S££  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  ?; 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


4.  HOMER 


5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 


6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 


7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 


10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 


11.  EUCLID 

ARCHIMEDES 

APOLLONIUS 

NICOMACHUS 


LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 


13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 


VIRGIL 

PLUTARCH 

TACITUS 


PTOLEMY 

COPERNICUS 

KEPLER 


17. 

18. 

19. 

20, 
21. 
22. 
23. 


PLOTINUS 

AUGUSTINE 

THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

DANTE 

CHAUCER 


MACHIAVELLI 

HOBBES 


24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 


RABELAIS 
MONTAIGNE 
SHAKESPEARE  I 
SHAKESPEARE  II 


*5^ 


‘^P^P 


T^P^P 

>‘«P^P 


GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


!yP^PP^P> 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 

29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 

31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 

32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 

34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 

35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 

36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 

37.  FIELDING 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 

39.  ADAM  SMITH 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 

43.  AMERICAN  STATE 

PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 

44.  BOSWELL 

45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 

46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 

50.  MARX 
ENGELS 

51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 


^p^p=^- 


^p^- 


^p*p^- 


^p^p^p*- 


^p^p 


40.  GIBBON  I 


54.  FREUD 


^P^P^P>~ 

H^P'P^P*- 


25401 


R 

808.8  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE 
G786  WESTERN  WORLD 
v.l4  Plutarch. 


OCT  1 4  1992 


REFERENCE  BOOK 
UMITEO  CIRCULATION 


Archbishop  Mitty  High  School 
Media  Center 
5000  Mitty  Way 
San  Jose,  CA  95129 


RULES 

1.  All  pup 
use  the  librar 

2.  Reservi 

one  period, 
should  be  re 
following  set  7805 

3.  All  other  books  may  uc  -  o 

weeks. 

4.  Injury  to  books  beyond  reasonable  wear 
and  all  losses  shall  be  paid  for. 

5.  No  books  may  be  taken  from  the  library 
without  being  charged. 


<3-0%.  3 


.r-*; 


•  .  ~  :.  -!■: ..  ' 


4 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


PLUTARCH 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


:;0-'  Ti 


■ 


*  •y.V:I  .*•  .  oA  J  OM 

J3  '  ■  ■■■  ..  '  T  ,  •  •  '-r  ‘  •  •  ■  .  . 

.V  KOC  'A.V  .  ..  */■•/'.  ■'  lA  ,I'1- »A’  .i  ‘  •  \> 

XXLHLV’.  Ti*  ,EADU.l ..  :  ’  /I  .A  -MvVi  <3\V* . 

'  oV  a  n\wivxH  f  /  i : w  ’  c  jjfl  ar»/  .  v 


24880 


PLUTARCH 

The  Lives  of  the  Noble  Grecians 
and  Romans 

The  Dry  den  Translation 


William  Benton,  Publisher 

encyclopedia  BRITANNICA,  INC. 

CHICAGO  ■  lONDON  ■  TORONTO  ■  GENEVA  ■  SYDNEY  ■  TOKYO  ■  MANILA 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 


The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

No  part  of  this  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 
publisher. 

© 

1952 

by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Twenty-seventh  Printing,  1984 

Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10323 
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-85229-163-9 


25401 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Plutarch,  c.  4 6-c.  12.0 


Plutarch  lived  in  the  time  of  the  emperors 
Nerva,  Trajan,  and  Hadrian,  a  time  usually 
thought  of  as  the  beginning  of  the  best  age  of 
the  Roman  imperial  period  and  as  the  last 
great  era  of  Greek  and  Roman  literature.  He  is 
not  quoted  nor  even  mentioned  by  his  cele¬ 
brated  contemporaries,  Juvenal,  Quintilian, 
Martial,  Tacitus,  and  the  younger  Pliny.  He 
never  wrote  directly  of  himself,  and  the  sources 
for  his  life  are  the  many  scattered  passages 
where  some  reminiscence  appears  incidentally. 

Later,  when  his  fame  became  widespread, 
legends  grew  up  to  supplement  the  little  extant 
knowledge.  The  legends  tended  to  confirm  the 
impression  made  by  his  works  that  he  was  to 
an  exceptional  degree  representative  of  his 
time.  Plutarch  was  pictured  as  tutor  to  Trajan, 
to  whom  he  was  supposed  to  have  dedicated  a 
treatise  on  the  good  of  a  prince  after  the  man¬ 
ner  of  Plato’s  epistle  to  Dion.  He  was  supposed 
to  have  lived  for  a  long  period  in  Rome,  where 
he  was  held  in  great  esteem,  honored  with 
consular  rank,  and  later  appointed  governor 
of  Greece  by  the  Emperor,  who  had  been  his 
pupil. 

These  legendary  titles  and  distinctions  ap¬ 
parently  have  no  basis  in  fact.  The  truth  seems 
to  be  that  the  man  who  wrote  of  the  fall  of 
Athens,  of  the  growth  of  Roman  dominion 
over  the  East,  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Roman 
republic,  was  a  Theban  provincial,  fortunate  in 
his  ancestors  and  in  his  education,  contented 
with  his  family  and  his  friends,  and  loyal  in  a 
spirited  way  to  his  town.  He  did  go  to  Rome 
on  several  occasions.  His  visits  were  short.  He 
himself  records  that  he  had  “no  leisure  while 
there  to  study  and  exercise  the  Latin  tongue,  as 
well  for  the  business  I  had  then  to  do,  as  also 
to  satisfy  them  that  came  to  learn  philosophy 
of  me.”  He  adds,  however,  that  he  had  familiar 
conversation  with  many  of  the  highest  men  in 
Rome;  his  lack  of  Latin  would  not  prevent  that 
in  the“Greek  city, ”as  Juvenal  indignantly  called 
it.  From  this  “great  place,  containing  plenty  of 
all  sorts  of  books”  he  returned  to  “his  poor  lit¬ 
tle  town  and  remained  there  willingly,  being 
loath  to  make  it  less  by  the  withdrawal  of  even 
one.” 


The  place  of  his  birth  was  Chaeronea  in  Boe- 
otia.  It  was  a  town  not  incapable  of  stirring  the 
imagination  by  the  contrast  of  its  memories 
with  its  present  obscurity.  Plutarch  relates  that 
long  ago  Epaminondas  had  called  it  “the  play- 
field  of  Mars.”  Not  as  long  ago  as  that,  Mace- 
don  and  the  allied  armies  of  Thebes  and  Ath¬ 
ens  had  fought  on  its  plains  a  battle  “fatal  to 
Greek  liberty.”  Chaeronea  appears  in  Plu¬ 
tarch’s  life  of  Antony,  where  he  recalls  the 
story  he  had  from  his  great-grandfather  Nicar- 
chus.  The  citizens  of  the  town,  Nicarchus 
among  them,  had  been  forced  by  Antony’s  sup¬ 
ply  officers  to  carry  corn  like  beasts  of  burden. 
They  were  starting  out  in  file  on  their  second 
trip  to  the  sea  when  news  came  of  Antony’s  de¬ 
feat  at  Actium.  “Antony’s  purveyors  and  sol¬ 
diers  fled  upon  the  news,  and  the  citizens  of 
Chaeronea  divided  the  corn  among  them¬ 
selves.” 

Among  the  sons  of  Nicarchus  was  Lamprias, 
Plutarch’s  grandfather.  Plutarch  remembers 
him  with  joy  as  a  man  whose  wit  was  affected 
by  wine  as  incense  by  fire.  Lamprias  too  figures 
in  the  life  of  Antony  as  able  to  pass  on,  from  a 
friend  who  had  lived  in  Alexandria,  tales  of  the 
luxurious  revels  of  Antony  and  Cleopatra.  Plu¬ 
tarch’s  father  is  mentioned  by  him  a  number 
of  times,  once  with  vivid  gratitude  for  the  way 
in  which  he  taught  his  son  to  share  honor  and 
avoid  envy. 

As  a  young  man,  Plutarch  studied  at  Athens 
with  Ammonius,  reputedly  an  Egyptian  who 
taught  at  Alexandria  before  settling  in  Athens. 
Plutarch  boarded  in  his  teacher’s  house  and  re¬ 
cords  that  one  of  his  fellow  students  was  a  de¬ 
scendant  of  Themistocles. 

It  is  not  known  when  he  wrote  the  series  of 
treatises  collected  under  the  title  Moralia.  Many 
of  them,  he  tells  us,  were  expansions  of  his 
notes  for  lectures  at  Rome.  It  was  after  his  re¬ 
turn  to  Chaeronea  that  he  compiled  his  Sym- 
posiacs,  or  Table  Tal\,  wherein  a  variety  of 
personages  are  depicted  in  discussion  of  a  wide 
variety  of  lively,  often  trivial,  problems.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  most  opinion,  he  began  work  on  the 
Parallel  Lives  towards  the  end  of  his  life.  He 
states  that  his  original  intention  had  been  to  in- 


v 


VI 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


struct  others,  but  in  the  course  of  writing  he 
discovered  that  more  and  more  it  was  he  him¬ 
self  who  was  deriving  profit  and  stimulation 
from  “lodging  these  men  one  after  the  other  in 
his  house.” 

In  his  native  Chaeronea,  Plutarch  seems  to 
have  held  many  municipal  offices.  When  he 
was  ridiculed  on  one  occasion  for  his  patience 
in  discharging  trivial  duties,  he  said:  “You  re¬ 
member  what  Antisthenes  said,  when  someone 
was  surprised  that  he  carried  some  pickled  fish 
home  from  the  market:  ‘But  it  is  for  myself.’ 
When  you  reproach  me  for  watching  tiles 
measured  out  and  stone  and  mortar  brought 
up,  I  give  you  the  converse  answer:  ‘It  is  not 
for  myself,  but  for  the  city.’  ”  He  filled  the  po¬ 
sition  of  Archon  a  number  of  times  and  served 
as  a  priest  of  Apollo  at  Delphi.  His  term  in 
this  last  office  seems  to  have  lasted  to  the  end 
of  his  life,  for  in  one  of  his  Symposiacs  he  ar¬ 
gues  on  the  question  Whether  an  Old  Man 


should  continue  in  Public  Life  by  submitting 
that  no  one  would  say  to  him:  “You  have 
served  for  many  pythiads,  you  have  taken  part 
enough  in  the  sacrifices,  processions,  and 
dances,  and  it  is  high  time,  Plutarch,  now  you 
are  an  old  man,  to  lay  aside  your  garland  and 
retire  as  superannuated  from  the  oracle.” 

There  is  much  testimony  in  his  writing  of 
the  tenderness  and  warmth  in  the  smaller  cir¬ 
cle  of  his  family.  Plutarch  wrote  affectionate 
descriptions  of  his  little  girl,  Timoxena,  and  a 
famous  letter  of  consolation  to  his  wife  at  the 
time  of  this  child’s  death.  In  another  letter  to 
his  wife  he  writes  that  he  finds  “scarcely  an 
erasure,  as  in  a  book  well-written”  in  the 
happiness  of  his  long  life.  Legend  reports  that 
the  people  of  Rome  requested  after  his  death 
that  a  statue  be  erected  to  honor  his  virtue. 

This  translation  was  made  by  many  hands, 
but  is  commonly  called  the  Dryden  Transla¬ 
tion. 


CONTENTS 


Theseus 

Romulus 

Romulus  and  Theseus  Compared 

Lycurgus 

Numa  Pompilius 

Lycurgus  and  Numa  Compared 

Solon 

Poplicola 

PoPLICOLA  AND  SOLON  COMPARED 

Themistocles 

Camillus 

Pericles 

Fabius 

Fabius  and  Pericles  Compared 
Alcibiades 

CoRIOLANUS 

Alcibiades  and  Coriolanus  Compared 

Timoleon 

^Lmilius  Paulus 

(-/Lmilius  Paulus  and  Timoleon 
Compared 
Pelopidas 
Marcellus 

Marcellus  and  Pelopidas  Compared 

Aristides 

Marcus  Cato 

Aristides  and  Marcus  Cato  Compared 

Philopceman 

Flamininus 

Flamininus  and  Philopceman 
Compared 
Pyrrhus 
Caius  Marius 
Lysander 
Sulla 

Lysander  and  Sulla  Compared 


Cimon  389 

Lucullus  400 

Cimon  and  Lucullus  Compared  421 

Nicias  423 

Crassus  438 

Crassus  and  Nicias  Compared  455 

Sertorius  457 

Eumenus  470 

Eumenus  and  Sertorius  Compared  479 

Agesilaus  480 

Pompey  499 

Agesilaus  and  Pompey  Compared  538 

Alexander  540 

Caesar  577 

Phocion  604 

Cato  the  Younger  620 

Agis  648 

Cleomenes  657 

Tiberius  Gracchus  671 

Caius  Gracchus  681 

Caius  and  Tiberius  Gracchus  and 
Agis  and  Cleomenes  Compared  689 

Demosthenes  691 

Cicero  704 

Cicero  and  Demosthenes  Compared  724 
Demetrius  726 

Antony  748 

Antony  and  Demetrius  Compared  780 

Dion  781 

Marcus  Brutus  802 

Brutus  and  Dion  Compared  824 

Aratus  826 

Artaxerxes  846 

Galba  859 

Otho  869 

Index  877 

vii 


1 

30 

32 

49 

61 

64 

77 

86 

88 

102 

121 

141 

i54 

i55 

*74 

*93 

T95 

214 

230 

232 

246 

261 

262 

276 

291 

293 

3°2 

3T3 

3X4 

332 

354 

368 

38? 


Y 

Ji.  sAMOj.  &  CW>  wti 


THESEUS 

LEGENDARY 


/is  geographers,  Sosius,  crowd  into  the 
edges  of  their  maps  parts  of  the  world 
JL  JL  which  they  do  not  know  about,  adding 
notes  in  the  margin  to  the  effect,  that  beyond 
this  lies  nothing  but  the  sandy  deserts  full  of 
wild  beasts,  unapproachable  bogs,  Scythian  ice, 
or  a  frozen  sea,  so  in  this  work  of  mine,  in 
which  I  have  compared  the  lives  of  the  greatest 
men  with  one  another,  after  passing  through 
those  periods  which  probable  reasoning  can 
reach  to  and  real  history  find  a  footing  in,  I 
might  very  well  say  of  those  that  are  farther 
off:  “Beyond  this  there  is  nothing  but  prodigies 
and  fictions,  the  only  inhabitants  are  the  poets 
and  inventors  of  fables;  there  is  no  credit,  or 
certainty  any  farther.” 

Yet,  after  publishing  an  account  of  Lycurgus 
the  lawgiver  and  Numa  the  king,  I  thought  I 
might,  not  without  reason,  ascend  as  high  as  to 
Romulus,  being  brought  by  my  history  so  near 
to  his  time.  Considering  therefore  with  my¬ 
self— 

Whom  shall  l  set  so  great  a  man  to  face? 

Or  whom  oppose?  Who's  equal  to  the  place? 

(as  Aeschylus  expresses  it),  I  found  none  so 
fit  as  him  that  peopled  the  beautiful  and  far- 
famed  city  of  Athens,  to  be  set  in  opposition 
with  the  father  of  the  invincible  and  re¬ 
nowned  city  of  Rome.  Let  us  hope  that  Fable 
may,  in  what  shall  follow,  so  submit  to  the 
purifying  processes  of  Reason  as  to  take  the 
character  of  exact  history.  In  any  case,  how¬ 
ever,  where  it  shall  be  found  contumaciously 
slighting  credibility  and  refusing  to  be  re¬ 
duced  to  anything  like  probable  fact,  we  shall 
beg  that  we  may  meet  with  candid  readers, 
and  such  as  will  receive  with  indulgence  the 
stories  of  antiquity. 

Theseus  seemed  to  me  to  resemble  Romu¬ 
lus  in  many  particulars.  Both  of  them,  born 
out  of  wedlock  and  of  uncertain  parentage, 
had  the  repute  of  being  sprung  from  the  gods. 

Both  warriors ;  that  by  all  the  world's  allowed. 

Both  of  them  united  with  strength  of  body  an 
equal  vigour  of  mind;  and  of  the  two  most 
famous  cities  of  the  world,  the  one  built 


Rome,  and  the  other  made  Athens  be  inhab¬ 
ited.  Both  stand  charged  with  the  rape  of 
women;  neither  of  them  could  avoid  domestic 
misfortunes  nor  jealousy  at  home;  but  towards 
the  close  of  their  lives  are  both  of  them  said  to 
have  incurred  great  odium  with  their  country¬ 
men,  if,  that  is,  we  may  take  the  stories  least 
like  poetry  as  our  guide  to  the  truth. 

The  lineage  of  Theseus,  by  his  father’s  side, 
ascends  as  high  as  to  Erechtheus  and  the  first 
inhabitants  of  Attica.  By  his  mother’s  side  he 
was  descended  of  Pelops.  For  Pelops  was  the 
most  powerful  of  all  the  kings  of  Pelopon¬ 
nesus,  not  so  much  by  the  greatness  of  his 
riches  as  the  multitude  of  his  children,  having 
married  many  daughters  to  chief  men,  and 
put  many  sons  in  places  of  command  in  the 
towns  round  about  him.  One  of  whom  named 
Pittheus,  grandfather  to  Theseus,  was  gov¬ 
ernor  of  the  small  city  of  the  Trcezenians  and 
had  the  repute  of  a  man  of  the  greatest  knowl¬ 
edge  and  wisdom  of  his  time;  which  then,  it 
seems,  consisted  chiefly  in  grave  maxims,  such 
as  the  poet  Hesiod  got  his  great  fame  by,  in 
his  book  of  Works  and  Days.  And,  indeed, 
among  these  is  one  that  they  ascribe  to  Pit¬ 
theus, — 

Unto  a  friend  suffice 

A  stipulated  price ; 

which,  also,  Aristotle  mentions.  And  Euripi¬ 
des,  by  calling  Hippolytus  “scholar  of  the  holy 
Pittheus,”  shows  the  opinion  that  the  world 
had  of  him. 

iEgeus,  being  desirous  of  children,  and  con¬ 
sulting  the  oracle  of  Delphi,  received  the  cele¬ 
brated  answer  which  forbade  him  the  com¬ 
pany  of  any  woman  before  his  return  to  Ath¬ 
ens.  But  the  oracle  being  so  obscure  as  not  to 
satisfy  him  that  he  was  clearly  forbid  this,  he 
went  to  Trcezen,  and  communicated  to  Pit¬ 
theus  the  voice  of  the  god,  which  was  in  this 
manner, — 

Loose  not  the  wineskin  foot,  thou  chief  of  men, 
Until  to  Athens  thou  art  come  again. 

Pittheus,  therefore,  taking  advantage  from 
the  obscurity  of  the  oracle,  prevailed  upon  him, 
it  is  uncertain  whether  by  persuasion  or  deceit, 


1 


2 

to  lie  with  his  daughter  ^Ethra.  .dEgeus  after¬ 
wards,  knowing  her  whom  he  had  lain  with  to 
be  Pittheus’s  daughter,  and  suspecting  her  to 
be  with  child  by  him,  left  a  sword  and  a  pair  of 
shoes,  hiding  them  under  a  great  stone  that 
had  a  hollow  in  it  exactly  fitting  them;  and 
went  away  making  her  only  privy  to  it,  and 
commanding  her,  if  she  brought  forth  a  son 
who,  when  he  came  to  man’s  estate,  should  be 
able  to  lift  up  the  stone  and  take  away  what  he 
had  left  there,  she  should  send  him  away  to 
him  with  those  things  with  all  secrecy,  and 
with  injunctions  to  him  as  much  as  possible  to 
conceal  his  journey  from  every  one;  for  he 
greatly  feared  the  Pallantidae,  who  were  con¬ 
tinually  mutinying  against  him,  and  despised 
him  for  his  want  of  children,  they  themselves 
being  fifty  brothers,  all  sons  of  Pallas. 

When  yEthra  was  delivered  of  a  son,  some 
say  that  he  was  immediately  named  Theseus, 
from  the  tokens  which  his  father  had  put 
under  the  stone;  others  that  he  had  received 
his  name  afterwards  at  Athens,  when  ^Tgeus 
acknowledged  him  for  his  son.  He  was 
brought  up  under  his  grandfather  Pittheus, 
and  had  a  tutor  and  attendant  set  over  him 
named  Connidas,  to  whom  the  Athenians 
even  to  this  time,  the  day  before  the  feast 
that  is  dedicated  to  Theseus,  sacrifice  a  ram, 
giving  this  honour  to  his  memory  upon  much 
juster  grounds  than  to  Silanio  and  Parrhasius 
for  making  pictures  and  statues  of  Theseus. 
There  being  then  a  custom  for  the  Grecian 
youth,  upon  their  first  coming  to  man’s  estate, 
to  go  to  Delphi  and  offer  first-fruits  of  their 
hair  to  the  god,  Theseus  also  went  thither,  and 
a  place  there  to  this  day  is  yet  named  Thesea, 
as  it  is  said,  from  him.  He  clipped  only  the 
fore  part  of  his  head,  as  Homer  says  the 
Abantes  did.  And  this  sort  of  tonsure  was  from 
him  named  Theseus.  The  Abantes  first  used  it, 
not  in  imitation  of  the  Arabians,  as  some  im¬ 
agine,  nor  of  the  Mysians,  but  because  they 
were  a  warlike  people,  and  used  to  close  fight¬ 
ing,  and  above  all  other  nations  accustomed  to 
engage  hand  to  hand;  as  Archilochus  testifies 
in  these  verses: — 

Slings  shall  not  whirl,  nor  many  arrows  fly, 

When  on  the  plain  the  battle  joins;  but  swords, 
Man  against  man,  the  deadly  conflict  try 

As  is  the  practice  of  Euboea's  lords 
Shilled  with  the  spear. — 

Therefore  that  they  might  not  give  their 
enemies  a  hold  by  their  hair,  they  cut  it  in 
this  manner.  They  write  also  that  this  was 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  reason  why  Alexander  gave  command  to 
his  captains  that  all  the  beards  of  the  Mace¬ 
donians  should  be  shaved,  as  being  the  readiest 
hold  for  an  enemy. 

^Tthra  for  some  time  concealed  the  true 
parentage  of  Theseus,  and  a  report  was  given 
out  by  Pittheus  that  he  was  begotten  by  Nep¬ 
tune;  for  the  Trcezenians  pay  Neptune  the 
highest  veneration.  He  is  their  tutelar  god;  to 
him  they  offer  all  their  first-fruits,  and  in  his 
honour  stamp  their  money  with  a  trident. 

Theseus  displaying  not  only  great  strength 
of  body,  but  equal  bravery,  and  a  quickness 
alike  and  force  of  understanding,  his  mother 
^Ethra,  conducting  him  to  the  stone,  and  in¬ 
forming  him  who  was  his  true  father,  com¬ 
manded  him  to  take  from  thence  the  tokens 
that  iEgeus  had  left,  and  sail  to  Athens.  He 
without  any  difficulty  set  himself  to  the  stone 
and  lifted  it  up;  but  refused  to  take  his  journey 
by  sea,  though  it  was  much  the  safer  way,  and 
though  his  mother  and  grandfather  begged 
him  to  do  so.  For  it  was  at  that  time  very  dan¬ 
gerous  to  go  by  land  on  the  road  to  Athens,  no 
part  of  it  being  free  from  robbers  and  murder¬ 
ers.  That  age  produced  a  sort  of  men,  in  force 
of  hand,  and  swiftness  of  foot,  and  strength  of 
body,  excelling  the  ordinary  rate  and  wholly 
incapable  of  fatigue;  making  use,  however,  of 
these  gifts  of  nature  to  no  good  or  profitable 
purpose  for  mankind,  but  rejoicing  and  prid¬ 
ing  themselves  in  insolence,  and  taking  the 
benefit  of  their  superior  strength  in  the  exer¬ 
cise  of  inhumanity  and  cruelty,  and  in  seizing, 
forcing,  and  committing  all  manner  of  out¬ 
rages  upon  everything  that  fell  into  their 
hands;  all  respect  for  others,  all  justice,  they 
thought,  all  equity  and  humanity,  though  nat¬ 
urally  lauded  by  common  people,  either  out  of 
want  of  courage  to  commit  injuries  or  fear  to 
receive  them,  yet  no  way  concerned  those  who 
were  strong  enough  to  win  for  themselves. 
Some  of  these,  Hercules  destroyed  and  cut  off 
in  his  passage  through  these  countries;  but 
some  escaping  his  notice  while  he  was  passing 
by,  fled  and  hid  themselves,  or  else  were  spared 
by  him  in  contempt  of  their  abject  submission. 

After  that  Hercules  fell  into  misfortune, 
and,  having  slain  Iphitus,  retired  to  Lydia, 
and  for  a  long  time  was  there  slave  to  Om- 
phale,  a  punishment  which  he  had  imposed 
upon  himself  for  the  murder:  then,  indeed, 
Lydia  enjoyed  high  peace  and  security,  but  in 
Greece  and  the  countries  about  it  the  like  vil¬ 
lainies  again  revived  and  broke  out,  there  be¬ 
ing  none  to  repress  or  chastise  them.  It  was 


THESEUS 


therefore  a  very  hazardous  journey  to  travel  by 
land  from  Athens  to  Peloponnesus;'  and  Pit- 
theus,  giving  him  an  exact  account  of  each  of 
the  robbers  and  villains,  their  strength,  and 
the  cruelty  they  used  to  all  strangers,  tried  to 
persuade  Theseus  to  go  by  sea.  But  he,  it 
seems,  had  long  since  been  secretly  fired  by  the 
glory  of  Hercules,  held  him  in  the  highest  esti¬ 
mation,  and  was  never  more  satisfied  than  in 
listening  to  any  that  gave  an  account  of  him; 
especially  those  that  had  seen  him,  or  had  been 
present  at  any  action  or  saying  of  his.  So  that 
he  was  altogether  in  the  same  state  of  feeling 
as,  in  after  ages,  Themistocles  was,  when  he 
said  that  he  could  not  sleep  for  the  trophy  of 
Miltiades;  entertaining  such  admiration  for 
the  virtue  of  Hercules,  that  in  the  night  his 
dreams  were  all  of  that  hero’s  actions,  and  in 
the  day  a  continual  emulation  stirred  him  up 
to  perform  the  like.  Besides,  they  were  related, 
being  born  of  cousins-german.  For  iEthra  was 
daughter  of  Pittheus,  and  Alcmena  of  Lysidice; 
and  Lysidice  and  Pittheus  were  brother  and 
sister,  children  of  Hippodamia  and  Pelops.  He 
thought  it  therefore  a  dishonourable  thing, 
and  not  to  be  endured,  that  Hercules  should 
go  out  everywhere,  and  purge  both  land  and 
sea  from  wicked  men,  and  he  himself  should 
fly  from  the  like  adventures  that  actually  came 
in  his  way;  disgracing  his  reputed  father  by  a 
mean  flight  by  sea,  and  not  showing  his  true 
one  as  good  evidence  of  the  greatness  of  his 
birth  by  noble  and  worthy  actions,  as  by  the 
token  that  he  brought  with  him  the  shoes  and 
the  sword. 

With  this  mind  and  these  thoughts,  he  set 
forward  with  a  design  to  do  injury  to  nobody, 
but  to  repel  and  revenge  himself  of  all  those 
that  should  offer  any.  And  first  of  all,  in  a 
set  combat,  he  slew  Periphetes,  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood  of  Epidaurus,  who  used  a  club  for 
his  arms,  and  from  thence  had  the  name  of 
Corynetes,  or  the  club-bearer;  who  seized  upon 
him,  and  forbade  him  to  go  forward  in  his 
journey.  Being  pleased  with  the  club,  he  took 
it,  and  made  it  his  weapon,  continuing  to  use 
it  as  Hercules  did  the  lion’s  skin,  on  whose 
shoulders  that  served  to  prove  how  huge  a 
beast  he  had  killed;  and  to  the  same  end  The¬ 
seus  carried  about  him  this  club;  overcome  in¬ 
deed  by  him,  but  now,  in  his  hands,  invin¬ 
cible. 

Passing  on  farther  towards  the  Isthmus  of 
Peloponnesus,  he  slew  Sinnis,  often  surnamed 
the  Bender  of  Pines,  after  the  same  manner  in 
which  he  himself  had  destroyed  many  others 


3 

before.  And  this  he  did  without  having  either 
practised  or  ever  learnt  the  art  of  bending 
these  trees,  to  show  that  natural  strength  is 
above  all  art.  This  Sinnis  had  a  daughter  of  re¬ 
markable  beauty  and  stature,  called  Perigune, 
who,  when  her  father  was  killed,  fled,  and  was 
sought  after  everywhere  by  Theseus;  and  com¬ 
ing  into  a  place  overgrown  with  brushwood, 
shrubs,  and  asparagus-thorn,  there,  in  a  child¬ 
like  innocent  manner,  prayed  and  begged 
them,  as  if  they  understood  her,  to  give  her 
shelter,  with  vows  that  if  she  escaped  she 
would  never  cut  them  down  nor  burn  them. 
But  Theseus  calling  upon  her,  and  giving  her 
his  promise  that  he  would  use  her  with  respect, 
and  offer  her  no  injury,  she  came  forth,  and  in 
due  time  bore  him  a  son,  named  Melanippus; 
but  afterwards  was  married  to  Deioneus,  the 
son  of  Eurytus,  the  (Echalian,  Theseus  himself 
giving  her  to  him.  Ioxus,  the  son  of  this  Mela¬ 
nippus,  who  was  born  to  Theseus,  accompa¬ 
nied  Ornytus  in  the  colony  that  he  carried 
with  him  into  Caria,  whence  it  is  a  family 
usage  amongst  the  people  called  Ioxids,  both 
male  and  female,  never  to  burn  either  shrubs 
or  asparagus-thorn,  but  to  respect  and  honour 
them. 

The  Crommyonian  sow,  which  they  called 
Phaea,  was  a  savage  and  formidable  wild  beast, 
by  no  means  an  enemy  to  be  despised.  Theseus 
killed  her,  going  out  of  his  way  on  purpose  to 
meet  and  engage  her,  so  that  he  might  not 
seem  to  perform  all  his  great  exploits  out  of 
mere  necessity;  being  also  of  opinion  that  it 
was  the  part  of  a  brave  man  to  chastise  villain¬ 
ous  and  wicked  men  when  attacked  by  them, 
but  to  seek  out  and  overcome  the  more  noble 
wild  beasts.  Others  relate  that  Phaea  was  a 
woman,  a  robber  full  of  cruelty  and  lust,  that 
lived  in  Crommyon,  and  had  the  name  of  Sow 
given  her  from  the  foulness  of  her  life  and 
manners,  and  afterwards  was  killed  by  The¬ 
seus.  He  slew  also  Sciron,  upon  the  borders  of 
Megara,  casting  him  down  from  the  rocks, 
being,  as  most  report,  a  notorious  robber  of  all 
passengers,  and,  as  others  add,  accustomed, 
out  of  insolence  and  wantonness,  to  stretch 
forth  his  feet  to  strangers  commanding  them 
to  wash  them,  and  then  while  they  did  it,  with 
a  kick  to  send  them  down  the  rock  into  the  sea. 

The  writers  of  Megara,  however,  in  con¬ 
tradiction  to  the  received  report,  and,  as  Si¬ 
monides,  expresses  it,  “fighting  with  all  anti¬ 
quity,”  contend  that  Sciron  was  neither  a  rob¬ 
ber  nor  doer  of  violence,  but  a  punisher  of  all 
such,  and  the  relative  and  friend  of  good  and 


4 

just  men;  for  .Eacus,  they  say,  was  ever  esteemed 
a  man  of  the  greatest  sanctity  of  all  the 
Greeks;  and  Cychreus,  the  Salaminian,  was 
honoured  at  Athens  with  divine  worship;  and 
the  virtues  of  Peleus  and  Telamon  were  not  un¬ 
known  to  any  one.  Now  Sciron  was  son-in-law 
to  Cychreus,  father-in-law  to  Eacus,  and 
grandfather  to  Peleus  and  Telamon,  who  were 
both  of  them  sons  of  Endeis,  the  daughter  of 
Sciron  and  Chariclo;  it  was  not  probable,  there¬ 
fore,  that  the  best  of  men  should  make  these  al¬ 
liances  with  one  who  was  worst,  giving  and  re¬ 
ceiving  mutually  what  was  of  greatest  value 
and  most  dear  to  them.  Theseus,  by  their  ac¬ 
count,  did  not  slay  Sciron  in  his  first  journey 
to  Athens,  but  afterwards,  when  he  took  Eleu- 
sis,  a  city  of  the  Megarians,  having  circum¬ 
vented  Diodes,  the  governor.  Such  are  the  con¬ 
tradictions  in  this  story. 

In  Eleusis  he  killed  Cercyon,  the  Arcadian, 
in  a  wrestling  match.  And  going  on  a  little 
farther,  in  Erineus,  he  slew  Damastes,  other¬ 
wise  called  Procrustes,  forcing  his  body  to 
the  size  of  his  own  bed,  as  he  himself  was 
used  to  do  with  all  strangers;  this  he  did  in 
imitation  of  Hercules,  who  always  returned 
upon  his  assailants  the  same  sort  of  violence 
that  they  offered  to  him;  sacrificed  Busiris, 
killed  Antaeus  in  wrestling,  and  Cycnus  in 
single  combat,  and  Termerus  by  breaking 
his  skull  in  pieces  (whence,  they  say,  comes 
the  proverb  of  “a  Termerian  mischief”),  for 
it  seems  Termerus  killed  passengers  that  he 
met  by  running  with  his  head  against  them. 
And  so  also  Theseus  proceeded  in  the  punish¬ 
ment  of  evil  men,  who  underwent  the  same 
violence  from  him  which  they  had  inflicted 
upon  others,  justly  suffering  after  the  manner 
of  their  own  injustice. 

As  he  went  forward  on  his  journey,  and 
was  come  as  far  as  the  river  Cephisus,  some 
of  the  race  of  the  Phytalidae  met  him  and  sa¬ 
luted  him,  and  upon  his  desire  to  use  the  puri¬ 
fications,  then  in  custom,  they  performed  them 
with  all  the  usual  ceremonies,  and,  having  of¬ 
fered  propitiatory  sacrifices  to  the  gods,  in¬ 
vited  him  and  entertained  him  at  their  house, 
a  kindness  which,  in  all  his  journey  hitherto, 
he  had  not  met. 

On  the  eighth  day  of  Cronius,  now  called 
Hecatombaeon,  he  arrived  at  Athens,  where  he 
found  the  public  affairs  full  of  all  confusion, 
and  divided  into  parties  and  factions,  Egeus 
also,  and  his  whole  private  family,  labouring 
under  the  same  distemper;  for  Medea,  having 
fled  from  Corinth,  and  promised  Egeus  to 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

make  him,  by  her  art,  capable  of  having  chil¬ 
dren,  was  living  with  him.  She  first  was  aware 
of  Theseus,  whom  as  yet  Egeus  did  not  know, 
and  he  being  in  years,  full  of  jealousies  and 
suspicions,  and  fearing  everything  by  reason  of 
the  faction  that  was  then  in  the  city,  she  easily 
persuaded  Theseus  to  kill  him  by  poison  at  a 
feast,  to  which  he  was  to  be  invited  as  a  stran¬ 
ger.  He,  coming  to  the  entertainment,  thought 
it  not  fit  to  discover  himself  at  once,  but  will¬ 
ing  to  give  his  father  the  occasion  of  first  find¬ 
ing  him  out,  the  meat  being  on  the  table,  he 
drew  his  sword  as  if  he  designed  to  cut  with  it; 
Egeus,  at  once  recognising  the  token,  threw 
down  the  cup  of  poison,  and,  questioning  his 
son,  embraced  him,  and  having  gathered  to¬ 
gether  all  his  citizens,  owned  him  publicly  be¬ 
fore  them,  who,  on  their  part,  received  him 
gladly  for  the  fame  of  his  greatness  and  brav¬ 
ery;  and  it  is  said,  that  when  the  cup  fell,  the 
poison  was  spilt  there  where  now  is  the  enclosed 
space  in  the  Delphinium;  for  in  that  place 
stood  Egeus’s  house,  and  the  figure  of  Mercu¬ 
ry  on  the  east  side  of  the  temple  is  called  the 
Mercury  of  Egeus’s  gate. 

The  sons  of  Pallas,  who  before  were  quiet, 
upon  expectation  of  recovering  the  kingdom 
after  Egeus’s  death,  who  was  without  issue, 
as  soon  as  Theseus  appeared  and  was  ac¬ 
knowledged  the  successor,  highly  resenting  that 
Egeus  first,  an  adopted  son  only  of  Pandion, 
and  not  at  all  related  to  the  family  of  Erech- 
theus,  should  be  holding  the  kingdom,  and 
that  after  him,  Theseus,  a  visitor  and  stranger, 
should  be  destined  to  succeed  to  it,  broke  out 
into  open  war.  And  dividing  themselves  into 
two  companies,  one  part  of  them  marched 
openly  from  Sphettus,  with  their  father, 
against  the  city,  the  other,  hiding  themselves 
in  the  village  of  Gargettus,  lay  in  ambush,  with 
a  design  to  set  upon  the  enemy  on  both  sides. 
They  had  with  them  a  crier  of  the  township  of 
Agnus,  named  Leos,  who  discovered  to  The¬ 
seus  all  the  designs  of  the  Pallantidae.  He  im¬ 
mediately  fell  upon  those  that  lay  in  ambus¬ 
cade,  and  cut  them  all  off;  upon  tidings  of 
which  Pallas  and  his  company  fled  and  were 
dispersed. 

From  hence  they  say  is  derived  the  custom 
among  the  people  of  the  township  of  Pallene 
to  have  no  marriages  or  any  alliance  with  the 
people  of  Agnus,  nor  to  suffer  the  criers  to 
pronounce  in  their  proclamations  the  words 
used  in  all  other  parts  of  the  country,  Accouete 
Leoi  (Hear  ye  people),  hating  the  very  sound 
of  Leo,  because  of  the  treason  of  Leos. 


THESEUS 

Theseus,  longing  to  be  in  action,  and  de¬ 
sirous  also  to  make  himself  popular,  left 
Athens  to  fight  with  the  bull  of  Marathon, 
which  did  no  small  mischief  to  the  inhabitants 
of  Tetrapolis.  And  having  overcome  it,  he 
brought  it  alive  in  triumph  through  the 
city,  and  afterwards  sacrificed  it  to  the  Del- 
phinian  Apollo.  The  story  of  Hecale,  also,  of 
her  receiving  and  entertaining  Theseus  in  this 
expedition,  seems  to  be  not  altogether  void  of 
truth;  for  the  townships  round  about,  meeting 
upon  a  certain  day,  used  to  offer  a  sacrifice 
which  they  called  Hecalesia,  to  Jupiter  Heca- 
leius,  and  to  pay  honour  to  Hecale,  whom,  by 
a  diminutive  name,  they  called  Hecalene,  be¬ 
cause  she,  while  entertaining  Theseus,  who 
was  quite  a  youth,  addressed  him,  as  old  peo¬ 
ple  do,  with  similar  endearing  diminutives; 
and  having  made  a  vow  to  Jupiter  for  him  as 
he  was  going  to  the  fight,  that,  if  he  returned 
in  safety,  she  would  offer  sacrifices  in  thanks 
of  it,  and  dying  before  he  came  back,  she  had 
these  honours  given  her  by  way  of  return  for 
her  hospitality,  by  the  command  of  Theseus, 
as  Philochorus  tells  us. 

Not  long  after  arrived  the  third  time  from 
Crete  the  collectors  of  the  tribute  which  the 
Athenians  paid  them  upon  the  following  occa¬ 
sion.  Androgeus  having  been  treacherously 
murdered  in  the  confines  of  Attica,  not  only 
Minos,  his  father,  put  the  Athenians  to  extreme 
distress  by  a  perpetual  war,  but  the  gods  also 
laid  waste  their  country;  both  famine  and  pes¬ 
tilence  lay  heavy  upon  them,  and  even  their 
rivers  were  dried  up.  Being  told  by  the  oracle 
that,  if  they  appeased  and  reconciled  Minos, 
the  anger  of  the  gods  would  cease  and  they 
should  enjoy  rest  from  the  miseries  they  la¬ 
boured  under,  they  sent  heralds,  and  with 
much  supplication  were  at  last  reconciled,  en¬ 
tering  into  an  agreement  to  send  to  Crete  every 
nine  years  a  tribute  of  seven  young  men  and 
as  many  virgins,  as  most  writers  agree  in  stat¬ 
ing;  and  the  most  poetical  story  adds,  that  the 
Minotaur  destroyed  them,  or  that,  wandering 
in  the  labyrinth,  and  finding  no  possible  means 
of  getting  out,  they  miserably  ended  their  lives 
there;  and  that  this  Minotaur  was  (as  Euri¬ 
pides  hath  it) — 

A  mingled  form  where  two  strange  shapes  com¬ 
bined, 

And  different  natures,  bull  and  man,  were  joined . 

But  Philochorus  says  that  the  Cretans  will 
by  no  means  allow  the  truth  of  this,  but  say 
that  the  labyrinth  was  only  an  ordinary  pris¬ 
on,  having  no  other  bad  quality  but  that  it  se- 


5 

cured  the  prisoners  from  escaping,  and  that 
Minos,  having  instituted  games  in  honour  of 
Androgeus,  gave,  as  a  reward  to  the  victors, 
these  youths,  who  in  the  meantime  were  kept 
in  the  labyrinth;  and  that  the  first  that  over¬ 
came  in  those  games  was  one  of  the  greatest 
power  and  command  among  them,  named 
Taurus,  a  man  of  no  merciful  or  gentle  dis¬ 
position,  who  treated  the  Athenians  that  were 
made  his  prize  in  a  proud  and  cruel  manner. 
Also  Aristotle  himself,  in  the  account  that  he 
gives  of  the  form  of  government  of  the  Botti- 
aeans,  is  manifestly  of  opinion  that  the  youths 
were  not  slain  by  Minos,  but  spent  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  their  days  in  slavery  in  Crete;  that 
the  Cretans,  in  former  times,  to  acquit  them¬ 
selves  of  an  ancient  vow  which  they  had 
made,  were  used  to  send  an  offering  of  the 
first-fruits  of  their  men  to  Delphi,  and  that 
some  descendants  of  these  Athenian  slaves 
were  mingled  with  them  and  sent  amongst 
them,  and,  unable  to  get  their  living  there,  re¬ 
moved  from  thence,  first  into  Italy,  and  settled 
about  Japygia;  from  thence  again,  that  they  re¬ 
moved  to  Thrace,  and  were  named  Bottiaeans; 
and  that  this  is  the  reason  why,  in  a  certain 
sacrifice,  the  Bottiaean  girls  sing  a  hymn  be¬ 
ginning  Let  us  go  to  Athens .  This  may  show 
us  how  dangerous  it  is  to  incur  the  hostility 
of  a  city  that  is  mistress  of  eloquence  and 
song.  For  Minos  was  always  ill  spoken  of, 
and  represented  ever  as  a  very  wicked  man, 
in  the  Athenian  theatres;  neither  did  Hesiod 
avail  him  by  calling  him  “the  most  royal 
Minos,”  nor  Homer,  who  styles  him  “Jupiter’s 
familiar  friend”;  the  tragedians  got  the  better, 
and  from  the  vantage  ground  of  the  stage 
showered  down  obloquy  upon  him,  as  a  man 
of  cruelty  and  violence;  whereas,  in  fact,  he 
appears  to  have  been  a  king  and  a  law-giver, 
and  Rhadamanthus,  a  judge  under  him,  ad¬ 
ministering  the  statutes  that  he  ordained. 

Now,  when  the  time  of  the  third  tribute 
was  come,  and  the  fathers  who  had  any 
young  men  for  their  sons  were  to  proceed 
by  lot  to  the  choice  of  those  that  were  to  be 
sent,  there  arose  fresh  discontents  and  accusa¬ 
tions  against  ^Egeus  among  the  people,  who 
were  full  of  grief  and  indignation  that  he  who 
was  the  cause  of  all  their  miseries  was  the  only 
person  exempt  from  the  punishment;  adopting 
and  settling  his  kingdom  upon  a  bastard  and 
foreign  son,  he  took  no  thought,  they  said,  of 
their  destitution  and  loss,  not  of  bastards,  but 
lawful  children.  These  things  sensibly  affected 
Theseus,  who,  thinking  it  but  just  not  to  dis- 


6 

regard,  but  rather  partake  of,  the  sufferings  of 
his  fellow-citizens,  offered  himself  for  one 
without  any  lot.  All  else  were  struck  with  ad¬ 
miration  for  the  nobleness  and  with  love  for 
the  goodness  of  the  act;  and  ffigeus,  after  pray¬ 
ers  and  entreaties,  finding  him  inflexible  and 
not  to  be  persuaded,  proceeded  to  the  choosing 
of  the  rest  by  lot.  Hollanicus,  however,  tells  us 
that  the  Athenians  did  not  send  the  young  men 
and  virgins  by  lot,  but  that  Minos  himself 
used  to  come  and  make  his  own  choice,  and 
pitched  upon  Theseus  before  all  others;  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  conditions  agreed  upon  between 
them,  namely,  that  the  Athenians  should  fur¬ 
nish  them  with  a  ship  and  that  the  young  men 
that  were  to  sail  with  him  should  carry  no 
weapons  of  war;  but  that  if  the  Minotaur  was 
destroyed,  the  tribute  should  cease. 

On  the  two  former  occasions  of  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  the  tribute,  entertaining  no  hopes 
of  safety  or  return,  they  sent  out  the  ship 
with  a  black  sail,  as  to  unavoidable  destruc¬ 
tion;  but  now,  Theseus  encouraging  his  father, 
and  speaking  greatly  of  himself,  as  confident 
that  he  should  kill  the  Minotaur,  he  gave  the 
pilot  another  sail,  which  was  white,  command¬ 
ing  him,  as  he  returned,  if  Theseus  were  safe, 
to  make  use  of  that;  but  if  not,  to  sail  with  the 
black  one,  and  to  hang  out  that  sign  of  his  mis¬ 
fortune.  Simonides  says  that  the  sail  which  ALg- 
eus  delivered  to  the  pilot  was  not  white,  but — 

Scarlet,  in  the  juicy  bloom 

Of  the  living  oa\-tree  steeped, 

and  that  this  was  to  be  the  sign  of  their  escape. 
Phereclus,  son  of  Amarsyas,  according  to  Si¬ 
monides,  was  pilot  of  the  ship.  But  Philo- 
chorus  says  Theseus  had  sent  him  by  Scirus, 
from  Salamis,  Nausithoiis  to  be  his  steersman, 
and  Phaeax  his  look-out-man  in  the  prow,  the 
Athenians  having  as  yet  not  applied  them¬ 
selves  to  navigation;  and  that  Scirus  did  this 
because  one  of  the  young  men,  Menesthes,  was 
his  daughter’s  son;  and  this  the  chapels  of 
Nausithoiis  and  Phaeax,  built  by  Theseus  near 
the  temple  of  Scirus,  confirm.  He  adds,  also, 
that  the  feast  named  Cybernesia  was  in  honour 
of  them.  The  lot  being  cast,  and  Theseus  hav¬ 
ing  received  out  of  the  Prytaneiim  those  upon 
whom  it  fell,  he  went  to  the  Delphinium,  and 
made  an  offering  for  them  to  Apollo  of  his  sup¬ 
pliant’s  badge,  which  was  a  bough  of  a  conse¬ 
crated  olive  tree,  with  white  wool  tied  about  it. 

Having  thus  performed  his  devotion,  he 
went  to  sea,  the  sixth  day  of  Munychion,  on 
which  day  even  to  this  time  the  Athenians 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

send  their  virgins  to  the  same  temple  to  make 
supplication  to  the  gods.  It  is  further  re¬ 
ported  that  he  was  commanded  by  the  oracle 
of  Delphi  to  make  Venus  his  guide,  and  to 
invoke  her  as  the  companion  and  conductress 
of  his  voyage,  and  that,  as  he  was  sacrificing 
a  she  goat  to  her  by  the  sea-side,  it  was  sud¬ 
denly  changed  into  a  he,  and  for  this  cause 
that  goddess  had  the  name  of  Epitragia. 

When  he  arrived  at  Crete,  as  most  of  the 
ancient  historians  as  well  as  poets  tell  us, 
having  a  clue  of  thread  given  him  by  Ariadne, 
who  had  fallen  in  love  with  him,  and  being 
instructed  by  her  how  to  use  it  so  as  to  con¬ 
duct  him  through  the  windings  of  the  laby¬ 
rinth,  he  escaped  out  of  it  and  slew  the  Min¬ 
otaur,  and  sailed  back,  taking  along  with 
him  Ariadne  and  the  young  Athenian  cap¬ 
tives.  Pherecydes  adds  that  he  bored  holes  in 
the  bottom  of  the  Cretan  ships  to  hinder 
their  pursuit.  Demon  writes  that  Taurus,  the 
chief  captain  of  Minos,  was  slain  by  Theseus 
at  the  mouth  of  the  port,  in  a  naval  combat  as 
he  was  sailing  out  for  Athens. 

But  Philochorus  gives  us  the  story  thus: 
That  at  the  setting  forth  of  the  yearly  games 
by  King  Minos,  Taurus  was  expected  to 
carry  away  the  prize,  as  he  had  done  before; 
and  was  much  grudged  the  honour.  His 
character  and  manners  made  his  power  hate¬ 
ful,  and  he  was  accused  moreover  of  too 
near  familiarity  with  Pasiphae,  for  which 
reason,  when  Theseus  desired  the  combat, 
Minos  readily  complied.  And  as  it  was  a  cus¬ 
tom  in  Crete  that  the  women  also  should  be 
admitted  to  the  sight  of  these  games,  Ariadne, 
being  present,  was  struck  with  admiration  of 
the  manly  beauty  of  Theseus,  and  the  vigour 
and  address  which  he  showed  in  the  combat, 
overcoming  all  that  encountered  with  him. 
Minos,  too,  being  extremely  pleased  with  him, 
especially  because  he  had  overthrown  and  dis¬ 
graced  Taurus,  voluntarily  gave  up  the  young 
captives  to  Theseus,  and  remitted  the  tribute 
to  the  Athenians. 

Clidemus  gives  an  account  peculiar  to  him¬ 
self,  very  ambitiously,  and  beginning  a  great 
way  back:  That  it  was  a  decree  consented  to 
by  all  Greece,  that  no  vessel  from  any  place, 
containing  above  five  persons,  should  be  per¬ 
mitted  to  sail,  Jason  only  excepted,  who  was 
made  captain  of  the  great  ship  Argo,  to  sail 
about  and  scour  the  sea  of  pirates.  But  Daedalus 
having  escaped  from  Crete,  and  flying  by  sea 
to  Athens,  Minos,  contrary  to  this  decree,  pur¬ 
sued  him  with  his  ships  of  war,  was  forced  by 


THESEUS 

a  storm  upon  Sicily,  and  there  ended  his  life. 
After  his  decease,  Deucalion,  his  son,  desiring 
a  quarrel  with  the  Athenians,  sent  to  them,  de¬ 
manding  that  they  should  deliver  up  Daedalus 
to  him,  threatening  upon  their  refusal  to  put 
to  death  all  the  young  Athenians  whom  his  fa¬ 
ther  had  received  as  hostages  from  the  city.  To 
this  angry  message  Theseus  returned  a  very 
gentle  answer  excusing  himself  that  he  could 
not  deliver  up  Daedalus,  who  was  nearly  re¬ 
lated  to  him,  being  his  cousin-german,  his 
mother  being  Merope,  the  daughter  of  Erech- 
theus.  In  the  meanwhile  he  secretly  prepared 
a  navy,  part  of  it  at  home  near  the  village  of 
the  Thymcetadae,  a  place  of  no  resort,  and  far 
from  any  common  roads,  the  other  part  by  his 
grandfather  Pittheus’s  means  at  Troezen,  that 
so  his  design  might  be  carried  on  with  the 
greatest  secrecy.  As  soon  as  ever  his  fleet  was 
in  readiness,  he  set  sail,  having  with  him 
Daedalus  and  other  exiles  from  Crete  for  his 
guides;  and  none  of  the  Cretans  having  any 
knowledge  of  his  coming,  but  imagining  when 
they  saw  his  fleet  that  they  were  friends  and 
vessels  of  their  own,  he  soon  made  himself 
master  of  the  port,  and  immediately  making  a 
descent,  reached  Gnossus  before  any  notice  of 
his  coming,  and,  in  a  battle  before  the  gates  of 
the  labyrinth,  put  Deucalion  and  all  his  guards 
to  the  sword.  The  government  by  this  means 
falling  to  Ariadne,  he  made  a  league  with  her, 
and  received  the  captives  of  her,  and  ratified  a 
perpetual  friendship  between  the  Athenians  and 
the  Cretans,  whom  he  engaged  under  an  oath 
never  again  to  commence  any  war  with  Athens. 

There  are  yet  many  other  traditions  about 
these  things,  and  as  many  concerning  Ariadne, 
all  inconsistent  with  each  other.  Some  relate 
that  she  hung  herself,  being  deserted  by  The¬ 
seus.  Others  that  she  was  carried  away  by  his 
sailors  to  the  isle  of  Naxos,  and  married  to 
GEnarus,  priest  of  Bacchus;  and  that  Theseus 
left  her  because  he  fell  in  love  with  another — 
For  /. Egle’s  love  was  burning  in  his  breast; 
a  verse  which  Hereas,  the  Megarian,  says  was 
formerly  in  the  poet  Hesiod’s  works,  but  put 
out  by  Pisistratus,  in  like  manner  as  he  added 
in  Homer’s  Raising  of  the  Dead,  to  gratify 
the  Athenians,  the  line — 

Theseus,  Pirithous,  mighty  son  of  gods. 

Others  say  Ariadne  had  sons  also  by  Theseus, 
(Enopion  and  Staphylus;  and  among  these  is 
the  poet  Ion  of  Chios,  who  writes  of  his  own 
native  city — 

Which  once  CEnopion,  son  of  Theseus  built. 


7 

But  the  more  famous  of  the  legendary  stories 
everybody  (as  I  may  say)  has  in  his  mouth. 

In  Paeon,  however,  the  Amathusian,  there 
is  a  story  given,  differing  from  the  rest.  For 
he  writes  that  Theseus,  being  driven  by 
a  storm  upon  the  isle  of  Cyprus,  and  having 
aboard  with  him  Ariadne,  big  with  child, 
and  extremely  discomposed  with  the  rolling 
of  the  sea,  set  her  on  shore,  and  left  her 
there  alone,  to  return  himself  and  help  the 
ship,  when,  on  a  sudden,  a  violent  wind  car¬ 
ried  him  again  out  to  sea.  That  the  women 
of  the  island  received  Ariadne  very  kindly, 
and  did  all  they  could  to  console  and  alleviate 
her  distress  at  being  left  behind.  That  they 
counterfeited  kind  letters,  and  delivered  them 
to  her,  as  sent  from  Theseus,  and,  when  she 
fell  in  labour,  were  diligent  in  performing 
to  her  every  needful  service;  but  that  she  died 
before  she  could  be  delivered,  and  was 
honourably  interred.  That  soon  after  Theseus 
returned,  and  was  greatly  afflicted  for  her 
loss,  and  at  his  departure  left  a  sum  of  money 
among  the  people  of  the  island,  ordering 
them  to  do  sacrifice  to  Ariadne;  and  caused 
two  little  images  to  be  made  and  dedicated 
to  her,  one  of  silver  and  the  other  of  brass. 
Moreover,  that  on  the  second  day  of  Gor- 
piaeus,  which  is  sacred  to  Ariadne,  they  have 
this  ceremony  among  their  sacrifices,  to  have 
a  youth  lie  down  and  with  his  voice  and 
gesture  represent  the  pains  of  a  woman  in  tra¬ 
vail;  and  that  the  Amathusians  call  the  grove 
in  which  they  show  her  tomb,  the  grove  of 
Venus  Ariadne. 

Differing  yet  from  this  account,  some  of  the 
Naxians  write  that  there  were  two  Minoses 
and  two  Ariadnes,  one  of  whom,  they  say,  was 
married  to  Bacchus,  in  the  isle  of  Naxos,  and 
bore  the  children  Staphylus  and  his  brother; 
but  that  the  other,  of  a  later  age,  was  carried 
off  by  Theseus,  and,  being  afterwards  deserted 
by  him,  retired  to  Naxos,  with  her  nurse  Cor- 
cyna,  whose  grave  they  yet  show.  That  this 
Ariadne  also  died  there,  and  was  worshipped 
by  the  island,  but  in  a  different  manner  from 
the  former;  for  her  day  is  celebrated  with  gen¬ 
eral  joy  and  revelling,  but  all  the  sacrifices  per¬ 
formed  to  the  latter  are  attended  with  mourn¬ 
ing  and  gloom. 

Now  Theseus,  in  his  return  from  Crete, 
put  in  at  Delos,  and  having  sacrificed  to  the 
god  of  the  island,  dedicated  to  the  temple  the 
image  of  Venus  which  Ariadne  had  given 
him,  and  danced  with  the  young  Athenians 
a  dance  that,  in  memory  of  him,  they  say  is 


8 

still  preserved  among  the  inhabitants  of  Delos, 
consisting  in  certain  measured  turnings  and 
returnings,  imitative  of  the  windings  and 
twistings  of  the  labyrinth.  And  this  dance,  as 
Dicaearchus  writes,  is  called  among  the  Deli¬ 
ans  the  Crane.  This  he  danced  around  the 
Ceratonian  Altar,  so  called  from  its  consist¬ 
ing  of  horns  taken  from  the  left  side  of  the 
head.  They  say  also  that  he  instituted  games 
in  Delos,  where  he  was  the  first  that  began 
the  custom  of  giving  a  palm  to  the  victors. 

When  they  were  come  near  the  coast  of 
Attica,  so  great  was  the  joy  for  the  happy 
success  of  their  voyage,  that  neither  Theseus 
himself  nor  the  pilot  remembered  to  hang 
out  the  sail  which  should  have  been  the  token 
of  their  safety  to  /Egeus,  who,  in  despair  at 
the  sight,  threw  himself  headlong  from  a 
rock,  and  perished  in  the  sea.  But  Theseus 
being  arrived  at  the  port  of  Phalerum,  paid 
there  the  sacrifices  which  he  had  vowed  to 
the  gods  at  his  setting  out  to  sea,  and  sent  a 
herald  to  the  city  to  carry  the  news  of  his 
safe  return.  At  his  entrance,  the  herald  found 
the  people  for  the  most  part  full  of  grief  for 
the  loss  of  their  king;  others,  as  may  well  be 
believed,  as  full  of  joy  for  the  tidings  that 
he  brought,  and  eager  to  welcome  him  and 
crown  him  with  garlands  for  his  good  news, 
which  he  indeed  accepted  of,  but  hung  them 
upon  his  herald’s  staff;  and  thus  returning  to 
the  seaside  before  Theseus  had  finished  his 
libation  to  the  gods,  he  stayed  apart  for  fear 
of  disturbing  the  holy  rites;  but,  as  soon  as 
the  libation  was  ended,  went  up  and  related 
the  king’s  death,  upon  the  hearing  of  which, 
with  great  lamentations  and  a  confused  tu¬ 
mult  of  grief,  they  ran  with  all  haste  to  the 
city.  And  from  hence,  they  say,  it  comes  that 
at  this  day,  in  the  feast  of  Oschophoria,  the 
herald  is  not  crowned,  but  his  staff,  and  all 
who  are  present  at  the  libation  cry  out  eleleu, 
iou,  iou,  the  first  of  which  confused  sounds 
is  commonly  used  by  men  in  haste,  or  at  a 
triumph,  the  other  is  proper  to  people  in  con¬ 
sternation  or  disorder  of  mind. 

Theseus,  after  the  funeral  of  his  father, 
paid  his  vows  to  Apollo  the  seventh  day  of 
Pyanepsion;  for  on  that  day  the  youth  that  re¬ 
turned  with  him  safe  from  Crete  made  their 
entry  into  the  city.  They  say,  also,  that  the 
custom  of  boiling  pulse  at  this  feast  is  derived 
from  hence;  because  the  young  men  that  es¬ 
caped  put  all  that  was  left  of  their  provision 
together,  and,  boiling  it  in  one  common  pot, 
feasted  themselves  with  it,  and  ate  it  all  up 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

together.  Hence,  also,  they  carry  in  procession 
an  olive  branch  bound  about  with  wool  (such 
as  they  then  made  use  of  in  their  supplica¬ 
tions),  which  they  call  Eiresione,  crowned 
with  all  sorts  of  fruits,  to  signify  that  scarcity 
and  barrenness  was  ceased,  singing  in  their 
procession  this  song: — 

Eiresione  bring  figs,  and  Eiresione  bring  loaves ; 
Bring  us  honey  in  pints,  and  oil  to  rub  on  our 
bodies, 

And  a  strong  flagon  of  wine,  for  all  to  go  mellow 
to  bed  on. 

Although  some  hold  opinion  that  this  cere¬ 
mony  is  retained  in  memory  of  the  Heraclidae, 
who  were  thus  entertained  and  brought  up  by 
the  Athenians,  most  are  of  the  opinion  which 
we  have  given  above. 

The  ship  wherein  Theseus  and  the  youth 
of  Athens  returned  had  thirty  oars,  and  was 
preserved  by  the  Athenians  down  even  to  the 
time  of  Demetrius  Phalereus,  for  they  took 
away  the  old  planks  as  they  decayed,  putting 
in  new  and  stronger  timber  in  their  place,  in¬ 
somuch  that  this  ship  became  a  standing  ex¬ 
ample  among  the  philosophers,  for  the  logical 
question  of  things  that  grow;  one  side  holding 
that  the  ship  remained  the  same,  and  the  other 
contending  that  it  was  not  the  same. 

The  feast  called  Oschophoria,  or  the  feast 
of  boughs,  which  to  this  day  the  Athenians 
celebrate,  was  then  first  instituted  by  Theseus. 
For  he  took  not  with  him  the  full  number  of 
virgins  which  by  lot  were  to  be  carried  away, 
but  selected  two  youths  of  his  acquaintance, 
of  fair  and  womanish  faces,  but  of  a  manly 
and  forward  spirit,  and  having,  by  frequent 
baths,  and  avoiding  the  heat  and  scorching 
of  the  sun,  with  a  constant  use  of  all  the  oint¬ 
ments  and  washes  and  dresses  that  serve  to 
the  adorning  of  the  head  or  smoothing  the 
skin  or  improving  the  complexion,  in  a  man¬ 
ner  changed  them  from  what  they  were  be¬ 
fore,  and  having  taught  them  farther  to  coun¬ 
terfeit  the  very  voice  and  carriage  and  gait  of 
virgins  so  that  there  could  not  be  the  least  dif¬ 
ference  perceived,  he,  undiscovered  by  any, 
put  them  into  the  number  of  the  Athenian 
maids  designed  for  Crete.  At  his  return,  he 
and  these  two  youths  led  up  a  solemn  proces¬ 
sion,  in  the  same  habit  that  is  now  worn  by 
those  who  carry  the  vine-branches.  These 
branches  they  carry  in  honour  of  Bacchus  and 
Ariadne,  for  the  sake  of  their  story  before  re¬ 
lated;  or  rather  because  they  happened  to  re¬ 
turn  in  autumn,  the  time  of  gathering  the 
grapes. 


THESEUS 

The  women,  whom  they  call  Deipnopherae, 
or  supper-carriers,  are  taken  into  these  cere- 

I  monies,  and  assist  at  the  sacrifice,  in  remem¬ 
brance  and  imitation  of  the  mothers  of  the 
young  men  and  virgins  upon  whom  the  lot 
fell,  for  thus  they  ran  about  bringing  bread 
and  meat  to  their  children;  and  because  the 
women  then  told  their  sons  and  daughters 
many  tales  and  stories,  to  comfort  and  en¬ 
courage  them  under  the  danger  they  were 
going  upon,  it  has  still  continued  a  custom 
that  at  this  feast  old  fables  and  tales  should 
be  told.  For  these  particularities  we  are  in¬ 
debted  to  the  history  of  Demon.  There  was 
then  a  place  chosen  out,  and  a  temple  erected 
in  it  to  Theseus,  and  those  families  out  of 
whom  the  tribute  of  the  youth  was  gathered 
were  appointed  to  pay  a  tax  to  the  temple 
for  sacrifices  to  him.  And  the  house  of  the 
Phytalidae  had  the  overseeing  of  these  sacri¬ 
fices,  Theseus  doing  them  that  honour  in  re¬ 
compense  of  their  former  hospitality. 

Now,  after  the  death  of  his  father  .Egeus, 
forming  in  his  mind  a  great  and  wonderful 
design,  he  gathered  together  all  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  Attica  into  one  town,  and  made  them 
one  people  of  one  city,  whereas  before  they 
lived  dispersed,  and  were  not  easy  to  assemble 
upon  any  affair  for  the  common  interest.  Nay, 
differences  and  even  wars  often  occurred  be¬ 
tween  them,  which  he  by  his  persuasions  ap¬ 
peased,  going  from  township  to  township, 
and  from  tribe  to  tribe.  And  those  of  a  more 
private  and  mean  condition  readily  embrac¬ 
ing  such  good  advice,  to  those  of  greater  power 
he  promised  a  commonwealth  without  mon¬ 
archy,  a  democracy,  or  people’s  government, 
in  which  he  should  only  be  continued  as  their 
commander  in  war  and  the  protector  of  their 
laws,  all  things  else  being  equally  distributed 
among  them; — and  by  this  means  brought  a 
part  of  them  over  to  his  proposal.  The  rest, 
fearing  his  power,  which  was  already  grown 
very  formidable,  and  knowing  his  courage  and 
resolution,  chose  rather  to  be  persuaded  than 
forced  into  a  compliance.  He  then  dissolved  all 
the  distinct  state -houses,  council  halls,  and 
magistracies,  and  built  one  common  state- 
house  and  council  hall  on  the  site  of  the  present 

(upper  town,  and  gave  the  name  of  Athens  to 
the  whole  state,  ordaining  a  common  feast 
and  sacrifice,  which  he  called  Panathenaea,  or 
the  sacrifice  of  all  the  united  Athenians.  He 
instituted  also  another  sacrifice  called  Metcecia, 
or  Feast  of  Migration,  which  is  yet  celebrated 
on  the  sixteenth  day  of  Hecatombaeon. 


9 

Then,  as  he  had  promised,  he  laid  down 
his  regal  power  and  proceeded  to  order  a  com¬ 
monwealth,  entering  upon  this  great  work  not 
without  advice  from  the  gods.  For  having  sent 
to  consult  the  oracle  of  Delphi  concerning  the 
fortune  of  his  new  government  and  city,  he 
received  this  answer: — 

Son  of  the  Pitthean  maid , 

To  your  town  the  terms  and  fates, 

My  father  gives  of  many  states. 

Be  not  anxious  nor  afraid; 

The  bladder  will  not  fail  to  swim 
On  the  waves  that  compass  him. 

Which  oracle,  they  say,  one  of  the  Sibyls  long 
after  did  in  a  manner  repeat  to  the  Athenians, 
in  this  verse: — 

The  bladder  may  be  dipt,  but  not  be  drowned. 

Farther  yet  designing  to  enlarge  his  city, 
he  invited  all  strangers  to  come  and  enjoy 
equal  privileges  with  the  natives,  and  it  is 
said  that  the  common  form,  Come  hither,  all 
ye  people,  was  the  words  that  Theseus  pro¬ 
claimed  when  he  thus  set  up  a  common¬ 
wealth,  in  a  manner,  for  all  nations.  Yet  he 
did  not  suffer  his  state,  by  the  promiscuous 
multitude  that  flowed  in,  to  be  turned  into 
confusion  and  be  left  without  any  order  or 
degree,  but  was  the  first  that  divided  the 
Commonwealth  into  three  distinct  ranks,  the 
noblemen,  the  husbandmen,  and  artificers. 
To  the  nobility  he  committed  the  care  of  reli¬ 
gion,  the  choice  of  magistrates,  the  teaching 
and  dispensing  of  the  laws,  and  interpreta¬ 
tion  and  direction  in  all  sacred  matters;  the 
whole  city  being,  as  it  were,  reduced  to  an 
exact  equality,  the  nobles  excelling  the  rest 
in  honour,  the  husbandmen  in  profit,  and  the 
artificers  in  number.  And  that  Theseus  was 
the  first,  who,  as  Aristotle  says,  out  of  an  in¬ 
clination  to  popular  government,  parted  with 
the  regal  power,  Homer  also  seems  to  testify, 
in  his  catalogue  of  the  ships,  where  he  gives 
the  name  of  People  to  the  Athenians  only. 

He  also  coined  money,  and  stamped  it  with 
the  image  of  an  ox,  either  in  memory  of  the 
Marathonian  bull,  or  of  Taurus,  whom  he 
vanquished,  or  else  to  put  his  people  in  mind 
to  follow  husbandry;  and  from  this  coin  came 
the  expression  so  frequent  among  the  Greeks, 
of  a  thing  being  worth  ten  or  a  hundred 
oxen. 

After  this  he  joined  Megara  to  Attica,  and 
erected  that  famous  pillar  on  the  Isthmus, 
which  bears  an  inscription  of  two  lines,  show- 


10 


ing  the  bounds  of  the  two  countries  that  meet 
there.  On  the  east  side  the  inscription  is, — 
Peloponnesus  there,  Ionia  here 
and  on  the  west  side, — 

Peloponnesus  here,  Ionia  there. 

He  also  instituted  the  games,  in  emulation 
of  Hercules,  being  ambitious  that  as  the 
Greeks,  by  that  hero’s  appointment,  cele¬ 
brated  the  Olympian  games  to  the  honour  of 
Jupiter,  so  by  his  institution,  they  should  cele¬ 
brate  the  Isthmian  to  the  honour  of  Neptune. 
For  those  that  were  observed  there  before, 
dedicated  to  Melicerta,  were  performed  pri¬ 
vately  in  the  night,  and  had  the  form  rather 
of  a  religious  rite  than  of  an  open  spectacle  or 
public  feast.  There  are  some  who  say  that  the 
Isthmian  games  were  first  instituted  in  mem¬ 
ory  of  Sciron,  Theseus  thus  making  expiation 
for  his  death,  upon  account  of  the  nearness  of 
kindred  between  them,  Sciron  being  the  son 
of  Canethus  and  Heniocha,  the  daughter  of 
Pittheus;  though  others  write  that  Sinnis,  not 
Sciron,  was  their  son,  and  that  to  his  honour, 
and  not  to  the  other’s,  these  games  were  or¬ 
dained  by  Theseus.  At  the  same  time  he  made 
an  agreement  with  the  Corinthians,  that  they 
should  allow  those  that  came  from  Athens  to 
the  celebration  of  the  Isthmian  games  as  much 
space  of  honour  before  the  rest  to  behold  the 
spectacle  in,  as  the  sail  of  the  ship  that 
brought  them  thither,  stretched  to  its  full  ex¬ 
tent,  could  cover;  so  Hellanicus  and  Andro  of 
Halicarnassus  have  established. 

Concerning  his  voyage  into  the  Euxine  Sea, 
Philochorus  and  some  others  write  that  he 
made  it  with  Hercules,  offering  him  his  ser¬ 
vice  in  the  war  against  the  Amazons,  and  had 
Antiope  given  him  for  the  reward  of  his  val¬ 
our;  but  the  greater  number,  of  whom  are  Phe- 
recydes,  Hellanicus,  and  Herodorus,  write  that 
he  made  this  voyage  many  years  after  Hercu¬ 
les,  with  a  navy  under  his  own  command,  and 
took  the  Amazon  prisoner — the  more  prob¬ 
able  story,  for  we  do  not  read  that  any  other, 
of  all  those  that  accompanied  him  in  this  ac¬ 
tion,  took  any  Amazon  prisoner.  Bion  adds, 
that,  to  take  her,  he  had  to  use  deceit  and  fly 
away;  for  the  Amazons,  he  says,  being  natu¬ 
rally  lovers  of  men,  were  so  far  from  avoiding 
Theseus  when  he  touched  upon  their  coasts, 
that  they  sent  him  presents  to  his  ship;  but  he, 
having  invited  Antiope,  who  brought  them,  to 
come  aboard,  immediately  set  sail  and  carried 
her  away. 

An  author  named  Menecrates,  that  wrote 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  history  of  Nicae  in  Bithynia,  adds,  that 
Theseus,  having  Antiope  aboard  his  vessel, 
cruised  for  some  time  about  those  coasts,  and 
that  there  were  in  the  same  ship  three  young 
men  of  Athens,  that  accompanied  him  in  this 
voyage,  all  brothers,  whose  names  were 
Euneos,  Thoas,  and  Soloon.  The  last  of  these 
fell  desperately  in  love  with  Antiope,  and,  es¬ 
caping  the  notice  of  the  rest,  revealed  the  secret 
only  to  one  of  his  most  intimate  acquaintances, 
and  employed  him  to  disclose  his  passion  to 
Antiope;  she  rejected  his  pretences  with  a  very 
positive  denial,  yet  treated  the  matter  with 
much  gentleness  and  discretion,  and  made  no 
complaint  to  Theseus  of  anything  that  had 
happened;  but  Soloon,  the  thing  being  desper¬ 
ate,  leaped  into  a  river  near  the  seaside  and 
drowned  himself. 

As  soon  as  Theseus  was  acquainted  with 
his  death,  and  his  unhappy  love  that  was  the 
cause  of  it,  he  was  extremely  distressed,  and, 
in  the  height  of  his  grief,  an  oracle  which  he 
had  formerly  received  at  Delphi  came  into 
his  mind;  for  he  had  been  commanded  by 
the  priestess  of  Apollo  Pythius,  that  wherever 
in  a  strange  land  he  was  most  sorrowful  and 
under  the  greatest  affliction,  he  should  build 
a  city  there,  and  leave  some  of  his  followers 
to  be  governors  of  the  place.  For  this  cause 
he  there  founded  a  city,  which  he  called,  from 
the  name  of  Apollo,  Pythopolis,  and,  in  hon¬ 
our  of  the  unfortunate  youth,  he  named  the 
river  that  runs  by  it  Soloon,  and  left  the  two 
surviving  brothers  intrusted  with  the  care  of 
the  government  and  laws,  joining  with  them 
Hermus,  one  of  the  nobility  of  Athens,  from 
whom  a  place  in  the  city  is  called  the  House  of 
Hermus;  though  by  an  error  in  the  accent  it 
has  been  taken  for  the  House  of  Hermes,  or 
Mercury,  and  the  honour  that  was  designed  to 
the  hero,  transferred  to  the  god. 

This  was  the  origin  and  cause  of  the  Ama¬ 
zonian  invasion  of  Attica,  which  would  seem 
to  have  been  no  slight  or  womanish  enter¬ 
prise.  For  it  is  impossible  that  they  should 
have  placed  their  camp  in  the  very  city,  and 
joined  battle  close  by  the  Pnyx  and  the  hill 
called  Museum,  unless,  having  first  conquered 
the  country  round  about,  they  had  thus  with 
impunity  advanced  to  the  city.  That  they 
made  so  long  a  journey  by  land,  and  passed 
the  Cimmerian  Bosphorus,  when  frozen,  as 
Hellanicus  writes,  is  difficult  to  be  believed. 
That  they  encamped  all  but  in  the  city  is  cer¬ 
tain,  and  may  be  sufficiently  confirmed  by  the 
names  that  the  places  hereabout  yet  retain, 


THESEUS 

and  the  graves  and  monuments  of  those  that 
fell  in  the  battle. 

Both  armies  being  in  sight,  there  was  a 
long  pause  and  doubt  on  each  side  which 
should  give  the  first  onset;  at  last  Theseus, 
having  sacrificed  to  Fear,  in  obedience  to  the 
command  of  an  oracle  he  had  received,  gave 
them  battle;  and  this  happened  in  the  month 
of  Boedromion,  in  which  to  this  very  day  the 
Athenians  celebrate  the  Feast  Boedromia. 
Clidemus,  desirous  to  be  very  circumstantial, 
writes  that  the  left  wing  of  the  Amazons 
moved  towards  the  place  which  is  yet  called 
Amazonium  and  the  right  towards  the  Pnyx, 
near  Chrysa,  that  with  this  wing  the  Athe¬ 
nians,  issuing  from  behind  the  Museum,  en¬ 
gaged,  and  that  the  graves  of  those  that  were 
slain  are  to  be  seen  in  the  street  that  leads 
to  the  gate  called  the  Piraic,  by  the  chapel  of 
the  hero  Chalcodon;  and  that  here  the  Athe¬ 
nians  were  routed,  and  gave  way  before  the 
women,  as  far  as  to  the  temple  of  the  Furies, 
but,  fresh  supplies  coming  in  from  the  Pal¬ 
ladium,  Ardettus,  and  the  Lyceum,  they 
charged  their  right  wing,  and  beat  them  back 
into  their  tents,  in  which  action  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  the  Amazons  were  slain.  At  length, 
after  four  months,  a  peace  was  concluded  be¬ 
tween  them  by  the  mediation  of  Hippolyta 
(for  so  this  historian  calls  the  Amazon  whom 
Theseus  married,  and  not  Antiope),  though 
others  write  that  she  was  slain  with  a  dart  by 
Molpadia,  while  fighting  by  Theseus’s  side, 

I  and  that  the  pillar  which  stands  by  the  temple 
of  Olympian  Earth  was  erected  to  her  honour. 

Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  that  in  events 
of  such  antiquity,  history  should  be  in  dis¬ 
order.  For  indeed  we  are  also  told  that  those 
of  the  Amazons  that  were  wounded  were 
privately  sent  away  by  Antiope  to  Chalcis, 
where  many  by  her  care  recovered,  but  some 
that  died  were  buried  there  in  the  place  that 
is  to  this  time  called  Amazonium.  That  this 
war,  however,  was  ended  by  a  treaty  is  evi¬ 
dent,  both  from  the  name  of  the  place  adjoin¬ 
ing  to  the  temple  of  Theseus,  called,  from  the 

(solemn  oath  there  taken,  Horcomosium;  and 
also  from  the  ancient  sacrifice  which  used  to 
be  celebrated  to  the  Amazons  the  day  before 
the  Feast  of  Theseus.  The  Megarians  also  show 
a  spot  in  their  city  where  some  Amazons  were 
buried,  on  the  way  from  the  market  to  a  place 
called  Rhus,  where  the  building  in  the  shape 
of  a  lozenge  stands.  It  is  said,  likewise,  that 
others  of  them  were  slain  near  Chaeronea,  and 
buried  near  the  little  rivulet  formerly  called 


11 

Thermodon,  but  now  Haemon,  of  which  an  ac¬ 
count  is  given  in  the  life  of  Demosthenes.  It 
appears  further  that  the  passage  of  the  Ama¬ 
zons  through  Thessaly  was  not  without  oppo¬ 
sition,  for  there  are  yet  shown  many  tombs  of 
them  near  Scotussa  and  Cynoscephalae. 

This  is  as  much  as  is  worth  telling  concern¬ 
ing  the  Amazons.  For  the  account  which  the 
author  of  the  poem  called  the  Theseid  gives  of 
this  rising  of  the  Amazons,  how  Antiope,  to 
revenge  herself  upon  Theseus  for  refusing  her 
and  marrying  Phaedra,  came  down  upon  the 
city  with  her  train  of  Amazons,  whom  Her¬ 
cules  slew,  is  manifestly  nothing  else  but  fable 
and  invention.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  Theseus 
married  Phaedra,  but  that  was  after  the  death 
of  Antiope,  by  whom  he  had  a  son  called  Hip- 
polytus,  or,  as  Pindar  writes,  Demophon.  The 
calamities  which  befell  Phaedra  and  this  son, 
since  none  of  the  historians  have  contradicted 
the  tragic  poets  that  have  written  of  them,  we 
must  suppose  happened  as  represented  uni¬ 
formly  by  them. 

There  are  also  other  traditions  of  the  mar¬ 
riages  of  Theseus,  neither  honourable  in  their 
occasions  nor  fortunate  in  their  events,  which 
yet  were  never  represented  in  the  Greek  plays. 
For  he  is  said  to  have  carried  off  Anaxo,  a 
Trcezenian,  and  having  slain  Sinnis  and  Cer- 
cyon,  to  have  ravished  their  daughters;  to 
have  married  Peribcea,  the  mother  of  Ajax, 
and  then  Pherebcea,  and  then  lope,  the 
daughter  of  Iphicles.  And  further,  he  is  ac¬ 
cused  of  deserting  Ariadne  (as  is  before  re¬ 
lated),  being  in  love  with  ^Egle,  the  daughter 
of  Panopeus,  neither  justly  nor  honourably; 
and  lastly,  of  the  rape  of  Helen,  which  filled 
all  Attica  with  war  and  blood,  and  was  in 
the  end  the  occasion  of  his  banishment  and 
death,  as  will  presently  be  related. 

Herodorus  is  of  opinion,  that  though  there 
were  many  famous  expeditions  undertaken 
by  the  bravest  men  of  his  time,  yet  Theseus 
never  joined  in  any  of  them,  once  only  ex¬ 
cepted,  with  the  Lapithae,  in  their  war  against 
the  Centaurs;  but  others  say  that  he  accom¬ 
panied  Jason  to  Colchis  and  Meleager  to 
the  slaying  of  the  Calydonian  boar,  and  that 
hence  it  came  to  be  a  proverb,  Not  without 
Theseus;  that  he  himself,  however,  without 
aid  of  any  one,  performed  many  glorious  ex¬ 
ploits,  and  that  from  him  began  the  saying, 
He  is  a  second  Hercules.  He  also  joined 
Adrastus  in  recovering  the  bodies  of  those 
that  were  slain  before  Thebes,  but  not  as 
Euripides  in  his  tragedy  says,  by  force  of 


12 


arms,  but  by  persuasion  and  mutual  agree¬ 
ment  and  composition,  for  so  the  greater  part 
of  the  historians  write;  Philochorus  adds  fur¬ 
ther  that  this  was  the  first  treaty  that  ever 
was  made  for  the  recovering  the  bodies  of  the 
dead,  but  in  the  history  of  Hercules,  it  is 
shown  that  it  was  he  who  first  gave  leave  to 
his  enemies  to  carry  off  their  slain.  The  bury- 
ing-places  of  the  most  part  are  yet  to  be  seen 
in  the  village  called  Eleutherae;  those  of  the 
commanders,  at  Eleusis,  where  Theseus  al¬ 
lotted  them  a  place,  to  oblige  Adrastus.  The 
story  of  Euripides  in  his  suppliants  is  dis¬ 
proved  by  iEschylus  in  his  Eleusinians,  where 
Theseus  himself  relates  the  facts  as  here  told. 

The  celebrated  friendship  between  Theseus 
and  Pirithoiis  is  said  to  have  been  thus  be¬ 
gun:  the  fame  of  the  strength  and  valour  of 
Theseus  being  spread  through  Greece,  Piri- 
thoiis  was  desirous  to  make  a  trial  and 
proof  of  it  himself,  and  to  this  end  seized 
a  herd  of  oxen  which  belonged  to  Theseus, 
and  was  driving  them  away  from  Marathon, 
and,  when  the  news  was  brought  that  The¬ 
seus  pursued  him  in  arms,  he  did  not  fly,  but 
turned  back  and  went  to  meet  him.  But  as 
soon  as  they  had  viewed  one  another,  each 
so  admired  the  gracefulness  and  beauty,  and 
was  seized  with  such  respect  for  the  courage 
of  the  other,  that  they  forgot  all  thoughts 
of  fighting;  and  Pirithoiis,  first  stretching  out 
his  hand  to  Theseus,  bade  him  be  judge  in 
this  case  himself,  and  promised  to  submit 
willingly  to  any  penalty  he  should  impose. 
But  Theseus  not  only  forgave  him  all,  but 
entreated  him  to  be  his  friend  and  brother 
in  arms;  and  they  ratified  their  friendship  by 
oaths. 

After  this  Pirithoiis  married  Deidamia,  and 
invited  Theseus  to  the  wedding,  entreating 
him  to  come  and  see  his  country,  and  make 
acquaintance  with  the  Lapithae;  he  had  at  the 
same  time  invited  the  Centaurs  to  the  feast, 
who  growing  hot  with  wine  and  beginning 
to  be  insolent  and  wild,  and  offering  violence 
to  the  women,  the  Lapithae  took  immediate 
revenge  upon  them,  slaying  many  of  them 
upon  the  place,  and  afterwards,  having  over¬ 
come  them  in  battle,  drove  the  whole  race  of 
them  out  of  their  country,  Theseus  all  along 
taking  their  part  and  fighting  on  their  side. 

But  Herodorus  gives  a  different  relation  of 
these  things;  that  Theseus  came  not  to  the 
assistance  of  the  Lapithae  till  the  war  was  al¬ 
ready  begun;  and  that  it  was  in  this  journey 
that  he  had  the  first  sight  of  Hercules,  having 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

made  it  his  business  to  find  him  out  at 
Trachis,  where  he  had  chosen  to  rest  himself 
after  all  his  wanderings  and  his  labours;  and 
that  this  interview  was  honourably  performed 
on  each  part,  with  extreme  respect,  and  good¬ 
will,  and  admiration  of  each  other.  Yet  it  is 
more  credible,  as  others  write,  that  there  were, 
before,  frequent  interviews  between  them, 
and  that  it  was  by  the  means  of  Theseus  that 
Hercules  was  initiated  at  Eleusis,  and  purified 
before  initiation,  upon  account  of  several  rash 
actions  of  his  former  life. 

Theseus  was  now  fifty  years  old,  as  Hellan- 
icus  states,  when  he  carried  off  Helen,  who 
was  yet  too  young  to  be  married.  Some  writers, 
to  take  away  this  accusation  of  one  of  the 
greatest  crimes  laid  to  his  charge,  say,  that  he 
did  not  steal  away  Helen  himself,  but  that 
Idas  and  Lynceus  were  the  ravishers,  who 
brought  her  to  him,  and  committed  her  to  his 
charge,  and  that,  therefore,  he  refused  to  re¬ 
store  her  at  the  demand  of  Castor  and  Pollux; 
or,  indeed,  they  say  her  own  father,  Tyndarus, 
had  sent  her  to  be  kept  by  him,  for  fear  of 
Enarophorus,  the  son  of  Hippocoon,  who 
would  have  carried  her  away  by  force  when 
she  was  yet  a  child. 

But  the  most  probable  account,  and  that 
which  has  most  witnesses  on  its  side,  is  this: 
Theseus  and  Pirithoiis  went  both  together  to 
Sparta,  and,  having  seized  the  young  lady  as 
she  was  dancing  in  the  temple  Diana  Orthia, 
fled  away  with  her.  There  were  presently  men 
sent  in  arms  to  pursue,  but  they  followed  no 
further  than  to  Tegea;  and  Theseus  and  Pi- 
rithoiis,  being  now  out  of  danger,  having 
passed  through  Peloponnesus,  made  an  agree¬ 
ment  between  themselves,  that  he  to  whom 
the  lot  should  fall  should  have  Helen  to  his 
wife,  but  should  be  obliged  to  assist  in  pro¬ 
curing  another  for  his  friend.  The  lot  fell 
upon  Theseus,  who  conveyed  her  to  Aphidnae, 
not  being  yet  marriageable,  and  delivered  her 
to  one  of  his  allies,  called  Aphidnus,  and, 
having  sent  his  mother,  iEthra,  after  to  take 
care  of  her,  desired  him  to  keep  them  so 
secretly,  that  none  might  know  where  they 
were;  which  done,  to  return  the  same  service 
to  his  friend  Pirithoiis,  he  accompanied  him 
in  his  journey  to  Epirus,  in  order  to  steal 
away  the  king  of  the  Molossians’  daughter. 
The  king,  his  own  name  being  Aidoneus,  or 
Pluto,  called  his  wife  Proserpina,  and  his 
daughter  Cora,  and  a  great  dog,  which  he 
kept,  Cerberus,  with  whom  he  ordered  all 
that  came  as  suitors  to  his  daughter  to  fight, 


THESEUS 

and  promised  her  to  him  that  should  over¬ 
come  the  beast.  But  having  been  informed 
that  the  design  of  Pirithoiis  and  his  com¬ 
panion  was  not  to  court  his  daughter,  but  to 
force  her  away,  he  caused  them  both  to  be 
seized,  and  threw  Pirithoiis  to  be  torn  in 
pieces  by  his  dog,  and  put  Theseus  into  prison, 
and  kept  him. 

(  About  this  time,  Menestheus,  the  son  of 
Peteus,  grandson  of  Orneus,  and  great-grand¬ 
son  to  Erechtheus,  the  first  man  that  is  re¬ 
corded  to  have  affected  popularity  and  in¬ 
gratiated  himself  with  the  multitude,  stirred 
up  and  exasperated  the  most  eminent  men  of 
the  city,  who  had  long  borne  a  secret  grudge 
to  Theseus,  conceiving  that  he  had  robbed 
them  of  their  several  little  kingdoms  and 
lordships,  and  having  pent  them  all  up  in 
one  city,  was  using  them  as  his  subjects  and 
slaves.  He  put  also  the  meaner  people  into 
commotion,  telling  them,  that,  deluded  with 
a  mere  dream  of  liberty,  though  indeed  they 
were  deprived  of  both  that  and  of  their  proper 
homes  and  religious  usages,  instead  of  many 
good  and  gracious  kings  of  their  own,  they 
had  given  themselves  up  to  be  lorded  over 
by  a  new-comer  and  a  stranger. 

Whilst  he  was  thus  busied  in  infecting  the 
minds  of  the  citizens,  the  war  that  Castor  and 
Pollux  brought  against  Athens  came  very  op- 

(portunely  to  further  the  sedition  he  had  been 
promoting,  and  some  say  that  by  his  persua¬ 
sions  was  wholly  the  cause  of  their  invading 
the  city.  At  their  first  approach,  they  com¬ 
mitted  no  acts  of  hostility,  but  peaceably  de¬ 
manded  their  sister  Helen;  but  the  Athenians 
returning  answer  that  they  neither  had  her 
there  nor  knew  where  she  was  disposed  of, 
they  prepared  to  assault  the  city,  when  Acad- 
emus,  having,  by  whatever  means,  found  it 
out,  disclosed  to  them  that  she  was  secretly 
kept  at  Aphidnae.  For  which  reason  he  was 
both  highly  honoured  during  his  life  by 
Castor  and  Pollux,  and  the  Lacedaemonians, 
when  often  in  aftertimes  they  made  incur¬ 
sions  into  Attica,  and  destroyed  all  the  coun¬ 
try  round  about,  spared  the  Academy  for  the 
sake  of  Academus.  But  Dicaearchus  writes 
that  there  were  two  Arcadians  in  the  army 
of  Castor  and  Pollux,  the  one  called  Echede- 
mus,  and  the  other  Marathus;  from  the  first 
that  which  is  now  called  Academia  was  then 
named  Echedemia,  and  the  village  Marathon 
had  its  name  from  the  other,  who,  to  fulfil 
some  oracle,  voluntarily  offered  himself  to  be 
made  a  sacrifice  before  battle. 


13 

As  soon  as  they  were  arrived  at  Aphidnae, 
they  overcame  their  enemies  in  a  set  battle, 
and  then  assaulted  and  took  the  town.  And 
here,  they  say,  Alycus,  the  son  of  Sciron,  was 
slain,  of  the  party  of  the  Dioscuri  (Castor 
and  Pollux),  from  whom  a  place  in  Megara, 
where  he  was  buried,  is  called  Alycus  to  this 
day.  And  Hereas  writes  that  it  was  Theseus 
himself  that  killed  him,  in  witness  of  which 
he  cites  these  verses  concerning  Alycus — 

And  Alycus  upon  Aphid  net's  plain, 

By  Theseus  in  the  cause  of  Helen  slain . 

Though  it  is  not  at  all  probable  that  Theseus 
himself  was  there  when  both  the  city  and 
his  mother  were  taken. 

Aphidnae  being  won  by  Castor  and  Pollux, 
and  the  city  of  Athens  being  in  consterna¬ 
tion,  Menestheus  persuaded  the  people  to 
open  their  gates,  and  receive  them  with  all 
manner  of  friendship,  for  they  were,  he  told 
them,  at  enmity  with  none  but  Theseus, 
who  had  first  injured  them,  and  were  benefac¬ 
tors  and  saviours  to  all  mankind  beside.  And 
their  behaviour  gave  credit  to  those  promises; 
for,  having  made  themselves  absolute  masters 
of  the  place,  they  demanded  no  more  than  to 
be  initiated,  since  they  were  as  nearly  related 
to  the  city  as  Hercules  was,  who  had  received 
the  same  honour.  This  their  desire  they  easily 
obtained,  and  were  adopted  by  Aphidnus,  as 
Hercules  had  been  by  Pylius.  They  were  hon¬ 
oured  also  like  gods,  and  were  called  by  a  new 
name,  Anaces,  either  from  the  cessation  of  the 
war,  or  from  the  care  they  took  that  none 
should  suffer  any  injury,  though  there  was  so 
great  an  army  within  the  walls;  for  the  phrase 
ana\os  e\hein  is  used  of  those  who  look  to  or 
care  for  anything;  kings  for  this  reason,  per¬ 
haps,  are  called  anactes.  Others  say,  that  from 
the  appearance  of  their  star  in  the  heavens, 
they  were  thus  called,  for  in  the  Attic  dialect 
this  name  comes  very  near  the  words  that 
signify  above . 

Some  say  that  ^Ethra,  Theseus’s  mother,  was 
here  taken  prisoner,  and  carried  to  Lacedae¬ 
mon,  and  from  thence  went  away  with  Helen 
to  Troy,  alleging  this  verse  of  Homer  to  prove 
that  she  waited  upon  Helen — 

JEthra  of  Pittheus  born,  and  large  eyed  Clymene. 
Others  reject  this  verse  as  none  of  Homer’s, 
as  they  do  likewise  the  whole  fable  of  Mu- 
nychus,  who,  the  story  says,  was  the  son  of 
Demophon  and  Laodice,  born  secretly,  and 
brought  up  by  ^Ethra  at  Troy.  But  Ister,  in  the 
thirteenth  book  of  his  Attic  History,  gives  us 


14 


an  account  of  /Ethra,  different  yet  from  all  the 
rest:  that  Achilles  and  Patroclus  overcame 
Paris  in  Thessaly,  near  the  river  Sperchius,  but 
that  Hector  took  and  plundered  the  city  of  the 
Trcezenians,  and  made  fiEthra  prisoner  there. 
But  this  seems  a  groundless  tale. 

Now  Hercules,  passing  by  the  Molossians, 
was  entertained  in  his  way  to  Aidoneus  the 
king,  who,  in  conversation,  accidentally  spoke 
of  the  journey  of  Theseus  and  Pirithous  into 
his  country,  of  what  they  had  designed  to  do, 
and  what  they  were  forced  to  suffer.  Hercules 
was  much  grieved  for  the  inglorious  death  of 
the  one  and  the  miserable  condition  of  the 
other.  As  for  Pirithous,  he  thought  it  useless 
to  complain;  but  begged  to  have  Theseus  re¬ 
leased  for  his  sake,  and  obtained  that  favour 
from  the  king. 

Theseus,  being  thus  set  at  liberty,  returned 
to  Athens,  where  his  friends  were  not  yet 
wholly  suppressed,  and  dedicated  to  Hercules 
all  the  sacred  places  which  the  city  had  set 
apart  for  himself,  changing  their  names  from 
Thesea  to  Heraclea,  four  only  excepted,  as 
Philochorus  writes.  And  wishing  immedi¬ 
ately  to  resume  the  first  place  in  the  common¬ 
wealth,  and  manage  the  state  as  before,  he 
soon  found  himself  involved  in  factions  and 
troubles;  those  who  long  had  hated  him  had 
now  added  to  their  hatred  contempt;  and  the 
minds  of  the  people  were  so  generally  cor¬ 
rupted,  that,  instead  of  obeying  commands 
with  silence,  they  expected  to  be  flattered  into 
their  duty.  He  had  some  thoughts  to  have  re¬ 
duced  them  by  force,  but  was  overpowered 
by  demagogues  and  factions.  And  at  last,  de¬ 
spairing  of  any  good  success  of  his  affairs  in 
Athens,  he  sent  away  his  children  privately 
to  Euboea,  commending  them  to  the  care  of 
Elephenor,  the  son  of  Chalcodon;  and  he  him¬ 
self  having  solemnly  cursed  the  people  of 
Athens  in  the  village  of  Gargettus,  in  which 
there  yet  remains  the  place  called  Araterion, 
or  the  place  of  cursing,  sailed  to  Scyros,  where 
he  had  lands  left  him  by  his  father,  and  friend¬ 
ship,  as  he  thought,  with  those  of  the  island. 

Lycomedes  was  then  king  of  Scyros. 
Theseus,  therefore,  addressed  himself  to  him 
and  desired  to  have  his  lands  put  into  his 
possession,  as  designing  to  settle  and  to  dwell 
there,  though  others  say  that  he  came  to  beg 
his  assistance  against  the  Athenians.  But  Ly¬ 
comedes,  either  jealous  of  the  glory  of  so  great 
a  man,  or  to  gratify  Menestheus,  having  led 
him  up  to  the  highest  cliff  of  the  island,  on 
pretence  of  showing  him  from  thence  the 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

lands  that  he  desired,  threw  him  headlong 
down  from  the  rock,  and  killed  him.  Others 
say  he  fell  down  of  himself  by  a  slip  of  his  foot, 
as  he  was  walking  there,  according  to  his  cus¬ 
tom,  after  supper.  At  that  time  there  was  no 
notice  taken,  nor  were  any  concerned  for  his 
death,  but  Menestheus  quietly  possessed  the 
kingdom  of  Athens.  His  sons  were  brought 
up  in  a  private  condition,  and  accompanied 
Elephenor  to  the  Trojan  war,  but,  after  the 
decease  of  Menestheus  in  that  expedition,  re¬ 
turned  to  Athens,  and  recovered  the  govern¬ 
ment. 

But  in  succeeding  ages,  besides  several 
other  circumstances  that  moved  the  Athenians 
to  honour  Theseus  as  a  demigod,  in  the  battle 
which  was  fought  at  Marathon  against  the 
Medes,  many  of  the  soldiers  believed  they  saw 
an  apparition  of  Theseus  in  arms,  rushing  on 
at  the  head  of  them  against  the  barbarians. 
And  after  the  Median  war,  Phaedo  being 
archon  of  Athens,  the  Athenians,  consulting 
the  oracle  at  Delphi,  were  commanded  to 
gather  together  the  bones  of  Theseus,  and, 
laying  them  in  some  honourable  place,  keep 
them  as  sacred  in  the  city.  But  it  was  very 
difficult  to  recover  these  relics,  or  so  much  as 
to  find  out  the  place  where  they  lay,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  inhospitable  and  savage  temper 
of  the  barbarous  people  that  inhabited  the 
island.  Nevertheless,  afterwards,  when  Cimon 
took  the  island  (as  is  related  in  his  life),  and 
had  a  great  ambition  to  find  out  the  place 
where  Theseus  was  buried,  he,  by  chance, 
spied  an  eagle  upon  a  rising  ground  pecking 
with  her  beak  and  tearing  up  the  earth  with 
her  talons,  when  on  the  sudden  it  came  into  his 
mind,  as  it  were  by  some  divine  inspiration, 
to  dig  there,  and  search  for  the  bones  of  The¬ 
seus.  There  were  found  in  that  place  a  coffin 
of  a  man  of  more  than  ordinary  size,  and  a 
brazen  spear-head,  and  a  sword  lying  by  it, 
all  which  he  took  aboard  his  galley  and 
brought  with  him  to  Athens.  Upon  which  the 
Athenians,  greatly  delighted,  went  out  to  meet 
and  receive  the  relics  with  splendid  proces¬ 
sions  and  sacrifices,  as  if  it  were  Theseus  him¬ 
self  returning  alive  to  the  city. 

He  lies  interred  in  the  middle  of  the  city, 
near  the  present  gymnasium.  His  tomb  is  a 
sanctuary  and  refuge  for  slaves,  and  all  those 
of  mean  condition  that  fly  from  the  persecu¬ 
tion  of  men  in  power,  in  memory  that  The¬ 
seus  while  he  lived  was  an  assister  and  protec¬ 
tor  of  the  distressed,  and  never  refused  the 
petitions  of  the  afflicted  that  fled  to  him.  The 


ROMULUS 

chief  and  most  solemn  sacrifice  which  they 
celebrate  to  him  is  kept  on  the  eighth  day  of 
Pyanepsion,  on  which  he  returned  with  the 
Athenian  young  men  from  Crete.  Besides 
which  they  sacrifice  to  him  on  the  eighth  day 
of  every  month,  either  because  he  returned 
from  Trcezen  the  eighth  day  of  Hecatombaeon, 
as  Diodorus  the  geographer  writes,  or  else 
thinking  that  number  to  be  proper  to  him,  be- 


15 

cause  he  was  reputed  to  be  born  of  Neptune, 
because  they  sacrifice  to  Neptune  on  the  eighth 
day  of  every  month.  The  number  eight  being 
the  first  cube  of  an  even  number,  and  the  dou¬ 
ble  of  the  first  square,  seemed  to  be  an  emblem 
of  the  steadfast  and  immovable  power  of  this 
god,  who  from  thence  has  the  names  of  As- 
phalius  and  Gaeiochus,  that  is,  the  establisher 
and  stayer  of  the  earth. 


ROMULUS 

LEGENDARY,  8TH  CENTURY  B.C. 


From  whom,  and  for  what  reason,  the 
city  of  Rome,  a  name  so  great  in  glory, 
and  famous  in  the  mouths  of  all  men, 
was  so  first  called,  authors  do  not  agree. 
Some  are  of  opinion  that  the  Pelasgians, 
wandering  over  the  greater  part  of  the  habit¬ 
able  world,  and  subduing  numerous  nations, 
fixed  themselves  here,  and,  from  their  own 
great  strength  in  war,  called  the  city  Rome. 
Others,  that  at  the  taking  of  Troy,  some  few 
that  escaped  and  met  with  shipping,  put  to 
sea,  and  driven  by  winds,  were  carried  upon 
the  coasts  of  Tuscany,  and  came  to  anchor 
off  the  mouth  of  the  river  Tiber,  where  their 
women,  out  of  heart  and  weary  with  the 
sea,  on  its  being  proposed  by  one  of  the 
highest  birth  and  best  understanding  amongst 
them,  whose  name  was  Roma,  burnt  the 
ships.  With  which  act  the  men  at  first  were 
angry,  but  afterwards,  of  necessity,  seating 
themselves  near  Palatium,  where  things  in  a 
short  while  succeeded  far  better  than  they 
could  hope,  in  that  they  found  the  country 
very  good,  and  the  people  courteous,  they  not 
only  did  the  lady  Roma  other  honours,  but 
added  also  this,  of  calling  after  her  name  the 
city  which  she  had  been  the  occasion  of  their 
founding.  From  this,  they  say,  has  come 
down  that  custom  at  Rome  for  women  to  sa¬ 
lute  their  kinsmen  and  husbands  with  kisses; 
because  these  women,  after  they  had  burnt  the 
ships,  made  use  of  such  endearments  when 
entreating  and  pacifying  their  husbands. 

Some  again  say  that  Roma,  from  whom  this 
city  was  so  called,  was  daughter  of  Italus  and 
Leucaria;  or,  by  another  account,  of  Telaphus, 
Hercules’s  son,  and  that  she  was  married  to 
iEneas,  or,  according  to  others  again,  to  As- 
canius,  Eneas’s  son.  Some  tell  us  that  Ro- 


manus,  the  son  of  Ulysses  and  Circe,  built  it; 
some,  Romus,  the  son  of  Emathion,  Diomede 
having  sent  him  from  Troy;  and  others,  Ro¬ 
mus,  king  of  the  Latins,  after  driving  out  the 
Tyrrhenians,  who  had  come  from  Thessaly 
into  Lydia,  and  from  thence  into  Italy.  Those 
very  authors,  too,  who,  in  accordance  with 
the  safest  account,  make  Romulus  give  the 
name  of  the  city,  yet  differ  concerning  his 
birth  and  family.  For  some  say,  he  was  son 
to  .Eneas  and  Dexithea,  daughter  of  Phorbas, 
and  was,  with  his  brother  Remus,  in  their 
infancy,  carried  into  Italy,  and  being  on  the 
river  when  the  waters  came  down  in  a  flood, 
all  the  vessels  were  cast  away  except  only  that 
where  the  young  children  were,  which  being 
gently  landed  on  a  level  bank  of  the  river, 
they  were  both  unexpectedly  saved,  and  from 
them  the  place  was  called  Rome. 

Some  say,  Roma,  daughter  of  the  Trojan 
lady  above  mentioned,  was  married  to  Lati- 
nus,  Telemachus’s  son,  and  became  mother  to 
Romulus;  others,  that  Emilia,  daughter  of 
Eneas  and  Lavinia,  had  him  by  the  god  Mars; 
and  others  give  you  mere  fables  of  his  origin. 
For  to  Tarchetius,  they  say,  king  of  Alba,  who 
was  a  most  wicked  and  cruel  man,  there  ap¬ 
peared  in  his  own  house  a  strange  vision,  a 
male  figure  that  rose  out  of  a  hearth,  and 
stayed  there  for  many  days.  There  was  an 
oracle  of  Tethys  in  Tuscany  which  Tarchetius 
consulted,  and  received  an  answer  that  a  vir¬ 
gin  should  give  herself  to  the  apparition,  and 
that  a  son  should  be  born  of  her,  highly  re¬ 
nowned,  eminent  for  valour,  good  fortune, 
and  strength  of  body.  Tarchetius  told  the 
prophecy  to  one  of  his  own  daughters,  and 
commanded  her  to  do  this  thing;  which  she 
avoiding  as  an  indignity,  sent  her  handmaid. 


16 


Tarchetius,  hearing  this,  in  great  anger  im¬ 
prisoned  them  both,  purposing  to  put  them 
to  death,  but  being  deterred  from  murder  by 
the  goddess  Vesta  in  a  dream,  enjoined  them 
for  their  punishment  the  working  a  web  of 
cloth,  in  their  chains  as  they  were,  which 
when  they  finished,  they  should  be  suffered 
to  marry;  but  whatever  they  worked  by  day, 
Tarchetius  commanded  others  to  unravel  in 
the  night. 

In  the  meantime,  the  waiting-woman  was 
delivered  of  two  boys,  whom  Tarchetius  gave 
into  the  hands  of  one  Teratius,  with  com¬ 
mand  to  destroy  them;  he,  however,  carried 
and  laid  them  by  the  river  side,  where  a 
wolf  came  and  continued  to  suckle  them, 
while  birds  of  various  sorts  brought  little 
morsels  of  food,  which  they  put  into  their 
mouths;  till  a  cowherd,  spying  them,  was 
first  strangely  surprised,  but,  venturing  to 
draw  nearer,  took  the  children  up  in  his 
arms.  Thus  they  were  saved,  and  when  they 
grew  up,  set  upon  Tarchetius  and  overcame 
him.  This  one  Promathion  says,  who  com¬ 
piled  a  history  of  Italy. 

But  the  story  which  is  most  believed  and 
has  the  greatest  number  of  vouchers  was  first 
published,  in  its  chief  particulars,  amongst  the 
Greeks  by  Diodes  of  Peparethus,  whom  Fab- 
ius  Pictor  also  follows  in  most  points.  Here 
again  there  are  variations,  but  in  general  out¬ 
line  it  runs  thus:  the  kings  of  Alba  reigned  in 
lineal  descent  from  Tineas,  and  the  succession 
devolved  at  length  upon  two  brothers,  Numi- 
tor  and  Amulius.  Amulius  proposed  to  divide 
things  into  two  equal  shares,  and  set  as  equiv¬ 
alent  to  the  kingdom  the  treasure  and  gold 
that  were  brought  from  Troy.  Numitor  chose 
the  kingdom;  but  Amulius,  having  the  money, 
and  being  able  to  do  more  with  that  than  Nu¬ 
mitor,  took  his  kingdom  from  him  with  great 
ease,  and,  fearing  lest  his  daughter  might  have 
children,  made  her  a  Vestal,  bound  in  that 
condition  forever  to  live  a  single  and  maiden 
life.  This  lady  some  call  Ilia,  others  Rhea,  and 
others  Silvia. 

However,  not  long  after,  she  was,  con¬ 
trary  to  the  established  laws  of  the  Vestals, 
discovered  to  be  with  child,  and  should  have 
suffered  the  most  cruel  punishment,  had  not 
Antho,  the  king’s  daughter,  mediated  with 
her  father  for  her;  nevertheless,  she  was  con¬ 
fined,  and  debarred  all  company,  that  she 
might  not  be  delivered  without  the  king’s 
knowledge.  In  time  she  brought  forth  two 
boys,  of  more  than  human  size  and  beauty, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

whom  Amulius,  becoming  yet  more  alarmed, 
commanded  a  servant  to  take  and  cast  away; 
this  man  some  call  Faustulus,  others  say 
Faustulus  was  the  man  who  brought  them 
up.  He  put  the  children,  however,  in  a 
small  trough,  and  went  towards  the  river 
with  a  design  to  cast  them  in;  but,  seeing  the 
waters  much  swollen  and  coming  violently 
down,  was  afraid  to  go  nearer,  and  dropping 
the  children  near  the  bank,  went  away.  The 
river  overflowing,  the  flood  at  last  bore  up 
the  trough,  and,  gently  wafting  it,  landed 
them  on  a  smooth  piece  of  ground,  which 
they  now  called  Cermanus,  formerly  Ger- 
manus,  perhaps  from  Germani,  which  signifies 
brothers. 

Near  this  place  grew  a  wild  fig-tree,  which 
they  called  Ruminalis,  either  from  Romulus 
(as  it  is  vulgarly  thought),  or  from  ruminat¬ 
ing,  because  cattle  did  usually  in  the  heat  of 
the  day  seek  cover  under  it,  and  there  chew 
the  cud;  or,  better,  from  the  suckling  of  these 
children  there,  for  the  ancients  called  the 
dug  or  teat  of  any  creature  ruma ;  and  there 
is  a  tutelar  goddess  of  the  rearing  of  children 
whom  they  still  call  Rumilia,  in  sacrificing 
to  whom  they  use  no  wine,  but  make  liba¬ 
tions  of  milk.  While  the  infants  lay  here, 
history  tells  us,  a  she-wolf  nursed  them,  and 
a  woodpecker  constantly  fed  and  watched 
them;  these  creatures  are  esteemed  holy  to  the 
god  Mars;  the  woodpecker  the  Latins  still 
especially  worship  and  honour.  Which 
things,  as  much  as  any,  gave  credit  to  what 
the  mother  of  the  children  said,  that  their 
father  was  the  god  Mars;  though  some  say 
that  it  was  a  mistake  put  upon  her  by  Amu¬ 
lius,  who  himself  had  come  to  her  dressed  up 
in  armour. 

Others  think  that  the  first  rise  of  this 
fable  came  from  the  children’s  nurse,  through 
the  ambiguity  of  her  name;  for  the  Latins 
not  only  called  wolves  lupce,  but  also  women 
of  loose  life;  and  such  an  one  was  the  wife  of 
Faustulus,  who  nurtured  these  children,  Acca 
Larentia  by  name.  To  her  the  Romans  offer 
sacrifices,  and  in  the  month  of  April  the 
priest  of  Mars  makes  libations  there;  it  is 
called  the  Larentian  Feast. 

They  honour  also  another  Larentia,  for  the 
following  reason:  the  keeper  of  Hercules’s 
temple  having,  it  seems,  little  else  to  do,  pro¬ 
posed  to  his  deity  a  game  at  dice,  laying 
down  that,  if  he  himself  won,  he  would  have 
something  valuable  of  the  god;  but  if  he 
were  beaten,  he  would  spread  him  a  noble 


ROMULUS 

table,  and  procure  him  a  fair  lady’s  company. 
Upon  these  terms,  throwing  first  for  the  god 
and  then  for  himself,  he  found  himself 
beaten.  Wishing  to  pay  his  stakes  honourably, 
and  holding  himself  bound  by  what  he  had 
said,  he  both  provided  the  deity  a  good  sup¬ 
per,  and  giving  money  to  Larentia,  then  in 
her  beauty,  though  not  publicly  known,  gave 
her  a  feast  in  the  temple,  where  he  had  also 
laid  a  bed,  and  after  supper  locked  her  in, 
as  if  the  god  were  really  to  come  to  her.  And 
indeed,  it  is  said,  the  deity  did  truly  visit  her, 
and  commanded  her  in  the  morning  to  walk 
to  the  market-place,  and,  whatever  man  she 
met  first,  to  salute  him,  and  make  him  her 
friend.  She  met  one  named  Tarrutius,  who 
was  a  man  advanced  in  years,  fairly  rich, 
without  children,  and  had  always  lived  a 
single  life.  He  received  Larentia,  and  loved 
her  well,  and  at  his  death  left  her  sole  heir  of 
all  his  large  and  fair  possessions,  most  of 
which  she,  in  her  last  will  and  testament,  be¬ 
queathed  to  the  people.  It  was  reported  of  her, 
being  now  celebrated  and  esteemed  the  mis¬ 
tress  of  a  god,  that  she  suddenly  disappeared 
near  the  place  where  the  first  Larentia  lay 
buried;  the  spot  is  at  this  day  called  Vela- 
brum,  because,  the  river  frequently  overflow¬ 
ing,  they  went  over  in  ferry-boats  somewhere 
hereabouts  to  the  forum,  the  Latin  word  for 
ferrying  being  velatura.  Others  derive  the 
name  from  velum,  a  sail;  because  the  exhibi¬ 
tors  of  public  shows  used  to  hang  the  road 
that  leads  from  the  forum  to  the  Circus  Maxi¬ 
mus  with  sails,  beginning  at  this  spot.  Upon 
these  accounts  the  second  Larentia  is  hon¬ 
oured  at  Rome. 

Meantime  Faustulus,  Amulius’s  swineherd, 
brought  up  the  children  without  any  man’s 
knowledge;  or,  as  those  say  who  wish  to 
keep  closer  to  probabilities,  with  the  knowl¬ 
edge  and  secret  assistance  of  Numitor;  for  it 
is  said,  they  went  to  school  at  Gabii,  and 
were  well  instructed  in  letters,  and  other  ac¬ 
complishments  befitting  their  birth.  And 
they  were  called  Romulus  and  Remus  (from 
ruma,  the  dug),  as  we  had  before,  because 
they  were  found  sucking  the  wolf. 

In  their  very  infancy,  the  size  and  beauty 
of  their  bodies  intimated  their  natural 
superiority;  and  when  they  grew  up,  they 
both  proved  brave  and  manly,  attempting 
all  enterprises  that  seemed  hazardous,  and 
showing  in  them  a  courage  altogether  un¬ 
daunted.  But  Romulus  seemed  rather  to  act 
by  counsel,  and  to  show  the  sagacity  of  a 


17 

statesman,  and  in  all  his  dealings  with  their 
neighbours,  whether  relating  to  feeding  of 
flocks  or  to  hunting,  gave  the  idea  of  being 
born  rather  to  rule  than  to  obey.  To  their 
comrades  and  inferiors  they  were  therefore 
dear;  but  the  king’s  servants,  his  bailiffs  and 
overseers,  as  being  in  nothing  better  than 
themselves,  they  despised  and  slighted,  nor 
were  the  least  concerned  at  their  commands 
and  menaces.  They  used  honest  pastimes 
and  liberal  studies,  not  esteeming  sloth  and 
idleness  honest  and  liberal,  but  rather  such 
exercises  as  hunting  and  running,  repelling 
robbers,  taking  of  thieves,  and  delivering  the 
wronged  and  oppressed  from  injury.  For  do¬ 
ing  such  things  they  became  famous. 

A  quarrel  occurring  betwixt  Numitor’s  and 
Amulius’s  cowherds,  the  latter,  not  enduring 
the  driving  away  of  their  cattle  by  the  others, 
fell  upon  them  and  put  them  to  flight,  and 
rescued  the  greatest  part  of  the  prey.  At 
which  Numitor  being  highly  incensed,  they 
little  regarded  it,  but  collected  and  took  into 
their  company  a  number  of  needy  men  and 
runaway  slaves — acts  which  looked  like  the 
first  stages  of  rebellion. 

It  so  happened,  that  when  Romulus  was  at¬ 
tending  a  sacrifice,  being  fond  of  sacred  rites 
and  divination,  Numitor’s  herdsmen,  meeting 
with  Remus  on  a  journey  with  few  compan¬ 
ions,  fell  upon  him,  and  after  some  fighting, 
took  him  prisoner,  carried  him  before  Numi¬ 
tor,  and  there  accused  him.  Numitor  would 
not  punish  him  himself,  fearing  his  brother’s 
anger,  but  went  to  Amulius,  and  desired  jus¬ 
tice,  as  he  was  Amulius’s  brother  and  was  af¬ 
fronted  by  Amulius’s  servants.  The  men  of 
Alba  likewise  resenting  the  thing,  and  think¬ 
ing  he  had  been  dishonourably  used,  Amulius 
was  induced  to  deliver  Remus  up  into  Numi¬ 
tor’s  hands,  to  use  him  as  he  thought  fit. 

He  therefore  took  and  carried  him  home, 
and,  being  struck  with  admiration  of  the 
youth’s  person,  in  stature  and  strength  of 
body  exceeding  all  men,  and  perceiving  in 
his  very  countenance  the  courage  and  force 
of  his  mind,  which  stood  unsubdued  and 
unmoved  by  his  present  circumstances,  and 
hearing  further  that  all  the  enterprises  and 
actions  of  his  life  were  answerable  to  what 
he  saw  of  him,  but  chiefly,  as  it  seemed,  a 
divine  influence  aiding  and  directing  the  first 
steps  that  were  to  lead  to  great  results,  out 
of  the  mere  thought  of  his  mind,  and  casually, 
as  it  were,  he  put  his  hand  upon  the  fact, 
and,  in  gentle  terms  and  with  a  kind  aspect, 


18 


to  inspire  him  with  confidence  and  hope, 
asked  him  who  he  was,  and  whence  he  was 
derived.  He,  taking  heart,  spoke  thus:  “I 
will  hide  nothing  from  you,  for  you  seem  to 
be  of  a  more  princely  temper  than  Amulius, 
in  that  you  give  a  hearing  and  examine  be¬ 
fore  you  punish,  while  he  condemns  before 
the  cause  is  heard.  Formerly,  then,  we  (for 
we  are  twins)  thought  ourselves  the  sons  of 
Faustulus  and  Larentia,  the  king’s  servants; 
but  since  we  have  been  accused  and  aspersed 
with  calumnies,  and  brought  in  peril  of  our 
lives  here  before  you,  we  hear  great  things  of 
ourselves,  the  truth  of  which  my  present 
danger  is  likely  to  bring  to  the  test.  Our 
birth  is  said  to  have  been  secret,  our  fostering 
and  nurture  in  our  infancy  still  more  strange; 
by  birds  and  beasts,  to  whom  we  were  cast 
out,  we  were  fed,  by  the  milk  of  a  wolf  and 
the  morsels  of  a  woodpecker,  as  we  lay  in  a 
little  trough  by  the  side  of  the  river.  The 
trough  is  still  in  being,  and  is  preserved, 
with  brass  plates  round  it,  and  an  inscription 
in  letters  almost  effaced,  which  may  prove 
hereafter  unavailing  tokens  to  our  parents 
when  we  are  dead  and  gone.”  Numitor,  upon 
these  words,  and  computing  the  dates  by  the 
young  man’s  looks,  slighted  not  the  hope  that 
flattered  him,  but  considered  how  to  come  at 
his  daughter  privately  (for  she  was  still  kept 
under  restraint),  to  talk  with  her  concerning 
these  matters. 

Faustulus,  hearing  Remus  was  taken  and 
delivered  up,  called  on  Romulus  to  assist  in 
his  rescue,  informing  him  then  plainly  of  the 
particulars  of  his  birth,  not  but  he  had  before 
given  hints  of  it,  and  told  as  much  as  an 
attentive  man  might  make  no  small  con¬ 
clusions  from;  he  himself,  full  of  concern  and 
fear  of  not  coming  in  time,  took  the  trough, 
and  ran  instantly  to  Numitor;  but  giving  a 
suspicion  to  some  of  the  king’s  sentries  at  his 
gate,  and  being  gazed  upon  by  them  and  per¬ 
plexed  with  their  questions,  he  let  it  be  seen 
that  he  was  hiding  the  trough  under  his  cloak. 
By  chance  there  was  one  among  them  who 
was  at  the  exposing  of  the  children,  and  was 
employed  in  the  office;  he,  seeing  the  trough 
and  knowing  it  by  its  make  and  inscription, 
guessed  at  the  business,  and,  without  further 
delay,  telling  the  king  of  it,  brought  in  the 
man  to  be  examined,  Faustulus,  hard  beset, 
did  not  show  himself  altogether  proof  against 
terror;  nor  yet  was  he  wholly  forced  out  of  all; 
confessed  indeed  the  children  were  alive,  but 
lived,  he  said,  as  shepherds,  a  great  way  from 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

Alba;  he  himself  was  going  to  carry  the  trough 
to  Ilia,  who  had  often  greatly  desired  to  see  and 
handle  it,  for  a  confirmation  of  her  hopes  of 
her  children. 

As  men  generally  do  who  are  troubled  in 
mind  and  act  either  in  fear  or  passion,  it  so 
fell  out  Amulius  now  did;  for  he  sent  in  haste 
as  a  messenger,  a  man,  otherwise  honest,  and* 
friendly  to  Numitor,  with  commands  to  learn 
from  Numitor  whether  any  tidings  were  come 
to  him  of  the  children  being  alive.  He,  coming 
and  seeing  how  little  Remus  wanted  of  being 
received  into  the  arms  and  embraces  of  Numi¬ 
tor,  both  gave  him  surer  confidence  in  his  hope, 
and  advised  them,  with  all  expedition,  to  pro¬ 
ceed  to  action;  himself  too  joining  and  assist¬ 
ing  them,  and  indeed,  had  they  wished  it, 
the  time  would  not  have  let  them  demur.  For 
Romulus  was  now  come  very  near,  and  many 
of  the  citizens,  out  of  fear  and  hatred  of  Amu¬ 
lius,  were  running  out  to  join  him;  besides,  he 
brought  great  forces  with  him,  divided  into 
companies  each  of  an  hundred  men,  every 
captain  carrying  a  small  bundle  of  grass  and 
shrubs  tied  to  a  pole.  The  Latins  call  such  bun¬ 
dles  manipuli,  and  from  hence  it  is  that  in  their 
armies  they  still  call  their  captains  matiipulares. 
Remus  rousing  the  citizens  within  to  revolt, 
and  Romulus  making  attacks  from  without, 
the  tyrant,  not  knowing  either  what  to  do,  or 
what  expedient  to  think  of  for  his  security,  in 
this  perplexity  and  confusion  was  taken  and 
put  to  death. 

This  narrative  for  the  most  part  given  by 
Fabius  and  Diodes  of  Peparethus,  who  seem 
to  be  the  earliest  historians  of  the  foundation 
of  Rome,  is  suspected  by  some,  because  of  its 
dramatic  and  fictitious  appearance;  but  it 
would  not  wholly  be  disbelieved,  if  men 
would  remember  what  a  poet  fortune  some¬ 
times  shows  herself,  and  consider  that  the 
Roman  power  would  hardly  have  reached  so 
high  a  pitch  without  a  divinely  ordered  ori¬ 
gin,  attended  with  great  and  extraordinary  cir¬ 
cumstances. 

Amulius  now  being  dead  and  matters 
quietly  disposed,  the  two  brothers  would  nei¬ 
ther  dwell  in  Alba  without  governing  there, 
nor  take  the  government  into  their  own  hands 
during  the  life  of  their  grandfather.  Having 
therefore  delivered  the  dominion  up  into  his 
hands,  and  paid  their  mother  befitting  hon¬ 
our,  they  resolved  to  live  by  themselves,  and 
build  a  city  in  the  same  place  where  they 
were  in  their  infancy  brought  up.  This  seems 
the  most  honourable  reason  for  their  depar- 


ROMULUS 

ture;  though  perhaps  it  was  necessary,  having 
such  a  body  of  slaves  and  fugitives  collected 
about  them,  either  to  come  to  nothing  by  dis¬ 
persing  them,  or  if  not  so,  then  to  live  with 
them  elsewhere.  For  that  the  inhabitants  of 
Alba  did  not  think  fugitives  worthy  of  being 
received  and  incorporated  as  citizens  among 
them  plainly  appears  from  the  matter  of  the 
women,  an  attempt  made  not  wantonly  but  of 
necessity,  because  they  could  not  get  wives  by 
goodwill.  For  they  certainly  paid  unusual  re¬ 
spect  and  honour  to  those  whom  they  thus 
forcibly  seized. 

Not  long  after  the  first  foundation  of  the 
city,  they  opened  a  sanctuary  of  refuge  for 
all  fugitives,  which  they  called  the  temple  of 
the  god  Asylaeus,  where  they  received  and 
protected  all,  delivering  none  back,  neither  the 
servant  to  his  master,  the  debtor  to  his  credi¬ 
tor,  nor  the  murderer  into  the  hands  of  the 
magistrate,  saying  it  was  a  privileged  place, 
and  they  could  so  maintain  it  by  an  order  of 
the  holy  oracle;  insomuch  that  the  city  grew 
presently  very  populous,  for  they  say,  it  con¬ 
sisted  at  first  of  no  more  than  a  thousand 
houses.  But  of  that  hereafter. 

Their  minds  being  full  bent  upon  building, 
there  arose  presently  a  difference  about  the 
place.  Romulus  chose  what  was  called  Roma 
Quadrata,  or  the  Square  Rome,  and  would 
have  the  city  there.  Remus  laid  out  a  piece  of 
ground  on  the  Aventine  Mount,  well  fortified 
[  by  nature,  which  was  from  him  called  Remoni- 
um,  but  now  Rignarium.  Concluding  at  last  to 

(decide  the  contest  by  a  divination  from  a  flight 
of  birds,  and  placing  themselves  apart  at  some 
distance,  Remus,  they  say,  saw  six  vultures, 
and  Romulus  double  that  number.  Others  say, 
Remus  did  truly  see  his  number,  and  that 
Romulus  feigned  his,  but  when  Remus  came 
to  him,  that  then  he  did  indeed  see  twelve. 

Hence  it  is  that  the  Romans,  in  their  divina¬ 
tions  from  birds,  chiefly  regard  the  vulture, 
though  Herodorus  Ponticus  relates  that  Her¬ 
cules  was  always  very  joyful  when  a  vulture 
appeared  to  him  upon  any  action.  For  it  is 
a  creature  the  least  hurtful  of  any,  pernicious 
neither  to  corn,  fruit-tree,  nor  cattle;  it  preys 
only  upon  carrion,  and  never  kills  or  hurts 
any  living  thing;  and  as  for  birds,  it  touches 
not  them,  though  they  are  dead,  as  being 
of  its  own  species,  whereas  eagles,  owls,  and 
hawks  mangle  and  kill  their  own  fellow- 
creatures;  yet,  as  ^Eschylus  says, — 

What  bird  is  clean  that  preys  on  fellow  bird? 
Besides,  all  other  birds  are,  so  to  say,  never 


19 

out  of  our  eyes;  they  let  themselves  be  seen  of 
us  continually;  but  a  vulture  is  a  very  rare 
sight,  and  you  can  seldom  meet  with  a  man 
that  has  seen  their  young;  their  rarity  and  in¬ 
frequency  has  raised  a  strange  opinion  in  some, 
that  they  come  to  us  from  some  other  world; 
as  soothsayers  ascribe  a  divine  origination  to  all 
things  not  produced  either  of  nature  or  of 
themselves. 

When  Remus  knew  the  cheat,  he  was 
much  displeased;  and  as  Romulus  was  cast¬ 
ing  up  a  ditch,  where  he  designed  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  the  city-wall,  he  turned  some  pieces 
of  the  work  to  ridicule,  and  obstructed  others; 
at  last,  as  he  was  in  contempt  leaping  over 
it,  some  say  Romulus  himself  struck  him, 
others  Celer,  one  of  his  companions;  he  fell, 
however,  and  in  the  scuffle  Faustulus  also 
was  slain,  and  Plistinus,  who,  being  Faustu- 
lus’s  brother,  story  tells  us,  helped  to  bring 
up  Romulus.  Celer  upon  this  fled  instantly 
into  Tuscany,  and  from  him  the  Romans 
call  all  men  that  are  swift  of  feet  Celeres;  and 
because  Quintus  Metellus,  at  his  father’s  fu¬ 
neral,  in  a  few  days’  time  gave  the  people  a 
show  of  gladiators,  admiring  his  expedition  in 
getting  it  ready,  they  gave  him  the  name  of 
Celer. 

Romulus,  having  buried  his  brother  Remus, 
together  with  his  two  foster-fathers,  on  the 
mount  Remonia,  set  to  building  his  city;  and 
sent  for  men  out  of  Tuscany,  who  directed 
him  by  sacred  usages  and  written  rules  in  all 
the  ceremonies  to  be  observed,  as  in  a  religious 
rite.  First,  they  dug  a  round  trench  about  that 
which  is  now  the  Comitium,  or  Court  of  As¬ 
sembly,  and  into  it  solemnly  threw  the  first- 
fruits  of  all  things  either  good  by  custom  or 
necessary  by  nature;  lastly,  every  man  taking 
a  small  piece  of  earth  of  the  country  from 
whence  he  came,  they  all  threw  in  promiscu¬ 
ously  together.  This  trench  they  call,  as  they 
do  the  heavens,  Mundus;  making  which  their 
centre,  they  described  the  city  in  a  circle  round 
it.  Then  the  founder  fitted  to  a  plough  a 
brazen  ploughshare,  and,  yoking  together  a 
bull  and  a  cow,  drove  himself  a  deep  line  or 
furrow  round  the  bounds;  while  the  business 
of  those  that  followed  after  was  to  see  that 
whatever  earth  was  thrown  up  should  be 
turned  all  inwards  towards  the  city;  and  not 
to  let  any  clod  lie  outside.  With  this  line  they 
described  the  wall,  and  called  it,  by  a  contrac¬ 
tion,  Pomoerium,  that  is,  postmurum,  after  or 
beside  the  wall;  and  where  they  designed  to 
make  a  gate,  there  they  took  out  the  share, 


20 


carried  the  plough  over,  and  left  a  space;  for 
which  reason  they  consider  the  whole  wall  as 
holy,  except  where  the  gates  are;  for  had  they 
adjudged  them  also  sacred,  they  could  not, 
without  offence  to  religion,  have  given  free 
ingress  and  egress  for  the  necessaries  of  human 
life,  some  of  which  are  in  themselves  unclean. 

As  for  the  day  they  began  to  build  the 
city,  it  is  universally  agreed  to  have  been  the 
twenty-first  of  April,  and  that  day  the  Romans 
annually  keep  holy,  calling  it  their  country’s 
birthday.  At  first,  they  say,  they  sacrificed  no 
living  creature  on  this  day,  thinking  it  fit  to 
preserve  the  feast  of  their  country’s  birthday 
pure  and  without  stain  of  blood.  Yet  before 
ever  the  city  was  built,  there  was  a  feast  of 
herdsmen  and  shepherds  kept  on  this  day, 
which  went  by  the  name  of  Palilia.  The  Ro¬ 
man  and  Greek  months  have  now  little  or  no 
agreement;  they  say,  however,  the  day  on 
which  Romulus  began  to  build  was  quite  cer¬ 
tainly  the  thirtieth  of  the  month,  at  which  time 
there  was  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  which  they  con¬ 
ceived  to  be  that  seen  by  Antimachus,  the  Te- 
ian  poet,  in  the  third  year  of  the  sixth  Olym¬ 
piad. 

In  the  times  of  Varro  the  philosopher,  a 
man  deeply  read  in  Roman  history,  lived 
one  Tarrutius,  his  familiar  acquaintance,  a 
good  philosopher  and  mathematician,  and 
one,  too,  that  out  of  curiosity  had  studied 
the  way  of  drawing  schemes  and  tables,  and 
was  thought  to  be  a  proficient  in  the  art;  to 
him  Varro  propounded  to  cast  Romulus’s 
nativity,  even  to  the  first  day  and  hour,  mak¬ 
ing  his  deductions  from  the  several  events  of 
the  man’s  life  which  he  should  be  informed 
of,  exactly  as  in  working  back  a  geometrical 
problem;  for  it  belonged,  he  said,  to  the  same 
science  both  to  foretell  a  man’s  life  by  know¬ 
ing  the  time  of  his  birth,  and  also  to  find  out 
his  birth  by  the  knowledge  of  his  life.  This 
task  Tarrutius  undertook,  and  first  looking 
into  the  actions  and  casualties  of  the  man,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  time  of  his  life  and  manner  of 
his  death,  and  then  comparing  all  these  re¬ 
marks  together,  he  very  confidendy  and  posi¬ 
tively  pronounced  that  Romulus  was  conceived 
in  his  mother’s  womb  the  first  year  of  the  sec¬ 
ond  Olympiad,  the  twenty-third  day  of  the 
month  the  ^Egyptians  call  Chceac,  and  the 
third  hour  after  sunset,  at  which  time  there 
was  a  total  eclipse  of  the  sun;  that  he  was  born 
the  twenty-first  day  of  the  month  Thoth,  about 
sunrising;  and  that  the  first  stone  of  Rome 
was  laid  by  him  the  ninth  day  of  the  month 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Pharmuthi,  between  the  second  and  third 
hour.  For  the  fortunes  of  cities  as  well  as  of 
men,  they  think,  have  their  certain  periods  of 
time  prefixed,  which  may  be  collected  and 
foreknown  from  the  position  of  the  stars  at 
their  first  foundation.  But  these  and  the 
like  relations  may  perhaps  not  so  much  take 
and  delight  the  reader  with  their  novelty  and 
curiosity,  as  offend  him  by  their  extravagance. 

The  city  now  being  built,  Romulus  en¬ 
listed  all  that  were  of  age  to  bear  arms  into 
military  companies,  each  company  consisting 
of  three  thousand  footmen  and  three  hundred 
horse.  These  companies  were  called  legions, 
because  they  were  the  choicest  and  most  select 
of  the  people  for  fighting  men.  The  rest  of 
the  multitude  he  called  the  people;  an  hun¬ 
dred  of  the  most  eminent  he  chose  for  coun¬ 
sellors;  these  he  styled  patricians,  and  their 
assembly  the  senate,  which  signifies  a  council 
of  elders. 

The  patricians,  some  say,  were  so  called  be¬ 
cause  they  were  the  fathers  of  lawful  children; 
others,  because  they  could  give  a  good  account 
who  their  own  fathers  were,  which  not  every 
one  of  the  rabble  that  poured  into  the  city  at 
first  could  do;  others,  from  patronage,  their 
word  for  protection  of  inferiors,  the  origin  of 
which  they  attribute  to  Patron,  one  of  those 
that  came  over  with  Evander,  who  was  a  great 
protector  and  defender  of  the  weak  and  needy. 

But  perhaps  the  most  probable  judgment 
might  be,  that  Romulus,  esteeming  it  the 
duty  of  the  chiefest  and  wealthiest  men,  with 
a  fatherly  care  and  concern  to  look  after  the 
meaner,  and  also  encouraging  the  common¬ 
alty  not  to  dread  or  be  aggrieved  at  the  hon¬ 
ours  of  their  superiors,  but  to  love  and  respect 
them,  and  to  think  and  call  them  their  fathers, 
might  from  hence  give  them  the  name  of  patri¬ 
cians.  For  at  this  very  time  all  foreigners  give 
senators  the  style  of  lords;  but  the  Romans, 
making  use  of  a  more  honourable  and  less  in¬ 
vidious  name,  call  them  Patres  Conscripti;  at 
first,  indeed,  simply  Patres,  but  afterwards, 
more  being  added,  Patres  Conscripti.  By  this 
more  imposing  title  he  distinguished  the  sen¬ 
ate  from  the  populace;  and  in  other  ways  also 
separated  the  nobles  and  tb'*  commons, — call¬ 
ing  them  patrons,  and  the  .e  their  clients, — by 
which  means  he  created  wonderful  love  and 
amity  betwixt  them,  productive  of  great  justice 
in  their  dealings.  For  they  were  always  their 
clients’  counsellors  in  law  cases,  their  advocates 
in  courts  of  justice;  in  fine,  their  advisers  and 
supporters  in  all  affairs  whatever.  These  again 


ROMULUS 

faithfully  served  their  patrons,  not  only  paying 
them  all  respect  and  deference,  but  also,  in  case 
of  poverty,  helping  them  to  portion  their 
daughters  and  pay  off  their  debts;  and  for  a 
patron  to  witness  against  his  client,  or  a  client 
against  his  patron,  was  what  no  law  nor  magis¬ 
trate  could  enforce.  In  aftertimes,  all  other 
duties  subsisting  still  between  them,  it  was 
thought  mean  and  dishonourable  for  the  better 
sort  to  take  money  from  their  inferiors.  And  so 
much  of  these  matters. 

In  the  fourth  month,  after  the  city  was 
built,  as  Fabius  writes,  the  adventure  of  steal¬ 
ing  the  women  was  attempted;  and  some  say 
Romulus  himself,  being  naturally  a  martial 
man,  and  predisposed  too,  perhaps  by  certain 
oracles,  to  believe  the  fates  had  ordained  the 
future  growth  and  greatness  of  Rome  should 
depend  upon  the  benefit  of  war,  upon  these 
accounts  first  offered  violence  to  the  Sabines, 
since  he  took  away  only  thirty  virgins,  more 
to  give  an  occasion  of  war  than  out  of  any 
want  of  women. 

But  this  is  not  very  probable;  it  would 
seem  rather  that,  observing  his  city  to  be 
filled  by  a  confluence  of  foreigners,  few  of 
whom  had  wives,  and  that  the  multitude  in 
general,  consisting  of  a  mixture  of  mean  and 
obscure  men,  fell  under  contempt,  and  seemed 
to  be  of  no  long  continuance  together,  and 
hoping  farther,  after  the  women  were  ap¬ 
peased,  to  make  this  injury  in  some  measure 
an  occasion  of  confederacy  and  mutual  com¬ 
merce  with  the  Sabines,  he  took  in  hand  this 
exploit  after  this  manner. 

First,  he  gave  it  out  as  if  he  had  found  an 
altar  of  a  certain  god  hid  under  ground;  the 
god  they  called  Consus,  either  the  god  of  coun¬ 
sel  (for  they  still  call  a  consultation  consilium, 
and  their  chief  magistrates  consules,  namely, 
counsellors),  or  else  the  equestrian  Neptune, 
for  the  altar  is  kept  covered  in  the  Circus  Maxi¬ 
mus  at  all  other  times,  and  only  at  horse-races 
is  exposed  to  public  view;  others  merely  say 
that  this  god  had  his  altar  hid  under  ground 
because  counsel  ought  to  be  secret  and  con¬ 
cealed. 

Upon  discovery  of  this  altar,  Romulus,  by 
proclamation,  appointed  a  day  for  a  splendid 
sacrifice,  and  for  public  games  and  shows,  to 
entertain  all  sorts  of  people:  many  flocked 
thither,  and  he  himself  sat  in  front,  amidst 
his  nobles  clad  in  purple.  Now  the  signal  for 
their  falling  on  was  to  be  whenever  he  rose 
and  gathered  up  his  robe  and  threw  it  over 
his  body;  his  men  stood  all  ready  armed,  with 


21 

their  eyes  intent  upon  him,  and  when  the  sign 
was  given,  drawing  their  swords  and  falling  on 
with  a  great  shout,  they  ravished  away  the 
daughters  of  the  Sabines,  they  themselves  fly¬ 
ing  without  any  let  or  hindrance. 

They  say  there  were  but  thirty  taken,  and 
from  them  the  Curicc  or  Fraternities  were 
named;  but  Valerius  Antias  says  five  hundred 
and  twenty-seven,  Juba,  six  hundred  and 
eighty-three  virgins:  which  was  indeed  the 
greatest  excuse  Romulus  could  allege,  namely, 
that  they  had  taken  no  married  woman,  save 
one  only,  Hersilia  by  name,  and  her  too  un¬ 
knowingly;  which  showed  that  they  did  not 
commit  this  rape  wantonly,  but  with  a  de¬ 
sign  purely  of  forming  alliance  with  their 
neighbours  by  the  greatest  and  surest  bonds. 

This  Hersilia  some  say  Hostilius  married,  a 
most  eminent  man  among  the  Romans;  others, 
Romulus  himself,  and  that  she  bore  two  chil¬ 
dren  to  him, — a  daughter,  by  reason  of  primo¬ 
geniture  called  Prima,  and  one  only  son,  whom, 
from  the  great  concourse  of  citizens  to  him  at 
that  time,  he  called  Aollius,  but  after  ages 
Abillius.  But  Zenodotus  the  Troezenian,  in  giv¬ 
ing  this  account,  is  contradicted  by  many. 

Among  those  who  committed  this  rape 
upon  the  virgins,  there  were,  they  say,  as  it 
so  then  happened,  some  of  the  meaner  sort 
of  men,  who  were  carrying  off  a  damsel, 
excelling  all  in  beauty  and  comeliness  and 
stature,  whom  when  some  of  superior  rank 
that  met  them,  attempted  to  take  away,  they 
cried  out  they  were  carrying  her  to  Talasius, 
a  young  man,  indeed,  but  brave  and  worthy; 
hearing  that,  they  commended  and  applauded 
them  loudly,  and  also  some,  turning  back,  ac¬ 
companied  them  with  good-will  and  pleasure, 
shouting  out  the  name  of  Talasius. 

Hence  the  Romans  to  this  very  time,  at 
their  weddings,  sing  Talasius  for  their  nup¬ 
tial  word,  as  the  Greeks  do  Hymenceus,  be¬ 
cause  they  say  Talasius  was  very  happy  in  his 
marriage.  But  Sextius  Sulla  the  Carthaginian, 
a  man  wanting  neither  learning  nor  ingenu¬ 
ity,  told  me  Romulus  gave  this  word  as  a  sign 
when  to  begin  the  onset;  everybody,  therefore, 
who  made  prize  of  a  maiden,  cried  out,  “Talasi- 
us”;  and  for  that  reason  the  custom  continues 
so  now  at  marriages. 

But  most  are  of  opinion  (of  whom  Juba 
particularly  is  one)  that  this  word  was  used 
to  new-married  women  by  way  of  incitement 
to  good  housewifery  and  talasia  (spinning), 
as  we  say  in  Greek,  Greek  words  at  that  time 
not  being  as  yet  overpowered  by  Italian. 


22 


But  if  this  be  the  case,  and  if  the  Romans 
did  at  the  time  use  the  word  talasia  as  we 
do,  a  man  might  fancy  a  more  probable 
reason  of  the  custom.  For  when  the  Sabines, 
after  the  war  against  the  Romans,  were  recon¬ 
ciled,  conditions  were  made  concerning  their 
women,  that  they  should  be  obliged  to  do  no 
other  servile  offices  to  their  husbands  but  what 
concerned  spinning;  it  was  customary,  there¬ 
fore,  ever  after,  at  weddings,  for  those  that 
gave  the  bride  or  escorted  her  or  otherwise 
were  present,  sportingly  to  say  “Talasius,”  in¬ 
timating  that  she  was  henceforth  to  serve  in 
spinning  and  no  more. 

It  continues  also  a  custom  at  this  very  day 
for  the  bride  not  of  herself  to  pass  her  hus¬ 
band’s  threshold,  but  to  be  lifted  over,  in 
memory  that  the  Sabine  virgins  were  carried 
in  by  violence,  and  did  not  go  in  of  their  own 
will.  Some  say,  too,  the  custom  of  parting  the 
bride’s  hair  with  the  head  of  a  spear  was  in 
token  their  marriages  began  at  first  by  war 
and  acts  of  hostility,  of  which  I  have  spoken 
more  fully  in  my  book  of  Questions. 

This  rape  was  committed  on  the  eighteenth 
day  of  the  month  Sextilis,  now  called  August, 
on  which  the  solemnities  of  the  Consualia  are 
kept. 

The  Sabines  were  a  numerous  and  martial 
people,  but  lived  in  small,  unfortified  villages, 
as  it  befitted,  they  thought,  a  colony  of  the 
Lacedaemonians  to  be  bold  and  fearless;  never¬ 
theless,  seeing  themselves  bound  by  such 
hostages  to  their  good  behaviour,  and  being 
solicitous  for  their  daughters,  they  sent  am¬ 
bassadors  to  Romulus  with  fair  and  equitable 
requests,  that  he  would  return  their  young 
women  and  recall  that  act  of  violence,  and 
afterwards,  by  persuasion  and  lawful  means, 
seek  friendly  correspondence  between  both 
nations.  Romulus  would  not  part  with  the 
young  women,  yet  proposed  to  the  Sabines 
to  enter  into  an  alliance  with  them;  upon 
which  point  some  consulted  and  demurred 
long,  but  Acron,  king  of  the  Ceninenses,  a 
man  of  high  spirit  and  a  good  warrior,  who 
had  all  along  a  jealousy  of  Romulus’s  bold 
attempts,  and  considering  particularly,  from 
this  exploit  upon  the  women,  that  he  was 
growing  formidable  to  all  people,  and  in¬ 
deed  insufferable,  were  he  not  chastised,  first 
rose  up  in  arms,  and  with  a  powerful  army 
advanced  against  him. 

Romulus  likewise  prepared  to  receive  him; 
but  when  they  came  within  sight  and  viewed 
each  other,  they  made  a  challenge  to  fight  a 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

single  duel,  the  armies  standing  by  under 
arms,  without  participation.  And  Romulus, 
making  a  vow  to  Jupiter,  if  he  should  con¬ 
quer,  to  carry,  himself,  and  dedicate  his  ad¬ 
versary’s  armour  to  his  honour,  overcame  him 
in  combat,  and  a  battle  ensuing,  routed  his 
army  also,  and  then  took  his  city;  but  did 
those  he  found  in  it  no  injury,  only  com¬ 
manded  them  to  demolish  the  place  and  at¬ 
tend  him  to  Rome,  there  to  be  admitted  to 
all  the  privileges  of  citizens.  And  indeed 
there  was  nothing  did  more  advance  the 
greatness  of  Rome,  than  that  she  did  always 
unite  and  incorporate  those  whom  she  con¬ 
quered  into  herself. 

Romulus,  that  he  might  perform  his  vow 
in  the  most  acceptable  manner  to  Jupiter,  and 
withal  make  the  pomp  of  it  delightful  to  the 
eye  of  the  city,  cut  down  a  tall  oak  which  he 
saw  growing  in  the  camp,  which  he  trimmed 
to  the  shape  of  a  trophy,  and  fastened  on  it 
Acron’s  whole  suit  of  armour  disposed  in  prop¬ 
er  form;  then  he  himself,  girding  his  clothes 
about  him,  and  crowning  his  head  with  a 
laurel  garland,  his  hair  gracefully  flowing,  car¬ 
ried  the  trophy  resting  erect  upon  his  right 
shoulder,  and  so  marched  on,  singing  songs  of 
triumph,  and  his  whole  army  following  after, 
the  citizens  ail  receiving  him  with  acclama¬ 
tions  of  joy  and  wonder. 

The  procession  of  this  day  was  the  origin 
and  model  of  all  after  triumphs.  This  trophy 
was  styled  an  offering  to  Jupiter  Feretrius, 
from  ferire,  which  in  Latin  is  to  smite;  for 
Romulus  prayed  he  might  smite  and  over¬ 
throw  his  enemy;  and  the  spoils  were  called 
opima,  or  royal  spoils,  says  Varro,  from  their 
richness,  which  the  word  opes  signifies; 
though  one  would  more  probably  conjecture 
from  opus,  an  act;  for  it  is  only  to  the  general 
of  an  army  who  with  his  own  hand  kills  his 
enemies’  general  that  this  honour  is  granted 
of  offering  the  opima  spolia.  And  three  only 
of  the  Roman  captains  have  had  it  conferred 
on  them:  first,  Romulus,  upon  killing  Acron 
the  Ceninensian;  next,  Cornelius  Cossus,  for 
slaying  Tolumnius  the  Tuscan;  and  lasdy, 
Claudius  Marcellus,  upon  his  conquering  Viri- 
domarus,  king  of  the  Gauls.  The  two  latter, 
Cossus  and  Marcellus,  made  their  entries  in 
triumphant  chariots,  bearing  their  trophies 
themselves;  but  that  Romulus  made  use  of  a 
chariot,  Dionysius  is  wrong  in  asserting.  His¬ 
tory  says,  Tarquinius,  Damaratus’s  son,  was 
the  first  that  brought  triumphs  to  this  great 
pomp  and  grandeur;  others,  that  Publicola 


ROMULUS 

was  the  first  that  rode  in  triumph.  The  statues 
of  Romulus  in  triumph  are,  as  may  be  seen  in 
Rome,  all  on  foot. 

After  the  overthrow  of  the  Ceninensians, 
the  other  Sabines  still  protracting  the  time  in 
preparations,  the  people  of  Fidenae,  Crus- 
tumerium,  and  Antemna  joined  their  forces 
against  the  Romans;  they  in  like  manner 
were  defeated  in  battle,  and  surrendered  up 
to  Romulus  their  cities  to  be  seized,  their 
lands  and  territories  to  be  divided,  and  them¬ 
selves  to  be  transplanted  to  Rome.  All  the 
lands  which  Romulus  acquired,  he  distributed 
among  the  citizens,  except  only  what  the 
parents  of  the  stolen  virgins  had;  these  he 
suffered  to  possess  their  own. 

The  rest  of  the  Sabines,  enraged  hereat, 
choosing  Tatius  their  captain,  marched 
straight  against  Rome.  The  city  was  almost 
inaccessible,  having  for  its  fortress  that  which 
is  now  the  Capitol,  where  a  strong  guard 
was  placed,  and  Tarpeius  their  captain;  not 
Tarpeia  the  virgin,  as  some  say  who  would 
make  Romulus  a  fool.  But  Tarpeia,  daughter 
to  the  captain,  coveting  the  golden  bracelets 
she  saw  them  wear,  betrayed  the  fort  into 
the  Sabines’  hands,  and  asked,  in  reward  of 
her  treachery,  the  things  they  wore  on  their 
left  arms.  Tatius  conditioning  thus  with  her, 
in  the  night  she  opened  one  of  the  gates,  and 
received  the  Sabines. 

And  truly  Antigonus,  it  would  seem,  was 
not  solitary  in  saying  he  loved  betrayers,  but 
hated  those  who  had  betrayed;  nor  Caesar, 
who  told  Rhymitalces  the  Thracian,  that  he 
loved  the  treason,  but  hated  the  traitor;  but 
it  is  the  general  feeling  of  all  who  have  occa¬ 
sion  for  wicked  men’s  service,  as  people  have 
for  the  poison  of  venomous  beasts;  they  are 
glad  of  them  while  they  are  of  use,  and  abhor 
their  baseness  when  it  is  over.  And  so  then 
did  Tatius  behave  towards  Tarpeia,  for  he  com¬ 
manded  the  Sabines,  in  regard  to  their  con¬ 
tract,  not  to  refuse  her  the  least  part  of  what 
they  wore  on  their  left  arms;  and  he  himself 
first  took  his  bracelet  off  his  arm,  and  threw 
that,  together  with  his  buckler,  at  her;  and  all 
the  rest  following,  she,  being  borne  down  and 
quite  buried  with  the  multitude  of  gold  and 
their  shields,  died  under  the  weight  and  pres¬ 
sure  of  them;  Tarpeius  also  himself,  being 
prosecuted  by  Romulus,  was  found  guilty  of 
treason,  as  Juba  says  Sulpicius  Galba  relates. 

Those  who  write  otherwise  concerning 
Tarpeia,  as  that  she  was  the  daughter  of 
Tatius,  the  Sabine  captain,  and  being  forcibly 


23 

detained  by  Romulus,  acted  and  suffered  thus 
by  her  father’s  contrivance,  speak  very  ab¬ 
surdly,  of  whom  Antigonus  is  one.  And  Simy- 
lus,  the  poet,  who  thinks  Tarpeia  betrayed  the 
Capitol,  not  to  the  Sabines,  but  the  Gauls,  hav¬ 
ing  fallen  in  love  with  their  king,  talks  mere 
folly,  saying  thus: — 

Tarpeia  'twas,  who,  dwelling  close  thereby, 
Laid  open  Rome  unto  the  enemy, 

She,  for  the  love  of  the  besieging  Gaul, 
Betrayed  the  city's  strength,  the  Capitol. 

And  a  little  after,  speaking  of  her  death: — 

The  numerous  nations  of  the  Celtic  foe 
Bore  her  not  living  to  the  ban\s  of  Po; 

Their  heavy  shields  upon  the  maid  they  threw, 
And  with  their  splendid  gifts  entombed  at  once 
and  slew. 

Tarpeia  afterwards  was  buried  there,  and 
the  hill  from  her  was  called  Tarpeius,  until 
the  reign  of  King  Tarquin,  who  dedicated  the 
place  to  Jupiter,  at  which  time  her  bones  were 
removed,  and  so  it  lost  her  name,  except  only 
that  part  of  the  Capitol  which  they  still  called 
the  Tarpeian  Rock,  from  which  they  used  to 
cast  down  malefactors. 

The  Sabines  being  possessed  of  the  hill, 
Romulus,  in  great  fury,  bade  them  battle,  and 
Tatius  was  confident  to  accept  it,  perceiving, 
if  they  were  overpowered,  that  they  had  be¬ 
hind  them  a  secure  retreat.  The  level  in  the 
middle,  where  they  were  to  join  battle,  being 
surrounded  with  many  little  hills  seemed  to 
enforce  both  parties  to  a  sharp  and  desperate 
conflict,  by  reason  of  the  difficulties  of  the  place, 
which  had  but  a  few  outlets,  inconvenient  eith¬ 
er  for  refuge  or  pursuit.  It  happened,  too,  the 
river  having  overflowed  not  many  days  before, 
there  was  left  behind  in  the  plain,  where  now 
the  Forum  stands,  a  deep  blind  mud  and  slime, 
which,  though  it  did  not  appear  much  to  the 
eye,  and  was  not  easily  avoided,  at  bottom  was 
deceitful  and  dangerous;  upon  which  the  Sa¬ 
bines  being  unwarily  about  to  enter,  met  with 
a  piece  of  good  fortune;  for  Curtius,  a  gal¬ 
lant  man,  eager  of  honour,  and  of  aspiring 
thoughts,  being  mounted  on  horseback,  was 
galloping  on  before  the  rest,  and  mired  his 
horse  here,  and,  endeavouring  for  a  while,  by 
whip  and  spur  and  voice  to  disentangle  him, 
but  finding  it  impossible,  quitted  him  and 
saved  himself;  the  place  from  him  to  this  very 
time  is  called  the  Curtian  Lake.  The  Sabines, 
having  avoided  this  danger,  began  the  fight 
very  smartly,  the  fortune  of  the  day  being  very 
dubious,  though  many  were  slain;  amongst 
whom  was  Hostilius,  who,  they  say,  was  hus- 


24 

band  to  Hersilia,  and  grandfather  to  that  Hos- 
tilius  who  reigned  after  Numa. 

There  were  many  other  brief  conflicts,  we 
may  suppose,  but  the  most  memorable  was 
the  last,  in  which  Romulus  having  received 
a  wound  on  his  head  by  a  stone,  and  being 
almost  felled  to  the  ground  by  it,  and  dis¬ 
abled,  the  Romans  gave  way,  and,  being 
driven  out  of  the  level  ground,  fled  towards 
the  Palatium.  Romulus,  by  this  time  recover¬ 
ing  from  his  wound  a  little,  turned  about  to 
renew  the  battle,  and,  facing  the  fliers,  with 
a  loud  voice  encouraged  them  to  stand  and 
fight.  But  being  overborne  with  numbers, 
and  nobody  daring  to  face  about,  stretching 
out  his  hands  to  heaven,  he  prayed  to  Jupiter 
to  stop  the  army,  and  not  to  neglect,  but 
maintain  the  Roman  cause,  now  in  extreme 
danger.  The  prayer  was  no  sooner  made, 
than  shame  and  respect  for  their  king  checked 
many;  the  fears  of  the  fugitives  changed  sud¬ 
denly  into  confidence.  The  place  they  first 
stood  at  was  where  now  is  the  temple  of 
Jupiter  Stator  (which  may  be  translated  the 
Stayer);  there  they  rallied  again  into  ranks 
and  repulsed  the  Sabines  to  the  place  called 
now  Regia,  and  to  the  temple  of  Vesta;  where 
both  parties,  preparing  to  begin  a  second 
battle,  were  prevented  by  a  spectacle,  strange 
to  behold,  and  defying  description.  For  the 
daughters  of  the  Sabines,  who  had  been  car¬ 
ried  off,  came  running,  in  great  confusion, 
some  on  this  side,  some  on  that,  with  miser¬ 
able  cries  and  lamentations,  like  creatures 
possessed,  in  the  midst  of  the  army  and  among 
the  dead  bodies,  to  come  at  their  husbands 
and  their  fathers,  some  with  their  young 
babes  in  their  arms,  others  their  hair  loose 
about  their  ears,  but  all  calling,  now  upon 
the  Sabines,  now  upon  the  Romans,  in  the 
most  tender  and  endearing  words.  Hereupon 
both  melted  into  compassion,  and  fell  back, 
to  make  room  for  them  betwixt  the  armies. 
The  sight  of  the  women  carried  sorrow  and 
commiseration  upon  both  sides  into  the 
hearts  of  all,  but  still  more  their  words,  which 
began  with  expostulation  and  upbraiding,  and 
ended  with  entreaty  and  supplication. 

“Wherein,”  say  they,  “have  we  injured  or 
offended  you,  as  to  deserve  such  sufferings 
past  and  present?  We  were  ravished  away  un¬ 
justly  and  violently  by  those  whose  now  we 
are;  that  being  done,  we  were  so  long  neg¬ 
lected  by  our  fathers,  our  brothers  and  coun¬ 
trymen,  that  time,  having  now  by  the  strictest 
bonds  united  us  to  those  we  once  mortally 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

hated,  has  made  it  impossible  for  us  not  to 
tremble  at  the  danger  and  weep  at  the  death 
of  the  very  men  who  once  used  violence  to  us. 
You  did  not  come  to  vindicate  our  honour, 
while  we  were  virgins,  against  our  assailants; 
but  do  come  now  to  force  away  wives  from 
their  husbands  and  mothers  from  their  chil¬ 
dren,  a  succour  more  grievous  to  its  wretched 
objects  than  the  former  betrayal  and  neglect 
of  them.  Which  shall  we  call  the  worst,  their 
love-making  or  your  compassion  ?  If  you  were 
making  war  upon  any  other  occasion,  for  our 
sakes  you  ought  to  withhold  your  hands  from 
those  to  whom  we  have  made  you  fathers-in- 
law  and  grandsires.  If  it  be  for  our  own  cause, 
then  take  us,  and  with  us  your  sons-in-law 
and  grandchildren.  Restore  to  us  our  parents 
and  kindred,  but  do  not  rob  us  of  our  chil¬ 
dren  and  husbands.  Make  us  not,  we  entreat 
you,  twice  captives.” 

Hersilia  having  spoken  many  such  words  as 
these,  and  the  others  earnesdy  praying,  a 
truce  was  made,  and  the  chief  officers  came  to  a 
parley;  the  women,  in  the  meantime,  brought 
and  presented  their  husbands  and  children 
to  their  fathers  and  brothers;  gave  those  that 
wanted  meat  and  drink,  and  carried  the 
wounded  home  to  be  cured,  and  showed  also 
how  much  they  governed  within  doors,  and 
how  indulgent  their  husbands  were  to  them, 
in  demeaning  themselves  towards  them  with 
all  kindness  and  respect  imaginable.  Upon  this, 
conditions  were  agreed,  that  what  women 
pleased  might  stay  where  they  were,  exempt, 
as  aforesaid,  from  all  drudgery  and  labour 
but  spinning;  that  the  Romans  and  Sabines 
should  inhabit  the  city  together;  that  the  city 
should  be  called  Rome  from  Romulus;  but 
the  Romans,  Quirites,  from  the  country  of  Ta- 
tius;  and  that  they  both  should  govern  and 
command  in  common.  The  place  of  the  ratifi¬ 
cation  is  still  called  Comitium,  from  coire,  to 
meet. 

The  city  being  thus  doubled  in  number,  an 
hundred  of  the  Sabines  were  elected  senators, 
and  the  legions  were  increased  to  six  thousand 
foot  and  six  hundred  horse;  then  they  divided 
the  people  into  three  tribes:  the  first,  from 
Romulus,  named  Ramnenses;  the  second  from 
Tatius,  Tatienses;  the  third  Luceres,  from  the 
lucus,  or  grove,  where  the  Asylum  stood, 
whither  many  fled  for  sanctuary,  and  were 
received  into  the  city.  And  that  they  were 
just  three,  the  very  name  of  tribe  and  tribune 
seems  to  show;  each  tribe  contained  ten 
curice,  or  brotherhoods,  which,  some  say, 


ROMULUS 

took  their  names  from  the  Sabine  women; 
but  that  seems  to  be  false,  because  many 
had  their  names  from  various  places.  Though 
it  is  true,  they  then  constituted  many  things 
in  honour  to  the  women;  as  to  give  them  the 
way  wherever  they  met  them;  to  speak  no  ill 
word  in  their  presence;  not  to  appear  naked  be¬ 
fore  them,  or  else  be  liable  to  prosecution  before 
the  judge,  of  homicide;  that  their  children 
should  wear  an  ornament  about  their  necks 
called  the  bulla  (because  it  was  like  a  bubble), 
and  the  prcetexta,  a  gown  edged  with  purple. 

The  princes  did  not  immediately  join  in 
council  together,  but  at  first  each  met  with  his 
own  hundred;  afterwards  all  assembled  togeth¬ 
er.  Tatius  dwelt  where  now  the  temple  of  Mo- 
neta  stands,  and  Romulus,  close  by  the  steps,  as 
they  call  them,  of  the  Fair  Shore,  near  the  de¬ 
scent  from  the  Mount  Palatine  to  the  Circus 
Maximus.  There,  they  say,  grew  the  holy  cor¬ 
nel  tree,  of  which  they  report,  that  Romulus 
once,  to  try  his  strength,  threw  a  dart  from  the 
Aventine  Mount,  the  staff  of  which  was  made 
of  cornel,  which  struck  so  deep  into  the  ground, 
that  no  one  of  many  that  tried  could  pluck  it 
up,  and  the  soil,  being  fertile,  gave  nourish¬ 
ment  to  the  wood,  which  sent  forth  branches, 
and  produced  a  cornel  stock-  of  considerable 
bigness.  This  did  posterity  preserve  and  wor¬ 
ship  as  one  of  the  most  sacred  things;  and 
therefore  walled  it  about;  and  if  to  any  one  it 
appeared  not  green  nor  flourishing,  but  inclin¬ 
ing  to  pine  and  wither,  he  immediately  made 
outcry  to  all  he  met,  and  they,  like  people  hear¬ 
ing  of  a  house  on  fire,  with  one  accord  would 
cry  for  water,  and  run  from  all  parts  with 
buckets  full  to  the  place.  But  when  Caius  Cae¬ 
sar,  they  say,  was  repairing  the  steps  about  it, 
some  of  the  labourers  digging  too  close,  the 
roots  were  destroyed,  and  the  tree  withered. 

The  Sabines  adopted  the  Roman  months, 
of  which  whatever  is  remarkable  is  mentioned 
in  the  Life  of  Numa.  Romulus,  on  the  other 
hand,  adopted  their  long  shields,  and  changed 
his  own  armour  and  that  of  all  the  Romans, 
who  before  wore  round  targets  of  the  Argive 
pattern.  Feasts  and  sacrifices  they  partook  of  in 
common,  not  abolishing  any  which  either  na¬ 
tion  observed  before,  and  instituting  several 
new  ones;  of  which  one  was  the  Matronalia, 
instituted  in  honour  of  the  women,  for  their 
extinction  of  the  war;  likewise  the  Carmen- 
talia.  This  Carmenta  some  think  a  deity  pre¬ 
siding  over  human  birth;  for  which  reason  she 
is  much  honoured  by  mothers.  Others  say  she 
was  the  wife  of  Evander,  the  Arcadian,  being 


25 

a  prophetess,  and  wont  to  deliver  her  oracles  in 
verse,  and  from  carmen ,  a  verse,  was  called 
Carmenta;  her  proper  name  being  Nicostrata. 
Others  more  probably  derive  Carmenta  from 
carens  mente ,  or  insane,  in  allusion  to  her  pro¬ 
phetic  frenzies.  Of  the  feast  of  Palilia  we  have 
spoken  before. 

The  Lupercalia,  by  the  time  of  its  celebra¬ 
tion,  may  seem  to  be  a  feast  of  purification, 
for  it  is  solemnised  on  the  dies  nefasti,  or  non¬ 
court  days,  of  the  month  February,  which 
name  signifies  purification,  and  the  very  day 
of  the  feast  was  anciently  called  Februata;  but 
its  name  is  equivalent  to  the  Greek  Lycaea;  and 
it  seems  thus  to  be  of  great  antiquity,  and 
brought  in  by  the  Arcadians  who  came  with 
Evander.  Yet  this  is  but  dubious,  for  it  may 
come  as  well  from  the  wolf  that  nursed  Romu¬ 
lus;  and  we  see  the  Luperci,  the  priests,  begin 
their  course  from  the  place  where  they  say 
Romulus  was  exposed.  But  the  ceremonies  per¬ 
formed  in  it  render  the  origin  of  the  thing 
more  difficult  to  be  guessed  at;  for  there  are 
goats  killed,  then,  two  young  noblemen’s  sons 
being  brought,  some  are  to  stain  their  fore¬ 
heads  with  the  bloody  knife,  others  presently 
to  wipe  it  off  with  wool  dipped  in  milk;  then 
the  young  boys  must  laugh  after  their  fore¬ 
heads  are  wiped;  that  done,  having  cut  the 
goats’  skins  into  thongs,  they  run  about  naked, 
only  with  something  about  their  middle,  lash¬ 
ing  all  they  meet;  and  the  young  wives  do  not 
avoid  their  strokes,  fancying  they  will  help  con¬ 
ception  and  childbirth.  Another  thing  peculiar 
to  this  feast  is  for  the  Luperci  to  sacrifice  a  dog. 

But,  as  a  certain  poet  who  wrote  fabulous 
explanations  of  Roman  customs  in  elegiac 
verses,  asserts,  Romulus  and  Remus,  after  the 
conquest  of  Amulius,  ran  joyfully  to  the  place 
where  the  wolf  gave  them  suck;  and  thus,  in 
imitation  of  that,  this  feast  was  held,  and  two 
young  noblemen  ran — 

Striding  at  all ,  as  when  from  Alba  town, 

With  sword  in  hand,  the  twins  came  hurrying 
down; 

and  there  the  bloody  knife  applied  to  their 
foreheads  was  a  sign  of  the  danger  and  blood¬ 
shed  of  that  day;  the  cleansing  of  them  in 
milk,  a  remembrance  of  their  food  and  nour¬ 
ishment.  Caius  Acilius  writes,  that,  before  the 
city  was  built,  the  cattle  of  Romulus  and  Re¬ 
mus  one  day  going  astray,  they,  praying  to  the 
god  Faunus,  ran  out  to  seek  them  naked,  wish¬ 
ing  not  to  be  troubled  with  sweat,  and  that 
this  is  why  the  Luperci  run  naked.  If  the  sac- 


26 

rifice  be  by  way  of  purification,  a  dog  might 
very  well  be  sacrificed,  for  the  Greeks,  in  their 
illustrations,  carry  out  young  dogs,  and  fre¬ 
quently  use  this  ceremony  of  periscylacismus, 
as  they  call  it.  Or  if  again  it  is  a  sacrifice  of 
gratitude  to  the  wolf  that  nourished  and  pre¬ 
served  Romulus,  there  is  good  reason  in  kill¬ 
ing  a  dog,  as  being  an  enemy  to  wolves.  Un¬ 
less,  indeed,  after  all,  the  creature  is  punished 
for  hindering  the  Luperci  in  their  running. 

They  say,  too,  Romulus  was  the  first  that 
consecrated  holy  fire,  and  instituted  holy  vir¬ 
gins  to  keep  it,  called  vestals;  others  ascribe 
it  to  Numa  Pompilius;  agreeing,  however, 
that  Romulus  was  otherwise  eminently  reli¬ 
gious,  and  skilled  in  divination,  and  for  that 
reason  carried  the  lituus,  a  crooked  rod  with 
which  soothsayers  describe  the  quarters  of  the 
heavens,  when  they  sit  to  observe  the  flights 
of  birds.  This  of  his,  being  kept  in  the  Pala- 
tium,  was  lost  when  the  city  was  taken  by  the 
Gauls;  and  afterwards,  that  barbarous  people 
being  driven  out,  was  found  in  the  ruins,  under 
a  great  heap  of  ashes,  untouched  by  the  fire,  all 
things  about  it  being  consumed  and  burnt. 

He  instituted  also  certain  laws,  one  of 
which  is  somewhat  severe,  which  suffers  not  a 
wife  to  leave  her  husband,  but  grants  a  hus¬ 
band  power  to  turn  off  his  wife,  either  upon 
poisoning  her  children,  or  counterfeiting  his 
keys,  or  for  adultery;  but  if  the  husband  upon 
any  other  occasion  put  her  away,  he  ordered 
one  moiety  of  his  estate  to  be  given  to  the  wife, 
the  other  to  fall  to  the  goddess  Ceres;  and  who¬ 
ever  cast  off  his  wife,  to  make  an  atonement  by 
sacrifice  to  the  gods  of  the  dead. 

This,  too,  is  observable  as  a  singular  thing 
in  Romulus,  that  he  appointed  no  punish¬ 
ment  for  real  parricide,  but  called  all  murder 
so,  thinking  the  one  an  accursed  thing,  but 
the  other  a  thing  impossible;  and,  for  a  long 
time,  his  judgment  seemed  to  have  been  right; 
for  in  almost  six  hundred  years  together,  no¬ 
body  committed  the  like  in  Rome;  and  Lucius 
Hostius,  after  the  wars  of  Hannibal,  is  re¬ 
corded  to  have  been  the  first  parricide.  Let 
this  much  suffice  concerning  these  matters. 

In  the  fifth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tatius, 
some  of  his  friends  and  kinsmen,  meeting  am¬ 
bassadors  coming  from  Laurentum  to  Rome, 
attempted  on  the  road  to  take  away  their 
money  by  force,  and,  upon  their  resistance, 
killed  them.  So  great  a  villainy  having  been 
committed  Romulus  thought  the  malefactors 
ought  at  once  to  be  punished,  but  Tatius  shuf¬ 
fled  off  and  deferred  the  execution  of  it;  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

this  one  thing  was  the  beginning  of  open  quar¬ 
rel  betwixt  them;  in  all  other  respects  they  were 
very  careful  of  their  conduct,  and  administered 
affairs  together  with  great  unanimity.  The  re¬ 
lations  of  the  slain,  being  debarred  of  lawful 
satisfaction  by  reason  of  Tatius,  fell  upon  him 
as  he  was  sacrificing  with  Romulus  at  Lavini- 
um  and  slew  him;  but  escorted  Romulus  home, 
commending  and  extolling  him  for  a  just 
prince.  Romulus  took  the  body  of  Tatius,  and 
buried  it  very  splendidly  in  the  Aventine 
Mount,  near  the  place  called  Armilustrium, 
but  altogether  neglected  revenging  his  murder. 
Some  authors  write,  that  the  city  of  Lauren¬ 
tum,  fearing  the  consequences,  delivered  up 
the  murderers  of  Tatius;  but  Romulus  dis¬ 
missed  them,  saying,  one  murder  was  requited 
with  another.  This  gave  occasion  of  talk  and 
jealousy,  as  if  he  were  well  pleased  at  the  re¬ 
moval  of  his  co-partner  in  the  government. 

Nothing  of  these  things,  however,  raised 
any  sort  of  feud  or  disturbance  among  the 
Sabines;  but  some  out  of  love  to  him,  others 
out  of  fear  of  his  power,  some  again  reverenc¬ 
ing  him  as  a  god,  they  all  continued  living 
peacefully  in  admiration  and  awe  of  him; 
many  foreign  nations,  too,  showed  respect 
to  Romulus;  the  Ancient  Latins  sent  and 
entered  into  league  and  confederacy  with  him. 
Fidense  he  took,  a  neighbouring  city  to  Rome, 
by  a  party  of  horse,  as  some  say,  whom  he 
sent  before  with  commands  to  cut  down  the 
hinges  of  the  gates,  himself  afterwards  un¬ 
expectedly  coming  up.  Others  say,  they  hav¬ 
ing  first  made  the  invasion,  plundering  and 
ravaging  the  country  and  suburbs,  Romulus 
lay  in  ambush  for  them,  and  having  killed 
many  of  their  men,  took  the  city;  but,  never¬ 
theless,  did  not  raze  or  demolish  it,  but  made 
it  a  Roman  colony,  and  sent  thither,  on  the 
Ides  of  April,  two  thousand  five  hundred  in¬ 
habitants. 

Soon  after  a  plague  broke  out,  causing  sud¬ 
den  death  without  any  previous  sickness;  it 
infected  also  the  corn  with  unfruitfulness, 
and  cattle  with  barrenness;  there  rained  blood, 
too,  in  the  city;  so  that,  to  their  actual  suf¬ 
ferings,  fear  of  the  wrath  of  the  gods  was 
added.  But  when  the  same  mischiefs  fell  upon 
Laurentum,  then  everybody  judged  it  was  di¬ 
vine  vengeance  that  fell  upon  both  cities,  for 
the  neglect  of  executing  justice  upon  the  mur¬ 
der  of  Tatius  and  the  ambassadors.  But  the 
murderers  on  both  sides  being  delivered  up  and 
punished,  the  pestilence  visibly  abated;  and 
Romulus  purified  the  cities  with  lustrations, 


ROMULUS 

which,  they  say,  even  now,  are  performed  at 
the  wood  called  Ferentina.  But  before  the 
plague  ceased,  the  Camertines  invaded  the  Ro¬ 
mans  and  overran  the  country,  thinking  them, 
by  reason  of  the  distemper,  unable  to  resist; 
but  Romulus  at  once  made  head  against  them, 
and  gained  the  victory,  with  the  slaughter  of 
six  thousand  men,  then  took  their  city,  and 
brought  half  of  those  he  found  there  to  Rome, 
sending  from  Rome  to  Camerium  double  the 
number  he  left  there.  This  was  done  on  the 
first  of  August.  So  many  citizens  had  he  to 
spare,  in  sixteen  years’  time  from  his  first 
founding  Rome.  Among  other  spoils  he  took 
a  brazen  four-horse  chariot  from  Camerium, 
which  he  placed  in  the  temple  of  Vulcan,  set¬ 
ting  on  it  his  own  statue,  with  a  figure  of  vic¬ 
tory  crowning  him. 

The  Roman  cause  thus  daily  gathering 
strength,  their  weaker  neighbours  shrunk 
I  away,  and  were  thankful  to  be  left  untouched; 

but  the  stronger,  out  of  fear  or  envy,  thought 
'  they  ought  not  to  give  way  to  Romulus,  but 
to  curb  and  put  a  stop  to  his  growing  great¬ 
ness.  The  first  were  the  Veientes,  a  people  of 
Tuscany,  who  had  large  possessions,  and 
dwelt  in  a  spacious  city;  they  took  occasion 
to  commence  a  war,  by  claiming  Fidense  as 
belonging  to  them;  a  thing  not  only  very  un¬ 
reasonable,  but  very  ridiculous,  that  they,  who 
did  not  assist  them  in  the  greatest  extremities, 
but  permitted  them  to  be  slain,  should  chal¬ 
lenge  their  lands  and  houses  when  in  the  hands 
of  others.  But  being  scornfully  retorted  upon 
by  Romulus  in  his  answers,  they  divided  them¬ 
selves  into  two  bodies;  with  one  they  attacked 
the  garrison  of  Fidenae,  the  other  marched 
against  Romulus;  that  which  went  against  Fi- 
denae  got  the  victory,  and  slew  two  thousand 
Romans;  the  other  was  worsted  by  Romulus, 
with  the  loss  of  eight  thousand  men. 

A  fresh  battle  was  fought  near  Fidenae,  and 
here  all  men  acknowledge  the  day’s  success  to 
have  been  chiefly  the  work  of  Romulus  him¬ 
self,  who  showed  the  highest  skill  as  well  as 
courage,  and  seemed  to  manifest  a  strength 
and  swiftness  more  than  human.  But  what 
some  write,  that  of  fourteen  thousand  that  fell 
t  that  day,  above  half  were  slain  by  Romulus’s 
own  hand,  verges  too  near  to  fable,  and  is,  in¬ 
deed,  simply  incredible;  since  even  the  Messen- 
ians  are  thought  to  go  too  far  in  saying  that 
Aristomenes  three  times  offered  sacrifice  for 
the  death  of  a  hundred  enemies,  Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans,  slain  by  himself.  The  army  being  thus 
routed,  Romulus,  suffering  those  that  were 


27 

left  to  make  their  escape,  led  his  forces  against 
the  city;  they,  having  suffered  such  great  losses, 
did  not  venture  to  oppose,  but,  humbly  suing 
to  him,  made  a  league  and  friendship  for  an 
hundred  years;  surrendering  also  a  large  dis¬ 
trict  of  land  called  Septempagium,  that  is,  the 
seven  parts,  as  also  their  salt-works  upon  the 
river,  and  fifty  noblemen  for  hostages.  He 
made  his  triumph  for  this  on  the  Ides  of  Octo¬ 
ber,  leading,  among  the  rest  of  his  many  cap¬ 
tives,  the  general  of  the  Veientes,  an  elderly 
man,  but  who  had  not,  it  seemed,  acted  with 
the  prudence  of  age;  whence  even  now,  in 
sacrifices  for  victories,  they  lead  an  old  man 
through  the  marketplace  to  the  Capitol,  appar¬ 
elled  in  purple,  with  a  bulla,  or  child’s  toy,  tied 
to  it,  and  the  crier  cries,  Sardians  to  be  sold; 
for  the  Tuscans  are  said  to  be  a  colony  of  the 
Sardians,  and  the  Veientes  are  a  city  of  Tus¬ 
cany. 

This  was  the  last  battle  Romulus  ever 
fought;  afterwards  he,  as  most,  nay  all  men, 
very  few  excepted,  do,  who  are  raised  by  great 
and  miraculous  good-haps  of  fortune  to  power 
and  greatness,  so,  I  say,  did  he;  relying  upon 
his  own  great  actions,  and  growing  of  an 
haughtier  mind,  he  forsook  his  popular  behav¬ 
iour  for  kingly  arrogance,  odious  to  the  people; 
to  whom  in  particular  the  state  which  he  as¬ 
sumed  was  hateful.  For  he  dressed  in  scarlet, 
with  the  purple-bordered  robe  over  it;  he  gave 
audience  on  a  couch  of  state,  having  always 
about  him  some  young  men  called  Celeres, 
from  their  swiftness  in  doing  commissions; 
there  went  before  him  others  with  staves,  to 
make  room,  with  leather  thongs  tied  on  their 
bodies,  to  bind  on  the  moment  whoever  he 
commanded.  The  Latins  formerly  used  ligare 
in  the  same  sense  as  now  alligare,  to  bind, 
whence  the  name  lictors,  for  these  officers,  and 
bacula,  or  staves,  for  their  rods,  because  staves 
were  then  used.  It  is  probable,  however,  they 
were  first  called  litores,  afterwards,  by  putting 
in  a  c,  lictores,  or,  in  Greek,  liturgi,  or  people’s 
officers,  for  le'itos  is  still  Greek  for  the  com¬ 
mons,  and  lads  for  the  people  in  general. 

But  when,  after  the  death  of  his  grand¬ 
father  Numitor  in  Alba,  the  throne  devolving 
upon  Romulus,  he,  to  court  the  people,  put 
the  government  into  their  own  hands,  and 
appointed  an  annual  magistrate  over  the  Al¬ 
bans,  this  taught  the  great  men  of  Rome  to 
seek  after  a  free  and  anti-monarchical  state, 
wherein  all  might  in  turn  be  subjects  and  rul¬ 
ers.  For  neither  were  the  patricians  any  longer 
admitted  to  state  affairs,  only  had  the  name 


28 


and  title  left  them,  convening  in  council  rather 
for  fashion’s  sake  than  advice,  where  they 
heard  in  silence  the  king’s  commands,  and  so 
departed,  exceeding  the  commonalty  only  in 
hearing  first  what  was  done. 

These  and  the  like  were  matters  of  small 
moment;  but  when  he  of  his  own  accord 
parted  among  his  soldiers  what  lands  were 
acquired  by  war,  and  restored  the  Veientes 
their  hostages,  the  senate  neither  consenting 
nor  approving  of  it,  then,  indeed,  he  seemed 
to  put  a  great  affront  upon  them;  so  that,  on 
his  sudden  and  strange  disappearance  a  short 
while  after,  the  senate  fell  under  suspicion  and 
calumny.  He  disappeared  on  the  Nones  of  July, 
as  they  now  call  the  month  which  was  then 
Quintilis,  leaving  nothing  of  certainty  to  be  re¬ 
lated  of  his  death,  only  the  time,  as  just  men¬ 
tioned,  for  on  that  day  many  ceremonies  are 
still  performed  in  representation  of  what  hap¬ 
pened. 

Neither  is  this  uncertainty  to  be  thought 
strange,  seeing  the  manner  of  the  death  of 
Scipio  Africanus,  who  died  at  his  own  home 
after  supper,  has  been  found  capable  neither 
of  proof  or  disproof;  for  some  say  he  died  a 
natural  death,  being  of  a  sickly  habit;  others, 
that  he  poisoned  himself;  others  again,  that 
his  enemies,  breaking  in  upon  him  in  the 
night,  stifled  him.  Yet  Scipio’s  dead  body  lay 
open  to  be  seen  of  all,  and  any  one,  from  his 
own  observation,  might  form  his  suspicions 
and  conjectures,  whereas  Romulus,  when  he 
vanished,  left  neither  the  least  part  of  his 
body,  nor  any  remnant  of  his  clothes  to  be 
seen. 

So  that  some  fancied  the  senators,  having 
fallen  upon  him  in  the  temple  of  Vulcan,  cut 
his  body  into  pieces,  and  took  each  a  part 
away  in  his  bosom;  others  think  his  disap¬ 
pearance  was  neither  in  the  temple  of  Vulcan, 
nor  with  the  senators  only  by,  but  that  it 
came  to  pass  that,  as  he  was  haranguing  the 
people  without  the  city,  near  a  place  called 
the  Goat’s  Marsh,  on  a  sudden  strange  and 
unaccountable  disorders  and  alterations  took 
place  in  the  air;  the  face  of  the  sun  was 
darkened,  and  the  day  turned  into  night,  and 
that,  too,  no  quiet,  peaceable  night,  but  with 
terrible  thunderings,  and  boisterous  winds 
from  all  quarters;  during  which  the  common 
people  dispersed  and  fled,  but  the  senators 
kept  close  together.  The  tempest  being  over 
and  the  light  breaking  out,  when  the  people 
gathered  again,  they  missed  and  inquired  for 
their  king;  the  senators  suffered  them  not  to 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

search,  or  busy  themselves  about  the  matter, 
but  commanded  them  to  honour  and  worship 
Romulus  as  one  taken  up  to  the  gods,  and 
about  to  be  to  them,  in  the  place  of  a  good 
prince,  now  a  propitious  god.  The  multitude, 
hearing  this,  went  away  believing  and  rejoic¬ 
ing  in  hopes  of  good  things  from  him;  but 
there  were  some,  who,  canvassing  the  matter 
in  a  hostile  temper,  accused  and  aspersed  the 
patricians,  as  men  that  persuaded  the  people  to 
believe  ridiculous  tales,  when  they  themselves 
were  the  murderers  of  the  king. 

Things  being  in  this  disorder,  one,  they  say, 
of  the  patricians,  of  noble  family  and  ap¬ 
proved  good  character,  and  a  faithful  and 
familiar  friend  of  Romulus  himself,  having 
come  with  him  from  Alba,  Julius  Proculus  by 
name,  presented  himself  in  the  Forum;  and, 
taking  a  most  sacred  oath,  protested  before 
them  all,  that,  as  he  was  travelling  on  the  road, 
he  had  seen  Romulus  coming  to  meet  him, 
looking  taller  and  comelier  than  ever,  dressed 
in  shining  and  flaming  armour;  and  he,  being 
affrighted  at  the  apparition,  said,  “Why,  O 
king,  or  for  what  purpose  have  you  abandoned 
us  to  unjust  and  wicked  surmises,  and  the 
whole  city  to  bereavement  and  endless  sor¬ 
row?”  and  that  he  made  answer,  “It  pleased 
the  gods,  O  Proculus,  that  we,  who  came  from 
them,  should  remain  so  long  a  time  amongst 
men  as  we  did;  and,  having  built  a  city  to  be 
the  greatest  in  the  world  for  empire  and  glory, 
should  again  return  to  heaven.  But  farewell; 
and  tell  the  Romans,  that,  by  the  exercise  of 
temperance  and  fortitude,  they  shall  attain  the 
height  of  human  power;  we  will  be  to  you  the 
propitious  god  Quirinus.”  This  seemed  credi¬ 
ble  to  the  Romans,  upon  the  honesty  and  oath 
of  the  relater,  and  indeed,  too,  there  mingled 
with  it  a  certain  divine  passion,  some  preter¬ 
natural  influence  similar  to  possession  by  a  di¬ 
vinity;  nobody  contradicted  it,  but,  laying  aside 
all  jealousies  and  detractions,  they  prayed  to 
Quirinus  and  saluted  him  as  a  god. 

This  is  like  some  of  the  Greek  fables  of  Aris- 
teas  the  Proconnesian,  and  Cleomedes  the  As- 
typalaean;  for  they  say  Aristeas  died  in  a  fuller’s 
work-shop,  and  his  friends  coming  to  look  for 
him,  found  his  body  vanished;  and  that  some 
presendy  after,  coming  from  abroad,  said  they 
met  him  travelling  towards  Croton.  And  that 
Cleomedes,  being  an  extraordinarily  strong  and 
gigantic  man,  but  also  wild  and  mad,  commit¬ 
ted  many  desperate  freaks;  and  at  last,  in  a 
school-house,  striking  a  pillar  that  sustained 
the  roof  with  his  fist,  broke  it  in  the  middle,  so 


ROMULUS 

that  the  house  fell  and  destroyed  the  .children 
in  it;  and  being  pursued,  he  fled  into  a  great 
I  chest,  and,  shutting  to  the  lid,  held  it  so  fast, 
that  many  men,  with  their  united  strength, 
could  not  force  it  open;  afterwards,  breaking 
the  chest  to  pieces,  they  found  no  man  in  it 
alive  or  dead;  in  astonishment  at  which,  they 
sent  to  consult  the  oracle  at  Delphi;  to  whom 
the  prophetess  made  this  answer, — 

Of  all  the  heroes  Cleomede  is  last. 

They  say,  too,  the  body  of  Alcmena,  as  they 
were  carrying  her  to  her  grave,  vanished,  and 
a  stone  was  found  lying  on  the  bier. 

And  many  such  improbabilities  do  your 
fabulous  writers  relate,  deifying  creatures  nat¬ 
urally  mortal;  for  though  altogether  to  disown 
a  divine  nature  in  human  virtue  were  impious 
and  base,  so  again,  to  mix  heaven  with  earth  is 
ridiculous.  Let  us  believe  with  Pindar,  that — 

All  human  bodies  yield  to  Death’s  decree, 

The  soul  survives  to  all  eternity. 

For  that  alone  is  derived  from  the  gods, 
thence  comes,  and  thither  returns;  not  with 
the  body,  but  when  most  disengaged  and  sep¬ 
arated  from  it,  and  when  most  entirely  pure 
and  clean  and  free  from  the  flesh:  for  the 
most  perfect  soul,  says  Heraclitus,  is  a  dry 
light,  which  flies  out  of  the  body  as  lightning 
breaks  from  a  cloud;  but  that  which  is 
f  clogged  and  surfeited  with  body  is  like  gross 
I  and  humid  incense,  slow  to  kindle  and  as¬ 
cend.  We  must  not,  therefore,  contrary  to  na¬ 
ture,  send  the  bodies,  too,  of  good  men  to  heav¬ 
en;  but  we  must  really  believe  that,  according 
to  their  divine  nature  and  law,  their  virtue  and 
*  their  souls  are  translated  out  of  men  into  he¬ 
roes,  out  of  heroes  into  demi-gods,  out  of  demi¬ 
gods,  after  passing,  as  in  the  rite  of  initiation, 
through  a  final  cleansing  and  sanctification, 
and  so  freeing  themselves  from  all  that  per¬ 
tains  to  mortality  and  sense,  are  thus,  not  by 
human  decree,  but  really  and  according  to 
right  reason,  elevated  into  gods  admitted  thus 
to  the  greatest  and  most  blessed  perfection. 

Romulus’s  surname  Quirinus,  some  say,  is 

I  equivalent  to  Mars;  others,  that  he  was  so 
called  because  the  citizens  were  called  Quirites; 
others,  because  the  ancients  called  a  dart  or 
spear  Quiris;  thus,  the  statue  of  Juno  resting 
on  a  spear  is  called  Quiritis,  and  the  dart  in  the 
Regia  is  addressed  as  Mars,  and  those  that  were 
distinguished  in  war  were  usually  presented 
with  a  dart;  that,  therefore,  Romulus  being  a 
martial  god,  or  a  god  of  darts,  was  called  Quir- 


29 

inus.  A  temple  is  certainly  built  to  his  honour 
on  the  mount  called  from  him  Quirinalis. 

The  day  he  vanished  on  is  called  the  Flight 
of  the  People  and  the  Nones  of  the  Goats,  be¬ 
cause  they  go  then  out  of  the  city  and  sacrifice 
at  the  Goat’s  Marsh,  and,  as  they  go,  they  shout 
out  some  of  the  Roman  names,  as  Marcus,  Lu¬ 
cius,  Caius,  imitating  the  way  in  which  they 
then  fled  and  called  upon  one  another  in  that 
fright  and  hurry. 

Some,  however,  say  this  was  not  in  imita¬ 
tion  of  a  flight,  but  of  a  quick  and  hasty  onset, 
referring  it  to  the  following  occasion:  After 
the  Gauls  who  had  taken  Rome  were  driven 
out  by  Camillus,  and  the  city  was  scarcely  as 
yet  recovering  her  strength,  many  of  the 
Latins,  under  the  command  of  Livius  Pos- 
tumius,  took  this  time  to  march  against  her. 
Postumius  halting  not  far  from  Rome,  sent  a 
herald,  signifying  that  the  Latins  were  desir¬ 
ous  to  renew  their  former  alliance  and  affinity 
(that  was  now  almost  decayed)  by  contracting 
new  marriages  between  both  nations;  if,  there¬ 
fore,  they  would  send  forth  a  good  number  of 
their  virgins  and  widows,  they  should  have 
peace  and  friendship,  such  as  the  Sabines  had 
formerly  had  on  the  like  conditions. 

The  Romans,  hearing  this,  dreaded  a  war, 
yet  thought  a  surrender  of  their  women  little 
better  than  mere  captivity.  Being  in  this 
doubt,  a  servant-maid  called  Philotis  (or,  as 
some  say,  Tutola),  advised  them  to  do  neither, 
but,  by  a  stratagem,  avoid  both  fighting  and 
the  giving  up  of  such  pledges.  The  stratagem 
was  this,  that  they  should  send  herself,  with 
other  well-looking  servant-maids,  to  the  en¬ 
emy,  in  the  dress  of  free-born  virgins,  and 
she  should  in  the  night  light  up  a  fire  signal, 
at  which  the  Romans  should  come  armed  and 
surprise  them  asleep. 

The  Latins  were  thus  deceived,  and  accord¬ 
ingly  Philotis  set  up  a  torch  in  a  wild  fig- 
tree,  screening  it  behind  with  curtains  and 
coverlets  from  the  sight  of  the  enemy,  while 
visible  to  the  Romans.  They,  when  they  saw 
it,  eagerly  ran  out  of  the  gates,  calling  in 
their  haste  to  each  other  as  they  went  out, 
and  so,  falling  in  unexpectedly  upon  the  en¬ 
emy,  they  defeated  them,  and  upon  that  made 
a  feast  of  triumph,  called  the  Nones  of  the 
Goats,  because  of  the  wild  fig-tree  called  by 
the  Romans  caprificus,  or  the  goat-fig.  They 
feast  the  women  without  the  city  in  arbours 
made  of  fig-tree  boughs,  and  the  maid-servants 
gather  together  and  run  about  playing;  after¬ 
wards  they  fight  in  sport,  and  throw  stones  one 


30 

at  another,  in  memory  that  they  then  aided  and 
assisted  the  Roman  men  in  fight. 

This  only  a  few  authors  admit  for  true;  for 
the  calling  upon  one  another’s  names  by  day 
and  the  going  out  to  the  Goat’s  Marsh  to  do 
sacrifice  seem  to  agree  more  with  the  former 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

story,  unless,  indeed,  we  shall  say  that  both  the 
actions  might  have  happened  on  the  same  day 
in  different  years. 

It  was  in  the  fifty-fourth  year  of  his  age  and 
the  thirty-eighth  of  his  reign  that  Romulus, 
they  tell  us,  left  the  world. 


ROMULUS  and  THESEUS 
Compared 


This  is  what  I  have  learnt  of  Romulus  and 
Theseus,  worthy  of  memory.  It  seems,  first 
of  all,  that  Theseus,  out  of  his  own  free¬ 
will,  without  any  compulsion,  when  he  might 
have  reigned  in  security  at  Troezen  in  the  en¬ 
joyment  of  no  inglorious  empire,  of  his  own 
motion  affected  great  actions,  whereas  the 
other,  to  escape  present  servitude  and  a  punish¬ 
ment  that  threatened  him  (according  to  Plato’s 
phrase),  grew  valiant  purely  out  of  fear,  and 
dreading  the  extremest  inflictions,  attempted 
great  enterprises  out  of  mere  necessity. 

Again,  his  greatest  action  was  only  the  kill¬ 
ing  of  one  King  of  Alba;  while,  as  mere  by¬ 
adventures  and  preludes,  the  other  can  name 
Sciron,  Sinnis,  Procrustes,  and  Corynetes;  by 
reducing  and  killing  of  whom,  he  rid  Greece 
of  terrible  oppressors,  before  any  of  them  that 
were  relieved  knew  who  did  it;  moreover,  he 
might  without  any  trouble  as  well  have  gone 
to  Athens  by  sea,  considering  he  himself  never 
was  in  the  least  injured  by  those  robbers; 
whereas  Romulus  could  not  but  be  in  trouble 
whilst  Amulius  lived.  Add  to  this,  the  fact 
that  Theseus,  for  no  wrong  done  to  himself, 
but  for  the  sake  of  others,  fell  upon  these 
villains;  but  Romulus  and  Remus,  as  long  as 
they  themselves  suffered  no  ill  by  the  tyrant, 
permitted  him  to  oppress  all  others.  And  if 
it  be  a  great  thing  to  have  been  wounded  in 
battle  by  the  Sabines,  to  have  killed  King 
Acron,  and  to  have  conquered  many  enemies, 
we  may  oppose  to  these  actions  the  battle 
with  the  Centaurs  and  the  feats  done  against 
the  Amazons. 

But  what  Theseus  adventured,  in  offering 
himself  voluntarily  with  young  boys  and  vir¬ 
gins,  as  part  of  the  tribute  unto  Crete,  either 
to  be  a  prey  to  a  monster  or  a  victim  upon 
the  tomb  of  Androgeus,  or,  according  to  the 
mildest  form  of  the  story,  to  live  vilely  and 
dishonourably  in  slavery  to  insulting  and 
cruel  men;  it  is  not  to  be  expressed  what  an 
act  of  courage,  magnanimity,  or  justice  to 
the  public,  or  of  love  for  honour  and  bravery, 


that  was.  So  what  methinks  the  philosophers 
did  not  ill  define  love  to  be  the  provision  of 
the  gods  for  the  care  and  preservation  of  the 
young;  for  the  love  of  Ariadne,  above  all, 
seems  to  have  been  the  proper  work  and  de¬ 
sign  of  some  god  in  order  to  preserve  The¬ 
seus;  and,  indeed,  we  ought  not  to  blame 
her  for  loving  him,  but  rather  wonder  all 
men  and  women  were  not  alike  affected  to¬ 
wards  him;  and  if  she  alone  were  so,  truly 
I  dare  pronounce  her  worthy  of  the  love  of  a 
god,  who  was  herself  so  great  a  lover  of  virtue 
and  goodness,  and  the  bravest  man. 

Both  Theseus  and  Romulus  were  by  nature 
meant  for  governors;  yet  neither  lived  up  to 
the  true  character  of  a  king,  but  fell  off,  and 
ran,  the  one  into  popularity,  the  other  into 
tyranny,  falling  both  into  the  same  fault  out 
of  different  passions.  For  a  ruler’s  first  aim  is 
to  maintain  his  office,  which  is  done  no  less 
by  avoiding  what  is  unfit  than  by  observing 
what  is  suitable.  Whoever  is  either  too  remiss 
or  too  strict  is  no  more  a  king  or  a  governor, 
but  either  a  demagogue  or  a  despot,  and  so 
becomes  either  odious  or  contemptible  to  his 
subjects.  Though  certainly  the  one  seems  to  be 
the  fault  of  easiness  and  good-nature,  the  other 
of  pride  and  severity. 

If  men’s  calamities,  again,  are  not  to  be 
wholly  imputed  to  fortune,  but  refer  them¬ 
selves  to  differences  of  character,  who  will 
acquit  either  Theseus  of  rash  and  unreason¬ 
able  anger  against  his  son,  or  Romulus  against 
his  brother?  Looking  at  motives,  we  more 
easily  excuse  the  anger  which  a  stronger  cause, 
like  a  severer  blow,  provoked.  Romulus,  hav¬ 
ing  disagreed  with  his  brother  advisedly  and 
deliberately  on  public  matters,  one  would 
think  could  not  on  a  sudden  have  been  put 
into  so  great  a  passion;  but  love  and  jealousy 
and  the  complaints  of  his  wife,  which  few 
men  can  avoid  being  moved  by,  seduced  The¬ 
seus  to  commit  that  outrage  upon  his  son.  And 
what  is  more,  Romulus,  in  his  anger,  commit¬ 
ted  an  action  of  unfortunate  consequence;  but 


ROMULUS  AND  THESEUS 

that  of  Theseus  ended  only  in  words,  s.ome  evil 
speaking,  and  an  old  man’s  curse;  the  rest  of 
the  youth’s  disasters  seem  to  have  proceeded 
from  fortune;  so  that,  so  far,  a  man  would  give 
his  vote  on  Theseus’s  part. 

But  Romulus  has,  first  of  all  one  great  plea, 
that  his  performances  proceeded  from  very 
small  beginnings;  for  both  the  brothers  being 
thought  servants  and  the  sons  of  swine-herds, 
before  becoming  freemen  themselves,  gave 
liberty  to  almost  all  the  Latins,  obtaining  at 
once  all  the  most  honourable  titles,  as  de¬ 
stroyers  of  their  country’s  enemies,  preservers 
of  their  friends  and  kindred,  princes  of  the 
people,  founders  of  cities,  not  removers,  like 
Theseus,  who  raised  and  compiled  only  one 
house  out  of  many,  demolishing  many  cities 
bearing  the  names  of  ancient  kings  and 
heroes.  Romulus,  indeed,  did  the  same  after¬ 
wards,  forcing  his  enemies  to  deface  and  ruin 
their  own  dwellings,  and  to  sojourn  with  their 
conquerors;  but  at  first,  not  by  removal,  or 
increase  of  an  existing  city,  but  by  foundation 
of  a  new  one,  he  obtained  himself  lands,  a 
country,  a  kingdom,  wives,  children,  and  rela¬ 
tions.  And,  in  so  doing,  he  killed  or  destroyed 
nobody,  but  benefited  those  that  wanted  houses 
and  homes  and  were  willing  to  be  of  a  society 
and  become  citizens.  Robbers  and  malefactors 
he  slew  not;  but  he  subdued  nations,  he  over¬ 
threw  cities,  he  triumphed  over  kings  and 
commanders. 

As  to  Remus,  it  is  doubtful  by  whose  hand 
he  fell;  it  is  generally  imputed  to  others.  His 
mother  he  clearly  retrieved  from  death,  and 
placed  his  grandfather,  who  was  brought 
under  base  and  dishonourable  vassalage,  on 
the  ancient  throne  of  ALneas,  to  whom  he  did 
voluntarily  many  good  offices,  but  never  did 
him  harm  even  inadvertently.  But  Theseus, 
in  his  forgetfulness,  and  neglect  of  the  com¬ 
mand  concerning  the  flag,  can  scarcely,  me- 
'  thinks,  by  any  excuses,  or  before  the  most  in¬ 
dulgent  judges,  avoid  the  imputation  of  parri¬ 
cide.  And,  indeed,  one  of  the  Attic  writers, 
perceiving  it  to  be  very  hard  to  make  an  ex¬ 
cuse  for  this,  feigns  that  Aigeus,  at  the  ap¬ 
proach  of  the  ship,  running  hastily  to  the 
Acropolis  to  see  what  news,  slipped  and  fell 
down,  as  if  he  had  no  servants,  or  none  would 
attend  him  on  his  way  to  the  shore. 

And,  indeed,  the  faults  committed  in  the 
rapes  of  women  admit  of  no  plausible  excuse 
in  Theseus.  First,  because  of  the  often  repeti¬ 
tion  of  the  crime;  for  he  stole  Ariadne,  An- 


31 

tiope,  Anaxo  the  Troezenian,  at  last  Helen, 
when  he  was  an  old  man,  and  she  not  mar¬ 
riageable;  she  a  child,  and  he  at  an  age  past 
even  lawful  wedlock.  Then,  on  account  of 
the  cause;  for  the  Troezenian,  Lacedaemonian, 
and  Amazonian  virgins,  beside  that  they  were 
not  betrothed  to  him,  were  not  worthier  to 
raise  children  by  than  the  Athenian  women, 
derived  from  Erechtheus  and  Cecrops;  but  it 
is  to  be  suspected  these  things  were  done  out 
of  wantonness  and  lust.  Romulus,  when  he 
had  taken  near  eight  hundred  women,  chose 
not  all,  but  only  Hersilia,  as  they  say,  for  him¬ 
self;  the  rest  he  divided  among  the  chief  of 
the  city;  and  afterwards,  by  the  respect  and 
tenderness  and  justice  shown  towards  them, 
he  made  it  clear  that  this  violence  and  injury 
was  a  commendable  and  politic  exploit  to  es¬ 
tablish  a  society;  by  which  he  intermixed  and 
united  both  nations,  and  made  it  the  fountain 
of  after  friendship  and  public  stability. 

And  to  the  reverence  and  love  and  con¬ 
stancy  he  established  in  matrimony,  time  can 
witness,  for  in  two  hundred  and  thirty  years, 
neither  any  husband  deserted  his  wife,  nor 
any  wife  her  husband;  but,  as  the  curious 
among  the  Greeks  can  name  the  first  case 
of  parricide  or  matricide,  so  the  Romans  all 
well  know  that  Spurius  Carvilius  was  the  first 
who  put  away  his  wife,  accusing  her  of  bar¬ 
renness. 

The  immediate  results  were  similar;  for 
upon  those  marriages  the  two  princes  shared 
in  the  dominion,  and  both  nations  fell  under 
the  same  government.  But  from  the  marriages 
of  Theseus  proceeded  nothing  of  friendship 
or  correspondence  for  the  advantage  of  com¬ 
merce,  but  enmities  and  wars  and  the  slaugh¬ 
ter  of  citizens,  and,  at  last,  the  loss  of  the  city 
Aphidnae,  when  only  out  of  the  compassion  of 
the  enemy,  whom  they  entreated  and  caressed 
like  gods,  they  escaped  suffering  what  Troy 
did  by  Paris.  Theseus’s  mother,  however,  was 
not  only  in  danger,  but  suffered  actually  what 
Hecuba  did,  deserted  and  neglected  by  her  son, 
unless  her  captivity  be  not  a  fiction,  as  I  could 
wish  both  that  and  other  things  were. 

The  circumstances  of  the  divine  interven¬ 
tion,  said  to  have  preceded  or  accompanied 
their  births,  are  also  in  contrast;  for  Romulus 
was  preserved  by  the  special  favour  of  the 
gods;  but  the  oracle  given  to  Aigeus  com¬ 
manding  him  to  abstain,  seems  to  demon¬ 
strate  that  the  birth  of  Theseus  was  not  agree¬ 
able  to  the  will  of  the  gods. 


LYCURGUS 

LEGENDARY,  ^TH  CENTURY  B.C. 


There  is  so  much  uncertainty  in  the 
accounts  which  historians  have  left  us 
of  Lycurgus,  the  lawgiver  of  Sparta, 
that  scarcely  anything  is  asserted  by  one  of 
them  which  is  not  called  into  question  or  con¬ 
tradicted  by  the  rest.  Their  sentiments  are 
quite  different  as  to  the  family  he  came  of,  the 
voyages  he  undertook,  the  place  and  manner 
of  his  death,  but  most  of  all  when  they  speak 
of  the  laws  he  made  and  the  commonwealth 
which  he  founded.  They  cannot,  by  any 
means,  be  brought  to  an  agreement  as  to  the 
very  age  in  which  he  lived;  for  some  of  them 
say  that  he  flourished  in  the  time  of  Iphitus,  and 
that  they  two  jointly  contrived  the  ordinance 
for  the  cessation  of  arms  during  the  solemnity 
of  the  Olympic  games.  Of  this  opinion  was 
Aristotle;  and  for  confirmation  of  it,  he  al¬ 
leges  an  inscription  upon  one  of  the  copper 
quoits  used  in  those  sports,  upon  which  the 
name  of  Lycurgus  continued  uneffaced  to  his 
time.  But  Eratosthenes  and  Apollodorus  and 
other  chronologers,  computing  the  time  by  the 
successions  of  the  Spartan  kings,  pretend  to 
demonstrate  that  he  was  much  more  ancient 
than  the  institution  of  the  Olympic  games. 
Timaeus  conjectures  that  there  were  two  of  this 
name,  and  in  diverse  times,  but  that  the  one  of 
them  being  much  more  famous  than  the  other, 
men  gave  to  him  the  glory  of  the  exploits  of 
both;  the  elder  of  the  two,  according  to  him, 
was  not  long  after  Homer;  and  some  are  so 
particular  as  to  say  that  he  had  seen  him.  But 
that  he  was  of  great  antiquity  may  be  gathered 
from  a  passage  in  Xenophon,  where  he  makes 
him  contemporary  with  the  Heraclidae.  By  de¬ 
scent,  indeed,  the  very  last  kings  of  Sparta 
were  Heraclidae  too;  but  he  seems  in  that 
place  to  speak  of  the  first  and  more  immediate 
successors  of  Hercules.  But  notwithstanding 
this  confusion  and  obscurity,  we  shall  endeav¬ 
our  to  compose  the  history  of  his  life,  adhering 
to  those  statements  which  are  least  contra¬ 
dicted,  and  depending  upon  those  authors 
who  are  most  worthy  of  credit. 

The  poet  Simonides  will  have  it  that  Ly¬ 
curgus  was  the  son  of  Prytanis,  and  not  of 


Eunomus;  but  in  this  opinion  he  is  singular, 
for  all  the  rest  deduce  the  genealogy  of  them 
both  as  follows: — 

Aristodemus 

I 

Patrocles 

I 

Soiis 

I 

Eurvpon 

I 

Eunomus 

_ 

Polydectes  by  his  Lycurgus  by  Dionassa 
first  wife  his  second 

Dieuchidas  says  he  was  the  sixth  from  Pa¬ 
trocles  and  the  eleventh  from  Hercules.  Be 
this  as  it  will,  Sous  certainly  was  the  most 
renowned  of  all  his  ancestors,  under  whose 
conduct  the  Spartans  made  slaves  of  the 
Helots,  and  added  to  their  dominions,  by  con¬ 
quest,  a  good  part  of  Arcadia.  There  goes  a 
story  of  this  king  Soiis,  that,  being  besieged 
by  the  Clitorians  in  a  dry  and  stony  place  so 
that  he  could  come  at  no  water,  he  was  at  last 
constrained  to  agree  with  them  upon  these 
terms,  that  he  would  restore  to  them  all  his 
conquests,  provided  that  himself  and  all  his 
men  should  drink  of  the  nearest  spring.  After 
the  usual  oaths  and  ratifications,  he  called  his 
soldiers  together,  and  offered  to  him  that 
would  forbear  drinking  his  kingdom  for  a  re¬ 
ward;  and  when  not  a  man  of  them  was  able 
to  forbear,  in  short,  when  they  had  all  drunk 
their  fill,  at  last  comes  King  Soiis  himself  to 
the  spring,  and,  having  sprinkled  his  face  only, 
wihout  swallowing  one  drop,  marches  off  in 
the  face  of  his  enemies,  refusing  to  yield  up 
his  conquests,  because  himself  and  all  his  men 
had  not,  according  to  the  articles,  drunk  of 
their  water. 

Although  he  was  justly  had  in  admiration 
on  this  account,  yet  his  family  was  not  sur- 
named  from  him,  but  from  his  son  Eurypon 
(of  whom  they  were  called  Eurypontids) ;  the 
reason  of  which  was  that  Eurypon  relaxed  the 
rigour  of  the  monarchy,  seeking  favour  and 
popularity  with  the  many.  They,  after  this 


LYCURGUS 

first  step,  grew  bolder;  and  the  succeeding 
kings  partly  incurred  hatred  with  their  people 
by  trying  to  use  force,  or,  for  popularity’s  sake 
and  through  weakness,  gave  way;  and  an¬ 
archy  and  confusion  long  prevailed  in  Sparta, 
causing,  moreover,  the  death  of  the  father  of 
Lycurgus.  For  as  he  was  endeavouring  to 
quell  a  riot,  he  was  stabbed  with  a  butcher’s 
knife,  and  left  the  title  of  king  to  his  eldest 
son,  Poly  dec  tes. 

He,  too,  dying  soon  after,  the  right  of  suc¬ 
cession  (as  every  one  thought)  rested  in  Ly¬ 
curgus;  and  reign  he  did,  until  it  was  found 
that  the  queen,  his  sister-in-law,  was  with 
child;  upon  which  he  immediately  declared 
that  the  kingdom  belonged  to  her  issue,  pro¬ 
vided  it  were  male,  and  that  he  himself  ex¬ 
ercised  the  regal  jurisdiction  only  as  his 
guardian;  the  Spartan  name  for  which  office 
is  prodicus.  Soon  after,  an  overture  was  made 
to  him  by  the  queen,  that  she  would  herself 
in  some  way  destroy  the  infant,  upon  condi¬ 
tion  that  he  would  marry  her  when  he  came 
to  the  crown.  Abhorring  the  woman’s  wicked¬ 
ness,  he  nevertheless  did  not  reject  her  pro¬ 
posal,  but,  making  show  of  closing  with  her, 
despatched  the  messenger  with  thanks  and  ex¬ 
pressions  of  joy,  but  dissuaded  her  earnestly 
from  procuring  herself  to  miscarry,  which 
would  impair  her  health,  if  not  endanger  her 
life;  he  himself,  he  said,  would  see  to  it,  that 
the  child,  as  soon  as  born,  should  be  taken 
out  of  the  way. 

By  such  artifices  having  drawn  on  the 
woman  to  the  time  of  her  lying-in,  as  soon 
as  he  heard  that  she  was  in  labour,  he  sent 
persons  to  be  by  and  observe  all  that  passed, 
with  orders  that  if  it  were  a  girl  they  should 
deliver  it  to  the  women,  but  if  a  boy,  should 
bring  it  to  him  wheresoever  he  were,  and 
whatsoever  doing.  It  so  fell  out  that  when  he 
was  at  supper  with  the  principal  magistrates 
the  queen  was  brought  to  bed  of  a  boy,  who 
was  soon  after  presented  to  him  as  he  was 
at  the  table;  he,  taking  him  into  his  arms, 
said  to  those  about  him,  “Men  of  Sparta,  here 
is  a  king  born  unto  us”;  this  said,  he  laid  him 
down  in  the  king’s  place,  and  named  him 
Charilaus,  that  is,  the  joy  of  the  people;  be¬ 
cause  that  all  were  transported  with  joy  and 
with  wonder  at  his  noble  and  just  spirit. 

His  reign  had  lasted  only  eight  months, 
but  he  was  honoured  on  other  accounts  by 
the  citizens,  and  there  were  more  who  obeyed 
him  because  of  his  eminent  virtues,  than  be¬ 
cause  he  was  regent  to  the  king  and  had  the 


33 

royal  power  in  his  hands.  Some,  however, 
envied  and  sought  to  impede  his  growing  in¬ 
fluence  while  he  was  still  young;  chiefly  the 
kindred  and  friends  of  the  queen-mother,  who 
pretended  to  have  been  dealt  with  injuriously. 
Her  brother  Leonidas,  in  a  warm  debate 
which  fell  out  betwixt  him  and  Lycurgus, 
went  so  far  as  to  tell  him  to  his  face  that 
he  was  well  assured  that  ere  long  he  should 
see  him  king;  suggesting  suspicions  and  pre¬ 
paring  the  way  for  an  accusation  of  him,  as 
though  he  had  made  away  with  his  nephew, 
if  the  child  should  chance  to  fail,  though  by 
a  natural  death.  Words  of  the  like  import 
were  designedly  cast  abroad  by  the  queen- 
mother  and  her  adherents. 

Troubled  at  this,  and  not  knowing  what 
it  might  come  to,  he  thought  it  his  wisest 
course  to  avoid  their  envy  by  a  voluntary 
exile,  and  to  travel  from  place  to  place  until 
his  nephew  came  to  marriageable  years,  and, 
by  having  a  son,  had  secured  the  succession; 
setting  sail,  therefore,  with  this  resolution,  he 
first  arrived  at  Crete,  where,  having  con¬ 
sidered  their  several  forms  of  government, 
and  got  an  acquaintance  with  the  principal 
men  among  them,  some  of  their  laws  he  very 
much  approved  of,  and  resolved  to  make 
use  of  them  in  his  own  country;  a  good  part 
he  rejected  as  useless.  Among  the  persons 
there  the  most  renowned  for  their  learning 
and  their  wisdom  in  state  matters  was  one 
Thales,  whom  Lycurgus,  by  importunities 
and  assurances  of  friendship,  persuaded  to  go 
over  to  Lacedaemon;  where,  though  by  his 
outward  appearance  and  his  own  profession 
he  seemed  to  be  no  other  than  a  lyric  poet, 
in  reality  he  performed  the  part  of  one  of 
the  ablest  lawgivers  in  the  world.  The  very 
songs  which  he  composed  were  exhortations 
to  obedience  and  concord,  and  the  very 
measure  and  cadence  of  the  verse,  conveying 
impressions  of  order  and  tranquillity,  had  so 
great  an  influence  on  the  minds  of  the  listen¬ 
ers,  that  they  were  insensibly  softened  and  civ¬ 
ilised,  insomuch  that  they  renounced  their  pri¬ 
vate  feuds  and  animosities,  and  were  reunited 
in  a  common  admiration  of  virtue.  So  that  it 
may  truly  be  said  that  Thales  prepared  the  way 
for  the  discipline  introduced  by  Lycurgus. 

From  Crete  he  sailed  to  Asia,  with  design, 
as  is  said,  to  examine  the  difference  betwixt 
the  manners  and  rules  of  life  of  the  Cretans, 
which  were  very  sober  and  temperate,  and 
those  of  the  Ionians,  a  people  of  sumptuous 
and  delicate  habits,  and  so  to  form  a  judg- 


34 

ment;  just  as  physicians  do  by  comparing 
healthy  and  diseased  bodies.  Here  he  had  the 
first  sight  of  Homer’s  works,  in  the  hands, 
we  may  suppose,  of  the  posterity  of  Creo- 
phylus;  and,  having  observed  that  the  few 
loose  expressions  and  actions  of  ill  example 
which  are  to  be  found  in  his  poems  were 
much  outweighed  by  serious  lessons  of  state 
and  rules  of  morality,  he  set  himself  eagerly 
to  transcribe  and  digest  them  into  order,  as 
thinking  they  would  be  of  good  use  in  his 
own  country.  They  had,  indeed,  already  ob¬ 
tained  some  slight  repute  among  the  Greeks, 
and  scattered  portions,  as  chance  conveyed 
them,  were  in  the  hands  of  individuals;  but 
Lycurgus  first  made  them  really  known. 

The  Egyptians  say  that  he  took  a  voyage 
into  Egypt,  and  that,  being  much  taken  with 
their  way  of  separating  the  soldiery  from  the 
rest  of  the  nation,  he  transferred  it  from 
them  to  Sparta,  a  removal  from  contact  with 
those  employed  in  low  and  mechanical  oc¬ 
cupations  giving  high  refinement  and  beauty 
to  the  state.  Some  Greek  writers  also  record 
this.  But  as  for  his  voyages  into  Spain,  Africa 
and  the  Indies,  and  his  conferences  there 
with  the  Gymnosophists,  the  whole  relation, 
as  far  as  I  can  find,  rests  on  the  single  credit 
of  the  Spartan  Aristocrates,  the  son  of  Hip¬ 
parchus. 

Lycurgus  was  much  missed  at  Sparta,  and 
often  sent  for,  “for  kings  indeed  we  have,” 
they  said,  “who  wear  the  marks  and  assume 
the  titles  of  royalty,  but  as  for  the  qualities  of 
their  minds,  they  have  nothing  by  which  they 
are  to  be  distinguished  from  their  subjects”; 
adding,  that  in  him  alone  was  the  true  founda¬ 
tion  of  sovereignty  to  be  seen,  a  nature  made 
to  rule,  and  a  genius  to  gain  obedience.  Nor 
were  the  kings  themselves  averse  to  see  him 
back,  for  they  looked  upon  his  presence  as  a 
bulwark  against  the  insolence  of  the  people. 

Things  being  in  this  posture  at  his  re¬ 
turn,  he  applied  himself,  without  loss  of 
time,  to  a  thorough  reformation,  and  resolved 
to  change  the  whole  face  of  the  common¬ 
wealth;  for  what  could  a  few  particular  laws 
and  a  partial  alteration  avail?  He  must  act  as 
wise  physicians  do,  in  the  case  of  one  who  la¬ 
bours  under  a  complication  of  diseases,  by  force 
of  medicines  reduce  and  exhaust  him,  change 
his  whole  temperament,  and  then  set  him  upon 
a  totally  new  regimen  of  diet. 

Having  thus  projected  things,  away  he  goes 
to  Delphi  to  consult  Apollo  there;  which 
having  done,  and  offered  his  sacrifice,  he 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

returned  with  that  renowned  oracle,  in  which 
he  is  called  beloved  of  God,  and  rather  God 
than  man;  that  his  prayers  were  heard,  that 
his  laws  should  be  the  best,  and  the  common¬ 
wealth  which  observed  them  the  most  famous 
in  the  world.  Encouraged  by  these  things  he 
set  himself  to  bring  over  to  his  side  the  leading 
men  of  Sparta,  exhorting  them  to  give  him  a 
helping  hand  in  his  great  undertaking;  he 
broke  it  first  to  his  particular  friends,  and  then 
by  degrees  gained  others,  and  animated  them 
all  to  put  his  design  in  execution. 

When  things  were  ripe  for  action,  he  gave 
orders  to  thirty  of  the  principal  men  of 
Sparta  to  be  ready  armed  at  the  market-place 
by  break  of  day,  to  the  end  that  he  might 
strike  a  terror  into  the  opposite  party.  Her- 
mippus  hath  set  down  the  names  of  twenty 
of  the  most  eminent  of  them;  but  the  name 
of  him  whom  Lycurgus  most  confided  in, 
and  who  was  of  most  use  to  him,  both  in 
making  his  laws  and  putting  them  in  execu¬ 
tion  was  Arthmiadas.  Things  growing  to  a 
tumult,  King  Charilaus,  apprehending  that 
it  was  a  conspiracy  against  his  person,  took 
sanctuary  in  the  temple  of  Minerva  of  the 
Brazen  House;  but,  being  soon  after  unde¬ 
ceived,  and  having  taken  an  oath  of  them 
that  they  had  no  designs  against  him,  he 
quitted  his  refuge,  and  himself  also  entered 
into  the  confederacy  with  them;  of  so  gentle 
and  flexible  a  disposition  he  was,  to  which 
Archelaus,  his  brother-king,  alluded,  when, 
hearing  him  extolled  for  his  goodness,  he 
said,  “Who  can  say  he  is  anything  but  good? 
He  is  so  even  to  the  bad.” 

Amongst  the  many  changes  and  altera¬ 
tions  which  Lycurgus  made,  the  first  and  of 
greatest  importance  was  the  establishment  of 
the  senate,  which  having  a  power  equal  to  the 
king’s  in  matters  of  great  consequence,  and,  as 
Plato  expresses  it,  allaying  and  qualifying  the 
fiery  genius  of  the  royal  office,  gave  steadiness 
and  safety  to  the  commonwealth.  For  the  state, 
which  before  had  no  firm  basis  to  stand  upon, 
but  leaned  one  while  towards  an  absolute  mon¬ 
archy,  when  the  kings  had  the  upper  hand, 
and  another  while  towards  a  pure  democracy, 
when  the  people  had  the  better,  found  in  this 
establishment  of  the  senate  a  central  weight, 
like  ballast  in  a  ship,  which  always  kept  things 
in  a  just  equilibrium;  the  twenty-eight  always 
adhering  to  the  kings  so  far  as  to  resist  democ¬ 
racy,  and  on  the  other  hand,  supporting  the 
people  against  the  establishment  of  absolute 
monarchy. 


LYCURGUS 

As  for  the  determinate  number  of -twenty- 
eight,  Aristotle  states,  that  it  so  fell  out  be¬ 
cause  two  of  the  original  associates,  for  want 
of  courage,  fell  off  from  the  enterprise;  but 
Sphaerus  assures  us  that  there  were  but 
twenty-eight  of  the  confederates  at  first;  per¬ 
haps  there  is  some  mystery  in  the  number, 
which  consists  of  seven  multiplied  by  four, 
and  is  the  first  of  perfect  numbers  after  six, 
being,  as  that  is,  equal  to  all  its  parts.  For 
my  part,  I  believe  Lycurgus  fixed  upon  the 
number  of  twenty-eight,  that,  the  two  kings 
being  reckoned  amongst  them,  they  might 
be  thirty  in  all.  So  eagerly  set  was  he  upon 
this  establishment,  that  he  took  the  trouble 
to  obtain  an  oracle  about  it  from  Delphi,  the 
Rhetra,  which  runs  thus:  “After  that  you 
have  built  a  temple  to  Jupiter  Helianius,  and 
to  Minerva  Hellania,  and  after  that  you 
have  phyle’d  the  people  into  phyles,  and 
obed  them  into  obes,  you  shall  establish  a 
council  of  thirty  elders,  the  leaders  included, 
and  shall,  from  time  to  time,  apellazem  the 
people  betwixt  Babyca  and  Cnacion,  there 
propound  and  put  to  the  vote.  The  commons 
have  the  final  voice  and  decision.”  By  phyles 
and  obes  are  meant  the  divisions  of  the  people; 
by  the  leaders,  the  two  kings;  apellazein, 
referring  to  the  Pythian  Apollo,  signifies  to 
assemble;  Babyca  and  Cnacion  they  now  call 
GEnus;  Aristotle  says  Cnacion  is  a  river,  and 
Babyca  a  bridge. 

Betwixt  this  Babyca  and  Cnacion,  their 
assemblies  were  held,  for  they  had  no  council- 
house  or  building  to  meet  in.  Lycurgus  was 
of  opinion  that  ornaments  were  so  far  from 
advantaging  them  in  their  counsels,  that 
they  were  rather  an  hindrance,  by  diverting 
their  attention  from  the  business  before  them 
to  statues  and  pictures,  and  roofs  curiously 
fretted,  the  usual  embellishments  of  such 
places  amongst  the  other  Greeks. 

The  people  then  being  thus  assembled  in 
the  open  air,  it  was  not  allowed  to  any  one 
of  their  order  to  give  his  advice,  but  only 
either  to  ratify  or  reject  what  should  be  pro¬ 
pounded  to  them  by  the  king  or  senate.  But 
because  it  fell  out  afterwards  that  the  people, 
by  adding  or  omitting  words,  distorted  and 
perverted  the  sense  of  propositions,  Kings 
Polydorus  and  Theopompus  inserted  into 
the  Rhetra,  or  grand  covenant,  the  following 
clause:  “That  if  the  people  decide  crookedly 
it  should  be  lawful  for  the  elders  and  leaders 
to  dissolve”;  that  is  to  say,  refuse  ratification, 
and  dismiss  the  people  as  depravers  and  per- 


35 

verters  of  their  counsel.  It  passed  among  the 
people,  by  their  management,  as  being  equally 
authentic  with  the  rest  of  the  Rhetra,  as  ap¬ 
pears  by  these  verses  of  Tyrtaeus, — 

These  oracles  they  fro?n  Apollo  heard, 

And  brought  from  Pytho  home  the  perfect  word: 
The  heaven-appointed  kings,  who  love  the  land, 
Shall  foremost  in  the  nation’s  council  stand; 

The  elders  next  to  them;  the  commons  last; 

Let  a  straight  Rhetra  among  all  be  passed. 

Although  Lycurgus  had,  in  this  manner, 
used  all  the  qualifications  possible  in  the 
constitution  of  his  commonwealth,  yet  those 
who  succeeded  him  found  the  oligarchical 
element  still  too  strong  and  dominant,  and 
to  check  its  high  temper  and  its  violence, 
put,  as  Plato  says,  a  bit  in  its  mouth,  which 
was  the  power  of  the  ephori,  established  an 
hundred  and  thirty  years  after  the  death  of 
Lycurgus.  Elatus  and  his  colleagues  were 
the  first  who  had  this  dignity  conferred  upon 
them  in  the  reign  of  King  Theopompus,  who, 
when  his  queen  upbraided  him  one  day  that 
he  would  leave  the  regal  power  to  his  children 
less  than  he  had  received  it  from  his  an¬ 
cestors,  said  in  answer,  “No,  greater;  for  it 
will  last  longer.”  For,  indeed,  their  preroga¬ 
tive  being  thus  reduced  within  reasonable 
bounds,  the  Spartan  kings  were  at  once 
freed  from  all  further  jealousies  and  conse¬ 
quent  danger,  and  never  experienced  the 
calamities  of  their  neighbours  at  Messene  and 
Argos,  who,  by  maintaining  their  prerogative 
too  strictly,  for  want  of  yielding  a  little  to 
the  populace,  lost  it  all. 

Indeed,  whosoever  shall  look  at  the  sedi¬ 
tion  and  misgovernment  which  befell  these 
bordering  nations  to  whom  they  were  as 
near  related  in  blood  as  situation,  will  find 
in  them  the  best  reason  to  admire  the  wisdom 
and  foresight  of  Lycurgus.  For  these  three 
states,  in  their  first  rise,  were  equal,  or,  if 
there  were  any  odds,  they  lay  on  the  side  of 
the  Messenians  and  Argives,  who,  in  the  first 
allotment,  were  thought  to  have  been  luckier 
than  the  Spartans;  yet  was  their  happiness 
of  but  small  continuance,  partly  the  tyran¬ 
nical  temper  of  their  kings  and  partly  the 
ungovernableness  of  the  people  quickly  bring¬ 
ing  upon  them  such  disorders,  and  so  com¬ 
plete  an  overthrow  of  all  existing  institu¬ 
tions,  as  clearly  to  show  how  truly  divine  a 
blessing  the  Spartans  had  had  in  that  wise 
lawgiver  who  gave  their  government  its 
happy  balance  and  temper.  But  of  this  I 
shall  say  more  in  its  due  place. 


36 

After  the  creation  of  the  thirty  senators, 
his  next  task,  and,  indeed,  the  most  hazardous 
he  ever  undertook,  was  the  making  a  new 
division  of  their  lands.  For  there  was  an  ex¬ 
treme  inequality  amongst  them,  and  their  state 
was  overloaded  with  a  multitude  of  indigent 
and  necessitous  persons,  while  its  whole  wealth 
had  centred  upon  a  very  few.  To  the  end, 
therefore,  that  he  might  expel  from  the  state 
arrogance  and  envy,  luxury  and  crime,  and 
those  yet  more  inveterate  diseases  of  want  and 
superfluity,  he  obtained  of  them  to  renounce 
their  properties,  and  to  consent  to  a  new  divi¬ 
sion  of  the  land,  and  that  they  should  live  all 
together  on  an  equal  footing;  merit  to  be  their 
only  road  to  eminence,  and  the  disgrace  of  evil, 
and  credit  of  worthy  acts,  their  one  measure  of 
difference  between  man  and  man. 

Upon  their  consent  to  these  proposals,  pro¬ 
ceeding  at  once  to  put  them  into  execution, 
he  divided  the  country  of  Laconia  in  general 
into  thirty  thousand  equal  shares,  and  the 
part  attached  to  the  city  of  Sparta  into  nine 
thousand;  these  he  distributed  among  the 
Spartans,  as  he  did  the  others  to  the  country 
citizens.  Some  authors  say  that  he  made  but 
six  thousand  lots  for  the  citizens  of  Sparta, 
and  that  King  Polydorus  added  three  thou¬ 
sand  more.  Others  say  that  Polydorus  doubled 
the  number  Lycurgus  had  made,  which,  ac¬ 
cording  to  them,  was  but  four  thousand  five 
hundred.  A  lot  was  so  much  as  to  yield, 
one  year  with  another,  about  seventy  bushels 
of  grain  for  the  master  of  the  family,  and 
twelve  for  his  wife,  with  a  suitable  propor¬ 
tion  of  oil  and  wine.  And  this  he  thought 
sufficient  to  keep  their  bodies  in  good  health 
and  strength;  superfluities  they  were  better 
without.  It  is  reported,  that,  as  he  returned 
from  a  journey  shortly  after  the  division  of 
the  lands,  in  harvest  time,  the  ground  being 
newly  reaped,  seeing  the  stacks  all  standing 
equal  and  alike,  he  smiled,  and  said  to  those 
about  him,  “Methinks  all  Laconia  looks  like 
one  family  estate  just  divided  among  a  num¬ 
ber  of  brothers.” 

Not  contented  with  this,  he  resolved  to 
make  a  division  of  their  movables  too,  that 
there  might  be  no  odious  distinction  or  in¬ 
equality  left  amongst  them;  but  finding  that 
it  would  be  very  dangerous  to  go  about  it 
openly,  he  took  another  course,  and  defeated 
their  avarice  by  the  following  stratagem:  he 
commanded  that  all  gold  and  silver  coin 
should  be  called  in,  and  that  only  a  sort  of 
money  made  of  iron  should  be  current,  a 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

great  weight  and  quantity  of  which  was  very 
little  worth;  so  that  to  lay  up  twenty  or 
thirty  pounds  there  was  required  a  pretty 
large  closet,  and,  to  remove  it,  nothing  less 
than  a  yoke  of  oxen.  With  the  diffusion  of 
this  money,  at  once  a  number  of  vices  were 
banished  from  Lacedaemon;  for  who  would 
rob  another  of  such  a  coin?  Who  would  un¬ 
justly  detain  or  take  by  force,  or  accept  as  a 
bribe,  a  thing  which  it  was  not  easy  to  hide, 
nor  a  credit  to  have,  nor  indeed  of  any  use  to 
cut  in  pieces?  For  when  it  was  just  red  hot, 
they  quenched  it  in  vinegar,  and  by  that  means 
spoilt  it,  and  made  it  almost  incapable  of  being 
worked. 

In  the  next  place,  he  declared  an  outlawry 
of  all  needless  and  superfluous  arts;  but 
here  he  might  almost  have  spared  his  procla¬ 
mation;  for  they  of  themselves  would  have 
gone  after  the  gold  and  silver,  the  money 
which  remained  being  not  so  proper  payment 
for  curious  work;  for,  being  of  iron,  it  was 
scarcely  portable,  neither,  if  they  should  take 
the  means  to  export  it,  would  it  pass  amongst 
the  other  Greeks,  who  ridiculed  it.  So  there 
was  now  no  more  means  of  purchasing  for¬ 
eign  goods  and  small  wares;  merchants  sent  no 
shiploads  into  Laconian  ports;  no  rhetoric-mas¬ 
ter,  no  itinerant  fortune-teller,  no  harlot-mon¬ 
ger,  or  gold  or  silversmith,  engraver,  or  jewel¬ 
ler,  set  foot  in  a  country  which  had  no  money; 
so  that  luxury,  deprived  little  by  little  of  that 
which  fed  and  fomented  it,  wasted  to  nothing 
and  died  away  of  itself.  For  the  rich  had  no 
advantage  here  over  the  poor,  as  their  wealth 
and  abundance  had  no  road  to  come  abroad  by 
but  were  shut  up  at  home  doing  nothing.  And 
in  this  way  they  became  excellent  artists  in 
common,  necessary  things;  bedsteads,  chairs, 
and  tables,  and  such  like  staple  utensils  in  a 
family,  were  admirably  well  made  there;  their 
cup,  particularly,  was  very  much  in  fashion, 
and  eagerly  bought  up  by  soldiers,  as  Critias 
reports;  for  its  colour  was  such  as  to  prevent 
water,  drunk  upon  necessity  and  disagreeable 
to  look  at,  from  being  noticed;  and  the  shape 
of  it  was  such  that  the  mud  stuck  to  the  sides, 
so  that  only  the  purer  part  came  to  the  drink¬ 
er’s  mouth.  For  this,  also,  they  had  to  thank 
their  lawgiver,  who,  by  relieving  the  artisans 
of  the  trouble  of  making  useless  things,  set 
them  to  show  their  skill  in  giving  beauty  to 
those  of  daily  and  indispensable  use. 

The  third  and  most  masterly  stroke  of  this 
great  lawgiver,  by  which  he  struck  a  yet  more 
effectual  blow  against  luxury  and  the  desire 


LYCURGUS 

of  riches,  was  the  ordinance,  he  made,  that 
they  should  all  eat  in  common,  of  the  same 
bread  and  same  meat,  and  of  kinds  that  were 
specified,  and  should  not  spend  their  lives 
at  home,  laid  on  costly  couches  at  splendid 
tables,  delivering  themselves  up  into  the 
hands  of  their  tradesmen  and  cooks,  to  fatten 
them  in  corners,  like  greedy  brutes,  and  to 
ruin  not  their  minds  only  but  their  very 
bodies  which,  enfeebled  by  indulgence  and 
excess,  would  stand  in  need  of  long  sleep, 
warm  bathing,  freedom  from  work,  and,  in 
a  word,  of  as  much  care  and  attendance  as 
if  they  were  continually  sick. 

It  was  certainly  an  extraordinary  thing  to 
have  brought  about  such  a  result  as  this,  but  a 
greater  yet  to  have  taken  away  from  wealth,  as 
Theophrastus  observes,  not  merely  the  prop¬ 
erty  of  being  coveted,  but  its  very  nature  of  be¬ 
ing  wealth.  For  the  rich,  being  obliged  to  go  to 
the  same  table  with  the  poor,  could  not  make 
use  of  or  enjoy  their  abundance,  nor  so  much 
as  please  their  vanity  by  looking  at  or  display¬ 
ing  it.  So  that  the  common  proverb,  that  Plu- 
tus,  the  god  of  riches,  is  blind,  was  nowhere 
in  all  the  world  literally  verified  but  in  Sparta. 
There,  indeed,  he  was  not  only  blind,  but  like 
a  picture,  without  either  life  or  motion.  Nor 
were  they  allowed  to  take  food  at  home  first, 
and  then  attend  the  public  tables,  for  every  one 
had  an  eye  upon  those  who  did  not  eat  and 
drink  like  the  rest,  and  reproached  them  with 
being  dainty  and  effeminate. 

This  last  ordinance  in  particular  exas¬ 
perated  the  wealthier  men.  They  collected  in 
a  body  against  Lycurgus,  and  from  ill  words 
came  to  throwing  stones,  so  that  at  length  he 
was  forced  to  run  out  of  the  market-place, 
and  make  to  sanctuary  to  save  his  life;  by 
good-hap  he  outran  all,  excepting  one  Al- 
cander,  a  young  man  otherwise  not  ill  ac¬ 
complished,  but  hasty  and  violent,  who  came 
up  so  close  to  him,  that  when  he  turned  to  see 
who  was  so  near  him,  he  struck  him  upon  the 
face  with  his  stick,  and  put  out  one  of  his  eyes. 
Lycurgus,  so  far  from  being  daunted  and  dis¬ 
couraged  by  this  accident,  stopped  short  and 
showed  his  disfigured  face  and  eye  beat  out  to 
his  countrymen;  they,  dismayed  and  ashamed 
at  the  sight,  delivered  Alcander  into  his  hands 
to  be  punished,  and  escorted  him  home,  with 
expressions  of  great  concern  for  his  ill-usage. 

Lycurgus,  having  thanked  them  for  their 
care  of  his  person,  dismissed  them  all,  ex¬ 
cepting  only  Alcander;  and,  taking  him  with 
him  into  his  house,  neither  did  nor  said 


37 

anything  severely  to  him,  but,  dismissing 
those  whose  place  it  was,  bade  Alcander  to 
wait  upon  him  at  table.  The  young  man,  who 
was  of  an  ingenuous  temper,  without  murmur¬ 
ing  did  as  he  was  commanded;  and  being 
thus  admitted  to  live  with  Lycurgus,  he  had 
an  opportunity  to  observe  in  him,  besides 
his  gentleness  and  calmness  of  temper,  an 
extraordinary  sobriety  and  an  indefatigable 
industry,  and  so,  from  an  enemy,  became  one 
of  his  most  zealous  admirers,  and  told  his 
friends  and  relations  that  Lycurgus  was  not 
that  morose  and  ill-natured  man  they  had 
formerly  taken  him  for,  but  the  one  mild  and 
gentle  character  of  the  world.  And  thus  did 
Lycurgus,  for  chastisement  of  his  fault,  make 
of  a  wild  and  passionate  young  man  one  of 
the  discreetest  citizens  of  Sparta. 

In  memory  of  this  accident,  Lycurgus  built 
a  temple  to  Minerva,  sur named  Optiletis;  op- 
tilus  being  the  Doric  of  these  parts  for  ophthal- 
mus,  the  eye.  Some  authors,  however,  of  whom 
Dioscorides  is  one  (who  wrote  a  treatise  on 
the  commonwealth  of  Sparta),  say  that  he  was 
wounded,  indeed,  but  did  not  lose  his  eye  with 
the  blow;  and  that  he  built  the  temple  in  grati¬ 
tude  for  the  cure.  Be  this  as  it  will,  certain  it  is, 
that,  after  this  misadventure,  the  Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans  made  it  a  rule  never  to  carry  so  much  as  a 
staff  into  their  public  assemblies. 

But  to  return  to  their  public  repasts; — 
these  had  several  names  in  Greek;  the  Cretans 
called  them  andria,  because  the  men  only 
came  to  them.  The  Lacedaemonians  called 
them  phiditia,  that  is,  by  changing  l  into  d, 
the  same  as  philitia,  love  feasts,  because  that, 
by  eating  and  drinking  together,  they  had 
opportunity  of  making  friends.  Or  perhaps 
from  phido,  parsimony,  because  they  were  so 
many  schools  of  sobriety;  or  perhaps  the 
first  letter  is  an  addition,  and  the  word  at 
first  was  editia,  from  edode,  eating.  They  met 
by  companies  of  fifteen,  more  or  less,  and 
each  of  them  stood  bound  to  bring  in  monthly 
a  bushel  of  meal,  eight  gallons  of  wine,  five 
pounds  of  cheese,  two  pounds  and  a  half  of 
figs,  and  some  very  small  sum  of  money  to 
buy  flesh  or  fish  with.  Besides  this,  when  any 
of  them  made  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  they  al¬ 
ways  sent  a  dole  to  the  common  hall;  and, 
likewise,  when  any  of  them  had  been  a  hunt¬ 
ing,  he  sent  thither  a  part  of  the  venison  he  had 
killed;  for  these  two  occasions  were  the  only 
excuses  allowed  for  supping  at  home.  The  cus¬ 
tom  of  eating  together  was  observed  strictly 
for  a  great  while  afterwards;  insomuch  that 


38 

King  Agis  himself,  after  having  vanquished 
the  Athenians,  sending  for  his  commons  at  his 
return  home,  because  he  desired  to  eat  private¬ 
ly  with  his  queen,  was  refused  them  by  the 
polemarchs;  which  refusal  when  he  resented  so 
much  as  to  omit  next  day  the  sacrifice  due  for  a 
war  happily  ended,  they  made  him  pay  a  fine. 

They  used  to  send  their  children  to  these 
tables  as  to  schools  of  temperance;  here  they 
were  instructed  in  state  affairs  by  listening 
to  experienced  statesmen;  here  they  learned 
to  converse  with  pleasantry,  to  make  jests 
without  scurrility  and  take  them  without  ill 
humour.  In  this  point  of  good  breeding,  the 
Lacedaemonians  excelled  particularly,  but  if 
any  man  were  uneasy  under  it,  upon  the 
least  hint  given,  there  was  no  more  to  be 
said  to  him.  It  was  customary  also  for  the 
eldest  man  in  the  company  to  say  to  each  of 
them,  as  they  came  in,  “Through  this”  (point¬ 
ing  to  the  door),  “no  words  go  out.” 

When  any  one  had  a  desire  to  be  admitted 
into  any  of  these  little  societies,  he  was  to  go 
through  the  following  probation:  each  man  in 
the  company  took  a  little  ball  of  soft  bread, 
which  they  were  to  throw  into  a  deep  basin, 
which  a  waiter  carried  round  upon  his  head; 
those  that  liked  the  person  to  be  chosen  drop¬ 
ped  their  ball  into  the  basin  without  altering 
its  figure,  and  those  who  disliked  him  pressed 
it  betwixt  their  fingers,  and  made  it  flat;  and 
this  signified  as  much  as  a  negative  voice.  And 
if  there  were  but  one  of  these  flattened  pieces 
in  the  basin,  the  suitor  was  rejected,  so  desirous 
were  they  that  all  the  members  of  the  company 
should  be  agreeable  to  each  other.  The  basin 
was  called  caddichus,  and  the  rejected  candi¬ 
date  had  a  name  thence  derived.  Their  most 
famous  dish  was  the  black  broth,  which  was 
so  much  valued  that  the  elderly  men  fed  only 
upon  that,  leaving  what  flesh  there  was  to  the 
younger. 

They  say  that  a  certain  king  of  Pontus,  hav¬ 
ing  heard  much  of  this  black  broth  of  theirs, 
sent  for  a  Lacedaemonian  cook  on  purpose  to 
make  him  some,  but  had  no  sooner  tasted  it 
than  he  found  it  extremely  bad,  which  the 
cook  observing,  told  him,  “Sir,  to  make  this 
broth  relish,  you  should  have  bathed  yourself 
first  in  the  river  Eurotas.” 

After  drinking  moderately,  every  man  went 
to  his  home  without  lights,  for  the  use  of 
them  was,  on  all  occasions,  forbid,  to  the  end 
that  they  might  accustom  themselves  to  march 
boldly  in  the  dark.  Such  was  the  common  fash¬ 
ion  of  their  meals. 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

Lycurgus  would  never  reduce  his  laws  into 
writing;  nay  there  is  a  Rhetra  expressly  to 
forbid  it.  For  he  thought  that  the  most  ma¬ 
terial  points,  and  such  as  most  directly  tended 
to  the  public  welfare,  being  imprinted  on  the 
hearts  of  their  youth  by  a  good  discipline, 
would  be  sure  to  remain,  and  would  find  a 
stronger  security,  than  any  compulsion  would 
be,  in  the  principles  of  action  formed  in  them 
by  their  best  lawgiver,  education.  And  as 
for  things  of  lesser  importance,  as  pecuniary 
contracts,  and  such  like,  the  forms  of  which 
have  to  be  changed  as  occasion  requires,  he 
thought  it  the  best  way  to  prescribe  no  posi¬ 
tive  rule  or  inviolable  usage  in  such  cases, 
willing  that  their  manner  and  form  should  be 
altered  according  to  the  circumstances  of  time, 
and  determinations  of  men  of  sound  judg¬ 
ment.  Every  end  and  object  of  law  and  enact¬ 
ment  it  was  his  design  education  should  effect. 

One,  then,  of  the  Rhetras  was,  that  their 
laws  should  not  be  written;  another  is  par¬ 
ticularly  levelled  against  luxury  and  expen¬ 
siveness,  for  by  it  it  was  ordained  that  the 
ceilings  of  their  houses  should  only  be 
wrought  by  the  axe,  and  their  gates  and 
doors  smoothed  only  by  the  saw.  Epaminon- 
das’s  famous  dictum  about  his  own  table,  that 
“Treason  and  a  dinner  like  this  do  not  keep 
company  together,”  may  be  said  to  have  been 
anticipated  by  Lycurgus.  Luxury  and  a  house 
of  this  kind  could  not  well  be  companions. 
For  a  man  might  have  a  less  than  ordinary 
share  of  sense  that  would  furnish  such  plain 
and  common  rooms  with  silver-footed  couches 
and  purple  coverlets  and  gold  and  silver 
plate.  Doubtless  he  had  good  reason  to  think 
that  they  would  proportion  their  beds  to 
their  houses,  and  their  coverlets  to  their  beds, 
and  the  rest  of  their  goods  and  furniture  to 
these.  It  is  reported  that  king  Leotychides, 
the  first  of  that  name,  was  so  little  used  to  the 
sight  of  any  other  kind  of  work,  that,  being  en¬ 
tertained  at  Corinth  in  a  stately  room,  he 
was  much  surprised  to  see  the  timber  and  ceil¬ 
ing  so  finely  carved  and  panelled,  and  asked 
his  host  whether  the  trees  grew  so  in  his  coun- 
try. 

A  third  ordinance  or  Rhetra  was,  that  they 
should  not  make  war  often,  or  long,  with  the 
same  enemy,  lest  that  they  should  train  and 
instruct  them  in  war,  by  habituating  them  to 
defend  themselves.  And  this  is  what  Agesilaus 
was  much  blamed  for,  a  long  time  after;  it  be¬ 
ing  thought,  that,  by  his  continual  incursions 
into  Bceotia,  he  made  the  Thebans  a  match  for 


LYCURGUS 

the  Lacedaemonians;  and  therefore  Antalcidas, 
seeing  him  wounded  one  day,  said  to  him,  that 
he  was  very  well  paid  for  taking  such  pains  to 
make  the  Thebans  good  soldiers,  whether  they 
would  or  no.  These  laws  were  called  the  Rhe- 
tras,  to  intimate  that  they  were  divine  sanc¬ 
tions  and  revelations. 

In  order  to  the  good  education  of  their 
youth  (which,  as  I  said  before,  he  thought  the 
most  important  and  noblest  work  of  a  lawgiv¬ 
er),  he  went  so  far  back  as  to  take  into  con¬ 
sideration  their  very  conception  and  birth,  by 
regulating  their  marriages.  For  Aristotle  is 
wrong  in  saying,  that,  after  he  had  tried  all 
ways  to  reduce  the  women  to  more  modesty 
and  sobriety,  he  was  at  last  forced  to  leave 
them  as  they  were,  because  that  in  the  absence 
of  their  husbands,  who  spent  the  best  part  of 
their  lives  in  the  wars,  their  wives,  whom  they 
were  obliged  to  leave  absolute  mistresses  at 
home,  took  great  liberties  and  assumed  the 
superiority;  and  were  treated  with  overmuch 
respect  and  called  by  the  title  of  lady  or  queen. 
The  truth  is,  he  took  in  their  case,  also,  all  the 
care  that  was  possible;  he  ordered  the  maidens 
to  exercise  themselves  with  wrestling,  running, 
throwing  the  quoit,  and  casting  the  dart,  to  the 
end  that  the  fruit  they  conceived  might,  in 
strong  and  healthy  bodies,  take  firmer  root  and 
find  better  growth,  and  withal  that  they,  with 
this  greater  vigour,  might  be  the  more  able  to 
undergo  the  pains  of  child-bearing. 

And  to  the  end  he  might  take  away  their 
overgreat  tenderness  and  fear  of  exposure  to 
the  air,  and  all  acquired  womanishness,  he  or¬ 
dered  that  the  young  women  should  go  naked 
in  the  processions,  as  well  as  the  young  men, 
and  dance,  too,  in  that  condition,  at  certain 
solemn  feasts,  singing  certain  songs,  whilst  the 
young  men  stood  around,  seeing  and  hearing 
them.  On  these  occasions  they  now  and  then 
made,  by  jests,  a  befitting  reflection  upon  those 
who  had  misbehaved  themselves  in  the  wars; 
and  again  sang  encomiums  upon  those  who 
had  done  any  gallant  action,  and  by  these 
means  inspired  the  younger  sort  with  an  emu¬ 
lation  of  their  glory.  Those  that  were  thus 
commended  went  away  proud,  elated,  and 
gratified  with  their  honour  among  the  maid¬ 
ens;  and  those  who  were  rallied  were  as  sensi¬ 
bly  touched  with  it  as  if  they  had  been  formally 
reprimanded;  and  so  much  the  more,  because 
the  kings  and  the  elders,  as  well  as  the  rest  of 
the  city,  saw  and  heard  all  that  passed.  Nor 
was  there  anything  shameful  in  this  nakedness 
of  the  young  women;  modesty  attended  them, 


39 

and  all  wantonness  was  excluded.  It  taught 
them  simplicity  and  a  care  for  good  health,  and 
gave  them  some  taste  of  higher  feelings,  ad¬ 
mitted  as  they  thus  were  to  the  field  of  noble 
action  and  glory.  Hence  it  was  natural  for 
them  to  think  and  speak  as  Gorgo,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  the  wife  of  Leonidas,  is  said  to  have  done, 
when  some  foreign  lady,  as  it  would  seem,  told 
her  that  the  women  of  Lacedaemon  were  the 
only  women  in  the  world  who  could  rule  men; 
“With  good  reason,”  she  said,  “for  we  are  the 
only  women  who  bring  forth  men.” 

These  public  processions  of  the  maidens, 
and  their  appearing  naked  in  their  exercises 
and  dancings,  were  incitements  to  marriage, 
operating  upon  the  young  with  the  rigour 
and  certainty,  as  Plato  says,  of  love,  if  not 
of  mathematics.  But  besides  all  this,  to  pro¬ 
mote  it  yet  more  effectually,  those  who  con¬ 
tinued  bachelors  were  in  a  degree  disfran¬ 
chised  by  law;  for  they  were  excluded  from 
the  sight  of  those  public  processions  in  which 
the  young  men  and  maidens  danced  naked, 
and,  in  winter-time,  the  officers  compelled 
them  to  march  naked  themselves  round  the 
market-place,  singing  as  they  went  a  certain 
song  to  their  own  disgrace,  that  they  justly 
suffered  this  punishment  for  disobeying  the 
laws.  Moreover,  they  were  denied  that  respect 
and  observance  which  the  younger  men  paid 
their  elders;  and  no  man,  for  example,  found 
fault  with  what  was  said  to  Dercyllidas, 
though  so  eminent  a  commander;  upon  whose 
approach  one  day,  a  young  man,  instead  of 
rising,  retained  his  seat,  remarking,  “No 
child  of  yours  will  make  room  for  me.” 

In  their  marriages,  the  husband  carried  off 
his  bride  by  a  sort  of  force;  nor  were  their 
brides  ever  small  and  of  tender  years,  but  in 
their  full  bloom  and  ripeness.  After  this,  she 
who  superintended  the  wedding  comes  and 
clips  the  hair  of  the  bride  close  round  her 
head,  dresses  her  up  in  man’s  clothes,  and 
leaves  her  upon  a  mattress  in  the  dark;  after¬ 
wards  comes  the  bridegroom,  in  his  everyday 
clothes,  sober  and  composed,  as  having  supped 
at  the  common  table,  and,  entering  privately 
into  the  room  where  the  bride  lies,  unties 
her  virgin  zone,  and  takes  her  to  himself;  and, 
after  staying  some  time  together,  he  returns 
composedly  to  his  own  apartment,  to  sleep  as 
usual  with  the  other  young  men. 

And  so  he  continues  to  do,  spending  his 
days,  and,  indeed,  his  nights,  with  them,  visit¬ 
ing  his  bride  in  fear  and  shame,  and  with  cir¬ 
cumspection,  when  he  thought  he  should  not 


40 

be  observed;  she,  also,  on  her  part,  using  her 
wit  to  help  and  find  favourable  opportunities 
for  their  meeting,  when  company  was  out  of 
the  way.  In  this  manner  they  lived  a  long  time, 
insomuch  that  they  sometimes  had  children  by 
their  wives  before  ever  they  saw  their  faces  by 
daylight.  Their  interviews,  being  thus  difficult 
and  rare,  served  not  only  for  continual  exercise 
of  their  self-control,  but  brought  them  together 
with  their  bodies  healthy  and  vigorous,  and 
their  affections  fresh  and  lively,  unsated  and 
undulled  by  easy  access  and  long  continuance 
with  each  other;  while  their  partings  were  al¬ 
ways  early  enough  to  leave  behind  unextin¬ 
guished  in  each  of  them  some  remaining  fire 
of  longing  and  mutual  delight. 

After  guarding  marriage  with  this  modesty 
and  reserve,  he  was  equally  careful  to  banish 
empty  and  womanish  jealousy.  For  this  ob¬ 
ject,  excluding  all  licentious  disorders,  he 
made  it,  nevertheless,  honourable  for  men  to 
give  the  use  of  their  wives  to  those  whom 
they  should  think  fit,  that  so  they  might  have 
children  by  them;  ridiculing  those  in  whose 
opinion  such  favours  are  so  unfit  for  participa¬ 
tion  as  to  fight  and  shed  blood  and  go  to  war 
about  it.  Lycurgus  allowed  a  man  who  was  ad¬ 
vanced  in  years  and  had  a  young  wife  to  rec¬ 
ommend  some  virtuous  and  approved  young 
man,  that  she  might  have  a  child  by  him,  who 
might  inherit  the  good  qualities  of  the  father, 
and  be  a  son  to  himself. 

On  the  other  side,  an  honest  man  who  had 
love  for  a  married  woman  upon  account  of 
her  modesty  and  the  well-favouredness  of  her 
children,  might,  without  formality,  beg  her 
company  of  her  husband,  that  he  might  raise, 
as  it  were,  from  this  plot  of  good  ground, 
worthy  and  well-allied  children  for  himself. 
And  indeed,  Lycurgus  was  of  a  persuasion 
that  children  were  not  so  much  the  property 
of  their  parents  as  of  the  whole  common¬ 
wealth,  and,  therefore,  would  not  have  his 
citizens  begot  by  the  first-comers,  but  by  the 
best  men  that  could  be  found;  the  laws  of 
other  nations  seemed  to  him  very  absurd  and 
inconsistent,  where  people  would  be  so  solicit¬ 
ous  for  their  dogs  and  horses  as  to  exert  inter¬ 
est  and  to  pay  money  to  procure  fine  breeding, 
and  yet  kept  their  wives  shut  up,  to  be  made 
mothers  only  by  themselves,  who  might  be 
foolish,  infirm,  or  diseased;  as  if  it  were  not 
apparent  that  children  of  a  bad  breed  would 
prove  their  bad  qualities  first  upon  those  who 
kept  and  were  rearing  them,  and  well-born 
children,  in  like  manner,  their  good  qualities. 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

These  regulations,  founded  on  natural  and 
social  grounds,  were  certainly  so  far  from 
that  scandalous  liberty  which  was  afterwards 
charged  upon  their  women,  that  they  knew 
not  what  adultery  meant.  It  is  told,  for  in¬ 
stance,  of  Geradas,  a  very  ancient  Spartan, 
that,  being  asked  by  a  stranger  what  punish¬ 
ment  their  law  had  appointed  for  adulterers, 
he  answered,  “There  are  no  adulterers  in  our 
country.”  “But,”  replied  the  stranger,  “sup¬ 
pose  there  were?”  “Then,”  answered  he, 
“the  offender  would  have  to  give  the  plaintiff 
a  bull  with  a  neck  so  long  as  that  he  might 
drink  from  the  top  of  Taygetus  of  the  Eurotas 
river  below  it.”  The  man,  surprised  at  this, 
said,  “Why,  ’tis  impossible  to  find  such  a 
bull.”  Geradas  smilingly  replied,  “  ’Tis  as 
possible  as  to  find  an  adulterer  in  Sparta.” 
So  much  I  had  to  say  of  their  marriages. 

Nor  was  it  in  the  power  of  the  father  to 
dispose  of  the  child  as  he  thought  fit;  he  was 
obliged  to  carry  it  before  certain  triers  at  a 
place  called  Lesche;  these  were  some  of  the 
elders  of  the  tribe  to  which  the  child  be¬ 
longed;  their  business  it  was  carefully  to  view 
the  infant,  and,  if  they  found  it  stout  and 
well  made,  they  gave  order  for  its  rearing, 
and  allotted  to  it  one  of  the  nine  thousand 
shares  of  land  above  mentioned  for  its  main¬ 
tenance,  but,  if  they  found  it  puny  and  ill¬ 
shaped,  ordered  it  to  be  taken  to  what  was 
called  the  Apothetae,  a  sort  of  chasm  under 
Taygetus;  as  thinking  it  neither  for  the  good 
of  the  child  itself,  nor  for  the  public  interest, 
that  it  should  be  brought  up,  if  it  did  not, 
from  the  very  outset,  appear  made  to  be 
healthy  and  vigorous. 

Upon  the  same  account,  the  women  did  not 
bathe  the  new-born  children  with  water,  as 
is  the  custom  in  all  other  countries,  but  with 
wine,  to  prove  the  temper  and  complexion 
of  their  bodies;  from  a  notion  they  had  that 
epileptic  and  weakly  children  faint  and  waste 
away  upon  their  being  thus  bathed,  while,  on 
the  contrary,  those  of  a  strong  and  vigorous 
habit  acquire  firmness  and  get  a  temper  by 
it,  like  steel. 

There  was  much  care  and  art,  too,  used  by 
the  nurses;  they  had  no  swaddling  bands;  the 
children  grew  up  free  and  unconstrained  in 
limb  and  form,  and  not  dainty  and  fanciful 
about  their  food;  not  afraid  in  the  dark,  or  of 
being  left  alone;  and  without  peevishness,  or 
ill-humour,  or  crying.  Upon  this  account,  Spar¬ 
tan  nurses  were  often  bought  up,  or  hired  by 
people  of  other  countries;  and  it  is  recorded 


LYCURGUS 

that  she  who  suckled  Alcibiades  was  a  Spartan; 
who,  however,  if  fortunate  in  his  nurse,  was 
not  so  in  his  preceptor;  his  guardian,  Pericles, 
as  Plato  tells  us,  chose  a  servant  for  that  office 
called  Zopyrus,  no  better  than  any  common 
slave. 

Lycurgus  was  of  another  mind;  he  would 
not  have  masters  bought  out  of  the  market 
for  his  young  Spartans,  nor  such  as  should 
sell  their  pains;  nor  was  it  lawful,  indeed,  for 
the  father  himself  to  breed  up  the  children 
after  his  own  fancy;  but  as  soon  as  they  were 
seven  years  old  they  were  to  be  enrolled  in 
certain  companies  and  classes,  where  they  all 
lived  under  the  same  order  and  discipline, 
doing  their  exercises  and  taking  their  play  to¬ 
gether.  Of  these,  he  who  showed  the  most  con¬ 
duct  and  courage  was  made  captain;  they  had 
their  eyes  always  upon  him,  obeyed  his  orders, 
and  underwent  patiently  whatsoever  punish¬ 
ment  he  inflicted;  so  that  the  whole  course  of 
their  education  was  one  continued  exercise  of 
a  ready  and  perfect  obedience.  The  old  men, 
too,  were  spectators  of  their  performances,  and 
often  raised  quarrels  and  disputes  among 
them,  to  have  a  good  opportunity  of  finding 
out  their  different  characters,  and  of  seeing 
which  would  be  valiant,  which  a  coward,  when 
they  should  come  to  more  dangerous  encoun¬ 
ters.  Reading  and  writing  they  gave  them,  just 
enough  to  serve  their  turn;  their  chief  care  was 
to  make  them  good  subjects,  and  to  teach  them 
to  endure  pain  and  conquer  in  battle.  To  this 
end,  as  they  grew  in  years,  their  discipline  was 
proportionately  increased;  their  heads  were 
close-clipped,  they  were  accustomed  to  go  bare¬ 
foot,  and  for  the  most  part  to  play  naked. 

After  they  were  twelve  years  old,  they  were 
no  longer  allowed  to  wear  any  undergarment; 
they  had  one  coat  to  serve  them  a  year;  their 
bodies  were  hard  and  dry,  with  but  little  ac¬ 
quaintance  of  baths  and  unguents;  these  hu¬ 
man  indulgences  they  were  allowed  only  on 
some  few  particular  days  in  the  year.  They 
lodged  together  in  little  bands  upon  beds 
made  of  the  rushes  which  grew  by  the  banks 
of  the  river  Eurotas,  which  they  were  to  break 
off  with  their  hands  without  a  knife;  if  it 
were  winter,  they  mingled  some  thistle-down 
with  their  rushes,  which  it  was  thought  had 
the  property  of  giving  warmth.  By  the  time 
they  were  come  to  this  age  there  was  not  any 
of  the  more  hopeful  boys  who  had  not  a  lover 
to  bear  him  company.  The  old  men,  too, 
had  an  eye  upon  them,  coming  often  to  the 
grounds  to  hear  and  see  them  contend  either 


41 

in  wit  or  strength  with  one  another,  and  this 
as  seriously  and  with  as  much  concern  as  if 
they  were  their  fathers,  their  tutors,  or  their 
magistrates;  so  that  there  scarcely  was  any 
time  or  place  without  some  one  present  to 
put  them  in  mind  of  their  duty,  and  punish 
them  if  they  had  neglected  it. 

Besides  all  this,  there  was  always  one  of 
the  best  and  honestest  men  in  the  city  ap¬ 
pointed  to  undertake  the  charge  and  govern¬ 
ance  of  them;  he  again  arranged  them  into 
their  several  bands,  and  set  over  each  of  them 
for  their  captain  the  most  temperate  and  bold¬ 
est  of  those  they  called  Irens,  who  were  usu¬ 
ally  twenty  years  old,  two  years  out  of  the 
boys;  and  the  oldest  of  the  boys,  again,  were 
Mell-Irens,  as  much  as  to  say,  who  would 
shortly  be  men.  This  young  man,  therefore, 
was  their  captain  when  they  fought  and  their 
master  at  home,  using  them  for  the  offices 
of  his  house;  sending  the  eldest  of  them  to 
fetch  wood,  and  the  weaker  and  less  able  to 
gather  salads  and  herbs,  and  these  they  must 
either  go  without  or  steal;  which  they  did 
by  creeping  into  the  gardens,  or  conveying 
themselves  cunningly  and  closely  into  the 
eating-houses;  if  they  were  taken  in  the  act, 
they  were  whipped  without  mercy,  for  thiev¬ 
ing  so  ill  and  awkwardly.  They  stole,  too, 
all  other  meat  they  could  lay  their  hands  on, 
looking  out  and  watching  all  opportunities, 
when  people  were  asleep  or  more  careless 
than  usual.  If  they  were  caught,  they  were 
not  only  punished  with  whipping,  but  hun¬ 
ger,  too,  being  reduced  to  their  ordinary  al¬ 
lowance,  which  was  but  very  slender,  and  so 
contrived  on  purpose,  that  they  might  set 
about  to  help  themselves,  and  be  forced  to 
exercise  their  energy  and  address. 

This  was  the  principal  design  of  their  hard 
fare;  there  was  another  not  inconsiderable, 
that  they  might  grow  taller;  for  the  vital  spir¬ 
its,  not  being  overburdened  and  oppressed  by 
too  great  a  quantity  of  nourishment;  which 
necessarily  discharges  itself  into  thickness  and 
breadth,  do,  by  their  natural  lightness,  rise; 
and  the  body,  giving  and  yielding  because  it 
is  pliant,  grows  in  height.  The  same  thing 
seems,  also,  to  conduce  to  beauty  of  shape; 
a  dry  and  lean  habit  is  a  better  subject  for 
nature’s  configuration,  which  the  gross  and 
over-fed  are  too  heavy  to  submit  to  properly. 
Just  as  we  find  that  women  who  take  physic 
whilst  they  are  with  child,  bear  leaner  and 
smaller  but  better-shaped  and  prettier  chil¬ 
dren;  the  material  they  come  of  having  been 


42 


more  pliable  and  easily  moulded.  The  reason, 
however,  I  leave  others  to  determine. 

To  return  from  whence  we  have  digressed. 
So  seriously  did  the  Lacedaemonian  children 
go  about  their  stealing,  that  a  youth,  having 
stolen  a  young  fox  and  hid  it  under  his  coat, 
suffered  it  to  tear  out  his  very  bowels  with  its 
teeth  and  claws  and  died  upon  the  place, 
rather  than  let  it  be  seen.  What  is  practised  to 
this  very  day  in  Lacedaemon  is  enough  to  gain 
credit  to  this  story,  for  I  myself  have  seen 
several  of  the  youths  endure  whipping  to 
death  at  the  foot  of  the  altar  of  Diana  sur- 
named  Orthia. 

The  Iren,  or  under-master,  used  to  stay  a 
little  with  them  after  supper,  and  one  of 
them  he  bade  to  sing  a  song,  to  another  he 
put  a  question  which  required  an  advised  and 
deliberate  answer;  for  example,  Who  was  the 
best  man  in  the  city?  What  he  thought  of 
such  an  action  of  such  a  man?  They  used 
them  thus  early  to  pass  a  right  judgment 
upon  persons  and  things,  and  to  inform  them¬ 
selves  of  the  abilities  or  defects  of  their  coun¬ 
trymen.  If  they  had  not  an  answer  ready  to 
the  question,  Who  was  a  good  or  who  an  ill- 
reputed  citizen,  they  were  looked  upon  as  of 
a  dull  and  careless  disposition,  and  to  have 
little  or  no  sense  of  virtue  and  honour;  be¬ 
sides  this,  they  were  to  give  a  good  reason  for 
what  they  said,  and  in  as  few  words  and  as 
comprehensive  as  might  be;  he  that  failed  of 
this,  or  answered  not  to  the  purpose,  had  his 
thumb  bit  by  the  master.  Sometimes  the  Iren 
did  this  in  the  presence  of  the  old  men  and 
magistrates,  that  they  might  see  whether  he 
punished  them  justly  and  in  due  measure  or 
not,  and  when  he  did  amiss,  they  would  not  re¬ 
prove  him  before  the  boys,  but,  when  they 
were  gone,  he  was  called  to  an  account  and  un¬ 
derwent  correction,  if  he  had  run  far  into  either 
of  the  extremes  of  indulgence  or  severity. 

Their  lovers  and  favourers,  too,  had  a  share 
in  the  young  boy’s  honour  or  disgrace;  and 
there  goes  a  story  that  one  of  them  was  fined 
by  the  magistrate,  because  the  lad  whom  he 
loved  cried  out  effeminately  as  he  was  fight¬ 
ing.  And  though  this  sort  of  love  was  so  ap¬ 
proved  among  them,  that  the  most  virtuous 
matrons  would  make  professions  of  it  to 
young  girls,  yet  rivalry  did  not  exist,  and  if 
several  men’s  fancies  met  in  one  person,  it 
was  rather  the  beginning  of  an  intimate 
friendship,  whilst  they  all  jointly  conspired 
to  render  the  object  of  their  affection  as  ac¬ 
complished  as  possible. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

They  taught  them,  also,  to  speak  with  a 
natural  and  graceful  raillery,  and  to  compre¬ 
hend  much  matter  of  thought  in  few  words. 
For  Lycurgus,  who  ordered,  as  we  saw,  that 
a  great  piece  of  money  should  be  but  of  an 
inconsiderable  value,  on  the  contrary  would 
allow  no  discourse  to  be  current  which  did 
not  contain  in  few  words  a  great  deal  of  use¬ 
ful  and  curious  sense;  children  in  Sparta,  by 
a  habit  of  long  silence,  came  to  give  just  and 
sententious  answers;  for,  indeed,  as  loose  and 
incontinent  livers  are  seldom  fathers  of  many 
children,  so  loose  and  incontinent  talkers  sel¬ 
dom  originate  many  sensible  words.  King 
Agis,  when  some  Athenian  laughed  at  their 
short  swords,  and  said  that  the  jugglers  on 
the  stage  swallowed  them  with  ease,  answered 
him,  “We  find  them  long  enough  to  reach 
our  enemies  with”;  and  as  their  swords  were 
short  and  sharp,  so,  it  seems  to  me,  were  their 
sayings.  They  reach  the  point  and  arrest  the 
attention  of  the  hearers  better  than  any. 

Lycurgus  himself  seems  to  have  been  short 
and  sententious,  if  we  may  trust  the  anecdotes 
of  him;  as  appears  by  his  answer  to  one  who 
by  all  means  would  set  up  a  democracy  in 
Lacedaemon.  “Begin,  friend,”  said  he,  “and 
set  it  up  in  your  family.”  Another  asked  him 
why  he  allowed  of  such  mean  and  trivial  sacri¬ 
fices  to  the  gods.  He  replied,  “That  we  may 
always  have  something  to  offer  to  them.” 
Being  asked  what  sort  of  martial  exercises 
or  combats  he  approved  of,  he  answered,  “All 
sorts,  except  that  in  which  you  stretch  out 
your  hands.”  Similar  answers,  addressed  to 
his  countrymen  by  letter,  are  ascribed  to  him; 
as,  being  consulted  how  they  might  best  op¬ 
pose  an  invasion  of  their  enemies,  he  returned 
this  answer,  “By  continuing  poor,  and  not 
coveting  each  man  to  be  greater  than  his 
fellow.”  Being  consulted  again  whether  it 
were  requisite  to  enclose  the  city  with  a  wall, 
he  sent  them  word,  “The  city  is  well  fortified 
which  hath  a  wall  of  men  instead  of  brick.” 
But  whether  these  letters  are  counterfeit  or 
not  is  not  easy  to  determine. 

Of  their  dislike  to  talkativeness,  the  follow¬ 
ing  apophthegms  are  evidence.  King  Leonidas 
said  to  one  who  held  him  in  discourse  upon 
some  useful  matter,  but  not  in  due  time  and 
place,  “Much  to  the  purpose,  Sir,  elsewhere.” 
King  Charilaus,  the  nephew  of  Lycurgus, 
being  asked  why  his  uncle  had  made  so  few 
laws,  answered,  “Men  of  few  words  require 
but  few  laws.”  When  one,  named  Hecatseus 
the  sophist,  because  that,  being  invited  to  the 


LYCURGUS 

public  table,  he  had  not  spoken  one  word  all 
supper-time,  Archidamidas  answered  in  his 
vindication,  “He  who  knows  how  to  speak, 
knows  also  when.” 

The  sharp  and  yet  not  ungraceful  retorts 
which  I  mentioned  may  be  instanced  as  fol¬ 
lows.  Demaratus,  being  asked  in  a  trouble¬ 
some  manner  by  an  importunate  fellow,  Who 
was  the  best  man  in  Lacedaemon?  answered 
at  last,  “He,  Sir,  that  is  the  least  like  you.” 
Some,  in  company  where  Agis  was,  much 
extolled  the  Eleans  for  their  just  and  honour¬ 
able  management  of  the  Olympic  games;  “In¬ 
deed,”  said  Agis,  “they  are  highly  to  be  com¬ 
mended  if  they  can  do  justice  one  day  in  five 
years.”  Theopompus  answered  a  stranger  who 
talked  much  of  his  affection  to  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians,  and  said  that  his  countrymen  called 
him  Philolacon  (a  lover  of  the  Lacedaemo¬ 
nians),  that  it  had  been  more  for  his  honour 
if  they  had  called  him  Philopolites  (a  lover 
of  his  own  countrymen).  And  Plistoanax,  the 
son  of  Pausanias,  when  an  orator  of  Athens 
said  the  Lacedaemonians  had  no  learning,  told 
him,  “You  say  true,  Sir;  we  alone  of  all  the 
Greeks  have  learned  none  of  your  bad  quali¬ 
ties.”  One  asked  Archidamidas  what  number 
there  might  be  of  the  Spartans,  he  answered: 
“Enough,  Sir,  to  keep  out  wicked  men.” 

We  may  see  their  character,  too,  in  their 
very  jests.  For  they  did  not  throw  them  out 
at  random,  but  the  very  wit  of  them  was 
grounded  upon  something  or  other  worth 
thinking  about.  For  instance,  one,  being  asked 
to  go  hear  a  man  who  exactly  counterfeited 
the  voice  of  a  nightingale,  answered,  “Sir,  I 
have  heard  the  nightingale  itself.”  Another, 
having  read  the  following  inscription  upon 
a  tomb — 

Seeding  to  quench  a  cruel  tyranny, 

They,  at  Selinus,  did  in  battle  die, 
said,  it  served  them  right;  for  instead  of  try¬ 
ing  to  quench  the  tyranny,  they  should  have 
let  it  burn  out.  A  lad,  being  offered  some 
game-cocks  that  would  die  upon  the  spot,  said 
that  he  cared  not  for  cocks  that  would  die, 
but  for  such  that  would  live  and  kill  others. 
Another,  seeing  people  easing  themselves  on 
seats,  said,  “God  forbid  I  should  sit  where  I 
could  not  get  up  to  salute  my  elders.”  In  short, 
their  answers  were  so  sententious  and  per¬ 
tinent,  that  one  said  well  that  intellectual 
much  more  truly  than  athletic  exercise  was 
the  Spartan  characteristic. 

Nor  was  their  instruction  in  music  and 
verse  less  carefully  attended  to  than  their 


43 

habits  of  grace  and  good-breeding  in  conver¬ 
sation.  And  their  very  songs  had  a  life  and 
spirit  in  them  that  inflamed  and  possessed 
men’s  minds  with  an  enthusiasm  and  ardour 
for  action;  the  style  of  them  was  plain  and 
without  affectation;  the  subject  always  serious 
and  moral;  most  usually,  it  was  in  praise  of 
such  men  as  had  died  in  defence  of  their 
country,  or  in  derision  of  those  that  had  been 
cowards;  the  former  they  declared  happy  and 
glorified;  the  life  of  the  latter  they  described 
as  most  miserable  and  abject.  There  were  also 
vaunts  of  what  they  would  do,  and  boasts  of 
what  they  had  done,  varying  with  the  various 
ages,  as,  for  example,  they  had  three  choirs 
in  their  solemn  festivals,  the  first  of  the  old 
men,  the  second  of  the  young  men,  and  the 
last  of  the  children;  the  old  men  began 
thus: — 

We  once  were  young,  and  brave,  and  strong; 

the  young  men  answered  them,  singing: — 
And  we’re  so  now,  come  on  and  try; 

the  children  came  last  and  said: — 

But  we'll  be  strongest  by  and  by. 

Indeed,  if  we  will  take  the  pains  to  consider 
their  compositions,  some  of  which  were  still 
extant  in  our  days,  and  the  airs  on  the  flute 
to  which  they  marched  when  going  to  battle, 
we  shall  find  that  Terpander  and  Pindar  had 
reason  to  say  that  musing  and  valour  were 
allied.  The  first  says  of  Lacedaemon — 

The  spear  and  song  in  her  do  meet, 

And  Justice  walks  about  her  street; 

And  Pindar — 

Councils  of  wise  elders  here, 

And  the  young  men's  conquering  spear, 

And  dance,  and  song,  and  Joy  appear; 

both  describing  the  Spartans  as  no  less  mus¬ 
ical  than  warlike;  in  the  words  of  one  of  their 
own  poets — 

With  the  iron  stern  and  sharp, 

Comes  the  playing  on  the  harp. 

For,  indeed,  before  they  engaged  in  battle,  the 
king  first  did  sacrifice  to  the  Muses,  in  all 
likelihood  to  put  them  in  mind  of  the  manner 
of  their  education,  and  of  the  judgment  that 
would  be  passed  upon  their  actions,  and  there¬ 
by  to  animate  them  to  the  performance  of 
exploits  that  should  deserve  a  record.  At  such 
times,  too,  the  Lacedaemonians  abated  a  little 
the  severity  of  their  manners  in  favour  of 
their  young  men,  suffering  them  to  curl  and 


44 


adorn  their  hair,  and  to  have  costly  arms  and 
fine  clothes;  and  were  well  pleased  to  see 
them,  like  proud  horses,  neighing  and  press¬ 
ing  to  the  course.  And,  therefore,  as  soon  as 
they  came  to  be  well-grown,  they  took  a  great 
deal  of  care  of  their  hair,  to  have  it  parted 
and  trimmed,  especially  against  a  day  of 
battle,  pursuant  to  a  saying  recorded  of  their 
lawgiver,  that  a  large  head  of  hair  added 
beauty  to  a  good  face,  and  terror  to  an  ugly 
one. 

When  they  were  in  the  field,  their  exercises 
were  generally  more  moderate,  their  fare  not 
so  hard,  nor  so  strict  a  hand  held  over  them 
by  their  officers,  so  that  they  were  the  only 
people  in  the  world  to  whom  war  gave  re¬ 
pose.  When  their  army  was  drawn  up  in 
battle  array,  and  the  enemy  near,  the  king 
sacrificed  a  goat,  commanded  the  soldiers 
to  set  their  garlands  upon  their  heads,  and 
the  pipers  to  play  the  tune  of  the  hymn  to 
Castor,  and  himself  began  the  paean  of  ad¬ 
vance.  It  was  at  once  a  magnificent  and  a  ter¬ 
rible  sight  to  see  them  march  on  to  the  tune 
of  their  flutes,  without  any  disorder  in  their 
ranks,  any  discomposure  in  their  minds,  or 
change  in  their  countenances,  calmly  and 
cheerfully  moving  with  the  music  to  the  dead¬ 
ly  fight.  Men,  in  this  temper,  were  not  likely  to 
be  possessed  with  fear  or  any  transport  of  fury, 
but  with  the  deliberate  valour  of  hope  and  as¬ 
surance,  as  if  some  divinity  were  attending  and 
conducting  them. 

The  king  had  always  about  his  person  some 
one  who  had  been  crowned  in  the  Olympic 
games;  and  upon  this  account  a  Lacedaemo¬ 
nian  is  said  to  have  refused  a  considerable 
present,  which  was  offered  to  him  upon  con¬ 
dition  that  he  would  not  come  into  the  lists; 
and  when  he  had  with  much  to-do  thrown 
his  antagonist,  some  of  the  spectators  saying 
to  him,  “And  now,  Sir  Lacedaemonian,  what 
are  you  the  better  for  your  victory?”  he  an¬ 
swered,  smiling,  “I  shall  fight  next  the  king.” 

After  they  had  routed  an  enemy,  they 
pursued  him  till  they  were  well  assured  of 
the  victory,  and  then  they  sounded  a  retreat, 
thinking  it  base  and  unworthy  of  a  Grecian 
people  to  cut  men  in  pieces,  who  had  given 
up  and  abandoned  all  resistance.  This  manner 
of  dealing  with  their  enemies  did  not  only 
show  magnanimity,  but  was  politic  too;  for, 
knowing  that  they  killed  only  those  who 
made  resistance,  and  gave  quarter  to  the  rest, 
men  generally  thought  it  their  best  way  to 
consult  their  safety  by  flight. 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

Hippius  the  sophist  says  that  Lycurgus  him¬ 
self  was  a  great  soldier  and  an  experienced 
commander.  Philostephanus  attributes  to  him 
the  first  division  of  the  cavalry  into  troops  of 
fifties  in  a  square  body;  but  Demetrius  the 
Phalerian  says  quite  the  contrary,  and  that  he 
made  all  his  laws  in  a  continued  peace.  And, 
indeed,  the  Olympic  holy  truce,  or  cessation 
of  arms,  that  was  procured  by  his  means  and 
management,  inclines  me  to  think  him  a 
kind-natured  man,  and  one  that  loved  quiet¬ 
ness  and  peace.  Notwithstanding  all  this  Her- 
mippus  tells  us  that  he  had  no  hand  in  the 
ordinance,  that  Iphitus  made  it,  and  Lycurgus 
came  only  as  a  spectator,  and  that  by  mere 
accident  too.  Being  there,  he  heard  as  it  were 
a  man’s  voice  behind  him,  blaming  and  won¬ 
dering  at  him  that  he  did  not  encourage  his 
countrymen  to  resort  to  the  assembly,  and, 
turning  about  and  seeing  no  man,  concluded 
that  it  was  a  voice  from  heaven,  and  upon 
this  immediately  went  to  Iphitus  and  assisted 
him  in  ordering  the  ceremonies  of  that  feast, 
which,  by  his  means,  were  better  established, 
and  with  more  repute  than  before. 

To  return  to  the  Lacedaemonians.  Their 
discipline  continued  still  after  they  were  full- 
grown  men.  No  one  was  allowed  to  live  after 
his  own  fancy;  but  the  city  was  a  sort  of  camp, 
in  which  every  man  had  his  share  of  provi¬ 
sions  and  business  set  out,  and  looked  upon 
himself  not  so  much  born  to  serve  his  own 
ends  as  the  interest  of  his  country.  Therefore 
if  they  were  commanded  nothing  else,  they 
went  to  see  the  boys  perform  their  exercises, 
to  teach  them  something  useful  or  to  learn  it 
themselves  of  those  who  knew  better.  And 
indeed  one  of  the  greatest  and  highest  bless¬ 
ings  Lycurgus  procured  his  people  was  the 
abundance  of  leisure  which  proceeded  from 
his  forbidding  to  them  the  exercise  of  any 
mean  and  mechanical  trade.  Of  the  money¬ 
making  that  depends  on  troublesome  going 
about  and  seeing  people  and  doing  business, 
they  had  no  need  at  all  in  a  state  where 
wealth  obtained  no  honour  or  respect.  The 
Helots  tilled  their  ground  for  them,  and  paid 
them  yearly  in  kind  the  appointed  quantity, 
without  any  trouble  of  theirs.  To  this  purpose 
there  goes  a  story  of  a  Lacedaemonian  who, 
happening  to  be  at  Athens  when  the  courts 
were  sitting,  was  told  of  a  citizen  that  had 
been  fined  for  living  an  idle  life,  and  was 
being  escorted  home  in  much  distress  of  mind 
by  his  condoling  friends;  the  Lacedaemonian 
was  much  surprised  at  it  and  desired  his 


LYCURGUS 

friend  to  show  him  the  man  who  was  con¬ 
demned  for  living  like  a  freeman.  So  much  be¬ 
neath  them  did  they  esteem  the  frivolous  de¬ 
votion  of  time  and  attention  to  the  mechanical 
arts  and  to  money-making. 

It  need  not  be  said  that  upon  the  prohibi¬ 
tion  of  gold  and  silver,  all  iawsuits  immedi¬ 
ately  ceased,  for  there  was  now  neither  ava¬ 
rice  nor  poverty  amongst  them,  but  equality, 
where  every  one’s  wants  were  supplied,  and  in¬ 
dependence,  because  those  wants  were  so  small. 
All  their  time,  except  when  they  were  in  the 
field,  was  taken  up  by  the  choral  dances  and 
the  festivals,  in  hunting,  and  in  attendance  on 
the  exercise-grounds  and  the  places  of  public 
conversation. 

Those  who  were  under  thirty  years  of  age 
were  not  allowed  to  go  into  the  market-place, 
but  had  the  necessaries  of  their  family  sup¬ 
plied  by  the  care  of  their  relations  and  lovers; 
nor  was  it  for  the  credit  of  elderly  men  to  be 
seen  too  often  in  the  market-place;  it  was 
esteemed  more  suitable  for  them  to  frequent 
the  exercise-grounds  and  places  of  conversa¬ 
tion,  where  they  spent  their  leisure  rationally 
in  conversation,  not  on  money-making  and 
market-prices,  but  for  the  most  part  in  passing 
judgment  on  some  action  worth  considering; 
extolling  the  good,  and  censuring  those  who 
were  otherwise,  and  that  in  a  light  and  spor¬ 
tive  manner,  conveying,  without  too  much 
gravity,  lessons  of  advice  and  improvement. 
Nor  was  Lycurgus  himself  unduly  austere;  it 
was  he  who  dedicated,  says  Sosibius,  the  little 
statue  of  Laughter.  Mirth,  introduced  season¬ 
ably  at  their  suppers  and  places  of  common 
entertainment,  was  to  serve  as  a  sort  of  sweet¬ 
meat  to  accompany  their  strict  and  hard  life. 
To  conclude,  he  bred  up  his  citizens  in  such 
a  way  that  they  neither  would  nor  could  live 
by  themselves;  they  were  to  make  themselves 
one  with  the  public  good,  and,  clustering  like 
bees  around  their  commander,  be  by  their 
zeal  and  public  spirit  carried  all  but  out  of 
themselves,  and  devoted  wholly  to  their  coun- 
try. 

What  their  sentiments  were  will  better  ap¬ 
pear  by  a  few  of  their  sayings.  Paedaretus,  not 
being  admitted  into  the  list  of  the  three  hun¬ 
dred,  returned  home  with  a  joyful  face,  well 
pleased  to  find  that  there  were  in  Sparta 
three  hundred  better  men  than  himself.  And 
Polycratidas,  being  sent  with  some  others  am¬ 
bassador  to  the  lieutenants  of  the  king  of 
Persia,  being  asked  by  them  whether  they 
came  in  a  private  or  in  a  public  character, 


45 

answered,  “In  a  public,  if  we  succeed;  if  not, 
in  a  private  character.”  Argileonis,  asking 
some  who  came  from  Amphipolis  if  her  son 
Brasidas  died  courageously  and  as  became  a 
Spartan,  on  their  beginning  to  praise  him  to 
a  high  degree,  and  saying  there  was  not  such 
another  left  in  Sparta,  answered,  “Do  not 
say  so;  Brasidas  was  a  good  and  brave  man, 
but  there  are  in  Sparta  many  better  than  he.” 

The  senate,  as  I  said  before,  consisted  of 
those  who  were  Lycurgus’s  chief  aiders  and 
assistants  in  his  plans.  The  vacancies  he  or¬ 
dered  to  be  supplied  out  of  the  best  and  most 
deserving  men  past  sixty  years  old,  and  we 
need  not  wonder  if  there  was  much  striving 
for  it;  for  what  more  glorious  competition 
could  there  be  amongst  men,  than  one  in 
which  it  was  not  contested  who  was  swiftest 
among  the  swift  or  strongest  of  the  strong, 
but  who  of  many  wise  and  good  was  wisest 
and  best,  and  fittest  to  be  intrusted  for  ever 
after,  as  the  reward  of  his  merits,  with  the 
supreme  authority  of  the  commonwealth,  and 
with  power  over  the  lives,  franchises,  and  high¬ 
est  interests  of  all  his  countrymen? 

The  manner  of  their  election  was  as  fol¬ 
lows:  The  people  being  called  together,  some 
selected  persons  were  locked  up  in  a  room 
near  the  place  of  election,  so  contrived  that 
they  could  neither  see  nor  be  seen,  but  could 
only  hear  the  noise  of  the  assembly  without; 
for  they  decided  this,  as  most  other  affairs 
of  moment,  by  the  shouts  of  the  people.  This 
done,  the  competitors  were  not  brought  in 
and  presented  all  together,  but  one  after 
another  by  lot,  and  passed  in  order  through 
the  assembly  without  speaking  a  word.  Those 
who  were  locked  up  had  writing-tables  with 
them,  in  which  they  recorded  and  marked 
each  shout  by  its  loudness,  without  knowing 
in  favour  of  which  candidate  each  of  them 
was  made,  but  merely  that  they  came  first, 
second,  third,  and  so  forth.  He  who  was  found 
to  have  the  most  and  loudest  acclamations 
was  declared  senator  duly  elected. 

Upon  this  he  had  a  garland  set  upon  his 
head,  and  went  in  procession  to  all  the 
temples  to  give  thanks  to  the  gods;  a  great 
number  of  young  men  followed  him  with 
applauses,  and  women,  also,  singing  verses  in 
his  honour,  and  extolling  the  virtue  and  hap¬ 
piness  of  his  life.  As  he  went  round  the  city 
in  this  manner,  each  of  his  relations  and 
friends  set  a  table  before  him,  saying,  “The 
city  honours  you  with  this  banquet”;  but  he, 
instead  of  accepting,  passed  round  to  the 


46 

common  table  where  he’  formerly  used  to 
eat,  and  was  served  as  before,  excepting  that 
now  he  had  a  second  allowance,  which  he 
took  and  put  by.  By  the  time  supper  was 
ended,  the  women  who  were  of  kin  to  him 
had  come  about  the  door;  and  he,  beckoning 
to  her  whom  he  most  esteemed,  presented  to 
her  the  portion  he  had  saved,  saying,  that  it 
had  been  a  mark  of  esteem  to  him,  and  was 
so  now  to  her;  upon  which  she  was  trium¬ 
phantly  waited  upon  home  by  the  women. 

Touching  burials,  Lycurgus  made  very  wise 
regulations;  for  first  of  all,  to  cut  off  all  super¬ 
stition,  he  allowed  them  to  bury  their  dead 
within  the  city,  and  even  round  about  their 
temples,  to  the  end  that  their  youth  might  be 
accustomed  to  such  spectacles,  and  not  be 
afraid  to  see  a  dead  body,  or  imagine  that  to 
touch  a  corpse  or  to  tread  upon  a  grave  would 
defile  a  man.  In  the  next  place,  he  com¬ 
manded  them  to  put  nothing  into  the  ground 
with  them,  except,  if  they  pleased,  a  few  olive 
leaves,  and  the  scarlet  cloth  that  they  were 
wrapped  in.  He  would  not  suffer  the  names 
to  be  inscribed,  except  only  of  men  who  fell 
in  the  wars,  or  women  who  died  in  a  sacred 
office.  The  time,  too,  appointed  for  mourning, 
was  very  short,  eleven  days;  on  the  twelfth, 
they  were  to  do  sacrifice  to  Ceres,  and  leave  it 
off;  so  that  we  may  see,  that  as  he  cut  off  all 
superfluity,  so  in  things  necessary  there  was 
nothing  so  small  and  trivial  which  did  not  ex¬ 
press  some  homage  of  virtue  or  scorn  of  vice. 

He  filled  Lacedaemon  all  through  with 
proofs  and  examples  of  good  conduct;  with 
the  constant  sight  of  which  from  their  youth 
up  the  people  would  hardly  fail  to  be  grad¬ 
ually  formed  and  advanced  in  virtue.  And 
this  was  the  reason  why  he  forbade  them  to 
travel  abroad,  and  go  about  acquainting  them¬ 
selves  with  foreign  rules  of  morality,  the  hab¬ 
its  of  ill-educated  people,  and  different  views 
of  government.  Withal  he  banished  from  Lace¬ 
daemon  all  strangers  who  would  not  give  a  very 
good  reason  for  their  coming  thither;  not  be¬ 
cause  he  was  afraid  lest  they  should  inform 
themselves  of  and  imitate  his  manner  of  gov¬ 
ernment  (as  Thucydides  says),  or  learn  any¬ 
thing  to  their  good;  but  rather  lest  they  should 
introduce  something  contrary  to  good  man¬ 
ners.  With  strange  people,  strange  words  must 
be  admitted;  these  novelties  produce  novelties 
in  thought;  and  on  these  follow  views  and  feel¬ 
ings  whose  discordant  character  destroys  the 
harmony  of  the  state.  He  was  as  careful  to  save 
his  city  from  the  infection  of  foreign  bad  hab- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

its,  as  men  usually  are  to  prevent  the  introduc¬ 
tion  of  a  pestilence. 

Hitherto  I,  for  my  part,  see  no  sign  of  in¬ 
justice  or  want  of  equity  in  the  laws  of  Ly¬ 
curgus,  though  some  who  admit  them  to  be 
well  contrived  to  make  good  soldiers,  pro¬ 
nounce  them  defective  in  point  of  justice.  The 
Cryptia,  perhaps  (if  it  were  one  of  Lycurgus’s 
ordinances,  as  Aristotle  says  it  was),  gave 
both  him  and  Plato,  too,  this  opinion  alike  of 
the  lawgiver  and  his  government.  By  this 
ordinance,  the  magistrates  despatched  pri¬ 
vately  some  of  the  ablest  of  the  young  men 
into  the  country,  from  time  to  time,  armed 
only  with  their  daggers,  and  taking  a  little 
necessary  provision  with  them;  in  the  day¬ 
time,  they  hid  themselves  in  out-of-the-way 
places,  and  there  lay  close,  but  in  the  night 
issued  out  into  the  highways,  and  killed  all 
the  Helots  they  could  light  upon;  sometimes 
they  set  upon  them  by  day,  as  they  were  at 
work  in  the  fields,  and  murdered  them.  As, 
also,  Thucydides,  in  his  history  of  the  Pelo¬ 
ponnesian  war,  tells  us,  that  a  good  number 
of  them,  after  being  singled  out  for  their 
bravery  by  the  Spartans,  garlanded,  as  en¬ 
franchised  persons,  and  led  about  to  all  the 
temples  in  token  of  honours,  shortly  after  dis¬ 
appeared  all  of  a  sudden,  being  about  the 
number  of  two  thousand;  and  no  man  either 
then  or  since  could  give  an  account  how  they 
came  by  their  deaths.  And  Aristotle,  in  par¬ 
ticular,  adds,  that  the  ephori,  so  soon  as  they 
were  entered  into  their  office,  used  to  declare 
war  against  them,  that  they  might  be  mas¬ 
sacred  without  a  breach  of  religion. 

It  is  confessed,  on  all  hands,  that  the  Spar¬ 
tans  dealt  with  them  very  hardly;  for  it  was  a 
common  thing  to  force  them  to  drink  to  ex¬ 
cess,  and  to  lead  them  in  that  condition  into 
their  public  halls,  that  the  children  might  see 
what  a  sight  a  drunken  man  is;  they  made 
them  to  dance  low  dances,  and  sing  ridiculous 
songs,  forbidding  them  expressly  to  meddle 
with  any  of  a  better  kind.  And  accordingly, 
when  the  Thebans  made  their  invasion  into 
Laconia,  and  took  a  great  number  of  the 
Helots,  they  could  by  no  means  persuade 
them  to  sing  the  verses  of  Terpander,  Ale¬ 
man,  or  Spendon,  “For,”  said  they,  “the 
masters  do  not  like  it.”  So  that  it  was  truly 
observed  by  one,  that  in  Sparta  he  who  was 
free  was  most  so,  and  he  that  was  a  slave 
there,  the  greatest  slave  in  the  world.  For  my 
part,  I  am  of  opinion  that  these  outrages  and 
cruelties  began  to  be  exercised  in  Sparta  at  a 


LYCURGUS 

later  time,  especially  after  the  great  earth¬ 
quake,  when  the  Helots  made  a  general  insur¬ 
rection,  and,  joining  with  the  Messenians,  laid 
the  country  waste,  and  brought  the  greatest 
danger  upon  the  city.  For  I  cannot  persuade 
myself  to  ascribe  to  Lycurgus  so  wicked  and 
barbarous  a  course,  judging  of  him  from  the 
gentleness  of  his  disposition  and  justice  upon 
all  other  occasions;  to  which  the  oracle  also 
testified. 

When  he  perceived  that  his  more  important 
institutions  had  taken  root  in  the  minds  of 
his  countrymen,  that  custom  had  rendered 
them  familiar  and  easy,  that  his  common¬ 
wealth  was  now  grown  up  and  able  to  go 
alone,  then,  as  Plato  somewhere  tells  us,  the 
Maker  of  the  world,  when  first  he  saw  it 
existing  and  beginning  its  motion,  felt  joy, 
even  so  Lycurgus,  viewing  with  joy  and  satis¬ 
faction  the  greatness  and  beauty  of  his  polit¬ 
ical  structure,  now  fairly  at  work  and  in  mo¬ 
tion,  conceived  the  thought  to  make  it  im¬ 
mortal  too,  and,  as  far  as  human  forecast 
could  reach,  to  deliver  it  down  unchangeable 
to  posterity.  He  called  an  extraordinary  as¬ 
sembly  of  all  the  people,  and  told  them  that 
he  now  thought  everything  reasonably  well 
established,  both  for  the  happiness  and  the 
virtue  of  the  state;  but  that  there  was  one 
thing  still  behind,  of  the  greatest  importance, 
which  he  thought  not  fit  to  impart  until  he 
had  consulted  the  oracle;  in  the  meantime,  his 
desire  was  that  they  would  observe  the  laws 
without  any  the  least  alteration  until  his  re¬ 
turn,  and  then  he  would  do  as  the  god  should 
direct  him.  They  all  consented  readily,  and 
bade  him  hasten  his  journey;  but,  before  he  de¬ 
parted,  he  administered  an  oath  to  the  two 
kings,  the  senate,  and  the  whole  commons,  to 
abide  by  and  maintain  the  established  form  of 
polity  until  Lycurgus  should  be  come  back. 

This  done,  he  set  out  for  Delphi,  and,  hav¬ 
ing  sacrificed  to  Apollo,  asked  him  whether 
the  laws  he  had  established  were  good,  and 
sufficient  for  a  people’s  happiness  and  virtue. 
The  oracle  answered  that  the  laws  were  ex¬ 
cellent,  and  that  the  people,  while  it  observed 
them,  should  live  in  the  height  of  renown. 
Lycurgus  took  the  oracle  in  writing,  and  sent 
it  over  to  Sparta;  and,  having  sacrificed  the 
second  time  to  Apollo,  and  taken  leave  of  his 
friends  and  his  son,  he  resolved  that  the 
Spartans  should  not  be  released  from  the  oath 
they  had  taken,  and  that  he  would,  of  his 
own  act,  close  his  life  where  he  was. 

He  was  now  about  that  age  in  which  life 


47 

was  still  tolerable,  and  yet  might  be  quitted 
without  regret.  Everything,  moreover,  about 
him  was  in  a  sufficiently  prosperous  condi¬ 
tion.  He  therefore  made  an  end  of  himself  by 
a  total  abstinence  from  food,  thinking  it  a 
statesman’s  duty  to  make  his  very  death,  if 
possible,  an  act  of  service  to  the  state,  and 
even  in  the  end  of  his  life  to  give  some  ex¬ 
ample  of  virtue  and  effect  some  useful  pur¬ 
pose.  He  would,  on  the  one  hand,  crown  and 
consummate  his  own  happiness  by  a  death 
suitable  to  so  honourable  a  life,  and  on  the 
other  hand,  would  secure  to  his  countrymen 
the  enjoyment  of  the  advantages  he  had  spent 
his  life  in  obtaining  for  them,  since  they  had 
solemnly  sworn  the  maintenance  of  his  insti¬ 
tutions  until  his  return. 

Nor  was  he  deceived  in  his  expectations, 
for  the  city  of  Lacedaemon  continued  the  chief 
city  of  all  Greece  for  the  space  of  five  hun¬ 
dred  years,  in  strict  observance  of  Lycurgus’s 
laws;  in  all  which  time  there  was  no  manner 
of  alteration  made,  during  the  reign  of  four¬ 
teen  kings  down  to  the  time  of  Agis,  the  son 
of  Archidamus.  For  the  new  creation  of  the 
ephori,  though  thought  to  be  in  favour  of  the 
people,  was  so  far  from  diminishing,  that  it 
very  much  heightened,  the  aristocratical  char¬ 
acter  of  the  government. 

In  the  time  of  Agis,  gold  and  silver  first 
flowed  into  Sparta,  and  with  them  all  those 
mischiefs  which  attend  the  immoderate  de¬ 
sire  of  riches.  Lysander  promoted  this  dis¬ 
order;  for  by  bringing  in  rich  spoils  from  the 
wars,  although  himself  incorrupt,  he  yet  by 
this  means  filled  his  country  with  avarice  and 
luxury,  and  subverted  the  laws  and  ordi¬ 
nances  of  Lycurgus;  so  long  as  which  were 
in  force,  the  aspect  presented  by  Sparta  was 
rather  that  of  a  rule  of  life  followed  by  one 
wise  and  temperate  man,  than  of  the  political 
government  of  a  nation.  And  as  the  poets 
feign  of  Hercules,  that,  with  his  lion’s  skin 
and  his  club,  he  went  over  the  world,  punish¬ 
ing  lawless  and  cruel  tyrants,  so  may  it  be 
said  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  that,  with  a  com¬ 
mon  staff  and  a  coarse  coat,  they  gained 
the  willing  and  joyful  obedience  of  Greece, 
through  whose  whole  extent  they  suppressed 
unjust  usurpations  and  despotisms,  arbitrated 
in  war,  and  composed  civil  dissensions;  and 
this  often  without  so  much  as  taking  down 
one  buckler,  but  barely  by  sending  some  one 
single  deputy  to  whose  direction  all  at  once 
submitted,  like  bees  swarming  and  taking 
their  places  around  their  prince.  Such  a  fund 


48 

of  order  and  equity,  enough  and  to  spare  for 
others,  existed  in  their  state. 

And  therefore  I  cannot  but  wonder  at  those 
who  say  that  the  Spartans  were  good  subjects, 
but  bad  governors,  and  for  proof  of  it  allege 
a  saying  of  King  Theopompus,  who  when 
one  said  that  Sparta  held  up  so  long  because 
their  kings  could  command  so  well,  replied, 
“Nay,  rather  because  the  people  know  so  well 
how  to  obey.”  For  people  do  not  obey,  unless 
rulers  know  how  to  command;  obedience  is 
a  lesson  taught  by  commanders.  A  true  leader 
himself  creates  the  obedience  of  his  own  fol¬ 
lowers;  as  it  is  the  last  attainment  in  the  art 
of  riding  to  make  a  horse  gentle  and  tractable, 
so  is  it  of  the  science  of  government,  to  inspire 
men  with  a  willingness  to  obey.  The  Lacedae¬ 
monians  inspired  men  not  with  a  mere  will¬ 
ingness,  but  with  an  absolute  desire  to  be 
their  subjects.  For  they  did  not  send  petitions 
to  them  for  ships  or  money,  or  a  supply  of 
armed  men,  but  only  for  a  Spartan  com¬ 
mander;  and,  having  obtained  one,  used  him 
with  honour  and  reverence;  so  the  Sicilians 
behaved  to  Gylippus,  the  Chalcidians  to  Bra- 
sidas,  and  all  the  Greeks  in  Asia  to  Lysander, 
Callicratidas,  and  Agesilaus;  they  styled  them 
the  composers  and  chasteners  of  each  people  or 
prince  they  were  sent  to,  and  had  their  eyes  al¬ 
ways  fixed  upon  the  city  of  Sparta  itself,  as  the 
perfect  model  of  good  manners  and  wise  gov¬ 
ernment. 

The  rest  seemed  as  scholars,  they  the  mas¬ 
ters  of  Greece;  and  to  this  Stratonicus  pleas¬ 
antly  alluded,  when  in  jest  he  pretended  to 
make  a  law  that  the  Athenians  should  con¬ 
duct  religious  processions  and  the  mysteries, 
the  Eleans  should  preside  at  the  Olympic 
games,  and,  if  either  did  amiss,  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians  be  beaten.  Antisthenes,  too,  one  of 
the  scholars  of  Socrates,  said,  in  earnest,  of 
the  Thebans,  when  they  were  elated  by  their 
victory  at  Leuctra,  that  they  looked  like 
schoolboys  who  had  beaten  their  master. 

However,  it  was  not  the  design  of  Lycurgus 
that  his  city  should  govern  a  great  many 
others;  he  thought  rather  that  the  happiness 
of  a  state,  as  a  private  man,  consisted  chiefly 
in  the  exercise  of  virtue,  and  in  the  concord 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

of  the  inhabitants;  his  aim,  therefore,  in  all 
his  arrangements,  was  to  make  and  keep  them 
free-minded,  self-dependent,  and  temperate. 
And  therefore  all  those  who  have  written  well 
on  politics,  as  Plato,  Diogenes,  and  Zeno,  have 
taken  Lycurgus  for  their  model,  leaving  be¬ 
hind  them,  however,  mere  projects  and 
words;  whereas  Lycurgus  was  the  author, 
not  in  writing  but  in  reality,  of  a  government 
which  none  else  could  so  much  as  copy;  and 
while  men  in  general  have  treated  the  individ¬ 
ual  philosophic  character  as  unattainable,  he, 
by  the  example  of  a  complete  philosophic  state, 
raised  himself  high  above  all  other  lawgivers 
of  Greece.  And  so  Aristotle  says  they  did  him 
less  honour  at  Lacedaemon  after  his  death  than 
he  deserved,  although  he  has  a  temple  there, 
and  they  offer  sacrifices  yearly  to  him  as  to  a 
god. 

It  is  reported  that  when  his  bones  were 
brought  home  to  Sparta  his  tomb  was  struck 
with  lightning,  an  accident  which  befell  no 
eminent  person  but  himself  and  Euripides, 
who  was  buried  at  Arethusa  in  Macedonia; 
and  it  may  serve  that  poet’s  admirers  as  a 
testimony  in  his  favour,  that  he  had  in  this 
the  same  fate  with  that  holy  man  and  fa¬ 
vourite  of  the  gods.  Some  say  Lycurgus  died 
in  Cirrha;  Apollothemis  says,  after  he  had 
come  to  Elis;  Timaeus  and  Aristoxenus,  that 
he  ended  his  life  in  Crete;  Aristoxenus  adds 
that  his  tomb  is  shown  by  the  Cretans  in  the 
district  of  Pergamus,  near  the  strangers’  road. 
He  left  an  only  son,  Antiorus,  on  whose 
death  without  issue  his  family  became  extinct. 
But  his  relations  and  friends  kept  up  an  annual 
commemoration  of  him  down  to  a  long  time 
after;  and  the  days  of  the  meeting  were  called 
Lycurgides.  Aristocrates,  the  son  of  Hipparch¬ 
us,  says  that  he  died  in  Crete,  and  that  his  Cre¬ 
tan  friends,  in  accordance  with  his  own  re¬ 
quest,  when  they  had  burned  his  body,  scat¬ 
tered  the  ashes  into  the  sea;  for  fear  lest,  if  his 
relics  should  be  transported  to  Lacedaemon,  the 
people  might  pretend  to  be  released  from  their 
oaths,  and  make  innovations  in  the  govern¬ 
ment.  Thus  much  may  suffice  for  the  life  and 
actions  of  Lycurgus. 

V  V  V 


NUMA  POMPILIUS 

LEGENDARY,  8TH-7TH  CENTURY  B.C. 


Though  the  pedigrees  of  noble  families 
of  Rome  go  back  in  exact  form  as  far 
as  Numa  Pompilius,  yet  there  is  great 
diversity  amongst  historians  concerning  the 
time  in  which  he  reigned;  a  certain  writer 
called  Clodius,  in  a  book  of  his  entitled  Stric¬ 
tures  on  Chronology ,  avers  that  the  ancient 
registers  of  Rome  were  lost  when  the  city 
was  sacked  by  the  Gauls,  and  that  those 
which  are  now  extant  were  conterfeited,  to 
flatter  and  serve  the  humour  of  some  men  who 
wished  to  have  themselves  derived  from  some 
ancient  and  noble  lineage,  though  in  reality 
with  no  claim  to  it.  And  though  it  be  common¬ 
ly  reported  that  Numa  was  a  scholar  and  a  fa¬ 
miliar  acquaintance  of  Pythagoras,  yet  it  is 
again  contradicted  by  others,  who  affirm  that 
he  was  acquainted  with  neither  the  Greek  lan¬ 
guage  nor  learning,  and  that*  he  was  a  person 
of  that  natural  talent  and  ability  as  of  himself 
to  attain  to  virtue,  or  else  that  he  found  some 
barbarian  instructor  superior  to  Pythagoras. 
Some  affirm,  also,  that  Pythagoras  was  not  con¬ 
temporary  with  Numa,  but  lived  at  least  five 
generations  after  him;  and  that  some  other  Py¬ 
thagoras,  a  native  of  Sparta,  who,  in  the  six¬ 
teenth  Olympiad,  in  the  third  year  of  which 
Numa  became  king,  won  a  prize  at  the  Olym¬ 
pic  race,  might,  in  his  travel  through  Italy, 
have  gained  acquaintance  with  Numa,  and  as¬ 
sisted  him  in  the  constitution  of  his  kingdom; 
whence  it  comes  that  many  Laconian  laws  and 
customs  appear  amongst  the  Roman  institu¬ 
tions.  Yet,  in  any  case,  Numa  was  descended 
of  the  Sabines,  who  declare  themselves  to  be  a 
colony  of  the  Lacedaemonians.  And  chronol- 
ogy,  in  general,  is  uncertain;  especially  when 
fixed  by  the  lists  of  victors  in  the  Olympic 
games,  which  were  published  at  a  late  period 
by  Hippias  the  Elean,  and  rest  on  no  positive 
authority.  Commencing,  however,  at  a  con¬ 
venient  point,  we  will  proceed  to  give  the  most 
noticeable  events  that  are  recorded  of  the  life 
of  Numa. 

It  was  the  thirty-seventh  year,  counted  from 
the  foundation  of  Rome,  when  Romulus,  then 
reigning,  did,  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  month 


of  July,  called  the  Caprotine  Nones,  offer  a 
public  sacrifice  at  the  Goat’s  Marsh,  in  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome.  Sud¬ 
denly  the  sky  was  darkened,  a  thick  cloud  of 
storm  and  rain  settled  on  the  earth;  the  com¬ 
mon  people  fled  in  affright,  and  were  dis¬ 
persed;  and  in  this  whirlwind  Romulus  dis¬ 
appeared,  his  body  being  never  found  either 
living  or  dead.  A  foul  suspicion  presently  at¬ 
tached  to  the  patricians,  and  rumours  were 
current  among  the  people  as  if  that  they, 
weary  of  kingly  government,  and  exasperated 
of  late  by  the  imperious  deportment  of  Rom¬ 
ulus  towards  them,  had  plotted  against  his 
life  and  made  him  away,  that  so  they  might 
assume  the  authority  and  government  into 
their  own  hands.  This  suspicion  they  sought 
to  turn  aside  by  decreeing  divine  honours  to 
Romulus,  as  to  one  not  dead  but  translated 
to  a  higher  condition.  And  Proculus,  a  man  of 
note,  took  oath  that  he  saw  Romulus  caught 
up  into  heaven  in  his  arms  and  vestments,  and 
heard  him,  as  he  ascended,  cry  out  that  they 
should  hereafter  style  him  by  the  name  of 
Quirinus. 

This  trouble,  being  appeased,  was  followed 
by  another,  about  the  election  of  a  new  king; 
for  the  minds  of  the  original  Romans  and 
the  new  inhabitants  were  not  as  yet  grown 
into  that  perfect  unity  of  temper,  but  that 
there  were  diversities  of  factions  amongst  the 
commonalty,  and  jealousies  and  emulations 
amongst  the  senators;  for  though  all  agreed 
that  it  was  necessary  to  have  a  king,  yet  what 
person  or  of  which  nation  was  matter  of  dis¬ 
pute.  For  those  who  had  been  builders  of  the 
city  with  Romulus,  and  had  already  yielded  a 
share  of  their  lands  and  dwellings  to  the  Sa¬ 
bines,  were  indignant  at  any  pretension  on 
their  part  to  rule  over  their  benefactors.  On  the 
other  side,  the  Sabines  could  plausibly  allege, 
that,  at  their  king  Tatius’s  decease,  they  had 
peaceably  submitted  to  the  sole  command  of 
Romulus;  so  now  their  turn  was  come  to  have 
a  king  chosen  out  of  their  own  nation;  nor  did 
they  esteem  themselves  to  have  combined  with 
the  Romans  as  inferiors,  nor  to  have  contrib- 


49 

ARCHBISHOP  MiTTY  HIGH  SCHOOL  LIBRARY 

San  Jose,  California 


50 

utecl  less  than  they  to  the  increase  of  Rome, 
which  without  their  numbers  and  association, 
could  scarcely  have  merited  the  name  of  a  city. 

Thus  did  both  parties  argue  and  dispute 
their  cause;  but  lest  meanwhile  discord,  in 
the  absence  of  all  command,  should  occasion 
general  confusion,  it  was  agreed  that  the  hun¬ 
dred  and  fifty  senators  should  interchange¬ 
ably  execute  the  office  of  supreme  magistrate, 
and  each  in  succession,  with  the  ensigns  of 
royalty,  should  offer  the  solemn  sacrifices  and 
despatch  public  business  for  the  space  of  six 
hours  by  day  and  six  by  night;  which  vicissi¬ 
tude  and  equal  distribution  of  power  would 
preclude  all  rivalry  amongst  the  senators  and 
envy  from  the  people,  when  they  should  be¬ 
hold  one,  elevated  to  the  degree  of  a  king, 
levelled  within  the  space  of  a  day  to  the  con¬ 
dition  of  a  private  citizen.  This  form  of  gov¬ 
ernment  is  termed,  by  the  Romans,  interreg¬ 
num. 

Nor  yet  could  they,  by  this  plausible  and 
modest  way  of  rule,  escape  suspicion  and 
clamour  of  the  vulgar,  as  though  they  were 
changing  the  form  of  government  to  an  olig¬ 
archy,  and  designing  to  keep  the  supreme 
power  in  a  sort  of  wardship  under  themselves, 
without  ever  proceeding  to  choose  a  king. 
Both  parties  came  at  length  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  one  should  choose  a  king  out  of  the 
body  of  the  other;  the  Romans  make  a  choice 
of  a  Sabine,  or  the  Sabines  name  a  Roman; 
this  was  esteemed  the  best  expedient  to  put 
an  end  to  all  party  spirit,  and  the  prince  who 
should  be  chosen  would  have  an  equal  affec¬ 
tion  to  the  one  party  as  his  electors  and  to 
the  other  as  his  kinsmen.  The  Sabines  re¬ 
mitted  the  choice  to  the  original  Romans, 
and  they,  too,  on  their  part,  were  more  in¬ 
clinable  to  receive  a  Sabine  king  elected  by 
themselves  than  to  see  a  Roman  exalted  by 
the  Sabines.  Consultations  being  accordingly 
held,  they  named  Numa  Pompilius,  of  the 
Sabine  race,  a  person  of  that  high  reputation 
for  excellence,  that,  though  he  were  not  actu¬ 
ally  residing  at  Rome,  yet  he  was  no  sooner 
nominated  than  accepted  by  the  Sabines,  with 
acclamation  almost  greater  than  that  of  the 
electors  themselves. 

The  choice  being  declared  and  made  known 
to  the  people,  principal  men  of  both  parties 
were  appointed  to  visit  and  entreat  him,  that 
he  would  accept  the  administration  of  the 
government.  Numa  resided  at  a  famous  city 
of  the  Sabines  called  Cures,  whence  the  Ro¬ 
mans  and  Sabines  gave  themselves  the  joint 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

name  of  Quirites.  Pomponius,  an  illustrious 
person,  was  his  father,  and  he  the  youngest  of 
his  four  sons,  being  (as  it  had  been  divinely 
ordered)  born  on  the  twenty-first  day  of  April, 
the  day  of  the  foundation  of  Rome.  He  was  en¬ 
dued  with  a  soul  rarely  tempered  by  nature, 
and  disposed  to  virtue,  which  he  had  yet  more 
subdued  by  discipline,  a  severe  life,  and  the 
study  of  philosophy;  means  which  had  not  only 
succeeded  in  expelling  the  baser  passions,  but 
also  the  violent  and  rapacious  temper  which 
barbarians  are  apt  to  think  highly  of;  true 
bravery,  in  his  judgment,  was  regarded  as  con¬ 
sisting  in  the  subjugation  of  our  passions  by 
reason. 

He  banished  all  luxury  and  softness  from 
his  own  home,  and  while  citizens  alike  and 
strangers  found  in  him  an  incorruptible  judge 
and  counsellor,  in  private  he  devoted  himself 
not  to  amusement  or  lucre,  but  to  the  wor¬ 
ship  of  the  immortal  gods,  and  rational  con¬ 
templation  of  their  divine  power  and  nature. 
So  famous  was  he,  that  Tatius,  the  colleague 
of  Romulus,  chose  him  for  his  son-in-law, 
and  gave  him  his  only  daughter,  which,  how¬ 
ever,  did  not  stimulate  his  vanity  to  desire 
to  dwell  with  his  father-in-law  at  Rome;  he 
rather  chose  to  inhabit  with  his  Sabines,  and 
cherish  his  own  father  in  his  old  age;  and 
Tatia,  also,  preferred  the  private  condition  of 
her  husband  before  the  honours  and  splen¬ 
dour  she  might  have  enjoyed  with  her  father. 
She  is  said  to  have  died  after  she  had  been 
married  thirteen  years,  and  then  Numa,  leav¬ 
ing  the  conversation  of  the  town,  betook  him¬ 
self  to  a  country  life,  and  in  a  solitary  manner 
frequented  the  groves  and  fields  consecrated 
to  the  gods,  passing  his  life  in  desert  places. 
And  this  in  particular  gave  occasion  to  the 
story  about  the  goddess,  namely,  that  Numa 
did  not  retire  from  human  society  out  of  any 
melancholy  or  disorder  of  mind,  but  because 
he  had  tasted  the  joys  of  more  elevated  inter¬ 
course,  and,  admitted  to  celestial  wedlock  in 
the  love  and  converse  of  the  goddess  Egeria, 
had  attained  to  blessedness,  and  to  a  divine 
wisdom. 

The  story  evidently  resembles  those  very 
ancient  fables  which  the  Phrygians  have  re¬ 
ceived  and  still  recount  of  Attis,  the  Bithyni- 
ans  of  Herodotus,  the  Arcadians  of  Endy- 
mion,  not  to  mention  several  others  who  were 
thought  blessed  and  beloved  of  the  gods;  nor 
does  it  seem  strange  if  God,  a  lover,  not  of 
horses  or  birds,  but  men,  should  not  disdain 
to  dwell  with  the  virtuous  and  converse  with 


NUMA  POMPILIUS 

the  wise  and  temperate  soul,  though  it  be  alto¬ 
gether  hard,  indeed,  to  believe,  that  any  god  or 
daemon  is  capable  of  a  sensual  or  bodily  love 
and  passion  for  any  human  form  or  beauty. 
Though,  indeed,  the  wise  Egyptians  do  not 
plausibly  make  the  distinction,  that  it  may  be 
possible  for  a  divine  spirit  so  to  apply  itself  to 
the  nature  of  a  woman,  as  to  imbreed  in  her 
the  first  beginnings  of  generation,  while  on  the 
other  side  they  conclude  it  impossible  for  the 
male  kind  to  have  any  intercourse  or  mixture 
by  the  body  with  any  divinity,  not  considering, 
however,  that  what  takes  place  on  the  one  side 
must  also  take  place  on  the  other;  intermix¬ 
ture,  by  force  of  terms,  is  reciprocal.  Not  that 
it  is  otherwise  than  befitting  to  suppose  that 
the  gods  feel  towards  men  affection,  and  love, 
in  the  sense  of  affection,  and  in  the  form  of 
care  and  solicitude  for  their  virtue  and  their 
good  dispositions.  And,  therefore,  it  was  no 
error  of  those  who  feigned,  that  Phorbas,  Hya- 
cinthus,  and  Admetus  were  beloved  by  Apollo; 
or  that  Hippolytus  the  Sicyonian  was  so  much 
in  his  favour,  that,  as  often  as  he  sailed  from 
Sicyon  to  Cirrha,  the  Pythian  prophetess  ut¬ 
tered  this  heroic  verse,  expressive  of  the  god’s 
attention  and  joy: 

Now  doth  Hippolytus  return  again, 

And  venture  his  dear  lije  upon  the  main . 

It  is  reported,  also,  that  Pan  became  enam¬ 
oured  of  Pindar  for  his  verses,  and  the  divine 
power  rendered  honour  to  Hesiod  and  Archi¬ 
lochus  after  their  death  for  the  sake  of  the 
Muses;  there  is  a  statement,  also,  that  Aescul¬ 
apius  sojourned  with  Sophocles  in  his  lifetime, 
of  which  many  proofs  still  exist,  and  that, 
when  he  was  dead,  another  deity  took  care  for 
his  funeral  rites.  And  so  if  any  credit  may  be 
given  to  these  instances,  why  should  we  judge 
it  incongruous,  that  a  like  spirit  of  the  gods 
should  visit  Zaleucus,  Minos,  Zoroaster,  Ly- 
curgus,  and  Numa,  the  controllers  of  king¬ 
doms,  and  the  legislators  for  commonwealths? 
Nay,  it  may  be  reasonable  to  believe,  that  the 
gods,  with  a  serious  purpose,  assist  at  the  coun¬ 
cils  and  serious  debates  of  such  men,  to  inspire 
and  direct  them;  and  visit  poets  and  musicians, 
if  at  all,  in  their  more  sportive  moods;  but,  for 
difference  of  opinion  here,  as  Bacchylides  said, 
“the  road  is  broad.”  For  there  is  no  absurdity 
in  the  account  also  given,  that  Lycurgus  and 
Numa,  and  other  famous  lawgivers,  having 
the  task  of  subduing  perverse  and  refractory 
multitudes,  and  of  introducing  great  innova¬ 
tions,  themselves  made  this  pretension  to  di¬ 
vine  authority,  which,  if  not  true,  assuredly 


51 

was  expedient  for  the  interests  of  those  it  im¬ 
posed  upon. 

Numa  was  about  forty  years  of  age  when 
the  ambassadors  came  to  make  him  offers  of 
the  kingdom;  the  speakers  were  Proculus  and 
Velesus,  one  or  other  of  whom  it  had  been 
thought  the  people  would  elect  as  their  new 
king;  the  original  Romans  being  for  Proculus, 
and  the  Sabines  for  Velesus.  Their  speech  was 
very  short,  supposing  that,  when  they  came  to 
tender  a  kingdom,  there  needed  little  to  per¬ 
suade  to  an  acceptance;  but,  contrary  to  their 
expectations,  they  found  that  they  had  to  use 
many  reasons  and  entreaties  to  induce  one,  that 
lived  in  peace  and  quietness,  to  accept  the  gov¬ 
ernment  of  a  city  whose  foundation  and  in¬ 
crease  had  been  made,  in  a  manner,  in  war. 

In  presence  of  his  father  and  his  kinsman 
Marcius,  he  returned  answer  that  “Every  alter¬ 
ation  of  a  man’s  life  is  dangerous  to  him;  but 
madness  only  could  induce  one  who  needs 
nothing,  and  is  satisfied  with  everything,  to 
quit  a  life  he  is  accustomed  to;  which,  what¬ 
ever  else  it  is  deficient  in,  at  any  rate  has  the 
advantage  of  certainty  over  one  wholly  doubt¬ 
ful  and  unknown.  Though,  indeed,  the  diffi¬ 
culties  of  this  government  cannot  even  be 
called  unknown;  Romulus,  who  first  held  it, 
did  not  escape  the  suspicion  of  having  plotted 
against  the  life  of  his  colleague  Tatius;  nor  the 
senate  the  like  accusation,  of  having  treason¬ 
ably  murdered  Romulus.  Yet  Romulus  had  the 
advantage  to  be  thought  divinely  born  and  mi¬ 
raculously  preserved  and  nurtured.  My  birth 
was  mortal;  I  was  reared  and  instructed  by 
men  that  are  known  to  you.  The  very  points  of 
my  character  that  are  most  commended  mark 
me  as  unfit  to  reign, — love  of  retirement  and  of 
studies  inconsistent  with  business,  a  passion 
that  has  become  inveterate  in  me  for  peace,  for 
unwarlike  occupations,  and  for  the  society  of 
men  whose  meetings  are  but  those  of  worship 
and  of  kindly  intercourse,  whose  lives  in  gen¬ 
eral  are  spent  upon  their  farms  and  their  pas¬ 
tures.  I  should  but  be,  methinks,  a  laughing¬ 
stock,  while  I  should  go  about  to  inculcate  the 
worship  of  the  gods  and  give  lessons  in  the 
love  of  justice  and  the  abhorrence  of  violence 
and  war,  to  a  city  whose  needs  are  rather  for  a 
captain  than  for  a  king.” 

The  Romans,  perceiving  by  these  words 
that  he  was  declining  to  accept  the  kingdom, 
were  the  more  instant  and  urgent  with  him 
that  he  would  not  forsake  and  desert  them 
in  this  condition,  and  suffer  them  to  relapse, 
as  they  must,  into  their  former  sedition  and 


52 

civil  discord,  there  being  no  person  on  whom 
both  parties  could  accord  but  on  himself.  And, 
at  length,  his  father  and  Marcius,  taking  him 
aside,  persuaded  him  to  accept  a  gift  so  noble 
in  itself,  and  tendered  to  him  rather  from 
heaven  than  from  men.  “Though,”  said  they, 
“you  neither  desire  riches,  being  content  with 
what  you  have,  nor  court  the  fame  of  authority, 
as  having  already  the  more  valuable  fame  of 
virtue,  yet  you  will  consider  that  government 
itself  is  a  service  of  God,  who  now  calls  out 
into  action  your  qualities  of  justice  and  wis¬ 
dom,  which  were  not  meant  to  be  left  useless 
and  unemployed.  Cease,  therefore,  to  avoid 
and  turn  your  back  upon  an  office  which,  to  a 
wise  man,  is  a  field  for  great  and  honourable 
actions,  for  the  magnificent  worship  of  the 
gods,  and  for  the  introduction  of  habits  of  pi¬ 
ety,  which  authority  alone  can  effect  amongst 
a  people.  Tatius,  though  a  foreigner,  was  be¬ 
loved,  and  the  memory  of  Romulus  has  re¬ 
ceived  divine  honours;  and  who  knows  but 
that  this  people,  being  victorious,  may  be  sati¬ 
ated  with  war,  and,  content  with  the  trophies 
and  spoils  they  have  acquired,  may  be,  above 
all  things,  desirous  to  have  a  pacific  and  justice- 
loving  prince  to  lead  them  to  good  order  and 
quiet?  But,  if,  indeed,  their  desires  are  uncon¬ 
trollably  and  madly  set  on  war,  were  it  not 
better,  then,  to  have  the  reins  held  by  such  a 
moderating  hand  as  is  able  to  divert  the  fury 
another  way,  and  that  your  native  city  and  the 
whole  Sabine  nation  should  possess  in  you  a 
bond  of  goodwill  and  friendship  with  this 
young  and  growing  power?” 

With  these  reasons  and  persuasions  several 
auspicious  omens  are  said  to  have  concurred, 
and  the  zeal,  also,  of  his  fellow-citizens,  who, 
on  understanding  what  message  the  Roman 
ambassadors  had  brought  him,  entreated  him 
to  accompany  them,  and  to  accept  the  king¬ 
dom  as  a  means  to  unanimity  and  concord  be¬ 
tween  the  nations. 

Numa,  yielding  to  these  inducements,  hav¬ 
ing  first  performed  divine  sacrifice,  proceeded 
to  Rome,  being  met  on  his  way  by  the  senate 
and  people,  who,  with  an  impatient  desire, 
came  forth  to  receive  him;  the  women,  also, 
welcomed  him  with  joyful  acclamations,  and 
sacrifices  were  offered  for  him  in  all  the  tem¬ 
ples,  and  so  universal  was  the  joy,  that  they 
seemed  to  be  receiving,  not  a  new  king,  but  a 
new  kingdom.  In  this  manner  he  descended 
into  the  forum,  where  Spurius  Vettius,  whose 
turn  it  was  to  be  interrex  at  that  hour,  put  it  to 
the  vote;  and  all  declared  him  king. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Then  the  regalities  and  robes  of  authority 
were  brought  to  him;  but  he  refused  to  be  in¬ 
vested  with  them  until  he  had  first  consulted 
and  been  confirmed  by  the  gods;  so  being  ac¬ 
companied  by  the  priests  and  augurs,  he  as¬ 
cended  the  Capitol,  which  at  that  time  the  Ro¬ 
mans  called  the  Tarpeian  Hill.  Then  the  chief 
of  the  augurs  covered  Numa’s  head,  and  turned 
his  face  towards  the  south,  and,  standing  be¬ 
hind  him,  laid  his  right  hand  on  his  head,  and 
prayed,  turning  his  eyes  every  way,  in  expecta¬ 
tion  of  some  auspicious  signal  from  the  gods. 
It  was  wonderful,  meantime,  with  what  si¬ 
lence  and  devotion  the  multitude  stood  assem¬ 
bled  in  the  forum,  in  similar  expectation  and 
suspense,  till  auspicious  birds  appeared  and 
passed  on  the  right.  Then  Numa,  apparelling 
himself  in  his  royal  robes,  descended  from  the 
hill  to  the  people,  by  whom  he  was  received 
and  congratulated  with  shouts  and  acclama¬ 
tions  of  welcome,  as  a  holy  king,  and  beloved 
of  all  the  gods. 

The  first  thing  he  did  at  his  entrance  into 
government  was  to  dismiss  the  band  of  three 
hundred  men  which  had  been  Romulus’s 
life-guard,  called  by  him  Celeres,  saying  that 
he  would  not  distrust  those  who  put  con¬ 
fidence  in  him;  nor  rule  over  a  people  that 
distrusted  him.  The  next  thing  he  did  was 
to  add  to  the  two  priests  of  Jupiter  and  Mars 
a  third,  in  honour  of  Romulus,  whom  he 
called  the  Flamen  Quirinalis.  The  Romans 
anciently  called  their  priests  flamines,  by  cor¬ 
ruption  of  the  word  pilamines,  from  a  certain 
cap  which  they  wore,  called  pileus.  In  those 
times  Greek  words  were  more  mixed  with  the 
Latin  than  at  present;  thus  also  the  royal  robe, 
which  is  called  Icena,  Juba  says,  is  the  same  as 
the  Greek  chlcena;  and  that  the  name  of  Ca- 
millus,  given  to  the  boy  with  both  his  parents 
living,  who  serves  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  was 
taken  from  the  name  given  by  some  Greeks  to 
Mercury,  denoting  his  office  of  attendance  on 
the  gods. 

When  Numa  had,  by  such  measures,  won 
the  favour  and  affection  of  the  people,  he  set 
himself  without  delay  to  the  task  of  bring¬ 
ing  the  hard  and  iron  Roman  temper  to 
somewhat  more  of  gentleness  and  equity. 
Plato’s  expression  of  a  city  in  high  fever  was 
never  more  applicable  than  to  Rome  at  that 
time;  in  its  origin  formed  by  daring  and 
warlike  spirits,  whom  bold  and  desperate  ad¬ 
venture  brought  thither  from  every  quarter, 
it  had  found  in  perpetual  wars  and  incursions 
on  its  neighbours  its  after  sustenance  and 


NUMA  POMPILIUS 

means  of  growth,  and  in  conflict  with  danger 
the  source  of  new  strength;  like  pilds,  which 
the  blows  of  the  hammer  serve  to  fix  into 
the  ground.  Wherefore  Numa,  judging  it  no 
slight  undertaking  to  mollify  and  bend  to 
peace  the  presumptuous  and  stubborn  spirits 
of  this  people,  began  to  operate  upon  them 
with  the  sanctions  of  religion.  He  sacrificed 
often  and  used  processions  and  religious 
dances,  in  which  most  commonly  he  officiated 
in  person;  by  such  combinations  of  solemnity 
with  refined  and  humanising  pleasures,  seek¬ 
ing  to  win  over  and  mitigate  their  fiery  and 
warlike  tempers.  At  times,  also,  he  filled 
their  imaginations  with  religious  terrors,  pro¬ 
fessing  that  strange  apparitions  had  been 
seen,  and  dreadful  voices  heard;  thus  sub¬ 
duing  and  humbling  their  minds  by  a  sense 
of  supernatural  fears. 

This  method  which  Numa  used  made  it 
believed  that  he  had  been  much  conversant 
with  Pythagoras;  for  in  the  philosophy  of  the 
one,  as  in  the  policy  of  the  other,  man’s  rela¬ 
tions  to  the  deity  occupy  a  great  place.  It  is  said, 
also,  that  the  solemnity  of  his  exterior  garb  and 
gestures  was  adopted  by  him  from  the  same 
feeling  with  Pythagoras.  For  it  is  said  of  Py¬ 
thagoras,  that  he  had  taught  an  eagle  to  come 
at  his  call,  and  stoop  down  to  him  in  his  flight; 
and  that,  as  he  passed  among  the  people  as¬ 
sembled  at  the  Olympic  games,  he  showed 
them  his  golden  thigh;  besides  many  other 
strange  and  miraculous  seeming  practices,  on 
which  Timon  the  Philasian  wrote  the  distich — 
Who,  of  the  glory  of  a  juggler  proud, 

With  solemn  tal\  imposed  upon  the  crowd. 

In  like  manner  Numa  spoke  of  a  certain 
goddess  or  mountain  nymph  that  was  in 
love  with  him,  and  met  him  in  secret,  as 
before  related;  and  professed  that  he  enter¬ 
tained  familiar  conversation  with  the  Muses, 
to  whose  teaching  he  ascribed  the  greatest 
part  of  his  revelations;  and  amongst  them, 
above  all,  he  recommended  to  the  veneration 
of  the  Romans  one  in  particular,  whom  he 
named  Tacita,  the  silent;  which  he  did  per¬ 
haps  in  imitation  and  honour  of  the  Pytha¬ 
gorean  silence.  His  opinion,  also,  of  images 
is  very  agreeable  to  the  doctrine  of  Pytha¬ 
goras;  who  conceived  of  the  first  principle  of 
being  as  transcending  sense  and  passion,  in- 

1  visible  and  incorrupt,  and  only  to  be  ap¬ 
prehended  by  abstract  intelligence.  So  Numa 
forbade  the  Romans  to  represent  God  in  the 
form  of  man  or  beast,  nor  was  there  any 
painted  or  graven  image  of  a  deity  admitted 


53 

amongst  them  for  the  space  of  the  first  hun¬ 
dred  and  seventy  years,  all  which  time  their 
temples  and  chapels  were  kept  free  and  pure 
from  images;  to  such  baser  objects  they  deemed 
it  impious  to  liken  the  highest,  and  all  access 
to  God  impossible,  except  by  the  pure  act  of 
the  intellect.  His  sacrifices,  also,  had  great  si¬ 
militude  to  the  ceremonial  of  Pythagoras,  for 
they  were  not  celebrated  with  effusion  of  blood, 
but  consisted  of  flour,  wine,  and  the  least  costly 
offerings. 

Other  external  proofs,  too,  are  urged  to 
show  the  connection  Numa  had  with  Pytha¬ 
goras.  The  comic  writer  Epicharmus,  an  an¬ 
cient  author,  and  of  the  school  of  Pythagoras, 
in  a  book  of  his  dedicated  to  Antenor,  records 
that  Pythagoras  was  made  a  freeman  of 
Rome.  Again,  Numa  gave  to  one  of  his  four 
sons  the  name  of  Mamercus,  which  was  the 
name  of  one  of  the  sons  of  Pythagoras;  from 
whence,  as  they  say,  sprang  that  ancient  patri¬ 
cian  family  of  the  Afinilli,  for  that  the  king 
gave  him  in  sport  the  surname  of  dSmilius,  for 
his  engaging  and  graceful  manner  in  speaking. 
I  remember,  too,  that  when  I  was  at  Rome,  I 
heard  many  say,  that,  when  the  oracle  directed 
two  statues  to  be  raised,  one  to  the  wisest  and 
another  to  the  most  valiant  man  in  Greece, 
they  erected  two  of  brass,  one  representing 
Alcibiades,  and  the  other  Pythagoras. 

But  to  pass  by  these  matters,  which  are 
full  of  uncertainty  and  not  so  important  as  to 
be  worth  our  time  to  insist  on  them,  the  orig¬ 
inal  constitution  of  the  priests,  called  Pontif- 
ices,  is  ascribed  unto  Numa,  and  he  himself 
was,  it  is  said,  the  first  of  them;  and  that  they 
have  the  name  of  Pontifices  from  potens,  pow¬ 
erful,  because  they  attend  the  service  of  the 
gods,  who  have  power  and  command  over  all. 
Others  make  the  word  refer  to  exceptions  of 
impossible  cases;  the  priests  were  to  perform 
all  the  duties  possible  to  them;  if  anything  lay 
beyond  their  power,  the  exception  was  not  to 
be  cavilled  at.  The  most  common  opinion  is 
the  most  absurd,  which  derives  this  word  from 
pons,  and  assigns  the  priests  the  title  of  bridge- 
makers.  The  sacrifices  performed  on  the  bridge 
were  amongst  the  most  sacred  and  ancient, 
and  the  keeping  and  repairing  of  the  bridge 
attached,  like  any  other  public  sacred  office,  to 
the  priesthood.  It  was  accounted  not  simply 
unlawful,  but  a  positive  sacrilege,  to  pull  down 
the  wooden  bridge;  which  moreover  is  said,  in 
obedience  to  an  oracle,  to  have  been  built  en¬ 
tirely  of  timber  and  fastened  with  wooden 
pins,  without  nails  or  cramps  of  iron.  The 


54 

stone  bridge  was  built  a  very  long  time  after 
when  /Emilius  was  quaestor,  and  they  do,  in¬ 
deed,  say  also  that  the  wooden  bridge  was  not 
so  old  as  Numa’s  time,  but  was  finished  by 
Ancus  Marcius,  when  he  was  king,  who  was 
the  grandson  of  Numa  by  his  daughter. 

The  office  of  Pontifex  Maximus,  or  chief 
priest,  was  to  declare  and  interpret  the  divine 
law,  or,  rather,  to  preside  over  sacred  rites; 
he  not  only  prescribed  rules  for  public  cere¬ 
mony,  but  regulated  the  sacrifices  of  private 
persons,  not  suffering  them  to  vary  from  es¬ 
tablished  custom,  and  giving  information  to 
every  one  of  what  was  requisite  for  purposes 
of  worship  or  supplication.  He  was  also  guard¬ 
ian  of  the  vestal  virgins,  the  institution  of 
whom,  and  of  their  perpetual  fire,  was  attrib¬ 
uted  to  Numa,  who,  perhaps,  fancied  the 
charge  of  pure  and  uncorrupted  flames  would 
be  fitly  intrusted  to  chaste  and  unpolluted  per¬ 
sons,  or  that  fire,  which  consumes,  but  pro¬ 
duces  nothing,  bears  an  analogy  to  the  virgin 
estate. 

In  Greece,  wherever  a  perpetual  holy  fire 
is  kept,  as  at  Delphi  and  Athens,  the  charge 
of  it  is  committed,  not  to  virgins,  but  widows 
past  the  time  of  marriage.  And  in  case  by 
any  accident  it  should  happen  that  this  fire 
became  extinct,  as  the  holy  lamp  was  at 
Athens  under  the  tyranny  of  Aristion,  and  at 
Delphi,  when  that  temple  was  burnt  by  the 
Medes,  as  also  in  the  time  of  the  Mithridatic 
and  Roman  civil  war,  when  not  only  the  fire 
was  extinguished,  but  the  altar  demolished, 
then,  afterwards,  in  kindling  this  fire  again, 
it  was  esteemed  an  impiety  to  light  it  from 
common  sparks  or  flame,  or  from  anything 
but  the  pure  and  unpolluted  rays  of  the  sun, 
which  they  usually  effect  by  concave  mirrors, 
of  a  figure  formed  by  the  revolution  of  an  isos¬ 
celes  rectangular  triangle,  all  the  lines  from  the 
circumference  of  which  meeting  in  a  centre, 
by  holding  it  in  the  light  of  the  sun  they  can 
collect  and  concentrate  all  its  rays  at  this  one 
point  of  convergence;  where  the  air  will  now 
become  rarefied,  and  any  light,  dry,  combus¬ 
tible  matter  will  kindle  as  soon  as  applied,  un¬ 
der  the  effect  of  the  rays,  which  here  acquired 
the  substance  and  active  force  of  fire. 

Some  are  of  opinion  that  these  vestals  had 
no  other  business  than  the  preservation  of 
this  fire;  but  others  conceive  that  they  were 
keepers  of  other  divine  secrets  concealed  from 
all  but  themselves,  of  which  we  have  told  all 
that  may  lawfully  be  asked  or  told,  in  the 
life  of  Camillus.  Gegania  and  Verenia,  it  is  re- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

corded,  were  the  names  of  the  first  two  virgins 
consecrated  and  ordained  by  Numa;  Canuleia 
and  Tarpeia  succeeded;  Servius  afterwards 
added  two,  and  the  number  of  four  has  con¬ 
tinued  to  the  present  time. 

The  statutes  prescribed  by  Numa  for  the 
vestals  were  these:  that  they  should  take  a 
vow  of  virginity  for  the  space  of  thirty  years, 
the  first  ten  of  which  they  were  to  spend  in 
learning  their  duties,  the  second  ten  in  per¬ 
forming  them,  and  the  remaining  ten  in 
teaching  and  instructing  others.  Thus  the 
whole  term  being  completed,  it  was  lawful 
for  them  to  marry,  and,  leaving  the  sacred 
order,  to  choose  any  condition  of  life  that 
pleased  them;  but  this  permission  few,  as  they 
say,  made  use  of;  and  in  cases  where  they  did 
so,  it  was  observed  that  their  change  was  not  a 
happy  one,  but  accompanied  ever  after  with  re¬ 
gret  and  melancholy;  so  that  the  greater  num¬ 
ber,  from  religious  fears  and  scruples,  forbore, 
and  continued  to  old  age  and  death  in  the  strict 
observance  of  a  single  life. 

For  this  condition  he  compensated  by  great 
privileges  and  prerogatives;  as  that  they  had 
power  to  make  a  will  in  the  lifetime  of  their 
father;  that  they  had  a  free  administration  of 
their  own  affairs  without  guardian  or  tutor, 
which  was  the  privilege  of  women  who  were 
the  mothers  of  three  children;  when  they  go 
abroad,  they  have  the  fasces  carried  before 
them;  and  if  in  their  walks  they  chance  to 
meet  a  criminal  on  his  way  to  execution,  it 
saves  his  life,  upon  oath  made  that  the  meet¬ 
ing  was  an  accidental  one,  and  not  concerted 
or  of  set  purpose.  Any  one  who  presses  upon 
the  chair  on  which  they  are  carried,  is  put 
to  death. 

If  these  vestals  commit  any  minor  fault, 
they  are  punishable  by  the  high  priest  only, 
who  scourges  the  offender,  sometimes  with 
her  clothes  off,  in  a  dark  place,  with  a  curtain 
drawn  between;  but  she  that  has  broken  her 
vow  is  buried  alive  near  the  gate  called  Col- 
lina,  where  a  little  mound  of  earth  stands, 
inside  the  city,  reaching  some  little  distance, 
called  in  Latin  agger,  under  it  a  narrow  room 
is  constructed,  to  which  a  descent  is  made  by 
stairs;  here  they  prepare  a  bed,  and  light  a 
lamp,  and  leave  a  small  quantity  of  victuals, 
such  as  bread,  water,  a  pail  of  milk,  and  some 
oil;  that  so  that  body  which  had  been  con¬ 
secrated  and  devoted  to  the  most  sacred  serv¬ 
ice  of  religion  might  not  be  said  to  perish 
by  such  a  death  as  famine.  The  culprit  herself 
is  put  in  a  litter,  which  they  cover  over,  and 


NUMA  POMPILIUS 

tie  her  down  with  cords  on  it,  so  that  nothing 
she  utters  may  be  heard.  They  then  take  her 
to  the  Forum;  all  people  silently  go  out  of 
the  way  as  she  passes,  and  such  as  follow  ac¬ 
company  the  bier  with  solemn  and  speechless 
sorrow;  and  indeed,  there  is  not  any  spectacle 
more  appalling,  nor  any  day  observed  by  the 
city  with  greater  appearance  of  gloom  and  sad¬ 
ness.  When  they  come  to  the  place  of  execu¬ 
tion,  the  officers  loose  the  cords,  and  then  the 
high  priest,  lifting  his  hands  to  heaven,  pro¬ 
nounces  certain  prayers  to  himself  before  the 
act;  then  he  brings  out  the  prisoner,  being  still 
covered,  and  placing  her  upon  the  steps  that 
lead  down  to  the  cell,  turns  away  his  face  with 
the  rest  of  the  priests;  the  stairs  are  drawn  up 
after  she  has  gone  down,  and  a  quantity  of 
earth  is  heaped  up  over  the  entrance  to  the  cell, 
so  as  to  prevent  it  from  being  distinguished 
from  the  rest  of  the  mound.  This  is  the  punish¬ 
ment  of  those  who  break  their  vow  of  virgin¬ 
ity- 

It  is  said,  also,  that  Numa  built  the  temple 
of  Vesta,  which  was  intended  for  a  repository 
of  the  holy  fire,  of  a  circular  form,  not  to  repre¬ 
sent  the  figure  of  the  earth,  as  if  that  were  the 
same  as  Vesta,  but  that  of  the  general  universe, 
in  the  centre  of  which  the  Pythagoreans  place 
the  element  of  fire;  and  give  it  the  name  of 
Vesta  and  the  unit;  and  do  not  hold  that  the 
earth  is  immovable,  or  that  it  is  situated  in  the 
centre  of  the  globe,  but  that  it  keeps  a  circular 
motion  about  the  seat  of  fire,  and  is  not  in  the 
number  of  the  primary  elements;  in  this  agree¬ 
ing  with  the  opinion  of  Plato,  who,  they  say, 
in  his  later  life,  conceived  that  the  earth  held  a 
lateral  position,  and  that  the  central  and  sover¬ 
eign  space  was  reserved  for  some  nobler  body. 

There  was  yet  a  further  use  of  the  priests, 
and  that  was  to  give  people  directions  in  the 
national  usages  at  funeral  rites.  Numa  taught 
them  to  regard  these  offices,  not  as  a  pollu¬ 
tion,  but  as  a  duty  paid  to  the  gods  below, 
into  whose  hands  the  better  part  of  us  is 
transmitted;  especially  they  were  to  worship 
the  goddess  Libitina,  who  presided  over  all 
the  ceremonies  performed  at  burials;  whether 
they  meant  hereby  Proserpina,  or,  as  the  most 
learned  of  the  Romans  conceive,  Venus,  not 
inaptly  attributing  the  beginning  and  end  of 
man’s  life  to  the  agency  of  one  and  the  same 
deity.  Numa  also  prescribed  rules  for  regu¬ 
lating  the  days  of  mourning,  according  to 
certain  times  and  ages.  As,  for  example,  a 
child  of  three  years  was  not  to  be  mourned 
for  at  all;  one  older,  up  to  ten  years,  for  as 


55 

many  months  as  it  was  years  old;  and  the 
longest  time  of  mourning  for  any  person 
whatsoever  was  not  to  exceed  the  term  of  ten 
months;  which  was  the  time  appointed  for 
women  that  lost  their  husbands  to  continue 
in  widowhood.  If  any  married  again  before 
that  time,  by  the  laws  of  Numa,  she  was  to 
sacrifice  a  cow  big  with  calf. 

Numa,  also,  was  founder  of  several  other 
orders  of  priests,  two  of  which  I  shall  men¬ 
tion,  the  Salii  and  the  Feciales,  which  are 
among  the  clearest  proofs  of  the  devoutness 
and  sanctity  of  his  character.  These  Fecials, 
or  guardians  of  peace,  seem  to  have  had  their 
name  from  their  office,  which  was  to  put  a 
stop  to  disputes  by  conference  and  speech; 
for  it  was  not  allowable  to  take  up  arms 
until  they  had  declared  all  hopes  of  accom¬ 
modation  to  be  at  an  end,  for  in  Greek,  too, 
we  call  it  peace  when  disputes  are  settled 
by  words,  and  not  by  force.  The  Romans  com¬ 
monly  despatched  the  Fecials,  or  heralds,  to 
those  who  had  offered  them  injury,  request¬ 
ing  satisfaction;  and,  in  case  they  refused, 
they  then  called  the  gods  to  witness,  and, 
with  imprecations  upon  themselves  and  their 
country  should  they  be  acting  unjustly,  so 
declared  war;  against  their  will,  or  without 
their  consent,  it  was  lawful  neither  for  soldier 
nor  king  to  take  up  arms;  the  war  was  begun 
with  them,  and  when  they  had  first  handed  it 
over  to  the  commander  as  a  just  quarrel,  then 
his  business  was  to  deliberate  of  the  manner 
and  ways  to  carry  it  on. 

It  is  believed  that  the  slaughter  and  de¬ 
struction  which  the  Gauls  made  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans  was  a  judgment  on  the  city  for  neglect 
of  this  religious  proceeding;  for  that  when 
these  barbarians  besieged  the  Clusinians,  Fa- 
bius  Ambustus  was  despatched  to  their  camp 
to  negotiate  peace  for  the  besieged;  and,  on 
their  returning  a  rude  refusal,  Fabius  imag¬ 
ined  that  his  office  of  ambassador  was  at  an 
end,  and,  rashly  engaging  on  the  side  of  the 
Clusinians,  challenged  the  bravest  of  the  en¬ 
emy  to  a  single  combat.  It  was  the  fortune  of 
Fabius  to  kill  his  adversary,  and  to  take  his 
spoils;  but  when  the  Gauls  discovered  it,  they 
sent  a  herald  to  Rome  to  complain  against 
him;  since,  before  war  was  declared,  he  had, 
against  the  law  of  nations,  made  a  breach  of 
the  peace.  The  matter  being  debated  in  the 
senate,  the  Fecials  were  of  opinion  that  Fabius 
ought  to  be  consigned  into  the  hands  of  the 
Gauls;  but  he,  being  forewarned  of  their  judg¬ 
ment,  fled  to  the  people,  by  whose  protection 


56 

and  favour  he  escaped  the  sentence.  On  this, 
the  Gauls  marched  with  their  army  to  Rome, 
where,  having  taken  the  capitol,  they  sacked 
the  city.  The  particulars  of  all  which  are  fully 
given  in  the  history  of  Camillus. 

The  origin  of  the  Salii  is  this.  In  the  eighth 
year  of  the  reign  of  Numa,  a  terrible  pesti¬ 
lence,  which  traversed  all  Italy,  ravaged  like¬ 
wise  the  city  of  Rome;  and  the  citizens  being 
in  distress  and  despondent,  a  brazen  target, 
they  say,  fell  from  heaven  into  hands  of 
Numa,  who  gave  them  this  marvellous  ac¬ 
count  of  it;  that  Egeria  and  the  Muses  had 
assured  him  it  was  sent  from  heaven  for  the 
cure  and  safety  of  the  city,  and  that,  to  keep 
it  secure,  he  was  ordered  by  them  to  make 
eleven  others,  so  like  in  dimensions  and  form 
to  the  original  that  no  thief  should  be  able 
to  distinguish  the  true  from  the  counterfeit. 
He  farther  declared,  that  he  was  commanded 
to  consecrate  to  the  Muses  the  place,  and  the 
fields  about  it,  where  they  had  been  chiefly 
wont  to  meet  with  him,  and  that  the  spring 
which  watered  the  fields  should  be  hallowed 
for  the  use  of  the  vestal  virgins,  who  were  to 
wash  and  cleanse  the  penetralia  of  their  sanc¬ 
tuary  with  those  holy  waters.  The  truth  of  all 
this  was  speedily  verified  by  the  cessation  of 
the  pestilence.  Numa  displayed  the  target  to 
the  artificers  and  bade  them  show  their  skill  in 
making  others  like  it;  all  despaired,  until  at 
length  one  Marmurius  Veturius,  an  excellent 
workman,  happily  hit  upon  it,  and  made  all  so 
exactly  the  same  that  Numa  himself  was  at  a 
loss  and  could  not  distinguish. 

The  keeping  of  these  targets  was  commit¬ 
ted  to  the  charge  of  certain  priests,  called 
Salii,  who  did  not  receive  their  name,  as 
some  tell  the  story,  from  Salius,  a  dancing- 
master,  born  in  Samothrace,  or  at  Mantinea, 
who  taught  the  way  of  dancing  in  arms;  but 
more  truly  from  that  jumping  dance  which 
the  Salii  themselves  use,  when  in  the  month 
of  March  they  carry  the  sacred  targets 
through  the  city;  at  which  procession  they 
are  habited  in  short  frocks  of  purple,  girt  with 
a  broad  belt  studded  with  brass;  on  their 
heads  they  wear  a  brass  helmet,  and  carry  in 
their  hands  short  daggers,  which  they  clash 
every  now  and  then  against  the  targets.  But 
the  chief  thing  is  the  dance  itself.  They  move 
with  much  grace,  performing,  in  quick  time 
and  close  order,  various  intricate  figures,  with 
a  great  display  of  strength  and  agility. 

The  targets  were  called  Ancilia  from  their 
form;  for  they  are  not  made  round,  nor  like 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

proper  targets,  of  a  complete  circumference, 
but  are  cut  out  into  a  wavy  line,  the  ends  of 
which  are  rounded  oft'  and  turned  in  at  the 
thickest  part  towards  each  other;  so  that 
their  shape  is  curvilinear,  or,  in  Greek,  ancy- 
lon;  or  the  name  may  come  from  ancon ,  the 
elbow,  on  which  they  are  carried.  Thus  Juba 
writes,  who  is  eager  to  make  it  Greek.  But  it 
might  be,  for  that  matter,  from  its  having  come 
down  anecathen,  from  above;  or  from  its 
a\esis,  or  cure  of  diseases;  or  auchmon  lysis , 
because  it  put  an  end  to  a  drought;  or  from  its 
anaschesis ,  or  relief  from  calamities,  which  is 
the  origin  of  the  Athenian  name  Anaces,  given 
to  Castor  and  Pollux;  if  we  must,  that  is,  re¬ 
duce  it  to  Greek. 

The  reward  which  Mamurius  received  for 
his  art  was  to  be  mentioned  and  commemo¬ 
rated  in  the  verses  which  the  Salii  sang,  as  they 
danced  in  their  arms  through  the  city  though 
some  will  have  it  that  they  do  not  say  V eturium 
Mamuium,  but  Veterem  Memoriam,  ancient 
remembrance. 

After  Numa  had  in  this  manner  instituted 
these  several  orders  of  priests,  he  erected,  near 
the  temple  of  Vesta,  what  is  called  to  this  day 
Regia,  or  king’s  house,  where  he  spent  the 
most  part  of  his  time,  performing  divine  serv¬ 
ice,  instructing  the  priests,  or  conversing  with 
them  on  sacred  subjects.  He  had  another  house 
upon  the  Mount  Quirinalis,  the  site  of  which 
they  show  to  this  day. 

In  all  public  processions  and  solemn  pray¬ 
ers,  criers  were  sent  before  to  give  notice  to 
the  people  that  they  should  forbear  their 
work,  and  rest.  They  say  that  the  Pythag¬ 
oreans  did  not  allow  people  to  worship  and 
pray  to  their  gods  by  the  way,  but  would 
have  them  go  out  from  their  houses  direct, 
with  their  minds  set  upon  the  duty,  and  so 
Numa,  in  like  manner,  wished  that  his  citi¬ 
zens  should  neither  see  nor  hear  any  reli¬ 
gious  service  in  a  perfunctory  and  inattentive 
manner,  but,  laying  aside  all  other  occupa¬ 
tions,  should  apply  their  minds  to  religion  as 
to  a  most  serious  business;  and  that  the  streets 
should  be  free  from  all  noises  and  cries  that 
accompany  manual  labour,  and  clear  for  the 
sacred  solemnity.  Some  traces  of  this  custom 
remain  at  Rome  to  this  day,  for  when  the  con¬ 
sul  begins  to  take  auspices  or  do  sacrifice,  they 
call  out  to  the  people,  Hoc  age ,  Attend  to  this, 
whereby  the  auditors  then  present  are  admon¬ 
ished  to  compose  and  recollect  themselves. 

Many  other  of  his  precepts  resemble  those 
of  the  Pythagoreans.  The  Pythagoreans  said, 


NUMA  POMPILIUS 

for  example,  “Thou  shah  not  make  a  peck- 
measure  thy  seat  to  sit  on.  Thou  shalt  not  stir 
the  fire  with  a  sword.  When  thou  goest  out 
upon  a  journey,  look  not  behind  thee.  When 
thou  sacrificest  to  the  celestial  gods,  let  it 
be  with  an  odd  number,  and  when  to  the 
terrestrial,  with  even.”  The  significance  of 
each  of  which  precepts  they  would  not  com¬ 
monly  disclose.  So  some  of  Numa’s  traditions 
have  no  obvious  meaning.  “Thou  shalt  not 
make  libation  to  the  gods  of  wine  from  an 
unpruned  vine.  No  sacrifices  shall  be  per¬ 
formed  without  meal.  Turn  round  to  pay 
adoration  to  the  gods;  sit  after  you  have  wor¬ 
shipped.”  The  first  two  directions  seem  to 
denote  the  cultivation  and  subduing  of  the 
earth  as  a  part  of  religion;  and  as  to  the 
turning  which  the  worshippers  are  to  use  in 
divine  adoration,  it  is  said  to  represent  the 
rotatory  motion  of  the  world.  But,  in  my 
opinion,  the  meaning  rather  is,  that  the  wor¬ 
shipper,  since  the  temples  front  the  east, 
enters  with  his  back  to  the  rising  sun;  there, 
faces  round  to  the  east,  and  so  turns  back  to 
the  god  of  the  temple,  by  this  circular  move¬ 
ment  referring  the  fulfillment  of  his  prayers 
to  both  divinities.  Unless,  indeed,  this  change 
of  posture  may  have  a  mystical  meaning,  like 
the  Egyptian  wheels,  and  signify  to  us  the 
instability  of  human  fortune,  and  that,  in 
whatever  way  God  changes  and  turns  our 
lot  and  condition,  we  should  rest  contented, 
and  accept  it  as  right  and  fitting.  They  say, 
also,  that  the  sitting  after  worship  was  to  be 
by  way  of  omen  of  their  petitions  being 
granted,  and  the  blessing  they  asked  assured 
to  them.  Again,  as  different  courses  of  ac¬ 
tions  are  divided  by  intervals  of  rest,  they 
might  seat  themselves  after  the  completion  of 
what  they  had  done,  to  seek  favour  of  the 
gods  for  beginning  something  else.  And  this 
would  very  well  suit  with  what  we  had  be¬ 
fore;  the  lawgiver  wants  to  habituate  us  to 
make  our  petitions  to  the  deity  not  by  the 
way,  and,  as  it  were,  in  a  hurry,  when  we 
have  other  things  to  do,  but  with  time  and 
leisure  to  attend  to  it. 

By  such  discipline  and  schooling  in  reli¬ 
gion,  the  city  passed  insensibly  into  such  a 
submissiveness  of  temper,  and  stood  in  such 
awe  and  reverence  of  the  virtue  of  Numa, 
that  they  received,  with  an  undoubted  as¬ 
surance,  whatever  he  delivered  though  never 
so  fabulous,  and  thought  nothing  incredible 
or  impossible  from  him. 

There  goes  a  story  that  he  once  invited  a 


57 

great  number  of  citizens  to  an  entertainment, 
at  which  the  dishes  in  which  the  meat  was 
served  were  very  homely  and  plain,  and  the  re¬ 
past  itself  poor  and  ordinary  fare;  the  guests 
seated,  he  began  to  tell  them  that  the  goddess 
that  consulted  with  him  was  then  at  that  time 
come  to  him;  when  on  a  sudden  the  room  was 
furnished  with  all  sorts  of  costly  drinking-ves¬ 
sels,  and  the  tables  loaded  with  rich  meats,  and 
a  most  sumptuous  entertainment. 

But  the  dialogue  which  is  reported  to  have 
passed  between  him  and  Jupiter  surpasses  all 
the  fabulous  legends  that  were  ever  invented. 
They  say  that  before  Mount  Aventine  was 
inhabited  or  enclosed  within  the  walls  of  the 
city,  two  demigods,  Picus  and  Faunus,  fre¬ 
quented  the  springs  and  thick  shades  of  that 
place;  which  might  be  two  satyrs,  or  Pans, 
except  that  they  went  about  Italy  playing  the 
same  sorts  of  tricks,  by  skill  in  drugs  and 
magic,  as  are  ascribed  by  the  Greeks  to  the 
Dactyli  of  Mount  Ida.  Numa  contrived  one 
day  to  surprise  these  demigods,  by  mixing 
wine  and  honey  in  the  waters  of  the  spring  of 
which  they  usually  drank.  On  finding  them¬ 
selves  ensnared,  they  changed  themselves  into 
various  shapes,  dropping  their  own  form  and 
assuming  every  kind  of  unusual  and  hideous 
appearance;  but  when  they  saw  they  were  safe¬ 
ly  entrapped,  and  in  no  possibility  of  getting 
free,  they  revealed  to  him  many  secrets  and 
future  events;  and  particularly  a  charm  for 
thunder  and  lightning,  still  in  use,  performed 
with  onions  and  hair  and  pilchards. 

Some  say  they  did  not  tell  him  the  charm, 
but  by  their  magic  brought  down  Jupiter  out 
of  heaven;  and  that  he  then,  in  an  angry  man¬ 
ner  answering  the  inquiries,  told  Numa  that, 
if  he  would  charm  the  thunder  and  lightning, 
he  must  do  it  with  heads.  “How,”  said  Numa, 
“with  the  heads  of  onions?”  “No,”  replied 
Jupiter,  “of  men.”  But  Numa,  willing  to 
elude  the  cruelty  of  this  receipt,  turned  it 
another  way,  saying,  “Your  meaning  is,  the 
hairs  of  men’s  heads.”  “No,”  replied  Jupiter, 
“with  living” — “pilchards,”  said  Numa  in¬ 
terrupting  him.  These  answers  he  had  learnt 
from  Egeria.  Jupiter  returned  again  to  heaven, 
pacified  and  ileos,  or  propitious.  The  place 
was,  in  remembrance  of  him,  called  Ilicium, 
from  this  Greek  word;  and  the  spell  in  this 
manner  effected. 

These  stories,  laughable  as  they  are,  show 
us  the  feelings  which  people  then,  by  force 
of  habit,  entertained  towards  the  deity.  And 
Numa’s  own  thoughts  are  said  to  have  been 


58 

fixed  to  that  degree  on  divine  objects,  that  he 
once,  when  a  message  was  brought  to  him 
that  “Enemies  are  approaching,”  answered 
with  a  smile,  “And  I  am  sacrificing.”  It  was 
he,  also,  that  built  the  temples  of  Faith  and 
Terminus,  and  taught  the  Romans  that  the 
name  of  Faith  was  the  most  solemn  oath  that 
they  could  swear.  They  still  use  it. 

To  the  god  Terminus,  or  Boundary,  they 
offer  to  this  day  both  public  and  private  sacri¬ 
fices,  upon  the  borders  and  stone-marks  of 
their  land;  living  victims  now,  though  an¬ 
ciently  those  sacrifices  were  solemnised  with¬ 
out  blood;  for  Numa  reasoned  that  the  god 
of  boundaries,  who  watched  over  peace,  and 
testified  to  fair  dealing,  should  have  no  con¬ 
cern  with  blood.  It  is  very  clear  that  it  was 
this  king  who  first  prescribed  bounds  to  the 
territory  of  Rome;  for  Romulus  would  but 
have  openly  betrayed  how  much  he  had  en¬ 
croached  on  his  neighbours’  lands,  had  he 
ever  set  limits  to  his  own;  for  boundaries  are, 
indeed,  a  defence  to  those  who  choose  to 
observe  them,  but  are  only  a  testimony 
against  the  dishonesty  of  those  who  break 
through  them.  The  truth  is,  the  portion  of 
lands  which  the  Romans  possessed  at  the 
beginning  was  very  narrow,  until  Romulus 
enlarged  them  by  war;  all  those  acquisitions 
Numa  now  divided  amongst  the  indigent 
commonalty,  wishing  to  do  away  with  that 
extreme  want  which  is  a  compulsion  to  dis¬ 
honesty,  and,  by  turning  the  people  to  hus¬ 
bandry,  to  bring  them,  as  well  as  their  lands, 
into  better  order. 

For  there  is  no  employment  that  gives  so 
keen  and  quick  a  relish  for  peace  as  hus¬ 
bandry  and  a  country  life,  which  leave  in 
men  all  that  kind  of  courage  that  makes  them 
ready  to  fight  in  defence  of  their  own,  while 
it  destroys  the  licence  that  breaks  out  into 
acts  of  injustice  and  rapacity.  Numa,  there¬ 
fore,  hoping  agriculture  would  be  a  sort  of 
charm  to  captivate  the  affections  of  his  people 
to  peace,  and  viewing  it  rather  as  a  means  to 
moral  than  to  economical  profit,  divided  all 
the  lands  into  several  parcels,  to  which  he 
gave  the  name  of  pagus,  or  parish,  and  over 
every  one  of  them  he  ordained  chief  overseers; 
and,  taking  a  delight  sometimes  to  inspect  his 
colonies  in  person,  he  formed  his  judgment 
of  every  man’s  habits  by  the  results;  of  which 
being  witness  himself,  he  preferred  those  to 
honours  and  employments  who  had  done 
well,  and  by  rebukes  and  reproaches  incited 
the  indolent  and  careless  to  improvement. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

But  of  all  his  measures  the  most  com¬ 
mended  was  his  distribution  of  the  people  by 
their  trades  into  companies  or  guilds;  for 
as  the  city  consisted,  or  rather  did  not  consist 
of,  but  was  divided  into,  two  different  tribes, 
the  diversity  between  which  could  not  be 
effaced  and  in  the  meantime  prevented  all 
unity  and  caused  perpetual  tumult  and  ill- 
blood,  reflecting  how  hard  substances  that 
do  not  readily  mix  when  in  the  lump  may, 
by  being  beaten  into  powder,  in  that  minute 
form  be  combined,  he  resolved  to  divide  the 
whole  population  into  a  number  of  small  divi¬ 
sions,  and  thus  hoped,  by  introducing  other 
distinctions,  to  obliterate  the  original  and 
great  distinction,  which  would  be  lost  among 
the  smaller.  So,  distinguishing  the  whole  peo¬ 
ple  by  the  several  arts  and  trades,  he  formed 
the  companies  of  musicians,  goldsmiths,  car¬ 
penters,  dyers,  shoemakers,  skinners,  braziers, 
and  potters;  and  all  other  handicraftsmen  he 
composed  and  reduced  into  a  single  company, 
appointing  every  one  their  proper  courts,  coun¬ 
cils,  and  religious  observances.  In  this  manner 
all  factious  distinctions  began,  for  the  first 
time,  to  pass  out  of  use,  no  person  any  longer 
being  either  thought  of  or  spoken  of  under 
the  notion  of  a  Sabine  or  a  Roman,  a  Romu- 
lian  or  a  Tatian;  and  the  new  division  be¬ 
came  a  source  of  general  harmony  and  inter¬ 
mixture. 

He  is  also  much  to  be  commended  for  the 
repeal,  or  rather  amendment,  of  that  law 
which  gives  power  to  fathers  to  sell  their 
children;  he  exempted  such  as  were  married, 
conditionally  that  it  had  been  with  the  liking 
and  consent  of  their  parents;  for  it  seemed 
a  hard  thing  that  a  woman  who  had  given 
herself  in  marriage  to  a  man  whom  she 
judged  free  should  afterwards  find  herself  liv¬ 
ing  with  a  slave. 

He  attempted,  also,  the  formation  of  a 
calendar,  not  with  absolute  exactness,  yet 
not  without  some  scientific  knowledge.  Dur¬ 
ing  the  reign  of  Romulus,  they  had  let  their 
months  run  on  without  any  certain  or  equal 
term;  some  of  them  contained  twenty  days, 
others  thirty-five,  others  more;  they  had  no 
sort  of  knowledge  of  the  inequality  in  the 
motions  of  the  sun  and  moon;  they  only  kept 
to  the  one  rule  that  the  whole  course  of  the 
year  contained  three  hundred  and  sixty  days. 
Numa,  calculating  the  difference  between  the 
lunar  and  the  solar  year  at  eleven  days,  for 
that  the  moon  completed  her  anniversary 
course  in  three  hundred  and  fifty-four  days, 


NUMA  POMPILIUS 

and  the  sun  in  three  hundred  and  sixty-five, 
to  remedy  this  incongruity  doubled  the  eleven 
days,  and  every  other  year  added  an  inter¬ 
calary  month,  to  follow  February,  consisting 
of  twenty-two  days,  and  called  by  the  Romans 
the  month  Mercedinus.  This  amendment, 
however,  itself,  in  course  of  time,  came  to 
need  other  amendments. 

He  also  altered  the  order  of  the  months; 
for  March,  which  was  reckoned  the  first,  he 
put  into  the  third  place;  and  January,  which 
was  the  eleventh,  he  made  the  first;  and  Feb¬ 
ruary,  which  was  the  twelfth  and  last,  the 
second.  Many  will  have  it,  that  it  was  Numa, 
also,  who  added  the  two  months  of  January 
and  February;  for  in  the  beginning  they  had 
had  a  year  of  ten  months;  as  there  are  bar¬ 
barians  who  count  only  three;  the  Arcadians, 
in  Greece,  had  but  four;  the  Acarnanians,  six. 
The  Egyptian  year  at  first,  they  say,  was  of 
one  month;  afterwards,  of  four;  and  so, 
though  they  live  in  the  newest  of  all  coun¬ 
tries,  they  have  the  credit  of  being  a  more 
ancient  nation  than  any,  and  reckon,  in  their 
genealogies,  a  prodigious  number  of  years, 
counting  months,  that  is,  as  years. 

That  the  Romans,  at  first,  comprehended 
the  whole  year  within  ten, .  and  not  twelve 
months,  plainly  appears  by  the  name  of  the 
last,  December,  meaning  the  tenth  month; 
and  that  March  was  the  first  is  likewise  evi¬ 
dent,  for  the  fifth  month  after  it  was  called 
Quintilis,  and  the  sixth  Sextilis,  and  so  the 
rest;  whereas,  if  January  and  February  had, 
in  this  account,  preceded  March,  Quintilis 
would  have  been  fifth  in  name  and  seventh 
in  reckoning.  It  was  also  natural  that  March, 
dedicated  to  Mars,  should  be  Romulus’s  first, 
and  April,  named  from  Venus,  or  Aphrodite, 
his  second  month;  in  it  they  sacrifice  to 
Venus,  and  the  women  bathe  on  the  calends, 
or  first  day  of  it,  with  myrtle  garlands  on 
their  heads.  But  others,  because  of  its  being 
p  and  not  ph,  will  not  allow  of  the  derivation 
of  this  word  from  Aphrodite,  but  say  it  is 
called  April  from  aperio,  Latin  for  to  open,  be¬ 
cause  that  this  month  is  high  spring,  and  opens 
and  discloses  the  buds  and  flowers.  The  next  is 
called  May,  from  Maia,  the  mother  of  Mer¬ 
cury,  to  whom  it  is  sacred;  then  June  follows, 
so  called  from  Juno;  some,  however,  derive 
them  from  the  two  ages,  old  and  young,  ma¬ 
jor  es,  being  their  name  for  older,  and  junior es 
for  younger  men.  To  the  other  months  they 
gave  denominations  according  to  their  order; 
so  the  fifth  was  called  Quintilis,  Sextilis  the 


59 

sixth,  and  the  rest,  September,  October,  No¬ 
vember,  and  December. 

Afterwards  Quintilis  received  the  name  of 
Julius,  from  Caesar,  who  defeated  Pompey;  as 
also  Sextilis  that  of  Augustus,  from  the  second 
Caesar,  who  had  that  title.  Domitian,  also, 
in  imitation,  gave  the  two  other  following 
months  his  own  names,  of  Germanicus  and 
Domitianus;  but,  on  his  being  slain,  they  recov¬ 
ered  their  ancient  denominations  of  September 
and  October.  The  two  last  are  the  only  ones 
that  have  kept  their  names  throughout  with¬ 
out  any  alteration. 

Of  the  months  which  were  added  or  trans¬ 
posed  in  their  order  by  Nunaa,  February 
comes  from  februa;  and  is  as  much  a  Purifica¬ 
tion  month;  in  it  they  make  offerings  to  the 
dead,  and  celebrate  the  Lupercalia,  which,  in 
most  points,  resembles  a  purification.  Janu¬ 
ary  was  so  called  from  Janus,  and  precedence 
given  to  it  by  Numa  before  March,  which 
was  dedicated  to  the  god  Mars;  because,  as  I 
conceive,  he  wished  to  take  every  opportunity 
of  intimating  that  the  arts  and  studies  of 
peace  are  to  be  preferred  before  those  of  war. 

For  this  Janus,  whether  in  remote  antiquity 
he  were  a  demigod  or  a  king,  was  certainly  a 
great  lover  of  civil  and  social  unity,  and  one 
who  reclaimed  men  from  brutal  and  savage 
living;  for  which  reason  they  figure  him  with 
two  faces,  to  represent  the  two  states  and  condi¬ 
tions  out  of  the  one  of  which  he  brought  man¬ 
kind,  to  lead  them  into  the  other.  His  temple 
at  Rome  has  two  gates,  which  they  call  the 
gates  of  war,  because  they  stand  open  in  the 
time  of  war,  and  shut  in  the  times  of  peace;  of 
which  latter  there  was  very  seldom  an  exam¬ 
ple,  for,  as  the  Roman  empire  was  enlarged 
and  extended,  it  was  so  encompassed  with  bar¬ 
barous  nations  and  enemies  to  be  resisted,  that 
it  was  seldom  or  never  at  peace.  Only  in  the 
time  of  Augustus  Caesar,  after  he  had  overcome 
Antony,  this  temple  was  shut;  as  likewise  once 
before,  when  Marcus  Atilius  and  Titus  Man¬ 
lius  were  consuls;  but  then  it  was  not  long  be¬ 
fore,  wars  breaking  out,  the  gates  were  again 
opened. 

But,  during  the  reign  of  Numa,  those 
gates  were  never  seen  open  a  single  day,  but 
continued  constantly  shut  for  a  space  of 
forty-three  years  together;  such  an  entire  and 
universal  cessation  of  war  existed.  For  not 
only  had  the  people  of  Rome  itself  been 
softened  and  charmed  into  a  peaceful  temper 
by  the  just  and  mild  rule  of  a  pacific  prince, 
but  even  the  neighbouring  cities,  as  if  some 


60 


salubrious  and  gentle  air  had  blown  from 
Rome  upon  them,  began  to  experience  a 
change  of  feeling,  and  partook  in  the  general 
longing  for  the  sweets  of  peace  and  order, 
and  for  life  employed  in  the  quiet  tillage  of 
soil,  bringing  up  of  children,  and  worship  of 
the  gods.  Festival  days  and  sports,  and  the 
secure  and  peaceful  interchange  of  friendly 
visits  and  hospitalities  prevailed  all  through 
the  whole  of  Italy.  The  love  of  virtue  and 
justice  flowed  from  Numa’s  wisdom  as  from  a 
fountain,  and  the  serenity  of  his  spirit  dif¬ 
fused  itself,  like  a  calm,  on  all  sides;  so  that 
the  hyperboles  of  poets  were  flat  and  tame  to 
express  what  then  existed;  as  that — 

Over  the  iron  shield  the  spiders  hang  their 
threads, 

or  that — 

Rust  eats  the  pointed  spear  and  double-edged 
sword. 

No  more  is  heard  the  trumpet’s  brazen  roar, 
Sweet  sleep  is  banished  from  our  eyes  no  more. 

For  during  the  whole  reign  of  Numa,  there 
was  neither  war,  nor  sedition,  nor  innovation 
in  the  state,  nor  any  envy  or  ill-will  to  his 
person,  nor  plot  or  conspiracy  from  views  of 
ambition.  Either  fear  of  the  gods  that  were 
thought  to  watch  over  him,  or  reverence  for 
his  virtue,  or  a  divine  felicity  of  fortune  that 
in  his  days  preserved  human  innocence,  made 
his  reign,  by  whatever  means,  a  living  ex¬ 
ample  and  verification  of  that  saying  which 
Plato,  long  afterwards,  ventured  to  pronounce, 
that  the  sole  and  only  hope  of  respite  or  rem¬ 
edy  for  human  evils  was  in  some  happy  con¬ 
junction  of  events  which  should  unite  in  a  sin¬ 
gle  person  the  power  of  a  king  and  the  wisdom 
of  a  philosopher,  so  as  to  elevate  virtue  to  con¬ 
trol  and  mastery  over  vice. 

The  wise  man  is  blessed  in  himself,  and 
blessed  also  are  the  auditors  who  can  hear 
and  receive  those  words  which  flow  from  his 
mouth;  and  perhaps,  too,  there  is  no  need  of 
compulsion  or  menaces  to  affect  the  multitude, 
for  the  mere  sight  itself  of  a  shining  and  con¬ 
spicuous  example  of  virtue  in  the  life  of  their 
prince  will  bring  them  spontaneously  to  virtue, 
and  to  a  conformity  with  that  blameless  and 
blessed  life  of  good-will  and  mutual  concord, 
supported  by  temperance  and  justice,  which  is 
the  highest  benefit  that  human  means  can  con¬ 
fer;  and  he  is  the  truest  ruler  who  can  best  in¬ 
troduce  it  into  the  hearts  and  practice  of  his 
subjects.  It  is  the  praise  of  Numa  that  no  one 
seems  ever  to  have  discerned  this  so  clearly  as 
he. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

As  to  his  children  and  wives,  there  is  a 
diversity  of  reports  by  several  authors;  some 
will  have  it  that  he  never  had  any  other  wife 
than  Tatia;  nor  more  children  than  one 
daughter  called  Pompilia;  others  will  have  it 
that  he  left  also  four  sons,  namely,  Pompo, 
Pinus,  Calpus,  and  Mamercus,  every  one  of 
whom  had  issue,  and  from  them  descended 
the  noble  and  illustrious  families  of  Pomponii, 
Pinarii,  Calpurnii,  and  Mamerci,  which  for 
this  reason  took  also  the  surname  of  Rex,  or 
King. 

But  there  is  a  third  set  of  writers  who  say 
that  these  pedigrees  are  but  a  piece  of  flattery 
used  by  writers  who,  to  gain  favour  with  these 
great  families,  made  them  fictitious  geneal¬ 
ogies  from  the  lineage  of  Numa;  and  that 
Pompilia  was  not  the  daughter  of  Tatia,  but 
Lucretia,  another  wife  whom  he  married  after 
he  came  to  his  kingdom;  however,  all  of 
them  agree  in  opinion  that  she  was  married 
to  the  son  of  that  Marcius  who  persuaded  him 
to  accept  the  government,  and  accompanied 
him  to  Rome,  where,  as  a  mark  of  honour,  he 
was  chosen  into  the  senate,  and  after  the  death 
of  Numa,  standing  in  competition  with  Tullus 
Hostilius  for  the  kingdom,  and  being  disap¬ 
pointed  of  the  election,  in  discontent  killed 
himself;  his  son  Marcius,  however,  who  had 
married  Pompilia,  continuing  at  Rome,  was 
the  father  of  Ancus  Marcius,  who  succeeded 
Tullus  Hostilius  in  the  kingdom,  and  was  but 
five  years  of  age  when  Numa  died. 

Numa  lived  something  above  eighty  years, 
and  then,  as  Piso  writes,  was  not  taken  out 
of  the  world  by  a  sudden  or  acute  disease, 
but  died  of  old  age  and  by  a  gradual  and 
gentle  decline.  At  his  funeral  all  the  glories 
of  his  life  were  consummated,  when  all  the 
neighbouring  states  in  alliance  and  amity  with 
Rome  met  to  honour  and  grace  the  rites  of 
his  interment  with  garlands  and  public  pres¬ 
ents;  the  senators  carried  the  bier  on  which 
his  corpse  was  laid,  and  the  priests  followed 
and  accompanied  the  solemn  procession; 
while  a  general  crowd,  in  which  women  and 
children  took  part,  followed  with  such  cries 
and  weeping  as  if  they  had  bewailed  the 
death  and  loss  of  some  most  dear  relation 
taken  away  in  the  flower  of  age,  and  not  an 
old  and  worn-out  king. 

It  is  said  that  his  body,  by  his  particular 
command,  was  not  burnt,  but  that  they  made, 
in  conformity  with  his  order,  two  stone 
coffins,  and  buried  both  under  the  hill  Janicu- 
lum,  in  one  of  which  his  body  was  laid,  and 


LYCURGUS  AND  NUMA 

the  other  his  sacred  books,  which,  as  the 
Greek  legislators  their  tables,  he  had  written 
out  for  himself,  but  had  so  long  inculcated  the 
contents  of  them,  whilst  he  lived,  into  the 
minds  and  hearts  of  the  priests,  that  their 
understandings  became  fully  possessed  with 
the  whole  spirit  and  purpose  of  them;  and 
he  therefore  bade  that  they  should  be  buried 
with  his  body,  as  though  such  holy  precepts 
could  not  without  irreverence  be  left  to  cir¬ 
culate  in  mere  lifeless  writings. 

For  this  very  reason,  they  say,  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans  bade  that  their  precepts  should  not 
be  committed  to  paper,  but  rather  preserved 
in  the  living  memories  of  those  who  were 
worthy  to  receive  them;  and  when  some  of 
their  out-of-the-way  and  abstruse  geometrical 
processes  had  been  divulged  to  an  unworthy 
person,  they  said  the  gods  threatened  to  pun¬ 
ish  this  wickedness  and  profanity  by  a  signal 
and  wide-spreading  calamity.  With  these  sev¬ 
eral  instances  concurring  to  show  a  similarity 
in  the  lives  of  Numa  and  Pythagoras,  we  may 
easily  pardon  those  who  seek  to  establish  the 
fact  of  a  real  acquaintance  between  them. 

Valerius  Antias  writes  that  the  books  which 
were  buried  in  the  aforesaid  chest  or  coffin  of 
stone  were  twelve  volumes  of  holy  writ  and 
twelve  others  of  Greek  philosophy,  and  that 
about  four  hundred  years  afterwards,  when 
P.  Cornelius  and  M.  Baebius  were  consuls,  in 
a  time  of  heavy  rains,  a  violent  torrent  washed 
away  the  earth,  and  dislodged  the  chests  of 


61 

stone;  and,  their  covers  falling  off,  one  of 
them  was  found  wholly  empty,  without  the 
least  relic  of  any  human  body;  in  the  other 
were  the  books  before  mentioned,  which  the 
praetor  Petilius  having  read  and  perused, 
made  oath  in  the  senate,  that,  in  his  opinion, 
it  was  not  fit  for  their  contents  to  be  made 
public  to  the  people;  whereupon  the  volumes 
were  all  carried  to  the  Comitium,  and  there 
burnt. 

It  is  the  fortune  of  all  good  men  that  their 
virtue  rises  in  glory  after  their  deaths,  and 
that  the  envy  which  evil  men  conceive  against 
them  never  outlives  them  long;  some  have  the 
happiness  even  to  see  it  die  before  them; 
but  in  Numa’s  case,  also,  the  fortunes  of  the 
succeeding  kings  served  as  foils  to  set  off  the 
brightness  of  his  reputation.  For  after  him 
there  were  five  kings,  the  last  of  whom  ended 
his  old  age  in  banishment,  being  deposed 
from  his  crown;  of  the  other  four,  three  were 
assassinated  and  murdered  by  treason;  the 
other,  who  was  Tullus  Hostilius,  that  imme¬ 
diately  succeeded  Numa,  derided  his  virtues, 
and  especially  his  devotion  to  religious  wor¬ 
ship,  as  a  cowardly  and  mean-spirited  occupa¬ 
tion,  and  diverted  the  minds  of  the  people  to 
war;  but  was  checked  in  these  youthful  inso¬ 
lences,  and  was  himself  driven  by  an  acute  and 
tormenting  disease  into  superstitions,  wholly 
different  from  Numa’s  piety,  and  left  others 
also  to  participate  in  these  terrors  when  he  died 
by  the  stroke  of  a  thunderbolt. 


LYCURGUS  and  NUMA 
Compared 


Having  thus  finished  the  lives  of  Lycurgus 
and  Numa,  we  shall  now,  though  the 
work  be  difficult,  put  together  their  points  of 
difference  as  they  lie  here  before  our  view. 
Their  points  of  likeness  are  obvious;  their 
moderation,  their  religion,  their  capacity  of 
government  and  discipline,  their  both  deriving 
their  laws  and  constitutions  from  the  gods. 

Yet  in  their  common  glories  there  are  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  diversity;  for  first  Numa  ac¬ 
cepted  and  Lycurgus  resigned  a  kingdom; 
Numa  received  without  desiring  it,  Lycurgus 
had  it  and  gave  it  up;  the  one  from  a  private 
person  and  a  stranger  was  raised  by  others 
to  be  their  king;  the  other  from  the  condition 
of  a  prince  voluntarily  descended  to  the  state 
of  privacy.  It  was  glorious  to  acquire  a  throne 
by  justice,  yet  more  glorious  to  prefer  justice 


before  a  throne;  the  same  virtue  which  made 
the  one  appear  worthy  of  regal  power  exalted 
the  other  to  the  disregard  of  it.  Lastly,  as 
the  musicians  tune  their  harps,  so  the  one  let 
down  the  high-flown  spirits  of  the  people 
at  Rome  to  a  lower  key,  as  the  other  screwed 
them  up  at  Sparta  to  a  higher  note,  when  they 
were  sunken  low  by  dissoluteness  and  riot. 

The  harder  task  was  that  of  Lycurgus;  for 
it  was  not  so  much  his  business  to  persuade 
his  citizens  to  put  off  their  armour  or  ungird 
their  swords,  as  to  cast  away  their  gold  or  sil¬ 
ver,  and  abandon  costly  furniture  and  rich  ta¬ 
bles;  nor  was  it  necessary  to  preach  to  them, 
that,  laying  aside  their  arms,  they  should  ob¬ 
serve  the  festivals,  and  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  but 
rather,  that,  giving  up  feasting  and  drinking, 
they  should  employ  their  time  in  laborious 


62 

and  martial  exercises;  so  that  while  the  one  ef¬ 
fected  all  by  persuasions  and  his  people’s  love 
for  him,  the  other,  with  danger  and  hazard  of 
his  person,  scarcely  in  the  end  succeeded. 

Numa’s  muse  was  a  gentle  and  loving  in¬ 
spiration,  fitting  him  well  to  turn  and  soothe 
his  people  into  peace  and  justice  out  of  their 
violent  and  fiery  tempers;  whereas,  if  we 
must  admit  the  treatment  of  the  Helots  to  be 
a  part  of  Lycurgus’s  legislation,  a  most  cruel 
and  iniquitous  proceeding,  we  must  own 
that  Numa  was  by  a  great  deal  the  more  hu¬ 
mane  and  Greek-like  legislator,  granting  even 
to  actual  slaves  a  licence  to  sit  at  meat  with 
their  masters  at  the  feast  of  Saturn,  that  they 
also  might  have  some  taste  and  relish  of  the 
sweets  of  liberty.  For  this  custom,  too,  is  as¬ 
cribed  to  Numa,  whose  wish  was,  they  con¬ 
ceive,  to  give  a  place  in  the  enjoyment  of  the 
yearly  fruits  of  the  soil  to  those  who  had 
helped  to  produce  them.  Others  will  have  it  to 
be  in  remembrance  of  the  age  of  Saturn,  when 
there  was  no  distinction  between  master  and 
slave,  but  all  lived  as  brothers  and  as  equals  in 
a  condition  of  equality. 

In  general,  it  seems  that  both  aimed  at  the 
same  design  and  intent,  which  was  to  bring 
their  people  to  moderation  and  frugality;  but 
of  other  virtues,  the  one  set  his  affection  most 
on  fortitude,  and  the  other  on  justice;  unless 
we  will  attribute  their  different  ways  to  the 
different  habits  and  temperaments  which  they 
had  to  work  upon  by  their  enactments;  for 
Numa  did  not  out  of  cowardice  or  fear  affect 
peace,  but  because  he  would  not  be  guilty  of 
injustice;  nor  did  Lycurgus  promote  a  spirit 
of  war  in  his  people  that  they  might  do  injus¬ 
tice  to  others,  but  that  they  might  protect 
themselves  by  it. 

In  bringing  the  habits  they  formed  in  their 
people  to  a  just  and  happy  mean,  mitigating 
them  where  they  exceeded,  and  strengthening 
them  where  they  were  deficient,  both  were 
compelled  to  make  great  innovations.  The 
frame  of  government  which  Numa  formed 
was  democratic  and  popular  to  the  last  ex¬ 
treme,  goldsmiths  and  flute-players  and  shoe¬ 
makers  constituting  his  promiscuous,  many- 
colored  commonalty.  Lycurgus  was  rigid 
and  aristocratical,  banishing  all  the  base  and 
mechanic  arts  to  the  company  of  servants  and 
strangers,  and  allowing  the  true  citizens  no 
implements  but  the  spear  and  shield,  the 
trade  of  war  only,  and  the  service  of  Mars, 
and  no  other  knowledge  or  study,  but  that  of 
obedience  to  their  commanding  officers,  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

victory  over  their  enemies.  Every  sort  of  mon¬ 
ey-making  was  forbid  them  as  freemen;  and  to 
make  them  thoroughly  so  and  keep  them  so 
through  their  whole  lives,  every  conceivable 
concern  with  money  was  handed  over,  with 
the  cooking  and  the  waiting  at  table,  to  slaves 
and  Helots. 

But  Numa  made  none  of  these  distinctions; 
he  only  suppressed  military  rapacity,  allowing 
free  scope  to  every  other  means  of  obtaining 
wealth;  nor  did  he  endeavour  to  do  away  with 
inequality  in  this  respect,  but  permitted  riches 
to  be  amassed  to  any  extent,  and  paid  no  at¬ 
tention  to  the  gradual  and  continual  augmen¬ 
tation  and  influx  of  poverty;  which  it  was 
his  business  at  the  outset,  whilst  there  was  no 
great  disparity  in  the  estates  of  men,  and 
whilst  people  still  lived  much  in  one  manner, 
to  obviate,  as  Lycurgus  did,  and  take  measures 
of  precaution  against  the  mischiefs  of  avarice, 
mischiefs  not  of  small  importance,  but  the 
real  seed  and  first  beginning  of  all  the  great 
and  extensive  evils  of  after-times.  The  re¬ 
division  of  estates,  Lycurgus  is  not,  it  seems 
to  me,  to  be  blamed  for  making,  nor  Numa 
for  omitting;  this  equality  was  the  basis  and 
foundation  of  the  one  commonwealth;  but  at 
Rome,  where  the  lands  had  been  lately  di¬ 
vided,  there  was  nothing  to  urge  any  redivision 
or  any  disturbance  of  the  first  arrangement, 
which  was  probably  still  in  existence. 

With  respect  to  wives  and  children,  and 
that  community  which  both,  with  a  sound  pol¬ 
icy,  appointed,  to  prevent  all  jealousy,  their 
methods,  however,  were  different.  For  when 
a  Roman  thought  himself  to  have  a  sufficient 
number  of  children,  in  case  his  neighbour 
who  had  none  should  come  and  request  his 
wife  of  him,  he  had  a  lawful  power  to  give 
her  up  to  him  who  desired  her,  either  for  a 
certain  time,  or  for  good.  The  Lacedaemonian 
husband,  on  the  other  hand,  might  allow  the 
use  of  his  wife  to  any  other  that  desired  to 
have  children  by  her,  and  yet  still  keep  her 
in  his  house,  the  original  marriage  obligation 
still  subsisting  as  at  first.  Nay,  many  hus¬ 
bands,  as  we  have  said,  would  invite  men 
whom  they  thought  likely  to  procure  them 
fine  and  good-looking  children  into  their 
houses.  What  is  the  difference,  then,  between 
the  two  customs  P  Shall  we  say  that  the  Lace¬ 
daemonian  system  is  one  of  an  extreme  and 
entire  unconcern  about  their  wives,  and 
would  cause  most  people  endless  disquiet  and 
annoyance  with  pangs  and  jealousies;  the 
Roman  course  wears  an  air  of  a  more  delicate 


LYCURGUS  AND  NUMA 

acquiescence,  draws  the  veil  of  a  new  con¬ 
tract  over  the  change,  and  concedes  the  gen¬ 
eral  insupportableness  of  mere  community? 

Numa’s  directions,  too,  for  the  care  of 
young  women,  are  better  adapted  to  the  female 
sex  and  to  propriety;  Lycurgus’s  are  altogether 
unreserved  and  unfeminine,  and  have  given  a 
great  handle  to  the  poets,  who  call  them 
(Ibycus,  for  example)  Phcenomerides,  bare¬ 
thighed;  and  give  them  the  character  (as  does 
Euripides)  of  being  wild  after  husbands — 

These  with  the  young  men  from  the  house  go 

out , 

With  thighs  that  show ,  and  robes  that  fly  about. 

For  in  fact  the  skirts  of  the  frock  worn  by  un¬ 
married  girls  were  not  sewn  together  at  the 
lower  part,  but  used  to  fly  back  and  show  the 
whole  thigh  bare  as  they  walked.  The  thing  is 
most  distinctly  given  by  Sophocles — 

— She,  also,  the  young  maid, 

Whose  froc\,  no  robe  yet  o’er  it  laid, 
Folding  bac\,  leaves  her  bare  thigh  free, 
Hermione. 

And  so  their  women,  it  is  said,  were  bold 
and  masculine,  overbearing  to  their  husbands 
in  the  first  place,  absolute  mistresses  in  their 
houses,  giving  their  opinions  about  public 
matters  freely,  and  speaking  openly  even  on 
the  most  important  subjects. 

But  the  matrons,  under  the  government  of 
Numa,  still  indeed  received  from  their  hus¬ 
bands  all  that  high  respect  and  honour  which 
had  been  paid  them  under  Romulus  as  a  sort 
of  atonement  for  the  violence  done  to  them; 
nevertheless,  great  modesty  was  enjoined  upon 
them;  all  busy  intermeddling  forbidden,  so¬ 
briety  insisted  on,  and  silence  made  habitual. 
Wine  they  were  not  to  touch  at  all,  nor  to 
speak,  except  in  their  husband’s  company, 
even  on  the  most  ordinary  subjects.  So  that 
once  when  a  woman  had  the  confidence  to 
plead  her  own  cause  in  a  court  of  judicature, 
the  senate,  it  is  said,  sent  to  inquire  of  the 
oracle  what  the  prodigy  did  portend;  and, 
indeed,  their  general  good  behaviour  and 
submissiveness  is  justly  proved  by  the  record 
of  those  that  were  otherwise;  for  as  the 
Greek  historians  record  in  their  annals  the 
names  of  those  who  first  unsheathed  the 
sword  of  civil  war,  or  murdered  their  broth¬ 
ers,  or  were  parricides,  or  killed  their  mothers, 
so  the  Roman  writers  report  it  as  the  first 
example,  that  Spurius  Carvilius  divorced  his 
wife,  being  a  case  that  never  before  happened, 
in  the  space  of  two  hundred  and  thirty  years 


63 

from  the  foundation  of  the  city;  and  that  one 
Thalaea,  the  wife  of  Pinarius,  had  a  quarrel 
(the  first  instance  of  the  kind)  with  her 
mother-in-law,  Gegania,  in  the  reign  of  Tar- 
quinius  Superbus;  so  successful  was  the  legis¬ 
lator  in  securing  order  and  good  conduct  in 
the  marriage  relation. 

Their  respective  regulations  for  marrying 
the  young  women  are  in  accordance  with 
those  for  their  education.  Lycurgus  made 
them  brides  when  they  were  of  full  age  and 
inclination  for  it.  Intercourse,  where  nature 
was  thus  consulted,  would  produce,  he 
thought,  love  and  tenderness,  instead  of  the 
dislike  and  fear  attending  an  unnatural  com¬ 
pulsion;  and  their  bodies,  also,  would  be  bet¬ 
ter  able  to  bear  the  trials  of  breeding  and  of 
bearing  children,  in  his  judgment  the  one 
end  of  marriage. 

The  Romans,  on  the  other  hand,  gave  their 
daughters  in  marriage  as  early  as  twelve  years 
old,  or  even  under;  thus  they  thought  their 
bodies  and  minds  alike  would  be  delivered 
to  the  future  husband  pure  and  undefiled. 
The  way  of  Lycurgus  seems  the  more  natural 
with  a  view  to  the  birth  of  children;  the  other, 
looking  to  a  life  to  be  spent  together,  is  more 
moral.  However,  the  rules  which  Lycurgus 
drew  up  for  superintendence  of  children,  their 
collection  into  companies,  their  discipline  and 
association,  as  also  his  exact  regulations  for 
their  meals,  exercises,  and  sports,  argue 
Numa  no  more  than  an  ordinary  lawgiver. 
Numa  left  the  whole  matter  simply  to  be 
decided  by  the  parent’s  wishes  or  necessities; 
he  might,  if  he  pleased,  make  his  son  a  hus¬ 
bandman  or  carpenter,  coppersmith  or  musi¬ 
cian;  as  if  it  were  of  no  importance  for  them 
to  be  directed  and  trained  up  from  the  begin¬ 
ning  to  one  and  the  same  common  end,  or  as 
though  it  would  do  for  them  to  be  like  pas¬ 
sengers  on  shipboard,  brought  thither  each 
for  his  own  ends  and  by  his  own  choice, 
uniting  to  act  for  the  common  good  only  in 
time  of  danger  upon  occasion  of  their  private 
fears,  in  general  looking  simply  to  their  own 
interest. 

We  may  forbear,  indeed,  to  blame  common 
legislators,  who  may  be  deficient  in  power  or 
knowledge.  But  when  a  wise  man  like  Numa 
had  received  the  sovereignty  over  a  new  and 
docile  people,  was  there  anything  that  would 
better  deserve  his  attention  than  the  educa¬ 
tion  of  children,  and  the  training  up  of  the 
young,  not  to  contrariety  and  discordance  of 
character,  but  to  the  unity  of  the  common 


64 

model  of  virtue,  to  which  from  their  cradle 
they  should  have  been  formed  and  moulded? 
One  benefit  among  many  that  Lycurgus  ob¬ 
tained  by  his  course  was  the  permanence 
which  it  secured  to  his  laws.  The  obligation 
of  oaths  to  preserve  them  would  have  availed 
but  little,  if  he  had  not,  by  discipline  and  edu¬ 
cation,  infused  them  into  the  children’s  char¬ 
acters,  and  imbued  their  whole  early  life  with 
a  love  of  his  government.  The  result  was  that 
the  main  points  and  fundamentals  of  his  legis¬ 
lation  continued  for  above  five  hundred  years, 
like  some  deep  and  thoroughly  ingrained 
tincture,  retaining  their  hold  upon  the  nation. 

But  Numa’s  whole  design  and  aim,  the 
continuance  of  peace  and  goodwill,  on  his 
death  vanished  with  him;  no  sooner  did  he 
expire  his  last  breath  than  the  gates  of  Janus’s 
temple  flew  wide  open,  and,  as  if  war  had, 
indeed,  been  kept  and  caged  up  within  those 
walls,  it  rushed  forth  to  fill  all  Italy  with 
blood  and  slaughter;  and  thus  that  best  and 
justest  fabric  of  things  was  of  no  long  continu¬ 
ance,  because  it  wanted  that  cement  which 
should  have  kept  all  together,  education.  What, 
then,  some  may  say,  has  not  Rome  been  ad¬ 
vanced  and  bettered  by  her  wars  ?  A  question 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

that  will  need  a  long  answer,  if  it  is  to  be  one 
to  satisfy  men  who  take  the  better  to  consist  in 
riches,  luxury,  and  dominion,  rather  than  in 
security,  gentleness,  and  that  independence 
which  is  accompanied  by  justice.  However,  it 
makes  much  for  Lycurgus,  that,  after  the  Ro¬ 
mans  had  deserted  the  doctrine  and  discipline 
of  Numa,  their  empire  grew  and  their  power 
increased  so  much;  whereas  so  soon  as  the  La¬ 
cedaemonians  fell  from  the  institutions  of  Ly¬ 
curgus,  they  sank  from  the  highest  to  the  low¬ 
est  state,  and,  after  forfeiting  their  supremacy 
over  the  rest  of  Greece,  were  themselves  in 
danger  of  absolute  extirpation. 

Thus  much,  meantime,  was  peculiarly  sig¬ 
nal  and  almost  divine  in  the  circumstances 
of  Numa,  that  he  was  an  alien,  and  yet 
courted  to  come  and  accept  a  kingdom,  the 
frame  of  which  though  he  entirely  altered, 
yet  he  performed  it  by  mere  persuasion,  and 
ruled  a  city  that  as  yet  had  scarce  become  one 
city,  without  recurring  to  arms  or  any  violence 
(such  as  Lycurgus  used,  supporting  himself 
by  the  aid  of  the  nobler  citizens  against  the 
commonalty),  but,  by  mere  force  of  wisdom 
and  justice,  established  union  and  harmony 
amongst  all. 


SOLON 

638-539  B.C. 


Didymus,  the  grammarian,  in  his  answer 
to  Asclepiades  concerning  Solon’s  Ta¬ 
bles  of  Law,  mentions  a  passage  of  one 
Philocles,  who  states  that  Solon’s  father’s  name 
was  Euphorion,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  all 
others  who  have  written  concerning  him;  for 
they  generally  agree  that  he  was  the  son  of  Ex- 
ecestides,  a  man  of  moderate  wealth  and  power 
in  the  city,  but  of  a  most  noble  stock,  being  de¬ 
scended  from  Codrus;  his  mother,  as  Hera- 
clides  Ponticus  affirms,  was  cousin  to  Pisistra- 
tus’s  mother,  and  the  two  at  first  were  great 
friends,  partly  because  they  were  akin,  and 
pardy  because  of  Pisistratus’s  noble  qualities 
and  beauty.  And  they  say  Solon  loved  him; 
and  that  is  the  reason,  I  suppose,  that  when 
afterwards  they  differed  about  the  government, 
their  enmity  never  produced  any  hot  and  vio¬ 
lent  passion;  they  remembered  their  old  kind¬ 
nesses,  and  retained — 

Still  in  its  embers  living  the  strong  fire 


of  their  love  and  dear  affection.  For  that  Solon 
was  not  proof  against  beauty,  nor  of  courage 
to  stand  up  to  passion  and  meet  it — 

Hand  to  hand  as  in  the  ring, 
we  may  conjecture  by  his  poems,  and  one 
of  his  laws,  in  which  there  are  practices  for¬ 
bidden  to  slaves,  which  he  would  appear, 
therefore,  to  recommend  to  freemen.  Pisis- 
tratus,  it  is  stated,  was  similarly  attached  to 
one  Charmus;  he  it  was  who  dedicated  the 
figure  of  Love  in  the  Academy,  where  the  run¬ 
ners  in  the  sacred  torch  race  light  their  torches. 

Solon,  as  Hermippus  writes,  when  his 
father  had  ruined  his  estate  in  doing  benefits 
and  kindnesses  to  other  men,  though  he  had 
friends  enough  that  were  willing  to  contrib¬ 
ute  to  his  relief,  yet  was  ashamed  to  be  be¬ 
holden  to  others,  since  he  was  descended  from 
a  family  who  were  accustomed  to  do  kind¬ 
nesses  rather  than  receive  them;  and  therefore 
applied  himself  to  merchandise  in  his  youth; 


SOLON 

though  others  assure  us  that  he  travelled 
rather  to  get  learning  and  experience  than 
to  make  money.  It  is  certain  that  he  was  a 
lover  of  knowledge,  for  when  he  was  old  he 
would  say,  that  he — 

Each  day  grew  older,  and  learnt  something  new; 
and  yet  no  admirer  of  riches,  esteeming  as 
equally  wealthy  the  man — 

Who  hath  both  gold  and  silver  in  his  hand, 
Horses  and  mules,  and  acres  of  wheat-land, 

And  him  whose  all  is  decent  food  to  eat, 

Clothes  to  his  bac\  and  shoes  upon  his  feet , 

And  a  young  wife  and  child,  since  so  ’twill  be, 
And  no  more  years  than  will  with  that  agree; 

and  in  another  place — 

Wealth  I  would  have,  but  weath  by  wrong 
procure 

1  would  not;  justice,  e’en  if  slow,  is  sure. 

And  it  is  perfectly  possible  for  a  good  man 
and  a  statesman,  without  being  solicitous  for 
superfluities,  to  show  some  concern  for  com¬ 
petent  necessaries. 

In  his  time,  as  Hesiod  says, — “Work  was 
a  shame  to  none,”  nor  was  distinction  made 
with  respect  to  trade,  but  merchandise  was  a 
noble  calling,  which  brought  home  the  good 
things  which  the  barbarous  nations  enjoyed, 
was  the  occasion  of  friendship  with  their 
kings,  and  a  great  source  of  experience.  Some 
merchants  have  built  great  cities,  as  Protis, 
the  founder  of  Massilia,  to  whom  the  Gauls, 
near  the  Rhone,  were  much  attached.  Some 
report  also,  that  Thales  and  Hippocrates  the 
mathematician  traded;  and  that  Plato  de¬ 
frayed  the  charges  of  his  travels  by  selling 
oil  in  Egypt.  Solon’s  softness  and  profuseness, 
his  popular  rather  than  philosophical  tone 
about  pleasure  in  his  poems,  have  been  as¬ 
cribed  to  his  trading  life;  for,  having  suffered 
a  thousand  dangers,  it  was  natural  they 
should  be  recompensed  with  some  gratifica¬ 
tions  and  enjoyments;  but  that  he  accounted 
himself  rather  poor  than  rich  is  evident  from 
the  lines — 

Some  wic\ed  men  are  rich,  some  good  are  poor, 
We  will  not  change  our  virtue  for  their  store: 
Virtue’s  a  thing  that  none  can  ta\e  away; 

But  money  changes  owners  all  the  day. 

At  first  he  used  his  poetry  only  in  trifles, 
not  for  any  serious  purpose,  but  simply  to 
pass  away  his  idle  hours;  but  afterwards  he 
introduced  moral  sentences  and  state  matters, 
which  he  did,  not  to  record  them  merely  as 
an  historian,  but  to  justify  his  own  actions, 
and  sometimes  to  correct,  chastise,  and  stir 
up  the  Athenians  to  noble  performances. 


65 

Some  report  that  he  designed  to  put  his  laws 
into  heroic  verse,  and  that  they  began  thus: — 
We  humbly  beg  a  blessing  on  our  laws 
From  mighty  Jove,  and  honour,  and  applause . 

In  philosophy,  as  most  of  the  wise  men 
then,  he  chiefly  esteemed  the  political  part  of 
morals;  in  physics,  he  was  very  plain  and  an¬ 
tiquated,  as  appears  by  this: — 

It  is  the  clouds  that  ma\e  the  snow  and  hail, 

And  thunder  comes  from  lightning  without  fail; 
The  sea  is  stormy  when  the  winds  have  blown, 
But  it  deals  fairly  when  ’ tis  left  alone. 

And,  indeed,  it  is  probable  that  at  that  time 
Thales  alone  had  raised  philosophy  above 
mere  practice  into  speculation;  and  the  rest 
of  the  wise  men  were  so  called  from  prudence 
in  political  concerns. 

It  is  said,  that  they  had  an  interview  at 
Delphi,  and  another  at  Corinth,  by  the  pro¬ 
curement  of  Periander,  who  made  a  meeting 
for  them,  and  a  supper.  But  their  reputation 
was  chiefly  raised  by  sending  the  tripod  to 
them  all,  by  their  modest  refusal,  and  com¬ 
plaisant  yielding  to  one  another.  For,  as  the 
story  goes,  some  of  the  Coans  fishing  with  a 
net,  some  strangers,  Milesians,  bought  the 
draught  at  a  venture;  the  net  brought  up 
a  golden  tripod,  which,  they  say,  Helen,  at 
her  return  from  Troy,  upon  the  remembrance 
of  an  old  prophecy,  threw  in  there.  Now,  the 
strangers  at  first  contesting  with  the  fishers 
about  the  tripod,  and  the  cities  espousing  the 
quarrel  so  far  as  to  engage  themselves  in  a 
war,  Apollo  decided  the  controversy  by  com¬ 
manding  to  present  it  to  the  wisest  man; 
and  first  it  was  sent  to  Miletus  to  Thales,  the 
Coans  freely  presenting  him  with  that  for 
which  they  fought  against  the  whole  body 
of  the  Milesians;  but  Thales  declaring  Bias 
the  wiser  person,  it  was  sent  to  him;  from 
him  to  another;  and  so,  going  round  them 
all,  it  came  to  Thales  a  second  time;  and, 
at  last,  being  carried  from  Miletus  to  Thebes, 
was  there  dedicated  to  Apollo  Ismenius.  Theo¬ 
phrastus  writes  that  it  was  first  presented  to 
Bias  at  Priene;  and  next  to  Thales  at  Miletus, 
and  so  through  all  it  returned  to  Bias,  and 
was  afterwards  sent  to  Delphi.  This  is  the 
general  report,  only  some,  instead  of  a  tripod, 
say  this  present  was  a  cup  sent  by  Croesus; 
others,  a  piece  of  plate  that  one  Bathycles 
had  left. 

It  is  stated,  that  Anacharsis  and  Solon, 
and  Solon  and  Thales,  were  familiarly  ac¬ 
quainted,  and  some  have  delivered  parts  of 
their  discourse;  for,  they  say,  Anacharsis, 


66 


coming  to  Athens,  knocked  at  Solon’s  door, 
and  told  him,  that  he,  being  a  stranger,  was 
come  to  be  his  guest,  and  contract  a  friend¬ 
ship  with  him;  and  Solon  replying,  “It  is 
better  to  make  friends  at  home,”  Anacharsis 
replied,  “Then  you  that  are  at  home  make 
friendship  with  me.”  Solon,  somewhat  sur¬ 
prised  at  the  readiness  of  the  repartee,  re¬ 
ceived  him  kindly,  and  kept  him  some  time 
with  him,  being  already  engaged  in  public 
business  and  the  compilation  of  his  laws; 
which,  when  Anacharsis  understood,  he 
laughed  at  him  for  imagining  the  dishonesty 
and  covetousness  of  his  countrymen  could  be 
restrained  by  written  laws,  which  were  like 
spiders’  webs,  and  would  catch,  it  is  true, 
the  weak  and  poor,  but  easily  be  broken  by 
the  mighty  and  rich.  To  this  Solon  rejoined 
that  men  keep  their  promises  when  neither 
side  can  get  anything  by  the  breaking  of 
them;  and  he  would  so  fit  his  laws  to  the 
citizens,  that  all  should  understand  it  was 
more  eligible  to  be  just  than  to  break  the 
laws.  But  the  event  rather  agreed  with  the 
conjecture  of  Anacharsis  than  Solon’s  hope. 
Anacharsis,  being  once  at  the  Assembly,  ex¬ 
pressed  his  wonder  at  the  fact  that  in  Greece 
wise  men  spoke  and  fools  decided. 

Solon  went,  they  say,  to  Thales,  at  Miletus, 
and  wondered  that  Thales  took  no  care  to 
get  him  a  wife  and  children.  To  this,  Thales 
made  no  answer  for  the  present;  but  a  few 
days  after  procured  a  stranger  to  pretend 
that  he  had  left  Athens  ten  days  ago;  and 
Solon  inquiring  what  news  there,  the  man, 
according  to  his  instructions,  replied,  “None 
but  a  young  man’s  funeral,  which  the  whole 
city  attended;  for  he  was  the  son,  they  said, 
of  an  honourable  man,  the  most  virtuous  of 
the  citizens,  who  was  not  then  at  home,  but 
had  been  travelling  a  long  time.”  Solon  re¬ 
plied,  “What  a  miserable  man  is  he!  But 
what  was  his  name?”  “I  have  heard  it,”  says 
the  man,  “but  have  now  forgotten  it,  only 
there  was  a  great  talk  of  his  wisdom  and  his 
justice.”  Thus  Solon  was  drawn  on  by  every 
answer,  and  his  fears  heightened,  till  at  last, 
being  extremely  concerned,  he  mentioned  his 
own  name,  and  asked  the  stranger  if  that 
young  man  was  called  Solon’s  son;  and  the 
stranger  assenting,  he  began  to  beat  his  head, 
and  to  do  and  say  all  that  is  usual  with  men 
in  transports  of  grief.  But  Thales  took  his 
hand,  and  with  a  smile,  said,  “These  things, 
Solon,  keep  me  from  marriage  and  rearing 
children,  which  are  too  great  for  even  your 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

constancy  to  support;  however,  be  not  con¬ 
cerned  at  the  report,  for  it  is  a  fiction.”  This 
Hermippus  relates,  from  Pataecus,  who 
boasted  that  he  had  Aesop’s  soul. 

However,  it  is  irrational  and  poor-spirited 
not  to  seek  conveniences  for  fear  of  losing 
them,  for  upon  the  same  account  we  should 
not  allow  ourselves  to  like  wealth,  glory,  or 
wisdom,  since  we  may  fear  to  be  deprived 
of  all  these;  nay,  even  virtue  itself,  than  which 
there  is  no  greater  nor  more  desirable  posses¬ 
sion,  is  often  suspended  by  sickness  or  drugs. 
Now  Thales,  though  unmarried,  could  not 
be  free  from  solicitude  unless  he  likewise 
felt  no  care  for  his  friends,  his  kinsman,  or 
his  country;  yet  we  are  told  he  adopted  Cy- 
bisthus,  his  sister’s  son. 

For  the  soul,  having  a  principle  of  kindness 
in  itself,  and  being  born  to  love,  as  well  as 
perceive,  think,  or  remember,  inclines  and 
fixes  upon  some  stranger,  when  a  man  has 
none  of  his  own  to  embrace.  And  alien  or 
illegitimate  objects  insinuate  themselves  into 
his  affections,  as  into  some  estate  that  lacks 
lawful  heirs;  and  with  affection  come  anxiety 
and  care;  insomuch  that  you  may  see  men 
that  use  the  strongest  language  against  the 
marriage-bed  and  the  fruit  of  it,  when  some 
servant’s  or  concubine’s  child  is  sick  or  dies, 
almost  killed  with  grief,  and  abjectly  lament¬ 
ing.  Some  have  given  way  to  shameful  and 
desperate  sorrow  at  the  loss  of  a  dog  or  horse; 
others  have  borne  the  death  of  virtuous  chil¬ 
dren  without  any  extravagant  or  unbecoming 
grief,  have  passed  the  rest  of  their  lives  like 
men,  and  according  to  the  principles  of 
reason.  It  is  not  affection,  it  is  weakness  that 
brings  men,  unarmed  against  fortune  by  rea¬ 
son,  into  these  endless  pains  and  terrors;  and 
they  indeed  have  not  even  the  present  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  what  they  dote  upon,  the  possibility  of 
the  future  loss  causing  them  continual  pangs, 
tremors,  and  distresses.  We  must  not  provide 
against  the  loss  of  wealth  by  poverty,  or  of 
friends  by  refusing  all  acquaintance,  or  of  chil¬ 
dren  by  having  none,  but  by  morality  and  rea¬ 
son.  But  of  this  too  much. 

Now,  when  the  Athenians  were  tired  with 
a  tedious  and  difficult  war  that  they  con¬ 
ducted  against  the  Megarians  for  the  island 
Salamis,  and  made  a  law  that  it  should  be 
death  for  any  man,  by  writing  or  speaking, 
to  assert  that  the  city  ought  to  endeavour  to 
recover  it,  Solon,  vexed  at  the  disgrace,  and 
perceiving  thousands  of  the  youth  wished  for 
somebody  to  begin,  but  did  not  dare  to  stir 


SOLON 

first  for  fear  of  the  law,  counterfeited  a  dis¬ 
traction,  and  by  his  own  family  it  was  spread 
about  the  city  that  he  was  mad.  He  then 
secretly  composed  some  elegiac  verses,  and 
getting  them  by  heart,  that  it  might  seem  ex¬ 
tempore,  ran  out  into  the  market-place  with 
a  cap  upon  his  head,  and,  the  people  gather¬ 
ing  about  him,  got  upon  the  herald’s  stand, 
and  sang  that  elegy  which  begins  thus: — 

I  am  a  herald  come  from  Salamis  the  fair, 

My  news  from  thence  my  verses  shall  declare. 
The  poem  is  called  Salamis;  it  contains  an 
hundred  verses  very  elegantly  written;  when 
it  had  been  sung,  his  friends  commended  it, 
and  especially  Pisistratus  exhorted  the  citizens 
to  obey  his  directions;  insomuch  that  they  re¬ 
called  the  law,  and  renewed  the  war  under 
Solon’s  conduct. 

The  popular  tale  is,  that  with  Pisistratus 
he  sailed  to  Colias,  and,  finding  the  women, 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  country  there, 
sacrificing  to  Ceres,  he  sent  a  trusty  friend  to 
Salamis,  who  should  pretend  himself  a  rene¬ 
gade,  and  advise  them,  if  they  desired  to 

(seize  the  chief  Athenian  women,  to  come  with 
him  at  once  to  Colias;  the  Megarians  presently 
sent  off  men  in  the  vessel  with  him;  and 
Solon,  seeing  it  put  off  from  the  island,  com¬ 
manded  the  women  to  be  gone,  and  some 
beardless  youths,  dressed  in  their  clothes,  their 
shoes  and  caps,  and  privately  armed  with 
daggers,  to  dance  and  play  near  the  shore  till 
the  enemies  had  landed  and  the  vessel  was  in 
their  power.  Things  being  thus  ordered,  the 
Megarians  were  lured  with  the  appearance, 
and,  coming  to  the  shore,  jumped  out,  eager 
who  should  first  seize  a  prize,  so  that  not  one 
of  them  escaped;  and  the  Athenians  set  sail  for 
the  island  and  took  it. 

Others  say  that  it  was  not  taken  this  way, 
but  that  he  first  received  this  oracle  from 
Delphi: — 

Those  heroes  that  in  fair  Asopia  rest, 

All  buried  with  their  faces  to  the  west, 

Go  and  appease  with  offerings  of  the  best; 
and  that  Solon,  sailing  by  night  to  the  island, 
sacrificed  to  the  heroes  Periphemus  and  Cy- 
chreus,  and  then  taking  five  hundred  Athe¬ 
nian  volunteers  (a  law  having  passed  that 
those  that  took  the  island  should  be  highest 
in  the  government),  with  a  number  of  fisher- 
boats  and  one  thirty-oared  ship,  anchored 
in  a  bay  of  Salamis  that  looks  towards  Nisaea; 
and  the  Megarians  that  were  then  in  the 
island,  hearing  only  an  uncertain  report, 
hurried  to  their  arms,  and  sent  a  ship  to  rec- 


67 

onnoitre  the  enemies.  This  ship  Solon  took, 
and,  securing  the  Megarians,  manned  it  with 
Athenians,  and  gave  them  orders  to  sail  to 
the  island  with  as  much  privacy  as  possible; 
meantime  he,  with  the  other  soldiers,  marched 
against  the  Megarians  by  land,  and  whilst 
they  were  fighting,  those  from  the  ship  took 
the  city.  And  this  narrative  is  confirmed  by 
the  following  solemnity,  that  was  afterwards 
observed:  An  Athenian  ship  used  to  sail 
silently  at  first  to  the  island,  then,  with  noise 
and  a  great  shout,  one  leapt  out  armed,  and 
with  a  loud  cry  ran  to  the  promontory  Scira- 
dium  to  meet  those  that  approached  upon 
the  land.  And  just  by  there  stands  a  temple 
which  Solon  dedicated  to  Mars.  For  he  beat 
the  Megarians,  and  as  many  as  were  not  killed 
in  the  battle  he  sent  away  upon  conditions. 

The  Megarians,  however,  still  contending, 
and  both  sides  having  received  considerable 
losses,  they  chose  the  Spartans  for  arbitrators. 
Now,  many  affirm  that  Homer’s  authority 
did  Solon  a  considerable  kindness,  and  that, 
introducing  a  line  into  the  Catalogue  of  Ships, 
when  the  matter  was  to  be  determined,  he 
read  the  passage  as  follows: — 

Twelve  ships  from  Salamis  stout  Ajax  brought, 
And  ranged  his  men  where  the  Athenians  fought. 
The  Athenians,  however,  call  this  but  an  idle 
story,  and  report  that  Solon  made  it  appear 
to  the  judges,  that  Philaeus  and  Eurysaces,  the 
sons  of  Ajax,  being  made  citizens  of  Athens, 
gave  them  the  island,  and  that  one  of  them 
dwelt  at  Brauron  in  Attica,  the  other  at  Melite; 
and  they  have  a  township  of  Philaidae,  to  which 
Pisistratus  belonged,  deriving  its  name  from 
this  Philaeus.  Solon  took  a  further  argument 
against  the  Megarians  from  the  dead  bodies, 
which,  he  said,  were  not  buried  after  their 
fashion,  but  according  to  the  Athenian;  for  the 
Megarians  turn  the  corpse  to  the  east,  the 
Athenians  to  the  west.  But  Hereas  the  Megari- 
an  denies  this,  and  affirms  that  they  likewise 
turn  the  body  to  the  west,  and  also  that  the 
Athenians  have  a  separate  tomb  for  everybody, 
but  the  Megarians  put  two  or  three  into  one. 
However,  some  of  Apollo’s  oracles,  where  he 
calls  Salamis  Ionian,  made  much  for  Solon. 
This  matter  was  determined  by  five  Spartans, 
Critolaidas,  Amompharetus,  Hypsechidas,  An- 
axilas,  and  Cleomenes. 

For  this,  Solon  grew  famed  and  powerful; 
but  his  advice  in  favour  of  defending  the 
oracle  at  Delphi,  to  give  aid,  and  not  to  suffer 
the  Cirrhaeans  to  profane  it,  but  to  maintain 
the  honour  of  the  god,  got  him  most  repute 


68 


among  the  Greeks;  for  upon  his  persuasion 
the  Amphictyons  undertook  the  war,  as 
amongst  others,  Aristotle  affirms,  in  his  enu¬ 
meration  of  the  victors  at  the  Pythian  games, 
where  he  makes  Solon  the  author  of  this 
counsel.  Solon,  however,  was  not  general  in 
that  expedition,  as  Hermippus  states,  out  of 
Evanthes  the  Samian;  for  ^Eschines  the  orator 
says  no  such  thing,  and,  in  the  Delphian  reg¬ 
ister,  Alcmaeon,  not  Solon,  is  named  as  com¬ 
mander  of  the  Athenians. 

Now  the  Cylonian  pollution  had  a  long 
while  disturbed  the  commonwealth,  ever  since 
the  time  when  Megacles  the  archon  persuaded 
the  conspirators  with  Cylon  that  took  sanc¬ 
tuary  in  Minerva’s  temple  to  come  down  and 
stand  to  a  fair  trial.  And  they,  tying  a  thread 
to  the  image,  and  holding  one  end  of  it, 
went  down  to  the  tribunal;  but  when  they 
came  to  the  temple  of  the  Furies,  the  thread 
broke  of  its  own  accord,  upon  which,  as  if 
the  goddess  had  refused  them  protection, 
they  were  seized  by  Megacles  and  the  other 
magistrates;  as  many  as  were  without  the 
temples  were  stoned,  these  that  fled  for  sanc¬ 
tuary  were  butchered  at  the  altar,  and  only 
those  escaped  who  made  supplication  to  the 
wives  of  the  magistrates.  But  they  from  that 
time  were  considered  under  pollution,  and 
regarded  with  hatred. 

The  remainder  of  the  faction  of  Cylon 
grew  strong  again,  and  had  continual  quarrels 
with  the  family  of  Megacles;  and  now  the 
quarrel  being  at  its  height,  and  the  people 
divided,  Solon,  being  in  reputation,  inter¬ 
posed  with  the  chiefest  of  the  Athenians,  and 
by  entreaty  and  admonition  persuaded  the 
polluted  to  submit  to  a  trial  and  the  decision 
of  three  hundred  noble  citizens.  And  Myron 
of  Phlya  being  their  accuser,  they  were  found 
guilty,  and  as  many  as  were  then  alive  were 
banished,  and  the  bodies  of  the  dead  were 
dug  up,  and  scattered  beyond  the  confines 
of  the  country. 

In  the  midst  of  these  distractions,  the  Meg- 
arians  falling  upon  them,  they  lost  Nisaea 
and  Salamis  again;  besides,  the  city  was  dis¬ 
turbed  with  superstitious  fears  and  strange 
appearances,  and  the  priests  declared  that  the 
sacrifices  intimated  some  villainies  and  pollu¬ 
tions  that  were  to  be  expiated.  Upon  this, 
they  sent  for  Epimenides  the  Phaestian  from 
Crete,  who  is  counted  the  seventh  wise  man 
by  those  that  will  not  admit  Periander  into 
the  number.  He  seems  to  have  been  thought 
a  favourite  of  heaven,  possessed  of  knowledge 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

in  all  the  supernatural  and  ritual  parts  of 
religion;  and,  therefore,  the  men  of  his  age 
called  him  a  new  Curies,  and  son  of  a  nymph 
named  Balte.  When  he  came  to  Athens,  and 
grew  acquainted  with  Solon,  he  served  him 
in  many  instances,  and  prepared  the  way  for 
his  legislation.  He  made  them  moderate  in 
their  forms  of  worship,  and  abated  their 
mourning  by  ordering  some  sacrifices  pres¬ 
ently  after  the  funeral,  and  taking  off  those 
severe  and  barbarous  ceremonies  which  the 
women  usually  practised;  but  the  greatest 
benefit  was  his  purifying  and  sanctifying  the 
city,  by  certain  propitiatory  and  expiatory  lus¬ 
trations,  and  foundations  of  sacred  buildings, 
by  that  means  making  them  more  submissive 
to  justice,  and  more  inclined  to  harmony. 
It  is  reported  that,  looking  upon  Munychia, 
and  considering  a  long  while,  he  said  to  those 
that  stood  by,  “How  blind  is  man  in  future 
things!  for  did  the  Athenians  foresee  what 
mischief  this  would  do  their  city,  they  would 
even  eat  it  with  their  own  teeth  to  be  rid 
of  it.”  A  similar  anticipation  is  ascribed  to 
Thales;  they  say  he  commanded  his  friends 
to  bury  him  in  an  obscure  and  contemned 
quarter  of  the  territory  of  Miletus,  saying 
that  it  should  some  day  be  the  market-place 
of  the  Milesians.  Epimenides,  being  much 
honoured,  and  receiving  from  the  city  rich 
offers  of  large  gifts  and  privileges,  requested 
but  one  branch  of  the  sacred  olive,  and,  on 
that  being  granted,  returned. 

The  Athenians,  now  the  Cylonian  sedition 
was  over  and  the  polluted  gone  into  banish¬ 
ment,  fell  into  their  old  quarrels  about  the 
government,  there  being  as  many  different 
parties  as  there  were  diversities  in  the  country. 
The  Hill  quarter  favoured  democracy,  the 
Plain,  oligarchy,  and  those  that  lived  by  the 
Seaside  stood  for  a  mixed  sort  of  govern¬ 
ment,  and  so  hindered  either  of  the  other 
parties  from  prevailing.  And  the  disparity 
of  fortune  between  the  rich  and  the  poor, 
at  that  time,  also  reached  its  height;  so  that 
the  city  seemed  to  be  in  a  truly  dangerous 
condition,  and  no  other  means  for  freeing  it 
from  disturbances  and  settling  it  to  be  possible 
but  a  despotic  power.  All  the  people  were 
indebted  to  the  rich;  and  either  they  tilled 
their  land  for  their  creditors,  paying  them  a 
sixth  part  of  the  increase,  and  were,  there¬ 
fore,  called  Hectemorii  and  Thetes,  or  else 
they  engaged  their  body  for  the  debt,  and 
might  be  seized,  and  either  sent  into  slavery 
at  home,  or  sold  to  strangers;  some  (for  no 


SOLON 

law  forbade  it)  were  forced  to  sell  their  chil¬ 
dren,  or  fly  their  country  to  avoid  the  cruelty 
of  their  creditors;  but  the  most  part  and  the 
bravest  of  them  began  to  combine  together 
and  encourage  one  another  to  stand  to  it, 
to  choose  a  leader,  to  liberate  the  condemned 
debtors,  divide  the  land,  and  change  the  gov¬ 
ernment. 

Then  the  wisest  of  the  Athenians,  perceiv¬ 
ing  Solon  was  of  all  men  the  only  one  not 
implicated  in  the  troubles,  that  he  had  not 
joined  in  the  exactions  of  the  rich,  and  was 
not  involved  in  the  necessities  of  the  poor, 
pressed  him  to  succour  the  commonwealth 
and  compose  the  differences.  Though  Phanias 
the  Lesbian  affirms,  that  Solon,  to  save  his 
country,  put  a  trick  upon  both  parties,  and 
privately  promised  the  poor  a  division  of  the 
lands,  and  the  rich  security  for  their  debts. 
Solon,  however,  himself  says,  that  it  was  re¬ 
luctantly  at  first  that  he  engaged  in  state 
affairs,  being  afraid  of  the  pride  of  one  party 
and  the  greediness  of  the  other;  he  was  chosen 
archon,  however,  after  Philombrotus,  and  em¬ 
powered  to  be  an  arbitrator  and  lawgiver;  the 
rich  consenting  because  he  was  wealthy,  the 
poor  because  he  was  honest.  There  was  a  say¬ 
ing  of  his  current  before  the  election,  that 
when  things  are  even  there  never  can  be  war, 
and  this  pleased  both  parties,  the  wealthy  and 
the  poor;  the  one  conceiving  him  to  mean, 
when  all  have  their  fair  proportion;  the  others, 
when  all  are  absolutely  equal. 

Thus,  there  being  great  hopes  on  both  sides, 
the  chief  men  pressed  Solon  to  take  the  gov¬ 
ernment  into  his  own  hands,  and,  when  he 
was  once  settled,  manage  the  business  freely 
and  according  to  his  pleasure;  and  many  of 
the  commons,  perceiving  it  would  be  a  diffi¬ 
cult  change  to  be  effected  by  law  and  reason, 
were  willing  to  have  one  wise  and  just  man 
set  over  the  affairs;  and  some  say  that  Solon 
had  this  oracle  from  Apollo — 

Ta\e  the  mid-seat,  and  be  the  vessel1  s  guide ; 

Many  in  Athens  are  upon  your  side . 

But  chiefly  his  familiar  friends  chid  him  for 
disaffecting  monarchy  only  because  of  the 
name,  as  if  the  virtue  of  the  ruler  could  not 
make  it  a  lawful  form;  Euboea  had  made  this 
experiment  when  it  chose  Tynnondas,  and 
Mitylene,  which  had  made  Pittacus  its  prince; 
yet  this  could  not  shake  Solon’s  resolution; 
but,  as  they  say,  he  replied  to  his  friends,  that 
it  was  true  a  tyranny  was  a  very  fair  spot, 
but  it  had  no  way  down  from  it;  and  in  a 
copy  of  verses  to  Phocus  he  writes — 


69 

that  l  spared  my  land, 

And  withheld  from  usurpation  and  from  violence 
my  hand, 

And  forbore  to  fix  a  stain  and  a  disgrace  on  my 
good  name, 

l  regret  not;  1  believe  that  it  will  be  my  chief est 
fame. 

From  which  it  is  manifest  that  he  was  a  man 
of  great  reputation  before  he  gave  his  laws. 
The  several  mocks  that  were  put  upon  him 
for  refusing  the  power,  he  records  in  these 
words : — 

Solon  surely  was  a  dreamer,  and  a  man  of  simple 
mind; 

When  the  gods  would  give  him  fortune,  he  of  his 
own  will  declined: 

When  the  net  was  full  of  fishes,  over-heavy 
thinking  it, 

He  declined  to  haul  it  up,  through  want  of  heart 
and  want  of  wit. 

Had  but  I  that  chance  of  riches  and  of  \ingship, 
for  one  day, 

I  would  give  my  s\in  for  flaying,  and  my  house 
to  die  away. 

Thus  he  makes  the  many  and  the  low 
people  speak  of  him.  Yet,  though  he  refused 
the  government,  he  was  not  too  mild  in  the 
affair;  he  did  not  show  himself  mean  and 
submissive  to  the  powerful,  nor  make  his 
laws  to  pleasure  those  that  chose  him.  For 
where  it  was  well  before,  he  applied  no  rem¬ 
edy,  nor  altered  anything,  for  fear  lest — 
Overthrowing  altogether  and  disordering  the 
state, 

he  should  be  too  weak  to  new-model  and  re¬ 
compose  it  to  a  tolerable  condition;  but  what 
he  thought  he  could  effect  by  persuasion  upon 
the  pliable,  and  by  force  upon  the  stubborn, 
this  he  did,  as  he  himself  says — 

With  force  and  justice  wording  both  in  one. 
And,  therefore,  when  he  was  afterwards  asked 
if  he  had  left  the  Athenians  the  best  laws 
that  could  be  given,  he  replied,  “The  best 
they  could  receive.”  The  way  which,  the 
moderns  say,  the  Athenians  have  of  softening 
the  badness  of  a  thing,  by  ingeniously  giving 
it  some  pretty  and  innocent  appellation,  call¬ 
ing  harlots,  for  example,  mistresses,  tributes 
customs,  a  garrison  a  guard,  and  the  jail  the 
chamber,  seems  originally  to  have  been  Solon’s 
contrivance,  who  called  cancelling  debts  Seis- 
acthea,  a  relief,  or  disencumbrance.  For  the 
first  thing  which  he  settled  was,  that  what 
debts  remained  should  be  forgiven,  and  no 
man,  for  the  future,  should  engage  the  body 
of  his  debtor  for  security.  Though  some,  as 
Androtion,  affirm  that  the  debts  were  not 


70 


cancelled,  but  the  interest  only  lessened,  which 
sufficiently  pleased  the  people;  so  that  they 
named  this  benefit  the  Seisacthea,  together 
with  the  enlarging  their  measures,  and  raising 
the  value  of  their  money;  for  he  made  a 
pound,  which  before  passed  for  seventy-three 
drachmas,  go  for  a  hundred;  so  that,  though 
the  number  of  pieces  in  the  payment  was 
equal,  the  value  was  less;  which  proved  a 
considerable  benefit  to  those  that  were  to  dis¬ 
charge  great  debts,  and  no  loss  to  the  credi¬ 
tors.  But  most  agree  that  it  was  the  taking  off 
the  debts  that  was  called  Seisacthea,  which 
is  confirmed  by  some  places  in  his  poem, 
where  he  takes  honour  to  himself,  that — 

The  mortgage-stones  that  covered  her,  by  me 

Removed, — the  land  that  was  a  slave  is  free: 

that  some  who  had  been  seized  for  their  debts 
he  had  brought  back  from  other  countries, 
where — 

— so  jar  their  lot  to  roam, 

They  had  forgot  the  language  of  their  home; 

and  some  he  had  set  at  liberty — 

Who  here  in  shameful  servitude  were  held. 

While  he  was  designing  this,  a  most  vexa¬ 
tious  thing  happened;  for  when  he  had  re¬ 
solved  to  take  off  the  debts,  and  was  consider¬ 
ing  the  proper  form  and  fit  beginning  for  it, 
he  told  some  of  this  friends,  Conon,  Clinias, 
and  Hipponicus,  in  whom  he  had  a  great 
deal  of  confidence,  that  he  would  not  meddle 
with  the  lands,  but  only  free  the  people  from 
their  debts;  upon  which  they,  using  their 
advantage,  made  haste  and  borrowed  some 
considerable  sums  of  money,  and  purchased 
some  large  farms;  and  when  the  law  was 
enacted,  they  kept  the  possessions,  and  would 
not  return  the  money;  which  brought  Solon 
into  great  suspicion  and  dislike,  as  if  he  him¬ 
self  had  not  been  abused,  but  was  concerned 
in  the  contrivance.  But  he  presently  stopped 
this  suspicion,  by  releasing  his  debtors  of  five 
talents  (for  he  had  lent  so  much),  according 
to  the  law;  others,  as  Polyzelus  the  Rhodian, 
say  fifteen;  his  friends,  however,  were  ever 
afterward  called  Chreocopidae,  repudiators. 

In  this  he  pleased  neither  party,  for  the 
rich  were  angry  for  their  money,  and  the 
poor  that  the  land  was  not  divided,  and,  as 
Lycurgus  ordered  in  his  commonwealth,  all 
men  reduced  to  equality.  He,  it  is  true,  being 
the  eleventh  from  Hercules,  and  having 
reigned  many  years  in  Lacedaemon,  had  got 
a  great  reputation  and  friends  and  power, 
which  he  could  use  in  modelling  his  state; 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  applying  force  more  than  persuasion,  in¬ 
somuch  that  he  lost  his  eye  in  the  scuffle, 
was  able  to  employ  the  most  effectual  means 
for  the  safety  and  harmony  of  a  state,  by 
not  permitting  any  to  be  poor  or  rich  in  his 
commonwealth.  Solon  could  not  rise  to  that 
in  his  polity,  being  but  a  citizen  of  the  middle 
classes;  yet  he  acted  fully  up  to  the  height 
of  his  power,  having  nothing  but  the  good¬ 
will  and  good  opinion  of  his  citizens  to  rely 
on;  and  that  he  offended  the  most  part,  who 
looked  for  another  result,  he  declares  in  the 
words — 

Formerly  they  boasted  of  me  vainly;  with  averted 

eyes 

Now  they  look  askance  upon  me;  friends  no 

more,  but  enemies. 

And  yet  had  any  other  man,  he  says,  received 
the  same  power — 

He  would  not  have  forborne,  nor  let  alone, 

But  made  the  fattest  of  the  milk  his  own. 

Soon,  however,  becoming  sensible  of  the  good 
that  was  done,  they  laid  by  their  grudges, 
made  a  public  sacrifice,  calling  it  Seisacthea, 
and  chose  Solon  to  new-model  and  make  laws 
for  the  commonwealth,  giving  him  the  entire 
power  over  everything,  their  magistracies, 
their  assemblies,  courts,  and  councils;  that  he 
should  appoint  the  number,  times  of  meeting, 
and  what  estate  they  must  have  that  could 
be  capable  of  these,  and  dissolve  or  continue 
any  of  the  present  constitutions,  according  to 
his  pleasure. 

First,  then,  he  repealed  all  Draco’s  laws, 
except  those  concerning  homicide,  because 
they  were  too  severe,  and  the  punishments 
too  great;  for  death  was  appointed  for  almost 
all  offences,  insomuch  that  those  that  were 
convicted  of  idleness  were  to  die,  and  those 
that  stole  a  cabbage  or  an  apple  to  suffer 
even  as  villains  that  committed  sacrilege  or 
murder.  So  that  Demades,  in  after  time,  was 
thought  to  have  said  very  happily,  that 
Draco’s  laws  were  written  not  with  ink  but 
blood;  and  he,  himself,  being  once  asked  why 
he  made  death  the  punishment  of  most  of¬ 
fences,  replied,  “Small  ones  deserve  that,  and  I 
have  no  higher  for  the  greater  crimes.” 

Next,  Solon,  being  willing  to  continue  the 
magistracies  in  the  hands  of  the  rich  men, 
and  yet  receive  the  people  into  the  other  part 
of  the  government,  took  an  account  of  the 
citizens’  estates,  and  those  that  were  worth 
five  hundred  measures  of  fruit,  dry  and  liq¬ 
uid,  he  placed  in  the  first  rank,  calling  them 
Pentacosiomedimni;  those  that  could  keep  an 


SOLON 

horse,  or  were  worth  three  hundred  measures, 
were  named  Hippada  Teluntes,  and  made 
the  second  class;  the  Zeugitae,  that  had  two 
hundred  measures,  were  in  the  third;  and 
all  the  others  were  called  Thetes,  who  were 
not  admitted  to  any  office,  but  could  come 
to  the  assembly,  and  act  as  jurors;  which  at 
first  seemed  nothing,  but  afterwards  was 
found  an  enormous  privilege,  as  almost  every 
matter  of  dispute  came  before  them  in  this 
latter  capacity.  Even  in  the  cases  which  he 
assigned  to  the  archon’s  cognisance,  he  al¬ 
lowed  an  appeal  to  the  courts. 

Besides,  it  is  said  that  he  was  obscure  and 
ambiguous  in  the  wording  of  his  laws,  on 
purpose  to  increase  the  honour  of  his  courts; 
for  since  their  differences  could  not  be  ad¬ 
justed  by  the  letter,  they  would  have  to  bring 
all  their  causes  to  the  judges,  who  thus  were 
in  a  manner  masters  of  the  laws.  Of  this  equal¬ 
isation  he  himself  makes  mention  in  this  man- 
ner:- 

Such  power  I  gave  the  people  as  might  do, 
Abridged  not  what  they  had,  now  lavished  new, 
Those  that  were  great  in  wealth  and  high  in  place 
My  counsel  likewise  \ept  from  all  disgrace. 

Before  them  both  l  held  my  shield  of  might, 

And  let  not  either  touch  the  other's  right. 

And  for  the  greater  security  of  the  weak 
commons,  he  gave  general  liberty  of  indicting 
for  an  act  of  injury;  if  any  one  was  beaten, 
maimed,  or  suffered  any  violence,  any  man 
that  would  and  was  able  might  prosecute 
the  wrong-doer;  intending  by  this  to  accustom 
the  citizens,  like  members  of  the  same  body, 
to  resent  and  be  sensible  of  one  another’s  in¬ 
juries.  And  there  is  a  saying  of  his  agreeable 
to  his  law,  for,  being  asked  what  city  was 
best  modelled,  “That,”  said  he,  “where  those 
that  are  not  injured  try  and  punish  the  un¬ 
just  as  much  as  those  that  are.” 

When  he  had  constituted  the  Areopagus  of 
those  who  had  been  yearly  archons,  of  which 
he  himself  was  a  member  therefore,  observ¬ 
ing  that  the  people,  now  free  from  their  debts, 
were  unsettled  and  imperious,  he  formed 
another  council  of  four  hundred,  a  hundred 
out  of  each  of  the  four  tribes,  which  was  to 
inspect  all  matters  before  they  were  pro¬ 
pounded  to  the  people,  and  to  take  care  that 
nothing  but  what  had  been  first  examined 
should  be  brought  before  the  general  assem¬ 
bly.  The  upper  council,  or  Areopagus,  he 
made  inspectors  and  keepers  of  the  laws,  con¬ 
ceiving  that  the  commonwealth,  held  by  these 
two  councils,  like  anchors,  would  be  less  liable 


71 

to  be  tossed  by  tumults,  and  the  people  be  more 
quiet. 

Such  is  the  general  statement,  that  Solon 
instituted  the  Areopagus;  which  seems  to  be 
confirmed,  because  Draco  makes  no  mention 
of  the  Areopagites,  but  in  all  causes  of  blood 
refers  to  the  Ephetae;  yet  Solon’s  thirteenth 
table  contains  the  eighth  law  set  down  in 
these  very  words:  “Whoever  before  Solon’s 
archonship  were  disfranchised,  let  them  be 
restored,  except  those  that,  being  condemned 
by  the  Areopagus,  Ephetae,  or  in  the  Pry- 
taneum  by  the  kings,  for  homicide,  murder, 
or  designs  against  the  government,  were  in 
banishment  when  this  law  was  made”;  and 
these  words  seem  to  show  that  the  Areopagus 
existed  before  Solon’s  laws,  for  who  could 
be  condemned  by  that  council  before  his  time, 
if  he  was  the  first  that  instituted  the  court? 
Unless,  which  is  probable,  there  is  some  ellip¬ 
sis,  or  want  of  precision  in  the  language,  and 
it  should  run  thus: — “Those  that  are  convicted 
of  such  offences  as  belong  to  the  cognisance  of 
the  Areopagites,  Ephetae,  or  the  Prytanes,  when 
this  law  was  made,”  shall  remain  still  in  dis¬ 
grace,  whilst  others  are  restored;  of  this  the 
reader  must  judge. 

Amongst  his  other  laws,  one  is  very  pe¬ 
culiar  and  surprising,  which  disfranchises  all 
who  stand  neuter  in  a  sedition;  for  it  seems 
he  would  not  have  any  one  remain  insensible 
and  regardless  of  the  public  good,  and  secur¬ 
ing  his  private  affairs,  glory  that  he  has  no 
feeling  of  the  distempers  of  his  country;  but 
at  once  join  with  the  good  party  and  those 
that  have  the  right  upon  their  side,  assist 
and  venture  with  them,  rather  than  keep  out 
of  harm’s  way  and  watch  who  would  get  the 
better.  It  seems  an  absurd  and  foolish  law 
which  permits  an  heiress,  if  her  lawful  hus¬ 
band  fail  her,  to  take  his  nearest  kinsman;  yet 
some  say  this  law  was  well  contrived  against 
those  who,  conscious  of  their  own  unfitness, 
yet,  for  the  sake  of  the  portion,  would  match 
with  heiresses,  and  make  use  of  law  to  put  a 
violence  upon  nature;  for  now,  since  she  can 
quit  him  for  whom  she  pleases,  they  would 
either  abstain  from  such  marriages,  or  con¬ 
tinue  them  with  disgrace,  and  suffer  for  their 
covetousness  and  designed  affront;  it  is  well 
done,  moreover,  to  confine  her  to  her  hus¬ 
band’s  nearest  kinsman,  that  the  children  may 
be  of  the  same  family.  Agreeable  to  this  is  the 
law  that  the  bride  and  bridegroom  shall  be 
shut  into  a  chamber,  and  eat  a  quince  together; 
and  that  the  husband  of  an  heiress  shall  con- 


72 


sort  with  her  thrice  a  month;  for  though  there 
be  no  children,  yet  it  is  an  honour  and  due  af¬ 
fection  which  an  husband  ought  to  pay  to  a 
virtuous,  chaste  wife;  it  takes  off  all  petty  dif¬ 
ferences,  and  will  not  permit  their  little  quar¬ 
rels  to  proceed  to  a  rupture. 

In  all  other  marriages  he  forbade  dowries 
to  be  given;  the  wife  was  to  have  three  suits 
of  clothes,  a  little  inconsiderable  household 
stuff,  and  that  was  all;  for  he  would  not  have 
marriages  contracted  for  gain  or  an  estate, 
but  for  pure  love,  kind  affection,  and  birth 
of  children.  When  the  mother  of  Dionysius  de¬ 
sired  him  to  marry  her  to  one  of  his  citizens, 
“Indeed/’  said  he,  “by  my  tyranny  I  have 
broken  my  country’s  laws,  but  cannot  put  a 
violence  upon  those  of  nature  by  an  unseason¬ 
able  marriage.”  Such  disorder  is  never  to  be 
suffered  in  a  commonwealth,  nor  such  unsea¬ 
sonable  and  unloving  and  unperforming  mar¬ 
riages,  which  attain  no  due  end  or  fruit;  any 
provident  governor  or  lawgiver  might  say  to 
an  old  man  that  takes  a  young  wife  what  is  said 
to  Philoctetes  in  the  tragedy — 

Truly,  in  a  fit  state  thou  to  marry ! 
and  if  he  find  a  young  man,  with  a  rich  and 
elderly  wife,  growing  fat  in  his  place,  like 
the  partridges,  remove  him  to  a  young  woman 
of  proper  age.  And  of  this  enough. 

Another  commendable  law  of  Solon’s  is 
that  which  forbids  men  to  speak  evil  of  the 
dead;  for  it  is  pious  to  think  the  deceased 
sacred,  and  just,  not  to  meddle  with  those 
that  are  gone,  and  politic,  to  prevent  the  per¬ 
petuity  of  discord.  He  likewise  forbade  them 
to  speak  evil  of  the  living  in  the  temples,  the 
courts  of  justice,  the  public  offices,  or  at  the 
games,  or  else  to  pay  three  drachmas  to  the 
person,  and  two  to  the  public.  For  never  to 
be  able  to  control  passion  shows  a  weak  na¬ 
ture  and  ill-breeding;  and  always  to  moderate 
it  is  very  hard,  and  to  some  impossible.  And 
laws  must  look  to  possibilities,  if  the  maker 
designs  to  punish  few  in  order  to  their  amend¬ 
ment,  and  not  many  to  no  purpose. 

He  is  likewise  much  commended  for  his 
law  concerning  wills;  for  before  him  none 
could  be  made,  but  all  the  wealth  and  estate 
of  the  deceased  belonged  to  his  family;  but 
he  by  permitting  them,  if  they  had  no  chil¬ 
dren,  to  bestow  it  on  whom  they  pleased, 
showed  that  he  esteemed  friendship  a  stronger 
tie  than  kindred,  and  affection  than  necessity; 
and  made  every  man’s  estate  truly  his  own. 
Yet  he  allowed  not  all  sorts  of  legacies,  but 
those  only  which  were  not  extorted  by  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

frenzy  of  a  disease,  charms,  imprisonment, 
force,  or  the  persuasions  of  a  wife;  with  good 
reason  thinking  that  being  seduced  into  wrong 
was  as  bad  as  being  forced,  and  that  between 
deceit  and  necessity,  flattery  and  compulsion, 
there  was  little  difference,  since  both  may 
equally  suspend  the  exercise  of  reason. 

He  regulated  the  walks,  feasts,  and  mourn¬ 
ing  of  the  women,  and  took  away  everything 
that  was  either  unbecoming  or  immodest; 
when  they  walked  abroad,  no  more  than 
three  articles  of  dress  were  allowed  them;  an 
obol’s  worth  of  meat  and  drink;  and  no  basket 
above  a  cubit  high;  and  at  night  they  were 
not  to  go  about  unless  in  a  chariot  with  a 
torch  before  them.  Mourners  tearing  them¬ 
selves  to  raise  pity,  and  set  wailings,  and  at 
one  man’s  funeral  to  lament  for  another,  he 
forbade.  To  offer  an  ox  at  the  grave  was 
not  permitted,  nor  to  bury  above  three  pieces 
of  dress  with  the  body,  or  visit  the  tombs  of 
any  besides  their  own  family,  unless  at  the 
very  funeral;  most  of  which  are  likewise  for¬ 
bidden  by  our  laws,  but  this  is  further  added  in 
ours,  that  those  that  are  convicted  of  extrava¬ 
gance  in  their  mournings  are  to  be  punished  as 
soft  and  effeminate  by  the  censors  of  women. 

Observing  the  city  to  be  filled  with  persons 
that  flocked  from  all  parts  into  Attica  for 
security  of  living,  and  that  most  of  the  coun¬ 
try  was  barren  and  unfruitful,  and  that 
traders  at  sea  import  nothing  to  those  that 
could  give  them  nothing  in  exchange,  he 
turned  his  citizens  to  trade,  and  made  a  law 
that  no  son  be  obliged  to  relieve  a  father 
who  had  not  bred  him  up  to  any  calling.  It 
is  true,  Lycurgus,  having  a  city  free  from 
all  strangers,  and  land,  according  to  Euri¬ 
pides — 

Large  for  large  hosts,  for  twice  their  number  much, 
and,  above  all,  an  abundance  of  labourers 
about  Sparta,  who  should  not  be  left  idle,  but 
be  kept  down  with  continual  toil  and  work, 
did  well  to  take  off  his  citizens  from  laborious 
and  mechanical  occupations,  and  keep  them  to 
their  arms,  and  teach  them  only  the  art  of  war. 

But  Solon,  fitting  his  laws  to  the  state  of 
things,  and  not  making  things  to  suit  his 
laws,  and  finding  the  ground  scarce  rich 
enough  to  maintain  the  husbandmen,  and  al¬ 
together  incapable  of  feeding  an  unoccupied 
and  leisured  multitude,  brought  trades  into 
credit,  and  ordered  the  Areopagites  to  ex¬ 
amine  how  every  man  got  his  living,  and 
chastise  the  idle.  But  that  law  was  yet  more 
rigid  which,  as  Heraclides  Ponticus  delivers, 


SOLON 

declared  the  sons  of  unmarried  mothers  not 
obliged  to  relieve  their  fathers;  for  he  that 
avoids  the  honourable  form  of  union  shows 
that  he  does  not  take  a  woman  for  children, 
but  for  pleasure,  and  thus  gets  his  just  reward, 
and  has  taken  away  from  himself  every  title 
to  upbraid  his  children,  to  whom  he  has 
made  their  very  birth  a  scandal  and  reproach. 

Solon’s  laws  in  general  about  women  are 
his  strangest;  for  he  permitted  any  one  to  kill 
an  adulterer  that  found  him  in  the  act;  but 
if  any  one  forced  a  free  woman,  a  hundred 
drachmas  was  the  fine,  if  he  enticed  her, 
twenty;  except  those  that  sell  themselves 
openly,  that  is,  harlots,  who  go  openly  to  those 
that  hire  them.  He  made  it  unlawful  to  sell 
a  daughter  or  a  sister,  unless,  being  yet  un¬ 
married,  she  was  found  wanton.  Now  it  is 
irrational  to  punish  the  same  crime  sometimes 
very  severely  and  without  remorse,  and  some¬ 
times  very  lightly,  and  as  it  were  in  sport, 
with  a  trivial  fine;  unless  there  being  little 
money  then  in  Athens,  scarcity  made  those 
mulcts  the  more  grievous  punishment. 

In  the  valuation  for  sacrifices,  a  sheep  and 
a  bushel  were  both  estimated  at  a  drachma; 
the  victor  in  the  Isthmian  games  was  to  have 
for  reward  an  hundred  drachmas;  the  con¬ 
queror  in  the  Olympian,  five  hundred;  he 
that  brought  a  wolf,  five  drachmas;  for  a 
whelp,  one;  the  former  sum,  as  Demetrius 
the  Phalerian  asserts,  was  the  value  of  an  ox, 
the  latter,  of  a  sheep.  The  prices  which  Solon, 
in  his  sixteenth  table,  sets  on  choice  victims, 
were  naturally  far  greater;  yet  they,  too,  are 
very  low  in  comparison  of  the  present.  The 
Athenians  were,  from  the  beginning,  great 
enemies  to  wolves,  their  fields  being  better  for 
pasture  than  corn.  Some  affirm  their  tribes 
did  not  take  their  names  from  the  sons  of 
Ion,  but  from  the  different  sorts  of  occupation 
that  they  followed;  the  soldiers  were  called 
Hoplitae,  the  craftsmen  Ergades,  and,  of  the 
remaining  two,  the  farmers  Gedeontes,  and 
the  shepherds  and  graziers  iEgicores. 

Since  the  country  has  but  few  rivers,  lakes, 
or  large  springs,  and  many  used  wells  which 
they  had  dug,  there  was  a  law  made,  that, 
where  there  was  a  public  well  within  a  hippi- 
con,  that  is,  four  furlongs,  all  should  draw  at 
that;  but  when  it  was  farther  off,  they  should 
try  and  procure  a  well  of  their  own;  and  if 
they  had  dug  ten  fathoms  deep  and  could 
find  no  water,  they  had  liberty  to  fetch  a 
pitcherful  of  four  gallons  and  a  half  in  a  day 
from  their  neighbours’;  for  he  thought  it 


73 

prudent  to  make  provision  against  want,  but 
not  to  supply  laziness.  He  showed  skill  in  his 
orders  about  planting,  for  any  one  that  would 
plant  another  tree  was  not  to  set  it  within 
five  feet  of  his  neighbour’s  field;  but  if  a  fig 
or  an  olive,  not  within  nine;  for  their  roots 
spread  farther,  nor  can  they  be  planted  near 
all  sorts  of  trees  without  damage,  for  they 
draw  away  the  nourishment,  and  in  some 
cases  are  noxious  by  their  effluvia.  He  that 
would  dig  a  pit  or  a  ditch  was  to  dig  it  at 
the  distance  of  its  own  depth  from  his  neigh¬ 
bour’s  ground;  and  he  that  would  raise  stocks 
of  bees  was  not  to  place  them  within  three 
hundred  feet  of  those  which  another  had  al¬ 
ready  raised. 

He  permitted  only  oil  to  be  exported,  and 
those  that  exported  any  other  fruit,  the  archon 
was  solemnly  to  curse,  or  else  pay  an  hundred 
drachmas  himself;  and  this  law  was  written 
in  his  first  table,  and,  therefore,  let  none 
think  it  incredible,  as  some  affirm,  that  the 
exportation  of  figs  was  once  unlawful,  and  the 
informer  against  the  delinquents  called  a  syco¬ 
phant.  He  made  a  law,  also,  concerning  hurts 
and  injuries  from  beasts,  in  which  he  com¬ 
mands  the  master  of  any  dog  that  bit  a  man  to 
deliver  him  up  with  a  log  about  his  neck,  four 
and  a  half  feet  long;  a  happy  device  for  men’s 
security.  The  law  concerning  naturalising 
strangers  is  of  doubtful  character,  he  permitted 
only  those  to  be  made  free  of  Athens  who 
were  in  perpetual  exile  from  their  own  country, 
or  came  with  their  whole  family  to  trade 
there;  this  he  did,  not  to  discourage  strangers, 
but  rather  to  invite  them  to  a  permanent  par¬ 
ticipation  in  the  privileges  of  the  government; 
and,  besides,  he  thought  those  would  prove 
the  more  faithful  citizens  who  had  been  forced 
from  their  own  country,  or  voluntarily  for¬ 
sook  it.  The  law  of  public  entertainment  ( par - 
asitcin  is  his  name  for  it)  is  also  peculiarly 
Solon’s;  for  if  any  man  came  often,  or  if  he 
that  was  invited  refused,  they  were  punished, 
for  he  concluded  that  one  was  greedy,  the  other 
a  contemner  of  the  state. 

All  his  laws  he  established  for  an  hundred 
years,  and  wrote  them  on  wooden  tables  or 
rollers,  named  axones,  which  might  be  turned 
round  in  oblong  cases;  some  of  their  relics 
were  in  my  time  still  to  be  seen  in  the  Pry- 
taneum,  or  common  hall,  at  Athens.  These,  as 
Aristotle  states,  were  called  cyrhes,  and  there 
is  a  passage  of  Cratinus  the  comedian — 

By  Solon,  and  by  Draco,  if  you  please, 

Whose  Cyrbes  make  the  fires  that  parch  our  peas. 


74 

But  some  say  those  are  properly  cyrbes,  which 
contain  laws  concerning  sacrifices  and  the  rites 
of  religion,  and  all  the  other  axones.  The 
council  all  jointly  swore  to  confirm  the  laws, 
and  every  one  of  the  Thesmothetae  vowed  for 
himself  at  the  stone  in  the  marketplace,  that 
if  he  broke  any  of  the  statutes,  he  would  ded¬ 
icate  a  golden  statue,  as  big  as  himself,  at 
Delphi. 

Observing  the  irregularity  of  the  months, 
and  that  the  moon  does  not  always  rise  and  set 
with  the  sun,  but  often  in  the  same  day  over¬ 
takes  and  gets  before  him,  he  ordered  the  day 
should  be  named  the  Old  and  New,  attrib¬ 
uting  that  part  of  it  which  was  before  the  con¬ 
junction  to  the  old  moon,  and  the  rest  to  the 
new,  he  being  the  first,  it  seems,  that  under¬ 
stood  that  verse  of  Homer — 

The  end  and  the  beginning  of  the  month, — 
and  the  following  day  he  called  the  new  moon. 
After  the  twentieth  he  did  not  count  by  addi¬ 
tion,  but,  like  the  moon  itself  in  its  wane,  by 
subtraction;  thus  up  to  the  thirtieth. 

Now  when  these  laws  were  enacted,  and 
some  came  to  Solon  every  day,  to  commend  or 
dispraise  them,  and  to  advise,  if  possible,  to 
leave  out  or  put  in  something,  and  many  criti¬ 
cised  and  desired  him  to  explain,  and  tell  the 
meaning  of  such  and  such  a  passage,  he,  know¬ 
ing  that  to  do  it  was  useless,  and  not  to  do  it 
would  get  him  ill-will,  and  desirous  to  bring 
himself  out  of  all  straits,  and  to  escape  all  dis¬ 
pleasure  and  exceptions,  it  being  a  hard  thing, 
as  he  himself  says — 

In  great  affairs  to  satisfy  all  sides. 
as  an  excuse  for  travelling,  bought  a  trading 
vessel,  and,  having  leave  for  ten  years’  absence, 
departed,  hoping  that  by  that  time  his  laws 
would  have  become  familiar. 

His  first  voyage  was  for  Egypt,  and  he 
lived,  as  he  himself  says — 

Near  Nilus’  mouth,  by  fair  Canopus y  shore, 
and  spent  some  time  in  study  with  Psenophis 
of  Heliopolis,  and  Sonchis  the  Saite,  the  most 
learned  of  all  the  priests;  from  whom,  as 
Plato  says,  getting  knowledge  of  the  Atlantic 
story,  he  put  it  into  a  poem,  and  proposed  to 
bring  it  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Greeks.  From 
thence  he  sailed  to  Cyprus,  where  he  was 
made  much  of  by  Philocyprus,  one  of  the 
kings  there,  who  had  a  small  city  built  by  De- 
mophon,  Theseus’s  son,  near  the  river  Clarius, 
in  a  strong  situation,  but  incommodius  and 
uneasy  of  access.  Solon  persuaded  him,  since 
there  lay  a  fair  plain  below,  to  remove,  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

build  there  a  pleasanter  and  more  spacious 
city.  And  he  stayed  himself,  and  assisted  in 
gathering  inhabitants,  and  in  fitting  it  both 
lor  defence  and  convenience  of  living;  inso¬ 
much  that  many  flocked  to  Philocyprus,  and 
the  other  kings  imitated  the  design;  and,  there¬ 
fore,  to  honour  Solon,  he  called  the  city  Soli, 
which  was  formerly  named  y£pea.  And  Solon 
himself,  in  his  Elegies,  addressing  Philocyprus, 
mentions  this  foundation  in  these  words: — 

Long  may  you  live,  and  fill  the  Solian  throne, 
Succeeded  still  by  children  of  your  own; 

And  from  your  happy  island  while  1  sail, 

Let  Cyprus  send  for  me  a  favouring  gale; 

May  she  advance,  and  bless  your  new  command, 
Prosper  your  town,  and  send  me  safe  to  land . 

That  Solon  should  discourse  with  Croesus, 
some  think  not  agreeable  with  chronology;  but 
I  cannot  reject  so  famous  and  well-attested  a 
narrative,  and,  what  is  more,  so  agreeable  to 
Solon’s  temper,  and  so  worthy  his  wisdom 
and  greatness  of  mind,  because,  forsooth,  it 
does  not  agree  with  some  chronological  can¬ 
ons,  which  thousands  have  endeavoured  to 
regulate,  and  yet,  to  this  day,  could  never 
bring  their  differing  opinions  to  any  agree¬ 
ment.  They  say,  therefore,  that  Solon,  coming 
to  Croesus  at  his  request,  was  in  the  same  con¬ 
dition  as  an  inland  man  when  first  he  goes  to 
see  the  sea;  for  as  he  fancies  every  river  he 
meets  with  to  be  the  ocean,  so  Solon,  as  he 
passed  through  the  court,  and  saw  a  great 
many  nobles  richly  dressed,  and  proudly  at¬ 
tended  with  a  multitude  of  guards  and  foot- 
boys,  thought  every  one  had  been  the  king, 
till  he  was  brought  to  Croesus,  who  was  decked 
with  every  possible  rarity  and  curiosity,  in  or¬ 
naments  of  jewels,  purple,  and  gold,  that  could 
make  a  grand  and  gorgeous  spectacle  of  him. 

Now  when  Solon  came  before  him,  and 
seemed  not  at  all  surprised,  nor  gave  Croesus 
those  compliments  he  expected,  but  showed 
himself  to  all  discerning  eyes  to  be  a  man 
that  despised  the  gaudiness  and  petty  osten¬ 
tation  of  it,  he  commanded  them  to  open  all 
his  treasure  houses,  and  carry  him  to  see  his 
sumptuous  furniture  and  luxuries,  though  he 
did  not  wish  it;  Solon  could  judge  of  him 
well  enough  by  the  first  sight  of  him;  and, 
when  he  returned  from  viewing  all,  Croesus 
asked  him  if  ever  he  had  known  a  happier 
man  than  he.  And  when  Solon  answered  that 
he  had  known  one  Tellus,  a  fellow-citizen 
of  his  own,  and  told  him  that  this  Tellus  had 
been  an  honest  man,  had  had  good  children, 
a  competent  estate,  and  died  bravely  in  battle 


SOLON 

for  his  country,  Croesus  took  him  for  an  ill- 
bred  fellow  and  a  fool,  for  not  measuring  hap¬ 
piness  by  the  abundance  of  gold  and  silver,  and 
preferring  the  life  and  death  of  a  private  and 
mean  man  before  so  much  power  and  empire. 

He  asked  him,  however,  again,  if,  besides 
Tellus,  he  knew  any  other  man  more  happy. 
And  Solon  replying,  Yes,  Cleobis  and  Biton, 
who  were  loving  brothers,  and  extremely 
dutiful  sons  to  their  mother,  and,  when  the 
oxen  delayed  her,  harnessed  themselves  to  the 
waggon,  and  drew  her  to  Juno’s  temple,  her 
neighbours  all  calling  her  happy,  and  she  her¬ 
self  rejoicing;  then,  after  sacrificing  and  feast¬ 
ing,  they  went  to  rest,  and  never  rose  again, 
but  died  in  the  midst  of  their  honour  a  pain¬ 
less  and  tranquil  death. 

“What,”  said  Croesus,  angrily,  “and  dost 
not  thou  reckon  us  amongst  the  happy  men 
at  all?”  Solon,  unwilling  either  to  flatter  or 
exasperate  him  more,  replied,  “The  gods,  O 
king,  have  given  the  Greeks  all  other  gifts  in 
moderate  degree;  and  so  our  wisdom,  too,  is 
a  cheerful  and  a  homely,  not  a  noble  and 
kingly  wisdom;  and  this,  observing  the  nu¬ 
merous  misfortunes  that  attend  all  conditions, 
forbids  us  to  grow  insolent  upon  our  present 
enjoyments,  or  to  admire  any  man’s  happi¬ 
ness  that  may  yet,  in  course  of  time,  suffer 
change.  For  the  uncertain  future  has  yet  to 
come,  with  every  possible  variety  of  fortune; 
and  him  only  to  whom  the  divinity  has  con¬ 
tinued  happiness  unto  the  end  we  call  happy; 
to  salute  as  happy  one  that  is  still  in  the 
midst  of  life  and  hazard,  we  think  as  little 
safe  and  conclusive  as  to  crown  and  proclaim 
as  victorious  the  wrestler  that  is  yet  in  the 
ring.”  After  this,  he  was  dismissed,  having 
given  Croesus  some  pain,  but  no  instruction. 

iTsop,  who  wrote  the  fables,  being  then  at 
Sardis  upon  Croesus’s  invitation,  and  very 
much  esteemed,  was  concerned  that  Solon 
was  so  ill  received,  and  gave  him  this  advice: 
“Solon,  let  your  converse  with  kings  be  either 
short  or  seasonable.”  “Nay,  rather,”  replied 
Solon,  “either  short  or  reasonable.”  So  at  this 
time  Croesus  despised  Solon;  but  when  he 
was  overcome  by  Cyrus,  had  lost  his  city,  was 
taken  alive,  condemned  to  be  burnt,  and  laid 
bound  upon  the  pile  before  all  the  Persians 
and  Cyrus  himself,  he  cried  out  as  loud  as 
possibly  he  could  three  times,  “O  Solon!”  and 
Cyrus  being  surprised,  and  sending  some  to 
inquire  what  man  or  god  this  Solon  was,  who 
alone  he  invoked  in  this  extremity,  Croesus 
told  him  the  whole  story,  saying,  “He  was  one 


75 

of  the  wise  men  of  Greece,  whom  I  sent  for, 
not  to  be  instructed,  or  to  learn  anything  that 
I  wanted,  but  that  he  should  see  and  be  a 
witness  of  my  happiness;  the  loss  of  which 
was,  it  seems,  to  be  a  greater  evil  than  the 
enjoyment  was  a  good;  for  when  I  had  them 
they  were  goods  only  in  opinion,  but  now  the 
loss  of  them  has  brought  upon  me  intolerable 
and  real  evils.  And  he,  conjecturing  from 
what  then  was,  this  that  now  is,  bade  look 
to  the  end  of  my  life,  and  not  rely  and  grow 
proud  upon  uncertainties.”  When  this  was 
told  Cyrus,  who  was  a  wiser  man  than 
Croesus,  and  saw  in  the  present  example 
Solon’s  Maxim  confirmed,  he  not  only  freed 
Croesus  from  punishment,  but  honoured  him 
as  long  as  he  lived;  and  Solon  had  the  glory, 
by  the  same  saying,  to  save  one  king  and 
instruct  another. 

When  Solon  was  gone,  the  citizens  began 
to  quarrel;  Lycurgus  headed  the  Plain;  Meg- 
acles,  the  son  of  Alcmaeon,  those  to  the  Sea¬ 
side;  and  Pisistratus  the  Hill-party,  in  which 
were  the  poorest  people,  the  Thetes,  and 
greatest  enemies  to  the  rich;  insomuch  that, 
though  the  city  still  used  the  new  laws,  yet 
all  looked  for  and  desired  a  change  of  govern¬ 
ment,  hoping  severally  that  the  change  would 
be  better  for  them,  and  put  them  above  the 
contrary  faction. 

Affairs  standing  thus,  Solon  returned,  and 
was  reverenced  by  all,  and  honoured;  but  his 
old  age  would  not  permit  him  to  be  as  active, 
and  to  speak  in  public,  as  formerly;  yet,  by 
privately  conferring  with  the  heads  of  the 
factions,  he  endeavoured  to  compose  the  dif¬ 
ferences,  Pisistratus  appearing  the  most  tract¬ 
able;  for  he  was  extremely  smooth  and  engag¬ 
ing  in  his  language,  a  great  friend  to  the  poor, 
and  moderate  in  his  resentments;  and  what 
nature  had  not  given  him,  he  had  the  skill  to 
imitate;  so  that  he  was  trusted  more  than  the 
others,  being  accounted  a  prudent  and  orderly 
man,  one  that  loved  equality,  and  would  be  an 
enemy  to  any  that  moved  against  the  present 
settlement.  Thus  he  deceived  the  majority  of 
people;  but  Solon  quickly  discovered  his 
character,  and  found  out  his  design  before 
any  one  else;  yet  did  not  hate  him  upon  this, 
but  endeavoured  to  humble  him,  and  bring 
him  off  from  his  ambition,  and  often  told 
him  and  others,  that  if  any  one  could  banish 
the  passion  for  pre-eminence  from  his  mind, 
and  cure  him  of  his  desire  of  absolute  power, 
none  would  make  a  more  virtuous  man  or 
a  more  excellent  citizen. 


76 

Thespis,  at  this  time,  beginning  to  act 
tragedies,  and  the  thing,  because  it  was  new, 
taking  very  much  with  the  multitude,  though 
it  was  not  yet  made  a  matter  of  competition, 
Solon,  being  by  nature  fond  of  hearing  and 
learning  something  new,  and  now,  in  his 
old  age,  living  idly,  and  enjoying  himself,  in¬ 
deed,  with  music  and  with  wine,  went  to  see 
Thespis  himself,  as  the  ancient  custom  was, 
act:  and  after  the  play  was  done,  he  addressed 
him,  and  asked  him  if  he  was  not  ashamed  to 
tell  so  many  lies  before  such  a  number  of  peo¬ 
ple;  and  Thespis  replying  that  it  was  no  harm 
to  say  or  do  so  in  play,  Solon  vehemently  struck 
his  staff  against  the  ground:  “Ah,”  said  he,  “if 
we  honour  and  commend  such  play  as  this,  we 
shall  find  it  some  day  in  our  business.” 

Now  when  Pisistratus,  having  wounded 
himself,  was  brought  into  the  market-place 
in  a  chariot,  and  stirred  up  the  people,  as 
if  he  had  been  thus  treated  by  his  opponents 
because  of  his  political  conduct,  and  a  great 
many  were  enraged  and  cried  out,  Solon, 
coming  close  to  him,  said,  “This,  O  son  of 
Hippocrates,  is  a  bad  copy  of  Homer’s  Ulysses; 
you  do,  to  trick  your  countrymen,  what  he  did 
to  deceive  his  enemies.”  After  this,  the  people 
were  eager  to  protect  Pisistratus,  and  met  in  an 
assembly,  where  one  Ariston  making  a  motion 
that  they  should  allow  Pisistratus  fifty  club¬ 
men  for  a  guard  to  his  person,  Solon  opposed 
it,  and  said  much  to  the  same  purport  as  what 
he  has  left  us  in  his  poems — 

You  dote  upon  his  words  and  taking  phrase; 

and  again — 

True,  you  are  singly  each  a  crafty  soul, 

But  all  together  ma\e  one  empty  fool. 

But  observing  the  poor  men  bent  to  gratify 
Pisistratus,  and  tumultuous,  and  the  rich 
fearful  and  getting  out  of  harm’s  way,  he 
departed,  saying  he  was  wiser  than  some  and 
stouter  than  others;  wiser  than  those  that  did 
not  understand  the  design,  stouter  than  those 
that,  though  they  understood  it,  were  afraid 
to  oppose  the  tyranny. 

Now,  the  people,  having  passed  the  law, 
were  not  nice  with  Pisistratus  about  the 
number  of  his  clubmen,  but  took  no  notice 
of  it,  though  he  enlisted  and  kept  as  many 
as  he  would,  until  he  seized  the  Acropolis. 
When  that  was  done,  and  the  city  in  an  uproar, 
Megacles,  with  all  his  family,  at  once  fled;  but 
Solon,  though  he  was  now  very  old,  and  had 
none  to  back  him,  yet  came  into  the  market¬ 
place  and  made  a  speech  to  the  citizens,  pardy 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

blaming  their  inadvertency  and  meanness  of 
spirit,  and  in  part  urging  and  exhorting  them 
not  thus  tamely  to  lose  their  liberty;  and  like¬ 
wise  then  spoke  that  memorable  saying,  that, 
before,  it  was  an  easier  task  to  stop  the  rising 
tyranny,  but  now  the  great  and  more  glorious 
action  to  destroy  it,  when  it  was  begun  already, 
and  had  gathered  strength. 

But  all  being  afraid  to  side  with  him,  he 
returned  home,  and,  taking  his  arms,  he 
brought  them  out  and  laid  them  in  the  porch 
before  his  door,  with  these  words:  “I  have 
done  my  part  to  maintain  my  country  and 
my  laws,”  and  then  he  busied  himself  no 
more.  His  friends  advising  him  to  fly,  he  re¬ 
fused,  but  wrote  poems,  and  thus  reproached 
the  Athenians  in  them: — 

If  now  you  suffer,  do  not  blame  the  Powers, 

For  they  are  good,  and  all  the  fault  was  ours. 

All  the  strongholds  you  put  into  his  hands, 

And  now  his  slaves  must  do  what  he  commands. 

And  many  telling  him  that  the  tyrant  would 
take  his  life  for  this,  and  asking  what  he 
trusted  to,  that  he  ventured  to  speak  so 
boldly,  he  replied,  “To  my  old  age.” 

But  Pisistratus,  having  got  the  command, 
so  extremely  courted  Solon,  so  honoured  him, 
obliged  him,  and  sent  to  see  him,  that  Solon 
gave  him  his  advice,  and  approved  many  of 
his  actions;  for  he  retained  most  of  Solon’s 
laws,  observed  them  himself,  and  compelled 
his  friends  to  obey.  And  he  himself,  though 
already  absolute  ruler,  being  accused  of  mur¬ 
der  before  the  Areopagus,  came  quietly  to 
clear  himself;  but  his  accuser  did  not  appear. 

And  he  added  other  laws,  one  of  which  is 
that  the  maimed  in  the  wars  should  be  main¬ 
tained  at  the  public  charge;  this  Heraclides 
Ponticus  records,  and  that  Pisistratus  fol¬ 
lowed  Solon’s  example  in  this,  who  had  de¬ 
creed  it  in  the  case  of  one  Thersippus,  that 
was  maimed;  and  Theophrastus  asserts  that 
it  was  Pisistratus,  not  Solon,  that  made  that 
law  against  laziness,  which  was  the  reason 
that  the  country  was  more  productive,  and 
the  city  tranquiller. 

Now  Solon,  having  begun  the  great  work 
in  verse,  the  history  or  fable  of  the  Atlantic 
Island,  which  he  had  learned  from  the  wise 
men  in  Sais,  and  thought  convenient  for  the 
Athenians  to  know,  abandoned  it;  not,  as 
Plato  says,  by  reason  of  want  of  time,  but  be¬ 
cause  of  his  age,  and  being  discouraged  at  the 
greatness  of  the  task;  for  that  he  had  leisure 
enough,  such  verses  testify,  as — 

Each  day  grow  older,  and  learn  something  new; 


POPLICOLA 

and  again — 

But  now  the  Powers ,  of  Beauty,  Song,  and  Wine, 
Which  are  most  men’s  delights,  are  also  mine. 

Plato,  willing  to  improve  the  story  of  the 
Atlantic  Island,  as  if  it  were  a  fair  estate  that 
wanted  an  heir  and  came  with  some  title  to 
him,  formed,  indeed,  stately  entrances,  noble 
enclosures,  large  courts,  such  as  never  yet 
introduced  any  story,  fable,  or  poetic  fiction; 
but,  beginning  it  late,  ended  his  life  before 
his  work;  and  the  reader’s  regret  for  the  un¬ 
finished  part  is  the  greater,  as  the  satisfaction 
he  takes  in  that  which  is  complete  is  extra¬ 
ordinary.  For  as  the  city  of  Athens  left  only 
the  temple  of  Jupier  Olympius  unfinished, 


77 

so  Plato,  amongst  all  his  excellent  works,  left 
this  only  piece  about  the  Atlantic  Island  im¬ 
perfect. 

Solon  lived  after  Pisistratus  seized  the  gov¬ 
ernment,  as  Heraclides  Ponticus  asserts,  a 
long  time;  but  Phanias  the  Eresian  says  not 
two  full  years;  for  Pisistratus  began  his  tyr¬ 
anny  when  Comias  was  archon,  and  Phanias 
says  Solon  died  under  Hegestratus,  who  suc¬ 
ceeded  Comias.  The  story  that  his  ashes  were 
scattered  about  the  island  Salamis  is  too 
strange  to  be  easily  believed,  or  be  thought 
anything  but  a  mere  fable;  and  yet  it  is  given, 
amongst  other  good  authors,  by  Aristotle,  the 
philosopher. 


POPLICOLA 

[ Publicola ] 

FLOURISHED  5OO  B.C. 


Such  was  Solon.  To  him  we  compare  Pop- 
licola,  who  received  this  later  title  from 
the  Roman  people  for  his  merit,  as  a  no¬ 
ble  accession  to  his  former  name,  Publius  Val¬ 
erius.  He  descended  from  Valerius,  a  man 
amongst  the  early  citizens,  reputed  the  prin¬ 
cipal  reconciler  of  the  differences  betwixt  the 
Romans  and  Sabines,  and  one  that  was  most 
instrumental  in  persuading  their  kings  to  as¬ 
sent  to  peace  and  union. 

Thus  descended,  Publius  Valerius,  as  it  is 
said,  whilst  Rome  remained  under  its  kingly 
government,  obtained  as  great  a  name  from 
his  eloquence  as  from  his  riches,  charitably 
employing  the  one  in  liberal  aid  to  the  poor, 
the  other  with  integrity  and  freedom  in  the 
service  of  justice;  thereby  giving  assurance, 
that,  should  the  government  fall  into  a  re¬ 
public,  he  would  become  a  chief  man  in  the 
community.  The  illegal  and  wicked  accession 
of  Tarquinius  Superbus  to  the  crown,  with 
his  making  it,  instead  of  kingly  rule,  the  in¬ 
strument  of  insolence  and  tyranny,  having 
inspired  the  people  with  a  hatred  to  his  reign, 
upon  the  death  of  Lucretia  (she  killing  her¬ 
self  after  violence  had  been  done  to  her),  they 
took  an  occasion  of  revolt;  and  Lucius  Brutus, 
engaging  in  the  change,  came  to  Valerius  be¬ 
fore  all  others,  and,  with  his  zealous  assistance, 
deposed  the  kings. 

And  whilst  the  people  inclined  towards  the 


electing  one  leader  instead  of  their  king, 
Valerius  acquiesced,  that  to  rule  was  rather 
Brutus’s  due,  as  the  author  of  the  democracy. 
But  when  the  name  of  monarchy  was  odious 
to  the  people,  and  a  divided  power  appeared 
more  grateful  in  the  prospect,  and  two  were 
chosen  to  hold  it,  Valerius,  entertaining  hopes 
that  he  might  be  elected  consul  with  Brutus, 
was  disappointed;  for,  instead  of  Valerius, 
notwithstanding  the  endeavours  of  Brutus, 
Tarquinius  Collatinus  was  chosen,  the  hus¬ 
band  of  Lucretia,  a  man  noways  his  superior 
in  merit.  But  the  nobles,  dreading  the  return 
of  their  kings,  who  still  used  all  endeavours 
abroad  and  solicitations  at  home,  were  re¬ 
solved  upon  a  chieftain  of  an  intense  hatred  to 
them,  and  noways  likely  to  yield. 

Now  Valerius  was  troubled  that  his  desire 
to  serve  his  country  should  be  doubted,  be¬ 
cause  he  had  sustained  no  private  injury 
from  the  insolence  of  the  tyrants.  He  with¬ 
drew  from  the  senate  and  practice  of  the  bar, 
quitting  all  public  concerns;  which  gave  an 
occasion  of  discourse,  and  fear,  too,  lest  his 
anger  should  reconcile  him  to  the  king’s  side, 
and  he  should  prove  the  ruin  of  the  state, 
tottering  as  yet  under  the  uncertainties  of  a 
change.  But  Brutus  being  doubtful  of  some 
others,  and  determined  to  give  the  test  to  the 
senate  upon  the  altars,  upon  the  day  ap¬ 
pointed  Valerius  came  with  cheerfulness  into 


78 

the  Forum,  and  was  the  first  man  that  took 
the  oath,  in  no  way  to  submit  or  yield  to 
Tarquin's  propositions,  but  rigorously  to 
maintain  liberty;  which  gave  great  satisfac¬ 
tion  to  the  senate  and  assurance  to  the  con¬ 
suls,  his  action  soon  after  showing  the  sin¬ 
cerity  of  his  oath. 

For  ambassadors  came  from  Tarquin,  with 
popular  and  specious  proposals,  whereby  they 
thought  to  seduce  the  people,  as  though  the 
king  had  cast  off  all  insolence,  and  made 
moderation  the  only  measure  of  his  desires. 
To  this  embassy  the  consuls  thought  fit  to 
give  public  audience,  but  Valerius  opposed 
it,  and  would  not  permit  that  the  poorer  peo¬ 
ple,  who  entertained  more  fear  of  war  than 
of  tyranny,  should  have  any  occasion  offered 
them,  or  any  temptations  to  new  designs. 
Afterwards  other  ambassadors  arrived,  who 
declared  their  king  would  recede  from  his 
crown,  and  lay  down  his  arms,  only  capitulat¬ 
ing  for  a  restitution  to  himself,  his  friends, 
and  allies,  of  their  moneys  and  estates  to  sup¬ 
port  them  in  their  banishment.  Now,  several 
inclining  to  the  request,  and  Collatinus  in 
particular  favouring  it,  Brutus,  a  man  of  ve¬ 
hement  and  unbending  nature,  rushed  into  the 
Forum,  there  proclaiming  his  fellow-consul  to 
be  a  traitor,  in  granting  subsidies  to  tyranny, 
and  supplies  for  a  war  to  those  to  whom  it  was 
monstrous  to  allow  so  much  as  subsistence  in 
exile.  This  caused  an  assembly  of  the  citizens, 
amongst  whom  the  first  that  spake  was  Caius 
Minucius,  a  private  man,  who  advised  Brutus, 
and  urged  the  Romans  to  keep  the  property, 
and  employ  it  against  the  tyrants,  rather  than 
to  remit  it  to  the  tyrants,  to  be  used  against 
themselves.  The  Romans,  however,  decided 
that  whilst  they  had  enjoyed  the  liberty  they 
had  fought  for,  they  should  not  sacrifice  peace 
for  the  sake  of  money;  but  send  out  the  ty¬ 
rants’  property  after  them. 

This  question,  however,  of  his  property 
was  the  least  part  of  Tarquin’s  design;  the 
demand  sounded  the  feelings  of  the  people, 
and  was  preparatory  to  a  conspiracy  which 
the  ambassadors  endeavoured  to  excite,  delay¬ 
ing  their  return,  under  pretence  of  selling 
some  of  the  goods  and  reserving  others  to 
be  sent  away,  till,  in  fine  they  corrupted  two 
of  the  most  eminent  families  in  Rome,  the 
Aquillian,  which  had  three,  and  the  Vitellian, 
which  had  two  senators.  Those  all  were,  by 
the  mother’s  side,  nephews  to  Collatinus; 
besides  which  Brutus  had  a  special  alliance 
to  the  Vitellii  from  his  marriage  with  their 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

sister,  by  whom  he  had  several  children;  two 
of  whom,  of  their  own  age,  their  near  rela¬ 
tions  and  daily  companions,  the  Vitellii  se¬ 
duced  to  join  in  the  plot,  to  ally  themselves 
to  the  great  house  and  royal  hopes  of  the 
Tarquins,  and  gain  emancipation  from  the 
violence  and  imbecility  united  of  their  father, 
whose  austerity  to  offenders  they  termed  vi¬ 
olence,  while  the  imbecility  which  he  had  long 
feigned,  to  protect  himself  from  the  tyrants, 
still,  it  appears,  was,  in  name  at  least,  ascribed 
to  him. 

Upon  these  considerations  the  youths  came 
to  confer  with  the  Aquillii,  and  thought  it 
convenient  to  bind  themselves  in  a  solemn 
and  dreadful  oath,  by  tasting  the  blood  of  a 
murdered  man,  and  touching  his  entrails. 
For  which  design  they  met  at  the  house  of 
the  Aquillii.  The  building  chosen  for  the 
transaction  was,  as  was  natural,  dark  and 
unfrequented,  and  a  slave  named  Vindicius 
had,  as  it  chanced,  concealed  himself  there, 
not  out  of  design  or  any  intelligence  of  the 
affair,  but,  accidentally  being  within,  seeing 
with  how  much  haste  and  concern  they  came 
in,  he  was  afraid  to  be  discovered,  and  placed 
himself  behind  a  chest,  where  he  was  able 
to  observe  their  actions  and  overhear  their 
debates.  Their  resolutions  were  to  kill  the 
consuls,  and  they  wrote  letters  to  Tarquin  to 
this  effect,  and  gave  them  to  the  ambassadors, 
who  were  lodging  upon  the  spot  with  the 
Aquillii,  and  were  present  at  the  consultation. 

Upon  their  departure,  Vindicius  secretly 
quitted  the  house,  but  was  at  a  loss  what  to 
do  in  the  matter,  for  to  arraign  the  sons  be¬ 
fore  the  father  Brutus,  or  the  nephews  before 
the  uncle  Collatinus,  seemed  equally  (as  in¬ 
deed  it  was)  shocking;  yet  he  knew  no  private 
Roman  to  whom  he  could  intrust  secrets  of 
such  importance.  Unable,  however,  to  keep  si¬ 
lence,  and  burdened  with  his  knowledge,  he 
went  and  addressed  himself  to  Valerius,  whose 
known  freedom  and  kindness  of  temper  were 
an  inducement;  as  he  was  a  person  to  whom 
the  needy  had  easy  access,  and  who  never  shut 
his  gates  against  the  petitions  or  indigences  of 
humble  people.  But  when  Vindicius  came  and 
made  a  complete  discovery  to  him,  his  brother 
Marcus  and  his  own  wife  being  present,  Val¬ 
erius  was  struck  with  amazement,  and  by  no 
means  would  dismiss  the  discoverer,  but  con¬ 
fined  him  to  the  room,  and  placed  his  wife  as 
a  guard  to  the  door,  sending  his  brother  in  the 
interim  to  beset  the  king’s  palace,  and  seize,  if 
possible,  the  writings  there,  and  secure  the  do- 


POPLICOLA 

mestics,  whilst  he,  with  his  constant  attendance 
of  clients  and  friends,  and  a  great  retinue  of 
attendants,  repaired  to  the  house  of  the  Aquil- 
lii,  who  were,  as  it  chanced,  absent  from  home; 
and  so,  forcing  an  entrance  through  the  gates, 
they  lit  upon  the  letters  then  lying  in  the  lodg¬ 
ings  of  the  ambassadors. 

Meantime  the  Aquillii  returned  in  all  haste, 
and,  coming  to  blows  about  the  gate,  en¬ 
deavoured  a  recovery  of  the  letters.  The  other 
party  made  a  resistance,  and  throwing  their 
gowns  around  their  opponents’  necks,  at  last, 
after  much  struggling  on  both  sides,  made 
their  way  with  their  prisoners  through  the 
streets  into  the  Forum.  The  like  engagement 
happened  about  the  king’s  palace,  where 
Marcus  seized  some  other  letters  which  it 
was  designed  should  be  conveyed  away  in  the 
goods,  and,  laying  hands  on  such  of  the  king’s 
people  as  he  could  find,  dragged  them  also 
into  the  Forum. 

When  the  consuls  had  quieted  the  tumult, 
Vindicius  was  brought  out  by  the  orders  of 
Valerius,  and  the  accusation  stated,  and  the 
letters  were  opened,  to  which  the  traitors 
could  make  no  plea.  Most  of  the  people  stand¬ 
ing  mute  and  sorrowful,  some  only,  out  of 
kindness  to  Brutus,  mentioning  banishment, 
the  tears  of  Collatinus,  attended  with  Valeri¬ 
us’s  silence,  gave  some  hopes  of  mercy.  But 
Brutus,  calling  his  two  sons  by  their  names, 
“Canst  not  thou,”  said  he,  “O  Titus,  or  thou, 
Tiberius,  make  any  defence  against  the  in¬ 
dictment?”  The  question  being  thrice  pro¬ 
posed,  and  no  reply  made,  he  turned  himself 
to  the  lictors  and  cried,  “What  remains  is 
your  duty.”  They  immediately  seized  the 
youths,  and,  stripping  them  of  their  clothes, 
bound  their  hands  behind  them  and  scourged 
their  bodies  with  their  rods;  too  tragical  a 
scene  for  others  to  look  at;  Brutus,  however, 
is  said  not  to  have  turned  aside  his  face,  nor 
allowed  the  least  glance  of  pity  to  soften  and 
smooth  his  aspect  of  rigour  and  austerity, 
but  sternly  watched  his  children  suffer,  even 
till  the  lictors,  extending  them  on  the  ground, 
cut  off  their  heads  with  an  axe;  then  departed, 
committing  the  rest  to  the  judgment  of  his 
colleague. 

An  action  truly  open  alike  to  the  highest 
commendation  and  the  strongest  censure;  for 
either  the  greatness  of  his  virtue  raised  him 
above  the  impressions  of  sorrow,  or  the  ex¬ 
travagance  of  his  misery  took  away  all  sense  of 
it;  but  neither  seemed  common,  or  the  result 
of  humanity,  but  either  divine  or  brutish.  Yet 


79 

it  is  more  reasonable  that  our  judgment  should 
yield  to  his  reputation,  than  that  his  merit 
should  suffer  detraction  by  the  weakness  of  our 
judgment;  in  the  Roman’s  opinion,  Brutus  did 
a  greater  work  in  the  establishment  of  the  gov¬ 
ernment  than  Romulus  in  the  foundation  of 
the  city. 

Upon  Brutus’s  departure  out  of  the  Forum, 
consternation,  horror,  and  silence  for  some 
time  possessed  all  that  reflected  on  what  was 
done;  the  easiness  and  tardiness,  however,  of 
Collatinus  gave  confidence  to  the  Aquillii  to 
request  some  time  to  answer  their  charge,  and 
that  Vindicius,  their  servant,  should  be  re¬ 
mitted  into  their  hands,  and  no  longer  har¬ 
boured  amongst  their  accusers.  The  consul 
seemed  inclined  to  their  proposal,  and  was 
proceeding  to  dissolve  the  assembly;  but 
Valerius  would  not  suffer  Vindicius,  who  was 
surrounded  by  his  people,  to  be  surrendered, 
nor  the  meeting  to  withdraw  without  punish¬ 
ing  the  traitors;  and  at  length  laid  violent 
hands  upon  the  Aquillii,  and,  calling  Brutus 
to  his  assistance,  exclaimed  against  the  un¬ 
reasonable  course  of  Collatinus,  to  impose 
upon  his  colleague  the  necessity  of  taking 
away  the  lives  of  his  own  sons,  and  yet  have 
thoughts  of  gratifying  some  women  with  the 
lives  of  traitors  and  public  enemies. 

Collatinus,  displeased  at  this,  and  com¬ 
manding  Vindicius  to  be  taken  away,  the 
lictors  made  their  way  through  the  crowd  and 
seized  their  man,  and  struck  all  who  en¬ 
deavoured  a  rescue.  Valerius’s  friends  headed 
the  resistance,  and  the  people  cried  out  for 
Brutus,  who,  returning,  on  silence  being 
made,  told  them  he  had  been  competent  to 
pass  sentence  by  himself  upon  his  own  sons, 
but  left  the  rest  to  the  suffrages  of  the  free  citi¬ 
zens:  “Let  every  man  speak  that  wishes,  and 
persuade  whom  he  can.”  But  there  was  no 
need  of  oratory,  for,  it  being  referred  to  the 
vote,  they  were  returned  condemned  by  all 
the  suffrages,  and  were  accordingly  beheaded. 

Collatinus’s  relationship  to  the  kings  had, 
indeed,  already  rendered  him  suspicious,  and 
his  second  name,  too,  had  made  him  ob¬ 
noxious  to  the  people,  who  were  loth  to  hear 
the  very  sound  of  Tarquin;  but  after  this 
had  happened,  perceiving  himself  an  offence 
to  every  one,  he  relinquished  his  charge  and 
departed  from  the  city.  At  the  new  elections 
in  his  room,  Valerius  obtained,  with  high  hon¬ 
our,  the  consulship,  as  a  just  reward  of  his  zeal; 
of  which  he  thought  Vindicius  deserved  a 
share,  whom  he  made,  first  of  all  freedmen,  a 


80 

citizen  of  Rome,  and  gave  him  the  privilege  of 
voting  in  what  tribe  soever  he  was  pleased  to 
be  enrolled;  other  freedmen,  received  the  right 
of  suffrage  a  long  time  after  from  Appius,  who 
thus  courted  popularity;  and  from  this  Vindi- 
cius,  a  perfect  manumission  is  called  to  this 
day  vindicta.  This  done,  the  goods  of  the  kings 
were  exposed  to  plunder,  and  the  palace  to 
ruin. 

The  pleasantest  part  of  the  field  of  Mars, 
which  Tarquin  had  owned,  was  devoted  to 
the  service  of  that  god;  but,  it  happening  to 
be  harvest  season,  and  the  sheaves  yet  being 
on  the  ground,  they  thought  it  not  proper  to 
commit  them  to  the  flail,  or  unsanctify  them 
with  any  use;  and,  therefore,  carrying  them 
to  the  river-side,  and  trees  withal  that  were 
cut  down,  they  cast  all  into  the  water,  dedi¬ 
cating  the  soil,  free  from  all  occupation,  to 
the  deity.  Now,  these  thrown  in,  one  upon 
another,  and  closing  together,  the  stream  did 
not  bear  them  far,  but  where  the  first  were 
carried  down  and  came  to  a  bottom,  the  re¬ 
mainder,  finding  no  farther  conveyance,  were 
stopped  and  interwoven  one  with  another;  the 
stream  working  the  mass  into  a  firmness,  and 
washing  down  fresh  mud.  This,  settling  there, 
became  an  accession  of  matter,  as  well  as  ce¬ 
ment,  to  the  rubbish,  insomuch  that  the  vio¬ 
lence  of  the  waters  could  not  remove  it,  but 
forced  and  compressed  it  all  together.  Thus 
its  bulk  and  solidity  gained  it  new  subsidies, 
which  gave  it  extension  enough  to  stop  on  its 
way  most  of  what  the  stream  brought  down. 
This  is  now  a  sacred  island,  lying  by  the  city, 
adorned  with  the  temples  of  the  gods,  and 
walks,  and  is  called  in  the  Latin  tongue  inter 
duos  pontes }  Though  some  say  this  did  not 
happen  at  the  dedication  of  Tarquin’s  field,  but 
in  aftertimes,  when  Tarquinia,  a  vestal  priest¬ 
ess,  gave  an  adjacent  field  to  the  public,  and 
obtained  great  honours  in  consequence,  as, 
amongst  the  rest,  that  of  all  women  her  testi¬ 
mony  alone  should  be  received;  she  had  also 
the  liberty  to  marry,  but  refused  it;  thus  some 
tell  the  story. 

Tarquin,  despairing  of  a  return  to  his  king¬ 
dom  by  the  conspiracy,  found  a  kind  recep¬ 
tion  amongst  the  Tuscans,  who,  with  a  great 
army,  proceeded  to  restore  him.  The  consuls 
headed  the  Romans  against  them,  and  made 
their  rendezvous  in  certain  holy  places,  the  one 
called  the  Arsian  grove,  the  other  the  ^Esuvian 
meadow.  When  they  came  into  action,  Aruns, 
the  son  of  Tarquin,  and  Brutus,  the  Roman 
between  two  bridges. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

consul,  not  accidentally  encountering  each  oth¬ 
er,  but  out  of  hatred  and  rage,  the  one  to 
avenge  tyranny  and  enmity  to  his  country,  the 
other  his  banishment,  set  spurs  to  their  horses, 
and,  engaging  with  more  fury  than  fore¬ 
thought,  disregarding  their  own  security,  fell 
together  in  the  combat.  This  dreadful  onset 
hardly  was  followed  by  a  more  favourable  end; 
both  armies,  doing  and  receiving  equal  dam¬ 
age,  were  separated  by  a  storm. 

Valerius  was  much  concerned,  not  know¬ 
ing  what  the  result  of  the  day  was,  and  seeing 
his  men  as  well  dismayed  at  the  sight  of 
their  own  dead,  as  rejoiced  at  the  loss  of  the 
enemy;  so  apparently  equal  in  the  number 
was  the  slaughter  on  either  side.  Each  party, 
however,  felt  surer  of  defeat  from  the  actual 
sight  of  their  own  dead,  than  they  could  feel 
of  victory  from  conjecture  about  those  of  their 
adversaries.  The  night  being  come  (and  such 
as  one  may  presume  must  follow  such  a  bat¬ 
tle),  and  the  armies  laid  to  rest,  they  say  that 
the  grove  shook,  and  uttered  a  voice,  saying 
that  the  Tuscans  had  lost  one  man  more  than 
the  Romans;  clearly  a  divine  announcement; 
and  the  Romans  at  once  received  it  with 
shouts  and  expressions  of  joy;  whilst  the  Tus¬ 
cans,  through  fear  and  amazement,  deserted 
their  tents,  and  were  for  the  most  part  dis¬ 
persed.  The  Romans,  falling  upon  the  re¬ 
mainder,  amounting  to  nearly  five  thousand, 
took  them  prisoners,  and  plundered  the  camp; 
when  they  numbered  the  dead,  they  found 
on  the  Tuscans’  side  eleven  thousand  and 
three  hundred,  exceeding  their  own  loss  but 
by  one  man. 

This  fight  happened  upon  the  last  of  Feb¬ 
ruary,  and  Valerius  triumphed  in  honour  of  it, 
being  the  first  consul  that  drove  in  with  a 
four-horse  chariot;  which  sight  both  appeared 
magnificent,  and  was  received  with  an  admir¬ 
ation  free  from  envy  or  offence  (as  some  sug¬ 
gest)  on  the  part  of  the  spectators;  it  would 
not  otherwise  have  been  continued  with  so 
much  eagerness  and  emulation  through  all  the 
after  ages.  The  people  applauded  likewise  the 
honours  he  did  to  his  colleague,  in  adding  to 
his  obsequies  a  funeral  oration,  which  was  so 
much  liked  by  the  Romans,  and  found  so  good 
a  reception,  that  it  became  customary  for  the 
best  men  to  celebrate  the  funerals  of  great  citi¬ 
zens  with  speeches  in  their  commendation; 
and  their  antiquity  in  Rome  is  affirmed  to  be 
greater  than  in  Greece,  unless,  with  the  orator 
Anaximenes,  we  make  Solon  the  first  author. 

Yet  some  part  of  Valerius’s  behavior  did 


POPLICOLA 

give  offence  and  disgust  to  the  people,  be¬ 
cause  Brutus,  whom  they  esteemed  the  father 
of  their  liberty,  had  not  presumed  to  rule 
without  a  colleague,  but  united  one  and  then 
another  to  him  in  his  commission;  while  Vale¬ 
rius,  they  said,  centring  all  authority  in  him¬ 
self,  seemed  not  in  any  sense  a  successor  to  Bru¬ 
tus  in  the  consulship,  but  to  Tarquin  in  the 
tyranny;  he  might  make  verbal  harangues  to 
Brutus’s  memory,  yet,  when  he  was  attended 
with  all  the  rods  and  axes,  proceeding  down 
from  a  house  than  which  the  king’s  house  that 
he  had  demolished  had  not  been  statelier,  those 
actions  showed  him  an  imitator  of  Tarquin. 
For,  indeed,  his  dwelling-house  on  the  Velia 
was  somewhat  imposing  in  appearance,  hang¬ 
ing  over  the  forum,  and  overlooking  all  trans¬ 
actions  there;  the  access  to  it  was  hard,  and  to 
see  him  far  off  coming  down,  a  stately  and 
royal  spectacle. 

But  Valerius  showed  how  well  it  were  for 
men  in  power  and  great  offices  to  have  ears 
that  give  admittance  to  truth  before  flattery; 
for  upon  his  friends  telling  him  that  he  dis¬ 
pleased  the  people,  he  contended  not,  neither 
resented  it,  but  while  it  was  still  night,  send¬ 
ing  for  a  number  of  work-people,  pulled 
down  his  house  and  levelled  it  with  the 
ground;  so  that  in  the  morning  the  people, 
seeing  and  flocking  together,  expressed  their 
wonder  and  their  respect  for  his  magnanimity, 
and  their  sorrow,  as  though  it  had  been  a  hu¬ 
man  being,  for  the  large  and  beautiful  house 
which  was  thus  lost  to  them  by  an  unfounded 
jealousy,  while  its  owner,  their  consul,  with¬ 
out  a  roof  of  his  own,  had  to  beg  a  lodging 
with  his  friends.  For  his  friends  received  him, 
till  a  place  the  people  gave  him  was  furnished 
with  a  house,  though  less  stately  than  his  own, 
where  now  stands  the  temple,  as  it  is  called,  of 
Vica  Pota. 

He  resolved  to  render  the  government,  as 
well  as  himself,  instead  of  terrible,  familiar 
and  pleasant  to  the  people,  and  parted  the 
axes  from  the  rods,  and  always,  upon  his  en¬ 
trance  into  the  assembly,  lowered  these  also 
to  the  people,  to  show,  in  the  strongest  way, 
the  republican  foundation  of  the  government; 
and  this  the  consuls  observe  to  this  day.  But 
the  humility  of  the  man  was  but  a  means,  not, 
as  they  thought,  of  lessening  himself,  but  mere¬ 
ly  to  abate  their  envy  by  this  moderation;  for 
whatever  he  detracted  from  his  authority  he 
added  to  his  real  power,  the  people  still  sub¬ 
mitting  with  satisfaction,  which  they  expressed 
by  calling  him  Poplicola,  or  people-lover, 


81 

which  name  had  the  pre-eminence  of  the  rest, 
and,  therefore,  in  the  sequel  of  his  narrative  we 
shall  use  no  other. 

He  gave  free  leave  to  any  to  sue  for  the 
consulship;  but  before  the  admittance  of  a 
colleague,  mistrusting  the  chances,  lest  emula¬ 
tion  or  ignorance  should  cross  his  designs,  by 
his  sole  authority  enacted  his  best  and  most 
important  measures.  First,  he  supplied  the 
vacancies  of  the  senators,  whom  either  Tar¬ 
quin  long  before  had  put  to  death,  or  the  war 
lately  cut  off;  those  that  he  enrolled,  they 
write,  amounted  to  a  hundred  and  sixty-four; 
afterwards  he  made  several  laws  which  added 
much  to  the  people’s  liberty,  in  particular  one 
granting  offenders  the  liberty  of  appealing  to 
the  people  from  the  judgment  of  the  con¬ 
suls;  a  second,  that  made  it  death  to  usurp 
any  magistracy  without  the  people’s  consent; 
a  third,  for  the  relief  of  poor  citizens,  which, 
taking  off  their  taxes,  encouraged  their  la¬ 
bours;  another,  against  disobedience  to  the 
consuls,  which  was  no  less  popular  than  the 
rest,  and  rather  to  the  benefit  of  the  common¬ 
alty  than  to  the  advantage  of  the  nobles,  for 
it  imposed  upon  disobedience  the  penalty  of 
ten  oxen  and  two  sheep;  the  price  of  a  sheep 
being  ten  obols,  of  an  ox,  an  hundred.  For  the 
use  of  money  was  then  infrequent  amongst 
the  Romans,  but  their  wealth  in  cattle  great; 
even  now  pieces  of  property  are  called  peculia, 
from  pecus,  cattle;  and  they  had  stamped  upon 
their  most  ancient  money  an  ox,  a  sheep,  or  a 
hog;  and  surnamed  their  sons  Suillii,  Bubulci, 
Caprarii,  and  Porcii,  from  caprce,  goats,  and 
porci,  hogs. 

Amidst  this  mildness  and  moderation,  for 
one  excessive  fault  he  instituted  one  exces¬ 
sive  punishment;  for  he  made  it  lawful  with¬ 
out  trial  to  take  away  any  man’s  life  that  as¬ 
pired  to  a  tyranny,  and  acquitted  the  slayer,  if 
he  produced  evidence  of  the  crime;  for  though 
it  was  not  probable  for  a  man,  whose  designs 
were  so  great,  to  escape  all  notice;  yet  because 
it  was  possible  he  might,  although  observed, 
by  force  anticipate  judgment,  which  the  usur¬ 
pation  itself  would  then  preclude,  he  gave  a 
licence  to  any  to  anticipate  the  usurper. 

He  was  honoured  likewise  for  the  law 
touching  the  treasury;  for  because  it  was 
necessary  for  the  citizens  to  contribute  out 
of  their  estates  to  the  maintenance  of  wars, 
and  he  was  unwilling  himself  to  be  concerned 
in  the  care  of  it,  or  to  permit  his  friends,  or 
indeed  to  let  the  public  money  pass  into  any 
private  house,  he  allotted  the  temple  of  Saturn 


82 


for  the  treasury,  in  which  to  this  day  they  de¬ 
posit  the  tribute-money,  and  granted  the  peo¬ 
ple  the  liberty  of  choosing  two  young  men  as 
quaestors,  or  treasurers.  The  first  were  Publius 
Veturius  and  Marcus  Minucius;  and  a  large 
sum  was  collected,  for  they  assessed  one  hun¬ 
dred  and  thirty  thousand,  excusing  orphans 
and  widows  from  the  payment. 

After  these  dispositions,  he  admitted  Lucre¬ 
tius,  the  father  of  Lucretia,  as  his  colleague, 
and  gave  him  the  precedence  in  the  govern¬ 
ment,  by  resigning  the  fasces  to  him,  as  due 
to  his  years,  which  privilege  of  seniority  con¬ 
tinued  to  our  time.  But  within  a  few  days 
Lucretius  died,  and  in  a  new  election  Marcus 
Horatius  succeeded  in  that  honour,  and  con¬ 
tinued  consul  for  the  remainder  of  the  year. 

Now,  whilst  Tarquin  was  making  prepara¬ 
tions  in  Tuscany  for  a  second  war  against  the 
Romans,  it  is  said  a  great  portent  occurred. 
When  Tarquin  was  king,  and  had  all  but  com¬ 
pleted  the  buildings  of  the  Capitol,  designing, 
whether  from  oracular  advice  or  his  own  plea¬ 
sure,  to  erect  an  earthen  chariot  upon  the  top, 
he  intrusted  the  workmanship  to  Tuscans  of 
the  city  Veii,  but  soon  after  lost  his  kingdom. 
The  work  thus  modelled,  the  Tuscans  set  in  a 
furnace,  but  the  clay  showed  not  those  passive 
qualities  which  usually  attend  its  nature,  to 
subside  and  be  condensed  upon  the  evapora¬ 
tion  of  the  moisture,  but  rose  and  swelled  out 
to  that  bulk,  that,  when  solid  and  firm,  not¬ 
withstanding  the  removal  of  the  roof  and  op¬ 
ening  the  walls  of  the  furnace,  it  could  not  be 
taken  out  without  much  difficulty.  The  sooth¬ 
sayers  looked  upon  this  as  a  divine  prognostic 
of  success  and  power  to  those  that  should  pos¬ 
sess  it;  and  the  Tuscans  resolved  not  to  deliver 
it  to  the  Romans,  who  demanded  it,  but  an¬ 
swered  that  it  rather  belonged  to  Tarquin  than 
to  those  who  had  sent  him  into  exile.  A  few 
days  after,  they  had  a  horserace  there,  with  the 
usual  shows  and  solemnities,  and  as  the  chari¬ 
oteer  with  his  garland  on  his  head  was  quietly 
driving  the  victorious  chariot  out  of  the  ring, 
the  horses,  upon  no  apparent  occasion,  taking 
fright,  either  by  divine  instigation  or  by  acci¬ 
dent,  hurried  away  their  driver  at  full  speed 
to  Rome;  neither  did  his  holding  them  in  pre¬ 
vail,  nor  his  voice,  but  he  was  forced  along 
with  violence  till,  coming  to  the  Capitol,  he 
was  thrown  out  by  the  gate  called  Ratumena. 
This  occurrence  raised  wonder  and  fear  in  the 
Veientines,  who  now  permitted  the  delivery  of 
the  chariot. 

The  building  of  the  temple  of  the  Capito- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

line  Jupiter  had  been  vowed  by  Tarquin,  the 
son  of  Demaratus,  when  warring  with  the  Sa¬ 
bines;  Tarquinius  Superbus,  his  son  or  grand¬ 
son,  built,  but  could  not  dedicate  it,  because  he 
lost  his  kingdom  before  it  was  quite  finished. 
And  now  that  it  was  completed  with  all  its 
ornaments,  Poplicola  was  ambitious  to  dedi¬ 
cate  it;  but  the  nobility  envied  him  that  hon¬ 
our,  as,  indeed,  also,  in  some  degree,  those  his 
prudence  in  making  laws  and  conduct  in  wars 
entitled  him  to.  Grudging  him,  at  any  rate,  the 
addition  of  this,  they  urged  Horatius  to  sue  for 
the  dedication,  and,  whilst  Poplicola  was  en¬ 
gaged  in  some  military  expedition,  voted  it  to 
Horatius,  and  conducted  him  to  the  Capitol,  as 
though,  were  Poplicola  present,  they  could  not 
have  carried  it. 

Yet,  some  write,  Poplicola  was  by  lot  des¬ 
tined  against  his  will  to  the  expedition,  the 
other  to  the  dedication;  and  what  happened 
in  the  performance  seems  to  intimate  some 
ground  for  this  conjecture;  for,  upon  the  Ides 
of  September,  which  happens  about  the  full 
moon  of  the  month  Metagitnion,  the  people 
having  assembled  at  the  Capitol  and  silence 
being  enjoined,  Horatius,  after  the  perform¬ 
ance  of  other  ceremonies,  holding  the  doors,  ac¬ 
cording  to  custom,  was  proceeding  to  pro¬ 
nounce  the  words  of  dedication,  when  Marcus, 
the  brother  of  Poplicola,  who  had  got  a  place 
on  purpose  beforehand  near  the  door,  observ¬ 
ing  his  opportunity,  cried,  “O  consul,  thy  son 
lies  dead  in  the  camp”;  which  made  a  great 
impression  upon  all  others  who  heard  it,  yet  in 
nowise  discomposed  Horatius,  who  returned 
merely  the  reply,  “Cast  the  dead  out  whither 
you  please;  I  am  not  a  mourner”;  and  so  com¬ 
pleted  the  dedication.  The  news  was  not  true, 
but  Marcus  thought  the  lie  might  avert  him 
from  his  performance;  but  it  argues  him  a  man 
of  wonderful  self-possession,  whether  he  at 
once  saw  through  the  cheat,  or,  believing  it  as 
true,  showed  no  discomposure. 

The  same  fortune  attended  the  dedication 
of  the  second  temple;  the  first,  as  has  been 
said,  was  built  by  Tarquin,  and  dedicated  by 
Horatius;  it  was  burnt  down  in  the  civil 
wars.  The  second,  Sulla  built,  and,  dying  be¬ 
fore  the  dedication,  left  that  honour  to  Catu- 
lus;  and  when  this  was  demolished  in  the  Vi- 
tellian  sedition,  Vespasian,  with  the  same  suc¬ 
cess  that  attended  him  in  other  things,  began  a 
third  and  lived  to  see  it  finished,  but  did  not 
live  to  see  it  again  destroyed,  as  it  presently 
was;  but  was  as  fortunate  in  dying  before  its 
destruction,  as  Sulla  was  the  reverse  in  dying 


POPLICOLA 

before  the  dedication  of  his.  For  immediately 
after  Vespasian’s  death  it  was  consumed  by 
fire.  The  fourth,  which  now  exists,  was  both 
built  and  dedicated  by  Domitian. 

It  is  said  Tarquin  expended  forty  thousand 
pounds  of  silver  in  the  very  foundations;  but 
the  whole  wealth  of  the  richest  private  man 
in  Rome  would  not  discharge  the  cost  of  the 
gilding  of  this  temple  in  our  days,  it  amount¬ 
ing  to  above  twelve  thousand  talents;  the  pil¬ 
lars  were  cut  out  of  Pentelican  marble,  of  a 
length  most  happily  proportioned  to  their 
thickness;  these  we  saw  at  Athens;  but  when 
they  were  cut  anew  at  Rome  and  polished,  they 
did  not  gain  so  much  in  embellishment  as  they 
lost  in  symmetry,  being  rendered  too  taper  and 
slender.  Should  any  one  who  wonders  at  the 
costliness  of  the  Capitol  visit  any  one  gallery  in 
Domitian’s  palace,  or  hall,  or  bath,  or  the  apart¬ 
ments  of  his  concubines,  Epicharmus’s  re¬ 
mark  upon  the  prodigal,  that — 

’Tis  not  beneficence,  but,  truth  to  say, 

A  mere  disease  of  giving  things  away; 

would  be  in  his  mouth  in  application  to  Do¬ 
mitian.  It  is  neither  piety,  he  would  say,  nor 
magnificence,  but,  indeed,  a  mere  disease  of 
building,  and  a  desire,  like  Midas,  of  convert¬ 
ing  everything  into  gold  or  stone.  And  thus 
much  for  this  matter. 

Tarquin,  after  the  great  battle  wherein  he 
lost  his  son  in  combat  with  Brutus,  fled  to  Clu- 
sium,  and  sought  aid  from  Lars  Porsenna,  then 
one  of  those  most  powerful  princes  of  Italy, 
and  a  man  of  worth  and  generosity;  who  as¬ 
sured  him  of  assistance,  immediately  sending 
his  commands  to  Rome  that  they  should  re¬ 
ceive  Tarquin  as  their  king,  and,  upon  the  Ro¬ 
mans’  refusal,  proclaimed  war,  and,  having 
signified  the  time  and  place  where  he  intended 
his  attack,  approached  with  a  great  army. 

Poplicola  was,  in  his  absence,  chosen  consul 
a  second  time,  and  Titus  Lucretius  his  col¬ 
league,  and,  returning  to  Rome,  to  show  a 
spirit  yet  loftier  than  Porsenna’s,  built  the 
city  Sigliura  when  Porsenna  was  already  in 
the  neighbourhood;  and  walling  it  at  great 
expense,  there  placed  a  colony  of  seven  hun¬ 
dred  men,  as  being  little  concerned  at  the 
war.  Nevertheless,  Porsenna,  making  a  sharp 
assault,  obliged  the  defendants  to  retire  to 
Rome,  who  had  almost  in  their  entrance  ad¬ 
mitted  the  enemy  into  the  city  with  them;  only 
Poplicola  by  sallying  out  at  the  gate  prevented 
them,  and,  joining  battle  by  Tiber  side,  op¬ 
posed  the  enemy,  that  pressed  on  with  their 


83 

multitude,  but  at  last,  sinking  under  desperate 
wounds,  was  carried  out  of  the  fight. 

The  same  fortune  fell  upon  Lucretius,  so 
that  the  Romans,  being  dismayed,  retreated 
into  the  city  for  their  security,  and  Rome  was 
in  great  hazard  of  being  taken,  the  enemy 
forcing  their  way  on  to  the  wooden  bridge, 
where  Horatius  Codes,  seconded  by  two  of 
the  first  men  in  Rome,  Herminius  and  Lar- 
tius,  made  head  against  them.  Horatius  ob¬ 
tained  this  name  from  the  loss  of  one  of  his 
eyes  in  the  wars,  or,  as  others  write,  from  the 
depressure  of  his  nose,  which,  leaving  nothing 
in  the  middle  to  separate  them,  made  both 
eyes  appear  but  as  one;  and  hence,  intending 
to  say  Cyclops,  by  a  mispronunciation  they 
called  him  Codes.  This  Codes  kept  the 
bridge,  and  held  back  the  enemy,  till  his  own 
party  broke  it  down  behind,  and  then  with 
his  armour  dropped  into  the  river,  and  swam 
to  the  hither  side,  with  a  wound  in  his  hip 
from  a  Tuscan  spear.  Poplicola,  admiring 
his  courage,  proposed  at  once  that  the  Ro¬ 
mans  should  every  one  make  him  a  present 
of  a  day’s  provisions,  and  afterwards  give  him 
as  much  land  as  he  could  plough  round  in  one 
day,  and  besides  erected  a  brazen  statue  to  his 
honour  in  the  temple  of  Vulcan,  as  a  requital 
for  the  lameness  caused  by  his  wound. 

But  Porsenna  laying  close  siege  to  the  city, 
and  a  famine  raging  amongst  the  Romans, 
also  a  new  army  of  the  Tuscans  making  in¬ 
cursions  into  the  country,  Poplicola,  a  third 
time  chosen  consul,  designed  to  make,  with¬ 
out  sallying  out,  his  defence  against  Porsenna, 
but,  privately  stealing  forth  against  the  new 
army  of  the  Tuscans,  put  them  to  flight  and 
slew  five  thousand. 

The  story  of  Mucius  is  variously  given;  we, 
like  others,  must  follow  the  commonly  re¬ 
ceived  statement.  He  was  a  man  endowed  with 
every  virtue,  but  most  eminent  in  war;  and, 
resolving  to  kill  Porsenna,  attired  himself  in 
the  Tuscan  habit,  and  using  the  Tuscan  lan¬ 
guage,  came  to  the  camp,  and  approaching  the 
seat  where  the  king  sat  amongst  his  nobles, 
but  not  certainly  knowing  the  king,  and  fear¬ 
ful  to  inquire,  drew  out  his  sword,  and  stabbed 
one  who  he  thought  had  most  the  appearance 
of  king.  Mucius  was  taken  in  the  act,  and 
whilst  he  was  under  examination,  a  pan  of  fire 
was  brought  to  the  king,  who  intended  to  sac¬ 
rifice;  Mucius  thrust  his  right  hand  into  the 
flame,  and  whilst  it  burnt  stood  looking  at 
Porsenna  with  a  steadfast  and  undaunted 
countenance;  Porsenna  at  last  in  admiration 


84 


dismissed  him,  and  returned  his  sword,  reach¬ 
ing  it  from  his  seat;  Mucius  received  it  in  his 
left  hand,  which  occasioned  the  name  of 
Scaevola,  left-handed,  and  said,  “I  have  over¬ 
come  the  terrors  of  Porsenna,  yet  am  van¬ 
quished  by  his  generosity,  and  gratitude 
obliges  me  to  disclose  what  no  punishment 
could  extort”;  and  assured  him  then,  that 
three  hundred  Romans,  all  of  the  same  reso¬ 
lution,  lurked  about  his  camp,  only  waiting 
for  an  opportunity;  he,  by  lot  appointed  to  the 
enterprise,  was  not  sorry  that  he  had  miscar¬ 
ried  in  it,  because  so  brave  and  good  a  man  de¬ 
served  rather  to  be  a  friend  to  the  Romans 
than  an  enemy.  To  this  Porsenna  gave  credit, 
and  thereupon  expressed  an  inclination  to  a 
truce,  not,  I  presume,  so  much  out  of  fear  of 
the  three  hundred  Romans,  as  in  admiration 
of  the  Roman  courage.  All  other  writers  call 
this  man  Mucius  Scaevola,  yet  Athendorus,  son 
of  Sandon,  in  a  book  addressed  to  Octavia, 
Caesar’s  sister,  avers  he  was  also  called  Postu- 
mus. 

Poplicola,  not  so  much  esteeming  Porsen- 
na’s  enmity  dangerous  to  Rome  as  his  friend¬ 
ship  and  alliance  serviceable,  was  induced  to 
refer  the  controversy  with  Tarquin  to  his  arbi¬ 
tration,  and  several  times  undertook  to  prove 
Tarquin  the  worst  of  men,  and  justly  deprived 
of  his  kingdom.  But  Tarquin  proudly  replied 
he  would  admit  no  judge,  much  less  Porsenna, 
that  had  fallen  away  from  his  engagements; 
and  Porsenna,  resenting  this  answer,  and  mis¬ 
trusting  the  equity  of  his  cause,  moved  also  by 
the  solicitations  of  his  son  Aruns,  who  was 
earnest  for  the  Roman  interest,  made  a  peace 
on  these  conditions,  that  they  should  resign  the 
land  they  had  taken  from  the  Tuscans,  and  re¬ 
store  all  prisoners  and  receive  back  their  desert¬ 
ers.  To  confirm  the  peace,  the  Romans  gave  as 
hostages  ten  sons  of  patrician  parents,  and  as 
many  daughters,  amongst  whom  was  Valeria, 
the  daughter  of  Poplicola. 

Upon  these  assurances,  Porsenna  ceased 
from  all  acts  of  hostility,  and  the  young  girls 
went  down  to  the  river  to  bathe,  at  that  part 
where  the  winding  of  the  bank  formed  a  bay 
and  made  the  waters  stiller  and  quieter;  and, 
seeing  no  guard,  nor  any  one  coming  or  going 
over,  they  were  encouraged  to  swim  over, 
notwithstanding  the  depth  and  violence  of 
the  stream.  Some  affirm  that  one  of  them,  by 
name  Clcelia,  passing  over  on  horseback,  per¬ 
suaded  the  rest  to  swim  after;  but,  upon  their 
safe  arrival,  presenting  themselves  to  Poplicola, 
he  neither  praised  nor  approved  their  return, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

but  was  concerned  lest  he  should  appear  less 
faithful  than  Porsenna,  and  this  boldness  in  the 
maidens  should  argue  treachery  in  the  Ro¬ 
mans;  so  that,  apprehending  them,  he  sent 
them  back  to  Porsenna. 

But  Tarquin’s  men,  having  intelligence  of 
this,  laid  a  strong  ambuscade  on  the  other  side 
for  those  that  conducted  them;  and  while 
these  were  skirmishing  together,  Valeria,  the 
daughter  of  Poplicola,  rushed  through  the  en¬ 
emy,  and  fled,  and  with  the  assistance  of  three 
of  her  attendants  made  good  her  escape,  whilst 
the  rest  were  dangerously  hedged  in  by  the 
soldiers;  but  Aruns,  Porsenna’s  son,  upon  tid¬ 
ings  of  it,  hastened  to  their  rescue,  and,  putting 
the  enemy  to  flight,  delivered  the  Romans. 

When  Porsenna  saw  the  maidens  returned, 
demanding  who  was  the  author  and  adviser 
of  the  act,  and  understanding  Clcelia  to  be 
the  person,  he  looked  on  her  with  a  cheerful 
and  benignant  countenance,  and  command¬ 
ing  one  of  his  horses  to  be  brought,  sumptu¬ 
ously  adorned,  made  her  a  present  of  it.  This 
is  produced  as  evidence  by  those  who  affirm 
that  only  Clcelia  passed  the  river  on  horse¬ 
back;  those  who  deny  it  call  it  only  the  hon¬ 
our  the  Tuscan  did  to  her  courage;  a  figure, 
however,  on  horseback,  stands  in  the  Via  Sacra, 
as  you  go  to  the  Palatium,  which  some  say  is 
the  statue  of  Clcelia,  others  of  Valeria.  Porsen¬ 
na,  thus  reconciled  to  the  Romans,  gave  them 
a  fresh  instance  of  his  generosity,  and  com¬ 
manded  his  soldiers  to  quit  the  camp  merely 
with  their  arms,  leaving  their  tents,  full  of  corn 
and  other  stores,  as  a  gift  to  the  Romans. 
Hence  even  down  to  our  time,  when  there  is 
a  public  sale  of  goods,  they  cry  Porsenna’s  first, 
by  way  of  perpetual  commemoration  of  his 
kindness.  There  stood  also,  by  the  senate- 
house,  a  brazen  statue  of  him,  of  plain  and  an¬ 
tique  workmanship. 

Afterwards,  the  Sabines,  making  incursions 
upon  the  Romans,  Marcus  Valerius,  brother 
to  Poplicola,  was  made  consul,  and  with  him 
Postumius  Tubertus.  Marcus,  through  the 
management  of  affairs  by  the  conduct  and 
direct  assistance  of  Poplicola,  obtained  two 
great  victories,  in  the  latter  of  which  he  slew 
thirteen  thousand  Sabines  without  the  loss  of 
one  Roman,  and  was  honoured,  as  an  accession 
to  his  triumph,  with  a  house  built  in  the  Pala¬ 
tium  at  the  public  charge;  and  whereas  the 
doors  of  other  houses  opened  inward  into  the 
house,  they  made  this  to  open  outward  into  the 
street,  to  intimate  their  perpetual  public  recog¬ 
nition  of  his  merit  by  thus  continually  making 


POPLICOLA 

way  for  him.  The  same  fashion  in  their  doors 
the  Greeks,  they  say,  had  of  old  universally, 
which  appears  from  their  comedies,  where 
those  that  are  going  out  make  a  noise  at  the 
door  within,  to  give  notice  to  those  that  pass 
by  or  stand  near  the  door,  that  the  opening 
the  door  into  the  street  might  occasion  no  sur- 
prisal. 

The  year  after,  Poplicola  was  made  consul 
the  fourth  time,  when  a  confederacy  of  the  Sa¬ 
bines  and  Latins  threatened  a  war;  a  supersti¬ 
tious  fear  also  overran  the  city  on  the  occa¬ 
sion  of  general  miscarriages  of  their  women,  no 
single  birth  coming  to  its  due  time.  Poplicola, 
upon  consultation  of  the  Sibylline  books,  sacri¬ 
ficing  to  Pluto,  and  renewing  certain  games 
commanded  by  Apollo,  restored  the  city  to 
more  cheerful  assurance  in  the  gods,  and  then 
prepared  against  the  menaces  of  men. 

There  were  appearances  of  great  prepa¬ 
ration,  and  of  a  formidable  confederacy. 
Amongst  the  Sabines  there  was  one  Appius 
Clausus,  a  man  of  a  great  wealth  and  strength 
of  body,  but  most  eminent  for  his  high  char¬ 
acter  and  for  his  eloquence;  yet,  as  is  usually 
the  fate  of  great  men,  he  could  not  escape 
the  envy  of  others,  which  was  much  occa¬ 
sioned  by  his  dissuading  the  war,  and  seem¬ 
ing  to  promote  the  Roman  interest,  with  a 
view,  it  is  thought,  to  obtaining  absolute  pow¬ 
er  in  his  own  country  for  himself.  Knowing 
how  welcome  these  reports  would  be  to  the 
multitude,  and  how  offensive  to  the  army  and 
the  abettors  of  the  war,  he  was  afraid  to  stand 
a  trial,  but,  having  a  considerable  body  of 
friends  and  allies  to  assist  him,  raised  a  tumult 
amongst  the  Sabines,  which  delayed  the  war. 

Neither  was  Poplicola  wanting,  not  only 
to  understand  the  grounds  of  the  sedition,  but 
to  promote  and  increase  it,  and  he  despatched 
emissaries  with  instructions  to  Clausus,  that 
Poplicola  was  assured  of  his  goodness  and  jus¬ 
tice,  and  thought  it  indeed  unworthy  in  any 
man,  however  injured,  to  seek  revenge  upon 
his  fellow-citizens;  yet  if  he  pleased,  for  his 
own  security,  to  leave  his  enemies  and  come 
to  Rome,  he  should  be  received,  both  in  public 
and  private,  with  the  honour  his  merit  de¬ 
served,  and  their  own  glory  required.  Appius, 
seriously  weighing  the  matter,  came  to  the  con¬ 
clusion  that  it  was  the  best  resource  which  ne¬ 
cessity  left  him,  and  advising  with  his  friends, 
and  they  inviting  again  others  in  the  same 
manner,  he  came  to  Rome,  bringing  five  thou¬ 
sand  families,  with  their  wives  and  children, 
people  of  the  quietest  and  steadiest  temper  of 


85 

all  the  Sabines.  Poplicola,  informed  of  their  ap¬ 
proach,  received  them  with  all  the  kind  offices 
of  a  friend,  and  admitted  them  at  once  to  the 
franchise,  allotting  to  every  one  two  acres  of 
land  by  the  river  Anio,  but  to  Clausus  twenty- 
five  acres,  and  gave  him  a  place  in  the  senate; 
a  commencement  of  political  power  which  he 
used  so  wisely,  that  he  rose  to  the  highest  rep¬ 
utation,  was  very  influential,  and  left  the  Clau- 
dian  house  behind  him,  inferior  to  none  in 
Rome. 

The  departure  of  these  men  rendered  things 
quiet  amongst  the  Sabines;  yet  the  chief  of  the 
community  would  not  suffer  them  to  settle  into 
peace,  but  resented  that  Clausus  now,  by  turn¬ 
ing  deserter,  should  disappoint  that  revenge 
upon  the  Romans,  which,  while  at  home,  he 
had  unsuccessfully  opposed.  Coming  with  a 
great  army,  they  sat  down  before  Fidenae,  and 
placed  an  ambuscade  of  two  thousand  men 
near  Rome,  in  wooded  and  hollow  spots,  with 
a  design  that  some  few  horsemen,  as  soon  as  it 
was  day,  should  go  out  and  ravage  the  coun¬ 
try,  commanding  them  upon  their  approach  to 
the  town  so  to  retreat  as  to  draw  the  enemy 
into  the  ambush. 

Poplicola,  however,  soon  advertised  of  these 
designs  by  deserters,  disposed  his  forces  to 
their  respective  charges.  Postumius  Balbus, 
his  son-in-law,  going  out  with  three  thousand 
men  in  the  evening,  was  ordered  to  take  the 
hills,  under  which  the  ambush  lay,  there  to 
observe  their  motions;  his  colleague,  Lucre¬ 
tius,  attended  with  a  body  of  the  lightest  and 
boldest  men,  was  appointed  to  meet  the  Sabine 
horse;  whilst  he,  with  the  rest  of  the  army,  en¬ 
compassed  the  enemy.  And  a  thick  mist  rising 
accidentally,  Postumius,  early  in  the  morning, 
with  shouts  from  the  hills,  assailed  the  ambus¬ 
cade,  Lucretius  charged  the  light-horse,  and 
Poplicola  besieged  the  camp;  so  that  on  all 
sides  defeat  and  ruin  came  upon  the  Sabines, 
and  without  any  resistance  the  Romans  killed 
them  in  their  flight,  their  very  hopes  leading 
them  to  their  death,  for  each  division,  presum¬ 
ing  that  the  other  was  safe,  gave  up  all  thought 
of  fighting  or  keeping  their  ground;  and  these 
quitting  the  camp  to  retire  to  the  ambuscade, 
and  the  ambuscade  flying  to  the  camp,  fugi¬ 
tives  thus  met  fugitives,  and  found  those  from 
whom  they  expected  succour  as  much  in  need 
of  succour  from  themselves. 

The  nearness,  however,  of  the  city  Fidense 
was  the  preservation  of  the  Sabines,  especially 
those  that  fled  from  the  camp;  those  that 
could  not  gain  the  city  either  perished  in  the 


86 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 


field,  or  were  taken  prisoners.  This  victory, 
the  Romans,  though  usually  ascribing  such 
success  to  some  god,  attributed  to  the  conduct 
of  one  captain;  and  it  was  observed  to  be 
heard  amongst  the  soldiers,  that  Poplicola  had 
delivered  their  enemies  lame  and  blind,  and 
only  not  in  chains,  to  be  despatched  by  their 
swords.  From  the  spoil  and  prisoners  great 
wealth  accrued  to  the  people. 

Poplicola,  having  completed  his  triumph, 
and  bequeathed  the  city  to  the  care  of  the 
succeeding  consuls,  died;  thus  closing  a  life 
which,  so  far  as  human  life  may  be,  had  been 
full  of  all  that  is  good  and  honourable.  The 
people,  as  though  they  had  not  duly  rewarded 


his  deserts  when  alive,  but  still  were  in  his 
debt,  decreed  him  a  public  interment,  every 
one  contributing  his  quadrans  towards  the 
charge;  the  women,  besides,  by  private  con¬ 
sent,  mourned  a  whole  year,  a  signal  mark  of 
honour  to  his  memory.  He  was  buried,  by  the 
people’s  desire,  within  the  city,  in  the  part 
called  Velia,  where  his  posterity  had  likewise 
privilege  of  burial;  now,  however,  none  of  the 
family  are  interred  there,  but  the  body  is  car¬ 
ried  thither  and  set  down,  and  some  one  places 
a  burning  torch  under  it  and  immediately  takes 
it  away,  as  an  attestation  of  the  deceased’s  priv¬ 
ilege,  and  his  receding  from  his  honour,  after 
which  the  body  is  removed. 


POPLICOLA  and  SOLON 
Compared 


THERE  is  something  singular  in  the 
present  parallel  which  has  not  occurred 
in  any  other  of  the  lives;  that  the  one  should 
be  the  imitator  of  the  other,  and  the  other 
his  best  evidence.  Upon  the  survey  of  Solon’s 
sentence  to  Croesus  in  favour  of  Tellus’s  hap¬ 
piness,  it  seems  more  applicable  to  Poplicola; 
for  Tellus,  whose  virtuous  life  and  dying  well 
had  gained  him  the  name  of  the  happiest  man, 
yet  was  never  celebrated  in  Solon’s  poems  for 
a  good  man,  nor  have  his  children  or  any  mag¬ 
istracy  of  his  deserved  a  memorial;  but  Popli- 
cola’s  life  was  the  most  eminent  amongst  the 
Romans,  as  well  for  the  greatness  of  his  vir¬ 
tue  as  his  power,  and  also  since  his  death  many 
amongst  the  distinguished  families,  even  in  our 
days,  the  Poplicolae,  Messalae,  and  Valerii,  after 
a  lapse  of  six  hundred  years,  acknowledge  him 
as  the  fountain  of  their  honour.  Besides,  Tel¬ 
lus,  though  keeping  his  post  and  fighting  like 
a  valiant  soldier,  was  yet  slain  by  his  enemies; 
but  Poplicola,  the  better  fortune,  slew  his,  and 
saw  his  country  victorious  under  his  command. 
And  his  honours  and  triumphs  brought  him, 
which  was  Solon’s  ambition,  to  a  happy  end; 
the  ejaculation  which,  in  his  verses  against 
Mimnermus  about  the  continuance  of  man’s 
life,  he  himself  made — 

Mourned  let  me  die;  and  may  I ,  when  life  ends, 
Occasion  sighs  and  sorrows  to  my  friends, 
is  evidence  to  Poplicola’s  happiness;  his  death 
did  not  only  draw  tears  from  his  friends  and 
acquaintance,  but  was  the  object  of  universal 
regret  and  sorrow  through  the  whole  city; 
the  women  deplored  his  loss  as  that  of  a  son, 
brother,  or  common  father.  “Wealth  I  would 


have,”  said  Solon,  “but  wealth  by  wrong  pro¬ 
cure  would  not,”  because  punishment  would 
follow.  But  Poplicola’s  riches  were  not  only 
justly  his,  but  he  spent  them  nobly  in  doing 
good  to  the  distressed.  So  that  if  Solon  was  re¬ 
puted  the  wisest  man,  we  must  allow  Poplicola 
to  be  the  happiest;  for  what  Solon  wished  for 
as  the  greatest  and  most  perfect  good,  this  Po¬ 
plicola  had,  and  used  and  enjoyed  to  his  death. 

And  as  Solon  may  thus  be  said  to  have 
contributed  to  Poplicola’s  glory,  so  did  also 
Poplicola  to  his,  by  his  choice  of  him  as  his 
model  in  the  formation  of  republican  institu¬ 
tions;  in  reducing,  for  example,  the  excessive 
powers  and  assumption  of  the  consulship.  Sev¬ 
eral  of  his  laws,  indeed,  he  actually  transferred 
to  Rome,  as  his  empowering  the  people  to 
elect  their  officers,  and  allowing  offenders  the 
liberty  of  appealing  to  the  people,  as  Solon  did 
to  the  jurors.  He  did  not,  indeed,  create  a  new 
senate,  as  Solon  did,  but  augmented  the  old  to 
almost  double  its  number.  The  appointment  of 
treasurers  again,  the  quaestors,  has  a  like  ori¬ 
gin;  with  the  intent  that  the  chief  magistrate 
should  not,  if  of  good  character,  be  withdrawn 
from  greater  matters;  or,  if  bad,  have  the  great¬ 
er  temptation  to  injustice,  by  holding  both  the 
government  and  treasury  in  his  hands. 

The  aversion  to  tyranny  was  stronger  in 
Poplicola;  any  one  who  attempted  usurpation 
could,  by  Solon’s  law,  only  be  punished  upon 
conviction;  but  Poplicola  made  it  death  before 
a  trial.  And  though  Solon  justly  gloried, 
that,  when  arbitrary  power  was  absolutely  of¬ 
fered  to  him  by  circumstances,  and  when  his 
countrymen  would  have  willingly  seen  him  ac- 


POPLICOLA  AND  SOLON 

cept  it,  he  yet  declined  it;  still  Poplicola  mer¬ 
ited  no  less,  who,  receiving  a  despotic  com¬ 
mand,  converted  it  to  a  popular  office,  and  did 
not  employ  the  whole  legal  power  which  he 
held.  We  must  allow,  indeed,  that  Solon  was 
before  Poplicola  in  observing  that — 

A  people  always  minds  its  rulers  best 

When  it  is  neither  humoured  nor  oppressed. 

The  remission  of  debts  was  peculiar  to  So¬ 
lon;  it  was  his  great  means  for  confirming  the 
citizens’  liberty;  for  a  mere  law  to  give  all  men 
equal  rights  is  but  useless,  if  the  poor  must 
sacrifice  those  rights  to  their  debts,  and,  in  the 
very  seats  and  sanctuaries  of  equality,  the  courts 
of  justice,  the  offices  of  state,  and  the  public 
discussions,  be  more  than  anywhere  at  the 
beck  and  bidding  of  the  rich.  A  yet  more  ex¬ 
traordinary  success  was,  that,  although  usually 
civil  violence  is  caused  by  any  remission  of 
debts,  upon  this  one  occasion  this  dangerous 
but  powerful  remedy  actually  put  an  end  to 
civil  violence  already  existing,  Solon’s  own  pri¬ 
vate  worth  and  reputation  overbalancing  all  the 
ordinary  ill-repute  and  discredit  of  the  change. 

The  beginning  of  his  government  was  more 
glorious,  for  he  was  entirely  original,  and  fol¬ 
lowed  no  man’s  example,  and,  without  the  aid 
of  any  ally,  achieved  his  most  important  meas¬ 
ures  by  his  own  conduct;  yet  the  close  of  Pop- 
licola’s  life  was  more  happy  and  desirable,  for 
Solon  saw  the  dissolution  of  his  own  common¬ 
wealth.  Poplicola  maintained  the  state  in  good 
order  down  to  the  civil  wars.  Solon,  leaving  his 
laws,  as  soon  as  he  had  made  them,  engraven 
in  wood,  but  destitute  of  a  defender,  departed 
from  Athens;  whilst  Poplicola,  remaining  both 
in  and  out  of  office,  laboured  to  establish  the 
government.  Solon,  though  he  actually  knew 
of  Pisistratus’s  ambition,  yet  was  not  able  to 
suppress  it,  but  had  to  yield  to  usurpation  in  its 
infancy;  whereas  Poplicola  utterly  subverted 
and  dissolved  a  potent  monarchy,  strongly  set¬ 
tled  by  long  continuance,  uniting  thus  to  vir¬ 
tues  equal  to  those,  and  purposes  identical  with 
those  of  Solon,  the  good  fortune  and  the  power 
that  alone  could  make  them  effective. 

In  military  exploits,  Daimachus  of  Platsea 


87 

will  not  even  allow  Solon  the  conduct  of  the 
war  against  the  Megarians,  as  was  before  in¬ 
timated;  but  Poplicola  was  victorious  in  the 
most  important  conflicts,  both  as  a  private 
soldier  and  commander.  In  domestic  politics, 
also,  Solon,  in  play,  as  it  were,  and  by  coun¬ 
terfeiting  madness  induced  the  enterprise 
against  Salamis;  whereas  Poplicola,  in  the 
very  beginning,  exposed  himself  to  the  great¬ 
est  risk,  took  arms  against  Tarquin,  detected 
the  conspiracy,  and,  being  principally  con¬ 
cerned  both  in  preventing  the  escape  of  and 
afterwards  punishing  the  traitors,  not  only 
expelled  the  tyrants  from  the  city,  but  extir¬ 
pated  their  very  hopes.  And  as,  in  cases  call¬ 
ing  for  contest  and  resistance  and  manful 
opposition,  he  behaved  with  courage  and  reso¬ 
lution,  so,  in  instances  where  peaceable  lan¬ 
guage,  persuasion,  and  concession  were  requi¬ 
site,  he  was  yet  more  to  be  commended;  and 
succeeded  in  gaining  happily  to  reconciliation 
and  friendship,  Porsenna,  a  terrible  and  in¬ 
vincible  enemy. 

Some  may,  perhaps,  object  that  Solon  re¬ 
covered  Salamis,  which  they  had  lost,  for  the 
Athenians;  whereas  Poplicola  receded  from 
part  of  what  the  Romans  were  at  that  time 
possessed  of;  but  judgment  is  to  be  made  of 
actions  according  to  the  times  in  which  they 
were  performed.  The  conduct  of  a  wise  poli¬ 
tician  is  ever  suited  to  the  present  posture  of 
affairs;  often  by  foregoing  a  part  he  saves 
the  whole,  and  by  yielding  in  a  small  matter 
secures  a  greater;  and  so  Poplicola,  by  re¬ 
storing  what  the  Romans  had  lately  usurped, 
saved  their  undoubted  patrimony,  and  pro¬ 
cured,  moreover,  the  stores  of  the  enemy  for 
those  who  were  only  too  thankful  to  secure 
their  city.  Permitting  the  decision  of  the  con¬ 
troversy  to  his  adversary,  he  not  only  got  the 
victory,  but  likewise  what  he  himself  would 
willingly  have  given  to  purchase  the  victory, 
Porsenna  putting  an  end  to  the  war,  and  leav¬ 
ing  them  all  the  provision  of  his  camp,  from 
the  sense  of  the  virtue  and  gallant  disposition 
of  the  Romans  which  their  consul  had  im¬ 
pressed  upon  him. 


THEMISTOCLES 

52_7?-?46o  b.c. 


The  birth  of  Themistocles  was  some¬ 
what  too  obscure  to  do  him  honour. 
His  father,  Neocles,  was  not  of  the  dis¬ 
tinguished  people  of  Athens,  but  of  the  town¬ 
ship  of  Phrearrhi,  and  of  the  tribe  Leontis;  and 
by  his  mother’s  side,  as  it  is  reported,  he  was 
base-born — 

l  am  not  of  the  noble  Grecian  race, 

Vm  poor  Abrotonon ,  and  born  in  Thrace ; 

Let  the  Gree\  women  scorn  me,  if  they  please , 
l  was  the  mother  of  Themistocles. 

Yet  Phanias  writes  that  the  mother  of 
Themistocles  was  not  of  Thrace,  but  of  Caria, 
and  that  her  name  was  not  Abrotonon,  but 
Euterpe;  and  Neanthes  adds  farther  that  she 
was  of  Halicarnassus  in  Caria.  And,  as  illegit¬ 
imate  children,  including  those  that  were  of 
half-blood  or  had  but  one  parent  an  Athenian, 
had  to  attend  at  the  Cynosarges  (a  wrestling- 
place  outside  the  gates,  dedicated  to  Hercules, 
who  was  also  of  half-blood  amongst  the  gods, 
having  had  a  mortal  woman  for  his  mother), 
Themistocles  persuaded  several  of  the  young 
men  of  high  birth  to  accompany  him  to  anoint 
and  exercise  themselves  together  at  Cyno¬ 
sarges;  an  ingenious  device  for  destroying 
the  distinction  between  the  noble  and  the 
base-born,  and  between  those  of  the  whole 
and  those  of  the  half-blood  of  Athens.  How¬ 
ever,  it  is  certain  that  he  was  related  to  the 
house  of  the  Lycomedar,  for  Simonides  re¬ 
cords  that  he  rebuilt  the  chapel  of  Phlya,  be¬ 
longing  to  that  family,  and  beautified  it  with 
pictures  and  other  ornaments,  after  it  had 
been  burnt  by  the  Persians. 

It  is  confessed  by  all  that  from  his  youth 
he  was  of  a  vehement  and  impetuous  nature, 
of  a  quick  apprehension,  and  a  strong  and 
aspiring  bent  for  action  and  great  affairs. 
The  holidays  and  intervals  in  his  studies  he 
did  not  spend  in  play  or  idleness,  as  other 
children,  but  would  be  always  insenting  or  ar¬ 
ranging  some  oration  or  declamation  to  him¬ 
self,  the  subject  of  which  was  generally  the  ex¬ 
cusing  or  accusing  his  companions,  so  that  his 
master  would  often  say  to  him,  “You,  my  boy, 
will  be  nothing  small,  but  great  one  way  or 


other,  for  good  or  else  for  bad.”  He  received 
reluctandy  and  carelessly  instructions  given 
him  to  improve  his  manners  and  behaviour,  or 
to  teach  him  any  pleasing  or  graceful  accom¬ 
plishment,  but  whatever  was  said  to  improve 
him  in  sagacity,  or  in  management  of  affairs, 
he  would  give  attention  to,  beyond  one  of  his 
years,  from  confidence  in  his  natural  capacities 
for  such  things. 

And  thus  afterwards,  when  in  company 
where  people  engaged  themselves  in  what  are 
commonly  thought  the  liberal  and  elegant 
amusements,  he  was  obliged  to  defend  him¬ 
self  against  the  observations  of  those  who  con¬ 
sidered  themselves  highly  accomplished,  by 
the  somewhat  arrogant  retort,  that  he  cer¬ 
tainly  could  not  make  use  of  any  stringed  in¬ 
strument,  could  only,  were  a  small  and  obscure 
city  put  into  his  hands,  make  it  great  and 
glorious. 

Notwithstanding  this,  Stesimbrotus  says 
that  Themistocles  was  a  hearer  of  Anaxagoras, 
and  that  he  studied  natural  philosophy  under 
Melissus,  contrary  to  chronology;  Melissus 
commanded  the  Samians  in  the  siege  by  Peri¬ 
cles,  who  was  much  Themistocles’s  junior;  and 
with  Pericles,  also,  Anaxagoras  was  intimate. 
They,  therefore,  might  rather  be  credited  who 
report,  that  Themistocles  was  an  admirer  of 
Mnesiphilus  the  Phrearrhian,  who  was  neither 
rhetorician  nor  natural  philosopher,  but  a  pro¬ 
fessor  of  that  which  was  then  called  wisdom, 
consisting  in  a  sort  of  political  shrewdness  and 
practical  sagacity,  which  had  begun  and  con¬ 
tinued,  almost  like  a  sect  of  philosophy,  from 
Solon:  but  those  who  came  afterwards,  and 
mixed  it  with  pleadings  and  legal  artifices,  and 
transformed  the  practical  part  of  it  into  a  mere 
art  of  speaking  and  an  exercise  of  words,  were 
generally  called  sophists.  Themistocles  resorted 
to  Mnesiphilus  when  he  had  already  embarked 
in  politics. 

In  the  first  essays  of  his  youth  he  was  not 
regular  nor  happily  balanced;  he  allowed  him¬ 
self  to  follow  mere  natural  character,  which, 
without  the  control  of  reason  and  instruction, 
is  apt  to  hurry,  upon  either  side,  into  sudden 


88 


THEMISTOCLES 

and  violent  courses,  and  very  often  to  break 
away  and  determine  upon  the  worst;  as  he 
afterwards  owned  himself,  saying,  that  the 
wildest  colts  make  the  best  horses,  if  they 
only  get  properly  trained  and  broken  in.  But 
those  who  upon  this  fasten  stories  of  their 
own  invention,  as  of  his  being  disowned  by 
his  father,  and  that  his  mother  died  for  grief 
of  her  son’s  ill-fame,  certainly  calumniate 
him;  and  there  are  others  who  relate,  on  the 
contrary,  how  that  to  deter  him  from  public 
business,  and  to  let  him  see  how  the  vulgar 
behave  themselves  towards  their  leaders  when 
they  have  at  last  no  further  use  of  them,  his 
father  showed  him  the  old  galleys  as  they  lay 
forsaken  and  cast  about  upon  the  sea-shore. 

Yet  it  is  evident  that  his  mind  was  early 
imbued  with  the  keenest  interest  in  public 
affairs,  and  the  most  passionate  ambition  for 
distinction.  Eager  from  the  first  to  obtain  the 
highest  place,  he  unhesitatingly  accepted  the 
hatred  of  the  most  powerful  and  influential 
leaders  in  the  city,  but  more  especially  of 
Aristides,  the  son  of  Lysimachus,  who  always 
opposed  him.  And  yet  all  this  great  enmity 
between  them  arose,  it  appears,  from  a  very 
boyish  occasion,  both  being  attached  to  the 
beautiful  Stesilaus  of  Ceos,  as  Ariston  the 
philosopher  tells  us;  ever  after  which  they 
took  opposite  sides,  and  were  rivals  in  politics. 
Not  but  that  the  incompatibility  of  their  lives 
and  manners  may  seem  to  have  increased  the 
difference,  for  Aristides  was  of  a  mild  nature, 
and  of  a  nobler  sort  of  character,  and,  in  pub¬ 
lic  matters,  acting  always  with  a  view,  not  to 
glory  or  popularity,  but  to  the  best  interest 
of  the  state  consistent  with  security  and  hon¬ 
esty,  he  was  often  forced  to  oppose  Themisto- 
cles,  and  interfere  against  the  increase  of  his  in¬ 
fluence,  seeing  him  stirring  up  the  people  to 
all  kinds  of  enterprises,  and  introducing  vari¬ 
ous  innovations. 

For  it  is  said  that  Themistocles  was  so  trans¬ 
ported  with  the  thoughts  of  glory,  and  so 
inflamed  with  the  passion  for  great  actions, 
that,  though  he  was  still  young  when  the 
battle  of  Marathon  was  fought  against  the 
Persians,  upon  the  skilful  conduct  of  the  gen¬ 
eral,  Miltiades,  being  everywhere  talked  about, 
he  was  observed  to  be  thoughtful  and  reserved, 
alone  by  himself;  he  passed  the  nights  without 
sleep,  and  avoided  all  his  usual  places  of  recre¬ 
ation,  and  to  those  who  wondered  at  the 
change,  and  inquired  the  reason  of  it,  he  gave 
the  answer,  that  “the  trophy  of  Miltiades 
would  not  let  him  sleep.”  And  when  others 


89 

were  of  opinion  that  the  battle  of  Marathon 
would  be  an  end  to  the  war,  Themistocles 
thought  that  it  was  but  the  beginning  of  far 
greater  conflicts,  and  for  these,  to  the  benefit 
of  all  Greece,  he  kept  himself  in  continual  read¬ 
iness,  and  his  city  also  in  proper  training,  fore¬ 
seeing  from  far  before  what  would  happen. 

And,  first  of  all,  the  Athenians  being  ac¬ 
customed  to  divide  amongst  themselves  the 
revenue  proceeding  from  the  silver  mines  at 
Laurium,  he  was  the  only  man  that  durst 
propose  to  the  people  that  this  distribution 
should  cease,  and  that  with  the  money  ships 
should  be  built  to  make  war  against  the 
/Eginetans,  who  were  the  most  flourishing 
people  in  all  Greece,  and  by  the  number  of 
their  ships  held  the  sovereignty  of  the  sea; 
and  Themistocles  thus  was  more  easily  able  to 
persuade  them,  avoiding  all  mention  of  danger 
from  Darius  or  the  Persians,  who  were  at  a 
great  distance,  and  their  coming  very  uncer¬ 
tain,  and  at  that  time  not  much  to  be  feared; 
but  by  a  seasonable  employment  of  the  emula¬ 
tion  and  anger  felt  by  the  Athenians  against 
the  ^Tginetans,  he  induced  them  to  prepara¬ 
tion.  So  that  with  this  money  an  hundred  ships 
were  built,  with  which  they  afterwards  fought 
against  Xerxes. 

And  henceforward,  little  by  little,  turning 
and  drawing  the  city  down  towards  the  sea, 
in  the  belief  that,  whereas  by  land  they  were 
not  a  fit  match  for  their  next  neighbours,  with 
their  ships  they  might  be  able  to  repel  the 
Persians  and  command  Greece,  thus,  as  Plato 
says,  from  steady  soldiers  he  turned  them  into 
mariners  and  seamen  tossed  about  the  sea, 
and  gave  occasion  for  the  reproach  against 
him,  that  he  took  away  from  the  Athenians 
the  spear  and  the  shield,  and  bound  them  to 
the  bench  and  the  oar.  These  measures  he 
carried  in  the  assembly,  against  the  opposi¬ 
tion,  as  Stesimbrotus  relates,  of  Miltiades;  and 
whether  or  no  he  hereby  injured  the  purity 
and  true  balance  of  government  may  be  a  ques¬ 
tion  for  philosophers,  but  that  the  deliverance 
of  Greece  came  at  that  time  from  the  sea,  and 
that  these  galleys  restored  Athens  again  after 
it  was  destroyed,  were  others  wanting,  Xerxes 
himself  would  be  sufficient  evidence,  who, 
though  his  land-forces  were  still  entire,  after 
his  defeat  at  sea,  fled  away,  and  thought  him¬ 
self  no  longer  able  to  encounter  the  Greeks; 
and,  as  it  seems  to  me,  left  Mardonius  behind 
him,  not  out  of  any  hopes  he  could  have  to 
bring  them  into  subjection,  but  to  hinder  them 
from  pursuing  him. 


90 

Themistocles  is  said  to  have  been  eager  in 
the  acquisition  of  riches,  according  to  some, 
that  he  might  be  the  more  liberal;  for  loving 
to  sacrifice  often,  and  to  be  splendid  in  his 
entertainment  of  strangers,  he  required  a 
plentiful  revenue;  yet  he  is  accused  by  others 
of  having  been  parsimonious  and  sordid  to 
that  degree  that  he  would  sell  provisions 
which  were  sent  to  him  as  a  present.  He  de¬ 
sired  Diphilides,  who  was  a  breeder  of  horses, 
to  give  him  a  colt,  and  when  he  refused  it, 
threatened  that  in  a  short  time  he  would  turn 
his  house  into  a  wooden  horse,  intimating 
that  he  would  stir  up  dispute  and  litigation 
between  him  and  some  of  his  relations. 

He  went  beyond  all  men  in  the  passion 
for  distinction.  When  he  was  still  young  and 
unknown  in  the  world,  he  entreated  Episcles 
of  Hermione,  who  had  a  good  hand  at  the 
lute  and  was  much  sought  after  by  the  Athe¬ 
nians,  to  come  and  practise  at  home  with  him, 
being  ambitious  of  having  people  inquire 
after  his  house  and  frequent  his  company. 
When  he  came  to  the  Olympic  games,  and 
was  so  splendid  in  his  equipage  and  enter¬ 
tainments,  in  his  rich  tents  and  furniture, 
that  he  strove  to  outdo  Cimon,  he  displeased 
the  Greeks,  who  thought  that  such  magnifi¬ 
cence  might  be  allowed  in  one  who  was  a 
young  man  and  of  a  great  family,  but  was 
a  great  piece  of  insolence  in  one  as  yet  un¬ 
distinguished,  and  without  title  or  means  for 
making  any  such  display.  In  a  dramatic  con¬ 
test,  the  play  he  paid  for  won  the  prize,  which 
was  then  a  matter  that  excited  much  emula¬ 
tion;  he  put  up  a  tablet  in  record  of  it,  with 
the  inscription:  “Themistocles  of  Phrearrhi 
was  at  the  charge  of  it;  Phrynichus  made  it; 
Adimantus  was  archon.” 

He  was  well  liked  by  the  common  people, 
would  salute  every  particular  citizen  by  his 
own  name,  and  always  show  himself  a  just 
judge  in  questions  of  business  between  private 
men;  he  said  to  Simonides,  the  poet  of  Ceos, 
who  desired  something  of  him,  when  he  was 
commander  of  the  army,  that  was  not  reason¬ 
able,  “Simonides,  you  would  be  no  good  poet 
if  you  wrote  false  measure,  nor  should  I  be  a 
good  magistrate  if  for  favour  I  made  false 
law.”  And  at  another  time,  laughing  at  Si¬ 
monides,  he  said  that  he  was  a  man  of  little 
judgment  to  speak  against  the  Corinthians, 
who  were  inhabitants  of  a  great  city,  and 
to  have  his  own  picture  drawn  so  often,  hav¬ 
ing  so  ill-looking  a  face. 

Gradually  growing  to  be  great,  and  win¬ 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ning  the  favour  of  the  people,  he  at  last 
gained  the  day  with  his  faction  over  that  of 
Aristides,  and  procured  his  banishment  by 
ostracism.  When  the  king  of  Persia  was  now 
advancing  against  Greece,  and  the  Athenians 
were  in  consultation  who  should  be  general, 
and  many  withdrew  themselves  of  their  own 
accord,  being  terrified  with  the  greatness  of 
the  danger,  there  was  one  Epicydes,  a  popu¬ 
lar  speaker,  son  to  Euphemides,  a  man  of  an 
elegant  tongue  but  of  a  faint  heart,  and  a 
slave  to  riches,  who  was  desirous  of  the  com¬ 
mand,  and  was  looked  upon  to  be  in  a  fair 
way  to  carry  it  by  the  number  of  votes;  but 
Themistocles,  fearing  that,  if  the  command 
should  fall  into  such  hands,  all  would  be  lost, 
bought  off  Epicydes  and  his  pretensions,  it 
is  said,  for  a  sum  of  money. 

When  the  king  of  Persia  sent  messengers 
into  Greece,  with  an  interpreter,  to  demand 
earth  and  water,  as  an  acknowledgment  of 
subjection,  Themistocles,  by  the  consent  of 
the  people,  seized  upon  the  interpreter,  and 
put  him  to  death,  for  presuming  to  publish 
the  barbarian  orders  and  decrees  in  the  Greek 
language;  this  is  one  of  the  actions  he  is  com¬ 
mended  for,  as  also  for  what  he  did  to  Arth- 
mius  of  Zelea,  who  brought  gold  from  the 
king  of  Persia  to  corrupt  the  Greeks,  and 
was,  by  an  order  from  Themistocles,  de¬ 
graded  and  disfranchised,  he  and  his  children 
and  his  posterity;  but  that  which  most  of  all 
redounded  to  his  credit  was,  that  he  put  an 
end  to  all  the  civil  wars  of  Greece,  composed 
their  differences,  and  persuaded  them  to  lay 
aside  all  enmity  during  the  war  with  the 
Persians;  and  in  this  great  work,  Chileus  the 
Arcadian  was,  it  is  said,  of  great  assistance 
to  him. 

Having  taken  upon  himself  the  command 
of  the  Athenian  forces,  he  immediately  en¬ 
deavoured  to  persuade  the  citizens  to  leave 
the  city,  and  to  embark  upon  their  galleys, 
and  meet  with  the  Persians  at  a  great  distance 
from  Greece;  but  many  being  against  this, 
he  led  a  large  force,  together  with  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians,  into  Tempe,  that  in  this  pass  they 
might  maintain  the  safety  of  Thessaly,  which 
had  not  as  yet  declared  for  the  king;  but 
when  they  returned  without  performing  any¬ 
thing,  and  it  was  known  that  not  only  the 
Thessalians,  but  all  as  far  as  Bceotia,  was 
going  over  to  Xerxes,  then  the  Athenians  more 
willingly  hearkened  to  the  advice  of  The¬ 
mistocles  to  fight  by  sea,  and  sent  him  with  a 
fleet  to  guard  the  straits  of  Artemisium. 


THEMISTOCLES 

When  the  contingents  met  here,  the  Greeks 
would  have  the  Lacedaemonians  to  command, 
and  Eurybiades  to  be  their  admiral;  but  the 
Athenians,  who  surpassed  all  the  rest  together 
in  number  of  vessels,  would  not  submit  to 
come  after  any  other,  till  Themistocles,  per¬ 
ceiving  the  danger  of  the  contest,  yielded  his 
own  command  to  Eurybiades,  and  got  the 
Athenians  to  submit,  extenuating  the  loss  by 
persuading  them  that  if  in  this  war  they  be¬ 
haved  themselves  like  men,  he  would  answer 
for  it  after  that,  that  the  Greeks,  of  their  own 
will,  would  submit  to  their  command.  And 
by  this  moderation  of  his,  it  is  evident  that 
he  was  the  chief  means  of  the  deliverance  of 
Greece,  and  gained  the  Athenians  the  glory 
of  alike  surpassing  their  enemies  in  valour, 
and  their  confederates  in  wisdom. 

As  soon  as  the  Persian  armada  arrived  at 
Aphetae,  Eurybiades  was  astonished  to  see 
such  a  vast  number  of  vessels  before  him, 
and  being  informed  that  two  hundred  more 
were  sailing  around  behind  the  island  of  Scia 
thus,  he  immediately  determined  to  retire 
farther  into  Greece,  and  to  sail  back  into 
some  part  of  Peloponnesus,  where  their  land 
army  and  their  fleet  might  join,  for  he  looked 
upon  the  Persian  forces  to  be  altogether  un¬ 
assailable  by  sea.  But  the  Eubceans,  fearing 
that  the  Greeks  would  forsake  them,  and 
leave  them  to  the  mercy  of  the  enemy,  sent 
Pelagon  to  confer  privately  with  Themistocles, 
taking  with  him  a  good  sum  of  money,  which, 
as  Herodotus  reports,  he  accepted  and  gave 
to  Eurybiades. 

In  this  affair  none  of  his  own  countrymen 
opposed  him  so  much  as  Architeles,  captain 
of  the  sacred  galley,  who,  having  no  money 
to  supply  his  seamen,  was  eager  to  go  home; 
but  Themistocles  so  incensed  the  Athenians 
against  them,  that  they  set  upon  him  and  left 
him  not  so  much  as  his  supper,  at  which 
Architeles  was  much  surprised,  and  took  it 
very  ill;  but  Themistocles  immediately  sent 
him  in  a  chest  a  service  of  provisions,  and  at 
the  bottom  of  it  a  talent  of  silver,  desiring 
him  to  sup  to-night,  and  to-morrow  provide 
for  his  seamen;  if  not,  he  would  report  it 
among  the  Athenians  that  he  had  received 
money  from  the  enemy.  So  Phanias  the 
Lesbian  tells  the  story. 

Though  the  fights  between  the  Greeks  and 
Persians  in  the  straits  of  Euboea  were  not  so 
important  as  to  make  any  final  decision  of 
the  war,  yet  the  experience  which  the  Greeks 
obtained  in  them  was  of  great  advantage;  for 


91 

thus,  by  actual  trial  and  in  real  danger,  they 
found  out  that  neither  number  of  ships,  nor 
riches  and  ornaments,  nor  boasting  shouts, 
nor  barbarous  songs  of  victory,  were  any  way 
terrible  to  men  that  knew  how  to  fight  and 
were  resolved  to  come  hand  to  hand  with 
their  enemies;  these  things  they  were  to  de¬ 
spise,  and  to  come  up  close  and  grapple  with 
their  foes. 

This  Pindar  appears  to  have  seen,  and  says 
justly  enough  of  the  fight  at  Artemisium, 
that — 

There  the  sons  of  Athens  set 

The  stone  that  freedom  stands  on  yet. 

For  the  first  step  towards  victory  undoubtedly 
is  to  gain  courage.  Artemisium  is  in  Euboea, 
beyond  the  city  of  Histiaea,  a  sea-beach  open 
to  the  north;  most  nearly  opposite  to  it  stands 
Olizon,  in  the  country  which  formally  was 
under  Philoctetes;  there  is  a  small  temple 
there,  dedicated  to  Diana,  surnamed  of  the 
Dawn,  and  trees  about  it,  around  which  again 
stand  pillars  of  white  marble;  and  if  you  rub 
them  with  your  hand,  they  send  forth  both 
the  smell  and  colour  of  saffron.  On  one  of 
these  pillars  these  verses  are  engraved: — 

With  numerous  tribes  from  Asia's  region  brought 
The  sons  of  Athens  on  these  waters  fought; 
Erecting,  after  they  had  quelled  the  Mede, 

To  Artemis  this  record  of  the  deed. 

There  is  a  place  still  to  be  seen  upon  ibis 
shore,  where,  in  the  middle  of  a  great  heap  of 
sand,  they  take  out  from  the  bottom  a  dark 
powder  like  ashes,  or  something  that  has 
passed  the  fire;  and  here,  it  is  supposed,  the 
shipwrecks  and  bodies  of  the  dead  were  burnt. 

But  when  news  came  from  Thermopylae  to 
Artemisium  informing  them  that  king  Leoni¬ 
das  was  slain,  and  that  Xerxes  had  made  him¬ 
self  master  of  all  the  passages  by  land,  they  re¬ 
turned  back  to  the  interior  of  Greece,  the  Athe¬ 
nians  having  the  command  of  the  rear,  the 
place  of  honour  and  danger,  and  much  elated 
by  what  had  been  done. 

As  Themistocles  sailed  along  the  coasts, 
he  took  notice  of  the  harbours  and  fit  places 
for  the  enemy’s  ships  to  come  to  land  at,  and 
engraved  large  letters  in  such  stones  as  he 
found  there  by  chance,  as  also  in  others  which 
he  set  up  on  purpose  near  to  the  landing- 
places,  or  where  they  were  to  water;  in  which 
inscriptions  he  called  upon  the  Ionians  to  for¬ 
sake  the  Medes,  if  it  were  possible,  and  to 
come  over  to  the  Greeks,  who  were  their 
proper  founders  and  fathers,  and  were  now 
hazarding  all  for  their  liberties;  but,  if  this 


92 

could  not  be  done,  at  any  rate  to  impede  and 
disturb  the  Persians  in  all  engagements.  He 
hoped  that  these  writings  would  prevail  with 
the  Ionians  to  revolt,  or  raise  some  trouble  by 
making  their  fidelity  doubtful  to  the  Persians. 

Now,  though  Xerxes  had  already  passed 
through  Doris  and  invaded  the  country  of 
Phocis,  and  was  burning  and  destroying  the 
cities  of  the  Phocians,  yet  the  Greeks  sent 
them  no  relief;  and,  though  the  Athenians 
earnestly  desired  them  to  meet  the  Persians  in 
Bceotia,  before  they  could  come  into  Attica, 
as  they  themselves  had  come  forward  by  sea 
at  Artemisium,  they  gave  no  ear  to  their  re¬ 
quests,  being  wholly  intent  upon  Pelopon¬ 
nesus,  and  resolved  to  gather  all  their  forces 
together  within  the  Isthmus,  and  to  build  a 
wall  from  sea  to  sea  in  that  narrow  neck  of 
land;  so  that  the  Athenians  were  enraged  to 
see  themselves  betrayed,  and  at  the  same  time 
afflicted  and  dejected  at  their  own  destitution. 
For  to  fight  alone  against  such  a  numerous 
army  was  to  no  purpose,  and  the  only  ex¬ 
pedient  now  left  them  was  to  leave  their  city 
and  cling  to  their  ships;  which  the  people 
were  very  unwilling  to  submit  to,  imagining 
that  it  would  signify  little  now  to  gain  a  vic¬ 
tory,  and  not  understanding  how  there  could 
be  deliverance  any  longer  after  they  had  once 
forsaken  the  temples  of  their  gods  and  ex¬ 
posed  the  tombs  and  monuments  of  their  an¬ 
cestors  to  the  fury  of  their  enemies. 

Themistocles,  being  at  a  loss,  and  not  able 
to  draw  the  people  over  to  his  opinion  by 
any  human  reason,  set  his  machines  to  work, 
as  in  a  theatre,  and  employed  prodigies  and 
oracles.  The  serpent  of  Minerva,  kept  in  the 
inner  part  of  her  temple,  disappeared;  the 
priest  gave  it  out  to  the  people  that  the  offer¬ 
ings  which  were  set  for  it  were  found  un¬ 
touched,  and  declared,  by  the  suggestion  of 
Themistocles,  that  the  goddess  had  left  the 
city,  and  taken  her  flight  before  them  towards 
the  sea.  And  he  often  urged  them  with  the 
oracle  which  bade  them  trust  to  walls  of 
wood,  showing  them  that  walls  of  wood  could 
signify  nothing  else  but  ships;  and  that  the 
island  of  Salamis  was  termed  in  it,  not  miser¬ 
able  or  unhappy,  but  had  the  epithet  of 
divine,  for  that  it  should  one  day  be  associated 
with  a  great  good  fortune  of  the  Greeks. 

At  length  his  opinion  prevailed,  and  he 
obtained  a  decree  that  the  city  should  be 
committed  to  the  protection  of  Minerva, 
“Queen  of  Athens”;  that  they  who  were  of 
age  to  bear  arms  should  embark,  and  that 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

each  should  see  to  sending  away  his  children, 
women,  and  slaves  where  he  could.  This  de¬ 
cree  being  confirmed,  most  of  the  Athenians 
removed  their  parents,  wives,  and  children  to 
Trcezen,  where  they  were  received  with  eager 
good-will  by  the  Trcezenians,  who  passed  a 
vote  that  they  should  be  maintained  at  the 
public  charge,  by  a  daily  payment  of  two 
obols  to  every  one,  and  leave  be  given  to  the 
children  to  gather  fruit  where  they  pleased, 
and  schoolmasters  paid  to  instruct  them.  This 
vote  was  proposed  by  Nicagoras. 

There  was  no  public  treasure  at  that  time 
in  Athens;  but  the  council  of  Areopagus,  as 
Aristotle  says,  distributed  to  every  one  that 
served  eight  drachmas,  which  was  a  great 
help  to  the  manning  of  the  fleet;  but  Cli- 
demus  ascribes  this  also  to  the  art  of  The¬ 
mistocles.  When  the  Athenians  were  on  their 
way  down  to  the  haven  of  Piraeus,  the  shield 
with  the  head  of  Medusa  was  missing;  and 
he,  under  the  pretext  of  searching  for  it,  ran¬ 
sacked  all  places,  and  found  among  their 
goods  considerable  sums  of  money  concealed, 
which  he  applied  to  the  public  use;  and  with 
this  the  soldiers  and  seamen  were  well  pro¬ 
vided  for  their  voyage. 

When  the  whole  city  of  Athens  were  going 
on  board,  it  afforded  a  spectacle  worthy  alike 
of  pity  and  admiration,  to  see  them  thus  send 
away  their  fathers  and  children  before  them, 
and,  unmoved  with  their  cries  and  tears, 
passed  over  into  the  island.  But  that  which 
stirred  compassion  most  of  all  was,  that  many 
old  men,  by  reason  of  their  great  age,  were 
left  behind;  and  even  the  tame  domestic  an¬ 
imals  could  not  be  seen  without  some  pity, 
running  about  the  town  and  howling,  as  de¬ 
sirous  to  be  carried  along  with  their  masters 
that  had  kept  them;  among  which  it  is  re¬ 
ported  that  Xanthippus,  the  father  of  Pericles, 
had  a  dog  that  would  not  endure  to  stay  be¬ 
hind,  but  leaped  into  the  sea,  and  swam  along 
by  the  galley’s  side  till  he  came  to  the  island 
of  Salamis,  where  he  fainted  away  and  died, 
and  that  spot  in  the  island,  which  is  still 
called  the  Dog’s  Grave,  is  said  to  be  his. 

Among  the  great  actions  of  Themistocles  at 
this  crisis,  the  recall  of  Aristides  was  not  the 
least,  for,  before  the  war,  he  had  been  ostra¬ 
cised  by  the  party  which  Themistocles  headed, 
and  was  in  banishment;  but  now,  perceiving 
that  the  people  regretted  his  absence,  and  were 
fearful  that  he  might  go  over  to  the  Persians 
to  revenge  himself,  and  thereby  ruin  the  affairs 
of  Greece,  Themistocles  proposed  a  decree  that 


THEMISTOCLES 

those  who  were  banished  for  a  time  might  re¬ 
turn  again,  to  give  assistance  by  word  and  deed 
to  the  cause  of  Greece  with  the  rest  of  their 
fellow-citizens. 

Eurybiades,  by  reason  of  the  greatness  of 
Sparta,  was  admiral  of  the  Greek  fleet,  but 
yet  was  faint-hearted  in  time  of  danger,  and 
willing  to  weigh  anchor  and  set  sail  for  the 
isthmus  of  Corinth,  near  which  the  land  army 
lay  encamped;  which  Themistocles  resisted; 
and  this  was  the  occasion  of  the  well-known 
words,  when  Eurybiades,  to  check  his  im¬ 
patience,  told  him  that  at  the  Olympic  games 
they  that  start  up  before  the  rest  are  lashed; 
“And  they,”  replied  Themistocles,  “that  are 
left  behind  are  not  crowned.”  Again,  Eury¬ 
biades,  lifting  up  his  staff  as  if  he  were  going 
to  strike,  Themistocles  said,  “Strike  if  you 
will,  but  hear”;  Eurybiades,  wondering  much 
at  his  moderation,  desired  him  to  speak,  and 
Themistocles  now  brought  him  to  a  better  un¬ 
derstanding. 

And  when  one  who  stood  by  him  told  him 
that  it  did  not  become  those  who  had  neither 
city  nor  house  to  lose,  to  persuade  others  to 
relinquish  their  habitations  and  forsake  their 
countries,  Themistocles  gave  this  reply:  “We 
have  indeed  left  our  houses  and  our  walls, 
base  fellow,  not  thinking  it  fit  to  become 
slaves  for  the  sake  of  things  that  have  no 
life  nor  soul;  and  yet  our  city  is  the  greatest  of 
all  Greece,  consisting  of  two  hundred  galleys, 
which  are  here  to  defend  you,  if  you  please; 
but  if  you  run  away  and  betray  us,  as  you  did 
once  before,  the  Greeks  shall  soon  hear  news 
of  the  Athenians  possessing  as  fair  a  country, 
and  as  large  and  free  a  city,  as  that  they  have 
lost.”  These  expressions  of  Themistocles  made 
Eurybiades  suspect  that  if  he  retreated  the 
Athenians  would  fall  off  from  him. 

When  one  of  Eretria  began  to  oppose  him, 
he  said,  “Have  you  anything  to  say  of  war, 
that  are  like  an  inkfish?  You  have  a  sword,  but 
no  heart.”  Some  say  that  while  Themistocles 
was  thus  speaking  upon  the  deck,  an  owl  was 
seen  flying  to  the  right  hand  of  the  fleet,  which 
came  and  sate  upon  the  top  of  the  mast;  and 
this  happy  omen  so  far  disposed  the  Greeks  to 
follow  his  advice,  that  they  presently  prepared 
to  fight.  Yet,  when  the  enemy’s  fleet  was  ar¬ 
rived  at  the  haven  of  Phalerum,  upon  the  coast 
of  Attica,  and  with  the  number  of  their  ships 
concealed  all  the  shore,  and  when  they  saw  the 
king  himself  in  person  come  down  with  his 
land  army  to  the  seaside,  with  all  his  forces 
united,  then  the  good  counsel  of  Themistocles 


93 

was  soon  forgotten,  and  the  Peloponnesians 
cast  their  eyes  again  towards  the  isthmus,  and 
took  it  very  ill  if  any  one  spoke  against  their 
returning  home;  and,  resolving  to  depart  that 
night,  the  pilots  had  orders  what  course  to 
steer. 

Themistocles,  in  great  distress  that  the 
Greeks  should  retire,  and  lose  the  advantage 
of  the  narrow  seas  and  strait  passage,  and  slip 
home  every  one  to  his  own  city,  considered 
with  himself,  and  contrived  that  stratagem 
that  was  carried  out  by  Sicinnus.  This  Sicinnus 
was  a  Persian  captive,  but  a  great  lover  of  The¬ 
mistocles,  and  the  attendant  of  his  children. 
Upon  this  occasion,  he  sent  him  privately  to 
Xerxes,  commanding  him  to  tell  the  king  that 
Themistocles,  the  admiral  of  the  Athenians, 
having  espoused  his  interest,  wished  to  be  the 
first  to  inform  him  that  the  Greeks  were  ready 
to  make  their  escape,  and  that  he  counselled 
him  to  hinder  their  flight,  to  set  upon  them 
while  they  were  in  this  confusion  and  at  a  dis¬ 
tance  from  their  land  army,  and  hereby  de¬ 
stroy  all  their  forces  by  sea. 

Xerxes  was  very  joyful  at  this  message,  and 
received  it  as  from  one  who  wished  him  all 
that  was  good,  and  immediately  issued  in¬ 
structions  to  the  commanders  of  his  ships, 
that  they  should  instantly  set  out  with  two 
hundred  galleys  to  encompass  all  the  islands, 
and  enclose  all  the  straits  and  passages,  that 
none  of  the  Greeks  might  escape,  and  that 
they  should  afterwards  follow  with  the  rest 
of  their  fleet  at  leisure.  This  being  done, 
Aristides,  the  son  of  Lysimachus,  was  the  first 
man  that  perceived  it,  and  went  to  the  tent 
of  Themistocles,  not  out  of  any  friendship, 
for  he  had  been  formerly  banished  by  his 
means,  as  has  been  related,  but  to  inform  him 
how  they  were  encompassed  by  their  enemies. 
Themistocles,  knowing  the  generosity  of  Ari¬ 
stides,  and  much  struck  by  his  visit  at  that 
time,  imparted  to  him  all  that  he  had  transact¬ 
ed  by  Sicinnus,  and  entreated  him  that,  as  he 
would  be  more  readily  believed  among  the 
Greeks,  he  would  make  use  of  his  credit  to  help 
to  induce  them  to  stay  and  fight  their  enemies 
in  the  narrow  seas.  Aristides  applauded  The¬ 
mistocles,  and  went  to  the  other  commanders 
and  captains  of  the  galleys,  and  encouraged 
them  to  engage;  yet  they  did  not  perfectly  as¬ 
sent  to  him,  till  a  galley  of  Tenos,  which  de¬ 
serted  from  the  Persians,  of  which  Panaetius 
was  commander,  came  in,  while  they  were  still 
doubting,  and  confirmed  the  news  that  all  the 
straits  and  passages  were  beset;  and  then  their 


94 

rage  and  fury,  as  well  as  their  necessity,  pro¬ 
voked  them  all  to  fight. 

As  soon  as  it  was  day,  Xerxes  placed  him¬ 
self  high  up,  to  view  his  fleet,  and  how  it  was 
set  in  order.  Phanodemus  says,  he  sat  upon 
a  promontory  above  the  temple  of  Hercules, 
where  the  coast  of  Attica  is  separated  from 
the  island  by  a  narrow  channel;  but  Acesto- 
dorus  writes,  that  it  was  in  the  confines  of 
Megara,  upon  those  hills  which  are  called  the 
Horns,  where  he  sat  in  a  chair  of  gold,  with 
many  secretaries  about  him  to  write  down  all 
that  was  done  in  the  fight. 

When  Themistocles  was  about  to  sacrifice, 
close  to  the  admiral’s  galley,  there  were  three 
prisoners  brought  to  him,  fine  looking  men, 
and  richly  dressed  in  ornamented  clothing 
and  gold,  said  to  be  the  children  of  Artayctes 
and  Sandauce,  sister  to  Xerxes.  As  soon  as  the 
prophet  Euphrantides  saw  them,  and  ob¬ 
served  that  at  the  same  time  the  fire  blazed 
out  from  the  offerings  with  a  more  than  or¬ 
dinary  flame,  and  a  man  sneezed  on  the  right, 
which  was  an  intimation  of  a  fortunate  event, 
he  took  Themistocles  by  the  hand,  and  bade 
him  consecrate  the  three  young  men  for  sacri¬ 
fice,  and  offer  them  up  with  prayers  for  victory 
to  Bacchus  the  Devourer;  so  should  the  Greeks 
not  only  save  themselves,  but  also  obtain  vic¬ 
tory.  Themistocles  was  much  disturbed  at  this 
strange  and  terrible  prophecy,  but  the  com¬ 
mon  people,  who  in  any  difficult  crisis  and 
great  exigency  ever  look  for  relief  rather  to 
strange  and  extravagant  than  to  reasonable 
means,  calling  upon  Bacchus  with  one  voice, 
led  the  captives  to  the  altar,  and  compelled  the 
execution  of  the  sacrifice  as  the  prophet  had 
commanded.  This  is  reported  by  Phanias  the 
Lesbian,  a  philosopher  well  read  in  history. 

The  number  of  the  enemy’s  ships  the  poet 
^Eschylus  gives  in  his  tragedy  called  The  Per¬ 
sians,  as  on  his  certain  knowledge,  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  words: — 

Xerxes,  l  hjiow,  did  into  battle  lead 

One  thousand  ships ;  of  more  than  usual  speed 

Seven  and  two  hundred.  So  it  is  agreed. 

The  Athenians  had  a  hundred  and  eighty;  in 
every  ship  eighteen  men  fought  upon  the  deck, 
four  of  whom  were  archers  and  the  rest  men  at 
arms. 

As  Themistocles  had  fixed  upon  the  most 
advantageous  place,  so,  with  no  less  sagacity, 
he  chose  the  best  time  of  fighting;  for  he 
would  not  run  the  prows  of  his  galleys  against 
the  Persians,  nor  begin  the  fight  till  the  time 
of  day  was  come,  when  there  regularly  blows 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

in  a  fresh  breeze  from  the  open  sea,  and 
brings  in  with  it  a  strong  swell  into  the  chan¬ 
nel;  which  was  no  inconvenience  to  the  Greek 
ships,  which  were  low-built,  and  little  above 
the  water,  but  did  much  to  hurt  the  Persians, 
which  had  high  sterns  and  lofty  decks,  and 
were  heavy  and  cumbrous  in  their  move¬ 
ments,  as  it  presented  them  broadside  to  the 
quick  charges  of  the  Greeks,  who  kept  their 
eyes  upon  the  motions  of  Themistocles,  as 
their  best  example,  and  more  particularly  be¬ 
cause,  opposed  to  his  ship,  Ariamenes,  ad¬ 
miral  to  Xerxes,  a  brave  man  and  by  far  the 
best  and  worthiest  of  the  king’s  brothers,  was 
seen  throwing  darts  and  shooting  arrows 
from  his  huge  galley,  as  from  the  walls  of  a 
castle.  Aminias  the  Decelean  and  Sosicles  the 
Pedian,  who  sailed  in  the  same  vessel,  upon 
the  ships  meeting  stem  to  stem,  and  transfix¬ 
ing  each  the  other  with  their  brazen  prows, 
so  that  they  were  fastened  together,  when  Ari¬ 
amenes  attempted  to  board  theirs,  ran  at  him 
with  their  pikes,  and  thrust  him  into  the 
sea;  his  body,  as  it  floated  amongst  other  ship¬ 
wrecks,  was  known  to  Artemisia,  and  carried 
to  Xerxes. 

It  is  reported  that,  in  the  middle  of  the 
fight,  a  great  flame  rose  into  the  air  above 
the  city  of  Eleusis,  and  that  sounds  and  voices 
were  heard  through  all  the  Thriasian  plain, 
as  far  as  the  sea,  sounding  like  a  number  of 
men  accompanying  and  escorting  the  mystic 
Iacchus,  and  that  a  mist  seemed  to  form  and 
rise  from  the  place  from  whence  the  sounds 
came,  and,  passing  forward,  fell  upon  the 
galleys.  Others  believed  that  they  saw  appari¬ 
tions,  in  the  shape  of  armed  men,  reaching 
out  their  hands  from  the  island  of  ffigina 
before  the  Grecian  galleys;  and  supposed  they 
were  the  ffiacidae,  whom  they  had  invoked  to 
their  aid  before  the  battle.  The  first  man  that 
took  a  ship  was  Lycomedes  the  Athenian, 
captain  of  the  galley,  who  cut  down  its  en¬ 
sign,  and  dedicated  it  to  Apollo  the  Laurel- 
crowned.  And  as  the  Persians  fought  in  a 
narrow  arm  of  the  sea,  and  could  bring  but 
part  of  their  fleet  to  fight,  and  fell  foul  of  one 
another,  the  Greeks  thus  equalled  them  in 
strength,  and  fought  with  them  till  the  eve¬ 
ning  forced  them  back,  and  obtained,  as  says 
Simonides,  that  noble  and  famous  victory, 
than  which  neither  amongst  the  Greeks  nor 
barbarians  was  ever  known  more  glorious  ex¬ 
ploit  on  the  seas;  by  the  joint  valour,  indeed, 
and  zeal  of  all  who  fought,  but  by  the  wisdom 
and  sagacity  of  Themistocles. 


THEMISTOCLES 

After  this  sea-fight,  Xerxes,  enraged  at  his 
ill-fortune,  attempted,  by  casting  great  heaps 
of  earth  and  stones  into  the  sea,  to  stop  up 
the  channel  and  to  make  a  dam,  upon  which 
he  might  lead  his  land-forces  over  into  the 
island  of  Salamis. 

Themistocles,  being  desirous  to  try  the 
opinion  of  Aristides,  told  him  that  he  pro¬ 
posed  to  set  sail  for  the  Hellespont,  to  break 
the  bridge  of  ships,  so  as  to  shut  up,  he  said, 
Asia  a  prisoner  within  Europe;  but  Aristides, 
disliking  the  design,  said:  “We  have  hitherto 
fought  with  an  enemy  who  has  regarded  little 
else  but  his  pleasure  and  luxury;  but  if  we 
shut  him  up  within  Greece,  and  drive  him  to 
necessity,  he  that  is  master  of  such  great 
forces  will  no  longer  sit  quietly  with  an  um¬ 
brella  of  gold  over  his  head,  looking  upon 
the  fight  for  his  pleasure;  but  in  such  a  strait 
will  attempt  all  things;  he  will  be  resolute, 
and  appear  himself  in  person  upon  all  oc¬ 
casions,  he  will  soon  correct  his  errors,  and 
supply  what  he  has  formerly  omitted  through 
remissness,  and  will  be  better  advised  in  all 
things.  Therefore,  it  is  noways  our  interest, 
Themistocles,”  he  said,  “to  take  away  the 
bridge  that  is  already  made,  but  rather  to 
build  another,  if  it  were  possible,  that  he 
might  make  his  retreat  with  the  more  ex¬ 
pedition.”  To  which  Themistocles  answered: 
“If  this  be  requisite,  we  must  immediately 
use  all  diligence,  art,  and  industry,  to  rid 
ourselves  of  him  as  soon  as  may  be”;  and  to 
this  purpose  he  found  out  among  the  captives 
one  of  the  King  of  Persia’s  eunuchs,  named 
Arnaces,  whom  he  sent  to  the  king,  to  inform 
him  that  the  Greeks,  being  now  victorious 
by  sea,  had  decreed  to  sail  to  the  Hellespont, 
where  the  boats  were  fastened  together,  and 
destroy  the  bridge;  but  that  Themistocles,  be¬ 
ing  concerned  for  the  king,  revealed  this  to 
him,  that  he  might  hasten  towards  the  Asiatic 
seas,  and  pass  over  into  his  own  dominions; 
and  in  the  meantime  would  cause  delays  and 
hinder  the  confederates  from  pursuing  him. 
Xerxes  no  sooner  heard  this,  but,  being  very 
much  terrified,  he  proceeded  to  retreat  out 
of  Greece  with  all  speed.  The  prudence  of 
Themistocles  and  Aristides  in  this  was  after¬ 
wards  more  fully  understood  at  the  battle  of 
Plataea,  where  Mardonimus,  with  a  very 
small  fraction  of  the  forces  of  Xerxes,  put  the 
Greeks  in  danger  of  losing  all. 

Herodotus  writes,  that  of  all  the  cities  of 
Greece,  iEgina  was  held  to  have  performed 
the  best  service  in  the  war;  while  all  single 


95 

men  yielded  to  Themistocles,  though,  out  of 
envy,  unwillingly;  and  when  they  returned 
to  the  entrance  of  Peloponnesus,  where  the 
several  commanders  delivered  their  suffrages 
at  the  altar,  to  determine  who  was  most 
worthy,  every  one  gave  the  first  vote  for 
himself  and  the  second  for  Themistocles.  The 
Lacedaemonians  carried  him  with  them  to 
Sparta,  where,  giving  the  rewards  of  valour 
to  Eurybiades,  and  of  wisdom  and  conduct 
to  Themistocles,  they  crowned  him  with 
olive,  presented  him  with  the  best  chariot  in 
the  city,  and  sent  three  hundred  young  men 
to  accompany  him  to  the  confines  of  their 
country.  And  at  the  next  Olympic  games, 
when  Themistocles  entered  the  course,  the 
spectators  took  no  further  notice  of  those  who 
were  contesting  the  prizes,  but  spent  the 
whole  day  in  looking  upon  him,  showing 
him  to  the  strangers,  admiring  him,  and 
applauding  him  by  clapping  their  hands,  and 
other  expressions  of  joy,  so  that  he  himself, 
much  gratified,  confessed  to  his  friends  that 
he  then  reaped  the  fruit  of  all  his  labours  for 
the  Greeks. 

He  was,  indeed,  by  nature,  a  great  lover  of 
honour,  as  is  evident  from  the  anecdotes 
recorded  of  him.  When  chosen  admiral  by 
the  Athenians,  he  would  not  quite  conclude 
any  single  matter  of  business,  either  public  or 
private,  but  deferred  all  till  the  day  they  were 
to  set  sail,  that,  by  despatching  a  great 
quantity  of  business  all  at  once,  and  having 
to  meet  a  great  variety  of  people,  he  might 
make  an  appearance  of  greatness  and  power. 
Viewing  the  dead  bodies  cast  up  by  the  sea, 
he  perceived  bracelets  and  necklaces  of  gold 
about  them,  yet  passed  on,  only  showing  them 
to  a  friend  that  followed  him,  saying,  “Take 
you  these  things,  for  you  are  not  The¬ 
mistocles.”  He  said  to  Antiphates,  a  handsome 
young  man,  who  had  formerly  avoided,  but 
now  in  his  glory  courted  him,  “Time,  young 
man,  has  taught  us  both  a  lesson.”  He  said 
that  the  Athenians  did  not  honour  him  or 
admire  him,  but  made,  as  it  were,  a  sort  of 
plane-tree  of  him;  sheltered  themselves  under 
him  in  bad  weather,  and  as  soon  as  it  was 
fine,  plucked  his  leaves  and  cut  his  branches. 
When  the  Seriphian  told  him  that  he  had  not 
obtained  this  honour  by  himself,  but  by  the 
greatness  of  the  city,  he  replied,  “You  speak 
truth;  I  should  never  have  been  famous  if  I 
had  been  of  Seriphus;  nor  you,  had  you  been 
of  Athens.” 

When  another  of  the  generals,  who  thought 


96 

he  had  performed  considerable  service  for  the 
Athenians,  boastingly  compared  his  actions 
with  those  of  Themistocles,  he  told  him  that 
once  upon  a  time  the  Day  after  the  Festival 
found  fault  with  the  Festival:  “On  you  there 
is  nothing  but  hurry  and  trouble  and  prepara¬ 
tion,  but,  when  I  come,  everybody  sits  down 
quietly  and  enjoys  himself”;  which  the  Festi¬ 
val  admitted  was  true,  but  “if  I  had  not  come 
first,  you  would  not  have  come  at  all.”  “Even 
so,”  he  said,  “if  Themistocles  had  not  come 
before,  where  had  you  been  now?”  Laughing 
at  his  own  son,  who  got  his  mother,  and,  by 
his  mother’s  means,  his  father  also,  to  indulge 
him,  he  told  him  that  he  had  the  most  power 
of  any  one  in  Greece:  “For  the  Athenians 
command  the  rest  of  Greece,  I  command  the 
Athenians,  your  mother  commands  me,  and 
you  command  your  mother.”  Loving  to  be 
singular  in  all  things,  when  he  had  land  to 
sell,  he  ordered  the  crier  to  give  notice  that 
there  were  good  neighbours  near  it.  Of  two 
who  made  love  to  his  daughter,  he  preferred 
the  man  of  worth  to  the  one  who  was  rich, 
saying  he  desired  a  man  without  riches,  rather 
than  riches  without  a  man.  Such  was  the  char¬ 
acter  of  his  sayings. 

After  these  things,  he  began  to  rebuild  and 
fortify  the  city  of  Athens,  bribing,  as  Theo- 
pompus  reports,  the  Lacedaemonian  ephors 
not  to  be  against  it,  but,  as  most  relate  it, 
overreaching  and  deceiving  them.  For,  under 
the  pretext  of  an  embassy,  he  went  to  Sparta, 
whereupon  the  Lacedaemonians  charging  him 
with  rebuilding  the  walls,  and  Poliarchus 
coming  on  purpose  from  TLgina  to  denounce 
it,  he  denied  the  fact,  bidding  them  to  send 
people  to  Athens  to  see  whether  it  were  so  or 
no;  by  which  delay  he  got  time  for  the  build¬ 
ing  of  the  wall,  and  also  placed  these  ambas¬ 
sadors  in  the  hands  of  his  countrymen  as  hos¬ 
tages  for  him;  and  so,  when  the  Lacedaemo¬ 
nians  knew  the  truth,  they  did  him  no  hurt, 
but,  suppressing  all  display  of  their  anger  for 
the  present,  sent  him  away. 

Next  he  proceeded  to  establish  the  harbour 
of  Piraeus,  observing  the  great  natural  advan¬ 
tages  of  the  locality,  and  desirous  to  unite  the 
whole  city  with  the  sea,  and  to  reverse,  in  a 
manner,  the  policy  of  ancient  Athenian  kings, 
who,  endeavouring  to  withdraw  their  subjects 
from  the  sea,  and  to  accustom  them  to  live, 
not  by  sailing  about,  but  by  planting  and  till¬ 
ing  the  earth,  spread  the  story  of  the  dispute 
between  Minerva  and  Neptune  for  the  sov¬ 
ereignty  of  Athens,  in  which  Minerva,  by  pro¬ 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ducing  to  the  judges  an  olive-tree,  was  de¬ 
clared  to  have  won;  whereas  Themistocles  did 
not  only  knead  up,  as  Aristophanes  says,  the 
port  and  the  city  into  one,  but  made  the  city 
absolutely  the  dependent  and  the  adjunct  of 
the  port,  and  the  land  of  the  sea,  which  in¬ 
creased  the  power  and  confidence  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  against  the  nobility;  the  authority  coming 
into  the  hands  of  sailors  and  boatswains  and  pi¬ 
lots.  Thus  it  was  one  of  the  orders  of  the  thirty 
tyrants,  that  the  hustings  in  the  assembly,  which 
had  faced  towards  the  sea,  should  be  turned 
round  towards  the  land;  implying  their  opin¬ 
ion  that  the  empire  by  sea  had  been  the  origin 
of  the  democracy,  and  that  the  farming  popu¬ 
lation  were  not  so  much  opposed  to  oligarchy. 

Themistocles,  however,  formed  yet  higher 
designs  with  a  view  to  naval  supremacy.  For, 
after  the  departure  of  Xerxes,  when  the  Gre¬ 
cian  fleet  was  arrived  at  Pagasae,  where  they 
wintered,  Themistocles,  in  a  public  oration  to 
the  people  of  Athens,  told  them  that  he  had  a 
design  to  perform  something  that  would  tend 
greatly  to  their  interests  and  safety,  but  was  of 
such  a  nature  that  it  could  not  be  made  gener¬ 
ally  public.  The  Athenians  ordered  him  to  im¬ 
part  it  to  Aristides  only;  and,  if  he  approved  of 
it,  to  put  it  in  practice.  And  when  Themistocles 
had  discovered  to  him  that  his  design  was  to 
burn  the  Grecian  fleet  in  the  haven  of  Pagasae, 
Aristides  coming  out  to  the  people,  gave  this  re¬ 
port  of  the  stratagem  contrived  by  Themisto¬ 
cles,  that  no  proposal  could  be  more  politic,  or 
more  dishonourable;  on  which  the  Athenians 
commanded  Themistocles  to  think  no  further 
of  it. 

When  the  Lacedaemonians  proposed,  at  the 
general  council  of  the  Amphictyonians,  that 
the  representatives  of  those  cities  which  were 
not  in  the  league,  nor  had  fought  against  the 
Persians,  should  be  excluded,  Themistocles, 
fearing  that  the  Thessalians,  with  those  of 
Thebes,  Argos,  and  others,  being  thrown  out 
of  the  council,  the  Lacedaemonians  would  be¬ 
come  wholly  masters  of  the  votes,  and  do 
what  they  pleased,  supported  the  deputies  of 
the  cities,  and  prevailed  with  the  members 
then  sitting  to  alter  their  opinion  on  this 
point,  showing  them  that  there  were  but  one- 
and-thirty  cities  which  had  partaken  in  the 
war,  and  that  most  of  these,  also,  were  very 
small;  how  intolerable  would  it  be,  if  the  rest 
of  Greece  should  be  excluded,  and  the  general 
council  should  come  to  be  ruled  by  two  or 
three  great  cities.  By  this,  chiefly,  he  incurred 
the  displeasure  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  whose 


THEMISTOCLES 

honours  and  favours  were  now  shown  to  Ci- 
mon,  with  a  view  to  making  him  the  oppo¬ 
nent  of  the  state  policy  of  Themistocles. 

He  was  also  burdensome  to  the  confed¬ 
erates,  sailing  about  the  islands  and  collecting 
money  from  them.  Herodotus  says,  that,  re¬ 
quiring  money  of  those  of  the  island  of  An¬ 
dros,  he  told  them  that  he  had  brought  with 
him  two  goddesses,  Persuasion  and  Force; 
and  they  answered  him  that  they  had  also 
two  great  goddesses,  which  prohibited  them 
from  giving  him  any  money,  Poverty  and  Im¬ 
possibility.  Timocreon,  the  Rhodian  poet, 
reprehends  him  somewhat  bitterly  for  being 
wrought  upon  by  money  to  let  some  who 
were  banished  return,  while  abandoning  him¬ 
self,  who  was  his  guest  and  friend.  The  verses 
are  these: — 

Pansanias  you  may  praise,  and  Xanthippus,  he  be 
for, 

For  Leutychidas,  a  third;  Aristides,  I  proclaim, 
From  the  sacred  Athens  came. 

The  one  true  man  of  all;  for  Themistocles 
Latona  doth  abhor, 

The  liar,  traitor,  cheat,  who  to  gain  his  filthy  pay, 
Timocreon,  his  friend,  neglected  to  restore 
To  his  native  Rhodian  shore; 

Three  silver  talents  too\,  and  departed  ( curses 
with  him )  on  his  way, 

Restoring  people  here,  expelling  there,  and  hilling 
here, 

Filling  evermore  his  purse:  and  at  the  Isthmus 
gave  a  treat, 

To  be  laughed  at,  of  cold  meat, 

Which  they  ate,  and  prayed  the  gods  some  one 
else  might  give  the  feast  another  year. 

But  after  the  sentence  and  banishment  of 
Themistocles,  Timocreon  reviles  him  yet  more 
immoderately  and  wildly  in  a  poem  that  be¬ 
gins  thus: — 

Unto  all  the  Greeks  repair, 

O  Muse,  and  tell  these  verses  there, 

As  is  fitting  and  is  fair. 

The  story  is,  that  it  was  put  to  the  question 
whether  Timocreon  should  be  banished  for 
siding  with  the  Persians,  and  Themistocles 
gave  his  vote  against  him.  So  when  Themisto¬ 
cles  was  accused  of  intriguing  with  the  Medes, 
Timocreon  made  these  lines  upon  him: — 

So  now  Timocreon,  indeed,  is  not  the  sole  friend 
of  the  Mede, 

There  are  some  \naves  besides;  nor  is  it  only 
mine  that  fails, 

But  other  foxes  have  lost  tails. — 

When  the  citizens  of  Athens  began  to  listen 
willingly  to  those  who  traduced  and  re- 


97 

proached  him,  he  was  forced,  with  somewhat 
obnoxious  frequency,  to  put  them  in  mind  of 
the  great  services  he  had  performed,  and  ask 
those  who  were  offended  with  him  whether 
they  were  weary  with  receiving  benefits  often 
from  the  same  person,  so  rendering  himself 
more  odious.  And  he  yet  more  provoked  the 
people  by  building  a  temple  to  Diana  with 
the  epithet  of  Aristobule,  or  Diana  of  Best 
Counsel;  intimating  thereby,  that  he  had 
given  the  best  counsel,  not  only  to  the  Atheni¬ 
ans,  but  to  all  Greece.  He  built  this  temple 
near  his  own  house,  in  the  district  called  Me- 
lite,  where  now  the  public  officers  carry  out  the 
bodies  of  such  as  are  executed,  and  throw  the 
halters  and  clothes  of  those  that  are  strangled 
or  otherwise  put  to  death.  There  is  to  this  day 
a  small  figure  of  Themistocles  in  the  temple 
of  Diana  of  Best  Counsel,  which  represents 
him  to  be  a  person  not  only  of  a  noble  mind, 
but  also  of  a  most  heroic  aspect. 

At  length  the  Athenians  banished  him, 
making  use  of  the  ostracism  to  humble  his 
eminence  and  authority,  as  they  ordinarily 
did  with  all  whom  they  thought  too  powerful, 
or,  by  their  greatness,  disproportionable  to  the 
equality  thought  requisite  in  a  popular  gov¬ 
ernment.  For  the  ostracism  was  instituted,  not 
so  much  to  punish  the  offender,  as  to  mitigate 
and  pacify  the  violence  of  the  envious,  who 
delighted  to  humble  eminent  men,  and  who, 
by  fixing  this  disgrace  upon  them,  might  vent 
some  part  of  their  rancour. 

Themistocles  being  banished  from  Athens, 
while  he  stayed  at  Argos  the  detection  of  Paus- 
anias  happened,  which  gave  such  advantage  to 
his  enemies,  that  Leobotes  of  Agraule,  son  of 
Alcmaeon,  indicted  him  of  treason,  the  Spar¬ 
tans  supporting  him  in  the  accusation. 

When  Pausanias  went  about  this  treason¬ 
able  design,  he  concealed  it  at  first  from  The¬ 
mistocles,  though  he  were  his  intimate  friend; 
but  when  he  saw  him  expelled  out  of  the  com¬ 
monwealth,  and  how  impatiently  he  took  his 
banishment,  he  ventured  to  communicate  it  to 
him,  and  desired  his  assistance,  showing  him 
the  king  of  Persia’s  letters,  and  exasperating 
him  against  the  Greeks,  as  a  villainous,  un¬ 
grateful  people.  However,  Themistocles  im¬ 
mediately  rejected  the  proposals  of  Pausanias, 
and  wholly  refused  to  be  a  party  in  the  enter¬ 
prise,  though  he  never  revealed  his  communi¬ 
cations,  nor  disclosed  the  conspiracy  to  any 
man,  either  hoping  that  Pausanias  would  desist 
from  his  intentions,  or  expecting  that  so  in¬ 
considerate  an  attempt  after  such  chimerical 


98 

objects  would  be  discovered  by  other  means. 

After  that  Pausanias  was  put  to  death,  let¬ 
ters  and  writings  being  found  concerning  this 
matter,  which  rendered  Themistocles  sus¬ 
pected,  the  Lacedaemonians  were  clamorous 
against  him,  and  his  enemies  among  the 
Athenians  accused  him;  when,  being  absent 
from  Athens,  he  made  his  defence  by  letters, 
especially  against  the  points  that  had  been 
previously  alleged  against  him.  In  answer  to 
the  malicious  detractions  of  his  enemies,  he 
merely  wrote  to  the  citizens,  urging  that  he 
who  was  always  ambitious  to  govern,  and  not 
of  a  character  or  a  disposition  to  serve,  would 
never  sell  himself  and  his  country  into  slavery 
to  a  barbarous  and  hostile  nation. 

Notwithstanding  this,  the  people,  being  per¬ 
suaded  bv  his  accusers,  sent  officers  to  take 
him  and  bring  him  away  to  be  tried  before  a 
council  of  the  Greeks,  but,  having  timely  no¬ 
tice  of  it,  he  passed  over  into  the  island  of 
Corcyra,  where  the  state  was  under  obliga¬ 
tions  to  him;  for,  being  chosen  as  arbitrator 
in  a  difference  between  them  and  the  Corin¬ 
thians,  he  decided  the  controversy  by  ordering 
the  Corinthians  to  pay  down  twenty  talents, 
and  declaring  the  town  and  island  of  Leucas 
a  joint  colony  from  both  cities.  From  thence 
he  fled  into  Epirus,  and,  the  Athenians  and 
Lacedaemonians  still  pursuing  him,  he  threw 
himself  upon  chances  of  safety  that  seemed  all 
but  desperate. 

For  he  fled  for  refuge  to  Admetus,  king  of 
the  Molossians,  who  had  formerly  made  some 
request  to  the  Athenians,  when  Themistocles 
was  in  the  height  of  his  authority,  and  had 
been  disdainfully  used  and  insulted  by  him, 
and  had  let  it  appear  plain  enough,  that, 
could  he  lay  hold  of  him,  he  would  take  his 
revenge.  Yet  in  this  misfortune,  Themistocles, 
fearing  the  recent  hatred  of  his  neighbours 
and  fellow-citizens  more  than  the  old  dis¬ 
pleasure  of  the  king,  put  himself  at  his  mercy 
and  became  an  humble  suppliant  to  Admetus, 
after  a  peculiar  manner  different  from  the 
custom  of  other  countries.  For  taking  the 
king’s  son,  who  was  then  a  child,  in  his  arms, 
he  laid  himself  down  at  his  hearth,  this  being 
the  most  sacred  and  only  manner  of  supplica¬ 
tion  among  the  Molossians,  which  was  not  to 
be  refused.  And  some  say  that  his  wife,  Phthia, 
intimated  to  Themistocles  this  way  of  peti¬ 
tioning,  and  placed  her  young  son  with  him 
before  the  hearth;  others,  that  king  Admetus, 
that  he  might  be  under  a  religious  obligation 
not  to  deliver  him  up  to  his  pursuers,  pre¬ 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

pared  and  enacted  with  him  a  sort  of  stage- 
play  to  this  effect. 

At  this  time  Epicrates  of  Acharnse  privately 
conveyed  his  wife  and  children  out  of  Athens, 
and  sent  them  hither,  for  which  afterwards 
Cimon  condemned  him  and  put  him  to  death, 
as  Stesimbrotus  reports,  and  yet  somehow,  ei¬ 
ther  forgetting  this  himself,  or  making  The¬ 
mistocles  to  be  little  mindful  of  it,  says  pres¬ 
ently  that  he  sailed  into  Sicily,  and  desired  in 
marriage  the  daughter  of  Hiero,  tyrant  of  Syra¬ 
cuse,  promising  to  bring  the  Greeks  under  his 
power;  and,  on  Hiero  refusing  him,  departed 
thence  into  Asia;  but  this  is  not  probable. 

For  Theophrastus  writes,  in  his  work  on 
Monarchy,  that  when  Hiero  sent  race-horses 
to  the  Olympian  games,  and  erected  a  pavilion 
sumptuously  furnished,  Themistocles  made 
an  oration  to  the  Greeks,  inciting  them  to  pull 
down  the  tyrant’s  tent,  and  not  to  suffer  his 
horses  to  run.  Thucydides  says,  that,  passing 
overland  to  the  zEgaean  Sea,  he  took  ship  at 
Pydna  in  the  bay  Therme,  not  being  known 
to  any  one  in  the  ship,  till,  being  terrified  to 
see  the  vessel  driven  by  the  winds  near  to 
Naxos,  which  was  then  besieged  by  the  Athe¬ 
nians,  he  made  himself  known  to  the  master 
and  pilot,  and  partly  entreating  them,  partly 
threatening  that  if  they  went  on  shore  he 
would  accuse  them,  and  make  the  Athenians 
to  believe  that  they  did  not  take  him  in  out 
of  ignorance,  but  that  he  had  corrupted  them 
with  money  from  the  beginning,  he  com¬ 
pelled  them  to  bear  off  and  stand  out  to  sea, 
and  sail  forward  towards  the  coast  of  Asia. 

A  great  part  of  his  estate  was  privately  con¬ 
veyed  away  by  his  friends,  and  sent  after  him 
by  sea  into  Asia;  besides  which,  there  was  dis¬ 
covered  and  confiscated  to  the  value  of  four¬ 
score  talents,  as  Theophrastus  writes;  Theo- 
pompus  says  an  hundred;  though  Themisto¬ 
cles  was  never  worth  three  talents  before  he  was 
concerned  in  public  affairs. 

When  he  arrived  at  Cyme,  and  understood 
that  all  along  the  coast  there  were  many  laid 
wait  for  him,  and  particularly  Ergoteles  and 
Pythodorus  (for  the  game  was  worth  the 
hunting  for  such  as  were  thankful  to  make 
money  by  any  means,  the  king  of  Persia  hav¬ 
ing  offered  by  public  proclamation  two  hun¬ 
dred  talents  to  him  that  should  take  him),  he 
fled  to  fiEgae,  a  small  city  of  the  fiEolians, 
where  no  one  knew  him  but  only  his  host 
Nicogenes,  who  was  the  richest  man  in  iEolia, 
and  well  known  to  the  great  men  of  Inner 
Asia.  While  Themistocles  lay  hid  for  some 


THEMISTOCLES 

days  in  his  house,  one  night,  after  a  sacrifice 
and  supper  ensuing,  Olbius,  the  attendant 
upon  Nicogenes’s  children,  fell  into  a  sort  of 
frenzy  and  fit  of  inspiration,  and  cried  out  in 
verse — 

Night  shall  spea\,  and  night  instruct  thee, 

By  the  voice  of  night  conduct  thee . 

After  this,  Themistocles,  going  to  bed, 
dreamed  that  he  saw  a  snake  coil  itself  up 
upon  his  belly,  and  so  creep  to  his  neck;  then, 
as  soon  as  it  touched  his  face,  it  turned  into 
an  eagle,  which  spread  its  wings  over  him, 
and  took  him  up  and  flew  away  with  him  a 
great  distance;  then  there  appeared  a  herald’s 
golden  wand,  and  upon  this  at  last  it  set  him 
down  securely,  after  infinite  terror  and  dis¬ 
turbance. 

His  departure  was  effected  by  Nicogenes  by 
the  following  artifice:  the  barbarous  nations, 
and  amongst  them  the  Persians  especially,  are 
extremely  jealous,  severe,  and  suspicious  about 
their  women,  not  only  their  wives,  but  also 
their  bought  slaves  and  concubines,  whom 
they  keep  so  strictly  that  no  one  ever  sees 
them  abroad;  they  spend  their  lives  shut  up 
within  doors,  and,  when  they  take  a  journey, 
are  carried  in  close  tents,  curtained  in  on  all 
sides,  and  set  upon  a  waggon.  Such  a  travel¬ 
ling  carriage  being  prepared  for  Themistocles, 
they  hid  him  in  it,  and  carried  him  on  his 
journey,  and  told  those  whom  they  met  or 
spoke  with  upon  the  road  that  they  were  con¬ 
veying  a  young  Greek  woman  out  of  Ionia  to 
a  nobleman  at  court. 

Thucydides  and  Charon  of  Lampsacus  say 
that  Xerxes  was  dead,  and  that  Themistocles 
had  an  interview  with  his  son;  but  Ephorus, 
Dinon,  Clitarchus,  Heraclides,  and  many  oth¬ 
ers,  write  that  he  came  to  Xerxes.  The  chrono¬ 
logical  tables  better  agree  with  the  account  of 
Thucydides,  and  yet  neither  can  their  state¬ 
ments  be  said  to  be  quite  set  at  rest. 

When  Themistocles  was  come  to  the  critical 
point,  he  applied  himself  first  to  Artabanus, 
commander  of  a  thousand  men,  telling  him 
that  he  was  a  Greek,  and  desired  to  speak 
with  the  king  about  important  affairs  concern¬ 
ing  which  the  king  was  extremely  solicitous. 
Artabanus  answered  him:  “O  stranger,  the 
laws  of  men  are  different,  and  one  thing  is 
honourable  to  one  man,  and  to  others  another; 
but  it  is  honourable  for  all  to  honour  and  ob¬ 
serve  their  own  laws.  It  is  the  habit  of  the 
Greeks,  we  are  told,  to  honour,  above  all  things, 
liberty  and  equality;  but  amongst  our  many 
excellent  laws,  we  account  this  the  most  excel- 


99 

lent,  to  honour  the  king,  and  to  worship  him, 
as  the  image  of  the  great  preserver  of  the  uni¬ 
verse;  if,  then,  you  shall  consent  to  our  laws, 
and  fall  down  before  the  king  and  worship 
him,  you  may  both  see  him  and  speak  to  him; 
but  if  your  mind  be  otherwise,  you  must  make 
use  of  others  to  intercede  for  you,  for  it  is  not 
the  national  custom  here  for  the  king  to  give 
audience  to  any  one  that  doth  not  fall  down 
before  him.” 

Themistocles,  hearing  this,  replied:  “Arta¬ 
banus,  I,  that  come  hither  to  increase  the 
power  and  glory  of  the  king,  will  not  only 
submit  myself  to  his  laws,  since  so  it  hath 
pleased  the  god  who  exalteth  the  Persian  em¬ 
pire  to  this  greatness,  but  will  also  cause  many 
more  to  be  worshippers  and  adorers  of  the 
king.  Let  not  this,  therefore,  be  an  impedi¬ 
ment  why  I  should  not  communicate  to  the 
king  what  I  have  to  impart.”  Artabanus  ask¬ 
ing  him,  “Who  must  we  tell  him  that  you 
are?  For  your  words  signify  you  to  be  no  or¬ 
dinary  person.”  Themistocles  answered,  “No 
man,  O  Artabanus,  must  be  informed  of  this 
before  the  king  himself.”  Thus  Phanias  re¬ 
lates;  to  which  Eratosthenes,  in  his  treatise  on 
Riches,  adds,  that  it  was  by  the  means  of  a 
woman  of  Eretria,  who  was  kept  by  Artabanus, 
that  he  obtained  this  audience  and  interview 
with  him. 

When  he  was  introduced  to  the  king,  and 
had  paid  his  reverence  to  him,  he  stood  silent, 
till  the  king  commanding  the  interpreter  to 
ask  him  who  he  was,  he  replied,  “O  king,  I 
am  Themistocles  the  Athenian,  driven  into 
banishment  by  the  Greeks.  The  evils  that  I 
have  done  to  the  Persians  are  numerous;  but 
my  benefits  to  them  yet  greater,  in  withhold¬ 
ing  the  Greeks  from  pursuit,  so  soon  as  the 
deliverance  of  my  own  country  allowed  me  to 
show  kindness  also  to  you.  I  come  with  a 
mind  suited  to  my  present  calamities,  pre¬ 
pared  alike  for  favours  and  for  anger,  to  wel¬ 
come  your  gracious  reconciliation,  and  to 
deprecate  your  wrath.  Take  my  own  country¬ 
men  for  witnesses  of  the  services  I  have  done 
for  Persia,  and  make  use  of  this  occasion  to 
show  the  world  your  virtue,  rather  than  to 
satisfy  your  indignation.  If  you  save  me,  you 
will  save  your  suppliant;  if  otherwise,  will 
destroy  an  enemy  of  the  Greeks.”  He  talked 
also  of  divine  admonitions,  such  as  the  vision 
which  he  saw  at  Nicogenes’s  house,  and  the 
direction  given  him  by  the  oracle  of  Dodona, 
where  Jupiter  commanded  him  to  go  to  him 
that  had  a  name  like  his,  by  which  he  under- 


100 

stood  that  he  was  sent  from  Jupiter  to  him, 
seeing  that  they  both  were  great,  and  had  the 
name  of  kings. 

The  king  heard  him  attentively,  and, 
though  he  admired  his  temper  and  courage, 
gave  him  no  answer  at  that  time;  but,  when 
he  was  with  his  intimate  friends,  rejoiced  in 
his  great  good  fortune,  and  esteemed  himself 
very  happy  in  this,  and  prayed  to  his  god  Ari- 
manius,  that  all  his  enemies  might  be  ever  of 
the  same  mind  with  the  Greeks,  to  abuse  and 
expel  the  bravest  men  amongst  them.  Then  he 
sacrificed  to  the  gods,  and  presently  fell  to 
drinking,  and  was  so  well  pleased,  that  in  the 
night,  in  the  middle  of  his  sleep,  he  cried  out 
for  joy  three  times,  “I  have  Themistocles  the 
Athenian.” 

In  the  morning,  calling  together  the  chief 
of  his  court,  he  had  Themistocles  brought  be¬ 
fore  him,  who  expected  no  good  of  it,  when 
he  saw,  for  example,  the  guards  fiercely  set 
against  him  as  soon  as  they  learnt  his  name, 
and  giving  him  ill  language.  As  he  came  for¬ 
ward  towards  the  king,  who  was  seated,  the 
rest  keeping  silence,  passing  by  Roxanes,  a 
commander  of  a  thousand  men,  he  heard  him, 
with  a  slight  groan,  say,  without  stirring  out 
of  his  place,  “You  subtle  Greek  serpent,  the 
king’s  good  genius  hath  brought  thee  hither.” 
Yet,  when  he  came  into  the  presence,  and 
again  fell  down,  the  king  saluted  him,  and 
spake  to  him  kindly,  telling  him  he  was  now 
indebted  to  him  two  hundred  talents;  for  it 
was  just  and  reasonable  that  he  should  re¬ 
ceive  the  reward  which  was  proposed  to  who¬ 
soever  should  bring  Themistocles;  and  prom¬ 
ising  much  more,  and  encouraging  him,  he 
commanded  him  to  speak  freely  what  he 
would  concerning  the  affairs  of  Greece.  Them¬ 
istocles  replied,  that  a  man’s  discourse  was 
like  to  a  rich  Persian  carpet,  the  beautiful  fig¬ 
ures  and  patterns  of  which  can  only  be  shown 
by  spreading  and  extending  it  out;  when  it  is 
contracted  and  folded  up,  they  are  obscure  and 
lost;  and,  therefore,  he  desired  time.  The  king 
being  pleased  with  the  comparison,  and  bid¬ 
ding  him  take  what  time  he  would,  he  desired 
a  year. 

In  which  time,  having  learnt  the  Persian 
language  sufficiently,  he  spoke  with  the  king 
by  himself  without  the  help  of  an  interpreter, 
it  being  supposed  that  he  discoursed  only 
about  the  affairs  of  Greece;  but  there  happen¬ 
ing,  at  the  same  time,  great  alterations  at 
court,  and  removals  of  the  king’s  favourites, 
he  drew  upon  himself  the  envy  of  the  great 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

people,  who  imagined  that  he  had  taken  the 
boldness  to  speak  concerning  them.  For  the 
favours  shown  to  other  strangers  were  nothing 
in  comparison  with  the  honours  conferred  on 
him;  the  king  invited  him  to  partake  of  his 
own  pastimes  and  recreations  both  at  home 
and  abroad,  carrying  him  with  him  a-hunting, 
and  made  him  his  intimate  so  far  that  he  per¬ 
mitted  him  to  see  the  queen-mother,  and  con¬ 
verse  frequently  with  her.  By  the  king’s  com¬ 
mand,  he  also  was  made  acquainted  with  the 
Magian  learning. 

When  Demaratus  the  Lacedaemonian,  being 
ordered  by  the  king  to  ask  whatsoever  he 
pleased,  that  it  should  immediately  be  granted 
him,  desired  that  he  might  make  his  public 
entrance,  and  be  carried  in  state  through  the 
city  of  Sardis,  with  the  tiara  set  in  the  royal 
manner  upon  his  head,  Mithropaustes,  cousin 
to  the  king,  touched  him  on  the  head,  and 
told  him  that  he  had  no  brains  for  the  royal 
tiara  to  cover,  and  if  Jupiter  should  give  him 
his  lightning  and  thunder,  he  would  not  any 
the  more  be  Jupiter  for  that;  the  king  also 
repulsed  him  with  anger,  resolving  never  to 
be  reconciled  to  him,  but  to  be  inexorable  to 
all  supplications  on  his  behalf.  Yet  Themis¬ 
tocles  pacified  him,  and  prevailed  with  him  to 
forgive  him. 

And  it  is  reported  that  the  succeeding  kings, 
in  whose  reigns  there  was  a  greater  communi¬ 
cation  between  the  Greeks  and  Persians,  when 
they  invited  any  considerable  Greek  into  their 
service,  to  encourage  him,  would  write  and 
promise  him  that  he  should  be  as  great  with 
them  as  Themistocles  had  been.  They  relate, 
also,  how  Themistocles,  when  he  was  in  great 
prosperity,  and  courted  by  many,  seeing  him¬ 
self  splendidly  served  at  his  table,  turned  to 
his  children  and  said,  “Children,  we  had  been 
undone  if  we  had  not  been  undone.”  Most 
writers  say  that  he  had  three  cities  given  him, 
Magnesia,  Myus,  and  Lampsacus,  to  maintain 
him  in  bread,  meat,  and  wine.  Neanthes  of 
Cyzicus,  and  Phanias,  add  two  more,  the  city 
of  Palaescepsis,  to  provide  him  with  clothes, 
and  Percote,  with  bedding  and  furniture  for 
his  house. 

As  he  was  going  down  towards  the  sea- 
coast  to  take  measures  against  Greece,  a  Per¬ 
sian  whose  name  was  Epixyes,  governor  of 
the  upper  Phrygia,  laid  wait  to  kill  him,  hav¬ 
ing  for  that  purpose  provided  a  long  time  be¬ 
fore  a  number  of  Pisidians,  who  were  to  set 
upon  him  when  he  should  stop  to  rest  at  a 
city  that  is  called  Lion’s-head.  But  Themis- 


THEMISTOCLES 

tocles,  sleeping  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  saw 
the  Mother  of  the  gods  appear  to  him  in  a 
dream  and  say  unto  him,  “Themistocles,  keep 
back  from  the  Lion’s-head,  for  fear  you  fall 
into  the  lion’s  jaws;  for  this  advice  I  expect 
that  your  daughter  Mnesiptolema  should  be 
my  servant.” 

Themistocles  was  much  astonished,  and 
when  he  had  made  his  vows  to  the  goddess, 
left  the  broad  road,  and,  making  a  circuit, 
went  another  way,  changing  his  intended  sta¬ 
tion  to  avoid  that  place,  and  at  night  took  up 
his  rest  in  the  fields.  But  one  of  the  sumpter- 
horses,  which  carried  the  furniture  for  his 
tent,  having  fallen  that  day  into  the  river,  his 
servants  spread  out  the  tapestry,  which  was 
wet,  and  hung  it  up  to  dry;  in  the  meantime 
the  Pisidians  made  towards  them  with  their 
swords  drawn,  and,  not  discerning  exactly  by 
the  moon  what  it  was  that  was  stretched  out, 
thought  it  to  be  the  tent  of  Themistocles,  and 
that  they  should  find  him  resting  himself 
within  it;  but  when  they  came  near,  and  lifted 
up  the  hangings,  those  who  watched  there  fell 
upon  them  and  took  them.  Themistocles,  hav¬ 
ing  escaped  this  great  danger,  in  admiration 
of  the  goodness  of  the  goddess  that  appeared 
to  him,  built,  in  memory  of  it,  a  temple  in 
the  city  of  Magnesia,  which  is  dedicated  to 
Dindymene,  Mother  of  the  gods,  in  which  he 
consecrated  and  devoted  his  daughter  Mnesi¬ 
ptolema  to  her  service. 

When  he  came  to  Sardis,  he  visited  the 
temples  of  the  gods,  and  observing,  at  his 
leisure,  their  buildings,  ornaments,  and  the 
number  of  their  offerings,  he  saw  in  the 
temple  of  the  Mother  of  the  gods  the  statue 
of  a  virgin  in  brass,  two  cubits  high,  called 
the  water-bringer.  Themistocles  had  caused 
this  to  be  made  and  set  up  when  he  was  sur¬ 
veyor  of  the  waters  at  Athens,  out  of  the  fines 
of  those  whom  he  detected  in  drawing  off  and 
diverting  the  public  water  by  pipes  for  their 
private  use;  and  whether  he  had  some  regret 
to  see  this  image  in  captivity,  or  was  desirous 
to  let  the  Athenians  see  in  what  great  credit 
and  authority  he  was  with  the  king,  he  en¬ 
tered  into  a  treaty  with  the  governor  to  per¬ 
suade  him  to  send  this  statue  back  to  Athens, 
which  so  enraged  the  Persian  officer,  that  he 
told  him  he  would  write  the  king  word  of  it. 
Themistocles,  being  affrighted  hereat,  got  ac¬ 
cess  to  his  wives  and  concubines,  by  presents 
of  money  to  whom  he  appeased  the  fury  of 
the  governor;  and  afterwards  behaved  with 
more  reserve  and  circumspection,  fearing  the 


101 

envy  of  the  Persians,  and  did  not,  as  Theo- 
pompus  writes,  continue  to  travel  about  Asia, 
but  lived  quietly  in  his  own  house  in  Mag¬ 
nesia,  where  for  a  long  time  he  passed  his 
days  in  great  security,  being  courted  by  all, 
and  enjoying  rich  presents,  and  honoured 
equally  with  the  greatest  persons  in  the  Per¬ 
sian  empire;  the  king,  at  that  time,  not  mind¬ 
ing  his  concerns  with  Greece,  being  taken  up 
with  the  affairs  of  inner  Asia. 

But  when  Egypt  revolted,  being  assisted  by 
the  Athenians,  and  the  Greek  galleys  roved 
about  as  far  as  Cyprus  and  Cilicia,  and  Cimon 
had  made  himself  master  of  the  seas,  the  king 
turned  his  thoughts  thither,  and,  bending  his 
mind  chiefly  to  resist  the  Greeks,  and  to 
check  the  growth  of  their  power  against  him, 
began  to  raise  forces,  and  send  out  command¬ 
ers,  and  to  despatch  messengers  to  Themis¬ 
tocles  at  Magnesia,  to  put  him  in  mind  of  his 
promise,  and  to  summon  him  to  act  against 
the  Greeks. 

Yet  this  did  not  increase  his  hatred  nor 
exasperate  him  against  the  Athenians,  neither 
was  he  in  any  way  elevated  with  the  thoughts 
of  the  honour  and  powerful  command  he  was 
to  have  in  this  war;  but  judging,  perhaps, 
that  the  object  would  not  be  attained,  the 
Greeks  having  at  that  time,  beside  other  great 
commanders,  Cimon,  in  particular,  who  was 
gaining  wonderful  military  successes;  but 
chiefly  being  ashamed  to  sully  the  glory  of  his 
former  great  actions,  and  of  his  many  vic¬ 
tories  and  trophies,  he  determined  to  put  a 
conclusion  to  his  life,  agreeable  to  its  previous 
course.  He  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  and  invited 
his  friends;  and,  having  entertained  them  and 
shaken  hands  with  them,  drank  bull’s  blood, 
as  is  the  usual  story;  as  others  state,  a  poison 
producing  instant  death;  and  ended  his  days 
in  the  city  of  Magnesia,  having  lived  sixty-five 
years,  most  of  which  he  had  spent  in  politics 
and  in  wars,  in  government  and  command. 
The  king  being  informed  of  the  cause  and 
manner  of  his  death,  admired  him  more  than 
ever,  and  continued  to  show  kindness  to  his 
friends  and  relations. 

Themistocles  left  three  sons  by  Archippe, 
daughter  to  Lysander  of  Alopece, — Archep- 
tolis,  Poleuctus,  and  Cleophantus.  Plato,  the 
philosopher,  mentions  the  last  as  a  most  ex¬ 
cellent  horseman,  but  otherwise  insignificant 
person;  of  two  sons  yet  older  than  these, 
Neocles  and  Diodes,  Neocles  died  when  he 
was  young  by  the  bite  of  a  horse,  and  Diodes 
was  adopted  by  his  grandfather,  Lysander. 


102 


He  had  many  daughters,  of  whom  Mnesip- 
tolema,  whom  he  had  by  a  second  marriage, 
was  wife  to  Archeptolis,  her  brother  by  an¬ 
other  mother;  Italia  was  married  to  Pan- 
thoides,  of  the  island  of  Chios;  Sybaris  to  Ni- 
comedes  the  Athenian.  After  the  death  of  The- 
mistocles,  his  nephew,  Phrasicles,  went  to 
Magnesia,  and  married,  with  her  brothers’ 
consent,  another  daughter,  Nicomache,  and 
took  charge  of  her  sister  Asia,  the  youngest 
of  all  the  children. 

The  Magnesians  possess  a  splendid  sepul¬ 
chre  of  Themistocles,  placed  in  the  middle  of 
their  market-place.  It  is  not  worth  while  tak¬ 
ing  notice  of  what  Andocides  states  in  his 
address  to  his  friends  concerning  his  remains, 
how  the  Athenians  robbed  his  tomb,  and 
threw  his  ashes  into  the  air;  for  he  feigns 
this,  to  exasperate  the  oligarchical  faction 
against  the  people;  and  there  is  no  man  living 
but  knows  that  Phylarchus  simply  invents  in 
his  history,  where  he  all  but  uses  an  actual 
stage  machine,  and  brings  in  Neocles  and  De- 
mopolis  as  the  sons  of  Themistocles,  to  incite 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

or  move  compassion,  as  if  he  were  writing  a 
tragedy.  Diodorus,  the  cosmographer,  says,  in 
his  work  on  Tombs,  but  by  conjecture  rather 
than  of  certain  knowledge,  that  near  to  the  ha¬ 
ven  of  Piraeus  where  the  land  runs  out  like  an 
elbow  from  the  promontory  of  Alcimus,  when 
you  have  doubled  the  cape  and  passed  inward 
where  the  sea  is  always  calm,  there  is  a  large 
piece  of  masonry,  and  upon  this  the  Tomb  of 
Themistocles,  in  the  shape  of  an  altar;  and 
Plato  the  comedian  confirms  this,  he  believes, 
in  these  verses: — 

Thy  tomb  is  fairly  placed  upon  the  strand, 

Where  merchants  still  shall  greet  it  with  the 

land; 

Still  in  and  out  ’ twill  see  them  come  and  go, 
And  watch  the  galleys  as  they  race  below. 

Various  honours  also  and  privileges  were 
granted  to  the  kindred  of  Themistocles  at 
Magnesia,  which  were  observed  down  to  our 
times,  and  were  enjoyed  by  another  The¬ 
mistocles  of  Athens,  with  whom  I  had  an  in¬ 
timate  acquaintance  and  friendship  in  the 
house  of  Ammonius  the  philosopher. 


CAMILLUS 

445?-3<$5  b.c. 


among  the  many  remarkable  things  that 
l\  are  related  of  Furius  Camillus,  it  seems 
X  A.  singular  and  strange  above  all,  that  he, 
who  continually  was  in  the  highest  com¬ 
mands,  and  obtained  the  greatest  successes, 
was  five  times  chosen  dictator,  triumphed  four 
times,  and  was  styled  a  second  founder  of 
Rome,  yet  never  was  so  much  as  once  consul. 
The  reason  of  which  was  the  state  and  temper 
of  the  commonwealth  at  that  time;  for  the 
people,  being  at  dissension  with  the  senate, 
refused  to  return  consuls,  but  in  their  stead 
elected  other  magistrates,  called  military  trib¬ 
unes,  who  acted,  indeed,  with  full  consular 
power,  but  were  thought  to  exercise  a  less  ob¬ 
noxious  amount  of  authority,  because  it  was 
divided  among  a  large  number;  for  to  have  the 
management  of  affairs  intrusted  to  the  hands 
of  six  persons  rather  than  two  was  some  satis¬ 
faction  to  the  opponents  of  oligarchy. 

This  was  the  condition  of  the  times  when 
Camillus  was  in  the  height  of  his  actions  and 
glory,  and,  although  the  government  in  the 
meantime  had  often  proceeded  to  consular 


elections,  yet  he  could  never  persuade  himself 
to  be  consul  against  the  inclination  of  the 
people.  In  all  his  other  administrations,  which 
were  many  and  various,  he  so  behaved  him¬ 
self,  that,  when  alone  in  authority,  he  exer¬ 
cised  his  power  as  in  common,  but  the  honour 
of  all  actions  redounded  entirely  to  himself^ 
even  when  in  joint  commission  with  others; 
the  reason  of  the  former  was  his  moderation 
in  command;  of  the  latter,  his  great  judgment 
and  wisdom,  which  gave  him  without  con¬ 
troversy  the  first  place. 

The  house  of  the  Furii  was  not,  at  that 
time,  of  any  considerable  distinction;  he,  by 
his  own  acts,  first  raised  himself  to  honour, 
serving  under  Postumius  Tubertis,  dictator, 
in  the  great  battle  against  the  fiEquians  and 
Volscians.  For  riding  out  from  the  rest  of  the 
army,  and  in  the  charge  receiving  a  wound 
in  his  thigh,  he  for  all  that  did  not  quit  the 
fight,  but,  letting  the  dart  drag  in  the  wound, 
and  engaging  with  the  bravest  of  the  enemy, 
put  them  to  flight;  for  which  action,  among 
other  rewards  bestowed  on  him,  he  was  ere- 


CAMILLUS 

ated  censor,  an  office  in  those  days  of  great  re¬ 
pute  and  authority.  During  his  censorship  one 
very  good  act  of  his  is  recorded,  that,  whereas 
the  wars  had  made  many  widows,  he  obliged 
such  as  had  no  wives,  some  by  fair  persuasion, 
others  by  threatening  to  set  fines  on  their  heads, 
to  take  them  in  marriage;  another  necessary 
one,  in  causing  orphans  to  be  rated,  who  be¬ 
fore  were  exempted  from  taxes,  the  frequent 
wars  requiring  more  than  ordinary  expenses 
to  maintain  them. 

What,  however,  pressed  them  most  was  the 
siege  of  Veii.  Some  call  this  people  Veientani. 
This  was  the  head  city  of  Tuscany,  not  in¬ 
ferior  to  Rome,  either  in  number  of  arms  or 
multitude  of  soldiers,  insomuch  that,  presum¬ 
ing  on  her  wealth  and  luxury,  and  priding 
herself  upon  her  refinement  and  sumptuous¬ 
ness,  she  engaged  in  many  honourable  con¬ 
tests  with  the  Romans  for  glory  and  empire. 
But  now  they  abandoned  their  former  am¬ 
bitious  hopes,  having  been  weakened  by  great 
defeats,  so  that,  having  fortified  themselves 
with  high  and  strong  walls,  and  furnished  the 
city  with  all  sorts  of  weapons  offensive  and  de¬ 
fensive,  as  likewise  with  corn  and  all  manner 
of  provisions,  they  cheerfully  endured  a  siege, 
which,  though  tedious  to  them,  was  no  less 
troublesome  and  distressing  to  the  besiegers. 
For  the  Romans,  having  never  been  accus¬ 
tomed  to  stay  away  from  home  except  in  sum¬ 
mer,  and  for  no  great  length  of  time,  and  con¬ 
stantly  to  winter  at  home,  were  then  first 
compelled  by  the  tribunes  to  build  forts  in  the 
enemy’s  country,  and  raising  strong  works 
about  their  camp,  to  join  winter  and  summer 
together. 

And  now,  the  seventh  year  of  the  war  draw¬ 
ing  to  an  end,  the  commanders  began  to  be 
suspected  as  too  slow  and  remiss  in  driving 
on  the  siege,  insomuch  that  they  were  dis¬ 
charged  and  others  chosen  for  the  war,  among 
whom  was  Camillus,  then  second  time  trib¬ 
une.  But  at  present  he  had  no  hand  in  the 
siege,  the  duties  that  fell  by  lot  to  him  being 
to  make  war  upon  the  Faliscans  and  Capen- 
ates,  who,  taking  advantage  of  the  Romans 
being  occupied  on  all  hands,  had  carried  rav¬ 
ages  into  their  country,  and,  through  all  the 
Tuscan  war,  given  them  much  annoyance,  but 
were  now  reduced  by  Camillus,  and  with 
great  loss  shut  up  within  their  walls. 

And  now,  in  the  very  heat  of  the  war,  a 
strange  phenomenon  in  the  Alban  lake, 
which,  in  the  absence  of  any  known  cause 
and  explanation  by  natural  reasons,  seemed  as 


103 

great  a  prodigy  as  the  most  incredible  that  are 
reported,  occasioned  great  alarm.  It  was  the 
beginning  of  autumn,  and  the  summer  now 
ending  had,  to  all  observation,  been  neither 
rainy  nor  much  troubled  with  southern  winds; 
and  of  the  many  lakes,  brooks,  and  springs 
of  all  sorts  with  which  Italy  abounds,  some 
were  wholly  dried  up,  others  drew  very  little 
water  with  them;  all  the  rivers,  as  is  usual  in 
summer,  ran  in  a  very  low  and  hollow  chan¬ 
nel.  But  the  Alban  lake,  that  is  fed  by  no 
other  waters  but  its  own,  and  is  on  all  sides 
encircled  with  fruitful  mountains,  without  any 
cause,  unless  it  were  divine,  began  visibly  to 
rise  and  swell,  increasing  to  the  feet  of  the 
mountains,  and  by  degrees  reaching  the  level 
of  the  very  tops  of  them,  and  all  this  without 
any  waves  or  agitation.  At  first  it  was  the 
wonder  of  shepherds  and  herdsmen;  but  when 
the  earth,  which,  like  a  great  dam,  held  up 
the  lake  from  falling  into  the  lower  grounds, 
through  the  quantity  and  weight  of  water  was 
broken  down,  and  in  a  violent  stream  it  ran 
through  the  ploughed  fields  and  plantations 
to  discharge  itself  in  the  sea,  it  not  only  struck 
terror  into  the  Romans,  but  was  thought  by 
all  the  inhabitants  of  Italy  to  portend  some 
extraordinary  event.  But  the  greatest  talk  of 
it  was  in  the  camp  that  besieged  Veii,  so  that 
in  the  town  itself,  also,  the  occurrence  became 
known. 

As  in  long  sieges  it  commonly  happens  that 
parties  on  both  sides  meet  often  and  converse 
with  one  another,  so  it  chanced  that  a  Roman 
had  gained  much  confidence  and  familiarity 
with  one  of  the  besieged,  a  man  versed  in 
ancient  prophecies,  and  of  repute  for  more 
than  ordinary  skill  in  divination.  The  Roman, 
observing  him  to  be  overjoyed  at  the  story  of 
the  lake,  and  to  mock  at  the  siege,  told  him 
that  this  was  not  the  only  prodigy  that  of  late 
had  happened  to  the  Romans;  others  more 
wonderful  yet  than  this  had  befallen  them, 
which  he  was  willing  to  communicate  to  him, 
that  he  might  the  better  provide  for  his  pri¬ 
vate  interests  in  these  public  distempers.  The 
man  greedily  embraced  the  proposal,  expect¬ 
ing  to  hear  some  wonderful  secrets;  but  when, 
by  little  and  little,  he  had  led  him  on  in  con¬ 
versation  and  insensibly  drawn  him  a  good 
way  from  the  gates  of  the  city,  he  snatched 
him  up  by  the  middle,  being  stronger  than 
he,  and,  by  the  assistance  of  others  that  came 
running  from  the  camp,  seized  and  delivered 
him  to  the  commanders. 

The  man,  reduced  to  this  necessity,  and 


104 

sensible  now  that  destiny  was  not  to  be 
avoided,  discovered  to  them  the  secret  oracles 
of  Veii;  that  it  was  not  possible  the  city  should 
be  taken,  until  the  Alban  lake,  which  now 
broke  forth  and  had  found  out  new  passages, 
was  drawn  back  from  that  course,  and  so 
diverted  that  it  could  not  mingle  with  the  sea. 
The  senate,  having  heard  and  satisfied  them¬ 
selves  about  the  matter,  decreed  to  send  to 
Delphi,  to  ask  counsel  of  the  god.  The  mes¬ 
sengers  were  persons  of  the  highest  repute, 
Licinius  Cossus,  Valerius  Potitus,  and  Fabius 
Ambustus;  who,  having  made  their  voyage  by 
sea  and  consulted  the  god,  returned  with  other 
answers,  particularly  that  there  had  been  a 
neglect  of  some  of  their  national  rites  relating 
to  the  Latin  feasts;  but  the  Alban  water  the 
oracle  commanded,  if  it  were  possible,  they 
should  keep  from  the  sea,  and  shut  it  up  in 
its  ancient  bounds;  but  if  that  was  not  to  be 
done,  then  they  should  carry  it  of!  by  ditches 
and  trenches  into  the  lower  grounds,  and  so 
dry  it  up;  which  message  being  delivered,  the 
priests  performed  what  related  to  the  sacrifices, 
and  the  people  went  to  work  and  turned  the 
water. 

And  now  the  senate,  in  the  tenth  year  of 
the  war,  taking  away  all  other  commands,  cre¬ 
ated  Camillus  dictator,  who  chose  Cornelius 
Scipio  for  his  general  of  horse.  And  in  the  first 
place  he  made  vows  unto  the  gods,  that,  if  they 
would  grant  a  happy  conclusion  of  the  war, 
he  would  celebrate  to  their  honour  the  great 
games,  and  dedicate  a  temple  to  the  goddess 
whom  the  Romans  call  Matuta,  the  Mother, 
though,  from  the  ceremonies  which  are  used, 
one  would  think  she  was  Leucothea.  For  they 
take  a  servant-maid  into  the  secret  part  of  the 
temple,  and  there  cuffi  her,  and  drive  her  out 
again,  and  they  embrace  their  brothers’  chil¬ 
dren  in  place  of  their  own;  and,  in  general,  the 
ceremonies  of  the  sacrifice  remind  one  of  the 
nursing  of  Bacchus  by  Ino,  and  the  calamities 
occasioned  by  her  husband’s  concubine. 

Camillus,  having  made  these  vows,  marched 
into  the  country  of  the  Faliscans,  and  in  a 
great  battle  overthrew  them  and  the  Capen- 
ates,  their  confederates;  afterwards  he  turned 
to  the  siege  of  Veii,  and,  finding  that  to  take 
it  by  assault  would  prove  a  difficult  and  haz¬ 
ardous  attempt,  proceeded  to  cut  mines  under¬ 
ground,  the  earth  about  the  city  being  easy  to 
break  up,  and  allowing  such  depth  for  the 
works  as  would  prevent  their  being  discovered 
by  the  enemy.  This  design  going  on  in  a  hope¬ 
ful  way,  he  openly  gave  assaults  to  the  en¬ 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

emy  to  keep  them  to  the  walls,  whilst  they 
that  worked  underground  in  the  mines  were, 
without  being  perceived,  arrived  within  the 
citadel,  close  to  the  temple  of  Juno,  which 
was  the  greatest  and  most  honoured  in  all  the 
city. 

It  is  said  that  the  prince  of  the  Tuscans  was 
at  that  very  time  at  sacrifice,  and  that  the 
priest,  after  he  had  looked  into  the  entrails 
of  the  beast,  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice  that 
the  gods  would  give  the  victory  to  those  that 
should  complete  those  offerings;  and  that  the 
Romans  who  were  in  the  mines,  hearing  the 
words,  immediately  pulled  down  the  floor, 
and,  ascending  with  noise  and  clashing  of 
weapons,  frightened  away  the  enemy,  and, 
snatching  up  the  entrails,  carried  them  to 
Camillus.  But  this  may  look  like  a  fable. 

The  city,  however,  being  taken  by  storm, 
and  the  soldiers  busied  in  pillaging  and  gath¬ 
ering  an  infinite  quantity  of  riches  and  spoils, 
Camillus,  from  the  high  tower,  viewing  what 
was  done,  at  first  wept  for  pity;  and  when 
they  that  were  by  congratulated  his  success, 
he  lifted  up  his  hands  to  heaven,  and  broke 
out  into  this  prayer:  “O  most  mighty  Jupiter, 
and  ye  gods  that  are  judges  of  good  and  evil 
actions,  ye  know  that  not  without  just  cause, 
but  constrained  by  necessity,  we  have  been 
forced  to  revenge  ourselves  on  the  city  of  our 
unrighteous  and  wicked  enemies.  But  if,  in 
the  vicissitude  of  things,  there  may  be  any  ca¬ 
lamity  due,  to  counterbalance  this  great  felicity, 
I  beg  that  it  may  be  diverted  from  the  city  and 
army  of  the  Romans,  and  fall,  with  as  little 
hurt  as  may  be,  upon  my  own  head.”  Having 
said  these  words,  and  just  turning  about  (as 
the  custom  of  the  Romans  is  to  turn  to  the 
right  after  adoration  or  prayer),  he  stumbled 
and  fell,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  that  were 
present.  But,  recovering  himself  presently  from 
the  fall,  he  told  them  that  he  had  received  what 
he  had  prayed  for,  a  small  mischance,  in  com¬ 
pensation  for  the  greatest  good  fortune. 

Having  sacked  the  city,  he  resolved,  accord¬ 
ing  as  he  had  vowed,  to  carry  Juno’s  image  to 
Rome;  and,  the  workmen  being  ready  for  that 
purpose,  he  sacrificed  to  the  goddess,  and 
made  his  supplications  that  she  would  be 
pleased  to  accept  of  their  devotion  toward  her, 
and  graciously  vouchsafe  to  accept  of  a  place 
among  the  gods  that  presided  at  Rome;  and 
the  statue,  they  say,  answered  in  a  low  voice 
that  she  was  ready  and  willing  to  go.  Livy 
writes,  that,  in  praying,  Camillus  touched  the 
goddess,  and  invited  her,  and  that  some  of 


CAMILLUS 

the  standers-by  cried  out  that  she  was  willing 
and  would  come. 

They  who  stand  up  for  the  miracle  and  en¬ 
deavour  to  maintain  it  have  one  great  advo¬ 
cate  on  their  side  in  the  wonderful  fortune 
of  the  city,  which,  from  a  small  and  contemp¬ 
tible  beginning,  could  never  have  attained  to 
that  greatness  and  power  without  many  signal 
manifestations  of  the  divine  presence  and  co¬ 
operation.  Other  wonders  of  the  like  nature, 
drops  of  sweat  seen  to  stand  on  statues,  groans 
heard  from  them,  the  figures  seen  to  turn 
round  and  to  close  their  eyes,  are  recorded  by 
many  ancient  historians;  and  we  ourselves 
could  relate  divers  wonderful  things,  which 
we  have  been  told  by  men  of  our  own  time, 
that  are  not  lightly  to  be  rejected;  but  to  give 
too  easy  credit  to  such  things,  or  wholly  to 
disbelieve  them,  is  equally  dangerous,  so  in¬ 
capable  is  human  infirmity  of  keeping  any 
bounds,  or  exercising  command  over  itself, 
running  off  sometimes  to  superstition  and  dot¬ 
age,  at  other  times  to  the  contempt  and  neglect 
of  all  that  is  supernatural.  But  moderation  is 
best,  and  to  avoid  all  extremes. 

Camillus,  however,  whether  puffed  up  with 
the  greatness  of  his  achievement  in  conquer¬ 
ing  a  city  that  was  the  rival  of  Rome,  and  had 
held  out  a  ten  years’  siege,  or  exalted  with  the 
felicitations  of  those  that  were  about  him,  as¬ 
sumed  to  himself  more  than  became  a  civil 
and  legal  magistrate;  among  other  things,  in 
the  pride  and  haughtiness  of  his  triumph, 
driving  through  Rome  in  a  chariot  drawn 
with  four  white  horses,  which  no  general 
either  before  or  since  ever  did;  for  the  Romans 
consider  such  a  mode  of  conveyance  to  be 
sacred,  and  specially  set  apart  to  the  king  and 
father  of  the  gods.  This  alienated  the  hearts 
of  his  fellow-citizens,  who  were  not  accus¬ 
tomed  to  such  pomp  and  display. 

The  second  pique  they  had  against  him  was 
his  opposing  the  law  by  which  the  city  was 
to  be  divided;  for  the  tribunes  of  the  people 
brought  forward  a  motion  that  the  people  and 
senate  should  be  divided  into  two  parts,  one 
of  which  should  remain  at  home,  the  other, 
as  the  lot  should  decide,  remove  to  the  new- 
taken  city.  By  which  means  they  should  not 
only  have  much  more  room,  but,  by  the  ad¬ 
vantage  of  two  great  and  magnificent  cities, 
be  better  able  to  maintain  their  territories  and 
their  fortunes  in  general.  The  people,  there¬ 
fore,  who  were  numerous  and  indigent,  greed¬ 
ily  embraced  it,  and  crowded  continually  to 
the  forum,  with  tumultuous  demands  to  have 


105 

it  put  to  the  vote.  But  the  senate  and  the 
noblest  citizens,  judging  the  proceedings  of  the 
tribunes  to  tend  rather  to  a  destruction  than 
a  division  of  Rome,  greatly  averse  to  it,  went 
to  Camillus  for  assistance,  who,  fearing  the 
result  if  it  came  to  a  direct  contest,  contrived 
to  occupy  the  people  with  other  business,  and 
so  staved  it  off.  He  thus  became  unpopular. 

But  the  greatest  and  most  apparent  cause 
of  their  dislike  against  him  arose  from  the 
tenths  of  the  spoil;  the  multitude  having  here, 
if  not  a  just,  yet  a  plausible  case  against  him. 
For  it  seems,  as  he  went  to  the  siege  of  Veii, 
he  had  vowed  to  Apollo  that  if  he  took  the 
city  he  would  dedicate  to  him  the  tenth  of 
the  spoil.  The  city  being  taken  and  sacked, 
whether  he  was  loath  to  trouble  the  soldiers 
at  that  time,  or  that  through  the  multitude  of 
business  he  had  forgotten  his  vow,  he  suffered 
them  to  enjoy  that  part  of  the  spoils  also. 
Some  time  afterwards,  when  his  authority  was 
laid  down,  he  brought  the  matter  before  the 
senate,  and  the  priests,  at  the  same  time,  re¬ 
ported,  out  of  the  sacrifices,  that  there  were 
intimations  of  divine  anger,  requiring  propi¬ 
tiations  and  offerings.  The  senate  decreed  the 
obligations  to  be  in  force. 

But  seeing  it  was  difficult  for  every  one  to 
produce  the  very  same  things  they  had  taken, 
to  be  divided  anew,  they  ordained  that  every 
one  upon  oath  should  bring  into  the  public 
the  tenth  part  of  his  gains.  This  occasioned 
many  annoyances  and  hardships  to  the  sol¬ 
diers,  who  were  poor  men,  and  had  endured 
much  in  the  war,  and  now  were  forced,  out  of 
what  they  had  gained  and  spent,  to  bring  in  so 
great  a  proportion.  Camillus,  being  assaulted 
by  their  clamour  and  tumults,  for  want  of  a  bet¬ 
ter  excuse,  betook  himself  to  the  poorest  of  de¬ 
fences,  confessing  he  had  forgotten  his  vow; 
they  in  turn  complained  that  he  had  vowed  the 
tenth  of  the  enemy’s  goods,  and  now  levied  it 
out  of  the  tenth  of  the  citizens’.  Nevertheless, 
every  one  having  brought  in  his  due  propor¬ 
tion,  it  was  decreed  that  out  of  it  a  bowl  of 
massy  gold  should  be  made,  and  sent  to  Delphi. 
And  when  there  was  great  scarcity  of  gold  in 
the  city,  and  the  magistrates  were  considering 
where  to  get  it,  the  Roman  ladies,  meeting  to¬ 
gether  and  consulting  among  themselves,  out 
of  the  golden  ornaments  they  wore  contributed 
as  much  as  went  to  the  making  of  the  offering, 
which  in  weight  came  to  eight  talents  of  gold. 
The  senate,  to  give  them  the  honour  they 
had  deserved,  ordained  that  funeral  orations 
should  be  used  at  the  obsequies  of  women  as 


106 

well  as  men,  it  having  never  before  been  a 
custom  that  any  women  after  death  should 
receive  any  public  eulogy.  Choosing  out,  there¬ 
fore,  three  of  the  noblest  citizens  as  a  deputa¬ 
tion,  they  sent  them  in  a  vessel  of  war,  well 
manned  and  sumptuously  adorned.  Storm  and 
calm  at  sea  may  both,  they  say,  alike  be  dan¬ 
gerous;  as  they  at  this  time  experienced,  being 
brought  almost  to  the  very  brink  of  destruc¬ 
tion,  and,  beyond  all  expectation,  escaping. 
For  near  the  isles  of  fiEolus  the  wind  slacking, 
galleys  of  the  Lipareans  came  upon  them, 
taking  them  for  pirates;  and,  when  they  held 
up  their  hands  as  suppliants,  forbore  indeed 
from  violence,  but  took  their  ship  in  tow,  and 
carried  her  into  the  harbour,  where  they  ex¬ 
posed  to  sale  their  goods  and  persons  as  law¬ 
ful  prize,  they  being  pirates;  and  scarcely,  at 
last,  by  the  virtue  and  interest  of  one  man, 
Timasitheus  by  name,  who  was  in  office  as 
general,  and  used  his  utmost  persuasion,  they 
were,  with  much  ado,  dismissed.  He,  however, 
himself  sent  out  some  of  his  own  vessels  with 
them,  to  accompany  them  in  their  voyage  and 
assist  them  at  the  dedication;  for  which  he 
received  honours  at  Rome,  as  he  had  deserved. 

And  now  the  tribunes  of  the  people  again 
resuming  their  motion  for  the  division  of  the 
city,  the  war  against  the  Faliscans  luckily 
broke  out,  giving  liberty  to  the  chief  citizens 
to  choose  what  magistrates  they  pleased,  and 
to  appoint  Camillus  military  tribune,  with 
five  colleagues;  affairs  then  requiring  a  com¬ 
mander  of  authority  and  reputation,  as  well 
as  experience.  And  when  the  people  had  rati¬ 
fied  the  election,  he  marched  with  his  forces 
into  the  territories  of  the  Faliscans,  and  laid 
siege  to  Falerii,  a  well-fortified  city,  and  plen¬ 
tifully  stored  with  all  necessaries  of  war.  And 
although  he  perceived  it  would  be  no  small 
work  to  take  it,  and  no  little  time  would  be 
required  for  it,  yet  he  was  willing  to  exercise 
the  citizens  and  keep  them  abroad,  that  they 
might  have  no  leisure,  idling  at  home,  to  fol¬ 
low  the  tribunes  in  factions  and  seditions;  a 
very  common  remedy,  indeed,  with  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  who  thus  carried  off,  like  good  physi¬ 
cians,  the  ill  humours  of  their  commonwealth. 
The  Falerians,  trusting  in  the  strength  of  their 
city,  which  was  well  fortified  on  all  sides, 
made  so  little  account  of  the  siege,  that  all, 
with  the  exception  of  those  that  guarded  the 
walls,  as  in  times  of  peace,  walked  about  the 
streets  in  their  common  dress,  the  boys  went 
to  school,  and  were  led  by  their  master  to 
play  and  exercise  about  the  town  walls;  for 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  Falerians,  like  the  Greeks,  used  to  have 
a  single  teacher  for  many  pupils,  wishing 
their  children  to  live  and  be  brought  up  from 
the  beginning  in  each  other’s  company. 

This  schoolmaster,  designing  to  betray  the 
Falerians  by  their  children,  led  them  out  every 
day  under  the  town  wall,  at  first  but  a  little 
way,  and,  when  they  had  exercised,  brought 
them  home  again.  Afterwards  by  degrees  he 
drew  them  farther  and  farther,  till  by  practice 
he  had  made  them  bold  and  fearless,  as  if  no 
danger  was  about  them;  and  at  last,  having 
got  them  all  together,  he  brought  them  to  the 
outposts  of  the  Romans,  and  delivered  them 
up,  demanding  to  be  led  to  Camillus.  Where 
being  come,  and  standing  in  the  middle,  he 
said  that  he  was  the  master  and  teacher  of 
these  children,  but  preferring  his  favour  be¬ 
fore  all  other  obligations,  he  was  come  to  de¬ 
liver  up  his  charge  to  him,  and,  in  that,  the 
whole  city.  When  Camillus  had  heard  him 
out,  he  was  astounded  at  the  treachery  of  the 
act,  and,  turning  to  the  standers-by,  observed 
that.  “War,  indeed,  is  of  necessity  attended 
with  much  injustice  and  violence!  Certain 
laws,  however,  all  good  men  observe  even  in 
war  itself,  nor  is  victory  so  great  an  object  as 
to  induce  us  to  incur  for  its  sake  obligations 
for  base  and  impious  acts.  A  great  general 
should  rely  on  his  own  virtue,  and  not  on 
other  men’s  vices.”  Which  said,  he  com¬ 
manded  the  officers  to  tear  off  the  man’s 
clothes,  and  bind  his  hands  behind  him,  and 
give  the  boys  rods  and  scourges  to  punish  the 
traitor  and  drive  him  back  to  the  city. 

By  this  time  the  Falerians  had  discovered 
the  treachery  of  the  schoolmaster,  and  the  city, 
as  was  likely,  was  full  of  lamentations  and 
cries  for  their  calamity,  men  and  women  of 
worth  running  in  distraction  about  the  walls 
and  gates;  when,  behold,  the  boys  came  whip¬ 
ping  their  master  on,  naked  and  bound,  call¬ 
ing  Camillus  their  preserver  and  god  and 
father.  Insomuch  that  it  struck  not  only  into 
the  parents,  but  the  rest  of  the  citizens  that 
saw  what  was  done,  such  admiration  and  love 
of  Camillus’s  justice,  that,  immediately  meet¬ 
ing  in  assembly,  they  sent  ambassadors  to  him, 
to  resign  whatever  they  had  to  his  disposal. 
Camillus  sent  them  to  Rome,  where,  being 
brought  into  the  senate,  they  spoke  to  this  pur¬ 
pose:  that  the  Romans,  preferring  justice  be¬ 
fore  victory,  had  taught  them  rather  to  em¬ 
brace  submission  than  liberty;  they  did  not  so 
much  confess  themselves  to  be  inferior  in 
strength,  as  they  must  acknowledge  them  to 


CAMILLUS 

be  superior  in  virtue.  The  senate  remitted  the 
whole  matter  to  Camillus,  to  judge  and  order 
as  he  thought  fit;  who,  taking  a  sum  of  money 
of  the  Falerians,  and,  making  a  peace  with  the 
whole  nation  of  the  Faliscans,  returned  home. 

But  the  soldiers,  who  had  expected  to  have 
the  pillage  of  the  city,  when  they  came  to 
Rome  empty-handed,  railed  against  Camillus 
among  their  fellow-citizens,  as  a  hater  of  the 
people,  and  one  that  grudged  all  advantage  to 
the  poor.  Afterwards,  when  the  tribunes  of 
the  people  again  brought  their  motion  for  di¬ 
viding  the  city  to  the  vote,  Camillus  appeared 
openly  against  it,  shrinking  from  no  unpopu¬ 
larity,  and  inveighing  boldly  against  the  pro¬ 
moters  of  it,  and  so  urging  and  constraining 
the  multitude  that,  contrary  to  their  inclina¬ 
tions,  they  rejected  the  proposal,  but  yet  hated 
Camillus.  Insomuch  that  though  a  great  mis¬ 
fortune  befell  him  in  his  family  (one  of  his 
two  sons  dying  of  a  disease),  commiseration 
for  this  could  not  in  the  least  make  them  abate 
their  malice.  And,  indeed,  he  took  this  loss 
with  immoderate  sorrow,  being  a  man  na¬ 
turally  of  a  mild  and  tender  disposition,  and, 
when  the  accusation  was  preferred  against 
him,  kept  his  house,  and  mourned  amongst 
the  women  of  his  family. 

His  accuser  was  Lucius  Apuleius;  the 
charge,  appropriation  of  the  Tuscan  spoils; 
certain  brass  gates,  part  of  those  spoils,  were 
said  to  be  in  his  possession.  The  people  were 
exasperated  against  him,  and  it  was  plain  they 
would  take  hold  of  any  occasion  to  condemn 
him.  Gathering,  therefore,  together  his  friends 
and  fellow-soldiers,  and  such  as  had  borne 
command  with  him,  a  considerable  number  in 
all,  he  besought  them  that  they  would  not 
suffer  him  to  be  unjustly  overborne  by  shame¬ 
ful  accusations,  and  left  the  mock  and  scorn  of 
his  enemies.  His  friends,  having  advised  and 
consulted  among  themselves,  made  answer, 
that,  as  to  the  sentence,  they  did  not  see  how 
they  could  help  him,  but  that  they  would  con¬ 
tribute  to  whatsoever  fine  should  be  set  upon 
him.  Not  able  to  endure  so  great  an  indignity, 
he  resolved,  in  his  anger,  to  leave  the  city,  and 
go  into  exile;  and  so,  having  taken  leave  of 
his  wife  and  his  son,  he  went  silently  to  the 
gate  of  the  city,  and  there  stopping  and  turn¬ 
ing  round,  stretched  out  his  hands  to  the  Cap¬ 
itol,  and  prayed  to  the  gods,  that  if,  without 
any  fault  of  his  own,  but  merely  through  the 
malice  and  violence  of  the  people,  he  was 
driven  out  into  banishment,  the  Romans 
might  quickly  repent  of  it;  and  that  all  man- 


107 

kind  might  witness  their  need  for  the  assis¬ 
tance,  and  desire  for  the  return  of  Camillus. 

Thus,  like  Achilles,  having  left  his  impreca¬ 
tions  on  the  citizens,  he  went  into  banishment; 
so  that,  neither  appearing  nor  making  de¬ 
fence,  he  was  condemned  in  the  sum  of  fifteen 
thousand  asses,  which,  reduced  to  silver,  make 
one  thousand  five  hundred  drachmas;  for  the 
as  was  the  money  of  the  time,  ten  of  such  cop¬ 
per  pieces  making  the  denarius,  or  piece  of 
ten.  And  there  is  not  a  Roman  but  believes 
that  immediately  upon  the  prayers  of  Camil¬ 
lus,  a  sudden  judgment  followed,  and  that  he 
received  a  revenge  for  the  injustice  done  unto 
him;  which  though  we  cannot  think  was 
pleasant,  but  rather  grievous  and  bitter  to  him, 
yet  was  very  remarkable,  and  noised  over  the 
whole  world.  Such  a  punishment  visited  the 
city  of  Rome,  an  era  of  such  loss  and  danger 
and  disgrace  so  quickly  succeeded;  whether  it 
thus  fell  out  by  fortune,  or  it  be  the  office  of 
some  god  not  to  see  injured  virtue  go  un¬ 
avenged. 

The  first  token  that  seemed  to  threaten 
some  mischief  to  ensue  was  the  death  of  the 
censor  Julius;  for  the  Romans  have  a  religious 
reverence  for  the  office  of  a  censor,  and  esteem 
it  sacred.  The  second  was,  that,  just  before 
Camillus  went  into  exile,  Marcus  Caedicius,  a 
person  of  no  great  distinction,  nor  of  the  rank 
of  senator,  but  esteemed  a  good  and  respect¬ 
able  man,  reported  to  the  military  tribunes  a 
thing  worthy  their  consideration:  that,  going 
along  the  night  before  in  the  street  called  the 
New  Way,  and  being  called  by  somebody  in 
a  loud  voice,  he  turned  about,  but  could  see  no 
one,  but  heard  a  voice  greater  than  human, 
which  said  these  words,  “Go,  Marcus  Caedicius, 
and  early  in  the  morning  tell  the  military 
tribunes  that  they  are  shortly  to  expect  the 
Gauls.”  But  the  tribunes  made  a  mock  and 
sport  with  the  story,  and  a  little  after  came 
Camillus’s  banishment. 

The  Gauls  are  of  the  Celtic  race,  and  are  re¬ 
ported  to  have  been  compelled  by  their  num¬ 
bers  to  leave  their  country,  which  was  insuf¬ 
ficient  to  sustain  them  all,  and  to  have  gone  in 
search  of  other  homes.  And  being,  many  thou¬ 
sands  of  them,  young  men  and  able  to  bear 
arms,  and  carrying  with  them  a  still  greater 
number  of  women  and  young  children,  some 
of  them,  passing  the  Riphaean  mountains,  fell 
upon  the  Northern  Ocean,  and  possessed 
themselves  of  the  farthest  parts  of  Europe; 
others,  seating  themselves  between  the  Py¬ 
renean  mountains  and  the  Alps,  lived  there  a 


108 

considerable  time,  near  to  the  Senones  and 
Celtorii;  but,  afterwards  tasting  wine  which 
was  then  first  brought  them  out  of  Italy,  they 
were  all  so  much  taken  with  the  liquor,  and 
transported  with  the  hitherto  unknown  de¬ 
light,  that,  snatching  up  their  arms  and  taking 
their  families  along  with  them,  they  marched 
directly  to  the  Alps,  to  find  out  the  country 
which  yielded  such  fruit,  pronouncing  all  oth¬ 
ers  barren  and  useless. 

He  that  first  brought  wine  among  them  and 
was  the  chief  instigator  of  their  coming  into 
Italy  is  said  to  have  been  one  Aruns,  a  Tus¬ 
can,  a  man  of  noble  extraction,  and  not  of  bad 
natural  character,  but  involved  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  misfortune.  He  was  guardian  to  an  or¬ 
phan,  one  of  the  richest  of  the  country,  and 
much  admired  for  his  beauty,  whose  name 
was  Lucumo.  From  his  childhood  he  had  been 
bred  up  with  Aruns  in  his  family,  and  when 
now  grown  up  did  not  leave  his  house,  pro¬ 
fessing  to  wish  for  the  enjoyment  of  his  so¬ 
ciety.  And  thus  for  a  great  while  he  secretly 
enjoyed  Aruns’s  wife,  corrupting  her,  and 
himself  corrupted  by  her.  But  when  they  were 
both  so  far  gone  in  their  passion  that  they 
could  neither  refrain  their  lust  nor  conceal  it, 
the  young  man  seized  the  woman  and  openly 
sought  to  carry  her  away.  The  husband,  going 
to  law,  and  finding  himself  overpowered  by 
the  interest  and  money  of  his  opponent,  left 
his  country  and,  hearing  of  the  state  of  the 
Gauls,  went  to  them,  and  was  the  conductor  of 
their  expedition  into  Italy. 

At  their  first  coming  they  at  once  possessed 
themselves  of  all  that  country  which  anciently 
the  Tuscans  inhabited,  reaching  from  the 
Alps  to  both  the  seas,  as  the  names  themselves 
testify;  for  the  North  or  Adriatic  Sea  is  named 
from  the  Tuscan  city,  Adria,  and  that  to  the 
south  the  Tuscan  Sea  simply.  The  whole 
country  is  rich  in  fruit-trees,  has  excellent  pas¬ 
ture,  and  is  well  watered  with  rivers.  It  had 
eighteen  large  and  beautiful  cities,  well  pro¬ 
vided  with  all  the  means  for  industry  and 
wealth,  and  all  the  enjoyments  and  pleasures 
of  life.  The  Gauls  cast  out  the  Tuscans,  and 
seated  themselves  in  them.  But  this  was  long 
before. 

The  Gauls  at  this  time  were  besieging  Clu- 
sium,  a  Tuscan  city.  The  Clusinians  sent  to 
the  Romans  for  succour,  desiring  them  to  in¬ 
terpose  with  the  barbarians  by  letters  and  am¬ 
bassadors.  There  were  sent  three  of  the  family 
of  the  Fabii,  persons  of  high  rank  and  distinc¬ 
tion  in  the  city.  The  Gauls  received  them  cour- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

teously,  from  respect  to  the  name  of  Rome, 
and,  giving  over  the  assault  which  was  then 
making  upon  the  walls,  came  to  conference 
with  them;  when  the  ambassadors  asking 
what  injury  they  had  received  of  the  Clusini¬ 
ans  that  they  thus  invaded  their  city,  Brennus, 
King  of  the  Gauls,  laughed  and  made  answer: 
“The  Clusinians  do  us  injury,  in  that,  being 
able  only  to  till  a  small  parcel  of  ground,  they 
must  needs  possess  a  great  territory,  and  will 
not  yield  any  part  to  us  who  are  strangers, 
many  in  number,  and  poor.  In  the  same  na¬ 
ture,  O  Romans,  formerly  the  Albans,  Fiden- 
ates,  and  Ardeates,  and  now  lately  the  Veien- 
tines  and  Capenates,  and  many  of  the  Falis- 
cans  and  Volscians,  did  you  injury;  upon 
whom  ye  make  war  if  they  do  not  yield  you 
part  of  what  they  possess,  make  slaves  of 
them,  waste  and  spoil  their  country,  and  ruin 
their  cities;  neither  in  so  doing  are  cruel  or 
unjust,  but  follow  that  most  ancient  of  all 
laws,  which  gives  the  possessions  of  the  feeble 
to  the  strong;  which  begins  with  God  and 
ends  in  the  beasts;  since  all  these,  by  nature, 
seek  the  stronger  to  have  advantage  over  the 
weaker.  Cease,  therefore,  to  pity  the  Clusini¬ 
ans  whom  we  besiege,  lest  ye  teach  the  Gauls  to 
be  kind  and  compassionate  to  those  that  are 
oppressed  by  you.” 

By  this  answer  the  Romans,  perceiving  that 
Brennus  was  not  to  be  treated  with,  went  into 
Clusium,  and  encouraged  and  stirred  up  the 
inhabitants  to  make  a  sally  with  them  upon 
the  barbarians,  which  they  did  either  to  try 
their  strength  or  to  show  their  own.  The  sally 
being  made,  and  the  fight  growing  hot  about 
the  walls,  one  of  the  Fabii,  Quintus  Ambustus, 
being  well  mounted,  and  setting  spurs  to  his 
horse,  made  full  against  a  Gaul,  a  man  of  huge 
bulk  and  stature,  whom  he  saw  riding  out  at 
a  distance  from  the  rest.  At  the  first  he  was  not 
recognised,  through  the  quickness  of  the  con¬ 
flict  and  the  glittering  of  his  armour,  that  pre¬ 
cluded  any  view  of  him;  but  when  he  had  over¬ 
thrown  the  Gaul,  and  was  going  to  gather  the 
spoils,  Brennus  knew  him;  and,  invoking  the 
gods  to  be  witnesses,  that,  contrary  to  the 
known  and  common  law  of  nations,  which  is 
holily  observed  by  all  mankind,  he  who  had 
come  as  an  ambassador  had  now  engaged  in 
hostility  against  him,  he  drew  off  his  men,  and 
bidding  Clusium  farewell,  led  his  army  di¬ 
rectly  to  Rome.  But  not  wishing  that  it  should 
look  as  if  they  took  advantage  of  that  injury, 
and  were  ready  to  embrace  any  occasion  of 
quarrel,  he  sent  a  herald  to  demand  the  man 


CAMILLUS 

in  punishment,  and  in  the  meantime  marched 
leisurely  on. 

The  senate  being  met  at  Rome,  among  many 
others  that  spoke  against  the  Fabii,  the  priests 
called  fecials  were  the  most  decided,  who,  on 
the  religious  ground,  urged  the  senate  that  they 
should  lay  the  whole  guilt  and  penalty  of  the 
fact  upon  him  that  committed  it,  and  so  exon¬ 
erate  the  rest.  These  fecials  Numa  Pompilius, 
the  mildest  and  justest  of  kings,  constituted 
guardians  of  peace,  and  the  judges  and  deter¬ 
miners  of  all  causes  by  which  war  may  justi¬ 
fiably  be  made.  The  senate  referring  the  whole 
matter  to  the  people,  and  the  priests  there,  as 
well  as  in  the  senate,  pleading  against  Fabius, 
the  multitude,  however,  so  little  regarded  their 
authority,  that  in  scorn  and  contempt  of  it 
they  chose  Fabius  and  the  rest  of  his  brothers 
military  tribunes. 

The  Gauls,  on  hearing  this,  in  great  rage 
threw  aside  every  delay,  and  hastened  on  with 
all  the  speed  they  could  make.  The  places 
through  which  they  marched,  terrified  with 
their  numbers  and  the  splendour  of  their  prep¬ 
arations  for  war,  and  in  alarm  at  their  violence 
and  fierceness,  began  to  give  up  their  territories 
as  already  lost,  with  little  doubt  but  their  cities 
would  quickly  follow;  contrary,  however,  to 
expectation,  they  did  no  injury  as  they  passed, 
nor  took  anything  from  the  fields;  and,  as  they 
went  by  any  city,  cried  out  that  they  were  going 
to  Rome;  that  the  Romans  only  were  their 
enemies,  and  that  they  took  all  others  for  their 
friends. 

Whilst  the  barbarians  were  thus  hastening 
with  all  speed,  the  military  tribunes  brought 
the  Romans  into  the  field  to  be  ready  to  en¬ 
gage  them,  being  not  inferior  to  the  Gauls  in 
number  (for  they  were  no  less  than  forty  thou¬ 
sand  foot),  but  most  of  them  raw  soldiers,  and 
such  as  never  handled  a  weapon  before.  Be¬ 
sides,  they  had  wholly  neglected  all  religious 
usages,  had  not  obtained  favourable  sacrifices, 
nor  made  inquiries  of  the  prophets,  natural  in 
danger  and  before  battle.  No  less  did  the  multi¬ 
tude  of  commanders  distract  and  confound 
their  proceedings;  frequently  before,  upon  less 
occasions,  they  had  chosen  a  single  leader,  with 
the  title  of  dictator,  being  sensible  of  what 
great  importance  it  is  in  critical  times  to  have 
the  soldiers  united  under  one  general  with  the 
entire  and  absolute  control  placed  in  his  hands. 
Add  to  all,  the  remembrance  of  Camillus’s 
treatment,  which  made  it  now  seem  a  dan¬ 
gerous  thing  for  officers  to  command  without 
humouring  their  soldiers. 


109 

In  this  condition  they  left  the  city,  and  en¬ 
camped  by  the  river  Allia,  about  ten  miles 
from  Rome,  and  not  far  from  the  place  where 
it  falls  into  the  Tiber;  and  here  the  Gauls  came 
upon  them,  and,  after  a  disgraceful  resistance, 
devoid  of  order  and  discipline,  they  were  mis¬ 
erably  defeated.  The  left  wing  was  immedi¬ 
ately  driven  into  the  river,  and  there  destroyed; 
the  right  had  less  damage  by  declining  the 
shock,  and  from  the  low  grounds  getting  to 
the  tops  of  the  hills,  from  whence  most  of  them 
afterwards  dropped  into  the  city;  the  rest,  as 
many  as  escaped,  the  enemy  being  weary  of  the 
slaughter,  stole  by  night  to  Veii,  giving  up 
Rome  and  all  that  was  in  it  for  lost. 

This  battle  was  fought  about  the  summer 
solstice,  the  moon  being  at  full,  the  very  same 
day  in  which  the  sad  disaster  of  the  Fabii  had 
happened,  when  three  hundred  of  that  name 
were  at  one  time  cut  off  by  the  Tuscans.  But 
from  this  second  loss  and  defeat  the  day  got  the 
name  of  Alliensis  from  the  river  Allia,  and  still 
retains  it.  The  question  of  unlucky  days, 
whether  we  should  consider  any  to  be  so,  and 
whether  Heraclitus  did  well  in  upbraiding 
Hesiod  for  distinguishing  them  into  fortunate 
and  unfortunate,  as  ignorant  that  the  nature 
of  every  day  is  the  same,  I  have  examined  in 
another  place;  but  upon  occasion  of  the  present 
subject,  I  think  it  will  not  be  amiss  to  annex  a 
few  examples  relating  to  this  matter. 

On  the  fifth  of  their  month  Hippodromius, 
which  corresponds  to  the  Athenian  Hecatom- 
baeon,  the  Boeotians  gained  two  signal  victories, 
the  one  at  Leuctra,  the  other  at  Ceressus,  about 
three  hundred  years  before,  when  they  over¬ 
came  Lattamyas  and  the  Thessalians,  both 
which  asserted  the  liberty  of  Greece.  Again,  on 
the  sixth  of  Boedromion,  the  Persians  were 
worsted  by  the  Greeks  at  Marathon;  on  the 
third,  at  Plataea,  as  also  at  Mycale;  on  the 
twenty-fifth,  at  Arbela.  The  Athenians,  about 
the  full  moon  in  Boedromion,  gained  their  sea- 
victory  at  Naxos  under  the  conduct  of  Cha- 
brias;  on  the  twentieth,  at  Salamis,  as  we  have 
shown  in  our  treatise  on  Days.  Thargelion  was 
a  very  unfortunate  month  to  the  barbarians, 
for  in  it  Alexander  overcame  Darius's  generals 
on  the  Granicus;  and  the  Carthaginians,  on 
the  twenty-fourth,  were  beaten  by  Timoleon 
in  Sicily,  on  which  same  day  and  month  Troy 
seems  to  have  been  taken,  as  Ephorus,  Cal- 
listhenes,  Damastes,  and  Phylarchus  state.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  month  Metagitnion, 
which  in  Bceotia  is  called  Panemus,  was  not 
very  lucky  to  the  Greeks;  for  on  its  seventh 


110 

day  they  were  defeated  by  Antipater,  at  the 
battle  in  Cranon,  and  utterly  ruined;  and  be¬ 
fore,  at  Chaeronea,  were  defeated  by  Philip; 
and  on  the  very  same  day,  same  month,  and 
same  year,  those  that  went  with  Archidamus 
into  Italy  were  there  cut  off  by  the  barbarians. 
The  Carthaginians  also  observe  the  twenty- 
first  of  the  same  month,  as  bringing  with  it 
the  largest  number  and  the  severest  of  their 
losses.  I  am  not  ignorant  that,  about  the  Feast 
of  Mysteries,  Thebes  was  destroyed  the  second 
time  by  Alexander;  and  after  that,  upon  the 
very  twentieth  of  Boedromion,  on  which  day 
they  lead  forth  the  mystic  Iacchus,  the  Athe¬ 
nians  received  a  garrison  of  the  Macedonians. 
On  the  selfsame  day  the  Romans  lost  their 
army  under  Caepio  by  the  Cimbrians,  and  in 
a  subsequent  year,  under  the  conduct  of  Lu- 
cullus,  overcame  the  Armenians  and  Tigranes. 
King  Attalus  and  Pompey  died  both  on  their 
birthdays.  One  could  reckon  up  several  that 
have  had  variety  of  fortune  on  the  same  day. 
This  day,  meantime,  is  one  of  the  unfortunate 
ones  to  the  Romans,  and  for  its  sake  two  oth¬ 
ers  in  every  month;  fear  and  superstition,  as 
the  custom  of  it  is,  more  and  more  prevailing. 
But  I  have  discussed  this  more  accurately  in 
my  Roman  Questions. 

And  now,  after  the  batde,  had  the  Gauls 
immediately  pursued  those  that  fled,  there  had 
been  no  remedy  but  Rome  must  have  wholly 
been  ruined,  and  those  who  remained  in  it  ut¬ 
terly  destroyed;  such  was  the  terror  that  those 
who  escaped  the  battle  brought  with  them 
into  the  city,  and  with  such  distraction  and 
confusion  were  themselves  in  turn  infected. 
But  the  Gauls,  not  imagining  their  victory  to 
be  so  considerable,  and  overtaken  with  the 
present  joy,  fell  to  feasting  and  dividing  the 
spoil,  by  which  means  they  gave  leisure  to 
those  who  were  for  leaving  the  city  to  make 
their  escape,  and  to  those  that  remained  to  an¬ 
ticipate  and  prepare  for  their  coming.  For  they 
who  resolved  to  stay  at  Rome,  abandoning  the 
rest  of  the  city,  betook  themselves  to  the  Capi¬ 
tol,  which  they  fortified  with  the  help  of  mis¬ 
siles  and  new  works.  One  of  their  principal 
cares  was  of  their  holy  things,  most  of  which 
they  conveyed  into  the  Capitol. 

But  the  consecrated  fire  the  vestal  virgins 
took,  and  fled  with  it,  as  likewise  their  other 
sacred  things.  Some  write  that  they  have  noth¬ 
ing  in  their  charge  but  the  ever-living  fire 
which  Numa  had  ordained  to  be  worshipped 
as  the  principle  of  all  things;  for  fire  is  the 
most  active  thing  in  nature,  and  all  produc- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

tion  is  either  motion,  or  attended  with  mo¬ 
tion;  all  the  other  parts  of  matter,  so  long  as 
they  are  without  warmth,  lie  sluggish  and 
dead,  and  require  the  accession  of  a  sort  of 
soul  or  vitality  in  the  principle  of  heat;  and 
upon  that  accession,  in  whatever  way,  im¬ 
mediately  receive  a  capacity  either  of  acting 
or  being  acted  upon.  And  thus  Numa,  a  man 
curious  in  such  things,  and  whose  wisdom 
made  it  thought  that  he  conversed  with  the 
Muses,  consecrated  fire,  and  ordained  it  to  be 
kept  ever  burning,  as  an  image  of  that  eternal 
power  which  orders  and  actuates  all  things. 

Others  say  that  this  fire  was  kept  burning 
in  front  of  the  holy  things,  as  in  Greece,  for 
purification,  and  that  there  were  other  things 
hid  in  the  most  secret  part  of  the  temple, 
which  were  kept  from  the  view  of  all,  except 
those  virgins  whom  they  call  vestals.  The 
most  common  opinion  was,  that  the  image  of 
Pallas,  brought  into  Italy  by  fiEneas,  was  laid 
up  there;  others  say  that  the  Samothracian 
images  lay  there,  telling  a  story  how  that  Dar- 
danus  carried  them  to  Troy,  and,  when  he 
had  built  the  city,  celebrated  those  rites,  and 
dedicated  those  images  there;  that  after  Troy 
was  taken,  fiEneas  stole  them  away,  and  kept 
them  till  his  coming  into  Italy.  But  they  who 
profess  to  know  more  of  the  matter  affirm 
that  there  are  two  barrels,  not  of  any  great 
size,  one  of  which  stands  open  and  has  noth¬ 
ing  in  it,  the  other  full  and  sealed  up;  but 
that  neither  of  them  may  be  seen  but  by  the 
most  holy  virgins.  Others  think  that  they  who 
say  this  are  misled  by  the  fact  that  the  virgins 
put  most  of  their  holy  things  into  two  barrels 
at  this  time  of  the  Gaulish  invasion,  and  hid 
them  underground  in  the  temple  of  Quirinus; 
and  that  from  hence  that  place  to  this  day 
bears  the  name  of  Barrels. 

However  it  be,  taking  the  most  precious 
and  important  things  they  had,  they  fled  away 
with  them,  shaping  their  course  along  the 
river-side,  where  Lucius  Albinius,  a  simple 
citizen  of  Rome,  who  among  others  was  mak¬ 
ing  his  escape,  overtook  them,  having  his 
wife,  children,  and  goods  in  a  cart;  and,  see¬ 
ing  the  virgins,  dragging  along  in  their  arms 
the  holy  things  of  the  gods,  in  a  helpless  and 
weary  condition,  he  caused  his  wife  and  chil¬ 
dren  to  get  down,  and,  taking  out  his  goods, 
put  the  virgins  in  the  cart,  that  they  might 
make  their  escape  to  some  of  the  Greek  cities. 
This  devout  act  of  Albinius,  and  the  respect 
he  showed  thus  signally  to  the  gods  at  a  time 
of  such  extremity,  deserved  not  to  be  passed 


CAMILLUS 

over  in  silence.  But  the  priests  that,  belonged 
to  other  gods,  and  the  most  elderly  of  the  sen¬ 
ators,  men  who  had  been  consuls  and  had  en¬ 
joyed  triumphs,  could  not  endure  to  leave  the 
city;  but,  putting  on  their  sacred  and  splendid 
robes,  Fabius  the  high  priest  performing  the 
office,  they  made  their  prayers  to  the  gods, 
and,  devoting  themselves,  as  it  were,  for  their 
country,  sate  themselves  down  in  their  ivory 
chairs  in  the  forum,  and  in  that  posture  ex¬ 
pected  the  event. 

On  the  third  day  after  the  battle,  Brennus 
appeared  with  his  army  at  the  city,  and,  find¬ 
ing  the  gates  wide  open  and  no  guards  upon 
the  walls,  first  began  to  suspect  it  was  some 
design  or  stratagem,  never  dreaming  that  the 
Romans  were  in  so  desperate  a  condition.  But 
when  he  found  it  to  be  so  indeed,  he  entered 
at  the  Colline  gate,  and  took  Rome,  in  the 
three  hundred  and  sixtieth  year,  or  a  little 
more,  after  it  was  built;  if,  indeed,  it  can  be 
supposed  probable  that  an  exact  chronological 
statement  has  been  preserved  of  events  which 
were  themselves  the  cause  of  chronological 
difficulties  about  things  of  later  date.  Of  the 
calamity  itself,  however,  and  of  the  fact  of  the 
capture,  some  faint  rumours  seem  to  have 
passed  at  the  time  into  Greece.  Heraclides 
Ponticus,  who  lived  not  long  after  these  times, 
in  his  book  upon  the  Soul,  relates  that  a  cer¬ 
tain  report  came  from  the  west,  that  an  army, 
proceeding  from  the  Hyperboreans,  had  taken 
a  Greek  city  called  Rome,  seated  somewhere 
upon  the  great  sea.  But  I  do  not  wonder  that 
so  fabulous  and  high-flown  an  author  as 
Heraclides  should  embellish  the  truth  of  the 
story  with  expressions  about  Hyperboreans 
and  the  great  sea.  Aristode  the  philosopher 
appears  to  have  heard  a  correct  statement  of 
the  taking  of  the  city  by  the  Gauls,  but  he 
calls  its  deliverer  Lucius;  whereas  Camillus’s 
surname  was  not  Lucius,  but  Marcus.  But 
this  is  a  matter  of  conjecture. 

Brennus,  having  taken  possession  of  Rome, 
set  a  strong  guard  about  the  Capitol,  and,  go¬ 
ing  himself  down  into  the  forum,  was  there 
struck  with  amazement  at  the  sight  of  so 
many  men  sitting  in  that  order  and  silence, 
observing  that  they  neither  rose  at  his  coming, 
nor  so  much  as  changed  colour  or  counten¬ 
ance,  but  remained  without  fear  or  concern 
leaning  upon  their  staves,  and  sitting  quiedy, 
looking  at  each  other.  The  Gauls,  for  a  great 
while,  stood  wondering  at  the  strangeness  of 
the  sight,  not  daring  to  approach  or  touch 
them,  taking  them  for  an  assembly  of  superior 


111 

beings.  But  when  one,  bolder  than  the  rest, 
drew  near  to  Marcus  Papirius,  and,  putting 
forth  his  hand,  gendy  touched  his  chin  and 
stroked  his  long  beard,  Papirius  with  his  staff 
struck  him  a  severe  blow  on  the  head;  upon 
which  the  barbarian  drew  his  sword  and  slew 
him.  This  was  the  introduction  to  the  slaugh¬ 
ter;  for  the  rest,  following  his  example,  set 
upon  them  all  and  killed  them,  and  des¬ 
patched  all  others  that  came  in  their  way; 
and  so  went  on  to  the  sacking  and  pillaging 
the  houses,  which  they  continued  for  many 
days  ensuing.  Afterwards,  they  burnt  them 
down  to  the  ground  and  demolished  them,  be¬ 
ing  incensed  at  those  who  kept  the  Capitol, 
because  they  would  not  yield  to  summons; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  when  assailed,  had  re¬ 
pelled  them,  with  some  loss,  from  their  de¬ 
fences.  This  provoked  them  to  ruin  the  whole 
city,  and  to  put  to- the  sword  all  that  came  to 
their  hands,  young  and  old,  men,  women,  and 
children. 

And  now,  the  siege  of  the  Capitol  having 
lasted  a  good  while,  the  Gauls  began  to  be  in 
want  of  provision;  and  dividing  their  forces, 
part  of  them  stayed  with  their  king  at  the 
siege,  the  rest  went  to  forage  the  country,  rav¬ 
aging  the  towns  and  villages  where  they  came, 
but  not  all  together  in  a  body,  but  in  different 
squadrons  and  parties;  and  to  such  a  con¬ 
fidence  had  success  raised  them,  that  they 
carelessly  rambled  about  without  the  least  fear 
or  apprehension  of  danger. 

But  the  greatest  and  best  ordered  body  of 
their  forces  went  to  the  city  of  Ardea,  where 
Camillus  then  sojourned,  having,  ever  since 
his  leaving  Rome,  sequestered  himself  from 
all  business,  and  taken  to  a  private  life;  but 
now  he  began  to  rouse  up  himself,  and  con¬ 
sider  not  how  to  avoid  or  escape  the  enemy, 
but  to  find  out  an  opportunity  to  be  revenged 
upon  them.  And  perceiving  that  the  Ardea- 
tians  wanted  not  men,  but  rather  enterprise, 
through  the  inexperience  and  timidity  of  their 
officers,  he  began  to  speak  with  the  young 
men,  first  to  the  effect  that  they  ought  not  to 
ascribe  the  misfortune  of  the  Romans  to  the 
courage  of  their  enemy,  nor  attribute  the 
losses  they  sustained  by  rash  counsel  to  the 
conduct  of  men  who  had  no  title  to  victory; 
the  event  had  been  only  an  evidence  of  the 
power  of  fortune;  that  it  was  a  brave  thing 
even  with  danger  to  repel  a  foreign  and  bar¬ 
barous  invader  whose  end  in  conquering  was, 
like  fire,  to  lay  waste  and  destroy,  but  if  they 
would  be  courageous  and  resolute  he  was 


112 


ready  to  put  an  opportunity  into  their  hands 
to  gain  a  victory,  without  hazard  at  all. 

When  he  found  the  young  men  embraced 
the  thing,  he  went  to  the  magistrates  and 
council  of  the  city,  and,  having  persuaded 
them  also,  he  mustered  all  that  could  bear 
arms,  and  drew  them  up  within  the  walls, 
that  they  might  not  be  perceived  by  the  ene¬ 
my,  who  was  near;  who,  having  scoured  the 
country,  and  now  returned  heavy-laden  with 
booty,  lay  encamped  in  the  plains  in  a  careless 
and  negligent  posture,  so  that,  with  the  night 
ensuing  upon  debauch  and  drunkenness,  si¬ 
lence  prevailed  through  all  the  camp. 

When  Camillus  learned  this  from  his  scouts, 
he  drew  out  the  Ardeatians,  and  in  the  dead 
of  the  night,  passing  in  silence  over  the 
ground  that  lay  between,  came  up  to  their 
works,  and,  commanding  his  trumpets  to 
sound  and  his  men  to  shout  and  halloo,  he 
struck  terror  into  them  from  all  quarters; 
while  drunkenness  impeded  and  sleep  re¬ 
tarded  their  movements.  A  few,  whom  fear 
had  sobered,  getting  into  some  order,  for  a 
while  resisted;  and  so  died  with  their  weapons 
in  their  hands.  But  the  greatest  part  of  them, 
buried  in  wine  and  sleep,  were  surprised  with¬ 
out  their  arms,  and  despatched;  and  as  many 
of  them  as  by  the  advantage  of  the  night  got 
out  of  the  camp  were  the  next  day  found  scat¬ 
tered  abroad  and  wandering  in  the  fields,  and 
were  picked  up  by  the  horse  that  pursued 
them. 

The  fame  of  this  action  soon  flew  through 
the  neighbouring  cities,  and  stirred  up  the 
young  men  from  various  quarters  to  come  and 
join  themselves  with  him.  But  none  were  so 
much  concerned  as  those  Romans  who  es¬ 
caped  in  the  batde  of  Allia,  and  were  now  at 
Veii,  thus  lamenting  with  themselves,  “O 
heavens,  what  a  commander  has  Providence 
bereaved  Rome  of,  to  honour  Ardea  with  his 
actions!  And  that  city,  which  brought  forth 
and  nursed  so  great  a  man,  is  lost  and  gone, 
and  we,  destitute  of  a  leader  and  shut  up 
within  strange  walls,  sit  idle,  and  see  Italy 
ruined  before  our  eyes.  Come,  let  us  send  to 
the  Ardeatians  to  have  back  our  general,  or 
else,  with  weapons  in  our  hands,  let  us  go 
thither  to  him;  for  he  is  no  longer  a  banished 
man,  nor  we  citizens,  having  no  country  but 
what  is  in  the  possession  of  the  enemy.”  To 
this  they  all  agreed,  and  sent  to  Camillus  to  de¬ 
sire  him  to  take  the  command;  but  he  an¬ 
swered,  that  he  would  not,  until  they  that 
were  in  the  Capitol  should  legally  appoint 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

him;  for  he  esteemed  them,  so  long  as  they 
were  in  being,  to  be  his  country;  that  if  they 
should  command  him  he  would  readily  obey; 
but  against  their  consent  he  would  intermed¬ 
dle  with  nothing. 

When  this  answer  was  returned,  they  ad¬ 
mired  the  modesty  and  temper  of  Camillus; 
but  they  could  not  tell  how  to  find  a  mes¬ 
senger  to  carry  the  intelligence  to  the  Capitol, 
or  rather,  indeed,  it  seemed  altogether  impos¬ 
sible  for  any  one  to  get  to  the  citadel  whilst 
the  enemy  was  in  full  possession  of  the  city. 
But  among  the  young  men  there  was  one  Pon¬ 
tius  Cominius,  of  ordinary  birth,  but  ambi¬ 
tious  of  honour,  who  proffered  himself  to  run 
the  hazard,  and  took  no  letters  with  him  to 
those  in  the  Capitol,  lest,  if  he  were  inter¬ 
cepted,  the  enemy  might  learn  the  intentions 
of  Camillus;  but,  putting  on  a  poor  dress  and 
carrying  corks  under  it,  he  boldly  travelled 
the  greatest  part  of  the  way  by  day,  and  came 
to  the  city  when  it  was  dark.  The  bridge  he 
could  not  pass,  as  it  was  guarded  by  the  bar¬ 
barians;  so  that  taking  his  clothes,  which  were 
neither  many  nor  heavy,  and  binding  them 
about  his  head,  he  laid  his  body  upon  the 
corks,  and  swimming  with  them,  got  over  to 
the  city.  And  avoiding  those  quarters  where 
he  perceived  the  enemy  was  awake,  which  he 
guessed  at  by  the  lights  and  noise,  he  went  to 
the  Carmental  gate,  where  there  was  greatest 
silence,  and  where  the  hill  of  the  Capitol  is 
steepest  and  rises  with  craggy  and  broken 
rock. 

By  this  way  he  got  up,  though  with  much 
difficulty,  by  the  hollow  of  the  cliff,  and  pre¬ 
sented  himself  to  the  guards,  saluting  them, 
and  telling  them  his  name;  he  was  taken  in, 
and  carried  to  the  commanders.  And  a  senate 
being  immediately  called,  he  related  to  them 
in  order  the  victory  of  Camillus,  which  they 
had  not  heard  of  before,  and  the  proceedings 
of  the  soldiers,  urging  them  to  confirm  Camil¬ 
lus  in  the  command,  as  on  him  alone  all  their 
fellow-countrymen  outside  the  city  would 
rely.  Having  heard  and  consulted  of  the  mat¬ 
ter,  the  senate  declared  Camillus  dictator,  and 
sent  back  Pontius  the  same  way  that  he  came, 
who,  with  the  same  success  as  before,  got 
through  the  enemy  without  being  discovered, 
and  delivered  to  the  Romans  outside  the  deci¬ 
sion  of  the  senate,  who  joyfully  received  it.  Ca¬ 
millus,  on  his  arrival,  found  twenty  thousand 
of  them  ready  in  arms;  with  which  forces,  and 
those  confederates  he  brought  along  with  him, 
he  prepared  to  set  upon  the  enemy. 


CAMILLUS 

But  at  Rome  some  of  the  barbarians,  pass¬ 
ing  by  chance  near  the  place  at  which  Pontius 
by  night  had  got  into  the  Capitol,  spied  in 
several  places  marks  of  feet  and  hands,  where 
he  had  laid  hold  and  clambered,  and  places 
where  the  plants  that  grew  to  the  rock  had 
been  rubbed  off,  and  the  earth  had  slipped, 
and  went  accordingly  and  reported  it  to  the 
king,  who,  coming  in  person,  and  viewing  it, 
for  the  present  said  nothing,  but  in  the  eve¬ 
ning,  picking  out  such  of  the  Gauls  as  were 
nimblest  of  body,  and  by  living  in  the  moun¬ 
tains  were  accustomed  to  climb,  he  said  to 
them,  “The  enemy  themselves  have  shown  us 
a  way  how  to  come  at  them,  which  we  knew 
not  of  before,  and  have  taught  us  that  it  is  not 
so  difficult  and  impossible  but  that  men  may 
overcome  it.  It  would  be  a  great  shame,  hav¬ 
ing  begun  well,  to  fail  in  the  end,  and  to 
give  up  a  place  as  impregnable,  when  the  en¬ 
emy  himself  lets  us  see  the  way  by  which  it 
may  be  taken;  for  where  it  was  easy  for  one 
man  to  get  up,  it  will  not  be  hard  for  many, 
one  after  another;  nay,  when  many  shall  un¬ 
dertake  it,  they  will  be  aid  and  strength  to 
each  other.  Rewards  and  honours  shall  be  be¬ 
stowed  on  every  man  as  he  shall  acquit  him¬ 
self.” 

When  the  king  had  thus  spoken,  the  Gauls 
cheerfully  undertook  to  perform  it,  and  in  the 
dead  of  night  a  good  party  of  them  together, 
with  great  silence,  began  to  climb  the  rock, 
clinging  to  the  precipitous  and  difficult  ascent, 
which  yet  upon  trial  offered  a  way  to  them, 
and  proved  less  difficult  than  they  had  ex¬ 
pected.  So  that  the  foremost  of  them  having 
gained  the  top  of  all,  and  put  themselves  into 
order,  they  all  but  surprised  the  outworks, 
and  mastered  the  watch,  who  were  fast  asleep; 
for  neither  man  nor  dog  perceived  their  com¬ 
ing. 

But  there  were  sacred  geese  kept  near  the 
temple  of  Juno,  which  at  other  times  were 
plentifully  fed,  but  now,  by  reason  that  corn 
and  other  provisions  were  grown  scarce  for 
all,  were  but  in  a  poor  condition.  The  creature 
is  by  nature  of  quick  sense,  and  apprehensive 
of  the  least  noise,  so  that  these,  being  more¬ 
over  watchful  through  hunger,  and  resdess, 
immediately  discovered  the  coming  of  the 
Gauls,  and,  running  up  and  down  with  their 
noise  and  cackling,  they  raised  the  whole 
camp,  while  the  barbarians  on  the  other  side, 
perceiving  themselves  discovered,  no  longer 
endeavoured  to  conceal  their  attempt,  but  with 
shouting  and  violence  advanced  to  the  assault. 


113 

The  Romans,  every  one  in  haste  snatching 
up  the  next  weapon  that  came  to  hand,  did 
what  they  could  on  the  sudden  occasion.  Man¬ 
lius,  a  man  of  consular  dignity,  of  strong  body 
and  great  spirit,  was  the  first  that  made  head 
against  them,  and,  engaging  with  two  of  the 
enemy  at  once,  with  his  sword  cut  off  the  right 
arm  of  one  just  as  he  was  lifting  up  his  blade 
to  strike,  and,  running  his  target  full  in  the 
face  of  the  other,  tumbled  him  headlong  down 
the  steep  rock;  then  mounting  the  rampart, 
and  there  standing  with  others  that  came  run¬ 
ning  to  his  assistance,  drove  down  the  rest  of 
them,  who,  indeed,  to  begin,  had  not  been 
many,  and  did  nothing  worthy  of  so  bold  an 
attempt. 

The  Romans,  having  thus  escaped  this  dan¬ 
ger,  early  in  the  morning  took  the  captain  of 
the  watch  and  flung  him  down  the  rock  upon 
the  heads  of  their  enemies,  and  to  Manlius  for 
his  victory  voted  a  reward,  intended  more  for 
honour  than  advantage,  bringing  him,  each 
man  of  them  as  much  as  he  received  for  his 
daily  allowance,  which  was  half  a  pound  of 
bread  and  one  eighth  of  a  pint  of  wine. 

Henceforward,  the  affairs  of  the  Gauls  were 
daily  in  a  worse  and  worse  condition;  they 
wanted  provisions,  being  withheld  from  for¬ 
aging  through  fear  of  Camillus,  and  sickness 
also  was  amongst  them,  occasioned  by  the 
number  of  carcases  that  lay  in  heaps  unburied. 
Being  lodged  among  the  ruins,  the  ashes, 
which  were  very  deep,  blown  about  by  the 
winds  and  combining  with  the  sultry  heats, 
breathed  up,  so  to  say,  a  dry  and  searching 
air,  the  inhalation  of  which  was  destructive  to 
their  health.  But  the  chief  cause  was  the 
change  from  their  natural  climate,  coming  as 
they  did  out  of  shady  and  hilly  countries, 
abounding  in  means  of  shelter  from  the  heat, 
to  lodge  in  low,  and,  in  the  autumn  season, 
very  unhealthy  ground;  added  to  which  was 
the  length  and  tediousness  of  the  siege,  as 
they  had  now  sate  seven  months  before  the 
Capitol.  There  was,  therefore,  a  great  destruc¬ 
tion  among  them,  and  the  number  of  the 
dead  grew  so  great  that  the  living  gave  up 
burying  them.  Neither,  indeed,  were  things 
on  that  account  any  better  with  the  besieged, 
for  famine  increased  upon  them,  and  despond¬ 
ency  with  not  hearing  anything  of  Camillus, 
it  being  impossible  to  send  any  one  to  him,  the 
city  was  so  guarded  by  the  barbarians. 

Things  being  in  this  sad  condition  on  both 
sides,  a  motion  of  treaty  was  made  at  first  by 
some  of  the  outposts,  as  they  happened  to  speak 


114 


with  one  another;  which  being  embraced  by 
the  leading  men,  Sulpicius,  tribune  of  the 
Romans,  came  to  a  parley  with  Brennus,  in 
which  it  was  agreed,  that  the  Romans  laying 
down  a  thousand  weight  of  gold,  the  Gauls 
upon  the  receipt  of  it  should  immediately  quit 
the  city  and  territories.  The  agreement  being 
confirmed  by  oath  on  both  sides,  and  the  gold 
brought  forth,  the  Gauls  used  false  dealing  in 
the  weights,  secredy  at  first,  but  afterwards 
openly  pulled  back  and  disturbed  the  balance; 
at  which  the  Romans  indignandy  complain¬ 
ing,  Brennus,  in  a  scoffing  and  insulting  man¬ 
ner,  pulled  off  his  sword  and  belt,  and  threw 
them  both  into  the  scales;  and  when  Sulpicius 
asked  what  that  meant,  “What  should  it 
mean,”  says  he,  “but  woe  to  the  conquered?” 
which  afterwards  became  a  proverbial  saying. 

As  for  the  Romans,  some  were  so  incensed 
that  they  were  for  taking  their  gold  back 
again  and  returning  to  endure  the  siege.  Oth¬ 
ers  were  for  passing  by  and  dissembling  a  pet¬ 
ty  injury,  and  not  to  account  that  the  indig¬ 
nity  of  the  thing  lay  in  paying  more  than  was 
due,  since  the  paying  anything  at  all  was  itself 
a  dishonour  only  submitted  to  as  a  necessity  of 
the  times. 

Whilst  this  difference  remained  still  unset¬ 
tled,  both  amongst  themselves  and  with  the 
Gauls,  Camillus  was  at  the  gates  with  his 
army;  and  having  learned  what  was  going  on, 
commanded  the  main  body  of  his  forces  to 
follow  slowly  after  him  in  good  order,  and 
himself  with  the  choicest  of  his  men  hastening 
on,  went  at  once  to  the  Romans;  where  all 
giving  way  to  him,  and  receiving  him  as  their 
sole  magistrate,  with  profound  silence  and  or¬ 
der,  he  took  the  gold  out  of  the  scales,  and  de¬ 
livered  it  to  his  officers,  and  commanded  the 
Gauls  to  take  their  weights  and  scales  and  de¬ 
part;  saying  that  it  was  customary  with  the 
Romans  to  deliver  their  country  with  iron, 
not  with  gold. 

And  when  Brennus  began  to  rage,  and  say 
that  he  was  unjusdy  dealt  with  in  such  a 
breach  of  contract,  Camillus  answered  that  it 
was  never  legally  made,  and  the  agreement  of 
no  force  or  obligation;  for  that  himself  being 
declared  dictator,  and  there  being  no  other 
magistrate  by  law,  the  engagement  had  been 
made  with  men  who  had  no  power  to  enter 
into  it;  but  now  they  might  say  anything  they 
had  to  urge,  for  he  was  come  with  full  power 
by  law  to  grant  pardon  to  such  as  should  ask 
it,  or  inflict  punishment  on  the  guilty,  if  they 
did  not  repent. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

At  this,  Brennus  broke  into  violent  anger, 
and  an  immediate  quarrel  ensued;  both  sides 
drew  their  swords  and  attacked,  but  in  con¬ 
fusion,  as  could  not  be  otherwise  amongst 
houses,  and  in  narrow  lanes  and  places  where 
it  was  impossible  to  form  in  any  order.  But 
Brennus,  presendy  recollecting  himself,  called 
off  his  men,  and,  with  the  loss  of  a  few  only, 
brought  them  to  their  camp;  and  rising  in  the 
night  with  all  his  forces,  left  the  city,  and,  ad¬ 
vancing  about  eight  miles,  encamped  upon  the 
way  to  Gabii. 

As  soon  as  day  appeared,  Camillus  came  up 
with  him,  splendidly  armed  himself,  and  his 
soldiers  full  of  courage  and  confidence;  and 
there  engaging  with  him  in  a  sharp  conflict, 
which  lasted  a  long  while,  overthrew  his  army 
with  great  slaughter,  and  took  their  camp.  Of 
those  that  fled,  some  were  presendy  cut  off  by 
the  pursuers;  others,  and  these  were  the  great¬ 
est  number,  dispersed  hither  and  thither,  and 
were  despatched  by  the  people  that  came  sally¬ 
ing  out  from  the  neighbouring  towns  and 
villages. 

Thus  Rome  was  strangely  taken,  and  more 
strangely  recovered,  having  been  seven  whole 
months  in  the  possession  of  the  barbarians, 
who  entered  her  a  little  after  the  Ides  of  July, 
and  were  driven  out  about  the  Ides  of  Feb¬ 
ruary  following.  Camillus  triumphed,  as  he 
deserved,  having  saved  his  country  that  was 
lost,  and  brought  the  city,  so  to  say,  back 
again  to  itself.  For  those  that  had  fled  abroad, 
together  with  their  wives  and  children,  ac¬ 
companied  him  as  he  rode  in;  and  those  who 
had  been  shut  up  in  the  Capitol,  and  were 
reduced  almost  to  the  point  of  perishing  with 
hunger,  went  out  to  meet  him,  embracing 
each  other  as  they  met,  and  weeping  for  joy, 
and,  through  the  excess  of  the  present  plea¬ 
sure,  scarce  believing  in  its  truth.  And  when 
the  priests  and  ministers  of  the  gods  appeared 
bearing  the  sacred  things,  which  in  their  flight 
they  had  either  hid  on  the  spot,  or  conveyed 
away  with  them,  and  now  openly  showed  in 
safety,  the  citizens  who  saw  the  blessed  sight 
felt  as  if  with  these  the  gods  themselves  were 
again  returned  unto  Rome.  After  Camillus 
had  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  and  purified  the 
city  according  to  the  directions  of  those  prop¬ 
erly  instructed,  he  restored  the  existing  tem¬ 
ples,  and  erected  a  new  one  to  Rumour,  or 
Voice,  informing  himself  of  the  spot  in  which 
that  voice  from  heaven  came  by  night  to  Mar¬ 
cus  Caedicius,  foretelling  the  coming  of  the 
barbarian  army. 


CAMILLUS 

It  was  a  matter  of  difficulty,  and  a  hard 
task,  amidst  so  much  rubbish,  to  discover  and 
re-determine  the  consecrated  places;  but  by 
the  zeal  of  Camillus,  and  the  incessant  labour 
of  the  priests,  it  was  at  last  accomplished.  But 
when  it  came  also  to  rebuilding  the  city, 
which  was  wholly  demolished,  despondency 
seized  the  multitude,  and  a  backwardness  to 
engage  in  a  work  for  which  they  had  no  ma¬ 
terials;  at  a  time,  too,  when  they  rather  needed 
relief  and  repose  from  their  past  labours,  than 
any  new  demands  upon  their  exhausted 
strength  and  impaired  fortunes.  Thus  insens¬ 
ibly  they  turned  their  thoughts  again  towards 
Veii,  a  city  ready-built  and  well-provided,  and 
gave  an  opening  to  the  arts  of  flatterers  eager 
to  gratify  their  desires,  and  lent  their  ears  to 
seditious  language  flung  out  against  Camillus; 
as  that,  out  of  ambition  and  self-glory,  he 
withheld  them  from  a  city  fit  to  receive  them, 
forcing  them  to  live  in  the  midst  of  ruins,  and 
to  re-erect  a  pile  of  burnt  rubbish,  that  he 
might  be  esteemed  not  the  chief  magistrate 
only  and  general  of  Rome,  but,  to  the  exclu¬ 
sion  of  Romulus,  its  founder  also.  The  senate, 
therefore,  fearing  a  sedition,  would  not  suffer 
Camillus,  though  desirous,  to  lay  down  his 
authority  within  the  year,  though  no  dictator 
had  ever  held  it  above  six  months. 

They  themselves,  meantime,  used  their  best 
endeavours,  by  kind  persuasions  and  familiar 
addresses,  to  encourage  and  appease  the  peo¬ 
ple,  showing  them  the  shrines  and  tombs  of 
their  ancestors,  calling  to  their  remembrance 
the  sacred  spots  and  holy  places  which  Romu¬ 
lus  and  Numa  or  any  other  of  their  kings  had 
consecrated  and  left  to  their  keeping;  and 
among  the  strongest  religious  arguments, 
urged  the  head,  newly  separated  from  the 
body,  which  was  found  in  laying  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  the  Capitol,  marking  it  as  a  place  des¬ 
tined  by  fate  to  be  the  head  of  all  Italy;  and 
the  holy  fire  which  had  just  been  rekindled 
again,  since  the  end  of  the  war,  by  the  vestal 
virgins;  “What  a  disgrace  it  would  be  to  them 
to  lose  and  extinguish  this,  leaving  the  city  it 
belonged  to,  to  be  either  inhabited  by  strang¬ 
ers  and  new-comers,  or  left  a  wild  pasture  for 
cattle  to  graze  on?”  Such  reasons  as  these, 
urged  with  complaint  and  expostulation, 
sometimes  in  private  upon  individuals,  and 
sometimes  in  their  public  assemblies,  were 
met,  on  the  other  hand,  by  laments  and  pro¬ 
testations  of  distress  and  helplessness;  en¬ 
treaties  that,  reunited  as  they  just  were,  after 
a  sort  of  shipwreck,  naked  and  destitute,  they 


115 

would  not  constrain  them  to  patch  up  the 
pieces  of  a  ruined  and  shattered  city,  when 
they  had  another  at  hand  ready-built  and  pre¬ 
pared. 

Camillus  thought  good  to  refer  it  to  general 
deliberation,  and  himself  spoke  largely  and 
earnestly  in  behalf  of  his  country,  as  also 
many  others.  At  last,  calling  to  Lucius  Lucre¬ 
tius,  whose  place  it  was  to  speak  first,  he  com¬ 
manded  him  to  give  his  sentence,  and  the  rest 
as  they  followed,  in  order.  Silence  being  made, 
and  Lucretius  just  about  to  begin,  by  chance 
a  centurion  passing  by  outside  with  his  com¬ 
pany  of  the  day-guard  called  out  with  a  loud 
voice  to  the  ensign-bearer  to  halt  and  fix  his 
standard,  for  this  was  the  best  place  to  stay  in. 
This  voice,  coming  in  that  moment  of  time, 
and  at  that  crisis  of  uncertainty  and  anxiety 
for  the  future,  was  taken  as  a  direction  what 
was  to  be  done;  so  that  Lucretius,  assuming 
an  attitude  of  devotion,  gave  sentence  in  con¬ 
currence  with  the  gods,  as  he  said,  as  likewise 
did  all  that  followed. 

Even  among  the  common  people  it  created 
a  wonderful  change  of  feeling;  every  one  now 
cheered  and  encouraged  his  neighbour,  and 
set  himself  to  the  work,  proceeding  in  it,  how¬ 
ever,  not  by  any  regular  lines  or  divisions,  but 
every  one  pitching  upon  that  plot  of  ground 
which  came  next  to  hand,  or  best  pleased  his 
fancy;  by  which  haste  and  hurry  in  building, 
they  constructed  their  city  in  narrow  and  ill- 
designed  lanes,  and  with  houses  huddled  to¬ 
gether  one  upon  another;  for  it  is  said  that 
within  the  compass  of  the  year  the  whole  city 
was  built  up  anew,  both  in  its  public  walls 
and  private  buildings. 

The  persons,  however,  appointed  by  Camil¬ 
lus  to  resume  and  mark  out,  in  this  general 
confusion,  all  consecrated  places,  coming,  in 
their  way  round  the  Palatium,  to  the  chapel 
of  Mars,  found  the  chapel  itself  indeed  de¬ 
stroyed  and  burnt  to  the  ground,  like  every¬ 
thing  else,  by  the  barbarians;  but  whilst  they 
were  clearing  the  place,  and  carrying  away 
the  rubbish,  lit  upon  Romulus’s  augural  staff, 
buried  under  a  great  heap  of  ashes.  This  sort 
of  staff  is  crooked  at  one  end,  and  is  called 
lituus;  they  make  use  of  it  in  quartering  out 
the  regions  of  the  heavens  when  engaged  in 
divination  from  the  flight  of  birds;  Romulus, 
who  was  himself  a  great  diviner,  made  use  of 
it.  But  when  he  disappeared  from  the  earth, 
the  priests  took  his  staff  and  kept  it,  as  other 
holy  things,  from  the  touch  of  man;  and 
when  they  now  found  that,  whereas  all  other 


116 


things  were  consumed,  this  staff  had  alto¬ 
gether  escaped  the  flames,  they  began  to  con¬ 
ceive  happier  hopes  of  Rome,  and  to  augur 
from  this  token  its  future  everlasting  safety. 

And  now  they  had  scarcely  got  a  breathing 
time  from  their  trouble,  when  a  new  war 
came  upon  them;  and  the  fiEquians,  Volscians, 
and  Latins  all  at  once  invaded  their  territories, 
and  the  Tuscans  besieged  Sutrium,  their  con¬ 
federate  city.  The  military  tribunes  who  com¬ 
manded  the  army,  and  were  encamped  about 
the  hill  Maecius,  being  closely  besieged  by  the 
Latins,  and  the  camp  in  danger  to  be  lost, 
sent  to  Rome,  where  Camillus  was  a  third 
time  chosen  dictator. 

Of  this  war  two  different  accounts  are 
given;  I  shall  begin  with  the  more  fabulous. 
They  say  that  the  Latins  (whether  out  of  pre¬ 
tence,  or  a  real  design  to  revive  the  ancient  re¬ 
lationship  of  the  two  nations)  sent  to  desire 
of  the  Romans  some  free-born  maidens  in 
marriage;  that  when  the  Romans  were  at  a 
loss  how  to  determine  (for  on  one  hand  they 
dreaded  a  war,  having  scarcely  yet  setded  and 
recovered  themselves,  and  on  the  other  side 
suspected  that  this  asking  of  wives  was,  in 
plain  terms,  nothing  else  but  a  demand  for 
hostages,  though  covered  over  with  the  spe¬ 
cious  name  of  intermarriage  and  alliance),  a 
certain  handmaid,  by  name  Tutula,  or,  as 
some  call  her,  Philotis,  persuaded  the  magis¬ 
trates  to  send  with  her  some  of  the  most 
youthful  and  best-looking  maid-servants,  in 
the  bridal  dress  of  noble  virgins,  and  leave  the 
rest  to  her  care  and  management;  that  the 
magistrates,  consenting,  chose  out  as  many  as 
she  thought  necessary  for  her  purpose,  and 
adorning  them  with  gold  and  rich  clothes,  de¬ 
livered  them  to  the  Latins,  who  were  en¬ 
camped  not  far  from  the  city;  that  at  night 
the  rest  stole  away  the  enemy’s  swords,  but 
Tutula  or  Philotis,  getting  to  the  top  of  a  wild 
fig-tree,  and  spreading  out  a  thick  woollen 
cloth  behind  her,  held  out  a  torch  towards 
Rome,  which  was  the  signal  concerted  be¬ 
tween  her  and  the  commanders,  without  the 
knowledge,  however,  of  any  other  of  the  citi¬ 
zens,  which  was  the  reason  that  their  issuing 
out  from  the  city  was  tumultuous,  the  officers 
pushing  their  men  on,  and  they  calling  upon 
one  another’s  names,  and  scarce  able  to  bring 
themselves  into  order;  that  setting  upon  the 
enemy’s  works,  who  either  were  asleep  or  ex¬ 
pected  no  such  matter,  they  took  the  camp 
and  destroyed  most  of  them;  and  that  this 
was  done  on  the  Nones  of  July,  which  was 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

then  called  Quintilis,  and  that  the  feast  that  is 
observed  on  that  day  is  a  commemoration  of 
what  was  then  done. 

For  in  it,  first,  they  run  out  of  the  city  in 
great  crowds,  and  call  out  aloud  several  fa¬ 
miliar  and  common  names,  Caius,  Marcus, 
Lucius,  and  the  like,  in  representation  of  the 
way  in  which  they  called  to  one  another  when 
they  went  out  in  such  haste.  In  the  next  place, 
the  maid-servants,  gaily  dressed,  run  about, 
playing  and  jesting  upon  all  they  meet,  and 
amongst  themselves,  also,  use  a  kind  of  skir¬ 
mishing,  to  show  they  helped  in  the  conflict 
against  the  Latins;  and  while  eating  and 
drinking,  they  sit  shaded  over  with  boughs  of 
wild  fig-tree,  and  the  day  they  call  Nonae  Cap- 
rotinae,  as  some  think  from  that  wild  fig-tree 
on  which  the  maid-servant  held  up  her  torch, 
the  Roman  name  for  a  wild  fig-tree  being  ca - 
prtficus.  Others  refer  most  of  what  is  said  or 
done  at  this  feast  to  the  fate  of  Romulus,  for, 
on  this  day,  he  vanished  outside  the  gates  in  a 
sudden  darkness  and  storm  (some  think  it  an 
eclipse  of  the  sun),  and  from  this  the  day  was 
caller  Nonae  Caprotinae,  the  Latin  for  a  goat 
being  capra,  and  the  place  where  he  disap¬ 
peared  having  the  name  of  Goat’s  Marsh,  as  is 
stated  in  his  life. 

But  the  general  stream  of  writers  prefer  the 
other  account  of  this  war,  which  they  thus  re¬ 
late.  Camillus,  being  the  third  time  chosen 
dictator,  and  learning  that  the  army  under  the 
tribunes  was  besieged  by  the  Latins  and  Vol¬ 
scians,  was  constrained  to  arm,  not  only  those 
under,  but  also  those  over,  the  age  of  service; 
and  taking  a  large  circuit  round  the  mountain 
Maecius,  undiscovered  by  the  enemy,  lodged 
his  army  on  their  rear,  and  then  by  many 
fires  gave  notice  of  his  arrival.  The  besieged, 
encouraged  by  this,  prepared  to  sally  forth  and 
join  battle;  but  the  Latins  and  Volscians,  fear¬ 
ing  this  exposure  to  an  enemy  on  both  sides, 
drew  themselves  within  their  works,  and  for¬ 
tified  their  camp  with  a  strong  palisade  of 
trees  on  every  side,  resolving  to  wait  for  more 
supplies  from  home,  and  expecting,  also,  the 
assistance  of  the  Tuscans,  their  confederates. 

Camillus,  detecting  their  object,  and  fearing 
to  be  reduced  to  the  same  position  to  which 
he  had  brought  them,  namely,  to  be  besieged 
himself,  resolved  to  lose  no  time:  and  finding 
their  rampart  was  all  of  timber,  and  observing 
that  a  strong  wind  constandy  at  sun-rising 
blew  off  from  the  mountains,  after  having 
prepared  a  quantity  of  combustibles,  about 
break  of  day  he  drew  forth  his  forces,  com- 


CAMILLUS 

manding  a  part  with  their  missiles  .to  assault 
the  enemy  with  noise  and  shouting  on  the 
other  quarter,  whilst  he,  with  those  that  were 
to  fling  in  the  fire,  went  to  that  side  of  the 
enemy’s  camp  to  which  the  wind  usually  blew, 
and  there  waited  his  opportunity.  When  the 
skirmish  was  begun,  and  the  sun  risen,  and  a 
strong  wind  set  in  from  the  mountains,  he 
gave  the  signal  of  onset;  and  heaving  in  an 
infinite  quantity  of  fiery  matter,  filled  all  their 
rampart  with  it,  so  that  the  flame  being  fed 
by  the  close  timber  and  wooden  palisades, 
went  on  and  spread  into  all  quarters.  The 
Latins,  having  nothing  ready  to  keep  it  off  or 
extinguish  it,  when  the  camp  was  now  almost 
full  of  fire,  were  driven  back  within  a  very 
small  compass,  and  at  last  forced  by  necessity 
to  come  into  their  enemy’s  hands,  who  stood 
before  the  works  ready  armed  and  prepared 
to  receive  them;  of  these  very  few  escaped, 
while  those  that  stayed  in  the  camp  were  all 
a  prey  to  the  fire,  until  the  Romans,  to  gain 
the  pillage,  extinguished  it. 

These  things  performed,  Camillus,  leaving 
his  son  Lucius  in  the  camp  to  guard  the  pris¬ 
oners  and  secure  the  booty,  passed  into  the 
enemy’s  country,  where,  having  taken  the  city 
of  the  iTquians  and  reduced  the  Volscians  to 
obedience,  he  then  immediately  led  his  army 
to  Sutrium,  not  having  heard  what  had  be¬ 
fallen  the  Sutrians,  but  making  haste  to  assist 
them,  as  if  they  were  still  in  danger  and  be¬ 
sieged  by  the  Tuscans.  They,  however,  had 
already  surrendered  their  city  to  their  enemies, 
and  destitute  of  all  things,  with  nothing  left 
but  their  clothes,  met  Camillus  on  the  way, 
leading  their  wives  and  children,  and  bewail¬ 
ing  their  misfortune.  Camillus  himself  was 
struck  with  compassion,  and  perceiving  the 
soldiers  weeping,  and  commiserating  their 
case,  while  the  Sutrians  hung  about  and  clung 
to  them,  resolved  not  to  defer  revenge,  but 
that  very  day  to  lead  his  army  to  Sutrium; 
conjecturing  that  the  enemy,  having  just  taken 
a  rich  and  plentiful  city,  without  an  enemy 
left  within  it,  nor  any  from  without  to  be  ex¬ 
pected,  would  be  found  abandoned  to  enjoy¬ 
ment  and  unguarded. 

Neither  did  his  opinion  fail  him;  he  not 
only  passed  through  their  country  without 
discovery,  but  came  up  to  their  very  gates  and 
possessed  himself  of  the  walls,  not  a  man  be¬ 
ing  left  to  guard  them,  but  their  whole  army 
scattered  about  in  the  houses,  drinking  and 
making  merry.  Nay,  when  at  last  they  did 
perceive  that  the  enemy  had  seized  the  city, 


117 

they  were  so  overloaded  with  meat  and  wine, 
that  few  were  able  so  much  as  to  endeavour  to 
escape,  but  either  waited  shamefully  for  their 
death  within  doors,  or  surrendered  themselves 
to  the  conqueror.  Thus  the  city  of  the  Sutrians 
was  twice  taken  in  one  day;  and  they  who 
were  in  possession  lost  it,  and  they  who  had 
lost  regained  it,  alike  by  the  means  of  Camil¬ 
lus.  For  all  which  actions  he  received  a  tri¬ 
umph,  which  brought  him  no  less  honour  and 
reputation  than  the  two  former  ones;  for  those 
citizens  who  before  most  regarded  him  with 
an  evil  eye,  and  ascribed  his  successes  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  luck  rather  than  real  merit,  were  com¬ 
pelled  by  these  last  acts  of  his  to  allow  the 
whole  honour  to  his  great  abilities  and  energy. 

Of  all  the  adversaries  and  enviers  of  his 
glory,  Marcus  Manlius  was  the  most  distin¬ 
guished,  he  who  first  drove  back  the  Gauls 
when  they  made  their  night  attack  upon  the 
Capitol,  and  who  for  that  reason  had  been 
named  Capitolinus.  This  man,  affecting  the 
first  place  in  the  commonwealth,  and  not  able 
by  noble  ways  to  outdo  Camillus’s  reputation, 
took  that  ordinary  course  towards  usurpation 
of  absolute  power,  namely,  to  gain  the  multi¬ 
tude,  those  of  them  especially  that  were  in 
debt;  defending  some  by  pleading  their  causes 
against  their  creditors,  rescuing  others  by 
force,  and  not  suffering  the  law  to  proceed 
against  them;  insomuch  that  in  a  short  time 
he  got  great  numbers  of  indigent  people  about 
him,  whose  tumults  and  uproars  in  the  forum 
struck  terror  into  the  principal  citizens.  After 
that  Quintius  Capitolinus,  who  was  made  dic¬ 
tator  to  suppress  these  disorders,  had  com¬ 
mitted  Manlius  to  prison,  the  people  immedi¬ 
ately  changed  their  apparel,  a  thing  never 
done  but  in  great  and  public  calamities,  and 
the  senate,  fearing  some  tumult,  ordered  him 
to  be  released. 

He,  however,  when  set  at  liberty,  changed 
not  his  course,  but  was  rather  the  more  in¬ 
solent  in  his  proceedings,  filling  the  whole 
city  with  faction  and  sedition.  They  chose, 
therefore,  Camillus  again  military  tribune; 
and  a  day  being  appointed  for  Manlius  to  an¬ 
swer  to  his  charge,  the  prospect  from  the 
place  where  his  trial  was  held  proved  a  great 
impediment  to  his  accusers,  for  the  very  spot 
where  Manlius  by  night  fought  with  the  Gauls 
overlooked  the  Forum  from  the  Capitol,  so 
that,  stretching  forth  his  hands  that  way,  and 
weeping,  he  called  to  their  remembrance  his 
past  actions,  raising  compassion  in  all  that  be¬ 
held  him.  Insomuch  that  the  judges  were  at 


118 


a  loss  what  to  do,  and  several  times  adjourned 
the  trial,  unwilling  to  acquit  him  of  the  crime, 
which  was  sufficiently  proved,  and  yet  unable 
to  execute  the  law  while  his  noble  action  re¬ 
mained,  as  it  were,  before  their  eyes.  Camillus, 
considering  this,  transferred  the  court  outside 
the  gate  to  the  Peteline  Grove,  from  whence 
there  is  no  prospect  of  the  Capitol.  Here  his 
accuser  went  on  with  his  charge,  and  his 
judges  were  capable  of  remembering  and  duly 
resenting  his  guilty  deeds.  He  was  convicted, 
carried  to  the  Capitol,  and  flung  headlong 
from  the  rock;  so  that  one  and  the  same  spot 
was  thus  the  witness  of  his  greatest  glory,  and 
monument  of  his  most  unfortunate  end.  The 
Romans,  besides,  razed  his  house,  and  built 
there  a  temple  to  the  goddess  they  call  Moneta, 
ordaining  for  the  future  that  none  of  the  pa¬ 
trician  order  should  ever  dwell  on  the  Cap- 
itoline. 

And  now  Camillus,  being  called  to  his  sixth 
tribuneship,  desired  to  be  excused,  as  being 
aged,  and  perhaps  not  unfearful  of  the  malice 
of  fortune,  and  those  reverses  which  seem  to 
ensue  upon  great  prosperity.  But  the  most  ap¬ 
parent  pretence  was  the  weakness  of  his  body, 
for  he  happened  at  that  time  to  be  sick;  the 
people,  however,  would  admit  of  no  excuses, 
but,  crying  that  they  wanted  not  his  strength 
for  horse  or  for  foot  service,  but  only  his  coun¬ 
sel  and  conduct,  constrained  him  to  undertake 
the  command,  and  with  one  of  his  fellow- 
tribunes  to  lead  the  army  immediately  against 
the  enemy.  These  were  the  Praenestines  and 
Volscians,  who,  with  large  forces,  were  laying 
waste  the  territory  of  the  Roman  confederates. 
Having  marched  out  with  his  army,  he  sat 
down  and  encamped  near  the  enemy,  meaning 
himself  to  protract  the  war,  or  if  there  should 
come  any  necessity  or  occasion  of  fighting,  in 
the  meantime  to  regain  his  strength. 

But  Lucius  Furius,  his  colleague,  carried 
away  with  the  desire  of  glory,  was  not  to  be 
held  in,  but,  impatient  to  give  battle,  inflamed 
the  inferior  officers  of  the  army  with  the  same 
eagerness;  so  that  Camillus,  fearing  he  might 
seem  out  of  envy  to  be  wishing  to  rob  the 
young  men  of  the  glory  of  a  noble  exploit, 
consented,  though  unwillingly,  that  he  should 
draw  out  the  forces,  whilst  himself,  by  reason 
of  weakness,  stayed  behind  with  a  few  in  the 
camp.  Lucius,  engaging  rashly,  was  discom¬ 
fited,  when  Camillus,  perceiving  the  Romans 
to  give  ground  and  fly,  could  not  contain  him¬ 
self,  but,  leaping  from  his  bed,  with  those  he 
had  about  him  ran  to  meet  them  at  the  gates 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

of  the  camp,  making  his  way  through  the 
flyers  to  oppose  the  pursuers;  so  that  those 
who  had  got  within  the  camp  turned  back 
at  once  and  followed  him,  and  those  that  came 
flying  from  without  made  head  again  and 
gathered  about  him,  exhorting  one  another 
not  to  forsake  their  general.  Thus  the  enemy, 
for  that  time,  was  stopped  in  his  pursuit.  The 
next  day  Camillus,  drawing  out  his  forces  and 
joining  battle  with  them,  overthrew  them  by 
main  force,  and  following  close  upon  them, 
entered  pell-mell  with  them  into  their  camp, 
and  took  it,  slaying  the  greatest  part  of  them. 

Afterwards,  having  heard  that  the  city  Sat- 
ricum  was  taken  by  the  Tuscans,  and  the  in¬ 
habitants,  all  Romans,  put  to  the  sword,  he 
sent  home  to  Rome  the  main  body  of  his 
forces  and  heaviest-armed,  and  taking  with 
him  the  lightest  and  most  vigorous  soldiers, 
set  suddenly  upon  the  Tuscans,  who  were  in 
the  possession  of  the  city,  and  mastered  them, 
slaying  some  and  expelling  the  rest;  and  so, 
returning  to  Rome  with  great  spoils,  gave 
signal  evidence  of  their  superior  wisdom, 
who,  not  mistrusting  the  weakness  and  age  of 
a  commander  endued  with  courage  and  con¬ 
duct,  had  rather  chosen  him  who  was  sickly 
and  desirous  to  be  excused,  than  younger  men 
who  were  forward  and  ambitious  to  com¬ 
mand. 

When,  therefore,  the  revolt  of  the  Tus- 
culans  was  reported,  they  gave  Camillus  the 
charge  of  reducing  them,  choosing  one  of  his 
five  colleagues  to  go  with  him.  And  when 
every  one  was  eager  for  the  place,  contrary 
to  the  expectation  of  all,  he  passed  by  the  rest 
and  chose  Lucius  Furius,  the  very  same  man 
who  lately,  against  the  judgment  of  Camillus, 
had  rashly  hazarded  and  nearly  lost  a  battle; 
willing,  as  it  should  seem,  to  dissemble  that 
miscarriage,  and  free  him  from  the  shame 
of  it. 

The  Tusculans,  hearing  of  Camillus’s  com- 
ing  against  them,  made  a  cunning  attempt  at 
revoking  their  act  of  revolt;  their  fields,  as 
in  times  of  highest  peace,  were  full  of  plough¬ 
men  and  shepherds;  their  gates  stood  wide 
open,  and  their  children  were  being  taught  in 
the  schools;  of  the  people,  such  as  were  trades¬ 
men,  he  found  in  their  workshops,  busied 
about  their  several  employments,  and  the  bet¬ 
ter  sort  of  citizens  walking  in  the  public  places 
in  their  ordinary  dress;  the  magistrates  hur¬ 
ried  about  to  provide  quarters  for  the  Romans, 
as  if  they  stood  in  fear  of  no  danger  and  were 
conscious  of  no  fault.  Which  arts,  though  they 


CAMILLUS 

could  not  dispossess  Camillus  of  the  conviction 
he  had  of  their  treason,  yet  induced  some  com¬ 
passion  for  their  repentance;  he  commanded 
them  to  go  to  the  senate  and  deprecate  their 
anger,  and  joined  himself  as  an  intercessor  in 
their  behalf,  so  that  their  city  was  acquitted  of 
all  guilt  and  admitted  to  Roman  citizenship. 
These  were  the  most  memorable  actions  of  his 
sixth  tribuneship. 

After  these  things,  Licinius  Stolo  raised  a 
great  sedition  in  the  city,  and  brought  the 
people  to  dissension  with  the  senate,  contend¬ 
ing,  that  of  two  consuls  one  should  be  chosen 
out  of  the  commons,  and  not  both  out  of  the 
patricians.  Tribunes  of  the  people  were  chosen, 
but  the  election  of  consuls  was  interrupted 
and  prevented  by  the  people.  And  as  this  ab¬ 
sence  of  any  supreme  magistrate  was  leading 
to  yet  further  confusion,  Camillus  was  the 
fourth  time  created  dictator  by  the  senate, 
sorely  against  the  people’s  will,  and  not  alto¬ 
gether  in  accordance  with  his  own;  he  had 
little  desire  for  a  conflict  with  men  whose 
past  services  entitled  them  to  tell  him  that  he 
had  achieved  far  greater  actions  in  war  along 
with  them  than  in  politics  with  the  patri¬ 
cians,  who,  indeed,  had  only  put  him  forward 
now  out  of  envy;  that,  if  successful,  he  might 
crush  the  people,  or  failing,  be  crushed  him¬ 
self. 

However,  to  provide  as  good  a  remedy  as 
he  could  for  the  present,  knowing  the  day  on 
which  the  tribunes  of  the  people  intended  to 
prefer  the  law,  he  appointed  it  by  proclama¬ 
tion  for  a  general  muster,  and  called  the  people 
from  the  Forum  into  the  Campus,  threatening 
to  set  heavy  fines  upon  such  as  should  not  obey. 
On  the  other  side,  the  tribunes  of  the  people 
met  his  threats  by  solemnly  protesting  they 
would  fine  him  in  fifty  thousand  drachmas  of 
silver,  if  he  persisted  in  obstructing  the  people 
from  giving  their  suffrages  for  the  law. 

Whether  it  were,  then,  that  he  feared  an¬ 
other  banishment  or  condemnation,  which 
would  ill  become  his  age  and  past  great  ac¬ 
tions,  or  found  himself  unable  to  stem  the 
current  of  the  multitude,  which  ran  strong 
and  violent,  he  betook  himself,  for  the  present, 
to  his  house,  and  afterwards,  for  some  days 
together  professing  sickness,  finally  laid  down 
his  dictatorship.  The  senate  created  another 
dictator;  who,  choosing  Stolo,  leader  of  the 
sedition,  to  be  his  general  of  horse,  suffered 
that  law  to  be  enacted  and  ratified,  which  was 
most  grievous  to  the  patricians,  namely,  that 
no  person  whatsoever  should  possess  above 


119 

five  hundred  acres  of  land.  Stolo  was  much 
distinguished  by  the  victory  he  had  gained; 
but,  not  long  after,  was  found  himself  to 
possess  more  than  he  had  allowed  to  others, 
and  suffered  the  penalties  of  his  own  law. 

And  now  the  contention  about  election  of 
consuls  coming  on  (which  was  the  main  point 
and  original  cause  of  the  dissension,  and  had 
throughout  furnished  most  matter  of  division 
between  the  senate  and  the  people),  certain 
intelligence  arrived,  that  the  Gauls  again,  pro¬ 
ceeding  from  the  Adriatic  Sea,  were  marching 
in  vast  numbers  upon  Rome.  On  the  very 
heels  of  the  report  followed  manifest  acts  also 
of  hostility;  the  country  through  which  they 
marched  was  all  wasted,  and  such  as  by  flight 
could  not  make  their  escape  to  Rome  were 
dispersing  and  scattering  among  the  moun¬ 
tains. 

The  terror  of  this  war  quieted  the  sedition; 
nobles  and  commons,  senate  and  people  to¬ 
gether  unanimously  chose  Camillus  the  fifth 
time  dictator;  who,  though  very  aged,  not 
wanting  much  of  fourscore  years,  yet,  con¬ 
sidering  the  danger  and  necessity  of  his  coun¬ 
try,  did  not,  as  before,  pretend  sickness,  or  de¬ 
preciate  his  own  capacity,  but  at  once  under¬ 
took  the  charge  and  enrolled  soldiers.  And, 
knowing  that  the  great  force  of  the  barbarians 
lay  chiefly  in  their  swords,  with  which  they 
laid  about  them  in  a  rude  and  inartificial  man¬ 
ner,  hacking  and  hewing  the  head  and  shoul¬ 
ders,  he  caused  head-pieces  entire  of  iron  to  be 
made  for  most  of  his  men,  smoothing  and 
polishing  the  outside,  that  the  enemy’s  swords, 
lighting  upon  them,  might  either  slide  off  or 
be  broken;  and  fitted  also  their  shields  with  a 
little  rim  of  brass,  the  wood  itself  not  being 
sufficient  to  bear  off  the  blows.  Besides,  he 
taught  his  soldiers  to  use  their  long  javelins  in 
close  encounter,  and,  by  bringing  them  under 
their  enemy’s  swords,  to  receive  their  strokes 
upon  them. 

When  the  Gauls  drew  near,  about  the  river 
Anio,  dragging  a  heavy  camp  after  them,  and 
loaded  with  infinite  spoil,  Camillus  drew  forth 
his  forces,  and  planted  himself  upon  a  hill  of 
easy  ascent,  and  which  had  many  dips  in  it, 
with  the  object  that  the  greatest  part  of  his 
army  might  lie  concealed,  and  those  who 
appeared  might  be  thought  to  have  betaken 
themselves,  through  fear,  to  those  upper 
grounds.  And  the  more  to  increase  this  opinion 
in  them,  he  suffered  them,  without  any  dis¬ 
turbance,  to  spoil  and  pillage  even  to  his  very 
trenches,  keeping  himself  quiet  within  his 


120 

works,  which  were  well  fortified;  till,  at  last, 
perceiving  that  part  of  the  enemy  were  scat¬ 
tered  about  the  country  foraging,  and  that 
those  that  were  in  the  camp  did  nothing  day 
and  night  but  drink  and  revel,  in  the  night¬ 
time  he  drew  up  his  lightest-armed  men,  and 
sent  them  out  before  to  impede  the  enemy 
while  forming  into  order,  and  to  harass  them 
when  they  should  first  issue  out  of  their  camp; 
and  early  in  the  morning  brought  down  his 
main  body,  and  set  them  in  battle  array  in 
the  lower  grounds,  a  numerous  and  coura¬ 
geous  army,  not,  as  the  barbarians  had  sup¬ 
posed,  an  inconsiderable  and  fearful  divi¬ 
sion. 

The  first  thing  that  shook  the  courage  of 
the  Gauls  was,  that  their  enemies  had,  con¬ 
trary  to  their  expectation,  the  honour  of  being 
aggressors.  In  the  next  place,  the  light-armed 
men,  falling  upon  them  before  they  could  get 
into  their  usual  order  or  range  themselves  in 
their  proper  squadrons,  so  disturbed  and 
pressed  upon  them,  that  they  were  obliged  to 
fight  at  random,  without  any  order  at  all. 
But  at  last,  when  Camillus  brought  on  his 
heavy-armed  legions,  the  barbarians,  with 
their  swords  drawn,  went  vigorously  to  en¬ 
gage  them;  the  Romans,  however,  opposing 
their  javelins  and  receiving  the  force  of  their 
blows  on  those  parts  of  their  defences  which 
were  well  guarded  with  steel,  turned  the  edge 
of  their  weapons,  being  made  of  soft  and  ill- 
tempered  metal,  so  that  their  swords  bent  and 
doubled  up  in  their  hands;  and  their  shields 
were  pierced  through  and  through,  and  grew 
heavy  with  the  javelins  that  stuck  upon  them. 
And  thus  forced  to  quit  their  own  weapons, 
they  endeavoured  to  take  advantage  of  those 
of  their  enemies,  laid  hold  of  the  javelins  with 
their  hands,  and  tried  to  pluck  them  away. 
But  the  Romans,  perceiving  them  now  naked 
and  defenceless,  betook  themselves  to  their 
swords,  which  they  so  well  used,  that  in  a 
little  time  great  slaughter  was  made  in  the 
foremost  ranks,  while  the  rest  fled  over  all 
parts  of  the  level  country;  the  hills  and  upper 
grounds  Camillus  had  secured  beforehand, 
and  their  camp  they  knew  it  would  not  be 
difficult  for  the  enemy  to  take,  as,  through 
confidence  of  victory,  they  had  left  it  un¬ 
guarded. 

This  fight,  it  is  stated,  was  thirteen  years 
after  the  sacking  of  Rome;  and  from  hence¬ 
forward  the  Romans  took  courage,  and  sur¬ 
mounted  the  apprehensions  they  had  hitherto 
entertained  of  the  barbarians,  whose  previous 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

defeat  they  had  attributed  rather  to  pestilence 
and  a  concurrence  of  mischances  than  to  their 
own  superior  valour.  And,  indeed,  this  fear 
had  been  formerly  so  great  that  they  made  a 
law  that  priests  should  be  excused  from  ser¬ 
vice  in  war,  unless  in  an  invasion  from  the 
Gaul. 

This  was  the  last  military  action  that  ever 
Camillus  performed;  for  the  voluntary  sur¬ 
render  of  the  city  of  the  Velitrani  was  but  a 
mere  accessory  to  it.  But  the  greatest  of  all 
civil  contests,  and  the  hardest  to  be  managed, 
was  still  to  be  fought  out  against  the  people; 
who,  returning  home  full  of  victory  and  suc¬ 
cess,  insisted,  contrary  to  established  law,  to 
have  one  of  the  consuls  chosen  out  of  their 
own  body.  The  senate  strongly  opposed  it, 
and  would  not  suffer  Camillus  to  lay  down 
his  dictatorship,  thinking  that,  under  the 
shelter  of  his  great  name  and  authority,  they 
should  be  better  able  to  contend  for  the  power 
of  his  aristocracy. 

But  when  Camillus  was  sitting  upon  the 
tribunal,  despatching  public  affairs,  an  officer, 
sent  by  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  com¬ 
manded  him  to  rise  and  follow  him,  laying 
his  hand  upon  him,  as  ready  to  seize  and  carry 
him  away;  upon  which,  such  a  noise  and  tu¬ 
mult  as  was  never  heard  before  filled  the 
whole  Forum,  some  that  were  about  Camillus 
thrusting  the  officer  from  the  bench,  and  the 
multitude  below  calling  out  to  him  to  bring 
Camillus  down.  Being  at  a  loss  what  to  do  in 
these  difficulties,  he  yet  laid  not  down  his  au¬ 
thority,  but,  taking  the  senators  along  with 
him,  he  went  to  the  senate-house;  but  before 
he  entered,  besought  the  gods  that  they  would 
bring  these  troubles  to  a  happy  conclusion, 
solemnly  vowing,  when  the  tumult  was  ended, 
to  build  a  temple  to  Concord.  A  great  conflict 
of  opposite  opinions  arose  in  the  senate;  but, 
at  last,  the  most  moderate  and  most  acceptable 
to  the  people  prevailed,  and  consent  was  given, 
that  of  two  consuls,  one  should  be  chosen 
from  the  commonalty. 

When  the  dictator  proclaimed  this  deter¬ 
mination  of  the  senate  to  the  people,  at  the 
moment  pleased  and  reconciled  with  the  sen¬ 
ate,  as  indeed  could  not  otherwise  be,  they 
accompanied  Camillus  home,  with  all  expres¬ 
sions  and  acclamations  of  joy;  and  the  next 
day,  assembling  together,  they  voted  a  temple 
of  Concord  to  be  built,  according  to  Camil- 
lus’s  vow,  facing  the  assembly  and  the  forum; 
and  to  the  feasts,  called  the  Latin  holidays, 
they  added  one  day  more,  making  four  in  all; 


PERICLES 

and  ordained  that,  on  the  present  occasion,  the 
whole  people  of  Rome  should  sacrifice  with 
garlands  on  their  heads. 

In  the  election  of  consuls  held  by  Camillus, 
Marcus  yEmilius  was  chosen  of  the  patricians, 
and  Lucius  Sextius  the  first  of  the  common¬ 
alty;  and  this  was  the  last  of  all  Camillus’s  ac¬ 
tions.  In  the  year  following,  a  pestilential  sick- 


121 

ness  infected  Rome,  which,  besides  an  infinite 
number  of  the  common  people,  swept  away 
most  of  the  magistrates,  among  whom  was  Ca¬ 
millus;  whose  death  cannot  be  called  imma¬ 
ture,  if  we  consider  his  great  age,  or  greater  ac¬ 
tions,  yet  was  he  more  lamented  than  all  the 
rest  put  together  that  then  died  of  that  dis¬ 
temper. 


PERICLES 

49o?~42_9  b.c. 


C^sar  once,  seeing  some  wealthy  stran¬ 
gers  at  Rome,  carrying  up  and  down 
with  them  in  their  arms  and  bosoms 
young  puppy-dogs  and  monkeys,  embracing 
and  making  much  of  them,  took  occasion  not 
unnaturally  to  ask  whether  the  women  in 
their  country  were  not  used  to  bear  children; 
by  that  prince-like  reprimand  gravely  re¬ 
flecting  upon  persons  who  spend  and  lavish 
upon  brute  beasts  that  affection  and  kindness 
which  nature  has  implanted  in  us  to  be  be¬ 
stowed  on  those  of  our  own. kind.  With  like 
reason  may  we  blame  those  who  misuse  that 
love  of  inquiry  and  observation  which  nature 
has  implanted  in  our  souls,  by  expending  it 
on  objects  unworthy  of  the  attention  either 
of  their  eyes  or  their  ears,  while  they  disre¬ 
gard  such  as  are  excellent  in  themselves,  and 
would  do  them  good. 

The  mere  outward  sense,  being  passive  in 
responding  to  the  impression  of  the  objects 
that  come  in  its  way  and  strike  upon  it,  per¬ 
haps  cannot  help  entertaining  and  taking  no¬ 
tice  of  everything  that  addresses  it,  be  it  what 
it  will,  useful  or  unuseful;  but,  in  the  exercise 
of  his  mental  perception,  every  man,  if  he 
chooses,  has  a  natural  power  to  turn  himself 
upon  all  occasions,  and  to  change  and  shift 
with  the  greatest  ease  to  what  he  shall  himself 
judge  desirable.  So  that  it  becomes  a  man’s 
duty  to  pursue  and  make  after  the  best  and 
choicest  of  everything,  that  he  may  not  only 
employ  his  contemplation,  but  may  also  be 
improved  by  it.  For  as  that  colour  is  most  suit¬ 
able  to  the  eye  whose  freshness  and  pleasant¬ 
ness  stimulates  and  strengthens  the  sight,  so 
a  man  ought  to  apply  his  intellectual  percep¬ 
tion  to  such  objects  as,  with  the  sense  of  de¬ 
light,  are  apt  to  call  it  forth,  and  allure  it  to 
its  own  proper  good  and  advantage. 


Such  objects  we  find  in  the  acts  of  virtue, 
which  also  produce  in  the  minds  of  mere 
readers  about  them  an  emulation  and  eager¬ 
ness  that  may  lead  them  on  to  imitation.  In 
other  things  there  does  not  immediately  fol¬ 
low  upon  the  admiration  and  liking  of  the 
thing  done  any  strong  desire  of  doing  the  like. 
Nay,  many  times,  on  the  very  contrary,  when 
we  are  pleased  with  the  work,  we  slight  and 
set  little  by  the  workman  or  artist  himself,  as, 
for  instance,  in  perfumes  and  purple  dyes,  we 
are  taken  with  the  things  themselves  well 
enough,  but  do  not  think  dyers  and  perfumers 
otherwise  than  low  and  sordid  people.  It  was 
not  said  amiss  by  Antisthenes,  when  people 
told  him  that  one  Ismenias  was  an  excellent 
piper.  “It  may  be  so,”  said  he,  “but  he  is  but 
a  wretched  human  being,  otherwise  he  would 
not  have  been  an  excellent  piper.”  And  King 
Philip,  to  the  same  purpose,  told  his  son 
Alexander,  who  once  at  a  merry-meeting 
played  a  piece  of  music  charmingly  and  skil¬ 
fully,  “Are  you  not  ashamed,  son,  to  play  so 
well?”  For  it  is  enough  for  a  king  or  prince 
to  find  leisure  sometimes  to  hear  others  sing, 
and  he  does  the  muses  quite  honour  enough 
when  he  pleases  to  be  but  present,  while  others 
engage  in  such  exercises  and  trials  of  skill. 

He  who  busies  himself  in  mean  occupations 
produces,  in  the  very  pains  he  takes  about 
things  of  little  or  no  use,  an  evidence  against 
himself  of  his  negligence  and  indisposition  to 
what  is  really  good.  Nor  did  any  generous 
and  ingenuous  young  man,  at  the  sight  of  the 
statue  of  Jupiter  at  Pisa,  ever  desire  to  be  a 
Phidias,  or  on  seeing  that  of  Juno  at  Argos, 
long  to  be  a  Polyclitus,  or  feel  induced  by  his 
pleasure  in  their  poems  to  wish  to  be  an  Ana¬ 
creon  or  Philetas  or  Archilochus.  For  it  does 
not  necessarily  follow,  that,  if  a  piece  of  work 


122 


please  for  its  gracefulness,  therefore  he  that 
wrought  it  deserves  our  admiration.  Whence 
it  is  that  neither  do  such  things  really  profit 
or  advantage  the  beholders,  upon  the  sight  of 
which  no  zeal  arises  for  the  imitation  of  them, 
nor  any  impulse  or  inclination,  which  may 
prompt  any  desire  or  endeavour  of  doing  the 
like. 

But  virtue,  by  the  bare  statement  of  its  ac¬ 
tions,  can  so  affect  men’s  minds  as  to  create 
at  once  both  admiration  of  the  things  done 
and  desire  to  imitate  the  doers  of  them.  The 
goods  of  fortune  we  would  possess  and  would 
enjoy;  those  of  virtue  we  long  to  practise  and 
exercise.  We  are  content  to  receive  the  former 
from  others,  the  latter  we  wish  others  to  ex¬ 
perience  from  us.  Moral  good  is  a  practical 
stimulus;  it  is  no  sooner  seen,  than  it  inspires 
an  impulse  to  practice,  and  influences  the 
mind  and  character  not  by  a  mere  imitation 
which  we  look  at,  but  by  the  statement  of  the 
fact  creates  a  moral  purpose  which  we  form. 

And  so  we  have  thought  fit  to  spend  our 
time  and  pains  in  writing  of  the  lives  of  fa¬ 
mous  persons;  and  have  composed  this  tenth 
book  upon  that  subject,  containing  the  life 
of  Pericles,  and  that  of  Fabius  Maximus,  who 
carried  on  the  war  against  Hannibal,  men 
alike,  as  in  their  other  virtues  and  good  parts, 
so  especially  in  their  mild  and  upright  temper 
and  demeanour,  and  in  that  capacity  to  bear 
the  cross-grained  humours  of  their  fellow-citi¬ 
zens  and  colleagues  in  office,  which  made 
them  both  most  useful  and  serviceable  to  the 
interests  of  their  countries.  Whether  we  take 
a  right  aim  at  our  intended  purpose,  it  is  left 
to  the  reader  to  judge  by  what  he  shall  here 
find. 

Pericles  was  of  the  tribe  Acamantis,  and  the 
township  Cholargus,  of  the  noblest  birth  both 
on  his  father’s  and  mother’s  side.  Xanthippus, 
his  father,  who  defeated  the  King  of  Persia’s 
generals  in  the  battle  at  Mycale,  took  to  wife 
Agariste,  the  grandchild  of  Clisthenes,  who 
drove  out  the  sons  of  Pisistratus,  and  nobly 
put  an  end  to  their  tyrannical  usurpation, 
and,  moreover,  made  a  body  of  laws,  and 
settled  a  model  of  government  admirably  tem¬ 
pered  and  suited  for  the  harmony  and  safety 
of  the  people. 

His  mother,  being  near  her  time,  fancied 
in  a  dream  that  she  was  brought  to  bed  of  a 
lion,  and  a  few  days  after  was  delivered  of 
Pericles,  in  other  respects  perfecdy  formed, 
only  his  head  was  somewhat  longish  and  out 
of  proportion.  For  which  reason  almost  all  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

images  and  statues  that  were  made  of  him 
have  the  head  covered  with  a  helmet,  the 
workmen  apparently  being  willing  not  to 
expose  him.  The  poets  of  Athens  called  him 
Schmocephalos,  or  squill-head,  from  schinos, 
a  squill,  or  sea-onion.  One  of  the  comic  poets, 
Cratinus,  in  the  Chirons,  tells  us  that — 

Old  Chronos  once  too\  queen  Sedition  to  wife: 
Which  two  brought  to  life 
That  tyrant  far-famed 

Whom  the  gods  the  supreme  s\idl -comp ell er  have 

named; 

and,  in  the  Nemesis,  addresses  him — 

Come,  Jove,  thou  head  of  Gods. 

And  a  second,  Teleclides,  says,  that  now, 
in  embarrassment  with  political  difficulties, 
he  sits  in  the  city — 

Fainting  underneath  the  load 
Of  his  own  head:  and  now  abroad 
From  his  huge  gallery  of  a  pate 
Sends  forth  trouble  to  the  state. 

And  a  third,  Eupolis,  in  the  comedy  called 
the  Demi,  in  a  series  of  questions  about  each 
of  the  demagogues,  whom  he  makes  in  the 
play  to  come  up  from  hell,  upon  Pericles  being 
named  last,  exclaims — 

And  here  by  way  of  summary,  now  we’ve  done, 
Behold,  in  brief,  the  heads  of  all  in  one. 

The  master  that  taught  him  music,  most 
authors  are  agreed,  was  Damon  (whose  name, 
they  say,  ought  to  be  pronounced  with  the 
first  syllable  short).  Though  Aristode  tells  us 
that  he  was  thoroughly  practised  in  all  ac¬ 
complishments  of  this  kind  by  Pythoclides. 
Damon,  it  is  not  unlikely,  being  a  sophist, 
out  of  policy  sheltered  himself  under  the  pro¬ 
fession  of  music  to  conceal  from  people  in 
general  his  skill  in  other  things,  and  under 
this  pretence  attended  Pericles,  the  young 
athlete  of  polidcs,  so  to  say,  as  his  training- 
master  in  these  exercises.  Damon’s  lyre,  how¬ 
ever,  did  not  prove  altogether  a  successful 
blind;  he  was  banished  the  country  by  ostra¬ 
cism  for  ten  years,  as  a  dangerous  inter¬ 
meddler  and  a  favourer  of  arbitrary  power, 
and,  by  this  means,  gave  the  stage  occasion 
to  play  upon  him.  As,  for  instance,  Plato,  the 
comic  poet,  introduces  a  character  who  ques¬ 
tions  him — 

Tell  me,  if  you  please, 

Since  you’re  the  Chiron  who  taught  Pericles. 

Pericles,  also,  was  a  hearer  of  Zeno,  the 
Eleatic,  who  treated  of  natural  philosophy  in 
the  same  manner  as  Parmenides  did,  but  had 
also  perfected  himself  in  an  art  of  his  own 


PERICLES 

for  refuting  and  silencing  opponents  -in  argu¬ 
ment;  as  Timon  of  Phlius  describes  it — 

Also  the  two-edged  tongue  of  mighty  Zeno,  who, 
Say  what  one  would,  could  argue  it  untrue. 

But  he  that  saw  most  of  Pericles,  and  fur¬ 
nished  him  most  especially  with  a  weight  and 
grandeur  of  sense,  superior  to  all  arts  of  pop¬ 
ularity,  and  in  general  gave  him  his  elevation 
and  sublimity  of  purpose  and  of  character, 
was  Anaxagoras  of  Clazomenae;  whom  the 
men  of  those  times  called  by  the  name  of 
Nous,  that  is,  mind,  or  intelligence,  whether 
in  admiration  of  the  great  and  extraordinary 
gift  he  had  displayed  for  the  science  of  nature, 
or  because  that  he  was  the  first  of  the  philos¬ 
ophers  who  did  not  refer  the  first  ordering 
of  the  world  to  fortune  or  chance,  nor  to 
necessity  or  compulsion,  but  to  a  pure,  un¬ 
adulterated  intelligence,  which  in  all  other  ex¬ 
isting  mixed  and  compound  things  acts  as  a 
principle  of  discrimination,  and  of  combina¬ 
tion  of  like  with  like. 

For  this  man,  Pericles  entertained  an  extra¬ 
ordinary  esteem  and  admiration,  and  filling 
himself  with  this  lofty  and,  as  they  call  it,  up- 
in-the-air  sort  of  thought,  derived  hence  not 
merely,  as  was  natural,  elevation  of  purpose 
and  dignity  of  language,  raised  far  above  the 
base  and  dishonest  buffooneries  of  mob-elo¬ 
quence,  but,  besides  this,  a  composure  of  coun¬ 
tenance,  and  a  serenity  and  calmness  in  all  his 
movements,  which  no  occurrence  whilst  he 
was  speaking  could  disturb,  a  sustained  and 
even  tone  of  voice,  and  various  other  advan¬ 
tages  of  a  similar  kind,  which  produced  the 
greatest  effect  on  his  hearers.  Once,  after  be¬ 
ing  reviled  and  ill-spoken  of  all  day  long  in  his 
own  hearing  by  some  vile  and  abandoned  fel¬ 
low  in  the  open  market-place,  where  he  was 
engaged  in  the  despatch  of  some  urgent  affair, 
he  continued  his  business  in  perfect  silence, 
and  in  the  evening  returned  home  com¬ 
posedly,  the  man  still  dogging  him  at  the 
heels,  and  pelting  him  all  the  way  with  abuse 
and  foul  language;  and  stepping  into  his 
house,  it  being  by  this  time  dark,  he  ordered 
one  of  his  servants  to  take  a  light,  and  to  go 
along  with  the  man  and  see  him  safe  home. 

Ion,  it  is  true,  the  dramatic  poet,  says  that 
Pericles's  manner  in  company  was  somewhat 
over-assuming  and  pompous;  and  that  into 
his  high-bearing  there  entered  a  good  deal  of 
slightingness  and  scorn  of  others;  he  reserves 
his  commendation  for  Cimon’s  ease  and  pli¬ 
ancy  and  natural  grace  in  society.  Ion,  how- 


123 

ever,  who  must  needs  make  virtue,  like  a 
show  of  tragedies,  include  some  comic  scenes, 
we  shall  not  altogether  rely  upon;  Zeno  used 
to  bid  those  who  called  Pericles's  gravity  the 
affectation  of  a  charlatan,  to  go  and  affect  the 
like  themselves;  inasmuch  as  this  mere  coun¬ 
terfeiting  might  in  time  insensibly  instil  into 
them  a  real  love  and  knowledge  of  those 
noble  qualities. 

Nor  were  these  the  only  advantages  which 
Pericles  derived  from  Anaxagoras's  acquain¬ 
tance;  he  seems  also  to  have  become,  by  his 
instructions,  superior  to  that  superstition  with 
which  an  ignorant  wonder  at  appearances, 
for  example,  in  the  heavens,  possesses  the 
minds  of  people  unacquainted  with  their 
causes,  eager  for  the  supernatural,  and  ex¬ 
citable  through  an  inexperience  which  the 
knowledge  of  natural  causes  removes,  replac¬ 
ing  wild  and  timid  superstition  by  the  good 
hope  and  assurance  of  an  intelligent  piety. 

There  is  a  story,  that  once  Pericles  had 
brought  to  him  from  a  country  farm  of  his  a 
ram’s  head  with  one  horn,  and  that  Lampon, 
the  diviner,  upon  seeing  the  horn  grow  strong 
and  solid  out  of  the  midst  of  the  forehead, 
gave  it  as  his  judgment,  that,  there  being  at 
that  time  two  potent  factions,  parties,  or  in¬ 
terests  in  the  city,  the  one  of  Thucydides  and 
the  other  of  Pericles,  the  government  would 
come  about  to  that  one  of  them  in  whose 
ground  or  estate  this  token  or  indication  of 
fate  had  shown  itself.  But  that  Anaxagoras, 
cleaving  the  skull  in  sunder,  showed  to  the 
bystanders  that  the  brain  had  not  filled  up  its 
natural  place,  but  being  oblong,  like  an  egg, 
had  collected  from  all  parts  of  the  vessel 
which  contained  it  in  a  point  to  that  place 
from  whence  the  root  of  the  horn  took  its 
rise.  And  that,  for  that  time,  Anaxagoras  was 
much  admired  for  his  explanation  by  those 
that  were  present;  and  Lampon  no  less  a  little 
while  after,  when  Thucydides  was  over-pow¬ 
ered,  and  the  whole  affairs  of  the  state  and 
government  came  into  the  hands  of  Pericles. 

And  yet,  in  my  opinion,  it  is  no  absurdity 
to  say  that  they  were  both  in  the  right,  both 
natural  philosopher  and  diviner,  one  justly 
detecting  the  cause  of  this  event,  by  which 
it  was  produced,  the  other  the  end  for  which 
it  was  designed.  For  it  was  the  business  of 
the  one  to  find  out  and  give  an  account  of 
what  it  was  made,  and  in  what  manner  and 
by  what  means  it  grew  as  it  did;  and  of  the 
other  to  foretell  to  what  end  and  purpose 
it  was  so  made,  and  what  it  might  mean  or 


124 

portend.  Those  who  say  that  to  find  out  the 
cause  of  a  prodigy  is  in  effect  to  destroy  its 
supposed  signification  as  such,  do  not  take 
notice,  that,  at  the  same  time,  together  with 
divine  prodigies,  they  also  do  away  with  signs 
and  signals  of  human  art  and  concert,  as,  for 
instance,  the  clashings  of  quoits,  fire-beacons, 
and  the  shadows  of  sun-dials,  every  one  of 
which  has  its  cause,  and  by  that  cause  and 
contrivance  is  a  sign  of  something  else.  But 
these  are  subjects,  perhaps,  that  would  better 
befit  another  place. 

Pericles,  while  yet  but  a  young  man,  stood 
in  considerable  apprehension  of  the  people, 
as  he  was  thought  in  face  and  figure  to  be 
very  like  the  tyrant  Pisistratus,  and  those  of 
great  age  remarked  upon  the  sweetness  of  his 
voice,  and  his  volubility  and  rapidity  in  speak¬ 
ing,  and  were  struck  with  amazement  at  the 
resemblance.  Reflecting,  too,  that  he  had  a 
considerable  estate,  and  was  descended  of  a 
noble  family,  and  had  friends  of  great  in¬ 
fluence,  he  was  fearful  all  this  might  bring 
him  to  be  banished  as  a  dangerous  person; 
and  for  this  reason  meddled  not  at  all  with 
state  affairs,  but  in  military  service  showed 
himself  of  a  brave  and  intrepid  nature. 

But  when  Aristides  was  now  dead,  and 
Themistocles  driven  out,  and  Cimon  was  for 
the  most  part  kept  abroad  by  the  expeditions 
he  made  in  parts  out  of  Greece,  Pericles,  see¬ 
ing  things  in  this  posture,  now  advanced  and 
took  his  side,  not  with  the  rich  and  few,  but 
with  the  many  and  poor,  contrary  to  his  na¬ 
tural  bent,  which  was  far  from  democratical; 
but,  most  likely  fearing  he  might  fall  under 
suspicion  of  aiming  at  arbitrary  power,  and 
seeing  Cimon  on  the  side  of  the  aristocracy, 
and  much  beloved  by  the  better  and  more  dis¬ 
tinguished  people,  he  joined  the  party  of  the 
people,  with  a  view  at  once  both  to  secure 
himself  and  procure  means  against  Cimon. 

He  immediately  entered,  also,  on  quite  a 
new  course  of  life  and  management  of  his 
time.  For  he  was  never  seen  to  walk  in  any 
street  but  that  which  led  to  the  market-place 
and  council-hall,  and  he  avoided  invitations 
of  friends  to  supper,  and  all  friendly  visiting 
and  intercourse  whatever;  in  all  the  time  he 
had  to  do  with  the  public,  which  was  not  a 
little,  he  was  never  known  to  have  gone  to 
any  of  his  friends  to  a  supper,  except  that 
once  when  his  near  kinsman,  Euryptolemus, 
married,  he  remained  present  till  the  cere¬ 
mony  of  the  drink-offering,  and  then  imme¬ 
diately  rose  from  table  and  went  his  way.  For 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

these  friendly  meetings  are  very  quick  to  de¬ 
feat  any  assumed  superiority,  and  in  intimate 
familiarity  an  exterior  of  gravity  is  hard  to 
maintain.  Real  excellence,  indeed,  is  most 
recognised  when  most  openly  looked  into; 
and  in  really  good  men,  nothing  which  meets 
the  eyes  of  external  observers  so  truly  deserves 
their  admiration,  as  their  daily  common  life 
does  that  of  their  nearer  friends. 

Pericles,  however,  to  avoid  any  feeling  of 
commonness,  or  any  satiety  on  the  part  of  the 
people,  presented  himself  at  intervals  only,  not 
speaking  to  every  business,  nor  at  all  times 
coming  into  the  assembly,  but,  as  Critolaus 
says,  reserving  himself,  like  the  Salaminian 
galley,  for  great  occasions,  while  matters  of 
lesser  importance  were  despatched  by  friends 
or  other  speakers  under  his  direction.  And  of 
this  number  we  are  told  Ephialtes  made  one, 
who  broke  the  power  of  the  council  of  Areo¬ 
pagus,  giving  the  people,  according  to  Plato’s 
expression,  so  copious  and  so  strong  a  draught 
of  liberty,  that  growing  wild  and  unruly,  like 
an  unmanageable  horse,  it,  as  the  comic  poets 
say — 

— got  beyond  all  keeping  in, 
Champing  at  Euboea,  and  among  the  islands 

leaping  in. 

The  style  of  speaking  most  consonant  to 
his  form  of  life  and  the  dignity  of  his  views 
he  found,  so  to  say,  in  the  tones  of  that  in¬ 
strument  with  which  Anaxagoras  had  fur¬ 
nished  him;  of  his  teaching  he  continually 
availed  himself,  and  deepened  the  colours  of 
rhetoric  with  the  dye  of  natural  science.  For 
having,  in  addition  to  his  great  natural  genius, 
attained,  by  the  study  of  nature,  to  use  the 
words  of  the  divine  Plato,  this  height  of  in¬ 
telligence,  and  this  universal  consummating 
power,  and  drawing  hence  whatever  might 
be  of  advantage  to  him  in  the  art  of  speaking, 
he  showed  himself  far  superior  to  all  others. 
Upon  which  account,  they  say,  he  had  his 
nickname  given  him,  though  some  are  of 
opinion  he  was  named  the  Olympian  from  the 
public  buildings  with  which  he  adorned  the 
city,  and  others,  again,  from  his  great  power 
in  public  affairs,  whether  of  war  or  peace. 
Nor  is  it  unlikely  that  the  confluence  of  many 
attributes  may  have  conferred  it  on  him.  How¬ 
ever,  the  comedies  represented  at  the  time, 
which,  both  in  good  earnest  and  in  merri¬ 
ment,  let  fly  many  hard  words  at  him,  plainly 
show  that  he  got  that  appellation  especially 
from  his  speaking;  they  speak  of  his  “thun¬ 
dering  and  lightning”  when  he  harangued  the 


PERICLES 


people,  and  of  his  wielding  a  dreadful  thun¬ 
derbolt  in  his  tongue. 

A  saying  also  of  Thucydides,  the  son  of 
Melesias,  stands  on  record,  spoken  by  him  by 
way  of  pleasantry  upon  Pericles’s  dexterity. 
Thucydides  was  one  of  the  noble  and  dis¬ 
tinguished  citizens,  and  had  been  his  greatest 
opponent;  and,  when  Archidamus,  the  King 
of  the  Lacedaemonians,  asked  him  whether  he 
or  Pericles  were  the  better  wrestler,  he  made 
this  answer:  “When  I,”  said  he,  “have  thrown 
him  and  given  him  a  fair  fall,  by  persisting  that 
he  had  no  fall,  he  gets  the  better  of  me,  and 
makes  the  bystanders,  in  spite  of  their  own 
eyes,  believe  him.”  The  truth,  however,  is,  that 
Pericles  himself  was  very  careful  what  and 
how  he  was  to  speak,  insomuch  that,  whenever 
he  went  up  to  the  hustings,  he  prayed  the  gods 
that  no  one  word  might  unawares  slip  from 
him  unsuitable  to  the  matter  and  the  occasion. 

He  has  left  nothing  in  writing  behind  him, 
except  some  decrees;  and  there  are  but  very 
few  of  his  sayings  recorded;  one,  for  example, 
is,  that  he  said  ^Egina  must,  like  a  gathering 
in  a  man’s  eye,  be  removed  from  Piraeus;  and 
another,  that  he  said  he  saw  already  war  mov¬ 
ing  on  its  way  towards  them  out  of  Pelopon¬ 
nesus.  Again,  when  on  a  time  Sophocles,  who 
was  his  fellow-commissioner  in  the  general¬ 
ship,  was  going  on  board  with  him,  and 
praised  the  beauty  of  a  youth  they  met  with 
in  the  way  to  the  ship,  “Sophocles,”  said  he, 
“a  general  ought  not  only  to  have  clean  hands 
but  also  clean  eyes.”  And  Stesimbrotus  tells 
us,  that,  in  his  encomium  on  those  who  fell 
in  battle  at  Samos,  he  said  they  were  become 
immortal,  as  the  gods  were.  “For,”  said  he, 
“we  do  not  see  them  themselves,  but  only  by 
the  honours  we  pay  them,  and  by  the  benefits 
they  do  us,  attribute  to  them  immortality;  and 
the  like  attributes  belong  also  to  those  that  die 
in  the  service  of  their  country.” 

Since  Thucydides  describes  the  rule  of  Per¬ 
icles  as  an  aristocratical  government,  that  went 
by  the  name  of  a  democracy,  but  was,  indeed, 
the  supremacy  of  a  single  great  man,  while 
many  others  say,  on  the  contrary,  that  by  him 
the  common  people  were  first  encouraged  and 
led  on  to  such  evils  as  appropriations  of  sub¬ 
ject  territory,  allowances  for  attending  theatres, 
payments  for  performing  public  duties,  and 
by  these  bad  habits  were,  under  the  influence 
of  his  public  measures,  changed  from  a  sober, 
thrifty  people,  that  maintained  themselves  by 
their  own  labours,  to  lovers  of  expense,  intem¬ 
perance,  and  licence,  let  us  examine  the  cause 


125 

of  this  change  by  the  actual  matters  of  fact. 

At  the  first,  as  has  been  said,  when  he  set 
himself  against  Cimon’s  great  authority,  he 
did  caress  the  people.  Finding  himself  come 
short  of  his  competitor  in  wealth  and  money, 
by  which  advantages  the  other  was  enabled 
to  take  care  of  the  poor,  inviting  every  day 
some  one  or  other  of  the  citizens  that  was  in 
want  to  supper,  and  bestowing  clothes  on  the 
aged  people,  and  breaking  down  the  hedges 
and  enclosures  of  his  grounds,  that  all  that 
would  might  freely  gather  what  fruit  they 
pleased,  Pericles,  thus  outdone  in  popular  arts, 
by  the  advice  of  one  Damonides  of  CEa,  as 
Aristotle  states,  turned  to  the  distribution  of 
the  public  moneys;  and  in  a  short  time  having 
bought  the  people  over,  what  with  moneys 
allowed  for  shows  and  for  service  on  juries, 
and  what  with  other  forms  of  pay  and  largess, 
he  made  use  of  them  against  the  council  of 
Areopagus,  of  which  he  himself  was  no  mem¬ 
ber,  as  having  never  been  appointed  by  lot 
either  chief  archon,  or  lawgiver,  or  king,  or 
captain.  For  from  of  old  these  offices  were 
conferred  on  persons  by  lot,  and  they  who 
had  acquitted  themselves  duly  in  the  dis¬ 
charge  of  them  were  advanced  to  the  court 
of  Areopagus. 

And  so  Pericles,  having  secured  his  power 
in  interest  with  the  populace,  directed  the  ex¬ 
ertions  of  his  party  against  this  council  with 
such  success,  that  most  of  these  causes  and 
matters  which  had  been  used  to  be  tried  there 
were,  by  the  agency  of  Ephialtes,  removed 
from  its  cognisance;  Cimon,  also,  was  banished 
by  ostracism  as  a  favourer  of  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians  and  a  hater  of  the  people,  though  in 
wealth  and  noble  birth  he  was  among  the 
first,  and  had  won  several  most  glorious  vic¬ 
tories  over  the  barbarians,  and  had  filled  the 
city  with  money  and  spoils  of  war;  as  is  re¬ 
corded  in  the  history  of  his  life.  So  vast  an 
authority  had  Pericles  obtained  among  the 
people. 

The  ostracism  was  limited  by  law  to  ten 
years;  but  the  Lacedaemonians,  in  the  mean¬ 
time,  entering  with  a  great  army  into  the 
territory  of  Tanagra,  and  the  Athenians  going 
out  against  them,  Cimon,  coming  from  his 
banishment  before  his  time  was  out,  put  him¬ 
self  in  arms  and  array  with  those  of  his  fellow- 
citizens  that  were  of  his  own  tribe,  and  de¬ 
sired  by  his  deeds  to  wipe  off  the  suspicion 
of  his  favouring  the  Lacedaemonians,  by  ven¬ 
turing  his  own  person  along  with  his  coun¬ 
trymen.  But  Pericles’  friends,  gathering  in  a 


126 

body,  forced  him  to  retire  as  a  banished  man. 

For  which  cause  also  Pericles  seems  to  have 
exerted  himself  more  in  that  than  in  any 
battle,  and  to  have  been  conspicuous  above  all 
for  his  exposure  of  himself  to  danger.  All 
Cimon’s  friends,  also,  to  a  man,  fell  together 
side  by  side,  whom  Pericles  had  accused  with 
him  of  taking  part  with  the  Lacedaemonians. 
Defeated  in  this  battle  on  their  own  frontiers, 
and  expecting  a  new  and  perilous  attack  with 
return  of  spring,  the  Athenians  now  felt 
regret  and  sorrow  for  the  loss  of  Cimon,  and 
repentance  for  their  expulsion  of  him.  Pericles, 
being  sensible  of  their  feelings,  did  not  hesi¬ 
tate  or  delay  to  gratify  it,  and  himself  made 
the  motion  for  recalling  him  home.  He,  upon 
his  return,  concluded  a  peace  betwixt  the  two 
cities;  for  the  Lacedaemonians  entertained  as 
kindly  feelings  towards  him  as  they  did  the 
reverse  towards  Pericles  and  the  other  popular 
leaders. 

Yet  some  there  are  who  say  that  Pericles  did 
not  propose  the  order  for  Cimon’s  return  till 
some  private  articles  of  agreement  had  been 
made  between  them,  and  this  by  means  of  El- 
pinice,  Cimon’s  sister;  that  Cimon,  namely, 
should  go  out  to  sea  with  a  fleet  of  two  hun¬ 
dred  ships,  and  be  commander-in-chief  abroad, 
with  a  design  to  reduce  the  King  of  Persia’s 
territories,  and  that  Pericles  should  have  the 
power  at  home. 

This  Elpinice,  it  was  thought,  had  before 
this  time  procured  some  favour  for  her 
brother  Cimon  at  Pericles’s  hands,  and  in¬ 
duced  him  to  be  more  remiss  and  gentle  in 
urging  the  charge  when  Cimon  was  tried  for 
his  life;  for  Pericles  was  one  of  the  committee 
appointed  by  the  commons  to  plead  against 
him.  And  when  Elpinice  came  and  besought 
him  in  her  brother’s  behalf,  he  answered,  with 
a  smile,  “O  Elpinice,  you  are  too  old  a  woman 
to  undertake  such  business  as  this.”  But,  when 
he  appeared  to  impeach  him,  he  stood  up  but 
once  to  speak,  merely  to  acquit  himself  of  his 
commission,  and  went  out  of  court,  having 
done  Cimon  the  least  prejudice  of  any  of  his 
accusers. 

How,  then,  can  one  believe  Idomeneus, 
who  charges  Pericles  as  if  he  had  by  treachery 
procured  the  murder  of  Ephialtes,  the  popu¬ 
lar  statesman,  one  who  was  his  friend,  and  of 
his  own  party  in  all  his  political  course,  out 
of  jealousy,  forsooth,  and  envy  of  his  great 
reputation?  This  historian,  it  seems,  having 
raked  up  these  stories,  I  know  not  whence, 
has  befouled  with  them  a  man  who,  per- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

chance,  was  not  altogether  free  from  fault  or 
blame,  but  yet  had  a  noble  spirit,  and  a  soul 
that  was  bent  on  honour;  and  where  such 
qualities  are,  there  can  no  such  cruel  and  bru¬ 
tal  passion  find  harbour  or  gain  admittance. 
As  to  Ephialtes,  the  truth  of  the  story,  as 
Aristotle  has  told  it,  is  this;  that  having  made 
himself  formidable  to  the  oligarchical  party, 
by  being  an  uncompromising  asserter  of  the 
people’s  rights  in  calling  to  account  and  prose¬ 
cuting  those  who  any  way  wronged  them,  his 
enemies,  lying  in  wait  for  him,  by  the  means 
of  Aristodicus  the  Tanagraean,  privately  des¬ 
patched  him. 

Cimon,  while  he  was  admiral,  ended  his 
days  in  the  Isle  of  Cyprus.  And  the  aristocrati- 
cal  party,  seeing  that  Pericles  was  already  be¬ 
fore  this  grown  to  be  the  greatest  and  fore¬ 
most  man  of  all  the  city,  but  nevertheless 
wishing  there  should  be  somebody  set  up 
against  him,  to  blunt  and  turn  the  edge  of  his 
power,  that  it  might  not  altogether  prove  a 
monarchy,  put  forward  Thucydides  of  Alo- 
pece,  a  discreet  person,  and  a  near  kinsman  of 
Cimon’s,  to  conduct  the  opposition  against 
him;  who,  indeed,  though  less  skilled  in  war¬ 
like  affairs  than  Cimon  was,  yet  was  better 
versed  in  speaking  and  political  business  and 
keeping  close  guard  in  the  city,  and,  engaging 
with  Pericles  on  the  hustings,  in  a  short  time 
brought  the  government  to  an  equality  of 
parties.  For  he  would  not  suffer  those  who 
were  called  the  honest  and  good  (persons  of 
worth  and  distinction)  to  be  scattered  up  and 
down  and  mix  themselves  and  be  lost  among 
the  populace,  as  formerly,  diminishing  and  ob¬ 
scuring  their  superiority  amongst  the  masses; 
but  taking  them  apart  by  themselves  and  unit¬ 
ing  them  in  one  body,  by  their  combined 
weight  he  was  able,  as  it  were  upon  the  bal¬ 
ance,  to  make  a  counterpoise  of  the  other 
party. 

For,  indeed,  there  was  from  the  beginning 
a  sort  of  concealed  split,  or  seam,  as  it  might 
be  in  a  piece  of  iron,  marking  the  different 
popular  and  aristocratical  tendencies;  but  the 
open  rivalry  and  contention  of  these  two  op¬ 
ponents  made  the  gash  deep,  and  severed  the 
city  into  the  two  parties  of  the  People  and  the 
Few.  And  so  Pericles,  at  that  time,  more  than 
at  any  other,  let  loose  the  reins  to  the  people, 
and  made  his  policy  subservient  to  their  plea¬ 
sure,  contriving  continually  to  have  some  great 
public  show  or  solemnity,  some  banquet,  or 
some  procession  or  other  in  the  town  to  please 
them,  coaxing  his  countrymen  like  children 


PERICLES 

with  such  delights  and  pleasures  as  were  not, 
however,  unedifying.  Besides  that  every  year 
he  sent  out  three-score  galleys,  on  board  of 
which  there  were  numbers  of  the  citizens, 
who  were  in  pay  eight  months,  learning  at 
the  same  time  and  practising  the  art  of  sea¬ 
manship. 

He  sent,  moreover,  a  thousand  of  them  into 
the  Chersonese  as  planters,  to  share  the  land 
among  them  by  lot,  and  five  hundred  more 
into  the  isle  of  Naxos,  and  half  that  number 
to  Andros,  a  thousand  into  Thrace  to  dwell 
among  the  Bisaltae,  and  others  into  Italy,  when 
the  city  Sybaris,  which  now  was  called  Thurii, 
was  to  be  repeopled.  And  this  he  did  to  ease 
and  discharge  the  city  of  an  idle,  and,  by  rea¬ 
son  of  their  idleness,  a  busy,  meddling  crowd 
of  people;  and  at  the  same  time  to  meet  the 
necessities  and  restore  the  fortunes  of  the  poor 
townsmen,  and  to  intimidate,  also,  and  check 
their  allies  from  attempting  any  change,  by 
posting  such  garrisons,  as  it  were,  in  the  midst 
of  them. 

That  which  gave  most  pleasure  and  orna¬ 
ment  to  the  city  of  Athens,  and  the  greatest 
admiration  and  even  astonishment  to  all  stran¬ 
gers,  and  that  which  now  is  Greece’s  only  evi¬ 
dence  that  the  power  she  boasts  of  and  her 
ancient  wealth  are  no  romance  or  idle  story, 
was  his  construction  of  the  public  and  sacred 
buildings.  Yet  this  was  that  of  all  his  actions 
in  the  government  which  his  enemies  most 
looked  askance  upon  and  cavilled  at  in  the 
popular  assemblies,  crying  out  how  that  the 
commonwealth  of  Athens  had  lost  its  reputa¬ 
tion  and  was  ill-spoken  of  abroad  for  remov¬ 
ing  the  common  treasure  of  the  Greeks  from 
the  isle  of  Delos  into  their  own  custody;  and 
how  that  their  fairest  excuse  for  so  doing, 
namely,  that  they  took  it  away  for  fear  the 
barbarians  should  seize  it,  and  on  purpose  to 
secure  it  in  a  safe  place,  this  Pericles  had 
made  unavailable,  and  how  that  “Greece  can¬ 
not  but  resent  it  as  an  insufferable  affront, 
and  consider  herself  to  be  tyrannised  over  open¬ 
ly,  when  she  sees  the  treasure,  which  was  con¬ 
tributed  by  her  upon  a  necessity  for  the  war, 
wantonly  lavished  out  by  us  upon  our  city,  to 
gild  her  all  over,  and  to  adorn  and  set  her 
forth,  as  it  were  some  vain  woman,  hung  round 
with  precious  stones  and  figures  and  temples, 
which  cost  a  world  of  money.” 

Pericles,  on  the  other  hand,  informed  the 
people,  that  they  were  in  no  way  obliged  to 
give  any  account  of  those  moneys  to  their  allies, 
so  long  as  they  maintained  their  defence,  and 


127 

kept  off  the  barbarians  from  attacking  them; 
while  in  the  meantime  they  did  not  so  much 
as  supply  one  horse  or  man  or  ship,  but  only 
found  money  for  the  service;  “which  money,” 
said  he,  “is  not  theirs  that  give  it,  but  theirs 
that  receive  it,  if  so  be  they  perform  the  condi¬ 
tions  upon  which  they  receive  it.”  And  that  it 
was  good  reason,  that,  now  the  city  was  suffi¬ 
ciently  provided  and  stored  with  all  things 
necessary  for  the  war,  they  should  convert  the 
overplus  of  its  wealth  to  such  undertakings 
as  would  hereafter,  when  completed,  give  them 
eternal  honour,  and,  for  the  present,  while  in 
process,  freely  supply  all  the  inhabitants  with 
plenty.  With  their  variety  of  workmanship  and 
of  occasions  for  service,  which  summon  all  arts 
and  trades  and  require  all  hands  to  be  em¬ 
ployed  about  them,  they  do  actually  put  the 
whole  city,  in  a  manner,  into  state-pay;  while 
at  the  same  time  she  is  both  beautified  and 
maintained  by  herself. 

For  as  those  who  are  of  age  and  strength 
for  war  are  provided  for  and  maintained  in 
the  armaments  abroad  by  their  pay  out  of  the 
public  stock,  so,  it  being  his  desire  and  design 
that  the  undisciplined  mechanic  multitude 
that  stayed  at  home  should  not  go  without 
their  share  of  public  salaries,  and  yet  should 
not  have  them  given  them  for  sitting  still  and 
doing  nothing,  to  that  end  he  thought  fit  to 
bring  in  among  them,  with  the  approbation 
of  the  people,  these  vast  projects  of  buildings 
and  designs  of  work  that  would  be  of  some 
continuance  before  they  were  finished,  and 
would  give  employment  to  numerous  arts,  so 
that  the  part  of  the  people  that  stayed  at 
home  might,  no  less  than  those  that  were  at 
sea  or  in  garrisons  or  on  expeditions,  have  a 
fair  and  just  occasion  of  receiving  the  benefit 
and  having  their  share  of  the  public  moneys. 

The  materials  were  stone,  brass,  ivory,  gold, 
ebony,  cypress-wood;  and  the  arts  or  trades 
that  wrought  and  fashioned  them  were  smiths 
and  carpenters,  moulders,  founders  and  bra¬ 
ziers,  stone-cutters,  dyers,  goldsmiths,  ivory- 
workers,  painters,  embroiderers,  turners;  those 
again  that  conveyed  them  to  the  town  for  use, 
merchants  and  mariners  and  ship-masters  by 
sea,  and  by  land,  Cartwrights,  cattle-breeders, 
waggoners,  ropemakers,  flax-workers,  shoe¬ 
makers  and  leather-dressers,  roadmakers,  min¬ 
ers.  And  every  trade  in  the  same  nature,  as  a 
captain  in  an  army  has  his  particular  com¬ 
pany  of  soldiers  under  him,  had  its  own  hired 
company  of  journeymen  and  labourers  be¬ 
longing  to  it  banded  together  as  in  array,  to 


128 


be  as  it  were  the  instrument  and  body  for  the 
performance  of  the  service.  Thus,  to  say  all  in 
a  word,  the  occasions  and  services  of  these 
public  works  distributed  plenty  through  every 
age  and  condition. 

As  then  grew  the  works  up,  no  less  stately 
in  size  than  exquisite  in  form,  the  workmen 
striving  to  outvie  the  material  and  the  design 
with  the  beauty  of  their  workmanship,  yet  the 
most  wonderful  thing  of  all  was  the  rapidity 
of  their  execution. 

Undertakings,  any  one  of  which  singly 
might  have  required,  they  thought,  for  their 
completion,  several  successions  and  ages  of 
men,  were  every  one  of  them  accomplished  in 
the  height  and  prime  of  one  man’s  political 
service.  Although  they  say,  too,  that  Zeuxis 
once,  having  heard  Agatharchus,  the  painter, 
boast  of  despatching  his  work  with  speed  and 
ease,  replied,  “I  take  a  long  time.”  For  ease 
and  speed  in  doing  a  thing  do  not  give  the 
work  lasting  solidity  or  exactness  of  beauty; 
the  expenditure  of  time  allowed  to  a  man’s 
pains  beforehand  for  the  production  of  a  thing 
is  repaid  by  way  of  interest  with  a  vital  force 
for  the  preservation  when  once  produced.  For 
which  reason  Pericles’s  works  are  especially 
admired,  as  having  been  made  quickly,  to  last 
long.  For  every  particular  piece  of  his  work 
was  immediately,  even  at  that  time,  for  its 
beauty  and  elegance,  antique;  and  yet  in  its 
vigour  and  freshness  looks  to  this  day  as  if  it 
were  just  executed.  There  is  a  sort  of  bloom 
of  newness  upon  those  works  of  his,  preserv¬ 
ing  them  from  the  touch  of  time,  as  if  they 
had  some  perennial  spirit  and  undying  vital¬ 
ity  mingled  in  the  composition  of  them. 

Phidias  had  the  oversight  of  all  the  works, 
and  was  surveyor-general,  though  upon  the 
various  portions  other  great  masters  and  work¬ 
men  were  employed.  For  Callicrates  and  Icti¬ 
nus  built  the  Parthenon;  the  chapel  at  Eleusis, 
where  the  mysteries  were  celebrated,  was  be¬ 
gun  by  Corcebus,  who  erected  the  pillars  that 
stand  upon  the  floor  or  pavement,  and  joined 
them  to  the  architraves;  and  after  his  death 
Metagenes  of  Xypete  added  the  frieze  and  the 
upper  line  of  columns;  Xenocles  of  Cholargus 
roofed  or  arched  the  lantern  on  top  of  the  tem¬ 
ple  of  Castor  and  Pollux;  and  the  long  wall, 
which  Socrates  says  he  himself  heard  Pericles 
propose  to  the  people,  was  undertaken  by  Cal¬ 
licrates.  This  work  Cratinus  ridicules,  as  long 
in  finishing — 

*Tis  long  since  Pericles,  if  words  would  do  it, 
Talked  up  the  wall;  yet  adds  not  one  mite  to  it. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

The  Odeum,  or  music-room,  which  in  its 
interior  was  full  of  seats  and  ranges  of  pillars, 
and  outside  had  its  roof  made  to  slope  and  de¬ 
scend  from  one  single  point  at  the  top,  was 
constructed,  we  are  told,  in  imitation  of  the 
King  of  Persia’s  Pavilion;  this  likewise  by 
Pericles’s  order;  which  Cratinus  again,  in  his 
comedy  called  The  Thracian  Women,  made 
an  occasion  of  raillery — 

So,  we  see  here, 

Jupiter  Long-pate  Pericles  appear, 

Since  ostracism  time,  he}s  laid  aside  his  head, 

And  wears  the  new  Odeum  in  its  stead. 

Pericles,  also  eager  for  distinction,  then  first 
obtained  the  decree  for  a  contest  in  musical 
skill  to  be  held  yearly  at  the  Panathenaea,  and 
he  himself,  being  chosen  judge,  arranged  the 
order  and  method  in  which  the  competitors 
should  sing  and  play  on  the  flute  and  on  the 
harp.  And  both  at  that  time,  and  at  other 
times  also,  they  sat  in  this  music-room  to  see 
and  hear  all  such  trials  of  skill. 

The  propylaea,  or  entrances  to  the  Acropo¬ 
lis,  were  finished  in  five  years’  time,  Mnesi- 
cles  being  the  principal  architect.  A  strange 
accident  happened  in  the  course  of  building, 
which  showed  that  the  goddess  was  not  averse 
to  the  work,  but  was  aiding  and  co-operating 
to  bring  it  to  perfection.  One  of  the  artificers, 
the  quickest  and  the  handiest  workman  among 
them  all,  with  a  slip  of  his  foot  fell  down  from 
a  great  height,  and  lay  in  a  miserable  condi¬ 
tion,  the  physicians  having  no  hope  of  his  re¬ 
covery.  When  Pericles  was  in  distress  about 
this,  Minerva  appeared  to  him  at  night  in  a 
dream,  and  ordered  a  course  of  treatment, 
which  he  applied,  and  in  a  short  time  and 
with  great  ease  cured  the  man.  And  upon  this 
occasion  it  was  that  he  set  up  a  brass  statue  of 
Minerva,  surnamed  Health,  in  the  citadel  near 
the  altar,  which  they  say  was  there  before. 

But  it  was  Phidias  who  wrought  the  god¬ 
dess’s  image  in  gold,  and  he  has  his  name  in¬ 
scribed  on  the  pedestal  as  the  workman  of  it; 
and  indeed  the  whole  work  in  a  manner  was 
under  his  charge,  and  he  had,  as  we  have  said 
already,  the  oversight  over  all  the  artists  and 
workmen,  through  Pericles’s  friendship  for 
him;  and  this,  indeed,  made  him  much  en¬ 
vied,  and  his  patron  shamefully  slandered 
with  stories,  as  if  Phidias  were  in  the  habit  of 
receiving,  for  Pericles’s  use,  freeborn  women 
that  came  to  see  the  works. 

The  comic  writers  of  the  town,  when  they 
had  got  hold  of  this  story,  made  much  of  it, 
and  bespattered  him  with  all  the  ribaldry  they 


PERICLES 

could  invent,  charging  him  falsely  with  the 
wife  of  Menippus,  one  who  was  his  friend 
and  served  as  lieutenant  under  him  in  the 
wars;  and  with  the  birds  kept  by  Pyrilampes, 
an  acquaintance  of  Pericles,  who,  they  pre¬ 
tended,  used  to  give  presents  of  peacocks  to 
Pericles’s  female  friends.  And  how  can  one 
wonder  at  any  number  of  strange  assertions 
from  men  whose  whole  lives  were  devoted  to 
mockery,  and  who  were  ready  at  any  time  to 
sacrifice  the  reputation  of  their  superiors  to 
vulgar  envy  and  spite,  as  to  some  evil  genius, 
when  even  Stesimbrotus  the  Thracian  has 
dared  to  lay  to  the  charge  of  Pericles  a  mon¬ 
strous  and  fabulous  piece  of  criminality  with 
his  son’s  wife?  So  very  difficult  a  matter  is  it 
to  trace  and  find  out  the  truth  of  anything  by 
history,  when,  on  the  one  hand,  those  who 
afterwards  write  it  find  long  periods  of  time  in¬ 
tercepting  their  view,  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  contemporary  records  of  any  actions  and 
lives,  partly  through  envy  and  ill-will,  partly 
through  favour  and  flattery,  pervert  and  dis¬ 
tort  truth. 

When  the  orators,  who  sided  with  Thucydi¬ 
des  and  his  party,  were  at  one  time  crying  out, 
as  their  custom  was,  against  Pericles,  as  one 
who  squandered  away  the  public  money,  and 
made  havoc  of  the  state  revenues,  he  rose  in  the 
open  assembly  and  put  the  question  to  the  peo¬ 
ple,  whether  they  thought  that  he  had  laid  out 
much;  and  they  saying,  “Too  much,  a  great 
deal,”  “Then,”  said  he,  “since  it  is  so,  let  the 
cost  not  go  to  your  account,  but  to  mine;  and 
let  the  inscription  upon  the  buildings  stand  in 
my  name.”  When  they  heard  him  say  thus, 
whether  it  were  out  of  a  surprise  to  see  the 
greatness  of  his  spirit  or  out  of  emulation  of  the 
glory  of  the  works,  they  cried  aloud,  bidding 
him  to  spend  on,  and  lay  out  what  he  thought 
fit  from  the  public  purse,  and  to  spare  no  cost, 
till  all  were  finished. 

At  length,  coming  to  a  final  contest  with 
Thucydides  which  of  the  two  should  ostracise 
the  other  out  of  the  country,  and  having  gone 
through  this  peril,  he  threw  his  antagonist 
out,  and  broke  up  the  confederacy  that  had 
been  organised  against  him.  So  that  now  all 
schism  and  division  being  at  an  end,  and  the 
city  brought  to  evenness  and  unity,  he  got  all 
Athens  and  all  affairs  that  pertained  to  the 
Athenians  into  his  own  hands,  their  tributes, 
their  armies,  and  their  galleys,  the  islands,  the 
sea,  and  their  wide-extended  power,  partly 
over  other  Greeks  and  partly  over  barbarians, 
and  all  that  empire,  which  they  possessed, 


129 

founded  and  fortified  upon  subject  nations 
and  royal  friendships  and  alliances. 

After  this  he  was  no  longer  the  same  man 
he  had  been  before,  nor  as  tame  and  gentle 
and  familiar  as  formerly  with  the  populace, 
so  as  readily  to  yield  to  their  pleasures  and  to 
comply  with  the  desires  of  the  multitude,  as  a 
steersman  shifts  with  the  winds.  Quitting  that 
loose,  remiss,  and,  in  some  cases,  licentious 
court  of  the  popular  will,  he  turned  those  soft 
and  flowery  modulations  to  the  austerity  of 
aristocratical  and  regal  rule;  and  employing 
this  uprightly  and  undeviatingly  for  the  coun¬ 
try’s  best  interests,  he  was  able  generally  to 
lead  the  people  along,  with  their  own  wills  and 
consents,  by  persuading  and  showing  them 
what  was  to  be  done;  and  sometimes,  too,  urg¬ 
ing  and  pressing  them  forward  extremely 
against  their  will,  he  made  them,  whether  they 
would  or  no,  yield  submission  to  what  was  for 
their  advantage. 

In  which,  to  say  the  truth,  he  did  but  like 
a  skilful  physician,  who,  in  a  complicated  and 
chronic  disease,  as  he  sees  occasion,  at  one 
while  allows  his  patient  the  moderate  use  of 
such  things  as  please  him,  at  another  while 
gives  him  keen  pains  and  drugs  to  work  the 
cure.  For  there  arising  and  growing  up,  as 
was  natural,  all  manner  of  distempered  feel¬ 
ings  among  a  people  which  had  so  vast  a  com¬ 
mand  and  dominion,  he  alone,  as  a  great  mas¬ 
ter,  knowing  how  to  handle  and  deal  fitly 
with  each  one  of  them,  and,  in  an  especial 
manner,  making  that  use  of  hopes  and  fears, 
as  his  two  chief  rudders,  with  the  one  to 
check  the  career  of  their  confidence  at  any 
time,  with  the  other  to  raise  them  up  and 
cheer  them  when  under  any  discouragement, 
plainly  showed  by  this,  that  rhetoric,  or  the 
art  of  speaking,  is,  in  Plato’s  language,  the 
government  of  the  souls  of  men,  and  that  her 
chief  business  is  to  address  the  affections  and 
passions,  which  are  as  it  were  the  strings  and 
keys  to  the  soul,  and  require  a  skilful  and  care¬ 
ful  touch  to  be  played  on  as  they  should  be. 

The  source  of  this  predominance  was  not 
barely  his  power  of  language,  but,  as  Thucy¬ 
dides  assures  us,  the  reputation  of  his  life,  and 
the  confidence  felt  in  his  character;  his  mani¬ 
fest  freedom  from  every  kind  of  corruption, 
and  superiority  to  all  considerations  of  money. 
Notwithstanding,  he  had  made  the  city  of 
Athens,  which  was  great  of  itself,  as  great  and 
rich  as  can  be  imagined,  and  though  he  were 
himself  in  power  and  interest  more  than  equal 
to  many  kings  and  absolute  rulers,  who  some 


130 

of  them  also  bequeathed  by  will  their  power 
to  their  children,  he,  for  his  part,  did  not  make 
the  patrimony  his  father  left  him  greater  than 
it  was  by  one  drachma. 

Thucydides,  indeed,  gives  a  plain  statement 
of  the  greatness  of  his  power;  and  the  comic 
poets,  in  their  spiteful  manner,  more  than  hint 
at  it,  styling  his  companions  and  friends  the 
new  Pisistratidae,  and  calling  on  him  to  abjure 
any  intention  of  usurpation,  as  one  whose 
eminence  was  too  great  to  be  any  longer  pro¬ 
portionable  to  and  compatible  with  a  democ¬ 
racy  or  popular  government.  And  Teleclides 
says  the  Athenians  had  surrendered  up  to 
him — 

The  tribute  of  the  cities,  and  with  them,  the  cities 
too,  to  do  with  them  as  he  pleases,  and  undo; 
To  build  up,  if  he  li\es,  stone  walls  around  a 
town;  and  again,  if  so  he  likes,  to  pull  them 
down; 

Their  treaties  and  alliances,  power,  empire,  peace, 
and  war,  their  wealth  and  their  success  forever 
more. 

Nor  was  all  this  the  luck  of  some  happy  oc¬ 
casion;  nor  was  it  the  mere  bloom  and  grace 
of  a  policy  that  flourished  for  a  season;  but 
having  for  forty  years  together  maintained  the 
first  place  among  statesmen  such  as  Ephialtes 
and  Leocrates  and  Myronides  and  Cimon  and 
Tolmides  and  Thucydides  were;  after  the  de¬ 
feat  and  banishment  of  Thucydides,  for  no 
less  than  fifteen  years  longer,  in  the  exercise  of 
one  continuous  unintermitted  command  in  the 
office,  to  which  he  was  annually  re-elected,  of 
General,  he  preserved  his  integrity  unspotted; 
though  otherwise  he  was  not  altogether  idle  or 
careless  in  looking  after  his  pecuniary  advan¬ 
tage.  His  paternal  estate,  which  of  right  be¬ 
longed  to  him,  he  so  ordered  that  it  might  nei¬ 
ther  through  negligence  be  wasted  or  lessened, 
nor  yet,  being  so  full  of  business  as  he  was,  cost 
him  any  great  trouble  or  time  with  taking  care 
of  it;  and  put  it  into  such  a  way  of  manage¬ 
ment  as  he  thought  to  be  the  most  easy  for  him¬ 
self,  and  the  most  exact.  All  his  yearly  products 
and  profits  he  sold  together  in  a  lump,  and  sup¬ 
plied  his  household  needs  afterwards  by  buy¬ 
ing  everything  that  he  or  his  family  wanted 
out  of  the  market. 

Upon  which  account,  his  children,  when 
they  grew  to  age,  were  not  well  pleased  with 
his  management,  and  the  women  that  lived 
with  him  were  treated  with  little  cost,  and  com¬ 
plained  of  his  way  of  housekeeping,  where 
everything  was  ordered  and  set  down  from 
day  to  day,  and  reduced  to  the  greatest  exact- 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

ness;  since  there  was  not  there,  as  is  usual  in 
a  great  family  and  a  plentiful  estate,  anything 
to  spare,  or  over  and  above;  but  all  that  went 
out  or  came  in,  all  disbursements  and  all  re¬ 
ceipts,  proceeded  as  it  were  by  number  and 
measure.  His  manager  in  all  this  was  a  single 
servant,  Evangelus  by  name,  a  man  either  nat¬ 
urally  gifted  or  instructed  by  Pericles  so  as  to 
excel  every  one  in  this  art  of  domestic  econ¬ 
omy. 

All  this,  in  truth,  was  very  little  in  harmony 
with  Anaxagoras’s  wisdom;  if,  indeed,  it  be 
true  that  he,  by  a  kind  of  divine  impulse  and 
greatness  of  spirit,  voluntarily  quitted  his 
house,  and  left  his  land  to  lie  fallow  and  to  be 
grazed  by  sheep  like  a  common.  But  the  life 
of  a  contemplative  philosopher  and  that  of  an 
active  statesman  are,  I  presume,  not  the  same 
thing;  for  the  one  merely  employs,  upon  great 
and  good  objects  of  thought,  an  intelligence 
that  requires  no  aid  of  instruments  nor  supply 
of  any  external  materials;  whereas  the  other, 
who  tempers  and  applies  his  virtue  to  human 
uses,  may  have  occasion  for  affluence,  not  as  a 
matter  of  necessity,  but  as  a  noble  thing; 
which  was  Pericles’s  case,  who  relieved  numer¬ 
ous  poor  citizens. 

However,  there  is  a  story  that  Anaxagoras 
himself,  while  Pericles  was  taken  up  with  pub¬ 
lic  affairs,  lay  neglected,  and  that,  now  being 
grown  old,  he  wrapped  himself  up  with  a  reso¬ 
lution  to  die  for  want  of  food;  which  being  by 
chance  brought  to  Pericles’s  ear,  he  was  hor¬ 
ror-struck,  and  instantly  ran  thither,  and  used 
all  the  arguments  and  entreaties  he  could  to 
him,  lamenting  not  so  much  Anaxagoras’s  con¬ 
dition  as  his  own,  should  he  lose  such  a  coun¬ 
sellor  as  he  had  found  him  to  be;  and  that,  up¬ 
on  this,  Anaxagoras  unfolded  his  robe,  and 
showing  himself,  made  answer:  “Pericles,” 
said  he,  “even  those  who  have  occasion  for  a 
lamp  supply  it  with  oil.” 

The  Lacedaemonians  beginning  to  show 
themselves  troubled  at  the  growth  of  the  Athe¬ 
nian  power,  Pericles,  on  the  other  hand,  to  ele¬ 
vate  the  people’s  spirit  yet  more,  and  to  raise 
them  to  the  thought  of  great  actions,  proposed 
a  decree,  to  summon  all  the  Greeks  in  what 
part  soever,  whether  of  Europe  or  Asia,  every 
city,  little  as  well  as  great,  to  send  their  depu¬ 
ties  to  Athens  to  a  general  assembly,  or  conven¬ 
tion,  there  to  consult  and  advise  concerning  the 
Greek  temples  which  the  barbarians  had  burnt 
down,  and  the  sacrifices  which  were  due  from 
them  upon  vows  they  had  made  to  their  gods 
for  the  safety  of  Greece  when  they  fought 


PERICLES 

against  the  barbarians;  and  also  concerning  the 
navigation  of  the  sea,  that  they  might  hence¬ 
forward  pass  to  and  fro  and  trade  securely  and 
be  at  peace  among  themselves. 

Upon  this  errand  there  were  twenty  men, 
of  such  as  were  above  fifty  years  of  age,  sent 
by  commission;  five  to  summon  the  Ionians 
and  Dorians  in  Asia,  and  the  islanders  as  far 
as  Lesbos  and  Rhodes;  five  to  visit  all  the 
places  in  the  Hellespont  and  Thrace,  up  to 
Byzantium;  and  other  five  besides  these  to  go 
to  Bceotia  and  Phocis  and  Peloponnesus,  and 
from  hence  to  pass  through  the  Locrians  over 
to  the  neighbouring  continent  as  far  as  Acar- 
nania  and  Ambracia;  and  the  rest  to  take  their 
course  through  Euboea  to  the  CEtaeans  and  the 
Malian  Gulf,  and  to  the  Achaeans  of  Phthiotis 
and  the  Thessalians;  all  of  them  to  treat  with 
the  people  as  they  passed,  and  to  persuade 
them  to  come  and  take  their  part  in  the  de¬ 
bates  for  settling  the  peace  and  jointly  regu¬ 
lating  the  affairs  of  Greece. 

Nothing  was  effected,  nor  did  the  cities 
meet  by  their  deputies,  as  was  desired;  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians,  as  it  is  said,  crossing  the  design 
underhand,  and  the  attempt  being  disappointed 
and  baffled  first  in  Peloponnesus.  I  thought  fit, 
however,  to  introduce  the  mention  of  it,  to 
show  the  spirit  of  the  man  and  the  greatness  of 
his  thoughts. 

In  his  military  conduct,  he  gained  a  great 
reputation  for  wariness;  he  would  not  by  his 
good-will  engage  in  any  fight  which  had 
much  uncertainty  or  hazard;  he  did  not  envy 
the  glory  of  generals  whose  rash  adventures 
fortune  favoured  with  brilliant  success,  how¬ 
ever  they  were  admired  by  others,  nor  did  he 
think  them  worthy  his  imitation,  but  always 
used  to  say  to  his  citizens  that,  so  far  as  lay  in 
his  power,  they  should  continue  immortal, 
and  live  for  ever. 

Seeing  Tolmides,  the  son  of  Tolmaeus,  upon 
the  confidence  of  his  former  successes,  and 
flushed  with  the  honour  his  military  actions 
had  procured  him,  making  preparations  to  at¬ 
tack  the  Boeotians  in  their  own  country  when 
there  was  no  likely  opportunity,  and  that  he 
had  prevailed  with  the  bravest  and  most  enter¬ 
prising  of  the  youth  to  enlist  themselves  as 
volunteers  in  the  service,  who  besides  his  other 
force  made  up  a  thousand,  he  endeavoured  to 
withhold  him  and  to  advise  him  from  it  in  the 
public  assembly,  telling  him  in  a  memorable 
saying  of  his,  which  still  goes  about,  that,  if 
he  would  not  take  Pericles’s  advice,  yet  he 
would  not  do  amiss  to  wait  and  be  ruled  by 


131 

time,  the  wisest  counsellor  of  all.  This  saying, 
at  that  time,  was  but  slightly  commended;  but 
within  a  few  days  after,  when  news  was 
brought  that  Tolmides  himself  had  been  de¬ 
feated  and  slain  in  battle  near  Coronea,  and 
that  many  brave  citizens  had  fallen  with  him, 
it  gained  him  great  repute  as  well  as  good¬ 
will  among  the  people,  for  wisdom  and  for 
love  of  his  countrymen. 

But  of  all  his  expeditions,  that  to  the  Cher¬ 
sonese  gave  most  satisfaction  and  pleasure, 
having  proved  the  safety  of  the  Greeks  who  in¬ 
habited  there.  For  not  only  by  carrying  along 
with  him  a  thousand  fresh  citizens  of  Athens 
he  gave  new  strength  and  vigour  to  the  cities, 
but  also  by  belting  the  neck  of  land,  which 
joins  the  peninsula  to  the  continent,  with  bul¬ 
warks  and  forts  from  sea  to  sea,  he  put  a  stop 
to  the  inroads  of  the  Thracians,  who  lay  all 
about  the  Chersonese,  and  closed  the  door 
against  a  continual  and  grievous  war,  with 
which  that  country  had  been  long  harassed,  ly¬ 
ing  exposed  to  the  encroachments  and  influx  of 
barbarous  neighbors,  and  groaning  under  the 
evils  of  a  predatory  population  both  upon  and 
within  its  borders. 

Nor  was  he  less  admired  and  talked  of 
abroad  for  his  sailing  around  the  Peloponne¬ 
sus,  having  set  out  from  Pegae,  or  The  Foun¬ 
tains,  the  port  of  Megara,  with  a  hundred  gal¬ 
leys.  For  he  not  only  laid  waste  the  sea-coast,  as 
Tolmides  had  done  before,  but  also,  advancing 
far  up  into  the  mainland  with  the  soldiers  he 
had  on  board,  by  the  terror  of  his  appearance 
drove  many  within  their  walls;  and  at  Nemea, 
with  main  force,  routed  and  raised  a  trophy 
over  the  Sicyonians,  who  stood  their  ground 
and  joined  battle  with  him.  And  having  taken 
on  board  a  supply  of  soldiers  into  the  galleys 
out  of  Achaia,  then  in  league  with  Athens,  he 
crossed  with  the  fleet  to  the  opposite  continent, 
and,  sailing  along  by  the  mouth  of  the  river 
Achelous,  overran  Acarnania  and  shut  up  the 
CEniadae  within  their  city  walls,  and  having 
ravaged  and  wasted  their  country,  weighed  an¬ 
chor  for  home  with  the  double  advantage  of 
having  shown  himself  formidable  to  his  ene¬ 
mies,  and  at  the  same  time  safe  and  energetic 
to  his  fellow-citizens;  for  there  was  not  so  much 
as  any  chance  miscarriage  that  happened,  the 
whole  voyage  through,  to  those  who  were  un¬ 
der  his  charge. 

Entering  also  the  Euxine  Sea  with  a  large  and 
finely  equipped  fleet,  he  obtained  for  the  Greek 
cities  any  new  arrangements  they  wanted,  and 
entered  into  friendly  relations  with  them;  and 


132 

to  the  barbarous  nations,  and  kings  and  chiefs 
round  about  them,  displayed  the  greatness  of 
the  power  of  the  Athenians,  their  perfect  abil¬ 
ity  and  confidence  to  sail  wherever  they  had  a 
mind,  and  to  bring  the  whole  sea  under  their 
control.  He  left  the  Sinopians  thirteen  ships  of 
war,  with  soldiers  under  the  command  of  La- 
machus,  to  assist  them  against  Timesileus  the 
tyrant;  and  when  he  and  his  accomplices  had 
been  thrown  out,  obtained  a  decree  that  six 
hundred  of  the  Athenians  that  were  willing 
should  sail  to  Sinope  and  plant  themselves 
there  with  the  Sinopians,  sharing  among  them 
the  houses  and  land  which  the  tyrant  and  his 
party  had  previously  held. 

But  in  other  things  he  did  not  comply  with 
the  giddy  impulses  of  the  citizens,  nor  quit 
his  own  resolutions  to  follow  their  fancies, 
when,  carried  away  with  the  thought  of  their 
strength  and  great  success,  they  were  eager  to 
interfere  again  in  Egypt,  and  to  disturb  the 
King  of  Persia’s  maritime  dominions.  Nay, 
there  were  a  good  many  who  were,  even  then, 
possessed  with  that  unblest  and  inauspicious 
passion  for  Sicily,  which  afterward  the  orators 
of  Alcibiades’s  party  blew  up  into  a  flame. 
There  were  some  also  who  dreamt  of  Tuscany 
and  Carthage,  and  not  without  plausible  rea¬ 
son  in  their  present  large  dominion  and  pros¬ 
perous  course  of  their  affairs. 

But  Pericles  curbed  this  passion  for  foreign 
conquest,  and  unsparingly  pruned  and  cut 
down  their  ever  busy  fancies  for  a  multitude 
of  undertakings;  and  directed  their  power  for 
the  most  part  to  securing  and  consolidating 
what  they  had  already  got,  supposing  it  would 
be  quite  enough  for  them  to  do,  if  they  could 
keep  the  Lacedaemonians  in  check;  to  whom 
he  entertained  all  along  a  sense  of  opposition; 
which,  as  upon  many  other  occasions,  so  he 
particularly  showed  by  what  he  did  in  the 
time  of  the  holy  war.  The  Lacedaemonians, 
having  gone  with  an  army  to  Delphi,  restored 
Apollo’s  temple,  which  the  Phocians  had  got 
into  their  possession,  to  the  Delphians;  imme¬ 
diately  after  their  departure,  Pericles,  with  an¬ 
other  army,  came  and  restored  the  Phocians. 
And  the  Lacedaemonians,  having  engraven  the 
record  of  their  privilege  of  consulting  the  or¬ 
acle  before  others,  which  the  Delphians  gave 
them,  upon  the  forehead  of  the  brazen  wolf 
which  stands  there,  he,  also,  having  received 
from  the  Phocians  the  like  privilege  for  the 
Athenians,  had  it  cut  upon  the  same  wolf  of 
brass  on  his  right  side. 

That  he  did  well  and  wisely  in  thus  re¬ 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

straining  the  exertions  of  the  Athenians  with¬ 
in  the  compass  of  Greece,  the  events  themselves 
that  happened  afterward  bore  sufficient  wit¬ 
ness.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the  Eubceans  re¬ 
volted,  against  whom  he  passed  over  with 
forces;  and  then,  immediately  after,  news 
came  that  the  Megarians  were  turned  their 
enemies;  and  a  hostile  army  was  upon  the  bor¬ 
ders  of  Attica,  under  the  conduct  of  Plistoanax, 
King  of  the  Lacedaemonians.  Wherefore  Per¬ 
icles  came  with  his  army  back  again  in  all  haste 
out  of  Euboea,  to  meet  the  war  which  threat¬ 
ened  at  home,  and  did  not  venture  to  engage 
a  numerous  and  brave  army  eager  for  battle; 
but  perceiving  that  Plistoanax  was  a  very 
young  man,  and  governed  himself  mostly  by 
the  counsel  and  advice  of  Cleandrides,  whom 
the  ephors  had  sent  with  him,  by  reason  of  his 
youth,  to  be  a  kind  of  guardian  and  assistant 
to  him,  he  privately  made  trial  of  this  man’s 
integrity,  and,  in  a  short  time,  having  cor¬ 
rupted  him  with  money,  prevailed  with  him  to 
withdraw  the  Peloponnesians  out  of  Attica. 

When  the  army  had  retired  and  dispersed 
into  their  several  states,  the  Lacedaemonians 
in  anger  fined  their  king  in  so  large  a  sum  of 
money,  that,  unable  to  pay  it,  he  quitted  Lace¬ 
daemon;  while  Cleandrides  fled,  and  had  sen¬ 
tence  of  death  passed  upon  him  in*his  absence. 
This  was  the  father  of  Gylippus,  who  over¬ 
powered  the  Athenians  in  Sicily.  And  it  seems 
that  this  covetousness  was  an  hereditary  dis¬ 
ease  transmitted  from  father  to  son;  for  Gy¬ 
lippus  also  afterwards  was  caught  in  foul 
practices,  and  expelled  from  Sparta  for  it.  But 
this  we  have  told  at  large  in  the  account  of 
Lysander. 

When  Pericles,  in  giving  up  his  accounts  of 
this  expedition,  stated  a  disbursement  of  ten 
talents,  as  laid  out  upon  fit  occasion,  the  peo¬ 
ple,  without  any  question,  nor  troubling  them¬ 
selves  to  investigate  the  mystery,  freely  al¬ 
lowed  of  it.  And  some  historians,  in  which 
number  is  Theophrastus,  the  philosopher,  have 
given  it  as  a  truth  that  Pericles  every  year 
used  to  send  privately  the  sum  of  ten  talents 
to  Sparta,  with  which  he  complimented  those 
in  office,  to  keep  off  the  war;  not  to  purchase 
peace  neither,  but  time,  that  he  might  prepare 
at  leisure,  and  be  the  better  able  to  carry  on 
war  hereafter. 

Immediately  after  this,  turning  his  forces 
against  the  revolters,  and  passing  over  into  the 
island  of  Euboea  with  fifty  sail  of  ships  and 
five  thousand  men  in  arms,  he  reduced  their 
cities,  and  drove  out  the  citizens  of  the  Chal- 


PERICLES 

cidians,  called  Hippobotae,  horse-feeders,  the 
chief  persons  for  wealth  and  reputation  among 
them;  and  removing  all  the  Histiaeans  out  of 
the  country,  brought  in  a  plantation  of  Athe¬ 
nians  in  their  room;  making  them  his  one 
example  of  severity,  because  they  had  captured 
an  Attic  ship  and  killed  all  on  board. 

After  this,  having  made  a  truce  between 
the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians  for  thirty 
years,  he  ordered,  by  public  decree,  the  expedi¬ 
tion  against  the  isle  of  Samos,  on  the  ground, 
that,  when  they  were  bid  to  leave  off  their 
war  with  the  Milesians  they  had  not  complied. 

And  as  these  measures  against  the  Samians 
are  thought  to  have  been  taken  to  please  As- 
pasia,  this  may  be  a  fit  point  for  inquiry  about 
the  woman,  what  art  or  charming  faculty  she 
had  that  enabled  her  to  captivate,  as  she  did, 
the  greatest  statesmen,  and  to  give  the  philos¬ 
ophers  occasion  to  speak  so  much  about  her, 
and  that,  too,  not  to  her  disparagement.  That 
she  was  a  Milesian  by  birth,  the  daughter  of 
Axiochus,  is  a  thing  acknowledged.  And  they 
say  it  was  in  emulation  of  Thargelia,  a  cour¬ 
tesan  of  the  old  Ionian  times,  that  she  made 
her  addresses  to  men  of  great  power.  Thar¬ 
gelia  was  a  great  beauty,  extremely  charming, 
and  at  the  same  time  sagacious;  she  had  nu¬ 
merous  suitors  among  the  Greeks,  and  brought 
all  who  had  to  do  with  her  over  to  the  Per¬ 
sian  interest,  and  by  their  means,  being  men 
of  the  greatest  power  and  station,  sowed  the 
seeds  of  the  Median  faction  up  and  down  in 
several  cities. 

Aspasia,  some  say,  was  courted  and  caressed 
by  Pericles  upon  account  of  her  knowledge 
and  skill  in  politics.  Socrates  himself  would 
sometimes  go  to  visit  her,  and  some  of  his  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  him;  and  those  who  fre¬ 
quented  her  company  would  carry  their  wives 
with  them  to  listen  to  her.  Her  occupation 
was  anything  but  creditable,  her  house  being 
a  home  for  young  courtesans.  fiEschines  tells 
us,  also,  that  Lysicles,  a  sheep-dealer,  a  man 
of  low  birth  and  character,  by  keeping  Aspasia 
company  after  Pericles’s  death,  came  to  be  a 
chief  man  in  Athens.  And  in  Plato’s  Men - 
exenus,  though  we  do  not  take  the  introduc¬ 
tion  as  quite  serious,  still  thus  much  seems  to 
be  historical,  that  she  had  the  repute  of  being 
resorted  to  by  many  of  the  Athenians  for  in¬ 
struction  in  the  art  of  speaking.  Pericles’s  in¬ 
clination  for  her  seems,  however,  to  have 
rather  proceeded  from  the  passion  of  love.  He 
had  a  wife  that  was  near  of  kin  to  him,  who 
had  been  married  first  to  Hipponicus,  by 


133 

whom  she  had  Callias,  surnamed  the  Rich; 
and  also  she  brought  Pericles,  while  she  lived 
with  him,  two  sons,  Xanthippus  and  Paralus. 
Afterwards,  when  they  did  not  well  agree,  nor 
like  to  live  together,  he  parted  with  her,  with 
her  own  consent,  to  another  man,  and  himself 
took  Aspasia,  and  loved  her  with  wonderful 
affection;  every  day,  both  as  he  went  out  and 
as  he  came  in  from  the  market-place,  he  saluted 
and  kissed  her. 

In  the  comedies  she  goes  by  the  nicknames 
of  the  new  Omphale  and  Deianira,  and  again 
is  styled  Juno.  Cratinus,  in  downright  terms, 
calls  her  a  harlot. 

To  find  him  a  Juno  the  goddess  of  lust 

Bore  that  harlot  past  shame, 

Aspasia  by  name. 

It  should  seem  also  that  he  had  a  son  by  her; 
Eupolis,  in  his  Demi,  introduced  Pericles  ask¬ 
ing  after  his  safety,  and  Myronides  replying — 

My  son?  He  lives:  a  man  he  had  been  long, 

But  that  the  harlot-mother  did  him  wrong. 
Aspasia,  they  say,  became  so  celebrated  and 
renowned,  that  Cyrus,  also  who  made  war 
against  Artaxerxes  for  the  Persian  monarchy, 
gave  her  whom  he  loved  the  best  of  all  his 
concubines  the  name  of  Aspasia,  who  before 
that  was  called  Milto.  She  was  a  Phocaean  by 
birth,  the  daughter  of  one  Hermotimus,  and, 
when  Cyrus  fell  in  battle,  was  carried  to  the 
king,  and  had  great  influence  at  court.  These 
things  coming  into  my  memory  as  I  am  writ¬ 
ing  this  story,  it  would  be  unnatural  for  me 
to  omit  them. 

Pericles,  however,  was  particularly  charged 
with  having  proposed  to  the  assembly  the  war 
against  the  Samians,  from  favour  to  the  Mi¬ 
lesians,  upon  the  entreaty  of  Aspasia.  For  the 
two  states  were  at  war  for  the  possession  of 
Priene;  and  the  Samians,  getting  the  better, 
refused  to  lay  down  their  arms  and  to  have 
the  controversy  betwixt  them  decided  by  ar¬ 
bitration  before  the  Athenians.  Pericles,  there¬ 
fore,  fitting  out  a  fleet,  went  and  broke  up  the 
oligarchical  government  at  Samos,  and  taking 
fifty  of  the  principal  men  of  the  town  as  hos¬ 
tages,  and  as  many  of  their  children,  sent  them 
to  the  isle  of  Lemnos,  there  to  be  kept,  though 
he  had  offers,  as  some  relate,  of  a  talent  apiece 
for  himself  from  each  one  of  the  hostages, 
and  of  many  other  presents  from  those  who 
were  anxious  not  to  have  a  democracy.  More¬ 
over,  Pisuthnes  the  Persian,  one  of  the  king’s 
lieutenants,  bearing  some  good-will  to  the 
Samians,  sent  him  ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold 
to  excuse  the  city.  Pericles,  however,  would 


134 

receive  none  of  all  this;  but  after  he  had  taken 
that  course  with  the  Samians  which  he 
thought  fit  and  set  up  a  democracy  among 
them,  sailed  back  to  Athens. 

But  they,  however,  immediately  revolted, 
Pisuthnes  having  privily  got  away  their  host¬ 
ages  for  them,  and  provided  them  with  means 
for  the  war.  Whereupon  Pericles  came  out 
with  a  fleet  a  second  time  against  them,  and 
found  them  not  idle  nor  slinking  away,  but 
manfully  resolved  to  try  for  the  dominion  of 
the  sea.  The  issue  was,  that  after  a  sharp  sea- 
fight  about  the  island  called  Tragia,  Pericles 
obtained  a  decisive  victory,  having  with  forty- 
four  ships  routed  seventy  of  the  enemy’s, 
twenty  of  which  were  carrying  soldiers. 

Together  with  his  victory  and  pursuit,  hav¬ 
ing  made  himself  master  of  the  port,  he  laid 
siege  to  the  Samians,  and  blocked  them  up, 
who  yet,  one  way  or  another,  still  ventured  to 
make  sallies,  and  fight  under  the  city  walls. 
But  after  that  another  greater  fleet  from  Ath¬ 
ens  was  arrived,  and  that  the  Samians  were 
now  shut  up  with  a  close  leaguer  on  every 
side,  Pericles,  taking  with  him  sixty  galleys, 
sailed  out  into  the  main  sea,  with  the  inten¬ 
tion,  as  most  authors  give  the  account,  to  meet 
a  squadron  of  Phcenecian  ships  that  were  com¬ 
ing  for  the  Samians’  relief,  and  to  fight  them 
at  as  great  distance  as  could  be  from  the  is¬ 
land;  but,  as  Stesimbrotus  says,  with  a  design 
of  putting  over  to  Cyprus,  which  does  not  seem 
to  be  probable. 

But,  whichever  of  the  two  was  his  inten¬ 
tion,  it  seems  to  have  been  a  miscalculation. 
For  on  his  departure,  Melissus,  the  son  of  Itha- 
genes,  a  philosopher,  being  at  that  time  the 
general  in  Samos,  despising  either  the  small 
number  of  the  ships  that  were  left  or  the  inex¬ 
perience  of  the  commanders,  prevailed  with  the 
citizens  to  attack  the  Athenians.  And  the  Sami¬ 
ans  having  won  the  battle,  and  taken  several  of 
the  men  prisoners,  and  disabled  several  of  the 
ships,  were  masters  of  the  sea,  and  brought  into 
port  all  necessaries  they  wanted  for  the  war, 
which  they  had  not  before.  Aristode  says,  too, 
that  Pericles  had  been  once  before  this  worsted 
by  this  Melissus  in  a  sea-fight. 

The  Samians,  that  they  might  requite  an 
affront  which  had  before  been  put  upon  them, 
branded  the  Athenians,  whom  they  took  pris¬ 
oners,  in  their  foreheads,  with  the  figure  of  an 
owl.  For  so  the  Athenians  had  marked  them 
before  with  a  Samaena,  which  is  a  sort  of  ship, 
low  and  flat  in  the  prow,  so  as  to  look  snub¬ 
nosed,  but  wide  and  large  and  well-spread  in 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  hold,  by  which  it  both  carries  a  large  cargo 
and  sails  well.  And  it  was  so  called,  because 
the  first  of  that  kind  was  seen  at  Samos,  hav¬ 
ing  been  built  by  order  of  Polycrates,  the  ty¬ 
rant.  These  brands  upon  the  Samians’  fore¬ 
heads,  they  say,  are  the  allusion  in  the  passage 
of  Aristophanes,  where  he  says — 

For,  oh,  the  Samians  are  a  lettered  people. 

Pericles,  as  soon  as  news  was  brought  him 
of  the  disaster  that  had  befallen  his  army, 
made  all  the  haste  he  could  to  come  in  to 
their  relief,  and  having  defeated  Melissus,  who 
bore  up  against  him,  and  put  the  enemy  to 
flight,  he  immediately  proceeded  to  hem  them 
in  with  a  wall,  resolving  to  master  them  and 
take  the  town,  rather  with  some  cost  and  time 
than  with  the  wounds  and  hazards  of  his  citi¬ 
zens.  But  as  it  was  a  hard  matter  to  keep  back 
the  Athenians,  who  were  vexed  at  the  delay, 
and  were  eagerly  bent  to  fight,  he  divided  the 
whole  multitude  into  eight  parts,  and  arranged 
by  lot  that  that  part  which  had  the  white  bean 
should  have  leave  to  feast  and  take  their  ease 
while  the  other  seven  were  fighting.  And  this 
is  the  reason,  they  say,  that  people,  when  at 
any  time  they  have  been  merry,  and  enjoyed 
themselves,  called  it  white  day,  in  allusion  to 
this  white  bean. 

Ephorus  the  historian  tells  us  besides,  that 
Pericles  made  use  of  engines  of  battery  in  this 
siege,  being  much  taken  with  the  curiousness 
of  the  invention,  with  the  aid  and  presence  of 
Artemon  himself,  the  engineer,  who,  being 
lame,  used  to  be  carried  about  in  a  litter, 
where  the  works  required  his  attendance,  and 
for  that  reason  was  called  Periphoretus.  But 
Heraclides  Ponticus  disproves  this  out  of  An¬ 
acreon’s  poems,  where  mention  is  made  of 
this  Artemon  Periphoretus  several  ages  before 
the  Samian  war,  or  any  of  these  occurrences. 
And  he  says  that  Artemon,  being  a  man  who 
loved  his  ease,  and  had  a  great  apprehension 
of  danger,  for  the  most  part  kept  close  within 
doors,  having  two  of  his  servants  to  hold  a  bra¬ 
zen  shield  over  his  head,  that  nothing  might 
fall  upon  him  from  above;  and  if  he  were  at 
any  time  forced  upon  necessity  to  go  abroad, 
that  he  was  carried  about  in  a  little  hanging 
bed,  close  to  the  very  ground,  and  that  for  this 
reason  he  was  called  Periphoretus. 

In  the  ninth  month,  the  Samians  surrender¬ 
ing  themselves  and  delivering  up  the  town, 
Pericles  pulled  down  their  walls,  and  seized 
their  shipping,  and  set  a  fine  of  a  large  sum  of 
money  upon  them,  part  of  which  they  paid 
down  at  once,  and  they  agreed  to  bring  in  the 


PERICLES 

rest  by  a  certain  time,  and  gave  hostages  for 
security.  Duris,  the  Samian,  makes  a  tragical 
drama  out  of  these  events,  charging  the  Athe¬ 
nians  and  Pericles  with  a  great  deal  of  cruelty, 
which  neither  Thucydides,  nor  Ephorus,  nor 
Aristotle  have  given  any  relation  of,  and  prob¬ 
ably  with  little  regard  to  truth;  how,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  he  brought  the  captains  and  soldiers  of 
the  galleys  into  the  market-place  at  Miletus, 
and  there  having  bound  them  fast  to  boards 
for  ten  days,  then,  when  they  were  already  all 
but  half  dead,  gave  order  to  have  them  killed 
by  beating  out  their  brains  with  clubs,  and 
their  dead  bodies  to  be  flung  out  into  the  open 
streets  and  fields,  unburied.  Duris,  however, 
who,  even  where  he  has  no  private  feeling  con¬ 
cerned,  is  not  wont  to  keep  his  narrative  within 
the  limits  of  truth,  is  the  more  likely  upon  this 
occasion  to  have  exaggerated  the  calamities 
which  befell  his  country,  to  create  odium 
against  the  Athenians. 

Pericles,  however,  after  the  reduction  of 
Samos,  returning  back  to  Athens,  took  care 
that  those  who  died  in  the  war  should  be  hon¬ 
ourably  buried,  and  made  a  funeral  harangue, 
as  the  custom  is,  in  their  commendation  at 
their  graves,  for  which  he  gained  great  ad¬ 
miration.  As  he  came  down  from  the  stage  on 
which  he  spoke,  the  rest  of  the  women  came 
and  complimented  him,  taking  him  by  the 
hand,  and  crowning  him  with  garlands  and 
ribbons,  like  a  victorious  athlete  in  the  games; 
but  Elpinice,  coming  near  to  him,  said,  “These 
are  brave  deeds,  Pericles,  that  you  have  done, 
and  such  as  deserve  our  chaplets;  who  have 
lost  us  many  a  worthy  citizen,  not  in  a  war 
with  Phoenicians  or  Medes,  like  my  brother 
Cimon,  but  for  the  overthrow  of  an  allied  and 
kindred  city.”  As  Elpinice  spoke  these  words, 
he,  smiling  quietly,  as  it  is  said,  returned  her 
answer  with  this  verse: — 

Old  women  should  not  see\  to  he  perfumed. 

Ion  says  of  him,  that  upon  this  exploit  of 
his,  conquering  the  Samians,  he  indulged  very 
high  and  proud  thoughts  of  himself:  whereas 
Agamemnon  was  ten  years  taking  a  barbarous 
city,  he  had  in  nine  months’  time  vanquished 
and  taken  the  greatest  and  most  powerful  of 
the  Ionians.  And  indeed  it  was  not  without 
reason  that  he  assumed  this  glory  to  himself, 
for,  in  real  truth,  there  was  much  uncertainty 
and  great  hazard  in  this  great  war,  if  so  be,  as 
Thucydides  tells  us,  the  Samian  state  were 
within  a  very  little  of  wresting  the  whole  pow¬ 
er  and  dominion  of  the  sea  out  of  the  Atheni¬ 
ans’  hands. 


135 

After  this  was  over,  the  Peloponnesian  war 
beginning  to  break  out  in  full  tide,  he  advised 
the  people  to  send  help  to  the  Corcyraeans, 
who  were  attacked  by  the  Corinthians,  and 
to  secure  to  themselves  an  island  possessed  of 
great  naval  resources,  since  the  Peloponnesians 
were  already  all  but  in  actual  hostilities  against 
them. 

The  people  readily  consenting  to  the  mo¬ 
tion,  and  voting  an  aid  and  succour  for  them, 
he  despatched  Lacedaemonius,  Cimon’s  son, 
having  only  ten  ships  with  him,  as  it  were  out 
of  a  design  to  affront  him;  for  there  was  a 
great  kindness  and  friendship  betwixt  Cimon’s 
family  and  the  Lacedaemonians;  so,  in  order 
that  Lacedaemonius  might  lie  the  more  open 
to  a  charge,  or  suspicion  at  least,  of  favouring 
the  Lacedaemonians  and  playing  false,  if  he 
performed  no  considerable  exploit  in  this  serv¬ 
ice,  he  allowed  him  a  small  number  of  ships, 
and  sent  him  out  against  his  will;  and  indeed 
he  made  it  somewhat  his  business  to  hinder 
Cimon’s  sons  from  rising  in  the  state,  profess¬ 
ing  that  by  their  very  names  they  were  not  to 
be  looked  upon  as  native  and  true  Athenians, 
but  foreigners  and  strangers,  one  being  called 
Lacedaemonius,  another  Thessalus,  and  the 
third  Eleus;  and  they  were  all  three  of  them, 
it  was  thought,  born  of  an  Arcadian  woman. 
Being,  however,  ill  spoken  of  on  account  of 
these  ten  galleys,  as  having  afforded  but  a 
small  supply  to  the  people  that  were  in  need, 
and  yet  given  a  great  advantage  to  those  who 
might  complain  of  the  act  of  intervention,  Per¬ 
icles  sent  out  a  larger  force  afterwards  to  Cor- 
cyra,  which  arrived  after  the  fight  was 
over. 

And  when  now  the  Corinthians,  angry  and 
indignant  with  the  Athenians,  accused  them 
publicly  at  Lacedaemon,  the  Megarians  joined 
with  them,  complaining  that  they  were,  con¬ 
trary  to  common  right  and  the  articles  of 
peace  sworn  to  among  the  Greeks,  kept  out 
and  driven  away  from  every  market  and  from 
all  ports  under  the  control  of  the  Athenians. 
The  iEginetans,  also,  professing  to  be  ill-used 
and  treated  with  violence,  made  supplications 
in  private  to  the  Lacedaemonians  for  redress, 
though  not  daring  openly  to  call  the  Atheni¬ 
ans  in  question.  In  the  meantime,  also,  the 
city  Potidaea,  under  the  dominion  of  the  Athe¬ 
nians,  but  a  colony  formerly  of  the  Corinthi¬ 
ans,  had  revolted,  and  was  beset  with  a  formal 
siege,  and  was  a  further  occasion  of  precipitat¬ 
ing  the  war. 

Yet  notwithstanding  all  this,  there  being 


136 

embassies  sent  to  Athens,  and  Archidamus, 
the  King  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  endeavour¬ 
ing  to  bring  the  greater  part  of  the  complaints 
and  matters  in  dispute  to  a  fair  determination, 
and  to  pacify  and  allay  the  heats  of  the  allies, 
it  is  very  likely  that  the  war  would  not  upon 
any  other  grounds  of  quarrel  have  fallen  upon 
the  Athenians,  could  they  have  been  prevailed 
with  to  repeal  the  ordinance  against  the  Meg- 
arians,  and  to  be  reconciled  to  them.  Upon 
which  account,  since  Pericles  was  the  man  who 
mainly  opposed  it,  and  stirred  up  the  people’s 
passions  to  persist  in  their  contention  with  the 
Megarians,  he  was  regarded  as  the  sole  cause  of 
the  war. 

They  say,  moreover,  that  ambassadors  went, 
by  order,  from  Lacedaemon  to  Athens  about 
this  very  business,  and  that  when  Pericles  was 
urging  a  certain  law  which  made  it  illegal  to 
take  down  or  withdraw  the  tablet  of  the  de¬ 
cree,  one  of  the  ambassadors,  Polyalces  by 
name,  said,  “Well,  do  not  take  it  down  then, 
but  turn  it;  there  is  no  law,  I  suppose,  which 
forbids  that”;  which,  though  prettily  said,  did 
not  move  Pericles  from  his  resolution. 

There  may  have  been,  in  all  likelihood, 
something  of  a  secret  grudge  and  private  ani¬ 
mosity  which  he  had  against  the  Megarians. 
Yet,  upon  a  public  and  open  charge  against 
them,  that  they  had  appropriated  part  of  the 
sacred  land  on  the  frontier,  he  proposed  a 
decree  that  a  herald  should  be  sent  to  them, 
and  the  same  also  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  with 
an  accusation  of  the  Megarians;  an  order 
which  certainly  shows  equitable  and  friendly 
proceeding  enough.  And  after  that  the  herald 
who  was  sent,  by  name  Anthemocritus,  died, 
and  it  was  believed  that  the  Megarians  had 
contrived  his  death,  then  Charinus  proposed 
a  decree  against  them,  that  there  should  be  an 
irreconcilable  and  implacable  enmity  thence¬ 
forward  betwixt  the  two  commonwealths;  and 
that  if  any  one  of  the  Megarians  should  but 
set  his  foot  in  Attica,  he  should  be  put  to 
death;  and  that  the  commanders,  when  they 
take  the  usual  oath,  should,  over  and  above 
that,  swear  that  they  will  twice  every  year 
make  an  inroad  into  the  Megarian  country; 
and  that  Anthemocritus  should  be  buried  near 
the  Thracian  Gates,  which  are  now  called  the 
Dipylon,  or  Double  Gate. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Megarians,  utterly 
denying  and  disowning  the  murder  of  An¬ 
themocritus,  throw  the  whole  matter  upon 
Aspasia  and  Pericles,  availing  themselves  of 
the  famous  verses  in  the  Acharnians — 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

To  Me  gar  a  some  of  our  madcaps  ran, 

And  stole  Simcetha  thence,  their  courtesan. 

Which  exploit  the  Megarians  to  outdo, 

Came  to  Aspasia’s  house,  and  too\  off  two. 

The  true  occasion  of  the  quarrel  is  not  so 
easy  to  find  out.  But  of  inducing  the  refusal  to 
annul  the  decree,  all  alike  charge  Pericles. 
Some  say  he  met  the  request  with  a  positive  re¬ 
fusal,  out  of  high  spirit  and  a  view  of  the  state’s 
best  interest,  accounting  that  the  demand  made 
in  those  embassies  was  designed  for  a  trial  of 
their  compliance,  and  that  a  concession  would 
be  taken  for  a  confession  of  weakness  as  if  they 
durst  not  do  otherwise;  while  some  others  there 
are  who  say  that  it  was  rather  out  of  arrogance 
and  a  wilful  spirit  of  contention,  to  show  his 
own  strength,  that  he  took  occasion  to  slight 
the  Lacedaemonians. 

The  worst  motive  of  all,  which  is  confirmed 
by  most  witnesses,  is  to  the  following  effect: 
Phidias  the  Moulder  had,  as  has  before  been 
said,  undertaken  to  make  the  statue  of  Min¬ 
erva.  Now  he,  being  admitted  to  friendship 
with  Pericles,  and  a  great  favourite  of  his,  had 
many  enemies  upon  this  account,  who  envied 
and  maligned  him;  who  also,  to  make  trial 
in  a  case  of  his,  what  kind  of  judges  the  com¬ 
mons  would  prove,  should  there  be  occasion 
to  bring  Pericles  himself  before  them,  having 
tampered  with  Menon,  one  who  had  been  a 
workman  with  Phidias,  stationed  him  in  the 
market-place,  with  a  petition  desiring  public 
security  upon  his  discovery  and  impeachment 
of  Phidias.  The  people  admitting  the  man  to 
tell  his  story,  and  the  prosecution  proceeding 
in  the  assembly,  there  was  nothing  of  theft 
or  cheat  proved  against  him;  for  Phidias,  from 
the  very  first  beginning,  by  the  advice  of 
Pericles,  had  so  wrought  and  wrapt  the  gold 
that  was  used  in  the  work  about  the  statue, 
that  they  might  take  it  all  off,  and  make  out 
the  just  weight  of  it,  which  Pericles  at  that 
time  bade  the  accusers  do.  But  the  reputation 
of  his  works  was  what  brought  envy  upon 
Phidias,  especially  that  where  he  represents 
the  fight  of  the  Amazons  upon  the  goddess’s 
shield;  he  had  introduced  a  likeness  of  himself 
as  a  bald  old  man  holding  up  a  great  stone 
with  both  hands,  and  had  put  in  a  very  fine 
representation  of  Pericles  fighting  with  an 
Amazon.  And  the  position  of  the  hand  which 
holds  out  the  spear  in  front  of  the  face,  was  in¬ 
geniously  contrived  to  conceal  in  some  degree 
the  likeness,  which  meantime  showed  itself  on 
either  side. 

Phidias  then  was  carried  away  to  prison, 


PERICLES 

and  there  died  of  a  disease;  but,  as  some  say,  of 
poison,  administered  by  the  enemies  of  Peri¬ 
cles,  to  raise  a  slander,  or  a  suspicion  at  least, 
as  though  he  had  procured  it.  The  informer 
Menon,  upon  Glycon’s  proposal,  the  people 
made  free  from  payment  of  taxes  and  customs, 
and  ordered  the  generals  to  take  care  that  no¬ 
body  should  do  him  any  hurt. 

About  the  same  time,  Aspasia  was  indicted 
of  impiety,  upon  the  complaint  of  Hermippus, 
the  comedian,  who  also  laid  further  to  her 
charge  that  she  received  into  her  house  free¬ 
born  women  for  the  uses  of  Pericles.  And  Dio- 
pithes  proposed  a  decree,  that  public  accusa¬ 
tions  should  be  laid  against  persons  who  neg¬ 
lected  religion,  or  taught  new  doctrines  about 
things  above,  directing  suspicion,  by  means 
of  Anaxagoras,  against  Pericles  himself.  The 
people  receiving  and  admitting  these  accusa¬ 
tions  and  complaints,  at  length,  by  this  means, 
they  came  to  enact  a  decree,  at  the  motion  of 
Dracontides,  that  Pericles  should  bring  in  the 
accounts  of  the  moneys  he  had  expended,  and 
lodge  them  with  the  Prytanes;  and  that  the 
judges,  carrying  their  suffrage  from  the  altar 
in  the  Acropolis,  should  examine  and  deter¬ 
mine  the  business  in  the  city.  This  last  clause 
Hagnon  took  out  of  the  decree,  and  moved 
that  the  causes  should  be  tried  before  fifteen 
hundred  jurors,  whether  they  should  be  styled 
prosecutions  for  robbery,  or  bribery,  or  any 
kind  of  malversation. 

Aspasia,  Pericles  begged  off,  shedding,  as 
^Eschines  says,  many  tears  at  the  trial,  and 
personally  entreating  the  jurors.  But  fearing 
how  it  might  go  with  Anaxagoras,  he  sent 
him  out  of  the  city.  And  finding  that  in  Phi¬ 
dias’s  case  he  had  miscarried  with  the  people, 
being  afraid  of  impeachment,  he  kindled  the 
war,  which  hitherto  had  lingered  and  smoth¬ 
ered,  and  blew  it  up  into  a  flame;  hoping,  by 
that  means,  to  disperse  and  scatter  these  com¬ 
plaints  and  charges,  and  to  allay  their  jeal¬ 
ousy;  the  city  usually  throwing  herself  upon 
him  alone,  and  trusting  to  his  sole  conduct, 
upon  the  urgency  of  great  affairs  and  public 
dangers,  by  reason  of  his  authority  and  the 
sway  he  bore. 

These  are  given  out  to  have  been  the  rea¬ 
sons  which  induced  Pericles  not  to  suffer  the 
people  of  Athens  to  yield  to  the  proposals  of 
the  Lacedaemonians;  but  their  truth  is  uncer¬ 
tain. 

The  Lacedaemonians,  for  their  part,  feeling 
sure  that  if  they  could  once  remove  him,  they 
might  be  at  what  terms  they  pleased  with  the 


137 

Athenians,  sent  them  word  that  they  should 
expel  the  “Pollution”  with  which  Pericles  on 
the  mother’s  side  was  tainted,  as  Thucydides 
tells  us.  But  the  issue  proved  quite  contrary 
to  what  those  who  sent  the  message  expected; 
instead  of  bringing  Pericles  under  suspicion 
and  reproach,  they  raised  him  into  yet  greater 
credit  and  esteem  with  the  citizens,  as  a  man 
whom  their  enemies  most  hated  and  feared. 
In  the  same  way,  also,  before  Archidamus,  who 
was  at  the  head  of  the  Peloponnesians,  made 
his  invasion  into  Attica,  he  told  the  Athenians 
beforehand,  that  if  Archidamus,  while  he  laid 
waste  the  rest  of  the  country,  should  forbear 
and  spare  his  estate,  either  on  the  ground  of 
friendship  or  right  of  hospitality  that  was  be¬ 
twixt  them,  or  on  purpose  to  give  his  enemies 
an  occasion  of  traducing  him;  that  then  he  did 
freely  bestow  upon  the  state  all  his  land  and  the 
buildings  upon  it  for  the  public  use. 

The  Lacedaemonians,  therefore,  and  their 
allies,  with  a  great  army,  invaded  the  Athe¬ 
nian  territories,  under  the  conduct  of  King 
Archidamus,  and  laying  waste  the  country, 
marched  on  as  far  as  Acharnae,  and  there 
pitched  their  camp,  presuming  that  the  Athe¬ 
nians  would  never  endure  that,  but  would 
come  out  and  fight  them  for  their  country’s 
and  their  honour’s  sake.  But  Pericles  looked 
upon  it  as  dangerous  to  engage  in  battle,  to 
the  risk  of  the  city  itself,  against  sixty  thou¬ 
sand  men-at-arms  of  Peloponnesians  and  Boeo¬ 
tians;  for  so  many  they  were  in  number  that 
made  the  inroad  at  first;  and  he  endeavoured 
to  appease  those  who  were  desirous  to  fight, 
and  were  grieved  and  discontented  to  see  how 
things  went,  and  gave  them  good  words,  say¬ 
ing,  that  “trees,  when  they  are  lopped  and  cut, 
grow  up  again  in  a  short  time,  but  men,  being 
once  lost,  cannot  easily  be  recovered.” 

He  did  not  convene  the  people  into  an  as¬ 
sembly,  for  fear  lest  they  should  force  him 
to  act  against  his  judgment;  but,  like  a  skil¬ 
ful  steersman  or  pilot  of  a  ship,  who,  when  a 
sudden  squall  comes  on,  out  at  sea,  makes  all 
his  arrangements,  sees  that  all  is  tight  and  fast, 
and  then  follows  the  dictates  of  his  skill,  and 
minds  the  business  of  the  ship,  taking  no  no¬ 
tice  of  the  tears  and  entreaties  of  the  sea-sick 
and  fearful  passengers,  so  he,  having  shut  up 
the  city  gates,  and  placed  guards  at  all  posts  for 
security,  followed  his  own  reason  and  judg¬ 
ment,  little  regarding  those  that  cried  out 
against  him  and  were  angry  at  his  manage¬ 
ment,  although  there  were  a  great  many  of  his 
friends  that  urged  him  with  requests,  and 


138 

many  of  his  enemies  threatened  and  accused 
him  for  doing  as  he  did,  and  many  made  songs 
and  lampoons  upon  him,  which  were  sung 
about  the  town  to  his  disgrace,  reproaching 
him  with  the  cowardly  exercise  of  his  office  of 
general,  and  the  tame  abandonment  of  every¬ 
thing  to  the  enemy’s  hands. 

Cleon,  also,  already  was  among  his  assail¬ 
ants,  making  use  of  the  feeling  against  him 
as  a  step  to  the  leadership  of  the  people,  as  ap¬ 
pears  in  the  anapaestic  verses  of  Hermippus — 

Satyr-bjng,  instead  of  swords, 

Will  you  always  handle  words ? 

Very  brave  indeed  we  find  them, 

But  a  Teles  lur\s  behind  them. 

Yet  to  gnash  your  teeth  you're  seen, 

When  the  little  dagger  \een, 

Whetted  every  day  anew, 

Of  sharp  Cleon  touches  you . 

Pericles,  however,  was  not  at  all  moved  by 
any  attacks,  but  took  all  patiently,  and  sub¬ 
mitted  in  silence  to  the  disgrace  they  threw 
upon  him  and  the  ill-will  they  bore  him;  and, 
sending  out  a  fleet  of  a  hundred  galleys  to 
Peloponnesus,  he  did  not  go  along  with  it  in 
person,  but  stayed  behind,  that  he  might 
watch  at  home  and  keep  the  city  under  his 
own  control,  till  the  Peloponnesians  broke  up 
their  camp  and  were  gone.  Yet  to  soothe  the 
common  people,  jaded  and  distressed  with  the 
war,  he  relieved  them  with  distributions  of 
public  moneys,  and  ordained  new  divisions 
of  subject  land.  For  having  turned  out  all  the 
people  of  yEgina,  he  parted  the  island  among 
the  Athenians  according  to  lot.  Some  comfort, 
also,  and  ease  in  their  miseries,  they  might  re¬ 
ceive  from  what  their  enemies  endured.  For  the 
fleet,  sailing  round  the  Peloponnese,  ravaged  a 
great  deal  of  the  country,  and  pillaged  and 
plundered  the  towns  and  smaller  cities;  and  by 
land  he  himself  entered  with  an  army  the 
Megarian  country,  and  made  havoc  of  it  all. 
Whence  it  is  clear  that  the  Peloponnesians, 
though  they  did  the  Athenians  much  mischief 
by  land,  yet  suffering  as  much  themselves 
from  them  by  sea,  would  not  have  protracted 
the  war  to  such  a  length,  but  would  quickly 
have  given  it  over,  as  Pericles  at  first  foretold 
they  would,  had  not  some  divine  power 
crossed  human  purposes. 

In  the  first  place,  the  pestilential  disease,  or 
plague,  seized  upon  the  city,  and  ate  up  all  the 
flower  and  prime  of  their  youth  and  strength. 
Upon  occasion  of  which,  the  people,  distem¬ 
pered  and  afflicted  in  their  souls,  as  well  as  in 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

their  bodies,  were  utterly  enraged  like  mad¬ 
men  against  Pericles,  and,  like  patients  grown 
delirious,  sought  to  lay  violent  hands  on  their 
physician,  or,  as  it  were,  their  father.  They  had 
been  possessed,  by  his  enemies,  with  the  belief 
that  the  occasion  of  the  plague  was  the  crowd¬ 
ing  of  the  country  people  together  into  the 
town,  forced  as  they  were  now,  in  the  heat  of 
the  summer-weather,  to  dwell  many  of  them 
together  even  as  they  could,  in  small  tenements 
and  stifling  hovels,  and  to  be  tied  to  a  lazy 
course  of  life  within  doors,  whereas  before  they 
lived  in  a  pure,  open,  and  free  air.  The  cause 
and  author  of  all  this,  said  they,  is  he  who  on 
account  of  the  war  has  poured  a  multitude  of 
people  from  the  country  in  upon  us  within  the 
walls,  and  uses  all  these  men  that  he  has  here 
upon  no  employ  or  service,  but  keeps  them 
pent  up  like  cattle,  to  be  overrun  with  infection 
from  one  another,  affording  them  neither  shift 
of  quarters  nor  any  refreshment. 

With  the  design  to  remedy  these  evils,  and 
do  the  enemy  some  inconvenience,  Pericles 
got  a  hundred  and  fifty  galleys  ready,  and 
having  embarked  many  tried  soldiers,  both 
foot  and  horse,  was  about  to  sail  out,  giving 
great  hope  to  his  citizens,  and  no  less  alarm 
to  his  enemies,  upon  the  sight  of  so  great  a 
force.  And  now  the  vessels  having  their  com¬ 
plement  of  men,  and  Pericles  being  gone 
aboard  his  own  galley,  it  happened  that  the 
sun  was  eclipsed,  and  it  grew  dark  on  a  sud¬ 
den,  to  the  affright  of  all,  for  this  was  looked 
upon  as  extremely  ominous.  Pericles,  there¬ 
fore,  perceiving  the  steersman  seized  with  fear 
and  at  a  loss  what  to  do,  took  his  cloak  and 
held  it  up  before  the  man’s  face,  and  screen¬ 
ing  him  with  it  so  that  he  could  not  see, 
asked  him  whether  he  imagined  there  was 
any  great  hurt,  or  the  sign  of  any  great  hurt 
in  this,  and  he  answering  No,  “Why,”  said 
he,  “and  what  does  that  differ  from  this,  only 
that  what  has  caused  that  darkness  there,  is 
something  greater  than  a  cloak?”  This  is  a 
story  which  philosophers  tell  their  scholars. 

Pericles,  however,  after  putting  out  to  sea, 
seems  not  to  have  done  any  other  exploit  be¬ 
fitting  such  preparations,  and  when  he  had 
laid  siege  to  the  holy  city  Epidaurus,  which 
gave  him  some  hope  of  surrender,  miscarried 
in  his  design  by  reason  of  the  sickness.  For  it 
not  only  seized  upon  the  Athenians,  but  upon 
all  others,  too,  that  held  any  sort  of  communi¬ 
cation  with  the  army. 

Finding  after  this  the  Athenians  ill-affected 
and  highly  displeased  with  him,  he  tried  and 


PERICLES 

endeavoured  what  he  could  to  appease  and 
re-encourage  them.  But  he  could  not  pacify  or 
allay  their  anger,  nor  persuade  or  prevail  with 
them  any  way,  till  they  freely  passed  their 
votes  upon  him,  resumed  their  power,  took 
away  his  command  from  him,  and  fined  him 
in  a  sum  of  money;  which  by  their  account 
that  say  least,  was  fifteen  talents,  while  they 
who  reckon  most,  name  fifty.  The  name  pre¬ 
fixed  to  the  accusation  was  Cleon,  as  Ido- 
meneus  tells  us;  Simmias,  according  to  Theo¬ 
phrastus;  and  Heraclides  Ponticus  gives  it  as 
Lacratidas. 

After  this,  public  troubles  were  soon  to 
leave  him  unmolested;  the  people,  so  to  say, 
discharged  their  passion  in  their  stroke,  and 
lost  their  stings  in  the  wound.  But  his  do¬ 
mestic  concerns  were  in  an  unhappy  condi¬ 
tion,  many  of  his  friends  and  acquaintance 
having  died  in  the  plague  time,  and  those  of 
his  family  having  long  since  been  in  disorder 
and  in  a  kind  of  mutiny  against  him.  For  the 
eldest  of  his  lawfully  begotten  sons,  Xanthip- 
pus  by  name,  being  naturally  prodigal,  and 
marrying  a  young  and  expensive  wife,  the 
daughter  of  Tisander,  son  of  Epilycus,  was 
highly  offended  at  his  father's  economy  in 
making  him  but  a  scanty  allowance,  by  little 
and  little  at  a  time.  He  sent,  therefore,  to  a 
friend  one  day  and  borrowed  some  money  of 
him  in  his  father  Pericles’s  name,  pretending 
it  was  by  his  order.  The  man  coming  after¬ 
ward  to  demand  the  debt,  Pericles  was  so  far 
from  yielding  to  pay  it,  that  he  entered  an 
action  against  him. 

Upon  which  the  young  man,  Xanthippus, 
thought  himself  so  ill-used  and  disobliged 
that  he  openly  reviled  his  father;  telling  first, 
by  way  of  ridicule,  stories  about  his  conversa¬ 
tions  at  home,  and  the  discourses  he  had  with 
the  sophists  and  scholars  that  came  to  his 
house.  As,  for  instance,  how  one  who  was  a 
practiser  of  the  five  games  of  skill,  having 
with  a  dart  or  javelin  unawares  against  his 
will  struck  and  killed  Epitimus  the  Pharsalian, 
his  father  spent  a  whole  day  with  Protagoras 
in  a  serious  dispute,  whether  the  javelin,  or 
the  man  that  threw  it,  or  the  masters  of  the 
games  who  appointed  these  sports,  were,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  strictest  and  best  reason,  to  be 
accounted  the  cause  of  this  mischance.  Besides 
this,  Stesimbrotus  tells  us  that  it  was  Xanthip¬ 
pus  who  spread  abroad  among  the  people  the 
infamous  story  concerning  his  own  wife;  and 
in  general  that  this  difference  of  the  young 
man’s  with  his  father,  and  the  breach  betwixt 


139 

them,  continued  never  to  be  healed  or  made 
up  till  his  death.  For  Xanthippus  died  in  the 
plague  time  of  the  sickness. 

At  which  time  Pericles  also  lost  his  sister, 
and  the  greatest  part  of  his  relations  and 
friends,  and  those  who  had  been  most  useful 
and  serviceable  to  him  in  managing  the  affairs 
of  state.  However,  he  did  not  shrink  or  give 
in  upon  these  occasions,  nor  betray  or  lower 
his  high  spirit  and  the  greatness  of  his  mind 
under  all  his  misfortunes;  he  was  not  even 
so  much  as  seen  to  weep  or  to  mourn,  or  even 
attend  the  burial  of  any  of  his  friends  or  rela¬ 
tions,  till  at  last  he  lost  his  only  remaining 
legitimate  son.  Subdued  by  this  blow,  and  yet 
striving  still,  as  far  as  he  could,  to  maintain 
his  principle,  and  to  preserve  and  keep  up  the 
greatness  of  his  soul,  when  he  came,  however, 
to  perform  the  ceremony  of  putting  a  garland 
of  flowers  upon  the  head  of  the  corpse,  he  was 
vanquished  by  his  passion  at  the  sight,  so  that 
he  burst  into  exclamations,  and  shed  copious 
tears,  having  never  done  any  such  thing  in  all 
his  life  before. 

The  city  having  made  trial  of  other  gen¬ 
erals  for  the  conduct  of  war,  and  orators  for 
business  of  state,  when  they  found  there  was 
no  one  who  was  of  weight  enough  for  such  a 
charge,  or  of  authority  sufficient  to  be  trusted 
with  so  great  a  command,  regretted  the  loss 
of  him,  and  invited  him  again  to  address  and 
advise  them,  and  to  reassume  the  office  of  gen¬ 
eral.  He,  however,  lay  at  home  in  dejection  and 
mourning;  but  was  persuaded  by  Alcibiades 
and  others  of  his  friends  to  come  abroad  and 
show  himself  to  the  people;  who  having,  upon 
his  appearance,  made  their  acknowledgments, 
and  apologised  for  their  untowardly  treatment 
of  him,  he  undertook  the  public  affairs  once 
more;  and,  being  chosen  general,  requested 
that  the  statute  concerning  base-born  children, 
which  he  himself  had  formerly  caused  to  be 
made,  might  be  suspended;  that  so  the  name 
and  race  of  his  family  might  not,  for  absolute 
want  of  a  lawful  heir  to  succeed,  be  wholly  lost 
and  extinguished. 

The  case  of  the  statute  was  thus:  Pericles, 
when  long  ago  at  the  height  of  his  power  in 
the  state,  having  then,  as  has  been  said,  chil¬ 
dren  lawfully  begotten,  proposed  a  law  that 
those  only  should  be  reputed  true  citizens  of 
Athens  who  were  born  of  such  parents  as  were 
both  Athenians.  After  this,  the  King  of  Egypt 
having  sent  to  the  people,  by  way  of  present, 
forty  thousand  bushels  of  wheat,  which  were 
to  be  shared  out  among  the  citizens,  a  great 


140 


many  actions  and  suits  about  legitimacy  oc¬ 
curred,  by  virtue  of  that  edict;  cases  which,  till 
that  time,  had  not  been  known  nor  taken  no¬ 
tice  of;  and  several  persons  suffered  by  false 
accusations.  There  were  little  less  than  five 
thousand  who  were  convicted  and  sold  for 
slaves;  those  who,  enduring  the  test,  remained 
in  the  government  and  passed  muster  for  true 
Athenians  were  found  upon  the  poll  to  be  four¬ 
teen  thousands  and  forty  persons  in  number. 

It  looked  strange,  that  a  law,  which  had 
been  carried  so  far  against  so  many  people, 
should  be  cancelled  again  by  the  same  man 
that  made  it;  yet  the  present  calamity  and 
distress  which  Pericles  laboured  under  in  his 
family  broke  through  all  objections,  and  pre¬ 
vailed  with  the  Athenians  to  pity  him,  as  one 
whose  losses  and  misfortunes  had  sufficiently 
punished  his  former  arrogance  and  haughti¬ 
ness.  His  sufferings  deserved,  they  thought, 
their  pity,  and  even  indignation,  and  his  re¬ 
quest  was  such  as  became  a  man  to  ask  and 
men  to  grant;  they  gave  him  permission  to  en¬ 
rol  his  son  in  the  register  of  his  fraternity,  giv¬ 
ing  him  his  own  name.  This  son  afterward, 
after  having  defeated  the  Peloponnesians  at 
Arginusae,  was,  with  his  fellow-generals,  put 
to  death  by  the  people. 

About  the  time  when  his  son  was  enrolled, 
it  should  seem  the  plague  seized  Pericles,  not 
with  sharp  and  violent  fits,  as  it  did  others 
that  had  it,  but  with  a  dull  and  lingering  dis¬ 
temper,  attended  with  various  changes  and 
alterations,  leisurely,  by  little  and  little,  wast¬ 
ing  the  strength  of  his  body,  and  undermin¬ 
ing  the  noble  faculties  of  his  soul.  So  that 
Theophrastus,  in  his  Morals,  when  discussing 
whether  men’s  characters  change  with  their 
circumstances,  and  their  moral  habits,  dis¬ 
turbed  by  the  ailings  of  their  bodies,  start 
aside  from  the  rules  of  virtue,  has  left  it  upon 
record,  that  Pericles,  when  he  was  sick,  showed 
one  of  his  friends  that  came  to  visit  him  an 
amulet  or  charm  that  the  women  had  hung 
about  his  neck;  as  much  as  to  say,  that  he 
was  very  sick  indeed  when  he  would  admit  of 
such  a  foolery  as  that  was. 

When  he  was  now  near  his  end,  the  best 
of  the  citizens  and  those  of  his  friends  who 
were  left  alive,  sitting  about  him,  were  speak¬ 
ing  of  the  greatness  of  his  merit,  and  his  pow¬ 
er,  and  reckoning  up  his  famous  actions  and 
the  number  of  his  victories;  for  there  were  no 
less  than  nine  trophies,  which,  as  their  chief 
commander  and  conqueror  of  their  enemies,  he 
had  set  up  for  the  honour  of  the  city.  They 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

talked  thus  together  among  themselves,  as 
though  he  were  unable  to  understand  or  mind 
what  they  said,  but  had  now  lost  his  conscious¬ 
ness.  He  had  listened,  however,  all  the  while, 
and  attended  to  all,  and,  speaking  out  among 
them,  said  that  he  wondered  they  should  com¬ 
mend  and  take  notice  of  things  which  were  as 
much  owing  to  fortune  as  to  anything  else,  and 
had  happened  to  many  other  commanders, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  should  not  speak  or 
make  mention  of  that  which  was  the  most  ex¬ 
cellent  and  greatest  thing  of  all.  “For,”  said  he, 
“no  Athenian,  through  my  means,  ever  wore 
mourning.” 

He  was  indeed  a  character  deserving  our 
high  admiration  not  only  for  his  equitable 
and  mild  temper,  which  all  along  in  the  many 
affairs  of  his  life,  and  the  great  animosities 
which  he  incurred,  he  constantly  maintained; 
but  also  for  the  high  spirit  and  feeling  which 
made  him  regard  it  the  noblest  of  all  his 
honours  that,  in  the  exercise  of  such  immense 
power,  he  never  had  gratified  his  envy  or  his 
passion,  nor  ever  had  treated  any  enemy  as  ir¬ 
reconcilably  opposed  to  him. 

And  to  me  it  appears  that  this  one  thing 
gives  that  otherwise  childish  and  arrogant 
title  a  fitting  and  becoming  significance;  so 
dispassionate  a  temper,  a  life  so  pure  and  un¬ 
blemished,  in  the  height  of  power  and  place, 
might  well  be  called  Olympian,  in  accordance 
with  our  conceptions  of  the  divine  beings,  to 
whom,  as  the  natural  authors  of  all  good  and 
of  nothing  evil,  we  ascribe  the  rule  and  gov¬ 
ernment  of  the  world.  Not  as  the  poets  repre¬ 
sent,  who,  while  confounding  us  with  their 
ignorant  fancies,  are  themselves  confuted  by 
their  own  poems  and  fictions,  and  call  the 
place,  indeed,  where  they  say  the  gods  make 
their  abode,  a  secure  and  quiet  seat,  free  from 
all  hazards  and  commotions,  untroubled  with 
winds  or  with  clouds,  and  equally  through  all 
time  illumined  with  a  soft  serenity  and  a  pure 
light  as  though  such  were  a  home  most  agree¬ 
able  for  a  blessed  and  immortal  nature;  and 
yet,  in  the  meanwhile,  affirm  that  the  gods 
themselves  are  full  of  trouble  and  enmity  and 
anger  and  other  passions,  which  no  way  be¬ 
come  or  belong  to  even  men  that  have  any  un¬ 
derstanding.  But  this  will,  perhaps,  seem  a  sub¬ 
ject  fitter  for  some  other  consideration,  and  that 
ought  to  be  treated  of  in  some  other  place. 

The  course  of  public  affairs  after  his  death 
produced  a  quick  and  speedy  sense  of  the  loss 
of  Pericles.  Those  who,  while  he  lived,  re¬ 
sented  his  great  authority,  as  that  which 


FABIUS 

eclipsed  themselves,  presently  after  his -quitting 
the  stage,  making  trial  of  other  orators  and 
demagogues,  readily  acknowledged  that  there 
never  had  been  in  nature  such  a  disposition  as 
his  was,  more  moderate  and  reasonable  in  the 
height  of  that  state  he  took  upon  him,  or  more 
grave  and  impressive  in  the  mildness  which  he 
used.  And  that  invidious  arbitrary  power,  to 


141 

which  formerly  they  gave  the  name  of  mon¬ 
archy  and  tyranny,  did  then  appear  to  have 
been  the  chief  bulwark  of  public  safety;  so 
great  a  corruption  and  such  a  flood  of  mischief 
and  vice  followed  which  he,  by  keeping  weak 
and  low,  had  withheld  from  notice,  and  had 
prevented  from  attaining  incurable  height 
through  a  licentious  impunity. 


FABIUS 

C.  170-103  B.C. 


Having  related  the  memorable  actions 
of  Pericles,  our  history  now  proceeds 
to  the  life  of  Fabius.  A  son  of  Her¬ 
cules  and  a  nymph,  or  some  woman  of  that 
country,  who  brought  him  forth  on  the  banks 
of  Tiber,  was,  it  is  said,  the  first  Fabius,  the 
founder  of  the  numerous  and  distinguished 
family  of  the  name.  Others  will  have  it  that 
they  were  first  called  Fodii,  because  the  first 
of  the  race  delighted  in  digging  pitfalls  for 
wild  beasts,  fodere  being  still  the  Latin  for 
to  dig,  and  fossa  for  a  ditch,  and  that  in  proc¬ 
ess  of  time,  by  the  change  of  the  two  letters, 
they  grew  to  be  called  Fabii.  But  be  these 
things  true  or  false,  certain  it  is  that  this  fam¬ 
ily  for  a  long  time  yielded  a  great  number  of 
eminent  persons. 

Our  Fabius,  who  was  fourth  in  descent 
from  that  Fabius  Rullus  who  first  brought 
the  honourable  surname  of  Maximus  into  his 
family,  was  also,  by  way  of  personal  nick¬ 
name,  called  Verrucosus,  from  a  wart  on  his 
upper  lip;  and  in  his  childhood  they  in  like 
manner  named  him  Ovicula,  or  The  Lamb, 
on  account  of  his  extreme  mildness  of  temper. 
His  slowness  in  speaking,  his  long  labour  and 
pains  in  learning,  his  deliberation  in  entering 
into  the  sports  of  other  children,  his  easy  sub¬ 
mission  to  everybody,  as  if  he  had  no  will  of 
his  own,  made  those  who  judge  superficially 
of  him,  the  greater  number,  esteem  him  insen¬ 
sible  and  stupid;  and  few  only  saw  that  this 
tardiness  proceeded  from  stability,  and  dis¬ 
cerned  the  greatness  of  his  mind,  and  the  lion- 
likeness  of  his  temper.  But  as  soon  as  he  came 
into  employments,  his  virtues  exerted  and 
showed  themselves;  his  reputed  want  of  energy 
then  was  recognised  by  people  in  general  as  a 
freedom  of  passion;  his  slowness  in  words  and 
actions,  the  effect  of  a  true  prudence;  his  want 


of  rapidity  and  his  sluggishness,  as  constancy 
and  firmness. 

Living  in  a  great  commonwealth,  sur¬ 
rounded  by  many  enemies,  he  saw  the  wis¬ 
dom  of  inuring  his  body  (nature’s  own  wea¬ 
pon)  to  warlike  exercises,  and  disciplining  his 
tongue  for  public  oratory  in  a  style  conform¬ 
able  to  his  life  and  character.  His  eloquence, 
indeed,  had  not  much  of  popular  ornament, 
nor  empty  artifice,  but  there  was  in  it  great 
weight  of  sense;  it  was  strong  and  sententious, 
much  after  the  way  of  Thucydides.  We  have 
yet  extant  his  funeral  oration  upon  the  death 
of  his  son,  who  died  consul,  which  he  recited 
before  the  people. 

He  was  five  times  consul,  and  in  his  first  con¬ 
sulship  had  the  honour  of  a  triumph  for  the 
victory  he  gained  over  the  Ligurians,  whom  he 
defeated  in  a  set  battle,  and  drove  them  to  take 
shelter  in  the  Alps,  from  whence  they  never 
after  made  any  inroad  or  depredation  upon 
their  neighbours. 

After  this,  Hannibal  came  into  Italy,  who, 
at  his  first  entrance,  having  gained  a  great 
battle  near  the  river  Trebia,  traversed  all  Tus¬ 
cany  with  his  victorious  army,  and,  desolating 
the  country  round  about,  filled  Rome  itself 
with  astonishment  and  terror.  Besides  the 
more  common  signs  of  thunder  and  lightning 
then  happening,  the  report  of  several  unheard- 
of  and  utterly  strange  portents  much  in¬ 
creased  the  popular  consternation.  For  it  was 
said  that  some  targets  sweated  blood;  that  at 
Antium,  when  they  reaped  their  corn,  many 
of  the  ears  were  filled  with  blood;  that  it  had 
rained  red-hot  stones;  that  the  Falerians  had 
seen  the  heavens  open  and  several  scrolls  fall¬ 
ing  down,  in  one  of  which  was  plainly  writ¬ 
ten,  “Mars  himself  stirs  his  arms.” 

But  these  prodigies  had  no  effect  upon  the 


142 


impetuous  and  fiery  temper  of  the  consul  Fla- 
minius,  whose  natural  promptness  had  been 
much  heightened  by  his  late  unexpected  vic¬ 
tory  over  the  Gauls,  when  he  fought  them  con¬ 
trary  to  the  order  of  the  senate  and  the  advice 
of  his  colleague.  Fabius,  on  the  other  side, 
thought  it  not  seasonable  to  engage  with  the 
enemy;  not  that  he  much  regarded  the  prodi¬ 
gies,  which  he  thought  too  strange  to  be  easily 
understood,  though  many  were  alarmed  by 
them;  but  in  regard  that  the  Carthaginians 
were  but  few,  and  in  want  of  money  and  sup¬ 
plies,  he  deemed  it  best  not  to  meet  in  the  field 
a  general  whose  army  had  been  tried  in  many 
encounters,  and  whose  object  was  a  battle,  but 
to  send  aid  to  their  allies,  control  the  move¬ 
ments  of  the  various  subject  cities,  and  let  the 
force  and  vigour  of  Hannibal  waste  away  and 
expire,  like  a  flame,  for  want  of  the  aliment. 

These  weighty  reasons  did  not  prevail  with 
Flaminius,  who  protested  he  would  never 
suffer  the  advance  of  the  enemy  to  the  city, 
nor  be  reduced,  like  Camillus  in  former  time, 
to  fight  for  Rome  within  the  walls  of  Rome. 
Accordingly  he  ordered  the  tribunes  to  draw 
out  the  army  into  the  field;  and  though  he 
himself,  leaping  on  horseback  to  go  out,  was 
no  sooner  mounted  but  the  beast,  without  any 
apparent  cause,  fell  into  so  violent  a  fit  of 
trembling  and  bounding  that  he  cast  his  rider 
headlong  on  the  ground,  he  was  no  ways  de¬ 
terred;  but  proceeded  as  he  had  begun,  and 
marched  forward  up  to  Hannibal,  who  was 
posted  near  the  Lake  Thrasymene  in  Tuscany. 
At  the  moment  of  this  engagement,  there 
happened  so  great  an  earthquake,  that  it  de¬ 
stroyed  several  towns,  altered  the  course  of 
rivers,  and  carried  off  parts  of  high  cliffs,  yet 
such  was  the  eagerness  of  the  combatants, 
that  they  were  entirely  insensible  of  it. 

In  this  battle  Flaminius  fell,  after  many 
proofs  of  his  strength  and  courage,  and  round 
about  him  all  the  bravest  of  the  army;  in  the 
whole  fifteen  thousand  were  killed,  and  as 
many  made  prisoners.  Hannibal,  desirous  to 
bestow  funeral  honours  upon  the  body  of 
Flaminius,  made  diligent  search  after  it,  but 
could  not  find  it  among  the  dead,  nor  was  it 
ever  known  what  became  of  it. 

Upon  the  former  engagement  near  Trebia, 
neither  the  general  who  wrote,  nor  the  ex¬ 
press  who  told  the  news,  used  straightforward 
and  direct  terms,  nor  related  it  otherwise  than 
as  a  drawn  battle,  with  equal  loss  on  either 
side; but  on  this  occasion  as  soon  as  Pomponius, 
the  praetor,  had  the  intelligence,  he  caused  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

people  to  assemble,  and,  without  disguising  or 
dissembling  the  matter,  told  them  plainly,  “We 
are  beaten,  O  Romans,  in  a  great  battle;  the 
consul  Flaminius  is  killed;  think,  therefore, 
what  is  to  be  done  for  your  safety.”  Letting 
loose  his  news  like  a  gate  of  wind  upon  an 
open  sea,  he  threw  the  city  into  utter  confu¬ 
sion:  in  such  consternation,  their  thoughts 
found  no  support  or  stay.  The  danger  at  hand 
at  last  awakened  their  judgments  into  a  reso¬ 
lution  to  choose  a  dictator,  who  by  the  sov¬ 
ereign  authority  of  his  office,  and  by  his  per¬ 
sonal  wisdom  and  courage,  might  be  able  to 
manage  the  public  affairs.  Their  choice  unani¬ 
mously  fell  upon  Fabius,  whose  character 
seemed  equal  to  the  greatness  of  the  office, 
whose  age  was  so  far  advanced  as  to  give  him 
experience,  without  taking  from  him  the  vig¬ 
our  of  action;  his  body  could  execute  what  his 
soul  designed,  and  his  temper  was  a  happy 
compound  of  confidence  and  cautiousness. 

Fabius,  being  thus  installed  in  the  office  of 
dictator,  in  the  first  place  gave  the  command 
of  the  horse  to  Lucius  Minucius;  and  next 
asked  leave  of  the  senate  for  himself,  that  in 
time  of  battle  he  might  serve  on  horseback, 
which  by  an  ancient  law  amongst  the  Romans 
was  forbid  to  their  generals;  whether  it  were, 
that,  placing  their  greatest  strength  in  their 
foot,  they  would  have  their  commanders-in- 
chief  posted  amongst  them,  or  else  to  let  them 
know,  that,  how  great  and  absolute  soever 
their  authority  were,  the  people  and  senate 
were  still  their  masters,  of  whom  they  must 
ask  leave.  Fabius,  however,  to  make  the  au¬ 
thority  of  his  charge  more  observable,  and  to 
render  the  people  more  submissive  and  obedi¬ 
ent  to  him,  caused  himself  to  be  accompanied 
with  the  full  body  of  four-and-twenty  lictors; 
and,  when  the  surviving  consul  came  to  visit 
him,  sent  him  word  to  dismiss  his  lictors  with 
their  fasces,  the  ensigns  of  authority,  and  ap¬ 
pear  before  him  as  a  private  person. 

The  first  solemn  action  of  his  dictatorship 
was  very  fitly  a  religious  one:  an  admonition 
to  the  people,  that  their  late  overthrow  had  not 
befallen  them  through  want  of  courage  in  their 
soldiers,  but  through  the  neglect  of  divine  cere¬ 
monies  in  the  general.  He  therefore  exhorted 
them  not  to  fear  the  enemy,  but  by  extraordi¬ 
nary  honour  to  propitiate  the  gods.  This  he 
did,  not  to  fill  their  minds  with  superstition, 
but  by  religious  feeling  to  raise  their  courage, 
and  lessen  their  fear  of  the  enemy  by  inspiring 
the  belief  that  Heaven  was  on  their  side. 

With  this  view,  the  secret  prophecies  called 


FABIUS 

the  Sibylline  Books  were  consulted;  sundry 
predictions  found  in  them  were  said  to  refer 
to  the  fortunes  and  events  of  the  time;  but 
none  except  the  consulter  was  informed.  Pre¬ 
senting  himself  to  the  people,  the  dictator 
made  a  vow  before  them  to  offer  in  sacrifice 
the  whole  product  of  the  next  season,  all  Italy 
over,  of  the  cows,  goats,  swine,  sheep,  both 
in  the  mountains  and  the  plains;  and  to  cele¬ 
brate  musical  festivities  with  an  expenditure 
of  the  precise  sum  of  333  sestertia  and  333  de¬ 
narii,  with  one-third  of  a  denarius  over.  The 
sum  total  of  which  is,  in  our  money,  83,583 
drachmas  and  2  obols.  What  the  mystery 
might  be  in  that  exact  number  is  not  easy  to 
determine,  unless  it  were  in  honour  of  the  per¬ 
fection  of  the  number  three,  as  being  the  first 
of  odd  numbers,  the  first  that  contains  in  itself 
multiplication,  with  all  other  properties  what¬ 
soever  belonging  to  numbers  in  general. 

In  this  manner  Fabius,  having  given  the 
people  better  heart  for  the  future,  by  making 
them  believe  that  the  gods  took  their  side, 
for  his  own  part  placed  his  whole  confidence 
in  himself,  believing  that  the  gods  bestowed 
victory  and  good  fortune  by  the  instrumen¬ 
tality  of  valour  and  of  prudence;  and  thus  pre¬ 
pared  he  set  forth  to  oppose  Hannibal,  not 
with  intention  to  fight  him,  but  with  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  wearing  out  and  wasting  the  vigour 
of  his  arms  by  lapse  of  time,  of  meeting  his 
want  of  resources  by  superior  means,  by  large 
numbers  the  smallness  of  his  forces.  With  this 
design,  he  always  encamped  on  the  highest 
grounds,  where  the  enemy’s  horse  could  have 
no  access  to  him.  Still  he  kept  pace  with  them; 
when  they  marched  he  followed  them;  when 
they  encamped  he  did  the  same,  but  at  such 
a  distance  as  not  to  be  compelled  to  an  en¬ 
gagement,  and  always  keeping  upon  the  hills, 
free  from  the  insults  of  their  horse;  by  which 
means  he  gave  them  no  rest,  but  kept  them 
in  a  continual  alarm. 

But  this  his  dilatory  way  gave  occasion  in 
his  own  camp  for  suspicion  of  want  of  cour¬ 
age;  and  this  opinion  prevailed  yet  more  in 
Hannibal’s  army.  Hannibal  was  himself  the 
only  man  who  was  not  deceived,  who  dis¬ 
cerned  his  skill  and  detected  his  tactics,  and 
saw,  unless  he  could  by  art  or  force  bring  him 
to  battle,  that  the  Carthaginians,  unable  to  use 
the  arms  in  which  they  were  superior,  and  suf¬ 
fering  the  continual  drain  of  lives  and  treasure 
in  which  they  were  inferior,  would  in  the  end 
come  to  nothing.  He  resolved,  therefore,  with 
all  the  arts  and  subtleties  of  war  to  break  his 


143 

measures,  and  to  bring  Fabius  to  an  engage¬ 
ment;  like  a  cunning  wrestler,  watching  every 
opportunity  to  get  good  hold  and  close  with 
his  adversary.  He  at  one  time  attacked,  and 
sought  to  distract  his  attention,  tried  to  draw 
him  off  in  various  directions,  and  endeavoured 
in  all  ways  to  tempt  him  from  his  safe  policy. 

All  this  artifice,  though  it  had  no  effect 
upon  the  firm  judgment  and  conviction  of  the 
dictator,  yet  upon  the  common  soldier,  and 
even  upon  the  general  of  the  horse  himself,  it 
had  too  great  an  operation:  Minucius,  unsea¬ 
sonably  eager  for  action,  bold  and  confident, 
humoured  the  soldiery,  and  himself  contribu¬ 
ted  to  fill  them  with  wild  eagerness  and  empty 
hopes,  which  they  vented  in  reproaches  upon 
Fabius,  calling  him  Hannibal’s  pedagogue, 
since  he  did  nothing  else  but  follow  him  up 
and  down  and  wait  upon  him.  At  the  same 
time,  they  cried  up  Minucius  for  the  only  cap¬ 
tain  worthy  to  command  the  Romans;  whose 
vanity  and  presumption  rose  so  high  in  conse¬ 
quence,  that  he  insolently  jested  at  Fabius’s  en¬ 
campment  upon  the  mountains,  saying  that  he 
seated  them  there  as  on  a  theatre,  to  behold  the 
flames  and  desolation  of  their  country.  And  he 
would  sometimes  ask  the  friends  of  the  gen¬ 
eral,  whether  it  were  not  his  meaning,  by  thus 
leading  them  from  mountain  to  mountain,  to 
carry  them  at  last  (having  no  hopes  on  earth) 
up  into  heaven,  or  to  hide  them  in  the  clouds 
from  Hannibal’s  army? 

When  his  friends  reported  these  things  to 
the  dictator,  persuading  him  that,  to  avoid 
the  general  obloquy,  he  should  engage  the 
enemy,  his  answer  was,  “I  should  be  more 
faint-hearted  than  they  make  me,  if,  through 
fear  of  idle  reproaches,  I  should  abandon  my 
own  convictions.  It  is  no  inglorious  thing  to 
have  fear  for  the  safety  of  our  country,  but 
to  be  turned  from  one’s  course  by  men’s  opin¬ 
ions,  by  blame,  and  by  misrepresentation, 
shows  a  man  unfit  to  hold  an  office  such  as 
this,  which,  by  such  conduct,  he  makes  the 
slave  of  those  whose  errors  it  is  his  business 
to  control.” 

An  oversight  of  Hannibal  occurred  soon 
after.  Desirous  to  refresh  his  horse  in  some 
good  pasture-grounds,  and  to  draw  off  his 
army,  he  ordered  his  guides  to  conduct  him  to 
the  district  of  Casinum.  They,  mistaking  his 
bad  pronunciation,  led  him  and  his  army  to 
the  town  of  Casilinum,  on  the  frontier  of 
Campania  which  the  river  Lothronus,  called 
by  the  Romans  Vulturnus,  divides  in  two 
parts.  The  country  around  is  enclosed  by 


144 

mountains,  with  a  valley  opening  towards  the 
sea,  in  which  the  river  overflowing  forms  a 
quantity  of  marsh  lands  with  deep  banks  of 
sand,  and  discharges  itself  into  the  sea  on  a 
very  unsafe  and  rough  shore.  While  Hannibal 
was  proceeding  hither,  Fabius,  by  his  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  roads,  succeeded  in  making  his 
way  around  before  him,  and  despatched  four 
thousand  choice  men  to  seize  the  exit  from  it 
and  stop  him  up,  and  lodged  the  rest  of  his 
army  upon  the  neighbouring  hills,  in  the  most 
advantageous  places;  at  the  same  time  detach¬ 
ing  a  party  of  his  lightest  armed  men  to  fall 
upon  Hannibal’s  rear;  which  they  did  with 
such  success,  that  they  cut  of!  eight  hundred 
of  them,  and  put  the  whole  army  in  disorder. 
Hannibal,  finding  the  error  and  the  danger 
he  was  fallen  into,  immediately  crucified  the 
guides;  but  considered  the  enemy  to  be  so 
advantageously  posted,  that  there  was  no  hope 
of  breaking  through  them;  while  his  soldiers 
began  to  be  despondent  and  terrified,  and  to 
think  themselves  surrounded  with  embarrass¬ 
ments  too  difficult  to  be  surmounted. 

Thus  reduced,  Hannibal  had  recourse  to 
stratagem;  he  caused  two  thousand  head  of 
oxen  which  he  had  in  his  camp  to  have  torches 
or  dry  fagots  well  fastened  to  their  horns,  and 
lighting  them  in  the  beginning  of  the  night, 
ordered  the  beasts  to  be  driven  on  towards 
the  heights  commanding  the  passages  out  of 
the  valley  and  the  enemy’s  posts;  when  this 
was  done,  he  made  his  army  in  the  dark  lei¬ 
surely  march  after  them.  The  oxen  at  first  kept 
a  slew  orderly  pace,  and  with  their  lighted 
heads  resembled  an  army  marching  by  night, 
astonishing  the  shepherds  and  herdsmen  of  the 
hills  about.  But  when  the  fire  burnt  down  the 
horns  of  the  beasts  to  the  quick,  they  no  longer 
observed  their  sober  pace,  but,  unruly  and  wild 
with  their  pain,  ran  dispersed  about,  tossing 
their  heads  and  scattering  the  fire  round  about 
them  upon  each  other  and  setting  light  as  they 
passed  to  the  trees. 

This  was  a  surprising  spectacle  to  the 
Romans  on  guard  upon  the  heights.  Seeing 
flames  which  appeared  to  come  from  men  ad¬ 
vancing  with  torches,  they  were  possessed  with 
the  alarm  that  the  enemy  was  approaching 
in  various  quarters,  and  that  they  were  being 
surrounded;  and,  quitting  their  post,  aban¬ 
doned  the  pass,  and  precipitately  retired  to 
their  camp  on  the  hills.  They  were  no  sooner 
gone,  but  the  light-armed  of  Hannibal’s  men, 
according  to  his  order,  immediately  seized  the 
heights,  and  soon  after  the  whole  army,  with 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

all  the  baggage,  came  up  and  safely  marched 
through  the  passes. 

Fabius,  before  the  night  was  over,  quickly 
found  out  the  trick;  for  some  of  the  beasts 
fell  into  his  hands;  but  for  fear  of  an  ambush 
in  the  dark,  he  kept  his  men  all  night  to  their 
arms  in  the  camp.  As  soon  as  it  was  day,  he 
attacked  the  enemy  in  the  rear,  where,  after 
a  good  deal  of  skirmishing  in  the  uneven 
ground,  the  disorder  might  have  become  gen¬ 
eral,  but  that  Hannibal  detached  from  his  van 
a  body  of  Spaniards,  who,  of  themselves  active 
and  nimble,  were  accustomed  to  the  climbing 
of  mountains.  These  briskly  attacked  the  Ro¬ 
man  troops,  who  were  in  heavy  armour,  killed 
a  good  many,  and  left  Fabius  no  longer  in 
condition  to  follow  the  enemy.  This  action 
brought  the  extreme  of  obloquy  and  contempt 
upon  the  dictator;  they  said  it  was  now  mani¬ 
fest  that  he  was  not  only  inferior  to  his  ad¬ 
versary,  as  they  had  always  thought,  in  cour¬ 
age,  but  even  in  that  conduct,  foresight,  and 
generalship,  by  which  he  had  proposed  to 
bring  the  war  to  an  end. 

And  Hannibal,  to  enhance  their  anger 
against  him,  marched  with  his  army  close  to 
the  lands  and  possessions  of  Fabius,  and,  giv¬ 
ing  orders  to  his  soldiers  to  burn  and  destroy 
all  the  country  about,  forbade  them  to  do  the 
least  damage  in  the  estates  of  the  Roman  gen¬ 
eral,  and  placed  guards  for  their  security. 
This,  when  reported  at  Rome,  had  the  ef¬ 
fect  with  the  people  which  Hannibal  desired. 
Their  tribunes  raised  a  thousand  stories 
against  him,  chiefly  at  the  instigation  of  Me- 
tilius,  who,  not  so  much  out  of  hatred  to  him 
as  out  of  friendship  to  Minucius,  whose  kins¬ 
man  he  was,  thought  by  depressing  Fabius  to 
raise  his  friend. 

The  senate  on  their  part  were  also  offended 
with  him  for  the  bargain  he  had  made  with 
Hannibal  about  the  exchange  of  prisoners,  the 
conditions  of  which  were,  that,  after  exchange 
made  of  man  for  man,  if  any  on  either  side 
remained,  they  should  be  redeemed  at  the 
price  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  drachmas  a 
head.  Upon  the  whole  account,  there  re¬ 
mained  two  hundred  and  forty  Romans  un¬ 
exchanged,  and  the  senate  now  not  only  re¬ 
fused  to  allow  money  for  the  ransoms,  but  also 
reproached  Fabius  for  making  a  contract,  con¬ 
trary  to  the  honour  and  interest  of  the  com¬ 
monwealth,  for  redeeming  men  whose  cow¬ 
ardice  had  put  them  in  the  hands  of  the  en¬ 
emy.  Fabius  heard  and  endured  all  this  with 
invincible  patience;  and,  having  no  money 


FABIUS 

by  him,  and  on  the  other  side  being  resolved 
to  keep  his  word  with  Hannibal  and  not  to 
abandon  the  captives,  he  despatched  his  son 
to  Rome  to  sell  land,  and  to  bring  with  him 
the  price,  sufficient  to  discharge  the  ransoms; 
which  was  punctually  performed  by  his  son 
and  delivery  accordingly  made  to  him  of  the 
prisoners,  amongst  whom  many,  when  they 
were  released,  made  proposals  to  repay  the 
money;  which  Fabius  in  all  cases  declined. 

About  this  time,  he  was  called  to  Rome 
by  the  priests,  to  assist,  according  to  the  duty 
of  his  office,  at  certain  sacrifices,  and  was  thus 
forced  to  leave  the  command  of  the  army  with 
Minucius;  but  before  he  parted,  not  only 
charged  him  as  his  commander-in-chief,  but 
besought  and  entreated  him  not  to  come,  in 
his  absence,  to  a  battle  with  Hannibal. 

His  commands,  entreaties,  and  advice  were 
lost  upon  Minucius,  for  his  back  was  no  sooner 
turned  but  the  new  general  immediately 
sought  occasions  to  attack  the  enemy.  And  no¬ 
tice  being  brought  him  that  Hannibal  had  sent 
out  a  great  party  of  his  army  to  forage,  he  fell 
upon  a  detachment  of  the  remainder,  doing 
great  execution,  and  driving  them  to  their  very 
camp,  with  no  little  terror  to  the  rest,  who  ap¬ 
prehended  their  breaking  in  upon  them;  and 
when  Hannibal  had  recalled  his  scattered 
forces  to  the  camp,  he,  nevertheless,  without 
any  loss,  made  his  retreat,  a  success  which  ag¬ 
gravated  his  boldness  and  presumption,  and 
filled  the  soldiers  with  rash  confidence. 

The  news  spread  to  Rome,  where  Fabius, 
on  being  told  it,  said  that  what  he  most  feared 
was  Minucius’s  success;  but  the  people,  highly 
elated,  hurried  to  the  Forum  to  listen  to  an 
address  from  Metilius,  the  tribune,  in  which 
he  infinitely  extolled  the  valour  of  Minucius, 
and  fell  bitterly  upon  Fabius,  accusing  him 
for  want  not  merely  of  courage,  but  even  of 
loyalty;  and  not  only  him,  but  also  many  other 
eminent  and  considerable  persons;  saying  that 
it  was  they  that  had  brought  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians  into  Italy,  with  the  design  to  destroy 
the  liberty  of  the  people;  for  which  end  they 
had  at  once  put  the  supreme  authority  into 
the  hands  of  a  single  person,  who  by  his  slow¬ 
ness  and  delays  might  give  Hannibal  leisure 
to  establish  himself  in  Italy,  and  the  people 
of  Carthage  time  and  opportunity  to  supply 
him  with  fresh  succours  to  complete  his  con¬ 
quest. 

Fabius  came  forward  with  no  intention  to 
answer  the  tribune,  but  only  said  that  they 
should  expedite  the  sacrifices,  that  so  he  might 


145 

speedily  return  to  the  army  to  punish  Minu¬ 
cius,  who  had  presumed  to  fight  contrary  to 
his  orders;  words  which  immediately  possessed 
the  people  with  the  belief  that  Minucius  stood 
in  danger  of  his  life.  For  it  was  in  the  power  of 
the  dictator  to  imprison  and  to  put  to  death, 
and  they  feared  that  Fabius,  of  a  mild  temper 
in  general,  would  be  as  hard  to  be  appeased 
when  once  irritated,  as  he  was  slow  to  be  pro¬ 
voked. 

Nobody  dared  to  raise  his  voice  in  opposi¬ 
tion;  Metilius  alone,  whose  office  of  tribune 
gave  him  security  to  say  what  he  pleased  (for 
in  the  time  of  a  dictatorship  that  magistrateal 
one  preserves  his  authority),  boldly  applied 
himself  to  the  people  in  the  behalf  of  Minu¬ 
cius:  that  they  should  not  suffer  him  to  be 
made  a  sacrifice  to  the  enmity  of  Fabius,  nor 
permit  him  to  be  destroyed,  like  the  son  of 
Manlius  Torquatus,  who  was  beheaded  by  his 
father  for  a  victory  fought  and  triumphantly 
won  against  order;  he  exhorted  them  to  take 
away  from  Fabius  that  absolute  power  of  a 
dictator,  and  to  put  it  into  more  worthy  hands, 
better  able  and  more  inclined  to  use  it  for  the 
public  good. 

These  impressions  very  much  prevailed  up¬ 
on  the  people,  though  not  so  far  as  wholly  to 
dispossess  Fabius  of  the  dictatorship.  But  they 
decreed  that  Minucius  should  have  an  equal 
authority  with  the  dictator  in  the  conduct  of 
the  war;  which  was  a  thing  then  without  prece¬ 
dent,  though  a  little  later  it  was  again  practised 
after  the  disaster  at  Cannae;  when  the  dictator, 
Marcus  Junius,  being  with  the  army,  they  chose 
at  Rome  Fabius  Buteo  dictator,  that  he  might 
create  new  senators,  to  supply  the  numerous 
places  of  those  who  were  killed.  But  as  soon  as, 
once  acting  in  public,  he  had  filled  those  vacant 
places  with  a  sufficient  number,  he  immediate¬ 
ly  dismissed  his  lictors,  and  withdrew  from  all 
his  attendance,  and  mingling  like  a  common 
person  with  the  rest  of  the  people,  quietly  went 
about  his  own  affairs  in  the  Forum. 

The  enemies  of  Fabius  thought  they  had 
sufficiently  humiliated  and  subdued  him  by 
raising  Minucius  to  be  his  equal  in  authority; 
but  they  mistook  the  temper  of  the  man,  who 
looked  upon  their  folly  as  not  his  loss,  but  like 
Diogenes,  who,  being  told  that  some  persons 
derided  him,  made  answer,  “But  I  am  not 
derided,”  meaning  that  only  those  were  really 
insulted  on  whom  such  insults  made  an  im¬ 
pression,  so  Fabius,  with  great  tranquillity 
and  unconcern,  submitted  to  what  happened, 
and  contributed  a  proof  to  the  argument  of 


146 

the  philosophers  that  a  just  and  good  man  is 
not  capable  of  being  dishonoured.  His  only 
vexation  arose  from  his  fear  lest  this  ill  coun¬ 
sel,  by  supplying  opportunities  to  the  diseased 
military  ambition  of  his  subordinate,  should 
damage  the  public  cause. 

Lest  the  rashness  of  Minucius  should  now 
at  once  run  headlong  into  some  disaster,  he 
returned  back  with  all  privacy  and  speed  to 
the  army;  where  he  found  Minucius  so  ele¬ 
vated  with  his  new  dignity,  that,  a  joint- 
authority  not  contenting  him,  he  required 
by  turns  to  have  the  command  of  the  army 
every  other  day.  This  Fabius  rejected,  but  was 
contented  that  the  army  should  be  divided; 
thinking  each  general  singly  would  better 
command  his  part,  than  partially  command 
the  whole.  The  first  and  fourth  legion  he  took 
for  his  own  division,  the  second  and  third  he 
delivered  to  Minucius;  so  also  of  the  auxiliary 
forces  each  had  an  equal  share. 

Minucius,  thus  exalted,  could  not  contain 
himself  from  boasting  of  his  success  in  humili¬ 
ating  the  high  and  powerful  office  of  the  dic¬ 
tatorship.  Fabius  quietly  reminded  him  that  it 
was,  in  all  wisdom,  Hannibal,  and  not  Fabius, 
whom  he  had  to  combat;  but  if  he  must  needs 
contend  with  his  colleague,  it  had  best  be  in 
diligence  and  care  for  the  preservation  of 
Rome;  that  it  might  not  be  said,  a  man  so 
favoured  by  the  people  served  them  worse 
than  he  who  had  been  ill-treated  and  dis¬ 
graced  by  them. 

The  young  general,  despising  these  admoni¬ 
tions  as  the  false  humility  of  age,  immediately 
removed  with  the  body  of  his  army,  and  en¬ 
camped  by  himself.  Hannibal,  who  was  not 
ignorant  of  all  these  passages,  lay  watching 
his  advantage  from  them.  It  happened  that  be¬ 
tween  his  army  and  that  of  Minucius  there 
was  a  certain  eminence,  which  seemed  a  very 
advantageous  and  not  difficult  post  to  encamp 
upon;  the  level  field  around  it  appeared,  from 
a  distance,  to  be  all  smooth  and  even,  though 
it  had  many  inconsiderable  ditches  and  dips 
in  it,  not  discernible  to  the  eye.  Hannibal,  had 
he  pleased,  could  easily  have  possessed  him¬ 
self  of  this  ground;  but  he  had  reserved  it  for 
a  bait,  or  train,  in  proper  season,  to  draw  the 
Romans  to  an  engagement.  Now  that  Minu¬ 
cius  and  Fabius  were  divided,  he  thought  the 
opportunity  fair  for  his  purpose;  and,  there¬ 
fore,  having  in  the  night-time  lodged  a  con¬ 
venient  number  of  his  men  in  these  ditches 
and  hollow  places,  early  in  the  morning  he 
sent  forth  a  small  detachment,  who,  in  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

sight  of  Minucius,  proceeded  to  possess  them¬ 
selves  of  the  rising  ground. 

According  to  his  expectation,  Minucius 
swallowed  the  bait,  and  first  sent  out  his 
light  troops,  and  after  them  some  horse,  to 
dislodge  the  enemy;  and,  at  last,  when  he  saw 
Hannibal  in  person  advancing  to  the  assist¬ 
ance  of  his  men,  marched  down  with  his 
whole  army  drawn  up.  He  engaged  with  the 
troops  on  the  eminence,  and  sustained  their 
missiles;  the  combat  for  some  time  was  equal; 
but  as  soon  as  Hannibal  perceived  that  the 
whole  army  was  now  sufficiently  advanced 
within  the  toils  he  had  set  for  them,  so  that 
their  backs  were  open  to  his  men  whom  he 
had  posted  in  the  hollows,  he  gave  the  signal; 
upon  which  they  rushed  forth  from  various 
quarters,  and  with  loud  cries  furiously  at¬ 
tacked  Minucius  in  the  rear.  The  surprise  and 
the  slaughter  was  great,  and  struck  universal 
alarm  and  disorder  through  the  whole  army. 
Minucius  himself  lost  all  his  confidence;  he 
looked  from  officer  to  officer,  and  found  all 
alike  unprepared  to  face  the  danger,  and  yield¬ 
ing  to  a  flight,  which,  however,  could  not  end 
in  safety.  The  Numidian  horsemen  were  al¬ 
ready  in  full  victory  riding  about  the  plain, 
cutting  down  the  fugitives. 

Fabius  was  not  ignorant  of  this  danger  of 
his  countrymen;  he  foresaw  what  would  hap¬ 
pen  from  the  rashness  of  Minucius,  and  the 
cunning  of  Hannibal;  and,  therefore,  kept  his 
men  to  their  arms,  in  readiness  to  wait  the 
event;  nor  would  he  trust  to  the  reports  of 
others,  but  he  himself,  in  front  of  his  camp, 
viewed  all  that  passed.  When,  therefore,  he 
saw  the  army  of  Minucius  encompassed  by 
the  enemy,  and  that  by  their  countenance  and 
shifting  their  ground  they  appeared  more  dis¬ 
posed  to  flight  than  to  resistance,  with  a  great 
sigh,  striking  his  hand  upon  his  thigh,  he  said 
to  those  about  him,  “O  Hercules!  how  much 
sooner  than  I  expected,  though  later  than  he 
seemed  to  desire,  hath  Minucius  destroyed 
himself !”  He  then  commanded  the  ensigns  to 
be  led  forward,  and  the  army  to  follow,  tell¬ 
ing  them,  “We  must  make  haste  to  rescue 
Minucius,  who  is  a  valiant  man,  and  a  lover 
of  his  country;  and  if  he  hath  been  too  for¬ 
ward  to  engage  the  enemy,  at  another  time  we 
will  tell  him  of  it.” 

Thus,  at  the  head  of  his  men,  Fabius 
marched  up  to  the  enemy,  and  first  cleared  the 
plain  of  the  Numidians;  and  next  fell  upon 
those  who  were  charging  the  Romans  in  the 
rear,  cutting  down  all  that  made  opposition, 


FABIUS 

and  obliging  the  rest  to  save  themselves  by  a 
hasty  retreat,  lest  they  should  be  environed  as 
the  Romans  had  been.  Hannibal,  seeing  so  sud¬ 
den  a  change  of  affairs,  and  Fabius,  beyond  the 
force  of  his  age,  opening  his  way  through  the 
ranks  up  the  hillside,  that  he  might  join  Mi- 
nucius,  warily  forbore,  sounded  a  retreat,  and 
drew  off  his  men  into  their  camp;  while  the 
Romans  on  their  part  were  no  less  contented 
to  retire  in  safety.  It  is  reported  that  upon  this 
occasion  Hannibal  said  jestingly  to  his  friends: 
“Did  not  I  tell  you,  that  this  cloud  which  al¬ 
ways  hovered  upon  the  mountains  would,  at 
some  time  or  other,  come  down  with  a  storm 
upon  us?” 

Fabius,  after  his  men  had  picked  up  the 
spoils  of  the  field,  retired  to  his  own  camp, 
without  saying  any  harsh  or  reproachful  thing 
to  his  colleague;  who,  also,  on  his  part,  gath¬ 
ering  his  army  together,  spoke  and  said  to 
them:  “To  conduct  great  matters  and  never 
commit  a  fault  is  above  the  force  of  human 
nature;  but  to  learn  and  improve  by  the  faults 
we  have  committed,  is  that  which  becomes  a 
good  and  sensible  man.  Some  reasons  I  may 
have  to  accuse  fortune,  but  I  have  many  more 
to  thank  her;  for  in  a  few  hours  she  hath 
cured  a  long  mistake,  and  taught  me  that  I  am 
not  the  man  who  should  command  others,  but 
have  need  of  another  to  command  me;  and 
that  we  are  not  to  contend  for  victory  over 
those  to  whom  it  is  our  advantage  to  yield. 
Therefore  in  everything  else  henceforth  the 
dictator  must  be  your  commander;  only  in 
showing  gratitude  towards  him  I  will  still  be 
your  leader,  and  always  be  the  first  to  obey 
his  orders.” 

Having  said  this,  he  commanded  the  Ro¬ 
man  eagles  to  move  forward,  and  all  his  men 
to  follow  him  to  the  camp  of  Fabius.  The 
soldiers,  then,  as  he  entered,  stood  amazed  at 
the  novelty  of  the  sight,  and  were  anxious  and 
doubtful  what  the  meaning  might  be.  When 
he  came  near  the  dictator's  tent,  Fabius  went 
forth  to  meet  him,  on  which  he  at  once  laid 
his  standards  at  his  feet,  calling  him  with  a 
loud  voice  his  father;  while  the  soldiers  with 
him  saluted  the  soldiers  here  as  their  patrons, 
the  term  employed  by  freedmen  to  those  who 
gave  them  their  liberty.  After  silence  was  ob¬ 
tained,  Minucius  said,  “You  have  this  day,  O 
dictator,  obtained  two  victories;  one  by  your 
valour  and  conduct  over  Hannibal,  and  an¬ 
other  by  your  wisdom  and  goodness  over  your 
colleague;  by  one  victory  you  preserved,  and 
by  the  other  instructed  us;  and  when  we  were 


147 

already  suffering  one  shameful  defeat  from 
Hannibal,  by  another  welcome  one  from  you 
we  were  restored  to  honour  and  safety.  I  can 
address  you  by  no  nobler  name  than  that  of  a 
kind  father,  though  a  father’s  beneficence  falls 
short  of  that  I  have  received  from  you.  From 
a  father  I  individually  received  the  gift  of  life; 
to  you  I  owe  its  preservation  not  for  myself 
only,  but  for  all  these  who  are  under  me.” 
After  this,  he  threw  himself  into  the  arms  of 
the  dictator;  and  in  the  same  manner  the 
soldiers  of  each  army  embraced  one  another 
with  gladness  and  tears  of  joy. 

Not  long  after,  Fabius  laid  down  the  dic¬ 
tatorship,  and  consuls  were  again  created. 
Those  who  immediately  succeeded  observed 
the  same  method  in  managing  the  war,  and 
avoided  all  occasions  of  fighting  Hannibal  in 
a  pitched  battle;  they  only  succoured  their  al¬ 
lies,  and  preserved  the  towns  from  falling  off 
to  the  enemy. 

But  afterwards,  when  Terentius  Varro,  a 
man  of  obscure  birth,  but  very  popular  and 
bold,  had  obtained  the  consulship,  he  soon 
made  it  appear  that  by  his  rashness  and  igno¬ 
rance  he  would  stake  the  whole  commonwealth 
on  the  hazard.  For  it  was  his  custom  to  de¬ 
claim  in  all  assemblies,  that,  as  long  as  Rome 
employed  generals  like  Fabius,  there  never 
would  be  an  end  of  the  war;  vaunting  that 
whenever  he  should  get  sight  of  the  enemy, 
he  would  that  same  day  free  Italy  from  the 
strangers.  With  these  promises  he  so  prevailed, 
that  he  raised  a  greater  army  than  had  ever 
yet  been  sent  out  of  Rome.  There  were  en¬ 
listed  eighty-eight  thousand  fighting  men; 
but  what  gave  confidence  to  the  populace, 
only  terrified  the  wise  and  experienced,  and 
none  more  than  Fabius;  since  if  so  great  a 
body,  and  the  flower  of  the  Roman  youth, 
should  be  cut  off,  they  could  not  see  any  new 
resource  for  the  safety  of  Rome. 

They  addressed  themselves,  therefore,  to  the 
other  consul,  iEmilius  Paulus,  a  man  of  great 
experience  in  war,  but  unpopular,  and  fearful 
also  of  the  people,  who  once  before  upon  some 
impeachment  had  condemned  him;  so  that  he 
needed  encouragement  to  withstand  his  col¬ 
league’s  temerity.  Fabius  told  him,  if  he  would 
profitably  serve  his  country,  he  must  no  less 
oppose  Varro’s  ignorant  eagerness  than  Han¬ 
nibal’s  conscious  readiness,  since  both  alike 
conspired  to  decide  the  fate  of  Rome  by  a 
battle.  “It  is  more  reasonable,”  he  said  to  him, 
“that  you  should  believe  me  than  Varro,  in 
matters  relating  to  Hannibal,  when  I  tell  you 


148 

that  if  for  this  year  you  abstain  from  fighting 
with  him,  either  his  army  will  perish  of  itself, 
or  else  he  will  be  glad  to  depart  of  his  own 
will.  This  evidently  appears,  inasmuch  as,  not¬ 
withstanding  his  victories,  none  of  the  coun¬ 
tries  or  towns  of  Italy  come  in  to  him,  and  his 
army  is  not  now  the  third  part  of  what  it  was 
at  first.”  To  this  Paulus  is  said  to  have  replied, 
“Did  I  only  consider  myself,  I  should  rather 
choose  to  be  exposed  to  the  weapons  of  Han¬ 
nibal  than  once  more  to  the  suffrages  of  my 
fellow-citizens,  who  are  urgent  for  what  you 
disapprove;  yet  since  the  cause  of  Rome  is  at 
stake,  I  will  rather  seek  in  my  conduct  to 
please  and  obey  Fabius  than  all  the  world  be¬ 
sides.” 

These  good  measures  were  defeated  by  the 
importunity  of  Varro;  whom,  when  they  were 
both  come  to  the  army,  nothing  would  content 
but  a  separate  command,  that  each  consul 
should  have  his  day;  and  when  his  turn  came, 
he  posted  his  army  close  to  Hannibal,  at  a 
village  called  Cannae,  by  the  river  Aufidus.  It 
was  no  sooner  day,  but  he  set  up  the  scarlet 
coat  flying  over  his  tent,  which  was  the  signal 
of  battle.  This  boldness  of  the  consul,  and  the 
numerousness  of  his  army,  double  theirs,  star¬ 
tled  the  Carthaginians;  but  Hannibal  com¬ 
manded  them  to  their  arms,  and  with  a  small 
train  rode  out  to  take  a  full  prospect  of  the 
enemy  as  they  were  now  forming  in  their 
ranks,  from  a  rising  ground  not  far  distant. 
One  of  his  followers,  called  Gisco,  a  Cartha¬ 
ginian  of  equal  rank  with  himself,  told  him 
that  the  numbers  of  the  enemy  were  astonish¬ 
ing;  to  which  Hannibal  replied  with  a  serious 
countenance,  “There  is  one  thing,  Gisco,  yet 
more  astonishing,  which  you  take  no  notice 
of”;  and  when  Gisco  inquired  what,  an¬ 
swered,  that  “in  all  those  great  numbers  be¬ 
fore  us,  there  is  not  one  man  called  Gisco.” 
This  unexpected  jest  of  their  general  made  all 
the  company  laugh,  and  as  they  came  down 
from  the  hill  they  told  it  to  those  whom  they 
met,  which  caused  a  general  laughter  amongst 
them  all,  from  which  they  were  hardly  able 
to  recover  themselves.  The  army,  seeing  Han¬ 
nibal’s  attendants  come  back  from  viewing 
the  enemy  in  such  a  laughing  condition,  con¬ 
cluded  that  it  must  be  profound  contempt  of 
the  enemy,  that  made  their  general  at  this  mo¬ 
ment  indulge  in  such  hilarity. 

According  to  his  usual  manner,  Hannibal 
employed  stratagems  to  advantage  himself.  In 
the  first  place,  he  so  drew  up  his  men  that  the 
wind  was  at  their  backs,  which  at  that  time 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

blew  with  a  perfect  storm  of  violence,  and, 
sweeping  over  the  great  plains  of  sand,  car¬ 
ried  before  it  a  cloud  of  dust  over  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian  army  into  the  faces  of  the  Romans, 
which  much  disturbed  them  in  the  fight.  In 
the  next  place,  all  his  best  men  he  put  into  his 
wings;  and  in  the  body  which  was  somewhat 
more  advanced  than  the  wings,  placed  the 
worst  and  the  weakest  of  his  army.  He  com¬ 
manded  those  in  the  wings,  that,  when  the 
enemy  had  made  a  thorough  charge  upon  that 
middle  advance  body,  which  he  knew  would 
recoil,  as  not  being  able  to  withstand  their 
shock,  and  when  the  Romans  in  their  pursuit 
should  be  far  enough  engaged  within  the  two 
wings,  they  should,  both  on  the  right  and  the 
left,  charge  them  in  the  flank,  and  endeavour 
to  encompass  them. 

This  appears  to  have  been  the  chief  cause 
of  the  Roman  loss.  Pressing  upon  Hannibal’s 
front,  which  gave  ground,  they  reduced  the 
form  of  his  army  into  a  perfect  half-moon, 
and  gave  ample  opportunity  to  the  captains 
of  the  chosen  troops  to  charge  them  right  and 
left  on  their  flanks,  and  to  cut  off  and  destroy 
all  who  did  not  fall  back  before  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian  wings  united  in  their  rear.  To  this  gen¬ 
eral  calamity,  it  is  also  said,  that  a  strange 
mistake  among  the  cavalry  much  contributed. 
For  the  horse  of  iEmilius  receiving  a  hurt  and 
throwing  his  master,  those  about  him  immedi¬ 
ately  alighted  to  aid  the  consul;  and  the  Ro¬ 
man  troops,  seeing  their  commanders  thus 
quitting  their  horses,  took  it  for  a  sign  that 
they  should  all  dismount  and  charge  the  ene¬ 
my  on  foot.  At  the  sight  of  this,  Hannibal  was 
heard  to  say,  “This  pleases  me  better  than  if 
they  had  been  delivered  to  me  bound  hand 
and  foot.”  For  the  particulars  of  this  engage¬ 
ment,  we  refer  our  readers  to  those  authors 
who  have  written  at  large  upon  the  subject. 

The  consul  Varro,  with  a  thin  company, 
fled  to  Venusia;  iEmilius  Paulus,  unable  any 
longer  to  oppose  the  flight  of  his  men,  or  the 
pursuit  of  the  enemy,  his  body  all  covered 
with  wounds,  and  his  soul  no  less  wounded 
with  grief,  sat  himself  down  upon  a  stone,  ex¬ 
pecting  the  kindness  of  a  despatching  blow. 
His  face  was  so  disfigured,  and  all  his  person 
so  stained  with  blood,  that  his  very  friends 
and  domestics  passing  by  knew  him  not.  At 
last  Cornelius  Lentulus,  a  young  man  of  patri¬ 
cian  race,  perceiving  who  he  was,  alighted 
from  his  horse,  and,  tendering  it  to  him,  de¬ 
sired  him  to  get  up  and  save  a  life  so  necessary 
to  the  safety  of  the  commonwealth,  which,  at 


FABIUS 

this  time,  would  dearly  want  so  great  a  cap¬ 
tain.  But  nothing  could  prevail  upon  him  to 
accept  of  the  offer;  he  obliged  young  Lentulus, 
with  tears  in  his  eyes,  to  remount  his  horse; 
then  standing  up,  he  gave  him  his  hand,  and 
commanded  him  to  tell  Fabius  Maximus  that 
/Emilius  Paulus  had  followed  his  directions 
to  his  very  last,  and  had  not  in  the  least  de¬ 
viated  from  those  measures  which  were  agreed 
between  them;  but  that  it  was  his  hard  fate  to 
be  overpowered  by  Varro  in  the  first  place, 
and  secondly  by  Hannibal.  Having  despatched 
Lentulus  with  this  commission,  he  marked 
where  the  slaughter  was  greatest,  and  there 
threw  himself  upon  the  swords  of  the  enemy. 
In  this  battle  it  is  reported  that  fifty  thousand 
Romans  were  slain,  four  thousand  prisoners 
taken  in  the  field,  and  ten  thousand  in  the 
camp  of  both  consuls. 

The  friends  of  Hannibal  earnestly  persuaded 
him  to  follow  up  his  victory,  and  pursue  the 
flying  Romans  into  the  very  gates  of  Rome, 
assuring  him  that  in  five  days’  time  he  might 
sup  in  the  Capitol;  nor  is  it  easy  to  imagine 
what  consideration  hindered  him  from  it.  It 
would  seem  rather  that  some  supernatural  or 
divine  intervention  caused  the  hesitation  and 
timidity  which  he  now  displayed,  and  which 
made  Barcas,  a  Carthaginian,  tell  him  with 
indignation,  “You  know,  Hannibal,  how  to 
gain  a  victory,  but  not  how  to  use  it.”  Yet  it 
produced  a  marvellous  revolution  in  his  af¬ 
fairs;  he,  who  hitherto  had  not  one  town, 
market,  or  seaport  in  his  possession,  who  had 
nothing  for  the  subsistence  of  his  men  but 
what  he  pillaged  from  day  to  day,  who  had  no 
place  of  retreat  or  basis  of  operation,  but  was 
roving,  as  it  were,  with  a  huge  troop  of  ban¬ 
ditti,  now  became  master  of  the  best  provinces 
and  towns  of  Italy,  and  of  Capua  itself,  next 
to  Rome  the  most  flourishing  and  opulent 
city,  all  which  came  over  to  him,  and  submit¬ 
ted  to  his  authority. 

It  is  the  saying  of  Euripides,  that  “a  man  is 
in  ill-case  when  he  must  try  a  friend,”  and  so 
neither,  it  would  seem,  is  a  state  in  a  good 
one,  when  it  needs  an  able  general.  And  so  it 
was  with  the  Romans;  the  counsels  and  ac¬ 
tions  of  Fabius,  which,  before  the  batde,  they 
had  branded  as  cowardice  and  fear,  now,  in 
the  other  extreme,  they  accounted  to  have 
been  more  than  human  wisdom;  as  though 
nothing  but  a  divine  power  of  intellect  could 
have  seen  so  far,  and  foretold  contrary  to  the 
judgment  of  all  others,  a  result  which,  even 
now  it  had  arrived,  was  hardly  credible.  In 


149 

him,  therefore,  they  placed  their  whole  re¬ 
maining  hopes;  his  wisdom  was  the  sacred 
altar  and  temple  to  which  they  fled  for  refuge, 
and  his  counsels,  more  than  anything,  pre¬ 
served  them  from  dispersing  and  deserting 
their  city,  as  in  the  time  when  the  Gauls  took 
possession  of  Rome.  He,  whom  they  esteemed 
fearful  and  pusillanimous  when  they  were,  as 
they  thought,  in  a  prosperous  condition,  was 
now  the  only  man,  in  this  general  and 
unbounded  dejection  and  confusion,  who 
showed  no  fear,  but  walked  the  streets  with 
an  assured  and  serene  countenance,  addressed 
his  fellow-citizens,  checked  the  women’s  lam¬ 
entations,  and  the  public  gatherings  of  those 
who  wanted  thus  to  vent  their  sorrows.  He 
caused  the  senate  to  meet,  he  heartened  up 
the  magistrates,  and  was  himself  as  the  soul 
and  life  of  every  office. 

He  placed  guards  at  the  gates  of  the  city  to 
stop  the  frightened  multitude  from  flying;  he 
regulated  and  confined  their  mournings  for 
their  slain  friends,  both  as  to  time  and  place; 
ordering  that  each  family  should  perform  such 
observances  within  private  walls,  and  that 
they  should  continue  only  the  space  of  one 
month,  and  then  the  whole  city  should  be 
purified.  The  feast  of  Ceres  happening  to  fall 
within  this  time,  it  was  decreed  that  the 
solemnity  should  be  intermitted,  lest  the  few¬ 
ness,  and  the  sorrowful  countenance  of  those 
who  should  celebrate  it,  might  too  much  ex¬ 
pose  to  the  people  the  greatness  of  their  loss; 
besides  that,  the  worship  most  acceptable  to 
the  gods  is  that  which  comes  from  cheerful 
hearts.  But  those  rites  which  were  proper  for 
appeasing  their  anger,  and  procuring  auspi¬ 
cious  signs  and  presages,  were  by  the  direction 
of  the  augurs  carefully  performed.  Fabius  Pic- 
tor,  a  near  kinsman  to  Maximus,  was  sent  to 
consult  the  oracle  of  Delphi;  and  about  the 
same  time,  two  vestals  having  been  detected 
to  have  been  violated,  the  one  killed  herself, 
and  the  other,  according  to  custom,  was 
buried  alive. 

Above  all,  let  us  admire  the  high  spirit  and 
equanimity  of  this  Roman  commonwealth; 
that  when  the  consul  Varro  came  beaten  and 
flying  home,  full  of  shame  and  humiliation, 
after  he  had  so  disgracefully  and  calamitously 
managed  their  affairs,  yet  the  whole  senate 
and  people  went  forth  to  meet  him  at  the 
gates  of  the  city,  and  received  him  with  hon¬ 
our  and  respect.  And,  silence  being  com¬ 
manded,  the  magistrates  and  chief  of  the  sen¬ 
ate,  Fabius  amongst  them,  commended  him 


150 

before  the  people,  because  he  did  not  despair 
of  the  safety  of  the  commonwealth,  after  so 
great  a  loss,  but  was  come  to  take  the  govern¬ 
ment  into  his  hands,  to  execute  the  laws,  and 
aid  his  fellow-citizens  in  their  prospect  of  fu¬ 
ture  deliverance. 

When  word  was  brought  to  Rome  that 
Hannibal,  after  the  fight,  had  marched  with 
his  army  into  other  parts  of  Italy,  the  hearts 
of  the  Romans  began  to  revive,  and  they  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  send  out  generals  and  armies.  The 
most  distinguished  commands  were  held  by 
Fabius  Maximus  and  Claudius  Marcellus, 
both  generals  of  great  fame,  though  upon  op¬ 
posite  grounds.  For  Marcellus,  as  we  have  set 
forth  in  his  life,  was  a  man  of  action  and  high 
spirit,  ready  and  bold  with  his  own  hand, 
and,  as  Homer  describes  his  warriors,  fierce, 
and  delighting  in  fights.  Boldness,  enterprise, 
and  daring  to  match  those  of  Hannibal,  con¬ 
stituted  his  tactics,  and  marked  his  engage¬ 
ments.  But  Fabius  adhered  to  his  former  prin¬ 
ciples,  still  persuaded  that,  by  following  close 
and  not  fighting  him,  Hannibal  and  his  army 
would  at  least  be  tired  out  and  consumed, 
like  a  wrestler  in  too  high  condition,  whose 
very  excess  of  strength  makes  him  the  more 
likely  suddenly  to  give  way  and  lose  it. 

Posidonius  tells  us  that  the  Romans  called 
Marcellus  their  sword,  and  Fabius  their  buck¬ 
ler;  and  that  the  vigour  of  the  one,  mixed 
with  the  steadiness  of  the  other,  made  a  happy 
compound  that  proved  the  salvation  of  Rome. 
So  that  Hannibal  found  by  experience  that  en¬ 
countering  the  one,  he  met  with  a  rapid,  im¬ 
petuous  river,  which  drove  him  back,  and  still 
made  some  breach  upon  him;  and  by  the 
other,  though  silently  and  quietly  passing  by 
him,  he  was  insensibly  washed  away  and  con¬ 
sumed;  and,  at  last,  was  brought  to  this,  that 
he  dreaded  Marcellus  when  he  was  in  motion, 
and  Fabius  when  he  sat  still. 

During  the  whole  course  of  this  war,  he  had 
still  to  do  with  one  or  both  of  these  generals; 
for  each  of  them  was  five  times  consul,  and, 
as  praetors  or  proconsuls  or  consuls,  they  had 
always  a  part  in  the  government  of  the  army, 
till,  at  last,  Marcellus  fell  into  the  trap  which 
Hannibal  had  laid  for  him,  and  was  killed  in 
his  fifth  consulship. 

But  all  his  craft  and  subtlety  were  unsuc¬ 
cessful  upon  Fabius,  who  only  once  was  in 
some  danger  of  being  caught,  when  counter¬ 
feit  letters  came  to  him  from  the  principal  in¬ 
habitants  of  Metapontum,  with  promises  to 
deliver  up  their  town  if  he  would  come  before 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

it  with  his  army,  and  intimations  that  they 
should  expect  him.  This  train  had  almost 
drawn  him  in;  he  resolved  to  march  to  them 
with  part  of  his  army,  and  was  diverted  only 
by  consulting  the  omens  of  the  birds,  which 
he  found  to  be  inauspicious;  and  not  long 
after  it  was  discovered  that  the  letters  had 
been  forged  by  Hannibal,  who,  for  his  recep¬ 
tion,  had  laid  an  ambush  to  entertain  him. 
This,  perhaps,  we  must  rather  attribute  to  the 
favour  of  the  gods  than  to  the  prudence  of 
Fabius. 

In  preserving  the  towns  and  allies  from  re¬ 
volt  by  fair  and  gentle  treatment,  and  in  not 
using  rigour,  or  showing  a  suspicion  upon 
every  light  suggestion,  his  conduct  was  re¬ 
markable.  It  is  told  of  him,  that  being  in¬ 
formed  of  a  certain  Marsian,  eminent  for  cour¬ 
age  and  good  birth,  who  had  been  speaking 
underhand  with  some  of  the  soldiers  about 
deserting,  Fabius  was  so  far  from  using  sever¬ 
ity  against  him,  that  he  called  for  him,  and 
told  him  he  was  sensible  of  the  neglect  that 
had  been  shown  to  his  merit  and  good  service, 
which,  he  said,  was  a  great  fault  in  the  com¬ 
manders  who  reward  more  by  favour  than  by 
desert;  “but,  henceforth,  whenever  you  are 
aggrieved,”  said  Fabius,  “I  shall  consider  it 
your  fault,  if  you  apply  yourself  to  any  one 
but  to  me”;  and  when  he  had  so  spoken,  he 
bestowed  an  excellent  horse,  and  other  pres¬ 
ents  upon  him;  and,  from  that  time  forwards, 
there  was  not  a  faithfuller  and  more  trusty 
man  in  the  whole  army. 

With  good  reason  he  judged,  that,  if  those 
who  have  the  government  of  horses  and  dogs 
endeavour  by  gentle  usage  to  cure  their  angry 
and  untractable  tempers,  rather  than  by  cru¬ 
elty  and  beating,  much  more  should  those 
who  have  the  command  of  men  try  to  bring 
them  to  order  and  discipline  by  the  mildest 
and  fairest  means,  and  not  treat  them  worse 
than  gardeners  do  those  wild  plants,  which, 
with  care  and  attention,  lose  gradually  the 
savageness  of  their  nature,  and  bear  excellent 
fruit. 

At  another  time,  some  of  his  officers  in¬ 
formed  him  that  one  of  their  men  was  very 
often  absent  from  his  place,  and  out  at  nights; 
he  asked  them  what  kind  of  man  he  was;  they 
all  answered,  that  the  whole  army  had  not  a 
better  man,  that  he  was  a  native  of  Lucania, 
and  proceeded  to  speak  of  several  actions 
which  they  had  seen  him  perform.  Fabius 
made  strict  inquiry,  and  discovered  at  last 
that  these  frequent  excursions  which  he  ven- 


FABIUS 

tured  upon  were  to  visit  a  young  girl,  with 
whom  he  was  in  love.  Upon  which*  he  gave 
private  order  to  some  of  his  men  to  find  out 
the  woman  and  secretly  convey  her  into  his 
own  tent;  and  then  sent  for  the  Lucanian, 
and,  calling  him  aside,  told  him,  that  he  very 
well  knew  how  often  he  had  been  out  away 
from  the  camp  at  night,  which  was  a  capital 
transgression  against  military  discipline  and 
the  Roman  laws,  but  he  knew  also  how  brave 
he  was,  and  the  good  services  he  had  done; 
therefore,  in  consideration  of  them,  he  was 
willing  to  forgive  him  his  fault;  but  to  keep 
him  in  good  order,  he  was  resolved  to  place 
one  over  him  to  be  his  keeper,  who  should  be 
accountable  for  his  good  behaviour.  Having 
said  this,  he  produced  the  woman,  and  told 
the  soldier,  terrified  and  amazed  at  the  ad¬ 
venture,  “This  is  the  person  who  must  answer 
for  you;  and  by  your  future  behaviour  we 
shall  see  whether  your  night  rambles  were  on 
account  of  love,  or  for  any  other  worse  design.” 

Another  passage  there  was,  something  of 
the  same  kind,  which  gained  him  possession 
of  Tarentum.  There  was  a  young  Tarentine 
in  the  army  that  had  a  sister  in  Tarentum, 
then  in  possession  of  the  enemy,  who  entirely 
loved  her  brother,  and  wholly,  depended  upon 
him.  He,  being  informed  that  a  certain  Brut- 
tian,  whom  Hannibal  had  made  a  commander 
of  the  garrison,  was  deeply  in  love  with  his 
sister,  conceived  hopes  that  he  might  possibly 
turn  it  to  the  advantage  of  the  Romans.  And 
having  first  communicated  his  design  to  Fa- 
bius,  he  left  the  army  as  a  deserter  in  show, 
and  went  over  to  Tarentum.  The  first  days 
passed,  and  the  Bruttian  abstained  from  visit¬ 
ing  the  sister;  for  neither  of  them  knew  that 
the  brother  had  notice  of  the  amour  between 
them.  The  young  Tarentine,  however,  took 
an  occasion  to  tell  his  sister  how  he  had  heard 
that  a  man  of  station  and  authority  had  made 
his  addresses  to  her,  and  desired  her,  there¬ 
fore,  to  tell  him  who  it  was;  “for,”  said  he,  “if 
he  be  a  man  that  has  bravery  and  reputation, 
it  matters  not  what  countryman  he  is,  since 
at  this  time  the  sword  mingles  all  nations, 
and  makes  them  equal;  compulsion  makes  all 
things  honourable;  and  in  a  time  when  right 
is  weak,  we  may  be  thankful  if  might  as¬ 
sumes  a  form  of  gentleness.” 

Upon  this  the  woman  sent  for  her  friend, 
and  made  the  brother  and  him  acquainted; 
and  whereas  she  henceforth  showed  more 
countenance  to  her  lover  than  formerly,  in 
the  same  degrees  that  her  kindness  increased, 


151 

his  friendship,  also,  with  the  brother  ad¬ 
vanced.  So  that  at  last  our  Tarentine  thought 
this  Bruttian  officer  well  enough  prepared  to 
receive  the  offers  he  had  to  make  him,  and 
that  it  would  be  easy  for  a  mercenary  man, 
who  was  in  love,  to  accept,  upon  the  terms 
proposed,  the  large  rewards  promised  by  Fa- 
bius.  In  conclusion,  the  bargain  was  struck,  and 
the  promise  made  of  delivering  the  town.  This 
is  the  common  tradition,  though  some  relate 
the  story  otherwise,  and  say,  that  this  woman, 
by  whom  the  Bruttian  was  inveigled  to  betray 
the  town,  was  not  a  native  of  Tarentum,  but  a 
Bruttian  born,  and  was  kept  by  Fabius  as  his 
concubine;  and  being  a  country-woman  and  an 
acquaintance  of  the  Bruttian  governor,  he  pri¬ 
vately  sent  her  to  him  to  corrupt  him. 

Whilst  these  matters  were  thus  in  process, 
to  draw  off  Hannibal  from  scenting  the  de¬ 
sign,  Fabius  sends  orders  to  the  garrison  in 
Rhegium,  that  they  should  waste  and  spoil 
the  Bruttian  country,  and  should  also  lay  siege 
to  Caulonia,  and  storm  the  place  with  all  their 
might.  These  were  a  body  of  eight  thousand 
men,  the  worst  of  the  Roman  army,  who  had 
most  of  them  been  runaways,  and  had  been 
brought  home  by  Marcellus  from  Sicily,  in 
dishonour,  so  that  the  loss  of  them  would  not 
be  any  great  grief  to  the  Romans.  Fabius, 
therefore,  threw  out  these  men  as  a  bait  for 
Hannibal,  to  divert  him  from  Tarentum;  who 
instantly  caught  at  it,  and  led  his  forces  to 
Caulonia;  in  the  meantime,  Fabius  sat  down 
before  Tarentum.  On  the  sixth  day  of  the 
siege,  the  young  Tarentine  slips  by  night  out 
of  the  town,  and,  having  carefully  observed 
the  place  where  the  Bruttian  commander,  ac¬ 
cording  to  agreement,  was  to  admit  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  gave  an  account  of  the  whole  matter  to 
Fabius;  who  thought  it  not  safe  to  rely  wholly 
upon  the  plot,  but,  while  proceeding  with  se¬ 
crecy  to  the  post,  gave  order  for  a  general  as¬ 
sault  to  be  made  on  the  other  side  of  the  town, 
both  by  land  and  sea.  This  being  accordingly 
executed,  while  the  Tarentines  hurried  to  de¬ 
fend  the  town  on  the  side  attacked,  Fabius  re¬ 
ceived  the  signal  from  the  Bruttian,  scaled  the 
walls,  and  entered  the  town  unopposed. 

Here,  we  must  confess,  ambition  seems  to 
have  overcome  him.  To  make  it  appear  to  the 
world  that  he  had  taken  Tarentum  by  force 
and  his  own  prowess,  and  not  by  treachery, 
he  commanded  his  men  to  kill  the  Bruttians 
before  all  others;  yet  he  did  not  succeed  in 
establishing  the  impression  he  desired,  but 
merely  gained  the  character  of  perfidy  and 


152 

cruelty.  Many  of  the  Tarentines  were  also 
killed,  and  thirty  thousand  of  them  were  sold 
for  slaves;  the  army  had  the  plunder  of  the 
town,  and  there  was  brought  into  the  treasury 
three  thousand  talents.  Whilst  they  were 
carrying  of!  everything  else  as  plunder,  the 
officer  who  took  the  inventory  asked  what 
should  be  done  with  their  gods,  meaning  the 
pictures  and  statues;  Fabius  answered,  “Let  us 
leave  their  angry  gods  to  the  Tarentines.” 
Nevertheless,  he  removed  the  colossal  statue 
of  Hercules,  and  had  it  set  up  in  the  capitol, 
wTith  one  of  himself  on  horseback,  in  brass, 
near  it;  proceedings  very  different  from  those 
of  Marcellus  on  a  like  occasion,  and  which, 
indeed,  very  much  set  off  in  the  eyes  of  the 
world  his  clemency  and  humanity,  as  appears 
in  the  account  of  his  life. 

Hannibal,  it  is  said,  was  within  five  miles 
of  Tarentum,  when  he  was  informed  that  the 
town  was  taken.  He  said  openly,  “Rome  then 
has  also  got  a  Hannibal;  as  we  won  Taren¬ 
tum,  so  have  we  lost  it.”  And,  in  private  with 
some  of  his  confidants,  he  told  them,  for  the 
first  time,  that  he  always  thought  it  difficult, 
but  now  he  held  it  impossible,  with  the  forces 
he  then  had,  to  master  Italy. 

Upon  this  success,  Fabius  had  a  triumph  de¬ 
creed  him  at  Rome,  much  more  splendid  than 
his  first;  they  looked  upon  him  now  as  a 
champion  who  had  learned  to  cope  with  his 
antagonist,  and  could  now  easily  foil  his  arts 
and  prove  his  best  skill  ineffectual.  And,  in¬ 
deed,  the  army  of  Hannibal  was  at  this  time 
partly  worn  away  with  continual  action,  and 
partly  weakened  and  become  dissolute  with 
overabundance  and  luxury.  Marcus  Livius, 
who  was  governor  of  Tarentum  when  it  was 
betrayed  to  Hannibal,  and  then  retired  into 
the  citadel,  which  he  kept  till  the  town  was 
retaken,  was  annoyed  at  these  honours  and 
distinctions,  and,  on  one  occasion,  openly  de¬ 
clared  in  the  senate,  that  by  his  resistance, 
more  than  by  any  action  of  Fabius,  Tarentum 
had  been  recovered;  on  which  Fabius  laugh¬ 
ingly  replied,  “You  say  very  true,  for  if  Mar¬ 
cus  Livius  had  not  lost  Tarentum,  Fabius 
Maximus  had  never  recovered  it.” 

The  people,  amongst  other  marks  of  grati¬ 
tude,  gave  his  son  the  consulship  of  the  next 
year;  shortly  after  whose  entrance  upon  his 
office,  there  being  some  business  on  foot  about 
provision  for  the  war,  his  father,  either  by 
reason  of  age  and  infirmity,  or  perhaps  out 
of  design  to  try  his  son,  came  up  to  him  on 
horseback.  While  he  was  still  at  a  distance, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  young  consul  observed  it,  and  bade  one  of 
his  lictors  command  his  father  to  alight,  and 
tell  him  if  he  had  any  business  with  the  con¬ 
sul,  he  should  come  on  foot.  The  standers-by 
seemed  offended  at  the  imperiousness  of  the 
son  towards  a  father  so  venerable  for  his  age 
and  his  authority,  and  turned  their  eyes  in 
silence  towards  Fabius.  He,  however,  in¬ 
stantly  alighted  from  his  horse,  and  with  open 
arms  came  up,  almost  running,  and  embraced 
his  son,  saying,  “Yes,  my  son,  you  do  well, 
and  understand  well  what  authority  you  have 
received,  and  over  whom  you  are  to  use  it. 
This  was  the  way  by  which  we  and  our  fore¬ 
fathers  advanced  the  dignity  of  Rome,  pre¬ 
ferring  ever  her  honour  and  service  to  our 
own  fathers  and  children.” 

And,  in  fact,  it  is  told  that  the  great-grand¬ 
father  of  our  Fabius,  who  was  undoubtedly  the 
greatest  man  of  Rome  in  his  time,  both  in  repu¬ 
tation  and  authority,  who  had  been  five  times 
consul,  and  had  been  honoured  with  several  tri¬ 
umphs  for  victories  obtained  by  him,  took  plea¬ 
sure  in  serving  as  lieutenant  under  his  own  son, 
when  he  went  as  consul  to  his  command.  And 
when  afterwards  his  son  had  a  triumph  be¬ 
stowed  upon  him  for  his  good  service,  the  old 
man  followed,  on  horseback,  his  triumphant 
chariot,  as  one  of  his  attendants;  and  made  it 
his  glory,  that  while  he  really  was,  and  was  ac¬ 
knowledged  to  be,  the  greatest  man  in  Rome, 
and  held  a  father’s  full  power  over  his  son,  he 
yet  submitted  himself  to  the  laws  and  the  mag¬ 
istrate. 

But  the  praises  of  our  Fabius  are  not 
bounded  here.  He  afterwards  lost  his  son,  and 
was  remarkable  for  bearing  the  loss  with  the 
moderation  becoming  a  pious  father  and  a 
wise  man,  and  as  it  was  the  custom  amongst 
the  Romans,  upon  the  death  of  any  illustrious 
person,  to  have  a  funeral  oration  recited  by 
some  of  the  nearest  relations,  he  took  upon 
himself  that  office,  and  delivered  a  speech  in 
the  Forum,  which  he  committed  afterwards 
to  writing. 

After  Cornelius  Scipio,  who  was  sent  into 
Spain,  had  driven  the  Carthaginians,  de¬ 
feated  by  him  in  many  battles,  out  of  the 
country,  and  had  gained  over  to  Rome  many 
towns  and  nations  with  large  resources,  he 
was  received  at  his  coming  home  with  un¬ 
exampled  joy  and  acclamation  of  the  people; 
who,  to  show  their  gratitude,  elected  him  con¬ 
sul  for  the  year  ensuing.  Knowing  what  high 
expectation  they  had  of  him,  he  thought  the 
occupation  of  contesting  Italy  with  Hannibal 


FABIUS 

a  mere  old  man’s  employment,  and  proposed 
no  less  a  task  to  himself  than  to  make  Car¬ 
thage  the  seat  of  the  war,  fill  Africa  with 
arms  and  devastation,  and  so  oblige  Hannibal, 
instead  of  invading  the  countries  of  others, 
to  draw  back  and  defend  his  own.  And  to 
this  end  he  proceeded  to  exert  all  the  influence 
he  had  with  the  people. 

Fabius,  on  the  other  side,  opposed  the 
undertaking  with  all  his  might,  alarming  the 
city,  and  telling  them  that  nothing  but  the 
temerity  of  a  hot  young  man  could  inspire 
them  with  such  dangerous  counsels,  and  spar¬ 
ing  no  means,  by  word  or  deed,  to  prevent  it. 
He  prevailed  with  the  senate  to  espouse  his 
sentiments;  but  the  common  people  thought 
that  he  envied  the  fame  of  Scipio,  and  that  he 
was  afraid  lest  this  young  conqueror  should 
achieve  some  great  and  noble  exploit,  and  have 
the  glory,  perhaps,  of  driving  Hannibal  out  of 
Italy,  or  even  of  ending  the  war,  which  had  for 
so  many  years  continued  and  been  protracted 
under  his  management. 

To  say  the  truth,  when  Fabius  first  opposed 
this  project  of  Scipio,  he  probably  did  it  out 
of  caution  and  prudence,  in  consideration  only 
of  the  public  safety,  and  of  the  danger  which 
the  commonwealth  might  incur;  but  when  he 
found  Scipio  every  day  increasing  in  the  es¬ 
teem  of  the  people,  rivalry  and  ambition  led 
him  further,  and  made  him  violent  and  per¬ 
sonal  in  his  opposition.  For  he  even  applied 
to  Crassus,  the  colleague  of  Scipio,  and  urged 
him  not  to  yield  the  command  to  Scipio,  but 
that,  if  his  inclinations  were  for  it,  he  should 
himself  in  person  lead  the  army  to  Carthage. 
He  also  hindered  the  giving  of  money  to  Scipio 
for  the  war;  so  that  he  was  forced  to  raise  it 
upon  his  own  credit  and  interest  from  the 
cities  of  Etruria,  which  were  extremely  at¬ 
tached  to  him.  On  the  other  side,  Crassus 
would  not  stir  against  him,  nor  remove  out 
of  Italy,  being,  in  his  own  nature,  averse  to 
all  contention,  and  also  having,  by  his  office 
of  high  priest,  religious  duties  to  retain  him. 

Fabius,  therefore,  tried  other  ways  to  op¬ 
pose  the  design;  he  impeded  the  levies,  and 
he  declaimed,  both  in  the  senate  and  to  the 
people,  that  Scipio  was  not  only  himself  fly¬ 
ing  from  Hannibal,  but  was  also  endeavour¬ 
ing  to  drain  Italy  of  all  its  forces,  and  to  spirit 
away  the  youth  of  the  country  to  a  foreign 
war,  leaving  behind  them  their  parents,  wives, 
and  children,  and  the  city  itself,  a  defenceless 
prey  to  the  conquering  and  undefeated  enemy 
at  their  doors.  With  this  he  so  far  alarmed  the 


153 

people,  that  at  last  they  would  only  allow 
Scipio  for  the  war  the  legions  which  were  in 
Sicily,  and  three  hundred,  whom  he  partic¬ 
ularly  trusted,  of  those  men  who  had  served 
with  him  in  Spain.  In  these  transactions,  Fa¬ 
bius  seems  to  have  followed  the  dictates  of  his 
own  wary  temper. 

But,  after  that  Scipio  was  gone  over  into 
Africa,  when  news  almost  immediately  came 
to  Rome  of  wonderful  exploits  and  victories, 
of  which  the  fame  was  confirmed  by  the 
spoils  he  sent  home;  of  a  Numidian  king  taken 
prisoner;  of  a  vast  slaughter  of  their  men;  of 
two  camps  of  the  enemy  burnt  and  destroyed, 
and  in  them  a  great  quantity  of  arms  and 
horses;  and  when,  hereupon,  the  Carthagin¬ 
ians  were  compelled  to  send  envoys  to  Han¬ 
nibal  to  call  him  home,  and  leave  his  idle 
hopes  in  Italy,  to  defend  Carthage;  when,  for 
such  eminent  and  transcending  services,  the 
whole  people  of  Rome  cried  up  and  extolled 
the  actions  of  Scipio;  even  then,  Fabius  con¬ 
tended  that  a  successor  should  be  sent  in  his 
place,  alleging  for  it  only  the  old  reason  of 
the  mutability  of  fortune,  as  if  she  would  be 
weary  of  long  favouring  the  same  person. 

With  this  language  many  did  begin  to  feel 
offended;  it  seemed  to  be  morosity  and  ill- 
will,  the  pusillanimity  of  old  age,  or  a  fear, 
that  had  now  become  exaggerated,  of  the  skill 
of  Hannibal.  Nay,  when  Hannibal  had  put 
his  army  on  shipboard,  and  taken  his  leave 
of  Italy,  Fabius  still  could  not  forbear  to  op¬ 
pose  and  disturb  the  universal  joy  of  Rome, 
expressing  his  fears  and  apprehensions,  telling 
them  that  the  commonwealth  was  never  in 
more  danger  than  now,  and  that  Hannibal 
was  a  more  formidable  enemy  under  the  walls 
of  Carthage  than  ever  he  had  been  in  Italy; 
that  it  would  be  fatal  to  Rome  whenever 
Scipio  should  encounter  his  victorious  army, 
still  warm  with  the  blood  of  so  many  Roman 
generals,  dictators,  and  consuls  slain.  And  the 
people  were,  in  some  degree,  startled  with 
these  declamations,  and  were  brought  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  the  further  off  Hannibal  was,  the 
nearer  was  their  danger.  Scipio,  however, 
shortly  afterwards  fought  Hannibal,  and  ut¬ 
terly  defeated  him,  humbled  the  pride  of 
Carthage  beneath  his  feet,  gave  his  country¬ 
men  joy  and  exultation  beyond  all  their  hopes, 
and — 

Long  shaken  on  the  seas  restored  the  state. 

Fabius  Maximus,  however,  did  not  live  to 
see  the  prosperous  end  of  this  war,  and  the 


154 

final  overthrow  of  Hannibal,  nor  to  rejoice  in 
the  re-established  happiness  and  security  of 
the  commonwealth;  for  about  the  time  that 
Hannibal  left  Italy,  he  fell  sick  and  died.  At 
Thebes,  Epaminondas  died  so  poor  that  he 
was  buried  at  the  public  charge;  one  small 
iron  coin  was  all,  it  is  said,  that  was  found 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

in  his  house.  Fabius  did  not  need  this,  but 
the  people,  as  a  mark  of  their  affection,  de¬ 
frayed  the  expenses  of  his  funeral  by  a  pri¬ 
vate  contribution  from  each  citizen  of  the 
smallest  piece  of  coin;  thus  owning  him  their 
common  father,  and  making  his  end  no  less 
honourable  than  his  life. 


FABIUS  and  PERICLES 
Compared 


We  have  here  had  two  lives  rich  in  ex¬ 
amples,  both  of  civil  and  military  ex¬ 
cellence.  Let  us  first  compare  the  two  men  in 
their  warlike  capacity. 

Pericles  presided  in  his  commonwealth 
when  it  was  in  its  most  flourishing  and  opu¬ 
lent  condition,  great  and  growing  in  power; 
so  that  it  may  be  thought  it  was  rather  the 
common  success  and  fortune  that  kept  him 
from  any  fall  or  disaster.  But  the  task  of  Fa¬ 
bius,  who  undertook  the  government  in  the 
worst  and  most  difficult  times,  was  not  to  pre¬ 
serve  and  maintain  the  well-established  felicity 
of  a  prosperous  state,  but  to  raise  and  uphold  a 
sinking  and  ruinous  commonwealth.  Besides, 
the  victories  of  Cimon,  the  trophies  of  Myro- 
nides  and  Leocrates,  with  the  many  famous  ex¬ 
ploits  of  Tolmides,  were  employed  by  Pericles 
rather  to  fill  the  city  with  festive  entertain¬ 
ments  and  solemnities  than  to  enlarge  and  se¬ 
cure  its  empire.  Whereas,  Fabius,  when  he 
took  upon  him  the  government,  had  the  fright¬ 
ful  object  before  his  eyes  of  Roman  armies  de¬ 
stroyed,  of  their  generals  and  consuls  slain,  of 
lakes  and  plains  and  forests  strewed  with  the 
dead  bodies,  and  rivers  stained  with  the  blood 
of  his  fellow-citizens;  and  yet,  with  his  mature 
and  solid  counsels,  with  the  firmness  of  his 
resolution,  he,  as  it  were,  put  his  shoulder  to 
the  falling  commonwealth,  and  kept  it  up  from 
foundering  through  the  failings  and  weakness 
of  others. 

Perhaps  it  may  be  more  easy  to  govern  a 
city  broken  and  tamed  with  calamities  and 
adversity,  and  compelled  by  danger  and  neces¬ 
sity  to  listen  to  wisdom,  than  to  set  a  bridle 
on  wantonness  and  temerity,  and  rule  a  people 
pampered  and  restive  with  long  prosperity  as 
were  the  Athenians  when  Pericles  held  the 
reins  of  government.  But  then  again,  not  to  be 
daunted  nor  discomposed  with  the  vast  heap  of 
calamities  under  which  the  people  of  Rome  at 
that  time  groaned  and  succumbed,  argues  a 


courage  in  Fabius  and  a  strength  of  purpose 
more  than  ordinary. 

We  may  set  Tarentum  retaken  against  Sa¬ 
mos  won  by  Pericles,  and  the  conquest  of  Eu¬ 
boea  we  may  well  balance  with  the  towns  of 
Campania;  though  Capua  itself  was  reduced 
by  the  consuls  Fulvius  and  Appius.  I  do  not 
find  that  Fabius  won  any  set  battle  but  that 
against  the  Ligurians,  for  which  he  had  his  tri¬ 
umph;  whereas  Pericles  erected  nine  trophies 
for  as  many  victories  obtained  by  land  and  by 
sea.  But  no  action  of  Pericles  can  be  compared 
to  that  memorable  rescue  of  Minucius,  when 
Fabius  redeemed  both  him  and  his  army  from 
utter  destruction,  a  noble  act  combining  the 
highest  valour,  wisdom  and  humanity. 

On  the  other  side,  it  does  not  appear  that  Per¬ 
icles  was  ever  so  overreached  as  Fabius  was  by 
Hannibal  with  his  flaming  oxen.  His  enemy 
there  had,  without  his  agency,  put  himself  acci¬ 
dentally  into  his  power,  yet  Fabius  let  him  slip 
in  the  night,  and,  when  day  came,  was  worsted 
by  him,  was  anticipated  in  the  moment  of  suc¬ 
cess,  and  mastered  by  his  prisoner. 

If  it  is  the  part  of  a  good  general,  not  only 
to  provide  for  the  present,  but  also  to  have  a 
clear  foresight  of  things  to  come,  in  this  point 
Pericles  is  the  superior;  for  he  admonished 
the  Athenians,  and  told  them  beforehand  the 
ruin  the  war  would  bring  upon  them,  by  their 
grasping  more  than  they  were  able  to  man¬ 
age.  But  Fabius  was  not  so  good  a  prophet, 
when  he  denounced  to  the  Romans  that  the 
undertaking  of  Scipio  would  be  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  the  commonwealth.  So  that  Pericles 
was  a  good  prophet  of  bad  success,  and  Fabius 
was  a  bad  prophet  of  success  that  was  good. 
And,  indeed,  to  lose  an  advantage  through  dif¬ 
fidence  is  no  less  blamable  in  a  general  than  to 
fall  into  danger  for  want  of  foresight;  for  both 
these  faults,  though  of  a  contrary  nature,  spring 
from  the  same  root,  want  of  judgment  and  ex¬ 
perience. 

As  for  their  civil  policy,  it  is  imputed  to 


ALCIBIADES 

Pericles  that  he  occasioned  the  war,  since  no 
terms  of  peace,  offered  by  the  Lacedaemonians, 
would  content  him.  It  is  true,  I  presume,  that 
Fabius,  also,  was  not  for  yielding  any  point 
to  the  Carthaginians,  but  was  ready  to  hazard 
all,  rather  than  lessen  the  empire  of  Rome. 
The  mildness  of  Fabius  towards  his  colleague 
Minucius  does,  by  way  of  comparison,  rebuke 
and  condemn  the  exertions  of  Pericles  to 
banish  Cimon  and  Thucydides,  noble,  aristo¬ 
cratic  men,  who  by  his  means  suffered  ostra¬ 
cism.  The  authority  of  Pericles  in  Athens  was 
much  greater  than  that  of  Fabius  in  Rome. 
Hence  it  was  more  easy  for  him  to  prevent  mis¬ 
carriages  arising  from  the  mistakes  and  insuf¬ 
ficiency  of  other  officers;  only  Tolmides  broke 
loose  from  him,  and,  contrary  to  his  persua¬ 
sions,  unadvisedly  fought  with  the  Boeotians, 
and  was  slain.  The  greatness  of  his  influence 
made  all  others  submit  and  conform  themselves 
to  his  judgment.  Whereas  Fabius,  sure  and  un¬ 
erring  himself,  for  want  of  that  general  power, 


155 

had  not  the  means  to  obviate  the  miscarriages 
of  others;  but  it  had  been  happy  for  the  Ro¬ 
mans  if  his  authority  had  been  greater,  for  so, 
we  may  presume,  their  disasters  had  been 
fewer. 

As  to  liberality  and  public  spirit,  Pericles 
was  eminent  in  never  taking  any  gifts,  and 
Fabius,  for  giving  his  own  money  to  ransom 
his  soldiers,  though  the  sum  did  not  exceed 
six  talents.  Than  Pericles,  meantime,  no  man 
had  ever  greater  opportunities  to  enrich  him¬ 
self,  having  had  presents  offered  him  from  so 
many  kings  and  princes  and  allies,  yet  no 
man  was  ever  more  free  from  corruption. 
And  for  the  beauty  and  magnificence  of  tem¬ 
ples  and  public  edifices  with  which  he  adorned 
his  country,  it  must  be  confessed,  that  all  the 
ornaments  and  structures  of  Rome,  to  the  time 
of  the  Caesars,  had  nothing  to  compare,  either 
in  greatness  of  design  or  of  expense,  with  the 
lustre  of  those  which  Pericles  only  erected  at 
Athens. 


ALCIBIADES 

C.  450-404  B.C. 


A  lcibiades,  as  it  is  supposed,  was  an- 
ZA  ciently  descended  from  Eurysaces,  the 
X  A.  son  of  Ajax,  by  his  father's  side;  and 
by  his  mother’s  side  from  Alcmaeon.  Dino- 
mache,  his  mother,  was  the  daughter  of  Meg- 
acles.  His  father,  Clinias,  having  fitted  out 
a  galley  at  his  own  expense,  gained  great  hon¬ 
our  in  the  sea-fight  at  Artemisium,  and  was 
afterwards  slain  in  the  battle  of  Coronea, 
fighting  against  the  Boeotians.  Pericles  and 
Ariphron,  the  sons  of  Xanthippus,  nearly  re¬ 
lated  to  him,  became  the  guardians  of  Alci- 
biades.  It  has  been  said  not  untruly  that  the 
friendship  which  Socrates  felt  for  him  has 
much  contributed  to  his  fame;  and  certain 
it  is,  that,  though  we  have  no  account  from 
any  writer  concerning  the  mother  of  Nicias 
or  Demosthenes,  of  Lamachus  or  Phormion, 
of  Thrasybulus  or  Theramenes,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  these  were  all  illustrious  men  of  the  same 
period,  yet  we  know  even  the  nurse  of  Alci- 
biades,  that  her  country  was  Lacedaemon,  and 
her  name  Amycla,  and  that  Zopyrus  was  his 
teacher  and  attendant;  the  one  being  recorded 
by  Antisthenes,  and  the  other  by  Plato. 

It  is  not,  perhaps,  material  to  say  anything  of 


the  beauty  of  Alcibiades,  only  that  it  bloomed 
with  him  in  all  the  ages  of  his  life,  in  his  in¬ 
fancy,  in  his  youth,  and  in  his  manhood;  and, 
in  the  peculiar  character  becoming  to  each  of 
these  periods,  gave  him,  in  every  one  of  them, 
a  grace  and  a  charm.  What  Euripides  says, 
that — 

Of  all  fair  things  the  autumn,  too,  is  fair, 
is  by  no  means  universally  true.  But  it  hap¬ 
pened  so  with  Alcibiades,  amongst  few  others, 
by  reason  of  his  happy  constitution  and  nat¬ 
ural  vigour  of  body.  It  is  said  that  his  lisp¬ 
ing,  when  he  spoke,  became  him  well,  and 
gave  a  grace  and  persuasiveness  to  his  rapid 
speech.  Aristophanes  takes  notice  of  it  in  the 
verses  in  which  he  jests  at  Theorus:  “How 
like  a  colax  he  is,”  says  Alcibiades,  meaning 
a  corax;  on  which  it  is  remarked, — 

How  very  happily  he  lisped  the  truth. 
Archippus  also  alludes  to  it  in  a  passage  where 
he  ridicules  the  son  of  Alcibiades: — 

That  people  may  believe  him  li\e  his  father, 
He  wal\s  lihe  one  dissolved  in  luxury, 

Lets  his  robe  trail  behind  him  on  the  ground, 
Carelessly  leans  his  head,  and  in  his  tal\ 
Affects  to  lisp. 


156 

His  conduct  displayed  many  great  inconsis¬ 
tencies  and  variations,  not  unnaturally,  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  the  many  and  wonderful  vicis¬ 
situdes  of  his  fortunes;  but  among  the  many 
strong  passions  of  his  real  character,  the  one 
most  prevailing  of  all  was  his  ambition  and 
desire  of  superiority,  which  appears  in  several 
anecdotes  told  of  his  sayings  whilst  he  was 
a  child.  Once  being  hard  pressed  in  wrestling, 
and  fearing  to  be  thrown,  he  got  the  hand  of 
his  antagonist  to  his  mouth,  and  bit  it  with 
all  his  force;  and  when  the  other  loosed  his 
hold  presently,  he  said,  “You  bite,  Alci- 
biades,  like  a  woman!”  “No,”  replied  he,  “like 
a  lion.”  Another  time  as  he  played  at  dice 
in  the  street,  being  then  but  a  child,  a  loaded 
cart  came  that  way,  when  it  was  his  turn  to 
throw;  at  first  he  called  to  the  driver  to  stop, 
because  he  was  to  throw  in  the  way  over 
which  the  cart  was  to  pass;  but  the  man  giv¬ 
ing  him  no  attention  and  driving  on,  when 
the  rest  of  the  boys  divided  and  gave  way, 
Alcibiades  threw  himself  on  his  face  before 
the  cart  and,  stretching  himself  out,  bade  the 
carter  pass  on  now  if  he  would;  which  so 
startled  the  man,  that  he  put  back  his  horses, 
while  all  that  saw  it  were  terrified,  and,  crying 
out,  ran  to  assist  Alcibiades. 

When  he  began  to  study,  he  obeyed  all  his 
other  masters  fairly  well,  but  refused  to  learn 
upon  the  flute,  as  a  sordid  thing,  and  not 
becoming  a  free  citizen;  saying  that  to  play 
on  the  lute  or  the  harp  does  not  in  any  way 
disfigure  a  man’s  body  or  face,  but  one  is 
hardly  to  be  known  by  the  most  intimate 
friends  when  playing  on  the  flute.  Besides, 
one  who  plays  on  the  harp  may  speak  or 
sing  at  the  same  time;  but  the  use  of  the 
flute  stops  the  mouth,  intercepts  the  voice,  and 
prevents  all  articulation.  “Therefore,”  said  he, 
“let  the  Theban  youths  pipe,  who  do  not 
know  how  to  speak,  but  we  Athenians,  as  our 
ancestors  have  told  us,  have  Minerva  for  our 
patroness,  and  Apollo  for  our  protector,  one 
of  whom  threw  away  the  flute,  and  the  other 
stripped  the  flute-player  of  his  skin.” 

Thus,  between  raillery  and  good  earnest, 
Alcibiades  kept  not  only  himself  but  others 
from  learning,  as  it  presently  became  the  talk 
of  the  young  boys,  how  Alcibiades  despised 
playing  on  the  flute,  and  ridiculed  those  who 
studied  it.  In  consequence  of  which,  it  ceased 
to  be  reckoned  amongst  the  liberal  accom¬ 
plishments,  and  became  generally  neglected. 

It  is  stated  in  the  invective  which  Antiphon 
wrote  against  Alcibiades,  that  once,  when  he 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

was  a  boy,  he  ran  away  to  the  house  of  Demo- 
crates,  one  of  those  who  made  a  favourite  of 
him,  and  that  Ariphon  had  determined  to 
cause  proclamation  to  be  made  for  him,  had 
not  Pericles  diverted  him  from  it,  by  saying, 
that  if  he  were  dead,  the  proclaiming  of  him 
could  only  cause  it  to  be  discovered  one  day 
sooner,  and  if  he  were  safe,  it  would  be  a 
reproach  to  him  as  long  as  he  lived.  Antiphon 
also  says,  that  he  killed  one  of  his  own  ser¬ 
vants  with  the  blow  of  a  staff  in  Sibyrtius’s 
wrestling  ground.  But  it  is  unreasonable  to 
give  credit  to  all  that  is  objected  by  an  enemy, 
who  makes  open  profession  of  his  design  to 
defame  him. 

It  was  manifest  that  the  many  well-born 
persons  who  were  continually  seeking  his  com¬ 
pany,  and  making  their  court  to  him,  were 
attracted  and  captivated  by  his  brilliant  and 
extraordinary  beauty  only.  But  the  affection 
which  Socrates  entertained  for  him  is  a  great 
evidence  of  the  natural  noble  qualities  and 
good  disposition  of  the  boy,  which  Socrates, 
indeed,  detected  both  in  and  under  his  per¬ 
sonal  beauty;  and,  hearing  that  his  wealth  and 
station,  and  the  great  number  both  of  stran¬ 
gers  and  Athenians  who  flattered  and  caressed 
him,  might  at  last  corrupt  him,  resolved,  if 
possible,  to  interpose,  and  preserve  so  hopeful 
a  plant  from  perishing  in  the  flower,  before  its 
fruit  came  to  perfection. 

For  never  did  fortune  surround  and  enclose 
a  man  with  so  many  of  those  things  which 
we  vulgarly  call  goods,  or  so  protect  him  from 
every  weapon  of  philosophy,  and  fence  him 
from  every  access  of  free  and  searching  words, 
as  she  did  Alcibiades;  who,  from  the  begin¬ 
ning,  was  exposed  to  the  flatteries  of  those 
who  sought  merely  his  gratification,  such  as 
might  well  unnerve  him,  and  indispose  him  to 
listen  to  any  real  adviser  or  instructor.  Yet  such 
was  the  happiness  of  his  genius,  that  he  dis¬ 
cerned  Socrates  from  the  rest,  and  admitted 
him,  whilst  he  drove  away  the  wealthy  and  the 
noble  who  made  court  to  him.  And,  in  a  little 
time,  they  grew  intimate,  and  Alcibiades,  lis¬ 
tening  now  to  language  entirely  free  from  ev¬ 
ery  thought  of  unmanly  fondness  and  silly  dis¬ 
plays  of  affection,  finding  himself  with  one  who 
sought  to  lay  open  to  him  the  deficiencies  of  his 
mind,  and  repress  his  vain  and  foolish  arro¬ 
gance — 

Dropped  U\e  the  craven  coc\  his  conquered 
wing. 

He  esteemed  these  endeavours  of  Socrates  as 
most  truly  a  means  which  the  gods  made  use  of 


ALCIBIADES 

for  the  care  and  preservation  of  youth,  and  be¬ 
gan  to  think  meanly  of  himself  and  to  admire 
him;  to  be  pleased  with  his  kindness,  and  to 
stand  in  awe  of  his  virtue;  and,  unawares  to 
himself,  there  became  formed  in  his  mind  that 
reflex  image  and  reciprocation  of  Love,  or  An- 
teros,  that  Plato  talks  of.  It  was  a  matter  of  gen¬ 
eral  wonder,  when  people  saw  him  joining 
Socrates  in  his  meals  and  his  exercises,  living 
with  him  in  the  same  tent,  whilst  he  was  re¬ 
served  and  rough  to  all  others  who  made  their 
addresses  to  him,  and  acted,  indeed,  with  great 
insolence  to  some  of  them. 

As  in  particular  to  Anytus,  the  son  of  An- 
themion,  one  who  was  very  fond  of  him,  and 
invited  him  to  an  entertainment  which  he  had 
prepared  for  some  strangers.  Alcibiades  refused 
the  invitation;  but,  having  drunk  to  excess  at 
his  own  house  with  some  of  his  companions, 
went  thither  with  them  to  play  some  frolic; 
and,  standing  at  the  door  of  the  room  where 
the  guests  were  enjoying  themselves,  and  see¬ 
ing  the  tables  covered  with  gold  and  silver 
cups,  he  commanded  his  servants  to  take  away 
the  one-half  of  them,  and  carry  them  to  his  own 
house;  and  then,  disdaining  so  much  as  to  en¬ 
ter  into  the  room  himself,  as  soon  as  he  had 
done  this,  went  away.  The  company  was  indig¬ 
nant,  and  exclaimed  at  his  rude  and  insulting 
conduct;  Anytus,  however,  said,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  he  had  shown  great  consideration  and 
tenderness  in  taking  only  a  part  when  he  might 
have  taken  all. 

He  behaved  in  the  same  manner  to  all 
others  who  courted  him  except  only  one  stran¬ 
ger,  who,  as  the  story  is  told,  having  but  a 
small  estate,  sold  it  all  for  about  a  hundred 
staters,  which  he  presented  to  Alcibiades,  and 
besought  him  to  accept.  Alcibiades,  smiling 
and  well  pleased  at  the  thing,  invited  him  to 
supper,  and,  after  a  very  kind  entertainment, 
gave  him  his  gold  again,  requiring  him,  more¬ 
over,  not  to  fail  to  be  present  the  next  day, 
when  the  public  revenue  was  offered  to  farm, 
and  to  outbid  all  others.  The  man  would  have 
excused  himself,  because  the  contract  was  so 
large,  and  would  cost  many  talents;  but  Alci¬ 
biades,  who  had  at  that  time  a  private  pique 
against  the  existing  farmers  of  the  revenue, 
threatened  to  have  him  beaten  if  he  refused. 

The  next  morning,  the  stranger,  coming 
to  the  market-place,  offered  a  talent  more 
than  the  existing  rate;  upon  which  the  farm¬ 
ers,  enraged  and  consulting  together,  called 
upon  him  to  name  his  sureties,  concluding 
that  he  could  find  none.  The  poor  man,  being 


157 

startled  at  the  proposal,  began  to  retire;  but 
Alcibiades,  standing  at  a  distance,  cried  out 
to  the  magistrates:  “Set  my  name  down;  he 
is  a  friend  of  mine;  I  will  be  security  for  him.” 
When  the  other  bidders  heard  this,  they  per¬ 
ceived  that  all  their  contrivance  was  defeated; 
for  their  way  was,  with  the  profits  of  the  sec¬ 
ond  year  to  pay  the  rent  for  the  year  preced¬ 
ing;  so  that,  not  seeing  any  other  way  to  extri¬ 
cate  themselves  out  of  the  difficulty,  they  began 
to  entreat  the  stranger,  and  offered  him  a  sum 
of  money.  Alcibiades  would  not  suffer  him  to 
accept  of  less  than  a  talent;  but  when  that  was 
paid  down,  he  commanded  him  to  relinquish 
the  bargain,  having  by  this  device  relieved  his 
necessity. 

Though  Socrates  had  many  and  powerful 
rivals,  yet  the  natural  good  qualities  of  Alci¬ 
biades  gave  his  affection  the  mastery.  His 
words  overcame  him  so  much,  as  to  draw 
tears  from  his  eyes,  and  to  disturb  his  very 
soul.  Yet  sometimes  he  would  abandon  him¬ 
self  to  flatterers,  when  they  proposed  to  him 
varieties  of  pleasure,  and  would  desert  Soc¬ 
rates;  who,  then,  would  pursue  him,  as  if  he 
had  been  a  fugitive  slave.  He  despised  every 
one  else,  and  had  no  reverence  or  awe  for  any 
one  but  him.  Cleanthes,  the  philosopher,  speak¬ 
ing  of  one  to  whom  he  was  attached,  says  his 
only  hold  on  him  was  by  his  ears,  while  his 
rivals  had  all  the  others  offered  them;  and 
there  is  no  question  that  Alcibiades  was  very 
easily  caught  by  pleasure;  and  the  expression 
used  by  Thucydides  about  the  excesses  of  his 
habitual  course  of  living  gives  occasion  to  be¬ 
lieve  so. 

But  those  who  endeavoured  to  corrupt  Alci¬ 
biades  took  advantage  chiefly  of  his  vanity 
and  ambition,  and  thrust  him  on  unseason¬ 
ably  to  undertake  great  enterprises,  persuad¬ 
ing  him,  that  as  soon  as  he  began  to  concern 
himself  in  public  affairs,  he  would  not  only 
obscure  the  rest  of  the  generals  and  statesmen, 
but  outdo  the  authority  and  the  reputation 
which  Pericles  himself  had  gained  in  Greece. 
But  in  the  same  manner  as  iron  which  is 
softened  by  the  fire  grows  hard  with  the  cold 
and  all  its  parts  are  closed  again,  so,  as  often 
as  Socrates  observed  Alcibiades  to  be  misled 
by  luxury  or  pride,  he  reduced  and  corrected 
him  by  his  addresses,  and  made  him  humble 
and  modest,  by  showing  him  in  how  many 
things  he  was  deficient,  and  how  very  far 
from  perfection  in  virtue. 

When  he  was  past  his  childhood,  he  went 
once  to  a  grammar-school,  and  asked  the  mas- 


158 

ter  for  one  of  Homer’s  books;  and  he  making 
answer  that  he  had  nothing  of  Homer’s,  Alci- 
biades  gave  him  a  blow  with  his  fist,  and  went 
away.  Another  schoolmaster  telling  him  that 
he  had  Homer  corrected  by  himself;  “How?” 
said  Alcibiades,  “And  do  you  employ  your  time 
in  teaching  children  to  read?  You,  who  are 
able  to  amend  Homer,  may  well  undertake  to 
instruct  men.”  Being  once  desirous  to  speak 
with  Pericles,  he  went  to  his  house  and  was  told 
there  that  he  was  not  at  leisure,  but  busied  in 
considering  how  to  give  up  his  accounts  to 
the  Athenians;  Alcibiades,  as  he  went  away, 
said,  “It  were  better  for  him  to  consider 
how  he  might  avoid  giving  up  his  accounts 
at  all.” 

Whilst  he  was  very  young,  he  was  a  soldier 
in  the  expedition  against  Potidaea,  where  Soc¬ 
rates  lodged  in  the  same  tent  with  him,  and 
stood  next  to  him  in  battle.  Once  there  hap¬ 
pened  a  sharp  skirmish,  in  which  they  both 
behaved  with  signal  bravery;  but  Alcibiades 
receiving  a  wound,  Socrates  threw  himself  be¬ 
fore  him  to  defend  him,  and  beyond  any  ques¬ 
tion  saved  him  and  his  arms  from  the  enemy, 
and  so  in  all  justice  might  have  challenged  the 
prize  of  valour.  But  the  generals  appearing 
eager  to  adjudge  the  honour  of  Alcibiades,  be¬ 
cause  of  his  rank,  Socrates,  who  desired  to  in¬ 
crease  his  thirst  after  glory  of  a  noble  kind, 
was  the  first  to  give  evidence  for  him,  and 
pressed  them  to  crown  him,  and  to  decree  to 
him  the  complete  suit  of  armour.  Afterwards, 
in  the  battle  of  Delium,  when  the  Athenians 
were  routed,  and  Socrates  with  a  few  others 
was  retreating  on  foot,  Alcibiades,  who  was  on 
horseback,  observing  it,  would  not  pass  on,  but 
stayed  to  shelter  him  from  the  danger,  and 
brought  him  safe  off,  though  the  enemy 
pressed  hard  upon  them,  and  cut  off  many.  But 
this  happened  some  time  after. 

He  gave  a  box  on  the  ear  to  Hipponicus, 
the  father  of  Callias,  whose  birth  and  wealth 
made  him  a  person  of  great  influence  and  re¬ 
pute.  And  this  he  did  unprovoked  by  any  pas¬ 
sion  or  quarrel  between  them,  but  only  be¬ 
cause,  in  a  frolic,  he  had  agreed  with  his  com¬ 
panions  to  do  it.  People  were  justly  offended  at 
this  insolence  when  it  became  known  through 
the  city;  but  early  the  next  morning,  Alcibiades 
went  to  his  house  and  knocked  at  the  door, 
and  being  admitted  to  him,  took  off  his  outer 
garment,  and  presenting  his  naked  body,  de¬ 
sired  him  to  scourge  and  chastise  him  as  he 
pleased.  Upon  this  Hipponicus  forgot  all  his 
resentment,  and  not  only  pardoned  him,  but 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

soon  after  gave  him  his  daughter  Hipparete  in 
marriage. 

Some  say  that  it  was  not  Hipponicus,  but 
his  son,  Callias,  who  gave  Hipparete  to  Alci¬ 
biades,  together  with  a  portion  of  ten  talents, 
and  that  after,  when  she  had  a  child,  Alci¬ 
biades  forced  him  to  give  ten  talents  more, 
upon  pretence  that  such  was  the  agreement 
if  she  brought  him  any  children.  Afterwards, 
Callias,  for  fear  of  coming  to  his  death  by 
his  means,  declared,  in  a  full  assembly  of  the 
people,  that,  if  he  should  happen  to  die  with¬ 
out  children,  the  state  should  inherit  his  house 
and  all  his  goods. 

Hipparete  was  a  virtuous  and  dutiful  wife, 
but,  at  last,  growing  impatient  of  the  out¬ 
rages  done  to  her  by  her  husband’s  continual 
entertaining  of  courtesans,  as  well  strangers 
as  Athenians,  she  departed  from  him  and  re¬ 
tired  to  her  brother’s  house.  Alcibiades  seemed 
not  at  all  concerned  at  this,  and  lived  on  still 
in  the  same  luxury;  but  the  law  requiring 
that  she  should  deliver  to  the  archon  in  per¬ 
son,  and  not  by  proxy,  the  instrument  by 
which  she  claimed  a  divorce,  when,  in  obedi¬ 
ence  to  the  law,  she  presented  herself  before 
him  to  perform  this,  Alcibiades  came  in, 
caught  her  up,  and  carried  her  home  through 
the  market-place,  no  one  daring  to  oppose 
him  nor  to  take  her  from  him.  She  continued 
with  him  till  her  death,  which  happened  not 
long  after,  when  Alcibiades  had  gone  to  Ephe¬ 
sus.  Nor  is  this  violence  to  be  thought  so  very 
enormous  or  unmanly.  For  the  law,  in  mak¬ 
ing  her  who  desires  to  be  divorced  appear  in 
public,  seems  to  design  to  give  her  husband 
an  opportunity  of  treating  with  her,  and  en¬ 
deavouring  to  retain  her. 

Alcibiades  had  a  dog  which  cost  him  seventy 
minas,  and  was  a  very  large  one,  and  very 
handsome.  His  tail,  which  was  his  principal 
ornament,  he  caused  to  be  cut  off,  and  his 
acquaintances  exclaiming  at  him  for  it,  and 
telling  him  that  all  Athens  was  sorry  for  the 
dog,  and  cried  out  upon  him  for  this  action, 
he  laughed,  and  said,  “Just  what  I  wanted  has 
happened  then.  I  wished  the  Athenians  to 
talk  about  this,  that  they  might  not  say  some¬ 
thing  worse  of  me.” 

It  is  said  that  the  first  time  he  came  into 
the  assembly  was  upon  occasion  of  a  largess 
of  money  which  he  made  to  the  people.  This 
was  not  done  by  design,  but  as  he  passed 
along  he  heard  a  shout,  and  inquiring  the 
cause,  and  having  learned  that  there  was  a 
donative  making  to  the  people,  he  went  in 


ALCIBIADES 

amongst  them  and  gave  money  also.  The  mul¬ 
titude  thereupon  applauding  him,  and  shout¬ 
ing,  he  was  so  transported  at  it,  that  he  forgot 
a  quail  which  he  had  under  his  robe,  and  the 
bird,  being  frighted  with  the  noise,  flew  off; 
upon  which  the  people  made  louder  acclama¬ 
tions  than  before,  and  many  of  them  started 
up  to  pursue  the  bird;  and  one  Antiochus,  a 
pilot,  caught  it  and  restored  it  to  him,  for 
which  he  was  ever  after  a  favourite  with  Al- 
cibiades. 

He  had  great  advantages  for  entering  pub¬ 
lic  life;  his  noble  birth,  his  riches,  the  personal 
courage  he  had  shown  in  divers  battles,  and 
the  multitude  of  his  friends  and  dependants, 
threw  open,  so  to  say,  folding-doors  for  his 
admittance.  But  he  did  not  consent  to  let  his 
power  with  the  people  rest  on  anything,  rather 
than  on  his  own  gift  of  eloquence.  That  he 
was  a  master  in  the  art  of  speaking,  the  comic 
poets  bear  him  witness;  and  the  most  eloquent 
of  public  speakers,  in  his  oration  against  Mi- 
dias,  allows  that  Alcibiades,  among  other  per¬ 
fections,  was  a  most  accomplished  orator.  If, 
however,  we  give  credit  to  Theophrastus,  who 
of  all  philosophers  was  the  most  curious  in¬ 
quirer,  and  the  greatest  lover  of  history,  we  are 
to  understand  that  Alcibiades  had  the  highest 
capacity  for  inventing,  for  discerning  what  was 
the  right  thing  to  be  said  for  any  purpose,  and 
on  any  occasion;  but  aiming  not  only  at  saying 
what  was  required,  but  also  at  saying  it  well,  in 
respect,  that  is,  of  words  and  phrases,  when 
these  did  not  readily  occur,  he  would  often 
pause  in  the  middle  of  his  discourse  for  want 
of  the  apt  word,  and  would  be  silent  and  stop 
till  he  could  recollect  himself,  and  had  consid¬ 
ered  what  to  say. 

His  expenses  in  horses  kept  for  the  public 
games,  and  in  the  number  of  his  chariots, 
were  matter  of  great  observation;  never  did 
any  one  but  he,  either  private  person  or  king, 
send  seven  chariots  to  the  Olympic  games. 
And  to  have  carried  away  at  once  the  first, 
the  second,  and  the  fourth  prize,  as  Thucy¬ 
dides  says,  or  the  third,  as  Euripides  relates 
it,  outdoes  far  away  every  distinction  that  ever 
was  known  or  thought  of  in  that  kind.  Euri¬ 
pides  celebrates  his  success  in  this  manner: — 

— But  my  song  to  you, 

Son  of  Clinias,  is  due. 

Victory  is  noble;  how  much  more 
To  do  as  never  Gree\  before; 

To  obtain  in  the  great  chariot  race 
The  first,  the  second,  and  third  place; 

With  easy  step  advanced  to  fame 


159 

To  bid  the  herald  three  times  claim 

The  olive  for  one  victor’s  name. 

The  emulation  displayed  by  the  deputations 
of  various  states  in  the  presents  which  they 
made  to  him,  rendered  this  success  yet  more 
illustrious.  The  Ephesians  erected  a  tent  for 
him,  adorned  magnificently;  the  city  of  Chios 
furnished  him  with  provender  for  his  horses 
and  with  great  numbers  of  beasts  for  sacrifice; 
and  the  Lesbians  sent  him  wine  and  other 
provisions  for  the  many  great  entertainments 
which  he  made. 

Yet  in  the  midst  of  all  this  he  escaped  not 
without  censure,  occasioned  either  by  the  ill- 
nature  of  his  enemies  or  by  his  own  miscon¬ 
duct.  For  it  is  said,  that  one  Diomedes,  an 
Athenian,  a  worthy  man  and  a  friend  to  Al¬ 
cibiades,  passionately  desiring  to  obtain  the 
victory  at  the  Olympic  games,  and  having 
heard  much  of  a  chariot  which  belonged  to 
the  state  at  Argos,  where  he  knew  that  Alci¬ 
biades  had  great  power  and  many  friends, 
prevailed  with  him  to  undertake  to  buy  the 
chariot.  Alcibiades  did  indeed  buy  it,  but  then 
claimed  it  for  his  own,  leaving  Diomedes  to 
rage  at  him,  and  to  call  upon  the  gods  and 
men  to  bear  witness  to  the  injustice.  It  would 
seem  there  was  a  suit  at  law  commenced  upon 
this  occasion,  and  there  is  yet  extant  an  ora¬ 
tion  concerning  the  chariot,  written  by  Iso¬ 
crates  in  defence  of  the  son  of  Alcibiades.  But 
the  plaintiff  in  this  action  is  named  Tisias, 
and  not  Diomedes. 

As  soon  as  he  began  to  intermeddle  in  the 
government,  which  was  when  he  was  very 
young,  he  quickly  lessened  the  credit  of  all 
who  aspired  to  the  confidence  of  the  people 
except  Phaeax,  the  son  of  Erasistratus,  and 
Nicias,  the  son  of  Niceratus,  who  alone  could 
contest  it  with  him.  Nicias  was  arrived  at  a 
mature  age,  and  was  esteemed  their  first  gen¬ 
eral.  Phaeax  was  but  a  rising  statesman  like 
Alcibiades;  he  was  descended  from  noble  an¬ 
cestors,  but  was  his  inferior,  as  in  many  other 
things,  so,  principally,  in  eloquence.  He  pos¬ 
sessed  rather  the  art  of  persuading  in  private 
conversation  than  of  debate  before  the  people, 
and  was,  as  Eupolis  said  of  him — 

The  best  of  tal\ers,  and  of  speakers  worst. 

There  is  extant  an  oration  written  by  Phaeax 
against  Alcibiades,  in  which,  amongst  other 
things,  it  is  said,  that  Alcibiades  made  daily 
use  at  his  table  of  many  gold  and  silver  vessels, 
which  belonged  to  the  commonwealth,  as  if 
they  had  been  his  own. 


160 


There  was  a  certain  Hyperbolus,  of  the 
township  of  Perithcedae,  whom  Thucydides 
also  speaks  of  as  a  man  of  bad  character,  a 
general  butt  for  the  mockery  of  all  the  comic 
writers  of  the  time,  but  quite  unconcerned 
at  the  worst  things  they  could  say,  and,  being 
careless  of  glory,  also  insensible  of  shame;  a 
temper  which  some  people  call  boldness  and 
courage,  whereas  it  is  indeed  impudence  and 
recklessness.  He  was  liked  by  nobody,  yet  the 
people  made  frequent  use  of  him,  when  they 
had  a  mind  to  disgrace  or  calumniate  any  per¬ 
sons  in  authority. 

At  this  time,  the  people,  by  his  persuasions, 
were  ready  to  proceed  to  pronounce  the  sen¬ 
tence  of  ten  years’  banishment,  called  os¬ 
tracism.  This  they  made  use  of  to  humiliate 
and  drive  out  of  the  city  such  citizens  as  out¬ 
did  the  rest  in  credit  and  power,  indulging 
not  so  much  perhaps  their  apprehensions  as 
their  jealousies  in  this  way.  And  when,  at 
this  time,  there  was  no  doubt  but  that  the 
ostracism  would  fall  upon  one  of  those  three, 
Alcibiades  contrived  to  form  a  coalition  of 
parties,  and,  communicating  his  project  to 
Nicias,  turned  the  sentence  upon  Hyperbolus 
himself.  Others  say,  that  it  was  not  with  Nicias, 
but  Phaeax,  that  he  consulted,  and  by  help  of 
his  party  procured  the  banishment  of  Hyper¬ 
bolus,  when  he  least  suspected  it.  For,  be¬ 
fore  that  time,  no  mean  or  obscure  person  had 
ever  fallen  under  that  punishment,  so  that 
Plato,  the  comic  poet,  speaking  of  Hyperbolus, 
might  well  say — 

The  man  deserved  the  fate ;  deny't  who  can ? 

Yes,  but  the  fate  did  not  deserve  the  man; 

Not  for  the  li\e  of  him  and  his  slave-brands 

Did  Athens  put  the  sherd  into  our  hands. 

But  we  have  given  elsewhere  a  fuller  state¬ 
ment  of  what  is  known  to  us  of  the  matter. 

Alcibiades  was  not  less  disturbed  at  the 
distinctions  which  Nicias  gained  amongst  the 
enemies  of  Athens  than  at  the  honours  which 
the  Athenians  themselves  paid  to  him.  For 
though  Alcibiades  was  the  proper  appointed 
person  to  receive  all  Lacedaemonians  when 
they  came  to  Athens,  and  had  taken  particular 
care  of  those  that  were  made  prisoners  at 
Pylos,  yet,  after  they  had  obtained  the  peace 
and  restitution  of  the  captives,  by  the  pro¬ 
curement  chiefly  of  Nicias,  they  paid  him  very 
special  attentions.  And  it  was  commonly  said 
in  Greece,  that  the  war  was  begun  by  Pericles, 
and  that  Nicias  made  an  end  of  it,  and  the 
peace  was  generally  called  the  peace  of  Nicias. 

Alcibiades  was  extremely  annoyed  at  this, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  being  full  of  envy,  set  himself  to  break 
the  league.  First,  therefore,  observing  that  the 
Argives,  as  well  out  of  fear  as  hatred  to  the 
Lacedaemonians,  sought  for  protection  against 
them,  he  gave  them  a  secret  assurance  of  alli¬ 
ance  with  Athens.  And  communicating,  as 
well  in  peison  as  by  letters,  with  the  chief 
advisers  of  the  people  there,  he  encouraged 
them  not  to  fear  the  Lacedaemonians,  nor 
make  concessions  to  them,  but  to  wait  a  little, 
and  keep  their  eyes  on  the  Athenians,  who, 
already,  were  all  but  sorry  they  had  made 
peace,  and  would  soon  give  it  up. 

And  afterwards,  when  the  Lacedaemonians 
had  made  a  league  with  the  Boeotians  and 
had  not  delivered  up  Panactum  entire,  as  they 
ought  to  have  done  by  the  treaty,  but  only 
after  first  destroying  it,  which  gave  great  of¬ 
fence  to  the  people  of  Athens,  Alcibiades  laid 
hold  of  that  opportunity  to  exasperate  them 
more  highly.  He  exclaimed  fiercely  against  Ni¬ 
cias,  and  accused  him  of  many  things,  which 
seemed  probable  enough:  as  that,  when  he  was 
general,  he  made  no  attempt  himself  to  capture 
their  enemies  that  were  shut  up  in  the  isle  of 
Sphacteria,  but,  when  they  were  afterwards 
made  prisoners  by  others,  he  procured  their  re¬ 
lease  and  sent  them  back  to  the  Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans,  only  to  get  favour  with  them;  that  he 
would  not  make  use  of  his  credit  with  them  to 
prevent  their  entering  into  this  confederacy 
with  the  Boeotians  and  Corinthians,  and  yet,  on 
the  other  side,  that  he  sought  to  stand  in  the 
way  of  those  Greeks  who  were  inclined  to 
make  an  alliance  and  friendship  with  Athens, 
if  the  Lacedaemonians  did  not  like  it. 

It  happened,  at  the  very  time  when  Nicias 
was  by  these  arts  brought  into  disgrace  with 
the  people,  that  ambassadors  arrived  from  La¬ 
cedaemon,  who,  at  their  first  coming,  said  what 
seemed  very  satisfactory,  declaring  that  they 
had  full  powers  to  arrange  all  matters  in  dis¬ 
pute  upon  fair  and  equal  terms.  The  council 
received  their  propositions,  and  the  people 
were  to  assemble  on  the  morrow  to  give  them 
audience.  Alcibiades  grew  very  apprehensive 
of  this,  and  contrived  to  gain  a  secret  confer¬ 
ence  with  the  ambassadors.  When  they  were 
met,  he  said:  “What  is  it  you  intend,  you  men 
of  Sparta?  Can  you  be  ignorant  that  the  coun¬ 
cil  always  acts  with  moderation  and  respect 
towards  ambassadors,  but  that  the  people  are 
full  of  ambition  and  great  designs?  So  that,  if 
you  let  them  know  what  full  powers  your  com¬ 
mission  gives  you,  they  will  urge  and  press  you 
to  unreasonable  conditions.  Quit,  therefore, 


ALCIBIADES 

this  indiscreet  simplicity,  if  you  expect  to  ob¬ 
tain  equal  terms  from  the  Athenians,  and 
would  not  have  things  extorted  from  you  con¬ 
trary  to  your  inclinations,  and  begin  to  treat 
with  the  people  upon  some  reasonable  articles, 
not  avowing  yourselves  plenipotentiaries;  and 
I  will  be  ready  to  assist  you,  out  of  good-will  to 
the  Lacedaemonians.”  When  he  had  said  thus, 
he  gave  them  his  oath  for  the  performance  of 
what  he  promised,  and  by  this  way  drew  them 
from  Nicias  to  rely  entirely  upon  himself,  and 
left  them  full  of  admiration  of  the  discernment 
and  sagacity  they  had  seen  in  him. 

The  next  day,  when  the  people  were  as¬ 
sembled  and  the  ambassadors  introduced,  Al- 
cibiades,  with  great  apparent  courtesy,  de¬ 
manded  of  them,  with  what  powers  they 
were  come.  They  made  answer  that  they 
were  not  come  as  plenipotentiaries.  Instantly 
upon  that,  Alcibiades,  with  a  loud  voice,  as 
though  he  had  received  and  not  done  the 
wrong,  began  to  call  them  dishonest  prevari¬ 
cators,  and  to  urge  that  such  men  could  not 
possibly  come  with  a  purpose  to  say  or  do 
anything  that  was  sincere.  The  council  was 
incensed,  the  people  were  in  a  rage,  and 
Nicias,  who  knew  nothing  of  the  deceit  and 
the  imposture,  was  in  the  greatest  confusion, 
equally  surprised  and  ashamed  at  such  a 
change  in  the  men.  So  thus  the  Lacedae¬ 
monian  ambassadors  were  utterly  rejected, 
and  Alcibiades  was  declared  general,  who 
presently  united  the  Argives,  the  Eleans,  and 
the  people  of  Mantinea,  into  a  confederacy 
with  the  Athenians. 

No  man  commended  the  method  by  which 
Alcibiades  effected  all  this,  yet  it  was  a  great 
political  feat  thus  to  divide  and  shake  almost 
all  Peloponnesus,  and  to  combine  so  many 
men  in  arms  against  the  Lacedaemonians  in 
one  day  before  Mantinea;  and,  moreover,  to 
remove  the  war  and  the  danger  so  far  from 
the  frontier  of  the  Athenians,  that  even  suc¬ 
cess  would  profit  the  enemy  but  little,  should 
they  be  conquerors,  whereas,  if  they  were  de¬ 
feated,  Sparta  itself  was  hardly  safe. 

After  this  battle  at  Mantinea,  the  select 
thousand  of  the  army  of  the  Argives  at¬ 
tempted  to  overthrow  the  government  of  the 
people  in  Argos,  and  make  themselves  mas¬ 
ters  of  the  city;  and  the  Lacedaemonians  came 
to  their  aid  and  abolished  the  democracy.  But 
the  people  took  arms  again,  and  gained  the 
advantage,  and  Alcibiades  came  in  to  their 
aid  and  completed  the  victory,  and  persuaded 
them  to  build  long  walls,  and  by  that  means 


l6l 

to  join  their  city  to  the  sea,  and  so  to  bring  it 
wholly  within  the  reach  of  the  Athenian 
power.  To  this  purpose  he  procured  them 
builders  and  masons  from  Athens,  and  dis¬ 
played  the  greatest  zeal  for  their  service,  and 
gained  no  less  honour  and  power  to  himself 
than  to  the  commonwealth  of  Athens. 

He  also  persuaded  the  people  of  Patrae  to 
join  their  city  to  the  sea,  by  building  long 
walls;  and  when  some  one  told  them,  by  way 
of  warning,  that  the  Athenians  would  swal¬ 
low  them  up  at  last,  Alcibiades  made  answer, 
“Possibly  it  may  be  so,  but  it  will  be  by  little 
and  little,  and  beginning  at  the  feet,  whereas 
the  Lacedaemonians  will  begin  at  the  head  and 
devour  you  all  at  once.” 

Nor  did  he  neglect  either  to  advise  the 
Athenians  to  look  to  their  interests  by  land, 
and  often  put  the  young  men  in  mind  of  the 
oath  which  they  had  made  at  Agraulos,  to  the 
effect  that  they  would  account  wheat  and  bar¬ 
ley,  and  vines  and  olives,  to  be  the  limits  of 
Attica;  by  which  they  were  taught  to  claim  a 
title  to  all  land  that  was  cultivated  and  pro¬ 
ductive. 

But  with  all  these  words  and  deeds,  and 
with  all  this  sagacity  and  eloquence,  he  inter¬ 
mingled  exorbitant  luxury  and  wantonness, 
in  his  eating  and  drinking  and  dissolute  liv¬ 
ing;  wore  long  purple  robes  like  a  woman, 
which  dragged  after  him  as  he  went  through 
the  market-place;  caused  the  planks  of  his  gal¬ 
ley  to  be  cut  away,  that  so  he  might  lie  the 
softer,  his  bed  not  being  placed  on  the  boards, 
but  hanging  upon  girths.  His  shield,  again, 
which  was  richly  gilded,  had  not  the  usual 
ensigns  of  the  Athenians,  but  a  Cupid,  hold¬ 
ing  a  thunderbolt  in  his  hand,  was  painted 
upon  it.  The  sight  of  all  this  made  the  people 
of  good  repute  in  the  city  feel  disgust  and  ab¬ 
horrence,  and  apprehension  also,  at  his  free 
living,  and  his  contempt  of  law,  as  things 
monstrous  in  themselves,  and  indicating  de¬ 
signs  of  usurpation.  Aristophanes  has  well  ex¬ 
pressed  the  people’s  feeling  towards  him — 
They  love,  and  hate,  and  cannot  do  without  him. 

And  still  more  strongly,  under  a  figurative 
expression, — 

Best  rear  no  lion  in  your  state,  His  true; 

But  treat  him  lil{e  a  lion  if  you  do. 

The  truth  is,  his  liberalities,  his  public  shows, 
and  other  munificence  to  the  people,  which 
were  such  as  nothing  could  exceed,  the  glory 
of  his  ancestors,  the  force  of  his  eloquence,  the 
grace  of  his  person,  his  strength  of  body,  joined 


162 


with  his  great  courage  and  knowledge  in  mili¬ 
tary  affairs,  prevailed  upon  the  Athenians  to 
endure  patiently  his  excesses,  to  indulge  many 
things  to  him,  and,  according  to  their  habit, 
to  give  the  softest  names  to  his  faults,  attribut¬ 
ing  them  to  youth  and  good  nature. 

As,  for  example,  he  kept  Agatharcus,  the 
painter,  a  prisoner  till  he  had  painted  his  whole 
house,  but  then  dismissed  him  with  a  reward. 
He  publicly  struck  Taureas,  who  exhibited  cer¬ 
tain  shows  in  opposition  to  him  and  contended 
with  him  for  the  prize.  He  selected  for  himself 
one  of  the  captive  Mehan  women,  and  had  a 
son  by  her,  whom  he  took  care  to  educate.  This 
the  Athenians  styled  great  humanity,  and  yet 
he  was  the  principal  cause  of  the  slaughter  of 
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  isle  of  Melos  who 
were  of  age  to  bear  arms,  having  spoken  in 
favour  of  that  decree.  When  Aristophon,  the 
painter,  had  drawn  Nemea  sitting  and  holding 
Alcibiades  in  her  arms,  the  multitude  seemed 
pleased  with  the  piece,  and  thronged  to  see  it, 
but  older  people  disliked  and  disrelished  it, 
and  looked  on  these  things  as  enormities,  and 
movements  towards  tyranny.  So  that  it  was 
not  said  amiss  by  Archestratus,  that  Greece 
could  not  support  a  second  Alcibiades. 

Once,  when  Alcibiades  succeeded  well  in  an 
oration  which  he  made,  and  the  whole  as¬ 
sembly  attended  upon  him  to  do  him  honour, 
Timon,  the  misanthrope,  did  not  pass  slightly 
by  him,  nor  avoid  him,  as  did  others,  but  pur¬ 
posely  met  him,  and  taking  him  by  the  hand, 
said,  “Go  on  boldly,  my  son,  and  increase  in 
credit  with  the  people,  for  thou  wilt  one  day 
bring  them  calamities  enough.”  Some  that 
were  present  laughed  at  the  saying,  and  some 
reviled  Timon;  but  there  were  others  upon 
whom  it  made  a  deep  impression;  so  various 
was  the  judgment  which  was  made  of  him, 
and  so  irregular  his  own  character. 

The  Athenians,  even  in  the  lifetime  of  Peri¬ 
cles,  had  already  cast  a  longing  eye  upon  Sicily; 
but  did  not  attempt  anything  till  after  his 
death.  Then,  under  pretence  of  aiding  their 
confederates,  they  sent  succours  upon  all  oc¬ 
casions  to  those  who  were  oppressed  by  the 
Syracusans,  preparing  the  way  for  sending 
over  a  greater  force.  But  Alcibiades  was  the 
person  who  inflamed  this  desire  of  theirs  to 
the  height,  and  prevailed  with  them  no  longer 
to  proceed  secretly,  and  by  little  and  little,  in 
their  design,  but  to  sail  out  with  a  great  fleet, 
and  undertake  at  once  to  make  themselves 
masters  of  the  island.  He  possessed  the  people 
with  great  hopes,  and  he  himself  entertained 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

yet  greater;  and  the  conquest  of  Sicily,  which 
was  the  utmost  bound  of  their  ambition,  was 
but  the  mere  outset  of  his. expectation. 

Nicias  endeavoured  to  divert  the  people  from 
the  expedition,  by  representing  to  them  that  the 
taking  of  Syracuse  would  be  a  work  of  great 
difficulty;  but  Alcibiades  dreamed  of  nothing 
less  than  the  conquest  of  Carthage  and  Libya, 
and  by  the  accession  of  these  conceiving  him¬ 
self  at  once  made  master  of  Italy  and  Pelopon¬ 
nesus,  seemed  to  look  upon  Sicily  as  little  more 
than  a  magazine  for  the  war.  The  young  men 
were  soon  elevated  with  these  hopes,  and  lis¬ 
tened  gladly  to  those  of  riper  years,  who  talked 
wonders  of  the  countries  they  were  going  to; 
so  that  you  might  see  great  numbers  sitting  in 
the  wrestling  grounds  and  public  places,  draw¬ 
ing  on  the  ground  the  figure  of  the  island  and 
the  situation  of  Libya  and  Carthage. 

Socrates,  the  philosopher,  and  Meton,  the  as¬ 
trologer,  are  said,  however,  never  to  have  hoped 
for  any  good  to  the  commonwealth  from  this 
war;  the  one,  it  is  to  be  supposed,  presaging 
what  would  ensue,  by  the  intervention  of  his 
attendant  Genius;  and  the  other,  either  upon 
rational  consideration  of  the  project  or  by  use 
of  the  art  of  divination,  conceived  fears  for  its 
issue,  and,  feigning  madness,  caught  up  a  burn¬ 
ing  torch,  and  seemed  as  if  he  would  have  set 
his  own  house  on  fire.  Others  report,  that  he 
did  not  take  upon  him  to  act  the  madman,  but 
secretly  in  the  night  set  his  house  on  fire,  and 
the  next  morning  besought  the  people,  that  for 
his  comfort,  after  such  a  calamity,  they  would 
spare  his  son  from  the  expedition.  By  which 
artifice  he  deceived  his  fellow-citizens,  and  ob¬ 
tained  of  them  what  he  desired. 

Together  with  Alcibiades,  Nicias,  much 
against  his  will,  was  appointed  general;  and 
he  endeavoured  to  avoid  the  command,  not 
the  less  on  account  of  his  colleague.  But  the 
Athenians  thought  the  war  would  proceed 
more  prosperously,  if  they  did  not  send  Alci¬ 
biades  free  from  all  restraint,  but  tempered  his 
heat  with  the  caution  of  Nicias.  This  they  chose 
the  rather  to  do,  because  Lamachus,  the  third 
general,  though  he  was  of  mature  years,  yet 
in  several  battles  had  appeared  no  less  hot  and 
rash  than  Alcibiades  himself.  When  they  began 
to  deliberate  of  the  number  of  forces,  and  of 
the  manner  of  making  the  necessary  provi¬ 
sions,  Nicias  made  another  attempt  to  oppose 
the  design,  and  to  prevent  the  war;  but  Alci¬ 
biades  contradicted  him,  and  carried  his  point 
with  the  people.  And  one  Demostratus,  an  ora¬ 
tor,  proposing  to  give  the  generals  absolute 


ALCIBIADES 

power  over  the  preparations  and  the  whole 
management  of  the  war,  it  was  presently  de¬ 
creed  so. 

When  all  things  were  fitted  for  the  voyage, 
many  unlucky  omens  appeared.  At  that  very 
time  the  feast  of  Adonis  happened  in  which 
the  women  were  used  to  expose,  in  all  parts 
of  the  city,  images  resembling  dead  men  car¬ 
ried  out  to  their  burial,  and  to  represent  funeral 
solemnities  by  lamentations  and  mournful 
songs.  The  mutilation,  however,  of  the  images 
of  Mercury,  most  of  which,  in  one  night,  had 
their  faces  all  disfigured,  terrified  many  per¬ 
sons  who  were  wont  to  despise  most  things  of 
that  nature.  It  was  given  out  that  it  was  done 
by  the  Corinthians,  for  the  sake  of  the  Syra¬ 
cusans,  who  were  their  colony,  in  hopes  that 
the  Athenians,  by  such  prodigies,  might  be  in¬ 
duced  to  delay  or  abandon  the  war. 

But  the  report  gained  no  credit  with  the 
people,  nor  yet  the  opinion  of  those  who  would 
not  believe  that  there  was  anything  ominous 
in  the  matter,  but  that  it  was  only  an  extrava¬ 
gant  action,  committed,  in  that  sort  of  sport 
which  runs  into  licence,  by  wild  young  men 
coming  from  a  debauch.  Alike  enraged  and 
terrified  at  the  thing,  looking  upon  it  to  pro¬ 
ceed  from  a  conspiracy  of  persons  who  de¬ 
signed  some  commotions  in  the  state,  the  coun¬ 
cil,  as  well  as  the  assembly  of  the  people,  which 
were  held  frequently  in  a  few  days’  space,  ex¬ 
amined  diligently  everything  that  might  ad¬ 
minister  ground  for  suspicion. 

During  this  examination,  Androcles,  one  of 
the  demagogues,  produced  certain  slaves  and 
strangers  before  them,  who  accused  Alcibiades 
and  some  of  his  friends  of  defacing  other  im¬ 
ages  in  the  same  manner,  and  of  having  pro¬ 
fanely  acted  the  sacred  mysteries  at  a  drunken 
meeting,  where  one  Theodorus  represented  the 
herald,  Polytion  the  torch-bearer,  and  Alci¬ 
biades  the  chief  priest,  while  the  rest  of  the 
party  appeared  as  candidates  for  initiation,  and 
received  the  title  of  Initiates.  These  were  the 
matters  contained  in  the  articles  of  information 
which  Thessalus,  the  son  of  Cimon,  exhibited 
against  Alcibiades,  for  his  impious  mockery 
of  the  goddesses  Ceres  and  Proserpine.  The 
people  were  highly  exasperated  and  incensed 
against  Alcibiades  upon  this  accusation,  which 
being  aggravated  by  Androcles,  the  most  ma¬ 
licious  of  all  his  enemies,  at  first  disturbed 
his  friends  exceedingly. 

But  when  they  perceived  that  all  the  seamen 
designed  for  Sicily  were  for  him,  and  the  sol¬ 
diers  also,  and  when  the  Argive  and  Mantinean 


163 

auxiliaries,  a  thousand  men  at  arms,  openly  de¬ 
clared  that  they  had  undertaken  this  distant 
maritime  expedition  for  the  sake  of  Alcibiades, 
and  that,  if  he  was  ill-used,  they  would  all  go 
home,  they  recovered  their  courage,  and  be¬ 
came  eager  to  make  use  of  the  present  oppor¬ 
tunity  for  justifying  him.  At  this  his  enemies 
were  again  discouraged,  fearing  lest  the  people 
should  be  more  gentle  to  him  in  their  sentence, 
because  of  the  occasion  they  had  for  his  ser¬ 
vice.  Therefore,  to  obviate  this,  they  contrived 
that  some  other  orators,  who  did  not  appear  to 
be  enemies  to  Alcibiades,  but  really  hated  him 
no  less  than  those  who  avowed  it,  should  stand 
up  in  the  assembly  and  say  that  it  was  a  very 
absurd  thing  that  one  who  was  created  general 
of  such  an  army  with  absolute  power,  after  his 
troops  were  assembled,  and  the  confederates 
were  come,  should  lose  the  opportunity,  whilst 
the  people  were  choosing  his  judges  by  lot,  and 
appointing  times  for  the  hearing  of  the  cause. 
And,  therefore,  let  him  set  sail  at  once,  good 
fortune  attend  him;  and  when  the  war  should 
be  at  an  end,  he  might  then  in  person  make 
his  defence  according  to  the  laws. 

Alcibiades  perceived  the  malice  of  this  post¬ 
ponement,  and,  appearing  in  the  assembly, 
represented  that  it  was  monstrous  for  him  to 
be  sent  with  the  command  of  so  large  an  army, 
when  he  lay  under  such  accusations  and  ca¬ 
lumnies;  that  he  deserved  to  die,  if  he  could 
not  clear  himself  of  the  crimes  objected  to  him; 
but  when  he  had  so  done,  and  had  proved  his 
innocence,  he  should  then  cheerfully  apply 
himself  to  the  war,  as  standing  no  longer  in 
fear  of  false  accusers.  But  he  could  not  prevail 
with  the  people,  who  commanded  him  to  sail 
immediately.  So  he  departed,  together  with  the 
other  generals,  having  with  them  near  140 
galleys,  5100  men  at  arms,  and  about  1300 
archers,  slingers,  and  light-armed  men,  and  all 
the  other  provisions  corresponding. 

Arriving  on  the  coast  of  Italy,  he  landed  at 
Rhegium,  and  there  stated  his  views  of  the 
manner  in  which  they  ought  to  conduct  the 
war.  He  was  opposed  by  Nicias;  but  Lamachus 
being  of  his  opinion,  they  sailed  for  Sicily  forth¬ 
with,  and  took  Catana.  This  was  all  that  was 
done  while  he  was  there,  for  he  was  soon  after 
recalled  by  the  Athenians  to  abide  his  trial. 

At  first,  as  we  before  said,  there  were  only 
some  slight  suspicions  advanced  against  Alci¬ 
biades,  and  accusations  by  certain  slaves  and 
strangers.  But  afterwards,  in  his  absence,  his 
enemies  attacked  him  more  violently,  and  con¬ 
founded  together  the  breaking  of  the  images 


164 


with  the  profanation  of  the  mysteries,  as  though 
both  had  been  committed  in  pursuance  of  the 
same  conspiracy  for  changing  the  government. 
The  people  proceeded  to  imprison  all  that  were 
accused,  without  distinction,  and  without  hear¬ 
ing  them,  and  repented  now,  considering  the 
importance  of  the  charge,  that  they  had  not 
immediately  brought  Alcibiades  to  his  trial, 
and  given  judgment  against  him.  Any  of  his 
friends  or  acquaintance  who  fell  into  the 
people’s  hands,  whilst  they  were  in  this  fury, 
did  not  fail  to  meet  with  very  severe  usage. 
Thucydides  has  omitted  to  name  the  informers, 
but  others  mention  Dioclides  and  Teucer. 
Amongst  whom  is  Phrynichus,  the  comic  poet, 
in  whom  we  find  the  following: — 

O  dearest  Hermes !  only  do  ta\e  care , 

And  mind  yon  do  not  miss  your  footing  there ; 
Should  you  get  hurt,  occasion  may  arise 
For  a  new  Dioclides  to  tell  lies. 

To  which  he  makes  Mercury  return  this  an¬ 
swer: — 

will  so,  for  7  feel  no  inclination 

To  reward  Teucer  for  more  information. 

The  truth  is,  his  accusers  alleged  nothing 
that  was  certain  or  solid  against  him.  One  of 
them,  being  asked  how  he  knew  the  men  who 
defaced  the  images,  replying,  that  he  saw  them 
by  the  light  of  the  moon,  made  a  palpable  mis¬ 
statement,  for  it  was  just  new  moon  when  the 
fact  was  committed.  This  made  all  men  of  un¬ 
derstanding  cry  out  upon  the  thing;  but  the 
people  were  as  eager  as  ever  to  receive  further 
accusations,  nor  was  their  first  heat  at  all 
abated,  but  they  instantly  seized  and  impris¬ 
oned  every  one  that  was  accused. 

Amongst  those  who  were  detained  in  prison 
for  their  trials  was  Andocides,  the  orator,  whose 
descent  the  historian  Hellanicus  deduces  from 
Ulysses.  He  was  always  supposed  to  hate  pop¬ 
ular  government,  and  to  support  oligarchy. 
The  chief  ground  of  his  being  suspected  of  de¬ 
facing  the  images  was  because  the  great  Mer¬ 
cury,  which  stood  near  his  house,  and  was  an 
ancient  monument  of  the  tribe  fiEgei's,  was  al¬ 
most  the  only  statue  of  all  the  remarkable  ones 
which  remained  entire.  For  this  cause,  it  is  now 
called  the  Mercury  of  Andocides,  all  men  giv¬ 
ing  it  that  name,  though  the  inscription  is  evi¬ 
dence  to  the  contrary. 

It  happened  that  Andocides,  amongst  the 
rest  who  were  prisoners  upon  the  same  ac¬ 
count,  contracted  particular  acquaintance  and 
intimacy  with  one  Timaeus,  a  person  inferior 
to  him  in  repute,  but  of  remarkable  dexterity 
and  boldness.  He  persuaded  Andocides  to  ac- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

cuse  himself  and  some  few  others  of  this  crime, 
urging  to  him  that,  upon  his  confession,  he 
would  be,  by  the  decree  of  the  people,  secure 
of  his  pardon,  whereas  the  event  of  judgment 
is  uncertain  to  all  men,  but  to  great  persons, 
such  as  he  was,  most  formidable.  So  that  it  was 
better  for  him,  if  he  regarded  himself,  to  save 
his  life  by  a  falsity,  than  to  suffer  an  infamous 
death,  as  really  guilty  of  the  crime.  And  if  he 
had  regard  to  the  public  good,  it  was  com¬ 
mendable  to  sacrifice  a  few  suspected  men,  by 
that  means  to  rescue  many  excellent  persons 
from  the  fury  of  the  people.  Andocides  was 
prevailed  upon,  and  accused  himself  and  some 
others,  and,  by  the  terms  of  the  decree,  ob¬ 
tained  his  pardon,  while  all  the  persons  named 
by  him,  except  some  few  who  had  saved  them¬ 
selves  by  flight,  suffered  death.  To  gain  the 
greater  credit  to  his  information,  he  accused 
his  own  servants  amongst  others.  But  notwith¬ 
standing  this,  the  people’s  anger  was  not  wholly 
appeased;  and  being  now  no  longer  diverted 
by  the  mutilators,  they  were  at  leisure  to  pour 
out  their  whole  rage  upon  Alcibiades.  And,  in 
conclusion,  they  sent  the  galley  named  Sala- 
minian  to  recall  him. 

But  they  expressly  commanded  those  that 
were  sent  to  use  no  violence,  nor  seize  upon 
his  person,  but  address  themselves  to  him  in 
the  mildest  terms,  requiring  him  to  follow 
them  to  Athens  in  order  to  abide  his  trial,  and 
clear  himself  before  the  people.  For  they  feared 
mutiny  and  sedition  in  the  army  in  an  enemy’s 
country,  which  indeed  it  would  have  been  easy 
for  Alcibiades  to  effect,  if  he  had  wished  it. 
For  the  soldiers  were  dispirited  upon  his  de¬ 
parture,  expecting  for  the  future  tedious  delays, 
and  that  the  war  would  be  drawn  out  into  a 
lazy  length  by  Nicias,  when  Alcibiades,  who 
was  the  spur  to  action,  was  taken  away.  For 
though  Lamachus  was  a  soldier,  and  a  man  of 
courage,  poverty  deprived  him  of  authority 
and  respect  in  the  army. 

Alcibiades,  just  upon  his  departure,  pre¬ 
vented  Messena  from  falling  into  the  hands  of 
the  Athenians.  There  were  some  in  that  city 
who  were  upon  the  point  of  delivering  it  up, 
but  he,  knowing  the  persons,  gave  information 
to  some  friends  of  the  Syracusans,  and  so  de¬ 
feated  the  whole  contrivance.  When  he  arrived 
at  Thurii,  he  went  on  shore,  and,  concealing 
himself  there,  escaped  those  who  searched  after 
him.  But  to  one  who  knew  him,  and  asked  him 
if  he  durst  not  trust  his  own  native  country, 
he  made  answer,  “In  everything  else,  yes;  but 
in  a  matter  that  touches  my  life,  I  would  not 


ALCIBIADES 

even  my  own  mother,  lest  she  might  by  mis¬ 
take  throw  in  the  black  ball  instead  of  the 
white.”  When,  afterwards,  he  was  told  that 
the  assembly  had  pronounced  judgment  of 
death  against  him,  all  he  said  was,  “I  will  make 
them  feel  that  I  am  alive.” 

The  information  against  him  was  conceived 
in  this  form: — 

“Thessalus,  the  son  of  Cimon,  of  the  town¬ 
ship  of  Lacia,  lays  information  that  Alcibiades, 
the  son  of  Clinias  of  the  township  of  the  Scam- 
bonidae,  has  committed  a  crime  against  the  god¬ 
dess  Ceres  and  Proserpine,  by  representing  in 
derision  the  holy  mysteries,  and  showing  them 
to  his  companions  in  his  own  house.  Where, 
being  habited  in  such  robes  as  are  used  by  the 
chief  priest  when  he  shows  the  holy  things,  he 
named  himself  the  chief  priest,  Polytion  the 
torch-bearer,  and  Theodorus,  of  the  township 
of  Phegaea,  the  herald;  and  saluted  the  rest  of 
his  company  as  Initiates  and  Novices,  all  which 
was  done  contrary  to  the  laws  and  institutions 
of  the  Eumolpidae,  and  the  heralds  and  priests 
of  the  temple  at  Eleusis.” 

He  was  condemned  as  contumacious  upon 
his  not  appearing,  his  property  confiscated,  and 
it  was  decreed  that  all  the  priests  and  priestesses 
should  solemnly  curse  him.  But  one  of  them, 
Theano,  the  daughter  of  Menon,  of  the  town¬ 
ship  of  Agraule,  is  said  to  have  opposed  that 
part  of  the  decree,  saying  that  her  holy  office 
obliged  her  to  make  prayers,  but  not  execra¬ 
tions. 

Alcibiades,  lying  under  these  heavy  decrees 
and  sentences,  when  first  he  fled  from  Thurii, 
passed  over  into  Peloponnesus  and  remained 
some  time  at  Argos.  But  being  there  in  fear  of 
his  enemies,  and  seeing  himself  utterly  hope¬ 
less  of  return  to  his  native  country,  he  sent 
to  Sparta,  desiring  safe  conduct,  and  assuring 
them  that  he  would  make  them  amends  by  his 
future  services  for  all  the  mischief  he  had  done 
them  while  he  was  their  enemy.  The  Spartans 
giving  him  the  security  he  desired,  he  went 
eagerly,  was  well  received,  and,  at  his  very 
first  coming,  succeeded  in  inducing  them,  with¬ 
out  any  further  caution  or  delay,  to  send  aid 
to  the  Syracusans;  and  so  roused  and  excited 
them,  that  they  forthwith  despatched  Gylippus 
into  Sicily  to  crush  the  forces  which  the  Athe¬ 
nians  had  in  Sicily.  A  second  point  was  to  re¬ 
new  the  war  upon  the  Athenians  at  home.  But 
the  third  thing,  and  the  most  important  of  all, 
was  to  make  them  fortify  Decelea,  which  above 
everything  reduced  and  wasted  the  resources 
of  the  Athenians. 


163 

The  renown  which  he  earned  by  these  pub¬ 
lic  services  was  equalled  by  the  admiration  he 
attracted  to  his  private  life;  he  captivated  and 
won  over  everybody  by  his  conformity  to  Spar¬ 
tan  habits.  People  who  saw  him  wearing  his 
hair  close  cut,  bathing  in  cold  water,  eat¬ 
ing  coarse  meal,  and  dining  on  black  broth, 
doubted,  or  rather  could  not  believe,  that  he 
ever  had  a  cook  in  his  house,  or  had  ever  seen 
a  perfumer,  or  had  worn  a  mantle  of  Milesian 
purple. 

For  he  had,  as  it  was  observed,  this  peculiar 
talent  and  artifice  for  gaining  men’s  affections, 
that  he  could  at  once  comply  with  and  really 
embrace  and  enter  into  their  habits  and  ways 
of  life,  and  change  faster  than  the  chameleon. 
One  colour,  indeed,  they  say  the  chameleon 
cannot  assume:  it  cannot  itself  appear  white; 
but  Alcibiades,  whether  with  good  men  or 
with  bad,  could  adapt  himself  to  his  company, 
and  equally  wear  the  appearance  of  virtue  or 
vice.  At  Sparta,  he  was  devoted  to  athletic  ex¬ 
ercises,  was  frugal  and  reserved;  in  Ionia,  lux¬ 
urious,  gay,  and  indolent;  in  Thrace,  always 
drinking;  in  Thessaly,  ever  on  horseback;  and 
when  he  lived  with  Tisaphernes,  the  Persian 
satrap,  he  exceeded  the  Persians  themselves  in 
magnificence  and  pomp.  Not  that  his  natural 
disposition  changed  so  easily,  nor  that  his  real 
character  was  so  variable,  but,  whenever  he 
was  sensible  that  by  pursuing  his  own  inclina¬ 
tions  he  might  give  offence  to  those  with  whom 
he  had  occasion  to  converse,  he  transformed 
himself  into  any  shape,  and  adopted  any  fash¬ 
ion,  that  he  observed  to  be  most  agreeable  to 
them. 

So  that  to  have  seen  him  at  Lacedaemon,  a 
man,  judging  by  the  outward  appearance, 
would  have  said,  “  ’Tis  not  Achilles’s  son,  but 
he,  himself;  the  very  man  that  Lycurgus  de¬ 
signed  to  form”;  while  his  real  feeling  and  acts 
would  have  rather  provoked  the  exclamation, 
“  ’Tis  the  same  woman  still.”  For  while  king 
Agis  was  absent,  and  abroad  with  the  army,  he 
corrupted  his  wife,  Timaea,  and  had  a  child 
born  by  her.  Nor  did  she  even  deny  it,  but 
when  she  was  brought  to  bed  of  a  son,  called 
him  in  public  Leotychides,  but,  amongst  her 
confidants  and  attendants,  would  whisper  that 
his  name  was  Alcibiades.  To  such  a  degree  was 
she  transported  by  her  passion  for  him.  He, 
on  the  other  side,  would  say,  in  his  vain  way, 
he  had  not  done  this  thing  out  of  mere  wan¬ 
tonness  of  insult,  nor  to  gratify  a  passion,  but 
that  his  race  might  one  day  be  kings  over  the 
Lacedaemonians. 


166 

There  were  many  who  told  Agis  that  this 
was  so,  but  time  itself  gave  the  greatest  con¬ 
firmation  to  the  story.  For  Agis,  alarmed  by 
an  earthquake,  had  quitted  his  wife,  and  for 
ten  months  after  was  never  with  her;  Leoty- 
chides,  therefore,  being  born  after  these  ten 
months,  he  would  not  acknowledge  him  for 
his  son;  which  was  the  reason  that  afterwards 
he  was  not  admitted  to  the  succession. 

After  the  defeat  which  the  Athenians  re¬ 
ceived  in  Sicily,  ambassadors  were  despatched 
to  Sparta  at  once  from  Chios  and  Lesbos  and 
Cyzicus,  to  signify  their  purpose  of  revolting 
from  the  Athenians.  The  Boeotians  interposed 
in  favour  of  the  Lesbians,  and  Pharnabazus  of 
the  Cyzicenes,  but  the  Lacedaemonians,  at  the 
persuasion  of  Alcibiades,  chose  to  assist  Chios 
before  all  others.  He  himself,  also,  went  in¬ 
stantly  to  sea,  procured  the  immediate  revolt 
of  almost  all  Ionia,  and,  co-operating  with  the 
Lacedaemonian  generals,  did  great  mischief  to 
the  Athenians. 

But  Agis  was  his  enemy,  hating  him  for  hav¬ 
ing  dishonoured  his  wife,  and  also  impatient 
of  his  glory,  as  almost  every  enterprise  and 
every  success  was  ascribed  to  Alcibiades.  Oth¬ 
ers,  also,  of  the  most  powerful  and  ambitious 
amongst  the  Spartans  were  possessed  with  jeal¬ 
ousy  of  him,  and  at  last  prevailed  with  the 
magistrates  in  the  city  to  send  orders  into  Ionia 
that  he  should  be  killed.  Alcibiades,  however, 
had  secret  intelligence  of  this,  and  in  apprehen¬ 
sion  of  the  result,  while  he  communicated  all 
affairs  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  yet  took  care  not 
to  put  himself  into  their  power. 

At  last  he  retired  to  Tisaphernes,  the  King 
of  Persia’s  satrap,  for  his  security,  and  immedi¬ 
ately  became  the  first  and  most  influential  per¬ 
son  about  him.  For  this  barbarian,  not  being 
himself  sincere,  but  a  lover  of  guile  and  wicked¬ 
ness,  admired  his  address  and  wonderful  sub¬ 
tlety.  And,  indeed,  the  charm  of  daily  inter¬ 
course  with  him  was  more  than  any  character 
could  resist  or  any  disposition  escape.  Even 
those  who  feared  and  envied  him  could  not 
but  take  delight,  and  have  a  sort  of  kindness 
for  him,  when  they  saw  him  and  were  in  his 
company.  So  that  Tisaphernes,  otherwise  a 
cruel  character,  and,  above  all  other  Persians, 
a  hater  of  the  Greeks,  was  yet  so  won  by  the 
flatteries  of  Alcibiades,  that  he  set  himself  even 
to  exceed  him  in  responding  to  them.  The  most 
beautiful  of  his  parks,  containing  salubrious 
streams  and  meadows,  where  he  had  built  pa¬ 
vilions,  and  places  of  retirement  royally  and 
exquisitely  adorned,  received  by  his  direction 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  name  of  Alcibiades,  and  was  always  so 
called  and  so  spoken  of. 

Thus  Alcibiades,  quitting  the  interests  of  the 
Spartans,  whom  he  could  no  longer  trust,  be¬ 
cause  he  stood  in  fear  of  Agis,  endeavoured  to 
do  them  ill  offices,  and  render  them  odious  to 
Tisaphernes,  who  by  his  means  was  hindered 
from  assisting  them  vigorously,  and  from  fi¬ 
nally  ruining  the  Athenians.  For  his  advice 
was  to  furnish  them  but  sparingly  with  money, 
and  so  wear  them  out,  and  consume  them  in¬ 
sensibly;  when  they  had  wasted  their  strength 
upon  one  another,  they  would  both  become 
ready  to  submit  to  the  king.  Tisaphernes  read¬ 
ily  pursued  his  counsel,  and  so  openly  ex¬ 
pressed  the  liking  and  admiration  which  he 
had  for  him,  that  Alcibiades  was  looked  up  to 
by  the  Greeks  of  both  parties,  and  the  Athe¬ 
nians,  now  in  their  misfortunes,  repented  them 
of  their  severe  sentence  against  him.  And  he, 
on  the  other  side,  began  to  be  troubled  for 
them,  and  to  fear  lest,  if  that  commonwealth 
were  utterly  destroyed,  he  should  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  nis  enemies. 

At  that  time  the  whole  strength  of  the  Athe¬ 
nians  was  in  Samos.  Their  fleet  maintained  it¬ 
self  here,  and  issued  from  these  headquarters 
to  reduce  such  as  had  revolted,  and  protect  the 
rest  of  their  territories;  in  one  way  or  other 
still  contriving  to  be  a  match  for  their  ene¬ 
mies  at  sea.  What  they  stood  in  fear  of  was 
Tisaphernes  and  the  Phoenician  fleet  of  one 
hundred  and  fifty  galleys,  which  was  said  to 
be  already  under  sail;  if  those  came,  there  re¬ 
mained  then  no  hopes  for  the  commonwealth 
of  Athens. 

Understanding  this,  Alcibiades  sent  secretly 
to  the  chief  men  of  the  Athenians,  who  were 
then  at  Samos,  giving  them  hopes  that  he 
would  make  Tisaphernes  their  friend;  he  was 
willing,  he  implied,  to  do  some  favour,  not 
to  the  people,  not  in  reliance  upon  them,  but 
to  the  better  citizens,  if  only,  like  brave  men, 
they  would  make  the  attempt  to  put  down  the 
insolence  of  the  people,  and,  by  taking  upon 
them  the  government,  would  endeavour  to 
save  the  city  from  ruin.  All  of  them  gave  a 
ready  ear  to  the  proposal  made  by  Alcibiades, 
except  only  Phrynichus,  of  the  township  of 
Dirades,  one  of  the  generals,  who  suspected, 
as  the  truth  was,  that  Alcibiades  concerned  not 
himself  whether  the  government  were  in  the 
people  or  the  better  citizens,  but  only  sought 
by  any  means  to  make  way  for  his  return  into 
his  native  country,  and  to  that  end  inveighed 
against  the  people,  thereby  to  gain  the  others, 


ALCIBIADES 

and  to  insinuate  himself  into  their  good  opin¬ 
ion. 

But  when  Phrynichus  found  his  counsel  to 
be  rejected  and  that  he  was  himself  become  a 
declared  enemy  of  Alcibiades,  he  gave  secret 
intelligence  to  Astyochus,  the  enemy’s  admiral, 
cautioning  him  to  beware  of  Alcibiades  and  to 
seize  him  as  a  double  dealer,  unaware  that  one 
traitor  was  making  discoveries  to  another.  For 
Astyochus,  who  was  eager  to  gain  the  favour  of 
Tisaphernes,  observing  the  credit  Alcibiades 
had  with  him,  revealed  to  Alcibiades  all  that 
Phrynichus  had  said  against  him.  Alcibiades 
at  once  despatched  messengers  to  Samos,  to 
accuse  Phrynichus  of  the  treachery.  Upon  this, 
all  the  commanders  were  enraged  with  Phry¬ 
nichus,  and  set  themselves  against  him,  and 
he,  seeing  no  other  way  to  extricate  himself 
from  the  present  danger,  attempted  to  remedy 
one  evil  by  a  greater.  He  sent  to  Astyochus  to 
reproach  him  for  betraying  him,  and  to  make 
an  offer  to  him  at  the  same  time  to  deliver  into 
his  hands  both  the  army  and  the  navy  of  the 
Athenians. 

This  occasioned  no  damage  to  the  Athenians, 
because  Astyochus  repeated  his  treachery  and 
revealed  also  this  proposal  to  Alcibiades.  But 
this  again  was  foreseen  by  Phrynichus,  who, 
expecting  a  second  accusation  from  Alcibiades 
to  anticipate  him,  advertised  the  Athenians  be¬ 
forehand  that  the  enemy  was  ready  to  sail  in 
order  to  surprise  them,  and  therefore  advised 
them  to  fortify  their  camp,  and  be  in  a  readi¬ 
ness  to  go  aboard  their  ships.  While  the  Athe¬ 
nians  were  intent  upon  doing  these  things,  they 
received  other  letters  from  Alcibiades,  admon¬ 
ishing  them  to  beware  of  Phrynichus,  as  one 
who  designed  to  betray  their  fleet  to  the  enemy, 
to  which  they  then  gave  no  credit  at  all,  con¬ 
ceiving  that  Alcibiades,  who  knew  perfectly 
the  counsels  and  preparations  of  the  enemy, 
was  merely  making  use  of  that  knowledge,  in 
order  to  impose  upon  them  in  this  false  accu¬ 
sation  of  Phrynichus.  Yet,  afterwards,  when 
Phrynichus  was  stabbed  with  a  dagger  in  the 
market-place  by  Hermon,  one  of  the  guards, 
the  Athenians,  entering  into  an  examination 
of  the  cause,  solemnly  condemned  Phrynichus 
of  treason,  and  decreed  crowns  to  Hermon  and 
his  associates. 

And  now  the  friends  of  Alcibiades,  carrying 
all  before  them  at  Samos,  despatched  Pisander 
to  Athens,  to  attempt  a  change  of  govern¬ 
ment,  and  to  encourage  the  aristocratical  citi¬ 
zens  to  take  upon  themselves  the  government, 
and  overthrow  the  democracy,  representing  to 


167 

them,  that  upon  these  terms,  Alcibiades  would 
procure  them  the  friendship  and  alliance  of 
Tisaphernes. 

This  was  the  colour  and  pretence  made  use 
of  by  those  who  desired  to  change  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  Athens  to  an  oligarchy.  But  as  soon  as 
they  prevailed,  and  had  got  the  administration 
of  affairs  into  their  hands,  under  the  name  of 
the  Five  Thousand  (whereas,  indeed,  they 
were  but  four  hundred),  they  slighted  Alci¬ 
biades  altogether,  and  prosecuted  the  war  with 
less  vigour;  partly  because  they  durst  not  yet 
trust  the  citizens,  who  secretly  detested  this 
change,  and  partly  because  they  thought  the 
Lacedaemonians,  who  always  befriended  the 
government  of  the  few,  would  be  inclined  to 
give  them  favourable  terms. 

The  people  in  the  city  were  terrified  into  sub¬ 
mission,  many  of  those  who  had  dared  openly 
to  oppose  the  four  hundred  having  been  put  to 
death.  But  those  who  were  at  Samos,  indignant 
when  they  heard  this  news,  were  eager  to  set 
sail  instantly  for  the  Piraeus;  sending  for  Alci¬ 
biades,  they  declared  him  general,  requiring 
him  to  lead  them  on  to  put  down  the  tyrants. 

He,  however,  in  that  juncture,  did  not,  as  it 
might  have  been  thought  a  man  would,  on  be¬ 
ing  suddenly  exalted  by  the  favour  of  a  multi¬ 
tude,  think  himself  under  an  obligation  to  grat¬ 
ify  and  submit  to  all  the  wishes  of  those  who, 
from  a  fugitive  and  an  exile,  had  created  him 
general  of  so  great  an  army,  and  given  him  the 
command  of  such  a  fleet.  But,  as  became  a  great 
captain,  he  opposed  himself  to  the  precipitate 
resolutions  which  their  rage  led  them  to,  and, 
by  restraining  them  from  the  great  error  they 
were  about  to  commit,  unequivocally  saved  the 
commonwealth.  For  if  they  then  sailed  to  Ath¬ 
ens,  all  Ionia  and  the  islands  and  the  Helles¬ 
pont  would  have  fallen  into  the  enemies’ hands 
without  opposition,  while  the  Athenians,  in¬ 
volved  in  civil  war,  would  have  been  fighting 
with  one  another  within  the  circuit  of  their 
own  walls. 

It  was  Alcibiades  alone,  or,  at  least,  prin¬ 
cipally,  who  prevented  all  this  mischief;  for  he 
not  only  used  persuasion  to  the  whole  army, 
and  showed  them  the  danger,  but  applied  him¬ 
self  to  them,  one  by  one,  entreating  some,  and 
constraining  others.  He  was  much  assisted, 
however,  by  Thrasybulus  of  Stiria,  who  having 
the  loudest  voice,  as  we  are  told,  of  all  the  Athe¬ 
nians,  went  along  with  him,  and  cried  out  to 
those  who  were  ready  to  be  gone. 

A  second  great  service  which  Alcibiades  did 
for  them  was  his  undertaking  that  the  Phceni- 


168 

cian  fleet,  which  the  Lacedaemonians  expected 
to  be  sent  to  them  by  the  King  of  Persia,  should 
either  come  in  aid  of  the  Athenians  or  other¬ 
wise  should  not  come  at  all.  He  sailed  off  with 
all  expedition  in  order  to  perform  this,  and  the 
ships,  which  had  already  been  seen  as  near  as 
Aspendus,  were  not  brought  any  further  by 
Tisaphernes,  who  thus  deceived  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians;  and  it  was  by  both  sides  believed  that 
they  had  been  diverted  by  the  procurement  of 
Alcibiades.  The  Lacedaemonians,  in  particular, 
accused  him,  that  he  had  advised  the  Barbarian 
to  stand  still,  and  suffer  the  Greeks  to  waste 
and  destroy  one  another,  as  it  was  evident  that 
the  accession  of  so  great  a  force  to  either  party 
would  enable  them  to  take  away  the  entire  do¬ 
minion  of  the  sea  from  the  other  side. 

Soon  after  this,  the  four  hundred  usurpers 
were  driven  out,  the  friends  of  Alcibiades  vig¬ 
orously  assisting  those  who  were  for  the  popu¬ 
lar  government.  And  now  the  people  in  the  city 
not  only  desired,  but  commanded  Alcibiades 
to  return  home  from  his  exile.  He,  however, 
desired  not  to  owe  his  return  to  the  mere  grace 
and  commiseration  of  the  people,  and  resolved 
to  come  back,  not  with  empty  hands,  but  with 
glory,  and  after  some  service  done. 

To  this  end,  he  sailed  from  Samos  with  a  few 
ships,  and  cruised  on  the  sea  of  Cnidos,  and 
about  the  isle  of  Cos;  but  receiving  intelligence 
there  that  Mindarus,  the  Spartan  admiral,  had 
sailed  with  his  whole  army  into  the  Hellespont, 
and  that  the  Athenians  had  followed  him,  he 
hurried  back  to  succour  the  Athenian  com¬ 
manders,  and,  by  good  fortune,  arrived  with 
eighteen  galleys  at  a  critical  time.  For  both  the 
fleets  having  engaged  near  Abydos,  the  fight 
between  them  had  lasted  till  night,  the  one  side 
having  the  advantage  on  one  quarter,  and  the 
other  on  another.  Upon  his  first  appearance, 
both  sides  formed  a  false  impression;  the  enemy 
was  encouraged  and  the  Athenians  terrified. 
But  Alcibiades  suddenly  raised  the  Athenian 
ensign  in  the  admiral  ship,  and  fell  upon  those 
galleys  of  the  Peloponnesians  which  had  the 
advantage  and  were  in  pursuit.  He  soon  put 
these  to  flight,  and  followed  them  so  close  that 
he  forced  them  on  shore,  and  broke  the  ships 
in  pieces,  the  sailors  abandoning  them  and 
swimming  away  in  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of 
Pharnabazus,  who  had  come  down  to  their  as¬ 
sistance  by  land  and  did  what  he  could  to  pro¬ 
tect  them  from  the  shore.  In  fine,  the  Athe¬ 
nians,  having  taken  thirty  of  the  enemy’s  ships, 
and  recovered  all  their  own,  erected  a  trophy. 

After  the  gaining  of  so  glorious  a  victory,  his 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

vanity  made  him  eager  to  show  himself  to  Tisa¬ 
phernes,  and,  having  furnished  himself  with 
gifts  and  presents,  and  an  equipage  suitable  to 
his  dignity,  he  set  out  to  visit  him.  But  the  thing 
did  not  succeed  as  he  had  imagined,  for  Tisa¬ 
phernes  had  been  long  suspected  by  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians,  and  was  afraid  to  fall  into  disgrace 
with  his  king  upon  that  account,  and  therefore 
thought  that  Alcibiades  arrived  very  oppor¬ 
tunely,  and  immediately  caused  him  to  be 
seized,  and  sent  away  prisoner  to  Sardis,  fancy¬ 
ing,  by  this  act  of  injustice,  to  clear  himself 
from  all  former  imputations.  But  about  thirty 
days  after,  Alcibiades  escaped  from  his  keep¬ 
ing,  and  having  got  a  horse,  fled  to  Clazomenae, 
where  he  procured  Tisaphernes  additional  dis¬ 
grace  by  professing  he  was  a  party  to  his  escape. 

From  there  he  sailed  to  the  Athenian  camp, 
and,  being  informed  there  that  Mindarus  and 
Pharnabazus  were  together  at  Cyzicus,  he 
made  a  speech  to  the  soldiers,  telling  them  that 
sea-fighting,  land-fighting,  and,  by  the  gods, 
fighting  against  fortified  cities  too,  must  be  all 
one  for  them,  as  unless  they  conquered  every¬ 
where,  there  was  no  money  for  them.  As  soon 
as  ever  he  got  them  on  shipboard,  he  hastened 
to  Proconnesus,  and  gave  command  to  seize  all 
the  small  vessels  they  met,  and  guard  them 
safely  in  the  interior  of  the  fleet,  that  the  enemy 
might  have  no  notice  of  his  coming;  and  a 
great  storm  of  rain,  accompanied  with  thunder 
and  darkness,  which  happened  at  the  same 
time,  contributed  much  to  the  concealment  of 
his  enterprise.  Indeed,  it  was  not  only  undis¬ 
covered  by  the  enemy,  but  the  Athenians  them¬ 
selves  were  ignorant  of  it,  for  he  commanded 
them  suddenly  on  board,  and  set  sail  when  they 
had  abandoned  all  intention  of  it. 

As  the  darkness  presently  passed  away,  the 
Peloponnesian  fleet  was  seen  riding  out  at  sea 
in  front  of  the  harbour  of  Cyzicus.  Fearing,  if 
they  discovered  the  number  of  his  ships,  they 
might  endeavour  to  save  themselves  by  land, 
he  commanded  the  rest  of  the  captains  to  slack¬ 
en,  and  follow  him  slowly,  whilst  he,  advanc¬ 
ing  with  forty  ships,  showed  himself  to  the  en¬ 
emy,  and  provoked  them  to  fight.  The  enemy, 
being  deceived  as  to  their  numbers,  despised 
them,  and,  supposing  they  were  to  contend 
with  those  only,  made  themselves  ready  and  be¬ 
gan  the  fight.  But  as  soon  as  they  were  engaged, 
they  perceived  the  other  part  of  the  fleet  com¬ 
ing  down  upon  them,  at  which  they  were  so 
terrified  that  they  fled  immediately.  Upon  that, 
Alcibiades,  breaking  through  the  midst  of 
them  with  twenty  of  his  best  ships,  hastened  to 


ALCIBIADES 

the  shore,  disembarked,  and  pursued  those  who 
abandoned  their  ships  and  fled  to  land,  and 
made  a  great  slaughter  of  them. 

Mindarus  and  Pharnabazus,  coming  to  their 
succour,  were  utterly  defeated.  Mindarus  was 
slain  upon  the  place,  fighting  valiantly;  Phar¬ 
nabazus  saved  himself  by  flight.  The  Atheni¬ 
ans  slew  great  numbers  of  their  enemies,  won 
much  spoil,  and  took  all  their  ships.  They  also 
made  themselves  masters  of  Cyzicus,  which 
was  deserted  by  Pharnabazus,  and  destroyed 
its  Peloponnesian  garrison,  and  thereby  not 
only  secured  to  themselves  the  Hellespont,  but 
by  force  drove  the  Lacedaemonians  from  out  of 
all  the  rest  of  the  sea.  They  intercepted  some 
letters  written  to  the  ephors,  which  gave  an  ac¬ 
count  of  this  fatal  overthrow,  after  their  short 
laconic  manner.  “Our  hopes  are  at  an  end. 
Mindarus  is  slain.  The  men  starve.  We  know 
not  what  to  do.” 

The  soldiers  who  followed  Alcibiades  in  this 
last  fight  were  so  exalted  with  their  success, 
and  felt  that  degree  of  pride,  that,  looking  on 
themselves  as  invincible,  they  disdained  to  mix 
with  the  other  soldiers,  who  had  been  often 
overcome.  For  it  happened  not  long  before, 
Thrasyllus  had  received  a  defeat  near  Ephesus, 
and,  upon  that  occasion,  the  Ephesians  erected 
their  brazen  trophy  to  the  disgrace  of  the  Athe¬ 
nians.  The  soldiers  of  Alcibiades  reproached 
those  who  were  under  the  command  of  Thra¬ 
syllus  with  this  misfortune,  at  the  same  time 
magnifying  themselves  and  their  own  com¬ 
mander,  and  it  went  so  far  that  they  would  not 
exercise  with  them,  nor  lodge  in  the  same  quar¬ 
ters.  But  soon  after,  Pharnabazus,  with  a  great 
force  of  horse  and  foot,  falling  upon  the  sol¬ 
diers  of  Thrasyllus,  as  they  were  laying  waste 
the  territory  of  Abydos,  Alcibiades  came  to 
their  aid,  routed  Pharnabazus,  and  together 
with  Thrasyllus  pursued  him  till  it  was  night; 
and  in  this  action  the  troops  united,  and  re¬ 
turned  together  to  the  camp,  rejoicing  and  con¬ 
gratulating  one  another. 

The  next  day  he  erected  a  trophy,  and  then 
proceeded  to  lay  waste  with  fire  and  sword  the 
whole  province  which  was  under  Pharnabazus, 
where  none  ventured  to  resist;  and  he  took 
divers  priests  and  priestesses,  but  released  them 
without  ransom.  He  prepared  next  to  attack 
the  Chalcedonians,  who  had  revolted  from  the 
Athenians,  and  had  received  a  Lacedaemonian 
governor  and  garrison.  But  having  intelligence 
that  they  had  removed  their  corn  and  cattle  out 
of  the  fields,  and  were  conveying  it  all  to  the 
Bithynians,  who  were  their  friends,  he  drew 


169 

down  his  army  to  the  frontier  of  the  Bithy¬ 
nians,  and  then  sent  a  herald  to  charge  them 
with  this  proceeding.  The  Bithynians,  terrified 
at  his  approach,  delivered  up  to  him  the  booty, 
and  entered  into  alliance  with  him. 

Afterwards  he  proceeded  to  the  siege  of  Chal- 
cedon,  and  enclosed  it  with  a  wall  from  sea  to 
sea.  Pharnabazus  advanced  with  his  forces  to 
raise  the  siege,  and  Hippocrates,  the  governor 
of  the  town,  at  the  same  time,  gathering  to¬ 
gether  all  the  strength  he  had,  made  a  sally 
upon  the  Athenians.  Alcibiades  divided  his 
army  so  as  to  engage  both  at  once,  and  not  only 
forced  Pharnabazus  to  a  dishonourable  flight, 
but  defeated  Hippocrates,  and  killed  him  and 
a  number  of  the  soldiers  with  him. 

After  this  he  sailed  into  the  Hellespont,  in 
order  to  raise  supplies  of  money,  and  took  the 
city  of  Selymbria,  in  which  action,  through  his 
precipitation,  he  exposed  himself  to  great  dan¬ 
ger.  For  some  within  the  town  had  undertaken 
to  betray  it  into  his  hands,  and,  by  agreement, 
were  to  give  him  a  signal  by  a  lighted  torch 
about  midnight.  But  one  of  the  conspirators  be¬ 
ginning  to  repent  himself  of  the  design,  the 
rest,  for  fear  of  being  discovered,  were  driven 
to  give  the  signal  before  the  appointed  hour. 
Alcibiades,  as  soon  as  he  saw  the  torch  lifted  up 
in  the  air,  though  his  army  was  not  in  readi¬ 
ness  to  march,  ran  instantly  towards  the  walls, 
taking  with  him  about  thirty  men  only,  and 
commanding  the  rest  of  the  army  to  follow  him 
with  all  possible  speed.  When  he  came  thither, 
he  found  the  gate  opened  for  him  and  entered 
with  his  thirty  men,  and  about  twenty  more 
light-armed  men,  who  were  come  up  to  them. 
They  were  no  sooner  in  the  city,  but  he  per¬ 
ceived  the  Selymbrians  all  armed,  coming 
down  upon  him;  so  that  there  was  no  hope  of 
escaping  if  he  stayed  to  receive  them;  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  having  been  always  successful 
till  that  day,  wherever  he  commanded,  he  could 
not  endure  to  be  defeated  and  fly.  So,  requiring 
silence  by  sound  of  a  trumpet,  he  commanded 
one  of  his  men  to  make  proclamation  that  the 
Selymbrians  should  not  take  arms  against  the 
Athenians.  This  cooled  such  of  the  inhabitants 
as  were  fiercest  for  the  fight,  for  they  supposed 
that  all  their  enemies  were  within  the  walls, 
and  it  raised  the  hopes  of  others  who  were  dis¬ 
posed  to  an  accommodation.  Whilst  they  were 
parleying,  and  propositions  making  on  one  side 
and  the  other,  Alcibiades’s  whole  army  came 
up  to  the  town.  And  now,  conjecturing  rightly 
that  the  Selymbrians  were  well  inclined  to 
peace,  and  fearing  lest  the  city  might  be  sacked 


170 


by  the  Thracians,  who  came  in  great  numbers 
to  his  army  to  serve  as  volunteers,  out  of  kind¬ 
ness  for  him,  he  commanded  them  all  to  re¬ 
treat  without  the  walls.  And  upon  the  submis¬ 
sion  of  the  Selymbrians,  he  saved  them  from 
being  pillaged,  only  taking  of  them  a  sum  of 
money,  and,  after  placing  an  Athenian  garrison 
in  the  town,  departed. 

During  this  action,  the  Athenian  captains 
who  besieged  Chalcedon  concluded  a  treaty 
with  Pharnabazus  upon  these  articles:  That  he 
should  give  them  a  sum  of  money;  that  the 
Chalcedonians  should  return  to  the  subjection 
of  Athens,  and  that  the  Athenians  should  make 
no  inroad  into  the  province  whereof  Pharna¬ 
bazus  was  governor;  and  Pharnabazus  was  also 
to  provide  safe  conducts  for  the  Athenian  am¬ 
bassadors  to  the  King  of  Persia.  Afterwards, 
when  Alcibiades  returned  thither,  Pharnaba¬ 
zus  required  that  he  also  should  be  sworn  to 
the  treaty;  but  he  refused  it,  unless  Pharnaba¬ 
zus  would  swear  at  the  same  time. 

When  the  treaty  was  sworn  to  on  both  sides, 
Alcibiades  went  against  the  Byzantines,  who 
had  revolted  from  the  Athenians,  and  drew  a 
line  of  circumvallation  about  the  city.  But 
Anaxilaus  and  Lycurgus,  together  with  some 
others,  having  undertaken  to  betray  the  city  to 
him  upon  his  engagement  to  preserve  the  lives 
and  property  of  the  inhabitants,  he  caused  a  re¬ 
port  to  be  spread  abroad,  as  if  by  reason  of  some 
unexpected  movement  in  Ionia,  he  should  be 
obliged  to  raise  the  siege.  And,  accordingly, 
that  day  he  made  a  show  to  depart  with  his 
whole  fleet;  but  returned  the  same  night,  and 
went  ashore  with  all  his  men  at  arms,  and,  si¬ 
lently  and  undiscovered,  marched  up  to  the 
walls.  At  the  same  time,  his  ships  rowed  into 
the  harbour  with  all  possible  violence,  coming 
on  with  much  fury,  and  with  great  shouts 
and  outcries.  The  Byzantines,  thus  surprised 
and  astonished,  while  they  all  hurried  to 
the  defence  of  their  port  and  shipping, 
gave  opportunity  to  those  who  favoured  the 
Athenians  securely  to  receive  Alcibiades  into 
the  city. 

Yet  the  enterprise  was  not  accomplished 
without  fighting,  for  the  Peloponnesians,  Boeo¬ 
tians,  and  Megarians,  not  only  repulsed  those 
who  came  out  of  the  ships,  and  forced  them  on 
board  again,  but,  hearing  that  the  Athenians 
were  entered  on  the  other  side,  drew  up  in  order, 
and  went  to  meet  them.  Alcibiades,  however, 
gained  the  victory  after  some  sharp  fighting,  in 
which  he  himself  had  the  command  of  the 
right  wing,  and  Theramenes  of  the  left,  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

took  about  three  hundred,  who  survived  of  the 
enemy,  prisoners  of  war. 

After  the  battle,  not  one  of  the  Byzantines 
was  slain,  or  driven  out  of  the  city,  according 
to  the  terms  upon  which  the  city  was  put  into 
his  hands,  that  they  should  receive  no  prejudice 
in  life  or  property.  And  thus  Anaxilaus,  being 
afterwards  accused  at  Lacedaemon  for  this  trea¬ 
son,  neither  disowned  nor  professed  to  be 
ashamed  of  the  action;  for  he  urged  that  he  was 
not  a  Lacedaemonian,  but  a  Byzantine,  and  saw 
not  Sparta,  but  Byzantium,  in  extreme  danger, 
the  city  so  blockaded  that  it  was  not  possible  to 
bring  in  any  new  provisions,  and  the  Pelopon¬ 
nesians  and  Boeotians,  who  were  in  garrison, 
devouring  the  old  stores,  whilst  the  Byzan¬ 
tines,  with  their  wives  and  children,  were  starv¬ 
ing;  that  he  had  not,  therefore,  betrayed  his 
country  to  enemies,  but  had  delivered  it  from 
the  calamities  of  war,  and  had  but  followed  the 
example  of  the  most  worthy  Lacedaemonians, 
who  esteemed  nothing  to  be  honourable  and 
just,  but  what  was  profitable  for  their  coun¬ 
try.  The  Lacedaemonians,  upon  hearing  his  de¬ 
fence,  respected  it,  and  discharged  all  that  were 
accused. 

And  now  Alcibiades  began  to  desire  to  see 
his  native  country  again,  or  rather  to  show  his 
fellow-citizens  a  person  who  had  gained  so 
many  victories  for  them.  He  set  sail  for  Athens, 
the  ships  that  accompanied  him  being  adorned 
with  great  numbers  of  shields  and  other  spoils, 
and  towing  after  them  many  galleys  taken 
from  the  enemy,  and  the  ensigns  and  orna¬ 
ments  of  many  others  which  he  had  sunk  and 
destroyed,  all  of  them  together  amounting  to 
two  hundred. 

Little  credit,  perhaps,  can  be  given  to  what 
Duris  the  Samian,  who  professed  to  be  de¬ 
scended  from  Alcibiades,  adds,  that  Chrysogo- 
nus,  who  had  gained  a  victory  at  the  Pythian 
games,  played  upon  his  flute  for  the  galleys, 
whilst  the  oars  kept  time  with  the  music;  and 
that  Callippides,  the  tragedian,  attired  in  his 
buskins,  his  purple  robes,  and  other  ornaments 
used  in  the  theatre,  gave  the  word  to  the  row¬ 
ers,  and  that  the  admiral  galley  entered  into  the 
port  with  a  purple  sail.  Neither  Theopompus, 
nor  Ephorus,  nor  Xenophon,  mention  them. 
Nor  indeed,  is  it  credible  that  one  who  re¬ 
turned  from  so  long  an  exile,  and  such  variety 
of  misfortunes,  should  come  home  to  his  coun¬ 
trymen  in  the  style  of  revellers  breaking  up 
from  a  drinking-party.  On  the  contrary,  he  ven¬ 
tured  the  harbour  full  of  fear,  nor  would  he 
venture  to  go  on  shore,  till,  standing  on  the 


ALCIBIADES 

deck,  he  saw  Euryptolemus,  his  cousin,  and 
others  of  his  friends  and  acquaintance,  who 
were  ready  to  receive  him,  and  invited  him  to 
land. 

As  soon  as  he  was  landed,  the  multitude  who 
came  out  to  meet  him  scarcely  seemed  so  much 
as  to  see  any  of  the  other  captains,  but  came  in 
throngs  about  Alcibiades,  and  saluted  him  with 
loud  acclamations,  and  still  followed  him; 
those  who  could  press  near  him  crowned  him 
with  garlands,  and  they  who  could  not  come 
up  so  close  yet  stayed  to  behold  him  afar  off, 
and  the  old  men  pointed  him  out,  and  showed 
him  to  the  young  ones. 

Nevertheless,  this  public  joy  was  mixed  with 
some  tears,  and  the  present  happiness  was  al¬ 
loyed  by  the  remembrance  of  the  miseries  they 
had  endured.  They  made  reflections,  that  they 
could  not  have  so  unfortunately  miscarried  in 
Sicily,  or  been  defeated  in  any  of  their  other  ex¬ 
pectations,  if  they  had  left  the  management  of 
their  affairs  formerly,  and  the  command  of 
their  forces,  to  Alcibiades,  since,  upon  his  un¬ 
dertaking  the  administration,  when  they  were 
in  a  manner  driven  from  the  sea,  and  could 
scarce  defend  the  suburbs  of  their  city  by  land, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  were  miserably  dis¬ 
tracted  with  intestine  factions;  he  had  raised 
them  up  from  this  low  and  deplorable  condi¬ 
tion,  and  had  not  only  restored  them  to  their 
ancient  dominion  of  the  sea,  but  had  also  made 
them  everywhere  victorious  over  their  enemies 
on  land. 

There  had  been  a  decree  for  recalling  him 
from  his  banishment  already  passed  by  the  peo¬ 
ple,  at  the  instance  of  Critias,  the  son  of  Cal- 
laeschrus,  as  appears  by  his  elegies,  in  which  he 
puts  Alcibiades  in  mind  of  this  service: — 

From  my  proposal  did  that  edict  come , 

Which  from  your  tedious  exile  brought  you 
home. 

The  public  vote  at  first  was  moved  by  me, 

And  my  voice  put  the  seal  to  the  decree. 

The  people  being  summoned  to  an  assembly, 
Alcibiades  came  in  amongst  them,  and  first  be¬ 
wailed  and  lamented  his  own  sufferings,  and, 
in  gentle  terms  complaining  of  the  usage  he 
had  received,  imputed  all  to  his  hard  fortune, 
and  some  ill-genius  that  attended  him:  then  he 
spoke  at  large  of  their  prospects,  and  exhorted 
them  to  courage  and  good  hope.  The  people 
crowned  him  with  crowns  of  gold,  and  created 
him  general,  both  at  land  and  sea,  with  abso¬ 
lute  power.  They  also  made  a  decree  that  his 
estate  should  be  restored  to  him,  and  that  the 
Eumolpidae  and  the  holy  herald  should  absolve 


171 

him  from  the  curses  which  they  had  solemnly 
pronounced  against  him  by  sentence  of  the  peo¬ 
ple.  Which  when  all  the  rest  obeyed,  Theo- 
dorus,  the  high  priest,  excused  himself, 
“For,”  said  he,  “if  he  is  innocent,  I  never 
cursed  him.” 

But  notwithstanding  the  affairs  of  Alcibiades 
went  so  prosperously,  and  so  much  to  his  glory, 
yet  many  were  still  somewhat  disturbed,  and 
looked  upon  the  time  of  his  arrival  to  be  omin¬ 
ous.  For  on  the  day  that  he  came  into  the  port, 
the  feast  of  the  goddess  Minerva,  which  they 
call  the  Plynteria,  was  kept.  It  is  the  twenty- 
fifth  day  of  Thargelion,  when  the  Praxiergidae 
solemnise  their  secret  rites,  taking  all  the  orna¬ 
ments  from  off  her  image,  and  keeping  the 
part  of  the  temple  where  it  stands  close  cov¬ 
ered.  Hence  the  Athenians  esteem  this  day 
most  inauspicious,  and  never  undertake  any¬ 
thing  of  importance  upon  it;  and,  therefore, 
they  imagined  that  the  goddess  did  not  receive 
Alcibiades  graciously  and  propitiously,  thus 
hiding  her  face  and  rejecting  him. 

Yet,  notwithstanding,  everything  succeeded 
according  to  his  wish.  When  the  one  hundred 
galleys,  that  were  to  return  with  him,  were 
fitted  out  and  ready  to  sail,  an  honourable  zeal 
detained  him  till  the  celebration  of  the  myster¬ 
ies  was  over.  For  ever  since  Decelea  had  been 
occupied,  as  the  enemy  commanded  the  roads 
leading  from  Athens  to  Eleusis,  the  procession, 
being  conducted  by  sea,  had  not  been  per¬ 
formed  with  any  proper  solemnity;  they  were 
forced  to  omit  the  sacrifices  and  dances  and 
other  holy  ceremonies,  which  had  usually  been 
performed  in  the  way,  when  they  led  forth 
Iacchus. 

Alcibiades,  therefore,  judged  it  would  be  a 
glorious  action,  which  would  do  honour  to  the 
gods  and  gain  him  esteem  with  men,  if  he  re¬ 
stored  the  ancient  splendour  to  these  rites,  es¬ 
corting  the  procession  again  by  land,  and  pro¬ 
tecting  it  with  his  army  in  the  face  of  the  ene¬ 
my.  For  either,  if  Agis  stood  still  and  did  not 
oppose,  it  would  very  much  diminish  and  ob¬ 
scure  his  reputation,  or,  in  the  other  alterna¬ 
tive,  Alcibiades  would  engage  in  a  holy  war,  in 
the  cause  of  the  gods,  and  in  defence  of  the 
most  sacred  and  solemn  ceremonies;  and  this  in 
the  sight  of  his  country,  where  he  should  have 
all  his  fellow-citizens  witnesses  of  his  valour. 

As  soon  as  he  had  resolved  upon  this  design, 
and  had  communicated  it  to  the  Eumolpidae 
and  heralds,  he  placed  sentinels  on  the  tops  of 
the  hills,  and  at  the  break  of  day  sent  forth  his 
scouts.  And  then  taking  with  him  the  priests 


172 


and  Initiates  and  the  Initiators,  and  encompas¬ 
sing  them  with  his  soldiers,  he  conducted  them 
with  great  order  and  profound  silence;  an  aug¬ 
ust  and  venerable  procession,  wherein  all  who 
did  not  envy  him  said  he  performed  at  once  the 
office  of  a  high  priest  and  of  a  general.  The  ene¬ 
my  did  not  dare  to  attempt  anything  against 
them,  and  thus  he  brought  them  back  to  safety 
to  the  city. 

Upon  which,  as  he  was  exalted  in  his  own 
thought,  so  the  opinion  which  the  people  had 
of  his  conduct  was  raised  to  that  degree,  that 
they  looked  upon  their  armies  as  irresistible 
and  invincible  while  he  commanded  them;  and 
he  so  won,  indeed,  upon  the  lower  and  meaner 
sort  of  people,  that  they  passionately  desired  to 
have  him  “tyrant”  over  them,  and  some  of 
them  did  not  scruple  to  tell  him  so,  and  to  ad¬ 
vise  him  to  put  himself  out  of  the  reach  of  envy, 
by  abolishing  the  laws  and  ordinances  of  the 
people,  and  suppressing  the  idle  talkers  that 
were  ruining  the  state,  that  so  he  might  act  and 
take  upon  him  the  management  of  affairs, 
without  standing  in  fear  of  being  called  to  an 
account. 

How  far  his  own  inclinations  led  him  to 
usurp  sovereign  power  is  uncertain,  but  the 
most  considerable  persons  in  the  city  were  so 
much  afraid  of  it,  that  they  hastened  him  on 
shipboard  as  speedily  as  they  could,  appointing 
the  colleagues  whom  he  chose,  and  allowing 
him  all  other  things  as  he  desired.  Thereupon 
he  set  sail  with  a  fleet  of  one  hundred  ships, 
and,  arriving  at  Andros,  he  there  fought  with 
and  defeated  as  well  the  inhabitants  as  the 
Lacedaemonians  who  assisted  them. 

He  did  not,  however,  take  the  city;  which 
gave  the  first  occasion  to  his  enemies  for  all 
their  accusations  against  him.  Certainly,  if  ever 
man  was  ruined  by  his  own  glory,  it  was  Alci- 
biades.  For  his  continual  success  had  produced 
such  an  idea  of  his  courage  and  conduct,  that 
if  he  failed  in  anything  he  undertook,  it  was 
imputed  to  his  neglect,  and  no  one  would  be¬ 
lieve  it  was  through  want  of  power.  For  they 
thought  nothing  was  too  hard  for  him,  if  he 
went  about  it  in  good  earnest.  They  fancied, 
every  day,  that  they  should  hear  news  of  the 
reduction  of  Chios,  and  of  the  rest  of  Ionia, 
and  grew  impatient  that  things  were  not  ef¬ 
fected  as  fast  and  as  rapidly  as  they  could  wish 
for  them.  They  never  considered  how  ex¬ 
tremely  money  was  wanting,  and  that,  having 
to  carry  on  war  with  an  enemy  who  had  sup¬ 
plies  of  all  things  from  a  great  king,  he  was 
often  forced  to  quit  his  armament  in  order  to 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

procure  money  and  provisions  for  the  subsis¬ 
tence  of  his  soldiers. 

This  it  was  which  gave  occasion  for  the  last 
accusation  which  was  made  against  him.  For 
Lysander,  being  sent  from  Lacedaemon  with  a 
commission  to  be  admiral  of  their  fleet,  and  be¬ 
ing  furnished  by  Cyrus  with  a  great  sum  of 
money,  gave  every  sailor  four  obols  a  day, 
whereas  before  they  had  but  three.  Alcibiades 
could  hardly  allow  his  men  three  obols,  and 
therefore  was  constrained  to  go  into  Caria  to 
furnish  himself  with  money.  He  left  the  care 
of  the  fleet,  in  his  absence,  to  Antiochus,  an  ex¬ 
perienced  seaman,  but  rash  and  inconsiderate, 
who  had  express  orders  from  Alcibiades  not  to 
engage,  though  the  enemy  provoked  him.  But 
he  slighted  and  disregarded  these  directions  to 
that  degree,  that,  having  made  ready  his  own 
galley  and  another,  he  stood  for  Ephesus, 
where  the  enemy  lay,  and,  as  he  sailed  before 
the  heads  of  their  galleys,  used  every  provoca¬ 
tion  possible,  both  in  words  and  deeds.  Lysan¬ 
der  at  first  manned  out  a  few  ships,  and  pur¬ 
sued  him.  But  all  the  Athenian  ships  coming 
in  to  his  assistance,  Lysander,  also,  brought  up 
his  whole  fleet,  which  gained  an  entire  victory. 
He  slew  Antiochus  himself,  took  many  men 
and  ships,  and  erected  a  trophy. 

As  soon  as  Alcibiades  heard  this  news,  he  re¬ 
turned  to  Samos,  and  loosing  from  hence  with 
his  whole  fleet,  came  and  offered  battle  to  Ly¬ 
sander.  But  Lysander,  content  with  the  victory 
he  had  gained,  would  not  stir.  Amongst  others 
in  the  army  who  hated  Alcibiades,  Thrasybu- 
lus,  the  son  of  Thrason,  was  his  particular  ene¬ 
my,  and  went  purposely  to  Athens  to  accuse 
him,  and  to  exasperate  his  enemies  in  the  city 
against  him.  Addressing  the  people,  he  repre¬ 
sented  that  Alcibiades  had  ruined  their  affairs 
and  lost  their  ships  by  mere  self-conceited  ne¬ 
glect  of  his  duties,  committing  the  government 
of  the  army,  in  his  absence,  to  men  who  gained 
his  favour  by  drinking  and  scurrilous  talking, 
whilst  he  wandered  up  and  down  at  pleasure 
to  raise  money,  giving  himself  up  to  every  sort 
of  luxury  and  excess  amongst  the  courtesans  of 
Abydos  and  Ionia  at  a  time  when  the  enemy’s 
navy  were  on  the  watch  close  at  hand.  It  was 
also  objected  to  him,  that  he  had  fortified  a 
castle  near  Bisanthe  in  Thrace,  for  a  safe  re¬ 
treat  for  himself,  as  one  that  either  could  not, 
or  would  not,  live  in  his  own  country.  The 
Athenians  gave  credit  to  these  informations, 
and  showed  the  resentment  and  displeasure 
which  they  had  conceived  against  him  by 
choosing  other  generals. 


ALCIBIADES 

As  soon  as  Alcibiades  heard  of  this,  he  imme¬ 
diately  forsook  the  army,  afraid  of  what  might 
follow;  and,  collecting  a  body  of  mercenary 
soldiers,  made  war  upon  his  own  account 
against  those  Thracians  who  called  themselves 
free,  and  acknowledged  no  king.  By  this  means 
he  amassed  to  himself  a  considerable  treasure, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  secured  the  bordering 
Greeks  from  the  incursions  of  the  barbarians. 

Tydeus,  Menander,  and  Adimantus,  the 
new-made  generals,  were  at  that  time  posted  at 
^Tgospotami,  with  all  the  ships  which  the  Athe¬ 
nians  had  left.  From  whence  they  were  used  to 
go  out  to  sea  every  morning,  and  offer  battle 
to  Lysander,  who  lay  near  Lampsacus;  and 
when  they  had  done  so,  returning  back  again, 
lay,  all  the  rest  of  the  day,  carelessly  and  with¬ 
out  order,  in  contempt  of  the  enemy. 

Alcibiades,  who  was  not  far  off,  did  not 
think  so  slightly  of  their  danger,  nor  neglect  to 
let  them  know  it,  but,  mounting  his  horse, 
came  to  the  generals,  and  represented  to  them 
that  they  had  chosen  a  very  inconvenient  sta¬ 
tion,  where  there  was  no  safe  harbour,  and 
where  they  were  distant  from  any  town;  so 
that  they  were  constrained  to  send  for  their 
necessary  provisions  as  far  as  Sestos.  He  also 
pointed  out  to  them  their  carelessness  in  suffer¬ 
ing  the  soldiers,  when  they  went  ashore,  to  dis¬ 
perse  and  wander  up  and  down  at  their  pleas¬ 
ure,  while  the  enemy’s  fleet,  under  the  com¬ 
mand  of  one  general,  and  strictly  obedient  to 
discipline,  lay  so  very  near  them.  He  advised 
them  to  remove  the  fleet  to  Sestos.  But  the 
admirals  not  only  disregarded  what  he 
said,  but  Tydeus,  with  insulting  expressions, 
commanded  him  to  be  gone,  saying,  that 
now  not  he,  but  others,  had  the  command  of 
the  forces. 

Alcibiades,  suspecting  something  of  treach¬ 
ery  in  them,  departed,  and  told  his  friends,  who 
accompanied  him  out  of  the  camp,  that  if  the 
generals  had  not  used  him  with  such  insup¬ 
portable  contempt,  he  would  within  a  few  days 
have  forced  the  Lacedaemonians,  however  un¬ 
willing,  either  to  have  fought  the  Athenians  at 
sea  or  to  have  deserted  their  ships.  Some  looked 
upon  this  as  a  piece  of  ostentation  only;  others 
said,  the  thing  was  probable,  for  that  he  might 
have  brought  down  by  land  great  numbers  of 
the  Thracian  cavalry  and  archers,  to  assault 
and  disorder  them  in  their  camp.  The  event, 
however,  soon  made  it  evident  how  rightly  he 
had  judged  of  the  errors  which  the  Athenians 
committed.  For  Lysander  fell  upon  them  on  a 
sudden,  when  they  least  suspected  it,  with  such 


173 

fury  that  Conon  alone,  with  eight  galleys,  es¬ 
caped  him;  all  the  rest,  which  were  about  two 
hundred,  he  took  and  carried  away,  together 
with  three  thousand  prisoners,  whom  he  put  to 
death.  And  within  a  short  time  after,  he  took 
Athens  itself,  burnt  all  the  ships  which  he 
found  there,  and  demolished  their  long  walls. 

After  this,  Alcibiades,  standing  in  dread  of 
the  Lacedaemonians,  who  were  now  masters 
both  at  sea  and  land,  retired  into  Bithynia.  He 
sent  thither  great  treasure  before  him,  took 
much  with  him,  but  left  much  more  in  the 
castle  where  he  had  before  resided.  But  he  lost 
great  part  of  his  wealth  in  Bithynia,  being 
robbed  by  some  Thracians  who  lived  in  those 
parts,  and  thereupon  determined  to  go  to  the 
court  of  Artaxerxes,  not  doubting  but  that  the 
king,  if  he  would  make  trial  of  his  abilities, 
would  find  him  not  inferior  to  Themistocles, 
besides  that  he  was  recommended  by  a  more 
honourable  cause.  For  he  went  not,  as  Themis¬ 
tocles  did,  to  offer  his  service  against  his  fellow- 
citizens,  but  against  their  enemies,  and  to  im¬ 
plore  the  king’s  aid  for  the  defence  of  his  coun¬ 
try.  He  concluded  that  Pharnabazus  would 
most  readily  procure  him  a  safe  conduct,  and 
therefore  went  into  Phrygia  to  him,  and  con¬ 
tinued  to  dwell  there  some  time,  paying  him 
great  respect,  and  being  honourably  treated  by 
him. 

The  Athenians,  in  the  meantime,  were  mis¬ 
erably  afflicted  at  their  loss  of  empire;  but  when 
they  were  deprived  of  liberty  also,  and  Lysan¬ 
der  set  up  thirty  despotic  rulers  in  the  city,  in 
their  ruin  now  they  began  to  turn  to  those 
thoughts  which,  while  safety  was  yet  possible, 
they  would  not  entertain;  they  acknowledged 
and  bewailed  their  former  errors  and  follies, 
and  judged  this  second  ill-usage  of  Alcibiades 
to  be  of  all  the  most  inexcusable.  For  he  was 
rejected  without  any  fault  committed  by  him¬ 
self,  and  only  because  they  were  incensed 
against  his  subordinate  for  having  shamefully 
lost  a  few  ships,  they  much  more  shamefully 
deprived  the  commonwealth  of  its  most  valiant 
and  accomplished  general. 

Yet  in  this  sad  state  of  affairs  they  had  still 
some  faint  hopes  left  them,  nor  would  they  ut¬ 
terly  despair  of  the  Athenian  commonwealth 
while  Alcibiades  was  safe.  For  they  persuaded 
themselves  that  if  before,  when  he  was  an  exile, 
he  could  not  content  himself  to  live  idly  and  at 
ease,  much  less  now,  if  he  could  find  any  fa¬ 
vourable  opportunity,  would  he  endure  the  in¬ 
solence  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  the  out¬ 
rages  of  the  Thirty.  Nor  was  it  an  absurd  thing 


174 

in  the  people  to  entertain  such  imaginations, 
when  the  Thirty  themselves  were  so  very  soli¬ 
citous  to  be  informed  and  to  get  intelligence  of 
all  his  actions  and  designs.  In  fine,  Critias  rep¬ 
resented  to  Lysander  that  the  Lacedaemonians 
could  never  securely  enjoy  the  dominion  of 
Greece  till  the  Athenian  democracy  was  abso¬ 
lutely  destroyed;  and,  though  now  the  people 
of  Athens  seemed  quietly  and  patiently  to  sub¬ 
mit  to  so  small  a  number  of  governors,  yet  so 
long  as  Alcibiades  lived,  the  knowledge  of  this 
fact  would  never  suffer  them  to  acquiesce  in 
their  present  circumstances. 

Yet  Lysander  would  not  be  prevailed  upon 
by  these  representations,  till  at  last  he  received 
secret  orders  from  the  magistrates  of  Lacedae¬ 
mon,  expressly  requiring  him  to  get  Alcibiades 
despatched:  whether  it  was  that  they  feared  his 
energy  and  boldness  in  enterprising  what  was 
hazardous,  or  that  it  was  done  to  gratify  King 
Agis.  Upon  receipt  of  this  order,  Lysander  sent 
away  a  messenger  to  Pharnabazus,  desiring 
him  to  put  it  in  execution.  Pharnabazus  com¬ 
mitted  the  affair  to  Magaeus,  his  brother,  and  to 
his  uncle,  Susamithres. 

Alcibiades  resided  at  that  time  in  a  small  vil¬ 
lage  in  Phrygia,  together  with  Timandra,  a 
mistress  of  his.  As  he  slept,  he  had  this  dream: 
he  thought  himself  attired  in  his  mistress’s 
habit,  and  that  she,  holding  him  in  her  arms, 
dressed  his  head  and  painted  his  face  as  if  he 
had  been  a  woman;  others  say,  he  dreamed 
that  he  saw  Magaeus  cut  off  his  head  and  burn 
his  body;  at  any  rate,  it  was  but  a  little  while 
before  his  death  that  he  had  these  visions. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Those  who  were  sent  to  assassinate  him  had 
not  courage  enough  to  enter  the  house,  but  sur¬ 
rounded  it  first,  and  set  it  on  fire.  Alcibiades, 
as  soon  as  he  perceived  it,  getting  together  great 
quantities  of  clothes  and  furniture,  threw  them 
upon  the  fire  to  choke  it,  and,  having  wrapped 
his  cloak  about  his  left  arm,  and  holding  his 
naked  sword  in  his  right,  he  cast  himself  into 
the  middle  of  the  fire,  and  escaped  securely 
through  it  before  his  clothes  were  burnt.  The 
barbarians,  as  soon  as  they  saw  him,  retreated, 
and  none  of  them  durst  stay  to  wait  for  him,  or 
to  engage  with  him,  but,  standing  at  a  distance, 
they  slew  him  with  their  darts  and  arrows. 
When  he  was  dead  the  barbarians  departed, 
and  Timandra  took  up  his  dead  body,  and,  cov¬ 
ering  and  wrapping  it  up  in  her  own  robes,  she 
buried  it  as  decently  and  as  honourably  as  her 
circumstances  would  allow. 

It  is  said,  that  the  famous  Lais,  who  was 
called  the  Corinthian,  though  she  was  a  native 
of  Hyccara,  a  small  town  in  Sicily,  from 
whence  she  was  brought  a  captive,  was  the 
daughter  of  this  Timandra. 

There  are  some  who  agree  with  this  account 
of  Alcibiades’s  death  in  all  points,  except  that 
they  impute  the  cause  of  it  neither  to  Pharna¬ 
bazus,  nor  Lysander,  nor  the  Lacedaemonians; 
but  they  say  he  was  keeping  with  him  a  young 
lady  of  a  noble  house,  whom  he  had  debauch¬ 
ed,  and  that  her  brothers,  not  being  able  to  en¬ 
dure  the  indignity,  set  fire  by  night  to  the  house 
where  he  was  living,  and,  as  he  endeavoured 
to  save  himself  from  the  flames,  slew  him  with 
their  darts,  in  the  manner  just  related. 


CORIOLANUS 

LEGENDARY,  5TH  CENTURY  B.C. 


The  patrician  house  of  the  Marcii  in 
Rome  produced  many  men  of  distinc¬ 
tion,  and  among  the  rest,  Ancus  Mar- 
cius,  grandson  to  Numa  by  his  daughter,  and 
king  after  Tullus  Hostilius;  of  the  same  family 
were  also  Publius  and  Quintus  Marcius,  which 
two  conveyed  into  the  city  the  best  and  most 
abundant  supply  of  water  they  have  at  Rome. 
As  likewise  Censorinus,  who,  having  been 
twice  chosen  censor  by  the  people,  afterwards 
himself  induced  them  to  make  a  law  that  no¬ 
body  should  bear  that  office  twice. 

But  Caius  Marcius,  of  whom  I  now  write, 


being  left  an  orphan,  and  brought  up  under 
the  widowhood  of  his  mother,  has  shown  us  by 
experience,  that,  although  the  early  loss  of  a 
father  may  be  attended  with  other  disadvan¬ 
tages,  yet  it  can  hinder  none  from  being  either 
virtuous  or  eminent  in  the  world,  and  that  it 
is  no  obstacle  to  true  goodness  and  excellence; 
however  bad  men  may  be  pleased  to  lay  the 
blame  of  their  corruptions  upon  that  misfor¬ 
tune  and  the  neglect  of  them  in  their  minority. 

Nor  is  he  less  an  evidence  to  the  truth  of 
their  opinion  who  conceive  that  a  generous  and 
worthy  nature  without  proper  discipline,  like 


CORIOLANUS 

a  rich  soil  without  culture,  is  apt  with*  its  better 
fruits  to  produce  also  much  that  is  bad  and 
faulty.  While  the  force  and  vigour  of  his  soul, 
and  a  persevering  constancy  in  all  he  under¬ 
took,  led  him  successfully  into  many  noble 
achievements,  yet,  on  the  other  side,  also,  by  in¬ 
dulging  the  vehemence  of  his  passion,  and 
through  an  obstinate  reluctance  to  yield  or  ac¬ 
commodate  his  humours  and  sentiments  to 
those  of  a  people  about  him,  he  rendered  him¬ 
self  incapable  of  acting  and  associating  with 
others.  Those  who  saw  with  admiration  how 
proof  his  nature  was  against  all  the  softnesses 
of  pleasure,  the  hardships  of  service,  and  the  al¬ 
lurements  of  gain,  while  allowing  to  that  uni¬ 
versal  firmness  of  his  the  respective  names  of 
temperance,  fortitude,  and  justice,  yet,  in  the 
life  of  the  citizen  and  the  statesman,  could  not 
choose  but  be  disgusted  at  the  severity  and  rug¬ 
gedness  of  his  deportment,  and  with  his  over¬ 
bearing,  haughty,  and  imperious  temper.  Edu¬ 
cation  and  study,  and  the  favours  of  the  muses, 
confer  no  greater  benefit  on  those  that  seek 
them  than  these  humanising  and  civilising  les¬ 
sons,  which  teach  our  natural  qualities  to  sub¬ 
mit  to  the  limitations  prescribed  by  reason,  and 
to  avoid  the  wildness  of  extremes. 

Those  were  times  at  Rome  in  which  that 
kind  of  worth  was  most  esteemed  which  dis¬ 
played  itself  in  military  achievements;  one  evi¬ 
dence  of  which  we  find  in  the  Latin  word  for 
virtue,  which  is  properly  equivalent  to  manly 
courage.  As  if  valour  and  all  virtue  had  been 
the  same  thing,  they  used  as  the  common  term 
the  name  of  the  particular  excellence.  But  Mar- 
cius,  having  a  more  passionate  inclination  than 
any  of  that  age  for  feats  of  war,  began  at  once, 
from  his  very  childhood,  to  handle  arms;  and 
feeling  that  adventitious  implements  and  arti¬ 
ficial  arms  would  effect  little,  and  be  of  small 
use  to  such  as  have  not  their  native  and  natural 
weapons  well  fixed  and  prepared  for  service,  he 
so  exercised  and  inured  his  body  to  all  sorts  of 
activity  and  encounter,  that  besides  the  light¬ 
ness  of  a  racer,  he  had  a  weight  in  close  seizures 
and  wrestlings  with  an  enemy,  from  which  it 
was  hard  for  any  to  disengage  himself;  so  that 
his  competitors  at  home  in  displays  of  bravery, 
loth  to  own  themselves  inferior  in  that  respect, 
were  wont  to  ascribe  their  deficiencies  to  his 
strength  of  body,  which  they  said  no  resistance 
and  no  fatigue  could  exhaust. 

The  first  time  he  went  out  to  the  wars,  being 
yet  a  stripling,  was  when  Tarquinius  Super¬ 
bus,  who  had  been  King  of  Rome  and  was 
afterwards  expelled,  after  many  unsuccessful 


175 

attempts,  now  entered  upon  his  last  effort,  and 
proceeded  to  hazard  all  as  it  were  upon  a  single 
throw.  A  great  number  of  the  Latins  and  other 
people  of  Italy  joined  their  forces,  and  were 
marching  with  him  toward  the  city,  to  procure 
his  restoration;  not,  however,  so  much  out  of  a 
desire  to  serve  and  oblige  Tarquin,  as  to  gratify 
their  own  fear  and  envy  at  the  increase  of  the 
Roman  greatness;  which  they  were  anxious  to 
check  and  reduce.  The  armies  met  and  en¬ 
gaged  in  a  decisive  battle,  in  the  vicissitudes  of 
which,  Marcius,  while  fighting  bravely  in  the 
dictator’s  presence,  saw  a  Roman  soldier  struck 
down  at  a  little  distance,  and  immediately 
stepped  in  and  stood  before  him,  and  slew  his 
assailant. 

The  general,  after  having  gained  the  victory, 
crowned  him  for  this  act,  one  of  the  first,  with 
a  garland  of  oaken  branches,  it  being  the  Ro¬ 
man  custom  thus  to  adorn  those  who  had  saved 
the  life  of  a  citizen;  whether  that  the  law  in¬ 
tended  some  special  honour  to  the  oak,  in  mem¬ 
ory  of  the  Arcadians,  a  people  the  oracle  had 
made  famous  by  the  name  of  acorn-eaters;  or 
whether  the  reason  of  it  was  because  they 
might  easily,  and  in  all  places  where  they 
fought,  have  plenty  of  oak  for  that  purpose;  or, 
finally,  whether  the  oaken  wreath,  being  sacred 
to  Jupiter,  the  guardian  of  the  city,  might, 
therefore,  be  thought  a  proper  ornament  for 
one  who  preserved  a  citizen.  And  the  oak,  in 
truth,  is  the  tree  which  bears  the  most  and  the 
prettiest  fruit  of  any  that  grow  wild,  and  is  the 
strongest  of  all  that  are  under  cultivation;  its 
acorns  were  the  principal  diet  of  the  first  mor¬ 
tals,  and  the  honey  found  in  it  gave  them 
drink.  I  may  say,  too,  it  furnished  fowl  and 
other  creatures  as  dainties,  in  producing  mistle¬ 
toe  for  bird-lime  to  ensnare  them. 

In  this  battle,  meantime,  it  is  stated  that  Cas¬ 
tor  and  Pollux  appeared,  and  immediately  after 
the  battle  were  seen  at  Rome  just  by  the  foun¬ 
tain  where  their  temple  now  stands,  with  their 
horses  foaming  with  sweat,  and  told  the  news 
of  the  victory  to  the  people  in  the  Forum.  The 
fifteenth  of  July,  being  the  day  of  this  conquest, 
became  consequently  a  solemn  holiday  sacred 
to  the  Twin  Brothers. 

It  may  be  observed,  in  general,  that  when 
young  men  arrive  early  at  fame  and  repute,  if 
they  are  of  a  nature  but  slightly  touched  with 
emulation,  this  early  attainment  is  apt  to  extin¬ 
guish  their  thirst  and  satiate  their  small  appe¬ 
tite;  whereas  the  first  distinctions  of  more  solid 
and  weighty  characters  do  but  stimulate  and 
quicken  them  and  take  them  away  like  a  wind 


176 

in  the  pursuit  of  honour;  they  look  upon  these 
marks  and  testimonies  to  their  virtue  not  as  a 
recompense  received  for  what  they  have  al¬ 
ready  done,  but  as  a  pledge  given  by  themselves 
of  what  they  will  perform  hereafter,  ashamed 
now  to  forsake  or  underlive  the  credit  they 
have  won,  or,  rather,  not  to  exceed  and  obscure 
all  that  is  gone  before  by  the  lustre  of  their  fol¬ 
lowing  actions. 

Marcius,  having  a  spirit  of  this  noble  make, 
was  ambitious  always  to  surpass  himself,  and 
did  nothing,  how  extraordinary  soever,  but  he 
thought  he  was  bound  to  outdo  it  at  the  next 
occasion;  and  ever  desiring  to  give  continual 
fresh  instances  of  his  prowess,  he  added  one  ex¬ 
ploit  to  another,  and  heaped  up  trophies  upon 
trophies,  so  as  to  make  it  matter  of  contest  also 
among  his  commanders,  the  latter  still  vying 
with  the  earlier,  which  should  pay  him  the 
greatest  honour  and  speak  highest  in  his  com¬ 
mendation.  Of  all  the  numerous  wars  and  con¬ 
flicts  in  those  days  there  was  not  one  from 
which  he  returned  without  laurels  and  re¬ 
wards. 

And,  whereas  others  made  glory  the  end  of 
their  daring,  the  end  of  his  glory  was  his  moth¬ 
er’s  gladness;  the  delight  she  took  to  hear  him 
praised  and  to  see  him  crowned,  and  her  weep¬ 
ing  for  joy  in  his  embraces  rendered  him  in  his 
own  thoughts  the  most  honoured  and  most 
happy  person  in  the  world.  Epaminondas  is 
similarly  said  to  have  acknowledged  his  feel¬ 
ing,  that  it  was  the  greatest  felicity  of  his  whole 
life  that  his  father  and  mother  survived  to  hear 
of  his  successful  generalship  and  his  victory  at 
Leuctra.  And  he  had  the  advantage,  indeed,  to 
have  both  his  parents  partake  with  him,  and 
enjoy  the  pleasure  of  his  good  fortune.  But 
Marcius,  believing  himself  bound  to  pay  his 
mother,  Volumnia,  all  that  gratitude  and  duty 
which  would  have  belonged  to  his  father,  had 
he  also  been  alive,  could  never  satiate  himself 
in  his  tenderness  and  respect  to  her.  He  took  a 
wife,  also,  at  her  request  and  wish,  and  con¬ 
tinued,  even  after  he  had  children,  to  live  still 
with  his  mother,  without  parting  families. 

The  repute  of  his  integrity  and  courage  had, 
by  this  time,  gained  him  a  considerable  influ¬ 
ence  and  authority  in  Rome,  when  the  senate, 
favouring  the  wealthier  citizens,  began  to  be  at 
variance  with  the  common  people,  who  made 
sad  complaints  of  the  rigorous  and  inhuman 
usage  they  received  from  the  money-lenders. 

For  as  many  as  were  behind  with  them,  and 
had  any  sort  of  property,  they  stripped  of  all 
they  had,  by  the  way  of  pledges  and  sales;  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

such  as  through  former  exactions  were  reduced 
already  to  extreme  indigence,  and  had  nothing 
more  to  be  deprived  of,  these  they  led  away  in 
person  and  put  their  bodies  under  constraint, 
notwithstanding  the  scars  and  wounds  that 
they  could  show  in  attestation  of  their  public 
services  in  numerous  campaigns;  the  last  of 
which  had  been  against  the  Sabines,  which 
they  undertook  upon  a  promise  made  by  their 
rich  creditors  that  they  would  treat  them  with 
more  gentleness  for  the  future,  Marcus  Valeri¬ 
us,  the  consul,  having,  by  order  from  the  sen¬ 
ate,  engaged  also  for  the  performance  of  it. 

But  when,  after  they  had  fought  courage¬ 
ously  and  beaten  the  enemy,  there  was,  never¬ 
theless,  no  moderation  or  forbearance  used, 
and  the  senate  also  professed  to  remember 
nothing  of  that  agreement,  and  sat  without  tes¬ 
tifying  the  least  concern  to  see  them  dragged 
away  like  slaves  and  their  goods  seized  upon  as 
formerly,  there  began  now  to  be  open  disorders 
and  dangerous  meetings  in  the  city;  and  the 
enemy,  also,  aware  of  the  popular  confusion, 
invaded  and  laid  waste  the  country. 

And  when  the  consuls  now  gave  notice,  that 
all  who  were  of  an  age  to  bear  arms  should 
make  their  personal  appearance,  but  found  no 
one  regard  the  summons,  the  members  of  the 
government,  then  coming  to  consult  what 
course  should  be  taken,  were  themselves  again 
divided  in  opinion;  some  thought  it  most  ad¬ 
visable  to  comply  a  little  in  favour  of  the  poor, 
by  relaxing  their  overstrained  rights,  and  miti¬ 
gating  the  extreme  rigour  of  the  law,  while 
others  withstood  this  proposal;  Marcius  in  par¬ 
ticular,  with  more  vehemence  than  the  rest, 
alleging  that  the  business  of  money  on  either 
side  was  not  the  main  thing  in  question,  urged 
that  this  disorderly  proceeding  was  but  the 
first  insolent  step  towards  open  revolt  against 
the  laws,  which  it  would  become  the  wisdom 
of  the  government  to  check  at  the  earliest  mo¬ 
ment. 

There  had  been  frequent  assemblies  of  the 
whole  senate,  within  a  small  compass  of  time, 
about  this  difficulty,  but  without  any  certain 
issue;  the  poor  commonalty,  therefore,  perceiv¬ 
ing  there  was  likely  to  be  no  redress  of  their 
grievances,  on  a  sudden  collected  in  a  body, 
and,  encouraging  each  other  in  their  resolu¬ 
tion,  forsook  the  city,  with  one  accord,  and 
seizing  the  hill  which  is  now  called  the  Holy 
Mount,  sat  down  by  the  river  Anio,  without 
committing  any  sort  of  violence  or  seditious 
outrage,  but  merely  exclaiming,  as  they  went 
along,  that  they  had  this  long  time  past  been, 


CORIOLANUS 

in  fact,  expelled  and  excluded  from  the  city  by 
the  cruelty  of  the  rich;  that  Italy  would  every¬ 
where  afford  them  the  benefit  of  air  and  water 
and  a  place  of  burial,  which  was  all  they  could 
expect  in  the  city,  unless  it  were,  perhaps,  the 
privilege  of  being  wounded  and  killed  in  time 
of  war  for  the  defence  of  their  creditors.  The 
senate,  apprehending  the  consequences,  sent 
the  most  moderate  and  popular  men  of  their 
own  order  to  treat  with  them. 

Menenius  Agrippa,  their  chief  spokesman, 
after  much  entreaty  to  the  people,  and  much 
plain-speaking  on  behalf  of  the  senate,  con¬ 
cluded,  at  length,  with  the  celebrated  fable.  “It 
once  happened,”  he  said,  “that  all  the  other 
members  of  a  man  mutinied  against  the  stom¬ 
ach,  which  they  accused  as  the  only  idle,  un¬ 
contributing  part  in  the  whole  body,  while  the 
rest  were  put  to  hardships  and  the  expense  of 
much  labour  to  supply  and  minister  to  its  appe¬ 
tites.  The  stomach,  however,  merely  ridiculed 
the  silliness  of  the  members,  who  appeared  not 
to  be  aware  that  the  stomach  certainly  does  re¬ 
ceive  the  general  nourishment,  but  only  to  re¬ 
turn  it  again,  and  redistribute  it  amongst  the 
rest.  Such  is  the  case,”  he  said,  “ye  citizens, 
between  you  and  the  senate.  The  counsels  and 
plans  that  are  there  duly  digested,  convey  and 
secure  to  all  of  you  your  proper  benefit  and 
support.” 

A  reconciliation  ensued,  the  senate  acceding 
to  the  request  of  the  people  for  the  annual  elec¬ 
tion  of  five  protectors  for  those  in  need  of  suc¬ 
cour,  the  same  that  are  now  called  the  tribunes 
of  the  people;  and  the  first  two  they  pitched 
upon  were  Junius  Brutus  and  Sicinnius  Vellu- 
tus,  their  leaders  in  the  secession. 

The  city  being  thus  united,  the  commons 
stood  presently  to  their  arms,  and  followed 
their  commanders  to  the  war  with  great  alac¬ 
rity.  As  for  Marcius,  though  he  was  not  a  little 
vexed  himself  to  see  the  populace  prevail  so 
far,  and  gain  ground  of  the  senators,  and  might 
observe  many  other  patricians  have  the  same 
dislike  of  the  late  concessions,  he  yet  besought 
them  not  to  yield  at  least  to  the  common  people 
in  the  zeal  and  forwardness  they  now  showed 
for  their  country’s  service,  but  to  prove  that 
they  were  superior  to  them,  not  so  much  in 
power  and  riches,  as  in  merit  and  worth. 

The  Romans  were  now  at  war  with  the  Vol- 
scian  nation,  whose  principal  city  was  Corioli; 
when,  therefore,  Cominius,  the  consul,  had  in¬ 
vested  this  important  place,  the  rest  of  the  Vol- 
scians,  fearing  it  would  be  taken,  mustered  up 
whatever  force  they  could  from  all  parts,  to  re- 


177 

lieve  it,  designing  to  give  the  Romans  battle  be¬ 
fore  the  city,  and  so  attack  them  on  both  sides. 
Cominius,  to  avoid  this  inconvenience,  divided 
his  army,  marching  himself  with  one  body  to 
encounter  the  Volscians  on  their  approach 
from  without  and  leaving  Titus  Lartius,  one 
of  the  bravest  Romans  of  his  time,  to  command 
the  other  and  continue  the  siege. 

Those  within  Corioli,  despising  now  the 
smallness  of  their  number,  made  a  sally  upon 
them,  and  prevailed  at  first,  and  pursued  the 
Romans  into  their  trenches.  Here  it  was  that 
Marcius,  flying  out  with  a  slender  company, 
and  cutting  those  in  pieces  that  first  engaged 
him,  obliged  the  other  assailants  to  slacken 
their  speed;  and  then,  with  loud  cries,  called 
upon  the  Romans  to  renew  the  battle.  For  he 
had,  what  Cato  thought  a  great  point  in  a  sol¬ 
dier,  not  only  strength  of  hand  and  stroke,  but 
also  a  voice  and  look  that  of  themselves  were  a 
terror  to  an  enemy. 

Divers  of  his  own  party  now  rallying  and 
making  up  to  him,  the  enemies  soon  retreated; 
but  Marcius,  not  content  to  see  them  draw  off 
and  retire,  pressed  hard  upon  the  rear,  and 
drove  them,  as  they  fled  away  in  haste,  to  the 
very  gates  of  their  city;  where,  perceiving  the 
Romans  to  fall  back  from  their  pursuit,  beaten 
off  by  the  multitude  of  darts  poured  in  upon 
them  from  the  walls,  and  that  none  of  his  fol¬ 
lowers  had  the  hardiness  to  think  of  falling  in 
pell-mell  among  the  fugitives  and  so  entering 
a  city  full  of  enemies  in  arms,  he,  nevertheless, 
stood  and  urged  them  to  the  attempt,  crying 
out,  that  fortune  had  now  set  open  Corioli,  not 
so  much  to  shelter  the  vanquished,  as  to  re¬ 
ceive  the  conquerors.  Seconded  by  a  few  that 
were  willing  to  venture  with  him,  he  bore 
along  through  the  crowd,  made  good  his  pas¬ 
sage,  and  thrust  himself  into  the  gate  through 
the  midst  of  them,  nobody  at  first  daring  to 
resist  him. 

But  when  the  citizens  on  looking  about  saw 
that  a  very  small  number  had  entered,  they 
now  took  courage,  and  came  up  and  attacked 
them.  A  combat  ensued  of  the  most  extraordi¬ 
nary  description,  in  which  Marcius,  by  strength 
of  hand,  and  swiftness  of  foot,  and  daring  of 
soul,  overpowering  every  one  that  he  assailed, 
succeeded  in  driving  the  enemy  to  seek  refuge, 
for  the  most  part,  in  the  interior  of  the  town, 
while  those  remaining  submitted,  and  threw 
down  their  arms,  thus  affording  Lartius  abun¬ 
dant  opportunity  to  bring  in  the  rest  of  the 
Romans  with  ease  and  safety. 

Corioli  being  thus  surprised  and  taken,  the 


178 


greater  part  of  the  soldiers  employed  them¬ 
selves  in  spoiling  and  pillaging  it,  while  Mar- 
cius  indignantly  reproached  them,  and  ex¬ 
claimed  that  it  was  a  dishonourable  and  un¬ 
worthy  thing,  when  the  consul  and  their  fel¬ 
low-citizens  had  now  perhaps  encountered  the 
other  Volscians,  and  were  hazarding  their  lives 
in  battle,  basely  to  misspend  the  time  in  run¬ 
ning  up  and  down  for  booty,  and,  under  a  pre¬ 
tence  of  enriching  themselves,  keep  out  of  dan¬ 
ger.  Few  paid  him  any  attention,  but,  putting 
himself  at  the  head  of  these,  he  took  the  road 
by  which  the  consul’s  army  had  marched  be¬ 
fore  him,  encouraging  his  companions,  and  be¬ 
seeching  them,  as  they  went  along,  not  to  give 
up,  and  praying  often  to  the  gods,  too,  that  he 
might  be  so  happy  as  to  arrive  before  the  fight 
was  over,  and  come  seasonably  up  to  assist 
Cominius,  and  partake  in  the  peril  of  the  ac¬ 
tion. 

It  was  customary  with  the  Romans  of  that 
age,  when  they  were  moving  into  battle  array, 
and  were  on  the  point  of  taking  up  their  buck¬ 
lers,  and  girding  their  coats  about  them,  to 
make  at  the  same  time  an  unwritten  will,  or 
verbal  testament,  and  to  name  who  should  be 
their  heirs,  in  the  hearing  of  three  or  four  wit¬ 
nesses.  In  this  precise  posture  Marcius  found 
them  at  his  arrival,  the  enemy  being  advanced 
within  view. 

They  were  not  a  little  disturbed  by  his  first 
appearance,  seeing  him  covered  with  blood  and 
sweat,  and  attended  with  a  small  train;  but 
when  he  hastily  made  up  to  the  consul  with 
gladness  in  his  looks,  giving  him  his  hand,  and 
recounting  to  him  how  the  city  had  been  taken, 
and  when  they  saw  Cominius  also  embrace 
and  salute  him,  every  one  took  fresh  heart; 
those  that  were  near  enough  hearing,  and 
those  that  were  at  a  distance  guessing,  what 
had  happened;  and  all  cried  out  to  be  led  to 
battle.  First,  however,  Marcius  desired  to  know 
of  him  how  the  Volscians  had  arrayed  their 
army,  and  where  they  had  placed  their  best 
men,  and  on  his  answering  that  he  took  the 
troops  of  the  Antiates  in  the  centre  to  be  their 
prime  warriors,  that  would  yield  to  none  in 
bravery,  “Let  me  demand  and  obtain  of  you,” 
said  Marcius,  “that  we  may  be  posted  against 
them.”  The  consul  granted  the  request,  with 
much  admiration  for  his  gallantry. 

And  when  the  conflict  began  by  the  soldiers 
darting  at  each  other,  and  Marcius  sallied  out 
before  the  rest,  the  Volscians  opposed  to  him 
were  not  able  to  make  head  against  him;  wher¬ 
ever  he  fell  in,  he  broke  their  ranks,  and  made 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

a  lane  through  them;  but  the  parties  turning 
again,  and  enclosing  him  on  each  side  with 
their  weapons,  the  consul,  who  observed  the 
danger  he  was  in,  despatched  some  of  the 
choicest  men  he  had  for  his  rescue.  The  conflict 
then  growing  warm  and  sharp  about  Marcius, 
and  many  falling  dead  in  a  little  space,  the 
Romans  bore  so  hard  upon  their  enemies,  and 
pressed  them  with  such  violence,  that  they 
forced  them  at  length  to  abandon  their  ground, 
and  to  quit  the  field.  And  going  now  to  prose¬ 
cute  the  victory,  they  besought  Marcius,  tired 
out  with  his  toils,  and  faint  and  heavy  through 
the  loss  of  blood,  that  he  would  retire  to  the 
camp.  He  replied,  however,  that  weariness  was 
not  for  conquerors,  and  joined  with  them  in 
the  pursuit.  The  rest  of  the  Volscian  army  was 
in  like  manner  defeated,  great  numbers  killed, 
and  no  less  taken  captive. 

The  day  after,  when  Marcius,  with  the  rest 
of  the  army,  presented  themselves  at  the  con¬ 
sul’s  tent,  Cominius  rose,  and  having  rendered 
all  due  acknowledgment  to  the  gods  for  the 
success  of  that  enterprise,  turned  next  to  Mar¬ 
cius,  and  first  of  all  delivered  the  strongest  en¬ 
comium  upon  his  rare  exploits,  which  he  had 
partly  been  an  eye-witness  of  himself,  in  the 
late  battle,  and  had  partly  learned  from  the  tes¬ 
timony  of  Lartius.  And  then  he  required  him 
to  choose  a  tenth  part  of  all  the  treasure  and 
horses  and  captives  that  had  fallen  into  their 
hands,  before  any  division  should  be  made  to 
others;  besides  which,  he  made  him  the  special 
present  of  a  horse  with  trappings  and  orna¬ 
ments,  in  honour  of  his  actions. 

The  whole  army  applauded;  Marcius,  how¬ 
ever,  stepped  forth,  and  declaring  his  thankful 
acceptance  of  the  horse,  and  his  gratification  at 
the  praises  of  his  general,  said  that  all  other 
things,  which  he  could  only  regard  rather  as 
mercenary  advantages  than  any  significations 
of  honour,  he  must  waive,  and  should  be  con¬ 
tent  with  the  ordinary  proportion  of  such  re¬ 
wards.  “I  have  only,”  said  he,  “one  special 
grace  to  beg,  and  this  I  hope  you  will  not  deny 
me.  There  was  a  certain  hospitable  friend  of 
mine  among  the  Volscians,  a  man  of  probity 
and  virtue,  who  is  become  a  prisoner,  and  from 
former  wealth  and  freedom  is  now  reduced  to 
servitude.  Among  his  many  misfortunes  let  my 
intercession  redeem  him  from  the  one  of  being 
sold  as  a  common  slave.” 

Such  a  refusal  and  such  a  request  on  the  part 
of  Marcius  were  followed  with  yet  louder  ac¬ 
clamations;  and  he  had  many  more  admirers 
of  this  generous  superiority  to  avarice,  than  of 


CORIOLANUS 

the  bravery  he  had  shown  in  battle.  The  very 
persons  who  conceived  some  envy  and  despite 
to  see  him  so  specially  honoured,  could  not  but 
acknowledge  that  one  who  so  nobly  could  re¬ 
fuse  reward  was  beyond  others  worthy  to  re¬ 
ceive  it;  and  were  more  charmed  with  that 
virtue  which  made  him  despise  advantage, 
than  with  any  of  those  former  actions  that  have 
gained  him  his  title  to  it.  It  is  the  higher  ac¬ 
complishment  to  use  money  well  than  to  use 
arms;  but  not  to  need  it  is  more  noble  than  to 
use  it. 

When  the  noise  of  approbation  and  applause 
ceased,  Cominius,  resuming,  said:  “It  is  idle, 
fellow-soldiers,  to  force  and  obtrude  those  oth¬ 
er  gifts  of  ours  on  one  who  is  unwilling  to  ac¬ 
cept  them;  let  us,  therefore,  give  him  one  of 
such  a  kind  that  he  cannot  well  reject  it;  let  us 
pass  a  vote,  I  mean,  that  he  shall  hereafter  be 
called  Coriolanus,  unless  you  think  that  his 
performance  at  Corioli  has  itself  anticipated 
any  such  resolution.”  Hence,  therefore,  he  had 
this  third  name  of  Coriolanus,  making  it  all 
the  plainer  that  Caius  was  a  personal  proper 
name,  and  the  second,  or  surname,  Marcius, 
one  common  to  his  house  and  family;  the  third 
being  a  subsequent  addition  which  used  to  be 
imposed  either  from  some  particular  act,  or 
fortune,  bodily  characteristic,  or  good  quality 
of  the  bearer. 

Just  as  the  Greeks,  too,  gave  additional 
names  in  old  time,  in  some  cases  from  some 
achievement,  Soter,  for  example,  and  Callini- 
cus;  or  personal  appearance,  as  Physcon  and 
Grypus;  good  qualities,  Euergetes  and  Phila- 
delphus;  good  fortune,  Eudaemon,  the  title  of 
the  second  Battus.  Several  monarchs  have  also 
had  names  given  them  in  mockery,  as  Anti- 
gonus  was  called  Doson,  and  Ptolemy,  Lathy- 
rus. 

This  sort  of  title  was  yet  more  common 
among  the  Romans.  One  of  the  Metelli  was 
surnamed  Diadematus,  because  he  walked 
about  for  a  long  time  with  a  bandage  on  his 
head  to  conceal  a  scar;  and  another,  of  the  same 
family,  got  the  name  of  Celer,  from  the  rapid¬ 
ity  he  displayed  in  giving  a  funeral  entertain¬ 
ment  of  gladiators  within  a  few  days  after  his 
father’s  death,  his  speed  and  energy  in  doing 
which  was  thought  extraordinary.  There  are 
some,  too,  who  even  at  this  day  take  names 
from  certain  casual  incidents  at  their  nativity: 
a  child  that  is  born  when  his  father  is  away 
from  home  is  called  Proculus;  or  Postumus,  if 
after  his  decease;  and  when  twins  come  into 
the  world,  and  one  dies  at  the  birth,  the  sur- 


179 

vivor  has  the  name  of  Vopiscus.  From  bodily 
peculiarities  they  derive  not  only  their  Sullas 
and  Nigers,  but  their  Caeci  and  Claudii,  wisely 
endeavouring  to  accustom  their  people  not  to 
reckon  either  the  loss  of  sight,  or  any  other 
bodily  misfortune,  as  a  matter  of  disgrace  to 
them,  but  to  answer  to  such  names  without 
shame,  as  if  they  were  really  their  own.  But 
this  discussion  better  befits  another  place. 

The  war  against  the  Volscians  was  no  sooner 
at  an  end,  than  the  popular  orators  revived 
domestic  troubles,  and  raised  another  sedition, 
without  any  new  cause  or  complaint  or  just 
grievance  to  proceed  upon,  but  merely  turning 
the  very  mischiefs  that  unavoidably  ensued 
from  their  former  contests  into  a  pretext  against 
the  patricians.  The  greatest  part  of  their  arable 
land  had  been  left  unsown  and  without  tillage, 
and  the  time  of  war  allowing  them  no  means 
or  leisure  to  import  provision  from  other  coun¬ 
tries,  there  was  an  extreme  scarcity.  The  movers 
of  the  people  then  observing  that  there  was  no 
corn  to  be  bought,  and  that  if  there  had  been 
they  had  no  money  to  buy  it,  began  to  calumni¬ 
ate  the  wealthy  with  false  stories  and  whisper 
it  about,  as  if  they,  out  of  their  malice,  had 
purposely  contrived  the  famine. 

Meanwhile,  there  came  an  embassy  from  the 
Velitrani,  proposing  to  deliver  up  their  city  to 
the  Romans,  and  desiring  they  would  send 
some  new  inhabitants  to  people  it,  as  a  late  pes¬ 
tilential  disease  had  swept  away  so  many  of 
the  natives,  that  there  was  hardly  a  tenth  part 
remaining  of  their  whole  community.  This 
necessity  of  the  Velitrani  was  considered  by  all 
more  prudent  people  as  most  opportune  in  the 
present  state  of  affairs;  since  the  dearth  made 
it  needful  to  ease  the  city  of  its  superfluous 
members,  and  they  were  in  hope  also,  at  the 
same  time,  to  dissipate  the  gathering  sedition 
by  ridding  themselves  of  the  more  violent  and 
heated  partisans,  and  discharging,  so  to  say, 
the  elements  of  disease  and  disorder  in  the 
state.  The  consuls,  therefore,  singled  out  such 
citizens  to  supply  the  desolation  at  Velitrae,  and 
gave  notice  to  others,  that  they  should  be  ready 
to  march  against  the  Volscians,  with  the  politic 
design  of  preventing  intestine  broils  by  em¬ 
ployment  abroad,  and  in  the  hope  that  when 
rich  as  well  as  poor,  plebeians  and  patricians, 
should  be  mingled  again  in  the  same  army  and 
the  same  camp,  and  engage  in  one  common 
service  for  the  public,  it  would  mutually  dis¬ 
pose  them  to  reconciliation  and  friendship. 

But  Sicinnius  and  Brutus,  the  popular  ora¬ 
tors,  interposed,  crying  out  that  the  consuls  dis- 


180 

guised  the  most  cruel  and  barbarous  action  in 
the  world  under  that  mild  and  plausible  name 
of  a  colony,  and  were  simply  precipitating  so 
many  poor  citizens  into  a  mere  pit  of  destruc¬ 
tion,  bidding  them  settle  down  in  a  country 
where  the  air  was  charged  with  disease,  and 
the  ground  covered  with  dead  bodies,  and 
expose  themselves  to  the  evil  influence  of  a 
strange  and  angered  deity.  And  then,  as  if  it 
would  not  satisfy  their  hatred  to  destroy  some 
by  hunger,  and  offer  others  to  the  mercy  of 
a  plague,  they  must  proceed  to  involve  them 
also  in  a  needless  war  of  their  own  making, 
that  no  calamity  might  be  wanting  to  complete 
the  punishment  of  the  citizens  for  refusing  to 
submit  to  that  of  slavery  to  the  rich. 

By  such  addresses,  the  people  were  so  pos¬ 
sessed,  that  none  of  them  would  appear  upon 
the  consular  summons  to  be  enlisted  for  the 
war;  and  they  showed  entire  aversion  to  the 
proposal  for  a  new  plantation;  so  that  the  sen¬ 
ate  was  at  a  loss  what  to  say  or  do.  But  Marcius, 
who  began  now  to  bear  himself  higher  and 
to  feel  confidence  in  his  past  actions,  conscious, 
too,  of  the  admiration  of  the  best  and  greatest 
men  of  Rome,  openly  took  the  lead  in  opposing 
the  favourers  of  the  people.  The  colony  was 
despatched  to  Velitrae,  those  that  were  chosen 
by  lot  being  compelled  to  depart  upon  high 
penalties;  and  when  they  obstinately  persisted 
in  refusing  to  enrol  themselves  for  the  Volsci- 
an  service,  he  mustered  up  his  own  clients,  and 
as  many  others  as  could  be  wrought  upon  by 
persuasion,  and  with  these  made  inroad  into 
the  territories  of  the  Antiates,  where,  finding 
a  considerable  quantity  of  corn,  and  collecting 
much  booty,  both  of  cattle  and  prisoners,  he 
reserved  nothing  for  himself  in  private,  but  re¬ 
turned  safe  to  Rome,  while  those  that  ventured 
out  with  him  were  seen  laden  with  pillage, 
and  driving  their  prey  before  them.  This  sight 
filled  those  that  had  stayed  at  home  with  regret 
for  their  perverseness,  with  envy  at  their  for¬ 
tunate  fellow-citizens,  and  with  feelings  of  dis¬ 
like  to  Marcius,  and  hostility  to  his  growing 
reputation  and  power,  which  might  probably 
be  used  against  the  popular  interest. 

Not  long  after  he  stood  for  the  consulship; 
when,  however,  the  people  began  to  relent  and 
incline  to  favour  him,  being  sensible  what  a 
shame  it  would  be  to  repulse  and  affront  a  man 
of  his  birth  and  merit,  after  he  had  done  them 
so  many  signal  services. 

It  was  usual  for  those  who  stood  for  offices 
among  them  to  solicit  and  address  themselves 
personally  to  the  citizens,  presenting  them- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

selves  in  the  Forum  with  the  toga  on  alone, 
and  no  tunic  under  it;  either  to  promote  their 
supplications  by  the  humility  of  their  dress,  or 
that  such  as  had  received  wounds  might  more 
readily  display  those  marks  of  their  fortitude. 
Certainly,  it  was  not  out  of  suspicion  of  bribery 
and  corruption  that  they  required  all  such  peti¬ 
tioners  for  their  favour  to  appear  ungirt  and 
open,  without  any  close  garment;  as  it  was 
much  later,  and  many  ages  after  this,  that  buy¬ 
ing  and  selling  crept  in  at  their  elections,  and 
money  became  an  ingredient  in  the  public 
suffrages;  proceeding  thence  to  attempt  their 
tribunals,  and  even  attack  their  camps,  till,  by 
hiring  the  valiant,  and  enslaving  iron  to  silver, 
it  grew  master  of  the  state,  and  turned  their 
commonwealth  into  a  monarchy. 

For  it  was  well  and  truly  said  that  the  first 
destroyer  of  the  liberties  of  a  people  is  he  who 
first  gave  them  bounties  and  largesses.  At 
Rome  the  mischief  seems  to  have  stolen  secretly 
in,  and  by  little  and  little,  not  being  at  once 
discerned  and  taken  notice  of.  It  is  not  certainly 
known  who  the  man  was  that  did  there  first 
either  bribe  the  citizens,  or  corrupt  the  courts; 
whereas,  in  Athens,  Anytus,  the  son  of  Anthe- 
mion,  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  that  gave 
money  to  the  judges,  when  on  his  trial,  toward 
the  latter  end  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  for 
letting  the  fort  of  Pylos  fall  into  the  hands  of 
the  enemy,  in  a  period  while  the  pure  and 
golden  race  of  men  were  still  in  possession  of 
the  Roman  Forum. 

Marcius,  therefore,  as  the  fashion  of  candi¬ 
dates  was,  showing  the  scars  and  gashes  that 
were  still  visible  on  his  body,  from  the  many 
conflicts  in  which  he  had  signalised  himself 
during  a  service  of  seventeen  years  together, 
they  were,  so  to  say,  put  out  of  countenance 
at  this  display  of  merit,  and  told  one  another 
that  they  ought  in  common  modesty  to  create 
him  consul. 

But  when  the  day  of  election  was  now  come, 
and  Marcius  appeared  in  the  Forum,  with  a 
pompous  train  of  senators  attending  him,  and 
the  patricians  all  manifested  greater  concern, 
and  seemed  to  be  exerting  greater  efforts,  than 
they  had  ever  done  before  on  the  like  occasion, 
the  commons  then  fell  off  again  from  the  kind¬ 
ness  they  had  conceived  for  him,  and  in  the 
place  of  their  late  benevolence,  began  to  feel 
something  of  indignation  and  envy;  passions 
assisted  by  the  fear  they  entertained,  that  if  a 
man  of  such  aristocratic  temper  and  so  influen¬ 
tial  among  the  patricians  should  be  invested 
with  the  power  which  that  office  would  give 


CORIOLANUS 

him,  he  might  employ  it  to  deprive  the  people 
of  all  that  liberty  which  was  yet  left  them.  In 
conclusion,  they  rejected  Marcius. 

Two  other  names  were  announced,  to  the 
great  mortification  of  the  senators,  who  felt  as 
if  the  indignity  reflected  rather  upon  them¬ 
selves  than  on  Marcius.  He,  for  his  part,  could 
not  bear  the  affront  with  any  patience.  He  had 
always  indulged  his  temper,  and  had  regarded 
the  proud  and  contentious  element  of  human 
nature  as  a  sort  of  nobleness  and  magnanimity; 
reason  and  discipline  had  not  imbued  him  with 
that  solidity  and  equanimity  which  enters  so 
largely  into  the  virtues  of  the  statesman.  He 
had  never  learned  how  essential  it  is  for  any 
one  who  undertakes  public  business,  and  de¬ 
sires  to  deal  with  mankind,  to  avoid  above  all 
things  that  self-will,  which,  as  Plato  says,  be¬ 
longs  to  the  family  of  solitude;  and  to  pursue, 
above  all  things,  that  capacity  so  generally  ridi¬ 
culed,  of  submission  to  ill-treatment. 

Marcius,  straightforward  and  direct,  and 
possessed  with  the  idea  that  to  vanquish  and 
overbear  all  opposition  is  the  true  part  of  brav¬ 
ery,  and  never  imagining  that  it  was  the  weak¬ 
ness  and  womanishness  of  his  nature  that  broke 
out,  so  to  say,  in  these  ulcerations  of  anger,  re¬ 
tired,  full  of  fury  and  bitterness  against  the 
people.  The  young  patricians,  too,  all  that  were 
proudest  and  most  conscious  of  their  noble 
birth,  had  always  been  devoted  to  his  interest, 
and,  adhering  to  him  now,  with  a  fidelity  that 
did  him  no  good,  aggravated  his  resentment 
with  the  expression  of  their  indignation  and 
condolence.  He  had  been  their  captain,  and 
their  willing  instructor  in  the  arts  of  war, 
when  out  upon  expeditions,  and  their  model  in 
that  true  emulation  and  love  of  excellence 
which  makes  men  extol,  without  envy,  or  jeal¬ 
ousy,  each  other’s  brave  achievements. 

In  the  midst  of  these  distempers,  a  large 
quantity  of  corn  reached  Rome,  a  great  part 
bought  up  in  Italy,  but  an  equal  amount  sent 
as  a  present  from  Syracuse,  from  Gelo,  then 
reigning  there.  Many  began  now  to  hope  well 
of  their  affairs,  supposing  the  city,  by  this 
means,  would  be  delivered  at  once,  both  of  its 
want  and  discord.  A  council,  therefore,  being 
presently  held,  the  people  came  flocking  about 
the  senate-house,  eagerly  awaiting  the  issue  of 
that  deliberation,  expecting  that  the  market- 
prices  would  now  be  less  cruel,  and  that  what 
had  come  as  gift  would  be  distributed  as  such. 

There  were  some  within  who  so  advised  the 
senate;  but  Marcius,  standing  up,  sharply  in¬ 
veighed  against  those  who  spoke  in  favour  of 


181 

the  multitude,  calling  them  flatterers  of  the 
rabble,  traitors  to  the  nobility,  and  alleging 
that,  by  such  gratifications,  they  did  but  cherish 
those  ill  seeds  of  boldness  and  petulance  that 
had  been  sown  among  the  people,  to  their  own 
prejudice,  which  they  should  have  done  well 
to  observe  and  stifle  at  their  first  appearance, 
and  not  have  suffered  the  plebeians  to  grow 
so  strong,  by  granting  them  magistrates  of  such 
authority  as  the  tribunes.  They  were,  indeed, 
even  now  formidable  to  the  state  since  every¬ 
thing  they  desired  was  granted  them;  no  con¬ 
straint  was  put  on  their  will;  they  refused  obe¬ 
dience  to  the  consuls  and,  overthrowing  all 
law  and  magistracy,  gave  the  title  of  magistrate 
to  their  private  factious  leaders. 

“When  things  are  come  to  such  a  pass  for 
us  to  sit  here  and  decree  largesses  and  bounties 
for  them,  like  those  Greeks  where  the  popu¬ 
lace  is  supreme  and  absolute,  what  would  it 
be  else,”  said  he,  “but  to  take  their  disobedience 
into  pay  and  maintain  it  for  the  common  ruin 
of  us  all?  They  certainly  cannot  look  upon 
these  liberalities  as  a  reward  of  public  service, 
which  they  know  they  have  so  often  deserted; 
nor  yet  of  those  secessions,  by  which  they 
openly  renounced  their  country;  much  less  of 
the  calumnies  and  slanders  they  have  been  al¬ 
ways  so  ready  to  entertain  against  the  senate; 
but  will  rather  conclude  that  a  bounty,  which 
seems  to  have  no  other  visible  cause  or  reason, 
must  needs  be  the  effect  of  our  fear  and  flattery; 
and  will,  therefore,  set  no  limit  to  their  dis¬ 
obedience,  nor  ever  cease  from  disturbances 
and  sedition.  Concession  is  mere  madness;  if 
we  have  any  wisdom  and  resolution  at  all, 
we  shall,  on  the  contrary,  never  rest  till  we 
have  recovered  from  them  that  tribunician 
power  they  have  extorted  from  us;  as  being  a 
plain  subversion  of  the  consulship,  and  a  per¬ 
petual  ground  of  separation  in  our  city  that  is 
no  longer  one,  as  heretofore,  but  has  in  this 
received  such  a  wound  and  rupture  as  is  never 
likely  to  close  and  unite  again,  or  suffer  us  to 
be  of  one  mind,  and  to  give  over  inflaming 
our  distempers,  and  being  a  torment  to  each 
other.” 

Marcius,  with  much  more  to  this  purpose, 
succeeded,  to  an  extraordinary  degree,  in  in¬ 
spiring  the  younger  men  with  the  same  furious 
sentiments,  and  had  almost  all  the  wealthy  on 
his  side,  who  cried  him  up  as  the  only  person 
their  city  had,  superior  alike  to  force  and  flat¬ 
tery;  some  of  the  older  men,  however,  opposed 
him,  suspecting  the  consequences. 

As,  indeed,  there  came  no  good  of  it;  for  the 


182 


tribunes,  who  were  present,  perceiving  how 
the  proposal  of  Marcius  took,  ran  out  into  the 
crowd  with  exclamations,  calling  on  the  plebe¬ 
ians  to  stand  together,  and  come  in  to  their 
assistance.  The  assembly  met,  and  soon  became 
tumultuous.  The  sum  of  what  Marcius  had 
spoken,  having  been  reported  to  the  people, 
excited  them  to  such  fury  that  they  were  ready 
to  break  in  upon  the  senate.  The  tribunes  pre¬ 
vented  this,  by  laying  all  the  blame  on  Corio- 
lanus,  whom,  therefore,  they  cited  by  their  mes¬ 
sengers  to  come  before  them  and  defend  him¬ 
self.  And  when  he  contemptuously  repulsed 
the  officers  who  brought  him  the  summons, 
they  came  themselves,  with  the  ALdiles,  or  over¬ 
seers  of  the  market,  proposing  to  carry  him 
away  by  force,  and,  accordingly,  began  to  lay 
hold  on  his  person.  The  patricians,  however, 
coming  to  his  rescue,  not  only  thrust  off  the 
tribunes,  but  also  beat  the  /Ediles,  that  were 
their  seconds  in  the  quarrel;  night  approach¬ 
ing,  put  an  end  to  the  contest. 

But,  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  the  consuls,  ob¬ 
serving  the  people  to  be  highly  exasperated, 
and  that  they  ran  from  all  quarters  and  gath¬ 
ered  in  the  Forum,  were  afraid  for  the  whole 
city,  so  that,  convening  the  senate  afresh,  they 
desired  them  to  advise  how  they  might  best 
compose  and  pacify  the  incensed  multitude  by 
equitable  language  and  indulgent  decrees; 
since,  if  they  wisely  considered  the  state  of 
things,  they  would  find  that  it  was  no  time 
to  stand  upon  terms  of  honour  and  a  mere 
point  of  glory;  such  a  critical  conjuncture 
called  for  gentle  methods,  and  for  temperate 
and  humane  counsels.  The  majority,  therefore, 
of  the  senators  giving  way,  the  consuls  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  pacify  the  people  in  the  best  manner 
they  were  able,  answering  gently  to  such  impu¬ 
tations  and  charges  as  had  been  cast  upon  the 
senate,  and  using  much  tenderness  and  mod¬ 
eration  in  the  admonitions  and  reproofs  they 
gave  them.  On  the  point  of  the  price  of  provi¬ 
sions,  they  said  there  should  be  no  difference 
at  all  between  them. 

When  a  great  part  of  the  commonalty  was 
grown  cool,  and  it  appeared  from  their  orderly 
and  peaceful  behaviour  that  they  had  been  very 
much  appeased  by  what  they  had  heard,  the 
tribunes,  standing  up,  declared,  in  the  name 
of  the  people,  that  since  the  senate  was  pleased 
to  act  soberly  and  do  them  reason,  they,  like¬ 
wise,  should  be  ready  to  yield  in  all  that  was 
fair  and  equitable  on  their  side;  they  must  in¬ 
sist,  however,  that  Marcius  should  give  in  his 
answer  to  the  several  charges  as  follows:  first, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

could  he  deny  that  he  instigated  the  senate  to 
overthrow  the  government  and  annul  the  priv¬ 
ileges  of  the  people?  And,  in  the  next  place, 
when  called  to  account  for  it,  did  he  not  dis¬ 
obey  the  summons?  And,  lastly,  by  the  blows 
and  other  public  affronts  to  the  JEdiles,  had 
he  not  done  all  he  could  to  commence  a  civil 
war? 

These  articles  were  brought  in  against  him, 
with  a  design  either  to  humble  Marcius,  and 
show  his  submission,  if,  contrary  to  his  nature, 
he  should  now  court  and  sue  the  people;  or,  if 
he  should  follow  his  natural  disposition,  which 
they  rather  expected  from  their  judgment  of 
his  character,  then  that  he  might  thus  make 
the  breach  final  between  himself  and  the 
people. 

He  came,  therefore,  as  it  were,  to  make  his 
apology,  and  clear  himself;  in  which  belief 
the  people  kept  silence,  and  gave  him  a  quiet 
hearing.  But  when,  instead  of  the  submissive 
and  deprecatory  language  expected  from  him, 
he  began  to  use  not  only  an  offensive  kind  of 
freedom,  seeming  rather  to  accuse  than  apolo¬ 
gise,  but,  as  well  by  the  tone  of  his  voice  as 
the  air  of  his  countenance,  displayed  a  security 
that  was  not  far  from  disdain  and  contempt  of 
them,  the  whole  multitude  then  became  angry, 
and  gave  evident  signs  of  impatience  and  dis¬ 
gust;  and  Sicinnius,  the  most  violent  of  the  tri¬ 
bunes,  after  a  little  private  conference  with  his 
colleagues,  proceeded  solemnly  to  pronounce 
before  them  all,  that  Marcius  was  condemned 
to  die  by  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  and  bid  the 
Aidiles  take  him  to  the  Tarpeian  rock,  and 
without  delay  throw  him  headlong  from  the 
precipice. 

When  they,  however,  in  compliance  with  the 
order,  came  to  seize  upon  his  body,  many,  even 
of  the  plebeian  party,  felt  it  to  be  a  horrible 
and  extravagant  act;  the  patricians,  meantime, 
wholly  beside  themselves  with  distress  and 
horror,  hurried  up  with  cries  to  the  rescue; 
and  while  some  made  actual  use  of  their  hands 
to  hinder  the  arrest,  and  surrounding  Marcius, 
got  him  in  among  them,  others,  as  in  so  great 
a  tumult  no  good  could  be  done  by  words, 
stretched  out  theirs,  beseeching  the  multitude 
that  they  would  not  proceed  to  such  furious 
extremities;  and  at  length,  the  friends  and  ac¬ 
quaintance  of  the  tribunes,  wisely  perceiving 
how  impossible  it  would  be  to  carry  off  Marcius 
to  punishment  without  much  bloodshed  and 
slaughter  of  the  nobility,  persuaded  them  to 
forbear  everything  unusual  and  odious;  not 
to  despatch  him  by  any  sudden  violence,  or 


CORIOLANUS 

without  regular  process,  but  refer  the  cause 
to  the  general  suffrage  of  the  people. 

Sicinnius  then,  after  a  little  pause,  turning  to 
the  patricians,  demanded  what  their  meaning 
was,  thus  forcibly  to  rescue  Marcius  out  of  the 
people’s  hands,  as  they  were  going  to  punish 
him;  when  it  was  replied  by  them,  on  the  other 
side,  and  the  question  put,  “Rather,  how  came 
it  into  your  minds,  and  what  is  it  you  design, 
thus  to  drag  one  of  the  worthiest  men  of  Rome, 
without  trial,  to  a  barbarous  and  illegal  execu¬ 
tion?”  “Very  well,”  said  Sicinnius,  “you  shall 
have  no  ground  in  this  respect  for  quarrel  or 
complaint  against  the  people.  The  people  grant 
your  request,  and  your  partisan  shall  be  tried. 
We  appoint  you,  Marcius,”  directing  his  speech 
to  him,  “the  third  market-day  ensuing,  to  ap¬ 
pear  and  defend  yourself,  and  to  try  if  you 
can  satisfy  the  Roman  citizens  of  your  inno¬ 
cence,  who  will  then  judge  your  case  by  vote.” 
The  patricians  were  content  with  such  a  truce 
and  respite  for  that  time,  and  gladly  returned 
home,  having  for  the  present  brought  off  Mar¬ 
cius  in  safety. 

During  the  interval  before  the  appointed 
time  (for  the  Romans  hold  their  sessions  every 
ninth  day,  which  from  that  cause  are  called 
mundinoe  in  Latin),  a  war  fell  out  with  the 
Antiates,  likely  to  be  of  some  continuance, 
which  gave  them  hope  they  might  one  way 
or  other  elude  the  judgment.  The  people,  they 
presumed,  would  become  tractable,  and  their 
indignation  lessen  and  languish  by  degrees  in 
so  long  a  space,  if  occupation  and  war  did  not 
wholly  put  it  out  of  their  mind. 

But  when,  contrary  to  expectation,  they 
made  a  speedy  agreement  with  the  people  of 
Antium,  and  the  army  came  back  to  Rome,  the 
patricians  were  again  in  great  perplexity,  and 
had  frequent  meetings  to  consider  how  things 
might  be  arranged,  without  either  abandoning 
Marcius,  or  yet  giving  occasion  to  the  popular 
orators  to  create  new  disorders.  Appius  Claud¬ 
ius,  whom  they  counted  among  the  senators 
most  averse  to  the  popular  interest,  made  a 
solemn  declaration,  and  told  them  beforehand, 
that  the  senate  would  utterly  destroy  itself  and 
betray  the  government,  if  they  should  once 
suffer  the  people  to  assume  the  authority  of 
pronouncing  sentence  upon  any  of  the  patri¬ 
cians;  but  the  oldest  senators  and  most  favour¬ 
able  to  the  people  maintained,  on  the  other 
side,  that  the  people  would  not  be  so  harsh  and 
severe  upon  them  as  some  were  pleased  to 
imagine,  but  rather  become  more  gentle  and 
humane  upon  the  concession  of  that  power, 


183 

since  it  was  not  contempt  of  the  senate,  but  the 
impression  of  being  contemned  by  it,  which 
made  them  pretend  to  such  a  prerogative.  Let 
that  be  once  allowed  them  as  a  mark  of  respect 
and  kind  feeling,  and  the  mere  possession  of 
this  power  of  voting  would  at  once  dispossess 
them  of  their  animosity. 

When,  therefore,  Marcius  saw  that  the  sen¬ 
ate  was  in  pain  and  suspense  upon  his  account, 
divided,  as  it  were,  betwixt  their  kindness  for 
him  and  their  apprehensions  from  the  people, 
he  desired  to  know  of  the  tribunes  what  the 
crimes  were  they  intended  to  charge  him  with, 
and  what  the  heads  of  the  indictment  they 
would  oblige  him  to  plead  to  before  the  people; 
and  being  told  by  them  that  he  was  to  be  im¬ 
peached  for  attempting  usurpation,  and  that 
they  would  prove  him  guilty  of  designing  to 
establish  arbitrary  government,  stepping  forth 
upon  this,  “Let  me  go  then,”  he  said,  “to  clear 
myself  from  that  imputation  before  an  assem¬ 
bly  of  them;  I  freely  offer  myself  to  any  sort 
of  trial,  nor  do  I  refuse  any  kind  of  punishment 
whatsoever;  only,”  he  continued,  “let  what  you 
now  mention  be  really  made  my  accusation, 
and  do  not  you  play  false  with  the  senate.”  On 
their  consenting  to  these  terms,  he  came  to  his 
trial. 

But  when  the  people  met  together,  the  trib¬ 
unes,  contrary  to  all  former  practice,  extorted 
first,  that  votes  should  be  taken,  not  by  cen¬ 
turies,  but  tribes;  a  change  by  which  the  in¬ 
digent  and  factious  rabble,  that  had  no  respect 
for  honesty  and  justice,  would  be  sure  to  carry 
it  against  those  who  were  rich  and  well  known, 
and  accustomed  to  serve  the  state  in  war. 

In  the  next  place,  whereas  they  had  engaged 
to  prosecute  Marcius  upon  no  other  head  but 
that  of  tyranny,  which  could  never  be  made 
out  against  him,  they  relinquished  this  plea, 
and  urged  instead,  his  language  in  the  senate 
against  an  abasement  of  the  price  of  corn,  and 
for  the  overthrow  of  the  tribunician  power; 
adding  further,  as  a  new  impeachment,  the  dis¬ 
tribution  that  was  made  by  him  of  the  spoil 
and  booty  he  had  taken  from  the  Antiates, 
when  he  overran  their  country,  which  he  had 
divided  among  those  that  had  followed  him, 
whereas  it  ought  rather  to  have  been  brought 
into  the  public  treasury;  which  last  accusation 
did,  they  say,  more  discompose  Marcius  than 
all  the  rest,  as  he  had  not  anticipated  he  should 
ever  be  questioned  on  that  subject,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  was  less  provided  with  any  satisfactory 
answer  to  it  on  the  sudden.  And  when,  by  way 
of  excuse,  he  began  to  magnify  the  merits  of 


184 

those  who  had  been  partakers  with  him  in  the 
action,  those  that  had  stayed  at  home,  being 
more  numerous  than  the  other,  interrupted 
him  with  outcries.  In  conclusion,  when  they 
came  to  vote,  a  majority  of  three  tribes  con¬ 
demned  him;  the  penalty  being  perpetual  ban¬ 
ishment. 

The  sentence  of  his  condemnation  being  pro¬ 
nounced,  the  people  went  away  with  greater 
triumph  and  exultation  than  they  had  ever 
shown  for  any  victory  over  enemies;  while  the 
senate  was  in  grief  and  deep  dejection,  repent¬ 
ing  now  and  vexed  to  the  soul  that  they  had 
not  done  and  suffered  all  things  rather  than 
give  way  to  the  insolence  of  the  people,  and 
permit  them  to  assume  and  abuse  so  great  an 
authority.  There  was  no  need  then  to  look  at 
men’s  dresses,  or  other  marks  of  distinction,  to 
know  one  from  another;  any  one  who  was  glad 
was,  beyond  all  doubt,  a  plebeian,  any  one  who 
looked  sorrowful,  a  patrician. 

Marcius  alone,  himself,  was  neither  stunned 
nor  humiliated.  In  mien,  carriage,  and  coun¬ 
tenance  he  bore  the  appearance  of  entire  com¬ 
posure,  and,  while  all  his  friends  were  full  of 
distress,  seemed  the  only  man  that  was  not 
touched  with  his  misfortune.  Not  that  either 
reflection  taught  him,  or  gentleness  of  temper 
made  it  natural  for  him,  to  submit;  he  was 
wholly  possessed,  on  the  contrary,  with  a  pro¬ 
found  and  deep-seated  fury,  which  passes  with 
many  for  no  pain  at  all.  And  pain,  it  is  true, 
transmuted,  so  to  say,  by  its  own  fiery  heat  into 
anger,  loses  every  appearance  of  depression  and 
feebleness;  the  angry  man  makes  a  show  of 
energy,  as  the  man  in  a  high  fever  does  of  na¬ 
tural  heat,  while,  in  fact,  all  this  action  of  the 
soul  is  but  mere  diseased  palpitation,  disten¬ 
sion,  and  inflammation.  That  such  was  his 
distempered  state  appeared  presently  plainly 
enough  in  his  actions. 

On  his  return  home,  after  saluting  his  moth¬ 
er  and  his  wife,  who  were  all  in  tears  and  full 
of  loud  lamentations,  and  exhorting  them  to 
moderate  the  sense  they  had  of  his  calamity, 
he  proceeded  at  once  to  the  city  gates,  whither 
all  the  nobility  came  to  attend  him;  and  so  not 
so  much  as  taking  anything  with  him,  or  mak¬ 
ing  any  request  to  the  company,  he  departed 
from  them,  having  only  three  or  four  clients 
with  him.  He  continued  solitary  for  a  few  days 
in  a  place  in  the  country,  distracted  with  a 
variety  of  counsels,  such  as  rage  and  indigna¬ 
tion  suggested  to  him;  and  proposing  to  him¬ 
self  no  honourable  or  useful  end,  but  only  how 
he  might  best  satisfy  his  revenge  on  the  Ro- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

mans,  he  resolved  at  length  to  raise  up  a  heavy 
war  against  them  from  their  nearest  neigh¬ 
bours.  He  determined,  first  to  make  trial  of  the 
Volscians,  whom  he  knew  to  be  still  vigorous 
and  flourishing,  both  in  men  and  treasure,  and 
he  imagined  their  force  and  power  was  not  so 
much  abated  as  their  spite  and  anger  increased 
by  the  late  overthrows  they  had  received  from 
the  Romans. 

There  was  a  man  of  Antium,  called  Tullus 
Aufidius,  who,  for  his  wealth  and  bravery  and 
the  splendour  of  his  family,  had  the  respect 
and  privilege  of  a  king  among  the  Volscians, 
but  whom  Marcius  knew  to  have  a  particular 
hostility  to  himself,  above  all  other  Romans. 
Frequent  menaces  and  challenges  had  passed 
in  battle  between  them,  and  those  exchanges 
of  defiance  to  which  their  hot  and  eager  emu¬ 
lation  is  apt  to  prompt  young  soldiers  had 
added  private  animosity  to  their  national  feel¬ 
ings  of  opposition.  Yet  for  all  this,  considering 
Tullus  to  have  a  certain  generosity  of  temper, 
and  knowing  that  no  Volscian,  so  much  as  he, 
desired  an  occasion  to  requite  upon  the  Romans 
the  evils  they  had  done,  he  did  what  much 
confirms  the  saying,  that — 

Hard  and  unequal  is  with  wrath  the  strife, 

Which  ma\es  us  buy  its  pleasure  with  our  life . 

Putting  on  such  a  dress  as  would  make  him 
appear  to  any  whom  he  might  meet  most  un¬ 
like  what  he  really  was,  like  Ulysses — 

The  town  he  entered  of  his  mortal  foes. 

His  arrival  at  Antium  was  about  evening,  and, 
though  several  met  him  in  the  streets,  yet  he 
passed  along  without  being  known  to  any  and 
went  directly  to  the  house  of  Tullus,  and,  en¬ 
tering  undiscovered,  went  up  to  the  fire- 
hearth,  and  seated  himself  there  without  speak¬ 
ing  a  word,  covering  up  his  head.  Those  of  the 
family  could  not  but  wonder,  and  yet  they 
were  afraid  either  to  raise  or  question  him,  for 
there  was  a  certain  air  of  majesty  both  in  his 
posture  and  silence,  but  they  recounted  to  Tul¬ 
lus,  being  then  at  supper,  the  strangeness  of 
this  accident. 

He  immediately  rose  from  table  and  came 
in,  and  asked  who  he  was,  and  for  what  busi¬ 
ness  he  came  thither;  and  then  Marcius,  un¬ 
muffling  himself,  and  pausing  awhile,  “If,” 
said  he,  “you  cannot  call  me  to  mind,  Tullus, 
or  do  not  believe  your  eyes  concerning  me,  I 
must  of  necessity  be  my  own  accuser.  I  am 
Caius  Marcius,  the  author  of  so  much  mischief 
to  the  Volscians;  of  which,  were  I  seeking  to 
deny  it,  the  surname  of  Coriolanus  I  now  bear 


CORIOLANUS 

would  be  a  sufficient  evidence  against  me.  The 
one  recompense  I  have  received  for  all  the  hard¬ 
ships  and  perils  I  have  gone  through  was  the 
title  that  proclaims  my  enmity  to  your  nation, 
and  this  is  the  only  thing  which  is  still  left  me. 
Of  all  other  advantages,  I  have  been  stripped 
and  deprived  by  the  envy  and  outrage  of  the 
Roman  people,  and  the  cowardice  and  treach¬ 
ery  of  the  magistrates  and  those  of  my  own 
order.  I  am  driven  out  as  an  exile,  and  become 
an  humble  suppliant  at  your  hearth,  not  so 
much  for  safety  and  protection  (should  I  have 
come  hither,  had  I  been  afraid  to  die?)  as  to 
seek  vengeance  against  those  that  expelled  me; 
which,  methinks,  I  have  already  obtained,  by 
putting  myself  into  your  hands.  If,  therefore, 
you  have  really  a  mind  to  attack  your  enemies, 
come  then,  make  use  of  that  affliction  you  see 
me  in  to  assist  the  enterprise,  and  convert  my 
personal  felicity  into  a  common  blessing  to  the 
Volscians;  as,  indeed,  I  am  likely  to  be  more 
serviceable  in  fighting  for  than  against  you, 
with  the  advantage  which  I  now  possess,  of 
knowing  all  the  secrets  of  the  enemy  that  I 
am  attacking.  But  if  you  decline  to  make  any 
further  attempts  I  am  neither  desirous  to  live 
myself,  nor  will  it  be  well  in  you  to  preserve 
a  person  who  has  been  your  rival  and  adver¬ 
sary  of  old,  and  now,  when  he  offers  you  his 

service,  appears  unprofitable  and  useless  to 
>> 

you. 

Tullus,  on  hearing  this,  was  extremely  re¬ 
joiced,  and  giving  him  his  right  hand,  ex¬ 
claimed,  “Rise,  Marcius,  and  be  of  good  cour¬ 
age;  it  is  a  great  happiness  you  bring  to  An- 
tium,  in  the  present  use  you  make  of  yourself; 
expect  everything  that  is  good  from  the  Vol¬ 
scians. ”  He  then  proceeded  to  feast  and  enter¬ 
tain  him  with  every  display  of  kindness,  and 
for  several  days  after  they  were  in  close  delib¬ 
eration  together  on  the  prospects  of  a  war. 

While  this  design  was  forming,  there  were 
great  troubles  and  commotions  at  Rome,  from 
the  animosity  of  the  senators  against  the  people, 
heightened  just  now  by  the  late  condemnation 
of  Marcius. 

Besides  that  their  soothsayers  and  priests, 
and  even  private  persons,  reported  signs  and 
prodigies  not  to  be  neglected;  one  of  which  is 
stated  to  have  occurred  as  follows:  Titus  Lati- 
nus,  a  man  of  ordinary  condition,  but  of  a  quiet 
and  virtuous  character,  free  from  all  supersti¬ 
tious  fancies,  and  yet  more  from  vanity  and 
exaggeration,  had  an  apparition  in  his  sleep,  as 
if  Jupiter  came  and  bade  him  tell  the  senate, 
that  it  was  with  a  bad  and  unacceptable  dancer 


185 

that  they  had  headed  his  procession.  Having 
beheld  the  vision,  he  said,  he  did  not  much  at¬ 
tend  to  it  at  the  first  appearance;  but  after  he 
had  seen  and  slighted  it  a  second  and  third 
time,  he  had  lost  a  hopeful  son,  and  was  him¬ 
self  struck  with  a  palsy.  He  was  brought  into 
the  senate  on  a  litter  to  tell  this,  and  the  story 
goes  that  he  had  no  sooner  delivered  his  mes¬ 
sage  there,  but  he  at  once  felt  his  strength  re¬ 
turn  and  got  upon  his  legs,  and  went  home 
alone  without  need  of  any  support. 

The  senators,  in  wonder  and  surprise,  made 
a  diligent  search  into  the  matter.  That  which 
his  dream  alluded  to  was  this:  some  citizen 
had,  for  some  heinous  offence,  given  up  a  serv¬ 
ant  of  his  to  the  rest  of  his  fellows  with  charge 
to  whip  him  first  through  the  market,  and  then 
to  kill  him;  and  while  they  were  executing  this 
command,  and  scourging  the  wretch,  who 
screwed  and  turned  himself  into  all  manner 
of  shapes  and  unseemly  motions,  through  the 
pain  he  was  in,  the  solemn  procession  in  hon¬ 
our  of  Jupiter  chanced  to  follow  at  their  heels. 
Several  of  the  attendants  on  which  were,  in¬ 
deed,  scandalised  at  the  sight,  yet  no  one  of 
them  interfered,  or  acted  further  in  the  matter 
than  merely  to  utter  some  common  reproaches 
and  execrations  on  a  master  who  inflicted  so 
cruel  a  punishment. 

For  the  Romans  treated  their  slaves  with 
great  humanity  in  these  times,  when,  working 
and  labouring  themselves,  and  living  together 
among  them,  they  naturally  were  more  gentle 
and  familiar  with  them.  It  was  one  of  the  se¬ 
verest  punishments  for  a  slave  who  had  com¬ 
mitted  a  fault  to  have  to  take  the  piece  of  wood 
which  supports  the  pole  of  a  waggon,  and  carry 
it  about  through  the  neighbourhood;  a  slave 
who  had  once  undergone  the  shame  of  this, 
and  been  thus  seen  by  the  household  and  the 
neighbours,  had  no  longer  any  trust  or  credit 
among  them,  and  had  the  name  of  furcifer; 
jurca  being  the  Latin  word  for  a  prop,  or  sup¬ 
port. 

When,  therefore,  Latinus  had  related  his 
dream,  and  the  senators  were  considering  who 
this  disagreeable  and  ungainly  dancer  could  be, 
some  of  the  company,  having  been  struck  with 
the  strangeness  of  the  punishment,  called  to 
mind  and  mentioned  the  miserable  slave  who 
was  lashed  through  the  streets  and  afterwards 
put  to  death.  The  priests,  when  consulted, 
confirmed  the  conjecture;  the  master  was  pun¬ 
ished;  and  orders  given  for  a  new  celebration 
of  the  procession  and  the  spectacles  in  honour 
of  the  god. 


186 

Numa,  in  other  respects  also  a  wise  arranger 
of  religious  offices,  would  seem  to  have  been 
especially  judicious  in  his  direction,  with  a 
view  to  the  attentiveness  of  the  people,  that, 
when  the  magistrates  or  priests  performed  any 
divine  worship,  a  herald  should  go  before,  and 
proclaim  with  a  loud  voice,  Hoc  age,  Do  this 
you  are  about,  and  so  warn  them  to  mind  what¬ 
ever  sacred  action  they  were  engaged  in,  and 
not  suffer  any  business  or  worldly  avocation 
to  disturb  and  interrupt  it;  most  of  the  things 
which  men  do  of  this  kind  being  in  a  manner 
forced  from  them,  and  effected  by  constraint. 

It  is  usual  with  the  Romans  to  recommence 
their  sacrifices  and  processions  and  spectacles, 
not  only  upon  such  a  cause  as  this,  but  for  any 
slighter  reason.  If  but  one  of  the  horses  which 
drew  the  chariots  called  Tensae,  upon  which 
the  images  of  their  gods  were  placed,  happened 
to  fail  and  falter,  or  if  the  driver  took  hold  of 
the  reins  with  his  left  hand,  they  would  decree 
that  the  whole  operation  should  commence 
anew;  and,  in  later  ages,  one  and  the  same 
sacrifice  was  performed  thirty  times  over,  be¬ 
cause  of  the  occurrence  of  some  defect  of  mis¬ 
take  or  accident  in  the  service.  Such  was  the 
Roman  reverence  and  caution  in  religious  mat¬ 
ters. 

Marcius  and  Tullus  were  now  secretly  dis¬ 
coursing  of  their  project  with  the  chief  men  of 
Antium,  advising  them  to  invade  the  Romans 
while  they  were  at  variance  among  themselves. 
And  when  shame  appeared  to  hinder  them 
from  embracing  the  motion,  as  they  had  sworn 
to  a  truce  and  cessation  of  arms  for  the  space 
of  two  years,  the  Romans  themselves  soon  fur¬ 
nished  them  with  a  pretence,  by  making  proc¬ 
lamation,  out  of  some  jealousy  or  slanderous 
report,  in  the  midst  of  the  spectacles,  that  all 
the  Volscians  who  had  come  to  see  them  should 
depart  the  city  before  sunset.  Some  affirm  that 
this  was  a  contrivance  of  Marcius,  who  sent  a 
man  privately  to  the  consuls,  falsely  to  accuse 
the  Volscians  of  intending  to  fall  upon  the 
Romans  during  the  games,  and  to  set  the  city 
on  fire. 

This  public  affront  roused  and  inflamed  their 
hostility  to  the  Romans;  and  Tullus,  perceiving 
it,  made  his  advantage  of  it,  aggravating  the 
fact,  and  working  on  their  indignation,  till  he 
persuaded  them,  at  last,  to  despatch  ambassa¬ 
dors  to  Rome,  requiring  the  Romans  to  restore 
that  part  of  their  country  and  those  towns 
which  they  had  taken  from  the  Volscians  in 
the  late  war.  When  the  Romans  heard  the  mes¬ 
sage,  they  indignantly  replied  that  the  Vol- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

scians  were  the  first  that  took  up  arms,  but  the 
Romans  would  be  the  last  to  lay  them  down. 

This  answer  being  brought  back,  Tullus 
called  a  general  assembly  of  the  Volscians;  and 
the  vote  passing  for  a  war,  he  then  proposed 
that  they  should  call  in  Marcius,  laying  aside 
the  remembrance  of  former  grudges,  and  as¬ 
suring  themselves  that  the  services  they  should 
now  receive  from  him  as  a  friend  and  asso¬ 
ciate  would  abundantly  outweigh  any  harm  or 
damage  he  had  done  them  when  he  was  their 
enemy. 

Marcius  was  accordingly  summoned,  and 
having  made  his  entrance,  and  spoken  to  the 
people,  won  their  good  opinion  of  his  capacity, 
his  skill,  counsel,  and  boldness,  not  less  by  his 
present  words  than  by  his  past  actions.  They 
joined  him  in  commission  with  Tullus,  to  have 
full  power  as  the  general  of  their  forces  in  all 
that  related  to  the  war.  And  he,  fearing  lest  the 
time  that  would  be  requisite  to  bring  all  the 
Volscians  together  in  full  preparation  might 
be  so  long  as  to  lose  him  the  opportunity  of 
action,  left  order  with  the  chief  persons  and 
magistrates  of  the  city  to  provide  other  things, 
while  he  himself,  prevailing  upon  the  most  for¬ 
ward  to  assemble  and  march  out  with  him  as 
volunteers  without  staying  to  be  enrolled,  made 
a  sudden  inroad  into  the  Roman  confines,  when 
nobody  expected  him,  and  possessed  himself  of 
so  much  booty,  that  the  Volscians  found  they 
had  more  than  they  could  either  carry  away  or 
use  in  the  camp. 

The  abundance  of  provision  which  he  gained, 
and  the  waste  and  havoc  of  the  country  which 
he  made,  were,  however,  of  themselves  and  in 
his  account,  the  smallest  results  of  that  inva¬ 
sion;  the  great  mischief  he  intended,  and  his 
special  object  in  all,  was  to  increase  at  Rome 
the  suspicions  entertained  of  the  patricians, 
and  to  make  them  upon  worse  terms  with  the 
people.  With  this  view,  while  spoiling  all  the 
fields  and  destroying  the  property  of  other  men, 
he  took  special  care  to  preserve  their  farms  and 
lands  untouched,  and  would  not  allow  his  sol¬ 
diers  to  ravage  there,  or  seize  upon  anything 
which  belonged  to  them. 

From  hence  their  invectives  and  quarrels 
against  one  another  broke  out  afresh,  and  rose 
to  a  greater  height  than  ever;  the  senators  re¬ 
proaching  those  of  the  commonalty  with  their 
late  injustice  to  Marcius;  while  the  plebeians, 
on  their  side,  did  not  hesitate  to  accuse  them 
of  having,  out  of  spite  and  revenge,  solicited 
him  to  this  enterprise,  and  thus,  when  others 
were  involved  in  the  miseries  of  a  war  by  their 


CORIOLANUS 

means,  they  sat  like  unconcerned  spectators, 
as  being  furnished  with  a  guardian  and  pro¬ 
tector  abroad  of  their  wealth  and  fortunes,  in 
the  very  person  of  the  public  enemy.  After  this 
incursion  and  exploit,  which  was  of  great  ad¬ 
vantage  to  the  Volscians,  as  they  learned  by  it 
to  grow  more  hardy  and  to  contemn  their  en¬ 
emy,  Marcius  drew  them  off,  and  returned  in 
safety. 

But  when  the  whole  strength  of  the  Vol¬ 
scians  was  brought  together  in  the  field,  with 
great  expedition  and  alacrity,  it  appeared  so 
considerable  a  body,  that  they  agreed  to  leave 
part  in  garrison,  for  the  security  of  their  towns, 
and  with  the  other  part  to  march  against  the 
Romans.  Marcius  now  desired  Tullus  to  choose 
which  of  the  two  charges  would  be  most  agree¬ 
able  to  him.  Tullus  answered  that  since  he 
knew  Marcius  to  be  equally  valiant  with  him¬ 
self,  and  far  more  fortunate,  he  would  have 
him  take  the  command  of  those  that  were 
going  out  to  the  war,  while  he  made  it  his  care 
to  defend  their  cities  at  home,  and  provide  all 
conveniences  for  the  army  abroad. 

Marcius  thus  reinforced,  and  much  stronger 
than  before,  moved  first  towards  the  city  called 
Circaeum,  a  Roman  colony.  He  received  its  sur¬ 
render  and  did  the  inhabitants  no  injury;  pass¬ 
ing  thence,  he  entered  and  laid  waste  the  coun¬ 
try  of  the  Latins,  where  he  expected  the  Ro¬ 
mans  would  meet  him,  as  the  Latins  were  their 
confederates  and  allies,  and  had  often  sent  to 
demand  succours  from  them.  The  people,  how¬ 
ever,  on  their  part,  showing  little  inclination 
for  the  service,  and  the  consuls  themselves  be¬ 
ing  unwilling  to  run  the  hazard  of  a  battle 
when  the  time  of  their  office  was  almost  ready 
to  expire,  they  dismissed  the  Latin  ambassa¬ 
dors  without  any  effect;  so  that  Marcius,  find¬ 
ing  no  army  to  oppose  him,  marched  up  to 
their  cities,  and  having  taken  by  force  Toleria, 
Lavici,  Peda,  and  Bola,  all  of  which  offered 
resistance,  not  only  plundered  their  houses,  but 
made  a  prey  likewise  of  their  persons.  Mean¬ 
time  he  showed  particular  regard  for  all  such 
as  came  over  to  his  party,  and,  for  fear  they 
might  sustain  any  damage  against  his  will,  en¬ 
camped  at  the  greatest  distance  he  could,  and 
wholly  abstained  from  the  lands  of  their  prop¬ 
erty. 

After,  however,  that  he  had  made  himself 
master  of  Bola,  a  town  not  above  ten  miles 
from  Rome,  where  he  found  great  treasure, 
and  put  almost  all  the  adults  to  the  sword;  and 
when  on  this,  the  other  Volscians  that  were 
ordered  to  stay  behind  and  protect  their  cities, 


187 

hearing  of  his  achievements  and  success,  had 
not  patience  to  remain  any  longer  at  home, 
but  came  hastening  in  their  arms  to  Marcius, 
saying  that  he  alone  was  their  general  and  the 
sole  commander  they  would  own;  with  all  this, 
his  name  and  renown  spread  throughout  all 
Italy,  and  universal  wonder  prevailed  at  the 
sudden  and  mighty  revolution  in  the  fortunes 
of  two  nations  which  the  loss  and  the  accession 
of  a  single  man  had  effected. 

All  at  Rome  was  in  great  disorder;  they  were 
utterly  averse  from  fighting,  and  spent  their 
whole  time  in  cabals  and  disputes  and  re¬ 
proaches  against  each  other;  until  news  was 
brought  that  the  enemy  had  laid  close  siege  to 
Lavinium,  where  were  the  images  and  sacred 
things  of  their  tutelar  gods,  and  from  whence 
they  derived  the  origin  of  their  nation,  that 
being  the  first  city  which  y£neas  built  in  Italy. 

These  tidings  produced  a  change  as  uni¬ 
versal  as  it  was  extraordinary  in  the  thoughts 
and  inclinations  of  the  people,  but  occasioned 
a  yet  stranger  revulsion  of  feelings  among  the 
patricians.  The  people  now  were  for  repealing 
the  sentence  against  Marcius,  and  calling  him 
back  into  the  city;  whereas  the  senate,  being 
assembled  to  preconsider  the  decree,  opposed 
and  finally  rejected  the  proposal,  either  out  of 
the  mere  humour  of  contradicting  and  with¬ 
standing  the  people  in  whatever  they  should 
desire,  or  because  they  were  unwilling,  per¬ 
haps,  that  he  should  owe  his  restoration  to  their 
kindness;  or  having  now  conceived  a  displeas¬ 
ure  against  Marcius  himself,  who  was  bringing 
distress  upon  all  alike,  though  he  had  not  been 
ill-treated  by  all,  and  was  become  a  declared 
enemy  to  his  whole  country,  though  he  knew 
well  enough  that  the  principal  and  all  the  bet¬ 
ter  men  condoled  with  him  and  suffered  in  his 
injuries. 

This  resolution  of  theirs  being  made  public, 
the  people  could  proceed  no  further,  having  no 
authority  to  pass  anything  by  suffrage,  and 
enact  it  for  a  law,  without  a  previous  decree 
from  the  senate.  When  Marcius  heard  of  this, 
he  was  more  exasperated  than  ever,  and,  quit¬ 
ting  the  siege  of  Lavinium,  marched  furiously 
towards  Rome,  and  encamped  at  a  place  called 
the  Cluilian  ditches,  about  five  miles  from  the 
city. 

The  nearness  of  his  approach  did,  indeed, 
create  much  terror  and  disturbance,  yet  it  also 
ended  their  dissensions  for  the  present;  as  no¬ 
body  now,  whether  consul  or  senator,  durst  any 
longer  contradict  the  people  in  their  design  of 
recalling  Marcius;  but,  seeing  their  women  run- 


188 

ning  affrighted  up  and  down  the  streets,  and 
the  old  men  at  prayer  in  every  temple  with 
tears  and  supplications,  and  that,  in  short,  there 
was  a  general  absence  among  them  both  of 
courage  and  wisdom  to  provide  for  their  own 
safety,  they  came  at  last  to  be  all  of  one  mind, 
that  the  people  had  been  in  the  right  to  pro¬ 
pose  as  they  did  a  reconciliation  with  Marcius, 
and  that  the  senate  was  guilty  of  a  fatal  error  to 
begin  a  quarrel  with  him  when  it  was  a  time 
to  forget  offences,  and  they  should  have  studied 
rather  to  appease  him.  It  was,  therefore,  unani¬ 
mously  agreed  by  all  parties  that  ambassadors 
should  be  despatched,  offering  him  return  to 
his  country,  and  desiring  he  would  free  them 
from  the  terrors  and  distresses  of  the  war. 

The  persons  sent  by  the  senate  with  this  mes¬ 
sage  were  chosen  out  of  his  kindred  and  ac¬ 
quaintance,  who  naturally  expected  a  very  kind 
reception  at  their  first  interview,  upon  the 
score  of  that  relation  and  their  old  familiarity 
and  friendship  with  him;  in  which,  however, 
they  were  much  mistaken.  Being  led  through 
the  enemy’s  camp,  they  found  him  sitting  in 
state  amidst  the  chief  men  of  the  Volscians, 
looking  insupportably  proud  and  arrogant.  He 
bade  them  declare  the  cause  of  their  coming, 
which  they  did  in  the  most  gentle  and  tender 
terms,  and  with  a  behaviour  suitable  to  their 
language.  When  they  had  made  an  end  of 
speaking,  he  returned  them  a  sharp  answer, 
full  of  bitterness  and  angry  resentment,  as  to 
what  concerned  himself  and  the  ill-usage  he 
had  received  from  them;  but  as  general  of  the 
Volscians,  he  demanded  restitution  of  the  cities 
and  the  lands  which  had  been  seized  upon  dur¬ 
ing  the  late  war,  and  that  the  same  rights  and 
franchises  should  be  granted  them  at  Rome, 
which  had  been  before  accorded  to  the  Latins; 
since  there  could  be  no  assurance  that  a  peace 
would  be  firm  and  lasting  without  fair  and 
just  conditions  on  both  sides.  He  allowed  them 
thirty  days  to  consider  and  resolve. 

The  ambassadors  being  departed,  he  with¬ 
drew  his  forces  out  of  the  Roman  territory. 
This,  those  of  the  Volscians  who  had  long  en¬ 
vied  his  reputation,  and  could  not  endure  to 
see  the  influence  he  had  with  the  people,  laid 
hold  of,  as  the  first  matter  of  complaint  against 
him.  Among  them  was  also  Tullus  himself,  not 
for  any  wrong  done  him  personally  by  Mar¬ 
cius,  but  through  the  weakness  incident  to 
human  nature.  He  could  not  help  feeling  mor¬ 
tified  to  find  his  own  glory  thus  totally  ob¬ 
scured,  and  himself  overlooked  and  neglected 
now  by  the  Volscians,  who  had  so  great  an 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

opinion  of  their  new  leader,  that  he  alone  was 
all  to  them,  while  other  captains,  they  thought, 
should  be  content  with  that  share  of  power 
which  he  might  think  fit  to  accord. 

From  hence  the  first  seeds  of  complaint  and 
accusation  were  scattered  about  in  secret,  and 
the  malcontents  met  and  heightened  each 
other’s  indignation,  saying,  that  to  retreat  as 
he  did  was  in  effect  to  betray  and  deliver  up, 
though  not  their  cities  and  their  arms,  yet  what 
was  as  bad,  the  critical  times  and  opportunities 
for  action,  on  which  depend  the  preservation 
or  the  loss  of  everything  else;  since  in  less  than 
thirty  days’  space,  for  which  he  had  given  a 
respite  for  the  war,  there  might  happen  the 
greatest  changes  in  the  world.  Yet  Marcius 
spent  not  any  part  of  the  time  idly,  but  at¬ 
tacked  the  confederates  of  the  enemy,  ravaged 
their  land,  and  took  from  them  seven  great  and 
populous  cities  in  that  interval. 

The  Romans,  in  the  meanwhile,  durst  not 
venture  out  to  their  relief;  but  were  utterly 
fearful,  and  showed  no  more  disposition  or  ca¬ 
pacity  for  action  than  if  their  bodies  had  been 
struck  with  a  palsy,  and  became  destitute  of 
sense  and  motion.  But  when  the  thirty  days 
were  expired,  and  Marcius  appeared  agaia 
with  his  whole  army,  they  sent  another  em¬ 
bassy,  to  beseech  him  that  he  would  moderate 
his  displeasure  and  would  withdraw  the  Vol- 
scian  army,  and  then  make  any  proposals  he 
thought  best  for  both  parties;  the  Romans 
would  make  no  concessions  to  menaces,  but  if 
it  were  his  opinion  that  the  Volscians  ought  to 
have  any  favour  shown  them,  upon  laying 
down  their  arms  they  might  obtain  all  they 
could  in  reason  desire. 

The  reply  of  Marcius  was,  that  he  should 
make  no  answer  to  this  as  general  of  the  Vol¬ 
scians,  but,  in  the  quality  still  of  a  Roman  citi¬ 
zen,  he  would  advise  and  exhort  them,  as  the 
case  stood,  not  to  carry  it  so  high,  but  think 
rather  of  just  compliance,  and  return  to  him, 
before  three  days  were  at  an  end,  with  a  ratifi¬ 
cation  of  his  previous  demands;  otherwise, 
they  must  understand  that  they  could  not  have 
any  further  freedom  of  passing  through  his 
camp  upon  idle  errands. 

When  the  ambassadors  were  come  back,  and 
had  acquainted  the  senate  with  the  answer,  see¬ 
ing  the  whole  state  now  threatened  as  it  were 
by  a  tempest,  and  the  waves  ready  to  over¬ 
whelm  them,  they  were  forced,  as  we  say  in 
extreme  perils,  to  let  down  the  sacred  anchor. 

A  decree  was  made,  that  the  whole  order  of 
their  priests,  those  who  initiated  in  the  mys- 


CORIOLANUS 

teries  or  had  the  custody  of  them,  and  those 
who,  according  to  the  ancient  practice  of  the 
country,  divined  from  birds,  should  all  and 
every  one  of  them  go  in  full  procession  to  Mar- 
cius  with  their  pontifical  array,  and  the  dress 
and  habit  which  they  respectively  used  in  their 
several  functions,  and  should  urge  him,  as  be¬ 
fore,  to  withdraw  his  forces,  and  then  treat 
with  his  countrymen  in  favour  of  the  Vol- 
scians.  He  consented  so  far,  indeed,  as  to  give 
the  deputation  an  admittance  into  his  camp, 
but  granted  nothing  at  all,  nor  so  much  as  ex¬ 
pressed  himself  more  mildly;  but  without  ca¬ 
pitulating  or  receding,  bade  them  once  for  all 
choose  whether  they  would  yield  or  fight,  since 
the  old  terms  were  the  only  terms  of  peace. 

When  this  solemn  application  proved  inef¬ 
fectual,  the  priests,  too,  returning  unsuccessful, 
they  determined  to  sit  still  within  the  city  and 
keep  watch  about  their  walls,  intending  only  to 
repulse  the  enemy,  should  he  offer  to  attack 
them,  and  placing  their  hopes  chiefly  in  time 
and  in  extraordinary  accidents  of  fortune;  as 
to  themselves,  they  felt  incapable  of  doing  any¬ 
thing  for  their  own  deliverance;  mere  confu¬ 
sion  and  terror  and  ill-boding  reports  possessed 
the  whole  city;  till  at  last  a  thing  happened  not 
unlike  what  we  so  often  find  represented, 
without,  however,  being  accepted  as  true  by 
people  in  general,  in  Homer. 

On  some  great  and  unusual  occasion  we  find 
him  say — 

But  him  the  blue-eyed  goddess  did  inspire , 
and  elsewhere — 

But  some  immortal  turned  my  mind  away, 

To  thinly  what  others  of  the  deed  would  say; 

and  again — 

Were't  his  own  thought  or  were’t  a  god's 
command ? 

People  are  apt,  in  such  passages,  to  censure  and 
disregard  the  poet,  as  if,  by  the  introduction  of 
mere  impossibilities  and  idle  fictions,  he  were 
denying  the  action  of  a  man’s  own  deliberate 
thought  and  free  choice;  which  is  not  in  the 
least  the  case  in  Homer’s  representation, 
where  the  ordinary,  probable,  and  habitual 
conclusions  that  common  reason  leads  to  are 
continually  ascribed  to  our  own  direct  agency. 
He  certainly  says  frequently  enough — 

But  I  consulted  with  my  own  great  soul; 

or,  as  in  another  passage — 

He  spo\e.  Achilles,  with  quic\  pain  possessed , 
Resolved  two  purposes  in  his  strong  breast; 


189 

and  in  a  third — 

— Yet  never  to  her  wishes  won 

The  fust  mind  of  the  brave  Bellerophon. 

But  where  the  act  is  something  out  of  the 
way  and  extraordinary,  and  seems  in  a  manner 
to  demand  some  impulse  of  divine  possession 
and  sudden  inspiration  to  account  for  it,  here 
he  does  introduce  divine  agency,  not  to  destroy, 
but  to  prompt  the  human  will;  not  to  create  in 
us  another  agency,  but  offering  images  to  stim¬ 
ulate  our  own;  images  that  in  no  sort  or  kind 
make  our  action  involuntary,  but  give  occasion 
rather  to  spontaneous  action,  aided  and  sus¬ 
tained  by  feelings  of  confidence  and  hope.  For 
either  we  must  totally  dismiss  and  exclude  di¬ 
vine  influences  from  every  kind  of  causality 
and  origination  in  what  we  do,  or  else  what 
other  way  can  we  conceive  in  which  divine  aid 
and  co-operation  can  act?  Certainly  we  cannot 
suppose  that  the  divine  beings  actually  and  lit¬ 
erally  turn  our  bodies  and  direct  our  hands 
and  our  feet  this  way  or  that,  to  do  what  is 
right:  it  is  obvious  that  they  must  actuate  the 
practical  and  elective  element  of  our  nature,  by 
certain  initial  occasions,  by  images  presented 
to  the  imagination,  and  thoughts  suggested  to 
the  mind,  such  either  as  to  excite  it  to,  or  avert 
and  withhold  it  from,  any  particular  course. 

In  the  perplexity  which  I  have  described, 
the  Roman  women  went,  some  to  other  tem¬ 
ples,  but  the  greater  part,  and  the  ladies  of 
highest  rank,  to  the  altar  of  Jupiter  Capitolin- 
us.  Among  these  suppliants  was  Valeria,  sister 
to  the  great  Poplicola,  who  did  the  Romans 
eminent  service  both  in  peace  and  war.  Popli¬ 
cola  himself  was  now  deceased,  as  is  told  in  the 
history  of  his  life;  but  Valeria  lived  still,  and 
enjoyed  great  respect  and  honour  at  Rome,  her 
life  and  conduct  no  way  disparaging  her  birth. 
She,  suddenly  seized  with  the  sort  of  instinct 
or  emotion  of  mind  which  I  have  described, 
and  happily  lighting,  not  without  divine  guid¬ 
ance,  on  the  right  expedient,  both  rose  herself, 
and  bade  the  others  rise,  and  went  directly 
with  them  to  the  house  of  Volumnia,  the 
mother  of  Marcius.  And  coming  in  and  find¬ 
ing  her  sitting  with  her  daughter-in-law,  and 
with  her  little  grandchildren  on  her  lap,  Va¬ 
leria,  then  surrounded  by  her  female  com¬ 
panions,  spoke  in  the  name  of  them  all: — 
“We  that  now  make  our  appearance,  O  Vol¬ 
umnia,  and  you,  Vergilia,  are  come  as  mere 
women  to  women,  not  by  direction  of  the  sen¬ 
ate,  or  an  order  from  the  consuls,  or  the  ap¬ 
pointment  of  any  other  magistrate;  but  the 
divine  being  himself,  as  I  conceive,  moved  to 


190 

compassion  by  our  prayers,  prompted  us  to 
visit  you  in  a  body,  and  request  a  thing  on 
which  our  own  and  the  common  safety  de¬ 
pends,  and  which,  if  you  consent  to  it,  will 
raise  your  glory  above  that  of  the  daughters 
of  the  Sabines,  who  won  over  their  fathers  and 
their  husbands  from  mortal  enmity  to  peace 
and  friendship.  Arise  and  come  with  us  to 
Marcius;  join  in  our  supplication,  and  bear  for 
your  country  this  true  and  just  testimony  on 
her  behalf;  that,  notwithstanding  the  many 
mischiefs  that  have  been  done  her,  yet  she 
has  never  outraged  you,  nor  so  much  as 
thought  of  treating  you  ill,  in  all  her  resent¬ 
ment,  but  does  now  restore  you  safe  into 
his  hands,  though  there  be  small  likelihood 
she  should  obtain  from  him  any  equitable 
terms.” 

The  words  of  Valeria  were  seconded  by  the 
acclamations  of  the  other  women,  to  which 
Volumnia  made  answer: — 

“I  and  Vergilia,  my  countrywomen,  have 
an  equal  share  with  you  all  in  the  common 
miseries,  and  we  have  the  additional  sorrow, 
which  is  wholly  ours,  that  we  have  lost  the 
merit  and  good  fame  of  Marcius,  and  see  his 
person  confined,  rather  than  protected,  by  the 
arms  of  the  enemy.  Yet  I  account  this  the 
greatest  of  all  misfortunes,  if  indeed  the  affairs 
of  Rome  be  sunk  to  so  feeble  a  state  as  to  have 
their  last  dependence  upon  us.  For  it  is  hardly 
imaginable  he  should  have  any  consideration 
left  for  us,  when  he  has  no  regard  for  the  coun¬ 
try  which  he  was  wont  to  prefer  before  his 
mother  and  wife  and  children.  Make  use,  how¬ 
ever,  of  our  service;  and  lead  us,  if  you  please, 
to  him;  we  are  able,  if  nothing  more,  at  least 
to  spend  our  last  breath  in  making  suit  to  him 
for  our  country.” 

Having  spoken  thus,  she  took  Vergilia  by 
the  hand,  and  the  young  children,  and  so  ac¬ 
companied  them  to  the  Volscian  camp.  So  lam¬ 
entable  a  sight  much  affected  the  enemies 
themselves,  who  viewed  them  in  respectful  si¬ 
lence.  Marcius  was  then  sitting  in  his  place, 
with  his  chief  officers  about  him,  and,  seeing 
the  party  of  women  advance  toward  them, 
wondered  what  should  be  the  matter;  but  per¬ 
ceiving  at  length  that  his  mother  was  at  the 
head  of  them,  he  would  fain  have  hardened 
himself  in  his  former  inexorable  temper,  but, 
overcome  by  his  feelings,  and  confounded  at 
what  he  saw,  he  did  not  endure  they  should 
approach  him  sitting  in  state,  but  came  down 
hastily  to  meet  them,  saluting  his  mother  first, 
and  embracing  her  a  long  time,  and  then  his 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

wife  and  children,  sparing  neither  tears  nor 
caresses,  but  suffering  himself  to  be  borne 
away  and  carried  headlong,  as  it  were,  by  the 
impetuous  violence  of  his  passion. 

When  he  had  satisfied  himself,  and  observed 
that  his  mother,  Volumnia,  was  desirous  to  say 
something,  the  Volscian  council  being  first 
called  in,  he  heard  her  to  the  following  effect: 
“Our  dress  and  our  very  persons,  my  son, 
might  tell  you,  though  we  should  say  nothing 
ourselves,  in  how  forlorn  a  condition  we  have 
lived  at  home  since  your  banishment  and  ab¬ 
sence  from  us;  and  now  consider  with  your¬ 
self,  whether  we  may  not  pass  for  the  most 
unfortunate  of  all  women,  to  have  that  sight, 
which  should  be  the  sweetest  that  we  could  see, 
converted,  through  I  know  not  what  fatality, 
to  one  of  all  others  the  most  formidable  and 
dreadful — Volumnia  to  behold  her  son,  and 
Vergilia  her  husband,  in  arms  against  the  walls 
of  Rome. 

“Even  prayer  itself,  whence  others  gain  com¬ 
fort  and  relief  in  all  manner  of  misfortunes,  is 
that  which  most  adds  to  our  confusion  and 
distress;  since  our  best  wishes  are  inconsistent 
with  themselves,  nor  can  we  at  the  same  time 
petition  the  gods  for  Rome’s  victory  and  your 
preservation,  but  what  the  worst  of  our  ene¬ 
mies  would  imprecate  as  a  curse,  is  the  very 
object  of  our  vows.  Your  wife  and  children  are 
under  the  sad  necessity,  that  they  must  either 
be  deprived  of  you  or  of  their  native  soil. 

“As  for  myself,  I  am  resolved  not  to  wait  till 
war  shall  determine  this  alternative  for  me; 
but  if  I  cannot  prevail  with  you  to  prefer  amity 
and  concord  to  quarrel  and  hostility,  and  to  be 
the  benefactor  to  both  parties  rather  than  the 
destroyer  of  one  of  them,  be  assured  of  this 
from  me,  and  reckon  steadfastly  upon  it,  that 
you  shall  not  be  able  to  reach  your  country, 
unless  you  trample  first  upon  the  corpse  of  her 
that  brought  you  into  life.  For  it  will  be  ill  in 
me  to  wait  and  loiter  in  the  world  till  the  day 
come  wherein  I  shall  see  a  child  of  mine,  either 
led  in  triumph  by  his  own  countrymen,  or 
triumphing  over  them. 

“Did  I  require  you  to  save  your  country  by 
ruining  the  Volscians,  then,  I  confess,  my  son, 
the  case  would  be  hard  for  you  to  solve.  It  is 
base  to  bring  destitution  on  our  fellow-citi¬ 
zens;  it  is  unjust  to  betray  those  who  have 
placed  their  confidence  in  us.  But,  as  it  is,  we 
do  but  desire  a  deliverance  equally  expedient 
for  them  and  us;  only  more  glorious  and  hon¬ 
ourable  on  the  Volscian  side,  who,  as  superior 
in  arms,  will  be  thought  freely  to  bestow  the 


CORIOLANUS 

two  greatest  of  blessings,  peace  and  friendship, 
even  when  they  themselves  receive  the  same. 

“If  we  obtain  these,  the  common  thanks  will 
be  chiefly  due  to  you  as  the  principal  cause; 
but  if  they  be  not  granted,  you  alone  must  ex¬ 
pect  to  bear  the  blame  from  both  nations.  The 
chance  of  all  war  is  uncertain,  yet  thus  much 
is  certain  in  the  present,  that  you,  by  conquer¬ 
ing  Rome,  will  only  get  the  reputation  of  hav¬ 
ing  undone  your  country;  but  if  the  Volscians 
happen  to  be  defeated  under  your  conduct, 
then  the  world  will  say,  that,  to  satisfy  a  re¬ 
vengeful  humour,  you  brought  misery  on  your 
friends  and  patrons.” 

Marcius  listened  to  his  mother  while  she 
spoke  without  answering  her  a  word;  and 
Volumnia,  seeing  him  stand  mute  also  for  a 
long  time  after  she  had  ceased,  resumed:  “O 
my  son,”  said  she,  “what  is  the  meaning  of  this 
silence?  Is  it  a  duty  to  postpone  everything  to 
a  sense  of  injuries,  and  wrong  to  gratify  a 
mother  in  a  request  like  this?  Is  it  the  charac¬ 
teristic  of  a  great  man  to  remember  wrongs 
that  have  been  done  him,  and  not  the  part  of 
a  great  and  good  man  to  remember  benefits 
such  as  those  that  children  receive  from  par¬ 
ents,  and  to  requite  them  with  honour  and 
respect?  You,  methinks,  who  are  so  relentless 
in  the  punishment  of  the  ungrateful,  should 
not  be  more  careless  than  others  to  be  grateful 
yourself.  You  have  punished  your  country  al¬ 
ready;  you  have  not  yet  paid  your  debt  to  me. 
Nature  and  religion,  surely,  unattended  by  any 
constraint,  should  have  won  your  consent  to 
petitions  so  worthy  and  so  just  as  these;  but  if 
it  must  be  so,  I  will  even  use  my  last  re¬ 
source.” 

Having  said  this,  she  threw  herself  down  at 
his  feet,  as  did  also  his  wife  and  children;  upon 
which  Marcius,  crying  out,  “O  mother!  what 
is  it  you  have  done  to  me!”  raised  her  up  from 
the  ground,  and  pressing  her  right  hand  with 
more  than  ordinary  vehemence,  “You  have 
gained  a  victory,”  said  he,  “fortunate  enough 
for  the  Romans,  but  destructive  to  your  son; 
whom  you,  though  none  else,  have  defeated.” 
After  which,  and  a  little  private  conference 
with  his  mother  and  his  wife,  he  sent  them 
back  again  to  Rome,  as  they  desired  of  him. 

The  next  morning  he  broke  up  his  camp, 
and  led  the  Volscians  homeward,  variously  af¬ 
fected  with  what  he  had  done;  some  of  them 
complaining  of  him  and  condemning  his  act, 
others,  who  were  inclined  to  a  peaceful  con¬ 
clusion,  unfavourable  to  neither.  A  third  par¬ 
ty,  while  much  disliking  his  proceedings,  yet 


191 

could  not  look  upon  Marcius  as  a  treacherous 
person,  but  thought  it  pardonable  in  him  to  be 
thus  shaken  and  driven  to  surrender  at  last, 
under  such  compulsion.  None,  however,  op¬ 
posed  his  commands;  they  all  obediently  fol¬ 
lowed  him,  though  rather  from  admiration  of 
his  virtue,  than  any  regard  they  now  had  to 
his  authority. 

The  Roman  people,  meantime,  more  effec¬ 
tually  manifested  how  much  fear  and  danger 
they  had  been  in  while  the  war  lasted,  by  their 
deportment  after  they  were  freed  from  it. 
Those  that  guarded  the  walls  had  no  sooner 
given  notice  that  the  Volscians  were  dislodged 
and  drawn  off,  but  they  set  open  all  their  tem¬ 
ples  in  a  moment,  and  began  to  crown  them¬ 
selves  with  garlands  and  prepare  for  sacrifice, 
as  they  were  wont  to  do  upon  tidings  brought 
of  any  signal  victory. 

But  the  joy  and  transport  of  the  whole  city 
was  chiefly  remarkable  in  the  honours  and 
marks  of  affection  paid  to  the  women,  as  well 
by  the  senate  as  the  people  in  general;  every 
one  declaring  that  they  were,  beyond  all  ques¬ 
tion,  the  instruments  of  the  public  safety.  And 
the  senate  having  passed  a  decree  that  whatso¬ 
ever  they  would  ask  in  the  way  of  any  favour 
or  honour  should  be  allowed  and  done  for 
them  by  the  magistrates,  they  demanded  sim¬ 
ply  that  a  temple  might  be  erected  to  Female 
Fortune,  the  expense  of  which  they  offered  to 
defray  out  of  their  own  contributions,  if  the 
city  would  pay  the  cost  of  sacrifices,  and  other 
matters  pertaining  to  the  due  honour  of  the 
gods,  out  of  the  common  treasury. 

The  senate,  much  commending  their  public 
spirit,  caused  the  temple  to  be  built  and  a  stat¬ 
ue  set  up  in  it  at  the  public  charge;  they,  how¬ 
ever,  made  up  a  sum  among  themselves  for  a 
second  image  of  Fortune,  which  the  Romans 
say  uttered,  as  it  was  putting  up,  words  to  this 
effect,  “Blessed  of  the  gods,  O  women,  is  your 
gift.” 

These  words,  they  profess,  were  repeated  a 
second  time,  expecting  our  belief  for  what 
seems  pretty  nearly  an  impossibility.  It  may  be 
possible  enough  that  statues  may  seem  to 
sweat,  and  to  run  with  tears,  and  to  stand  with 
certain  dewy  drops  of  a  sanguine  colour;  for 
timber  and  stones  are  frequently  known  to 
contract  a  kind  of  scurf  and  rottenness,  pro¬ 
ductive  of  moisture;  and  various  tints  may 
form  on  the  surfaces,  both  from  within  and 
from  the  action  of  the  air  outside;  and  by  these 
signs  it  is  not  absurd  to  imagine  that  the  deity 
may  forewarn  us.  It  may  happen,  also,  that  im- 


192 

ages  and  statues  may  sometimes  make  a  noise 
not  unlike  that  of  a  moan  or  groan,  through  a 
rupture  or  violent  internal  separation  of  the 
parts;  but  that  an  articulate  voice,  and  such 
express  words,  and  language  so  clear  and  exact 
and  elaborate,  should  proceed  from  inanimate 
things  is,  in  my  judgment,  a  thing  utterly  out 
of  possibility.  For  it  was  never  known  that 
either  the  soul  of  man,  or  the  deity  himself,  ut¬ 
tered  vocal  sounds  and  language,  alone,  with¬ 
out  an  organised  body  and  members  fitted  for 
speech. 

But  where  history  seems  in  a  manner  to 
force  our  assent  by  the  concurrence  of  numer¬ 
ous  and  credible  witnesses,  we  are  to  conclude 
that  an  impression  distinct  from  sensation  af¬ 
fects  the  imaginative  part  of  our  nature,  and 
then  carries  away  the  judgment,  so  as  to  be¬ 
lieve  it  to  be  a  sensation;  just  as  in  sleep  we 
fancy  we  see  and  hear,  without  really  doing 
either.  Persons,  however,  whose  strong  feel¬ 
ings  of  reverence  to  the  deity,  and  tenderness 
for  religion,  will  not  allow  them  to  deny  or  in¬ 
validate  anything  of  this  kind,  have  certainly 
a  strong  argument  for  their  faith,  in  the  won¬ 
derful  and  transcendent  character  of  the  divine 
power;  which  admits  no  manner  of  compari¬ 
son  with  ours,  either  in  its  nature  or  its  action, 
the  modes  or  the  strength  of  its  operations.  It 
is  no  contradiction  to  reason  that  it  should  do 
things  that  we  cannot  do,  and  effect  what  for 
us  is  impracticable:  differing  from  us  in  all 
respects,  in  its  acts  yet  more  than  in  other 
points  we  may  well  believe  it  to  be  unlike  us 
and  remote  from  us.  Knowledge  of  divine 
things  for  the  most  part,  as  Heraclitus  says,  is 
lost  to  us  by  incredulity. 

When  Marcius  came  back  to  Antium,  Tul- 
lus,  who  thoroughly  hated  and  greatly  feared 
him,  proceeded  at  once  to  contrive  how  he 
might  immediately  despatch  him,  as,  if  he  es¬ 
caped  now,  he  was  never  likely  to  give  him 
such  another  advantage.  Having  therefore  got 
together  and  suborned  several  partisans  against 
him,  he  required  Marcius  to  resign  his  charge, 
and  give  the  Volscians  an  account  of  his  ad¬ 
ministration.  He,  apprehending  the  danger  of 
a  private  condition,  while  Tullus  held  the  of¬ 
fice  of  general  and  exercised  the  greatest  pow¬ 
er  among  his  fellow-citizens,  made  answer, 
that  he  was  ready  to  lay  down  his  commission 
whenever  those  from  whose  common  author¬ 
ity  he  had  received  it  should  think  fit  to  recall 
it,  and  that  in  the  meantime  he  was  ready  to 
give  the  Antiates  satisfaction,  as  to  all  particu¬ 
lars  of  his  conduct,  if  they  were  desirous  of  it. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

An  assembly  was  called,  and  popular  speak¬ 
ers,  as  had  been  concerted,  came  forward  to  ex¬ 
asperate  and  incense  the  multitude;  but  when 
Marcius  stood  up  to  answer,  the  more  unruly 
and  tumultuous  part  of  the  people  became 
quiet  on  a  sudden,  and  out  of  reverence  al¬ 
lowed  him  to  speak  without  the  least  disturb¬ 
ance;  while  all  the  better  people,  and  such  as 
were  satisfied  with  a  peace,  made  it  evident  by 
their  whole  behaviour,  that  they  would  give 
him  a  favourable  hearing,  and  judge  and  pro¬ 
nounce  according  to  equity. 

Tullus,  therefore,  began  to  dread  the  issue 
of  the  defence  he  was  going  to  make  for  him¬ 
self;  for  he  was  an  admirable  speaker,  and  the 
former  services  he  had  done  the  Volscians  had 
procured  and  still  preserved  for  him  greater 
kindness  than  could  be  outweighed  by  any 
blame  for  his  late  conduct.  Indeed,  the  very  ac¬ 
cusation  itself  was  a  proof  and  testimony  of  the 
greatness  of  his  merits,  since  people  could  nev¬ 
er  have  complained  or  thought  themselves 
wronged,  because  Rome  was  not  brought  into 
their  power,  but  that  by  his  means  they  had 
come  so  near  to  taking  it* 

For  these  reasons,  the  conspirators  judged  it 
prudent  not  to  make  any  further  delays,  nor  to 
test  the  general  feeling;  but  the  boldest  of  their 
faction,  crying  out  that  they  ought  not  to  listen 
to  a  traitor,  nor  allow  him  still  to  retain  office 
and  play  the  tyrant  among  them,  fell  upon 
Marcius  in  a  body,  and  slew  him  there,  none  of 
those  that  were  present  offering  to  defend  him. 
But  it  quickly  appeared  that  the  action  was  in 
nowise  approved  by  the  majority  of  the  Vol¬ 
scians,  who  hurried  out  of  their  several  cities  to 
show  respect  to  his  corpse;  to  which  they  gave 
honourable  interment,  adorning  his  sepulchre 
with  arms  and  trophies,  as  the  monument  of  a 
noble  hero  and  a  famous  general. 

When  the  Romans  heard  tidings  of  his 
death,  they  gave  no  other  signification  either  of 
honour  or  of  anger  towards  him,  but  simply 
granted  the  request  of  the  women,  that  they 
might  put  themselves  into  mourning  and  be¬ 
wail  him  for  ten  months,  as  the  usage  was  upon 
the  loss  of  a  father  or  a  son  or  a  brother;  that 
being  the  period  fixed  for  the  longest  lamenta¬ 
tion  by  the  laws  of  Numa  Pompilius,  as  is  more 
amply  told  in  the  account  of  him. 

Marcius  was  no  sooner  deceased,  but  the 
Volscians  felt  the  need  of  his  assistance.  They 
quarrelled  first  with  the  2Equians,  their  con¬ 
federates  and  their  friends,  about  the  appoint¬ 
ment  of  the  general  of  their  joint  forces,  and 
carried  their  dispute  to  the  length  of  bloodshed 


ALCIBIADES  AND  CORIOLANUS 

and  slaughter;  and  were  then  defeated  by  the 
Romans  in  a  pitched  battle,  where  not  only 
Tullus  lost  his  life,  but  the  principal  flower  of 
their  whole  army  was  cut  in  pieces;  so  that  they 


193 

were  forced  to  submit  and  accept  of  peace  upon 
very  dishonourable  terms,  becoming  subjects 
of  Rome,  and  pledging  themselves  to  submis¬ 
sion. 


ALCIBIADES  and  CORIOLANUS 
Compared 


Having  described  all  their  actions  that  seem 
to  deserve  commemoration,  their  mili¬ 
tary  ones,  we  may  say,  incline  the  balance  very 
decidedly  upon  neither  side.  They  both,  in 
pretty  equal  measure,  displayed  on  numerous 
occasions  the  daring  and  courage  of  the  soldier, 
and  the  skill  and  foresight  of  the  general;  un¬ 
less,  indeed,  the  fact  that  Alcibiades  was  vic¬ 
torious  and  successful  in  many  contests  both  by 
sea  and  land,  ought  to  gain  him  the  title  of  a 
more  complete  commander.  That  so  long  as 
they  remained  and  held  command  in  their  re¬ 
spective  countries  they  eminently  sustained, 
and  when  they  were  driven  into  exile  yet  more 
eminently  damaged,  the  fortunes  of  those 
countries,  is  common  to  both. 

All  the  sober  citizens  felt  disgust  at  the  petu¬ 
lance,  the  low  flattery,  and  base  seductions 
which  Alcibiades,  in  his  public  life,  allowed 
himself  to  employ  with  the  view  of  winning 
the  people’s  favour;  and  the  ungraciousness, 
pride,  and  oligarchical  haughtiness  which  Mar- 
cius,  on  the  other  hand,  displayed  in  his,  were 
the  abhorrence  of  the  Roman  populace.  Nei¬ 
ther  of  these  courses  can  be  called  commend¬ 
able;  but  a  man  who  ingratiates  himself  by  in¬ 
dulgence  and  flattery  is  hardly  so  censurable  as 
one  who,  to  avoid  the  appearance  of  flattering, 
insults.  To  seek  power  by  servility  to  the  peo¬ 
ple  is  a  disgrace,  but  to  maintain  it  by  terror, 
violence,  and  oppression  is  not  a  disgrace  only, 
but  an  injustice. 

Marcius,  according  to  our  common  concep¬ 
tions  of  his  character,  was  undoubtedly  simple 
and  straightforward;  Alcibiades,  unscrupulous 
as  a  public  man,  and  false.  He  is  more  especial¬ 
ly  blamed  for  the  dishonourable  and  treacher¬ 
ous  way  in  which,  as  Thucydides  relates,  he 
imposed  upon  the  Lacedaemonian  ambassadors, 
and  disturbed  the  continuance  of  the  peace. 
Yet  this  policy,  which  engaged  the  city  again  in 
war,  nevertheless  placed  it  in  a  powerful  and 
formidable  position,  by  the  accession,  which 
Alcibiades  obtained  for  it,  of  the  alliance  of 
Argos  and  Mantinea.  And  Coriolanus  also, 
Dionysius  relates,  used  unfair  means  to  excite 
war  between  the  Romans  and  the  Volscians,  in 


the  false  report  which  he  spread  about  the 
visitors  at  the  Games;  and  the  motive  of  this 
action  seems  to  make  it  the  worse  of  the  two; 
since  it  was  not  done,  like  the  other,  out  of 
ordinary  political  jealousy,  strife,  and  compe¬ 
tition.  Simply  to  gratify  anger  from  which,  as 
Ion  says,  no  one  ever  yet  got  any  return,  he 
threw  whole  districts  of  Italy  into  confusion, 
and  sacrificed  to  his  passion  against  his  coun¬ 
try  numerous  innocent  cities. 

It  is  true,  indeed,  that  Alcibiades  also,  by  his 
resentment,  was  the  occasion  of  great  disasters 
to  his  country,  but  he  relented  as  soon  as  he 
found  their  feelings  to  be  changed;  and  after  he 
was  driven  out  a  second  time,  so  far  from  tak¬ 
ing  pleasure  in  the  errors  and  inadvertencies  of 
their  commanders,  or  being  indifferent  to  the 
danger  they  were  thus  incurring,  he  did  the 
very  thing  that  Aristides  is  so  highly  commend¬ 
ed  for  doing  to  Themistocles;  he  came  to  the 
generals  who  were  his  enemies,  and  pointed 
out  to  them  what  they  ought  to  do.  Coriolanus, 
on  the  other  hand,  first  of  all  attacked  the 
whole  body  of  his  countrymen,  though  only 
one  portion  of  them  had  done  him  any  wrong, 
while  the  other,  the  better  and  nobler  portion, 
had  actually  suffered,  as  well  as  sympathised, 
with  him.  And,  secondly,  by  the  obduracy  with 
which  he  resisted  numerous  embassies  and  sup¬ 
plications,  addressed  in  propitiation  of  his  sin¬ 
gle  anger  and  offence,  he  showed  that  it  had 
been  to  destroy  and  overthrow,  not  to  recover 
and  regain  his  country,  that  he  had  excited  bit¬ 
ter  and  implacable  hostilities  against  it. 

There  is,  indeed,  one  distinction  that  may  be 
drawn.  Alcibiades,  it  may  be  said,  was  not  safe 
among  the  Spartans,  and  had  the  inducements 
at  once  of  fear  and  of  hatred  to  lead  him  again 
to  Athens;  whereas  Marcius  could  not  honour¬ 
ably  have  left  the  Volscians,  when  they  were 
behaving  so  well  to  him:  he,  in  the  command 
of  their  forces  and  the  enjoyment  of  their  en¬ 
tire  confidence,  was  in  a  very  different  position 
from  Alcibiades,  whom  the  Lacedaemonians 
did  not  so  much  wish  to  adopt  into  their  serv¬ 
ice,  as  to  use  and  then  abandon.  Driven  about 
from  house  to  house  in  the  city,  and  from  gen- 


194 

eral  to  general  in  the  camp,  the  latter  had  no 
resort  but  to  place  himself  in  the  hands  of  Ti- 
saphernes;  unless,  indeed,  we  are  to  suppose 
that  his  object  in  courting  favour  with  him  was 
to  avert  the  entire  destruction  of  his  native  city, 
whither  he  wished  himself  to  return. 

As  regards  money,  Alcibiades,  we  are  told, 
was  often  guilty  of  procuring  it  by  accepting 
bribes,  and  spent  it  ill  in  luxury  and  dissipa¬ 
tion.  Coriolanus  declined  to  receive  it,  even 
when  pressed  upon  him  by  his  commanders  as 
an  honour;  and  one  great  reason  for  the  odium 
he  incurred  with  the  populace  in  the  discus¬ 
sions  about  their  debts  was,  that  he  trampled 
upon  the  poor,  not  for  money’s  sake,  but  out 
of  pride  and  insolence. 

Antipater,  in  a  letter  written  upon  the  death 
of  Aristotle,  the  philosopher,  observes,  “A- 
mongst  his  other  gifts  he  had  that  of  persua¬ 
siveness”;  and  the  absence  of  this  in  the  charac¬ 
ter  of  Marcius  made  all  his  great  actions  and 
noble  qualities  unacceptable  to  those  whom 
they  benefited:  pride,  and  self-will,  the  consort, 
as  Plato  calls  it,  of  solitude,  made  him  insuffer¬ 
able.  With  the  skill  which  Alcibiades,  on  the 
contrary,  possessed  to  treat  every  one  in  the 
way  most  agreeable  to  him,  we  cannot  wonder 
that  all  his  successes  were  attended  with  the 
most  exuberant  favour  and  honour;  his  very 
errors,  at  times,  being  accompanied  by  some¬ 
thing  of  grace  and  felicity.  And  so  in  spite  of 
great  and  frequent  hurt  that  he  had  done  the 
city,  he  was  repeatedly  appointed  to  office  and 
command;  while  Coriolanus  stood  in  vain  for 
a  place  which  his  great  services  had  made 
his  due.  The  one,  in  spite  of  the  harm  he 
occasioned,  could  not  make  himself  hated, 
nor  the  other,  with  all  the  admiration  he 
attracted,  succeed  in  being  beloved  by  his 
countrymen. 

Coriolanus,  moreover,  it  should  be  said,  did 
not  as  a  general  obtain  any  successes  for  his 
country,  but  only  for  his  enemies  against  his 
country.  Alcibiades  was  often  of  service  to 
Athens,  both  as  a  soldier  and  as  a  commander. 
So  long  as  he  was  personally  present,  he  had 
the  perfect  mastery  of  his  political  adversaries; 
calumny  only  succeeded  in  his  absence. 

Coriolanus  was  condemned  in  person  at 
Rome;  and  in  like  manner  killed  by  the  Vol- 
scians,  not  indeed  with  any  right  or  justice, 
yet  not  without  some  pretext  occasioned  by 
his  own  acts;  since,  after  rejecting  all  condi¬ 
tions  of  peace  in  public,  in  private  he  yielded 
to  the  solicitations  of  the  women  and,  without 
establishing  peace,  threw  up  the  favourable 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

chances  of  war.  He  ought,  before  retiring,  to 
have  obtained  the  consent  of  those  who  had 
placed  their  trust  in  him;  if  indeed  he  consid¬ 
ered  their  claims  on  him  to  be  the  strongest. 

Or,  if  we  say  that  he  did  not  care  about  the 
Volscians,  but  merely  had  prosecuted  the  war, 
which  he  now  abandoned,  for  the  satisfaction 
of  his  own  resentment,  then  the  noble  thing 
would  have  been,  not  to  spare  his  country  for 
his  mother’s  sake,  but  his  mother  in  and  with 
his  country;  since  both  his  mother  and  his  wife 
were  part  and  parcel  of  that  endangered  coun¬ 
try.  After  harshly  repelling  public  supplica¬ 
tions,  the  entreaties  of  ambassadors,  and  the 
prayers  of  priests,  to  concede  all  as  a  private 
favour  to  his  mother  was  less  an  honour  to  her 
than  a  dishonour  to  the  city  which  thus  es¬ 
caped,  in  spite,  it  would  seem,  of  its  own  de¬ 
merits  through  the  intercession  of  a  single 
woman.  Such  a  grace  could,  indeed,  seem  mere¬ 
ly  invidious,  ungracious,  and  unreasonable  in 
the  eyes  of  both  parties;  he  retreated  without 
listening  to  the  persuasions  of  his  opponents  or 
asking  the  consent  of  his  friends. 

The  origin  of  all  lay  in  his  unsociable,  super¬ 
cilious,  and  self-willed  disposition,  which,  in 
all  cases,  is  offensive  to  most  people;  and  when 
combined  with  a  passion  for  distinction  passes 
into  absolute  savageness  and  mercilessness. 
Men  decline  to  ask  favours  of  the  people,  pro¬ 
fessing  not  to  need  any  honours  from  them; 
and  then  are  indignant  if  they  do  not  obtain 
them.  Metellus,  Aristides,  and  Epaminondas 
certainly  did  not  beg  favours  of  the  multitude; 
but  that  was  because  they,  in  real  truth,  did  not 
value  the  gifts  which  a  popular  body  can  either 
confer  or  refuse;  and  when  they  were  more 
than  once  driven  into  exile,  rejected  at  elec¬ 
tions,  and  condemned  in  courts  of  justice,  they 
showed  no  resentment  at  the  ill-humour  of 
their  fellow-citizens,  but  were  willing  and  con¬ 
tented  to  return  and  be  reconciled  when  the 
feeling  altered  and  they  were  wished  for.  He 
who  least  likes  courting  favour,  ought  also  least 
to  think  of  resenting  neglect;  to  feel  wounded 
at  being  refused  a  distinction  can  only  arise 
from  an  overweening  appetite  to  have  it. 

Alcibiades  never  professed  to  deny  that  it 
was  pleasant  to  him  to  be  honoured,  and  dis¬ 
tasteful  to  him  to  be  overlooked;  and,  accord¬ 
ingly,  he  always  tried  to  place  himself  upon 
good  terms  with  all  that  he  met;  Coriolanus’s 
pride  forbade  him  to  pay  attentions  to  those 
who  could  have  promoted  his  advancement, 
and  yet  his  love  of  distinction  made  him  feel 
hurt  and  angry  when  he  was  disregarded. 


TIMOLEON 

Such  are  the  faulty  parts  of  his  character, 
which  in  all  other  respects  was  a  noble  one. 
For  his  temperance,  continence,  and  probity 
he  claims  to  be  compared  with  the  best  and 


195 

purest  of  the  Greeks;  not  in  any  sort  or  kind 
with  Alcibiades,  the  least  scrupulous  and  most 
entirely  careless  of  human  beings  in  all  these 
points. 


TIMOLEON 

4n?~337  b.c. 


Ir  was  for  the  sake  of  others  that  I  first  com¬ 
menced  writing  biographies;  but  I  find 
myself  proceeding  and  attaching  myself  to 
it  for  my  own;  the  virtues  of  these  great  men 
serving  me  as  a  sort  of  looking-glass,  in  which 
I  may  see  how  to  adjust  and  adorn  my  own  life. 
Indeed,  it  can  be  compared  to  nothing  but  daily 
living  and  associating  together;  we  receive,  as 
it  were,  in  our  inquiry,  and  entertain  each  suc¬ 
cessive  guest,  view — 

Their  stature  and  their  qualities, 
and  select  from  their  actions  all  that  is  noblest 
and  worthiest  to  know. 

Ah,  and  what  greater  pleasure  could  one  have ? 
or  what  more  effective  means  to  one’s  moral 
improvement? 

Democritus  tells  us  we  ought  to  pray  that  of 
the  phantasms  appearing  in  the  circumambient 
air,  such  may  present  themselves  to  us  as  are 
propitious,  and  that  we  may  rather  meet  with 
those  that  are  agreeable  to  our  natures  and  are 
good  than  the  evil  and  unfortunate;  which  is 
simply  introducing  into  philosophy  a  doctrine 
untrue  in  itself,  and  leading  to  endless  super¬ 
stitions.  My  method,  on  the  contrary,  is,  by  the 
study  of  history,  and  by  the  familiarity  ac¬ 
quired  in  writing,  to  habituate  my  memory  to 
receive  and  retain  images  of  the  best  and  wor¬ 
thiest  characters.  I  thus  am  enabled  to  free  my¬ 
self  from  any  ignoble,  base,  or  vicious  impres¬ 
sions,  contracted  from  the  contagion  of  ill  com¬ 
pany  that  I  may  be  unavoidably  engaged  in, 
by  the  remedy  of  turning  my  thoughts  in  a 
happy  and  calm  temper  to  view  these  noble  ex¬ 
amples.  Of  this  kind  are  those  of  Timoleon  the 
Corinthian  and  Paulus  ffimilius,  to  write 
whose  lives  is  my  present  business;  men  equal¬ 
ly  famous,  not  only  for  their  virtues,  but  suc¬ 
cess;  insomuch  that  they  have  left  it  doubtful 
whether  they  owe  their  greatest  achievements 
to  good  fortune,  or  their  own  prudence  and 
conduct. 

The  affairs  of  the  Syracusans,  before  Timo¬ 
leon  was  sent  into  Sicily,  were  in  this  posture: 


after  Dion  had  driven  out  Dionysius  the  tyrant, 
he  was  slain  by  treachery,  and  those  that  had 
assisted  him  in  delivering  Syracuse  were  di¬ 
vided  among  themselves;  and  thus  the  city  by 
a  continual  change  of  governors,  and  a  train  of 
mischiefs  that  succeeded  each  other,  became 
almost  abandoned;  while  of  the  rest  of  Sicily, 
part  was  now  utterly  depopulated  and  desolate 
through  long  continuance  of  war,  and  most  of 
the  cities  that  had  been  left  standing  were  in 
the  hands  of  barbarians  and  soldiers  out  of  em¬ 
ployment,  that  were  ready  to  embrace  every 
turn  of  government. 

Such  being  the  state  of  things,  Dionysius 
takes  the  opportunity,  and  in  the  tenth  year  of 
his  banishment,  by  the  help  of  some  mercenary 
troops  he  had  got  together,  forces  out  Nysaeus, 
then  master  of  Syracuse,  recovers  all  afresh, 
and  is  again  settled  in  his  dominion;  and  as  at 
first  he  had  been  strangely  deprived  of  the 
greatest  and  most  absolute  power  that  ever  was 
by  a  very  small  party,  so  now,  in  a  yet  stranger 
manner,  when  in  exile  and  of  mean  condition, 
he  became  the  sovereign  of  those  who  had 
ejected  him.  All,  therefore,  that  remained  in 
Syracuse  had  to  serve  under  a  tyrant,  who  at 
the  best  was  of  an  ungentle  nature,  and  exas¬ 
perated  now  to  a  degree  of  savageness  by  the 
late  misfortunes  and  calamities  he  had  suffered. 

The  better  and  more  distinguished  citizens, 
having  timely  retired  thence  to  Hicetes,  ruler 
of  the  Leontines,  put  themselves  under  his  pro¬ 
tection,  and  chose  him  for  their  general  in  the 
war;  not  that  he  was  much  preferable  to  any 
open  and  avowed  tyrant,  but  they  had  no  other 
sanctuary  at  present,  and  it  gave  them  some 
ground  of  confidence  that  he  was  of  a  Syra¬ 
cusan  family,  and  had  forces  able  to  encounter 
those  of  Dionysius. 

In  the  meantime  the  Carthaginians  appeared 
before  Sicily  with  a  great  navy,  watching  when 
and  where  they  might  make  a  descent  upon  the 
island;  and  terror  at  this  fleet  made  the  Sicil¬ 
ians  incline  to  send  an  embassy  into  Greece 


196 

to  demand  succours  from  the  Corinthians, 
whom  they  confided  in  rather  than  others,  not 
only  upon  the  account  of  their  near  kindred, 
and  the  great  benefits  they  had  often  received 
by  trusting  them,  but  because  Corinth  had  ever 
shown  herself  attached  to  freedom  and  averse 
from  tyranny  and  had  engaged  in  many  noble 
wars,  not  for  empire  or  aggrandisement,  but 
for  the  sole  liberty  of  the  Greeks. 

But  Hicetes,  who  made  it  the  business  of  his 
command  not  so  much  to  deliver  the  Syracu¬ 
sans  from  other  tyrants,  as  to  enslave  them  to 
himself,  had  already  entered  into  some  secret 
conferences  with  those  of  Carthage,  while  in 
public  he  commended  the  design  of  his  Syra¬ 
cusan  clients,  and  despatched  ambassadors 
from  himself,  together  with  theirs,  into  Pelo¬ 
ponnesus;'  not  that  he  really  desired  any  relief 
to  come  from  there,  but  in  case  the  Corinthi¬ 
ans,  as  was  likely  enough,  on  account  of  the 
troubles  of  Greece  and  occupation  at  home, 
should  refuse  their  assistance,  hoping  then  he 
should  be  able  with  less  difficulty  to  dispose 
and  incline  things  for  the  Carthaginian  inter¬ 
est,  and  so  make  use  of  these  foreign  pretend¬ 
ers,  as  instruments  and  auxiliaries  for  himself, 
either  against  the  Syracusans  or  Dionysius,  as 
occasion  served.  This  was  discovered  a  while 
after. 

The  ambassadors  being  arrived,  and  their  re¬ 
quest  known,  the  Corinthians,  who  had  always 
a  great  concern  for  all  their  colonies  and  plan¬ 
tations,  but  especially  for  Syracuse,  since  by 
good  fortune  there  was  nothing  to  molest  them 
in  their  own  country,  where  they  were  enjoying 
peace  and  leisure  at  that  time,  readily  and  with 
one  accord  passed  a  vote  for  their  assistance. 
And  when  they  were  deliberating  about  the 
choice  of  a  captain  for  the  expedition,  and  the 
magistrates  were  urging  the  claims  of  various 
aspirants  for  reputation,  one  of  the  crowd  stood 
up  and  named  Timoleon,  son  of  Timodemus, 
who  had  long  absented  himself  from  public 
business,  and  had  neither  any  thoughts  of,  nor 
the  least  pretensions  to,  an  employment  of  that 
nature. 

Some  god  or  other,  it  might  rather  seem,  had 
put  it  in  the  man’s  heart  to  mention  him;  such 
favour  and  good-will  on  the  part  of  Fortune 
seemed  at  once  to  be  shown  in  his  election,  and 
to  accompany  all  his  following  actions,  as 
though  it  were  on  purpose  to  commend  his 
worth,  and  add  grace  and  ornament  to  his  per¬ 
sonal  virtues. 

As  regards  his  parentage,  both  Timodemus, 
his  father,  and  his  mother,  Demariste,  were 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

of  high  rank  in  the  city;  and  as  for  himself,  he 
was  noted  for  his  love  of  his  country,  and  his 
gentleness  of  temper,  except  in  his  extreme 
hatred  to  tyrants  and  wicked  men.  His  natural 
abilities  for  war  were  so  happily  tempered, 
that  while  a  rare  prudence  might  be  seen  in  all 
the  enterprises  of  his  younger  years,  an  equal 
courage  showed  itself  in  the  last  exploits  of  his 
declining  age. 

He  had  an  elder  brother,  whose  name  was 
Timophanes,  who  was  every  way  unlike  him, 
being  indiscreet  and  rash,  and  infected  by  the 
suggestions  of  some  friends  and  foreign  sol¬ 
diers,  whom  he  kept  always  about  him,  with 
a  passion  for  absolute  power-  He  seemed  to 
have  a  certain  force  and  vehemence  in  all  mili¬ 
tary  service,  and  even  to  delight  in  dangers, 
and  thus  he  took  much  with  the  people,  and 
was  advanced  to  the  highest  charges,  as  a  vigor¬ 
ous  and  effective  warrior;  in  the  obtaining  of 
which  offices  and  promotions,  Timoleon  much 
assisted  him,  helping  to  conceal  or  at  least  to 
extenuate  his  errors,  embellishing  by  his  praise 
whatever  was  commendable  in  him,  and  set¬ 
ting  off  his  good  qualities  to  the  best  advan¬ 
tage. 

It  happened  once  in  the  battle  fought  by  the 
Corinthians  against  the  forces  of  Argos  and 
Cleonse,  that  Timoleon  served  among  the  in¬ 
fantry,  when  Timophanes,  commanding  their 
cavalry,  was  brought  into  extreme  danger;  as 
his  horse  being  wounded  fell  forward  and 
threw  him  headlong  amidst  the  enemies,  while 
part  of  his  companions  dispersed  at  once  in  a 
panic,  and  the  small  number  that  remained, 
bearing  up  against  a  great  multitude,  had 
much  ado  to  maintain  any  resistance.  As  soon, 
therefore,  as  Timoleon  was  aware  of  the  acci¬ 
dent,  he  ran  hastily  in  to  his  brother’s  rescue, 
and  covering  the  fallen  Timophanes  with  his 
buckler,  after  having  received  abundance  of 
darts,  and  several  strokes  by  the  sword  upon 
his  body  and  his  armour,  he  at  length  with 
much  difficulty  obliged  the  enemies  to  retire, 
and  brought  off  his  brother  alive  and  safe. 

But  when  the  Corinthians,  for  fear  of  losing 
their  city  a  second  time,  as  they  had  once  be¬ 
fore,  by  admitting  their  allies,  made  a  decree 
to  maintain  four  hundred  mercenaries  for  its 
security,  and  gave  Timophanes  the  command 
over  them,  he,  abandoning  all  regard  to  honour 
and  equity,  at  once  proceeded  to  put  into  exe¬ 
cution  his  plans  for  making  himself  absolute, 
and  bringing  the  place  under  his  own  power; 
and  having  cut  off  many  principal  citizens, 
uncondemned  and  without  trial,  who  were 


TIMOLEON 

most  likely  to  hinder  his  designs,  he  declared 
himself  tyrant  of  Corinth;  a  procedure  that 
infinitely  afflicted  Timoleon,  to  whom  the 
wickedness  of  such  a  brother  appeared  to  be 
his  own  reproach  and  calamity.  He  undertook 
to  persuade  him  by  reasoning,  that  desisting 
from  that  wild  and  unhappy  ambition,  he 
would  bethink  himself  how  he  should  make 
the  Corinthians  some  amends,  and  find  out  an 
expedient  to  remedy  and  correct  the  evils  he 
had  done  them. 

When  his  single  admonition  was  rejected 
and  contemned  by  him,  he  makes  a  second  at¬ 
tempt,  taking  with  him  ^Eschylus  his  kinsman, 
brother  to  the  wife  of  Timophanes,  and  a  cer¬ 
tain  diviner,  that  was  his  friend,  whom  Theo- 
pompus  in  his  history  calls  Satyrus,  but  Ephor- 
us  and  Timaeus  mention  in  theirs  by  the  name 
of  Orthagoras.  After  a  few  days,  then,  he  re¬ 
turns  to  his  brother  with  this  company,  all 
three  of  them  surrounding  and  earnestly  im¬ 
portuning  him  upon  the  same  subject,  that 
now  at  length  he  would  listen  to  reason,  and 
be  of  another  mind.  But  when  Timophanes  be¬ 
gan  first  to  laugh  at  the  men’s  simplicity,  and 
presently  broke  out  into  rage  and  indignation 
against  them,  Timoleon  stepped  aside  from 
him  and  stood  weeping  with  his  face  covered, 
while  the  other  two,  drawing  out  their  swords, 
despatched  him  in  a  moment. 

On  the  rumour  of  this  act  being  soon  scat¬ 
tered  about,  the  better  and  more  generous  of 
the  Corinthians  highly  applauded  Timoleon 
for  the  hatred  of  wrong  and  the  greatness  of 
soul  that  had  made  him,  though  of  a  gentle 
disposition  and  full  of  love  and  kindness  for  his 
family,  think  the  obligations  to  his  country 
stronger  than  the  ties  of  consanguinity,  and 
prefer  that  which  is  good  and  just  before  gain 
and  interest  and  his  own  particular  advantage. 
For  the  same  brother,  who  with  so  much  brav¬ 
ery  had  been  saved  by  him  when  he  fought 
valiantly  in  the  cause  of  Corinth,  he  had  now 
as  nobly  sacrificed  for  enslaving  her  afterwards 
by  a  base  usurpation. 

But  then,  on  the  other  side,  those  that  knew 
not  how  to  live  in  a  democracy,  and  had  been 
used  to  make  their  humble  court  to  the  men  of 
power,  though  they  openly  professed  to  rejoice 
at  the  death  of  the  tyrant,  nevertheless,  secretly 
reviling  Timoleon,  as  one  that  had  committed 
an  impious  and  abominable  act,  drove  him  into 
melancholy  and  dejection. 

And  when  he  came  to  understand  how  heav¬ 
ily  his  mother  took  it,  and  that  she  likewise  ut¬ 
tered  the  saddest  complaints  and  most  terrible 


197 

imprecations  against  him,  he  went  to  satisfy 
and  comfort  her  as  to  what  had  happened;  and 
finding  that  she  would  not  endure  so  much  as 
to  look  upon  him,  but  caused  her  doors  to  be 
shut,  that  he  might  have  no  admission  into  her 
presence,  with  grief  at  this  he  grew  so  disor¬ 
dered  in  his  mind  and  so  disconsolate,  that  he 
determined  to  put  an  end  to  his  perplexity  with 
his  life,  by  abstaining  from  all  manner  of  sus¬ 
tenance. 

But  through  the  care  and  diligence  of  his 
friends,  who  were  every  instant  with  him,  and 
added  force  to  their  entreaties,  he  came  to  re¬ 
solve  and  promise  at  last,  that  he  would  endure 
living,  provided  it  might  be  in  solitude,  and  re¬ 
mote  from  company;  so  that,  quitting  all  civil 
transactions  and  commerce  with  the  world  for 
a  long  while  after  his  first  retirement,  he  never 
came  into  Corinth,  but  wandered  up  and  down 
the  fields,  full  of  anxious  and  tormenting 
thoughts,  and  spent  his  time  in  desert  places, 
at  the  farthest  distance  from  society  and  human 
intercourse. 

So  true  it  is  that  the  minds  of  men  are  easily 
shaken  and  carried  off  from  their  own  senti¬ 
ments  through  the  casual  commendation  or 
reproof  of  others,  unless  the  judgments  that  we 
make,  and  the  purposes  we  conceive,  be  con¬ 
firmed  by  reason  and  philosophy,  and  thus  ob¬ 
tain  strength  and  steadiness.  An  action  must 
not  only  be  just  and  laudable  in  its  own  na¬ 
ture,  but  it  must  proceed  likewise  from  solid 
motives  and  a  lasting  principle,  that  so  we  may 
fully  and  constantly  approve  the  thing,  and  be 
perfectly  satisfied  in  what  we  do;  for  otherwise, 
after  having  put  our  resolution  into  practice, 
we  shall  out  of  pure  weakness  come  to  be  trou¬ 
bled  at  the  performance,  when  the  grace  and 
godliness,  which  rendered  it  before  so  amiable 
and  pleasing  to  us,  begin  to  decay  and  wear  out 
of  our  fancy;  like  greedy  people,  who,  seizing 
on  the  more  delicious  morsels  of  any  dish  with 
a  keen  appetite,  are  presently  disgusted  when 
they  grow  full,  and  find  themselves  oppressed 
and  uneasy  now  by  what  they  before  so  greed¬ 
ily  desired.  For  a  succeeding  dislike  spoils  the 
best  of  actions,  and  repentance  makes  that 
which  was  never  so  well  done  become  base  and 
faulty;  whereas  the  choice  that  is  founded  upon 
knowledge  and  wise  reasoning  does  not  change 
by  disappointment,  or  suffer  us  to  repent, 
though  it  happen  perchance  to  be  less  prosper¬ 
ous  in  the  issue. 

And  thus,  Phocion,  of  Athens,  having  al¬ 
ways  vigorously  opposed  the  measures  of  Leos- 
thenes,  when  success  appeared  to  attend  them. 


198 

and  he  saw  his  countrymen  rejoicing  and  of¬ 
fering  sacrifice  in  honour  of  their  victory,  “I 
should  have  been  as  glad,”  said  he  to  them, 
“that  I  myself  had  been  the  author  of  what 
Leosthenes  has  achieved  for  you,  as  I  am  that  I 
gave  you  my  own  counsel  against  it.” 

A  more  vehement  reply  is  recorded  to  have 
been  made  by  Aristides  the  Locrian,  one  of 
Plato’s  companions,  to  Dionysius  the  elder, 
who  demanded  one  of  his  daughters  in  mar¬ 
riage:  “I  had  rather,”  said  he  to  him,  “see  the 
virgin  in  her  grave  than  in  the  palace  of  a  ty¬ 
rant.”  And  when  Dionysius,  enraged  at  the 
affront,  made  his  sons  be  put  to  death  a  while 
after,  and  then  again  insultingly  asked,  wheth¬ 
er  he  were  still  in  the  same  mind  as  to  the  dis¬ 
posal  of  his  daughters,  his  answer  was,  “I  can¬ 
not  but  grieve  at  the  cruelty  of  your  deeds,  but 
am  not  sorry  for  the  freedom  of  my  own 
words.”  Such  expressions  as  these  may  belong 
perhaps  to  a  more  sublime  and  accomplished 
virtue. 

The  grief,  however,  of  Timoleon  at  what 
had  been  done,  whether  it  arose  from  commis¬ 
eration  of  his  brother’s  fate  or  the  reverence  he 
bore  his  mother,  so  shattered  and  broke  his 
spirits  that  for  the  space  of  almost  twenty  years 
he  had  not  offered  to  concern  himself  in  any 
honourable  or  public  action.  When,  therefore, 
he  was  pitched  upon  for  a  general,  and,  joyful¬ 
ly  accepted  as  such  by  the  suffrages  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  Teleclides,  who  was  at  that  time  the  most 
powerful  and  distinguished  man  in  Corinth, 
began  to  exhort  him  that  he  would  act  now 
like  a  man  of  worth  and  gallantry:  “For,” 
said  he,  “if  you  do  bravely  in  this  service  we 
shall  believe  that  you  delivered  us  from  a 
tyrant;  but  if  otherwise  that  you  killed  your 
brother.” 

While  he  was  yet  preparing  to  set  sail,  and 
enlisting  soldiers  to  embark  with  him,  there 
came  letters  to  the  Corinthians  from  Hicetes, 
plainly  disclosing  his  revolt  and  treachery.  For 
his  ambassadors  had  no  sooner  gone  for  Cor¬ 
inth,  but  he  openly  joined  the  Carthaginians, 
negotiating  that  they  might  assist  him  to  throw 
out  Dionysius,  and  become  master  of  Syracuse 
in  his  room.  And  fearing  he  might  be  disap¬ 
pointed  of  his  aim  if  troops  and  a  commander 
should  come  from  Corinth  before  this  were  ef¬ 
fected,  he  sent  a  letter  of  advice  thither,  in  all 
haste,  to  prevent  their  setting  out,  telling  them 
they  need  not  be  at  any  cost  and  trouble  upon 
his  account,  or  run  the  hazard  of  a  Sicilian  voy¬ 
age,  especially  since  the  Carthaginians,  alliance 
with  whom  against  Dionysius  the  slowness  of 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

their  motions  had  compelled  him  to  embrace, 
would  dispute  their  passage,  and  lay  in  wait  to 
attack  them  with  a  numerous  fleet.  This  letter 
being  publicly  read,  if  any  had  been  cold  and 
indifferent  before  as  to  the  expedition  in  hand, 
the  indignation  they  now  conceived  against 
Hicetes  so  exasperated  and  inflamed  them  all 
that  they  willingly  contributed  to  supply  Ti¬ 
moleon,  and  endeavoured  with  one  accord  to 
hasten  his  departure. 

When  the  vessels  were  equipped,  and  his  sol¬ 
diers  every  way  provided  for,  the  female  priest 
of  Proserpina  had  a  dream  or  vision  wherein 
she  and  her  mother  Ceres  appeared  to  them  in 
a  travelling  garb,  and  were  heard  to  say  that 
they  were  going  to  sail  with  Timoleon  into 
Sicily;  whereupon  the  Corinthians,  having 
built  a  sacred  galley,  devoted  it  to  them,  and 
called  it  the  galley  of  the  goddesses. 

Timoleon  went  in  person  to  Delphi,  where 
he  sacrificed  to  Apollo,  and,  descending  into 
the  place  of  prophecy,  was  surprised  with  the 
following  marvellous  occurrence.  A  riband, 
with  crowns  and  figures  of  victory  embroid¬ 
ered  upon  it,  slipped  off  from  among  the  gifts 
that  were  there  consecrated  and  hung  up  in  the 
temple,  and  fell  directly  down  upon  his  head; 
so  that  Apollo  seemed  already  to  crown  him 
with  success,  and  send  him  thence  to  conquer 
and  triumph. 

He  put  to  sea  only  with  seven  ships  of  Cor¬ 
inth,  two  of  Corcyra,  and  a  tenth  which  was 
furnished  by  the  Leucadians;  and  when  he  was 
now  entered  into  the  deep  by  night,  and  car¬ 
ried  with  a  prosperous  gale,  the  heaven  seemed 
all  on  a  sudden  to  break  open,  and  a  bright 
spreading  flame  to  issue  forth  from  it,  and 
hover  over  the  ship  he  was  in;  and,  having 
formed  itself  into  a  torch,  not  unlike  those  that 
are  used  in  the  mysteries,  it  began  to  steer  the 
same  course,  and  run  along  in  their  company, 
guiding  them  by  its  light  to  that  quarter  of 
Italy  where  they  designed  to  go  ashore.  The 
soothsayers  affirmed  that  this  apparition  agreed 
with  the  dream  of  the  holy  woman,  since  the 
goddesses  were  now  visibly  joining  in  the  ex¬ 
pedition,  and  sending  this  light  from  heaven 
before  them,  Sicily  being  thought  sacred  to 
Proserpina,  as  poets  feign  that  the  rape  was 
committed  there,  and  that  the  island  was  given 
her  in  dowry  when  she  married  Pluto. 

These  early  demonstrations  of  divine  favour 
greatly  encouraged  his  whole  army;  so  that 
making  all  the  speed  they  were  able,  by  a  voy¬ 
age  across  the  open  sea,  they  were  soon  passing 
along  the  coast  of  Italy.  But  the  tidings  that 


TIMOLEON 

came  from  Sicily  much  perplexed  Timoleon, 
and  disheartened  his  soldiers. 

For  Hicetes,  having  already  beaten  Diony¬ 
sius  out  of  the  field,  and  reduced  most  of  the 
quarters  of  Syracuse  itself,  now  hemmed  him 
in  and  besieged  him  in  the  citadel  and  what  is 
called  the  Island,  whither  he  was  fled  for  his 
last  refuge;  while  the  Carthaginians,  by  agree¬ 
ment,  were  to  make  it  their  business  to  hinder 
Timoleon  from  landing  in  any  port  of  Sicily; 
so  that  he  and  his  party  being  driven  back,  they 
might  with  ease  and  at  their  own  leisure  divide 
the  island  among  themselves. 

In  pursuance  of  which  design  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians  sent  away  twenty  of  their  galleys  to 
Rhegium,  having  aboard  them  certain  ambas¬ 
sadors  from  Hicetes  to  Timoleon,  who  carried 
instructions  suitable  to  these  proceedings,  spe¬ 
cious  amusements,  and  plausible  stories,  to  col¬ 
our  and  conceal  dishonest  purposes.  They  had 
order  to  propose  and  demand  that  Timoleon 
himself,  if  he  liked  the  offer,  should  come  and 
advise  with  Hicetes  and  partake  of  all  his  con¬ 
quests,  but  that  he  might  send  back  his  ships 
and  forces  to  Corinth,  since  the  war  was  in  a 
manner  finished,  and  the  Carthaginians  had 
blocked  up  the  passage,  determined  to  oppose 
them  if  they  should  try  to.  force  their  way 
towards  the  shore. 

When,  therefore,  the  Corinthians  met  with 
these  envoys  at  Rhegium,  and  received  their 
message,  and  saw  the  Phoenician  vessels  riding 
at  anchor  in  the  bay,  they  became  keenly  sensi¬ 
ble  of  the  abuse  that  was  put  upon  them,  and 
felt  a  general  indignation  against  Hicetes,  and 
great  apprehensions  for  the  Siceliots,  whom 
they  now  plainly  perceived  to  be  as  it  were  a 
prize  and  recompense  to  Hicetes  on  one  side 
for  his  perfidy,  and  to  the  Carthaginians  on  the 
other  for  the  sovereign  power  they  secured  to 
him.  For  it  seemed  utterly  impossible  to  force 
and  overbear  the  Carthaginian  ships  that  lay 
before  them  and  were  double  their  number,  as 
also  to  vanquish  the  victorious  troops  which 
Hicetes  had  with  him  in  Syracuse,  to  take  the 
lead  of  which  very  troops  they  had  undertaken 
their  voyage. 

The  case  being  thus,  Timoleon,  after  some 
conference  with  the  envoys  of  Hicetes  and  the 
Carthaginian  captains,  told  them  he  should 
readily  submit  to  their  proposals  (to  what  pur¬ 
pose  would  it  be  to  refuse  compliance?):  he 
was  desirous  only,  before  his  return  to  Corinth, 
that  what  had  passed  between  them  in  private 
might  be  solemnly  declared  before  the  people 
of  Rhegium,  a  Greek  city,  and  a  common 


199 

friend  to  the  parties;  this,  he  said,  would  very 
much  conduce  to  his  own  security  and  dis¬ 
charge;  and  they  likewise  would  more  strictly 
observe  articles  of  agreement,  on  behalf  of  the 
Syracusans,  which  they  had  obliged  themselves 
to  in  the  presence  of  so  many  witnesses.  The 
design  of  all  which  was  only  to  divert  their  at¬ 
tention,  while  he  got  an  opportunity  of  slip¬ 
ping  away  from  their  fleet;  a  contrivance  that 
all  the  principal  Rhegians  were  privy  and  as¬ 
sisting  to,  who  had  a  great  desire  that  the 
affairs  of  Sicily  should  fall  into  Corinthian 
hands,  and  dreaded  the  consequences  of  having 
barbarian  neighbours. 

An  assembly  was  therefore  called,  and  the 
gates  shut,  that  the  citizens  might  have  no  lib¬ 
erty  to  turn  to  other  business;  and  a  succession 
of  speakers  came  forward,  addressing  the  peo¬ 
ple  at  great  length,  to  the  same  effect,  without 
bringing  the  subject  to  any  conclusion,  making 
way  each  for  another  and  purposely  spinning 
out  the  time,  till  the  Corinthian  galleys  should 
get  clear  of  the  haven;  the  Carthaginian  com¬ 
manders  being  detained  there  without  any  sus¬ 
picion,  as  also  Timoleon  still  remained  present, 
and  gave  signs  as  if  he  were  just  preparing  to 
make  an  oration. 

But  upon  secret  notice  that  the  rest  of  the  gal¬ 
leys  were  already  gone  off,  and  that  his  alone 
remained  waiting  for  him,  by  the  help  and  con¬ 
cealment  of  those  Rhegians  that  were  about  the 
hustings  and  favoured  his  departure,  he  made 
shift  to  slip  away  through  the  crowd,  and  run¬ 
ning  down  to  the  port,  set  sail  with  all  speed; 
and  having  reached  his  other  vessels,  they  came 
all  safe  to  Tauromenium  in  Sicily,  whither  they 
had  been  formerly  invited,  and  where  they  were 
now  kindly  received  by  Andromachus,  then 
ruler  of  the  city.  This  man  was  father  of  Timae- 
us,  the  historian,  and  incomparably  the  best  of 
all  those  that  bore  sway  in  Sicily  at  that  time, 
governing  his  citizens  according  to  law  and 
justice  and  openly  professing  an  aversion  and 
enmity  to  all  tyrants;  upon  which  account  he 
gave  Timoleon  leave  to  muster  up  his  troops 
there,  and  to  make  that  city  the  seat  of  war, 
persuading  the  inhabitants  to  join  their  arms 
with  the  Corinthian  forces,  and  assist  them  in 
the  design  of  delivering  Sicily. 

But  the  Carthaginians  who  were  left  in  Rhe¬ 
gium  perceiving,  when  the  assembly  was  dis¬ 
solved,  that  Timoleon  had  given  them  the 
go-by,  were  not  a  little  vexed  to  see  themselves 
outwitted,  much  to  the  amusement  of  the 
Rhegians,  who  could  not  but  smile  to  find 
Phoenicians  complain  of  being  cheated.  How- 


200 

ever,  they  despatched  a  messenger  aboard  one 
of  their  galleys  to  Tauromenium,  who,  after 
much  blustering  in  the  insolent  barbaric  way, 
and  many  menaces  to  Andromachus  if  he 
did  not  forthwith  send  the  Corinthians  off, 
stretched  out  his  hand  with  the  inside  upward, 
and  then  turning  it  down  again,  threatened  he 
would  handle  their  city  even  so,  and  turn  it 
topsy-turvy  in  as  little  time,  and  with  as  much 
ease.  Andromachus,  laughing  at  the  man’s  con¬ 
fidence,  made  no  other  reply,  but,  imitating  his 
gesture,  bid  him  hasten  his  own  departure,  un¬ 
less  he  had  a  mind  to  see  that  kind  of  dexterity 
practised  first  upon  the  galley  which  brought 
him  hither. 

Hicetes,  informed  that  Timoleon  had  made 
good  his  passage,  was  in  great  fear  of  what 
might  follow,  and  sent  to  desire  the  Carthagin¬ 
ians  that  a  large  number  of  galleys  might  be 
ordered  to  attend  and  secure  the  coast.  And 
now  it  was  that  the  Syracusans  began  wholly 
to  despair  of  safety,  seeing  the  Carthaginians 
possessed  of  their  haven,  Hicetes  master  of  the 
town,  and  Dionysius  supreme  in  the  citadel; 
while  Timoleon  had  as  yet  but  a  slender  hold 
of  Sicily,  as  it  were  by  the  fringe  or  border  of 
it,  in  the  small  city  of  the  Tauromenians,  with 
a  feeble  hope  and  a  poor  company,  having  but 
a  thousand  soldiers  at  the  most,  and  no  more 
provisions,  either  of  corn  or  money,  than  were 
just  necessary  for  the  maintenance  and  the  pay 
of  that  inconsiderable  number. 

Nor  did  the  other  towns  of  Sicily  confide  in 
him,  overpowered  as  they  were  with  violence 
and  outrage,  and  embittered  against  all  that 
should  offer  to  lead  armies  by  the  treacherous 
conduct  chiefly  of  Callipus,  an  Athenian,  and 
Pharax,  a  Lacedaemonian  captain,  both  of 
whom,  after  giving  out  that  the  design  of  their 
coming  was  to  introduce  liberty  and  to  depose 
tyrants,  so  tyrannised  themselves,  that  the  reign 
of  former  oppressors  seemed  to  be  a  golden  age 
in  comparison,  and  the  Sicilians  began  to  con¬ 
sider  those  more  happy  who  had  expired  in 
servitude,  than  any  that  had  lived  to  see  such  a 
dismal  freedom. 

Looking,  therefore,  for  no  better  usage  from 
the  Corinthian  general,  but  imagining  that  it 
was  only  the  same  old  course  of  things  once 
more,  specious  pretences  and  false  professions 
to  allure  them  by  fair  hopes  and  kind  promises 
into  the  obedience  of  a  new  master,  they  all, 
with  one  accord,  unless  it  were  the  people  of 
Adranum,  suspected  the  exhortations,  and  re¬ 
jected  the  overtures  that  were  made  them  in 
his  name. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

These  were  inhabitants  of  a  small  city,  con¬ 
secrated  to  Adranus,  a  certain  god  that  was  in 
high  veneration  throughout  Sicily,  and,  as  it 
happened,  they  were  then  at  variance  among 
themselves,  insomuch  that  one  party  called  in 
Hicetes  and  the  Carthaginians  to  assist  them, 
while  the  other  sent  proposals  to  Timoleon.  It 
so  fell  out  that  these  auxiliaries,  striving  which 
should  be  soonest,  both  arrived  at  Adranum 
about  the  same  time;  Hicetes  bringing  with 
him  at  least  five  thousand  men,  while  all  the 
force  Timoleon  could  make  did  not  exceed 
twelve  hundred. 

With  these  he  marched  out  of  Taurome¬ 
nium,  which  was  about  three  hundred  and 
forty  furlongs  distant  from  that  city.  The  first 
day  he  moved  but  slowly,  and  took  up  his  quar¬ 
ters  betimes  after  a  short  journey;  but  the  day 
following  he  quickened  his  pace,  and,  having 
passed  through  much  difficult  ground,  towards 
evening  received  advice  that  Hicetes  was  just 
approaching  Adranum,  and  pitching  his  camp 
before  it;  upon  which  intelligence,  his  captains 
and  other  officers  caused  the  vanguard  to  halt, 
that  the  army  being  refreshed,  and  having  re¬ 
posed  a  while,  might  engage  the  enemy  with 
better  heart. 

But  Timoleon,  coming  up  in  haste,  desired 
them  not  to  stop  for  that  reason,  but  rather  use 
all  possible  diligence  to  surprise  the  enemy, 
whom  probably  they  would  now  find  in  dis¬ 
order,  as  having  lately  ended  their  march  and 
being  taken  up  at  present  in  erecting  tents  and 
preparing  supper;  which  he  had  no  sooner  said, 
but  laying  hold  of  his  buckler  and  putting  him¬ 
self  in  the  front,  he  led  them  on  as  it  were  to 
certain  victory.  The  braveness  of  such  a  leader 
made  them  all  follow  him  with  like  courage 
and  assurance. 

They  were  now  within  less  than  thirty  fur¬ 
longs  of  Adranum,  which  they  quickly  trav¬ 
ersed,  and  immediately  fell  in  upon  the  enemy, 
who  were  seized  with  confusion,  and  began  to 
retire  at  their  first  approaches;  one  consequence 
of  which  was  that,  amidst  so  little  opposition, 
and  so  early  and  general  a  flight,  there  were  not 
many  more  than  three  hundred  slain,  and 
about  twice  the  number  made  prisoners.  Their 
camp  and  baggage,  however,  was  all  taken. 

The  fortune  of  this  onset  soon  induced  the 
Adranitans  to  unlock  their  gates,  and  to  em¬ 
brace  the  interest  of  Timoleon,  to  whom  they 
recounted,  with  a  mixture  of  affright  and  ad¬ 
miration,  how,  at  the  very  minute  of  the  en¬ 
counter,  the  doors  of  their  temple  flew  open  of 
their  own  accord,  that  the  javelin  also,  which 


TIMOLEON 

their  god  held  in  his  hand,  was  observed  to 
tremble  at  the  point,  and  that  drops  of  sweat 
had  been  seen  running  down  his  face;  prodi¬ 
gies  that  not  only  presaged  the  victory  then 
obtained,  but  were  an  omen,  it  seems,  of  all  his 
future  exploits,  to  which  this  first  happy  action 
gave  the  occasion. 

For  now  the  neighbouring  cities  and  poten¬ 
tates  sent  deputies,  one  upon  another,  to  seek 
his  friendship  and  make  offer  of  their  service. 
Among  the  rest  Mamercus,  the  tyrant  of  Ca- 
tana,  an  experienced  warrior  and  a  wealthy 
prince,  made  proposals  of  alliance  with  him, 
and  what  was  of  greater  importance  still,  Di¬ 
onysius  himself,  being  now  grown  desperate, 
and  well-nigh  forced  to  surrender,  despising 
Hicetes  who  had  been  thus  shamefully  baffled, 
and  admiring  the  valour  of  Timoleon,  found 
means  to  advertise  him  and  his  Corinthians 
that  he  should  be  content  to  deliver  up  himself 
and  the  citadel  into  their  hands. 

Timoleon,  gladly  embracing  this  unlooked- 
for  advantage,  sends  away  Euclides  and  Tele- 
machus,  two  Corinthian  captains,  with  four 
hundred  men,  for  the  seizure  and  custody  of 
the  castle,  with  directions  to  enter  not  all  at 
once,  or  in  open  view,  that  being  impracti¬ 
cable  so  long  as  the  enemy  kept  guard,  but 
by  stealth,  and  in  small  companies.  And  so 
they  took  possession  of  the  fortress  and  the 
palace  of  Dionysius,  with  all  the  stores  and 
ammunition  he  had  prepared  and  laid  up  to 
maintain  the  war.  They  found  a  good  number 
of  horses,  every  variety  of  engines,  a  multi¬ 
tude  of  darts,  and  weapons  to  arm  seventy 
thousand  men  (a  magazine  that  had  been 
formed  from  ancient  time),  besides  two  thou¬ 
sand  soldiers  that  were  then  with  him,  whom 
he  gave  up  with  the  rest  for  Timoleon’s  ser¬ 
vice. 

Dionysius  himself,  putting  his  treasure 
aboard,  and  taking  a  few  friends,  sailed  away 
unobserved  by  Hicetes,  and  being  brought  to 
the  camp  of  Timoleon,  there  first  appeared  in 
the  humble  dress  of  a  private  person,  and  was 
shortly  after  sent  to  Corinth  with  a  single  ship 
and  a  small  sum  of  money.  Born  and  edu¬ 
cated  in  the  most  splendid  court  and  the  most 
absolute  monarchy  that  ever  was,  which  he 
held  and  kept  up  for  the  space  of  ten  years 
succeeding  his  father’s  death,  he  had,  after 
Dion’s  expedition,  spent  twelve  other  years  in 
a  continual  agitation  of  wars  and  contests,  and 
great  variety  of  fortune,  during  which  time 
all  the  mischiefs  he  had  committed  in  his  for¬ 
mer  reign  were  more  than  repaid  by  the  ills 


201 

he  himself  then  suffered,  since  he  lived  to  see 
the  deaths  of  his  sons  in  the  prime  and  vigour 
of  their  age,  and  the  rape  of  his  daughters  in 
the  flower  of  their  virginity,  and  the  wicked 
abuse  of  his  sister  and  his  wife,  who,  after  be¬ 
ing  first  exposed  to  all  the  lawless  insults  of 
the  soldiery,  was  then  murdered  with  her  chil¬ 
dren,  and  cast  into  the  sea;  the  particulars  of 
which  are  more  exactly  given  in  the  life  of 
Dion. 

Upon  the  news  of  his  landing  at  Corinth, 
there  was  hardly  a  man  in  Greece  who  had 
not  the  curiosity  to  come  and  view  the  late 
formidable  tyrant,  and  say  some  words  to 
him;  part,  rejoicing  at  his  disasters,  were  led 
thither  out  of  mere  spite  and  hatred,  that  they 
might  have  the  pleasure  of  trampling,  as  it 
were,  on  the  ruins  of  his  broken  fortune;  but 
others,  letting  their  attention  and  their  sym¬ 
pathy  turn  rather  to  the  changes  and  revolu¬ 
tions  of  his  life,  could  not  but  see  in  them  a 
proof  of  the  strength  and  potency  with  which 
divine  and  unseen  causes  operate  amidst  the 
weakness  of  human  and  visible  things. 

For  neither  art  nor  nature  did  in  that  age 
produce  anything  comparable  to  this  work 
and  wonder  of  fortune  which  showed  the 
very  same  man,  that  was  not  long  before  su¬ 
preme  monarch  of  Sicily,  loitering  about  per¬ 
haps  in  the  fish-market,  or  sitting  in  a  per¬ 
fumer’s  shop  drinking  the  diluted  wine  of 
taverns,  or  squabbling  in  the  street  with  com¬ 
mon  women,  or  pretending  to  instruct  the 
singing  women  of  the  theatre,  and  seriously 
disputing  with  them  about  the  measure  and 
harmony  of  pieces  of  music  that  were  per¬ 
formed  there. 

Such  behaviour  on  his  part  was  variously 
criticised.  He  was  thought  by  many  to  act 
thus  out  of  pure  compliance  with  his  own  nat¬ 
ural  indolent  and  vicious  inclinations;  while 
finer  judges  were  of  the  opinion,  that  in  all 
this  he  was  playing  a  politic  part,  with  a  de¬ 
sign  to  be  contemned  among  them,  and  that 
the  Corinthians  might  not  feel  any  apprehen¬ 
sion  or  suspicion  of  his  being  uneasy  under  his 
reverse  of  fortune,  or  solicitous  to  retrieve  it; 
to  avoid  which  danger,  he  purposely  and 
against  his  true  nature  affected  an  appearance 
of  folly  and  want  of  spirit  in  his  private  life 
and  amusements. 

However  it  be,  there  are  sayings  and  rep¬ 
artees  of  his  left  still  upon  record,  which 
seem  to  show  that  he  not  ignobly  accommo¬ 
dated  himself  to  his  present  circumstances;  as 
may  appear  in  part  from  the  ingenuousness  of 


202 


the  avowal  he  made  on  coming  to  Leucadia, 
which,  as  well  as  Syracuse,  was  a  Corinthian 
colony,  where  he  told  the  inhabitants  that  he 
found  himself  not  unlike  boys  who  had  been 
in  fault,  who  can  talk  cheerfully  with  their 
brothers,  but  are  ashamed  to  see  their  father; 
so  likewise  he,  he  said,  could  gladly  reside 
with  them  in  that  island,  whereas  he  felt  a 
certain  awe  upon  his  mind  which  made  him 
averse  to  the  sight  of  Corinth,  that  was  a  com¬ 
mon  mother  to  them  both. 

The  thing  is  further  evident  from  the  reply 
he  once  made  to  a  stranger  in  Corinth,  who, 
deriding  him  in  a  rude  and  scornful  manner 
about  the  conferences  he  used  to  have  with 
philosophers,  whose  company  had  been  one 
of  his  pleasures  while  yet  a  monarch,  and  de¬ 
manding,  in  fine,  what  he  was  the  better  now 
for  all  those  wise  and  learned  discourses  of 
Plato,  “Do  you  think,”  said  he,  “I  have  made 
no  profit  of  his  philosophy  when  you  see  me 
bear  my  change  of  fortune  as  I  do?” 

And  when  Aristoxenus,  the  musician,  and 
several  others,  desired  to  know  how  Plato 
offended  him,  and  what  had  been  the  ground 
of  his  displeasure  with  him,  he  made  answer 
that,  of  the  many  evils  attaching  to  the  con¬ 
dition  of  sovereignty,  the  one  greatest  infelic¬ 
ity  was  that  none  of  those  who  were  accounted 
friends  would  venture  to  speak  freely,  or  tell 
the  plain  truth;  and  that  by  means  of  such  he 
had  been  deprived  of  Plato’s  kindness. 

At  another  time,  when  one  of  those  pleas¬ 
ant  companions  that  are  desirous  to  pass  for 
wits,  in  mockery  to  Dionysius,  as  if  he  were 
still  the  tyrant,  shook  out  the  folds  of  his 
cloak,  as  he  was  entering  into  a  room  where 
he  was,  to  show  there  were  no  concealed  wea¬ 
pons  about  him,  Dionysius,  by  way  of  retort, 
observed,  that  he  would  prefer  he  would  do 
so  on  leaving  the  room,  as  a  security  that  he 
was  carrying  nothing  off  with  him. 

And  when  Philip  of  Macedon,  at  a  drink¬ 
ing  party,  began  to  speak  in  banter  about  the 
verses  and  tragedies  which  his  father,  Diony¬ 
sius  the  elder,  had  left  behind  him,  and  pre¬ 
tended  to  wonder  how  he  could  get  any  time 
from  his  other  business  to  compose  such  elab¬ 
orate  and  ingenious  pieces,  he  replied,  very 
much  to  the  purpose,  “It  was  at  those  leisur- 
able  hours,  which  such  as  you  and  I,  and 
those  we  call  happy  men,  bestow  upon  our 
cups.” 

Plato  had  not  the  opportunity  to  see  Diony¬ 
sius  at  Corinth,  being  already  dead  before  he 
came  thither;  but  Diogenes  of  Sinope,  at  their 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

first  meeting  in  the  street  there,  saluted  him 
with  the  ambiguous  expression,  “O  Diony¬ 
sius,  how  little  you  deserve  your  present  life!” 
Upon  which  Dionysius  stopped  and  replied, 
“I  thank  you,  Diogenes,  for  your  condolence.” 
“Condole  with  you!”  replied  Diogenes;  “Do 
you  not  suppose  that,  on  the  contrary,  I  am 
indignant  that  such  a  slave  as  you,  who,  if 
you  had  your  due,  should  have  been  let  alone 
to  grow  old  and  die  in  the  state  of  tyranny, 
as  your  father  did  before  you,  should  now  en¬ 
joy  the  ease  of  private  persons,  and  be  here  to 
sport  and  frolic  in  our  society?” 

So  that  when  I  compare  those  sad  stories  of 
Philistus,  touching  the  daughters  of  Leptines, 
where  he  makes  pitiful  moan  on  their  behalf, 
as  fallen  from  all  the  blessings  and  advan¬ 
tages  of  powerful  greatness  to  the  miseries  of 
an  humble  life,  they  seem  to  me  like  the  lam¬ 
entations  of  a  woman  who  has  lost  her  box  of 
ointment,  her  purple  dresses,  and  her  golden 
trinkets.  Such  anecdotes  will  not,  I  conceive, 
be  thought  either  foreign  to  my  purpose  of 
writing  Lives,  or  unprofitable  in  themselves, 
by  such  readers  as  are  not  in  too  much  haste, 
or  busied  and  taken  up  with  other  concerns. 

But  if  the  misfortune  of  Dionysius  appears 
strange  and  extraordinary,  we  shall  have  no 
less  reason  to  wonder  at  the  good  fortune  of 
Timoleon,  who,  within  fifty  days  after  his 
landing  in  Sicily,  both  recovered  the  citadel 
of  Syracuse  and  sent  Dionysius  an  exile  into 
Peloponnesus.  This  lucky  beginning  so  an¬ 
imated  the  Corinthians,  that  they  ordered 
him  a  supply  of  two  thousand  foot  and  two 
hundred  horse,  who,  reaching  Thurii,  in¬ 
tended  to  cross  over  thence  into  Sicily;  but 
finding  the  whole  sea  beset  with  Carthagin¬ 
ian  ships,  which  made  their  passage  imprac¬ 
ticable,  they  were  constrained  to  stop  there, 
and  watch  their  opportunity;  which  time, 
however,  was  employed  in  a  noble  action.  For 
the  Thurians,  going  out  to  war  against  their 
Bruttian  enemies,  left  their  city  in  charge  with 
these  Corinthian  strangers,  who  defended  it 
as  carefully  as  if  it  had  been  their  own  coun¬ 
try,  and  faithfully  resigned  it  up  again. 

Hicetes,  in  the  interim,  continued  still  to  be¬ 
siege  the  castle  of  Syracuse,  and  hindered  all 
provisions  from  coming  in  by  sea  to  relieve 
the  Corinthians  that  were  in  it. 

He  had  engaged  also,  and  despatched  to¬ 
wards  Adranum,  two  unknown  foreigners  to 
assassinate  Timoleon,  who  at  no  time  kept 
any  standing  guard  about  his  person,  and  was 
then  altogether  secure,  diverting  himself, 


TIMOLEON 

without  any  apprehension,  among  the  citizens 
of  the  place,  it  being  a  festival  in  honour  of 
their  gods.  The  two  men  that  were  sent,  hav¬ 
ing  casually  heard  that  Timoleon  was  about 
to  sacrifice,  came  direcdy  into  the  temple  with 
poniards  under  their  cloaks,  and  pressing  in 
among  the  crowd,  by  little  and  little  got  up 
close  to  the  altar;  but,  as  they  were  just  look¬ 
ing  for  a  sign  from  each  other  to  begin  the 
attempt,  a  third  person  struck  one  of  them 
over  the  head  with  a  sword,  upon  whose  sud¬ 
den  fall,  neither  he  that  gave  the  blow,  nor 
the  partisan  of  him  that  received  it,  kept  their 
stations  any  longer;  but  the  one,  making  way 
with  his  bloody  sword,  put  no  stop  to  his 
flight,  till  he  gained  the  top  of  a  certain  lofty 
precipice,  while  the  other,  laying  hold  of  the 
altar,  besought  Timoleon  to  spare  his  life,  and 
he  would  reveal  to  him  the  whole  conspiracy. 
His  pardon  being  granted,  he  confessed  that 
both  himself  and  his  dead  companion  were 
sent  thither  purposely  to  slay  him. 

While  this  discovery  was  made,  he  that 
killed  the  other  conspirator  had  been  fetched 
down  from  his  sanctuary  of  the  rock,  loudly 
and  often  protesting,  as  he  came  along,  that 
there  was  no  injustice  in  the  fact,  as  he  had 
only  taken  righteous  vengeance  for  his  fa¬ 
ther’s  blood,  whom  this  man  had  murdered 
before  in  the  city  of  Leontini;  the  truth  of 
which  was  attested  by  several  there  present, 
who  could  not  choose  but  wonder  too  at  the 
strange  dexterity  of  Fortune’s  operations,  the 
facility  with  which  she  makes  one  event  the 
spring  and  motion  to  something  wholly  differ¬ 
ent,  uniting  every  scattered  accident  and  loose 
particular  and  remote  action,  and  interweav¬ 
ing  them  together  to  serve  her  purpose;  so 
that  things  that  in  themselves  seem  to  have  no 
connection  or  interdependence  whatsoever,  be¬ 
come  in  her  hands,  so  to  say,  the  end  and  the 
beginning  of  each  other. 

The  Corinthians,  satisfied  as  to  the  innocence 
of  this  seasonable  feat,  honoured  and  reward¬ 
ed  the  author  with  a  present  of  ten  pounds  in 
their  money,  since  he  had,  as  it  were,  lent  the 
use  of  his  just  resentment  to  the  tutelar  genius 
that  seemed  to  be  protecting  Timoleon,  and 
had  not  pre -expended  this  anger,  so  long  ago 
conceived,  but  had  reserved  and  deferred,  un¬ 
der  fortune’s  guidance,  for  his  preservation,  the 
revenge  of  a  private  quarrel. 

But  this  fortunate  escape  had  effects  and 
consequences  beyond  the  present,  as  it  in¬ 
spired  the  highest  hopes  and  future  expecta¬ 
tions  of  Timoleon,  making  people  reverence 


203 

and  protect  him  as  a  sacred  person  sent  by 
heaven  to  revenge  and  redeem  Sicily. 

Hicetes,  having  missed  his  aim  in  this  en¬ 
terprise,  and  perceiving,  also,  that  many  went 
off  and  sided  with  Timoleon,  began  to  chide 
himself  for  his  foolish  modesty,  that,  when  so 
considerable  a  force  of  the  Carthaginians  lay 
ready  to  be  commanded  by  him,  he  had  em¬ 
ployed  them  hitherto  by  degrees  and  in  small 
numbers,  introducing  their  reinforcements  by 
stealth  and  clandestinely,  as  if  he  had  been 
ashamed  of  the  action.  Therefore,  now  laying 
aside  his  former  nicety,  he  called  in  Mago,  their 
admiral,  with  his  whole  navy,  who  presently 
set  sail,  and  seized  upon  the  port  with  a  for¬ 
midable  fleet  of  at  least  a  hundred  and  fifty 
vessels,  landing  there  sixty  thousand  foot, 
which  were  all  lodged  within  the  city  of  Syra¬ 
cuse;  so  that,  in  all  men’s  opinion,  the  time 
anciently  talked  of  and  long  expected,  where¬ 
in  Sicily  should  be  subjugated  by  barbarians, 
was  now  come  to  its  fatal  period.  For  in  all 
their  preceding  wars  and  many  desperate  con¬ 
flicts  with  Sicily,  the  Carthaginians  had  never 
been  able,  before  this,  to  take  Syracuse; 
whereas  Hicetes  now  receiving  them  and 
putting  them  into  their  hands,  you  might  see 
it  become  now,  as  it  were,  a  camp  of  bar¬ 
barians. 

By  this  means,  the  Corinthian  soldiers  that 
kept  the  castle  found  themselves  brought  into 
great  danger  and  hardship;  as,  besides  that 
their  provision  grew  scarce,  and  they  began 
to  be  in  want,  because  the  havens  were  strictly 
guarded  and  blocked  up,  the  enemy  exercised 
them  still  with  skirmishes  and  combats  about 
their  walls,  and  they  were  not  only  obliged  to 
be  continually  in  arms,  but  to  divide  and  pre¬ 
pare  themselves  for  assaults  and  encounters  of 
every  kind,  and  to  repel  every  variety  of  the 
means  of  offence  employed  by  a  besieging 
army. 

Timoleon  made  shift  to  relieve  them  in 
these  straits,  sending  corn  from  Catana  by 
small  fishing-boats  and  little  skiffs,  which 
commonly  gained  a  passage  through  the  Car¬ 
thaginian  galleys  in  times  of  storm,  stealing 
up  when  the  blockading  ships  were  driven 
apart  and  dispersed  by  the  stress  of  weather; 
which  Mago  and  Hicetes  observing,  they 
agreed  to  fall  upon  Catana,  from  whence 
these  supplies  were  brought  in  to  the  besieged, 
and  accordingly  put  off  from  Syracuse,  taking 
with  them  the  best  soldiers  in  their  whole 
army. 

Upon  this  Neon,  the  Corinthian,  who  was 


204 


captain  of  those  that  kept  the  citadel,  taking 
notice  that  the  enemies  who  stayed  there  be¬ 
hind  were  very  negligent  and  careless  in  keep¬ 
ing  guard,  made  a  sudden  sally  upon  them  as 
they  lay  scattered,  and,  killing  some  and  put¬ 
ting  others  to  flight,  he  took  and  possessed 
himself  of  that  quarter  which  they  call  Acra- 
dina,  and  was  thought  to  be  the  strongest 
and  most  impregnable  part  of  Syracuse,  a  city 
made  up  and  compacted,  as  it  were,  of  several 
towns  put  together.  Having  thus  stored  him¬ 
self  with  corn  and  money,  he  did  not  abandon 
the  place,  nor  retire  again  into  the  castle,  but 
fortifying  the  precincts  of  Acradina,  and  join¬ 
ing  it  by  works  to  the  citadel,  he  undertook 
the  defence  of  both. 

Mago  and  Hicetes  were  now  come  near  to 
Catana,  when  a  horseman,  despatched  from 
Syracuse,  brought  them  tidings  that  Acradina 
was  taken;  upon  which  they  returned,  in  all 
haste,  with  great  disorder  and  confusion,  hav¬ 
ing  neither  been  able  to  reduce  the  city  they 
went  against,  nor  to  preserve  that  they  were 
masters  of. 

These  successes,  indeed,  were  such  as  might 
leave  foresight  and  courage  a  pretence  still  of 
disputing  it  with  fortune,  which  contributed 
most  to  the  result.  But  the  next  following 
event  can  scarcely  be  ascribed  to  anything  but 
pure  felicity.  The  Corinthian  soldiers  who 
stayed  at  Thurii,  partly  for  fear  of  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian  galleys  which  lay  in  wait  for  them 
under  the  command  of  Hanno,  and  partly  be¬ 
cause  of  tempestuous  weather  which  had  last¬ 
ed  for  many  days,  and  rendered  the  sea  dan¬ 
gerous,  took  a  resolution  to  march  by  land 
over  the  Bruttian  territories,  and  what  with 
persuasion  and  force  together,  made  good 
their  passage  through  those  barbarians  to  the 
city  of  Rhegium,  the  sea  being  still  rough  and 
raging  as  before. 

But  Hanno,  not  expecting  the  Corinthians 
would  venture  out,  and  supposing  it  would  be 
useless  to  wait  there  any  longer,  bethought 
himself,  as  he  imagined,  of  a  most  ingenious 
and  clever  stratagem  apt  to  delude  and  en¬ 
snare  the  enemy;  in  pursuance  of  which  he 
commanded  the  seamen  to  crown  themselves 
with  garlands,  and  adorning  his  galleys  with 
bucklers  both  of  the  Greek  and  Carthaginian 
make,  he  sailed  away  for  Syracuse  in  this  tri¬ 
umphant  equipage,  and  using  all  his  oars  as 
he  passed  under  the  castle  with  much  shout¬ 
ing  and  laughter,  cried  out,  on  purpose  to  dis¬ 
hearten  the  besieged,  that  he  was  come  from 
vanquishing  and  taking  the  Corinthian  suc- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

cours,  which  he  fell  upon  at  sea  as  they  were 
passing  over  into  Sicily. 

While  he  was  thus  trifling  and  playing  his 
tricks  before  Syracuse,  the  Corinthians,  now 
come  as  far  as  Rhegium,  observing  the  coast 
clear,  and  that  the  wind  was  laid,  as  it  were 
by  miracle,  to  afford  them  in  all  appearance  a 
quiet  and  smooth  passage,  went  immediately 
aboard  on  such  little  barks  and  fishing  boats 
as  were  then  at  hand,  and  got  over  to  Sicily 
with  such  complete  safety  and  in  such  an  ex¬ 
traordinary  calm,  that  they  drew  their  horses 
by  the  reins,  swimming  along  by  them  as  the 
vessels  went  across.  When  they  were  all  land¬ 
ed,  Timoleon  came  to  receive  them,  and  by 
their  means  at  once  obtained  possession  of 
Messena,  from  whence  he  marched  in  good 
order  to  Syracuse,  trusting  more  to  his  late 
prosperous  achievements  than  his  present 
strength,  as  the  whole  army  he  had  then  with 
him  did  not  exceed  the  number  of  four  thou¬ 
sand. 

Mago,  however,  was  troubled  and  fearful  at 
the  first  notice  of  his  coming,  and  grew  more 
apprehensive  and  jealous  still  upon  the  follow¬ 
ing  occasion.  The  marshes  about  Syracuse, 
that  receive  a  great  deal  of  fresh  water,  as 
well  from  springs  as  from  lakes  and  rivers  dis¬ 
charging  themselves  into  the  sea,  breed  abun¬ 
dance  of  eels,  which  may  be  always  taken 
there  in  great  quantities  by  any  that  will  fish 
for  them.  The  mercenary  soldiers  that  served 
on  both  sides  were  wont  to  follow  the  sport 
together  at  their  vacant  hours,  and  upon  any 
cessation  of  arms;  who  being  all  Greeks,  and 
having  no  cause  of  private  enmity  to  each 
other,  as  they  would  venture  bravely  in  fight, 
so  in  times  of  truce  used  to  meet  and  converse 
amicably  together. 

And  at  this  present  time,  while  engaged 
about  this  common  business  of  fishing,  they 
fell  into  talk  together;  and  some  expressing 
their  admiration  of  the  neighbouring  sea,  and 
others  telling  how  much  they  were  taken  with 
the  convenience  and  commodiousness  of  the 
buildings  and  public  works,  one  of  the  Cor¬ 
inthian  party  took  occasion  to  demand  of  the 
others:  “And  is  it  possible  that  you  who  are 
Grecians  born  should  be  so  forward  to  reduce 
a  city  of  this  greatness,  and  enjoying  so  many 
rare  advantages,  into  the  state  of  barbarism; 
and  lend  your  assistance  to  plant  Carthagin¬ 
ians,  that  are  the  worst  and  bloodiest  of  men, 
so  much  the  nearer  to  us?  Whereas  you  should 
rather  wish  there  were  many  more  Sicilies  to 
lie  between  them  and  Greece*  Have  you  so 


TIMOLEON 

little  sense  as  to  believe,  that  they  come  hither 
with  an  army,  from  the  Pillars  of  Hercules 
and  the  Atlantic  Sea,  to  hazard  themselves  for 
the  establishment  of  Hicetes?  who,  if  he  had 
had  the  consideration  which  becomes  a  gen¬ 
eral,  would  never  have  thrown  out  his  ances¬ 
tors  and  founders  to  bring  in  the  enemies  of 
his  country  in  the  room  of  them,  when  he 
might  have  enjoyed  all  suitable  honour  and 
command,  with  consent  of  Timoleon  and  the 
rest  of  Corinth.” 

The  Greeks  that  were  in  pay  with  Hicetes, 
noising  these  discourses  about  their  camp, 
gave  Mago  some  ground  to  suspect,  as  indeed 
he  had  long  sought  for  a  pretence  to  be  gone, 
that  there  was  treachery  contrived  against 
him;  so  that,  although  Hicetes  entreated  him 
to  tarry,  and  made  it  appear  how  much 
stronger  they  were  than  the  enemy,  yet,  con¬ 
ceiving  they  came  far  more  short  of  Timo¬ 
leon  in  respect  of  courage  and  fortune  than 
they  surpassed  him  in  number,  he  presently 
went  aboard  and  set  sail  for  Africa,  letting 
Sicily  escape  out  of  his  hands  with  dishonour 
to  himself,  and  for  such  uncertain  causes,  that 
no  human  reason  could  give  an  account  of  his 
departure. 

The  day  after  he  went  away,  Timoleon 
came  up  before  the  city  in  array  for  a  battle. 
But  when  he  and  his  company  heard  of  this 
sudden  flight,  and  saw  the  docks  all  empty, 
they  could  not  forbear  laughing  at  the  cow¬ 
ardice  of  Mago,  and  in  mockery  caused  proc¬ 
lamation  to  be  made  through  the  city  that  a 
reward  would  be  given  to  any  one  who  could 
bring  them  tidings  whither  the  Carthaginian 
fleet  had  conveyed  itself  from  them. 

However,  Hicetes  resolving  to  fight  it  out 
alone,  and  not  quitting  his  hold  of  the  city, 
but  sticking  close  to  the  quarters  he  was  in 
possession  of,  places  that  were  well  fortified 
and  not  easy  to  be  attacked,  Timoleon  divided 
his  forces  into  three  parts,  and  fell  himself 
upon  the  side  where  the  river  Anapas  ran, 
which  was  most  strong  and  difficult  of  access; 
and  he  commanded  those  that  were  led  by 
Isias,  a  Corinthian  captain,  to  make  their  as¬ 
sault  from  the  post  of  Acradina,  while  Dinar- 
chus  and  Demaretus,  that  brought  him  the 
last  supply  from  Corinth,  were,  with  a  third  di¬ 
vision,  to  attempt  the  quarter  called  Epipolae. 

A  considerable  impression  being  made  from 
every  side  at  once,  the  soldiers  of  Hicetes  were 
beaten  off  and  put  to  flight;  and  this — that 
the  city  came  to  be  taken  by  storm,  and  fall 
suddenly  into  their  hands,  upon  the  defeat 


205 

and  rout  of  the  enemy — we  must  in  all  justice 
ascribe  to  the  valour  of  the  assailants  and  the 
wise  conduct  of  their  general;  but  that  not  so 
much  as  a  man  of  the  Corinthians  was  either 
slain  or  wounded  in  the  action,  this  the  good 
fortune  of  Timoleon  seems  to  challenge  for 
her  own  work,  as  though,  in  a  sort  of  rivalry 
with  his  own  personal  exertions,  she  made  it 
her  aim  to  exceed  and  obscure  his  actions  by 
her  favours,  that  those  who  heard  him  com¬ 
mended  for  his  noble  deeds  might  rather  ad¬ 
mire  the  happiness  than  the  merit  of  them. 

For  the  fame  of  what  was  done  not  only 
passed  through  all  Sicily,  and  filled  Italy  with 
wonder,  but  even  Greece  itself,  after  a  few 
days,  came  to  ring  with  the  greatness  of  his 
exploit;  insomuch  that  those  of  Corinth,  who 
had  as  yet  no  certainty  that  their  auxiliaries 
were  landed  on  the  island,  had  tidings 
brought  them  at  the  same  time  that  they  were 
safe  and  were  conquerors.  In  so  prosperous  a 
course  did  affairs  run,  and  such  was  the  speed 
and  celerity  of  execution  with  which  fortune, 
as  with  a  new  ornament,  set  off  the  native 
lustres  of  the  performance. 

Timoleon,  being  master  of  the  citadel, 
avoided  the  error  which  Dion  had  been  guilty 
of.  He  spared  not  the  place  for  the  beauty  and 
sumptuousness  of  its  fabric,  and,  keeping  clear 
of  those  suspicions  which  occasioned  first  the 
unpopularity  and  afterwards  the  fall  of  Dion, 
made  a  public  crier  give  notice  that  all  the 
Syracusans  who  were  willing  to  have  a  hand 
in  the  work  should  bring  pick-axes  and  mat¬ 
tocks,  and  other  instruments,  and  help  him  to 
demolish  the  fortifications  of  the  tyrants. 
When  they  all  came  up  with  one  accord,  look¬ 
ing  upon  that  order  and  that  day  as  the  surest 
foundation  of  their  liberty,  they  not  only  pull¬ 
ed  down  the  castle,  but  overturned  the  palaces 
and  monuments  adjoining,  and  whatever  else 
might  preserve  any  memory  of  former  ty¬ 
rants.  Having  soon  levelled  and  cleared  the 
place,  he  there  presently  erected  courts  for  ad¬ 
ministration  of  justice,  ratifying  the  citizens 
by  this  means,  and  building  popular  govern¬ 
ment  on  the  fall  and  ruin  of  tyranny. 

But  since  he  had  recovered  a  city  destitute 
of  inhabitants,  some  of  them  dead  in  civil 
wars  and  insurrections,  and  others  being  fled 
to  escape  tyrants,  so  that  through  solitude  and 
want  of  people  the  great  market-place  of  Syra¬ 
cuse  was  overgrown  with  such  quantity  of 
rank  herbage  that  it  became  a  pasture  for 
their  horses,  the  grooms  lying  along  in  the 
grass  as  they  fed  by  them;  while  also  other 


206 

towns,  very  few  excepted,  were  become  full  of 
stags  and  wild  boars,  so  that  those  who  had 
nothing  else  to  do  went  frequently  a-hunting, 
and  found  game  in  the  suburbs  and  about  the 
walls;  and  not  one  of  those  who  possessed 
themselves  of  castles,  or  made  garrisons  in 
the  country,  could  be  persuaded  to  quit  their 
present  abode,  or  would  accept  an  invitation 
to  return  back  into  the  city,  so  much  did  they 
all  dread  and  abhor  the  very  name  of  assem¬ 
blies  and  forms  of  government  and  public 
speaking,  that  had  produced  the  greater  part 
of  those  usurpers  who  had  successively  as¬ 
sumed  a  dominion  over  them — Timoleon, 
therefore,  with  the  Syracusans  that  remained, 
considering  this  vast  desolation,  and  how  little 
hope  there  was  to  have  it  otherwise  supplied, 
thought  good  to  write  to  the  Corinthians,  re¬ 
questing  that  they  would  send  a  colony  out  of 
Greece  to  repeople  Syracuse,  for  else  the  land 
about  it  would  lie  unimproved. 

Besides  this,  they  expected  to  be  involved  in 
a  greater  war  from  Africa,  having  news 
brought  them  that  Mago  had  killed  him¬ 
self,  and  that  the  Carthaginians,  out  of  rage 
for  his  ill-conduct  in  the  late  expedition,  had 
caused  his  body  to  be  nailed  upon  a  cross,  and 
that  they  were  raising  a  mighty  force,  with  de¬ 
sign  to  make  their  descent  upon  Sicily  the 
next  summer. 

These  letters  from  Timoleon  being  deliv¬ 
ered  at  Corinth,  and  the  ambassadors  of  Syra¬ 
cuse  beseeching  them  at  the  same  time  that 
they  would  take  upon  them  the  care  of  their 
poor  city,  and  once  again  become  the  founders 
of  it,  the  Corinthians  were  not  tempted  by 
any  feeling  of  cupidity  to  lay  hold  of  the  ad¬ 
vantage.  Nor  did  they  seize  and  appropriate 
the  city  to  themselves,  but  going  about  first 
to  the  games  that  are  kept  as  sacred  in  Greece, 
and  to  the  most  numerously  attended  religious 
assemblages,  they  made  publication  by  her¬ 
alds,  that  the  Corinthians,  having  destroyed 
the  usurpation  at  Syracuse  and  driven  out  the 
tyrant,  did  thereby  invite  the  Syracusan  exiles, 
and  any  other  Siceliots,  to  return  and  inhabit 
the  city,  with  full  enjoyment  of  freedom  un¬ 
der  their  own  laws,  the  land  being  divided 
among  them  in  just  and  equal  proportions. 

And  after  this,  sending  messengers  into 
Asia  and  the  several  islands  where  they  under¬ 
stood  that  most  of  the  scattered  fugitives  were 
then  residing,  they  bade  them  all  repair  to 
Corinth,  engaging  that  the  Corinthians  would 
afford  them  vessels  and  commanders,  and  a 
safe  convoy,  at  their  own  charges,  to  Syracuse. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Such  generous  proposals,  being  thus  spread 
about,  gained  them  the  just  and  honourable 
recompense  of  general  praise  and  benediction, 
for  delivering  the  country  from  oppressors, 
and  saving  it  from  barbarians,  and  restoring 
it  at  length  to  the  rightful  owners  of  the  place. 

These,  when  they  were  assembled  at  Cor¬ 
inth,  and  found  how  insufficient  their  com¬ 
pany  was,  besought  the  Corinthians  that  they 
might  have  a  supplement  of  other  persons,  as 
well  out  of  their  city  as  the  rest  of  Greece,  to 
go  with  them  as  joint  colonists;  and  so  raising 
themselves  to  the  number  of  ten  thousand, 
they  sailed  together  to  Syracuse.  By  this  time 
great  multitudes,  also,  from  Italy  and  Sicily 
had  flocked  in  to  Timoleon,  so  that,  as  Atha- 
nis  reports,  their  entire  body  amounted  now 
to  sixty  thousand  men. 

Among  these  he  divided  the  whole  terri¬ 
tory,  and  sold  the  houses  for  a  thousand  tal¬ 
ents;  by  which  method  he  both  left  it  in  the 
power  of  the  old  Syracusans  to  redeem  their 
own,  and  made  it  a  means  also  for  raising  a 
stock  for  the  community,  which  had  been  so 
much  impoverished  of  late  and  was  so  unable 
to  defray  other  expenses,  and  especially  those 
of  a  war,  that  they  exposed  their  very  statues 
to  sale,  a  regular  process  being  observed,  and 
sentence  of  auction  passed  upon  each  of  them 
by  majority  of  votes,  as  if  they  had  been  so 
many  criminals  taking  their  trial;  in  the 
course  of  which  it  is  said  that  while  condem¬ 
nation  was  pronounced  upon  all  other  statues, 
that  of  the  ancient  usurper  Gelo  was  exempt¬ 
ed,  out  of  admiration  and  honour  and  for  the 
sake  of  the  victory  he  gained  over  the  Cartha¬ 
ginian  forces  at  the  river  Himera. 

Syracuse  being  thus  happily  revived,  and  re¬ 
plenished  again  by  the  general  concourse  of 
inhabitants  from  all  parts,  Timoleon  was  de¬ 
sirous  now  to  rescue  other  cities  from  the  like 
bondage,  and  wholly  and  once  for  all  to  ex¬ 
tirpate  arbitrary  government  out  of  Sicily. 
And  for  this  purpose,  marching  in  to  the  ter¬ 
ritories  of  those  that  used  it,  he  compelled 
Hicetes  first  to  renounce  the  Carthaginian  in¬ 
terest,  and,  demolishing  the  fortresses  which 
were  held  by  him,  to  live  henceforth  among 
the  Leontinians  as  a  private  person.  Leptines, 
also,  the  tyrant  of  Apollonia  and  divers  other 
little  towns,  after  some  resistance  made,  see¬ 
ing  the  danger  he  was  in  of  being  taken  by 
force,  surrendered  himself;  upon  which  Ti¬ 
moleon  spared  his  life,  and  sent  him  away  to 
Corinth,  counting  it  a  glorious  thing  that  the 
mother  city  should  expose  to  the  view  of  other 


TIMOLEON 

Greeks  these  Sicilian  tyrants,  living  now  in  an 
exiled  and  a  low  condition. 

After  this  he  returned  to  Syracuse,  that  he 
might  have  leisure  to  attend  to  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  the  new  constitution,  and  assist  Ce- 
phalus  and  Dionysius,  who  were  sent  from 
Corinth  to  make  laws,  in  determining  the 
most  important  points  of  it. 

In  the  meanwhile,  desirous  that  his  hired 
soldiers  should  not  want  action,  but  might 
rather  enrich  themselves  by  some  plunder 
from  the  enemy,  he  despatched  Dinarchus  and 
Demaretus  with  a  portion  of  them  into  the 
part  of  the  island  belonging  to  the  Carthagin¬ 
ians,  where  they  obliged  several  cities  to  revolt 
from  the  barbarians,  and  not  only  lived  in 
great  abundance  themselves,  but  raised  money 
from  their  spoil  to  carry  on  the  war. 

Meantime,  the  Carthaginians  landed  at  the 
promontory  of  Lilybaeum,  bringing  with  them 
an  army  of  seventy  thousand  men  on  board 
two  hundred  galleys,  besides  a  thousand  other 
vessels  laden  with  engines  of  battery,  chariots, 
corn,  and  other  military  stores,  as  if  they  did 
not  intend  to  manage  the  war  by  piecemeal 
and  in  parts  as  heretofore,  but  to  drive  the 
Greeks  altogether  and  at  once  out  of  all  Sicily. 
And  indeed  it  was  a  force  sufficient  to  over¬ 
power  the  Siceliots,  even  though  they  had  been 
at  perfect  union  among  themselves,  and  had 
never  been  enfeebled  by  intestine  quarrels. 

Hearing  that  part  of  their  subject  territory 
was  suffering  devastation,  they  forthwith 
made  toward  the  Corinthians  with  great  fury, 
having  Hasdrubal  and  Hamilcar  for  their  gen¬ 
erals;  the  report  of  whose  numbers  and 
strength  coming  suddenly  to  Syracuse,  the  cit¬ 
izens  were  so  terrified,  that  hardly  three  thou¬ 
sand,  among  so  many  myriads  of  them,  had 
the  courage  to  take  up  arms  and  join  Timo- 
leon.  The  foreigners,  serving  for  pay,  were 
not  above  four  thousand  in  all,  and  about  a 
thousand  of  these  grew  faint-hearted  by  the 
way,  and  forsook  Timoleon  in  his  march  to¬ 
wards  the  enemy,  looking  on  him  as  frantic 
and  distracted,  destitute  of  the  sense  which 
might  have  been  expected  from  his  time  of 
life,  thus  to  venture  out  against  an  army  of 
seventy  thousand  men,  with  no  more  than 
five  thousand  foot  and  a  thousand  horse;  and, 
when  he  should  have  kept  those  forces  to  de¬ 
fend  the  city,  choosing  rather  to  remove  them 
eight  days’  journey  from  Syracuse,  so  that  if 
they  were  beaten  from  the  field,  they  would 
have  no  retreat,  nor  any  burial  if  they  fell 
upon  it.  Timoleon,  however,  reckoned  it  some 


207 

kind  of  advantage,  that  these  had  thus  discov¬ 
ered  themselves  before  the  battle,  and  encour¬ 
aging  the  rest,  led  them  with  all  speed  to  the 
river  Crimesus,  where  it  was  told  him  the 
Carthaginians  were  drawn  together. 

As  he  was  marching  up  an  ascent,  from  the 
top  of  which  they  expected  to  have  a  view  of 
the  army  and  of  the  strength  of  the  enemy, 
there  met  him  by  chance  a  train  of  mules 
loaded  with  parsley;  which  his  soldiers  con¬ 
ceived  to  be  an  ominous  occurrence  or  ill- 
boding  token,  because  this  is  the  herb  with 
which  we  not  unfrequently  adorn  the  sepul¬ 
chres  of  the  dead;  and  there  is  a  proverb  de¬ 
rived  from  the  custom,  used  of  one  who  is 
dangerously  sick,  that  he  has  need  of  nothing 
but  parsley.  So  to  ease  their  minds,  and  free 
them  from  any  superstitious  thoughts  or  fore¬ 
bodings  of  evil,  Timoleon  halted,  and  con¬ 
cluded  an  address  suitable  to  the  occasion,  by 
saying,  that  a  garland  of  triumph  was  here 
luckily  brought  them,  and  had  fallen  into 
their  hands  of  its  own  accord,  as  an  anticipa¬ 
tion  of  victory,  the  same  with  which  the  Cor¬ 
inthians  crown  the  victors  in  the  Isthmian 
games,  accounting  chaplets  of  parsley  the  sa¬ 
cred  wreath  proper  to  their  country;  parsley 
being  at  that  time  still  the  emblem  of  victory 
at  the  Isthmian,  as  it  is  now  at  the  Nemean 
sports;  and  it  is  not  so  very  long  ago  that  the 
pine  first  began  to  be  used  in  its  place. 

Timoleon,  therefore,  having  thus  bespoke 
his  soldiers,  took  part  of  the  parsley,  and  with 
it  made  himself  a  chaplet  first,  his  captains 
and  their  companies  all  following  the  example 
of  their  leader.  The  soothsayers  then,  observ¬ 
ing  also  two  eagles  on  the  wing  towards  them, 
one  of  which  bore  a  snake  struck  through  with 
her  talons,  and  the  other,  as  she  flew,  uttered  a 
loud  cry  indicating  boldness  and  assurance,  at 
once  showed  them  to  the  soldiers,  who  with 
one  consent  fell  to  supplicate  the  gods,  and 
call  them  in  to  their  assistance. 

It  was  now  about  the  beginning  of  summer, 
and  conclusion  of  the  month  called  Tharge- 
lion,  not  far  from  the  solstice;  and  the  river 
sending  up  a  thick  mist,  all  the  adjacent  plain 
was  at  first  darkened  with  the  fog,  so  that  for 
a  while  they  could  discern  nothing  from  the 
enemy’s  camp;  only  a  confused  buzz  and  un¬ 
distinguished  mixture  of  voices  came  up  to 
the  hill  from  the  distant  motions  and  clam¬ 
ours  of  so  vast  a  multitude.  When  the  Cor¬ 
inthians  had  mounted,  and  stood  on  the  top, 
and  had  laid  down  their  bucklers  to  take 
breath  and  repose  themselves,  the  sun  coming 


208 


round  and  drawing  up  the  vapours  from  be¬ 
low,  the  gross  foggy  air  that  was  now  gath¬ 
ered  and  condensed  above  formed  in  a  cloud 
upon  the  mountains;  and,  all  the  under  places 
being  clear  and  open,  the  river  Crimesus  ap¬ 
peared  to  them  again,  and  they  could  descry 
the  enemies  passing  over  it,  first  with  their 
formidable  four-horse  chariots  of  war,  and 
then  ten  thousand  footmen  bearing  white 
shields,  whom  they  guessed  to  be  all  Cartha¬ 
ginians,  from  the  splendour  of  their  arms, 
and  the  slowness  and  order  of  their  march. 

And  when  now  the  troops  of  various  other 
nations,  flowing  in  behind  them,  began  to 
throng  for  passage  in  a  tumultuous  and  un¬ 
ruly  manner,  Timoleon,  perceiving  that  the 
river  gave  them  opportunity  to  single  off 
whatever  number  of  their  enemies  they  had 
a  mind  to  engage  at  once,  and  bidding  his 
soldiers  observe  how  their  forces  were  divided 
into  two  separate  bodies  by  the  intervention 
of  the  stream,  some  being  already  over,  and 
others  still  to  ford  it,  gave  Demaretus  com¬ 
mand  to  fall  in  upon  the  Carthaginians  with 
his  horse,  and  disturb  their  ranks  before  they 
should  be  drawn  up  into  form  of  battle;  and 
coming  down  into  the  plain  himself,  forming 
his  right  and  left  wing  of  other  Sicilians,  in¬ 
termingling  only  a  few  strangers  in  each,  he 
placed  the  natives  of  Syracuse  in  the  middle, 
with  the  stoutest  mercenaries  he  had  about 
his  own  person;  and  waiting  a  little  to  observe 
the  action  of  his  horse,  when  he  saw  they 
were  not  only  hindered  from  grappling  with 
the  Carthaginians  by  the  armed  chariots  that 
ran  to  and  fro  before  the  army,  but  forced 
continually  to  wheel  about  to  escape  having 
their  ranks  broken,  and  so  to  repeat  their 
charges  anew,  he  took  his  buckler  in  his  hand, 
and  crying  out  to  the  foot  that  they  should 
follow  him  with  courage  and  confidence,  he 
seemed  to  speak  with  a  more  than  human  ac¬ 
cent,  and  a  voice  stronger  than  ordinary; 
whether  it  were  that  he  naturally  raised  it  so 
high  in  the  vehemence  and  ardour  with  his 
mind  to  assault  the  enemy,  or  else,  as  many 
then  thought,  some  god  or  other  spoke  with 
him. 

When  his  soldiers  quickly  gave  an  echo  to 
it,  and  besought  him  to  lead  them  on  without 
any  further  delay,  he  made  a  sign  to  the  horse, 
that  they  should  draw  off  from  the  front 
where  the  chariots  were,  and  pass  sidewards 
to  attack  their  enemies  in  the  flank;  then, 
making  his  vanguard  firm  by  joining  man  to 
man  and  buckler  to  buckler,  he  caused  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

trumpet  to  sound,  and  so  bore  in  upon  the 
Carthaginians.  They,  for  their  part,  stoutly 
received  and  sustained  his  first  onset;  and 
having  their  bodies  armed  with  breast-plates 
of  iron,  and  helmets  of  brass  on  their  heads, 
besides  great  bucklers  to  cover  and  secure 
them,  they  could  easily  repel  the  charge  of  the 
Greek  spears. 

But  when  the  business  came  to  a  decision 
by  the  sword,  where  mastery  depends  no  less 
upon  art  than  strength,  all  on  a  sudden  from 
the  mountain-tops  violent  peals  of  thunder 
and  vivid  flashes  of  lightning  broke  out;  fol¬ 
lowing  upon  which  the  darkness,  that  had 
been  hovering  about  the  higher  grounds  and 
the  crests  of  the  hills,  descending  to  the  place 
of  battle  and  bringing  a  tempest  of  rain  and 
of  wind  and  hail  along  with  it,  was  driven 
upon  the  Greeks  behind,  and  fell  only  at  their 
backs,  but  discharged  itself  in  the  very  faces  of 
the  barbarians,  the  rain  beating  on  them,  and 
the  lightning  dazzling  them  without  cessa¬ 
tion;  annoyances  that  in  many  ways  distressed 
at  any  rate  the  inexperienced,  who  had  not 
been  used  to  such  hardships,  and,  in  particu¬ 
lar,  the  claps  of  thunder,  and  the  noise  of  the 
rain  and  hail  beating  on  their  arms,  kept 
them  from  hearing  the  commands  of  their 
officers. 

Besides  which,  the  very  mud  also  was  a 
great  hindrance  to  the  Carthaginians,  who 
were  not  lightly  equipped,  but,  as  I  said  be¬ 
fore,  loaded  with  heavy  armour;  and  then 
their  shirts  underneath  getting  drenched,  the 
foldings  about  the  bosom  filled  with  water, 
grew  unwieldy  and  cumbersome  to  them  as 
they  fought,  and  made  it  easy  for  the  Greeks 
to  throw  them  down,  and,  when  they  were 
once  down,  impossible  for  them,  under  that 
weight,  to  disengage  themselves  and  rise  again 
with  weapons  in  their  hands. 

The  river  Crimesus,  too,  swollen  partly  by 
the  rain,  and  partly  by  the  stoppage  of  its 
course  with  the  numbers  that  were  passing 
through,  overflowed  its  banks;  and  the  level 
ground  by  the  side  of  it,  being  so  situated  as 
to  have  a  number  of  small  ravines  and  hol¬ 
lows  of  the  hillside  descending  upon  it,  was 
now  filled  with  rivulets  and  currents  that  had 
no  certain  channel,  in  which  the  Carthagin¬ 
ians  stumbled  and  rolled  about,  and  found 
themselves  in  great  difficulty.  So  that,  in  fine, 
the  storm  bearing  still  upon  them,  and  the 
Greeks  having  cut  in  pieces  four  hundred 
men  of  their  first  ranks,  the  whole  body  of 
their  army  began  to  fly. 


TIMOLEON 

Great  numbers  were  overtaken  in  the  plain, 
and  put  to  the  sword  there;  and  many  of 
them,  as  they  were  making  their  way  back 
through  the  river,  falling  foul  upon  others 
that  were  yet  coming  over,  were  borne  away 
and  overwhelmed  by  the  waters;  but  the 
major  part,  attempting  to  get  up  the  hill  so  as 
to  make  their  escape,  were  intercepted  and  de¬ 
stroyed  by  the  light-armed  troops.  It  is  said 
that,  of  ten  thousand  who  lay  dead  after  the 
fight,  three  thousand,  at  least,  were  Cartha¬ 
ginian  citizens;  a  heavy  loss  and  great  grief 
to  their  countrymen;  those  that  fell  being  men 
inferior  to  none  among  them  as  to  birth, 
wealth,  or  reputation.  Nor  do  their  records 
mention  that  so  many  native  Carthaginians 
were  ever  cut  off  before  in  any  one  battle;  as 
they  usually  employed  Africans,  Spaniards, 
and  Numidians  in  their  wars,  so  that  if  they 
chanced  to  be  defeated,  it  was  still  at  the  cost 
and  damage  of  other  nations. 

The  Greeks  easily  discovered  of  what  con¬ 
dition  and  account  the  slain  were  by  the  rich¬ 
ness  of  their  spoils;  for  when  they  came  to 
collect  the  booty,  there  was  little  reckoning 
made  either  of  brass  or  iron,  so  abundant 
were  better  metals,  and  so  common  were  sil¬ 
ver  and  gold.  Passing  over  the  river  they  be¬ 
came  masters  of  their  camp  and  carriages. 
As  for  captives,  a  great  many  of  them  were 
stolen  away  and  sold  privately  by  the  soldiers, 
but  about  five  thousand  were  brought  in  and 
delivered  up  for  the  benefit  of  the  public;  two 
hundred  of  their  chariots  of  war  were  also 
taken.  The  tent  of  Timoleon  then  presented 
a  most  glorious  and  magnificent  appearance, 
being  heaped  up  and  hung  round  with  every 
variety  of  spoils  and  military  ornaments, 
among  which  were  a  thousand  breastplates  of 
rare  workmanship  and  beauty,  and  bucklers 
to  the  number  of  ten  thousand.  The  victors 
being  but  few  to  strip  so  many  that  were  van¬ 
quished,  and  having  such  valuable  booty  to 
occupy  them,  it  was  the  third  day  after  the 
fight  before  they  could  erect  and  finish  the 
trophy  of  their  conquest. 

Timoleon  sent  tidings  of  his  victory  to  Cor¬ 
inth,  with  the  best  and  goodliest  arms  he  had 
taken  as  a  proof  of  it;  that  he  thus  might  ren¬ 
der  his  country  an  object  of  emulation  to  the 
whole  world,  when,  of  all  the  cities  of  Greece, 
men  should  there  alone  behold  the  chief  tem¬ 
ples  adorned,  not  with  Grecian  spoils,  nor  of¬ 
ferings  obtained  by  the  bloodshed  and  plunder 
of  their  own  countrymen  and  kindred,  and 
attended,  therefore,  with  sad  and  unhappy  re- 


209 

membrances,  but  with  such  as  had  been 
stripped  from  barbarians  and  enemies  to  their 
nation,  with  the  noblest  titles  inscribed  upon 
them,  titles  telling  of  the  justice  as  well  as 
fortitude  of  the  conquerors;  namely,  that  the 
people  of  Corinth,  and  Timoleon  their  gen¬ 
eral,  having  redeemed  the  Greeks  of  Sicily 
from  Carthaginian  bondage,  made  oblation 
of  these  to  the  gods,  in  grateful  acknowledg¬ 
ment  of  their  favour. 

Having  done  this,  he  left  his  hired  soldiers 
in  the  enemy’s  country  to  drive  and  carry 
away  all  they  could  throughout  the  subject- 
territory  of  Carthage,  and  so  marched  with 
the  rest  of  his  army  to  Syracuse,  where  he  is¬ 
sued  an  edict  for  banishing  the  thousand  mer¬ 
cenaries  who  had  basely  deserted  him  before 
the  battle,  and  obliged  them  to  quit  the  city  be¬ 
fore  sunset.  They,  sailing  into  Italy,  lost  their 
lives  there  by  the  hands  of  the  Bruttians,  in 
spite  of  a  public  assurance  of  safety  previously 
given  them;  thus  receiving,  from  the  divine 
power,  a  just  reward  of  their  own  treachery. 

Mamercus,  however,  the  tyrant  of  Catana, 
and  Hicetes,  after  all,  either  envying  Timo¬ 
leon  the  glory  of  his  exploits,  or  fearing  him  as 
one  that  would  keep  no  agreement,  or  have 
any  peace  with  tyrants,  made  a  league  with 
the  Carthaginians,  and  pressed  them  much  to 
send  a  new  army  and  commander  into  Sicily, 
unless  they  would  be  content  to  hazard  all  and 
to  be  wholly  ejected  out  of  that  island. 

And  in  consequence  of  this,  Gisco  was  des¬ 
patched  with  a  navy  of  seventy  sail.  He  took 
numerous  Greek  mercenaries  also  into  pay, 
that  being  the  first  time  they  had  ever  been 
enlisted  for  the  Carthaginian  service;  but  then 
it  seems  the  Carthaginians  began  to  admire 
them,  as  the  most  irresistible  soldiers  of  all 
mankind. 

Uniting  their  forces  in  the  territory  of  Mes- 
sena,  they  cut  off  four  hundred  of  Timoleon’s 
paid  soldiers,  and  within  the  dependencies  of 
Carthage,  at  a  place  called  Hierae,  destroyed, 
by  an  ambuscade,  the  whole  body  of  mercen¬ 
aries  that  served  under  Euthymus  the  Leu- 
cadian;  which  accidents,  however,  made  the 
good  fortune  of  Timoleon  accounted  all  the 
more  remarkable,  as  these  were  the  men  that, 
with  Philomelus  of  Phocis  and  Onomarchus, 
had  forcibly  broken  into  the  temple  of  Apollo 
at  Delphi,  and  were  partakers  with  them  in 
the  sacrilege;  so  that  being  hated  and  shunned 
by  all,  as  persons  under  a  curse,  they  were 
constrained  to  wander  about  in  Peloponnesus; 
when,  for  want  of  others,  Timoleon  was  glad 


210 


to  take  them  into  service  in  his  expedition  for 
Sicily,  where  they  were  successful  in  whatever 
enterprise  they  attempted  under  his  conduct. 

But  now,  when  all  the  important  dangers 
were  past,  on  his  sending  them  out  for  the  re¬ 
lief  and  defence  of  his  party  in  several  places, 
they  perished  and  were  destroyed  at  a  distance 
from  him,  not  all  together,  but  in  small  par¬ 
ties;  and  the  vengeance  which  was  destined 
for  them  accommodated  itself  to  the  good  for¬ 
tune  which  guarded  Timoleon  so  as  not  to 
allow  any  harm  or  prejudice  for  good  men 
to  arise  from  the  punishment  of  the  wicked. 
The  benevolence  and  kindness  which  the  gods 
had  for  Timoleon  was  thus  as  distinctly  recog¬ 
nised  in  his  disasters  as  in  his  successes. 

What  most  annoyed  the  Syracusans  was 
their  being  insulted  and  mocked  by  the  ty¬ 
rants;  as,  for  example,  by  Mamercus,  who 
valued  himself  much  upon  his  gift  for  writing 
poems  and  tragedies,  and  took  occasion,  when 
coming  to  present  the  gods  with  the  bucklers 
of  the  hired  soldiers  whom  he  had  killed,  to 
make  a  boast  of  his  victory  in  an  insulting 
elegiac  inscription: — 

These  shields  with  purple,  gold,  and  ivory 

wrought, 

Were  won  by  us  that  but  with  poor  ones  fought . 

After  this,  while  Timoleon  marched  to  Ca- 
lauria,  Hicetes  made  an  inroad  into  the  bor¬ 
ders  of  Syracuse,  where  he  met  with  consid¬ 
erable  booty,  and  having  done  much  mischief 
and  havoc,  returned  back  by  Calauria  itself, 
in  contempt  of  Timoleon  and  the  slender 
force  he  had  then  with  him.  He,  suffering 
Hicetes  to  pass  forward,  pursued  him  with  his 
horsemen  and  light  infantry;  which  Hicetes 
perceiving,  crossed  the  river  Damyrias,  and 
then  stood  in  a  posture  to  receive  him;  the 
difficulty  of  the  passage,  and  the  height  and 
steepness  of  the  bank  on  each  side,  giving  ad¬ 
vantage  enough  to  make  him  confident. 

A  strange  contention  and  dispute,  mean¬ 
time,  among  the  officers  of  Timoleon  a  little 
retarded  the  conflict;  no  one  of  them  was  will¬ 
ing  to  let  another  pass  over  before  him  to  en¬ 
gage  the  enemy;  each  man  claiming  it  as  a 
right  to  venture  first  and  begin  the  onset;  so 
that  their  fording  was  likely  to  be  tumultuous 
and  without  order,  a  mere  general  struggle 
which  should  be  the  foremost. 

Timoleon,  therefore,  desiring  to  decide  the 
quarrel  by  lot,  took  a  ring  from  each  of  the 
pretenders,  which  he  cast  into  his  own  cloak, 
and,  after  he  had  shaken  all  together,  the  first 
he  drew  out  had,  by  good  fortune,  the  figure 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

of  a  trophy  engraved  as  a  seal  upon  it;  at  the 
sight  of  which  the  young  captains  all  shouted 
for  joy,  and,  without  waiting  any  longer  to 
see  how  chance  would  determine  it  for  the 
rest,  took  every  man  his  way  through  the 
river  with  all  the  speed  they  could  make,  and 
fell  to  blows  with  the  enemies,  who  were  not 
able  to  bear  up  against  the  violence  of  their 
attack,  but  fled  in  haste  and  left  their  arms 
behind  them  all  alike,  and  a  thousand  dead 
upon  the  place. 

Not  long  after,  Timoleon,  marching  up  to 
the  city  of  the  Leontines,  took  Hicetes  alive, 
and  his  son  Eupolemus,  and  Euthymus,  the 
commander  of  his  horse,  who  were  bound  and 
brought  to  him  by  their  own  soldiers.  Hicetes 
and  the  stripling  his  son  were  then  executed 
as  tyrants  and  traitors;  and  Euthymus,  though 
a  brave  man,  and  one  of  singular  courage, 
could  obtain  no  mercy,  because  he  was  charged 
with  contemptuous  language  in  disparage¬ 
ment  of  the  Corinthians  when  they  first  sent 
their  forces  into  Sicily;  it  is  said  that  he  told 
the  Leontini  in  a  speech  that  the  news  did  not 
sound  terrible,  nor  was  any  great  danger  to  be 
feared  because  of — 

Corinthian  women  coming  out  of  doors. 

So  true  it  is  that  men  are  usually  more  stung 
and  galled  by  reproachful  words  than  hostile 
actions;  and  they  bear  an  affront  with  less  pa¬ 
tience  than  an  injury;  to  do  harm  and  mis¬ 
chief  by  deeds  is  counted  pardonable  from 
enemies,  as  nothing  less  can  be  expected  in  a 
state  of  war;  whereas  virulent  and  contumeli¬ 
ous  words  appear  to  be  the  expression  of  need¬ 
less  hatred,  and  to  proceed  from  an  excess  of 
rancour. 

When  Timoleon  came  back  to  Syracuse,  the 
citizens  brought  the  wives  and  daughters  of 
Hicetes  and  his  son  to  a  public  trial,  and  con¬ 
demned  and  put  them  to  death.  This  seems  to 
be  the  least  pleasing  action  of  Timoleon’s  life; 
since  if  he  had  interposed,  the  unhappy  wom¬ 
en  would  have  been  spared.  He  would  appear 
to  have  disregarded  the  thing,  and  to  have 
given  them  up  to  the  citizens,  who  were  eager 
to  take  vengeance  for  the  wrongs  done  to 
Dion,  who  expelled  Dionysius;  since  it  was 
this  very  Hicetes  who  took  Arete  the  wife  and 
Aristomache  the  sister  of  Dion,  with  a  son 
that  had  not  yet  passed  his  childhood,  and 
threw  them  all  together  into  the  sea  alive,  as 
related  in  the  life  of  Dion. 

After  this,  he  moved  towards  Catana  against 
Mamercus,  who  gave  him  battle  near  the  river 
Abolus,  and  was  overthrown  and  put  to  flight, 


TIMOLEON 

losing  above  two  thousand  men,  a  consider¬ 
able  part  of  whom  were  the  Phoenician  troops 
sent  by  Gisco  to  his  assistance.  After  this  de¬ 
feat  the  Carthaginians  sued  for  peace;  which 
was  granted  on  the  conditions  that  they 
should  confine  themselves  to  the  country  with¬ 
in  the  river  Lycus,  that  those  of  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  who  wished  to  remove  to  the  Syracusan 
territories  should  be  allowed  to  depart  with 
their  whole  families  and  fortunes,  and,  lastly, 
that  Carthage  should  renounce  all  engage¬ 
ments  to  the  tyrants. 

Mamercus,  now  forsaken  and  despairing  of 
success,  took  ship  for  Italy  with  the  design  of 
bringing  in  the  Lucanians  against  Timoleon 
and  the  people  of  Syracuse;  but  the  men  in 
his  galleys  turning  back  and  landing  again 
and  delivering  up  Catana  to  Timoleon,  thus 
obliged  him  to  fly  for  his  own  safety  to  Mes- 
sena,  where  Hippo  was  tyrant.  Timoleon, 
however,  coming  up  against  them,  and  be¬ 
sieging  the  city  both  by  sea  and  land,  Hippo, 
fearful  of  the  event,  endeavoured  to  slip  away 
in  a  vessel;  which  the  people  of  Messena  sur¬ 
prised  as  it  was  putting  off,  and  seizing  on  his 
person,  and  bringing  all  their  children  from 
school  into  the  theatre  to  witness  the  glorious 
spectacle  of  a  tyrant  punished,  they  first  pub¬ 
licly  scourged  and  then  put  him  to  death. 

Mamercus  made  surrender  of  himself  to 
Timoleon,  with  the  proviso  that  he  should  be 
tried  at  Syracuse  and  Timoleon  should  take 
no  part  in  his  accusation.  Thither  he  was 
brought  accordingly,  and  presenting  himself 
to  plead  before  the  people,  he  essayed  to  pro¬ 
nounce  an  oration  he  had  long  before  com¬ 
posed  in  his  own  defence;  but  finding  him¬ 
self  interrupted  by  noise  and  clamours,  and 
observing  from  their  aspect  and  demeanour 
that  the  assembly  was  inexorable,  he  threw 
off  his  upper  garment,  and  running  across  the 
theatre  as  hard  as  he  could,  dashed  his  head 
against  one  of  the  stones  under  the  seats  with 
intention  to  have  killed  himself;  but  he  had 
not  the  fortune  to  perish  as  he  designed,  but 
was  taken  up  alive,  and  suffered  the  death  of 
a  robber. 

Thus  did  Timoleon  cut  the  nerves  of  tyran¬ 
ny  and  put  a  period  to  the  wars;  and,  where¬ 
as,  at  his  first  entering  upon  Sicily,  the  island 
was  as  it  were  become  wild  again,  and  was 
hateful  to  the  very  natives  on  account  of  the 
evils  and  miseries  they  suffered  there,  he  so 
civilised  and  restored  it,  and  rendered  it  so 
desirable  to  all  men,  that  even  strangers  now 
came  by  sea  to  inhabit  those  towns  and  places 


211 

which  their  own  citizens  had  formerly  for¬ 
saken  and  left  desolate. 

Agrigentum  and  Gela,  two  famous  cities 
that  had  been  ruined  and  laid  waste  by  the 
Carthaginians  after  the  Attic  war,  were  then 
peopled  again,  the  one  by  Megellus  and  Phe- 
ristus  from  Elea,  the  other  by  Gorgus,  from 
the  island  of  Ceos,  partly  with  new  settlers, 
partly  with  the  old  inhabitants  whom  they 
collected  again  from  various  parts;  to  all  of 
whom  Timoleon  not  only  afforded  a  secure  and 
peaceful  abode  after  so  obstinate  a  war,  but 
was  further  so  zealous  in  assisting  and  provid¬ 
ing  for  them  that  he  was  honoured  among 
them  as  their  founder. 

Similar  feelings  also  possessed  to  such  a  de¬ 
gree  all  the  rest  of  the  Sicilians  that  there  was 
no  proposal  for  peace,  nor  reformation  of 
laws,  nor  assignation  of  land,  nor  reconstitu¬ 
tion  of  government,  which  they  could  think 
well  of,  unless  he  lent  his  aid  as  a  chief  archi¬ 
tect,  to  finish  and  adorn  the  work,  and  super¬ 
add  some  touches  from  his  own  hand,  which 
might  render  it  pleasing  both  to  God  and 
man. 

Although  Greece  had  in  his  time  produced 
several  persons  of  extraordinary  worth,  and 
much  renowned  for  their  achievements,  such 
as  Timotheus  and  Agesilaus  and  Pelopidas 
and  (Timoleon’s  chief  model)  Epaminondas, 
yet  the  lustre  of  their  best  actions  was  ob¬ 
scured  by  a  degree  of  violence  and  labour,  in¬ 
somuch  that  some  of  them  were  matter  of 
blame  and  of  repentance;  whereas  there  is  not 
any  one  act  of  Timoleon’s,  setting  aside  the 
necessity  he  was  placed  under  in  reference  to 
his  brother,  to  which,  as  Timaeus  observes,  we 
may  not  fitly  apply  that  exclamation  of  So¬ 
phocles — 

0  gods !  what  Venus,  or  what  grace  divine, 

Did  here  with  human  workmanship  combine ? 

For  as  the  poetry  of  Antimachus,  and  the 
painting  of  Dionysius,  the  artists  of  Colophon, 
though  full  of  force  and  vigour,  yet  appeared 
to  be  strained  and  elaborate  in  comparison 
with  the  pictures  of  Nicomachus  and  the 
verses  of  Homer,  which,  besides  their  general 
strength  and  beauty,  have  the  peculiar  charm 
of  seeming  to  have  been  executed  with  per¬ 
fect  ease  and  readiness;  so  the  expeditions  and 
acts  of  Epaminondas  or  Agesilaus,  that  were 
full  of  toil  and  effort,  when  compared  with 
the  easy  and  natural  as  well  as  noble  and 
glorious  achievements  of  Timoleon,  compel 
our  fair  and  unbiased  judgment  to  pronounce 


212 


the  latter  not  indeed  the  effect  of  fortune,  but 
the  success  of  fortunate  merit.  Though  he 
himself  indeed  ascribed  that  success  to  the 
sole  favour  of  fortune;  and  both  in  the  letters 
which  he  wrote  to  his  friends  at  Corinth,  and 
in  the  speeches  he  made  to  the  people  of  Syra¬ 
cuse,  he  would  say,  that  he  was  thankful  unto 
God,  who,  designing  to  save  Sicily,  was 
pleased  to  honour  him  with  the  name  and 
title  of  the  deliverance  he  vouchsafed  it. 

And  having  built  a  chapel  in  his  house,  he 
there  sacrificed  to  Good  Hap,  as  a  deity  that 
had  favoured  him,  and  devoted  the  house  it¬ 
self  to  the  Sacred  Genius;  it  being  a  house 
which  the  Syracusans  had  selected  for  him, 
as  a  special  reward  and  monument  of  his 
brave  exploits,  granting  him  together  with  it 
the  most  agreeable  and  beautiful  piece  of  land 
in  the  whole  country,  where  he  kept  his  resi¬ 
dence  for  the  most  part,  and  enjoyed  a  private 
life  with  his  wife  and  children,  who  came  to 
him  from  Corinth.  For  he  returned  thither 
no  more,  unwilling  to  be  concerned  in  the 
broils  and  tumults  of  Greece,  or  to  expose 
himself  to  public  envy  (the  fatal  mischief 
which  great  commanders  continually  run  into, 
from  the  insatiable  appetite  for  honours  and 
authority);  but  wisely  chose  to  spend  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  his  days  in  Sicily,  and  there  par¬ 
take  of  the  blessings  he  himself  had  procured, 
the  greatest  of  which  was  to  behold  so  many 
cities  flourish,  and  so  many  thousands  of 
people  live  happy  through  his  means. 

As,  however,  not  only,  as  Simonides  says, 
“on  every  lark  must  grow  a  crest,”  but  also 
in  every  democracy  there  must  spring  up  a 
false  accuser,  so  was  it  at  Syracuse:  two  of 
their  popular  spokesmen,  Laphystius  and  De- 
maenetus  by  name,  fell  to  slander  Timoleon. 
The  former  of  whom  requiring  him  to  put  in 
sureties  that  he  would  answer  to  an  indict¬ 
ment  that  would  be  brought  against  him, 
Timoleon  would  not  suffer  the  citizens,  who 
were  incensed  at  this  demand,  to  oppose  it 
or  hinder  the  proceeding,  since  he  of  his  own 
accord  had  been,  he  said,  at  all  that  trouble, 
and  run  so  many  dangerous  risks  for  this  very 
end  and  purpose,  that  every  one  who  wished 
to  try  matters  by  law  should  freely  have  re¬ 
course  to  it.  And  when  Demaenetus,  in  a  full 
audience  of  the  people,  laid  several  things  to 
his  charge  which  had  been  done  while  he  was 
general,  he  made  no  other  reply  to  him,  but 
only  said  he  was  much  indebted  to  the  gods 
for  granting  the  request  he  had  so  often  made 
them,  namely,  that  he  might  live  to  see  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Syracusans  enjoy  that  liberty  of  speech  which 
they  now  seemed  to  be  masters  of. 

Timoleon,  therefore,  having  by  confession 
of  all  done  the  greatest  and  the  noblest  things 
of  any  Greek  of  his  age,  and  alone  distin¬ 
guished  himself  in  those  actions  to  which  their 
orators  and  philosophers,  in  their  harangues 
and  panegyrics  at  their  solemn  national  as¬ 
semblies,  used  to  exhort  and  incite  the  Greeks, 
and  being  withdrawn  beforehand  by  happy 
fortune,  unspotted  and  without  blood,  from 
the  calamities  of  civil  war,  in  which  ancient 
Greece  was  soon  after  involved;  having  also 
given  full  proof,  as  of  his  sage  conduct  and 
manly  courage  to  the  barbarians  and  tyrants, 
so  of  his  justice  and  gentleness  to  the  Greeks, 
and  his  friends  in  general;  having  raised,  too, 
the  greater  part  of  those  trophies  he  won  in 
battle  without  any  tears  shed  or  any  mourning 
worn  by  the  citizens  either  of  Syracuse  or 
Corinth,  and  within  less  than  eight  years’ 
space  delivered  Sicily  from  its  inveterate  griev¬ 
ances  and  intestine  distempers,  and  given  it 
up  free  to  the  native  inhabitants,  began,  as  he 
was  now  growing  old,  to  find  his  eyes  fail, 
and  awhile  after  became  perfectly  blind. 

Not  that  he  had  done  anything  himself 
which  might  occasion  this  defect,  or  was  de¬ 
prived  of  his  sight  by  any  outrage  of  fortune; 
it  seems  rather  to  have  been  some  inbred  and 
hereditary  weakness  that  was  founded  in  nat¬ 
ural  causes,  which  by  length  of  time  came 
to  discover  itself.  For  it  is  said,  that  several 
of  his  kindred  and  family  were  subject  to 
the  like  gradual  decay,  and  lost  all  use  of  their 
eyes,  as  he  did,  in  their  declining  years.  Atha- 
nis,  the  historian,  tells  us  that  even  during  the 
war  against  Hippo  and  Mamercus,  while  he 
was  in  his  camp  at  Mylae,  there  appeared  a 
white  speck  within  his  eye,  from  whence  all 
could  foresee  the  deprivation  that  was  coming 
on  him;  this,  however,  did  not  hinder  him 
then  from  continuing  the  siege,  and  prosecut¬ 
ing  the  war,  till  he  got  both  the  tyrants  into 
his  power;  but  upon  his  coming  back  to  Syra¬ 
cuse,  he  presently  resigned  the  authority  of 
sole  commander,  and  besought  the  citizens  to 
excuse  him  from  any  further  service,  since 
things  were  already  brought  to  so  fair  an  issue. 

Nor  is  it  so  much  to  be  wondered  that  he 
himself  should  bear  the  misfortune  without 
any  marks  of  trouble;  but  the  respect  and 
gratitude  which  the  Syracusans  showed  him 
when  he  was  entirely  blind  may  justly  deserve 
our  admiration.  They  used  to  go  themselves 
to  visit  him  in  troops,  and  brought  all  the 


TIMOLEON 

strangers  that  travelled  through  their  country 
to  his  house  and  manor,  that  they  also  might 
have  the  pleasure  to  see  their  noble  benefac¬ 
tor;  making  it  the  great  matter  of  their  joy 
and  exultation,  that  when,  after  so  many  brave 
and  happy  exploits,  he  might  have  returned 
with  triumph  into  Greece,  he  should  disre¬ 
gard  all  the  glorious  preparations  that  were 
there  made  to  receive  him,  and  choose  rather 
to  stay  here  and  end  his  days  among  them. 

Of  the  various  things  decreed  and  done  in 
honour  of  Timoleon,  I  consider  one  most  sig¬ 
nal  testimony  to  have  been  the  vote  which 
they  passed,  that,  whenever  they  should  be  at 
war  with  any  foreign  nation,  they  should 
make  use  of  none  but  a  Corinthian  general. 

The  method,  also,  of  their  proceeding  in 
council  was  a  noble  demonstration  of  the  same 
deference  for  his  person.  For,  determining 
matters  of  less  consequence  themselves,  they 
always  called  him  to  advise  in  the  more  diffi¬ 
cult  cases,  and  such  as  were  of  greater  mo¬ 
ment.  He  was,  on  these  occasions,  carried 
through  the  market-place  in  a  litter,  and 
brought  in,  sitting,  into  the  theatre,  where  the 
people  with  one  voice  saluted  him  by  his 
name;  and  then,  after  returning  the  courtesy, 
and  pausing  for  a  time,  till  the  noise  of  their 
gratulations  and  blessings  began  to  cease,  he 
heard  the  business  in  debate,  and  delivered 
his  opinion.  This  being  confirmed  by  a  gen¬ 
eral  suffrage,  his  servants  went  back  with  the 
litter  through  the  midst  of  the  assembly,  the 
people  waiting  on  him  with  acclamations 
and  applauses,  and  then  returning  to  consider 
other  public  matters,  which  they  could  des¬ 
patch  in  his  absence. 

Being  thus  cherished  in  his  old  age,  with 
all  the  respect  and  tenderness  due  to  a  com¬ 
mon  father,  he  was  seized  with  a  very  slight 
indisposition,  which,  however,  was  sufficient, 
with  the  aid  of  time,  to  put  a  period  to  his 
life.  There  was  an  allotment  then  of  certain 
days  given,  within  the  space  of  which  the 
Syracusans  were  to  provide  whatever  should 
be  necessary  for  his  burial,  and  all  the  neigh- 


213 

bouring  country  people  and  strangers  were 
to  make  their  appearance  in  a  body;  so  that 
the  funeral  pomp  was  set  out  with  great  splen¬ 
dour  and  magnificence  in  all  other  respects, 
and  the  bier,  decked  with  ornaments  and 
trophies,  was  borne  by  a  select  body  of  young 
men  over  that  ground  where  the  palace  and 
castle  of  Dionysius  stood  before  they  were  de¬ 
molished  by  Timoleon.  There  attended  on 
the  solemnity  several  thousands  of  men  and 
women,  all  crowned  with  flowers,  and  arrayed 
in  fresh  and  clean  attire,  which  made  it  look 
like  the  procession  of  a  public  festival;  while 
the  language  of  all,  and  their  tears  mingling 
with  their  praise  and  benediction  of  the  dead 
Timoleon,  manifestly  showed  that  it  was  not 
any  superficial  honour,  or  commanded  hom¬ 
age,  which  they  paid  him,  but  the  testimony 
of  a  just  sorrow  for  his  death,  and  the  expres¬ 
sion  of  true  affection. 

The  bier  at  length  being  placed  upon  the 
pile  of  wood  that  was  kindled  to  consume  his 
corpse,  Demetrius,  one  of  their  loudest  criers, 
proceeded  to  read  a  proclamation  to  the  fol¬ 
lowing  purpose:  “The  people  of  Syracuse 
have  made  a  special  decree  to  inter  Timoleon, 
the  son  of  Timodemus,  the  Corinthian,  at  the 
common  expense  of  two  hundred  minae,  and 
to  honour  his  memory  for  ever,  by  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  annual  prizes  to  be  competed  for 
in  music,  and  horse-races,  and  all  sorts  of 
bodily  exercise;  and  this,  because  he  sup¬ 
pressed  the  tyrants,  overthrew  the  barbarians, 
replenished  the  principal  cities,  that  were  des¬ 
olate,  with  new  inhabitants,  and  then  restored 
the  Sicilian  Greeks  to  the  privilege  of  living 
by  their  own  laws.” 

Besides  this,  they  made  a  tomb  for  him 
in  the  market-place,  which  they  afterwards 
built  round  with  colonnades,  and  attached  to 
it  places  of  exercise  for  the  young  men,  and 
gave  it  the  name  of  the  Timoleonteum.  And 
keeping  to  that  form  and  order  of  civil  policy 
and  observing  those  laws  and  constitutions 
which  he  left  them,  they  lived  themselves  a 
long  time  in  great  prosperity. 


A2MILIUS  PAULUS 

C.  2.2.9-160  B.C. 


A  lmost  all  historians  agree  that  the  JEmi- 
lii  were  one  of  the  ancient  and  patri- 
X  A.cian  houses  in  Rome;  and  those  authors 
who  affirm  that  King  Numa  was  pupil  to  Py¬ 
thagoras  tell  us  that  the  first  who  gave  name 
to  his  posterity  was  Mamercus,  the  son  of  Py¬ 
thagoras,  who,  for  his  grace  and  address  in 
speaking,  was  called  ffimilius.  Most  of  this  race 
that  have  risen  through  their  merit  to  rep¬ 
utation  also  enjoyed  good  fortune;  and  even 
the  misfortune  to  Lucius  Paulus  at  the  battle 
of  Cannae  gave  testimony  to  his  wisdom  and 
valour.  For  not  being  able  to  persuade  his  col¬ 
league  not  to  hazard  the  battle,  he,  though 
against  his  judgment,  joined  with  him  in  the 
contest,  but  was  no  companion  in  his  flight; 
on  the  contrary,  when  he  that  was  so  resolute 
to  engage  deserted  him  in  the  midst  of  danger 
he  kept  the  field  and  died  fighting.  This 
ffimilius  had  a  daughter  named  ^Emilia,  who 
was  married  to  Scipio  the  Great,  and  a  son 
Paulus,  who  is  the  subject  of  my  present  his¬ 
tory. 

In  his  early  manhood,  which  fell  at  a  time 
when  Rome  was  flourishing  with  illustrious 
characters,  he  was  distinguished  for  not  at¬ 
taching  himself  to  the  studies  usual  with  the 
young  men  of  mark  of  that  age,  nor  treading 
the  same  paths  to  fame.  For  he  did  not  prac¬ 
tise  oratory  with  a  view  to  pleading  causes, 
nor  would  he  stoop  to  salute,  embrace,  and 
entertain  the  vulgar,  which  were  the  usual 
insinuating  arts  by  which  many  grew  popular. 
Not  that  he  was  incapable  of  either,  but  he 
chose  to  purchase  a  much  more  lasting  glory 
by  his  valour,  justice,  and  integrity,  and  in 
these  virtues  he  soon  outstripped  all  his  equals. 

The  first  honourable  office  he  aspired  to 
was  that  of  aedile,  which  he  carried  against 
twelve  competitors  of  such  merit  that  all  of 
them  in  process  of  time  were  consuls.  Being 
afterwards  chosen  into  the  number  of  priests 
called  augurs,  appointed  amongst  the  Romans 
to  observe  and  register  divinations  made  by 
the  flight  of  birds  or  prodigies  in  the  air,  he 
so  carefully  studied  the  ancient  customs  of  his 
country,  and  so  thoroughly  understood  the 


religion  of  his  ancestors,  that  this  office,  which 
was  before  only  esteemed  a  title  of  honour  and 
merely  upon  that  account  sought  after,  by  his 
means  rose  to  the  rank  of  one  of  the  highest 
arts,  and  gave  a  confirmation  to  the  correct¬ 
ness  of  the  definition,  which  some  philosophers 
have  given  of  religion,  that  it  is  the  science  of 
worshipping  the  gods. 

When  he  performed  any  part  of  his  duty, 
he  did  it  with  great  skill  and  utmost  care, 
making  it,  when  he  was  engaged  in  it,  his 
only  business,  not  omitting  any  one  ceremony, 
or  adding  the  least  circumstance,  but  always 
insisting,  with  his  companions  of  the  same 
order,  even  on  points  that  might  seem  incon¬ 
siderable,  and  urging  upon  them,  that  though 
they  might  think  the  Deity  was  easily  paci¬ 
fied,  and  ready  to  forgive  faults  of  inadver¬ 
tency,  yet  any  such  laxity  was  a  very  dangerous 
thing  for  a  commonwealth  to  allow;  because 
no  man  ever  began  the  disturbance  of  his 
country’s  peace  by  a  notorious  breach  of  its 
laws;  and  those  who  are  careless  in  trifles  give 
a  precedent  for  remissness  in  important  duties. 

Nor  was  he  less  severe  in  requiring  and  ob¬ 
serving  the  ancient  Roman  discipline  in  mili¬ 
tary  affairs;  not  endeavouring,  when  he  had 
the  command,  to  ingratiate  himself  with  his 
soldiers  by  popular  flattery,  though  this  cus¬ 
tom  prevailed  at  that  time  amongst  many, 
who,  by  favour  and  gentleness  to  those  that 
were  under  them  in  their  first  employment, 
sought  to  be  promoted  to  a  second;  but,  by  in¬ 
structing  them  in  the  laws  of  military  disci¬ 
pline  with  the  same  care  and  exactness  a  priest 
would  use  in  teaching  ceremonies  and  dread¬ 
ful  mysteries,  and  by  severity  to  such  as  trans¬ 
gressed  and  contemned  those  laws,  he  main¬ 
tained  his  country  in  its  former  greatness, 
esteeming  victory  over  enemies  itself  but  as 
an  accessory  to  the  proper  training  and  dis¬ 
ciplining  of  the  citizens. 

Whilst  the  Romans  were  engaged  in  war 
with  Antiochus  the  Great,  against  whom 
their  most  experienced  commanders  were  em¬ 
ployed,  there  arose  another  war  in  the  west, 
and  they  were  all  up  in  arms  in  Spain. 


214 


/EMILIUS  PAULUS 

Thither  they  sent  yEmilius,  in  the  quality  of 
praetor,  not  with  six  axes,  which  number  other 
praetors  were  accustomed  to  have  carried  be¬ 
fore  them,  but  with  twelve;  so  that  in  his 
praetorship  he  was  honoured  with  the  dignity 
of  a  consul.  He  twice  overcame  the  barbarians 
in  battle,  thirty  thousand  of  whom  were  slain: 
successes  chiefly  to  be  ascribed  to  the  wisdom 
and  conduct  of  the  commander,  who  by  his 
great  skill  in  choosing  the  advantage  of  the 
ground,  and  making  the  onset  at  the  passage 
of  a  river,  gave  his  soldiers  an  easy  victory. 
Having  made  himself  master  of  two  hundred 
and  fifty  cities,  whose  inhabitants  voluntarily 
yielded,  and  bound  themselves  by  oath  to 
fidelity,  he  left  the  province  in  peace,  and  re¬ 
turned  to  Rome,  not  enriching  himself  a 
drachma  by  the  war.  And,  indeed,  in  gen¬ 
eral,  he  was  but  remiss  in  making  money; 
though  he  always  lived  freely  and  generously 
on  what  he  had,  which  was  so  far  from  being 
excessive,  that  after  his  death  there  was  barely 
enough  left  to  answer  his  wife’s  dowry. 

His  first  wife  was  Papiria,  the  daughter  of 
Maso,  who  had  formerly  been  consul.  With 
her  he  lived  a  considerable  time  in  wedlock, 
and  then  divorced  her,  though  she  had  made 
him  the  father  of  noble  .children,  being 
mother  of  the  renowned  Scipio  and  Fabius 
Maximus.  The  reason  of  this  separation  has 
not  come  to  our  knowledge;  but  there  seems 
to  be  a  truth  conveyed  in  the  account  of  an¬ 
other  Roman’s  being  divorced  from  his  wife, 
which  may  be  applicable  here.  This  person 
being  highly  blamed  by  his  friends,  who  de¬ 
manded,  “Was  she  not  chaste?  was  she  not 
fair?  was  she  not  fruitful?”  holding  out  his 
shoe,  asked  them,  whether  it  was  not  new 
and  well  made.  “Yet,”  added  he,  “none  of  you 
can  tell  where  it  pinches  me.”  Certain  it  is, 
that  great  and  open  faults  have  often  led  to 
no  separation;  while  mere  petty  repeated  an¬ 
noyances,  arising  from  unpleasantness  or  in¬ 
congruity  of  character,  have  been  the  occasion 
of  such  estrangement  as  to  make  it  impossible 
for  man  and  wife  to  live  together  with  any 
content. 

iEmilius,  having  thus  put  away  Papiria, 
married  a  second  wife,  by  whom  he  had  two 
sons,  whom  he  brought  up  in  his  own  house, 
transferring  the  two  former  into  the  greatest 
and  the  most  noble  families  of  Rome.  The 
elder  was  adopted  into  the  house  of  Fabius 
Maximus,  who  was  five  times  consul;  the 
younger  by  the  son  of  Scipio  Africanus,  his 
cousin-german,  and  was  by  him  named  Scipio. 


215 

Of  the  daughters  of  iEmilius,  one  was  mar¬ 
ried  to  the  son  of  Cato,  the  other  to  iElius 
Tubero,  a  most  worthy  man,  and  the  one 
Roman  who  best  succeeded  in  combining  lib¬ 
eral  habits  with  poverty.  For  there  were  six¬ 
teen  near  relations,  all  of  them  of  the  family 
of  the  JEYn,  possessed  of  but  one  farm,  which 
sufficed  them  all,  whilst  one  small  house,  or 
rather  cottage,  contained  them,  their  numer¬ 
ous  offspring,  and  their  wives;  amongst  whom 
was  the  daughter  of  our  .Emilius,  who,  al¬ 
though  her  father  had  been  twice  consul,  and 
had  twice  triumphed,  was  not  ashamed  of  her 
husband’s  poverty,  but  proud  of  his  virtue 
that  kept  him  poor.  Far  otherwise  it  is  with 
the  brothers  and  relations  of  this  age,  who, 
unless  whole  tracts  of  land,  or  at  least  walls 
and  rivers,  part  their  inheritances,  and  keep 
them  at  a  distance,  never  cease  from  mutual 
quarrels.  History  suggests  a  variety  of  good 
counsel  of  this  sort,  by  the  way,  to  those  who 
desire  to  learn  and  improve. 

To  proceed:  Emilius,  being  chosen  consul, 
waged  war  with  the  Ligurians,  or  Ligustines, 
a  people  near  the  Alps.  They  were  a  bold 
and  warlike  nation,  and  their  neighbourhood 
to  the  Romans  had  begun  to  give  them  skill 
in  the  arts  of  war.  They  occupy  the  further 
parts  of  Italy  ending  under  the  Alps,  and 
those  parts  of  the  Alps  themselves  which  are 
washed  by  the  Tuscan  sea  and  face  toward 
Africa,  mingled  there  with  Gauls  and  Iberians 
of  the  coast.  Besides,  at  that  time  they  had 
turned  their  thoughts  to  the  seas,  and  sailing 
as  far  as  the  Pillars  of  Hercules  in  light  ves¬ 
sels  fitted  for  that  purpose,  robbed  and  de¬ 
stroyed  all  that  trafficked  in  those  parts.  They, 
with  an  army  of  forty  thousand,  waited  the 
coming  of  Emilius,  who  brought  with  him 
not  above  eight  thousand,  so  that  the  enemy 
was  five  to  one  when  they  engaged;  yet  he 
vanquished  and  put  them  to  flight,  forcing 
them  to  retire  into  their  walled  towns,  and 
in  this  condition  offered  them  fair  conditions 
of  accommodation;  it  being  the  policy  of  the 
Romans  not  utterly  to  destroy  the  Ligurians, 
because  they  were  a  sort  of  guard  and  bul¬ 
wark  against  the  frequent  attempts  of  the 
Gauls  to  overrun  Italy.  Trusting  wholly  there¬ 
fore  to  Emilius,  they  delivered  up  their  towns 
and  shipping  into  his  hands.  He,  at  the  ut¬ 
most,  razed  only  the  fortifications  and  de¬ 
livered  their  towns  to  them  again,  but  took 
away  all  their  shipping  with  him,  leaving 
them  no  vessels  bigger  than  those  of  three 
oars,  and  set  at  liberty  great  numbers  of  pris- 


216 

oners  they  had  taken  both  by  sea  and  land, 
strangers  as  well  as  Romans.  These  were  the 
acts  most  worthy  of  remark  in  his  first  consul¬ 
ship. 

Afterwards  he  frequently  intimated  his  de¬ 
sire  of  being  a  second  time  consul,  and  was 
once  candidate;  but  meeting  with  a  repulse 
and  being  passed  by,  he  gave  up  all  thought  of 
it,  and  devoted  himself  to  his  duties  as  augur, 
and  to  the  education  of  his  children,  whom 
he  not  only  brought  up,  as  he  himself  had 
been,  in  the  Roman  and  ancient  discipline,  but 
also  with  unusual  zeal  in  that  of  Greece.  To 
this  purpose  he  not  only  procured  masters  to 
teach  them  grammar,  logic  and  rhetoric,  but 
had  for  them  also  preceptors  in  modelling  and 
drawing,  managers  of  horses  and  dogs,  and  in¬ 
structors  in  field  sports,  all  from  Greece.  And, 
if  he  was  not  hindered  by  public  affairs,  he 
himself  would  be  with  them  at  their  studies, 
and  see  them  perform  their  exercises,  being 
the  most  affectionate  father  in  Rome. 

This  was  the  time,  in  public  matters,  when 
the  Romans  were  engaged  in  war  with  Per¬ 
seus,  King  of  the  Macedonians,  and  great  com¬ 
plaints  were  made  of  their  commanders,  who, 
either  through  their  want  of  skill  or  courage, 
were  conducting  matters  so  shamefully,  that 
they  did  less  hurt  to  the  enemy  than  they  re¬ 
ceived  from  him.  They  that  not  long  before 
had  forced  Antiochus  the  Great  to  quit  the  rest 
of  Asia,  to  retire  beyond  Mount  Taurus,  and 
confine  himself  to  Syria,  glad  to  buy  his  peace 
with  fifteen  thousand  talents;  they  that  not 
long  since  had  vanquished  King  Philip  in 
Thessaly,  and  freed  the  Greeks  from  the  Mace¬ 
donian  yoke;  nay,  had  overcome  Hannibal 
himself,  who  far  surpassed  all  kings  in  daring 
and  power — thought  it  scorn  that  Perseus 
should  think  himself  an  enemy  fit  to  match  the 
Romans,  and  to  be  able  to  wage  war  with  them 
so  long  on  equal  terms,  with  the  remainder 
only  of  his  father’s  routed  forces;  not  being 
aware  that  Philip  after  his  defeat  had  greatly 
improved  both  the  strength  and  discipline  of 
the  Macedonian  army.  To  make  which  appear, 
I  shall  briefly  recount  the  story  from  the  be¬ 
ginning. 

Antigonus,  the  most  powerful  amongst  the 
captains  and  successors  of  Alexander,  having 
obtained  for  himself  and  his  posterity  the  title 
of  king,  had  a  son  named  Demetrius,  father 
to  Antigonus,  called  Gonatas,  and  he  had  a 
son  Demetrius,  who,  reigning  some  short 
time,  died  and  left  a  young  son  called  Philip. 
The  chief  men  of  Macedon,  fearing  great  con- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

fusion  might  arise  in  his  minority,  called  in 
Antigonus,  cousin-german  to  the  late  king, 
and  married  him  to  the  widow,  the  mother  of 
Philip.  At  first  they  only  styled  him  regent 
and  general,  but  when  they  found  by  ex¬ 
perience  that  he  governed  the  kingdom  with 
moderation  and  to  general  advantage,  gave 
him  the  title  of  king.  This  was  he  that  was 
surnamed  Doson,  as  if  he  was  a  great  prom¬ 
iser  and  a  bad  performer. 

To  him  succeeded  Philip,  who  in  his  youth 
gave  great  hopes  of  equalling  the  best  of  kings, 
and  that  he  one  day  would  restore  Macedon 
to  its  former  state  and  dignity,  and  prove  him¬ 
self  the  one  man  able  to  check  the  power  of 
the  Romans,  now  rising  and  extending  over 
the  whole  world.  But,  being  vanquished  in  a 
pitched  battle  by  Titus  Flamininus  near  Sco- 
tussa,  his  resolution  failed,  and  he  yielded  him¬ 
self  and  all  that  he  had  to  the  mercy  of  the 
Romans,  well  contented  that  he  could  escape 
with  paying  a  small  tribute. 

Yet  afterwards,  recollecting  himself,  he  bore 
it  with  great  impatience,  and  thought  he  lived 
rather  like  a  slave  that  was  pleased  with  ease, 
than  a  man  of  sense  and  courage,  whilst  he 
held  his  kingdom  at  the  pleasure  of  his  con¬ 
querors;  which  made  him  turn  his  whole 
mind  to  war,  and  prepare  himself  with  as 
much  cunning  and  privacy  as  possible.  To  this 
end,  he  left  his  cities  on  the  high  roads  and 
sea-coast  ungarrisoned,  and  almost  desolate, 
that  they  might  seem  inconsiderable;  in  the 
meantime,  collecting  large  forces  up  the  coun¬ 
try,  and  furnishing  his  inland  posts,  strong¬ 
holds,  and  towns,  with  arms,  money,  and 
men  fit  for  service,  he  thus  provided  himself 
for  war,  and  yet  kept  his  preparations  close. 
He  had  in  his  armoury  arms  for  thirty  thou¬ 
sand  men;  in  granaries,  in  places  of  strength, 
eight  millions  of  bushels  of  corn,  and  as  much 
ready  money  as  would  defray  the  charge  of 
maintaining  ten  thousand  mercenary  soldiers 
for  ten  years  in  defence  of  the  country.  But 
before  he  could  put  these  things  into  motion, 
and  carry  his  designs  into  effect,  he  died  for 
grief  and  anguish  of  mind,  being  sensible  he 
had  put  his  innocent  son  Demetrius  to  death, 
upon  the  calumnies  of  one  that  was  far  more 
guilty. 

Perseus,  his  son  that  survived,  inherited  his 
hatred  of  the  Romans  as  well  as  his  kingdom, 
but  was  incompetent  to  carry  out  his  designs, 
through  want  of  courage  and  the  viciousness 
of  a  character  in  which,  among  faults  and 
diseases  of  various  sorts,  covetousness  bore 


^EMILIUS  PAULUS 

the  chief  place.  There  is  a  statement  also  of 
his  not  being  true-born;  that  the  wife  of  King 
Philip  took  him  from  his  mother,  Gnathaenion 
(a  woman  of  Argos,  that  earned  her  living  as 
a  seamstress),  as  soon  as  he  was  born,  and 
passed  him  upon  her  husband  as  her  own. 
And  this  might  be  the  chief  cause  of  his  con¬ 
triving  the  death  of  Demetrius;  as  he  might 
well  fear  that,  so  long  as  there  was  a  lawful 
successor  in  the  family,  there  was  no  security 
that  his  spurious  birth  might  not  be  revealed. 

Notwithstanding  all  this,  and  though  his 
spirit  was  so  mean  and  temper  so  sordid,  yet 
trusting  to  the  strength  of  his  resources,  he 
engaged  in  a  war  with  the  Romans,  and  for  a 
long  time  maintained  it;  repulsing  and  even 
vanquishing  some  generals  of  consular  dignity, 
and  some  great  armies  and  fleets.  He  routed 
Publius  Licinius,  who  was  the  first  that  in¬ 
vaded  Macedonia,  in  a  cavalry  battle,  slew 
twenty-five  hundred  practiced  soldiers,  and 
took  six  hundred  prisoners;  and  surprising 
their  fleet  as  they  rode  at  anchor  before  Orens, 
he  took  twenty  ships  of  burden  with  all  their 
lading,  sunk  the  rest  that  were  freighted  with 
corn,  and,  besides  this,  made  himself  master 
of  four  galleys  with  five  banks  of  oars. 

He  fought  a  second  battle  with  Hostilius, 
a  consular  officer,  as  he  was  making  his  way 
into  the  country  at  Elimiae,  and  forced  him  to 
retreat;  and,  when  he  afterwards  by  stealth 
designed  an  invasion  through  Thessaly,  chal¬ 
lenged  him  to  fight,  which  the  other  feared 
to  accept.  Nay  more,  to  show  his  contempt  to 
the  Romans,  and  that  he  wanted  employment, 
as  an  incidental  war,  he  made  an  expedition 
against  the  Dardanians,  in  which  he  slew 
ten  thousand  of  those  barbarian  people,  and 
brought  a  great  spoil  away-  He  privately, 
moreover,  solicited  the  Gauls  (also  called  Bas- 
ternae),  a  warlike  nation,  and  famous  for 
horsemen,  dwelling  near  the  Danube;  and  in¬ 
cited  the  Illyrians,  by  the  means  of  Genthius, 
their  king,  to  join  with  him  in  the  war.  It  was 
also  reported  that  the  barbarians,  allured  by 
promise  of  rewards,  were  to  make  an  irrup¬ 
tion  into  Italy,  through  the  lower  Gaul  by 
the  shore  of  the  Adriatic  Sea. 

The  Romans,  being  advertised  of  these 
things,  thought  it  necessary  no  longer  to 
choose  their  commanders  by  favour  or  solici¬ 
tation,  but  of  their  own  motion  to  select  a  gen¬ 
eral  of  wisdom  and  capacity  for  the  manage¬ 
ment  of  great  affairs.  And  such  was  Paulus 
iEmilius,  advanced  in  years,  being  nearly 
threescore,  yet  vigorous  in  his  own  person,  and 


217 

rich  in  valiant  sons  and  sons-in-law,  besides 
a  great  number  of  influential  relations  and 
friends,  all  of  whom  joined  in  urging  him  to 
yield  to  the  desires  of  the  people,  who  called 
him  to  the  consulship.  He  at  first  manifested 
some  shyness  of  the  people  and  withdrew  him¬ 
self  from  their  importunity,  professing  reluc¬ 
tance  to  hold  office;  but,  when  they  daily  came 
to  his  doors,  urging  him  to  come  forth  to  the 
place  of  election,  and  pressing  him  with  noise 
and  clamour,  he  acceded  to  their  request. 

When  he  appeared  amongst  the  candidates, 
it  did  not  look  as  if  it  were  to  sue  for  the  con¬ 
sulship,  but  to  bring  victory  and  success,  that 
he  came  down  into  the  Campus;  they  all  re¬ 
ceived  him  there  with  such  hopes  and  such 
gladness,  unanimously  choosing  him  a  second 
time  consul;  nor  would  they  suffer  the  lots  to 
be  cast,  as  was  usual,  to  determine  which  prov¬ 
ince  should  fall  to  his  share,  but  immediately 
decreed  him  the  command  of  the  Macedonian 
war. 

It  is  told,  that  when  he  had  been  proclaimed 
general  against  Perseus,  and  was  honourably 
accompanied  home  by  great  numbers  of 
people,  he  found  his  daughter  Tertia,  a  very 
little  girl,  weeping,  and  taking  her  to  him 
asked  her  why  she  was  crying.  She,  catching 
him  about  the  neck  and  kissing  him,  said, 
“O  father,  do  you  not  know  that  Perseus  is 
dead?”  meaning  a  little  dog  of  that  name  that 
was  brought  up  in  the  house  with  her;  to 
which  yEmilius  replied,  “Good  fortune,  my 
daughter;  I  embrace  the  omen.”  This  Cicero, 
the  orator,  relates  in  his  book  On  Divination. 

It  was  the  custom  for  such  as  were  chosen 
consuls,  from  a  stage  designed  for  such  pur¬ 
poses,  to  address  the  people,  and  return  them 
thanks  for  their  favour.  /Emilius,  therefore, 
having  gathered  an  assembly,  spoke  and  said 
that  he  sued  for  the  first  consulship,  because 
he  himself  stood  in  need  of  such  honour;  but 
for  the  second,  because  they  wanted  a  general; 
upon  which  account  he  thought  there  was  no 
thanks  due:  if  they  judged  they  could  man¬ 
age  the  war  by  any  other  to  more  advantage, 
he  would  willingly  yield  up  his  charge;  but, 
if  they  confided  in  him,  they  were  not  to  make 
themselves  his  colleagues  in  his  office,  or  raise 
reports,  and  criticise  his  actions,  but,  without 
talking,  supply  him  with  means  and  assistance 
necessary  to  the  carrying  on  of  the  war;  for 
if  they  proposed  to  command  their  own  com¬ 
mander  they  would  render  this  expedition 
more  ridiculous  than  the  former. 

By  this  speech  he  inspired  great  reverence 


218 


for  him  amongst  the  citizens  and  great  expec¬ 
tations  of  future  success;  all  were  well  pleased 
that  they  had  passed  by  such  as  sought  to  be 
preferred  by  flattery,  and  fixed  upon  a  com¬ 
mander  endued  with  wisdom  and  courage  to 
tell  them  the  truth.  So  entirely  did  the  people 
of  Rome,  that  they  might  rule,  and  become 
masters  of  the  world,  yield  obedience  and  serv¬ 
ice  to  reason  and  superior  virtue. 

That  Atmilius,  setting  forward  to  the  war, 
by  a  prosperous  voyage  and  successful  journey, 
arrived  with  speed  and  safety  at  his  camp  I 
attribute  to  good  fortune;  but,  when  I  see  how 
the  war  under  his  command  was  brought  to 
a  happy  issue,  partly  by  his  own  daring  bold¬ 
ness,  partly  by  his  good  counsel,  partly  by  the 
ready  administration  of  his  friends,  partly  by 
his  presence  of  mind  and  skill  to  embrace  the 
most  proper  advice  in  the  extremity  of  danger, 
I  cannot  ascribe  any  of  his  remarkable  and 
famous  actions  (as  I  can  those  of  other  com¬ 
manders)  to  his  so  much  celebrated  good  for¬ 
tune;  unless  you  will  say  that  the  covetousness 
of  Perseus  was  the  good  fortune  of  Atmilius. 

The  truth  is,  Perseus’s  fear  of  spending  his 
money  was  the  destruction  and  utter  ruin  of 
all  those  splendid  and  great  preparations  with 
which  the  Macedonians  were  in  high  hopes  to 
carry  on  the  war  with  success.  For  there  came 
at  his  request  ten  thousand  horsemen  of  the 
Basternae,  and  as  many  foot,  who  were  to  keep 
pace  with  them,  and  supply  their  places  in  case 
of  failure;  all  of  them  professed  soldiers,  men 
skilled  neither  in  tilling  of  land,  nor  in  navi¬ 
gation  of  ships,  nor  able  to  get  their  living  by 
grazing,  but  whose  only  business  and  single 
art  and  trade  it  was  to  fight  and  conquer  all 
that  resisted  them. 

When  these  came  into  the  district  of  Mae- 
dica,and  encamped  and  mixed  with  the  king’s 
soldiers,  being  men  of  great  stature,  admirable 
at  their  exercises,  great  boasters,  and  loud  in 
their  threats  against  their  enemies,  they  gave 
new  courage  to  the  Macedonians,  who  were 
ready  to  think  the  Romans  would  not  be  able 
to  confront  them,  but  would  be  struck  with 
terror  at  their  looks  and  motions,  they  were 
so  strange  and  so  formidable  to  behold.  When 
Perseus  had  thus  encouraged  his  men,  and 
elevated  them  with  these  great  hopes,  as  soon 
as  a  thousand  gold  pieces  were  demanded  for 
each  captain,  he  was  so  amazed  and  beside 
himself  at  the  vastness  of  the  amount,  that 
out  of  mere  stinginess  he  drew  back  and  let 
himself  lose  their  assistance,  as  if  he  had  been 
some  steward,  not  the  enemy  of  the  Romans, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  would  have  to  give  an  exact  account  of 
the  expenses  of  the  war  to  those  with  whom 
he  waged  it.  Nay,  when  he  had  his  foes  as 
tutors,  to  instruct  him  what  he  had  to  do, 
who,  besides  their  other  preparations,  had  a 
hundred  thousand  men  drawn  together  and 
in  readiness  for  their  service;  yet  he  that  was 
to  engage  against  so  considerable  a  force,  and 
in  a  war  that  was  maintaining  such  numbers 
as  this,  nevertheless  doled  out  his  money,  and 
put  seals  on  his  bags,  and  was  as  fearful  of 
touching  it,  as  if  it  had  belonged  to  some  one 
else. 

And  all  this  was  done  by  one,  not  descended 
from  Lydians  or  Phoenicians,  but  who  could 
pretend  to  some  share  of  the  virtues  of  Alex¬ 
ander  and  Philip,  whom  he  was  allied  to  by 
birth;  men  who  conquered  the  world  by  judg¬ 
ing  that  empire  was  to  be  purchased  by 
money,  not  money  by  empire.  Certainly  it  be¬ 
came  a  proverb,  that  not  Philip,  but  his  gold, 
took  the  cities  of  Greece-  And  Alexander, 
when  he  undertook  his  expedition  against  the 
Indians,  and  found  his  Macedonians  encum¬ 
bered  and  appear  to  march  heavily  with  their 
Persian  spoils,  first  set  fire  to  his  own  car¬ 
riages,  and  thence  persuaded  the  rest  to  imi¬ 
tate  his  example,  that  thus  freed  they  might 
proceed  to  the  war  without  hindrance. 

Whereas  Perseus,  abounding  in  wealth, 
would  not  preserve  himself,  his  children,  and 
his  kingdom,  at  the  expense  of  a  small  part 
of  his  treasure;  but  chose  rather  to  be  carried 
away  with  numbers  of  his  subjects  with  the 
name  of  the  wealthy  captive,  and  show  the 
Romans  what  great  riches  he  had  husbanded 
and  preserved  for  them.  For  he  not  only 
played  false  with  the  Gauls,  and  sent  them 
away,  but  also,  after  alluring  Genthius,  King 
of  tbe  Illyrians,  by  the  hopes  of  three  hundred 
talents,  to  assist  him  in  the  war,  he  caused 
the  money  to  be  counted  out  in  the  presence 
of  his  messengers,  and  to  be  sealed  up.  Upon 
which  Genthius,  thinking  himself  possessed 
of  what  he  desired,  committed  a  wicked  and 
shameful  act:  he  seized  and  imprisoned  the 
ambassadors  sent  to  him  from  the  Romans. 
Whence  Perseus,  concluding  that  there  was  no 
need  of  money  to  make  Genthius  an  enemy 
to  the  Romans,  but  that  he  had  given  a  lasting 
earnest  of  his  enmity,  and  by  his  flagrant  in¬ 
justice  sufficiently  involved  himself  in  the  war, 
defrauded  the  unfortunate  king  of  his  three 
hundred  talents,  and  without  any  concern  be¬ 
held  him,  his  wife,  and  children,  in  a  short 
time  after,  carried  out  of  their  kingdom,  as 


^EMILIUS  PAULUS 

from  their  nest,  by  Lucius  Anicius,  who  was 
sent  against  him  with  an  army. 

iEmilius,  coming  against  such  an  adversary, 
made  light  indeed  of  him,  but  admired  his 
preparation  and  power.  For  he  had  four  thou¬ 
sand  horse,  and  not  much  fewer  than  forty 
thousand  full-armed  foot  of  the  phalanx;  and 
planting  himself  along  the  seaside,  at  the  foot 
of  Mount  Olympus,  in  ground  with  no  access 
on  any  side,  and  on  all  sides  fortified  with 
fences  and  bulwarks  of  wood,  remained  in 
great  security,  thinking  by  delay  and  expense 
to  weary  out  /Emilius. 

But  he,  in  the  meantime,  busy  in  thought, 
weighed  all  counsels  and  all  means  of  attack, 
and  perceiving  his  soldiers,  from  their  former 
want  of  discipline,  to  be  impatient  of  delay, 
and  ready  on  all  occasions  to  teach  their  gen¬ 
eral  his  duty,  rebuked  them,  and  bade  them 
not  meddle  with  what  was  not  their  concern, 
but  only  take  care  that  they  and  their  arms 
were  in  readiness,  and  to  use  their  swords  like 
Romans  when  their  commander  should  think 
fit  to  employ  them.  Further,  he  ordered  that 
the  sentinels  by  night  should  watch  without 
javelins,  that  thus  they  might  be  more  careful 
and  surer  to  resist  sleep,  having  no  arms  to 
defend  themselves  against  any  attacks  of  an 
enemy. 

What  most  annoyed  the  army  was  the  want 
of  water;  for  only  a  little,  and  that  foul,  flowed 
out,  or  rather  came  by  drops  from  a  spring 
adjoining  the  sea;  but  Afinilius,  considering 
that  he  was  at  the  foot  of  the  high  and  woody 
Mount  Olympus,  and  conjecturing  by  the 
flourishing  growth  of  the  trees  that  there  were 
springs  that  had  their  course  underground, 
dug  a  great  many  holes  and  wells  along  the 
foot  of  the  mountain,  which  were  presently 
filled  with  pure  water  escaping  from  its  con¬ 
finement  into  the  vacuum  they  afforded.  Al¬ 
though  there  are  some,  indeed,  who  deny  that 
there  are  reservoirs  of  water  lying  ready  pro¬ 
vided  out  of  sight,  in  the  places  from  whence 
springs  flow,  and  that  when  they  appear,  they 
merely  issue  and  run  out;  on  the  contrary, 
they  say,  they  are  then  formed  and  come  into 
existence  for  the  first  time,  by  the  liquefaction 
of  the  surrounding  matter;  and  that  this 
change  is  caused  by  density  and  cold,  when 
the  moist  vapour,  by  being  closely  pressed  to¬ 
gether,  becomes  fluid. 

As  women’s  breasts  are  not  like  vessels  full 
of  milk  always  prepared  and  ready  to  flow 
from  them;  but  their  nourishment  being 
changed  in  their  breasts,  is  there  made  milk, 


219 

and  from  thence  is  pressed  out.  In  like  man¬ 
ner,  places  of  the  earth  that  are  cold  and  full 
of  springs,  do  not  contain  any  hidden  waters 
or  receptacles  which  are  capable,  as  from  a 
source  always  ready  and  furnished,  of  supply¬ 
ing  all  the  brooks  and  deep  rivers;  but  by 
compressing  and  condensing  the  vapours  and 
air  they  turn  them  into  that  substance.  And 
thus  places  that  are  dug  open  flow  by  that 
pressure,  and  afford  the  more  water  (as  the 
breasts  of  women  do  milk  by  their  being 
sucked),  the  vapour  thus  moistening  and  be¬ 
coming  fluid;  whereas  ground  that  remains 
idle  and  undug  is  not  capable  of  producing 
any  water,  whilst  it  wants  the  motion  which 
is  the  cause  of  liquefaction. 

But  those  that  assert  this  opinion  give  oc¬ 
casion  to  the  doubtful  to  argue,  that  on  the 
same  ground  there  should  be  no  blood  in  liv¬ 
ing  creatures,  but  that  it  must  be  formed  by 
the  wound,  some  sort  of  spirit  or  flesh  being 
changed  into  a  liquid  and  flowing  matter. 
Moreover,  they  are  refuted  by  the  fact  that 
men  who  dig  mines,  either  in  sieges  or  for 
metals,  meet  with  rivers,  which  are  not  col¬ 
lected  by  little  and  little  (as  must  necessarily 
be,  if  they  had  their  being  at  the  very  instant 
the  earth  was  opened),  but  break  out  at  once 
with  violence;  and  upon  the  cutting  through 
a  rock,  there  often  gush  out  great  quantities 
of  water,  which  then  as  suddenly  cease.  But 
of  this  enough. 

yEmilius  lay  still  for  some  days,  and  it  is 
said  that  there  were  never  two  great  armies 
so  nigh  that  enjoyed  so  much  quiet.  When 
he  had  tried  and  considered  all  things,  he  was 
informed  that  there  was  yet  one  passage  left 
unguarded,  through  Perrhaebia  by  the  temple 
of  Apollo  and  the  Rock  Gathering;  therefore, 
conceiving  more  hope  from  the  place  being  left 
defenceless  than  fear  from  the  roughness  and 
difficulty  of  the  passage,  he  proposed  it  for  con¬ 
sultation. 

Amongst  those  that  were  present  at  the 
council,  Scipio,  surnamed  Nasica,  son-in-law 
to  Scipio  Africanus,  who  afterwards  was  so 
powerful  in  the  senate-house,  was  the  first 
that  offered  himself  to  command  those  that 
should  be  sent  to  encompass  the  enemy.  Next 
to  him,  Fabius  Maximus,  eldest  son  of  ^Emi- 
lius,  although  yet  very  young,  offered  himself 
with  great  zeal.  iEmilius,  rejoicing,  gave  them, 
not  so  many  as  Polybius  states,  but,  as  Nasica 
himself  tells  us  in  a  brief  letter  which  he 
wrote  to  one  of  the  kings  with  an  account  of 
the  expedition,  three  thousand  Italians  that 


220 


were  not  Romans,  and  his  left  wing  consisting 
of  five  thousand. 

Taking  with  him,  besides  these,  one  hun¬ 
dred  and  twenty  horsemen,  and  two  hundred 
Thracians  and  Cretans  intermixed  that  Har- 
palus  had  sent,  he  began  his  journey  towards 
the  sea,  and  encamped  near  the  temple  of  Her¬ 
cules,  as  if  he  designed  to  embark,  and  so  to 
sail  round  and  environ  the  enemy.  But  when 
the  soldiers  had  supped  and  it  was  dark,  he 
made  the  captains  acquainted  with  his  real 
intentions,  and  marching  all  night  in  the  op¬ 
posite  direction  away  from  the  sea,  till  he 
came  under  the  temple  of  Apollo,  there  rested 
his  army.  At  this  place  Mount  Olympus  rises 
in  height  more  than  ten  furlongs,  as  appears 
by  the  epigram  made  by  the  man  that  meas¬ 
ured  it: — 

The  summit  of  Olympus,  at  the  site 

Where  stands  Apollo's  temple,  has  a  height 

Of  full  ten  furlongs  by  the  line,  and  more, 

Ten  furlongs,  and  one  hundred  feet,  less  four. 

Eumelus’s  son,  Xenagoras,  reached  the  place. 

Adieu,  O  king,  and  do  thy  pilgrim  grace. 

It  is  allowed,  say  the  geometricians,  that 
no  mountain  in  height  or  sea  in  depth  exceeds 
ten  furlongs,  and  yet  it  seems  probable  that 
Xenagoras  did  not  take  his  admeasurement 
carelessly,  but  according  to  the  rules  of  art, 
and  with  instruments  for  the  purpose.  Here 
it  was  that  Nasica  passed  the  night. 

A  Cretan  deserted,  who  fled  to  the  enemy 
during  the  march,  discovered  to  Perseus  the 
design  which  the  Romans  had  to  encompass 
him;  for  he,  seeing  that  ^Emilius  lay  still,  had 
not  suspected  any  such  attempt.  He  was  star¬ 
tled  at  the  news,  yet  did  not  put  his  army  in 
motion,  but  sent  ten  thousand  mercenary  sol¬ 
diers,  and  two  thousand  Macedonians,  under 
command  of  Milo,  with  order  to  hasten  and 
possess  themselves  of  the  passes.  Polybius  re¬ 
lates  that  the  Romans  found  these  men  asleep 
when  they  attacked  them;  but  Nasica  says 
there  was  a  sharp  and  severe  conflict  on  the 
top  of  the  mountain,  that  he  himself  encoun¬ 
tered  a  mercenary  Thracian,  pierced  him 
through  with  his  javelin,  and  slew  him;  and 
that  the  enemy  being  forced  to  retreat,  Milo 
stripped  to  his  coat  and  fled  shamefully  with¬ 
out  his  armour,  while  he  followed  without 
danger,  and  conveyed  the  whole  army  down 
into  the  country. 

After  this  event,  Perseus,  now  grown  fear¬ 
ful,  and  fallen  from  his  hopes,  removed  his 
camp  in  all  haste;  he  was  under  the  necessity 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

either  to  stop  before  Pydna,  and  there  run  the 
hazard  of  a  battle,  or  disperse  his  army  into 
cities,  and  there  expect  the  event  of  the  war, 
which,  having  once  made  its  way  into  his 
country,  could  not  be  driven  out  without  great 
slaughter  and  bloodshed.  But  Perseus,  being 
told  by  his  friends  that  he  was  much  superior 
in  number,  and  that  men  fighting  in  the  de¬ 
fence  of  their  wives  and  children  must  needs 
feel  all  the  more  courage,  especially  when  all 
was  done  in  the  sight  of  their  king,  who  him¬ 
self  was  engaged  in  equal  danger,  was  thus 
again  encouraged;  and,  pitching  his  camp, 
prepared  himself  to  fight,  viewed  the  country, 
and  gave  out  the  commands,  as  if  he  designed 
to  set  upon  the  Romans  as  soon  as  they  ap¬ 
proached.  The  place  was  a  field  fit  for  the 
action  of  a  phalanx,  which  requires  smooth 
standing  and  even  ground,  and  also  had  di¬ 
vers  little  hills,  one  joining  another,  fit  for 
the  motions  whether  in  retreat  or  advance  of 
light  troops  and  skirmishers.  Through  the 
middle  ran  the  rivers  iEson  and  Leucus, 
which  though  not  very  deep,  it  being  the  lat¬ 
ter  end  of  summer,  yet  were  likely  enough  to 
give  the  Romans  some  trouble. 

As  soon  as  yEmilius  had  rejoined  Nasica,  he 
advanced  in  battle  array  against  the  enemy; 
but  when  he  found  how  they  were  drawn  up, 
and  the  number  of  their  forces,  he  regarded 
them  with  admiration  and  surprise,  and  halt¬ 
ed,  considering  within  himself.  The  young 
commanders,  eager  to  fight,  riding  along  by 
his  side,  pressed  him  not  to  delay,  and  most 
of  all  Nasica,  flushed  with  his  late  success  on 
Olympus.  To  whom  iEmilius  answered  with 
a  smile:  “So  would  I  do  were  I  of  your  age; 
but  many  victories  have  taught  me  the  ways 
in  which  men  are  defeated,  and  forbid  me  to 
engage  soldiers  weary  with  a  long  march 
against  an  army  drawn  up  and  prepared  for 
battle.” 

Then  he  gave  command  that  the  front  of 
his  army,  and  such  as  were  in  sight  of  the 
enemy,  should  form  as  if  ready  to  engage,  and 
those  in  the  rear  should  cast  up  the  trenches 
and  fortify  the  camp;  so  that  the  hindmost  in 
succession  wheeling  off  by  degrees  and  with¬ 
drawing,  their  whole  order  was  insensibly 
broken  up,  and  the  army  encamped  without 
noise  or  trouble. 

When  it  was  night,  and,  supper  being  over, 
all  were  turning  to  sleep  and  rest,  on  a  sud¬ 
den  the  moon,  which  was  then  at  full  and 
high  in  the  heavens,  grew  dark,  and  by  de¬ 
grees  losing  her  light,  passed  through  various 


^EMILIUS  PAULUS 

colours,  and  at  length  was  totally  eclipsed. 
The  Romans,  according  to  their  custom,  clat¬ 
tering  brass  pans  and  lifting  up  fire-brands 
and  torches  into  the  air,  invoked  the  return 
of  her  light;  the  Macedonians  behaved  far 
otherwise;  terror  and  amazement  seized  their 
whole  army,  and  a  rumour  crept  by  degrees 
into  their  camp  that  this  eclipse  portended 
even  that  of  their  king. 

iTmilius  was  no  novice  in  these  things,  nor 
was  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  seeming  ir¬ 
regularities  of  eclipses — that  in  a  certain  revo¬ 
lution  of  time,  the  moon  in  her  course  enters 
the  shadow  of  the  earth  and  is  there  obscured, 
till,  passing  the  region  of  darkness,  she  is 
again  enlightened  by  the  sun.  Yet  being  a  de¬ 
vout  man,  a  religious  observer  of  sacrifices 
and  the  art  of  divination,  as  soon  as  he  per¬ 
ceived  the  moon  beginning  to  regain  her  for¬ 
mer  lustre,  he  offered  up  to  her  eleven  heifers. 
At  the  break  of  day  he  sacrificed  as  many  as 
twenty  in  succession  to  Hercules,  without  any 
token  that  his  offering  was  accepted;  but  at 
the  one-and-twentieth,  the  signs  promised  vic¬ 
tory  to  defenders.  He  then  vowed  a  hecatomb 
and  solemn  sports  to  Hercules,  and  command¬ 
ed  his  captains  to  make  ready  for  battle,  stay¬ 
ing  only  till  the  sun  should  decline  and  come 
round  to  the  west,  lest,  being  in  their  faces  in 
the  morning,  it  should  dazzle  the  eyes  of  his 
soldiers.  Thus  he  whiled  away  the  time  in  his 
tent,  which  was  open  towards  the  plain  where 
his  enemies  were  encamped. 

When  it  grew  towards  evening,  some  tell 
us,  .dEmilius  himself  used  a  stratagem  to  in¬ 
duce  the  enemy  to  begin  the  fight;  that  he 
turned  loose  a  horse  without  a  bridle,  and 
sent  some  of  the  Romans  to  catch  him,  upon 
whose  following  the  beast  the  battle  began. 
Others  relate  that  the  Thracians,  under  the 
command  of  one  Alexander,  set  upon  the  Ro¬ 
man  beasts  of  burden  that  were  bringing  for¬ 
age  to  the  camp;  that  to  oppose  these,  a  party 
of  seven  hundred  Ligurians  were  immediately 
detached;  and  that,  relief  coming  still  from 
both  armies,  the  main  bodies  at  last  engaged. 
iTmilius,  like  a  wise  pilot,  foreseeing  by  the 
present  waves  and  motion  of  the  armies  the 
greatness  of  the  following  storm,  came  out  of 
his  tent,  went  through  the  legions,  and  en¬ 
couraged  his  soldiers. 

Nasica,  in  the  meantime,  who  had  ridden 
out  to  the  skirmishers,  saw  the  whole  force  of 
the  enemy  on  the  point  of  engaging.  First 
marched  the  Thracians,  who,  he  himself  tells 
us,  inspired  him  with  most  terror;  they  were 


221 

of  great  stature,  with  bright  and  glittering 
shields  and  black  frocks  under  them,  their 
legs  armed  with  greaves,  and  they  brandished, 
as  they  moved,  straight  and  heavily-ironed 
spears  over  their  right  shoulders.  Next  the 
Thracians  marched  the  mercenary  soldiers, 
armed  after  different  fashions;  with  these  the 
Paeonians  were  mingled.  These  were  suc¬ 
ceeded  by  a  third  division,  of  picked  men,  na¬ 
tive  Macedonians,  the  choicest  for  courage 
and  strength,  in  the  prime  of  life,  gleaming 
with  gilt  armour  and  scarlet  coats.  As  these 
were  taking  their  places  they  were  followed 
from  the  camp  by  the  troops  in  phalanx  called 
the  Brazen  Shields,  so  that  the  whole  plain 
seemed  alive  with  the  flashing  of  steel  and  the 
glistening  of  brass;  and  the  hills  also  with 
their  shouts,  as  they  cheered  each  other  on.  In 
this  order  they  marched,  and  with  such  bold¬ 
ness  and  speed,  that  those  that  were  first  slain 
died  at  but  two  furlongs  distance  from  the 
Roman  camp. 

The  battle  being  begun,  ALmilius  came  in 
and  found  that  the  foremost  of  the  Mace¬ 
donians  had  already  fixed  the  ends  of  their 
spears  into  the  shields  of  his  Romans,  so  that 
it  was  impossible  to  come  near  them  with 
their  swords.  When  he  saw  this,  and  observed 
that  the  rest  of  the  Macedonians  took  the  tar¬ 
gets  that  hung  on  their  left  shoulders,  and 
brought  them  round  before  them,  and  all  at 
once  stooped  their  pikes  against  their  enemies’ 
shields,  and  considered  the  great  strength  of 
this  wall  of  shields,  and  the  formidable  ap¬ 
pearance  of  a  front  thus  bristling  with  arms, 
he  was  seized  with  amazement  and  alarm; 
nothing  he  had  ever  seen  before  had  been 
equal  to  it;  and  in  aftertimes  he  frequently 
used  to  speak  both  of  the  sight  and  of  his  own 
sensations.  These,  however,  he  dissembled,  and 
rode  through  his  army  without  either  breast¬ 
plate  or  helmet,  with  a  serene  and  cheerful 
countenance. 

On  the  contrary,  as  Polybius  relates,  no 
sooner  was  the  battle  begun,  but  the  Mace¬ 
donian  king  basely  withdrew  to  the  city  Pyd- 
na,  under  a  pretence  of  sacrificing  to  Her¬ 
cules;  a  god  that  is  not  wont  to  regard  the 
faint  offerings  of  cowards,  or  to  fulfil  unsanc¬ 
tioned  vows.  For  truly  it  can  hardly  be  a  thing 
that  heaven  would  sanction,  that  he  that  never 
shoots  should  carry  away  the  prize,  he  tri¬ 
umph  that  slinks  from  the  battle,  he  that 
takes  no  pains  to  meet  with  success,  or  the 
wicked  man  prosper.  But  to  iFmilius’s  peti¬ 
tions  the  god  listened;  he  prayed  for  victory 


222 


with  his  sword  in  his  hand,  and  fought  while 
entreating  divine  assistance. 

A  certain  Posidonius,  who  has  at  some 
length  written  a  history  of  Perseus,  and  pro¬ 
fesses  to  have  lived  at  the  time,  and  to  have 
been  himself  engaged  in  these  events,  denies 
that  Perseus  left  the  field  either  through  fear 
or  pretence  of  sacrificing,  but  that,  the  very 
day  before  the  fight,  he  received  a  kick  from 
a  horse  on  his  thigh;  that  though  very  much 
disabled,  and  dissuaded  by  all  his  friends,  he 
commanded  one  of  his  riding-horses  to  be 
brought,  and  entered  the  field  unarmed;  that 
amongst  an  infinite  number  of  darts  that  flew 
about  on  all  sides,  one  of  iron  lighted  on  him, 
and  though  not  with  the  point,  yet  by  a 
glance  struck  him  with  such  force  on  his  left 
side  that  it  tore  his  clothes  and  so  bruised  his 
flesh  that  the  mark  remained  a  long  time 
after.  This  is  what  Posidonius  says  in  defence 
of  Perseus. 

The  Romans  not  being  able  to  make  a 
breach  in  the  phalanx,  one  Salius,  a  command¬ 
er  of  the  Pelignians,  snatched  the  ensign  of 
his  company  and  threw  it  amongst  the  ene¬ 
mies;  on  seeing  which,  the  Pelignians  (as 
amongst  the  Italians  it  is  always  thought  the 
greatest  breach  of  honour  to  abandon  a  stand¬ 
ard)  rushed  with  great  violence  towards  the 
place,  where  the  conflict  grew  very  fierce  and 
the  slaughter  terrible  on  both  sides.  For  these 
endeavoured  to  cut  the  spears  asunder  with 
their  swords,  or  to  beat  them  back  with  their 
shields,  or  put  them  by  with  their  hands;  and, 
on  the  other  side,  the  Macedonians  held  their 
long  sarissas  in  both  hands,  and  pierced  those 
that  came  in  their  way  quite  through  their 
armour,  no  shield  or  corslet  being  able  to  re¬ 
sist  the  force  of  that  weapon.  The  Pelignians 
and  Marrucinians  were  thrown  headlong  to 
the  ground,  having  without  consideration, 
with  mere  animal  fury,  rushed  upon  a  certain 
death.  Their  first  ranks  being  slain,  those  that 
were  behind  were  forced  to  give  back;  it  can¬ 
not  be  said  they  fled,  but  they  retreated  to¬ 
wards  Mount  Olocrus.  When  iEmilius  saw 
this,  Posidonius  relates,  he  rent  his  clothes, 
some  of  his  men  being  ready  to  fly,  and  the 
rest  not  willing  to  engage  with  a  phalanx  into 
which  they  could  not  hope  to  make  any  en¬ 
trance — a  sort  of  palisade,  as  it  were,  impreg¬ 
nable  and  unapproachable,  with  its  close  array 
of  long  spears  everywhere  meeting  the  assail¬ 
ant. 

Nevertheless,  the  unequalness  of  the  ground 
would  not  permit  a  widely  extended  front  to 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

be  so  exactly  drawn  up  as  to  have  their  shields 
everywhere  joined;  and  /Emilius  perceived 
that  there  were  a  great  many  interstices  and 
breaches  in  the  Macedonian  phalanx;  as  it 
usually  happens  in  all  great  armies,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  different  efforts  of  the  combatants, 
who  in  one  part  press  forward  with  eagerness, 
and  in  another  are  forced  to  fall  back.  Tak¬ 
ing,  therefore,  this  occasion,  with  all  speed  he 
broke  up  his  men  into  their  cohorts,  and  gave 
them  order  to  fall  into  the  intervals  and  open¬ 
ings  of  the  enemy’s  body,  and  not  to  make 
one  general  attack  upon  them  all,  but  to  en¬ 
gage,  as  they  were  divided,  in  several  partial 
battles.  These  commands  ^Emilius  gave  to  his 
captains,  and  they  to  their  soldiers;  and  no 
sooner  had  they  entered  the  spaces  and  sepa¬ 
rated  their  enemies,  but  they  charged  them, 
some  on  their  sides  where  they  were  naked 
and  exposed,  and  others,  making  a  circuit, 
behind;  and  thus  destroyed  the  force  of  the 
phalanx,  which  consists  in  common  action 
and  close  union.  And  now,  come  to  fight  man 
to  man,  or  in  small  parties,  the  Macedonians 
smote  in  vain  upon  firm  and  long  shields  with 
their  little  swords,  whilst  their  slight  bucklers 
were  not  able  to  sustain  the  weight  and  force 
of  the  Roman  swords,  which  pierced  through 
all  their  armour  to  their  bodies;  they  turned, 
in  fine,  and  fled. 

The  conflict  was  obstinate.  And  here  Mar¬ 
cus,  the  son  of  Cato,  and  son-in-law  of  iEmili- 
us,  whilst  he  showed  all  possible  courage,  let 
fall  his  sword.  Being  a  young  man  carefully 
brought  up  and  disciplined,  and,  son  of  so  re¬ 
nowned  a  father,  bound  to  give  proof  of  more 
than  ordinary  virtue,  he  thought  his  life  but 
a  burden,  should  he  live  and  permit  his  ene¬ 
mies  to  enjoy  this  spoil.  He  hurried  hither 
and  thither,  and  wherever  he  espied  a  friend 
or  companion,  declared  his  misfortune,  and 
begged  their  assistance;  a  considerable  number 
of  brave  men  being  thus  collected,  with  one 
accord  they  made  their  way  through  their  fel¬ 
lows  after  their  leader,  and  fell  upon  the 
enemy;  whom  after  a  sharp  conflict,  many 
wounds,  and  much  slaughter,  they  repulsed, 
possessed  the  place  that  was  now  deserted  and 
free,  and  set  themselves  to  search  for  the 
sword,  which  at  last  they  found  covered  with 
a  great  heap  of  arms  and  dead  bodies.  Over¬ 
joyed  with  this  success,  they  raised  the  song 
of  triumph,  and,  with  more  eagerness  than 
ever,  charged  the  foes  that  yet  remained  firm 
and  unbroken. 

In  the  end,  three  thousand  of  the  chosen 


/EMILIUS  PAULUS 

men,  who  kept  their  ground  and  fought  val¬ 
iantly  to  the  last,  were  all  cut  in  pieces,  while 
the  slaughter  of  such  as  fled  was  also  very 
great.  The  plain  and  the  lower  part  of  the 
hills  were  filled  with  dead  bodies,  and  the 
water  of  the  river  Leucus,  which  the  Romans 
did  not  pass  till  the  next  day  after  the  battle, 
was  then  mingled  with  blood.  For  it  is  said 
there  fell  more  than  twenty-five  thousand  of 
the  enemy;  of  the  Romans,  as  Posidonius  re¬ 
lates,  a  hundred;  as  Nasica,  only  fourscore. 
This  battle,  though  so  great,  was  very  quickly 
decided,  it  being  three  in  the  afternoon  when 
they  first  engaged,  and  not  four  when  the 
enemy  was  vanquished;  the  rest  of  the  day  was 
spent  in  pursuit  of  the  fugitives,  whom  they 
followed  about  thirteen  or  fourteen  miles,  so 
that  it  was  far  in  the  night  when  they  returned. 

All  the  others  were  met  by  their  servants 
with  torches,  and  brought  back  with  joy  and 
great  triumph  to  their  tents,  which  were  set 
out  with  lights,  and  decked  with  wreaths  of 
ivy  and  laurel.  But  the  general  himself  was  in 
great  grief.  Of  the  two  sons  that  served  under 
him  in  the  war,  the  youngest  was  missing, 
whom  he  held  most  dear,  and  whose  courage 
and  good  qualities  he  perceived  much  to  excel 
those  of  his  brothers.  Bold  and  eager  for  dis¬ 
tinction,  and  still  a  mere  child  in  age,  he  con¬ 
cluded  that  he  had  perished  whilst  for  want 
of  experience  he  had  engaged  himself  too  far 
amongst  his  enemies.  His  sorrow  and  fears 
became  known  to  the  army;  the  soldiers,  quit¬ 
ting  their  suppers,  ran  about  with  lights,  some 
to  iEmilius’s  tent,  some  out  of  the  trenches,  to 
seek  him  amongst  such  as  were  slain  in  the 
first  onset.  There  was  nothing  but  grief  in  the 
camp,  and  the  plain  was  filled  with  the  cries 
of  men  calling  out  for  Scipio;  for  from  his 
very  youth,  he  was  an  object  of  admiration; 
endowed  above  any  of  his  equals  with  the 
good  qualities  requisite  either  for  command 
or  counsel.  At  length,  when  it  was  late,  and 
they  almost  despaired,  he  returned  from  the 
pursuit  with  only  two  or  three  of  his  com¬ 
panions  all  covered  with  the  fresh  blood  of 
his  enemies,  having  been,  like  some  dog  of 
noble  breed,  carried  away  by  the  pleasure, 
greater  than  he  could  control,  of  his  first  vic¬ 
tory.  This  was  that  Scipio  that  afterwards  de¬ 
stroyed  Carthage  and  Numantia,  and  was 
without  dispute  the  first  of  the  Romans  in 
merit,  and  had  the  greatest  authority  amongst 
them.  Thus  Fortune,  deferring  her  displeas¬ 
ure  and  jealousy  of  such  great  success  to  some 
other  time,  let  iEmilius  at  present  enjoy  this 


223 

victory,  without  any  detraction  or  diminution. 

As  for  Perseus,  from  Pydna  he  fled  to  Pella 
with  his  cavalry,  which  was  as  yet  almost  en¬ 
tire.  But  when  the  foot  came  up  with  them, 
and,  upbraiding  them  as  cowards  and  traitors, 
tried  to  pull  them  off  their  horses,  and  fell  to 
blows,  Perseus,  fearing  the  tumult,  forsook 
the  common  road,  and,  lest  he  should  be 
known,  pulled  off  his  purple,  and  carried  it 
before  him,  and  took  his  crown  in  his  hand 
and,  that  he  might  the  better  converse  with 
his  friends,  alighted  from  his  horse  and  led 
him. 

Of  those  that  were  about  him,  one  stopped, 
pretending  to  tie  his  shoe  that  was  loose, 
another  to  water  his  horse,  a  third  to  drink 
himself;  and  thus  lagging  behind,  by  degrees 
left  him,  they  having  not  so  much  reason  to 
fear  their  enemies  as  his  cruelty;  for  he,  dis¬ 
ordered  by  his  misfortune,  sought  to  clear 
himself  by  laying  the  cause  of  the  overthrow 
upon  everybody  else. 

He  arrived  at  Pella  in  the  night,  where 
Euctus  and  Eudaeus,  two  of  his  treasurers, 
came  to  him,  and,  what  with  their  reflecting 
on  his  former  faults,  and  their  free  and  ill- 
timed  admonitions  and  counsels,  so  exasper¬ 
ated  him,  that  he  killed  them  both,  stabbing 
them  with  his  own  dagger.  After  this,  nobody 
stuck  to  him  but  Evander  the  Cretan,  Arche- 
demus  the  Aitolian,  and  Neon  the  Bceotian. 
Of  the  common  soldiers  there  followed  him 
only  those  from  Crete,  not  out  of  any  good¬ 
will,  but  because  they  were  as  constant  to  his 
riches  as  the  bees  to  their  hive.  For  he  carried 
a  great  treasure  with  him,  out  of  which  he 
had  suffered  them  to  take  cups,  bowls,  and 
other  vessels  of  silver  and  gold,  to  the  value 
of  fifty  talents. 

But  when  he  was  come  to  Amphipolis,  and 
afterwards  to  Galepsus,  and  his  fears  were  a 
little  abated,  he  relapsed  into  his  old  and  con¬ 
stitutional  disease  of  covetousness,  and  lamen¬ 
ted  to  his  friends  that  he  had,  through  inad¬ 
vertency,  allowed  some  gold  plate  which  had 
belonged  to  Alexander  the  Great  to  go  into 
the  hands  of  the  Cretans,  and  besought  those 
that  had  it,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  to  exchange 
with  him  again  for  money.  Those  that  under¬ 
stood  him  thoroughly  knew  very  well  that  he 
only  played  the  Cretan  with  the  Cretans,  but 
those  that  believed  him,  and  restored  what 
they  had,  were  cheated;  as  he  not  only  did  not 
pay  the  money,  but  by  craft  got  thirty  talents 
more  of  his  friends  into  his  hands  (which  in 
a  short  time  after  fell  to  the  enemy),  and  with 


224 

them  sailed  to  Samothrace,  and  there  fled  to 
the  temple  of  Castor  and  Pollux  for  refuge. 

The  Macedonians  were  always  accounted 
great  lovers  of  their  kings,  but  now,  as  if  their 
chief  prop  was  broken,  they  all  gave  way  to¬ 
gether,  and  submitted  to  Aimilius,  and  in  two 
days  made  him  master  of  their  whole  country. 
This  seems  to  confirm  the  opinion  which  as¬ 
cribes  whatever  he  did  to  good  fortune.  The 
omen,  also,  that  happened  at  Amphipolis  has 
a  supernatural  character.  When  he  was  sacri¬ 
ficing  there,  and  the  holy  rites  were  just  be¬ 
gun,  on  a  sudden,  lightning  fell  upon  the 
altar,  set  the  wood  on  fire,  and  completed  the 
immolation  of  the  sacrifice. 

The  most  signal  manifestation,  however,  of 
preternatural  agency  appears  in  the  story  of 
the  rumour  of  his  success.  For  on  the  fourth 
day  after  Perseus  was  vanquished  at  Pydna, 
whilst  the  people  at  Rome  were  seeing  the 
horse-races,  a  report  suddenly  rose  at  the  en¬ 
trance  of  the  theatre  that  iEmilius  had  de¬ 
feated  Perseus  in  a  great  battle,  and  was  re¬ 
ducing  all  Macedonia  under  his  power;  and 
from  thence  it  spread  amongst  the  people,  and 
created  general  joy,  with  shoutings  and  ac¬ 
clamations  for  that  whole  day  through  the 
city.  But  when  no  certain  author  was  found 
of  the  news,  and  every  one  alike  had  taken  it 
at  random,  it  was  abandoned  for  the  present 
and  thought  no  more  of,  until,  a  few  days 
after,  certain  intelligence  came,  and  then  the 
first  was  looked  upon  as  no  less  than  a  mir¬ 
acle,  having,  under  an  appearance  of  fiction, 
contained  what  was  real  and  true. 

It  is  reported  also,  that  the  news  of  the  bat¬ 
tle  fought  in  Italy,  near  the  river  Sagra,  was 
conveyed  into  Peloponnesus  the  same  day,  and 
of  that  at  Mycale  against  the  Medes,  to  Pla- 
taea.  When  the  Romans  had  defeated  the  Tar- 
quins,  who  were  combined  with  the  Latins, 
a  little  after  there  were  seen  at  Rome  two  tall 
and  comely  men,  who  professed  to  bring  the 
news  from  the  camp.  They  were  conjectured 
to  be  Castor  and  Pollux.  The  first  man  that 
spoke  to  them  in  the  Forum,  near  the  foun¬ 
tain  where  they  were  cooling  their  horses, 
which  were  all  of  a  foam,  expressed  surprise 
at  the  report  of  the  victory,  when,  it  is  said, 
they  smiled,  and  gently  touched  his  beard 
with  their  hands,  the  hair  of  which  from  be¬ 
ing  black  was,  on  the  spot,  changed  to  yellow. 
This  gave  credit  to  what  they  said,  and  fixed 
the  name  of  Ahenobarbus,  or  Brazen-beard, 
on  the  man. 

And  a  thing  which  happened  in  our  own 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

time  will  make  all  these  credible.  For  when 
Antonius  rebelled  against  Domitian,  and 
Rome  was  in  consternation,  expecting  great 
wars  from  the  quarter  of  Germany,  all  on  a 
sudden,  and  nobody  knows  upon  what  ac¬ 
count,  the  people  spontaneously  gave  out  a 
rumour  of  victory,  and  the  news  ran  current 
through  the  city,  that  Antonius  himself  was 
slain,  his  whole  army  destroyed,  and  not  so 
much  as  a  part  of  it  escaped;  nay,  this  belief 
was  so  strong  and  positive,  that  many  of  the 
magistrates  offered  up  sacrifice.  But  when,  at 
length,  the  author  was  sought  for,  and  none 
was  to  be  found,  it  vanished  by  degrees,  every 
one  shifting  it  off  from  himself  to  another, 
and,  at  last,  was  lost  in  the  numberless  crowd, 
as  in  a  vast  ocean,  and,  having  no  solid  ground 
to  support  its  credit,  was  in  a  short  time  not 
so  much  as  named  in  the  city.  Nevertheless, 
when  Domitian  marched  out  with  his  forces 
to  the  war,  he  met  with  messengers  and  let¬ 
ters  that  gave  him  a  relation  of  the  victory; 
and  the  rumour,  it  was  found,  had  come  the 
very  day  it  was  gained,  though  the  distance 
between  the  places  was  more  than  twenty-five 
hundred  miles.  The  truth  of  this  no  man  of 
our  time  is  ignorant  of. 

But  to  proceed.  Cnaeus  Octavius,  who  was 
joined  in  command  with  iEmilius,  came  to 
an  anchor  with  his  fleet  under  Samothrace, 
where,  out  of  respect  to  the  gods,  he  permitted 
Perseus  to  enjoy  the  benefit  of  refuge,  but 
took  care  that  he  should  not  escape  by  sea. 
Notwithstanding,  Perseus  secretly  persuaded 
Oroandes  of  Crete,  master  of  a  small  vessel, 
to  convey  him  and  his  treasure  away.  He, 
however,  playing  the  true  Cretan,  took  in  the 
treasure,  and  bade  him  come,  in  the  night, 
with  his  children  and  most  necessary  atten¬ 
dants,  to  the  port  by  the  temple  of  Ceres;  but, 
as  soon  as  it  was  evening,  set  sail  without  him. 

It  had  been  sad  enough  for  Perseus  to  be 
forced  to  let  down  himself,  his  wife,  and  chil¬ 
dren  through  a  narrow  window  by  a  wall — 
people  altogether  unaccustomed  to  hardship 
and  fleeing;  but  that  which  drew  a  far  sadder 
sigh  from  his  heart  was,  when  he  was  told  by 
a  man,  as  he  wandered  on  the  shore,  that  he 
had  seen  Oroandes  under  sail  in  the  main  sea; 
it  being  now  about  daybreak.  So,  there  being 
no  hopes  left  of  escaping,  he  fled  back  again 
to  the  wall,  which  he  and  his  wife  recovered, 
though  they  were  seen  by  the  Romans,  before 
they  could  reach  them.  His  children  he  him¬ 
self  had  delivered  into  the  hands  of  Ion,  one 
that  had  been  his  favourite,  but  now  proved 


/EMILIUS  PAULUS 

his  betrayer,  and  was  the  chief  cause  that 
forced  him  (beasts  themselves  will  do  so  when 
their  young  ones  are  taken)  to  come  and  yield 
himself  up  to  those  that  had  them  in  their 
power.  His  greatest  confidence  was  in  Nasica, 
and  it  was  for  him  he  called,  but  he  not  being 
there,  he  bewailed  his  misfortune,  and,  seeing 
there  was  no  possible  remedy,  surrendered 
himself  to  Octavius. 

And  here,  in  particular,  he  made  it  mani¬ 
fest  that  he  was  possessed  with  a  vice  more 
sordid  than  covetousness  itself,  namely,  the 
fondness  of  life;  by  which  he  deprived  him¬ 
self  even  of  pity,  the  only  thing  that  fortune 
never  takes  away  from  the  most  wretched.  He 
desired  to  be  brought  to  Aimilius,  who  arose 
from  his  seat,  and,  accompanied  with  his 
friends,  went  to  receive  him,  with  tears  in  his 
eyes,  as  a  great  man  fallen  by  the  anger  of 
the  gods  and  his  own  ill-fortune;  when  Per¬ 
seus — the  most  shameful  of  sights — threw 
himself  at  his  feet,  embraced  his  knees,  and 
uttered  unmanly  cries  and  petitions,  such  as 
iEmilius  was  not  able  to  bear,  nor  would 
vouchsafe  to  hear;  but  looking  on  him  with  a 
sad  and  angry  countenance  he  said,  “Why, 
unhappy  man,  do  you  thus  take  pains  to  exon¬ 
erate  fortune  of  your  heaviest  charge  against 
her,  by  conduct  that  will  make  it  seem  that 
you  are  not  unjustly  in  calamity,  and  that  it 
is  not  your  present  condition,  but  your  former 
happiness,  that  was  more  than  your  deserts? 
And  why  depreciate  also  my  victory,  and 
make  my  conquests  insignificant,  by  proving 
yourself  a  coward,  and  a  foe  beneath  a  Ro¬ 
man?  Distressed  valour  challenges  great  re¬ 
spect,  even  from  enemies;  but  cowardice, 
though  never  so  successful,  from  the  Romans 
has  always  met  with  scorn.”  Yet  for  all  this 
he  took  him  up,  gave  him  his  hand,  and  de¬ 
livered  him  into  the  custody  of  Tubero. 

Meantime,  he  himself  carried  his  sons,  his 
sons-in-law,  and  others  of  chief  rank,  espe¬ 
cially  of  the  younger  sort,  back  with  him  into 
his  tent,  where  for  a  long  time  he  sat  down 
without  speaking  one  word,  insomuch  that 
they  all  wondered  at  him.  At  last,  he  began 
to  discourse  of  fortune  and  human  affairs.  “Is 
it  meet,”  said  he,  “for  him  that  knows  he  is 
but  man,  in  his  greatest  prosperity  to  pride 
himself,  and  be  exalted  at  the  conquest  of  a 
city,  nation,  or  kingdom,  and  not,  rather,  well 
to  weigh  this  change  of  fortune,  in  which  all 
warriors  may  see  an  example  of  their  com¬ 
mon  frailty,  and  learn  a  lesson  that  there  is 
nothing  durable  or  constant?  For  what  time 


225 

can  men  select  to  think  themselves  secure, 
when  that  of  victory  itself  forces  us  more  than 
any  to  dread  our  own  fortune?  And  a  very 
little  consideration  on  the  law  of  things,  and 
how  all  are  hurried  round,  and  each  man’s 
station  changed,  will  introduce  sadness  in  the 
midst  of  the  greatest  joy.  Or  can  you,  when 
you  see  before  your  eyes  the  succession  of 
Alexander  himself,  who  arrived  at  the  height 
of  power  and  ruled  the  greatest  empire,  in  the 
short  space  of  an  hour  trodden  underfoot — 
when  you  behold  a  king,  that  was  but  even 
now  surrounded  with  so  numerous  an  army, 
receiving  nourishment  to  support  his  life  from 
the  hands  of  his  conquerors — can  you,  I  say, 
believe  there  is  any  certainty  in  what  we  now 
possess,  whilst  there  is  such  a  thing  as  chance? 
No,  young  men,  cast  off  that  vain  pride  and 
empty  boast  of  victory;  sit  down  with  humil¬ 
ity,  looking  always  for  what  is  yet  to  come, 
and  the  possible  future  reverses  which  the  di¬ 
vine  displeasure  may  eventually  make  the  end 
of  our  present  happiness.”  It  is  said  that 
Aimilius,  having  spoken  much  more  to  the 
same  purpose,  dismissed  the  young  men  prop¬ 
erly  humbled,  and  with  their  vainglory  and 
insolence  thoroughly  chastened  and  curbed  by 
his  address. 

When  this  was  done,  he  put  his  army  into 
garrisons,  to  refresh  themselves,  and  went 
himself  to  visit  Greece,  and  to  spend  a  short 
time  in  relaxations  equally  honourable  and 
humane.  For  as  he  passed,  he  eased  the  peo¬ 
ple’s  grievances,  reformed  their  governments, 
and  bestowed  gifts  upon  them;  to  some  corn, 
to  others  oil  out  of  the  king’s  storehouses,  in 
which,  they  report,  there  were  such  vast  quan¬ 
tities  laid  up,  that  receivers  and  petitioners 
were  lacking  before  they  could  be  exhausted. 

In  Delphi  he  found  a  great  square  pillar  of 
white  marble,  designed  for  the  pedestal  of 
King  Perseus’s  golden  statue,  on  which  he 
commanded  his  own  to  be  placed,  alleging 
that  it  was  but  just  that  the  conquered  should 
give  place  to  the  conquerors.  In  Olympia  he  is 
said  to  have  uttered  the  saying  everybody  has 
heard,  that  Phidias  had  carved  Homer’s  Jupi¬ 
ter. 

When  the  ten  commissioners  arrived  from 
Rome,  he  delivered  up  again  to  the  Mace¬ 
donians  their  cities  and  country,  granting 
them  to  live  at  liberty,  and  according  to  their 
own  laws,  only  paying  the  Romans  the  tribute 
of  a  hundred  talents,  double  which  sum  they 
had  been  wont  to  pay  to  their  kings. 

Then  he  celebrated  all  manner  of  shows  and 


226 

games,  and  sacrifices  to  the  gods,  and  made 
great  entertainments  and  feasts;  the  charge  of 
all  which  he  liberally  defrayed  out  of  the 
king’s  treasury;  and  showed  that  he  under¬ 
stood  the  ordering  and  placing  of  his  guests, 
and  how  every  man  should  be  received,  an- 
swerably  to  their  rank  and  quality,  with  such 
nice  exactness,  that  the  Greeks  were  full  of 
wonder,  finding  the  care  of  these  matters  of 
pleasure  did  not  escape  him,  and  that  though 
involved  in  such  important  business,  he  could 
observe  correctness  in  these  trifles.  Nor  was  it 
least  gratifying  to  him,  that,  amidst  all  the 
magnificent  and  splendid  preparations,  he 
himself  was  always  the  most  grateful  sight, 
and  greatest  pleasure  to  those  he  entertained. 
And  he  told  those  that  seemed  to  wonder  at 
his  diligence,  that  there  was  the  same  spirit 
shown  in  marshalling  a  banquet  as  an  army; 
in  rendering  the  one  formidable  to  the  enemy, 
the  other  acceptable  to  the  guests. 

Nor  did  men  less  praise  his  liberality,  and 
the  greatness  of  his  soul,  than  his  other  vir¬ 
tues;  for  he  would  not  so  much  as  see  those 
great  quantities  of  silver  and  gold,  which 
were  heaped  together  out  of  the  king’s  pal¬ 
aces,  but  delivered  them  to  the  quaestors,  to  be 
put  into  the  public  treasury.  He  only  per¬ 
mitted  his  own  sons,  who  were  great  lovers 
of  learning,  to  take  the  king’s  books;  and 
when  he  distributed  rewards  due  to  extraordi¬ 
nary  valour,  he  gave  his  son-in-law,  iElius  Tu- 
bero,  a  bowl  that  weighed  five  pounds.  This 
is  that  Tubero  we  have  already  mentioned, 
who  was  one  of  sixteen  relations  that  lived  to¬ 
gether,  and  were  all  maintained  out  of  one 
little  farm;  and  it  is  said  that  this  was  the  first 
plate  that  ever  entered  the  house  of  the  Ailii, 
brought  thither  as  an  honour  and  reward 
of  virtue;  before  this  time,  neither  they  nor 
their  wives  ever  made  use  either  of  silver 
or  gold. 

Having  thus  settled  everything  well,  taking 
his  leave  of  the  Greeks,  and  exhorting  the 
Macedonians,  that,  mindful  of  the  liberty  they 
had  received  from  the  Romans,  they  should 
endeavour  to  maintain  it  by  their  obedience 
to  the  laws,  and  concord  amongst  themselves, 
he  departed  for  Epirus,  having  orders  from 
the  senate  to  give  the  soldiers  that  followed 
him  in  the  war  against  Perseus  the  pillage  of 
the  cities  of  that  country. 

That  he  might  set  upon  them  all  at  once  by 
surprise  and  unawares,  he  summoned  ten  of 
the  principal  men  out  of  each,  whom  he  com¬ 
manded,  on  such  an  appointed  day,  to  bring 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

all  the  gold  and  silver  they  had  either  in  their 
private  houses  or  temples;  and,  with  every 
one  of  these,  as  if  it  were  for  this  very  pur¬ 
pose,  and  under  a  pretence  of  searching  for 
and  receiving  the  gold,  he  sent  a  centurion 
and  a  guard  of  soldiers;  who,  the  set  day  be¬ 
ing  come,  rose  all  at  once,  and  at  the  very 
self-same  time  fell  upon  them,  and  proceeded 
to  ransack  the  cities;  so  that  in  one  hour  a 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  persons  were 
made  slaves,  and  threescore  and  ten  cities 
sacked.  Yet  what  was  given  to  each  soldier, 
out  of  so  vast  a  destruction  and  utter  ruin, 
amounted  to  no  more  than  eleven  drachmas; 
so  that  men  could  only  shudder  at  the  issue 
of  a  war,  where  the  wealth  of  a  whole  nation 
thus  divided  turned  to  so  little  advantage  and 
profit  to  each  particular  man. 

When  iEmilius  had  done  this — an  action 
perfectly  contrary  to  his  gentle  and  mild  na¬ 
ture — he  went  down  to  Oricus,  where  he  em¬ 
barked  his  army  for  Italy.  He  sailed  up  the 
river  Tiber  in  the  king’s  galley,  that  had  six¬ 
teen  banks  of  oars,  and  was  richly  adorned 
with  captured  arms  and  with  cloths  of  purple 
and  scarlet;  so  that,  the  vessel  rowing  slowly 
against  the  stream,  the  Romans  that  crowded 
on  the  shore  to  meet  him  had  a  foretaste  of 
his  following  triumph. 

But  the  soldiers,  who  had  cast  a  covetous 
eye  on  the  treasures  of  Perseus,  when  they  did 
not  obtain  as  much  as  they  thought  they  de¬ 
served,  were  secretly  enraged  and  angry  with 
iEmilius  for  this,  but  openly  complained  that 
he  had  been  a  severe  and  tyrannical  com¬ 
mander  over  them;  nor  were  they  ready  to 
show  their  desire  of  his  triumph.  When  Ser- 
vius  Galba,  who  was  iEmilius’s  enemy,  though 
he  commanded  as  tribune  under  him,  under¬ 
stood  this,  he  had  the  boldness  plainly  to 
affirm  that  a  triumph  was  not  to  be  allowed 
him;  and  sowed  various  calumnies  amongst 
the  soldiers,  which  yet  further  increased  their 
ill-will. 

Nay  more,  he  desired  the  tribunes  of  the 
people,  because  the  four  hours  that  were  re¬ 
maining  of  the  day  could  not  suffice  for  the 
accusation,  to  let  him  put  it  off  till  another. 
But  when  the  tribunes  commanded  him  to 
speak  then,  if  he  had  anything  to  say,  he  be¬ 
gan  a  long  oration,  filled  with  all  manner  of 
reproaches,  in  which  he  spent  the  remaining 
part  of  the  time,  and  the  tribunes,  when  it 
was  dark,  dismissed  the  assembly.  The  sol¬ 
diers  growing  more  vehement  on  this,  throng¬ 
ed  all  to  Galba,  and  entering  into  a  conspir- 


^EMILIUS  PAULUS 

acy,  early  in  the  morning  beset  the  capitol, 
where  the  tribunes  had  appointed  the  follow¬ 
ing  assembly  to  be  held. 

As  soon  as  it  was  day  it  was  put  to  the  vote, 
and  the  first  tribe  was  proceeding  to  refuse 
the  triumph;  and  the  news  spread  amongst 
the  people  and  to  the  senate.  The  people  were 
indeed  much  grieved  that  iTmilius  should 
meet  with  such  ignominy;  but  this  was  only 
in  words,  which  had  no  effect.  The  chief  of 
the  senate  exclaimed  against  it  as  a  base  ac¬ 
tion,  and  excited  one  another  to  repress  the 
boldness  and  insolence  of  the  soldiers,  which 
would  ere  long  become  altogether  ungovern¬ 
able  and  violent,  were  they  now  permitted  to 
deprive  iTmilius  of  his  triumph.  Forcing  a 
passage  through  the  crowd,  they  came  up  in 
great  numbers,  and  desired  the  tribunes  to 
defer  polling  till  they  had  spoken  what  they 
had  to  say  to  the  people. 

All  things  thus  suspended,  and  silence  be¬ 
ing  made,  Marcus  Servilius  stood  up,  a  man 
of  consular  dignity,  and  who  had  killed 
twenty-three  of  his  enemies  that  had  chal¬ 
lenged  him  in  single  combat.  “It  is  now  more 
than  ever,”  said  he,  “clear  to  my  mind  how 
great  a  commander  our  iTmilius  Paulus  is, 
when  I  see  he  was  able  to  perform  such  fa¬ 
mous  and  great  exploits  with  an  army  so  full 
of  sedition  and  baseness;  nor  can  I  sufficiently 
wonder,  that  a  people  that  seemed  to  glory  in 
the  triumphs  over  Illyrians  and  Ligurians, 
should  now  through  envy  refuse  to  see  the 
Macedonian  king  led  alive,  and  all  the  glory 
of  Philip  and  Alexander,  in  captivity  to  the 
Roman  power.  For  is  it  not  a  strange  thing 
for  you,  who  upon  a  slight  rumour  of  victory 
that  came  by  chance  into  the  city,  did  offer 
sacrifices  and  put  up  your  requests  unto  the 
gods  that  you  might  see  the  report  verified, 
now,  when  the  general  is  returned  with  an 
undoubted  conquest,  to  defraud  the  gods  of 
honour,  and  yourselves  of  joy,  as  if  you  feared 
to  behold  the  greatness  of  his  warlike  deed, 
or  were  resolved  to  spare  your  enemy?  And 
of  the  two,  much  better  were  it  to  put  a  stop 
to  the  triumph,  out  of  pity  to  him,  than  out 
of  envy  to  your  general;  yet  to  such  a  height 
of  power  is  malice  arrived  amongst  you,  that 
a  man  without  one  scar  to  show  on  his  skin, 
that  is  smooth  and  sleek  with  ease  and  home¬ 
keeping  habits,  will  undertake  to  define  the 
office  and  duties  of  a  general  before  us,  who 
with  our  own  wounds  have  been  taught  how 
to  judge  of  the  valour  or  the  cowardice  of 
commanders.” 


227 

And,  at  the  same  time,  putting  aside  his 
garment,  he  showed  an  infinite  number  of 
scars  upon  his  breast,  and,  turning  about,  he 
exposed  some  parts  of  his  person  which  it  is 
usual  to  conceal;  and,  addressing  Galba,  said: 
“You  deride  me  for  these,  in  which  I  glory 
before  my  fellow-citizens,  for  it  is  in  their 
service,  in  which  I  have  ridden  night  and  day, 
that  I  received  them;  but  go  collect  the  votes, 
whilst  I  follow  after,  and  note  the  base  and 
ungrateful,  and  such  as  choose  rather  to  be 
flattered  and  courted  than  commanded  by 
their  general.”  It  is  said  this  speech  so  stopped 
the  soldiers’  mouths,  and  altered  their  minds, 
that  all  the  tribes  decreed  a  triumph  for 
iEmilius;  which  was  performed  after  this 
manner. 

The  people  erected  scaffolds  in  the  Forum, 
in  the  circuses,  as  they  call  their  buildings  for 
horse-races,  and  in  all  other  parts  of  the  city 
where  they  could  best  behold  the  show.  The 
spectators  were  clad  in  white  garments;  all 
the  temples  were  open,  and  full  of  garlands 
and  perfumes;  the  ways  were  cleared  and  kept 
open  by  numerous  officers,  who  drove  back  all 
who  crowded  into  or  ran  across  the  main  ave¬ 
nue.  This  triumph  lasted  three  days. 

On  the  first,  which  was  scarcely  long  enough 
for  the  sight,  were  to  be  seen  the  statues,  pic¬ 
tures,  and  colossal  images  which  were  taken 
from  the  enemy,  drawn  upon  two  hundred 
and  fifty  chariots. 

On  the  second  was  carried  in  a  great  many 
waggons  the  finest  and  richest  armour  of  the 
Macedonians,  both  of  brass  and  steel,  all  new¬ 
ly  polished  and  glittering;  the  pieces  of  which 
were  piled  up  and  arranged  purposely  with 
the  greatest  art,  so  as  to  seem  to  be  tumbled 
in  heaps  carelessly  and  by  chance;  helmets 
were  thrown  upon  shields,  coats  of  mail  upon 
greaves;  Cretan  targets,  and  Thracian  buck¬ 
lers  and  quivers  of  arrows,  lay  huddled 
amongst  horses’  bits,  and  through  these  there 
appeared  the  points  of  naked  swords,  inter¬ 
mixed  with  long  Macedonian  sarissas.  All 
these  arms  were  fastened  together  with  just  so 
much  looseness  that  they  struck  against  one 
another  as  they  were  drawn  along,  and  made 
a  harsh  and  alarming  noise,  so  that,  even  as 
spoils  of  a  conquered  enemy,  they  could  not 
be  beheld  without  dread.  After  these  waggons 
loaded  with  armour  there  followed  three  thou¬ 
sand  men  who  carried  the  silver  that  was 
coined,  in  seven  hundred  and  fifty  vessels, 
each  of  which  weighed  three  talents,  and  was 
carried  by  four  men.  Others  brought  silver 


228 


bowls  and  goblets  and  cups,  all  disposed  in 
such  order  as  to  make  the  best  show,  and  all 
curious  as  well  for  their  size  as  the  solidity  of 
their  embossed  work. 

On  the  third  day,  early  in  the  morning, 
first  came  the  trumpeters,  who  did  not  sound 
as  they  were  wont  in  a  procession  or  solemn 
entry,  but  such  a  charge  as  the  Romans  use 
when  they  encourage  the  soldiers  to  fight. 
Next  followed  young  men  wearing  frocks 
with  ornamented  borders,  who  led  to  the  sac¬ 
rifice  a  hundred  and  twenty  stalled  oxen,  with 
their  horns  gilded,  and  their  heads  adorned 
with  ribbons  and  garlands;  and  with  these 
were  boys  that  carried  basins  for  libation,  of 
silver  and  gold.  After  this  was  brought  the 
gold  coin,  which  was  divided  into  vessels  that 
weighed  three  talents,  like  those  that  con¬ 
tained  the  silver;  they  were  in  number  seventy- 
seven.  These  were  followed  by  those  that 
brought  the  consecrated  bowl  which  iEmilius 
had  caused  to  be  made,  that  weighed  ten  tal¬ 
ents,  and  was  set  with  precious  stones.  Then 
were  exposed  to  view  the  cups  of  Antigonus 
and  Seleucuse,  and  those  of  the  Thericlean 
make,  and  all  the  gold  plate  that  was  used  at 
Perseus’s  table.  Next  to  these  came  Perseus’s 
chariot,  in  which  his  armour  was  placed,  and 
on  that  his  diadem. 

And,  after  a  little  intermission,  the  king’s 
children  were  led  captives,  and  with  them  a 
train  of  their  attendants,  masters,  and  teach¬ 
ers,  all  shedding  tears,  and  stretching  out 
hands  to  the  spectators,  and  making  the  chil¬ 
dren  themselves  also  beg  and  entreat  their 
compassion.  There  were  two  sons  and  a 
daughter,  whose  tender  age  made  them  but 
little  sensible  of  the  greatness  of  their  misery, 
which  very  insensibility  of  their  condition 
rendered  it  the  more  deplorable;  insomuch 
that  Perseus  himself  was  scarcely  regarded  as 
he  went  along,  whilst  pity  fixed  the  eyes  of 
the  Romans  upon  the  infants;  and  many  of 
them  could  not  forbear  tears,  and  all  beheld 
the  sight  with  a  mixture  of  sorrow  and  plea¬ 
sure,  until  the  children  were  passed. 

After  his  children  and  their  attendants  came 
Perseus  himself,  clad  all  in  black,  and  wear¬ 
ing  the  boots  of  his  country,  and  looking  like 
one  altogether  stunned  and  deprived  of  rea¬ 
son,  through  the  greatness  of  his  misfortunes. 
Next  followed  a  great  company  of  his  friends 
and  familiars,  whose  countenances  were  dis¬ 
figured  with  grief  and  who  let  the  spectators 
see,  by  their  tears  and  their  continual  looking 
upon  Perseus,  that  it  was  his  fortune  they  so 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

much  lamented,  and  that  they  were  regardless 
of  their  own. 

Perseus  sent  to  /Emilius  to  entreat  that  he 
might  not  be  led  in  pomp,  but  be  left  out  of 
the  triumph;  who,  deriding,  as  was  but  just, 
his  cowardice  and  fondness  of  life,  sent  him 
this  answer,  that  as  for  that,  it  had  been  be¬ 
fore,  and  was  now,  in  his  own  power,  giving 
him  to  understand  that  the  disgrace  could  be 
avoided  by  death;  which  the  faint-hearted 
man  not  having  the  spirit  for,  and  made  ef¬ 
feminate  by  I  know  not  what  hopes,  allowed 
himself  to  appear  as  a  part  of  his  own  spoils. 

After  these  were  carried  four  hundred 
crowns,  all  made  of  gold,  sent  from  the  cities 
by  their  respective  deputations  to  /Emilius,  in 
honour  of  his  victory.  Then  he  himself  came, 
seated  on  a  chariot  magnificently  adorned  (a 
man  well  worthy  to  be  looked  at,  even  with¬ 
out  these  ensigns  of  power),  dressed  in  a  robe 
of  purple,  interwoven  with  gold,  and  holding 
a  laurel  branch  in  his  right  hand.  All  the 
army,  in  like  manner,  with  boughs  of  laurel 
in  their  hands,  divided  into  their  bands  and 
companies,  followed  the  chariot  of  their  com¬ 
mander;  some  singing  verses,  according  to  the 
usual  custom,  mingled  with  raillery;  others, 
songs  of  triumph  and  the  praise  of  ^Emilius’s 
deeds;  who,  indeed,  was  admired  and  ac¬ 
counted  happy  by  all  men,  and  unenvied  by 
every  one  that  was  good;  except  so  far  as  it 
seems  the  province  of  some  god  to  lessen  that 
happiness  which  is  too  great  and  inordinate, 
and  so  to  mingle  the  affairs  of  human  life 
that  no  one  should  be  entirely  free  and  ex¬ 
empt  from  calamities;  but,  as  we  read  in 
Homer,  that  those  should  think  themselves 
truly  blessed  to  whom  fortune  has  given  an 
equal  share  of  good  and  evil. 

iEmilius  had  four  sons,  of  whom  Scipio  and 
Fabius,  as  is  already  related,  were  adopted 
into  other  families;  the  other  two,  whom  he 
had  by  a  second  wife,  and  who  were  yet  but 
young,  he  brought  up  in  his  own  house.  One 
of  these  died  at  fourteen  years  of  age,  five 
days  before  his  father’s  triumph,  the  other  at 
twelve,  three  days  after;  so  that  there  was  no 
Roman  without  a  deep  sense  of  his  suffering, 
and  who  did  not  shudder  at  the  cruelty  of  for¬ 
tune,  that  had  not  scrupled  to  bring  so  much 
sorrow  into  a  house  replenished  with  happi¬ 
ness,  rejoicing,  and  sacrifices,  and  to  inter¬ 
mingle  tears  and  laments  with  songs  of  vic¬ 
tory  and  triumph. 

iEmilius,  however,  reasoning  justly  that 
courage  and  resolution  was  not  merely  to  re- 


^EMILIUS  PAULUS 

sist  armour  and  spears,  but  all  the  shocks  of 
ill-fortune,  so  met  and  so  adapted  himself  to 
these  mingled  and  contrasting  circumstances, 
as  to  outbalance  the  evil  with  the  good,  and 
his  private  concerns  with  those  of  the  public; 
and  thus  did  not  allow  anything  either  to 
take  away  from  the  grandeur,  or  sully  the 
dignity  of  his  victory.  For  as  soon  as  he  had 
buried  the  first  of  his  sons  (as  we  have  al¬ 
ready  said),  he  triumphed;  and  the  second 
dying  almost  as  soon  as  his  triumph  was  over, 
he  gathered  together  an  assembly  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  and  made  an  oration  to  them,  not  like  a 
man  that  stood  in  need  of  comfort  from  oth¬ 
ers,  but  one  that  undertook  to  support  his 
fellow-citizens  in  their  grief  for  the  sufferings 
he  himself  underwent. 

“I,”  he  said,  “who  never  yet  feared  anything 
that  was  human,  have,  amongst  such  as  were 
divine,  always  had  a  dread  of  Fortune  as 
faithless  and  inconstant;  and,  for  the  very  rea¬ 
son  that  in  this  war  she  had  been  as  a  favour¬ 
able  gale  in  all  my  affairs,  I  still  expected  some 
change  and  reflux  of  things.  In  one  day  I 
passed  the  Ionian  sea,  and  reached  Corcyra 
from  Brundisium;  thence  in  five  more  I  sacri¬ 
ficed  at  Delphi,  and  in  other  five  days  came 
to  my  forces  in  Macedonia,  where,  after  I  had 
finished  the  usual  sacrifices  for  the  purifying 
of  the  army,  I  entered  on  my  duties,  and,  in 
the  space  of  fifteen  days,  put  an  honourable 
period  to  the  war. 

“Still  retaining  a  jealousy  of  Fortune,  even 
from  the  smooth  current  of  my  affairs,  and 
seeing  myself  secure  and  free  from  the  dan¬ 
ger  of  any  enemy,  I  chiefly  dreaded  the  change 
of  the  goddess  at  sea,  whilst  conveying  home 
my  victorious  army,  vast  spoils,  and  a  captive 
king.  Nay,  indeed,  after  I  was  returned  to 
you  safe,  and  saw  the  city  full  of  joy,  con¬ 
gratulating,  and  sacrifices,  yet  still  I  distrusted, 
well  knowing  that  Fortune  never  conferred 
any  great  benefits  that  were  unmixed  and  un¬ 
attended  with  probabilities  of  reverse.  Nor 
could  my  mind,  that  was  still,  as  it  were,  in 
labour,  and  always  foreseeing  something  to 
befall  this  city,  free  itself  from  this  fear,  until 
this  great  misfortune  befell  me  in  my  own 
family,  and  till,  in  the  midst  of  those  days  set 
apart  for  triumph,  I  carried  two  of  the  best  of 
sons,  my  only  destined  successors,  one  after 
another  to  their  funerals. 

“Now,  therefore,  I  am  myself  safe  from 
danger,  at  least  as  to  what  was  my  greatest 
care;  and  I  trust  and  am  verily  persuaded  that 
for  the  time  to  come  Fortune  will  prove  con- 


229 

stant  and  harmless  unto  you;  since  she  has 
sufficiently  wreaked  her  jealousy  at  our  great 
successes  on  me  and  mine,  and  has  made  the 
conqueror  as  marked  an  example  of  human 
instability  as  the  captive  whom  he  led  in  tri¬ 
umph,  with  this  only  difference,  that  Perseus, 
though  conquered,  does  yet  enjoy  his  children, 
while  the  conqueror,  iTmilius,  is  deprived  of 
his.”  This  was  the  generous  and  magnani¬ 
mous  oration  Thnilius  is  said  to  have  spoken 
to  the  people,  from  a  heart  truly  sincere  and 
free  from  all  artifice. 

Although  he  very  much  pitied  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  Perseus,  and  studied  to  befriend  him 
in  what  he  was  able,  yet  he  could  procure  no 
other  favour  than  his  removal  from  the  com¬ 
mon  prison,  the  career ,  into  a  more  cleanly 
and  humane  place  of  security,  where,  whilst 
he  was  guarded,  it  is  said,  he  starved  himself 
to  death. 

Others  state  his  death  to  be  of  the  strangest 
and  most  unusual  character:  that  the  soldiers 
who  were  his  guard,  having  conceived  a  spite 
and  hatred  against  him  for  some  reason,  and 
finding  no  other  way  to  grieve  and  afflict  him, 
kept  him  from  sleep,  took  pains  to  disturb 
him  when  he  was  disposed  to  rest,  and  found 
out  contrivances  to  keep  him  continually 
awake,  by  which  means  at  length  he  was  ut¬ 
terly  worn  out,  and  expired. 

Two  of  his  children,  also,  died  soon  after 
him;  the  third,  who  was  named  Alexander, 
they  say  proved  an  exquisite  artist  in  turning 
and  graving  small  figures,  and  learned  so  per¬ 
fectly  to  speak  and  write  the  Roman  lan¬ 
guage,  that  he  became  clerk  to  the  magis¬ 
trates,  and  behaved  himself  in  his  office  with 
great  skill  and  conduct. 

They  ascribed  to  Aimilius’s  conquest  of 
Macedonia  this  most  acceptable  benefit  to  the 
people,  that  he  brought  so  vast  a  quantity  of 
money  into  the  public  treasury,  that  they 
never  paid  any  taxes,  until  Hirtius  and  Pansa 
were  consuls,  which  was  in  the  first  war  be¬ 
tween  Antony  and  Caesar. 

This  also  was  peculiar  and  remarkable  in 
ffimilius,  that  though  he  was  extremely  be¬ 
loved  and  honoured  by  the  people,  yet  he 
always  sided  with  the  nobles;  nor  would  he 
either  say  or  do  anything  to  ingratiate  him¬ 
self  with  the  multitude,  but  constantly  ad¬ 
hered  to  the  nobility,  in  all  political  matters, 
which  in  aftertimes  was  cast  in  Scipio  Afri- 
canus’s  teeth  by  Appius;  these  two  being  in 
their  time  the  most  considerable  men  in  the 
city,  and  standing  in  competition  for  the  office 


230 

of  censor.  The  one  had  on  his  side  the  nobles 
and  the  senate,  to  which  party  the  Appii  were 
always  attached;  the  other,  although  his  own 
interest  was  great,  yet  made  use  of  the  favour 
and  love  of  the  people. 

When,  therefore,  Appius  saw  Scipio  come 
to  the  market-place,  surrounded  with  men  of 
mean  rank,  and  such  as  were  but  newly  made 
free,  yet  were  very  fit  to  manage  a  debate,  to 
gather  together  the  rabble,  and  to  carry  what¬ 
soever  they  designed  by  importunity  and 
noise,  crying  out  with  a  loud  voice:  “Groan 
now,”  said  he,  “O  ^Tmilius  Paulus,  if  you 
have  knowledge  in  your  grave  of  what  is 
done  above,  that  your  son  aspires  to  be  censor, 
by  the  help  of  ^Tmilius,  the  common  crier, 
and  Licinius  Philonicus.” 

Scipio  always  had  the  good-will  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  because  he  was  constantly  heaping  fa¬ 
vours  on  them;  but  yRmilius,  although  he  still 
took  part  with  the  nobles,  yet  was  as  much  the 
people’s  favourite  as  those  who  most  sought 
popularity  and  used  every  art  to  obtain  it.  This 
they  made  manifest,  when,  amongst  other  dig¬ 
nities,  they  thought  him  worthy  of  the  office 
of  censor,  a  trust  accounted  most  sacred  and 
of  great  authority,  as  well  in  other  things,  as 
in  the  strict  examination  into  men’s  lives.  For 
the  censors  had  power  to  expel  a  senator,  and 
enrol  whom  they  judged  most  fit  in  his  room, 
and  to  disgrace  such  young  men  as  lived  li¬ 
centiously,  by  taking  away  their  horses.  Be¬ 
sides  this,  they  were  to  value  and  assess  each 
man’s  estate,  and  register  the  number  of  the 
people. 

There  were  numbered  by  TEmilius  347,452 
men.  He  declared  Marcus  iEmilius  Lepidus 
first  senator,  who  had  already  four  times  held 
that  honour,  and  he  removed  from  their  office 
three  of  the  senators  of  the  least  note.  The 
same  moderation  he  and  his  fellow-censor, 
Marcius  Philippus,  used  at  the  muster  of  the 
knights. 

Whilst  he  was  thus  busy  about  many  and 
weighty  affairs  he  fell  sick  of  a  disease,  which 
at  first  seemed  hazardous;  and  although  after 
a  while  it  proved  without  danger,  yet  was 
troublesome  and  difficult  to  be  cured;  so  that 
by  the  advice  of  his  physicians  he  sailed  to 
Velia,  in  south  Italy,  and  there  dwelt  a  long 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

time  near  the  sea,  where  he  enjoyed  all  pos¬ 
sible  quietness. 

The  Romans,  in  the  meanwhile,  longed  for 
his  return,  and  oftentimes  by  their  expressions 
in  the  theatres  gave  public  testimony  of  their 
great  desire  and  impatience  to  see  him.  When, 
therefore,  the  time  drew  nigh  that  a  solemn 
sacrifice  was  of  necessity  to  be  offered,  and  he 
found,  as  he  thought,  his  body  strong  enough, 
he  came  back  again  to  Rome,  and  there  per¬ 
formed  the  holy  rites  with  the  rest  of  the 
priests,  the  people  in  the  meantime  crowding 
about  him  and  congratulating  his  return. 

The  next  day  he  sacrificed  again  to  the  gods 
for  his  recovery;  and,  having  finished  the  sac¬ 
rifice,  returned  to  his  house  and  sat  down  to 
dinner,  when,  all  on  a  sudden  and  when  no 
change  was  expected,  he  fell  into  a  fit  of  de¬ 
lirium,  and,  being  quite  deprived  of  his  senses, 
the  third  day  after  ended  a  life  in  which  he 
had  wanted  no  manner  of  thing  which  is 
thought  to  conduce  to  happiness. 

Nay,  his  very  funeral  pomp  had  something 
in  it  remarkable  and  to  be  admired,  and  his 
virtue  was  graced  with  the  most  solemn  and 
happy  rites  at  his  burial;  consisting,  not  in 
gold  and  ivory,  or  in  the  usual  sumptuous¬ 
ness  and  splendour  of  such  preparations,  but 
in  the  good-will,  honour,  and  love,  not  only 
of  his  fellow-citizens,  but  of  his  enemies  them¬ 
selves.  For  as  many  Spaniards,  Ligurians, 
and  Macedonians  as  happened  to  be  present 
at  the  solemnity,  that  were  young  and  of 
vigorous  bodies,  took  up  the  bier  and  carried 
it;  whilst  the  more  aged  followed,  called 
iFmilius  the  benefactor  and  preserver  of  their 
countries. 

For  not  only  at  the  time  of  his  conquest 
had  he  acted  to  all  with  kindness  and  clemen¬ 
cy,  but,  through  the  whole  course  of  his  life, 
he  continued  to  do  them  good  and  look  after 
their  concerns,  as  if  they  had  been  his  famil¬ 
iars  and  relations.  They  report  that  the  whole 
of  his  estate  scarce  amounted  to  three  hun¬ 
dred  and  seventy  thousand  drachmas;  to 
which  he  left  his  two  sons  co-heirs;  but  Scipio, 
who  was  the  youngest,  being  adopted  into 
the  more  wealthy  family  of  Africanus,  gave  it 
all  to  his  brother.  Such  are  said  to  have  been 
the  life  and  manners  of  TEmilius. 


^MILIUS  PAULUS  and  TIMOLEON  Compared 

Such  being  the  story  of  these  two  great  tween  them.  They  made  war  with  two  power- 
men’s  lives,  without  doubt  in  the  com-  ful  enemies:  the  one  against  the  Macedonians, 
parison  very  little  difference  will  be  found  be-  and  the  other  with  the  Carthaginians,  and  the 


^EMILIUS  PAULUS  AND  TIMOLEON 

success  was  in  both  cases  glorious.  One  con¬ 
quered  Macedon  from  the  seventh  succeeding 
heir  of  Antigonus;  the  other  freed  Sicily 
from  usurping  tyrants,  and  restored  the  is¬ 
land  to  its  former  liberty.  Unless,  indeed,  it 
be  made  a  point  of  ffimilius’s  side,  that  he 
engaged  with  Perseus  when  his  forces  were 
entire,  and  composed  of  men  that  had  often 
successfully  fought  with  the  Romans;  whereas 
Timoleon  found  Dionysius  in  a  despairing 
condition,  his  affairs  being  reduced  to  the  last 
extremity;  or,  on  the  contrary,  it  be  urged  in 
favour  of  Timoleon,  that  he  vanquished  sev¬ 
eral  tyrants,  and  a  powerful  Carthaginian 
army,  with  an  inconsiderable  number  of  men 
gathered  together  from  all  parts,  not  with  such 
an  army  as  Aimilius  had,  of  well-disciplined 
soldiers,  experienced  in  war,  and  accustomed 
to  obey;  but  with  such  as  through  the  hopes 
of  gain  restored  to  him,  unskilled  in  fighting 
and  ungovernable.  And  when  actions  are 
equally  glorious,  and  the  means  to  compass 
them  unequal,  the  greater  esteem  is  certainly 
due  to  that  general  who  conquers  with  the 
smaller  power. 

Both  have  the  reputation  of  having  behaved 
themselves  with  an  uncorrupted  integrity  in 
all  the  affairs  they  managed;  but  ffimilius  had 
the  advantage  of  being,  from  his  infancy,  by 
the  laws  and  customs  of  his  country  brought 
up  to  the  proper  management  of  public  af¬ 
fairs,  which  Timoleon  brought  himself  to  by 
his  own  efforts.  And  this  is  plain;  for  at  that 
time  all  the  Romans  were  uniformly  orderly 
and  obedient,  respectful  to  the  laws  and  to 
their  fellow-citizens:  whereas  it  is  remarkable 
that  not  one  of  the  Greek  generals  command¬ 
ing  in  Sicily  could  keep  himself  uncorrupted, 
except  Dion,  and  of  him  many  entertained  a 
jealousy  that  he  would  establish  a  monarchy 
there,  after  the  Lacedaemonian  manner.  Ti- 
maeus  writes,  that  the  Syracusans  sent  even 
Gylippus  home  dishonourably,  and  with  a 
reputation  lost  by  the  unsatiable  covetousness 
he  displayed  when  he  commanded  the  army. 
And  numerous  historians  tell  us  of  the  wick¬ 
ed  and  perfidious  acts  committed  by  Pharax 
the  Spartan  and  Callippus  the  Athenian,  with 


231 

the  view  of  making  themselves  kings  of  Si¬ 
cily.  Yet  what  were  these  men,  and  what 
strength  had  they,  to  entertain  such  a  thought? 
The  first  of  them  was  a  follower  of  Dionysius, 
when  he  was  expelled  from  Syracuse,  and  the 
other  a  hired  captain  of  foot  under  Dion,  and 
came  into  Sicily  with  him.  But  Timoleon,  at 
the  request  and  prayers  of  the  Syracusans, 
was  sent  to  be  their  general,  and  had  no  need 
to  seek  for  power,  but  had  a  perfect  title, 
founded  on  their  own  offers,  to  hold  it;  and 
yet  no  sooner  had  he  freed  Sicily  from  her 
oppressors,  but  he  willingly  surrendered  it. 

It  is  truly  worthy  our  admiration  in  2Emb 
lius,  that  though  he  conquered  so  great  and 
so  rich  a  realm  as  that  of  Macedon,  yet  he 
would  not  touch,  nor  see  any  of  the  money, 
nor  did  he  advantage  himself  one  farthing  by 
it,  though  he  was  very  generous  of  his  own  to 
others.  I  would  not  intend  any  reflection  on 
Timoleon  for  accepting  of  a  house  and  hand¬ 
some  estate  in  the  country,  which  the  Syra¬ 
cusans  presented  him  with;  there  is  no  dis¬ 
honour  in  accepting;  but  yet  there  is  greater 
glory  in  a  refusal,  and  the  supremest  virtue 
is  shown  in  not  wanting  what  it  might  fairly 
take. 

And  as  that  body  is,  without  doubt,  the 
most  strong  and  healthful  which  can  the  easi¬ 
est  support  extreme  cold  and  excessive  heat  in 
the  change  of  seasons,  and  that  the  most  firm 
and  collected  mind  which  is  not  puffed  up 
with  prosperity  nor  dejected  with  adversity; 
so  the  virtue  of  2Emilius  was  eminently  seen 
in  his  countenance  and  behaviour,  continuing 
as  noble  and  lofty  upon  the  loss  of  two  dear 
sons,  as  when  he  achieved  his  greatest  vic¬ 
tories  and  triumphs.  But  Timoleon,  after  he 
had  justly  punished  his  brother,  a  truly  heroic 
action,  let  his  reason  yield  to  a  causeless  sor¬ 
row,  and,  humiliated  with  grief  and  remorse, 
forbore  for  twenty  years  to  appear  in  any  pub¬ 
lic  place,  or  meddle  with  any  affairs  of  the 
commonwealth.  It  is  truly  very  commendable 
to  abhor  and  shun  the  doing  any  base  action; 
but  to  stand  in  fear  of  every  kind  of  censure 
or  disrepute  may  argue  a  gentle  and  open- 
hearted,  but  not  an  heroic  temper. 


PELOPIDAS 

4io?~364  b.c. 


Cato  Major,  hearing  some  commend  one 
that  was  rash,  and  inconsiderately  dar¬ 
ing  in  a  battle,  said,  “There  is  a  differ¬ 
ence  between  a  man's  prizing  valour  at  a 
great  rate,  and  valuing  life  at  little,”  a  very 
just  remark.  Antigonus,  we  know,  at  least,  had 
a  soldier,  a  venturous  fellow,  but  of  wretched 
health  and  constitution;  the  reason  of  whose 
ill-look  he  took  the  trouble  to  inquire  into; 
and,  on  understanding  from  him  that  it  was 
a  disease,  commanded  his  physicians  to  em¬ 
ploy  their  utmost  skill,  and  if  possible  recover 
him;  which  brave  hero,  when  once  cured, 
never  afterwards  sought  danger  or  showed 
himself  venturous  in  battle;  and,  when  Anti¬ 
gonus  wondered  and  upbraided  him  with  his 
change,  made  no  secret  of  the  reason,  and  said, 
“Sir,  you  are  the  cause  of  my  cowardice,  by 
freeing  me  from  those  miseries  which  made 
me  care  little  for  life.” 

With  the  same  feeling,  the  Sybarite  seems 
to  have  said  of  the  Spartans,  that  it  was  no 
commendable  thing  in  them  to  be  so  ready 
to  die  in  the  wars,  since  by  that  they  were 
freed  from  such  hard  labour  and  miserable 
living.  In  truth,  the  Sybarites,  a  soft  and  dis¬ 
solute  people,  might  well  imagine  they  hated 
life,  because  in  their  eager  pursuit  of  virtue 
and  glory  they  were  not  afraid  to  die;  but,  in 
fact,  the  Lacedaemonians  found  their  virtue 
secured  them  happiness  alike  in  living  or  in 
dying;  as  we  see  in  the  epitaph  that  says — 
They  died,  but  not  as  lavish  of  their  blood, 

Or  thinking  death  itself  was  simply  good; 
Their  wishes  neither  were  to  live  nor  die, 

But  to  do  both  ali\e  commendably. 

An  endeavour  to  avoid  death  is  not  blam- 
able,  if  we  do  not  basely  desire  to  live;  nor  a 
willingness  to  die  good  and  virtuous,  if  it  pro¬ 
ceeds  from  a  contempt  of  life.  And,  therefore, 
Homer  always  takes  care  to  bring  his  bravest 
and  most  daring  heroes  well  armed  into  bat¬ 
tle;  and  the  Greek  law-givers  punished  those 
that  threw  away  their  shields,  but  not  him 
that  lost  his  sword  or  spear,  intimating  that 
self-defence  is  more  a  man's  business  than 
offence.  This  is  especially  true  of  a  governor 


of  a  city,  or  a  general;  for  if,  as  Iphicrates 
divides  it  out,  the  light-armed  are  the  hands, 
the  horse  the  feet,  the  infantry  the  breast,  and 
the  general  the  head,  he,  when  he  puts  him¬ 
self  upon  danger,  not  only  ventures  his  own 
person,  but  all  those  whose  safety  depends  on 
his;  and  so  on  the  contrary.  Callicratidas, 
therefore,  though  otherwise  a  great  man,  was 
wrong  in  his  answer  to  the  augur  who  ad¬ 
vised  him,  the  sacrifice  being  unlucky,  to  be 
careful  of  his  life;  “Sparta,”  said  he,  “will  not 
miss  one  man.”  It  is  true,  Callicratidas,  when 
simply  serving  in  any  engagement  either  at 
sea  or  land,  was  but  a  single  person,  but  as  a 
general,  he  united  in  his  life  the  lives  of  all, 
and  could  hardly  be  called  one  when  his  death 
involved  the  ruin  of  so  many. 

The  saying  of  old  Antigonus  was  better, 
who,  when  he  was  to  fight  at  Andros,  and 
one  told  him,  “The  enemy’s  ships  are  more 
than  ours”;  replied,  “For  how  many  then  wilt 
thou  reckon  me?”  intimating  that  a  brave 
and  experienced  commander  is  to  be  highly 
valued,  one  of  the  first  duties  of  whose  office 
indeed  it  is  to  save  him  on  whose  safety  de¬ 
pends  that  of  others.  And,  therefore,  I  applaud 
Timotheus,  who,  when  Chares  showed  the 
wounds  he  had  received,  and  his  shield 
pierced  by  a  dart,  told  him,  “Yet  how  ashamed 
I  was,  at  the  siege  of  Samos,  when  a  dart  fell 
near  me,  for  exposing  myself,  more  like  a  boy 
than  like  a  general  in  command  of  a  large 
army.”  Indeed,  where  the  general’s  hazarding 
himself  will  go  far  to  decide  the  result,  there 
he  must  fight  and  venture  his  person,  and  not 
mind  their  maxims,  who  would  have  a  gen¬ 
eral  die,  if  not  of,  at  least  in  old  age;  but 
when  the  advantage  will  be  but  small  if  he 
gets  the  better,  and  the  loss  considerable  if  he 
falls,  who  then  would  desire,  at  the  risk  of  the 
commander’s  life,  a  piece  of  success  which  a 
common  soldier  might  obtain? 

This  I  thought  fit  to  premise  before  the 
lives  of  Pelopidas  and  Marcellus,  who  were 
both  great  men,  but  who  both  fell  by  their 
own  rashness.  For,  being  gallant  men,  and 
having  gained  their  respective  countries  great 


232 


PELOPIDAS 

glory  and  reputation  by  their  conduct  in  war 
against  terrible  enemies,  the  one,  as  history 
relates,  overthrowing  Hannibal,  who  was  till 
then  invincible;  the  other,  in  a  set  battle  beat¬ 
ing  the  Lacedaemonians,  then  supreme  both 
at  sea  and  land;  they  ventured  at  last  too  far, 
and  were  heedlessly  prodigal  of  their  lives, 
when  there  was  the  greatest  need  of  men  and 
commanders  such  as  they.  And  this  agreement 
in  their  characters  and  their  deaths  is  the  rea¬ 
son  why  I  compare  their  lives. 

Pelopidas,  the  son  of  Hippoclus,  was  de¬ 
scended,  as  likewise  Epaminondas  was,  from 
an  honourable  family  in  Thebes;  and,  being 
brought  up  to  opulence,  and  having  a  fair 
estate  left  him  whilst  he  was  young,  he  made 
it  his  business  to  relieve  the  good  and  deserv¬ 
ing  amongst  the  poor,  that  he  might  show 
himself  lord  and  not  slave  of  his  estate.  For 
amongst  men,  as  Aristotle  observes,  some  are 
too  narrow-minded  to  use  their  wealth,  and 
some  are  loose  and  abuse  it;  and  these  live 
perpetual  slaves  to  their  pleasures,  as  the  oth¬ 
ers  to  their  gain. 

Others  permitted  themselves  to  be  obliged 
by  Pelopidas,  and  thankfully  made  use  of  his 
liberality  and  kindness;  but  amongst  all  his 
friends  he  could  never  persuade  Epaminondas 
to  be  a  sharer  in  his  wealth.  He,  however, 
stepped  down  into  his  poverty,  and  took  pleas¬ 
ure  in  the  same  poor  attire,  spare  diet,  un¬ 
wearied  endurance  of  hardships,  and  un¬ 
shrinking  boldness  in  war;  like  Capaneus  in 
Euripides,  who  had — 

Abundant  wealth  and  in  that  wealth  no  pride, 
he  was  ashamed  any  one  should  think  that  he 
spent  more  upon  his  person  than  the  meanest 
Theban. 

Epaminondas  made  his  familiar  and  heredi¬ 
tary  poverty  more  light  and  easy  by  his  philos¬ 
ophy  and  single  life;  but  Pelopidas  married 
a  woman  of  good  family,  and  had  children; 
yet  still  thinking  little  of  his  private  interests, 
and  devoting  all  his  time  to  the  public,  he 
ruined  his  estate;  and,  when  his  friends  ad¬ 
monished  and  told  him  how  necessary  that 
money  which  he  neglected  was:  “Yes,”  he 
replied,  “necessary  to  Nicodemus,”  pointing  to 
a  blind  cripple. 

Both  seemed  equally  fitted  by  nature  for  all 
sorts  of  excellence;  but  bodily  exercises  chiefly 
delighted  Pelopidas,  learning  Epaminondas; 
and  the  one  spent  his  spare  hours  in  hunting 
and  the  Palaestra,  the  other  in  hearing  lectures 
or  philosophising.  And,  amongst  a  thousand 
points  for  praise  in  both,  the  judicious  esteem 


233 

nothing  equal  to  that  constant  benevolence 
and  friendship,  which  they  inviolably  pre¬ 
served  in  all  their  expeditions,  public  actions, 
and  administration  of  the  commonwealth.  For 
if  any  one  looks  on  the  administrations  of 
Aristides  and  Themistocles,  of  Cimon  and 
Pericles,  of  Nicias  and  Alcibiades,  what  con¬ 
fusion,  what  envy,  what  mutual  jealousy  ap¬ 
pears?  And  if  he  then  casts  his  eye  on  the 
kindness  and  reverence  that  Pelopidas  showed 
Epaminondas,  he  must  needs  confess  that 
these  are  more  truly  and  more  justly  styled 
colleagues  in  government  and  command  than 
the  others,  who  strove  rather  to  overcome  one 
another  than  their  enemies. 

The  true  cause  of  this  was  their  virtue; 
whence  it  came  that  they  did  not  make  their 
actions  aim  at  wealth  and  glory,  an  endeavour 
sure  to  lead  to  bitter  and  contentious  jealousy; 
but  both  from  the  beginning  being  inflamed 
with  a  divine  desire  of  seeing  their  country 
glorious  by  their  exertions,  they  used  to  that 
end  one  another’s  excellences  as  their  own. 
Many,  indeed,  think  this  strict  and  entire  af¬ 
fection  is  to  be  dated  from  the  battle  at  Man- 
tinea,  where  they  both  fought,  being  part  of 
the  succours  that  were  sent  from  Thebes  to 
the  Lacedaemonians,  their  then  friends  and 
allies.  For,  being  placed  together  amongst  the 
infantry,  and  engaging  the  Arcadians,  when 
the  Lacedaemonian  wing,  in  which  they 
fought,  gave  ground,  and  many  fled,  they 
closed  their  shields  together  and  resisted  the 
assailants. 

Pelopidas,  having  received  seven  wounds  in 
the  forepart  of  his  body,  fell  upon  an  heap  of 
slain  friends  and  enemies;  but  Epaminondas, 
though  he  thought  him  past  recovery,  ad¬ 
vanced  to  defend  his  arms  and  body,  and 
singly  fought  a  multitude,  resolving  rather  to 
die  than  forsake  his  helpless  Pelopidas.  And 
now,  he  being  much  distressed,  being  wound¬ 
ed  in  the  breast  by  a  spear,  and  in  the  arm 
by  a  sword,  Agesipolis,  the  King  of  the  Spar¬ 
tans,  came  to  his  succour  from  the  other  wing, 
and  beyond  hope  delivered  both. 

After  this  the  Lacedaemonians  pretended  to 
be  friends  to  Thebes,  but  in  truth  looked  with 
jealous  suspicions  on  the  designs  and  power 
of  the  city,  and  chiefly  hated  the  party  of 
Ismenias  and  Androclides,  in  which  Pelopidas 
also  was  an  associate,  as  tending  to  liberty  and 
the  advancement  of  the  commonalty.  There¬ 
fore  Archias,  Leontidas,  and  Philip,  all  rich 
men,  and  of  oligarchical  principles,  and  im¬ 
moderately  ambitious,  urged  Phoebidas  the 


234 

Spartan,  as  he  was  on  his  way  past  the  city 
with  a  considerable  force,  to  surprise  the  Cad- 
mea,  and,  banishing  the  contrary  faction,  to 
establish  an  oligarchy,  and  by  that  means  sub¬ 
ject  the  city  to  the  supremacy  of  the  Spartans. 
He,  accepting  the  proposal,  at  the  festival  of 
Ceres  unexpectedly  fell  on  the  Thebans,  and 
made  himself  master  of  the  citadel.  Ismenias 
was  taken,  carried  to  Sparta,  and  in  a  short 
time  murdered;  but  Pelopidas,  Pherenicus, 
Androclides,  and  many  more  that  fled  were 
publicly  proclaimed  outlaws.  Epaminondas 
stayed  at  home,  being  not  much  looked  after, 
as  one  whom  philosophy  had  made  inactive 
and  poverty  incapable. 

The  Lacedaemonians  cashiered  Phcebidas, 
and  fined  him  one  hundred  thousand  drach¬ 
mas,  yet  still  kept  a  garrison  in  the  Cadmea; 
which  made  all  Greece  wonder  at  their  in¬ 
consistency,  since  they  punished  the  doer,  but 
approved  the  deed.  And  though  the  Thebans, 
having  lost  their  polity,  and  being  enslaved  by 
Archias  and  Leontidas,  had  no  hopes  to  get 
free  from  this  tyranny,  which  they  saw  guard¬ 
ed  by  the  whole  military  power  of  the  Spar¬ 
tans,  and  had  no  means  to  break  the  yoke,  un¬ 
less  these  could  be  deposed  from  their  com¬ 
mand  of  sea  and  land;  yet  Leontidas  and  his 
associates,  understanding  the  exiles  lived  at 
Athens  in  favour  with  the  people,  and  with 
honour  from  all  the  good  and  virtuous,  formed 
secret  designs  against  their  lives,  and,  suborn¬ 
ing  some  unknown  fellows,  despatched  Andro¬ 
clides,  but  were  not  successful  on  the  rest. 

Letters,  besides,  were  sent  from  Sparta  to 
the  Athenians,  warning  them  neither  to  re¬ 
ceive  nor  countenance  the  exiles,  but  expel 
them  as  declared  common  enemies  of  the  con¬ 
federacy.  But  the  Athenians,  from  their  nat¬ 
ural  hereditary  inclination  to  be  kind,  and 
also  to  make  a  grateful  return  to  the  Thebans, 
who  had  very  much  assisted  them  in  restoring 
their  democracy,  and  had  publicly  enacted, 
that  if  any  Athenian  would  march  armed 
through  Bceotia  against  the  tyrants,  that  no 
Boeotian  should  either  see  or  hear  it,  did  the 
Thebans  no  harm. 

Pelopidas,  though  one  of  the  youngest,  was 
active  in  privately  exciting  each  single  exile; 
and  often  told  them  at  their  meetings  that  it 
was  both  dishonourable  and  impious  to  neg¬ 
lect  their  enslaved  and  engarrisoned  country, 
and,  lazily  contented  with  their  own  lives  and 
safety,  depend  on  the  decree  of  the  Athenians, 
and  through  fear  fawn  on  every  smooth¬ 
tongued  orator  that  was  able  to  work  upon 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  people:  no,  they  must  venture  for  this 
great  prize,  taking  Thrasybulus’s  bold  cour¬ 
age  for  example,  and  as  he  advanced  from 
Thebes  and  broke  the  power  of  the  Athenian 
tyrants,  so  they  should  march  from  Athens 
and  free  Thebes.  When  by  this  method  he 
had  persuaded  them,  they  privately  despatched 
some  persons  to  those  friends  they  had  left  at 
Thebes,  and  acquainted  them  with  their  de¬ 
signs. 

Their  plans  being  approved,  Charon,  a  man 
of  the  greatest  distinction,  offered  his  house 
for  their  reception;  Phillidas  contrived  to  get 
himself  made  secretary  to  Archias  and  Philip, 
who  then  held  the  office  of  polemarch  or  chief 
captain;  and  Epaminondas  had  already  in¬ 
flamed  the  youth.  For,  in  their  exercises,  he 
had  encouraged  them  to  challenge  and  wres¬ 
tle  with  the  Spartans,*  and  again,  when  he 
saw  them  puffed  up  with  victory  and  success, 
sharply  told  them  that  it  was  the  greater 
shame  to  be  such  cowards  as  to  serve  those 
whom  in  strength  they  so  much  excelled. 

The  day  for  action  being  fixed,  it  was 
agreed  upon  by  the  exiles  that  Pherenicus 
with  the  rest  should  stay  at  the  Thriasian  plain, 
while  some  few  of  the  younger  men  tried  the 
first  danger  by  endeavouring  to  get  into  the 
city;  and,  if  they  were  surprised  by  their  ene¬ 
mies,  the  others  should  take  care  to  provide 
for  their  children  and  parents.  Pelopidas  first 
offered  to  undertake  the  business;  then  Melon, 
Damoclides,  and  Theopompus,  men  of  noble 
families,  who,  in  other  things  loving  and 
faithful  to  one  another,  were  rivals  constant 
only  in  glory  and  courageous  exploits. 

They  were  twelve  in  all,  and  having  taken 
leave  of  those  that  stayed  behind,  and  sent  a 
messenger  to  Charon,  they  went  forward, 
clad  in  short  coats,  and  carrying  hounds  and 
hunting-poles  with  them,  that  they  might  be 
taken  for  hunters  beating  over  the  fields,  and 
prevent  all  suspicion  in  those  that  met  them 
on  the  way.  When  the  messenger  came  to 
Charon,  and  told  him  they  were  approaching, 
he  did  not  change  his  resolution  at  the  sight 
of  danger,  but,  being  a  man  of  his  word, 
offered  them  his  house. 

But  one  Hipposthenidas — a  man  of  no  ill 
principles,  a  lover  of  his  country,  and  a  friend 
to  the  exiles,  but  not  of  as  much  resolution 
as  the  shortness  of  time  and  the  character  of 
the  action  required,  being  as  it  were  dizzied 
at  the  greatness  of  the  approaching  enterprise 
and  beginning  now  for  the  first  time  to  com¬ 
prehend  that,  relying  on  that  weak  assistance 


PELOPIDAS 

which  could  be  expected  from  the  exiles,  they 
were  undertaking  no  less  a  task  than  to  shake 
the  government,  and  overthrow  the  whole 
power  of  Sparta, — went  privately  to  his  house 
and  sent  a  friend  to  Melon  and  Pelopidas, 
desiring  them  to  forbear  for  the  present,  to 
return  to  Athens  and  expect  a  better  oppor¬ 
tunity. 

The  messenger’s  name  was  Chlidon,  who, 
going  home  in  haste  and  bringing  out  his 
horse,  asked  for  the  bridle;  but,  his  wife  not 
knowing  where  it  was,  and,  when  it  could 
not  be  found,  telling  him  she  had  lent  it  to  a 
friend,  first  they  began  to  chide,  then  to  curse 
one  another,  and  his  wife  wished  the  journey 
might  prove  ill  to  him  and  those  that  sent 
him;  insomuch  that  Chlidon’s  passion  made 
him  waste  a  great  part  of  the  day  in  this  quar¬ 
relling,  and  then,  looking  on  this  chance  as  an 
omen,  he  laid  aside  all  thoughts  of  his  jour¬ 
ney,  and  went  away  to  some  other  business. 
So  nearly  had  these  great  and  glorious  de¬ 
signs,  even  in  their  very  birth,  lost  their  op¬ 
portunity. 

But  Pelopidas  and  his  companions,  dressing 
themselves  like  countrymen,  divided,  and, 
whilst  it  was  yet  day,  entered  at  different 
quarters  of  the  city.  It  was,  besides,  a  windy 
day,  and  now  it  just  began  to  snow,  which 
contributed  much  to  their  concealment,  be¬ 
cause  most  people  were  gone  indoors  to  avoid 
the  weather.  Those,  however,  that  were  con¬ 
cerned  in  the  design  received  them  as  they 
came,  and  conducted  them  to  Charon’s  house, 
where  the  exiles  and  others  made  up  forty- 
eight  in  number.  The  tyrant’s  affairs  stood 
thus:  the  secretary,  Phillidas,  as  I  have  already 
observed,  was  an  accomplice  in  and  privy  to 
all  the  contrivance  of  the  exiles,  and  he  a 
while  before  had  invited  Archias,  with  others, 
to  an  entertainment  on  that  day,  to  drink 
freely,  and  meet  some  women  of  the  town, 
on  purpose  that  when  they  were  drunk,  and 
given  up  to  their  pleasures,  he  might  deliver 
them  over  to  the  conspirators.  But  before 
Archias  was  thoroughly  heated  notice  was 
given  him  that  the  exiles  were  privately  in 
the  town;  a  true  report  indeed,  but  obscure, 
and  not  well  confirmed;  nevertheless,  though 
Phillidas  endeavoured  to  divert  the  discourse, 
Archias  sent  one  of  his  guards  to  Charon,  and 
commanded  him  to  attend  immediately. 

It  was  evening,  and  Pelopidas  and  his 
friends  with  him  in  the  house  were  putting 
themselves  into  a  fit  posture  for  action,  hav¬ 
ing  their  breastplates  on  already,  and  their 


235 

swords  girt;  but  at  the  sudden  knocking  at 
the  door,  one  stepping  forth  to  inquire  the 
matter,  and  learning  from  the  officer  that 
Charon  was  sent  for  by  the  polemarch,  re¬ 
turned  in  great  confusion  and  acquainted 
those  within;  and  immediately  conjectured 
that  the  whole  plot  was  discovered,  and  they 
should  be  cut  in  pieces,  before  so  much  as 
achieving  any  action  to  do  credit  to  their 
bravery;  yet  all  agreed  that  Charon  should 
obey  and  attend  the  polemarch  to  prevent 
suspicion.  Charon  was,  indeed,  a  man  of  cour¬ 
age  and  resolution  in  all  dangers,  yet  in  this 
case  he  was  extremely  concerned,  lest  any 
should  suspect  that  he  was  the  traitor  and 
the  death  of  so  many  brave  citizens  be  laid  on 
him.  And,  therefore,  when  he  was  ready  to 
depart,  he  brought  his  son  out  of  the  women’s 
apartment,  a  little  boy  as  yet,  but  one  of  the 
best  looking  and  strongest  of  all  those  of  his 
age,  and  delivered  him  to  Pelopidas  with  these 
words:  “If  you  find  me  a  traitor,  treat  the 
boy  as  an  enemy  without  any  mercy.” 

The  concern  which  Charon  showed  drew 
tears  from  many;  but  all  protested  vehemently 
against  his  supposing  any  one  of  them  so 
mean-spirited  and  base,  at  the  appearance  of 
approaching  danger,  as  to  suspect  or  blame 
him;  and  therefore  desired  him  not  to  involve 
his  son,  but  to  set  him  out  of  harm’s  way: 
that  so  he,  perhaps  escaping  the  tyrant’s  pow¬ 
er,  might  live  to  revenge  the  city  and  his 
friends.  Charon,  however,  refused  to  remove 
him,  and  asked,  “What  life,  what  safety  could 
be  more  honourable,  than  to  die  bravely  with 
his  father  and  such  generous  companions?” 
Thus,  imploring  the  protection  of  the  gods, 
and  saluting  and  encouraging  them  all,  he 
departed,  considering  with  himself,  and  com¬ 
posing  his  voice  and  countenance,  that  he 
might  look  as  little  like  as  possible  to  what  in 
fact  he  really  was. 

When  he  was  come  to  the  door,  Archias 
with  Phillidas  came  out  to  him,  and  said,  “I 
have  heard,  Charon,  that  there  are  some  men 
just  come,  and  lurking  in  the  town,  and  that 
some  of  the  citizens  are  resorting  to  them.” 
Charon  was  at  first  disturbed,  but  asking, 
“Who  are  they,  and  who  conceals  them?” 
and  finding  Archias  did  not  thoroughly  un¬ 
derstand  the  matter,  he  concluded  that  none 
of  those  privy  to  the  design  had  given  this 
information,  and  replied,  “Do  not  disturb 
yourself  for  an  empty  rumour;  I  will  look 
into  it,  however,  for  no  report  in  such  a  case 
is  to  be  neglected.” 


236 

Phillidas,  who  stood  by,  commended  him, 
and  leading  back  Archias,  got  him  deep  in 
drink,  still  prolonging  the  entertainment  with 
the  hopes  of  the  women’s  company  at  last.  But 
when  Charon  returned,  and  found  the  men 
prepared,  not  as  if  they  hoped  for  safety  and 
success,  but  to  die  bravely  and  with  the  slaugh¬ 
ter  of  their  enemies,  he  told  Pelopidas  and 
his  friends  the  truth,  but  pretended  to  others 
in  the  house  that  Archias  talked  to  him  about 
something  else,  inventing  a  story  for  the  oc¬ 
casion. 

This  storm  was  just  blowing  over,  when 
fortune  brought  another;  for  a  messenger  came 
with  a  letter  from  one  Archias,  the  Hiero¬ 
phant  at  Athens,  to  his  namesake  Archias, 
who  was  his  friend  and  guest.  This  did  not 
merely  contain  a  vague  conjectural  suspicion, 
but,  as  it  appeared  afterwards,  disclosed  every 
particular  of  the  design.  The  messenger  being 
brought  in  to  Archias,  who  was  now  pretty 
well  drunk,  and  delivering  the  letter,  said  to 
him,  “The  writer  of  this  desired  it  might  be 
read  at  once;  it  is  on  urgent  business.”  Archias, 
with  a  smile,  replied,  “Urgent  business  to¬ 
morrow,”  and  so  receiving  the  letter,  he  put 
it  under  his  pillow,  and  returned  to  what  he 
had  been  speaking  of  with  Phillidas,  and  these 
words  of  his  are  a  proverb  to  this  day  amongst 
the  Greeks. 

Now  when  the  opportunity  seemed  con¬ 
venient  for  action,  they  set  out  in  two  com¬ 
panies;  Pelopidas  and  Damoclides  with  their 
party  went  against  Leontidas  and  Hypates, 
that  lived  near  together;  Charon  and  Melon 
against  Archias  and  Philip,  having  put  on 
women’s  apparel  over  their  breastplates,  and 
thick  garlands  of  fir  and  pine  to  shade  their 
faces;  and  so,  as  soon  as  they  came  to  the 
door,  the  guests  clapped  and  gave  an  huzza, 
supposing  them  to  be  the  women  they  ex¬ 
pected.  But  when  the  conspirators  had  looked 
about  the  room,  and  carefully  marked  all  that 
were  at  the  entertainment,  they  drew  their 
swords,  and  making  at  Archias  and  Philip 
amongst  the  tables,  disclosed  who  they  were. 
Phillidas  persuaded  some  few  of  his  guests  to 
sit  still,  and  those  that  got  up  and  endeav¬ 
oured  to  assist  the  polemarch,  being  drunk, 
were  easily  despatched.  But  Pelopidas  and  his 
party  met  with  a  harder  task;  as  they  at¬ 
tempted  Leontidas,  a  sober  and  formidable 
man,  and  when  they  came  to  his  house  found 
his  door  shut,  he  being  already  gone  to  bed. 

They  knocked  a  long  time  before  any  one 
would  answer,  but  at  last,  a  servant  that  heard 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

them,  came  out  and  unbarred  the  door.  As 
soon  as  the  gate  gave  way,  they  rushed  in, 
and,  overturning  the  man,  made  all  haste  to 
Leontidas’s  chamber.  But  Leontidas,  guessing 
at  the  matter  by  the  noise  and  running,  leaped 
from  his  bed  and  drew  his  dagger,  but  forgot 
to  put  out  the  lights,  and  by  that  means  make 
them  fall  foul  of  one  another  in  the  dark. 
As  it  was,  being  easily  seen  by  reason  of  the 
light,  he  received  them  at  his  chamber  door 
and  stabbed  Cephisodorus,  the  first  man  that 
entered:  on  his  falling  the  next  that  he  en¬ 
gaged  was  Pelopidas;  and  the  passage  being 
narrow  and  Cephisodorus’s  body  lying  in  the 
way,  there  was  a  fierce  and  dangerous  conflict. 
At  last  Pelopidas  prevailed,  and  having  killed 
Leontidas,  he  and  his  companions  went  in 
pursuit  of  Hypates,  and  after  the  same  man¬ 
ner  broke  into  his  house.  He  perceived  the 
design,  and  fled  to  his  neighbours;  but  they 
closely  followed,  and  caught  and  killed  him. 

This  done  they  joined  Melon,  and  sent  to 
hasten  the  exiles  they  had  left  in  Attica;  and 
called  upon  the  citizens  to  maintain  their  lib¬ 
erty,  and  taking  down  the  spoils  from  the 
porches,  and  breaking  open  all  the  armourers’ 
shops  that  were  near,  equipped  those  that 
came  to  their  assistance.  Epaminondas  and 
Gorgidas  came  in  already  armed,  with  a  gal¬ 
lant  train  of  young  men  and  the  best  of  the 
old. 

Now  the  city  was  in  a  great  excitement 
and  confusion,  a  great  noise  and  hurry,  lights 
set  up  in  every  house,  men  running  here  and 
there;  however,  the  people  did  not  as  yet 
gather  into  a  body,  but,  amazed  at  the  pro¬ 
ceedings,  and  not  clearly  understanding  the 
matter,  waited  for  the  day.  And,  therefore,  the 
Spartan  officers  were  thought  to  have  been  in 
fault  for  not  falling  on  at  once,  since  their 
garrison  consisted  of  about  fifteen  hundred 
men,  and  many  of  the  citizens  ran  to  them; 
but,  alarmed  with  the  noise,  the  fires,  and  the 
confused  running  of  the  people,  they  kept 
quietly  within  the  Cadmea.  As  soon  as  day 
appeared,  the  exiles  from  Attica  came  in 
armed,  and  there  was  a  general  assembly  of 
the  people. 

Epaminondas  and  Gorgidas  brought  forth 
Pelopidas  and  his  party,  encompassed  by  the 
priests,  who  held  out  garlands,  and  exhorted 
the  people  to  fight  for  their  country  and  their 
gods.  The  assembly,  at  their  appearance,  rose 
up  in  a  body  and  with  shouts  and  acclama¬ 
tions  received  the  men  as  their  deliverers  and 
benefactors. 


PELOPIDAS 

Then  Pelopidas,  being  chosen  chief  captain 
of  Bceotia,  together  with  Melon  and  Charon, 
proceeded  at  once  to  blockade  the  citadel,  and 
stormed  it  on  all  sides,  being  extremely  de¬ 
sirous  to  expel  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  free 
the  Cadmea,  before  an  army  could  come  from 
Sparta  to  their  relief.  And  he  just  so  narrowly 
succeeded,  that  they,  having  surrendered  on 
terms  and  departed,  on  their  way  home  met 
Cleombrotus  at  Megara  marching  towards 
Thebes  with  a  considerable  force.  The  Spar¬ 
tans  condemned  and  executed  Herippidas  and 
Arcissus,  two  of  their  governors,  at  Thebes, 
and  Lysanoridas  the  third,  being  severely 
fined,  fled  to  Peloponnesus. 

This  action  so  closely  resembling  that  of 
Thrasybulus,  in  the  courage  of  the  actors,  the 
danger,  the  encounters,  and  equally  crowned 
with  success,  was  called  the  sister  of  it  by  the 
Greeks.  For  we  can  scarcely  find  any  other 
examples  where  so  small  and  weak  a  party  of 
men  by  bold  courage  overcame  such  numer¬ 
ous  and  powerful  enemies,  or  brought  greater 
blessings  to  their  country  by  so  doing.  But  the 
subsequent  change  of  affairs  made  this  action 
the  more  famous;  for  the  war  which  forever 
ruined  the  pretensions  of  Sparta  to  command, 
and  put  an  end  to  the  supremacy  she  then  ex¬ 
ercised  alike  by  sea  and  by  land,  proceeded 
from  that  night,  in  which  Pelopidas  not  sur¬ 
prising  any  fort,  or  castle,  or  citadel,  but  com¬ 
ing,  the  twelfth  man,  to  a  private  house, 
loosed  and  broke,  if  we  may  speak  truth  in 
metaphor,  the  chains  of  the  Spartan  sway, 
which  before  seemed  of  adamant  and  indis¬ 
soluble. 

But  now  the  Lacedaemonians  invading 
Boeotia  with  a  great  army,  the  Athenians,  af¬ 
frighted  at  the  danger,  declared  themselves  no 
allies  to  Thebes,  and  prosecuting  those  that 
stood  for  the  Boeotian  interest,  executed  some, 
and  banished  and  fined  others;  and  the  cause 
of  Thebes,  destitute  of  allies,  seemed  in  a  des¬ 
perate  condition.  But  Pelopidas  and  Gorgidas, 
holding  the  office  of  captains  of  Boeotia,  de¬ 
signing  to  breed  a  quarrel  between  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians  and  Athenians,  made  this  con¬ 
trivance. 

One  Sphodrias,  a  Spartan,  a  man  famous 
indeed  for  courage  in  battle,  but  of  no  sound 
judgment,  full  of  ungrounded  hopes  and 
foolish  ambition,  was  left  with  an  army  at 
Thespiae,  to  receive  and  succour  the  Theban 
renegades.  To  him  Pelopidas  and  his  col¬ 
leagues  privately  sent  a  merchant,  one  of  their 
friends,  with  money,  and,  what  proved  more 


237 

efficient,  advice — that  it  more  became  a  man 
of  his  worth  to  set  upon  some  great  enter¬ 
prise,  and  that  he  should,  making  a  sudden 
incursion  on  the  unprotected  Athenians,  sur¬ 
prise  the  Piraeus;  since  nothing  could  be  so 
grateful  to  Sparta  as  to  take  Athens;  and  the 
Thebans,  of  course,  would  not  stir  to  the 
assistance  of  men  whom  they  now  hated  and 
looked  upon  as  traitors. 

Sphodrias,  being  at  last  wrought  upon, 
marched  into  Attica  by  night  with  his  army, 
and  advanced  as  far  as  Eleusis;  but  there  his 
soldiers’  hearts  failing,  after  exposing  his  pro¬ 
ject  and  involving  the  Spartans  in  a  danger¬ 
ous  war,  he  retreated  to  Thespiae.  After  this 
the  Athenians  zealously  sent  supplies  to 
Thebes,  and  putting  to  sea,  sailed  to  many 
places,  and  offered  support  and  protection  to 
all  those  of  the  Greeks  who  were  willing  to 
revolt. 

The  Thebans,  meantime,  singly,  having 
many  skirmishes  with  the  Spartans  in  Bceotia, 
and  fighting  some  battles,  not  great  indeed, 
but  important  as  training  and  instructing 
them,  thus  had  their  minds  raised,  and  their 
bodies  inured  to  labour,  and  gained  both  ex¬ 
perience  and  courage  by  these  frequent  en¬ 
counters,  insomuch  that  we  have  it  related 
that  Antalcidas,  the  Spartan,  said  to  Agesilaus, 
returning  wounded  from  Bceotia,  “Indeed, 
the  Thebans  have  paid  you  handsomely  for 
instructing  them  in  the  art  of  war,  against 
their  wills.” 

In  real  truth,  however,  Agesilaus  was  not 
their  master  in  this,  but  those  that  prudently 
and  opportunely,  as  men  do  young  dogs,  set 
them  on  their  enemies,  and  brought  them 
safely  off  after  they  had  tasted  the  sweets  of 
victory  and  resolution.  Of  all  those  leaders, 
Pelopidas  deserves  the  most  honour;  as  after 
they  had  once  chosen  him  general,  he  was 
every  year  in  command  as  long  as  he  lived; 
either  captain  of  the  sacred  band,  or,  what 
was  most  frequent,  chief  captain  of  Bceotia. 
About  Plataea  and  Thespiae  the  Spartans  were 
routed  and  put  to  flight,  and  Phcebidas,  that 
surprised  the  Cadmea,  slain;  and  at  Tanagra 
a  considerable  force  was  worsted,  and  the 
leader,  Panthoides,  killed.  But  these  encoun¬ 
ters,  though  they  raised  the  victors’  spirits,  did 
not  thoroughly  dishearten  the  unsuccessful;  for 
there  was  no  set  battle,  or  regular  fighting, 
but  mere  incursions  on  advantage,  in  which, 
according  to  occasion,  they  charged,  retired 
again,  or  pursued. 

But  the  battle  at  Tegyrae,  which  seemed  a 


238 

prelude  to  Leuctra,  won  Pelopidas  great  repu¬ 
tation;  for  none  of  the  other  commanders 
could  claim  any  hand  in  the  design,  nor  the 
enemies  any  show  of  victory.  The  city  of  the 
Orchomenians  siding  with  the  Spartans,  and 
having  received  two  companies  for  its  guard, 
he  kept  a  constant  eye  upon  it,  and  watched 
his  opportunity.  Hearing  that  the  garrison 
had  moved  into  Locris,  and  hoping  to  find 
Orchomenus  defenceless,  he  marched  with  his 
sacred  band  and  some  few  horsemen.  But 
when  he  approached  the  city,  and  found  that 
a  reinforcement  of  the  garrison  was  on  its 
march  from  Sparta,  he  made  a  circuit  round 
the  foot  of  the  mountains,  and  retreated  with 
his  little  army  through  Tegyrae,  that  being  the 
only  way  he  could  pass. 

For  the  river  Melas,  almost  as  soon  as  it 
rises,  spreads  itself  into  marshes  and  navigable 
pools,  and  makes  all  the  plain  between  im¬ 
passable.  A  little  below  the  marshes  stands  the 
temple  and  oracle  of  Apollo  Tegyraeus,  for¬ 
saken  not  long  before  that  time,  having  flour¬ 
ished  till  the  Median  wars,  Echecrates  then 
being  priest.  Here  they  profess  that  the  god 
was  born;  the  neighbouring  mountain  is  called 
Delos,  and  there  the  river  Melas  comes  again 
into  a  channel;  behind  the  temple  rise  two 
springs,  admirable  for  the  sweetness,  abun¬ 
dance,  and  coolness  of  the  streams;  one  they 
called  Phoenix,  the  other  Elaea,  even  to  the 
present  time,  as  if  Lucina  had  not  been  de¬ 
livered  between  two  trees,  but  fountains.  A 
place  hard  by,  called  Ptoum,  is  shown,  where 
they  say  she  was  affrighted  by  the  appearance 
of  a  boar;  and  the  stories  of  the  Python  and 
Tityus  are  in  like  manner  appropriated  by 
these  localities. 

I  omit  many  of  the  points  that  are  used  as 
arguments.  For  our  tradition  does  not  rank 
this  god  amongst  those  that  were  born,  and 
then  made  immortal,  as  Hercules  and  Bac¬ 
chus,  whom  their  virtue  raised  above  a  mortal 
and  passible  condition;  but  Apollo  is  one  of 
the  eternal  unbegotten  deities,  if  we  may  col¬ 
lect  any  certainty  concerning  these  things, 
from  the  statements  of  the  oldest  and  wisest 
in  such  subjects. 

As  the  Thebans  were  retreating  from  Orch¬ 
omenus  towards  Tegyrae,  the  Spartans,  at  the 
same  time  marching  from  Locris,  met  them. 
As  soon  as  they  came  in  view,  advancing 
through  the  straits,  one  told  Pelopidas,  “We 
are  fallen  into  our  enemy’s  hands.”  He  re¬ 
plied,  “And  why  not  they  into  ours?”  and 
immediately  commanded  his  horse  to  come 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

up  from  the  rear  and  charge,  while  he  him¬ 
self  drew  his  infantry,  being  three  hundred 
in  number,  into  a  close  body,  hoping  by  that 
means,  at  whatsoever  point  he  made  the  at¬ 
tack,  to  break  his  way  through  his  more 
numerous  enemies. 

The  Spartans  had  two  companies  (the  com¬ 
pany  consisting,  as  Ephorus  states,  of  five  hun¬ 
dred;  Callisthenes  says  seven  hundred;  others, 
as  Polybius,  nine  hundred);  and  their  leaders 
Gorgoleon  and  Theopompus,  confident  of  suc¬ 
cess,  advanced  upon  the  Thebans.  The  charge 
being  made  with  much  fury,  chiefly  where  the 
commanders  were  posted,  the  Spartan  captains 
that  engaged  Pelopidas  were  first  killed;  and 
those  immediately  around  them  suffering  se¬ 
verely,  the  whole  army  was  thus  disheartened, 
and  opened  a  lane  for  the  Thebans  as  if  they 
desired  to  pass  through  and  escape. 

But  when  Pelopidas  entered,  and  turning 
against  those  that  stood  their  ground,  still 
went  on  with  a  bloody  slaughter,  an  open 
flight  ensued  amongst  the  Spartans.  The  pur¬ 
suit  was  carried  but  a  little  way,  because  they 
feared  the  neighbouring  Orchomenians  and 
the  reinforcements  from  Lacedaemon;  they  had 
succeeded,  however,  in  fighting  a  way  through 
their  enemies,  and  overpowering  their  whole 
force;  and,  therefore,  erecting  a  trophy,  and 
spoiling  the  slain,  they  returned  home  ex¬ 
tremely  encouraged  with  their  achievements. 

For  in  all  the  great  wars  there  had  ever 
been  against  Greeks  or  barbarians,  the  Spar¬ 
tans  were  never  before  beaten  by  a  smaller 
company  than  their  own;  nor,  indeed,  in  a 
set  battle,  when  their  number  was  equal. 
Hence  their  courage  was  thought  irresistible, 
and  their  high  repute  before  the  battle  made 
a  conquest  already  of  enemies,  who  thought 
themselves  no  match  for  the  men  of  Sparta 
even  on  equal  terms.  But  this  battle  first 
taught  the  other  Greeks,  that  not  only  Eur- 
otas,  or  the  country  between  Babyce  and  Cna- 
cion,  breeds  men  of  courage  and  resolution, 
but  that  where  the  youth  are  ashamed  of  base¬ 
ness,  and  ready  to  venture  in  a  good  cause, 
where  they  fly  disgrace  more  than  danger, 
there,  wherever  it  be,  are  found  the  bravest 
and  most  formidable  opponents. 

Gorgidas,  according  to  some,  first  formed 
the  Sacred  Band  of  three  hundred  chosen 
men,  to  whom,  as  being  a  guard  for  the  cita¬ 
del,  the  State  allowed  provision,  and  all  things 
necessary  for  exercise:  and  hence  they  were 
called  the  city  band,  as  citadels  of  old  were 
usually  called  cities.  Others  say  that  it  was 


PELOPIDAS 

composed  of  young  men  attached*  to  each 
other  by  personal  affection,  and  a  pleasant 
saying  of  Pammenes  is  current,  that  Homer’s 
Nestor  was  not  well  skilled  in  ordering  an 
army,  when  he  advised  the  Greeks  to  rank 
tribe  and  tribe,  and  family  and  family  to¬ 
gether,  that — 

So  tribe  might  tribe,  and  kinsmen  kinsmen  aid. 
but  that  he  should  have  joined  lovers  and 
their  beloved. 

For  men  of  the  same  tribe  or  family  little 
value  one  another  when  dangers  press;  but 
a  band  cemented  by  friendship  grounded  up¬ 
on  love  is  never  to  be  broken,  and  invincible; 
since  the  lovers,  ashamed  to  be  base  in  sight 
of  their  beloved,  and  the  beloved  before  their 
lovers,  willingly  rush  into  danger  for  the  re¬ 
lief  of  one  another.  Nor  can  that  be  wondered 
at  since  they  have  more  regard  for  their  ab¬ 
sent  lovers  than  for  others  present;  as  in  the 
instance  of  the  man  who,  when  his  enemy 
was  going  to  kill  him,  earnestly  requested 
him  to  run  him  through  the  breast,  that  his 
lover  might  not  blush  to  see  him  wounded 
in  the  back. 

It  is  a  tradition  likewise  that  Iolaiis,  who 
assisted  Hercules  in  his  labours  and  fought  at 
his  side,  was  beloved  of  him;  and  Aristotle  ob¬ 
serves  that,  even  in  his  time,  lovers  plighted 
their  faith  at  Iolaiis’s  tomb.  It  is  likely,  there¬ 
fore,  that  this  band  was  called  sacred  on  this 
account,  as  Plato  calls  a  lover  a  divine  friend. 
It  is  stated  that  it  was  never  beaten  till  the 
battle  at  Chaeronea;  and  when  Philip,  after  the 
fight,  took  a  view  of  the  slain,  and  came  to 
the  place  where  the  three  hundred  that  fought 
his  phalanx  lay  dead  together,  he  wondered, 
and  understanding  that  it  was  the  band  of 
lovers,  he  shed  tears  and  said,  “Perish  any 
man  who  suspects  that  these  men  either  did 
or  suffered  anything  that  was  base.” 

It  was  not  the  disaster  of  Laius,  as  the  poets 
imagine,  that  first  gave  rise  to  this  form  of 
attachment  amongst  the  Thebans,  but  their 
lawgivers,  designing  to  soften  whilst  they 
were  young  their  natural  fierceness,  brought, 
for  example,  the  pipe  into  great  esteem,  both 
in  serious  and  sportive  occasions,  and  gave 
great  encouragement  to  these  friendships  in 
the  Palaestra,  to  temper  the  manners  and 
characters  of  the  youth.  With  a  view  to  this 
they  did  well,  again,  to  make  Harmony,  the 
daughter  of  Mars  and  Venus,  their  tutelar 
deity;  since,  where  force  and  courage  is  joined 
with  gracefulness  and  winning  behaviour,  a 
harmony  ensues  that  combines  all  the  ele- 


239 

ments  of  society  in  perfect  consonance  and 
order. 

Gorgidas  distributed  this  Sacred  Band  all 
through  the  front  ranks  of  the  infantry,  and 
thus  made  their  gallantry  less  conspicuous; 
not  being  united  in  one  body,  but  mingled 
with  so  many  others  of  inferior  resolution, 
they  had  no  fair  opportunity  of  showing  what 
they  could  do.  But  Pelopidas,  having  suffi¬ 
ciently  tried  their  bravery  at  Tegyrae,  where 
they  had  fought  alone  and  around  his  own 
person,  never  afterward  divided  them,  but, 
keeping  them  entire,  and  as  one  man,  gave 
them  the  first  duty  in  the  greatest  battles.  For 
as  horses  run  brisker  in  a  chariot  than  singly, 
not  that  their  joint  force  divides  the  air  with 
greater  ease,  but  because  being  matched  one 
against  the  other  emulation  kindles  and  in¬ 
flames  their  courage;  thus  he  thought  brave 
men,  provoking  one  another  to  noble  actions, 
would  prove  most  serviceable,  and  most  reso¬ 
lute,  where  all  were  united  together. 

Now  when  the  Lacedaemonians  had  made 
peace  with  the  other  Greeks,  and  united  all 
their  strength  against  the  Thebans  only,  and 
their  king,  Cleombrotus,  had  passed  the  fron¬ 
tier  with  ten  thousand  foot  and  one  thousand 
horse,  and  not  only  subjection,  as  heretofore, 
but  total  dispersion  and  annihilation  threat¬ 
ened,  and  Boeotia  was  in  a  greater  fear  than 
ever — Pelopidas,  leaving  his  house,  when  his 
wife  followed  him  on  his  way,  and  with  tears 
begged  him  to  be  careful  of  his  life,  made 
answer,  “Private  men,  my  wife,  should  be  ad¬ 
vised  to  look  to  themselves,  generals  to  save 
others.”  And  when  he  came  to  the  camp,  and 
found  the  chief  captains  disagreeing,  he,  first, 
joined  the  side  of  Epaminondas,  who  advised 
to  fight  the  enemy;  though  Pelopidas  himself 
was  not  then  in  office  as  chief  captain  of 
Boeotia,  but  in  command  of  the  Sacred  Band, 
and  trusted  as  it  was  fit  a  man  should  be,  who 
had  given  his  country  such  proofs  of  his  zeal 
for  its  freedom. 

And  so  when  a  battle  was  agreed  on,  and 
they  encamped  in  front  of  the  Spartans  at 
Leuctra,  Pelopidas  saw  a  vision,  which  much 
discomposed  him.  In  that  plain  lie  the  bodies 
of  the  daughters  of  one  Scedasus,  called  from 
the  place  Leuctridae,  having  been  buried  there 
after  having  been  ravished  by  some  Spartan 
strangers.  When  this  base  and  lawless  deed 
was  done,  and  their  father  could  get  no  satis¬ 
faction  at  Lacedaemon,  with  bitter  impreca¬ 
tions  on  the  Spartans,  he  killed  himself  at  his 
daughters’  tombs;  and  from  that  time  the 


240 

prophecies  and  oracles  still  warned  them  to 
have  a  great  care  of  the  divine  vengeance  at 
Leuctra.  Many,  however,  did  not  understand 
the  meaning,  being  uncertain  about  the  place, 
because  there  was  a  little  maritime  town  of 
Laconia  called  Leuctron,  and  near  Megalop¬ 
olis  in  Arcadia  a  place  of  the  same  name; 
and  the  villainy  was  committed  long  before 
this  battle. 

Now  Pelopidas,  being  asleep  in  the  camp, 
thought  he  saw  the  maidens  weeping  about 
their  tombs,  and  cursing  the  Spartans,  and 
Scedasus  commanding,  if  they  desired  the  vic¬ 
tory,  to  sacrifice  a  virgin  with  chestnut  hair 
to  his  daughters.  Pelopidas  looked  on  this  as 
an  harsh  and  impious  injunction,  but  rose 
and  told  it  to  the  prophets  and  commanders 
of  the  army,  some  of  whom  contended  that 
it  was  fit  to  obey,  and  adduced  as  examples 
from  the  ancients,  Menceceus,  son  of  Creon; 
Macaria,  daughter  of  Hercules;  and  from  later 
times,  Pherecydes,  the  philosopher,  slain  by 
the  Lacedaemonians,  and  his  skin,  as  the  or¬ 
acles  advised,  still  kept  by  their  kings.  Leoni¬ 
das,  again,  warned  by  the  oracle,  did  as  it 
were  sacrifice  himself  for  the  good  of  Greece; 
Themistocles  offered  human  victims  to  Bac¬ 
chus  Omestes,  before  the  engagement  at  Sala- 
mis;  and  success  showed  their  actions  to  be 
good.  On  the  contrary,  Agesilaus,  going  from 
the  same  place,  and  against  the  same  enemies 
that  Agamemnon  did,  and  being  commanded 
in  a  dream  at  Aulis  to  sacrifice  his  daughter, 
was  so  weak  as  to  disobey;  the  consequence 
of  which  was,  that  his  expedition  was  unsuc¬ 
cessful  and  inglorious. 

But  some  on  the  other  side  urged  that  such 
a  barbarous  and  impious  obligation  could  not 
be  pleasing  to  any  Superior  Beings;  that  ty- 
phons  and  giants  did  not  preside  over  the 
world,  but  the  general  father  of  gods  and 
men;  that  it  was  absurd  to  imagine  any  divin¬ 
ities  or  powers  delighted  in  slaughter  and  sac¬ 
rifices  of  men;  or,  if  there  were  such,  they 
were  to  be  neglected  as  weak  and  unable  to 
assist;  such  unreasonable  and  cruel  desires 
could  only  proceed  from,  and  live  in,  weak 
and  depraved  minds. 

The  commanders  thus  disputing,  and  Pelo¬ 
pidas  being  in  a  great  perplexity,  a  mare  colt 
breaking  from  the  herd,  ran  through  the 
camp,  and  when  she  came  to  the  place  where 
they  were  stood  still;  and  whilst  some  admired 
her  bright  chestnut  colour,  others  her  mettle, 
or  the  strength  and  fury  of  her  neighing, 
Theocritus,  the  augur,  took  thought,  and  cried 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

out  to  Pelopidas,  “O  good  friend!  look,  the 
sacrifice  is  come;  expect  no  other  virgin,  but 
use  that  which  the  gods  have  sent  thee.” 
With  that  they  took  the  colt,  and,  leading  her 
to  the  maidens’  sepulchres,  with  the  usual 
solemnity  and  prayers,  offered  her  with  joy, 
and  spread  through  the  whole  army  the  ac¬ 
count  of  Pelopidas’s  dream,  and  how  they 
had  given  the  required  sacrifice. 

In  the  battle,  Epaminondas,  bending  his 
phalanx  to  the  left,  that,  as  much  as  possible, 
he  might  divide  the  right  wing,  composed  of 
Spartans,  from  the  other  Greeks,  and  distress 
Cleombrotus  by  a  fierce  charge  in  column  on 
that  wing,  the  enemies  perceived  the  design, 
and  began  to  change  their  order,  to  open  and 
extend  their  right  wing,  and,  as  they  far  ex¬ 
ceeded  him  in  number,  to  encompass  Epa¬ 
minondas.  But  Pelopidas  with  the  three  hun¬ 
dred  came  rapidly  up,  before  Cleombrotus 
could  extend  his  line,  and  close  up  his  divi¬ 
sions,  and  so  fell  upon  the  Spartans  while  in 
disorder;  though  the  Lacedaemonians,  the  ex- 
pertest  and  most  practised  soldiers  of  all  man¬ 
kind,  used  to  train  and  accustom  themselves 
to  nothing  so  much  as  to  keep  themselves 
from  confusion  upon  any  change  of  position, 
and  to  follow  any  leader,  or  right-hand  man, 
and  form  in  order,  and  fight  on  what  part 
soever  dangers  press. 

In  this  battle,  however,  Epaminondas  with 
his  phalanx,  neglecting  the  other  Greeks,  and 
charging  them  alone,  and  Pelopidas  coming 
up  with  such  incredible  speed  and  fury,  so 
broke  their  courage  and  baffled  their  art  that 
there  began  such  a  flight  and  slaughter 
amongst  the  Spartans  as  was  never  before 
known.  And  so  Pelopidas,  though  in  no  high 
office,  but  only  captain  of  a  small  band,  got  as 
much  reputation  by  the  victory  as  Epaminon¬ 
das,  who  was  general  and  chief  captain  of 
Bceotia. 

Into  Peloponnesus,  however,  they  both  ad¬ 
vanced  together  as  colleagues  in  supreme  com¬ 
mand,  and  gained  the  greater  part  of  the  na¬ 
tions  there  from  the  Spartan  confederacy;  Elis, 
Argos,  all  Arcadia,  and  much  of  Laconia  it¬ 
self.  It  was  the  dead  of  winter,  and  but  few 
of  the  last  days  of  the  month  remained,  and, 
in  the  beginning  of  the  next,  new  officers  were 
to  succeed,  and  whoever  failed  to  deliver  up 
his  charge  forfeited  his  head.  Therefore,  the 
other  chief  captains  fearing  the  law,  and  to 
avoid  the  sharpness  of  the  winter,  advised  a 
retreat.  But  Pelopidas  joined  with  Epamin¬ 
ondas,  and,  encouraging  his  countrymen,  led 


PELOPIDAS 

them  against  Sparta,  and,  passing  the  Eurotas, 
took  many  of  the  towns,  and  wasted  the  coun¬ 
try  as  far  as  the  sea. 

This  army  consisted  of  seventy  thousand 
Greeks,  of  which  number  the  Thebans  could 
not  make  the  twelfth  part;  but  the  reputation 
of  the  men  made  all  their  allies  contented  to 
follow  them  as  leaders,  though  no  articles  to 
that  effect  had  been  made.  For,  indeed,  it 
seems  the  first  and  paramount  law,  that  he 
that  wants  a  defender  is  naturally  a  subject  to 
him  that  is  able  to  defend:  as  mariners,  though 
in  a  calm  or  in  the  port  they  grow  insolent, 
and  brave  the  pilot,  yet  when  a  storm  comes, 
and  danger  is  at  hand,  they  all  attend,  and  put 
their  hopes  in  him. 

So  the  Argives,  Eleans,  and  Arcadians,  in 
their  congresses,  would  contend  with  the  The¬ 
bans  for  superiority  in  command,  yet  in  a 
battle,  or  any  hazardous  undertaking,  of  their 
own  will  followed  their  Theban  captains.  In 
this  expedition  they  united  all  Arcadia  into 
one  body,  and  expelling  the  Spartans  that  in¬ 
habited  Messenia,  they  called  back  the  old 
Messenians,  and  established  them  in  Ithome 
in  one  body;  and,  returning  through  Cen- 
chreae,  they  dispersed  the  Athenians,  who  de¬ 
signed  to  set  upon  them  in  the  straits,  and 
hinder  their  march. 

For  these  exploits,  all  the  other  Greeks  loved 
their  courage  and  admired  their  success;  but 
among  their  own  citizens,  envy,  still  increas¬ 
ing  with  their  glory,  prepared  them  no  pleas¬ 
ing  nor  agreeable  reception.  Both  were  tried 
for  their  lives,  because  they  did  not  deliver  up 
their  command  in  the  first  month,  Bucatius, 
as  the  law  required,  but  kept  it  four  months 
longer,  in  which  time  they  did  these  memor¬ 
able  actions  in  Messenia,  Arcadia,  and  Laconia. 

Pelopidas  was  first  tried,  and  therefore  in 
greatest  danger,  but  both  were  acquitted.  Epa- 
minondas  bore  the  accusation  and  trial  very 
patiently,  esteeming  it  a  great  and  essential 
part  of  courage  and  generosity  not  to  resent 
injuries  in  political  life.  But  Pelopidas,  being 
a  man  of  a  fiercer  temper,  and  stirred  on  by 
his  friends  to  revenge  the  affront,  took  the 
following  occasion. 

Meneclidas,  the  orator,  was  one  of  those 
that  had  met  with  Melon  and  Pelopidas  at 
Charon’s  house;  but  not  receiving  equal  hon¬ 
our,  and  being  powerful  in  his  speech,  but 
loose  in  his  manners,  and  ill-natured,  he 
abused  his  natural  endowments,  even  after 
this  trial,  to  accuse  and  calumniate  his  betters. 
He  excluded  Epaminondas  from  the  chief 


241 

captaincy,  and  for  a  long  time  kept  the  upper 
hand  of  him,  but  he  was  not  powerful  enough 
to  bring  Pelopidas  out  of  the  people’s  favour, 
and  therefore  endeavoured  to  raise  a  quarrel 
between  him  and  Charon.  And  since  it  is 
some  comfort  to  the  envious  to  make  those 
men,  whom  themselves  cannot  excel,  appear 
worse  than  others,  he  studiously  enlarged  up¬ 
on  Charon’s  actions  in  his  speeches  to  the 
people,  and  made  panegyrics  on  his  expedi¬ 
tions  and  victories;  and,  of  the  victory  which 
the  horsemen  won  at  Platsea,  before  the  battle 
at  Leuctra,  under  Charon’s  command,  he  en¬ 
deavoured  to  make  the  following  sacred  me¬ 
morial. 

Androcydes,  the  Cyzicenian,  had  under¬ 
taken  to  paint  a  previous  battle  for  the  city, 
and  was  at  work  in  Thebes;  and  when  the  re¬ 
volt  began,  and  the  war  came  on,  the  Thebans 
kept  the  picture  that  was  then  almost  finish¬ 
ed.  This  picture  Meneclidas  persuaded  them 
to  dedicate,  inscribed  with  Charon’s  name, 
designing  by  that  means  to  obscure  the  glory 
of  Epaminondas  and  Pelopidas.  This  was  a 
ludicrous  piece  of  pretension,  to  set  a  single 
victory,  where  only  one  Gerandas,  an  obscure 
Spartan,  and  forty  more  were  slain,  above  such 
numerous  and  important  battles.  This  motion 
Pelopidas  opposed,  as  contrary  to  law,  alleg¬ 
ing  that  it  was  not  the  custom  of  the  Thebans 
to  honour  any  single  man,  but  to  attribute  the 
victory  to  their  country;  yet  in  all  the  contest 
he  extremely  commended  Charon,  and  con¬ 
fined  himself  to  showing  Meneclidas  to  be  a 
troublesome  and  envious  fellow,  asking  the 
Thebans,  if  they  had  done  nothing  that  was 
excellent  themselves.  The  result  was  that  Men¬ 
eclidas  was  severely  fined;  and  he,  being  un¬ 
able  to  pay,  endeavoured  afterwards  to  dis¬ 
turb  the  government.  These  things  give  us 
some  light  into  Pelopidas’s  life. 

Now  when  Alexander,  the  tyrant  of  Pherae, 
made  open  war  against  some  of  the  Thessa¬ 
lians,  and  had  designs  against  all,  the  cities 
sent  an  embassy  to  Thebes,  to  desire  succours 
and  a  general;  and  Pelopidas,  knowing  that 
Epaminondas  was  detained  by  the  Pelopon¬ 
nesian  affairs,  offered  himself  to  lead  the 
Thessalians,  being  unwilling  to  let  his  courage 
and  skill  lie  idle,  and  thinking  it  unfit  that 
Epaminondas  should  be  withdrawn  from  his 
present  duties. 

When  he  came  into  Thessaly  with  his  army, 
he  presently  took  Larissa,  and  endeavoured  to 
reclaim  Alexander,  who  submitted,  and  bring 
him,  from  being  a  tyrant,  to  govern  gently, 


242 

and  according  to  law;  but  finding  him  un- 
tractable  and  brutish,  and  hearing  great  com¬ 
plaints  of  his  lust  and  cruelty,  Pelopidas  began 
to  be  severe,  and  used  him  roughly,  insomuch 
that  the  tyrant  stole  away  privately  with  his 
guard. 

But  Pelopidas,  leaving  the  Thessalians  fear¬ 
less  of  the  tyrant,  and  friends  amongst  them¬ 
selves,  marched  into  Macedonia,  where  Ptol¬ 
emy  was  then  at  war  with  Alexander,  the 
King  of  Macedon;  both  parties  having  sent 
for  him  to  hear  and  determine  their  differ¬ 
ences,  and  assist  the  one  that  appeared  in¬ 
jured.  When  he  came,  he  reconciled  them, 
calling  back  the  exiles;  and  receiving  for  hos¬ 
tages  Philip,  the  king’s  brother,  and  thirty 
children  of  the  nobles,  he  brought  them  to 
Thebes;  showing  the  other  Greeks  how  wide 
a  reputation  the  Thebans  had  gained  for  hon¬ 
esty  and  courage. 

This  was  that  Philip  who  afterwards  en¬ 
deavoured  to  enslave  the  Greeks:  then  he  was 
a  boy,  and  lived  with  Pammenes  in  Thebes; 
and  hence  some  conjecture  that  he  took  Epa- 
minondas’s  actions  for  the  rule  of  his  own; 
and  perhaps,  indeed,  he  did  take  example 
from  his  activity  and  skill  in  war,  which,  how¬ 
ever,  was  but  a  small  portion  of  his  virtues; 
of  his  temperance,  justice,  generosity,  and 
mildness,  in  which  he  was  truly  great,  Philip 
enjoyed  no  share  either  by  nature  or  imita¬ 
tion. 

After  this,  upon  a  second  complaint  of  the 
Thessalians  against  Alexander  of  Pherae,  as  a 
disturber  of  the  cities,  Pelopidas  was  joined 
with  Ismenias,  in  an  embassy  to  him;  but  led 
no  forces  from  Thebes,  not  expecting  any  war, 
and  therefore  was  necessitated  to  make  use 
of  the  Thessalians  upon  the  emergency.  At 
the  same  time,  also,  Macedon  was  in  confu¬ 
sion  again,  as  Ptolemy  had  murdered  the 
king,  and  seized  the  government;  but  the 
king’s  friends  sent  for  Pelopidas,  and  he  being 
willing  to  interpose  in  the  matter,  but  having 
no  soldiers  of  his  own,  enlisted  some  mer¬ 
cenaries  in  the  country,  and  with  them  march¬ 
ed  against  Ptolemy. 

When  they  faced  one  another  Ptolemy 
corrupted  these  mercenaries  with  a  sum  of 
money,  and  persuaded  them  to  revolt  to  him; 
but  yet  fearing  the  very  name  and  reputation 
of  Pelopidas,  he  came  to  him  as  his  superior, 
submitted,  begged  his  pardon,  and  protested 
that  he  kept  the  government  only  for  the 
brothers  of  the  dead  king,  and  would  prove 
a  friend  to  the  friends,  and  an  enemy  to  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

enemies  of  Thebes;  and,  to  confirm  this,  he 
gave  his  son,  Philoxenus,  and  fifty  of  his  com¬ 
panions,  for  hostages.  These  Pelopidas  sent  to 
Thebes;  but  he  himself,  being  vexed  at  the 
treachery  of  the  mercenaries,  and  understand¬ 
ing  that  most  of  their  goods,  their  wives,  and 
children  lay  at  Pharsalus,  so  that  if  he  could 
take  them  the  injury  would  be  sufficiently 
revenged,  got  together  some  of  the  Thessa¬ 
lians,  and  marched  to  Pharsalus. 

When  he  just  entered  the  city,  Alexander, 
the  tyrant,  appeared  before  it  with  an  army; 
but  Pelopidas  and  his  friends,  thinking  that 
he  came  to  clear  himself  from  those  crimes 
that  were  laid  to  his  charge,  went  to  him;  and 
though  they  knew  very  well  that  he  was  prof¬ 
ligate  and  cruel,  yet  they  imagined  that  the 
authority  of  Thebes,  and  their  own  dignity 
and  reputation,  would  secure  them  from  vio¬ 
lence.  But  the  tyrant,  seeing  them  come  un¬ 
armed  and  alone,  seized  them,  and  made  him¬ 
self  master  of  Pharsalus.  Upon  this  his  sub¬ 
jects  were  much  intimidated,  thinking  that 
after  so  great  and  so  bold  an  iniquity  he 
would  spare  none,  but  behave  himself  toward 
all,  and  in  all  matters,  as  one  despairing  of 
his  life. 

The  Thebans,  when  they  heard  of  this, 
were  very  much  enraged,  and  despatched  an 
army,  Epaminondas  being  then  in  disgrace, 
under  the  command  of  other  leaders.  When 
the  tyrant  brought  Pelopidas  to  Pherae,  at  first 
he  permitted  those  that  desired  it  to  speak 
with  him,  imagining  that  this  disaster  would 
break  his  spirit,  and  make  him  appear  con¬ 
temptible.  But  when  Pelopidas  advised  the 
complaining  Pheraeans  to  be  comforted,  as 
if  the  tyrant  was  now  certain  in  a  short  time 
to  smart  for  his  injuries,  and  sent  to  tell  him, 
“that  it  was  absurd  daily  to  torment  and  mur¬ 
der  his  wretched  innocent  subjects,  and  yet 
spare  him,  who,  he  well  knew,  if  ever  he  got 
his  liberty,  would  be  bitterly  revenged”;  the 
tyrant,  wondering  at  his  boldness  and  free¬ 
dom  of  speech,  replied,  “And  why  is  Pelo¬ 
pidas  in  haste  to  die?”  He,  hearing  of  it,  re¬ 
joined,  “That  you  may  be  the  sooner  ruined, 
being  then  more  hated  by  the  gods  than 
now.” 

From  that  time  he  forbade  any  to  converse 
with  him;  but  Thebe,  the  daughter  of  Jason 
and  wife  to  Alexander,  hearing  from  the 
keepers  of  the  bravery  and  noble  behaviour 
of  Pelopidas,  had  a  great  desire  to  see  and 
speak  with  him.  Now  when  she  came  into  the 
prison,  and,  as  a  woman,  could  not  at  once 


PELOPIDAS 

discern  his  greatness  in  his  calamity,  only 
judging  by  the  meanness  of  his  attire  and  gen¬ 
eral  appearance,  that  he  was  used  basely  and 
not  befitting  a  man  of  his  reputation,  she 
wept. 

Pelopidas,  at  first  not  knowing  who  she 
was,  stood  amazed;  but  when  he  understood, 
saluted  her  by  her  father’s  name — Jason  and 
he  having  been  friends  and  familiars — and 
she  saying,  “I  pity  your  wife,  sir,”  he  replied, 
“And  I  you,  that  though  not  in  chains,  can 
endure  Alexander.”  This  touched  the  woman, 
who  already  hated  Alexander  for  his  cruelty 
and  injustice,  for  his  general  debaucheries, 
and  for  his  abuse  of  her  youngest  brother. 
She,  therefore,  often  went  to  Pelopidas,  and, 
speaking  freely  of  the  indignities  she  suffered, 
grew  more  enraged  and  more  exasperated 
against  Alexander. 

The  Theban  generals  that  were  sent  into 
Thessaly  did  nothing,  but,  being  either  un¬ 
skilful  or  unfortunate,  made  a  dishonourable 
retreat,  for  which  the  city  fined  each  of  them 
ten  thousand  drachmas,  and  sent  Epaminon- 
das  with  their  forces.  The  Thessalians,  in¬ 
spirited  by  the  fame  of  this  general,  at  once 
began  to  stir,  and  the  tyrant’s  affairs  were  at 
the  verge  of  destruction;  so  great  was  the  fear 
that  possessed  his  captains  and  his  friends, 
and  so  eager  the  desire  of  his  subjects  to  re¬ 
volt,  in  hope  of  his  speedy  punishment. 

But  Epaminondas,  more  solicitous  for  the 
safety  of  Pelopidas  than  his  own  glory,  and 
fearing  that  if  things  came  to  extremity  Alex¬ 
ander  would  grow  desperate,  and,  like  a  wild 
beast,  turn  and  worry  him,  did  not  prosecute 
the  war  to  the  utmost;  but,  hovering  still  over 
him  with  his  army,  he  so  handled  the  tyrant 
as  not  to  leave  him  any  confidence,  and  yet 
not  to  drive  him  to  despair  and  fury.  He  was 
aware  of  his  savageness,  and  the  little  value 
he  had  for  right  and  justice,  insomuch  that 
sometimes  he  buried  men  alive,  and  some¬ 
times  dressed  them  in  bears’  and  boars’  skins, 
and  then  baited  them  with  dogs,  or  shot  at 
them  for  his  divertisement. 

At  Meliboea  and  Scotussa,  two  cities,  his 
allies,  he  called  all  the  inhabitants  to  an  as¬ 
sembly,  and  then  surrounded  them  and  cut 
them  to  pieces  with  his  guards.  He  conse¬ 
crated  the  spear  with  which  he  killed  his 
uncle  Polyphron,  and,  crowning  it  with  gar¬ 
lands,  sacrificed  to  it  as  a  god,  and  called  it 
Tychon.  And  once  seeing  a  tragedian  act 
Euripides’s  Troades,  he  left  the  theatre;  but 
sending  for  the  actor,  bade  him  not  to  be  con- 


243 

cerned  at  his  departure,  but  act  as  he  had 
been  used  to  do,  as  it  was  not  in  contempt  of 
him  that  he  departed,  but  because  he  was 
ashamed  that  his  citizens  should  see  him,  who 
never  pitied  any  man  that  he  murdered,  weep 
at  the  sufferings  of  Hecuba  and  Andromache. 
This  tyrant,  however,  alarmed  at  the  very 
name,  report,  and  appearance  of  an  expedi¬ 
tion  under  the  conduct  of  Epaminondas,  pres¬ 
ently — 

Dropped  li\e  a  craven  coc\  his  conquered  wing , 
and  sent  an  embassy  to  entreat  and  offer  satis¬ 
faction.  Epaminondas  refused  to  admit  such 
a  man  as  an  ally  to  the  Thebans,  but  granted 
him  a  truce  of  thirty  days,  and,  Pelopidas  and 
Ismenias  being  delivered  up,  returned  home. 

Now  the  Thebans,  understanding  that  the 
Spartans  and  Athenians  had  sent  an  embassy 
to  the  Persians  for  assistance,  themselves,  like¬ 
wise,  sent  Pelopidas;  an  excellent  design  to  in¬ 
crease  his  glory,  no  man  having  ever  before 
passed  through  the  dominions  of  the  king 
with  greater  fame  and  reputation. 

For  the  glory  that  he  won  against  the  Spar¬ 
tans  did  not  creep  slowly  or  obscurely;  but, 
after  the  fame  of  the  first  battle  at  Leuctra  was 
gone  abroad,  the  report  of  new  victories  con¬ 
tinually  following,  exceedingly  increased,  and 
spread  his  celebrity  far  and  near.  Whatever 
satraps  or  generals  or  commanders  he  met,  he 
was  the  object  of  their  wonder  and  discourse. 
“This  is  the  man,”  they  said,  “who  hath 
beaten  the  Lacedaemonians  from  sea  and  land, 
and  confined  that  Sparta  within  Taygetus  and 
Eurotas,  which,  but  a  little  before,  under  the 
conduct  of  Agesilaus,  was  entering  upon  a 
war  with  the  great  king  about  Susa  and  Ecba- 
tana.” 

This  pleased  Artaxerxes,  and  he  was  the 
more  inclined  to  show  Pelopidas  attention 
and  honour,  being  desirous  to  seem  rever¬ 
enced,  and  attended  by  the  greatest.  But  when 
he  saw  him  and  heard  his  discourse,  more 
solid  than  the  Athenians,  and  not  so  haughty 
as  the  Spartans,  his  regard  was  heightened, 
and,  truly  acting  like  a  king,  he  openly 
showed  the  respect  that  he  felt  for  him;  and 
this  the  other  ambassadors  perceived. 

Of  all  other  Greeks  he  had  been  thought  to 
have  done  Antalcidas,  the  Spartan,  the  greatest 
honour,  by  sending  him  that  garland  dipped 
in  an  unguent,  which  he  himself  had  worn 
at  an  entertainment.  Indeed,  he  did  not  deal 
so  delicately  with  Pelopidas,  but,  according  to 
the  custom,  gave  him  the  most  splendid  and 
considerable  presents,  and  granted  him  his 


244 

desires — that  the  Grecians  should  be  free, 
Messenia  inhabited,  and  the  Thebans  account¬ 
ed  the  king’s  hereditary  friends. 

With  these  answers,  but  not  accepting  one 
of  the  presents,  except  what  was  a  pledge  of 
kindness  and  good-will,  he  returned.  This  be¬ 
haviour  of  Pelopidas  ruined  the  other  ambas¬ 
sadors;  the  Athenians  condemned  and  exe¬ 
cuted  their  Timagoras,  and,  indeed,  if  they 
did  it  for  receiving  so  many  presents  from  the 
king,  their  sentence  was  just  and  good;  as  he 
not  only  took  gold  and  silver,  but  a  rich  bed, 
and  slaves  to  make  it,  as  if  the  Greeks  were 
unskilful  in  that  art;  besides  eighty  cows  and 
herdsmen,  professing  he  needed  cows’  milk 
for  some  distemper;  and,  lastly,  he  was  car¬ 
ried  in  a  litter  to  the  seaside,  with  a  present 
of  four  talents  for  his  attendants. 

But  the  Athenians,  perhaps,  were  not  so 
much  irritated  at  his  greediness  for  the  pres¬ 
ents.  For  Epicrates,  the  baggage-carrier,  not 
only  confessed  to  the  people  that  he  had  re¬ 
ceived  gifts  from  the  king,  but  made  a  mo¬ 
tion,  that  instead  of  nine  archons,  they  should 
yearly  choose  nine  poor  citizens  to  be  sent 
ambassadors  to  the  king,  and  enriched  by  his 
presents,  and  the  people  only  laughed  at  the 
joke.  But  they  were  vexed  that  the  Thebans 
obtained  their  desires,  never  considering  that 
Pelopidas’s  fame  was  more  powerful  than  all 
their  rhetorical  discourse,  with  a  man  who 
still  inclined  to  the  victorious  in  arms.  This 
embassy,  having  obtained  the  restitution  of 
Messenia,  and  the  freedom  of  the  other 
Greeks,  got  Pelopidas  a  great  deal  of  good¬ 
will  at  his  return. 

At  this  time,  Alexander,  the  Pheraean,  fall¬ 
ing  back  to  his  old  nature,  and  having  seized 
many  of  the  Thessalian  cities,  and  put  garri¬ 
sons  upon  the  Achaeans  of  Phthiotis,  and  the 
Magnesians,  the  cities,  hearing  that  Pelopidas 
was  returned,  sent  an  embassy  to  Thebes  re¬ 
questing  succours,  and  him  for  their  leader. 
The  Thebans  willingly  granted  their  desire; 
and  now  when  all  things  were  prepared,  and 
the  general  beginning  to  march,  the  sun  was 
eclipsed,  and  darkness  spread  over  the  city  at 
noonday. 

Now  when  Pelopidas  saw  them  startled  at 
the  prodigy,  he  did  not  think  it  fit  to  force 
on  men  who  were  afraid  and  out  of  heart, 
nor  to  hazard  seven  thousand  of  his  citizens; 
and  therefore  with  only  three  hundred  horse 
volunteers,  set  forward  himself  to  Thessaly, 
much  against  the  will  of  the  augurs  and  his 
fellow-citizens  in  general,  who  all  imagined 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

this  marked  portent  to  have  reference  to  this 
great  man.  But  he  was  heated  against  Alex¬ 
ander  for  the  injuries  he  had  received,  and 
hoped  likewise,  from  the  discourse  which  for¬ 
merly  he  had  with  Thebe,  that  his  family  by 
this  time  was  divided  and  in  disorder.  But 
the  glory  of  the  expedition  chiefly  excited 
him;  for  he  was  extremely  desirous  at  this 
time,  when  the  Lacedaemonians  were  sending 
out  military  officers  to  assist  Dionysius,  the 
Sicilian  tyrant,  and  the  Athenians  took  Alex¬ 
ander’s  pay,  and  honoured  him  with  a  brazen 
statue  as  a  benefactor,  that  the  Thebans  should 
be  seen,  alone,  of  all  the  Greeks,  undertaking 
the  cause  of  those  who  were  oppressed  by  ty¬ 
rants,  and  destroying  the  violent  and  illegal 
forms  of  government  in  Greece. 

When  Pelopidas  was  come  to  Pharsalus, 
he  formed  an  army,  and  presently  marched 
against  Alexander;  and  Alexander,  under¬ 
standing  that  Pelopidas  had  few  Thebans  with 
him,  and  that  his  own  infantry  was  double  the 
number  of  the  Thessalians,  faced  him  at  The- 
tidium.  Some  one  told  Pelopidas,  “The  tyrant 
meets  us  with  a  great  army.”  “So  much  the 
better,”  he  replied,  “for  then  we  shall  over¬ 
come  the  more.” 

Between  the  two  armies  lay  some  steep  high 
hills  about  Cynoscephalae,  which  both  parties 
endeavoured  to  take  by  their  foot.  Pelopidas 
commanded  his  horse,  which  were  good  and 
many,  to  charge  that  of  the  enemies;  they 
routed  and  pursued  them  through  the  plain. 
But  Alexander  meantime  took  the  hills,  and 
charging  the  Thessalian  foot  that  came  up 
later  and  strove  to  climb  the  steep  and  craggy 
ascent,  killed  the  foremost,  and  the  others, 
much  distressed,  could  do  the  enemies  no 
harm. 

Pelopidas,  observing  this,  sounded  a  retreat 
to  his  horse,  and  gave  orders  that  they  should 
charge  the  enemies  that  kept  their  ground; 
and  he  himself,  taking  his  shield,  quickly 
joined  those  that  fought  about  the  hills,  and 
advancing  to  the  front,  filled  his  men  with 
such  courage  and  alacrity,  that  the  enemies 
imagined  they  came  with  other  spirits  and 
other  bodies  to  the  onset.  They  stood  two  or 
three  charges,  but  finding  these  come  on  stout¬ 
ly,  and  the  horse,  also,  returning  from  the 
pursuit,  gave  ground,  and  retreated  in  order. 

Pelopidas,  now  perceiving  from  the  rising 
ground  that  the  enemy’s  army  was,  though 
not  yet  routed,  full  of  disorder  and  confusion, 
stood  and  looked  about  for  Alexander;  and 
when  he  saw  him  in  the  right  wing,  encourag- 


PELOPIDAS 

ing  and  ordering  his  mercenaries,  he  could 
not  moderate  his  anger,  but  inflamed  at  the 
sight,  and  blindly  following  his  passion,  re¬ 
gardless  alike  of  his  own  life  and  his  com¬ 
mand,  advanced  far  before  his  soldiers,  crying 
out  and  challenging  the  tyrant  who  did  not 
dare  to  receive  him,  but  retreating,  hid  him¬ 
self  amongst  his  guard.  The  foremost  of  the 
mercenaries  that  came  hand  to  hand  were 
driven  back  by  Pelopidas,  and  some  killed; 
but  many  at  a  distance  shot  through  his  ar¬ 
mour  and  wounded  him,  till  the  Thessalians, 
in  anxiety  for  the  result,  ran  down  from  the 
hill  to  his  relief,  but  found  him  already  slain. 
The  horse  came  up  also,  and  routed  the  pha¬ 
lanx,  and  following  the  pursuit  a  great  way 
filled  the  whole  country  with  the  slain,  which 
were  above  three  thousand. 

No  one  can  wonder  that  the  Thebans  then 
present  should  show  great  grief  at  the  death 
of  Pelopidas,  calling  him  their  father,  de¬ 
liverer,  and  instructor  in  all  that  was  good 
and  commendable.  But  the  Thessalians  and 
the  allies,  outdoing  in  their  public  edicts  all 
the  just  honours  that  could  be  paid  to  human 
courage,  gave,  in  their  display  of  feeling,  yet 
stronger  demonstrations  of  the  kindness  they 
had  for  him.  It  is  stated  that  none  of  the  sol¬ 
diers,  when  they  heard  of  his  death,  would 
put  off  their  armour,  unbridle  their  horses, 
or  dress  their  wounds,  but  still  hot  and  with 
their  arms  on,  ran  to  the  corpse,  and,  as  if  he 
had  been  yet  alive  and  could  see  what  they 
did,  heaped  up  spoils  about  his  body.  They 
cut  off  their  horses’  manes  and  their  own 
hair,  many  kindled  no  fire  in  their  tents,  took 
no  supper,  and  silence  and  sadness  was  spread 
over  all  the  army;  as  if  they  had  not  gained 
the  greatest  and  most  glorious  victory,  but 
were  overcome  by  the  tyrant  and  enslaved. 

As  soon  as  it  was  known  in  the  cities,  the 
magistrates,  youths,  children,  and  priests  came 
out  to  meet  the  body,  and  brought  trophies, 
crowns,  and  suits  of  golden  armour;  and, 
when  he  was  to  be  interred,  the  elders  of  the 
Thessalians  came  and  begged  the  Thebans 
that  they  might  give  the  funeral;  and  one  of 
them  said,  “Friends,  we  ask  a  favour  of  you, 
that  will  prove  both  an  honour  and  comfort 
to  us  in  this  our  great  misfortune.  The  Thes¬ 
salians  shall  never  again  wait  on  the  living 
Pelopidas,  shall  never  give  honours  of  which 
he  can  be  sensible,  but  if  we  may  have  his 
body,  adorn  his  funeral,  and  inter  him,  we 
shall  hope  to  show  that  we  esteem  his  death 
a  greater  loss  to  the  Thessalians  than  to  the 


245 

Thebans.  You  have  lost  only  a  good  general, 
we  both  a  general  and  our  liberty.  For  how 
shall  we  dare  to  desire  from  you  another  cap¬ 
tain,  since  we  cannot  restore  Pelopidas?” 

The  Thebans  granted  their  request,  and 
there  was  never  a  more  splendid  funeral  in  the 
opinion  of  those  who  do  not  think  the  glory  of 
such  solemnities  consists  only  in  gold,  ivory, 
and  purple;  as  Philistus  did,  who  extravagantly 
celebrates  the  funeral  of  Dionysius,  in  which 
his  tyranny  concluded  like  the  pompous  exit 
of  some  great  tragedy.  Alexander  the  Great, 
at  the  death  of  Hephsestion,  not  only  cut  off  the 
manes  of  his  horses  and  his  mules,  but  took 
down  the  battlements  from  the  city  walls,  that 
even  the  towns  might  seem  mourners,  and  in¬ 
stead  of  their  former  beauteous  appearance, 
look  bald  at  his  funeral. 

But  such  honours,  being  commanded  and 
forced  from  the  mourners,  attended  with  feel¬ 
ings  of  jealousy  towards  those  who  received 
them,  and  of  hatred  towards  those  who  ex¬ 
acted  them,  were  no  testimonies  of  love  and 
respect,  but  of  the  barbaric  pride,  luxury,  and 
insolence  of  those  who  lavished  their  wealth 
in  these  vain  and  undesirable  displays.  But 
that  a  man  of  common  rank,  dying  in  a 
strange  country,  neither  his  wife,  children, 
nor  kinsmen  present,  none  either  asking  or 
compelling  it,  should  be  attended,  buried,  and 
crowned  by  so  many  cities  that  strove  to  ex¬ 
ceed  one  another  in  the  demonstrations  of  their 
love,  seems  to  be  the  sum  and  completion  of 
happy  fortune.  For  the  death  of  happy  men  is 
not,  as^Esop  observes,  most  grievous,  but  most 
blessed,  since  it  secures  their  felicity,  and  puts 
it  out  of  fortune’s  power.  And  that  Spartan 
advised  well,  who,  embracing  Diagoras,  that 
had  himself  been  crowned  in  the  Olympic 
Games,  and  saw  his  sons  and  grandchildren 
victors,  said,  “Die,  Diagoras,  for  thou  canst  not 
be  a  god.” 

And  yet  who  would  compare  all  the  vic¬ 
tories  in  the  Pythian  and  Olympian  Games 
put  together  with  one  of  those  enterprises  of 
Pelopidas,  of  which  he  successfully  performed 
so  many?  Having  spent  his  life  in  brave  and 
glorious  actions,  he  died  at  last  in  the  chief 
command,  for  the  thirteenth  time,  of  the 
Boeotians,  fighting  bravely  and  in  the  act  of 
slaying  a  tyrant,  in  defence  of  the  liberty  of 
the  Thessalians. 

His  death,  as  it  brought  grief,  so  likewise  it 
produced  advantage  to  the  allies;  for  the  The¬ 
bans,  as  soon  as  they  heard  of  his  fall,  de¬ 
layed  not  their  revenge,  but  presently  sent 


246 

seven  thousand  foot  and  seven  hundred  horse, 
under  the  command  of  Malcitas  and  Diogiton. 
And  they,  finding  Alexander  weak  and  with¬ 
out  forces,  compelled  him  to  restore  the  cities 
he  had  taken,  to  withdraw  his  garrisons  from 
the  Magnesians  and  Achaeans  of  Phthiotis, 
and  swear  to  assist  the  Thebans  against  what¬ 
soever  enemies  they  should  require. 

This  contented  the  Thebans,  but  punish¬ 
ment  overtook  the  tyrant  for  his  wickedness, 
and  the  death  of  Pelopidas  was  revenged  by 
Heaven  in  the  following  manner.  Pelopidas, 
as  I  have  already  mentioned,  had  taught  his 
wife,  Thebe,  not  to  fear  the  outward  splendour 
and  show  of  the  tyrant’s  defences,  since  she 
was  admitted  within  them.  She,  of  herself, 
too,  dreaded  his  inconstancy,  and  hated  his 
cruelty;  and  therefore,  conspiring  with  her 
three  brothers,  Tisiphonus,  Pytholaus,  and 
Lycophron,  made  the  following  attempt  upon 
him. 

All  the  other  apartments  were  full  of  the 
tyrant’s  night  guards,  but  their  bed-chamber 
was  an  upper  room,  and  before  the  door  lay 
a  chained  dog  to  guard  it,  which  would  fly  at 
all  but  the  tyrant  and  his  wife  and  one  ser¬ 
vant  that  fed  him.  When  Thebe,  therefore,  de¬ 
signed  to  kill  her  husband,  she  hid  her  broth- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ers  all  day  in  a  room  hard  by,  and  she,  going 
in  alone,  according  to  her  usual  custom,  to 
Alexander,  who  was  asleep  already,  in  a  little 
time  came  out  again,  and  commanded  the 
servant  to  lead  away  the  dog,  for  Alexander 
wished  to  rest  quietly.  She  covered  the  stairs 
with  wool,  that  the  young  men  might  make 
no  noise  as  they  came  up;  and  then,  bringing 
up  her  brothers  with  their  weapons,  and  leav¬ 
ing  them  at  the  chamber  door,  she  went  in, 
and  brought  away  the  tyrant’s  sword  that 
hung  over  his  head,  and  showed  it  them  for 
confirmation  that  he  was  fast  asleep.  The 
young  men  appearing  fearful,  and  unwilling 
to  do  the  murder,  she  chid  them,  and  angrily 
vowed  she  would  wake  Alexander  and  dis¬ 
cover  the  conspiracy;  and  so,  with  a  lamp  in 
her  hand,  she  conducted  them  in,  they  being 
both  ashamed  and  afraid,  and  brought  them 
to  the  bed;  when  one  of  them  caught  him  by 
the  feet,  the  other  pulled  him  backwards  by 
the  hair,  and  the  third  ran  him  through.  The 
death  was  more  speedy,  perhaps,  than  was 
fit;  but,  in  that  he  was  the  first  tyrant  that 
was  killed  by  the  contrivance  of  his  wife,  and 
as  his  corpse  was  abused,  thrown  out,  and 
trodden  under  foot  by  the  Pheraeans,  he  seems 
to  have  suffered  what  his  villainies  deserved. 


MARCELLUS 

2_68?-2_o8  b.c. 


They  say  that  Marcus  Claudius,  who  was 
five  times  consul  of  the  Romans,  was 
the  son  of  Marcus;  and  that  he  was  the 
first  of  his  family  called  Marcellus,  that  is,  mar¬ 
tial,  as  Posidonius  affirms.  He  was,  indeed,  by 
long  experience,  skilful  in  the  art  of  war,  of  a 
strong  body,  valiant  of  hand,  and  by  natural 
inclinations  addicted  to  war.  This  high  tem¬ 
per  and  heat  he  showed  conspicuously  in  bat¬ 
tle;  in  other  respects  he  was  modest  and  oblig¬ 
ing,  and  so  far  studious  of  Greek  learning 
and  discipline,  as  to  honour  and  admire  those 
that  excelled  in  it,  though  he  did  not  himself 
attain  a  proficiency  in  them  equal  to  his  de¬ 
sire,  by  reason  of  his  employments.  For  if 
ever  there  were  any  men  whom,  as  Homer 
says,  Heaven 

From  their  first  youth  unto  their  utmost  age 
Appointed  the  laborious  wars  to  wage, 
certainly  they  were  the  chief  Romans  of  that 


time;  who  in  their  youth  had  war  with  the 
Carthaginians  in  Sicily;  in  their  middle  age 
with  the  Gauls  in  the  defence  of  Italy  itself; 
and  at  last,  when  now  grown  old,  struggled 
again  with  Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians, 
and  wanted  in  their  latest  years  what  is  granted 
to  most  men,  exemption  from  military  toils, 
their  rank  and  their  great  qualities  still  making 
them  be  called  upon  to  undertake  the  com¬ 
mand. 

Marcellus,  ignorant  or  unskilful  of  no  kind 
of  fighting,  in  single  combat  surpassed  him¬ 
self;  he  never  declined  a  challenge,  and  never 
accepted  without  killing  his  challenger.  In 
Sicily,  he  protected  and  saved  his  brother  Ota- 
cilius  when  surrounded  in  battle,  and  slew 
the  enemies  that  pressed  upon  him;  for  which 
act  he  was  by  the  generals,  while  he  was  yet 
but  young,  presented  with  crowns  and  other 
honourable  rewards;  and,  his  good  qualities 


MARCELLUS 

more  and  more  displaying  themselves,  he  was 
created  Curule  ALdile  by  the  people  and  by 
the  high  priests  Augur;  which  is  that  priest¬ 
hood  to  which  chiefly  the  law  assigns  the  ob¬ 
servation  of  auguries. 

In  his  aedileship,  a  certain  mischance  brought 
him  to  the  necessity  of  bringing  an  impeach¬ 
ment  into  the  senate.  He  had  a  son  named 
Marcus,  of  great  beauty,  in  the  flower  of  his 
age,  and  no  less  admired  for  the  goodness  of 
his  character.  This  youth,  Capitolinus,  a  bold 
and  ill-mannered  man,  Marcellus’s  colleague, 
sought  to  abuse.  The  boy  at  first  himself  re¬ 
pelled  him;  but  when  the  other  again  perse¬ 
cuted  him,  told  his  father.  Marcellus,  highly 
indignant,  accused  the  man  in  the  senate, 
where  he,  having  appealed  to  the  tribunes  of 
the  people,  endeavoured  by  various  shifts  and 
exceptions  to  elude  the  impeachment;  and, 
when  the  tribunes  refused  their  protection,  by 
flat  denial  rejected  the  charge.  As  there  was 
no  witness  of  the  fact,  the  senate  thought  fit 
to  call  the  youth  himself  before  them;  on  wit¬ 
nessing  whose  blushes  and  tears,  and  shame 
mixed  with  the  highest  indignation,  seeking 
no  further  evidence  of  the  crime,  they  con¬ 
demned  Capitolinus,  and  set  a  fine  upon  him; 
of  the  money  of  which  Marcellus  caused  sil¬ 
ver  vessels  for  libation  to  be  made,  which  he 
dedicated  to  the  gods. 

After  the  end  of  the  first  Punic  war,  which 
lasted  one-and-twenty  years,  the  seed  of  Gal¬ 
lic  tumults  sprang  up,  and  began  again  to 
trouble  Rome.  The  Insubrians,  a  people  in¬ 
habiting  the  subalpine  region  of  Italy,  strong 
in  their  own  forces,  raised  from  among  the 
other  Gauls  aids  of  mercenary  soldiers,  called 
Gaesatae-  And  it  was  a  sort  of  miracle,  and  spe¬ 
cial  good  fortune  for  Rome,  that  the  Gallic 
war  was  not  coincident  with  the  Punic,  but 
that  the  Gauls  had  with  fidelity  stood  quiet 
as  spectators  while  the  Punic  war  continued, 
as  though  they  had  been  under  engagement 
to  await  and  attack  the  victors,  and  now  only 
were  at  liberty  to  come  forward.  Still  the  posi¬ 
tion  itself,  and  the  ancient  renown  of  the 
Gauls,  struck  no  little  fear  into  the  minds  of 
the  Romans,  who  were  about  to  undertake  a 
war  so  near  home  and  upon  their  own  bor¬ 
ders;  and  regarded  the  Gauls,  because  they 
had  once  taken  their  city,  with  more  appre¬ 
hension  than  any  people,  as  is  apparent  from 
the  enactment  which  from  that  time  forth 
provided  that  the  high  priests  should  enjoy 
an  exemption  from  all  military  duty,  except 
only  in  Gallic  insurrections. 


247 

The  great  preparations,  also,  made  by  the 
Romans  for  war  (for  it  is  not  reported  that 
the  people  of  Rome  ever  had  at  one  time  so 
many  legions  in  arms,  either  before  or  since), 
and  their  extraordinary  sacrifices,  were  plain 
arguments  of  their  fear.  For  though  they  were 
most  averse  to  barbarous  and  cruel  rites,  and 
entertained  more  than  any  nation  the  same 
pious  and  reverent  sentiments  of  the  gods 
with  the  Greeks;  yet,  when  this  war  was  com¬ 
ing  upon  them,  they  then,  from  some  prophe¬ 
cies  in  the  Sibyls’  books,  put  alive  under¬ 
ground  a  pair  of  Greeks,  one  male,  the  other 
female;  and  likewise  two  Gauls,  one  of  each 
sex,  in  the  market  called  the  beast  market. 
They  continue  even  to  this  day  to  offer  to  these 
Greeks  and  Gauls  certain  ceremonial  observ¬ 
ances  in  the  month  of  November. 

In  the  beginning  of  this  war,  in  which  the 
Romans  sometimes  obtained  remarkable  vic¬ 
tories,  sometimes  were  shamefully  beaten, 
nothing  was  done  toward  the  determination 
of  the  contest  until  Flaminius  and  Furius,  be¬ 
ing  consuls,  led  large  forces  against  the  Insu¬ 
brians. 

At  the  time  of  their  departure,  the  river 
that  runs  through  the  country  of  Picenum 
was  seen  flowing  with  blood;  there  was  a  re¬ 
port  that  three  moons  had  been  seen  at  once 
at  Ariminum;  and,  in  the  consular  assembly, 
the  augurs  declared  that  the  consuls  had  been 
unduly  and  inauspiciously  created.  The  sen¬ 
ate,  therefore,  immediately  sent  letters  to  the 
camp,  recalling  the  consuls  to  Rome  with  all 
possible  speed,  and  commanding  them  to  for¬ 
bear  from  acting  against  the  enemies,  and  to 
abdicate  the  consulship  on  the  first  oppor¬ 
tunity.  These  letters  being  brought  to  Flami¬ 
nius,  he  deferred  to  open  them  till,  having  de¬ 
feated  and  put  to  flight  the  enemy’s  forces,  he 
wasted  and  ravaged  their  borders. 

The  people,  therefore,  did  not  go  forth  to 
meet  him  when  he  returned  with  huge  spoils; 
nay,  because  he  had  not  instantly  obeyed  the 
command  in  the  letters,  by  which  he  was  re¬ 
called,  but  slighted  and  contemned  them,  they 
were  very  near  denying  him  the  honour  of  a 
triumph.  Nor  was  the  triumph  sooner  passed 
than  they  deposed  him,  with  his  colleague, 
from  the  magistracy,  and  reduced  them  to  the 
state  of  private  citizens. 

So  much  were  all  things  at  Rome  made  to 
depend  upon  religion;  they  would  not  allow 
any  contempt  of  the  omens  and  the  ancient 
rites,  even  though  attended  with  the  highest 
success,  thinking  it  to  be  of  more  importance 


248 

to  the  public  safety  that  the  magistrates  should 
reverence  the  gods,  than  that  they  should 
overcome  their  enemies. 

Thus  Tiberius  Sempronius,  whom  for  his 
probity  and  virtue  the  citizens  highly  es¬ 
teemed,  created  Scipio  Nasica  and  Caius  Mar- 
cius  consuls  to  succeed  him;  and  when  they 
were  gone  into  their  provinces,  lit  upon  books 
concerning  the  religious  observances,  where 
he  found  something  he  had  not  known  be¬ 
fore;  which  was  this:  when  the  consul  took 
his  auspices,  he  sat  without  the  city  in  a  house, 
or  tent,  hired  for  that  occasion;  but,  if  it  hap¬ 
pened  that  he,  for  any  urgent  cause,  returned 
into  the  city,  without  having  yet  seen  any  cer¬ 
tain  signs,  he  was  obliged  to  leave  that  first 
building,  or  tent,  and  to  seek  another  to  re¬ 
peat  the  survey  from. 

Tiberius,  it  appears,  in  ignorance  of  this, 
had  twice  used  the  same  building  before  an¬ 
nouncing  the  new  consuls.  Now,  understand¬ 
ing  his  error,  he  referred  the  matter  to  the 
senate;  nor  did  the  senate  neglect  this  minute 
fault,  but  soon  wrote  expressly  of  it  to  Scipio 
Nasica  and  Caius  Marcius;  who,  leaving  their 
provinces  and  without  delay  returning  to 
Rome,  laid  down  their  magistracy.  This  hap¬ 
pened  at  a  later  period. 

About  the  same  time,  too,  the  priesthood 
was  taken  away  from  two  men  of  very  great 
honour,  Cornelius  Cethegus  and  Quintus  Sul- 
picius:  from  the  former,  because  he  had  not 
rightly  held  out  the  entrails  of  a  beast  slain 
for  sacrifice;  from  the  latter,  because,  while 
he  was  immolating,  the  tufted  cap  which  the 
Flamens  wear  had  fallen  from  his  head.  Minu- 
cius,  the  dictator,  who  had  already  named 
Caius  Flaminius  master  of  the  horse,  they  de¬ 
posed  from  his  command,  because  the  squeak 
of  a  mouse  was  heard,  and  put  others  into  their 
places.  And  yet,  notwithstanding,  by  observ¬ 
ing  so  anxiously  these  little  niceties  they  did 
not  run  into  any  superstition,  because  they 
never  varied  from  nor  exceeded  the  observ¬ 
ances  of  their  ancestors. 

So  soon  as  Flaminius  with  his  colleague  had 
resigned  the  consulate,  Marcellus  was  declared 
consul  by  the  presiding  officers  called  Inter¬ 
rexes;  and,  entering  into  the  magistracy,  chose 
Cnaeus  Cornelius  his  colleague.  There  was  a 
report  that,  the  Gauls  proposing  a  pacification, 
and  the  senate  also  inclining  to  peace,  Mar¬ 
cellus  inflamed  the  people  to  war;  but  a  peace 
appears  to  have  been  agreed  upon,  which  the 
Gxsatx  broke;  who,  passing  the  Alps,  stirred 
up  the  Insubrians  (they  being  thirty  thousand 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

in  number,  and  the  Insubrians  more  numer¬ 
ous  by  far);  and  proud  of  their  strength, 
marched  directly  to  Acerrae,  a  city  seated  on 
the  north  of  the  river  Po.  From  thence  Brito- 
martus,  king  of  the  Gaesatae,  taking  with  him 
ten  thousand  soldiers,  harassed  the  country 
round  about. 

News  of  which  being  brought  to  Marcellus, 
leaving  his  colleague  at  Acerrae  with  the  foot 
and  all  the  heavy  arms  and  a  third  part  of  the 
horse,  and  carrying  with  him  the  rest  of 
the  horse  and  six  hundred  light-armed  foot, 
marching  night  and  day  without  remission, 
he  stayed  not  till  he  came  up  to  these  ten  thou¬ 
sand  near  a  Gaulish  village  called  Clastidium, 
which  not  long  before  had  been  reduced  un¬ 
der  the  Roman  jurisdiction.  Nor  had  he  time 
to  refresh  his  soldiers  or  to  give  them  rest. 
For  the  barbarians,  that  were  then  present, 
immediately  observed  his  approach,  and  con¬ 
temned  him,  because  he  had  very  few  foot 
with  him.  The  Gauls  were  singularly  skilful 
in  horsemanship,  and  thought  to  excel  in  it; 
and  as  at  present  they  also  exceeded  Marcel¬ 
lus  in  number,  they  made  no  account  of  him. 
They,  therefore,  with  their  king  at  their  head, 
instantly  charged  upon  him,  as  if  they  would 
trample  him  under  their  horses’  feet,  threat¬ 
ening  all  kinds  of  cruelties. 

Marcellus,  because  his  men  were  few,  that 
they  might  not  be  encompassed  and  charged 
on  all  sides  by  the  enemy,  extended  his  wings 
of  horse,  and,  riding  about,  drew  out  his 
wings  of  foot  in  length,  till  he  came  near  to 
the  enemy.  Just  as  he  was  in  the  act  of  turn¬ 
ing  round  to  face  the  enemy,  it  so  happened 
that  his  horse,  startled  with  their  fierce  look 
and  their  cries,  gave  back,  and  carried  him 
forcibly  aside.  Fearing  lest  this  accident,  if 
converted  into  an  omen,  might  discourage  his 
soldiers,  he  quickly  brought  his  horse  round 
to  confront  the  enemy,  and  made  a  gesture  of 
adoration  to  the  sun,  as  if  he  had  wheeled 
about  not  by  chance,  but  for  a  purpose  of  de¬ 
votion.  For  it  was  customary  to  the  Romans, 
when  they  offered  worship  to  the  gods,  to 
turn  round;  and  in  this  moment  of  meeting 
the  enemy,  he  is  said  to  have  vowed  the  best 
of  the  arms  to  Jupiter  Feretrius. 

The  king  of  the  Gauls  beholding  Marcellus, 
and  from  the  badges  of  his  authority  con¬ 
jecturing  him  to  be  the  general,  advanced 
some  way  before  his  embatded  army,  and 
with  a  loud  voice  challenged  him,  and,  bran¬ 
dishing  his  lance;  fiercely  ran  in  full  career 
at  him;  exceeding  the  rest  of  the  Gauls  in  stat- 


MARCELLUS 

ure,  and  with  his  armour,  that  was  adorned 
with  gold  and  silver  and  various  colours, 
shining  like  lightning.  These  arms  seeming  to 
Marcellus,  while  he  viewed  the  enemy’s  army 
drawn  up  in  battalia,  to  be  the  best  and  fairest, 
and  thinking  them  to  be  those  he  had  vowed  to 
Jupiter,  he  instantly  ran  upon  the  king,  and 
pierced  through  his  breastplate  with  his  lance; 
then  pressing  upon  him  with  the  weight  of  his 
horse,  threw  him  to  the  ground,  and  with  two 
or  three  strokes  more  slew  him. 

Immediately  he  leapt  from  his  horse,  laid 
his  hand  upon  the  dead  king’s  arms,  and, 
looking  up  towards  Heaven,  thus  spoke:  “O 
Jupiter  Feretrius,  arbiter  of  the  exploits  of 
captains,  and  of  the  acts  of  commanders  in 
war  and  battles,  be  thou  witness  that  I,  a  gen¬ 
eral,  have  slain  a  general;  I,  a  consul,  have 
slain  a  king  with  my  own  hand,  third  of  all  the 
Romans;  and  that  to  thee  I  consecrate  these 
first  and  most  excellent  of  the  spoils.  Grant  to 
us  to  despatch  the  relics  of  the  war  with  the 
same  course  of  fortune.” 

Then  the  Roman  horse  joining  battle  not 
only  with  the  enemy’s  horse,  but  also  with 
the  foot  who  attacked  them,  obtained  a  singu¬ 
lar  and  unheard-of  victory.  For  never  before 
or  since  have  so  few  horse  defeated  such  nu¬ 
merous  forces  of  horse  and  foot  together.  The 
enemies  being  to  a  great  number  slain,  and 
the  spoils  collected,  he  returned  to  his  col¬ 
league,  who  was  conducting  the  war  with  ill- 
success  against  the  enemies  near  the  greatest 
and  most  populous  of  the  Gallic  cities,  Milan. 
This  was  their  capital,  and,  therefore,  fight¬ 
ing  valiantly  in  defence  of  it,  they  were  not 
so  much  besieged  by  Cornelius,  as  they  be¬ 
sieged  him.  But  Marcellus  having  returned, 
and  the  Gaesatae  retiring  as  soon  as  they  were 
certified  of  the  death  of  the  king  and  the  de¬ 
feat  of  his  army,  Milan  was  taken.  The  rest 
of  their  towns,  and  all  they  had,  the  Gauls  de¬ 
livered  up  of  their  own  accord  to  the  Romans, 
and  had  peace  upon  equitable  conditions 
granted  to  them. 

Marcellus  alone,  by  a  decree  of  the  senate, 
triumphed.  The  triumph  was  in  magnificence, 
opulence,  spoils,  and  the  gigantic  bodies  of  the 
captives  most  remarkable.  But  the  most  grate¬ 
ful  and  most  rare  spectacle  of  all  was  the  gen¬ 
eral  himself,  carrying  the  arms  of  the  barbarian 
king  to  the  god  to  whom  he  had  vowed  them. 

He  had  taken  a  tall  and  straight  stock  of 
an  oak,  and  had  lopped  and  formed  it  to  a 
trophy.  Upon  this  he  fastened  and  hung  about 
the  arms  of  the  king,  arranging  all  the  pieces 


249 

in  their  suitable  places.  The  procession  ad¬ 
vancing  solemnly,  he,  carrying  this  trophy, 
ascended  the  chariot;  and  thus,  himself  the 
fairest  and  most  glorious  triumphant  image, 
was  conveyed  into  the  city.  The  army  adorned 
with  shining  armour  followed  in  order,  and 
with  verses  composed  for  the  occasion,  and 
with  songs  of  victory  celebrated  the  praises  of 
Jupiter  and  of  their  general.  Then  entering 
the  temple  of  Jupiter  Feretrius,  he  dedicated 
his  gift;  the  third,  and  to  our  memory  the 
last,  that  ever  did  so.  The  first  was  Romulus, 
after  having  slain  Acron,  king  of  the  Caeni- 
nenses;  the  second,  Cornelius  Cossus,  who 
slew  Tolumnius,  the  Etruscan;  after  them 
Marcellus,  having  killed  Britomartus,  king  of 
the  Gauls;  after  Marcellus,  no  man. 

The  god  to  whom  these  spoils  were  conse¬ 
crated  is  called  Jupiter  Feretrius,  from  the 
trophy  carried  on  the  jeretrum ,  one  of  the 
Greek  words  which  at  that  time  still  existed 
in  great  numbers  in  Latin;  or,  as  others  say, 
it  is  the  surname  of  the  Thundering  Jupiter 
derived  from  jerire,  to  strike.  Others  there 
are  who  would  have  the  name  to  be  deduced 
from  the  strokes  that  are  given  in  fight;  since 
even  now  in  battles,  when  they  press  upon 
their  enemies,  they  constantly  call  out  to  each 
other,  “Strike,”  in  Latin  feri. 

Spoils  in  general  they  call  spolia,  and  these 
in  particular  opima ;  though,  indeed,  they  say 
that  Numa  Pompilius,  in  his  commentaries, 
makes  mention  of  first,  second,  and  third 
Spolia  Opima;  and  that  he  prescribes  that  the 
first  taken  be  consecrated  to  Jupiter  Feretrius, 
the  second  to  Mars,  the  third  to  Quirinus;  as 
also  that  the  reward  of  the  first  be  three  hun¬ 
dred  asses;  of  the  second,  two  hundred;  of  the 
third,  one  hundred.  The  general  account, 
however,  prevails,  that  those  spoils  only  are 
opima  which  the  general  first  takes  in  set 
battle,  and  takes  from  the  enemy’s  chief  cap¬ 
tain  whom  he  has  slain  with  his  own  hand. 
But  of  this  enough. 

The  victory  and  the  ending  of  the  war  was 
so  welcome  to  the  people  of  Rome,  that  they 
sent  to  Apollo  of  Delphi,  in  testimony  of  their 
gratitude,  a  present  of  a  golden  cup  of  an 
hundred  pound  weight,  and  gave  a  great  part 
of  the  spoil  to  their  associate  cities,  and  took 
care  that  many  presents  should  be  sent  also  to 
Hiero,  King  of  the  Syracusans,  their  friend 
and  ally. 

When  Hannibal  invaded  Italy,  Marcellus 
was  despatched  with  a  fleet  to  Sicily.  And 
when  the  army  had  been  defeated  at  Cannae, 


250 

and  many  thousands  of  them  perished,  and 
few  had  saved  themselves  by  flying  to  Canu- 
sium,  and  all  feared  lest  Hannibal,  who  had 
destroyed  the  strength  of  the  Roman  army, 
should  advance  at  once  with  his  victorious 
troops  to  Rome,  Marcellus  first  sent  for  the 
protection  of  the  city  fifteen  hundred  soldiers 
from  the  fleet.  Then,  by  decree  of  the  senate, 
going  to  Canusium,  having  heard  that  many 
of  the  soldiers  had  come  together  in  that 
place,  he  led  them  out  of  the  fortifications  to 
prevent  the  enemy  from  ravaging  the  coun¬ 
try.  The  chief  Roman  commanders  had  most 
of  them  fallen  in  battles;  and  the  citizens 
complained  that  the  extreme  caution  of  Fa- 
bius  Maximus,  whose  integrity  and  wisdom 
gave  him  the  highest  authority,  verged  upon 
timidity  and  inaction.  They  confided  in  him 
to  keep  them  out  of  danger,  but  could  not  ex¬ 
pect  that  he  would  enable  them  to  retaliate. 
Fixing,  therefore,  their  thoughts  upon  Mar¬ 
cellus,  and  hoping  to  combine  his  boldness, 
confidence,  and  promptitude  with  Fabius’s 
caution  and  prudence,  and  to  temper  the  one 
by  the  other,  they  sent,  sometimes  both  with 
consular  command,  sometimes  one  as  consul, 
the  other  as  proconsul,  against  the  enemy. 
Posidonius  writes  that  Fabius  was  called  the 
buckler,  Marcellus  the  sword  of  Rome.  Cer¬ 
tainly,  Hannibal  himself  confessed  that  he 
feared  Fabius  as  a  schoolmaster,  Marcellus  as 
an  adversary:  the  former,  lest  he  should  be 
hindered  from  doing  mischief;  the  latter,  lest 
he  should  receive  harm  himself. 

And  first,  when  among  Hannibal’s  soldiers, 
proud  of  their  victory,  carelessness  and  bold¬ 
ness  had  grown  to  a  great  height,  Marcellus, 
attacking  all  their  stragglers  and  plundering 
parties,  cut  them  off,  and  by  little  and  little 
diminished  their  forces.  Then  carrying  aid  to 
the  Neapolitans  and  Nolans,  he  confirmed 
the  minds  of  the  former,  who,  indeed,  were 
of  their  own  accord  faithful  enough  to  the 
Romans;  but  in  Nola  he  found  a  state  of  dis¬ 
cord,  the  senate  not  being  able  to  rule  and 
keep  in  the  common  people,  who  were  gen¬ 
erally  favourers  of  Hannibal. 

There  was  in  the  town  one  Bantius,  a  man 
renowned  for  his  high  birth  and  courage. 
This  man,  after  he  had  fought  most  fiercely 
at  Cannae,  and  had  killed  many  of  the  ene¬ 
mies,  at  last  was  found  lying  in  a  heap  of 
dead  bodies,  covered  with  darts,  and  was 
brought  to  Hannibal,  who  so  honoured  him, 
that  he  not  only  dismissed  him  without  ran¬ 
som,  but  also  contracted  friendship  with  him, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  made  him  his  guest.  In  gratitude  for  this 
great  favour,  he  became  one  of  the  strongest 
partisans  of  Hannibal,  and  urged  the  people 
to  revolt. 

Marcellus  could  not  be  induced  to  put  to 
death  a  man  of  such  eminence,  and  who  had 
endured  such  dangers  in  fighting  on  the  Ro¬ 
man  side;  but,  knowing  himself  able,  by  the 
general  kindliness  of  his  disposition,  and  in 
particular  by  the  attractiveness  of  his  address, 
to  gain  over  a  character  whose  passion  was 
for  honour,  one  day  when  Bantius  saluted 
him,  he  asked  him  who  he  was;  not  that  he 
knew  him  not  before,  but  seeking  an  occasion 
of  further  conference.  When  Bantius  had  told 
who  he  was,  Marcellus,  seeming  surprised 
with  joy  and  wonder,  replied:  “Are  you  that 
Bantius  whom  the  Romans  commend  above 
the  rest  that  fought  at  Cannae,  and  praise  as 
the  one  man  that  not  only  did  not  forsake  the 
consul  Paulus  iEmilius,  but  received  in  his 
own  body  many  darts  thrown  at  him?”  Ban¬ 
tius  owning  himself  to  be  that  very  man,  and 
showing  his  scars:  “Why,  then,”  said  Mar¬ 
cellus,  “did  not  you,  having  such  proofs  to 
show  of  your  affection  to  us,  come  to  me  at 
my  first  arrival  here?  Do  you  think  that  we 
are  unwilling  to  requite  with  favour  those 
who  have  well  deserved,  and  who  are  hon¬ 
oured  even  by  our  enemies?”  He  followed  up 
his  courtesies  by  a  present  of  a  war-horse  and 
five  hundred  drachmas  in  money.  From  that 
time  Bantius  became  the  most  faithful  assis¬ 
tant  and  ally  of  Marcellus,  and  a  most  keen 
discoverer  of  those  that  attempted  innovation 
and  sedition. 

These  were  many,  and  had  entered  into  a 
conspiracy  to  plunder  the  baggage  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  when  they  should  make  an  irruption 
against  the  enemy.  Marcellus,  therefore,  hav¬ 
ing  marshalled  his  army  within  the  city, 
placed  the  baggage  near  to  the  gates,  and,  by 
an  edict,  forbade  the  Nolans  to  go  to  the 
walls.  Thus,  outside  the  city,  no  arms  could 
be  seen;  by  which  prudent  device  he  allured 
Hannibal  to  move  with  his  army  in  some  dis¬ 
order  to  the  city,  thinking  that  things  were 
in  a  tumult  there. 

Then  Marcellus,  the  nearest  gate  being,  as 
he  had  commanded,  thrown  open,  issuing 
forth  with  the  flower  of  his  horse  in  front, 
charged  the  enemy.  By  and  by  the  foot,  sally¬ 
ing  out  of  another  gate,  with  a  loud  shout 
joined  in  the  battle.  And  while  Hannibal  op¬ 
poses  part  of  his  forces  to  these,  the  third  gate 
also  is  opened,  out  of  which  the  rest  break 


MARCELLUS 

forth,  and  on  all  quarters  fall  upon  the  ene¬ 
mies,  who  were  dismayed  at  this  unexpected 
encounter,  and  did  but  feebly  resist  those  with 
whom  they  had  been  first  engaged,  because 
of  their  attack  by  these  others  who  sallied  out 
later.  Here  Hannibal’s  soldiers,  with  much 
bloodshed  and  many  wounds,  were  beaten 
back  to  their  camp,  and  for  the  first  time 
turned  their  backs  to  the  Romans.  There  fell 
in  this  action,  as  it  is  related,  more  than  five 
thousand  of  them;  of  the  Romans,  not  above 
five  hundred.  Livy  does  not  affirm  that  either 
the  victory  or  the  slaughter  of  the  enemy  was 
so  great;  but  certain  it  is  that  the  adventure 
brought  great  glory  to  Marcellus,  and  to  the 
Romans,  after  their  calamities,  a  great  revival 
of  confidence,  as  they  began  now  to  entertain 
a  hope  that  the  enemy  with  whom  they  con¬ 
tended  was  not  invincible,  but  liable  like 
themselves  to  defeats. 

Therefore,  the  other  consul  being  deceased, 
the  people  recalled  Marcellus,  that  they  might 
put  him  into  his  place;  and,  in  spite  of  the 
magistrates,  succeeded  in  postponing  the  elec¬ 
tion  till  his  arrival,  when  he  was  by  all  the 
suffrages  created  consul.  But  because  it  hap¬ 
pened  to  thunder,  the  augurs  accounting  that 
he  was  not  legitimately  created,  and  yet  not 
daring,  for  fear  of  the  people,  to  declare  their 
sentence  openly,  Marcellus  voluntarily  re¬ 
signed  the  consulate,  retaining  however  his 
command. 

Being  created  proconsul,  and  returning  to 
the  camp  at  Nola,  he  proceeded  to  harass 
those  that  followed  the  party  of  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians;  on  whose  coming  with  speed  to  suc¬ 
cour  them,  Marcellus  declined  a  challenge  to 
a  set  battle,  but  when  Hannibal  had  sent  out 
a  party  to  plunder,  and  now  expected  no 
fight,  he  broke  out  upon  him  with  his  army- 
He  had  distributed  to  the  foot  long  lances, 
such  as  are  commonly  used  in  naval  fights; 
and  instructed  them  to  throw  them  with 
great  force  at  convenient  distances  against  the 
enemies,  who  were  inexperienced  in  that  way 
of  darting,  and  used  to  fight  with  short  darts 
hand  to  hand.  This  seems  to  have  been  the 
cause  of  the  total  rout  and  open  flight  of  all 
the  Carthaginians  who  were  then  engaged; 
there  fell  of  them  five  thousand;  four  ele¬ 
phants  were  killed,  and  two  taken;  but  what 
was  of  the  greatest  moment,  on  the  third  day 
after,  more  than  three  hundred  horse,  Span¬ 
iards  and  Numidians  mixed,  deserted  to  him, 
a  disaster  that  had  never  to  that  day  hap¬ 
pened  to  Hannibal,  who  had  long  kept  to- 


251 

gether  in  harmony  an  army  of  barbarians, 
collected  out  of  many  various  and  discordant 
nations.  Marcellus  and  his  successors  in  all 
this  war  made  good  use  of  the  faithful  service 
of  these  horsemen. 

He  now  was  a  third  time  created  consul, 
and  sailed  over  into  Sicily.  For  the  success  of 
Hannibal  had  excited  the  Carthaginians  to 
lay  claim  to  that  whole  island;  chiefly  because, 
after  the  murder  of  the  tyrant,  Hieronymus, 
all  things  had  been  in  tumult  and  confusion 
at  Syracuse.  For  which  reason  the  Romans 
also  had  sent  before  to  that  city  a  force  under 
the  conduct  of  Appius,  as  praetor. 

While  Marcellus  was  receiving  that  army, 
a  number  of  Roman  soldiers  cast  themselves 
at  his  feet,  upon  occasion  of  the  following 
calamity.  Of  those  that  survived  the  battle  at 
Cannae,  some  had  escaped  by  flight,  and  some 
were  taken  alive  by  the  enemy;  so  great  a 
multitude,  that  it  was  thought  there  were  not 
remaining  Romans  enough  to  defend  the 
walls  of  the  city.  And  yet  the  magnanimity 
and  constancy  of  the  city  was  such  that  it 
would  not  redeem  the  captives  from  Hanni¬ 
bal,  though  it  might  have  done  so  for  a  small 
ransom;  a  decree  of  the  senate  forbade  it,  and 
chose  rather  to  leave  them  to  be  killed  by  the 
enemy,  or  sold  out  of  Italy;  and  commanded 
that  all  who  had  saved  themselves  by  flight 
should  be  transported  into  Sicily,  and  not  per¬ 
mitted  to  return  into  Italy,  until  the  war  with 
Hannibal  should  be  ended. 

These,  therefore,  when  Marcellus  was  ar¬ 
rived  in  Sicily,  addressed  themselves  to  him  in 
great  numbers;  and  casting  themselves  at  his 
feet,  with  much  lamentation  and  tears  hum¬ 
bly  besought  him  to  admit  them  to  honour¬ 
able  service;  and  promised  to  make  it  appear 
by  their  future  fidelity  and  exertions  that  that 
defeat  had  been  received  rather  by  misfortune 
than  by  cowardice. 

Marcellus,  pitying  them,  petitioned  the  sen¬ 
ate  by  letters  that  he  might  have  leave  at  all 
times  to  recruit  his  legions  out  of  them.  After 
much  debate  about  the  thing,  the  senate  de¬ 
creed  they  were  of  opinion  that  the  common¬ 
wealth  did  not  require  the  service  of  coward¬ 
ly  soldiers;  if  Marcellus  perhaps  thought  oth¬ 
erwise,  he  might  make  use  of  them,  provided 
no  one  of  them  be  honoured  on  any  occasion 
with  a  crown  or  military  gift,  as  a  reward  of 
his  virtue  or  courage.  This  decree  stung  Mar¬ 
cellus;  and  on  his  return  to  Rome,  after  the 
Sicilian  war  was  ended,  he  upbraided  the  sen¬ 
ate  that  they  had  denied  to  him,  who  had  so 


252 

highly  deserved  of  the  republic,  liberty  to  re¬ 
lieve  so  great  a  number  of  citizens  in  great 
calamity. 

At  this  time  Marcellus,  first  incensed  by  in¬ 
juries  done  him  by  Hippocrates,  commander 
of  the  Syracusans  (who,  to  give  proof  of  his 
good  affection  to  the  Carthaginians,  and  to 
acquire  the  tyranny  to  himself,  had  killed  a 
number  of  Romans  at  Leontini),  besieged 
and  took  by  force  the  city  of  Leontini;  yet 
violated  none  of  the  townsmen;  only  desert¬ 
ers,  as  many  as  he  took,  he  subjected  to  the 
punishment  of  the  rods  and  axe.  But  Hip¬ 
pocrates,  sending  a  report  to  Syracuse  that 
Marcellus  had  put  all  the  adult  population  to 
the  sword,  and  then  coming  upon  the  Syra¬ 
cusans,  who  had  risen  in  tumult  upon  that 
false  report,  made  himself  master  of  the  city. 

Upon  this  Marcellus  moved  with  his  whole 
army  to  Syracuse,  and  encamping  near  the 
wall,  sent  ambassadors  into  the  city  to  relate 
to  the  Syracusans  the  truth  of  what  had  been 
done  in  Leontini.  When  these  could  not  pre¬ 
vail  by  treaty,  the  whole  power  being  now  in 
the  hands  of  Hippocrates,  he  proceeded  to  at¬ 
tack  the  city  both  by  land  and  by  sea.  The 
land  forces  were  conducted  by  Appius:  Mar¬ 
cellus,  with  sixty  galleys,  each  with  five  rows 
of  oars,  furnished  with  all  sorts  of  arms  and 
missiles,  and  a  huge  bridge  of  planks  laid 
upon  eight  ships  chained  together,  upon 
which  was  carried  the  engine  to  cast  stones 
and  darts,  assaulted  the  walls,  relying  on  the 
abundance  and  magnificence  of  his  prepara¬ 
tions,  and  on  his  own  previous  glory;  all 
which,  however,  were,  it  would  seem,  but 
trifles  for  Archimedes  and  his  machines. 

These  machines  he  had  designed  and  con¬ 
trived,  not  as  matters  of  any  importance,  but 
as  mere  amusements  in  geometry;  in  compli¬ 
ance  with  King  Hiero’s  desire  and  request, 
some  little  time  before,  that  he  should  reduce 
to  practice  some  part  of  his  admirable  specu¬ 
lation  in  science,  and  by  accommodating  the 
theoretic  truth  to  sensation  and  ordinary  use, 
bring  it  more  within  the  appreciation  of  the 
people  in  general. 

Eudoxus  and  Archytas  had  been  the  first 
originators  of  this  far-famed  and  highly-prized 
art  of  mechanics,  which  they  employed  as  an 
elegant  illustration  of  geometrical  truths,  and 
as  means  of  sustaining  experimentally,  to  the 
satisfaction  of  the  senses,  conclusions  too  in¬ 
tricate  for  proof  by  words  and  diagrams.  As, 
for  example,  to  solve  the  problem,  so  often 
required  in  constructing  geometrical  figures, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

given  the  two  extremes,  to  find  the  two  mean 
lines  of  a  proportion,  both  these  mathemati¬ 
cians  had  recourse  to  the  aid  of  instruments, 
adapting  to  their  purpose  certain  curves  and 
sections  of  lines. 

But  because  of  Plato’s  indignation  at  it,  and 
his  invectives  against  it  as  the  mere  corrup¬ 
tion  and  annihilation  of  the  one  good  of 
geometry,  which  was  thus  shamefully  turning 
its  back  upon  the  unembodied  objects  of  pure 
intelligence  to  recur  to  sensation,  and  to  ask 
help  (not  to  be  obtained  without  base  super¬ 
visions  and  depravation)  from  matter;  so  it 
was  that  mechanics  came  to  be  separated 
from  geometry,  and,  repudiated  and  neglected 
by  philosophers,  took  its  place  as  a  military 
art. 

Archimedes,  however,  in  writing  to  King 
Hiero,  whose  friend  and  near  relation  he  was, 
had  stated  that  given  the  force,  any  given 
weight  might  be  moved,  and  even  boasted, 
we  are  told,  relying  on  the  strength  of  demon¬ 
stration,  that  if  there  were  another  earth,  by 
going  into  it  he  could  remove  this.  Hiero  be¬ 
ing  struck  with  amazement  at  this,  and  en¬ 
treating  him  to  make  good  this  problem  by  ac¬ 
tual  experiment,  and  show  some  great  weight 
moved  by  a  small  engine,  he  fixed  accord¬ 
ingly  upon  a  ship  of  burden  out  of  the  king’s 
arsenal,  which  could  not  be  drawn  out  of  the 
dock  without  great  labour  and  many  men; 
and,  loading  her  with  many  passengers  and  a 
full  freight,  sitting  himself  the  while  far  off, 
with  no  great  endeavour,  but  only  holding 
the  head  of  the  pulley  in  his  hand  and  draw¬ 
ing  the  cords  by  degrees,  he  drew  the  ship  in 
a  straight  line,  as  smoothly  and  evenly  as  if 
she  had  been  in  the  sea.  The  king,  astonished 
at  this,  and  convinced  of  the  power  of  the  art, 
prevailed  upon  Archimedes  to  make  him  en¬ 
gines  accommodated  to  all  the  purposes,  of¬ 
fensive  and  defensive,  of  a  siege.  These  the 
king  himself  never  made  use  of,  because  he 
spent  almost  all  his  life  in  a  profound  quiet 
and  the  highest  affluence.  But  the  apparatus 
was,  in  most  opportune  time,  ready  at  hand 
for  the  Syracusans,  and  with  it  also  the  engi¬ 
neer  himself. 

When,  therefore,  the  Romans  assaulted  the 
walls  in  two  places  at  once,  fear  and  conster¬ 
nation  stupefied  the  Syracusans,  believing  that 
nothing  was  able  to  resist  that  violence  and 
those  forces.  But  when  Archimedes  began  to 
ply  his  engines,  he  at  once  shot  against  the 
land  forces  all  sorts  of  missile  weapons,  and 
immense  masses  of  stone  that  came  down 


MARCELLUS 

with  incredible  noise  and  violence;  against 
which  no  man  could  stand,  for  they  knocked 
down  those  upon  whom  they  fell  in  heaps, 
breaking  all  their  ranks  and  files. 

In  the  meantime  huge  poles  thrust  out  from 
the  walls  over  the  ships  sunk  some  by  the 
great  weights  which  they  let  down  from  on 
high  upon  them;  others  they  lifted  up  into 
the  air  by  an  iron  hand  or  beak  like  a  crane’s 
beak,  and,  when  they  had  drawn  them  up  by 
the  prow,  and  set  them  on  end  upon  the  poop, 
they  plunged  them  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea; 
or  else  the  ships,  drawn  by  engines  within, 
and  whirled  about,  were  dashed  against  steep 
rocks  that  stood  jutting  out  under  the  walls, 
with  great  destruction  of  the  soldiers  that 
were  aboard  them. 

A  ship  was  frequently  lifted  up  to  a  great 
height  in  the  air  (a  dreadful  thing  to  be¬ 
hold),  and  was  rolled  to  and  fro,  and  kept 
swinging,  until  the  mariners  were  all  thrown 
out,  when  at  length  it  was  dashed  against  the 
rocks,  or  let  fall.  At  the  engine  that  Marcellus 
brought  upon  the  bridge  of  ships,  which  was 
called  Sambuca,  from  some  resemblance  it  had 
to  an  instrument  of  music,  while  it  was  as  yet 
approaching  the  wall,  there  was  discharged  a 
piece  of  a  rock  of  ten  talents  weight,  then  a 
second  and  a  third,  which,  striking  upon  it 
with  immense  force  and  a  noise  like  thunder, 
broke  all  its  foundation  to  pieces,  shook  out 
all  its  fastenings,  and  completely  dislodged 
it  from  the  bridge.  So  Marcellus,  doubtful 
what  counsel  to  pursue,  drew  off  his  ships  to 
a  safer  distance,  and  sounded  a  retreat  to  his 
forces  on  land. 

They  then  took  a  resolution  of  coming  up 
under  the  walls,  if  it  were  possible,  in  the 
night;  thinking  that  as  Archimedes  used  ropes 
stretched  at  length  in  playing  his  engines,  the 
soldiers  would  now  be  under  the  shot,  and  the 
darts  would,  for  want  of  sufficient  distance  to 
throw  them,  fly  over  their  heads  without  ef¬ 
fect. 

But  he,  it  appeared,  had  long  before  framed 
for  such  occasions  engines  accommodated  to 
any  distance,  and  shorter  weapons;  and  had 
made  numerous  small  openings  in  the  walls, 
through  which,  with  engines  of  a  shorter 
range,  unexpected  blows  were  inflicted  on  the 
assailants.  Thus,  when  they  who  thought  to 
deceive  the  defenders  came  close  up  to  the 
walls,  instantly  a  shower  of  darts  and  other 
missile  weapons  was  again  cast  upon  them. 
And  when  stones  came  tumbling  down  per¬ 
pendicularly  upon  their  heads,  and,  as  it  were, 


253 

the  whole  wall  shot  out  arrows  at  them,  they 
retired. 

And  now,  again,  as  they  were  going  off, 
arrows  and  darts  of  a  longer  range  inflicted 
a  great  slaughter  among  them,  and  their  ships 
were  driven  one  against  another;  while  they 
themselves  were  not  able  to  retaliate  in  any 
way.  For  Archimedes  had  provided  and  fixed 
most  of  his  engines  immediately  under  the 
wall;  whence  the  Romans,  seeing  that  indefi¬ 
nite  mischief  overwhelmed  them  from  no  visi¬ 
ble  means,  began  to  think  they  were  fighting 
with  the  gods. 

Yet  Marcellus  escaped  unhurt,  and  deriding 
his  own  artificers  and  engineers,  “What,”  said 
he,  “must  we  give  up  fighting  with  this  geo¬ 
metrical  Briareus,  who  plays  pitch-and-toss 
with  our  ships,  and,  with  the  multitude  of 
darts  which  he  showers  at  a  single  moment 
upon  us,  really  outdoes  the  hundred-handed 
giants  of  mythology?”  And,  doubtless,  the  rest 
of  the  Syracusans  were  but  the  body  of  Archi¬ 
medes’s  designs,  one  soul  moving  and  govern¬ 
ing  all;  for,  laying  aside  all  other  arms,  with 
this  alone  they  infested  the  Romans  and  pro¬ 
tected  themselves.  In  fine,  when  such  terror 
had  seized  upon  the  Romans,  that,  if  they  did 
but  see  a  little  rope  or  a  piece  of  wood  from 
the  wall,  instantly  crying  out,  that  there  it 
was  again,  Archimedes  was  about  to  let  fly 
some  engine  at  them,  they  turned  their  backs 
and  fled,  Marcellus  desisted  from  conflicts  and 
assaults,  putting  all  his  hope  in  a  long  siege* 

Yet  Archimedes  possessed  so  high  a  spirit, 
so  profound  a  soul,  and  such  treasures  of 
scientific  knowledge,  that  though  these  inven¬ 
tions  had  now  obtained  him  the  renown  of 
more  than  human  sagacity,  he  yet  would  not 
deign  to  leave  behind  him  any  commentary 
or  writing  on  such  subjects;  but,  repudiating 
as  sordid  and  ignoble  the  whole  trade  of  engi¬ 
neering,  and  every  sort  of  art  that  lends  it¬ 
self  to  mere  use  and  profit,  he  placed  his  whole 
affection  and  ambition  in  those  purer  specu¬ 
lations  where  there  can  be  no  reference  to  the 
vulgar  needs  of  life:  studies,  the  superiority 
of  which  to  all  others  is  unquestioned,  and  in 
which  the  only  doubt  can  be  whether  the 
beauty  and  grandeur  of  the  subjects  exam¬ 
ined,  or  the  precision  and  cogency  of  the 
methods  and  means  of  proof,  most  deserve 
our  admiration.  It  is  not  possible  to  find  in  all 
geometry  more  difficult  and  intricate  ques¬ 
tions,  or  more  simple  and  lucid  explanations. 

Some  ascribe  this  to  his  natural  genius; 
while  others  think  that  incredible  effort  and 


254 

toil  produced  these,  to  all  appearances,  easy 
and  unlaboured  results.  No  amount  of  in¬ 
vestigation  of  yours  would  succeed  in  attain¬ 
ing  the  proof,  and  yet,  once  seen,  you  imme¬ 
diately  believe  you  would  have  discovered  it; 
by  so  smooth  and  so  rapid  a  path  he  leads 
you  to  the  conclusion  required.  And  thus  it 
ceases  to  be  incredible  that  (as  is  commonly 
told  of  him)  the  charm  of  his  familiar  and 
domestic  Siren  made  him  forget  his  food  and 
neglect  his  person,  to  that  degree  that  when 
he  was  occasionally  carried  by  absolute  vio¬ 
lence  to  bathe  or  have  his  body  anointed,  he 
used  to  trace  geometrical  figures  in  the  ashes 
of  the  fire,  and  diagrams  in  the  oil  on  his 
body,  being  in  a  state  of  entire  preoccupa¬ 
tion,  and,  in  the  truest  sense,  divine  possession 
with  his  love  and  delight  in  science.  His  dis¬ 
coveries  were  numerous  and  admirable;  but 
he  is  said  to  have  requested  his  friends  and 
relations  that,  when  he  was  dead,  they  would 
place  over  his  tomb  a  sphere  containing  a  cyl¬ 
inder,  inscribing  it  with  the  ratio  which  the 
containing  solid  bears  to  the  contained.  Such 
was  Archimedes,  who  now  showed  himself, 
and  so  far  as  lay  in  him  the  city  also,  invin¬ 
cible. 

While  the  siege  continued,  Marcellus  took 
Megara,  one  of  the  earliest  founded  of  the 
Greek  cities  in  Sicily,  and  capturing  also  the 
camp  of  Hippocrates  at  Acilae,  killed  above 
eight  thousand  men,  having  attacked  them 
whilst  they  were  engaged  in  forming  their 
fortifications.  He  overran  a  great  part  of  Sic¬ 
ily;  gained  over  many  towns  from  the  Car¬ 
thaginians,  and  overcame  all  that  dared  to 
encounter  him. 

As  the  siege  went  on,  one  Damippus,  a 
Lacedaemonian,  putting  to  sea  in  a  ship  from 
Syracuse,  was  taken.  When  the  Syracusans 
much  desired  to  redeem  this  man,  and  there 
were  many  meetings  and  treaties  about  the 
matter  betwixt  them  and  Marcellus,  he  had 
opportunity  to  notice  a  tower  into  which  a 
body  of  men  might  be  secretly  introduced,  as 
the  wall  near  to  it  was  not  difficult  to  sur¬ 
mount,  and  it  was  itself  carelessly  guarded. 
Coming  often  thither,  and  entertaining  con¬ 
ferences  about  the  release  of  Damippus,  he 
had  pretty  well  calculated  the  height  of  the 
tower,  and  got  ladders  prepared.  The  Syra¬ 
cusans  celebrated  a  feast  to  Diana;  this  junc¬ 
ture  of  time,  when  they  were  given  up  en¬ 
tirely  to  wine  and  sport,  Marcellus  laid  hold 
of,  and  before  the  citizens  perceived  it,  not 
only  possessed  himself  of  the  tower,  but,  be- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

fore  the  break  of  day,  filled  the  wall  around 
with  soldiers,  and  made  his  way  into  the  Hex- 
apylum. 

The  Syracusans  now  beginning  to  stir,  and 
to  be  alarmed  at  the  tumult,  he  ordered  the 
trumpets  everywhere  to  sound,  and  thus  fright¬ 
ened  them  all  into  flight,  as  if  all  parts  of  the 
city  were  already  won,  though  the  most  forti¬ 
fied,  and  the  fairest,  and  most  ample  quarter 
was  still  ungained.  It  is  called  Acradina,  and 
was  divided  by  a  wall  from  the  outer  city,  one 
part  of  which  they  call  Neapolis,  the  other 
Tycha.  Possessing  himself  of  these,  Marcellus, 
about  break  of  day,  entered  through  the  Hex- 
apylum,  all  his  officers  congratulating  him. 

But  looking  down  from  the  higher  places 
upon  the  beautiful  and  spacious  city  below, 
he  is  said  to  have  wept  much,  commiserating 
the  calamity  that  hung  over  it,  when  his 
thoughts  represented  to  him  how  dismal  and 
foul  the  face  of  the  city  would  be  in  a  few 
hours,  when  plundered  and  sacked  by  the  sol¬ 
diers.  For  among  the  officers  of  his  army  there 
was  not  one  man  that  durst  deny  the  plunder 
of  the  city  to  the  soldiers’  demands;  nay,  many 
were  instant  that  it  should  be  set  on  fire  and 
laid  level  to  the  ground;  but  this  Marcellus 
would  not  listen  to. 

Yet  he  granted,  but  with  great  unwilling¬ 
ness  and  reluctance,  that  the  money  and  slaves 
should  be  made  prey;  giving  orders,  at  the 
same  time,  that  none  should  violate  any  free 
person,  nor  kill,  misuse,  or  make  a  slave  of 
any  of  the  Syracusans.  Though  he  had  used 
this  moderation,  he  still  esteemed  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  that  city  to  be  pitiable,  and,  even 
amidst  the  congratulations  and  joy,  showed 
his  strong  feelings  of  sympathy  and  commis¬ 
eration  at  seeing  all  the  riches  accumulated 
during  a  long  felicity  now  dissipated  in  an 
hour.  For  it  is  related  that  no  less  prey  and 
plunder  was  taken  here  than  afterward  in 
Carthage.  For  not  long  after  they  obtained 
also  the  plunder  of  the  other  parts  of  the  city, 
which  were  taken  by  treachery;  leaving  noth¬ 
ing  untouched  but  the  king’s  money,  which 
was  brought  into  the  public  treasury. 

But  nothing  afflicted  Marcellus  so  much  as 
the  death  of  Archimedes,  who  was  then,  as 
fate  would  have  it,  intent  upon  working  out 
some  problem  by  a  diagram,  and  having  fixed 
his  mind  alike  and  his  eyes  upon  the  subject 
of  his  speculation,  he  never  noticed  the  incur¬ 
sion  of  the  Romans,  nor  that  the  city  was 
taken.  In  this  transport  of  study  and  contem¬ 
plation,  a  soldier,  unexpectedly  coming  up  to 


MARCELLUS 

him,  commanded  him  to  follow  to  Marcel- 
lus;  which  he  declining  to  do  before  he  had 
worked  out  his  problem  to  a  demonstration, 
the  soldier,  enraged,  drew  his  sword  and  ran 
him  through.  Others  write  that  a  Roman  sol¬ 
dier,  running  upon  him  with  a  drawn  sword, 
offered  to  kill  him;  and  that  Archimedes, 
looking  back,  earnestly  besought  him  to  hold 
his  hand  a  little  while,  that  he  might  not 
leave  what  he  was  then  at  work  upon  incon¬ 
clusive  and  imperfect;  but  the  soldier,  noth¬ 
ing  moved  by  his  entreaty,  instantly  killed 
him.  Others  again  relate  that,  as  Archimedes 
was  carrying  to  Marcellus  mathematical  in¬ 
struments,  dials,  spheres,  and  angles,  by  which 
the  magnitude  of  the  sun  might  be  measured 
to  the  sight,  some  soldiers  seeing  him,  and 
thinking  that  he  carried  gold  in  a  vessel,  slew 
him.  Certain  it  is  that  his  death  was  very 
afflicting  to  Marcellus;  and  that  Marcellus 
ever  after  regarded  him  that  killed  him  as  a 
murderer;  and  that  he  sought  for  his  kindred 
and  honoured  them  with  signal  favours. 

Indeed,  foreign  nations  had  held  the  Ro¬ 
mans  to  be  excellent  soldiers  and  formidable 
in  battle;  but  they  had  hitherto  given  no 
memorable  example  of  gentleness,  or  human¬ 
ity,  or  civil  virtue;  and  Marcellus  seems  first 
to  have  shown  to  the  Greeks  that  his  coun¬ 
trymen  were  most  illustrious  for  their  jus¬ 
tice.  For  such  was  his  moderation  to  all 
with  whom  he  had  anything  to  do,  and 
such  his  benignity  also  to  many  cities  and  pri¬ 
vate  men,  that,  if  anything  hard  or  severe 
was  decreed  concerning  the  people  of  Enna, 
Megara,  or  Syracuse,  the  blame  was  thought 
to  belong  rather  to  those  upon  whom  the 
storm  fell,  than  to  those  who  brought  it  upon 
them. 

One  example  of  many  I  will  commemorate. 
In  Sicily  there  is  a  town  called  Engyum,  not 
indeed  great,  but  very  ancient  and  ennobled 
by  the  presence  of  the  goddesses,  called  the 
Mothers.  The  temple,  they  say,  was  built  by 
the  Cretans;  and  they  show  some  spears  and 
brazen  helmets,  inscribed  with  the  names  of 
Meriones,  and  (with  the  same  spelling  as  in 
Latin)  of  Ulysses,  who  consecrated  them  to 
the  goddesses. 

This  city  highly  favouring  the  party  of  the 
Carthaginians,  Nicias,  the  most  eminent  of 
the  citizens,  counselled  them  to  go  over  to  the 
Romans,  to  that  end  acting  freely  and  openly 
in  harangues  to  their  assemblies,  arguing  the 
imprudence  and  madness  of  the  opposite 
course.  They,  fearing  his  power  and  authority, 


255 

resolved  to  deliver  him  in  bonds  to  the  Car¬ 
thaginians. 

Nicias,  detecting  the  design,  and  seeing 
that  his  person  was  secretly  kept  in  watch, 
proceeded  to  speak  irreligiously  to  the  vulgar 
of  the  Mothers,  and  showed  many  signs  of 
disrespect,  as  if  he  denied  and  contemned  the 
received  opinion  of  the  presence  of  those  god¬ 
desses;  his  enemies  the  while  rejoicing  that 
he,  of  his  own  accord,  sought  the  destruction 
hanging  over  his  head. 

When  they  were  just  now  about  to  lay 
hands  upon  him,  as  assembly  was  held,  and 
here  Nicias,  making  a  speech  to  the  people 
concerning  some  affair  then  under  delibera¬ 
tion,  in  the  midst  of  his  address,  cast  himself 
upon  the  ground;  and  soon  after,  while  amaze¬ 
ment  (as  usually  happens  on  such  surprising 
occasions)  held  the  assembly  immovable,  rais¬ 
ing  and  turning  his  head  round,  he  began  in 
a  trembling  and  deep  tone,  but  by  degrees 
raised  and  sharpened  his  voice.  When  he  saw 
the  whole  theatre  struck  with  horror  and  si¬ 
lence,  throwing  off  his  mantle  and  rending 
his  tunic  he  leaps  up  half  naked,  and  runs 
towards  the  door,  crying  out  aloud  that  he 
was  driven  by  the  wrath  of  the  Mothers. 
When  no  man  durst,  out  of  religious  fear, 
lay  hands  upon  him  or  stop  him,  but  all  gave 
way  before  him,  he  ran  out  of  the  gate,  not 
omitting  any  shriek  or  gesture  of  men  pos¬ 
sessed  and  mad. 

His  wife,  conscious  of  his  counterfeiting, 
and  privy  to  his  design,  taking  her  children 
with  her,  first  cast  herself  as  a  suppliant  be¬ 
fore  the  temple  of  the  goddesses;  then,  pre¬ 
tending  to  seek  her  wandering  husband,  no 
man  hindering  her,  went  out  of  the  town  in 
safety;  and  by  this  means  they  all  escaped  to 
Marcellus  at  Syracuse.  After  many  other  such 
affronts  offered  him  by  the  men  of  Engyum, 
Marcellus,  having  taken  them  all  prisoners 
and  cast  them  into  bonds,  was  preparing  to 
inflict  upon  them  the  last  punishment,  when 
Nicias,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  addressed  him¬ 
self  to  him.  In  fine,  casting  himself  at  Mar- 
cellus’s  feet,  and  deprecating  for  his  citizens, 
he  begged  most  earnestly  their  lives,  chiefly 
those  of  his  enemies.  Marcellus,  relenting,  set 
them  all  at  liberty,  and  rewarded  Nicias  with 
ample  lands  and  rich  presents.  This  history  is 
recorded  by  Posidonius,  the  philosopher. 

Marcellus,  at  length  recalled  by  the  people 
of  Rome  to  the  immediate  war  at  home  to 
illustrate  his  triumph,  and  adorn  the  city,  car¬ 
ried  away  with  him  a  great  number  of  the 


256 

most  beautiful  ornaments  of  Syracuse.  For,  be¬ 
fore  that,  Rome  neither  had,  nor  had  seen,  any 
of  those  fine  and  exquisite  rarities;  nor  was  any 
pleasure  taken  in  graceful  and  elegant  pieces 
of  workmanship.  Stuffed  with  barbarous  arms 
and  spoils  stained  with  blood,  and  everywhere 
crowned  with  triumphal  memorials  and  tro¬ 
phies,  she  was  no  pleasant  or  delightful  spec¬ 
tacle  for  the  eyes  of  peaceful  or  refined  specta¬ 
tors;  but,  as  Epaminondas  named  the  fields  of 
Bceotia  the  stage  of  Mars;  and  Xenophon 
called  Ephesus  the  workhouse  of  war;  so,  in 
my  judgment,  may  you  call  Rome,  at  that  time 
(to  use  the  words  of  Pindar),  “the  precinct  of 
the  peaceless  Mars.” 

Whence  Marcellus  was  more  popular  with 
the  people  in  general,  because  he  had  adorned 
the  city  with  beautiful  objects  that  had  all  the 
charms  of  Grecian  grace  and  symmetry;  but 
Fabius  Maximus,  who  neither  touched  nor 
brought  away  anything  of  this  kind  from  Ta- 
rentum,  when  he  had  taken  it,  was  more  ap¬ 
proved  of  by  the  elder  men.  He  carried  off  the 
money  and  valuables,  but  forbade  the  statues 
to  be  moved,  adding,  as  it  is  commonly  related, 
“Let  us  leave  to  the  Tarentines  these  offended 
gods.” 

They  blamed  Marcellus,  first  for  placing  the 
city  in  an  invidious  position,  as  it  seemed  now 
to  celebrate  victories  and  lead  processions  of 
triumph,  not  only  over  men,  but  also  over  the 
gods  as  captives;  then,  that  he  had  diverted  to 
idleness,  and  vain  talk  about  curious  arts  and 
artificers,  the  common  people,  which,  bred  up 
in  wars  and  agriculture,  had  never  tasted  of 
luxury  and  sloth,  and,  as  Euripides  said  of 
Hercules,  had  been — 

Rude,  unrefined,  only  for  great  things  good, 
so  that  now  they  misspent  much  of  their  time 
in  examining  and  criticising  trifles.  And  yet, 
notwithstanding  this  reprimand,  Marcellus 
made  it  his  glory  to  the  Greeks  themselves, 
that  he  had  taught  his  ignorant  countrymen 
to  esteem  and  admire  the  elegant  and  won¬ 
derful  productions  of  Greece. 

But  when  the  envious  opposed  his  being 
brought  triumphant  into  the  city,  because 
there  were  some  relics  of  the  war  in  Sicily, 
and  a  third  triumph  would  be  looked  upon 
with  jealousy,  he  gave  way.  He  triumphed 
upon  the  Alban  mount,  and  thence  entered 
the  city  in  ovation,  as  it  is  called  in  Latin,  in 
Greek  eua;  but  in  this  ovation  he  was  neither 
carried  in  a  chariot,  nor  crowned  with  laurel, 
nor  ushered  by  trumpets  sounding;  but  went 
afoot  with  shoes  on,  many  flutes  or  pipes 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

sounding  in  concert,  while  he  passed  along, 
wearing  a  garland  of  myrtle,  in  a  peaceable 
aspect,  exciting  rather  love  and  respect  than 
fear. 

Whence  I  am,  by  conjecture,  led  to  think 
that,  originally,  the  difference  observed  be¬ 
twixt  ovation  and  triumph  did  not  depend 
upon  the  greatness  of  the  achievements,  but 
the  manner  of  performing  them.  For  they 
who,  having  fought  a  set  battle,  and  slain  the 
enemy,  returned  victors,  led  that  martial,  ter¬ 
rible  triumph,  and,  as  the  ordinary  custom 
then  was  in  lustrating  the  army,  adorned  the 
arms  and  the  soldiers  with  a  great  deal  of 
laurel.  But  they  who  without  force,  by  col¬ 
loquy,  persuasion,  and  reasoning,  had  done 
the  business, — to  these  captains  custom  gave 
the  honour  of  the  unmilitary  and  festive  ova¬ 
tion.  For  the  pipe  is  the  badge  of  peace,  and 
myrtle  the  plant  of  Venus,  who  more  than 
the  rest  of  the  gods  and  goddesses  abhors 
force  and  war. 

It  is  called  ovation,  not  as  most  think,  from 
the  Greek  euasmus,  because  they  act  it  with 
shouting  and  cries  of  eua:  for  so  do  they  also 
the  proper  triumphs.  The  Greeks  have  wrested 
the  word  to  their  own  language,  thinking  that 
this  honour,  also,  must  have  some  connection 
with  Bacchus,  who  in  Greek  has  the  titles  of 
Euius  and  Thriambus.  But  the  thing  is  other¬ 
wise.  For  it  was  the  custom  for  commanders, 
in  their  triumph,  to  immolate  an  ox,  but  in 
their  ovation,  a  sheep:  hence  they  named  it 
ovation,  from  the  Latin  ovis . 

It  is  worth  observing,  how  exactly  opposite 
the  sacrifices  appointed  by  the  Spartan  legis¬ 
lator  are  to  those  of  the  Romans.  For  at  Lace¬ 
daemon,  a  captain,  who  had  performed  the 
work  he  had  undertook  by  cunning,  or  cour¬ 
teous  treaty,  on  laying  down  his  command, 
immolated  an  ox;  he  that  did  the  business  by 
battle,  offered  a  cock;  the  Lacedaemonians, 
though  most  war-like,  thinking  an  exploit 
performed  by  reason  and  wisdom  to  be  more 
excellent  and  more  congruous  to  man,  than 
one  effected  by  mere  force  and  courage. 
Which  of  the  two  is  to  be  preferred  I  leave  to 
the  determination  of  others. 

Marcellus  being  the  fourth  time  consul,  his 
enemies  suborned  the  Syracusans  to  come  to 
Rome  to  accuse  him,  and  to  complain  that 
they  had  suffered  indignities  and  wrongs,  con¬ 
trary  to  the  conditions  granted  them.  It  hap¬ 
pened  that  Marcellus  was  in  the  capitol  offer¬ 
ing  sacrifice  when  the  Syracusans  petitioned 
the  senate,  yet  sitting,  that  they  might  have 


MARCELLUS 

leave  to  accuse  him  and  present  their  griev¬ 
ances.  Marcellus’s  colleague,  eager  to  protect 
him  in  his  absence,  put  them  out  of  the  court. 

But  Marcellus  himself  came  as  soon  as  he 
heard  of  it.  And  first,  in  his  curule  chair  as 
consul,  he  referred  to  the  senate  the  cogni¬ 
zance  of  other  matters:  but  when  these  were 
transacted,  rising  from  his  seat,  he  passed  as 
a  private  man  into  the  place  where  the  ac¬ 
cused  were  wont  to  make  their  defence,  and 
gave  free  liberty  to  the  Syracusans  to  impeach 
him.  But  they,  struck  with  consternation  by 
his  majesty  and  confidence,  stood  astonished; 
and  the  power  of  his  presence  now,  in  his 
robe  of  state,  appeared  far  more  terrible  and 
severe  than  it  had  done  when  he  was  arrayed 
in  armour. 

Yet,  reanimated  at  length  by  Marcellus’s 
rivals,  they  began  their  impeachment,  and 
made  an  oration  in  which  pleas  of  justice  min¬ 
gled  with  lamentation  and  complaint;  the  sum 
of  which  was,  that  being  allies  and  friends  of 
the  people  of  Rome,  they  had,  notwithstand¬ 
ing,  suffered  things  which  other  commanders 
had  abstained  from  inflicting  upon  enemies. 

To  this  Marcellus  answered  that  they  had 
committed  many  acts  of  hostility  against  the 
people  of  Rome,  and  had  suffered  nothing  but 
what  enemies  conquered  and  captured  in  war 
cannot  possibly  be  protected  from  suffering; 
that  it  was  their  own  fault  they  had  been 
made  captives,  because  they  refused  to  give 
ear  to  his  frequent  attempts  to  persuade  them 
by  gentle  means;  neither  were  they  forced  in¬ 
to  war  by  the  power  of  tyrants,  but  had  rather 
chosen  the  tyrants  themselves  for  the  express 
object  that  they  might  make  war.  The  ora¬ 
tions  ended,  and  the  Syracusans,  according  to 
the  custom,  having  retired,  Marcellus  left  his 
colleague  to  ask  the  sentences,  and,  withdraw¬ 
ing  with  the  Syracusans,  stayed  expecting  at 
the  doors  of  the  senate-house;  not  in  the  least 
discomposed  in  spirit,  either  with  alarm  at  the 
accusation,  or  by  anger  against  the  Syra¬ 
cusans,  but  with  perfect  calmness  and  serenity 
attending  the  issue  of  the  cause. 

The  sentences  at  length  being  all  asked, 
and  a  decree  of  the  senate  made  in  vindica¬ 
tion  of  Marcellus,  the  Syracusans,  with  tears 
flowing  from  their  eyes,  cast  themselves  at  his 
knees,  beseeching  him  to  forgive  themselves 
there  present,  and  to  be  moved  by  the  misery 
of  the  rest  of  their  city,  which  would  ever  be 
mindful  of,  and  grateful  for,  his  benefits. 
Thus  Marcellus,  softened  by  their  tears  and 
distress,  was  not  only  reconciled  to  the  depu- 


257 

ties,  but  ever  afterwards  continued  to  find 
opportunity  of  doing  kindness  to  the  Syra¬ 
cusans.  The  liberty  which  he  had  restored 
to  them,  and  their  rights,  laws,  and  goods 
that  were  left,  the  senate  confirmed.  Upon 
which  account  the  Syracusans,  besides  other 
signal  honours,  made  a  law,  that  if  Marcellus 
should  at  any  time  come  into  Sicily,  or  any 
of  his  posterity,  the  Syracusans  should  wear 
garlands  and  offer  public  sacrifice  to  the  gods. 

After  this  he  moved  against  Hannibal.  And 
whereas  the  other  consuls  and  commanders, 
since  the  defeat  received  at  Cannae,  had  all 
made  use  of  the  same  policy  against  Hanni¬ 
bal,  namely,  to  decline  coming  to  a  battle  with 
him;  and  none  had  had  the  courage  to  en¬ 
counter  him  in  the  field  and  put  themselves 
to  the  decision  by  the  sword;  Marcellus  en¬ 
tered  upon  the  opposite  course,  thinking  that 
Italy  would  be  destroyed  by  the  very  delay  by 
which  they  looked  to  wear  out  Hannibal;  and 
that  Fabius,  who,  adhering  to  his  cautious 
policy,  waited  to  see  the  war  extinguished, 
while  Rome  itself  meantime  wasted  away 
(like  timid  physicians,  who,  dreading  to  ad¬ 
minister  remedies,  stay  waiting,  and  believe 
that  what  is  the  decay  of  the  patient’s  strength 
is  the  decline  of  the  disease),  was  not  taking 
a  right  course  to  heal  the  sickness  of  his  coun¬ 
ty- 

And  first,  the  great  cities  of  the  Samnites, 
which  had  revolted,  came  into  his  power;  in 
which  he  found  a  large  quantity  of  corn  and 
money,  and  three  thousand  of  Hannibal’s  sol¬ 
diers,  that  were  left  for  the  defence. 

After  this,  the  proconsul  Cnaeus  Fulvius 
with  eleven  tribunes  of  the  soldiers  being  slain 
in  Apulia,  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  army 
also  at  the  same  time  cut  off,  he  despatched 
letters  to  Rome,  and  bade  the  people  be  of 
good  courage,  for  that  he  was  now  upon  the 
march  against  Hannibal,  to  turn  his  triumph 
into  sadness.  On  these  letters  being  read,  Livy 
writes  that  the  people  were  not  only  not  en¬ 
couraged,  but  more  discouraged  than  before. 
For  danger,  they  thought,  was  but  the  greater 
in  proportion  as  Marcellus  was  of  more  value 
than  Fulvius. 

He,  as  he  had  written,  advancing  into  the 
territories  of  the  Lucanians,  came  up  to  him 
at  Numistro,  and,  the  enemy  keeping  himself 
upon  the  hills,  pitched  his  camp  in  a  level 
plain,  and  the  next  day  drew  forth  his  army 
in  order  for  fight.  Nor  did  Hannibal  refuse 
the  challenge.  They  fought  long  and  obsti¬ 
nately  on  both  sides,  victory  yet  seeming  unde- 


258 

cided,  when,  after  three  hours’  conflict,  night 
hardly  parted  them.  The  next  day,  as  soon  as 
the  sun  was  risen,  Marcellus  again  brought 
forth  his  troops,  and  ranged  them  among  the 
dead  bodies  of  the  slain,  challenging  Hannibal 
to  solve  the  question  by  another  trial.  When 
he  dislodged  and  drew  off,  Marcellus,  gather¬ 
ing  up  the  spoils  of  the  enemies,  and  burying 
the  bodies  of  his  slain  soldiers,  closely  followed 
him. 

And  though  Hannibal  often  used  strata¬ 
gems,  and  laid  ambushes  to  entrap  Marcellus, 
yet  he  never  could  circumvent  him.  By  skir¬ 
mishes,  meantime,  in  all  of  which  he  was 
superior,  Marcellus  gained  himself  such  high 
repute,  that,  when  the  time  of  the  Comitia 
at  Rome  was  near  at  hand,  the  senate  thought 
fit  rather  to  recall  the  other  consul  from  Sicily 
than  to  withdraw  Marcellus  from  his  conflict 
with  Hannibal;  and  on  his  arrival  they  bid 
him  name  Quintus  Fulvius  dictator.  For  the 
dictator  is  created  neither  by  the  people  nor 
by  the  senate,  but  the  consul  of  the  praetor, 
before  the  popular  assembly,  pronounces  him 
to  be  dictator  whom  he  himself  chooses.  Hence 
he  is  called  dictator,  dicere  meaning  to  name. 
Others  say  that  he  is  named  dictator  because 
his  word  is  a  law,  and  he  orders  what  he 
pleases,  without  submitting  it  to  the  vote.  For 
the  Romans  call  the  orders  of  magistrates 
Edicts. 

And  now  because  Marcellus’s  colleague, 
who  was  recalled  from  Sicily,  had  a  mind  to 
name  another  man  dictator,  and  would  not  be 
forced  to  change  his  opinion,  he  sailed  away 
by  night  back  to  Sicily.  So  the  common  people 
made  an  order  that  Quintus  Fulvius  should  be 
chosen  dictator,  and  the  senate,  by  an  express, 
commanded  Marcellus  to  nominate  him.  He 
obeying  proclaimed  him  dictator  according  to 
the  order  of  the  people;  but  the  office  of  pro- 
consul  was  continued  to  himself  for  a  year. 

And  having  arranged  with  Fabius  Maxi¬ 
mus  that,  while  he  besieged  Tarentum,  he 
himself  would,  by  following  Hannibal  and 
drawing  him  up  and  down,  detain  him  from 
coming  to  the  relief  of  the  Tarentines,  he 
overtook  him  at  Canusium;  and  as  Hannibal 
often  shifted  his  camp,  and  still  declined  the 
combat,  he  everywhere  sought  to  engage  him. 
At  last,  pressing  upon  him  while  encamping, 
by  light  skirmishes  he  provoked  him  to  a 
battle;  but  night  again  divided  them  in  the 
very  heat  of  the  conflict.  The  next  day  Mar¬ 
cellus  again  showed  himself  in  arms,  and 
brought  up  his  forces  in  array. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Hannibal,  in  extreme  grief,  called  his  Car¬ 
thaginians  together  to  an  harangue,  and  vehe¬ 
mently  prayed  them  to  fight  to-day  worthily 
of  all  their  former  successes;  “For  you  see,” 
said  he,  “how,  after  such  great  victories,  we 
have  not  liberty  to  respire,  nor  to  repose  our¬ 
selves,  though  victors;  unless  we  drive  this 
man  back.”  Then  the  two  armies,  joining 
battle,  fought  fiercely;  when  the  event  of  an 
untimely  movement  showed  Marcellus  to  have 
been  guilty  of  an  error.  The  right  wing  being 
hard  pressed  upon,  he  commanded  one  of  the 
legions  to  be  brought  up  to  the  front.  This 
change,  disturbing  the  array  and  posture  of 
the  legions,  gave  the  victory  to  the  enemies; 
and  there  fell  two  thousand  seven  hundred 
Romans. 

Marcellus,  after  he  had  retreated  into  his 
camp,  called  his  soldiers  together-  “I  see,”  said 
he,  “many  Roman  arms  and  bodies,  but  I  see 
not  so  much  as  one  Roman.”  To  their  en¬ 
treaties  for  his  pardon,  he  returned  a  refusal 
while  they  remained  beaten,  but  promised  to 
give  it  so  soon  as  they  should  overcome;  and 
he  resolved  to  bring  them  into  the  field  again 
the  next  day,  that  the  fame  of  their  victory 
might  arrive  at  Rome  before  that  of  their 
flight.  Dismissing  the  assembly,  he  command¬ 
ed  barley  instead  of  wheat  to  be  given  to  those 
companies  that  had  turned  their  backs.  These 
rebukes  were  so  bitter  to  the  soldiers,  that 
though  a  great  number  of  them  were  griev¬ 
ously  wounded,  yet  they  relate  there  was  not 
one  to  whom  the  general’s  oration  was  not 
more  painful  and  smarting  than  his  wounds. 

The  day  breaking,  a  scarlet  toga,  the  sign 
of  instant  battle,  was  displayed.  The  com¬ 
panies  marked  with  ignominy  begged  they 
might  be  posted  in  the  foremost  place,  and 
obtained  their  request.  Then  the  tribunes  bring 
forth  the  rest  of  the  forces,  and  draw  them 
up.  On  news  of  which,  “O  strange!”  said 
Hannibal,  “What  will  you  do  with  this  man, 
who  can  bear  neither  good  nor  bad  fortune? 
He  is  the  only  man  who  neither  suffers  us  to 
rest  when  he  is  victor,  nor  rests  himself  when 
he  is  overcome.  We  shall  have,  it  seems,  per¬ 
petually  to  fight  with  him;  as  in  good  suc¬ 
cess  his  confidence,  and  in  ill  success  his 
shame,  still  urges  him  to  some  further  enter¬ 
prise.”  Then  the  armies  engaged. 

When  the  fight  was  doubtful,  Hannibal 
commanded  the  elephants  to  be  brought  into 
the  first  battalion,  and  to  be  driven  upon  the 
van  of  the  Romans.  When  the  beasts,  tram¬ 
pling  upon  many,  soon  caused  disorder,  Fla- 


MARCELLUS 

vius,  a  tribune  of  soldiers,  snatching  an  ensign, 
met  them,  and  wounding  the  first  elephant 
with  the  spike  at  the  bottom  of  the  ensign 
staff,  put  him  to  flight.  The  beast  turned 
around  upon  the  next,  and  drove  back  both 
him  and  the  rest  that  followed.  Marcellus,  see¬ 
ing  this,  poured  in  his  horse  with  great  force 
upon  the  elephants,  and  upon  the  enemy  dis¬ 
ordered  by  their  flight.  The  horse,  making  a 
fierce  impression,  pursued  the  Carthaginians 
home  to  their  camp,  while  the  elephants, 
wounded  and  running  upon  their  own  party, 
caused  a  considerable  slaughter.  It  is  said  more 
than  eight  thousand  were  slain;  of  the  Roman 
army  three  thousand,  and  almost  all  wounded. 
This  gave  Hannibal  opportunity  to  retire  in 
the  silence  of  the  night,  and  to  remove  to 
greater  distance  from  Marcellus;  who  was  kept 
from  pursuing  by  the  number  of  his  wounded 
men,  and  removed,  by  gentle  marches,  into 
Campania,  and  spent  the  summer  at  Sinuessa, 
engaged  in  restoring  them. 

But  as  Hannibal,  having  disentangled  him¬ 
self  from  Marcellus,  ranged  with  his  army 
round  about  the  country  and  wasted  Italy 
free  from  all  fear,  at  Rome  Marcellus  was 
evil  spoken  of.  His  detractors  induced  Pub- 
licius  Bibulus,  tribune  of  the- people,  an  elo¬ 
quent  and  violent  man,  to  undertake  his  ac¬ 
cusation.  He,  by  assiduous  harangues,  pre¬ 
vailed  upon  the  people  to  withdraw  from 
Marcellus  the  command  of  the  army;  “Seeing 
that  Marcellus,”  said  he,  “after  brief  exercise 
in  the  war,  has  withdrawn  as  it  might  be  from 
the  wrestling  ground  to  the  warm  baths  to  re¬ 
fresh  himself.”  Marcellus,  on  hearing  this,  ap¬ 
pointed  lieutenants  over  his  camp  and  hasted 
to  Rome  to  refute  the  charges  against  him, 
and  there  found  ready  drawn  up  an  impeach¬ 
ment  consisting  of  these  calumnies. 

At  the  day  prefixed,  in  the  Flaminian  cir¬ 
cus,  into  which  place  the  people  had  assembled 
themselves,  Bibulus  rose  and  accused  him. 
Marcellus  himself  answered,  briefly  and  simply, 
but  the  first  and  most  approved  men  of  the 
city  spoke  largely  and  in  high  terms,  very 
freely  advising  the  people  not  to  show  them¬ 
selves  worse  judges  than  the  enemy,  condemn¬ 
ing  Marcellus  of  timidity,  from  whom  alone 
of  all  their  captains  the  enemy  fled,  and  as 
perpetually  endeavoured  to  avoid  fighting  with 
him  as  to  fight  with  others.  When  they  made 
an  end  of  speaking,  the  accuser’s  hope  to  ob¬ 
tain  judgment  so  far  deceived  him  that  Mar¬ 
cellus  was  not  only  absolved,  but  the  fifth 
time  created  consul. 


259 

No  sooner  had  he  entered  upon  this  con¬ 
sulate,  but  he  suppressed  a  great  commotion 
in  Etruria  that  had  proceeded  near  to  revolt, 
and  visited  and  quieted  the  cities.  Then,  when 
the  dedication  of  the  temple,  which  he  had 
vowed  out  of  his  Sicilian  spoils  to  Honour 
and  Virtue,  was  objected  to  by  the  priests,  be¬ 
cause  they  denied  that  one  temple  could  be 
lawfully  dedicated  to  two  gods,  he  began  to 
adjoin  another  to  it,  resenting  the  priests’  op¬ 
position,  and  almost  converting  the  thing  into 
an  omen. 

And,  truly,  many  other  prodigies  also  af¬ 
frighted  him;  some  temples  had  been  struck 
with  lightning,  and  in  Jupiter’s  temple  mice 
had  gnawed  the  gold;  it  was  reported,  also, 
that  an  ox  had  spoken,  and  that  a  boy  had 
been  born  with  a  head  like  an  elephant’s.  All 
which  prodigies  had  indeed  been  attended  to, 
but  due  reconciliation  had  not  been  obtained 
from  the  gods.  The  aruspices  therefore  de¬ 
tained  him  at  Rome,  glowing  and  burning 
with  desire  to  return  to  the  war.  For  no  man 
was  ever  inflamed  with  so  great  desire  of  any¬ 
thing  as  was  he  to  fight  a  battle  with  Hanni¬ 
bal.  It  was  the  subject  of  his  dreams  in  the 
night,  the  topic  of  all  his  consultations  with 
his  friends  and  familiars,  nor  did  he  present 
to  the  gods  any  other  wish,  but  that  he  might 
meet  Hannibal  in  the  field.  And  I  think  that 
he  would  most  gladly  have  set  upon  him, 
with  both  armies  environed  within  a  single 
camp.  Had  he  not  been  even  loaded  with  hon¬ 
ours,  and  had  he  not  given  proofs  in  many 
ways  of  his  maturity  of  judgment  and  of  pru¬ 
dence  equal  to  that  of  any  commander,  you 
might  have  said  that  he  was  agitated  by  a 
youthful  ambition,  above  what  became  a  man 
of  that  age,  for  he  had  passed  the  sixtieth 
year  of  his  life  when  he  began  his  fifth  con¬ 
sulship. 

The  sacrifices  having  been  offered,  and  all 
that  belonged  to  the  propitiation  of  the  gods 
performed,  according  to  the  prescription  of 
the  diviners,  he  at  last  with  his  colleague  went 
forth  to  carry  on  the  war.  He  tried  all  possible 
means  to  provoke  Hannibal,  who  at  that 
time  had  a  standing  camp  betwixt  Bantia  and 
Venusia.  Hannibal  declined  an  engagement, 
but  having  obtained  intelligence  that  some 
troops  were  on  their  way  to  the  town  of  Locri 
Epizephyrii,  placing  an  ambush  under  the 
little  hill  of  Petelia,  he  slew  two  thousand  five 
hundred  soldiers.  This  incensed  Marcellus  to 
revenge;  and  he  therefore  moved  nearer  Han¬ 
nibal. 


260 

Betwixt  the  two  camps  was  a  little  hill,  a 
tolerably  secure  post,  covered  with  wood;  it 
had  steep  descents  on  either  side,  and  there 
were  springs  of  water  seen  trickling  down. 
This  place  was  so  fit  and  advantageous  that  the 
Romans  wondered  that  Hannibal,  who  had 
come  thither  before  them,  had  not  seized  upon 
it,  but  had  left  it  to  the  enemies.  But  to  him 
the  place  had  seemed  commodious  indeed  for  a 
camp,  but  yet  more  commodious  for  an  ambus¬ 
cade;  and  to  that  use  he  chose  to  put  it. 

So  in  the  wood  and  the  hollows  he  hid  a 
number  of  archers  and  spearmen,  confident 
that  the  commodiousness  of  the  place  would 
allure  the  Romans.  Nor  was  he  deceived  in 
his  expectation.  For  presently  in  the  Roman 
camp  they  talked  and  disputed,  as  if  they  had 
all  been  captains,  how  the  place  ought  to  be 
seized,  and  what  great  advantage  they  should 
thereby  gain  upon  the  enemies,  chiefly  if  they 
transferred  their  camp  thither,  at  any  rate, 
if  they  strengthened  the  place  with  a  fort. 
Marcellus  resolved  to  go,  with  a  few  horse,  to 
view  it.  Having  called  a  diviner  he  proceeded 
to  sacrifice. 

In  the  first  victim  the  aruspex  showed  him 
the  liver  without  a  head;  in  the  second  the 
head  appeared  of  unusual  size,  and  all  the 
other  indications  highly  promising.  When 
these  seemed  sufficient  to  free  them  from  the 
dread  of  the  former,  the  diviners  declared 
that  they  were  all  the  more  terrified  by  the 
latter;  because  entrails  too  fair  and  promising 
when  they  appear  after  others  that  are  maim¬ 
ed  and  monstrous  render  the  change  doubtful 
and  suspicious.  But — 

Nor  fire  nor  brazen  wall  can  \eep  out  fate; 

as  Pindar  observes.  Marcellus,  therefore,  tak¬ 
ing  with  him  his  colleague  Crispinus,  and  his 
son,  a  tribune  of  soldiers,  with  two  hundred 
and  twenty  horse  at  most  (among  whom  there 
was  not  one  Roman,  but  all  were  Etruscans, 
except  forty  Fregellans,  of  whose  courage  and 
fidelity  he  had  on  all  occasions  received  full 
proof),  went  to  view  the  place. 

The  hill  was  covered  with  woods  all  over; 
on  the  top  of  it  sat  a  scout  concealed  from  the 
sight  of  the  enemy,  but  having  the  Roman 
camp  exposed  to  his  view.  Upon  signs  received 
from  him,  the  men  that  were  placed  in  am¬ 
bush  stirred  not  till  Marcellus  came  near;  and 
then  all  starting  up  in  an  instant,  and  encom¬ 
passing  him  from  all  sides,  attacked  him  with 
darts,  struck  about  and  wounded  the  backs 
of  those  that  fled,  and  pressed  upon  those  who 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

resisted.  These  were  the  forty  Fregellans.  For 
though  the  Etruscans  fled  in  the  very  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  fight,  the  Fregellans  formed  them¬ 
selves  into  a  ring,  bravely  defending  the  con¬ 
suls,  till  Crispinus,  struck  with  two  darts, 
turned  his  horse  to  fly  away;  and  Marcellus’s 
side  was  run  through  with  a  lance  with  a 
broad  head.  Then  the  Fregellans,  also,  the 
few  that  remained  alive,  leaving  the  fallen 
consul,  and  rescuing  young  Marcellus,  who 
also  was  wounded,  got  into  the  camp  by  flight. 

There  were  slain  not  much  above  forty;  five 
lictors  and  eighteen  horsemen  came  alive  into 
the  enemy’s  hands.  Crispinus  also  died  of  his 
wounds  a  few  days  after.  Such  a  disaster  as 
the  loss  of  both  consuls  in  a  single  engage¬ 
ment  was  one  that  had  never  before  befallen 
the  Romans. 

Hannibal,  little  valuing  the  other  events,  as 
soon  as  he  was  told  of  Marcellus’s  death,  im¬ 
mediately  hasted  to  the  hill.  Viewing  the 
body,  and  continuing  for  some  time  to  observe 
its  strength  and  shape,  he  allowed  not  a  word 
to  fall  from  him  expressive  of  the  least  pride 
or  arrogancy,  nor  did  he  show  in  his  coun¬ 
tenance  any  sign  of  gladness,  as  another  per¬ 
haps  would  have  done,  when  his  fierce  and 
troublesome  enemy  had  been  taken  away;  but 
amazed  by  so  sudden  and  unexpected  an  end, 
taking  off  nothing  but  his  ring,  gave  order 
to  have  the  body  properly  clad  and  adorned 
and  honourably  burned.  The  relics  put  into  a 
silver  urn,  with  a  crown  of  gold  to  cover  it, 
he  sent  back  to  his  son. 

But  some  of  the  Numidians,  setting  upon 
these  that  were  carrying  the  urn,  took  it  from 
them  by  force,  and  cast  away  the  bones;  which 
being  told  to  Hannibal,  “It  is  impossible,  it 
seems  then,”  he  said,  “to  do  anything  against 
the  will  of  God!”  He  punished  the  Numid¬ 
ians;  but  took  no  further  care  of  sending  or 
re-collecting  the  bones;  conceiving  that  Mar¬ 
cellus  so  fell,  and  so  lay  unburied,  by  a  certain 
fate. 

So  Cornelius  Nepos  and  Vaerius  Maximus 
have  left  upon  record:  but  Livy  and  Augustus 
Caesar  affirm  that  the  urn  was  brought  to  his 
son,  and  honoured  with  a  magnificent  funer¬ 
al.  Besides  the  monuments  raised  for  him  at 
Rome,  there  was  dedicated  to  his  memory  at 
Catana,  in  Sicily,  an  ample  wrestling  place 
called  after  him;  statues  and  pictures,  out  of 
those  he  took  from  Syracuse,  were  set  up  in 
Samothrace,  in  the  temple  of  the  gods,  named 
Cabiri,  and  in  that  of  Minerva  at  Lindus, 
where  also  there  was  a  statue  of  him,  says 


MARCELLUS  AND  PELOPIDAS 

Posidonius,  with  the  following  inscription: — 
This  was,  O  stranger,  once  Rome's  star  divine, 
Claudius  Marcellus  of  an  ancient  line; 

To  fight  her  wars  seven  times  her  consul  made, 
Low  in  the  dust  her  enemies  he  laid. 

The  writer  of  the  inscription  has  added  to 
Marcellus’s  five  consulates  his  two  proconsu¬ 
lates.  His  progeny  continued  in  high  honour 


261 

even  down  to  Marcellus,  son  of  Octavia,  sister 
of  Augustus,  whom  she  bore  to  her  husband 
Caius  Marcellus;  and  who  died  a  bridegroom, 
in  the  year  of  his  aedileship,  having  not  long 
before  married  Caesar’s  daughter.  His  mother, 
Octavia,  dedicated  the  library  to  his  honour 
and  memory,  and  Caesar  the  theatre  which 
bears  his  name. 


MARCELLUS  and  PELOPIDAS 
Compared 


These  are  the  memorable  things  I  have 
found  in  historians  concerning  Marcellus 
and  Pelopidas.  Betwixt  which  two  great  men, 
though  in  natural  character  and  manners  they 
nearly  resembled  each  other,  because  both 
were  valiant  and  diligent,  daring  and  high- 
spirited,  there  was  yet  some  diversity  in  the 
one  point,  that  Marcellus  in  many  cities  which 
he  reduced  under  his  power  committed  great 
slaughter;  but  Epaminondas  and  Pelopidas 
never  after  any  victory  put  men  to  death,  or 
reduced  citizens  to  slavery.  And  we  are  told, 
too,  that  the  Thebans  would  not,  had  these 
been  present,  have  taken  the  measures  they 
did  against  the  Orchomenians.  Marcellus’s  ex¬ 
ploits  against  the  Gauls  are  admirable  and 
ample;  when,  accompanied  by  a  few  horse, 
he  defeated  and  put  to  flight  a  vast  number  of 
horse  and  foot  together  (an  action  you  cannot 
easily  in  historians  find  to  have  been  done  by 
any  other  captain),  and  took  their  king  pris¬ 
oner.  To  which  honour  Pelopidas  aspired, 
but  did  not  attain;  he  was  killed  by  the  tyrant 
in  the  attempt. 

But  to  these  you  may  perhaps  oppose  those 
two  most  glorious  battles  at  Leuctra  and 
Tegyrae;  and  we  have  no  statement  of  any 
achievement  of  Marcellus,  by  stealth  or  am¬ 
buscade,  such  as  were  those  of  Pelopidas, 
when  he  returned  from  exile,  and  killed  the 
tyrants  at  Thebes;  which,  indeed,  may  claim 
to  be  called  the  first  in  rank  of  all  achieve¬ 
ments  ever  performed  by  secrecy  and  cunning. 
Hannibal  was,  indeed,  a  most  formidable  en¬ 
emy  for  the  Romans;  but  so  for  that  matter 
were  the  Lacedaemonians  for  the  Thebans. 
And  that  these  were,  in  the  fights  of  Leuctra 
and  Tegyrae,  beaten  and  put  to  flight  by  Pelo¬ 
pidas  is  confessed;  whereas  Polybius  writes 
that  Hannibal  was  never  so  much  as  once  van¬ 
quished  by  Marcellus,  but  remained  invincible 
in  all  encounters  till  Scipio  came. 

I  myself,  indeed,  have  followed  rather  Livy, 


Caesar,  Cornelius  Nepos,  and,  among  the 
Greeks,  king  Juba,  in  stating  that  the  troops 
of  Hannibal  were  in  some  encounters  routed 
and  put  to  flight  by  Marcellus;  but  certainly 
these  defeats  conduced  little  to  the  sum  of  the 
war.  It  would  seem  as  if  they  had  been  merely 
feints  of  some  sort  on  the  part  of  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians. 

What  was  indeed  truly  and  really  admir¬ 
able  was,  that  the  Romans,  after  the  defeat 
of  so  many  armies,  the  slaughter  of  so  many 
captains,  and,  in  fine,  the  confusion  of  almost 
the  whole  Roman  empire,  still  showed  a  cour¬ 
age  equal  to  their  losses,  and  were  as  willing 
as  their  enemies  to  engage  in  new  battles.  And 
Marcellus  was  the  one  man  who  overcame  the 
great  and  inveterate  fear  and  dread,  and  re¬ 
vived,  raised,  and  confirmed  the  spirits  of  the 
soldiers  to  that  degree  of  emulation  and  brav¬ 
ery  that  would  not  let  them  easily  yield  the 
victory,  but  made  them  contend  for  it  to  the 
last.  For  the  same  men,  whom  continual  de¬ 
feats  had  accustomed  to  think  themselves 
happy,  if  they  could  but  save  themselves  by 
running  from  Hannibal,  were  by  him  taught 
to  esteem  it  base  and  ignominious  to  return 
safe  but  unsuccessful;  to  be  ashamed  to  con¬ 
fess  that  they  had  yielded  one  step  in  the 
terrors  of  the  fight;  and  to  grieve  to  extremity 
if  they  were  not  victorious. 

In  short,  as  Pelopidas  was  never  overcome 
in  any  battle,  where  himself  was  present  and 
commanded  in  chief,  and  as  Marcellus  gained 
more  victories  than  any  of  his  contemporaries, 
truly  he  that  could  not  be  easily  overcome, 
considering  his  many  successes,  may  fairly  be 
compared  with  him  who  was  undefeated.  Mar¬ 
cellus  took  Syracuse;  whereas  Pelopidas  was 
frustrated  of  his  hope  of  capturing  Sparta. 

But  in  my  judgment  it  was  more  difficult 
to  advance  his  standard  even  to  the  walls  of 
Sparta,  and  to  be  the  first  of  mortals  that  ever 
passed  the  river  Eurotas  in  arms,  than  it  was 


262 

to  reduce  Sicily;  unless,  indeed,  we  say  that 
that  adventure  is  with  more  of  right  to  be 
attributed  to  Epaminondas,  as  was  also  the 
Leuctrian  battle;  whereas  Marcellus’s  renown, 
and  the  glory  of  his  brave  actions,  came  entire 
and  undiminished  to  him  alone.  For  he  alone 
took  Syracuse;  and  without  his  colleague’s 
help  defeated  the  Gauls,  and,  when  all  others 
declined,  alone,  without  one  companion,  ven¬ 
tured  to  engage  with  Hannibal;  and  changing 
the  aspect  of  the  war  first  showed  the  example 
of  daring  to  attack  him. 

I  cannot  commend  the  death  of  either  of 
these  great  men;  the  suddenness  and  strange¬ 
ness  of  their  ends  gives  me  a  feeling  rather 
of  pain  and  distress.  Hannibal  has  my  admira¬ 
tion  who,  in  so  many  severe  conflicts,  more 
than  can  be  reckoned  in  one  day,  never  re¬ 
ceived  so  much  as  one  wound.  I  honour  Chry- 
santes  also  (in  Xenophon’s  Cyropcedia ),  who, 
having  raised  his  sword  in  the  act  of  striking 
his  enemy,  so  soon  as  a  retreat  was  sounded, 
left  him,  and  retired  sedately  and  modestly. 
Yet  the  anger  which  provoked  Pelopidas  to 
pursue  revenge  in  the  heat  of  fight  may  ex¬ 
cuse  him. 

The  first  thing  for  a  captain  is  to  gain 
Safe  victory ;  the  next  to  be  with  honour  slain, 

as  Euripides  says.  For  then  he  cannot  be  said 
to  suffer  death;  it  is  rather  to  be  called  an 
action.  The  very  object,  too,  of  Pelopidas’s  vic¬ 
tory,  which  consisted  in  the  slaughter  of  the 
tyrant,  presenting  itself  to  his  eyes,  did  not 
wholly  carry  him  away  unadvisedly:  he  could 
not  easily  expect  again  to  have  another  equally 
glorious  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  his  cour¬ 
age  in  a  noble  and  honourable  cause. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

But  Marcellus,  when  it  made  little  to  his  ad¬ 
vantage,  and  when  no  such  violent  ardour  as 
present  danger  naturally  calls  out  transported 
him  to  passion,  throwing  himself  into  danger, 
fell  into  an  unexplored  ambush;  he,  namely, 
who  had  borne  five  consulates,  led  three 
triumphs,  won  the  spoils  and  glories  of  kings 
and  victories,  to  act  the  part  of  a  mere  scout, 
or  sentinel,  and  to  expose  all  his  achieve¬ 
ments  to  be  trod  under  foot  by  the  mercenary 
Spaniards  and  Numidians,  who  sold  them¬ 
selves  and  their  lives  to  the  Carthaginians;  so 
that  even  they  themselves  felt  unworthy,  and 
almost  grudged  themselves  the  unhoped-for 
success  of  having  cut  off,  among  a  few  Fre- 
gellan  scouts,  the  most  valiant,  the  most  po¬ 
tent,  and  most  renowned  of  the  Romans. 

Let  no  man  think  that  we  have  thus  spoken 
out  of  a  design  to  accuse  these  noble  men; 
it  is  merely  an  expression  of  frank  indignation 
in  their  own  behalf,  at  seeing  them  thus  wast¬ 
ing  all  their  other  virtues  upon  that  of  brav¬ 
ery,  and  throwing  away  their  lives,  as  if  the 
loss  would  be  only  felt  by  themselves,  and 
not  by  their  country,  allies,  and  friends. 

After  Pelopidas’s  death,  his  friends,  for 
whom  he  died,  made  a  funeral  for  him;  the 
enemies,  by  whom  he  had  been  killed,  made 
one  for  Marcellus.  A  noble  and  happy  lot  in¬ 
deed  the  former;  yet  there  is  something  high¬ 
er  and  greater  in  the  admiration  rendered  by 
enemies  to  the  virtue  that  had  been  their  own 
obstacle,  than  in  the  grateful  acknowledg¬ 
ments  of  friends.  Since,  in  the  one  case,  it  is 
virtue  alone  that  challenges  itself  the  honour; 
while,  in  the  other,  it  may  be  rather  men’s 
personal  profit  and  advantage  that  is  the  real 
origin  of  what  they  do. 


ARISTIDES 

530?— ?468  b.c. 


yi  ristides,  the  son  of  Lysimachus,  was  of 
f-\  the  tribe  Antiochis,  and  township  of 
jL  JL  Alopece.  As  to  wealth,  statements  dif¬ 
fer;  some  say  he  passed  his  life  in  extreme 
poverty,  and  left  behind  him  two  daughters 
whose  indigence  long  kept  them  unmarried; 
but  Demetrius,  the  Phalerian,  in  opposition 
to  this  general  report,  professes  in  his  Socrates 
to  know  a  farm  at  Phalerum  going  by  Aris- 
tides’s  name,  where  he  was  interred;  and,  as 


marks  of  his  opulence,  adduces  first,  the  office 
of  archon  eponymus,  which  he  obtained  by 
the  lot  of  the  bean;  which  was  confined  to 
the  highest  assessed  families,  called  the  Penta- 
cosiomedimni;  second,  the  ostracism,  which 
was  not  usually  inflicted  on  the  poorer  citi¬ 
zens,  but  on  those  of  great  houses,  whose  sta¬ 
tion  exposed  them  to  envy;  third  and  last, 
that  he  left  certain  tripods  in  the  temple  of 
Bacchus,  offerings  for  his  victory  in  conduct- 


ARISTIDES 

ing  the  representation  of  dramatic  perform¬ 
ances,  which  were  even  in  our  age  still  to  be 
seen,  retaining  this  inscription  upon  them, 
“The  tribe  Antiochis  obtained  the  victory: 
Aristides  defrayed  the  charges:  Archestratus’s 
play  was  acted.” 

But  this  argument,  though  in  appearance 
the  strongest,  is  of  the  least  moment  of  any. 
For  Epaminondas,  who  all  the  world  knows 
was  educated,  and  lived  his  whole  life  in 
much  poverty,  and  also  Plato,  the  philosopher, 
exhibited  magnificent  shows,  the  one  an  en¬ 
tertainment  of  flute-players,  the  other  of  dithy- 
rambic  singers;  Dion,  the  Syracusan,  supply¬ 
ing  the  expenses  of  the  latter,  and  Pelopidas 
those  of  Epaminondas.  For  good  men  do  not 
allow  themselves  any  inveterate  and  irre¬ 
concilable  hostility  to  receiving  presents  from 
their  friends,  but  while  looking  upon  those 
that  are  accepted  to  be  hoarded  up  and  with 
avaricious  intentions  as  sordid  and  mean,  they 
do  not  refuse  such  as,  apart  from  all  profit, 
gratify  the  pure  love  of  honour  and  magni¬ 
ficence. 

Panaetius,  again,  shows  that  Demetrius  was 
deceived  concerning  the  tripod  by  an  identity 
of  name.  For,  from  the  Persian  war  to  the 
end  of  the  Peloponnesian,  there  are  upon  rec¬ 
ord  only  two  of  the  name  of  Aristides  who 
defrayed  the  expense  of  representing  plays 
and  gained  the  prize,  neither  of  which  was  the 
same  with  the  son  of  Lysimachus;  but  the 
father  of  the  one  was  Xenophilus,  and  the 
other  lived  at  a  much  later  time,  as  the  way 
of  writing,  which  is  that  in  use  since  the  time 
of  Euclides,  and  the  addition  of  the  name 
of  Archestratus  prove,  a  name  which,  in  the 
time  of  the  Persian  war,  no  writer  mentions, 
but  which  several,  during  the  Peloponnesian 
war,  record  as  that  of  a  dramatic  poet. 

The  argument  of  Panaetius  requires  to  be 
more  closely  considered.  But  as  for  the  ostra¬ 
cism,  every  one  was  liable  to  it,  whom  his 
reputation,  birth,  or  eloquence  raised  above 
the  common  level;  insomuch  that  even  Damon, 
preceptor  to  Pericles,  was  thus  banished,  be¬ 
cause  he  seemed  a  man  of  more  than  ordinary 
sense.  And,  moreover,  Idomeneus  says  that 
Aristides  was  not  made  archon  by  the  lot  of 
the  bean,  but  the  free  election  of  the  people. 
And  if  he  held  the  office  after  the  battle  of 
Plataea,  as  Demetrius  himself  has  written,  it 
is  very  probable  that  his  great  reputation  and 
success  in  the  war  made  him  be  preferred  for 
his  virtue  to  an  office  which  others  received 
in  consideration  of  their  wealth.  But  Deme- 


263 

trius  manifestly  is  eager  not  only  to  exempt 
Aristides,  but  Socrates  likewise,  from  poverty, 
as  from  a  great  evil;  telling  us  that  the  latter 
had  not  only  a  house  of  his  own,  but  also 
seventy  minae  put  out  at  interest  with  Crito. 

Aristides  being  the  friend  and  supporter  of 
that  Clisthenes,  who  settled  the  government 
after  the  expulsion  of  the  tyrants,  and  emulat¬ 
ing  and  admiring  Lycurgus,  the  Lacedaemo¬ 
nian,  above  all  politicians,  adhered  to  the  aris- 
tocratical  principles  of  government;  and  had 
Themistocles,  son  to  Neocles,  his  adversary 
on  the  side  of  the  populace. 

Some  say  that,  being  boys  and  bred  up  to¬ 
gether  from  their  infancy,  they  were  always 
at  variance  with  each  other  in  all  their  words 
and  actions,  as  well  serious  as  playful,  and 
that  in  this  their  early  contention  they  soon 
made  proof  of  their  natural  inclinations;  the 
one  being  ready,  adventurous,  and  subtle,  en¬ 
gaging  readily  and  eagerly  in  everything;  the 
other  of  a  staid  and  settled  temper,  intent  on 
the  exercise  of  justice,  not  admitting  any  de¬ 
gree  of  falsity,  indecorum,  or  trickery,  no,  not 
so  much  as  at  his  play. 

Ariston  of  Chios  says  the  first  origin  of  the 
enmity  which  rose  to  so  great  a  height  was  a 
love  affair;  they  were  rivals  for  the  affection 
of  the  beautiful  Stesilaus  of  Ceos,  and  were 
passionate  beyond  all  moderation,  and  did  not 
lay  aside  their  animosity  when  the  beauty  that 
had  excited  it  passed  away;  but,  as  if  it  had 
only  exercised  them  in  it,  immediately  carried 
their  heats  and  differences  into  public  busi¬ 
ness. 

Themistocles,  therefore,  joining  an  associa¬ 
tion  of  partisans,  fortified  himself  with  con¬ 
siderable  strength;  insomuch  that  when  some 
one  told  him  that  were  he  impartial  he  would 
make  a  good  magistrate;  “I  wish,”  replied  he, 
“I  may  never  sit  on  that  tribunal  where  my 
friends  shall  not  plead  a  greater  privilege  than 
strangers.” 

But  Aristides  walked,  so  to  say,  alone  on 
his  own  path  in  politics,  being  unwilling,  in 
the  first  place,  to  go  along  with  his  associates 
in  ill-doing,  or  to  cause  them  vexation  by  not 
gratifying  their  wishes;  and,  secondly,  observ¬ 
ing  that  many  were  encouraged  by  the  sup¬ 
port  they  had  in  their  friends  to  act  injuri¬ 
ously,  he  was  cautious;  being  of  opinion  that 
the  integrity  of  his  words  and  actions  was  the 
only  right  security  for  a  good  citizen. 

However,  Themistocles  making  many  dan¬ 
gerous  alterations,  and  withstanding  and  in¬ 
terrupting  him  in  the  whole  series  of  his  ac- 


264 

tions,  Aristides  also  was  necessitated  to  set 
himself  against  all  Themistocles  did,  partly  in 
self-defence,  and  partly  to  impede  his  power 
from  still  increasing  by  the  favour  of  the  mul¬ 
titude;  esteeming  it  better  to  let  slip  some 
public  conveniences,  rather  than  that  he  by 
prevailing  should  become  powerful  in  all 
things.  In  fine,  when  he  once  had  opposed 
Themistocles  in  some  measures  that  were  ex¬ 
pedient,  and  had  got  the  better  of  him,  he 
could  not  refrain  from  saying,  when  he  left 
the  assembly,  that  unless  they  sent  Themisto¬ 
cles  and  himself  to  the  barathum,  there  could 
be  no  safety  for  Athens. 

Another  time,  when  urging  some  proposal 
upon  the  people,  though  there  were  much 
opposition  and  stirring  against  it,  he  yet  was 
gaining  the  day;  but  just  as  the  president  of 
the  assembly  was  about  to  put  it  to  the  vote, 
perceiving  by  what  had  been  said  in  debate 
the  inexpediency  of  his  advice,  he  let  it  fall. 
Also  he  often  brought  in  his  bills  by  other 
persons,  lest  Themistocles,  through  party  spir¬ 
it  against  him,  should  be  any  hindrance  to 
the  good  of  the  public. 

In  all  the  vicissitudes  of  public  affairs,  the 
constancy  he  showed  was  admirable,  not  be¬ 
ing  elated  with  honours,  and  demeaning  him¬ 
self  tranquilly  and  sedately  in  adversity;  hold¬ 
ing  the  opinion  that  he  ought  to  offer  himself 
to  the  service  of  his  country  without  mer¬ 
cenary  views  and  irrespectively  of  any  reward, 
not  only  of  riches,  but  even  of  glory  itself. 
Hence  it  came,  probably,  that  at  the  recital  of 
these  verses  of  fiEschylus  in  the  theatre,  relat¬ 
ing  to  Amphiaraus — 

For  not  at  seeming  just,  but  being  so 

He  aims;  and  from  his  depth  of  soil  below 

Harvests  of  wise  and  prudent  counsels  grow , 
the  eyes  of  all  the  spectators  turned  on  Aris¬ 
tides,  as  if  this  virtue,  in  an  especial  manner, 
belonged  to  him. 

He  was  a  most  determined  champion  for 
justice,  not  only  against  feelings  of  friendship 
and  favour,  but  wrath  and  malice.  Thus  it  is 
reported  of  him  that  when  prosecuting  the 
law  against  one  who  was  his  enemy,  on  the 
judges  after  accusation  refusing  to  hear  the 
criminal,  and  proceeding  immediately  to  pass 
sentence  upon  him,  he  rose  in  haste  from  his 
seat  and  joined  in  petition  with  him  for  a 
hearing,  and  that  he  might  enjoy  the  privilege 
of  the  law. 

Another  time,  when  judging  between  two 
private  persons,  on  the  one  declaring  his  ad¬ 
versary  had  very  much  injured  Aristides;  “Tell 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

me  rather,  good  friend,”  he  said,  “what  wrong 
he  has  done  you;  for  it  is  your  cause,  not  my 
own,  which  I  now  sit  judge  of.”  Being  chosen 
to  the  charge  of  the  public  revenue,  he  made 
it  appear  that  not  only  those  of  his  time,  but 
the  preceding  officers,  had  embezzled  much 
treasure,  and  especially  Themistocles — 

Well  \nown  he  was  an  able  man  to  be, 

But  with  his  fingers  apt  to  be  too  free. 

Therefore,  Themistocles,  associating  several 
persons  against  Aristides,  and  impeaching  him 
when  he  gave  in  his  accounts,  caused  him  to 
be  condemned  of  robbing  the  public;  so  Ido- 
meneus  states;  but  the  best  and  chiefest  men 
of  the  city  much  resenting  it,  he  was  not  only 
exempted  from  the  fine  imposed  upon  him, 
but  likewise  again  called  to  the  same  employ¬ 
ment.  Pretending  now  to  repent  him  of  his 
former  practice,  and  carrying  himself  with 
more  remissness,  he  became  acceptable  to  such 
as  pillaged  the  treasury  by  not  detecting  or 
calling  them  to  an  exact  account.  So  that  those 
who  had  their  fill  of  the  public  money  began 
highly  to  applaud  Aristides,  and  sued  to  the 
people  making  interest  to  have  him  once  more 
chosen  treasurer. 

But  when  they  were  upon  the  point  of  elec¬ 
tion,  he  reproved  the  Athenians.  “When  I  dis¬ 
charged  my  office  well  and  faithfully,”  said 
he,  “I  was  insulted  and  abused;  but  now  that 
I  have  allowed  the  public  thieves  in  a  variety 
of  malpractices,  I  am  considered  an  admirable 
patriot.  I  am  more  ashamed,  therefore,  of  this 
present  honour  than  of  the  former  sentence; 
and  I  commiserate  your  condition,  with  whom 
it  is  more  praiseworthy  to  oblige  ill  men  than 
to  conserve  the  revenue  of  the  public.”  Say¬ 
ing  thus,  and  proceeding  to  expose  the  thefts 
that  had  been  committed,  he  stopped  the 
mouths  of  those  who  cried  him  up  and  vouch¬ 
ed  for  him,  but  gained  real  and  true  com¬ 
mendations  from  the  best  men. 

When  Datis,  being  sent  by  Darius  under 
pretence  of  punishing  the  Athenians  for  their 
burning  of  Sardis,  but  in  reality  to  reduce  the 
Greeks  under  his  dominion,  landed  at  Mara¬ 
thon  and  laid  waste  the  country,  among  the 
ten  commanders  appointed  by  the  Athenians 
for  the  war,  Miltiades  was  of  the  greatest 
name;  but  the  second  place,  both  for  reputa¬ 
tion  and  power,  was  possessed  by  Aristides; 
and  when  his  opinion  to  join  battle  was  added 
to  that  of  Miltiades,  it  did  much  to  incline  the 
balance. 

Every  leader  by  his  day  having  the  com¬ 
mand  in  chief,  when  it  came  to  Aristides’s 


ARISTIDES 

turn  he  delivered  it  into  the  hands  of  Milti- 
ades,  showing  his  fellow-officers  that  it  is  not 
dishonourable  to  obey  and  follow  wise  and 
able  men,  but,  on  the  contrary,  noble  and 
prudent.  So  appeasing  their  rivalry,  and  bring¬ 
ing  them  to  acquiesce  in  one  and  the  best  ad¬ 
vice,  he  confirmed  Miltiades  in  the  strength 
of  an  undivided  and  unmolested  authority. 
For  now  every  one,  yielding  his  day  of  com¬ 
mand,  looked  for  orders  only  to  him. 

During  the  fight  the  main  body  of  the  Athe¬ 
nians  being  the  hardest  put  to  it,  the  bar¬ 
barians,  for  a  long  time,  making  opposition 
there  against  the  tribes  Leontis  and  Antiochis, 
Themistocles  and  Aristides  being  ranged  to¬ 
gether  fought  valiantly;  the  one  being  of  the 
tribe  Leontis,  the  other  of  the  Antiochis.  But 
after  they  had  beaten  the  barbarians  back  to 
their  ships,  and  perceived  that  they  sailed  not 
for  the  isles,  but  were  driven  in  by  the  force 
of  sea  and  wind  towards  the  country  of  Attica, 
fearing  lest  they  should  take  the  city,  unpro¬ 
vided  of  defence,  they  hurried  away  thither 
with  nine  tribes,  and  reached  it  the  same  day. 
Aristides,  being  left  with  his  tribe  at  Marathon 
to  guard  the  plunder  and  prisoners,  did  not 
disappoint  the  opinion  they  had  of  him. 

Amidst  the  profusion  of  gold  and  silver, 
all  sorts  of  apparel,  and  other  property,  more 
than  can  be  mentioned,  that  were  in  the  tents 
and  the  vessels  which  they  had  taken,  he 
neither  felt  the  desire  to  meddle  with  any¬ 
thing  himself,  nor  suffered  others  to  do  it; 
unless  it  might  be  some  who  took  away  any¬ 
thing  unknown  to  him;  as  Callias,  the  torch- 
bearer,  did.  One  of  the  barbarians,  it  seems, 
prostrated  himself  before  this  man,  supposing 
him  to  be  a  king  by  his  hair  and  fillet;  and, 
when  he  had  so  done,  taking  him  by  the 
hand,  showed  him  a  great  quantity  of  gold 
hid  in  a  ditch.  But  Callias,  most  cruel  and 
impious  of  men,  took  away  the  treasure,  but 
slew  the  man,  lest  he  should  tell  of  him. 

Hence,  they  say,  the  comic  poets  gave  his 
family  the  name  of  Laccopluti,  or  enriched  by 
the  ditch,  alluding  to  the  place  where  Callias 
found  the  gold.  Aristides,  immediately  after 
this,  was  archon;  although  Demetrius,  the 
Phalerian,  says  he  held  the  office  a  little  be¬ 
fore  he  died  after  the  battle  of  Plataea.  But  in 
the  records  of  the  successors  of  Xanthippides, 
in  whose  year  Mardonius  was  overthrown  at 
Plataea,  amongst  very  many  there  mentioned, 
there  is  not  so  much  as  one  of  the  same  name 
as  Aristides;  while  immediately  after  Phaenip- 
pus,  during  whose  term  of  office  they  obtained 


265 

the  victory  of  Marathon,  Aristides  is  regis¬ 
tered. 

Of  all  his  virtues,  the  common  people  were 
most  affected  with  his  justice,  because  of  its 
continual  and  common  use;  and  thus,  al¬ 
though  of  mean  fortune  and  ordinary  birth, 
he  possessed  himself  of  the  most  kingly  and 
divine  appellation  of  Just:  which  kings  how¬ 
ever  and  tyrants  have  never  sought  after;  but 
have  taken  delight  to  be  surnamed  besiegers 
of  cities,  thunderers,  conquerors,  or  eagles 
again,  and  hawks;  affecting,  it  seems,  the  rep¬ 
utation  which  proceeds  from  power  and  vio¬ 
lence,  rather  than  that  of  virtue. 

Although  the  divinity,  to  whom  they  desire 
to  compare  and  assimilate  themselves,  excels, 
it  is  supposed,  in  three  things,  immortality, 
power,  and  virtue;  of  which  three  the  noblest 
and  divinest  is  virtue.  For  the  elements  and 
vacuum  have  an  everlasting  existence;  earth¬ 
quakes,  thunders,  storms,  and  torrents  have 
great  power;  but  in  justice  and  equity  nothing 
participates  except  by  means  of  reason  and 
the  knowledge  of  that  which  is  divine.  And 
thus,  taking  the  three  varieties  of  feeling  com¬ 
monly  entertained  towards  the  deity,  the  sense 
of  his  happiness,  fear,  and  honour  of  him, 
people  would  seem  to  think  him  blest  and 
happy  for  his  exemption  from  death  and  cor¬ 
ruption,  to  fear  and  dread  him  for  his  power 
and  dominion,  but  to  love,  honour,  and  adore 
him  for  his  justice.  Yet  though  thus  disposed, 
they  covet  that  immortality  which  our  nature 
is  not  capable  of,  and  that  power  the  greatest 
part  of  which  is  at  the  disposal  of  fortune; 
but  give  virtue,  the  only  divine  good  really  in 
our  reach,  the  last  place,  most  unwisely;  since 
justice  makes  the  life  of  such  as  are  in  pros¬ 
perity,  power,  and  authority  the  life  of  a  god, 
and  injustice  turns  it  to  that  of  a  beast. 

Aristides,  therefore,  had  at  first  the  fortune 
to  be  beloved  for  this  surname,  but  at  length 
envied.  Especially  when  Themistocles  spread 
a  rumour  amongst  the  people  that,  by  deter¬ 
mining  and  judging  all  matters  privately,  he 
had  destroyed  the  courts  of  judicature,  and 
was  secretly  making  way  for  a  monarchy  in 
his  own  person,  without  the  assistance  of 
guards. 

Moreover,  the  spirit  of  the  people,  now 
grown  high,  and  confident  with  their  late  vic¬ 
tory,  naturally  entertained  feelings  of  dislike 
to  all  of  more  than  common  fame  and  repu¬ 
tation.  Coming  together,  therefore,  from  all 
parts  into  the  city,  they  banished  Aristides  by 
the  ostracism,  giving  their  jealousy  of  his  rep- 


266 

utation  the  name  of  fear  of  tyranny.  For  os¬ 
tracism  was  not  the  punishment  of  any  crim¬ 
inal  act,  but  was  speciously  said  to  be  the 
mere  depression  and  humiliation  of  excessive 
greatness  and  power;  and  was  in  fact  a  gentle 
relief  and  mitigation  of  envious  feeling,  which 
was  thus  allowed  to  vent  itself  in  inflicting  no 
intolerable  injury,  only  a  ten  years’  banish¬ 
ment.  But  after  it  came  to  be  exercised  upon 
base  and  villainous  fellows,  they  desisted  from 
it,  Hyperbolus  being  the  last  whom  they  ban¬ 
ished  by  the  ostracism. 

The  cause  of  Hyperbolus’s  banishment  is 
said  to  have  been  this.  Alcibiades  and  Nicias, 
men  that  bore  the  greatest  sway  in  the  city, 
were  of  different  factions.  As  the  people,  there¬ 
fore,  were  about  to  vote  the  ostracism,  and  ob¬ 
viously  to  decree  it  against  one  of  them,  con¬ 
sulting  together  and  uniting  their  parties  they 
contrived  the  banishment  of  Hyperbolus.  Up¬ 
on  which  the  people,  being  offended,  as  if 
some  contempt  or  affront  was  put  upon  the 
thing,  left  off  and  quite  abolished  it. 

It  was  performed,  to  be  short,  in  this  man¬ 
ner.  Every  one  taking  an  ostracon,  a  sherd, 
that  is,  or  piece  of  earthenware,  wrote  upon 
it  the  citizen’s  name  he  would  have  banished, 
and  carried  it  to  a  certain  part  of  the  market¬ 
place  surrounded  with  wooden  rails.  First, 
the  magistrates  numbered  all  the  sherds  in 
gross  (for  if  there  were  less  than  six  thousand, 
the  ostracism  was  imperfect);  then,  laying 
every  name  by  itself,  they  pronounced  him 
whose  name  was  written  by  the  larger  num¬ 
ber  banished  for  ten  years,  with  the  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  his  estate. 

As,  therefore,  they  were  writing  the  names 
on  the  sherds,  it  is  reported  that  an  illiterate 
clownish  fellow,  giving  Aristides  his  sherd, 
supposing  him  a  common  citizen,  begged  him 
to  write  Aristides  upon  it;  and  he  being  sur¬ 
prised  and  asking  if  Aristides  had  ever  done 
him  any  injury,  “None  at  all,”  said  he,  “nei¬ 
ther  know  I  the  man;  but  I  am  tired  of  hear¬ 
ing  him  everywhere  called  the  Just.”  Aris¬ 
tides,  hearing  this,  is  said  to  have  made  no 
reply,  but  returned  the  sherd  with  his  own 
name  inscribed.  At  his  departure  from  the 
city,  lifting  up  his  hands  to  heaven,  he  made 
a  prayer  (the  reverse,  it  would  seem,  of  that 
of  Achilles),  that  the  Athenians  might  never 
have  any  occasion  which  should  constrain 
them  to  remember  Aristides. 

Nevertheless,  three  years  after,  when  Xerxes 
marched  through  Thessaly  and  Bceotia  into 
the  country  of  Attica,  repealing  the  law,  they 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

decreed  the  return  of  the  banished,  chiefly 
fearing  Aristides,  lest,  joining  himself  to  the 
enemy,  he  should  corrupt  and  bring  over 
many  of  his  fellow-citizens  to  the  party  of  the 
barbarians;  much  mistaking  the  man,  who, 
already  before  the  decree,  was  exerting  him¬ 
self  to  excite  and  encourage  the  Greeks  to  the 
defence  of  their  liberty. 

And  afterwards,  when  Themistocles  was 
general  with  absolute  power,  he  assisted  him 
in  all  ways  both  in  action  and  counsel;  ren¬ 
dering,  in  consideration  of  the  common  secur¬ 
ity,  the  greatest  enemy  he  had  the  most  glori¬ 
ous  of  men.  For  when  Eurybiades  was  delib¬ 
erating  to  desert  the  isle  of  Salamis,  and  the 
galleys  of  the  barbarians  putting  out  by  night 
to  sea  surrounded  and  beset  the  narrow  pas¬ 
sage  and  islands,  and  nobody  was  aware  how 
they  were  environed,  Aristides,  with  great  haz¬ 
ard,  sailed  from  2Egina  through  the  enemy’s 
fleet;  and  coming  by  night  to  Themistocles’s 
tent,  and  calling  him  out  by  himself;  “If  we 
have  any  discretion,”  said  he,  “Themistocles, 
laying  aside  at  this  time  our  vain  and  childish 
contention,  let  us  enter  upon  a  safe  and  hon¬ 
ourable  dispute,  vying  with  each  other  for  the 
preservation  of  Greece;  you  in  the  ruling  and 
commanding,  I  in  the  subservient  and  advis¬ 
ing  part;  even  indeed,  as  I  now  understand 
you  alone  to  be  adhering  to  the  best  advice, 
in  counselling  without  any  delay  to  engage  in 
the  straits. 

“And  in  this,  though  our  own  party  oppose, 
the  enemy  seems  to  assist  you.  For  the  sea  be¬ 
hind,  and  all  around  us,  is  covered  with  their 
fleet;  so  that  we  are  under  a  necessity  of  ap¬ 
proving  ourselves  men  of  courage,  and  fight¬ 
ing,  whether  we  will  or  no;  for  there  is  no 
room  left  us  for  flight.” 

To  which  Themistocles  answered,  “I  would 
not  willingly,  Aristides,  be  overcome  by  you 
on  this  occasion;  and  shall  endeavour,  in  emu¬ 
lation  of  this  good  beginning,  to  outdo  it  in 
my  actions.”  Also  relating  to  him  the  strata¬ 
gem  he  had  framed  against  the  barbarians,  he 
entreated  him  to  persuade  Eurybiades  and 
show  him  how  it  was  impossible  they  should 
save  themselves  without  an  engagement;  as 
he  was  the  more  likely  to  be  believed. 

Whence,  in  the  council  of  war,  Cleocritus, 
the  Corinthian,  telling  Themistocles  that  Aris¬ 
tides  did  not  like  his  advice,  as  he  was  present 
and  said  nothing,  Aristides  answered  that 
he  should  not  have  held  his  peace  if  Themis¬ 
tocles  had  not  been  giving  the  best  advice; 
and  that  he  was  now  silent,  not  out  of  any 


ARISTIDES 

good-will  to  the  person,  but  in  approbation  of 
his  counsel. 

Thus  the  Greek  captains  were  employed. 
But  Aristides  perceiving  Psyttalea,  a  small 
island  that  lies  within  the  straits  over  against 
Salamis,  to  be  filled  by  a  body  of  the  enemy, 
put  aboard  his  small  boats  the  most  forward 
and  courageous  of  his  countrymen,  and  went 
ashore  upon  it;  and,  joining  battle  with  the 
barbarians,  slew  them  all,  except  such  more 
remarkable  persons  as  were  taken  alive. 

Amongst  these  were  three  children  of  San- 
dauce,  the  king’s  sister,  whom  he  immediately 
sent  away  to  Themistocles,  and  it  is  stated 
that,  in  accordance  with  a  certain  oracle,  they 
were,  by  the  command  of  Euphrantides,  the 
seer,  sacrificed  to  Bacchus,  called  Omestes,  or 
the  devourer.  But  Aristides,  placing  armed 
men  all  around  the  island,  lay  in  wait  for 
such  as  were  cast  upon  it,  to  the  intent  that 
none  of  his  friends  should  perish,  nor  any  of 
his  enemies  escape.  For  the  closest  engage¬ 
ment  of  the  ships,  and  the  main  fury  of  the 
whole  battle,  seems  to  have  been  about  this 
place;  for  which  reason  a  trophy  was  erected 
in  Psyttalea. 

After  the  fight,  Themistocles,  to  sound  Aris¬ 
tides,  told  him  they  had  performed  a  good 
piece  of  service,  but  there  was  a  better  yet  to 
be  done,  the  keeping  Asia  in  Europe,  by  sail¬ 
ing  forthwith  to  the  Hellespont  and  cutting 
in  sunder  the  bridge.  But  Aristides,  with  an 
exclamation,  bid  him  think  no  more  of  it,  but 
deliberate  and  find  out  means  for  removing 
the  Mede,  as  quickly  as  possible,  out  of 
Greece;  lest  being  enclosed,  through  want  of 
means  to  escape,  necessity  should  compel  him 
to  force  his  way  with  so  great  an  army.  So 
Themistocles  once  more  despatched  Arnaces, 
the  eunuch,  his  prisoner,  giving  him  in  com¬ 
mand  privately  to  advertise  the  king  that  he 
had  diverted  the  Greeks  from  their  intention 
of  setting  sail  for  the  bridges,  out  of  the  de¬ 
sire  he  felt  to  preserve  him. 

Xerxes,  being  much  terrified  with  this,  im¬ 
mediately  hasted  to  the  Hellespont.  But  Mar- 
donius  was  left  with  the  most  serviceable  part 
of  the  army,  about  three  hundred  thousand 
men,  and  was  a  formidable  enemy,  confident 
in  his  infantry,  and  writing  messages  of  de¬ 
fiance  to  the  Greeks:  “You  have  overcome  by 
sea  men  accustomed  to  fight  on  land,  and  un¬ 
skilled  at  the  oar;  but  there  lies  now  the  open 
country  of  Thessaly;  and  the  plains  of  Bceotia 
offer  a  broad  and  worthy  field  for  brave  men, 
either  horse  or  foot,  to  contend  in.” 


267 

But  he  sent  privately  to  the  Athenians,  both 
by  letter  and  word  of  mouth  from  the  king, 
promising  to  rebuild  their  city,  to  give  them 
a  vast  sum  of  money,  and  constitute  them 
lords  of  all  Greece,  on  condition  they  were 
not  engaged  in  the  war.  The  Lacedaemonians, 
receiving  news  of  this,  and  fearing,  despatched 
an  embassy  to  the  Athenians,  entreating  that 
they  would  send  their  wives  and  children  to 
Sparta,  and  receive  support  from  them  for 
their  superannuated.  For,  being  despoiled 
both  of  their  city  and  country,  the  people 
were  suffering  extreme  distress.  Having  given 
audience  to  the  ambassadors,  they  returned  an 
answer,  upon  the  motion  of  Aristides,  worthy 
of  the  highest  admiration;  declaring  that  they 
forgave  their  enemies  if  they  thought  all  things 
purchasable  by  wealth,  than  which  they  knew 
nothing  of  greater  value;  but  that  they  felt 
offended  at  the  Lacedaemonians  for  looking 
only  to  their  present  poverty  and  exigence, 
without  any  remembrance  of  their  valour  and 
magnanimity,  offering  them  their  victuals  to 
fight  in  the  cause  of  Greece. 

Aristides,  making  this  proposal  and  bring¬ 
ing  back  the  ambassadors  into  the  assembly, 
charged  them  to  tell  the  Lacedaemonians  that 
all  the  treasure  on  the  earth  or  under  it  was 
of  less  value  with  the  people  of  Athens  than 
the  liberty  of  Greece.  And,  showing  the  sun 
to  those  who  came  from  Mardonius,  “As  long 
as  that  retains  the  same  course,  so  long,”  said 
he,  “shall  the  citizens  of  Athens  wage  war 
with  the  Persians  for  the  country  which  has 
been  wasted,  and  the  temples  that  have  been 
profaned  and  burnt  by  them.”  Moreover,  he 
proposed  a  decree  that  the  priests  should 
anathematise  him  who  sent  any  herald  to  the 
Medes,  or  deserted  the  alliance  of  Greece. 

When  Mardonius  made  a  second  incursion 
into  the  country  of  Attica,  the  people  passed 
over  again  into  the  isle  of  Salamis.  Aristides, 
being  sent  to  Lacedaemon,  reproved  them  for 
their  delay  and  neglect  in  abandoning  Athens 
once  more  to  the  barbarians;  and  demanded 
their  assistance  for  that  part  of  Greece  which 
was  not  yet  lost.  The  Ephori,  hearing  this, 
made  show  of  sporting  all  day,  and  of  care¬ 
lessly  keeping  holy  day  (for  they  were  then 
celebrating  the  Hyacinthian  festival),  but  in 
the  night,  selecting  five  thousand  Spartans, 
each  of  whom  was  attended  by  seven  Helots, 
they  sent  them  forth  unknown  to  those  from 
Athens.  And  when  Aristides  again  repre¬ 
hended  them,  they  told  him  in  derision  that 
he  either  doted  or  dreamed,  for  the  army  was 


268 

already  at  Oresteum,  in  their  march  towards 
the  strangers;  as  they  called  the  Persians. 
Aristides  answered  that  they  jested  unseason¬ 
ably,  deluding  their  friends  instead  of  their 
enemies.  Thus  says  Idomeneus.  But  in  the  de¬ 
cree  of  Aristides,  not  himself,  but  Cimon,  Xan- 
thippus,  and  Myronides  are  appointed  ambas¬ 
sadors. 

Being  chosen  general  for  the  war,  he  re¬ 
paired  to  Plataea  with  eight  thousand  Athe¬ 
nians,  where  Pausanias,  generalissimo  of  all 
Greece,  joined  him  with  the  Spartans;  and 
the  forces  of  the  other  Greeks  came  into  them. 
The  whole  encampment  of  the  barbarians  ex¬ 
tended  all  along  the  bank  of  the  river  Asopus, 
their  numbers  being  so  great  there  was  no 
enclosing  them  all,  but  their  baggage  and 
most  valuable  things  were  surrounded  with 
a  square  bulwark,  each  side  of  which  was  the 
length  of  ten  furlongs. 

Tisamenus,  the  Elean,  had  prophesied  to 
Pausanias  and  all  the  Greeks,  and  foretold 
them  victory  if  they  made  no  attempt  upon 
the  enemy,  but  stood  on  their  defence.  But 
Aristides  sending  to  Delphi,  the  god  answered 
that  the  Athenians  should  overcome  their  ene¬ 
mies  in  case  they  made  supplication  to  Jupiter 
and  Juno  of  Cithaeron,  Pan,  and  the  nymphs 
Sphragitides,  and  sacrificed  to  the  heroes  An- 
drocrates,  Leucon,  Pisander,  Damocrates,  Hyp- 
sion,  Action,  and  Polyidus;  and  if  they  fought 
within  their  own  territories  in  the  plain  of 
Ceres  Eleusinia  and  Proserpine. 

Aristides  was  perplexed  upon  the  tidings  of 
this  oracle;  since  the  heroes  to  whom  it  com¬ 
manded  him  to  sacrifice  had  been  chieftains 
of  the  Plataeans,  and  the  cave  of  the  nymphs 
Sphragitides  was  on  the  top  of  Mount  Cithae- 
ron,  on  the  side  facing  the  setting  sun  of 
summer  time;  in  which  place,  as  the  story 
goes,  there  was  formerly  an  oracle,  and  many 
that  lived  in  the  district  were  inspired  with  it, 
whom  they  called  Nympholepti,  possessed 
with  the  nymphs. 

But  the  plain  of  Ceres  Eleusinia,  and  the 
offer  of  victory  to  the  Athenians,  if  they  fought 
in  their  own  territories,  recalled  them  again, 
and  transferred  the  war  into  the  country  of 
Attica.  In  this  juncture,  Arimnestus,  who  com¬ 
manded  the  Plataeans,  dreamed  that  Jupiter, 
the  Saviour,  asked  him  what  the  Greeks  had 
resolved  upon;  and  that  he  answered,  “To¬ 
morrow,  my  Lord,  we  march  our  army  to 
Eleusis,  and  there  give  the  barbarians  battle 
according  to  the  directions  of  the  oracle  of 
Apollo.” 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

And  that  the  god  replied  they  were  utterly 
mistaken,  for  that  the  places  spoken  of  by  the 
oracle  were  within  the  bounds  of  Plataea,  and 
if  they  sought  there  they  should  find  them. 
This  manifest  vision  having  appeared  to 
Arimnestus,  when  he  awoke  he  sent  for  the 
most  aged  and  experienced  of  his  countrymen, 
with  whom,  communicating  and  examining 
the  matter,  he  found  that  near  Hysiae,  at  the 
foot  of  Mount  Cithaeron,  there  was  a  very  an¬ 
cient  temple  called  the  temple  of  Ceres  Eleu¬ 
sinia  and  Proserpine.  He  therefore  forthwith 
took  Aristides  to  the  place,  which  was  very  con¬ 
venient  for  drawing  up  an  army  on  foot,  be¬ 
cause  the  slopes  at  the  bottom  of  the  mountain 
Cithaeron  rendered  the  plain,  where  it  comes 
up  to  the  temple,  unfit  for  the  movements  of 
cavalry. 

Also,  in  the  same  place,  there  was  the  fane 
of  Androcrates,  environed  with  a  thick  shady 
grove.  And  that  the  oracle  might  be  accom¬ 
plished  in  all  particulars  for  the  hope  of  vic¬ 
tory,  Arimnestus  proposed,  and  the  Plataeans 
decreed,  that  the  frontiers  of  their  country 
towards  Attica  should  be  removed,  and  the 
land  given  to  the  Athenians,  that  they  might 
fight  in  defence  of  Greece  in  their  own  proper 
territory.  This  zeal  and  liberality  of  the  Pla- 
taeans  became  so  famous  that  Alexander,  many 
years  after,  when  he  had  obtained  the  domin¬ 
ion  of  all  Asia,  upon  erecting  the  walls  of 
Plataea,  caused  proclamation  to  be  made,  by 
the  herald  at  the  Olympic  games,  that  the 
king  did  the  Plataeans  this  favour  in  consid¬ 
eration  of  their  nobleness  and  magnanimity, 
because,  in  the  war  with  the  Medes,  they 
freely  gave  up  their  land  and  zealously  fought 
with  the  Greeks. 

The  Tegeatans,  contesting  the  post  of  hon¬ 
our  with  the  Athenians,  demanded  that,  ac¬ 
cording  to  custom,  the  Lacedaemonians  being 
ranged  on  the  right  wing  of  the  battle,  they 
might  have  the  left,  alleging  several  matters 
in  commendation  of  their  ancestors.  The  Athe¬ 
nians  being  indignant  at  the  claim,  Aristides 
came  forward:  “To  contend  with  the  Tegea¬ 
tans,”  said  he,  “for  noble  descent  and  valour, 
the  present  time  permits  not;  but  this  we  say 
to  you,  O  you  Spartans,  and  you  the  rest  of 
the  Greeks,  that  place  neither  takes  away  nor 
contributes  courage;  we  shall  endeavour  by 
crediting  and  maintaining  the  post  you  assign 
us  to  reflect  no  dishonour  on  our  former  per¬ 
formances.  For  we  are  come,  not  to  differ 
with  our  friends,  but  to  fight  our  enemies; 
not  to  extol  our  ancestors,  but  ourselves  to  be- 


ARISTIDES 

have  as  valiant  men.  This  battle  will  manifest 
how  much  each  city,  captain,  and  private  sol¬ 
dier  is  worth  to  Greece.”  The  council  of  war, 
upon  this  address,  decided  for  the  Athenians, 
and  gave  them  the  other  wing  of  the  battle. 

All  Greece  being  in  suspense,  and  especially 
the  affairs  of  the  Athenians  unsettled,  certain 
persons  of  great  families  and  possessions  hav¬ 
ing  been  impoverished  by  the  war,  and  seeing 
all  their  authority  and  reputation  in  the  city 
vanished  with  their  wealth,  and  others  in  pos¬ 
session  of  their  honours  and  places,  convened 
privately  at  a  house  in  Plataea,  and  conspired 
for  the  dissolution  of  the  democratic  govern¬ 
ment;  and,  if  the  plot  should  not  succeed,  to 
ruin  the  cause  and  betray  all  to  the  barbarians. 

These  matters  being  in  agitation  in  the 
camp,  and  many  persons  already  corrupted, 
Aristides,  perceiving  the  design,  and  dreading 
the  present  juncture  of  time,  determined  nei¬ 
ther  to  let  the  business  pass  unanimadverted 
upon,  nor  yet  altogether  to  expose  it;  not 
knowing  how  many  the  accusation  might 
reach,  and  willing  to  set  bounds  to  his  justice 
with  a  view  to  the  public  convenience.  There¬ 
fore,  of  many  that  were  concerned,  he  ap¬ 
prehended  eight  only,  two  of  whom,  who 
were  first  proceeded  against  and  most  guilty, 
iRschines  of  Lampra  and  Agesias  of  Acharnae, 
made  their  escape  out  of  the  camp.  The  rest 
he  dismissed;  giving  opportunity  to  such  as 
thought  themselves  concealed  to  take  courage 
and  repent;  intimating  that  they  had  in  the 
war  a  great  tribunal,  where  they  might  clear 
their  guilt  by  manifesting  their  sincere  and 
good  intentions  towards  their  country. 

After  this,  Mardonius  made  trial  of  the 
Grecian  courage,  by  sending  his  whole  num¬ 
ber  of  horse,  in  which  he  thought  himself 
much  the  stronger,  against  them,  while  they 
were  all  pitched  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Cithae- 
ron,  in  strong  and  rocky  places,  except  the 
Megarians.  They,  being  three  thousand  in 
number,  were  encamped  on  the  plain,  where 
they  were  damaged  by  the  horse  charging  and 
making  inroads  upon  them  on  all  hands. 

They  sent,  therefore,  in  haste  to  Pausanias, 
demanding  relief,  as  not  being  able  alone  to 
sustain  the  great  numbers  of  the  barbarians. 
Pausanias,  hearing  this,  and  perceiving  the 
tents  of  the  Megarians  already  hid  by  the  mul¬ 
titude  of  darts  and  arrows,  and  themselves 
driven  together  into  a  narrow  space,  was  at 
a  loss  himself  how  to  aid  them  with  his  bat¬ 
talion  of  heavy-armed  Lacedaemonians.  He 
proposed  it,  therefore,  as  a  point  of  emulation 


269 

in  valour  and  love  of  distinction,  to  the  com¬ 
manders  and  captains  who  were  around  him, 
if  any  would  voluntarily  take  upon  them  the 
defence  and  succour  of  the  Megarians. 

The  rest  being  backward,  Aristides  under¬ 
took  the  enterprise  for  the  Athenians,  and 
sent  Olympiodorus,  the  most  valiant  of  his 
inferior  officers,  with  three  hundred  chosen 
men  and  some  archers  under  his  command. 
These  being  soon  in  readiness,  and  running 
upon  the  enemy,  as  soon  as  Masistius,  who 
commanded  the  barbarians’  horse,  a  man  of 
wonderful  courage  and  of  extraordinary  bulk 
and  comeliness  of  person,  perceived  it,  turn¬ 
ing  his  steed  he  made  towards  them.  And 
they  sustaining  the  shock  and  joining  battle 
with  him,  there  was  a  sharp  conflict,  as  though 
by  this  encounter  they  were  to  try  the  success 
of  the  whole  war. 

But  after  Masistius’s  horse  received  a  wound 
and  flung  him,  and  he  falling  could  hardly 
raise  himself  through  the  weight  of  his  ar¬ 
mour,  the  Athenians,  pressing  upon  him  with 
blows,  could  not  easily  get  at  his  person, 
armed  as  he  was,  his  breast,  his  head,  and  his 
limbs  all  over,  with  gold  and  brass  and  iron; 
but  one  of  them  at  last,  running  him  in  at 
the  visor  of  his  helmet,  slew  him;  and  the 
rest  of  the  Persians,  leaving  the  body,  fled. 

The  greatness  of  the  Greek  success  was 
known,  not  by  the  multitude  of  the  slain  (for 
an  inconsiderable  number  were  killed),  but 
by  the  sorrow  the  barbarians  expressed.  For 
they  shaved  themselves,  their  horses,  and 
mules  for  the  death  of  Masistius,  and  filled 
the  plain  with  howling  and  lamentation;  hav¬ 
ing  lost  a  person,  who,  next  to  Mardonius 
himself,  was  by  many  degrees  the  chief  among 
them,  both  for  valour  and  authority. 

After  this  skirmish  of  the  horse,  they  kept 
from  fighting  a  long  time;  for  the  soothsay¬ 
ers,  by  the  sacrifices,  foretold  the  victory  both 
to  Greeks  and  Persians,  if  they  stood  upon  the 
defensive  part  only,  but  if  they  became  ag¬ 
gressors,  the  contrary.  At  length  Mardonius, 
when  he  had  but  a  few  days’  provision,  and 
the  Greek  forces  increased  continually  by 
some  or  other  that  came  in  to  them,  impatient 
of  delay,  determined  to  lie  still  no  longer,  but 
passing  Asopus  by  daybreak,  to  fall  unex¬ 
pectedly  upon  the  Greeks;  and  signified  the 
same  over  night  to  the  captains  of  his  host. 

But  about  midnight,  a  certain  horseman 
stole  into  the  Greek  camp,  and  coming  to  the 
watch,  desired  them  to  call  Aristides,  the  Ath¬ 
enian,  to  him.  He  coming  speedily,  “I  am,” 


270 

said  the  stranger,  “Alexander,  king  of  the 
Macedonians,  and  am  arrived  here  through 
the  greatest  danger  in  the  world  for  the  good¬ 
will  I  bear  you,  lest  a  sudden  onset  should 
dismay  you,  so  as  to  behave  in  the  fight  worse 
than  usual.  For  to-morrow  Mardonius  will 
give  you  battle,  urged,  not  by  any  hope  of 
success  or  courage,  but  by  want  of  victuals; 
since,  indeed,  the  prophets  prohibit  him  the 
battle,  the  sacrifices  and  oracles  being  un¬ 
favourable;  and  the  army  is  in  despondency 
and  consternation;  but  necessity  forces  him  to 
try  his  fortune,  or  sit  still  and  endure  the  last 
extremity  of  want.” 

Alexander,  thus  saying,  entreated  Aristides 
to  take  notice  and  remember  him,  but  not  to 
tell  any  other.  But  he  told  him  it  was  not 
convenient  to  conceal  the  matter  from  Pausa- 
nias  (because  he  was  general);  as  for  any 
other,  he  would  keep  it  secret  from  them  till 
the  battle  was  fought;  but  if  the  Greeks  ob¬ 
tained  the  victory,  that  then  no  one  should 
be  ignorant  of  Alexander’s  good-will  and 
kindness  towards  them.  After  this,  the  king 
of  the  Macedonians  rode  back  again,  and  Aris¬ 
tides  went  to  Pausanias’s  tent  and  told  him; 
and  they  sent  for  the  rest  of  the  captains  and 
gave  orders  that  the  army  should  be  in  battle 
array. 

Here,  according  to  Herodotus,  Pausanias 
spoke  to  Aristides,  desiring  him  to  transfer 
the  Athenians  to  the  right  wing  of  the  army 
opposite  to  the  Persians  (as  they  would  do 
better  service  against  them,  having  been  ex¬ 
perienced  in  their  way  of  combat,  and  em¬ 
boldened  with  former  victories),  and  to  give 
him  the  left,  where  the  Medizing  Greeks  were 
to  make  their  assault.  The  rest  of  the  Athe¬ 
nian  captains  regarded  this  as  an  arrogant  and 
interfering  act  on  the  part  of  Pausanias;  be¬ 
cause,  while  permitting  the  rest  of  the  army 
to  keep  their  stations,  he  removed  them  only 
from  place  to  place,  like  so  many  Helots,  op¬ 
posing  them  to  the  greatest  strength  of  the 
enemy. 

But  Aristides  said  they  were  altogether  in 
the  wrong.  If  so  short  a  time  ago  they  con¬ 
tested  the  left  wing  with  the  Tegeatans,  and 
gloried  in  being  preferred  before  them,  now, 
when  the  Lacedaemonians  gave  them  place  in 
the  right,  and  yielded  them  in  a  manner  the 
leading  of  the  army,  how  was  it  they  were  dis¬ 
contented  with  the  honour  that  was  done  them, 
and  did  not  look  upon  it  as  an  advantage  to 
have  to  fight,  not  against  their  countrymen 
and  kindred,  but  barbarians,  and  such  as  were 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

by  nature  their  enemies?  After  this,  the  Athe¬ 
nians  very  readily  changed  places  with  the 
Lacedaemonians,  and  there  went  words  amongst 
them  as  they  were  encouraging  each  other 
that  the  enemy  approached  with  no  better 
arms  or  stouter  hearts  than  those  who  fought 
the  battle  of  Marathon;  but  had  the  same 
bows  and  arrows,  and  the  same  embroidered 
coats  and  gold,  and  the  same  delicate  bodies 
and  effeminate  minds  within;  “While  we 
have  the  same  weapons  and  bodies,  and  our 
courage  augmented  by  our  victories;  and  fight 
not  like  others  in  defence  of  our  country  only, 
but  for  the  trophies  of  Salamis  and  Mara¬ 
thon;  that  they  may  not  be  looked  upon  as 
due  to  Miltiades  or  fortune,  but  to  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  Athens.”  Thus,  therefore,  were  they 
making  haste  to  change  the  order  of  their 
battle. 

But  the  Thebans,  understanding  it  by  some 
deserters,  forthwith  acquainted  Mardonius; 
and  he,  either  for  fear  of  the  Athenians,  or  a 
desire  to  engage  the  Lacedaemonians,  marched 
over  his  Persians  to  the  other  wing,  and  com¬ 
manded  the  Greeks  of  his  party  to  be  posted 
opposite  to  the  Athenians.  But  this  change 
was  observed  on  the  other  side,  and  Pausa¬ 
nias,  wheeling  about  again,  ranged  himself  on 
the  right,  and  Mardonius,  also,  as  at  first, 
took  the  left  wing  over  against  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians.  So  the  day  passed  without  action. 

After  this  the  Greeks  determined  in  coun¬ 
cil  to  remove  their  camp  some  distance,  to 
possess  themselves  of  a  place  convenient  for 
watering,  because  the  springs  near  them  were 
polluted  and  destroyed  by  the  barbarian  cav¬ 
alry.  But  night  being  come,  and  the  captains 
setting  out  towards  the  place  designed  for 
their  camping,  the  soldiers  were  not  very 
ready  to  follow,  and  keep  in  a  body,  but,  as 
soon  as  they  had  quitted  their  first  entrench¬ 
ments,  made  towards  the  city  of  Plataea;  and 
there  was  much  tumult  and  disorder  as  they 
dispersed  to  various  quarters  and  proceeded 
to  pitch  their  tents. 

The  Lacedaemonians,  against  their  will,  had 
the  fortune  to  be  left  by  the  rest.  For  Amom- 
pharetus,  a  brave  and  daring  man,  who  had 
long  been  burning  with  desire  of  the  fight, 
and  resented  their  many  fingerings  and  de¬ 
lays,  calling  the  removal  of  the  camp  a  mere 
running  away  and  flight,  protested  he  would 
not  desert  his  post,  but  would  there  remain 
with  his  company  and  sustain  the  charge  of 
Mardonius.  And  when  Pausanias  came  to  him 
and  told  him  he  did  do  these  things  by  the 


ARISTIDES 

common  vote  and  determination  of  the  Greeks, 
Amompharetus  taking  up  a  great  stone  flung 
it  at  Pausanias’s  feet,  and  “By  this  token/’ 
said  he,  “do  I  give  my  suffrage  for  the  battle, 
nor  have  I  any  concern  with  the  cowardly  con¬ 
sultations  and  decrees  of  other  men.” 

Pausanias,  not  knowing  what  to  do  in  the 
present  juncture,  sent  to  the  Athenians,  who 
were  drawing  off,  to  stay  to  accompany  him; 
and  so  he  himself  set  off  with  the  rest  of  the 
army  for  Plataea,  hoping  thus  to  make  Amom¬ 
pharetus  move. 

Meantime,  day  came  upon  them;  and  Mar- 
donius  (for  he  was  not  ignorant  of  their  de¬ 
serting  their  camp),  having  his  army  in  array, 
fell  upon  the  Lacedaemonians  with  great  shout¬ 
ing  and  noise  of  barbarous  people,  as  if  they 
were  not  about  to  join  battle,  but  crush  the 
Greeks  in  their  flight.  Which  within  a  very 
little  came  to  pass.  For  Pausanias,  perceiving 
what  was  done,  made  a  halt,  and  commanded 
every  one  to  put  themselves  in  order  for  the 
battle;  but  either  through  his  anger  with 
Amompharetus,  or  the  disturbance  he  was  in 
by  reason  of  the  sudden  approach  of  the  ene¬ 
my,  he  forgot  to  give  the  signal  to  the  Greeks 
in  general.  Whence  it  was  that  they  did  not 
come  in  immediately  or  in  a  body  to  their 
assistance,  but  by  small  companies  and  strag¬ 
gling,  when  the  fight  was  already  begun. 

Pausanias,  offering  sacrifice,  could  not  pro¬ 
cure  favourable  omens,  and  so  commanded 
the  Lacedaemonians,  setting  down  their  shields 
at  their  feet,  to  abide  quietly  and  attend  his 
directions,  making  no  resistance  to  any  of 
their  enemies.  And  he  sacrificing  again  a  sec¬ 
ond  time,  the  horse  charged,  and  some  of  the 
Lacedaemonians  were  wounded. 

At  this  time,  also,  Callicrates,  who,  we  are 
told,  was  the  most  comely  man  in  the  army, 
being  shot  with  an  arrow  and  upon  the  point 
of  expiring,  said  that  he  lamented  not  his 
death  (for  he  came  from  home  to  lay  down 
his  life  in  the  defence  of  Greece),  but  that  he 
died  without  action.  The  case  was  indeed  hard, 
and  the  forbearance  of  the  men  wonderful; 
for  they  let  the  enemy  charge  without  re¬ 
pelling  them;  and,  expecting  their  proper  op¬ 
portunity  from  the  gods  and  their  general, 
suffered  themselves  to  be  wounded  and  slain 
in  their  ranks. 

And  some  say,  that  while  Pausanias  was  at 
sacrifice  and  prayers,  some  space  out  of  the 
battle  array,  certain  Lydians,  falling  suddenly 
upon  him,  plundered  and  scattered  the  sacri¬ 
fice:  and  that  Pausanias  and  his  company, 


271 

having  no  arms,  beat  them  with  staves  and 
whips;  and  that,  in  imitation  of  this  attack, 
the  whipping  the  boys  about  the  altar,  and 
after  it  the  Lydian  procession,  are  to  this  day 
practised  in  Sparta. 

Pausanias,  therefore,  being  troubled  at  these 
things,  while  the  priests  went  on  offering  one 
sacrifice  after  another,  turned  himself  towards 
the  temple  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  lifting 
up  his  hands  to  heaven  besought  Juno  of 
Cithaeron,  and  the  other  tutelar  gods  of  the 
Platseans,  if  it  were  not  in  the  fates  for  the 
Greeks  to  obtain  the  victory,  that  they  might 
not  perish  without  performing  some  remark¬ 
able  thing,  and  by  their  actions  demonstrating 
to  their  enemies  that  they  waged  war  with 
men  of  courage  and  soldiers. 

While  Pausanias  was  thus  in  the  act  of  sup¬ 
plication,  the  sacrifices  appeared  propitious, 
and  the  soothsayers  foretold  victory.  The  word 
being  given,  the  Lacedaemonian  battalion  of 
foot  seemed,  on  the  sudden,  like  some  one 
fierce  animal,  setting  up  his  bristles,  and  be¬ 
taking  himself  to  the  combat;  and  the  bar¬ 
barians  perceived  that  they  encountered  with 
men  who  would  fight  it  to  the  death.  There¬ 
fore,  holding  their  wicker-shields  before  them, 
they  shoe  their  arrows  amongst  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians. 

But  they,  keeping  together  in  the  order  of 
a  phalanx,  and  falling  upon  the  enemies, 
forced  their  shields  out  of  their  hands,  and, 
striking  with  their  pikes  at  the  breasts  and 
faces  of  the  Persians,  overthrew  many  of  them, 
who,  however,  fell  not  either  unrevenged  or 
without  courage.  For  taking  hold  of  the  spears 
with  their  bare  hands,  they  broke  many  of 
them,  and  betook  themselves  not  without  ef¬ 
fect  to  the  sword;  and  making  use  of  their 
falchions  and  scimitars,  and  wresting  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians’  shields  from  them,  and  grappling 
with  them,  it  was  a  long  time  that  they  made 
resistance. 

Meanwhile,  for  some  time,  the  Athenians 
stood  still,  waiting  for  the  Lacedaemonians  to 
come  up.  But  when  they  heard  much  noise  as 
of  men  engaged  in  fight,  and  a  messenger, 
they  say,  came  from  Pausanias,  to  advertise 
them  of  what  was  going  on,  they  soon  hasted 
to  their  assistance.  And  as  they  passed  through 
the  plain  to  the  place  where  the  noise  was,  the 
Greeks,  who  took  part  with  the  enemy,  came 
upon  them.  Aristides,  as  soon  as  he  saw  them, 
going  a  considerable  space  before  the  rest, 
cried  out  to  them,  conjuring  them  by  the 
guardian  gods  of  Greece  to  forbear  the  fight, 


272 


and  be  no  impediment  or  stop  to  those  who 
were  going  to  succour  the  defenders  of  Greece. 

But  when  he  perceived  they  gave  no  atten¬ 
tion  to  him,  and  had  prepared  themselves  for 
the  battle,  then  turning  from  the  present  re¬ 
lief  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  he  engaged  them, 
being  five  thousand  in  number.  But  the  great¬ 
est  part  soon  gave  way  and  retreated,  as  the 
barbarians  also  were  put  to  flight.  The  sharp¬ 
est  conflict  is  said  to  have  been  against  the 
Thebans,  the  chiefest  and  most  powerful  per¬ 
sons  among  them  at  that  time  siding  zealously 
with  the  Medes,  and  leading  the  multitude 
not  according  to  their  own  inclinations,  but 
as  being  subjects  of  an  oligarchy. 

The  battle  being  thus  divided,  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians  first  beat  off  the  Persians;  and  a 
Spartan,  named  Arimnestus,  slew  Mardonius 
by  a  blow  on  the  head  with  a  stone,  as  the 
oracle  in  the  temple  of  Amphiaraus  had  fore¬ 
told  to  him.  For  Mardonius  sent  a  Lydian 
thither,  and  another  person,  a  Carian,  to  the 
cave  of  Trophonius.  This  latter  the  priest  of 
the  oracle  answered  in  his  own  language.  But 
the  Lydian  sleeping  in  the  temple  of  Amphia¬ 
raus,  it  seemed  to  him  that  a  minister  of  the 
divinity  stood  before  him  and  commanded 
him  to  be  gone;  and  on  his  refusing  to  do  it, 
flung  a  great  stone  at  his  head,  so  that  he 
thought  himself  slain  with  the  blow. 

Such  is  the  story. — They  drove  the  fliers 
within  their  walls  of  wood;  and,  a  little  time 
after,  the  Athenians  put  the  Thebans  to  flight, 
killing  three  hundred  of  the  chiefest  and  of 
greatest  note  among  them  in  the  actual  fight 
itself.  For  when  they  began  to  flee,  news  came 
that  the  army  of  the  barbarians  was  besieged 
within  their  palisade;  and  so  giving  the 
Greeks  opportunity  to  save  themselves,  they 
marched  to  assist  at  the  fortifications;  and 
coming  in  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  were 
altogether  unhandy  and  inexperienced  in 
storming,  they  took  the  camp  with  great 
slaughter  of  the  enemy. 

For  of  three  hundred  thousand,  forty  thou¬ 
sand  only  are  said  to  have  escaped  with  Arta- 
bazus;  while  on  the  Greeks’  side  there  per¬ 
ished  in  all  thirteen  hundred  and  sixty;  of 
which  fifty-two  were  Athenians,  all  of  the 
tribe  iTantis,  that  fought,  says  Clidemus,  with 
the  greatest  courage  of  any;  and  for  this  rea¬ 
son  the  men  of  this  tribe  used  to  offer  sacri¬ 
fice  for  the  victory,  as  enjoined  by  the  oracle, 
to  the  nymphs  Sphragitides  at  the  expense  of 
the  public;  ninety-one  were  Lacedaemonians, 
and  sixteen  Tegeatans. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

It  is  strange,  therefore,  upon  what  grounds 
Herodotus  can  say,  that  they  only,  and  none 
other,  encountered  the  enemy,  for  the  number 
of  the  slain  and  their  monuments  testify  that 
the  victory  was  obtained  by  all  in  general;  and 
if  the  rest  had  been  standing  still,  while  the 
inhabitants  of  three  cities  only  had  been  en¬ 
gaged  in  the  fight,  they  would  not  have  set  on 
the  altar  the  inscription — 

The  Greeks,  when,  by  their  courage  and  their 

might, 

They  had  repelled  the  Persian  in  the  fight, 

The  common  altar  of  freed  Greece  to  be, 

Reared  this  to  Jupiter  who  guards  the  free. 

They  fought  this  battle  on  the  fourth  day 
of  the  month  Boedromion,  according  to  the 
Athenians,  but  according  to  the  Boeotians,  on 
the  twenty-seventh  of  Panemus; — on  which 
day  there  is  still  a  convention  of  the  Greeks 
at  Plataea,  and  the  Plataeans  still  offer  sacrifice 
for  the  victory  to  Jupiter  of  freedom. 

As  for  the  difference  of  days,  it  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at,  since  even  at  the  present  time, 
when  there  is  a  far  more  accurate  knowledge 
of  astronomy,  some  begin  the  month  at  one 
time,  and  some  at  another. 

After  this,  the  Athenians  not  yielding  the 
honour  of  the  day  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  nor 
consenting  they  should  erect  a  trophy,  things 
were  not  far  from  being  ruined  by  dissension 
among  the  armed  Greeks;  had  not  Aristides, 
by  much  soothing  and  counselling  the  com¬ 
manders,  especially  Leocrates  and  Myronides, 
pacified  and  persuaded  them  to  leave  the 
thing  to  the  decision  of  the  Greeks. 

And  on  their  proceeding  to  discuss  the  mat¬ 
ter,  Theogiton,  the  Megarian,  declared  the 
honour  of  the  victory  was  to  be  given  some 
other  city,  if  they  would  prevent  a  civil  war; 
after  him  Cleocritus  of  Corinth  rising  up, 
made  people  think  he  would  ask  the  palm  for 
the  Corinthians  (for  next  to  Sparta  and  Ath¬ 
ens,  Corinth  was  in  greatest  estimation);  but 
he  delivered  his  opinion,  to  the  general  ad¬ 
miration,  in  favour  of  the  Plataeans;  and  coun¬ 
selled  to  take  away  all  contention  by  giving 
them  the  reward  and  glory  of  the  victory, 
whose  being  honoured  could  be  distasteful  to 
neither  party.  This  being  said,  first  Aristides 
gave  consent  in  the  name  of  the  Athenians, 
and  Pausanias,  then,  for  the  Lacedaemonians. 
So,  being  reconciled,  they  set  apart  eighty 
talents  for  the  Plataeans,  with  which  they  built 
the  temple  and  dedicated  the  image  to  Mi¬ 
nerva,  and  adorned  the  temple  with  pictures, 
which  even  to  this  very  day  retain  their  lustre. 


ARISTIDES 

But  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Athenians  each 
erected  a  trophy  apart  by  themselves.  On  their 
consulting  the  oracle  about  offering  sacrifice, 
Apollo  answered  that  they  should  dedicate  an 
altar  to  Jupiter  of  freedom,  but  should  not 
sacrifice  till  they  had  extinguished  the  fires 
throughout  the  country,  as  having  been  de¬ 
filed  by  the  barbarians,  and  had  kindled  un¬ 
polluted  fire  at  the  common  altar  at  Delphi. 

The  magistrates  of  Greece,  therefore,  went 
forthwith  and  compelled  such  as  had  fire  to 
put  it  out;  and  Euchidas,  a  Plataean,  promis¬ 
ing  to  fetch  fire,  with  all  possible  speed,  from 
the  altar  of  the  god,  went  to  Delphi,  and  hav¬ 
ing  sprinkled  and  purified  his  body  crowned 
himself  with  laurel;  and  taking  the  fire  from 
the  altar  ran  back  to  Plataea,  and  got  back 
there  before  sunset,  performing  in  one  day  a 
journey  of  a  thousand  furlongs;  and  saluting 
his  fellow-citizens  and  delivering  them  the 
fire,  he  immediately  fell  down,  and  in  a  short 
time  after  expired.  But  the  Plataeans,  taking 
him  up,  interred  him  in  the  temple  of  Diana 
Euclia,  setting  this  inscription  over  him:  “Eu¬ 
chidas  ran  to  Delphi  and  back  again  in  one 
day.” 

Most  people  believe  that  Euclia  is  Diana, 
and  call  her  by  that  name.  But  some  say  she 
was  the  daughter  of  Hercules,  by  Myrto,  the 
daughter  of  Mencetius,  and  sister  of  Patroclus, 
and  dying  a  virgin,  was  worshipped  by  the 
Boeotians  and  Locrians.  Her  altar  and  image 
are  set  up  in  all  their  market-places,  and  those 
of  both  sexes  that  are  about  marrying  sacrifice 
to  her  before  the  nuptials. 

A  general  assembly  of  all  the  Greeks  being 
called,  Aristides  proposed  a  decree  that  the 
deputies  and  religious  representatives  of  the 
Greek  states  should  assemble  annually  at  Pla- 
taea,  and  every  fifth  year  celebrate  the  Eleuthe- 
ria  or  games  of  freedom.  And  that  there 
should  be  a  levy  upon  all  Greece  for  the  war 
against  the  barbarians  of  ten  thousand  spear¬ 
men,  one  thousand  horse,  and  a  hundred  sail 
of  ships;  but  the  Plataeans  to  be  exempt,  and 
sacred  to  the  service  of  the  gods,  offering  sac¬ 
rifice  for  the  welfare  of  Greece. 

These  things  being  ratified,  the  Plataeans  un¬ 
dertook  the  performance  of  annual  sacrifice  to 
such  as  were  slain  and  buried  in  that  place; 
which  they  still  perform  in  the  following 
manner.  On  the  sixteenth  day  of  Maemacte- 
rion  (which  with  the  Boeotians  is  Alalcome- 
nus)  they  make  their  procession,  which,  be¬ 
ginning  by  break  of  day,  is  led  by  a  trumpeter 
sounding  for  onset;  then  follow  certain  char- 


273 

iots  loaded  with  myrrh  and  garlands;  and 
then  a  black  bull;  then  come  the  young  men 
of  free  birth  carrying  libations  of  wine  and 
milk  in  large  two-handed  vessels,  and  jars  of 
oil  and  precious  ointments,  none  of  servile 
condition  being  permitted  to  have  any  hand 
in  this  ministration,  because  the  men  died  in 
defence  of  freedom;  after  all  comes  the  chief 
magistrate  of  Plataea  (for  whom  it  is  unlawful 
at  other  times  either  to  touch  iron  or  wear 
any  other  coloured  garment  but  white),  at 
that  time  apparelled  in  a  purple  robe;  and, 
taking  a  water-pot  out  of  the  city  record-office, 
he  proceeds,  bearing  a  sword  in  his  hand, 
through  the  middle  of  the  town  to  the  sepul¬ 
chres.  Then  drawing  water  out  of  a  spring, 
he  washes  and  anoints  the  monuments,  and 
sacrificing  the  bull  upon  a  pile  of  wood,  and 
making  supplication  to  Jupiter  and  Mercury 
of  the  earth,  invites  those  valiant  men  who 
perished  in  the  defence  of  Greece  to  the  ban¬ 
quet  and  the  libations  of  blood.  After  this, 
mixing  a  bowl  of  wine,  and  pouring  out  for 
himself,  he  says,  “I  drink  to  those  who  lost 
their  lives  for  the  liberty  of  Greece.”  These 
solemnities  the  Plataeans  observe  to  this  day. 

Aristides  perceived  that  the  Athenians,  after 
their  return  into  the  city,  were  eager  for  a 
democracy;  and  deeming  the  people  to  de¬ 
serve  consideration  on  account  of  their  valiant 
behaviour,  as  also  that  it  was  a  matter  of  diffi¬ 
culty,  they  being  well  armed,  powerful,  and 
full  of  spirit  with  their  victories,  to  oppose 
them  by  force,  he  brought  forward  a  decree 
that  every  one  might  share  in  the  government 
and  the  archons  be  chosen  out  of  the  whole 
body  of  the  Athenians. 

And  on  Themistocles  telling  the  people  in 
assembly  that  he  had  some  advice  for  them, 
which  could  not  be  given  in  public,  but  was 
most  important  for  the  advantage  and  secur¬ 
ity  of  the  city,  they  appointed  Aristides  alone 
to  hear  and  consider  it  with  him.  And  on  his 
acquainting  Aristides  that  his  intent  was  to 
set  fire  to  the  arsenal  of  the  Greeks,  for  by 
that  means  should  the  Athenians  become  su¬ 
preme  masters  of  all  Greece,  Aristides,  return¬ 
ing  to  the  assembly,  told  them  that  nothing 
was  more  advantageous  than  what  Themis¬ 
tocles  designed,  and  nothing  more  unjust. 
The  Athenians,  hearing  this,  gave  Themis¬ 
tocles  order  to  desist;  such  was  the  love  of  jus¬ 
tice  felt  by  the  people,  and  such  the  credit  and 
confidence  they  reposed  in  Aristides. 

Being  sent  in  joint  commission  with  Cimon 
to  the  war,  he  took  notice  that  Pausanias  and 


274 

the  other  Spartan  captains  made  themselves 
offensive  by  imperiousness  and  harshness  to 
the  confederates;  and  by  being  himself  gentle 
and  considerate  with  them,  and  by  the  cour¬ 
tesy  and  disinterested  temper  which  Cimon, 
after  his  example,  manifested  in  the  expedi¬ 
tions,  he  stole  away  the  chief  command  from 
the  Lacedaemonians,  neither  by  weapons,  ships, 
or  horses,  but  by  equity  and  wise  policy.  For 
the  Athenians  being  endeared  to  the  Greeks 
by  the  justice  of  Aristides  and  by  Cimon’s 
moderation,  the  tyranny  and  selfishness  of 
Pausanias  rendered  them  yet  more  desirable. 

He  on  all  occasions  treated  the  commanders 
of  the  confederates  haughtily  and  roughly; 
and  the  common  soldiers  he  punished  with 
stripes,  or  standing  under  the  iron  anchor  for 
a  whole  day  together;  neither  was  it  permitted 
for  any  to  provide  straw  for  themselves  to  lie 
on,  or  forage  for  their  horses,  or  to  come  near 
the  springs  to  water  before  the  Spartans  were 
furnished,  but  servants  with  whips  drove 
away  such  as  approached.  And  when  Aris¬ 
tides  once  was  about  to  complain  and  expostu¬ 
late  with  Pausanias,  he  told  him  with  an 
angry  look  that  he  was  not  at  leisure,  and 
gave  no  attention  to  him. 

The  consequence  was  that  the  sea  captains 
and  generals  of  the  Greeks,  in  particular,  the 
Chians,  Samians,  and  Lesbians,  came  to  Aris¬ 
tides  and  requested  him  to  be  their  general, 
and  to  receive  the  confederates  into  his  com¬ 
mand,  who  had  long  desired  to  relinquish  the 
Spartans  and  come  over  to  the  Athenians.  But 
he  answered  that  he  saw  both  equity  and 
necessity  in  what  they  said,  but  their  fidelity 
required  the  test  of  some  action,  the  commis¬ 
sion  of  which  would  make  it  impossible  for 
the  multitude  to  change  their  minds  again. 
Upon  which  Uliades,  the  Samian,  and  Anta- 
goras  of  Chios,  conspiring  together,  ran  in 
near  Byzantium  on  Pausanias’s  galley,  getting 
her  between  them  as  she  was  sailing  before  the 
rest. 

But  when  Pausanias,  beholding  them,  arose 
up  and  furiously  threatened  soon  to  make 
them  know  that  they  had  been  endangering 
not  his  galley,  but  their  own  countries,  they 
bid  him  go  his  way,  and  thank  Fortune  that 
fought  for  him  at  Plataea;  for  hitherto,  in  rev¬ 
erence  to  that,  the  Greeks  had  forborne  from 
inflicting  on  him  the  punishment  he  deserved. 
In  fine,  they  all  went  off  and  joined  the  Athe¬ 
nians. 

And  here  the  magnanimity  of  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians  was  wonderful.  For  when  they  per- 


PLUTARCHS  LIVES 

ceived  that  their  generals  were  becoming  cor¬ 
rupted  by  the  greatness  of  their  authority, 
they  voluntarily  laid  down  the  chief  com¬ 
mand,  and  left  off  sending  any  more  of  them 
to  the  wars,  choosing  rather  to  have  citizens 
of  moderation  and  consistent  in  the  obser¬ 
vance  of  their  customs,  than  to  possess  the  do¬ 
minion  of  all  Greece. 

Even  during  the  command  of  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians,  the  Greeks  paid  a  certain  contribu¬ 
tion  towards  the  maintenance  of  the  war;  and 
being  desirous  to  be  rated  city  by  city  in  their 
due  proportion,  they  desired  Aristides  of  the 
Athenians,  and  gave  him  command,  survey¬ 
ing  the  country  and  revenue,  to  assess  every 
one  according  to  their  ability  and  what  they 
were  worth.  But  he,  being  so  largely  empow¬ 
ered,  Greece,  as  it  were,  submitting  all  her 
affairs  to  his  sole  management,  went  out  poor 
and  returned  poorer,  laying  the  tax  not  only 
without  corruption  and  injustice,  but  to  the 
satisfaction  and  convenience  of  all.  For  as  the 
ancients  celebrated  the  age  of  Saturn,  so  did 
the  confederates  of  Athens  Aristides’s  taxation, 
terming  it  the  happy  time  of  Greece;  and  that 
more  especially,  as  the  sum  was  in  a  short 
time  doubled,  and  afterwards  trebled.  For  the 
assessment  which  Aristides  made  was  four 
hundred  and  sixty  talents.  But  to  this  Pericles 
added  very  near  one  third  part  more;  for 
Thucydides  says  that  in  the  beginning  of  the 
Peloponnesian  war  the  Athenians  had  coming 
in  from  their  confederates  six  hundred  talents. 

But  after  Pericles’s  death,  the  demagogues, 
increasing  by  little  and  little,  raised  it  to  the 
sum  of  thirteen  hundred  talents;  not  so  much 
through  the  war’s  being  so  expensive  and 
changeable  either  by  its  length  or  ill  success, 
as  by  their  alluring  the  people  to  spend  upon 
largesses  and  playhouse  allowances,  and  in 
erecting  statues  and  temples.  Aristides,  there¬ 
fore,  having  acquired  a  wonderful  and  great 
reputation  by  this  levy  of  the  tribute,  Themis- 
tocles  is  said  to  have  derided  him,  as  if  this 
had  been  not  the  commendation  of  a  man, 
but  a  money-bag;  a  retaliation,  though  not  in 
the  same  kind,  for  some  free  words  which  Ar¬ 
istides  had  used.  For  he,  when  Themistocles 
once  was  saying  that  he  thought  the  highest  vir¬ 
tue  of  a  general  was  to  understand  and  fore¬ 
know  the  measures  the  enemy  would  take,  re¬ 
plied,  “This,  indeed,  Themistocles,  is  simply 
necessary,  but  the  excellent  thing  in  a  general 
is  to  keep  his  hands  from  taking  money.” 

Aristides,  moreover,  made  all  the  people  of 
Greece  swear  to  keep  the  league,  and  himself 


ARISTIDES 

took  the  oath  in  the  name  of  the  Athenians, 
flinging  wedges  of  red-hot  iron  into  the  sea, 
after  curses  against  such  as  should  make 
breach  of  their  vow.  But  afterwards,  it  would 
seem,  when  things  were  in  such  a  state  as  con¬ 
strained  them  to  govern  with  a  stronger  hand, 
he  bade  the  Athenians  to  throw  the  perjury 
upon  him,  and  manage  affairs  as  convenience 
required.  And,  in  general,  Theophrastus  tells 
us,  that  Aristides  was,  in  his  own  private  af¬ 
fairs,  and  those  of  his  fellow-citizens,  rigor¬ 
ously  just,  but  that  in  public  matters  he  acted 
often  in  accordance  with  his  country’s  policy, 
which  demanded,  sometimes,  not  a  little  in¬ 
justice.  It  is  reported  of  him  that  he  said  in 
a  debate,  upon  the  motion  of  the  Samians  for 
removing  the  treasure  from  Delos  to  Athens, 
contrary  to  the  league,  that  the  thing  indeed 
was  not  just  but  was  expedient. 

In  fine,  having  established  the  dominion  of 
his  city  over  so  many  people,  he  himself  re¬ 
mained  indigent;  and  always  delighted  as 
much  in  the  glory  of  being  poor,  as  in  that  of 
his  trophies;  as  is  evident  from  the  following 
story.  Callias,  the  torch-bearer,  was  related  to 
him;  and  was  prosecuted  by  his  enemies  in  a 
capital  cause,  in  which,  after  they  had  slightly 
argued  the  matters  on  which  they  indicted 
him,  they  proceeded,  besides  the  point,  to  ad¬ 
dress  the  judges:  “You  know,”  said  they, 
“Aristides,  the  son  of  Lysimachus,  who  is  the 
admiration  of  all  Greece.  In  what  a  condition 
do  you  think  his  family  is  in  at  his  house, 
when  you  see  him  appear  in  public  in  such  a 
threadbare  cloak?  Is  it  not  probable  that  one 
who,  out  of  doors,  goes  thus  exposed  to  the 
cold,  must  want  food  and  other  necessaries 
at  home?  Callias,  the  wealthiest  of  the  Athe¬ 
nians,  does  nothing  to  relieve  either  him  or 
his  wife  and  children  in  their  poverty,  though 
he  is  his  own  cousin,  and  has  made  use  of 
him  in  many  cases,  and  often  reaped  advan¬ 
tage  by  his  interest  with  you.” 

But  Callias,  perceiving  the  judges  were 
moved  more  particularly  by  this,  and  were  ex¬ 
asperated  against  him,  called  in  Aristides,  re¬ 
quiring  him  to  testify  that  when  he  frequently 
offered  him  divers  presents,  and  entreated 
him  to  accept  them,  he  had  refused,  answer¬ 
ing  that  it  became  him  better  to  be  proud  of 
his  poverty  than  Callias  of  his  wealth;  since 
there  are  many  to  be  seen  that  make  a  good 
or  a  bad  use  of  riches,  but  it  is  difficult,  com¬ 
paratively,  to  meet  with  one  who  supports 
poverty  in  a  noble  spirit;  those  only  should 
be  ashamed  of  it  who  incurred  it  against  their 


275 

wills.  On  Aristides  deposing  these  facts  in 
favour  of  Callias,  there  was  none  who  heard 
them  that  went  not  away  desirous  rather  to 
be  poor  like  Aristides  than  rich  as  Callias. 
Thus  Aeschines,  the  scholar  of  Socrates,  writes. 

But  Plato  declares  that,  of  all  the  great  re¬ 
nowned  men  in  the  city  of  Athens,  he  was 
the  only  one  worthy  of  consideration;  for 
Themistocles,  Cimon,  and  Pericles  filled  the 
city  with  porticoes,  treasure,  and  many  other 
vain  things,  but  Aristides  guided  his  public 
life  by  the  rule  of  justice.  He  showed  his  mod¬ 
eration  very  plainly  in  his  conduct  towards 
Themistocles  himself.  For  though  Themis¬ 
tocles  had  been  his  adversary  in  all  his  under¬ 
takings,  and  was  the  cause  of  his  banishment, 
yet  when  he  afforded  a  similar  opportunity  of 
revenge,  being  accused  to  the  city,  Aristides 
bore  him  no  malice;  but  while  Alcmaeon,  Ci¬ 
mon,  and  many  others  were  prosecuting  and 
impeaching  him,  Aristides  alone  neither  did 
nor  said  any  ill  against  him,  and  no  more 
triumphed  over  his  enemy  in  his  adversity 
than  he  had  envied  him  his  prosperity- 

Some  say  Aristides  died  in  Pontus,  during 
a  voyage  upon  the  affairs  of  the  public.  Oth¬ 
ers  that  he  died  of  old  age  at  Athens  being  in 
great  honour  and  veneration  amongst  his  fel¬ 
low-citizens. 

But  Craterus,  the  Macedonian,  relates  his 
death  as  follows.  After  the  banishment  of 
Themistocles,  he  says,  the  people  growing  in¬ 
solent,  there  sprung  up  a  number  of  false  and 
frivolous  accusers,  impeaching  the  best  and 
most  influential  men  and  exposing  them  to 
the  envy  of  the  multitude,  whom  their  good 
fortune  and  power  had  filled  with  self-conceit. 
Amongst  these,  Aristides  was  condemned  of 
bribery  upon  the  accusation  of  Diophantus  of 
Amphitrope,  for  taking  money  from  the  Ioni- 
ans  when  he  was  collector  of  the  tribute;  and 
being  unable  to  pay  the  fine,  which  was  fifty 
minae,  sailed  to  Ionia,  and  died  there. 

But  of  this  Craterus  brings  no  written  proof, 
neither  the  sentence  of  his  condemnation,  nor 
the  decree  of  the  people;  though  in  general  it 
is  tolerably  usual  with  him  to  set  down  such 
things  and  to  cite  his  authors.  Almost  all  oth¬ 
ers  who  have  spoken  of  the  misdeeds  of  the 
people  towards  their  generals  collect  them  all 
together,  and  tell  us  of  the  banishment  of 
Themistocles,  Miltiades’s  bonds,  Pericles’s  fine, 
and  the  death  of  Paches  in  the  judgment-hall, 
who,  upon  receiving  sentence,  killed  himself 
on  the  hustings,  with  many  things  of  the  like 
nature.  They  add  the  banishment  of  Aristides; 


27  6 

but  of  this  his  condemnation  they  make  no 
mention. 

Moreover,  his  monument  is  to  be  seen  at 
Phalerum,  which  they  say  was  built  him  by 
the  city,  he  not  having  left  enough  even  to 
defray  funeral  charges.  And  it  is  stated  that 
his  two  daughters  were  publicly  married  out 
of  the  prytaneum ,  or  state-house,  by  the  city, 
which  decreed  each  of  them  three  thousand 
drachmas  for  her  portion;  and  that  upon  his 
son  Lysimachus  the  people  bestowed  a  hun¬ 
dred  minae  of  money,  and  as  many  acres  of 
planted  land,  and  ordered  him  besides,  upon 
the  motion  of  Alcibiades,  four  drachmas  a 
day.  Furthermore,  Lysimachus  leaving  a 
daughter,  named  Polycrite,  as  Callisthenes 
says,  the  people  voted  her,  also,  the  same 
allowance  for  food  with  those  that  obtained 
the  victory  in  the  Olympic  Games. 

But  Demetrius  the  Phalerian,  Hieronymus 
the  Rhodian,  Aristoxenus,  the  musician,  and 
Aristotle  (if  the  Treatise  of  Nobility  is  to  be 
reckoned  among  the  genuine  pieces  of  Aris¬ 
totle)  say  that  Myrto,  Aristides’s  granddaugh¬ 
ter,  lived  with  Socrates,  the  philosopher,  who 
indeed  had  another  wife,  but  took  her  into  his 
house,  being  a  widow,  by  reason  of  her  in- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

digence  and  want  of  the  necessaries  of  life. 
But  Panaetius  sufficiently  confutes  this  in  his 
book  concerning  Socrates. 

Demetrius  the  Phalerian,  in  his  Socrates , 
says  he  knew  one  Lysimachus,  son  of  the 
daughter  of  Aristides,  extremely  poor,  who 
used  to  sit  near  what  is  called  the  laccheum, 
and  sustained  himself  by  a  table  for  interpret¬ 
ing  dreams;  and  that,  upon  his  proposal  and 
representations,  a  decree  was  passed  by  the 
people  to  give  the  mother  and  aunt  of  this 
man  half  a  drachma  a  day.  The  same  De¬ 
metrius,  when  he  was  legislating  himself,  de¬ 
creed  each  of  these  women  a  drachma  per 
diem. 

And  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  the 
people  of  Athens  should  take  such  care  of 
people  living  in  the  city,  since,  hearing  the 
granddaughter  of  Aristogiton  was  in  a  low 
condition  in  the  isle  of  Lemnos,  and  so  poor 
nobody  would  marry  her,  they  brought  her 
back  to  Athens,  and  marrying  her  to  a  man 
of  good  birth,  gave  a  farm  at  Potamus  as  her 
marriage-portion;  and  of  similar  humanity 
and  bounty  the  city  of  Athens,  even  in  our 
age,  has  given  numerous  proofs,  and  is  justly 
admired  and  respected  in  consequence. 


MARCUS  CATO 

2-34-I49  BC- 


Marcus  Cato,  we  are  told,  was  born  at 
Tusculum,  though  (till  he  betook 
himself  to  civil  and  military  affairs) 
he  lived  and  was  bred  up  in  the  country  of 
the  Sabines,  where  his  father’s  estate  lay.  His 
ancestors  seeming  almost  entirely  unknown, 
he  himself  praises  his  father  Marcus,  as  a 
worthy  man  and  a  brave  soldier,  and  Cato, 
his  great-grandfather,  too,  as  one  who  had 
often  obtained  military  prizes,  and  who,  hav¬ 
ing  lost  five  horses  under  him,  received,  on 
the  account  of  his  valour,  the  worth  of  them 
out  of  the  public  exchequer. 

Now  it  being  the  custom  among  the  Ro¬ 
mans  to  call  those  who,  having  no  repute  by 
birth,  made  themselves  eminent  by  their  own 
exertions,  new  men  or  upstarts,  they  called 
even  Cato  himself  so,  and  so  he  confessed 
himself  to  be  as  to  any  public  distinction  or 
employment,  but  yet  asserted  that  in  the  ex¬ 


ploits  and  virtues  of  his  ancestors  he  was  very 
ancient. 

His  third  name  originally  was  not  Cato, 
but  Priscus,  though  afterwards  he  had  the 
surname  of  Cato,  by  reason  of  his  abilities; 
for  the  Romans  call  a  skilful  or  experienced 
man  Catus.  He  was  of  a  ruddy  complexion 
and  grey-eyed;  as  the  writer,  who,  with  no 
good-will,  made  the  following  epigram  upon 
him  lets  us  see: — 

Porcius,  who  snarls  at  all  in  every  place, 

With  his  grey  eyes,  and  with  his  fiery  face , 
Even  after  death  will  scarce  admitted  be 
Into  the  infernal  realms  by  Hecate. 

He  gained,  in  early  life,  a  good  habit  of 
body  by  working  with  his  own  hands,  and 
living  temperately,  and  serving  in  war;  and 
seemed  to  have  an  equal  proportion  both  of 
health  and  strength.  And  he  exerted  and  prac¬ 
tised  his  eloquence  through  all  the  neighbour- 


MARCUS  CATO 

hood  and  little  villages;  thinking  it  ‘as  requi¬ 
site  as  a  second  body,  and  an  all  but  necessary 
organ  to  one  who  looks  forward  to  something 
above  a  mere  humble  and  inactive  life.  He 
would  never  refuse  to  be  counsel  for  those 
who  needed  him,  and  was,  indeed,  early  reck¬ 
oned  a  good  lawyer,  and,  ere  long,  a  capable 
orator. 

Hence  his  solidity  and  depth  of  character 
showed  itself  gradually  more  and  more  to 
those  with  whom  he  was  concerned,  and 
claimed,  as  it  were,  employment  in  great  af¬ 
fairs  and  places  of  public  command.  Nor  did 
he  merely  abstain  from  taking  fees  for  his 
counsel  and  pleading,  but  did  not  even  seem 
to  put  any  high  price  on  the  honour  which 
proceeded  from  such  kind  of  combats,  seem¬ 
ing  much  more  desirous  to  signalise  himself 
in  the  camp  and  in  real  fights;  and  while  yet 
but  a  youth,  had  his  breast  covered  with  scars 
he  had  received  from  the  enemy:  being  (as 
he  himself  says)  but  seventeen  years  old  when 
he  made  his  first  campaign;  in  the  time  when 
Hannibal,  in  the  height  of  his  success,  was 
burning  and  pillaging  all  Italy. 

In  engagements  he  would  strike  boldly, 
without  flinching,  stand  firm  to  his  ground, 
fix  a  bold  countenance  upon  his  enemies,  and 
with  a  harsh  threatening  voice  accost  them, 
justly  thinking  himself  and  telling  others  that 
such  a  rugged  kind  of  behaviour  sometimes 
terrifies  the  enemy  more  than  the  sword  it¬ 
self.  In  his  marches  he  bore  his  own  arms  on 
foot,  whilst  one  servant  only  followed,  to  carry 
the  provision  for  his  table,  with  whom  he  is 
said  never  to  have  been  angry  or  hasty  whilst 
he  made  ready  his  dinner  or  supper,  but 
would,  for  the  most  part,  when  he  was  free 
from  military  duty,  assist  and  help  him  him¬ 
self  to  dress  it.  When  he  was  with  the  army, 
he  used  to  drink  only  water;  unless,  perhaps, 
when  extremely  thirsty,  he  might  mingle  it 
with  a  little  vinegar,  or  if  he  found  his 
strength  fail  him,  take  a  little  wine. 

The  little  country  house  of  Manius  Curius, 
who  had  been  thrice  carried  in  triumph,  hap¬ 
pened  to  be  near  his  farm;  so  that  often  going 
thither,  and  contemplating  the  small  compass 
of  the  place,  and  plainness  of  the  dwelling,  he 
formed  an  idea  of  the  mind  of  the  person, 
who  being  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  Romans, 
and  having  subdued  the  most  warlike  nations, 
nay,  had  driven  Pyrrhus  out  of  Italy,  now, 
after  three  triumphs,  was  contented  to  dig  in 
so  small  a  piece  of  ground,  and  live  in  such 
a  cottage.  Here  it  was  that  the  ambassadors 


277 

of  the  Samnites,  finding  him  boiling  turnips 
in  the  chimney  corner,  offered  him  a  present 
of  gold;  but  he  sent  them  away  with  this  say¬ 
ing;  that  he,  who  was  content  with  such  a 
supper,  had  no  need  of  gold;  and  that  he 
thought  it  more  honourable  to  conquer  those 
who  possessed  the  gold,  than  to  possess  the 
gold  itself.  Cato,  after  reflecting  upon  these 
things,  used  to  return  and,  reviewing  his  own 
farm,  his  servants,  and  housekeeping,  increase 
his  labour  and  retrench  all  superfluous  ex¬ 
penses. 

When  Fabius  Maximus  took  Tarentum, 
Cato,  being  then  but  a  youth,  was  a  soldier 
under  him;  and  being  lodged  with  one  Near- 
chus,  a  Pythagorean,  desired  to  understand 
some  of  his  doctrine,  and  hearing  from  him 
the  language,  which  Plato  also  uses — that 
pleasure  is  evil’s  chief  bait;  the  body  the  prin¬ 
cipal  calamity  of  the  soul;  and  that  those 
thoughts  which  most  separate  and  take  it  off 
from  the  affections  of  the  body  most  enfran¬ 
chise  and  purify  it — he  fell  in  love  the  more 
with  frugality  and  temperance.  With  this  ex¬ 
ception,  he  is  said  not  to  have  studied  Greek 
until  when  he  was  pretty  old;  and  in  rhetoric, 
to  have  then  profited  a  little  by  Thucydides, 
but  more  by  Demosthenes.  His  writings,  how¬ 
ever,  are  considerably  embellished  with  Greek 
sayings  and  stories;  nay,  many  of  these,  trans¬ 
lated  word  for  word,  are  placed  with  his  own 
apophthegms  and  sentences. 

There  was  a  man  of  the  highest  rank,  and 
very  influential  among  the  Romans,  called 
Valerius  Flaccus,  who  was  singularly  skilful 
in  discerning  excellence  yet  in  the  bud,  and 
also  much  disposed  to  nourish  and  advance  it. 
He,  it  seems,  had  lands  bordering  upon  Ca¬ 
to’s:  nor  could  he  but  admire  when  he  under¬ 
stood  from  his  servants  the  manner  of  his  liv¬ 
ing,  how  he  laboured  with  his  own  hands, 
went  on  foot  betimes  in  the  morning  to  the 
courts  to  assist  those  who  wanted  his  counsel: 
how,  returning  home  again,  when  it  was  win¬ 
ter,  he  would  throw  a  loose  frock  over  his 
shoulders,  and  in  the  summer  time  would 
work  without  anything  on  among  his  domes¬ 
tics,  sit  down  with  them,  eat  of  the  same 
bread,  and  drink  of  the  same  wine.  When 
they  spoke,  also,  of  other  good  qualities,  his 
fair  dealing  and  moderation,  mentioning  also 
some  of  his  wise  sayings,  he  ordered  that  he 
should  be  invited  to  supper;  and  thus  becom¬ 
ing  personally  assured  of  his  fine  temper  and 
his  superior  character,  which,  like  a  plant, 
seemed  only  to  require  culture  and  a  better 


278 

situation,  he  urged  and  persuaded  him  to 
apply  himself  to  state  affairs  at  Rome. 

Thither,  therefore,  he  went,  and  by  his 
pleading  soon  gained  many  friends  and  ad¬ 
mirers;  but,  Valerius  chiefly  assisting  his  pro¬ 
motion,  he  first  of  all  got  appointed  tribune 
in  the  army,  and  afterwards  was  made  quaes¬ 
tor,  or  treasurer.  And  now  becoming  eminent 
and  noted,  he  passed,  with  Valerius  himself, 
through  the  greatest  commands,  being  first 
his  colleague  as  consul,  and  then  censor. 

But  among  all  the  ancient  senators,  he  most 
attached  himself  to  Fabius  Maximus;  not  so 
much  for  the  honour  of  his  person,  and  the 
greatness  of  his  power,  as  that  he  might  have 
before  him  his  habit  and  manner  of  life,  as 
the  best  examples  to  follow;  and  so  he  did 
not  hesitate  to  oppose  Scipio  the  Great,  who, 
being  then  but  a  young  man,  seemed  to  set 
himself  against  the  power  of  Fabius,  and  to 
be  envied  by  him. 

For  being  sent  together  with  him  as  trea¬ 
surer,  when  he  saw  him,  according  to  his  nat¬ 
ural  custom,  make  great  expenses,  and  dis¬ 
tribute  among  the  soldiers  without  sparing,  he 
freely  told  him  that  the  expense  in  itself  was 
not  the  greatest  thing  to  be  considered,  but 
that  he  was  corrupting  the  frugality  of  the 
soldiers  by  giving  them  the  means  to  aban¬ 
don  themselves  to  unnecessary  pleasures  and 
luxuries.  Scipio  answered  that  he  had  no 
need  for  so  accurate  a  treasurer  (bearing  on 
as  he  was,  so  to  say,  full  sail  to  the  war),  and 
that  he  owed  the  people  an  account  of  his 
actions,  and  not  of  the  money  he  spent. 

Hereupon  Cato  returned  from  Sicily  and, 
together  with  Fabius,  made  loud  complaints 
in  the  open  senate  of  Scipio’s  lavishing  un¬ 
speakable  sums,  and  childishly  loitering  away 
his  time  in  wrestling  matches  and  comedies, 
as  if  he  were  not  to  make  war,  but  holiday; 
and  thus  succeeded  in  getting  some  of  the 
tribunes  of  the  people  sent  to  call  him  back 
to  Rome,  in  case  the  accusations  should  prove 
true.  But  Scipio  demonstrating,  as  it  were, 
to  them,  by  his  preparations,  the  coming  vic¬ 
tory,  and,  being  found  merely  to  be  living 
pleasantly  with  his  friends,  when  there  was 
nothing  else  to  do,  but  in  no  respect  because 
of  that  easiness  and  liberality  at  all  the  more 
negligent  in  things  of  consequence  and  mo¬ 
ment,  without  impediment,  set  sail  toward 
the  war. 

Cato  grew  more  and  more  powerful  by  his 
eloquence,  so  that  he  was  commonly  called 
the  Roman  Demosthenes;  but  his  manner  of 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

life  was  yet  more  famous  and  talked  of.  For 
oratorical  skill  was,  as  an  accomplishment, 
commonly  studied  and  sought  after  by  all 
young  men;  but  he  was  very  rare  who  would 
cultivate  the  old  habits  of  bodily  labour,  or 
prefer  a  light  supper,  and  a  breakfast  which 
never  saw  the  fire,  or  be  in  love  with  poor 
clothes  and  a  homely  lodging,  or  could  set  his 
ambition  rather  on  doing  without  luxuries 
than  on  possessing  them.  For  now  the  state, 
unable  to  keep  its  purity  by  reason  of  its 
greatness,  and  having  so  many  affairs,  and 
people  from  all  parts  under  its  government, 
was  fain  to  admit  many  mixed  customs  and 
new  examples  of  living. 

With  reason,  therefore,  everybody  admired 
Cato,  when  they  saw  others  sink  under  la¬ 
bours  and  grow  effeminate  by  pleasures;  and 
yet  beheld  him  unconquered  by  either,  and 
that  not  only  when  he  was  young  and  de¬ 
sirous  of  honour,  but  also  when  old  and  grey¬ 
headed,  after  a  consulship  and  triumph;  like 
some  famous  victor  in  the  games,  persevering 
in  his  exercise  and  maintaining  his  character 
to  the  very  last.  He  himself  says  that  he  never 
wore  a  suit  of  clothes  which  cost  more  than 
a  hundred  drachmas;  and  that,  when  he  was 
general  and  consul,  he  drank  the  same  wine 
which  his  workmen  did;  and  that  the  meat 
or  fish  which  was  bought  in  the  meat-market 
for  his  dinner  did  not  cost  above  thirty  asses. 
All  which  was  for  the  sake  of  the  common¬ 
wealth,  that  so  his  body  might  be  the  hardier 
for  the  war. 

Having  a  piece  of  embroidered  Babylonian 
tapestry  left  him,  he  sold  it;  because  none  of 
his  farmhouses  were  so  much  as  plastered.  Nor 
did  he  ever  buy  a  slave  for  above  fifteen  hun¬ 
dred  drachmas;  as  he  did  not  seek  for  effemi¬ 
nate  and  handsome  ones,  but  able  sturdy 
workmen,  horse-keepers  and  cow-herds;  and 
these  he  thought  ought  to  be  sold  again,  when 
they  grew  old,  and  no  useless  servants  fed 
in  the  house.  In  short,  he  reckoned  nothing  a 
good  bargain  which  was  superfluous;  but  what¬ 
ever  it  was,  though  sold  for  a  farthing,  he 
would  think  it  a  great  price,  if  you  had  no  need 
of  it,  and  was  for  the  purchase  of  lands  for 
sowing  and  feeding,  rather  than  grounds  for 
sweeping  and  watering. 

Some  imputed  these  things  to  petty  avarice, 
but  others  approved  of  him,  as  if  he  had  only 
the  more  strictly  denied  himself  for  the  recti¬ 
fying  and  amending  of  others.  Yet  certainlv. 
in  my  judgment,  it  marks  an  over-rigid  tem¬ 
per  for  a  man  to  take  the  work  out  of  his 


MARCUS  CATO 

servants  as  out  of  brute  beasts,  turning  them 
off  and  selling  them  in  their  old  age,  and 
thinking  there  ought  to  be  no  further  com¬ 
merce  between  man  and  man  than  whilst 
there  arises  some  profit  by  it.  We  see  that 
kindness  or  humanity  has  a  larger  field  than 
bare  justice  to  exercise  itself  in;  law  and  jus¬ 
tice  we  cannot,  in  the  nature  of  things,  em¬ 
ploy  on  others  than  men;  but  we  may  extend 
our  goodness  and  charity  even  to  irrational 
creatures;  and  such  acts  flow  from  a  gentle 
nature,  as  water  from  an  abundant  spring.  It 
is  doubtless  the  part  of  a  kind-natured  man  to 
keep  even  worn-out  horses  and  dogs,  and  not 
only  take  care  of  them  when  they  are  foals 
and  whelps,  but  also  when  they  are  grown  old. 

The  Athenians,  when  they  built  their  Heca- 
tompedon,  turned  those  mules  loose  to  feed 
freely  which  they  had  observed  to  have  done 
the  hardest  labour.  One  of  these  (they  say) 
came  once  of  itself  to  offer  its  service,  and  ran 
along  with,  nay,  and  went  before,  the  teams 
which  drew  the  waggons  up  to  the  Acropolis, 
as  if  it  would  incite  and  encourage  them  to 
draw  more  stoutly;  upon  which  there  passed 
a  vote  that  the  creature  should  be  kept  at  the 
public  charge  even  till  it  died, 

The  graves  of  Cimon’s  horses,  which  thrice 
won  the  Olympian  races,  are  yet  to  be  seen 
close  by  his  own  monument.  Old  Xanthippus, 
too  (amongst  many  others  who  buried  the 
dogs  they  had  bred  up),  entombed  his  which 
swam  after  his  galley  to  Salamis,  when  the 
people  fled  from  Athens,  on  the  top  of  a  cliff, 
which  they  call  the  Dog’s  Tomb  to  this  day. 
Nor  are  we  to  use  living  creatures  like  old 
shoes  or  dishes,  and  throw  them  away  when 
they  are  worn  out  or  broken  with  service;  but 
if  it  were  for  nothing  else,  but  by  way  of 
study  and  practice  in  humanity,  a  man  ought 
always  to  prehabituate  himself  in  these  things 
to  be  of  a  kind  and  sweet  disposition. 

As  to  myself,  I  would  not  so  much  as  sell 
my  draught  ox  on  the  account  of  his  age, 
much  less  for  a  small  piece  of  money  sell  a 
poor  old  man,  and  so  chase  him,  as  it  were, 
from  his  own  country,  by  turning  him  not 
only  out  of  the  place  where  he  has  lived  a 
long  while,  but  also  out  of  the  manner  of 
living  he  has  been  accustomed  to,  and  that 
more  especially  when  he  would  be  as  useless 
to  the  buyer  as  to  the  seller.  Yet  Cato,  for  all 
this,  glories  that  he  left  that  very  horse  in 
Spain  which  he  used  in  the  wars  when  he  was 
consul,  only  because  he  would  not  put  the 
public  to  the  charge  of  his  freight.  Whether 


279 

these  acts  are  to  be  ascribed  to  the  greatness 
or  pettiness  of  his  spirit,  let  every  one  argue 
as  they  please. 

For  his  general  temperance,  however,  and 
self-control  he  really  deserves  the  highest  ad¬ 
miration.  For  when  he  commanded  the  army, 
he  never  took  for  himself,  and  those  that  be¬ 
longed  to  him,  above  three  bushels  of  wheat 
for  a  month,  and  somewhat  less  than  a  bushel 
and  a  half  a  day  of  barley  for  his  baggage- 
cattle.  And  when  he  entered  upon  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  Sardinia,  where  his  predecessors  had 
been  used  to  require  tents,  bedding,  and 
clothes  upon  the  public  account,  and  to  charge 
the  state  heavily  with  the  cost  of  provisions 
and  entertainments  for  a  great  train  of  serv¬ 
ants  and  friends,  the  difference  he  showed  in 
his  economy  was  something  incredible.  There 
was  nothing  of  any  sort  for  which  he  put  the 
public  to  expense;  he  would  walk  without  a 
carriage  to  visit  the  cities,  with  one  only  of 
the  common  town  officers,  who  carried  his 
dress,  and  a  cup  to  offer  libation  with. 

Yet  though  he  seemed  thus  easy  and  spar¬ 
ing  to  all  who  were  under  his  power,  he,  on 
the  other  hand,  showed  most  inflexible  sever¬ 
ity  and  strictness  in  what  related  to  public 
justice,  and  was  rigorous  and  precise  in  what 
concerned  the  ordinances  of  the  common¬ 
wealth;  so  that  the  Roman  government  never 
seemed  more  terrible,  nor  yet  more  mild  than 
under  his  administration. 

His  very  manner  of  speaking  seemed  to 
have  such  a  kind  of  idea  with  it;  for  it  was 
courteous,  and  yet  forcible;  pleasant,  yet  over¬ 
whelming;  facetious,  yet  austere;  sententious, 
and  yet  vehement;  like  Socrates,  in  the  de¬ 
scription  of  Plato,  who  seemed  outwardly  to 
those  about  him  to  be  but  a  simple,  talkative, 
blunt  fellow;  whilst  at  the  bottom  he  was  full 
of  such  gravity  and  matter,  as  would  even 
move  tears  and  touch  the  very  hearts  of  his 
auditors.  And,  therefore,  I  know  not  what  has 
persuaded  some  to  say  that  Cato’s  style  was 
chiefly  like  that  of  Lysias.  However,  let  us 
leave  those  to  judge  of  these  things  who  pro¬ 
fess  most  to  distinguish  between  the  several 
kinds  of  oratorical  style  in  Latin;  whilst  we 
write  down  some  of  his  memorable  sayings, 
being  of  the  opinion  that  a  man’s  character 
appears  much  more  by  his  words  than,  as 
some  think  it  does,  by  his  looks. 

Being  once  desirous  to  dissuade  the  com¬ 
mon  people  of  Rome  from  their  unseasonable 
and  impetuous  clamour  for  largesses  and  dis¬ 
tributions  of  corn,  he  began  thus  to  harangue 


280 

them:  “It  is  a  difficult  task,  O  citizens,  to 
make  speeches  to  the  belly,  which  has  no 
ears.” 

Reproving,  also,  their  sumptuous  habits,  he 
said  it  was  hard  to  preserve  a  city  where  a  fish 
sold  for  more  than  an  ox. 

He  had  a  saying,  also,  that  the  Roman 
people  were  like  sheep;  for  they,  when  single, 
do  not  obey,  but  when  altogether  in  a  flock, 
they  follow  their  leaders:  “So  you,”  said  he, 
“when  you  have  got  together  in  a  body,  let 
yourselves  be  guided  by  those  whom  singly 
you  would  never  think  of  being  advised  by.” 

Discoursing  of  the  power  of  women:  “Men,” 
said  he,  “usually  command  women;  but  we 
command  all  men,  and  the  women  command 
us.”  But  this,  indeed,  is  borrowed  from  the 
sayings  of  Themistocles,  who,  when  his  son 
was  making  many  demands  of  him  by  means 
of  his  mother,  said,  “O  woman,  the  Athenians 
govern  the  Greeks;  I  govern  the  Athenians, 
but  you  govern  me,  and  your  son  governs 
you;  so  let  him  use  his  power  sparingly,  since, 
simple  as  he  is,  he  can  do  more  than  all  the 
Greeks  together.” 

Another  saying  of  Cato’s  was,  that  the  Ro¬ 
man  people  did  not  only  fix  the  value  of 
such  and  such  purple  dyes,  but  also  of  such 
and  such  habits  of  life:  “For,”  said  he,  “as 
dyers  most  of  all  dye  such  colours  as  they  see 
to  be  most  agreeable,  so  the  young  men  learn, 
and  zealously  affect,  what  is  most  popular 
with  you.” 

He  also  exhorted  them  that  if  they  were 
grown  great  by  their  virtue  and  temperance, 
they  should  not  change  for  the  worse;  but  if 
intemperance  and  vice  had  made  them  great, 
they  should  change  for  the  better;  for  by  that 
means  they  were  grown  indeed  quite  great 
enough.  He  would  say,  likewise,  of  men  who 
wanted  to  be  continually  in  office,  that  ap¬ 
parently  they  did  not  know  their  road,  since 
they  could  not  do  without  beadles  to  guide 
them  on  it. 

He  also  reproved  the  citizens  for  choosing 
still  the  same  men  as  their  magistrates:  “For 
you  will  seem,”  said  he,  “either  not  to  esteem 
government  worth  much,  or  to  think  few 
worthy  to  hold  it.” 

Speaking,  too,  of  a  certain  enemy  of  his, 
who  lived  a  very  base  and  discreditable  life: 
“It  is  considered,”  he  said,  “rather  as  a  curse 
than  a  blessing  on  him,  that  this  fellow’s 
mother  prays  that  she  may  leave  him  behind 
her.” 

Pointing  at  one  who  had  sold  the  land 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

which  his  father  had  left  him,  and  which  lay 
near  the  seaside,  he  pretended  to  express  his 
wonder  at  his  being  stronger  even  than  the 
sea  itself;  for  what  it  washed  away  with  a 
great  deal  of  labour,  he  with  a  great  deal  of 
ease  drank  away. 

When  the  senate,  with  a  great  deal  of  splen¬ 
dour,  received  King  Eumenes  on  his  visit  to 
Rome,  and  the  chief  citizens  strove  who  should 
be  most  about  him,  Cato  appeared  to  regard 
him  with  suspicion  and  apprehension;  and 
when  one  that  stood  by,  too,  took  occasion 
to  say  that  he  was  a  very  good  prince  and  a 
great  lover  of  the  Romans,  “It  may  be  so,” 
said  Cato,  “but  by  nature  this  same  animal  of 
a  king  is  a  kind  of  man-eater,”  nor,  indeed, 
were  there  ever  kings  who  deserved  to  be 
compared  with  Epaminondas,  Pericles,  The¬ 
mistocles,  Manius  Curius,  or  Hamilcar,  sur- 
named  Barcas. 

He  used  to  say,  too,  that  his  enemies  envied 
him  because  he  had  to  get  up  every  day  before 
light  and  neglect  his  own  business  to  follow 
that  of  the  public. 

He  would  also  tell  you  that  he  had  rather 
be  deprived  of  the  reward  for  doing  well  than 
not  to  suffer  the  punishment  for  doing  ill; 
and  that  he  could  pardon  all  offenders  but 
himself. 

The  Romans  having  sent  three  ambassadors 
to  Bithynia,  of  whom  one  was  gouty,  another 
had  his  skull  trepanned,  and  the  other  seemed 
little  better  than  a  fool,  Cato,  laughing,  gave 
out  that  the  Romans  had  sent  an  embassy 
which  had  neither  feet,  head,  nor  heart. 

His  interest  being  entreated  by  Scipio,  on 
account  of  Polybius,  for  the  Achaean  exiles, 
and  there  happening  to  be  a  great  discussion 
in  the  senate  about  it,  some  being  for,  and 
some  against  their  return,  Cato,  standing  up, 
thus  delivered  himself:  “Here  do  we  sit  all 
day  long,  as  if  we  had  nothing  to  do  but  beat 
our  brains  whether  these  old  Greeks  should 
be  carried  to  their  graves  by  the  bearers  here 
or  by  those  in  Achaea.” 

The  senate  voting  their  return,  it  seems  that 
a  few  days  after  Polybius’s  friends  further 
wished  that  it  should  be  further  moved  in  the 
senate  that  the  said  banished  persons  should 
receive  again  the  honours  which  they  first  had 
in  Achsea;  and  to  this  purpose  they  sounded 
Cato  for  his  opinion;  but  he,  smiling,  an¬ 
swered,  that  Polybius,  Ulysses  like,  having  es¬ 
caped  out  of  the  Cyclops’  den,  wanted,  it 
would  seem,  to  go  back  again  because  he  had 
left  his  cap  and  belt  behind  him. 


MARCUS  CATO 

He  used  to  assert,  also,  that  wise  m‘en  prof¬ 
ited  more  by  fools,  than  fools  by  wise  men; 
for  that  wise  men  avoided  the  faults  of  fools, 
but  that  fools  would  not  imitate  the  good  ex¬ 
amples  of  wise  men. 

He  would  profess,  too,  that  he  was  more 
taken  with  young  men  that  blushed  than  with 
those  who  looked  pale;  and  that  he  never  de¬ 
sired  to  have  a  soldier  that  moved  his  hands 
too  much  in  marching,  and  his  feet  too  much 
in  fighting,  or  snored  louder  than  he  shouted. 

Ridiculing  a  fat,  overgrown  man:  “What 
use,”  said  he,  “can  the  state  turn  a  man’s  body 
to,  when  all  between  the  throat  and  groin  is 
taken  up  by  the  belly?” 

When  one  who  was  much  given  to  pleas¬ 
ures  desired  his  acquaintance,  begging  his 
pardon,  he  said  he  could  not  live  with  a  man 
whose  palate  was  of  a  quicker  sense  than  his 
heart. 

He  would  likewise  say  that  the  soul  of  a 
lover  lived  in  the  body  of  another:  and  that 
in  his  whole  life  he  most  repented  of  three 
things;  one  was,  that  he  had  trusted  a  secret 
to  a  woman;  another  that  he  went  by  water 
when  he  might  have  gone  by  land;  the  third, 
that  he  had  remained  one  whqle  day  without 
doing  any  business  of  moment. 

Applying  himself  to  an  old  man  who  was 
committing  some  vice:  “Friend,”  said  he,  “old 
age  has  of  itself  blemishes  enough;  do  not  you 
add  to  it  the  deformity  of  vice.” 

Speaking  to  a  tribune,  who  was  reputed  a 
poisoner,  and  was  very  violent  for  the  bring¬ 
ing  in  of  a  bill,  in  order  to  make  a  certain 
law:  “Young  man,”  cried  he,  “I  know  not 
which  would  be  better,  to  drink  what  you 
mix,  or  confirm  what  you  would  put  up  for 
a  law.” 

Being  reviled  by  a  fellow  who  lived  a  prof¬ 
ligate  and  wicked  life:  “A  contest,”  replied 
he,  “is  unequal  between  you  and  me:  for  you 
can  hear  ill  words  easily,  and  can  as  easily 
give  them;  but  it  is  unpleasant  to  me  to  give 
such,  and  unusual  to  hear  them.”  Such  was 
his  manner  of  expressing  himself  in  his  mem¬ 
orable  sayings. 

Being  chosen  consul,  with  his  friend  and 
familiar,  Valerius  Flaccus,  the  government  of 
that  part  of  Spain  which  the  Romans  called 
the  Hither  Spain  fell  to  his  lot.  Here,  as  he 
was  engaged  in  reducing  some  of  the  tribes 
by  force,  and  bringing  over  others  by  good 
words,  a  large  army  of  barbarians  fell  upon 
him,  so  that  there  was  danger  of  being  dis¬ 
gracefully  forced  out  again.  He  therefore  call- 


281 

ed  upon  his  neighbours,  the  Celtiberians,  for 
help;  and  on  their  demanding  two  hundred 
talents  for  their  assistance,  everybody  else 
thought  it  intolerable  that  even  the  Romans 
should  promise  barbarians  a  reward  for  their 
aid;  but  Cato  said  there  was  no  discredit  or 
harm  in  it;  for,  if  they  overcame,  they  would 
pay  them  out  of  the  enemy’s  purse,  and  not 
out  of  their  own;  but  if  they  were  overcome, 
there  would  be  nobody  left  either  to  demand 
the  reward  or  to  pay  it.  However,  he  won 
that  battle  completely,  and,  after  that,  all  his 
other  affairs  succeeded  splendidly. 

Polybius  says  that,  by  his  command,  the 
walls  of  all  the  cities  on  this  side  the  river 
Baetis  were  in  one  day’s  time  demolished,  and 
yet  there  were  a  great  many  of  them  full  of 
brave  and  warlike  men.  Cato  himself  says  that 
he  took  more  cities  than  he  stayed  days  in 
Spain.  Neither  is  this  a  mere  rhodomontade, 
if  it  be  true  that  the  number  was  four  hun¬ 
dred. 

And  though  the  soldiers  themselves  had  got 
much  in  the  fights,  yet  he  distributed  a  pound 
of  silver  to  every  man  of  them,  saying,  it  was 
better  that  many  of  the  Romans  should  return 
home  with  silver,  rather  than  a  few  with  gold. 

For  himself,  he  affirms,  that  of  all  the  things 
that  were  taken,  nothing  came  to  him  beyond 
what  he  ate  and  drank.  “Neither  do  I  find 
fault,”  continued  he,  “with  those  that  seek  to 
profit  by  these  spoils,  but  I  had  rather  com¬ 
pete  in  valour  with  the  best,  than  in  wealth 
with  the  richest,  or  with  the  most  covetous  in 
love  of  money.”  Nor  did  he  merely  keep  him¬ 
self  clear  from  taking  anything,  but  even  all 
those  who  more  immediately  belonged  to  him. 
He  had  five  servants  with  him  in  the  army; 
one  of  whom  called  Paccus,  bought  three  boys 
out  of  those  who  were  taken  captive;  which 
Cato  coming  to  understand,  the  man,  rather 
than  venture  into  his  presence,  hanged  him¬ 
self.  Cato  sold  the  boys,  and  carried  the  price 
he  got  for  them  into  the  public  exchequer. 

Scipio  the  Great,  being  his  enemy,  and  de¬ 
siring,  whilst  he  was  carrying  all  things  so 
successfully,  to  obstruct  him,  and  take  the  af¬ 
fairs  of  Spain  into  his  own  hands,  succeeded 
in  getting  himself  appointed  his  successor  in 
the  government,  and,  making  all  possible 
haste,  put  a  term  to  Cato’s  authority.  But  he, 
taking  with  him  a  convoy  of  five  cohorts  of 
foot  and  five  hundred  horse  to  attend  him 
home,  overthrew  by  the  way  the  Lacetanians, 
and  taking  from  them  six  hundred  deserters, 
caused  them  all  to  be  beheaded;  upon  which 


282 


Scipio  seemed  to  be  in  indignation,  but  Cato, 
in  mock  disparagement  of  himself,  said, 
‘‘Rome  would  become  great  indeed,  if  the 
most  honourable  and  great  men  would  not 
yield  up  the  first  place  of  valour  to  those  who 
were  more  obscure,  and  when  they  who  were 
of  the  commonalty  (as  he  himself  was)  would 
contend  in  valour  with  those  who  were  most 
eminent  in  birth  and  honour.” 

The  senate  having  voted  to  change  nothing 
of  what  had  been  established  by  Cato,  the  gov¬ 
ernment  passed  away  under  Scipio  to  no  man¬ 
ner  of  purpose,  in  idleness  and  doing  nothing; 
and  so  diminished  his  credit  much  more  than 
Cato’s.  Nor  did  Cato,  who  now  received  a 
triumph,  remit  after  this  and  slacken  the  reins 
of  virtue,  as  many  do,  who  strive  not  so  much 
for  virtue’s  sake,  as  for  vainglory,  and  having 
attained  the  highest  honours,  as  the  consul¬ 
ship  and  triumphs,  pass  the  rest  of  their  life 
in  pleasure  and  idleness,  and  quit  all  public 
affairs.  But  he,  like  those  who  are  just  entered 
upon  public  life  for  the  first  time,  and  thirst 
after  gaining  honour  and  glory  in  some  new 
office,  strained  himself,  as  if  he  were  but  just 
setting  out;  and  offering  still  publicly  his  serv¬ 
ice  to  his  friends  and  citizens,  would  give  up 
neither  his  pleadings  nor  his  soldiery. 

He  accompanied  and  assisted  Tiberius  Sem- 
pronius,  as  his  lieutenant,  when  he  went  into 
Thrace  and  to  the  Danube;  and,  in  the  quality 
of  tribune,  went  with  Manius  Acilius  into 
Greece,  against  Antiochus  the  Great,  who,  af¬ 
ter  Hannibal,  more  than  any  one  struck  terror 
into  the  Romans.  For  having  reduced  once 
more  under  a  single  command  almost  the 
whole  of  Asia,  all,  namely,  that  Seleucus  Nica- 
tor  had  possessed,  and  having  brought  into 
obedience  many  warlike  nations  of  the  bar¬ 
barians,  he  longed  to  fall  upon  the  Romans, 
as  if  they  only  were  now  worthy  to  fight  with 
him. 

So  across  he  came  with  his  forces,  pretend¬ 
ing,  as  a  specious  cause  of  the  war,  that  it  was 
to  free  the  Greeks,  who  had  indeed  no  need 
of  it,  they  having  been  but  newly  delivered 
from  the  power  of  king  Philip  and  the  Mace¬ 
donians,  and  made  independent,  with  the  free 
use  of  their  own  laws,  by  the  goodness  of  the 
Romans  themselves:  so  that  all  Greece  was  in 
commotion  and  excitement,  having  been  cor¬ 
rupted  by  the  hopes  of  royal  aid  which  the 
popular  leaders  in  their  cities  put  them  into. 

Manius,  therefore,  sent  ambassadors  to  the 
different  cities;  and  Titus  Flamininus  (as  is 
written  in  the  account  of  him)  suppressed  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

quieted  most  of  the  attempts  of  the  innova¬ 
tors,  without  any  trouble.  Cato  brought  over 
the  Corinthians,  those  of  Patrae  and  iTgium, 
and  spent  a  good  deal  of  time  at  Athens. 
There  is  also  an  oration  of  his  said  to  be  ex¬ 
tant  which  he  spoke  in  Greek  to  the  people, 
in  which  he  expressed  his  admiration  of  the 
virtue  of  the  ancient  Athenians,  and  signified 
that  he  came  with  a  great  deal  of  pleasure  to 
be  a  spectator  of  the  beauty  and  greatness  of 
their  city. 

But  this  is  a  fiction;  for  he  spoke  to  the 
Athenians  by  an  interpreter,  though  he  was 
able  to  have  spoken  himself;  but  he  wished 
to  observe  the  usage  of  his  own  country,  and 
laughed  at  those  who  admired  nothing  but 
what  was  in  Greek.  Jesting  upon  Postumius 
Albinus,  who  had  written  an  historical  work 
in  Greek,  and  requested  that  allowances  might 
be  made  for  his  attempt,  he  said  that  allow¬ 
ance  indeed  might  be  made  if  he  had  done  it 
under  the  express  compulsion  of  an  Amphic- 
tyonic  decree.  The  Athenians,  he  says,  ad¬ 
mired  the  quickness  and  vehemence  of  his 
speech;  for  an  interpreter  would  be  very  long 
in  repeating  what  he  expressed  with  a  great 
deal  of  brevity;  but  on  the  whole  he  professed 
to  believe  that  the  words  of  the  Greeks  came 
only  from  their  lips,  whilst  those  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans  came  from  their  hearts. 

Now  Antiochus,  having  occupied  with  his 
army  the  narrow  passages  about  Thermopylae, 
and  added  palisades  and  walls  to  the  natural 
fortifications  of  the  place,  sat  down  there, 
thinking  he  had  done  enough  to  divert  the 
war;  and  the  Romans,  indeed,  seemed  wholly 
to  despair  of  forcing  the  passage;  but  Cato, 
calling  to  mind  the  compass  and  circuit  which 
the  Persians  had  formerly  made  to  come  at 
this  place,  went  forth  in  the  night,  taking 
along  with  him  part  of  the  army. 

Whilst  they  were  climbing  up,  the  guide, 
who  was  a  prisoner,  missed  the  way,  and  wan¬ 
dering  up  and  down  by  impracticable  and 
precipitous  paths,  filled  the  soldiers  with  fear 
and  despondency.  Cato  perceiving  the  danger, 
commanded  all  the  rest  to  halt,  and  stay 
where  they  were,  whilst  he  himself,  taking 
along  with  him  one  Lucius  Manlius,  a  most 
expert  man  at  climbing  mountains,  went  for¬ 
ward  with  a  great  deal  of  labour  and  danger, 
in  the  dark  night,  and  without  the  least  moon¬ 
light,  among  the  wild  olive-trees  and  steep 
craggy  rocks,  there  being  nothing  but  preci¬ 
pices  and  darkness  before  their  eyes,  till  they 
struck  into  a  little  pass  which  they  thought 


MARCUS  CATO 

might  lead  down  into  the  enemy’s  camp. 
There  they  put  up  marks  upon  some  con¬ 
spicuous  peaks  which  surmount  the  hill  called 
Callidromon,  and,  returning  again,  they  led 
the  army  along  with  them  to  the  said  marks, 
till  they  got  into  their  little  path  again,  and 
there  once  made  a  halt;  but  when  they  began 
to  go  further,  the  path  deserted  them  at  a 
precipice,  where  they  were  in  another  strait 
and  fear;  nor  did  they  perceive  that  they  were 
all  this  while  near  the  enemy. 

And  now  the  day  began  to  give  some  light, 
when  they  seemed  to  hear  a  noise,  and  pres¬ 
ently  after  to  see  the  Greek  trenches  and  the 
guard  at  the  foot  of  the  rock.  Here,  therefore, 
Cato  halted  his  forces,  and  commanded  the 
troops  from  Firmum  only,  without  the  rest, 
to  stick  by  him,  as  he  had  always  found  them 
faithful  and  ready.  And  when  they  came  up 
and  formed  around  him  in  close  order,  he 
thus  spoke  to  them:  “I  desire,”  he  said,  “to 
take  one  of  the  enemy  alive,  that  so  I  may 
understand  what  men  these  are  who  guard 
the  passage;  their  number;  and  with  what  dis¬ 
cipline,  order,  and  preparation  they  expect  us; 
but  this  feat,”  continued  he,  “must  be  an  act 
of  a  great  deal  of  quickness  and  boldness, 
such  as  that  of  lions,  when  they  dart  upon 
some  timorous  animal.” 

Cato  had  no  sooner  thus  expressed  himself, 
but  the  Firmans  forthwith  rushed  down  the 
mountain,  just  as  they  were,  upon  the  guard, 
and,  falling  unexpectedly  upon  them,  af¬ 
frighted  and  dispersed  them  all.  One  armed 
man  they  took,  and  brought  to  Cato,  who 
quickly  learned  from  him  that  the  rest  of  the 
forces  lay  in  the  narrow  passage  about  the 
king;  that  those  who  kept  the  tops  of  the 
rocks  were  six  hundred  choice  iTtolians.  Cato, 
therefore,  despising  the  smallness  of  their 
number  and  carelessness,  forthwith  drawing 
his  sword,  fell  upon  them  with  a  great  noise 
of  trumpets  and  shouting.  The  enemy,  per¬ 
ceiving  them  thus  tumbling,  as  it  were,  upon 
them  from  the  precipices,  flew  to  the  main 
body,  and  put  all  things  into  disorder  there. 

In  the  meantime,  whilst  Manius  was  forc¬ 
ing  the  works  below,  and  pouring  the  thickest 
of  his  forces  into  the  narrow  passages,  Antio- 
chus  was  hit  in  the  mouth  with  a  stone,  so 
that  his  teeth  being  beaten  out  by  it,  he  felt 
such  excessive  pain,  that  he  was  fain  to  turn 
away  with  his  horse;  nor  did  any  part  of  his 
army  stand  the  shock  of  the  Romans.  Yet, 
though  there  seemed  no  reasonable  hope  of 
flight,  where  all  paths  were  so  difficult,  and 


283 

where  there  were  deep  marshes  and  steep 
rocks,  which  looked  as  if  they  were  ready  to 
receive  those  who  should  stumble,  the  fugi¬ 
tives,  nevertheless,  crowding  and  pressing  to¬ 
gether  in  the  narrow  passages,  destroyed  even 
one  another  in  their  terror  of  the  swords  and 
blows  of  the  enemy. 

Cato  (as  it  plainly  appears)  was  never  over¬ 
sparing  of  his  own  praises,  and  seldom  shunned 
boasting  of  any  exploit;  which  quality,  in¬ 
deed,  he  seems  to  have  thought  the  natural  ac¬ 
companiment  of  great  actions;  and  with  these 
particular  exploits  he  was  highly  puffed  up; 
he  says  that  those  who  saw  him  that  day  pur¬ 
suing  and  slaying  the  enemies  were  ready  to 
assert  that  Cato  owed  not  so  much  to  the  pub¬ 
lic  as  the  public  did  to  Cato;  nay,  he  adds, 
that  Manius  the  consul,  coming  hot  from  the 
fight,  embraced  him  for  a  great  while,  when 
both  were  all  in  a  sweat;  and  then  cried  out 
with  joy  that  neither  he  himself,  no,  nor  all 
the  people  together,  could  make  him  a  re¬ 
compense  equal  to  his  actions. 

After  the  fight  he  was  sent  to  Rome,  that 
he  himself  might  be  the  messenger  of  it:  and 
so,  with  a  favourable  wind,  he  sailed  to  Brun- 
dusium,  and  in  one  day  got  from  thence  to 
Tarentum;  and  having  travelled  four  days 
more,  upon  the  fifth,  counting  from  the  time 
of  his  landing,  he  arrived  at  Rome,  and  so 
brought  the  first  news  of  the  victory  himself; 
and  filled  the  whole  city  with  joy  and  sac¬ 
rifices,  and  the  people  with  the  belief  that 
they  were  able  to  conquer  every  sea  and  every 
land. 

These  are  pretty  nearly  all  the  eminent  ac¬ 
tions  of  Cato  relating  to  military  affairs:  in 
civil  policy,  he  was  of  opinion  that  one  chief 
duty  consisted  in  accusing  and  indicting  crim¬ 
inals.  He  himself  prosecuted  many,  and  he 
would  also  assist  others  who  prosecuted  them, 
nay,  would  even  procure  such,  as  he  did  the 
Petilii  against  Scipio;  but  not  being  able  to  de¬ 
stroy  him,  by  reason  of  the  nobleness  of  his 
family,  and  the  real  greatness  of  his  mind, 
which  enabled  him  to  trample  all  calumnies 
under  foot,  Cato  at  last  would  meddle  no 
more  with  him;  yet  joining  with  the  accusers 
against  Scipio’s  brother  Lucius,  he  succeeded 
in  obtaining  a  sentence  against  him,  which 
condemned  him  to  the  payment  of  a  large 
sum  of  money  to  the  state;  and  being  insol¬ 
vent,  and  in  danger  of  being  thrown  into  jail, 
he  was,  by  the  interposition  of  the  tribunes 
of  the  people,  with  much  ado  dismissed. 

It  is  also  said  of  Cato,  that  when  he  met  a 


284 

certain  youth,  who  had  effected  the  disgrace 
of  one  of  his  father’s  enemies,  walking  in  the 
market-place,  he  shook  him  by  the  hand,  tell¬ 
ing  him,  that  this  was  what  we  ought  to  sacri¬ 
fice  to  our  dead  parents — not  lambs  and  goats, 
but  the  tears  and  condemnations  of  their  ad¬ 
versaries. 

But  neither  did  he  himself  escape  with  im¬ 
punity  in  his  management  of  affairs;  for  if  he 
gave  his  enemies  but  the  least  hold,  he  was 
still  in  danger,  and  exposed  to  be  brought  to 
justice.  He  is  reported  to  have  escaped  at  least 
fifty  indictments;  and  one  above  the  rest, 
which  was  the  last,  when  he  was  eighty-six 
years  old,  about  which  time  he  uttered  the 
well-known  saying,  that  it  was  hard  for  him 
who  had  lived  with  one  generation  of  men, 
to  plead  now  before  another.  Neither  did  he 
make  this  the  least  of  his  lawsuits;  for,  four 
years  after,  when  he  was  fourscore  and  ten, 
he  accused  Servilius  Galba:  so  that  his  life 
and  actions  extended,  we  may  say,  as  Nestor’s 
did,  over  three  ordinary  ages  of  man.  For, 
having  had  many  contests,  as  we  have  related, 
with  Scipio  the  Great,  about  affairs  of  state, 
he  continued  them  down  to  Scipio  the  young¬ 
er,  who  was  the  adopted  grandson  of  the  for¬ 
mer,  and  the  son  of  that  Paulus  who  over¬ 
threw  Perseus  and  the  Macedonians. 

Ten  years  after  his  consulship,  Cato  stood 
for  the  office  of  censor,  which  was  indeed  the 
summit  of  all  honour,  and  in  a  manner  the 
highest  step  in  civil  affairs;  for  besides  all 
other  power,  it  had  also  that  of  an  inquisition 
into  every  one’s  life  and  manners. 

For  the  Romans  thought  that  no  marriage, 
or  rearing  of  children,  nay,  no  feast  or  drink¬ 
ing-bout,  ought  to  be  permitted  according  to 
every  one’s  appetite  or  fancy,  without  being 
examined  and  inquired  into;  being  indeed  of 
opinion  that  a  man’s  character  was  much 
sooner  perceived  in  things  of  this  sort  than  in 
what  is  done  publicly  and  in  open  day. 

They  chose,  therefore,  two  persons,  one  out 
of  the  patricians,  the  other  out  of  the  com¬ 
mons,  who  were  to  watch,  correct,  and  pun¬ 
ish,  if  any  one  ran  too  much  into  voluptuous¬ 
ness,  or  transgressed  the  usual  manner  of  life 
of  his  country;  and  these  they  called  Censors. 
They  had  power  to  take  away  a  horse,  or  ex¬ 
pel  out  of  the  senate  any  one  who  lived  in- 
temperately  and  out  of  order.  It  was  also  their 
business  to  take  an  estimate  of  what  every 
one  was  worth,  and  to  put  down  in  registers 
everybody’s  birth  and  quality;  besides  many 
other  prerogatives. 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

And  therefore  the  chief  nobility  opposed  his 
pretensions  to  it.  Jealousy  prompted  the  patri¬ 
cians,  who  thought  that  it  would  be  a  stain 
to  everybody’s  nobility,  if  men  of  no  original 
honour  should  rise  to  the  highest  dignity  and 
power;  while  others,  conscious  of  their  own 
evil  practices,  and  of  the  violation  of  the  laws 
and  customs  of  their  country,  were  afraid  of 
the  austerity  of  the  man;  which,  in  an  office 
of  such  great  power,  was  likely  to  prove  most 
uncompromising  and  severe.  And  so,  consult¬ 
ing  among  themselves,  they  brought  forward 
seven  candidates  in  opposition  to  him,  who 
sedulously  set  themselves  to  court  the  people’s 
favour  by  fair  promises,  as  though  what  they 
wished  for  was  indulgent  and  easy  govern¬ 
ment. 

Cato,  on  the  contrary,  promising  no  such 
mildness,  but  plainly  threatening  evil  livers, 
from  the  very  hustings  openly  declared  him¬ 
self,  and  exclaiming  that  the  city  needed  a 
great  and  thorough  purgation,  called  upon  the 
people,  if  they  were  wise,  not  to  choose  the 
gentlest,  but  the  roughest  of  physicians;  such 
a  one,  he  said,  he  was,  and  Valerius  Flaccus, 
one  of  the  patricians,  another;  together  with 
him,  he  doubted  not  but  he  should  do  some¬ 
thing  worth  the  while,  and  that  by  cutting  to 
pieces  and  burning  like  a  hydra  all  luxury  and 
voluptuousness.  He  added,  too,  that  he  saw 
all  the  rest  endeavouring  after  the  office  with 
ill  intent,  because  they  were  afraid  of  those 
who  would  exercise  it  justly,  as  they  ought. 
And  so  truly  great  and  so  worthy  of  great 
men  to  be  its  leaders  were,  it  would  seem,  the 
Roman  people,  that  they  did  not  fear  the 
severity  and  grim  countenance  of  Cato,  but 
rejecting  those  smooth  promisers  who  were 
ready  to  do  all  things  to  ingratiate  themselves, 
they  took  him,  together  with  Flaccus;  obey¬ 
ing  his  recommendations  not  as  though  he 
were  a  candidate,  but  as  if  he  had  had  the 
actual  power  of  commanding  and  governing 
already. 

Cato  named,  as  chief  of  the  senate,  his 
friend  and  colleague  Lucius  Valerius  Flac¬ 
cus,  and  expelled,  among  many  others,  Lucius 
Quintius,  who  had  been  consul  seven  years 
before,  and  (which  was  greater  honour  to 
him  than  the  consulship)  brother  to  that 
Titus  Flamininus  who  overthrew  King  Philip. 
The  reason  he  had  for  his  expulsion  was  this. 
Lucius,  it  seems,  took  along  with  him  in  all 
his  commands  a  youth  whom  he  had  kept 
as  his  companion  from  the  flower  of  his  age, 
and  to  whom  he  gave  as  much  power  and 


MARCUS  CATO 

respect  as  to  the  chiefest  of  his  friends  and 
relations. 

Now  it  happened  that  Lucius  being  con¬ 
sular  governor  of  one  of  the  provinces,  the 
youth  setting  himself  down  by  him,  as  he 
used  to  do,  among  other  flatteries  with  which 
he  played  upon  him,  when  he  was  in  his  cups, 
told  him  he  loved  him  so  dearly  that,  “though 
there  was  a  show  of  gladiators  to  be  seen  at 
Rome,  and  I,”  he  said,  “had  never  beheld  one 
in  my  life;  and  though  I,  as  it  were,  longed 
to  see  a  man  killed,  yet  I  made  all  possible 
haste  to  come  to  you.”  Upon  this  Lucius,  re¬ 
turning  his  fondness,  replied,  “Do  not  be 
melancholy  on  that  account;  I  can  remedy 
that.”  Ordering  therefore,  forthwith,  one  of 
those  condemned  to  die  to  be  brought  to  the 
feast,  together  with  the  headsman  and  axe, 
he  asked  the  youth  if  he  wished  to  see  him 
executed.  The  boy  answering  that  he  did, 
Lucius  commanded  the  executioner  to  cut 
off  his  neck;  and  this  several  historians  men¬ 
tion;  and  Cicero,  indeed,  in  his  dialogue  de 
Senectute,  introduces  Cato  relating  it  himself. 
But  Livy  says  that  he  that  was  killed  was  a 
Gaulish  deserter,  and  that  Lucius  did  not  ex¬ 
ecute  him  by  the  stroke  of  the  executioner, 
but  with  his  own  hand;  and  that  it  is  so  stated 
in  Cato’s  speech. 

Lucius  being  thus  expelled  out  of  the  senate 
by  Cato,  his  brother  took  it  very  ill,  and  ap¬ 
pealing  to  the  people,  desired  that  Cato  should 
declare  his  reasons;  and  when  he  began  to 
relate  this  transaction  of  the  feast,  Lucius  en¬ 
deavoured  to  deny  it;  but  Cato  challenging 
him  to  a  formal  investigation,  he  fell  off  and 
refused  it,  so  that  he  was  then  acknowledged 
to  suffer  deservedly.  Afterwards,  however, 
when  there  was  some  show  at  the  theatre,  he 
passed  by  the  seats  where  those  who  had  been 
consuls  used  to  be  placed,  and  taking  his  seat 
a  great  way  off,  excited  the  compassion  of  the 
common  people,  who  presendy  with  a  great 
noise  made  him  go  forward,  and  as  much  as 
they  could  tried  to  set  right  and  salve  over 
what  had  happened.  Manilius,  also,  who,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  public  expectation,  would  have 
been  next  consul,  he  threw  out  of  the  senate, 
because,  in  the  presence  of  his  daughter,  and 
in  open  day,  he  had  kissed  his  wife.  He  said 
that,  as  for  himself,  his  wife  never  came  into 
his  arms  except  when  there  was  great  thun¬ 
der;  (so  that  it  was  a  jest  with  him  that  it 
was  a  pleasure  for  him  when  Jupiter  thun¬ 
dered). 

His  treatment  of  Lucius,  likewise  the  broth- 


285 

er  of  Scipio,  and  one  who  had  been  honour¬ 
ed  with  a  triumph,  occasioned  some  odium 
against  Cato;  for  he  took  his  horse  from  him, 
and  was  thought  to  do  it  with  a  design  of 
putting  an  affront  on  Scipio  Africanus,  now 
dead.  But  he  gave  most  general  annoyance  by 
retrenching  people’s  luxury;  for  though  (most 
of  the  youth  being  thereby  already  corrupted) 
it  seemed  almost  impossible  to  take  it  away 
with  an  open  hand  and  directly,  yet  going, 
as  it  were,  obliquely  around,  he  caused  all 
dress  carriages,  women’s  ornaments,  house¬ 
hold  furniture,  whose  price  exceeded  one  thou¬ 
sand  five  hundred  drachmas,  to  be  rated  at 
ten  times  as  much  as  they  were  worth;  intend¬ 
ing  by  thus  making  the  assessments  greater, 
to  increase  the  taxes  paid  upon  them.  He  also 
ordained  that  upon  every  thousand  asses  of 
property  of  this  kind,  three  should  be  paid, 
so  that  people,  burdened  with  these  extra 
charges,  and  seeing  others  of  as  good  estates, 
but  more  frugal  and  sparing,  paying  less  into 
the  public  exchequer,  might  be  tired  out  of 
their  prodigality. 

And  thus,  on  the  one  side,  not  only  those 
were  disgusted  at  Cato  who  bore  the  taxes  for 
the  sake  of  their  luxury,  but  those,  too,  who 
on  the  other  side  laid  by  their  luxury  for  fear 
of  the  taxes.  For  people  in  general  reckon 
that  an  order  not  to  display  their  riches  is 
equivalent  to  the  taking  away  of  their  riches, 
because  riches  are  seen  much  more  in  super¬ 
fluous  than  in  necessary  things.  Indeed  this 
was  what  excited  the  wonder  of  Ariston,  the 
philosopher;  that  we  account  those  who  pos¬ 
sess  superfluous  things  more  happy  than  those 
who  abound  with  what  is  necessary  and  use¬ 
ful.  But  when  one  of  his  friends  asked  Scopas, 
the  rich  Thessalian,  to  give  him  some  article 
of  no  great  utility,  saying  that  it  was  not  a 
thing  that  he  had  any  great  need  or  use  for 
himself,  “In  truth,”  replied  he,  “it  is  just  these 
useless  and  unnecessary  things  that  make  my 
wealth  and  happiness.”  Thus  the  desire  of 
riches  does  not  proceed  from  a  natural  passion 
within  us,  but  arises  rather  from  vulgar  out- 
of-doors  opinion  of  other  people. 

Cato,  notwithstanding,  being  little  solicitous 
as  to  those  who  exclaimed  against  him,  in¬ 
creased  his  austerity.  He  caused  the  pipes, 
through  which  some  persons  brought  the  pub¬ 
lic  water  into  their  houses  and  gardens,  to  be 
cut,  and  threw  down  all  buildings  which 
jutted  out  into  the  common  streets.  He  beat 
down  also  the  price  in  contracts  for  public 
works  to  the  lowest,  and  raised  it  in  contracts 


286 

for  farming  the  taxes  to  the  highest  sum;  by 
which  proceedings  he  drew  a  great  deal  of 
hatred  upon  himself. 

Those  who  were  of  Titus  Flamininus’s 
party  cancelled  in  the  senate  all  the  bargains 
and  contracts  made  by  him  for  the  repairing 
and  carrying  on  of  the  sacred  and  public 
buildings  as  unadvantageous  to  the  common¬ 
wealth.  They  incited  also  the  boldest  of  the 
tribunes  of  the  people  to  accuse  him  and  to 
fine  him  two  talents.  They  likewise  much  op¬ 
posed  him  in  building  the  court  or  basilica, 
which  he  caused  to  be  erected  at  the  common 
charge,  just  by  the  senate-house,  in  the  mar¬ 
ket-place,  and  called  by  his  own  name,  the 
Porcian. 

However,  the  people,  it  seems,  liked  his 
censorship  wondrously  well;  for,  setting  up  a 
statue  for  him  in  the  temple  of  the  goddess  of 
Health,  they  put  an  inscription  under  it,  not 
recording  his  commands  in  war  or  his  tri¬ 
umph,  but  to  the  effect  that  this  was  Cato 
the  Censor,  who,  by  his  good  discipline  and 
wise  and  temperate  ordinances,  reclaimed  the 
Roman  commonwealth  when  it  was  declining 
and  sinking  down  into  vice.  Before  this  hon¬ 
our  was  done  to  himself,  he  used  to  laugh  at 
those  who  loved  such  kind  of  things,  saying 
that  they  did  not  see  that  they  were  taking 
pride  in  the  workmanship  of  brass-founders 
and  painters;  whereas  the  citizens  bore  about 
his  best  likeness  in  their  breasts.  And  when 
any  seemed  to  wonder  that  he  should  have 
never  a  statue,  while  many  ordinary  persons 
had  one,  “I  would,”  said  he,  “much  rather 
be  asked,  why  I  have  not  one,  than  why  I 
have  one.”  In  short,  he  would  not  have  any 
honest  citizen  endure  to  be  praised,  except  it 
might  prove  advantageous  to  the  common¬ 
wealth. 

Yet  still  he  had  passed  the  highest  commen¬ 
dation  on  himself;  for  he  tells  us  that  those 
who  did  anything  wrong,  and  were  found 
fault  with,  used  to  say  it  was  not  worth  while 
to  blame  them,  for  they  were  not  Catos.  He 
also  adds,  that  they  who  awkwardly  mimicked 
some  of  his  actions  were  called  “left-handed 
Catos”;  and  that  the  senate  in  perilous  times 
would  cast  their  eyes  on  him,  as  upon  a  pilot 
in  a  ship,  and  that  often  when  he  was  not 
present  they  put  off  affairs  of  greatest  conse¬ 
quence.  These  things  are  indeed  also  testified 
of  him  by  others;  for  he  had  a  great  authority 
in  the  city,  alike  for  his  life,  his  eloquence, 
and  his  age. 

He  was  also  a  good  father,  an  excellent  hus¬ 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

band  to  his  wife,  and  an  extraordinary  econ¬ 
omist;  and  as  he  did  not  manage  his  affairs 
of  this  kind  carelessly,  and  as  things  of  little 
moment,  I  think  I  ought  to  record  a  little  fur¬ 
ther  whatever  was  commendable  in  him  in 
these  points.  He  married  a  wife  more  noble 
than  rich;  being  of  opinion  that  the  rich  and 
the  high-born  are  equally  haughty  and  proud; 
but  that  those  of  noble  blood  would  be  more 
ashamed  of  base  things,  and  consequently 
more  obedient  to  their  husbands  in  all  that 
was  fit  and  right.  A  man  who  beat  his  wife  or 
child  laid  violent  hands,  he  said,  on  what  was 
most  sacred;  and  a  good  husband  he  reckoned 
worthy  of  more  praise  than  a  great  senator; 
and  he  admired  the  ancient  Socrates  for  noth¬ 
ing  so  much  as  for  having  lived  a  temperate 
and  contented  life  with  a  wife  who  was  a  scold, 
and  children  who  were  half-witted. 

As  soon  as  he  had  a  son  born,  though  he 
had  never  such  urgent  business  upon  his 
hands,  unless  it  were  some  public  matter,  he 
would  be  by  when  his  wife  washed  it  and 
dressed  it  in  its  swaddling  clothes.  For  she 
herself  suckled  it;  nay,  she  often,  too,  gave  her 
breast  to  her  servants’  children,  to  produce, 
by  suckling  the  same  milk,  a  kind  of  natural 
love  in  them  to  her  son.  When  he  began  to 
come  to  years  of  discretion,  Cato  himself 
would  teach  him  to  read,  although  he  had  a 
servant,  a  very  good  grammarian,  called  Chilo, 
who  taught  many  others;  but  he  thought  not 
fit,  as  he  himself  said,  to  have  his  son  repri¬ 
manded  by  a  slave,  or  pulled,  it  may  be,  by 
the  ears  when  found  tardy  in  his  lesson:  nor 
would  he  have  him  owe  to  a  servant  the  ob¬ 
ligation  of  so  great  a  thing  as  his  learning;  he 
himself,  therefore  (as  we  were  saying),  taught 
him  his  grammar,  law,  and  his  gymnastic 
exercises.  Nor  did  he  only  show  him,  too,  how 
to  throw  a  dart,  to  fight  in  armour,  and  to 
ride,  but  to  box  also  and  to  endure  both  heat 
and  cold,  and  to  swim  over  the  most  rapid 
and  rough  rivers.  He  says,  likewise,  that  he 
wrote  histories,  in  large  characters,  with  his 
own  hand,  that  so  his  son,  without  stirring 
out  of  the  house,  might  learn  to  know  about 
his  countrymen  and  forefathers;  nor  did  he 
less  abstain  from  speaking  anything  obscene 
before  his  son,  than  if  it  had  been  in  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  sacred  virgins,  called  vestals.  Nor 
would  he  ever  go  into  the  bath  with  him; 
which  seems  indeed  to  have  been  the  common 
custom  of  the  Romans.  Sons-in-law  used  to 
avoid  bathing  with  fathers-in-law,  disliking  to 
see  one  another  naked;  but  having,  in  time, 


MARCUS  CATO 

learned  of  the  Greeks  to  strip  before  men, 
they  have  since  taught  the  Greeks  to  do  it 
even  with  the  women  themselves. 

Thus,  like  an  excellent  work,  Cato  formed 
and  fashioned  his  son  to  virtue;  nor  had  he 
any  occasion  to  find  fault  with  his  readiness 
and  docility;  but  as  he  proved  to  be  of  too 
weak  a  constitution  for  hardships,  he  did  not 
insist  on  requiring  of  him  any  very  austere 
way  of  living.  However,  though  delicate  in 
health,  he  proved  a  stout  man  in  the  field, 
and  behaved  himself  valiantly  when  Paulus 
dEmilius  fought  against  Perseus;  where  when 
his  sword  was  struck  from  him  by  a  blow, 
or  rather  slipped  out  of  his  hand  by  reason 
of  its  moistness,  he  so  keenly  resented  it,  that 
he  turned  to  some  of  his  friends  about  him, 
and  taking  them  along  with  him  again,  fell 
upon  the  enemy;  and  having  by  a  long  fight 
and  much  force  cleared  the  place,  at  length 
found  it  among  great  heaps  of  arms,  and  the 
dead  bodies  of  friends  as  well  as  enemies 
piled  one  upon  another.  Upon  which  Paulus, 
his  general,  much  commended  the  youth;  and 
there  is  a  letter  of  Cato’s  to  his  son,  which 
highly  praises  his  honourable  eagerness  for 
the  recovery  of  his  sword.  Afterwards  he  mar¬ 
ried  Tertie,  iTmilius  Paulus’s  daughter,  and 
sister  to  Scipio;  nor  was  he  admitted  into  this 
family  less  for  his  own  worth  than  his  father’s. 
So  that  Cato’s  care  in  his  son’s  education 
came  to  a  very  fitting  result. 

He  purchased  a  great  many  slaves  out  of 
the  captives  taken  in  war,  but  chiefly  bought 
up  the  young  ones,  who  were  capable  to  be, 
as  it  were,  broken  and  taught  like  whelps  and 
colts.  None  of  these  ever  entered  another 
man’s  house,  except  sent  either  by  Cato  him¬ 
self  or  his  wife.  If  any  one  of  them  were 
asked  what  Cato  did,  they  answered  merely 
that  they  did  not  know. 

When  a  servant  was  at  home,  he  was 
obliged  either  to  do  some  work  or  sleep,  for 
indeed  Cato  loved  those  most  who  used  to  lie 
down  often  to  sleep,  accounting  them  more 
docile  than  those  who  were  wakeful,  and 
more  fit  for  anything  when  they  were  re¬ 
freshed  with  a  little  slumber.  Being  also  of 
opinion  that  the  great  cause  of  the  laziness 
and  misbehaviour  of  slaves  was  their  running 
after  their  pleasures,  he  fixed  a  certain  price 
for  them  to  pay  for  permission  amongst  them¬ 
selves,  but  would  suffer  no  connections  out  of 
the  house. 

At  first,  when  he  was  but  a  poor  soldier, 
he  would  not  be  difficult  in  anything  which 


287 

related  to  his  eating,  but  looked  upon  it  as  a 
pitiful  thing  to  quarrel  with  a  servant  for  the 
belly’s  sake;  but  afterwards,  when  he  grew 
richer,  and  made  any  feasts  for  his  friends 
and  colleagues  in  office,  as  soon  as  supper  was 
over  he  used  to  go  with  a  leathern  thong  and 
scourge  those  who  had  waited  or  dressed  the 
meat  carelessly. 

He  always  contrived,  too,  that  his  servants 
should  have  some  difference  one  among  an¬ 
other,  always  suspecting  and  fearing  a  good 
understanding  between  them.  Those  who  had 
committed  anything  worthy  of  death,  he  pun¬ 
ished  if  they  were  found  guilty  by  the  ver¬ 
dict  of  their  fellow-servants. 

But  being  after  all  much  given  to  the  desire 
of  gain,  he  looked  upon  agriculture  rather  as 
a  pleasure  than  profit;  resolving,  therefore,  to 
lay  out  his  money  in  safe  and  solid  things,  he 
purchased  ponds,  hot  baths,  grounds  full  of 
fuller’s  earth,  remunerative  lands,  pastures, 
and  woods;  from  all  which  he  drew  large 
returns,  nor  could  Jupiter  himself,  he  used  to 
say,  do  him  much  damage. 

He  was  also  given  to  the  form  of  usury, 
which  is  considered  most  odious,  in  traffic  by 
sea;  and  that  thus: — he  desired  that  those 
whom  he  put  out  his  money  to  should  have 
many  partners;  when  the  number  of  them 
and  their  ships  came  to  be  fifty,  he  himself 
took  one  share  through  Quintio  his  freedman, 
who  therefore  was  to  sail  with  the  adventur¬ 
ers,  and  take  a  part  in  all  their  proceedings, 
so  that  thus  there  was  no  danger  of  losing  his 
whole  stock,  but  only  a  little  part,  and  that 
with  a  prospect  of  great  profit. 

He  likewise  lent  money  to  those  of  his 
slaves  who  wished  to  borrow,  with  which  they 
bought  also  other  young  ones,  whom,  when 
they  had  taught  and  bred  up  at  his  charges, 
they  would  sell  again  at  the  year’s  end;  but 
some  of  them  Cato  would  keep  for  himself, 
giving  just  as  much  for  them  as  another  had 
offered. 

To  incline  his  son  to  be  of  his  kind  or  tem¬ 
per,  he  used  to  tell  him  that  it  was  not  like 
a  man,  but  rather  like  a  widow  woman,  to 
lessen  an  estate.  But  the  strongest  indication 
of  Cato’s  avaricious  humour  was  when  he 
took  the  boldness  to  affirm  that  he  was  a  most 
wonderful,  nay,  a  godlike  man,  who  left  more 
behind  him  than  he  had  received. 

He  was  now  grown  old,  when  Carneades 
the  Academic,  and  Diogenes  the  Stoic,  came 
as  deputies  from  Athens  to  Rome,  praying  for 
release  from  a  penalty  of  five  hundred  talents 


288 

laid  on  the  Athenians,  in  a  suit,  to  which  they 
did  not  appear,  in  which  the  Oropians  were 
plaintiffs  and  Sicyonians  judges.  All  the  most 
studious  youth  immediately  waited  on  these 
philosophers,  and  frequently,  with  admira¬ 
tion,  heard  them  speak.  But  the  gracefulness 
of  Carneades’s  oratory,  whose  ability  was 
really  greatest,  and  his  reputation  equal  to 
it,  gathered  large  and  favourable  audiences, 
and  ere  long  filled,  like  a  wind,  all  the  city 
with  the  sound  of  it.  So  that  it  soon  began  to 
be  told  that  a  Greek,  famous  even  to  admira¬ 
tion,  winning  and  carrying  all  before  him, 
had  impressed  so  strange  a  love  upon  the 
young  men,  that  quitting  all  their  pleasures 
and  pastimes,  they  ran  mad,  as  it  were,  after 
philosophy;  which  indeed  much  pleased  the 
Romans  in  general;  nor  could  they  but  with 
much  pleasure  see  the  youth  receive  so  wel- 
comely  the  Greek  literature,  and  frequent  the 
company  of  learned  men. 

But  Cato,  on  the  other  side,  seeing  the  pas¬ 
sion  for  words  flowing  into  the  city,  from  the 
beginning  took  it  ill,  fearing  lest  the  youth 
should  be  diverted  that  way,  and  so  should  pre¬ 
fer  the  glory  of  speaking  well  before  that  of 
arms  and  doing  well.  And  when  the  fame  of 
the  Philosophers  increased  in  the  city,  and 
Caius  Acilius,  a  person  of  distinction,  at  his 
own  request,  became  their  interpreter  to  the 
senate  at  their  first  audience,  Cato  resolved,  un¬ 
der  some  specious  pretence,  to  have  all  philoso¬ 
phers  cleared  out  of  the  city;  and,  coming  into 
the  senate,  blamed  the  magistrates  for  letting 
these  deputies  stay  so  long  a  time  without  be¬ 
ing  despatched,  though  they  were  persons  that 
could  easily  persuade  the  people  to  what  they 
pleased;  that  therefore  in  all  haste  something 
should  be  determined  about  their  petition,  that 
so  they  might  go  home  again  in  their  own 
schools,  and  declaim  to  the  Greek  children, 
and  leave  the  Roman  youth  to  be  obedient, 
as  hitherto,  to  their  own  laws  and  governors. 

Yet  he  did  this  not  out  of  any  anger,  as 
some  think,  to  Carneades;  but  because  he 
wholly  despised  philosophy,  and  out  of  a  kind 
of  pride  scoffed  at  the  Greek  studies  and  lit¬ 
erature;  as,  for  example,  he  would  say,  that 
Socrates  was  a  prating,  seditious  fellow,  who 
did  his  best  to  tyrannise  over  his  country,  to 
undermine  the  ancient  customs,  and  to  entice 
and  withdraw  the  citizens  to  opinions  con¬ 
trary  to  the  laws.  Ridiculing  the  school  of  Iso¬ 
crates,  he  would  add,  that  his  scholars  grew 
old  men  before  they  had  done  learning  with 
him,  as  if  they  were  to  use  their  art  and  plead 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

causes  in  the  court  of  Minos  in  the  next  world. 
And  to  frighten  his  son  from  anything  that 
was  Greek,  in  a  more  vehement  tone  than 
became  one  of  his  age,  he  pronounced,  as  it 
were,  with  the  voice  of  an  oracle,  that  the 
Romans  would  certainly  be  destroyed  when 
they  began  once  to  be  infected  with  Greek 
literature;  though  time  indeed  has  shown  the 
vanity  of  this  his  prophecy;  as,  in  truth,  the 
city  of  Rome  has  risen  to  its  highest  fortune 
while  entertaining  Grecian  learning. 

Nor  had  he  an  aversion  only  against  the 
Greek  philosophers,  but  the  physicians  also; 
for  having,  it  seems,  heard  how  Hippocrates, 
when  the  king  of  Persia  sent  for  him  with 
offers  of  a  fee  of  several  talents,  said  that  he 
would  never  assist  barbarians  who  were  en¬ 
emies  to  the  Greeks;  he  affirmed  that  this  was 
now  become  a  common  oath  taken  by  all  phy¬ 
sicians,  and  enjoined  his  son  to  have  a  care 
and  avoid  them;  for  that  he  himself  had  writ¬ 
ten  a  little  book  of  prescriptions  for  curing 
those  who  were  sick  in  his  family;  he  never 
enjoined  fasting  to  any  one,  but  ordered  them 
either  vegetables,  or  the  meat  of  a  duck,  pi¬ 
geon,  or  leveret;  such  kind  of  diet  being  of 
light  digestion  and  fit  for  sick  folks,  only  it 
made  those  who  ate  it  dream  a  little  too 
much;  and  by  the  use  of  this  kind  of  physic, 
he  said,  he  not  only  made  himself  and  those 
about  him  well,  but  kept  them  so. 

However,  for  this  his  presumption  he  seemed 
not  to  have  escaped  unpunished;  for  he  lost 
both  his  wife  and  his  son;  though  he  himself, 
being  of  a  strong,  robust  constitution,  held 
out  longer;  so  that  he  would  often,  even  in 
his  old  days,  address  himself  to  women,  and 
when  he  was  past  a  lover’s  age,  married  a 
young  woman,  upon  the  following  pretence: 
Having  lost  his  own  wife,  he  married  his  son 
to  the  daughter  of  Paulus  fiEmilius,  who  was 
sister  to  Scipio;  so  that  being  now  a  widower 
himself,  he  had  a  young  girl  who  came  pri¬ 
vately  to  visit  him,  but  the  house  being  very 
small,  and  a  daughter-in-law  also  in  it,  this 
practice  was  quickly  discovered;  for  the  young 
woman  seeming  once  to  pass  through  it  a  little 
too  boldly,  the  youth,  his  son,  though  he  said 
nothing,  seemed  to  look  somewhat  indignandy 
upon  her. 

The  old  man  perceiving  and  understanding 
that  what  he  did  was  disliked,  without  find¬ 
ing  any  fault  or  saying  a  word,  went  away,  as 
his  custom  was,  with  his  usual  companions  to 
the  market:  and  among  the  rest,  he  called 
aloud  to  one  Salonius,  who  had  been  a  clerk 


MARCUS  CATO 

under  him,  and  asked  him  whether  he  had 
married  his  daughter.  He  answered  no,  nor 
would  he,  till  he  had  consulted  him.  Said 
Cato,  “Then  I  have  found  out  a  fit  son-in-law 
for  you,  if  he  should  not  displease  by  reason 
of  his  age;  for  in  all  other  points  there  is  no 
fault  to  be  found  in  him;  but  he  is  indeed,  as 
I  said,  extremely  old.”  However,  Salonius  de¬ 
sired  him  to  undertake  the  business,  and  to 
give  the  young  girl  to  whom  he  pleased,  she 
being  a  humble  servant  of  his,  who  stood  in 
need  of  his  care  and  patronage.  Upon  this 
Cato,  without  any  more  ado,  told  him  he  de¬ 
sired  to  have  the  damsel  himself.  These  words, 
as  may  well  be  imagined,  at  first  astonished 
the  man,  conceiving  that  Cato  was  as  far  off 
from  marrying,  as  he  from  a  likelihood  of  be¬ 
ing  allied  to  the  family  of  one  who  had  been 
consul  and  had  triumphed;  but  perceiving  him 
in  earnest,  he  consented  willingly;  and  going 
onwards  to  the  forum,  they  quickly  completed 
the  bargain. 

Whilst  the  marriage  was  in  hand,  Cato’s 
son,  taking  some  of  his  friends  along  with 
him,  went  and  asked  his  father  if  it  were  for 
any  offence  he  brought  in  a  stepmother  upon 
him.  But  Cato  cried  out,  “Far  from  it,  my 
son,  I  have  no  fault  to  find  with  you  or  any¬ 
thing  of  yours;  only  I  desire  to  have  many 
children,  and  to  leave  the  commonwealth 
more  such  citizens  as  you  are.”  Pisistratus,  the 
tyrant  of  Athens,  made,  they  say,  this  answer 
to  his '  sons,  when  they  were  grown  men, 
when  he  married  his  second  wife,  Timonassa 
of  Argos,  by  whom  he  had,  it  is  said,  Iophon 
and  Thessalus.  Cato  had  a  son  by  his  second 
wife,  to  whom,  from  his  mother,  he  gave  the 
surname  of  Salonius. 

In  the  meantime,  his  eldest  died  in  his  prae- 
torship;  of  whom  Cato  often  makes  mention 
in  his  books,  as  having  been  a  good  man.  He 
is  said,  however,  to  have  borne  the  loss  mod¬ 
erately  and  like  a  philosopher,  and  was  noth¬ 
ing  the  more  remiss  in  attending  to  affairs  of 
state;  so  that  he  did  not,  as  Lucius  Lucullus 
and  Metellus  Pius  did,  grow  languid  in  his 
old  age,  as  though  public  business  were  a  duty 
once  to  be  discharged,  and  then  quitted;  nor 
did  he,  like  Scipio  Africanus,  because  envy 
had  struck  at  his  glory,  turn  from  the  public, 
and  change  and  pass  away  the  rest  of  his  life 
without  doing  anything;  but  as  one  persuaded 
Dionysius,  that  the  most  honourable  tomb  he 
could  have  would  be  to  die  in  the  exercise  of 
his  dominion;  so  Cato  thought  that  old  age 
to  be  the  most  honourable  which  was  busied 


289 

in  public  affairs;  though  he  would,  now  and 
then,  when  he  had  leisure,  recreate  himself 
with  husbandry  and  writing. 

And,  indeed,  he  composed  various  books 
and  histories;  and  in  his  youth  he  addicted 
himself  to  agriculture  for  profit’s  sake;  for  he 
used  to  say  he  had  but  two  ways  of  getting — 
agriculture  and  parsimony;  and  now,  in  his 
old  age,  the  first  of  these  gave  him  both  occu¬ 
pation  and  a  subject  of  study.  He  wrote  one 
book  on  country  matters,  in  which  he  treated 
particularly  even  of  making  cakes  and  pre¬ 
serving  fruit,  it  being  his  ambition  to  be  curi¬ 
ous  and  singular  in  all  things. 

His  suppers,  at  his  country-house,  used  also 
to  be  plentiful;  he  daily  invited  his  friends 
and  neighbours  about  him,  and  passed  the 
time  merrily  with  them;  so  that  his  company 
was  not  only  agreeable  to  those  of  the  same 
age,  but  even  to  younger  men;  for  he  had  had 
experience  in  many  things,  and  had  been  con¬ 
cerned  in  much,  both  by  word  and  deed,  that 
was  worth  the  hearing.  He  looked  upon  a 
good  table  as  the  best  place  for  making  friends; 
where  the  commendations  of  brave  and  good 
citizens  were  usually  introduced,  and  little 
said  of  base  and  unworthy  ones;  as  Cato 
would  not  give  leave  in  his  company  to  have 
anything,  either  good  or  ill,  said  about  them. 

Some  will  have  the  overthrow  of  Carthage 
to  have  been  one  of  his  last  acts  of  state; 
when,  indeed,  Scipio  the  younger  did  by  his 
valour  give  it  the  last  blow,  but  the  war,  chief¬ 
ly  by  the  counsel  and  advice  of  Cato,  was  un¬ 
dertaken  on  the  following  occasion.  Cato  was 
sent  to  the  Carthaginians  and  Masinissa,  King 
of  Numidia,  who  were  at  war  with  one  an¬ 
other,  to  know  the  cause  of  their  difference. 
He,  it  seems,  had  been  a  friend  of  the  Romans 
from  the  beginning;  and  they,  too,  since  they 
were  conquered  by  Scipio,  were  of  the  Roman 
confederacy,  having  been  shorn  of  their  pow¬ 
er  by  loss  of  territory  and  a  heavy  tax. 

Finding  Carthage,  not  (as  the  Romans 
thought)  low  and  in  an  ill  condition,  but  well 
manned,  full  of  riches  and  all  sorts  of  arms 
and  ammunition,  and  perceiving  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians  carry  it  high,  he  conceived  that  it  was 
not  a  time  for  the  Romans  to  adjust  affairs 
between  them  and  Masinissa;  but  rather  that 
they  themselves  would  fall  into  danger,  unless 
they  should  find  means  to  check  this  rapid 
new  growth  of  Rome’s  ancient  irreconcilable 
enemy.  Therefore,  returning  quickly  to  Rome, 
he  acquainted  the  senate  that  the  former  de¬ 
feats  and  blows  given  to  the  Carthaginians 


290 

had  not  so  much  diminished  their  strength, 
as  it  had  abated  their  imprudence  and  folly; 
that  they  were  not  become  weaker,  but  more 
experienced  in  war,  and  did  only  skirmish  with 
the  Numidians  to  exercise  themselves  the  bet¬ 
ter  to  cope  with  the  Romans;  that  the  peace 
and  league  they  had  made  was  but  a  kind  of 
suspension  of  war  which  awaited  a  fairer  op¬ 
portunity  to  break  out  again. 

Moreover,  they  say  that,  shaking  his  gown, 
he  took  occasion  to  let  drop  some  African  figs 
before  the  senate.  And  on  their  admiring  the 
size  and  beauty  of  them,  he  presently  added 
that  the  place  that  bore  them  was  but  three 
days’  sail  from  Rome.  Nay,  he  never  after  this 
gave  his  opinion,  but  at  the  end  he  would  be 
sure  to  come  out  with  this  sentence,  “Also, 
Carthage,  methinks,  ought  utterly  to  be 
destroyed.”  But  Publius  Scipio  Nasica  would 
always  declare  his  opinion  to  the  contrary,  in 
these  words,  “It  seems  requisite  to  me  that 
Carthage  should  still  stand.” 

For  seeing  his  countrymen  to  be  grown 
wanton  and  insolent,  and  the  people  made, 
by  their  prosperity,  obstinate  and  disobedient 
to  the  senate,  and  drawing  the  whole  city, 
whither  they  would,  after  them,  he  would 
have  had  the  fear  of  Carthage  to  serve  as  a 
bit  to  hold  the  contumacy  of  the  multitude; 
and  he  looked  upon  the  Carthaginians  as  too 
weak  to  overcome  the  Romans,  and  too  great 
to  be  despised  by  them.  On  the  other  side,  it 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

seemed  a  perilous  thing  to  Cato  that  a  city 
which  had  been  always  great,  and  was  now 
grown  sober  and  wise,  by  reason  of  its  former 
calamities,  should  still  lie,  as  it  were,  in  wait 
for  the  follies  and  dangerous  excesses  of  the 
over-powerful  Roman  people;  so  that  he 
thought  it  the  wisest  course  to  have  all  out¬ 
ward  dangers  removed,  when  they  had  so 
many  inward  ones  among  themselves. 

Thus  Cato,  they  say,  stirred  up  the  third 
and  last  war  against  the  Carthaginians:  but 
no  sooner  was  the  said  war  begun,  than  he 
died,  prophesying  of  the  person  that  should 
put  an  end  to  it  who  was  then  only  a  young 
man;  but,  being  tribune  in  the  army,  he  in 
several  fights  gave  proof  of  his  courage  and 
conduct.  The  news  of  which  being  brought  to 
Cato’s  ears  at  Rome,  he  thus  expressed  him¬ 
self: — 

The  only  wise  man  of  them  all  is  he, 

The  others  e'en  as  shadows  flit  and  flee. 
This  prophecy  Scipio  soon  confirmed  by  his 
actions. 

Cato  left  no  posterity,  except  one  son  by  his 
second  wife,  who  was  named,  as  we  said, 
Cato  Salonius;  and  a  grandson  by  his  eldest 
son,  who  died.  Cato  Salonius  died  when  he 
was  praetor,  but  his  son  Marcus  was  after¬ 
wards  consul,  and  he  was  grandfather  of  Cato, 
the  philosopher,  who  for  virtue  and  renown 
was  one  of  the  most  eminent  personages  of  his 
time. 


ARISTIDES  and  MARCUS  CATO 
Compared 


Having  mentioned  the  most  memorable  ac¬ 
tions  of  these  great  men,  if  we  now  com¬ 
pare  the  whole  life  of  the  one  with  that  of  the 
other,  it  will  not  be  easy  to  discern  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  them,  lost  as  it  is  amongst  such 
a  number  of  circumstances  in  which  they  re¬ 
semble  each  other.  If,  however,  we  examine 
them  in  detail,  as  we  might  some  piece  of 
poetry,  or  some  picture,  we  shall  find  this 
common  to  them  both,  that  they  advanced 
themselves  to  great  honour  and  dignity  in  the 
commonwealth  by  no  other  means  than  their 
own  virtue  and  industry. 

But  it  seems  when  Aristides  appeared,  Ath¬ 
ens  was  not  at  its  height  of  grandeur  and 
plenty,  the  chief  magistrates  and  officers  of  his 
time  being  men  only  of  moderate  and  equal 
fortunes  among  themselves.  The  estimate  of 
the  greatest  estates  then  was  five  hundred  me¬ 


diums;  that  of  the  second,  or  knights,  three 
hundred;  of  the  third  and  last  called  Zeugitae, 
two  hundred. 

But  Cato,  out  of  a  petty  village  from  a 
country  life,  leaped  into  the  commonwealth, 
as  it  were,  into  a  vast  ocean;  at  a  time  when 
there  were  no  such  governors  as  the  Curii, 
Fabricii,  and  Hostilii.  Poor  labouring  men 
were  not  then  advanced  from  the  plough  and 
spade  to  be  governors  and  magistrates;  but 
greatness  of  family,  riches,  profuse  gifts,  dis¬ 
tributions,  and  personal  application  were  what 
the  city  looked  to;  keeping  a  high  hand,  and, 
in  a  manner,  insulting  over  those  that  courted 
preferment.  It  was  not  as  great  a  matter  to 
have  Themistocles  for  an  adversary,  a  person 
of  mean  extraction  and  small  fortune  (for  he 
was  not  worth,  it  is  said,  more  than  four  or 
five  talents  when  he  first  applied  himself  to 


ARISTIDES  AND  MARCUS  CATO 

public  affairs),  as  to  contest  with  a  Scipio 
Africanus,  a  Servius  Galba,  and  a  Quintius 
Flamininus,  having  no  other  aid  but  a  tongue 
free  to  assert  right. 

Besides,  Aristides  at  Marathon,  and  again 
at  Plataea,  was  but  one  commander  out  of  ten; 
whereas  Cato  was  chosen  consul  with  a  single 
colleague,  having  many  competitors,  and  with 
a  single  colleague,  also,  was  preferred  before 
seven  most  noble  and  eminent  pretenders  to  be 
censor.  But  Aristides  was  never  principal  in 
any  action;  for  Miltiades  carried  the  day  at 
Marathon,  at  Salamis,  Themistocles,  and  at 
Plataea,  Herodotus  tells  us,  Pausanias  got  the 
glory  of  that  noble  victory:  and  men  like  So- 
phanes,  and  Aminias,  Callimachus,  and  Cy- 
nxgyrus,  behaved  themselves  so  well  in  all 
those  engagements  as  to  contest  it  with  Aris¬ 
tides  even  for  the  second  place. 

But  Cato  not  only  in  his  consulship  was 
esteemed  the  chief  in  courage  and  conduct 
in  the  Spanish  war,  but  even  whilst  he  was 
only  serving  as  tribune  at  Thermopylae,  under 
another’s  command,  he  gained  the  glory  of 
the  victory,  for  having,  as  it  were,  opened  a 
wide  gate  for  the  Romans  to  rush  in  upon 
Antiochus,  and  for  having  brought  the  war 
on  his  back,  whilst  he  only  minded  what  was 
before  his  face.  For  that  victory,  which  was 
beyond  dispute  all  Cato’s  own  work,  cleared 
Asia  out  of  Greece,  and  by  that  means  made 
way  afterwards  for  Scipio  into  Asia. 

Both  of  them,  indeed,  were  always  victori¬ 
ous  in  war;  but  at  home  Aristides  stumbled, 
being  banished  and  oppressed  by  the  faction 
of  Themistocles;  yet  Cato,  notwithstanding 
he  had  almost  all  the  chief  and  most  power¬ 
ful  of  Rome  for  his  adversaries,  and  wrestled 
with  them  even  to  his  old  age,  kept  still  his 
footing.  Engaging  also  in  many  public  suits, 
sometimes  plaintiff,  sometimes  defendant,  he 
cast  the  most,  and  came  off  clear  with  all; 
thanks  to  his  eloquence,  that  bulwark  and 
powerful  instrument  to  which  more  truly, 
than  to  chance  or  his  fortune,  he  owed  it,  that 
he  sustained  himself  unhurt  to  the  last.  Anti¬ 
pater  justly  gives  it  as  a  high  commendation 
to  Aristotle,  the  philosopher,  writing  of  him 
after  his  death,  that  among  his  other  virtues, 
he  was  endowed  with  a  faculty  of  persuading 
people  which  way  he  pleased. 

Questionless,  there  is  no  perfecter  endow¬ 
ment  in  man  than  political  virtue,  and  of  this 
Economics  is  commonly  esteemed  not  the  least 
part;  for  a  city,  which  is  a  collection  of  pri¬ 
vate  households,  grows  into  a  stable  common- 


291 

wealth  by  the  private  means  of  prosperous  cit¬ 
izens  that  compose  it.  Lycurgus  by  prohibit¬ 
ing  gold  and  silver  in  Sparta,  and  making 
iron,  spoiled  by  the  fire,  the  only  currency,  did 
not  by  these  measures  discharge  them  from 
minding  their  household  affairs,  but  cutting 
off  luxury,  the  corruption  and  tumour  of 
riches,  he  provided  there  should  be  an  abun¬ 
dant  supply  of  all  necessary  and  useful  things 
for  all  persons,  as  much  as  any  other  law¬ 
maker  ever  did;  being  more  apprehensive  of 
a  poor,  needy,  and  indigent  member  of  a  com¬ 
munity,  than  of  the  rich  and  haughty.  And  in 
this  management  of  domestic  concerns,  Cato 
was  as  great  as  in  the  government  of  public 
affairs;  for  he  increased  his  estate,  and  became 
a  master  to  others  in  economy  and  husbandry; 
upon  which  subjects  he  collected  in  his  writ¬ 
ings  many  useful  observations. 

On  the  contrary  Aristides,  by  his  poverty, 
made  justice  odious,  as  if  it  were  the  pest  and 
impoverisher  of  a  family,  and  beneficial  to  all, 
rather  than  to  those  that  were  endowed  with 
it.  Yet  Hesiod  urges  us  alike  to  just  dealing 
and  to  care  of  our  households,  and  inveighs 
against  idleness  as  the  origin  of  injustice;  and 
Homer  admirably  says: — 

Wor\  was  not  dear,  nor  household  cares  to  me, 

Whose  increase  rears  the  thriving  jamily; 

But  well-rigged  ships  were  always  my  delight, 

And  wars,  and  darts,  and  arrows  of  the  fight: 

as  if  the  same  characters  carelessly  neglected 
their  own  estates,  and  lived  by  injustice  and 
rapine  from  others. 

For  it  is  not  as  the  physicians  say  of  oil, 
that,  outwardly  applied,  it  is  very  wholesome, 
but  taken  inwardly  detrimental,  that  thus  a 
just  man  provides  carefully  for  others,  and  is 
heedless  of  himself  and  his  own  affairs;  but  in 
this  Aristides’s  political  virtues  seem  to  be  de¬ 
fective;  since,  according  to  most  authors,  he 
took  no  care  to  leave  his  daughters  a  portion, 
or  himself  enough  to  defray  his  funeral 
charges:  whereas  Cato’s  family  produced  sen¬ 
ators  and  generals  to  the  fourth  generation; 
his  grandchildren,  and  their  children,  came  to 
the  highest  preferments.  But  Aristides,  who 
was  the  principal  man  of  Greece,  through  ex¬ 
treme  poverty  reduced  some  of  his  to  get  their 
living  by  jugglers’  tricks,  others,  for  want,  to 
hold  out  their  hands  for  public  alms;  leaving 
none  means  to  perform  any  noble  action,  or 
worthy  his  dignity. 

Yet  why  should  this  needs  follow?  Since 
poverty  is  dishonourable  not  in  itself,  but 
when  it  is  a  proof  of  laziness,  intemperance. 


292 

luxury,  and  carelessness;  whereas  in  a  person 
that  is  temperate,  industrious,  just,  and  val¬ 
iant,  and  who  uses  all  his  virtues  for  the  pub¬ 
lic  good,  it  shows  a  great  and  lofty  mind.  For 
he  has  no  time  for  great  matters  who  concerns 
himself  with  petty  ones;  nor  can  he  relieve 
many  needs  of  others,  who  himself  has  many 
needs  of  his  own.  What  most  of  all  enables  a 
man  to  serve  the  public  is  not  wealth,  but  con¬ 
tent  and  independence;  which,  requiring  no 
superfluity  at  home,  distracts  not  the  mind 
from  the  common  good.  God  alone  is  entirely 
exempt  from  all  want:  of  human  virtues,  that 
which  needs  least  is  the  most  absolute  and 
most  divine.  For  as  a  body  bred  to  a  good 
habit  requires  nothing  exquisite  either  in 
clothes  or  food,  so  a  sound  man  and  a  sound 
household  keep  themselves  up  with  a  small 
matter.  Riches  ought  to  be  proportioned  to 
the  use  we  have  of  them;  for  he  that  scrapes 
together  a  great  deal,  making  use  of  but  little, 
is  not  independent;  for  if  he  wants  them  not, 
it  is  folly  in  him  to  make  provision  for  things 
which  he  does  not  desire;  or  if  he  does  desire 
them,  and  restrains  his  enjoyment  out  of  sor¬ 
didness,  he  is  miserable. 

I  would  fain  know  of  Cato  himself,  if  we 
seek  riches  that  we  may  enjoy  them,  why  is  he 
proud  of  having  a  great  deal,  and  being  con¬ 
tented  with  little?  But  if  it  be  noble,  as  it  is,  to 
feed  on  coarse  bread,  and  drink  the  same 
wine  with  our  hinds,  and  not  to  covet  purple, 
and  plastered  houses,  neither  Aristides,  nor 
Epaminondas,  nor  Manius  Curius,  nor  Caius 
Fabricius  wanted  necessaries,  who  took  no 
pains  to  get  those  things  whose  use  they  ap¬ 
proved  not.  For  it  was  not  worth  the  while 
of  a  man  who  esteemed  turnips  a  most  deli¬ 
cate  food,  and  who  boiled  them  himself,  whilst 
his  wife  made  bread,  to  brag  so  often  of  a 
half-penny,  and  write  a  book  to  show  how  a 
man  may  soonest  grow  rich;  the  very  good  of 
being  contented  with  little  is  because  it  cuts 
off  at  once  the  desire  and  the  anxiety  for 
superfluities.  Hence  Aristides,  it  is  told,  said, 
on  the  trial  of  Callias,  that  it  was  for  them  to 
blush  at  poverty  who  were  poor  against  their 
wills;  they  who  like  him  were  willingly  so 
might  glory  in  it.  For  it  is  ridiculous  to  think 
Aristides’s  neediness  imputable  to  his  sloth, 
who  might  fairly  enough  by  the  spoil  of  one 
barbarian,  or  seizing  one  tent,  have  become 
wealthy.  But  enough  of  this. 

Cato’s  expeditions  added  no  great  matter  to 
the  Roman  empire,  which  already  was  so 
great,  as  that  in  a  manner  it  could  receive  no 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

addition;  but  those  of  Aristides  are  the  noblest, 
most  splendid,  and  distinguished  actions  the 
Grecians  ever  did,  the  battles  at  Marathon, 
Salamis,  and  Plataea.  Nor  indeed  is  Antiochus, 
nor  the  destruction  of  the  walls  of  the  Spanish 
towns,  to  be  compared  with  Xerxes,  and  the 
destruction  by  sea  and  land  of  so  many  myri¬ 
ads  of  enemies;  in  all  of  which  noble  exploits 
Aristides  yielded  to  none,  though  he  left  the 
glory  and  the  laurels,  like  the  wealth  and 
money,  to  those  who  needed  and  thirsted  more 
greedily  after  them,  because  he  was  superior 
to  those  also. 

I  do  not  blame  Cato  for  perpetually  boast¬ 
ing  and  preferring  himself  before  all  others, 
though  in  one  of  his  orations  he  says  that  it 
is  equally  absurd  to  praise  and  dispraise  one’s 
self:  yet  he  who  does  not  so  much  as  desire 
others’  praises,  seems  to  me  more  perfectly  vir¬ 
tuous  than  he  who  is  always  extolling  him¬ 
self.  A  mind  free  from  ambition  is  a  main 
help  to  political  gentleness;  ambition,  on  the 
contrary,  is  hard-hearted,  and  the  greatest  fo- 
menter  of  envy;  from  which  Aristides  was 
wholly  exempt;  Cato  very  subject  to  it. 

Aristides  assisted  Themistocles  in  matters  of 
highest  importance,  and,  as  his  subordinate  of¬ 
ficer,  in  a  manner  raised  Athens:  Cato,  by  op¬ 
posing  Scipio,  almost  broke  and  defeated  his 
expedition  against  the  Carthaginians,  in  which 
he  overthrew  Hannibal,  who  till  then  was 
even  invincible;  and,  at  last,  by  continually 
raising  suspicions  and  calumnies  against  him, 
he  chased  him  from  the  city,  and  inflicted  a 
disgraceful  sentence  on  his  brother  for  robbing 
the  state. 

Finally,  that  temperance  which  Cato  always 
highly  cried  up,  Aristides  preserved  truly  pure 
and  untainted.  But  Cato’s  marriage,  unbecom¬ 
ing  his  dignity  and  age,  is  a  considerable  dis¬ 
paragement,  in  this  respect,  to  his  character. 
For  it  was  not  decent  for  him  at  that  age  to 
bring  home  to  his  son  and  his  wife  a  young 
woman,  the  daughter  of  a  common  paid  clerk 
in  the  public  service:  but  whether  it  were  for 
his  own  gratification  or  out  of  anger  at  his 
son,  both  the  fact  and  the  pretence  were  un¬ 
worthy.  For  the  reason  he  pretended  to  his 
son  was  false;  for  if  he  desired  to  get  more 
children  as  worthy,  he  ought  to  have  married  a 
well-born  wife;  not  to  have  contented  himself, 
so  long  as  it  was  unnoticed,  with  a  woman  to 
whom  he  was  not  married;  and,  when  it  was 
discovered,  he  ought  not  to  have  chosen  such  a 
father-in-law  as  was  easiest  to  be  got,  instead  of 
one  whose  affinity  might  be  honourable  to  him. 


PHILOPCEMEN 

2.53?-i83  b.c. 


Cleander  was  a  man  of  high  birth  and 
great  power  in  the  city  of  Mantinea, 
but  by  the  chances  of  the  time  hap¬ 
pened  to  be  driven  from  thence.  There  being 
an  intimate  friendship  betwixt  him  and  Crau- 
gis,  the  father  of  Philopcemen,  who  was  a  per¬ 
son  of  great  distinction,  he  settled  at  Megalo¬ 
polis,  where,  while  his  friend  lived,  he  had  all 
he  could  desire.  When  Craugis  died,  he  repaid 
the  father’s  hospitable  kindness  in  the  care  of 
the  orphan  son;  by  which  means  Philopcemen 
was  educated  by  him,  as  Homer  says  Achilles 
was  by  Phoenix,  and  from  his  infancy  moulded 
to  lofty  and  noble  inclinations. 

But  Ecdemus  and  Demophanes  had  the 
principal  tuition  of  him,  after  he  was  past  the 
years  of  childhood.  They  were  both  Megalo- 
politans;  they  had  been  scholars  in  the  aca¬ 
demic  philosophy,  and  friends  to  Arcesilaus, 
and  had,  more  than  any  of  their  contempo¬ 
raries,  brought  philosophy  to  bear  upon  action 
and  state  affairs.  They  had  freed  their  country 
from  tyranny  by  the  death  of  Aristodemus, 
whom  they  caused  to  be  killed;  they  had  as¬ 
sisted  Aratus  in  driving  out  the  tyrant  Ni- 
cocles  from  Sicyon;  and,  at  the  request  of  the 
Cyreneans,  whose  city  was  in  a  state  of  ex¬ 
treme  disorder  and  confusion,  went  thither  by 
sea,  and  succeeded  in  establishing  good  gov¬ 
ernment  and  happily  settling  their  common¬ 
wealth.  And  among  their  best  actions  they 
themselves  counted  the  education  of  Philo¬ 
pcemen,  thinking  they  had  done  a  general 
good  to  Greece  by  giving  him  the  nurture  of 
philosophy.  And  indeed  all  Greece  (which 
looked  upon  him  as  a  kind  of  latter  birth 
brought  forth,  after  so  many  noble  leaders,  in 
her  decrepit  age)  loved  him  wonderfully;  and, 
as  his  glory  grew,  increased  his  power.  And 
one  of  the  Romans,  to  praise  him,  calls  him 
the  last  of  the  Greeks;  as  if  after  him  Greece 
had  produced  no  great  man,  nor  one  deserving 
the  name  of  Greek. 

His  person  was  not,  as  some  fancy,  de¬ 
formed;  for  his  likeness  is  yet  to  be  seen  at 
Delphi.  The  mistake  of  the  hostess  of  Megara 
was  occasioned,  it  would  seem,  merely  by  his 


easiness  of  temper  and  his  plain  manners. 
This  hostess  having  word  brought  her  that 
the  general  of  the  Achaeans  was  coming  to  her 
house  in  the  absence  of  her  husband,  was  all 
in  a  hurry  about  providing  his  supper.  Philo¬ 
pcemen,  in  an  ordinary  cloak,  arriving  in  this 
point  of  time,  she  took  him  for  one  of  his  own 
train  who  had  been  sent  on  before,  and  bid 
him  lend  her  his  hand  in  her  household  work. 
He  forthwith  threw  off  his  cloak,  and  fell  to 
cutting  up  the  firewood.  The  husband  return¬ 
ing,  and  seeing  him  at  it,  “What,”  says  he, 
“may  this  mean,  O  Philopcemen?”  “I  am,” 
replied  he  in  his  Doric  dialect,  “paying  the 
penalty  of  my  ugly  looks.”  Titus  Flamininus, 
jesting  with  him  upon  his  figure,  told  him 
one  day  he  had  well-shaped  hands  and  feet, 
but  no  belly,  and  he  was  indeed  slender  in  the 
waist.  But  this  raillery  was  meant  to  the  pov¬ 
erty  of  his  fortune;  for  he  had  good  horse  and 
foot,  but  often  wanted  money  to  entertain  and 
pay  them.  These  are  common  anecdotes  told  of 
Philopcemen. 

The  love  of  honor  and  distinction  was,  in 
his  character,  not  unalloyed  with  feelings  of 
personal  rivalry  and  resentment.  He  made 
Epaminondas  his  great  example,  and  came  not 
far  behind  him  in  activity,  sagacity,  and  incor¬ 
ruptible  integrity;  but  his  hot  contentious  tem¬ 
per  continually  carried  him  out  of  the  bounds 
of  that  gentleness,  composure,  and  humanity 
which  had  marked  Epaminondas,  and  this 
made  thim  thought  a  pattern  rather  of  military 
than  of  civil  virtue. 

He  was  strongly  inclined  to  the  life  of  a 
soldier  even  from  his  childhood,  and  he  stud¬ 
ied  and  practised  all  that  belonged  to  it,  tak¬ 
ing  great  delight  in  managing  of  horses  and 
handling  of  weapons.  Because  he  was  naturally 
fitted  to  excel  in  wrestling,  some  of  his  friends 
and  tutors  recommended  his  attention  to  ath¬ 
letic  exercises.  But  he  would  first  be  satisfied 
whether  it  would  not  interfere  with  his  be¬ 
coming  a  good  soldier.  They  told  him,  as  was 
the  truth,  that  the  one  life  was  direcdy  oppo¬ 
site  to  the  other;  the  requisite  state  of  body, 
the  ways  of  living,  and  the  exercises  all  differ- 


293 


294 

ent;  the  professed  athlete  sleeping  much  and 
feeding  plentifully,  punctually  regular  in  his 
set  times  of  exercise  and  rest,  and  apt  to 
spoil  all  by  every  little  excess  or  breach  of 
his  usual  method;  whereas  the  soldier  ought 
to  train  himself  in  every  variety  of  change  and 
irregularity,  and,  above  all,  to  bring  himself  to 
endure  hunger  and  loss  of  sleep  without  diffi¬ 
culty.  Philopcemen,  hearing  this,  not  only  laid 
by  all  thoughts  of  wrestling  and  contemned  it 
then,  but  when  he  came  to  be  general,  discour¬ 
aged  it  by  all  marks  of  reproach  and  dishonour 
he  could  imagine,  as  a  thing  which  made  men, 
otherwise  excellently  fit  for  war,  to  be  utterly 
useless  and  unable  to  fight  on  necessary  occa¬ 
sions. 

'When  he  left  off  his  masters  and  teachers, 
and  began  to  bear  arms  in  the  incursions 
which  his  citizens  used  to  make  upon  the 
Lacedaemonians  for  pillage  and  plunder,  he 
would  always  march  out  the  first  and  return 
the  last.  When  there  was  nothing  to  do,  he 
sought  to  harden  his  body,  and  make  it 
strong  and  active  by  hunting,  or  labouring  in 
his  ground.  He  had  a  good  estate  about  twenty 
furlongs  from  the  town,  and  thither  he  would 
go  every  day  after  dinner  and  supper;  and 
when  night  came,  throw  himself  upon  the  first 
mattress  in  his  way,  and  there  sleep  as  one  of 
the  labourers.  At  break  of  day  he  would  rise 
with  the  rest,  and  work  either  in  the  vineyard 
or  at  the  plough;  from  thence  return  again  to 
the  town,  and  employ  his  time  with  his  friends 
or  the  magistrates  in  public  business.  What  he 
got  in  the  wars  he  laid  out  on  horses,  or  arms, 
or  in  ransoming  captives;  but  endeavoured  to 
improve  his  own  property  the  justest  way,  by 
tillage;  and  this  not  slightly,  by  way  of  diver¬ 
sion,  but  thinking  it  his  strict  duty  so  to  man¬ 
age  his  own  fortune  as  to  be  out  of  the  tempta¬ 
tion  of  wronging  others. 

He  spent  much  time  on  eloquence  and  philos¬ 
ophy,  but  selected  his  authors,  and  cared  only 
for  those  by  whom  he  might  profit  in  virtue. 
In  Homer’s  fictions  his  attention  was  given  to 
whatever  he  thought  apt  to  raise  the  courage. 
Of  all  other  books  he  was  most  devoted  to  the 
commentaries  of  Evangelus  on  military  tactics, 
and  also  took  delight,  at  leisure  hours,  in  the 
histories  of  Alexander;  thinking  that  such  read¬ 
ing,  unless  undertaken  for  mere  amusement 
and  idle  conversation,  was  to  the  purpose  for 
action.  Even  in  speculations  on  military  sub¬ 
jects  it  was  his  habit  to  neglect  maps  and  dia¬ 
grams,  and  to  put  the  theorems  to  practical 
proof  on  the  ground  itself.  He  would  be  exer- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

cising  his  thoughts  and  considering  as  he 
travelled,  and  arguing  with  those  about  him  of 
the  difficulties  of  steep  or  broken  ground,  what 
might  happen  at  rivers,  ditches,  or  mountain- 
passes,  in  marching  in  close  or  in  open,  in  this 
or  in  that  particular  form  of  battle.  The  truth 
is,  he  indeed  took  an  immoderate  pleasure  in 
military  operations  and  in  warfare,  to  which 
he  devoted  himself,  as  the  special  means  for 
exercising  all  sorts  of  virtue,  and  utterly  con¬ 
temned  those  who  were  not  soldiers,  as  drones 
and  useless  in  the  commonwealth. 

When  he  was  thirty  years  of  age,  Cleo- 
menes,  King  of  Lacedaemonians,  surprised 
Megalopolis  by  night,  forced  the  guards,  broke 
in,  and  seized  the  market-place.  Philopcemen 
came  out  upon  the  alarm,  and  fought  with 
desperate  courage,  but  could  not  beat  the  ene¬ 
my  out  again;  yet  he  succeeded  in  effecting 
the  escape  of  the  citizens,  who  got  away  while 
he  made  head  against  the  pursuers,  and 
amused  Cleomenes,  till,  after  losing  his  horse 
and  receiving  several  wounds,  with  much  ado 
he  came  off  himself,  being  the  last  man  in  the 
retreat.  The  Megalopolitans  escaped  to  Mes- 
sene,  whither  Cleomenes  sent  to  offer  them 
their  town  and  goods  again.  Philopcemen  per¬ 
ceiving  them  to  be  only  too  glad  at  the  news, 
and  eager  to  return,  checked  them  with  a 
speech,  in  which  he  made  them  sensible  that 
what  Cleomenes  called  restoring  the  city  was, 
rather,  possessing  himself  of  the  citizens;  and 
through  their  means  securing  also  the  city  for 
the  future.  The  mere  solitude  would,  of  itself, 
ere  long  force  him  away,  since  there  was  no 
staying  to  guard  empty  houses  and  naked 
walls.  These  reasons  withheld  the  Megalopol¬ 
itans,  but  gave  Cleomenes  a  pretext  to  pillage 
and  destroy  a  great  part  of  the  city,  and  carry 
away  a  great  booty. 

Awhile  after,  King  Antigonus  coming  down 
to  succour  the  Achaeans,  they  marched  with 
their  united  forces  against  Cleomenes;  who, 
having  seized  the  avenues,  lay  advantageously 
posted  on  the  hills  of  Sellasia.  Antigonus 
drew  up  close  by  him,  with  a  resolution 
to  force  him  in  his  strength.  Philopcemen, 
with  his  citizens,  was  that  day  placed  among 
the  horse,  next  to  the  Illyrian  foot,  a  numer¬ 
ous  body  of  bold  fighters,  who  completed  the 
line  of  battle,  forming,  together  with  the  Achae¬ 
ans,  the  reserve.  Their  orders  were  to  keep 
their  ground,  and  not  engage  till  from  the 
other  wing,  where  the  king  fought  in  person, 
they  should  see  a  red  coat  lifted  up  on  the 
point  of  a  spear.  The  Achaeans  obeyed  their 


PHILOPCEMEN 

order  and  stood  fast,  but  the  Illyrians  were  led 
on  by  their  commanders  to  the  attack. 

Euclides,  the  brother  of  Cleomenes,  seeing 
the  foot  thus  severed  from  the  horse,  detached 
the  best  of  his  light-armed  men,  command¬ 
ing  them  to  wheel  about,  and  charge  the 
unprotected  Illyrians  in  the  rear.  This  charge 
putting  things  in  confusion,  Philopcemen, 
considering  those  light-armed  men  would  be 
easily  repelled,  went  first  to  the  king’s  officers 
to  make  them  sensible  what  the  occasion  re¬ 
quired.  But  they  not  minding  what  he  said, 
but  slighting  him  as  a  hare-brained  fellow  (as 
indeed  he  was  not  yet  of  any  repute  sufficient 
to  give  credit  to  a  proposal  of  such  impor¬ 
tance),  he  charged  with  his  own  citizens,  at 
the  first  encounter  disordered,  and  soon  after 
put  the  troops  to  flight  with  great  slaughter. 

Then,  to  encourage  the  king’s  army  further, 
to  bring  them  all  upon  the  enemy  while  he 
was  in  confusion,  he  quitted  his  horse,  and 
fighting  with  extreme  difficulty  in  his  heavy 
horseman’s  dress,  in  rough  uneven  ground, 
full  of  watercourses  and  hollows,  had  both  his 
thighs  struck  through  with  a  thonged  javelin. 
It  was  thrown  with  great  force,  so  that  the  head 
came  out  on  the  other  side,  and  made  a  severe, 
though  not  a  mortal,  wound.  There  he  stood 
awhile,  as  if  he  had  been  shackled,  unable  to 
move.  The  fastening  which  joined  the  thong 
to  the  javelin  made  it  difficult  to  get  it  drawn 
out,  nor  would  any  about  him  venture  to  do 
it.  But  the  fight  being  now  at  the  hottest,  and 
likely  to  be  quickly  decided,  he  was  transported 
with  the  desire  of  partaking  in  it,  and  strug¬ 
gled  and  strained  so  violently,  setting  one  leg 
forward,  the  other  back,  that  at  last  he  broke 
the  shaft  in  two;  and  thus  got  the  pieces  pulled 
out.  Being  in  this  manner  set  at  liberty,  he 
caught  up  his  sword,  and  running  through  the 
midst  of  those  who  were  fighting  in  the  first 
ranks,  animated  his  men,  and  set  them  afire 
with  emulation. 

Antigonus  after  the  victory  asked  the  Mace¬ 
donians,  to  try  them,  how  it  happened  the 
horse  had  charged  without  orders  before  the 
signal.  They  answering,  that  they  were 
against  their  wills  forced  to  it  by  a  young 
man  of  Megalopolis,  who  had  fallen  in  before 
his  time:  “That  young  man,”  replied  Anti¬ 
gonus,  smiling,  “did  like  an  experienced  com¬ 
mander.” 

This,  as  was  natural,  brought  Philopoemen 
into  great  reputation.  Antigonus  was  earnest 
to  have  him  in  his  service,  and  offered  him 
very  advantageous  conditions,  both  as  to  corn- 


295 

mand  and  pay.  But  Philopcemen,  who  knew 
that  his  nature  brooked  not  to  be  under  an¬ 
other,  would  not  accept  them;  yet  not  endur¬ 
ing  to  live  idle,  and  hearing  of  wars  in  Crete, 
for  practice’  sake  he  passed  over  thither.  He 
spent  some  time  among  those  very  warlike, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  sober  and  temperate 
men,  improving  much  by  experience  in  all 
sorts  of  service;  and  then  returned  with  so 
much  fame  that  the  Achaeans  presently  chose 
him  commander  of  the  horse. 

These  horsemen  at  that  time  had  neither  ex¬ 
perience  nor  bravery,  it  being  the  custom  to 
take  any  common  horses,  the  first  and  cheapest 
they  could  procure,  when  they  were  to  march; 
and  on  almost  all  occasions  they  did  not  go 
themselves,  but  hired  others  in  their  places, 
and  stayed  at  home.  Their  former  commanders 
winked  at  this,  because,  it  being  an  honour 
among  the  Achaeans  to  serve  on  horseback, 
these  men  had  great  power  in  the  common¬ 
wealth,  and  were  able  to  gratify  or  molest 
whom  they  pleased.  Philopcemen,  finding  them 
in  this  condition,  yielded  not  to  any  such  con¬ 
siderations,  nor  would  pass  it  over  as  formerly; 
but  went  himself  from  town  to  town,  where, 
speaking  with  the  young  men,  one  by  one,  he 
endeavoured  to  excite  a  spirit  of  ambition  and 
love  of  honour  among  them,  using  punish¬ 
ment  also,  where  it  was  necessary.  And  then  by 
public  exercises,  reviews,  and  contests  in  the 
presence  of  numerous  spectators,  in  a  little 
time  he  made  them  wonderfully  strong  and 
bold,  and,  which  is  reckoned  of  greatest  conse¬ 
quence  in  military  service,  light  and  agile. 
With  use  and  industry  they  grew  so  perfect,  to 
such  a  command  of  their  horses,  such  a  ready 
exactness  in  wheeling  round  in  their  troops, 
that  in  any  change  of  posture  the  whole  body 
seemed  to  move  with  all  the  facility  and 
promptitude,  and,  as  it  were,  with  the  single 
will  of  one  man. 

In  the  great  battle  which  they  fought  with 
the  iEtolians  and  Eleans  by  the  river  Larissus, 
he  set  them  an  example  himself.  Damo- 
phantus,  general  of  the  Elean  horse,  singled 
out  Philopcemen,  and  rode  with  full  speed  at 
him.  Philopcemen  awaited  his  charge,  and,  be¬ 
fore  receiving  the  stroke,  with  a  violent  blow  of 
his  spear  threw  him  dead  to  the  ground:  upon 
whose  fall  the  enemy  fled  immediately.  And 
now  Philopoemen  was  in  everybody’s  mouth, 
as  a  man  who  in  actual  fighting  with  his  own 
hand  yielded  not  to  the  youngest,  nor  in  good 
conduct  to  the  oldest,  and  there  came  not  into 
the  field  any  better  soldier  or  commander. 


296 

Aratus,  indeed,  was  the  first  who  raised 
the  Achaeans,  inconsiderable  till  then,  into  rep¬ 
utation  and  power,  by  uniting  their  divided 
cities  into  one  commonwealth,  and  establish¬ 
ing  amongst  them  a  humane  and  truly  Gre¬ 
cian  form  of  government;  and  hence  it  hap¬ 
pened,  as  in  running  waters,  where,  when  a 
few  little  particles  of  matter  once  stop,  others 
stick  to  them,  and  one  part  strengthening  an¬ 
other,  the  whole  becomes  firm  and  solid;  so 
in  a  general  weakness,  when  every  city  relying 
only  on  itself,  all  Greece  was  giving  way  to  an 
easy  dissolution,  the  Achaeans,  first  forming 
themselves  into  a  body,  and  then  drawing  in 
their  neighbours  round  about,  some  by  pro¬ 
tection,  delivering  them  from  their  tyrants, 
others  by  peaceful  consent  and  by  naturaliza¬ 
tion,  designed  at  last  to  bring  all  Peloponne¬ 
sus  into  one  community. 

Yet  while  Aratus  lived,  they  depended  much 
on  the  Macedonians,  courting  first  Ptolemy, 
then  Antigonus  and  Philip,  who  all  took  part 
continually  in  whatever  concerned  the  affairs 
of  Greece.  But  when  Philopoemen  came  to  a 
command,  the  Achaeans,  feeling  themselves  a 
match  for  the  most  powerful  of  their  enemies, 
declined  foreign  support.  The  truth  is,  Aratus, 
as  we  have  written  in  his  life,  was  not  of  so 
warlike  a  temper,  but  did  most  by  policy  and 
gentleness,  and  friendships  with  foreign 
princes;  but  Philopoemen  being  a  man  both  of 
execution  and  command,  a  great  soldier,  and 
fortunate  in  his  first  attempts,  wonderfully 
heightened  both  the  power  and  courage  of  the 
Achaeans,  accustomed  to  victory  under  his  con¬ 
duct. 

But  first  he  altered  what  he  found  amiss 
in  their  arms  and  form  of  battle.  Hitherto 
they  had  used  light,  thin  bucklers,  too  narrow 
to  cover  the  body,  and  javelins  much  shorter 
than  pikes.  By  which  means  they  were  skilful 
in  skirmishing  at  a  distance,  but  in  a  close  fight 
had  much  the  disadvantage.  Then  in  drawing 
their  forces  up  for  battle,  they  were  never  ac¬ 
customed  to  form  in  regular  divisions;  and 
their  line  being  unprotected  either  by  the  thick 
array  of  projecting  spears  or  by  their  shields,  as 
in  the  Macedonian  phalanx,  where  the  soldiers 
close  and  their  shields  touch,  they  were  easily 
opened  and  broken.  Philopoemen  reformed  all 
this,  persuading  them  to  change  the  narrow 
target  and  short  javelin  into  a  large  shield  and 
long  pike;  to  arm  their  heads,  bodies,  thighs, 
and  legs,  and  instead  of  loose  skirmishing, 
fight  firmly  and  foot  to  foot. 

After  he  had  brought  them  all  to  wear  full 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

armour,  and  by  that  means  into  the  confidence 
of  thinking  themselves  now  invincible,  he 
turned  what  before  had  been  idle  profusion 
and  luxury  into  an  honourable  expense.  For 
being  long  used  to  vie  with  each  other  in  their 
dress,  the  furniture  of  their  houses,  and  service 
of  their  tables,  and  to  glory  in  outdoing  one 
another,  the  disease  by  custom  was  grown  in¬ 
curable,  and  there  was  no  possibility  of  remov¬ 
ing  it  altogether.  But  he  diverted  the  passion, 
and  brought  them,  instead  of  these  superflui¬ 
ties,  to  love  useful  and  more  manly  display, 
and  reducing  their  other  expenses,  to  take  de¬ 
light  in  appearing  magnificent  in  their  equi¬ 
page  of  war. 

Nothing  then  was  to  be  seen  in  the  shops 
but  plate  breaking  up,  or  melting  down,  gild¬ 
ing  of  breastplate,  and  studding  bucklers  and 
bits  with  silver;  nothing  in  the  places  of  exer¬ 
cise,  but  breaking  colts,  and  young  men  ex¬ 
ercising  their. arms;  nothing  in  the  hands  of 
the  women,  but  helmets  and  crests  of  feathers 
to  be  dyed,  and  military  cloaks  and  riding- 
frocks  to  be  embroidered;  the  very  sight  of  all 
which,  quickening  and  raising  their  spirits, 
made  them  contemn  dangers,  and  feel  ready 
to  venture  on  any  honourable  dangers.  Other 
kinds  of  sumptuousness  give  us  pleasure,  but 
make  us  effeminate,  the  tickling  of  the  sense 
slackening  the  vigour  of  the  mind;  but  mag¬ 
nificence  of  this  kind  strengthens  and  height¬ 
ens  the  courage;  as  Homer  makes  Achilles  at 
the  sight  of  his  new  arms  exulting  with  joy, 
and  on  fire  to  use  them. 

When  Philopoemen  had  obtained  of  them 
to  arm,  and  set  themselves  out  in  this  manner, 
he  proceeded  to  train  them,  mustering  and  ex¬ 
ercising  them  perpetually;  in  which  they  obeyed 
him  with  great  zeal  and  eagerness.  For  they 
were  wonderfully  pleased  with  their  new  form 
of  battle,  which  being  so  knit  and  cemented  to¬ 
gether,  seemed  almost  incapable  of  being 
broken.  And  then  their  arms,  which  for  their 
riches  and  beauty  they  wore  with  pleasure,  be¬ 
coming  light  and  easy  to  them  with  constant 
use,  they  longed  for  nothing  more  than  to  try 
them  with  an  enemy,  and  fight  in  earnest. 

The  Achaeans  at  that  time  were  at  war  with 
Machanidas,  the  tyrant  of  Lacedaemon,  who, 
having  a  strong  army,  watched  all  opportuni¬ 
ties  of  becoming  entire  master  of  Peloponne¬ 
sus.  When  intelligence  came  that  he  was  fallen 
upon  the  Mantineans,  Philopoemen  forthwith 
took  the  field,  and  marched  towards  him. 

They  met  near  Mantinea,  and  drew  up  in 
sight  of  the  city.  Both,  besides  the  whole 


PHILOPGEMEN 

strength  of  their  several  cities,  had  a  good 
number  of  mercenaries  in  pay.  When  they 
came  to  fall  on,  Machanidas,  with  his  hired 
soldiers,  beat  the  spearmen  and  the  Taren- 
tines  whom  Philopcemen  had  placed  in  the 
front.  But  when  he  should  have  charged  im¬ 
mediately  into  the  main  battle,  which  stood 
close  and  firm,  he  hotly  followed  the  chase; 
and  instead  of  attacking  the  Achaeans,  passed 
on  beyond  them,  while  they  remained  drawn 
up  in  their  place. 

With  so  untoward  a  beginning  the  rest  of 
the  confederates  gave  themselves  up  for  lost; 
but  Philopcemen,  professing  to  make  it  a  mat¬ 
ter  of  small  consequence,  and  observing  the 
enemy’s  oversight,  who  had  thus  left  an  open¬ 
ing  in  their  main  body,  and  exposed  their  own 
phalanx,  made  no  sort  of  motion  to  oppose 
them,  but  let  them  pursue  the  chase  freely,  till 
they  had  placed  themselves  at  a  great  distance 
from  him.  Then  seeing  the  Lacedaemonians 
before  him  deserted  by  their  horse,  with  their 
flanks  quite  bare,  he  charged  suddenly,  and 
surprised  them  without  a  commander,  and  not 
so  much  as  expecting  an  encounter,  as,  when 
they  saw  Machanidas  driving  the  beaten  en¬ 
emy  before  him,  they  thought  the  victory  al¬ 
ready  gained.  He  overthrew- them  with  great 
slaughter  (they  report  above  four  thousand 
killed  in  the  place),  and  then  faced  about 
against  Machanidas,  who  was  returning  with 
his  mercenaries  from  the  pursuit. 

There  happened  to  be  a  broad  deep  ditch 
between  them,  alongside  of  which  both  rode 
their  horses  for  a  while,  the  one  trying  to 
get  over  and  flee,  the  other  to  hinder  him. 
It  looked  less  like  the  contest  between  two 
generals  than  like  the  last  defence  of  some 
wild  beast  brought  to  bay  by  the  keen  hunts¬ 
man  Philopcemen,  and  forced  to  fight  for 
his  life.  The  tyrant’s  horse  was  mettled  and 
strong;  and  feeling  the  bloody  spurs  in  his 
sides,  ventured  to  take  the  ditch.  He  had 
already  so  far  reached  the  other  side,  as  to 
have  planted  his  fore-feet  upon  it,  and  was 
struggling  to  raise  himself  with  these,  when 
Simmias  and  Polyaenus,  who  used  to  fight 
by  the  side  of  Philopcemen,  came  up  on 
horseback  to  his  assistance.  But  Philopoemen, 
before  either  of  them,  himself  met  Machani¬ 
das;  and  perceiving  that  the  horse  with  his 
head  high  reared  covered  his  master’s  body, 
turned  his  own  a  little,  and  holding  his  javelin 
by  the  middle,  drove  it  against  the  tyrant  with 
all  his  force,  and  tumbled  him  dead  into  the 
ditch.  Such  is  the  precise  posture  in  which  he 


297 

stands  at  Delphi  in  the  brazen  statue  which 
the  Achaeans  set  up  of  him,  in  admiration  of 
his  valour  in  this  single  combat,  and  conduct 
during  the  whole  day. 

We  are  told  that  at  the  Nemean  games, 
a  little  after  this  victory,  Philopcemen  being 
then  general  the  second  time,  and  at  leisure 
on  the  occasion  of  the  solemnity,  first  showed 
the  Greeks  his  army  drawn  up  in  full  array 
as  if  they  were  to  fight,  and  executed  with 
it  all  the  manoeuvres  of  a  battle  with  wonder¬ 
ful  order,  strength,  and  clerity.  After  which 
he  went  into  the  theatre,  while  the  musicians 
were  singing  for  the  prize,  followed  by  the 
young  soldiers  in  their  military  cloaks  and 
their  scarlet  frocks  under  their  armour,  all  in 
the  very  height  of  bodily  vigour,  and  much 
alike  in  age,  showing  a  high  respect  to  their 
general;  yet  breathing  at  the  same  time  a  noble 
confidence  in  themselves,  raised  by  success  in 
many  glorious  encounters.  Just  at  their  coming 
in,  it  so  happened  that  the  musician  Pylades, 
with  a  voice  well  suited  to  the  lofty  style  of 
poetry,  was  in  the  act  of  commencing  The  Per¬ 
sians  of  Timotheus — 

Under  his  conduct  Greece  was  glorious  and  was 

free. 

The  whole  theatre  at  once  turned  to  look  at 
Philopcemen,  and  clapped  with  delight;  their 
hopes  venturing  once  more  to  return  to  their 
country’s  former  reputation;  and  their  feelings 
almost  rising  to  the  height  of  their  ancient 
spirit. 

It  was  with  the  Achaeans  as  with  young 
horses,  which  go  quietly  with  their  usual  rid¬ 
ers,  but  grow  unruly  and  restive  under  stran¬ 
gers.  The  soldiers,  when  any  service  was  in 
hand,  and  Philopcemen  not  at  their  head,  grew 
dejected  and  looked  about  for  him;  but  if  he 
once  appeared,  came  presently  to  themselves, 
and  recovered  their  confidence  and  courage, 
being  sensible  that  this  was  the  only  one  of 
their  commanders  whom  the  enemy  could  not 
endure  to  face;  but,  as  appeared  on  several  oc¬ 
casions,  were  frighted  with  his  very  name. 

Thus  we  find  that  Philip,  King  of  Macedon, 
thinking  to  terrify  the  Achaeans  into  subjection 
again,  if  he  could  rid  his  hands  of  Philopoe- 
men,  employed  some  persons  privately  to  as¬ 
sassinate  him.  But  the  treachery  coming  to 
light,  he  became  infamous,  and  lost  his  char¬ 
acter  through  Greece.  The  Bceotians  besieging 
Megara,  and  ready  to  carry  the  town  by  storm, 
upon  a  groundless  rumour  that  Philopcemen 
was  at  hand  with  succour,  ran  away,  and  left 
their  scaling  ladders  at  the  wall  behind  them. 


298 

Nabis  (who  was  tyrant  of  Lacedaemon 
after  Machanidas)  had  surprised  Messene  at 
a  time  when  Philopcemen  was  out  of  com¬ 
mand.  He  tried  to  persuade  Lysippus,  then 
general  of  the  Achaeans,  to  succour  Messene: 
but  not  prevailing  with  him,  because,  he  said, 
the  enemy  being  now  within  it,  the  place  was 
irrecoverably  lost,  he  resolved  to  go  himself, 
without  order  or  commission,  followed  merely 
by  his  own  immediate  fellow-citizens,  who 
went  with  him  as  their  general  by  commission 
from  nature,  which  had  made  him  fittest  to 
command.  Nabis,  hearing  of  his  coming, 
though  his  army  quartered  within  the  town, 
thought  it  not  convenient  to  stay;  but  stealing 
out  of  the  furthest  gate  with  his  men,  marched 
away  with  all  the  speed  he  could,  thinking 
himself  a  happy  man  if  he  could  get  off  with 
safety.  And  he  did  escape;  but  Messene  was 
rescued. 

All  hitherto  makes  for  the  praise  and  hon¬ 
our  of  Philopcemen.  But  when  at  the  request 
of  the  Gortynians  he  went  away  into  Crete  to 
command  for  them,  at  a  time  when  his  own 
country  was  distressed  by  Nabis,  he  exposed 
himself  to  the  charge  of  either  cowardice,  or 
unseasonable  ambition  of  honour  amongst  for¬ 
eigners.  For  the  Megalopolitans  were  then  so 
pressed,  that,  the  enemy  being  master  of  the 
field  and  encamping  almost  at  their  gates,  they 
were  forced  to  keep  themselves  within  their 
walls,  and  sow  their  very  streets.  And  he  in  the 
meantime,  across  the  seas,  waging  war  and 
commanding  in  chief  in  a  foreign  nation, 
furnished  his  ill-wishers  with  matter  enough 
for  their  reproaches. 

Some  said  he  took  the  offer  of  the  Gorty¬ 
nians,  because  the  Achaeans  chose  other  gen¬ 
erals,  and  left  him  but  a  private  man.  For  he 
could  not  endure  to  sit  still,  but  looking  upon 
war  and  command  in  it  as  his  great  business, 
always  coveted  to  be  employed.  And  this 
agrees  with  what  he  once  aptly  said  of  King 
Ptolemy.  Somebody  was  praising  him  for  keep¬ 
ing  his  army  and  himself  in  an  admirable  state 
of  discipline  and  exercise:  “And  what  praise,” 
replied  Philopcemen,  “for  a  king  of  his  years, 
to  be  always  preparing,  and  never  perform¬ 
ing?” 

However,  the  Megalopolitans,  thinking 
themselves  betrayed,  took  it  so  ill  that  they 
were  about  to  banish  him.  But  the  Achaeans  put 
an  end  to  that  design  by  sending  their  general, 
Aristaeus,  to  Megalopolis,  who,  though  he  were 
at  difference  with  Philopcemen  about  affairs  of 
the  commonwealth,  yet  would  not  suffer  him 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

to  be  banished.  Philopcemen  finding  himself 
upon  this  account  out  of  favour  with  his  citi¬ 
zens,  induced  divers  of  the  little  neighbouring 
places  to  renounce  obedience  to  them,  suggest¬ 
ing  to  them  to  urge  that  from  the  beginning 
they  were  not  subject  to  their  taxes  or  laws,  or 
any  way  under  their  command.  In  these  pre¬ 
tences  he  openly  took  their  part,  and  fomented 
seditious  movements  amongst  the  Achaeans  in 
general  against  Megalopolis.  But  these  things 
happened  a  while  after. 

While  he  stayed  in  Crete,  in  the  service  of 
the  Gortynians,  he  made  war  not  like  a  Pelo¬ 
ponnesian  and  Arcanian,  fairly  in  the  open 
field,  but  fought  with  them  at  their  own  weap¬ 
on,  and  turning  their  stratagems  and  tricks 
against  themselves,  showed  them  they  played 
craft  against  skill,  and  were  but  children  to  an 
experienced  soldier. 

Having  acted  here  with  great  bravery,  and 
great  reputation  to  himself,  he  returned  into 
Peloponnesus,  where  he  found  Philip  beaten 
by  Titus  Quintius,  and  Nabis  at  war  both 
with  the  Romans  and  Achaeans.  He  was  at 
once  chosen  general  against  Nabis,  but  ven¬ 
turing  to  fight  by  sea,  met,  like  Epaminondas, 
with  a  result  very  contrary  to  the  general 
expectation  and  his  own  former  reputation. 
Epaminondas,  however,  according  to  some 
statements,  was  backward  by  design,  unwill¬ 
ing  to  give  his  countrymen  an  appetite  for  the 
advantages  of  the  sea,  lest  from  good  soldiers 
they  should  by  little  and  little  turn,  as  Plato 
says,  to  ill  mariners.  And  therefore  he  re¬ 
turned  from  Asia  and  the  Islands  without 
doing  anything,  on  purpose.  Whereas  Philo- 
poemen,  thinking  his  skill  in  land-service 
would  equally  avail  at  sea,  learned  how  great 
a  part  of  valour  experience  is,  and  how  much 
it  imports  in  the  management  of  things  to  be 
accustomed  to  them.  For  he  was  not  only  put 
to  the  worst  in  the  fight  for  want  of  skill,  but 
having  rigged  up  an  old  ship,  which  had 
been  a  famous  vessel  forty  years  before,  and 
shipped  his  citizens  in  her,  she  foundering, 
he  was  in  danger  of  losing  them  all.  But  find¬ 
ing  the  enemy,  as  if  he  had  been  driving  out 
of  the  sea,  had,  in  contempt  of  him,  besieged 
Gythium,  he  presently  set  sail  again,  and 
taking  them  unexpectedly,  dispersed  and 
careless  after  their  victory,  landed  in  the 
night,  burnt  their  camp,  and  killed  a  great 
number. 

A  few  days  after,  as  he  was  marching 
through  a  rough  country,  Nabis  came  sudden¬ 
ly  upon  him.  The  Achaeans  were  dismayed, 


PHILOPGEMEN 

and  in  such  difficult  ground  where  the  enemy 
had  secured  the  advantage,  despaired  to  get 
off  with  safety.  Philopcemen  made  a  little 
halt,  and,  viewing  the  ground,  soon  made  it 
appear  that  the  one  important  thing  in  war 
is  skill  in  drawing  up  an  army.  For  by  advanc¬ 
ing  only  a  few  paces,  and,  without  any  con¬ 
fusion  or  trouble,  altering  his  order  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  nature  of  the  place,  he  immedi¬ 
ately  relieved  himself  from  every  difficulty, 
and  then  charging,  put  the  enemy  to  flight. 
But  when  he  saw  they  fled,  not  towards  the 
city,  but  dispersed  every  man  a  different  way 
all  over  the  field,  which  for  wood  and  hills, 
brooks  and  hollows,  was  not  passable  by  horse, 
he  sounded  a  retreat,  and  encamped  by  broad 
daylight.  Then  foreseeing  the  enemy  would 
endeavour  to  steal  scatteringly  into  the  city 
in  the  dark,  he  posted  strong  parties  of  the 
Achaeans  all  along  the  watercourses  and  slop¬ 
ing  ground  near  the  walls.  Many  of  Nabis’s 
men  fell  into  their  hands.  For  returning  not 
in  a  body,  but  as  the  chance  of  flight  had  dis¬ 
posed  of  every  one,  they  were  caught  like 
birds  ere  they  could  enter  into  the  town. 

These  actions  obtained  him  distinguished 
marks  of  affection  and  honour  in  all  the  the¬ 
atres  of  Greece,  but  not  without  the  secret 
ill-will  of  Titus  Flamininus,  who  was  natur¬ 
ally  eager  for  glory,  and  thought  it  but  rea¬ 
sonable  a  consul  if  Rome  should  be  otherwise 
esteemed  by  the  Achaeans  than  a  common 
Arcadian;  especially  as  there  was  no  compari¬ 
son  between  what  he  and  what  Philopcemen 
had  done  for  them,  he  having  by  one  proc¬ 
lamation  restored  all  Greece,  as  much  as  had 
been  subject  to  Philip  and  the  Macedonians, 
to  liberty.  After  this,  Titus  made  peace  with 
Nabis,  and  Nabis  was  circumvented  and  slain 
by  the  Aitolians. 

Things  being  then  in  confusion  at  Sparta, 
Philopcemen  laid  hold  of  the  occasion,  and 
coming  upon  them  with  an  army,  prevailed 
with  some  by  persuasion,  with  others  by  fear, 
till  he  brought  the  whole  city  over  to  the 
Achaeans.  As  it  was  no  small  matter  for 
Sparta  to  become  a  member  of  Achaea,  this 
action  gained  him  infinite  praise  from  the 
Achaeans,  for  having  strengthened  their  con¬ 
federacy  by  the  addition  of  so  great  and  pow¬ 
erful  a  city,  and  not  a  little  good-will  from 
the  nobility  of  Sparta  itself,  who  hoped  they 
had  now  procured  an  ally  who  would  defend 
their  freedom.  Accordingly,  having  raised  a 
sum  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  silver  talents 
by  the  sale  of  the  house  and  goods  of  Nabis, 


299 

they  decreed  him  the  money,  and  sent  a  depu¬ 
tation  in  the  name  of  the  city  to  present  it. 

But  here  the  honesty  of  Philopcemen 
showed  itself  clearly  to  be  a  real,  uncounter¬ 
feited  virtue.  For,  first  of  all,  there  was  not  a 
man  among  them  who  would  undertake  to 
make  him  this  offer  of  a  present,  but  every 
one  excusing  himself,  and  shifting  it  off  upon 
his  fellow,  they  laid  the  office  at  last  on 
Timolaus,  with  whom  he  had  lodged  at 
Sparta.  Then  Timolaus  came  to  Megalopolis, 
and  was  entertained  by  Philopcemen;  but 
struck  into  admiration  with  the  dignity  of 
his  life  and  manners,  and  the  simplicity  of 
his  habits,  judging  him  to  be  utterly  inacces¬ 
sible  to  any  such  considerations,  he  said  noth¬ 
ing,  but  pretending  other  business,  returned 
without  a  word  mentioned  of  the  present. 
He  was  sent  again,  and  did  just  as  formerly. 
But  the  third  time  with  much  ado,  and  falter¬ 
ing  in  his  words,  he  acquainted  Philopcemen 
with  the  good-will  of  the  city  of  Sparta  to  him. 

Philopcemen  listened  obligingly  and  gladly; 
and  then  went  himself  to  Sparta,  where  he  ad¬ 
vised  them  not  to  bribe  good  men  and  their 
friends,  of  whose  virtue  they  might  be  sure 
without  charge  to  themselves;  but  to  buy  off 
and  silence  ill  citizens,  who  disquited  the  city 
with  their  seditious  speeches  in  the  public  as¬ 
semblies;  for  it  was  better  to  bar  liberty  of  speech 
in  enemies  than  friends.  Thus  it  appeared  how 
much  Philopcemen  was  above  bribery. 

Diophanes  being  afterwards  general  of  the 
Achaeans,  and  hearing  the  Lacedaemonians 
were  bent  on  new  commotions,  resolved  to 
chastise  them;  they,  on  the  other  side,  being 
set  upon  war,  were  embroiling  all  Pelopon¬ 
nesus.  Philopcemen  on  this  occasion  did  all 
he  could  to  keep  Diophanes  quiet  and  to 
make  him  sensible  that  as  the  times  went, 
while  Antiochus  and  the  Romans  were  dis¬ 
puting  their  pretensions  with  vast  armies  in 
the  heart  of  Greece,  it  concerned  a  man  in  his 
position  to  keep  a  watchful  eye  over  them, 
and  dissembling,  and  putting  up  with  any 
less  important  grievances,  to  preserve  all  quiet 
at  home.  Diophanes  would  not  be  ruled,  but 
joined  with  Titus,  and  both  together  falling 
into  Daconia,  marched  directly  to  Sparta. 
Philopcemen,  upon  this,  took,  in  his  indigna¬ 
tion,  a  step  which  certainly  was  not  lawful, 
nor  in  the  strictest  sense  just,  but  boldly  and 
loftily  conceived.  Entering  into  the  town  him¬ 
self,  he,  a  private  man  as  he  was,  refused  ad¬ 
mission  to  both  the  consul  of  Rome  and  the 
general  of  the  Achaeans,  quieted  the  disorders 


300 

in  the  city,  and  reunited  it  on  the  same  terms 
as  before  to  the  Achaean  confederacy. 

Yet  afterwards,  when  he  was  general  him¬ 
self,  upon  some  new  misdemeanour  of  the 
Laceda:monians,  he  brought  back  those  who 
had  been  banished,  put,  as  Polybius  writes, 
eighty,  according  to  Aristocrates  three  hun¬ 
dred  and  fifty,  Spartans  to  death,  razed  the 
walls,  took  away  a  good  part  of  their  terri¬ 
tory  and  transferred  it  to  the  Megalopolitans, 
forced  out  of  the  country  and  carried  into 
Achaea  all  who  had  been  made  citizens  of 
Sparta  by  tyrants,  except  three  thousand  who 
would  not  submit  to  banishment.  These  he 
sold  for  slaves,  and  with  the  money,  as  if  to 
exult  over  them,  built  a  colonnade  at  Megalo¬ 
polis.  Lastly,  unworthily  trampling  upon  the 
Lacedaemonians  in  their  calamities,  and  grati¬ 
fying  his  hostility  by  a  most  oppressive  and 
arbitrarv  action,  he  abolished  the  laws  of  Ly- 
curgus,  and  forced  them  to  educate  their  chil¬ 
dren  and  live  after  the  manner  of  the  Achae- 
ans;  as  though,  while  they  kept  to  the  disci¬ 
pline  of  Lycurgus,  there  was  no  humbling  their 
haughty  spirits.  In  their  present  distress  and 
adversity  they  allowed  Philopcemen  thus  to  cut 
the  sinews  of  their  commonwealth  asunder, 
and  behaved  themselves  humbly  and  submis¬ 
sively.  But  afterwards,  in  no  long  time,  obtain¬ 
ing  the  support  of  the  Romans,  they  abandon¬ 
ed  their  new  Achaean  citizenship;  and  as  much 
as  in  so  miserable  and  ruined  a  condition  they 
could,  re-established  their  ancient  discipline. 

When  the  war  betwixt  Antiochus  and  the 
Romans  broke  out  in  Greece,  Philopcemen 
was  a  private  man.  He  repined  grievously 
when  he  saw  Antiochus  lay  idle  at  Chalcis, 
spending  his  time  in  unreasonable  courtship 
and  weddings,  while  his  men  lay  dispersed  in 
several  towns,  without  order,  or  commanders, 
and  minding  nothing  but  their  pleasures.  He 
complained  much  that  he  was  not  himself  in 
office  and  said  he  envied  the  Romans  their  vic¬ 
tory;  and  that  if  he  had  had  the  fortune  to  be 
then  in  command,  he  would  have  surprised 
and  killed  the  whole  army  in  the  taverns. 

When  Antiochus  was  overcome,  the  Ro¬ 
mans  pressed  harder  upon  Greece,  and  en¬ 
compassed  the  Achaeans  with  their  power; 
the  popular  leaders  in  the  several  cities  yielded 
before  them;  and  their  power  speedily,  under 
the  divine  guidance,  advanced  to  the  consum¬ 
mation  due  to  it  in  the  revolutions  of  fortune. 
Philopcemen,  in  this  conjuncture,  carried  him¬ 
self  like  a  good  pilot  in  a  high  sea,  sometimes 
shifting  sail,  and  sometimes  yielding,  but  still 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

steering  steady;  and  omitting  no  opportunity 
nor  effort  to  keep  all  who  were  considerable, 
whether  for  eloquence  or  riches,  fast  to  the  de¬ 
fence  of  their  common  liberty. 

Aristaenus,  a  Megalopolitan  of  great  credit 
among  the  Achaeans,  but  always  a  favourer 
of  the  Romans,  saying  one  day  in  the  senate 
that  the  Romans  should  not  be  opposed,  or 
displeased  in  any  way,  Philopcemen  heard  him 
with  an  impatient  silence;  but  at  last,  not  able 
to  hold  longer,  said  angrily  to  him,  “And  why 
be  in  such  haste,  wretched  man,  to  behold  the 
end  of  Greece?”  Manius,  the  Roman  consul, 
after  the  defeat  of  Antiochus,  requested  the 
Achaeans  to  restore  the  banished  Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans  to  their  country,  which  motion  was  sec¬ 
onded  and  supported  by  all  the  interest  of  Ti¬ 
tus.  But  Philopcemen  crossed  it,  not  from  ill- 
will  to  the  men,  but  that  they  might  be  be¬ 
holden  to  him  and  the  Achaeans,  not  to  Titus 
and  the  Romans.  For  when  he  came  to  be 
general  himself,  he  restored  them.  So  impa¬ 
tient  was  his  spirit  of  any  subjection  and  so 
prone  his  nature  to  contest  everything  with 
men  in  power. 

Being  now  three  score  and  ten,  and  the 
eighth  time  general,  he  was  in  hope  to  pass 
in  quiet,  not  only  the  year  of  his  magistracy, 
but  his  remaining  life.  For  as  our  diseases  de¬ 
cline,  as  it  is  supposed  with  our  declining  bod¬ 
ily  strength,  so  that  quarreling  humour  of  the 
Greeks  abated  much  with  their  failing  politi¬ 
cal  greatness.  But  fortune  or  some  divine  retri¬ 
butive  power  threw  him  down  in  the  close  of 
his  life,  like  a  successful  runner  who  stumbles 
at  the  goal.  It  is  reported,  that  being  in  com¬ 
pany  where  one  was  praised  for  a  great  com¬ 
mander,  he  replied,  there  was  no  great  account 
to  be  made  of  a  man  who  had  suffered  himself 
to  be  taken  alive  by  his  enemies. 

A  few  days  after,  news  came  that  Dinocrates 
the  Messenian,  a  particular  enemy  to  Philopoe- 
men,  and  for  his  wickedness  and  villainies 
generally  hated,  had  induced  Messene  to  revolt 
from  the  Achaeans,  and  was  about  to  seize  up¬ 
on  a  little  place  called  Colonis.  Philopcemen 
lay  then  sick  of  a  fever  at  Argos.  Upon  the 
news  he  hasted  away,  and  reached  Megalopo¬ 
lis,  which  was  distant  above  four  hundred  fur¬ 
longs,  in  a  day.  From  thence  he  immediately 
led  out  the  horse,  the  noblest  of  the  city,  young 
men  in  the  vigour  of  their  age,  and  eager  to 
proffer  their  service,  both  from  attachment  to 
Philopcemen  and  zeal  for  the  cause.  As  they 
marched  towards  Messene,  they  met  with  Di¬ 
nocrates,  near  the  hill  of  Evander,  charged  and 


PHILOPOEMEN 

routed  him.  But  five  hundred  fresh  men,  who, 
being  left  for  a  guard  to  the  country,  came  in 
late,  happening  to  appear,  the  fleeing  enemy 
rallied  again  about  the  hills. 

Philopoemen,  fearing  to  be  enclosed,  and 
solicitous  for  his  men,  retreated  over  ground 
extremely  disadvantageous,  bringing  up  the 
rear  himself.  As  he  often  faced,  and  made 
charges  upon  the  enemy,  he  drew  them  upon 
himself;  though  they  merely  made  move¬ 
ments  at  a  distance,  and  shouted  about  him, 
nobody  daring  to  approach  him.  In  his  care  to 
save  every  single  man,  he  left  his  main  body  so 
often,  that  at  last  he  found  himself  alone 
among  the  thickest  of  his  enemies.  Yet  even 
then  none  durst  come  up  to  him,  but  being 
pelted  at  a  distance,  and  driven  to  stony  steep 
places,  he  had  great  difficulty,  with  much  spur¬ 
ring,  to  guide  his  horse  aright.  His  age  was  no 
hindrance  to  him,  for  with  perpetual  exercise 
he  was  both  strong  and  active;  but  being  weak¬ 
ened  with  sickness,  and  tired  with  his  long 
journey,  his  horse  stumbling,  he  fell  encum¬ 
bered  with  his  arms,  and  faint,  upon  a  hard  and 
rugged  piece  of  ground.  His  head  received 
such  a  shock  with  the  fall  that  he  lay  awhile 
speechless,  so  that  the  enemy,  thinking  him 
dead,  began  to  turn  and  strip  him.  But  when 
they  saw  him  lift  his  head  and  open  his  eyes, 
they  threw  themselves  all  together  upon  him, 
bound  his  hands  behind  him,  and  carried  him 
off,  every  kind  of  insult  and  contumely  being 
lavished  on  him  who  truly  had  never  so  much 
as  dreamed  of  being  led  in  triumph  by  Dino¬ 
crates. 

The  Messenians,  wonderfully  elated  with  the 
news,  thronged  in  swarms  to  the  city  gates. 
But  when  they  saw  Philopoemen  in  a  posture 
so  unsuitable  to  the  glory  of  his  great  actions 
and  famous  victories,  most  of  them,  struck 
with  grief  and  cursing  the  deceitful  vanity  of 
human  fortune,  even  shed  tears  of  compassion 
at  the  spectacle.  Such  tears  by  little  and  little 
turned  to  kind  words,  and  it  was  almost  in 
everybody’s  mouth  that  they  ought  to  remem¬ 
ber  what  he  had  done  for  them,  and  how  he 
had  preserved  the  common  liberty,  by  driving 
away  Nabis.  Some  few,  to  make  their  court  to 
Dinocrates,  were  for  torturing  and  then  put¬ 
ting  him  to  death  as  a  dangerous  and  irrecon¬ 
cilable  enemy;  all  the  more  formidable  to  Di¬ 
nocrates,  who  had  taken  him  a  prisoner,  should 
he  after  this  misfortune  regain  his  liberty. 
They  put  him  at  last  into  a  dungeon  under¬ 
ground,  which  they  called  the  treasury,  a  place 
into  which  there  came  no  air  nor  light  from 


301 

abroad;  and  which,  having  no  doors,  was  closed 
with  a  great  stone.  This  they  rolled  into  the  en¬ 
trance  and  fixed,  and  placing  a  guard  about  it, 
left  him. 

In  the  meantime  Philopcemen’s  soldiers,  re¬ 
covering  themselves  after  their  flight,  and  fear¬ 
ing  he  was  dead  when  he  appeared  nowhere, 
made  a  stand,  calling  him  with  loud  cries,  and 
reproaching  one  another  with  their  unworthy 
and  shameful  escape,  having  betrayed  their 
general,  who,  to  preserve  their  lives,  had  lost 
his  own.  Then  returning  after  much  inquiry 
and  search,  hearing  at  last  that  he  was  taken, 
they  sent  away  messengers  round  about  with 
the  news.  The  Achaeans  resented  the  misfor¬ 
tune  deeply,  and  decreed  to  send  and  demand 
him;  and  in  the  meantime  drew  their  army 
together  for  his  rescue. 

While  these  things  passed  in  Achaea,  Dino¬ 
crates,  fearing  that  any  delay  would  save  Phi¬ 
lopoemen,  and  resolving  to  be  beforehand  with 
the  Achaeans,  as  soon  as  night  had  dispersed 
the  multitude,  sent  in  the  executioner  with  poi¬ 
son,  with  orders  not  to  stir  from  him  till  he 
had  taken  it.  Philopoemen  had  then  laid  down, 
wrapt  up  in  his  cloak,  not  sleeping,  but  op¬ 
pressed  with  grief  and  trouble;  but  seeing 
light,  and  a  man  with  poison  by  him,  struggled 
to  sit  up;  and  taking  the  cup,  asked  the  man 
if  he  heard  anything  of  the  horsemen,  particu¬ 
larly  Lycortas?  The  fellow  answering,  that  the 
most  part  had  got  off  safe,  he  nodded,  and 
looking  cheerfully  upon  him,  “It  is  well,”  he 
said,  “that  we  have  not  been  every  way  un¬ 
fortunate”;  and  without  a  word  more,  drank 
it  off,  and  laid  him  down  again.  His  weakness 
offering  but  little  resistance  to  the  poison,  it 
despatched  him  presently. 

The  news  of  his  death  filled  all  Achaea 
with  grief  and  lamentation.  The  youth,  with 
some  of  the  chiefs  of  the  several  cities,  met  at 
Megalopolis  with  a  resolution  to  take  revenge 
without  delay.  They  chose  Lycortas  general, 
and  falling  upon  the  Messenians,  put  all  to 
fire  and  sword,  till  they  all  with  one  consent 
made  their  submission.  Dinocrates,  with  as 
many  as  had  voted  for  Philopcemen’s  death, 
anticipated  their  vengeance  and  killed  them¬ 
selves.  Those  who  would  have  had  him  tor¬ 
tured,  Lycortas  put  in  chains  and  reserved  for 
severer  punishment.  They  burnt  his  body,  and 
put  the  ashes  into  an  urn,  and  then  marched 
homeward,  not  as  in  an  ordinary  march,  but 
with  a  kind  of  solemn  pomp,  half  triumph, 
half  funeral,  crowns  of  victory  on  their  heads, 
and  tears  in  their  eyes,  and  their  captive  en- 


302 

emies  in  fetters  by  them.  Polybius  the  general’s 
son,  carried  the  urn,  so  covered  with  garlands 
and  ribbons  as  scarcely  to  be  visible;  and  the 
noblest  of  the  Achaeans  accompanied  him.  The 
soldiers  followed  fully  armed  and  mounted, 
with  looks  neither  altogether  sad  as  in  mourn¬ 
ing,  nor  lofty  as  in  victory.  The  people  from  all 
towns  and  villages  in  their  way  flocked  out  to 
meet  him,  as  at  his  return  from  conquest,  and, 
saluting  the  urn,  fell  in  with  the  company  and 
followed  on  to  Megalopolis;  where,  when  the 
old  men,  the  women  and  children  were  min¬ 
gled  with  the  rest,  the  whole  city  was  filled 
with  sighs,  complaints  and  cries,  the  loss  of 
Philopcemen  seeming  to  them  the  loss  of  their 
own  greatness,  and  of  their  rank  among  the 
Achaeans.  Thus  he  was  honourably  buried  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  worth,  and  the  prisoners  were 
stoned  about  his  tomb. 

Many  statues  were  set  up,  and  many  hon- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ours  decreed  to  him  by  the  several  cities.  One 
of  the  Romans  in  the  time  of  Greece’s  afflic¬ 
tions,  after  the  destruction  of  Corinth,  pub¬ 
licly  accusing  Philopcemen,  as  if  he  had  been 
still  alive,  of  having  been  the  enemy  of  Rome, 
proposed  that  these  memorials  should  be  all 
removed.  A  discussion  ensued,  speeches  were 
made,  and  Polybius  answered  the  sycophant 
at  large.  And  neither  Mummius  nor  the  lieu¬ 
tenants  would  suffer  the  honourable  monu¬ 
ments  of  so  great  a  man  to  be  defaced,  though 
he  had  often  crossed  both  Titus  and  Manius. 
They  justly  distinguished,  and  as  became  hon¬ 
est  men,  betwixt  usefulness  and  virtue — what 
is  good  in  itself,  and  what  is  profitable  to  par¬ 
ticular  parties — judging  thanks  and  reward 
due  to  him  who  does  a  benefit  from  him  who 
receives  it,  and  honour  never  to  be  denied 
by  the  good  to  the  good.  And  so  much  con¬ 
cerning  Philopcemen. 


FLAMININUS 

2_3o?-i74  b.c. 


What  Titus  Quintius  Flamininus, 
whom  we  select  as  a  parallel  to 
Philopcemen,  was  in  personal  ap¬ 
pearance,  those  who  are  curious  may  see  by  the 
brazen  statue  of  him,  which  stands  in  Rome 
near  that  of  the  great  Apollo,  brought  from 
Carthage,  opposite  to  the  Circus  Maximus, 
with  a  Greek  inscription  upon  it.  The  temper 
of  his  mind  is  said  to  have  been  of  the  warmest 
both  in  anger  and  in  kindness,  not  indeed 
equally  so  in  both  respects;  as  in  punishing  he 
was  ever  moderate,  never  inflexible;  but  what¬ 
ever  courtesy  or  good  turn  he  set  about,  he 
went  through  with  it,  and  was  as  perpetually 
kind  and  obliging  to  those  on  whom  he  had 
poured  his  favours,  as  if  they,  not  he,  had  been 
the  benefactors:  exerting  himself  for  the  se¬ 
curity  and  preservation  of  what  he  seemed  to 
consider  his  noblest  possessions,  those  to  whom 
he  had  done  good.  But  being  ever  thirsty  after 
honour,  and  passionate  for  glory,  if  anything 
of  a  greater  and  more  extraordinary  nature 
were  to  be  done,  he  was  eager  to  be  the  doer 
of  it  himself;  and  took  more  pleasure  in  those 
that  needed,  than  in  those  that  were  capable  of 
conferring  favours;  looking  on  the  former  as 
objects  for  his  virtue,  and  on  the  latter  as  com¬ 
petitors  in  glory. 


Rome  had  then  many  sharp  contests  going 
on,  and  her  youth  betaking  themselves  early 
to  the  wars,  learned  betimes  the  art  of  com¬ 
manding;  and  Flamininus,  having  passed 
through  the  rudiments  of  soldiery,  received 
his  first  charge  in  the  war  against  Hannibal, 
as  tribune  under  Marcellus,  then  consul.  Mar- 
cellus,  indeed,  falling  into  an  ambuscade,  was 
cut  off.  But  Titus,  receiving  the  appointment 
of  governor,  as  well  of  Tarentum,  then  re¬ 
taken,  as  of  the  country  about  it,  grew  no 
less  famous  for  his  administration  of  jus¬ 
tice,  than  for  his  military  skill.  This  obtained 
him  the  office  of  leader  and  founder  of  two 
colonies  which  were  sent  into  the  cities  of 
Narnia  and  Cossa;  which  filled  him  with 
loftier  hopes,  and  made  him  aspire  to  step  over 
those  previous  honours  which  it  was  usual  first 
to  pass  through,  the  offices  of  tribune  of  the 
people,  praetor  and  aedile,  and  to  level  his  aim 
immediately  at  the  consulship.  Having  these 
colonies,  and  all  their  interest  ready  at  his  serv¬ 
ice,  he  offered  himself  as  candidate;  but  the 
tribunes  of  the  people,  Fulvius  and  Manius 
[Curius],  and  their  party,  strongly  opposed 
him;  alleging  how  unbecoming  a  thing  it  was 
that  a  man  of  such  raw  years,  one  who  was  yet, 
as  it  were,  untrained,  uninitiated  in  the  first 


FLAMININUS 

sacred  rites  and  mysteries  of  government, 
should,  in  contempt  of  the  laws,  intrude  and 
force  himself  into  the  sovereignty.  However, 
the  senate  remitted  it  to  the  people’s  choice 
and  suffrage;  who  elected  him  (though  not 
then  arrived  at  his  thirtieth  year)  consul  with 
Sextus  Adius. 

The  war  against  Philip  and  the  Macedoni¬ 
ans  fell  to  Titus  by  lot,  and  some  kind  for¬ 
tune,  propitious  at  that  time  to  the  Romans, 
seems  to  have  so  determined  it;  as  neither 
the  people  nor  the  state  of  things  which  were 
now  to  be  dealt  with  were  such  as  to  require  a 
general  who  would  always  be  upon  the  point 
of  force  and  mere  blows,  but  rather  were  ac¬ 
cessible  to  persuasion  and  gentle  usage.  It  is 
true  that  the  kingdom  of  Macedon  furnished 
supplies  enough  to  Philip  for  actual  battle  with 
the  Romans;  but  to  maintain  a  long  and  linger¬ 
ing  war  he  must  call  in  aid  from  Greece;  must 
thence  procure  his  supplies;  there  find  his 
means  of  retreat.  Greece,  in  a  word,  would  be 
his  resource  for  all  the  requisites  of  his  army. 
Unless,  therefore,  the  Greeks  could  be  with¬ 
drawn  from  siding  with  Philip,  this  war  with 
him  must  not  expect  its  decision  from  a  single 
battle.  Now  Greece  (which  had  not  hitherto 
held  much  correspondence  with  the  Romans, 
but  first  began  an  intercourse  on  this  occasion) 
would  not  so  soon  have  embraced  a  foreign 
authority,  instead  of  the  commanders  she  had 
been  inured  to,  had  not  the  general  of  these 
strangers  been  of  a  kind,  gentle  nature,  one 
who  worked  rather  by  fair  means  than  force; 
of  a  persuasive  address  in  all  applications  to 
others,  and  no  less  courteous  and  open  to 
all  addresses  of  others  to  him;  and  above  all 
bent  and  determined  on  justice.  But  the 
story  of  his  actions  will  best  illustrate  these 
particulars. 

Titus  observed  that  both  Sulpicius  and  Pu¬ 
blius,  who  had  been  his  predecessors  in  that 
command,  had  not  taken  the  field  against  the 
Macedonians  till  late  in  the  year;  and  then,  too, 
had  not  set  their  hands  properly  to  the  war, 
but  had  kept  skirmishing  and  scouting  here 
and  there  for  passes  and  provisions,  and  never 
came  to  close  fighting  with  Philip.  He  resolved 
not  to  trifle  away  a  year,  as  they  had  done,  at 
home  in  ostentation  of  the  honour,  and  in  do¬ 
mestic  administration,  and  only  then  to  join 
the  army,  with  the  pitiful  hope  of  protracting 
the  term  of  office  through  a  second  year,  acting 
as  consul  in  the  first,  and  as  general  in  the 
latter.  He  was,  moreover,  infinitely  desirous  to 
employ  his  authority  with  effect  upon  the  war, 


303 

which  made  him  slight  those  home  honours 
and  prerogatives. 

Requesting,  therefore,  of  the  senate,  that 
his  brother  Lucius  might  act  with  him  as 
admiral  of  the  navy,  and  taking  with  him 
to  be  the  edge,  as  it  were,  of  the  expedition 
three  thousand  still  young  and  vigorous  sol¬ 
diers,  of  those  who,  under  Scipio,  had  de¬ 
feated  Hasdrubal  in  Spain,  and  Hannibal  in 
Africa,  he  got  safe  into  Epirus;  and  found 
Publius  encamped  with  his  army,  over  against 
Philip,  who  had  long  made  good  the  pass 
over  the  river  Apsus,  and  the  straits  there; 
Publius  not  having  been  able,  for  the  nat¬ 
ural  strength  of  the  place,  to  effect  anything 
against  him.  Titus  therefore  took  upon  him¬ 
self  the  conduct  of  the  army,  and,  having 
dismissed  Publius,  examined  the  ground.  The 
place  is  in  strength  not  inferior  to  Tempe, 
though  it  lacks  the  trees  and  green  woods, 
and  the  pleasant  meadows  and  walks  that 
adorn  Tempe.  The  Apsus,  making  its  way  be¬ 
tween  vast  and  lofty  mountains  which  all  but 
meet  above  a  single  deep  ravine  in  the  midst, 
is  not  unlike  the  river  Peneus  in  the  rapidity 
of  its  current  and  in  its  general  appearance.  It 
covers  the  foot  of  those  hills,  and  leaves  only  a 
craggy,  narrow  path  cut  out  beside  the  stream, 
not  easily  passable  at  any  time  for  an  army,  but 
not  at  all  when  guarded  by  an  enemy. 

There  were  some,  therefore,  who  would 
have  had  Titus  make  a  circuit  through  Das- 
saretis,  and  take  an  easy  and  safe  road  by  the 
district  of  Lyncus.  But  he,  fearing  that  if  he 
should  engage  himself  too  far  from  the  sea  in 
barren  and  untilled  countries,  and  Philip 
should  decline  fighting,  he  might,  through 
want  of  provisions,  be  constrained  to  march 
back  again  to  the  seaside  without  effecting 
anything,  as  his  predecessor  had  done  before 
him,  embraced  the  resolution  of  forcing  his 
way  over  the  mountains.  But  Philip,  having 
possessed  himself  of  them  with  his  army,  show¬ 
ered  down  his  darts  and  arrows  from  all  parts 
upon  the  Romans. 

Sharp  encounters  took  place,  and  many  fell 
wounded  and  slain  on  both  sides,  and  there 
seemed  but  little  likelihood  of  thus  ending  the 
war;  when  some  of  the  men,  who  fed  their 
cattle  thereabouts,  came  to  Titus  with  a  discov¬ 
ery  that  there  was  a  round-about  way  which 
the  enemy  neglected  to  guard:  through  which 
they  undertook  to  conduct  his  army,  and  to 
bring  it,  within  three  days  at  furthest,  to  the 
top  of  the  hills.  To  gain  the  surer  credit  with 
him,  they  said  that  Charops,  son  of  Machatas, 


304 

a  leading  man  in  Epirus,  who  was  friendly  to 
the  Romans,  and  aided  them  (though,  for  fear 
of  Philip,  secretly),  was  privy  to  the  design. 
Titus  gave  their  information  belief,  and  sent  a 
captain  with  four  thousand  foot  and  three 
hundred  horse,  these  herdsmen  being  their 
guides,  but  kept  in  bonds.  In  the  daytime 
they  lay  still  under  the  covert  of  the  hollow 
and  woody  places,  but  in  the  night  they 
marched  by  moonlight,  the  moon  being  then 
at  the  full. 

Titus,  having  detached  this  party,  lay  quiet 
with  his  main  body,  merely  keeping  up  the 
attention  of  the  enemy  by  some  slight  skir¬ 
mishing.  But  when  the  day  arrived  that  those 
who  stole  round  were  expected  upon  the  top 
of  the  hill,  he  drew  up  his  forces  early  in  the 
morning,  as  well  the  light-armed  as  the 
heavy,  and,  dividing  them  into  three  parts, 
himself  led  the  van,  marching  his  men  up 
the  narrow  passage  along  the  bank,  darted 
at  by  the  Macedonians  and  engaging,  in  this 
difficult  ground,  hand  to  hand  with  his  assail¬ 
ants;  whilst  the  other  two  divisions  on  either 
side  of  him  threw  themselves  with  great  alac¬ 
rity  among  the  rocks.  Whilst  they  were  strug¬ 
gling  forward,  the  sun  rose,  and  a  thin  smoke, 
like  a  mist,  hanging  on  the  hills,  was  seen  ris¬ 
ing  at  a  distance,  unperceived  by  the  enemy, 
being  behind  them,  as  they  stood  on  the 
heights;  and  the  Romans,  also,  as  yet  under 
suspense,  in  the  toil  and  difficulty  they  were  in, 
could  only  doubtfully  construe  the  sight  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  desires.  But  as  it  grew  thicker 
and  thicker,  blackening  the  air,  and  mounting 
to  a  greater  height,  they  no  longer  doubted  but 
it  was  the  fire-signal  of  their  companions;  and, 
raising  a  triumphant  shout,  forcing  their  way 
onwards,  they  drove  the  enemy  back  into  the 
roughest  ground;  while  the  other  party  echoed 
back  their  acclamations  from  the  top  of  the 
mountain. 

The  Macedonians  fled  with  all  the  speed 
they  could  make;  there  fell,  indeed,  not  more 
than  two  thousand  of  them;  for  the  difficul¬ 
ties  of  the  place  rescued  them  from  pursuit. 
But  the  Romans  pillaged  their  camp,  seized 
upon  their  money  and  slaves,  and,  becoming 
absolute  masters  of  the  pass,  traversed  all  Epi¬ 
rus;  but  with  such  order  and  discipline,  with 
such  temperance  and  moderation,  that,  though 
they  were  far  from  the  sea,  at  a  great  distance 
from  their  vessels,  and  stinted  of  their  monthly 
allowance  of  corn,  and  though  they  had  much 
difficulty  in  buying,  they  nevertheless  abstain¬ 
ed  altogether  from  plundering  the  country, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

which  had  provisions  enough  of  all  sorts  in  it. 

For  intelligence  being  received  that  Philip, 
making  a  flight,  rather  than  a  march,  through 
Thessaly,  forced  the  inhabitants  from  the 
towns  to  take  shelter  in  the  mountains,  burnt 
down  the  towns  themselves,  and  gave  up  as 
spoil  to  his  soldiers  all  the  property  which  it 
had  been  found  impossible  to  remove,  aban¬ 
doning,  as  it  would  seem,  the  whole  country  to 
the  Romans.  Titus  was,  therefore,  very  desir¬ 
ous,  and  entreated  his  soldiers,  that  they  would 
pass  through  it  as  if  it  were  their  own,  or  as  if 
a  place  trusted  into  their  hands;  and,  indeed, 
they  quickly  perceived,  by  the  event,  what  ben¬ 
efit  they  derived  from  this  moderate  and  or¬ 
derly  conduct.  For  they  no  sooner  set  foot  in 
Thessaly,  but  the  cities  opened  their  gates,  and 
the  Greeks  within  Thermopylae,  were  all  ea¬ 
gerness  and  excitement  to  ally  themselves  with 
them.  The  Achaeans  abandoned  their  alliance 
with  Philip,  and  voted  to  join  with  the  Ro¬ 
mans  in  actual  arms  against  him;  and  the 
Opuntians,  though  the  iEtolians,  who  were 
zealous  allies  of  the  Romans,  were  willing  and 
desirous  to  undertake  the  protection  of  the 
city,  would  not  listen  to  proposals  from  them; 
but  sending  for  Titus,  intrusted  and  commit¬ 
ted  themselves  to  his  charge. 

It  is  told  of  Pyrrhus,  that  when  first,  from 
an  adjacent  hill  or  watch-tower  which  gave 
him  a  prospect  of  the  Roman  army,  he  de¬ 
scried  them  drawn  up  in  order,  he  observed 
that  he  saw  nothing  barbarian-like  in  this  bar¬ 
barian  line  of  battle.  And  all  who  came  near 
Titus  could  not  choose  but  say  as  much  of 
him,  at  their  first  view.  For  they  had  been 
told  by  the  Macedonians  of  an  invader,  at  the 
head  of  a  barbarian  army,  carrying  everywhere 
slavery  and  destruction  on  his  sword’s  point; 
when,  in  lieu  of  such  an  one,  they  met  a  man, 
in  the  flower  of  his  age,  of  a  gentle  and  hu¬ 
mane  aspect,  a  Greek  in  his  voice  and  language, 
and  a  lover  of  honour,  they  were  wonderful¬ 
ly  pleased  and  attracted;  and  when  they  left 
him,  they  filled  the  cities,  wherever  they  went, 
with  favourable  feelings  for  him,  and  with  the 
belief  that  in  him  they  might  find  the  protec¬ 
tor  and  assertor  of  their  liberties.  And  when 
afterwards,  on  Philip’s  professing  a  desire  for 
peace,  Titus  made  a  tender  to  him  of  peace  and 
friendship,  upon  the  condition  that  the  Greeks 
be  left  to  their  own  laws,  and  that  he  should 
withdraw  his  garrisons,  which  he  refused  to 
comply  with.  Now  after  these  proposals  the 
universal  belief  even  of  the  favourers  and  par¬ 
tisans  of  Philip  was,  that  the  Romans  came  not 


FLAMININUS 

to  fight  against  the  Greeks,  but  for  the  Greeks 
against  the  Macedonians. 

Accordingly,  all  the  rest  of  Greece  came  to 
peaceable  terms  with  him.  But  as  he  marched 
into  Bceotia,  without  committing  the  least  act 
of  hostility,  the  nobility  and  chief  men  of 
Thebes  came  out  of  their  city  to  meet  him,  de¬ 
voted  under  the  influence  of  Brachylles  to  the 
Macedonian  alliance,  but  desirous  at  the  same 
time  to  show  honour  and  deference  to  Titus; 
as  they  were,  they  conceived,  in  amity  with 
both  parties.  Titus  received  them  in  the  most 
obliging  and  courteous  manner,  but  kept  going 
gently  on,  questioning  and  inquiring  of  them, 
and  sometimes  entertaining  them  with  narra¬ 
tives  of  his  own,  till  his  soldiers  might  a  little 
recover  from  the  weariness  of  their  journey. 
Thus  passing  on,  he  and  the  Thebans  came  to¬ 
gether  into  their  city,  not  much  to  their  satis¬ 
faction;  but  yet  they  could  not  well  deny  him 
entrance,  as  a  good  number  of  his  men  attend¬ 
ed  him  in.  Titus,  however,  now  he  was  within, 
as  if  he  had  not  had  the  city  at  his  mercy,  came 
forward  and  addressed  them,  urging  them  to 
join  the  Roman  interest.  King  Attalus  follow¬ 
ed  to  the  same  effect.  And  he,  indeed,  trying  to 
play  the  advocate,  beyond  what  it  seems  his 
age  could  bear,  was  seized,  in  the  midst  of  his 
speech,  with  a  sudden  flux  or  dizziness,  and 
swooned  away;  and,  not  long  after,  was  con¬ 
veyed  by  ship  into  Asia,  and  died  there.  The 
Boeotians  joined  the  Roman  alliance. 

But  now,  when  Philip  sent  an  embassy  to 
Rome,  Titus  despatched  away  agents  on  his 
part,  too,  to  solicit  the  senate,  if  they  should 
continue  the  war,  to  continue  him  in  his 
command,  or  if  they  determined  an  end  to 
that,  that  he  might  have  the  honour  of  con¬ 
cluding  the  peace.  Having  a  great  passion 
for  distinction,  his  fear  was,  that  if  another 
general  were  commissioned  to  carry  on  the 
war,  the  honour  even  of  what  was  passed 
would  be  lost  to  him;  and  his  friends  trans¬ 
acted  matters  so  well  on  his  behalf,  that 
Philip  was  unsuccessful  in  his  proposals,  and 
the  management  of  the  war  was  confirmed 
in  his  hands. 

He  no  sooner  received  the  senate’s  deter¬ 
mination,  but,  big  with  hopes,  he  marched 
directly  into  Thessaly  to  engage  Philip;  his 
army  consisting  of  twenty-six  thousand  men, 
out  of  which  the  iEtolians  furnished  six  thou¬ 
sand  foot  and  four  hundred  horse.  The  forces 
of  Philip  were  much  about  the  same  number. 
In  this  eagerness  to  encounter,  they  advanced 
against  each  other,  till  both  were  near  Sco- 


305 

tussa,  where  they  resolved  to  hazard  a  battle. 
Nor  had  the  approach  of  these  two  formid¬ 
able  armies  the  effect  that  might  have  been 
supposed,  to  strike  into  the  generals  a  mutual 
terror  of  each  other;  it  rather  inspired  them 
with  ardour  and  ambition;  on  the  Romans’ 
part,  to  be  the  conquerors  of  Macedon,  a 
name  which  Alexander  had  made  famous 
amongst  them  for  strength  and  valour;  whilst 
the  Macedonians,  on  the  other  hand,  esteem¬ 
ing  the  Romans  as  an  enemy  very  different 
from  the  Persians,  hoped,  if  victory  stood  on 
their  side,  to  make  the  name  of  Philip  more 
glorious  than  that  of  Alexander. 

Titus,  therefore,  called  upon  his  soldiers  to 
play  the  part  of  valiant  men,  because  they 
were  now  to  act  their  parts  upon  the  most  il¬ 
lustrious  theatre  of  the  world,  Greece,  and  to 
contend  with  the  bravest  antagonists.  And 
Philip,  on  the  other  side,  commenced  a  har¬ 
angue  to  his  men,  as  usual  before  an  engage¬ 
ment,  and  to  be  the  better  heard  (whether  it 
were  merely  a  mischance,  or  the  result  of  un¬ 
seasonable  haste,  not  observing  what  he  did), 
mounted  an  eminence  outside  their  camp, 
which  proved  to  be  a  bury ing-pl ace;  and  much 
disturbed  by  the  despondency  that  seized  his 
army  at  the  unluckiness  of  the  omen,  all  that 
day  kept  in  his  camp,  and  declined  fighting. 

But  on  the  morrow,  as  day  came  on,  after 
a  soft  and  rainy  night,  the  clouds  changing 
into  a  mist  filled  all  the  plain  with  thick 
darkness;  and  a  dense  foggy  air  descending, 
by  the  time  it  was  full  day,  from  the  adjacent 
mountains  into  the  ground  betwixt  the  two 
camps,  concealed  them  from  each  other’s 
view.  The  parties  sent  out  on  either  side, 
some  for  ambuscade,  some  for  discovery,  fall¬ 
ing  in  upon  one  another  quickly  after  they 
were  thus  detached,  began  the  fight  at  what 
are  called  the  Cynos  Cephalae,  a  number  of 
sharp  tops  of  hills  that  stand  close  to  one 
another,  and  have  the  name  from  some  re¬ 
semblance  in  their  shape.  Now  many  vicis¬ 
situdes  and  changes  happening,  as  may  well 
be  expected,  in  such  an  uneven  field  of  battle, 
sometimes  hot  pursuit,  and  sometimes  as 
rapid  a  flight,  the  generals  on  both  sides  kept 
sending  in  succours  from  the  main  bodies, 
as  they  saw  their  men  pressed  or  giving 
ground,  till  at  length  the  heavens  clearing  up, 
let  them  see  what  was  going  on,  upon  which 
the  whole  armies  engaged. 

Philip,  who  was  in  the  right  wing,  from 
the  advantage  of  the  higher  ground  which 
he  had,  threw  on  the  Romans  the  whole 


306 

weight  of  his  phalanx,  with  a  force  which 
they  were  unable  to  sustain;  the  dense  array 
of  spears,  and  the  pressure  of  the  compact 
mass  overpowering  them.  But  the  king’s  left 
wing  being  broken  up  by  the  hilliness  of  the 
place,  Titus  observing  it,  and  cherishing 
little  or  no  hopes  on  that  side  where  his  own 
gave  ground,  made  in  all  haste  to  the  other, 
and  there  charged  in  upon  the  Macedonians; 
who,  in  consequence  of  the  inequality  and 
roughness  of  the  ground,  could  not  keep  their 
phalanx  entire,  nor  line  their  ranks  to  any 
great  depth  (which  is  the  great  point  of  their 
strength),  but  were  forced  to  fight  man  for 
man  under  heavy  and  unwieldy  armour.  For 
the  Macedonian  phalanx  is  like  some  single 
powerful  animal,  irresistible  so  long  as  it  is 
embodied  into  one,  and  keeps  its  order,  shield 
touching  shield,  all  as  in  a  piece;  but  if  it  be 
once  broken,  not  only  is  the  joint  force  lost, 
but  the  individual  soldiers  also  who  com¬ 
posed  it  lose  each  one  his  own  single  strength, 
because  of  the  nature  of  their  armour;  and 
because  each  of  them  is  strong,  rather,  as  he 
makes  a  part  of  the  whole,  than  in  himself. 

When  these  were  routed,  some  gave  chase 
to  the  fleeing,  others  charged  the  flanks  of 
those  Macedonians  who  were  still  fighting, 
so  that  the  conquering  wing,  also,  was  quickly 
disordered,  took  to  flight,  and  threw  down  its 
arms.  There  were  then  slain  no  less  than 
eight  thousand,  and  about  five  thousand  were 
taken  prisoners;  and  the  iTtolians  were 
blamed  as  having  been  the  main  occasion  that 
Philip  himself  got  safe  off.  For  whilst  the 
Romans  were  in  pursuit,  they  fell  to  ravaging 
and  plundering  the  camp,  and  did  it  so  com¬ 
pletely,  that  when  the  others  returned,  they 
found  no  booty  in  it. 

This  bred  at  first  hard  words,  quarrels, 
and  misunderstandings  betwixt  them.  But, 
afterwards,  they  galled  Titus  more  by  ascrib¬ 
ing  the  victory  to  themselves,  and  prepossess¬ 
ing  the  Greeks  with  reports  to  that  effect;  in¬ 
somuch  that  poets,  and  people  in  general  in 
the  songs  that  were  sung  or  written  in  honour 
of  the  action,  still  ranked  the  TLtolians  fore¬ 
most.  One  of  the  pieces  most  current  was  the 
following  epigram: — 

Naked  and  tombless  see,  0  passer-by 

The  thirty  thousand  men  of  Thessaly, 

Slain  by  the  JEtolians  and  the  Latin  band, 

That  came  with  Titus  from  ltaliays  land; 

Alas  for  mighty  Maced  on!  that  day, 

Swift  as  a  roe,  King  Philip  fled  away . 

This  was  composed  by  Alcaeus  in  mockery  of 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Philip,  exaggerating  the  number  of  the  slain. 
However,  being  everywhere  repeated,  and  by 
almost  everybody,  Titus  was  more  nettled  at 
it  than  Philip.  The  latter  merely  retorted  upon 
Alcaeus  with  some  elegiac  verses  of  his  own: — 
Nailed  and  leafless  see,  O  passer-by , 

The  cross  that  shall  Alcceus  crucify. 

But  such  little  matters  extremely  fretted 
Titus,  who  was  ambitious  of  a  reputation 
among  the  Greeks;  and  he  therefore  acted 
in  all  after-occurrences  by  himself,  paying  but 
very  slight  regard  to  the  iEtolians.  This  of¬ 
fended  them  in  their  turn;  and  when  Titus 
listened  to  terms  of  accommodation,  and  ad¬ 
mitted  an  embassy  upon  the  proffers  of  the 
Macedonian  king,  the  /Etolians  made  it  their 
business  to  publish  through  all  the  cities  of 
Greece  that  this  was  the  conclusion  of  all; 
that  he  was  selling  Philip  a  peace  at  a  time 
when  it  was  in  his  hand  to  destroy  the  very 
roots  of  the  war,  and  to  overthrow  the  power 
which  had  first  inflicted  servitude  upon 
Greece. 

But  whilst  with  these  and  the  like  rumours 
the  ^Ttolians  laboured  to  shake  the  Roman 
confederates,  Philip,  making  overtures  of 
submission  of  himself  and  his  kingdom  to  the 
discretion  of  Titus  and  the  Romans,  put  an 
end  to  those  jealousies,  as  Titus,  by  accepting 
them,  did  to  the  war.  For  he  reinstated  Philip 
in  his  kingdom  of  Macedon,  but  made  it  a 
condition  that  he  should  quit  Greece,  and  that 
he  should  pay  one  thousand  talents;  he  took 
from  him  also  all  his  shipping,  save  ten  ves¬ 
sels;  and  sent  away  Demetrius,  one  of  his 
sons,  hostage  to  Rome;  improving  his  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  the  best  advantage,  and  taking  wise 
precautions  for  the  future. 

For  Hannibal  the  African,  a  professed 
enemy  to  the  Roman  name,  an  exile  from  his 
own  country,  and  not  long  since  arrived  at 
King  Antiochus’s  court,  was  already  stimulat¬ 
ing  that  prince,  not  to  be  wanting  to  the 
good  fortune  that  had  been  hitherto  so  propi¬ 
tious  to  his  affairs;  the  magnitude  of  his  suc¬ 
cesses  having  gained  him  the  surname  of  the 
Great.  He  had  begun  to  level  his  aim  at  uni¬ 
versal  monarchy,  but  above  all  he  was  eager 
to  measure  himself  with  the  Romans.  Had 
not,  therefore,  Titus,  upon  a  principle  of 
prudence  and  foresight,  lent  an  ear  to  peace, 
and  had  Antiochus  found  the  Romans  still  at 
war  in  Greece  with  Philip,  and  had  these 
two,  the  most  powerful  and  warlike  princes 
of  that  age,  confederated  for  their  common 
interests  against  the  Roman  state,  Rome  might 


FLAMININUS 

once  more  have  run  no  less  a  risk,  and  been 
reduced  to  no  less  extremities,  than  she  had 
experienced  under  Hannibal.  But  now,  Titus 
opportunely  introducing  this  peace  between 
the  wars,  despatching  the  present  danger  be¬ 
fore  the  new  one  had  arrived,  at  once  disap¬ 
pointed  Antiochus  of  his  first  hopes  and 
Philip  of  his  last. 

When  the  ten  commissioners,  delegated  to 
Titus  from  the  senate,  advised  him  to  restore 
the  rest  of  Greece  to  their  liberty,  but  that 
Corinth,  Chalcis,  and  Demetrias  should  be 
kept  garrisoned  for  security  against  Antio¬ 
chus;  the  ^Etolians  on  this,  breaking  out  into 
loud  accusations,  agitated  all  the  cities,  call¬ 
ing  upon  Titus  to  strike  off  the  shackles  of 
Greece  (so  Philip  used  to  term  those  three 
cities),  and  asking  the  Greeks  whether  it  were 
not  matter  of  much  consolation  to  them  that, 
though  their  chains  weighed  heavier,  yet 
they  were  now  smoother  and  better  polished 
than  formerly,  and  whether  Titus  were  not 
deservedly  admired  by  them  as  their  benefac¬ 
tor,  who  had  unshackled  the  feet  of  Greece, 
and  tied  her  up  by  the  neck;  Titus,  vexed  and 
angry  at  this,  made  it  his  request  to  the 
senate,  and  at  last  prevailed  in  it,  that  the 
garrisons  in  these  cities  should  be  dismissed, 
that  so  the  Greeks  might  be  no  longer  debtors 
to  him  for  a  partial,  but  for  an  entire  favour. 

It  was  now  the  time  of  the  celebration  of 
the  Isthmian  games;  and  the  seats  around  the 
racecourse  were  crowded  with  an  unusual 
multitude  of  spectators;  Greece,  after  long 
wars,  having  regained  not  only  peace,  but 
hopes  of  liberty,  and  being  able  once  more 
to  keep  holiday  in  safety.  A  trumpet  sounded 
to  command  silence;  and  the  crier,  stepping 
forth  amidst  the  spectators,  made  proclama¬ 
tion  that  the  Roman  senate  and  Titus  Quin- 
tius,  the  proconsular  general,  having  van¬ 
quished  King  Philip  and  the  Macedonians, 
restored  the  Corinthians,  Locrians,  Phocians, 
Eubceans,  Achaeans  of  Phthiotis,  Magnetians, 
Thessalians,  and  Perrhaebians  to  their  own 
lands,  laws,  and  liberties;  remitting  all  impo¬ 
sitions  upon  them,  and  withdrawing  all  gar¬ 
risons  from  their  cities.  At  first,  many  heard 
not  at  all,  and  others  not  distinctly,  what  was 
said;  but  there  was  a  confused  and  uncertain 
stir  among  the  assembled  people,  some  won¬ 
dering,  some  asking,  some  calling  out  to  have 
it  proclaimed  again. 

When,  therefore,  fresh  silence  was  made, 
the  crier  raising  his  voice,  succeeded  in  mak¬ 
ing  himself  generally  heard  and  recited  the 


307 

decree  again.  A  shout  of  joy  followed  it,  so 
loud  that  it  was  heard  as  far  as  the  sea.  The 
whole  assembly  rose  and  stood  up;  there  was 
no  further  thought  of  the  entertainment;  all 
were  only  eager  to  leap  up  and  salute  and  ad¬ 
dress  their  thanks  to  the  deliverer  and  cham¬ 
pion  of  Greece.  What  we  often  hear  alleged, 
in  proof  of  the  force  of  human  voices,  was  ac¬ 
tually  verified  upon  this  occasion.  Crows  that 
were  accidentally  flying  over  the  course  fell 
down  dead  into  it.  The  disruption  of  the  air 
must  be  the  cause  of  it;  for  the  voices  being 
numerous,  and  the  acclamation  violent,  the 
air  breaks  with  it  and  can  no  longer  give  sup¬ 
port  to  the  birds,  but  lets  them  tumble,  like 
one  that  should  attempt  to  walk  upon  a  vac¬ 
uum;  unless  we  should  rather  imagine  them 
to  fall  and  die,  shot  with  the  noise  as  a  dart. 
It  is  possible,  too,  that  there  may  be  a  circular 
agitation  of  the  air,  which,  like  marine  whirl¬ 
pools,  may  have  a  violent  direction  of  this  sort 
given  to  it  from  the  excess  of  its  fluctuation. 

But  for  Titus;  the  sports  being  now  quite 
at  an  end,  so  beset  was  he  on  every  side,  and 
by  such  multitudes,  that  had  he  not,  foreseeing 
the  probable  throng  and  concourse  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  timely  withdrawn,  he  would  scarce,  it  is 
thought,  have  ever  got  clear  of  them.  When 
they  had  tired  themselves  with  acclamations 
all  about  his  pavilion,  and  night  was  now 
come,  wherever  friends  or  fellow-citizens  met, 
they  joyfully  saluted  and  embraced  each  other, 
and  went  home  to  feast  and  carouse  together. 

And  there,  no  doubt,  redoubling  their  joy, 
they  began  to  recollect  and  talk  of  the  state 
of  Greece,  what  wars  she  had  incurred  in 
defence  of  her  liberty,  and  yet  was  never  per¬ 
haps  mistress  of  a  more  settled  or  grateful 
one  than  this  which  other  men’s  labours  had 
won  for  her;  almost  without  one  drop  of 
blood,  or  one  citizen’s  loss  to  be  mourned  for, 
she  had  this  day  had  put  into  her  hands  the 
most  glorious  of  rewards,  and  best  worth  the 
contending  for.  Courage  and  wisdom  are,  in¬ 
deed,  rarities  amongst  men,  but  of  all  that  is 
good,  a  just  man  it  would  seem  is  the  most 
scarce.  Such  as  Agesilaus,  Lysander,  Nicias, 
and  Alcibiades,  knew  how  to  play  the  general’s 
part,  how  to  manage  a  war,  how  to  bring  off 
their  men  victorious  by  land  and  sea;  but  how 
to  employ  that  success  to  generous  and  honest 
purposes  they  had  not  known.  For  should  a 
man  except  the  achievement  at  Marathon,  the 
sea-fight  at  Salamis,  the  engagements  at  Plataea 
and  Thermopylae,  Cimon’s  exploits  at  Eurym- 
edon,  and  on  the  coast  of  Cyprus,  Greece 


308 

fought  all  her  battles  against,  and  to  enslave, 
herself;  she  erected  all  her  trophies  to  her  own 
shame  and  misery,  and  was  brought  to  ruin 
and  desolation  almost  wholly  by  the  guilt  and 
ambition  of  her  great  men.  A  foreign  people, 
appearing  just  to  retain  some  embers,  as  it 
were,  some  faint  remainders  of  a  common 
character  derived  to  them  from  their  ancient 
sires,  a  nation  from  whom  it  was  a  mere  won¬ 
der  that  Greece  should  reap  any  benefit  by 
word  or  thought,  these  are  they  who  have  re¬ 
trieved  Greece  from  her  severest  dangers  and 
distresses,  have  rescued  her  out  of  the  hands  of 
insulting  lords  and  tyrants,  and  reinstated  her 
in  her  former  liberties. 

Thus  they  entertained  their  tongues  and 
thoughts:  whilst  Titus  by  his  actions  made 
good  what  had  been  proclaimed.  For  he  im¬ 
mediately  despatched  away  Lentulus  to  Asia, 
to  set  the  Bargylians  free,  Titillius  to  Thrace, 
to  see  the  garrisons  of  Philip  removed  out  of 
the  towns  and  islands  there,  while  Publius 
Villius  set  sail,  in  order  to  treat  with  Antio- 
chus  about  the  freedom  of  the  Greeks  under 
him.  Titus  himself  passed  on  to  Chalcis,  and 
sailing  thence  to  Magnesia,  dismantled  the 
garrisons  there,  and  surrendered  the  govern¬ 
ment  into  the  people’s  hands.  Shortly  after, 
he  was  appointed  at  Argos  to  preside  in  the 
Nemean  games,  and  did  his  part  in  the  man¬ 
agement  of  that  solemnity  singularly  well;  and 
made  a  second  publication  there  by  the  crier  of 
liberty  to  the  Greeks;  and,  visiting  all  the  cities, 
he  exhorted  them  to  the  practice  of  obedience 
to  law,  of  constant  justice,  and  unity,  and 
friendship  one  towards  another.  He  suppress¬ 
ed  their  factions,  brought  home  their  political 
exiles;  and,  in  short,  his  conquest  over  the  Mac¬ 
edonians  did  not  seem  to  give  him  a  more 
lively  pleasure,  than  to  find  himself  prevalent 
in  reconciling  Greeks  with  Greeks;  so  that 
their  liberty  seemed  now  the  least  part  of  the 
kindness  he  conferred  upon  them. 

The  story  goes,  that  when  Lycurgus  the  ora¬ 
tor  had  rescued  Xenocrates,  the  philosopher, 
from  the  collectors  who  were  hurrying  him 
away  to  prison  for  non-payment  of  the  alien 
tax,  and  had  them  punished  for  the  licence 
they  had  been  guilty  of,  Xenocrates  afterwards 
meeting  the  children  of  Lycurgus,  “My  sons,” 
said  he,  “I  am  nobly  repaying  your  father  for 
his  kindness;  he  has  the  praises  of  the  whole 
people  in  return  for  it.”  But  the  returns  which 
attended  Titus  Quintius  and  the  Romans,  for 
their  beneficence  to  the  Greeks,  terminated  not 
in  empty  praises  only;  for  these  proceedings 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

gained  them,  deservedly,  credit  and  confi¬ 
dence,  and  thereby  power,  among  all  nations, 
for  many  not  only  admitted  the  Roman  com¬ 
manders,  but  even  sent  and  entreated  to  be  un¬ 
der  their  protection;  neither  was  this  done  by 
popular  governments  alone,  or  by  single  cities; 
but  kings  oppressed  by  kings  cast  themselves 
into  these  protecting  hands.  Insomuch  that  in 
a  very  short  time  (though  perchance  not  with¬ 
out  divine  influence  in  it)  all  the  world  did 
homage  to  them.  Titus  himself  thought  more 
highly  of  his  liberation  of  Greece  than  of  any 
other  of  his  actions,  as  appears  by  the  inscrip¬ 
tion  with  which  he  dedicated  some  silver  tar¬ 
gets,  together  with  his  own  shields,  to  Apollo 
at  Delphi: 

Ye  Spartan  Tyndarids,  twin  sons  of  Jove , 

Who  in  swift  horsemanship  have  placed  your 
love, 

Titus,  of  great  /Eneas’s  race,  leaves  this 

In  honour  of  the  liberty  of  Greece. 

He  offered  also  to  Apollo  a  golden  crown,  with 
this  inscription: — 

This  golden  crown  upon  thy  loc\s  divine, 

O  blest  Latona’s  son,  was  set  to  shine 

By  the  great  captain  of  the  /Enean  name. 

O  Phoebus,  grant  the  noble  Titus  fame ! 

The  same  event  has  twice  occurred  to  the 
Greeks  in  the  city  of  Corinth.  Titus,  then,  and 
Nero  again  in  our  days,  both  at  Corinth,  and 
both  alike  at  the  celebration  of  the  Isthmian 
games,  permitted  the  Greeks  to  enjoy  their 
own  laws  and  liberty.  The  former  (as  has  been 
said)  proclaimed  it  by  the  crier;  but  Nero  did 
it  in  the  public  meeting-place  from  the  tribu¬ 
nal,  in  a  speech  which  he  himself  made  to  the 
people.  This,  however,  was  long  after. 

Titus  now  engaged  in  a  most  gallant  and 
just  war  upon  Nabis,  that  most  profligate  and 
lawless  tyrant  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  but  in 
the  end  disappointed  the  expectations  of  the 
Greeks.  For  when  he  had  an  opportunity  of 
taking  him,  he  purposely  let  it  slip,  and  struck 
up  a  peace  with  him,  leaving  Sparta  to  bewail 
an  unworthy  slavery;  whether  it  were  that  he 
feared,  if  the  war  should  be  protracted,  Rome 
would  send  a  new  general  who  might  rob  him 
of  the  glory  of  it;  or  that  emulation  and  envy 
of  Philopoemen  (who  had  signalised  himself 
among  the  Greeks  upon  all  other  occasions, 
but  in  that  war  especially  had  done  wonders 
both  for  matter  of  courage  and  counsel,  and 
whom  the  Achaeans  magnified  in  their  thea¬ 
tres,  and  put  into  the  same  balance  of  glory 
with  Titus),  touched  him  to  the  quick;  and 
that  he  scorned  that  an  ordinary  Arcadian, 


FLAMININUS 

who  had  commanded  in  a  few  rencounters  up¬ 
on  the  confines  of  his  native  district,  should  be 
spoken  of  in  terms  of  equality  with  a  Roman 
consul,  waging  war  as  the  protector  of  Greece 
in  general.  But,  besides,  Titus  was  not  without 
an  apology,  too,  for  what  he  did,  namely,  that 
he  put  an  end  to  the  war  only  when  he  foresaw 
that  the  tyrant’s  destruction  must  have  been 
attended  with  the  ruin  of  the  other  Spartans. 

The  Achaeans,  by  various  decrees,  did  much 
to  show  Titus  honour:  none  of  these  returns, 
however,  seemed  to  come  up  to  the  height  of 
the  actions  that  merited  them,  unless  it  were 
one  present  they  made  him,  which  affected  and 
pleased  him  beyond  all  the  rest,  which  was 
this.  The  Romans,  who  in  the  war  with  Han¬ 
nibal  had  the  misfortune  to  be  taken  captives, 
were  sold  about  here  and  there,  and  dispersed 
into  slavery;  twelve  hundred  in  number  were 
at  that  time  in  Greece.  The  reverse  of  their 
fortune  always  rendered  them  objects  of  com¬ 
passion;  but  more  particularly,  as  well  might 
be,  when  they  now  met,  some  with  their  sons, 
some  with  their  brothers,  others  with  their  ac¬ 
quaintance;  slaves  with  their  free,  and  captives 
with  their  victorious  countrymen.  Titus, 
though  deeply  concerned  on  their  behalf,  yet 
took  none  of  them  from  their  masters  by  con¬ 
straint.  But  the  Achaeans,  redeeming  them  at 
five  pounds  a  man,  brought  them  altogether 
into  one  place,  and  made  a  present  of  them  to 
him,  as  he  was  just  going  on  shipboard,  so  that 
he  now  sailed  away  with  the  fullest  satisfac¬ 
tion;  his  generous  actions  having  procured 
him  as  generous  returns,  worthy  a  brave  man 
and  a  lover  of  his  country. 

This  seemed  the  most  glorious  part  of  all 
his  succeeding  triumph;  for  these  redeemed 
Romans  (as  it  is  the  custom  for  slaves,  upon 
their  manumission,  to  shave  their  heads  and 
wear  felt  hats)  followed  in  that  habit  in  the 
procession.  To  add  to  the  glory  of  this  show, 
there  were  the  Grecian  helmets,  the  Macedo¬ 
nian  targets  and  long  spears,  borne  with  the 
rest  of  the  spoils  in  public  view,  besides  vast 
sums  of  money;  Tuditanus  says  3,713  pounds 
weight  of  massy  gold,  43,270  of  silver,  14,514 
pieces  of  coined  gold,  called  philippics,  which 
was  all  over  and  above  the  thousand  talents 
which  Philip  owed,  and  which  the  Romans 
were  afterwards  prevailed  upon,  chiefly  by  the 
mediation  of  Titus,  to  remit  to  Philip,  declar¬ 
ing  him  their  ally  and  confederate  and  send¬ 
ing  him  home  his  hostage  son. 

Shortly  after,  Antiochus  entered  Greece 
with  a  numerous  fleet  and  a  powerful  army, 


309 

soliciting  the  cities  there  to  sedition  and  re¬ 
volt;  abetted  in  all  and  seconded  by  the  HEtoli- 
ans,  who  for  this  long  time  had  borne  a 
grudge  and  secret  enmity  to  the  Romans,  and 
now  suggested  to  him,  by  the  way  of  a  cause 
and  pretext  of  war,  that  he  came  to  bring  the 
Greeks  liberty.  When,  indeed,  they  never 
wanted  it  less,  as  they  were  free  already,  but, 
in  lack  of  really  honourable  grounds,  he  was 
instructed  to  employ  these  lofty  professions. 

The  Romans,  in  the  interim,  in  the  great 
apprehension  of  revolutions  and  revolt  in 
Greece,  and  of  his  great  reputation  for  mili¬ 
tary  strength,  despatched  the  consul  Manius 
Acilius  to  take  the  charge  of  the  war,  and 
Titus,  as  his  lieutenant,  out  of  regard  to  the 
Greeks,  some  of  whom  he  no  sooner  saw,  but 
he  confirmed  them  in  the  Roman  interests; 
others,  who  began  to  falter,  like  a  timely  phy¬ 
sician,  by  the  use  of  the  strong  remedy  of  their 
own  affection  for  himself,  he  was  able  to  arrest 
in  the  first  stage  of  the  disease,  before  they  had 
committed  themselves  to  any  great  error.  Some 
few  there  were  whom  the  Aitolians  were  be¬ 
forehand  with,  and  had  so  wholly  perverted 
that  he  could  do  no  good  with  them;  yet  these, 
however  angry  and  exasperated  before,  he 
saved  and  protected  when  the  engagement  was 
over. 

For  Antiochus,  receiving  a  defeat  at  Ther¬ 
mopylae,  not  only  fled  the  field,  but  hoisted 
sail  instantly  for  Asia.  Manius,  the  consul, 
himself  invaded  and  besieged  a  part  of  the 
Aitolians,  while  King  Philip  had  permission 
to  reduce  the  rest.  Thus  while,  for  instance, 
the  Dolopes  and  Magnetians  on  the  one  hand, 
the  Athamanes  and  Aperantians  on  the  other, 
were  ransacked  by  the  Macedonians,  and 
while  Manius  laid  Heraclea  waste,  and  be¬ 
sieged  Naupactus,  then  in  the  Aitolians’ 
hands,  Titus,  still  with  a  compassionate  care 
for  Greece,  sailed  across  from  Peloponnesus 
to  the  consul:  and  began  first  of  all  to  chide 
him,  that  the  victory  should  be  owing  alone 
to  his  arms,  and  yet  he  should  suffer  Philip 
to  bear  away  the  prize  and  profit  of  the  war, 
and  set  wreaking  his  anger  upon  a  single 
town,  whilst  the  Macedonians  overran  several 
nations  and  kingdoms.  But  as  he  happened 
to  stand  then  in  view  of  the  besieged,  they 
no  sooner  spied  him  out,  but  they  called  to  him 
from  their  wall;  they  stretched  forth  their 
hands;  they  supplicated  and  entreated  him. 

At  the  time,  he  said  not  a  word  more,  but 
turning  about  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  went  his 
way.  Some  little  while  after  he  discussed  the 


310 

matter  so  effectually  with  Manius,  that  he  won 
him  over  from  his  passion,  and  prevailed  with 
him  to  give  a  truce  and  time  to  the  ^tolians  to 
send  deputies  to  Rome  to  petition  the  senate 
for  terms  of  moderation. 

But  the  hardest  task,  and  that  which  put 
Titus  to  the  greatest  difficulty,  was  to  entreat 
with  Manius  for  the  Chalcidians,  who  had 
incensed  him  on  account  of  a  marriage  which 
Antiochus  had  made  in  their  city,  even  whilst 
the  war  was  on  foot;  a  match  noways  suitable 
in  point  of  age,  he  an  elderly  man  being  enam¬ 
oured  with  a  mere  girl,  and  as  little  proper  for 
the  time,  in  the  midst  of  a  war.  She  was  the 
daughter  of  one  Cleoptolemus,  and  is  said  to 
have  been  wonderfully  beautiful.  The  Chalci¬ 
dians,  in  consequence,  embraced  the  king’s  in¬ 
terests  with  zeal  and  alacrity,  and  let  him 
make  their  city  the  basis  of  his  operations  dur¬ 
ing  the  war.  Thither,  therefore,  he  made  with 
all  speed,  when  he  was  routed  and  fled;  and 
reaching  Chalcis,  without  making  any  stay, 
taking  this  young  lady,  and  his  money  and 
friends  with  him,  away  he  sailed  to  Asia.  And 
now  Manius’s  indignation  carrying  him  in  all 
haste  against  the  Chalcidians,  Titus  hurried 
after  him,  endeavouring  to  pacify  and  to  en¬ 
treat  him;  and  at  length  succeeded  both  with 
him  and  the  chief  men  among  the  Romans. 

The  Chalcidians,  thus  owing  their  lives  to 
Titus,  dedicated  to  him  all  the  best  and  most 
magnificent  of  their  sacred  buildings,  inscrip¬ 
tions  upon  which  may  be  seen  to  run  thus  to 
this  day:  the  people  dedicate  this  gymnasi¬ 
um  TO  TITUS  AND  TO  HERCULES*,  SO  again:  THE 
PEOPLE  CONSECRATE  THE  DELPHINIUM  TO  TITUS 

and  to  Hercules;  and  what  is  yet  more,  even 
in  our  time,  a  priest  of  Titus  was  formally 
elected  and  declared;  and  after  sacrifice  and  li¬ 
bation,  they  sang  a  set  song,  much  of  which  for 
the  length  of  it  we  omit,  but  shall  transcribe 
the  closing  verses — 

The  Roman ,  Faith,  whose  aid  of  yore 
Our  vows  were  offered  to  implore, 

We  worship  now  and  evermore. 

To  Rome,  to  Titus,  and  to  Jove, 

O  maidens,  in  the  dances  move. 

Dances  and  lo-Pceans  too 
Unto  the  Roman  Faith  are  due, 

O  Saviour  Titus,  and  to  you. 

Other  parts  of  Greece  also  heaped  honours 
upon  him  suitable  to  his  merits,  and  what 
made  all  those  honours  true  and  real,  was 
the  surprising  good-will  and  affection  which 
his  moderation  and  equity  of  character  had 
won  for  him.  For  if  he  were  at  any  time  at  va- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

riance  with  anybody  in  matters  of  business,  or 
out  of  emulation  and  rivalry  (as  with  Philopoe- 
men,  and  again  with  Diophanes,  when  in  of¬ 
fice  as  general  of  the  Achaeans),  his  resent¬ 
ment  never  went  far,  nor  did  it  ever  break  out 
into  acts;  but  when  it  had  vented  itself  in  some 
citizen-like  freedom  of  speech,  there  was  an 
end  of  it.  In  fine,  nobody  charged  malice  or 
bitterness  upon  his  nature,  though  many  im¬ 
puted  hastiness  and  levity  to  it. 

In  general,  he  was  the  most  attractive  and 
agreeable  of  companions,  and  could  speak, 
too,  both  with  grace  and  forcibly.  For  in¬ 
stance,  to  divert  the  Achaeans  from  the  con¬ 
quest  of  the  isle  of  Zacynthus,  “If,”  said  he, 
“they  put  their  head  too  far  out  of  Peloponne¬ 
sus,  they  may  hazard  themselves  as  much  as 
a  tortoise  out  of  its  shell.”  Again,  when  he 
and  Philip  first  met  to  treat  of  a  cessation 
and  peace,  the  latter  complaining  that  Titus 
came  with  a  mighty  train,  while  he  himself 
came  alone  and  unattended,  “Yes,”  replied  Ti¬ 
tus,  “you  have  left  yourself  alone  by  killing 
your  friends.”  At  another  time,  Dinocrates, 
the  Messenian,  having  drunk  too  much  at  a 
merrymeeting  in  Rome,  danced  there  in  wom¬ 
an’s  clothes,  and  the  next  day  addressed  him¬ 
self  to  Titus  for  assistance  in  his  design  to  get 
Messene  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Achaeans. 
“This,”  replied  Titus,  “will  be  matter  for  con¬ 
sideration;  my  only  surprise  is  that  a  man  with 
such  purposes  on  his  hands  should  be  able  to 
dance  and  sing  at  drinking  parties.”  When, 
again,  the  ambassadors  of  Antiochus  were  re¬ 
counting  to  those  of  Achaea  the  various  multi¬ 
tudes  composing  their  royal  master’s  forces, 
and  ran  over  a  long  catalogue  of  hard  names, 
“I  supped  once,”  said  Titus,  “with  a  friend, 
and  could  not  forbear  expostulating  with  him 
at  the  number  of  dishes  he  had  provided,  and 
said  I  wondered  where  he  had  furnished  him¬ 
self  with  such  a  variety;  ‘Sir,*  replied  he,  ‘to 
confess  the  truth,  it  is  all  hog’s  flesh  differently 
cooked.’  And  so,  men  of  Achaea,  when  you  are 
told  of  Antiochus’s  lancers,  and  pikemen,  and 
foot-guards,  I  advise  you  not  to  be  surprised; 
since  in  fact  they  are  all  Syrians,  differendy 
armed.” 

After  his  achievements  in  Greece,  and  when 
the  war  with  Antiochus  was  at  an  end,  Titus 
was  created  censor;  the  most  eminent  office, 
and,  in  a  manner,  the  highest  preferment,  in 
the  commonwealth.  The  son  of  Marcellus, 
who  had  been  five  times  consul,  was  his  col¬ 
league.  These,  by  virtue  of  their  office,  cash¬ 
iered  four  senators  of  no  great  distinction,  and 


FLAMININUS 

admitted  to  the  roll  of  citizens  all.  free-born 
residents.  But  this  was  more  by  constraint  than 
their  own  choice;  for  Terentius  Culeo,  then 
tribune  of  the  people,  to  spite  the  nobility, 
spurred  on  the  populace  to  order  it  to  be  done. 

At  this  time,  the  two  greatest  and  most  emi¬ 
nent  persons  in  the  city,  Africanus  Scipio  and 
Marcus  Cato,  were  at  variance.  Titus  named 
Scipio  first  member  of  the  senate;  and  involv¬ 
ed  himself  in  a  quarrel  with  Cato,  on  the  fol¬ 
lowing  unhappy  occasion.  Titus  had  a  brother, 
Lucius  Flamininus,  very  unlike  him  in  all 
points  of  character,  and,  in  particular,  low  and 
dissolute  in  his  pleasures,  and  flagrantly  re¬ 
gardless  of  all  decency.  He  kept  as  a  compan¬ 
ion  a  boy  whom  he  used  to  carry  about  with 
him,  not  only  when  he  had  troops  under  his 
charge,  but  even  when  the  care  of  a  province 
was  committed  to  him.  One  day  at  a  drinking- 
bout,  when  the  youngster  was  wantoning  with 
Lucius,  “I  love  you,  sir,  so  dearly,”  said  he, 
“that  preferring  your  satisfaction  to  my  own, 
I  came  away  without  seeing  the  gladiators, 
though  I  have  never  seen  a  man  killed  in  my 
life.”  Lucius,  delighted  with  what  the  boy 
said,  answered,  “Let  not  that  trouble  you;  I 
can  satisfy  that  longing,”  and  with  that  or¬ 
dered  a  condemned  man  to  be  fetched  out  of 
the  prison,  and  the  executioner  to  be  sent  for, 
and  commanded  him  to  strike  off  the  man’s 
head  before  they  rose  from  table.  Valerius  An- 
tias  only  so  far  varies  the  story  as  to  make  it  a 
woman  for  whom  he  did  it.  But  Livy  says  that 
in  Cato’s  own  speech  the  statement  is  that  a 
Gaulish  deserter  coming  with  his  wife  and 
children  to  the  door,  Lucius  took  him  into  the 
banqueting-room,  and  killed  him  with  his 
own  hand,  to  gratify  his  paramour.  Cato,  it  is 
probable,  might  say  this  by  way  of  aggravation 
of  the  crime;  but  that  the  slain  was  no  such 
fugitive,  but  a  prisoner,  and  one  condemned  to 
die,  not  to  mention  other  authorities,  Cicero 
tells  us  in  his  treatise  On  Old  Age,  where  he 
brings  in  Cato,  himself  giving  that  account  of 
the  matter. 

However,  this  is  certain;  Cato,  during  his 
censorship,  made  a  severe  scrutiny  into  the 
senators’  lives  in  order  to  the  purging  and  re¬ 
forming  the  house,  and  expelled  Lucius, 
though  he  had  been  once  consul  before,  and 
though  the  punishment  seemed  to  reflect  dis¬ 
honour  on  his  brother  also.  Both  of  them  pre¬ 
sented  themsleves  to  the  assembly  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  in  a  suppliant  manner,  not  without  tears  in 
their  eyes,  requesting  that  Cato  might  show 
the  reason  and  cause  of  his  fixing  such  a  stain 


311 

upon  so  honourable  a  family.  The  citizens 
thought  it  a  modest  and  moderate  request. 
Cato,  however,  without  any  retraction  or  re¬ 
serve,  at  once  came  forward,  and  standing  up 
with  his  colleague  interrogated  Titus  as  to 
whether  he  knew  the  story  of  the  supper.  Ti¬ 
tus  answered  in  the  negative.  Cato  related  it, 
and  challenged  Lucius  to  a  formal  denial  of  it. 
Lucius  made  no  reply,  whereupon  the  people 
adjudged  the  disgrace  just  and  suitable,  and 
waited  upon  Cato  home  from  the  tribunal  in 
great  state. 

But  Titus  still  so  deeply  resented  his  broth¬ 
er’s  degradation,  that  he  allied  himself  with 
those  who  had  long  borne  a  grudge  against 
Cato;  and  winning  over  a  major  part  of  the  sen¬ 
ate,  he  revoked  and  made  void  all  the  con¬ 
tracts,  leases,  and  bargains  made  by  Cato,  relat¬ 
ing  to  public  revenues,  and  also  got  numerous 
actions  and  accusations  brought  against  him; 
carrying  on  against  a  lawful  magistrate  and  ex¬ 
cellent  citizens  for  the  sake  of  one  who  was  in¬ 
deed  his  relation,  but  was  unworthy  to  be  so, 
and  had  but  gotten  his  deserts,  a  course  of  bit¬ 
ter  and  violent  attacks,  which  it  would  be  hard 
to  say  were  either  right  or  patriotic.  After¬ 
wards,  however,  at  a  public  spectacle  in  the 
theatre,  at  which  the  senators  appeared  as  usu¬ 
al,  sitting,  as  became  their  rank,  in  the  first 
seats,  when  Lucius  was  spied  at  the  lower  end, 
seated  in  a  mean,  dishonourable  place,  it  made 
a  great  impression  upon  the  people,  nor  could 
they  endure  the  sight,  but  kept  calling  out  to 
him  to  move,  until  he  did  move,  and  went  in 
among  those  of  consular  dignity,  who  received 
him  into  their  seats. 

This  natural  ambition  of  Titus  was  well 
enough  looked  upon  by  the  world  whilst  the 
wars  we  have  given  a  relation  of  afforded  com¬ 
petent  fuel  to  feed  it;  as,  for  instance,  when 
after  the  expiration  of  his  consulship,  he  had  a 
command  as  military  tribune,  which  nobody 
pressed  upon  him.  But  being  now  out  of  all  em¬ 
ploy  in  the  government,  and  advanced  in  years, 
he  showed  his  defects  more  plainly;  allowing 
himself  in  this  inactive  remainder  of  life  to  be 
carried  away  with  the  passion  for  reputation, 
as  uncontrollably  as  any  youth. 

Some  such  transport,  it  is  thought,  betrayed 
him  into  a  proceeding  against  Hannibal, 
which  lost  him  the  regard  of  many.  For  Han¬ 
nibal,  having  fled  his  country,  first  took  sanc¬ 
tuary  with  Antiochus;  but  he,  having  been 
glad  to  obtain  a  peace,  after  the  battle  in  Phry¬ 
gia,  Hannibal  was  put  to  shift  for  himself,  by 
a  second  flight,  and,  after  wandering  through 


312 

many  countries,  fixed  at  length  in  Bithynia, 
proffering  his  service  to  King  Prusias.  Every 
one  at  Rome  knew  where  he  was,  but  looked 
upon  him,  now  in  his  weakness  and  old  age, 
with  no  sort  of  apprehension,  as  one  whom  for¬ 
tune  had  quite  cast  off.  Titus,  however,  com¬ 
ing  thither  as  ambassador,  though  he  was  sent 
from  the  senate  to  Prusias  upon  another  er¬ 
rand,  yet  seeing  Hannibal  resident  there,  it 
stirred  up  resentment  in  him  to  find  that  he 
was  yet  alive.  And  though  Prusias  used  much 
intercession  and  entreaties  in  favour  of  him,  as 
his  suppliant  and  familiar  friend,  Titus  was 
not  to  be  entreated. 

There  was  an  ancient  oracle,  it  seems, 
which  prophesied  thus  of  Hannibal’s  end: — 
Libyssan  earth  shall  Hannibal  inclose . 

He  interpreted  this  to  be  meant  of  the  African 
Libya,  and  that  he  should  be  buried  in  Carth¬ 
age;  as  if  he  might  yet  expect  to  return  and 
end  his  life  there.  But  there  is  a  sandy  place 
in  Bithynia,  bordering  on  the  sea,  and  near 
it  a  little  village  called  Libyssa.  It  was  Hanni¬ 
bal’s  chance  to  be  staying  here,  and,  having 
ever  from  the  beginning  had  a  distrust  of  the 
easiness  and  cowardice  of  Prusias,  and  a  fear 
of  the  Romans,  he  had,  long  before,  ordered 
seven  underground  passages  to  be  dug  from 
his  house,  leading  from  his  lodging  and  run¬ 
ning  a  considerable  distance  in  various  oppo¬ 
site  directions,  all  undiscernible  from  without. 

As  soon,  therefore,  as  he  heard  what  Titus 
had  ordered,  he  attempted  to  make  his  escape 
through  these  mines;  but  finding  them  beset 
with  the  king’s  guards,  he  resolved  upon  mak¬ 
ing  away  with  himself.  Some  say  that,  wrap¬ 
ping  his  upper  garment  about  his  neck,  he 
commanded  his  servant  to  set  his  knee  against 
his  back,  and  not  to  cease  twisting  and  pulling 
it  till  he  had  completely  strangled  him.  Others 
say  he  drank  bull’s  blood,  after  the  example 
of  Themistocles  and  Midas.  Livy  writes  that 
he  had  poison  in  readiness,  which  he  mixed 
for  the  purpose,  and  that,  taking  the  cup  in 
his  hand,  “Let  us  ease,”  said  he,  “the  Romans 
of  their  continual  dread  and  care,  who  think 
it  long  and  tedious  to  await  the  death  of  a 
hated  old  man.  Yet  Titus  will  not  bear  away 
a  glorious  victory,  nor  one  worthy  of  those 
ancestors  who  sent  to  caution  Pyrrhus,  an 
enemy,  and  a  conqueror  too,  against  the  poi¬ 
son  prepared  for  him  by  traitors.” 

Thus  various  are  the  reports  of  Hannibal’s 
death;  but  when  the  news  of  it  came  to  the 
senators’  ears,  some  felt  indignation  against 
Titus  for  it,  blaming  as  well  his  officiousness 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

as  his  cruelty;  who,  when  there  was  nothing 
to  urge  it,  out  of  mere  appetite  for  distinc¬ 
tion  to  have  it  said  that  he  had  caused  Han¬ 
nibal’s  death,  sent  him  to  his  grave  when  he 
was  now  like  a  bird  that  in  its  old  age  has 
lost  its  feathers,  and  incapable  of  flying,  is  let 
alone  to  live  tamely  without  molestation. 

They  began  also  now  to  regard  with  in¬ 
creased  admiration  the  clemency  and  magna¬ 
nimity  of  Scipio  Africanus,  and  called  to  mind 
how  he,  when  he  had  vanquished  in  Africa  the 
till  then  invincible  and  terrible  Hannibal,  nei¬ 
ther  banished  him  his  country,  nor  exacted  of 
his  countrymen  that  they  should  give  him  up. 
At  a  parley  just  before  they  joined  battle,  Sci¬ 
pio  gave  him  his  hand,  and  in  the  peace  made 
after  it,  he  put  no  hard  article  upon  him,  nor 
insulted  over  his  fallen  fortune.  It  is  told,  too, 
that  they  had  another  meeting  afterwards,  at 
Ephesus,  and  that  when  Hannibal,  as  they 
were  walking  together,  took  the  upper  hand, 
Africanus  let  it  pass, and  walked  on  without 
the  least  notice  of  it;  and  that  then  they  began 
to  talk  of  generals,  and  Hannibal  affirmed  that 
Alexander  was  the  greatest  commander  the 
world  had  seen,  next  to  him  Pyrrhus,  and  the 
third  was  himself;  Africanus,  with  a  smile 
asked,  “What  would  you  have  said,  if  I  had 
not  defeated  you?”  “I  would  not  then,  Scipio,” 
he  replied,  “have  made  myself  the  third,  but 
the  first  commander.” 

Such  conduct  was  much  admired  in  Scipio, 
and  that  of  Titus,  who  had,  as  it  were,  insulted 
the  dead  whom  another  had  slain,  was  no  less 
generally  found  fault  with.  Not  but  that  there 
were  some  who  applauded  the  action,  looking 
upon  a  living  Hannibal  as  a  fire,  which  only 
wanted  blowing  to  become  a  flame.  For  when 
he  was  in  the  prime  and  flower  of  his  age,  it 
was  not  his  body  nor  his  hand  that  had  been  so 
formidable,  but  his  consummate  skill  and  ex¬ 
perience,  together  with  his  innate  malice  and 
rancour  against  the  Roman  name,  things  which 
do  not  impair  with  age.  For  the  temper  and 
bent  of  the  soul  remains  constant,  while  for¬ 
tune  continually  varies;  and  some  new  hope 
might  easily  rouse  to  a  fresh  attempt  those 
whose  hatred  made  them  enemies  to  the  last. 

And  what  really  happened  afterwards  does 
to  a  certain  extent  tend  yet  further  to  the  ex¬ 
culpation  of  Titus.  Aristonicus,  of  the  family 
of  a  common  musician,  upon  the  reputation  of 
being  the  son  of  Eumenes,  filled  all  Asia  with 
tumults  and  rebellion.  Then  again,  Mithri- 
dates,  after  his  defeats  by  Sulla  and  Fimbria, 
and  vast  slaughter  as  well  among  his  prime  of- 


FLAMININUS  AND  PHILOPCEMEN 

ficers  as  common  soldiers,  made  head  again, 
and  proved  a  most  dangerous  enemy,  against 
Lucullus,  both  by  sea  and  land.  Hannibal  was 
never  reduced  to  so  contemptible  a  state  as  Cai- 
us  Marius;  he  had  the  friendship  of  a  king,  and 
the  free  exercise  of  his  faculties,  employment 
and  charge  in  the  navy,  and  over  the  horse  and 
foot,  of  Prusias;  whereas  those  who  but  now 
were  laughing  to  hear  of  Marius  wandering 
about  Africa,  destitute  and  begging,  in  no  long 
time  after  were  seen  entreating  his  mercy  in 
Rome,  with  his  rods  at  their  backs,  and  his 
axes  at  their  necks.  So  true  it  is,  that  looking  to 
the  possible  future,  we  can  call  nothing  that 


313 

we  see  either  great  or  small;  as  nothing  puts  an 
end  to  the  mutability  and  vicissitude  of  things 
but  what  puts  an  end  to  their  very  being.  Some 
authors  accordingly  tell  us  that  Titus  did  not 
do  this  of  his  own  head,  but  that  he  was  joined 
in  commission  with  Lucius  Scipio,  and  that  the 
whole  object  of  the  embassy  was  to  effect  Han- 
nibaPs  death. 

And  now,  as  we  find  no  further  mention  in 
history  of  anything  done  by  Titus,  either  in 
war  or  in  the  administration  of  the  govern¬ 
ment,  but  simply  that  he  died  in  peace,  it  is 
time  to  look  upon  him  as  he  stands  in  com¬ 
parison  with  Philopcemen. 


FLAMININUS  and  PHILOPCEMEN 
Compared 


First  then,  as  for  the  greatness  of  the  bene¬ 
fits  which  Titus  conferred  on  Greece,  nei¬ 
ther  Philopcemen,  nor  many  braver  men  than 
he,  can  make  good  the  parallel.  They  were 
Greeks  fighting  against  Greeks,  but  Titus, 
a  stranger  to  Greece,  fought  for  her.  And  at 
the  very  time  when  Philopcemen  went  over 
into  Crete,  destitute  of  means  to  succor  his  be¬ 
sieged  countrymen,  Titus,  by  a  defeat  given  to 
Philip  in  the  heart  of  Greece,  set  them  and 
their  cities  free.  Again,  if  we  examine  the  bat¬ 
tles  they  fought,  Philopcemen,  whilst  he  was 
the  Achaeans’  general,  slew  more  Greeks  than 
Titus,  in  aiding  the  Greeks,  slew  Macedonians. 
As  to  their  failings,  ambition  was  Titus’s  weak 
side,  and  obstinacy  Philopcemen’s;  in  the  for¬ 
mer,  anger  was  easily  kindled;  in  the  latter,  it 
was  as  hardly  quenched.  Titus  reserved  to 
Philip  the  royal  dignity;  he  pardoned  the  ALto- 
lians,  and  stood  their  friend;  but  Philopcemen, 
exasperated  against  his  country,  deprived  it  of 
its  supremacy  over  the  adjacent  villages.  Titus 
was  ever  constant  to  those  he  had  once  be¬ 
friended;  the  other,  upon  any  offence,  as  prone 
to  cancel  kindnesses.  He  who  had  once  been  a 
benefactor  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  afterwards 
laid  their  walls  level  with  the  ground,  wasted 
their  country,  and  in  the  end  changed  and  de¬ 
stroyed  the  whole  frame  of  their  government. 
He  seems,  in  truth,  to  have  prodigalled  away 
his  own  life,  through  passion  and  perverse¬ 
ness;  for  he  fell  upon  the  Messenians,  not  with 
that  conduct  and  caution  that  characterised  the 
movements  of  Titus,  but  with  unnecessary  and 
unreasonable  haste. 

The  many  battles  he  fought,  and  the  many 
trophies  he  won,  may  make  us  ascribe  to  Philo¬ 


pcemen  the  more  thorough  knowledge  of  war. 
Titus  decided  the  matter  betwixt  Philip  and 
himself  in  two  engagements;  but  Philopcemen 
came  off  victorious  in  ten  thousand  encounters, 
to  all  which  fortune  had  scarcely  any  pretence, 
so  much  were  they  owing  to  his  skill.  Besides, 
Titus  got  his  renown,  assisted  by  the  power  of 
a  flourishing  Rome;  the  other  flourished  under 
a  declined  Greece,  so  that  his  successes  may  be 
accounted  his  own;  in  Titus’s  glory  Rome 
claims  a  share.  The  one  had  brave  men  under 
him,  the  other  made  his  brave,  by  being  over 
them. 

And  though  Philopcemen  was  unfortunate, 
certainly,  in  always  being  opposed  to  his  coun¬ 
trymen,  yet  this  misfortune  is  at  the  same  time 
a  proof  of  his  merit.  Where  the  circumstances 
are  the  same,  superior  success  can  only  be  as¬ 
cribed  to  superior  merit.  And  he  had,  indeed, 
to  do  with  the  two  most  warlike  nations  of  all 
Greece,  the  Cretans  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
Lacedaemonians  on  the  other,  and  he  mastered 
the  craftiest  of  them  by  art  and  the  bravest  of 
them  by  valour. 

It  may  also  be  said  that  Titus,  having  his 
men  armed  and  disciplined  to  his  hand,  had  in 
a  manner  his  victories  made  for  him;  whereas 
Philopcemen  was  forced  to  introduce  a  disci¬ 
pline  and  tactics  of  his  own,  and  to  new-mould 
and  model  his  soldiers;  so  that  what  is  of  great¬ 
est  import  towards  insuring  a  victory  was  in 
his  case  his  own  creation,  while  the  other  had 
it  ready  provided  for  his  benefit.  Philopcemen 
effected  many  gallant  things  with  his  own 
hand,  but  Titus  none;  so  much  so  that  one 
Archedemus,  an  Aeolian,  made  it  a  jest  against 
him  that  while  he,  the  AEtolian,  was  running 


314 

with  his  drawn  sword,  where  he  saw  the  Mace¬ 
donians  drawn  up  closest  and  fighting  hardest, 
Titus  was  standing  still,  and  with  hands 
stretched  out  to  heaven,  praying  to  the  gods  for 
aid. 

It  is  true  Titus  acquitted  himself  admir¬ 
ably,  both  as  a  governor  and  as  an  ambassa¬ 
dor;  but  Philopcemen  was  no  less  serviceable 
and  useful  to  the  Achaeans  in  the  capacity  of  a 
private  man  than  in  that  of  a  commander.  He 
was  a  private  citizen  when  he  restored  the  Mes- 
senians  to  their  liberty,  and  delivered  their  city 
from  Nabis;  he  was  also  a  private  citizen  when 
he  rescued  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  shut  the 
gates  of  Sparta  against  the  general,  Diophanes, 
and  Titus.  He  had  a  nature  so  truly  formed  for 
command  that  he  could  govern  even  the  laws 
themselves  for  the  public  good;  he  did  not 
need  to  wait  for  the  formality  of  being  elected 
into  command  by  the  governed,  but  employed 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

their  service,  if  occasion  required,  at  his  own 
discretion;  judging  that  he  who  understood 
their  real  interests  was  more  truly  their  su¬ 
preme  magistrate,  than  he  whom  they  had 
elected  to  the  office.  The  equity,  clemency,  and 
humanity  of  Titus  towards  the  Greeks  display 
a  great  and  generous  nature;  but  the  actions  of 
Philopcemen,  full  of  courage,  and  forward  to 
assert  his  country’s  liberty  against  the  Romans, 
have  something  yet  greater  and  nobler  in  them. 
For  it  is  not  as  hard  a  task  to  gratify  the  indi¬ 
gent  and  distressed,  as  to  bear  up  against  and 
to  dare  to  incur  the  anger  of  the  powerful.  To 
conclude,  since  it  does  not  appear  to  be  easy,  by 
any  review  or  discussion,  to  establish  the  true 
difference  of  their  merits  and  decide  to  which 
a  preference  is  due,  will  it  be  an  unfair  award 
in  the  case,  if  we  let  the  Greek  bear  away  the 
crown  for  military  conduct  and  warlike  skill, 
and  the  Roman  for  justice  and  clemency? 


PYRRHUS 

^6^-zyz  b.c. 


Of  the  Thesprotians  and  Molossians 
after  the  great  inundation,  the  first 
king,  according  to  some  historians, 
was  Phsethon,  one  of  those  who  came  into  Epi¬ 
rus  with  Pelasgus.  Others  tell  us  that  Deucali¬ 
on  and  Pyrrha,  having  set  up  the  worship  of 
Jupiter  at  Dodona,  settled  there  among  the  Mo¬ 
lossians.  In  after  time,  Neoptolemus,  Achilles’s 
son,  planting  a  colony,  possessed  these  parts 
himself,  and  left  a  succession  of  kings,  who, 
after  him,  were  named  Pyrrhidae,  as  he  in  his 
youth  was  called  Pyrrhus,  and  of  his  legitimate 
children,  one  born  of  Lanassa,  daughter  of 
Cleodaeus,  Hyllus’s  son,  had  also  that  name. 
From  him  Achilles  came  to  have  divine  hon¬ 
ours  in  Epirus,  under  the  name  of  Aspetus,  in 
the  language  of  the  country. 

After  these  first  kings,  those  of  the  follow¬ 
ing  intervening  times  becoming  barbarous, 
and  insignificant  both  in  their  power  and  their 
lives,  Tharrhypas  is  said  to  have  been  the  first 
who,  by  introducing  Greek  manners  and  learn¬ 
ing,  and  humane  laws  into  his  cities,  left  any 
fame  of  himself.  Alcetas  was  the  son  of  Thar¬ 
rhypas,  Arybas  of  Alcetas,  and  of  Arybas  and 
Troas,  his  queen,  fiEacides;  he  married  Phthia, 
the  daughter  of  Menon,  the  Thessalian,  a  man 
of  note  at  the  time  of  the  Lamiac  war,  and  of 


highest  command  in  the  confederate  army  next 
to  Leosthenes.  To  ^Eacides  were  born  of  Phth¬ 
ia,  Deidamia  and  Troas,  daughters,  and  Pyr¬ 
rhus,  a  son. 

The  Molossians,  afterwards  falling  into  fac¬ 
tions  and  expelling  iEacides,  brought  in  the 
sons  of  Neoptolemus,  and  such  friends  of 
iEacides  as  they  could  take  were  all  cut  off; 
Pyrrhus,  yet  an  infant,  and  searched  for  by 
the  enemy,  had  been  stolen  away  and  carried 
off  by  Androclides  and  Angelus;  who,  how¬ 
ever,  being  obliged  to  take  with  them  a  few 
servants,  and  women  to  nurse  the  child,  were 
much  impeded  and  retarded  in  their  flight, 
and  when  they  were  now  overtaken,  they  de¬ 
livered  the  infant  to  Androcleon,  Hippias,  and 
Neander,  faithful  and  able  young  fellows,  giv¬ 
ing  them  in  charge  to  make  for  Megara,  a 
town  of  Macedon,  with  all  their  might,  while 
they  themselves,  partly  by  entreaty,  and  partly 
by  force,  stopped  the  course  of  the  pursuers  till 
late  in  the  evening. 

At  last,  having  hardly  forced  them  back, 
they  joined  those  who  had  the  care  of  Pyr¬ 
rhus;  but  the  sun  being  already  set,  at  the 
point  of  attaining  their  object  they  suddenly 
found  themselves  cut  off  from  it.  For  on 
reaching  the  river  that  runs  by  the  city  they 


PYRRHUS 

found  it  looking  formidable  and  rough,  and 
endeavouring  to  pass  over,  they  discovered  it 
was  not  fordable;  late  rains  having  heightened 
the  water  and  made  the  current  violent.  The 
darkness  of  the  night  added  to  the  horror  of 
all,  so  that  they  durst  not  venture  of  them¬ 
selves  to  carry  over  the  child  and  the  women 
that  attended  it;  but,  perceiving  some  of  the 
country  people  on  the  other  side,  they  de¬ 
sired  them  to  assist  their  passage,  and  showed 
them  Pyrrhus,  calling  out  aloud,  and  impor¬ 
tuning  them.  They,  however,  could  not  hear 
for  the  noise  and  roaring  of  the  water. 

Thus  time  was  spent  while  those  called  out, 
and  the  others  did  not  understand  what  was 
said,  till  one  recollecting  himself,  stripped  off 
a  piece  of  bark  from  an  oak,  and  wrote  on  it 
with  the  tongue  of  a  buckle,  stating  the  necessi¬ 
ties  and  the  fortunes  of  the  child,  and  then  roll¬ 
ing  it  about  a  stone,  which  was  made  use  of  to 
give  force  to  the  motion,  threw  it  over  to  the 
other  side,  or,  as  some  say,  fastened  it  to  the 
end  of  a  javelin,  and  darted  it  over.  When  the 
men  on  the  other  shore  read  what  was  on  the 
bark,  and  saw  how  time  pressed,  without  delay 
they  cut  down  some  trees,  and  lashing  them  to¬ 
gether,  came  over  to  them.  And  it  so  fell  out, 
that  he  who  first  got  ashore,  and  took  Pyrrhus 
in  his  arms,  was  named  Achilles,  the  rest  being 
helped  over  by  others  as  they  came  to  hand. 

Thus  being  safe,  and  out  of  the  reach  of 
pursuit,  they  addressed  themselves  to  Glaucias, 
then  King  of  the  Illyrians,  and  finding  him  sit¬ 
ting  at  home  with  his  wife,  they  laid  down  the 
child  before  them.  The  king  began  to  weigh 
the  matter,  fearing  Cassander,  who  was  a  mor¬ 
tal  enemy  of  /Eacides,  and,  being  in  deep  con¬ 
sideration,  said  nothing  for  a  long  time;  while 
Pyrrhus,  crawling  about  on  the  ground,  gradu¬ 
ally  got  near  and  laid  hold  with  his  hand  upon 
the  king’s  robe,  and  so  helping  himself  upon 
his  feet  against  the  knees  of  Glaucias  first 
moved  laughter,  and  then  pity,  as  a  little,  hum¬ 
ble,  crying  petitioner.  Some  say  he  did  not 
throw  himself  before  Glaucias,  but  catching 
hold  of  an  altar  of  the  gods,  and  spreading  his 
hands  about  it,  raised  himself  up  by  that;  and 
that  Glaucias  took  the  act  as  an  omen.  At  pres¬ 
ent,  therefore,  he  gave  Pyrrhus  into  the  charge 
of  his  wife,  commanding  he  should  be  brought 
up  with  his  own  children;  and  a  little  after,  the 
enemies  sending  to  demand  him,  and  Cassan¬ 
der  himself  offering  two  hundred  talents,  he 
would  not  deliver  him  up;  but  when  he  was 
twelve  years  old,  bringing  him  with  an  army 
into  Epirus,  made  him  king. 


315 

Pyrrhus  in  the  air  of  his  face  had  some¬ 
thing  more  of  the  terrors  than  of  the  august¬ 
ness  of  kingly  power;  he  had  not  a  regular  set 
of  upper  teeth,  but  in  the  place  of  them  one 
continued  bone,  with  small  lines  marked  on  it, 
resembling  the  divisions  of  a  row  of  teeth.  It 
was  a  general  belief  he  could  cure  the  spleen  by 
sacrificing  a  white  cock  and  gently  pressing 
with  his  right  foot  on  the  spleen  of  the  persons 
as  they  lay  down  on  their  backs,  nor  was  any 
one  so  poor  or  inconsiderable  as  not  to  be  wel¬ 
come,  if  he  desired  it,  to  the  benefit  of  his 
touch.  He  accepted  the  cock  for  the  sacrifice  as 
a  reward,  and  was  always  much  pleased  with 
the  present.  The  large  toe  of  that  foot  was  said 
to  have  a  divine  virtue;  for  after  his  death,  the 
rest  of  the  body  being  consumed,  this  was 
found  unhurt,  and  untouched  by  the  fire.  But 
of  these  things  hereafter. 

Being  now  about  seventeen  years  old, 
and  the  government  in  appearance  well  set¬ 
tled,  he  took  a  journey  out  of  the  kingdom  to 
attend  the  marriage  of  one  of  Glaucias’s  sons, 
with  whom  he  was  brought  up;  upon  which 
opportunity  the  Molossians  again  rebelling; 
turned  out  all  of  his  party,  plundered  his  prop¬ 
erty,  and  gave  themselves  up  to  Neoptolemus. 
Pyrrhus  having  thus  lost  the  kingdom,  and  be¬ 
ing  in  want  of  all  things,  applied  to  Demetrius, 
the  son  of  Antigonus,  the  husband  of  his  sister, 
Deidamia,  who,  while  she  was  but  a  child,  had 
been  in  name  the  wife  of  Alexander,  son  of 
Roxana,  but  their  affairs  afterwards  proving 
unfortunate,  when  she  came  to  age,  Demetrius 
married  her. 

At  the  great  battle  of  Ipsus,  where  so 
many  kings  were  engaged,  Pyrrhus,  taking 
part  with  Demetrius,  though  yet  but  a  youth, 
routed  those  that  encountered  him,  and 
highly  signalised  himself  among  all  the  sol¬ 
diery,  and  afterwards,  when  Demetrius’s  for¬ 
tunes  were  low,  he  did  not  forsake  him  then, 
but  secured  for  him  the  cities  of  Greece  with 
which  he  was  intrusted;  and  upon  articles 
of  agreement  being  made  between  Deme¬ 
trius  and  Ptolemy,  he  went  over  as  an  hostage 
for  him  into  Egypt,  where  both  in  hunting 
and  other  exercises  he  gave  Ptolemy  an  ample 
proof  of  his  courage  and  strength.  Here  ob¬ 
serving  Berenice  in  greatest  power,  and  of  all 
Ptolemy’s  wives  highest  in  esteem  for  virtue 
and  understanding,  he  made  his  court  princi¬ 
pally  to  her.  He  had  a  particular  art  of  gain¬ 
ing  over  the  great  to  his  own  interest,  as  on 
the  other  hand  he  readily  overlooked  such  as 
were  below  him;  and  being  also  well-behaved 


316 

and  temperate  in  his  life,  among  all  the 
young  princes  then  at  court  he  was  thought 
most  fit  to  have  Antigone  for  his  wife,  one 
of  the  daughters  of  Berenice  by  Philip,  before 
she  married  Ptolemy. 

After  this  match,  advancing  in  honour,  and 
Antigone  being  a  very  good  wife  to  him,  hav¬ 
ing  procured  a  sum  of  money,  and  raised 
an  army,  he  so  ordered  matters  as  to  be  sent 
into  his  kingdom  of  Epirus,  and  arrived  there 
to  the  great  satisfaction  of  many,  from  their 
hate  to  Neoptolemus,  who  was  governing  in 
a  violent  and  arbitrary  way.  But  fearing  lest 
Neoptolemus  should  enter  into  alliance  with 
some  neighbouring  princes,  he  came  to  terms 
and  friendship  with  him,  agreeing  that  they 
should  share  the  government  between  them. 
There  were  people,  however,  who,  as  time 
went  on,  secretly  exasperated  them,  and  fo¬ 
mented  jealousies  between  them. 

The  cause  chiefly  moving  Pyrrhus  is  said  to 
have  had  this  beginning.  It  was  customary 
for  the  kings  to  offer  sacrifice  to  Mars  at  Pas- 
saro,  a  place  in  the  Molossian  country,  and 
that  done  to  enter  into  a  solemn  covenant 
with  the  Epirots;  they  to  govern  according  to 
law,  these  to  preserve  the  government  as  by 
law  established.  This  was  performed  in  the 
presence  of  both  kings,  who  were  there  with 
their  immediate  friends,  giving  and  receiving 
many  presents;  here  Gelo,  one  of  the  friends 
of  Neoptolemus,  taking  Pyrrhus  by  the  hand, 
presented  him  with  two  pair  of  draught  oxen. 
Myrtilus,  his  cup-bearer,  being  then  by, 
begged  these  of  Pyrrhus,  who  not  giving 
them  to  him,  but  to  another,  Myrtilus  ex¬ 
tremely  resented  it,  which  Gelo  took  notice 
of,  and,  inviting  him  to  a  banquet  (amidst 
drinking  and  other  excesses,  as  some  relate, 
Myrtilus  being  then  in  the  flower  of  his 
youth),  he  entered  into  discourse,  persuading 
him  to  adhere  to  Neoptolemus,  and  destroy 
Pyrrhus  by  poison.  Myrtilus  received  the  de¬ 
sign,  appearing  to  approve  and  consent  to  it, 
but  privately  discovered  it  to  Pyrrhus,  by 
whose  command  he  recommended  Alexicrates, 
his  chief  cup-bearer,  to  Gelo,  as  a  fit  instrument 
for  their  design,  Pyrrhus  being  very  desirous 
to  have  proof  of  the  plot  by  several  evidences. 

So  Gelo,  being  deceived,  Neoptolemus,  who 
was  no  less  deceived,  imagining  the  design 
went  prosperously  on,  could  not  forbear,  but 
in  his  joy  spoke  of  it  among  his  friends,  and 
once  at  an  entertainment  at  his  sister  Cadmea’s 
talked  openly  of  it,  thinking  none  heard  but 
themselves.  Nor  was  any  one  there  but  Phae- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

narete,  the  wife  of  Samon,  who  had  the  care  of 
Neoptolemus’s  flocks  and  herds.  She,  turning 
her  face  towards  the  wall  upon  a  couch,  seemed 
fast  asleep,  and  having  heard  all  that  passed, 
unsuspected,  next  day  came  to  Antigone,  Pyr¬ 
rhus’s  wife,  and  told  her  what  she  had  heard 
Neoptolemus  say  to  his  sister.  On  understand¬ 
ing  which  Pyrrhus  for  the  present  said  little, 
but  on  a  sacrifice  day,  making  an  invitation  for 
Neoptolemus,  killed  him;  being  satisfied  be¬ 
fore  that  the  great  men  of  the  Epirots  were  his 
friends  and  that  they  were  eager  for  him  to  rid 
himself  of  Neoptolemus  and  not  to  content 
himself  with  a  mere  petty  share  of  the  govern¬ 
ment,  but  to  follow  his  own  natural  vocation 
to  great  designs,  and  now  when  a  just  ground 
of  suspicion  appeared,  to  anticipate  Neoptole¬ 
mus  by  taking  him  off  first. 

In  memory  of  Berenice  and  Ptolemy  he 
named  his  son  by  Antigone,  Ptolemy,  and 
having  built  a  city  in  the  peninsula  of  Epirus, 
called  it  Berenicis.  From  this  time  he  began 
to  revolve  many  and  vast  projects  in  his 
thoughts;  but  his  first  special  hope  and  design 
lay  near  home,  and  he  found  means  to  en¬ 
gage  himself  in  the  Macedonian  affairs  under 
the  following  pretext.  Of  Cassander’s  sons, 
Antipater,  the  eldest,  killed  Thessalonica, 
his  mother,  and  expelled  his  brother,  Alexan¬ 
der,  who  sent  to  Demetrius  entreating  his  as¬ 
sistance,  and  also  called  in  Pyrrhus;  but  De¬ 
metrius  being  retarded  by  multitude  of  busi¬ 
ness,  Pyrrhus,  coming  first,  demanded  in  re¬ 
ward  of  his  service  the  districts  called  Tym- 
phaea  and  Parauaea  in  Macedon  itself,  and  of 
their  new  conquests,  Ambracia,  Acarnania, 
and  Amphilochia.  The  young  prince  giving 
way,  he  took  possession  of  these  countries,  and 
secured  them  with  good  garrisons,  and  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  reduce  for  Alexander  himself  other 
parts  of  the  kingdom  which  he  gained  from 
Antipater. 

Lysimachus,  designing  to  send  aid  to  An¬ 
tipater,  was  involved  in  much  other  business, 
but  knowing  Pyrrhus  would  not  disoblige 
Ptolemy,  or  deny  him  anything,  sent  pre¬ 
tended  letters  to  him  as  from  Ptolemy,  desir¬ 
ing  him  to  give  up  his  expedition,  upon  the 
payment  of  three  hundred  talents  to  him  by 
Antipater.  Pyrrhus,  opening  the  letter,  quickly 
discovered  the  fraud  of  Lysimachus;  for  it  had 
not  the  accustomed  style  of  salutation,  “The 
father  to  the  son,  health,”  but  “King  Ptolemy 
to  Pyrrhus,  the  king,  health”;  and  reproach¬ 
ing  Lysimachus,  he  notwithstanding  made  a 
peace,  and  they  all  met  to  confirm  it  by  a 


PYRRHUS 

solemn  oath  upon  sacrifice.  A  goat,  a  bull,  and 
a  ram  being  brought  out,  the  ram  on  a  sudden 
fell  dead.  The  others  laughed,  but  Theodotus, 
the  prophet,  forbade  Pyrrhus  to  swear,  declar¬ 
ing  that  Heaven  by  that  portended  the  death 
of  one  of  the  three  kings,  upon  which  he  re¬ 
fused  to  ratify  the  peace. 

The  affairs  of  Alexander  being  now  in 
some  kind  of  settlement,  Demetrius  arrived, 
contrary,  as  soon  appeared,  to  the  desire  and 
indeed  not  without  the  alarm  of  Alexander. 
After  they  had  been  a  few  days  together,  their 
mutual  jealousy  led  them  to  conspire  against 
each  other;  and  Demetrius,  taking  advantage 
of  the  first  occasion,  was  beforehand  with  the 
young  king,  and  slew  him,  and  proclaimed 
himself  King  of  Macedon. 

There  had  been  formerly  no  very  good  un¬ 
derstanding  between  him  and  Pyrrhus;  for 
besides  the  inroads  he  made  into  Thessaly,  the 
innate  disease  of  princes,  ambition  of  greater 
empire,  had  rendered  them  formidable  and 
suspected  neighbours  to  each  other,  especially 
since  Deidamia’s  death;  and  both  having 
seized  Macedon,  they  came  into  conflict  for 
the  same  object,  and  the  difference  between 
them  had  the  stronger  motives. 

Demetrius  having  first  attacked  the  iEtoli- 
ans  and  subdued  them,  left  Pantauchus  there 
with  a  considerable  army,  and  marched  direct 
against  Pyrrhus,  and  Pyrrhus,  as  he  thought, 
against  him;  but  by  mistake  of  the  ways  they 
passed  by  one  another,  and  Demetrius  falling 
into  Epirus  wasted  the  country,  and  Pyrrhus, 
meeting  with  Pantauchus,  prepared  for  an  en¬ 
gagement.  The  soldiers  fell  to,  and  there  was  a 
sharp  and  terrible  conflict,  especially  where  the 
generals  were. 

Pantauchus,  in  courage,  dexterity,  and 
strength  of  body,  being  confessedly  the  best  of 
all  Demetrius's  captains,  and  having  both 
resolution  and  high  spirit,  challenged  Pyrrhus 
to  fight  hand  to  hand;  on  the  other  side 
Pyrrhus,  professing  not  to  yield  to  any  king 
in  valour  and  glory,  and  esteeming  the  fame 
of  Achilles  more  truly  to  belong  to  him  for  his 
courage  than  for  his  blood,  advanced  against 
Pantauchus  through  the  front  of  the  army. 
First  they  used  their  lances,  then  came  to  a 
close  fight,  and  managed  their  swords  both 
with  art  and  force;  Pyrrhus  receiving  one 
wound,  but  returning  two  for  it,  one  in  the 
thigh  and  the  other  near  the  neck,  repulsed 
and  overthrew  Pantauchus,  but  did  not  kill 
him  outright,  as  he  was  rescued  by  his  friends. 
But  the  Epirots  exulting  in  the  victory  of  their 


317 

king,  and  admiring  his  courage,  forced  through 
and  cut  in  pieces  the  phalanx  of  the  Macedo¬ 
nians,  and  pursuing  those  that  fled,  killed 
many,  and  took  five  thousand  prisoners. 

This  fight  did  not  so  much  exasperate  the 
Macedonians  with  anger  for  their  loss,  or 
with  hatred  to  Pyrrhus,  as  it  caused  esteem 
and  admiration  of  his  valour,  and  great  dis¬ 
course  of  him  among  those  that  saw  what 
he  did,  and  were  engaged  against  him  in 
the  action.  They  thought  his  countenance,  his 
swiftness,  and  his  motions  expressed  those  of 
the  great  Alexander,  and  that  they  beheld  here 
an  image  and  resemblance  of  his  rapidity  and 
strength  in  fight;  other  kings  merely  by  their 
purple  and  their  guards,  by  the  formal  bend¬ 
ing  of  their  necks  and  lofty  tone  of  their 
speech,  Pyrrhus  only  by  arms  and  in  action, 
represented  Alexander. 

Of  his  knowledge  of  military  tactics  and 
the  art  of  a  general,  and  his  great  ability  that 
way,  we  have  the  best  information  from  the 
commentaries  he  left  behind  him.  Antigonus, 
also,  we  are  told,  being  asked  who  was  the 
greatest  soldier,  said,  “Pyrrhus,  if  he  lives  to 
be  old,"  referring  only  to  those  of  his  own 
time;  but  Hannibal  of  all  great  commanders 
esteemed  Pyrrhus  for  skill  and  conduct  the 
first,  Scipio  the  second,  and  himself  the  third, 
as  is  related  in  the  life  of  Scipio.  In  a  word, 
he  seemed  ever  to  make  this  all  his  thought 
and  philosophy,  as  the  most  kingly  part  of 
learning;  other  curiosities  he  held  in  no 
account.  He  is  reported,  when  asked  at  a  feast 
whether  he  thought  Python  or  Caphisias  the 
best  musician,  to  have  said,  Polysperchon  was 
the  best  soldier,  as  though  it  became  a  king 
to  examine  and  understand  only  such  things. 

Towards  his  familiars  he  was  mild  and  not 
easily  incensed;  zealous  and  even  vehement  in 
returning  kindnesses.  Thus  when  Aeropus  was 
dead,  he  could  not  bear  it  with  moderation, 
saying,  he  indeed  had  suffered  what  was  com¬ 
mon  to  human  nature,  but  condemning  and 
blaming  himself,  that  by  puttings  off  and  de¬ 
lays  he  had  not  returned  his  kindness  in  time. 
For  our  debts  may  be  satisfied  to  the  creditor’s 
heirs,  but  not  to  have  made  the  acknowledg¬ 
ment  of  received  favours,  while  they  to  whom 
it  is  due  can  be  sensible  of  it,  afflicts  a  good  and 
worthy  nature.  Some  thinking  it  fit  that  Pyr¬ 
rhus  should  banish  a  certain  ill-tongued  fellow 
in  Ambracio,  who  had  spoken  very  indecently 
of  him,  “Let  him  rather,”  said  he,  “speak 
against  us  here  to  a  few,  than  rambling  about 
to  a  great  many.”  And  others  who  in  their 


318 

wine  had  made  reflections  upon  him,  being 
afterward  questioned  for  it,  and  asked  by  him 
whether  they  had  said  such  words,  on  one  of 
the  young  fellows  answering,  “Yes,  all  that, 
king;  and  should  have  said  more  if  we  had 
had  more  wine,”  he  laughed  and  discharged 
them. 

After  Antigone’s  death,  he  married  several 
wives  to  enlarge  his  interest  and  power.  He 
had  the  daughter  of  Autoleon,  King  of  the 
Paeonians,  Bircenna,  Bardyllis  the  Illyrian’s 
daughter,  Lanassa,  daughter  of  Agathocles 
the  Syracusan,  who  brought  with  her  in 
dower  the  city  of  Corcyra,  which  had  been 
taken  by  Agathocles.  By  Antigone  he  had 
Ptolemy,  Alexander  by  Lanassa,  and  Helenus, 
his  youngest  son,  by  Bircenna:  he  brought 
them  up  all  in  arms,  hot  and  eager  youths, 
and  by  him  sharpened  and  whetted  to  war 
from  their  very  infancy.  It  is  said  when  one 
of  them,  while  yet  a  child,  asked  him  to 
which  he  would  leave  the  kingdom,  he  re¬ 
plied,  to  him  that  had  the  sharpest  sword, 
which  indeed  was  much  like  that  tragical 
curse  of  CEdipus  to  his  sons: — 

Not  by  the  lot  decide, 

But  within  the  sword  the  heritage  divide. 

So  unsocial  and  wild-beast-like  is  the  nature 
of  ambition  and  cupidity. 

After  this  battle  Pyrrhus,  returning  glori¬ 
ously  home,  enjoyed  his  fame  and  reputation, 
and  being  called  “Eagle”  by  the  Epirots,  “By 
you,”  said  he,  “I  am  an  eagle;  for  how  should 
I  not  be  such,  while  I  have  your  arms  as 
wings  to  sustain  me?” 

A  little  after,  having  intelligence  that  De¬ 
metrius  was  dangerously  sick,  he  entered  on 
a  sudden  into  Macedonia,  intending  only  an 
incursion,  and  to  harass  the  country;  but  was 
very  near  seizing  upon  all,  and  taking  the 
kingdom  without  a  blow.  He  marched  as  far 
as  Edessa  unresisted,  great  numbers  deserting 
and  coming  in  to  him.  This  danger  excited 
Demetrius  beyond  his  strength,  and  his  friends 
and  commanders  in  a  short  time  got  a  con¬ 
siderable  army  together,  and  with  all  their 
forces  briskly  attacked  Pyrrhus,  who,  coming 
only  to  pillage,  would  not  stand  a  fight,  but 
retreating,  lost  part  of  his  army,  as  he  went  off, 
by  the  close  pursuit  of  the  Macedonians. 

Demetrius,  however,  although  he  had  easily 
and  quickly  forced  Pyrrhus  out  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  yet  did  not  slight  him,  but  having  re¬ 
solved  upon  great  designs,  and  to  recover  his 
father’s  kingdom  with  an  army  of  one  hun¬ 
dred  thousand  men,  and  a  fleet  of  five  hun- 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

dred  ships,  would  neither  embroil  himself 
with  Pyrrhus,  nor  leave  the  Macedonians  so 
active  and  troublesome  a  neighbour;  and  since 
he  had  no  leisure  to  continue  the  war  with 
him,  he  was  willing  to  treat  and  conclude  a 
peace,  and  to  turn  his  forces  upon  the  other 
kings. 

Articles  being  agreed  upon,  the  designs  of 
Demetrius  quickly  discovered  themselves  by 
the  greatness  of  his  preparation.  And  the 
other  kings,  being  alarmed,  sent  to  Pyrrhus 
ambassadors  and  letters,  expressing  their  won¬ 
der  that  he  should  choose  to  let  his  own  op¬ 
portunity  pass  by,  and  wait  till  Demetrius 
could  use  his;  and  whereas  he  was  now  able 
to  chase  him  out  of  Macedon,  involved  in 
designs  and  disturbed,  he  should  wait  till 
Demetrius  at  leisure,  and  grown  great,  should 
bring  the  war  home  to  his  own  door,  and 
make  him  fight  for  his  temples  and  sepulchres 
in  Molossia;  especially  having  so  lately,  by 
his  means,  lost  Corcyra  and  his  wife  together. 
For  Lanassa  had  taken  offence  at  Pyrrhus  for 
too  great  an  inclination  to  those  wives  of  his 
that  were  barbarians,  and  so  withdrew  to  Cor¬ 
cyra,  and  desiring  to  marry  some  king,  invited 
Demetrius,  knowing  of  all  the  kings  he  was 
most  ready  to  entertain  offers  of  marriage;  so 
he  sailed  thither,  married  Lanassa,  and  placed 
a  garrison  in  the  city. 

The  kings  having  written  thus  to  Pyrrhus, 
themselves  likewise  contrived  to  find  Deme¬ 
trius  work,  while  he  was  delaying  and  mak¬ 
ing  his  preparations.  Ptolemy,  setting  out 
with  a  great  fleet,  drew  off  many  of  the  Greek 
cities.  Lysimachus  out  of  Thrace  wasted  the 
upper  Macedon;  and  Pyrrhus,  also  taking 
arms  at  the  same  time,  marched  to  Bercea, 
expecting,  as  it  fell  out,  that  Demetrius,  col¬ 
lecting  his  forces  against  Lysimachus,  would 
leave  the  lower  country  undefended.  That 
very  night  he  seemed  in  his  sleep  to  be  called 
by  Alexander  the  Great,  and  approaching,  saw 
him  sick  abed,  but  was  received  with  very 
kind  words,  and  much  respect,  and  promised 
zealous  assistance.  He  making  bold  to  reply, 
“How,  sir,  can  you,  being  sick,  assist  me?” 
“With  my  name,”  said  he,  and  mounting  a 
Nisaean  horse,  seemed  to  lead  the  way.  At  the 
sight  of  this  vision  he  was  much  assured,  and 
with  swift  marches  overrunning  all  the  inter¬ 
jacent  places,  took  Bercea,  and  making  his 
headquarters  there,  reduced  the  rest  of  the 
country  by  his  commanders. 

When  Demetrius  received  intelligence  of 
this,  and  perceived  likewise  the  Macedonians 


PYRRHUS 

ready  to  mutiny  in  the  army,  he  was  afraid  to 
advance  further,  lest,  coming  near  Lysima- 
chus,  a  Macedonian  king,  and  of  great  fame, 
they  should  revolt  to  him.  So  returning,  he 
marched  directly  against  Pyrrhus,  as  a  stran¬ 
ger,  and  hated  by  the  Macedonians.  But  while 
he  lay  encamped  there  near  him,  many  who 
came  out  of  Bercea  infinitely  praised  Pyrrhus 
as  invincible  in  arms,  a  glorious  warrior,  who 
treated  those  he  had  taken  kindly  and  hu¬ 
manely.  Several  of  these  Pyrrhus  himself  sent 
privately,  pretending  to  be  Macedonians,  and 
saying,  now  was  the  time  to  be  delivered  from 
the  severe  government  of  Demetrius  by  com¬ 
ing  over  to  Pyrrhus,  a  gracious  prince  and  a 
lover  of  soldiers. 

By  this  artifice  a  great  part  of  the  army 
was  in  a  state  of  excitement,  and  the  soldiers 
began  to  look  every  way  about  inquiring  for 
Pyrrhus.  It  happened  he  was  without  his 
helmet,  till  understanding  they  did  not  know 
him,  he  put  it  on  again,  and  so  was  quickly 
recognised  by  his  lofty  crest  and  the  goat’s 
horns  he  wore  upon  it.  Then  the  Macedoni¬ 
ans,  running  to  him,  desired  to  be  told  his 
password,  and  some  put  oaken  boughs  upon 
their  heads,  because  they  saw  them  worn 
by  the  soldiers  about  him.  Some  persons  even 
took  the  confidence  to  say  to  Demetrius  him¬ 
self,  that  he  would  be  well  advised  to  with¬ 
draw  and  lay  down  the  government.  And  he, 
indeed,  seeing  the  mutinous  movements  of 
the  army  to  be  only  too  consistent  with  what 
they  said,  privately  got  away,  disguised  in  a 
broad  hat  and  a  common  soldier’s  coat.  So 
Pyrrhus  became  master  of  the  army  without 
fighting,  and  was  declared  King  of  the  Mace¬ 
donians. 

But  Lysimachus  now  arriving,  and  claiming 
the  defeat  of  Demetrius  as  the  joint  exploit  of 
them  both,  and  that  therefore  the  kingdom 
should  be  shared  between  them,  Pyrrhus,  not 
as  yet  quite  assured  of  the  Macedonians,  and 
in  doubt  of  their  faith,  consented  to  the 
proposition  of  Lysimachus,  and  divided  the 
country  and  cities  between  them  accordingly. 

This  was  for  the  present  useful,  and  pre¬ 
vented  a  war;  but  shortly  after  they  found  the 
partition  not  so  much  a  peaceful  settlement 
as  an  occasion  of  further  complaint  and  differ¬ 
ence.  For  men  whose  ambition  neither  seas, 
nor  mountains,  nor  unpeopled  deserts  can 
limit,  nor  the  bounds  dividing  Europe  from 
Asia  confine  their  vast  desires,  it  would  be 
hard  to  expect  to  forbear  from  injuring  one 
another  when  they  touch  and  are  close  to- 


319 

gether.  These  are  ever  naturally  at  war,  envy¬ 
ing  and  seeking  advantages  of  one  another, 
and  merely  make  use  of  those  two  words, 
peace  and  war,  like  current  coin,  to  serve  their 
occasions,  not  as  justice  but  as  expediency  sug¬ 
gests,  and  are  really  better  men  when  they 
openly  enter  on  a  war,  than  when  they  give 
to  the  mere  forbearance  from  doing  wrong, 
for  want  of  opportunity,  the  sacred  names  of 
justice  and  friendship. 

Pyrrhus  was  an  instance  of  this;  for  setting 
himself  against  the  rise  of  Demetrius  again, 
and  endeavouring  to  hinder  the  recovery  of 
his  power,  as  it  were  from  a  kind  of  sickness, 
he  assisted  the  Greeks,  and  came  to  Athens, 
where  having  ascended  the  Acropolis,  he  of¬ 
fered  sacrifice  to  the  goddess,  and  the  same 
day  came  down  again,  and  told  the  Athenians 
he  was  much  gratified  by  the  good-will  and 
the  confidence  they  had  shown  to  him;  but  if 
they  were  wise  he  advised  them  never  to  let 
any  king  come  thither  again,  or  open  their 
city  gates  to  him.  He  concluded  also  a  peace 
with  Demetrius,  but  shortly  after  he  was  gone 
into  Asia,  at  the  persuasion  of  Lysimachus,  he 
tampered  with  the  Thessalians  to  revolt,  and 
besieged  his  cities  in  Greece;  finding  he  could 
better  preserve  the  attachment  of  the  Mace¬ 
donians  in  war  than  in  peace,  and  being  of  his 
own  inclination  not  much  given  to  rest. 

At  last,  after  Demetrius  had  been  over¬ 
thrown  in  Syria,  Lysimachus,  who  had  se¬ 
cured  his  affairs,  and  had  nothing  to  do,  im¬ 
mediately  turned  his  whole  forces  upon  Pyr¬ 
rhus,  who  was  in  quarters  at  Edessa,  and 
falling  upon  and  seizing  his  convoy  of  pro¬ 
visions,  brought  first  a  great  scarcity  into 
the  army;  then  partly  by  letters,  partly  by 
spreading  rumours  abroad,  he  corrupted  the 
principal  officers  of  the  Macedonians,  re¬ 
proaching  them  that  they  had  made  one  their 
master  who  was  both  a  stranger  and  de¬ 
scended  from  those  who  had  ever  been  serv¬ 
ants  to  the  Macedonians,  and  that  they  had 
thrust  the  old  friends  and  familiars  of  Alex¬ 
ander  out  of  the  country.  The  Macedonian 
soldiers  being  much  prevailed  upon,  Pyrrhus 
withdrew  himself  with  his  Epirots  and  aux¬ 
iliary  forces,  relinquishing  Macedon,  just  after 
the  same  manner  he  took  it.  So  little  reason 
have  kings  to  condemn  popular  governments 
for  changing  sides  as  suits  their  interests,  as 
in  this  they  do  but  imitate  them  who  are 
the  great  instructors  of  unfaithfulness  and 
treachery;  holding  him  the  wisest  that  makes 
the  least  account  of  being  an  honest  man. 


320 

Pyrrhus  having  thus  retired  into  Epirus, 
and  left  Macedon,  fortune  gave  him  a  fair 
occasion  of  enjoying  himself  in  quiet,  and 
peaceably  governing  his  own  subjects,  but 
he  who  thought  it  a  nauseous  course  of  life 
not  to  be  doing  mischief  to  others,  or  re¬ 
ceiving  some  from  them,  like  Achilles,  could 
not  endure  repose — 

- But  sad  and  languished  jar, 

Desiring  battle  and  the  shout  of  war, 
and  gratified  his  inclination  by  the  following 
pretext  for  new  troubles.  The  Romans  were 
at  war  with  the  Tarentines,  who,  not  being 
able  to  go  on  with  the  war,  nor  yet,  through 
the  foolhardiness  and  the  viciousness  of  their 
popular  speakers,  to  come  to  terms  and  give 
it  up,  proposed  now  to  make  Pyrrhus  their 
general,  and  engage  him  in  it,  as  of  all  the 
neighbouring  kings  the  most  at  leisure,  and 
the  most  skilful  as  a  commander.  The  more 
grave  and  discreet  citizens  opposing  these 
counsels,  were  partly  overborne  by  the  noise 
and  violence  of  the  multitude;  while  others, 
seeing  this,  absented  themselves  from  the  as¬ 
semblies;  only  one  Meton,  a  very  sober  man, 
on  the  day  this  public  decree  was  to  be  rati¬ 
fied,  when  the  people  were  now  seating  them¬ 
selves,  came  dancing  into  the  assembly  like 
one  quite  drunk,  with  a  withered  garland  and 
a  small  lamp  in  his  hand,  and  a  woman  play¬ 
ing  on  a  flute  before  him.  And  as  in  great 
multitudes  met  at  such  popular  assemblies  no 
decorum  can  be  well  observed,  some  clapped 
him,  others  laughed,  none  forbade  him,  but 
called  to  the  woman  to  play,  and  to  him  to 
sing  to  the  company,  and  when  they  thought 
he  was  going  to  do  so,  “  ’Tis  right  of  you,  O 
men  of  Tarentum,”  he  said,  “not  to  hinder 
any  from  making  themselves  merry  that  have 
a  mind  to  it,  while  it  is  yet  in  their  power; 
and  if  you  are  wise,  you  will  take  out  your 
pleasure  of  your  freedom  while  you  can,  for 
you  must  change  your  course  of  life,  and  fol¬ 
low  other  diet  when  Pyrrhus  comes  to  town.” 

These  words  made  a  great  impression  upon 
many  of  the  Tarentines,  and  a  confused  mur¬ 
mur  went  about  that  he  had  spoken  much  to 
the  purpose;  but  some  who  feared  they  should 
be  sacrificed  if  a  peace  were  made  with  the 
Romans,  reviled  the  whole  assembly  for  so 
tamely  suffering  themselves  to  be  abused  by  a 
drunken  sot,  and  crowding  together  upon 
Meton,  thrust  him  out.  So  the  public  order 
was  passed  and  ambassadors  sent  into  Epirus, 
not  only  in  their  own  names,  but  in  those  of 
all  the  Italian  Greeks,  carrying  presents  to 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Pyrrhus,  and  letting  him  know  they  wanted 
a  general  of  reputation  and  experience;  and 
that  they  could  furnish  him  with  large  forces 
of  Lucanians,  Messapians,  Samnites,  and  Tar¬ 
entines,  amounting  to  twenty  thousand  horse, 
and  three  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  foot. 
This  did  not  only  quicken  Pyrrhus,  but  raised 
an  eager  desire  for  the  expedition  in  the  Ep- 
irots. 

There  was  one  Cineas,  a  Thessalian,  con¬ 
sidered  to  be  a  man  of  very  good  sense,  a 
disciple  of  the  great  orator,  Demosthenes,  who, 
of  all  that  were  famous  at  that  time  for  speak¬ 
ing  well,  most  seemed,  as  in  a  picture,  to  re¬ 
vive  in  the  minds  of  the  audience  the  mem¬ 
ory  of  his  force  and  vigour  of  eloquence;  and 
being  always  about  Pyrrhus,  and  sent  about  in 
his  service  to  several  cities,  verified  the  saying 
of  Euripides,  that — 

- the  force  of  words 

Can  do  whateyer  is  done  by  conquering  swords. 
And  Pyrrhus  was  used  to  say,  that  Cineas  had 
taken  more  towns  with  his  words  than  he 
with  his  arms,  and  always  did  him  the  hon¬ 
our  to  employ  him  in  his  most  important 
occasions. 

This  person,  seeing  Pyrrhus  eagerly  prepar¬ 
ing  for  Italy,  led  him  one  day  when  he  was  at 
leisure  into  the  following  reasonings:  “The 
Romans,  sir,  are  reported  to  be  great  warriors 
and  conquerors  of  many  warlike  nations;  if 
God  permit  us  to  overcome  them,  how  should 
we  use  our  victory?”  “You  ask,”  said  Pyrrhus, 
“a  thing  evident  of  itself.  The  Romans  once 
conquered,  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  bar¬ 
barian  city  that  will  resist  us,  but  we  shall 
presently  be  masters  of  all  Italy,  the  extent 
and  resources  and  strength  of  which  any  one 
should  rather  profess  to  be  ignorant  of  than 
yourself.” 

Cineas  after  a  little  pause,  “And  having 
subdued  Italy,  what  shall  we  do  next?” 
Pyrrhus  not  yet  discovering  his  intention, 
“Sicily,”  he  replied,  “next  holds  out  her  arms 
to  receive  us,  a  wealthy  and  populous  island, 
and  easy  to  be  gained;  for  since  Agathocles 
left  it,  only  faction  and  anarchy,  and  the 
licentious  violence  of  the  demagogues  prevail.” 

“You  speak,”  said  Cineas,  “what  is  per¬ 
fectly  probable,  but  will  the  possession  of 
Sicily  put  an  end  to  the  war?”  “God  grant 
us,”  answered  Pyrrhus,  “victory  and  success 
in  that,  and  we  will  use  these  as  forerunners 
of  greater  things;  who  could  forbear  from 
Libya  and  Carthage  then  within  reach,  which 
Agathocles,  even  when  forced  to  flee  from 


PYRRHUS 

Syracuse,  and  passing  the  sea  only  with  a  few 
ships,  had  all  but  surprised?  These  conquests 
once  perfected,  will  any  assert  that  of  the  ene¬ 
mies  who  now  pretend  to  despise  us,  any  one 
will  dare  to  make  further  resistance?” 

“None,”  replied  Cineas,  “for  then  it  is  mani¬ 
fest  we  may  with  such  mighty  forces  regain 
Macedon,  and  make  an  absolute  conquest  of 
Greece;  and  when  all  these  are  in  our  power 
what  shall  we  do  then?”  Said  Pyrrhus,  smil¬ 
ing,  “We  will  live  at  our  ease,  my  dear  friend, 
and  drink  all  day,  and  divert  ourselves  with 
pleasant  conversation.” 

When  Cineas  had  led  Pyrrhus  with  his 
argument  to  this  point:  “And  what  hinders 
us  now,  sir,  if  we  have  a  mind  to  be  merry, 
and  entertain  one  another,  since  we  have  at 
hand  without  trouble  all  those  necessary 
things,  to  which  through  much  blood  and 
great  labour,  and  infinite  hazards  and  mis¬ 
chief  done  to  ourselves  and  to  others,  we  de¬ 
sign  at  last  to  arrive?”  Such  reasonings  rather 
troubled  Pyrrhus  with  the  thought  of  the  hap¬ 
piness  he  was  quitting,  than  any  way  altered 
his  purpose,  he  being  unable  to  abandon  the 
hopes  of  what  he  so  much  desired. 

And  first,  he  sent  away  Cineas  to  the  Taren- 
tines  with  three  thousand  men;  presently  after, 
many  vessels  for  transport  of  horse,  and  gal¬ 
leys,  and  flat-bottomed  boats  of  all  sorts  arriv¬ 
ing  from  Tarentum,  he  shipped  upon  them 
twenty  elephants,  three  thousand  horse,  twen¬ 
ty  thousand  foot,  two  thousand  archers,  and 
five  hundred  slingers. 

All  being  thus  in  readiness,  he  set  sail,  and 
being  half-way  over,  was  driven  by  the  wind, 
blowing,  contrary  to  the  season  of  the  year, 
violently  from  the  north,  and  carried  from  his 
course,  but  by  the  great  skill  and  resolution 
of  his  pilots  and  seamen,  he  made  the  land 
with  infinite  labour,  and  beyond  expectation. 
The  rest  of  the  fleet  could  not  get  up,  and 
some  of  the  dispersed  ships,  losing  the  coast 
of  Italy,  were  driven  into  the  Libyan  and 
Sicilian  Sea;  others,  not  able  to  double  the 
cape  of  Japygium,  were  overtaken  by  the 
night;  and,  with  a  boisterous  and  heavy  sea, 
throwing  them  upon  a  dangerous  and  rocky 
shore,  they  were  all  very  much  disabled  ex¬ 
cept  the  royal  galley.  She,  while  the  sea  bore 
upon  her  sides,  resisted  with  her  bulk  and 
strength,  and  avoided  the  force  of  it,  till  the 
wind  coming  about,  blew  directly  in  their 
teeth  from  the  shore,  and  the  vessel  keeping 
up  with  her  head  against  it,  was  in  danger  of 
going  to  pieces;  yet  on  the  other  hand,  to 


321 

suffer  themselves  to  be  driven  off  to  sea  again, 
which  was  thus  raging  and  tempestuous,  with 
the  wind  shifting  about  every  way,  seemed 
to  them  the  most  dreadful  of  all  their  present 
evils.  Pyrrhus,  rising  up,  threw  himself  over¬ 
board. 

His  friends  and  guards  strove  eagerly  who 
should  be  most  ready  to  help  him,  but  night 
and  the  sea,  with  its  noise  and  violent  surge, 
made  it  extremely  difficult  to  do  this;  so  that 
hardly,  when  with  the  morning  the  wind  be¬ 
gan  to  subside,  he  got  ashore,  breathless  and 
weakened  in  body,  but  with  high  courage  and 
strength  of  mind  resisting  his  hard  fortune. 
The  Messapians,  upon  whose  shore  they  were 
thrown  by  the  tempest,  came  up  eagerly  to 
help  them  in  the  best  manner  they  could;  and 
some  of  the  straggling  vessels  that  had  escaped 
the  storm  arrived;  in  which  were  a  very  few 
horse,  and  not  quite  two  thousand  foot,  and 
two  elephants. 

With  these  Pyrrhus  marched  straight  to 
Tarentum,  where  Cineas,  being  informed  of 
his  arrival,  led  out  the  troops  to  meet  him. 
Entering  the  town,  he  did  nothing  unpleasing 
to  the  Tarentines,  nor  put  any  force  upon 
them,  till  the  ships  were  all  in  harbour,  and 
the  greatest  part  of  the  army  got  together; 
but  then  perceiving  that  the  people,  unless 
some  strong  compulsion  was  used  to  them, 
were  not  capable  either  of  saving  others  or 
being  saved  themselves,  and  were  rather  in¬ 
tending,  while  he  engaged  for  them  in  the 
field,  to  remain  at  home  bathing  and  feasting 
themselves,  he  first  shut  up  the  places  of  pub¬ 
lic  exercise,  and  the  walks,  where,  in  their 
idle  way,  they  fought  their  country’s  battles 
and  conducted  her  campaigns  in  their  talk; 
he  prohibited  likewise  all  festivals,  revels,  and 
drinking-parties  as  unseasonable,  and  sum¬ 
moning  them  to  arms,  showed  himself  vigor¬ 
ous  and  inflexible  in  carrying  out  the  con¬ 
scription  for  service  in  the  war.  So  that  many, 
not  understanding  what  it  was  to  be  com¬ 
manded,  left  the  town,  calling  it  mere  slavery 
not  to  do  as  they  pleased. 

He  now  received  intelligence  that  Laevinus, 
the  Roman  consul,  was  upon  his  march  with 
a  great  army,  and  plundering  Lucania  as  he 
went.  The  confederate  forces  were  not  come 
up  to  him,  yet  he  thought  it  impossible  to  suf¬ 
fer  so  near  an  approach  of  an  enemy,  and  drew 
out  with  his  army,  but  first  sent  an  herald  to 
the  Romans  to  know  if  before  the  war  they 
would  decide  the  differences  between  them 
and  the  Italian  Greeks  by  his  arbitrament  and 


3  22 

mediation.  But  Lasvinus  returning  answer  that 
the  Romans  neither  accepted  him  as  arbitrator 
nor  feared  him  as  an  enemy,  Pyrrhus  advanced, 
and  encamped  in  the  plain  between  the  cities 
of  Pandosia  and  Heraclea,  and  having  notice 
the  Romans  were  near,  and  lay  on  the  other 
side  of  the  river  Siris,  he  rode  up  to  take  a 
view  of  them,  and  seeing  their  order,  the  ap¬ 
pointment  of  the  watches,  their  method  and 
the  general  form  of  their  encampment,  he  was 
amazed,  and  addressing  one  of  his  friends  next 
to  him:  “This  order,”  said  he,  “Megacles,  of 
the  barbarians,  is  not  at  all  barbarian  in  char¬ 
acter;  we  shall  see  presently  what  they  can  do”; 
and  growing  a  little  more  thoughtful  of  the 
event,  resolved  to  expect  the  arriving  of  the 
confederate  troops. 

And  to  hinder  the  Romans,  if  in  the  mean¬ 
time  they  should  endeavour  to  pass  the  river, 
he  planted  men  all  along  the  bank  to  oppose 
them.  But  they,  hastening  to  anticipate  the 
coming  up  of  the  same  forces  which  he  had 
determined  to  wait  for,  attempted  the  passage 
with  their  infantry,  where  it  was  fordable, 
and  with  the  horse  in  several  places,  so  that 
the  Greeks,  fearing  to  be  surrounded,  were 
obliged  to  retreat,  and  Pyrrhus,  perceiving 
this,  and  being  much  surprised,  bade  his  foot 
officers  draw  their  men  up  in  line  of  battle, 
and  continue  in  arms,  while  he  himself  with 
three  thousand  horse  advanced,  hoping  to 
attack  the  Romans  as  they  were  coming  over, 
scattered  and  disordered. 

But  when  he  saw  a  vast  number  of  shields 
appearing  above  the  water,  and  the  horse  fol¬ 
lowing  them  in  good  order,  gathering  his 
men  in  a  closer  body,  himself  at  the  head  of 
them,  he  began  the  charge,  conspicuous  by  his 
rich  and  beautiful  armour,  and  letting  it  be 
seen  that  his  reputation  had  not  outgone  what 
he  was  able  effectually  to  perform.  While 
exposing  his  hands  and  body  in  the  fight,  and 
bravely  repelling  all  that  engaged  him,  he 
still  guided  the  battle  with  a  steady  and  un¬ 
disturbed  reason,  and  such  presence  of  mind, 
as  if  he  had  been  out  of  the  action  and  watch¬ 
ing  it  from  a  distance,  passing  still  from  point 
to  point,  and  assisting  those  whom  he  thought 
most  pressed  by  the  enemy. 

Here  Leonnatus  the  Macedonian,  observing 
one  of  the  Italians  very  intent  upon  Pyrrhus, 
riding  up  towards  him,  and  changing  places 
as  he  did,  and  moving  as  he  moved:  “Do  you 
see,  sir,”  said  he,  “that  barbarian  on  the  black 
horse  with  white  feet?  He  seems  to  be  one 
that  designs  some  great  and  dangerous  thing, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

for  he  looks  constantly  at  you,  and  fixes  his 
whole  attention,  full  of  vehement  purpose,  on 
you  alone,  taking  no  notice  of  others.  Be  on 
your  guard,  sir,  against  him.”  “Leonnatus,” 
said  Pyrrhus,  “it  is  impossible  for  any  man  to 
avoid  his  fate;  but  neither  he  nor  any  other 
Italian  shall  have  much  satisfaction  in  engag¬ 
ing  with  me.” 

While  they  were  in  this  discourse,  the 
Italian,  lowering  his  spear  and  quickening  his 
horse,  rode  furiously  at  Pyrrhus,  and  ran  his 
horse  through  with  his  lance;  at  the  same 
instant  Leonnatus  ran  his  through.  Both 
horses  falling,  Pyrrhus’s  friends  surrounded 
him  and  brought  him  off  safe,  and  killed  the 
Italian,  bravely  defending  himself.  He  was 
by  birth  a  Frentanian,  captain  of  a  troop,  and 
named  Oplacus. 

This  made  Pyrrhus  use  greater  caution,  and 
now  seeing  his  horse  give  ground,  he  brought 
up  the  infantry  against  the  enemy,  and  chang¬ 
ing  his  scarf  and  his  arms  with  Megacles,  one 
of  his  friends,  and  obscuring  himself,  as  it 
were,  in  his,  charged  upon  the  Romans,  who 
received  and  engaged  him,  and  a  great  while 
the  success  of  the  battle  remained  undeter¬ 
mined;  and  it  is  said  there  were  seven  turns 
of  fortune  both  of  pursuing  and  being  pur¬ 
sued.  And  the  change  of  his  arms  was  very 
opportune  for  the  safety  of  his  person,  but 
had  like  to  have  overthrown  his  cause  and 
lost  him  the  victory;  for  several  falling  upon 
Megacles,  the  first  that  gave  him  his  mortal 
wound  was  one  Dexous,  who,  snatching  away 
his  helmet  and  his  robe,  rode  at  once  to 
Lsevinus,  holding  them  up,  and  saying  aloud 
he  had  killed  Pyrrhus. 

These  spoils  being  carried  about  and  shown 
among  the  ranks,  the  Romans  were  trans¬ 
ported  with  joy,  and  shouted  aloud;  while 
equal  discouragement  and  terror  prevailed 
among  the  Greeks,  until  Pyrrhus,  understand¬ 
ing  what  had  happened,  rode  about  the  army 
with  his  face  bare,  stretching  out  his  hand  to 
his  soldiers,  and  telling  them  aloud  it  was  he. 

At  last,  the  elephants  more  particularly  be¬ 
gan  to  distress  the  Romans,  whose  horses,  be¬ 
fore  they  came  near,  nor  enduring  them,  went 
back  with  their  riders;  and  upon  this,  he  com¬ 
manded  the  Thessalian  cavalry  to  charge  them 
in  their  disorder,  and  routed  them  with  great 
loss.  Dionysius  affirms  near  fifteen  thousand 
of  the  Romans  fell;  Hieronymus,  no  more 
than  seven  thousand.  On  Pyrrhus’s  side,  the 
same  Dionysius  makes  thirteen  thousand 
slain,  the  other  under  four  thousand;  but  they 


PYRRHUS 

were  the  flower  of  his  men,  and  amongst  them 
his  particular  friends  as  well  as  officers  whom 
he  most  trusted  and  made  use  of.  However, 
he  possessed  himself  of  the  Romans’  camp 
which  they  deserted,  and  gained  over  several 
confederate  cities,  and  wasted  the  country 
round  about,  and  advanced  so  far  that  he  was 
within  about  thirty-seven  miles  of  Rome  itself. 
After  the  fight  many  of  the  Lucanians  and 
Samnites  came  in  and  joined  him,  whom  he 
chid  for  their  delay,  but  yet  he  was  evidently 
well  pleased  and  raised  in  his  thoughts,  that 
he  had  defeated  so  great  an  army  of  the 
Romans  with  the  assistance  of  the  Tarentines 
alone. 

The  Romans  did  not  remove  Laevinus  from 
the  consulship;  though  it  is  told  that  Caius 
Fabricius  said,  that  the  Epirots  had  not  beaten 
the  Romans,  but  only  Pyrrhus,  Laevinus;  in¬ 
sinuating  that  their  loss  was  not  through  want 
of  valour  but  of  conduct;  but  filled  up  their 
legions,  and  enlisted  fresh  men  with  all  speed, 
talking  high  and  boldly  of  war,  which  struck 
Pyrrhus  with  amazement.  He  thought  it  ad¬ 
visable  by  sending  first  to  make  an  experi¬ 
ment  whether  they  had  any  inclination  to 
treat,  thinking  that  to  take  the  city  and  make 
an  absolute  conquest  was  no  work  for  such 
an  army  as  his  was  at  that  time,  but  to  settle 
a  friendship,  and  bring  them  to  terms,  would 
be  highly  honourable  after  his  victory. 

Cineas  was  despatched  away,  and  applied 
himself  to  several  of  the  great  ones,  with  pres¬ 
ents  for  themselves  and  their  ladies  from  the 
king;  but  not  a  person  would  receive  any,  and 
answered,  as  well  men  as  women,  that  if  an 
agreement  were  publicly  concluded,  they  also 
should  be  ready,  for  their  parts,  to  express 
their  regard  to  the  king.  And  Cineas,  dis¬ 
coursing  with  the  senate  in  the  most  persua¬ 
sive  and  obliging  manner  in  the  world,  yet 
was  not  heard  with  kindness  or  inclination, 
although  Pyrrhus  offered  also  to  return  all  the 
prisoners  he  had  taken  in  the  fight  without 
ransom,  and  promised  his  assistance  for  the 
entire  conquest  of  all  Italy,  asking  only  their 
friendship  for  himself,  and  security  for  the 
Tarentines,  and  nothing  further.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  most  were  well  inclined  to  a  peace,  hav¬ 
ing  already  received  one  great  defeat,  and 
fearing  another  from  an  additional  force  of 
the  native  Italians,  now  joining  with  Pyrrhus. 

At  this  point  Appius  Claudius,  a  man  of 
great  distinction,  but  who,  because  of  his 
great  age  and  loss  of  sight,  had  declined  the 
fatigue  of  public  business,  after  these  proposi- 


323 

tions  had  been  made  by  the  king,  hearing  a 
report  that  the  senate  was  ready  to  vote  the 
conditions  of  peace,  could  not  forbear,  but 
commanding  his  servants  to  take  him  up,  was 
carried  in  his  chair  through  the  Forum  to  the 
senate-house.  When  he  was  set  down  at  the 
door,  his  sons  and  sons-in-law  took  him  up  in 
their  arms,  and,  walking  close  round  about 
him,  brought  him  into  the  senate.  Out  of  rev¬ 
erence  for  so  worthy  a  man,  the  whole  assem¬ 
bly  was  respectfully  silent. 

And  a  little  after  raising  up  himself:  “I 
bore,”  said  he,  “until  this  time,  the  misfortune 
of  my  eyes  with  some  impatience,  but  now 
while  I  hear  of  these  dishonourable  motions 
and  resolves  of  yours,  destructive  to  the  glory 
of  Rome,  it  is  my  affliction,  that  being  already 
blind,  I  am  not  deaf,  too.  Where  is  now  that 
discourse  of  yours  that  became  famous  in  all 
the  world,  that  if  he,  the  great  Alexander,  had 
come  into  Italy,  and  dared  to  attack  us  when 
we  were  young  men,  and  our  fathers,  who 
were  then  in  their  prime,  he  had  not  now 
been  celebrated  as  invincible,  but  either  flee¬ 
ing  hence,  or  falling  here,  had  left  Rome 
more  glorious?  You  demonstrate  now  that  all 
that  was  but  foolish  arrogance  and  vanity,  by 
fearing  Molossians  and  Chaonians,  ever  the 
Macedonian’s  prey,  and  by  trembling  at  Pyr¬ 
rhus  who  was  himself  but  an  humble  servant 
to  one  of  Alexander’s  life-guard,  and  comes 
here,  not  so  much  to  assist  the  Greeks  that 
inhabit  among  us,  as  to  escape  from  his  ene¬ 
mies  at  home,  a  wanderer  about  Italy,  and  yet 
dares  to  promise  you  the  conquest  of  it  all 
by  that  army  which  has  not  been  able  to  pre¬ 
serve  for  him  a  little  part  of  Macedon.  Do  not 
persuade  yourselves  that  making  him  your 
friend  is  the  way  to  send  him  back;  it  is  the 
way  rather  to  bring  over  other  invaders  from 
thence,  contemning  you  as  easy  to  be  reduced, 
if  Pyrrhus  goes  off  without  punishment  for 
his  outrages  on  you,  but,  on  the  contrary,  with 
the  reward  of  having  enabled  the  Tarentines 
and  Samnites  to  laugh  at  the  Romans.” 

When  Appius  had  done,  eagerness  for  the 
war  seized  on  every  man,  and  Cineas  was  dis¬ 
missed  with  this  answer,  that  when  Pyrrhus 
had  withdrawn  his  forces  out  of  Italy,  then, 
if  he  pleased,  they  would  treat  with  him  about 
friendship  and  alliance,  but  while  he  stayed 
there  in  arms,  they  were  resolved  to  prosecute 
the  war  against  him  with  all  their  force, 
though  he  should  have  defeated  a  thousand 
Laevinuses. 

It  is  said  that  Cineas,  while  he  was  man- 


324 

aging  this  affair,  made  it  his  business  care¬ 
fully  to  inspect  the  manners  of  the  Romans, 
and  to  understand  their  methods  of  govern¬ 
ment,  and  having  conversed  with  their  noblest 
citizens,  he  afterwards  told  Pyrrhus,  among 
other  things,  that  the  senate  seemed  to  him  an 
assembly  of  kings,  and  as  for  the  people,  he 
feared  lest  it  might  prove  that  they  were  fight¬ 
ing  with  a  Lernsean  hydra,  for  the  consul  had 
already  raised  twice  as  large  an  army  as  the 
former,  and  there  were  many  times  over  the 
some  number  of  Romans  able  to  bear  arms. 

Then  Caius  Fabricius  came  in  embassy 
from  the  Romans  to  treat  about  the  prisoners 
that  were  taken,  one  whom  Cineas  had  re¬ 
ported  to  be  a  man  of  highest  consideration 
among  them  as  an  honest  man  and  a  good 
soldier,  but  extremely  poor.  Pyrrhus  received 
him  with  much  kindness,  and  privately  would 
have  persuaded  him  to  accept  of  his  gold, 
not  for  any  evil  purpose,  but  calling  it  a  mark 
of  respect  and  hospitable  kindness. 

Upon  Fabricius’s  refusal,  he  pressed  him 
no  further,  but  the  next  day,  having  a  mind 
to  discompose  him,  as  he  had  never  seen  an 
elephant  before,  he  commanded  one  of  the 
largest,  completely  armed,  to  be  placed  be¬ 
hind  the  hangings,  as  they  were  talking  to¬ 
gether.  Which  being  done,  upon  a  sign  given, 
the  hanging  was  drawn  aside,  and  the  ele¬ 
phant,  raising  his  trunk  over  the  head  of  Fa¬ 
bricius,  made  an  horrid  and  ugly  noise.  He, 
gently  turning  about  and  smiling,  said  to  Pyr¬ 
rhus,  “Neither  your  money  yesterday,  nor 

this  beast  to-day,  makes  any  impression  upon 
” 

me. 

At  supper,  amongst  all  sorts  of  things  that 
were  discoursed  of,  but  more  particularly 
Greece  and  the  philosophers  there,  Cineas,  by 
accident,  had  occasion  to  speak  of  Epicurus, 
and  explained  the  opinions  his  followers  hold 
about  the  gods  and  the  commonwealth,  and 
the  objects  of  life,  placing  the  chief  happiness 
of  man  in  pleasure,  and  declining  public  af¬ 
fairs  as  an  injury  and  disturbance  of  a  happy 
life,  removing  the  gods  afar  off  both  from 
kindness  or  anger,  or  any  concern  for  us  at 
all,  to  a  life  wholly  without  business  and 
flowing  in  pleasures.  Before  he  had  done 
speaking,  “O  Hercules!”  Fabricius  cried  out 
to  Pyrrhus,  “may  Pyrrhus  and  the  Samnites 
entertain  themselves  with  this  sort  of  opin¬ 
ions  as  long  as  they  are  in  war  with  us.” 

Pyrrhus,  admiring  the  wisdom  and  gravity 
of  the  man,  was  the  more  transported  with 
desire  of  making  friendship  instead  of  war 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

with  the  city,  and  entreated  him,  personally, 
after  the  peace  should  be  concluded,  to  accept 
of  living  with  him  as  the  chief  of  his  min¬ 
isters  and  generals.  Fabricius  answered  quiet¬ 
ly,  “Sir,  this  will  not  be  for  your  advantage, 
for  they  who  now  honour  and  admire  you, 
when  they  have  had  experience  of  me,  will 
rather  choose  to  be  governed  by  me  than  by 
you.” 

Such  was  Fabricius.  And  Pyrrhus  received 
his  answer  without  any  resentment  or  tyran¬ 
nic  passion;  nay,  among  his  friends  he  highly 
commended  the  great  mind  of  Fabricius,  and 
intrusted  the  prisoners  to  him  alone,  on  con¬ 
dition  that  if  the  senate  should  not  vote  a 
peace,  after  they  had  conversed  with  their 
friends  and  celebrated  the  festival  of  Saturn, 
they  should  be  remanded.  And,  accordingly, 
they  were  sent  back  after  the  holidays,  it 
being  decreed  pain  of  death  for  any  that 
stayed  behind. 

After  this  Fabricius  taking  the  consulate,  a 
person  came  with  a  letter  to  the  camp  writ¬ 
ten  by  the  king’s  principal  physician,  offering 
to  take  off  Pyrrhus  by  poison,  and  so  end  the 
war  without  further  hazard  to  the  Romans, 
if  he  might  have  a  reward  proportionable  to 
his  services.  Fabricius,  hating  the  villainy  of 
the  man,  and  disposing  the  other  consul  to 
the  same  opinion,  sent  dispatches  immediately 
to  Pyrrhus  to  caution  him  against  the  treason. 

His  letter  was  to  this  effect:  “Caius  Fabri¬ 
cius  and  Quintus  iEmilius,  consuls  of  the 
Romans,  to  Pyrrhus,  the  king,  health.  You 
seem  to  have  made  an  ill-judgment  both  of 
your  friends  and  enemies;  you  will  under¬ 
stand  by  reading  this  letter  sent  to  us,  that 
you  are  at  war  with  honest  men,  and  trust 
villains  and  knaves.  Nor  do  we  disclose  this 
to  you  out  of  any  favour  to  you,  but  lest  your 
ruin  might  bring  a  reproach  upon  us,  as  if 
we  had  ended  the  war,  by  treachery,  as  not 
able  to  do  it  by  force.” 

When  Pyrrhus  had  read  the  letter  and 
made  inquiry  into  the  treason,  he  punished 
the  physician,  and  as  an  acknowledgment  to 
the  Romans  sent  to  Rome  the  prisoners  with¬ 
out  ransom,  and  again  employed  Cineas  to 
negotiate  a  peace  for  him.  But  they,  regarding 
it  as  at  once  too  great  a  kindness  from  an  en¬ 
emy,  and  too  great  a  reward  for  not  doing  an 
ill  thing  to  accept  their  prisoners  so,  released 
in  return  an  equal  number  of  the  Taren- 
tines  and  Samnites,  but  would  admit  of  no  de¬ 
bate  of  alliance  or  peace  until  he  had  removed 
his  arms  and  forces  out  of  Italy,  and  sailed  back 


PYRRHUS 

to  Epirus  with  the  same  ships  that:  brought 
him  over. 

Afterwards,  his  affairs  demanding  a  sec¬ 
ond  fight,  when  he  had  refreshed  his  men, 
he  decamped,  and  met  the  Romans  about  the 
city  Asculum,  where,  however,  he  was  much 
incommoded  by  a  woody  country  unfit  for 
his  horse,  and  a  swift  river,  so  that  the  ele¬ 
phants,  for  want  of  sure  treading,  could  not 
get  up  with  the  infantry.  After  many  wounded 
and  many  killed,  night  put  an  end  to  the 
engagement. 

Next  day,  designing  to  make  the  fight  on 
even  ground,  and  have  the  elephants  among 
the  thickest  of  the  enemy,  he  caused  a  detach¬ 
ment  to  possess  themselves  of  those  incom¬ 
modious  grounds,  and,  mixing  slingers  and 
archers  among  the  elephants,  with  full 
strength  and  courage,  he  advanced  in  a  close 
and  well-ordered  body.  The  Romans,  not  hav¬ 
ing  those  advantages  of  retreating  and  falling 
on  as  they  pleased,  which  they  had  before, 
were  obliged  to  fight  man  to  man  upon  plain 
ground,  and,  being  anxious  to  drive  back  the 
infantry  before  the  elephants  could  get  up, 
they  fought  fiercely  with  their  swords  among 
the  Macedonian  spears,  not  sparing  them¬ 
selves,  thinking  only  to  wound  and  kill,  with¬ 
out  regard  to  what  they  suffered. 

After  a  long  and  obstinate  fight,  the  first 
giving  ground  is  reported  to  have  been  where 
Pyrrhus  himself  engaged  with  extraordinary 
courage;  but  they  were  most  carried  away  by 
the  overwhelming  force  of  the  elephants,  not 
being  able  to  make  use  of  their  valour,  but 
overthrown  as  it  were  by  the  irruption  of  a 
sea  or  an  earthquake,  before  which  it  seemed 
better  to  give  way  than  to  die  without  doing 
anything,  and  not  gain  the  least  advantage  by 
suffering  the  utmost  extremity,  the  retreat  to 
their  camp  not  being  far.  Hieronymus  says 
there  fell  six  thousand  of  the  Romans,  and 
of  Pyrrhus’s  men,  the  king’s  own  commen¬ 
taries  reported  three  thousand  five  hundred 
and  fifty  lost  in  this  action.  Dionysius,  how¬ 
ever,  neither  gives  any  account  of  two  engage¬ 
ments  at  Asculum,  nor  allows  the  Romans  to 
have  been  certainly  beaten,  stating  that  once 
only  after  they  had  fought  till  sunset,  both 
armies  were  unwillingly  separated  by  the 
night,  Pyrrhus  being  wounded  by  a  javelin 
in  the  arm,  and  his  baggage  plundered  by  the 
Samnites,  that  in  all  there  died  of  Pyrrhus’s 
men  and  the  Romans  above  fifteen  thousand. 

The  armies  separated;  and,  it  is  said,  Pyr¬ 
rhus  replied  to  one  that  gave  him  joy  of  his 


325 

victory  that  one  other  such  would  utterly 
undo  him.  For  he  had  lost  a  great  part  of  the 
forces  he  brought  with  him,  and  almost  all 
his  particular  friends  and  principal  command¬ 
ers;  there  were  no  others  there  to  make  re¬ 
cruits,  and  he  found  the  confederates  in  Italy 
backward.  On  the  other  hand,  as  from  a 
fountain  continually  flowing  out  of  the  city, 
the  Roman  camp  was  quickly  and  plentifully 
filled  up  with  fresh  men,  not  at  all  abating  in 
courage  for  the  losses  they  sustained,  but  even 
from  their  very  anger  gaining  new  force  and 
resolution  to  go  on  with  the  war. 

Among  these  difficulties  he  fell  again  into 
new  hopes  and  projects  distracting  his  pur¬ 
poses.  For  at  the  same  time  some  persons  ar¬ 
rived  from  Sicily,  offering  into  his  hands  the 
cities  of  Agrigentum,  Syracuse,  and  Leontini, 
and  begging  his  assistance  to  drive  out  the 
Carthaginians  and  rid  the  island  of  tyrants; 
and  others  brought  him  news  out  of  Greece 
that  Ptolemy,  called  Ceranus,  was  slain  in  a 
fight,  and  his  army  cut  in  pieces  by  the  Gauls, 
and  that  now,  above  all  others,  was  his  time 
to  offer  himself  to  the  Macedonians,  in  great 
need  of  a  king.  Complaining  much  of  fortune 
for  bringing  him  so  many  occasions  of  great 
things  all  together  at  a  time,  and  thinking 
that  to  have  both  offered  to  him  was  to  lose 
one  of  them,  he  was  doubtful,  balancing  in 
his  thoughts.  But  the  affairs  of  Sicily  seeming 
to  hold  out  the  greater  prospects,  Africa  lying 
so  near,  he  turned  himself  to  them,  and  pres¬ 
ently  despatched  away  Cineas,  as  he  used  to 
do,  to  make  terms  beforehand  with  the  cities. 

Then  he  placed  a  garrison  in  Tarentum, 
much  to  the  Tarentines’  discontent,  who  re¬ 
quired  him  either  to  perform  what  he  came 
for,  and  continue  with  them  in  a  war  against 
the  Romans,  or  leave  the  city  as  he  found  it. 
He  returned  no  pleasing  answer,  but  com¬ 
manded  them  to  be  quiet  and  attend  his  time, 
and  so  sailed  away. 

Being  arrived  in  Sicily,  what  he  had  de¬ 
signed  in  his  hopes  was  confirmed  effectually, 
and  the  cities  frankly  surrendered  to  him;  and 
wherever  his  arms  and  force  were  necessary, 
nothing  at  first  made  any  considerable  re¬ 
sistance.  For  advancing  with  thirty  thousand 
foot,  and  twenty-five  hundred  horse,  and  two 
hundred  ships,  he  totally  routed  the  Phoeni¬ 
cians,  and  overran  their  whole  province,  and 
Eryx  being  the  strongest  town  they  held,  and 
having  a  great  garrison  in  it,  he  resolved  to 
take  it  by  storm.  The  army  being  in  readiness 
to  give  the  assault,  he  put  on  his  arms,  and 


326 

coming  to  the  head  of  his  men  made  a  vow 
of  plays  and  sacrifices  in  honour  to  Hercules, 
if  he  signalised  himself  in  that  day’s  action 
before  the  Greeks  that  dwelt  in  Sicily,  as  be¬ 
came  his  great  descent  and  his  fortunes. 

The  sign  being  given  by  sound  of  trumpet, 
he  first  scattered  the  barbarians  with  his 
shot,  and  then  brought  his  ladders  to  the  wall, 
and  was  the  first  that  mounted  upon  it  him¬ 
self,  and,  the  enemy  appearing  in  great  num¬ 
bers,  he  beat  them  back;  some  he  threw  down 
from  the  walls  on  each  side,  others  he  laid 
dead  in  a  heap  round  about  him  with  his 
sword,  nor  did  he  receive  the  least  wound, 
but  by  his  very  aspect  inspired  terror  in  the 
enemy;  and  gave  a  clear  demonstration  that 
Homer  was  in  the  right,  and  pronounced  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  truth  of  fact,  that  fortitude 
alone,  of  all  the  virtues,  is  wont  to  display 
itself  in  divine  transports  and  frenzies.  The 
city  being  taken,  he  offered  to  Hercules  most 
magnificently,  and  exhibited  all  varieties  of 
shows  and  plays. 

A  sort  of  barbarous  people  about  Messena, 
called  Mamertines,  gave  much  trouble  to  the 
Greeks,  and  put  several  of  them  under  con¬ 
tribution.  These  being  numerous  and  valiant 
(from  whence  they  had  their  name,  equiva¬ 
lent  in  the  Latin  tongue  to  warli\e,1)  he  first 
intercepted  the  collectors  of  the  contribution 
money,  and  cut  them  off,  then  beat  them  in 
open  fight,  and  destroyed  many  of  their  places 
of  strength. 

The  Carthaginians  being  now  inclined  to 
composition,  and  offering  him  a  round  sum 
of  money,  and  to  furnish  him  with  shipping, 
if  a  peace  were  concluded,  he  told  them 
plainly,  aspiring  still  to  greater  things,  there 
was  but  one  way  for  a  friendship  and  right 
understanding  between  them,  if  they,  wholly 
abandoning  Sicily,  would  consent  to  make 
the  African  sea  the  limit  between  them  and 
the  Greeks.  And  being  elevated  with  his  good 
fortune,  and  the  strength  of  his  forces,  and 
pursuing  those  hopes  in  prospect  of  which  he 
first  sailed  thither,  his  immediate  aim  was  at 
Africa;  and  as  he  had  abundance  of  shipping, 
but  very  ill  equipped,  he  collected  seamen, 
not  by  fair  and  gentle  dealing  with  the  cities, 
but  by  force  in  a  haughty  and  insolent  way, 
and  menacing  them  with  punishments.  And 
as  at  first  he  had  not  acted  thus,  but  had  been 
unusually  indulgent  and  kind,  ready  to  be¬ 
lieve,  and  uneasy  to  none;  now  of  a  popular 
leader  becoming  a  tyrant  by  these  severe  pro- 
1Mamers  being  another  and  older  form  for  Mars. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ceedings,  he  got  the  name  of  an  ungrateful 
and  a  faithless  man. 

However,  they  gave  way  to  these  things  as 
necessary,  although  they  took  them  very  ill 
from  him;  and  especially  when  he  began  to 
show  suspicion  of  Thcenon  and  Sosistratus, 
men  of  the  first  position  in  Syracuse,  who  in¬ 
vited  him  over  into  Sicily,  and  when  he  was 
come,  put  the  cities  into  his  power,  and  were 
most  instrumental  in  all  he  had  done  there 
since  his  arrival,  whom  he  now  would  neither 
suffer  to  be  about  his  person,  nor  leave  at 
home;  and  when  Sosistratus  out  of  fear  with¬ 
drew  himself,  and  then  he  charged  Thoenon, 
as  in  a  conspiracy  with  the  other,  and  put  him 
to  death,  with  this  all  his  prospects  changed, 
not  by  little  and  little,  nor  in  a  single  place 
only,  but  a  mortal  hatred  being  raised  in  the 
cities  against  him,  some  fell  off  to  the  Cartha¬ 
ginians,  others  called  in  the  Mamertines. 

And  seeing  revolts  in  all  places,  and  desires 
of  alteration,  and  a  potent  faction  against  him, 
at  the  same  time  he  received  letters  from  the 
Samnites  and  Tarentines,  who  were  beaten 
quite  out  of  the  field,  and  scarce  able  to  secure 
their  towns  against  the  war,  earnestly  begging 
his  help.  This  served  as  a  colour  to  make  his 
relinquishing  Sicily  no  flight,  nor  a  despair  of 
good  success;  but  in  truth  not  being  able  to 
manage  Sicily,  which  was  as  a  ship  labouring 
in  a  storm,  and  willing  to  be  out  of  her,  he 
suddenly  threw  himself  over  into  Italy.  It  is 
reported  that  at  his  going  off  he  looked  back 
upon  the  island,  and  said  to  those  about  him, 
“How  brave  a  field  of  war  do  we  leave,  my 
friends,  for  the  Romans  and  Carthaginians  to 
fight  in,”  which,  as  he  then  conjectured,  fell 
out  indeed  not  long  after. 

When  he  was  sailing  off,  the  barbarians 
having  conspired  together,  he  was  forced  to  a 
fight  with  the  Carthaginians  in  the  very  road, 
and  lost  many  of  his  ships;  with  the  rest  he 
fled  into  Italy.  There,  about  one  thousand 
Mamertines,  who  had  crossed  the  sea  a  little 
before,  though  afraid  to  engage  him  in  open 
field,  setting  upon  him  where  the  passages 
were  difficult,  put  the  whole  army  in  confu¬ 
sion.  Two  elephants  fell,  and  a  great  part  of 
his  rear  was  cut  off.  He,  therefore,  coming 
up  in  person,  repulsed  the  enemy,  but  ran 
into  great  danger  among  men  long  trained 
and  bold  in  war. 

His  being  wounded  in  the  head  with  a 
sword,  and  retiring  a  little  out  of  the  fight, 
much  increased  their  confidence,  and  one  of 
them  advancing  a  good  way  before  the  rest, 


PYRRHUS 

large  of  body  and  in  bright  armour,  with  an 
haughty  voice  challenged  him  to  come  forth 
if  he  were  alive.  Pyrrhus,  in  great  anger, 
broke  away  violently  from  his  guards,  and, 
in  his  fury,  besmeared  with  blood,  terrible 
to  look  upon,  made  his  way  through  his  own 
men,  and  struck  the  barbarian  on  the  head 
with  his  sword  such  a  blow,  as  with  the 
strength  of  his  arm,  and  the  excellent  temper 
of  the  weapon,  passed  downward  so  far  that 
his  body  being  cut  asunder  fell  in  two  pieces. 

This  stopped  the  course  of  the  barbarians, 
amazed  and  confounded  at  Pyrrhus,  as  one 
more  than  man;  so  that  continuing  his 
march  all  the  rest  of  the  way  undisturbed,  he 
arrived  at  Tarentum  with  twenty  thousand 
foot  and  three  thousand  horse,  where,  rein¬ 
forcing  himself  with  the  choicest  troops  of  the 
Tarentines,  he  advanced  immediately  against 
the  Romans,  who  then  lay  encamped  in  the 
territories  of  the  Samnites,  whose  affairs  were 
extremely  shattered,  and  their  counsels  broken, 
having  been  in  many  fights  beaten  by  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  There  was  also  a  discontent  amongst 
them  at  Pyrrhus  for  his  expedition  into  Sicily, 
so  that  not  many  came  in  to  join  him. 

He  divided  his  army  into  two  parts,  and 
despatched  the  first  into  Lucania  to  oppose  one 
of  the  consuls  there,  so  that  he  should  not  come 
in  to  assist  the  other;  the  rest  he  led  against 
Manius  Curius,  who  had  posted  himself  very 
advantageously  near  Beneventum,  and  expect¬ 
ed  the  other  consul’s  forces,  and  partly  because 
the  priests  had  dissuaded  him  by  unfavourable 
omens,  was  resolved  to  remain  inactive.  Pyr¬ 
rhus,  hastening  to  attack  these  before  the  other 
could  arrive,  with  his  best  men,  and  the  most 
serviceable  elephants,  marched  in  the  night 
toward  their  camp.  But  being  forced  to  go 
round  about,  and  through  a  very  woody  coun¬ 
try,  their  lights  failed  them,  and  the  soldiers 
lost  their  way. 

A  council  of  war  being  called,  while  they 
were  in  debate,  the  night  was  spent,  and,  at 
the  break  of  day,  his  approach,  as  he  came 
down  the  hills,  was  discovered  by  the  enemy, 
and  put  the  whole  camp  into  disorder  and  tu¬ 
mult.  But  the  sacrifices  being  auspicious,  and 
the  time  absolutely  obliging  them  to  fight, 
Manius  drew  his  troops  out  of  the  trenches, 
and  attacked  the  vanguard,  and,  having  routed 
them  all,  put  the  whole  army  into  consterna¬ 
tion,  so  that  many  were  cut  off  and  some  of  the 
elephants  taken. 

This  success  drew  on  Manius  into  the  level 
plain,  and  here,  in  open  battle,  he  defeated  part 


327 

of  the  enemy;  but,  in  other  quarters,  finding 
himself  overpowered  by  the  elephants  and 
forced  back  to  his  trenches,  he  commanded  out 
those  who  were  left  to  guard  them,  a  numer¬ 
ous  body,  standing  thick  at  the  ramparts,  all  in 
arms  and  fresh.  These  coming  down  from 
their  strong  position,  and  charging  the  ele¬ 
phants,  forced  them  to  retire;  and  they  in  the 
flight  turning  back  upon  their  own  men,  caused 
great  disorder  and  confusion,  and  gave  into  the 
hands  of  the  Romans  the  victory  and  the  future 
supremacy.  Having  obtained  from  these  ef¬ 
forts,  and  these  contests,  the  feeling  as  well  as 
the  fame  of  invincible  strength,  they  at  once  re¬ 
duced  Italy  under  their  power,  and  not  long 
after  Sicily,  too. 

Thus  fell  Pyrrhus  from  his  Italian  and  Sicili¬ 
an  hopes,  after  he  had  consumed  six  years  in 
these  wars,  and  though  unsuccessful  in  his  af¬ 
fairs,  yet  preserved  his  courage  unconquerable 
among  all  these  misfortunes,  and  was  held,  for 
military  experience,  and  personal  valour  and 
enterprise,  much  the  bravest  of  all  the  princes 
of  his  time,  only  what  he  got  by  great  actions 
he  lost  again  by  vain  hopes,  and  by  new  desires 
of  what  he  had  not,  kept  nothing  of  what  he 
had.  So  that  Antigonus  used  to  compare  him  to 
a  player  with  dice,  who  had  excellent  throws, 
but  knew  not  how  to  use  them. 

He  returned  into  Epirus  with  eight  thou¬ 
sand  foot  and  five  hundred  horse,  and  for 
want  of  money  to  pay  them,  was  fain  to  look 
out  for  a  new  war  to  maintain  the  army. 
Some  of  the  Gauls  joining  him,  he  invaded 
Macedonia,  where  Antigonus,  son  of  Deme¬ 
trius,  governed,  designing  merely  to  plunder 
and  waste  the  country.  But  after  he  had  made 
himself  master  of  several  towns,  and  two 
thousand  men  came  over  to  him,  he  began  to 
hope  for  something  greater,  and  adventured 
upon  Antigonus  himself,  and  meeting  him  at 
a  narrow  passage,  put  the  whole  army  in  dis¬ 
order. 

The  Gauls,  who  brought  up  Antigonus’s 
rear,  were  very  numerous  and  stood  firm,  but 
after  a  sharp  encounter,  the  greatest  part  of 
them  were  cut  off,  and  they  who  had  the 
charge  of  the  elephants  being  surrounded  ev¬ 
ery  way,  delivered  up  both  themselves  and  the 
beasts,  Pyrrhus,  taking  this  advantage,  and  ad¬ 
vising  more  with  his  good  fortune  than  his  rea¬ 
son,  boldly  set  upon  the  main  body  of  the  Ma¬ 
cedonian  foot,  already  surprised  with  fear,  and 
troubled  at  the  former  loss.  They  declined  any 
action  or  engagement  with  him;  and  he,  hold¬ 
ing  out  his  hand  and  calling  aloud  both  to  the 


328 

superior  and  under  officers  by  name,  brought 
over  the  foot  from  Antigonus,  who,  flying 
away  secretly,  was  only  able  to  retain  some  of 
the  seaport  towns. 

Pyrrhus,  among  all  these  kindnesses  of  for¬ 
tune,  thinking  what  he  had  effected  against 
the  Gauls  the  most  advantageous  for  his  glory, 
hung  up  their  richest  and  goodliest  spoils  in 
the  temple  of  Minerva  Itonis,  with  this  inscrip¬ 
tion: — 

Pyrrhus ,  descendant  of  Molossian  kings, 

These  shields  to  thee,  ltonian  goddess,  brings, 
Won  from  the  valiant  Gaul  when  in  the  fight 
Antigonus  and  all  his  host  took  flight; 

’Tis  not  today  or  yesterday  alone 

That  for  brave  deeds  the  /Eacidce  are  known . 

After  this  victory  in  the  field,  he  proceeded 
to  secure  the  cities,  and  having  possessed  him¬ 
self  of  eEgx,  besides  other  hardships  put  upon 
the  people  there,  he  left  in  the  town  a  garrison 
of  Gauls,  some  of  those  in  his  own  army,  who 
being  insatiably  desirous  of  wealth,  instandy 
dug  up  the  tombs  of  the  kings  that  lay  buried 
there,  and  took  away  the  riches,  and  insolent¬ 
ly  scattered  about  their  bones.  Pyrrhus,  in  ap¬ 
pearance,  made  no  great  matter  of  it,  either 
deferring  it  on  account  of  the  pressure  of 
other  business,  or  wholly  passing  it  by,  out  of 
fear  of  punishing  those  barbarians;  but  this 
made  him  very  ill  spoken  of  among  the  Mace¬ 
donians,  and  his  affairs  being  yet  unsetded 
and  brought  to  no  firm  consistence,  he  began 
to  entertain  new  hopes  and  projects,  and  in 
raillery  called  Antigonus  a  shameless  man, 
for  still  wearing  his  purple  and  not  changing 
it  for  an  ordinary  dress;  but  upon  Cleonymus, 
the  Spartan,  arriving  and  inviting  him  to  Lace¬ 
daemon,  he  frankly  embraced  the  overture.  Cle¬ 
onymus  was  of  royal  descent,  but  seeming  too 
arbitrary  and  absolute,  had  no  great  respect  nor 
credit  at  home;  and  Areus  was  king  there. 

This  was  the  occasion  of  an  old  and  public 
grudge  between  him  and  the  citizens;  but,  be¬ 
side  that,  Cleonymus,  in  his  old  age,  had  mar¬ 
ried  a  young  lady  of  great  beauty  and  royal 
blood,  Chilonis,  daughter  of  Leotychides,  who, 
falling  desperately  in  love  with  Acrotatus,  Are- 
us’s  son,  a  youth  in  the  flower  of  manhood, 
rendered  this  match  both  uneasy  and  dishon¬ 
ourable  to  Cleonymus,  as  there  was  none  of  the 
Spartans  who  did  not  very  well  know  how 
much  his  wife  slighted  him;  so  these  domestic 
troubles  added  to  his  public  discontent.  He 
brought  Pyrrhus  to  Sparta  with  an  army  of 
twenty-five  thousand  foot,  two  thousand  horse, 
and  twenty-four  elephants. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

So  great  a  preparation  made  it  evident  to 
the  whole  world  that  he  came,  not  so  much  to 
gain  Sparta  for  Cleonymus,  as  to  take  all  Pelo¬ 
ponnesus  for  himself,  although  he  expressly 
denied  this  to  the  Lacedaemonian  ambassadors 
that  came  to  him  at  Megalopolis,  affirming  he 
came  to  deliver  the  cities  from  the  slavery  of 
Antigonus,  and  declaring  he  would  send  his 
younger  sons  to  Sparta,  if  he  might,  to  be 
brought  up  in  Spartan  habits,  that  so  they 
might  be  better  bred  than  all  other  kings. 

With  these  pretensions  amusing  those  who 
came  to  meet  him  in  his  march,  as  soon  as 
ever  he  entered  Laconia  he  began  to  plunder 
and  waste  the  country,  and  on  the  ambassa¬ 
dors  complaining  that  he  began  the  war  upon 
them  before  it  was  proclaimed:  “We  know,” 
said  he,  “very  well  that  neither  do  you  Spar¬ 
tans,  when  you  design  anything,  talk  of  it 
beforehand.”  One  Mandroclidas,  then  present, 
told  him,  in  the  broad  Spartan  dialect:  “If 
you  are  a  god,  you  will  do  us  no  harm,  we  are 
wronging  no  man;  but  if  you  are  a  man,  there 
may  be  another  stronger  than  you.” 

He  now  marched  away  direcdy  for  Lace¬ 
daemon,  and  being  advised  by  Cleonymus  to 
give  the  assault  as  soon  as  he  arrived,  fearing, 
as  it  is  said,  lest  the  soldiers,  entering  by  night, 
should  plunder  the  city,  he  answered,  they 
might  do  it  as  well  next  morning,  because 
there  were  but  few  soldiers  in  town,  and  those 
unprovided  against  his  sudden  approach,  as 
Areus  was  not  there  in  person,  but  gone  to 
aid  the  Gortynians  in  Crete.  And  it  was  this 
alone  that  saved  the  town,  because  he  despised 
it  as  not  tenable,  and  so  imagining  no  defense 
would  be  made,  he  sat  down  before  it  that 
night. 

Cleonymus’s  friends,  and  the  Helots,  his 
domestic  servants,  had  made  great  prepara¬ 
tion  at  his  house,  as  expecting  Pyrrhus  there 
at  supper.  In  the  night  the  Lacedaemonians 
held  a  consultation  to  ship  over  all  the  wo¬ 
men  into  Crete,  but  they  unanimously  refused, 
and  Archidamia  came  into  the  senate  with  a 
sword  in  her  hand,  in  the  name  of  them  all, 
asking  if  the  men  expected  the  women  to  sur¬ 
vive  the  ruins  of  Sparta. 

It  was  next  resolved  to  draw  a  trench  in  a 
line  directly  over  against  the  enemy’s  camp, 
and,  here  and  there  in  it,  to  sink  waggons  in 
the  ground,  as  deep  as  the  naves  of  the 
wheels,  that,  so  being  firmly  fixed,  they  might 
obstruct  the  passage  of  the  elephants.  When 
they  had  just  begun  the  work,  both  maids  and 
women  came  to  them,  the  married  women  with 


PYRRHUS 

their  robes  tied  like  girdles  round  their  under¬ 
frocks,  and  the  unmarried  girls  in  their  single 
frocks  only,  to  assist  the  elder  men  at  the  work. 
As  for  the  youth  that  were  next  day  to  engage, 
they  left  them  to  their  rest,  and  undertaking 
their  proportion,  they  themselves  finished  a 
third  part  of  the  trench,  which  was  in  breadth 
six  cubits,  four  in  depth,  and  eight  hundred 
feet  long,  as  Phylarchus  says;  Hieronymus 
makes  it  somewhat  less. 

The  enemy  beginning  to  move  by  break  of 
day,  they  brought  their  arms  to  the  young 
men,  and  giving  them  also  in  charge  the 
trench,  exhorted  them  to  defend  and  keep  it 
bravely,  as  it  would  be  happy  for  them  to  con¬ 
quer  in  the  view  of  their  whole  country,  and 
glorious  to  die  in  the  arms  of  their  mothers 
and  wives,  falling  as  became  Spartans.  As  for 
Chilonis,  she  retired  with  a  halter  about  her 
neck,  resolving  to  die  so  rather  than  fall  into 
the  hands  of  Cleonymus,  if  the  city  were 
taken. 

Pyrrhus  himself,  in  person,  advanced  with 
his  foot  to  force  through  the  shields  of  the 
Spartans  ranged  against  him,  and  to  get  over 
the  trench,  which  was  scarce  passable,  because 
the  looseness  of  the  fresh  earth  afforded  no 
firm  footing  for  the  soldiers. 

Ptolemy,  his  son,  with  two  thousand  Gauls, 
and  some  choice  men  of  the  Chaonians,  went 
around  the  trench,  and  endeavoured  to  get 
over  where  the  waggons  were.  But  they,  being 
so  deep  in  the  ground,  and  placed  close  to¬ 
gether,  not  only  made  his  passage,  but  also 
the  defence  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  very  trou¬ 
blesome.  Yet  now  the  Gauls  had  got  the 
wheels  out  of  the  ground,  and  were  drawing 
off  the  waggons  toward  the  river,  when  young 
Acrotatus,  seeing  the  danger,  passing  through 
the  town  with  three  hundred  men,  surround¬ 
ed  Ptolemy  undiscerned,  taking  the  advantage 
of  some  slopes  of  the  ground,  until  he  fell 
upon  his  rear,  and  forced  him  to  wheel  about. 
And  thrusting  one  another  into  the  ditch, 
and  falling  among  the  waggons,  at  last  with 
much  loss,  not  without  difficulty,  they  with¬ 
drew. 

The  elderly  men  and  all  the  women  saw 
this  brave  action  of  Acrotatus,  and  when  he 
returned  back  into  the  town  to  his  first  post, 
all  covered  with  blood  and  fierce  and  elate  with 
victory,  he  seemed  to  the  Spartan  women  to 
have  become  taller  and  more  beautiful  than  be¬ 
fore,  and  they  envied  Chilonis  so  worthy  a  lov¬ 
er.  And  some  of  the  old  men  followed  him, 
crying  aloud,  “Go  on,  Acrotatus,  be  happy 


329 

with  Chilonis,  and  beget  brave  sons  for 
Sparta.” 

Where  Pyrrhus  himself  fought  was  the 
hottest  of  the  action  and  many  of  the  Spartans 
did  gallantly,  but  in  particular  one  Phyllius 
signalised  himself,  made  the  best  resistance, 
and  killed  most  assailants;  and  when  he  found 
himself  ready  to  sink  with  the  many  wounds 
he  had  received,  retiring  a  little  out  of  his 
place  behind  another,  he  fell  down  among  his 
fellow-soldiers,  that  the  enemy  might  not 
carry  off  his  body. 

The  fight  ended  with  the  day,  and  Pyrrhus, 
in  his  sleep,  dreamed  that  he  drew  thunder¬ 
bolts  upon  Lacedaemon,  and  set  it  all  on  fire, 
and  rejoiced  at  the  sight;  and  waking,  in  this 
transport  of  joy,  he  commanded  his  officers  to 
get  all  things  ready  for  a  second  assault,  and 
relating  his  dream  among  his  friends,  suppos¬ 
ing  it  to  mean  that  he  should  take  the  town 
by  storm,  the  rest  assented  to  it  with  admira¬ 
tion,  but  Lysimachus  was  not  pleased  with 
the  dream,  and  told  him  he  feared  lest  as 
places  struck  with  lightning  are  held  sacred, 
and  not  to  be  trodden  upon,  so  the  gods 
might  by  this  let  him  know  the  city  should 
not  be  taken.  Pyrrhus  replied,  that  all  these 
things  were  but  idle  talk,  full  of  uncertainty, 
and  only  fit  to  amuse  the  vulgar;  their 
thought,  with  their  swords  in  their  hands, 
should  always  be — 

The  one  good  omen  is  King  Pyrrhus’s  cause, 
and  so  got  up,  and  drew  out  his  army  to  the 
walls  by  break  of  day. 

The  Lacedaemonians,  in  resolution  and 
courage,  made  a  defence  even  beyond  their 
power;  the  women  were  all  by,  helping  them 
to  arms,  and  bringing  bread  and  drink  to 
those  that  desired  it,  and  taking  care  of  the 
wounded.  The  Macedonians  attempted  to  fill 
up  the  trench,  bringing  huge  quantities  of 
materials  and  throwing  them  upon  the  arms 
and  dead  bodies,  that  lay  there  and  were  cov¬ 
ered  over.  While  the  Lacedaemonians  opposed 
this  with  all  their  force,  Pyrrhus,  in  person, 
appeared  on  their  side  of  the  trench  and  the 
waggons,  pressing  on  horseback  toward  the 
city,  at  which  the  men  who  had  that  post 
calling  out,  and  the  women  shrieking  and  run¬ 
ning  about,  while  Pyrrhus  violently  pushed 
on,  and  beat  down  all  that  disputed  his  way, 
his  horse  received  a  shot  in  the  belly  from  a 
Cretan  arrow,  and,  in  his  convulsions  as  he 
died,  threw  off  Pyrrhus  on  slippery  and  steep 
ground.  And  all  about  him  being  in  confu¬ 
sion  at  this,  the  Spartans  came  boldly  up,  and 


330 

making  good  use  of  their  missiles,  forced  them 
off  again. 

After  this  Pyrrhus,  in  other  quarters  also, 
put  an  end  to  the  combat,  imagining  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians  would  be  inclined  to  yield,  as  al¬ 
most  all  of  them  were  wounded,  and  very 
great  numbers  killed  outright;  but  the  good 
fortune  of  the  city,  either  satisfied  with  the 
experiment  upon  the  bravery  of  the  citizens, 
or  willing  to  prove  how  much  even  in  the  last 
extremities  such  interposition  may  effect, 
brought,  when  the  Lacedaemonians  had  now 
but  very  slender  hopes  left,  Aminias,  the  Pho- 
cian,  one  of  Antigonus’s  commanders,  from 
Corinth  to  their  assistance,  with  a  force  of 
mercenaries;  and  they  were  no  sooner  re¬ 
ceived  into  the  town,  but  Areus,  their  king, 
arrived  there  himself,  too,  from  Crete,  with 
two  thousand  men  more.  The  women  upon 
this  went  all  home  to  their  houses,  finding  it 
no  longer  necessary  for  them  to  meddle  with 
the  business  of  the  war;  and  they  also  were 
sent  back,  who,  though  not  of  military  age, 
were  by  necessity  forced  to  take  arms,  while 
the  rest  prepared  to  fight  Pyrrhus. 

He,  upon  the  coming  of  these  additional 
forces,  was  indeed  possessed  with  a  more 
eager  desire  and  ambition  than  before  to  make 
himself  master  of  the  town;  but  his  designs 
not  succeeding,  and  receiving  fresh  losses 
every  day,  he  gave  over  the  siege,  and  fell  to 
plundering  the  country,  determining  to  win¬ 
ter  thereabouts. 

But  fate  is  unavoidable,  and  a  great  feud 
happening  at  Argos  between  Aristeas  and 
Aristippus,  two  principal  citizens,  after  Aris¬ 
tippus  had  resolved  to  make  use  of  the  friend¬ 
ship  of  Antigonus,  Aristeas  to  anticipate  him 
invited  Pyrrhus  thither.  And  he  always  re¬ 
volving  hopes  upon  hopes,  and  treating  all  his 
successes  as  occasions  of  more,  and  his  re¬ 
verses  as  defects  to  be  amended  by  new  enter¬ 
prises,  allowed  neither  losses  nor  victories  to 
limit  him  in  his  receiving  or  giving  trouble, 
and  so  presently  went  for  Argos.  Areus,  by 
frequent  ambushes,  and  seizing  positions 
where  the  ways  were  most  unpracticable, 
harassed  the  Gauls  and  Molossians  that 
brought  up  the  rear. 

It  had  been  told  Pyrrhus  by  one  of  the 
priests  that  found  the  liver  of  the  sacrificed 
beast  imperfect  that  some  of  his  near  rela¬ 
tions  would  be  lost;  in  this  tumult  and  disor¬ 
der  of  his  rear,  forgetting  the  prediction,  he 
commanded  out  his  son,  Ptolemy,  with  some 
of  his  guards  to  their  assistance,  while  he 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

himself  led  on  the  main  body  rapidly  out  of 
the  pass.  And  the  fight  being  very  warm 
where  Ptolemy  was  (for  the  most  select  men 
of  the  Lacedaemonians,  commanded  by  Eval- 
cus,  were  there  engaged),  one  Oryssus  of 
Aptera  in  Crete,  a  stout  man  and  swift  of 
foot,  running  on  one  side  of  the  young  prince, 
as  he  was  fighting  bravely,  gave  him  a  mortal 
wound  and  slew  him.  On  his  fall  those  about 
him  turned  their  backs,  and  the  Lacedaemon¬ 
ian  horse,  pursuing  and  cutting  oft  many,  got 
into  the  open  plain,  and  found  themselves  en¬ 
gaged  with  the  enemy  before  they  were  aware, 
without  their  infantry. 

Pyrrhus,  who  had  received  the  ill  news  of 
his  son,  and  was  in  great  affliction,  drew  out 
his  Molossian  horse  against  them,  and  charg¬ 
ing  at  the  head  of  his  men,  satiated  himself 
with  the  blood  and  slaughter  of  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians,  as  indeed  he  always  showed  him¬ 
self  a  terrible  and  invincible  hero  in  actual 
fight,  but  now  he  exceeded  all  he  had  ever 
done  before  in  courage  and  force.  On  his  rid¬ 
ing  his  horse  up  to  Evalcus,  he,  by  declining 
a  little  to  one  side,  had  almost  cut  off  Pyrrhus’s 
hand  in  which  he  held  the  reins,  but  lighting 
on  the  reins,  only  cut  them;  at  the  same  in¬ 
stant  Pyrrhus,  running  him  through  with  his 
spear,  fell  from  his  horse,  and  there  on  foot 
as  he  was  proceeded  to  slaughter  all  those 
choice  men  that  fought  about  the  body  of 
Evalcus;  a  severe  additional  loss  to  Sparta, 
incurred  after  the  war  itself  was  now  at 
an  end,  by  the  mere  animosity  of  the  com¬ 
manders. 

Pyrrhus  having  thus  offered,  as  it  were,  a 
sacrifice  to  the  ghost  of  his  son,  and  fought  a 
glorious  batde  in  honour  of  his  obsequies, 
and  having  vented  much  of  his  pain  in  action 
against  the  enemy,  marched  away  to  Argos. 
And  having  intelligence  that  Antigonus  was 
already  in  possession  of  the  high  grounds,  he 
encamped  about  Nauplia,  and  the  next  day 
despatched  a  herald  to  Antigonus  calling  him 
a  villain,  and  challenging  him  to  descend  into 
the  plain  field  and  fight  with  him  for  the 
kingdom.  He  answered,  that  his  conduct 
should  be  measured  by  times  as  well  as  by 
arms,  and  that  if  Pyrrhus  had  no  leisure  to 
live,  there  were  ways  enough  open  to  death. 
To  both  the  kings,  also,  came  ambassadors 
from  Argos,  desiring  each  party  to  retreat, 
and  to  allow  the  city  to  remain  in  friendship 
with  both,  without  falling  into  the  hands  of 
either.  Antigonus  was  persuaded,  and  sent 
his  son  as  a  hostage  to  the  Argives;  but  Pyr- 


PYRRHUS 

rhus,  although  he  consented  to  retire,  yet,  as 
he  sent  no  hostage,  was  suspected. 

A  remarkable  portent  happened  at  this  time 
to  Pyrrhus;  the  heads  of  the  sacrificed  oxen, 
lying  apart  from  the  bodies,  were  seen  to 
thrust  out  their  tongues  and  lick  up  their  own 
gore.  And  in  the  city  of  Argos,  the  priestess 
of  Apollo  Lycius  rushed  out  of  the  temple, 
crying  she  saw  the  city  full  of  carcases  and 
slaughter,  and  an  eagle  coming  out  to  fight, 
and  presently  vanishing  again. 

In  the  dead  of  the  night,  Pyrrhus,  ap¬ 
proaching  the  walls,  and  finding  the  gate 
called  Diamperes  set  open  for  them  by  Aris- 
teas,  was  undiscovered  long  enough  to  allow 
all  his  Gauls  to  enter  and  take  possession  of 
the  market-place.  But  the  gate  being  too  low 
to  let  in  the  elephants,  they  were  obliged  to 
take  down  the  towers  which  they  carried  on 
their  backs,  and  put  them  on  again  in  the 
dark  and  in  disorder,  so  that  time  being  lost, 
the  city  took  the  alarm,  and  the  people  ran, 
some  to  Apis,  the  chief  citadel,  and  others  to 
other  places  of  defence,  and  sent  away  to 
Antigonus  to  assist  them.  He,  advancing  with¬ 
in  a  short  distance,  made  an  halt,  but  sent  in 
some  of  his  principal  commanders,  and  his  son 
with  a  considerable  force:  Ar'eus  came  thither, 
too,  with  one  thousand  Cretans,  and  some  of 
the  most  active  men  among  the  Spartans,  and 
all  falling  on  at  once  upon  the  Gauls,  put 
them  in  great  disorder. 

Pyrrhus,  entering  in  with  noise  and  shout¬ 
ing  near  the  Cylarabis,  when  the  Gauls  re¬ 
turned  the  cry,  noticed  that  it  did  not  express 
courage  and  assurance,  but  was  the  voice  of 
men  distressed,  and  that  had  their  hands  full. 
He,  therefore,  pushed  forward  in  haste  the 
van  of  his  horse  that  marched  but  slowly  and 
dangerously,  by  reason  of  the  drains  and  sinks 
of  which  the  city  is  full.  In  this  night  engage¬ 
ment  there  was  infinite  uncertainty  as  to  what 
was  being  done,  or  what  orders  were  given; 
there  was  much  mistaking  and  struggling  in 
the  narrow  streets;  all  generalship  was  use¬ 
less  in  that  darkness  and  noise  and  pressure; 
so  both  sides  continued  without  doing  any¬ 
thing,  expecting  daylight. 

At  the  first  dawn,  Pyrrhus,  seeing  the  great 
citadel,  Aspis,  full  of  enemies,  was  disturbed, 
and  remarking,  among  a  variety  of  figures 
dedicated  in  the  market-place,  a  wolf  and  bull 
of  brass,  as  it  were  ready  to  attack  one  an¬ 
other,  he  was  struck  with  alarm,  recollecting 
an  oracle  that  formerly  predicted  fate  had  de¬ 
termined  his  death  when  he  should  see  a  wolf 


331 

fighting  with  a  bull.  The  Argives  say  these 
figures  were  set  up  in  record  of  a  thing  that 
long  ago  had  happened  there.  For  Danaus,  at 
his  first  landing  in  the  country,  near  the 
Pyramia  in  Thyreatis,  as  he  was  on  his  way 
towards  Argos,  espied  a  wolf  fighting  with  a 
bull,  and  conceiving  the  wolf  to  represent  him 
(for  this  stranger  fell  upon  a  native  as  he  de¬ 
signed  to  do),  stayed  to  see  the  issue  of  the 
fight,  and  the  wolf  prevailing,  he  offered  vows 
to  Apollo  Lycius,  and  thus  made  his  attempt 
upon  the  town,  and  succeeded;  Gelanor,  who 
was  then  king,  being  displaced  by  a  faction. 
And  this  was  the  cause  of  dedicating  those 
figures. 

Pyrrhus,  quite  out  of  heart  at  this  sight,  and 
seeing  none  of  his  designs  succeed,  thought 
best  to  retreat,  but  fearing  the  narrow  passage 
at  the  gate,  sent  to  his  son,  Helenus,  who  was 
left  without  the  town  with  a  great  part  of  his 
forces,  commanding  him  to  break  down  part 
of  the  wall,  and  assist  the  retreat  if  the  enemy 
pressed  hard  upon  them.  But  what  with  haste 
and  confusion,  the  person  that  was  sent  deliv¬ 
ered  nothing  clearly;  so  that  quite  mistaking, 
the  young  prince  with  the  best  of  his  men 
and  the  remaining  elephants  marched  straight 
through  the  gates  into  the  town  to  assist  his 
father. 

Pyrrhus  was  now  making  good  his  retreat, 
and  while  the  market-place  afforded  them 
ground  enough  both  to  retreat  and  fight,  fre¬ 
quently  repulsed  the  enemy  that  bore  upon 
him.  But  when  he  was  forced  out  of  that 
broad  place  into  the  narrow  street  leading  to 
the  gate,  and  fell  in  with  those  who  came  the 
other  way  to  his  assistance,  some  did  not  hear 
him  call  out  to  them  to  give  back,  and  those 
who  did,  however  eager  to  obey  him,  were 
pushed  forward  by  others  behind,  who  poured 
in  at  the  gate.  Besides,  the  largest  of  his  ele¬ 
phants  falling  down  on  his  side  in  the  very 
gate,  and  lying  roaring  on  the  ground,  was  in 
the  way  of  those  that  would  have  got  out. 

Another  of  the  elephants  already  in  the 
town,  called  Nicon,  striving  to  take  up  his 
rider,  who,  after  many  wounds  received,  was 
fallen  off  his  back,  bore  forward  upon  those 
that  were  retreating,  and,  thrusting  upon 
friends  as  well  as  enemies,  tumbled  them  all 
confusedly  upon  one  another,  till  having 
found  the  body,  and  taken  it  up  with  his 
trunk,  he  carried  it  on  his  tusks,  and,  return¬ 
ing  in  a  fury,  trod  down  all  before  him.  Being 
thus  pressed  and  crowded  together,  not  a  man 
could  do  anything  for  himself,  but  being 


332 

wedged,  as  it  were,  together  into  one  mass, 
the  whole  multitude  rolled  and  swayed  this 
way  and  that  altogether,  and  did  very  little 
execution  either  upon  the  enemy  in  their  rear, 
or  on  any  of  them  who  were  intercepted  in 
the  mass,  but  very  much  harm  to  one  another. 
For  he  who  had  either  drawn  his  sword  or 
directed  his  lance  could  neither  restore  it 
again,  nor  put  his  sword  up;  with  these  weap¬ 
ons  they  wounded  their  own  men,  as  they 
happened  to  come  in  the  way,  and  they  were 
dying  by  mere  contact  with  each  other. 

Pyrrhus,  seeing  this  storm  and  confusion  of 
things,  took  off  the  crown  he  wore  upon  his 
helmet,  by  which  he  was  distinguished,  and 
gave  it  to  one  nearest  his  person,  and  trusting 
to  the  goodness  of  his  horse,  rode  in  among 
the  thickest  of  the  enemy,  and  being  wounded 
with  a  lance  through  his  breastplate,  but  not 
dangerously,  nor  indeed  very  much,  he  turned 
about  upon  the  man  who  struck  him,  who 
was  an  Argive,  not  of  any  illustrious  birth, 
but  the  son  of  a  poor  old  woman;  she  was 
looking  upon  the  fight  among  other  women 
from  the  top  of  a  house,  and  perceiving  her 
son  engaged  with  Pyrrhus,  and  affrighted  at 
the  danger  he  was  in,  took  up  a  tile  with  both 
hands  and  threw  it  at  Pyrrhus.  This  falling  on 
his  head  below  the  helmet,  and  bruising  the 
vertebrae  of  the  lower  part  of  the  neck,  stunned 
and  blinded  him;  his  hands  let  go  the  reins, 
and  sinking  down  from  his  horse  he  fell  just 
by  the  tomb  of  Licymnius. 

The  common  soldiers  knew  not  who  it  was; 
but  one  Zopyrus,  who  served  under  Antigo- 
nus,  and  two  or  three  others  running  thither, 
and  knowing  it  was  Pyrrhus,  dragged  him  to 
a  doorway  hard  by,  just  as  he  was  recovering 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

a  little  from  the  blow.  But  when  Zopyrus 
drew  out  an  Illyrian  sword,  ready  to  cut  off 
his  head,  Pyrrhus  gave  him  so  fierce  a  look 
that,  confounded  with  terror,  and  sometimes 
his  hands  trembling  and  then  again  endeav¬ 
ouring  to  do  it,  full  of  fear  and  confusion,  he 
could  not  strike  him  right,  but  cutting  over 
his  mouth  and  chin,  it  was  a  long  time  before 
he  got  off  the  head. 

By  this  time  what  had  happened  was 
known  to  a  great  many,  and  Alcyoneus  has¬ 
tening  to  the  place,  desired  to  look  upon  the 
head,  and  see  whether  he  knew  it,  and  taking 
it  in  his  hand  rode  away  to  his  father,  and 
threw  it  at  his  feet,  while  he  was  sitting  with 
some  of  his  particular  favourites.  Antigonus, 
looking  upon  it,  and  knowing  it,  thrust  his 
son  from  him,  and  struck  him  with  his  staff, 
calling  him  wicked  and  barbarous,  and  cover¬ 
ing  his  eyes  with  his  robe  shed  tears,  thinking 
of  his  own  father  and  grandfather,  instances 
in  his  own  family  of  the  changefulness  of 
fortune,  and  caused  the  head  and  body  of 
Pyrrhus  to  be  burned  with  all  due  solemnity. 

After  this,  Alcyoneus,  discovering  Helenus 
under  a  mean  disguise  in  a  threadbare  coat, 
used  him  very  respectfully,  and  brought  him 
to  his  father.  When  Antigonus  saw  him, 
“This,  my  son,”  said  he,  “is  better;  and  yet 
even  now  you  have  not  done  wholly  well  in 
allowing  these  clothes  to  remain,  to  the  dis¬ 
grace  of  those  who  it  seems  now  are  the  vic¬ 
tors.”  And  treating  Helenus  with  great  kind¬ 
ness,  and  as  became  a  prince,  restored  him  to 
his  kingdom  of  Epirus,  and  gave  the  same 
obliging  reception  to  all  Pyrrhus’s  principal 
commanders,  his  camp  and  whole  army  hav¬ 
ing  fallen  into  his  hands. 


CAIUS  MARIUS 

15  5?— 86  b.c. 


We  are  altogether  ignorant  of  any 
third  name  of  Caius  Marius;  as  also 
of  Quintus  Sertorius,  that  possessed 
himself  of  Spain;  or  of  Lucius  Mummius  that 
destroyed  Corinth,  though  this  last  was  sur- 
named  Achaicus  from  his  conquests,  as  Scipio 
was  called  Africanus,  and  Metellus,  Macedoni- 
cus.  Hence  Posidonius  draws  his  chief  argu¬ 
ment  to  confute  those  that  hold  the  third  to  be 
the  Roman  proper  name,  as  Camillus,  Mar- 


cellus,  Cato;  as  in  this  case,  those  that  had  but 
two  names  would  have  no  proper  name  at  all. 
He  did  not,  however,  observe  that  by  his  own 
reasoning  he  must  rob  the  women  absolutely 
of  their  names;  for  none  of  them  have  the 
first,  which  Posidonius  imagines  the  proper 
name  with  the  Romans.  Of  the  other  two,  one 
was  common  to  the  whole  family,  Pompeii, 
Manlii,  Cornelii  (as  with  us  Greeks,  the  Her- 
aclidae,  and  Pelopidae),  the  other  titular,  and 


CAIUS  MARIUS 

personal,  taken  either  from  their  natures,  or 
actions,  or  bodily  characteristics,  as  Macrinus, 
Torquatus,  Sulla;  such  as  are  Mnemon,  Gry- 
pus,  or  Callinicus  among  the  Greeks.  On  the 
subject  of  names,  however,  the  irregularity  of 
custom,  would  we  insist  upon  it,  might  fur¬ 
nish  us  with  discourse  enough. 

There  is  a  likeness  of  Marius  in  stone  at 
Ravenna,  in  Gaul,  which  I  myself  saw,  quite 
corresponding  with  that  roughness  and  harsh¬ 
ness  of  character  that  is  ascribed  to  him.  Being 
naturally  valiant  and  warlike,  and  more  ac¬ 
quainted  also  with  the  discipline  of  the  camp 
than  of  the  city,  he  could  not  moderate  his 
passion  when  in  authority.  He  is  said  never 
to  have  either  studied  Greek,  or  to  have  use  of 
that  language  in  any  matter  of  consequence; 
thinking  it  ridiculous  to  bestow  time  in  that 
learning,  the  teachers  of  which  were  little  bet¬ 
ter  than  slaves.  So  after  his  second  triumph, 
when  at  the  dedication  of  a  temple  he  pre¬ 
sented  some  shows  after  the  Greek  fashion, 
coming  into  the  theatre,  he  only  sat  down  and 
immediately  departed.  And,  accordingly,  as 
Plato  used  to  say  to  Xenocrates,  the  philoso¬ 
pher,  who  was  thought  to  show  more  than 
ordinary  harshness  of  disposition,  “I  pray  you, 
good  Xenocrates,  sacrifice  to  the  Graces”;  so 
if  any  could  have  persuaded  Marius  to  pay  his 
devotions  to  the  Greek  Muses  and  Graces,  he 
had  never  brought  his  incomparable  actions, 
both  in  war  and  peace,  to  so  unworthy  a  con¬ 
clusion,  or  wrecked  himself,  so  to  say,  upon  an 
old  age  of  cruelty  and  vindictiveness,  through 
passion,  ill-timed  ambition,  and  insatiable  cu¬ 
pidity.  But  this  will  further  appear  by  and  by 
from  the  facts. 

He  was  born  of  parents  altogether  obscure 
and  indigent,  who  supported  themselves  by 
their  daily  labour;  his  father  of  the  same  name 
with  himself,  his  mother  called  Fulcinia.  He 
had  spent  a  considerable  part  of  his  life  before 
he  saw  and  tasted  the  pleasures  of  the  city; 
having  passed  previously  in  Cirrhaeaton,  a  vil¬ 
lage  of  the  territory  of  Arpinum,  a  life,  com¬ 
pared  with  city  delicacies,  rude  and  unrefined, 
yet  temperate,  and  conformable  to  the  ancient 
Roman  severity. 

He  first  served  as  a  soldier  in  the  war 
against  the  Celtiberians,  when  Scipio  Afri- 
canus  besieged  Numantia;  where  he  signalised 
himself  to  his  general  by  courage  far  above  his 
comrades,  and  particularly  by  his  cheerfully 
complying  with  Scipio’s  reformation  of  his 
army,  being  almost  ruined  by  pleasures  and 
luxury.  It  is  stated,  too,  that  he  encountered 


333 

and  vanquished  an  enemy  in  single  combat, 
in  his  general’s  sight.  In  consequence  of  all 
this  he  had  several  honours  conferred  upon 
him;  and  once  when  at  an  entertainment  a 
question  arose  about  commanders,  and  one  of 
the  company  (whether  really  desirous  to 
know,  or  only  in  complaisance)  asked  Scipio 
where  the  Romans,  after  him,  should  obtain 
such  another  general,  Scipio,  gently  clapping 
Marius  on  the  shoulder  as  he  sat  next  him, 
replied,  “Here,  perhaps.”  So  promising  was 
his  early  youth  of  his  future  greatness,  and 
so  discerning  was  Scipio  to  detect  the  distant 
future  in  the  present  first  beginnings. 

It  was  this  speech  of  Scipio,  we  are  told, 
which,  like  a  divine  admonition,  chiefly  em¬ 
boldened  Marius  to  aspire  to  a  political  ca¬ 
reer.  He  sought,  and  by  the  assistance  of  Cae- 
cilius  Metellus,  of  whose  family  he  as  well  as 
his  father  were  dependants,  obtained  the  office 
of  tribune  of  the  people.  In  which  place, 
when  he  brought  forward  a  bill  for  the  regu¬ 
lation  of  voting,  which  seemed  likely  to  lessen 
the  authority  of  the  great  men  in  the  courts 
of  justice,  the  consul  Cotta  opposed  him,  and 
persuaded  the  senate  to  declare  against  the 
law,  and  called  Marius  to  account  for  it.  He, 
however,  when  this  decree  was  prepared, 
coming  into  the  senate,  did  not  behave  like  a 
young  man  newly  and  undeservedly  ad¬ 
vanced  to  authority,  but,  assuming  all  the 
courage  that  his  future  actions  would  have 
warranted,  threatened  Cotta,  unless  he  re¬ 
called  the  decree,  to  throw  him  into  prison. 
And  on  his  returning  to  Metellus,  and  asking 
his  vote,  and  Metellus,  rising  up  to  concur 
with  the  consul,  Marius,  calling  for  the  officer 
outside,  commanded  him  to  take  Metellus 
into  custody.  He  appealed  to  the  other  trib¬ 
unes,  but  not  one  of  them  assisted  him;  so 
that  the  senate,  immediately  complying,  with¬ 
drew  the  decree. 

Marius  came  forth  with  glory  to  the  people 
and  confirmed  his  law,  and  was  henceforth 
esteemed  a  man  of  undaunted  courage  and 
assurance,  as  well  as  a  vigorous  opposer  of 
the  senate  in  favour  of  the  commons.  But  he 
immediately  lost  their  opinion  of  him  by  a 
contrary  action;  for  when  a  law  for  the  dis¬ 
tribution  of  corn  was  proposed,  he  vigorously 
and  successfully  resisted  it,  making  himself 
equally  honoured  by  both  parties,  in  gratify¬ 
ing  neither,  contrary  to  the  public  interest. 

After  his  tribuneship,  he  was  candidate  for 
the  office  of  chief  aedile;  there  being  two  or¬ 
ders  of  them,  one  the  curules,  from  the  stool 


334 

with  crooked  feet  on  which  they  sat  when 
they  performed  their  duty,  the  other  and  in¬ 
ferior,  called  aediles  of  the  people.  As  soon  as 
they  have  chosen  the  former,  they  give  their 
voices  again  for  the  latter.  Marius,  finding  he 
was  likely  to  be  put  by  for  the  greater,  imme¬ 
diately  changed  and  stood  for  the  less;  but 
because  he  seemed  too  forward  and  hot,  he 
was  disappointed  of  that  also.  And  yet  though 
he  was  in  one  day  twice  frustrated  of  his  de¬ 
sired  preferment  (which  never  happened  to 
any  before),  yet  he  was  not  at  all  discour¬ 
aged,  but  a  little  while  after  sought  for  the 
praetorship  and  was  nearly  suffering  a  repulse, 
and  then,  too,  though  he  was  returned  last  of 
all,  was  nevertheless  accused  of  bribery. 

Cassius  Sabaco’s  servant,  who  was  observed 
within  the  rails  among  those  who  voted, 
chiefly  occasioned  the  suspicion,  as  Sabaco 
was  an  intimate  friend  of  Marius;  but  on 
being  called  to  appear  before  the  judges,  he 
alleged,  that  being  thirsty  by  reason  of  the 
heat,  he  called  for  cold  water,  and  that  his 
servant  brought  him  a  cup,  and  as  soon  as  he 
had  drunk,  departed;  he  was,  however,  ex¬ 
cluded  from  the  senate  by  the  succeeding  cen¬ 
sors,  and  not  undeservedly  either,  as  was 
thought,  whether  it  might  be  for  his  false 
evidence,  or  his  want  of  temperance. 

Caius  Herennius  was  also  cited  to  appear 
as  evidence,  but  pleaded  that  it  was  not  cus¬ 
tomary  for  a  patron  (the  Roman  word  for 
protector)  to  witness  against  his  clients,  and 
that  the  law  excused  them  from  that  harsh 
duty;  and  both  Marius  and  his  parents  had 
always  been  clients  to  the  family  of  Herennii. 
And  when  the  judges  would  have  accepted  of 
this  plea,  Marius  himself  opposed  it,  and  told 
Herennius,  that  when  he  was  first  created 
magistrate  he  ceased  to  be  his  client;  which 
was  not  altogether  true.  For  it  is  not  every 
office  that  frees  clients  and  their  posterity 
from  the  observance  due  to  their  patrons,  but 
only  those  to  which  the  law  has  assigned  a 
curule  chair.  Notwithstanding,  though  at  the 
beginning  of  the  suit  it  went  somewhat  hard 
with  Marius,  and  he  found  the  judges  no 
way  favourable  to  him,  yet  at  last,  their  voices 
being  equal,  contrary  to  all  expectation,  he 
was  acquitted. 

In  his  praetorship  he  did  not  get  much  hon¬ 
our,  yet  after  it  he  obtained  the  further  Spain; 
which  province  he  is  said  to  have  cleared  of 
robbers,  with  which  it  was  much  infested,  the 
old  barbarous  habits  still  prevailing,  and  the 
Spaniards,  in  those  days,  still  regarding  rob- 


PLUTARCH  S  LIVES 

bery  as  a  piece  of  valour.  In  the  city  he  had 
neither  riches  nor  eloquence  to  trust  to,  with 
which  the  leading  men  of  the  time  obtained 
power  with  the  people,  but  his  vehement  dis¬ 
position,  his  indefatigable  labours,  and  his 
plain  way  of  living,  of  themselves  gained  him 
esteem  and  influence;  so  that  he  made  an 
honourable  match  with  Julia,  of  the  distin¬ 
guished  family  of  the  Caesars,  to  whom  that 
Caesar  was  nephew  who  was  afterwards  so 
great  among  the  Romans,  and,  in  some  de¬ 
gree,  from  his  relationship,  made  Marius  his 
example,  as  in  his  life  we  have  observed. 

Marius  is  praised  for  both  temperance  and 
endurance,  of  which  latter  he  gave  a  decided 
instance  in  an  operation  of  surgery.  For  hav¬ 
ing,  as  it  seems,  both  his  legs  full  of  great 
tumours,  and  disliking  the  deformity,  he  de¬ 
termined  to  put  himself  into  the  hands  of 
an  operator;  when,  without  being  tied,  he 
stretched  out  one  of  his  legs,  and  silently,  with¬ 
out  changing  countenance,  endured  most  ex¬ 
cessive  torments  in  the  cutting,  never  either 
flinching  or  complaining;  but  when  the  sur¬ 
geon  went  to  the  other,  he  declined  to  have 
it  done,  saying,  “I  see  the  cure  is  not  worth 
the  pain.” 

The  consul  Caecilius  Metellus,  being  de¬ 
clared  general  in  the  war  against  Jugurtha  in 
Africa,  took  with  him  Marius  for  lieutenant; 
where,  eager  himself  to  do  great  deeds  and 
services  that  would  get  him  distinction,  he 
did  not,  like  others,  consult  Metellus’s  glory 
and  the  serving  his  interest,  and  attributing 
his  honour  of  lieutenancy  not  to  Metellus, 
but  to  fortune,  which  had  presented  him  with 
a  proper  opportunity  and  theatre  of  great  ac¬ 
tions,  he  exerted  his  utmost  courage. 

That  war,  too,  affording  several  difficulties, 
he  neither  declined  the  greatest,  nor  disdained 
undertaking  the  least  of  them,  but  surpassing 
his  equals  in  counsel  and  conduct,  and  match¬ 
ing  the  very  common  soldiers  in  labour  and 
abstemiousness,  he  gained  great  popularity 
with  them;  as  indeed  any  voluntary  partak¬ 
ing  with  people  in  their  labour  is  felt  as  an 
easing  of  that  labour,  as  it  seems  to  take  away 
the  constraint  and  necessity  of  it.  It  is  the 
most  obliging  sight  in  the  world  to  the  Ro¬ 
man  soldier  to  see  a  commander  eat  the  same 
bread  as  himself,  or  lie  upon  an  ordinary  bed, 
or  assist  the  work  in  the  drawing  a  trench 
and  raising  a  bulwark.  For  they  do  not  so 
much  admire  those  that  confer  honours  and 
riches  upon  them,  as  those  that  partake  of  the 
same  labour  and  danger  with  themselves;  but 


CAIUS  MARIUS 

love  them  better  that  will  vouchsafe  to  join  in 
their  work,  than  those  that  encourage  their 
idleness. 

Marius  thus  employed,  and  thus  winning 
the  affections  of  the  soldiers,  before  long  filled 
both  Africa  and  Rome  with  his  fame,  and 
some,  too,  wrote  home  from  the  army  that 
the  war  with  Africa  would  never  be  brought 
to  a  conclusion  unless  they  chose  Caius  Ma¬ 
rius  consul.  All  which  was  evidently  unpleas¬ 
ing  to  Metellus;  but  what  more  especially 
grieved  him  was  the  calamity  of  Turpillius. 

This  Turpillius  had,  from  his  ancestors, 
been  a  friend  of  Metellus,  and  kept  up  a  con¬ 
stant  hospitality  with  him,  and  was  now  serv¬ 
ing  in  the  war  in  command  of  the  smiths  and 
carpenters  of  the  army.  Having  the  charge  of 
a  garrison  in  Vaga,  a  considerable  city,  and 
trusting  too  much  to  the  inhabitants,  because 
he  treated  them  civilly  and  kindly,  he  un¬ 
awares  fell  into  the  enemy’s  hands.  They  re¬ 
ceived  Jugurtha  into  the  city;  yet  nevertheless, 
at  their  request,  Turpillius  was  dismissed  safe 
and  without  receiving  any  injury;  whereupon 
he  was  accused  of  betraying  it  to  the  enemy. 
Marius,  being  one  of  the  council  of  war,  was 
not  only  violent  against  him  himself,  but  also 
incensed  most  of  the  others,  so  that  Metellus 
was  forced,  much  against  his  will,  to  put  him 
to  death.  Not  long  after  the  accusation  proved 
false,  and  when  others  were  comforting  Me¬ 
tellus,  who  took  heavily  the  loss  of  his  friend, 
Marius,  rather  insulting  and  arrogating  it  to 
himself,  boasted  in  all  companies  that  he  had 
involved  Metellus  in  the  guilt  of  putting  his 
friend  to  death. 

Henceforward  they  were  at  open  variance; 
and  it  is  reported  that  Metellus  once,  when 
Marius  was  present,  said  insultingly,  “You, 
sir,  design  to  leave  us  to  go  home  and  stand 
for  the  consulship,  and  will  not  be  content  to 
wait  and  be  consul  with  this  boy  of  mine?” 
Metellus’s  son  being  a  mere  boy  at  the  time. 

Yet  for  all  this  Marius  being  very  impor¬ 
tunate  to  be  gone,  after  several  delays,  he  was 
dismissed  about  twelve  days  before  the  elec¬ 
tion  of  consuls;  and  performed  that  long  jour¬ 
ney  from  the  camp  to  the  seaport  of  Utica  in 
two  days  and  a  night,  and  there  doing  sacri¬ 
fice  before  he  went  on  shipboard,  it  is  said 
the  augur  told  him  that  heaven  promised  him 
some  incredible  good  fortune,  and  such  as 
was  beyond  all  expectation.  Marius,  not  a 
little  elated  with  this  good  omen,  began  his 
voyage,  and  in  four  days,  with  a  favourable 
wind,  passed  the  sea;  he  was  welcomed  with 


335 

great  joy  by  the  people,  and  being  brought 
into  the  assembly  by  one  of  the  tribunes,  sued 
for  the  consulship,  inveighing  in  all  ways 
against  Metellus,  and  promising  either  to  slay 
Jugurtha  or  take  him  alive. 

He  was  elected  triumphantly,  and  at  once 
proceeded  to  levy  soldiers  contrary  both  to 
law  and  custom,  enlisting  slaves  and  poor 
people;  whereas  former  commanders  never 
accepted  of  such,  but  bestowed  arms,  like 
other  favours,  as  a  matter  of  distinction,  on 
persons  who  had  the  proper  qualification,  a 
man’s  property  being  thus  a  sort  of  security 
for  his  good  behaviour. 

These  were  not  the  only  occasions  of  ill- 
will  against  Marius;  some  haughty  speeches, 
uttered  with  great  arrogance  and  contempt, 
gave  great  offence  to  the  nobility;  as,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  his  saying  that  he  had  carried  off  the 
consulship  as  a  spoil  from  the  effeminacy  of 
the  wealthy  and  high-born  citizens,  and  tell¬ 
ing  the  people  that  he  gloried  in  wounds  he 
had  himself  received  for  them,  as  much  as 
others  did  in  the  monuments  of  dead  men, 
and  images  of  their  ancestors.  Often  speaking 
of  the  commanders  that  had  been  unfortunate 
in  Africa,  naming  Bestia,  for  example,  and 
Albinus,  men  of  very  good  families,  but  unfit 
for  war,  and  who  had  miscarried  through 
want  of  experience,  he  asked  the  people  about 
him  if  they  did  not  think  that  the  ancestors 
of  these  nobles  had  much  rather  have  left  a 
descendant  like  him,  since  they  themselves 
grew  famous  not  by  nobility,  but  by  their 
valour  and  great  actions. 

This  he  did  not  say  merely  out  of  vanity 
and  arrogance,  or  that  he  were  willing,  with¬ 
out  any  advantage,  to  offend  the  nobility;  but 
the  people  delighting  in  affronts  and  scur¬ 
rilous  contumelies  against  the  senate,  making 
boldness  of  speech  their  measure  of  greatness 
of  spirit,  continually  encouraged  him  in  it, 
and  strengthened  his  inclination  not  to  spare 
persons  of  repute,  so  he  might  gratify  the 
multitude. 

As  soon  as  he  arrived  again  in  Africa, 
Metellus,  no  longer  able  to  control  his  feelings 
of  jealousy,  and  his  indignation  that  now 
when  he  had  really  finished  the  war,  and 
nothing  was  left  but  to  secure  the  person  of 
Jugurtha,  Marius,  grown  great  merely  through 
his  ingratitude  to  him,  should  come  to  be¬ 
reave  him  both  of  his  victory  and  triumph, 
could  not  bear  to  have  any  interview  with 
him;  but  retired  himself,  whilst  Rutilius,  his 
lieutenant,  surrendered  up  the  army  to  Ma- 


336 

rius,  whose  conduct,  however,  in  the  end  of 
the  war,  met  with  some  sort  of  retribution,  as 
Sulla  deprived  him  of  the  glory  of  the  action 
as  he  had  done  Metellus. 

I  shall  state  the  circumstances  briefly  here 
as  they  are  given  at  large  in  the  life  of  Sulla. 
Bocchus  was  king  of  the  more  distant  bar¬ 
barians  and  was  father-in-law  to  Jugurtha, 
yet  sent  him  little  or  no  assistance  in  his  war, 
professing  fears  of  his  unfaithfulness,  and 
really  jealous  of  his  growing  power;  but  after 
Jugurtha  fled,  and  in  his  distress  came  to  him 
as  his  last  hope,  he  received  him  as  a  sup¬ 
pliant,  rather  because  ashamed  to  do  other¬ 
wise  than  out  of  real  kindness;  and  when  he 
had  him  in  his  power,  he  openly  entreated 
Marius  on  his  behalf,  and  interceded  for  him 
with  bold  words,  giving  out  that  he  would 
by  no  means  deliver  him.  Yet  privately  de¬ 
signing  to  betray  him,  he  sent  for  Lucius 
Sulla,  quaestor  to  Marius,  and  who  had  on  a 
previous  occasion  befriended  Bocchus  in  the 
war.  When  Sulla,  relying  on  his  word,  came 
to  him,  the  African  began  to  doubt  and  re¬ 
pent  of  his  purpose,  and  for  several  days  was 
unresolved  with  himself,  whether  he  should 
deliver  Jugurtha  or  retain  Sulla;  at  length  he 
fixed  upon  his  former  treachery,  and  put 
Jugurtha  alive  into  Sulla’s  possession. 

Thus  was  the  first  occasion  given  of  that 
fierce  and  implacable  hostility  which  so  nearly 
ruined  the  whole  Roman  empire.  For  many 
that  envied  Marius  attributed  the  success 
wholly  to  Sulla,  and  Sulla  himself  got  a  seal 
made,  on  which  was  engraved  Bocchus  be¬ 
traying  Jugurtha  to  him,  and  constantly  used 
it,  irritating  the  hot  and  jealous  temper  of 
Marius,  who  was  naturally  greedy  of  distinc¬ 
tion,  and  quick  to  resent  any  claim  to  share 
in  his  glory,  and  whose  enemies  took  care  to 
promote  the  quarrel,  ascribing  the  beginning 
and  chief  business  of  the  war  to  Metellus  and 
its  conclusion  to  Sulla;  that  so  the  people 
might  give  over  admiring  and  esteeming 
Marius  as  the  worthiest  person. 

But  these  envyings  and  calumnies  were  soon 
dispersed  and  cleared  away  from  Marius  by 
the  danger  that  threatened  Italy  from  the  west; 
when  the  city,  in  great  need  of  a  good  com¬ 
mander,  sought  about  whom  she  might  set  at 
the  helm  to  meet  the  tempest  of  so  great  a 
war,  no  one  would  have  anything  to  say  to 
any  members  of  noble  or  potent  families  who 
offered  themselves  for  the  consulship,  and 
Marius,  though  then  absent,  was  elected. 

Jugurtha’s  apprehension  was  only  just 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

known,  when  the  news  of  the  invasion  of  the 
Teutones  and  Cimbri  began.  The  accounts  at 
first  exceeded  all  credit,  as  to  the  number  and 
strength  of  the  approaching  army,  but  in  the 
end  report  proved  much  inferior  to  truth,  as 
they  were  three  hundred  thousand  effective 
fighting  men,  besides  a  far  greater  number  of 
women  and  children.  They  professed  to  be 
seeking  new  countries  to  sustain  these  great 
multitudes,  and  cities  where  they  might  settle 
and  inhabit,  in  the  same  way  as  they  had 
heard  the  Celti  before  them  had  driven  out 
the  Tyrrhenians,  and  possessed  themselves  of 
the  best  part  of  Italy.  Having  had  no  com¬ 
merce  with  the  southern  nations,  and  travel¬ 
ling  over  a  wide  extent  of  country,  no  man 
knew  what  people  they  were,  or  whence  they 
came,  that  thus  like  a  cloud  burst  over  Gaul 
and  Italy;  yet  by  their  grey  eyes  and  the  large¬ 
ness  of  their  stature  they  were  conjectured  to 
be  some  of  the  German  races  dwelling  by  the 
northern  sea;  besides  that,  the  Germans  call 
plunderers  Cimbri. 

There  are  some  that  say  that  the  country  of 
the  Celti,  in  its  vast  size  and  extent,  reaches 
from  the  furthest  sea  and  the  arctic  regions  to 
the  lake  Maeotis  eastward,  and  to  that  part  of 
Scythia  which  is  near  Pontus,  and  that  there 
the  nations  mingle  together;  that  they  did  not 
swarm  out  of  their  country  all  at  once,  or  on 
a  sudden,  but  advancing  by  force  of  arms,  in 
the  summer  season,  every  year,  in  the  course 
of  time  they  crossed  the  whole  continent. 
And  thus,  though  each  party  had  several  ap¬ 
pellations,  yet  the  whole  army  was  called  by 
the  common  name  of  Celto-Scythians. 

Others  say  that  the  Cimmerii,  anciently 
known  to  the  Greeks,  were  only  a  small  part 
of  the  nation,  who  were  driven  out  upon 
some  quarrel  among  the  Scythians,  and  passed 
all  along  from  the  lake  Maeotis  to  Asia,  under 
the  conduct  of  one  Lygdamis;  and  that  the 
greater  and  more  warlike  part  of  them  still 
inhabit  the  remotest  regions  lying  upon  the 
outer  ocean.  These,  they  say,  live  in  a  dark 
and  woody  country  hardly  penetrable  by  the 
sunbeams,  the  trees  are  so  close  and  thick,  ex¬ 
tending  into  the  interior  as  far  as  the  Her- 
cynian  forest;  and  their  position  on  the  earth 
is  under  that  part  of  heaven  where  the  pole 
is  so  elevated  that,  by  the  declination  of  the 
parallels,  the  zenith  of  the  inhabitants  seems 
to  be  but  little  distant  from  it;  and  that  their 
days  and  nights  being  almost  of  an  equal 
length,  they  divide  their  year  into  one  of  each. 
This  was  Homer’s  occasion  for  the  story  of 


CAIUS  MARIUS 

Ulysses  calling  up  the  dead,  and  from  this  re¬ 
gion  the  people,  anciently  called  Cimmerii, 
and  afterwards,  by  an  easy  change,  Cimbri, 
came  into  Italy.  All  this,  however,  is  rather 
conjecture  than  an  authentic  history. 

Their  numbers,  most  writers  agree,  were 
not  less,  but  rather  greater  than  was  reported. 
They  were  of  invincible  strength  and  fierce¬ 
ness  in  their  wars,  and  hurried  into  battle  with 
the  violence  of  a  devouring  flame;  none  could 
withstand  them;  all  they  assaulted  became 
their  prey.  Several  of  the  greatest  Roman  com¬ 
manders  with  their  whole  armies,  that  ad¬ 
vanced  for  the  defence  of  Transalpine  Gaul, 
were  ingloriously  overthrown,  and,  indeed, 
by  their  faint  resistance,  chiefly  gave  them  the 
impulse  of  marching  towards  Rome.  Having 
vanquished  all  they  had  met,  and  found 
abundance  of  plunder,  they  resolved  to  settle 
themselves  nowhere  till  they  should  have 
razed  the  city  and  wasted  all  Italy. 

The  Romans,  being  from  all  parts  alarmed 
with  this  news,  sent  for  Marius  to  undertake 
the  war,  and  nominated  him  the  second  time 
consul,  though  the  law  did  not  permit  any 
one  that  was  absent,  or  that  had  not  waited  a 
certain  time  after  his  first  consulship,  to  be 
again  created.  But  the  people  rejected  all  op- 
posers,  for  they  considered  this  was  not  the 
first  time  that  the  law  gave  place  to  the  com¬ 
mon  interest;  nor  the  present  occasion  less 
urgent  than  that  when,  contrary  to  law,  they 
made  Scipio  consul,  not  in  fear  for  the  de¬ 
struction  of  their  own  city,  but  desiring  the 
ruin  of  that  of  the  Carthaginians. 

Thus  it  was  decided;  and  Marius,  bringing 
over  his  legions  out  of  Africa  on  the  very  first 
day  of  January,  which  the  Romans  count  the 
beginning  of  the  year,  received  the  consulship, 
and  then,  also,  entered  in  triumph,  showing 
Jugurtha  a  prisoner  to  the  people,  a  sight  they 
had  despaired  of  ever  beholding,  nor  could 
any,  so  long  as  he  lived,  have  hoped  to  reduce 
the  enemy  in  Africa;  so  fertile  in  expedients 
was  he  to  adapt  himself  to  every  turn  of  for¬ 
tune,  and  so  bold  as  well  as  subtle.  When,  how¬ 
ever,  he  was  led  in  triumph,  it  is  said  that  he 
fell  distracted,  and  when  he  was  afterwards 
thrown  into  prison,  where  some  tore  off  his 
clothes  by  force,  and  others,  whilst  they  strug¬ 
gled  for  his  golden  earring,  with  it  pulled 
off  the  tip  of  his  ear,  and  when  he  was,  after 
this,  cast  naked  into  the  dungeon,  in  his 
amazement  and  confusion,  with  a  ghastly 
laugh,  he  cried  out,  “O  Hercules!  how  cold 
your  bath  is!”  Here  for  six  days  struggling 


337 

with  hunger,  and  to  the  very  last  minute 
desirous  of  life,  he  was  overtaken  by  the  just 
reward  of  his  villainies. 

In  this  triumph  was  brought,  as  is  stated, 
of  gold  three  thousand  and  seven  pounds’ 
weight,  of  silver  bullion  five  thousand  seven 
hundred  and  seventy-five,  of  money  in  gold 
and  silver  coin  two  hundred  and  eighty-seven 
thousand  drachmas.  After  the  solemnity,  Ma¬ 
rius  called  together  the  senate  in  the  capitol, 
and  entered,  whether  through  inadvertency 
or  unbecoming  exultation  with  his  good  for¬ 
tune,  in  his  triumphal  habit;  but  presently 
observing  the  senate  offended  at  it,  went  out, 
and  returned  in  his  ordinary  purple-bordered 
robe. 

On  the  expedition  he  carefully  disciplined 
and  trained  his  army  whilst  they  were  on 
their  way,  giving  them  practice  in  long 
marches,  and  running  of  every  sort,  and  com¬ 
pelling  every  man  to  carry  his  own  baggage 
and  prepare  his  own  victuals;  insomuch  that 
thenceforward  laborious  soldiers,  who  did 
their  work  silently  without  grumbling,  had 
the  name  of  “Marius’s  mules.”  Some,  how¬ 
ever,  think  the  proverb  had  a  different  occa¬ 
sion;  that  when  Scipio  besieged  Numantia,  and 
was  careful  to  inspect  not  only  their  horses  and 
arms,  but  their  mules  and  carriages  too,  and 
see  how  well  equipped  and  in  what  readiness 
each  one’s  was,  Marius  brought  forth  his  horse 
which  he  had  fed  extremely  well,  and  a  mule 
in  better  case,  stronger  and  gentler  than  those 
of  others;  that  the  general  was  very  well 
pleased,  and  often  afterwards  mentioned  Ma¬ 
rius’s  beasts;  and  that  hence  the  soldiers,  when 
speaking  jestingly  in  the  praise  of  a  drudging 
laborious  fellow,  called  him  Marius’s  mule. 

But  to  proceed;  very  great  fortune  seemed 
to  attend  Marius,  for  by  the  enemy  in  manner 
changing  their  course,  and  falling  first  upon 
Spain,  he  had  time  to  exercise  his  soldiers, 
and  confirm  their  courage,  and,  which  was 
most  important,  to  show  them  what  he  him¬ 
self  was.  For  that  fierce  manner  of  his  in 
command,  and  inexorableness  in  punishing, 
when  his  men  became  used  not  to  do  amiss 
or  disobey,  was  felt  to  be  wholesome  and  ad¬ 
vantageous,  as  well  as  just,  and  his  violent 
spirit,  stern  voice,  and  harsh  aspect,  which  in 
a  little  while  grew  familiar  to  them,  they  es¬ 
teemed  terrible  not  to  themselves,  but  only  to 
their  enemies. 

But  his  uprightness  in  judging  more  espe¬ 
cially  pleased  the  soldiers,  one  remarkable  in¬ 
stance  of  which  is  as  follows.  One  Caius  Lu- 


338 

sius,  his  own  nephew,  had  a  command  under 
him  in  the  army,  a  man  not  in  other  respects 
of  bad  character,  but  shamefully  licentious 
with  young  men.  He  had  one  young  man 
under  his  command  called  Trebonius,  with 
whom  notwithstanding  many  solicitations  he 
could  never  prevail.  At  length  one  night  he 
sent  a  messenger  for  him  and  Trebonius 
came,  as  it  was  not  lawful  for  him  to  refuse 
when  he  was  sent  for,  and  being  brought  into 
his  tent,  when  Lusius  began  to  use  violence 
with  him,  he  drew  his  sword  and  ran  him 
through.  This  was  done  whilst  Marius  was 
absent.  When  he  returned,  he  appointed  Tre¬ 
bonius  a  time  for  his  trial,  where,  whilst 
many  accused  him,  and  not  any  one  appeared 
in  his  defence,  he  himself  boldly  related  the 
whole  matter,  and  brought  witness  of  his  pre¬ 
vious  conduct  to  Lusius,  who  had  frequendy 
offered  him  considerable  presents.  Marius,  ad¬ 
miring  his  conduct  and  much  pleased,  com¬ 
manded  the  garland,  the  usual  Roman  re¬ 
ward  for  valour,  to  be  brought,  and  himself 
crowned  Trebonius  with  it,  as  having  per¬ 
formed  an  excellent  action,  at  a  time  that  very 
much  wanted  such  good  examples. 

This  being  told  at  Rome,  proved  no  small 
help  to  Marius  towards  his  third  consulship; 
to  which  also  conduced  the  expectation  of  the 
barbarians  at  the  summer  season,  the  people 
being  unwilling  to  trust  their  fortunes  with 
any  other  general  but  him.  However,  their 
arrival  was  not  so  early  as  was  imagined,  and 
the  time  of  Marius’s  consulship  was  again 
expired.  The  election  coming  on,  and  his  col¬ 
league  being  dead,  he  left  the  command  of 
the  army  to  Manius  Aquilius,  and  hastened  to 
Rome,  where,  several  eminent  persons  being 
candidates  for  the  consulship,  Lucius  Saturni- 
nus,  who  more  than  any  of  the  other  tribunes 
swayed  the  populace,  and  of  whom  Marius 
himself  was  very  observant,  exerted  his  elo¬ 
quence  with  the  people,  advising  them  to 
choose  Marius  consul.  He  playing  the  modest 
part,  and  professing  to  decline  the  office,  Sa- 
turninus  called  him  traitor  to  his  country  if, 
in  such  apparent  danger,  he  would  avoid 
command.  And  though  it  was  not  difficult  to 
discover  that  he  was  merely  helping  Marius 
in  putting  this  pretence  upon  the  people,  yet, 
considering  that  the  present  juncture  much 
required  his  skill,  and  his  good  fortunes  too, 
they  voted  him  the  fourth  time  consul,  and 
made  Catulus  Lutatius  his  colleague,  a  man 
very  much  esteemed  by  the  nobility  and  not 
unagreeable  to  the  commons. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Marius,  having  notice  of  the  enemy’s  ap¬ 
proach,  with  all  expedition  passed  the  Alps, 
and  pitching  his  camp  by  the  river  Rhone, 
took  care  first  for  plentiful  supplies  of  vict¬ 
uals:  lest  at  any  time  he  should  be  forced  to 
fight  at  a  disadvantage  for  want  of  neces¬ 
saries.  The  carriage  of  provision  for  the  army 
from  the  sea,  which  was  formerly  long  and 
expensive,  he  made  speedy  and  easy.  For  the 
mouth  of  the  Rhone,  by  the  influx  of  the  sea, 
being  barred  and  almost  filled  up  with  sand 
and  mud  mixed  with  clay,  the  passage  there 
became  narrow,  difficult,  and  dangerous  for 
the  ships  that  brought  their  provisions. 
Hither,  therefore,  bringing  his  army,  then  at 
leisure,  he  drew  a  great  trench;  and  by  turn¬ 
ing  the  course  of  a  great  part  of  the  river, 
brought  it  to  a  convenient  point  on  the  shore 
where  the  water  was  deep  enough  to  receive 
ships  of  considerable  burden,  and  where  there 
was  a  calm  and  easy  opening  to  the  sea.  And 
this  still  retains  the  name  it  took  from  him. 

The  enemy  dividing  themselves  into  two 
parts,  the  Cimbri  arranged  to  go  against 
Catulus  higher  up  through  the  country  of  the 
Norici,  and  to  force  that  passage;  the  Teu- 
tones  and  Ambrones  to  march  against  Marius 
by  the  seaside  through  Liguria.  The  Cimbri 
were  a  considerable  time  in  doing  their  part. 
But  the  Teutones  and  Ambrones  with  all  ex¬ 
pedition  passing  over  the  interjacent  country, 
soon  came  in  sight,  in  numbers  beyond  belief, 
of  a  terrible  aspect,  and  uttering  strange  cries 
and  shouts.  Taking  up  a  great  part  of  the 
plain  with  their  camp,  they  challenged  Marius 
to  battle;  he  seemed  to  take  no  notice  of  them, 
but  kept  his  soldiers  within  their  fortification, 
and  sharply  reprehended  those  that  were  too 
forward  and  eager  to  show  their  courage,  and 
who,  out  of  passion,  would  needs  be  fighting, 
calling  them  traitors  to  their  country,  and  tell¬ 
ing  them  they  were  not  now  to  think  of  the 
glory  of  triumphs  and  trophies,  but  rather 
how  they  might  repel  such  an  impetuous 
tempest  of  war  and  save  Italy. 

Thus  he  discoursed  privately  with  his  offi¬ 
cers  and  equals,  but  placed  the  soldiers  by 
turns  upon  the  bulwarks  to  survey  the  enemy, 
and  so  made  them  familiar  with  their  shape 
and  voice,  which  were  indeed  altogether  ex¬ 
travagant  and  barbarous,  and  he  caused  them 
to  observe  their  arms,  and  the  way  of  using 
them,  so  that  in  a  little  time  what  at  first  ap¬ 
peared  terrible  to  their  apprehensions,  by 
often  viewing  became  familiar.  For  he  very 
rationally  supposed  that  the  strangeness  of 


CAIUS  MARIUS 

things  often  makes  them  seem  formidable 
when  they  are  not  so;  and  that  by  our  better 
acquaintance,  even  things  which  are  really 
terrible  lose  much  of  their  frightfulness.  This 
daily  converse  not  only  diminished  some  of 
the  soldiers’  fears,  but  their  indignation 
warmed  and  inflamed  their  courage  when 
they  heard  the  threats  and  insupportable  in¬ 
solence  of  their  enemies;  who  not  only  plun¬ 
dered  and  depopulated  all  the  country  round, 
but  would  even  contemptuously  and  confi¬ 
dently  attack  the  ramparts. 

Complaints  of  the  soldiers  now  began  to 
come  to  Marius’s  ears.  “What  effeminacy  does 
Marius  see  in  us,  that  he  should  thus  like 
women  lock  us  up  from  encountering  our 
enemies?  Come  on,  let  us  show  ourselves 
men,  and  ask  him  if  he  expects  others  to  fight 
for  Italy;  and  means  merely  to  employ  us  in 
servile  offices,  when  he  would  dig  trenches, 
cleanse  places  of  mud  and  dirt,  and  turn  the 
course  of  the  rivers.  It  was  to  do  such  works 
as  these,  it  seems,  that  he  gave  us  all  our  long 
training;  he  will  return  home,  and  boast  of 
these  great  performances  of  his  consulships  to 
the  people.  Does  the  defeat  of  Carbo  and 
Caepio,  who  were  vanquished  by  the  enemy, 
affright  him?  Surely  they  were  much  inferior 
to  Marius  both  in  glory  and  valour,  and  com¬ 
manded  a  much  weaker  army;  at  the  worst, 
it  is  better  to  be  in  action,  though  we  suffer 
for  it  like  them,  than  to  sit  idle  spectators  of 
the  destruction  of  our  allies  and  companions.” 
Marius,  not  a  little  pleased  to  hear  this,  gently 
appeased  them,  pretending  that  he  did  not 
distrust  their  valour,  but  that  he  took  his 
measures  as  to  the  time  and  place  of  victory 
from  some  certain  oracles. 

And,  in  fact,  he  used  solemnly  to  carry 
about  in  a  litter  a  Syrian  woman,  called  Mar¬ 
tha,  a  supposed  prophetess,  and  to  do  sacrifice 
by  her  directions.  She  had  formerly  been 
driven  away  by  the  senate,  to  whom  she  ad¬ 
dressed  herself,  offering  to  inform  them  about 
these  affairs,  and  to  foretell  future  events;  and 
after  this  betook  herself  to  the  women,  and 
gave  them  proofs  of  her  skill,  especially  Ma¬ 
rius’s  wife,  at  whose  feet  she  sat  when  she  was 
viewing  a  contest  of  gladiators,  and  correctly 
foretold  which  of  them  should  overcome.  She 
was  for  this  and  the  like  predictings  sent  by 
her  to  Marius  and  the  army,  where  she  was 
very  much  looked  up  to,  and,  for  the  most  part, 
carried  about  in  a  litter.  When  she  went  to 
sacrifice,  she  wore  a  purple  robe  lined  and 
buckled  up,  and  had  in  her  hand  a  little  spear 


339 

trimmed  with  ribbons  and  garlands.  This  the¬ 
atrical  show  made  many  question  whether  Ma¬ 
rius  really  gave  any  credit  to  her  himself,  or 
only  played  the  counterfeit,  when  he  showed 
her  publicly,  to  impose  upon  the  soldiers. 

What,  however,  Alexander  the  Myndian 
relates  about  the  vultures  does  really  deserve 
admiration;  that  always  before  Marius’s  vic¬ 
tories  there  appeared  two  of  them,  and  ac¬ 
companied  the  army,  which  were  known  by 
their  brazen  collars  (the  soldiers  having 
caught  them  and  put  these  about  their  necks, 
and  so  let  them  go,  from  which  time  they  in 
a  manner  knew  and  saluted  the  soldiers),  and 
whenever  these  appeared  in  their  marches, 
they  used  to  rejoice  at  it,  and  thought  them¬ 
selves  sure  of  some  success. 

Of  the  many  other  prodigies  that  then  were 
taken  notice  of,  the  greater  part  were  but  of 
the  ordinary  stamp;  it  was,  however,  reported 
that  at  Ameria  and  Tuder,  two  cities  in  Italy, 
there  were  seen  at  nights  in  the  sky  flaming 
darts  and  shields,  now  waved  about,  and  then 
again  clashing  against  one  another,  all  in 
accordance  with  the  postures  and  motions 
soldiers  use  in  fighting;  that  at  length  one 
party  retreating,  and  the  other  pursuing,  they 
all  disappeared  westward. 

Much  about  the  same  time  came  Bataces, 
one  of  Cybele’s  priests,  from  Pessinus,  and 
reported  how  the  goddess  had  declared  to  him 
out  of  her  oracle  that  the  Romans  should  ob¬ 
tain  the  victory.  The  senate  giving  credit  to 
him,  and  voting  the  goddess  a  temple  to  be 
built  in  hopes  of  the  victory,  Aulus  Pompeius, 
a  tribune,  prevented  Bataces,  when  he  would 
have  gone  and  told  the  people  this  same  story, 
calling  him  impostor,  and  ignominiously  pull¬ 
ing  him  off  the  hustings;  which  action  in  the 
end  was  the  main  thing  that  gained  credit  for 
the  man’s  story,  for  Aulus  had  scarce  dis¬ 
solved  the  assembly,  and  returned  home,  when 
a  violent  fever  seized  him,  and  it  was  matter 
of  universal  remark,  and  in  everybody’s  mouth, 
that  he  died  within  a  week  after. 

Now  the  Teutones,  whilst  Marius  lay  quiet, 
ventured  to  attack  his  camp;  from  whence, 
however,  being  encountered  with  showers  of 
darts,  and  losing  several  of  their  men,  they 
determined  to  march  forward,  hoping  to  reach 
the  other  side  of  the  Alps  without  opposition, 
and,  packing  up  their  baggage,  passed  securely 
by  the  Roman  camp,  where  the  greatness  of 
their  number  was  especially  made  evident  by 
the  long  time  they  took  in  their  march,  for  they 
were  said  to  be  six  days  continually  going  on  in 


340 

passing  Marius’s  fortifications;  they  marched 
pretty  near,  and  revilingly  asked  the  Romans 
if  they  would  send  any  commands  by  them  to 
their  wives,  for  they  would  shortly  be  with 
them. 

As  soon  as  they  were  passed  and  had  gone 
on  a  little  distance  ahead,  Marius  began  to 
move,  and  follow  them  at  his  leisure,  always 
encamping  at  some  small  distance  from  them; 
choosing  also  strong  positions,  and  carefully 
fortifying  them,  that  he  might  quarter  with 
safety.  Thus  they  marched  till  they  came  to 
the  place  called  Sextilius’s  Waters,  from 
whence  it  was  but  a  short  way  before  being 
amidst  the  Alps,  and  here  Marius  put  himself 
in  readiness  for  the  encounter. 

He  chose  a  place  for  his  camp  of  consider¬ 
able  strength,  but  where  there  was  a  scarcity 
of  water;  designing,  it  is  said,  by  this  means, 
also  to  put  an  edge  on  his  soldiers’  courage; 
and  when  several  were  not  a  little  distressed, 
and  complained  of  thirst,  pointing  to  a  river 
that  ran  near  the  enemy’s  camp,  “There,” 
said  he,  “you  may  have  drink,  if  you  will  buy 
it  with  your  blood.”  “Why,  then,”  replied 
they,  “do  you  not  lead  us  to  them,  before  our 
blood  is  dried  up  in  us?”  He  answered,  in  a 
softer  tone,  “Let  us  first  fortify  our  camp,” 
and  the  soldiers,  though  not  without  repin¬ 
ing,  proceeded  to  obey. 

Now  a  great  company  of  their  boys  and 
camp  followers,  having  neither  drink  for 
themselves  nor  for  their  horses,  went  down  to 
that  river;  some  taking  axes  and  hatchets,  and 
some,  too,  swords  and  darts  with  their  pitch¬ 
ers,  resolving  to  have  water  though  they 
fought  for  it.  These  were  first  encountered  by 
a  small  party  of  the  enemies;  for  most  of 
them  had  just  finished  bathing,  and  were 
eating  and  drinking,  and  several  were  still 
bathing,  the  country  thereabouts  abounding 
in  hot  springs;  so  that  the  Romans  partly  fell 
upon  them  whilst  they  were  enjoying  them¬ 
selves  and  occupied  with  the  novel  sights  and 
pleasantness  of  the  place. 

Upon  hearing  the  shouts,  great  numbers 
still  joining  in  the  fight,  it  was  not  a  little 
difficult  for  Marius  to  contain  his  soldiers, 
who  were  afraid  of  losing  the  camp  servants; 
and  the  more  warlike  part  of  the  enemies, 
who  had  overthrown  Manlius  and  Caepio 
(they  were  called  Ambrones,  and  were  in 
number,  one  with  another,  above  thirty  thou¬ 
sand),  taking  the  alarm,  leaped  up  and  hur¬ 
ried  to  arms. 

These,  though  they  had  just  been  gorging 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

themselves  with  food,  and  were  excited  and 
disordered  with  drink,  nevertheless  did  not 
advance  with  an  unruly  step,  or  in  mere 
senseless  fury,  nor  were  their  shouts  mere  in¬ 
articulate  cries;  but  clashing  their  arms  in 
concert  and  keeping  time  as  they  leapt  and 
bounded  onward,  they  continually  repeated 
their  own  name,  “Ambrones!”  either  to  en¬ 
courage  one  another,  or  to  strike  the  greater 
terror  into  their  enemies. 

Of  all  the  Italians  in  Marius’s  army,  the 
Ligurians  were  the  first  that  charged;  and 
when  they  caught  the  word  of  the  enemy’s 
confused  shout,  they,  too,  returned  the  same, 
as  it  was  an  ancient  name  also  in  their  coun¬ 
try,  the  Ligurians  always  using  it  when  speak¬ 
ing  of  their  descent.  This  acclamation,  ban¬ 
died  from  one  army  to  the  other  before  they 
joined,  served  to  rouse  and  heighten  their 
fury,  while  the  men  on  either  side  strove, 
with  all  possible  vehemence,  the  one  to  over¬ 
shout  the  other. 

The  river  disordered  the  Ambrones;  before 
they  could  draw  up  all  their  army  on  the 
other  side  of  it,  the  Ligurians  presently  fell 
upon  the  van,  and  began  to  charge  them 
hand  to  hand.  The  Romans,  too,  coming  to 
their  assistance,  and  from  the  higher  ground 
pouring  upon  the  enemy,  forcibly  repelled 
them,  and  the  most  of  them  (one  thrusting 
another  into  the  river)  were  there  slain,  and 
filled  it  with  their  blood  and  dead  bodies. 

Those  that  got  safe  over,  not  daring  to  make 
head,  were  slain  by  the  Romans,  as  they  fled 
to  their  camp  and  waggons;  where  the  women 
meeting  them  with  swords  and  hatchets,  and 
making  a  hideous  outcry,  set  upon  those  that 
fled  as  well  as  those  that  pursued,  the  one  as 
traitors,  the  other  as  enemies,  and  mixing 
themselves  with  the  combatants,  with  their 
bare  arms  pulling  away  the  Romans’  shields, 
and  laying  hold  on  their  swords,  endured  the 
wounds  and  slashing  of  their  bodies  to  the 
very  last  with  undaunted  resolution.  Thus  the 
battle  seems  to  have  happened  at  that  river 
rather  by  accident  than  by  the  design  of  the 
general. 

After  the  Romans  were  retired  from  the 
great  slaughter  of  the  Ambrones,  night  came 
on;  but  the  army  was  not  indulged,  as  was 
the  usual  custom,  with  songs  of  victory, 
drinking  in  their  tents,  and  mutual  entertain¬ 
ments  and  (what  is  most  welcome  to  soldiers 
after  successful  fighting)  quiet  sleep,  but  they 
passed  that  night,  above  all  others,  in  fears 
and  alarm. 


CAIUS  MARIUS 

For  their  camp  was  without  either  rampart 
or  palisade,  and  there  remained  thousands 
upon  thousands  of  their  enemies  yet  uncon¬ 
quered;  to  whom  were  joined  as  many  of  the 
Ambrones  as  escaped.  There  were  heard  from 
these  all  through  the  night  wild  bewailings, 
nothing  like  the  sighs  and  groans  of  men,  but 
a  sort  of  wild-beast-like  howling  and  cursing 
joined  with  threats  and  lamentations  rising 
from  the  vast  multitude,  and  echoed  among 
the  neighbouring  hills  and  hollow  banks  of 
the  river. 

The  whole  plain  was  filled  with  hideous 
noise,  insomuch  that  the  Romans  were  not  a 
little  afraid,  and  Marius  himself  was  appre¬ 
hensive  of  a  confused  tumultuous  night  en¬ 
gagement.  But  the  enemy  did  not  stir  either 
this  night  or  the  next  day,  but  were  employed 
in  disposing  and  drawing  themselves  up  to 
the  greatest  advantage. 

Of  this  occasion  Marius  made  good  use; 
for  there  were  beyond  the  enemies  some 
wooded  ascents  and  deep  valleys  thickly  set 
with  trees,  whither  he  sent  Claudius  Marcel- 
lus,  secretly,  with  three  thousand  regular  sol¬ 
diers,  giving  him  orders  to  post  them  in  am¬ 
bush  there,  and  show  themselves  at  the  rear 
of  the  enemies  when  the  fight- was  begun. 

The  others,  refreshed  with  victuals  and 
sleep,  as  soon  as  it  was  day  he  drew  up  before 
the  camp,  and  commanded  the  horse  to  sally 
out  into  the  plain,  at  the  sight  of  which  the 
Teutones  could  not  contain  themselves  till 
the  Romans  should  come  down  and  fight 
them  on  equal  terms,  but  hastily  arming 
themselves,  charged  in  their  fury  up  the 
hillside. 

Marius,  sending  officers  to  all  parts,  com¬ 
manded  his  men  to  stand  still  and  keep  their 
ground;  when  they  came  within  reach,  to 
throw  their  javelins,  then  use  their  swords, 
and  joining  their  shields,  force  them  back; 
pointing  out  to  them  that  the  steepness  of  the 
ground  would  render  the  enemy's  blows  in¬ 
efficient,  nor  could  their  shields  be  kept  close 
together,  the  inequality  of  the  ground  hinder¬ 
ing  the  stability  of  their  footing. 

This  counsel  he  gave  them,  and  was  the 
first  that  followed  it;  for  he  was  inferior  to 
none  in  the  use  of  his  body,  and  far  excelled 
all  in  resolution.  The  Romans  accordingly 
stood  for  their  approach,  and,  checking  them 
in  their  advance  upwards,  forced  them  little 
by  little  to  give  way  and  yield  down  the  hill, 
and  here,  on  level  ground,  no  sooner  had  the 
Ambrones  begun  to  restore  their  van  into  a 


341 

posture  of  resistance,  but  they  found  their 
rear  disordered. 

For  Marcellus  had  not  let  slip  the  opportun¬ 
ity;  but  as  soon  as  the  shout  was  raised  among 
the  Romans  on  the  hills,  he,  setting  his  men 
in  motion,  fell  in  upon  the  enemy  behind,  at 
full  speed,  and  with  loud  cries,  and  routed 
those  nearest  him,  and  they,  breaking  the 
ranks  of  those  that  were  before  them,  filled 
the  whole  army  with  confusion.  They  made 
no  long  resistance  after  they  were  thus  broke 
in  upon,  but  having  lost  all  order,  fled. 

The  Romans,  pursuing  them,  slew  and 
took  prisoners  above  one  hundred  thousand, 
and  possessing  themselves  of  their  spoil,  tents, 
and  carriages,  voted  all  that  was  not  purloined 
to  Marius's  share,  which,  though  so  magnifi¬ 
cent  a  present,  yet  was  generally  thought  less 
than  his  conduct  deserved  in  so  great  a  dan¬ 
ger. 

Other  authors  give  a  different  account,  both 
about  the  division  of  the  plunder  and  the 
number  of  the  slain.  They  say,  however,  that 
the  inhabitants  of  Massilia  made  fences  round 
their  vineyards  with  the  bones,  and  that  the 
ground,  enriched  by  the  moisture  of  the 
putrefied  bodies  (soaked  with  the  rain  of  the 
following  winter),  yielded  at  the  season  a 
prodigious  crop,  and  fully  justified  Archi¬ 
lochus,  who  said,  that  the  fallows  thus  are 
fattened. 

It  is  an  observation,  also,  that  extraordinary 
rains  pretty  generally  fall  after  great  battles; 
whether  it  be  that  some  divine  power  thus 
washes  and  cleanses  the  polluted  earth  with 
showers  from  above,  or  that  moist  and  heavy 
evaporations,  steaming  forth  from  the  blood 
and  corruption,  thicken  the  air,  which  natu¬ 
rally  is  subject  to  alteration  from  the  smallest 
causes. 

After  the  battle,  Marius  chose  out  from 
amongst  the  barbarians'  spoils  and  arms  those 
that  were  whole  and  handsome,  and  that 
would  make  the  greatest  show  in  his  tri¬ 
umph;  the  rest  he  heaped  upon  a  large  pile, 
and  offered  a  very  splendid  sacrifice. 

Whilst  the  army  stood  round  about  with 
their  arms  and  garlands,  himself  attired  (as 
the  fashion  is  on  such  occasions)  in  the  pur¬ 
ple-bordered  robe,  and  taking  a  lighted  torch, 
and  with  both  hands  lifting  it  up  towards 
heaven,  he  was  then  going  to  put  it  to  the 
pile,  when  some  friends  were  espied  with  all 
haste  coming  towards  him  on  horseback. 
Upon  which  every  one  remained  in  silence 
and  expectation. 


342 

They,  upon  their  coming  up,  leapt  of?  and 
saluted  Marius,  bringing  him  the  news  of  his 
fifth  consulship,  and  delivered  him  letters  to 
that  effect.  This  gave  the  addition  of  no  small 
joy  to  the  solemnity;  and  while  the  soldiers 
clashed  their  arms  and  shouted,  the  officers 
again  crowned  Marius  with  a  laurel  wreath, 
and  he  thus  set  fire  to  the  pile,  and  finished 
his  sacrifice. 

But  whatever  it  be  which  interferes  to 
prevent  the  enjoyment  of  prosperity  ever  be¬ 
ing  pure  and  sincere,  and  still  diversifies 
human  affairs  with  the  mixture  of  good  and 
bad,  whether  fortune  or  divine  displeasure,  or 
the  necessity  of  the  nature  of  things,  within 
a  few  days  Marius  received  an  account  of  his 
colleague,  Catulus,  which,  as  a  cloud  in  seren¬ 
ity  and  calm,  terrified  Rome  with  the  appre¬ 
hension  of  another  imminent  storm. 

Catulus,  who  marched  against  the  Cimbri, 
despairing  of  being  able  to  defend  the  passes 
of  the  Alps,  lest,  being  compelled  to  divide 
his  forces  into  several  parties,  he  should 
weaken  himself,  descended  again  into  Italy, 
and  posted  his  army  behind  the  river  Adige; 
where  he  occupied  the  passages  with  strong 
fortifications  on  both  sides  the  river,  and 
made  a  bridge  that  so  he  might  cross  to  the 
assistance  of  his  men  on  the  other  side,  if  so 
be  the  enemy,  having  forced  their  way 
through  the  mountain  passes,  should  storm 
the  fortresses. 

The  barbarians,  however,  came  on  with 
such  insolence  and  contempt  of  their  enemies, 
that  to  show  their  strength  and  courage, 
rather  than  out  of  any  necessity,  they  went 
naked  in  the  showers  of  snow,  and  through 
the  ice  and  deep  snow  climbed  up  to  the  tops 
of  the  hills,  and  from  thence,  placing  their 
broad  shields  under  their  bodies,  let  them¬ 
selves  slide  from  the  precipices  along  their 
vast  slippery  descents. 

When  they  had  pitched  their  camp  at  a 
little  distance  from  the  river,  and  surveyed 
the  passage,  they  began  to  pile  it  up,  giant¬ 
like,  tearing  down  the  neighbouring  hills; 
and  brought  trees  pulled  up  by  the  roots,  and 
heaps  of  earth  to  the  river,  damming  up  its 
course;  and  with  great  heavy  materials  which 
they  rolled  down  the  stream  and  dashed 
against  the  bridge,  they  forced  away  the 
beams  which  supported  it;  in  consequence 
of  which  the  greatest  part  of  the  Roman  sol¬ 
diers,  much  affrighted,  left  the  large  camp 
and  fled. 

Here  Catulus  showed  himself  a  generous 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  noble  general,  in  preferring  the  glory  of 
his  people  before  his  own;  for  when  he  could 
not  prevail  with  his  soldiers  to  stand  to  their 
colours,  but  saw  how  they  all  deserted  them, 
he  commanded  his  own  standard  to  be  taken 
up,  and  running  to  the  foremost  of  those  that 
fled,  he  led  them  forward,  choosing  rather 
that  the  disgrace  should  fall  upon  himself  than 
upon  his  country,  and  that  they  should  not 
seem  to  fly,  but,  following  their  captain,  to 
make  a  retreat. 

The  barbarians  assaulted  and  took  the  fort¬ 
ress  on  the  other  side  the  Adige;  where  much 
admiring  the  few  Romans  there  left,  who  had 
shown  extreme  courage,  and  had  fought 
worthily  of  their  country,  they  dismissed  them 
upon  terms,  swearing  them  upon  their  brazen 
bull,  which  was  afterwards  taken  in  the  bat¬ 
tle,  and  carried,  they  say,  to  Catulus’s  house, 
as  the  chief  trophy  of  victory. 

Thus  falling  in  upon  the  country  destitute 
of  defence,  they  wasted  it  on  all  sides.  Marius 
was  presently  sent  for  to  the  city;  where, 
when  he  arrived,  every  one  supposing  he 
would  triumph,  the  senate,  too,  unanimously 
voting  it,  he  himself  did  not  think  it  con¬ 
venient;  whether  that  he  were  not  willing  to 
deprive  his  soldiers  and  officers  of  their  share 
of  the  glory  or  that,  to  encourage  the  people 
in  this  juncture,  he  would  leave  the  honour 
due  to  his  past  victory  on  trust,  as  it  were,  in 
the  hands  of  the  city  and  its  future  fortune, 
deferring  it  now  to  receive  it  afterwards  with 
the  greater  splendour. 

Having  left  such  orders  as  the  occasion 
required,  he  hastened  to  Catulus,  whose 
drooping  spirits  he  much  raised,  and  sent  for 
his  own  army  from  Gaul;  and  as  soon  as  it 
came,  passing  the  river  Po,  he  endeavoured 
to  keep  the  barbarians  out  of  that  part  of 
Italy  which  lies  south  of  it. 

They  professed  they  were  in  expectation  of 
the  Teutones,  and,  saying  they  wondered  they 
were  so  long  in  coming,  deferred  the  battle; 
either  that  they  were  really  ignorant  of  their 
defeat  or  were  willing  to  seem  so.  For  they 
certainly  much  maltreated  those  that  brought 
them  such  news,  and,  sending  to  Marius,  re¬ 
quired  some  part  of  the  country  for  them¬ 
selves  and  their  brethren,  and  cities  fit  for 
them  to  inhabit. 

When  Marius  inquired  of  the  ambassadors 
who  their  brethren  were,  upon  their  saying 
the  Teutones,  all  that  were  present  began  to 
laugh;  and  Marius  scoffingly  answered  them, 
“Do  not  trouble  yourself  for  your  brethren, 


CAIUS  MARIUS 

for  we  have  already  provided  lands  for  them, 
which  they  shall  possess  forever/’ 

The  ambassadors,  understanding  the  mock¬ 
ery,  broke  into  insults,  and  threatened  that 
the  Cimbri  would  make  him  pay  for  this,  and 
the  Teutones,  too,  when  they  came.  “They 
are  not  far  off,”  replied  Marius,  “and  it  will 
be  unkindly  done  of  you  to  go  away  before 
greeting  your  brethren.” 

Saying  so,  he  commanded  the  kings  of  the 
Teutones  to  be  brought  out,  as  they  were,  in 
chains;  for  they  were  taken  by  the  Sequani 
among  the  Alps,  before  they  could  make  their 
escape.  This  was  no  sooner  made  known  to 
the  Cimbri,  but  they  with  all  expedition  came 
against  Marius,  who  then  lay  still  and 
guarded  his  camp. 

It  is  said  that,  against  this  battle,  Marius 
first  altered  the  construction  of  the  Roman 
javelins.  For  before,  at  the  place  where  the 
wood  was  joined  to  the  iron,  it  was  made  fast 
with  two  iron  pins;  but  now  Marius  let  one 
of  them  alone  as  it  was,  and  pulling  out  the 
other,  put  a  weak  wooden  peg  in  its  place, 
thus  contriving  that  when  it  was  driven  into 
the  enemy’s  shield,  it  should  not  stand  right 
out,  but  the  wooden  peg  breaking,  the  iron 
should  bend,  and  so  the  javelin  should  hold 
fast  by  its  crooked  point  and  drag. 

Bceorix,  King  of  the  Cimbri,  came  with  a 
small  party  of  horse  to  the  Roman  camp,  and 
challenged  Marius  to  appoint  the  time  and 
place  where  they  might  meet  and  fight  for 
the  country.  Marius  answered  that  the  Ro¬ 
mans  never  consulted  their  enemies  when  to 
fight;  however,  he  would  gratify  the  Cimbri 
so  far;  and  so  they  fixed  upon  the  third  day 
after,  and  for  the  place,  the  plain  near  Ver- 
cellae,  which  was  convenient  enough  for  the 
Roman  horse,  and  afforded  room  for  the 
enemy  to  display  their  numbers. 

They  observed  the  time  appointed,  and 
drew  out  their  forces  against  each  other. 
Catulus  commanded  twenty  thousand  three 
hundred,  and  Marius  thirty-two  thousand, 
who  were  placed  in  the  two  wings,  leaving 
Catulus  the  centre.  Sulla,  who  was  present  at 
the  fight,  gives  this  account;  saying,  also,  that 
Marius  drew  up  his  army  in  this  order,  be¬ 
cause  he  expected  that  the  armies  would  meet 
on  the  wings,  since  it  generally  happens  that 
in  such  extensive  fronts  the  centre  falls  back, 
and  thus  he  would  have  the  whole  victory  to 
himself  and  his  soldiers,  and  Catulus  would 
not  be  even  engaged.  They  tell  us,  also,  that 
Catulus  himself  alleged  this  in  vindication  of 


343 

his  honour,  accusing,  in  various  ways,  the 
enviousness  of  Marius. 

The  infantry  of  the  Cimbri  marched  quietly 
out  of  their  fortifications,  having  their  flanks 
equal  to  their  front,  every  side  of  the  army 
taking  up  thirty  furlongs.  Their  horse,  that 
were  in  number  fifteen  thousand,  made  a  very 
splendid  appearance.  They  wore  helmets, 
made  to  resemble  the  heads  and  jaws  of  wild 
beasts,  and  other  strange  shapes,  and  height¬ 
ening  these  with  plumes  of  feathers,  they 
made  themselves  appear  taller  than  they  were. 
They  had  breastplates  of  iron  and  white  glit¬ 
tering  shields;  and  for  their  offensive  arms 
every  one  had  two  darts,  and  when  they  came 
hand  to  hand,  they  used  large  and  heavy 
swords. 

The  cavalry  did  not  fall  directly  upon  the 
front  of  the  Romans,  but,  turning  to  the 
right,  they  endeavoured  to  draw  them  on  in 
that  direction  by  little  and  little,  so  as  to  get 
them  between  themselves  and  their  infantry, 
who  were  placed  in  the  left  wing.  The  Roman 
commanders  soon  perceived  the  design,  but 
could  not  contain  the  soldiers;  for  one  hap¬ 
pening  to  shout  out  that  the  enemy  fled,  they 
all  rushed  to  pursue  them,  while  the  whole 
barbarian  foot  came  on,  moving  like  a  great 
ocean. 

Here  Marius,  having  washed  his  hands,  and 
lifting  them  up  towards  heaven,  vowed  an  hec¬ 
atomb  to  the  gods;  and  Catulus,  too,  in  the 
same  posture,  solemnly  promised  to  consecrate 
a  temple  to  the  “Fortune  of  that  day.”  They 
say,  too,  that  Marius,  having  the  victim  shown 
to  him  as  he  was  sacrificing,  cried  out  with  a 
loud  voice,  “The  victory  is  mine.” 

However,  in  the  engagement,  according  to 
the  accounts  of  Sulla  and  his  friends,  Marius 
met  with  what  might  be  called  a  mark  of  di¬ 
vine  displeasure.  For  a  great  dust  being 
raised,  which  (as  it  might  very  probably  hap¬ 
pen)  almost  covered  both  the  armies,  he, 
leading  on  his  forces  to  the  pursuit,  missed 
the  enemy,  and  having  passed  by  their  array, 
moved,  for  a  good  space,  up  and  down  the 
field;  meanwhile  the  enemy,  by  chance,  en¬ 
gaged  with  Catulus,  and  the  heat  of  the  battle 
was  chiefly  with  him  and  his  men,  among 
whom  Sulla  says  he  was;  adding,  that  the 
Romans  had  great  advantage  of  the  heat  and 
sun  that  shone  in  the  faces  of  the  Cimbri. 

For  they,  well  able  to  endure  cold,  and  hav¬ 
ing  been  bred  up  (as  we  observed  before)  in 
cold  and  shady  countries,  were  overcome  with 
the  excessive  heat;  they  sweated  extremely, 


344 

and  were  much  out  of  breath,  being  forced  to 
hold  their  shields  before  their  faces;  for  the 
battle  was  fought  not  long  after  the  summer 
solstice,  or,  as  the  Romans  reckon,  upon  the 
third  day  before  the  new  moon  of  the  month 
now  called  August,  and  then  Sextilis. 

The  dust,  too,  gave  the  Romans  no  small 
addition  to  their  courage,  inasmuch  as  it  hid 
the  enemy.  For  afar  off  they  could  not  dis¬ 
cover  their  number;  but  every  one  advancing 
to  encounter  those  that  were  nearest  to  them, 
they  came  to  fight  hand  to  hand  before  the 
sight  of  so  vast  a  multitude  had  struck  terror 
into  them.  They  were  so  much  used  to  la¬ 
bour,  and  so  well  exercised,  that  in  all  the 
heat  and  toil  of  the  encounter,  not  one  of 
them  was  observed  either  to  sweat  or  to  be 
out  of  breath;  so  much  so,  that  Catulus  him¬ 
self,  they  say,  recorded  it  in  commendation 
of  his  soldiers. 

Here  the  greatest  part  and  most  valiant  of 
the  enemy  were  cut  to  pieces;  for  those  that 
fought  in  the  front,  that  they  might  not  break 
their  ranks,  were  fast  tied  to  one  another, 
with  long  chains  put  through  their  belts.  But 
as  they  pursued  those  that  fled  to  their  camp, 
they  witnessed  a  most  fearful  tragedy;  the 
women,  standing  in  black  clothes  on  their 
waggons,  slew  all  that  fled,  some  their  hus¬ 
bands,  some  their  brethren,  others  their  fa¬ 
thers;  and  strangling  their  little  children  with 
their  own  hands,  threw  them  under  the 
wheels  and  the  feet  of  the  catde,  and  then 
killed  themselves. 

They  tell  of  one  who  hung  herself  from  the 
end  of  the  pole  of  a  waggon,  with  her  chil¬ 
dren  tied  dangling  at  her  heels.  The  men, 
for  want  of  trees,  tied  themselves,  some  to  the 
horns  of  the  oxen,  others  by  the  neck  to  their 
legs,  that  so  pricking  them  on,  by  the  starting 
and  springing  of  the  beasts,  they  might  be 
torn  and  trodden  to  pieces.  Yet  for  all  they 
thus  massacred  themselves,  above  sixty  thou¬ 
sand  were  taken  prisoners,  and  those  that 
were  slain  were  said  to  be  twice  as  many. 

The  ordinary  plunder  was  taken  by  Ma¬ 
rius’s  soldiers,  but  the  other  spoils,  as  ensigns, 
trumpets,  and  the  like,  they  say,  were  brought 
to  Catulus’s  camp;  which  he  used  for  the  best 
argument  that  the  victory  was  obtained  by  him¬ 
self  and  his  army.  Some  dissensions  arising,  as 
was  natural,  among  the  soldiers,  the  deputies 
from  Parma,  being  then  present,  were  made 
judges  of  the  controversy;  whom  Catulus’s  men 
carried  about  among  their  slain  enemies,  and 
manifestly  showed  them  that  they  were  slain 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

by  their  javelins,  which  were  known  by  the  in¬ 
scriptions,  having  Catulus’s  name  cut  in  the 
wood. 

Nevertheless  the  whole  glory  of  the  action 
was  ascribed  to  Marius,  on  account  of  his 
former  victory,  and  under  colour  of  his  pres¬ 
ent  authority;  the  populace  more  especially 
styling  him  the  third  founder  of  their  city, 
as  having  diverted  a  danger  no  less  threaten¬ 
ing  than  was  that  when  the  Gauls  sacked 
Rome;  and  every  one,  in  their  feasts  and  re¬ 
joicings  at  home  with  their  wives  and  chil¬ 
dren,  made  offerings  and  libations  in  honour 
of  “The  Gods  and  Marius”;  and  would  have 
had  him  solely  have  the  honour  of  both 
the  triumphs.  However,  he  did  not  do  so, 
but  triumphed  together  with  Catulus,  being 
desirous  to  show  his  moderation  even  in 
such  great  circumstances  of  good  fortune; 
besides  he  was  not  a  little  afraid  of  the  sol¬ 
diers  in  Catulus’s  army,  lest,  if  he  should 
wholly  bereave  their  general  of  the  honour, 
they  should  endeavour  to  hinder  him  of  his 
triumph. 

Marius  was  now  in  his  fifth  consulship, 
and  he  sued  for  his  sixth  in  such  a  manner 
as  never  any  man  before  him  had  done,  even 
for  his  first;  he  courted  the  people’s  favour 
and  ingratiated  himself  with  the  multitude 
by  every  sort  of  complaisance;  not  only  dero¬ 
gating  from  the  state  and  dignity  of  his  office, 
but  also  belying  his  own  character,  by  at¬ 
tempting  to  seem  popular  and  obliging,  for 
which  nature  had  never  designed  him.  His 
passion  for  distinction  did,  indeed,  they  say, 
make  him  exceedingly  timorous  in  any  politi¬ 
cal  matters,  or  in  confronting  public  assem¬ 
blies;  and  that  undaunted  presence  of  mind 
he  always  showed  in  battle  against  the  enemy 
forsook  him  when  he  was  to  address  the 
people;  he  was  easily  upset  by  the  most  or¬ 
dinary  commendation  or  dispraise. 

It  is  told  of  him,  that  having  at  one  time 
given  the  freedom  of  the  city  to  one  thousand 
men  of  Camerinum  who  had  behaved  val¬ 
iantly  in  this  war,  and  this  seeming  to  be  ille¬ 
gally  done,  upon  some  one  or  other  calling  him 
to  an  account  for  it,  he  answered,  that  the  law 
spoke  too  softly  to  be  heard  in  such  a  noise  of 
war;  yet  he  himself  appeared  to  be  more  dis¬ 
concerted  and  overcome  by  the  clamour  made 
in  the  assemblies.  The  need  they  had  of  him 
in  time  of  war  procured  him  power  and  dig¬ 
nity;  but  in  civil  affairs,  when  he  despaired  of 
getting  the  first  place,  he  was  forced  to  betake 
himself  to  the  favour  of  the  people,  never  car- 


CAIUS  MARIUS 

ing  to  be  a  good  man  so  that  he  were  hut  a 
great  one. 

He  thus  became  very  odious  to  all  the  no¬ 
bility;  and  above  all,  he  feared  Metellus,  who 
had  been  so  ungratefully  used  by  him,  and 
whose  true  virtue  made  him  naturally  an 
enemy  to  those  that  sought  influence  with  the 
people,  not  by  the  honourable  course,  but  by 
subservience  and  complaisance.  Marius,  there¬ 
fore,  endeavoured  to  banish  him  from  the 
city,  and  for  this  purpose  he  contracted  a  close 
alliance  with  Glaucia  and  Saturninus,  a 
couple  of  daring  fellows,  who  had  the  great 
mass  of  the  indigent  and  seditious  multitude 
at  their  control;  and  by  their  assistance  he  en¬ 
acted  various  laws,  and  bringing  the  soldiers, 
also,  to  attend  the  assembly,  he  was  enabled 
to  overpower  Metellus.  And  as  Rutilius  re¬ 
lates  (in  all  other  respects  a  fair  and  faithful 
authority,  but,  indeed,  privately  an  enemy  to 
Marius),  he  obtained  his  sixth  consulship  by 
distributing  vast  sums  of  money  among  the 
tribes,  and  by  this  bribery  kept  out  Metellus, 
and  had  Valerius  Flaccus  given  him  as  his  in¬ 
strument,  rather  than  his  colleague,  in  the 
consulship.  The  people  had  never  before  be¬ 
stowed  so  many  consulships  on  any  one  man, 
except  on  Valerius  Corvinus  only,  and  he,  too, 
they  say,  was  forty-five  years  between  his  first 
and  last;  but  Marius,  from  his  first,  ran 
through  five  more,  with  one  current  of  good 
fortune. 

In  the  last,  especially,  he  contracted  a  great 
deal  of  hatred,  by  committing  several  gross 
misdemeanours  in  compliance  with  the  de¬ 
sires  of  Saturninus;  among  which  was  the 
murder  of  Nonius,  whom  Saturninus  slew 
because  he  stood  in  competition  with  him  for 
the  tribuneship.  And  when,  afterwards,  Satur¬ 
ninus,  on  becoming  tribune,  brought  forward 
his  law  for  the  division  of  lands,  with  a  clause 
enacting  that  the  senate  should  publicly  swear 
to  confirm  whatever  the  people  should  vote, 
and  not  to  oppose  them  in  anything,  Marius, 
in  the  senate,  cunningly  feigned  to  be  against 
this  provision,  and  said  that  he  would  not 
take  any  such  oath,  nor  would  any  man,  he 
thought,  who  was  wise;  for  if  there  were  no 
ill  design  in  the  law,  still  it  would  be  an  af¬ 
front  to  the  senate  to  be  compelled  to  give  their 
approbation,  and  not  to  do  it  willingly  and 
upon  persuasion. 

This,  he  said,  not  that  it  was  agreeable  to 
his  own  sentiments,  but  that  he  might  entrap 
Metellus  beyond  any  possibility  of  escape.  For 
Marius,  in  whose  ideas  virtue  and  capacity  con- 


345 

sisted  largely  in  deceit,  made  very  little  account 
of  what  he  had  openly  professed  to  the  senate; 
and  knowing  that  Metellus  was  one  of  a  fixed 
resolution,  and,  as  Pindar  has  it,  esteemed 
“truth  the  first  principle  of  heroic  virtue,”  he 
hoped  to  ensnare  him  into  a  declaration  before 
the  senate,  and  on  his  refusing,  as  he  was  sure 
to  do,  afterwards  to  take  the  oath,  he  expected 
to  bring  him  into  such  odium  with  the  people 
as  should  never  be  wiped  off.  The  design  suc¬ 
ceeded  to  his  wish.  As  soon  as  Metellus  had 
declared  that  he  would  not  swear  to  it,  the 
senate  adjourned. 

A  few  days  after,  on  Saturninus  citing  the 
senators  to  make  their  appearance,  and  take 
the  oath  before  the  people,  Marius  stepped 
forth,  amidst  a  profound  silence,  every  one 
being  intent  to  hear  him,  and  bidding  fare¬ 
well  to  those  fine  speeches  he  had  before 
made  in  the  senate,  said,  that  his  back  was 
not  so  broad  that  he  should  think  himself 
bound,  once  for  all,  by  any  opinion  once  given 
on  so  important  a  matter;  he  would  willingly 
swear  and  submit  to  the  law,  if  so  be  it  were 
one,  a  proviso  which  he  added  as  a  mere  cover 
for  his  effrontery. 

The  people,  in  great  joy  at  his  taking  the 
oath,  loudly  clapped  and  applauded  him, 
while  the  nobility  stood  by  ashamed  and 
vexed  at  his  inconstancy;  but  they  submitted 
out  of  fear  of  the  people,  and  all  in  order  took 
the  oath,  till  it  came  to  Metellus’s  turn.  But 
he,  though  his  friends  begged  and  entreated 
him  to  take  it,  and  not  to  plunge  himself 
irrecoverably  into  the  penalties  which  Satur¬ 
ninus  had  provided  for  those  that  should  re¬ 
fuse  it,  would  not  flinch  from  his  resolution, 
nor  swear;  but,  according  to  his  fixed  custom, 
being  ready  to  suffer  anything  rather  than  do 
a  base,  unworthy  action,  he  left  the  Forum, 
telling  those  that  were  with  him  that  to  do  a 
wrong  thing  is  base,  and  to  do  well  where 
there  is  no  danger,  common;  the  good  man’s 
characteristic  is  to  do  so  where  there  is  dan¬ 
ger. 

Hereupon  Saturninus  put  it  to  the  vote, 
that  the  consuls  should  place  Metellus  under 
their  interdict,  and  forbid  him  fire,  water, 
and  lodging.  There  were  enough,  too,  of  the 
basest  of  people  ready  to  kill  him.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  when  many  of  the  better  sort  were  ex¬ 
tremely  concerned,  and  gathered  about  Metel¬ 
lus,  he  would  not  suffer  them  to  raise  a  se¬ 
dition  upon  his  account,  but  with  this  calm 
reflection  left  the  city,  “Either  when  the  pos¬ 
ture  of  affairs  is  mended  and  the  people  re- 


346 

pent,  I  shall  be  recalled,  or  if  things  remain 
in  their  present  condition,  it  will  be  best  to 
be  absent.”  But  what  great  favour  and  honour 
Metellus  received  in  his  banishment,  and  in 
what  manner  he  spent  his  time  at  Rhodes,  in 
philosophy,  will  be  more  fitly  our  subject 
when  we  write  his  life. 

Marius,  in  return  for  this  piece  of  service, 
was  forced  to  connive  with  Saturninus,  now 
proceeding  to  the  very  height  of  insolence 
and  violence,  and  was,  without  knowing  it, 
the  instrument  of  mischief  beyond  endurance, 
the  only  course  of  which  was  through  out¬ 
rages  and  massacres  to  tyranny  and  the  sub¬ 
version  of  the  government.  Standing  in  some 
awe  of  the  nobility,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
eager  to  court  the  commonalty,  he  was  guilty 
of  a  most  mean  and  dishonest  action. 

When  some  of  the  great  men  came  to  him 
at  night  to  stir  him  up  against  Saturninus, 
at  the  other  door,  unknown  to  them,  he  let 
him  in;  then  making  the  same  pretence  of 
some  disorder  of  body  to  both,  he  ran  from 
one  party  to  the  other,  and  staying  at  one 
time  with  them  and  another  with  him,  he 
instigated  and  exasperated  them  one  against 
another. 

At  length  when  the  senate  and  equestrian 
order  concerted  measures  together,  and  openly 
manifested  their  resentment,  he  did  bring  his 
soldiers  into  the  Forum,  and  driving  the  in¬ 
surgents  into  the  capitol,  and  then  cutting 
off  the  conduits,  forced  them  to  surrender  by 
want  of  water.  They,  in  this  distress,  address¬ 
ing  themselves  to  him,  surrendered,  as  it  is 
termed,  on  the  public  faith.  He  did  his  ut¬ 
most  to  save  their  lives,  but  so  wholly  in 
vain,  that  when  they  came  down  into  the 
Forum  they  were  all  basely  murdered. 

Thus  he  had  made  himself  equally  odious 
both  to  the  nobility  and  commons,  and  when 
the  time  was  come  to  create  censors,  though 
he  was  the  most  obvious  man,  yet  he  did 
not  petition  for  it;  but  fearing  the  disgrace 
of  being  repulsed,  permitted  others,  his  in¬ 
feriors,  to  be  elected,  though  he  pleased  him¬ 
self  by  giving  out  that  he  was  not  willing  to 
disoblige  too  many  by  undertaking  a  severe 
inspection  into  their  lives  and  conduct. 

There  was  now  an  edict  preferred  to  recall 
Metellus  from  banishment;  this  he  vigorously, 
but  in  vain,  opposed  both  by  word  and  deed, 
and  was  at  length  obliged  to  desist.  The  peo¬ 
ple  unanimously  voted  for  it;  and  he,  not  able 
to  endure  the  sight  of  Metellus’s  return,  made 
a  voyage  to  Cappadocia  and  Galatia,  giving 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

out  that  he  had  to  perform  the  sacrifices 
which  he  had  vowed  to  Cybele,  but  actuated 
really  by  other  less  apparent  reasons. 

For,  in  fact,  being  a  man  altogether  igno¬ 
rant  of  civil  life  and  ordinary  politics,  he  re¬ 
ceived  all  his  advancement  from  war;  and 
supposing  his  power  and  glory  would  by  little 
and  little  decrease  by  his  lying  quietly  out  of 
action,  he  was  eager  by  every  means  to  excite 
some  new  commotions,  and  hoped  that  by 
setting  at  variance  some  of  the  kings,  and  by 
exasperating  Mithridates,  especially,  who  was 
then  apparently  making  preparations  for  war, 
he  himself  should  be  chosen  general  against 
him,  and  so  furnish  the  city  with  new  matter 
of  triumph,  and  his  own  house  with  the  plun¬ 
der  of  Pontus  and  the  riches  of  its  king. 

Therefore,  though  Mithridates  entertained 
him  with  all  imaginable  attention  and  respect, 
yet  he  was  not  at  all  wrought  upon  or  soft¬ 
ened  by  it;  but  said,  “O  king,  either  endeavour 
to  be  stronger  than  the  Romans,  or  else  quietly 
submit  to  their  commands.”  With  which  he 
left  Mithridates,  who  indeed  had  often  heard 
the  fame  of  the  bold  speaking  of  the  Romans, 
but  now  for  the  first  time  experienced  it. 

When  Marius  returned  again  to  Rome,  he 
built  a  house  close  by  the  Forum,  either,  as  he 
himself  gave  out,  that  he  was  not  willing  his 
clients  should  be  tired  with  going  far,  or 
that  he  imagined  distance  was  the  reason 
why  more  did  not  come.  This,  however,  was 
not  so;  the  real  reason  was,  that,  being  in¬ 
ferior  to  others  in  agreeableness  of  conversa¬ 
tion  and  the  arts  of  political  life,  like  a  mere 
tool  and  implement  of  war,  he  was  thrown 
aside  in  time  of  peace. 

Amongst  all  those  whose  brightness  eclipsed 
his  glory,  he  was  most  incensed  against  Sulla, 
who  had  owed  his  rise  to  the  hatred  which 
the  nobility  bore  Marius;  and  had  made  his 
disagreement  with  him  the  one  principle  of 
his  political  life.  When  Bocchus,  King  of 
Numidia,  who  was  styled  the  associate  of  the 
Romans,  dedicated  some  figures  of  Victory  in 
the  capitol,  and  with  them  a  representation 
in  gold  of  himself  delivering  Jugurtha  to 
Sulla,  Marius  upon  this  was  almost  distracted 
with  rage  and  ambition,  as  though  Sulla  had 
arrogated  this  honour  to  himself,  and  en¬ 
deavoured  forcibly  to  pull  down  these  pres¬ 
ents;  Sulla,  on  the  other  side,  as  vigorously 
resisted  him;  but  the  Social  War,  then  on  a 
sudden  threatening  the  city,  put  a  stop  to  this 
sedition  when  just  ready  to  break  out. 

For  the  most  warlike  and  best-peopled 


CAIUS  MARIUS 

countries  of  all  Italy  formed  a  confederacy 
together  against  Rome,  and  were  within  a 
little  of  subverting  the  empire;  as  they  were 
indeed  strong,  not  only  in  their  weapons  and 
the  valour  of  their  soldiers,  but  stood  nearly 
upon  equal  terms  with  the  Romans  as  to  the 
skill  and  daring  of  their  commanders. 

As  much  glory  and  power  as  this  war,  so 
various  in  its  events  and  so  uncertain  as  to  its 
success,  conferred  upon  Sulla,  so  much  it  took 
away  from  Marius,  who  was  thought  tardy, 
unenterprising  and  timid,  whether  it  were 
that  his  age  was  now  quenching  his  former 
heat  and  vigour  (for  he  was  above  sixty-five 
years  old),  or  that  having,  as  he  himself  said, 
some  distemper  that  affected  his  muscles,  and 
his  body  being  unfit  for  action,  he  did  service 
above  his  strength.  Yet,  for  all  this,  he  came 
off  victor  in  a  considerable  battle,  wherein  he 
slew  six  thousand  of  the  enemies,  and  never 
once  gave  them  any  advantage  over  him;  and 
when  he  was  surrounded  by  the  works  of  the 
enemy,  he  contained  himself,  and  though  in¬ 
sulted  over,  and  challenged,  did  not  yield  to 
the  provocation. 

The  story  is  told  that  when  Publius  Silo,  a 
man  of  the  greatest  repute  and  authority 
among  the  enemies,  said  to  him,  “If  you  are 
indeed  a  great  general,  Marius,  leave  your 
camp  and  fight  a  battle,”  he  replied,  “If  you 
are  one,  make  me  do  so.”  And  another  time, 
when  the  enemy  gave  them  a  good  opportunity 
of  a  battle,  and  the  Romans  through  fear  durst 
not  charge,  so  that  both  parties  retreated,  he 
called  an  assembly  of  his  soldiers,  and  said,  “It 
is  no  small  question  whether  I  should  call  the 
enemies  or  you  the  greater  cowards,  for  nei¬ 
ther  did  they  dare  to  face  your  backs,  nor  you 
to  confront  theirs.”  At  length,  professing  to  be 
worn  out  with  the  infirmity  of  his  body,  he 
laid  down  his  command. 

Afterwards  when  the  Italians  were  worsted, 
there  were  several  candidates  suing  with  the 
aid  of  the  popular  leaders  for  the  chief  com¬ 
mand  in  the  war  with  Mithridates.  Sulpicius, 
tribune  of  the  people,  a  bold  and  confident 
man,  contrary  to  everybody’s  expectation, 
brought  forward  Marius,  and  proposed  him 
as  proconsul  and  general  in  that  war. 

The  people  were  divided;  some  were  on  Ma¬ 
rius’s  side,  others  voted  for  Sulla,  and  jeeringly 
bade  Marius  go  to  the  baths  at  Baiae,  to  cure 
his  body,  worn  out,  as  himself  confessed,  with 
age  and  catarrhs.  Marius  had  indeed,  there, 
about  Misenum,  a  villa  more  effeminately  and 
luxuriously  furnished  than  seemed  to  become 


347 

one  that  had  seen  service  in  so  many  and  great 
wars  and  expeditions.  This  same  house  Cor¬ 
nelia  bought  for  seventy-five  thousand  drach¬ 
mas,  and  not  long  after  Lucius  Lucullus,  for 
two  million  five  hundred  thousand;  so  rapid 
and  so  great  was  the  growth  of  Roman  sump¬ 
tuousness. 

Yet,  in  spite  of  all  this,  out  of  a  mere  boy¬ 
ish  passion  for  distinction,  affecting  to  shake 
off  his  age  and  weakness,  he  went  down  daily 
to  the  Campus  Martius,  and  exercising  him¬ 
self  with  the  youth,  showed  himself  still  nim¬ 
ble  in  his  armour,  and  expert  in  riding; 
though  he  was  undoubtedly  grown  bulky  in 
his  old  age,  and  inclining  to  excessive  faint¬ 
ness  and  corpulency. 

Some  people  were  pleased  with  this,  and 
went  continually  to  see  him  competing  and 
displaying  himself  in  these  exercises;  but  the 
better  sort  that  saw  him  pitied  the  cupidity 
and  ambition  that  made  one  who  had  risen 
from  utter  poverty  to  extreme  wealth,  and  out 
of  nothing  into  greatness,  unwilling  to  admit 
any  limit  to  his  high  fortune,  or  to  be  content 
with  being  admired,  and  quietly  enjoying 
what  he  had  already  got.  Why,  as  if  he  still 
were  indigent,  should  he  at  so  great  an  age 
leave  his  glory  and  his  triumphs  to  go  into 
Cappadocia  and  the  Euxine  Sea,  to  fight  Ar- 
chelaus  and  Neoptolemus,  Mithridates’s  gener¬ 
als?  Marius’s  pretences  for  this  action  of  his 
seemed  very  ridiculous,  for  he  said  he  wanted 
to  go  and  teach  his  son  to  be  a  general. 

The  condition  of  the  city,  which  had  long 
been  unsound  and  diseased,  became  hopeless 
now  that  Marius  found  so  opportune  an  in¬ 
strument  for  the  public  destruction  as  Sulpi- 
cius’s  insolence.  This  man  professed,  in  all 
other  respects,  to  admire  and  imitate  Saturni- 
nus;  only  he  found  fault  with  him  for  back¬ 
wardness  and  want  of  spirit  in  his  designs. 
He,  therefore,  to  avoid  this  fault,  got  six  hun¬ 
dred  of  the  equestrian  order  about  him  as  his 
guard,  whom  he  named  anti-senators;  and 
with  these  confederates  he  set  upon  the  con¬ 
suls,  whilst  they  were  at  the  assembly,  and 
took  the  son  of  one  of  them  who  fled  from  the 
Forum  and  slew  him. 

Sulla,  being  hotly  pursued,  took  refuge  in 
Marius’s  house,  which  none  could  suspect,  by 
that  means  escaping  those  that  sought  him, 
who  hastily  passed  by  there,  and,  it  is  said, 
was  safely  conveyed  by  Marius  himself  out  at 
the  other  door,  and  came  to  the  camp.  Yet 
Sulla,  in  his  memoirs,  positively  denies  that  he 
fled  to  Marius,  saying  he  was  carried  thither  to 


348 

consult  upon  the  matters  to  which  Sulpicius 
would  have  forced  him,  against  his  will,  to 
consent;  that  he,  surrounding  him  with  drawn 
swords,  hurried  him  to  Marius,  and  con¬ 
strained  him  thus,  till  he  went  thence  to  the 
Forum  and  removed,  as  they  required  him  to 
do,  the  interdict  on  business. 

Sulpicius,  having  thus  obtained  the  mas¬ 
tery,  decreed  the  command  of  the  army  to 
Marius,  who  proceeded  to  make  preparations 
for  his  march,  and  sent  two  tribunes  to  receive 
the  charge  of  the  army  from  Sulla.  Sulla  here¬ 
upon  exasperating  his  soldiers,  who  were 
about  thirty-five  thousand  full-armed  men,  led 
them  towards  Rome.  First  falling  upon  the 
tribunes  Marius  had  sent,  they  slew  them;  Ma¬ 
rius  having  done  as  much  for  several  of  Sulla’s 
friends  in  Rome,  and  now  offering  their  free¬ 
dom  to  the  slaves  on  condition  of  their  assist¬ 
ance  in  the  war;  of  whom,  however,  they  say, 
there  were  but  three  who  accepted  his  proposal. 

For  some  small  time  he  made  head  against 
Sulla’s  assault,  but  was  soon  overpowered  and 
fled;  those  that  were  with  him,  as  soon  as  he 
had  escaped  out  of  the  city,  were  dispersed, 
and  night  coming  on,  he  hastened  to  a  coun¬ 
try-house  of  his,  called  Solonium.  Hence  he 
sent  his  son  to  some  neighbouring  farms  of 
his  father-in-law,  Mucius,  to  provide  necessa¬ 
ries;  he  went  himself  to  Ostia,  where  his 
friend,  Numerius,  had  prepared  him  a  ship, 
and  hence,  not  staying  for  his  son,  he  took 
with  him  his  son-in-law,  Granius,  and  weighed 
anchor. 

Young  Marius,  coming  to  Mucius’s  farms, 
made  his  preparations;  and  the  day  breaking, 
was  almost  discovered  by  the  enemy.  For  there 
came  thither  a  party  of  horse  that  suspected 
some  such  matter;  but  the  farm  steward,  fore¬ 
seeing  their  approach,  hid  Marius  in  a  cart 
full  of  beans,  then  yoking  in  his  team  and 
driving  toward  the  city,  met  those  that  were 
in  search  of  him.  Marius,  thus  conveyed  home 
to  his  wife,  took  with  him  some  necessaries, 
and  came  at  night  to  the  seaside;  where,  going 
on  board  a  ship  that  was  bound  for  Africa,  he 
went  away  thither. 

Marius,  the  father,  when  he  had  put  to  sea, 
with  a  strong  gale  passing  along  the  coast  of 
Italy,  was  in  no  small  apprehension  of  one 
Geminius,  a  great  man  at  Terracina,  and  his 
enemy;  and  therefore  bade  the  seamen  hold 
off  from  that  place.  They  were  indeed  willing 
to  gratify  him,  but  the  wind  now  blowing  in 
from  the  sea  and  making  the  waves  swell  to 
a  great  height,  they  were  afraid  the  ship  would 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

not  be  able  to  weather  out  the  storm,  and  Ma¬ 
rius,  too,  being  indisposed  and  sea-sick,  they 
made  for  land,  and  not  without  some  difficulty 
reached  the  shore  near  Circeium. 

The  storm  now  increasing  and  their  vict¬ 
uals  failing,  they  left  their  ship,  and  wandered 
up  and  down  without  any  certain  purpose, 
simply  as  in  great  distresses  people  shun  the 
present  as  the  greatest  evil,  and  rely  upon  the 
hopes  of  uncertainties.  For  the  land  and  sea 
were  both  equally  unsafe  for  them;  it  was 
dangerous  to  meet  with  people,  and  it  was  no 
less  so  to  meet  with  none,  on  account  of  their 
want  of  necessaries. 

At  length,  though  late,  they  lighted  upon  a 
few  poor  shepherds,  that  had  not  anything  to 
relieve  them;  but  knowing  Marius,  advised 
him  to  depart  as  soon  as  might  be,  for  they 
had  seen  a  little  beyond  that  place  a  party  of 
horse  that  were  gone  in  search  of  him.  Find¬ 
ing  himself  in  a  great  strait,  especially  because 
those  that  attended  him  were  not  able  to  go 
further,  being  spent  with  their  long  fasting, 
for  the  present  he  turned  aside  out  of  the 
road,  and  hid  himself  in  a  thick  wood,  where 
he  passed  the  night  in  great  wretchedness. 
The  next  day,  pinched  with  hunger,  and  will¬ 
ing  to  make  use  of  the  little  strength  he  had, 
before  it  were  all  exhausted,  he  travelled  by 
the  seaside,  encouraging  his  companions  not 
to  fall  away  from  him  before  the  fulfillment 
of  his  final  hopes,  for  which,  in  reliance  on 
some  old  predictions,  he  professed  to  be  sus¬ 
taining  himself. 

For  when  he  was  yet  but  very  young,  and 
lived  in  the  country,  he  caught  in  the  skirt  of 
his  garment  an  eagle’s  nest,  as  it  was  falling,  in 
which  were  seven  young  ones,  which  his  par¬ 
ents  seeing  and  much  admiring,  consulted  the 
augurs  about  it,  who  told  them  he  should  be¬ 
come  the  greatest  man  in  the  world,  and  that 
the  fates  had  decreed  he  should  seven  times 
be  possessed  of  the  supreme  power  and  author¬ 
ity. 

Some  are  of  opinion  that  this  really  hap¬ 
pened  to  Marius,  as  we  have  related  it;  others 
say,  that  those  who  then  and  through  the  rest 
of  his  exile  heard  him  tell  these  stories,  and 
believed  him,  have  merely  repeated  a  story 
that  is  altogether  fabulous;  for  an  eagle  never 
hatches  more  than  two;  and  even  Musaeus  was 
deceived,  who,  speaking  of  the  eagle,  says 
that — 

She  lays  three  eggs,  hatches  two,  and  rears  one. 
However  this  be,  it  is  certain  Marius,  in  his 


CAIUS  MARIUS 

exile  and  greatest  extremities,  would  often  say 
that  he  should  attain  a  seventh  consulship. 

When  Marius  and  his  company  were  now 
about  twenty  furlongs  distant  from  Minturnae, 
a  city  in  Italy,  they  espied  a  troop  of  horse 
making  up  toward  them  with  all  speed,  and 
by  chance,  also,  at  the  same  time,  two  ships 
under  sail.  Accordingly,  they  ran  every  one 
with  what  speed  and  strength  they  could  to  the 
sea,  and  plunging  into  it  swam  to  the  ships. 
Those  that  were  with  Granius,  reaching  one  of 
them,  passed  over  to  an  island  opposite,  called 
JE naria;  Marius  himself,  whose  body  was 
heavy  and  unwieldy,  was  with  great  pains  and 
difficulty  kept  above  the  water  by  two  servants, 
and  put  into  the  other  ship. 

The  soldiers  were  by  this  time  come  to  the 
seaside,  and  from  thence  called  out  to  the  sea¬ 
men  to  put  to  shore,  or  else  to  throw  out 
Marius,  and  then  they  might  go  whither  they 
would.  Marius  besought  them  with  tears  to 
the  contrary,  and  the  masters  of  the  ship,  after 
frequent  changes,  in  a  short  space  of  time,  of 
their  purpose,  inclining  first  to  one,  then  to 
the  other  side,  resolved  at  length  to  answer  the 
soldiers  that  they  would  not  give  up  Marius. 

As  soon  as  they  had  ridden  off  in  a  rage, 
the  seamen,  again  changing  their  resolution, 
came  to  land,  and  casting  anchor  at  the  mouth 
of  the  river  Liris,  where  it  overflows  and 
makes  a  marsh,  they  advised  him  to  land,  re¬ 
fresh  himself  on  shore,  and  take  some  care  of 
his  discomposed  body,  till  the  wind  came  fair¬ 
er;  which,  said  they,  will  happen  at  such  an 
hour,  when  the  wind  from  the  sea  will  calm, 
and  that  from  the  marshes  rise. 

Marius,  following  their  advice,  did  so,  and 
when  the  seamen  had  set  him  on  shore,  he 
laid  him  down  in  an  adjacent  field,  suspect¬ 
ing  nothing  less  than  what  was  to  befall  him. 
They,  as  soon  as  they  had  got  into  the  ship, 
weighed  anchor  and  departed,  as  thinking  it 
neither  honourable  to  deliver  Marius  into  the 
hands  of  those  that  sought  him,  nor  safe  to 
protect  him. 

He  thus,  deserted  by  all,  lay  a  good  while 
silently  on  the  shore;  at  length  collecting  him¬ 
self,  he  advanced  with  pain  and  difficulty, 
without  any  path,  till,  wading  through  deep 
bogs  and  ditches  full  of  water  and  mud,  he 
came  upon  the  hut  of  an  old  man  that  worked 
in  the  fens,  and  falling  at  his  feet  besought 
him  to  assist  and  preserve  one  who,  if  he  es¬ 
caped  the  present  danger,  would  make  him 
returns  beyond  his  expectation.  The  poor  man, 
whether  he  had  formerly  known  him,  or  was 


349 

then  moved  with  his  superior  aspect,  told  him 
that  if  he  wanted  only  rest  his  cottage  would 
be  convenient;  but  if  he  were  fleeing  from  any¬ 
body’s  search,  he  would  hide  him  in  a  more 
retired  place.  Marius  desiring  him  to  do  so, 
he  carried  him  into  the  fens  and  bade  him 
hide  himself  in  an  hollow  place  by  the  river¬ 
side,  where  he  laid  upon  him  a  great  many 
reeds,  and  other  things  that  were  light,  and 
would  cover,  but  not  oppress  him. 

But  within  a  very  short  time  he  was  dis¬ 
turbed  with  a  noise  and  tumult  from  the  cot¬ 
tage,  for  Geminius  had  sent  several  from  Ter- 
racina  in  pursuit  of  him;  some  of  whom  hap¬ 
pening  to  come  that  way,  frightened  and 
threatened  the  old  man  for  having  enter¬ 
tained  and  hid  an  enemy  of  the  Romans. 
Whereupon  Marius,  arising  and  stripping 
himself,  plunged  into  a  puddle  full  of  thick 
muddy  water;  and  even  there  he  could  not  es¬ 
cape  their  search,  but  was  pulled  out  covered 
with  mire,  and  carried  away  naked  to  Min- 
turnae  and  delivered  to  the  magistrates.  For 
there  had  been  orders  sent  through  all  the 
towns  to  make  public  search  for  Marius,  and 
if  they  found  him  to  kill  him;  however,  the 
magistrates  thought  convenient  to  consider  a 
little  better  of  it  first,  and  sent  him  prisoner  to 
the  house  of  one  Fannia. 

This  woman  was  supposed  not  very  well 
affected  towards  him  upon  an  old  account. 
One  Tinnius  had  formerly  married  this  Fan¬ 
nia;  from  whom  she  afterwards,  being  di¬ 
vorced,  demanded  her  portion,  which  was 
considerable,  but  her  husband  accused  her  of 
adultery;  so  the  controversy  was  brought  be¬ 
fore  Marius  in  his  sixth  consulship.  When  the 
case  was  examined  thoroughly,  it  appeared 
both  that  Fannia  had  been  incontinent,  and 
that  her  husband,  knowing  her  to  be  so,  had 
married  and  lived  a  considerable  time  with 
her.  So  that  Marius  was  severe  enough  with 
both,  commanding  him  to  restore  her  portion, 
and  laying  a  fine  of  four  copper  coins  upon 
her  by  way  of  disgrace. 

But  Fannia  did  not  then  behave  like  a  wom¬ 
an  that  had  been  injured,  but  as  soon  as  she 
saw  Marius,  remembered  nothing  less  than 
old  affronts;  took  care  of  him  according  to  her 
ability,  and  comforted  him.  He  made  her  his 
returns  and  told  her  he  did  not  despair,  for  he 
had  met  with  a  lucky  omen,  which  was  thus. 
When  he  was  brought  to  Fannia’s  house,  as 
soon  as  the  gate  was  opened,  an  ass  came  run¬ 
ning  out  to  drink  at  a  spring  hard  by,  and 
giving  a  bold  and  encouraging  look,  first 


350 

stood  still  before  him,  then  brayed  aloud  and 
pranced  by  him.  From  which  Marius  drew  his 
conclusion,  and  said,  that  the  fates  designed 
his  safety,  rather  by  sea  than  land,  because  the 
ass  neglected  his  dry  fodder,  and  turned  from 
it  to  the  water.  Having  told  Fannia  this  story, 
he  bade  the  chamber  door  to  be  shut  and  went 
to  rest. 

Meanwhile,  the  magistrates  and  councillors 
of  Minturnae  consulted  together,  and  deter¬ 
mined  not  to  delay  any  longer,  but  immedi¬ 
ately  to  kill  Marius;  and  when  none  of  their 
citizens  durst  undertake  the  business,  a  cer¬ 
tain  soldier,  a  Gaulish  or  Cimbrian  horseman 
(the  story  is  told  both  ways),  went  in  with 
his  sword  drawn  to  him.  The  room  itself  was 
not  very  light,  that  part  of  it  especially  where 
he  then  lay  was  dark,  from  whence  Marius’s 
eyes,  they  say,  seemed  to  the  fellow  to  dart  out 
flames  at  him,  and  a  loud  voice  to  say,  out  of 
the  dark,  “Fellow,  darest  thou  kill  Caius 
Marius?” 

The  barbarian  hereupon  immediately  fled, 
and  leaving  his  sword  in  the  place,  rushed 
out  of  doors,  crying  only  this,  “I  cannot  kill 
Caius  Marius.”  At  which  they  were  all  at  first 
astonished,  and  presently  began  to  feel  pity, 
and  remorse,  and  anger  at  themselves  for  mak¬ 
ing  so  unjust  and  ungrateful  a  decree  against 
one  who  had  preserved  Italy,  and  whom  it 
was  bad  enough  not  to  assist.  “Let  him  go,” 
said  they,  “where  he  please  to  banishment, 
and  find  his  fate  somewhere  else;  we  only  en¬ 
treat  pardon  of  the  gods  for  thrusting  Marius 
distressed  and  deserted  out  of  our  city.” 

Impelled  by  thoughts  of  this  kind,  they 
went  in  a  body  into  the  room,  and  taking  him 
amongst  them,  conducted  him  towards  the 
seaside;  on  his  way  to  which,  though  every 
one  was  very  officious  to  him,  and  all  made 
what  haste  they  could,  yet  a  considerable  time 
was  likely  to  be  lost.  For  the  grove  of  Marica 
(as  she  is  called),  which  the  people  hold  sa¬ 
cred  and  make  it  a  point  of  religion  not  to  let 
anything  that  is  once  carried  into  it  be  taken 
out,  lay  just  in  their  road  to  the  sea,  and  if 
they  should  go  round  about,  they  must  needs 
come  very  late  thither.  At  length  one  of  the 
old  men  cried  out  and  said,  there  was  no  place 
so  sacred  but  they  might  pass  through  it  for 
Marius’s  preservation;  and  thereupon,  first  of 
all,  he  himself,  taking  up  some  of  the  baggage 
that  was  carried  for  his  accommodation  to  the 
ship,  passed  through  the  grove,  all  the  rest 
immediately,  with  the  same  readiness,  accom¬ 
panying  him. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

And  one  Belaeus  (who  afterwards  had  a  pic¬ 
ture  of  these  things  drawn,  and  put  it  in  a 
temple  at  the  place  of  embarkation),  having 
by  this  time  provided  him  a  ship,  Marius 
went  on  board,  and  hoisting  sail,  was  by  for¬ 
tune  thrown  upon  the  island  ALnaria,  where 
meeting  with  Granius,  and  his  other  friends, 
he  sailed  with  them  for  Africa.  But  their  wa¬ 
ter  failing  them  in  the  way,  they  were  forced 
to  put  in  near  Eryx,  in  Sicily,  where  was  a 
Roman  quaestor  on  the  watch,  who  all  but 
captured  Marius  himself  on  his  landing,  and 
did  kill  sixteen  of  his  retinue  that  went  to 
fetch  water.  Marius,  with  all  expedition  loos¬ 
ing  thence,  crossed  the  sea  to  the  isle  of  Me- 
ninx,  where  he  first  heard  the  news  of  his 
son’s  escape  with  Cethegus,  and  of  his  going 
to  implore  the  assistance  of  Hiempsal,  King 
of  Numidia. 

With  this  news,  being  somewhat  comforted, 
he  ventured  to  pass  from  that  isle  towards 
Carthage.  Sextilius,  a  Roman,  was  then  gov¬ 
ernor  in  Africa;  one  that  had  never  received 
either  any  injury  or  any  kindness  from  Ma¬ 
rius;  but  who  from  compassion,  it  was  hoped, 
might  lend  him  some  help.  But  he  was  scarce 
got  ashore  with  a  small  retinue  when  an  offi¬ 
cer  met  him,  and  said,  “Sextilius,  the  gover¬ 
nor,  forbids  you,  Marius,  to  set  foot  in  Africa; 
if  you  do,  he  says  he  will  put  the  decree  of  the 
senate  in  execution,  and  treat  you  as  an  enemy 
to  the  Romans.” 

When  Marius  heard  this,  he  wanted  words 
to  express  his  grief  and  resentment,  and  for  a 
good  while  held  his  peace,  looking  sternly 
upon  the  messenger,  who  asked  him  what  he 
should  say,  or  what  answer  he  should  return 
to  the  governor.  Marius  answered  him  with 
a  deep  sigh:  “Go  tell  him  that  you  have  seen 
Caius  Marius  sitting  in  exile  among  the  ruins 
of  Carthage”;  appositely  applying  the  exam¬ 
ple  of  the  fortune  of  that  city  to  the  change  of 
his  own  condition. 

In  the  interim,  Hiempsal,  King  of  Numid¬ 
ia,  dubious  of  what  he  should  determine  to 
do,  treated  young  Marius  and  those  that  were 
with  him  very  honourably;  but  when  they  had 
a  mind  to  depart,  he  still  had  some  pretence 
or  other  to  detain  them,  and  it  was  manifest 
he  made  these  delays  upon  no  good  design. 
However,  there  happened  an  accident  that 
made  well  for  their  preservation. 

The  hard  fortune  which  attended  young 
Marius,  who  was  of  a  comely  aspect,  touched 
one  of  the  king’s  concubines,  and  this  pity  of 
hers  was  the  beginning  and  occasion  of  love 


CAIUS  MARIUS 

for  him.  At  first  he  declined  the  woman’s 
solicitations,  but  when  he  perceived  that  there 
was  no  other  way  of  escaping,  and  that  her 
offers  were  more  serious  than  for  the  gratifi¬ 
cation  of  intemperate  passion,  he  accepted  her 
kindness,  and  she  finding  means  to  convey 
them  away,  he  escaped  with  his  friends  and 
fled  to  his  father. 

As  soon  as  they  had  saluted  each  other,  and 
were  going  by  the  seaside,  they  saw  some 
scorpions  fighting,  which  Marius  took  for  an 
ill  omen,  whereupon  they  immediately  went 
on  board  a  little  fishing-boat,  and  made  to¬ 
wards  Cercinas,  an  island  not  far  distant  from 
the  continent.  They  had  scarce  put  off  from 
shore  when  they  espied  some  horse,  sent  after 
them  by  the  king,  with  all  speed  making  to¬ 
wards  that  very  place  from  which  they  were 
just  retired.  And  Marius  thus  escaped  a  danger, 
it  might  be  said,  as  great  as  any  he  ever 
incurred. 

At  Rome  news  came  that  Sulla  was  en¬ 
gaged  with  Mithridates’  generals  in  Bceotia; 
the  consuls,  from  factious  opposition,  were 
fallen  to  downright  fighting,  wherein  Octavi¬ 
us  prevailing,  drove  Cinna  out  of  the  city  for 
attempting  despotic  government,  and  made 
Cornelius  Merula  consul  in  his  stead;  while 
Cinna,  raising  forces  in  other  parts  of  Italy, 
carried  the  war  against  them. 

As  soon  as  Marius  heard  of  this  he  resolved, 
with  all  expedition,  to  put  to  sea  again,  and 
taking  with  him  from  Africa  some  Maurita¬ 
nian  horse,  and  a  few  of  the  refugees  out  of 
Italy,  all  together  not  above  one  thousand,  he, 
with  this  handful,  began  his  voyage.  Arriving 
at  Telamon,  in  Etruria,  and  coming  ashore, 
he  proclaimed  freedom  for  the  slaves;  and 
many  of  the  countrymen,  also,  and  shepherds 
thereabouts,  who  were  already  freemen,  at 
hearing  his  name,  flocked  to  him  to  the  sea¬ 
side.  He  persuaded  the  youngest  and  strong¬ 
est  to  join  him,  and  in  a  small  time  got  to¬ 
gether  a  competent  force  with  which  he  filled 
forty  ships. 

Knowing  Octavius  to  be  a  good  man  and 
willing  to  execute  his  office  with  the  greatest 
justice  imaginable,  and  Cinna  to  be  suspected 
by  Sulla,  and  in  actual  warfare  against  the  es¬ 
tablished  government,  he  determined  to  join 
himself  and  his  forces  with  the  latter.  He 
therefore  sent  a  message  to  him,  to  let  him 
know  that  he  was  ready  to  obey  him  as  consul. 

When  Cinna  had  joyfully  received  his  offer, 
naming  him  proconsul,  and  sending  him  the 
fasces  and  other  ensigns  of  authority,  he  said 


351 

that  grandeur  did  not  become  his  present  for¬ 
tune;  but  wearing  an  ordinary  habit,  and  still 
letting  his  hair  grow  as  it  had  done,  from 
that  very  day  he  first  went  into  banishment, 
and  being  now  above  threescore  and  ten  years 
old,  he  came  slowly  on  foot,  designing  to 
move  people’s  compassion;  which  did  not  pre¬ 
vent,  however,  his  natural  fierceness  of  ex¬ 
pression  from  still  predominating,  and  his  hu¬ 
miliation  still  let  it  appear  that  he  was  not  so 
much  dejected  as  exasperated  by  the  change 
of  his  condition. 

Having  saluted  Cinna  and  the  soldiers,  he 
immediately  prepared  for  action,  and  soon 
made  a  considerable  alteration  in  the  posture 
of  affairs.  He  first  cut  off  the  provision  ships, 
and  plundering  all  the  merchants,  made  him¬ 
self  master  of  the  supplies  of  corn;  then  bring¬ 
ing  his  navy  to  the  seaport  towns,  he  took 
them,  and  at  last,  becoming  master  of  Ostia 
by  treachery,  he  pillaged  that  town,  and  slew 
a  multitude  of  the  inhabitants,  and,  blocking 
up  the  river,  took  from  the  enemy  all  hopes  of 
supply  by  the  sea;  then  marched  with  his  army 
toward  the  city,  and  posted  himself  upon  the 
hill  called  Janiculum. 

The  public  interest  did  not  receive  so  great 
damage  from  Octavius’s  unskilfulness  in  his 
management  of  affairs  as  from  his  omitting 
needful  measures  through  too  strict  observ¬ 
ance  of  the  law.  As  when  several  advised  him 
to  make  the  slaves  free,  he  said  that  he  would 
not  give  slaves  the  privilege  of  the  country 
from  which  he  then,  in  defence  of  the  laws, 
was  driving  away  Marius. 

When  Metellus,  son  to  that  Metellus  who 
was  general  in  the  war  in  Africa,  and  after¬ 
wards  banished  through  Marius’s  means, 
came  to  Rome,  being  thought  a  much  better 
commander  than  Octavius,  the  soldiers,  de¬ 
serting  the  consul,  came  to  him  and  desired 
him  to  take  the  command  of  them  and  pre¬ 
serve  the  city;  that  they,  when  they  had  got 
an  experienced  valiant  commander,  should 
fight  courageously,  and  come  off  conquerors. 
But  when  Metellus,  offended  at  it,  command¬ 
ed  them  angrily  to  return  to  the  consul,  they 
revolted  to  the  enemy. 

Metellus,  too,  seeing  the  city  in  a  desperate 
condition,  left  it;  but  a  company  of  Chaldae- 
ans,  sacrificers,  and  interpreters  of  the  Sibyl’s 
books  persuaded  Octavius  that  things  could 
turn  out  happily,  and  kept  him  at  Rome.  He 
was,  indeed,  of  all  the  Romans  the  most  up¬ 
right  and  just,  and  maintained  the  honour  of 
the  consulate,  without  cringing  or  compliance, 


352 

as  strictly  in  accordance  with  ancient  laws  and 
usages  as  though  they  had  been  immutable 
mathematical  truths;  and  yet  fell,  I  know  not 
how,  into  some  weaknesses,  giving  more  ob¬ 
servance  to  fortune-tellers  and  diviners,  than 
to  men  skilled  in  civil  and  Inilitary  affairs. 

He  therefore,  before  Marius  entered  the 
city,  was  pulled  down  from  the  rostra  and 
murdered  by  those  that  were  sent  before  by 
Marius;  and  it  is  reported  there  was  a  Chal- 
daean  writing  found  in  his  gown  when  he  was 
slain.  And  it  seemed  a  thing  very  unaccount¬ 
able,  that  of  two  famous  generals,  Marius 
should  be  often  successful  by  the  observing  of 
divinations,  and  Octavius  ruined  by  the  same 
means. 

When  affairs  were  in  this  posture,  the  sen¬ 
ate  assembled,  and  sent  a  deputation  to  Cinna 
and  Marius,  desiring  them  to  come  into  the 
city  peaceably  and  spare  the  citizens.  Cinna, 
as  consul,  received  the  embassy,  sitting  in  the 
curule  chair,  and  returned  a  kind  answer  to 
the  messengers;  Marius  stood  by  him  and  said 
nothing,  but  gave  sufficient  testimony,  by  the 
gloominess  of  his  countenance  and  the  stern¬ 
ness  of  his  looks,  that  he  would  in  a  short  time 
fill  the  city  with  blood. 

As  soon  as  the  council  arose,  they  went 
toward  the  city,  where  Cinna  entered  with  his 
guards,  but  Marius  stayed  at  the  gates,  and, 
dissembling  his  rage,  professed  that  he  was 
then  an  exile  and  banished  his  country  by 
course  of  law;  that  if  his  presence  were  neces¬ 
sary,  they  must,  by  a  new  decree,  repeal  the 
former  act  by  which  he  was  banished;  as 
though  he  were,  indeed,  a  religious  observer 
of  the  laws,  and  as  if  he  were  returning  to  a 
city  free  from  fear  or  oppression. 

Hereupon  the  people  were  assembled,  but 
before  three  or  four  tribes  had  given  their 
votes,  throwing  up  his  pretences  and  his  legal 
scruples  about  his  banishment,  he  came  into 
the  city  with  a  select  guard  of  the  slaves  who 
had  joined  him,  whom  he  called  Bardyaei. 
These  proceeded  to  murder  a  number  of  citi¬ 
zens,  as  he  gave  command,  partly  by  word  of 
mouth,  partly  by  the  signal  of  his  nod. 

At  length  Ancharius,  a  senator,  and  one 
that  had  been  praetor,  coming  to  Marius,  and 
not  being  re-saluted  by  him,  they  with  their 
drawn  swords  slew  him  before  Marius’s  face; 
and  henceforth  this  was  their  token,  immedi¬ 
ately  to  kill  all  those  who  met  Marius  and 
saluting  him  were  taken  no  notice  of,  nor  an¬ 
swered  with  the  like  courtesy;  so  that  his  very 
friends  were  not  without  dreadful  apprehen- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

sions  and  horror,  whensoever  they  came  to 
speak  with  him. 

When  they  had  now  butchered  a  great  num¬ 
ber,  Cinna  grew  more  remiss  and  cloyed  with 
murders;  but  Marius’s  rage  continued  still 
fresh  and  unsatisfied,  and  he  daily  sought  for 
all  that  were  any  way  suspected  by  him.  Now 
was  every  road  and  every  town  filled  with 
those  that  pursued  and  hunted  them  that  fled 
and  hid  themselves;  and  it  was  remarkable 
that  there  was  no  more  confidence  to  be 
placed,  as  things  stood,  either  in  hospitality 
or  friendship;  for  there  were  found  but  a  very 
few  that  did  not  betray  those  that  fled  to  them 
for  shelter. 

And  thus  the  servants  of  Cornutus  deserve 
the  greater  praise  and  admiration,  who,  hav¬ 
ing  concealed  their  master  in  the  house,  took 
the  body  of  one  of  the  slain,  cut  off  the  head, 
put  a  gold  ring  on  the  finger,  and  showed  it 
to  Marius’s  guards,  and  buried  it  with  the 
same  solemnity  as  if  it  had  been  their  own 
master.  This  trick  was  perceived  by  nobody, 
and  so  Cornutus  escaped,  and  was  conveyed 
by  his  domestics  into  Gaul. 

Marcus  Antonius,  the  orator,  though  he, 
too,  found  a  true  friend,  had  ill-fortune.  The 
man  was  but  poor  and  a  plebeian,  and  as  he 
was  entertaining  a  man  of  the  greatest  rank 
in  Rome,  trying  to  provide  for  him  with  the 
best  he  could,  he  sent  his  servant  to  get  some 
wine  of  a  neighbouring  vintner.  The  servant 
carefully  tasting  it  and  bidding  him  draw  bet¬ 
ter,  the  fellow  asked  him  what  was  the  mat¬ 
ter,  that  he  did  not  buy  new  and  ordinary 
wine  as  he  used  to  do,  but  richer  and  of  a 
greater  price;  he  without  any  designs  told 
him,  as  his  old  friend  and  acquaintance,  that 
his  master  entertained  Marcus  Antonius,  who 
was  concealed  with  him. 

The  villainous  vintner,  as  soon  as  the  serv¬ 
ant  was  gone,  went  himself  to  Marius,  then 
at  supper,  and  being  brought  into  his  pres¬ 
ence,  told  him  he  would  deliver  Antonius  into 
his  hands.  As  soon  as  he  heard  it,  it  is  said  he 
gave  a  great  shout,  and  clapped  his  hands  for 
joy,  and  had  very  nearly  risen  up  and  gone  to 
the  place  himself;  but  being  detained  by  his 
friends,  he  sent  Annius,  and  some  soldiers  with 
him,  and  commanded  him  to  bring  Antonius’s 
head  to  him  with  all  speed. 

When  they  came  to  the  house,  Annius 
stayed  at  the  door,  and  the  soldiers  went  up¬ 
stairs  into  the  chamber;  where,  seeing  Anto¬ 
nius,  they  endeavoured  to  shuffle  off  the  mur¬ 
der  from  one  another;  for  so  great  it  seems 


CAIUS  MARIUS 

were  the  graces  and  charms  of  his  oratory,  that 
as  soon  as  he  began  to  speak  and  beg  his  life, 
none  of  them  durst  touch  or  so  much  as  look 
upon  him;  but  hanging  down  their  heads,  eve¬ 
ry  one  fell  a-weeping.  When  their  stay  seemed 
something  tedious,  Annius  came  up  himself 
and  found  Antonius  discoursing,  and  the  sol¬ 
diers  astonished  and  quite  softened  by  it,  and 
calling  them  cowards,  went  himself  and  cut 
off  his  head. 

Catulus  Lutatius,  who  was  colleague  with 
Marius,  and  his  partner  in  the  triumph  over 
the  Cimbri,  when  Marius  replied  to  those  that 
interceded  for  him  and  begged  his  life,  merely 
with  the  words,  “He  must  die,”  shut  himself 
up  in  a  room,  and  making  a  great  fire,  smoth¬ 
ered  himself.  When  maimed  and  headless  car¬ 
casses  were  now  frequently  thrown  about  and 
trampled  upon  in  the  streets,  people  were  not 
so  much  moved  with  compassion  at  the  sight, 
as  struck  into  a  kind  of  horror  and  consterna¬ 
tion. 

The  outrages  of  those  that  were  called 
Bardyaei  was  the  greatest  grievance.  These 
murdered  the  masters  of  families  in  their  own 
houses,  abused  their  children,  and  ravished 
their  wives,  and  were  uncontrollable  in  their 
rapine  and  murders,  till  those  of  Cinna’s  and 
Sertorius’s  party,  taking  counsel  together,  fell 
upon  them  in  the  camp  and  killed  them  every 
man. 

In  the  interim,  as  if  a  change  of  wind  was 
coming  on,  there  came  news  from  all  parts 
that  Sulla,  having  put  an  end  to  the  war  with 
Mithridates,  and  taken  possession  of  the  prov¬ 
inces,  was  returning  into  Italy  with  a  great 
army.  This  gave  some  small  respite  and  inter¬ 
mission  to  these  unspeakable  calamities.  Mari¬ 
us  and  his  friends  believing  war  to  be  close  at 
hand,  Marius  was  chosen  consul  the  seventh 
time,  and  appearing  on  the  very  calends  of 
January,  the  beginning  of  the  year,  threw  one 
Sextus  Lucinus  from  the  Tarpeian  precipice; 
an  omen,  as  it  seemed,  portending  the  re¬ 
newed  misfortunes  both  of  their  party  and  of 
the  city. 

Marius,  himself  now  worn  out  with  labour 
and  sinking  under  the  burden  of  anxieties, 
could  not  sustain  his  spirits,  which  shook 
within  him  with  the  apprehension  of  a  new 
war  and  fresh  encounters  and  dangers,  the 
formidable  character  of  which  he  knew  by  his 
own  experience.  He  was  not  now  to  hazard 
the  war  with  Octavius  or  Merula,  command¬ 
ing  an  inexperienced  multitude  or  seditious 
rabble;  but  Sulla  himself  was  approaching,  the 


353 

same  who  had  formerly  banished  him,  and 
since  that,  had  driven  Mithridates  as  far  as  the 
Euxine  Sea. 

Perplexed  with  such  thoughts  as  these,  and 
calling  to  mind  his  banishment,  and  the  tedi¬ 
ous  wanderings  and  dangers  he  underwent, 
both  by  sea  and  land,  he  fell  into  despon¬ 
dency,  nocturnal  frights,  and  unquiet  sleep, 
still  fancying  that  he  heard  some  one  telling 
him,  that — 

- * — the  lion’s  lair 

Is  dangerous,  though  the  lion  be  not  there. 

Above  all  things  fearing  to  lie  awake,  he  gave 
himself  up  to  drinking  deep  and  besotting 
himself  at  night  in  a  way  most  unsuitable  to 
his  age;  by  all  means  provoking  sleep,  as  a 
diversion  to  his  thoughts. 

At  length,  on  the  arrival  of  a  messenger 
from  the  sea,  he  was  seized  with  new  alarms, 
and  so  what  with  his  fear  for  the  future,  and 
what  with  the  burden  and  satiety  of  the  pres¬ 
ent,  on  some  slight  predisposing  cause,  he  fell 
into  a  pleurisy,  as  Posidonius,  the  philosopher, 
relates,  who  says  he  visited  and  conversed 
with  him  when  he  was  sick,  about  some  busi¬ 
ness  relating  to  his  embassy. 

Caius  Piso,  an  historian,  tells  us  that  Mari¬ 
us,  walking  after  supper  with  his  friends,  fell 
into  a  conversation  with  them  about  his  past 
life,  and  after  reckoning  up  the  several 
changes  of  his  condition  that  from  the  begin¬ 
ning  had  happened  to  him,  said,  that  it  did 
not  become  a  prudent  man  to  trust  himsell 
any  longer  with  fortune;  and,  thereupon  tak¬ 
ing  leave  of  those  that  were  with  him,  he  kept 
his  bed  seven  days,  and  then  died. 

Some  say  his  ambition  betrayed  itself  open¬ 
ly  in  his  sickness,  and  that  he  ran  into  an  ex¬ 
travagant  frenzy,  fancying  himself  to  be  gen¬ 
eral  in  the  war  against  Mithridates,  throwing 
himself  into  such  postures  and  motions  of  his 
body  as  he  had  formerly  used  when  he  was  in 
battle,  with  frequent  shouts  and  loud  cries, 
with  so  strong  and  invincible  a  desire  of  being 
employed  in  that  business  had  he  been  pos¬ 
sessed  through  his  pride  and  emulation. 
Though  he  had  now  lived  seventy  years,  and 
was  the  first  man  that  ever  was  chosen  seven 
times  consul,  and  had  an  establishment 
and  riches  sufficient  for  many  kings,  he  yet 
complained  of  his  ill  fortune,  that  he  must 
now  die  before  he  had  attained  what  he 
desired. 

Plato,  when  he  saw  his  death  approaching, 
thanked  the  guiding  providence  and  fortune 
of  his  life,  first,  that  he  was  born  a  man  and  a 


354 

Grecian,  not  a  barbarian  or  a  brute,  and  next, 
that  he  happened  to  live  in  Socrates’s  age. 
And  so,  indeed,  they  say  Antipater  of  Tarsus, 
in  like  manner,  at  his  death,  calling  to  mind 
the  happiness  that  he  had  enjoyed,  did  not  so 
much  as  omit  his  prosperous  voyage  to  Ath¬ 
ens;  thus  recognising  every  favour  of  his  in¬ 
dulgent  fortune  with  the  greatest  acknowl¬ 
edgments,  and  carefully  saving  all  to  the  last 
in  that  safest  of  human  treasure-chambers,  the 
memory. 

Unmindful  and  thoughtless  persons,  on  the 
contrary,  let  all  that  occurs  to  them  slip  away 
from  them  as  time  passes  on.  Retaining  and 
preserving  nothing,  they  lose  the  enjoyment 
of  their  present  prosperity  by  fancying  some¬ 
thing  better  to  come;  whereas  by  fortune  we 
may  be  prevented  to  this,  but  that  cannot  be 
taken  from  us.  Yet  they  reject  their  present 
success,  as  though  it  did  not  concern  them, 
and  do  nothing  but  dream  of  future  uncer¬ 
tainties;  not  indeed  unnaturally;  as  till  men 
have  by  reason  and  education  laid  a  good 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

foundation  for  external  superstructures,  in  the 
seeking  after  and  gathering  them  they  can 
never  satisfy  the  unlimited  desires  of  their 
mind. 

Thus  died  Marius  on  the  seventeenth  day 
of  his  seventh  consulship,  to  the  great  joy  and 
content  of  Rome,  which  thereby  was  in  good 
hopes  to  be  delivered  from  the  calamity  of  a 
cruel  tyranny;  but  in  a  small  time  they  found 
that  they  had  only  changed  their  old  and 
worn-out  master  for  another,  young  and  vig¬ 
orous;  so  much  cruelty  and  savageness  did  his 
son,  Marius,  show  in  murdering  the  noblest 
and  most  approved  citizens.  At  first,  being 
esteemed  resolute  and  daring  against  his  ene¬ 
mies,  he  was  named  the  son  of  Mars,  but  after¬ 
wards,  his  actions  betraying  his  contrary  dis¬ 
position,  he  was  called  the  son  of  Venus.  At 
last,  besieged  by  Sulla  in  Praeneste,  where  he 
endeavoured  in  many  ways,  but  in  vain,  to 
save  his  life,  when  on  the  capture  of  the  city 
there  was  no  hope  of  escape,  he  killed  himself 
with  his  own  hand. 


LYSANDER 

445?-395  b.c. 


The  treasure-chamber  of  the  Acanthians 
at  Delphi  has  this  inscription:  “The 
spoils  which  Brasidas  and  the  Acan¬ 
thians  took  from  the  Athenians.”  And,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  many  take  the  marble  statue,  which 
stands  within  the  building  by  the  gates,  to  be 
Brasidas’s;  but,  indeed,  it  is  Ly sander’s,  repre¬ 
senting  him  with  his  hair  at  full  length,  after 
the  old  fashion,  and  with  an  ample  beard. 

Neither  is  it  true,  as  some  give  out,  that  be¬ 
cause  the  Argives,  after  their  great  defeat, 
shaved  themselves  for  sorrow,  that  the  Spar¬ 
tans  contrarywise  triumphing  in  their  achieve¬ 
ments,  suffered  their  hair  to  grow;  neither  did 
the  Spartans  come  to  be  ambitious  of  wearing 
long  hair,  because  the  Bacchiadae,  who  fled 
from  Corinth  to  Lacedaemon,  looked  mean 
and  unsightly,  having  their  heads  all  close  cut. 
But  this,  also,  is  indeed  one  of  the  ordinances 
of  Lycurgus,  who,  as  it  is  reported,  was  used 
to  say,  that  long  hair  made  good-looking  men 
more  beautiful,  and  ill-looking  men  more  ter¬ 
rible. 

Lysander’s  father  is  said  to  have  been  Aris- 
toclitus,  who  was  not  indeed  of  the  royal  fam¬ 


ily  but  yet  of  the  stock  of  the  Heraclidae.  He 
was  brought  up  in  poverty,  and  showed  him¬ 
self  obedient  and  conformable,  as  ever  any  one 
did,  to  the  customs  of  his  country;  of  a  manly 
spirit,  also,  and  superior  to  all  pleasures,  ex¬ 
cepting  only  that  which  their  good  actions 
bring  to  those  who  are  honoured  and  success¬ 
ful;  and  it  is  accounted  no  base  thing  in 
Sparta  for  their  young  men  to  be  overcome 
with  this  kind  of  pleasure.  For  they  are  de¬ 
sirous,  from  the  very  first,  to  have  their  youth 
susceptible  to  good  and  bad  repute,  to  feel 
pain  at  disgrace,  and  exultation  at  being  com¬ 
mended;  and  any  one  who  is  insensible  and 
unaffected  in  these  respects  is  thought  poor- 
spirited  and  of  no  capacity  for  virtue. 

Ambition  and  the  passion  for  distinction 
were  thus  implanted  in  his  character  by  his 
Laconian  education,  nor,  if  they  continued 
there,  must  we  blame  his  natural  disposition 
much  for  this.  But  he  was  submissive  to  great 
men,  beyond  what  seems  agreeable  to  the  Spar¬ 
tan  temper,  and  could  easily  bear  the  haughti¬ 
ness  of  those  who  were  in  power,  when  it 
was  any  way  for  his  advantage,  which  some 


LYSANDER 

are  of  opinion  is  no  small  part  of. political 
discretion. 

Aristotle,  who  says  all  great  characters  are 
more  or  less  atrabilious,  as  Socrates  and  Plato 
and  Hercules  were,  writes  that  Lysander,  not 
indeed  early  in  life,  but  when  he  was  old,  be¬ 
came  thus  affected.  What  is  singular  in  his 
character  is  that  he  endured  poverty  very  well, 
and  that  he  was  not  at  all  enslaved  or  cor¬ 
rupted  by  wealth,  and  yet  he  filled  his  country 
with  riches  and  the  love  of  them,  and  took 
away  from  them  the  glory  of  not  admiring 
money ;  importing  amongst  them  an  abundance 
of  gold  and  silver  after  the  Athenian  war, 
though  keeping  not  one  drachma  for  himself. 

When  Dionysius,  the  tyrant,  sent  his  daugh¬ 
ters  some  costly  gowns  of  Sicilian  manufac¬ 
ture,  he  would  not  receive  them,  saying  he 
was  afraid  they  would  make  them  look  more 
unhandsome.  But  a  while  after,  being  sent 
ambassador  from  the  same  city  to  the  same 
tyrant,  when  he  had  sent  him  a  couple  of 
robes,  and  bade  him  choose  which  of  them  he 
would,  and  carry  to  his  daughter:  “She,”  said 
he,  “will  be  able  to  choose  best  for  herself,” 
and  taking  both  of  them,  went  his  way. 

The  Peloponnesian  war  having  now  been 
carried  on  a  long  time,  and  it  being  expected, 
after  the  disaster  of  the  Athenians  in  Sicily, 
that  they  would  at  once  lose  the  mastery  of 
the  sea,  and  ere  long  be  routed  everywhere,  Al- 
cibiades,  returning  from  banishment,  and  tak¬ 
ing  the  command,  produced  a  great  change, 
and  made  the  Athenians  again  a  match  for 
their  opponents  by  sea;  and  the  Lacedaemo¬ 
nians,  in  great  alarm  at  this,  and  calling  up 
fresh  courage  and  zeal  for  the  conflict,  feeling 
the  want  of  an  able  commander  and  of  a  pow¬ 
erful  armament,  sent  out  Lysander  to  be  ad¬ 
miral  of  the  seas. 

Being  at  Ephesus,  and  finding  the  city  well 
affected  towards  him,  and  favourable  to  the 
Lacedaemonian  party,  but  in  ill  condition, 
and  in  danger  to  become  barbarised  by  adopt¬ 
ing  the  manners  of  the  Persians,  who  were 
much  mingled  among  them,  the  country  of 
Lydia  bordering  upon  them,  and  the  king’s 
generals  being  quartered  there  for  a  long  time, 
he  pitched  his  camp  there,  and  commanded  the 
merchant  ships  all  about  to  put  in  thither,  and 
proceeded  to  build  ships  of  war  there;  and  thus 
restored  their  ports  by  the  traffic  he  created, 
and  their  market  by  the  employment  he  gave, 
and  filled  their  private  houses  and  their  work¬ 
shops  with  wealth,  so  that  from  that  time  the 
city  began,  first  of  all  by  Lysander’s  means,  to 


355 

have  some  hopes  of  growing  to  that  stateliness 
and  grandeur  which  now  it  is  at. 

Understanding  that  Cyrus,  the  king’s  son, 
was  come  to  Sardis,  he  went  up  to  talk  with 
him,  and  to  accuse  Tisaphernes,  who,  receiv¬ 
ing  a  command  to  help  the  Lacedaemonians, 
and  to  drive  the  Athenians  from  the  sea,  was 
thought,  on  account  of  Alcibiades,  to  have  be¬ 
come  remiss  and  unwilling,  and  by  paying  the 
seamen  slenderly  to  be  ruining  the  fleet.  Now 
Cyrus  was  willing  that  Tisaphernes  might  be 
found  in  blame,  and  be  ill  reported  of,  as  being, 
indeed,  a  dishonest  man,  and  privately  at  feud 
with  himself. 

By  these  means,  and  by  their  daily  inter¬ 
course  together,  Lysander,  especially  by  the 
submissiveness  of  his  conversation,  won  the 
affection  of  the  young  prince,  and  greatly 
roused  him  to  carry  on  the  war;  and  when  he 
would  depart,  Cyrus  gave  him  a  banquet,  and 
desired  him  not  to  refuse  his  goodwill,  but  to 
speak  and  ask  whatever  he  had  a  mind  to,  and 
that  he  should  not  be  refused  anything  what¬ 
soever:  “Since  you  are  so  very  kind,”  replied 
Lysander,  “I  earnestly  request  you  to  add  one 
penny  to  the  seamen’s  pay,  that  instead  of  three 
pence,  they  may  now  receive  four  pence.” 

Cyrus,  delighted  with  his  public  spirit,  gave 
him  ten  thousand  darics,  out  of  which  he 
added  the  penny  to  the  seamen’s  pay,  and  by 
the  renown  of  this  in  a  short  time  emptied  the 
ships  of  the  enemies,  as  many  would  come  over 
to  that  side  which  gave  the  most  pay,  and  those 
who  remained,  being  disheartened  and  muti¬ 
nous,  daily  created  trouble  to  the  captains.  Yet 
for  all  Lysander  had  so  distracted  and  weak¬ 
ened  his  enemies,  he  was  afraid  to  engage  by 
sea,  Alcibiades  being  an  energetic  commander, 
and  having  the  superior  number  of  ships,  and 
having  been  hitherto,  in  all  battles,  uncon¬ 
quered  both  by  sea  and  land. 

But  afterwards,  when  Alcibiades  sailed  from 
Samos  to  Phocaea,  leaving  Antiochus,  the  pilot, 
in  command  of  all  his  forces,  this  Antiochus, 
to  insult  Lysander,  sailed  with  two  galleys  into 
the  port  of  the  Ephesians,  and  with  mocking 
and  laughter  proudly  rowed  along  before  the 
place  where  the  ships  lay  drawn  up.  Lysander, 
in  indignation,  launched  at  first  a  few  ships 
only  and  pursued  him,  but  as  soon  as  he  saw 
the  Athenians  come  to  his  help,  he  added  some 
other  ships,  and,  at  last,  they  fell  to  a  set  battle 
together;  and  Lysander  won  the  victory,  and 
taking  fifteen  of  their  ships,  erected  a  trophy. 
For  this,  the  people  in  the  city  being  angry, 
put  Alcibiades  out  of  command,  and  finding 


356 

himself  despised  by  the  soldiers  in  Samos,  and 
ill  spoken  of,  he  sailed  from  the  army  into  the 
Chersonese.  And  this  battle,  although  not  im¬ 
portant  in  itself,  was  made  remarkable  by  its 
consequences  to  Alcibiades. 

Lysander,  meanwhile,  invited  to  Ephesus 
such  persons  in  the  various  cities  as  he  saw 
to  be  bolder  and  haughtier-spirited  than  the 
rest,  proceeded  to  lay  the  foundations  of  that 
government  by  bodies  of  ten,  and  those  revo¬ 
lutions  which  afterwards  came  to  pass,  stir¬ 
ring  up  and  urging  them  to  unite  in  clubs  and 
apply  themselves  to  public  affairs,  since  as  soon 
as  ever  the  Athenians  should  be  put  down,  the 
popular  government,  he  said,  should  be  sup¬ 
pressed  and  they  should  become  supreme  in 
their  several  countries.  And  he  made  them  be¬ 
lieve  these  things  by  present  deeds,  promoting 
those  who  were  his  friends  already  to  great 
employments,  honours,  and  offices,  and,  to 
gratify  their  covetousness,  making  himself  a 
partner  in  injustice  and  wickedness.  So  much 
so,  that  all  flocked  to  him,  and  courted  and  de¬ 
sired  him,  hoping,  if  he  remained  in  power, 
that  the  highest  wishes  they  could  form  would 
all  be  gratified. 

And  therefore,  from  the  very  beginning, 
they  could  not  look  pleasantly  upon  Callicra- 
tidas,  when  he  came  to  succeed  Lysander  as  ad¬ 
miral;  nor,  afterwards,  when  he  had  given 
them  experience  that  he  was  a  most  noble  and 
just  person,  were  they  pleased  with  the  manner 
of  his  government,  and  its  straightforward, 
Dorian,  honest  character.  They  did,  indeed, 
admire  his  virtue,  as  they  might  the  beauty  of 
some  hero’s  image;  but  their  wishes  were  for 
Lysander’s  zealous  and  profitable  support  of 
the  interests  of  his  friends  and  partisans,  and 
they  shed  tears,  and  were  much  disheartened 
when  he  sailed  from  them. 

He  himself  made  them  yet  more  disaffected 
to  Callicratidas;  for  what  remained  of  the 
money  which  had  been  given  him  to  pay  the 
navy,  he  sent  back  again  to  Sardis,  bidding 
them,  if  they  would,  apply  to  Callicratidas 
himself,  and  see  how  he  was  able  to  maintain 
the  soldiers.  And,  at  the  last,  sailing  away,  he 
declared  to  him  that  he  delivered  up  the  fleet  in 
possession  and  command  of  the  sea.  But  Calli¬ 
cratidas,  to  expose  the  emptiness  of  these  high 
pretensions,  said,  “In  that  case,  leave  Samos 
on  the  left  hand,  and  sailing  to  Miletus,  there 
deliver  up  the  ships  to  me;  for  if  we  are  masters 
of  the  sea,  we  need  not  fear  sailing  by  our 
enemies  in  Samos.”  To  which  Lysander  an¬ 
swering,  that  not  himself  but  he  commanded 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  ships,  sailed  to  Peloponnesus,  leaving  Cal¬ 
licratidas  in  great  perplexity.  For  neither  had 
he  brought  any  money  from  home  with  him, 
nor  could  he  endure  to  tax  the  towns  or  force 
them,  being  in  hardship  enough. 

Therefore,  the  only  course  that  was  to  be 
taken  was  to  go  and  beg  at  the  doors  of  the 
king’s  commanders,  as  Lysander  had  done;  for 
which  he  was  most  unfit  of  any  man,  being  of 
a  generous  and  great  spirit,  and  one  who 
thought  it  more  becoming  for  the  Greeks  to 
suffer  any  damage  from  one  another,  than  to 
flatter  and  wait  at  the  gates  of  barbarians,  who, 
indeed,  had  gold  enough,  but  nothing  else  that 
was  commendable.  But  being  compelled  by 
necessity,  he  proceeded  to  Lydia,  and  went  at 
once  to  Cyrus’s  house,  and  sent  in  word  that 
Callicratidas,  the  admiral,  was  there  to  speak 
with  him;  one  of  those  who  kept  the  gates  re¬ 
plied,  “Cyrus,  O  stranger,  is  not  now  at  leisure, 
for  he  is  drinking.”  To  which  Callicratidas 
answered,  most  innocently,  “Very  well,  I  will 
wait  till  he  has  done  his  draught.” 

This  time,  therefore,  they  took  him  for 
some  clownish  fellow,  and  he  withdrew, 
merely  laughed  at  by  the  barbarians;  but 
when,  afterwards,  he  came  a  second  time  to  the 
gate,  and  was  not  admitted,  he  took  it  hardly 
and  set  off  for  Ephesus,  wishing  a  great  many 
evils  to  those  who  first  let  themselves  be  in¬ 
sulted  over  by  these  barbarians,  and  taught 
them  to  be  insolent  because  of  their  riches;  and 
added  vows  to  those  who  were  present,  that  as 
soon  as  ever  he  came  back  to  Sparta,  he  would 
do  all  he  could  to  reconcile  the  Greeks,  that 
they  might  be  formidable  to  barbarians,  and 
that  they  should  cease  henceforth  to  need  their 
aid  against  one  another.  But  Callicratidas, 
who  entertained  purposes  worthy  a  Lacedaemo¬ 
nian,  and  showed  himself  worthy  to  compete 
with  the  very  best  of  Greece,  for  his  justice,  his 
greatness  of  mind  and  courage,  not  long  after, 
having  been  beaten  in  a  sea  fight  at  Arginusae, 
died. 

And  now,  affairs  going  backwards,  the  asso¬ 
ciates  in  the  war  sent  an  embassy  to  Sparta,  re¬ 
quiring  Lysander  to  be  their  admiral,  profess¬ 
ing  themselves  ready  to  undertake  the  business 
much  more  zealously  if  he  was  commander; 
and  Cyrus  also  sent  to  request  the  same  thing. 
But  because  they  had  a  law  which  would  not 
suffer  any  one  to  be  admiral  twice,  and  wished, 
nevertheless,  to  gratify  their  allies,  they  gave 
the  title  of  admiral  to  one  Aracus,  and  sent  Ly¬ 
sander  nominally  as  vice-admiral,  but,  indeed, 
with  full  powers.  So  he  came  out,  long  wished 


LYSANDER 

for  by  the  greatest  part  of  the  chief  persons  and 
leaders  in  the  towns,  who  hoped  to  grow  to 
greater  power  still  by  his  means,  when  the  pop¬ 
ular  governments  should  be  everywhere  de¬ 
stroyed. 

But  to  those  who  loved  honest  and  noble 
behaviour  in  their  commanders,  Lysander, 
compared  with  Callicratidas,  seemed  cunning 
and  subtle,  managing  most  things  in  the  war 
by  deceit,  extolling  what  was  just  when  it  was 
profitable,  and  when  it  was  not,  using  that 
which  was  convenient,  instead  of  that  which 
was  good;  and  not  judging  truth  to  be  in  na¬ 
ture  better  than  falsehood,  but  setting  a  value 
upon  both  according  to  interest.  He  would 
laugh  at  those  who  thought  Hercules’s  poster¬ 
ity  ought  not  to  use  deceit  in  war:  “For  where 
the  lion’s  skin  will  not  reach,  you  must  patch 
it  out  with  the  fox’s.” 

Such  is  the  conduct  recorded  of  him  in  the 
business  about  Miletus;  for  when  his  friends 
and  connections,  whom  he  had  promised  to 
assist  in  suppressing  popular  government,  and 
expelling  their  political  opponents,  had  al¬ 
tered  their  minds,  and  were  reconciled  to 
their  enemies,  he  pretended  openly  as  if  he 
was  pleased  with  it,  and  was  desirous  to 
further  the  reconciliation,  but  privately  he 
railed  at  and  abused  them,  and  provoked 
them  to  set  upon  the  multitude.  And  as  soon 
as  ever  he  perceived  a  new  attempt  to  be  com¬ 
mencing,  he  at  once  came  up  and  entered 
into  the  city,  and  the  first  of  the  conspirators 
he  lit  upon,  he  pretended  to  rebuke,  and  spoke 
roughly,  as  if  he  would  punish  them;  but  the 
others,  meantime,  he  bade  be  courageous,  and 
to  fear  nothing,  now  he  was  with  them.  And 
all  this  acting  and  dissembling  was  with  the 
object  that  the  most  considerable  men  of  the 
popular  party  might  not  fly  away,  but  might 
stay  in  the  city  and  be  killed;  which  so  fell 
out,  for  all  who  believed  him  were  put  to 
death. 

There  is  a  saying  also,  recorded  by  Andro- 
clides,  which  makes  him  guilty  of  great  in¬ 
difference  to  the  obligations  of  an  oath.  His 
recommendation,  according  to  this  account, 
was  to  “cheat  boys  with  dice,  and  men  with 
oaths,”  an  imitation  of  Polycrates  of  Samos, 
not  very  honourable  to  a  lawful  commander, 
to  take  example,  namely,  from  a  tyrant;  nor  in 
character  with  Laconian  usages,  to  treat  gods 
as  ill  as  enemies,  or,  indeed,  even  more  injuri¬ 
ously;  since  he  who  overreaches  by  an  oath  ad¬ 
mits  that  he  fears  his  enemy,  while  he  despises 
his  God. 


357 

Cyrus  now  sent  for  Lysander  to  Sardis,  and 
gave  him  some  money,  and  promised  him 
some  more,  youthfully  protesting  in  favour 
to  him,  that  if  his  father  gave  him  nothing, 
he  would  supply  him  of  his  own;  and  if  he 
himself  should  be  destitute  of  all,  he  would  cut 
up,  he  said,  to  make  money,  the  very  throne 
upon  which  he  sat  to  do  justice,  it  being  made 
of  gold  and  silver;  and,  at  last,  on  going  up  into 
Media  to  his  father,  he  ordered  that  he  should 
receive  the  tribute  of  the  towns,  and  committed 
his  government  to  him,  and  so  taking  his  leave, 
and  desiring  him  not  to  fight  by  sea  before  he 
returned,  for  he  would  come  back  with  a  great 
many  ships  out  of  Phoenicia  and  Cilicia,  de¬ 
parted  to  visit  the  king. 

Lysander’s  ships  were  too  few  for  him  to 
venture  to  fight,  and  yet  too  many  to  allow  of 
his  remaining  idle;  he  set  out,  therefore,  and 
reduced  some  of  the  islands,  and  wasted  Angina 
and  Salamis;  and  from  thence  landing  in  Atti¬ 
ca,  and  saluting  Agis,  who  came  from  Decelea 
to  meet  him,  he  made  a  display  to  the  land- 
forces  of  the  strength  of  the  fleet  as  though  he 
could  sail  where  he  pleased,  and  were  abso¬ 
lute  master  by  sea.  But  hearing  the  Athenians 
pursued  him,  he  fled  another  way  through  the 
island  into  Asia.  And  finding  the  Hellespont 
without  any  defence,  he  attacked  Lampsacus 
with  his  ships  by  sea;  while  Thorax,  acting  in 
concert  with  him  with  the  land  army,  made 
an  assault  on  the  walls;  and  so  having  taken 
the  city  by  storm,  he  gave  it  up  to  his  soldiers 
to  plunder. 

The  fleet  of  the  Athenians,  a  hundred  and 
eighty  ships,  had  just  arrived  at  Elaeus  in  the 
Chersonese;  and  hearing  the  news,  that  Lamp¬ 
sacus  was  destroyed,  they  presently  sailed  to 
Sestos;  where,  taking  in  victuals,  they  ad¬ 
vanced  to  JEgos  Potami,  over  against  their  en¬ 
emies,  who  were  still  stationed  about  Lamp¬ 
sacus.  Amongst  other  Athenian  captains  who 
were  now  in  command  was  Philocles,  he  who 
persuaded  the  people  to  pass  a  decree  to  cut  off 
the  right  thumb  of  the  captives  in  the  war, 
that  they  should  not  be  able  to  hold  the  spear, 
though  they  might  the  oar. 

Then  they  all  rested  themselves,  hoping 
they  should  have  battle  the  next  morning.  But 
Lysander  had  other  things  in  his  head;  he  com¬ 
manded  the  mariners  and  pilots  to  go  on  board 
at  dawn,  as  if  there  should  be  a  battle  as  soon 
as  it  was  day,  and  to  sit  there  in  order,  and 
without  any  noise,  excepting  what  should  be 
commanded,  and  in  like  manner  that  the  land 
army  should  remain  quietly  in  their  ranks  by 


358 

the  sea.  But  the  sun  rising,  and  the  Athenians 
sailing  up  with  their  whole  fleet  in  line,  and 
challenging  them  to  battle,  though  he  had  had 
his  ships  all  drawn  up  and  manned  before  day¬ 
break,  nevertheless  did  not  stir.  He  merely 
sent  some  small  boats  to  those  who  lay  fore¬ 
most,  and  bade  them  keep  still  and  stay  in  their 
order;  not  to  be  disturbed,  and  none  of  them  to 
sail  out  and  offer  battle.  So  about  evening,  the 
Athenians  sailing  back,  he  would  not  let  the 
seamen  go  out  of  the  ships  before  two  or  three, 
which  he  had  sent  to  espy,  were  returned,  after 
seeing  the  enemies  disembark.  And  thus  they 
did  the  next  day,  and  the  third,  and  so  to  the 
fourth.  So  that  the  Athenians  grew  extremely 
confident,  and  disdained  their  enemies  as  if 
they  had  been  afraid  and  daunted. 

At  this  time,  Alcibiades,  who  was  in  his 
castle  in  the  Chersonese,  came  on  horseback 
to  the  Athenian  army,  and  found  fault  with 
their  captains;  first  of  all  that  they  had  pitched 
their  camp  neither  well  nor  safely  on  an  ex¬ 
posed  and  open  beach,  a  very  bad  landing  for 
the  ships;  and  secondly,  that  where  they  were 
they  had  to  fetch  all  they  wanted  from  Sestos, 
some  considerable  way  off;  whereas  if  they 
sailed  round  a  little  way  to  the  town  and  har¬ 
bour  of  Sestos,  they  would  be  at  a  safer  dis¬ 
tance  from  an  enemy  who  lay  watching  their 
movements,  at  the  command  of  a  single  gen¬ 
eral,  terror  of  whom  made  every  order  rapidly 
executed.  This  advice,  however,  they  would 
not  listen  to;  and  Tydeus  answered  disdain¬ 
fully,  that  not  he,  but  others,  were  in  office 
now.  So  Alcibiades,  who  even  suspected  there 
must  be  treachery,  departed. 

But  on  the  fifth  day,  the  Athenians  having 
sailed  towards  them,  and  gone  back  again  as 
they  were  used  to  do,  very  proudly  and  full 
of  contempt,  Lysander  sending  some  ships,  as 
usual,  to  look  out,  commanded  the  masters  of 
them  that  when  they  saw  the  Athenians  go  to 
land,  they  should  row  back  again  with  all  their 
speed,  and  that  when  they  were  about  half-way 
across,  they  should  lift  up  a  brazen  shield  from 
the  foredeck,  as  the  sign  of  battle.  And  he  him¬ 
self  sailing  round,  encouraged  the  pilots  and 
masters  of  the  ships,  and  exhorted  them  to 
keep  all  their  men  to  their  places,  seamen  and 
soldiers  alike,  and  as  soon  as  ever  the  sign 
should  be  given,  to  row  up  boldly  to  their  en¬ 
emies.  Accordingly,  when  the  shield  had  been 
lifted  up  from  the  ships,  and  the  trumpet  from 
the  admiral’s  vessel  had  sounded  for  the  battle, 
the  ships  rowed  up,  and  the  foot  soldiers  strove 
to  get  along  by  the  shore  to  the  promontory. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

The  distance  there  between  the  two  continents 
is  fifteen  furlongs,  which,  by  the  zeal  and  ea¬ 
gerness  of  the  rowers,  was  quickly  traversed. 

Conon,  one  of  the  Athenian  commanders, 
was  the  first  who  saw  from  the  land  the  fleet 
advancing,  and  shouted  out  to  embark,  and  in 
the  greatest  distress  bade  some  and  entreated 
others,  and  some  he  forced  to  man  the  ships. 

But  all  his  diligence  signified  nothing,  because 
the  men  were  scattered  about;  for  as  soon  as 
they  came  out  of  the  ships,  expecting  no  such 
matter,  some  went  to  market,  others  walked 
about  the  country,  or  went  to  sleep  in  their 
tents,  or  got  their  dinners  ready,  being,  through 
their  commanders’  want  of  skill,  as  far  as  pos¬ 
sible  from  any  thought  of  what  was  to  happen; 
and  the  enemy  now  coming  up  with  shouts 
and  noise,  Conon,  with  eight  ships,  sailed  out, 
and  making  his  escape,  passed  from  thence  to 
Cyprus,  to  Evagoras. 

The  Peloponnesians  falling  upon  the  rest, 
some  they  took  quite  empty,  and  some  they 
destroyed  while  they  were  filling;  the  men, 
meantime,  coming  unarmed  and  scattered  to 
help,  died  at  their  ships,  or  fleeing  by  land, 
were  slain,  their  enemies  disembarking  and  j 
pursuing  them.  Lysander  took  three  thou¬ 
sand  prisoners,  with  the  generals,  and  the 
whole  fleet,  excepting  the  sacred  ship,  Paralus, 
and  those  which  fled  with  Conon. 

So  taking  their  ships  in  tow,  and  having  , 
plundered  their  tents,  with  pipe  and  songs  of 
victory,  he  sailed  back  to  Lampsacus,  having 
accomplished  a  great  work  with  small  pains, 
and  having  finished  in  one  hour  a  war  which 
had  been  protracted  in  its  continuance,  and 
diversified  in  its  incidents  and  in  its  fortunes, 
to  a  degree  exceeding  belief,  compared  with 
all  before  it.  After  altering  its  shape  and  char¬ 
acter  a  thousand  times,  and  after  having  been 
the  destruction  of  more  commanders  than  all 
the  previous  wars  of  Greece  put  together,  it 
was  now  put  an  end  to  by  the  good  counsel 
and  ready  conduct  of  one  man. 

Some,  therefore,  looked  upon  the  result  as 
a  divine  intervention,  and  there  were  certain 
who  affirmed  that  the  stars  of  Castor  and  Pol¬ 
lux  were  seen  on  each  side  of  Lysander’s  ship,  I 

when  he  first  set  sail  from  the  haven  toward  I 

his  enemies,  shining  about  the  helm;  and  some 
say  the  stone  which  fell  down  was  a  sign  of 
this  slaughter.  For  a  stone  of  a  great  size  did 
fall,  according  to  the  common  belief,  from 
heaven,  at  iEgos  Potami,  which  is  shown  to 
this  day,  and  held  in  great  esteem  by  the  Cher- 
sonites. 


LYSANDER 

And  it  is  said  that  Anaxagoras  foretold  that 
the  occurrence  of  a  slip  or  shake  among  the 
bodies  fixed  in  the  heavens,  dislodging  any 
one  of  them,  would  be  followed  by  the  fall 
of  the  whole  of  them.  For  no  one  of  the  stars 
is  now  in  the  same  place  in  which  it  was  at 
first;  for  they,  being,  according  to  him,  like 
stones  and  heavy,  shine  by  the  refraction  of 
the  upper  air  round  about  them,  and  are  car¬ 
ried  along  forcibly  by  the  violence  of  the 
circular  motion  by  which  they  were  originally 
withheld  from  falling,  when  cold  and  heavy 
bodies  were  first  separated  from  the  general 
universe.  But  there  is  a  more  probable  opinion 
than  this  maintained  by  some,  who  say  that 
falling  stars  are  no  effluxes,  nor  discharges  of 
ethereal  fire,  extinguished  almost  at  the  in¬ 
stant  of  its  igniting  by  the  lower  air;  neither 
are  they  the  sudden  combustion  and  blazing 
up  of  a  quantity  of  the  lower  air  let  loose  in 
great  abundance  into  the  upper  region;  but 
the  heavenly  bodies,  by  a  lelaxation  of  the 
force  of  their  circular  movement,  are  carried  by 
an  irregular  course,  not  in  general  into  the  in¬ 
habited  part  of  the  earth,  but  for  the  most  part 
into  the  wide  sea;  which  is  the  cause  of  their 
not  being  observed. 

Daimachus,  in  his  treatise  On  Religion,  sup¬ 
ports  the  view  of  Anaxagoras.  He  says,  that 
before  this  stone  fell,  for  seventy-five  days 
continually,  there  was  seen  in  the  heavens  a 
vast  fiery  body,  as  if  it  had  been  a  flaming 
cloud,  not  resting,  but  carried  about  with  sev¬ 
eral  intricate  and  broken  movements,  so  that 
the  flaming  pieces,  which  were  broken  off  by 
this  commotion  and  running  about,  were  car¬ 
ried  in  all  directions,  shining  as  falling  stars 
do.  But  when  it  afterwards  came  down  to  the 
ground  in  this  district,  and  the  people  of  the 
place  recovering  from  their  fear  and  astonish¬ 
ment  came  together,  there  was  no  fire  to  be 
seen,  neither  any  sign  of  it;  there  was  only 
a  stone  lying,  big  indeed,  but  which  bore 
no  proportion,  to  speak  of,  to  that  fiery  com¬ 
pass. 

It  is  manifest  that  Daimachus  needs  to  have 
indulgent  hearers;  but  if  what  he  says  be 
true,  he  altogether  proves  those  to  be  wrong 
who  say  that  a  rock  broken  off  from  the  top 
of  some  mountain,  by  winds  and  tempests, 
and  caught  and  whirled  about  like  a  top,  as 
soon  as  this  impetus  began  to  slacken  and 
cease,  was  precipitated  and  fell  to  the  ground. 
Unless,  indeed,  we  choose  to  say  that  the 
phenomenon  which  was  observed  for  so  many 
days  was  really  fire,  and  that  the  change  in 


359 

the  atmosphere  ensuing  on  its  extinction  was 
attended  with  violent  winds  and  agitations, 
which  might  be  the  cause  of  this  stone  being 
carried  off.  The  exacter  treatment  of  this  sub¬ 
ject  belongs,  however,  to  a  different  kind  of 
writing. 

Lysander,  after  the  three  thousand  Atheni¬ 
ans  whom  he  had  taken  prisoners  were  con¬ 
demned  by  the  commissioners  to  die,  called 
Philocles,  the  general,  and  asked  him  what 
punishment  he  considered  himself  to  deserve, 
for  having  advised  the  citizens,  as  he  had 
done,  against  the  Greeks;  but  he,  being  noth¬ 
ing  cast  down  at  his  calamity,  bade  him  not 
to  accuse  him  of  matters  of  which  nobody 
was  a  judge,  but  to  do  to  him,  now  he  was  a 
conqueror,  as  he  would  have  suffered,  had  he 
been  overcome.  Then  washing  himself,  and 
putting  on  a  fine  cloak,  he  led  the  citizens  the 
way  to  the  slaughter,  as  Theophrastus  writes 
in  his  history. 

After  this  Lysander,  sailing  about  to  the 
various  cities,  bade  all  the  Athenians  he  met 
go  into  Athens,  declaring  that  he  would  spare 
none,  but  kill  every  man  whom  he  found  out 
of  the  city,  intending  thus  to  cause  immediate 
famine  and  scarcity  there,  that  they  might  not 
make  the  siege  laborious  to  him,  having  pro¬ 
visions  sufficient  to  endure  it.  And  suppress¬ 
ing  the  popular  governments  and  all  other 
constitutions,  he  left  one  Lacedaemonian  chief 
officer  in  every  city,  with  ten  rulers  to  act 
with  him,  selected  out  of  the  societies  which 
he  had  previously  formed  in  the  different 
towns.  And  doing  thus  as  well  in  the  cities 
of  his  enemies  as  of  his  associates,  he  sailed 
leisurely  on,  establishing,  in  a  manner,  for 
himself  supremacy  over  the  whole  of  Greece. 

Neither  did  he  make  choice  of  rulers  by 
birth  or  by  wealth,  but  bestowed  the  offices  on 
his  own  friends  and  partisans,  doing  every¬ 
thing  to  please  them,  and  putting  absolute 
power  of  reward  and  punishment  into  their 
hands.  And  thus,  personally  appearing  on 
many  occasions  of  bloodshed  and  massacre, 
and  aiding  his  friends  to  expel  their  opponents, 
he  did  not  give  the  Greeks  a  favourable  speci¬ 
men  of  the  Lacedaemonian  government;  and 
the  expression  of  Theopompus,  the  comic  poet, 
seemed  but  poor,  when  he  compared  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians  to  tavern  women,  because  when 
the  Greeks  had  first  tasted  the  sweet  wine  of 
liberty,  they  then  poured  vinegar  into  the  cup; 
for  from  the  very  first  it  had  a  rough  and  bitter 
taste,  all  government  by  the  people  being  sup¬ 
pressed  by  Lysander,  and  the  boldest  and  least 


360 

scrupulous  of  the  oligarchical  party  selected  to 
rule  the  cities. 

Having  spent  some  little  time  about  these 
things,  and  sent  some  before  to  Lacedaemon 
to  tell  them  he  was  arriving  with  two  hun¬ 
dred  ships,  he  united  his  forces  in  Attica  with 
those  of  the  two  kings,  Agis  and  Pausanias, 
hoping  to  take  the  city  without  delay.  But 
when  the  Athenians  defended  themselves,  he 
with  his  fleet  passed  again  to  Asia,  and  in  like 
manner  destroyed  the  forms  of  government 
in  all  the  other  cities,  and  placed  them  under 
the  rule  of  ten  chief  persons,  many  in  every 
one  being  killed,  and  many  driven  into  exile; 
and  in  Samos  he  expelled  the  whole  people, 
and  gave  their  cities  to  the  exiles  whom  he 
brought  back.  And  the  Athenians  still  pos¬ 
sessing  Sestos,  he  took  it  from  them,  and  suf¬ 
fered  not  the  Sestians  themselves  to  dwell  in 
it,  but  gave  the  city  and  country  to  be  divided 
out  among  the  pilots  and  masters  of  the  ships 
under  him;  which  was  his  first  act  that  was 
disallowed  by  the  Lacedaemonians,  who 
brought  the  Sestians  back  again  into  their 
country.  All  Greece,  however,  rejoiced  to  see 
the  iEginetans,  by  Lysander’s  aid,  now  again, 
after  a  long  time,  receiving  back  their  cities, 
and  the  Melians  and  Scionaeans  restored, 
while  the  Athenians  were  driven  out,  and  de¬ 
livered  up  the  cities. 

But  when  he  now  understood  they  were  in 
a  bad  case  in  the  city  because  of  the  famine,  he 
sailed  to  Piraeus,  and  reduced  the  city,  which 
was  compelled  to  surrender  on  what  condi¬ 
tions  he  demanded.  One  hears  it  said  by  Lace¬ 
daemonians  that  Lysander  wrote  to  the  Ephors 
thus:  “Athens  is  taken”;  and  that  these  magis¬ 
trates  wrote  back  to  Lysander,  “  ‘Taken’  were 
enough.” 

But  this  saying  was  invented  for  its  neat¬ 
ness’  sake;  for  the  true  decree  of  the  magis¬ 
trates  was  in  this  manner:  “The  government 
of  the  Lacedaemonians  has  made  these  orders; 
pull  down  the  Piraeus  and  the  long  walls;  quit 
all  the  towns,  and  keep  to  your  own  land;  if 
you  do  these  things,  you  shall  have  peace,  if 
you  wish  it,  restoring  also  your  exiles.  As  con¬ 
cerning  the  number  of  the  ships,  whatso¬ 
ever  there  be  judged  necessary  to  appoint, 
that  do.” 

This  scroll  of  conditions  the  Athenians  ac¬ 
cepted.  Theramenes,  son  of  Hagnon,  support¬ 
ing  it.  At  which  time,  too,  they  say  that  when 
Cleomenes,  one  of  the  young  orators,  asked 
him  how  he  durst  act  and  speak  contrary  to 
Themistocles,  delivering  up  the  walls  to  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Lacedaemonians,  which  he  had  built  against 
the  will  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  he  said,  “O 
young  man,  I  do  nothing  contrary  to  Themis¬ 
tocles,  for  he  raised  these  walls  for  the  safety 
of  the  citizens,  and  we  pull  them  down  for 
their  safety;  and  if  walls  make  a  city  happy, 
then  Sparta  must  be  the  most  wretched  of  all, 
as  it  has  none.” 

Lysander,  as  soon  as  he  had  taken  all  the 
ships  except  twelve,  and  the  walls  of  the 
Athenians,  on  the  sixteenth  day  of  the  month 
Munychion,  the  same  on  which  they  had 
overcome  the  barbarians  at  Salamis,  then  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  take  measures  for  altering  the  gov¬ 
ernment.  But  the  Athenians  taking  that  very 
unwillingly,  and  resisting,  he  sent  to  the  people 
and  informed  them  that  he  found  that  the  city 
had  broken  the  terms,  for  the  walls  were  stand¬ 
ing  when  the  days  were  past  within  which  they 
should  have  been  pulled  down.  He  should, 
therefore,  consider  their  case  anew,  they  hav¬ 
ing  broken  their  first  articles.  And  some  state, 
in  fact,  the  proposal  was  made  in  the  congress 
of  the  allies,  that  the  Athenians  should  all  be 
sold  as  slaves;  on  which  occasion,  Erianthus, 
the  Theban,  gave  his  vote  to  pull  down  the  city, 
and  turn  the  country  into  sheep-pasture;  yet 
afterwards,  when  there  was  a  meeting  of  the 
captains  together,  a  man  of  Phocis,  singing  the 
first  chorus  in  Euripides’s  Electra,  which  be¬ 
gins— 

Electra,  Agamemnon’s  child,  I  came  unto  thy 
desert  home, 

they  were  all  melted  with  compassion,  and 
it  seemed  to  be  a  cruel  deed  to  destroy  and 
pull  down  a  city  which  had  been  so  famous, 
and  produced  such  men. 

Accordingly  Lysander,  the  Athenians  yield¬ 
ing  up  everything,  sent  for  a  number  of  flute- 
women  out  of  the  city,  and  collected  together 
all  that  were  in  the  camp,  and  pulled  down 
the  walls,  and  burnt  the  ships  to  the  sound  of 
the  flute,  the  allies  being  crowned  with  gar¬ 
lands,  and  making  merry  together,  as  count¬ 
ing  that  day  the  beginning  of  their  liberty. 
He  proceeded  also  at  once  to  alter  the  govern¬ 
ment,  placing  thirty  rulers  in  the  city  and  ten 
in  the  Piraeus:  he  put,  also,  a  garrison  into  the 
Acropolis,  and  made  Callibius,  a  Spartan,  the 
governor  of  it;  who  afterwards  taking  up  his 
staff  to  strike  Autolycus,  the  athlete,  about 
whom  Xenophon  wrote  his  Banquet,  on  his 
tripping  up  his  heels  and  throwing  him  to  the 
ground,  Lysander  was  not  vexed  at  it,  but 
chid  Callibius,  telling  him  he  did  not  know 
how  to  govern  freemen.  The  thirty  rulers, 


LYSANDER 

however,  to  gain  Callibius’s  favour,  a  little 
after  killed  Autolycus. 

Lysander,  after  this,  sailed  out  to  Thrace, 
and  what  remained  of  the  public  money,  and 
the  gifts  and  crowns  which  he  had  himself 
received,  numbers  of  people,  as  might  be  ex¬ 
pected,  being  anxious  to  make  presents  to  a 
man  of  such  great  power,  who  was,  in  a  man¬ 
ner,  the  lord  of  Greece,  he  sent  to  Lace¬ 
daemon  by  Gylippus,  who  had  commanded 
formerly  in  Sicily.  But  he,  it  is  reported,  un¬ 
sewed  the  sacks  at  the  bottom,  took  a  consid¬ 
erable  amount  of  silver  out  of  every  one  of 
them,  and  sewed  them  up  again,  not  knowing 
there  was  a  writing  in  every  one  stating  how 
much  there  was.  And  coming  into  Sparta, 
what  he  had  thus  stolen  away  he  hid  under 
the  tiles  of  his  house,  and  delivered  up  the 
sacks  to  the  magistrates,  and  showed  the  seals 
were  upon  them.  But  afterwards,  on  their 
opening  the  sacks  and  counting  it,  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  the  silver  differed  from  what  the  writ¬ 
ing  expressed;  and  the  matter  causing  some 
perplexity  to  the  magistrates,  Gylippus’s  serv¬ 
ant  told  them  in  a  riddle,  that  under  the  tiles 
lay  many  owls;  for,  as  it  seems,  the  greatest 
part  of  the  money  then  current  bore  the  Athe¬ 
nian  stamp  of  the  owl.  Gylippus  having  com¬ 
mitted  so  foul  and  base  a  deed,  after  such  great 
and  distinguished  exploits  before,  removed 
himself  from  Lacedaemon. 

But  the  wisest  of  the  Spartans,  very  much 
on  account  of  this  occurrence,  dreading  the 
influence  of  money,  as  being  what  had  cor¬ 
rupted  the  greatest  citizens,  exclaimed  against 
Lysander’s  conduct,  and  declared  to  the 
ephors  that  all  the  silver  and  gold  should  be 
sent  away,  as  mere  “alien  mischiefs.” 

These  consulted  about  it;  and  Theopompus 
says  it  was  Sciraphidas,  but  Ephorus  that  it 
was  Phlogidas,  who  declared  they  ought  not  to 
receive  any  gold  or  silver  into  the  city;  but  to 
use  their  own  country  coin,  which  was  iron, 
and  was  first  of  all  dipped  in  vinegar  when  it 
was  red-hot,  that  it  might  not  be  worked  up 
anew,  but  because  of  the  dipping  might  be 
hard  and  unpliable.  It  was  also,  of  course,  very 
heavy  and  troublesome  to  carry,  and  a  great 
deal  of  it  in  quantity  and  weight  was  but  a 
little  in  value.  And  perhaps  all  the  old  money 
was  so,  coin  consisting  of  iron,  or,  in  some 
countries,  copper  skewers,  whence  it  comes 
that  we  still  find  a  great  number  of  small  pieces 
of  money  retain  the  name  of  obol,  and  the 
drachma  is  six  of  these,  because  so  much  may 
be  grasped  in  one’s  hand. 


361 

But  Lysander’s  friends  being  against  it, 
and  endeavouring  to  keep  the  money  in  the 
city,  it  was  resolved  to  bring  in  this  sort  of 
money  to  be  used  publicly,  enacting,  at  the 
same  time,  that  if  any  one  was  found  in  pos¬ 
session  of  any  privately,  he  should  be  put  to 
death,  as  if  Lycurgus  had  feared  the  coin,  and 
not  the  covetousness  resulting  from  it,  which 
they  did  not  repress  by  letting  no  private  man 
keep  any,  so  much  as  they  encouraged  it,  by 
allowing  the  state  to  possess  it;  attaching 
thereby  a  sort  of  dignity  to  it,  over  and  above 
its  ordinary  utility. 

Neither  was  it  possible,  that  what  they  saw 
was  so  much  esteemed  publicly  should  be 
privately  despised  as  unprofitable;  and  that 
every  one  should  think  that  thing  could  be 
worth  nothing  for  his  own  personal  use, 
which  was  so  extremely  valued  and  desired 
for  the  use  of  the  state.  And  moral  habits, 
induced  by  public  practices,  are  far  quicker 
in  making  their  way  into  men’s  private  lives, 
than  the  failings  and  faults  of  individuals  are 
in  infecting  the  city  at  large.  For  it  is  prob¬ 
able  that  the  parts  will  be  rather  corrupted 
by  the  whole  if  that  grows  bad;  while  the 
vices  which  flow  from  a  part  into  the  whole 
find  many  correctives  and  remedies  from  that 
which  remains  sound.  Terror  and  the  law 
were  now  to  keep  guard  over  the  citizens’ 
houses,  to  prevent  any  money  entering  into 
them;  but  their  minds  could  no  longer  be 
expected  to  remain  superior  to  the  desire  of  it 
when  wealth  in  general  was  thus  set  up  to 
be  striven  after,  as  a  high  and  noble  object. 
On  this  point,  however,  we  have  given  our 
censure  of  the  Lacedaemonians  in  one  of  our 
other  writings. 

Lysander  erected  out  of  the  spoils  brazen 
statues  at  Delphi  of  himself,  and  of  every  one 
of  the  masters  of  the  ships,  as  also  figures  of 
the  golden  stars  of  Castor  and  Pollux,  which 
vanished  before  the  battle  at  Leuctra.  In  the 
treasury  of  Brasidas  and  the  Acanthians  there 
was  a  trireme  made  of  gold  and  ivory,  of  two 
cubits,  which  Cyrus  sent  Lysander  in  honour 
of  his  victory.  But  Alexandrides  of  Delphi 
writes,  in  his  history,  that  there  was  also  a  de¬ 
posit  of  Lysander’s,  a  talent  of  silver,  and  fifty- 
two  minae,  besides  eleven  staters;  a  statement 
not  consistent  with  the  generally  received  ac¬ 
count  of  his  poverty.  And  at  that  time,  Lysan¬ 
der,  being  in  fact  of  greater  power  than  any 
Greek  before,  was  yet  thought  to  show  a  pride, 
and  to  affect  a  superiority  greater  even  than  his 
power  warranted.  He  was  the  first,  as  Duris 


362 

says  in  his  history,  among  the  Greeks  to  whom 
the  cities  reared  altars  as  to  a  god,  and  sacri¬ 
ficed;  to  him  were  songs  of  triumph  first  sung, 
the  beginning  of  one  of  which  still  remains 
recorded: — 

Great  Greece’s  general  from  spacious  Sparta  we 

Will  celebrate  with  songs  of  victory. 

And  the  Samians  decreed  that  their  solem¬ 
nities  of  Juno  should  be  called  the  Lysandria; 
and  out  of  the  poets  he  had  Chcerilus  always 
with  him,  to  extol  his  achievements  in  verse; 
and  to  Antilochus,  who  had  made  some  verses 
in  his  commendation,  being  pleased  with  them, 
he  gave  a  hat  full  of  silver;  and  when  Antima- 
chus  of  Colophon,  and  one  Niceratus  of  Hera- 
clea,  competed  with  each  other  in  a  poem  on 
the  deeds  of  Lysander,  he  gave  the  garland  to 
Niceratus;  at  which  Antimachus,  in  vexation, 
suppressed  his  poem;  but  Plato,  being  then  a 
young  man  and  admiring  Antimachus  for  his 
poetry,  consoled  him  for  his  defeat  by  telling 
him  that  it  is  the  ignorant  who  are  the  sufferers 
by  ignorance,  as  truly  as  the  blind  by  want  of 
sight.  Afterwards,  when  Aristonus,  the  musi¬ 
cian,  who  had  been  a  conqueror  six  times  at  the 
Pythian  games,  told  him  as  a  piece  of  flattery, 
that  if  he  were  successful  again,  he  would  pro¬ 
claim  himself  in  the  name  of  Lysander,  “That 
is,”  he  answered,  “as  his  slave?” 

This  ambitious  temper  was  indeed  only 
burdensome  to  the  highest  personages  and  to 
his  equals,  but  through  having  so  many  peo¬ 
ple  devoted  to  serve  him,  an  extreme  haughti¬ 
ness  and  contemptuousness  grew  up,  together 
with  ambition,  in  his  character.  He  observed 
no  sort  of  moderation,  such  as  befitted  a 
private  man,  either  in  rewarding  or  in  pun¬ 
ishing;  the  recompense  of  his  friends  and 
guests  was  absolute  power  over  cities,  and 
irresponsible  authority,  and  the  only  satisfac¬ 
tion  of  his  wrath  was  the  destruction  of  his 
enemy;  banishment  would  not  suffice.  As  for 
example,  at  a  later  period,  fearing  lest  the 
popular  leaders  of  the  Milesians  should  fly, 
and  desiring  also  to  discover  those  who  lay 
hid,  he  swore  he  would  do  them  no  harm, 
and  on  their  believing  him  and  coming  forth, 
he  delivered  them  up  to  the  oligarchical  lead¬ 
ers  to  be  slain,  being  in  all  no  less  than  eight 
hundred. 

And,  indeed,  the  slaughter  in  general  of 
those  of  the  popular  party  in  the  towns  ex¬ 
ceeded  all  computation;  as  he  did  not  kill 
only  for  offences  against  himself,  but  granted 
those  favours  without  sparing,  and  joined  in 
the  execution  of  them,  to  gratify  the  many 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

hatreds  and  the  great  cupidity  of  his  friends 
everywhere  round  about  him.  From  whence 
the  saying  of  Eteocles,  the  Lacedaemonian, 
came  to  be  famous,  that  “Greece  could  not 
have  borne  two  Lysanders.”  Theophrastus 
says,  that  Archestratus  said  the  same  thing 
concerning  Alcibiades.  But  in  his  case  what 
had  given  most  offence  was  a  certain  licen¬ 
tious  and  wanton  self-will;  Lysander’s  power 
was  feared  and  hated  because  of  his  unmerci¬ 
ful  disposition. 

The  Lacedaemonians  did  not  at  all  concern 
themselves  for  any  other  accusers;  but  after¬ 
wards,  when  Pharnabazus,  having  been  in¬ 
jured  by  him,  he  having  pillaged  and  wasted 
his  country,  sent  some  to  Sparta  to  inform 
against  him,  the  ephors  taking  it  very  ill,  put 
one  of  his  friends  and  fellow-captains,  Thorax, 
to  death,  taking  him  with  some  silver  pri¬ 
vately  in  his  possession;  and  they  sent  him  a 
scroll,  commanding  him  to  return  home. 

This  scroll  is  made  up  thus:  When  the 
ephors  send  an  admiral  or  general  on  his 
way,  they  take  two  round  pieces  of  wood, 
both  exactly  of  a  length  and  thickness,  and 
cut  even  to  one  another;  they  keep  one  them¬ 
selves,  and  the  other  they  give  to  the  person 
they  send  forth;  and  these  pieces  of  wood 
they  call  scytales.  When,  therefore,  they  have 
occasion  to  communicate  any  secret  or  im¬ 
portant  matter,  making  a  scroll  of  parchment 
long  and  narrow  like  a  leathern  thong,  they 
roll  it  about  their  own  staff  of  wood,  leaving  no 
space  void  between,  but  covering  the  surface 
of  the  staff  with  the  scroll  all  over.  When  they 
have  done  this,  they  write  what  they  please 
on  the  scroll,  as  it  is  wrapped  about  the  staff; 
and  when  they  have  written,  they  take  off 
the  scroll,  and  send  it  to  the  general  without 
the  wood.  He,  when  he  has  received  it,  can 
read  nothing  of  the  writing,  because  the 
words  and  letters  are  not  connected,  but  all 
broken  up;  but  taking  his  own  staff,  he 
winds  the  slip  of  the  scroll  about  it,  so  that 
this  folding,  restoring  all  the  parts  into  the 
same  order  that  they  were  in  before,  and  put¬ 
ting  what  comes  first  into  connection  with 
what  follows,  brings  the  whole  consecutive 
contents  to  view  round  the  outside.  And  this 
scroll  is  called  a  staff,  after  the  name  of  the 
wood,  as  a  thing  measured  is  by  the  name  of 
the  measure. 

But  Lysander,  when  the  staff  came  to  him 
to  the  Hellespont,  was  troubled,  and  fearing 
Pharnabazus’s  accusations  most,  made  haste 
to  confer  with  him,  hoping  to  end  the  differ- 


LYSANDER 

ence  by  a  meeting  together.  When  they  met, 
he  desired  him  to  write  another  letter  to  the 
magistrates,  stating  that  he  had  not  been 
wronged,  and  had  no  complaint  to  prefer.  But 
he  was  ignorant  that  Pharnabazus,  as  it  is  in 
the  proverb,  played  Cretan  against  Cretan;  for 
pretending  to  do  all  that  was  desired,  openly 
he  wrote  such  a  letter  as  Lysander  wanted,  but 
kept  by  him  another,  written  privately;  and 
when  they  came  to  put  on  the  seals,  changed 
the  tablets,  which  differed  not  at  all  to  look 
upon,  and  gave  him  the  letter  which  had  been 
written  privately. 

Lysander,  accordingly,  coming  to  Lace¬ 
daemon,  and  going,  as  the  custom  is,  to  the 
magistrates’  office,  gave  Pharnabazus’s  letter 
to  the  ephors,  being  persuaded  that  the  great¬ 
est  accusation  against  him  was  now  with¬ 
drawn;  for  Pharnabazus  was  beloved  by  the 
Lacedaemonians,  having  been  the  most  zeal¬ 
ous  on  their  side  in  the  war  of  all  the  king’s 
captains.  But  after  the  magistrates  had  read 
the  letter  they  showed  it  him,  and  he  under¬ 
standing  now  that — 

Others  beside  Ulysses  deep  can  be, 

Not  the  one  wise  man  of  the  world  is  he, 

in  extreme  confusion,  left  them  at  the  time. 
But  a  few  days  after,  meeting  the  ephors,  he 
said  he  must  go  to  the  temple  of  Ammon,  and 
offer  the  god  the  sacrifices  which  he  had 
vowed  in  war. 

For  some  state  it  as  a  truth,  that  when  he 
was  besieging  the  city  of  Aphytse  in  Thrace, 
Ammon  stood  by  him  in  his  sleep;  whereupon 
raising  the  siege,  supposing  the  god  had  com¬ 
manded  it,  he  bade  the  Aphytaeans  sacrifice 
to  Ammon,  and  resolved  to  make  a  journey 
into  Libya  to  propitiate  the  god.  But  most 
were  of  opinion  that  the  god  was  but  the  pre¬ 
tence,  and  that  in  reality  he  was  afraid  of  the 
ephors,  and  that  impatience  of  the  yoke  at 
home,  and  dislike  of  living  under  authority, 
made  him  long  for  some  travel  and  wander¬ 
ing,  like  a  horse  just  brought  in  from  open 
feeding  and  pasture  to  the  stable,  and  put 
again  to  his  ordinary  work.  For  that  which 
Ephorus  states  to  have  been  the  cause  of  this 
travelling  about,  I  shall  relate  by  and  by. 

And  having  hardly  and  with  difficulty  ob¬ 
tained  leave  of  the  magistrates  to  depart,  he 
set  sail.  But  the  kings,  while  he  was  on  his 
voyage,  considering  that  keeping,  as  he  did, 
the  cities  in  possession  by  his  own  friends  and 
partisans,  he  was  in  fact  their  sovereign  and 
the  lord  of  Greece,  took  measures  for  restor- 


363 

ing  the  power  to  the  people,  and  for  throwing 
his  friends  out. 

Disturbances  commencing  again  about  these 
things,  and,  first  of  all,  the  Athenians  from 
Phyle  setting  upon  their  thirty  rulers  and  over¬ 
powering  them,  Lysander,  coming  home  in 
haste,  persuaded  the  Lacedaemonians  to  sup¬ 
port  the  oligarchies  and  to  put  down  the 
popular  governments,  and  to  the  thirty  in 
Athens,  first  of  all,  they  sent  a  hundred  tal¬ 
ents  for  the  war,  and  Lysander  himself,  as 
general,  to  assist  them.  But  the  kings  envying 
him,  and  fearing  lest  he  should  take  Athens 
again,  resolved  that  one  of  themselves  should 
take  the  command.  Accordingly,  Pausanias 
went,  and  in  words,  indeed,  professed  as  if  he 
had  been  for  the  tyrant  against  the  people, 
but  in  reality  exerted  himself  for  peace,  that  Ly¬ 
sander  might  not  by  the  means  of  his  friends 
become  lord  of  Athens  again. 

This  he  brought  easily  to  pass;  for,  recon¬ 
ciling  the  Athenians,  and  quieting  the  tu¬ 
mults,  he  defeated  the  ambitious  hope  of  Ly¬ 
sander,  though  shortly  after,  on  the  Athenians 
rebelling  again,  he  was  censured  for  having 
thus  taken,  as  it  were,  the  bit  out  of  the  mouth 
of  the  people,  which,  being  freed  from  the 
oligarchy,  would  now  break  out  again  into  af¬ 
fronts  and  insolence;  and  Lysander  regained 
the  reputation  of  a  person  who  employed  his 
command  not  in  gratification  of  others,  not  for 
applause,  but  strictly  for  the  good  of  Sparta. 

His  speech,  also,  was  bold  and  daunting 
to  such  as  opposed  him.  The  Argives,  for 
example,  contended  about  the  bounds  of  their 
land,  and  thought  they  brought  juster  pleas 
than  the  Lacedaemonians;  holding  out  his 
sword,  “He,”  said  Lysander,  “that  is  master 
of  this,  brings  the  best  argument  about  the 
bounds  of  territory.”  A  man  of  Megara,  at 
some  conference,  taking  freedom  with  him, 
“This  language,  my  friend,”  said  he,  “should 
come  from  a  city.”  To  the  Boeotians,  who 
were  acting  a  doubtful  part,  he  put  the  ques¬ 
tion,  whether  he  should  pass  through  their 
country  with  spears  upright  or  levelled.  After 
the  revolt  of  the  Corinthians,  when,  on  com¬ 
ing  to  their  walls,  he  perceived  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians  hesitating  to  make  the  assault,  and  a 
hare  was  seen  to  leap  through  the  ditch:  “Are 
you  not  ashamed,”  he  said,  “to  fear  an  enemy, 
for  whose  laziness  the  very  hares  sleep  upon 
their  walls?” 

When  King  Agis  died,  leaving  a  brother, 
Agesilaus,  and  Leontychides,  who  was  sup¬ 
posed  his  son,  Lysander,  being  attached  to 


364 

Agesilaus,  persuaded  him  to  lay  claim  to  the 
kingdom,  as  being  a  true  descendant  of  Her¬ 
cules;  Leontychides  lying  under  the  suspicion 
of  being  the  son  of  Alcibiades,  who  lived 
privately  in  familiarity  with  Timaea,  the  wife 
of  Agis,  at  the  time  he  was  a  fugitive  in 
Sparta.  Agis,  they  say,  computing  the  time, 
satisfied  himself  that  she  could  not  have  con¬ 
ceived  by  him,  and  had  hitherto  always  neg¬ 
lected  and  manifestly  disowned  Leontychides; 
but  now  when  he  was  carried  sick  to  Heraea, 
being  ready  to  die,  what  by  importunities  of 
the  young  man  himself,  and  of  his  friends,  in 
the  presence  of  many  he  declared  Leonty¬ 
chides  to  be  his;  and  desiring  those  who  were 
present  to  bear  witness  to  this  to  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians,  died.  They  accordingly  did  so 
testify  in  favour  of  Leontychides. 

And  Agesilaus,  being  otherwise  highly 
reputed  of,  and  strong  in  the  support  of 
Lysander,  was,  on  the  other  hand,  prejudiced 
by  Diopithes,  a  man  famous  for  his  knowl¬ 
edge  of  oracles,  who  adduced  this  prophecy 
in  reference  to  Agesilaus’s  lameness: — 

Beware,  great  Sparta,  lest  there  come  of  thee, 

Though  sound  thyself,  an  halting  sovereignty; 

Troubles,  both  long  and  unexpected  too, 

And  storms  of  deadly  warfare  shall  ensue. 

When  many,  therefore,  yielded  to  the  oracle, 
and  inclined  to  Leontychides,  Lysander  said 
that  Diopithes  did  not  take  the  prophecy 
rightly;  for  it  was  not  that  the  god  would  be 
offended  if  any  lame  person  ruled  over  the 
Lacedaemonians,  but  that  the  kingdom  would 
be  a  lame  one  if  bastards  and  false-born 
should  govern  with  the  posterity  of  Hercules. 
By  this  argument,  and  by  his  great  influence 
among  them,  he  prevailed,  and  Agesilaus  was 
made  king. 

Immediately,  therefore,  Lysander  spurred 
him  on  to  make  an  expedition  into  Asia,  put¬ 
ting  him  in  hopes  that  he  might  destroy  the 
Persians,  and  attain  the  height  of  greatness. 
And  he  wrote  to  his  friends  in  Asia,  bidding 
them  request  to  have  Agesilaus  appointed  to 
command  them  in  the  war  against  the  bar¬ 
barians;  which  they  were  persuaded  to,  and 
sent  ambassadors  to  Lacedaemon  to  entreat  it. 
And  this  would  seem  to  be  a  second  favour 
done  Agesilaus  by  Lysander,  not  inferior  to 
his  first  in  obtaining  him  the  kingdom. 

But  with  ambitious  natures,  otherwise  not 
ill  qualified  for  command,  the  feeling  of  jeal¬ 
ousy  of  those  near  them  in  reputation  con¬ 
tinually  stands  in  the  way  of  the  performance 
of  noble  actions;  they  make  those  their  rivals 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

in  virtue,  whom  they  ought  to  use  as  their 
helpers  to  it.  Agesilaus  took  Lysander,  among 
the  thirty  counsellors  that  accompanied  him, 
with  intentions  of  using  him  as  his  especial 
friend;  but  when  they  were  come  into  Asia, 
the  inhabitants  there,  to  whom  he  was  but 
little  known,  addressed  themselves  to  him  but 
little  and  seldom;  whereas  Lysander,  because 
of  their  frequent  previous  intercourse,  was 
visited  and  attended  by  large  numbers,  by  his 
friends  out  of  observance,  and  by  others  out 
of  fear;  and  just  as  in  tragedies  it  not  uncom¬ 
monly  is  the  case  with  the  actors,  the  person 
who  represents  a  messenger  or  servant  is 
much  taken  notice  of,  and  plays  the  chief  part, 
while  he  who  wears  the  crown  and  sceptre  is 
hardly  heard  to  speak,  even  so  was  it  about 
the  counsellor,  he  had  all  the  real  honours  of 
the  government,  and  to  the  king  was  left  the 
empty  name  of  power. 

This  disproportionate  ambition  ought  very 
likely  to  have  been  in  some  way  softened 
down,  and  Lysander  should  have  been  re¬ 
duced  to  his  proper  second  place,  but  wholly 
to  cast  off  and  to  insult  and  affront  for  glory’s 
sake  one  who  was  his  benefactor  and  friend 
was  not  worthy  of  Agesilaus  to  allow  in  him¬ 
self.  For,  first  of  all,  he  gave  him  no  opportu¬ 
nity  for  any  action,  and  never  set  him  in  any 
place  of  command;  then,  for  whomsoever  he 
perceived  him  exerting  his  interest,  these  per¬ 
sons  he  always  sent  away  with  a  refusal,  and 
with  less  attention  than  any  ordinary  suitors, 
thus  silently  undoing  and  weakening  his  in¬ 
fluence. 

Lysander,  miscarrying  in  everything,  and 
perceiving  that  his  diligence  for  his  friends 
was  but  a  hindrance  to  them,  forbore  to  help 
them,  entreating  them  that  they  would  not  ad¬ 
dress  themselves  to,  nor  observe  him,  but  that 
they  would  speak  to  the  king,  and  to  those  who 
could  be  of  more  service  to  friends  than  at 
present  he  could;  most,  on  hearing  this,  for¬ 
bore  to  trouble  him  about  their  concerns,  but 
continued  their  observances  to  him,  waiting 
upon  him  in  the  walks  and  places  of  exercise; 
at  which  Agesilaus  was  more  annoyed  than 
ever,  envying  him  the  honour;  and,  finally, 
when  he  gave  many  of  the  officers  places  of 
command  and  the  governments  of  cities,  he  ap¬ 
pointed  Lysander  carver  at  his  table,  adding, 
by  way  of  insult  to  the  Ionians,  “Let  them  go 
now,  and  pay  their  court  to  my  carver.” 

Upon  this,  Lysander  thought  fit  to  come 
and  speak  with  him;  and  a  brief  laconic  dia¬ 
logue  passed  between  them  as  follows:  “Truly, 


LYSANDER 

you  know  very  well,  O  Agesilaus,  how  to  de¬ 
press  your  friends”;  ‘‘Those  friends,”  replied 
he,  “who  would  be  greater  than  myself;  but 
those  who  increase  my  power,  it  is  just  should 
share  in  it.”  “Possibly,  O  Agesilaus,”  answered 
Lysander,  “in  all  this  there  may  be  more  said 
on  your  part  than  done  on  mine,  but  I  request 
you,  for  the  sake  of  observers  from  without, 
to  place  me  in  any  command  under  you  where 
you  may  judge  I  shall  be  the  least  offensive, 
and  most  useful.” 

Upon  this  he  was  sent  ambassador  to  the 
Hellespont;  and  though  angry  with  Agesilaus, 
yet  did  not  neglect  to  perform  his  duty,  and 
having  induced  Spithridates  the  Persian,  be¬ 
ing  offended  with  Pharnabazus,  a  gallant 
man,  and  in  command  of  some  forces,  to  re¬ 
volt,  he  brought  him  to  Agesilaus.  He  was 
not,  however,  employed  in  any  other  service, 
but  having  completed  his  time  returned  to 
Sparta,  without  honour,  angry  with  Agesilaus, 
and  hating  more  than  ever  the  whole  Spartan 
government,  and  resolved  to  delay  no  longer, 
but  while  there  was  yet  time,  to  put  into  ex¬ 
ecution  the  plans  which  he  appears  some  time 
before  to  have  concerted  for  a  revolution  and 
change  in  the  constitution. 

These  were  as  follows.  The  Heraclidae  who 
joined  with  the  Dorians,  and  came  into  Pelo¬ 
ponnesus,  became  a  numerous  and  glorious 
race  in  Sparta,  but  not  every  family  belonging 
to  it  had  the  right  of  succession  in  the  king¬ 
dom,  but  the  kings  were  chosen  out  of  two 
only,  called  the  Eurypontidae  and  the  Agi- 
adae;  the  rest  had  no  privilege  in  the  govern¬ 
ment  by  their  nobility  of  birth,  and  the  hon¬ 
ours  which  followed  from  merit  lay  open  to 
all  who  could  obtain  them. 

Lysander,  who  was  born  of  one  of  these 
families,  when  he  had  risen  into  great  re¬ 
nown  for  his  exploits,  and  had  gained  great 
friends  and  power,  was  vexed  to  see  the  city, 
which  had  increased  to  what  it  was  by  him, 
ruled  by  others  not  at  all  better  descended 
than  himself,  and  formed  a  design  to  remove 
the  government  from  the  two  families,  and  to 
give  it  in  common  to  all  the  Heraclidae;  or,  as 
some  say,  not  to  the  Heraclidae  only,  but  to  all 
the  Spartans;  that  the  reward  might  not  be¬ 
long  to  the  posterity  of  Hercules,  but  to  those 
who  were  like  Hercules,  judging  by  that  per¬ 
sonal  merit  which  raised  even  him  to  the 
honour  of  the  Godhead;  and  he  hoped  that 
when  the  kingdom  was  thus  to  be  competed 
for,  no  Spartan  would  be  chosen  before  him¬ 
self. 


365 

Accordingly  he  first  attempted  and  pre¬ 
pared  to  persuade  the  citizens  privately,  and 
studied  an  oration  composed  for  this  purpose 
by  Cleon,  the  Halicarnassian.  Afterwards,  per¬ 
ceiving  so  unexpected  and  great  an  innova¬ 
tion  required  bolder  means  of  support,  he 
proceeded,  as  it  might  be  on  the  stage,  to  avail 
himself  of  machinery,  and  to  try  the  effects  of 
divine  agency  upon  his  countrymen.  He  col¬ 
lected  and  arranged  for  his  purpose  answers 
and  oracles  from  Apollo,  not  expecting  to  get 
any  benefit  from  Cleon’s  rhetoric,  unless  he 
should  first  alarm  and  overpower  the  minds 
of  his  fellow-citizens  by  religious  and  super¬ 
stitious  terrors,  before  bringing  them  to  the 
consideration  of  his  arguments. 

Ephorus  relates,  after  he  had  endeavoured 
to  corrupt  the  oracle  of  Apollo,  and  had  again 
failed  to  persuade  the  priestess  of  Dodona  by 
means  of  Pherecles,  that  he  went  to  Ammon, 
and  discoursed  with  the  guardians  of  the  ora¬ 
cle  there,  proffering  them  a  great  deal  of  gold, 
and  that  they,  taking  this  ill,  sent  some  to 
Sparta  to  accuse  Lysander;  and  on  his  acquit¬ 
tal  the  Libyans,  going  away,  said,  “You  will 
find  us,  O  Spartans,  better  judges,  when  you 
come  to  dwell  with  us  in  Libya,”  there  being 
a  certain  ancient  oracle  that  the  Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans  should  dwell  in  Libya.  But  as  the  whole 
intrigue  and  the  course  of  the  contrivance  was 
no  ordinary  one,  nor  lightly  undertaken,  but 
depended  as  it  went  on,  like  some  mathemat 
ical  proposition,  on  a  variety  of  important  ad 
missions,  and  proceeded  through  a  series  of 
intricate  and  difficult  steps  to  its  conclusion, 
we  will  go  into  it  at  length,  following  the  ac¬ 
count  of  one  who  was  at  once  an  historian  and 
a  philosopher. 

There  was  a  woman  in  Pontus  who  pro¬ 
fessed  to  be  pregnant  by  Apollo,  which  many, 
as  was  natural,  disbelieved,  and  many  also 
gave  credit  to,  and  when  she  had  brought 
forth  a  man-child,  several,  not  unimportant 
persons,  took  an  interest  in  its  rearing  and 
bringing  up.  The  name  given  the  boy  was 
Silenus,  for  some  reason  or  other.  Lysander, 
taking  this  for  the  groundwork,  framed  and 
devised  the  rest  himself,  making  use  of  not  a 
few,  nor  these  insignificant  champions  of  his 
story,  who  brought  the  report  of  the  child’s 
birth  into  credit  without  any  suspicion. 

Another  report,  also,  was  procured  from 
Delphi  and  circulated  in  Sparta,  that  there 
were  some  very  old  oracles  which  were  kept 
by  the  priests  in  private  writings;  and  they 
were  not  to  be  meddled  with,  neither  was  it 


366 

lawful  to  read  them,  till  one  in  aftertimes 
should  come,  descended  from  Apollo,  and,  on 
giving  some  known  token  to  the  keepers, 
should  take  the  books  in  which  the  oracles 
were.  Things  being  thus  ordered  beforehand, 
Silenus,  it  was  intended,  should  come  and  ask 
for  the  oracles,  as  being  the  child  of  Apollo, 
and  those  priests  who  were  privy  to  the  de¬ 
sign  were  to  profess  to  search  narrowly  into 
all  particulars,  and  to  question  him  concern¬ 
ing  his  birth;  and,  finally,  were  to  be  con¬ 
vinced,  and,  as  to  Apollo’s  son,  to  deliver  up 
to  him  the  writings.  Then  he,  in  the  presence 
of  many  witnesses,  should  read,  amongst  other 
prophecies,  that  which  was  the  object  of  the 
whole  contrivance,  relating  to  the  office  of  the 
kings,  that  it  would  be  better  and  more  de¬ 
sirable  to  the  Spartans  to  choose  their  kings 
out  of  the  best  citizens.  And  now,  Silenus  be¬ 
ing  grown  up  to  a  youth,  and  being  ready  for 
the  action,  Lysander  miscarried  in  his  drama 
through  the  timidity  of  one  of  his  actors,  or 
assistants,  who  just  as  he  came  to  the  point, 
lost  heart  and  drew  back.  Yet  nothing  was 
found  out  while  Lysander  lived,  but  only  after 
his  death. 

He  died  before  Agesilaus  came  back  from 
Asia,  being  involved,  or  perhaps  more  truly 
having  himself  involved  Greece,  in  the  Boeo¬ 
tian  war.  For  it  is  stated  both  ways;  and  the 
cause  of  it  some  make  to  be  himself,  others  the 
Thebans,  and  some  both  together;  the  The¬ 
bans,  on  the  one  hand,  being  charged  with 
casting  away  the  sacrifices  at  Aulis,  and  that 
being  bribed  with  the  king’s  money  brought 
by  Androclides  and  Amphitheus,  they  had, 
with  the  object  of  entangling  the  Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans  in  a  Grecian  war,  set  upon  the  Phocians, 
and  wasted  their  country;  it  being  said,  on  the 
other  hand,  that  Lysander  was  angry  that  the 
Thebans  had  preferred  a  claim  to  the  tenth 
part  of  the  spoils  of  the  war,  while  the  rest  of 
the  confederates  submitted  without  complaint; 
and  because  they  expressed  indignation  about 
the  money  which  Lysander  sent  to  Sparta,  but 
more  especially,  because  from  them  the  Athe¬ 
nians  had  obtained  the  first  opportunity  of 
freeing  themselves  from  the  thirty  tyrants, 
whom  Lysander  had  made,  and  to  support 
whom  the  Lacedaemonians  issued  a  decree 
that  political  refugees  from  Athens  might  be 
arrested  in  whatever  country  they  were  found, 
and  that  those  who  impeded  their  arrest 
should  be  excluded  from  the  confederacy. 

In  reply  to  this  the  Thebans  issued  counter 
decrees  of  their  own,  truly  in  the  spirit  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

temper  of  the  actions  of  Hercules  and  Bacchus, 
that  every  house  and  city  in  Boeotia  should  be 
opened  to  the  Athenians  who  required  it,  and 
that  he  who  did  not  help  a  fugitive  who  was 
seized  should  be  fined  a  talent  for  damages, 
and  if  any  one  should  bear  arms  through 
Bceotia  to  Attica  against  the  tyrants,  that  none 
of  the  Thebans  should  either  see  or  hear  of  it. 
Nor  did  they  pass  these  human  and  truly 
Greek  decrees  without  at  the  same  time  mak¬ 
ing  their  acts  conformable  to  their  words.  For 
Thrasybulus,  and  those  who  with  him  oc¬ 
cupied  Phyle,  set  out  upon  that  enterprise  from 
Thebes,  with  arms  and  money,  and  secrecy 
and  a  point  to  start  from,  provided  for  them  by 
the  Thebans.  Such  were  the  causes  of  com¬ 
plaint  Lysander  had  against  Thebes. 

And  being  now  grown  violent  in  his  tem¬ 
per  through  the  atrabilious  tendency  which 
increased  upon  him  in  his  old  age,  he  urged  the 
ephors  and  persuaded  them  to  place  a  garrison 
in  Thebes,  and  taking  the  commander’s  place, 
he  marched  forth  with  a  body  of  troops.  Pau- 
sanias,  also,  the  king,  was  sent  shortly  after 
with  an  army. 

Now  Pausanias,  going  round  by  Cithaeron, 
was  to  invade  Boeotia;  Lysander,  meantime, 
advanced  through  Phocis  to  meet  him,  with  a 
numerous  body  of  soldiers.  He  took  the  city 
of  the  Orchomenians,  who  came  over  to  him 
of  their  own  accord,  and  plundered  Lebadea. 
He  despatched  also  letters  to  Pausanias,  order¬ 
ing  him  to  move  from  Plataea  to  meet  him  at 
Haliartus,  and  that  himself  would  be  at  the 
walls  of  Haliartus  by  break  of  day.  These  let¬ 
ters  were  brought  to  the  Thebans,  the  carrier 
of  them  falling  into  the  hands  of  some  Theban 
scouts.  They,  having  received  aid  from  Ath¬ 
ens,  committed  their  city  to  the  charge  of  the 
Athenian  troops,  and  sallying  out  about  the 
first  sleep,  succeeded  in  reaching  Haliartus  a 
little  before  Lysander,  and  part  of  them  en¬ 
tered  into  the  city. 

He  upon  this  first  of  all  resolved,  posting 
his  army  upon  a  hill,  to  stay  for  Pausanias; 
then  as  the  day  advanced,  not  being  able  to 
rest,  he  bade  his  men  take  up  their  arms,  and 
encouraging  the  allies,  led  them  in  a  column 
along  the  road  to  the  walls.  But  those  The¬ 
bans  who  had  remained  outside,  taking  the 
city  on  the  left  hand,  advanced  against  the 
rear  of  their  enemies,  by  the  fountain  which 
is  called  Cissusa;  here  they  tell  the  story  that 
the  nurses  washed  the  infant  Bacchus  after  his 
birth;  the  water  of  it  is  of  a  bright  wine- 
colour,  clear,  and  most  pleasant  to  drink;  and 


LYSANDER 

not  far  off  the  Cretan  storax  grows  all  about, 
which  the  Haliartians  adduce  in  token  of 
Rhadamanthus  having  dwelt  there,  and  they 
show  his  sepulchre,  calling  it  Alea.  And  the 
monument  also  of  Alcmena  is  hard  by;  for 
there,  as  they  say,  she  was  buried,  having 
married  Rhadamanthus  after  Amphitryon’s 
death. 

But  the  Thebans  inside  the  city,  forming  in 
order  of  battle  with  the  Haliartians,  stood 
still  for  some  time,  but  on  seeing  Lysander 
with  a  party  of  those  who  were  foremost  ap¬ 
proaching,  on  a  sudden  opening  the  gates  and 
falling  on,  they  killed  him  with  the  sooth¬ 
sayer  at  his  side,  and  a  few  others;  for  the 
greater  part  immediately  fled  back  to  the  main 
force.  But  the  Thebans  not  slackening,  but 
closely  pursuing  them,  the  whole  body  turned 
to  fly  towards  the  hills.  There  were  one  thou¬ 
sand  of  them  slain;  there  died,  also,  of  the 
Thebans  three  hundred,  who  were  killed  with 
their  enemies;  while  chasing  them  into  craggy 
and  difficult  places.  These  had  been  under  sus¬ 
picion  of  favouring  the  Lacedaemonians,  and 
in  their  eagerness  to  clear  themselves  in  the 
eyes  of  their  fellow-citizens,  exposed  them¬ 
selves  in  the  pursuit,  and  so  met  their  death. 

News  of  the  disaster  reached  Pausanias  as  he 
was  on  the  way  from  Plataea  to  Thespiae,  and 
having  set  his  army  in  order  he  came  to  Haliar- 
tus;  Thrasybulus,  also,  came  from  Thebes, 
leading  the  Athenians. 

Pausanias  proposing  to  request  the  bodies 
of  the  dead  under  truce,  the  elders  of  the 
Spartans  took  it  ill,  and  were  angry  among 
themselves,  and  coming  to  the  king,  declared 
that  Lysander  should  not  be  taken  away  upon 
any  conditions;  if  they  fought  it  out  by  arms 
about  his  body,  and  conquered,  then  they 
might  bury  him;  if  they  were  overcome,  it 
was  glorious  to  die  upon  the  spot  with  their 
commander. 

When  the  elders  had  spoken  these  things, 
Pausanias  saw  it  would  be  a  difficult  business 
to  vanquish  the  Thebans,  who  had  but  just 
been  conquerors;  that  Lysander’s  body  also 
lay  near  the  walls,  so  that  it  would  be  hard 
for  them,  though  they  overcame,  to  take  it 
away  without  a  truce;  he  therefore  sent  a 
herald,  obtained  a  truce,  and  withdrew  his 
forces,  and  carrying  away  the  body  of  Ly¬ 
sander,  they  buried  it  in  the  first  friendly  soil 
they  reached  on  crossing  the  Boeotian  frontier, 
in  the  country  of  the  Panopaeans;  where  the 
monument  still  stands  as  you  go  on  the  road 
from  Delphi  to  Chaeronea. 


367 

Now  the  army  quartering  there,  it  is  said 
that  a  person  of  Phocis,  relating  the  battle  to 
one  who  was  not  in  it,  said,  the  enemies  fell 
upon  them  just  after  Lysander  had  passed 
over  the  Hoplites;  surprised  at  which  a  Spar¬ 
tan,  a  friend  of  Lysander,  asked  what  Hopli¬ 
tes  he  meant,  for  he  did  not  know  the  name. 
“It  was  there,”  answered  the  Phocian,  “that 
the  enemy  killed  the  first  of  us;  the  rivulet  by 
the  city  is  called  Hoplites.”  On  hearing  which 
the  Spartan  shed  tears  and  observed  how  im¬ 
possible  it  is  for  any  man  to  avoid  his  ap¬ 
pointed  lot;  Lysander,  it  appears,  having  re¬ 
ceived  an  oracle  as  follows: — 

Sounding  Hoplites  see  thou  bear  in  mind, 
And  the  earthborn  dragon  following  behind. 
Some,  however,  say  that  Hoplites  does  not 
run  by  Haliartus,  but  is  a  watercourse  near 
Coronea,  falling  into  the  river  Philarus,  not 
far  from  the  town  in  former  times  called 
Hoplias,  and  now  Isomantus. 

The  man  of  Haliartus  who  killed  Lysander, 
by  name  Neochorus,  bore  on  his  shield  the  de¬ 
vice  of  a  dragon;  and  this,  it  was  supposed, 
the  oracle  signified.  It  is  said  also  that  at  the 
time  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  the  Thebans 
received  an  oracle  from  the  sanctuary  of  Is- 
menus,  referring  at  once  to  the  battle  at  Deli- 
um,  and  to  this  which  thirty  years  after  took 
place  at  Haliartus.  It  ran  thus: — 

Hunting  the  wolf,  observe  the  utmost  bound, 
And  the  hill  Orchalides  where  foxes  most  are 
found. 

By  the  words,  “the  utmost  bound,”  Delium 
being  intended,  where  Bceotia  touches  Attica, 
and  by  Orchalides,  the  hill  now  called  Alope- 
cus,  which  lies  in  the  parts  of  Haliartus 
towards  Helicon. 

But  such  a  death  befalling  Lysander,  the 
Spartans  took  it  so  grievously  at  the  time,  that 
they  put  the  king  to  a  trial  for  his  life,  which 
he  not  daring  to  await,  fled  to  Tegea,  and 
there  lived  out  his  life  in  the  sanctuary  of 
Minerva.  The  poverty  also  of  Lysander  being 
discovered  by  his  death  made  his  merit  more 
manifest,  since  from  so  much  wealth  and 
power,  from  all  the  homage  of  the  cities,  and 
of  the  Persian  kingdom,  he  had  not  in  the 
least  degree,  so  far  as  money  goes,  sought  any 
private  aggrandisement,  as  Theopompus  in 
his  history  relates,  whom  any  one  may  rather 
give  credit  to  when  he  commends  than  when 
he  finds  fault,  as  it  is  more  agreeable  to  him 
to  blame  than  to  praise. 

But  subsequently,  Ephorus  says,  some  con¬ 
troversy  arising  among  the  allies  at  Sparta, 


368 

which  made  it  necessary  to  consult  the  writ¬ 
ings  which  Lysander  had  kept  by  him,  Agesi- 
laus  came  to  his  house,  and  finding  the  book 
in  which  the  oration  on  the  Spartan  constitu¬ 
tion  was  written  at  length,  to  the  effect  that 
the  kingdom  ought  to  be  taken  from  the 
Eurypontidae  and  Agiadae,  and  to  be  offered 
in  common,  and  a  choice  made  out  of  the  best 
citizens,  at  first  he  was  eager  to  make  it  pub¬ 
lic,  and  to  show  his  countrymen  the  real  char¬ 
acter  of  Lysander.  But  Lacratidas,  a  wise  man, 
and  at  that  time  chief  of  the  ephors,  hindered 
Agesilaus,  and  said  they  ought  not  to  dig  up 
Lysander  again,  but  rather  to  bury  with  him  a 
discourse,  composed  so  plausibly  and  subtly. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Other  honours,  also,  were  paid  him,  after 
his  death;  and  amongst  these  they  imposed  a 
fine  upon  those  who  had  engaged  themselves 
to  marry  his  daughters,  and  then  when  Ly¬ 
sander  was  found  to  be  poor,  after  his  decease, 
refused  them;  because  when  they  thought  him 
rich  they  had  been  observant  of  him,  but  now 
his  poverty  had  proved  him  just  and  good, 
they  forsook  him.  For  there  was,  it  seems,  in 
Sparta,  a  punishment  for  not  marrying,  for  a 
late,  and  for  a  bad  marriage;  and  to  the  last 
penalty  those  were  most  especially  liable  who 
sought  alliances  with  the  rich  instead  of  with 
the  good  and  with  their  friends.  Such  is  the 
account  we  have  found  given  of  Lysander. 


SULLA 

138-78  B.C. 


Lucius  Cornelius  Sulla  was  descended  of 
a  patrician  or  noble  family.  Of  his  an- 
cestors,  Rufinus,  it  is  said,  had  been 
consul,  and  incurred  a  disgrace  more  signal 
than  his  distinction.  For  being  found  pos¬ 
sessed  of  more  than  ten  pounds  of  silver  plate, 
contrary  to  the  law,  he  was  for  this  reason  put 
out  of  the  senate. 

His  posterity  continued  ever  after  in  ob¬ 
scurity,  nor  had  Sulla  himself  any  opulent 
parentage.  In  his  younger  days  he  lived  in 
hired  lodgings,  at  a  low  rate,  which  in  after¬ 
times  was  adduced  against  him  as  proof  that 
he  had  been  fortunate  above  his  quality. 
When  he  was  boasting  and  magnifying  him¬ 
self  for  his  exploits  in  Libya,  a  person  of  no¬ 
ble  station  made  answer,  “And  how  can  you 
be  an  honest  man,  who,  since  the  death  of  a 
father  who  left  you  nothing,  have  become  so 
rich?” 

The  time  in  which  he  lived  was  no  longer 
an  age  of  pure  and  upright  manners,  but  had 
already  declined,  and  yielded  to  the  appetite 
for  riches  and  luxury;  yet  still,  in  the  general 
opinion,  they  who  deserted  the  hereditary  pov¬ 
erty  of  their  family  were  as  much  blamed  as 
those  who  had  run  out  a  fair  patrimonial  es¬ 
tate.  And  afterwards,  when  he  had  seized  the 
power  into  his  hands,  and  was  putting  many 
to  death,  a  freedman,  suspected  of  having  con¬ 
cealed  one  of  the  proscribed,  and  for  that  rea¬ 
son  sentenced  to  be  thrown  down  the  Tarpe- 
ian  rock,  in  a  reproachful  way  recounted  how 


they  had  lived  long  together  under  the  same 
roof,  himself  for  the  upper  rooms  paying  two 
thousand  sesterces,  and  Sulla  for  the  lower 
three  thousand;  so  that  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  their  fortunes  then  was  no  more  than 
one  thousand  sesterces,  equivalent  in  Attic 
coin  to  two  hundred  and  fifty  drachmas.  And 
thus  much  concerning  his  early  fortune. 

His  general  personal  appearance  may  be 
known  by  his  statues;  only  his  blue  eyes,  of 
themselves  extremely  keen  and  glaring,  were 
rendered  all  the  more  forbidding  and  terrible 
by  the  complexion  of  his  face,  in  which  white 
was  mixed  with  rough  blotches  of  fiery  red. 
Hence,  it  is  said,  he  was  surnamed  Sulla,  and 
in  allusion  to  it  one  of  the  scurrilous  jesters  at 
Athens  made  the  verse  upon  him — 

Sulla  is  a  mulberry  sprinkled  o’er  with  meal. 

Nor  is  it  out  of  place  to  make  use  of  marks 
of  character  like  these,  in  the  case  of  one  who 
was  by  nature  so  addicted  to  raillery,  that  in 
his  youthful  obscure  years  he  would  converse 
freely  with  players  and  professed  jesters,  and 
join  them  in  all  their  low  pleasures.  And 
when  supreme  master  of  all,  he  was  often 
wont  to  muster  together  the  most  impudent 
players  and  stage-followers  of  the  town,  and 
to  drink  and  bandy  jests  with  them  without 
regard  to  his  age  or  the  dignity  of  his  place, 
and  to  the  prejudice  of  important  affairs  that 
required  his  attention.  When  he  was  once  at 
table,  it  was  not  in  Sulla’s  nature  to  admit  of 
anything  that  was  serious,  and  whereas  at 


SULLA 

other  times  he  was  a  man  of  business  and 
austere  of  countenance,  he  underwent  all  of 
a  sudden,  at  his  first  entrance  upon  wine  and 
goodfellowship,  a  total  revolution,  and  was 
gentle  and  tractable  with  common  singers  and 
dancers,  and  ready  to  oblige  any  one  that 
spoke  with  him. 

It  seems  to  have  been  a  sort  of  diseased  re¬ 
sult  of  this  laxity  that  he  was  so  prone  to 
amorous  pleasures,  and  yielded  without  resis¬ 
tance  to  any  temptation  of  voluptuousness, 
from  which  even  in  his  old  age  he  could  not 
refrain.  He  had  a  long  attachment  for  Metro- 
bius,  a  player.  In  his  first  amours,  it  happened 
that  he  made  court  to  a  common  but  rich 
lady,  Nicopolis  by  name,  and  what  by  the  air 
of  his  youth,  and  what  by  long  intimacy,  won 
so  far  on  her  affections,  that  she  rather  than 
he  was  the  lover,  and  at  her  death  she  be¬ 
queathed  him  her  whole  property.  He  like¬ 
wise  inherited  the  estate  of  a  stepmother  who 
loved  him  as  her  own  son.  By  these  means  he 
had  pretty  well  advanced  his  fortunes. 

He  was  chosen  quaestor  to  Marius  in  his 
first  consulship,  and  set  sail  with  him  for 
Libya,  to  war  upon  Jugurtha.  Here,  in  gen¬ 
eral,  he  gained  approbation;  and  more  espe¬ 
cially,  by  closing  in  dexterously  with  an  acci¬ 
dental  occasion,  made  a  friend  of  Bocchus, 
King  of  Numidia.  He  hospitably  entertained 
the  king’s  ambassadors  on  their  escape  from 
some  Numidian  robbers,  and  after  showing 
them  much  kindness,  sent  them  on  their  jour¬ 
ney  with  presents,  and  an  escort  to  protect 
them. 

Bocchus  had  long  hated  and  dreaded  his 
son-in-law,  Jugurtha,  who  had  now  been 
worsted  in  the  field  and  had  fled  to  him  for 
shelter;  and  it  so  happened  he  was  at  this 
time  entertaining  a  design  to  betray  him.  He 
accordingly  invited  Sulla  to  come  to  him, 
wishing  the  seizure  and  surrender  of  Jugur¬ 
tha  to  be  effected  rather  through  him,  than 
directly  by  himself.  Sulla,  when  he  had  com¬ 
municated  the  business  to  Marius,  and  re¬ 
ceived  from  him  a  small  detachment,  volun¬ 
tarily  put  himself  into  this  imminent  danger; 
and  confiding  in  a  barbarian,  who  had  been 
unfaithful  to  his  own  relations,  to  apprehend 
another  man’s  person,  made  surrender  of  his 
own.  Bocchus,  having  both  of  them  now  in 
his  power,  was  necessitated  to  betray  one  or 
other,  and  after  long  debate  with  himself,  at 
last  resolved  on  his  first  design,  and  gave  up 
Jugurtha  into  the  hands  of  Sulla. 

For  this  Marius  triumphed,  but  the  glory 


369 

of  the  enterprise,  which  through  people’s  envy 
of  Marius  was  ascribed  to  Sulla,  secretly 
grieved  him.  And  the  truth  is,  Sulla  himself 
was  by  nature  vainglorious,  and  this  being  the 
first  time  that  from  a  low  and  private  condi¬ 
tion  he  had  risen  to  esteem  amongst  the  citi¬ 
zens  and  tasted  of  honour,  his  appetite  for  dis¬ 
tinction  carried  him  to  such  a  pitch  of  osten¬ 
tation,  that  he  had  a  representation  of  this  ac¬ 
tion  engraved  on  a  signet  ring,  which  he  car¬ 
ried  about  with  him,  and  made  use  of  ever 
after.  The  impress  was  Bocchus  delivering, 
and  Sulla  receiving,  Jugurtha.  This  touched 
Marius  to  the  quick;  however,  judging  Sulla 
to  be  beneath  his  rivalry,  he  made  use  of  him 
as  lieutenant,  in  his  second  consulship,  and 
in  his  third  as  tribune;  and  many  consider¬ 
able  services  were  effected  by  his  means. 
When  acting  as  lieutenant  he  took  Copillus, 
chief  of  the  Tectosages,  prisoner,  and  com¬ 
pelled  the  Marsians,  a  great  and  populous  na¬ 
tion,  to  become  friends  and  confederates  of 
the  Romans. 

Henceforward,  however,  Sulla,  perceiving 
that  Marius  bore  a  jealous  eye  over  him,  and 
would  no  longer  afford  him  opportunities  of 
action,  but  rather  opposed  his  advance,  at¬ 
tached  himself  to  Catulus,  Marius’s  colleague, 
a  worthy  man,  but  not  energetic  enough  as  a 
general.  And  under  this  commander,  who  in¬ 
trusted  him  with  the  highest  and  most  impor¬ 
tant  commissions,  he  rose  at  once  to  reputa¬ 
tion  and  to  power.  He  subdued  by  arms  most 
part  of  the  Alpine  barbarians;  and  when  there 
was  a  scarcity  in  the  armies,  he  took  that  care 
upon  himself  and  brought  in  such  a  store  of 
provisions  as  not  only  to  furnish  the  soldiers 
of  Catulus  with  abundance,  but  likewise  to 
supply  Marius.  This,  as  he.  writes  himself, 
wounded  Marius  to  the  very  heart.  So  slight 
and  childish  were  the  first  occasions  and  mo¬ 
tives  of  that  enmity  between  them,  which, 
passing  afterwards  through  a  long  course  of 
civil  bloodshed  and  incurable  divisions  to  find 
its  end  in  tyranny,  and  the  confusion  of  the 
whole  state,  proved  Euripides  to  have  been 
truly  wise  and  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the 
causes  of  disorders  in  the  body  politic,  when 
he  forewarned  all  men  to  beware  of  Ambi¬ 
tion,  as  of  all  the  higher  Powers  the  most  de¬ 
structive  and  pernicious  to  her  votaries. 

Sulla,  by  this  time  thinking  that  the  repu¬ 
tation  of  his  arms  abroad  was  sufficient  to  en¬ 
title  him  to  a  part  in  the  civil  administration, 
betook  himself  immediately  from  the  camp  to 
the  assembly,  and  offered  himself  as  a  candi- 


370 

date  for  a  praetorship,  but  failed.  The  fault  of 
this  disappointment  he  wholly  ascribes  to  the 
populace,  who,  knowing  his  intimacy  with 
King  Bocchus,  and  for  that  reason  expecting, 
that  if  he  was  made  aedile  before  his  praetor- 
ship,  he  would  then  show  them  magnificent 
hunting-shows  and  combats  between  Libyan 
wild  beasts,  chose  other  praetors,  on  purpose 
to  force  him  into  the  aedileship. 

The  vanity  of  this  pretext  is  sufficiently  dis¬ 
proved  by  matter-of-fact.  For  the  year  follow¬ 
ing,  partly  by  flatteries  to  the  people,  and 
partly  by  money,  he  got  himself  elected  prae¬ 
tor.  Accordingly,  once  while  he  was  in  office, 
on  his  angrily  telling  Caesar  that  he  should 
make  use  of  his  authority  against  him,  Caesar 
answered  him  with  a  smile,  “You  do  well  to 
call  it  your  own,  as  you  bought  it.” 

At  the  end  of  his  praetorship  he  was  sent 
over  into  Cappadocia,  under  the  pretence  of 
re-establishing  Ariobarzanes  in  his  kingdom, 
but  in  reality  to  keep  in  check  the  restless 
movements  of  Mithridates,  who  was  gradu¬ 
ally  procuring  himself  as  vast  a  new  acquired 
power  and  dominion  as  was  that  of  his  an¬ 
cient  inheritance.  He  carried  over  with  him 
no  great  forces  of  his  own,  but  making  use  of 
the  cheerful  aid  of  the  confederates,  succeeded, 
with  considerable  slaughter  of  the  Cappado¬ 
cians,  and  yet  greater  of  the  Armenian  suc¬ 
cours,  in  expelling  Gordius  and  establishing 
Ariobarzanes  as  king. 

During  his  stay  on  the  banks  of  the  Eu¬ 
phrates,  there  came  to  him  Orobazus,  a  Par¬ 
thian,  ambassador  from  King  Arsaces,  as  yet 
there  having  been  no  correspondence  between 
the  two  nations.  And  this  also  we  may  lay  to 
the  account  of  Sulla’s  felicity,  that  he  should 
be  the  first  Roman  to  whom  the  Parthians 
made  address  for  alliance  and  friendship.  At 
the  time  of  which  reception,  the  story  is,  that, 
having  ordered  three  chairs  of  state  to  be  set, 
one  for  Ariobarzanes,  one  for  Orobazus,  and 
a  third  for  himself,  he  placed  himself  in  the 
middle,  and  so  gave  audience.  For  this  the 
King  of  Parthia  afterwards  put  Orobazus  to 
death. 

Some  people  commended  Sulla  for  his  lofty 
carriage  towards  the  barbarians;  others  again 
accused  him  of  arrogance  and  unseasonable 
display.  It  is  reported  that  a  certain  Chaldaean, 
of  Orobazus’s  retinue,  looking  Sulla  wistfully 
in  the  face,  and  observing  carefully  the  mo¬ 
tions  of  his  mind  and  body,  and  forming  a 
judgment  of  his  nature,  according  to  the  rules 
of  his  art,  said  that  it  was  impossible  for  him 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

not  to  become  the  greatest  of  men;  it  was 
rather  a  wonder  how  he  could  even  then  ab¬ 
stain  from  being  head  of  all. 

At  his  return,  Censorinus  impeached  him 
of  extortion,  for  having  exacted  a  vast  sum  of 
money  from  a  well-affected  and  associate 
kingdom.  However,  Censorinus  did  not  ap¬ 
pear  at  the  trial,  but  dropped  his  accusation. 
His  quarrel,  meantime,  with  Marius  began  to 
break  out  afresh,  receiving  new  material  from 
the  ambition  of  Bocchus,  who,  to  please  the 
people  of  Rome,  and  gratify  Sulla,  set  up  in 
the  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus  images  bear¬ 
ing  trophies,  and  a  representation  in  gold  of 
the  surrender  of  Jugurtha  to  Sulla.  When 
Marius,  in  great  anger,  attempted  to  pull 
them  down,  and  others  aided  Sulla,  the  whole 
city  would  have  been  in  tumult  and  commo¬ 
tion  with  this  dispute,  had  not  the  Social  War, 
which  had  long  lain  smouldering,  blazed 
forth  at  last,  and  for  the  present  put  an  end  to 
the  quarrel. 

In  the  course  of  this  war,  which  had  many 
great  changes  of  fortune,  and  which,  more 
than  any,  afflicted  the  Romans,  and,  indeed, 
endangered  the  very  being  of  the  Common¬ 
wealth,  Marius  was  not  able  to  signalise  his 
valour  in  any  action,  but  left  behind  him  a 
clear  proof,  that  warlike  excellence  requires  a 
strong  and  still  vigorous  body.  Sulla,  on  the 
other  hand,  by  his  many  achievements,  gained 
himself,  with  his  fellow-citizens,  the  name  of 
a  great  commander,  while  his  friends  thought 
him  the  greatest  of  all  commanders,  and  his  en¬ 
emies  called  him  the  most  fortunate. 

Nor  did  this  make  the  same  sort  of  impres¬ 
sion  on  him  as  it  made  on  Timotheus,  the  son 
of  Conon,  the  Athenian;  who,  when  his  ad¬ 
versaries  ascribed  his  successes  to  his  good 
luck,  and  had  a  painting  made,  representing 
him  asleep,  and  Fortune  by  his  side,  casting 
her  nets  over  the  cities,  was  rough  and  violent 
in  his  indignation  at  those  who  did  it,  as  if,  by 
attributing  all  to  Fortune,  they  had  robbed 
him  of  his  just  honours;  and  said  to  the  peo¬ 
ple  on  one  occasion  at  his  return  from  war, 
“In  this,  ye  men  of  Athens,  Fortune  had  no 
part.”  A  piece  of  boyish  petulance,  which  the 
deity,  we  are  told,  played  back  upon  Timothe¬ 
us;  who  from  that  time  was  never  able  to 
achieve  anything  that  was  great,  but  proving 
altogether  unfortunate  in  his  attempts,  and 
falling  into  discredit  with  the  people,  was  at 
last  banished  the  city. 

Sulla,  on  the  contrary,  not  only  accepted 
with  pleasure  the  credit  of  such  divine  felici- 


SULLA 

ties  and  favours,  but  joining  himself ‘and  ex¬ 
tolling  and  glorifying  what  was  done,  gave 
the  honour  of  all  to  Fortune,  whether  it  were 
out  of  boastfulness,  or  a  real  feeling  of  divine 
agency.  He  remarks,  in  his  Memoirs,  that  of 
all  his  well-advised  actions,  none  proved  so 
lucky  in  the  execution  as  what  he  had  boldly 
enterprised,  not  by  calculation,  but  upon  the 
moment.  And,  in  the  character  which  he  gives 
of  himself,  that  he  was  born  for  fortune  rather 
than  war,  he  seems  to  give  Fortune  a  higher 
place  than  merit,  and,  in  short,  makes  him¬ 
self  entirely  the  creature  of  a  superior  power, 
accounting  even  his  concord  with  Metellus, 
his  equal  in  office,  and  his  connection  by  mar¬ 
riage,  a  piece  of  preternatural  felicity.  For  ex¬ 
pecting  to  have  met  in  him  a  most  trouble¬ 
some,  he  found  him  a  most  accommodating, 
colleague. 

Moreover,  in  the  Memoirs  which  he  dedi¬ 
cated  to  Lucullus,  he  admonished  him  to  es¬ 
teem  nothing  more  trustworthy  than  what 
the  divine  powers  advise  him  by  night.  And 
when  he  was  leaving  the  city  with  an  army, 
to  fight  in  the  Social  War,  he  relates  that  the 
earth  near  the  Laverna  opened,  and  a  quan¬ 
tity  of  fire  came  rushing  out  of  it,  shooting 
up  with  a  bright  flame  into  the  heavens.  The 
soothsayers  upon  this  foretold  that  a  person 
of  great  qualities,  and  of  a  rare  and  singular 
aspect,  should  take  the  government  in  hand, 
and  quiet  the  present  troubles  of  the  city. 
Sulla  affirms  he  was  the  man,  for  his  golden 
head  of  hair  made  him  an  extraordinary¬ 
looking  man,  nor  had  he  any  shame,  after  the 
great  actions  he  had  done,  in  testifying  to  his 
own  great  qualities.  And  thus  much  of  his 
opinion  as  to  divine  agency. 

In  general  he  would  seem  to  have  been  of 
a  very  irregular  character,  full  of  inconsisten¬ 
cies  with  himself;  much  given  to  rapine,  to  prod¬ 
igality  yet  more;  in  promoting  or  disgracing 
whom  he  pleased,  alike  unaccountable;  cring¬ 
ing  to  those  he  stood  in  need  of,  and  domi¬ 
neering  over  others  who  stood  in  need  of  him, 
so  that  it  was  hard  to  tell  whether  his  nature 
had  more  in  it  of  pride  or  of  servility. 

As  to  his  unequal  distribution  of  punish¬ 
ments,  as,  for  example,  that  upon  slight 
grounds  he  would  put  to  the  torture,  and 
again  would  bear  patiently  with  the  greatest 
wrongs;  would  readily  forgive  and  be  recon¬ 
ciled  after  the  most  heinous  acts  of  enmity, 
and  yet  would  visit  small  and  inconsiderable 
offences  with  death  and  confiscation  of  goods; 
one  might  judge  that  in  himself  he  was  really 


371 

of  a  violent  and  revengeful  nature,  which, 
however,  he  could  qualify,  upon  reflection,  for 
his  interest.  In  this  very  Social  War,  when  the 
soldiers  with  stones  and  clubs  had  killed  an 
officer  of  praetorian  rank,  his  own  lieutenant, 
Albinus  by  name,  he  passed  by  this  flagrant 
crime  without  any  inquiry,  giving  it  out  more¬ 
over  in  a  boast,  that  the  soldiers  would  be¬ 
have  all  the  better  now,  to  make  amends,  by 
some  special  bravery,  for  their  breach  of  dis¬ 
cipline.  He  took  no  notice  of  the  clamours  of 
those  that  cried  for  justice,  but  designing  al¬ 
ready  to  supplant  Marius,  now  that  he  saw 
the  Social  War  near  its  end,  he  made  much 
of  his  army,  in  hopes  to  get  himself  declared 
general  of  the  forces  against  Mithridates. 

At  his  return  to  Rome  he  was  chosen  con¬ 
sul  with  Quintus  Pompeius,  in  the  fiftieth 
year  of  his  age,  and  made  a  most  distin¬ 
guished  marriage  with  Caecilia,  daughter  of 
Metellus,  the  chief  priest.  The  common  peo¬ 
ple  made  a  variety  of  verses  in  ridicule  of  the 
marriage,  and  many  of  the  nobility  also  were 
disgusted  at  it,  esteeming  him,  as  Livy  writes, 
unworthy  of  this  connection,  whom  before 
they  thought  worthy  of  a  consulship. 

This  was  not  his  only  wife,  for  first,  in  his 
younger  days,  he  was  married  to  Ilia,  by 
whom  he  had  a  daughter;  after  her  to  ALlia; 
and  thirdly  to  Clcelia,  whom  he  dismissed  as 
barren,  but  honourably,  and  with  professions 
of  respect,  adding,  moreover,  presents.  But  the 
match  between  him  and  Metella,  falling  out  a 
few  days  after,  occasioned  suspicions  that  he 
had  complained  of  Cloelia  without  due  cause. 

To  Metella  he  always  showed  great  defer¬ 
ence,  so  much  so  that  the  people,  when  anx¬ 
ious  for  the  recall  of  the  exiles  of  Marius’s 
party,  upon  his  refusal,  entreated  the  inter¬ 
cession  of  Metella.  And  the  Athenians,  it  is 
thought,  had  harder  measure,  at  the  capture 
of  their  town,  because  they  used  insulting  lan¬ 
guage  to  Metella  in  their  jests  from  the  walls 
during  the  siege.  But  of  this  hereafter. 

At  present  esteeming  the  consulship  but  a 
small  matter  in  comparison  of  things  to  come, 
he  was  impatiently  carried  away  in  thought  to 
the  Mithridatic  War.  Here  he  was  withstood 
by  Marius;  who  out  of  mad  affectation  of 
glory  and  thirst  for  distinction,  those  never 
dying  passions,  though  he  were  now  unwieldy 
in  body,  and  had  given  up  service,  on  account 
of  his  age,  during  the  late  campaigns,  still 
coveted  after  command  in  a  distant  war  be¬ 
yond  the  seas. 

And  whilst  Sulla  was  departed  for  the 


372 

camp,  to  order  the  rest  of  his  affairs  there,  he 
sat  brooding  at  home,  and  at  last  hatched 
that  execrable  sedition,  which  wrought  Rome 
more  mischief  than  all  her  enemies  together 
had  done,  as  was  indeed  foreshown  by  the 
gods.  For  a  flame  broke  forth  of  its  own  ac¬ 
cord,  from  under  the  staves  of  the  ensigns, 
and  was  with  difficulty  extinguished.  Three  ra¬ 
vens  brought  their  young  into  the  open  road, 
and  ate  them,  carrying  the  relics  into  the  nest 
again.  Mice  having  gnawed  the  consecrated 
gold  in  one  of  the  temples,  the  keepers  caught 
one  of  them,  a  female,  in  a  trap;  and  she  bring¬ 
ing  forth  five  young  ones  in  the  very  trap, 
devoured  three  of  them.  But  what  was  great¬ 
est  of  all,  in  a  calm  and  clear  sky  there  was 
heard  the  sound  of  a  trumpet,  with  such  a  loud 
and  dismal  blast  as  struck  terror  and  amaze¬ 
ments  into  the  hearts  of  the  people. 

The  Etruscan  sages  affirmed  that  this  prod¬ 
igy  betokened  the  mutation  of  the  age,  and  a 
general  revolution  in  the  world.  For  accord¬ 
ing  to  them  there  are  in  all  eight  ages,  differ¬ 
ing  one  from  another  in  the  lives  and  the 
characters  of  men,  and  to  each  of  these  God 
has  allotted  a  certain  measure  of  time,  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  circuit  of  the  great  year.  And 
when  one  age  is  run  out,  at  the  approach  of 
another,  there  appears  some  wonderful  sign 
from  earth  or  heaven,  such  as  makes  it  mani¬ 
fest  at  once  to  those  who  have  made  it  their 
business  to  study  such  things,  that  there  has 
succeeded  in  the  world  a  new  race  of  men,  dif¬ 
fering  in  customs  and  institutes  of  life,  and 
more  or  less  regarded  by  the  gods  than  the 
preceding.  Among  other  great  changes  that 
happen,  as  they  say,  at  the  turn  of  ages,  the 
art  of  divination,  also,  at  one  time  rises  in  es¬ 
teem,  and  is  more  successful  in  its  predictions, 
clearer  and  surer  tokens  being  sent  from  God, 
and  then,  again,  in  another  generation  de¬ 
clines  as  low,  becoming  mere  guesswork  for 
the  most  part,  and  discerning  future  events  by 
dim  and  uncertain  intimations.  This  was  the 
mythology  of  the  wisest  of  the  Tuscan  sages, 
who  were  thought  to  possess  a  knowledge  be¬ 
yond  other  men. 

Whilst  the  senate  sat  in  consultation  with 
the  soothsayers,  concerning  these  prodigies,  in 
the  temple  of  Bellona,  a  sparrow  came  flying 
in,  before  them  all,  with  a  grasshopper  in  its 
mouth,  and  letting  fall  one  part  of  it,  flew 
away  with  the  remainder.  The  diviners  fore¬ 
boded  commotions  and  dissensions  between 
the  great  landed  proprietors  and  the  common 
city  populace;  the  latter,  like  the  grasshopper, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

being  loud  and  talkative;  while  the  sparrow 
might  represent  the  “dwellers  in  the  field/’ 

Marius  had  taken  into  alliance  Sulpicius, 
the  tribune,  a  man  second  to  none  in  any  vil¬ 
lainies,  so  that  it  was  less  the  question  what 
others  he  surpassed,  but  rather  in  what  re¬ 
spects  he  most  surpassed  himself  in  wicked¬ 
ness.  He  was  cruel,  bold,  rapacious,  and  in  all 
these  points  utterly  shameless  and  unscrupu¬ 
lous;  not  hesitating  to  offer  Roman  citizen¬ 
ship  by  public  sale  to  freed  slaves  and  aliens, 
and  to  count  out  the  price  on  public  money- 
tables  in  the  Forum.  He  maintained  three 
thousand  swordmen,  and  had  always  about 
him  a  company  of  young  men  of  the  eques¬ 
trian  class  ready  for  all  occasions,  whom  he 
styled  his  Anti-senate.  Having  had  a  law  en¬ 
acted,  that  no  senator  should  contract  a  debt 
of  above  two  thousand  drachmas,  he  himself, 
after  death,  was  found  indebted  three  millions. 

This  was  the  man  whom  Marius  let  in  upon 
the  Commonwealth,  and  who,  confounding  all 
things  by  force  and  the  sword,  made  several 
ordinances  of  dangerous  consequence,  and 
amongst  the  rest  one  giving  Marius  the  con¬ 
duct  of  the  Mithridatic  war.  Upon  this  the  con¬ 
suls  proclaimed  a  public  cessation  of  business, 
but  as  they  were  holding  an  assembly  near  the 
temple  of  Castor  and  Pollux,  he  let  loose  the 
rabble  upon  them,  and  amongst  many  others 
slew  the  consul  Pompeius’s  young  son  in  the 
Forum,  Pompeius  himself  hardly  escaping  in 
the  crowd.  Sulla,  being  closely  pursued  into 
the  house  of  Marius,  was  forced  to  come  forth 
and  dissolve  the  cessation;  and  for  his  doing 
this,  Sulpicius,  having  deposed  Pompeius,  al¬ 
lowed  Sulla  to  continue  his  consulship,  only 
transferring  the  Mithridatic  expedition  to  Ma¬ 
rius. 

There  were  immediately  despatched  to  Nola 
tribunes  to  receive  the  army,  and  bring  it  to 
Marius;  but  Sulla,  having  got  first  to  the 
camp,  and  the  soldiers,  upon  hearing  the 
news,  having  stoned  the  tribunes,  Marius,  in 
requital,  proceeded  to  put  the  friends  of  Sulla 
in  the  city  to  the  sword,  and  rifled  their 
goods.  Every  kind  of  removal  and  flight  went 
on,  some  hastening  from  the  camp  to  the  city, 
others  from  the  city  to  the  camp. 

The  senate,  no  more  in  its  own  power,  but 
wholly  governed  by  the  dictates  of  Marius  and 
Sulpicius,  alarmed  at  the  report  of  Sulla’s  ad¬ 
vancing  with  his  troops  towards  the  city,  sent 
forth  two  of  the  praetors,  Brutus  and  Servilius, 
to  forbid  his  nearer  approach.  The  soldiers 
would  have  slain  these  praetors  in  a  fury,  for 


SULLA 

their  bold  language  to  Sulla;  contenting  them¬ 
selves,  however,  with  breaking  their  rods,  and 
tearing  off  their  purple-edged  robes,  after 
much  contumelious  usage  they  sent  them 
back,  to  the  sad  dejection  of  the  citizens,  who 
beheld  their  magistrates  despoiled  of  their 
badges  of  office,  and  announcing  to  them  that 
things  were  now  manifestly  come  to  a  rupture 
past  all  cure. 

Marius  put  himself  in  readiness,  and  Sulla 
with  his  colleague  moved  from  Nola,  at  the 
head  of  six  complete  legions,  all  of  them  will¬ 
ing  to  march  up  directly  against  the  city, 
though  he  himself  as  yet  was  doubtful  in 
thought,  and  apprehensive  of  the  danger.  As 
he  was  sacrificing,  Postumius,  the  soothsayer, 
having  inspected  the  entrails,  stretching  forth 
both  hands  to  Sulla,  required  to  be  bound  and 
kept  in  custody  till  the  battle  was  over,  as 
willing,  if  they  had  not  speedy  and  complete 
success,  to  suffer  the  utmost  punishment.  It  is 
said,  also,  that  there  appeared  to  Sulla  him¬ 
self,  in  a  dream,  a  certain  goddess,  whom  the 
Romans  learnt  to  worship  from  the  Cappa¬ 
docians,  whether  it  be  the  Moon,  or  Pallas,  or 
Bellona.  This  same  goddess,  to  his  thinking, 
stood  by  him,  and  put  into  his  hand  thunder 
and  lightning,  then  naming  his  enemies  one 
by  one,  bade  him  strike  them,  who,  all  of 
them,  fell  on  the  discharge  and  disappeared. 
Encouraged  by  this  vision,  and  relating  it  to 
his  colleague,  next  day  he  led  on  towards 
Rome. 

About  Picinae  being  met  by  a  deputation, 
beseeching  him  not  to  attack  at  once,  in  the 
heat  of  a  march,  for  that  the  senate  had  de¬ 
creed  to  do  him  all  the  right  imaginable,  he 
consented  to  halt  on  the  spot,  and  sent  his  of¬ 
ficers  to  measure  out  the  ground,  as  is  usual, 
for  a  camp;  so  that  the  deputation,  believing 
it,  returned.  They  were  no  sooner  gone,  but 
he  sent  a  party  on  under  the  command  of 
Lucius  Basillus  and  Caius  Mummius,  to  se¬ 
cure  the  city  gate,  and  the  walls  on  the  side 
of  the  Esquiline  hill,  and  then  close  at  their 
heels  followed  himself  with  all  speed. 

Basillus  made  his  way  successfully  into  the 
city,  but  the  unarmed  multitude,  pelting  him 
with  stones  and  tiles  from  off  the  houses, 
stopped  his  further  progress,  and  beat  him 
back  to  the  wall.  Sulla  by  this  time  was  come 
up,  and  seeing  what  was  going  on,  called 
aloud  to  his  men  to  set  fire  to  the  houses,  and 
taking  a  flaming  torch,  he  himself  led  the 
way,  and  commanded  the  archers  to  make  use 
of  their  fire-darts,  letting  fly  at  the  tops  of 


373 

houses;  all  which  he  did,  not  upon  any  plan, 
but  simply  in  his  fury,  yielding  the  conduct 
of  that  day’s  work  to  passion,  and  as  if  all  he 
saw  were  enemies,  without  respect  or  pity 
either  to  friends,  relations,  or  acquaintance, 
made  his  entry  by  fire,  which  knows  no  dis¬ 
tinction  betwixt  friend  or  foe. 

In  this  conflict,  Marius,  being  driven  into 
the  temple  of  Mother-Earth,  thence  invited  the 
slaves  by  proclamation  of  freedom,  but  the 
enemy  coming  on,  he  was  overpowered  and 
fled  the  city. 

Sulla,  having  called  a  senate,  had  sentence  of 
death  passed  on  Marius,  and  some  few  others, 
amongst  whom  was  Sulpicius,  tribune  of  the 
people.  Sulpicius  was  killed,  being  betrayed 
by  his  servant,  whom  Sulla  first  made  free, 
and  then  threw  him  headlong  down  the  Tar- 
peian  rock.  As  for  Marius,  he  set  a  price  on 
his  life,  by  proclamation,  neither  gratefully 
nor  politically,  if  we  consider  into  whose 
house,  not  long  before,  he  put  himself  at 
mercy,  and  was  safely  dismissed.  Had  Marius 
at  that  time  not  let  Sulla  go,  but  suffered  him 
to  be  slain  by  the  hands  of  Sulpicius,  he  might 
have  been  lord  of  all;  nevertheless,  he  spared 
his  life,  and  a  few  days  after,  when  in  a  sim¬ 
ilar  position  himself,  received  a  different 
measure. 

By  these  proceedings  Sulla  excited  the  se¬ 
cret  distaste  of  the  senate;  but  the  displeasure 
and  free  indignation  of  the  commonalty 
showed  itself  plainly  by  their  actions.  For  they 
ignominiously  rejected  Nonius,  his  nephew, 
and  Servius,  who  stood  for  offices  of  state  by 
his  interest,  and  elected  others  as  magistrates, 
by  honouring  whom  they  thought  they  should 
most  annoy  him.  He  made  semblance  of  ex¬ 
treme  satisfaction  at  all  this,  as  if  the  people 
by  his  means  had  again  enjoyed  the  liberty 
of  doing  what  seemed  best  to  them. 

And  to  pacify  the  public  hostility,  he  cre¬ 
ated  Lucius  Cinna  consul,  one  of  the  adverse 
party,  having  first  bound  -him  under  oaths 
and  imprecations  to  be  favourable  to  his  inter¬ 
est.  For  Cinna,  ascending  the  capitol  with  a 
stone  in  his  hand,  swore  solemnly,  and  prayed 
with  direful  curses,  that  he  himself,  if  he  were 
not  true  to  his  friendship  with  Sulla,  might  be 
cast  out  of  the  city,  as  that  stone  out  of  his 
hand;  and  thereupon  cast  the  stone  to  the 
ground,  in  the  presence  of  many  people.  Nev¬ 
ertheless,  Cinna  had  no  sooner  entered  on  his 
charge,  but  he  took  measures  to  disturb  the 
present  settlement,  having  prepared  an  im¬ 
peachment  against  Sulla,  got  Virginius,  one  of 


374 

the  tribunes  of  the  people,  to  be  his  accuser; 
but  Sulla,  leaving  him  and  the  court  of  judica¬ 
ture  to  themselves,  set  forth  against  Mithri- 
dates. 

About  the  time  that  Sulla  was  making  ready 
to  put  off  with  his  force  from  Italy,  besides 
many  other  omens  which  befell  Mithridates, 
then  staying  at  Pergamus,  there  goes  a  story 
that  a  figure  of  Victory,  with  a  crown  in  her 
hand,  which  the  Pergamenians  by  machinery 
from  above  let  down  on  him,  when  it  had 
almost  reached  his  head,  fell  to  pieces,  and  the 
crown  tumbling  down  into  the  midst  of  the 
theatre,  there  broke  against  the  ground,  occa¬ 
sioning  a  general  alarm  among  the  populace, 
and  considerably  disquieting  Mithridates  him¬ 
self,  although  his  affairs  at  that  time  were 
succeeding  beyond  expectation. 

For  having  wrested  Asia  from  the  Romans, 
and  Bithynia  and  Cappadocia  from  their 
kings,  he  made  Pergamus  his  royal  seat,  dis¬ 
tributing  among  his  friends  riches,  principali¬ 
ties,  and  kingdoms.  Of  his  sons,  one  residing 
in  Pontus  and  Bosporus  held  his  ancient  realm 
as  far  as  the  deserts  beyond  the  lake  Maeotis, 
without  molestation;  while  Ariarathes,  an¬ 
other,  was  reducing  Thrace  and  Macedon, 
with  a  great  army,  to  obedience.  His  generals, 
with  forces  under  them,  were  establishing  his 
supremacy  in  other  quarters.  Archelaus,  in 
particular,  with  his  fleet,  held  absolute  mas¬ 
tery  of  the  sea,  and  was  bringing  into  sub¬ 
jection  the  Cyclades,  and  all  the  other  islands 
as  far  as  Malea,  and  had  taken  Euboea  itself. 

Making  Athens  his  headquarters,  from 
thence  as  far  as  Thessaly  he  was  withdrawing 
the  states  of  Greece  from  the  Roman  alle¬ 
giance,  without  the  least  ill-success,  except  at 
Chaeronea.  For  here  Bruttius  Sura,  lieutenant 
to  Sentius,  governor  of  Macedon,  a  man  of 
singular  valour  and  prudence,  met  him,  and, 
though  he  came  like  a  torrent  pouring  over 
Bceotia,  made  stout  resistance,  and  thrice  giv¬ 
ing  him  battle  near  Chaeronea,  repulsed  and 
forced  him  back  to  the  sea.  But  being  com¬ 
manded  by  Lucius  Lucullus  to  give  place  to 
his  successor,  Sulla,  and  resign  the  war  to 
whom  it  was  decreed,  he  presently  left  Bceotia, 
and  retired  back  to  Sentius,  although  his  suc¬ 
cess  had  outgone  all  hopes,  and  Greece  was 
well  disposed  to  a  new  revolution,  upon  ac¬ 
count  of  his  gallant  behaviour.  These  were 
the  glorious  actions  of  Bruttius. 

Sulla,  on  his  arrival,  received  by  their  depu¬ 
tations  the  compliments  of  all  the  cities  of 
Greece,  except  Athens,  against  which,  as  it 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

was  compelled  by  the  tyrant  Aristion  to  hold 
for  the  king,  he  advanced  with  all  his  forces, 
and  investing  the  Piraeus,  laid  formal  siege  to 
it,  employing  every  variety  of  engines,  and 
trying  every  manner  of  assault;  whereas,  had 
he  forborne  but  a  little  while,  he  might  with¬ 
out  hazard  have  taken  the  Upper  City  by 
famine,  it  being  already  reduced  to  the  last 
extremity,  through  want  of  necessaries.  But 
eager  to  return  to  Rome,  and  fearing  innova¬ 
tion  there,  at  great  risk,  with  continual  fight¬ 
ing  and  vast  expense,  he  pushed  on  the  war. 

Besides  other  equipage,  the  very  work  about 
the  engines  of  battery  was  supplied  with  no 
less  than  ten  thousand  yoke  of  mules,  em¬ 
ployed  daily  in  that  service.  And  when  tim¬ 
ber  grew  scarce,  for  many  of  the  works  failed, 
some  crushed  to  pieces  by  their  own  weight, 
others  taking  fire  by  the  continual  play  of  the 
enemy,  he  had  recourse  to  the  sacred  groves, 
and  cut  down  the  trees  of  the  Academy,  the 
shadiest  of  all  the  suburbs,  and  the  Lyceum. 

And  a  vast  sum  of  money  being  wanted  to 
carry  on  the  war,  he  broke  into  the  sanctuaries 
of  Greece,  that  of  Epidaurus  and  that  of 
Olympia,  sending  for  the  most  beautiful  and 
precious  offerings  deposited  there.  He  wrote, 
likewise,  to  the  Amphictyons  at  Delphi,  that 
it  were  better  to  remit  the  wealth  of  the  god 
to  him,  for  that  he  would  keep  it  more  se¬ 
curely,  or  in  case  he  made  use  of  it,  restore  as 
much.  He  sent  Caphis,  the  Phocian,  one  of  his 
friends,  with  this  message,  commanding  him 
to  receive  each  item  by  weight. 

Caphis  came  to  Delphi,  but  was  loth  to 
touch  the  holy  things,  and  with  many  tears,  in 
the  presence  of  the  Amphictyons,  bewailed 
the  necessity.  And  on  some  of  them  declaring 
they  heard  the  sound  of  a  harp  from  the  inner 
shrine,  he,  whether  he  himself  believed  it,  or 
was  willing  to  try  the  effect  of  religious  fear 
upon  Sulla,  sent  back  an  express.  To  which 
Sulla  replied  in  a  scoffing  way,  that  it  was 
surprising  to  him  that  Caphis  did  not  know 
that  music  was  a  sign  of  joy,  not  anger;  he 
should,  therefore,  go  on  boldly,  and  accept 
what  a  gracious  and  bountiful  god  offered. 

Other  things  were  sent  away  without  much 
notice  on  the  part  of  the  Greeks  in  general, 
but  in  the  case  of  the  silver  tun,  that  only  relic 
of  the  regal  donations,  which  its  weight  and 
bulk  made  it  impossible  for  any  carriage  to 
receive,  the  Amphictyons  were  forced  to  cut 
it  into  pieces,  and  called  to  mind  in  so  doing, 
how  Titus  Flamininus,  and  Manius  Acilius, 
and  again  Paulus  ^Emilius,  one  of  whom 


SULLA 

drove  Antiochus  out  of  Greece,  and  the  others 
subdued  the  Macedonian  kings,  had  not  only 
abstained  from  violating  the  Greek  temples, 
but  had  even  given  them  new  gifts  and  hon¬ 
ours,  and  increased  the  general  veneration  for 
them.  They,  indeed,  the  lawful  commanders 
of  temperate  and  obedient  soldiers,  and  them¬ 
selves  great  in  soul,  and  simple  in  expenses, 
lived  within  the  bounds  of  the  ordinary  estab¬ 
lished  charges,  accounting  it  a  greater  dis¬ 
grace  to  seek  popularity  with  their  men,  than 
to  feel  fear  of  their  enemy. 

Whereas  the  commanders  of  these  times, 
attaining  to  superiority  by  force,  not  worth, 
and  having  need  of  arms  one  against  another, 
rather  than  against  the  public  enemy,  were 
constrained  to  temporise  in  authority,  and  in 
order  to  pay  for  the  gratifications  with  which 
they  purchased  the  labour  of  their  soldiers, 
were  driven,  before  they  knew  it,  to  sell  the 
commonwealth  itself,  and,  to  gain  the  mas¬ 
tery  over  men  better  than  themselves,  were 
content  to  become  slaves  to  the  vilest  of 
wretches.  These  practices  drove  Marius  into 
exile,  and  again  brought  him  in  against  Sulla. 
These  made  Cinna  the  assassin  of  Octavius, 
and  Fimbria  of  Flaccus.  To  which  courses 
Sulla  contributed  not  the  least;  for  to  corrupt 
and  win  over  those  who  were  under  the  com¬ 
mand  of  others,  he  would  be  munificent  and 
profuse  towards  those  who  were  under  his 
own;  and  so,  while  tempting  the  soldiers  of 
other  generals  to  treachery,  and  his  own  to 
dissolute  living,  he  was  naturally  in  want  of 
a  large  treasury,  and  especially  during  that 
siege. 

Sulla  had  a  vehement  and  an  implacable 
desire  to  conquer  Athens,  whether  out  of  emu¬ 
lation,  fighting  as  it  were  against  the  shadow 
of  the  once  famous  city,  or  out  of  anger,  at  the 
foul  words  and  scurrilous  jests  with  which  the 
tyrant  Aristion,  showing  himself  daily,  with 
unseemly  gesticulations,  upon  the  walls,  had 
provoked  him  and  Metella. 

The  tyrant  Aristion  had  his  very  being 
compounded  of  wantonness  and  cruelty,  hav¬ 
ing  gathered  into  himself  all  the  worst  of 
Mithridates’s  diseased  and  vicious  qualities, 
like  some  fatal  malady  which  the  city,  after  its 
deliverance  from  innumerable  wars,  many 
tyrannies  and  seditions,  was  in  its  last  days 
destined  to  endure.  At  the  time  when  a  me- 
dimnus  of  wheat  was  sold  in  the  city  for  one 
thousand  drachmas  and  men  were  forced  to 
live  on  the  feverfew  growing  round  the  cita¬ 
del,  and  to  boil  down  shoes  and  oil-bags  for 


375 

their  food,  he,  carousing  and  feasting  in  the 
open  face  of  day,  then  dancing  in  armour, 
and  making  jokes  at  the  enemy,  suffered  the 
holy  lamp  of  the  goddess  to  expire  for  want 
of  oil,  and  to  the  chief  priestess,  who  de¬ 
manded  of  him  the  twelfth  part  of  a  medim- 
nus  of  wheat,  he  sent  the  like  quantity  of 
pepper. 

The  senators  and  priests  who  came  as  sup¬ 
pliants  to  beg  of  him  to  take  compassion  on 
the  city,  and  treat  for  peace  with  Sulla,  he 
drove  away  and  dispersed  with  a  flight  of  ar¬ 
rows.  At  last,  with  much  ado,  he  sent  forth 
two  or  three  of  his  revelling  companions  to 
parley,  to  whom  Sulla,  perceiving  that  they 
made  no  serious  overtures  towards  an  accom¬ 
modation,  but  went  on  haranguing  in  praise 
of  Theseus,  Eumolpus,  and  the  Median  tro¬ 
phies,  replied,  “My  good  friends,  you  may  put 
up  your  speeches  and  be  gone.  I  was  sent  by 
the  Romans  to  Athens,  not  to  take  lessons, 
but  to  reduce  rebels  to  obedience.” 

In  the  meantime  news  came  to  Sulla  that 
some  old  men,  talking  in  the  Ceramicus,  had 
been  overheard  to  blame  the  tyrant  for  not 
securing  the  passages  and  approaches  near  the 
Heptachalcum,  the  one  point  where  the  enemy 
might  easily  get  over.  Sulla  neglected  not  the 
report,  but  going  in  the  night,  and  discover¬ 
ing  the  place  to  be  assailable,  set  instantly  to 
work.  Sulla  himself  makes  mention  in  his 
Memoirs  that  Marcus  Teius,  the  first  man 
who  scaled  the  wall,  meeting  with  an  adver¬ 
sary,  and  striking  him  on  the  headpiece  a 
home-stroke,  broke  his  own  sword,  but,  not¬ 
withstanding,  did  not  give  ground,  but  stood 
and  held  him  fast.  The  city  was  certainly 
taken  from  that  quarter,  according  to  the  tra¬ 
dition  of  the  oldest  of  the  Athenians. 

When  they  had  thrown  down  the  wall,  and 
made  all  level  betwixt  the  Piraic  and  Sacred 
Gate,  about  midnight  Sulla  entered  the  breach, 
with  all  the  terrors  of  trumpets  and  cornets 
sounding,  with  the  triumphant  shout  and  cry 
of  an  army  let  loose  to  spoil  and  slaughter, 
and  scouring  through  the  streets  with  swords 
drawn. 

There  was  no  numbering  the  slain;  the 
amount  is  to  this  day  conjectured  only  from 
the  space  of  ground  overflowed  with  blood. 
For  without  mentioning  the  execution  done  in 
other  quarters  of  the  city,  the  blood  that  was 
shed  about  the  market-place  spread  over  the 
whole  Ceramicus  within  the  Double-gate,  and, 
according  to  most  writers,  passed  through  the 
gate  and  overflowed  the  suburb.  Nor  did  the 


376 

multitudes  which  fell  thus  exceed  the  number 
of  those  who,  out  of  pity  and  love  for  their 
country  which  they  believed  was  now  finally  to 
perish,  slew  themselves;  the  best  of  them, 
through  despair  of  their  country's  surviving, 
dreading  themselves  to  survive,  expecting  nei¬ 
ther  humanity  nor  moderation  in  Sulla. 

At  length,  partly  at  the  instance  of  Midias 
and  Calliphon,  two  exiled  men,  beseeching 
and  casting  themselves  at  his  feet,  partly  by 
the  intercession  of  those  senators  who  fol¬ 
lowed  the  camp,  having  had  his  fill  of  re¬ 
venge,  and  making  some  honourable  mention 
of  the  ancient  Athenians,  “I  forgive,"  said  he, 
“the  many  for  the  sake  of  the  few,  the  living 
for  the  dead."  He  took  Athens,  according  to 
his  own  Memoirs,  on  the  Calends  of  March, 
coinciding  pretty  nearly  with  the  new  moon 
of  Anthesterion,  on  which  day  it  is  the  Athe¬ 
nian  usage  to  perform  various  acts  in  com¬ 
memoration  of  the  ruins  and  devastations  oc¬ 
casioned  by  the  deluge,  that  being  supposed 
to  be  the  time  of  its  occurrence. 

At  the  taking  of  the  town,  the  tyrant  fled 
into  the  citadel,  and  was  there  besieged  by  Cu¬ 
rio,  who  had  that  charge  given  him.  He  held 
out  a  considerable  time,  but  at  last  yielded  him¬ 
self  up  for  want  of  water,  and  divine  power  im¬ 
mediately  intimated  its  agency  in  the  matter. 
For  on  the  same  day  and  hour  that  Curio  con¬ 
ducted  him  down,  the  clouds  gathered  in  a 
clear  sky,  and  there  came  down  a  great  quan¬ 
tity  of  rain  and  filled  the  citadel  with  water. 

Not  long  after,  Sulla  won  the  Piraeus,  and 
burnt  most  of  it;  amongst  the  rest,  Philo's 
arsenal,  a  work  very  greatly  admired. 

In  the  meantime  Taxiles,  Mithridates’s  gen¬ 
eral,  coming  down  from  Thrace  and  Mace- 
don,  with  an  army  of  one  hundred  thousand 
foot,  ten  thousand  horse,  and  ninety  chariots, 
armed  with  scythes  at  the  wheels,  would  have 
joined  Archelaus,  who  lay  with  a  navy  on  the 
coast  near  Munychia,  reluctant  to  quit  the 
sea,  and  yet  unwilling  to  engage  the  Romans 
in  battle,  but  desiring  to  protract  the  war  and 
cut  off  the  enemy’s  supplies. 

Which  Sulla  perceiving  much  better  than 
himself,  passed  with  his  forces  into  Bceotia, 
quitting  a  barren  district  which  was  inade¬ 
quate  to  maintain  an  army  even  in  time  of 
peace.  He  was  thought  by  some  to  have  taken 
false  measures  in  thus  leaving  Attica,  a  rugged 
country,  and  ill  suited  for  cavalry  to  move  in, 
and  entering  the  plain  and  open  fields  of 
Bceotia,  knowing  as  he  did  the  barbarian 
strength  to  consist  most  in  horses  and  chari- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ots.  But  as  was  said  before,  to  avoid  famine 
and  scarcity,  he  was  forced  to  run  the  risk  of 
a  battle.  Moreover,  he  was  in  anxiety  for  Hor- 
tensius,  a  bold  and  active  officer,  whom  on 
his  way  to  Sulla  with  forces  from  Thessaly, 
the  barbarians  awaited  in  the  straits.  For  these 
reasons  Sulla  drew  off  into  Bceotia. 

Hortensius,  meantime,  was  conducted  by 
Caphis,  our  countryman,  another  way  un¬ 
known  to  the  barbarians,  by  Parnassus,  just 
under  Tithora,  which  was  then  not  so  large  a 
town  as  it  is  now,  but  a  mere  fort,  surrounded 
by  steep  precipices  whither  the  Phocians  also, 
in  old  times,  when  flying  from  the  invasion  of 
Xerxes,  carried  themselves  and  their  goods 
and  were  saved.  Hortensius,  encamping  here, 
kept  off  the  enemy  by  day,  and  at  night  de¬ 
scending  by  difficult  passages  to  Patronis, 
joined  the  forces  of  Sulla,  who  came  to  meet 
him.  Thus  united  they  posted  themselves  on 
a  fertile  hill  in  the  middle  of  the  plain  of 
Elatea,  shaded  with  trees  and  watered  at  the 
foot.  It  is  called  Philobceotus,  and  its  situation 
and  natural  advantages  are  spoken  of  with 
great  admiration  by  Sulla. 

As  they  lay  thus  encamped,  they  seemed  to 
the  enemy  a  contemptible  number,  for  there 
were  not  above  fifteen  hundred  horse,  and 
less  than  fifteen  thousand  foot.  Therefore,  the 
rest  of  the  commanders,  over-persuading  Ar¬ 
chelaus  and  drawing  up  the  army,  covered  the 
plain  with  horses,  chariots,  bucklers,  targets. 
The  clamour  and  cries  of  so  many  nations 
forming  for  battle  rent  the  air,  nor  was  the 
pomp  and  ostentation  of  their  costly  array  alto¬ 
gether  idle  and  unserviceable  for  terror;  for  the 
brightness  of  their  armour,  embellished  mag¬ 
nificently  with  gold  and  silver,  and  the  rich 
colours  of  their  Median  and  Scythian  coats,  in¬ 
termixed  with  brass  and  shining  steel,  presented 
a  flaming  and  terrible  sight  as  they  swayed 
about  and  moved  in  their  ranks,  so  much  so 
that  the  Romans  shrunk  within  their  trenches, 
and  Sulla,  unable  by  any  arguments  to  remove 
their  fear,  and  unwilling  to  force  them  to  fight 
against  their  wills,  was  fain  to  sit  down  in 
quiet,  ill-brooking  to  become  the  subject  of  bar¬ 
barian  insolence  and  laughter. 

This,  however,  above  all  advantaged  him, 
for  the  enemy,  from  contemning  of  him,  fell 
into  disorder  amongst  themselves,  being  al¬ 
ready  less  thoroughly  under  command,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  number  of  their  leaders.  Some 
few  of  them  remained  within  the  encampment, 
but  others,  the  major  part,  lured  out  with  hopes 
of  prey  and  rapine,  strayed  about  the  country 


SULLA 

many  days’  journey  from  the  camp,  and  are  re¬ 
lated  to  have  destroyed  the  city  of  Panope,  to 
have  plundered  Lebadea,  and  robbed  the  ora¬ 
cle  without  any  orders  from  their  commanders. 

Sulla,  all  this  while,  chafing  and  fretting  to 
see  the  cities  all  around  destroyed,  suffered  not 
the  soldiery  to  remain  idle,  but  leading  them 
out,  compelled  them  to  divert  the  Cephisus 
from  its  ancient  channel  by  casting  up  ditches, 
and  giving  respite  to  none,  showed  himself 
rigorous  in  punishing  the  remiss,  that  growing 
weary  of  labour,  they  might  be  induced  by 
hardship  to  embrace  danger.  Which  fell  out 
accordingly,  for  on  the  third  day,  being  hard 
at  work  as  Sulla  passed  by,  they  begged  and 
clamoured  to  be  led  against  the  enemy. 

Sulla  replied,  that  this  demand  of  war  pro¬ 
ceeded  rather  from  a  backwardness  to  labour 
than  any  forwardness  to  fight,  but  if  they  were 
in  good  earnest  martially  inclined,  he  bade 
them  take  their  arms  and  get  up  thither,  point¬ 
ing  to  the  ancient  citadel  of  the  Parapotamians, 
of  which  at  present,  the  city  being  laid  waste, 
there  remained  only  the  rocky  hill  itself,  steep 
and  craggy  on  all  sides,  and  severed  from 
Mount  Hedylium  by  the  breadth  of  the  river 
Assus,  which,  running  between,  and  at  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  the  same  hill  falling  into  the  Cephisus 
with  an  impetuous  confluence,  makes  this  emi¬ 
nence  a  strong  position  for  soldiers  to  occupy. 

Observing  that  the  enemy’s  division,  called 
the  Brazen  Shields,  were  making  their  way  up 
thither,  Sulla  was  willing  to  take  first  posses¬ 
sion,  and  by  the  vigorous  efforts  of  the  soldiers, 
succeeded.  Archelaus,  driven  from  hence,  bent 
his  forces  upon  Chaeronea.  The  Chaeroneans 
who  bore  arms  in  the  Roman  camp  beseeching 
Sulla  not  to  abandon  the  city,  he  despatched 
Gabinius,  a  tribune,  with  one  legion,  and  sent 
out  also  the  Chaeroneans,  who  endeavoured, 
but  were  not  able  to  get  in  before  Gabinius;  so 
active  was  he,  and  more  zealous  to  bring  relief 
than  those  who  had  entreated  it.  Juba  writes 
that  Ericius  was  the  man  sent,  not  Gabinius. 
Thus  narrowly  did  our  native  city  escape. 

From  Lebadea  and  the  cave  of  Trophonius 
there  came  favourable  rumours  and  prophecies 
of  victory  to  the  Romans,  of  which  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  those  places  gave  a  fuller  account,  but 
as  Sulla  himself  affirms  in  the  tenth  book  of  his 
Memoirs,  Quintus  Titius,  a  man  of  some  repute 
among  the  Romans  who  were  engaged  in  mer¬ 
cantile  business  in  Greece,  came  to  him  after 
the  battle  won  at  Chaeronea,  and  declared  that 
Trophonius  had  foretold  another  fight  and  vic¬ 
tory  on  the  place,  within  a  short  time.  After 


377 

him  a  soldier,  by  name  Salvenius,  brought  an 
account  from  the  god  of  the  future  issue  of  af¬ 
fairs  in  Italy.  As  to  the  vision,  they  both  agreed 
in  this,  that  they  had  seen  one  who  in  stature 
and  in  majesty  was  similar  to  Jupiter  Olym- 
pius. 

Sulla,  when  he  had  passed  over  the  Assus, 
marching  under  the  Mount  Hedylium,  en¬ 
camped  close  to  Archelaus,  who  had  intrenched 
himself  strongly  between  the  mountains  Acon- 
tium  and  Hedylium,  close  to  what  are  called 
the  Assia.  The  place  of  his  intrenchment  is  to 
this  day  named  from  him,  Archelaus.  Sulla, 
after  one  day’s  respite,  having  left  Murena 
behind  him  with  one  legion  and  two  cohorts 
to  amuse  the  enemy  with  continual  alarms, 
himself  went  and  sacrificed  on  the  banks  of 
Cephisus,  and  the  holy  rites  ended,  held  on 
towards  Chaeronea  to  receive  the  forces  there 
and  view  Mount  Thurium,  where  a  party  of 
the  enemy  had  posted  themselves. 

This  is  a  craggy  height  running  up  in  a  con¬ 
ical  form  to  a  point  called  by  us  Orthopagus; 
at  the  foot  of  it  is  the  river  Morius  and  the 
temple  of  Apollo  Thurius.  The  god  had  his 
surname  from  Thuro,  mother  of  Chaeron, 
whom  ancient  record  makes  founder  of  Chaer¬ 
onea.  Others  assert  that  the  cow,  which  Apollo 
gave  to  Cadmus  for  a  guide,  appeared  there, 
and  that  the  place  took  its  name  from  the 
beast,  thor  being  the  Phoenician  word  for 
cow. 

At  Sulla’s  approach  to  Chaeronea,  the  trib¬ 
une  who  had  been  appointed  to  guard  the  city 
led  out  his  men  in  arms,  and  met  him  with  a 
garland  of  laurel  in  his  hand,  which  Sulla  ac¬ 
cepting,  and  at  the  same  time  saluting  the  sol¬ 
diers  and  animating  them  to  the  encounter, 
two  men  of  Chaeronea,  Homoloichus  and  An- 
axidamus,  presented  themselves  before  him, 
and  offered,  with  a  small  party,  to  dislodge 
those  who  were  posted  on  Thurium.  For  there 
lay  a  path  out  of  sight  of  the  barbarians,  from 
what  is  called  Petrochus  along  by  the  Museum, 
leading  right  down  from  above  upon  Thu¬ 
rium.  By  this  way  it  was  easy  to  fall  upon  them 
and  either  stone  them  from  above  or  force 
them  down  into  the  plain. 

Sulla,  assured  of  their  faith  and  courage  by 
Gabinius,  bade  them  proceed  with  the  enter¬ 
prise,  and  meantime  drew  up  the  army,  and 
disposing  the  cavalry  on  both  wings,  himself 
took  command  of  the  right;  the  left  being 
committed  to  the  direction  of  Murena.  In  the 
rear  of  all,  Galba  and  Hortensius,  his  lieuten¬ 
ants,  planted  themselves  on  the  upper  grounds 


378 

with  the  cohorts  of  reserve,  to  watch  the  mo¬ 
tions  of  the  enemy,  who,  with  numbers  of 
horse  and  swift-footed,  light-armed  infantry, 
were  noticed  to  have  so  formed  their  wing  as 
to  allow  it  readily  to  change  about  and  alter 
its  position,  and  thus  gave  reason  for  suspect¬ 
ing  that  they  intended  to  carry  it  far  out  and 
so  to  inclose  the  Romans. 

In  the  meanwhile,  the  Chaeroneans,  who 
had  Ericius  for  commander  by  appointment  of 
Sulla,  covertly  making  their  way  around  Thu- 
rium,  and  then  discovering  themselves,  occa¬ 
sioned  a  great  confusion  and  rout  among  the 
barbarians,  and  slaughter,  for  the  most  part 
by  their  own  hands.  For  they  kept  not  their 
place,  but  making  down  the  steep  descent,  ran 
themselves  on  their  own  spears,  and  violently 
sent  each  other  over  the  cliffs,  the  enemy  from 
above  pressing  on  and  wounding  them  where 
they  exposed  their  bodies;  insomuch  that  there 
fell  three  thousand  about  Thurium.  Some  of 
those  who  escaped,  being  met  by  Murena  as  he 
stood  in  array,  were  cut  off  and  destroyed. 
Others  breaking  through  to  their  friends  and 
falling  pell-mell  into  the  ranks,  filled  most  part 
of  the  army  with  fear  and  tumult,  and  caused 
a  hesitation  and  delay  among  the  generals, 
which  was  no  small  disadvantage. 

For  immediately  upon  the  discomposure, 
Sulla  coming  full  speed  to  the  charge,  and 
quickly  crossing  the  interval  between  the  ar¬ 
mies,  lost  them  the  service  of  their  armed  char¬ 
iots,  which  require  a  considerable  space  of 
ground  to  gather  strength  and  impetuosity  in 
their  career,  a  short  course  being  weak  and  in¬ 
effectual,  like  that  of  missiles  without  a  full 
swing.  Thus  it  fared  with  the  barbarians  at 
present,  whose  first  chariots  came  feebly  on 
and  made  but  a  faint  impression;  the  Romans, 
repulsing  them  with  shouts  and  laughter, 
called  out,  as  they  do  at  the  races  in  the  circus, 
for  more  to  come. 

By  this  time  the  mass  of  both  armies  met; 
the  barbarians  on  one  side  fixed  their  long 
pikes,  and  with  their  shields  locked  close  to¬ 
gether,  strove  so  far  as  in  them  lay  to  preserve 
their  line  of  battle  entire.  The  Romans,  on  the 
other  side,  having  discharged  their  javelins, 
rushed  on  with  their  drawn  swords,  and  strug¬ 
gled  to  put  by  the  pikes  to  get  at  them  the 
sooner,  in  the  fury  that  possessed  them  at  see¬ 
ing  in  the  front  of  the  enemy  fifteen  thousand 
slaves,  whom  the  royal  commanders  had  set 
free  by  proclamation,  and  ranged  amongst  the 
men  of  arms.  And  a  Roman  centurion  is  re¬ 
ported  to  have  said  at  this  sight,  that  he  never 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

knew  servants  allowed  to  play  the  masters,  un¬ 
less  at  the  Saturnalia. 

These  men,  by  their  deep  and  solid  array,  as 
well  as  by  their  daring  courage,  yielded  but 
slowly  to  the  legions,  till  at  last  by  slinging  en¬ 
gines,  and  darts,  which  the  Romans  poured  in 
upon  them  behind,  they  were  forced  to  give 
way  and  scatter. 

As  Archelaus  was  extending  the  right  wing 
to  encompass  the  enemy,  Hortensius  with  his 
cohorts  came  down  in  force,  with  intention  to 
charge  him  in  the  flank.  But  Archelaus  wheel¬ 
ing  about  suddenly  with  two  thousand  horse, 
Hortensius,  out-numbered  and  hard  pressed, 
fell  back  towards  the  higher  grounds,  and 
found  himself  gradually  getting  separated 
from  the  main  body  and  likely  to  be  sur¬ 
rounded  by  the  enemy.  When  Sulla  heard  this, 
he  came  rapidly  up  to  his  succour  from  the 
right  wing,  which  as  yet  had  not  engaged.  But 
Archelaus,  guessing  the  matter  by  the  dust  of 
his  troops,  turned  to  the  right  wing,  from 
whence  Sulla  came,  in  hopes  to  surprise  it 
without  a  commander.  At  the  same  instant, 
likewise,  Taxiles,  with  his  Brazen  Shields,  as¬ 
sailed  Murena,  so  that  a  cry  coming  from  both 
places,  and  the  hills  repeating  it  around,  Sulla 
stood  in  suspense  which  way  to  move. 

Deciding  to  resume  his  own  station,  he  sent 
in  aid  to  Murena  four  cohorts  under  Horten¬ 
sius,  and  commanding  the  fifth  to  follow  him, 
returned  hastily  to  the  right  wing,  which  of  it¬ 
self  held  its  ground  on  equal  terms  against  Ar¬ 
chelaus;  and,  at  his  appearance,  with  one  bold 
effort  forced  them  back,  and,  obtaining  the 
mastery,  followed  them,  flying  in  disorder  to 
the  river  and  Mount  Acontium.  Sulla,  how¬ 
ever,  did  not  forget  the  danger  Murena  was  in; 
but  hasting  thither  and  finding  him  victorious 
also,  then  joined  in  the  pursuit. 

Many  barbarians  were  slain  in  the  field, 
many  more  were  cut  in  pieces  as  they  were 
making  into  the  camp.  Of  all  the  vast  multi¬ 
tude,  ten  thousand  only  got  safe  into  Chalcis. 
Sulla  writes  that  there  were  but  fourteen  of  his 
soldiers  missing,  and  that  two  of  these  re¬ 
turned  towards  evening;  he,  therefore,  in¬ 
scribed  on  the  trophies  the  names  of  Mars, 
Victory,  and  Venus,  as  having  won  the  day  no 
less  by  good  fortune  than  by  management  and 
force  of  arms.  This  trophy  of  the  battle  in  the 
plain  stands  on  the  place  where  Archelaus  first 
gave  way,  near  the  stream  of  the  Molus;  an¬ 
other  is  erected  high  on  the  top  of  Thurium, 
where  the  barbarians  were  environed,  with  an 
inscription  in  Greek,  recording  that  the  glory 


SULLA 

of  the  day  belonged  to  Homoloichus.  and  An- 
axidamus. 

Sulla  celebrated  his  victory  at  Thebes  with 
spectacles,  for  which  he  erected  a  stage,  near 
CEdipus’s  well.  The  judges  of  the  perform¬ 
ances  were  Greeks  chosen  out  of  other  cities; 
his  hostility  to  the  Thebans  being  implacable, 
half  of  their  territory  he  took  away  and  con¬ 
secrated  to  Apollo  and  Jupiter,  ordering  that 
out  of  the  revenue  compensation  should  be 
made  to  the  gods  for  the  riches  he  had  taken 
from  them. 

After  this,  hearing  that  Flaccus,  a  man  of 
the  contrary  faction,  had  been  chosen  consul, 
and  was  crossing  the  Ionian  Sea  with  an  army, 
professedly  to  act  against  Mithridates,  but  in 
reality  against  himself,  he  hastened  towards 
Thessaly,  designing  to  meet  him,  but  in  his 
march,  when  near  Melitea,  received  advices 
from  all  parts  that  the  countries  behind  him 
were  overrun  and  ravaged  by  no  less  a  royal 
army  than  the  former.  For  Dorylaus,  arriving 
at  Chalcis  with  a  large  fleet,  on  board  of  which 
he  brought  over  with  him  eighty  thousand  of 
the  best  appointed  and  best  disciplined  soldiers 
of  Mithridates’s  army,  at  once  invaded  Bceotia, 
and  occupied  the  country  in  hopes  to  bring 
Sulla  to  a  battle,  making  no  account  of  the  dis¬ 
suasions  of  Archelaus,  but  giving  it  out  as  to 
the  last  fight,  that  without  treachery  so  many 
thousand  men  could  never  have  perished. 

Sulla,  however,  facing  about  expeditiously, 
made  it  clear  to  him  that  Archelaus  was  a  wise 
man,  and  had  good  skill  in  the  Roman  valour; 
insomuch  that  he  himself,  after  some  small 
skirmishes  with  Sulla  near  Tilphossium,  was 
the  first  of  those  who  thought  it  not  advisable 
to  put  things  to  the  decision  of  the  sword,  but 
rather  to  wear  out  the  war  by  expense  of  time 
and  treasure.  The  ground,  however,  near  Or- 
chomenus,  where  they  then  lay  encamped, 
gave  some  encouragement  to  Archelaus,  being 
a  battlefield  admirably  suited  for  an  army  su¬ 
perior  in  cavalry. 

Of  all  the  plains  in  Bceotia  that  are  renowned 
for  their  beauty  and  extent,  this  alone,  which 
commences  from  the  city  of  Orchomenus, 
spreads  out  unbroken  and  clear  of  trees  to  the 
edge  of  the  fens  in  which  the  Melas,  rising 
close  under  Orchomenus,  loses  itself,  the  only 
Greek  river  which  is  a  deep  and  navigable  wa¬ 
ter  from  the  very  head,  increasing  also  about 
the  summer  solstice  like  the  Nile,  and  produc¬ 
ing  plants  similar  to  those  that  grow  there, 
only  small  and  without  fruit.  It  does  not  run 
far  before  the  main  stream  disappears  among 


379 

the  blind  and  woody  marsh-grounds;  a  small 
branch,  however,  joins  the  Cephisus,  about  the 
place  where  the  lake  is  thought  to  produce  the 
best  flute-reeds. 

Now  that  both  armies  were  posted  near  each 
other,  Archelaus  lay  still,  but  Sulla  employed 
himself  in  cutting  ditches  from  either  side; 
that  if  possible,  by  driving  the  enemies  from 
the  firm  and  open  champaign,  he  might  force 
them  into  the  fens.  They,  on  the  other  hand, 
not  enduring  this,  as  soon  as  their  leaders  al¬ 
lowed  them  the  word  of  command,  issued  out 
furiously  in  large  bodies;  when  not  only  the 
men  at  work  were  dispersed,  but  most  part  of 
those  who  stood  in  arms  to  protect  the  work 
fled  in  disorder. 

Upon  this,  Sulla  leaped  from  his  horse,  and 
snatching  hold  of  an  ensign,  rushed  through 
the  midst  of  the  rout  upon  the  enemy,  crying 
out  aloud,  “To  me,  O  Romans,  it  will  be  glori¬ 
ous  to  fall  here.  As  for  you,  when  they  ask  you 
where  you  betrayed  your  general,  remember 
and  say,  at  Orchomenus.”  His  men  rallying 
again  at  these  words,  and  two  cohorts  coming 
to  his  succour  from  the  right  wing,  he  led  them 
to  the  charge  and  turned  the  day. 

Then  retiring  some  short  distance  and  re¬ 
freshing  his  men,  he  proceeded  again  with  his 
works  to  block  up  the  enemy’s  camp.  They 
again  sallied  out  in  better  order  than  before. 
Here  Diogenes,  stepson  to  Archelaus,  fighting 
on  the  right  wing  with  much  gallantry,  made 
an  honourable  end.  And  the  archers,  being 
hard  pressed  by  the  Romans,  and  wanting 
space  for  a  retreat,  took  their  arrows  by  hand¬ 
fuls,  and  striking  with  these  as  with  swords, 
beat  them  back.  In  the  end,  however,  they 
were  all  driven  into  the  intrenchment  and  had 
a  sorrowful  night  of  it  with  their  slain  and 
wounded. 

The  next  day  again,  Sulla,  leading  forth  his 
men  up  to  their  quarters,  went  on  finishing 
the  lines  of  intrenchment,  and  when  they  is¬ 
sued  out  again  with  larger  numbers  to  give 
him  battle,  fell  on  them  and  put  them  to  the 
rout,  and  in  the  consternation  ensuing,  none 
daring  to  abide,  he  took  the  camp  by  storm. 
The  marshes  were  filled  with  blood,  and  the 
lake  with  dead  bodies,  insomuch  that  to  this 
day  many  bows,  helmets,  fragments  of  iron, 
breastplates,  and  swords  of  barbarian  make 
continue  to  be  found  buried  deep  in  mud,  two 
hundred  years  after  the  fight.  Thus  much  of 
the  actions  of  Chaeronea  and  Orchomenus. 

At  Rome,  Cinna  and  Carbo  were  now  using 
injustice  and  violence  towards  persons  of  the 


380 

greatest  eminence,  and  many  of  them  to  avoid 
this  tyranny  repaired,  as  to  a  safe  harbour,  to 
Sulla’s  camp,  where,  in  a  short  space,  he  had 
about  him  the  aspect  of  a  senate.  Metella,  like¬ 
wise,  having  with  difficulty  conveyed  herself 
and  children  away  by  stealth,  brought  him 
word  that  his  houses,  both  in  town  and  coun¬ 
try,  had  been  burnt  by  his  enemies,  and  en¬ 
treated  his  help  at  home. 

Whilst  he  was  in  doubt  what  to  do,  being 
impatient  to  hear  of  his  country  being  thus 
outraged,  and  yet  not  knowing  how  to  leave 
so  great  a  work  as  the  Mithridatic  war  unfin¬ 
ished,  there  came  to  him  Archelaus,  a  mer¬ 
chant  of  Delos,  with  hopes  of  an  accommoda¬ 
tion,  and  private  instructions  from  Archelaus, 
the  king’s  general.  Sulla  liked  the  business  so 
well  as  to  desire  a  speedy  conference  with  Ar¬ 
chelaus  in  person,  and  a  meeting  took  place  on 
the  seacoast  near  Delium,  where  the  temple  of 
Apollo  stands. 

When  Archelaus  opened  the  conversation, 
and  began  to  urge  Sulla  to  abandon  his  preten¬ 
sions  to  Asia  and  Pontus,  and  to  set  sail  for  the 
war  in  Rome,  receiving  money  and  shipping, 
and  such  forces  as  he  should  think  fitting  from 
the  king,  Sulla,  interposing,  bade  Archelaus 
take  no  further  care  for  Mithridates,  but  as¬ 
sume  the  crown  to  himself,  and  become  a  con¬ 
federate  of  Rome,  delivering  up  the  navy.  Ar¬ 
chelaus  professing  his  abhorrence  of  such  trea¬ 
son,  Sulla  proceeded:  “So  you,  Archelaus,  a 
Cappadocian,  and  slave,  or  if  it  so  please  you 
friend,  to  a  barbarian  king,  would  not,  upon 
such  vast  considerations,  be  guilty  of  what  is 
dishonourable,  and  yet  dare  to  talk  to  me,  Ro¬ 
man  general  and  Sulla,  of  treason?  As  if  you 
were  not  the  self-same  Archelaus  who  ran 
away  at  Chaeronea,  with  few  remaining  out  of 
one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  men;  who 
lay  for  two  days  in  the  fens  of  Orchomenus, 
and  left  Bceotia  impassable  for  heaps  of  dead 
carcasses!”  Archelaus,  changing  his  tone  at 
this,  humbly  besought  him  to  lay  aside  the 
thoughts  of  war,  and  make  peace  with  Mithri¬ 
dates. 

Sulla  consenting  to  this  request,  articles  of 
agreement  were  concluded  on.  That  Mithri¬ 
dates  should  quit  Asia  and  Paphlagonia,  re¬ 
store  Bithynia  to  Nicomedes,  Cappadocia  to 
Ariobarzanes,  and  pay  the  Romans  two  thou¬ 
sand  talents,  and  give  him  seventy  ships  of  war 
with  all  their  furniture.  On  the  other  hand, 
that  Sulla  should  confirm  to  him  his  other  do¬ 
minions,  and  declare  him  a  Roman  confeder¬ 
ate. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

On  these  terms  he  proceeded  by  the  way  of 
Thessaly  and  Macedon  towards  the  Helles¬ 
pont,  having  Archelaus  with  him,  and  treating 
him  with  great  attention.  For  Archelaus  being 
taken  dangerously  ill  at  Larissa,  he  stopped  the 
march  of  the  army,  and  took  care  of  him,  as  if 
he  had  been  one  of  his  own  captains,  or  his  col¬ 
league  in  command.  This  gave  suspicion  of 
foul  play  in  the  battle  of  Chaeronea;  as  it  was 
also  observed  that  Sulla  had  released  all  the 
friends  of  Mithridates  taken  prisoners  in  war, 
except  only  Aristion  the  tyrant,  who  was  at 
enmity  with  Archelaus,  and  was  put  to  death 
by  poison;  and,  above  all,  ten  thousand  acres  of 
land  in  Euboea  had  been  given  to  the  Cappa¬ 
docian,  and  he  had  received  from  Sulla  the 
style  of  friend  and  ally  of  the  Romans.  On  all 
which  points  Sulla  defends  himself  in  his 
Memoirs. 

The  ambassadors  of  Mithridates  arriving 
and  declaring  that  they  accepted  of  the  condi¬ 
tions,  only  Paphlagonia  they  could  not  part 
with;  and  as  for  the  ships,  professing  not  to 
know  of  any  such  capitulation,  Sulla  in  a  rage 
exclaimed,  “What  say  you?  Does  Mithridates 
then  withhold  Paphlagonia,  and  as  to  the 
ships,  deny  that  article?  I  thought  to  have  seen 
him  prostrate  at  my  feet  to  thank  me  for  leav¬ 
ing  him  so  much  as  that  right  hand  of  his, 
which  has  cut  off  so  many  Romans.  He  will 
shortly,  at  my  coming  over  into  Asia,  speak 
another  language;  in  the  meantime,  let  him 
at  his  ease  in  Pergamus  sit  managing  a  war 
which  he  never  saw.” 

The  ambassadors  in  terror  stood  silent  by, 
but  Archelaus  endeavoured  with  humble  sup¬ 
plications  to  assuage  his  wrath,  laying  hold  on 
his  right  hand  and  weeping.  In  confusion  he 
obtained  permission  to  go  himself  in  person 
to  Mithridates;  for  that  he  would  either  medi¬ 
ate  a  peace  to  the  satisfaction  of  Sulla,  or  if  not, 
slay  himself. 

Sulla  having  thus  despatched  him  away, 
made  an  inroad  into  Maedica,  and  after  wide 
depopulations  returned  back  again  into  Mace¬ 
don,  where  he  received  Archelaus  about  Phi¬ 
lippi,  bringing  word  that  all  was  well,  and  that 
Mithridates  earnestly  requested  an  interview. 
The  chief  cause  of  this  meeting  was  Fimbria; 
for  he,  having  assassinated  Flaccus,  the  consul 
of  the  contrary  faction,  and  worsted  the  Mith¬ 
ridatic  commanders,  was  advancing  against 
Mithridates  himself,  who,  fearing  this,  chose 
rather  to  seek  the  friendship  of  Sulla. 

And  so  met  at  Dardanus  in  the  Troad,  on 
one  side  Mithridates,  attended  with  two  hun- 


SULLA 

dred  ships,  and  land-forces  consisting,  of  twen¬ 
ty  thousand  men  at  arms,  six  thousand  horse, 
and  a  large  train  of  scythed  chariots;  on  the 
other,  Sulla  with  only  four  cohorts  and  two 
hundred  horse. 

As  Mithridates  drew  near  and  put  out  his 
hand,  Sulla  demanded  whether  he  was  willing 
or  no  to  end  the  war  on  the  terms  Archelaus 
had  agreed  to,  but  seeing  the  king  made  no 
answer,  “How  is  this?”  he  continued.  “Ought 
not  the  petitioner  to  speak  first,  and  the  con¬ 
queror  to  listen  in  silence?”  And  when  Mithri¬ 
dates,  entering  upon  his  plea,  began  to  shift  off 
the  war,  partly  on  the  gods,  and  partly  to 
blame  the  Romans  themselves,  he  took  him  up, 
saying  that  he  had  heard,  indeed,  long  since 
from  others,  and  now  he  knew  it  himself  for 
truth,  that  Mithridates  was  a  powerful  speak¬ 
er,  who  in  defence  of  the  most  foul  and  unjust 
proceedings,  had  not  wanted  for  specious  pre¬ 
tences.  Then  charging  him  with  and  inveigh¬ 
ing  bitterly  against  the  outrages  he  had  com¬ 
mitted,  he  asked  again  whether  he  was  willing 
or  no  to  ratify  the  treaty  of  Archelaus?  Mithri¬ 
dates  answering  in  the  affirmative,  Sulla  came 
forward,  embraced  and  kissed  him.  Not  long 
after  he  introduced  Ariobarzanes  and  Nico- 
medes,  the  two  kings,  and  made  them  friends. 
Mithridates,  when  he  had  handed  over  to  Sulla 
seventy  ships  and  five  hundred  archers,  set  sail 
for  Pontus. 

Sulla,  perceiving  the  soldiers  to  be  dissatis¬ 
fied  with  the  peace  (as  it  seemed  indeed  a  mon¬ 
strous  thing  that  they  should  see  the  king  who 
was  their  bitterest  enemy,  and  who  had  caused 
one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  Romans  to  be 
massacred  in  one  day  in  Asia,  now  sailing  off 
with  the  riches  and  spoils  of  Asia,  which  he 
had  pillaged,  and  put  under  contribution  for 
the  space  of  four  years),  in  his  defence  to  them 
alleged  that  he  could  not  have  made  head 
against  Fimbria  and  Mithridates,  had  they 
both  withstood  him  in  conjunction.  Thence  he 
set  out  and  went  in  search  of  Fimbria,  who  lay 
with  the  army  about  Thyatira,  and  pitching 
his  camp  not  far  off,  proceeded  to  fortify  it 
with  a  trench.  The  soldiers  of  Fimbria  came 
out  in  their  single  coats,  and  saluting  his  men, 
lent  ready  assistance  to  the  work;  which 
change  Fimbria  beholding,  and  apprehending 
Sulla  as  irreconcilable,  laid  violent  hands  on 
himself  in  the  camp. 

Sulla  imposed  on  Asia  in  general  a  tax  of 
twenty  thousand  talents,  and  despoiled  indi¬ 
vidually  each  family  by  the  licentious  behav¬ 
iour  and  long  residence  of  the  soldiery  in  pri- 


381 

vate  quarters.  For  he  ordained  that  every  host 
should  allow  his  guest  four  tetradrachmas  each 
day,  and  moreover  entertain  him,  and  as  many 
friends  as  he  should  invite,  with  a  supper;  that 
a  centurion  should  receive  fifty  drachmas  a 
day,  together  with  one  suit  of  clothes  to  wear 
within  doors,  and  another  when  he  went 
abroad. 

Having  set  out  from  Ephesus  with  the  whole 
navy,  he  came  the  third  day  to  anchor  in  the 
Piraeus.  Here  he  was  initiated  in  the  mysteries, 
and  seized  for  his  use  the  library  of  Apellicon 
the  Teian,  in  which  were  most  of  the  works  of 
Theophrastus  and  Aristotle,  then  not  in  gen¬ 
eral  circulation.  When  the  whole  was  after¬ 
wards  conveyed  to  Rome,  there,  it  is  said,  the 
greater  part  of  the  collection  passed  through 
the  hands  of  Tyrannion,  the  grammarian,  and 
that  Andronicus,  the  Rhodian,  having  through 
his  means  the  command  of  numerous  copies, 
made  the  treatises  public,  and  drew  up  the  cat¬ 
alogues  that  are  now  current.  The  elder  Peri¬ 
patetics  appear  themselves,  indeed,  to  have 
been  accomplished  and  learned  men,  but  of  the 
writings  of  Aristotle  and  Theophrastus  they 
had  no  large  or  exact  knowledge,  because  The¬ 
ophrastus  bequeathing  his  books  to  the  heir  of 
Neleus  of  Scepsis,  they  came  into  careless  and 
illiterate  hands. 

During  Sulla’s  stay  about  Athens,  his  feet 
were  attacked  by  a  heavy  benumbing  pain, 
which  Strabo  calls  the  first  inarticulate  sounds 
of  the  gout.  Taking,  therefore,  a  voyage  to 
iEdepsus,  he  made  use  of  the  hot  waters  there, 
allowing  himself  at  the  same  time  to  forget  all 
anxieties,  and  passing  away  his  time  with  ac¬ 
tors.  As  he  was  walking  along  the  seashore, 
certain  fishermen  brought  him  some  magnifi¬ 
cent  fish.  Being  much  delighted  with  the  gift, 
and  understanding,  on  inquiry,  that  they  were 
men  of  Halaeae,  “What,”  said  he,  “are  there  any 
men  of  Halaeae  surviving?”  For  after  his  vic¬ 
tory  at  Orchomenus,  in  the  heat  of  pursuit,  he 
had  destroyed  three  cities  of  Bceotia,  Anthedon, 
Larymna,  and  Halaeae.  The  men  not  knowing 
what  to  say  for  fear,  Sulla,  with  a  smile,  bade 
them  cheer  up  and  return  in  peace,  as  they  had 
brought  with  them  no  insignificant  interces¬ 
sors.  The  Halaeans  say  that  this  first  gave  them 
courage  to  re-unite  and  return  to  their  city. 

Sulla,  having  marched  through  Thessaly 
and  Macedon  to  the  sea  coast,  prepared,  with 
twelve  hundred  vessels,  to  cross  over  from  Dyr- 
rhachium  to  Brundisium.  Not  far  from  hence 
is  Apollonia,  and  near  it  the  Nymphaeum,  a 
spot  of  ground  where,  from  among  green  trees 


382 

and  meadows,  there  are  found  at  various 
points  springs  of  fire  continually  streaming 
out.  Here,  they  say,  a  satyr,  such  as  statuaries 
and  painters  represent,  was  caught  asleep,  and 
brought  before  Sulla,  where  he  was  asked  by 
several  interpreters  who  he  was,  and,  after 
much  trouble,  at  last  uttered  nothing  intelli¬ 
gible,  but  a  harsh  noise,  something  between 
the  neighing  of  a  horse  and  crying  of  a  goat. 
Sulla,  in  dismay,  and  deprecating  such  an 
omen,  bade  it  be  removed. 

At  the  point  of  transportation,  Sulla  being 
in  alarm  lest  at  their  first  setting  foot  upon 
Italy  the  soldiers  should  disband  and  disperse 
one  by  one  among  the  cities,  they  of  their  own 
accord  first  took  an  oath  to  stand  firm  by  him, 
and  not  of  their  good-will  to  injure  Italy;  then 
seeing  him  in  distress  for  money,  they  made, 
so  they  say,  a  free-will  offering,  and  contrib¬ 
uted  each  man  according  to  his  ability.  How¬ 
ever,  Sulla  would  not  accept  of  their  offering, 
but  praising  their  good-will,  and  arousing  up 
their  courage,  went  over  (as  he  himself  writes) 
against  fifteen  hostile  generals  in  command  of 
four  hundred  and  fifty  cohorts;  but  not  with¬ 
out  the  most  unmistakable  divine  intimations 
of  his  approaching  happy  successes. 

For  when  he  was  sacrificing  at  his  first  land¬ 
ing  near  Tarentum,  the  victim’s  liver  showed 
the  figure  of  a  crown  of  laurel  with  two  fillets 
hanging  from  it.  And  a  little  while  before  his 
arrival  in  Campania,  near  the  mountain  He- 
phaeus,  two  stately  goats  were  seen  in  the  day¬ 
time,  fighting  together,  and  performing  all  the 
motions  of  men  in  battle.  It  proved  to  be  an 
apparition,  and  rising  up  gradually  from  the 
ground,  dispersed  in  the  air,  like  fancied  repre¬ 
sentations  in  the  clouds,  and  so  vanished  out 
of  sight. 

Not  long  after,  in  the  selfsame  place,  when 
Marius  the  younger  and  Norbanus  the  consul 
attacked  him  with  two  great  armies,  without 
prescribing  the  order  of  battle,  or  arranging 
his  men  according  to  their  divisions,  by  the 
sway  only  of  one  common  alacrity  and  trans¬ 
port  of  courage,  he  overthrew  the  enemy,  and 
shut  up  Norbanus  into  the  city  of  Capua,  with 
the  loss  of  seven  thousand  of  his  men.  And  this 
was  the  reason,  he  says,  that  the  soldiers  did 
not  leave  him  and  disperse  into  the  different 
towns,  but  held  fast  to  him,  and  despised  the 
enemy,  though  infinitely  more  in  number. 

At  Silvium  (as  he  himself  relates  it),  there 
met  him  a  servant  of  Pontius,  in  a  state  of  di¬ 
vine  possession,  saying  that  he  brought  him 
the  power  of  the  sword  and  victory  from  Bel- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Iona,  the  goddess  of  war,  and  if  he  did  not 
make  haste,  that  the  capitol  would  be  burnt, 
which  fell  out  on  the  same  day  the  man  fore¬ 
told  it,  namely,  on  the  sixth  day  of  the  month 
Quintilis,  which  we  now  call  July. 

At  Fidentia,  also,  Marcus  Lucullus,  one  of 
Sulla’s  commanders,  reposed  such  confidence 
in  the  forwardness  of  the  soldiers  as  to  dare  to 
face  fifty  cohorts  of  the  enemy  with  only  six¬ 
teen  of  his  own;  but  because  many  of  them 
were  unarmed  delayed  the  onset.  As  he  stood 
thus  waiting,  and  considering  with  himself,  a 
gentle  gale  of  wind,  bearing  along  with  it  from 
the  neighbouring  meadows  a  quantity  of  flow¬ 
ers,  scattered  them  down  upon  the  army,  on 
whose  shields  and  helmets  they  settled,  and 
arranged  themselves  spontaneously  so  as  to 
give  the  soldiers,  in  the  eyes  of  the  enemy,  the 
appearance  of  being  crowned  with  chaplets. 
Upon  this,  being  yet  further  animated,  they 
joined  battle,  and  victoriously  slaying  eight 
thousand  men,  took  the  camp.  This  Lucullus 
was  brother  to  that  Lucullus  who  in  aftertimes 
conquered  Mithridates  and  Tigranes. 

Sulla,  seeing  himself  still  surrounded  by  so 
many  armies,  and  such  mighty  hostile  powers, 
had  recourse  to  art,  inviting  Scipio,  the  other 
consul,  to  a  treaty  of  peace.  The  motion  was 
willingly  embraced,  and  several  meetings  and 
consultations  ensued,  in  all  which  Sulla,  still 
interposing  matter  of  delay  and  new  pretences, 
in  the  meanwhile  debauched  Scipio’s  men  by 
means  of  his  own,  who  were  as  well  practised 
as  the  general  himself  in  all  the  artifices  of  in¬ 
veigling.  For  entering  into  the  enemy’s  quar¬ 
ters  and  joining  in  conversation,  they  gained 
some  by  present  money,  some  by  promises, 
others  by  fair  words  and  persuasions;  so  that 
in  the  end,  when  Sulla  with  twenty  cohorts 
drew  near,  on  his  men  saluting  Scipio’s  sol¬ 
diers,  they  returned  the  greeting  and  came 
over,  leaving  Scipio  behind  them  in  his  tent, 
where  he  was  found  all  alone  and  dismissed. 
And  having  used  his  twenty  cohorts  as  decoys 
to  ensnare  the  forty  of  the  enemy,  he  led  them 
all  back  into  camp.  On  this  occasion,  Carbo 
was  heard  to  say  that  he  had  both  a  fox  and  a 
lion  in  the  breast  of  Sulla  to  deal  with,  and 
was  most  troubled  with  the  fox. 

Some  time  after,  at  Signa,  Marius  the  young¬ 
er  with  eighty-five  cohorts,  offered  battle  to 
Sulla,  who  was  extremely  desirous  to  have  it 
decided  on  that  very  day;  for  the  night  before 
he  had  seen  a  vision  in  his  sleep,  of  Marius  the 
elder,  who  had  been  some  time  dead,  advising 
his  son  to  beware  of  the  following  day,  as  of 


SULLA 

fatal  consequence  to  him.  For  this  reason, 
Sulla,  longing  to  come  to  a  battle,  sent  off  for 
Dolabella,  who  lay  encamped  at  some  distance. 
But  because  the  enemy  had  beset  and  blocked 
up  the  passes,  his  soldiers  got  tired  with  skir¬ 
mishing  and  marching  at  once.  To  these  diffi¬ 
culties  was  added,  moreover,  tempestuous  rainy 
weather,  which  distressed  them  most  of  all. 
The  principal  officers,  therefore,  came  to  Sulla, 
and  besought  him  to  defer  the  battle  that  day, 
showing  him  how  the  soldiers  lay  stretched  on 
the  ground,  where  they  had  thrown  themselves 
down  in  their  weariness,  resting  their  heads 
upon  their  shields  to  gain  some  repose. 

When,  with  much  reluctance,  he  had  yield¬ 
ed,  and  given  orders  for  pitching  the  camp, 
they  had  no  sooner  begun  to  cast  up  the  ram¬ 
part  and  draw  the  ditch,  but  Marius  came  rid¬ 
ing  up  furiously  at  the  head  of  his  troops,  in 
hopes  to  scatter  them  in  that  disorder  and  con¬ 
fusion.  Here  the  gods  fulfilled  Sulla’s  dream. 
For  the  soldiers,  stirred  up  with  anger,  left  off 
their  work,  and  sticking  their  javelins  into  the 
bank,  with  drawn  swords  and  a  courageous 
shout,  came  to  blows  with  the  enemy,  who 
made  but  small  resistance,  and  lost  great  num¬ 
bers  in  the  flight.  Marius  fled  to  Praeneste,  but 
finding  the  gates  shut,  tied  himself  round  by  a 
rope  that  was  thrown  down  to  him,  and  was 
taken  up  on  the  walls.  Some  there  are  (as  Fe- 
nestella  for  one)  who  affirm  that  Marius  knew 
nothing  of  the  fight,  but,  overwatched  and 
spent  with  hard  duty,  had  reposed  himself, 
when  the  signal  was  given,  beneath  some 
shade,  and  was  hardly  to  be  awakened  at  the 
flight  of  his  men.  Sulla,  according  to  his  own 
account,  lost  only  twenty-three  men  in  this 
fight,  having  killed  of  the  enemy  twenty  thou¬ 
sand,  and  taken  alive  eight  thousand. 

The  like  success  attended  his  lieutenants, 
Pompey,  Crassus,  Metellus,  Servilius,  who 
with  little  or  no  loss  cut  off  vast  numbers  of 
the  enemy,  insomuch  that  Carbo,  the  prime 
supporter  of  the  cause,  fled  by  night  from 
his  charge  of  the  army,  and  sailed  over  into 
Libya. 

In  the  last  struggle,  however,  the  Samnite, 
Telesinus,  like  some  champion,  whose  lot  it  is 
to  enter  last  of  all  into  the  lists  and  take  up  the 
wearied  conqueror,  came  nigh  to  have  foiled 
and  overthrown  Sulla  before  the  gates  of 
Rome.  For  Telesinus  with  his  second,  Lampo- 
nius,  the  Lucanian,  having  collected  a  large 
force,  had  been  hastening  towards  Praeneste, 
to  relieve  Marius  from  the  siege;  but  perceiv¬ 
ing  Sulla  ahead  of  him,  and  Pompey  behind, 


383 

both  hurrying  up  against  him,  straitened  thus 
before  and  behind,  as  a  valiant  and  experienced 
soldier,  he  arose  by  night,  and  marching  di¬ 
rectly  with  his  whole  army,  was  within  a  little 
of  making  his  way  unexpectedly  into  Rome  it¬ 
self. 

He  lay  that  night  before  the  city,  at  ten  fur¬ 
longs  distance  from  the  Colline  gate,  elated 
and  full  of  hope  at  having  thus  out-generalled 
so  many  eminent  commanders.  At  break  of 
day,  being  charged  by  the  noble  youth  of  the 
city,  among  many  others  he  overthrew  Appius 
Claudius,  renowned  for  high  birth  and  char¬ 
acter.  The  city,  as  is  easy  to  imagine,  was  all  in 
an  uproar,  the  women  shrieking  and  running 
about,  as  if  it  had  already  been  entered  forcibly 
by  assault,  till  at  last  Balbus,  sent  forward  by 
Sulla,  was  seen  riding  up  with  seven  hundred 
horse  at  full  speed.  Halting  only  long  enough 
to  wipe  the  sweat  from  the  horses,  and  then 
hastily  bridling  again,  he  at  once  attacked  the 
enemy. 

Presently  Sulla  himself  appeared,  and  com¬ 
manding  those  who  were  foremost  to  take  im¬ 
mediate  refreshment,  proceeded  to  form  in  or¬ 
der  for  battle.  Dolabella  and  Torquatus  were 
extremely  earnest  with  him  to  desist  awhile, 
and  not  with  spent  forces  to  hazard  the  last 
hope,  having  before  them  in  the  field,  not 
Carbo  or  Marius,  but  two  warlike  nations  bear¬ 
ing  immortal  hatred  to  Rome,  the  Samnites 
and  Lucanians,  to  grapple  with.  But  he  put 
them  by,  and  commanded  the  trumpets  to 
sound  a  charge,  when  it  was  now  about  four 
o’clock  in  the  afternoon. 

In  the  conflict  which  followed,  as  sharp  a 
one  as  ever  was,  the  right  wing  where  Crassus 
was  posted  had  clearly  the  advantage;  the  left 
suffered  and  was  in  distress,  when  Sulla  came 
to  its  succour,  mounted  on  a  white  courser,  full 
of  mettle  and  exceedingly  swift,  which  two 
of  the  enemy  knowing  him  by,  had  their  lances 
ready  to  throw  at  him;  he  himself  observed 
nothing,  but  his  attendant  behind  him  giving 
the  horse  a  touch,  he  was,  unknown  to  him¬ 
self,  just  so  far  carried  forward  that  the  points, 
falling  beside  the  horse’s  tail,  stuck  in  the 
ground. 

There  is  a  story  that  he  had  a  small  golden 
image  of  Apollo  from  Delphi,  which  he  was 
always  wont  in  battle  to  carry  about  him  in  his 
bosom,  and  that  he  then  kissed  it  with  these 
words,  “O  Apollo  Pythius,  who  in  so  many 
battles  hast  raised  to  honour  and  greatness  the 
fortunate  Cornelius  Sulla,  wilt  thou  now  cast 
him  down,  bringing  him  before  the  gate  of  his 


384 

country,  to  perish  shamefully  with  his  fellow- 
citizens?” 

Thus,  they  say,  addressing  himself  to  the 
god,  he  entreated  some  of  his  men,  threatened 
some,  and  seized  others  with  his  hand,  till  at 
length  the  left  wing  being  wholly  shattered,  he 
was  forced,  in  the  general  rout,  to  betake  him¬ 
self  to  the  camp,  having  lost  many  of  his 
friends  and  acquaintances.  Many,  likewise,  of 
the  city  spectators,  who  had  come  out,  were 
killed  or  trodden  under  foot.  So  that  it  was 
generally  believed  in  the  city  that  all  was  lost, 
and  the  siege  of  Praeneste  was  all  but  raised; 
many  fugitives  from  the  battle  making  their 
way  thither,  and  urging  Lucretius  Ofella,  who 
was  appointed  to  keep  on  the  siege,  to  rise  in 
all  haste,  for  that  Sulla  had  perished,  and  Rome 
fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

About  midnight  there  came  into  Sulla’s 
camp  messengers  from  Crassus,  to  fetch  provi¬ 
sion  for  him  and  his  soldiers;  for  having  van¬ 
quished  the  enemy,  they  had  pursued  him  to 
the  walls  of  Antemna,  and  had  sat  down  there. 
Sulla,  hearing  this,  and  that  most  of  the  enemy 
were  destroyed,  came  to  Antemna  by  break  of 
day,  where  three  thousand  of  the  besieged  hav¬ 
ing  sent  forth  a  herald,  he  promised  to  receive 
them  to  mercy,  on  condition  they  did  the  ene¬ 
my  some  mischief  in  their  coming  over.  Trust¬ 
ing  to  his  word,  they  fell  foul  on  the  rest  of 
their  companions,  and  made  a  great  slaughter 
one  of  another. 

Nevertheless,  Sulla  gathered  together  in  the 
circus,  as  well  these  as  other  survivors  of  the 
party,  to  the  number  of  six  thousand,  and  just 
as  he  commenced  speaking  to  the  senate,  in  the 
temple  of  Bellona,  proceeded  to  cut  them  down, 
by  men  appointed  for  that  service.  The  cry  of 
so  vast  a  multitude  put  to  the  sword,  in  so  nar¬ 
row  a  space,  was  naturally  heard  some  dis¬ 
tance,  and  startled  the  senators.  He,  however, 
continuing  his  speech  with  a  calm  and  uncon¬ 
cerned  countenance,  bade  them  listen  to  what 
he  had  to  say,  and  not  busy  themselves  with 
what  was  doing  out  of  doors;  he  had  given  di¬ 
rections  for  the  chastisement  of  some  offenders. 
This  gave  the  most  stupid  of  the  Romans  to 
understand  that  they  had  merely  exchanged, 
not  escaped,  tyranny. 

And  Marius,  being  of  a  naturally  harsh  tem¬ 
per,  had  not  altered,  but  merely  continued 
what  he  had  been,  in  authority;  whereas  Sulla, 
using  his  fortune  moderately  and  unambi- 
tiously  at  first,  and  giving  good  hopes  of  a  true 
patriot,  firm  to  the  interests  both  of  the  nobil¬ 
ity  and  commonalty,  being,  moreover,  of  a  gay 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  cheerful  temper  from  his  youth,  and  so 
easily  moved  to  pity  as  to  shed  tears  readily, 
has,  perhaps  deservedly,  cast  a  blemish  upon 
offices  of  great  authority,  as  if  they  deranged 
men’s  former  habits  and  character,  and  gave 
rise  to  violence,  pride,  and  inhumanity. 
Whether  this  be  a  real  change  and  revolution 
in  the  mind,  caused  by  fortune,  or  rather  a 
lurking  viciousness  of  nature,  discovering  it¬ 
self  in  authority,  it  were  matter  of  another  sort 
of  disquisition  to  decide. 

Sulla  being  thus  wholly  bent  upon  slaughter, 
and  filling  the  city  with  executions  without 
number  or  limit,  many  wholly  uninterested 
persons  falling  a  sacrifice  to  private  enmity, 
through  his  permission  and  indulgence  to  his 
friends,  Caius  Metellus,  one  of  the  younger 
men,  made  bold  in  the  senate  to  ask  him  what 
end  there  was  of  these  evils,  and  at  what  point 
he  might  be  expected  to  stop?  “We  do  not  ask 
you,”  said  he,  “to  pardon  any  whom  you  have 
resolved  to  destroy,  but  to  free  from  doubt 
those  whom  you  are  pleased  to  save.”  Sulla  an¬ 
swering  that  he  knew  not  as  yet  whom  to 
spare,  “Why,  then,”  said  he,  “tell  us  whom 
you  will  punish.”  This  Sulla  said  he  would  do. 
These  last  words,  some  authors  say,  were 
spoken  not  by  Metellus,  but  by  Afidius,  one  of 
Sulla’s  fawning  companions. 

Immediately  upon  this,  without  communi¬ 
cating  with  any  of  the  magistrates,  Sulla  pro¬ 
scribed  eighty  persons,  and  notwithstanding 
the  general  indignation,  after  one  day’s  respite, 
he  posted  two  hundred  and  twenty  more,  and 
on  the  third  again,  as  many.  In  an  address  to 
the  people  on  this  occasion,  he  told  them  he 
had  put  up  as  many  names  as  he  could  think 
of;  those  which  had  escaped  his  memory,  he 
would  publish  at  a  future  time.  He  issued  an 
edict  likewise,  making  death  the  punishment 
of  humanity,  proscribing  any  who  should  dare 
to  receive  and  cherish  a  proscribed  person 
without  exception  to  brother,  son,  or  parents. 
And  to  him  who  should  slay  any  one  pro¬ 
scribed  person,  he  ordained  two  talents  reward, 
even  were  it  a  slave  who  had  killed  his  master, 
or  a  son  his  father.  And  what  was  thought 
most  unjust  of  all,  he  caused  the  attainder  to 
pass  upon  their  sons,  and  sons’  sons,  and  made 
open  sale  of  all  their  property. 

Nor  did  the  proscription  prevail  only  at 
Rome,  but  throughout  all  the  cities  of  Italy  the 
effusion  of  blood  was  such,  that  neither  sanc¬ 
tuary  of  the  gods,  nor  hearth  of  hospitality,  nor 
ancestral  home  escaped.  Men  were  butchered 
in  the  embraces  of  their  wives,  children  in  the 


SULLA 

arms  of  their  mothers.  Those  who-  perished 
through  public  animosity  or  private  enmity 
were  nothing  in  comparison  of  the  numbers  of 
those  who  suffered  for  their  riches.  Even  the 
murderers  began  to  say,  that  “his  fine  house 
killed  this  man,  a  garden  that,  a  third,  his  hot 
baths.”  Quintus  Aurelius,  a  quiet,  peaceable 
man,  and  one  who  thought  all  his  part  in  the 
common  calamity  consisted  in  condoling  with 
the  misfortunes  of  others,  coming  into  the 
Forum  to  read  the  list,  and  finding  himself 
among  the  proscribed,  cried  out,  “Woe  is  me, 
my  Alban  farm  has  informed  against  me.”  He 
had  not  gone  far  before  he  was  despatched  by 
a  ruffian,  sent  on  that  errand. 

In  the  meantime,  Marius,  on  the  point  of 
being  taken,  killed  himself;  and  Sulla,  coming 
to  Praeneste,  at  first  proceeded  judicially  against 
each  particular  person,  till  at  last,  finding  it  a 
work  of  too  much  time,  he  cooped  them  up 
together  in  one  place,  to  the  number  of  twelve 
thousand  men,  and  gave  order  for  the  execu¬ 
tion  of  them  all,  his  own  host  alone  excepted. 
But  he,  brave  man,  telling  him  he  could  not 
accept  the  obligation  of  life  from  the  hands  of 
one  who  had  been  the  ruin  of  his  country, 
went  in  among  the  rest,  and  submitted  will¬ 
ingly  to  the  stroke.  What  Lucius  Catilina  did 
was  thought  to  exceed  all  other  acts.  For  hav¬ 
ing,  before  matters  came  to  an  issue,  made 
away  with  his  brother,  he  besought  Sulla  to 
place  him  on  the  list  of  proscription,  as  though 
he  had  been  alive,  which  was  done;  and  Cati¬ 
lina,  to  return  the  kind  office,  assassinated  a 
certain  Marcus  Marius,  one  of  the  adverse  par¬ 
ty,  and  brought  the  head  to  Sulla,  as  he  was 
sitting  in  the  Forum,  and  then  going  to  the 
holy  water  of  Apollo,  which  was  nigh,  washed 
his  hands. 

There  were  other  things,  besides  this  blood¬ 
shed,  which  gave  offence.  For  Sulla  had  de¬ 
clared  himself  dictator,  an  office  which  had 
then  been  laid  aside  for  the  space  of  one  hun¬ 
dred  and  twenty  years.  There  was,  likewise,  an 
act  of  grace  passed  on  his  behalf,  granting  in¬ 
demnity  for  what  was  passed,  and  for  the  fu¬ 
ture  intrusting  him  with  the  power  of  life  and 
death,  confiscation,  division  of  lands,  erecting 
and  demolishing  of  cities,  taking  away  of  king¬ 
doms,  and  bestowing  them  at  pleasure.  He 
conducted  the  sale  of  confiscated  property  after 
such  an  arbitrary,  imperious  way,  from  the 
tribunal,  that  his  gifts  excited  greater  odium 
even  than  his  usurpations;  women  mimes,  and 
musicians,  and  the  lowest  of  the  freed  slaves 
had  presents  made  them  of  the  territories  of 


385 

nations  and  the  revenues  of  cities:  and  women 
of  rank  were  married  against  their  will  to  some 
of  them.  Wishing  to  insure  the  fidelity  of  Pom- 
pey  the  Great  by  a  nearer  tie  of  blood,  he  bade 
him  divorce  his  present  wife,  and  forcing 
^Emilia,  the  daughter  of  Scaurus  and  Metella, 
his  own  wife,  to  leave  her  husband,  Manius 
Glabrio,  he  bestowed  her,  though  then  with 
child,  on  Pompey,  and  she  died  in  childbirth 
at  his  house. 

When  Lucretius  Ofella,  the  same  who  re¬ 
duced  Marius  by  siege,  offered  himself  for  the 
consulship,  he  first  forbade  him;  then,  seeing 
he  could  not  restrain  him,  on  his  coming  down 
into  the  Forum  with  a  numerous  train  of  fol¬ 
lowers,  he  sent  one  of  the  centurions  who  were 
immediately  about  him,  and  slew  him,  himself 
sitting  on  the  tribunal  in  the  temple  of  Castor, 
and  beholding  the  murder  from  above.  The 
citizens  apprehending  the  centurion,  and  drag¬ 
ging  him  to  the  tribunal,  he  bade  them  cease 
their  clamouring  and  let  the  centurion  go,  for 
he  had  commanded  it. 

His  triumph  was,  in  itself,  exceedingly 
splendid,  and  distinguished  by  the  rarity  and 
magnificence  of  the  royal  spoils;  but  its  yet 
greatest  glory  was  the  noble  spectacle  of  the  ex¬ 
iles.  For  in  the  rear  followed  the  most  eminent 
and  most  potent  of  the  citizens,  crowned  with 
garlands,  and  calling  Sulla  saviour  and  father, 
by  whose  means  they  were  restored  to  their 
own  country,  and  again  enjoyed  their  wives 
and  children.  When  the  solemnity  was  over, 
and  the  time  come  to  render  an  account  of  his 
actions,  addressing  the  public  assembly,  he  was 
as  profuse  in  enumerating  the  lucky  chances 
of  war  as  any  of  his  own  military  merits.  And, 
finally,  from  this  felicity  he  requested  to  re¬ 
ceive  the  surname  of  Felix. 

In  writing  and  transacting  business  with  the 
Greeks,  he  styled  himself  Epaphroditus,  and 
on  his  trophies  which  are  still  extant  with  us 
the  name  is  given  Lucius  Cornelius  Sulla  Epa¬ 
phroditus.  Moreover,  when  his  wife  had 
brought  him  forth  twins,  he  named  the  male 
Faustus  and  the  female  Fausta,  the  Roman 
words  for  what  is  auspicious  and  of  happy 
omen.  The  confidence  which  he  reposed  in  his 
good  genius,  rather  than  in  any  abilities  of  his 
own,  emboldened  him,  though  deeply  involved 
in  bloodshed,  and  though  he  had  been  the  au¬ 
thor  of  such  great  changes  and  revolutions  of 
state,  to  lay  down  his  authority,  and  place  the 
right  of  consular  elections  once  more  in  the 
hands  of  the  people. 

And  when  they  were  held,  he  not  only  de- 


386 

dined  to  seek  that  office,  but  in  the  Forum 
exposed  his  person  publicly  to  the  people,  walk¬ 
ing  up  and  down  as  a  private  man.  And  con¬ 
trary  to  his  will,  a  certain  bold  man  and  his 
enemy,  Marcus  Lepidus,  was  expected  to  be¬ 
come  consul,  not  so  much  by  his  own  interest, 
as  by  the  power  and  solicitation  of  Pompey, 
whom  the  people  were  willing  to  oblige.  When 
the  business  was  over,  seeing  Pompey  going 
home  overjoyed  with  the  success,  he  called  him 
to  him  and  said,  “What  a  polite  act,  young 
man,  to  pass  by  Catulus,  the  best  of  men,  and 
choose  Lepidus,  the  worst!  It  will  be  well  for 
you  to  be  vigilant,  now  that  you  have  strength¬ 
ened  your  opponent  against  yourself.”  Sulla 
spoke  this,  it  may  seem,  by  a  prophetic  instinct, 
for,  not  long  after,  Lepidus  grew  insolent  and 
broke  into  open  hostility  to  Pompey  and  his 
friends. 

Sulla,  consecrating  the  tenth  of  his  whole 
substance  to  Hercules,  entertained  the  people 
with  sumptuous  feastings.  The  provision  was 
so  much  above  what  was  necessary,  that  they 
were  forced  daily  to  throw  great  quantities  of 
meat  into  the  river,  and  they  drank  wine  forty 
years  old  and  upwards.  In  the  midst  of  the 
banqueting,  which  lasted  many  days,  Metella 
died  of  a  disease.  And  because  that  the  priest 
forbade  him  to  visit  the  sick,  or  suffer  his  house 
to  be  polluted  with  mourning,  he  drew  up  an 
act  of  divorce  and  caused  her  to  be  removed 
into  another  house  whilst  alive.  Thus  far,  out 
of  religious  apprehension,  he  observed  the 
strict  rule  to  the  very  letter,  but  in  the  funeral 
expenses  he  transgressed  the  law  he  himself  had 
made,  limiting  the  amount,  and  spared  no  cost. 
He  transgressed,  likewise,  his  own  sumptuary 
laws  respecting  expenditure  in  banquets, 
thinking  to  allay  his  grief  by  luxurious  drink¬ 
ing  parties  and  revellings  with  common  buf¬ 
foons. 

Some  few  months  after,  at  a  show  of  gladia¬ 
tors,  when  men  and  women  sat  promiscuously 
in  the  theatre,  no  distinct  places  being  as  yet 
appointed,  there  sat  down  by  Sulla  a  beautiful 
woman  of  high  birth,  by  name  Valeria,  daugh¬ 
ter  of  Messala,  and  sister  to  Hortensius,  the 
orator.  Now  it  happened  that  she  had  been 
lately  divorced  from  her  husband.  Passing 
along  behind  Sulla,  she  leaned  on  him  with 
her  hand,  and  plucking  a  bit  of  wool  from  his 
garment,  so  proceeded  to  her  seat.  And  on 
Sulla  looking  up  and  wondering  what  it 
meant,  “What  harm,  mighty  sir,”  said  she,  “if 
I  also  was  desirous  to  partake  a  little  in  your 
felicity?” 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

It  appeared  at  once  that  Sulla  was  not  dis¬ 
pleased,  but  even  tickled  in  his  fancy,  for  he 
sent  out  to  inquire  her  name,  her  birth,  and 
past  life.  From  this  time  there  passed  between 
them  many  side  glances,  each  continually  turn¬ 
ing  round  to  look  at  the  other,  and  frequently 
interchanging  smiles.  In  the  end,  overtures 
were  made,  and  a  marriage  concluded  on.  All 
which  was  innocent,  perhaps,  on  the  lady’s 
side,  but,  though  she  had  been  never  so  modest 
and  virtuous,  it  was  scarcely  a  temperate  and 
worthy  occasion  of  marriage  on  the  part  of 
Sulla,  to  take  fire,  as  a  boy  might,  at  a  face  and 
a  bold  look,  incentives  not  seldom  to  the  most 
disorderly  and  shameless  passions. 

Notwithstanding  this  marriage,  he  kept 
company  with  actresses,  musicians,  and  danc¬ 
ers,  drinking  with  them  on  couches  night  and 
day.  His  chief  favourites  were  Roscius,  the 
comedian,  Sorex,  the  arch  mime,  and  Metro- 
bius,  the  player,  for  whom,  though  past  his 
prime,  he  still  professed  a  passionate  fondness. 
By  these  courses  he  encouraged  a  disease  which 
had  begun  from  unimportant  cause;  and  for  a 
long  time  he  failed  to  observe  that  his  bowels 
were  ulcerated,  till  at  length  the  corrupted 
flesh  broke  out  into  lice.  Many  were  employed 
day  and  night  in  destroying  them,  but  the 
work  so  multiplied  under  their  hands,  that  not 
only  his  clothes,  baths,  basins,  but  his  very 
meat  was  polluted  with  that  flux  and  conta¬ 
gion,  they  came  swarming  out  in  such  num¬ 
bers.  He  went  frequently  by  day  into  the  bath 
to  scour  and  cleanse  his  body,  but  all  in  vain; 
the  evil  generated  too  rapidly  and  too  abun¬ 
dantly  for  any  ablutions  to  overcome  it.  There 
died  of  this  disease,  amongst  those  of  the 
most  ancient  times,  Acastus,  the  son  of  Pe- 
lias;  of  later  date,  Aleman,  the  poet,  Phere- 
cydes,  the  theologian,  Callisthenes,  the  Olyn- 
thian,  in  the  time  of  his  imprisonment,  as 
also  Mucius,  the  lawyer;  and  if  we  may  men¬ 
tion  ignoble,  but  notorious  names,  Eunus, 
the  fugitive,  who  stirred  up  the  slaves  of 
Sicily  to  rebel  against  their  masters,  after  he 
was  brought  captive  to  Rome,  died  of  this 
creeping  sickness. 

Sulla  not  only  foresaw  his  end,  but  may  be 
also  said  to  have  written  of  it.  For  in  the  two- 
and-twentieth  book  of  his  Memoirs,  which  he 
finished  two  days  before  his  death,  he  writes 
that  the  Chaldeans  foretold  him  that  after  he 
had  led  a  life  of  honour,  he  should  conclude,  it 
in  fulness  of  prosperity.  He  declares,  more¬ 
over,  that  in  a  vision  he  had  seen  his  son,  who 
had  died  not  long  before  Metella,  stand  by  in 


LYSANDER  AND  SULLA 

mourning  attire,  and  beseech  his  father  to  cast 
off  further  care,  and  come  along  with  him  to 
his  mother,  Metella,  there  to  live  at  ease  and 
quietness  with  her.  However,  he  could  not  re¬ 
frain  from  intermeddling  in  public  affairs. 
For,  ten  days  before  his  decease,  he  composed 
the  differences  of  the  people  of  Dicaearchia, 
and  prescribed  laws  for  their  better  govern¬ 
ment.  And  the  very  day  before  his  end,  it  being 
told  him  that  the  magistrate  Granius  deferred 
the  payment  of  a  public  debt,  in  expectation  of 
his  death,  he  sent  for  him  to  his  house,  and 
placing  his  attendants  about  him,  caused  him 
to  be  strangled;  but  through  the  straining  of 
his  voice  and  body,  the  imposthume  breaking, 
he  lost  a  great  quantity  of  blood.  Upon  this,  his 
strength  failing  him,  after  spending  a  trouble¬ 
some  night,  he  died,  leaving  behind  him  two 
young  children  by  Metella.  Valeria  was  after¬ 
wards  delivered  of  a  daughter,  named  Pos- 
thuma;  for  so  the  Romans  call  those  who  are 
born  after  the  father’s  death. 

Many  ran  tumultuously  together,  and  joined 
with  Lepidus  to  deprive  the  corpse  of  the  ac¬ 
customed  solemnities;  but  Pompey,  though  of¬ 
fended  at  Sulla  (for  he  alone  of  all  his  friends 


387 

was  not  mentioned  in  his  will),  having  kept 
off  some  by  his  interest  and  entreaty,  others  by 
menaces,  conveyed  the  body  to  Rome,  and  gave 
it  a  secure  and  honourable  burial.  It  is  said  that 
the  Roman  ladies  contributed  such  vast  heaps 
of  spices,  that  besides  what  was  carried  on  two 
hundred  and  ten  litters,  there  was  sufficient  to 
form  a  large  figure  of  Sulla  himself,  and  an¬ 
other  representing  a  lictor,  out  of  the  costly 
frankincense  and  cinnamon.  The  day  being 
cloudy  in  the  morning,  they  deferred  carrying 
forth  the  corpse  till  about  three  in  the  after¬ 
noon,  expecting  it  would  rain.  But  a  strong 
wind  blowing  full  upon  the  funeral  pile,  and 
setting  it  all  in  a  bright  flame,  the  body  was 
consumed  so  exactly  in  good  time,  that  the 
pyre  had  begun  to  smoulder,  and  the  fire  was 
upon  the  point  of  expiring,  when  a  violent  rain 
came  down,  which  continued  till  night.  So 
that  his  good  fortune  was  firm  even  to  the  last, 
and  did  as  it  were  officiate  at  his  funeral.  His 
monument  stands  in  the  Campus  Martius, 
with  an  epitaph  of  his  own  writing;  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  it  being,  that  he  had  not  been  out¬ 
done  by  any  of  his  friends  in  doing  good  turns, 
nor  by  any  of  his  foes  in  doing  bad. 


LYSANDER  and  SULLA 
Compared 


Having  completed  this  Life  also,  come  we 
now  to  the  comparison.  That  which  was 
common  to  them  both  was  that  they  were 
founders  of  their  own  greatness,  with  this  dif¬ 
ference,  that  Lysander  had  the  consent  of  his 
fellow-citizens,  in  times  of  sober  judgment,  for 
the  honours  he  received;  nor  did  he  force  any¬ 
thing  from  them  against  their  good-will,  nor 
hold  any  power  contrary  to  the  laws. 

In  civil  strife  e’en  villains  rise  to  fame. 

And  so  then  at  Rome,  when  the  people  were 
distempered,  and  the  government  out  of  order, 
one  or  other  was  still  raised  to  despotic  power; 
no  wonder,  then,  if  Sulla  reigned,  when  the 
Glauciae  and  Saturnini  drove  out  the  Metelli, 
when  sons  of  consuls  were  slain  in  the  assem¬ 
blies,  when  silver  and  gold  purchased  men  and 
arms,  and  fire  and  sword  enacted  new  laws 
and  put  down  lawful  opposition.  Nor  do  I 
blame  any  one,  in  such  circumstances,  for 
working  himself  into  supreme  power,  only  I 
would  not  have  it  thought  a  sign  of  great  good¬ 
ness  to  be  head  of  a  state  so  wretchedly  discom¬ 
posed. 

Lysander,  being  employed  in  the  greatest 


commands  and  affairs  of  state,  by  a  sober  and 
well-governed  city,  may  be  said  to  have  had 
repute  as  the  best  and  most  virtuous  man,  in 
the  best  and  most  virtuous  commonwealth. 
And  thus,  often  returning  the  government  into 
the  hands  of  the  citizens,  he  received  it  again 
as  often,  the  superiority  of  his  merit  still 
awarding  him  the  first  place.  Sulla,  on  the 
other  hand,  when  he  had  once  made  himself 
general  of  an  army,  kept  his  command  for  ten 
years  together,  creating  himself  sometimes  con¬ 
sul,  sometimes  proconsul,  and  sometimes  dic¬ 
tator,  but  always  remaining  a  tyrant. 

It  is  true  Lysander,  as  was  said,  designed  to 
introduce  a  new  form  of  government;  by 
milder  methods,  however,  and  more  agreeably 
to  law  than  Sulla,  not  by  force  of  arms,  but 
persuasion,  nor  by  subverting  the  whole  state 
at  once,  but  simply  by  amending  the  succession 
of  the  kings;  in  a  way,  moreover,  which  seem¬ 
ed  the  naturally  just  one,  that  the  most  deserv¬ 
ing  should  rule,  especially  in  a  city  which  itself 
exercised  command  in  Greece,  upon  account 
of  virtue,  not  nobility.  For  as  the  hunter  con¬ 
siders  the  whelp  itself,  not  the  bitch,  and  the 


388 

horse-dealer  the  foal,  not  the  mare  (for  what 
if  the  foal  should  prove  a  mule?),  so  likewise 
were  that  politician  extremely  out,  who,  in  the 
choice  of  a  chief  magistrate,  should  inquire, 
not  what  the  man  is,  but  how  descended.  The 
very  Spartans  themselves  have  deposed  several 
of  their  kings  for  want  of  kingly  virtues,  as  de¬ 
generated  and  good  for  nothing.  As  a  vicious 
nature,  though  of  an  ancient  stock,  is  dishon¬ 
ourable,  it  must  be  virtue  itself,  and  not  birth, 
that  makes  virtue  honourable. 

Furthermore,  the  one  committed  his  acts 
of  injustice  for  the  sake  of  his  friends;  the  other 
extended  his  to  his  friends  themselves.  It  is 
confessed  on  all  hands  that  Lysander  offended 
most  commonly  for  the  sake  of  his  compan¬ 
ions,  committing  several  slaughters  to  uphold 
their  power  and  dominion;  but  as  for  Sulla,  he, 
out  of  envy,  reduced  Pompey’s  command  by 
land  and  Dolabella’s  by  sea,  although  he  him¬ 
self  had  given  them  those  places;  and  ordered 
Lucretius  Ofella,  who  sued  for  the  consulship 
as  the  reward  of  many  great  services,  to  be 
slain  before  his  eyes,  exciting  horror  and  alarm 
in  the  minds  of  all  men,  by  his  cruelty  to  his 
dearest  friends. 

As  regards  the  pursuit  of  riches  and  pleas¬ 
ures,  we  yet  further  discover  in  one  a  princely, 
in  the  other  a  tyrannical,  disposition.  Lysander 
did  nothing  that  was  intemperate  or  licentious, 
in  that  full  command  of  means  and  opportu¬ 
nity,  but  kept  clear,  as  much  as  ever  man  did, 
of  that  trite  saying — 

Lions  at  home,  hut  foxes  out  of  doors ; 
and  ever  maintained  a  sober,  truly  Spartan, 
and  well-disciplined  course  of  conduct.  Where¬ 
as  Sulla  could  never  moderate  his  unruly  af¬ 
fections,  either  by  poverty  when  young,  or  by 
years  when  grown  old,  but  would  be  still  pre¬ 
scribing  laws  to  the  citizens  concerning  chas¬ 
tity  and  sobriety,  himself  living  all  that  time, 
as  Sallust  affirms,  in  lewdness  and  adultery.  By 
these  ways  he  so  impoverished  and  drained  the 
city  of  her  treasures,  as  to  be  forced  to  sell 
privileges  and  immunities  to  allied  and  friend¬ 
ly  cities  for  money,  although  he  daily  gave  up 
the  wealthiest  and  the  greatest  families  to  pub¬ 
lic  sale  and  confiscation. 

There  was  no  end  of  his  favours  vainly  spent 
and  thrown  away  on  flatterers;  for  what  hope 
could  there  be,  or  what  likelihood  of  fore¬ 
thought  or  economy,  in  his  more  private  mo¬ 
ments  over  wine,  when,  in  the  open  face  of  the 
people,  upon  the  auction  of  a  large  estate, 
which  he  would  have  passed  over  to  one  of  his 
friends  at  a  small  price,  because  another  bid 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

higher,  and  the  officer  announced  the  advance, 
he  broke  out  into  a  passion,  saying:  “What  a 
strange  and  unjust  thing  is  this,  O  citizens, 
that  I  cannot  dispose  of  my  own  booty  as  I 
please!”  But  Lysander,  on  the  contrary,  with 
the  rest  of  the  spoil,  sent  home  for  public  use 
even  the  presents  which  were  made  him.  Nor 
do  I  commend  him  for  it,  for  he,  perhaps,  by 
excessive  liberality,  did  Sparta  more  harm  than 
ever  the  other  did  Rome  by  rapine;  I  only  use 
it  as  an  argument  of  his  indifference  to  riches. 

They  exercised  a  strange  influence  on  their 
respective  cities.  Sulla,  a  profuse  debauchee, 
endeavoured  to  restore  sober  living  amongst 
the  citizens;  Lysander,  temperate  himself,  fill¬ 
ed  Sparta  with  the  luxury  he  disregarded.  So 
that  both  were  blameworthy,  the  one  for  rais¬ 
ing  himself  above  his  own  laws,  the  other  for 
causing  his  fellow-citizens  to  fall  beneath  his 
own  example.  He  taught  Sparta  to  want  the 
very  things  which  he  himself  had  learned  to 
do  without.  And  thus  much  concerning  their 
civil  administration. 

As  for  feats  of  arms,  wise  conduct  in  war, 
innumerable  victories,  perilous  adventures, 
Sulla  was  beyond  compare.  Lysander,  indeed, 
came  off  twice  victorious  in  two  battles  by  sea; 
I  shall  add  to  that  the  siege  of  Athens,  a  work 
of  greater  fame  than  difficulty.  What  occurred 
in  Bceotia,  and  at  Haliartus,  was  the  result, 
perhaps,  of  ill  fortune;  yet  it  certainly  looks 
like  ill  counsel,  not  to  wait  for  the  king’s  forces, 
which  had  all  but  arrived  from  Plataea,  but  out 
of  ambition  and  eagerness  to  fight,  to  approach 
the  walls  at  disadvantage,  and  so  to  be  cut  off 
by  a  sally  of  inconsiderable  men.  He  received 
his  death-wound,  not  as  Cleombrotus,  at  Le- 
uctra,  resisting  manfully  the  assault  of  an  en¬ 
emy  in  the  field;  not  as  Cyrus  or  Epaminondas, 
sustaining  the  declining  battle,  or  making  sure 
the  victory;  all  these  died  the  death  of  kings 
and  generals;  but  he,  as  it  had  been  some  com¬ 
mon  skirmisher  or  scout,  cast  away  his  life  in- 
gloriously,  giving  testimony  to  the  wisdom  of 
the  ancient  Spartan  maxim,  to  avoid  attacks  on 
walled  cities,  in  which  the  stoutest  warrior 
may  chance  to  fall  by  the  hand,  not  only  of  a 
man  utterly  his  inferior,  but  by  that  of  a  boy 
or  woman,  as  Achilles,  they  say,  was  slain  by 
Paris  in  the  gates.  As  for  Sulla,  it  were  hard  to 
reckon  up  how  many  set  battles  he  won,  or 
how  many  thousand  he  slew;  he  took  Rome 
itself  twice,  as  also  the  Athenian  Piraeus,  not  by 
famine,  as  Lysander  did,  but  by  a  series  of 
great  battles,  driving  Archelaus  into  the  sea. 

And  what  is  most  important,  there  was  a 


CIMON 

vast  difference  between  the  commanders  they 
had  to  deal  with.  For  I  look  upon  it  as  an  easy 
task,  or  rather  sport,  to  beat  Antiochus,  Alci- 
biades’s  pilot,  or  to  circumvent  Philocles,  the 
Athenian  demagogue — 

Sharp  only  at  the  inglorious  point  of  tongue, 
whom  Mithridates  would  have  scorned  to  com¬ 
pare  with  his  groom,  or  Marius  with  his  lictor. 
But  of  the  potentates,  consuls,  commanders, 
and  demagogues,  to  pass  by  all  the  rest  who 
opposed  themselves  to  Sulla,  who  amongst  the 
Romans  so  formidable  as  Marius,  what  king 
more  powerful  than  Mithridates  ?  Who  of  the 
Italians  more  warlike  than  Lamponious  and 
Telesinus?  Yet  of  these,  one  he  drove  into  ban¬ 
ishment,  one  he  quelled,  and  the  others  he 
slew. 

And  what  is  more  important,  in  my  judg¬ 
ment,  than  anything  yet  adduced,  is  that  Ly- 
sander  had  the  assistance  of  the  state  in  all  his 
achievements;  whereas  Sulla  decided  that  he 
was  a  banished  person,  and  overpowered  by  a 
faction,  at  a  time  when  his  wife  was  driven 
from  home,  his  houses  demolished,  adherents 
slain,  himself  then  in  Bceotia,  stood  embattled 
against  countless  numbers  of  the  public  enemy, 
and,  endangering  himself  for  the  sake  of  his 
country,  raised  a  trophy  of  victory;  and  not 
even  when  Mithridates  came  with  proposals  of 
alliance  and  aid  against  his  enemies  would  he 
show  any  sort  of  compliance,  or  even  clemency; 


389 

did  not  so  much  as  address  him,  or  vouchsafe 
him  his  hand,  until  he  had  it  from  the  king’s 
own  mouth  that  he  was  willing  to  quit  Asia, 
surrender  the  navy,  and  restore  Bithynia  and 
Cappadocia  to  the  two  kings.  Than  which  ac¬ 
tion  Sulla  never  performed  a  braver,  or  with  a 
nobler  spirit,  when  preferring  the  public  good 
to  the  private,  and  like  good  hounds,  where  he 
had  once  fixed,  never  letting  go  his  hold,  till 
the  enemy  yielded,  then,  and  not  until  then, 
he  set  himself  to  revenge  his  own  private 
quarrels. 

We  may  perhaps  let  ourselves  be  influenced, 
moreover,  in  our  comparison  of  their  charac¬ 
ters,  by  considering  their  treatment  of  Athens. 
Sulla,  when  he  had  made  himself  master  of 
the  city,  which  then  upheld  the  dominion  and 
power  of  Mithridates  in  opposition  to  him,  re¬ 
stored  her  to  liberty  and  the  free  exercise  of 
her  own  laws;  Lysander,  on  the  contrary, 
when  she  had  fallen  from  a  vast  height  of  dig¬ 
nity  and  rule,  showed  her  no  compassion,  but 
abolishing  her  democratic  government,  im¬ 
posed  on  her  the  most  cruel  and  lawless  ty¬ 
rants.  We  are  now  qualified  to  consider  wheth¬ 
er  we  should  go  far  from  the  truth  or  no  in 
pronouncing  that  Sulla  performed  the  more 
glorious  deeds,  but  Lysander  committed  the 
fewer  faults,  as,  likewise,  by  giving  to  one  the 
pre-eminence  for  moderation  and  self-control, 
to  the  other  for  conduct  and  valour. 


CIMON 

5°7?-449  b.c. 


Peripoltas,  the  prophet,  having  brought 
the  King  Opheltas,  and  those  under  his 
command,  from  Thessaly  into  Baeotia, 
left  there  a  family,  which  flourished  a  long 
time  after;  the  greater  part  of  them  inhabiting 
Chaeronea,  the  first  city  out  of  which  they  ex¬ 
pelled  the  barbarians.  The  descendants  of  this 
race,  being  men  of  bold  attempts  and  warlike 
habits,  exposed  themselves  to  so  many  dangers 
in  the  invasions  of  the  Medes,  and  in  battles 
against  the  Gauls,  that  at  last  they  were  almost 
wholly  consumed. 

There  was  left  one  orphan  of  this  house, 
called  Damon,  surnamed  Peripoltas,  in  beauty 
and  greatness  of  spirit  surpassing  all  of  his 
age,  but  rude  and  undisciplined  in  temper.  A 
Roman  captain  of  a  company  that  wintered  in 


Chaeronea  became  passionately  fond  of  this 
youth,  who  was  now  pretty  nearly  grown  a 
man.  And  finding  all  his  approaches,  his  gifts, 
his  entreaties,  alike  repulsed,  he  showed  vio¬ 
lent  inclinations  to  assault  Damon. 

Our  native  Chaeronea  was  then  in  a  distress¬ 
ed  condition,  too  small  and  too  poor  to  meet 
with  anything  but  neglect.  Damon,  being  sen¬ 
sible  of  this,  and  looking  upon  himself  as  in¬ 
jured  already,  resolved  to  inflict  punishment. 
Accordingly,  he  and  sixteen  of  his  companions 
conspired  against  the  captain;  but  that  the  de¬ 
sign  might  be  managed  without  any  danger  of 
being  discovered,  they  all  daubed  their  faces  at 
night  with  soot.  Thus  disguised  and  inflamed 
with  wine,  they  set  upon  him  by  break  of  day, 
as  he  was  sacrificing  in  the  market-place;  and 


390 

having  killed  him,  and  several  others  that  were 
with  him,  they  lied  out  of  the  city,  which  was 
extremely  alarmed  and  troubled  at  the  murder. 

The  council  assembled  immediately,  and 
pronounced  sentence  of  death  against  Damon 
and  his  accomplices.  This  they  did  to  justify 
the  city  to  the  Romans.  But  that  evening,  as  the 
magistrates  were  at  supper  together,  according 
to  the  custom,  Damon  and  his  confederates, 
breaking  into  the  hall,  killed  them,  and  then 
again  fled  out  of  the  town.  About  this  time, 
Lucius  Lucullus  chanced  to  be  passing  that 
way  with  a  body  of  troops,  upon  some  expedi¬ 
tion,  and  this  disaster  having  but  recently  hap¬ 
pened,  he  stayed  to  examine  the  matter.  Upon 
inquiry,  he  found  the  city  was  in  no  wise  faul¬ 
ty,  but  rather  that  they  themselves  had  suf¬ 
fered;  therefore  he  drew  out  the  soldiers,  and 
carried  them  away  with  him.  Yet  Damon  con¬ 
tinuing  to  ravage  the  country  all  about,  the  citi¬ 
zens,  by  messages  and  decrees,  in  appearance 
favourable,  enticed  him  into  the  city,  and  upon 
his  return,  made  him  Gymnasiarch;  but  after¬ 
wards  as  he  was  anointing  himself  in  the  va¬ 
pour  baths,  they  set  upon  him  and  killed  him. 

For  a  long  while  after  apparitions  continu¬ 
ing  to  be  seen,  and  groans  to  be  heard  in  that 
place,  so  our  fathers  have  told  us,  they  ordered 
the  gates  of  the  baths  to  be  built  up;  and  even 
to  this  day  those  who  live  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  believe  that  they  sometimes  see  spectres 
and  hear  alarming  sounds.  The  posterity  of 
Damon,  of  whom  some  still  remain,  mostly  in 
Phocis,  near  the  town  of  Stiris,  are  called  Asbo- 
lomeni,  that  is,  in  the  Aeolian  idiom,  men 
daubed  with  soot,  because  Damon  was  thus  be¬ 
smeared  when  he  committed  this  murder. 

But  there  being  a  quarrel  between  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  Chaeronea  and  the  Orchomenians,  their 
neighbours,  these  latter  hired  an  informer,  a 
Roman,  to  accuse  the  community  of  Chaero- 
nea  as  if  it  had  been  a  single  person  of  the  mur¬ 
der  of  the  Romans,  of  which  only  Damon  and 
his  companions  were  guilty;  accordingly,  the 
process  was  commenced,  and  the  cause  pleaded 
before  the  Praetor  of  Macedon,  since  the  Ro¬ 
mans  as  yet  had  not  sent  governors  into  Greece. 

The  advocates  who  defended  the  inhabitants 
appealed  to  the  testimony  of  Lucullus,  who,  in 
answer  to  a  letter  the  praetor  wrote  to  him,  re¬ 
turned  a  true  account  of  the  matter-of-fact.  By 
this  means  the  town  obtained  its  acquittal,  and 
escaped  a  most  serious  danger.  The  citizens, 
thus  preserved,  erected  a  statue  to  Lucullus  in 
the  market-place,  near  that  of  the  god  Bacchus. 

We  also  have  the  same  impressions  of  grati- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

tude;  and  though  removed  from  the  events  by 
the  distance  of  several  generations,  we  yet  feel 
the  obligation  to  extend  to  ourselves;  and  as 
we  think  an  image  of  the  character  and  habits 
to  be  a  greater  honour  than  one  merely  repre¬ 
senting  the  face  and  the  person,  we  will  put 
Lucullus’s  life  amongst  our  parallels  of  illustri¬ 
ous  men,  and  without  swerving  from  the  truth, 
will  record  his  actions.  The  commemoration 
will  be  itself  a  sufficient  proof  of  our  grateful 
feeling,  and  he  himself  would  not  thank  us,  if 
in  recompense  for  a  service  which  consisted  in 
speaking  the  truth,  we  should  abuse  his  mem¬ 
ory  with  a  false  and  counterfeit  narration. 

For  as  we  would  wish  that  a  painter  who  is 
to  draw  a  beautiful  face,  in  which  there  is  yet 
some  imperfection,  should  neither  wholly  leave 
out,  nor  yet  too  pointedly  express  what  is  de¬ 
fective,  because  this  would  deform  it,  and  that 
spoil  the  resemblance;  so  since  it  is  hard,  or  in¬ 
deed  perhaps  impossible,  to  show  the  life  of  a 
man  wholly  free  from  blemish,  in  all  that  is  ex¬ 
cellent  we  must  follow  truth  exactly,  and  give 
it  fully;  any  lapses  or  faults  that  occur,  through 
human  passions  or  political  necessities,  we  may 
regard  rather  as  the  shortcomings  of  some  par¬ 
ticular  virtue,  than  as  the  natural  effects  of 
vice;  and  may  be  content  without  introducing 
them,  curiously  and  officiously,  into  our  narra¬ 
tive,  if  it  be  but  out  of  tenderness  to  the  weak¬ 
ness  of  nature,  which  has  never  succeeded  in 
producing  any  human  character  so  perfect  in 
virtue  as  to  be  pure  from  all  admixture  and 
open  to  no  criticism.  On  considering  with  my¬ 
self  to  whom  I  should  compare  Lucullus  I  find 
none  so  exactly  his  parallel  as  Cimon. 

They  were  both  valiant  in  war,  and  success¬ 
ful  against  the  barbarians;  both  gentle  in  polit¬ 
ical  life,  and  more  than  any  others  gave  their 
countrymen  a  respite  from  civil  troubles  at 
home,  while  abroad  each  of  them  raised  tro¬ 
phies  and  gained  famous  victories.  No  Greek 
before  Cimon,  nor  Roman  before  Lucullus, 
ever  carried  the  scene  of  war  so  far  from  their 
own  country;  putting  out  of  the  question  the 
acts  of  Bacchus  and  Hercules,  and  any  exploit 
of  Perseus  against  the  Ethiopians,  Medes,  and 
Armenians,  or  again  of  Jason,  of  which  any 
record  that  deserves  credit  can  be  said  to  have 
come  down  to  our  days. 

Moreover  in  this  they  were  alike,  that  they 
did  not  finish  the  enterprises  they  undertook. 
They  brought  their  enemies  near  their  ruin,  but 
never  entirely  conquered  them.  There  was  yet 
a  great  conformity  in  the  free  good-will  and 
lavish  abundance  of  their  entertainments  and 


CIMON 

general  hospitalities,  and  in  the  youthful  laxity 
of  their  habits.  Other  points  of  resemblance, 
which  we  have  failed  to  notice,  may  be  easily 
collected  from  our  narrative  itself. 

Cimon  was  the  son  of  Miltiades  and  Hege- 
sipyle,  who  was  by  birth  a  Thracian,  and  daugh¬ 
ter  to  the  King  Olorus,  as  appears  from  the  po¬ 
em  of  Melanthius  and  Archelaus,  written  in 
praise  of  Cimon.  By  this  means  the  historian 
Thucydides  was  his  kinsman  by  the  mother’s 
side;  for  his  father’s  name  also,  in  remem¬ 
brance  of  this  common  ancestor,  was  Olorus, 
and  he  was  the  owner  of  the  gold  mines  in 
Thrace,  and  met  his  death,  it  is  said,  by  vio¬ 
lence,  in  Scapte  Hyle,  a  district  of  Thrace;  and 
his  remains  having  afterwards  been  brought 
into  Attica,  a  monument  is  shown  as  his  among 
those  of  the  family  of  Cimon,  near  the  tomb 
of  Elpinice,  Cimon’s  sister.  But  Thucydides 
was  of  the  township  of  Halimus,  and  Miltia¬ 
des  and  his  family  were  Laciadae.  Miltiades, 
being  condemned  in  a  fine  of  fifty  talents  of 
the  state,  and  unable  to  pay  it,  was  cast  into 
prison,  and  there  died. 

Thus  Cimon  was  left  an  orphan  very  young, 
with  his  sister  Elpinice,  who  was  also  young 
and  unmarried.  And  at  first  he  had  but  an  in¬ 
different  reputation,  being  looked  upon  as  dis¬ 
orderly  in  his  habits,  fond  of  drinking,  and  re¬ 
sembling  his  grandfather,  also  called  Cimon, 
in  character,  whose  simplicity  got  him  the  sur¬ 
name  of  Coalemus.  Stesimbrotus  of  Thasos, 
who  lived  near  about  the  same  time  with  Ci¬ 
mon,  reports  of  him  that  he  had  little  acquain¬ 
tance  either  with  music,  or  any  of  the  other 
liberal  studies  and  accomplishments,  then  com¬ 
mon  among  the  Greeks;  that  he  had  nothing 
whatever  of  the  quickness  and  the  ready  speech 
of  his  countrymen  in  Attica;  that  he  had  great 
nobleness  and  candour  in  his  disposition,  and 
in  his  character  in  general  resembled  rather  a 
native  of  Peloponnesus  than  of  Athens;  as  Eu¬ 
ripides  describes  Hercules — 

- Rude 

And  unrefined,  for  great  things  well  endued: 
for  this  may  fairly  be  added  to  the  character 
which  Stesimbrotus  has  given  of  him. 

They  accused  him,  in  his  younger  years,  of 
cohabiting  with  his  own  sister  Elpinice,  who, 
indeed,  otherwise  had  no  very  clear  reputation, 
but  was  reported  to  have  been  over-intimate 
with  Polygnotus,  the  painter;  and  hence,  when 
he  painted  the  Trojan  women  in  the  porch, 
then  called  the  Plesianactium,  and  now  the 
Pcecile,  he  made  Laodice  a  portrait  of  her.  Po¬ 
lygnotus  was  not  an  ordinary  mechanic,  nor 


391 

was  he  paid  for  this  work,  but  out  of  a  desire 
to  please  the  Athenians  painted  the  portico  for 
nothing.  So  it  is  stated  by  the  historians,  and  in 
the  following  verses  by  the  poet  Melanthius: — 

Wrought  by  his  hand  the  deeds  of  heroes  grace 

At  his  own  charge  our  temples  and  our  place. 

Some  affirm  that  Elpinice  lived  with  her 
brother,  not  secretly,  but  as  his  married  wife, 
her  poverty  excluding  her  from  any  suitable 
match.  But  afterwards,  when  Callias,  one  of 
the  richest  men  of  Athens,  fell  in  love  with  her, 
and  proffered  to  pay  the  fine  the  father  was 
condemned  in,  if  he  could  obtain  the  daughter 
in  marriage,  with  Elpinice’s  own  consent,  Ci¬ 
mon  betrothed  her  to  Callias. 

There  is  no  doubt  but  that  Cimon  was,  in 
general,  of  an  amorous  temper.  For  Melanthi¬ 
us,  in  his  elegies,  rallies  him  on  his  attachment 
for  Asteria  of  Salamis,  and  again  for  a  certain 
Mnestra.  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  his  un¬ 
usually  passionate  affection  for  his  lawful  wife 
Isodice,  the  daughter  of  Euryptolemus,  the  son 
of  Megacles;  nor  of  his  regret,  even  to  impa¬ 
tience,  at  her  death,  if  any  conclusion  may  be 
drawn  from  those  elegies  of  condolence,  ad¬ 
dressed  to  him  upon  his  loss  of  her.  The  philo¬ 
sopher  Pansetius  is  of  opinion  that  Archelaus, 
the  writer  on  physics,  was  the  author  of  them, 
and  indeed  the  time  seems  to  favour  that  con¬ 
jecture. 

All  the  other  points  of  Cimon’s  character 
were  noble  and  good.  He  was  as  daring  as  Mil¬ 
tiades,  and  not  inferior  to  Themistocles  in 
judgment,  and  was  incomparably  more  just 
and  honest  than  either  of  them.  Fully  their 
equal  in  all  military  virtues,  in  the  ordinary 
duties  of  a  citizen  at  home  he  was  immeasur¬ 
ably  their  superior.  And  this,  too,  when  he  was 
very  young,  his  years  not  yet  strengthened  by 
any  experience. 

For  when  Themistocles,  upon  the  Median 
invasion,  advised  the  Athenians  to  forsake 
their  city  and  their  country,  and  to  carry  all 
their  arms  on  shipboard  and  fight  the  enemy 
by  sea,  in  the  straits  of  Salamis;  when  all  the 
people  stood  amazed  at  the  confidence  and 
rashness  of  this  advice,  Cimon  was  seen,  the 
first  of  all  men,  passing  with  a  cheerful  coun¬ 
tenance  through  the  Ceramicus,  on  his  way 
with  his  companions  to  the  citadel,  carrying  a 
bridle  in  his  hand  to  offer  to  the  goddess,  in¬ 
timating  that  there  was  no  more  need  of  horse¬ 
men  now,  but  of  mariners.  There,  after  he  had 
paid  his  devotions  to  the  goddess,  and  offered 
up  the  bridle,  he  took  down  one  of  the  bucklers 
that  hung  upon  the  walls  of  the  temple,  and 


392 

went  down  to  the  port;  by  this  example  giving 
confidence  to  many  of  the  citizens. 

He  was  also  of  a  fairly  handsome  person,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  poet  Ion,  tall  and  large,  and  let 
his  thick  and  curly  hair  grow  long.  After  he 
had  acquitted  himself  gallantly  in  this  battle  of 
Salamis,  he  obtained  great  repute  among  the 
Athenians,  and  was  regarded  with  affection, 
as  well  as  admiration.  He  had  many  who  fol¬ 
lowed  after  him,  and  bade  him  aspire  to  ac¬ 
tions  not  less  famous  than  his  father’s  battle  of 
Marathon.  And  when  he  came  forward  in  po¬ 
litical  life,  the  people  welcomed  him  gladly, 
being  now  weary  of  Themistocles;  in  opposi¬ 
tion  to  whom,  and  because  of  the  frankness 
and  easiness  of  his  temper,  which  was  agree¬ 
able  to  every  one,  they  advanced  Cimon  to  the 
highest  employments  in  the  government.  The 
man  that  contributed  most  to  his  promotion 
was  Aristides,  who  early  discerned  in  his  char¬ 
acter  his  natural  capacity,  and  purposely  raised 
him,  that  he  might  be  a  counterpoise  to  the 
craft  and  boldness  of  Themistocles. 

After  the  Medes  had  been  driven  out  of 
Greece,  Cimon  was  sent  out  as  an  admiral, 
when  the  Athenians  had  not  yet  attained  their 
dominion  by  sea,  but  still  followed  Pausanias 
and  the  Lacedaemonians;  and  his  fellow-citi¬ 
zens  under  his  command  were  highly  distin¬ 
guished,  both  for  the  excellence  of  their  disci¬ 
pline,  and  for  their  extraordinary  zeal  and 
readiness.  And  further,  perceiving  that  Pausa¬ 
nias  was  carrying  on  secret  communications 
with  the  barbarians,  and  writing  letters  to  the 
King  of  Persia  to  betray  Greece,  and  puffed  up 
with  authority  and  success,  was  treating  the 
allies  haughtily,  and  committing  many  wan¬ 
ton  injustices,  Cimon,  taking  this  advantage, 
by  acts  of  kindness  to  those  who  were  suffering 
wrong,  and  by  his  general  humane  bearing, 
robbed  him  of  the  command  of  the  Greeks,  be¬ 
fore  he  was  aware,  not  by  arms,  but  by  his 
mere  language  and  character. 

The  greatest  part  of  the  allies,  no  longer  able 
to  endure  the  harshness  and  pride  of  Pausa¬ 
nias,  revolted  from  him  to  Cimon  and  Aristi¬ 
des,  who  accepted  the  duty,  and  wrote  to  the 
Ephors  of  Sparta,  desiring  them  to  recall  a  man 
who  was  causing  dishonour  to  Sparta  and 
trouble  to  Greece. 

They  tell  of  Pausanias,  that  when  he  was  in 
Byzantium,  he  solicited  a  young  lady  of  a  no¬ 
ble  family  in  the  city,  whose  name  was  Cleo- 
nice,  to  debauch  her.  Her  parents,  dreading  his 
cruelty,  were  forced  to  consent,  and  so  aban¬ 
doned  their  daughter  to  his  wishes.  The  daugh- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ter  asked  the  servants  outside  the  chamber  to 
put  out  all  the  lights;  so  that  approaching  si¬ 
lently  and  in  the  dark  towards  his  bed,  she 
stumbled  upon  the  lamp,  which  she  over¬ 
turned.  Pausanias,  who  was  fallen  asleep,  awak¬ 
ened  and,  startled  with  the  noise,  thought  an 
assassin  had  taken  that  dead  time  of  night  to 
murder  him,  so  that  hastily  snatching  up  his 
poniard  that  lay  by  him,  he  struck  the  girl,  who 
fell  with  the  blow,  and  died.  After  this,  he 
never  had  rest,  but  was  continually  haunted 
by  her,  and  saw  an  apparition  visiting  him  in 
his  sleep,  and  addressing  him  with  these  angry 
words: — 

Go  on  thy  way,  unto  the  evil  end, 

That  doth  on  lust  and  violence  attend . 

This  was  one  of  the  chief  occasions  of  indig¬ 
nation  against  him  among  the  confederates, 
who  now,  joining  their  resentments  and  forces 
with  Cimon’s,  besieged  him  in  Byzantium.  He 
escaped  out  of  their  hands,  and,  continuing,  as 
it  is  said,  to  be  disturbed  by  the  apparition,  fled 
to  the  oracle  of  the  dead  at  Heraclea,  raised  the 
ghost  of  Cleonice,  and  entreated  her  to  be  rec¬ 
onciled.  Accordingly  she  appeared  to  him,  and 
answered  that,  as  soon  as  he  came  to  Sparta,  he 
should  speedily  be  freed  from  all  evils;  ob¬ 
scurely  foretelling,  it  would  seem,  his  immi¬ 
nent  death.  This  story  is  related  by  many  au¬ 
thors. 

Cimon,  strengthened  with  the  accession  of 
the  allies,  went  as  general  into  Thrace.  For  he 
was  told  that  some  great  men  among  the  Per¬ 
sians,  of  the  king’s  kindred,  being  in  posses¬ 
sion  of  Eion,  a  city  situated  upon  the  river 
Strymon,  infested  the  neighbouring  Greeks. 
First  he  defeated  these  Persians  in  battle,  and 
shut  them  up  within  the  walls  of  their  town. 
Then  he  fell  upon  the  Thracians  of  the  coun¬ 
try  beyond  the  Strymon,  because  they  supplied 
Eion  with  victuals,  and  driving  them  entirely 
out  of  the  country,  took  possession  of  it  as  con¬ 
queror,  by  which  means  he  reduced  the  be¬ 
sieged  to  such  straits,  that  Butes,  who  com¬ 
manded  there  for  the  king,  in  desperation  set 
fire  to  the  town,  and  burned  himself,  his  goods, 
and  all  his  relations,  in  one  common  flame. 

By  this  means,  Cimon  got  the  town,  but  no 
great  booty;  as  the  barbarians  had  not  only 
consumed  themselves  in  the  fire,  but  the  rich¬ 
est  of  their  effects.  However,  he  put  the  coun¬ 
try  about  into  the  hands  of  the  Athenians,  a 
most  advantageous  and  desirable  situation  for 
a  settlement.  For  this  action,  the  people  per¬ 
mitted  him  to  erect  the  stone  Mercuries,  upon 
the  first  of  which  was  this  inscription: — 


CIMON 

Of  bold  and  patient  spirit,  too,  were  those, 
Who,  where  the  Strymon  under  Eion  flows, 
With  famine  and  the  sword,  to  utmost  need, 
Reduced  at  last  the  children  of  the  Mede. 

Upon  the  second  stood  this: — 

The  Athenians  to  their  leaders  this  reward 
For  great  and  useful  service  did  accord; 

Others  hereafter  shall,  from  their  applause, 
Learn  to  be  valiant  in  their  country’s  cause . 

And  upon  the  third  the  following: — 

With  Atreus’  sons,  this  city  sent  of  yore 
Divine  Menestheus  to  the  Trojan  shore; 

Of  all  the  Greeks,  so  Homer’s  verses  say, 

The  ablest  man  an  army  to  array: 

So  old  the  title  of  her  sons  the  name 
Of  chiefs  and  champions  in  the  field  to  claim . 

Though  the  name  of  Cimon  is  not  men¬ 
tioned  in  these  inscriptions,  yet  his  contempo¬ 
raries  considered  them  to  be  the  very  highest 
honours  to  him;  as  neither  Miltiades  nor  The- 
mistocles  ever  received  the  like.  When  Miltia¬ 
des  claimed  a  garland,  Sochares  of  Decelea 
stood  up  in  the  midst  of  the  assembly  and  op¬ 
posed  it,  using  words  which,  though  ungra¬ 
cious,  were  received  with  applause  by  the  peo¬ 
ple:  “When  you  have  gained  a  victory  by  your¬ 
self,  Miltiades,  then  you  may  ask  to  triumph 
so,  too.” 

What  then  induced  them  so  particularly  to 
honour  Cimon?  Was  it  that  under  other  com¬ 
manders  they  stood  upon  the  defensive?  But 
by  his  conduct,  they  not  only  attacked  their  en¬ 
emies,  but  invaded  them  in  their  own  country, 
and  acquired  new  territory,  becoming  masters 
of  Eion  and  Amphipolis,  where  they  planted 
colonies,  as  also  they  did  in  the  isle  of  Scyros, 
which  Cimon  had  taken  on  the  following  occa¬ 
sion. 

The  Dolopians  were  the  inhabitants  of  this 
isle,  a  people  who  neglected  all  husbandry,  and 
had,  for  many  generations,  been  devoted  to  pi¬ 
racy;  this  they  practised  to  that  degree,  that  at 
last  they  began  to  plunder  foreigners  that 
brought  merchandise  into  their  ports.  Some 
merchants  of  Thessaly,  who  had  come  to  shore 
near  to  Ctesium,  were  not  only  spoiled  of  their 
goods,  but  themselves  put  into  confinement. 
These  men  afterwards  escaping  from  their 
prison,  went  and  obtained  sentence  against  the 
Scyrians  in  a  court  of  Amphictyons,  and  when 
the  Scyrian  people  declined  to  make  public  res¬ 
titution,  and  called  upon  the  individuals  who 
had  got  the  plunder  to  give  it  up,  these  per¬ 
sons,  in  alarm,  wrote  to  Cimon  to  succour 
them,  with  his  fleet,  and  declared  themselves 
ready  to  deliver  the  town  into  his  hands. 


393 

Cimon,  by  these  means,  got  the  town,  expelled 
the  Dolopian  pirates,  and  so  opened  the  traffic 
of  the  Aegean  sea.  And,  understanding  that  the 
ancient  Theseus,  the  son  of  ^Egeus,  when  he 
fled  from  Athens  and  took  refuge  in  this  isle, 
was  here  treacherously  slain  by  King  Lycome- 
des,  who  feared  him,  Cimon  endeavoured  to 
find  out  where  he  was  buried.  For  an  oracle 
had  commanded  the  Athenians  to  bring  home 
his  ashes,  and  pay  him  all  due  honours  as  a  he¬ 
ro;  but  hitherto  they  had  not  been  able  to  learn 
where  he  was  interred,  as  the  people  of  Scyros 
dissembled  the  knowledge  of  it,  and  were  not 
willing  to  allow  a  search.  But  now,  great  in¬ 
quiry  being  made,  with  some  difficulty  he 
found  out  the  tomb  and  carried  the  relics  into 
his  own  galley,  and  with  great  pomp  and  show 
brought  them  to  Athens,  four  hundred  years, 
or  thereabouts,  after  his  expulsion. 

This  act  got  Cimon  great  favour  with  the 
people,  one  mark  of  which  was  the  judgment, 
afterwards  so  famous,  upon  the  tragic  poets. 
Sophocles,  still  a  young  man,  had  just  brought 
forward  his  first  plays;  opinions  were  much  di¬ 
vided,  and  the  spectators  had  taken  sides  with 
some  heat.  So,  to  determine  the  case,  Apseph- 
ion,  who  was  at  that  time  archon,  would  not 
cast  lots  who  should  be  judges;  but  when  Ci¬ 
mon  and  his  brother  commanders  with  him 
came  into  the  theatre,  after  they  had  performed 
the  usual  rites  to  the  god  of  the  festival,  he 
would  not  allow  them  to  retire,  but  came  for¬ 
ward  and  made  them  swear  (being  ten  in  all, 
one  from  each  tribe)  the  usual  oath;  and  so  be¬ 
ing  sworn  judges,  he  made  them  sit  down  to 
give  sentence.  The  eagerness  for  victory  grew 
all  the  warmer  from  the  ambition  to  get  the 
suffrages  of  such  honourable  judges.  And  the 
victory  was  at  last  adjudged  to  Sophocles, 
which  iEschylus  is  said  to  have  taken  so  ill,  that 
he  left  Athens  shortly  after,  and  went  in  anger 
to  Sicily,  where  he  died,  and  was  buried  near 
the  city  of  Gela. 

Ion  relates  that  when  he  was  a  young  man, 
and  recently  come  from  Chios  to  Athens,  he 
chanced  to  sup  with  Cimon  at  Laomedon’s 
house.  After  supper,  when  they  had,  according 
to  custom,  poured  out  wine  to  the  honour  of 
the  gods,  Cimon  was  desired  by  the  company 
to  give  them  a  song,  which  he  did  with  suffi¬ 
cient  success,  and  received  the  commendations 
of  the  company,  who  remarked  on  his  superi¬ 
ority  to  Themistocles,  who,  on  a  like  occasion, 
had  declared  he  had  never  learnt  to  sing,  nor  to 
play,  and  only  knew  how  to  make  a  city  rich 
and  powerful. 


394 

After  talking  of  things  incident  to  such  en¬ 
tertainments,  they  entered  upon  the  particulars 
of  the  several  actions  for  which  Cimon  had 
been  famous.  And  when  they  were  mentioning 
the  most  signal,  he  told  them  they  had  omitted 
one,  upon  which  he  valued  himself  most  for  ad¬ 
dress  and  good  contrivance.  He  gave  this  ac¬ 
count  of  it.  When  the  allies  had  taken  a  great 
number  of  the  barbarians  prisoners  in  Sestos 
and  Byzantium,  they  gave  him  the  preference 
to  divide  the  booty;  he  accordingly  put  the 
prisoners  in  one  lot,  and  the  spoils  of  their  rich 
attire  and  jewels  in  the  other.  This  the  allies 
complained  of  as  an  unequal  division;  but  he 
gave  them  their  choice  to  take  which  lot  they 
would,  for  that  the  Athenians  should  be  con¬ 
tent  with  that  which  they  refused. 

Herophytus  of  Samos  advised  them  to  take 
the  ornaments  for  their  share,  and  leave  the 
slaves  to  the  Athenians;  and  Cimon  went  away, 
and  was  much  laughed  at  for  his  ridiculous  di¬ 
vision.  For  the  allies  carried  away  the  golden 
bracelets,  and  armlets,  and  collars,  and  purple 
robes,  and  the  Athenians  had  only  the  naked 
bodies  of  the  captives,  which  they  could  make 
no  advantage  of,  being  unused  to  labour.  But  a 
little  while  after,  the  friends  and  kinsmen  of 
the  prisoners  coming  from  Lydia  and  Phrygia, 
redeemed  everyone  his  relations  at  a  high  ran¬ 
som;  so  that  by  this  means  Cimon  got  so  much 
treasure  that  he  maintained  his  whole  fleet  of 
galleys  with  the  money  for  four  months;  and 
yet  there  was  some  left  to  lay  up  in  the  treasury 
at  Athens. 

Cimon  now  grew  rich,  and  what  he  gained 
from  the  barbarians  with  honour,  he  spent  yet 
more  honourably  upon  the  citizens.  For  he 
pulled  down  all  the  enclosures  of  his  gardens 
and  grounds,  that  strangers,  and  the  needy  of 
his  fellow-citizens,  might  gather  of  his  fruits 
freely.  At  home  he  kept  a  table,  plain,  but  suf¬ 
ficient  for  a  considerable  number;  to  which  any 
poor  townsman  had  free  access,  and  so  might 
support  himself  without  labour,  with  his  whole 
time  left  free  for  public  duties.  Aristotle  states, 
however,  that  this  reception  did  not  extend  to 
all  the  Athenians,  but  only  to  his  own  fellow- 
townsmen,  the  Laciadae. 

Besides  this,  he  always  went  attended  by  two 
or  three  young  companions,  very  well  clad;  and 
if  he  met  with  an  elderly  citizen  in  a  poor  hab¬ 
it,  one  of  these  would  change  clothes  with  the 
decayed  citizen,  which  was  looked  upon  as 
very  nobly  done.  He  enjoined  them,  likewise, 
to  carry  a  considerable  quantity  of  coin  about 
them,  which  they  were  to  convey  silently  into 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  hands  of  the  better  class  of  poor  men,  as 
they  stood  by  them  in  the  market-place.  This, 
Cratinus,  the  poet,  speaks  of  in  one  of  his  come¬ 
dies,  the  Archilochi — 

For  1 ,  Metrobius,  too,  the  scrivener  poor, 

Of  ease  and  comfort  in  my  age  secure 
By  Greece’s  noblest  son  in  life’s  decline, 

Cimon,  the  generous-hearted ,  the  divine, 
Well-fed  and  feasted  hoped  till  death  to  be, 
Death  which,  alas !  has  taken  him  ere  me . 

Gorgias,  the  Leontine,  gives  him  this  charac¬ 
ter,  that  he  got  riches  that  he  might  use  them, 
and  used  them  that  he  might  get  honour  by 
them.  And  Critias,  one  of  the  thirty  tyrants, 
makes  it,  in  his  elegies,  his  wish  to  have — 

The  Scopads’  wealth,  and  Cimon’ s  nobleness, 
And  King  Agesilaus’s  success. 

Lichas,  we  know,  became  famous  in  Greece, 
only  because  on  the  days  of  the  sports,  when 
the  young  boys  run  naked,  he  used  to  enter¬ 
tain  the  strangers  that  came  to  see  these  diver¬ 
sions.  But  Cimon’s  generosity  outdid  all  the 
old  Athenian  hospitality  and  good-nature.  For 
though  it  is  the  city’s  just  boast  that  their  fore¬ 
fathers  taught  the  rest  of  Greece  to  sow  corn, 
and  how  to  use  springs  of  water,  and  to  kindle 
fire,  yet  Cimon,  by  keeping  open  house  for  his 
fellow-citizens,  and  giving  travellers  liberty  to 
eat  the  fruits  which  the  several  seasons  pro¬ 
duced  in  his  land,  seemed  to  restore  to  the 
world  that  community  of  goods  which  myth¬ 
ology  says  existed  in  the  reign  of  Saturn. 

Those  who  object  to  him,  that  he  did  this  to 
be  popular  and  gain  the  applause  of  the  vulgar, 
are  confuted  by  the  constant  tenor  of  the  rest  of 
his  actions,  which  all  tended  to  uphold  the  in¬ 
terests  of  the  nobility  and  the  Spartan  policy, 
of  which  he  gave  instances,  when  together  with 
Aristides  he  opposed  Themistocles,  who  was 
advancing  the  authority  of  the  people  beyond 
its  just  limits,  and  resisted  Ephialtes,  who,  to 
please  the  multitude,  was  for  abolishing  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  court  of  Areopagus. 

And  when  all  of  his  time,  except  Aristides 
and  Ephialtes,  enriched  themselves  out  of  the 
public  money,  he  still  kept  his  hands  clean  and 
untainted,  and  to  his  last  day  never  acted  or 
spoke  for  his  own  private  gain  or  emolument. 
They  tell  us  that  Rhcesaces,  a  Persian,  who  had 
traitorously  revolted  from  the  king  his  master, 
fled  to  Athens,  and  there,  being  harassed  by 
sycophants,  who  were  still  accusing  him  to  the 
people,  he  applied  himself  to  Cimon  for  re¬ 
dress,  and,  to  gain  his  favour,  laid  down  in  his 
doorway  two  cups,  the  one  full  of  gold  and  the 
other  of  silver  Darics.  Cimon  smiled  and  asked 


CIMON 

him  whether  he  wished  to  have  Cimon’s  hired 
service  or  his  friendship.  He  replied,  his  friend¬ 
ship.  “If  so,”  said  he,  “take  away  these  pieces, 
for,  being  your  friend,  when  I  shall  have  occa¬ 
sion  for  them,  I  will  send  and  ask  for  them.” 

The  allies  of  the  Athenians  began  now  to  be 
weary  of  war  and  military  service,  willing  to 
have  repose,  and  to  look  after  their  husbandry 
and  traffic.  For  they  saw  their  enemies  driven 
out  of  the  country,  and  did  not  fear  any  new 
vexations  from  them.  They  still  paid  the  tax 
they  were  assessed  at,  but  did  not  send  men  and 
galleys,  as  they  had  done  before.  This  the  other 
Athenian  generals  wished  to  constrain  them  to, 
and  by  judicial  proceedings  against  defaulters, 
and  penalties  which  they  inflicted  on  them, 
made  the  government  uneasy,  and  even  odious. 

But  Cimon  practised  a  contrary  method;  he 
forced  no  man  to  go  that  was  not  willing,  but 
of  those  that  desired  to  be  excused  from  service 
he  took  money  and  vessels  unmanned,  and  let 
them  yield  to  the  temptation  of  staying  at 
home,  to  attend  to  their  private  business.  Thus 
they  lost  their  military  habits  and  luxury,  and 
their  own  folly  quickly  changed  them  into  un¬ 
warlike  husbandmen  and  traders;  while  Ci¬ 
mon,  continually  embarking  large  numbers  of 
Athenians  on  board  his  galleys,  thoroughly  dis¬ 
ciplined  them  in  his  expeditions,  and  ere  long 
made  them  the  lords  of  their  own  paymasters. 
The  allies,  whose  indolence  maintained  them, 
while  they  thus  went  sailing  about  everywhere, 
and  incessantly  bearing  arms  and  acquiring 
skill,  began  to  fear  and  flatter  them,  and  found 
themselves  after  a  while  allies  no  longer,  but 
unwittingly  become  tributaries  and  slaves. 

Nor  did  any  man  ever  do  more  than  Cimon 
did  to  humble  the  pride  of  the  Persian  king. 
He  was  not  content  with  getting  rid  of  him  out 
of  Greece;  but  following  close  at  his  heels,  be¬ 
fore  the  barbarians  could  take  breath  and  re¬ 
cover  themselves,  he  was  already  at  work,  and 
what  with  his  devastations,  and  his  forcible  re¬ 
duction  of  some  places,  and  the  revolts  and 
voluntary  accession  of  others  in  the  end  from 
Ionia  to  Pamphylia,  all  Asia  was  clear  of  Per¬ 
sian  soldiers. 

Word  being  brought  him  that  the  royal  com¬ 
manders  were  lying  in  wait  upon  the  coast  of 
Pamphylia  with  a  numerous  land  army  and  a 
large  fleet,  he  determined  to  make  the  whole 
sea  on  his  side  the  Chelidonian  islands  so  for¬ 
midable  to  them  that  they  should  never  dare  to 
show  themselves  in  it;  and  setting  off  from 
Cnidos  and  the  Triopian  headland  with  two 
hundred  galleys,  which  had  been  originally 


395 

built  with  particular  care  by  Themistocles,  for 
speed  and  rapid  evolutions,  and  to  which  he 
now  gave  greater  width  and  roomier  decks 
along  the  sides  to  move  to  and  fro  upon,  so  as 
to  allow  a  great  number  of  full-armed  soldiers 
to  take  part  in  the  engagements  and  fight  from 
them,  he  shaped  his  course  first  of  all  against 
the  town  of  Phaselis,  which  though  inhabited 
by  Greeks,  yet  would  not  quit  the  interests  of 
Persia,  but  denied  his  galleys  entrance  into 
their  port. 

Upon  this  he  wasted  the  country,  and  drew 
up  his  army  to  their  very  walls;  but  the  soldiers 
of  Chios,  who  were  then  serving  under  him, 
being  ancient  friends  to  the  Phaselites,  endeav¬ 
ouring  to  propitiate  the  general  in  their  behalf, 
at  the  same  time  shot  arrows  into  the  town,  to 
which  were  fastened  letters  conveying  intelli¬ 
gence.  At  length  he  concluded  peace  with 
them,  upon  the  conditions  that  they  should 
pay  down  ten  talents,  and  follow  him  against 
the  barbarians. 

Ephorus  says  the  admiral  of  the  Persian  fleet 
was  Tithraustes,  and  the  general  of  the  land 
army  Pherendates;  but  Callisthenes  is  positive 
that  Ariomandes,  the  son  of  Gobryas,  had  the 
supreme  command  of  all  the  forces.  He  lay 
waiting  with  the  whole  fleet  at  the  mouth  of 
the  river  Eurymedon,  with  no  design  to  fight, 
but  expecting  a  reinforcement  of  eighty  Phoe¬ 
nician  ships  on  their  way  from  Cyprus. 

Cimon,  aware  of  this,  put  out  to  sea,  re¬ 
solved,  if  they  would  not  fight  a  battle  willing¬ 
ly,  to  force  them  to  it.  The  barbarians,  seeing 
this,  retired  within  the  mouth  of  the  river  to 
avoid  being  attacked;  but  when  they  saw  the 
Athenians  come  upon  them,  notwithstanding 
their  retreat,  they  met  them  with  six  hundred 
ships,  as  Phanodemus  relates,  but,  according 
to  Ephorus,  only  with  three  hundred  and 
fifty.  However,  they  did  nothing  worthy  such 
mighty  forces,  but  immediately  turned  the 
prows  of  their  galleys  toward  the  shore,  where 
those  that  came  first  threw  themselves  upon 
the  land,  and  fled  to  their  army  drawn  up 
thereabout,  while  the  rest  perished  with  their 
vessels  or  were  taken.  By  this,  one  may  guess  at 
their  number,  for  though  a  great  many  escaped 
out  of  the  fight,  and  a  great  many  others  were 
sunk,  yet  two  hundred  galleys  were  taken  by 
the  Athenians. 

When  their  land  army  drew  toward  the  sea¬ 
side,  Cimon  was  in  suspense  whether  he  should 
venture  to  try  and  force  his  way  on  shore;  as  he 
should  thus  expose  his  Greeks,  wearied  with 
slaughter  in  the  first  engagement,  to  the  swords 


396 

of  the  barbarians,  who  were  all  fresh  men,  and 
many  times  their  number.  But  seeing  his  men 
resolute,  and  flushed  with  victory,  he  bade 
them  land,  though  they  were  not  yet  cool  from 
their  first  battle.  As  soon  as  they  touched 
ground,  they  set  up  a  shout  and  ran  upon  the 
enemy,  who  stood  firm  and  sustained  the  first 
shock  with  great  courage,  so  that  the  fight  was 
a  hard  one,  and  some  principal  men  of  the 
Athenians  in  rank  and  courage  were  slain.  At 
length,  though  with  much  ado,  they  routed  the 
barbarians,  and  killing  some,  took  others  pris¬ 
oners,  and  plundered  all  their  tents  and  pavil¬ 
ions,  which  were  full  of  rich  spoil. 

Cimon,  like  a  skilled  athlete  at  the  games, 
having  in  one  day  carried  off  two  victories 
wherein  he  surpassed  that  of  Salamis  by  sea 
and  that  of  Plataea  by  land,  was  encouraged  to 
try  for  yet  another  success.  News  being  brought 
that  the  Phoenician  succours,  in  number  eighty 
sail,  had  come  in  sight  at  Hydrum,  he  set  off 
with  all  speed  to  find  them,  while  they  as  yet 
had  not  received  any  certain  account  of  the 
larger  fleet,  and  were  in  doubt  what  to  think; 
so  that,  thus  surprised,  they  lost  all  their  vessels 
and  most  of  their  men  with  them. 

This  success  of  Cimon  so  daunted  the  King 
of  Persia  that  he  presently  made  that  celebrated 
peace,  by  which  he  engaged  that  his  armies 
should  come  no  nearer  the  Grecian  sea  than 
the  length  of  a  horse’s  course,  and  that  none  of 
his  galleys  or  vessels  of  war  should  appear  be¬ 
tween  the  Cyanean  and  Chelidonian  isles.  Cal- 
listhenes,  however,  says  that  he  did  not  agree  to 
any  such  articles,  but  that,  upon  the  fear  this 
victory  gave  him,  he  did  in  reality  thus  act,  and 
kept  off  so  far  from  Greece,  that  when  Pericles 
with  fifty  and  Ephialtes  with  thirty  galleys 
cruised  beyond  the  Chelidonian  isles,  they  did 
not  discover  one  Persian  vessel.  But  in  the  col¬ 
lection  which  Craterus  made  of  the  public  acts 
of  the  people,  there  is  a  draft  of  this  treaty 
given.  And  it  is  told,  also,  that  at  Athens  they 
erected  the  altar  of  Peace  upon  this  occasion, 
and  decreed  particular  honours  to  Callias,  who 
was  employed  as  ambassador  to  procure  the 
treaty. 

The  people  of  Athens  raised  so  much  money 
from  the  spoils  of  this  war,  which  were  pub¬ 
licly  sold,  that  besides  other  expenses,  and  rais¬ 
ing  the  south  wall  of  the  citadel,  they  laid  the 
foundation  of  the  long  walls,  not,  indeed,  fin¬ 
ished  till  at  a  later  time,  which  were  called  the 
Legs.  And  the  place  where  they  built  them  be¬ 
ing  soft  and  marshy  ground,  they  were  forced 
to  sink  great  weights  of  stone  and  rubble  to  se- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

cure  the  foundation,  and  did  all  this  out  of  the 
money  Cimon  supplied  them  with.  It  was  he, 
likewise,  who  first  embellished  the  upper  city 
with  those  fine  and  ornamental  places  of  exer¬ 
cise  and  resort,  which  they  afterwards  so  much 
frequented  and  delighted  in.  He  set  the  mar¬ 
ket-place  with  plane-trees;  and  the  Academy, 
which  was  before  a  bare,  dry,  and  dirty  spot, 
he  converted  into  a  well-watered  grove,  with 
shady  alleys  to  walk  in,  and  open  courses  for 
races. 

When  the  Persians  who  had  made  them¬ 
selves  masters  of  the  Chersonese,  so  far  from 
quitting  it,  called  in  the  people  of  the  interior 
of  Thrace  to  help  them  against  Cimon,  whom 
they  despised  for  the  smallness  of  his  forces,  he 
set  upon  them  with  only  four  galleys,  and  took 
thirteen  of  theirs;  and  having  driven  out  the 
Persians,  and  subdued  the  Thracians,  he  made 
the  whole  Chersonese  the  property  of  Athens. 

Next  he  attacked  the  people  of  Thasos,  who 
had  revolted  from  the  Athenians;  and,  having 
defeated  them  in  a  fight  at  sea,  where  he  took 
thirty-three  of  their  vessels,  he  took  their  town 
by  siege,  and  acquired  for  the  Athenians  all 
the  mines  of  gold  on  the  opposite  coast,  and  the 
territory  dependent  on  Thasos.  This  opened 
him.  a  fair  passage  into  Macedon,  so  that  he 
might,  it  was  thought,  have  acquired  a  good 
portion  of  that  country;  and  because  he  neg¬ 
lected  the  opportunity,  he  was  suspected  of 
corruption,  and  of  having  been  bribed  off  by 
King  Alexander. 

So,  by  the  combination  of  his  adversaries,  he 
was  accused  of  being  false  to  his  country.  In 
his  defence  he  told  the  judges  that  he  had 
always  shown  himself  in  his  public  life  the 
friend,  not,  like  other  men,  of  rich  Ionians  and 
Thessalians,  to  be  courted,  and  to  receive  pres¬ 
ents,  but  of  the  Lacedaemonians;  for  as  he  ad¬ 
mired,  so  he  wished  to  imitate,  the  plainness 
of  their  habits,  their  temperance,  and  simplic¬ 
ity  of  living,  which  he  preferred  to  any  sort  of 
riches;  but  that  he  always  had  been,  and  still 
was,  proud  to  enrich  his  country  with  the  spoils 
of  her  enemies.  Stesimbrotus,  making  mention 
of  this  trial,  states  that  Elpinice,  in  behalf  of 
her  brother,  addressed  herself  to  Pericles,  the 
most  vehement  of  his  accusers,  to  whom  Peri¬ 
cles  answered,  with  a  smile,  ‘‘You  are  old,  El¬ 
pinice,  to  meddle  with  affairs  of  this  nature.” 
However,  he  proved  the  mildest  of  his  prose¬ 
cutors,  and  rose  up  but  once  all  the  while,  al¬ 
most  as  a  matter  of  form,  to  plead  against  him. 
Cimon  was  acquitted. 

In  his  public  life  after  this  he  continued, 


CIMON 

whilst  at  home,  to  control  and  restrain  the 
common  people,  who  would  have  trampled  up¬ 
on  the  nobility,  and  drawn  all  the  power  and 
sovereignty  to  themselves.  But  when  he  after¬ 
wards  was  sent  out  to  war,  the  multitude 
broke  loose,  as  it  were,  and  overthrew  all  the 
ancient  laws  and  customs  they  had  hitherto 
observed,  and,  chiefly  at  the  instigation  of 
Ephialtes,  withdrew  the  cognisance  of  almost 
all  causes  from  the  Areopagus;  so  that  all  juris¬ 
diction  now  being  transferred  to  them,  the 
government  was  reduced  to  a  perfect  democ¬ 
racy,  and  this  by  the  help  of  Pericles,  who  was 
already  powerful,  and  had  pronounced  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  the  common  people. 

Cimon,  when  he  returned,  seeing  the  au¬ 
thority  of  this  great  council  so  upset,  was  ex¬ 
ceedingly  troubled,  and  endeavoured  to  rem¬ 
edy  these  disorders  by  bringing  the  courts  of 
law  to  their  former  state,  and  restoring  the  old 
aristocracy  of  the  time  of  Clisthenes.  This  the 
others  declaimed  against  with  all  the  vehe¬ 
mence  possible,  and  began  to  revive  those  sto¬ 
ries  concerning  him  and  his  sister,  and  cried 
out  against  him  as  the  partisan  of  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians.  To  these  calumnies  the  famous  verses 
of  Eupolis,  the  poet,  upon  Cimon  refer: — 

He  was  as  good  as  others  that  one  sees, 

But  he  was  fond  of  drinking  and  of  ease ; 

And  would  at  nights  to  Sparta  often  roam, 

Leaving  his  sister  desolate  at  home. 

But  if,  though  slothful  and  a  drunkard,  he 
could  capture  so  many  towns  and  gain  so 
many  victories,  certainly  if  he  had  been  sober 
and  minded  his  business,  there  had  been  no 
Grecian  commander,  either  before  or  after 
him,  that  could  have  surpassed  him  for  ex¬ 
ploits  of  war. 

He  was,  indeed,  a  favourer  of  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians,  even  from  his  youth,  and  he  gave  the 
names  of  Lacedaemonius  and  Eleus  to  two 
sons,  twins,  whom  he  had,  as  Stesimbrotus 
says,  by  a  woman  of  Clitorium,  whence  Peri¬ 
cles  often  upbraided  them  with  their  mother’s 
blood.  But  Diodorus,  the  geographer,  asserts 
that  both  these,  and  another  son  of  Cimon’s, 
whose  name  was  Thessalus,  were  born  of  Iso¬ 
dice,  the  daughter  of  Euryptolemus,  the  son  of 
Megacles. 

However,  this  is  certain,  that  Cimon  was 
countenanced  by  the  Lacedaemonians  in  oppo¬ 
sition  to  Themistocles,  whom  they  disliked; 
and  while  he  was  yet  very  young,  they  endeav¬ 
oured  to  raise  and  increase  his  credit  in  Athens. 
This  the  Athenians  perceived  at  first  with 
pleasure,  and  the  favour  the  Lacedaemonians 


397 

showed  him  was  in  various  ways  advantageous 
to  them  and  their  affairs;  as  at  that  time  they 
were  just  rising  to  power,  and  were  occupied 
in  winning  the  allies  to  their  side.  So  they 
seemed  not  at  all  offended  with  the  honour 
and  kindness  shown  to  Cimon,  who  then  had 
the  chief  management  of  all  the  affairs  of 
Greece,  and  was  acceptable  to  the  Lacedaemo¬ 
nians,  and  courteous  to  the  allies. 

But  afterwards  the  Athenians,  grown  more 
powerful,  when  they  saw  Cimon  so  entirely 
devoted  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  began  to  be 
angry,  for  he  would  always  in  his  speeches 
prefer  them  to  the  Athenians,  and  upon  every 
occasion,  when  he  would  reprimand  them  for 
a  fault,  or  incite  them  to  emulation,  he  would 
exclaim,  “The  Lacedaemonians  would  not  do 
thus.”  This  raised  the  discontent,  and  got  him 
in  some  degree  the  hatred  of  the  citizens;  but 
that  which  ministered  chiefly  to  the  accusation 
against  him  fell  out  upon  the  following  occa¬ 
sion. 

In  the  fourth  year  of  the  reign  of  Archida- 
mus,  the  son  of  Zeuxidamus,  King  of  Sparta, 
there  happened  in  the  country  of  Lacedaemon 
the  greatest  earthquake  that  was  known  in  the 
memory  of  man;  the  earth  opened  into  chasms, 
and  the  mountain  Taygetus  was  so  shaken, 
that  some  of  the  rocky  points  of  it  fell  down, 
and  except  five  houses,  all  the  town  of  Sparta 
was  shattered  to  pieces. 

They  say  that  a  little  before  any  motion  was 
perceived,  as  the  young  men  and  the  boys  just 
grown  up  were  exercising  themselves  together 
in  the  middle  of  the  portico,  a  hare,  of  a  sud¬ 
den,  started  out  just  by  them,  which  the  young 
men,  though  all  naked  and  daubed  with  oil, 
ran  after  for  sport.  No  sooner  were  they  gone 
from  the  place,  than  the  gymnasium  fell  down 
upon  the  boys  who  had  stayed  behind,  and 
killed  them  all.  Their  tomb  is  to  this  day  called 
Sismatias. 

Archidamus,  by  the  present  danger  made 
apprehensive  of  what  might  follow,  and  seeing 
the  citizens  intent  upon  removing  the  most 
valuable  of  their  goods  out  of  their  houses, 
commanded  an  alarm  to  be  sounded,  as  if  an 
enemy  were  coming  upon  them,  in  order  that 
they  should  collect  about  him  in  a  body,  with 
arms.  It  was  this  alone  that  saved  Sparta  at 
that  time,  for  the  Helots  were  got  together 
from  the  country  about,  with  design  to  sur¬ 
prise  the  Spartans,  and  overpower  those  whom 
the  earthquake  had  spared.  But  finding  them 
armed  and  well  prepared,  they  retired  into  the 
towns  and  openly  made  war  with  them,  gain- 


398 

ing  over  a  number  of  the  Laconians  of  the 
country  districts;  while  at  the  same  time  the 
Messenians,  also,  made  an  attack  upon  the 
Spartans,  who  therefore  despatched  Periclidas 
to  Athens  to  solicit  succours,  of  whom  Aris¬ 
tophanes  says  in  mockery  that  he  came  and — 

In  a  red  jacket,  at  the  altars  seated, 

With  a  white  face,  for  men  and  arms  entreated. 

This  Ephialtes  opposed,  protesting  that  they 
ought  not  to  raise  up  or  assist  a  city  that  was  a 
rival  to  Athens;  but  that  being  down,  it  were 
best  to  keep  her  so,  and  let  the  pride  and  ar¬ 
rogance  of  Sparta  be  trodden  under.  But  Ci- 
mon,  as  Critias  says,  preferring  the  safety  of 
Lacedaemon  to  the  aggrandisement  of  his  own 
country,  so  persuaded  the  people,  that  he  soon 
marched  out  with  a  large  army  to  their  relief. 
Ion  records,  also,  the  most  successful  expres¬ 
sion  which  he  used  to  move  the  Athenians: 
“They  ought  not  to  suffer  Greece  to  be  lamed, 
nor  their  own  city  to  be  deprived  of  her  yoke¬ 
fellow.” 

In  his  return  from  aiding  the  Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans,  he  passed  with  his  army  through  the  ter¬ 
ritory  of  Corinth;  whereupon  Lachartus  re¬ 
proached  him  for  bringing  his  army  into  the 
country  without  first  asking  leave  of  the  peo¬ 
ple.  For  he  that  knocks  at  another  man’s  door 
ought  not  to  enter  the  house  till  the  master 
gives  him  leave.  “But  you  Corinthians,  O 
Lachartus,”  said  Cimon,  “did  not  knock  at  the 
gates  of  the  Cleonaeans  and  Megarians,  but 
broke  them  down,  and  entered  by  force,  think¬ 
ing  that  all  places  should  be  open  to  the  strong¬ 
er.”  And  having  thus  rallied  the  Corinthian, 
he  passed  on  with  his  army. 

Some  time  after  this,  the  Lacedaemonians 
sent  a  second  time  to  desire  succours  of  the 
Athenians  against  the  Messenians  and  Helots, 
who  had  seized  upon  Ithome.  But  when  they 
came,  fearing  their  boldness  and  gallantry,  of 
all  that  came  to  their  assistance,  they  sent  them 
only  back,  alleging  they  were  designing  inno¬ 
vations.  The  Athenians  returned  home,  en¬ 
raged  at  this  usage,  and  vented  their  anger 
upon  all  those  who  were  favourers  of  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians,  and  seizing  some  slight  occasion, 
they  banished  Cimon  for  ten  years,  which  is 
the  time  prescribed  to  those  that  are  banished 
by  the  ostracism. 

In  the  meantime,  the  Lacedaemonians,  on 
their  return  after  freeing  Delphi  from  the  Pho- 
cians,  encamped  their  army  at  Tanagra,  whith¬ 
er  the  Athenians  presently  marched  with  de¬ 
sign  to  fight  them.  Cimon,  also,  came  thither 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

armed,  and  ranged  himself  among  those  of 
his  own  tribe,  which  was  the  CEneis,  desirous 
of  fighting  with  the  rest  against  the  Spartans; 
but  the  council  of  five  hundred  being  in¬ 
formed  of  this,  and  frighted  at  it,  his  adver¬ 
saries  crying  out  he  would  disorder  the  army, 
and  bring  the  Lacedaemonians  to  Athens, 
commanded  the  officers  not  to  receive  him. 

Wherefore  Cimon  left  the  army,  conjuring 
Euthippus,  the  Anaphlystian,  and  the  rest  of 
his  companions,  who  were  most  suspected  as 
favouring  the  Lacedaemonians,  to  behave 
themselves  bravely  against  their  enemies,  and 
by  their  actions  make  their  innocence  evident 
to  their  countrymen.  These,  being  in  all  a  hun¬ 
dred,  took  the  arms  of  Cimon,  and  followed 
his  advice;  and  making  a  body  by  themselves, 
fought  so  desperately  with  the  enemy,  that 
they  were  all  cut  off,  leaving  the  Athenians 
deep  regret  for  the  loss  of  such  brave  men,  and 
repentance  for  having  so  unjustly  suspected 
them. 

Accordingly,  they  did  not  long  retain  their 
severity  toward  Cimon,  partly  upon  remem¬ 
brance  of  his  former  services,  and  partly,  per¬ 
haps,  induced  by  the  juncture  of  the  times.  For 
being  defeated  at  Tanagra  in  a  great  battle, 
and  fearing  the  Peloponnesians  would  come 
upon  them  at  the  opening  of  the  spring,  they 
recalled  Cimon  by  a  decree,  of  which  Pericles 
himself  was  author.  So  reasonable  were  men’s 
resentments  in  those  times,  and  so  moderate 
their  anger,  that  it  always  gave  way  to  the  pub¬ 
lic  good.  Even  ambition,  the  least  governable 
of  all  human  passions,  could  then  yield  to  the 
necessities  of  the  state. 

Cimon,  as  soon  as  he  returned,  put  an  end  to 
the  war,  and  reconciled  the  two  cities.  Peace 
thus  established,  seeing  the  Athenians  impa¬ 
tient  of  being  idle,  and  eager  after  the  honour 
and  aggrandisement  of  war,  lest  they  should  set 
upon  the  Greeks  themselves,  or  with  so  many 
ships  cruising  about  the  isles  and  Peloponnesus 
they  should  give  occasions  to  intestine  wars,  or 
complaints  of  their  allies  against  them,  he 
equipped  two  hundred  galleys,  with  design 
to  make  an  attempt  upon  Egypt  and  Cyprus; 
purposing,  by  this  means,  to  accustom  the 
Athenians  to  fight  against  the  barbarians,  and 
enrich  themselves  honestly  by  spoiling  those 
who  were  the  natural  enemies  of  Greece. 

But  when  all  things  were  prepared,  and  the 
army  ready  to  embark,  Cimon  had  this  dream. 
It  seemed  to  him  that  there  was  a  furious  bitch 
barking  at  him,  and  mixed  with  the  barking  a 
kind  of  human  voice  uttered  these  words: — 


CIMON 

Come  on,  jor  thou  shalt  shortly  be, 

A  pleasure  to  my  whelps  and  rye. 

This  dream  was  hard  to  interpret,  yet  Astyph- 
ilus  of  Posidonia,  a  man  skilled  in  divinations, 
and  intimate  with  Cimon,  told  him  that  his 
death  was  presaged  by  this  vision,  which  he 
thus  explained.  A  dog  is  enemy  to  him  he 
barks  at;  and  one  is  always  most  a  pleasure  to 
one’s  enemies  when  one  is  dead;  the  mixture 
of  human  voice  with  barking  signifies  the 
Medes,  for  the  army  of  the  Medes  is  mixed  up 
of  Greeks  and  barbarians.  After  this  dream,  as 
he  was  sacrificing  to  Bacchus,  and  the  priest 
cutting  up  the  victim,  a  number  of  ants,  taking 
up  the  congealed  particles  of  the  blood,  laid 
them  about  Cimon’s  great  toe.  This  was  not 
observed  for  a  good  while,  but  at  the  very  time 
when  Cimon  spied  it,  the  priest  came  and 
showed  him  the  liver  of  the  sacrifice  imperfect, 
wanting  that  part  of  it  called  the  head. 

But  he  could  not  then  recede  from  the  enter¬ 
prise,  so  he  set  sail.  Sixty  of  his  ships  he  sent 
toward  Egypt;  with  the  rest  he  went  and 
fought  the  King  of  Persia’s  fleet,  composed  of 
Phoenician  and  Cilician  galleys,  recovered  all 
the  cities  thereabout,  and  threatened  Egypt; 
designing  no  less  than  the  entire  ruin  of  the 
Persian  empire.  And  all  the  more  for  that  he 
was  informed  Themistocles  was  in  great  repute 
among  the  barbarians,  having  promised  the 
king  to  lead  his  army,  whenever  he  should 
make  war  upon  Greece.  But  Themistocles,  it 
is  said,  abandoning  all  hopes  of  compassing  his 
designs,  very  much  out  of  the  despair  of  over¬ 
coming  the  valour  and  good  fortune  of  Cimon, 
died  a  voluntary  death. 

Cimon,  intent  on  great  designs,  which  he 
was  now  to  enter  upon,  keeping  his  navy  about 
the  isle  of  Cyprus,  sent  messengers  to  consult 
the  oracle  of  Jupiter  Ammon  upon  some  secret 
matter.  For  it  is  not  known  about  what  they 
were  sent,  and  the  god  would  give  them  no 
answer,  but  commanded  them  to  return  again, 
for  that  Cimon  was  already  with  him.  Hearing 
this,  they  returned  to  sea,  and  as  soon  as  they 
came  to  the  Grecian  army,  which  was  then 
about  Egypt,  they  understood  that  Cimon  was 
dead;  and  computing  the  time  of  the  oracle, 
they  found  that  his  death  had  been  signified, 
he  being  then  already  with  the  gods. 


399 

He  died,  some  say,  of  sickness,  while  besieg¬ 
ing  Citium,  in  Cyprus;  according  to  others,  of 
a  wound  he  received  in  a  skirmish  with  the 
barbarians.  When  he  perceived  he  should  die, 
he  commanded  those  under  his  charge  to  re¬ 
turn,  and  by  no  means  to  let  the  news  of 
his  death  be  known  by  the  way;  this  they  did 
with  such  secrecy  that  they  all  came  home 
safe,  and  neither  their  enemies  nor  the  allies 
knew  what  had  happened.  Thus,  as  Phano- 
demus  relates,  the  Grecian  army  was,  as  it 
were,  conducted  by  Cimon  thirty  days  after 
he  was  dead. 

But  after  his  death  there  was  not  one  com¬ 
mander  among  the  Greeks  that  did  anything 
considerable  against  the  barbarians,  and  in¬ 
stead  of  uniting  against  their  common  ene¬ 
mies,  the  popular  leaders  and  partisans  of  war 
animated  them  against  one  another  to  that 
degree,  that  none  could  interpose  their  good 
offices  to  reconcile  them.  And  while,  by  their 
mutual  discord,  they  ruined  the  power  of 
Greece,  they  gave  the  Persians  time  to  recover 
breath,  and  repair  all  their  losses. 

It  is  true,  indeed,  Agesilaus  carried  the  arms 
of  Greece  into  Asia,  but  it  was  a  long  time 
after;  there  were,  indeed,  some  brief  appear¬ 
ances  of  a  war  against  the  king’s  lieutenants  in 
the  maritime  provinces,  but  they  all  quickly 
vanished;  before  he  could  perform  anything  of 
moment,  he  was  recalled  by  fresh  civil  dissen¬ 
sions  and  disturbances  at  home.  So  that  he  was 
forced  to  leave  the  Persian  king’s  officers  to 
impose  what  tribute  they  pleased  on  the  Greek 
cities  in  Asia,  the  confederates  and  allies  of  the 
Lacedaemonians.  Whereas,  in  the  time  of  Ci¬ 
mon,  not  so  much  as  a  letter-carrier,  or  a  single 
horseman,  was  ever  seen  to  come  within  four 
hundred  furlongs  of  the  sea. 

The  monuments,  called  Cimonian  to  this 
day,  in  Athens,  show  that  his  remains  were 
conveyed  home,  yet  the  inhabitants  of  the  city 
Citium  pay  particular  honour  to  a  certain 
tomb  which  they  call  the  tomb  of  Cimon,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Nausicrates,  the  rhetorician,  who 
states  that  in  a  time  of  famine,  when  the  crops 
of  their  land  all  failed,  they  sent  to  the  oracle, 
which  commanded  them  not  to  forget  Cimon, 
but  give  him  the  honours  of  a  superior  being. 
Such  was  the  Greek  commander. 


LUCULLUS 

iio?~56  b.c. 


The  grandfather  of  Lucullus  had  been 
consul;  his  uncle  by  the  mother’s  side 
was  Metellus,  surnamed  Numidicus.  As 
for  his  parents,  his  father  was  convicted  of  ex¬ 
tortion,  and  his  mother  Caecilia’s  reputation 
was  bad. 

The  first  thing  that  Lucullus  did  before  ever 
he  stood  for  any  office,  or  meddled  with  the  af¬ 
fairs  of  state,  being  then  but  a  youth,  was  to 
accuse  the  accuser  of  his  father,  Servilius,  the 
augur,  having  caught  him  in  offence  against 
the  state.  This  thing  was  much  taken  notice  of 
among  the  Romans,  who  commended  it  as  an 
act  of  high  merit.  Even  without  the  provoca¬ 
tion  the  accusation  was  esteemed  no  unbecom¬ 
ing  action,  for  they  delighted  to  see  young  men 
as  eagerly  attacking  injustice  as  good  dogs  do 
wild  beasts.  But  when  great  animosities  en¬ 
sued,  insomuch  that  some  were  wounded  and 
killed  in  the  fray,  Servilius  escaped. 

Lucullus  followed  his  studies  and  became  a 
competent  speaker,  in  both  Greek  and  Latin, 
insomuch  that  Sulla,  when  composing  the 
commentaries  of  his  own  life  and  actions,  dedi¬ 
cated  them  to  him,  as  one  who  could  have 
performed  the  task  better  himself.  His  speech 
was  not  only  elegant  and  ready  for  purposes  of 
mere  business,  like  the  ordinary  oratory  which 
will  in  the  public  market-place — 

Lash  as  a  wounded  tunny  does  the  sea, 
but  on  every  other  occasion  shows  itself — 
Dried  up  and  perished  with  the  want  of  wit; 
but  even  in  his  younger  days  he  addicted  him¬ 
self  to  the  study,  simply  for  its  own  sake,  of  the 
liberal  arts;  and  when  advanced  in  years,  after 
a  life  of  conflicts,  he  gave  his  mind,  as  it  were, 
its  liberty,  to  enjoy  in  full  leisure  the  refresh¬ 
ment  of  philosophy;  and  summoning  up  his 
contemplative  faculties,  administered  a  timely 
check,  after  his  difference  with  Pompey,  to  his 
feelings  of  emulation  and  ambition. 

Besides  what  has  been  said  of  his  love  of 
learning  already,  one  instance  more  was,  that 
in  his  youth,  upon  a  suggestion  of  writing  the 
Marsian  war  in  Greek  and  Latin  verse  and 
prose,  arising  out  of  some  pleasantry  that 


passed  into  a  serious  proposal,  he  agreed  with 
Hortensius,  the  lawyer,  and  Sisenna,  the  histor¬ 
ian,  that  he  would  take  his  lot;  and  it  seems 
that  the  lot  directed  him  to  the  Greek  tongue, 
for  a  Greek  history  of  that  war  is  still  extant. 

Among  the  many  signs  of  the  great  love 
which  he  bore  to  his  brother  Marcus,  one  in 
particular  is  commemorated  by  the  Romans. 
Though  he  was  elder  brother,  he  would  not 
step  into  authority  without  him,  but  deferred 
his  own  advance  until  his  brother  was  quali¬ 
fied  to  bear  a  share  with  him,  and  so  won  upon 
the  people  as,  when  absent,  to  be  chosen  sedile 
with  him. 

He  gave  many  and  early  proofs  of  his  valour 
and  conduct  in  the  Marsian  war,  and  was  ad¬ 
mired  by  Sulla  for  his  constancy  and  mildness, 
and  always  employed  in  affairs  of  importance, 
especially  in  the  mint;  most  of  the  money  for 
carrying  on  the  Mithridatic  war  being  coined 
by  him  in  Peloponnesus,  which,  by  the  sol¬ 
diers’  wants,  was  brought  into  rapid  circula¬ 
tion  and  long  continued  current  under  the 
name  of  Lucullean  coin. 

After  this,  when  Sulla  conquered  Athens, 
and  was  victorious  by  land,  but  found  the  sup¬ 
plies  for  his  army  cut  off,  the  enemy  being 
master  at  sea,  Lucullus  was  the  man  whom  he 
sent  into  Libya  and  Egypt  to  procure  him 
shipping.  It  was  the  depth  of  winter  when  he 
ventured  with  but  three  small  Greek  vessels, 
and  as  many  Rhodian  galleys,  not  only  into  the 
main  sea,  but  also  among  multitudes  of  vessels 
belonging  to  the  enemies  who  were  cruising 
about  as  absolute  masters.  Arriving  at  Crete  he 
gained  it,  and  finding  the  Cyrenians  harassed 
by  long  tyrannies  and  wars,  he  composed  their 
troubles,  and  settled  their  government;  putting 
the  city  in  mind  of  that  saying  which  Plato 
once  had  oracularly  uttered  of  them,  who,  be¬ 
ing  requested  to  prescribe  laws  to  them,  and 
mould  them  into  some  sound  form  of  govern¬ 
ment,  made  answer  that  it  was  a  hard  thing  to 
give  laws  to  the  Cyrenians,  abounding,  as  they 
did,  in  wealth  and  plenty.  For  nothing  is  more 
intractable  than  man  when  in  felicity,  nor  any¬ 
thing  more  docile,  when  he  has  been  reduced 


400 


LUCULLUS 

and  humbled  by  fortune.  This  made  the  Cy- 
renians  so  willingly  submit  to  the  laws  which 
Lucullus  imposed  upon  them. 

From  thence  sailing  into  Egypt,  and  pressed 
by  pirates,  he  lost  most  of  his  vessels;  but  he 
himself  narrowly  escaping,  made  a  magnifi¬ 
cent  entry  into  Alexandria.  The  whole  fleet,  a 
compliment  due  only  to  royalty,  met  him  in 
full  array,  and  the  young  Ptolemy  showed 
wonderful  kindness  to  him,  appointing  him 
lodging  and  diet  in  the  palace,  where  no  for¬ 
eign  commander  before  him  had  been  re¬ 
ceived.  Besides,  he  gave  him  gratuities  and 
presents,  not  such  as  were  usually  given  to  men 
of  his  condition,  but  four  times  as  much;  of 
which,  however,  he  took  nothing  more  than 
served  his  necessity  and  accepted  of  no  gift, 
though  what  was  worth  eighty  talents  was  of¬ 
fered  him.  It  is  reported  he  neither  went  to  see 
Memphis,  nor  any  of  the  celebrated  wonders 
of  Egypt.  It  was  for  a  man  of  no  business  and 
much  curiosity  to  see  such  things,  not  for  him 
who  had  left  his  commander  in  the  field  lodg¬ 
ing  under  the  ramparts  of  his  enemies. 

Ptolemy,  fearing  the  issue  of  that  war,  de¬ 
serted  the  confederacy,  but  nevertheless  sent  a 
convoy  with  him  as  far  as  Cyprus,  and  at  part¬ 
ing,  with  much  ceremony,  wishing  him  a  good 
voyage,  gave  him  a  very  precious  emerald  set 
in  gold.  Lucullus  at  first  refused  it,  but  when 
the  king  showed  him  his  own  likeness  cut  up¬ 
on  it,  he  thought  he  could  not  persist  in  a 
denial,  for  had  he  parted  with  such  open  of¬ 
fence,  it  might  have  endangered  his  passage. 

Drawing  a  considerable  squadron  together, 
which  he  summoned  as  he  sailed  by  out  of  all 
the  maritime  towns  except  those  suspected  of 
piracy,  he  sailed  for  Cyprus,  and  there  under¬ 
standing  that  the  enemy  lay  in  wait  under  the 
promontories  for  him,  he  laid  up  his  fleet,  and 
sent  to  the  cities  to  send  in  provisions  for  his 
wintering  among  them.  But  when  time  served, 
he  launched  his  ships  suddenly,  and  went  off, 
and  hoisting  all  his  sails  in  the  night,  while  he 
kept  them  down  in  the  day,  thus  came  safe  to 
Rhodes.  Being  furnished  with  ships  at  Rhodes, 
he  also  prevailed  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Cos 
and  Cnidus  to  leave  the  king’s  side,  and  join 
in  an  expedition  against  the  Samians.  Out  of 
Chios  he  himself  drove  the  king’s  party,  and 
set  the  Colophonians  at  liberty,  having  seized 
Epigonus,  the  tyrant,  who  oppressed  them. 

About  this  time  Mithridates  left  Pergamus, 
and  retired  to  Pitane,  where  being  closely  be¬ 
sieged  by  Fimbria  on  the  land,  and  not  daring 
to  engage  with  so  bold  and  victorious  a  corn- 


401 

mander,  he  was  concerting  means  for  escape 
by  sea,  and  sent  for  all  his  fleets  from  every 
quarter  to  attend  him.  Which  when  Fimbria 
perceived,  having  no  ships  of  his  own,  he  sent 
to  Lucullus,  entreating  him  to  assist  him  with 
his,  in  subduing  the  most  odious  and  warlike 
of  kings,  lest  the  opportunity  of  humbling 
Mithridates,  the  prize  which  the  Romans  had 
pursued  with  so  much  blood  and  trouble, 
should  now  at  last  be  lost,  when  he  was  within 
the  net  and  easily  to  be  taken.  And  were  he 
caught,  no  one  would  be  more  highly  com¬ 
mended  than  Lucullus,  who  stopped  his  pas¬ 
sage  and  seized  him  in  his  flight.  Being  driven 
from  the  land  by  the  one,  and  met  in  the  sea 
by  the  other,  he  would  give  matter  of  renown 
and  glory  to  them  both,  and  the  much  ap¬ 
plauded  actions  of  Sulla  at  Orchomenus  and 
about  Chaeronea  would  no  longer  be  thought 
of  by  the  Romans. 

The  proposal  was  no  unreasonable  thing;  it 
being  obvious  to  all  men,  that  if  Lucullus  had 
hearkened  to  Fimbria,  and  with  his  navy, 
which  was  then  near  at  hand,  had  blocked  up 
the  haven,  the  war  soon  had  been  brought  to 
an  end,  and  infinite  numbers  of  mischiefs  pre¬ 
vented  thereby.  But  he,  whether  from  the  sa¬ 
credness  of  friendship  between  himself  and 
Sulla,  reckoning  all  other  considerations  of 
public  or  of  private  advantage  inferior  to  it, 
or  out  of  detestation  of  the  wickedness  of 
Fimbria,  whom  he  abhorred  for  advancing 
himself  by  the  late  death  of  his  friend  and  the 
general  of  the  army,  or  by  a  divine  fortune 
sparing  Mithridates  then,  that  he  might  have 
him  an  adversary  for  a  time  to  come,  for  what¬ 
ever  reason,  refused  to  comply,  and  suffered 
Mithridates  to  escape  and  laugh  at  the  at¬ 
tempts  of  Fimbria. 

He  himself  alone  first,  near  Lectum,  in 
Troas,  in  a  sea-fight,  overcame  the  king’s 
ships;  and  afterwards,  discovering  Neoptole- 
mus  lying  in  wait  for  him  near  Tenedos,  with 
a  greater  fleet,  he  went  aboard  a  Rhodian  quin- 
quereme  galley,  commanded  by  Damagoras,  a 
man  of  great  experience  at  sea,  and  friendly  to 
the  Romans,  and  sailed  before  the  rest.  Neop- 
tolemus  made  up  furiously  at  him,  and  com¬ 
manded  the  master,  with  all  imaginable  might, 
to  charge;  but  Damagoras,  fearing  the  bulk 
and  massy  stem  of  the  admiral,  thought  it  dan¬ 
gerous  to  meet  him  prow  to  prow,  and,  rapidly 
wheeling  round,  bid  his  men  back  water,  and 
so  received  him  astern;  in  which  place,  though 
violently  borne  upon,  he  received  no  manner 
of  harm,  the  blow  being  defeated  by  falling  on 


402 

those  parts  of  the  ship  which  lay  under  water. 
By  which  time,  the  rest  of  the  fleet  coming  up 
to  him,  Lucullus  gave  order  to  turn  again,  and 
vigorously  falling  upon  the  enemy,  put  them 
to  flight,  and  pursued  Neoptolemus.  After  this 
he  came  to  Sulla,  in  Chersonesus,  as  he  was 
preparing  to  pass  the  strait,  and  brought  timely 
assistance  for  the  safe  transportation  of  the 
army. 

Peace  being  presently  made,  Mithridates 
sailed  off  to  the  Euxine  sea,  but  Sulla  taxed  the 
inhabitants  of  Asia  twenty  thousand  talents, 
and  ordered  Lucullus  to  gather  and  coin  the 
money.  And  it  was  no  small  comfort  to  the 
cities  under  Sulla’s  severity,  that  a  man  of  not 
only  incorrupt  and  just  behaviour,  but  also  of 
moderation,  should  be  employed  in  so  heavy 
and  odious  an  office.  The  Mitylenaeans,  who 
absolutely  revolted,  he  was  willing  should  re¬ 
turn  to  their  duty,  and  submit  to  a  moderate 
penalty  for  the  offence  they  had  given  in  the 
case  of  Marius.  But  finding  them  bent  upon 
their  own  destruction,  he  came  up  to  them, 
defeated  them  at  sea,  blocked  them  up  in  their 
city  and  besieged  them;  then  sailing  off  from 
them  openly  in  the  day  to  Elaea,  he  returned 
privately,  and  posting  an  ambush  near  the  city, 
lay  quiet  himself.  And  on  the  Mitylenaeans 
coming  out  eagerly  and  in  disorder  to  plunder 
the  deserted  camp,  he  fell  upon  them,  took 
many  of  them,  and  slew  five  hundred,  who 
stood  upon  their  defence.  He  gained  six  thou¬ 
sand  slaves  and  a  very  rich  booty. 

He  was  no  way  engaged  in  the  great  and 
general  troubles  of  Italy  which  Sulla  and  Ma¬ 
rius  created,  a  happy  providence  at  that  time 
detaining  him  in  Asia  upon  business.  He  was 
as  much  in  Sulla’s  favour,  however,  as  any  of 
his  other  friends;  Sulla,  as  was  said  before, 
dedicated  his  Memoirs  to  him  as  a  token  of 
kindness,  and  at  his  death,  passing  by  Pompey, 
made  him  guardian  to  his  son;  which  seems, 
indeed,  to  have  been  the  rise  of  the  quarrel  and 
jealousy  between  them  two,  being  both  young 
men,  and  passionate  for  honour. 

A  little  after  Sulla’s  death,  he  was  made  con¬ 
sul  with  Marcus  Cotta,  about  the  one  hundred 
and  seventy-sixth  Olympiad.  The  Mithridatic 
war  being  then  under  debate,  Marcus  declared 
that  it  was  not  finished,  but  only  respited  for  a 
time,  and  therefore,  upon  choice  of  provinces, 
the  lot  falling  to  Lucullus  to  have  Gaul  within 
the  Alps,  a  province  where  no  great  action  was 
to  be  done,  he  was  ill-pleased. 

But  chiefly,  the  success  of  Pompey  in  Spain 
fretted  him,  as,  with  the  renown  he  got  there, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

if  the  Spanish  war  were  finished  in  time,  he 
was  likely  to  be  chosen  general  before  any  one 
else  against  Mithridates.  So  that  when  Pom¬ 
pey  sent  for  money,  and  signified  by  letter  that, 
unless  it  were  sent  him,  he  would  leave  the 
country  and  Sertorius,  and  bring  his  forces 
home  to  Italy,  Lucullus  most  zealously  sup¬ 
ported  his  request,  to  prevent  any  pretence  of 
his  returning  home  during  his  own  consulship; 
for  all  things  would  have  been  at  his  disposal, 
at  the  head  of  so  great  an  army. 

For  Cethegus,  the  most  influential  popular 
leader  at  that  time,  owing  to  his  always  both 
acting  and  speaking  to  please  the  people,  had, 
as  it  happened,  a  hatred  to  Lucullus,  who  had 
not  concealed  his  disgust  at  his  debauched,  in¬ 
solent,  and  lawless  life.  Lucullus,  therefore, 
was  at  open  warfare  with  him.  And  Lucius 
Quintius,  also,  another  demagogue,  who  was 
taking  steps  against  Sulla’s  constitution,  and 
endeavouring  to  put  things  out  of  order,  by 
private  exhortations  and  public  admonitions 
he  checked  in  his  designs,  and  repressed  his 
ambition,  wisely  and  safely  remedying  a  great 
evil  at  the  very  outset. 

At  this  time  news  came  that  Octavius,  the 
governor  of  Cilicia,  was  dead,  and  many  were 
eager  for  the  place,  courting  Cethegus,  as  the 
man  best  able  to  serve  them.  Lucullus  set  little 
value  upon  Cilicia  itself,  no  otherwise  than  as 
he  thought,  by  his  acceptance  of  it,  no  other 
man  besides  himself  might  be  employed  in  the 
war  against  Mithridates,  by  reason  of  its  near¬ 
ness  to  Cappadocia.  This  made  him  strain 
every  effort  that  that  province  might  be  allotted 
to  himself,  and  to  none  other;  which  led  him 
at  last  into  an  expedient  not  so  honest  or  com¬ 
mendable,  as  it  was  serviceable  for  compassing 
his  design,  submitting  to  necessity  against  his 
own  inclination. 

There  was  one  Praecia,  a  celebrated  wit  and 
beauty,  but  in  other  respects  nothing  better 
than  an  ordinary  harlot;  who,  however,  to  the 
charms  of  her  person  adding  the  reputation  of 
one  that  loved  and  served  her  friends,  by  mak¬ 
ing  use  of  those  who  visited  her  to  assist  their 
designs  and  promote  their  interests,  had  thus 
gained  great  power.  She  had  seduced  Cethe¬ 
gus,  the  first  man  at  that  time  in  reputation 
and  authority  of  all  the  city,  and  enticed  him 
to  her  love,  and  so  had  made  all  authority  fol¬ 
low  her.  For  nothing  of  moment  was  done  in 
which  Cethegus  was  not  concerned,  and  noth¬ 
ing  by  Cethegus  without  Praecia.  This  woman 
Lucullus  gained  to  his  side  by  gifts  and  flattery 
(and  a  great  price  it  was  in  itself  to  so  stately 


LUCULLUS 

and  magnificent  a  dame,  to  be  seen  engaged 
in  the  same  cause  with  Lucullus),  and  thus  he 
presently  found  Cethegus  his  friend,  using  his 
utmost  interest  to  procure  Cilicia  for  him; 
which  when  once  obtained,  there  was  no  more 
need  of  applying  himself  either  to  Praecia  or 
Cethegus;  for  all  unanimously  voted  him  to 
the  Mithridatic  war,  by  no  hands  likely  to  be 
so  successfully  managed  as  his.  Pompey  was 
still  contending  with  Sertorius,  and  Metellus 
by  age  unfit  for  service;  which  two  alone  were 
the  competitors  who  could  prefer  any  claim 
with  Lucullus  for  that  command.  Cotta,  his 
colleague,  after  much  ado  in  the  senate,  was 
sent  away  with  a  fleet  to  guard  the  Propontis, 
and  defend  Bithynia. 

Lucullus  carried  with  him  a  legion  under 
his  own  orders,  and  crossed  over  into  Asia  and 
took  the  command  of  the  forces  there,  com¬ 
posed  of  men  who  were  all  thoroughly  dis¬ 
abled  by  dissoluteness  and  rapine,  and  the 
Fimbrians,  as  they  were  called,  utterly  unman¬ 
ageable  by  long  want  of  any  sort  of  discipline. 
For  these  were  they  who  under  Fimbria  had 
slain  Flaccus,  the  consul  and  general,  and  after¬ 
wards  betrayed  Fimbria  to  Sulla;  a  wilful  and 
lawless  set  of  men,  but  warlike,  expert  and 
hardy  in  the  field.  Lucullus  „in  a  short  time 
took  down  the  courage  of  these,  and  disci¬ 
plined  the  others,  who  then  first,  in  all  proba¬ 
bility,  knew  what  a  true  commander  and  gov¬ 
ernor  was;  whereas  in  former  times  they  had 
been  courted  to  service,  and  took  up  arms  at 
nobody’s  command,  but  their  own  wills. 

The  enemy’s  provisions  for  war  stood  thus: 
Mithridates,  like  the  Sophists,  boastful  and 
haughty  at  first,  set  upon  the  Romans,  with  a 
very  inefficient  army,  such,  indeed,  as  made  a 
good  show,  but  was  nothing  for  use;  but  being 
shamefully  routed,  and  taught  a  lesson  for  a 
second  engagement,  he  reduced  his  forces  to  a 
proper,  serviceable  shape.  Dispensing  with  the 
mixed  multitudes,  and  the  noisy  menaces  of 
barbarous  tribes  of  various  languages,  and 
with  the  ornaments  of  gold  and  precious 
stones,  a  greater  temptation  to  the  victors  than 
security  to  the  bearers,  he  gave  his  men  broad 
swords  like  the  Romans’,  and  massy  shields; 
chose  horses  better  for  service  than  show,  drew 
up  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  foot  in 
the  figure  of  the  Roman  phalanx,  and  had  six¬ 
teen  thousand  horse,  besides  chariots  armed 
with  scythes,  no  less  than  a  hundred.  Besides 
which,  he  set  out  a  fleet  not  at  all  cumbered 
with  gilded  cabins,  luxurious  baths,  and  wom¬ 
en’s  furniture,  but  stored  with  weapons  and 


403 

darts,  and  other  necessaries,  and  thus  made  a 
descent  upon  Bithynia.  Not  only  did  these 
parts  willingly  receive  him  again,  but  almost 
all  Asia  regarded  him  as  their  salvation  from 
the  intolerable  miseries  which  they  were  suffer¬ 
ing  from  the  Roman  money-lenders  and  reve¬ 
nue  farmers.  These,  afterwards,  who  like  har¬ 
pies  stole  away  their  very  nourishment,  Lucul¬ 
lus  drove  away,  and  at  this  time,  by  reproving 
them,  did  what  he  could  to  make  them  more 
moderate,  and  to  prevent  a  general  secession, 
then  breaking  out  in  all  parts. 

While  Lucullus  was  detained  in  rectifying 
these  matters,  Cotta,  finding  affairs  ripe  for 
action,  prepared  for  battle  with  Mithridates; 
and  news  coming  from  all  hands  that  Lucullus 
had  already  entered  Phrygia,  on  his  march 
against  the  enemy,  he,  thinking  he  had  a  tri¬ 
umph  all  but  actually  in  his  hands,  lest  his  col¬ 
league  should  share  in  the  glory  of  it,  hasted 
to  battle  without  him.  But  being  routed,  both 
by  sea  and  land,  he  lost  sixty  ships  with  their 
men,  and  four  thousand  foot,  and  himself 
was  forced  into  and  besieged  in  Chalcedon, 
there  waiting  for  relief  from  Lucullus.  There 
were  those  about  Lucullus  who  would  have 
had  him  leave  Cotta,  and  go  forward,  in  hope 
of  surprising  the  defenceless  kingdom  of  Mith¬ 
ridates.  And  this  was  the  feeling  of  the  soldiers 
in  general,  who  were  indignant  that  Cotta 
should  by  his  ill-counsel  not  only  lose  his  own 
army,  but  hinder  them  also  from  conquest, 
which  at  that  time,  without  the  hazard  of  a 
battle,  they  might  have  obtained.  But  Lucul¬ 
lus,  in  a  public  address,  declared  to  them  that 
he  would  rather  save  one  citizen  from  the 
enemy,  than  be  master  of  all  that  they  had. 

Archelaus,  the  former  commander  in  Bceotia 
under  Mithridates,  who  afterwards  deserted 
him  and  accompanied  the  Romans,  protested 
to  Lucullus  that,  upon  his  bare  coming,  he 
would  possess  himself  of  all  Pontus.  But  he 
answered,  that  it  did  not  become  him  to  be 
more  cowardly  than  huntsmen,  to  leave  the 
wild  beasts  abroad  and  seek  after  sport  in  their 
deserted  dens.  Having  so  said,  he  made  to¬ 
wards  Mithridates  with  thirty  thousand  foot 
and  two  thousand  five  hundred  horse.  But  on 
being  come  in  sight  of  his  enemies,  he  was 
astonished  at  their  numbers,  and  thought  to 
forbear  fighting,  and  wear  out  time. 

But  Marius,  whom  Sertorius  had  sent  out  of 
Spain  to  Mithridates  with  forces  under  him, 
stepping  out  and  challenging  him,  he  prepared 
for  battle.  In  the  very  instant  before  joining 
battle,  without  any  perceptible  alteration  pre- 


404 


ceding,  on  a  sudden  the  sky  opened,  and  a 
large  luminous  body  fell  down  in  the  midst 
between  the  armies,  in  shape  like  a  hogshead, 
but  in  colour  like  melted  silver,  insomuch  that 
both  armies  in  alarm  withdrew.  This  wonder¬ 
ful  prodigy  happened  in  Phrygia,  near  Otryae. 

Lucullus  after  this  began  to  think  with  him¬ 
self  that  no  human  power  and  wealth  could 
suffice  to  sustain  such  great  numbers  as  Mith- 
ridates  had  for  any  long  time  in  the  face  of  an 
enemy,  and  commanded  one  of  the  captives  to 
be  brought  before  him,  and  first  of  all  asked 
him  how  many  companions  had  been  quarter¬ 
ed  with  him  and  how  much  provision  he  had 
left  behind  him,  and  when  he  had  answered 
him,  commanded  him  to  stand  aside;  then 
asked  a  second  and  a  third  the  same  question; 
after  which,  comparing  the  quantity  of  provi¬ 
sion  with  the  men,  he  found  that  in  three  or 
four  days’  time  his  enemies  would  be  brought 
to  want.  This  all  the  more  determined  him  to 
trust  to  time,  and  he  took  measures  to  store  his 
camp  with  all  sorts  of  provision,  and  thus  liv¬ 
ing  in  plenty,  trusted  to  watch  the  necessities 
of  his  hungry  enemy. 

This  made  Mithridates  set  out  against  the 
Cyzicenians,  miserably  shattered  in  the  fight 
at  Chalcedon,  where  they  lost  no  less  than  three 
thousand  citizens  and  ten  ships.  And  that  he 
might  the  safer  steal  away  unobserved  by  Lu¬ 
cullus,  immediately  after  supper,  by  the  help 
of  a  dark  and  wet  night,  he  went  off,  and  by 
the  morning  gained  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
city,  and  sat  down  with  his  forces  upon  the 
Adrastean  mount.  Lucullus,  on  finding  him 
gone,  pursued,  but  was  well  pleased  not  to 
overtake  him  with  his  own  forces  in  disorder; 
and  he  sat  down  near  what  is  called  the  Thra¬ 
cian  village,  an  admirable  position  for  com¬ 
manding  all  the  roads  and  the  places  whence, 
and  through  which,  the  provisions  for  Mith- 
ridates’s  camp  must  of  necessity  come.  And 
judging  now  of  the  event,  he  no  longer  kept 
his  mind  from  his  soldiers,  but  when  the  camp 
was  fortified  and  their  work  finished,  called 
them  together,  and  with  great  assurance  told 
them  that  in  a  few  days,  without  the  expense 
of  blood,  he  would  give  them  victory. 

Mithridates  besieged  the  Cyzicenians  with 
ten  camps  by  land,  and  with  his  ships  occupied 
the  strait  that  was  betwixt  their  city  and  the 
mainland,  and  so  blocked  them  up  on  all  sides; 
they,  however,  were  fully  prepared  stoutly  to 
receive  him,  and  resolved  to  endure  the  utmost 
extremity,  rather  than  forsake  the  Romans. 
That  which  troubled  them  most  was,  that  they 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

knew  not  where  Lucullus  was,  and  heard 
nothing  of  him,  though  at  that  time  his  army 
was  visible  before  them.  But  they  were  im¬ 
posed  upon  by  the  Mithridatians,  who,  show¬ 
ing  them  the  Romans  encamped  on  the  hills, 
said,  “Do  ye  see  those?  Those  are  the  auxiliary 
Armenians  and  Medes,  whom  Tigranes  has 
sent  to  Mithridates.” 

They  were  thus  overwhelmed  with  thinking 
of  the  vast  numbers  round  them,  and  could  not 
believe  any  way  of  relief  was  left  them,  even 
if  Lucullus  should  come  up  to  their  assistance. 
Demonax,  a  messenger  sent  in  by  Archelaus, 
was  the  first  who  told  them  of  Lucullus’s  ar¬ 
rival;  but  they  disbelieved  his  report,  and 
thought  he  came  with  a  story  invented  merely 
to  encourage  them.  At  which  time  it  happened 
that  a  boy,  a  prisoner  who  had  run  away  from 
the  enemy,  was  brought  before  them;  who,  be¬ 
ing  asked  where  Lucullus  was,  laughed  at  their 
jesting,  as  he  thought,  but,  finding  them  in 
earnest,  with  his  finger  pointed  to  the  Roman 
camp;  upon  which  they  took  courage.  The  lake 
Dascylitis  was  navigated  with  vessels  of  some 
little  size;  one,  the  biggest  of  them,  Lucullus 
drew  ashore,  and  carrying  her  across  in  a  wag¬ 
gon  to  the  sea,  filled  her  with  soldiers,  who, 
sailing  along  unseen  in  the  dead  of  the  night, 
came  safe  into  the  city. 

The  gods  themselves,  too,  in  admiration  of 
the  constancy  of  the  Cyzicenians,  seem  to  have 
animated  them  with  manifest  signs,  more  espe¬ 
cially  now  in  the  festival  of  Proserpine,  where 
a  black  heifer  being  wanting  for  sacrifice,  they 
supplied  it  by  a  figure  made  of  dough,  which 
they  set  before  the  altar.  But  the  holy  heifer 
set  apart  for  the  goddess,  and  at  that  time  graz¬ 
ing  with  the  other  herds  of  the  Cyzicenians, 
on  the  other  side  of  the  strait,  left  the  herd  and 
swam  over  to  the  city  alone,  and  offered  her¬ 
self  for  sacrifice.  By  night,  also,  the  goddess  ap¬ 
pearing  to  Aristagoras,  the  town  clerk,  “I  am 
come,”  said  she,  “and  have  brought  the  Libyan 
piper  against  the  Pontic  trumpeter;  bid  the 
citizens,  therefore,  be  of  good  courage.” 

While  the  Cyzicenians  were  wondering 
what  the  words  could  mean,  a  sudden  wind 
sprung  up  and  caused  a  considerable  motion 
on  the  sea.  The  king’s  battering  engines,  the 
wonderful  contrivance  of  Niconides  of  Thes¬ 
saly,  then  under  the  walls,  by  their  cracking 
and  rattling  soon  demonstrated  what  would 
follow;  after  which  an  extraordinarily  tempes¬ 
tuous  south  wind  succeeding  shattered,  in  a 
short  space  of  time,  all  the  rest  of  the  works, 
and,  by  a  violent  concussion,  threw  down  the 


LUCULLUS 

wooden  tower  a  hundred  cibits  high.  It  is  said 
that  in  Ilium  Minerva  appeared  to  many  that 
night  in  their  sleep,  with  the  sweat  running 
down  her  person,  and  showed  them  her  robe 
torn  in  one  place,  telling  them  that  she  had 
just  arrived  from  relieving  the  Cyzicenians; 
and  the  inhabitants  to  this  day  show  a  monu¬ 
ment,  with  an  inscription,  including  a  public 
decree,  referring  to  the  fact. 

Mithridates,  through  the  knavery  of  his  offi¬ 
cers,  not  knowing  for  some  time  the  want  of 
provision  in  his  camp,  was  troubled  in  mind 
that  the  Cyzicenians  should  hold  out  against 
him.  But  his  ambition  and  anger  fell,  when  he 
saw  his  soldiers  in  the  extremity  of  want,  and 
feeding  on  men’s  flesh;  as,  in  truth,  Lucullus 
was  not  carrying  on  the  war  as  mere  matter  of 
show  and  stage-play,  but,  according  to  the 
proverb,  made  the  seat  of  war  in  the  belly,  and 
did  everything  to  cut  off  their  supplies  of  food. 
Mithridates,  therefore,  took  advantage  of  the 
time  while  Lucullus  was  storming  a  fort,  and 
sent  away  almost  all  his  horse  to  Bithynia,  with 
the  sumpter  cattle,  and  as  many  of  the  foot  as 
were  unfit  for  service. 

On  intelligence  of  which,  Lucullus,  while  it 
was  yet  night,  came  to  his  camp,  and  in  the 
morning,  though  it  was  stormy  weather,  took 
with  him  ten  cohorts  of  foot,  and  the  horse, 
and  pursued  them  under  falling  snow  and  in 
cold  so  severe  that  many  of  his  soldiers  were 
unable  to  proceed;  and  with  the  rest  coming 
upon  the  enemy,  near  the  river  Rhyndacus,  he 
overthrew  them  with  so  great  a  slaughter  that 
the  very  women  of  Apollonia  came  out  to 
seize  on  the  booty  and  strip  the  slain.  Great 
numbers,  as  we  may  suppose,  were  slain;  six 
thousand  horses  were  taken,  with  an  infinite 
number  of  beasts  of  burden,  and  no  less  than 
fifteen  thousand  men.  All  which  he  led  along 
by  the  enemy’s  camp. 

I  cannot  but  wonder  on  this  occasion  at  Sal¬ 
lust,  who  says  that  this  was  the  first  time  cam¬ 
els  were  seen  by  the  Romans,  as  if  he  thought 
those  who,  long  before,  under  Scipio  defeated 
Antiochus,  or  those  who  lately  had  fought 
against  Archelaus  near  Orchomenus  and  Chae- 
ronea,  had  not  known  what  a  camel  was. 

Mithridates  himself,  fully  determined  upon 
flight,  as  mere  delays  and  diversions  for  Lucul¬ 
lus,  sent  his  admiral,  Aristonicus,  to  the  Greek 
sea;  who,  however,  was  betrayed  in  the  very 
instant  of  going  off,  and  Lucullus  became  mas¬ 
ter  of  him,  and  ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold 
which  he  was  carrying  with  him  to  corrupt 
some  of  the  Roman  army.  After  which,  Mith- 


405 

ridates  himself  made  for  the  sea,  leaving  the 
foot  officers  to  conduct  the  army,  upon  whom 
Lucullus  fell,  near  the  river  Granicus,  where 
he  took  a  vast  number  alive,  and  slew  twenty 
thousand.  It  is  reported  that  the  total  number 
killed,  of  fighting  men  and  of  others  who  fol¬ 
lowed  the  camp,  amounted  to  something  not 
far  short  of  three  hundred  thousand. 

Lucullus  first  went  to  Cyzicus,  where  he  was 
received  with  all  the  joy  and  gratitude  suiting 
the  occasion,  and  then  collected  a  navy,  visiting 
the  shores  of  the  Hellespont.  And  arriving  at 
Troas,  he  lodged  in  the  temple  of  Venus, 
where,  in  the  night,  he  thought  he  saw  the 
goddess  coming  to  him,  and  saying — 

Sleep’ st  thou ,  great  lion,  when  the  fawns  are 
nigh? 

Rising  up  hereupon,  he  called  his  friends  to 
him,  it  being  yet  night,  and  told  them  his  vi¬ 
sion;  at  which  instant  some  Ilians  came  up  and 
acquainted  him  that  thirteen  of  the  king’s 
quinqueremes  were  seen  off  the  Achaean  har¬ 
bour,  sailing  for  Lemnos.  He  at  once  put  to 
sea,  took  these,  and  slew  their  admiral,  Isi- 
dorus. 

And  then  he  made  after  another  squadron, 
who  were  just  come  into  port,  and  were  haul¬ 
ing  their  vessels  ashore,  but  fought  from  the 
decks,  and  sorely  galled  Lucullus’s  men;  there 
being  neither  room  to  sail  round  them,  nor  to 
bear  upon  them  for  any  damage,  his  ships  be¬ 
ing  afloat,  while  theirs  stood  secure  and  fixed 
on  the  sand.  After  much  ado,  at  the  only  land¬ 
ing-place  of  the  island,  he  disembarked  the 
choicest  of  his  men,  who,  falling  upon  the 
enemy  behind,  killed  some,  and  forced  others 
to  cut  their  cables,  and  thus  making  from  the 
shore,  they  fell  foul  upon  one  another,  or  came 
within  the  reach  of  Lucullus’s  fleet.  Many 
were  killed  in  the  action.  Among  the  captives 
was  Marius,  the  commander  sent  by  Sertorius, 
who  had  but  one  eye.  And  it  was  Lucullus’s 
strict  command  to  his  men  before  the  engage¬ 
ment,  that  they  should  kill  no  man  who  had 
but  one  eye,  that  he  might  rather  die  under  dis¬ 
grace  and  reproach. 

This  being  over,  he  hastened  his  pursuit 
after  Mithridates,  whom  he  hoped  to  find  still 
in  Bithynia,  intercepted  by  Voconius,  whom 
he  sent  out  before  to  Nicomedia  with  part  of 
the  fleet  to  stop  his  flight.  But  Voconius,  loiter¬ 
ing  in  Samothrace  to  get  initiated  and  cele¬ 
brate  a  feast,  let  slip  his  opportunity,  Mithri¬ 
dates  being  passed  by  with  all  his  fleet.  He, 
hastening  into  Pontus  before  Lucullus  should 
come  up  to  him,  was  caught  in  a  storm,  which 


406 

dispersed  his  fleet  and  sank  several  ships.  The 
wrecks  floated  on  all  the  neighbouring  shore 
for  many  days  after.  The  merchant  ship,  in 
which  he  himself  was,  could  not  well  in  that 
heavy  swell  be  brought  ashore  by  the  masters 
for  its  bigness,  and  it  being  heavy  with  water 
and  ready  to  sink,  he  left  it  and  went  aboard  a 
pirate  vessel,  delivering  himself  into  the  hands 
of  pirates,  and  thus  unexpectedly  and  wonder¬ 
fully  came  safe  to  Heraclea,  in  Pontus. 

Thus  the  proud  language  Lucullus  had  used 
to  the  senate  ended  without  any  mischance. 
For  they  having  decreed  him  three  thousand 
talents  to  furnish  out  a  navy,  he  himself  was 
against  it,  and  sent  them  word  that  without 
any  such  great  and  costly  supplies,  by  the  con¬ 
federate  shipping  alone,  he  did  not  in  the  least 
doubt  but  to  rout  Mithridates  from  the  sea. 
And  so  he  did,  by  divine  assistance,  for  it  is 
said  that  the  wrath  of  Diana  of  Priapus 
brought  the  great  tempest  upon  the  men  of 
Pontus,  because  they  had  robbed  her  temple 
and  removed  her  image. 

Many  were  persuading  Lucullus  to  defer  the 
war,  but  he  rejected  their  counsel,  and  marched 
through  Bithynia  and  Galatia  into  the  king’s 
country,  in  such  great  scarcity  of  provision  at 
first,  that  thirty  thousand  Galatians  followed, 
every  man  carrying  a  bushel  of  wheat  on  his 
-back.  But  subduing  all  in  his  progress  before 
him,  he  at  last  found  himself  in  such  great 
plenty  that  an  ox  was  sold  in  the  camp  for  a 
single  drachma,  and  a  slave  for  four.  The  other 
booty  they  made  no  account  of,  but  left  it  be¬ 
hind  or  destroyed  it;  there  being  no  disposing 
of  it,  where  all  had  such  abundance. 

But  when  they  had  made  frequent  incur¬ 
sions  with  their  cavalry,  and  had  advanced  as 
far  as  Themiscyra,  and  the  plains  of  the  Ther- 
modon,  merely  laying  waste  the  country  before 
them,  they  began  to  find  fault  with  Lucullus, 
asking  why  he  took  so  many  towns  by  sur¬ 
render,  and  never  one  by  storm,  which  might 
enrich  them  with  the  plunder;  and  now,  for¬ 
sooth,  leaving  Amisus  behind,  a  rich  and 
wealthy  city  of  easy  conquest  if  closely  be¬ 
sieged,  he  would  carry  them  into  the  Tibaren- 
ian  and  Chaldean  wilderness  to  fight  with 
Mithridates. 

Lucullus,  little  thinking  this  would  be  of 
such  dangerous  consequence  as  it  afterwards 
proved,  took  no  notice  and  slighted  it;  and  was 
rather  anxious  to  excuse  himself  to  those  who 
blamed  his  tardiness,  in  losing  time  about 
small,  pitiful  places  not  worth  the  while,  and 
allowing  Mithridates  opportunity  to  recruit. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

“That  is  what  I  design,”  said  he,  “and  sit  here 
contriving  by  my  delay,  that  he  may  grow 
great  again,  and  gather  a  considerable  army, 
which  may  induce  him  to  stand,  and  not  fly 
away  before  us.  For  do  you  not  see  the  wide 
and  unknown  wilderness  behind?  Caucasus  is 
not  far  off,  and  a  multitude  of  vast  mountains, 
enough  to  conceal  ten  thousand  kings  that 
wished  to  avoid  a  battle.  Besides  this,  a  journey 
but  of  few  days  leads  from  Cabira  to  Armenia, 
where  Tigranes  reigns,  king  of  kings,  and 
holds  in  his  hands  a  power  that  has  enabled 
him  to  keep  the  Parthians  in  narrow  bounds, 
to  remove  Greek  cities  bodily  into  Media,  to 
conquer  Syria  and  Palestine,  to  put  to  death 
the  kings  of  the  royal  line  of  Seleucus,  and 
carry  away  their  wives  and  daughters  by  vio¬ 
lence.  This  same  is  relation  and  son-in-law  to 
Mithridates,  and  cannot  but  receive  him  upon 
entreaty,  and  enter  into  war  with  us  to  defend 
him;  so  that,  while  we  endeavour  to  dispose 
Mithridates,  we  shall  endanger  the  bringing 
in  of  Tigranes  against  us,  who  already  has 
sought  occasion  to  fall  out  with  us,  but  can 
never  find  one  so  justifiable  as  the  succour  of  a 
friend  and  prince  in  his  necessity.  Why,  there¬ 
fore,  should  we  put  Mithridates  upon  this  re¬ 
source,  who  as  yet  does  not  see  how  he  may 
best  fight  with  us,  and  disdains  to  stoop  to  Ti¬ 
granes,  and  not  rather  allow  him  time  to  gath¬ 
er  a  new  army  and  grow  confident  again,  that 
we  may  thus  fight  with  Colchians  and  Tibar- 
enians,  whom  we  have  often  defeated  already, 
and  not  with  Medes  and  Armenians?” 

Upon  these  motives,  Lucullus  sat  down  be¬ 
fore  Amisus,  and  slowly  carried  on  the  siege. 
But  the  winter  being  well  spent,  he  left  Mu- 
rena  in  charge  of  it,  and  went  himself  against 
Mithridates,  then  rendezvousing  at  Cabira, 
and  resolving  to  await  the  Romans,  with  forty 
thousand  foot  about  him,  and  fourteen  thou¬ 
sand  horse,  on  whom  he  chiefly  confided.  Pass¬ 
ing  the  river  Lycus,  he  challenged  the  Romans 
into  the  plains,  where  the  cavalry  engaged,  and 
the  Romans  were  beaten. 

Pomponius,  a  man  of  some  note,  was  taken 
wounded;  and  sore,  and  in  pain  as  he  was,  was 
carried  before  Mithridates,  and  asked  by  the 
king  if  he  would  become  his  friend,  if  he  saved 
his  life.  He  answered,  “Yes,  if  you  become  rec¬ 
onciled  to  the  Romans;  if  not,  your  enemy.” 
Mithridates  wondered  at  him,  and  did  him  no 
hurt. 

The  enemy  being  with  their  cavalry  master 
of  the  plains,  Lucullus  was  something  afraid, 
and  hesitated  to  enter  the  mountains,  being 


LUCULLUS 

very  large,  woody,  and  almost  inaccessible, 
when,  by  good  luck,  some  Greeks  who  had 
fled  into  a  cave  were  taken,  the  eldest  of  whom, 
Artemidorus  by  name,  promised  to  bring  Lu- 
cullus,  and  seat  him  in  a  place  of  safety  for  his 
army,  where  there  was  a  fort  that  overlooked 
Cabira.  Lucullus,  believing  him,  lighted  his 
fires,  and  marched  in  the  night;  and  safely 
passing  the  defile,  gained  the  place,  and  in  the 
morning  was  seen  above  the  enemy,  pitching 
his  camp  in  a  place  advantageous  to  descend 
upon  them  if  he  desired  to  fight,  and  secure 
from  being  forced  if  he  preferred  to  lie  still. 

Neither  side  was  willing  to  engage  at  pres¬ 
ent.  But  it  is  related  that  some  of  the  king’s 
party  were  hunting  a  stag,  and  some  Romans 
wanting  to  cut  them  of?,  came  out  and  met 
them.  Whereupon  they  skirmished,  more  still 
drawing  together  to  each  side,  and  at  last  the 
king’s  party  prevailed,  on  which  the  Romans, 
from  their  camp  seeing  their  companions  fly, 
were  enraged,  and  ran  to  Lucullus  with  en¬ 
treaties  to  lead  them  out,  demanding  that  the 
sign  might  be  given  for  battle.  But  he,  that  they 
might  know  of  what  consequence  the  presence 
and  appearance  of  a  wise  commander  is  in 
time  of  conflict  and  danger,  ordered  them  to 
stand  still. 

But  he  went  down  himself  into  the  plains, 
and  meeting  with  the  foremost  that  fled,  com¬ 
manded  them  to  stand  and  turn  back  with 
him.  These  obeying,  the  rest  also  turned  and 
formed  again  in  a  body,  and  thus,  with  no 
great  difficulty,  drove  back  the  enemies,  and 
pursued  them  to  their  camp.  After  his  return, 
Lucullus  inflicted  the  customary  punishment 
upon  the  fugitives,  and  made  them  dig  a 
trench  of  twelve  foot,  working  in  their  frocks 
unfastened,  while  the  rest  stood  by  and  looked 
on. 

There  was  in  Mithridates’s  camp  one  Oltha- 
cus,  a  chief  of  the  Dandarians,  a  barbarous  peo¬ 
ple  living  near  the  lake  Maeotis,  a  man  remark¬ 
able  for  strength  and  courage  in  fight,  wise  in 
council,  and  pleasant  and  ingratiating  in  con¬ 
versation.  He,  out  of  emulation,  and  a  constant 
eagerness  which  possessed  him  to  outdo  one  of 
the  other  chiefs  of  his  country,  promised  a 
great  piece  of  service  to  Mithridates,  no  less 
than  the  death  of  Lucullus.  The  king  com¬ 
mended  his  resolution,  and,  according  to  agree¬ 
ment,  counterfeited  anger,  and  put  some  dis¬ 
grace  upon  him;  whereupon  he  took  horse, 
and  fled  to  Lucullus,  who  kindly  received  him, 
being  a  man  of  great  name  in  the  army. 

After  some  short  trial  of  his  sagacity  and 


407 

perseverance,  he  found  way  to  Lucullus’s 
board  and  council.  The  Dandarian,  thinking 
he  had  a  fair  opportunity,  commanded  his 
servants  to  lead  his  horse  out  of  the  camp, 
while  he  himself,  as  the  soldiers  were  refresh¬ 
ing  and  resting  themselves,  it  being  then  high 
noon,  went  to  the  general’s  tent,  not  at  all  ex¬ 
pecting  that  entrance  would  be  denied  to  one 
who  was  so  familiar  with  him,  and  came  under 
pretence  of  extraordinary  business  with  him. 

He  had  certainly  been  admitted  had  not 
sleep,  which  has  destroyed  many  captains,  sav¬ 
ed  Lucullus.  For  so  it  was,  and  Menedemus, 
one  of  the  bedchamber,  was  standing  at  the 
door,  who  told  Olthacus  that  it  was  altogether 
unseasonable  to  see  the  general,  since,  after 
long  watching  and  hard  labour,  he  was  but 
just  before  laid  down  to  repose  himself.  Oltha¬ 
cus  would  not  go  away  upon  this  denial,  but 
still  persisted,  saying  that  he  must  go  in  to 
speak  of  some  necessary  affairs,  whereupon 
Menedemus  grew  angry,  and  replied  that 
nothing  was  more  necessary  than  the  safety  of 
Lucullus,  and  forced  him  away  with  both 
hands.  Upon  which,  out  of  fear,  he  straightway 
left  the  camp,  took  horse,  and  without  effect 
returned  to  Mithridates.  Thus  in  action  as  in 
physic,  it  is  the  critical  moment  that  gives  both 
the  fortunate  and  the  fatal  effect. 

After  this,  Sornatius  being  sent  out  with  ten 
companies  for  forage,  and  pursued  by  Me¬ 
nander,  one  of  Mithridates’s  captains,  stood 
his  ground,  and  after  a  sharp  engagement, 
routed  and  slew  a  considerable  number  of  the 
enemy.  Adrianus  being  sent  afterward,  with 
some  forces,  to  procure  food  enough  and  to 
spare  for  the  camp,  Mithridates  did  not  let  the 
opportunity  slip,  but  despatched  Menemachus 
and  Myro,  with  a  great  force,  both  horse  and 
foot,  against  him,  all  which  except  two  men, 
it  is  stated,  were  cut  off  by  the  Romans. 

Mithridates  concealed  the  loss,  giving  it  out 
that  it  was  a  small  defeat,  nothing  near  so  great 
as  reported,  and  occasioned  by  the  unskilful¬ 
ness  of  the  leaders.  But  Adrianus  in  great 
pomp  passed  by  his  camp,  having  many  wag¬ 
gons  full  of  corn  and  other  booty,  filling  Mith¬ 
ridates  with  distress,  and  the  army  with  con¬ 
fusion  and  consternation. 

It  was  resolved,  therefore,  to  stay  no  longer. 
But  when  the  king’s  servants  sent  away  their 
own  goods  quietly,  and  hindered  others  from 
doing  so  too,  the  soldiers  in  great  fury  thronged 
and  crowded  to  the  gates,  seized  on  the  king’s 
servants  and  killed  them,  and  plundered  the 
baggage.  Dorylaus,  the  general,  in  this  confu- 


408 


sion,  having  nothing  else  besides  his  purple 
cloak,  lost  his  life  for  that,  and  Hermaeus,  the 
priest,  was  trod  underfoot  in  the  gate. 

Mithridates,  having  not  one  of  his  guards, 
nor  even  a  groom  remaining  with  him,  got  out 
of  the  camp  in  the  throng,  but  had  none  of  his 
horses  with  him;  until  Ptolemy,  the  eunuch, 
some  little  time  after,  seeing  him  in  the  press 
making  his  way  among  the  others,  dismounted 
and  gave  his  horse  to  the  king.  The  Romans 
were  already  close  upon  him  in  their  pursuit, 
nor  was  it  through  want  of  speed  that  they 
failed  to  catch  him,  but  they  were  as  near  as 
possible  doing  so. 

But  greediness  and  a  petty  military  avarice 
hindered  them  from  acquiring  that  booty 
which  in  so  many  fights  and  hazards  they  had 
sought  after,  and  lost  Lucullus  the  prize  of  his 
victory.  For  the  horse  which  carried  the  king 
was  within  reach,  but  one  of  the  mules  that 
carried  the  treasure  either  by  accident  stepping 
in,  or  by  order  of  the  king  so  appointed  to  go 
between  him  and  the  pursuers,  they  seized  and 
pilfered  the  gold,  and  falling  out  among  them¬ 
selves  about  the  prey,  let  slip  the  great  prize. 
Neither  was  their  greediness  prejudicial  to 
Lucullus  in  this  only,  but  also  they  slew  Callis- 
tratus,  the  king’s  confidential  attendant,  un¬ 
der  suspicion  of  having  five  hundred  pieces  of 
gold  in  his  girdle;  whereas  Lucullus  had  spe¬ 
cially  ordered  that  he  should  be  conveyed  safe 
into  the  camp.  Notwithstanding  all  which,  he 
gave  them  leave  to  plunder  the  camp. 

After  this,  in  Cabira,  and  other  strongholds 
which  he  took,  he  found  great  treasures,  and 
private  prisons,  in  which  many  Greeks  and 
many  of  the  king’s  relations  had  been  con¬ 
fined,  who,  having  long  since  counted  them¬ 
selves  no  other  than  dead  men,  by  the  favour 
of  Lucullus  met  not  with  relief  so  truly  as  with 
a  new  life  and  second  birth. 

Nyssa,  also,  sister  of  Mithridates,  enjoyed 
the  like  fortunate  captivity;  while  those  who 
seemed  to  be  most  out  of  danger,  his  wives  and 
sisters  at  Phernacia,  placed  in  safety  as  they 
thought,  miserably  perished,  Mithridates  in 
his  flight  sending  Bacchides,  the  eunuch,  to 
them.  Among  others  there  were  two  sisters  of 
the  king,  Roxana  and  Statira,  unmarried  wom¬ 
en  forty  years  old,  and  two  Ionian  wives,  Ber¬ 
enice  of  Chios  and  Monime  of  Miletus. 

This  latter  was  the  most  celebrated  among 
the  Greeks,  because  she  so  long  withstood  the 
king  in  his  courtship  to  her,  though  he  pre¬ 
sented  her  with  fifteen  thousand  pieces  of  gold, 
until  a  covenant  of  marriage  was  made,  and  a 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

crown  was  sent  her,  and  she  was  saluted  queen. 
She  had  been  a  sorrowful  woman  before,  and 
often  bewailed  her  beauty,  that  had  procured 
her  a  keeper,  instead  of  a  husband,  and  a  watch 
of  barbarians,  instead  of  the  home  and  attend¬ 
ance  of  a  wife;  and,  removed  far  from  Greece, 
she  enjoyed  the  pleasure  which  she  proposed  to 
herself  only  in  a  dream,  being  in  the  mean¬ 
time  robbed  of  that  which  is  real.  And  when 
Bacchides  came  and  bade  them  prepare  for 
death,  as  every  one  thought  most  easy  and 
painless,  she  took  the  diadem  from  her  head, 
and  fastening  the  string  to  her  neck,  suspended 
herself  with  it;  which  soon  breaking,  “O 
wretched  headband!”  said  she,  “not  able  to 
help  me  even  in  this  small  thing!”  And  throw¬ 
ing  it  away  she  spat  on  it,  and  offered  her 
throat  to  Bacchides. 

Berenice  had  prepared  a  potion  for  herself, 
but  at  her  mother’s  entreaty,  who  stood  by, 
she  gave  her  part  of  it.  Both  drank  of  the  po¬ 
tion,  which  prevailed  over  the  weaker  body. 
But  Berenice,  having  drunk  too  little,  was  not 
released  by  it,  but  lingering  on  unable  to  die, 
was  strangled  by  Bacchides  for  haste. 

It  is  said  that  one  of  the  unmarried  sisters 
drank  the  poison,  with  bitter  execrations  and 
curses;  but  Statira  uttered  nothing  ungentle  or 
reproachful,  but,  on  the  contrary,  commended 
her  brother,  who  in  his  own  danger  neglected 
not  theirs,  but  carefully  provided  that  they 
might  go  out  of  the  world  without  shame  or 
disgrace. 

Lucullus,  being  a  good  and  humane  man, 
was  concerned  at  these  things.  However,  going 
on,  he  came  to  Talaura,  from  whence  four  days 
before  his  arrival  Mithridates  had  fled,  and 
was  got  to  Tigranes  in  Armenia.  He  turned 
off,  therefore,  and  subdued  the  Chaldeans  and 
Tibarenians,  with  the  lesser  Armenia,  and  hav¬ 
ing  reduced  all  their  forts  and  cities,  he  sent 
Appius  to  Tigranes  to  demand  Mithridates. 

He  himself  went  to  Amisus,  which  still  held 
out  under  the  command  of  Callimachus,  who, 
by  his  great  engineering  skill,  and  his  dexter¬ 
ity  at  all  the  shifts  and  subtleties  of  a  siege,  had 
greatly  incommoded  the  Romans.  For  which 
afterward  he  paid  dear  enough,  and  was  now 
outmanoeuvred  by  Lucullus,  who,  unexpected¬ 
ly  coming  upon  him  at  the  time  of  the  day 
when  the  soldiers  used  to  withdraw  and  rest 
themselves,  gained  part  of  the  wall,  and  forced 
him  to  leave  the  city,  in  doing  which  he  fired 
it;  either  envying  the  Romans  the  booty,  or  to 
secure  his  own  escape  the  better. 

No  man  looked  after  those  who  went  off  in 


LUCULLUS 

the  ships,  but  as  soon  as  the  fire  had  seized  on 
most  part  of  the  wall,  the  soldiers  -prepared 
themselves  for  plunder;  while  Lucullus,  pity¬ 
ing  the  ruin  of  the  city,  brought  assistance 
from  without,  and  encouraged  his  men  to  ex¬ 
tinguish  the  flames.  But  all,  being  intent  upon 
the  prey,  and  giving  no  heed  to  him,  with  loud 
outcries,  beat  and  clashed  their  arms  together, 
until  he  was  compelled  to  let  them  plunder, 
that  by  that  means  he  might  at  least  save  the 
city  from  fire. 

But  they  did  quite  the  contrary,  for  in 
searching  the  houses  with  lights  and  torches 
everywhere,  they  were  themselves  the  cause 
of  the  destruction  of  most  of  the  buildings,  in¬ 
asmuch  that  when  Lucullus  the  next  day  went 
in,  he  shed  tears,  and  said  to  his  friends  that 
he  had  often  before  blessed  the  fortune  of 
Sulla,  but  never  so  much  admired  it  as  then, 
because  when  he  was  willing  he  was  also  able 
to  save  Athens,  “but  my  infelicity  is  such,  that 
while  I  endeavour  to  imitate  him,  I  become 
like  Mummius.”  Nevertheless,  he  endeavoured 
to  save  as  much  of  the  city  as  he  could,  and  at 
the  same  time,  also,  by  a  happy  providence  a 
fall  of  rain  concurred  to  extinguish  the  fire.  He 
himself  while  present  repaired  the  ruins  as 
much  as  he  could,  receiving  back  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  who  had  fled,  and  settling  as  many  other 
Greeks  as  were  willing  to  live  there,  adding  a 
hundred  furlongs  of  ground  to  the  place. 

This  city  was  a  colony  of  Athens,  built  at 
that  time  when  she  flourished  and  was  power¬ 
ful  at  sea,  upon  which  account  many  who  fled 
from  Aristion’s  tyranny  settled  here,  and  were 
admitted  as  citizens,  but  had  the  ill-luck  to  fly 
from  evils  at  home  into  greater  abroad.  As 
many  of  these  as  survived  Lucullus  furnished 
every  one  with  clothes,  and  two  hundred 
drachmas,  and  sent  them  away  into  their  own 
country. 

On  this  occasion  Tyrannion,  the  grammari¬ 
an,  was  taken.  Murena  begged  him  of  Lucul¬ 
lus,  and  took  him  and  made  him  a  freedman; 
but  in  this  he  abused  Lucullus’s  favor,  who 
by  no  means  liked  that  a  man  of  high  repute 
for  learning  should  be  first  made  a  slave  and 
then  freed; for  freedom  thus  speciously  granted 
again  was  a  real  deprivation  of  what  he  had 
before.  But  not  in  this  case  alone  Murena 
showed  himself  far  inferior  in  generosity  to  the 
general. 

Lucullus  was  now  busy  in  looking  after  the 
cities  of  Asia,  and  having  no  war  to  divert  his 
time,  spent  it  in  the  administration  of  law  and 
justice,  the  want  of  which  had  for  a  long  time 


409 

left  the  province  a  prey  to  unspeakable  and  in¬ 
credible  miseries;  so  plundered  and  enslaved 
by  tax-farmers  and  usurers  that  private  people 
were  compelled  to  sell  their  sons  in  the  flower 
of  their  youth,  and  their  daughters  in  their 
virginity,  and  the  states  publicly  to  sell  their 
consecrated  gifts,  pictures,  and  statutes.  In  the 
end  their  lot  was  to  yield  themselves  up  slaves 
to  their  creditors,  but  before  this  worse  troubles 
befell  them,  tortures,  inflicted  with  ropes  and 
by  horses,  standing  abroad  to  be  scorched 
when  the  sun  was  hot,  and  being  driven  into 
ice  and  clay  in  the  cold;  insomuch  that  slavery 
was  no  less  than  redemption  and  joy  to  them. 

Lucullus  in  a  short  time  freed  the  cities  from 
all  these  evils  and  oppressions;  for,  first  of  all, 
he  ordered  there  should  be  no  more  taken  than 
one  per  cent.  Secondly,  where  the  interest  ex¬ 
ceeded  the  principal,  he  struck  it  off.  The  third 
and  most  considerable  order  was,  that  the  cred¬ 
itor  should  receive  the  fourth  part  of  the  deb¬ 
tor’s  income;  but  if  any  lender  had  added  the 
interest  to  the  principal,  it  was  utterly  disal¬ 
lowed.  Insomuch,  that  in  the  space  of  four 
years  all  debts  were  paid  and  lands  returned  to 
their  right  owners. 

The  public  debt  was  contracted  when  Asia 
was  fined  twenty  thousand  talents  by  Sulla, 
but  twice  as  much  was  paid  to  the  collectors, 
who  by  their  usury  had  by  this  time  advanced 
it  to  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  talents. 
And  accordingly  they  inveighed  against  Lu¬ 
cullus  at  Rome,  as  grossly  injured  by  him,  and 
by  their  money’s  help  (as,  indeed,  they  were 
very  powerful,  and  had  many  of  the  statesmen 
in  their  debt),  they  stirred  up  several  leading 
senators  against  him.  But  Lucullus  was  not 
only  beloved  by  the  cities  which  he  obliged, 
but  was  also  wished  for  by  other  provinces, 
who  blessed  the  good-luck  of  those  who  had 
such  a  governor  over  them. 

Appius  Clodius,  who  was  sent  to  Tigranes 
(the  same  Clodius  was  brother  to  Lucullus’s 
wife),  being  led  by  the  king’s  guides  a  round¬ 
about  way,  unnecessarily  long  and  tedious, 
through  the  upper  country,  being  informed  by 
his  freedman,  a  Syrian  by  nation,  of  the  direct 
road,  left  that  lengthy  and  fallacious  one;  and 
bidding  the  barbarians,  his  guides,  adieu,  in  a 
few  days  passed  over  Euphrates,  and  came  to 
Antioch  upon  Daphne. 

There  being  commanded  to  wait  for  Tigra¬ 
nes,  who  at  that  time  was  reducing  some  towns 
in  Phoenicia,  he  won  over  many  chiefs  to  his 
side,  who  unwillingly  submitted  to  the  King  of 
Armenia,  among  whom  was  Zarbienus,  King 


410 

of  the  Gordyenians;  also  many  of  the  conquer¬ 
ed  cities  corresponded  privately  with  him, 
whom  he  assured  of  relief  from  Lucullus,  but 
ordered  them  to  lie  still  at  present. 

The  Armenian  government  was  an  oppres¬ 
sive  one,  and  intolerable  to  the  Greeks,  espe¬ 
cially  that  of  the  present  king,  who,  growing 
insolent  and  overbearing  with  his  success,  im¬ 
agined  all  things  valuable  and  esteemed  among 
men  not  only  were  his  in  fact,  but  had  been 
purposely  created  for  him  alone.  From  a  small 
and  inconsiderable  beginning,  he  had  gone  on 
to  be  the  conqueror  of  many  nations,  had 
humbled  the  Parthian  power  more  than  any 
before  him,  and  filled  Mesopotamia  with 
Greeks,  whom  he  carried  in  numbers  out  of 
Cilicia  and  Cappadocia.  He  transplanted  also 
the  Arabs,  who  lived  in  tents,  from  their  coun¬ 
try  and  home,  and  settled  them  near  him,  that 
by  their  means  he  might  carry  on  the  trade. 

He  had  many  kings  waiting  on  him,  but 
four  he  always  carried  with  him  as  servants 
and  guards,  who,  when  he  rode,  ran  by  his 
horse’s  side  in  ordinary  under-frocks,  and  at¬ 
tended  him,  when  sitting  on  his  throne,  and 
publishing  his  decrees  to  the  people,  with  their 
hands  folded  together;  which  posture  of  all 
others  was  that  which  most  expressed  slavery, 
it  being  that  of  men  who  had  bidden  adieu  to 
liberty,  and  had  prepared  their  bodies  more  for 
chastisement  than  the  service  of  their  masters. 

Appius,  nothing  dismayed  or  surprised  at 
this  theatrical  display,  as  soon  as  audience  was 
granted  him,  said  he  came  to  demand  Mithri- 
dates  for  Lucullus’s  triumph,  otherwise  to  de¬ 
nounce  war  against  Tigranes:  insomuch  that 
though  Tigranes  endeavoured  to  receive  him 
with  a  smooth  countenance  and  a  forced  smile, 
he  could  not  dissemble  his  discomposure  to 
those  who  stood  about  him  at  the  bold  lan¬ 
guage  of  the  young  man;  for  it  was  the  first 
time,  perhaps  in  twenty-five  years,  the  length 
of  his  reign,  or,  more  truly,  of  his  tyranny,  that 
any  free  speech  had  been  uttered  to  him. 

However,  he  made  answer  to  Appius,  that 
he  would  not  desert  Mithridates,  and  would 
defend  himself,  if  the  Romans  attacked  him. 
He  was  angry,  also,  with  Lucullus  for  calling 
him  only  King  in  his  letter,  and  not  King  of 
Kings,  and,  in  his  answer,  would  not  give  him 
his  title  of  Imperator.  Great  gifts  were  sent  to 
Appius,  which  he  refused;  but  on  their  being 
sent  again,  and  augmented,  that  he  might  not 
seem  to  refuse  in  anger,  he  took  one  goblet  and 
sent  the  rest  back,  and  without  delay  went  off 
to  the  general. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Tigranes  before  this  neither  vouchsafed  to 
see  nor  speak  with  Mithridates,  though  a  near 
kinsman,  and  forced  out  of  so  considerable  a 
kingdom,  but  proudly  and  scornfully  kept  him 
at  a  distance,  as  a  sort  of  prisoner,  in  a  marshy 
and  unhealthy  district;  but  now,  with  much 
profession  of  respect  and  kindness,  he  sent  for 
him,  and  at  a  private  conference  between  them 
in  the  palace,  they  healed  up  all  private  jeal¬ 
ousies  between  them,  punishing  their  favour¬ 
ites,  who  bore  all  the  blame;  among  whom  Me- 
trodorus  of  Scepsis  was  one,  an  eloquent  and 
learned  man,  and  so  close  an  intimate  as  com¬ 
monly  to  be  called  the  king’s  father. 

This  man,  as  it  happened,  being  employed 
in  an  embassy  by  Mithridates  to  solicit  help 
against  the  Romans,  Tigranes  asked  him, 
‘'What  would  you,  Metrodorus,  advise  me  to 
in  this  affair?”  In  return  to  which,  either  out 
of  good-will  to  Tigranes,  or  a  want  of  solici¬ 
tude  for  Mithridates,  he  made  answer,  that  as 
ambassador  he  counselled  him  to  it,  but  as  a 
friend  dissuaded  him  from  it.  This  Tigranes 
reported  and  affirmed  to  Mithridates,  thinking 
that  no  irreparable  harm  would  come  of  it  to 
Metrodorus.  But  upon  this  he  was  presently 
taken  off,  and  Tigranes  was  sorry  for  what  he 
had  done,  though  he  had  not,  indeed,  been  ab¬ 
solutely  the  cause  of  his  death;  yet  he  had 
given  the  fatal  turn  to  the  anger  of  Mithrida¬ 
tes,  who  had  privately  hated  him  before,  as  ap¬ 
peared  from  his  cabinet  papers  when  taken, 
among  which  there  was  an  order  that  Metro¬ 
dorus  should  die.  Tigranes  buried  him  splen¬ 
didly,  sparing  no  cost  to  his  dead  body,  whom 
he  betrayed  when  alive. 

In  Tigranes’s  court  died,  also,  Amphicrates, 
the  orator,  (if,  for  the  sake  of  Athens,  we  may 
also  mention  him),  of  whom  it  is  told  that  he 
left  his  country  and  fled  to  Seleucia,  upon  the 
river  Tigris,  and,  being  desired  to  teach  logic 
among  them,  arrogantly  replied,  that  the  dish 
was  too  little  to  hold  a  dolphin.  He,  therefore, 
came  to  Cleopatra,  daughter  of  Mithridates, 
and  queen  to  Tigranes,  but,  being  accused  of 
misdemeanours,  prohibited  all  commerce  with 
his  countrymen,  ended  his  days  by  starving 
himself.  He,  in  like  manner,  received  from 
Cleopatra  an  honourable  burial,  near  Sapha,  a 
place  so  called  in  that  country. 

Lucullus,  when  he  had  re-established  law 
and  a  lasting  peace  in  Asia,  did  not  altogether 
forget  pleasure  and  mirth,  but,  during  his  resi¬ 
dence  at  Ephesus,  gratified  the  cities  with 
sports,  festival  triumphs,  wrestling  games,  and 
single  combats  of  gladiators.  And  they,  in  re- 


LUCULLUS 

quital,  instituted  others,  called  Lucullean 
games,  in  honour  to  him,  thus  manifesting 
their  love  to  him,  which  was  of  more  value  to 
him  than  all  the  honour. 

But  when  Appius  came  to  him  and  told  him 
he  must  prepare  for  war  with  Tigranes,  he 
went  again  into  Pontus,  and,  gathering  togeth¬ 
er  his  army,  besieged  Sinope,  or  rather  the  Cili- 
cians  of  the  king’s  side  who  held  it;  who  there¬ 
upon  killed  a  number  of  the  Sinopians,  and  set 
the  city  on  fire,  and  by  night  endeavoured  to 
escape.  Which  when  Lucullus  perceived,  he  en¬ 
tered  the  city,  and  killed  eight  thousand  of 
them  who  were  still  left  behind;  but  restored  to 
the  inhabitants  what  was  their  own,  and  took 
special  care  for  the  welfare  of  the  city. 

To  which  he  was  chiefly  prompted  by  this 
vision.  One  seemed  to  come  to  him  in  his  sleep, 
and  say,  “Go  on  a  little  further,  Lucullus,  for 
Autolycus  is  coming  to  see  thee.”  When  he 
arose  he  could  not  imagine  what  the  vision 
meant.  The  same  day  he  took  the  city,  and  as 
he  was  pursuing  the  Cilicians,  who  were  flying 
by  sea,  he  saw  a  statue  lying  on  the  shore, 
which  the  Cilicians  carried  so  far,  but  had  not 
time  to  carry  aboard.  It  was  one  of  the  master¬ 
pieces  of  Sthenis.  And  one  told  him  that  it 
was  the  statue  of  Autolycus,  the  founder  of 
the  city. 

This  Autolycus  is  reported  to  have  been  son 
to  Deimachus,  and  one  of  those  who,  under 
Hercules,  went  on  the  expedition  out  of  Thes¬ 
saly  against  the  Amazons;  from  whence  in  his 
return  with  Demoleon  and  Phlogius,  he  lost  his 
vessel  on  a  point  of  the  Chersonesus,  called 
Pedalium.  He  himself,  with  his  companions 
and  their  weapons,  being  saved,  came  to  Si¬ 
nope,  and  dispossessed  the  Syrians  there.  The 
Syrians  who  held  it  were  descended  from  Sy- 
rus,  as  is  the  story,  the  son  of  Apollo  and  Sin¬ 
ope,  the  daughter  of  Asopus.  Which  as  soon  as 
Lucullus  heard,  he  remembered  the  admoni¬ 
tion  of  Sulla,  whose  advice  it  is  in  his  Memoirs 
to  treat  nothing  as  so  certain  and  so  worthy  of 
reliance  as  an  intimation  given  in  dreams. 

When  it  was  now  told  him  that  Mithridates 
and  Tigranes  were  just  ready  to  transport  their 
forces  into  Lycaonia  and  Cilicia,  with  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  entering  Asia  before  him,  he  wondered 
much  why  the  Armenian,  supposing  him  to 
entertain  any  real  intentions  to  fight  with  the 
Romans,  did  not  assist  Mithridates  in  his  flour¬ 
ishing  condition,  and  join  forces  when  he  was 
fit  for  service,  instead  of  suffering  him  to  be 
vanquished  and  broken  in  pieces,  and  now  at 
last  beginning  the  war,  when  its  hopes  were 


411 

grown  cold,  and  throwing  himself  down  head¬ 
long  with  them,  who  were  irrevocably  fallen 
already.  But  when  Machares,  the  son  of  Mithri¬ 
dates,  and  governor  of  Bosporus,  sent  him  a 
crown,  valued  at  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and 
desired  to  be  enrolled  as  a  friend  and  confeder¬ 
ate  of  the  Romans,  he  fairly  reputed  that  war 
at  an  end,  and  left  Sornatius,  his  deputy,  with 
six  thousand  soldiers,  to  take  care  of  Pontus. 

He  himself,  with  twelve  thousand  foot  and 
a  little  less  than  three  thousand  horse,  went 
forth  to  the  second  war,  advancing,  it  seemed 
very  plain,  with  too  great  and  ill-advised  speed, 
into  the  midst  of  warlike  nations  and  many 
thousands  upon  thousands  of  horse,  into  an 
unknown  extent  of  country,  every  way  inclosed 
with  deep  rivers  and  mountains,  never  free 
from  snow;  which  made  the  soldiers,  already 
far  from  orderly,  follow  him  with  great  un¬ 
willingness  and  opposition.  For  the  same  rea¬ 
son,  also,  the  popular  leaders  at  home  publicly 
inveighed  and  declaimed  against  him,  as  one 
that  raised  up  war  after  war,  not  so  much  for 
the  interest  of  the  republic,  as  that  he  himself, 
being  still  in  commission,  might  not  lay  down 
arms,  but  go  on  enriching  himself  by  the  pub¬ 
lic  dangers.  These  men,  in  the  end,  effected 
their  purpose. 

But  Lucullus,  by  long  journeys,  came  to  the 
Euphrates,  where,  finding  the  waters  high  and 
rough  from  the  winter,  he  was  much  troubled 
for  fear  of  delay  and  difficulty  while  he  should 
procure  boats  and  make  a  bridge  of  them.  But 
in  the  evening  the  flood  beginning  to  retire, 
and  decreasing  all  through  the  night,  the  next 
day  they  saw  the  river  far  down  within  his 
banks,  so  much  so  that  the  inhabitants,  discov¬ 
ering  the  little  islands  in  the  river,  and  the  wa¬ 
ter  stagnating  among  them,  a  thing  which  had 
rarely  happened  before,  made  obeisance  to  Lu¬ 
cullus,  before  whom  the  very  river  was  hum¬ 
ble  and  submissive,  and  yielded  an  easy  and 
swift  passage. 

Making  use  of  the  opportunity,  he  carried 
over  his  army,  and  met  with  a  lucky  sign  at 
landing.  Holy  heifers  are  pastured  on  purpose 
for  Diana  Persia,  whom,  of  all  the  gods,  the 
barbarians  beyond  Euphrates  chiefly  adore. 
They  use  these  heifers  only  for  her  sacrifices. 
At  other  times  they  wander  up  and  down  un¬ 
disturbed,  with  the  mark  of  the  goddess,  a 
torch,  branded  on  them;  and  it  is  no  such  light 
or  easy  thing,  when  occasion  requires,  to  seize 
one  of  them.  But  one  of  these,  when  the  army 
had  passed  the  Euphrates,  coming  to  a  rock 
consecrated  to  the  goddess,  stood  upon  it,  and 


412 


then,  laying  down  her  neck,  like  others  that  are 
forced  down  with  a  rope,  offered  herself  to  Lu- 
cullus  for  sacrifice.  Besides  which,  he  offered 
also  a  bull  to  Euphrates,  for  his  safe  passage. 

That  day  he  tarried  there,  but  on  the  next, 
and  those  that  followed,  he  travelled  through 
Sophene,  using  no  manner  of  violence  to  the 
people  who  came  to  him  and  willingly  received 
his  army.  And  when  the  soldiers  were  desirous 
to  plunder  a  castle  that  seemed  to  be  well  stored 
within,  “That  is  the  castle,”  said  he,  “that  we 
must  storm,”  showing  them  Taurus  at  a  dis¬ 
tance;  “the  rest  is  reserved  for  those  who  con¬ 
quer  there.”  Wherefore  hastening  his  march, 
and  passing  the  Tigris,  he  came  over  into  Ar¬ 
menia. 

The  first  messenger  that  gave  notice  of 
Lucullus’s  coming  was  so  far  from  pleasing  Ti- 
granes  that  he  had  his  head  cut  off  for  his  pains; 
and  no  man  daring  to  bring  further  informa¬ 
tion,  without  any  intelligence  at  all,  Tigranes 
sat  while  war  was  already  blazing  around  him, 
giving  ear  only  to  those  who  flattered  him,  by 
saying  that  Lucullus  would  show  himself  a 
great  commander  if  he  ventured  to  wait  for 
Tigranes  at  Ephesus,  and  did  not  at  once  fly 
out  of  Asia  at  the  mere  sight  of  the  many  thou¬ 
sands  that  were  come  against  him.  He  is  a  man 
of  a  strong  body  that  can  carry  off  a  great 
quantity  of  wine,  and  of  a  powerful  constitu¬ 
tion  of  mind  that  can  sustain  felicity. 

Mithrobarzanes,  one  of  his  chief  favourites, 
first  dared  to  tell  him  the  truth,  but  had  no 
more  thanks  for  his  freedom  of  speech  than  to 
be  immediately  sent  out  against  Lucullus  with 
three  thousand  horse,  and  a  great  number  of 
foot,  with  peremptory  demands  to  bring  him 
alive  and  trample  down  his  army.  Some  of  Lu¬ 
cullus’s  men  were  then  pitching  their  camp, 
and  the  rest  were  coming  up  to  them,  when 
the  scouts  gave  notice  that  the  enemy  was  ap¬ 
proaching,  whereupon  he  was  in  fear  lest  they 
should  fall  upon  him,  while  his  men  were  di¬ 
vided  and  unarranged;  which  made  him  stay  to 
pitch  the  camp  himself,  and  send  out  Sextilius, 
the  legate,  with  sixteen  hundred  horse,  and 
about  as  many  heavy  and  light  arms,  with  or¬ 
ders  to  advance  towards  the  enemy,  and  wait 
until  intelligence  came  to  him  that  the  camp 
was  finished.  Sextilius  designed  to  have  kept 
this  order;  but  Mithrobarzanes  coming  furious¬ 
ly  upon  him,  he  was  forced  to  fight.  In  the  en¬ 
gagement,  Mithrobarzanes  himself  was  slain, 
fighting,  and  all  his  men,  except  a  few  who  ran 
away,  were  destroyed.  After  this,  Tigranes  left 
Tigranocerta,  a  great  city  built  by  himself,  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

retired  to  Taurus,  and  called  all  his  forces 
about  him. 

But  Lucullus,  giving  him  no  time  to  rendez¬ 
vous,  sent  out  Murena  to  harass  and  cut  off 
those  who  marched  to  Tigranes,  and  Sextilius, 
also,  to  disperse  a  great  company  of  Arabians 
then  on  the  way  to  the  king.  Sextilius  fell  upon 
the  Arabians  in  their  camp,  and  destroyed  most 
of  them,  and  also  Murena,  in  his  pursuit  after 
Tigranes  through  a  craggy  and  narrow  pass,  1 
opportunely  fell  upon  him.  Upon  which  Tigra¬ 
nes,  abandoning  all  his  baggage,  fled;  many  of 
the  Armenians  were  killed  and  more  taken. 

After  this  success,  Lucullus  went  to  Tigrano¬ 
certa,  and  sitting  down  before  the  city,  besieged 
it.  In  it  were  many  Greeks  carried  away  out  of 
Cilicia,  and  many  barbarians  in  like  circum¬ 
stances  with  the  Greeks,  Adiabenians,  Assyri¬ 
ans,  Gordyenians,  and  Cappadocians,  whose 
native  cities  he  had  destroyed,  and  forced  away 
the  inhabitants  to  settle  here.  It  was  a  rich  and 
beautiful  city;  every  common  man,  and  every 
man  of  rank,  in  imitation  of  the  king,  studied 
to  enlarge  and  adorn  it.  This  made  Lucullus 
more  vigorously  press  the  siege,  in  the  belief 
that  Tigranes  would  not  patiently  endure  it, 
but  even  against  his  own  judgment  would 
come  down  in  anger  to  force  him  away;  in 
which  he  was  not  mistaken. 

Mithridates  earnestly  dissuaded  him  from  it, 
sending  messengers  and  letters  to  him  not  to 
engage,  but  rather  with  his  horse  to  try  and  cut 
off  the  supplies.  Taxiles,  also,  who  came  from 
Mithridates,  and  who  stayed  with  his  army, 
very  much  entreated  the  king  to  forbear,  and 
to  avoid  the  Roman  arms,  things  it  was  not  safe  i 
to  meddle  with. 

To  this  he  hearkened  at  first,  but  when  the 
Armenians  and  Gordyenians  in  a  full  body,  i 
and  the  whole  forces  of  Medes  and  Adiabeni-  ' 
ans,  under  their  respective  kings,  joined  him;  j 
when  many  Arabians  came  up  from  the  sea  be-  i 
yond  Babylon;  and  from  the  Caspian  sea,  the  ( 
Albanians  and  the  Iberians,  their  neighbours,  ;  ; 
and  not  a  few  of  the  free  people,  without  kings,  ; 
living  about  the  Araxes,  by  entreaty  and  hire 
also  came  together  to  him;  and  all  the  king’s  \ 

feasts  and  councils  rang  of  nothing  but  expec-  i 

tations,  boastings,  and  barbaric  threatenings,  t 

Taxiles  went  in  danger  of  his  life  for  giving  ( 

council  against  fighting,  and  it  was  imputed  to  i 

envy  in  Mithridates  thus  to  discourage  him 
from  so  glorious  an  enterprise.  Therefore,  Ti-  \ 

granes  would  by  no  means  tarry  for  him,  for  $ 

fear  he  should  share  in  the  glory,  but  marched  [ 

on  with  all  his  army,  lamenting  to  his  friends, 


o 


LUCULLUS 

as  it  is  said,  that  he  should  fight  with  Lucullus 
alone  and  not  with  all  the  Roman  generals  to¬ 
gether. 

Neither  was  his  boldness  to  be  accounted 
wholly  frantic  or  unreasonable,  when  he  had 
so  many  nations  and  kings  attending  him,  and 
so  many  tens  of  thousands  of  well-armed  foot 
and  horse  about  him.  He  had  twenty  thousand 
archers  and  slingers,  fifty-five  thousand  horse, 
of  which  seventeen  thousand  were  in  complete 
armour,  as  Lucullus  wrote  to  the  senate,  a  hun¬ 
dred  and  fifty  thousand  heavy-armed  men, 
drawn  up  partly  into  cohorts,  partly  into  pha¬ 
lanxes,  besides  various  divisions  of  men  ap¬ 
pointed  to  make  roads  and  lay  bridges,  to  drain 
off  waters  and  cut  wood,  and  to  perform  other 
necessary  services,  to  the  number  of  thirty-five 
thousand,  who,  being  quartered  behind  the 
army,  added  to  its  strength,  and  made  it  the 
more  formidable  to  behold. 

As  soon  as  he  had  passed  Taurus,  and  ap¬ 
peared  with  his  forces,  and  saw  the  Romans  be¬ 
leaguering  Tigranocerta,  the  barbarous  people 
within,  with  shoutings  and  acclamations,  re¬ 
ceived  the  sight,  and  threatening  the  Romans 
from  the  wall,  pointed  to  the  Armenians. 

In  a  council  of  war,  some  advised  Lucullus 
to  leave  the  siege,  and  march  up  to  Tigranes, 
others  that  it  would  not  be  safe  to  leave  the 
siege,  and  so  many  enemies  behind.  He  an¬ 
swered  that  neither  side  by  itself  was  right,  but 
together  both  gave  sound  advice;  and  accord¬ 
ingly  he  divided  his  army,  and  left  Murena 
with  six  thousand  foot  in  charge  of  the  siege, 
and  himself  went  out  with  twenty-four  cohorts, 
in  which  were  no  more  than  ten  thousand  men- 
at-arms,  and  with  all  the  horse  and  slingers  and 
archers  and  about  a  thousand  sitting  down  by 
the  river  in  a  large  plain,  he  appeared,  indeed, 
very  inconsiderable  to  Tigranes,  and  a  fit  sub¬ 
ject  for  the  flattering  wits  about  him.  Some  of 
whom  jeered,  others  cast  lots  for  the  spoil,  and 
every  one  of  the  kings  and  commanders  came 
and  desired  to  undertake  the  engagement 
alone,  and  that  he  would  be  pleased  to  sit  still 
and  behold.  Tigranes  himself,  wishing  to  be 
witty  and  pleasant  upon  the  occasion,  made 
use  of  the  well-known  saying,  that  they  were 
too  many  for  ambassadors,  and  too  few  for  sol¬ 
diers.  Thus  they  continued  sneering  and  scoff¬ 
ing. 

As  soon  as  day  came,  Lucullus  brought  out 
his  forces  under  arms.  The  barbarian  army 
stood  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  river,  and  there 
being  a  bend  of  the  river  westward  in  that  part 
of  it,  where  it  was  easiest  forded,  Lucullus, 


413 

while  he  led  his  army  on  in  haste,  seemed  to 
Tigranes  to  be  flying;  who  thereupon  called 
Taxiles,  and  in  derision  said,  “Do  you  not  see 
these  invincible  Romans  flying?”  But  Taxiles 
replied,  “Would,  indeed,  O  king,  that  some 
such  unlikely  piece  of  fortune  might  be  des¬ 
tined  you;  but  the  Romans  do  not,  when  going 
on  a  march,  put  on  their  best  clothes,  nor  use 
bright  shields,  and  naked  headpieces,  as  now 
you  see  them,  with  the  leathern  coverings 
all  taken  off,  but  this  is  a  preparation  for 
war  of  men  just  ready  to  engage  with  their 
enemies.” 

While  Taxiles  was  thus  speaking,  as  Lucul¬ 
lus  wheeled  about,  the  first  eagle  appeared,  and 
the  cohorts,  according  to  their  divisions  and 
companies,  formed  in  order  to  pass  over,  when 
with  much  ado,  and  like  a  man  that  is  just  re¬ 
covering  from  a  drunken  fit,  Tigranes  cried 
out  twice  or  thrice,  “What,  are  they  upon  us?” 
In  great  confusion,  therefore,  the  army  got  in 
array,  the  king  keeping  the  main  body  to  him¬ 
self,  while  the  left  wing  given  in  charge  to  the 
Adiabenian,  and  the  right  to  the  Mede,  in  front 
of  which  latter  were  posted  most  of  the  heavy¬ 
armed  cavalry.  Some  officers  advised  Lucullus, 
just  as  he  was  going  to  cross  the  river,  to  lie 
still,  that  day  being  one  of  the  unfortunate  ones 
which  they  call  black  days,  for  on  it  the  army 
under  Caepio,  engaging  with  the  Cimbrians, 
was  destroyed.  But  he  returned  the  famous  an¬ 
swer,  “I  will  make  it  a  happy  day  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans.”  It  was  the  day  before  the  Nones  of 
October. 

Having  so  said,  he  bade  them  take  courage, 
passed  over  the  river,  and  himself  first  of  all 
led  them  against  the  enemy,  clad  in  a  coat  of 
mail,  with  shining  steel  scales  and  a  fringed 
mantle;  and  his  sword  might  already  be  seen 
out  of  the  scabbard,  as  if  to  signify  that  they 
must  without  delay  come  to  a  hand-to-hand 
combat  with  an  enemy  whose  skill  was  in  dis¬ 
tant  fighting,  and  by  the  speed  of  their  advance 
curtail  the  space  that  exposed  them  to  the  arch¬ 
ery. 

But  when  he  saw  the  heavy-armed  horse,  the 
flower  of  the  army,  drawn  up  under  a  hill,  on 
the  top  of  which  was  a  broad  and  open  plain 
about  four  furlongs  distant,  and  of  no  very  dif¬ 
ficult  or  troublesome  access,  he  commanded  his 
Thracian  and  Galatian  horse  to  fall  upon  their 
flank,  and  beat  down  their  lances  with  their 
swords.  The  only  defence  of  these  horsemen- 
at-arms  are  their  lances;  they  have  nothing  else 
that  they  can  use  to  protect  themselves  or  an¬ 
noy  their  enemy,  on  account  of  the  weight  and 


414 

stiffness  of  their  armour,  with  which  they  are, 
as  it  were,  built  up. 

He  himself,  with  two  cohorts,  made  to  the 
mountain,  the  soldiers  briskly  following,  when 
they  saw  him  in  arms  afoot  first  toiling  and 
climbing  up.  Being  on  the  top  and  standing  in 
an  open  place,  with  a  loud  voice  he  cried  out, 
“We  have  overcome,  we  have  overcome,  fel¬ 
low-soldiers!”  And  having  so  said,  he  marched 
against  the  armed  horsemen,  commanding  his 
men  not  to  throw  their  javelins,  but  coming  up 
hand  to  hand  with  the  enemy,  to  hack  their 
shins  and  thighs,  which  parts  alone  were  un¬ 
guarded  in  these  heavy-armed  horsemen. 

But  there  was  no  need  of  this  way  of  fight¬ 
ing,  for  they  stood  not  to  receive  the  Romans, 
but  with  great  clamour  and  worse  flight  they 
and  their  heavy  horses  threw  themselves  upon 
the  ranks  of  the  foot,  before  ever  these  could  so 
much  as  begin  to  fight,  insomuch  that  with¬ 
out  a  wound  or  bloodshed,  so  many  thousands 
were  overthrown.  The  greatest  slaughter  was 
made  in  the  flight,  or  rather  in  the  endeavour¬ 
ing  to  fly  away,  which  they  could  not  well  do 
by  reason  of  the  depth  and  closeness  of  their 
own  ranks,  which  hindered  them. 

Tigranes  at  first  fled  with  a  few,  but  seeing 
his  son  in  the  same  misfortune,  he  took  the  dia¬ 
dem  from  his  head,  and  with  tears  gave  it  him, 
bidding  him  save  himself  by  some  other  road 
if  he  could.  But  the  young  man,  not  daring  to 
put  it  on,  gave  it  to  one  of  his  trustiest  servants 
to  keep  for  him.  This  man,  as  it  happened,  be¬ 
ing  taken,  was  brought  to  Lucullus,  and  so, 
among  the  captives,  the  crown  of  Tigranes  was 
also  taken. 

It  is  stated  that  above  a  hundred  thousand 
foot  were  lost,  and  that  of  the  horse  but  very 
few  escaped  at  all.  Of  the  Romans,  a  hundred 
were  wounded  and  five  killed. 

Antiochus,  the  philosopher,  making  mention 
of  this  fight  in  his  book  about  the  gods,  says 
that  the  sun  never  saw  the  like.  Strabo,  a  sec¬ 
ond  philosopher,  in  his  historical  collection, 
says  that  the  Romans  could  not  but  blush  and 
deride  themselves  for  putting  on  armour 
against  such  pitiful  slaves.  Livy  also  says  that 
the  Romans  never  fought  an  enemy  with  such 
unequal  forces,  for  the  conquerors  were  not  so 
much  as  one-twentieth  part  of  the  number  of 
the  conquered. 

The  most  sagacious  and  experienced  Roman 
commanders  made  it  a  chief  commendation  of 
Lucullus  that  he  had  conquered  two  great  and 
potent  kings  by  two  most  opposite  ways,  haste 
and  delay.  For  he  wore  out  the  flourishing 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

power  of  Mithridates  by  delay  and  time,  and 
crushed  that  of  Tigranes  by  haste;  being  one 
of  the  rare  examples  of  generals  who  made  use 
of  delay  for  active  achievement  and  speed  for 
security. 

On  this  account  it  was  that  Mithridates  had 
made  no  haste  to  come  up  to  fight,  imagining 
Lucullus  would,  as  he  had  done  before,  use 
caution  and  delay,  which  made  him  march  at 
his  leisure  to  join  Tigranes.  And  first,  as  he  be¬ 
gan  to  meet  some  straggling  Armenians  in  the 
way,  making  off  in  great  fear  and  consterna¬ 
tion,  he  suspected  the  worst,  and  when  greater 
numbers  of  stripped  and  wounded  men  met 
him  and  assured  him  of  the  defeat,  he  set  out 
to  seek  for  Tigranes.  And  finding  him  destitute 
and  humiliated,  he  by  no  means  requited  him 
with  insolence,  but  alighting  from  his  horse, 
and  condoling  with  him  on  their  common  loss, 
he  gave  him  his  own  royal  guard  to  attend 
him,  and  animated  him  for  the  future.  And 
they  together  gathered  fresh  forces  about  them. 

In  the  city  Tigranocerta,  the  Greeks  mean¬ 
time,  dividing  from  the  barbarians,  sought  to 
deliver  it  up  to  Lucullus,  and  he  attacked  and 
took  it.  He  seized  on  the  treasure  himself,  but 
gave  the  city  to  be  plundered  by  the  soldiers,  in 
which  were  found,  amongst  other  property, 
eight  thousand  talents  of  coined  money.  Be¬ 
sides  this,  also,  he  distributed  eight  hundred 
drachmas  to  each  man  out  of  the  spoils.  When 
he  understood  that  many  players  were  taken  in 
the  city,  whom  Tigranes  had  invited  from  all 
parts  for  opening  the  theatre  which  he  had 
built,  he  made  use  of  them  for  celebrating  his 
triumphal  games  and  spectacles.  The  Greeks 
he  sent  home,  allowing  them  money  for  their 
journey,  and  the  barbarians  also,  as  many  as 
had  been  forced  away  from  their  own  dwell¬ 
ings.  So  that  by  this  one  city  being  dissolved, 
many,  by  the  restitution  of  their  former  in¬ 
habitants,  were  restored.  By  all  of  which  Lucul¬ 
lus  was  beloved  as  a  benefactor  and  founder. 

Other  successes,  also,  attended  him,  such  as 
he  well  deserved,  desirous  as  he  was  far  more 
of  praise  for  acts  of  justice  and  clemency,  than 
for  feats  in  war,  these  being  due  partly  to  the 
soldiers,  and  very  greatly  to  fortune,  while 
those  are  the  sure  proofs  of  a  gentle  and  liberal 
soul;  and  by  such  aids  Lucullus,  at  that  time, 
even  without  the  help  of  arms,  succeeded  in  re¬ 
ducing  the  barbarians.  For  the  kings  of  the 
Arabians  came  to  him,  tendering  what  they 
had,  and  with  them  the  Sophenians  also  sub¬ 
mitted.  And  he  so  dealt  with  the  Gordyenians, 
that  they  were  willing  to  leave  their  own  habi- 


LUCULLUS 

tations,  and  to  follow  him  with  their  wives  and 
children. 

Which  was  for  this  cause.  Zarbienus,  King 
of  the  Gordyenians,  as  has  been  told,  being  im¬ 
patient  under  the  tyranny  of  Tigranes,  had  by 
Appius  secretly  made  overtures  of  confederacy 
with  Lucullus,  but,  being  discovered,  was  exe¬ 
cuted,  and  his  wife  and  children  with  him,  be¬ 
fore  the  Romans  entered  Armenia.  Lucullus 
forgot  not  this,  but  coming  to  the  Gordyenians 
made  a  solemn  interment  in  honour  of  Zarbi¬ 
enus,  and  adorning  the  funeral  pile  with  royal 
robes,  and  gold,  and  the  spoils  of  Tigranes,  he 
himself  in  person  kindled  the  fire,  and  poured 
in  perfumes  with  the  friends  and  relations  of 
the  deceased,  calling  him  his  companion  and 
the  confederate  of  the  Romans.  He  ordered, 
also,  a  costly  monument  to  be  built  for  him. 
There  was  a  large  treasure  of  gold  and  silver 
found  in  Zarbienus’s  palace,  and  no  less  than 
three  million  measures  of  corn,  so  that  the  sol¬ 
diers  were  provided  for,  and  Lucullus  had  the 
high  commendation  of  maintaining  the  war  at 
its  own  charge,  without  receivingone  drachma 
from  the  public  treasury. 

After  this  came  an  embassy  from  the  King 
of  Parthia  to  him,  desiring  amity  and  confed¬ 
eracy;  which  being  readily  embraced  by  Lucul¬ 
lus,  another  was  sent  by  him  in  return  to  the 
Parthian,  the  members  of  which  discovered 
him  to  be  a  double-minded  man,  and  to  be 
dealing  privately  at  the  same  time  with  Tigra¬ 
nes,  offering  to  take  part  with  him,  upon  con¬ 
dition  Mesopotamia  were  delivered  up  to  him. 
Which  as  soon  as  Lucullus  understood,  he  re¬ 
solved  to  pass  by  Tigranes  and  Mithridates  as 
antagonists  already  overcome,  and  to  try  the 
power  of  Parthia,  by  leading  his  army  against 
them,  thinking  it  would  be  a  glorious  result, 
thus  in  one  current  of  war,  like  an  athlete  in 
the  games,  to  throw  down  three  kings  one  after 
another,  and  successively  to  deal  as  a  conquer¬ 
or  with  three  of  the  greatest  powers  under 
heaven. 

He  sent,  therefore,  into  Pontus  to  Sornatius 
and  his  colleagues,  bidding  them  bring  the 
army  thence,  and  join  with  him  in  his  expedi¬ 
tion  out  of  Gordyene.  The  soldiers  there,  how¬ 
ever,  who  had  been  restive  and  unruly  before, 
now  openly  displayed  their  mutinous  temper. 
No  manner  of  entreaty  or  force  availed  with 
them,  but  they  protested  and  cried  out  that 
they  would  stay  no  longer  even  there,  but 
would  go  away  and  desert  Pontus.  The  news  of 
which,  when  reported  to  Lucullus,  did  no 
small  harm  to  the  soldiers  about  him,  who  were 


415 

already  corrupted  with  wealth  and  plenty,  and 
desirous  of  ease.  And  on  hearing  the  boldness 
of  the  others,  they  called  them  men,  and  de¬ 
clared  they  themselves  ought  to  follow  their 
example,  for  the  actions  which  they  had  done 
did  now  well  deserve  release  from  service  and 
repose. 

Upon  these  and  worse  words,  Lucullus  gave 
up  the  thoughts  of  invading  Parthia,  and  in  the 
height  of  summer-time  went  against  Tigranes. 
Passing  over  Taurus,  he  was  filled  with  appre¬ 
hension  at  the  greenness  of  the  fields  before 
him,  so  long  is  the  season  deferred  in  this  re¬ 
gion  by  the  coldness  of  the  air.  But  neverthe¬ 
less,  he  went  down,  and  twice  or  thrice  putting 
to  flight  the  Armenians  who  dared  to  come  out 
against  him,  he  plundered  and  burnt  their  vil¬ 
lages,  and  seizing  on  the  provision  designed 
for  Tigranes,  reduced  his  enemies  to  the  neces¬ 
sity  which  he  had  feared  for  himself. 

But  when,  after  doing  all  he  could  to  pro¬ 
voke  the  enemy  to  fight,  by  drawing  entrench¬ 
ments  round  their  camp  and  by  burning  the 
country  before  them,  he  could  by  no  means 
bring  them  to  venture  out,  after  their  frequent 
defeats  before,  he  rose  up  and  marched  to  Ar- 
taxata,  the  royal  city  of  Tigranes,  where  his 
wives  and  young  children  were  kept,  judging 
that  Tigranes  would  never  suffer  that  to  go 
without  the  hazard  of  a  battle.  It  is  related  that 
Hannibal  the  Carthaginian,  after  the  defeat  of 
Antiochus  by  the  Romans,  coming  to  Artaxas, 
King  of  Armenia,  pointed  out  to  him  many 
other  matters  to  his  advantage,  and  observing 
the  great  natural  capacities  and  the  pleasant¬ 
ness  of  the  site,  then  lying  unoccupied  and  neg¬ 
lected,  drew  a  model  of  a  city  for  it,  and  bring¬ 
ing  Artaxas  thither,  showed  it  to  him  and  en¬ 
couraged  him  to  build.  At  which  the  king  be¬ 
ing  pleased,  and  desiring  him  to  oversee  the 
work,  erected  a  large  and  stately  city  which  was 
called  after  his  own  name,  and  made  metropo¬ 
lis  of  Armenia. 

And  in  fact,  when  Lucullus  proceeded  against 
it,  Tigranes  no  longer  suffered  it  but  came  with 
his  army,  and  on  the  fourth  day  sat  down  by 
the  Romans,  the  river  Arsanias  lying  between 
them,  which  of  necessity  Lucullus  must  pass  in 
his  march  to  Artaxata.  Lucullus,  after  sacrifice 
to  the  gods,  as  if  victory  were  already  obtained, 
carried  over  his  army,  having  twelve  cohorts  in 
the  first  division  in  front,  the  rest  being  dis¬ 
posed  in  the  rear  to  prevent  the  enemy’s  inclos¬ 
ing  them.  For  there  were  many  choice  horse 
drawn  up  against  him;  in  the  front  stood  the 
Mardian  horse-archers,  and  Iberians  with  long 


416 

spears,  in  whom,  being  the  most  warlike,  Ti- 
granes  more  confided  than  in  any  other  of  his 
foreign  troops.  But  nothing  of  moment  was 
done  by  them,  for  though  they  skirmished  with 
the  Roman  horse  at  a  distance,  they  were  not 
able  to  stand  when  the  foot  came  up  to  them; 
but  being  broken,  and  flying  on  both  sides, 
drew  the  horse  in  pursuit  after  them. 

Though  these  were  routed,  yet  Lucullus  was 
not  without  alarm  when  he  saw  the  cavalry 
about  Tigranes  with  great  bravery  and  in  large 
numbers  coming  upon  him;  he  recalled  his 
horse  from  pursuing,  and  he  himself,  first  of 
all,  with  the  best  of  his  men,  engaged  the  Satra- 
penians  who  were  opposite  him,  and  before 
ever  they  came  to  close  fight  routed  them  with 
the  mere  terror.  Of  three  kings  in  battle  against 
him,  Mithridates  of  Pontus  fled  away  the  most 
shamefully,  being  not  so  much  as  able  to  en¬ 
dure  the  shout  of  the  Romans.  The  pursuit 
reached  a  long  way,  and  all  through  the  night 
the  Romans  slew  and  took  prisoners,  and  car¬ 
ried  off  spoils  and  treasure,  till  they  were  weary. 
Livy  says  there  were  more  taken  and  destroyed 
in  the  first  battle,  but  in  the  second,  men  of 
greater  distinction. 

Lucullus,  flushed  and  animated  by  this  vic¬ 
tory,  determined  to  march  on  into  the  interior 
and  there  complete  his  conquests  over  the  bar¬ 
barians,  but  winter  weather  came  on,  contrary 
to  expectation,  as  early  as  the  autumnal  equi¬ 
nox,  with  storms  and  frequent  snows,  and, 
even  in  the  most  clear  days,  hoar  frost  and  ice, 
which  made  the  waters  scarcely  drinkable  for 
the  horses  by  their  exceeding  coldness,  and 
scarcely  passable  through  the  ice  breaking  and 
cutting  the  horses’  sinews.  The  country  for  the 
most  part  being  quite  uncleared,  with  difficult 
passes,  and  much  wood,  kept  them  continually 
wet,  the  snow  falling  thickly  on  them  as  they 
marched  in  the  day,  and  the  ground  that  they 
lay  upon  at  night  being  damp  and  watery. 
After  the  battle  they  followed  not  Lucullus 
many  days  before  they  began  to  be  refractory, 
first  of  all  entreating  and  sending  the  tribunes 
to  him,  but  presently  they  tumultuously  gath¬ 
ered  together,  and  made  a  shouting  all  night 
long  in  their  tents,  a  plain  sign  of  a  mutinous 
army.  But  Lucullus  as  earnestly  entreated  them, 
desiring  them  to  have  patience,  till  they  took 
the  Armenian  Carthage,  and  overturned  the 
work  of  their  great  enemy,  meaning  Hannibal. 

But  when  he  could  not  prevail,  he  led  them 
back,  and  crossing  Taurus  by  another  road, 
came  into  the  fruitful  and  sunny  country  of 
Mygdonia,  where  was  a  great  and  populous 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES  i 

city,  by  the  barbarians  called  Nisibis,  by  the  h 

Greeks  Antioch  of  Mygdonia.  This  was  de-  a 

fended  by  Guras,  brother  of  Tigranes,  with  the  si 

dignity  of  governor,  and  by  the  engineering  v 

skill  and  dexterity  of  Callimachus,  the  same  o 

who  so  much  annoyed  the  Romans  at  Amisus.  li 

Lucullus,  however,  brought  his  army  up  to  it,  n 

and  laying  close  siege,  in  a  short  time  took  it  si 

by  storm.  He  used  Guras,  who  surrendered 
himself,  kindly,  but  gave  no  attention  to  Calli-  p 

machus,  though  he  offered  to  make  discovery  ii 

of  hidden  treasures,  commanding  him  to  be  1 

kept  in  chains,  to  be  punished  for  firing  the  v 

city  of  Amisus,  which  had  disappointed  his  ii 

ambition  of  showing  favour  and  kindness  to  l 

the  Greeks.  1  p 

Hitherto,  one  would  imagine  fortune  had  at-  o 

tended  and  fought  with  Lucullus,  but  after-  a 

wards,  as  if  the  wind  had  failed  of  a  sudden,  |  y 

he  did  all  things  by  force,  and  as  it  were  against  a 

the  grain;  and  showed  certainly  the  conduct  y 

and  patience  of  a  wise  captain,  but  in  the  re-  si 

suits  met  with  no  fresh  honour  or  reputation;  b 

and  indeed,  by  bad  success  and  vain  embarrass-  f 

ments  with  his  soldiers,  he  came  within  a  little 
of  losing  even  what  he  had  before.  He  himself  d 

was  not  the  least  cause  of  all  this,  being  far  tl 

from  inclined  to  seek  popularity  with  the  mass  ;  d 
of  the  soldiers,  and  more  ready  to  think  any  “ 

indulgence  shown  to  them  an  invasion  of  his  jj 

own  authority.  But  what  was  worst  of  all,  he  tl 

was  naturally  unsociable  to  his  great  officers  in  tl 

commission  with  him,  despising  others  and  ${ 

thinking  them  worthy  of  nothing  in  compari-  0 

son  with  himself.  These  faults,  we  are  told,  he  |< 

had  with  all  his  many  excellences;  he  was  of  a  al 

large  and  noble  person,  an  eloquent  speaker,  ai 
and  a  wise  counsellor,  both  in  the  Forum  and  tl 
the  camp.  a 

Sallust  says  the  soldiers  were  ill-affected  to  ci 

him  from  the  beginning  of  the  war,  because  e: 

they  were  forced  to  keep  the  field  two  winters  (  if 
at  Cyzicus  and  afterwards  at  Amisus.  Their  jr 
other  winters,  also,  vexed  them,  for  they  either  di 
spent  them  in  an  enemy’s  country,  or  else  were  w 

confined  to  their  tents  in  the  open  field  among  0j 

their  confederates;  for  Lucullus  not  so  much  as 
once  went  into  a  Greek  confederate  town  with  jn 
his  army.  To  this  ill-affection  abroad,  the  trib-  f 
unes  yet  more  contributed  at  home,  invidious-  n, 
ly  accusing  Lucullus  as  one  who  for  empire  and  j  m 
riches  prolonged  the  war,  holding,  it  might  al-  u, 
most  be  said,  under  his  sole  power  Cilicia,  Asia,  J, 
Bithynia,  Paphlagonia,  Pontus,  Armenia,  all  as  0| 
far  as  the  river  Phasis;  and  now  of  late  had  w 

plundered  the  royal  city  of  Tigranes,  as  if  he  p; 


LUCULLUS 

had  been  commissioned  not  so  much  to  subdue 
as  to  strip  kings.  This  is  what  we  are  told  was 
said  by  Lucius  Quintius,  one  of  the  praetors,  at 
whose  instance,  in  particular,  the  people  deter¬ 
mined  to  send  one  who  should  succeed  Lucul- 
lus  in  his  province,  and  voted,  also,  to  relieve 
many  of  the  soldiers  under  him  from  further 
service. 

Besides  these  evils,  that  which  most  of  all 
prejudiced  Lucullus  was  Publius  Clodius,  an 
insolent  man,  very  vicious  and  bold,  brother  to 
Lucullus’s  wife,  a  woman  of  bad  conduct,  with 
whom  Clodius  was  himself  suspected  of  crim¬ 
inal  intercourse.  Being  then  in  the  army  under 
Lucullus,  but  not  in  as  great  authority  as  he  ex¬ 
pected  (for  he  would  fain  have  been  the  chief 
of  all,  but  on  account  of  his  character  was  placed 
after  many),  he  ingratiated  himself  secretly 
with  the  Fimbrian  troops,  and  stirred  them  up 
against  Lucullus,  using  fair  speeches  to  them, 
who  of  old  had  been  used  to  be  flattered  in 
such  a  manner.  These  were  those  whom  Fim¬ 
bria  before  had  persuaded  to  kill  the  consul 
Flaccus,  and  choose  him  their  leader. 

And  so  they  listened  not  unwillingly  to  Clo¬ 
dius,  and  called  him  the  soldiers’  friend,  for 
the  concern  he  professed  for  them,  and  the  in¬ 
dignation  he  expressed  at  the  prospect  that 
“there  must  be  no  end  of  wars  and  toils,  but  in 
fighting  with  all  nations,  and  wandering 
throughout  all  the  world  they  must  wear  out 
their  lives  receiving  no  other  reward  for  their 
service  than  to  guard  the  carriages  and  camels 
of  Lucullus,  laden  with  gold  and  precious  gob¬ 
lets;  while  as  for  Pompey’s  soldiers,  they  were 
all  citizens,  living  safe  at  home  with  their  wives 
and  children,  on  fertile  lands,  or  in  towns,  and 
that,  not  after  driving  Mithridates  and  Tigra- 
nes  into  wild  deserts,  and  overturning  the  royal 
cities  of  Asia,  but  after  having  merely  reduced 
exiles  in  Spain,  or  fugitive  slaves  in  Italy.  Nay, 
if  indeed  we  must  never  have  an  end  of  fight¬ 
ing,  should  we  not  rather  reserve  the  remain¬ 
der  of  our  bodies  and  souls  for  a  general  who 
will  reckon  his  chiefest  glory  to  be  the  wealth 
of  his  soldiers.” 

By  such  practices  the  army  of  Lucullus,  be¬ 
ing  corrupted,  neither  followed  him  against 
Tigranes,  nor  against  Mithridates,  when  he 
now  at  once  returned  into  Pontus  out  of  Ar¬ 
menia,  and  was  recovering  his  kingdom,  but 
under  pretence  of  the  winter,  sat  idle  in  Gor- 
dyene,  every  minute  expecting  either  Pompey, 
or  some  other  general,  to  succeed  Lucullus.  But 
when  news  came  that  Mithridates  had  defeated 
Fabius,  and  was  marching  against  Sornatius 


417 

and  Triarius,  out  of  shame  they  followed  Lu¬ 
cullus. 

Triarius,  ambitiously  aiming  at  victory  be¬ 
fore  ever  Lucullus  came  to  him,  though  he  was 
then  very  near,  was  defeated  in  a  great  battle, 
in  which  it  is  said  that  above  seven  thousand 
Romans  fell,  among  whom  were  a  hundred 
and  fifty  centurions  and  four-and-twenty  trib¬ 
unes,  and  that  the  camp  itself  was  taken.  Lu¬ 
cullus,  coming  up  a  few  days  after,  concealed 
Triarius  from  the  search  of  the  angry  soldiers. 

But  when  Mithridates  declined  battle,  and 
waited  for  the  coming  of  Tigranes,  who  was 
then  on  his  march  with  great  forces,  he  re¬ 
solved  before  they  joined  their  forces  to  turn 
once  more  and  engage  with  Tigranes.  But  in 
the  way  the  mutinous  Fimbrians  deserted  their 
ranks,  professing  themselves  released  from 
service  by  a  decree,  and  that  Lucullus,  the  prov¬ 
inces  being  allotted  to  others,  had  no  longer  any 
right  to  command  them.  There  was  nothing 
beneath  the  dignity  of  Lucullus  which  he  did 
not  now  submit  to  bear,  entreating  them  one 
by  one,  from  tent  to  tent,  going  up  and  down 
humbly  and  in  tears,  and  even  taking  some  like 
a  suppliant  by  the  hand.  But  they  turned  away 
from  his  salutes,  and  threw  down  their  empty 
purses,  bidding  him  engage  alone  with  the  en¬ 
emy,  as  he  alone  made  advantage  of  it. 

At  length  by  the  entreaty  of  the  other  sol¬ 
diers,  the  Fimbrians,  being  prevailed  upon, 
consented  to  tarry  that  summer  under  him,  but 
if  during  that  time  no  enemy  came  to  fight 
them,  to  be  free.  Lucullus  of  necessity  was 
forced  to  comply  with  this,  or  else  to  abandon 
the  country  to  the  barbarians.  He  kept  them, 
indeed,  with  him,  but  without  urging  his  au¬ 
thority  upon  them;  nor  did  he  lead  them  out  to 
battle,  being  contented  if  they  should  but  stay 
with  him,  though  he  then  saw  Cappadocia 
wasted  by  Tigranes,  and  Mithridates  again  tri¬ 
umphing,  whom  not  long  before  he  reported  to 
the  senate  to  be  wholly  subdued;  and  commis¬ 
sioners  were  now  arrived  to  settle  the  affairs  of 
Pontus,  as  if  all  had  been  quietly  in  his  posses¬ 
sion. 

But  when  they  came,  they  found  him  not  so 
much  as  master  of  himself,  but  contemned  and 
derided  by  the  common  soldiers,  who  arrived 
at  that  height  of  insolence  against  their  gen¬ 
eral,  that  at  the  end  of  summer  they  put  on 
their  armour  and  drew  their  swords,  and  de¬ 
fied  their  enemies  then  absent  and  gone  off  a 
long  while  before,  and  with  great  outcries  and 
waving  their  swords  in  the  air  they  quitted  the 
camp,  proclaiming  that  the  time  was  expired 


418 

which  they  promised  to  stay  with  Lucullus. 
The  rest  were  summoned  by  letters  from  Pom- 
pey  to  come  and  join  him;  he  by  the  favour 
of  the  people  and  by  flattery  of  their  leaders 
having  been  chosen  general  of  the  army  against 
Mithridates  and  Tigranes,  though  the  senate 
and  the  nobility  all  thought  that  Lucullus  was 
injured,  having  those  put  over  his  head  who 
succeeded  rather  to  his  triumph  than  to  his 
commission,  and  that  he  was  not  so  truly  de¬ 
prived  of  his  command,  as  of  the  glory  he  had 
deserved  in  his  command,  which  he  was  forced 
to  yield  to  another. 

It  was  yet  more  of  just  matter  of  pity  and  in¬ 
dignation  to  those  who  were  present;  for  Lu¬ 
cullus  remained  no  longer  master  of  rewards 
or  punishments  for  any  actions  done  in  the 
war;  neither  would  Pompey  suffer  any  man  to 
go  to  him,  or  pay  any  respect  to  the  orders  and 
arrangements  he  made  with  advice  of  his  ten 
commissioners,  but  expressly  issued  edicts  to 
the  contrary,  and  could  not  but  be  obeyed  by 
reason  of  his  greater  power. 

Friends,  however,  on  both  sides,  thought  it 
desirable  to  bring  them  together,  and  they  met 
in  a  village  of  Galatia,  and  saluted  each  other 
in  a  friendly  manner,  with  congratulations  on 
each  other’s  successes.  Lucullus  was  the  elder, 
but  Pompey  the  more  distinguished  by  his 
more  numerous  commands  and  his  two  tri¬ 
umphs.  Both  had  rods  dressed  with  laurel  car¬ 
ried  before  them  for  their  victories,  and  as 
Pompey’s  laurels  were  withered  with  passing 
through  hot  and  droughty  countries,  Lucul- 
lus’s  lictors  courteously  gave  Pompey’s  some  of 
the  fresh  and  green  ones  which  they  had, 
which  Pompey’s  friends  counted  a  good  omen, 
as  indeed,  of  a  truth,  Lucullus’s  actions  fur¬ 
nished  the  honours  of  Pompey’s  command. 
The  interview,  however,  did  not  bring  them  to 
any  amicable  agreement;  they  parted  even  less 
friends  than  they  met.  Pompey  repealed  all  the 
acts  of  Lucullus,  drew  off  his  soldiers,  and  left 
him  no  more  than  sixteen  hundred  for  his  tri¬ 
umph,  and  even  those  unwilling  to  go  with 
him. 

So  wanting  was  Lucullus,  either  through 
natural  constitution  or  adverse  circumstances, 
in  that  one  first  and  most  important  requisite 
of  a  general,  which  had  he  but  added  to  his 
other  many  and  remarkable  virtues,  his  forti¬ 
tude,  vigilance,  wisdom,  justice,  the  Roman 
empire  had  not  had  Euphrates  for  its  boun¬ 
dary,  but  the  utmost  ends  of  Asia  and  the  Hyr- 
canian  sea;  as  other  nations  were  then  disabled 
by  the  late  conquests  of  Tigranes,  and  the  pow- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

er  of  Parthia  had  not  in  Lucullus’s  time  shown 
itself  so  formidable  as  Crassus  afterwards  found 
it,  nor  had  as  yet  gained  that  consistency,  being 
crippled  by  wars  at  home  and  on  its  frontiers, 
and  unable  even  to  make  head  against  the  en¬ 
croachments  of  the  Armenians.  And  Lucullus, 
as  it  was,  seems  to  me  through  others’  agency 
to  have  done  Rome  greater  harm  than  he  did 
her  advantage  by  his  own.  For  the  trophies  in 
Armenia,  near  the  Parthian  frontier,  and  Ti- 
granocerta,  and  Nisibis,  and  the  great  wealth 
brought  from  thence  to  Rome,  with  the  captive 
crown  of  Tigranes  carried  in  triumph,  all 
helped  to  puff  up  Crassus,  as  if  the  barbarians 
had  been  nothing  else  but  spoil  and  booty,  and 
he,  falling  among  the  Parthian  archers,  soon 
demonstrated  that  Lucullus’s  triumphs  were 
not  beholden  to  the  inadvertency  and  effemi¬ 
nacy  of  his  enemies,  but  to  his  own  courage 
and  conduct.  But  of  this  afterwards. 

Lucullus,  upon  his  return  to  Rome,  found 
his  brother  Marcus  accused  by  Caius  Memmi- 
us  for  his  acts  as  quaestor,  done  by  Sulla’s  or¬ 
ders;  and  on  his  acquittal,  Memmius  changed 
the  scene,  and  animated  the  people  against  Lu¬ 
cullus  himself,  urging  them  to  deny  him  a  tri¬ 
umph  for  appropriating  the  spoils  and  pro¬ 
longing  the  war.  In  this  great  struggle,  the  no¬ 
bility  and  chief  men  went  down,  and  mingling 
in  person  among  the  tribes,  with  much  en¬ 
treaty  and  labour,  scarce  at  length  prevailed 
upon  them  to  consent  to  his  triumph. 

The  pomp  of  which  proved  not  so  wonder¬ 
ful  or  so  wearisome  with  the  length  of  the  pro¬ 
cession  and  the  number  of  things  carried  in  it, 
but  consisted  chiefly  in  vast  quantities  of  arms 
and  machines  of  the  king’s  with  which  he 
adorned  the  Flaminian  circus,  a  spectacle  by  no 
means  despicable.  In  his  progress  there  passed 
by  a  few  horsemen  in  heavy  armour,  ten  chari¬ 
ots  armed  with  scythes,  sixty  friends  and  offi¬ 
cers  of  the  king’s,  and  a  hundred  and  ten 
brazen  beaked  ships  of  war,  which  were  con¬ 
veyed  along  with  them,  a  golden  image  of 
Mithridates  six  feet  high,  a  shield  set  with  pre¬ 
cious  stones,  twenty  loads  of  silver  vessels,  and 
thirty-two  of  golden  cups,  armour,  and  money, 
all  carried  by  men.  Besides  which,  eight  mules 
were  laden  with  golden  couches,  fifty-six  with 
bullion,  and  a  hundred  and  seven  with  coined 
silver,  little  less  than  two  million  seven  hun¬ 
dred  thousand  pieces.  There  were  tablets,  also, 
with  inscriptions,  stating  what  moneys  he  gave 
Pompey  for  prosecuting  the  piratic  war,  what 
he  delivered  into  the  treasury,  and  what  he 
gave  to  every  soldier,  which  was  nine  hundred 


LUCULLUS 

and  fifty  drachmas  each.  After  all  which  he  no¬ 
bly  feasted  the  city  and  adjoining  villages  or 
vici. 

Being  divorced  from  Clodia,  a  dissolute  and 
wicked  woman,  he  married  Servilia,  sister  to 
Cato.  This  also  proved  an  unfortunate  match, 
for  she  only  wanted  one  of  all  of  Clodia’s  vices, 
the  criminality  she  was  accused  of  with  her 
brothers.  Out  of  reverence  to  Cato,  he  for  a 
while  connived  her  impurity  and  immodesty, 
but  at  length  dismissed  her. 

When  the  senate  expected  great  things  from 
him,  hoping  to  find  in  him  a  check  to  the 
usurpations  of  Pompey,  and  that  with  the 
greatness  of  his  station  and  credit  he  would 
come  forward  as  the  champion  of  the  nobility, 
he  retired  from  business  and  abandoned  pub¬ 
lic  life;  either  because  he  saw  the  state  to  be  in 
a  difficult  and  diseased  condition,  or,  as  others 
say,  because  he  was  as  great  as  he  could  well 
be,  and  inclined  to  a  quiet  and  easy  life,  after 
those  many  labours  and  toils  which  had  ended 
with  him  so  far  from  fortunately. 

There  are  those  who  highly  commend  his 
change  of  life,  saying  that  he  thus  avoided  the 
rock  on  which  Marius  split.  For  he,  after  the 
great  and  glorious  deeds  of  his  Cimbrian  vic¬ 
tories,  was  not  contented  to  retire  upon  his 
honours,  but  out  of  an  insatiable  desire  of  glory 
and  power,  even  in  his  old  age,  headed  a  politi¬ 
cal  party  against  young  men,  and  let  himself 
fall  into  miserable  actions,  and  yet  more  miser¬ 
able  sufferings. 

Better  in  like  manner,  they  say,  had  it  been 
for  Cicero,  after  Catiline’s  conspiracy,  to  have 
retired  and  grown  old,  and  for  Scipio,  after  his 
Numantine  and  Carthaginian  conquests,  to 
have  sat  down  contented.  For  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  public  affairs  has,  like  other  things,  its 
proper  term,  and  statesmen,  as  well  as  wres¬ 
tlers,  will  break  down  when  strength  and  youth 
fail.  But  Crassus  and  Pompey,  on  the  other 
hand,  laughed  to  see  Lucullus  abandoning  him¬ 
self  to  pleasure  and  expense,  as  if  luxurious 
living  were  not  a  thing  that  as  little  became  his 
years  as  government  of  affairs  at  home  or  of  an 
army  abroad. 

And,  indeed,  Lucullus’s  life,  like  the  Old 
Comedy,  presents  us  at  the  commencement 
with  acts  of  policy  and  of  war,  at  the  end  offer¬ 
ing  nothing  but  good  eating  and  drinking, 
feastings,  and  revellings,  and  mere  play.  For  I 
give  no  higher  name  to  his  sumptuous  build¬ 
ings,  porticos,  and  baths,  still  less  to  his  paint¬ 
ings  and  sculptures,  and  all  his  industry  about 
these  curiosities,  which  he  collected  with  vast 


419 

expense,  lavishly  bestowing  all  the  wealth  and 
treasure  which  he  got  in  the  war  upon  them, 
insomuch  that  even  now,  with  all  the  advance 
of  luxury,  the  Lucullean  gardens  are  counted 
the  noblest  the  emperor  has. 

Tubero,  the  stoic,  when  he  saw  his  buildings 
at  Naples,  where  he  suspended  the  hills  upon 
vast  tunnels,  brought  in  the  sea  for  moats  and 
fish-ponds  round  his  house,  and  built  pleasure- 
houses  in  the  waters,  called  him  Xerxes  in  a 
gown.  He  had  also  fine  seats  in  Tusculum,  bel¬ 
vederes,  and  large  open  balconies  for  men’s 
apartments,  and  porticos  to  walk  in,  where 
Pompey  coming  to  see  him,  blamed  him  for 
making  a  house  which  would  be  pleasant  in 
summer,  but  uninhabitable  in  winter;  whom 
he  answered  with  a  smile,  “You  think  me, 
then,  less  provident  than  cranes  and  storks,  not 
to  change  my  home  with  the  season.”  When  a 
praetor,  with  great  expense  and  pains,  was  pre¬ 
paring  a  spectacle  for  the  people,  and  asked 
him  to  lend  him  some  purple  robes  for  the  per¬ 
formers  in  a  chorus,  he  told  him  he  would  go 
home  and  see,  and  if  he  had  got  any,  would  let 
him  have  them;  and  the  next  day  asking  how 
many  he  wanted,  and  being  told  that  a  hun¬ 
dred  would  suffice,  bade  him  to  take  twice  as 
many;  on  which  the  poet  Horace  observes  that 
a  house  is  but  a  poor  one  where  the  valuables 
unseen  and  unthought  of  do  not  exceed  all 
those  that  meet  the  eye. 

Lucullus’s  daily  entertainments  were  osten¬ 
tatiously  extravagant,  not  only  with  purple  cov¬ 
erlets,  and  plate  adorned  with  precious  stones, 
and  dancings,  and  interludes,  but  with  the 
greatest  diversity  of  dishes  and  the  most  elabo¬ 
rate  cookery,  for  the  vulgar  to  admire  and  envy. 
It  was  a  happy  thought  of  Pompey  in  his  sick¬ 
ness,  when  his  physician  prescribed  a  thrush 
for  his  dinner,  and  his  servants  told  him  that 
in  summer-time  thrushes  were  not  to  be  found 
anywhere  but  in  Lucullus’s  fattening  coops, 
that  he  would  not  suffer  them  to  fetch  one 
thence,  but  observing  to  his  physician,  “So  if 
Lucullus  had  not  been  an  epicure,  Pompey  had 
not  lived,”  ordered  something  else  that  could 
easily  be  got  to  be  prepared  for  him.  Cato  was 
his  friend  and  connection,  but,  nevertheless,  so 
hated  his  life  and  habits,  that  when  a  young 
man  in  the  senate  made  a  long  and  tedious 
speech  in  praise  of  frugality  and  temperance, 
Cato  got  up  and  said,  “How  long  do  you  mean 
to  go  on  making  money  like  Crassus,  living 
like  Lucullus,  and  talking  like  Cato?”  There 
are  some,  however,  who  say  the  words  were 
said,  but  not  by  Cato. 


420 

It  is  plain  from  the  anecdotes  on  record  of 
him  that  Lucullus  was  not  only  pleased  with, 
but  even  gloried  in  his  way  of  living.  For  he  is 
said  to  have  feasted  several  Greeks  upon  their 
coming  to  Rome  day  after  day,  who  of  a  true 
Grecian  principle,  being  ashamed,  and  declin¬ 
ing  the  invitations,  where  so  great  an  expense 
was  every  day  incurred  for  them,  he  with  a 
smile  told  them,  “Some  of  this,  indeed,  my 
Grecian  friends,  is  for  your  sakes,  but  more  for 
that  of  Lucullus.” 

Once  when  he  supped  alone,  there  being 
only  one  course,  and  that  but  moderately  fur¬ 
nished,  he  called  his  steward  and  reproved  him, 
who  professing  to  have  supposed  that  there 
would  be  no  need  of  any  great  entertainment, 
when  nobody  was  invited,  was  answered, 
“What,  did  not  you  know,  then,  that  to-day 
Lucullus  dines  with  Lucullus?” 

Which  being  much  spoken  of  about  the  city, 
Cicero  and  Pompey  one  day  met  him  loitering 
in  the  Forum,  the  former  his  intimate  friend 
and  familiar,  and,  though  there  had  been  some 
ill-will  between  Pompey  and  him  about  the 
command  in  the  war,  still  they  used  to  see  each 
other  and  converse  on  easy  terms  together. 
Cicero  accordingly  saluted  him,  and  asked  him 
whether  to-day  were  a  good  time  for  asking  a 
favour  of  him,  and  on  his  answering,  “Very 
much  so,”  and  begging  to  hear  what  it  was, 
“Then,”  said  Cicero,  “we  should  like  to  dine 
with  you  to-day,  just  on  the  dinner  that  is  pre¬ 
pared  for  yourself.”  Lucullus  being  surprised, 
and  requesting  a  day’s  time,  they  refused  to 
grant  it,  neither  suffered  him  to  talk  with  his 
servants,  for  fear  he  should  give  order  for  more 
than  was  appointed  before.  But  thus  much 
they  consented  to,  that  before  their  faces  he 
might  tell  his  servants,  that  to-day  he  would 
sup  in  the  Apollo  (for  so  one  of  his  best  dining¬ 
rooms  was  called),  and  by  this  evasion  he  out¬ 
witted  his  guests. 

For  every  room,  as  it  seems,  had  its  own  as¬ 
sessment  of  expenditure,  dinner  at  such  a  price, 
and  all  else  in  accordance;  so  that  the  servants, 
on  knowing  where  he  would  dine,  knew  also 
how  much  was  to  be  expended,  and  in  what 
style  and  form  dinner  was  to  be  served.  The 
expense  for  the  Apollo  was  fifty  thousand 
drachmas,  and  thus  much  being  that  day  laid 
out,  the  greatness  of  the  cost  did  not  so  much 
amaze  Pompey  and  Cicero,  as  the  rapidity  of 
the  outlay.  One  might  believe  Lucullus  thought 
his  money  really  captive  and  barbarian,  so  wan¬ 
tonly  and  contumeliously  did  he  treat  it. 

His  furnishing  a  library,  however,  deserves 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

praise  and  record,  for  he  collected  very  many 
choice  manuscripts;  and  the  use  they  were  put 
to  was  even  more  magnificent  than  the  pur¬ 
chase,  the  library  being  always  open,  and  the 
walks  and  reading-rooms  about  it  free  to  all 
Greeks,  whose  delight  it  was  to  leave  their 
other  occupations  and  hasten  thither  as  to  the 
habitation  of  the  Muses,  there  walking  about, 
and  diverting  one  another.  He  himself  often 
passed  his  hours  there,  disputing  with  the 
learned  in  the  walks,  and  giving  his  advice  to 
statesmen  who  required  it,  insomuch  that  his 
house  was  altogether  a  home,  and  in  a  manner 
a  Greek  prytaneum  for  those  that  visited  Rome. 

He  was  fond  of  all  sorts  of  philosophy,  and 
was  well  read  and  expert  in  them  all.  But  he 
always  from  the  first  specially  favoured  and 
valued  the  Academy;  not  the  New  one,  which 
at  that  time  under  Philo  flourished  with  the 
precepts  of  Carneades,  but  the  Old  one,  then 
sustained  and  represented  by  Antiochus  of  As- 
calon,  a  learned  and  eloquent  man.  Lucullus 
with  great  labour  made  him  his  friend  and 
champion,  and  set  him  up  against  Philo’s  audi¬ 
tors,  among  whom  Cicero  was  one,  who  wrote 
an  admirable  treatise  in  defence  of  his  sect,  in 
which  he  puts  the  argument  in  favour  of  com¬ 
prehension  in  the  mouth  of  Lucullus,  and  the 
opposite  argument  in  his  own.  The  book  is 
called  Lucullus. 

For,  as  has  been  said,  they  were  great  friends, 
and  took  the  same  side  in  politics.  For  Lucul¬ 
lus  did  not  wholly  retire  from  the  republic,  but 
only  from  ambition,  and  from  the  dangerous 
and  often  lawless  struggle  for  political  pre¬ 
eminence,  which  he  left  to  Crassus  and  Cato, 
whom  the  senators,  jealous  of  Pompey’s  great¬ 
ness,  put  forward  as  their  champions,  when 
Lucullus  refused  to  head  them.  For  his  friends’ 
sake  he  came  into  the  Forum  and  into  the  sen¬ 
ate,  when  occasion  offered  to  humble  the  ambi¬ 
tion  and  pride  of  Pompey,  whose  settlement, 
after  his  conquests  over  the  kings,  he  got  can¬ 
celled,  and,  by  the  assistance  of  Cato,  hindered 
a  division  of  lands  to  his  soldiers,  which  he 
proposed. 

So  Pompey  went  over  to  Crassus  and  Caesar’s 
alliance,  or  rather  conspiracy,  and  filling  the 
city  with  armed  men,  procured  the  ratification 
of  his  decrees  by  force,  and  drove  Cato  and 
Lucullus  out  of  the  Forum.  Which  being  re¬ 
sented  by  the  nobility,  Pompey’s  party  pro¬ 
duced  one  Vettius,  pretending  they  apprehend¬ 
ed  him  in  a  design  against  Pompey’s  life.  Vet¬ 
tius  in  the  senate-house  accused  others,  but  be¬ 
fore  the  people  named  Lucullus,  as  if  he  had 


421 


CIMON  AND  LUCULLUS 

been  suborned  by  him  to  kill  Pompey.  Nobody 
gave  heed  to  what  he  said,  and  it  soon  ap¬ 
peared  that  they  had  put  him  forward  to  make 
false  charges  and  accusations. 

And  after  a  few  days  the  whole  intrigue  be¬ 
came  yet  more  obvious,  when  the  dead  body  of 
Vettius  was  thrown  out  of  prison,  he  being  re¬ 
ported,  indeed,  to  have  died  a  natural  death, 
but  carrying  marks  of  a  halter  and  blows  about 
him,  and  seeming  rather  to  have  been  taken 
off  by  those  who  suborned  him.  These  things 
kept  Lucullus  at  a  greater  distance  from  the 
republic. 

But  when  Cicero  was  banished  the  city,  and 
Cato  sent  to  Cyprus,  he  quitted  public  affairs 
altogether.  It  is  said,  too,  that  before  his  death 
his  intellects  failed  him  by  degrees.  But  Corne¬ 
lius  Nepos  denies  that  either  age  or  sickness 
impaired  his  mind,  which  was  rather  affected 
by  a  potion,  given  him  by  Callisthenes,  his 
freedman.  The  potion  was  meant  by  Callis¬ 


thenes  to  strengthen  his  affection  for  him,  and 
was  supposed  to  have  that  tendency,  but  it 
stood  quite  otherwise,  and  so  disabled  and  un¬ 
settled  his  mind,  that  while  he  was  yet  alive, 
his  brother  took  charge  of  his  affairs. 

At  his  death,  as  though  it  had  been  the  death 
of  one  taken  off  in  the  very  height  of  military 
and  civil  glory,  the  people  were  much  con¬ 
cerned,  and  flocked  together,  and  would  have 
forcibly  taken  his  corpse,  as  it  was  carried  into 
the  market-place  by  young  men  of  the  highest 
rank,  and  have  buried  it  in  the  field  of  Mars, 
where  they  buried  Sulla.  Which  being  alto¬ 
gether  unexpected,  and  necessaries  not  easily 
to  be  procured  on  a  sudden,  his  brother,  after 
much  entreaty  and  solicitation,  prevailed  upon 
them  to  suffer  him  to  be  buried  on  his  Tuscu- 
lan  estate  as  had  been  appointed.  He  himself 
survived  him  but  a  short  time,  coming  not  far 
behind  in  death,  as  he  did  in  age  and  renown, 
in  all  respects,  a  most  loving  brother. 


CIMON  and  LUCULLUS 
Compared 


One  might  bless  the  end  of  Lucullus,  which 
was  so  timid  as  to  let  him  die  before  the 
great  revolution,  which  fate,  by  intestine  wars, 
was  already  effecting  against  the  established 
government,  and  to  close  his  life  in  a  free 
though  troubled  commonwealth.  And  in  this, 
above  all  other  things,  Cimon  and  he  are  alike. 
For  he  died  also  when  Greece  was  as  yet  un¬ 
disordered,  in  its  highest  felicity;  though  in  the 
field  at  the  head  of  his  army,  not  recalled,  nor 
out  of  his  mind,  nor  sullying  the  glory  of  his 
wars,  engagements,  and  conquests,  by  making 
feastings  and  debauches  seem  the  apparent  end 
and  aim  of  them  all;  as  Plato  says  scornfully  of 
Orpheus,  that  he  makes  an  eternal  debauch 
hereafter  the  reward  of  those  who  lived  well 
here. 

Indeed,  ease  and  quiet,  and  the  study  of 
pleasant  and  speculative  learning,  to  an  old 
man  retiring  from  command  and  office,  is  a 
most  suitable  and  becoming  solace;  but  to  mis¬ 
guide  virtuous  actions  to  pleasure  as  their  ut¬ 
most  end,  and  as  the  conclusion  of  campaigns 
and  commands,  to  keep  the  feast  of  Venus,  did 
not  become  the  noble  Academy,  and  the  fol¬ 
lower  of  Xenocrates,  but  rather  one  that  in¬ 
clined  to  Epicurus.  And  this  is  one  surprising 
point  of  contrast  between  them;  Cimon’s  youth 
was  ill  reputed  and  intemperate,  Lucullus’s 
well  disciplined  and  sober.  Undoubtedly  we 


must  give  the  preference  to  the  change  for 
good,  for  it  argues  the  better  nature,  where 
vice  declines  and  virtue  grows. 

Both  had  great  wealth,  but  employed  it  in 
different  ways;  and  there  is  no  comparison  be¬ 
tween  the  south  wall  of  the  Acropolis  built  by 
Cimon,  and  the  chambers  and  galleries,  with 
their  sea-views,  built  at  Naples  by  Lucullus, 
out  of  the  spoils  of  the  barbarians.  Neither  can 
we  compare  Cimon’s  popular  and  liberal  table 
with  the  sumptuous  oriental  one  of  Lucullus, 
the  former  receiving  a  great  many  guests  every 
day  at  small  cost,  the  latter  expensively  spread 
for  a  few  men  of  pleasure,  unless  you  will  say 
that  different  times  made  the  alteration.  For 
who  can  tell  but  that  Cimon,  if  he  had  retired 
in  his  old  age  from  business  and  war  to  quiet 
and  solitude,  might  have  lived  a  more  luxuri¬ 
ous  and  self-indulgent  life,  as  he  was  fond  of 
wine  and  company,  and  accused,  as  has  been 
said,  of  laxity  with  women?  The  better  pleas¬ 
ures  gained  in  successful  action  and  effort 
leave  the  baser  appetites  no  time  or  place,  and 
make  active  and  heroic  men  forget  them.  Had 
but  Lucullus  ended  his  days  in  the  field,  and  in 
command,  envy  and  detraction  itself  could 
never  have  accused  him.  So  much  for  their 
manner  of  life. 

In  war,  it  is  plain  they  were  both  soldiers  of 
excellent  conduct,  both  at  land  and  sea.  But  as 


422 

in  the  games  they  honour  those  champions 
who  on  the  same  day  gain  the  garland,  both  in 
wrestling  and  in  the  pancratium,  with  the 
name  of  “victors  and  more,”  so  Cimon,  hon¬ 
ouring  Greece  with  a  sea  and  land  victory  on 
the  same  day,  may  claim  a  certain  pre-emi¬ 
nence  among  commanders. 

Lucullus  received  command  from  his  coun¬ 
try,  whereas  Cimon  brought  it  to  his. 

He  annexed  the  territories  of  enemies  to  her, 
who  ruled  over  confederates  before,  but  Ci¬ 
mon  made  his  country,  which  when  he  began 
was  a  mere  follower  of  others,  both  rule  over 
confederates,  and  conquer  enemies  too,  forcing 
the  Persians  to  relinquish  the  sea,  and  induc¬ 
ing  the  Lacedaemonians  to  surrender  their 
command. 

If  it  be  the  chiefest  thing  in  a  general  to  ob¬ 
tain  the  obedience  of  his  soldiers  by  good-will, 
Lucullus  was  despised  by  his  own  army,  but 
Cimon  highly  prized  even  by  others.  His  sol¬ 
diers  deserted  the  one,  the  confederates  came 
over  to  the  other.  Lucullus  came  home  without 
the  forces  which  he  led  out;  Cimon,  sent  out  at 
first  to  serve  as  one  confederate  among  others, 
returned  home  with  authority  even  over  these 
also,  having  successfully  effected  for  his  city 
three  most  difficult  services,  establishing  peace 
with  the  enemy,  dominion  over  confederates, 
and  concord  with  Lacedaemon.  Both  aiming  to 
destroy  great  kingdoms,  and  subdue  all  Asia, 
failed  in  their  enterprise,  Cimon  by  a  simple 
piece  of  ill-fortune,  for  he  died  when  general, 
in  the  height  of  success;  but  Lucullus  no  man 
can  wholly  acquit  of  being  in  fault  with  his 
soldiers,  whether  it  were  he  did  not  know,  or 
would  not  comply  with,  the  distastes  and  com¬ 
plaints  of  his  army,  which  brought  him  at  last 
into  such  extreme  unpopularity  among  them. 
But  did  not  Cimon  also  suffer  like  him  in  this? 
For  the  citizens  arraigned  him,  and  did  not 
leave  off  till  they  had  banished  him,  that,  as 
Plato  says,  they  might  not  hear  him  for  the 
space  of  ten  years.  For  high  and  noble  minds 
seldom  please  the  vulgar,  or  are  acceptable  to 
them;  for  the  force  they  use  to  straighten  their 
distorted  actions  gives  the  same  pain  as  sur¬ 
geons’  bandages  do  in  bringing  dislocated 
bones  to  their  natural  position.  Both  of  them, 
perhaps,  come  off  pretty  much  with  an  equal 
acquittal  on  this  count. 

Lucullus  very  much  outwent  him  in  war,  be¬ 
ing  the  first  Roman  who  carried  an  army  over 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Taurus,  passed  the  Tigris,  took  and  burned 
the  royal  palaces  of  Asia  in  the  sight  of  the 
kings,  Tigranocerta,  Cabira,  Sinope,  and  Nisi- 
bis,  seizing  and  overwhelming  the  northern 
parts  as  far  as  the  Phasis,  the  east  as  far  as 
Media,  and  making  the  South  and  Red  Sea  his 
own  through  the  kings  of  the  Arabians.  He 
shattered  the  power  of  the  kings,  and  narrowly 
missed  their  persons,  while  like  wild  beasts 
they  fled  away  into  deserts  and  thick  and  im¬ 
passable  woods. 

In  demonstration  of  this  superiority,  we  see 
that  the  Persians,  as  if  no  great  harm  had  be¬ 
fallen  them  under  Cimon,  soon  after  appeared 
in  arms  against  the  Greeks,  and  overcame  and 
destroyed  their  numerous  forces  in  Egypt.  But 
after  Lucullus,  Tigranes  and  Mithridates  were 
able  to  do  nothing;  the  latter,  being  disabled 
and  broken  in  the  former  wars,  never  dared 
to  show  his  army  to  Pompey  outside  the  camp, 
but  fled  away  to  Bosporus,  and  there  died. 
Tigranes  threw  himself,  naked  and  unarmed, 
down  before  Pompey,  and  taking  his  crown 
from  his  head  laid  it  at  his  feet,  compliment¬ 
ing  Pompey  with  what  was  not  his  own,  but, 
in  real  truth,  the  conquest  already  effected  by 
Lucullus.  And  when  he  received  the  ensigns  of 
majesty  again,  he  was  well  pleased,  evidently 
because  he  had  forfeited  them  before.  And  the 
commander,  as  the  wrestler,  is  to  be  accounted 
to  have  done  most  who  leaves  an  adversary  al¬ 
most  conquered  for  his  successor. 

Cimon,  moreover,  when  he  took  the  com¬ 
mand,  found  the  power  of  the  king  broken, 
and  the  spirits  of  the  Persians  humbled  by 
their  great  defeats  and  incessant  routs  under 
Themistocles,  Pausanias,  and  Leontychides, 
and  thus  easily  overcame  the  bodies  of  men 
whose  souls  were  quelled  and  defeated  before¬ 
hand.  But  Tigranes  had  never  yet  in  many 
combats  been  beaten,  and  was  flushed  with 
success  when  he  engaged  with  Lucullus.  There 
is  no  comparison  between  the  numbers  which 
came  against  Lucullus  and  those  subdued  by 
Cimon. 

All  which  things  being  rightly  considered, 
it  is  a  hard  matter  to  give  judgment.  For  super¬ 
natural  favour  also  appears  to  have  attended 
both  of  them,  directing  the  one  what  to  do,  the 
other  what  to  avoid,  and  thus  they  have,  both 
of  them,  so  to  say,  the  vote  of  the  gods,  to  de¬ 
clare  them  noble  and  divine  characters. 

V  V 


NICIAS 

D.  413  B.C. 


Crassus,  in  my  opinion,  may  most  prop¬ 
erly  be  set  against  Nicias,  and  the  Par¬ 
thian  disaster  compared  with  that  in 
Sicily.  But  here  it  will  be  well  for  me  to  en¬ 
treat  the  reader,  in  all  courtesy,  not  to  think 
that  I  contend  with  Thucydides  in  matters  so 
pathetically,  vividly,  and  eloquently,  beyond 
all  imitation,  and  even  beyond  himself,  ex¬ 
pressed  by  him;  nor  to  believe  me  guilty  of  the 
like  folly  with  Timaeus,  who,  hoping  in  his  his¬ 
tory  to  surpass  Thucydides  in  art,  and  to  make 
Philistus  appear  a  trifler  and  a  novice,  pushes 
on  in  his  descriptions,  through  all  the  battles, 
sea-fights,  and  public  speeches,  in  recording 
which  they  have  been  most  successful,  without 
meriting  so  much  as  to  be  compared,  in  Pin¬ 
dar’s  phrase,  to — 

One  that  on  his  feet 
Would  with  the  Lydian  cars  compete. 

He  simply  shows  himself  all  along  a  half- 
lettered,  childish  writer;  in  the  words  of  Di- 
philus — 

-  of  wit  obese, 

Oyerlarded  with  Sicilian  grease. 

Often  he  sinks  to  the  very  level  of  Xenarchus, 
telling  us  that  he  thinks  it  ominous  to  the  Athe¬ 
nians  that  their  general,  who  had  victory  in 
his  name,  was  unwilling  to  take  command  in 
the  expedition;  and  that  the  defacing  of  the 
Hermae  was  a  divine  intimation  that  they 
should  suffer  much  in  the  war  by  Hermocrates, 
the  son  of  Hermon;  and,  moreover,  how  it  was 
likely  that  Hercules  should  aid  the  Syracusans 
for  the  sake  of  Proserpine,  by  whose  means  he 
took  Cerberus,  and  should  be  angry  with  the 
Athenians  for  protecting  the  Egesteans,  de¬ 
scended  from  Trojan  ancestors,  whose  city  he, 
for  an  injury  of  their  king  Laomedon,  had 
overthrown.  However,  all  these  may  be  merely 
other  instances  of  the  same  happy  taste  that 
makes  him  correct  the  diction  of  Philistus,  and 
abuse  Plato  and  Aristotle. 

This  sort  of  contention  and  rivalry  with 
others  in  matter  of  style,  to  my  mind,  in  any 
case,  seems  petty  and  pedantic,  but  when  its 
objects  are  works  of  inimitable  excellence,  it  is 


absolutely  senseless.  Such  actions  in  Nicias’s 
life  as  Thucydides  and  Philistus  have  related, 
since  they  cannot  be  passed  by,  illustrating  as 
they  do  most  especially  his  character  and  tem¬ 
per,  under  his  many  and  great  troubles,  that  I 
may  not  seem  altogether  negligent,  I  shall 
briefly  run  over.  And  such  things  as  are  not 
commonly  known,  and  lie  scattered  here  and 
there  in  other  men’s  writings,  or  are  found 
amongst  the  old  monuments  and  archives,  I 
shall  endeavour  to  bring  together;  not  collect¬ 
ing  mere  useless  pieces  of  learning,  but  adduc¬ 
ing  what  may  make  his  disposition  and  habit 
of  mind  understood. 

First  of  all,  I  would  mention  what  Aristotle 
has  said  of  Nicias,  that  there  had  been  three 
good  citizens  eminent  above  the  rest  for  their 
hereditary  affection  and  love  to  the  people,  Ni¬ 
cias,  the  son  of  Niceratus,  Thucydides,  the  son 
of  Melesias,  and  Theramenes,  the  son  of  Hag- 
non,  but  the  last  less  than  the  others;  for  he 
had  his  dubious  extraction  cast  in  his  teeth,  as 
a  foreigner  from  Ceos,  and  his  inconstancy, 
which  made  him  side  sometimes  with  one 
party,  sometimes  with  another,  in  public  life, 
and  which  obtained  him  the  nickname  of  the 
Buskin. 

Thucydides  came  earlier,  and,  on  the  behalf 
of  the  nobility,  was  a  great  opponent  of  the 
measures  by  which  Pericles  courted  the  favour 
of  the  people. 

Nicias  was  a  younger  man,  yet  was  in  some 
reputation  even  whilst  Pericles  lived;  so  much 
so  as  to  have  been  his  colleague  in  the  office  of 
general,  and  to  have  held  command  by  himself 
more  than  once.  But  on  the  death  of  Pericles, 
he  presently  rose  to  the  highest  place,  chiefly 
by  the  favour  of  the  rich  and  eminent  citizens, 
who  set  him  up  for  their  bulwark  against  the 
presumption  and  insolence  of  Cleon;  neverthe¬ 
less,  he  did  not  forfeit  the  good-will  of  the 
commonalty,  who,  likewise,  contributed  to  his 
advancement.  For  though  Cleon  got  great  in¬ 
fluence  by  his  exertions — 

- to  please 

The  old  men,  who  trusted  him  to  find  them  fees, 
yet  even  those,  for  whose  interest  and  to  gain 


423 


424 

whose  favour  he  acted,  nevertheless  observing 
the  avarice,  the  arrogance,  and  the  presump¬ 
tion  of  the  man,  many  of  them  supported  Ni- 
cias. 

For  his  was  not  that  sort  of  gravity  which 
is  harsh  and  offensive,  but  he  tempered  it  with 
a  certain  caution  and  deference,  winning  upon 
the  people,  by  seeming  afraid  of  them.  And  be¬ 
ing  naturally  diffident  and  unhopeful  in  war, 
his  good  fortune  supplied  his  want  of  courage, 
and  kept  it  from  being  detected,  as  in  all  his 
commands  he  was  constantly  successful.  And 
his  timorousness  in  civil  life,  and  his  extreme 
dread  of  accusers,  was  thought  very  suitable  in 
a  citizen  of  a  free  state;  and  from  the  people’s 
good-will  towards  him,  got  him  no  small  pow¬ 
er  over  them,  they  being  fearful  of  all  that  de¬ 
spised  them,  but  willing  to  promote  one  who 
seemed  to  be  afraid  of  them;  the  greatest  com¬ 
pliment  their  betters  could  pay  them  being  not 
to  contemn  them. 

Pericles,  who  by  solid  virtue  and  the  pure 
force  of  argument  ruled  the  commonwealth, 
had  stood  in  need  of  no  disguises  nor  persua¬ 
sions  with  the  people.  Nicias,  inferior  in  these 
respects,  used  his  riches,  of  which  he  had  abun¬ 
dance,  to  gain  popularity.  Neither  had  he  the 
nimble  wit  of  Cleon  to  win  the  Athenians  to 
his  purposes  by  amusing  them  with  bold  jests; 
unprovided  with  such  qualities,  he  courted 
them  with  dramatic  exhibitions,  gymnastic 
games,  and  other  public  shows,  more  sumptu¬ 
ous  and  more  splendid  than  had  been  ever 
known  in  his  or  in  former  ages. 

Amongst  his  religious  offerings,  there  was 
extant,  even  in  our  days,  the  small  figure  of 
Minerva  in  the  citadel,  having  lost  the  gold 
that  covered  it;  and  a  shrine  in  the  temple  of 
Bacchus,  under  the  tripods,  that  were  presented 
by  those  who  won  the  prize  in  the  shows  or 
plays.  For  at  these  he  had  often  carried  off  the 
prize,  and  never  once  failed. 

We  are  told  that  on  one  of  these  occasions,  a 
slave  of  his  appeared  in  the  character  of  Bac¬ 
chus,  of  a  beautiful  person  and  noble  stature, 
and  with  as  yet  no  beard  upon  his  chin;  and 
on  the  Athenians  being  pleased  with  the  sight, 
and  applauding  a  long  time,  Nicias  stood  up, 
and  said  he  could  not  in  piety  keep  as  a  slave 
one  whose  person  had  been  consecrated  to  rep¬ 
resent  a  god.  And  forthwith  he  set  the  young 
man  free. 

His  performances  at  Delos  are,  also,  on  rec¬ 
ord,  as  noble  and  magnificent  works  of  devo¬ 
tion.  For  whereas  the  choruses  which  the  cities 
sent  to  sing  hymns  to  the  god  were  wont  to 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

arrive  in  no  order,  as  it  might  happen,  and, 
being  there  met  by  a  crowd  of  people  crying 
out  to  them  to  sing,  in  their  hurry  to  begin, 
used  to  disembark  confusedly,  putting  on  their 
garlands,  and  changing  their  dresses  as  they 
left  the  ships,  he,  when  he  had  to  convoy  the 
sacred  company,  disembarked  the  chorus  at 
Rhenea,  together  with  the  sacrifice,  and  other 
holy  appurtenances.  And  having  brought  along 
with  him  from  Athens  a  bridge  fitted  by  meas¬ 
urement  for  the  purpose,  and  magnificently 
adorned  with  gilding  and  colouring,  and  with 
garlands  and  tapestries,  this  he  laid  in  the 
night  over  the  channel  betwixt  Rhenea  and 
Delos,  being  no  great  distance. 

And  at  break  of  day  he  marched  forth  with 
all  the  procession  to  the  god,  and  led  the  cho¬ 
rus,  sumptuously  ornamented,  and  singing 
their  hymns,  along  over  the  bridge.  The  sacri¬ 
fices,  the  games,  and  the  feast  being  over,  he 
set  up  a  palm-tree  of  brass  for  a  present  to  the 
god,  and  bought  a  parcel  of  land  with  ten  thou¬ 
sand  drachmas  which  he  consecrated;  with  the 
revenue  the  inhabitants  of  Delos  were  to  sacri¬ 
fice  and  to  feast,  and  to  pray  the  gods  for  many 
good  things  to  Nicias.  This  he  engraved  on  a 
pillar,  which  he  left  in  Delos  to  be  a  record  of 
his  bequest.  This  same  palm-tree,  afterwards 
broken  down  by  the  wind,  fell  on  the  great 
statue  which  the  men  of  Naxos  presented,  and 
struck  it  to  the  ground. 

It  is  plain  that  much  of  this  might  be  vain¬ 
glory,  and  the  mere  desire  of  popularity  and 
applause;  yet  from  other  qualities  and  car¬ 
riages  of  the  man  one  might  believe  all  this 
cost  and  public  display  to  be  the  effect  of  devo¬ 
tion.  For  he  was  one  of  those  who  dreaded  the 
divine  powers  extremely,  and,  as  Thucydides 
tells  us,  was  much  given  to  arts  of  divination. 
In  one  of  Pasiphon’s  dialogues,  it  is  stated  that 
he  daily  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  and  keeping  a 
diviner  at  his  house,  professed  to  be  consulting 
always  about  the  commonwealth,  but  for  the 
most  part  inquired  about  his  own  private  af¬ 
fairs,  more  especially  concerning  his  silver 
mines;  for  he  owned  many  works  at  Laurium, 
of  great  value,  but  somewhat  hazardous  to  car¬ 
ry  on.  He  maintained  there  a  multitude  of 
slaves,  and  his  wealth  consisted  chiefly  in  silver. 
Hence  he  had  many  hangers-on  about  him, 
begging  and  obtaining.  For  he  gave  to  those 
who  could  do  him  mischief  no  less  than  to 
those  who  deserved  well.  In  short,  his  timidity 
was  a  revenue  to  rogues,  and  his  humanity  to 
honest  men. 

We  find  testimony  in  the  comic  writers,  as 


NICIAS 

when  Teleclides,  speaking  of  one  of  the  pro¬ 
fessed  informers,  says: — 

Charicles  gave  the  man  a  pound,  the  matter 
not  to  name, 

That  from  inside  a  money-hag  into  the 
world  he  came ; 

And  Nicias,  also,  paid  him  four;  1  know 
the  reason  well , 

But  Nicias  is  a  worthy  man,  and  so  l  will 
not  tell. 

So,  also,  the  informer  whom  Eupolis  intro¬ 
duces  in  his  Maricas ,  attacking  a  good,  simple, 
poor  man: — 

How  long  ago  did  you  and  Nicias  meet ? 

I  did  but  see  him  just  now  in  the  street. 

The  man  has  seen  him  and  denies  it  not, 

7Tis  evident  that  they  are  in  a  plot . 

See  you,  0  citizens!  7 tis  fact, 

Nicias  is  ta\en  in  the  act. 

Taken,  Fools !  ta\e  so  good  a  man 
In  aught  that7s  wrong  none  will  or  can. 

Cleon,  in  Aristophanes,  makes  it  one  of  his 
threats: — 

Til  outscream  all  the  speakers,  and  make  Nicias 
stand  aghast. 

Phrynichus  also  implies  his  want  of  spirit 
and  his  easiness  to  be  intimidated  in  the 
verses — 

A  noble  man  he  was,  I  well  can  say, 

Nor  walked  likje  Nicias,  cowering  on  his  way. 

So  cautious  was  he  of  informers,  and  so  re¬ 
served,  that  he  never  would  dine  out  with  any 
citizen,  nor  allow  himself  to  indulge  in  talk 
and  conversation  with  his  friends,  nor  give 
himself  any  leisure  for  such  amusements;  but 
when  he  was  general  he  used  to  stay  at  the 
office  till  night,  and  was  the  first  that  came  to 
the  council-house,  and  the  last  that  left  it.  And 
if  no  public  business  engaged  him,  it  was  very 
hard  to  have  access,  or  to  speak  with  him,  he 
being  retired  at  home  and  locked  up.  And 
when  any  came  to  the  door,  some  friend  of  his 
gave  them  good  words,  and  begged  them  to 
excuse  him,  Nicias  was  very  busy;  as  if  affairs 
of  state  and  public  duties  still  kept  him  occu¬ 
pied. 

He  who  principally  acted  this  part  for  him, 
and  contributed  most  to  this  state  and  show, 
was  Hiero,  a  man  educated  in  Nicias’s  family, 
and  instructed  by  him  in  letters  and  music.  He 
professed  to  be  the  son  of  Dionysius,  surnamed 
Chalcus,  whose  poems  are  yet  extant,  and  had 
led  out  the  colony  to  Italy  and  founded  Thurii. 


425 

This  Hiero  transacted  all  his  secrets  for  Nicias 
with  the  diviners;  and  gave  out  to  the  people 
what  a  toilsome  and  miserable  life  he  led  for 
the  sake  of  the  commonwealth. 

“He,”  said  Hiero,  “can  never  be  either  at 
the  bath  or  at  his  meat  but  some  public  busi¬ 
ness  interferes.  Careless  of  his  own  and  zealous 
for  the  public  good,  he  scarcely  ever  goes  to 
bed  till  after  others  have  had  their  first  sleep. 
So  that  his  health  is  impaired  and  his  body  out 
of  order,  nor  is  he  cheerful  or  affable  with  his 
friends,  but  loses  them  as  well  as  his  money  in 
the  service  of  the  state,  while  other  men  gain 
friends  by  public  speaking,  enrich  themselves, 
fare  delicately  and  make  government  their 
amusement.”  And  in  fact  this  was  Nicias’s 
manner  of  life,  so  that  he  well  might  apply  to 
himself  the  words  of  Agamemnon: — 

Vain  pomp7  s  the  ruler  of  the  life  we  live, 

And  a  slave7 s  service  to  the  crowd  we  give. 

He  observed  that  the  people,  in  the  case  of 
men  of  eloquence,  or  of  eminent  parts,  make 
use  of  their  talents  upon  occasion,  but  were 
always  jealous  of  their  abilities,  and  held  a 
watchful  eye  upon  them,  taking  all  opportuni¬ 
ties  to  humble  their  pride  and  abate  their  repu¬ 
tation;  as  was  manifest  in  their  condemnation 
of  Pericles,  their  banishment  of  Damon,  their 
distrust  of  Antiphon  the  Rhamnusian,  but  es¬ 
pecially  in  the  case  of  Paches  who  took  Lesbos, 
who,  having  to  give  an  account  of  his  conduct, 
in  the  very  court  of  justice  unsheathed  his 
sword  and  slew  himself.  Upon  such  considera¬ 
tions,  Nicias  declined  all  difficult  and  lengthy 
enterprises;  if  he  took  a  command,  he  was  for 
doing  what  was  safe;  and  if,  as  thus  was  likely, 
he  had  for  the  most  part  success,  he  did  not 
attribute  it  to  any  wisdom,  conduct,  or  courage 
of  his  own,  but,  to  avoid  envy,  he  thanked  for¬ 
tune  for  all,  and  gave  the  glory  to  the  divine 
powers. 

And  the  actions  themselves  bore  testimony 
in  his  favour;  the  city  met  at  that  time  with 
several  considerable  reverses,  but  he  had  not 
a  hand  in  any  of  them.  The  Athenians  were 
routed  in  Thrace  by  the  Chalcidians,  Calliades 
and  Xenophon  commanding  in  chief.  Demos¬ 
thenes  was  the  general  when  they  were  un¬ 
fortunate  in  iEtolia.  At  Delium  they  lost  a 
thousand  citizens  under  the  conduct  of  Hippo¬ 
crates;  the  plague  was  principally  laid  to  the 
charge  of  Pericles,  he,  to  carry  on  the  war, 
having  shut  up  close  together  in  the  town  the 
crowd  of  people  from  the  country  who,  by  the 
change  of  place,  and  of  their  usual  course  of 
living,  bred  the  pestilence. 


426 

Nicias  stood  clear  of  all  this;  under  his  con¬ 
duct  was  taken  Cythera,  an  island  most  com¬ 
modious  against  Laconia,  and  occupied  by  the 
Lacedaemonian  settlers;  many  places,  likewise, 
in  Thrace,  which  had  revolted,  were  taken  or 
won  over  by  him;  he  shutting  up  the  Megari- 
ans  within  their  town,  seized  upon  the  isle  of 
Minoa;  and  soon  after,  advancing  from  thence 
to  Nisaea,  made  himself  master  there,  and  then 
making  a  descent  upon  the  Corinthian  terri¬ 
tory,  fought  a  successful  battle,  and  slew  a  great 
number  of  the  Corinthians  with  their  captain, 
Lycophron. 

There  it  happened  that  two  of  his  men  were 
left  by  an  oversight,  when  they  carried  off  the 
dead,  which  when  he  understood,  he  stopped 
the  fleet,  and  sent  a  herald  to  the  enemy  for 
leave  to  carry  off  the  dead;  though  by  law  and 
custom,  he  that  by  a  truce  craved  leave  to  carry 
off  the  dead  was  hereby  supposed  to  give  up  all 
claim  to  the  victory.  Nor  was  it  lawful  for  him 
that  did  this  to  erect  a  trophy,  for  his  is  the  vic¬ 
tory  who  is  master  of  the  field,  and  he  is  not 
master  who  asks  leave,  as  wanting  power  to 
take.  But  he  chose  rather  to  renounce  his  vic¬ 
tory  and  his  glory  than  to  let  two  citizens  lie 
unburied. 

He  scoured  the  coast  of  Laconia  all  along, 
and  beat  the  Lacedaemonians  that  made  head 
against  him.  He  took  Thyrea,  occupied  by  the 
iTginetans,  and  carried  the  prisoners  to  Athens. 

When  Demosthenes  had  fortified  Pylos,  and 
the  Peloponnesians  brought  together  both  their 
sea  and  land  forces  before  it,  after  the  fight, 
about  the  number  of  four  hundred  native  Spar¬ 
tans  were  left  ashore  in  the  isle,  Sphacteria. 
The  Athenians  thought  it  a  great  prize,  as  in¬ 
deed  it  was,  to  take  these  men  prisoners.  But 
the  siege,  in  places  that  wanted  water,  being 
very  difficult  and  untoward,  and  to  convey  nec¬ 
essaries  about  by  sea  in  summer  tedious  and  ex¬ 
pensive,  in  winter  doubtful,  or  plainly  impos¬ 
sible,  they  began  to  be  annoyed,  and  to  repent 
their  having  rejected  the  embassy  of  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians,  that  had  been  sent  to  propose  a 
treaty  of  peace,  which  had  been  done  at  the  im¬ 
portunity  of  Cleon,  who  opposed  it  chiefly  out 
of  a  pique  to  Nicias;  for,  being  his  enemy,  and 
observing  him  to  be  extremely  solicitous  to 
support  the  offers  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  he 
persuaded  the  people  to  refuse  them. 

Now,  therefore,  that  the  siege  was  protracted, 
and  they  heard  of  the  difficulties  that  pressed 
their  army,  they  grew  enraged  against  Cleon. 
But  he  turned  all  the  blame  upon  Nicias, 
charging  it  on  his  softness  and  cowardice,  that 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

the  besieged  were  not  yet  taken.  “Were  I  gen¬ 
eral,”  said  he,  “they  should  not  hold  out  so 
long.”  The  Athenians  not  unnaturally  asked 
the  question,  “Why,  then,  as  it  is,  do  not  you 
go  with  a  squadron  against  them  ?”  And  Nicias 
standing  up  resigned  his  command  at  Pylos  to 
him,  and  bade  him  take  what  forces  he  pleased 
along  with  him,  and  not  be  bold  in  words,  out 
of  harm's  way,  but  go  forth  and  perform  some 
real  service  for  the  commonwealth. 

Cleon,  at  the  first,  tired  to  draw  back,  dis¬ 
concerted  at  the  proposal,  which  he  had  never 
expected;  but  the  Athenians  insisting,  and  Ni¬ 
cias  loudly  upbraiding  him,  he  thus  provoked, 
and  fired  with  ambition,  took  upon  him  the 
charge,  and  said  further,  that  within  twenty 
days  after  he  embarked,  he  would  either  kill 
the  enemy  upon  the  place,  or  bring  them  alive 
to  Athens.  This  the  Athenians  were  readier  to 
laugh  at  than  to  believe,  as  on  other  occasions, 
also,  his  bold  assertions  and  extravagances  used 
to  make  them  sport,  and  were  pleasant  enough. 

As,  for  instance,  it  is  reported  that  once  when 
the  people  were  assembled,  and  had  waited  his 
coming  a  long  time,  at  last  he  appeared  with  a 
garland  on  his  head,  and  prayed  them  to  ad¬ 
journ  to  the  next  day.  “For,”  said  he,  “I  am 
not  at  leisure  to-day;  I  have  sacrificed  to  the 
gods,  and  am  to  entertain  some  strangers.” 
Whereupon  the  Athenians,  laughing,  rose  up, 
and  dissolved  the  assembly. 

However,  at  this  time  he  had  good  fortune, 
and  in  conjunction  with  Demosthenes,  con¬ 
ducted  the  enterprise  so  well  that,  within  the 
time  he  had  limited,  he  carried  captive  to 
Athens  all  the  Spartans  that  had  not  fallen  in 
battle. 

This  brought  great  disgrace  on  Nicias;  for 
this  was  not  to  throw  away  his  shield,  but 
something  yet  more  shameful  and  ignomini¬ 
ous,  to  quit  his  charge  voluntarily  out  of  cow¬ 
ardice,  and  voting  himself,  as  it  were,  out  of 
his  command  of  his  own  accord,  to  put  into 
his  enemy's  hand  the  opportunity  of  achieving 
60  brave  an  action.  Aristophanes  has  a  jest 
against  him  on  this  occasion  in  The  Birds: — 

Indeed,  not  now  the  word  that  must  be  said 
Is,  do  like  Nicias,  or  retire  to  bed. 

And,  again,  in  his  Husbandmen : — 

I  wish  to  stay  at  home  and  farm. 

What  then ? 

Who  should  prevent  you ? 

You,  my  countrymen; 

Whom  I  would  pay  a  thousand  drachmas  down, 

To  let  me  give  up  office  and  leave  town. 


NICIAS 

Enough ;  content;  the  sum  two  thousand  is, 

With  those  that  Nicias  paid  to  give  up  his. 

Besides  all  this,  he  did  great  mischief  to  the 
city  by  suffering  the  accession  of  so  much  repu¬ 
tation  and  power  to  Cleon,  who  now  assumed 
such  lofty  airs,  and  allowed  himself  in  such  in¬ 
tolerable  audacity,  as  led  to  many  unfortunate 
results,  a  sufficient  part  of  which  fell  to  his 
own  share.  Amongst  other  things,  he  destroy¬ 
ed  all  the  decorum  of  public  speaking;  he  was 
the  first  who  ever  broke  out  into  exclamations, 
flung  open  his  dress,  smote  his  thigh,  and  ran 
up  and  down  whilst  he  was  speaking,  things 
which  soon  after  introduced,  amongst  those 
who  managed  the  affairs  of  state,  such  licence 
and  contempt  of  decency  as  brought  all  into 
confusion. 

Already,  too,  Alcibiades  was  beginning  to 
show  his  strength  at  Athens,  a  popular  leader, 
not,  indeed,  as  utterly  violent  as  Cleon,  but  as 
the  land  of  Egypt,  through  the  richness  of  its 
soil,  is  said — 

- great  plenty  to  produce, 

Both  wholesome  herbs,  and  drugs  of  deadly  juice, 
so  the  nature  of  Alcibiades  was  strong  and  lux¬ 
uriant  in  both  kinds,  and  made  way  for  many 
serious  innovations. 

Thus  it  fell  out  that  after  Nicias  had  got  his 
hands  clear  of  Cleon,  he  had  not  opportunity 
to  settle  the  city  perfectly  into  quietness.  For 
having  brought  matters  to  a  pretty  hopeful 
condition,  he  found  everything  carried  away 
and  plunged  again  into  confusion  by  Alcibi¬ 
ades,  through  the  wildness  and  vehemence  of 
his  ambition,  and  all  embroiled  again  in  war 
worse  than  ever. 

Which  fell  out  thus.  The  persons  who  had 
principally  hindered  the  peace  were  Cleon  and 
Brasidas.  War  setting  off  the  virtue  of  the  one 
and  hiding  the  villainy  of  the  other,  gave  to 
the  one  occasions  of  achieving  brave  actions,  to 
the  other  opportunity  of  committing  equal  dis¬ 
honesties.  Now  when  these  two  were  in  one 
battle  both  slain  near  Amphipolis,  Nicias  was 
aware  that  the  Spartans  had  long  been  desir¬ 
ous  of  a  peace,  and  that  the  Athenians  had  no 
longer  the  same  confidence  in  the  war. 

Both  being  alike  tired,  and,  as  it  were  by 
consent,  letting  fall  their  hands,  he,  therefore, 
in  this  nick  of  time,  employed  his  efforts  to 
make  a  friendship  betwixt  the  two  cities,  and 
to  deliver  the  other  states  of  Greece  from  the 
evils  and  calamities  they  laboured  under,  and 
so  establish  his  own  good  name  for  success  as 
a  statesman  for  all  future  time.  He  found  the 
men  of  substance,  the  elder  men,  and  the  land- 


427 

owners  and  farmers  pretty  generally  all  in¬ 
clined  to  peace. 

And  when,  in  addition  to  these,  by  convers¬ 
ing  and  reasoning,  he  had  cooled  the  wishes  of 
a  good  many  others  for  war,  he  now  encour¬ 
aged  the  hopes  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  and 
counselled  them  to  seek  peace.  They  confided 
in  him,  as  on  account  of  his  general  character 
for  moderation  and  equity,  so,  also,  because  of 
the  kindness  and  care  he  had  shown  to  the 
prisoners  taken  at  Pylos  and  kept  in  confine¬ 
ment,  making  their  misfortune  the  more  easy 
to  them. 

The  Athenians  and  the  Spartans  had  before 
this  concluded  a  truce  for  a  year,  and  during 
this,  by  associating  with  one  another,  they  had 
tasted  again  the  sweets  of  peace  and  security 
and  unimpeded  intercourse  with  friends  and 
connections,  and  thus  longed  for  an  end  of  that 
fighting  and  bloodshed,  and  heard  with  de¬ 
light  the  chorus  sing  such  verses  as — 

- my  lance  77/  leave 

Laid  by,  for  spiders  to  o}erweave, 
and  remembered  with  joy  the  saying,  “In 
peace,  they  who  sleep  are  awaked  by  the  cock¬ 
crow,  not  by  the  trumpet/' 

So  shutting  their  ears,  with  loud  reproaches, 
to  the  forebodings  of  those  who  said  that  the 
Fates  decreed  this  to  be  a  war  of  thrice  nine 
years,  the  whole  question  having  been  debated, 
they  made  a  peace.  And  most  people  thought, 
now,  indeed,  they  had  got  an  end  of  all  their 
evils.  And  Nicias  was  in  every  man’s  mouth, 
as  one  especially  beloved  of  the  gods,  who,  for 
his  piety  and  devotion,  had  been  appointed  to 
give  a  name  to  the  fairest  and  greatest  of  all 
blessings.  For  in  fact  they  considered  the  peace 
Nicias’s  work,  as  the  war  the  work  of  Pericles; 
because  he,  on  light  occasions,  seemed  to  have 
plunged  the  Greeks  into  great  calamities,  while 
Nicias  had  induced  them  to  forget  all  the  evils 
they  had  done  each  other  and  to  be  friends 
again;  and  so  to  this  day  it  is  called  the  Peace 
of  Nicias. 

The  articles  were  that  the  garrisons  and 
towns  taken  on  either  side  and  the  prisoners 
should  be  restored,  and  they  to  restore  the  first 
to  whom  it  should  fall  by  lot.  Nicias,  as  Theo¬ 
phrastus  tells  us,  by  a  sum  of  money  procured 
that  the  lot  should  fall  for  the  Lacedaemonians 
to  deliver  the  first.  Afterwards,  when  the  Co¬ 
rinthians  and  the  Boeotians  showed  their  dis¬ 
like  of  what  was  done,  and  by  their  complaints 
and  accusations  were  well  nigh  bringing  the 
war  back  again,  Nicias  persuaded  the  Athe¬ 
nians  and  the  Lacedaemonians,  besides  the 


428 

peace,  to  make  a  treaty  of  alliance,  offensive 
and  defensive,  as  a  tie  and  confirmation  of  the 
peace,  which  would  make  them  more  terrible 
to  those  that  held  out,  and  the  firmer  to  each 
other. 

Whilst  these  matters  were  on  foot,  Alcibia- 
des,  who  was  no  lover  of  tranquillity,  and  who 
was  offended  with  the  Lacedaemonians  be¬ 
cause  of  their  applications  and  attentions  to 
Nicias,  while  they  overlooked  and  despised 
himself,  from  first  to  last,  indeed,  had  opposed 
the  peace,  though  all  in  vain,  but  now  finding 
that  the  Lacedaemonians  did  not  altogether 
continue  to  please  the  Athenians,  but  were 
thought  to  have  acted  unfairly  in  having  made 
a  league  with  the  Boeotians,  and  had  not  given 
up  Panactum,  as  they  should  have  done,  with 
its  fortifications  unrazed,  nor  yet  Amphipolis, 
he  laid  hold  on  these  occasions  for  his  purpose, 
and  availed  himself  of  every  one  of  them  to  ir¬ 
ritate  the  people.  And,  at  length,  sending  for 
ambassadors  from  the  Argives,  he  exerted 
himself  to  effect  a  confederacy  between  the 
Athenians  and  them. 

And  now,  when  Lacedaemonian  ambassa¬ 
dors  were  come  with  full  powers,  and  at  their 
preliminary  audience  by  the  council  seemed  to 
come  in  all  points  with  just  proposals,  he,  fear¬ 
ing  that  the  general  assembly,  also,  would  be 
won  over  to  their  offers,  overreached  them  with 
false  professions  and  oaths  of  assistance,  on  the 
condition  that  they  would  not  avow  that  they 
came  with  full  powers;  this,  he  said,  being  the 
only  way  for  them  to  attain  their  desires.  They 
being  overpersuaded  and  decoyed  from  Nicias 
to  follow  him,  he  introduced  them  to  the  as¬ 
sembly,  and  asked  them  presently  whether  or 
no  they  came  in  all  points  with  full  powers, 
which,  when  they  denied,  he,  contrary  to  their 
expectation,  changing  his  countenance,  called 
the  council  to  witness  their  words,  and  now 
bade  the  people  beware  how  they  trust  or 
transact  anything  with  such  manifest  liars, 
who  say  at  one  time  one  thing,  and  at  another 
the  very  opposite  upon  the  same  subject. 

These  plenipotentiaries  were,  as  well  they 
might  be,  confounded  at  this,  and  Nicias,  also 
being  at  a  loss  what  to  say,  and  struck  with 
amazement  and  wonder,  the  assembly  resolved 
to  send  immediately  for  the  Argives,  to  enter 
into  a  league  with  them.  An  earthquake, 
which  interrupted  the  assembly,  made  for 
Nicias’s  advantage;  and  the  next  day  the  peo¬ 
ple  being  again  assembled,  after  much  speak¬ 
ing  and  soliciting,  with  great  ado  he  brought 
it  about  that  the  treaty  with  the  Argives  should 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

be  deferred,  and  he  be  sent  to  the  Lacedaemo¬ 
nians,  in  full  expectation  that  so  all  would  go 
well. 

When  he  arrived  at  Sparta,  they  received 
him  there  as  a  good  man,  and  one  well  in¬ 
clined  towards  them;  yet  he  effected  nothing, 
but,  baffled  by  the  party  that  favoured  the 
Boeotians,  he  returned  home,  not  only  dishon¬ 
oured  and  hardly  spoken  of,  but  likewise  in 
fear  of  the  Athenians,  who  were  vexed  and 
enraged  that  through  his  persuasions  they  had 
released  so  many  and  such  considerable  per¬ 
sons,  their  prisoners,  for  the  men  who  had 
been  brought  from  Pylos  were  of  the  chiefest 
families  of  Sparta,  and  had  those  who  were 
highest  there  in  place  and  power  for  their 
friends  and  kindred.  Yet  did  they  not  in  their 
heat  proceed  against  him,  otherwise  than  that 
they  chose  Alcibiades  general,  and  took  the 
Mantineans  and  Eleans,  who  had  thrown  up 
their  alliance  with  the  Lacedaemonians,  into 
the  league,  together  with  the  Argives,  and  sent 
to  Pylos  freebooters  to  infest  Laconia,  whereby 
the  war  began  to  break  out  afresh. 

But  the  enmity  betwixt  Nicias  and  Alcibia¬ 
des  running  higher  and  higher,  and  the  time 
being  at  hand  for  decreeing  the  ostracism  or 
banishment,  for  ten  years,  which  the  people, 
putting  the  name  on  a  sherd,  were  wont  to  in¬ 
flict  at  certain  times  on  some  person  suspected 
or  regarded  with  jealousy  for  his  popularity  or 
wealth,  both  were  now  in  alarm  and  appre¬ 
hension,  one  of  them,  in  all  likelihood,  having 
to  undergo  this  ostracism;  as  the  people  abom¬ 
inated  the  life  of  Alcibiades,  and  stood  in  fear 
of  his  boldness  and  resolution,  as  is  shown  par¬ 
ticularly  in  the  history  of  him;  while  as  for 
Nicias,  his  riches  made  him  envied,  and  his 
habits  of  living,  in  particular  his  unsociable 
and  exclusive  ways,  not  like  those  of  a  fellow- 
citizen,  or  even  a  fellow-man,  went  against 
him,  and  having  many  times  opposed  their 
inclinations,  forcing  them  against  their  feel¬ 
ings  to  do  what  was  their  interest,  he  had  got 
himself  disliked. 

To  speak  plainly,  it  was  a  contest  of  the 
young  men  who  were  eager  for  war,  against 
the  men  of  years  and  lovers  of  peace,  they  turn¬ 
ing  the  ostracism  upon  the  one,  these  upon  the 
other.  But — 

In  civil  strife  eyen  villains  rise  to  fame. 

And  so  now  it  happened  that  the  city,  dis¬ 
tracted  into  two  factions,  allowed  free  course 
to  the  most  impudent  and  profligate  persons, 
among  whom  was  Hyperbolus  of  the  Pe- 
rithcedae,  one  who  could  not,  indeed,  be  said  to 


NICIAS 

be  presuming  upon  any  power,  but  rather  by 
his  presumption  arose  into  power,  and  by  the 
honour  he  found  in  the  city,  became  the  scan¬ 
dal  of  it.  He,  at  this,  time,  thought  himself  far 
enough  from  the  ostracism,  as  more  properly 
deserving  the  slave's  gallows,  and  made  ac¬ 
count,  that  one  of  these  men  being  despatched 
out  of  the  way  he  might  be  able  to  play  a  part 
against  the  other  that  should  be  left,  and  open¬ 
ly  showed  his  pleasure  at  the  dissension,  and 
his  desire  to  inflame  the  people  against  both  of 
them. 

Nicias  and  Alcibiades,  perceiving  his  mal¬ 
ice,  secretly  combined  together,  and  setting 
both  their  interests  jointly  at  work,  succeeded 
in  fixing  the  ostracism  not  on  either  of  them, 
but  even  on  Hyperbolus.  This,  indeed,  at  the 
first  made  sport,  and  raised  laughter  among 
the  people;  but  afterwards  it  was  felt  as  an  af¬ 
front,  that  the  thing  should  be  dishonoured  by 
being  employed  upon  so  unworthy  a  subject; 
punishment,  also,  having  its  proper  dignity, 
and  ostracism  being  one  that  was  appropriate 
rather  for  Thucydides,  Aristides,  and  such  like 
persons;  whereas  for  Hyperbolus  it  was  a 
glory,  and  a  fair  ground  for  boasting  on  his 
part,  when  for  his  villainy  he  suffered  the  same 
with  the  best  men.  As  Plato,  the  comic  poet, 
said  of  him: — 

The  man  deserved  the  fate,  deny  who  can; 

Yes,  hut  the  fate  did  not  deserve  the  man; 

Not  for  the  li\e  of  him  and  his  slave-brands, 

Did  Athens  put  the  sherd  into  our  hands. 

And,  in  fact,  none  ever  afterwards  suffered 
this  sort  of  punishment,  but  Hyperbolus  was 
the  last,  as  Hipparchus  the  Cholargian,  who 
was  kin  to  the  tyrant,  was  the  first. 

There  is  no  judgment  to  be  made  of  for¬ 
tune;  nor  can  any  reasoning  bring  us  to  a  cer¬ 
tainty  about  it.  If  Nicias  had  run  the  risk  with 
Alcibiades,  whether  of  the  two  should  under¬ 
go  the  ostracism,  he  had  either  prevailed,  and, 
his  rival  being  expelled  the  city,  he  had  re¬ 
mained  secure;  or,  being  overcome,  he  had 
avoided  the  utmost  disasters,  and  preserved 
the  reputation  of  a  most  excellent  commander. 
Meantime  I  am  not  ignorant  that  Theophras¬ 
tus  says,  that  when  Hyperbolus  was  banished, 
Phaeax,  not  Nicias,  contested  it  with  Alcibia¬ 
des;  but  most  authors  differ  from  him. 

It  was  Alcibiades,  at  any  rate,  whom,  when 
the  iTgestean  and  Leontine  ambassadors  ar¬ 
rived  and  urged  the  Athenians  to  make  an  ex¬ 
pedition  against  Sicily,  Nicias  opposed,  and  by 
whose  persuasions  and  ambition  he  found 
himself  overborne,  who,  even  before  the  peo- 


429 

pie  could  be  assembled,  had  preoccupied  and 
corrupted  their  judgment  with  hopes  and  with 
speeches;  insomuch  that  the  young  men  at 
their  sports,  and  the  old  men  in  their  work¬ 
shops,  and  sitting  together  on  the  benches, 
would  be  drawing  maps  of  Sicily,  and  making 
charts  showing  the  seas,  the  harbours,  and  gen¬ 
eral  character  of  the  coast  of  the  island  oppo¬ 
site  Africa.  For  they  made  not  Sicily  the  end  of 
the  war  but  rather  its  starting-point  and  head¬ 
quarters  from  whence  they  might  carry  it  to 
the  Carthaginians,  and  possess  themselves  of 
Africa,  and  of  the  seas  as  far  as  the  pillars  of 
Hercules. 

The  bulk  of  the  people,  therefore,  pressing 
this  way,  Nicias,  who  opposed  them,  found 
but  few  supporters,  nor  those  of  much  influ¬ 
ence;  for  the  men  of  substance,  fearing  lest 
they  should  seem  to  shun  the  public  charges 
and  ship-money,  were  quiet  against  their  in¬ 
clination;  nevertheless  he  did  not  tire  nor  give 
it  up,  but  even  after  the  Athenians  decreed  a 
war  and  chose  him  in  the  first  place  general, 
together  with  Alcibiades  and  Lamachus,  when 
they  were  again  assembled,  he  stood  up,  dis¬ 
suaded  them,  and  protested  against  the  deci¬ 
sion,  and  laid  the  blame  on  Alcibiades,  charg¬ 
ing  him  with  going  about  to  involve  the  city  in 
foreign  dangers  and  difficulties,  merely  with  a 
view  to  his  own  private  lucre  and  ambition. 

Yet  it  came  to  nothing.  Nicias,  because  of 
his  experience,  was  looked  upon  as  the  fitter 
for  the  employment,  and  his  wariness  with  the 
bravery  of  Alcibiades,  and  the  easy  temper  of 
Lamachus,  all  compounded  together,  prom¬ 
ised  such  security,  that  he  did  but  confirm  the 
resolution.  Demostratus,  who,  of  the  popular 
leaders,  was  the  one  who  chiefly  pressed  the 
Athenians  to  the  expedition,  stood  up  and  said 
he  would  stop  the  mouth  of  Nicias  from  urg¬ 
ing  any  more  excuses,  and  moved  that  the 
generals  should  have  absolute  power,  both  at 
home  and  abroad,  to  order  and  to  act  as  they 
thought  best;  and  this  vote  the  people  passed. 

The  priests,  however,  are  said  to  have  very 
earnestly  opposed  the  enterprise.  But  Alcibia¬ 
des  had  his  diviners  of  another  sort,  who  from 
some  old  prophecies  announced  that  “there 
shall  be  great  fame  of  the  Athenians  in  Sicily,” 
and  messengers  came  back  to  him  from  Jupiter 
Ammon  with  oracles  importing  that  “the 
Athenians  shall  take  all  the  Syracusans.” 
Those,  meanwhile,  who  knew  anything  that 
boded  ill,  concealed  it  lest  they  might  seem  to 
fore-speak  ill-luck. 

For  even  prodigies  that  were  obvious  and 


430 

plain  would  not  deter  them;  not  the  defacing 
of  the  Hermae,  all  maimed  in  one  night  except 
one,  called  the  Hermes  of  Andocides,  erected 
by  the  tribe  of  /Egeus,  placed  directly  before  the 
house  then  occupied  by  Andocides;  nor  what 
was  perpetrated  on  the  altar  of  the  twelve  gods, 
upon  which  a  certain  man  leaped  suddenly 
up,  and  then  turning  round  mutilated  himself 
with  a  stone.  Likewise  at  Delphi  there  stood 
a  golden  image  of  Minerva,  set  on  a  palm-tree 
of  brass,  erected  by  the  city  of  Athens  from 
the  spoils  they  won  from  the  Medes;  this  was 
pecked  at  several  days  together  by  crows  flying 
upon  it,  who  also  plucked  off  and  knocked 
down  the  fruit,  made  of  gold,  upon  the  palm- 
tree.  But  the  Athenians  said  these  were  all  but 
inventions  of  the  Delphians,  corrupted  by  the 
men  of  Syracuse. 

A  certain  oracle  bade  them  bring  from 
Clazomenae  the  priestess  of  Minerva  there; 
they  sent  for  the  woman  and  found  her  named 
Hesychia,  Quietness,  this  being,  it  would 
seem,  what  the  divine  powers  advised  the 
city  at  this  time,  to  be  quiet.  Whether,  there¬ 
fore,  the  astrologer  Meton  feared  these  pres¬ 
ages,  or  that  from  human  reason  he  doubted 
its  success  (for  he  was  appointed  to  a  com¬ 
mand  in  it),  feigning  himself  mad,  he  set  his 
house  on  fire.  Others  say  he  did  not  counterfeit 
madness,  but  set  his  house  on  fire  in  the  night, 
and  the  next  morning  came  before  the  assem¬ 
bly  in  great  distress,  and  besought  the  people, 
in  consideration  of  the  sad  disaster,  to  release 
his  son  from  the  service,  who  was  about  to  go 
captain  of  a  galley  for  Sicily. 

The  genius,  also,  of  the  philosopher  Socra¬ 
tes,  on  this  occasion,  too,  gave  him  intimation 
by  the  usual  tokens,  that  the  expedition  would 
prove  the  ruin  of  the  commonwealth;  this  he 
imparted  to  his  friends  and  familiars,  and  by 
them  it  was  mentioned  to  a  number  of  people. 
Not  a  few  were  troubled  because  the  days  on 
which  the  fleet  set  sail  happened  to  be  the  time 
when  the  women  celebrated  the  death  of  Ado¬ 
nis;  there  being  everywhere  then  exposed  to 
view  images  of  dead  men,  carried  about  with 
mourning  and  lamentation,  and  women  beat¬ 
ing  their  breasts.  So  that  such  as  laid  any  stress 
on  these  matters  were  extremely  troubled,  and 
feared  lest  that  all  this  warlike  preparation,  so 
splendid  and  so  glorious,  should  suddenly,  in  a 
little  time,  be  blasted  in  its  very  prime  of  mag¬ 
nificence,  and  come  to  nothing. 

Nicias,  in  opposing  the  voting  of  this  ex¬ 
pedition,  and  neither  being  puffed  up  with 
hopes,  nor  transported  with  the  honour  of  his 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

high  command  so  as  to  modify  his  judgment, 
showed  himself  a  man  of  virtue  and  constancy. 

But  when  his  endeavours  could  not  diverge 
the  people  from  the  war,  nor  get  leave  for  him¬ 
self  to  be  discharged  of  the  command,  but  the 
people,  as  it  were,  violently  took  him  up  and 
carried  him,  and  against  his  will  put  him  in 
the  office  of  general,  this  was  no  longer  now  a 
time  for  his  excessive  caution  and  his  delays, 
nor  was  it  for  him,  like  a  child,  to  look  back 
from  the  ship,  often  repeating  and  reconsider¬ 
ing  over  and  over  again  how  that  his  advice 
had  not  been  over-ruled  by  fair  arguments, 
thus  blunting  the  courage  of  his  fellow-com¬ 
manders  and  spoiling  the  season  of  action. 
Whereas,  he  ought  speedily  to  have  closed 
with  the  enemy  and  brought  the  matter  to  an 
issue,  and  put  fortune  immediately  to  the  test 
in  battle. 

But,  on  the  contrary,  when  Lamachus  coun¬ 
selled  to  sail  directly  to  Syracuse,  and  fight  the 
enemy  under  their  city  walls,  and  Alcibiades 
advised  to  secure  the  friendship  of  the  other 
towns,  and  then  to  march  against  them,  Nicias 
dissented  from  them  both,  and  insisted  that 
they  should  cruise  quietly  around  the  island 
and  display  their  armament,  and  having  land¬ 
ed  a  small  supply  of  men  for  the  iEgesteans,  re¬ 
turn  to  Athens,  weakening  at  once  the  resolu¬ 
tion  and  casting  down  the  spirits  of  the  men. 
And  when,  a  little  while  after,  the  Athenians 
called  Alcibiades  home  in  order  to  stand  trial, 
he  being,  though  joined  nominally  with  an¬ 
other  in  commission,  in  effect  the  only  general, 
made  now  no  end  of  loitering,  of  cruising,  and 
considering,  till  their  hopes  were  grown  stale, 
and  all  the  disorder  and  consternation  which 
the  first  approach  and  view  of  their  forces  had 
cast  amongst  the  enemy  was  worn  off  and  had 
left  them. 

Whilst  yet  Alcibiades  was  with  the  fleet, 
they  went  before  Syracuse  with  a  squadron  of 
sixty  galleys,  fifty  of  them  lying  in  array  with¬ 
out  the  harbour,  while  the  other  ten  rowed  in 
to  reconnoitre,  and  by  a  herald  called  upon  the 
citizens  of  Leontini  to  return  to  their  own 
country.  These  scouts  took  a  galley  of  the  en¬ 
emy’s,  in  which  they  found  certain  tablets,  on 
which  was  set  down  a  list  of  all  the  Syracusans, 
according  to  their  tribes.  These  were  wont  to 
be  laid  up  at  a  distance  from  the  city,  in  the 
temple  of  Jupiter  Olympius,  but  were  now 
brought  forth  for  examination  to  furnish  a 
muster-roll  of  young  men  for  the  war.  These 
being  so  taken  by  the  Athenians,  and  carried 
to  the  officers,  and  the  multitude  of  names  ap- 


NICIAS 

pearing,  the  diviners  thought  it  unpropitious, 
and  were  in  apprehension  lest  this  should  be 
the  only  destined  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy, 
that  “the  Athenians  shall  take  all  the  Syracu¬ 
sans.”  Yet,  indeed,  this  was  said  to  be  ac¬ 
complished  by  the  Athenians  at  another  time, 
when  Callippus  the  Athenian,  having  slain 
Dion,  became  master  of  Syracuse. 

But  when  Alcibiades  shortly  after  sailed 
away  from  Sicily,  the  command  fell  wholly  to 
Nicias.  Lamachus  was,  indeed,  a  brave  and 
honest  man,  and  ready  to  fight  fearlessly  with 
his  own  hand  in  battle,  but  so  poor  and  ill-off 
that,  whenever  he  was  appointed  general,  he 
used  always,  in  accounting  for  his  outlay  of 
public  money,  to  bring  some  little  reckoning  or 
other  of  money  for  his  very  clothes  and  shoes. 

On  the  contrary,  Nicias,  as  on  other  ac¬ 
counts,  so,  also,  because  of  his  wealth  and  sta¬ 
tion,  was  very  much  thought  of.  The  story  is 
told  that  once  upon  a  time  the  commission  of 
generals  being  in  consultation  together  in  their 
public  office,  he  bade  Sophocles,  the  poet,  give 
his  opinion  first,  as  the  senior  of  the  board.  “I,” 
replied  Sophocles,  “am  the  older,  but  you  are 
the  senior.” 

And  so  now,  also,  Lamachus,  who  better 
understood  military  affairs,  being  quite  his  sub¬ 
ordinate,  he  himself,  evermore  delaying  and 
avoiding  risk,  and  faintly  employing  his  forces, 
first  by  his  sailing  about  Sicily  at  the  greatest 
distance  aloof  from  the  enemy,  gave  them  con¬ 
fidence,  then  by  afterwards  attacking  Hybla,  a 
petty  fortress,  and  drawing  off  before  he  could 
take  it,  made  himself  utterly  despised.  At  the 
last  he  retreated  to  Catana  without  having 
achieved  anything,  save  that  he  demolished 
Hyccara,  an  humble  town  of  the  barbarians, 
out  of  which,  the  story  goes,  that  Lais,  the 
courtesan,  yet  a  mere  girl,  was  sold  amongst 
the  other  prisoners,  and  carried  thence  away 
to  Peloponnesus. 

But  when  the  summer  was  spent,  after  re¬ 
ports  began  to  reach  him  that  the  Syracusans 
were  grown  so  confident  that  they  would  come 
first  to  attack  him,  and  troopers  skirmishing 
to  the  very  camp  twitted  his  soldiers,  asking 
whether  they  came  to  settle  with  the  Catanians, 
or  to  put  the  Leontines  in  possession  of  their 
city,  at  last,  with  much  ado,  Nicias  resolved  to 
sail  against  Syracuse.  And  wishing  to  form  his 
camp  safely  and  without  molestation,  he  pro¬ 
cured  a  man  to  carry  from  Catana  intelligence 
to  the  Syracusans  that  they  might  seize  the 
camp  of  the  Athenians  unprotected,  and  all 
their  arms,  if  on  such  a  day  they  should  march 


431 

with  all  their  forces  to  Catana;  and  that,  the 
Athenians  living  mostly  in  the  town,  the 
friends  of  the  Syracusans  had  concerted,  as 
soon  as  they  should  perceive  them  coming,  to 
possess  themselves  of  one  of  the  gates,  and  to 
fire  the  arsenal;  that  many  now  were  in  the 
conspiracy  and  waited  their  arrival. 

This  was  the  ablest  thing  Nicias  did  in  the 
whole  of  his  conduct  of  the  expedition.  For 
having  drawn  out  all  the  strength  of  the  en¬ 
emy,  and  made  the  city  destitute  of  men,  he  set 
out  from  Catana,  entered  the  harbour,  and 
chose  a  fit  place  for  his  camp,  where  the  enemy 
could  least  incommode  him  with  the  means  in 
which  they  were  superior  to  him,  while  with 
the  means  in  which  he  was  superior  to  them 
he  might  expect  to  carry  on  the  war  without 
impediment. 

When  the  Syracusans  returned  from  Cata¬ 
na,  and  stood  in  battle  array  before  the  city 
gates,  he  rapidly  led  up  the  Athenians  and  fell 
on  them  and  defeated  them,  but  did  not  kill 
many,  their  horse  hindering  the  pursuit.  And 
his  cutting  and  breaking  down  the  bridges 
that  lay  over  the  river  gave  Hermocrates,  when 
cheering  up  the  Syracusans,  occasion  to  say 
that  Nicias  was  ridiculous,  whose  great  aim 
seemed  to  be  to  avoid  fighting,  as  if  fighting 
were  not  the  thing  he  came  for.  However,  he 
put  the  Syracusans  into  a  very  great  alarm  and 
consternation,  so  that  instead  of  fifteen  gener¬ 
als  then  in  service,  they  chose  three  others,  to 
whom  the  people  engaged  by  oath  to  allow  ab¬ 
solute  authority. 

There  stood  near  them  the  temple  of  Jupiter 
Olympius,  which  the  Athenians  (there  being 
in  it  many  consecrated  things  of  gold  and  sil¬ 
ver)  were  eager  to  take,  but  were  purposely 
withheld  from  it  by  Nicias,  who  let  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  slip,  and  allowed  a  garrison  of  the  Sy¬ 
racusans  to  enter  it,  judging  that  if  the  soldiers 
should  make  booty  of  that  wealth  it  would  be 
no  advantage  to  the  public,  and  he  should  bear 
the  guilt  of  the  impiety. 

Not  improving  in  the  least  this  success, 
which  was  everywhere  famous,  after  a  few 
days’  stay,  away  he  went  to  Naxos,  and  there 
wintered,  spending  largely  for  the  maintenance 
of  so  great  an  army,  and  not  doing  anything 
except  some  matters  of  little  consequence  with 
some  native  Sicilians  that  revolted  to  him.  In¬ 
somuch  that  the  Syracusans  took  heart  again, 
made  excursions  to  Catana,  wasted  the  coun¬ 
try,  and  fired  the  camp  of  the  Athenians.  For 
which  everybody  blamed  Nicias,  who,  with  his 
long  reflection,  his  deliberateness,  and  his  cau- 


432 

tion,  had  let  slip  the  time  for  action.  None  ever 
found  fault  with  the  man  when  once  at  work, 
for  in  the  brunt  he  showed  vigour  and  activity 
enough,  but  was  slow  and  wanted  assurance  to 
engage. 

When,  therefore,  he  brought  again  the  army 
to  Syracuse,  such  was  his  conduct,  and  with 
such  celerity,  and  at  the  same  time  security,  he 
came  upon  them,  that  nobody  knew  of  his  ap¬ 
proach,  when  already  he  had  come  to  shore 
with  his  galleys  at  Thapsus,  and  had  landed 
his  men;  and  before  any  could  help  it,  he  had 
surprised  Epipolae,  had  defeated  the  body  of 
picked  men  that  came  to  its  succour,  took 
three  hundred  prisoners,  and  routed  the  caval¬ 
ry  of  the  enemy,  which  had  been  thought  in¬ 
vincible. 

But  what  chiefly  astonished  the  Syracusans, 
and  seemed  incredible  to  the  Greeks,  was  in  so 
short  a  space  of  time  the  walling  about  of  Syra¬ 
cuse,  a  town  not  less  than  Athens,  and  far 
more  difficult,  by  the  unevenness  of  the  ground, 
and  the  nearness  of  the  sea  and  the  marshes 
adjacent,  to  have  such  a  wall  drawn  in  a  circle 
round  it;  yet  this,  all  within  a  very  little,  fin¬ 
ished  by  a  man  that  had  not  even  his  health 
for  such  weighty  cares,  but  lay  ill  of  the  stone, 
which  may  justly  bear  the  blame  for  what  was 
left  undone.  I  admire  the  industry  of  the  gen¬ 
eral,  and  the  bravery  of  the  soldiers  for  what 
they  succeeded  in.  Euripides,  after  their  ruin 
and  disaster,  writing  their  funeral  elegy,  said 
that — 

Eight  victories  over  Syracuse  they  gained, 

While  equal  yet  to  both  the  gods  remained 
And  in  truth  one  shall  not  find  eight,  but  many 
more  victories,  won  by  these  men  against  the 
Syracusans,  till  the  gods,  in  real  truth,  or  for¬ 
tune  intervened  to  check  the  Athenians  in  this 
advance  to  the  height  of  power  and  greatness. 

Nicias,  therefore,  doing  violence  to  his  body, 
was  present  in  most  actions.  But  once,  when 
his  disease  was  the  sharpest  upon  him,  he  lay 
in  the  camp  with  some  few  servants  to  attend 
him.  And  Lamachus,  having  the  command, 
fought  the  Syracusans,  who  were  bringing  a 
cross-wall  from  the  city  along  to  that  of  the 
Athenians,  to  hinder  them  from  carrying  it 
round;  and  in  the  victory,  the  Athenians  hur¬ 
rying  in  some  disorder  to  the  pursuit,  Lama¬ 
chus  getting  separated  from  his  men,  had  to 
resist  the  Syracusan  horse  that  came  upon  him. 
Before  the  rest  advanced  Callicrates,  a  man 
of  good  courage  and  skill  in  war.  Lamachus, 
upon  a  challenge,  engaged  with  him  in  sin¬ 
gle  combat,  and  receiving  the  first  wound,  re- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

turned  it  so  home  to  Callicrates,  that  they  both 
fell  and  died  together. 

The  Syracusans  took  away  his  body  and 
arms,  and  at  full  speed  advanced  to  the  wall  of 
the  Athenians,  where  Nicias  lay  without  any 
troops  to  oppose  to  them,  yet  roused  by  this 
necessity,  and  seeing  the  danger,  he  bade  those 
about  him  go  and  set  on  fire  all  the  wood  and 
materials  that  lay  provided  before  the  wall  for 
the  engines,  and  the  engines  themselves;  this 
put  a  stop  to  the  Syracusans,  saved  Nicias, 
saved  the  walls  and  all  the  money  of  the 
Athenians.  For  when  the  Syracusans  saw  such 
a  fire  blazing  up  between  them  and  the  wall, 
they  retired. 

Nicias  now  remained  sole  general,  and  with 
great  prospects;  for  cities  began  to  come  over 
to  alliance  with  him,  and  ships  laden  with  corn 
from  every  coast  came  to  the  camp,  every  one 
favouring  when  matters  went  well.  And  some 
proposals  from  among  the  Syracusans  despair¬ 
ing  to  defend  the  city,  about  a  capitulation, 
were  already  conveyed  to  him.  And  in  fact 
Gylippus,  who  was  on  his  way  with  a  squad¬ 
ron  to  their  aid  from  Lacedaemon,  hearing  on 
his  voyage  of  the  wall  surrounding  them,  and 
of  their  distress,  only  continued  his  enterprise 
thenceforth,  that,  giving  Sicily  up  for  lost,  he 
might,  if  even  that  should  be  possible,  secure 
the  Italians  their  cities.  For  a  strong  report  was 
everywhere  spread  about  that  the  Athenians 
carried  all  before  them,  and  had  a  general 
alike  for  conduct  and  for  fortune  invincible. 

And  Nicias  himself,  too,  now  against  his  na¬ 
ture  grown  bold  in  his  present  strength  and 
success,  especially  from  the  intelligence  he  re¬ 
ceived  underhand  of  the  Syracusans,  believing 
they  would  almost  immediately  surrender  the 
town  upon  terms,  paid  no  manner  of  regard  to 
Gylippus  coming  to  their  assistance,  nor  kept 
any  watch  of  his  approach,  so  that,  neglected 
altogether  and  despised,  Gylippus  went  in  a 
long-boat  ashore  without  the  knowledge  of 
Nicias,  and,  having  landed  in  the  remotest 
parts  from  Syracuse,  mustered  up  a  consider¬ 
able  force,  the  Syracusans  not  so  much  as 
knowing  of  his  arrival  nor  expecting  him;  so 
that  an  assembly  was  summoned  to  consider 
the  terms  to  be  arranged  with  Nicias,  and  some 
were  actually  on  the  way,  thinking  it  essential 
to  have  all  despatched  before  the  town  should 
be  quite  walled  round,  for  now  there  remained 
very  little  to  be  done,  and  the  materials  for  the 
building  lay  all  ready  along  the  line. 

In  this  very  nick  of  time  and  danger  arrived 
Gongylus  in  one  galley  from  Corinth,  and 


NICIAS 

every  one,  as  may  be  imagined,  flocking  about 
him,  he  told  them  that  Gylippus  would  be 
with  them  speedily,  and  that  other  ships  were 
coming  to  relieve  them.  And,  ere  yet  they 
could  perfectly  believe  Gongylus,  an  express 
was  brought  from  Gylippus,  to  bid  them  go 
forth  to  meet  him.  So  now  taking  good  heart, 
they  armed  themselves;  and  Gylippus  at  once 
led  on  his  men  from  their  march  in  battle  array 
against  the  Athenians,  as  Nicias  also  embat¬ 
tled  these.  And  Gylippus,  piling  his  arms  in 
view  of  the  Athenians,  sent  a  herald  to  tell 
them  he  would  give  them  leave  to  depart  from 
Sicily  without  molestation.  To  this  Nicias 
would  not  vouchsafe  any  answer,  but  some  of 
his  soldiers  laughing,  asked  if  with  the  sight 
of  one  coarse  coat  and  Laconian  staff  the  Syra¬ 
cusan  prospects  had  become  so  brilliant  that 
they  could  despise  the  Athenians  who  had  re¬ 
leased  to  the  Lacedaemonians  three  hundred, 
whom  they  held  in  chains,  bigger  men  than 
Gylippus,  and  longer-haired  ? 

Timaeus,  also,  writes  that  even  the  Syracu¬ 
sans  made  no  account  of  Gylippus,  at  the  first 
sight  mocking  at  his  staff  and  long  hair,  as 
afterwards  they  found  reason  to  blame  his 
covetousness  and  meanness.  The  same  author, 
however,  adds  that  on  Gylippus’s  first  appear¬ 
ance,  as  it  might  have  been  at  the  sight  of  an 
owl  abroad  in  the  air,  there  was  a  general 
flocking  together  of  men  to  serve  in  the  war. 
And  this  is  the  truer  saying  of  the  two;  for  in 
the  staff  and  the  cloak  they  saw  the  badge  and 
authority  of  Sparta,  and  crowded  to  him  ac¬ 
cordingly.  And  not  only  Thucydides  affirms 
that  the  whole  thing  was  done  by  him  alone, 
but  so,  also,  does  Philistus,  who  was  a  Syracu¬ 
san  and  an  actual  witness  of  what  happened. 

However,  the  Athenians  had  the  better  in 
the  first  encounter,  and  slew  some  few  of  the 
Syracusans,  and  amongst  them  Gongylus  of 
Corinth.  But  on  the  next  day  Gylippus  showed 
what  it  is  to  be  a  man  of  experience;  for  with 
the  same  arms,  the  same  horses,  and  on  the 
same  spot  of  ground,  only  employing  them 
otherwise,  he  overcame  the  Athenians;  and 
they  fleeing  to  their  camp,  he  set  the  Syracu¬ 
sans  to  work,  and  with  the  stone  and  materials 
that  had  been  brought  together  for  finishing 
the  wall  of  the  Athenians,  he  built  a  cross-wall 
to  intercept  theirs  and  break  it  off,  so  that  even 
if  they  were  successful  in  the  field,  they  would 
not  be  able  to  do  anything. 

And  after  this  the  Syracusans  taking  cour¬ 
age  manned  their  galleys,  and  with  their  horse 
and  followers  ranging  about  took  a  good 


433 

many  prisoners;  and  Gylippus  going  himself 
to  the  cities,  called  upon  them  to  join  with 
him,  and  was  listened  to  and  supported  vigor¬ 
ously  by  them.  So  that  Nicias  fell  back  again 
to  his  old  views,  and,  seeing  the  face  of  affairs 
change,  desponded,  and  wrote  to  Athens,  bid¬ 
ding  them  either  send  another  army,  or  recall 
this  out  of  Sicily,  and  that  he  might,  in  any 
case,  be  wholly  relieved  of  the  command,  be¬ 
cause  of  his  disease. 

Before  this  the  Athenians  had  been  intend¬ 
ing  to  send  another  army  to  Sicily,  but  envy 
of  Nicias’s  early  achievements  and  high  for¬ 
tune  had  occasioned,  up  to  this  time,  many 
delays;  but  now  they  were  all  eager  to  send  off 
succours.  Eurymedon  went  before,  in  midwin¬ 
ter,  with  money,  and  to  announce  that  Euthy- 
demus  and  Menander  were  chosen  out  of  those 
that  served  there  under  Nicias  to  be  joint  com¬ 
manders  with  him.  Demosthenes  was  to  go 
after  in  the  spring  with  a  great  armament. 

In  the  meantime  Nicias  was  briskly  attack¬ 
ed,  both  by  sea  and  land;  in  the  beginning  he 
had  the  disadvantage  on  the  water,  but  in  the 
end  repulsed  and  sunk  many  galleys  of  the 
enemy.  But  by  land  he  could  not  provide  suc¬ 
cour  in  time,  so  Gylippus  surprised  and  captur¬ 
ed  Plemmyrium,  in  which  the  stores  for  the 
navy,  and  a  great  sum  of  money  being  there 
kept,  all  fell  into  his  hands,  and  many  were 
slain,  and  many  taken  prisoners.  And  what 
was  of  greatest  importance,  he  now  cut  off 
Nicias’s  supplies,  which  had  been  safely  and 
readily  conveyed  to  him  under  Plemmyrium, 
while  the  Athenians  still  held  it,  but  now  that 
they  were  beaten  out,  he  could  only  procure 
them  with  great  difficulty,  and  with  opposition 
from  the  enemy,  who  lay  in  wait  with  their 
ships  under  that  fort.  Moreover,  it  seemed 
manifest  to  the  Syracusans  that  their  navy  had 
not  been  beaten  by  strength,  but  by  their  dis¬ 
order  in  the  pursuit.  Now,  therefore,  all  hands 
went  to  work  to  prepare  for  a  new  attempt  that 
should  succeed  better  than  the  former. 

Nicias  had  no  wish  for  a  sea-fight,  but  said 
it  was  mere  folly  for  them,  when  Demosthenes 
was  coming  in  all  haste  with  so  great  a  fleet 
and  fresh  forces  to  their  succour,  to  engage  the 
enemy  with  a  less  number  of  ships  and  ill  pro¬ 
vided.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Menander  and 
Euthydemus,  who  were  just  commencing  their 
new  command,  prompted  by  a  feeling  of  ri¬ 
valry  and  emulation  of  both  the  generals,  were 
eager  to  gain  some  great  success  before  Demos¬ 
thenes  came,  and  to  prove  themselves  superior 
to  Nicias.  They  urged  the  honour  of  the  city, 


434 

which,  said  they,  would  he  blemished  and  ut¬ 
terly  lost  if  they  should  decline  a  challenge 
from  the  Syracusans.  Thus  they  forced  Nicias 
to  a  sea-light;  and  by  the  stratagem  of  Ariston, 
the  Corinthian  pilot  (his  trick,  described  by 
Thucydides,  about  the  men’s  dinners),  they 
were  worsted,  and  lost  many  of  their  men, 
causing  the  greatest  dejection  to  Nicias,  who 
had  suffered  so  much  from  having  the  sole 
command,  and  now  again  miscarried  through 
his  colleagues. 

But  now  by  this  time  Demosthenes  with  his 
splendid  fleet  came  in  sight  outside  the  har¬ 
bour,  a  terror  to  the  enemy.  He  brought  along, 
in  seventy-three  galleys,  five  thousand  men-at- 
arms;  of  darters,  archers,  and  slingers,  not  less 
than  three  thousand;  with  the  glittering  of 
their  armour,  the  flags  waving  from  the  gal¬ 
leys,  the  multitude  of  coxswains  and  flute- 
players  giving  time  to  the  rowers,  setting  off 
the  whole  with  all  possible  warlike  pomp  and 
ostentation  to  dismay  the  enemy.  Now  one 
may  believe  the  Syracusans  were  again  in  ex¬ 
treme  alarm,  seeing  no  end  or  prospect  of  re¬ 
lease  before  them,  toiling,  as  it  seemed,  in  vain, 
and  perishing  to  no  purpose. 

Nicias,  however,  was  not  long  overjoyed 
with  the  reinforcement,  for  the  first  time  he 
conferred  with  Demosthenes,  who  advised 
forthwith  to  attack  the  Syracusans,  and  to  put 
all  to  the  speediest  hazard,  to  win  Syracuse,  or 
else  return  home,  afraid,  and  wondering  at  his 
promptness  and  audacity,  he  besought  him  to 
do  nothing  rashly  and  desperately,  since  delay 
would  be  the  ruin  of  the  enemy,  whose  money 
would  not  hold  out,  nor  their  confederates  be 
long  kept  together;  that  when  once  they  came 
to  be  pinched  with  want,  they  would  presently 
come  again  to  him  for  terms,  as  formerly.  For, 
indeed,  many  in  Syracuse  held  secret  corre¬ 
spondence  with  him,  and  urged  him  to  stay, 
declaring  that  even  now  the  people  were  quite 
worn  out  with  the  war  and  weary  of  Gylippus. 
And  if  their  necessities  should  the  least  sharp¬ 
en  upon  them  they  would  give  up  all. 

Nicias  glancing  darkly  at  these  matters,  and 
unwilling  to  speak  out  plainly,  made  his  col¬ 
leagues  imagine  that  it  was  cowardice  which 
made  him  talk  in  this  manner.  And  saying 
that  this  was  the  old  story  over  again,  the  well- 
known  procrastinations  and  delays  and  refine¬ 
ments  with  which  at  first  he  let  slip  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  in  not  immediately  falling  on  the  en¬ 
emy,  but  suffering  the  armament  to  become  a 
thing  of  yesterday,  that  nobody  was  alarmed 
with,  they  took  the  side  of  Demosthenes,  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

with  much  ado  forced  Nicias  to  comply.  And 
so  Demosthenes,  taking  the  land-forces,  by 
night  made  an  assault  upon  Epipolae;  part  of 
the  enemy  he  slew  ere  they  took  the  alarm,  the 
rest  defending  themselves  he  put  to  flight.  Nor 
was  he  content  with  this  victory  there,  but 
pushed  on  further,  till  he  met  the  Boeotians. 
For  these  were  the  first  that  made  head  against 
the  Athenians,  and  charged  them  with  a  shout, 
spear  against  spear,  and  killed  many  on  the 
place.  And  now  at  once  there  ensued  a  panic 
and  confusion  throughout  the  whole  army;  the 
victorious  portion  got  infected  with  the  fears 
of  the  flying  part,  and  those  who  were  still 
disembarking  and  coming  forward,  falling 
foul  of  the  retreaters,  came  into  conflict  with 
their  own  party,  taking  the  fugitives  for  pur¬ 
suers,  and  treating  their  friends  as  if  they  were 
the  enemy. 

Thus  huddled  together  in  disorder,  distract¬ 
ed  with  fear  and  uncertainties,  and  unable  to 
be  sure  of  seeing  anything,  the  night  not  be¬ 
ing  absolutely  dark,  nor  yielding  any  steady 
light,  the  moon  then  towards  setting,  shadow¬ 
ed  with  the  many  weapons  and  bodies  that 
moved  to  and  fro,  and  glimmering  so  as  not  to 
show  an  object  plain,  but  to  make  friends 
through  fear  suspected  for  foes,  the  Athenians 
fell  into  utter  perplexity  and  desperation.  For, 
moreover,  they  had  the  moon  at  their  backs, 
and  consequently  their  own  shadows  fell  upon 
them,  and  both  hid  the  number  and  the  glit¬ 
tering  of  their  arms;  while  the  reflection  of  the 
moon  from  the  shields  of  the  enemy  made 
them  show  more  numerous  and  better  ap¬ 
pointed  than,  indeed,  they  were.  At  last,  being 
pressed  on  every  side,  when  once  they  had 
given  way,  they  took  to  rout,  and  in  their 
flight  were  destroyed,  some  by  the  enemy, 
some  by  the  hand  of  their  friends,  and  some 
tumbling  down  the  rocks,  while  those  that 
were  dispersed  and  straggled  about  were  pick¬ 
ed  off  in  the  morning  by  the  horsemen  and  put 
to  the  sword.  The  slain  were  two  thousand; 
and  of  the  rest  few  came  off  safe  with  their 
arms. 

Upon  this  disaster  which  to  him  was  not 
wholly  an  unexpected  one,  Nicias  accused  the 
rashness  of  Demosthenes;  but  he,  making  his 
excuses  for  the  past,  now  advised  to  be  gone  in 
all  haste,  for  neither  were  other  forces  to  come, 
nor  could  the  enemy  be  beaten  with  the  pres¬ 
ent.  And,  indeed,  even  supposing  they  were 
yet  too  hard  for  the  enemy  in  any  case,  they 
ought  to  remove  and  quit  a  situation  which 
they  understood  to  be  always  accounted  a  sick- 


NICIAS 

ly  one,  and  dangerous  for  an  army,  and  was 
more  particularly  unwholesome  now,  as  they 
could  see  themselves,  because  of  the  time  of 
year.  It  was  the  beginning  of  autumn,  and 
many  now  lay  sick,  and  all  were  out  of  heart. 

It  grieved  Nicias  to  hear  of  flight  and  de¬ 
parting  home,  not  that  he  did  not  fear  the  Syr¬ 
acusans,  but  he  was  worse  afraid  of  the  Athe¬ 
nians,  their  impeachments  and  sentences;  he 
professed  that  he  apprehended  no  further 
harm  there,  or  if  it  must  be,  he  would  rather 
die  by  the  hand  of  an  enemy  than  by  his  fel¬ 
low-citizens.  He  was  not  of  the  opinion  which 
Leo  of  Byzantium  declared  to  his  fellow-citi¬ 
zens:  “I  had  rather,”  said  he,  “perish  by  you, 
than  with  you.”  As  to  the  matter  of  place  and 
quarter  whither  to  remove  their  camp,  that, 
he  said,  might  be  debated  at  leisure.  And  De¬ 
mosthenes,  his  former  counsel  having  suc¬ 
ceeded  so  ill,  ceased  to  press  him  further; 
others  thought  Nicias  had  reasons  for  expecta¬ 
tion,  and  relied  on  some  assurance  from  peo¬ 
ple  within  the  city,  and  that  this  made  him  so 
strongly  oppose  their  retreat,  so  they  acqui¬ 
esced.  But  fresh  forces  now  coming  to  the  Syr¬ 
acusans  and  the  sickness  growing  worse  in  his 
camp,  he,  also,  now  approved  of  their  retreat, 
and  commanded  the  soldiers  to  make  ready  to 
go  abroad. 

And  when  all  were  in  readiness,  and  none  of 
the  enemy  had  observed  them,  not  expecting 
such  a  thing,  the  moon  was  eclipsed  in  the 
night,  to  the  great  fright  of  Nicias  and  others, 
who,  for  want  of  experience,  or  out  of  supersti¬ 
tion,  felt  alarm  at  such  appearances.  That  the 
sun  might  be  darkened  about  the  close  of  the 
month,  this  even  ordinary  people  now  under¬ 
stood  pretty  well  to  be  the  effect  of  the  moon; 
but  the  moon  itself  to  be  darkened,  how  that 
could  come  about,  and  how,  on  the  sudden,  a 
broad  full  moon  should  lose  her  light,  and 
show  such  various  colours,  was  not  easy  to  be 
comprehended;  they  concluded  it  to  be  omi¬ 
nous,  and  a  divine  intimation  of  some  heavy 
calamities. 

For  he  who  the  first,  and  the  most  plainly 
of  any,  and  with  the  greatest  assurance  com¬ 
mitted  to  writing  how  the  moon  is  enlightened 
and  overshadowed,  was  Anaxagoras;  and  he 
was  as  yet  but  recent,  nor  was  his  argument 
much  known,  but  was  rather  kept  secret,  pass¬ 
ing  only  amongst  a  few,  under  some  kind  of 
caution  and  confidence.  People  would  not  then 
tolerate  natural  philosophers,  and  theorists,  as 
they  then  called  them,  about  things  above;  as 
lessening  the  divine  power,  by  explaining 

# 


435 

away  its  agency  into  the  operation  of  irrational 
causes  and  senseless  forces  acting  by  necessity, 
without  anything  of  Providence  or  a  free 
agent.  Hence  it  was  that  Protagoras  was  ban¬ 
ished,  and  Anaxagoras  cast  in  prison,  so  that 
Pericles  had  much  difficulty  to  procure  his  lib¬ 
erty;  and  Socrates,  though  he  had  no  concern 
whatever  with  this  sort  of  learning,  yet  was 
put  to  death  for  philosophy. 

It  was  only  afterwards  that  the  reputation  of 
Plato,  shining  forth  by  his  life,  and  because  he 
subjected  natural  necessity  to  divine  and  more 
excellent  principles,  took  away  the  obloquy 
and  scandal  that  had  attached  to  such  con¬ 
templations,  and  obtained  these  studies  cur¬ 
rency  among  all  people.  So  his  friend,  Dion, 
when  the  moon,  at  the  time  he  was  to  embark 
from  Zacynthus  to  go  against  Dionysius,  was 
eclipsed,  was  not  in  the  least  disturbed,  but 
went  on,  and  arriving  at  Syracuse,  expelled  the 
tyrant. 

But  it  so  fell  out  with  Nicias,  that  he  had  not 
at  this  time  a  skilful  diviner  with  him;  his 
former  habitual  adviser  who  used  to  moderate 
much  of  his  superstition,  Stilbides,  had  died  a 
little  before.  For,  in  fact,  this  prodigy,  as  Philo- 
chorus  observes,  was  not  unlucky  for  men 
wishing  to  flee,  but  on  the  contrary  very  fa¬ 
vourable;  for  things  done  in  fear  require  to  be 
hidden,  and  the  light  is  their  foe.  Nor  was  it 
usual  to  observe  signs  in  the  sun  or  moon  more 
than  three  days,  as  Autoclides  states  in  his 
Commentaries .  But  Nicias  persuaded  them  to 
wait  another  full  course  of  the  moon,  as  if  he 
had  not  seen  it  clear  again  as  soon  as  ever  it 
had  passed  the  region  of  shadow  where  the 
light  was  obstructed  by  the  earth. 

In  a  manner  abandoning  all  other  cares,  he 
betook  himself  wholly  to  his  sacrifices,  till  the 
enemy  came  upon  them  with  their  infantry, 
besieging  the  forts  and  camp,  and  placing  their 
ships  in  a  circle  about  the  harbour.  Nor  did 
the  men  in  the  galleys  only,  but  the  little  boys 
everywhere  got  into  the  fishing-boats  and 
rowed  up  and  challenged  the  Athenians,  and 
insulted  over  them.  Amongst  these  a  youth  of 
noble  parentage,  Heraclides  by  name,  having 
ventured  out  beyond  the  rest,  an  Athenian 
ship  pursued  and  well-nigh  took  him.  His 
uncle,  Pollichus,  in  fear  for  him,  put  out  with 
ten  galleys  which  he  commanded,  and  the  rest, 
to  relieve  Pollichus,  in  like  manner  drew 
forth;  the  result  of  it  being  a  very  sharp  en¬ 
gagement,  in  which  the  Syracusans  had  the 
victory,  and  slew  Eurymedon,  with  many 
others. 


436 

After  this  the  Athenian  soldiers  had  no  pa¬ 
tience  to  stay  longer,  but  raised  an  outcry 
against  their  officers,  requiring  them  to  depart 
by  land;  for  the  Syracusans,  upon  their  victory, 
immediately  shut  and  blocked  up  the  entrance 
of  the  harbour;  but  Nicias  would  not  consent 
to  this,  as  it  was  a  shameful  thing  to  leave  be¬ 
hind  so  many  ships  of  burden,  and  galleys 
little  less  than  two  hundred.  Putting,  there¬ 
fore,  on  board  the  best  of  the  foot,  and  the 
most  serviceable  darters,  they  filled  one  hun¬ 
dred  and  ten  galleys;  the  rest  wanted  oars. 
The  remainder  of  his  army  Nicias  posted 
along  by  the  seaside,  abandoning  the  great 
camp  and  the  fortifications  adjoining  the  tem¬ 
ple  of  Hercules;  so  the  Syracusans,  not  having 
for  a  long  time  performed  their  usual  sacrifice 
to  Hercules,  went  up  now,  both  priests  and 
captains,  to  sacrifice. 

And  their  galleys  being  manned,  the  divin¬ 
ers  predicted  from  their  sacrifices  victory  and 
glory  to  the  Syracusans,  provided  they  would 
not  be  the  aggressors,  but  fight  upon  the  defen¬ 
sive;  for  so  Hercules  overcame  all,  by  only  de¬ 
fending  himself  when  set  upon.  In  this  con¬ 
fidence  they  set  out;  and  this  proved  the  hot¬ 
test  and  fiercest  of  all  their  sea-fights,  raising 
no  less  concern  and  passion  in  the  beholders 
than  in  the  actors;  as  they  could  oversee  the 
whole  action  with  all  the  various  and  unex¬ 
pected  turns  of  fortune  which,  in  a  short  space, 
occurred  in  it;  the  Athenians  suffering  no  less 
from  their  own  preparations,  than  from  the 
enemy;  for  they  fought  against  light  and  nim¬ 
ble  ships,  that  could  attack  from  any  quarter, 
with  theirs  laden  and  heavy.  And  they  were 
thrown  at  with  stones  that  fly  indifferently  any 
way,  for  which  they  could  only  return  darts 
and  arrows,  the  direct  aim  of  which  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  water  disturbed,  preventing  their 
coming  true,  point  foremost  to  their  mark. 
This  the  Syracusans  had  learned  from  Ariston, 
the  Corinthian  pilot,  who,  fighting  stoutly, 
fell  himself  in  this  very  engagement,  when 
the  victory  had  already  been  declared  for  the 
Syracusans. 

The  Athenians,  their  loss  and  slaughter  be¬ 
ing  very  great,  their  flight  by  sea  cut  off,  their 
safety  by  land  so  difficult,  did  not  attempt  to 
hinder  the  enemy  towing  away  their  ships, 
under  their  eyes,  nor  demanded  their  dead,  as, 
indeed,  their  want  of  burial  seemed  a  less 
calamity  than  the  leaving  behind  the  sick  and 
wounded  which  they  now  had  before  them. 
Yet  more  miserable  still  than  those  did  they 
reckon  themselves,  who  were  to  work  on  yet, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

through  more  such  sufferings,  after  all  to  reach 
the  same  end. 

They  prepared  to  dislodge  that  night.  And 
Gylippus  and  his  friends  seeing  the  Syracusans 
engaged  in  their  sacrifices  and  at  their  cups, 
for  their  victories,  and  it  being  also  a  holiday, 
did  not  expect  either  by  persuasion  or  by  force 
to  rouse  them  up  and  carry  them  against  the 
Athenians  as  they  decamped.  But  Hermo- 
crates,  of  his  own  head,  put  a  trick  upon  Nicias, 
and  sent  some  of  his  companions  to  him,  who 
pretended  they  came  from  those  that  were  wont 
to  hold  secret  intelligence  with  him,  and  ad¬ 
vised  him  not  to  stir  that  night,  the  Syracusans 
having  laid  ambushes  and  beset  the  ways. 

Nicias,  caught  with  this  stratagem,  remain¬ 
ed,  to  encounter  presently  in  reality  what  he 
had  feared  when  there  was  no  occasion.  For 
they,  the  next  morning,  marching  before,  seiz¬ 
ed  the  defiles,  fortified  the  passes  where  the 
rivers  were  fordable,  cut  down  the  bridges, 
and  ordered  their  horsemen  to  range  the  plains 
and  ground  that  lay  open,  so  as  to  leave  no 
part  of  the  country  where  the  Athenians  could 
move  without  fighting.  They  stayed  both  that 
day  and  another  night,  and  then  went  along  as 
if  they  were  leaving  their  own,  not  an  enemy’s 
country,  lamenting  and  bewailing  for  want  of 
necessaries,  and  for  their  parting  from  friends 
and  companions  that  were  not  able  to  help 
themselves;  and,  nevertheless,  judging  the 
present  evils  lighter  than  those  they  expected 
to  come. 

But  among  the  many  miserable  spectacles 
that  appeared  up  and  down  in  the  camp,  the 
saddest  sight  of  all  was  Nicias  himself,  labour¬ 
ing  under  his  malady,  and  unworthily  reduced 
to  the  scantiest  supply  of  all  the  accommoda¬ 
tions  necessary  for  human  wants,  of  which  he 
in  his  condition  required  more  than  ordinary, 
because  of  his  sickness,  yet  bearing  up  under 
all  this  illness,  and  doing  and  undergoing 
more  than  many  in  perfect  health. 

And  it  was  plainly  evident  that  all  this  toil 
was  not  for  himself,  or  from  any  regard  to  his 
own  life,  but  that  purely  for  the  sake  of  those 
under  his  command  he  would  not  abandon 
hope.  And,  indeed,  the  rest  were  given  over  to 
weeping  and  lamentation  through  fear  or  sor¬ 
row,  but  he,  whenever  he  yielded  to  anything 
of  the  kind,  did  so,  it  was  evident,  from  re¬ 
flection  upon  the  shame  and  dishonour  of  the 
enterprise,  contrasted  with  the  greatness  and 
glory  of  the  success  he  had  anticipated,  and 
not  only  the  sight  of  his  person,  but,  also,  the 
recollection  of  the  arguments  and  the  dissua- 


NICIAS 

sions  he  used  to  prevent  this  expedition  en¬ 
hanced  their  sense  of  the  undeservedness  of  his 
sufferings,  nor  had  they  any  heart  to  put  their 
trust  in  the  gods,  considering  that  a  man  so 
religious,  who  had  performed  to  the  divine 
powers  so  many  and  so  great  acts  of  devotion, 
should  have  no  more  favourable  treatment 
than  the  wickedest  and  meanest  of  the  army. 

Nicias,  however,  endeavoured  all  the  while 
by  his  voice,  his  countenance,  and  his  carriage, 
to  show  himself  undefeated  by  these  misfor¬ 
tunes.  And  all  along  the  way  shot  at,  and  re¬ 
ceiving  wounds  eight  days  continually  from 
the  enemy,  he  yet  preserved  the  forces  with 
him  in  a  body  entire,  till  that  Demosthenes 
was  taken  prisoner  with  the  party  that  he  led, 
whilst  they  fought  and  made  a  resistance,  and 
so  got  behind  and  were  surrounded  near  the 
country  house  of  Polyzelus.  Demosthenes 
thereupon  drew  his  sword,  and  wounded  but 
did  not  kill  himself,  the  enemy  speedily  run¬ 
ning  in  and  seizing  upon  him.  So  soon  as  the 
Syracusans  had  gone  and  informed  Nicias  of 
this,  and  he  had  sent  some  horsemen,  and  by 
them  knew  the  certainty  of  the  defeat  of  that 
division,  he  then  vouchsafed  to  sue  to  Gylip- 
pus  for  a  truce  for  the  Athenians  to  depart  out 
of  Sicily,  leaving  hostages  for  payment  of 
money  that  the  Syracusans  had  expended  in 
the  war. 

But  now  they  would  not  hear  of  these  pro¬ 
posals,  but  threatening  and  reviling  them, 
angrily  and  insultingly  continued  to  ply  their 
missiles  at  them,  now  destitute  of  every  neces¬ 
sary.  Yet  Nicias  still  made  good  his  retreat  all 
that  night,  and  the  next  day,  through  all  their 
darts,  made  his  way  to  the  river  Asinarus. 
There,  however,  the  enemy  encountering 
them,  drove  some  into  the  stream,  while  oth¬ 
ers,  ready  to  die  for  thirst,  plunged  in  head¬ 
long,  while  they  drank  at  the  same  time,  and 
were  cut  down  by  their  enemies.  And  here 
was  the  cruellest  and  the  most  immoderate 
slaughter.  Till  at  last  Nicias  falling  down  to 
Gylippus,  “Let  pity,  O  Gylippus,”  said  he, 
“move  you  in  your  victory;  not  for  me,  who 
was  destined,  it  seems,  to  bring  the  glory  I 
once  had  to  this  end,  but  for  the  other  Athe¬ 
nians;  as  you  well  know  that  the  chances  of 
war  are  common  to  all,  and  the  Athenians 
used  them  moderately  and  mildly  towards  you 
in  their  prosperity.” 

At  these  words,  and  at  the  sight  of  Nicias, 
Gylippus  was  somewhat  troubled,  for  he  was 
sensible  that  the  Lacedaemonians  had  received 
good  offices  from  Nicias  in  the  late  treaty,  and 


437 

he  thought  it  would  be  a  great  and  glorious 
thing  for  him  to  carry  off  the  chief  command¬ 
ers  of  the  Athenians  alive.  He  therefore  raised 
Nicias  with  respect,  and  bade  him  be  of  good 
cheer,  and  commanded  his  men  to  spare  the 
lives  of  the  rest.  But  the  word  of  command  be¬ 
ing  communicated  slowly,  the  slain  were  a  far 
greater  number  than  the  prisoners.  Many, 
however,  were  privately  conveyed  away  by 
particular  soldiers.  Those  taken  openly  were 
hurried  together  in  a  mass;  their  arms  and 
spoils  hung  up  on  the  finest  and  largest  trees 
along  the  river.  The  conquerors,  with  garlands 
on  their  heads,  with  their  own  horses  splen¬ 
didly  adorned,  and  cropping  short  the  manes 
and  tails  of  those  of  their  enemies,  entered  the 
city,  having,  in  the  most  signal  conflict  ever 
waged  by  Greeks  against  Greeks,  and  with 
the  greatest  strength  and  the  utmost  effort 
of  valour  and  manhood  won  a  most  entire 
victory. 

And  a  general  assembly  of  the  people  of  Syr¬ 
acuse  and  their  confederates  sitting,  Eurycles, 
the  popular  leader,  moved,  first,  that  the  day 
on  which  they  took  Nicias  should  from  thence¬ 
forward  be  kept  holiday  by  sacrificing  and  for¬ 
bearing  all  manner  of  work,  and  from  the 
river  be  called  the  Asinarian  Feast.  This  was 
the  twenty-sixth  day  of  the  month  Carneus, 
the  Athenian  Metagitnion.  And  that  the  ser¬ 
vants  of  the  Athenians  with  the  other  confeder¬ 
ates  be  sold  for  slaves,  and  they  themselves  and 
the  Sicilian  auxiliaries  be  kept  and  employed 
in  the  quarries,  except  the  generals,  who 
should  be  put  to  death. 

The  Syracusans  favoured  the  proposals,  and 
when  Hermocrates  said,  that  to  use  well  a  vic¬ 
tory  was  better  than  to  gain  a  victory,  he  was 
met  with  great  clamour  and  outcry.  When 
Gylippus,  also,  demanded  the  Athenian  gen¬ 
erals  to  be  delivered  to  him,  that  he  might 
carry  them  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  the  Syra¬ 
cusans,  now  insolent  with  their  good-fortune, 
gave  him  ill  words.  Indeed,  before  this,  even 
in  the  war,  they  had  been  impatient  at  his 
rough  behaviour  and  Lacedaemonian  haughti¬ 
ness,  and  had,  as  Timaeus  tells  us,  discovered 
sordidness  and  avarice  in  his  character,  vices 
which  may  have  descended  to  him  from  his 
father,  Cleandrides,  who  was  convicted  of 
bribery  and  banished.  And  the  very  man  him¬ 
self,  of  the  one  thousand  talents  which  Lysan- 
der  sent  to  Sparta,  embezzled  thirty,  and  hid 
them  under  the  tiles  of  his  house,  and  was  de¬ 
tected  and  shamefully  fled  his  country.  But  this 
is  related  more  at  large  in  the  life  of  Lysander. 


438 

Timaeus  says  that  Demosthenes  and  Nicias 
did  not  die,  as  Thucydides  and  Philistus  have 
written,  by  the  order  of  the  Syracusans,  but 
that  upon  a  message  sent  them  from  Hermo- 
crates,  whilst  yet  the  assembly  were  sitting,  by 
the  connivance  of  some  of  their  guards,  they 
were  enabled  to  put  an  end  to  themselves. 
Their  bodies,  however,  were  thrown  out  before 
the  gates  and  offered  for  a  public  spectacle. 
And  I  have  heard  that  to  this  day  in  a  temple 
at  Syracuse  is  shown  a  shield,  said  to  have  been 
Nicias’s,  curiously  wrought  and  embroidered 
with  gold  and  purple  intermixed. 

Most  of  the  Athenians  perished  in  the  quar¬ 
ries  by  diseases  and  ill  diet,  being  allowed  only 
one  pint  of  barley  every  day,  and  one  half  pint 
of  water.  Many  of  them,  however,  were  carried 
off  by  stealth,  or,  from  the  first,  were  supposed 
to  be  servants,  and  were  sold  as  slaves.  These 
latter  were  branded  on  their  foreheads  with 
the  figure  of  a  horse.  There  were,  however, 
Athenians  who,  in  addition  to  slavery,  had  to 
endure  even  this.  But  their  discreet  and  order¬ 
ly  conduct  was  an  advantage  to  them;  they 
were  either  soon  set  free,  or  won  the  respect  of 
their  masters  with  whom  they  continued  to 
live. 

Several  were  saved  for  the  sake  of  Euripides, 
whose  poetry,  it  appears,  was  in  request  among 
the  Sicilians  more  than  among  any  of  the  set¬ 
tlers  out  of  Greece.  And  when  any  travellers 
arrived  that  could  tell  them  some  passage,  or 
give  them  any  specimen  of  his  verses,  they 
were  delighted  to  be  able  to  communicate 
them  to  one  another.  Many  of  the  captives  who 
got  safe  back  to  Athens  are  said,  after  they 
reached  home,  to  have  gone  and  made  their 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

acknowledgments  to  Euripides,  relating  how 
that  some  of  them  had  been  released  from  their 
slavery  by  teaching  what  they  could  remember 
of  his  poems,  and  others,  when  straggling  after 
the  fight,  been  relieved  with  meat  and  drink 
for  repeating  some  of  his  lyrics.  Nor  need  this 
be  any  wonder,  for  it  is  told  that  a  ship  of 
Caunus  fleeing  into  one  of  their  harbours  for 
protection,  pursued  by  pirates,  was  not  receiv¬ 
ed,  but  forced  back,  till  one  asked  if  they  knew 
any  of  Euripides’s  verses,  and  on  their  saying 
they  did,  they  were  admitted,  and  their  ship 
brought  into  harbour. 

It  is  said  that  the  Athenians  would  not  be¬ 
lieve  their  loss,  in  a  great  degree  because  of 
the  person  who  first  brought  them  news  of  it. 
For  a  certain  stranger,  it  seems,  coming  to 
Piraeus,  and  there  sitting  in  a  barber’s  shop, 
began  to  talk  of  what  had  happened,  as  if  the 
Athenians  already  knew  all  that  had  passed; 
which  the  barber  hearing,  before  he  acquaint¬ 
ed  anybody  else,  ran  as  fast  as  he  could  up  into 
the  city,  addressed  himself  to  the  Archons, 
and  presently  spread  it  about  in  the  public 
place.  On  which,  there  being  everywhere,  as 
may  be  imagined,  terror  and  consternation, 
the  Archons  summoned  a  general  assembly, 
and  there  brought  in  the  man  and  questioned 
him  how  he  came  to  know.  And  he,  giving  no 
satisfactory  account,  was  taken  for  a  spreader 
of  false  intelligence  and  a  disturber  of  the  city, 
and  was,  therefore,  fastened  to  the  wheel  and 
racked  a  long  time,  till  other  messengers  ar¬ 
rived  that  related  the  whole  disaster  particu¬ 
larly.  So  hardly  was  Nicias  believed  to  have 
suffered  the  calamity  which  he  had  often  pre¬ 
dicted. 


CRASSUS 

i 15?— 53  b.c. 


Marcus  Crassus,  whose  father  had 
borne  the  office  of  a  censor,  and  re¬ 
ceived  the  honour  of  a  triumph,  was 
educated  in  a  little  house  together  with  his  two 
brothers,  who  both  married  in  their  parents’ 
lifetime;  they  kept  but  one  table  amongst 
them;  all  which,  perhaps,  was  not  the  least 
reason  of  his  own  temperance  and  moderation 
in  diet.  One  of  his  brothers  dying,  he  married 
his  widow,  by  whom  he  had  his  children; 
neither  was  there  in  these  respects  any  of  the 


Romans  who  lived  a  more  orderly  life  than  he 
did,  though  later  in  life  he  was  suspected  to 
have  been  too  familiar  with  one  of  the  vestal 
virgins,  named  Licinia,  who  was,  nevertheless, 
acquitted,  upon  an  impeachment  brought 
against  her  by  one  Plotinus.  Licinia  stood  pos¬ 
sessed  of  a  beautiful  property  in  the  suburbs, 
which  Crassus  desiring  to  purchase  at  a  low 
price,  for  this  reason  was  frequent  in  his  atten¬ 
tions  to  her,  which  gave  occasion  to  the  scan¬ 
dal,  and  his  avarice,  so  to  say,  serving  to  clear 


CRASSUS 

him  of  the  crime,  he  was  acquitted.  Nor  did 
he  leave  the  lady  till  he  had  got  the  estate. 

People  were  wont  to  say  that  the  many  vir¬ 
tues  of  Crassus  were  darkened  by  the  one 
vice  of  avarice,  and  indeed  he  seemed  to  have 
no  other  but  that;  for  it  being  the  most  pre¬ 
dominant,  obscured  others  to  which  he  was 
inclined.  The  arguments  in  proof  of  his  avarice 
were  the  vastness  of  his  estate,  and  the  manner 
of  raising  it;  for  whereas  at  first  he  was  not 
worth  above  three  hundred  talents,  yet,  though 
in  the  course  of  his  political  life  he  dedicated 
the  tenth  of  all  he  had  to  Hercules,  and  feasted 
the  people,  and  gave  to  every  citizen  corn 
enough  to  serve  him  three  months,  upon  cast¬ 
ing  up  his  accounts,  before  he  went  upon  his 
Parthian  expedition,  he  found  his  possessions 
to  amount  to  seven  thousand  one  hundred  tal¬ 
ents;  most  of  which,  if  we  may  scandal  him 
with  a  truth,  he  got  by  fire  and  rapine,  making 
his  advantages  of  the  public  calamities. 

For  when  Sulla  seized  the  city,  and  exposed 
to  sale  the  goods  of  those  that  he  had  caused  to 
be  slain,  accounting  them  booty  and  spoils, 
and,  indeed,  calling  them  so  too,  and  was  de¬ 
sirous  of  making  as  many,  and  as  eminent  men 
as  he  could,  partakers  in  the  crime,  Crassus 
never  was  the  man  that  refused  to  accept,  or 
give  money  for  them.  Moreover,  observing 
how  extremely  subject  the  city  was  to  fire  and 
falling  down  of  houses,  by  reason  of  their 
height  and  their  standing  so  near  together,  he 
bought  slaves  that  were  builders  and  archi¬ 
tects,  and  when  he  had  collected  these  to  the 
number  of  more  than  five  hundred,  he  made  it 
his  practice  to  buy  houses  that  were  on  fire, 
and  those  in  the  neighbourhood,  which,  in  the 
immediate  danger  and  uncertainty  the  pro¬ 
prietors  were  willing  to  part  with  for  little  or 
nothing,  so  that  the  greatest  part  of  Rome,  at 
one  time  or  other,  came  into  his  hands.  Yet  for 
all  he  had  so  many  workmen,  he  never  built 
anything  but  his  own  house,  and  used  to  say 
xthat  those  that  were  addicted  to  building 
would  undo  themselves  soon  enough  without 
the  help  of  other  enemies. 

And  though  he  had  many  silver  mines,  and 
much  valuable  land,  and  labourers  to  work  in 
it,  yet  all  this  was  nothing  in  comparison  of  his 
slaves,  such  a  number  and  variety  did  he  pos¬ 
sess  of  excellent  readers,  amanuenses,  silver¬ 
smiths,  stewards  and  table-waiters,  whose  in¬ 
struction  he  always  attended  to  himself,  super¬ 
intending  in  person  while  they  learned,  and 
teaching  them  himself,  accounting  it  the  main 
duty  of  a  master  to  look  over  the  servants  that 


439 

are,  indeed,  the  living  tools  of  housekeeping; 
and  in  this,  indeed,  he  was  in  the  right,  in 
thinking,  that  is,  as  he  used  to  say,  that  ser¬ 
vants  ought  to  look  after  all  other  things,  and 
the  master  after  them.  For  economy,  which  in 
things  inanimate  is  but  money-making,  when 
exercised  over  men  becomes  policy. 

But  it  was  surely  a  mistaken  judgment, 
when  he  said  no  man  was  to  be  accounted  rich 
that  could  not  maintain  an  army  at  his  own 
cost  and  charges,  for  war,  as  Archidamus  well 
observed,  is  not  fed  at  a  fixed  allowance,  so 
that  there  is  no  saying  what  wealth  suffices  for 
it,  and  certainly  it  was  one  very  far  removed 
from  that  of  Marius;  for  when  he  had  distrib¬ 
uted  fourteen  acres  of  land  a  man,  and  under¬ 
stood  that  some  desired  more,  “God  forbid,” 
said  he,  “that  any  Roman  should  think  that 
too  little  which  is  enough  to  keep  him  alive 
and  well.” 

Crassus,  however,  was  very  eager  to  be  hos¬ 
pitable  to  strangers;  he  kept  open  house,  and 
to  his  friends  he  would  lend  money  without 
interest,  but  called  it  in  precisely  at  the  time; 
so  that  his  kindness  was  often  thought  worse 
than  the  paying  the  interest  would  have  been. 
His  entertainments  were,  for  the  most  part, 
plain  and  citizenlike,  the  company  general  and 
popular;  good  taste  and  kindness  made  them 
pleasanter  than  sumptuosity  would  have  done. 

As  for  learning  he  chiefly  cared  for  rhetoric, 
and  what  would  be  serviceable  with  large 
numbers;  he  became  one  of  the  best  speakers 
at  Rome,  and  by  his  pains  and  industry  outdid 
the  best  natural  orators.  For  there  was  no  trial 
how  soever  mean  and  contemptible  that  he 
came  to  unprepared;  nay,  several  times  he  un¬ 
dertook  and  concluded  a  cause  when  Pompey 
and  Caesar  and  Cicero  refused  to  stand  up,  up¬ 
on  which  account  particularly  he  got  the  love 
of  the  people,  who  looked  upon  him  as  a  dili¬ 
gent  and  careful  man,  ready  to  help  and  suc¬ 
cour  his  fellow  citizens.  Besides,  the  people 
were  pleased  with  his  courteous  and  unpre¬ 
tending  salutations  and  greetings,  for  he  never 
met  any  citizen  however  humble  and  low,  but 
he  returned  him  his  salute  by  name. 

He  was  looked  upon  as  a  man  well-read  in 
history,  and  pretty  well  versed  in  Aristotle’s 
philosophy,  in  which  one  Alexander  instructed 
him,  a  man  whose  intercourse  with  Crassus 
gave  a  sufficient  proof  of  his  good  nature  and 
gentle  disposition;  for  it  is  hard  to  say  whether 
he  was  poorer  when  he  entered  into  his  serv¬ 
ice,  or  while  he  continued  in  it;  for  being  his 
only  friend  that  used  to  accompany  him  when 


440 

travelling,  he  used  to  receive  from  him  a  cloak 
for  the  journey,  and  when  he  came  home  had 
it  demanded  from  him  again;  poor,  patient 
sufferer,  when  even  the  philosophy  he  profess¬ 
ed  did  not  look  upon  poverty  as  a  thing  indif¬ 
ferent.  But  of  this  hereafter. 

When  Cinna  and  Marius  got  the  power  in 
their  hands  it  was  soon  perceived  that  they  had 
not  come  back  for  any  good  they  intended  to 
their  country,  but  to  effect  the  ruin  and  utter 
destruction  of  the  nobility.  And  as  many  as 
they  could  lay  their  hands  on  they  slew, 
amongst  whom  were  Crassus’s  father  and 
brother;  he  himself,  being  very  young,  for  the 
moment  escaped  the  danger;  but  understand¬ 
ing  that  he  was  every  way  beset  and  hunted 
after  by  the  tyrants,  taking  with  him  three 
friends  and  ten  servants,  with  all  possible  speed 
he  Hed  into  Spain,  having  formerly  been  there 
and  secured  a  great  number  of  friends,  while 
his  father  was  praetor  of  that  country. 

But  finding  all  people  in  a  consternation, 
and  trembling  at  the  cruelty  of  Marius,  as  if  he 
was  already  standing  over  them  in  person,  he 
durst  not  discover  himself  to  anybody,  but  hid 
himself  in  a  large  cave  which  was  by  the  sea¬ 
shore,  and  belonged  to  Vibius  Pacianus,  to 
whom  he  sent  one  of  his  servants  to  sound 
him,  his  provisions,  also,  beginning  to  fail. 
Vibius  was  well  pleased  at  his  escape,  and  in¬ 
quiring  the  place  of  his  abode  and  the  number 
of  his  companions,  he  went  not  to  him  him¬ 
self,  but  commanded  his  steward  to  provide 
every  day  a  good  meal’s  meat,  and  carry  it  and 
leave  it  near  such  a  rock,  and  to  return  without 
taking  any  further  notice  or  being  inquisitive, 
promising  him  his  liberty  if  he  did  as  he  com¬ 
manded  and  that  he  would  kill  him  if  he  in¬ 
termeddled. 

The  cave  is  not  far  from  the  sea;  a  small  and 
insignificant  looking  opening  in  the  cliffs  con¬ 
ducts  you  in;  when  you  are  entered,  a  wonder¬ 
fully  high  roof  spreads  above  you,  and  large 
chambers  open  out  one  beyond  another,  nor 
does  it  lack  either  water  or  light,  for  a  very 
pleasant  and  wholesome  spring  runs  at  the 
foot  of  the  cliffs,  and  natural  chinks,  in  the 
most  advantageous  place,  let  in  the  light  all 
day  long,  and  the  thickness  of  the  rock  makes 
the  air  within  pure  and  clear,  all  the  wet  and 
moisture  being  carried  off  into  the  spring. 

While  Crassus  remained  here,  the  steward 
brought  them  what  was  necessary,  but  never 
saw  them,  nor  knew  anything  of  the  matter, 
though  they  within  saw,  and  expected  him  at 
the  customary  times.  Neither  was  their  enter- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

tainment  such  as  just  to  keep  them  alive,  but 
given  them  in  abundance  and  for  their  enjoy¬ 
ment;  for  Pacianus  resolved  to  treat  him  with 
all  imaginable  kindness,  and  considering  that 
he  was  a  young  man,  thought  it  well  to  gratify 
a  little  his  youthful  inclinations;  for  to  give 
just  what  is  needful  seems  rather  to  come  from 
necessity  than  from  a  hearty  friendship.  Once 
taking  with  him  two  female  servants,  he  show¬ 
ed  them  the  place  and  bade  them  go  in  boldly, 
whom  when  Crassus  and  his  friends  saw,  they 
were  afraid  of  being  betrayed  and  demanded 
what  they  were,  and  what  they  would  have. 
They,  according  as  they  were  instructed,  an¬ 
swered,  they  came  to  wait  upon  their  master, 
who  was  hid  in  that  cave.  And  so  Crassus  per¬ 
ceiving  it  was  a  piece  of  pleasantry  and  of 
good-will  on  the  part  of  Vibius,  took  them  in 
and  kept  them  there  with  him  as  long  as  he 
stayed,  and  employed  them  to  give  informa¬ 
tion  to  Vibius  of  what  they  wanted,  and  how 
they  were.  Fenestella  says  he  saw  one  of  them, 
then  very  old,  and  often  heard  her  speak  of  the 
time  and  repeat  the  story  with  pleasure. 

After  Crassus  had  lain  concealed  there  eight 
months,  on  hearing  that  Cinna  was  dead,  he 
appeared  abroad,  and  a  great  number  of  peo¬ 
ple  flocking  to  him,  out  of  whom  he  selected 
a  body  of  two  thousand  five  hundred,  he  visit¬ 
ed  many  cities,  and,  as  some  write,  sacked 
Malaca,  which  he  himself,  however,  always 
denied,  and  contradicted  all  who  said  so. 

Afterwards,  getting  together  some  ships,  he 
passed  into  Africa,  and  joined  with  Metellus 
Pius,  an  eminent  person  that  had  raised  a  very 
considerable  force;  but  upon  some  difference 
between  him  and  Metellus,  he  stayed  not  long 
there,  but  went  over  to  Sulla,  by  whom  he  was 
very  much  esteemed.  When  Sulla  passed  over 
into  Italy,  he  was  anxious  to  put  all  the  young 
men  that  were  with  him  in  employment;  and 
as  he  despatched  some  one  way,  and  some  an¬ 
other,  Crassus,  on  its  falling  to  his  share  to 
raise  men  among  the  Marsians,  demanded  a 
guard,  having  to  pass  through  the  enemy’s 
country,  upon  which  Sulla  replied  sharply,  “I 
give  you  for  guard  your  father,  your  brother, 
your  friends  and  kindred,  whose  unjust  and 
cruel  murder  I  am  now  going  to  revenge”;  and 
Crassus,  being  nettled,  went  his  way,  broke 
boldly  through  the  enemy,  collected  a  consid¬ 
erable  force,  and  in  all  Sulla’s  wars  acted  with 
great  zeal  and  courage. 

And  in  these  times  and  occasions,  they  say, 
began  the  emulation  and  rivalry  for  glory  be¬ 
tween  him  and  Pompey;  for  though  Pompey 


CRASSUS 

was  the  younger  man,  and  had  the  disadvan¬ 
tage  to  be  descended  of  a  father  that  was  dis- 
esteemed  by  the  citizens,  and  hated  as  much  as 
ever  man  was,  yet  in  these  actions  he  shone  out 
and  was  proved  so  great  that  Sulla  always 
used,  when  he  came  in,  to  stand  up  and  un¬ 
cover  his  head,  an  honour  which  he  seldom 
showed  to  older  men  and  his  own  equals,  and 
always  saluted  him  Imperator.  This  fired  and 
stung  Crassus,  though,  indeed,  he  could  not 
with  any  fairness  claim  to  be  preferred;  for  he 
both  wanted  experience,  and  his  two  innate 
vices,  sordidness  and  avarice,  tarnished  all  the 
lustre  of  his  actions. 

For  when  he  had  taken  Tudertia,  a  town  of 
the  Umbrians,  he  converted,  it  was  said,  all  the 
spoils  to  his  own  use,  for  which  he  was  com¬ 
plained  of  to  Sulla.  But  in  the  last  and  greatest 
battle  before  Rome  itself,  when  Sulla  was  wors¬ 
ted,  some  of  his  battalions  giving  ground,  and 
others  being  quite  broken,  Crassus  got  the  vic¬ 
tory  on  the  right  wing,  which  he  commanded, 
and  pursued  the  enemy  till  night,  and  then 
sent  to  Sulla  to  acquaint  him  with  his  success, 
and  demand  provision  for  his  soldiers.  In  the 
time,  however,  of  the  proscriptions  and  seques¬ 
trations,  he  lost  his  repute  again,  by  making 
great  purchases  for  little  or  nothing,  and  ask¬ 
ing  for  grants.  Nay,  they  say  he  proscribed  one 
of  the  Bruttians  without  Sulla’s  order,  only  for 
his  own  profit,  and  that,  on  discovering  this, 
Sulla  never  after  trusted  him  in  any  public  af¬ 
fairs. 

As  no  man  was  more  cunning  than  Crassus 
to  ensnare  others  by  flattery,  so  no  man  lay 
more  open  to  it,  or  swallowed  it  more  greedily 
than  himself.  And  this  particularly  was  observ¬ 
ed  of  him,  that  though  he  was  the  most  covet¬ 
ous  man  in  the  world,  yet  he  habitually  dis¬ 
liked  and  cried  out  against  others  who  were  so. 

It  troubled  him  to  see  Pompey  so  successful 
in  all  his  undertakings;  that  he  had  had  a  tri¬ 
umph  before  he  was  capable  to  sit  in  the  sen¬ 
ate,  and  that  the  people  had  surnamed  him 
Magnus,  or  the  great.  When  somebody  was 
saying  Pompey  the  Great  was  coming,  he  smil¬ 
ed,  and  asked  him,  “How  big  is  he?”  Despair¬ 
ing  to  equal  him  by  feats  of  arms,  he  betook 
himself  to  civil  life,  where  by  doing  kind¬ 
nesses,  pleading,  lending  money,  by  speaking 
and  canvassing  among  the  people  for  those 
who  had  objects  to  obtain  from  them,  he  grad¬ 
ually  gained  as  great  honour  and  power  as 
Pompey  had  from  his  many  famous  expedi¬ 
tions. 

And  it  was  a  curious  thing  in  their  rivalry, 


441 

that  Pompey’s  name  and  interests  in  the  city 
were  greatest  when  he  was  absent,  for  his  re¬ 
nown  in  war,  but  when  present  he  was  often 
less  successful  than  Crassus,  by  reason  of  his 
superciliousness  and  haughty  way  of  living, 
shunning  crowds  of  people,  and  appearing 
rarely  in  the  Forum,  and  assisting  only  some 
few,  and  that  not  readily,  that  his  influence 
might  be  the  stronger  when  he  came  to  use  it 
for  himself.  Whereas  Crassus,  being  a  friend 
always  at  hand,  ready  to  be  had  and  easy  of 
access,  and  always  with  his  hands  full  of  other 
people’s  business,  with  his  freedom  and  cour¬ 
tesy,  got  the  better  of  Pompey’s  formality.  In 
point  of  dignity  of  person,  eloquence  of  lan¬ 
guage,  and  attractiveness  of  countenance,  they 
were  pretty  equally  excellent. 

But,  however,  this  emulation  never  trans¬ 
ported  Crassus  so  far  as  to  make  him  bear  en¬ 
mity  or  any  ill-will;  for  though  he  was  vexed 
to  see  Pompey  and  Caesar  preferred  to  him,  yet 
he  never  mingled  any  hostility  or  malice  with 
his  jealousy;  though  Caesar,  when  he  was  taken 
captive  by  the  corsairs  in  Asia,  cried  out,  “O 
Crassus,  how  glad  you  will  be  at  the  news  of 
my  captivity!”  Afterwards  they  lived  together 
on  friendly  terms,  for  when  Caesar  was  going 
praetor  into  Spain,  and  his  creditors,  he  being 
then  in  want  of  money,  came  upon  him  and 
seized  his  equipage,  Crassus  then  stood  by  him 
and  relieved  him,  and  was  his  security  for  eight 
hundred  and  thirty  talents. 

And  in  general,  Rome  being  divided  into 
three  great  interests,  those  of  Pompey,  Caesar, 
and  Crassus  (for  as  for  Cato,  his  fame  was 
greater  than  his  power,  and  he  was  rather  ad¬ 
mired  than  followed),  the  sober  and  quiet  part 
were  for  Pompey,  the  restless  and  hot-headed 
followed  Caesar’s  ambition,  but  Crassus 
trimmed  between  them,  making  advantages 
of  both,  and  changed  sides  continually,  being 
neither  a  trusty  friend  nor  an  implacable  en¬ 
emy,  and  easily  abandoned  both  his  attach¬ 
ments  and  his  animosities,  as  he  found  it  for 
his  advantage,  so  that  in  short  spaces  of  time 
the  same  men  and  the  same  measures  had  him 
both  as  their  supporter  and  as  their  opponent. 

He  was  much  liked,  but  was  feared  as  much 
or  even  more.  At  any  rate,  when  Sicinius,  who 
was  the  greatest  troubler  of  the  magistrates 
and  ministers  of  his  time,  was  asked  how  it 
was  he  let  Crassus  alone,  “Oh,”  said  he,  “he 
carries  hay  on  his  horns,”  alluding  to  the  cus¬ 
tom  of  tying  hay  to  the  horns  of  the  bull  that 
used  to  butt,  that  people  might  keep  out  of  his 
way. 


442 

The  insurrection  of  the  gladiators  and  the 
devastation  of  Italy,  commonly  called  the  war 
of  Spartacus,  began  upon  this  occasion.  One 
Lentulus  Batiates  trained  up  a  great  many 
gladiators  in  Capua,  most  of  them  Gauls  and 
Thracians,  who,  not  for  any  fault  by  them 
committed,  but  simply  through  the  cruelty  of 
their  master,  were  kept  in  confinement  for  this 
object  of  fighting  one  with  another.  Two  hun¬ 
dred  of  these  formed  a  plan  to  escape,  but  be¬ 
ing  discovered,  those  of  them  who  became 
aware  of  it  in  time  to  anticipate  their  master, 
being  seventy-eight,  got  out  of  a  cook’s  shop 
chopping-knives  and  spits,  and  made  their  way 
through  the  city,  and  lighting  by  the  way  on 
several  waggons  that  were  carrying  gladiators’ 
arms  to  another  city,  they  seized  upon  them 
and  armed  themselves. 

And  seizing  upon  a  defensible  place,  they 
chose  three  captains,  of  whom  Spartacus  was 
chief,  a  Thracian  of  one  of  the  nomad  tribes, 
and  a  man  not  only  of  high  spirit  and  valiant, 
but  in  understanding,  also,  and  in  gentleness 
superior  to  his  condition,  and  more  of  a  Gre¬ 
cian  than  the  people  of  his  country  usually  are. 
When  he  first  came  to  be  sold  at  Rome,  they 
say  a  snake  coiled  itself  upon  his  face  as  he  lay 
asleep,  and  his  wife,  who  at  this  latter  time 
also  accompanied  him  in  his  flight,  his  country¬ 
woman,  a  kind  of  prophetess,  and  one  of  those 
possessed  with  the  bacchanal  frenzy,  declared 
that  it  was  a  sign  portending  great  and  formid¬ 
able  power  to  him  with  no  happy  event. 

First,  then,  routing  those  that  came  out  of 
Capua  against  them,  and  thus  procuring  a 
quantity  of  proper  soldiers’  arms,  they  gladly 
threw  away  their  own  as  barbarous  and  dis¬ 
honourable.  Afterwards  Clodius,  the  praetor, 
took  the  command  against  them  with  a  body 
of  three  thousand  men  from  Rome,  and  be¬ 
sieged  them  within  a  mountain,  accessible  only 
by  one  narrow  and  difficult  passage,  which 
Clodius  kept  guarded,  encompassed  on  all 
other  sides  with  steep  and  slippery  precipices. 
Upon  the  top,  however,  grew  a  great  many 
wild  vines,  and  cutting  down  as  many  of  their 
boughs  as  they  had  need  of,  they  twisted  them 
into  strong  ladders  long  enough  to  reach  from 
thence  to  the  bottom,  by  which,  without  any 
danger,  they  got  down  all  but  one,  who  stayed 
there  to  throw  them  down  their  arms,  and 
after  this  succeeded  in  saving  himself.  The  Ro¬ 
mans  were  ignorant  of  all  this,  and,  therefore, 
coming  upon  them  in  the  rear,  they  assaulted 
them  unawares  and  took  their  camp.  Several, 
also,  of  the  shepherds  and  herdsmen  that  were 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

there,  stout  and  nimble  fellows,  revolted  over 
to  them,  to  some  of  whom  they  gave  complete 
arms,  and  made  use  of  others  as  scouts  and 
light-armed  soldiers. 

Publius  Varinus,  the  praetor,  was  now  sent 
against  them,  whose  lieutenant,  Furius,  with 
two  thousand  men,  they  fought  and  routed. 
Then  Cossinius  was  sent  with  considerable 
forces,  to  give  his  assistance  and  advice,  and 
him  Spartacus  missed  but  very  little  of  captur¬ 
ing  in  person,  as  he  was  bathing  at  Salinae;  for 
he  with  great  difficulty  made  his  escape,  while 
Spartacus  possessed  himself  of  his  baggage, 
and  following  the  chase  with  a  great  slaughter, 
stormed  his  camp  and  took  it,  where  Cossinius 
himself  was  slain. 

After  many  successful  skirmishes  with  the 
praetor  himself,  in  one  of  which  he  took  his 
lictors  and  his  own  horse,  he  began  to  be  great 
and  terrible;  but  wisely  considering  that  he 
was  not  to  expect  to  match  the  force  of  the 
empire,  he  marched  his  army  towards  the 
Alps,  intending,  when  he  had  passed  them, 
that  every  man  should  go  to  his  own  home, 
some  to  Thrace,  some  to  Gaul.  But  they, 
grown  confident  in  their  numbers,  and  puffed 
up  with  their  success,  would  give  no  obedience 
to  him,  but  went  about  and  ravaged  Italy;  so 
that  now  the  senate  was  not  only  moved  at 
the  indignity  and  baseness,  both  of  the  enemy 
and  of  the  insurrection,  but,  looking  upon  it 
as  a  matter  of  alarm  and  of  dangerous  conse¬ 
quence,  sent  out  both  the  consuls  to  it,  as  to 
a  great  and  difficult  enterprise. 

The  consul  Gellius,  falling  suddenly  upon  a 
party  of  Germans,  who  through  contempt  and 
confidence  had  straggled  from  Spartacus,  cut 
them  all  to  pieces.  But  when  Lentulus  with  a 
large  army  besieged  Spartacus,  he  sallied  out 
upon  him,  and,  joining  battle,  defeated  his 
chief  officers,  and  captured  all  his  baggage.  As 
he  made  toward  the  Alps,  Cassius,  who  was 
praetor  of  that  part  of  Gaul  that  lies  about  the 
Po,  met  him  with  ten  thousand  men,  but  being 
overcome  in  battle,  he  had  much  ado  to  escape 
himself,  with  the  loss  of  a  great  many  of  his 
men. 

When  the  senate  understood  this,  they  were 
displeased  at  the  consuls,  and  ordering  them  to 
meddle  no  further,  they  appointed  Crassus 
general  of  the  war,  and  a  great  many  of  the  no¬ 
bility  went  volunteers  with  him,  partly  out  of 
friendship,  and  partly  to  get  honour.  He  stayed 
himself  on  the  borders  of  Picenum,  expecting 
Spartacus  would  come  that  way,  and  sent  his 
lieutenant,  Mummius,  with  two  legions,  to 


CRASSUS 

wheel  about  and  observe  the  enemy’s*  motions, 
but  upon  no  account  to  engage  or  skirmish. 
But  he,  upon  the  first  opportunity,  joined  bat¬ 
tle,  and  was  routed,  having  a  great  many  of  his 
men  slain,  and  a  great  many  only  saving  their 
lives  with  the  loss  of  their  arms. 

Crassus  rebuked  Mummius  severely,  and 
arming  the  soldiers  again,  he  made  them  find 
sureties  for  their  arms,  that  they  would  part 
with  them  no  more,  and  five  hundred  that 
were  the  beginners  of  the  flight  he  divided  into 
fifty  tens,  and  one  of  each  was  to  die  by  lot, 
thus  reviving  the  ancient  Roman  punishment 
of  decimation,  where  ignominy  is  added  to  the 
penalty  of  death,  with  a  variety  of  appalling 
and  terrible  circumstances,  presented  before 
the  eyes  of  the  whole  army,  assembled  as  spec¬ 
tators. 

When  he  had  thus  reclaimed  his  men,  he  led 
them  against  the  enemy;  but  Spartacus  retreat¬ 
ed  through  Lucania  toward  the  sea,  and  in  the 
straights  meeting  with  some  Cilician  pirate 
ships,  he  had  thoughts  of  attempting  Sicily, 
where,  by  landing  two  thousand  men,  he  hoped 
to  new  kindle  the  war  of  the  slaves,  which  was 
but  lately  extinguished,  and  seemed  to  need 
but  little  fuel  to  set  it  burning  again.  But  after 
the  pirates  had  struck  a  bargain  with  him,  and 
received  his  gifts,  they  deceived  him  and 
sailed  away.  He  thereupon  retired  again  from 
the  sea,  and  established  his  army  in  the  penin¬ 
sula  of  Rhegium;  there  Crassus  came  upon 
him,  and  considering  the  nature  of  the  place, 
which  of  itself  suggested  the  undertaking,  he 
set  to  work  to  build  a  wall  across  the  isthmus; 
thus  keeping  his  soldiers  at  once  from  idleness 
and  his  foes  from  forage. 

This  great  and  difficult  work  he  perfected  in 
a  space  of  time  short  beyond  all  expectation, 
making  a  ditch  from  one  sea  to  the  other,  over 
the  neck  of  land,  three  hundred  furlongs  long, 
fifteen  feet  broad,  and  as  much  in  depth,  and 
above  it  built  a  wonderfully  high  and  strong 
wall.  All  which  Spartacus  at  first  slighted  and 
despised,  but  when  provisions  began  to  fail, 
and  on  his  proposing  to  pass  further,  he  found 
he  was  walled  in,  and  no  more  was  to  be  had 
in  the  peninsula,  taking  the  opportunity  of  a 
snowy,  stormy  night,  he  filled  up  part  of  the 
ditch  with  earth  and  boughs  of  trees,  and  so 
passed  the  third  part  of  his  army  over. 

Crassus  was  afraid  lest  he  should  march  di¬ 
rectly  to  Rome,  but  was  soon  eased  of  that  fear 
when  he  saw  many  of  his  men  break  out  in  a 
mutiny  and  quit  him,  and  encamp  by  them¬ 
selves  upon  the  Lucanian  lake.  This  lake  they 


443 

say  changes  at  intervals  of  time,  and  is  some¬ 
times  sweet,  and  sometimes  so  salt  that  it  can¬ 
not  be  drunk.  Crassus  falling  upon  these  beat 
them  from  the  lake,  but  he  could  not  pursue 
the  slaughter,  because  of  Spartacus  suddenly 
coming  up  and  checking  the  flight. 

Now  he  began  to  repent  that  he  had  previ¬ 
ously  written  to  the  senate  to  call  Lucullus  out 
of  Thrace,  and  Pompey  out  of  Spain;  so  that 
he  did  all  he  could  to  finish  the  war  before  they 
came,  knowing  that  the  honour  of  the  action 
would  redound  to  him  that  came  to  his  assist¬ 
ance.  Resolving,  therefore,  first  to  set  upon 
those  that  had  mutinied  and  encamped  apart, 
whom  Caius  Cannicius  and  Castus  command¬ 
ed,  he  sent  six  thousand  men  before  to  secure  a 
little  eminence,  and  to  do  it  as  privately  as  pos¬ 
sible,  which  that  they  might  do  they  covered 
their  helmets,  but  being  discovered  by  two 
women  that  were  sacrificing  for  the  enemy, 
they  had  been  in  great  hazard,  had  not  Crassus 
immediately  appeared,  and  engaged  in  a  bat¬ 
tle  which  proved  a  most  bloody  one.  Of  twelve 
thousand  three  hundred  whom  he  killed,  two 
only  were  found  wounded  in  their  backs,  the 
rest  all  having  died  standing  in  their  ranks  and 
fighting  bravely. 

Spartacus,  after  this  discomfiture,  retired  to 
the  mountains  of  Petelia,  but  Quintius,  one  of 
Crassus’s  officers,  and  Scrofa,  the  quaestor,  pur¬ 
sued  and  overtook  him.  But  when  Spartacus 
rallied  and  faced  them,  they  were  utterly  rout¬ 
ed  and  fled,  and  had  much  ado  to  carry  off  their 
quaestor,  who  was  wounded.  This  success, 
however,  ruined  Spartacus,  because  it  encour¬ 
aged  the  slaves,  who  now  disdained  any  longer 
to  avoid  fighting,  or  to  obey  their  officers,  but  as 
they  were  upon  the  march,  they  came  to  them 
with  their  swords  in  their  hands,  and  com¬ 
pelled  them  to  lead  them  back  again  through 
Lucania,  against  the  Romans,  the  very  thing 
which  Crassus  was  eager  for. 

For  news  was  already  brought  that  Pompey 
was  at  hand;  and  people  began  to  talk  openly 
that  the  honour  of  this  war  was  reserved  to 
him,  who  would  come  and  at  once  oblige  the 
enemy  to  fight  and  put  an  end  to  the  war.  Cras¬ 
sus,  therefore,  eager  to  fight  a  decisive  batde, 
encamped  very  near  the  enemy,  and  began  to 
make  lines  of  circumvallation;  but  the  slaves 
made  a  sally  and  attacked  the  pioneers.  As 
fresh  supplies  came  in  on  either  side,  Sparta¬ 
cus,  seeing  there  was  no  avoiding  it,  set  all  his 
army  in  array,  and  when  his  horse  was  brought 
him,  he  drew  out  his  sword  and  killed  him, 
saying,  if  he  got  the  day  he  should  have  a  great 


444 

many  better  horses  of  the  enemies’,  and  if  he 
lost  it  he  should  have  no  need  of  this.  And  so 
making  directly  towards  Crassus  himself, 
through  the  midst  of  arms  and  wounds,  he 
missed  him,  but  slew  two  centurions  that 
fell  upon  him  together.  At  last  being  de¬ 
serted  by  those  that  were  about  him,  he  him¬ 
self  stood  his  ground,  and,  surrounded  by  the 
enemy,  bravely  defending  himself,  was  cut 
in  pieces. 

But  though  Crassus  had  good  fortune,  and 
not  only  did  the  part  of  a  good  general,  but  gal¬ 
lantly  exposed  his  person,  yet  Pompey  had 
much  of  the  credit  of  the  action.  For  he  met 
with  many  of  the  fugitives,  and  slew  them,  and 
wrote  to  the  senate  that  Crassus  indeed  had 
vanquished  the  slaves  in  a  pitched  battle,  but 
that  he  had  put  an  end  to  the  war.  Pompey  was 
honoured  with  a  magnificent  triumph  for  his 
conquest  over  Sertorius  and  Spain,  while  Cras¬ 
sus  could  not  himself  so  much  as  desire  a  tri¬ 
umph  in  its  full  form,  and  indeed  it  was 
thought  to  look  but  meanly  in  him  to  accept  of 
the  lesser  honour,  called  the  ovation,  for  a  ser¬ 
vile  war,  and  perform  a  procession  on  foot. 
The  difference  between  this  and  the  other,  and 
the  origin  of  the  name,  are  explained  in  the  life 
of  Marcellus. 

And  Pompey  being  immediately  invited  to 
the  consulship,  Crassus,  who  had  hoped  to  be 
joined  with  him,  did  not  scruple  to  request  his 
assistance.  Pompey  most  readily  seized  the  op¬ 
portunity,  as  he  desired  by  all  means  to  lay 
some  obligation  upon  Crassus,  and  zealously 
promoted  his  interest;  and  at  last  he  declared 
in  one  of  his  speeches  to  the  people  that  he 
should  be  not  less  beholden  to  them  for  his  col¬ 
league  than  for  the  honour  of  his  own  appoint¬ 
ment. 

But  once  entered  upon  the  employment,  this 
amity  continued  not  long;  but  differing  almost 
in  everything,  disagreeing,  quarrelling,  and 
contending,  they  spent  the  time  of  their  con¬ 
sulship  without  effecting  any  measure  of  con¬ 
sequence,  except  that  Crassus  made  a  great 
sacrifice  to  Hercules,  and  feasted  the  people  at 
ten  thousand  tables,  and  measured  them  out 
corn  for  three  months. 

When  their  command  was  now  ready  to  ex¬ 
pire,  and  they  were,  as  it  happened,  addressing 
the  people,  a  Roman  knight,  one  Onatius  Au¬ 
relius,  an  ordinary  private  person,  living  in  the 
country,  mounted  the  hustings,  and  declared  a 
vision  he  had  in  his  sleep.  “Jupiter,”  said  he, 
“appeared  to  me,  and  commanded  me  to  tell 
you,  that  you  should  not  suffer  your  consuls  to 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

lay  down  their  charge  before  they  are  made 
friends.” 

When  he  had  spoken,  the  people  cried  out 
that  they  should  be  reconciled.  Pompey  stood 
still  and  said  nothing,  but  Crassus,  first  offer¬ 
ing  him  his  hand,  said,  “I  cannot  think,  my 
countrymen,  that  I  do  anything  humiliating  or 
unworthy  of  myself,  if  I  make  the  first  offers  of 
accommodation  and  friendship  with  Pompey, 
whom  you  yourselves  styled  the  Great  before 
he  was  of  man’s  estate,  and  decreed  him  a  tri¬ 
umph  before  he  was  capable  of  sitting  in  the 
senate.” 

This  is  what  was  memorable  in  Crassus’s 
consulship,  but  as  for  his  censorship,  that  was 
altogether  idle  and  inactive,  for  he  neither 
made  a  scrutiny  of  the  senate,  nor  took  a  re¬ 
view  of  the  horsemen,  nor  a  census  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  though  he  had  as  mild  a  man  as  could  be 
desired  for  his  colleague,  Lutatius  Catulus.  It 
is  said,  indeed,  that  when  Crassus  intended  a 
violent  and  unjust  measure,  which  was  the  re¬ 
ducing  Egypt  to  be  tributary  to  Rome,  Catulus 
strongly  opposed  it,  and  falling  out  about  it, 
they  laid  down  their  office  by  consent. 

In  the  great  conspiracy  of  Cataline,  which 
was  very  near  subverting  the  government, 
Crassus  was  not  without  some  suspicion  of  be¬ 
ing  concerned,  and  one  man  came  forward  and 
declared  him  to  be  in  the  plot;  but  nobody  cred¬ 
ited  him.  Yet  Cicero,  in  one  of  his  orations, 
clearly  charges  both  Crassus  and  Caesar  with 
the  guilt  of  it,  though  that  speech  was  not  pub¬ 
lished  till  they  were  both  dead.  But  in  his 
speech  upon  his  consulship,  he  declares  that 
Crassus  came  to  him  by  night,  and  brought  a 
letter  concerning  Cataline,  stating  the  details 
of  the  conspiracy.  Crassus  hated  him  ever  after, 
but  was  hindered  by  his  son  from  doing  him 
any  injury;  for  Publius  was  a  great  lover  of 
learning  and  eloquence,  and  a  constant  follow¬ 
er  of  Cicero,  insomuch  that  he  put  himself  in¬ 
to  mourning  when  he  was  accused,  and  in¬ 
duced  the  other  young  men  to  do  the  same. 
And  at  last  he  reconciled  him  to  his  father. 

Caesar  now  returning  from  his  command, 
and  designing  to  get  the  consulship,  and  seeing 
that  Crassus  and  Pompey  were  again  at  vari¬ 
ance,  was  unwilling  to  disoblige  one  by  mak¬ 
ing  application  to  the  other,  and  despaired  of 
success  without  the  help  of  one  of  them;  he 
therefore  made  it  his  business  to  reconcile 
them,  making  it  appear  that  by  weakening 
each  other’s  influence  they  were  promoting  the 
interest  of  the  Ciceros,  the  Catuli,  and  the  Ca¬ 
tos,  who  would  really  be  of  no  account  if  they 


CRASSUS 

would  join  their  interests  and  their  .factions, 
and  act  together  in  public  with  one  policy  and 
one  united  power. 

And  so  reconciling  them  by  his  persuasions, 
out  of  the  three  parties  he  set  up  one  irresistible 
power,  which  utterly  subverted  the  govern¬ 
ment  both  of  senate  and  people.  Not  that  he 
made  either  Pompey  or  Crassus  greater  than 
they  were  before,  but  by  their  means  made 
himself  greatest  of  all;  for  by  the  help  of  the 
adherents  of  both,  he  was  at  once  gloriously 
declared  consul,  which  office  when  he  admin¬ 
istered  with  credit,  they  decreed  him  the  com¬ 
mand  of  an  army,  and  allotted  him  Gaul  for 
his  province,  and  so  placed  him  as  it  were  in 
the  citadel,  not  doubting  but  they  should  di¬ 
vide  the  rest  at  their  pleasure  between  them¬ 
selves,  when  they  had  confirmed  him  in  his  al¬ 
lotted  command.  Pompey  was  actuated  in  all 
this  by  an  immoderate  desire  of  ruling,  but 
Crassus,  adding  to  his  old  disease  of  covetous¬ 
ness,  a  new  passion  after  trophies  and  tri¬ 
umphs,  emulous  of  Caesar’s  exploits,  not  con¬ 
tent  to  be  beneath  him  in  these  points,  though 
above  him  in  all  others,  could  not  be  at  rest,  till 
it  ended  in  an  ignominious  overthrow  and  a 
public  calamity. 

When  Caesar  came  out  of  Gaul  to  Lucca,  a 
great  many  went  thither  from  Rome  to  meet 
him.  Pompey  and  Crassus  had  various  confer¬ 
ences  with  him  in  secret,  in  which  they  came 
to  the  resolution  to  proceed  to  still  more  deci¬ 
sive  steps,  and  to  get  the  whole  management  of 
affairs  into  their  hands,  Caesar  to  keep  his  army, 
and  Pompey  and  Crassus  to  obtain  new  ones 
and  new  provinces.  To  effect  all  which  there 
was  but  one  way,  the  getting  the  consulate  a 
second  time,  which  they  were  to  stand  for,  and 
Caesar  to  assist  them  by  writing  to  his  friends 
and  sending  many  of  his  soldiers  to  vote. 

But  when  they  returned  to  Rome,  their  de¬ 
sign  was  presently  suspected,  and  a  report  was 
soon  spread  that  this  interview  had  been  for 
no  good.  When  Marcellinus  and  Domitius 
asked  Pompey  in  the  senate  if  he  intended  to 
stand  for  the  consulship,  he  answered,  perhaps 
he  would,  perhaps  not;  and  being  urged  again, 
replied,  he  would  ask  it  of  the  honest  citizens, 
but  not  of  the  dishonest.  Which  answer  ap¬ 
pearing  too  haughty  and  arrogant,  Crassus 
said,  more  modestly,  that  he  would  desire  it  if 
it  might  be  for  the  advantage  of  the  public, 
otherwise  he  would  decline  it. 

Upon  this  some  others  took  confidence  and 
came  forward  as  candidates,  among  them  Do- 
mitius.  But  when  Pompey  and  Crassus  now 


445 

openly  appeared  for  it,  the  rest  were  afraid  and 
drew  back;  only  Cato  encouraged  Domitius, 
who  was  his  friend  and  relation,  to  proceed, 
exciting  him  to  persist,  as  though  he  was  now 
defending  the  public  liberty,  as  these  men,  he 
said,  did  not  so  much  aim  at  the  consulate  as  at 
arbitrary  government,  and  it  was  not  a  petition 
for  office,  but  a  seizure  of  provinces  and  armies. 
Thus  spoke  and  thought  Cato,  and  almost 
forcibly  compelled  Domitius  to  appear  in  the 
Forum,  where  many  sided  with  them.  For 
there  was,  indeed,  much  wonder  and  question 
among  the  people,  “Why  should  Pompey  and 
Crassus  want  another  consulship?  And  why 
they  two  together,  and  not  with  some  third 
person?  We  have  a  great  many  men  not  un¬ 
worthy  to  be  fellow-consuls  with  either  the  one 
or  the  other.” 

Pompey ’s  party,  being  apprehensive  of  this, 
committed  all  manner  of  indecencies  and  vio¬ 
lences,  and  amongst  other  things  lay  in  wait 
for  Domitius,  as  he  was  coming  thither  before 
daybreak  with  his  friends;  his  torch-bearer  they 
killed,  and  wounded  several  others,  of  whom 
Cato  was  one.  And  these  being  beaten  back 
and  driven  into  a  house,  Pompey  and  Crassus 
were  proclaimed  consuls.  Not  long  after,  they 
surrounded  the  house  with  armed  men,  thrust 
Cato  out  of  the  Forum,  killed  some  that  made 
resistance,  and  decreed  Caesar  his  command 
for  five  years  longer,  and  provinces  for  them¬ 
selves,  Syria  and  both  the  Spains,  which  being 
divided  by  lots,  Syria  fell  to  Crassus,  and  the 
Spains  to  Pompey. 

All  were  well  pleased  with  the  change,  for 
the  people  were  desirous  that  Pompey  should 
not  go  far  from  the  city,  and  he,  being  ex¬ 
tremely  fond  of  his  wife,  was  very  glad  to  con¬ 
tinue  there;  but  Crassus  was  so  transported 
with  his  fortune,  that  it  was  manifest  he 
thought  he  had  never  had  such  good  luck  be¬ 
fall  him  as  now,  so  that  he  had  much  to  do  to 
contain  himself  before  company  and  strangers; 
but  amongst  his  private  friends  he  let  fall 
many  vain  and  childish  words,  which  were 
unworthy  of  his  age,  and  contrary  to  his  usual 
character,  for  he  had  been  very  little  given  to 
boasting  hitherto. 

But  then  being  strangely  puffed  up,  and  his 
head  heated,  he  would  not  limit  his  fortune 
with  Parthia  and  Syria;  but  looking  on  the 
actions  of  Lucullus  against  Tigranes  and  the 
exploits  of  Pompey  against  Mithridates  as  but 
child’s  play,  he  proposed  to  himself  in  his 
hopes  to  pass  as  far  as  Bactria  and  India,  and 
the  utmost  ocean.  Not  that  he  was  called  upon 


446 

by  the  decree  which  appointed  him  to  his  office 
to  undertake  any  expedition  against  the  Par- 
thians,  but  it  was  well  known  that  he  was 
eager  for  it,  and  Caesar  wrote  to  him  out  of 
Gaul  commending  his  resolution,  and  inciting 
him  to  the  war. 

And  when  Ateius,  the  tribune  of  the  people, 
designed  to  stop  his  journey,  and  many  others 
murmured  that  one  man  should  undertake  a 
war  against  a  people  that  had  done  them  no 
injury,  and  were  at  amity  with  them,  he  de¬ 
sired  Pompey  to  stand  by  him  and  accompany 
him  out  of  the  town,  as  he  had  a  great  name 
amongst  the  common  people.  And  when  sev¬ 
eral  were  ready  prepared  to  interfere  and  raise 
an  outcry,  Pompey  appeared  with  a  pleasing 
countenance,  and  so  mollified  the  people  that 
they  let  Crassus  pass  quietly.  Ateius,  however, 
met  him,  and  first  by  word  of  mouth  warned 
and  conjured  him  not  to  proceed,  and  then 
commanded  his  attendant  officer  to  seize  him 
and  detain  him;  but  the  other  tribunes  not  per¬ 
mitting  it,  the  officer  released  Crassus. 

Ateius,  therefore,  running  to  the  gate,  when 
Crassus  was  come  thither,  set  down  a  chafing- 
dish  with  lighted  fire  in  it,  and  burning  in¬ 
cense  and  pouring  libations  on  it,  cursed  him 
with  dreadful  imprecations,  calling  upon  and 
naming  several  strange  and  horrible  deities.  In 
the  Roman  belief  there  is  so  much  virtue  in 
these  sacred  and  ancient  rites,  that  no  man  can 
escape  the  effects  of  them,  and  that  the  utterer 
himself  seldom  prospers;  so  that  they  are  not 
often  made  use  of,  and  but  upon  a  great  occa¬ 
sion.  And  Ateius  was  blamed  at  the  time  for 
resorting  to  them,  as  the  city  itself,  in  whose 
cause  he  used  them,  would  be  the  first  to  feel 
the  ill  effects  of  these  curses  and  supernatural 
terrors. 

Crassus  arrived  at  Brundusium,  and  though 
the  sea  was  very  rough,  he  had  not  patience  to 
wait,  but  went  on  board,  and  lost  many  of  his 
ships.  With  the  remnant  of  his  army  he 
marched  rapidly  through  Galatia,  where  meet¬ 
ing  with  King  Deiotarus,  who,  though  he  was 
very  old,  was  about  building  a  new  city,  Cras¬ 
sus  scoffingly  told  him,  “Your  majesty  begins 
to  build  at  the  twelfth  hour.”  “Neither  do  you,” 
said  he,  “O  general,  undertake  your  Parthian 
expedition  very  early.”  For  Crasssus  was  then 
sixty  years  old,  and  he  seemed  older  than  he 
was. 

At  his  first  coming,  things  went  as  he  would 
have  them,  for  he  made  a  bridge  over  the  Eu¬ 
phrates  without  much  difficulty,  and  passed 
over  his  army  in  safety,  and  occupied  many 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

cities  of  Mesopotamia,  which  yielded  volun¬ 
tarily.  But  a  hundred  of  his  men  were  killed 
in  one,  in  which  Apollonius  was  tyrant;  there¬ 
fore,  bringing  his  forces  against  it,  he  took  it 
by  storm,  plundered  the  goods,  and  sold  the  in¬ 
habitants.  The  Greeks  call  this  city  Zenodotia, 
upon  the  taking  of  which  he  permitted  the 
army  to  salute  him  Imperator,  but  this  was 
very  ill  thought  of,  and  it  looked  as  if  he  de¬ 
spaired  a  nobler  achievement,  that  he  made  so 
much  of  this  little  success. 

Putting  garrisons  of  seven  thousand  foot 
and  one  thousand  horse  in  the  new  conquests, 
he  returned  to  take  up  his  winter  quarters  in 
Syria,  where  his  son  was  to  meet  him  coming 
from  Caesar  out  of  Gaul,  decorated  with  re¬ 
wards  for  his  valour,  and  bringing  with  him 
one  thousand  select  horse.  Here  Crassus  seem¬ 
ed  to  commit  his  first  error,  and  except,  indeed, 
the  whole  expedition,  his  greatest;  for  whereas 
he  ought  to  have  gone  forward  and  seized 
Babylon  and  Seleucia,  cities  that  were  ever  at 
enmity  with  the  Parthians,  he  gave  the  enemy 
time  to  provide  against  him. 

Besides,  he  spent  his  time  in  Syria  more  like 
an  usurer  than  a  general,  not  in  taking  an  ac¬ 
count  of  the  arms,  and  in  improving  the  skill 
and  discipline  of  his  soldiers,  but  in  comput¬ 
ing  the  revenue  of  the  cities,  wasting  many 
days  in  weighing  by  scale  and  balance  the 
treasure  that  was  in  the  temple  of  Hierapolis, 
issuing  requisitions  for  levies  of  soldiers  upon 
particular  towns  and  kingdoms,  and  then 
again  withdrawing  them  on  payment  of  sums 
of  money,  by  which  he  lost  his  credit  and  be¬ 
came  despised. 

Here,  too,  he  met  with  the  first  ill-omen 
from  that  goddess,  whom  some  call  Venus, 
others  Juno,  others  Nature,  or  the  Cause  that 
produces  out  of  moisture  the  first  principles 
and  seeds  of  all  things,  and  gives  mankind 
their  earliest  knowledge  of  all  that  is  good  for 
them.  For  as  they  were  going  out  of  the  temple 
young  Crassus  stumbled  and  his  father  fell 
upon  him. 

When  he  drew  his  army  out  of  winter  quar¬ 
ters,  ambassadors  came  to  him  from  Arsaces, 
with  this  short  speech:  If  the  army  was  sent  by 
the  people  of  Rome,  this  meant  mortal  war, 
but  if,  as  he  understood  was  the  case,  against 
the  consent  of  his  country,  Crassus  for  his  own 
private  profit  had  invaded  his  territory,  then 
their  king  would  be  more  merciful,  and  taking 
pity  upon  Crassus’s  dotage,  would  send  those 
soldiers  back  who  had  been  left  not  so  truly  to 
keep  guard  on  him  as  to  be  his  prisoners.  Cras- 


CRASSUS 

sus  boastfully  told  them  he  would  return  his 
answer  at  Seleucia,  upon  which  Vagises,  the 
eldest  of  them,  laughed  and  showed  the  palm 
of  his  hand,  saying,  “Hair  will  grow  here  be¬ 
fore  you  will  see  Seleucia”;  so  they  returned  to 
their  king,  Hyrodes,  telling  him  it  was  war. 

Several  of  the  Romans  that  were  in  garrison 
in  Mesopotamia  with  great  hazard  made  their 
escape,  and  brought  word  that  the  danger  was 
worth  consideration,  urging  their  own  eye¬ 
witness  of  the  numbers  of  the  enemy,  and  the 
manner  of  their  fighting,  when  they  assaulted 
their  towns;  and,  as  men’s  manner  is,  made  all 
seem  greater  than  really  it  was.  By  flight  it  was 
impossible  to  escape  them,  and  as  impossible 
to  overtake  them  when  they  fled,  and  they  had 
a  new  and  strange  sort  of  darts,  as  swift  as 
sight,  for  they  pierced  whatever  they  met  with, 
before  you  could  see  who  threw  them;  their 
men-at-arms  were  so  provided  that  their  weap¬ 
ons  would  cut  through  anything,  and  their 
armour  give  way  to  nothing. 

All  which  when  the  soldiers  heard  their 
hearts  failed  them;  for  till  now  they  thought 
there  was  no  difference  between  the  Parthians 
and  the  Armenians  or  Cappadocians,  whom 
Lucullus  grew  weary  with  plundering,  and 
had  been  persuaded  that  the  main  difficulty  of 
the  war  consisted  only  in  the  tediousness  of  the 
march  and  the  trouble  of  chasing  men  that 
durst  not  come  to  blows,  so  that  the  danger  of 
a  battle  was  beyond  their  expectation;  accord¬ 
ingly,  some  of  the  officers  advised  Crassus  to 
proceed  no  further  at  present,  but  reconsider 
the  whole  enterprise,  amongst  whom  in  parti¬ 
cular  was  Cassius,  the  quaestor.  The  sooth¬ 
sayers,  also,  told  him  privately  the  signs  found 
in  the  sacrifices  were  continually  adverse  and 
unfavourable.  But  he  paid  no  heed  to  them,  or 
to  anybody  who  gave  any  other  advice  than  to 
proceed. 

Nor  did  Artavasdes,  King  of  Armenia,  con¬ 
firm  him  a  little,  who  came  to  his  aid  with  six 
thousand  horse;  who,  however,  were  said  to 
be  only  the  king’s  life-guard  and  suit,  for  he 
promised  ten  thousand  cuirassiers  more,  and 
thirty  thousand  foot,  at  his  own  charge.  He 
urged  Crassus  to  invade  Parthia  by  the  way  of 
Armenia,  for  not  only  would  he  be  able  there 
to  supply  his  army  with  abundant  provision, 
which  he  would  give  him,  but  his  passage 
would  be  more  secure  in  the  mountains  and 
hills,  with  which  the  whole  country  was  cov¬ 
ered,  making  it  almost  impassable  to  horse,  in 
which  the  main  strength  of  the  Parthians  con¬ 
sisted.  Crassus  returned  him  but  cold  thanks 


447 

for  his  readiness  to  serve  him,  and  for  the 
splendour  of  his  assistance,  and  told  him  he 
was  resolved  to  pass  through  Mesopotamia, 
where  he  had  left  a  great  many  brave  Roman 
soldiers;  whereupon  the  Armenian  went  his 
way. 

As  Crassus  was  taking  the  army  over  the 
river  at  Zeugma,  he  encountered  preternatur- 
ally  violent  thunder,  and  the  lightning  flashed 
in  the  faces  of  the  troops,  and  during  the  storm 
a  hurricane  broke  upon  the  bridge,  and  carried 
part  of  it  away:  two  thunderbolts  fell  upon  the 
very  place  where  the  army  was  going  to  en¬ 
camp;  and  one  of  the  general’s  horses,  mag¬ 
nificently  caparisoned,  dragged  away  the 
groom  into  the  river  and  was  drowned.  It  is 
said,  too,  that  when  they  went  to  take  up  the 
first  standard,  the  eagle  of  itself  turned  its  head 
backward;  and  after  he  had  passed  over  his 
army,  as  they  were  distributing  provisions,  the 
first  thing  they  gave  was  lentils  and  salt,  which 
with  the  Romans  are  the  food  proper  to  funer¬ 
als,  and  are  offered  to  the  dead.  And  as  Crassus 
was  haranguing  his  soldiers,  he  let  fall  a  word 
which  was  thought  very  ominous  in  the  army; 
for  “I  am  going,”  he  said,  “to  break  down  the 
bridge,  that  none  of  you  may  return”;  and 
whereas  he  ought,  when  he  had  perceived  his 
blunder,  to  have  corrected  himself,  and  ex¬ 
plained  his  meaning,  seeing  the  men  alarmed 
at  the  expression,  he  would  not  do  it  out  of 
mere  stubbornness.  And  when  at  the  last  gen¬ 
eral  sacrifice  the  priest  gave  him  the  entrails, 
they  slipt  out  of  his  hand,  and  when  he  saw 
the  standers-by  concerned  at  it,  he  laughed  and 
said,  “See  what  it  is  to  be  an  old  man;  but  I 
shall  hold  my  sword  fast  enough.” 

So  he  marched  his  army  along  the  river  with 
seven  legions,  little  less  than  four  thousand 
horse,  and  as  many  light-armed  soldiers,  and 
the  scouts  returning  declared  that  not  one  man 
appeared,  but  that  they  saw  the  footing  of  a 
great  many  horses  which  seemed  to  be  retir¬ 
ing  in  flight,  whereupon  Crassus  conceived 
great  hopes,  and  the  Romans  began  to  despise 
the  Parthians,  as  men  that  would  not  come  to 
combat,  hand  to  hand.  But  Cassius  spoke  with 
him  again,  and  advised  him  to  refresh  his 
army  in  some  of  the  garrison  towns,  and  re¬ 
main  there  till  they  could  get  some  certain  in¬ 
telligence  of  the  enemy,  or  at  least  to  make 
toward  Seleucia,  and  keep  by  the  river,  that  so 
they  might  have  the  convenience  of  having 
provision  constantly  supplied  by  the  boats, 
which  might  always  accompany  the  army,  and 
the  river  would  secure  them  from  being  en- 


448 


vironed,  and,  it  they  should  tight,  it  might  be 
upon  equal  terms. 

While  Crassus  was  still  considering,  and  as 
yet  undetermined,  there  came  to  the  camp  an 
Arab  chief  named  Ariamnes,  a  cunning  and 
wily  fellow,  who,  of  all  the  evil  chances  which 
combined  to  lead  them  on  to  destruction,  was 
the  chief  and  the  most  fatal.  Some  of  Pompey’s 
old  soldiers  knew  him,  and  remembered  him 
to  have  received  some  kindnesses  of  Pompey, 
and  to  have  been  looked  upon  as  a  friend  to 
the  Romans,  but  he  was  now  suborned  by  the 
king’s  generals,  and  sent  to  Crassus  to  entice 
him  if  possible  from  the  river  and  hills  into 
the  wide  open  plain,  where  he  might  be  sur¬ 
rounded.  For  the  Parthians  desired  anything 
rather  than  to  be  obliged  to  meet  the  Romans 
face  to  face. 

He,  therefore,  coming  to  Crassus  (and  he 
had  a  persuasive  tongue),  highly  commended 
Pompey  as  his  benefactor,  and  admired  the 
forces  that  Crassus  had  with  him,  but  seemed 
to  wonder  why  he  delayed  and  made  prepara¬ 
tions,  as  if  he  should  not  use  his  feet  more  than 
any  arms,  against  men  that,  taking  with  them 
their  best  goods  and  chattels,  had  designed 
long  ago  to  fly  for  refuge  to  the  Scythians  or 
Hyrcanians.  “If  you  meant  to  fight,  you  should 
have  made  all  possible  haste,  before  the  king 
should  recover  courage,  and  collect  his  forces 
together;  at  present  you  see  Surena  and  Sillaces 
opposed  to  you,  to  draw  you  off  in  pursuit  of 
them,  while  the  king  himself  keeps  out  of  the 
way.” 

But  this  was  all  a  lie,  for  Hyrodes  had  di¬ 
vided  his  army  in  two  parts;  with  one  he  in 
person  wasted  Armenia,  revenging  himself 
upon  Artavasdes,  and  sent  Surena  against  the 
Romans,  not  out  of  contempt,  as  some  pretend, 
for  there  is  no  likelihood  that  he  should  de¬ 
spise  Crassus,  one  of  the  chiefest  men  of  Rome, 
to  go  and  fight  with  Artavasdes,  and  invade 
Armenia;  but  much  more  probably  he  really 
apprehended  the  danger,  and  therefore  waited 
to  see  the  event,  intending  that  Surena  should 
first  run  the  hazard  of  a  battle,  and  draw  the 
enemy  on. 

Nor  was  this  Surena  an  ordinary  person,  but 
in  wealth,  family,  and  reputation,  the  second 
man  in  the  kingdom,  and  in  courage  and 
prowess  the  first,  and  for  bodily  stature  and 
beauty  no  man  like  him.  Whenever  he  trav¬ 
elled  privately,  he  had  one  thousand  camels  to 
carry  his  baggage,  two  hundred  chariots  for 
his  concubines,  one  thousand  completely  arm¬ 
ed  men  for  life-guards,  and  a  great  many  more 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

light-armed;  and  he  had  at  least  ten  thousand 
horsemen  altogether,  of  his  servants  and  reti¬ 
nue.  The  honour  had  long  belonged  to  his 
family,  that  at  the  king’s  coronation  he  put  the 
crown  upon  his  head,  and  when  this  very  king 
Hyrodes  had  been  exiled,  he  brought  him  in. 
It  was  he,  also,  that  took  the  great  city  of 
Seleucia;  he  was  the  first  man  that  scaled  the 
walls,  and  with  his  own  hand  beat  off  the  de¬ 
fenders.  And  though  at  this  time  he  was  not 
above  thirty  years  old,  he  had  a  great  name  for 
wisdom  and  sagacity,  and,  indeed,  by  these 
qualities  chiefly,  he  overthrew  Crassus,  who 
first  through  his  overweening  confidence,  and 
afterwards  because  he  was  cowed  by  his  ca¬ 
lamities,  fell  a  ready  victim  to  his  subtlety. 

When  Ariamnes  had  thus  worked  upon 
him,  he  drew  him  from  the  river  into  vast 
plains,  by  a  way  that  at  first  was  pleasant  and 
easy  but  afterwards  very  troublesome  by  rea¬ 
son  of  the  depth  of  the  sand;  no  tree,  nor  any 
water,  and  no  end  of  this  to  be  seen;  so  that 
they  were  not  only  spent  with  thirst,  and  the 
difficulty  of  the  passage,  but  were  dismayed 
with  the  uncomfortable  prospect  of  not  a 
bough,  not  a  stream,  not  a  hillock,  not  a  green 
herb,  but  in  fact  a  sea  of  sand,  which  encom¬ 
passed  the  army  with  its  waves.  They  began 
to  suspect  some  treachery,  and  at  the  same  time 
came  messengers  from  Artavasdes,  that  he  was 
fiercely  attacked  by  Hyrodes,  who  had  invad¬ 
ed  his  country,  so  that  now  it  was  impossible 
for  him  to  send  any  succours,  and  that  he 
therefore  advised  Crassus  to  turn  back,  and 
with  joint  forces  to  give  Hyrodes  battle,  or  at 
least  that  he  should  march  and  encamp  where 
horses  could  not  easily  come,  and  keep  to  the 
mountains.  Crassus,  out  of  anger  and  perverse¬ 
ness,  wrote  him  no  answer,  but  told  them,  at 
present  he  was  not  at  leisure  to  mind  the  Ar¬ 
menians,  but  he  would  call  upon  them  another 
time,  and  revenge  himself  upon  Artavasdes  for 
his  treachery. 

Cassius  and  his  friends  began  again  to  com¬ 
plain,  but  when  they  perceived  that  it  merely 
displeased  Crassus,  they  gave  over,  but  pri¬ 
vately  railed  at  the  barbarian,  “What  evil 
genius,  O  thou  worst  of  men,  brought  thee  to 
our  camp,  and  with  what  charms  and  potions 
hast  thou  bewitched  Crassus,  that  he  should 
march  his  army  through  a  vast  and  deep  des¬ 
ert,  through  ways  which  are  rather  fit  for  a 
captain  of  Arabian  robbers,  than  for  the  gen¬ 
eral  of  a  Roman  army?”  But  the  barbarian, 
being  a  wily  fellow,  very  submissively  exhort¬ 
ed  them,  and  encouraged  them  to  sustain  it  a 


CRASSUS 

little  further,  and  ran  about  the  camp,  and,  pro¬ 
fessing  to  cheer  up  the  soldiers,  asked  them, 
jokingly,  “What,  do  you  think  you  march 
through  Campania,  expecting  everywhere  to 
find  springs,  and  shady  trees,  and  baths,  and 
inns  of  entertainment?  Consider  you  now  trav¬ 
el  through  the  confines  of  Arabia  and  Assy¬ 
ria.”  Thus  he  managed  them  like  children, 
and  before  the  cheat  was  discovered,  he  rode 
away;  not  but  that  Crassus  was  aware  of  his 
going,  but  he  had  persuaded  him  that  he 
would  go  and  contrive  how  to  disorder  the  af¬ 
fairs  of  the  enemy. 

It  is  related  that  Crassus  came  abroad  that 
day  not  in  his  scarlet  robe,  which  Roman  gen¬ 
erals  usually  wear,  but  in  a  black  one,  which, 
as  soon  as  he  perceived,  he  changed.  And  the 
standard-bearers  had  much  ado  to  take  up  their 
eagles,  which  seemed  to  be  fixed  to  the  place. 
Crassus  laughed  at  it,  and  hastened  their 
march,  and  compelled  his  infantry  to  keep 
pace  with  his  cavalry,  till  some  few  of  the 
scouts  returned  and  told  them  that  their  fel¬ 
lows  were  slain  and  they  hardly  escaped,  that 
the  enemy  was  at  hand  in  full  -force,  and  re¬ 
solved  to  give  them  battle. 

On  this  all  was  in  an  uproar;  Crassus  was 
struck  with  amazement,  and  for  haste  could 
scarcely  put  his  army  in  good  order.  First,  as 
Cassius  advised,  he  opened  their  ranks  and 
files  that  they  might  take  up  as  much  space  as 
could  be,  to  prevent  their  being  surrounded, 
and  distributed  the  horse  upon  the  wings,  but 
afterwards  changing  his  mind,  he  drew  up  his 
army  in  a  square,  and  made  a  front  every  way, 
each  of  which  consisted  of  twelve  cohorts,  to 
every  one  of  which  he  allotted  a  troop  of  horse, 
that  no  part  might  be  destitute  of  the  assist¬ 
ance  that  the  horse  might  give,  and  that  they 
might  be  ready  to  assist  everywhere,  as  need 
should  require.  Cassius  commanded  one  of  the 
wings,  young  Crassus  the  other,  and  he  him¬ 
self  was  in  the  middle. 

Thus  they  marched  on  till  they  came  to  a 
little  river  named  Balissus,  a  very  inconsider¬ 
able  one  in  itself,  but  very  grateful  to  the  sol¬ 
diers,  who  had  suffered  so  much  by  drouth 
and  heat  all  along  their  march.  Most  of  the 
commanders  were  of  the  opinion  that  they 
ought  to  remain  there  that  night,  and  to  in¬ 
form  themselves  as  much  as  possible  of  the 
number  of  the  enemies,  and  their  order,  and  so 
march  against  them  at  break  of  day;  but  Cras¬ 
sus  was  so  carried  away  by  the  eagerness  of  his 
son,  and  the  horsemen  that  were  with  him, 
who  desired  and  urged  him  to  lead  them  on 


449 

and  engage,  that  he  commanded  those  that  had 
a  mind  to  it  to  eat  and  drink  as  they  stood  in 
their  ranks,  and  before  they  had  all  well  done, 
he  led  them  on,  not  leisurely  and  with  halts  to 
take  breath,  as  if  he  was  going  to  battle,  but 
kept  on  his  pace  as  if  he  had  been  in  haste,  till 
they  saw  the  enemy,  contrary  to  their  expecta¬ 
tion,  neither  so  many  nor  so  magnificently 
armed  as  the  Romans  expected. 

For  Surena  had  hid  his  main  force  behind 
the  first  ranks,  and  ordered  them  to  hide  the 
glittering  of  their  armour  with  coats  and  skins. 
But  when  they  approached  and  the  general 
gave  the  signal,  immediately  all  the  field  rung 
with  a  hideous  noise  and  terrible  clamour.  For 
the  Parthians  do  not  encourage  themselves  to 
war  with  cornets  and  trumpets,  but  with  a 
kind  of  kettle-drum,  which  they  strike  all  at 
once  in  various  quarters.  With  these  they  make 
a  dead,  hollow  noise,  like  the  bellowing  of 
beasts,  mixed  with  sounds  resembling  thunder, 
having,  it  would  seem,  very  correctly  observed 
that  of  all  our  senses  hearing  most  confounds 
and  disorders  us,  and  that  the  feelings  excited 
through  it  most  quickly  disturb  and  most  en¬ 
tirely  overpower  the  understanding. 

When  they  had  sufficiently  terrified  the  Ro¬ 
mans  with  their  noise,  they  threw  off  the  cov¬ 
ering  of  their  armour,  and  shone  like  light¬ 
ning  in  their  breastplates  and  helmets  of  pol¬ 
ished  Margianian  steel,  and  with  their  horses 
covered  with  brass  and  steel  trappings.  Surena 
was  the  tallest  and  finest  looking  man  himself, 
but  the  delicacy  of  his  looks  and  effeminacy  of 
his  dress  did  not  promise  so  much  manhood  as 
he  really  was  master  of;  for  his  face  was  paint¬ 
ed,  and  his  hair  parted  after  the  fashion  of  the 
Medes,  whereas  the  other  Parthians  made  a 
more  terrible  appearance,  with  their  shaggy 
hair  gathered  in  a  mass  upon  their  foreheads 
after  the  Scythian  mode.  Their  first  design  was 
with  their  lances  to  beat  down  and  force  back 
the  first  ranks  of  the  Romans,  but  when  they 
perceived  the  depth  of  their  battle,  and  that 
the  soldiers  firmly  kept  their  ground,  they 
made  a  retreat,  and  pretending  to  break  their 
order  and  disperse,  they  encompassed  the  Ro¬ 
man  square  before  they  were  aware  of  it. 

Crassus  commanded  his  light-armed  sol¬ 
diers  to  charge,  but  they  had  not  gone  far  be¬ 
fore  they  were  received  with  such  a  shower  of 
arrows  that  they  were  glad  to  retire  amongst 
the  heavy-armed,  with  whom  this  was  the  first 
occasion  of  disorder  and  terror,  when  they  per¬ 
ceived  the  strength  and  force  of  their  darts, 
which  pierced  their  arms,  and  passed  through 


450 

every  kind  of  covering,  hard  and  soft  alike. 
The  Parthians  now  placing  themselves  at  dis¬ 
tances  began  to  shoot  from  all  sides,  not  aim¬ 
ing  at  any  particular  mark  (for,  indeed,  the 
order  of  the  Romans  was  so  close,  that  they 
could  not  miss  if  they  would),  but  simply  sent 
their  arrows  with  great  force  out  of  strong 
bent  bows,  the  strokes  from  which  came  with 
extreme  violence.  The  position  of  the  Romans 
was  a  very  bad  one  from  the  first;  for  if  they 
kept  their  ranks,  they  were  wounded,  and  if 
they  tried  to  charge,  they  hurt  the  enemy  none 
the  more,  and  themselves  suffered  none  the 
less.  For  the  Parthians  threw  their  darts  as  they 
fled,  an  art  in  which  none  but  the  Scythians 
excel  them,  and  it  is,  indeed,  a  cunning  prac¬ 
tice,  for  while  they  thus  fight  to  make  their 
escape,  they  avoid  the  dishonour  of  a  flight. 

However,  the  Romans  had  some  comfort  to 
think  that  when  they  had  spent  all  their  ar¬ 
rows,  they  would  either  give  over  or  come  to 
blows;  but  when  they  presently  understood 
that  there  were  numerous  camels  loaded  with 
arrows,  and  that  when  the  first  ranks  had  dis¬ 
charged  those  they  had,  they  wheeled  off  and 
took  more,  Crassus  seeing  no  end  of  it,  was  out 
of  all  heart,  and  sent  to  his  son  that  he  should 
endeavour  to  fall  in  upon  them  before  he  was 
quite  surrounded;  for  the  enemy  advanced 
most  upon  that  quarter,  and  seemed  to  be  try¬ 
ing  to  ride  round  and  come  upon  the  rear. 

Therefore,  the  young  man,  taking  with  him 
thirteen  hundred  horse,  one  thousand  of  which 
he  had  from  Caesar,  five  hundred  archers,  and 
eight  cohorts  of  the  full-armed  soldiers  that 
stood  next  him,  led  them  up  with  design  to 
charge  the  Parthians.  Whether  it  was  that  they 
found  themselves  in  a  piece  of  marshy  ground, 
as  some  think,  or  else  designing  to  entice 
young  Crassus  as  far  as  they  could  from  his 
father,  they  turned  and  began  to  fly;  where¬ 
upon  he  crying  out  that  they  durst  not  stand, 
pursued  them,  and  with  him  Censorinus  and 
Megabacchus,  both  famous,  the  latter  for  his 
courage  and  prowess,  the  other  for  being  of  a 
senator’s  family,  and  an  excellent  orator,  both 
intimates  of  Crassus,  and  of  about  the  same 
age.  The  horse  thus  pushing  on,  the  infantry 
stayed  a  little  behind,  being  exalted  with  hopes 
and  joy,  for  they  supposed  they  had  already 
conquered,  and  now  were  only  pursuing;  till 
when  they  were  gone  too  far,  they  perceived 
the  deceit,  for  they  that  seemed  to  fly  now 
turned  again,  and  a  great  many  fresh  ones 
came  on. 

Upon  this  they  made  a  halt,  for  they  doubt- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ed  not  but  now  the  enemy  would  attack  them, 
because  they  were  so  few.  But  they  merely 
placed  their  cuirassiers  to  face  the  Romans,  and 
with  the  rest  of  their  horse  rode  about  scour¬ 
ing  the  field,  and  thus  stirring  up  the  sand, 
they  raised  such  a  dust  that  the  Romans  could 
neither  see  nor  speak  to  one  another,  and  being 
driven  in  upon  one  another  in  one  close  body, 
they  were  thus  hit  and  killed,  dying,  not  by  a 
quick  and  easy  death,  but  with  miserable  pains 
and  convulsions;  for  writhing  upon  the  darts 
in  their  bodies,  they  broke  them  in  their 
wounds,  and  when  they  would  by  force  pluck 
out  the  barbed  points,  they  caught  the  nerves 
and  veins,  so  that  they  tore  and  tortured  them¬ 
selves.  Many  of  them  died  thus,  and  those  that 
survived  were  disabled  for  any  service,  and 
when  Publius  exhorted  them  to  charge  the 
cuirassiers,  they  showed  him  their  hands  nailed 
to  their  shields,  and  their  feet  stuck  to  the 
ground,  so  that  they  could  neither  fly  nor  fight. 

He  charged  in  himself  boldly,  however, 
with  his  horse,  and  came  to  close  quarters  with 
them,  but  was  very  unequal,  whether  as  to  the 
offensive  or  defensive  part;  for  with  his  weak 
and  little  javelins,  he  struck  against  targets 
that  were  of  tough  raw  hides  and  iron,  where¬ 
as,  the  lightly-clad  bodies  of  his  Gaulish  horse¬ 
men  were  exposed  to  the  strong  spears  of  the 
enemy.  For  upon  these  he  mostly  depended, 
and  with  them  he  wrought  wonders;  for  they 
would  catch  hold  of  the  great  spears,  and  close 
upon  the  enemy,  and  so  pull  them  off  from 
their  horses,  where  they  could  scarce  stir  by 
reason  of  the  heaviness  of  their  armour,  and 
many  of  the  Gauls  quitting  their  own  horses, 
would  creep  under  those  of  the  enemy,  and 
stick  them  in  the  belly;  which,  growing  unruly 
with  the  pain,  trampled  upon  their  riders  and 
upon  the  enemies  promiscuously. 

The  Gauls  were  chiefly  tormented  by  the 
heat  and  drouth,  being  not  accustomed  to 
either,  and  most  of  their  horses  were  slain  by 
being  spurred  on  against  the  spears,  so  that 
they  were  forced  to  retire  among  the  foot, 
bearing  off  Publius  grievously  wounded.  Ob¬ 
serving  a  sandy  hillock  not  far  off,  they  made 
to  it,  and  tying  their  horses  to  one  another, 
and  placing  them  in  the  midst,  and  joining 
all  their  shields  together  before  them,  they 
thought  they  might  make  some  defence  against 
the  barbarians.  But  it  fell  out  quite  contrary, 
for  when  they  were  drawn  up  in  a  plain,  the 
front  in  some  measure  secured  those  that  were 
behind;  but  when  they  were  upon  the  hill,  one 
being  of  necessity  higher  up  than  another, 


CRASSUS 

none  were  in  shelter,  but  all  alike  stood  equally 
exposed,  bewailing  their  inglorious  and  useless 
fate. 

There  were  with  Publius  two  Greeks  that 
lived  near  there  at  Carrhae,  Hieronymus  and 
Nicomachus;  these  men  urged  him  to  retire 
with  them  and  fly  to  Ichnae,  a  town  not  far 
from  thence,  and  friendly  to  the  Romans. 
“No,”  said  he,  “there  is  no  death  so  terrible, 
for  the  fear  of  which  Publius  would  leave  his 
friends  that  die  upon  his  account”;  and  bidding 
them  to  take  care  of  themselves,  he  embraced 
them  and  sent  them  away,  and,  because  he 
could  not  use  his  arm,  for  he  was  run  through 
with  a  dart,  he  opened  his  side  to  his  armour- 
bearer,  and  commanded  him  to  run  him 
through.  It  is  said  Sensorimus  fell  in  the  same 
manner.  Megabacchus  slew  himself,  as  did  also 
the  rest  of  best  note.  The  Parthians  coming  up¬ 
on  the  rest  with  their  lances,  killed  them  fight¬ 
ing,  nor  were  there  above  five  hundred  taken 
prisoners.  Cutting  off  the  head  of  Publius,  they 
rode  off  directly  towards  Crassus. 

His  condition  was  thus.  When  he  had  com¬ 
manded  his  son  to  fall  upon  the  enemy,  and 
word  was  brought  him  that  they  fled  and  that 
there  was  a  distant  pursuit,  and  perceiving  also 
that  the  enemy  did  not  press  upon  him  so  hard 
as  formerly,  for  they  were  mostly  gone  to  fall 
upon  Publius,  he  began  to  take  heart  a  little; 
and  drawing  his  army  towards  some  sloping 
ground,  expected  when  his  son  would  return 
from  the  pursuit.  Of  the  messengers  whom 
Publius  sent  to  him  (as  soon  as  he  saw  his 
danger),  the  first  were  intercepted  by  the  en¬ 
emy,  and  slain;  the  last,  hardly  escaping,  came 
and  declared  that  Publius  was  lost,  unless  he 
had  speedy  succours. 

Crassus  was  terribly  distracted,  not  knowing 
what  counsel  to  take,  and  indeed  no  longer 
capable  of  taking  any;  overpowered  now  by 
fear  for  the  whole  army,  now  by  desire  to  help 
his  son.  At  last  he  resolved  to  move  with  his 
forces.  Just  upon  this,  up  came  the  enemy  with 
their  shouts  and  noises  more  terrible  than  be¬ 
fore,  their  drums  sounding  again  in  the  ears 
of  the  Romans,  who  now  feared  a  fresh  en¬ 
gagement. 

And  they  who  brought  Publius’s  head  upon 
the  point  of  a  spear,  riding  up  near  enough 
that  it  could  be  known,  scoffingly  inquired 
where  were  his  parents,  and  what  family  he 
was  of,  for  it  was  impossible  that  so  brave  and 
gallant  a  warrior  should  be  the  son  of  so  pitiful 
a  coward  as  Crassus.  This  sight  above  all  the 
rest  dismayed  the  Romans,  for  it  did  not  in- 


451 

cite  them  to  anger  as  it  might  have  done,  but 
to  horror  and  trembling,  though  they  say  Cras¬ 
sus  outdid  himself  in  this  calamity,  for  he 
passed  through  the  ranks  and  cried  out  to 
them,  “This,  O  my  countrymen,  is  my  own 
peculiar  loss,  but  the  fortune  and  the  glory  of 
Rome  is  safe  and  untainted  so  long  as  you  are 
safe.  But  if  any  one  be  concerned  for  my  loss 
of  the  best  of  sons,  let  him  show  it  in  revenging 
him  upon  the  enemy.  Take  away  their  joy, 
revenge  their  cruelty,  nor  be  dismayed  at  what 
is  past;  for  whoever  tries  for  great  objects  must 
suffer  something.  Neither  did  Lucullus  over¬ 
throw  Tigranes  without  bloodshed,  nor  Scipio 
Antiochus;  our  ancestors  lost  one  thousand 
ships  about  Sicily,  and  how  many  generals  and 
captains  in  Italy?  No  one  of  which  losses  hin¬ 
dered  them  from  overthrowing  their  conquer¬ 
ors;  for  the  State  of  Rome  did  not  arrive  to 
this  height  by  fortune,  but  by  perseverance  and 
virtue  in  confronting  danger.” 

While  Crassus  thus  spoke  exhorting  them, 
he  saw  but  few  that  gave  much  heed  to  him, 
and  when  he  ordered  them  to  shout  for  battle, 
he  could  no  longer  mistake  the  despondency  of 
his  army,  which  made  but  a  faint  and  unsteady 
noise,  while  the  shout  of  the  enemy  was  clear 
and  bold.  And  when  they  came  to  the  business, 
the  Parthian  servants  and  dependants  riding 
about  shot  their  arrows,  and  the  horsemen  in 
the  foremost  ranks  with  their  spears  drove  the 
Romans  close  together,  except  those  who  rush¬ 
ed  upon  them  for  fear  of  being  killed  by  their 
arrows.  Neither  did  these  do  much  execution, 
being  quickly  despatched;  for  the  strong,  thick 
spear  made  large  and  mortal  wounds,  and 
often  ran  through  two  men  at  once. 

As  they  were  thus  fighting,  the  night  com¬ 
ing  on  parted  them,  the  Parthians  boasting 
that  they  would  indulge  Crassus  with  one 
night  to  mourn  his  son,  unless  upon  better  con¬ 
sideration  he  would  rather  go  to  Arsaces  than 
be  carried  to  him.  These,  therefore,  took  up 
their  quarters  near  them,  being  flushed  with 
their  victory.  But  the  Romans  had  a  sad  night 
of  it;  for  neither  taking  care  for  the  burial  of 
their  dead,  nor  the  cure  of  the  wounded,  nor 
the  groans  of  the  expiring,  every  one  bewailed 
his  own  fate.  For  there  was  no  means  of  escap¬ 
ing,  whether  they  should  stay  for  the  light,  or 
venture  to  retreat  into  the  vast  desert  in  the 
dark.  And  now  the  wounded  men  gave  them 
new  trouble,  since  to  take  them  with  them 
would  retard  their  flight,  and  if  they  should 
leave  them,  they  might  serve  as  guides  to  the 
enemy  by  their  cries. 


452 

However,  they  were  all  desirous  to  see  and 
hear  Crassus,  though  they  were  sensible  that 
he  was  the  cause  of  all  their  mischief.  But  he 
wrapped  his  cloak  around  him,  and  hid  him¬ 
self,  where  he  lay  as  an  example,  to  ordinary 
minds,  of  the  caprice  of  fortune,  but  to  the 
wise,  of  inconsiderateness  and  ambition;  who, 
not  content  to  be  superior  to  so  many  millions 
of  men,  being  inferior  to  two,  esteemed  him¬ 
self  as  the  lowest  of  all.  Then  came  Octavius, 
his  lieutenant,  and  Cassius,  to  comfort  him, 
but  he  being  altogether  past  helping,  they 
themselves  called  together  the  centurions  and 
tribunes,  and  agreeing  that  the  best  way  was 
to  flee,  they  ordered  the  army  out,  without 
sound  of  trumpet,  and  at  first  with  silence. 

But  before  long,  when  the  disabled  men 
found  they  were  left  behind,  strange  confu¬ 
sion  and  disorder,  with  an  outcry  and  lamenta¬ 
tion,  seized  the  camp,  and  a  trembling  and 
dread  presently  fell  upon  them,  as  if  the  enemy 
were  at  their  heels.  By  which  means,  now  and 
then  turning  out  of  their  way,  now  and  then 
standing  to  their  ranks,  sometimes  taking  up 
the  wounded  that  followed,  sometimes  laying 
them  down,  they  wasted  the  time,  except  three 
hundred  horse,  whom  Egnatius  brought  safe 
to  Carrhae  about  midnight;  where  calling,  in 
the  Roman  tongue,  to  the  watch,  as  soon  as 
they  heard  him,  he  bade  them  tell  Coponius, 
the  governor,  that  Crassus  had  fought  a  very 
great  battle  with  the  Parthians;  and  having 
said  but  this,  and  not  so  much  as  telling  his 
name,  he  rode  away  at  full  speed  to  Zeugma. 
And  by  this  means  he  saved  himself  and  his 
men,  but  lost  his  reputation  by  deserting  his 
general. 

However,  his  message  to  Coponius  was  for 
the  advantage  of  Crassus;  for  he,  suspecting  by 
this  hasty  and  confused  delivery  of  the  message 
that  all  was  not  well,  immediately  ordered  the 
garrison  to  be  in  arms,  and  as  soon  as  he  un¬ 
derstood  that  Crassus  was  upon  the  way  to¬ 
wards  him,  he  went  out  to  meet  him,  and  re¬ 
ceived  him  with  his  army  into  the  town. 

The  Parthians,  although  they  perceived 
their  dislodgment  in  the  night,  yet  did  not 
pursue  them,  but  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  they 
came  upon  those  that  were  left  in  the  camp, 
and  put  no  less  than  four  thousand  to  the 
sword,  and  with  their  light  horse  picked  up  a 
great  many  stragglers.  Varguntinus,  the  lieu¬ 
tenant,  while  it  was  yet  dark,  had  broken  off 
from  the  main  body  with  four  cohorts  which 
had  strayed  out  of  the  way;  and  the  Parthians 
encompassing  these  on  a  small  hill,  slew  every 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

man  of  them  excepting  twenty,  who  with  their 
drawn  swords  forced  their  way  through  the 
thickest,  and  they  admiring  their  courage, 
opened  their  ranks  to  the  right  and  left,  and  let 
them  pass  without  molestation  to  Carrhae. 

Soon  alter  a  false  report  was  brought  to  Su- 
rena,  that  Crassus,  with  his  principal  officers, 
had  escaped,  and  that  those  who  were  got  into 
Carrhae  were  but  a  confused  rout  of  insignifi¬ 
cant  people,  not  worth  further  pursuit.  Sup¬ 
posing,  therefore,  that  he  had  lost  the  very 
crown  and  glory  of  his  victory,  and  yet  being 
uncertain  whether  it  were  so  or  not,  and  anx¬ 
ious  to  ascertain  the  fact,  that  so  he  should 
either  stay  and  besiege  Carrhae  or  follow  Cras¬ 
sus,  he  sent  one  of  his  interpreters  to  the  walls, 
commanding  him  in  Latin  to  call  for  Crassus 
or  Cassius,  for  that  the  general,  Surena,  desired 
a  conference. 

As  soon  as  Crassus  heard  this,  he  embraced 
the  proposal,  and  soon  after  there  came  up  a 
band  of  Arabians,  who  very  well  knew  the 
faces  of  Crassus  and  Cassius,  as  having  been 
frequently  in  the  Roman  camp  before  the  bat¬ 
tle.  They  having  espied  Cassius  from  the  wall, 
told  him  that  Surena  desired  a  peace,  and 
would  give  them  safe  convoy,  if  they  would 
make  a  treaty  with  the  king  his  master,  and 
withdraw  all  their  troops  out  of  Mesopotamia; 
and  this  he  thought  most  advisable  for  them 
both,  before  things  came  to  the  last  extremity; 
Cassius,  embracing  the  proposal,  desired  that  a 
time  and  place  might  be  appointed  where  Cras¬ 
sus  and  Surena  might  have  an  interview.  The 
Arabians,  having  charged  themselves  with  the 
message,  went  back  to  Surena,  who  was  not  a 
little  rejoiced  that  Crassus  was  there  to  be  be¬ 
sieged. 

Next  day,  therefore,  he  came  up  with  his 
army,  insulting  over  the  Romans,  and  haugh¬ 
tily  demanded  of  them  Crassus  and  Cassius, 
bound,  if  they  expected  any  mercy.  The  Ro¬ 
mans,  seeing  themselves  deluded  and  mocked, 
were  much  troubled  at  it,  but  advising  Crassus 
to  lay  aside  his  distant  and  empty  hopes  of  aid 
from  the  Armenians,  resolved  to  flee  for  it;  and 
this  design  ought  to  have  been  kept  private, 
till  they  were  upon  their  way,  and  not  have 
been  told  to  any  of  the  people  of  Carrhae. 

But  Crassus  let  this  also  be  known  to  Andro- 
machus,  the  most  faithless  of  men,  nay,  he  was 
so  infatuated  as  to  choose  him  for  his  guide. 
The  Parthians  then,  to  be  sure,  had  punctual 
intelligence  of  all  that  passed;  but  it  being 
contrary  to  their  usage,  and  also  difficult  for 
them  to  fight  by  night,  and  Crassus  having 


CRASSUS 

chosen  that  time  to  set  out,  Andromachus,  lest 
he  should  get  the  start  too  far  of  his  pursuers, 
led  him  hither  and  thither,  and  at  last  conveyed 
him  into  the  midst  of  morasses  and  places  full 
of  ditches,  so  that  the  Romans  had  a  trouble¬ 
some  and  perplexing  journey  of  it,  and  some 
there  were  who,  supposing  by  these  windings 
and  turnings  of  Andromachus  that  no  good 
was  intended,  resolved  to  follow  him  no  fur¬ 
ther. 

And  at  last  Cassius  himself  returned  to 
Carrhae,  and  his  guides,  the  Arabians,  advising 
him  to  tarry  there  till  the  moon  was  got  out 
of  Scorpio,  he  told  them  that  he  was  most 
afraid  of  Sagittarius,  and  so  with  five  hundred 
horse  went  off  to  Syria.  Others  there  were 
who,  having  got  honest  guides,  took  their  way 
by  the  mountains  called  Sinnaca,  and  got  into 
places  of  security  by  daybreak;  these  were  five 
thousand  under  the  command  of  Octavius,  a 
very  gallant  man. 

But  Crassus  fared  worse;  day  overtook  him 
still  deceived  by  Andromachus,  and  entangled 
in  the  fens  and  the  difficult  country.  There 
were  with  him  four  cohorts  of  legionary  sol¬ 
diers,  a  very  few  horsemen,  and  five  lictors, 
with  whom  having  with  great  difficulty  got 
into  the  road,  and  not  being  a  mile  and  a  half 
from  Octavius,  instead  of  going  to  join  him, 
although  the  enemy  were  already  upon  him, 
he  retreated  to  another  hill,  neither  so  defensi¬ 
ble  nor  impassable  for  the  horse,  but  lying 
under  the  hills  at  Sinnaca,  and  continued  so 
as  to  join  them  in  a  long  ridge  through  the 
plain. 

Octavius  could  see  in  what  danger  the  gen¬ 
eral  was,  and  himself,  at  first  but  slenderly 
followed,  hurried  to  the  rescue.  Soon  after,  the 
rest,  upbraiding  one  another  with  baseness  in 
forsaking  their  officers,  marched  down,  and 
falling  upon  the  Parthians,  drove  them  from 
the  hill,  and  compassing  Crassus  about,  and 
fencing  him  with  their  shields,  declared  proud¬ 
ly,  that  no  arrow  in  Parthia  should  ever  touch 
their  general,  so  long  as  there  was  a  man  of 
them  left  alive  to  protect  him. 

Surena,  therefore,  perceiving  his  soldiers  less 
inclined  to  expose  themselves,  and  knowing 
that  if  the  Romans  should  prolong  the  battle 
till  night,  they  might  then  gain  the  mountains 
and  be  out  of  his  reach,  betook  himself  to  his 
usual  craft.  Some  of  the  prisoners  were  set 
free,  who  had,  as  it  was  contrived,  been  in 
hearing,  while  some  of  the  barbarians  spoke  a 
set  purpose  in  the  camp  to  the  effect  that  the 
king  did  not  design  the  war  to  be  pursued  to 


453 

extremity  against  the  Romans,  but  rather  de¬ 
sired,  by  his  general  treatment  of  Crassus,  to 
make  a  step  towards  reconciliation.  And  the 
barbarians  desisted  from  fighting,  and  Surena 
himself,  with  his  chief  officers,  riding  gently 
to  the  hill,  unbent  his  bow  and  held  out  his 
hand,  inviting  Crassus  to  an  agreement,  and 
saying  that  it  was  beside  the  king’s  intentions, 
that  they  had  thus  had  experience  of  the  cour¬ 
age  and  the  strength  of  his  soldiers;  that  now 
he  desired  no  other  contention  but  that  of 
kindness  and  friendship,  by  making  a  truce, 
and  permitting  them  to  go  away  in  safety. 

These  words  of  Surena  the  rest  received  joy¬ 
fully,  and  were  eager  to  accept  the  offer;  but 
Crassus,  who  had  had  sufficient  experience  of 
their  perfidiousness,  and  was  unable  to  see  any 
reason  for  the  sudden  change,  would  give  no 
ear  to  them,  and  only  took  time  to  consider. 
But  the  soldiers  cried  out  and  advised  him  to 
treat,  and  then  went  on  to  upbraid  and  affront 
him,  saying  that  it  was  very  unreasonable  that 
he  should  bring  them  to  fight  with  such  men 
armed,  whom  himself,  without  their  arms, 
durst  not  look  in  the  face.  He  tried  first  to 
prevail  with  them  by  entreaties,  and  told  them 
that  if  they  would  have  patience  till  evening, 
they  might  get  into  the  mountains  and  passes, 
inaccessible  for  horse,  and  be  out  of  danger, 
and  withal  he  pointed  out  the  way  with  his 
hand,  entreating  them  not  to  abandon  their 
preservation,  now  close  before  them. 

But  when  they  mutinied  and  clashed  their 
targets  in  a  threatening  manner,  he  was  over¬ 
powered  and  forced  to  go,  and  only  turning 
about  at  parting,  said,  “You,  Octavius  and 
Petronius,  and  the  rest  of  the  officers  who  are 
present,  see  the  necessity  of  going  which  I  lie 
under,  and  cannot  but  be  sensible  of  the  in¬ 
dignities  and  violence  offered  to  me.  Tell  all 
men  when  you  have  escaped,  that  Crassus  per¬ 
ished  rather  by  the  subtlety  of  his  enemies 
than  by  the  disobedience  of  his  countrymen.” 

Octavius,  however,  would  not  stay  there, 
but  with  Petronius  went  down  from  the  hill; 
as  for  the  lictors,  Crassus  bade  them  be  gone. 
The  first  that  met  him  were  two  half-blood 
Greeks,  who,  leaping  from  their  horses,  made 
a  profound  reverence  to  Crassus,  and  desired 
him,  in  Greek,  to  send  some  before  him,  who 
might  see  that  Surena  himself  was  coming  to¬ 
wards  them,  his  retinue  disarmed,  and  not 
having  so  much  as  their  wearing  swords  along 
with  them.  But  Crassus  answered,  that  if  he 
had  the  least  concern  for  his  life,  he  would 
never  have  intrusted  himself  in  their  hands. 


454 

but  sent  two  brothers  of  the  name  of  Roscius 
to  inquire  on  what  terms  and  in  what  numbers 
they  should  meet. 

These  Surena  ordered  immediately  to  be 
seized,  and  himself  with  his  principal  officers 
came  up  on  horseback,  and  greeting  him,  said, 
“How  is  this,  then?  A  Roman  commander  is 
on  foot,  whilst  I  and  my  train  are  mounted.” 
But  Crassus  replied,  that  there  was  no  error 
committed  on  either  side,  for  they  both  met  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  custom  of  their  own  country. 
Surena  told  him  that  from  that  time  there  was 
a  league  between  the  king  his  master  and  the 
Romans,  but  that  Crassus  must  go  with  him  to 
the  river  to  sign  it,  “for  you  Romans,”  said  he, 
“have  not  good  memories  for  conditions,”  and 
so  saying,  reached  out  his  hand  to  him.  Cras¬ 
sus,  therefore,  gave  order  that  one  of  his  horses 
should  be  brought;  but  Surena  told  him  there 
was  no  need,  “the  king,  my  master,  presents 
you  with  this”;  and  immediately  a  horse  with 
a  golden  bit  was  brought  up  to  him,  and  him¬ 
self  was  forcibly  put  into  the  saddle  by  the 
grooms,  who  ran  by  the  side  and  struck  the 
horse  to  make  the  more  haste. 

But  Octavius  running  up,  got  hold  of  the 
bridle,  and  soon  after  one  of  the  officers,  Pe- 
tronius,  and  the  rest  of  the  company  came  up, 
striving  to  stop  the  horse,  and  pulling  back 
those  who  on  both  sides  of  him  forced  Crassus 
forward.  Thus  from  pulling  and  thrusting  one 
another,  they  came  to  a  tumult,  and  soon  after 
to  blows.  Octavius,  drawing  his  sword,  killed 
a  groom  of  one  of  the  barbarians,  and  one  of 
them,  getting  behind  Octavius,  killed  him. 
Petronius  was  not  armed,  but  being  struck  on 
the  breastplate,  fell  down  from  his  horse, 
though  without  hurt.  Crassus  was  killed  by 
a  Parthian,  called  Pomaxathres;  others  say 
by  a  different  man,  and  that  Pomaxathres 
only  cut  off  his  head  and  right  hand  after  he 
had  fallen. 

But  this  is  conjecture  rather  than  certain 
knowledge,  for  those  that  were  by  had  not 
leisure  to  observe  particulars,  and  were  either 
killed  fighting  about  Crassus,  or  ran  off  at 
once  to  get  to  their  comrades  on  the  hill.  But 
the  Parthians  coming  up  to  them,  and  saying 
that  Crassus  had  the  punishment  he  justly  de¬ 
served,  and  that  Surena  bade  the  rest  come 
down  from  the  hill  without  fear,  some  of  them 
came  down  and  surrendered  themselves,  others 
were  scattered  up  and  down  in  the  night,  a 
very  few  of  whom  got  safe  home,  and  others 
the  Arabians,  beating  through  the  country, 
hunted  down  and  put  to  death.  It  is  generally 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

said,  that  in  all  twenty  thousand  men  were 
slain  and  ten  thousand  taken  prisoners. 

Surena  sent  the  head  and  hand  of  Crassus  to 
Hyrodes,  the  king,  into  Armenia,  but  himself 
by  his  messengers  scattering  a  report  that  he 
was  bringing  Crassus  alive  to  Seleucia,  made  a 
ridiculous  procession,  which,  by  way  of  scorn, 
he  called  a  triumph.  For  one  Caius  Paccianus, 
who  of  all  the  prisoners  was  most  like  Crassus, 
being  put  into  a  woman’s  dress  of  the  fashion 
of  the  barbarians,  and  instructed  to  answer  to 
the  title  of  Crassus  and  Imperator,  was  brought 
sitting  upon  his  horse,  while  before  him  went 
a  parcel  of  trumpeters  and  lictors  upon  camels. 
Purses  were  hung  at  the  end  of  the  bundles  of 
rods,  and  the  heads  of  the  slain  fresh  bleeding 
at  the  end  of  their  axes.  After  them  followed 
the  Seleucian  singing  women,  repeating  scur¬ 
rilous  and  abusive  songs  upon  the  effeminacy 
and  cowardliness  of  Crassus. 

This  show  was  seen  by  everybody;  but  Su¬ 
rena,  calling  together  the  senate  of  Seleucia, 
laid  before  them  certain  wanton  books,  of  the 
writings  of  Aristides,  his  Milesiaca;  neither, 
indeed,  was  this  any  forgery,  for  they  had  been 
found  among  the  baggage  of  Rustius,  and 
were  a  good  subject  to  supply  Surena  with  in¬ 
sulting  remarks  upon  the  Romans,  who  were 
not  able  even  in  the  time  of  war  to  forget  such 
writings  and  practices. 

But  the  people  of  Seleucia  had  reason  to 
commend  the  wisdom  of  iEsop’s  fable  of  the 
wallet,  seeing  their  general,  Surena,  carrying 
a  bag  full  of  loose  Melesian  stories  before  him, 
but  keeping  behind  him  a  whole  Parthian  Sy- 
baris  in  his  many  waggons  full  of  concubines; 
like  the  vipers  and  asps  people  talk  of,  all  the 
foremost  and  more  visible  parts  fierce  and  ter¬ 
rible  with  spears  and  arrows  and  horsemen, 
but  the  rear  terminating  in  loose  women  and 
castanets,  music  of  the  lute,  and  midnight  rev- 
ellings.  Rustius,  indeed,  is  not  to  be  excused, 
but  the  Parthians  had  forgot,  when  they 
mocked  at  the  Milesian  stories,  that  many  of 
the  royal  line  of  their  Arsacidae  had  been  born 
of  Milesian  and  Ionian  mistresses. 

Whilst  these  things  were  doing,  Hyrodes 
had  struck  up  a  peace  with  the  King  of  Ar¬ 
menia,  and  made  a  match  between  his  son, 
Pacorus,  and  the  King  of  Armenia’s  sister. 
Their  feastings  and  entertainments  in  conse¬ 
quence  were  very  sumptuous,  and  various 
Grecian  compositions,  suitable  to  the  occasion, 
were  recited  before  them.  For  Hyrodes  was 
not  ignorant  of  the  Greek  language  and  litera¬ 
ture,  and  Artavasdes  was  so  expert  in  it,  that 


CRASSUS  AND  NICIAS 

he  wrote  tragedies  and  orations  and  histories, 
some  of  which  are  still  extant. 

When  the  head  of  Crassus  was  brought  to 
the  door,  the  tables  were  just  taken  away,  and 
one  Jason,  a  tragic  actor,  of  the  town  of  Tralles, 
was  singing  the  scene  in  the  Bacchcc  of  Eurip¬ 
ides  concerning  Agave.  He  was  receiving 
much  applause,  when  Sillaces,  coming  to  the 
room,  and  having  made  obeisance  to  the  king, 
threw  down  the  head  of  Crassus  into  the  midst 
of  the  company.  The  Parthians  receiving  it 
with  joy  and  acclamations,  Sillaces,  by  the 
king’s  command,  was  made  to  sit  down,  while 
Jason  handed  over  the  costume  of  Pentheus  to 
one  of  the  dancers  in  the  chorus,  and  taking  up 
the  head  of  Crassus,  and  acting  the  part  of  a 
bacchante  in  her  frenzy,  in  a  rapturous  im¬ 
passioned  manner,  sang  the  lyric  passages — 
We've  hunted  down  a  mighty  chase  to-day, 
And  from  the  mountain  bring  the  noble  prey, 
to  the  great  delight  of  all  the  company;  but 
when  the  verses  of  the  dialogue  followed — 
What  happy  hand  the  glorious  victim  slew ? 

1  claim  that  honour  to  my  courage  due, 


455 

Pomaxathres,  who  happened  to  be  there  at  the 
supper,  started  up  and  would  have  got  the 
head  into  his  own  hands,  “for  it  is  my  due,” 
said  he,  “and  no  man’s  else.”  The  king  was 
greatly  pleased,  and  gave  presents,  according 
to  the  custom  of  the  Parthians,  to  them,  and  to 
Jason,  the  actor,  a  talent.  Such  was  the  bur¬ 
lesque  that  was  played,  they  tell  us,  as  the 
afterpiece  to  the  tragedy  of  Crassus’s  expedi¬ 
tion. 

But  divine  justice  failed  not  to  punish  both 
Hyrodes  for  his  cruelty  and  Surena  for  his 
perjury;  for  Surena  not  long  after  was  put  to 
death  by  Hyrodes,  out  of  mere  envy  to  his 
glory;  and  Hyrodes  himself,  having  lost  his 
son,  Pacorus,  who  was  beaten  in  a  battle  with 
the  Romans,  falling  into  a  disease  which  turn¬ 
ed  to  a  dropsy,  had  aconite  given  him  by  his 
second  son,  Phraates;  but  the  poison  working 
only  upon  the  disease,  and  carrying  away  the 
dropsical  matter  with  itself,  the  king  began 
suddenly  to  recover,  so  that  Phraates  at  length 
was  forced  to  take  the  shortest  course,  and 
strangled  him. 


CRASSUS  and  NICIAS 
Compared 


In  the  comparison  of  these  two,  first,  if  we 
compare  the  estate  of  Nicias  with  that  of 
Crassus,  we  must  acknowledge  Nicias’s  to 
have  been  more  honestly  got.  In  itself,  indeed, 
one  cannot  much  approve  of  gaining  riches  by 
working  mines,  the  greatest  part  of  which  is 
done  by  malefactors  and  barbarians,  some  of 
them,  too,  bound,  and  perishing  in  those  close 
and  unwholesome  places.  But  if  we  compare 
this  with  the  sequestrations  of  Sulla,  and  the 
contracts  for  houses  ruined  by  fire,  we  shall 
then  think  Nicias  came  very  honestly  by  his 
money.  For  Crassus  publicly  and  avowedly 
made  use  of  these  arts,  as  other  men  do  of  hus¬ 
bandry,  and  putting  out  money  to  interest; 
while  as  for  other  matters  which  he  used  to 
deny,  when  taxed  with  them,  as,  namely,  sell¬ 
ing  his  voice  in  the  senate  for  gain’s  sake,  and 
injuring  allies,  and  courting  women,  and  con¬ 
niving  at  criminals,  these  are  things  which  Ni¬ 
cias  was  never  so  much  as  falsely  accused  of; 
nay,  he  was  rather  laughed  at  for  giving  money 
to  those  who  made  a  trade  of  impeachments, 
merely  out  of  timorousness,  a  course,  indeed, 
that  would  by  no  means  become  Pericles  and 
Aristides,  but  necessary  for  him  who  by  nature 
was  wanting  in  assurance,  even  as  Lycurgus, 


the  orator,  frankly  acknowledged  to  the  peo¬ 
ple;  for  when  he  was  accused  for  buying  off  an 
evidence,  he  said  that  he  was  very  much 
pleased  that,  having  administered  their  affairs 
for  so  long  a  time,  he  was  at  last  accused,  rather 
for  giving  than  receiving. 

Again,  Nicias,  in  his  expenses,  was  of  a 
more  public  spirit  than  Crassus,  priding  him¬ 
self  much  on  the  dedication  of  gifts  in  temples, 
on  presiding  at  gymnastic  games,  and  furnish¬ 
ing  choruses  for  the  plays,  and  adorning  pro¬ 
cessions,  while  the  expenses  of  Crassus,  in 
feasting  and  afterwards  providing  food  for  so 
many  myriads  of  people,  were  much  greater 
than  all  that  Nicias  possessed  as  well  as  spent 
put  together.  So  that  one  might  wonder  at  any 
one’s  failing  to  see  that  vice  is  a  certain  incon¬ 
sistency  and  incongruity  of  habit,  after  such 
an  example  of  money  dishonourably  obtained 
and  wastefully  lavished  away. 

Let  so  much  be  said  of  their  estates;  as  for 
their  management  of  public  affairs,  I  see  not 
that  any  dishonesty,  injustice,  or  arbitrary  ac¬ 
tion  can  be  objected  to  Nicias,  who  was  rather 
the  victim  of  Alcibiades’s  tricks,  and  was  al¬ 
ways  careful  and  scrupulous  in  his  dealings 
with  the  people.  But  Crassus  is  very  generally 


456 

blamed  for  his  changeableness  in  his  friend¬ 
ships  and  enmities,  for  his  unfaithfulness,  and 
his  mean  and  underhand  proceedings;  since  he 
himself  could  not  deny  that  to  compass  the 
consulship  he  hired  men  to  lay  violent  hands 
upon  Domitius  and  Cato.  Then  at  the  assembly 
held  for  assigning  the  provinces,  many  were 
wounded  and  four  actually  killed,  and  he  him¬ 
self,  which  I  had  omitted  in  the  narrative  of 
his  life,  struck  with  his  fist  one  Lucius  Ana- 
lius,  a  senator,  for  contradicting  him,  so  that 
he  left  the  place  bleeding. 

But  as  Crassus  was  to  be  blamed  for  his  vio¬ 
lent  and  arbitrary  courses,  so  is  Nicias  no  less 
to  be  blamed  for  his  timorousness  and  mean¬ 
ness  of  spirit,  which  made  him  submit  and 
give  in  to  the  basest  people,  whereas  in  this 
respect  Crassus  showed  himself  lofty-spirited 
and  magnanimous,  who  having  to  do  not  with 
such  as  Cleon  or  Hyperbolus,  but  with  the 
splendid  acts  of  Caesar  and  the  three  triumphs 
of  Pompey,  would  not  stoop,  but  bravely  bore 
up  against  their  joint  interests,  and  in  obtain¬ 
ing  the  office  of  censor,  surpassed  even  Pom¬ 
pey  himself.  For  a  statesman  ought  not  to  re¬ 
gard  how  invidious  the  thing  is,  but  how 
noble,  and  by  his  greatness  to  overpower  envy; 
but  if  he  will  be  always  aiming  at  security  and 
quiet,  and  dread  Alcibiades  upon  the  hustings, 
and  the  Lacedaemonians  at  Pylos,  and  Perdic- 
cas  in  Thrace,  there  is  room  and  opportunity 
enough  for  retirement,  and  he  may  sit  out  of 
the  noise  of  business,  and  weave  himself,  as 
one  of  the  sophists  says,  his  triumphal  garland 
of  inactivity.  His  desire  of  peace,  indeed,  and 
of  finishing  the  war  was  a  divine  and  truly 
Grecian  ambition,  nor  in  this  respect  would 
Crassus  deserve  to  be  compared  to  him,  though 
he  had  enlarged  the  Roman  empire  to  the  Cas¬ 
pian  Sea  or  the  Indian  Ocean. 

In  a  state  where  there  is  a  sense  of  virtue,  a 
powerful  man  ought  not  to  give  way  to  the 
ill-affected,  or  expose  the  government  to  those 
that  are  incapable  of  it,  nor  suffer  high  trusts 
to  be  committed  to  those  who  want  common 
honesty.  Yet  Nicias,  by  his  connivance,  raised 
Cleon,  a  fellow  remarkable  for  nothing  but  his 
loud  voice  and  brazen  face,  to  the  command 
of  an  army.  Indeed,  I  do  not  commend  Cras¬ 
sus,  who  in  the  war  with  Spartacus  was  more 
forward  to  fight  than  became  a  discreet  gen¬ 
eral,  though  he  was  urged  into  it  by  a  point  of 
honour,  lest  Pompey  by  his  coming  should  rob 
him  of  the  glory  of  the  action,  as  Mummius 
did  Metellus  at  the  taking  of  Corinth,  but  Ni- 
cias’s  proceedings  are  inexcusable. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

For  he  did  not  yield  up  a  mere  opportunity 
of  getting  honour  and  advantage  to  his  com¬ 
petitor,  hut  believing  that  the  expedition  would 
be  very  hazardous,  was  thankful  to  take  care 
of  himself,  and  left  the  commonwealth  to  shift 
for  itself.  And  whereas  Themistocles,  lest  a 
mean  and  incapable  fellow  should  ruin  the 
state  by  holding  command  in  the  Persian  war, 
bought  him  off,  and  Cato,  in  a  most  dangerous 
and  critical  conjuncture,  stood  for  the  tribune- 
ship  for  the  sake  of  his  country,  Nicias,  reserv¬ 
ing  himself  for  trifling  expeditions  against 
Minoa  and  Cythera,  and  the  miserable  Meli- 
ans,  if  there  be  occasion  to  come  to  blows  with 
the  Lacedaemonians,  slips  off  his  general's  cloak 
and  hands  over  to  the  unskilfulness  and  rash¬ 
ness  of  Cleon,  fleet,  men,  and  arms,  and  the 
whole  command,  where  the  utmost  possible 
skill  was  called  for.  Such  conduct,  I  say,  is  not 
to  be  thought  so  much  carelessness  of  his  own 
fame,  as  of  the  interest  and  preservation  of  his 
country.  By  this  means  it  came  to  pass  he  was 
compelled  to  the  Sicilian  war,  men  generally 
believing  that  he  was  not  so  much  honestly 
convinced  of  the  difficulty  of  the  enterprise,  as 
ready  out  of  mere  love  of  ease  and  cowardice 
to  lose  the  city  the  conquest  of  Sicily. 

But  yet  it  is  a  great  sign  of  his  integrity,  that 
though  he  was  always  averse  from  war,  and 
unwilling  to  command,  yet  they  always  con¬ 
tinued  to  appoint  him  as  the  best  experienced 
and  ablest  general  they  had.  On  the  other  hand 
Crassus,  though  always  ambitious  of  com¬ 
mand,  never  attained  to  it,  except  by  mere 
necessity  in  the  servile  war,  Pompey  and  Me¬ 
tellus  and  the  two  brothers  Lucullus  being  ab¬ 
sent,  although  at  that  time  he  was  at  his  high¬ 
est  pitch  of  interest  and  reputation.  Even  those 
who  thought  most  of  him  seem  to  have  thought 
him,  as  the  comic  poet  says — 

A  brave  man  anywhere  but  in  the  field. 

There  was  no  help,  however,  for  the  Romans, 
against  his  passion  for  command  and  for  dis¬ 
tinction.  The  Athenians  sent  out  Nicias  against 
his  will  to  the  war,  and  Crassus  led  out  the 
Romans  against  theirs;  Crassus  brought  mis¬ 
fortune  on  Rome,  as  Athens  brought  it  on 
Nicias. 

Still  this  is  rather  ground  for  praising  Ni¬ 
cias,  than  for  finding  fault  with  Crassus.  His 
experience  and  sound  judgment  as  a  general 
saved  him  from  being  carried  away  by  the  de¬ 
lusive  hopes  of  his  fellow-citizens,  and  made 
him  refuse  to  entertain  any  prospect  of  con¬ 
quering  Sicily.  Crassus,  on  the  other  hand, 


SERTORIUS 

mistook,  in  entering  on  a  Parthian  war  as  an 
easy  matter.  He  was  eager,  while  Caesar  was 
subduing  the  west,  Gaul,  Germany,  and  Brit¬ 
ain,  to  advance  for  his  part  to  the  east  and  the 
Indian  Sea,  by  the  conquest  of  Asia,  to  com¬ 
plete  the  incursions  of  Pompey  and  the  at¬ 
tempts  of  Lucullus,  men  of  prudent  temper 
and  of  unimpeachable  worth,  who  nevertheless 
entertained  the  same  projects  as  Crassus,  and 
acted  under  the  same  convictions.  When  Pom¬ 
pey  was  appointed  to  the  like  command,  the 
senate  was  opposed  to  it;  and  after  Caesar  had 
routed  three  hundred  thousand  Germans, 
Cato  recommended  that  he  should  be  surren¬ 
dered  to  the  defeated  enemy,  to  expiate  in  his 
own  person  the  guilt  of  breach  of  faith.  The 
people,  meantime  (their  service  to  Cato!), 
kept  holiday  for  fifteen  days,  and  were  over¬ 
joyed.  What  would  have  been  their  feelings, 
and  how  many  holidays  would  they  have  cele¬ 
brated,  if  Crassus  had  sent  news  from  Babylon 
of  victory,  and  thence  marching  onward  had 
converted  Media  and  Persia,  and  Hyrcanians, 
Susa  and  Bactra,  into  Roman  provinces? 

If  wrong  we  must  do,  as  Euripides  says,  and 
cannot  be  content  with  peace  and  present  good 
things,  let  it  not  be  for  such  results  as  destroy¬ 
ing  Mende  or  Scandea,  or  beating  up  the  exiled 
iEginetans  in  the  coverts  to  which  like  hunted 
birds  they  had  fled,  when  expelled  from  their 
homes,  but  let  it  be  for  some  really  great  re¬ 
muneration;  nor  let  us  part  with  justice,  like  a 


457 

cheap  and  common  thing,  for  a  small  and 
trifling  price.  Those  who  praise  Alexander’s 
enterprise  and  blame  that  of  Crassus,  judge  of 
the  beginning  unfairly  by  the  results. 

In  actual  service,  Nicias  did  much  that  de¬ 
serves  high  praise.  He  frequently  defeated  the 
enemy  in  battle,  and  was  on  the  very  point  of 
capturing  Syracuse;  nor  should  he  bear  the 
whole  blame  of  the  disaster,  which  may  fairly 
be  ascribed  in  part  to  his  want  of  health  and  to 
the  jealousy  entertained  of  him  at  home.  Cras¬ 
sus,  on  the  other  hand,  committed  so  many  er¬ 
rors  as  not  to  leave  fortune  room  to  show  him 
favour.  It  is  no  surprise  to  find  such  imbecil¬ 
ity  fall  a  victim  to  the  power  of  Parthia;  the 
only  wonder  is  to  see  it  prevailing  over  the 
wonted  good  fortune  of  Rome.  One  scrupulous¬ 
ly  observed,  the  other  entirely  slighted  the  arts 
of  divination;  and  as  both  equally  perished,  it 
is  difficult  to  see  what  inference  we  should 
draw.  Yet  the  fault  of  over-caution,  supported 
by  old  and  general  opinion,  better  deserves  for¬ 
giveness  than  that  of  self-willed  and  lawless 
transgression. 

In  his  death,  however,  Crassus  had  the  ad¬ 
vantage,  as  he  did  not  surrender  himself,  nor 
submit  to  bondage,  nor  let  himself  be  taken 
in  by  trickery,  but  was  the  victim  only  of  the 
entreaties  of  his  friends  and  the  perfidy  of  his 
enemies;  whereas  Nicias  enhanced  the  shame 
of  his  death  by  yielding  himself  up  in  the  hope 
of  disgraceful  and  inglorious  escape. 


SERTORIUS 

I30?~72.  B.C. 


IT  is  no  great  wonder  if  in  long  process  of 
time,  while  Fortune  takes  her  course  hither 
and  thither,  numerous  coincidences  should 
spontaneously  occur.  If  the  number  and  vari¬ 
ety  of  subjects  to  be  wrought  upon  be  infinite, 
it  is  all  the  more  easy  for  Fortune,  with  such  an 
abundance  of  material,  to  effect  this  similarity 
of  results.  Or  if,  on  the  other  hand,  events  are 
limited  to  the  combinations  of  some  finite 
number,  then  of  necessity  the  same  must  often 
recur,  and  in  the  same  sequence. 

There  are  people  who  take  a  pleasure  in 
making  collections  of  all  such  fortuitous  oc¬ 
currences  that  they  have  heard  or  read  of,  as 
look  like  works  of  a  rational  power  and  de¬ 
sign;  they  observe,  for  example,  that  two  emi¬ 


nent  persons  whose  names  were  Attis,  the  one 
a  Syrian,  the  other  of  Arcadia,  were  both  slain 
by  a  wild  boar;  that  of  two  whose  names  were 
Actaeon,  the  one  was  torn  in  pieces  by  his  dogs, 
the  other  by  his  lovers;  that  of  two  famous 
Scipios,  the  one  overthrew  the  Carthaginians 
in  war,  the  other  totally  ruined  and  destroyed 
them;  the  city  of  Troy  was  the  first  time  taken 
by  Hercules  for  the  horses  promised  him  by 
Laomedon,  the  second  time  by  Agamemnon, 
by  means  of  the  celebrated  great  wooden  horse, 
and  the  third  time  by  Charidemus,  by  occasion 
of  a  horse  falling  down  at  the  gate,  which  hin¬ 
dered  the  Trojans,  so  that  they  could  not  shut 
them  soon  enough;  and  of  two  cities  which 
take  their  names  from  the  most  agreeable 


458 

odoriferous  plants,  Ios  and  Smyrna,  the  one 
from  a  violet,  the  other  from  myrrh,  the  poet 
Homer  is  reported  to  have  been  born  in  the 
one  and  to  have  died  in  the  other. 

And  so  to  these  instances  let  us  further  add, 
that  the  most  warlike  commanders,  and  most 
remarkable  for  exploits  of  skilful  stratagem, 
have  had  but  one  eye;  as  Philip,  Antigonus, 
Hannibal,  and  Sertorius,  whose  life  and  ac¬ 
tions  we  describe  at  present;  of  whom,  indeed, 
we  might  truly  say,  that  he  was  more  continent 
than  Philip,  more  faithful  to  his  friends  than 
Antigonus,  and  more  merciful  to  his  enemies 
than  Hannibal;  and  that  for  prudence  and 
judgment  he  gave  place  to  none  of  them,  but  in 
fortune  was  inferior  to  them  all.  Yet  though 
he  had  continually  in  her  a  far  more  difficult 
adversary  to  contend  against  than  his  open 
enemies,  he  nevertheless  maintained  his 
ground,  with  the  military  skill  of  Metellus, 
the  boldness  of  Pompey,  the  success  of  Sulla, 
and  the  power  of  the  Roman  people,  all  to  be 
encountered  by  one  who  was  a  banished  man 
and  a  stranger  at  the  head  of  a  body  of  bar¬ 
barians. 

Among  Greek  commanders,  Eumenes  of 
Cardia  may  be  best  compared  with  him; 
they  were  both  of  them  men  born  for  com¬ 
mand,  for  warfare,  and  for  stratagem;  both 
banished  from  their  countries,  and  holding 
command  over  strangers;  both  had  fortune  for 
their  adversary,  in  their  last  days  so  harshly  so, 
that  they  were  both  betrayed  and  murdered  by 
those  who  served  them,  and  with  whom  they 
had  formerly  overcome  their  enemies. 

Quintus  Sertorius  was  of  a  noble  family, 
born  in  the  city  of  Nursia,  in  the  country  of 
the  Sabines;  his  father  died  when  he  was 
young,  and  he  was  carefully  and  decently  edu¬ 
cated  by  his  mother,  whose  name  was  Rhea, 
and  whom  he  appears  to  have  extremely  loved 
and  honoured.  He  paid  some  attention  to  the 
study  of  oratory  and  pleading  in  his  youth, 
and  acquired  some  reputation  and  influence  in 
Rome  by  his  eloquence;  but  the  splendour  of 
his  actions  in  arms,  and  his  successful  achieve¬ 
ments  in  the  wars,  drew  of!  his  ambition  in 
that  direction. 

At  his  first  beginning,  he  served  under  Cae- 
pio,  when  the  Cimbri  and  Teutones  invaded 
Gaul;  where  the  Romans  fighting  unsuccess¬ 
fully,  and  being  put  to  flight,  he  was  wounded 
in  many  parts  of  his  body,  and  lost  his  horse, 
yet,  nevertheless,  swam  across  the  river  Rhone 
in  his  armour,  with  his  breastplate  and  shield, 
bearing  himself  up  against  the  violence  of  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

current;  so  strong  and  so  well  inured  to  hard¬ 
ship  was  his  body. 

The  second  time  that  the  Cimbri  and  Teu¬ 
tones  came  down  with  some  hundreds  of  thou¬ 
sands,  threatening  death  and  destruction  to  all, 
when  it  was  no  small  piece  of  service  for  a  Ro¬ 
man  soldier  to  keep  his  ranks  and  obey  his 
commander,  Sertorius  undertook,  while  Mari¬ 
us  led  the  army,  to  spy  out  the  enemy’s  camp. 
Procuring  a  Celtic  dress,  and  acquainting  him¬ 
self  with  the  ordinary  expressions  of  their  lan¬ 
guage  requisite  for  common  intercourse,  he 
threw  himself  in  amongst  the  barbarians ;  where 
having  carefully  seen  with  his  own  eyes,  or  hav¬ 
ing  been  fully  informed  by  persons  upon  the 
place  of  all  their  most  important  concerns,  he 
returned  to  Marius,  from  whose  hands  he  re¬ 
ceived  the  rewards  of  valour;  and  afterwards 
giving  frequent  proof  both  of  conduct  and 
courage  in  all  the  following  war,  he  was  ad¬ 
vanced  to  places  of  honour  and  trust  under  his 
general. 

After  the  wars  with  the  Cimbri  and  Teu¬ 
tones,  he  was  sent  into  Spain,  having  the  com¬ 
mand  of  a  thousand  men  under  Didius,  the 
Roman  general,  and  wintered  in  the  country 
of  the  Celtiberians,  in  the  city  of  Castulo,  where 
the  soldiers  enjoying  great  plenty,  and  growing 
insolent  and  continually  drinking,  the  inhabit¬ 
ants  despised  them  and  sent  for  aid  by  night 
to  the  Gyriscenians,  their  near  neighbours,  who 
fell  upon  the  Romans  in  their  lodgings  and 
slew  a  great  number  of  them.  Sertorius,  with  a 
few  of  his  soldiers,  made  his  way  out,  and  rally- 
ing  together  the  rest  who  escaped,  he  marched 
round  about  the  walls,  and  finding  the  gate 
open,  by  which  the  Gyriscenians  had  made 
their  secret  entrance,  he  gave  not  them  the 
same  opportunity,  but  placing  a  guard  at  the 
gate,  and  seizing  upon  all  quarters  of  the  city, 
he  slew  all  who  were  of  age  to  bear  arms,  and 
then  ordering  his  soldiers  to  lay  aside  their 
weapons  and  put  off  their  own  clothes,  and  put 
on  the  accoutrements  of  the  barbarians,  he 
commanded  them  to  follow  him  to  the  city 
from  whence  the  men  came  who  had  made  this 
night  attack  upon  the  Romans.  And  thus  de¬ 
ceiving  the  Gyriscenians  with  the  sight  of  their 
own  armour,  he  found  the  gates  of  their  city 
open,  and  took  a  great  number  prisoners,  who 
came  out  thinking  to  meet  their  friends  and 
fellow-citizens  come  home  from  a  successful 
expedition.  Most  of  them  were  thus  slain  by 
the  Romans  at  their  own  gates,  and  the  rest 
within  yielded  up  themselves  and  were  sold  for 
slaves. 


SERTORIUS 

This  action  made  Sertorius  highly  renowned 
throughout  all  Spain,  and  as  soon  as  he  re¬ 
turned  to  Rome  he  was  appointed  quaestor  of 
Cisalpine  Gaul,  at  a  very  seasonable  moment 
for  his  country,  the  Marsian  war  being  on  the 
point  of  breaking  out.  Sertorius  was  ordered  to 
raise  soldiers  and  provide  arms,  which  he  per¬ 
formed  with  a  diligence  and  alacrity,  so  con¬ 
trasting  with  the  feebleness  and  slothfulness  of 
other  officers  of  his  age,  that  he  got  the  repute 
of  a  man  whose  life  would  be  one  of  action. 

Nor  did  he  relinquish  the  part  of  a  soldier, 
now  that  he  had  arrived  at  the  dignity  of  a 
commander,  but  performed  wonders  with  his 
own  hands,  and  never  sparing  himself,  but  ex¬ 
posing  his  body  freely  in  all  conflicts,  he  lost 
one  of  his  eyes.  This  he  always  esteemed  an 
honour  to  him;  observing  that  others  do  not 
continually  carry  about  with  them  the  marks 
and  testimonies  of  their  valour,  but  must  often 
lay  aside  their  chains  of  gold,  their  spears  and 
crowns;  whereas  his  ensigns  of  honour,  and  the 
manifestations  of  his  courage,  always  remained 
with  him,  and  those  who  beheld  his  misfortune 
must  at  the  same  time  recognise  his  merits. 

The  people  also  paid  him  the  respect  he  de¬ 
served,  and  when  he  came  into  the  theatre, 
received  him  with  plaudits- and  joyful  acclama¬ 
tions,  an  honour  rarely  bestowed  even  on  per¬ 
sons  of  advanced  standing  and  established  rep¬ 
utation.  Yet,  notwithstanding  this  popularity, 
when  he  stood  to  be  tribune  of  the  people,  he 
was  disappointed,  and  lost  the  place,  being  op¬ 
posed  by  the  party  of  Sulla,  which  seems  to 
have  been  the  principal  cause  of  his  subsequent 
enmity  to  Sulla. 

After  that  Marius  was  overcome  by  Sulla  and 
fled  into  Africa,  and  Sulla  had  left  Italy  to  go  to 
the  wars  against  Mithridates,  and  of  the  two 
consuls  Octavius  and  Cinna,  Octavius  remained 
steadfast  to  the  policy  of  Sulla,  but  Cinna,  de¬ 
sirous  of  a  new  revolution,  attempted  to  recall 
the  lost  interest  of  Marius,  Sertorius  joined 
Cinna’s  party,  more  particularly  as  he  saw  that 
Octavius  was  not  very  capable,  and  was  also 
suspicious  of  any  one  that  was  a  friend  to  Ma¬ 
rius.  When  a  great  battle  was  fought  between 
the  two  consuls  in  the  Forum,  Octavius  over¬ 
came,  and  Cinna  and  Sertorius,  having  lost  not 
less  than  ten  thousand  men,  left  the  city,  and 
gaining  over  most  part  of  the  troops  who  were 
dispersed  about  and  remained  still  in  many 
parts  of  Italy,  they  in  a  short  time  mustered  up 
a  force  against  Octavius  sufficient  to  give  him 
battle  again,  and  Marius,  also,  now  coming  by 
sea  out  of  Africa,  proffered  himself  to  serve 


459 

under  Cinna,  as  a  private  soldier  under  his 
consul  and  commander. 

Most  were  for  the  immediate  reception  of 
Marius,  but  Sertorius  openly  declared  against 
it,  whether  he  thought  that  Cinna  would  not 
now  pay  as  much  attention  to  himself,  when  a 
man  of  higher  military  repute  was  present,  or 
feared  that  the  violence  of  Marius  would  bring 
all  things  to  confusion,  by  his  boundless  wrath 
and  vengeance  after  victory.  He  insisted  upon 
it  with  Cinna  that  they  were  already  victorious, 
that  there  remained  little  to  be  done,  and  that 
if  they  admitted  Marius,  he  would  deprive 
them  of  the  glory  and  advantage  of  the  war, 
as  there  was  no  man  less  easy  to  deal  with,  or 
less  to  be  trusted  in,  as  a  partner  in  power. 
Cinna  answered,  that  Sertorius  rightly  judged 
the  affair,  but  that  he  himself  was  at  a  loss,  and 
ashamed,  and  knew  not  how  to  reject  him, 
after  he  had  sent  for  him  to  share  in  his  for¬ 
tunes.  To  which  Sertorius  immediately  replied, 
that  he  had  thought  that  Marius  came  into 
Italy  of  his  own  accord,  and  therefore  had 
deliberated  as  to  what  might  be  most  expe¬ 
dient,  but  that  Cinna  ought  not  so  much  as 
to  have  questioned  whether  he  should  ac¬ 
cept  him  whom  he  had  already  invited,  but 
should  have  honourably  received  and  em¬ 
ployed  him,  for  his  word  once  passed  left  no 
room  for  debate. 

Thus  Marius  being  sent  for  by  Cinna,  and 
their  forces  being  divided  into  three  parts,  un¬ 
der  Cinna,  Marius,  and  Sertorius,  the  war  was 
brought  to  a  successful  conclusion;  but  those 
about  Cinna  and  Marius  committing  all  man¬ 
ner  of  insolence  and  cruelty,  made  the  Romans 
think  the  evils  of  war  a  golden  time  in  com¬ 
parison.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  reported  of  Serto¬ 
rius  that  he  never  slew  any  man  in  his  anger  to 
satisfy  his  own  private  revenge,  nor  ever  in¬ 
sulted  over  any  one  whom  he  had  overcome, 
but  was  much  offended  with  Marius,  and  often 
privately  entreated  Cinna  to  use  his  power 
more  moderately.  And  in  the  end,  when  the 
slaves  whom  Marius  had  freed  at  his  landing 
to  increase  his  army,  being  made  not  only  his 
fellow-soldiers  in  the  war,  but  also  now  his 
guard  in  his  usurpation,  enriched  and  power¬ 
ful  by  his  favour,  either  by  the  command  or 
permission  of  Marius,  or  by  their  own  lawless 
violence,  committed  all  sorts  of  crimes,  killed 
their  masters,  ravished  their  masters’  wives  and 
abused  their  children,  their  conduct  appeared 
so  intolerable  to  Sertorius  that  he  slew  the 
whole  body  of  them,  four  thousand  in  number, 
commanding  his  soldiers  to  shoot  them  down 


460 

with  their  javelins,  as  they  lay  encamped  to¬ 
gether. 

Afterwards  when  Marius  died,  and  Cinna 
shortly  after  was  slain,  when  the  younger  Ma¬ 
rius  made  himself  consul  against  Sertoriuss 
wishes  and  contrary  to  law,  when  Carbo,  Nor- 
banus,  and  Scipio  fought  unsuccessfully  against 
Sulla,  now  advancing  to  Rome,  when  much 
was  lost  by  the  cowardice  and  remissness  of  the 
commanders,  but  more  by  the  treachery  of  their 
party,  when  with  the  want  of  prudence  in  the 
chief  leaders,  all  went  so  ill  that  Sertorius’s 
presence  could  do  no  good;  and  in  the  end 
when  Sulla  had  placed  his  camp  near  to  Scipio, 
and  by  pretending  friendship,  and  putting  him 
in  hopes  of  a  peace,  corrupted  his  army,  and 
Scipio  could  not  be  made  sensible  of  this,  al¬ 
though  often  forewarned  of  it  by  Sertorius — at 
last  he  utterly  despaired  of  Rome,  and  hasted 
into  Spain,  that  by  taking  possession  there  be¬ 
forehand,  he  might  secure  a  refuge  to  his 
friends  from  their  misfortunes  at  home. 

Having  bad  weather  in  his  journey,  and 
travelling  through  mountainous  countries,  and 
the  inhabitants  stopping  the  way,  and  demand¬ 
ing  a  toll  and  money  for  passage,  those  who 
were  with  him  were  out  of  all  patience  at  the 
indignity  and  shame  it  would  be  for  a  procon¬ 
sul  of  Rome  to  pay  tribute  to  a  crew  of  wretch¬ 
ed  barbarians.  But  he  little  regarded  their  cen¬ 
sure,  and  slighting  that  which  had  only  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  an  indecency,  told  them  he  must 
buy  time,  the  most  precious  of  all  things  to 
those  who  go  upon  great  enterprises;  and  paci¬ 
fying  the  barbarous  people  with  money,  he 
hastened  his  journey,  and  took  possession  of 
Spain,  a  country  flourishing  and  populous, 
abounding  with  young  men  fit  to  bear  arms; 
but  on  account  of  the  insolence  and  covetous¬ 
ness  of  the  governors  from  time  to  time  sent 
thither  from  Rome  they  had  generally  an  aver¬ 
sion  to  Roman  supremacy. 

He,  however,  soon  gained  the  affection  of 
their  nobles  by  intercourse  with  them,  and  the 
good  opinion  of  the  people  by  remitting  their 
taxes.  But  that  which  won  him  most  popular 
ity  was  his  exempting  them  from  finding  lodg¬ 
ings  for  the  soldiers,  when  he  commanded  his 
army  to  take  up  their  winter  quarters  outside 
the  cities,  and  to  pitch  their  camp  in  the  sub¬ 
urbs;  and  when  he  himself,  first  of  all^  caused 
his  own  tent  to  be  raised  without  the  walls. 
Yet  not  being  willing  to  rely  totally  upon  the 
good  inclination  of  the  inhabitants  he  armed 
all  the  Romans  who  lived  in  those  countries 
that  were  of  military  age,  and  undertook  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

building  of  ships  and  the  making  of  all  sorts 
of  warlike  engines,  by  which  means  he  kept 
the  cities  in  due  obedience,  showing  himself 
gentle  in  all  peaceful  business,  and  at  the  same 
time  formidable  to  his  enemies  by  his  great 
preparations  for  war. 

As  soon  as  he  was  informed  that  Sulla  had 
made  himself  master  of  Rome,  and  that  the 
party  which  sided  with  Marius  and  Carbo  was 
going  to  destruction,  he  expected  that  some 
commander  with  a  considerable  army  would 
speedily  come  against  him,  and  therefore  sent 
away  Julius  Salinator  immediately,  with  six 
thousand  men  fully  armed,  to  fortify  and  de¬ 
fend  the  passes  of  the  Pyrenees. 

And  Caius  Annius  not  long  after  being  sent 
out  by  Sulla,  finding  Julius  unassailable,  sat 
down  short  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  in  per¬ 
plexity.  But  a  certain  Calpurnius,  surnamed 
Lanarius,  having  treacherously  slain  Julius, 
and  his  soldiers  then  forsaking  the  heights  of 
the  Pyrenees,  Caius  Annius  advanced  with 
large  numbers  and  drove  before  him  all  who 
endeavoured  to  hinder  his  march.  Sertorius, 
also,  not  being  strong  enough  to  give  him  bat¬ 
tle,  retreated  with  three  thousand  men  into 
New  Carthage,  where  he  took  shipping,  and 
crossed  the  seas  into  Africa.  And  coming  near 
the  coast  of  Mauritania,  his  men  went  on  shore 
to  water,  and  straggling  about  negligently,  the 
natives  fell  upon  them  and  slew  a  great  num¬ 
ber. 

This  new  misfortune  forced  him  to  sail  back 
again  into  Spain,  whence  he  was  also  repulsed, 
and,  some  Cilician  private  ships  joining  with 
him,  they  made  for  the  island  of  Pityussa, 
where  they  landed  and  overpowered  the  garri¬ 
son  placed  there  by  Annius,  who,  however, 
came  not  long  after  with  a  great  fleet  of  ships 
and  five  thousand  soldiers.  And  Sertorius  made 
ready  to  fight  him  by  sea,  although  his  ships 
were  not  built  for  strength,  but  for  lightness 
and  swift  sailing;  but  a  violent  west  wind 
raised  such  a  sea  that  many  of  them  were  run 
aground  and  shipwrecked,  and  he  himself, 
with  a  few  vessels,  being  kept  from  putting 
further  out  to  sea  by  the  fury  of  the  weather, 
and  from  landing  by  the  power  of  his  enemies, 
was  tossed  about  painfully  for  ten  days  to¬ 
gether,  amidst  the  boisterous  and  adverse 
waves. 

He  escaped  with  difficulty,  and  after  the 
wind  ceased,  ran  for  certain  desert  islands  scat¬ 
tered  in  those  seas,  affording  no  water,  and 
after  passing  a  night  there,  making  out  to  sea 
again,  he  went  through  the  straits  of  Cadiz, 


SERTORJUS 

and  sailing  outward,  keeping  the  Spanish  shore 
on  his  right  hand,  he  landed  a  little  above  the 
mouth  of  the  river  Baetis,  where  it  falls  into  the 
Atlantic  Sea,  and  gives  the  name  to  that  part 
of  Spain. 

Here  he  met  with  seamen  recently  arrived 
from  the  Atlantic  islands,  two  in  number,  di¬ 
vided  from  one  another  only  by  a  narrow  chan¬ 
nel,  and  distant  from  the  coast  of  Africa  ten 
thousand  furlongs.  These  are  called  the  Islands 
of  the  Blest;  rain  falls  there  seldom,  and  in 
moderate  showers,  but  for  the  most  part  they 
have  gentle  breezes,  bringing  along  with  them 
soft  dews,  which  render  the  soil  not  only  rich 
for  ploughing  and  planting,  but  so  abundantly 
fruitful  that  it  produces  spontaneously  an 
abundance  of  delicate  fruits,  sufficient  to  feed 
the  inhabitants,  who  may  here  enjoy  all  things 
without  trouble  or  labour.  The  seasons  of  the 
year  are  temperate,  and  the  transitions  from 
one  to  another  so  moderate  that  the  air  is  al¬ 
most  always  serene  and  pleasant.  The  rough 
northerly  and  easterly  winds  which  blow  from 
the  coasts  of  Europe  and  Africa,  dissipated  in 
the  vast  open  space,  utterly  lose  their  force  be¬ 
fore  they  reach  the  islands.  The  soft  western 
and  southerly  winds  which  breathe  upon  them 
sometimes  produce  gentle  sprinkling  showers, 
which  they  convey  along  with  them  from  the 
sea,  but  more  usually  bring  days  of  moist, 
bright  weather,  cooling  and  gently  fertilising 
the  soil,  so  that  the  firm  belief  prevails,  even 
among  the  barbarians,  that  this  is  the  seat  of 
the  blessed,  and  that  these  are  the  Elysian 
Fields  celebrated  by  Homer. 

When  Sertorius  heard  this  account,  he  was 
seized  with  a  wonderful  passion  for  these  is¬ 
lands,  and  had  an  extreme  desire  to  go  and  live 
there  in  peace  and  quietness,  and  safe  from  op¬ 
pression  and  unending  wars;  but  his  inclina¬ 
tions  being  perceived  by  the  Cilician  pirates, 
who  desired  not  peace  nor  quiet,  but  riches  and 
spoils,  they  immediately  forsook  him  and  sailed 
away  into  Africa  to  assist  Ascalis,  the  son  of 
Iphtha,  and  to  help  to  restore  him  to  his  king¬ 
dom  of  Mauritania.  Their  sudden  departure 
noways  discouraged  Sertorius;  he  presendy  re¬ 
solved  to  assist  the  enemies  of  Ascalis,  and  by 
this  new  adventure  trusted  to  keep  his  soldiers 
together,  who  from  this  might  conceive  new 
hopes,  and  a  prospect  of  a  new  scene  of  action. 

His  arrival  in  Mauritania  being  very  accept¬ 
able  to  the  Moors,  he  lost  no  time,  but  immedi¬ 
ately  giving  battle  to  Ascalis,  beat  him  out  of 
the  field  and  besieged  him;  and  Paccianus  be¬ 
ing  sent  by  Sulla,  with  a  powerful  supply,  to 


461 

raise  the  siege,  Sertorius  slew  him  in  the  field, 
gained  over  all  his  forces,  and  took  the  city  of 
Tingis,  into  which  Ascalis  and  his  brothers 
were  fled  for  refuge. 

The  Africans  tell  that  Antaeus  was  buried  in 
this  city,  and  Sertorius  had  the  grave  opened, 
doubting  the  story  because  of  the  prodigious 
size,  and  finding  there  his  body,  in  effect,  it  is 
said,  full  sixty  cubits  long,  he  was  infinitely  as¬ 
tonished,  offered  sacrifice,  and  heaped  up  the 
tomb  again,  gave  his  confirmation  to  the  story, 
and  added  new  honours  to  the  memory  of 
Antaeus. 

The  Africans  tell  that  after  the  death  of  An¬ 
taeus,  his  wife  Tinga  lived  with  Hercules,  and 
had  a  son  by  him  called  Sophax,  who  was  king 
of  these  countries,  and  gave  his  mother’s  name 
to  this  city,  whose  son,  also,  was  Diodorus,  a 
great  conqueror,  who  brought  the  greatest  part 
of  the  Libyan  tribes  under  his  subjection,  with 
an  army  of  Greeks,  raised  out  of  the  colonies 
of  the  Olbians  and  Myceneans  placed  here  by 
Hercules.  Thus  much  I  may  mention  for  the 
sake  of  King  Juba,  of  all  monarchs  the  great¬ 
est  student  of  history,  whose  ancestors  are  said 
to  have  sprung  from  Diodorus  and  Sophax. 

When  Sertorius  had  made  himself  absolute 
master  of  the  whole  country,  he  acted  with 
great  fairness  to  those  who  had  confided  in 
him,  and  who  yielded  to  his  mercy;  he  restored 
to  them  their  property,  cities,  and  government, 
accepting  only  of  such  acknowledgments  as 
they  themselves  freely  offered.  And  whilst  he 
considered  which  way  next  to  turn  his  arms, 
the  Lusitanians  sent  ambassadors  to  desire  him 
to  be  their  general ;  for  being  terrified  with  the 
Roman  power,  and  finding  the  necessity  of 
having  a  commander  of  great  authority  and  ex¬ 
perience  in  war,  being  also  sufficiently  assured 
of  his  worth  and  valour  by  those  who  had  for¬ 
merly  known  him,  they  were  desirous  to  com¬ 
mit  themselves  especially  to  his  care. 

And  in  fact  Sertorius  is  said  to  have  been  of 
a  temper  unassailable  either  by  fear  or  pleas¬ 
ure,  in  adversity  and  dangers  undaunted,  and 
noways  puffed  up  with  prosperity.  In  straight¬ 
forward  fighting,  no  commander  in  his  time 
was  more  bold  and  daring,  and  in  whatever 
was  to  be  performed  in  war  by  stratagem,  se¬ 
crecy,  or  surprise,  if  any  strong  place  was  to  be 
secured,  any  pass  to  be  gained  speedily,  for  de¬ 
ceiving  and  overreaching  an  enemy,  there  was 
no  man  equal  to  him  in  subtlety  and  skill.  In 
bestowing  rewards  and  conferring  honours  up¬ 
on  those  who  had  performed  good  service  in 
the  wars,  he  was  bountiful  and  magnificent. 


462 

and  was  no  less  sparing  and  moderate  in  in¬ 
flicting  punishment. 

It  is  true  that  that  piece  of  harshness  and 
cruelty  which  he  executed  in  the  latter  part  of 
his  days  upon  the  Spanish  hostages  seems  to 
argue  that  his  clemency  was  not  natural  to  him, 
but  only  worn  as  a  dress,  and  employed  upon 
calculation,  as  his  occasion  or  necessity  re¬ 
quired.  As  to  my  own  opinion,  I  am  persuaded 
that  pure  virtue,  established  by  reason  and 
judgment,  can  never  be  totally  perverted  or 
changed  into  its  opposite  by  any  misfortune 
whatever.  Yet  I  think  it  at  the  same  time  possi¬ 
ble  that  virtuous  inclinations  and  natural  good 
qualities  may,  when  unworthily  oppressed  by 
calamities,  show,  with  change  of  fortune,  some 
change  and  alteration  of  their  temper;  and  thus 
I  conceive  it  happened  to  Sertorius,  who,  when 
prosperity  failed  him,  became  exasperated  by 
his  disasters  against  those  who  had  done  him 
wrong. 

The  Lusitanians  having  sent  for  Sertorius, 
he  left  Africa,  and  being  made  general  with 
absolute  authority,  he  put  all  in  order  amongst 
them,  and  brought  the  neighbouring  parts  of 
Spain  under  subjection.  Most  of  the  tribes  vol¬ 
untarily  submitted  themselves,  won  by  the 
fame  of  his  clemency  and  of  his  courage,  and, 
to  some  extent,  also,  he  availed  himself  of  cun¬ 
ning  artifices  of  his  own  devising  to  impose 
upon  them  and  gain  influence  over  them. 

Amongst  which,  certainly,  that  of  the  hind 
was  not  the  least.  Spanus,  a  countryman  who 
lived  in  those  parts,  meeting  by  chance  a  hind 
that  had  recently  calved,  flying  from  the  hunt¬ 
ers,  let  the  dam  go,  and  pursuing  the  fawn, 
took  it,  being  wonderfully  pleased  with  the 
rarity  of  the  colour,  which  was  all  milk-white. 
As  at  that  time  Sertorius  was  living  in  the 
neighbourhood,  and  accepted  gladly  any  pres¬ 
ents  of  fruit,  fowl,  or  venison  that  the  country 
afforded,  and  rewarded  liberally  those  who 
presented  them,  the  countryman  brought  him 
his  young  hind,  which  he  took  and  was  well 
pleased  with  at  the  first  sight;  but  when  in  time 
he  had  made  it  so  tame  and  gentle  that  it  would 
come  when  he  called,  and  follow  him  where¬ 
soever  he  went,  and  could  endure  the  noise  and 
tumult  of  the  camp,  knowing  well  that  uncivi¬ 
lised  people  are  naturally  prone  to  superstition, 
by  little  and  little  he  raised  it  into  something 
preternatural,  saying  that  it  was  given  him  by 
the  goddess  Diana,  and  that  it  revealed  to  him 
many  secrets. 

He  added,  also,  further  contrivances.  If  he 
had  received  at  any  time  private  intelligence 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

that  the  enemies  had  made  an  incursion  into 
any  part  of  the  districts  under  his  command, 
or  had  solicited  any  city  to  revolt,  he  pretended 
that  the  hind  had  informed  him  of  it  in  his 
sleep,  and  charged  him  to  keep  his  forces  in 
readiness.  Or  if  again  he  had  noticed  that  any 
of  the  commanders  under  him  had  got  a  vic¬ 
tory,  he  would  hide  the  messengers  and  bring 
forth  the  hind  crowned  with  flowers,  for  joy  of 
the  good  news  that  was  to  come,  and  would  en¬ 
courage  them  to  rejoice  and  sacrifice  to  the 
gods  for  the  good  account  they  should  soon  re¬ 
ceive  of  their  prosperous  success. 

By  such  practices,  he  brought  them  to  be 
more  tractable  and  obedient  in  all  things;  for 
now  they  thought  themselves  no  longer  to  be 
led  by  a  stranger,  but  rather  conducted  by  a 
god,  and  the  more  so,  as  the  facts  themselves 
seemed  to  bear  witness  to  it,  his  power,  con¬ 
trary  to  all  expectation  or  probability,  continu¬ 
ally  increasing.  For  with  two  thousand  six  hun¬ 
dred  men,  whom  for  honour’s  sake  he  called 
Romans,  combined  with  seven  hundred  Afri¬ 
cans,  who  landed  with  him  when  he  first  en¬ 
tered  Lusitania,  together  with  four  thousand 
targeteers  and  seven  hundred  horse  of  the  Lu¬ 
sitanians  themselves,  he  made  war  against  four 
Roman  generals,  who  commanded  a  hundred 
and  twenty  thousand  foot,  six  thousand  horse, 
two  thousand  archers  and  slingers,  and  had 
cities  innumerable  in  their  power;  whereas  at 
the  first  he  had  not  above  twenty  cities  in  all. 

From  this  weak  and  slender  beginning,  he 
raised  himself  to  the  command  of  large  nations 
of  men,  and  the  possession  of  numerous  cities; 
and  of  the  Roman  commanders  who  were  sent 
against  him,  he  overthrew  Cotta  in  a  sea-fight, 
in  the  channel  near  the  town  of  Mellaria;  he 
routed  Fufidius,  the  governor  of  Baetica,  with 
the  loss  of  two  thousand  Romans,  near  the 
banks  of  the  river  Baetis;  Lucius  Domitius,  pro- 
consul  of  the  other  province  of  Spain,  was  over¬ 
thrown  by  one  of  his  lieutenants;  Thoranius, 
another  commander  sent  against  him  by  Metel- 
lus  with  a  great  force,  was  slain,  and  Metellus, 
one  of  the  greatest  and  most  approved  Roman 
generals  then  living,  by  a  series  of  defeats,  was 
reduced  to  such  extremities,  that  Lucius  Man¬ 
lius  came  to  his  assistance  out  of  Gallia  Nar- 
bonensis,  and  Pompey  the  Great  was  sent  from 
Rome  itself  in  all  haste  with  considerable 
forces. 

Nor  did  Metellus  know  which  way  to  turn 
himself,  in  a  war  with  such  a  bold  and  ready 
commander,  who  was  continually  molesting 
him,  and  yet  could  not  be  brought  to  a  set  bat- 


SERTORIUS 

tie,  but  by  the  swiftness  and  dexterity  of  his 
Spanish  soldiery  was  enabled  to  shift  and  adapt 
himself  to  any  change  of  circumstances.  Metel- 
lus  had  had  experience  in  battles  fought  by  reg¬ 
ular  legions  of  soldiers,  fully  armed  and  drawn 
up  in  due  order  into  a  heavy  standing  phalanx, 
admirably  trained  for  encountering  and  over¬ 
powering  an  enemy  who  came  to  close  combat, 
hand  to  hand,  but  entirely  unfit  for  climbing 
among  the  hills,  and  competing  incessantly 
with  the  swift  attacks  and  retreats  of  a  set  of 
fleet  mountaineers,  or  to  endure  hunger  and 
thirst,  and  live  exposed  like  them  to  the  wind 
and  weather,  without  fire  or  covering. 

Besides,  being  now  in  years,  and  having  been 
formerly  engaged  in  many  fights  and  danger¬ 
ous  conflicts,  he  had  grown  inclined  to  a  more 
remiss,  easy,  and  luxurious  life,  and  was  the 
less  able  to  contend  with  Sertorius,  who  was  in 
the  prime  of  his  strength  and  vigour,  and  had 
a  body  wonderfully  fitted  for  war,  being  strong, 
active,  and  temperate,  continually  accustomed 
to  endure  hard  labour,  to  take  long,  tedious 
journeys,  to  pass  many  nights  together  without 
sleep,  to  eat  little,  and  to  be  satisfied  with  very 
coarse  fare,  and  who  was  never  stained  with 
the  least  excess  in  wine,  even  when  he  was 
most  at  leisure.  What  leisure*  time  he  allowed 
himself  he  spent  in  hunting  and  riding  about, 
and  so  made  himself  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  every  passage  for  escape  when  he  would 
flee,  and  for  overtaking  and  intercepting  a  pur¬ 
suit,  and  gained  a  perfect  knowledge  of  where 
he  could  and  where  he  could  not  go. 

Insomuch  that  Metellus  suffered  all  the  in¬ 
conveniences  of  defeat,  although  he  earnestly 
desired  to  fight,  and  Sertorius,  though  he  re¬ 
fused  the  field,  reaped  all  the  advantages  of  a 
conqueror.  For  he  hindered  them  from  forag¬ 
ing,  and  cut  them  off  from  water;  if  they  ad¬ 
vanced,  he  was  nowhere  to  be  found;  if  they 
stayed  in  any  place  and  encamped,  he  continu¬ 
ally  molested  and  alarmed  them;  if  they  be¬ 
sieged  any  town,  he  presently  appeared  and  be¬ 
sieged  them  again,  and  put  them  to  extremities 
for  want  of  necessaries.  Thus  he  so  wearied  out 
the  Roman  army  that  when  Sertorius  chal¬ 
lenged  Metellus  to  fight  singly  with  him,  they 
commended  it,  and  cried  out  it  was  a  fair  offer, 
a  Roman  to  fight  against  a  Roman,  and  a  gen¬ 
eral  against  a  general;  and  when  Metellus  re¬ 
fused  the  challenge,  they  reproached  him. 

Metellus  derided  and  contemned  this,  and 
rightly  so;  for,  as  Theophrastus  observes,  a 
general  should  die  like  a  general,  and  not  like 
a  skirmisher.  But  perceiving  that  the  town  of 


463 

the  Langobritae,  which  gave  great  assistance  to 
Sertorius,  might  easily  be  taken  for  want  of  wa¬ 
ter,  as  there  was  but  one  well  within  the  walls, 
and  the  besieger  would  be  master  of  the  springs 
and  fountains  in  the  suburbs,  he  advanced 
against  the  place,  expecting  to  carry  it  in  two 
days’  time,  there  being  no  more  water,  and 
gave  command  to  his  soldiers  to  take  five  days’ 
provision  only.  Sertorius,  however,  resolving  to 
send  speedy  relief,  ordered  two  thousand  skins 
to  be  filled  with  water,  naming  a  considerable 
sum  of  money  for  the  carriage  of  every  skin; 
and  many  Spaniards  and  Moors  undertaking 
the  work,  he  chose  out  those  who  were  the 
strongest  and  swiftest  of  foot,  and  sent  them 
through  the  mountains,  with  order  that  when 
they  had  delivered  the  water,  they  should  con¬ 
vey  away  privately  all  those  who  would  be 
least  serviceable  in  the  siege,  that  there  might 
be  water  sufficient  for  the  defendants. 

As  soon  as  Metellus  understood  this,  he  was 
disturbed,  as  he  had  already  consumed  most 
part  of  the  necessary  provisions  for  his  army, 
but  he  sent  out  Aquinus  with  six  thousand  sol¬ 
diers  to  fetch  in  fresh  supplies.  But  Sertorius 
having  notice  of  it,  laid  an  ambush  for  him, 
and  having  sent  out  beforehand  three  thousand 
men  to  take  post  in  a  thickly  wooded  water¬ 
course,  with  these  he  attacked  the  rear  of  Aqui¬ 
nus  in  his  return,  while  he  himself,  charging 
him  in  the  front,  destroyed  part  of  his  army, 
and  took  the  rest  prisoners,  Aquinus  only  es¬ 
caping,  after  the  loss  of  both  his  horse  and  his 
armour.  And  Metellus,  being  forced  shameful¬ 
ly  to  raise  the  siege,  withdrew  amidst  the 
laughter  and  contempt  of  the  Spaniards;  while 
Sertorius  became  yet  more  the  object  of  their 
esteem  and  admiration. 

He  was  also  highly  honoured  for  his  intro¬ 
ducing  discipline  and  good  order  amongst 
them,  for  he  altered  their  furious  savage  man¬ 
ner  of  fighting,  and  brought  them  to  make  use 
of  the  Roman  armour,  taught  them  to  keep 
their  ranks,  and  observe  signals  and  watch¬ 
words;  and  out  of  a  confused  number  of  thieves 
and  robbers  he  constituted  a  regular,  well-dis¬ 
ciplined  army.  He  bestowed  silver  and  gold 
upon  them  liberally  to  gild  and  adorn  their 
helmets,  he  had  their  shields  worked  with  vari¬ 
ous  figures  and  designs,  he  brought  them  into 
the  mode  of  wearing  flowered  and  embroi¬ 
dered  cloaks  and  coats,  and  by  supplying  mon¬ 
ey  for  these  purposes,  and  joining  with  them 
in  all  improvements,  he  won  the  hearts  of  all. 

That,  however,  which  delighted  them  most 
was  the  care  that  he  took  of  their  children.  He 


464 

sent  for  all  the  boys  of  noblest  parentage  out  of 
all  their  tribes,  and  placed  them  in  the  great 
city  of  Osca,  where  he  appointed  masters  to  in¬ 
struct  them  in  the  Grecian  and  Roman  learn¬ 
ing,  that  when  they  came  to  be  men,  they 
might,  as  he  professed,  be  fitted  to  share  with 
him  in  authority,  and  in  conducting  the  gov¬ 
ernment,  although  under  this  pretext  he  really 
made  them  hostages.  However,  their  fathers 
were  wonderfully  pleased  that  their  children 
went  daily  to  the  schools  in  good  order,  hand¬ 
somely  dressed  in  gowns  edged  with  purple, 
and  that  Sertorius  paid  for  their  lessons,  exam¬ 
ined  them  often,  distributed  rewards  to  the 
most  deserving,  and  gave  them  the  golden 
bosses  to  hang  about  their  necks,  which  the 
Romans  called  bulled. 

There  being  a  custom  in  Spain  that  when  a 
commander  was  slain  in  battle,  those  who  at¬ 
tended  his  person  fought  it  out  till  they  all  died 
with  him,  which  the  inhabitants  of  those  coun¬ 
tries  called  an  offering,  or  libation,  there  were 
few  commanders  that  had  any  considerable 
guard  or  number  of  attendants;  but  Sertorius 
was  followed  by  many  thousands  who  offered 
themselves,  and  vowed  to  spend  their  blood 
with  his.  And  it  is  told  that  when  his  army  was 
defeated  near  a  city  in  Spain,  and  the  enemy 
pressed  hard  upon  them,  the  Spaniards,  with 
no  care  for  themselves,  but  being  totally  solici¬ 
tous  to  save  Sertorius,  took  him  upon  their 
shoulders  and  passed  him  from  one  to  another, 
till  they  carried  him  into  the  city,  and  only 
when  they  had  thus  placed  their  general  in 
safety,  provided  afterwards  each  man  for  his 
own  security. 

Nor  were  the  Spaniards  alone  ambitious  to 
serve  him,  but  the  Roman  soldiers,  also,  that 
came  out  of  Italy,  were  impatient  to  be  under 
his  command;  and  when  Perpenna  Vento,  who 
was  of  the  same  faction  with  Sertorius,  came 
into  Spain  with  a  quantity  of  money  and  a 
large  number  of  troops,  and  designed  to  make 
war  against  Metellus  on  his  own  account,  his 
own  soldiers  opposed  it,  and  talked  continu¬ 
ally  of  Sertorius,  much  to  the  mortification  of 
Perpenna,  who  was  puffed  up  with  the  gran¬ 
deur  of  his  family  and  his  riches.  And  when 
they  afterwards  received  tidings  that  Pompey 
was  passing  the  Pyrenees,  they  took  up  their 
arms,  laid  hold  on  their  ensigns,  called  upon 
Perpenna  to  lead  them  to  Sertorius,  and  threat¬ 
ened  him  that  if  he  refused  they  would  go 
without  him  and  place  themselves  under  a 
commander  who  was  able  to  defend  himself 
and  those  that  served  him.  And  so  Perpenna 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

was  obliged  to  yield  to  their  desires,  and  join¬ 
ing  Sertorius,  added  to  his  army  three-and-fifty 
cohorts. 

When  now  all  the  cities  on  this  side  of  the 
river  Ebro  also  united  their  forces  together  un¬ 
der  his  command,  his  army  grew  great,  for 
they  flocked  together  and  flowed  in  upon  him 
from  all  quarters.  But  when  they  continually 
cried  out  to  attack  the  enemy,  and  were  impa¬ 
tient  of  delay,  their  inexperienced,  disorderly 
rashness  caused  Sertorius  much  trouble,  who  at 
first  strove  to  restrain  them  with  reason  and 
good  counsel;  but  when  he  perceived  them  re¬ 
fractory  and  unseasonably  violent,  he  gave  way 
to  their  impetuous  desires,  and  permitted  them 
to  engage  with  the  enemy,  in  such  sort  that 
they  might,  being  repulsed,  yet  not  totally 
routed,  become  more  obedient  to  his  com¬ 
mands  for  the  future.  Which  happening  as  he 
had  anticipated,  he  soon  rescued  them,  and 
brought  them  safe  into  his  camp. 

After  a  few  days,  being  willing  to  encourage 
them  again,  when  he  had  called  all  his  army 
together,  he  caused  two  horses  to  be  brought 
into  the  field,  one  old,  feeble,  lean  animal,  the 
other  a  lusty,  strong  horse,  with  a  remarkable 
thick  and  long  tail.  Near  the  lean  one  he  placed 
a  tall,  strong  man,  and  near  the  strong  young 
horse  a  weak,  despicable-looking  fellow;  and 
at  a  sign  given,  the  strong  man  took  hold  of  the 
weak  horse’s  tail  with  both  his  hands,  and 
drew  it  to  him  with  his  whole  force,  as  if  he 
would  pull  it  off;  the  other,  the  weak  man,  in 
the  meantime,  set  to  work  to  pluck  off  hair  by 
hair  from  the  great  horse’s  tail.  When  the 
strong  man  had  given  trouble  enough  to  him¬ 
self  in  vain,  and  sufficient  diversion  to  the  com¬ 
pany,  and  had  abandoned  his  attempt,  whilst 
the  weak,  pitiful  fellow  in  a  short  time  and 
with  little  pains  had  left  not  a  hair  on  the  great 
horse’s  tail,  Sertorius  rose  up  and  spoke  to  his 
army.  “You  see,  fellow-soldiers,  that  persever¬ 
ance  is  more  prevailing  than  violence,  and  that 
many  things  which  cannot  be  overcome  when 
they  are  together,  yield  themselves  up  when 
taken  little  by  little.  Assiduity  and  persistence 
are  irresistible,  and  in  time  overthrow  and  deT 
stroy  the  greatest  powers  whatever.  Time  being 
the  favourable  friend  and  assistant  of  those 
who  use  their  judgment  to  await  his  occasions, 
and  the  destructive  enemy  of  those  who  are  un¬ 
seasonably  urging  and  pressing  forward.” 
With  a  frequent  use  of  such  words  and  such 
devices,  he  soothed  the  fierceness  of  the  barba¬ 
rous  people,  and  taught  them  to  attend  and 
watch  for  their  opportunities. 


SERTORIUS 

Of  all  his  remarkable  exploits,  none  raised 
greater  admiration  than  that  which  he  put  in 
practice  against  the  Characitanians.  These  are 
a  people  beyond  the  river  Tagus,  who  inhabit 
neither  cities  nor  towns,  but  live  in  a  vast  high 
hill,  within  the  deep  dens  and  caves  of  the 
rocks,  the  mouths  of  which  open  all  towards 
the  north.  The  country  below  is  of  a  soil  resem¬ 
bling  a  light  clay,  so  loose  as  easily  to  break 
into  powder,  and  is  not  firm  enough  to  bear 
any  one  that  treads  upon  it,  and  if  you  touch  it 
in  the  least  it  flies  about  like  ashes  or  unslacked 
lime.  In  any  danger  of  war,  these  people  de¬ 
scended  into  their  caves,  and  carrying  in  their 
booty  and  prey  along  with  them,  stayed  quiet¬ 
ly  within,  secure  from  every  attack. 

And  when  Sertorius,  leaving  Metellus  some 
distance  off,  had  placed  his  camp  near  this  hill, 
they  slighted  and  despised  him,  imagining  that 
he  retired  into  these  parts,  being  overthrown 
by  the  Romans.  And  whether  out  of  anger  or 
resentment,  or  out  of  his  unwillingness  to  be 
thought  to  fly  from  his  enemies,  early  in  the 
morning  he  rode  up  to  view  the  situation  of  the 
place.  But  finding  there  was  no  way  to  come  at 
it,  as  he  rode  about,  threatening  them  in  vain 
and  disconcerted,  he  took  notice  that  the  wind 
raised  the  dust  and  carried  it.  up  towards  the 
caves  of  the  Characitanians,  the  mouths  of 
which,  as  I  said  before,  opened  towards  the 
north;  and  the  northerly  wind,  which  some 
call  Caecias,  prevailing  most  in  those  parts, 
coming  up  out  of  moist  plains  or  mountains 
covered  with  snow,  at  this  particular  time,  in 
the  heat  of  summer,  being  further  supplied  and 
increased  by  the  melting  of  the  ice  in  the  north¬ 
ern  regions,  blew  a  delightful  fresh  gale,  cool¬ 
ing  and  refreshing  the  Characitanians  and 
their  cattle  all  the  day  long.  Sertorius,  consid¬ 
ering  well  all  circumstances  in  which  either  the 
information  of  the  inhabitants  or  his  own  ex¬ 
perience  had  instructed  him,  commanded  his 
soldiers  to  shovel  up  a  great  quantity  of  this 
light,  dusty  earth,  to  heap  it  up  together,  and 
make  a  mount  of  it  over  against  the  hill  in 
which  those  barbarous  people  resided,  who, 
imagining  that  all  this  preparation  was  for 
raising  a  mound  to  get  at  them,  only  mocked 
and  laughed  at  it.  However,  he  continued  the 
work  till  the  evening,  and  brought  his  soldiers 
back  into  their  camp. 

The  next  morning  a  gentle  breeze  at  first 
arose,  and  moved  the  lightest  parts  of  the  earth 
and  dispersed  it  about  as  the  chaff  before  the 
wind;  but  when  the  sun  coming  to  be  higher, 
the  strong  northerly  wind  had  covered  the  hills 


465 

with  the  dust,  the  soldiers  came  and  turned  this 
mound  of  earth  over  and  over,  and  broke  the 
hard  clods  in  pieces,  whilst  others  on  horse¬ 
back  rode  through  it  backward  and  forward, 
and  raised  a  cloud  of  dust  into  the  air;  there 
with  the  wind  the  whole  of  it  was  carried  away 
and  blown  into  the  dwellings  of  the  Characi¬ 
tanians,  all  lying  open  to  the  north.  And  there 
being  no  other  vent  or  breathing-place  than 
that  through  which  the  Caecias  rushed  in  upon 
them,  it  quickly  blinded  their  eyes  and  filled 
their  lungs,  and  all  but  choked  them,  whilst 
they  strove  to  draw  in  the  rough  air  mingled 
with  dust  and  powdered  earth.  Nor  were  they 
able,  with  all  they  could  do,  to  hold  out  above 
two  days,  but  yielding  up  themselves  on  the 
third,  adding,  by  their  defeat,  not  so  much  to 
the  power  of  Sertorius,  as  to  his  renown,  in 
proving  that  he  was  able  to  conquer  places  by 
art,  which  were  impregnable  by  the  force  of 
arms. 

So  long  as  he  had  to  do  with  Metellus,  he 
was  thought  to  owe  his  successes  to  his  oppo¬ 
nent’s  age  and  slow  temper,  which  were  ill 
suited  for  coping  with  the  daring  and  activity 
of  one  who  commanded  a  light  army  more  like 
a  band  of  robbers  than  regular  soldiers.  But 
when  Pompey  also  passed  over  the  Pyrenees, 
and  Sertorius  pitched  his  camp  near  him,  and 
offered  and  himself  accepted  every  occasion  by 
which  military  skill  could  be  put  to  the  proof, 
and  in  this  contest  of  dexterity  was  found  to 
have  the  better,  both  in  baffling  his  enemy’s  de¬ 
signs  and  in  counterscheming  himself,  the 
fame  of  him  now  spread  even  to  Rome  itself, 
as  the  most  expert  commander  of  his  time.  For 
the  renown  of  Pompey  was  not  small,  who  had 
already  won  much  honour  by  his  achievements 
in  the  wars  of  Sulla,  from  whom  he  received 
the  title  of  Magnus,  and  was  called  Pompey  the 
Great;  and  who  had  risen  to  the  honour  of  a 
triumph  before  the  beard  had  grown  on  his 
face.  And  many  cities  which  were  under  Ser¬ 
torius  were  on  the  very  eve  of  revolting  and  go¬ 
ing  over  to  Pompey,  when  they  were  deterred 
from  it  by  that  great  action,  amongst  others, 
which  he  performed  near  the  city  of  Lauron, 
contrary  to  the  expectation  of  all. 

For  Sertorius  had  laid  siege  to  Lauron,  and 
Pompey  came  with  his  whole  army  to  relieve 
it;  and  there  being  a  hill  near  this  city  very  ad¬ 
vantageously  situated,  they  both  made  haste  to 
take  it.  Sertorius  was  beforehand,  and  took  pos¬ 
session  of  it  first,  and  Pompey,  having  drawn 
down  his  forces,  was  not  sorry  that  it  had  thus 
happened,  imagining  that  he  had  hereby  en- 


466 

closed  his  enemy  between  his  own  army  and 
the  city,  and  sent  in  a  messenger  to  the  citizens 
of  Lauron,  to  bid  them  be  of  good  courage, 
and  to  come  upon  their  walls,  where  they 
might  see  their  besieger  besieged.  Sertorius, 
perceiving  their  intentions,  smiled,  and  said  he 
would  now  teach  Sulla’s  scholar,  for  so  he 
called  Pompey  in  derision,  that  it  was  the  part 
of  a  general  to  look  as  well  behind  him  as  be¬ 
fore  him,  and  at  the  same  time  showed  them 
six  thousand  soldiers,  whom  he  had  left  in  his 
former  camp,  from  whence  he  marched  out  to 
take  the  hill,  where,  if  Pompey  should  assault 
him,  they  might  fall  upon  his  rear. 

Pompey  discovered  this  too  late,  and  not  dar¬ 
ing  to  give  battle,  for  fear  of  being  encompass¬ 
ed,  and  yet  being  ashamed  to  desert  his  friends 
and  confederates  in  their  extreme  danger,  was 
thus  forced  to  sit  still,  and  see  them  ruined  be¬ 
fore  his  face.  For  the  besieged  despaired  of  re¬ 
lief,  and  delivered  up  themselves  to  Sertorius, 
who  spared  their  lives  and  granted  them  their 
liberty,  but  burnt  their  city,  not  out  of  anger  or 
cruelty,  for  of  all  commanders  that  ever  were 
Sertorius  seemed  least  of  all  to  have  indulged 
these  passions,  but  only  for  the  greater  shame 
and  confusion  of  the  admirers  of  Pompey,  and 
that  it  might  be  reported  amongst  the  Span¬ 
iards,  that  though  he  had  been  so  close  to  the 
fire  which  burnt  down  the  city  of  his  confed¬ 
erates  as  actually  to  feel  the  heat  of  it,  he  still 
had  not  dared  to  make  any  opposition. 

Sertorius,  however,  sustained  many  losses; 
but  he  always  maintained  himself  and  those 
immediately  with  him  undefeated,  and  it  was 
by  other  commanders  under  him  that  he  suf¬ 
fered;  and  he  was  more  admired  for  being 
able  to  repair  his  losses,  and  for  recovering  the 
victory,  than  the  Roman  generals  against  him 
for  gaining  these  advantages;  as  at  the  battle  of 
the  Sucro  against  Pompey,  and  at  the  battle 
near  Tuttia,  against  him  and  Metellus  together. 

The  battle  near  the  Sucro  was  fought,  it  is 
said,  through  the  impatience  of  Pompey,  lest 
Metellus  should  share  with  him  in  the  victory, 
Sertorius  being  also  willing  to  engage  Pompey 
before  the  arrival  of  Metellus.  Sertorius  delayed 
the  time  till  the  evening,  considering  that  the 
darkness  of  the  night  would  be  a  disadvantage 
to  his  enemies,  whether  fleeing  or  pursuing,  be¬ 
ing  strangers,  and  having  no  knowledge  of  the 
country. 

When  the  fight  began,  it  happened  that  Ser¬ 
torius  was  not  placed  directly  against  Pompey, 
but  against  Afranius,  who  had  command  of 
the  left  wing  of  the  Roman  army,  as  he  com- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

manded  the  right  wing  of  his  own;  but  when 
he  understood  that  his  left  wing  began  to  give 
way,  and  yield  to  the  assault  of  Pompey,  he 
committed  the  care  of  his  right  wing  to  other 
commanders,  and  made  haste  to  relieve  those 
in  distress;  and  rallying  some  that  were  fleeing, 
and  encouraging  others  that  still  kept  their 
ranks,  he  renewed  the  fight,  and  attacked  the 
enemy  in  their  pursuit  so  effectively  as  to  cause 
a  considerable  rout,  and  brought  Pompey  into 
great  danger  of  his  life.  For  after  being  wound¬ 
ed  and  losing  his  horse,  he  escaped  unexpected¬ 
ly.  For  the  Africans  with  Sertorius,  who  took 
Pompey’s  horse,  set  out  with  gold,  and  cov¬ 
ered  with  rich  trappings,  fell  out  with  one  an¬ 
other;  and  upon  the  dividing  of  the  spoil,  gave 
over  the  pursuit. 

Afranius,  in  the  meantime,  as  soon  as  Sertor¬ 
ius  had  left  his  right  wing,  to  assist  the  other 
part  of  his  army,  overthrew  all  that  opposed 
him;  and  pursuing  them  to  their  camp,  fell  in 
together  with  them,  and  plundered  them  till  it 
was  dark  night;  knowing  nothing  of  Pompey’s 
overthrow,  nor  being  able  to  restrain  his  sol¬ 
diers  from  pillaging;  when  Sertorius,  return¬ 
ing  with  victory,  fell  upon  him  and  upon  his 
men,  who  were  all  in  disorder,  and  slew  many 
of  them.  And  the  next  morning  he  came  into 
the  field  again  well  armed,  and  offered  battle, 
but  perceiving  that  Metellus  was  near,  he  drew 
off,  and  returned  to  his  camp,  saying,  “If  this 
old  woman  had  not  come  up,  I  would  have 
whipped  that  boy  soundly,  and  sent  him  to 
Rome.” 

He  was  much  concerned  that  his  white  hind 
could  nowhere  be  found;  as  he  was  thus  desti¬ 
tute  of  an  admirable  contrivance  to  encourage 
the  barbarous  people  at  a  time  when  he  most 
stood  in  need  of  it.  Some  men,  however,  wan¬ 
dering  in  the  night,  chanced  to  meet  her,  and 
knowing  her  by  her  colour,  took  her;  to  whom 
Sertorius  promised  a  good  reward,  if  they 
would  tell  no  one  of  it;  and  immediately  shut 
her  up.  A  few  days  after,  he  appeared  in  public 
with  a  very  cheerful  look,  and  declared  to  the 
chief  men  of  the  country  that  the  gods  had 
foretold  him  in  a  dream  that  some  great  good 
fortune  should  shortly  attend  him;  and,  taking 
his  seat,  proceeded  to  answer  the  petitions  of 
those  who  applied  themselves  to  him.  The 
keepers  of  the  hind,  who  were  not  far  off,  now 
let  her  loose,  and  she  no  sooner  espied  Sertori¬ 
us,  but  she  came  leaping  with  great  joy  to  his 
feet,  laid  her  head  upon  his  knees,  and  licked 
his  hands,  as  she  formerly  used  to  do.  And  Ser¬ 
torius  stroking  her,  and  making  much  of  her 


SERTORIUS 

again,  with  that  tenderness  that  the  tears  stood 
in  his  eyes,  all  that  were  present  were  immedi¬ 
ately  filled  with  wonder  and  astonishment,  and 
accompanying  him  to  his  house  with  loud 
shouts  for  joy,  looked  upon  him  as  a  person 
above  the  rank  of  mortal  men,  and  highly  be¬ 
loved  by  the  gods;  and  were  in  great  courage 
and  hope  for  the  future. 

When  he  had  reduced  his  enemies  to  the  last 
extremity  for  want  of  provision,  he  was  forced 
to  give  them  battle,  in  the  plains  near  Sagun- 
tum,  to  hinder  them  from  foraging  and  plun¬ 
dering  the  country.  Both  parties  fought  glori¬ 
ously.  Memmius,  the  best  commander  in  Pom- 
pey’s  army,  was  slain  in  the  heat  of  the  battle. 
Sertorius  overthrew  all  before  him,  and  with 
great  slaughter  of  his  enemies  pressed  forward 
towards  Metellus. 

This  old  commander,  making  a  resistance 
beyond  what  could  be  expected  from  one  of 
his  years,  was  wounded  with  a  lance;  an  occur¬ 
rence  which  filled  all  who  either  saw  it  or 
heard  of  it  with  shame,  to  be  thought  to  have 
left  their  general  in  distress,  but  at  the  same 
time  to  provoke  them  to  revenge  and  fury 
against  their  enemies;  they  covered  Metellus 
with  their  shields,  and  brought  him  off  in 
safety,  and  then  valiantly  repulsed  the  Span¬ 
iards;  and  so  victory  changed  sides,  and  Sertor¬ 
ius,  that  he  might  afford  a  more  secure  retreat 
to  his  army,  and  that  fresh  forces  might  more 
easily  be  raised,  retired  into  a  strong  city  in  the 
mountains. 

And  though  it  was  the  least  of  his  intention 
to  sustain  a  long  siege,  yet  he  began  to  repair 
the  walls,  and  to  fortify  the  gates,  thus  delud¬ 
ing  his  enemies,  who  came  and  sat  down  be¬ 
fore  the  town,  hoping  to  take  it  without  much 
resistance;  and  meantime  gave  over  the  pur¬ 
suit  of  the  Spaniards,  and  allowed  opportunity 
for  raising  new  forces  for  Sertorius,  to  which 
purpose  he  had  sent  commanders  to  all  their 
cities,  with  orders,  when  they  had  sufficiently 
increased  their  numbers,  to  send  him  word  of 
it.  This  news  he  no  sooner  received,  but  he  sal¬ 
lied  out  and  forced  his  way  through  his  en¬ 
emies,  and  easily  joined  them  with  the  rest  of 
his  army.  Having  received  this  considerable 
reinforcement,  he  set  upon  the  Romans  again, 
and  by  rapidly  assaulting  them,  by  alarming 
them  on  all  sides,  by  ensnaring,  circumvent¬ 
ing,  and  laying  ambushes  for  them,  he  cut  off 
all  provisions  by  land,  while  with  his  piratical 
vessels  he  kept  all  the  coast  in  awe,  and  hin¬ 
dered  their  supplies  by  sea. 

He  thus  forced  the  Roman  generals  to  dis- 


467 

lodge  and  to  separate  from  one  another:  Metel¬ 
lus  departed  into  Gaul,  and  Pompey  wintered 
among  the  Vaccaeans,  in  a  wretched  condition, 
where,  being  in  extreme  want  of  money,  he 
wrote  a  letter  to  the  senate,  to  let  them  know 
that  if  they  did  not  speedily  supply  him,  he 
must  draw  off  his  army;  for  he  had  already 
spent  his  own  money  in  the  defence  of  Italy. 
To  these  extremities,  the  chiefest  and  the  most 
powerful  commanders  of  the  age  were  reduced 
by  the  skill  of  Sertorius;  and  it  was  the  com¬ 
mon  opinion  in  Rome  that  he  would  be  in 
Italy  before  Pompey. 

How  far  Metellus  was  terrified,  and  at  what 
rate  he  esteemed  him,  he  plainly  declared, 
when  he  offered  by  proclamation  an  hundred 
talents  and  twenty  thousand  acres  of  land  to 
any  Roman  that  should  kill  him,  and  leave,  if 
he  were  banished,  to  return;  attempting  vil¬ 
lainously  to  buy  his  life  by  treachery,  when  he 
despaired  of  ever  being  able  to  overcome  him 
in  open  war.  When  once  he  gained  the  advan¬ 
tage  in  a  battle  against  Sertorius,  he  was  so 
pleased  and  transported  with  his  good  fortune, 
that  he  caused  himself  to  be  publicly  proclaim¬ 
ed  Imperator;  and  all  the  cities  which  he  vis¬ 
ited  received  him  with  altars  and  sacrifices; 
he  allowed  himself,  it  is  said,  to  have  garlands 
placed  on  his  head,  and  accepted  sumptuous 
entertainments,  at  which  he  sat  drinking  in 
triumphal  robes,  while  images  and  figures  of 
victory  were  introduced  by  the  motion  of  ma¬ 
chines,  bringing  in  with  them  crowns  and  tro¬ 
phies  of  gold  to  present  to  him,  and  companies 
of  young  men  and  women  danced  before  him, 
and  sang  to  him  songs  of  joy  and  triumph.  By 
all  which  he  rendered  himself  deservedly  ridic¬ 
ulous,  for  being  so  excessively  delighted  and 
puffed  up  with  the  thoughts  of  having  fol¬ 
lowed  one  who  was  retiring  of  his  own  accord, 
and  for  having  once  had  the  better  of  him 
whom  he  used  to  call  Sulla’s  runaway  slave, 
and  his  forces,  the  remnant  of  the  defeated 
troops  of  Carbo. 

Sertorius,  meantime,  showed  the  loftiness  of 
his  temper  in  calling  together  all  the  Roman 
senators  who  had  fled  from  Rome,  and  had 
come  and  resided  with  him,  and  giving  them 
the  name  of  a  senate;  and  out  of  these  he  chose 
praetors  and  quaestors,  and  adorned  his  gov¬ 
ernment  with  all  the  Roman  laws  and  institu¬ 
tions.  And  though  he  made  use  of  the  arms, 
riches,  and  cities  of  the  Spaniards,  yet  he  would 
never,  even  in  word,  remit  to  them  the  impe¬ 
rial  authority,  but  set  Roman  officers  and  com¬ 
manders  over  them,  intimating  his  purpose  to 


468 


restore  liberty  to  the  Romans,  not  to  raise  up 
the  Spaniard’s  power  against  them. 

For  he  was  a  sincere  lover  of  his  country, 
and  had  a  great  desire  to  return  home;  but  in 
his  adverse  fortune  he  showed  undaunted 
courage,  and  behaved  himself  towards  his  en¬ 
emies  in  a  manner  free  from  all  dejection  and 
mean-spiritedness;  and  when  he  was  in  his 
prosperity,  and  in  the  height  of  his  victories, 
he  sent  word  to  Metellus  and  Pompey  that  he 
was  ready  to  lay  down  his  arms  and  live  a 
private  life  if  he  were  allowed  to  return  home, 
declaring  that  he  had  rather  live  as  the  mean¬ 
est  citizen  in  Rome  than,  exiled  from  it,  be 
supreme  commander  of  all  other  cities  to¬ 
gether. 

And  it  is  thought  that  his  great  desire  for  his 
country  was  in  no  small  measure  promoted  by 
the  tenderness  he  had  for  his  mother,  under 
whom  he  was  brought  up  after  the  death  of 
his  father,  and  upon  whom  he  had  placed  his 
entire  affection.  After  that  his  friends  had  sent 
for  him  into  Spain  to  be  their  general,  as  soon 
as  he  heard  of  his  mother’s  death  he  had  al¬ 
most  cast  away  himself  and  died  for  grief;  for 
he  lay  seven  days  together  continually  in  his 
tent,  without  giving  the  word,  or  being  seen 
by  the  nearest  of  his  friends;  and  when  the 
chief  commanders  of  the  army  and  persons  of 
the  greatest  note  came  about  his  tent,  with 
great  difficulty  they  prevailed  with  him  at  last 
to  come  abroad,  and  speak  to  his  soldiers,  and 
to  take  upon  him  the  management  of  affairs, 
which  were  in  a  prosperous  condition. 

And  thus,  to  many  men’s  judgment,  he 
seemed  to  have  been  in  himself  of  a  mild  and 
compassionate  temper,  and  naturally  given  to 
ease  and  quietness,  and  to  have  accepted  of  the 
command  of  military  forces  contrary  to  his 
own  inclination,  and  not  being  able  to  live  in 
safety  otherwise,  to  have  been  driven  by  his 
enemies  to  have  recourse  to  arms,  and  to 
espouse  the  wars  as  a  necessary  guard  for  the 
defence  of  his  person. 

His  negotiations  with  King  Mithridates  fur¬ 
ther  argue  the  greatness  of  his  mind.  For 
when  Mithridates  recovering  himself  from  his 
overthrow  by  Sulla,  like  a  strong  wrestler  that 
gets  up  to  try  another  fall,  was  again  endeav¬ 
ouring  to  re-establish  his  power  in  Asia,  at  this 
time  the  great  fame  of  Sertorius  was  celebrated 
in  all  places;  and  when  the  merchants  who 
came  out  of  the  western  parts  of  Europe,  bring¬ 
ing  these,  as  it  were,  among  their  other  for¬ 
eign  wares,  had  filled  the  kingdom  of  Pontus 
with  their  stories  of  his  exploits  in  war,  Mithri- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

dates  was  extremely  desirous  to  send  an  em¬ 
bassy  to  him,  being  also  highly  encouraged  to 
it  by  the  boastings  of  his  flattering  courtiers, 
who,  comparing  Mithridates  to  Pyrrhus,  and 
Sertorius  to  Hannibal,  professed  that  the  Ro¬ 
mans  would  never  be  able  to  make  any  con¬ 
siderable  resistance  against  such  great  forces, 
and  such  admirable  commanders,  when  they 
should  be  set  upon  on  both  sides  at  once,  on 
one  by  the  most  warlike  general,  and  on  the 
other  by  the  most  powerful  prince  in  existence. 

Accordingly,  Mithridates  sent  ambassadors 
into  Spain  to  Sertorius  with  letters  and  instruc¬ 
tions,  and  commission  to  promise  ships  and 
money  toward  the  charge  of  the  war,  if  Ser¬ 
torius  would  confirm  his  pretensions  upon 
Asia,  and  authorise  him  to  possess  all  that  he 
had  surrendered  to  the  Romans  in  his  treaty 
with  Sulla.  Sertorius  summoned  a  full  council 
which  he  called  a  senate,  where,  when  others 
joyfully  approved  of  the  conditions,  and  were 
desirous  immediately  to  accept  of  his  offer, 
seeing  that  he  desired  nothing  of  them  but  a 
name,  and  an  empty  title  to  places  not  in  their 
power  to  dispose  of,  in  recompense  of  which 
they  should  be  supplied  with  what  they  then 
stood  most  in  need  of,  Sertorius  would  by  no 
means  agree  to  it;  declaring  that  he  was  will¬ 
ing  that  King  Mithridates  should  exercise  all 
royal  power  and  authority  over  Bithynia  and 
Cappadocia,  countries  accustomed  to  a  mon¬ 
archical  government,  and  not  belonging  to 
Rome,  but  he  could  never  consent  that  he 
should  seize  or  detain  a  province,  which,  by 
the  justest  right  and  title,  was  possessed  by  the 
Romans,  which  Mithridates  had  formerly  tak¬ 
en  away  from  them,  and  had  afterwards  lost 
in  open  war  to  Fimbria,  and  quitted  upon  a 
treaty  of  peace  with  Sulla.  For  he  looked  upon 
it  as  his  duty  to  enlarge  the  Roman  possessions 
by  his  conquering  arms,  and  not  to  increase  his 
own  power  by  the  diminution  of  the  Roman 
territories.  Since  a  noble-minded  man,  though 
he  willingly  accepts  of  victory  when  it  comes 
with  honour,  will  never  so  much  as  endeavour 
to  save  his  own  life  upon  any  dishonourable 
terms. 

When  this  was  related  to  Mithridates,  he 
was  struck  with  amazement,  and  said  to  his 
intimate  friends,  “What  will  Sertorius  enjoin 
us  to  do  when  he  comes  to  be  seated  in  the 
Palatium  in  Rome,  who  at  present,  when  he  is 
driven  out  to  the  borders  of  the  Atlantic  Sea, 
sets  bounds  to  our  kingdoms  in  the  east,  and 
threatens  us  with  war  if  we  attempt  the  recov¬ 
ery  of  Asia?” 


SERTORIUS 

However,  they  solemnly,  upon  oath,  con¬ 
cluded  a  league  between  them,  upon  jhese 
terms:  that  Mithridates  should  enjoy  the  free 
possession  of  Cappadocia  and  Bithynia,  and 
that  Sertorius  should  send  him  soldiers  and  a 
general  for  his  army,  in  recompense  of  which 
the  king  was  to  supply  him  with  three  thou¬ 
sand  talents  and  forty  ships.  Marcus  Marius,  a 
Roman  senator  who  had  quitted  Rome  to  fol¬ 
low  Sertorius,  was  sent  general  into  Asia,  in 
company  with  whom,  when  Mithridates  had 
reduced  divers  of  the  Asian  cities,  Marius  made 
his  entrance  with  rods  and  axes  carried  before 
him,  and  Mithridates  followed  in  the  second 
place,  voluntarily  waiting  upon  him.  Some  of 
these  cities  he  set  at  liberty,  and  others  he  freed 
from  taxes,  signifying  to  them  that  these  privi¬ 
leges  were  granted  to  them  by  the  favour  of 
Sertorius,  and  hereby  Asia,  which  had  been 
miserably  tormented  by  the  revenue  farmers, 
and  oppressed  by  the  insolent  pride  and  covet¬ 
ousness  of  the  soldiers,  began  to  rise  again  to 
new  hopes  and  to  look  forward  with  joy  to  the 
expected  change  of  government. 

But  in  Spain,  the  senators  about  Sertorius, 
and  others  of  the  nobility,  finding  themselves 
strong  enough  for  their  enemies,  no  sooner 
laid  aside  fear,  but  their  minds  were  possessed 
by  envy  and  irrational  jealousies  of  Sertorius’s 
power.  And  chiefly  Perpenna,  elevated  by  the 
thoughts  of  his  noble  birth,  and  carried  away 
with  a  fond  ambition  of  commanding  the 
army,  threw  out  villainous  discourses  in  pri¬ 
vate  amongst  his  acquaintance.  “What  evil 
genius,”  he  would  say,  “hurries  us  perpetually 
from  worse  to  worse?  We  who  disdained  to 
obey  the  dictates  of  Sulla,  the  ruler  of  the  sea 
and  land,  and  thus  to  live  at  home  in  peace  and 
quiet,  are  come  hither  to  our  destruction,  hop¬ 
ing  to  enjoy  our  liberty,  and  have  made  our¬ 
selves  slaves  of  our  own  accord;  and  are  be¬ 
come  the  contemptible  guards  and  attendants 
of  the  banished  Sertorius,  who,  that  he  may 
expose  us  the  further,  gives  us  a  name  that 
renders  us  ridiculous  to  all  that  hear  it,  and 
calls  us  the  senate,  when  at  the  same  time  he 
makes  us  undergo  as  much  hard  labour,  and 
forces  us  to  be  as  subject  to  his  haughty  com¬ 
mands  and  insolences,  as  any  Spaniards  and 
Lusitanians.” 

With  these  mutinous  discourses  he  seduced 
them;  and  though  the  greater  number  could 
not  be  led  into  open  rebellion  against  Sertorius, 
fearing  his  power,  they  were  prevailed  with  to 
endeavour  to  destroy  his  interest  secretly.  For 
by  abusing  the  Lusitanians  and  Spaniards,  by 


469 

inflicting  severe  punishments  upon  them,  by 
raising  exorbitant  taxes,  and  by  pretending 
that  all  this  was  done  by  the  strict  command  of 
Sertorius,  they  caused  great  troubles,  and  made 
many  cities  to  revolt;  and  those  who  were  sent 
to  mitigate  and  heal  these  differences  did 
rather  exasperate  them,  and  increase  the  num¬ 
ber  of  his  enemies,  and  left  them  at  their  re¬ 
turn  more  obstinate  and  rebellious  than  they 
found  them.  And  Sertorius,  incensed  with  all 
this,  now  so  far  forgot  his  former  clemency 
and  goodness  as  to  lay  hands  on  the  sons  of  the 
Spaniards  educated  in  the  city  of  Osca;  and, 
contrary  to  all  justice,  he  cruelly  put  some  of 
them  to  death,  and  sold  others. 

In  the  meantime,  Perpenna,  having  in¬ 
creased  the  number  of  his  conspirators,  drew 
in  Manlius,  a  commander  in  the  army,  who,  at 
that  time  being  attached  to  a  youth,  to  gain  his 
affections  the  more,  discovered  the  confederacy 
to  him,  bidding  him  neglect  others  and  be  con¬ 
stant  to  him  alone,  who,  in  a  few  days,  was  to 
be  a  person  of  great  power  and  authority.  But 
the  youth  having  a  greater  inclination  for  Aufi- 
dius,  disclosed  all  to  him,  which  much  sur¬ 
prised  and  amazed  him.  For  he  was  also  one 
of  the  confederacy,  but  knew  not  that  Manlius 
was  anyways  engaged  in  it;  but  when  the 
youth  began  to  name  Perpenna,  Gracinus,  and 
others,  whom  he  knew  very  well  to  be  sworn 
conspirators,  he  was  very  much  terrified  and 
astonished;  but  made  light  of  it  to  the  youth, 
and  bade  him  not  regard  what  Manlius  said,  a 
vain,  boasting  fellow. 

However,  he  went  presently  to  Perpenna, 
and  giving  him  notice  of  the  danger  they  were 
in,  and  of  the  shortness  of  their  time,  desired 
him  immediately  to  put  their  designs  in  execu¬ 
tion.  When  all  the  confederates  had  consented 
to  it,  they  provided  a  messenger  who  brought 
feigned  letters  to  Sertorius,  in  which  he  had 
notice  of  a  victory  obtained,  it  said,  by  one  of 
his  lieutenants,  and  of  the  great  slaughter  of 
his  enemies;  and  as  Sertorius,  being  extremely 
well  pleased,  was  sacrificing  and  giving  thanks 
to  the  gods  for  his  prosperous  success,  Per¬ 
penna  invited  him,  and  those  with  him,  who 
were  also  of  the  conspiracy,  to  an  entertain¬ 
ment,  and  being  very  importunate,  prevailed 
with  him  to  come. 

At  all  suppers  and  entertainments  where 
Sertorius  was  present,  great  order  and  decency 
was  wont  to  be  observed;  for  he  would  not  en¬ 
dure  to  hear  or  see  anything  that  was  rude  or 
unhandsome,  but  made  it  the  habit  of  all  who 
kept  his  company  to  entertain  themselves  with 


470 

quiet  and  inoffensive  amusements.  But  in  the 
middle  of  this  entertainment,  those  who  sought 
occasion  to  quarrel  fell  into  dissolute  discourse 
openly,  and  making  as  if  they  were  very  drunk, 
committed  many  insolences  on  purpose  to  pro¬ 
voke  him. 

Sertorius,  being  offended  with  their  ill-be¬ 
haviour,  or  perceiving  the  state  of  their  minds 
by  their  way  of  speaking  and  their  unusually 
disrespectful  manner,  changed  the  posture  of 
his  lying,  and  leaned  backward,  as  one  that 
neither  heard  nor  regarded  them.  Perpenna 
now  took  a  cup  full  of  wine,  and,  as  he  was 
drinking,  let  it  fall  out  of  his  hand  and  made 
a  noise,  which  was  the  sign  agreed  upon 
amongst  them;  and  Antonius,  who  was  next 
to  Sertorius,  immediately  wounded  him  with 
his  sword.  And  whilst  Sertorius,  upon  receiv¬ 
ing  the  wound,  turned  himself,  and  strove  to 
get  up,  Antonius  threw  himself  upon  his 
breast,  and  held  both  his  hands,  so  that  he  died 
by  a  number  of  blows,  without  being  able  even 
to  defend  himself. 

Upon  the  first  news  of  his  death,  most  of  the 
Spaniards  left  the  conspirators,  and  sent  am¬ 
bassadors  to  Pompey  and  Metellus,  and  yield¬ 
ed  themselves  up  to  them.  Perpenna  attempted 
to  do  something  with  those  that  remained,  but 
he  made  only  so  much  use  of  Sertorius’s  arms 
and  preparations  for  war  as  to  disgrace  himself 
in  them,  and  to  let  it  be  evident  to  all  that  he 
understood  no  more  how  to  command  than  he 
knew  how  to  obey;  and  when  he  came  against 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Pompey,  he  was  soon  overthrown  and  taken 
prisoner.  Neither  did  he  bear  this  last  affliction 
with  any  bravery,  but  having  Sertorius’s  pa¬ 
pers  and  writings  in  his  hands,  he  offered  to 
show  Pompey  letters  from  persons  of  consular 
dignity,  and  of  the  highest  quality  in  Rome, 
written  with  their  own  hands,  expressly  to  call 
Sertorius  into  Italy,  and  to  let  him  know  what 
great  numbers  there  were  that  earnestly  de¬ 
sired  to  alter  the  present  state  of  affairs,  and  to 
introduce  another  manner  of  government.  Up¬ 
on  this  occasion,  Pompey  behaved  not  like  a 
youth,  or  one  of  a  light  inconsiderate  mind, 
but  as  a  man  of  a  confirmed,  mature,  and  solid 
judgment;  and  so  freed  Rome  from  great  fears 
and  dangers  of  change.  For  he  put  all  Ser¬ 
torius’s  writings  and  letters  together  and  read 
not  one  of  them,  nor  suffered  any  one  else  to 
read  them,  but  burnt  them  all,  and  caused  Per¬ 
penna  immediately  to  be  put  to  death,  lest  by 
discovering  their  names  further  troubles  and 
revolutions  might  ensue. 

Of  the  rest  of  the  conspirators  with  Per¬ 
penna,  some  were  taken  and  slain  by  the  com¬ 
mand  of  Pompey,  others  fled  into  Africa,  and 
were  set  upon  by  the  Moors,  and  run  through 
with  their  darts:  and  in  a  short  time  not  one 
of  them  was  left  alive,  except  only  Aufidius, 
the  rival  of  Manlius,  who,  hiding  himself,  or 
not  being  much  inquired  after,  died  an  old 
man,  in  an  obscure  village  in  Spain,  in  extreme 
poverty,  and  hated  by  all. 

V  V  V 


EUMENES 

C.  361-316  B.C. 


Duris  reports  that  Eumenes,  the  Cardian, 
was  the  son  of  a  poor  waggoner  in  the 
Thracian  Chersonesus,  yet  liberally 
educated,  both  as  a  scholar  and  a  soldier;  and 
that  while  he  was  but  young,  Philip,  passing 
through  Cardia,  diverted  himself  with  a  sight 
of  the  wrestling  matches  and  other  exercises 
of  the  youth  of  that  place,  among  whom  Eu¬ 
menes  performing  with  success,  and  showing 
signs  of  intelligence  and  bravery,  Philip  was 
so  pleased  with  him  as  to  take  him  into  his 
service.  But  they  seem  to  speak  more  probably 
who  tell  us  that  Philip  advanced  Eumenes  for 
the  friendship  he  bore  to  his  father,  whose 
guest  he  had  sometime  been. 


After  the  death  of  Philip,  he  continued  in 
the  service  of  Alexander,  with  the  title  of  his 
principal  secretary,  but  in  as  great  favour  as 
the  most  intimate  of  his  familiars,  being  es¬ 
teemed  as  wise  and  faithful  as  any  person 
about  him,  so  that  he  went  with  troops  under 
his  immediate  command  as  general  in  the  ex¬ 
pedition  against  India,  and  succeeded  to  the 
post  of  Perdiccas,  when  Perdiccas  was  ad¬ 
vanced  to  that  of  Hephaestion,  then  newly  de¬ 
ceased. 

And  therefore,  after  the  death  of  Alexander, 
when  Neoptolemus,  who  had  been  captain  of 
his  life-guard,  said  that  he  had  followed  Alex¬ 
ander  with  shield  and  spear,  but  Eumenes 


EUMENES 

only  with  pen  and  paper,  the  Macedonians 
laughed  at  him,  as  knowing  very  well*  that,  be¬ 
sides  other  marks  of  favour,  the  king  had  done 
him  the  honour  to  make  him  a  kind  of  kins¬ 
man  to  himself  by  marriage.  For  Alexander's 
first  mistress  in  Asia,  by  whom  he  had  his  son, 
Hercules,  was  Barsine,  the  daughter  of  Arta- 
bazus;  and  in  the  distribution  of  the  Persian 
ladies  amongst  his  captains,  Alexander  gave 
Apame,  one  of  her  sisters,  to  Ptolemy,  and  an¬ 
other,  also  called  Barsine,  to  Eumenes. 

Notwithstanding,  he  frequently  incurred 
Alexander's  displeasure,  and  put  himself  into 
some  danger,  through  Hephaestion.  The  quar¬ 
ters  that  had  been  taken  up  for  Eumenes, 
Hephaestion  assigned  to  Euius,  the  flute-player. 
Upon  which,  in  great  anger,  Eumenes  and 
Mentor  came  to  Alexander  and  loudly  com¬ 
plained,  saying  that  the  way  to  be  regarded 
was  to  throw  away  their  arms  and  turn  flute- 
players  or  tragedians;  so  much  so  that  Alex¬ 
ander  took  their  part  and  chid  Hephaestion; 
but  soon  after  changed  his  mind  again,  and 
was  angry  with  Eumenes,  and  accounted  the 
freedom  he  had  taken  to  be  rather  an  affront 
to  the  king  than  a  reflection  upon  Hephaestion. 

Afterwards,  when  Nearchus,  with  a  fleet, 
was  to  be  sent  to  the  Southern  Sea,  Alexander 
borrowed  money  of  his  friends,  his  own  trea¬ 
sury  being  exhausted,  and  would  have  had 
three  hundred  talents  of  Eumenes,  but  he  sent 
a  hundred  only,  pretending  that  it  was  not 
without  great  difficulty  he  had  raised  so  much 
from  his  stewards.  Alexander  neither  com¬ 
plained  nor  took  the  money,  but  gave  private 
order  to  setEumenes's  tent  on  fire,  designing  to 
take  him  in  a  manifest  lie,  when  his  money  was 
carried  out.  But  before  that  could  be  done  the 
tent  was  consumed,  and  Alexander  repented  of 
his  orders,  all  his  papers  being  burnt;  the  gold 
and  silver,  however,  which  was  melted  down 
in  the  fire,  being  afterwards  collected,  was 
found  to  be  more  than  one  thousand  talents; 
yet  Alexander  took  none  of  it,  and  only  wrote 
to  the  several  governors  and  generals  to  send 
new  copies  of  the  papers  that  were  burnt,  and 
ordered  them  to  be  delivered  to  Eumenes. 

Another  difference  happened  between  him 
and  Hephaestion  concerning  a  gift,  and  a  great 
deal  of  ill  language  passed  between  them,  yet 
Eumenes  still  continued  in  favour.  But  He¬ 
phaestion  dying  soon  after,  the  king,  in  his 
grief,  presuming  all  those  that  differed  with 
Hephaestion  in  his  lifetime  were  now  rejoicing 
at  his  death,  showed  much  harshness  and  se¬ 
verity  in  his  behaviour  with  them,  especially 


471 

towards  Eumenes,  whom  he  often  upbraided 
with  his  quarrels  and  ill  language  to  Hephaes¬ 
tion.  But  he,  being  a  wise  and  dexterous  cour¬ 
tier,  made  advantage  of  what  had  done  him 
prejudice,  and  struck  in  with  the  king’s  pas¬ 
sion  for  glorifying  his  friend’s  memory,  sug¬ 
gesting  various  plans  to  do  him  honour,  and 
contributing  largely  and  readily  towards  erect¬ 
ing  his  monument. 

After  Alexander's  death,  when  the  quarrel 
broke  out  between  the  troops  of  the  phalanx 
and  the  officers,  his  companions,  Eumenes, 
though  in  his  judgment  he  inclined  to  the 
latter,  yet  in  his  professions  stood  neuter,  as  if 
he  thought  it  unbecoming  him,  who  was  a 
stranger,  to  interpose  in  the  private  quarrels  of 
the  Macedonians.  When  the  rest  of  Alexan¬ 
der’s  friends  left  Babylon,  he  stayed  behind, 
and  did  much  to  pacify  the  foot-soldiers,  and 
to  dispose  them  towards  an  accommodation. 
And  when  the  officers  had  agreed  among 
themselves,  and,  recovering  from  the  first  dis¬ 
order,  proceeded  to  share  out  the  several  com¬ 
mands  and  provinces,  they  made  Eumenes 
governor  of  Cappadocia  and  Paphlagonia,  and 
all  the  coast  upon  the  Pontic  Sea  as  far  as  Tre- 
bizond,  which  at  that  time  was  not  subject  to 
the  Macedonians,  for  Ariarathes  kept  it  as 
king,  but  Leonnatus  and  Antigonus,  with  a 
large  army,  were  to  put  him  in  possession  of  it. 

Antigonus,  already  filled  with  hopes  of  his 
own,  and  despising  all  men,  took  no  notice  of 
Perdiccas's  letters;  but  Leonnatus  with  his 
army  came  down  into  Phrygia  to  the  service  of 
Eumenes.  But  being  visited  by  Hecataeus,  the 
tyrant  of  the  Cardians,  and  requested  rather  to 
relieve  Antipater  and  the  Macedonians  that 
were  besieged  in  Lamia,  he  resolved  upon  that 
expedition,  inviting  Eumenes  to  a  share  in  it, 
and  endeavouring  to  reconcile  him  to  Heca¬ 
taeus.  For  there  was  an  hereditary  feud  be¬ 
tween  them,  arising  out  of  political  differences, 
and  Eumenes  had  more  than  once  been  known 
to  denounce  Hecataeus  as  a  tyrant,  and  to  ex¬ 
hort  Alexander  to  restore  the  Cardians  their 
liberty.  Therefore  at  this  time,  also,  he  declined 
the  expedition  proposed,  pretending  that  he 
feared  lest  Antipater,  who  already  hated  him, 
should  for  that  reason,  and  to  gratify  Heca¬ 
taeus,  kill  him. 

Leonnatus  so  far  believed  as  to  impart  to 
Eumenes  his  whole  design,  which,  as  he  had 
pretended  and  given  out,  was  to  aid  Antipater, 
but  in  truth  was  to  seize  the  kingdom  of  Mace- 
don;  and  he  showed  him  letters  from  Cleo¬ 
patra,  in  which,  it  appeared,  she  invited  him 


472 

to  Pella,  with  promises  to  marry  him.  But 
Eumenes,  whether  fearing  Antipater,  or  look¬ 
ing  upon  Leonnatus  as  a  rash,  headstrong,  and 
unsafe  man,  stole  away  from  him  by  night, 
taking  with  him  all  his  men,  namely,  three 
hundred  horse,  and  two  hundred  of  his  own 
servants  armed,  and  all  his  gold,  to  the  value 
of  five  thousand  talents  of  silver,  and  fled  to 
Perdiccas,  discovered  to  him  Leonnatus’s  de¬ 
sign,  and  thus  gained  great  interest  with  him, 
and  was  made  of  the  council. 

Soon  after,  Perdiccas,  with  a  great  army, 
which  he  led  himself,  conducted  Eumenes  into 
Cappadocia,  and,  having  taken  Ariarathes 
prisoner,  and  subdued  the  whole  country,  de¬ 
clared  him  governor  of  it.  He  accordingly  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  dispose  of  the  chief  cities  among  his 
own  friends,  and  made  captains  of  garrisons, 
judges,  receivers,  and  other  officers,  of  such  as 
he  thought  fit  himself,  Perdiccas  not  at  all  in¬ 
terposing.  Eumenes,  however,  still  continued 
to  attend  upon  Perdiccas,  both  out  of  respect  to 
him,  and  a  desire  not  to  be  absent  from  the 
royal  family. 

But  Perdiccas,  believing  he  was  able  enough 
to  attain  his  own  further  objects  without  as¬ 
sistance,  and  that  the  country  he  left  behind 
him  might  stand  in  need  of  an  active  and 
faithful  governor,  when  he  came  into  Cilicia 
dismissed  Eumenes,  under  colour  of  sending 
him  to  his  command,  but  in  truth  to  secure  Ar¬ 
menia,  which  was  on  its  frontier,  and  was  un¬ 
settled  through  the  practices  of  Neoptolemus. 
Him,  a  proud  and  vain  man,  Eumenes  exerted 
himself  to  gain  by  personal  attentions;  but  to 
balance  the  Macedonian  foot,  whom  he  found 
insolent  and  self-willed,  he  contrived  to  raise 
an  army  of  horse,  excusing  from  tax  and  con¬ 
tribution  all  those  of  the  country  that  were 
able  to  serve  on  horseback,  and  buying  up  a 
number  of  horses,  which  he  distributed  among 
such  of  his  own  men  as  he  most  confided  in, 
stimulating  the  courage  of  his  new  soldiers  by 
gifts  and  honours,  and  inuring  their  bodies  to 
service  by  frequent  marching  and  exercising; 
so  that  the  Macedonians  were  some  of  them 
astonished,  others  overjoyed  to  see  that  in  so 
short  a  time  he  had  got  together  a  body  of  no 
less  than  six  thousand  three  hundred  horse¬ 
men. 

But  when  Craterus  and  Antipater,  having 
subdued  the  Greeks,  advanced  into  Asia,  with 
intentions  to  quell  the  power  of  Perdiccas,  and 
were  reported  to  design  an  invasion  of  Cappa¬ 
docia,  Perdiccas,  resolving  himself  to  march 
against  Ptolemy,  made  Eumenes  commander- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

in-chief  of  all  the  forces  of  Armenia  and  Cap¬ 
padocia,  and  to  that  purpose  wrote  letters,  re¬ 
quiring  Alcetas  and  Neoptolemus  to  be  obedi¬ 
ent  to  Eumenes,  and  giving  full  commission  to 
Eumenes  to  dispose  and  order  all  things  as  he 
thought  fit.  Alcetas  flatly  refused  to  serve,  be¬ 
cause  his  Macedonians,  he  said,  were  ashamed 
to  fight  against  Antipater,  and  loved  Craterus 
so  well,  they  were  ready  to  receive  him  for 
their  commander.  Neoptolemus  designed 
treachery  against  Eumenes,  but  was  discov¬ 
ered,  and  being  summoned,  refused  to  obey, 
and  put  himself  in  a  posture  of  defence. 

Here  Eumenes  first  found  the  benefit  of  his 
own  foresight  and  contrivance,  for  his  foot  be¬ 
ing  beaten,  he  routed  Neoptolemus  with  his 
horse,  and  took  all  his  baggage;  and  coming 
up  with  his  whole  force  upon  the  phalanx 
while  broken  and  disordered  in  its  flight, 
obliged  the  men  to  lay  down  their  arms  and 
take  an  oath  to  serve  under  him.  Neoptolemus, 
with  some  few  stragglers  whom  he  rallied,  fled 
to  Craterus  and  Antipater. 

From  them  had  come  an  embassy  to  Eu¬ 
menes,  inviting  him  over  to  their  side,  offering 
to  secure  him  in  his  present  government  and 
to  give  him  additional  command,  both  of  men 
and  of  territory,  with  the  advantage  of  gaining 
his  enemy  Antipater  to  become  his  friend,  and 
keeping  Craterus  his  friend  from  turning  to  be 
his  enemy.  To  which  Eumenes  replied  that  he 
could  not  so  suddenly  be  reconciled  to  his  old 
enemy  Antipater,  especially  at  a  time  when  he 
saw  him  use  his  friends  like  enemies,  but  was 
ready  to  reconcile  Craterus  to  Perdiccas,  upon 
any  just  and  equitable  terms;  but  in  case  of 
any  aggression,  he  would  resist  the  injustice  to 
his  last  breath,  and  would  rather  lose  his  life 
than  betray  his  word. 

Antipater,  receiving  this  answer,  took  time 
to  consider  upon  the  whole  matter;  when  Ne¬ 
optolemus  arrived  from  his  defeat  and  ac¬ 
quainted  them  with  the  ill  success  of  his  arms, 
and  urged  them  to  give  him  assistance,  to 
come,  both  of  them,  if  possible,  but  Craterus  at 
any  rate,  for  the  Macedonians  loved  him  so  ex¬ 
cessively,  that  if  they  saw  but  his  hat,  or  heard 
his  voice,  they  would  all  pass  over  in  a  body 
with  their  arms.  And  in  truth  Craterus  had  a 
mighty  name  among  them,  and  the  soldiers 
after  Alexander’s  death  were  extremely  fond  of 
him,  remembering  how  he  had  often  for  their 
sakes  incurred  Alexander’s  displeasure,  doing 
his  best  to  withhold  him  when  he  began  to  fol¬ 
low  the  Persian  fashions,  and  always  main¬ 
taining  the  customs  of  his  country,  when, 


EUMENES 

through  pride  and  luxuriousness,  they  began 
to  be  disregarded. 

Craterus,  therefore,  sent  on  Antipater  into 
Cilicia,  and  himself  and  Neoptolemus  march¬ 
ed  with  a  large  division  of  the  army  against 
Eumenes;  expecting  to  come  upon  him  un¬ 
awares,  and  to  find  his  army  disordered  with 
revelling  after  the  late  victory.  Now  that  Eu¬ 
menes  should  suspect  his  coming,  and  be  pre¬ 
pared  to  receive  him,  is  an  argument  of  his 
vigilance,  but  not  perhaps  a  proof  of  any  ex¬ 
traordinary  sagacity,  but  that  he  should  con¬ 
trive  both  to  conceal  from  his  enemies  the  dis¬ 
advantages  of  his  position,  and  from  his  own 
men  whom  they  were  to  fight  with,  so  that  he 
led  them  on  against  Craterus  himself,  without 
their  knowing  that  he  commanded  the  enemy, 
this,  indeed,  seems  to  show  peculiar  address 
and  skill  in  the  general.  He  gave  out  that  Ne¬ 
optolemus  and  Pigres  were  approaching  with 
some  Cappadocian  and  Paphlagonian  horse. 

And  at  night,  having  resolved  on  marching, 
he  fell  asleep,  and  had  an  extraordinary  dream. 
For  he  thought  he  saw  two  Alexanders  ready 
to  engage,  each  commanding  his  several  pha¬ 
lanx,  the  one  assisted  by  Minerva,  the  other  by 
Ceres;  and  that  after  a  hot  dispute,  he  on 
whose  side  Minerva  was,  was  beaten,  and 
Ceres,  gathering  ears  of  corn,  wove  them  into 
a  crown  for  the  victor.  This  vision  Eumenes 
interpreted  at  once  as  boding  success  to  him¬ 
self,  who  was  to  fight  for  a  fruitful  country, 
and  at  that  very  time  covered  with  the  young 
ears,  the  whole  being  sown  with  corn,  and  the 
fields  so  thick  with  it  that  they  made  a  beauti¬ 
ful  show  of  a  long  peace. 

And  he  was  further  emboldened  when  he 
understood  that  the  enemy’s  password  was 
“Minerva  and  Alexander.”  Accordingly  he  also 
gave  out  as  his  “Ceres  and  Alexander,”  and 
gave  his  men  orders  to  make  garlands  for 
themselves,  and  to  dress  their  arms  with 
wreaths  of  corn.  He  found  himself  under  many 
temptations  to  discover  to  his  captains  and 
officers  whom  they  were  to  engage  with,  and 
not  to  conceal  a  secret  of  such  moment  in  his 
own  breast  alone,  yet  he  kept  to  his  first  resolu¬ 
tions,  and  ventured  to  run  the  hazard  of  his 
own  judgment. 

When  he  came  to  give  battle,  he  would  not 
trust  any  Macedonian  to  engage  Craterus,  but 
appointed  two  troops  of  foreign  horse,  com¬ 
manded  by  Pharnabazus,  son  to  Artabazus, 
and  Phoenix  of  Tenedos,  with  order  to  charge 
as  soon  as  ever  they  saw  the  enemy,  without 
giving  them  leisure  to  speak  or  retire,  or  re- 


473 

ceiving  any  herald  or  trumpet  from  them.  For 
he  was  exceedingly  afraid  about  his  Mace¬ 
donians,  lest,  if  they  found  out  Craterus  to  be 
there,  they  should  go  over  to  his  side.  He  him¬ 
self,  with  three  hundred  of  his  best  horse,  led 
the  right  wing  against  Neoptolemus.  When 
having  passed  a  little  hill  they  came  in  view, 
and  were  seen  advancing  with  more  than  or¬ 
dinary  briskness,  Craterus  was  amazed,  and 
bitterly  reproached  Neoptolemus  for  deceiv¬ 
ing  him  with  hopes  of  the  Macedonians’  revolt, 
but  he  encouraged  his  men  to  do  bravely,  and 
forthwith  charged. 

The  first  engagement  was  very  fierce,  and 
the  spears  being  soon  broken  to  pieces,  they 
came  to  close  fighting  with  their  swords;  and 
here  Craterus  did  by  no  means  dishonour 
Alexander,  but  slew  many  of  his  enemies  and 
repulsed  many  assaults,  but  at  last  received  a 
wound  in  his  side  from  a  Thracian,  and  fell  off 
his  horse.  Being  down,  many  not  knowing  him 
went  past  him,  but  Gorgias,  one  of  Eumenes’s 
captains,  knew  him,  and  alighting  from  his 
horse,  kept  guard  over  him  as  he  lay  badly 
wounded  and  slowly  dying. 

In  the  meantime,  Neoptolemus  and  Eume¬ 
nes  were  engaged;  who,  being  inveterate  and 
mortal  enemies,  sought  for  one  another,  but 
missed  for  the  two  first  courses,  but  in  the  third 
discovering  one  another,  they  drew  their 
swords,  and  with  loud  shouts  immediately 
charged.  And  their  horses  striking  against  one 
another  like  two  galleys,  they  quitted  their 
reins,  and  taking  mutual  hold  pulled  at  one 
another’s  helmets,  and  at  the  armour  from 
their  shoulders.  While  they  were  thus  strug¬ 
gling,  their  horses  went  from  under  them,  and 
they  fell  together  to  the  ground,  there  again 
still  keeping  their  hold  and  wrestling.  Neop¬ 
tolemus  was  getting  up  first,  but  Eumenes 
wounded  him  in  the  ham,  and  got  upon  his 
feet  before  him.  Neoptolemus  supporting  him¬ 
self  upon  one  knee,  the  other  leg  being  dis¬ 
abled,  and  himself  undermost,  fought  coura¬ 
geously,  though  his  blows  were  not  mortal,  but 
receiving  a  stroke  in  the  neck  he  fell  and 
ceased  to  resist.  Eumenes,  transported  with 
passion  and  his  inveterate  hatred  to  him,  fell  to 
reviling  and  stripping  him,  and  perceived  not 
that  his  sword  was  still  in  his  hand.  And  with 
this  he  wounded  Eumenes  under  the  bottom 
of  his  corslet  in  the  groin,  but  in  truth  more 
frightened  than  hurt  him,  his  blow  being  faint 
for  want  of  strength. 

Having  stript  the  dead  body,  ill  as  he  was 
with  the  wounds  he  had  received  in  his  legs 


474 

and  arms,  he  took  horse  again,  and  hurried 
towards  the  left  wing  of  his  army,  which  he 
supposed  to  be  still  engaged.  Hearing  of  the 
death  of  Craterus,  he  rode  up  to  him,  and  find¬ 
ing  there  was  yet  some  life  in  him,  alighted 
from  his  horse  and  wept,  and  laying  his  right 
hand  upon  him,  inveighed  bitterly  against  Ne- 
optolemus,  and  lamented  both  Craterus’s  mis¬ 
fortune  and  his  own  hard  fate,  that  he  should 
be  necessitated  to  engage  against  an  old  friend 
and  acquaintance,  and  either  do  or  suffer  so 
much  mischief. 

This  victory  Eumenes  obtained  about  ten 
days  after  the  former,  and  got  great  reputation 
alike  for  his  conduct  and  his  valour  in  achiev¬ 
ing  it.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  created  him 
great  envy  both  among  his  own  troops  and 
his  enemies  that  he,  a  stranger  and  a  foreigner, 
should  employ  the  forces  and  arms  of  Macedon 
to  cut  off  the  bravest  and  most  approved  man 
among  them.  Had  the  news  of  this  defeat  come 
timely  enough  to  Perdiccas,  he  had  doubtless 
been  the  greatest  of  all  the  Macedonians;  but 
now,  he  being  slain  in  a  mutiny  in  Egypt,  two 
days  before  the  news  arrived,  the  Macedonians 
in  a  rage  decreed  Eumenes’s  death,  giving  joint 
commission  to  Antigonus  and  Antipater  to 
prosecute  the  war  against  him. 

Passing  by  Mount  Ida,  where  there  was  a 
royal  establishment  of  horses,  Eumenes  took  as 
many  as  he  had  occasion  for,  and  sent  an  ac¬ 
count  of  his  doing  so  to  the  overseers,  at  which 
Antipater  is  said  to  have  laughed,  calling  it 
truly  laudable  in  Eumenes  thus  to  hold  him¬ 
self  prepared  for  giving  in  to  them  (or  would 
it  be  taking  from  them?)  strict  account  of  all 
matters  of  administration. 

Eumenes  had  designed  to  engage  in  the 
plains  of  Lydia,  near  Sardis,  both  because  his 
chief  strength  lay  in  horse,  and  to  let  Cleopatra 
see  how  powerful  he  was.  But  at  her  particular 
request,  for  she  was  afraid  to  give  any  umbrage 
to  Antipater,  he  marched  into  the  upper  Phryg¬ 
ia  and  wintered  in  Celaenae.  When  Alcetas, 
Polemon,  and  Docimus  disputed  with  him 
who  should  command  in  chief,  “You  know,” 
said  he,  “the  old  saying:  That  destruction  re¬ 
gards  no  punctilios.” 

Having  promised  his  soldiers  pay  within 
three  days,  he  sold  them  all  the  farms  and  cas¬ 
tles  in  the  country,  together  with  the  men  and 
beasts  with  which  they  were  filled;  every  cap¬ 
tain  or  officer  that  bought  received  from  Eu¬ 
menes  the  use  of  his  engines  to  storm  the  place, 
and  divided  the  spoils  among  his  company, 
proportionably  to  every  man’s  arrears.  By  this 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Eumenes  came  again  to  be  popular,  so  that 
when  letters  were  found  thrown  about  the 
camp  by  the  enemy  promising  one  hundred 
talents,  besides  great  honours,  to  any  one  that 
should  kill  Eumenes,  the  Macedonians  were 
extremely  offended,  and  made  an  order  that 
from  that  time  forward  one  thousand  of  their 
best  men  should  continually  guard  his  person, 
and  keep  strict  watch  about  him  by  night  in 
their  several  turns.  This  order  was  cheerfully 
obeyed,  and  they  gladly  received  of  Eumenes 
the  same  honours  which  the  kings  used  to  con¬ 
fer  upon  their  favourites.  He  now  had  leave  to 
bestow  purple  hats  and  cloaks,  which  among 
the  Macedonians  is  one  of  the  greatest  honours 
the  king  can  give. 

Good  fortune  will  elevate  even  petty  minds, 
and  give  them  the  appearance  of  a  certain 
greatness  and  stateliness,  as  from  their  high 
place  they  look  down  upon  the  world;  but  the 
truly  noble  and  resolved  spirit  raises  itself,  and 
becomes  more  conspicuous  in  times  of  disaster 
and  ill  fortune,  as  was  now  the  case  with  Eu¬ 
menes. 

For  having  by  the  treason  of  one  of  his  own 
men  lost  the  field  to  Antigonus  at  Orcynii,  in 
Cappadocia,  in  his  flight  he  gave  the  traitor  no 
opportunity  to  escape  to  the  enemy,  but  imme¬ 
diately  seized  and  hanged  him.  Then  in  his 
flight,  taking  a  contrary  course  to  his  pursuers, 
he  stole  by  them  unawares,  returned  to  the 
place  where  the  battle  had  been  fought,  and  en¬ 
camped.  There  he  gathered  up  the  dead  bodies 
and  burnt  them  with  the  doors  and  windows 
of  the  neighbouring  villages,  and  raised  heaps 
of  earth  upon  their  graves;  insomuch  that 
Antigonus,  who  came  thither  soon  after,  ex¬ 
pressed  his  astonishment  at  his  courage  and 
firm  resolution. 

Falling  afterwards  upon  the  baggage  of  An¬ 
tigonus,  he  might  easily  have  taken  many  cap¬ 
tives,  both  bond  and  freemen,  and  much 
wealth  collected  from  the  spoils  of  so  many 
wars;  but  he  feared  lest  his  men,  overladen 
with  so  much  booty,  might  become  unfit  for 
rapid  retreat,  and  too  fond  of  their  ease  to  sus¬ 
tain  the  continual  marches  and  endure  the  long 
waiting  on  which  he  depended  for  success,  ex¬ 
pecting  to  tire  Antigonus  into  some  other 
course.  But  then  considering  it  would  be  ex¬ 
tremely  difficult  to  restrain  the  Macedonians 
from  plunder,  when  it  seemed  to  offer  itself, 
he  gave  them  order  to  refresh  themselves,  and 
bait  their  horses,  and  then  attack  the  enemy. 

In  the  meantime  he  sent  privately  to  Menan¬ 
der,  who  had  care  of  all  this  baggage,  profess- 


EUMENES 

ing  a  concern  for  him  upon  the  score  of  old 
friendship  and  acquaintance;  and  therefore 
advising  him  to  quit  the  plain  and  secure  him¬ 
self  upon  the  sides  of  the  neighbouring  hills, 
where  the  horse  might  not  be  able  to  hem  him 
in.  When  Menander,  sensible  of  his  danger, 
had  speedily  packed  up  his  goods  and  decamp¬ 
ed,  Eumenes  openly  sent  his  scouts  to  discover 
the  enemy’s  posture,  and  commanded  his  men 
to  arm  and  bridle  their  horses,  as  designing 
immediately  to  give  battle;  but  the  scouts  re¬ 
turning  with  news  that  Menander  had  secured 
so  difficult  a  post  it  was  impossible  to  take  him, 
Eumenes,  pretending  to  be  grieved  with  the 
disappointment,  drew  off  his  men  another 
way. 

It  is  said  that  when  Menander  reported  this 
afterwards  to  Antigonus,  and  the  Macedonians 
commended  Eumenes,  imputing  it  to  his  sin¬ 
gular  good-nature,  that  having  it  in  his  power 
to  make  slaves  of  their  children  and  outrage 
their  wives  he  forbore  and  spared  them  all, 
Antigonus  replied,  “Alas,  good  friends,  he  had 
no  regard  to  us,  but  to  himself,  being  loath  to 
wear  so  many  shackles  when  he  designed  to 
flee.” 

From  this  time  Eumenes,  daily  fleeing  and 
wandering  about,  persuaded  many  of  his  men 
to  disband,  whether  out  of  kindness  to  them, 
or  unwillingness  to  lead  about  such  a  body  of 
men  as  were  too  few  to  engage  and  too  many 
to  flee  undiscovered.  Taking  refuge  at  Nora,  a 
place  on  the  confines  of  Lycaonia  and  Cappa¬ 
docia,  with  five  hundred  horse  and  two  hun¬ 
dred  heavy-armed  foot,  he  again  dismissed 
as  many  of  his  friends  as  desired  it,  through 
fear  of  the  probable  hardships  to  be  encoun¬ 
tered  there,  and  embracing  them  with  all  dem¬ 
onstrations  of  kindness  gave  them  licence  to 
depart. 

Antigonus,  when  he  came  before  this  fort, 
desired  to  have  an  interview  with  Eumenes  be¬ 
fore  the  siege;  but  he  returned  answer  that 
Antigonus  had  many  friends  who  might  com¬ 
mand  in  his  room;  but  they  whom  Eumenes 
defended  had  nobody  to  substitute  if  he  should 
miscarry;  therefore,  if  Antigonus  thought  it 
worth  while  to  treat  with  him,  he  should  first 
send  him  hostages.  And  when  Antigonus  re¬ 
quired  that  Eumenes  should  first  address  him¬ 
self  to  him  as  his  superior,  he  replied,  “While 
I  am  able  to  wield  a  sword,  I  shall  think  no 
man  greater  than  myself.”  At  last,  when,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Eumenes’s  demand,  Antigonus  sent 
his  own  nephew,  Ptolemy,  to  the  fort,  Eume¬ 
nes  went  out  to  him,  and  they  mutually  em- 


475 

braced  with  great  tenderness  and  friendship, 
as  having  formerly  been  very  intimate. 

After  long  conversation,  Eumenes  making 
no  mention  of  his  own  pardon  and  security, 
but  requiring  that  he  should  be  confirmed  in 
his  several  governments,  and  restitution  be 
made  him  of  the  rewards  of  his  service,  all  that 
were  present  were  astonished  at  his  courage 
and  gallantry.  And  many  of  the  Macedonians 
flocked  to  see  what  sort  of  person  Eumenes 
was,  for  since  the  death  of  Craterus  no  man 
had  been  so  much  talked  of  in  the  army.  But 
Antigonus,  being  afraid  lest  he  might  suffer 
some  violence,  first  commanded  the  soldiers  to 
keep  off,  calling  out  and  throwing  stones  at 
those  who  pressed  forwards.  At  last,  taking 
Eumenes  in  his  arms,  and  keeping  off  the 
crowd  with  his  guards,  not  without  great  diffi¬ 
culty,  he  returned  him  safe  into  the  fort. 

Then  Antigonus,  having  built  a  wall  round 
Nora,  left  a  force  sufficient  to  carry  on  the 
siege,  and  drew  off  the  rest  of  his  army;  and 
Eumenes  was  beleaguered  and  kept  garrison, 
having  plenty  of  corn  and  water  and  salt,  but 
no  other  thing,  either  for  food  or  delicacy;  yet 
with  such  as  he  had,  he  kept  a  cheerful  table 
for  his  friends,  inviting  them  severally  in  their 
turns,  and  seasoning  his  entertainment  with  a 
gentle  and  affable  behaviour.  For  he  had  a 
pleasant  countenance,  and  looked  not  like  an 
old  and  practised  soldier,  but  was  smooth  and 
florid,  and  his  shape  as  delicate  as  if  his  limbs 
had  been  carved  by  art  in  the  most  accurate 
proportions.  He  was  not  a  great  orator,  but 
winning  and  persuasive,  as  may  be  seen  in  his 
letters. 

The  greatest  distress  of  the  besieged  was  the 
narrowness  of  the  place  they  were  in,  their 
quarters  being  very  confined,  and  the  whole 
place  but  two  furlongs  in  compass;  so  that  both 
they  and  their  horses  fed  without  exercise.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  not  only  to  prevent  the  listlessness 
of  such  inactive  living,  but  to  have  them  in 
condition  to  flee  if  occasion  required,  he  as¬ 
signed  a  room  one-and-twenty  feet  long,  the 
largest  in  all  the  fort,  for  the  men  to  walk  in, 
directing  them  to  begin  their  walk  gently,  and 
so  gradually  mend  their  pace.  And  for  the 
horses,  he  tied  them  to  the  roof  with  great 
halters,  fastening  which  about  their  necks, 
with  a  pulley  he  gently  raised  them,  till  stand¬ 
ing  upon  the  ground  with  their  hinder  feet, 
they  just  touched  it  with  the  very  ends  of  their 
forefeet.  In  this  posture  the  grooms  plied  them 
with  whips  and  shouts,  provoking  them  to 
curvet  and  kick  out  with  their  hind  legs, 


476 

struggling  and  stamping  at  the  same  time  to 
find  support  for  their  forefeet,  and  thus  their 
whole  body  was  exercised,  till  they  were  all  in 
a  foam  and  sweat;  excellent  exercise,  whether 
for  strength  or  speed;  and  then  he  gave  them 
their  corn  already  coarsely  ground,  that  they 
might  sooner  despatch  and  better  digest  it. 

The  siege  continuing  long,  Antigonus  re¬ 
ceived  advice  that  Antipater  was  dead  in  Mac- 
edon,  and  that  affairs  were  embroiled  by  the 
differences  of  Cassander  and  Polysperchon,  up¬ 
on  which  he  conceived  no  mean  hopes,  pur¬ 
posing  to  make  himself  master  of  all,  and,  in 
order  to  his  design,  thought  to  bring  over  Eu- 
menes,  that  he  might  have  his  advice  and  as¬ 
sistance.  He,  therefore,  sent  Hieronymus  to 
treat  with  him,  proposing  a  certain  oath,  which 
Eumenes  first  corrected,  and  then  referred 
himself  to  the  Macedonians  themselves  that  be¬ 
sieged  him,  to  be  judged  by  them,  which  of  the 
two  forms  was  the  most  equitable. 

Antigonus  in  the  beginning  of  his  had 
slightly  mentioned  the  kings  as  by  way  of 
ceremony,  while  all  the  sequel  referred  to  him¬ 
self  alone;  but  Eumenes  changed  the  form  of 
it  to  Olympias  and  the  kings,  and  proceeded 
to  swear  not  to  be  true  to  Antigonus,  only,  but 
to  them,  and  to  have  the  same  friends  and 
enemies,  not  with  Antigonus,  but  with  Olym¬ 
pias  and  the  kings.  This  form  the  Macedonians 
thinking  the  more  reasonable,  swore  Eumenes 
according  to  it,  and  raised  the  siege,  sending 
also  to  Antigonus  that  he  should  swear  in  the 
same  form  to  Eumenes. 

Meantime,  all  the  hostages  of  the  Cappado¬ 
cians  whom  Eumenes  had  in  Nora  he  re¬ 
turned,  obtaining  from  their  friends  war- 
horses,  beasts  of  carriage,  and  tents  in  ex¬ 
change.  And  collecting  again  all  the  soldiers 
who  had  dispersed  at  the  time  of  his  flight,  and 
were  now  wandering  about  the  country,  he  got 
together  a  body  of  near  a  thousand  horse,  and 
with  them  fled  from  Antigonus,  whom  he 
justly  feared.  For  he  had  sent  orders  not  only 
to  have  him  blocked  up  and  besieged  again, 
but  had  given  a  very  sharp  answer  to  the  Mace¬ 
donians  for  admitting  Eumenes’s  amendment 
of  the  oath. 

While  Eumenes  was  fleeing,  he  received  let¬ 
ters  from  those  in  Macedonia,  who  were  jeal¬ 
ous  of  Antigonus’s  greatness,  from  Olympias, 
inviting  him  thither  to  take  the  charge  and 
protection  of  Alexander’s  infant  son,  whose 
person  was  in  danger,  and  other  letters  from 
Polysperchon  and  Philip,  the  king,  requiring 
him  to  make  war  upon  Antigonus,  as  general 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

of  the  forces  in  Cappadocia,  and  empowering 
him  out  of  the  treasure  at  Quinda  to  take  five 
hundred  talents’  compensation  for  his  own 
losses,  and  to  levy  as  much  as  he  thought  neces¬ 
sary  to  carry  on  the  war.  They  wrote  also  to  the 
same  effect  to  Antigenes  and  Teutamus,  the 
chief  officers  of  the  Argyraspids;  who,  on  re¬ 
ceiving  these  letters,  treated  Eumenes  with  a 
show  of  respect  and  kindness;  but  it  was  ap¬ 
parent  enough  that  they  were  full  of  envy  and 
emulation,  disdaining  to  give  place  to  him. 

Their  envy  Eumenes  moderated  by  refusing 
to  accept  the  money,  as  if  he  had  not  needed  it; 
and  their  ambition  and  emulation,  which  they 
were  neither  able  to  govern  nor  willing  to 
obey,  he  conquered  by  help  of  superstition.  For 
he  told  them  that  Alexander  had  appeared  to 
him  in  a  dream,  and  showed  him  a  regal  pavil¬ 
ion  richly  furnished,  with  a  throne  in  it;  and 
told  him  if  they  would  sit  in  council  there,  he 
himself  would  be  present,  and  prosper  all  the 
consultations  and  actions  upon  which  they 
should  enter  in  his  name.  Antigenes  and  Teu¬ 
tamus  were  easily  prevailed  upon  to  believe 
this,  being  as  little  willing  to  come  and  consult 
Eumenes  as  he  himself  was  to  be  seen  waiting 
at  other  men’s  doors.  Accordingly,  they  erected 
a  tent  royal,  and  a  throne,  called  Alexander’s, 
and  there  they  met  to  consult  upon  all  affairs 
of  moment. 

Afterwards  they  advanced  into  the  interior 
of  Asia,  and  in  their  march  met  with  Peuces- 
tes,  who  was  friendly  to  them  and  with  the 
other  satraps,  who  joined  forces  with  them, 
and  greatly  encouraged  the  Macedonians  with 
the  number  and  appearance  of  their  men.  But 
they  themselves,  having  since  Alexander’s  de¬ 
cease  become  imperious  and  ungoverned  in 
their  tempers,  and  luxurious  in  their  daily 
habits,  imagining  themselves  great  princes, 
and  pampered  in  their  conceit  by  the  flattery 
of  the  barbarians,  when  all  these  conflicting 
pretensions  now  came  together,  were  soon 
found  to  be  exacting  and  quarrelsome  one  with 
another,  while  all  alike  unmeasurably  flattered 
the  Macedonians,  giving  them  money  for  rev¬ 
els  and  sacrifices,  till  in  a  short  time  they 
brought  the  camp  to  a  dissolute  place  of  en¬ 
tertainment,  and  the  army  a  mere  multitude 
of  voters,  canvassed  as  in  a  democracy  for  the 
election  of  this  or  that  commander.  Eumenes, 
perceiving  they  despised  one  another,  and  all 
of  them  feared  him,  and  sought  an  opportunity 
to  kill  him,  pretended  to  be  in  want  of  money, 
and  borrowed  many  talents,  of  those  especially 
who  most  hated  him,  to  make  them  at  once 


EUMENES 

confide  in  him  and  forbear  all  violence  to  him 
for  fear  of  losing  their  own  money.  Thus  his 
enemies’  estates  were  the  guard  of  his  person, 
and  by  receiving  money  he  purchased  safety, 
for  which  it  is  more  common  to  give  it. 

The  Macedonians,  also,  while  there  was  no 
show  of  danger,  allowed  themselves  to  be  cor¬ 
rupted,  and  made  all  their  court  to  those  who 
gave  them  presents,  who  had  their  body¬ 
guards,  and  affected  to  appear  generals-in- 
chief.  But  when  Antigonus  came  upon  them 
with  a  great  army,  and  their  affairs  themselves 
seemed  to  call  out  for  a  true  general,  then  not 
only  the  common  soldiers  cast  their  eyes  upon 
Eumenes,  but  these  men,  who  had  appeared  so 
great  in  a  peaceful  time  of  ease,  submitted  all 
of  them  to  him,  and  quietly  posted  themselves 
severally  as  he  appointed  them.  And  when 
Antigonus  attempted  to  pass  the  river  Pasiti- 
gris,  all  the  rest  that  were  appointed  to  guard 
the  passes  were  not  so  much  as  aware  of  his 
march;  only  Eumenes  met  and  encountered 
him,  slew  many  of  his  men,  and  filled  the  river 
with  the  dead,  and  took  four  thousand  pris¬ 
oners. 

But  it  was  most  particularly  when  Eumenes 
was  sick  that  the  Macedonians  let  it  be  seen 
how  in  their  judgment,  while  others  could 
feast  them  handsomely  and  make  entertain¬ 
ments,  he  alone  knew  how  to  fight  and  lead  an 
army.  For  Peucestes,  having  made  a  splendid 
entertainment  in  Persia,  and  given  each  of  the 
soldiers  a  sheep  to  sacrifice  with,  made  himself 
sure  of  being  commander-in-chief. 

Some  few  days  after  the  army  was  to  march, 
and  Eumenes,  having  been  dangerously  ill,  was 
carried  in  a  litter  apart  from  the  body  of  the 
army,  that  any  rest  he  got  might  not  be  dis¬ 
turbed.  But  when  they  were  a  little  advanced, 
unexpectedly  they  had  a  view  of  the  enemy, 
who  had  passed  the  hills  that  lay  between 
them,  and  was  marching  down  into  the  plain. 
At  the  sight  of  the  golden  armour  glittering  in 
the  sun  as  they  marched  down  in  their  order, 
the  elephants  with  their  castles  on  their  backs, 
and  the  men  in  their  purple,  as  their  manner 
was  when  they  were  going  to  give  battle,  the 
front  stopped  their  march,  and  called  out  for 
Eumenes,  for  they  would  not  advance  a  step 
but  under  his  conduct;  and  fixing  their  arms 
in  the  ground  gave  the  word  among  them¬ 
selves  to  stand,  requiring  their  officers  also  not 
to  stir  or  engage  or  hazard  themselves  without 
Eumenes.  News  of  this  being  brought  to  Eu¬ 
menes,  he  hastened  those  that  carried  his  lit¬ 
ter,  and  drawing  back  the  curtains  on  both 


477 

sides,  joyfully  put  forth  his  right  hand.  As 
soon  as  the  soldiers  saw  him  they  saluted  him 
in  their  Macedonian  dialect,  and  took  up  their 
shields,  and  striking  them  with  their  pikes, 
gave  a  great  shout,  inviting  the  enemy  to  come 
on,  for  now  they  had  a  leader. 

Antigonus  understanding  by  some  prisoners 
he  had  taken  that  Eumenes  was  out  of  health, 
to  that  degree  that  he  was  carried  in  a  litter, 
presumed  it  would  be  no  hard  matter  to  crush 
the  rest  of  them,  since  he  was  ill.  He  therefore 
made  the  greater  haste  to  come  up  with  them 
and  engage.  But  being  come  so  near  as  to  dis¬ 
cover  how  the  enemy  was  drawn  up  and  ap¬ 
pointed,  he  was  astonished,  and  paused  for 
some  time;  at  last  he  saw  the  litter  carrying 
from  one  wing  of  the  army  to  the  other,  and, 
as  his  manner  was,  laughing  aloud,  he  said  to 
his  friends,  “That  litter  there,  it  seems,  is  the 
thing  that  offers  us  battle”;  and  immediately 
wheeled  about,  retired  with  all  his  army,  and 
pitched  his  camp. 

The  men  on  the  other  side,  finding  a  little 
respite,  returned  to  their  former  habits,  and  al¬ 
lowing  themselves  to  be  flattered,  and  making 
the  most  of  the  indulgence  of  their  generals, 
took  up  for  their  winter  quarters  near  the 
whole  country  of  the  Gabeni,  so  that  the  front 
was  quartered  nearly  a  thousand  furlongs  from 
the  rear;  which  Antigonus  understanding, 
marched  suddenly  towards  them,  taking  the 
most  difficult  road  through  a  country  that 
wanted  water;  but  the  way  was  short  though 
uneven;  hoping,  if  he  should  surprise  them 
thus  scattered  in  their  winter  quarters,  the 
soldiers  would  not  easily  be  able  to  come  up 
in  time  enough  and  join  with  their  officers. 
But  having  to  pass  through  a  country  unin¬ 
habited,  where  he  met  with  violent  winds  and 
severe  frosts,  he  was  much  checked  in  his 
march,  and  his  men  suffered  exceedingly.  The 
only  possible  relief  was  making  numerous  fires, 
by  which  his  enemies  got  notice  of  his  coming. 
For  the  barbarians  who  dwelt  on  the  moun¬ 
tains  overlooking  the  desert,  amazed  at  the 
multitude  of  fires  they  saw,  sent  messengers 
upon  dromedaries  to  acquaint  Peucestes. 

He  being  astonished  and  almost  out  of  his 
senses  with  the  news,  and  finding  the  rest  in 
no  less  disorder,  resolved  to  flee,  and  collect 
what  men  he  could  by  the  way.  But  Eumenes 
relieved  him  from  his  fear  and  trouble,  under¬ 
taking  so  to  stop  the  enemy’s  advance  that  he 
should  arrive  three  days  later  than  he  was  ex¬ 
pected.  Having  persuaded  them,  he  immedi¬ 
ately  despatched  expresses  to  all  the  officers  to 


478 

draw  the  men  out  of  their  winter  quarters  and 
muster  them  with  all  speed.  He  himself,  with 
some  of  the  chief  officers,  rode  out,  and  chose 
an  elevated  tract  within  view,  at  a  distance, 
of  such  as  travelled  the  desert;  this  he  occupied 
and  quartered  out,  and  commanded  many  fires 
to  be  made  in  it,  as  the  custom  is  in  a  camp. 

This  done,  and  the  enemies  seeing  the  fire 
upon  the  mountains,  Antigonus  was  filled  with 
vexation  and  despondency,  supposing  that  his 
enemies  had  been  long  since  advertised  of  his 
march,  and  were  prepared  to  receive  him. 
Therefore,  lest  his  army,  now  tired  and  wea¬ 
ried  out  with  their  march,  should  be  immedi¬ 
ately  forced  to  encounter  with  fresh  men,  who 
had  wintered  well  and  were  ready  for  him, 
quitting  the  near  way,  he  marched  slowly 
through  the  towns  and  villages  to  refresh  his 
men.  But  meeting  with  no  such  skirmishes  as 
are  usual  when  two  armies  lie  near  one  an¬ 
other,  and  being  assured  by  the  people  of  the 
country  that  no  army  had  been  seen,  but  only 
continual  fires  at  that  place,  he  concluded  he 
had  been  outwitted  by  a  stratagem  of  Eumenes, 
and,  much  troubled,  advanced  to  give  open 
battle. 

By  this  time,  the  greater  part  of  the  forces 
were  come  together  to  Eumenes,  and  admiring 
his  sagacity,  declared  him  alone  commander- 
in-chief  of  the  whole  army;  upon  which  Anti¬ 
genes  and  Teutamus,  the  commanders  of  the 
Argyraspids,  being  very  much  offended,  and 
envying  Eumenes,  formed  a  conspiracy  against 
him;  and  assembling  the  greater  part  of  the 
satraps  and  officers,  consulted  when  and  how 
to  cut  him  off.  When  they  had  unanimously 
agreed,  first  to  use  his  service  in  the  next  bat¬ 
tle,  and  then  to  take  an  occasion  to  destroy 
him,  Eudamus,  the  master  of  the  elephants, 
and  PhaMimus  gave  Eumenes  private  advice 
of  this  design,  not  out  of  kindness  or  good-will 
to  him,  but  lest  they  should  lose  the  money 
they  had  lent  him.  Eumenes,  having  com¬ 
mended  them,  retired  to  his  tent,  and  telling 
his  friends  he  lived  among  a  herd  of  wild 
beasts,  made  his  will,  and  tore  up  all  his  letters, 
lest  his  correspondents  after  his  death  should 
be  questioned  or  punished  on  account  of  any¬ 
thing  in  his  secret  papers. 

Having  thus  disposed  of  his  affairs,  he 
thought  of  letting  the  enemy  win  the  field,  or 
of  flying  through  Media  and  Armenia  and 
seizing  Cappadocia,  but  came  to  no  resolution 
while  his  friends  stayed  with  him.  After  turn¬ 
ing  to  many  expedients  in  his  mind,  which  his 
changeable  fortune  had  made  versatile,  he  at 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

last  put  his  men  in  array,  and  encouraged  the 
Greeks' and  barbarians;  as  for  the  phalanx  and 
the  Argyraspids,  they  encouraged  him,  and 
bade  him  be  of  good  heart,  for  the  enemy 
would  never  be  able  to  stand  them.  For  indeed 
they  were  the  oldest  of  Philip’s  and  Alexan¬ 
der’s  soldiers,  tried  men,  that  had  long  made 
war  their  exercise,  that  had  never  been  beaten 
or  foiled;  most  of  them  seventy,  none  less  than 
sixty  years  old.  And  so  when  they  charged 
Antigonus’s  men,  they  cried  out,  “You  fight 
against  your  fathers,  you  rascals,”  and  furious¬ 
ly  falling  on,  routed  the  whole  phalanx  at 
once,  nobody  being  able  to  stand  them,  and  the 
greatest  part  dying  by  their  hands. 

So  that  Antigonus’s  foot  was  routed,  but  his 
horse  got  the  better,  and  he  became  master  of 
the  baggage  through  the  cowardice  of  Peu- 
cestes,  who  behaved  himself  negligently  and 
basely;  while  Antigonus  used  his  judgment 
calmly  in  the  danger,  being  aided  moreover  by 
the  ground.  For  the  place  where  they  fought 
was  a  large  plain,  neither  deep  nor  hard  under 
foot,  but,  like  the  seashore,  covered  with  a  fine 
soft  sand  which  the  treading  of  so  many  men 
and  horses  in  the  time  of  battle  reduced  to  a 
small  white  dust,  that  like  a  cloud  of  lime 
darkened  the  air,  so  that  one  could  not  see 
clearly  at  any  distance,  and  so  made  it  easy  for 
Antigonus  to  take  the  baggage  unperceived. 

After  the  battle  Teutamus  sent  a  message  to 
Antigonus  to  demand  the  baggage.  He  made 
answer,  he  would  not  only  restore  it  to  the 
Argyraspids,  but  serve  them  further  in  the 
other  things  if  they  would  but  deliver  up  Eu¬ 
menes.  Upon  which  the  Argyraspids  took  a 
villainous  resolution  to  deliver  him  up  alive 
into  the  hands  of  his  enemies.  So  they  came  to 
wait  upon  him,  being  unsuspected  by  him,  but 
watching  their  opportunity,  some  lamenting 
the  loss  of  the  baggage,  some  encouraging  him 
as  if  he  had  been  victor,  some  accusing  the 
other  commanders,  till  at  last  they  all  fell  upon 
him,  and  seizing  his  sword,  bound  his  hands 
behind  him  with  his  own  girdle. 

When  Antigonus  had  sent  Nicanor  to  re¬ 
ceive  him  he  begged  he  might  be  led  through 
the  body  of  the  Macedonians,  and  have  liberty 
to  speak  to  them,  neither  to  request  nor  depre¬ 
cate  anything,  but  only  to  advise  them  what 
would  be  for  their  interest.  A  silence  being 
made,  as  he  stood  upon  a  rising  ground,  he 
stretched  out  his  hands  bound,  and  said, 
“What  trophy,  O  ye  basest  of  all  the  Mace¬ 
donians,  could  Antigonus  have  wished  for  so 
great  as  you  yourselves  have  erected  for  him 


EUMENES  AND  SERTORIUS 

in  delivering  up  your  general  captive  into  his 
hands?  You  are  not  ashamed,  when  you  are 
conquerors,  to  own  yourselves  conquered,  for 
the  sake  only  of  your  baggage,  as  if  it  were 
wealth,  not  arms,  wherein  victory  consisted; 
nay,  you  deliver  up  your  general  to  redeem 
your  stuff.  As  for  me  I  am  unvanquished, 
though  a  captive,  conqueror  of  my  enemies, 
and  betrayed  by  my  fellow-soldiers.  For  you, 
I  adjure  you  by  Jupiter,  the  protector  of  arms, 
and  by  all  the  gods  that  are  the  avengers  of 
perjury,  to  kill  me  here  with  your  own  hands; 
for  it  is  all  one;  and  if  I  am  murdered  yonder 
it  will  be  esteemed  your  act,  nor  will  Antig- 
onus  complain,  for  he  desires  not  Eumenes 
alive,  but  dead.  Or  if  you  withhold  your  own 
hands,  release  but  one  of  mine,  it  shall  suffice 
to  do  the  work;  and  if  you  dare  not  trust  me 
with  a  sword,  throw  me  bound  as  I  am  under 
the  feet  of  the  wild  beasts.  This  if  you  do  I 
shall  freely  acquit  you  from  the  guilt  of  my 
death,  as  the  most  just  and  kind  of  men  to 
their  general.” 

While  Eumenes  was  thus  speaking,  the  rest 
of  the  soldiers  wept  for  grief,  but  the  Argy- 
raspids  shouted  out  to  lead  him  on,  and  give 
no  attention  to  his  trifling.  For  it  was  no  such 
great  matter  if  this  Chersonesian  pest  should 
meet  his  death,  who  in  thousands  of  battles 
had  annoyed  and  wasted  the  Macedonians;  it 
would  be  a  much  more  grievous  thing  for  the 
choicest  of  Philip’s  and  Alexander’s  soldiers  to 
be  defrauded  of  the  fruits  of  so  long  service, 
and  in  their  old  age  to  come  to  beg  their  bread, 
and  to  leave  their  wives  three  nights  in  the 
power  of  their  enemies.  So  they  hurried  him 
on  with  violence. 

But  Antigonus,  fearing  the  multitude,  for 
nobody  was  left  in  the  camp,  sent  ten  of  his 
strongest  elephants  with  divers  of  his  Mede 
and  Parthian  lances  to  keep  off  the  press.  Then 
he  could  not  endure  to  have  Eumenes  brought 
into  his  presence,  by  reason  of  their  former  in¬ 
timacy  and  friendship;  but  when  they  that  had 
taken  him  inquired  how  he  would  have  him 
kept,  “As  I  would,”  said  he,  “an  elephant,  or 


479 

a  lion.”  A  little  after,  being  moved  with  com¬ 
passion,  he  commanded  the  heaviest  of  his 
irons  to  be  knocked  off,  one  of  his  servants  to 
be  admitted  to  anoint  him,  and  that  any  of  his 
friends  that  were  willing  should  have  liberty 
to  visit  him,  and  bring  him  what  he  wanted. 

Long  time  he  deliberated  what  to  do  with 
him,  sometimes  inclining  to  the  advice  and 
promises  of  Nearchus  of  Crete  and  Demetrius, 
his  son,  who  were  very  earnest  to  preserve  Eu¬ 
menes,  whilst  all  the  rest  were  unanimously 
instant  and  importunate  to  have  him  taken  off. 
It  is  related  that  Eumenes  inquired  of  Ono- 
marchus,  his  keeper,  why  Antigonus,  now  he 
had  his  enemy  in  his  hands,  would  not  forth¬ 
with  despatch  or  generously  release  him?  And 
that  Onomarchus  contumeliously  answered 
him,  that  the  field  had  been  a  more  proper 
place  than  this  to  show  his  contempt  of  death. 
To  whom  Eumenes  replied,  “And,  by  heavens, 
I  showed  it  there;  ask  the  men  else  that  en¬ 
gaged  me,  but  I  could  never  meet  a  man  that 
was  my  superior.”  “Therefore,”  rejoined  Ono¬ 
marchus,  “now  you  have  found  such  a  man, 
why  don’t  you  submit  quiedy  to  his  pleasure?” 

When  Antigonus  resolved  to  kill  Eumenes, 
he  commanded  to  keep  his  food  from  him, 
and  so  with  two  or  three  days’  fasting  he  began 
to  draw  near  his  end;  but  the  camp  being  on  a 
sudden  to  remove,  an  executioner  was  sent  to 
despatch  him.  Antigonus  granted  his  body  to 
his  friends,  permitted  them  to  burn  it,  and 
having  gathered  his  ashes  into  a  silver  urn,  to 
send  them  to  his  wife  and  children. 

Eumenes  was  thus  taken  off;  and  Divine 
Providence  assigned  to  no  other  man  the  chas¬ 
tisement  of  the  commanders  and  soldiers  that 
had  betrayed  him;  but  Antigonus  himself, 
abominating  the  Argyraspids  as  wicked  and 
inhuman  villains,  delivered  them  up  to  Sibyr- 
tius,  the  governor  of  Arachosia,  commanding 
him  by  all  ways  and  means  to  destroy  and  ex¬ 
terminate  them,  so  that  not  a  man  of  them 
might  ever  come  to  Macedon,  or  so  much  as 
within  sight  of  the  Greek  Sea. 

V  V  V 


EUMENES  and  SERTORIUS 
Compared 


These  are  the  most  remarkable  passages 
that  are  come  to  our  knowledge  concern¬ 
ing  Eumenes  and  Sertorius.  In  comparing 
their  lives,  we  may  observe  that  this  was  com¬ 
mon  to  them  both:  that  being  aliens,  strangers, 


and  banished  men,  they  came  to  be  command¬ 
ers  of  powerful  forces,  and  had  the  leading  of 
numerous  and  warlike  armies,  made  up  of 
divers  nations. 

This  was  peculiar  to  Sertorius,  that  the  chief 


480 

command  was,  by  his  whole  party,  freely  yield¬ 
ed  to  him,  as  to  the  person  of  the  greatest  merit 
and  renown,  whereas  Eumenes  had  many  who 
contested  the  office  with  him,  and  only  by  his 
actions  obtained  the  superiority.  They  follow¬ 
ed  the  one  honestly,  out  of  desire  to  be  com¬ 
manded  by  him;  they  submitted  themselves  to 
the  other  for  their  own  security,  because  they 
could  not  command  themselves. 

The  one,  being  a  Roman,  was  the  general  of 
the  Spaniards  and  Lusitanians,  who  for  many 
years  had  been  under  the  subjection  of  Rome; 
and  the  other,  a  Chersonesian,  who  was  chief 
commander  of  the  Macedonians,  who  were  the 
great  conquerors  of  mankind,  and  were  at  that 
time  subduing  the  world.  Sertorius,  being  al¬ 
ready  in  high  esteem  for  his  former  services  in 
the  wars  and  his  abilities  in  the  senate,  was 
advanced  to  the  dignity  of  a  general;  whereas 
Eumenes  obtained  this  honour  from  the  office 
of  a  writer,  or  secretary,  in  which  he  had  been 
despised. 

Nor  did  he  only  at  first  rise  from  inferior 
opportunities,  but  afterwards,  also,  met  with 
greater  impediments  in  the  progress  of  his 
authority,  and  that  not  only  from  those  who 
publicly  resisted  him,  but  from  many  others 
that  privately  conspired  against  him.  It  was 
much  otherwise  with  Sertorius,  not  one  of 
whose  party  publicly  opposed  him,  only  late  in 
life,  and  secretly,  a  few  of  his  acquaintances 
entered  into  a  conspiracy  against  him.  Serto¬ 
rius  put  an  end  to  his  dangers  as  often  as  he 
was  victorious  in  the  field,  whereas  the  victo¬ 
ries  of  Eumenes  were  the  beginning  of  his 
perils,  through  the  malice  of  those  that  envied 
him. 

Their  deeds  in  war  were  equal  and  parallel, 
but  their  general  inclinations  different.  Eu¬ 
menes  naturally  loved  war  and  contention,  but 
Sertorius  esteemed  peace  and  tranquillity; 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

when  Eumenes  might  have  lived  in  safety, 
with  honour,  if  he  would  have  quietly  retired 
out  of  their  way,  he  persisted  in  a  dangerous 
contest  with  the  greatest  of  the  Macedonian 
leaders;  but  Sertorius,  who  was  unwilling  to 
trouble  himself  with  any  public  disturbances, 
was  forced,  for  the  safety  of  his  person,  to 
make  war  against  those  who  would  not  suffer 
him  to  live  in  peace.  If  Eumenes  could  have 
contented  himself  with  the  second  place,  Antig- 
onus,  freed  from  his  competition  for  the  first, 
would  have  used  him  well,  and  shown  him 
favour,  whereas  Pompey’s  friends  would  never 
permit  Sertorius  so  much  as  to  live  in  quiet. 
The  one  made  war  of  his  own  accord,  out  of 
a  desire  for  command;  and  the  other  was  con¬ 
strained  to  accept  of  command  to  defend  him¬ 
self  from  war  that  was  made  against  him. 
Eumenes  was  certainly  a  true  lover  of  war,  for 
he  preferred  his  covetous  ambition  before  his 
own  security;  hut  Sertorius  was  truly  warlike, 
who  procured  his  own  safety  by  the  success  of 
his  arms. 

As  to  the  manner  of  their  deaths,  it  hap¬ 
pened  to  one  without  the  least  thought  or  sur¬ 
mise  of  it;  but  to  the  other  when  he  suspected 
it  daily;  which  in  the  first  argues  an  equitable 
temper,  and  a  noble  mind,  not  to  distrust  his 
friends;  but  in  the  other  it  shows  some  in¬ 
firmity  of  spirit,  for  Eumenes  intended  to  flee 
and  was  taken.  The  death  of  Sertorius  dishon¬ 
oured  not  his  life;  he  suffered  that  from  his 
companions  which  none  of  his  enemies  were 
ever  able  to  perform.  The  other,  not  being  able 
to  deliver  himself  before  his  imprisonment, 
being  willing  also  to  live  in  captivity,  did 
neither  prevent  nor  expect  his  fate  with  hon¬ 
our  or  bravery;  for  by  meanly  supplicating  and 
petitioning,  he  made  his  enemy,  that  pretend¬ 
ed  only  to  have  power  over  his  body,  to  be  lord 
and  master  of  his  body  and  mind. 


AGESILAUS 

485-4OI  B.C. 


/i  rchidamus,  the  son  of  Zeuxidamus,  hav- 
ing  reigned  gloriously  over  the  Lace- 
JL  Jl  daemonians,  left  behind  him  two  sons, 
Agis  the  elder,  begotten  of  Lampido,  a  noble 
lady,  Agesilaus,  much  the  younger,  born  of 
Eupolia,  the  daughter  of  Melesippidas.  Now 
the  succession  belonged  to  Agis  by  law,  Age¬ 


silaus,  who  in  all  probability  was  to  be  but  a 
private  man,  was  educated  according  to  the 
usual  discipline  of  the  country,  hard  and  se¬ 
vere,  and  meant  to  teach  young  men  to  obey 
their  superiors.  Whence  it  was  that,  men  say, 
Simonides  called  Sparta  “the  tamer  of  men,” 
because  by  early  strictness  of  education  they, 


AGESILAUS 

more  than  any  nation,  trained  the  citizens  to 
obedience  to  the  laws,  and  made  them  tract¬ 
able  and  patient  of  subjection,  as  horses  that 
are  broken  in  while  colts.  The  law  did  not  im¬ 
pose  this  harsh  rule  on  the  heirs  apparent  of 
the  kingdom.  But  Agesilaus,  whose  good  for¬ 
tune  it  was  to  be  born  a  younger  brother,  was 
consequently  bred  to  all  the  arts  of  obedience, 
and  so  the  better  fitted  for  the  government, 
when  it  fell  to  his  share;  hence  it  was  that  he 
proved  the  most  popular-tempered  of  the  Spar¬ 
tan  kings,  his  early  life  having  added  to  his 
natural  kingly  and  commanding  qualities  the 
gentle  and  humane  feelings  of  a  citizen. 

While  he  was  yet  a  boy,  bred  up  in  one  of 
what  are  called  the  flocks,  or  classes,  he  at¬ 
tracted  the  attachment  of  Lysander,  who  was 
particularly  struck  with  the  orderly  temper 
that  he  manifested.  For  though  he  was  one  of 
the  highest  spirits,  emulous  above  any  of  his 
companions,  ambitious  of  pre-eminence  in 
everything,  and  showed  an  impetuosity  and 
fervour  of  mind  which  irresistibly  carried  him 
through  all  opposition  or  difficulty  he  could 
meet  with;  yet  on  the  other  side,  he  was  so 
easy  and  gentle  in  his  nature,  and  so  apt  to 
yield  to  authority,  that  though  he  would  do 
nothing  on  compulsion,  upon  ingenuous  mo¬ 
tives  he  would  obey  any  commands,  and  was 
more  hurt  by  the  least  rebuke  or  disgrace  than 
he  was  distressed  by  any  toil  or  hardship. 

He  had  one  leg  shorter  than  the  other,  but 
this  deformity  was  little  observed  in  the  gen¬ 
eral  beauty  of  his  person  in  youth.  And  the 
easy  way  in  which  he  bore  it  (he  being  the  first 
always  to  pass  a  jest  upon  himself)  went  far  to 
make  it  disregarded.  And  indeed  his  high 
spirit  and  eagerness  to  distinguish  himself  were 
all  the  more  conspicuous  by  it,  since  he  never 
let  his  lameness  withhold  him  from  any  toil  or 
any  brave  action.  Neither  his  statue  nor  pic¬ 
ture  are  extant,  he  never  allowing  them  in  his 
life,  and  utterly  forbidding  them  to  be  made 
after  his  death.  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  little 
man,  of  a  contemptible  presence;  but  the  good¬ 
ness  of  his  humour,  and  his  constant  cheerful¬ 
ness  and  playfulness  of  temper,  always  free 
from  anything  of  moroseness  or  haughtiness, 
made  him  more  attractive,  even  to  his  old  age, 
than  the  most  beautiful  and  youthful  men  of 
the  nation.  Theophrastus  writes  that  the  eph- 
ors  laid  a  fine  upon  Archidamus  for  marrying 
a  little  wife,  “For,”  said  they,  “she  will  bring 
us  a  race  of  kinglets,  instead  of  kings.” 

Whilst  Agis,  the  elder  brother,  reigned,  Alci- 
biades,  being  then  an  exile  from  Athens,  came 


481 

from  Sicily  to  Sparta;  nor  had  he  stayed  long 
there  before  his  familiarity  with  Timaea,  the 
king’s  wife,  grew  suspected,  insomuch  that 
Agis  refused  to  own  a  child  of  hers,  which,  he 
said,  was  Alcibiades’s,  not  his.  Nor,  if  we  may 
believe  Duris,  the  historian,  was  Timaea  much 
concerned  at  it,  being  herself  forward  enough 
to  whisper  among  her  helot  maid-servants  that 
the  infants’  true  name  was  Alcibiades,  not  Leo- 
tychides.  Meanwhile,  it  was  believed  that  the 
amour  he  had  with  her  was  not  the  effect  of 
his  love  but  of  his  ambition,  that  he  might  have 
Spartan  kings  of  his  posterity.  This  affair  be¬ 
ing  grown  public,  it  became  needful  for  Alci¬ 
biades  to  withdraw  from  Sparta. 

But  the  child  Leotychides  had  not  the  hon¬ 
ours  due  to  a  legitimate  son  paid  him,  nor  was 
he  ever  owned  by  Agis,  till  by  his  prayers  and 
tears  he  prevailed  with  him  to  declare  him  his 
son  before  several  witnesses  upon  his  deathbed. 
But  this  did  not  avail  to  fix  him  in  the  throne 
of  Agis,  after  whose  death  Lysander,  who  had 
lately  achieved  his  conquest  of  Athens  by  sea, 
and  was  of  the  greatest  power  in  Sparta,  pro¬ 
moted  Agesilaus,  urging  Leotychides’s  bas¬ 
tardy  as  a  bar  to  his  pretensions.  Many  of  the 
other  citizens,  also,  were  favourable  to  Agesi¬ 
laus,  and  zealously  joined  his  party, induced  by 
the  opinion  they  had  of  his  merits,  of  which 
they  themselves  had  been  spectators,  in  the 
time  that  he  had  been  bred  up  among  them. 

But  there  was  a  man,  named  Diopithes,  at 
Sparta,  who  had  a  great  knowledge  of  ancient 
oracles,  and  was  thought  particularly  skilful 
and  clever  in  all  points  of  religion  and  divina¬ 
tion.  He  alleged,  that  it  was  unlawful  to  make 
a  lame  man  king  of  Lacedaemon,  citing  in  the 
debate  the  following  oracle: — 

Beware ,  great  Sparta,  lest  there  come  of  thee, 
Though  sound  thyself,  an  haulting  sovereignty: 
Troubles,  both  long  and  unexpected  too, 

And  storms  of  deadly  warfare  shall  ensue . 

But  Lysander  was  not  wanting  with  an  eva¬ 
sion,  alleging  that  if  the  Spartans  were  really 
apprehensive  of  the  oracle,  they  must  have  a 
care  of  Leotychides;  for  it  was  not  the  limping 
foot  of  a  king  that  the  gods  cared  about,  but 
the  purity  of  the  Herculean  family,  into  whose 
rights,  if  a  spurious  issue  were  admitted,  it 
would  make  the  kingdom  to  halt  indeed.  Ages¬ 
ilaus  likewise  alleged  that  the  bastardy  of  Le¬ 
otychides  was  witnessed  to  by  Neptune,  who 
threw  Agis  out  of  bed  by  a  violent  earthquake, 
after  which  time  he  ceased  to  visit  his  wife,  yet 
Leotychides  was  born  above  ten  months  after 
this. 


482 


Agesilaus  was  upon  these  allegations  declared 
king,  and  soon  possessed  himself  of  the  private 
estate  of  Agis,  as  well  as  his  throne,  Leotychi- 
des  being  wholly  rejected  as  a  bastard.  He  now 
turned  his  attention  to  his  kindred  by  the  moth¬ 
er’s  side,  persons  of  worth  and  virtue,  but  mis¬ 
erably  poor.  To  them  he  gave  half  his  brother’s 
estate,  and  by  popular  act  gained  general  good¬ 
will  and  reputation,  in  the  place  of  the  envy 
and  ill-feeling  which  the  inheritance  might 
otherwise  have  procured  him. 

What  Xenophon  tells  us  of  him,  that  by 
complying  with,  and,  as  it  were,  being  ruled  by 
his  country,  he  grew  into  such  great  power 
with  them,  that  he  could  do  what  he  pleased, 
is  meant  to  apply  to  the  power  he  gained  in  the 
following  manner  with  the  ephors  and  elders. 
These  were  at  that  time  of  the  greatest  author¬ 
ity  in  the  state;  the  former,  officers  annually 
chosen;  the  elders,  holding  their  places  during 
life;  both  instituted,  as  already  told  in  the  life 
of  Lycurgus,  to  restrain  the  power  of  the  kings. 
Hence  it  was  that  there  was  always  from  gen¬ 
eration  to  generation  a  feud  and  contention 
between  them  and  the  kings.  But  Agesilaus 
took  another  course.  Instead  of  contending 
with  them,  he  courted  them;  in  all  proceedings 
he  commenced  by  taking  their  advice,  was  al¬ 
ways  ready  to  go,  nay  almost  run,  wh6n  they 
called  him;  if  he  were  upon  his  royal  seat,  hear¬ 
ing  causes,  and  the  ephors  came  in,  he  rose  to 
them;  whenever  any  man  was  elected  into  the 
council  of  elders  he  presented  him  with  a 
gown  and  an  ox.  Thus,  whilst  he  made  a  show 
of  deference  to  them,  and  of  a  desire  to  extend 
their  authority,  he  secretly  advanced  his  own, 
and  enlarged  the  prerogatives  of  the  kings  by 
several  liberties  which  their  friendship  to  his 
person  conceded. 

To  other  citizens  he  so  behaved  himself  as 
to  be  less  blamable  in  his  enmities  than  in  his 
friendships;  for  against  his  enemy  he  forbore 
to  take  any  unjust  advantage,  but  his  friends 
he  would  assist,  even  in  what  was  unjust.  If  an 
enemy  had  done  anything  praiseworthy,  he  felt 
it  shameful  to  detract  from  his  due,  but  his 
friends  he  knew  not  how  to  reprove  when  they 
did  ill,  nay,  he  would  eagerly  join  with  them, 
and  assist  them  in  their  misdeed,  and  thought 
all  offices  of  friendship  commendable,  let  the 
matter  in  which  they  were  employed  be  what 
it  would.  Again,  when  any  of  his  adversaries 
was  overtaken  in  a  fault,  he  would  be  the  first 
to  pity  him;  and  he  soon  entreated  to  procure 
his  pardon,  by  which  he  won  the  hearts  of  all 
men.  Insomuch  that  his  popularity  grew  at  last 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

suspected  by  the  ephors,  who  laid  a  fine  on 
him,  professing  that  he  was  appropriating  the 
citizens  to  himself  who  ought  to  be  the  com¬ 
mon  property  of  the  state. 

For  as  it  is  the  opinion  of  philosophers,  that 
could  you  take  away  strife  and  opposition  out 
of  the  universe,  all  the  heavenly  bodies  would 
stand  still,  generation  and  motion  would  cease 
in  the  mutual  concord  and  agreement  of  all 
things,  so  the  Spartan  legislator  seems  to  have 
admitted  ambition  and  emulation  among  the 
ingredients  of  his  commonwealth  as  the  incen¬ 
tives  of  virtue,  distinctly  wishing  that  there 
should  be  some  dispute  and  competition  among 
his  men  of  worth,  and  pronouncing  the  mere 
idle,  uncontested,  mutual  compliance  to  un¬ 
proved  deserts  to  be  but  a  false  sort  of  concord. 
And  some  think  Homer  had  an  eye  to  this 
when  he  introduced  Agamemnon  well  pleased 
with  the  quarrel  arising  between  Ulysses  and 
Achilles,  and  with  the  “terrible  words”  that 
passed  between  them,  which  he  would  never 
have  done,  unless  he  had  thought  emulations 
and  dissensions  between  the  noblest  men  to  be 
of  great  public  benefit.  Yet  this  maxim  is  not 
simply  to  be  granted,  without  restriction,  for 
if  animosities  go  too  far  they  are  very  dan¬ 
gerous  to  cities  and  of  most  pernicious  conse¬ 
quence. 

When  Agesilaus  was  newly  entered  upon  the 
government,  there  came  news  from  Asia  that 
the  Persian  king  was  making  great  naval  prep¬ 
arations,  resolving  with  a  high  hand  to  dispos¬ 
sess  the  Spartans  of  their  maritime  supremacy. 
Lysander  was  eager  for  the  opportunity  of  go¬ 
ing  over  and  succouring  his  friends  in  Asia, 
whom  he  had  there  left  governors  and  masters 
of  the  cities,  whose  maladministration  and  ty¬ 
rannical  behaviour  was  causing  them  to  be 
driven  out,  and  in  some  cases  put  to  death. 

He  therefore  persuaded  Agesilaus  to  claim 
the  command  of  the  expedition,  and  by  carry¬ 
ing  the  war  far  from  Greece  into  Persia,  to  an¬ 
ticipate  the  designs  of  the  barbarian.  He  also 
wrote  to  his  friends  in  Asia,  that  by  embassy 
they  should  demand  Agesilaus  for  their  cap¬ 
tain.  Agesilaus,  therefore,  coming  into  the  pub¬ 
lic  assembly,  offered  his  service,  upon  condi¬ 
tion  that  he  might  have  thirty  Spartans  for 
captains  and  counsellors,  two  thousand  chosen 
men  of  the  newly  enfranchised  helots,  and  al¬ 
lies  to  the  number  of  six  thousand.  Lysander’s 
authority  and  assistance  soon  obtained  his  re¬ 
quest,  so  that  he  was  sent  away  with  the  thirty 
Spartans,  of  whom  Lysander  was  at  once  the 
chief,  not  only  because  of  his  power  and  repu- 


AGESILAUS 

tation,  but  also  on  account  of  his  friendship 
with  Agesilaus,  who  esteemed  his  procuring 
him  this  charge  a  greater  obligation  than  that 
of  preferring  him  to  the  kingdom. 

Whilst  the  army  was  collecting  to  the  ren¬ 
dezvous  at  Geraestus,  Agesilaus  went  with  some 
of  his  friends  to  Aulis,  where  in  a  dream  he  saw 
a  man  approach  him,  and  speak  to  him  after 
this  manner:  “O  King  of  the  Lacedaemonians, 
you  cannot  but  know  that,  before  yourself, 
there  hath  been  but  one  general  captain  of  the 
whole  of  the  Greeks,  namely,  Agamemnon; 
now,  since  you  succeed  him  in  the  same  office 
and  command  the  same  men,  since  you  war 
against  the  same  enemies,  and  begin  your  ex¬ 
pedition  from  the  same  place,  you  ought  also 
to  offer  such  a  sacrifice  as  he  offered  before  he 
weighed  anchor.”  Agesilaus  at  the  same  mo¬ 
ment  remembered  that  the  sacrifice  which 
Agamemnon  offered  was  his  own  daughter,  he 
being  so  directed  by  the  oracle. 

Yet  was  he  not  at  all  disturbed  by  it,  but  as 
soon  as  he  arose,  he  told  his  dream  to  his 
friends,  adding  that  he  would  propitiate  the 
goddess  with  the  sacrifices  a  goddess  must  de¬ 
light  in,  and  would  not  follow  the  ignorant  ex¬ 
ample  of  his  predecessor.  He  therefore  ordered 
an  hind  to  be  crowned  with  chaplets,  and  bade 
his  own  soothsayer  perform  the  rite,  not  the 
usual  person  whom  the  Boeotians,  in  ordinary 
course,  appointed  to  that  office. 

When  the  Boeotian  magistrates  understood 
it,  they  were  much  offended,  and  sent  officers  to 
Agesilaus  to  forbid  his  sacrificing  contrary  to 
the  laws  of  the  country.  These,  having  deliv¬ 
ered  their  message  to  him,  immediately  went 
to  the  altar  and  threw  down  the  quarters  of  the 
hind  that  lay  upon  it.  Agesilaus  took  this  very 
ill,  and  without  further  sacrifice  immediately 
sailed  away,  highly  displeased  with  the  Boeo¬ 
tians,  and  much  discouraged  in  his  mind  at  the 
omen,  boding  to  himself  an  unsuccessful  voy¬ 
age  and  an  imperfect  issue  of  the  whole  expedi¬ 
tion. 

When  he  came  to  Ephesus,  he  found  the 
power  and  interest  of  Lysander,  and  the  hon¬ 
ours  paid  to  him,  insufferably  great;  all  appli¬ 
cations  were  made  to  him,  crowds  of  suitors 
attended  at  his  door,  and  followed  upon  his 
steps,  as  if  nothing  but  the  mere  name  of  com¬ 
mander  belonged,  to  satisfy  the  usage,  to  Age¬ 
silaus,  the  whole  power  of  it  being  devolved 
upon  Lysander.  None  of  all  the  commanders 
that  had  been  sent  into  Asia  was  either  so  pow¬ 
erful  or  so  formidable  as  he;  no  one  had  re¬ 
warded  his  friends  better,  or  had  been  more 


483 

severe  against  his  enemies;  which  things  hav¬ 
ing  been  lately  done,  made  the  greater  impres¬ 
sion  on  men’s  minds,  especially  when  they 
compared  the  simple  and  popular  behaviour  of 
Agesilaus  with  the  harsh  and  violent  and  brief- 
spoken  demeanour  which  Lysander  still  re¬ 
tained.  Universal  preference  was  yielded  to 
this,  and  little  regard  shown  to  Agesilaus. 

This  first  occasioned  offence  to  the  other 
Spartan  captains,  who  resented  that  they 
should  rather  seem  the  attendants  of  Lysander, 
than  the  councillors  of  Agesilaus.  And  at  length 
Agesilaus  himself,  though  not  perhaps  an  en¬ 
vious  man  in  his  nature,  nor  apt  to  be  troubled 
at  the  honours  redounding  upon  other  men,  yet 
eager  for  honour  and  jealous  of  his  glory,  be¬ 
gan  to  apprehend  that  Lysander’s  greatness 
would  carry  away  from  him  the  reputation  of 
whatever  great  action  should  happen.  He  there¬ 
fore  went  this  way  to  work.  He  first  opposed 
him  in  all  his  counsels;  whatever  Lysander  spe¬ 
cially  advised  was  rejected,  and  other  proposals 
followed.  Then  whoever  made  any  address  to 
him,  if  he  found  him  attached  to  Lysander, 
certainly  lost  his  suit.  So  also  in  judicial  cases, 
any  one  whom  he  spoke  strongly  against  was 
sure  to  come  off  with  success,  and  any  man 
whom  he  was  particularly  solicitous  to  procure 
some  benefit  for  might  think  it  well  if  he  got 
away  without  an  actual  loss. 

These  things  being  clearly  not  done  by 
chance,  but  constantly  and  of  a  set  purpose, 
Lysander  was  soon  sensible  of  them,  and  hesi¬ 
tated  not  to  tell  his  friends  that  they  suffered 
for  his  sake,  bidding  them  apply  themselves  to 
the  king,  and  such  as  were  more  powerful  with 
him  than  he  was.  Such  sayings  of  his  seeming 
to  be  designed  purposely  to  excite  ill-feeling, 
Agesilaus  went  on  to  offer  himself  a  more  open 
affront,  appointing  him  his  meat-carver,  and 
would  in  public  companies  scornfully  say,  “Let 
them  go  now  and  pay  their  court  to  my  carv¬ 
er.”  Lysander,  no  longer  able  to  brook  these 
indignities,  complained  at  last  to  Agesilaus 
himself,  telling  him  that  he  knew  very  well 
how  to  humble  his  friends.  Agesilaus  answered, 
“I  know  certainly  how  to  humble  those  who 
pretend  to  more  power  than  myself.”  “That,” 
replied  Lysander,  “is  perhaps  rather  said  by 
you,  than  done  by  me:  I  desire  only  that  you 
will  assign  me  some  office  and  place  in  which  I 
may  serve  you  without  incurring  your  displeas¬ 
ure.” 

Upon  this  Agesilaus  sent  him  to  the  Helles¬ 
pont,  whence  he  procured  Spithridates,  a  Per¬ 
sian  of  the  province  of  Pharnabazus,  to  come 


484 

to  the  assistance  of  the  Greeks  with  two  hun¬ 
dred  horse  and  a  great  supply  of  money.  Yet 
his  anger  did  not  so  come  down,  but  he  thence¬ 
forward  pursued  the  design  of  wresting  the 
kingdom  out  of  the  hands  of  the  two  families 
which  then  enjoyed  it,  and  making  it  wholly 
elective;  and  it  is  thought  that  he  would  on  ac¬ 
count  of  this  quarrel  have  excited  a  great  com¬ 
motion  in  Sparta,  if  he  had  not  died  in  the 
Boeotian  war.  Thus  ambitious  spirits  in  a  com¬ 
monwealth,  when  they  transgress  their  bounds, 
are  apt  to  do  more  harm  than  good.  For  though 
Lysander’s  pride  and  assumption  was  most  ill- 
timed  and  insufferable  in  its  display,  yet  Age- 
silaus  surely  could  have  found  some  other  way 
of  setting  him  right,  less  offensive  to  a  man  of 
his  reputation  and  ambitious  temper.  Indeed, 
they  were  both  blinded  with  the  same  passion, 
so  as  one  not  to  recognise  the  authority  of  his 
superior,  the  other  not  to  bear  with  the  imper¬ 
fections  of  his  friend. 

Tisaphernes,  being  at  first  afraid  of  Agesi- 
laus,  treated  with  him  about  setting  the  Gre¬ 
cian  cities  at  liberty,  which  was  agreed  on.  But 
soon  after  finding  a  sufficient  force  drawn  to¬ 
gether,  he  resolved  upon  war,  for  which  Age- 
silaus  was  not  sorry.  For  the  expectation  of  this 
expedition  was  great,  and  he  did  not  think  it 
for  his  honour  that  Xenophon  with  ten  thou¬ 
sand  men  should  march  through  the  heart  of 
Asia  to  the  sea,  beating  the  Persian  forces  when 
and  how  he  pleased,  and  that  he  at  the  head  of 
the  Spartans,  then  sovereigns  both  at  sea  and 
land,  should  not  achieve  some  memorable  ac¬ 
tion  for  Greece.  And  so  to  be  even  with  Tisa¬ 
phernes,  he  requited  his  perjury  by  a  fair  stra¬ 
tagem.  He  pretended  to  march  into  Caria, 
whither,  when  he  had  drawn  Tisaphernes  and 
his  army,  he  suddenly  turned  back,  and  fell 
upon  Phrygia,  took  many  of  their  cities,  and 
carried  away  great  booty,  showing  his  allies 
that  to  break  a  solemn  league  was  a  downright 
contempt  of  the  gods,  but  the  circumvention  of 
an  enemy  in  war  was  not  only  just  but  glorious, 
at  once  a  gratification  and  an  advantage. 

Being  weak  in  horse,  and  discouraged  by  ill- 
omens  in  the  sacrifices,  he  retired  to  Ephesus, 
and  there  raised  cavalry.  He  obliged  the  rich 
men,  that  were  not  inclined  to  serve  in  person, 
to  find  each  of  them  a  horseman  armed  and 
mounted;  and  there  being  many  who  preferred 
doing  this,  the  army  was  quickly  reinforced  by 
a  body,  not  of  unwilling  recruits  for  the  infan¬ 
try,  but  of  brave  and  numerous  horsemen.  For 
those  that  were  not  good  at  fighting  themselves 
hired  such  as  were  more  military  in  their  in- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

clinations,  and  such  as  loved  not  horse-service 
substituted  in  their  places  such  as  did.  Aga¬ 
memnon’s  example  had  been  a  good  one,  when 
he  took  the  present  of  an  excellent  mare  to  dis¬ 
miss  a  rich  coward  from  the  army. 

When  by  Agesilaus’s  order  the  prisoners  he 
had  taken  in  Phrygia  were  exposed  to  sale,  they 
were  first  stripped  of  their  garments  and  then 
sold  naked.  The  clothes  found  many  custom¬ 
ers  to  buy  them,  but  the  bodies  being,  from  the 
want  of  all  exposure  and  exercise,  white  and 
tender-skinned,  were  derided  and  scorned  as 
unserviceable.  Agesilaus,  who  stood  by  at  the 
auction,  told  his  Greeks,  “These  are  the  men 
against  whom  ye  fight,  and  these  the  things 
you  will  gain  by  it.” 

The  season  of  the  year  being  come,  he  boldly 
gave  out  that  he  would  invade  Lydia;  and  this 
plain  dealing  of  his  was  now  mistaken  for  a 
stratagem  by  Tisaphernes,  who  by  not  believ¬ 
ing  Agesilaus,  having  been  already  deceived  by 
him,  overreached  himself.  He  expected  that  he 
should  have  made  choice  of  Caria,  as  a  rough 
country,  not  fit  for  horse,  in  which  he  deemed 
Agesilaus  to  be  weak,  and  directed  his  own 
marches  accordingly.  But  when  he  found  him 
to  be  as  good  as  his  word,  and  to  have  entered 
into  the  country  of  Sardis,  he  made  great  haste 
after  him,  and  by  great  marches  of  his  horse, 
overtaking  the  loose  stragglers  who  were  pil¬ 
laging  the  country,  he  cut  them  off. 

Agesilaus,  meanwhile,  considering  that  the 
horse  had  outridden  the  foot,  but  that  he  him¬ 
self  had  the  whole  body  of  his  own  army  en¬ 
tire,  made  haste  to  engage  them.  He  mingled 
his  light-armed  foot,  carrying  targets,  with  the 
horse,  commanding  them  to  advance  at  full 
speed  and  begin  the  battle,  whilst  he  brought 
up  the  heavier-armed  men  in  the  rear.  The  suc¬ 
cess  was  answerable  to  the  design;  the  barbari¬ 
ans  were  put  to  the  rout,  the  Grecians  pursued 
hard,  took  their  camp,  and  put  many  of  them 
to  the  sword. 

The  consequence  of  this  victory  was  very 
great;  for  they  had  not  only  the  liberty  of  for¬ 
aging  the  Persian  country,  and  plundering  at 
pleasure,  but  also  saw  Tisaphernes  pay  dearly 
for  all  the  cruelty  he  had  showed  the  Greeks,  to 
whom  he  was  a  professed  enemy.  For  the  King 
of  Persia  sent  Tithraustes,  who  took  off  his 
head,  and  presently  dealt  with  Agesilaus  about 
his  return  into  Greece,  sending  to  him  ambas¬ 
sadors  to  that  purpose  with  commission  to  of¬ 
fer  him  great  sums  of  money.  Agesilaus’s  an¬ 
swer  was  that  the  making  of  peace  belonged  to 
the  Lacedaemonians,  not  to  him;  as  for  wealth, 


AGESILAUS 

he  had  rather  see  it  in  his  soldiers’  hands  than 
his  own;  that  the  Grecians  thought  it  not  hon¬ 
ourable  to  enrich  themselves  with  the  bribes  of 
their  enemies,  but  with  their  spoils  only.  Yet, 
that  he  might  gratify  Tithraustes  for  the  jus¬ 
tice  he  had  done  upon  Tisaphernes,  the  com¬ 
mon  enemy  of  the  Greeks,  he  removed  his 
quarters  into  Phrygia,  accepting  thirty  talents 
for  his  expenses. 

Whilst  he  was  upon  his  march,  he  received 
a  staff  from  the  government  at  Sparta,  appoint¬ 
ing  him  admiral  as  well  as  general.  This  was 
an  honour  which  was  never  done  to  any  but 
Agesilaus,  who  being  now  undoubtedly  the 
greatest  and  most  illustrious  man  of  his  time, 
still,  as  Theopompus  had  said,  gave  himself 
more  occasion  of  glory  in  his  own  virtue  and 
merit  than  was  given  him  in  this  authority  and 
power. 

Yet  he  committed  a  fault  in  preferring  Pi- 
sander  to  the  command  of  the  navy,  when  there 
were  others  at  hand  both  older  and  more  ex¬ 
perienced;  in  this  not  so  much  consulting  the 
public  good  as  the  gratification  of  his  kindred, 
and  especially  his  wife,  whose  brother  Pisander 
was. 

Having  removed  his  camp  into  Pharnaba- 
zus’s  province,  he  not  only  met  with  great 
plenty  of  provisions,  but  also  raised  great  sums 
of  money,  and  marching  on  to  the  bounds  of 
Paphlagonia,  he  soon  drew  Cotys,  the  king  of 
it,  into  a  league,  to  which  he  of  his  own  accord 
inclined,  out  of  the  opinion  he  had  of  Agesi- 
laus’s  honour  and  virtue. 

Spithridates,  from  the  time  of  his  abandon¬ 
ing  Pharnabazus,  constantly  attended  Agesi¬ 
laus  in  the  camp  withersoever  he  went.  This 
Spithridates  had  a  son,  a  very  handsome  boy, 
called  Megabates,  of  whom  Agesilaus  was  ex¬ 
tremely  fond,  and  also  a  very  beautiful  daugh¬ 
ter  that  was  marriageable. 

Her  Agesilaus  matched  to  Cotys,  and  taking 
of  him  a  thousand  horse,  with  two  thousand 
light-armed  foot,  he  returned  into  Phrygia,  and 
there  pillaged  the  country  of  Pharnabazus, 
who  durst  not  meet  him  in  the  field,  nor  yet 
trust  to  his  garrisons,  but  getting  his  valuables 
together,  got  out  of  the  way  and  moved  about 
up  and  down  with  a  fleeing  army,  till  Spithri¬ 
dates,  joining  with  Herippidas  the  Spartan, 
took  his  camp  and  all  his  property.  Herippidas 
being  too  severe  an  inquirer  into  the  plunder 
with  which  the  barbarian  soldiers  had  enriched 
themselves,  and  forcing  them  to  deliver  it  up 
with  too  much  strictness,  so  disobliged  Spithri¬ 
dates  with  his  questioning  and  examining  that 


485 

he  changed  sides  again,  and  went  off  with  the 
Paphlagonians  to  Sardis. 

This  was  a  very  great  vexation  to  Agesilaus, 
not  only  that  he  had  lost  the  friendship  of  a 
gallant  commander,  and  with  him  a  consider¬ 
able  part  of  his  army,  but  still  more  that  it  had 
been  done  with  the  disrepute  of  a  sordid  and 
petty  covetousness,  of  which  he  always  had 
made  it  a  point  of  honour  to  keep  both  himself 
and  his  country  clear. 

Besides  these  public  causes,  he  had  a  private 
one,  his  excessive  fondness  for  the  son,  which 
touched  him  to  the  quick,  though  he  endeav¬ 
oured  to  master  it,  and,  especially  in  presence 
of  the  boy  to  suppress  all  appearance  of  it;  so 
much  so  that  when  Megabates,  for  that  was  his 
name,  came  once  to  receive  a  kiss  from  him,  he 
declined  it.  At  which,  when  the  young  boy 
blushed  and  drew  back,  and  afterwards  saluted 
him  at  a  more  reserved  distance,  Agesilaus 
soon  repenting  his  coldness,  and  changing  his 
mind,  pretended  to  wonder  why  he  did  not  sa¬ 
lute  him  with  the  same  familiarity  as  formerly. 
His  friends  about  him  answered,  “You  are  in 
the  fault,  who  would  not  accept  the  kiss  of  the 
boy,  but  turned  away  in  alarm;  he  would  come 
to  you  again  if  you  would  have  the  courage  to 
let  him  do  so.”  Upon  this  Agesilaus  paused  a 
while,  and  at  length  answered,  “You  need  not 
encourage  him  to  it;  I  think  I  had  rather  be 
master  of  myself  in  that  refusal,  than  see  all 
things  that  are  now  before  my  eyes  turned  into 
gold.”  Thus  he  demeaned  himself  to  Megaba¬ 
tes  when  present,  but  he  had  so  great  a  passion 
for  him  in  his  absence  that  it  may  be  ques¬ 
tioned  whether,  if  the  boy  had  returned  again, 
all  the  courage  he  had  would  have  sustained 
him  in  such  another  refusal. 

After  this  Pharnabazus  sought  an  opportun¬ 
ity  of  conferring  with  Agesilaus,  which  Apol- 
lophanes  of  Cyzicus,  the  common  host  of  them 
both,  procured  for  him.  Agesilaus  coming  first 
to  the  appointed  place,  threw  himself  down 
upon  the  grass  under  a  tree,  lying  there  in  ex¬ 
pectation  of  Pharnabazus,  who,  bringing  with 
him  soft  skins  and  wrought  carpets  to  lie  down 
upon,  when  he  saw  Agesilaus’s  posture,  grew 
ashamed  of  his  luxuries,  and  made  no  use  of 
them,  but  laid  himself  down  upon  the  grass 
also,  without  regard  for  his  delicate  and  richly 
dyed  clothing. 

Pharnabazus  had  matter  enough  of  com¬ 
plaint  against  Agesilaus,  and  therefore,  after 
the  mutual  civilities  were  over,  he  put  him  in 
mind  of  the  great  services  he  had  done  the 
Lacedaemonians  in  the  Attic  war,  of  which  he 


486 

thought  it  an  ill  recompense  to  have  his  coun¬ 
try  thus  harassed  and  spoiled  by  those  men 
who  owed  so  much  to  him.  The  Spartans  that 
were  present  hung  down  their  heads,  as  con¬ 
scious  of  the  wrong  they  had  done  to  their 
ally. 

But  Agesilaus  said,  “We,  O  Pharnabazus, 
when  we  were  in  amity  with  your  master  the 
king,  behaved  ourselves  like  friends,  and  now 
that  we  are  at  war  with  him,  we  behave  our¬ 
selves  as  enemies.  As  for  you,  we  must  look 
upon  you  as  a  part  of  his  property,  and  must 
do  these  outrages  upon  you,  not  intending  the 
harm  to  you,  but  to  him  whom  we  wound 
through  you.  But  whenever  you  will  choose 
rather  to  be  a  friend  to  the  Grecians  than  a 
slave  of  the  King  of  Persia,  you  may  then  reck¬ 
on  this  army  and  navy  to  be  all  at  your  com¬ 
mand,  to  defend  both  you,  your  country,  and 
your  liberties,  without  which  there  is  nothing 
honourable  or  indeed  desirable  among  men.” 

Upon  this  Pharnabazus  discovered  his  mind, 
and  answered,  “If  the  king  sends  another  gov¬ 
ernor  in  my  room,  I  will  certainly  come  over 
to  you,  but  as  long  as  he  trusts  me  with  the  gov¬ 
ernment  I  shall  be  just  to  him,  and  not  fail  to 
do  my  utmost  endeavours  in  opposing  you.” 
Agesilaus  was  taken  with  the  answer  and  shook 
hands  with  him;  and  rising,  said,  “How  much 
rather  had  I  have  so  brave  a  man  my  friend 
than  my  enemy.” 

Pharnabazus  being  gone  off,  his  son  staying 
behind,  ran  up  to  Agesilaus,  and  smilingly  said, 
“Agesilaus,  I  make  you  my  guest”;  and  there¬ 
upon  presented  him  with  a  javelin  which  he 
had  in  his  hand.  Agesilaus  received  it,  and  be¬ 
ing  much  taken  with  the  good  mien  and  cour¬ 
tesy  of  the  youth,  looked  about  to  see  if  there 
were  anything  in  his  train  fit  to  offer  him  in  re¬ 
turn;  and  observing  the  horse  of  Idaeus,  the  sec¬ 
retary,  to  have  very  fine  trappings  on,  he  took 
them  off,  and  bestowed  them  upon  the  young 
gentleman. 

Nor  did  his  kindness  rest  there,  but  he  con¬ 
tinued  ever  after  to  be  mindful  of  him,  so  that 
when  he  was  driven  out  of  his  country  by  his 
brothers,  and  lived  an  exile  in  Peloponnesus, 
he  took  great  care  of  him  and  condescended 
even  to  assist  him  in  some  love  matters.  He  had 
an  attachment  for  a  youth  of  Athenian  birth, 
who  was  bred  up  as  an  athlete;  and  when  at  the 
Olympic  games  this  boy,  on  account  of  his 
great  size  and  general  strong  and  full-grown 
appearance,  was  in  some  danger  of  not  being 
admitted  into  the  list,  the  Persian  betook  him¬ 
self  to  Agesilaus,  and  made  use  of  his  friend- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ship.  Agesilaus  readily  assisted  him,  and  not 
without  a  great  deal  of  difficulty  effected  his 
desires. 

He  was  in  all  other  things  a  man  of  great 
and  exact  justice,  but  when  the  case  concerned 
a  friend,  to  be  strait-laced  in  point  of  justice,  he 
said,  was  only  a  colourable  pretence  of  denying 
him.  There  is  an  epistle  written  to  Idrieus, 
Prince  of  Caria,  that  is  ascribed  to  Agesilaus; 
it  is  this:  “If  Nicias  be  innocent,  absolve  him; 
if  he  be  guilty,  absolve  him  upon  my  account; 
however,  be  sure  to  absolve  him.”  That  was  his 
usual  character  in  his  deportment  towards  his 
friends. 

Yet  his  rule  was  not  without  exception;  for 
sometimes  he  considered  the  necessity  of  his  af¬ 
fairs  more  than  his  friend,  of  which  he  once 
gave  an  example,  when  upon  a  sudden  and  dis¬ 
orderly  removal  of  his  camp,  he  left  a  sick 
friend  behind  him,  and  when  he  called  loudly 
after  him,  and  implored  his  help,  turned  his 
back,  and  said  it  was  hard  to  be  compassionate 
and  wise  too.  This  story  is  related  by  Hierony¬ 
mus,  the  philosopher. 

Another  year  of  the  war  being  spent,  Agesi- 
laus’s  fame  still  increased,  insomuch  that  the 
Persian  king  received  daily  information  con¬ 
cerning  his  many  virtues,  and  the  great  esteem 
the  world  had  of  his  temperance,  his  plain  liv¬ 
ing,  and  his  moderation.  When  he  made  any 
journey,  he  would  usually  take  up  his  lodging 
in  a  temple,  and  there  make  the  gods  witnesses 
of  his  most  private  actions,  which  others  would 
scarce  permit  men  to  be  acquainted  with.  In  so 
great  an  army  you  should  scarce  find  a  com¬ 
mon  soldier  lie  on  a  coarser  mattress  than  Age¬ 
silaus:  he  was  so  indifferent  to  the  varieties  of 
heat  and  cold  that  all  the  seasons,  as  the  gods 
sent  them,  seemed  natural  to  him. 

The  Greeks  that  inhabited  Asia  were  much 
pleased  to  see  the  great  lords  and  governors  of 
Persia,  with  all  the  pride,  cruelty,  and  luxury 
in  which  they  lived,  trembling  and  bowing  be¬ 
fore  a  man  in  a  poor  threadbare  cloak,  and,  at 
one  laconic  word  out  of  his  mouth,  obsequious¬ 
ly  deferring  and  changing  their  wishes  and 
purposes.  So  that  it  brought  to  the  minds  of 
many  the  verses  of  Timotheus — 

Mars  is  the  tyrant,  gold  Greece  does  not  fear. 

Many  parts  of  Asia  now  revolting  from  the 
Persians,  Agesilaus  restored  order  in  the  cities, 
and  without  bloodshed  or  banishment  of  any 
of  their  members  re-established  the  proper  con¬ 
stitution  in  the  governments,  and  now  resolved 
to  carry  away  the  war  from  the  seaside,  and  to 
march  further  up  into  the  country,  and  to  at- 


AGESILAUS 

tack  the  King  of  Persia  himself  in  his  own 
home  in  Susa  and  Ecbatana;  not  willing  to  let 
the  monarch  sit  idle  in  his  chair,  playing  um¬ 
pire  in  the  conflicts  of  the  Greeks,  and  bribing 
their  popular  leaders. 

But  these  great  thoughts  were  interrupted 
by  unhappy  news  from  Sparta;  Epicydidas  was 
from  thence  sent  to  remand  him  home,  to  assist 
his  own  country,  which  was  then  involved  in  a 
great  war: — 

Greece  to  herself  doth  a  barbarian  grow, 

Others  could  not,  she  doth  herself  overthrow. 
What  better  can  we  say  of  those  jealousies,  and 
that  league  and  conspiracy  of  the  Greeks  for 
their  own  mischief,  which  arrested  fortune  in 
full  career,  and  turned  back  arms  that  were  al¬ 
ready  uplifted  against  the  barbarians,  to  be 
used  upon  themselves,  and  recalled  into  Greece 
the  war  which  had  been  banished  out  of  her?  I 
by  no  means  assent  to  Demaratus  of  Corinth, 
who  said  that  those  Greeks  lost  a  great  satisfac¬ 
tion  that  did  not  live  to  see  Alexander  sit  in  the 
throne  of  Darius.  That  sight  should  rather 
have  drawn  tears  from  them,  when  they  con¬ 
sidered  that  they  had  left  that  glory  to  Alex¬ 
ander  and  the  Macedonians,  whilst  they  spent 
all  their  own  great  commanders  in  playing 
them  against  each  other  in  the  fields  of  Leuc- 
tra,  Coronea,  Corinth,  and  Arcadia. 

Nothing  was  greater  or  nobler  than  the  be¬ 
haviour  of  Agesilaus  on  this  occasion,  nor  can 
a  nobler  instance  be  found  in  story  of  a  ready 
obedience  and  just  deference  to  orders.  Hanni¬ 
bal,  though  in  a  bad  condition  himself,  and, 
almost  driven  out  of  Italy,  could  scarcely  be  in¬ 
duced  to  obey  when  he  was  called  home  to 
serve  his  country.  Alexander  made  a  jest  of  the 
battle  between  Agis  and  Antipater,  laughing 
and  saying,  “So,  whilst  we  were  conquering 
Darius  in  Asia,  it  seems  there  was  a  battle  of 
mice  in  Arcadia.”  Happy  Sparta,  meanwhile, 
in  the  justice  and  modesty  of  Agesilaus,  and  in 
the  deference  he  paid  to  the  laws  of  his  coun¬ 
try;  who,  immediately  upon  receipt  of  his  or¬ 
ders,  though  in  the  midst  of  his  high  fortune 
and  power,  and  in  full  hope  of  great  and  glori¬ 
ous  success,  gave  all  up  and  instantly  departed, 
“his  object  unachieved,”  leaving  many  regrets 
behind  him  among  his  allies  in  Asia,  and  prov¬ 
ing  by  his  example  the  falseness  of  that  saying 
of  Demostratus,  the  son  of  Phaeax,  “that  the 
Lacedaemonians  were  better  in  public  life,  but 
the  Athenians  in  private.”  For  while  approving 
himself  an  excellent  king  and  general,  he  like¬ 
wise  showed  himself  in  private  an  excellent 
friend  and  a  most  agreeable  companion. 


487 

The  coin  of  Persia  was  stamped  with  the  fig¬ 
ure  of  an  archer;  Agesilaus  said  that  a  thou¬ 
sand  Persian  archers  had  driven  him  out  of 
Asia;  meaning  the  money  that  had  been  laid 
out  in  bribing  the  demagogues  and  the  orators 
in  Thebes  and  Athens,  and  thus  inciting  those 
two  states  to  hostility  against  Sparta. 

Having  passed  the  Hellespont,  he  marched 
by  land  through  Thrace,  not  begging  or  en¬ 
treating  a  passage  anywhere,  only  he  sent  his 
messengers  to  them  to  demand  whether  they 
would  have  him  pass  as  a  friend  or  as  an  en¬ 
emy.  All  the  rest  received  him  as  a  friend,  and 
assisted  him  on  his  journey.  But  the  Trallians, 
to  whom  Xerxes  is  also  said  to  have  given 
money,  demanded  a  price  of  him,  namely,  one 
hundred  talents  of  silver  and  one  hundred 
women.  Agesilaus  in  scorn  asked  why  they 
were  not  ready  to  receive  them.  He  marched 
on,  and  finding  the  Trallians  in  arms  to  oppose 
him,  fought  them,  and  slew  great  numbers  of 
them.  He  sent  the  like  embassy  to  the  King  of 
Macedonia,  who  replied  he  would  take  time  to 
deliberate.  “Let  him  deliberate,”  said  Agesi¬ 
laus,  “we  will  go  forward  in  the  meantime.” 
The  Macedonian,  being  surprised  and  daunted 
at  the  resolution  of  the  Spartan,  gave  orders  to 
let  him  pass  as  a  friend. 

When  he  came  into  Thessaly  he  wasted  the 
country,  because  they  were  in  league  with  the 
enemy.  To  Larissa,  the  chief  city  of  Thessaly, 
he  sent  Xenocles  and  Scythes  to  treat  of  a  peace, 
whom  when  the  Larissaeans  had  laid  hold  of, 
and  put  into  custody,  others  were  enraged,  and 
advised  the  siege  of  the  town;  but  he  answered 
that  he  valued  either  of  those  men  at  more 
than  the  whole  country  of  Thessaly.  He  there¬ 
fore  made  terms  with  them,  and  received  his 
men  again  upon  composition. 

Nor  need  we  wonder  at  this  saying  of  Age¬ 
silaus,  since  when  he  had  news  brought  him 
from  Sparta,  of  several  great  captains  in  a  bat¬ 
tle  near  Corinth,  in  which  the  slaughter  fell 
upon  other  Greeks,  and  the  Lacedaemonians 
obtained  a  great  victory  with  small  loss,  he  did 
not  appear  at  all  satisfied;  but  with  a  great 
sigh  cried  out,  “O  Greece,  how  many  brave 
men  hast  thou  destroyed;  who,  if  they  had  been 
preserved  to  so  good  an  use,  had  sufficed  to 
have  conquered  all  Persia!” 

Yet  when  the  Pharsalians  grew  troublesome 
to  him,  by  pressing  upon  his  army  and  incom¬ 
moding  his  passage,  he  led  out  five  hundred 
horse,  and  in  person  fought  and  routed  them, 
setting  up  a  trophy  under  the  mount  Nartha- 
cius.  He  valued  himself  very  much  upon  that 


488 

victory,  that  with  so  small  a  number  of  his  own 
training,  he  had  vanquished  a  body  of  men 
that  thought  themselves  the  best  horsemen  of 
Greece. 

Here  Diphridas,  the  ephor,  met  him,  and 
delivered  his  message  from  Sparta,  which  or¬ 
dered  him  immediately  to  make  an  inroad  into 
Bceotia;  and  though  he  thought  this  fitter  to 
have  been  done  at  another  time,  and  with 
greater  force,  he  yet  obeyed  the  magistrates. 
He  thereupon  told  his  soldiers  that  the  day  had 
come  on  which  they  were  to  enter  upon  that 
employment  for  the  performance  of  which  they 
were  brought  out  of  Asia.  He  sent  for  two  di¬ 
visions  of  the  army  near  Corinth  to  his  assist¬ 
ance.  The  Lacedaemonians  at  home,  in  honour 
to  him,  made  proclamations  for  volunteers  that 
would  serve  under  the  king  to  come  in  and  be 
enlisted.  Finding  all  the  young  men  in  the  city 
ready  to  offer  themselves,  they  chose  fifty  of 
the  strongest,  and  sent  them. 

Agesilaus  having  gained  Thermopylae,  and 
passed  quietly  through  Phocis,  as  soon  as  he 
had  entered  Bceotia,  and  pitched  his  camp  near 
Chaeronea,  at  once  met  with  an  eclipse  of  the 
sun,  and  with  ill  news  from  the  navy,  Pisander, 
the  Spartan  admiral,  being  beaten  and  slain  at 
Cnidos  by  Pharnabazus  and  Conon.  He  was 
much  moved  at  it,  both  upon  his  own  and  the 
public  account.  Yet  lest  his  army,  being  now 
near  engaging,  should  meet  with  any  discour¬ 
agement,  he  ordered  the  messengers  to  give  out 
that  the  Spartans  were  the  conquerors,  and  he 
himself  putting  on  a  garland,  solemnly  sacri¬ 
ficed  for  the  good  news,  and  sent  portions  of 
the  sacrifices  to  his  friends. 

When  he  came  near  to  Coronea,  and  was 
within  view  of  the  enemy,  he  drew  up  his 
army,  and  giving  the  left  wing  to  the  Orcho- 
menians,  he  himself  led  the  right.  The  The¬ 
bans  took  the  right  wing  of  their  army,  leav¬ 
ing  the  left  to  the  Argives. 

Xenophon,  who  was  present,  and  fought  on 
Agesilaus’s  side,  reports  it  to  be  the  hardest- 
fought  battle  that  he  had  seen.  The  beginning 
of  it  was  not  so,  for  the  Thebans  soon  put  the 
Orchomenians  to  rout,  as  also  did  Agesilaus 
the  Argives.  But  both  parties  having  news  of 
the  misfortune  of  their  left  wings,  they  betook 
themselves  to  their  relief.  Here  Agesilaus 
might  have  been  sure  of  his  victory  had  he  con¬ 
tented  himself  not  to  charge  them  in  the  front, 
but  in  the  flank  or  rear;  but  being  angry  and 
heated  in  the  fight  he  would  not  wait  the  op¬ 
portunity,  but  fell  on  at  once,  thinking  to  bear 
them  down  before  him.  The  Thebans  were  not 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

behind  him  in  courage,  so  that  the  battle  was 
fiercely  carried  on  on  both  sides,  especially  near 
Agesilaus’s  person,  whose  new  guard  of  fifty 
volunteers  stood  him  in  great  stead  that  day, 
and  saved  his  life.  They  fought  with  great  val¬ 
our,  and  interposed  their  bodies  frequently  be¬ 
tween  him  and  danger,  yet  could  they  not  so 
preserve  him,  but  that  he  received  many 
wounds  through  his  armour  with  lances  and 
swords,  and  was  with  much  difficulty  gotten 
off  alive  by  their  making  a  ring  about  him,  and 
so  guarding  him,  with  the  slaughter  of  many 
of  the  enemy,  and  the  loss  of  many  of  their  own 
number. 

At  length,  finding  it  too  hard  a  task  to  break 
the  front  of  the  Theban  troops,  they  opened 
their  own  files,  and  let  the  enemy  march 
through  them  (an  artifice  which  in  the  begin¬ 
ning  they  scorned),  watching  in  the  meantime 
the  posture  of  the  enemy,  who,  having  passed 
through,  grew  careless,  as  esteeming  them¬ 
selves  past  danger,  in  which  position  they  were 
immediately  set  upon  by  the  Spartans.  Yet 
were  they  not  then  put  to  rout,  but  marched  on 
to  Helicon,  proud  of  what  they  had  done,  be¬ 
ing  able  to  say  that  they  themselves,  as  to  their 
part  of  the  army,  were  not  worsted. 

Agesilaus,  sore  wounded  as  he  was,  would 
not  be  borne  to  his  tent  till  he  had  been  first 
carried  about  the  field,  and  had  seen  the  dead 
conveyed  within  his  encampment.  As  many  of 
his  enemies  as  had  taken  sanctuary  in  the  tem¬ 
ple  he  dismissed.  For  there  stood  near  the  bat¬ 
tlefield  the  temple  of  Minerva  the  Itonian,  and 
before  it  a  trophy  erected  by  the  Boeotians,  for 
the  victory  which,  under  the  conduct  of  Spar- 
ton,  their  general,  they  obtained  over  the 
Athenians  under  Tolmides,  who  himself  fell 
in  the  battle. 

Next  morning  early,  to  make  trial  of  the 
Theban  courage,  whether  they  had  any  mind 
to  a  second  encounter,  he  commanded  his  sol¬ 
diers  to  put  on  garlands  on  their  heads,  and 
play  with  their  flutes,  and  raise  a  trophy  before 
their  faces;  but  when  they,  instead  of  fighting, 
sent  for  leave  to  bury  their  dead,  he  gave  it 
them;  and  having  so  assured  himself  of  the  vic¬ 
tory,  after  this  he  went  to  Delphi,  to  the  Pythi¬ 
an  games,  which  were  then  celebrating,  at 
which  feast  he  assisted,  and  there  solemnly  of¬ 
fered  the  tenth  part  of  the  spoils  he  had  brought 
from  Asia,  which  amounted  to  a  hundred  tal¬ 
ents. 

Thence  he  returned  to  his  own  country, 
where  his  way  and  habits  of  life  quickly  ex¬ 
cited  the  affection  and  admiration  of  the  Spar- 


AGESILAUS 

tans;  for,  unlike  other  generals,  he  came  home 
from  foreign  lands  the  same  man  that  he  went 
out,  having  not  so  learned  the  fashions  of  other 
countries,  as  to  forget  his  own,  much  less  to  dis¬ 
like  or  despise  them.  He  followed  and  respect¬ 
ed  all  the  Spartan  customs,  without  any  change 
either  in  the  manner  of  his  supping,  or  bath¬ 
ing,  or  his  wife’s  apparel,  as  if  he  had  never 
travelled  over  the  river  Eurotas.  So  also  with 
his  household  furniture  and  his  own  armour, 
nay,  the  very  gates  of  his  house  were  so  old 
that  they  might  well  be  thought  of  Aristode- 
mus’s  setting  up.  His  daughter’s  canathrum, 
says  Xenophon,  was  no  richer  than  that  of  any 
one  else.  The  canathrum,  as  they  call  it,  is  a 
chair  or  chariot  made  of  wood,  in  the  shape  of 
a  griffin,  or  tragelaphus,  on  which  the  children 
and  young  virgins  are  carried  in  processions. 
Xenophon  has  not  left  us  the  name  of  this 
daughter  of  Agesilaus;  and  Dicaearchus  ex¬ 
presses  some  indignation,  because  we  do  not 
know,  he  says,  the  name  of  Agesilaus’s  daugh¬ 
ter,  nor  of  Epaminondas’s  mother.  But  in  the 
records  of  Laconia,  we  ourselves  found  his 
wife’s  name  to  have  been  Cleora,  and  his  two 
daughters  to  have  been  called  Eupolia  and  Pro- 
lyta.  And  you  may  also  to  this  day  see  Agesi¬ 
laus’s  spear  kept  in  Sparta,  nothing  differing 
from  that  of  other  men. 

There  was  a  vanity  he  observed  among  the 
Spartans,  about  keeping  running  horses  for  the 
Olympic  games,  upon  which  he  found  they 
much  valued  themselves.  Agesilaus  regarded 
it  as  a  display  not  of  any  real  virtue,  but  of 
wealth  and  expense;  and  to  make  this  evident 
to  the  Greeks,  induced  his  sister,  Cynisca,  to 
send  a  chariot  into  the  course. 

He  kept  with  him  Xenophon,  the  philoso¬ 
pher,  and  made  much  of  him,  and  proposed  to 
him  to  send  for  his  children  and  educate  them 
at  Sparta,  where  they  would  be  taught  the  best 
of  all  learning;  how  to  obey,  and  how  to  com¬ 
mand. 

Finding  on  Lysander’s  death  a  large  faction 
formed,  which  he  on  his  return  from  Asia  had 
established  against  Agesilaus,  he  thought  it  ad¬ 
visable  to  expose  both  him  and  it,  by  showing 
what  manner  of  a  citizen  he  had  been  whilst 
he  lived.  To  that  end,  finding  among  his  writ¬ 
ings  an  oration,  composed  by  Cleon  the  Hali- 
carnassean,  but  to  have  been  spoken  by  Ly- 
sander  in  a  public  assembly,  to  excite  the  peo¬ 
ple  to  innovations  and  changes  in  the  govern¬ 
ment,  he  resolved  to  publish  it  as  an  evidence 
of  Lysander’s  practices.  But  one  of  the  Elders 
having  the  perusal  of  it,  and  finding  it  power- 


489 

fully  written,  advised  him  to  have  a  care  of 
digging  up  Lysander  again,  and  rather  bury 
that  oration  in  the  grave  with  him;  and  this 
advice  he  wisely  hearkened  to,  and  hushed  the 
whole  thing  up;  and  ever  after  forbore  public¬ 
ly  to  affront  any  of  his  adversaries,  but  took 
occasions  of  picking  out  the  ringleaders,  and 
sending  them  away  upon  foreign  services.  He 
thus  had  means  for  exposing  the  avarice  and 
the  injustice  of  many  of  them  in  their  employ¬ 
ments;  and  again  when  they  were  by  others 
brought  into  question,  he  made  it  his  business 
to  bring  them  off,  obliging  them,  by  that 
means,  of  enemies  to  become  his  friends,  and 
so  by  degrees  left  none  remaining. 

Agesipolis,  his  fellow-king,  was  under  the 
disadvantage  of  being  born  of  an  exiled  father, 
and  himself  young,  modest,  and  inactive,  med¬ 
dled  not  much  in  affairs.  Agesilaus  took  a 
course  of  gaining  him  over  and  making  him 
entirely  tractable.  According  to  the  custom  of 
Sparta,  the  kings,  if  they  were  in  town,  always 
dined  together.  This  was  Agesilaus’s  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  dealing  with  Agesipolis,  whom  he 
found  quick,  as  he  himself  was,  in  forming 
attachments  for  young  men,  and  accordingly 
talked  with  him  always  on  such  subjects,  join¬ 
ing  and  aiding  him,  and  acting  as  his  confi¬ 
dant,  such  attachments  in  Sparta  being  entire¬ 
ly  honourable,  and  attended  always  with  lively 
feelings  of  modesty,  love  of  virtue,  and  a  noble 
emulation;  of  which  more  is  said  in  Lycurgus’s 
life. 

Having  thus  established  his  power  in  the 
city,  he  easily  obtained  that  his  half-brother 
Teleutias  might  be  chosen  admiral,  and  there¬ 
upon  making  an  expedition  against  the  Corin¬ 
thians,  he  made  himself  master  of  the  long 
walls  by  land,  through  the  assistance  of  his 
brother  at  sea.  Coming  thus  upon  the  Argives, 
who  then  held  Corinth,  in  the  midst  of  their 
Isthmian  festival,  he  made  them  fly  from  the 
sacrifice  they  had  just  commenced,  and  leave 
all  their  festive  provision  behind  them.  The 
exiled  Corinthians  that  were  in  the  Spartan 
army  desired  him  to  keep  the  feast,  and  to  pre¬ 
side  in  the  celebration  of  it.  This  he  refused, 
but  gave  them  leave  to  carry  on  the  solemnity 
if  they  pleased,  and  he  in  the  meantime  stayed 
and  guarded  them. 

When  Agesilaus  marched  off,  the  Argives 
returned  and  celebrated  the  games  over  again, 
when  some  who  were  victors  before  became 
victors  a  second  time;  others  lost  the  prizes 
which  before  they  had  gained.  Agesilaus  thus 
made  it  clear  to  everybody  that  the  Argives 


490 

must  in  their  own  eyes  have  been  guilty  of 
great  cowardice  since  they  set  such  a  value  on 
presiding  at  the  games,  and  yet  had  not  dared 
to  fight  for  it. 

He  himself  was  of  opinion  that  to  keep  a 
mean  in  such  things  was  best;  he  assisted  at 
the  sports  and  dances  usual  in  his  own  coun¬ 
try,  and  was  always  ready  and  eager  to  be 
present  at  the  exercises  either  of  the  young 
men  or  of  the  girls,  but  things  that  many  men 
used  to  be  highly  taken  with  he  seemed  not  at 
all  concerned  about. 

Callippides,  the  tragic  actor,  who  had  a 
great  name  in  all  Greece  and  was  made  much 
of,  once  met  and  saluted  him;  of  which  when 
he  found  no  notice  taken,  he  confidently  thrust 
himself  into  his  train,  expecting  that  Agesilaus 
would  pay  him  some  attention.  When  all  that 
failed,  he  boldly  accosted  him,  and  asked  him 
whether  he  did  not  remember  him.  Agesilaus 
turned,  and  looking  him  in  the  face,  “Are  you 
not,”  said  he,  “Callippides  the  showman?” 

Being  invited  once  to  hear  a  man  who  ad¬ 
mirably  imitated  the  nightingale,  he  declined, 
saying  he  had  heard  the  nightingale  itself.  Me- 
necrates,  the  physician,  having  had  great  suc¬ 
cess  in  some  desperate  diseases,  was  by  way  of 
flattery  called  Jupiter;  he  was  so  vain  as  to  take 
the  name,  and  having  occasion  to  write  a  letter 
to  Agesilaus,  thus  addressed  it:  “Jupiter  Mene- 
crates  to  King  Agesilaus,  greeting.”  The  king 
returned  answer:  “Agesilaus  to  Menecrates, 
health  and  a  sound  mind.” 

Whilst  Agesilaus  was  in  the  Corinthian  ter¬ 
ritories,  having  just  taken  the  Heraeum,  he  was 
looking  on  while  his  soldiers  were  carrying 
away  the  prisoners  and  the  plunder,  when  am¬ 
bassadors  from  Thebes  came  to  him  to  treat  of 
peace.  Having  a  great  aversion  for  that  city, 
and  thinking  it  then  advantageous  to  his  af¬ 
fairs  publicly  to  slight  them,  he  took  the  oppor¬ 
tunity,  and  would  not  seem  either  to  see  them 
or  hear  them  speak.  But  as  if  on  purpose  to 
punish  him  in  his  pride,  before  they  parted 
from  him,  messengers  came  with  news  of  the 
complete  slaughter  of  one  of  the  Spartan  divi¬ 
sions  by  Iphicrates,  a  greater  disaster  than  had 
befallen  them  for  many  years,  and  that  the 
more  grievous  because  it  was  a  choice  regiment 
of  full-armed  Lacedaemonians  overthrown  by 
a  parcel  of  mere  mercenary  targeteers. 

Agesilaus  leapt  from  his  seat,  to  go  at  once 
to  their  rescue,  but  found  it  too  late,  the  busi¬ 
ness  being  over.  He  therefore  returned  to  the 
Heraeum  and  sent  for  the  Theban  ambassadors 
to  give  them  audience.  They  now  resolved  to 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

be  even  with  him  for  the  affront  he  gave  them, 
and  without  speaking  one  word  of  the  peace, 
only  desired  leave  to  go  into  Corinth.  Agesi¬ 
laus,  irritated  with  this  proposal,  told  them  in 
scorn,  that  if  they  were  anxious  to  go  and  see 
how  proud  their  friends  were  of  their  success 
they  should  do  it  to-morrow  with  safety.  Next 
morning,  taking  the  ambassadors  with  him,  he 
ravaged  the  Corinthian  territories,  up  to  the 
very  gates  of  the  city,  where,  having  made  a 
stand,  and  let  the  ambassadors  see  that  the  Co¬ 
rinthians  durst  not  come  out  to  defend  them¬ 
selves,  he  dismissed  them.  Then  gathering  up 
the  small  remainders  of  the  shattered  regiment, 
he  marched  homewards,  always  removing  his 
camp  before  day,  and  always  pitching  his  tents 
after  night,  that  he  might  prevent  their  en¬ 
emies  among  the  Arcadians  from  taking  any 
opportunity  of  exulting  over  their  loss. 

After  this,  at  the  request  of  the  Achaeans,  he 
marched  with  them  into  Acarnania,  and  there 
collected  great  spoils,  and  defeated  the  Acarna- 
nians  in  battle.  The  Achaeans  would  have  per¬ 
suaded  him  to  keep  his  winter  quarters  there, 
to  hinder  the  Acarnanians  from  sowing  their 
corn;  but  he  was  of  the  contrary  opinion,  al¬ 
leging  that  they  would  be  more  afraid  of  a 
war  next  summer,  when  their  fields  were 
sown,  than  they  would  be  if  they  lay  fallow. 
The  event  justified  his  opinion;  for  next  sum¬ 
mer,  when  the  Achaeans  began  their  expedi¬ 
tion  again,  the  Acarnanians  immediately  made 
peace  with  them. 

When  Conon  and  Pharnabazus  with  the 
Persian  navy  were  grown  masters  of  the  sea, 
and  had  not  only  infested  the  coast  of  Laconia, 
but  also  rebuilt  the  walls  of  Athens  at  the  cost 
of  Pharnabazus,  the  Lacedaemonians  thought 
fit  to  treat  of  peace  with  the  King  of  Persia.  To 
that  end,  they  sent  Antalcidas  to  Tiribazus, 
basely  and  wickedly  betraying  the  Asiatic 
Greeks,  on  whose  behalf  Agesilaus  had  made 
the  war.  But  no  part  of  this  dishonour  fell 
upon  Agesilaus,  the  whole  being  transacted  by 
Antalcidas,  who  was  his  bitter  enemy,  and  was 
urgent  for  peace  upon  any  terms,  because  war 
was  sure  to  increase  his  power  and  reputation. 
Nevertheless,  once  being  told  by  way  of  re¬ 
proach  that  the  Lacedaemonians  had  gone  over 
to  the  Medes,  he  replied,  “No,  the  Medes  had 
come  over  to  the  Lacedaemonians.” 

And  when  the  Greeks  were  backward  to 
submit  to  the  agreement,  he  threatened  them 
with  war,  unless  they  fulfilled  the  King  of 
Persia’s  conditions,  his  particular  end  in  this 
being  to  weaken  the  Thebans;  for  it  was  made 


AGESILAUS 

one  of  the  articles  of  peace  that  the  country  of 
Boeotia  should  be  left  independent/  This  feel¬ 
ing  of  his  to  Thebes  appeared  further  after¬ 
wards,  when  Phcebidas,  in  full  peace,  most 
unjustifiably  seized  upon  the  Cadmea.  The 
thing  was  much  resented  by  all  Greece,  and 
not  well  liked  by  the  Lacedaemonians  them¬ 
selves;  those  especially  who  were  enemies  to 
Agesilaus  required  an  account  of  the  action, 
and  by  whose  authority  it  was  done,  laying  the 
suspicion  of  it  at  his  door.  Agesilaus  resolutely 
answered,  on  the  behalf  of  Phcebidas,  that  the 
profitableness  of  the  act  was  chiefly  to  be  con¬ 
sidered;  if  it  were  for  the  advantage  of  the 
commonwealth,  it  was  no  matter  whether  it 
were  done  with  or  without  authority. 

This  was  the  more  remarkable  in  him,  be¬ 
cause  in  his  ordinary  language  he  was  always 
observed  to  be  a  great  maintainer  of  justice, 
and  would  commend  it  as  the  chief  of  virtues, 
saying,  that  valour  without  justice  was  useless, 
and  if  all  the  world  were  just,  there  would  be 
no  need  of  valour.  When  any  would  say  to 
him,  the  Great  King  will  have  it  so,  he  would 
reply,  “How  is  he  greater  than  I,  unless  he  be 
juster?”  nobly  and  rightly  taking,  as  a  sort  of 
royal  measure  of  greatness,  justice  and  not 
force.  And  thus  when,  on  the  conclusion  of 
the  peace,  the  King  of  Persia  wrote  to  Agesi¬ 
laus,  desiring  a  private  friendship  and  rela¬ 
tions  of  hospitality,  he  refused  it,  saying  that 
the  public  friendship  was  enough;  whilst  that 
lasted  there  was  no  need  of  private. 

Yet  in  his  acts  he  was  not  constant  to  his 
doctrine,  but  sometimes  out  of  ambition,  and 
sometimes  out  of  private  pique,  he  let  himself 
be  carried  away;  and  particularly  in  this  case 
of  the  Thebans,  he  not  only  saved  Phcebidas, 
but  persuaded  the  Lacedaemonians  to  take  the 
fault  upon  themselves,  and  to  retain  the  Cad¬ 
mea,  putting  a  garrison  into  it,  and  to  put  the 
government  of  Thebes  into  the  hands  of  Ar- 
chias  and  Leontidas,  who  had  been  betrayers 
of  the  castle  to  them. 

This  excited  strong  suspicion  that  what 
Phcebidas  did  was  by  Agesilaus’s  order,  which 
was  corroborated  by  after-occurrences.  For 
when  the  Thebans  had  expelled  the  garrison, 
and  asserted  their  liberty,  he,  accusing  them  of 
the  murder  of  Archias  and  Leontidas,  who  in¬ 
deed  were  tyrants,  though  in  name  holding 
the  office  of  polemarchs,  made  war  upon  them. 
He  sent  Cleombrotus  on  that  errand,  who  was 
now  his  fellow-king,  in  the  place  of  Agesipolis, 
who  was  dead,  excusing  himself  by  reason  of 
his  age;  for  it  was  forty  years  since  he  had  first 


491 

borne  arms,  and  he  was  consequently  exempt 
by  the  law;  meanwhile,  the  true  reason  was, 
that  he  was  ashamed,  having  so  lately  fought 
against  tyranny  in  behalf  of  the  Phliasians,  to 
fight  now  in  defence  of  a  tyranny  against  the 
Thebans. 

One  Sphodrias,  of  Lacedaemon,  of  the  con¬ 
trary  faction  to  Agesilaus,  was  governor  in 
Thespiae,  a  bold  and  enterprising  man,  though 
he  had  perhaps  more  of  confidence  than  wis¬ 
dom.  This  action  of  Phcebidas  fired  him,  and 
incited  his  ambition  to  attempt  some  great 
enterprise,  which  might  render  him  as  famous 
as  he  perceived  the  taking  of  the  Cadmea  had 
made  Phcebidas.  He  thought  the  sudden  cap¬ 
ture  of  the  Piraeus,  and  the  cutting  off  thereby 
the  Athenians  from  the  sea,  would  be  a  matter 
of  far  more  glory.  It  is  said,  too,  that  Pelopidas 
and  Melon,  the  chief  captains  of  Boeotia,  put 
him  upon  it;  that  they  privily  sent  men  to  him, 
pretending  to  be  of  the  Spartan  faction,  who, 
highly  commending  Sphodrias,  filled  him  with 
a  great  opinion  of  himself,  protesting  him  to  be 
the  only  man  in  the  world  that  was  fit  for  so 
great  an  enterprise. 

Being  thus  stimulated,  he  could  hold  no 
longer,  but  hurried  into  an  attempt  as  dishon¬ 
ourable  and  treacherous  as  that  of  the  Cadmea, 
but  executed  with  less  valour  and  less  success; 
for  the  day  broke  whilst  he  was  yet  in  the  Thri- 
asian  plain,  whereas  he  designed  the  whole 
exploit  to  have  been  done  in  the  night.  As  soon 
as  the  soldiers  perceived  the  rays  of  light  re¬ 
flecting  from  the  temples  of  Eleusis,  upon  the 
first  rising  of  the  sun,  it  is  said  that  their  hearts 
failed  them;  nay,  he  himself,  when  he  saw  that 
he  could  not  have  the  benefit  of  the  night,  had 
not  courage  enough  to  go  on  with  his  enter¬ 
prise;  but  having  pillaged  the  country,  he  re¬ 
turned  with  shame  to  Thespiae. 

An  embassy  was  upon  this  sent  from  Athens 
to  Sparta,  to  complain  of  the  breach  of  peace; 
but  the  ambassadors  found  their  journey  need¬ 
less,  Sphodrias  being  then  under  process  by  the 
magistrates  of  Sparta.  Sphodrias  durst  not  stay 
to  expect  judgment,  which  he  found  would  be 
capital,  the  city  being  highly  incensed  against 
him,  out  of  the  shame  they  felt  at  the  business 
and  their  desire  to  appear  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Athenians  as  fellow-sufferers  in  the  wrong, 
rather  than  accomplices  in  its  being  done. 

This  Sphodrias  had  a  son  of  great  beauty 
named  Cleonymus,  to  whom  Archidamus,  the 
son  of  Agesilaus,  was  extremely  attached.  Ar¬ 
chidamus,  as  became  him,  was  concerned  for 
the  danger  of  his  friend’s  father,  but  yet  he 


492 

durst  not  do  anything  openly  for  his  assistance, 
he  being  one  of  the  professed  enemies  of  Age- 
silaus.  But  Cleonymus  having  solicited  him 
with  tears  about  it,  as  knowing  Agesilaus  to  be 
of  all  his  father’s  enemies  the  most  formidable, 
the  young  man  for  two  or  three  days  followed 
after  his  father  with  such  fear  and  confusion 
that  he  durst  not  speak  to  him.  At  last,  the  day 
of  sentence  being  at  hand,  he  ventured  to  tell 
him  that  Cleonymus  had  entreated  him  to  in¬ 
tercede  for  his  father.  Agesilaus,  though  well 
aware  of  the  love  between  the  two  young  men, 
yet  did  not  prohibit  it,  because  Cleonymus 
from  his  earliest  years  had  been  looked  upon  as 
a  youth  of  very  great  promise;  yet  he  gave  not 
his  son  any  kind  or  hopeful  answer  in  the  case, 
but  coldly  told  him  that  he  would  consider 
what  he  could  honestly  and  honourably  do  in 
it,  and  so  dismissed  him. 

Archidamus  being  ashamed  of  his  want  of 
success,  forbore  the  company  of  Cleonymus, 
whom  he  usually  saw  several  times  every  day. 
This  made  the  friends  of  Sphodrias  to  think 
his  case  desperate,  till  Etymocles,  one  of  Age- 
silaus’s  friends,  discovered  to  them  the  king’s 
mind;  namely,  that  he  abhorred  the  fact,  but 
yet  he  thought  Sphodrias  a  gallant  man  such 
as  the  commonwealth  much  wanted  at  that 
time.  For  Agesilaus  used  to  talk  thus  concern¬ 
ing  the  cause,  out  of  a  desire  to  gratify  his  son. 
And  now  Cleonymus  quickly  understood  that 
Archidamus  had  been  true  to  him,  in  using  all 
his  interests  with  his  father;  and  Sphodrias’s 
friend  ventured  to  be  forward  in  his  defence. 

The  truth  is,  that  Agesilaus  was  excessively 
fond  of  his  children;  and  it  is  to  him  the  story 
belongs,  that  when  they  were  little  ones,  he 
used  to  make  a  horse  of  a  stick,  and  ride  with 
them;  and  being  caught  at  this  sport  by  a 
friend,  he  desired  him  not  to  mention  it  till  he 
himself  were  the  father  of  children. 

Meanwhile,  Sphodrias  being  acquitted,  the 
Athenians  betook  themselves  to  arms,  and  Age¬ 
silaus  fell  into  disgrace  with  the  people;  since 
to  gratify  the  whims  of  a  boy  he  had  been  will¬ 
ing  to  pervert  justice,  and  make  the  city  acces¬ 
sory  to  the  crimes  of  private  men,  whose  most 
unjustifiable  actions  had  broken  the  peace  of 
Greece.  He  also  found  his  colleague,  Cleom- 
brotus,  little  inclined  to  the  Theban  war;  so 
that  it  became  necessary  for  him  to  waive  the 
privilege  of  his  age,  which  he  before  had  claim¬ 
ed,  and  to  lead  the  army  himself  into  Boeotia; 
which  he  did  with  variety  of  success,  some¬ 
times  conquering,  and  sometimes  conquered; 
insomuch  that  receiving  a  wound  in  a  battle, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

lie  was  reproached  by  Antalcidas,  that  the  The¬ 
bans  had  paid  him  well  for  the  lessons  he  had 
given  them  in  fighting.  And,  indeed,  they  were 
now  grown  far  better  soldiers  than  ever  they 
had  been,  being  so  continually  kept  in  training 
by  the  frequency  of  the  Lacedaemonian  expedi¬ 
tions  against  them.  Out  of  the  foresight  of 
which  it  was  that  anciently  Lycurgus,  in  three 
several  laws,  forbade  them  to  make  any  wars 
with  the  same  nation,  as  this  would  be  to  in¬ 
struct  their  enemies  in  the  art  of  it. 

Meanwhile,  the  allies  of  Sparta  were  not  a 
little  discontented  at  Agesilaus,  because  this 
war  was  commenced  not  upon  any  fair  public 
ground  of  quarrel,  but  merely  out  of  his  pri¬ 
vate  hatred  to  the  Thebans;  and  they  com¬ 
plained  with  indignation  that  they,  being  the 
majority  of  the  army,  should  from  year  to  year 
be  thus  exposed  to  danger  and  hardship  here 
and  there,  at  the  will  of  a  few  persons.  It  was 
at  this  time,  we  are  told,  that  Agesilaus,  to  ob¬ 
viate  the  objection,  devised  this  expedient,  to 
show  the  allies  were  not  the  greater  number. 
He  gave  orders  that  all  the  allies,  of  whatever 
country,  should  sit  down  promiscuously  on  one 
side,  and  all  the  Lacedaemonians  on  the  other: 
which  being  done,  he  commanded  a  herald  to 
proclaim,  that  all  the  potters  of  both  divisions 
should  stand  out;  then  all  the  blacksmiths; 
then  all  the  masons;  next  the  carpenters;  and 
so  he  went  through  all  the  handicrafts.  By  this 
time  almost  all  the  allies  were  risen,  but  of 
the  Lacedaemonians  not  a  man,  they  being  by 
law  forbidden  to  learn  any  mechanical  busi¬ 
ness;  and  now  Agesilaus  laughed  and  said, 
“You  see,  my  friends,  how  many  more  soldiers 
we  send  out  than  you  do.” 

When  he  brought  back  his  army  from  Bceo- 
tia  through  Megara,  as  he  was  going  up  to  the 
magistrate’s  office  in  the  Acropolis,  he  was  sud¬ 
denly  seized  with  pain  and  cramp  in  his  sound 
leg,  and  great  swelling  and  inflammation  en¬ 
sued.  He  was  treated  by  a  Syracusan  physician, 
who  let  him  bleed  below  the  ankle;  this  soon 
eased  his  pain,  but  then  the  blood  could  not 
be  stopped,  till  the  loss  of  it  brought  on  faint¬ 
ing  and  swooning;  at  length,  with  much  trou¬ 
ble,  he  stopped  it.  Agesilaus  was  carried  home 
to  Sparta  in  a  very  weak  condition,  and  did  not 
recover  strength  enough  to  appear  in  the  field 
for  a  long  time  after. 

Meanwhile,  the  Spartan  fortune  was  but  ill; 
they  received  many  losses  both  by  sea  and  land; 
but  the  greatest  was  that  at  Tegyras,  when  for 
the  first  time  they  were  beaten  by  the  Thebans 
in  a  set  battle. 


AGESILAUS 

All  the  Greeks  were,  accordingly,  disposed 
to  a  general  peace,  and  to  that  end  ambassa¬ 
dors  came  to  Sparta.  Among  these  was  Epami- 
nondas,  the  Theban,  famous  at  that  time  for 
his  philosophy  and  learning,  but  he  had  not 
yet  given  proof  of  his  capacity  as  a  general.  He, 
seeing  all  the  others  crouch  to  Agesilaus,  and 
court  favour  with  him,  alone  maintained  the 
dignity  of  an  ambassador,  and  with  that  free¬ 
dom  that  became  his  character  made  a  speech 
in  behalf  not  of  Thebes  only,  from  whence  he 
came,  but  of  all  Greece,  remonstrating  that 
Sparta  alone  grew  great  by  war,  to  the  distress 
and  suffering  of  all  her  neighbours.  He  urged 
that  a  peace  should  be  made  upon  just  and 
equal  terms,  such  as  alone  would  be  a  lasting 
one,  which  could  not  otherwise  be  done  than 
by  reducing  all  to  equality. 

Agesilaus,  perceiving  all  the  other  Greeks  to 
give  much  attention  to  this  discourse,  and  to 
be  pleased  with  it,  presently  asked  him 
whether  he  thought  it  a  part  of  this  justice  and 
equality  that  the  Boeotian  towns  should  enjoy 
their  independence.  Epaminondas  instantly 
and  without  wavering  asked  him  in  return, 
whether  he  thought  it  just  and  equal  that  the 
Laconian  towns  should  enjoy  theirs.  Agesilaus 
started  from  his  seat  and  bade  him  once  for  all 
speak  out  and  say  whether  or  not  Boeotia 
should  be  independent.  And  when  Epaminon¬ 
das  replied  once  again  with  the  same  inquiry, 
whether  Laconia  should  be  so,  Agesilaus  was 
so  enraged  that,  availing  himself  of  the  pre¬ 
text,  he  immediately  struck  the  name  of  the 
Thebans  out  of  the  league,  and  declared  war 
against  them.  With  the  rest  of  the  Greeks  he 
made  a  peace,  and  dismissed  them  with  this 
saying,  that  what  could  be  peaceably  adjusted, 
should;  what  was  otherwise  incurable,  must 
be  committed  to  the  success  of  war,  it  being  a 
thing  of  too  great  difficulty  to  provide  for  all 
things  by  treaty. 

The  ephors  upon  this  despatched  their  or¬ 
ders  to  Cleombrotus,  who  was  at  that  time  in 
Phocis,  to  march  directly  into  Boeotia,  and  at 
the  same  time  sent  to  their  allies  for  aid.  The 
confederates  were  very  tardy  in  their  business 
and  unwilling  to  engage,  but  as  yet  they  feared 
the  Spartans  too  much  to  dare  to  refuse.  And 
although  many  portents  and  prodigies  of  ill- 
presage,  which  I  have  mentioned  in  the  life  of 
Epaminondas,  had  appeared,  and  though  Pro- 
thous,  the  Laconian,  did  all  he  could  to  hinder 
it,  yet  Agesilaus  would  needs  go  forward,  and 
prevailed  so  that  the  war  was  decreed.  He 
thought  the  present  juncture  of  affairs  very  ad- 


493 

vantageous  for  their  revenge,  the  rest  of  Greece 
being  wholly  free,  and  the  Thebans  excluded 
from  the  peace.  But  that  this  war  was  under¬ 
taken  more  upon  passion  than  judgment  the 
event  may  prove;  for  the  treaty  was  finished 
but  the  fourteenth  of  Scirophorion,  and  the 
Lacedaemonians  received  their  great  overthrow 
at  Leuctra  on  the  fifth  of  Hecatombaeon,  with¬ 
in  twenty  days.  There  fell  at  that  time  a  thou¬ 
sand  Spartans,  and  Cleombrotus  their  king, 
and  around  him  the  bravest  men  of  the  nation; 
particularly  the  beautiful  youth,  Cleonymus, 
the  son  of  Sphodrias,  who  was  thrice  struck 
down  at  the  feet  of  the  king,  and  as  often  rose, 
but  was  slain  at  the  last. 

This  unexpected  blow,  which  fell  so  heavy 
upon  the  Lacedaemonians,  brought  greater 
glory  to  Thebes  than  ever  was  acquired  by  any 
other  of  the  Grecian  republics  in  their  civil 
wars  against  each  other.  The  behaviour,  not¬ 
withstanding,  of  the  Spartans,  though  beaten, 
was  as  great,  and  as  highly  to  be  admired,  as 
that  of  the  Thebans.  And  indeed,  if,  as  Xeno¬ 
phon  says,  in  conversation  good  men  even  in 
their  sports  and  at  their  wine  let  fall  many 
sayings  that  are  worth  the  preserving,  how 
much  more  worthy  to  be  recorded  is  an  exem¬ 
plary  constancy  of  mind,  as  shown  both  in  the 
words  and  in  the  acts  of  brave  men  when  they 
are  pressed  by  adverse  fortune! 

It  happened  that  the  Spartans  were  celebrat¬ 
ing  a  solemn  feast,  at  which  many  strangers 
were  present  from  other  countries,  and  the 
town  full  of  them,  when  this  news  of  the  over¬ 
throw  came.  It  was  the  gymnopaediae,  and  the 
boys  were  dancing  in  the  theatre,  when  the 
messengers  arrived  from  Leuctra.  The  ephors, 
though  they  were  sufficiently  aware  that  this 
blow  had  ruined  the  Spartan  power,  and  that 
their  primacy  over  the  rest  of  Greece  was  gone 
for  ever,  yet  gave  orders  that  the  dances  should 
not  break  off,  nor  any  of  the  celebration  of  the 
festival  abate;  but  privately  sending  the  names 
of  the  slain  to  each  family,  out  of  which  they 
were  lost,  they  continued  the  public  spectacles. 
The  next  morning  when  they  had  full  intelli¬ 
gence  concerning  it,  and  everybody  knew  who 
were  slain,  and  who  survived,  the  fathers,  rela¬ 
tives,  and  friends  of  the  slain  came  out  rejoic¬ 
ing  in  the  market-place,  saluting  each  other 
with  a  kind  of  exultation ;  on  the  contrary,  the 
fathers  of  the  survivors  hid  themselves  at  home 
among  the  women.  If  necessity  drove  any  of 
them  abroad  they  went  very  dejectedly,  with 
downcast  looks  and  sorrowful  countenances. 
The  women  outdid  the  men  in  it;  those  whose 


494 

sons  were  slain  openly  rejoicing,  cheerfully 
making  visits  to  one  another,  and  meeting  tri¬ 
umphantly  in  the  temples;  they  who  expected 
their  children  home  being  very  silent  and 
much  troubled. 

But  the  people  in  general,  when  their  allies 
now  began  to  desert  them,  and  Epaminondas, 
in  all  the  confidence  of  victory,  was  expected 
with  an  invading  army  in  Peloponnesus,  began 
to  think  again  of  Agesilaus’s  lameness,  and  to 
entertain  feelings  of  religious  fear  and  de¬ 
spondency,  as  if  their  having  rejected  the 
sound-footed,  and  having  chosen  the  halting 
king,  which  the  oracle  had  specially  warned 
them  against,  was  the  occasion  of  all  their  dis¬ 
tresses. 

Yet  the  regard  they  had  to  the  merit  and  rep¬ 
utation  of  Agesilaus  so  far  stilled  this  murmur¬ 
ing  of  the  people  that,  notwithstanding  it,  they 
intrusted  themselves  to  him  in  this  distress,  as 
the  only  man  that  was  fit  to  heal  the  public 
malady,  the  arbiter  of  all  their  difficulties, 
whether  relating  to  the  affairs  of  war  or  peace. 
One  great  one  was  then  before  them  concern¬ 
ing  the  runaways  (as  their  name  is  for  them) 
that  had  fled  out  of  the  battle,  who  being  many 
and  powerful,  it  was  feared  that  they  might 
make  some  commotion  in  the  republic  to  pre¬ 
vent  the  execution  of  the  law  upon  them  for 
their  cowardice. 

The  law  in  that  case  was  very  severe;  for 
they  were  not  only  to  be  debarred  from  all  hon¬ 
ours,  but  also  it  was  a  disgrace  to  intermarry 
with  them;  whoever  met  any  one  of  them  in 
the  streets  might  beat  him  if  he  chose,  nor  was 
it  lawful  for  him  to  resist;  they,  in  the  mean¬ 
while,  were  obliged  to  go  about  unwashed  and 
meanly  dressed,  with  their  clothes  patched 
with  divers  colours,  and  to  wear  their  beards 
half  shaved,  half  unshaven.  To  execute  so 
rigid  a  law  as  this,  in  a  case  where  the  offend¬ 
ers  were  so  many,  and  many  of  them  of  such 
distinction,  and  that  in  a  time  when  the  com¬ 
monwealth  wanted  soldiers  so  much  as  then  it 
did,  was  of  dangerous  consequence.  Therefore, 
they  chose  Agesilaus  as  a  sort  of  new  lawgiver 
for  the  occasion. 

But  he,  without  adding  to  or  diminishing 
from  or  any  way  changing  the  law,  came  out 
into  the  public  assembly,  and  said  that  the  law 
should  sleep  for  to-day,  but  from  this  day  forth 
be  vigorously  executed.  By  this  means  he  at 
once  preserved  the  law  from  abrogation  and 
the  citizens  from  infamy;  and  that  he  might 
alleviate  the  despondency  and  self-distrust  of 
the  young  men,  he  made  an  inroad  into  Ar- 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

cadia,  where,  carefully  avoiding  all  fighting, 
he  contented  himself  with  spoiling  the  terri¬ 
tory,  and  taking  a  small  town  belonging  to  the 
Mantineans,  thus  reviving  the  hearts  of  the 
people,  letting  them  see  that  they  were  not 
everywhere  unsuccessful. 

Epaminondas  now  invaded  Laconia  with  an 
army  of  forty  thousand,  besides  light-armed 
men  and  others  that  followed  the  camp  only 
for  plunder,  so  that  in  all  they  were  at  least 
seventy  thousand.  It  was  now  six  hundred 
years  since  the  Dorians  had  possessed  Laconia, 
and  in  all  that  time  the  face  of  an  enemy  had 
not  been  seen  within  their  territories,  no  man 
daring  to  invade  them;  but  now  they  made 
their  entrance,  and  burnt  and  plundered  with¬ 
out  resistance  the  hitherto  untouched  and  sa¬ 
cred  territory  up  to  Eurotas  and  the  very  sub¬ 
urbs  of  Sparta;  for  Agesilaus  would  not  per¬ 
mit  them  to  encounter  so  impetuous  a  torrent, 
as  Theopompus  calls  it,  of  war. 

He  contented  himself  with  fortifying  the 
chief  parts  of  the  city,  and  with  placing  guards 
in  convenient  places,  enduring  meanwhile  the 
taunts  of  the  Thebans,  who  reproached  him 
by  name  as  the  kindler  of  the  war,  and  the 
author  of  all  that  mischief  to  his  country,  bid¬ 
ding  him  defend  himself  if  he  could.  But  this 
was  not  all;  he  was  equally  disturbed  at  home 
with  the  tumults  of  the  city,  the  outcries  and 
running  about  of  the  old  men,  who  were  en¬ 
raged  at  their  present  condition,  and  the  wom¬ 
en  yet  worse,  out  of  their  senses  with  the  clam¬ 
ours  and  the  fires  of  the  enemy  in  the  field. 
He  was  also  himself  afflicted  by  the  sense 
of  his  lost  glory;  who,  having  come  to  the 
throne  of  Sparta  when  it  was  in  its  most  flour¬ 
ishing  and  powerful  condition,  now  lived  to 
see  it  laid  low  in  esteem,  and  all  its  great 
vaunts  cut  down,  even  that  which  he  himself 
had  been  accustomed  to  use,  that  the  women 
of  Sparta  had  never  seen  the  smoke  of  the 
enemy’s  fire. 

As  it  is  said,  also,  that  when  Antalcidas, 
once  being  in  dispute  with  an  Athenian  about 
the  valour  of  the  two  nations,  the  Athenian 
boasted  that  they  had  often  driven  the  Spar¬ 
tans  from  the  river  Cephisus,  “Yes,”  said  An¬ 
talcidas,  “but  we  never  had  occasion  to  drive 
you  from  Eurotas.”  And  a  common  Spartan  of 
less  note,  being  in  company  with  an  Argive, 
who  was  bragging  how  many  Spartans  lay 
buried  in  the  fields  of  Argos,  replied,  “None  of 
you  are  buried  in  the  country  of  Laconia.” 
Yet  now  the  case  was  so  altered  that  Antalci¬ 
das,  being  one  of  the  ephors,  out  of  fear  sent 


AGESILAUS 

away  his  children  privately  to  the  island  of 
Cythera. 

When  the  enemy  essayed  to  get  over  the 
river,  and  thence  to  attack  the  town,  Agesilaus, 
abandoning  the  rest,  betook  himself  to  the  high 
places  and  strongholds  of  it.  But  it  happened 
Eurotas  at  that  time  was  swollen  to  a  great 
height  with  snow  that  had  fallen  and  made  the 
passage  very  difficult  to  the  Thebans,  not  only 
by  its  depth,  but  much  more  by  its  extreme 
coldness.  Whilst  this  was  doing,  Epaminondas 
was  seen  in  the  front  of  the  phalanx,  and  was 
pointed  out  to  Agesilaus,  who  looked  long  at 
him,  and  said  but  these  words,  “O  bold  man!” 
But  when  he  came  to  the  city,  and  would  have 
fain  attempted  something  within  the  limits  of 
it  that  might  raise  him  a  trophy  there,  he  could 
not  tempt  Agesilaus  out  of  his  hold,  but  was 
forced  to  march  off  again,  wasting  the  country 
as  he  went. 

Meanwhile,  a  body  of  long  discontented  and 
bad  citizens,  about  two  hundred  in  number, 
having  got  into  a  strong  part  of  the  town 
called  the  Issorion,  where  the  temple  of  Diana 
stands,  seized  and  garrisoned  it.  The  Spartans 
would  have  fallen  upon  them  instantly;  but 
Agesilaus,  not  knowing  how  far  the  sedition 
might  reach,  bade  them  forbear,  and  going 
himself  in  his  ordinary  dress,  with  but  one 
servant,  when  he  came  near  the  rebels,  called 
out,  and  told  them  that  they  mistook  their 
orders;  this  was  not  the  right  place;  they  were 
to  go,  one  part  of  them  thither,  showing  them 
another  place  in  the  city,  and  part  to  another, 
which  he  also  showed.  The  conspirators  gladly 
heard  this,  thinking  themselves  unsuspected  of 
treason,  and  readily  went  off  to  the  places 
which  he  showd  them.  Whereupon  Agesilaus 
placed  in  their  room  a  guard  of  his  own;  and 
of  the  conspirators  he  apprehended  fifteen,  and 
put  them  to  death  in  the  night. 

But  after  this  a  much  more  dangerous  con¬ 
spiracy  was  discovered  of  Spartan  citizens,  who 
had  privately  met  in  each  other’s  houses,  plot¬ 
ting  a  revolution.  These  were  men  whom  it 
was  equally  dangerous  to  prosecute  publicly 
according  to  law  and  to  connive  at.  Agesilaus 
took  council  with  the  ephors,  and  put  these 
also  to  death  privately  without  process;  a  thing 
never  before  known  in  the  case  of  any  born 
Spartan. 

At  this  time,  also,  many  of  the  helots  and 
country  people,  who  were  in  the  army,  ran 
away  to  the  enemy,  which  was  a  matter  of 
great  consternation  to  the  city.  He  therefore 
caused  some  officers  of  his,  every  morning  be- 


495 

fore  day,  to  search  the  quarters  of  the  soldiers, 
and  where  any  man  was  gone,  to  hide  his  arms, 
that  so  the  greatness  of  the  number  might  not 
appear. 

Historians  differ  about  the  cause  of  the  The¬ 
bans’  departure  from  Sparta.  Some  say,  the 
winter  forced  them;  as  also  that  the  Arcadian 
soldiers  disbanding,  made  it  necessary  for  the 
rest  to  retire.  Others  say  that  they  stayed  there 
three  months,  till  they  had  laid  the  whole 
country  waste.  Theopompus  is  the  only  author 
who  says  that  when  the  Boeotian  generals  had 
already  resolved  upon  the  retreat,  Phrixus,  the 
Spartan,  came  to  them,  and  offered  them  from 
Agesilaus  ten  talents  to  be  gone,  so  hiring  them 
to  do  what  they  were  already  doing  of  their 
own  accord.  How  he  alone  should  come  to  be 
aware  of  this  I  know  not;  only  in  this  all  au¬ 
thors  agree,  that  the  saving  of  Sparta  from  ruin 
was  wholly  due  to  the  wisdom  of  Agesilaus, 
who  in  this  extremity  of  affairs  quitted  all  his 
ambition  and  his  haughtiness,  and  resolved  to 
play  a  saving  game. 

But  all  his  wisdom  and  courage  was  not 
sufficient  to  recover  the  glory  of  it,  and  to  raise 
it  to  its  ancient  greatness.  For  as  we  see  in  hu¬ 
man  bodies,  long  used  to  a  very  strict  and  too 
exquisitely  regular  diet,  any  single  great  dis¬ 
order  is  usually  fatal;  so  here  one  stroke  over¬ 
threw  the  whole  state’s  long  prosperity.  Nor 
can  we  be  surprised  at  this.  Lycurgus  had 
formed  a  polity  admirably  designed  for  the 
peace,  harmony,  and  virtuous  life  of  the  citi¬ 
zens;  and  their  fall  came  from  their  assuming 
foreign  dominion  and  arbitrary  sway,  things 
wholly  undesirable,  in  the  judgment  of  Lycur¬ 
gus,  for  a  well-conducted  and  happy  state. 

Agesilaus  being  now  in  years,  gave  over  all 
military  employments;  but  his  son,  Archida- 
mus,  having  received  help  from  Dionysius  of 
Sicily,  gave  a  great  defeat  to  the  Arcadians, 
in  the  fight  known  by  the  name  of  the  Tear¬ 
less  Battle,  in  which  there  was  a  great 
slaughter  of  the  enemy  without  the  loss  of 
one  Spartan. 

Yet  this  victory,  more  than  anything  else, 
discovered  the  present  weakness  of  Sparta;  for 
heretofore  victory  was  esteemed  so  usual  a 
thing  with  them  that  for  their  greatest  suc¬ 
cesses  they  merely  sacrificed  a  cock  to  the  gods. 
The  soldiers  never  vaunted,  nor  did  the  citi¬ 
zens  display  any  great  joy  at  the  news;  even 
when  the  great  victory,  described  by  Thucy¬ 
dides,  was  obtained  at  Mantinea,  the  messen¬ 
ger  that  brought  the  news  had  no  other  reward 
than  a  piece  of  meat,  sent  by  the  magistrates 


496 

from  the  common  table.  But  at  the  news  of 
this  Arcadian  victory  they  were  not  able  to 
contain  themselves;  Agesilaus  went  out  in  pro¬ 
cession  with  tears  of  joy  in  his  eyes  to  meet  and 
embrace  his  son,  and  all  the  magistrates  and 
public  officers  attended  him.  The  old  men  and 
the  women  marched  out  as  far  as  the  river 
Eurotas,  lifting  up  their  hands,  and  thanking 
the  gods  that  Sparta  was  now  cleared  again  of 
the  disgrace  and  indignity  that  had  befallen 
her,  and  once  more  saw  the  light  of  day.  Since 
before,  they  tell  us,  the  Spartan  men,  out  of 
shame  at  their  disasters,  did  not  dare  so  much 
as  to  look  their  wives  in  the  face. 

When  Epaminondas  restored  Messene,  and 
recalled  from  all  quarters  the  ancient  citizens 
to  inhabit  it,  they  were  not  able  to  obstruct  the 
design,  being  not  in  condition  of  appearing  in 
the  field  against  them.  But  it  went  greatly 
against  Agesilaus  in  the  minds  of  his  country¬ 
men,  when  they  found  so  large  a  territory, 
equal  to  their  own  in  compass,  and  for  fertility 
the  richest  of  all  Greece,  which  they  had  en¬ 
joyed  so  long,  taken  from  them  in  his  reign. 
Therefore  it  was  that  the  king  broke  off  treaty 
with  the  Thebans  when  they  offered  him 
peace,  rather  than  set  his  hand  to  the  passing 
away  of  that  country,  though  it  was  already 
taken  from  him.  Which  point  of  honour  had 
like  to  have  cost  him  dear;  for  not  long  after 
he  was  overreached  by  a  stratagem,  which  had 
almost  amounted  to  the  loss  of  Sparta.  For 
when  the  Mantineans  again  revolted  from 
Thebes  to  Sparta,  and  Epaminondas  under¬ 
stood  that  Agesilaus  was  come  to  their  assist¬ 
ance  with  a  powerful  army,  he  privately  in  the 
night  quitted  his  quarters  of  Tegea,  and,  un¬ 
known  to  the  Mantineans,  passing  by  Agesi¬ 
laus,  marched  toward  Sparta,  insomuch  that 
he  failed  very  little  of  taking  it  empty  and  un¬ 
armed. 

Agesilaus  had  intelligence  sent  him  by  Eu- 
thynus,  the  Thespian,  as  Callisthenes  says,  but 
Xenophon  says  by  a  Cretan;  and  immediately 
despatched  a  horseman  to  Lacedaemon  to  ap¬ 
prise  them  of  it,  and  to  let  them  know  that  he 
was  hastening  to  them.  Shortly  after  his  ar¬ 
rival  the  Thebans  crossed  the  Eurotas.  They 
made  an  assault  upon  the  town,  and  were  re¬ 
ceived  by  Agesilaus  with  great  courage,  and 
with  exertions  beyond  what  was  to  be  ex¬ 
pected  at  his  years.  For  he  did  not  now  fight 
with  that  caution  and  cunning  which  he  for¬ 
merly  made  use  of,  but  put  all  upon  a  desperate 
push;  which,  though  not  his  usual  method, 
succeeded  so  well  that  he  rescued  the  city  out 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

of  the  very  hands  of  Epaminondas,  and  forced 
him  to  retire,  and,  at  the  erection  of  a  trophy, 
was  able,  in  the  presence  of  their  wives  and 
children,  to  declare  that  the  Lacedaemonians 
had  nobly  paid  their  debt  to  their  country,  and 
particularly  his  son  Archidamus,  who  had  that 
day  made  himself  illustrious,  both  by  his  cour¬ 
age  and  agility  of  body,  rapidly  passing  about 
by  the  short  lanes  to  every  endangered  point, 
and  everywhere  maintaining  the  town  against 
the  enemy  with  but  few  to  help  him. 

Isadas,  however,  the  son  of  Phcebidas,  must 
have  been,  I  think,  the  admiration  of  the  en¬ 
emy  as  well  as  of  his  friends.  He  was  a  youth 
of  remarkable  beauty  and  stature,  in  the  very 
flower  of  the  most  attractive  time  of  life,  when 
the  boy  is  just  rising  into  the  man.  He  had  no 
arms  upon  him  and  scarcely  clothes;  he  had 
just  anointed  himself  at  home,  when,  upon  the 
alarm,  without  further  awaiting,  in  that  un¬ 
dress,  he  snatched  a  spear  in  one  hand  a  sword 
in  the  other,  and  broke  his  way  through  the 
combatants  to  the  enemies,  striking  at  all  he 
met.  He  received  no  wound,  whether  it  were 
that  a  special  divine  care  rewarded  his  valour 
with  an  extraordinary  protection,  or  whether 
his  shape  being  so  large  and  beautiful,  and  his 
dress  so  unusual,  they  thought  him  more  than 
a  man.  The  ephors  gave  him  a  garland;  but 
as  soon  as  they  had  done  so,  they  fined  him  a 
thousand  drachmas  for  going  out  to  battle  un¬ 
armed. 

A  few  days  after  this  there  was  another 
battle  fought  near  Mantinea,  in  which  Epami¬ 
nondas,  having  routed  the  van  of  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians,  was  eager  in  the  pursuit  of  them, 
when  Anticrates,  the  Laconian,  wounded  him 
with  a  spear,  says  Dioscorides;  but  the  Spar¬ 
tans  to  this  day  call  the  posterity  of  this  Anti¬ 
crates,  swordsmen,  because  he  wounded  Epa¬ 
minondas  with  a  sword.  They  so  dreaded  Epa¬ 
minondas  when  living,  that  the  slayer  of  him 
was  embraced  and  admired  by  all;  they  decreed 
honours  and  gifts  to  him,  and  an  exemption 
from  taxes  to  his  posterity,  a  privilege  enjoyed 
at  this  day  by  Callicrates,  one  of  his  descend¬ 
ants. 

Epaminondas  being  slain,  there  was  a  gen¬ 
eral  peace  again  concluded,  from  which  Agesi- 
laus’s  party  excluded  the  Messenians,  as  men 
that  had  no  city,  and  therefore  would  not  let 
them  swear  to  the  league;  to  which  when  the 
rest  of  the  Greeks  admitted  them,  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians  broke  off,  and  continued  the  war 
alone,  in  hopes  of  subduing  the  Messenians.  In 
this  Agesilaus  was  esteemed  a  stubborn  and 


AGESILAUS 

headstrong  man,  and  insatiable  of  war,  who 
took  such  pains  to  undermine  the  general 
peace,  and  to  protract  the  war  at  a  time  when 
he  had  not  money  to  carry  it  on  with,  but  was 
forced  to  borrow  of  his  friends  and  raise  sub¬ 
scriptions,  with  much  difficulty,  while  the  city, 
above  all  things,  needed  repose.  And  all  this  to 
recover  the  one  poor  town  of  Messene,  after 
he  had  lost  so  great  an  empire  both  by  sea  and 
land,  as  the  Spartans  were  possessed  of,  when 
he  began  to  reign. 

But  it  added  still  more  to  his  ill-repute  when 
he  put  himself  into  the  service  of  Tachos,  the 
Egyptian.  They  thought  it  too  unworthy  of  a 
man  of  his  high  station,  who  was  then  looked 
upon  as  the  first  commander  in  ail  Greece, 
who  had  filled  all  countries  with  his  renown, 
to  let  himself  out  to  hire  to  a  barbarian,  an 
Egyptian  rebel  (for  Tachos  was  no  better), 
and  to  fight  for  pay,  as  captain  only  of  a  band 
of  mercenaries.  If,  they  said,  at  those  years  of 
eighty  and  odd,  after  his  body  had  been  worn 
out  with  age,  and  enfeebled  with  wounds,  he 
had  resumed  that  noble  undertaking,  the  lib¬ 
eration  of  the  Greeks  from  Persia,  it  had  been 
worthy  of  some  reproof.  To  make  an  action 
honourable,  it  ought  to  be  agreeable  to  the  age 
and  other  circumstances  of  the  person;  since  it 
is  circumstance  and  proper  measure  that  give 
an  action  its  character,  and  make  it  either  good 
or  bad.  But  Agesilaus  valued  not  other  men’s 
discourses;  he  thought  no  public  employment 
dishonourable;  the  ignoblest  thing  in  his  es¬ 
teem  was  for  a  man  to  sit  idle  and  useless  at 
home,  waiting  for  his  death  to  come  and  take 
him.  The  money,  therefore,  that  he  received 
from  Tachos,  he  laid  out  in  raising  men,  with 
whom,  having  filled  his  ships,  he  took  also 
thirty  Spartan  counsellors  with  him,  as  for¬ 
merly  he  had  done  in  his  Asiatic  expedition, 
and  set  sail  for  Egypt. 

As  soon  as  he  arrived  in  Egypt,  all  the  great 
officers  of  the  kingdom  came  to  pay  their  com¬ 
pliments  to  him  at  his  landing.  His  reputation, 
being  so  great,  had  raised  the  expectation  of 
the  whole  country,  and  crowds  flocked  in  to 
see  him;  but  when  they  found,  instead  of  the 
splendid  prince  whom  they  looked  for,  a  little 
old  man  of  contemptible  appearance,  without 
ceremony  lying  down  upon  the  grass,  in  coarse 
and  threadbare  clothes,  they  fell  into  laughter 
and  scorn  of  him,  crying  out  that  the  old 
proverb  was  now  made  good,  “The  mountain 
had  brought  forth  a  mouse.”  They  were  yet 
more  astonished  at  his  stupidity,  as  they 
thought  it,  who,  when  presents  were  made 


497 

him  of  all  sorts  of  provisions,  took  only  the 
meal,  the  calves,  and  the  geese,  but  rejected  the 
sweetmeats,  the  confections,  and  perfumes; 
and  when  they  urged  him  to  the  acceptance  of 
them,  took  them  and  gave  them  to  the  helots 
in  his  army.  Yet  he  was  taken,  Theophrastus 
tells  us,  with  the  garlands  they  made  of  the 
papyrus,  because  of  their  simplicity,  and  when 
he  returned  home,  he  demanded  one  of  the 
king,  which  he  carried  with  him. 

When  he  joined  with  Tachos,  he  found  his 
expectation  of  being  general-in-chief  disap¬ 
pointed.  Tachos  reserved  that  place  for  him¬ 
self,  making  Agesilaus  only  captain  of  the 
mercenaries,  and  Chabrias,  the  Athenian,  com¬ 
mander  of  the  fleet.  This  was  the  first  occasion 
of  his  discontent,  but  there  followed  others; 
he  was  compelled  daily  to  submit  to  the  in¬ 
solence  and  vanity  of  this  Egyptian,  and  was 
at  length  forced  to  attend  him  into  Phoenicia, 
in  a  condition  much  below  his  character  and 
dignity,  which  he  bore  and  put  up  with  for  a 
time,  till  he  had  opportunity  of  showing  his 
feelings. 

It  was  afforded  him  by  Nectanabis,  the 
cousin  of  Tachos,  who  commanded  a  large 
force  under  him,  and  shortly  after  deserted  him, 
and  was  proclaimed  king  by  the  Egyptians. 
This  man  invited  Agesilaus  to  join  his  party, 
and  the  like  he  did  to  Chabrias,  offering  great 
rewards  to  both.  Tachos,  suspecting  it,  imme¬ 
diately  applied  himself  both  to  Agesilaus  and 
Chabrias,  with  great  humility  beseeching 
their  continuance  in  his  friendship.  Chabrias 
consented  to  it,  and  did  what  he  could  by  per¬ 
suasion  and  good  words  to  keep  Agesilaus 
with  them.  But  he  gave  this  short  reply,  “You, 
O  Chabrias,  came  hither  a  volunteer,  and  may 
go  and  stay  as  you  see  cause;  but  I  am  the 
servant  of  Sparta,  appointed  to  head  the  Egyp¬ 
tians,  and  therefore  I  cannot  fight  against  those 
to  whom  I  was  sent  as  a  friend,  unless  I  am 
commanded  to  do  so  by  my  country.” 

This  being  said,  he  despatched  messengers 
to  Sparta,  who  were  sufficiently  supplied  with 
matter  both  for  dispraise  of  Tachos  and  com¬ 
mendation  of  Nectanabis.  The  two  Egyptians 
also  sent  their  ambassadors  to  Lacedaemon,  the 
one  to  claim  continuance  of  the  league  already 
made,  the  other  to  make  great  offers  for  the 
breaking  of  it,  and  making  a  new  one.  The 
Spartans  having  heard  both  sides,  gave  in  their 
public  answer,  that  they  referred  the  whole  mat¬ 
ter  to  Agesilaus;  but  privately  wrote  to  him  to 
act  as  he  should  find  it  best  for  the  profit  of 
the  commonwealth. 


498 

Upon  receipt  of  his  orders,  he  at  once  chang¬ 
ed  sides,  carrying  all  the  mercenaries  with  him 
to  Nectanabis,  covering,  with  the  plausible  pre¬ 
tence  of  acting  for  the  benefit  of  his  country, 
a  most  questionable  piece  of  conduct,  which, 
stripped  of  that  disguise,  in  real  truth  was  no 
better  than  downright  treachery.  But  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians,  who  make  it  their  first  principle 
of  action  to  serve  their  country’s  interest,  knew 
not  anything  to  be  just  or  unjust  by  any  meas¬ 
ure  but  that. 

Tachos,  being  thus  deserted  by  the  merce¬ 
naries,  fled  for  it;  upon  which  a  new  king  of 
the  Mendesian  province  was  proclaimed  his 
successor,  and  came  against  Nectanabis  with 
an  army  of  one  hundred  thousand  men.  Necta¬ 
nabis,  in  his  talk  with  Agesilaus,  professed  to 
despise  them  as  newly  raised  men,  who, 
though  many  in  number,  were  of  no  skill  in 
war,  being  most  of  them  mechanics  and  trades¬ 
men,  never  bred  to  war.  To  whom  Agesilaus 
answered,  that  he  did  not  fear  their  numbers, 
but  did  fear  their  ignorance,  which  gave  no 
room  for  employing  stratagem  against  them. 
Stratagem  only  avails  with  men  who  are  alive 
to  suspicion,  and,  expecting  to  be  assailed,  ex¬ 
pose  themselves  by  their  attempts  at  defence; 
but  one  who  has  no  thought  or  expectation  of 
anything,  gives  as  little  opportunity  to  the  en¬ 
emy  as  he  who  stands  stock-still  does  to  a 
wrestler. 

The  Mendesian  was  not  wanting  in  solicita¬ 
tions  of  Agesilaus,  insomuch  that  Nectanabis 
grew  jealous.  But  when  Agesilaus  advised  to 
fight  the  enemy  at  once,  saying  it  was  folly 
to  protract  the  war  and  rely  on  time,  in  a  con¬ 
test  with  men  who  had  no  experience  in  fight¬ 
ing  battles,  but  with  their  great  numbers  might 
be  able  to  surround  them,  and  cut  off  their 
communications  by  entrenchments,  and  an¬ 
ticipate  them  in  many  matters  of  advantage, 
this  altogether  confirmed  him  in  his  fears  and 
suspicions.  He  took  quite  the  contrary  course, 
and  retreated  into  a  large  and  strongly  forti¬ 
fied  town.  Agesilaus,  finding  himself  mis¬ 
trusted,  took  it  very  ill,  and  was  full  of  indig¬ 
nation,  yet  was  ashamed  to  change  sides  back 
again,  or  to  go  away  without  effecting  any¬ 
thing,  so  that  he  was  forced  to  follow  Nectana¬ 
bis  into  the  town. 

When  the  enemy  came  up,  and  began  to 
draw  lines  about  the  town,  and  to  entrench, 
the  Egyptian  now  resolved  upon  a  battle  out  of 
fear  of  a  siege.  And  the  Greeks  were  eager  for 
it,  provisions  growing  already  scarce  in  the 
town.  When  Agesilaus  opposed  it,  the  Egyp- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

tians  then  suspected  him  much  more,  publicly 
calling  him  the  betrayer  of  the  king.  But  Age¬ 
silaus,  being  now  satisfied  within  himself, 
bore  these  reproaches  patiently,  and  followed 
the  design  which  he  had  laid,  of  overreaching 
the  enemy,  which  was  this. 

The  enemy  were  forming  a  deep  ditch  and 
high  wall,  resolving  to  shut  up  the  garrison  and 
starve  it.  When  the  ditch  was  brought  almost 
quite  round  and  the  two  ends  had  all  but  met, 
he  took  the  advantage  of  the  night  and  armed 
all  his  Greeks.  Then  going  to  the  Egyptian, 
“This,  young  man,  is  your  opportunity,”  said 
he,  “of  saving  yourself,  which  I  all  this  while 
durst  not  announce,  lest  discovery  should  pre¬ 
vent  it;  but  now  the  enemy  has,  at  his  own 
cost,  and  the  pains  and  labour  of  his  own  men, 
provided  for  our  security.  As  much  of  this  wall 
as  is  built  will  prevent  them  from  surrounding 
us  with  their  multitude,  the  gap  yet  left  will 
be  sufficient  for  us  to  sally  out  by;  now  play  the 
man,  and  follow  the  example  the  Greeks  will 
give  you,  and  by  fighting  valiantly  save  your¬ 
self  and  your  army;  their  front  will  not  be  able 
to  stand  against  us,  and  their  rear  we  are  suffi¬ 
ciently  secured  from  by  a  wall  of  their  own 
making.” 

Nectanabis,  admiring  the  sagacity  of  Agesi¬ 
laus,  immediately  placed  himself  in  the  middle 
of  the  Greek  troops,  and  fought  with  them; 
and  upon  the  first  charge  soon  routed  the  en¬ 
emy.  Agesilaus  having  now  gained  credit  with 
the  king,  proceeded  to  use,  like  a  trick  in  wres¬ 
tling,  the  same  stratagem  over  again.  He  some¬ 
times  pretended  a  retreat,  at  other  times  ad¬ 
vanced  to  attack  their  flanks,  and  by  this 
means  at  last  drew  them  into  a  place  enclosed 
between  two  ditches  that  were  very  deep  and 
full  of  water.  When  he  had  them  at  this  ad¬ 
vantage,  he  soon  charged  them,  drawing  up 
the  front  of  his  battle  equal  to  the  space  be¬ 
tween  the  two  ditches,  so  that  they  had  no  way 
of  surrounding  him,  being  enclosed  themselves 
on  both  sides.  They  made  but  little  resistance; 
many  fell,  others  fled  and  were  dispersed. 

Nectanabis,  being  thus  settled  and  fixed  in 
his  kingdom,  with  much  kindness  and  affec¬ 
tion  invited  Agesilaus  to  spend  his  winter  in 
Egypt,  but  he  made  haste  home  to  assist  in  wars 
of  his  own  country,  which  was,  he  knew,  in 
want  of  money,  and  forced  to  hire  merce¬ 
naries,  whilst  their  own  men  were  fighting 
abroad.  The  king,  therefore,  dismissed  him 
very  honourably,  and  among  other  gifts  pre¬ 
sented  him  with  two  hundred  and  thirty  tal¬ 
ents  of  silver  toward  the  charge  of  the  war. 


POMPEY 

But  the  weather  being  tempestuous,  his  ships 
kept  inshore,  and  passing  along  the  coast  of 
Africa  he  reached  an  uninhabited  spot  called 
the  Port  of  Menelaus,  and  here,  when  his  ships 
were  just  upon  landing,  he  expired,  being 
eighty-four  years  old,  and  having  reigned  in 
Lacedaemon  forty-one.  Thirty  of  which  years 
he  passed  with  the  reputation  of  being  the 
greatest  and  most  powerful  man  of  all  Greece, 
and  was  looked  upon  as,  in  a  manner,  general 
and  king  of  it,  until  the  battle  of  Leuctra.  It 


499 

was  the  custom  of  the  Spartans  to  bury  their 
common  dead  in  the  place  where  they  died, 
whatsoever  country  it  was,  but  their  kings  they 
carried  home.  The  followers  of  Agesilaus,  for 
want  of  honey,  enclosed  his  body  in  wax,  and 
so  conveyed  him  to  Lacedaemon. 

His  son,  Archidamus,  succeeded  him  on  his 
throne;  so  did  his  posterity  successively  to  Agis, 
the  fifth  from  Agesilaus;  who  was  slain  by 
Leonidas,  while  attempting  to  restore  the  an¬ 
cient  discipline  of  Sparta. 


POMPEY 

106-48  B.C. 


The  people  of  Rome  seem  to  have  enter¬ 
tained  for  Pompey  from  his  childhood 
the  same  affection  that  Prometheus,  in 
the  tragedy  of  yEschylus,  expresses  for  Hercu¬ 
les,  speaking  of  him  as  the  author  of  his  de¬ 
liverance,  in  these  words: — 

Ah  cruel  Sire !  how  dear  thy  son  to  me l 
The  generous  offspring  of  my  enemy! 

For  on  the  one  hand,  never  did  the  Romans 
give  such  demonstrations  of  a  vehement  and 
fierce  hatred  against  any  of  their  generals  as 
they  did  against  Strabo,  the  father  of  Pompey; 
during  whose  lifetime,  it  is  true,  they  stood  in 
awe  of  his  military  power,  as  indeed  he  was  a 
formidable  warrior,  but  immediately  upon  his 
death,  which  happened  by  a  stroke  of  thunder, 
they  treated  him  with  the  utmost  contumely, 
dragging  his  corpse  from  the  bier,  as  it  was 
carried  to  his  funeral.  On  the  other  side,  never 
had  any  Roman  the  people’s  good-will  and  de¬ 
votion  more  zealous  throughout  all  the 
changes  of  fortune,  more  early  in  its  first 
springing  up,  or  more  steadily  rising  with  his 
prosperity,  or  more  constant  in  his  adversity 
than  Pompey  had.  In  Strabo,  there  was  one 
great  cause  of  their  hatred,  his  insatiable  covet¬ 
ousness;  in  Pompey,  there  were  many  that 
helped  to  make  him  the  object  of  their  love; 
his  temperance,  his  skill  and  exercise  in  war, 
his  eloquence  of  speech,  integrity  of  mind,  and 
affability  in  conversation  and  address;  inso¬ 
much  that  no  man  ever  asked  a  favour  with 
less  offence,  or  conferred  one  with  a  better 
grace.  When  he  gave,  it  was  without  assump¬ 
tion;  when  he  received,  it  was  with  dignity  and 
honour. 

In  his  youth,  his  countenance  pleaded  for 


him,  seeming  to  anticipate  his  eloquence,  and 
win  upon  the  affections  of  the  people  before 
he  spoke.  His  beauty  even  in  his  bloom  of 
youth  had  something  in  it  at  once  of  gentleness 
and  dignity;  and  when  his  prime  of  manhood 
came,  the  majesty  and  kingliness  of  his  char¬ 
acter  at  once  became  visible  in  it.  His  hair  sat 
somewhat  hollow  or  rising  a  little;  and  this, 
with  the  languishing  motion  of  his  eyes,  seem¬ 
ed  to  form  a  resemblance  in  his  face,  though 
perhaps  more  talked  of  than  really  apparent, 
to  the  statues  of  the  King  Alexander.  And  be¬ 
cause  many  applied  that  name  to  him  in  his 
youth,  Pompey  himself  did  not  decline  it,  in¬ 
somuch  that  some  called  him  so  in  derision. 
And  Lucius  Philippus,  a  man  of  consular  dig¬ 
nity,  when  he  was  pleading  in  favour  of  him, 
thought  it  not  unfit  to  say,  that  people  could 
not  be  surprised  if  Philip  was  a  lover  of  Alex¬ 
ander. 

It  is  related  of  Flora,  the  courtesan,  that 
when  she  was  now  pretty  old,  she  took  great 
delight  in  speaking  of  her  early  familiarity 
with  Pompey,  and  was  wont  to  say  that  she 
could  never  part  after  being  with  him  without 
a  bite. 

She  would  further  tell,  that  Geminius,  a 
companion  of  Pompey’s,  fell  in  love  with  her, 
and  made  his  court  with  great  importunity; 
and  on  her  refusing,  and  telling  him,  however 
her  inclinations  were,  yet  she  could  not  gratify 
his  desires  for  Pompey’s  sake,  he  therefore 
made  his  request  to  Pompey,  and  Pompey 
frankly  gave  his  consent,  but  never  afterwards 
would  have  any  converse  with  her,  notwith¬ 
standing  that  he  seemed  to  have  a  great  pas¬ 
sion  for  her;  and  Flora,  on  this  occasion,  show- 


500 

ed  none  of  the  levity  that  might  have  been  ex¬ 
pected  of  her,  but  languished  for  some  time 
after  under  a  sickness  brought  on  by  grief  and 
desire. 

This  Flora,  we  are  told,  was  such  a  cele¬ 
brated  beauty,  that  Csecilius  Metellus,  when  he 
adorned  the  temple  of  Castor  and  Pollux  with 
paintings  and  statues,  among  the  rest  dedi¬ 
cated  hers  for  her  singular  beauty. 

In  his  conduct  also  to  the  wife  of  Demetrius, 
his  freed  servant  (who  had  great  influence 
with  him  in  his  lifetime,  and  left  an  estate  of 
four  thousand  talents),  Pompey  acted  contrary 
to  his  usual  habits,  not  quite  fairly  or  gener¬ 
ously,  fearing  lest  he  should  fall  under  the  com¬ 
mon  censure  of  being  enamoured  and  charmed 
with  her  beauty,  which  was  irresistible,  and 
became  famous  everywhere.  Nevertheless, 
though  he  seemed  to  be  so  extremely  circum¬ 
spect  and  cautious,  yet  even  in  matters  of  this 
nature  he  could  not  avoid  the  calumnies  of  his 
enemies,  but  upon  the  score  of  married  wom¬ 
en,  they  accused  him,  as  if  he  had  connived  at 
many  things,  and  embezzled  the  public  rev¬ 
enue  to  gratify  their  luxury. 

Of  his  easiness  of  temper  and  plainness,  in 
what  related  to  eating  and  drinking,  the  story 
is  told  that,  once  in  a  sickness,  when  his  stom¬ 
ach  nauseated  common  meats,  his  physician 
prescribed  him  a  thrush  to  eat;  but  upon 
search,  there  was  none  to  be  bought,  for  they 
were  not  then  in  season,  and  one  telling  him 
they  were  to  be  had  at  Lucullus’s,  who  kept 
them  all  the  year  round,  “So  then,”  said  he,  “if 
it  were  not  for  Lucullus’s  luxury,  Pompey 
should  not  live”;  and  thereupon,  not  minding 
the  prescription  of  the  physician,  he  contented 
himself  with  such  meat  as  could  easily  be  pro¬ 
cured.  But  this  was  at  a  later  time. 

Being  as  yet  a  very  young  man,  and  upon  an 
expedition  in  which  his  father  was  command¬ 
ing  against  Cinna,  he  had  in  his  tent  with  him 
one  Lucius  Terentius,  as  his  companion  and 
comrade,  who,  being  corrupted  by  Cinna,  en¬ 
tered  into  an  engagement  to  kill  Pompey,  as 
others  had  done  to  set  the  general’s  tent  on 
fire.  This  conspiracy  being  discovered  to  Pom¬ 
pey  at  supper,  he  showed  no  discomposure  at 
it,  but  on  the  contrary  drank  more  liberally 
than  usual,  and  expressed  great  kindness  to 
Terentius;  but  about  bedtime,  pretending  to 
go  to  his  repose,  he  stole  away  secretly  out  of 
the  tent,  and  setting  a  guard  about  his  father, 
quietly  expected  the  event.  Terentius,  when  he 
thought  the  proper  time  come,  rose  with  his 
naked  sword,  and  coming  to  Pompey’s  bedside 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

stabbed  several  strokes  through  the  bedclothes, 
as  if  he  were  lying  there.  Immediately  after 
this  there  was  a  great  uproar  throughout  all 
the  camp,  arising  from  the  hatred  they  bore  to 
the  general,  and  an  universal  movement  of  the 
soldiers  to  revolt,  all  tearing  down  their  tents 
and  betaking  themselves  to  their  arms.  The 
general  himself  all  this  while  durst  not  venture 
out  because  of  the  tumult;  but  Pompey,  going 
about  in  the  midst  of  them,  besought  them 
with  tears;  and  at  last  threw  himself  prostrate 
upon  his  face  before  the  gate  of  the  camp,  and 
lay  there  in  the  passage  at  their  feet  shedding 
tears,  and  bidding  those  that  were  marching 
off,  if  they  would  go,  trample  upon  him.  Upon 
which,  none  could  help  going  back  again,  and 
all,  except  eight  hundred,  either  through  shame 
or  compassion,  repented,  and  were  reconciled 
to  the  general. 

Immediately  upon  the  death  of  Strabo,  there 
was  an  action  commenced  against  Pompey,  as 
his  heir,  for  that  his  father  had  embezzled  the 
public  treasure.  But  Pompey,  having  traced 
the  principal  thefts,  charged  them  upon  one 
Alexander,  a  freed  slave  of  his  father’s,  and 
proved  before  the  judges  that  he  had  been  the 
appropriator.  But  he  himself  was  accused  ol 
having  in  his  possession  some  hunting  tackle, 
and  books,  that  were  taken  at  Asculum.  To 
this  he  confessed  thus  far,  that  he  received 
them  from  his  father  when  he  took  Asculum, 
but  pleaded  further,  that  he  had  lost  them 
since,  upon  Cinna’s  return  to  Rome,  when  his 
house  was  broken  open  and  plundered  by 
Cinna’s  guards. 

In  this  cause  he  had  a  great  many  prepara¬ 
tory  pleadings  against  his  accuser,  in  which  he 
showed  an  activity  and  steadfastness  beyond 
his  years,  and  gained  great  reputation  and  fa¬ 
vour,  insomuch  that  Antistius,  the  praetor  and 
judge  of  the  cause,  took  a  great  liking  to  him, 
and  offered  him  his  daughter  in  marriage, 
having  had  some  communications  with  his 
friends  about  it.  Pompey  accepted  the  pro¬ 
posal,  and  they  were  privately  contracted;  how¬ 
ever,  the  secret  was  not  so  closely  kept  as  to 
escape  the  multitude,  but  it  was  discernible 
enough,  from  the  favour  shown  him  by  Antis¬ 
tius  in  his  cause.  And  at  last,  when  Antistius 
pronounced  the  absolutory  sentence  of  the 
judges,  the  people,  as  if  it  had  been  upon  a 
signal  given,  made  the  acclamation  used  ac¬ 
cording  to  ancient  custom  at  marriages, 
Talasio. 

The  origin  of  which  custom  is  related  to  be 
this.  At  the  time  when  the  daughters  of  the 


POMPEY 

Sabines  came  to  Rome,  to  see  the  shows  and 
sports  there,  and  were  violently  seized  upon  by 
the  most  distinguished  and  bravest  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans  for  wives,  it  happened  that  some  goat- 
swains  and  herdsmen  of  the  meaner  rank  were 
carrying  off  a  beautiful  and  tall  maiden;  and 
lest  any  of  their  betters  should  meet  them,  and 
take  her  away,  as  they  ran,  they  cried  out  with 
one  voice,  Talasio,  Talasius  being  a  well- 
known  and  popular  person  among  them,  inso¬ 
much  that  all  that  heard  the  name  clapped 
their  hands  for  joy,  and  joined  with  them  in 
the  shout,  as  applauding  and  congratulating 
the  chance.  Now,  say  they,  because  this  proved 
a  fortunate  match  to  Talasius,  hence  it  is  that 
this  acclamation  is  sportively  used  as  a  nuptial 
cry  at  all  weddings.  This  is  the  most  credible 
of  the  accounts  that  are  given  of  the  Talasio. 
And  some  few  days  after  this  judgment,  Pom- 
pey  married  Antistia. 

After  this  he  went  to  Cinna’s  camp,  where, 
finding  some  false  suggestions  and  calumnies 
prevailing  against  him,  he  began  to  be  afraid, 
and  presently  withdrew  himself  secretly; 
which  sudden  disappearance  occasioned  great 
suspicion.  And  there  went  a  rumour  and 
speech  through  all  the  camp  that  Cinna  had 
murdered  the  young  man;  upon  which  all  that 
had  been  anyways  disobliged,  and  bore  any 
malice  to  him,  resolved  to  make  an  assault  up¬ 
on  him.  He,  endeavouring  to  make  his  escape, 
was  seized  by  a  centurion,  who  pursued  him 
with  his  naked  sword.  Cinna,  in  this  distress, 
fell  upon  his  knees,  and  offered  him  his  seal¬ 
ring,  of  great  value,  for  his  ransom;  but  the 
centurion  repulsed  him  insolently,  saying,  “I 
did  not  come  to  seal  a  covenant,  but  to  be  re¬ 
venged  upon  a  lawless  and  wicked  tyrant”; and 
so  despatched  him  immediately. 

Thus  Cinna  being  slain,  Carbo,  a  tyrant  yet 
more  senseless  than  he,  took  the  command  and 
exercised  it,  while  Sulla  meantime  was  ap¬ 
proaching,  much  to  the  joy  and  satisfaction  of 
most  people,  who  in  their  present  evils  were 
ready  to  find  some  comfort  if  it  were  but  in 
the  exchange  of  a  master.  For  the  city  was 
brought  to  that  pass  by  oppression  and  calami¬ 
ties  that,  being  utterly  in  despair  of  liberty, 
men  were  only  anxious  for  the  mildest  and 
most  tolerable  bondage. 

At  that  time  Pompey  was  in  Picenum  in 
Italy,  where  he  spent  some  time  amusing  him¬ 
self,  as  he  had  estates  in  the  country  there, 
though  the  chief  motive  of  his  stay  was  the 
liking  he  felt  for  the  towns  of  that  district, 
which  all  regarded  him  with  hereditary  feel- 


501 

ings  of  kindness  and  attachment.  But  when  he 
now  saw  that  the  noblest  and  best  of  the  city 
began  to  forsake  their  homes  and  property, 
and  fly  from  all  quarters  to  Sulla’s  camp,  as 
to  their  haven,  he  likewise  was  desirous  to  go; 
not,  however,  as  a  fugitive,  alone  and  with 
nothing  to  offer,  but  as  a  friend  rather  than  a 
suppliant,  in  a  way  that  would  gain  him  hon¬ 
our,  bringing  help  along  with  him,  and  at  the 
head  of  a  body  of  troops.  Accordingly  he  solic¬ 
ited  the  Picentines  for  their  assistance,  who  as 
cordially  embraced  his  motion,  and  rejected 
the  messengers  sent  from  Carbo;  insomuch 
that  a  certain  Vindius  taking  upon  him  to  say 
that  Pompey  was  come  from  the  school-room 
to  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  people,  they 
were  so  incensed  that  they  fell  forthwith  upon 
this  Vindius  and  killed  him. 

From  henceforward,  Pompey,  finding  a  spirit 
of  government  upon  him,  though  not  above 
twenty-three  years  of  age,  nor  deriving  an  au¬ 
thority  by  commission  from  any  man,  took  the 
privilege  to  grant  himself  full  power,  and, 
causing  a  tribunal  to  be  erected  in  the  market¬ 
place  of  Auximum,  a  populous  city,  expelled 
two  of  their  principal  men,  brothers,  of  the 
name  of  Ventidius,  who  were  acting  against 
him  in  Carbo’s  interest,  commanding  them  by 
a  public  edict  to  depart  the  city;  and  then  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  levy  soldiers,  issuing  out  commis¬ 
sions  to  centurions  and  other  officers,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  form  of  military  discipline.  And  in 
this  manner  he  went  round  all  the  rest  of  the 
cities  in  the  district. 

So  that  those  of  Carbo’s  faction  flying,  and 
all  others  cheerfully  submitting  to  his  com¬ 
mand,  in  a  little  time  he  mustered  three  entire 
legions,  having  supplied  himself  besides  with 
all  manner  of  provisions,  beasts  of  burden,  car¬ 
riages,  and  other  necessaries  of  war.  And  with 
this  equipage  he  set  forward  on  his  march  to¬ 
ward  Sulla,  not  as  if  he  were  in  haste,  or  de¬ 
sirous  of  escaping  observation,  but  by  small 
journeys,  making  several  halts  upon  the  road, 
to  distress  and  annoy  the  enemy,  and  exerting 
himself  to  detach  from  Carbo’s  interest  every 
part  of  Italy  that  he  passed  through. 

Three  commanders  of  the  enemy  encoun¬ 
tered  him  at  once,  Carinna,  Clcelius,  and  Bru¬ 
tus,  and  drew  up  their  forces,  not  all  in  the 
front,  nor  yet  together  on  any  one  part,  but 
encamping  three  several  armies  in  a  circle 
about  him,  they  resolved  to  encompass  and 
overpower  him.  Pompey  was  noway  alarmed 
at  this,  but  collecting  all  his  troops  into  one 
body,  and  placing  his  horse  in  the  front  of  the 


502 

battle,  where  he  himself  was  in  person,  he  sin¬ 
gled  out  and  bent  all  his  forces  against  Brutus, 
and  when  the  Celtic  horsemen  from  the  en¬ 
emy’s  side  rode  out  to  meet  him,  Pompey  him¬ 
self  encountering  hand  to  hand  with  the  fore¬ 
most  and  stoutest  among  them,  killed  him 
with  his  spear.  The  rest  seeing  this  turned 
their  backs  and  fled,  and  breaking  the  ranks  of 
their  own  foot,  presently  caused  a  general  rout; 
whereupon  the  commanders  fell  out  among 
themselves,  and  marched  off,  some  one  way, 
some  another,  as  their  fortunes  led  them,  and 
the  towns  round  about  came  in  and  surren¬ 
dered  themselves  to  Pompey,  concluding  that 
the  enemy  was  dispersed  for  fear. 

Next  after  these,  Scipio,  the  consul,  came  to 
attack  him,  and  with  as  little  success;  for  before 
the  armies  could  join,  or  be  within  the  throw 
of  their  javelins,  Scipio’s  soldiers  saluted  Pom- 
pey’s,  and  came  over  to  them,  while  Scipio 
made  his  escape  by  flight. 

Last  of  all,  Carbo  himself  sent  down  several 
troops  of  horse  against  him  by  the  river  Arsis, 
which  Pompey  assailed  with  the  same  courage 
and  success  as  before;  and  having  routed  and 
put  them  to  flight,  he  forced  them  in  the  pur¬ 
suit  into  difficult  ground,  unpassable  for  horse, 
where,  seeing  no  hopes  of  escape,  they  yielded 
themselves  with  their  horses  and  armour,  all 
to  his  mercy. 

Sulla  was  hitherto  unacquainted  with  all 
these  actions;  and  on  the  first  intelligence  he 
received  of  his  movements  was  in  great  anxiety 
about  him,  fearing  lest  he  should  be  cut  off 
among  so  many  and  such  experienced  com¬ 
manders  of  the  enemy,  and  marched  therefore 
with  all  speed  to  his  aid.  Now  Pompey,  having 
advice  of  his  approach,  sent  out  orders  to  his 
officers  to  marshal  and  draw  up  all  his  forces 
in  full  array,  that  they  might  make  the  finest 
and  noblest  appearance  before  the  commander- 
in-chief;  for  he  expected  indeed  great  honours 
from  him,  but  met  with  even  greater. 

For  as  soon  as  Sulla  saw  him  thus  advancing, 
his  army  so  well  appointed,  his  men  so  young 
and  strong,  and  their  spirits  so  high  and  hope¬ 
ful  with  their  successes,  he  alighted  from  his 
horse,  and  being  first,  as  was  his  due,  saluted 
by  them  with  the  title  of  Imperator,  he  return¬ 
ed  the  salutation  upon  Pompey,  in  the  same 
term  and  style  of  Imperator,  which  might  well 
cause  surprise,  as  none  could  have  ever  anti¬ 
cipated  that  he  would  have  imparted,  to  one 
so  young  in  years  and  not  yet  a  senator,  a  title 
which  was  the  object  of  contention  between 
him  and  the  Scipios  and  Marii.  And  indeed  all 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  rest  of  his  deportment  was  agreeable  to  this 
first  compliment;  whenever  Pompey  came  into 
his  presence,  he  paid  some  sort  of  respect  to 
him,  either  in  rising  and  being  uncovered,  or 
the  like,  which  he  was  rarely  seen  to  do  with 
any  one  else,  notwithstanding  that  there  were 
many  about  him  of  great  rank  and  honour. 

Yet  Pompey  was  not  puffed  up  at  all,  or  ex¬ 
alted  with  these  favours.  And  when  Sulla 
would  have  sent  him  with  all  expedition  into 
Gaul,  a  province  in  which  it  was  thought  Me- 
tellus,  who  commanded  in  it,  had  done  noth¬ 
ing  worthy  of  the  large  forces  at  his  disposal, 
Pompey  urged  that  it  could  not  be  fair  or  hon¬ 
ourable  for  him  to  take  a  province  out  of  the 
hands  of  his  senior  in  command  and  his  supe¬ 
rior  in  reputation;  however,  if  Metellus  were 
willing,  and  should  request  his  service,  he 
should  be  very  ready  to  accompany  and  assist 
him  in  the  war,  which  when  Metellus  came  to 
understand,  he  approved  of  the  proposal,  and 
invited  him  over  by  letter.  On  this  Pompey 
fell  immediately  into  Gaul,  where  he  not  only 
achieved  wonderful  exploits  of  himself,  but 
also  fired  up  and  kindled  again  that  bold  and 
warlike  spirit,  which  old  age  had  in  a  manner 
extinguished  in  Metellus,  into  a  new  heat;  just 
as  molten  copper,  they  say,  when  poured  upon 
that  which  is  cold  and  solid,  will  dissolve  and 
melt  it  faster  than  fire  itself. 

But  as  when  a  famous  wrestler  has  gained 
the  first  place  among  men,  and  borne  away  the 
prizes  at  all  the  games,  it  is  not  usual  to  take 
account  of  his  victories  as  a  boy,  or  to  enter 
them  upon  record  among  the  rest;  so  with  the 
exploits  of  Pompey  in  his  youth,  though  they 
were  extraordinary  in  themselves,  yet  because 
they  were  obscured  and  buried  in  the  multi¬ 
tude  and  greatness  of  his  later  wars  and  con¬ 
quests,  I  dare  not  be  particular  in  them,  lest, 
by  trifling  away  time  in  the  lesser  moments  of 
his  youth,  we  should  be  driven  to  omit  those 
greater  actions  and  fortunes  which  best  illus¬ 
trate  his  character. 

Now,  when  Sulla  had  brought  all  Italy  un¬ 
der  his  dominion,  and  was  proclaimed  dicta¬ 
tor,  he  began  to  reward  the  rest  of  his  follow¬ 
ers,  by  giving  them  wealth,  appointing  them  to 
offices  in  the  state,  and  granting  them  freely 
and  without  restriction  any  favours  they  asked 
for.  But  as  for  Pompey,  admiring  his  valour 
and  conduct,  and  thinking  that  he  might 
prove  a  great  stay  and  support  to  him  hereafter 
in  his  affairs,  he  sought  means  to  attach  him  to 
himself  by  some  personal  alliance,  and  his  wife 
Metella  joining  in  his  wishes,  they  two  per- 


POMPEY 

suaded  Pompey  to  put  away  Antistia,  and 
marry  ^Emilia,  the  step-daughter  of  Sulla,  born 
by  Metella  to  Scaurus,  her  former  husband, 
she  being  at  that  very  time  the  wife  of  another 
man,  living  with  him,  and  with  child  by  him. 

These  were  the  very  tyrannies  of  marriage, 
and  much  more  agreeable  to  the  times  under 
Sulla  than  to  the  nature  and  habits  of  Pompey; 
that  ^Emilia  great  with  child  should  be,  as  it 
were,  ravished  from  the  embraces  of  another 
for  him,  and  that  Antistia  should  be  divorced 
with  dishonour  and  misery  by  him,  for  whose 
sake  she  had  been  but  just  before  bereft  of  her 
father.  For  Antistius  was  murdered  in  the  sen¬ 
ate,  because  he  was  suspected  to  be  a  favourer 
of  Sulla  for  Pompey ’s  sake;  and  her  mother, 
likewise,  after  she  had  seen  all  these  indignities, 
made  away  with  herself,  a  new  calamity  to  be 
added  to  the  tragic  accompaniments  of  this 
marriage,  and  that  there  might  be  nothing 
wanting  to  complete  them,  ^Emilia  herself 
died,  almost  immediately  after  entering  Pom- 
pey’s  house,  in  childbed. 

About  this  time  news  came  to  Sulla  that  Per- 
penna  was  fortifying  himself  in  Sicily,  that  the 
island  was  now  become  a  refuge  and  receptacle 
for  the  relics  of  the  adverse  party,  that  Carbo 
was  hovering  about  those  seas  with  a  navy,  that 
Domitius  had  fallen  in  upon  Africa,  and  that 
many  of  the  exiled  men  of  note  who  had  es¬ 
caped  from  the  proscriptions  were  daily  flock¬ 
ing  into  those  parts.  Against  these,  therefore, 
Pompey  was  sent  with  a  large  force;  and  no 
sooner  was  he  arrived  in  Sicily,  but  Perpenna 
immediately  departed,  leaving  the  whole  island 
to  him. 

Pompey  received  the  distressed  cities  into  fa¬ 
vour,  and  treated  all  with  great  humanity,  ex¬ 
cept  the  Mamertines  inMessena;  for  when  they 
protested  against  his  court  and  jurisdiction,  al¬ 
leging  their  privilege  and  exemption  founded 
upon  an  ancient  charter  or  grant  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  he  replied  sharply,  ‘‘What!  will  you 
never  cease  prating  of  laws  to  us  that  have 
swords  by  our  sides?” 

It  was  thought,  likewise,  that  he  showed 
some  inhumanity  to  Carbo,  seeming  rather  to 
insult  over  his  misfortunes  than  to  chastise  his 
crimes.  For  if  there  had  been  a  necessity,  as  per¬ 
haps  there  was,  that  he  should  be  taken  off,  that 
might  have  been  done  at  first,  as  soon  as  he  was 
taken  prisoner,  for  then  it  would  have  been  the 
act  of  him  that  commanded  it.  But  here  Pom¬ 
pey  commanded  a  man  that  had  been  thrice 
consul  of  Rome  to  be  brought  in  fetters  to  stand 
at  the  bar,  he  himself  sitting  upon  the  bench  in 


503 

judgment,  examining  the  cause  with  the  for¬ 
malities  of  law,  to  the  offence  and  indignation 
of  all  that  were  present,  and  afterwards  ordered 
him  to  be  taken  away  and  put  to  death.  It  is  re¬ 
lated,  by  the  way,  of  Carbo,  that  as  soon  as  he 
was  brought  to  the  place,  and  saw  the  sword 
drawn  for  execution,  he  was  suddenly  seized 
with  a  looseness  or  pain  in  his  bowels,  and  de¬ 
sired  a  little  respite  of  the  executioner,  and  a 
convenient  place  to  relieve  himself. 

And  yet  further,  Caius  Oppius,  the  friend  of 
Caesar,  tells  us  that  Pompey  dealt  cruelly  with 
Quintus  Valerius,  a  man  of  singular  learning 
and  science.  For  when  he  was  brought  to  him, 
he  walked  aside,  and  drew  him  into  conversa¬ 
tion,  and  after  putting  a  variety  of  questions  to 
him,  and  receiving  answers  from  him,  he  or¬ 
dered  his  officers  to  take  him  away  and  put 
him  to  death.  But  we  must  not  be  too  credulous 
in  the  case  of  narratives  told  by  Oppius,  espe¬ 
cially  when  he  undertakes  to  relate  anything 
touching  the  friends  or  foes  of  Caesar. 

This  is  certain,  that  there  lay  a  necessity  upon 
Pompey  to  be  severe  upon  many  of  Sulla’s  ene¬ 
mies,  those  at  least  that  were  eminent  persons 
in  themselves,  and  notoriously  known  to  be 
taken;  but  for  the  rest,  he  acted  with  all  the 
clemency  possible  for  him,  conniving  at  the 
concealment  of  some,  and  himself  being  the 
instrument  in  the  escape  of  others. 

So  in  the  case  of  the  Himeraeans;  for  when 
Pompey  had  determined  on  severely  punishing 
their  city,  as  they  had  been  abettors  of  the  ene¬ 
my,  Sthenis,  the  leader  of  the  people  there, 
craving  liberty  of  speech,  told  him  that  what  he 
was  about  to  do  was  not  at  all  consistent  with 
justice,  for  that  he  would  pass  by  the  guilty 
and  destroy  the  innocent;  and  on  Pompey  de¬ 
manding  who  that  guilty  person  was  that 
would  assume  the  offences  of  them  all,  Sthenis 
replied  it  was  himself,  who  had  engaged  his 
friends  by  persuasion  to  what  they  had  done, 
and  his  enemies  by  force;  whereupon  Pompey, 
being  much  taken  with  the  frank  speech  and 
noble  spirit  of  the  man,  first  forgave  his  crime, 
and  then  pardoned  all  the  rest  of  the  Himerae¬ 
ans. 

Hearing,  likewise,  that  his  soldiers  were 
very  disorderly  in  their  march,  doing  violence 
upon  the  roads,  he  ordered  their  swords  to  be 
sealed  up  in  their  scabbards,  and  whosoever 
kept  them  not  so  were  severely  punished. 

Whilst  Pompey  was  thus  busy  in  the  affairs 
and  government  of  Sicily,  he  received  a  decree 
of  the  senate,  and  a  commission  from  Sulla, 
commanding  him  forthwith  to  sail  into  Africa, 


504 

and  make  war  upon  Domitius  with  all  his 
forces:  for  Domitius  had  rallied  up  a  far 
greater  army  than  Marius  had  had  not  long 
since,  when  he  sailed  out  of  Africa  into  Italy, 
and  caused  a  revolution  in  Rome,  and  himself, 
from  a  fugitive  outlaw,  became  a  tyrant.  Pom- 
pey,  therefore,  having  prepared  everything 
with  the  utmost  speed,  left  Memmius,  his  sis¬ 
ter’s  husband,  governor  of  Sicily,  and  set  sail 
with  one  hundred  and  twenty  galleys,  and 
eight  hundred  other  vessels  laden  with  provi¬ 
sions,  money,  ammunition,  and  engines  of  bat¬ 
tery.  He  arrived  with  his  fleet,  part  at  the  port 
of  Utica,  part  at  Carthage;  and  no  sooner  was 
he  landed,  but  seven  thousand  of  the  enemy 
revolted  and  came  over  to  him,  while  his  own 
forces  that  he  brought  with  him  consisted  of 
six  entire  legions.  Here  they  tell  us  of  a  pleas¬ 
ant  incident  that  happened  to  him  at  his  first 
arrival. 

Some  of  his  soldiers  having  by  accident 
stumbled  upon  a  treasure,  by  which  they  got  a 
good  sum  of  money,  the  rest  of  the  army  hear¬ 
ing  this,  began  to  fancy  that  the  field  was  full 
of  gold  and  silver,  which  had  been  hid  there  of 
old  by  the  Carthaginians  in  the  time  of  their 
calamities,  and  thereupon  fell  to  work,  so  that 
the  army  was  useless  to  Pompey  for  many  days, 
being  totally  engaged  in  digging  for  the  fan¬ 
cied  treasure,  he  himself  all  the  while  walking 
up  and  down  only,  and  laughing  to  see  so 
many  thousands  together,  digging  and  turning 
up  the  earth.  Until  at  last,  growing  weary  and 
hopeless,  they  came  to  themselves  and  returned 
to  their  general,  begging  him  to  lead  them 
where  he  pleased,  for  that  they  had  already  re¬ 
ceived  the  punishment  of  their  folly. 

By  this  time  Domitius  had  prepared  him¬ 
self  and  drawn  out  his  army  in  array  against 
Pompey;  but  there  was  a  watercourse  betwixt 
them,  craggy,  and  difficult  to  pass  over;  and 
this,  together  with  a  great  storm  of  wind  and 
rain  pouring  down  even  from  break  of  day, 
seemed  to  leave  but  little  possibility  of  their 
coming  together;  so  that  Domitius,  not  expect¬ 
ing  any  engagement  that  day,  commanded  his 
forces  to  draw  oft  and  retire  to  the  camp.  Now 
Pompey,  who  was  watchful  upon  every  occa¬ 
sion,  making  use  of  the  opportunity,  ordered 
a  march  forthwith,  and  having  passed  over  the 
torrent,  fell  in  immediately  upon  their  quar¬ 
ters.  The  enemy  was  in  great  disorder  and  tu¬ 
mult,  and  in  that  confusion  attempted  a  resist¬ 
ance;  but  they  neither  were  all  there,  nor  sup¬ 
ported  one  another;  besides,  the  wind  having 
veered  about  beat  the  rain  full  in  their  faces. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Neither  indeed  was  the  storm  less  troublesome 
to  the  Romans,  for  that  they  could  not  clearly 
discern  one  another,  insomuch  that  even  Pom¬ 
pey  himself,  being  unknown,  escaped  narrow¬ 
ly;  for  when  one  of  his  soldiers  demanded  of 
him  the  word  of  battle,  it  happened  that  he  was 
somewhat  slow  in  his  answer,  which  might 
have  cost  him  his  life. 

The  enemy  being  routed  with  a  great  slaugh¬ 
ter  (for  it  is  said  that  of  twenty  thousand  there 
escaped  but  three  thousand),  the  army  saluted 
Pompey  by  the  name  of  Imperator;  but  he  de¬ 
clined  it,  telling  them  that  he  could  not  by  any 
means  accept  of  that  title  as  long  as  he  saw  the 
camp  of  the  enemy  standing;  but  if  they  de¬ 
signed  to  make  him  worthy  of  the  honour,  they 
must  first  demolish  that.  The  soldiers  on  hear¬ 
ing  this  went  at  once  and  made  an  assault  upon 
the  works  and  trenches,  and  there  Pompey 
fought  without  his  helmet,  in  memory  of  his 
former  danger,  and  to  avoid  the  like.  The  camp 
was  thus  taken  by  storm,  and  among  the  rest 
Domitius  was  slain.  After  that  overthrow,  the 
cities  of  the  country  thereabouts  were  all  either 
secured  by  surrender,  or  taken  by  storm.  King 
Iarbas,  likewise,  a  confederate  and  auxiliary  of 
Domitius,  was  taken  prisoner,  and  his  king¬ 
dom  was  given  to  Hiempsal. 

Pompey  could  not  rest  here,  but  being  am¬ 
bitious  to  follow  the  good  fortune  and  use  the 
valour  of  his  army,  entered  Numidia;  and 
marching  forward  many  days’  journey  up  into 
the  country,  he  conquered  all  wherever  he 
came.  And  having  revived  the  terror  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  power,  which  was  now  almost  obliterated 
among  the  barbarous  nations,  he  said  likewise, 
that  the  wild  beasts  of  Africa  ought  not  to  be 
left  without  some  experience  of  the  courage 
and  success  of  the  Romans,  and  therefore  he 
bestowed  some  few  days  in  hunting  lions  and 
elephants.  And  it  is  said  that  it  was  not  above 
the  space  of  forty  days  at  the  utmost  in  which 
he  gave  a  total  overthrow  to  the  enemy,  re¬ 
duced  Africa,  and  established  the  affairs  of  the 
kings  and  kingdoms  of  all  that  country,  being 
then  in  the  twenty-fourth  year  of  his  age. 

When  Pompey  returned  back  to  the  city  of 
Utica,  there  were  presented  to  him  letters  and 
orders  from  Sulla,  commanding  him  to  dis¬ 
band  the  rest  of  his  army,  and  himself  with  one 
legion  only  to  wait  there  the  coming  of  another 
general,  to  succeed  him  in  the  government. 
This,  inwardly,  was  extremely  grievous  to  Pom¬ 
pey,  though  he  made  no  show  of  it.  But  the 
army  resented  it  openly,  and  when  Pompey  be¬ 
sought  them  to  depart  and  go  home  before 


POMPEY 

him,  they  began  to  revile  Sulla,  and  declared 
broadly  that  they  were  resolved  not  to  forsake 
him,  neither  did  they  think  it  safe  for  him  to 
trust  the  tyrant. 

Pompey  at  first  endeavoured  to  appease  and 
pacify  them  by  fair  speeches;  but  when  he  saw 
that  his  persuasions  were  vain,  he  left  the 
bench,  and  retired  to  his  tent  with  tears  in  his 
eyes.  But  the  soldiers  followed  him,  and  seizing 
upon  him,  by  force  brought  him  again,  and 
placed  him  in  his  tribunal;  where  great  part  of 
that  day  was  spent  in  dispute,  they  on  their 
part  persuading  him  to  stay  and  command 
them,  he,  on  the  other  side,  pressing  upon  them 
obedience  and  the  danger  of  mutiny.  At  last, 
when  they  grew  yet  more  importunate  and 
clamorous,  he  swore  that  he  would  kill  himself 
if  they  attempted  to  force  him;  and  scarcely 
even  thus  appeased  them. 

Nevertheless,  the  first  tidings  brought  to  Sul¬ 
la  were  that  Pompey  was  up  in  rebellion;  on 
which  he  remarked  to  some  of  his  friends,  “I 
see,  then,  it  is  my  destiny  to  contend  with  chil¬ 
dren  in  my  old  age”;  alluding  at  the  same  time 
to  Marius,  who,  being  but  a  mere  youth,  had 
given  him  great  trouble,  and  brought  him  into 
extreme  danger.  But  being  undeceived  after¬ 
wards  by  better  intelligence,  and  finding  the 
whole  city  prepared  to  meet  Pompey,  and  re¬ 
ceive  him  with  every  display  of  kindness  and 
honour,  he  resolved  to  exceed  them  all.  And, 
therefore,  going  out  foremost  to  meet  him  and 
embracing  him  with  great  cordiality,  he  gave 
him  his  welcome  aloud  in  the  title  of  Magnus, 
or  the  Great,  and  bade  all  that  were  present  call 
him  by  that  name. 

Others  say  that  he  had  this  title  first  given 
him  by  a  general  acclamation  of  all  the  army 
in  Africa,  but  that  it  was  fixed  upon  him  by 
this  ratification  of  Sulla.  It  is  certain  that  he 
himself  was  the  last  that  owned  the  title;  for  it 
was  a  long  time  after,  when  he  was  sent  pro- 
consul  into  Spain  against  Sertorius,  that  he  be¬ 
gan  to  write  himself  in  his  letters  and  commis¬ 
sions  by  the  name  of  Pompeius  Magnus;  com¬ 
mon  and  familiar  use  having  then  worn  off  the 
invidiousness  of  the  title. 

And  one  cannot  but  accord  respect  and  ad¬ 
miration  to  the  ancient  Romans,  who  did  not 
reward  the  successes  of  action  and  conduct  in 
war  alone  with  such  honourable  titles,  but 
adorned  likewise  the  virtue  and  services  of  em¬ 
inent  men  in  civil  government  with  the  same 
distinctions  and  marks  of  honour.  Two  persons 
received  from  the  people  the  name  of  Maximus, 
or  the  Greatest,  Valerius  for  reconciling  the 


505 

senate  and  people,  and  Fabius  Rullus,  because 
he  put  out  of  the  senate  certain  sons  of  freed 
slaves  who  had  been  admitted  into  it  because 
of  their  wealth. 

Pompey  now  desired  the  honour  of  a  tri¬ 
umph,  which  Sulla  opposed,  alleging  that  the 
law  allowed  that  honour  to  none  but  consuls 
and  praetors,  and  therefore  Scipio  the  elder, 
who  subdued  the  Carthaginians  in  Spain  in 
far  greater  and  nobler  conflicts,  never  peti¬ 
tioned  for  a  triumph,  because  he  had  never 
been  consul  or  praetor;  and  if  Pompey,  who 
had  scarcely  yet  fully  grown  a  beard,  and  was 
not  of  age  to  be  a  senator,  should  enter  the  city 
in  triumph,  what  a  weight  of  envy  would  it 
bring,  he  said,  at  once  upon  his  government 
and  Pompey’s  honour.  This  was  his  language 
to  Pompey,  intimating  that  he  could  not  by 
any  means  yield  to  his  request,  but  if  he  would 
persist  in  his  ambition,  that  he  was  resolved  to 
interpose  his  power  to  humble  him. 

Pompey,  however,  was  not  daunted;  but 
bade  Sulla  recollect  that  more  worshipped  the 
rising  than  the  setting  sun;  as  if  to  tell  him 
that  his  power  was  increasing  and  Sulla’s  on 
the  wane.  Sulla  did  not  perfectly  hear  the 
words,  but  observing  a  sort  of  amazement  and 
wonder  in  the  looks  and  gestures  of  those  that 
did  hear  them,  he  asked  what  it  was  that  he 
said. 

When  it  was  told  him,  he  seemed  astounded 
at  Pompey’s  boldness,  and  cried  out  twice  to¬ 
gether,  “Let  him  triumph,”  and  when  others 
began  to  show  their  disapprobation  and  of¬ 
fence  at  it,  Pompey,  it  is  said,  to  gall  and  vex 
them  the  more,  designed  to  have  his  trium¬ 
phant  chariot  drawn  with  four  elephants  (hav¬ 
ing  brought  over  several  which  belonged  to  the 
African  kings),  but  the  gates  of  the  city  being 
too  narrow,  he  was  forced  to  desist  from  that 
project,  and  be  content  with  horses. 

And  when  his  soldiers,  who  had  not  re¬ 
ceived  as  large  rewards  as  they  had  expected, 
began  to  clamour,  and  interrupt  the  triumph, 
Pompey  regarded  these  as  little  as  the  rest,  and 
plainly  told  them  that  he  had  rather  lose  the 
honour  of  his  triumph  than  flatter  them.  Upon 
which  Servilius,  a  man  of  great  distinction, 
and  at  first  one  of  the  chief  opposers  of  Pom¬ 
pey’s  triumph,  said  he  now  perceived  that 
Pompey  was  truly  great  and  worthy  of  a 
triumph. 

It  is  clear  that  he  might  easily  have  been  a 
senator,  also,  if  he  had  wished,  but  he  did  not 
sue  for  that,  being  ambitious,  it  seems,  only  of 
unusual  honours.  For  what  wonder  had  it  been 


506 

tor  Pompey  to  sit  in  the  senate  before  his  time? 
But  to  triumph  before  he  was  in  the  senate  was 
really  an  excess  of  glory. 

And,  moreover,  it  did  not  a  little  ingratiate 
him  with  the  people,  who  were  much  pleased 
to  see  him  after  his  triumph  take  his  place  again 
among  the  Roman  knights.  On  the  other  side, 
it  was  no  less  distasteful  to  Sulla  to  see  how 
fast  he  came  on,  and  to  what  a  height  of 
glory  and  power  he  was  advancing;  yet  being 
ashamed  to  hinder  him,  he  kept  quiet. 

But  when,  against  his  direct  wishes,  Pompey 
got  Lepidus  made  consul,  having  openly  joined 
in  the  canvass  and,  by  the  good-will  the  people 
felt  for  himself,  conciliated  their  favour  for 
Lepidus,  Sulla  could  forbear  no  longer;  but 
when  he  saw  him  coming  away  from  the  elec¬ 
tion  through  the  Forum  with  a  great  train  af¬ 
ter  him,  cried  out  to  him,  “Well,  young  man, 
I  see  you  rejoice  in  your  victory.  And,  indeed, 
is  it  not  a  most  generous  and  worthy  act,  that 
the  consulship  should  be  given  to  Lepidus,  the 
vilest  of  men,  in  preference  to  Catulus,  the  best 
and  most  deserving  in  the  city,  and  all  by  your 
influence  with  the  people?  It  will  be  well,  how¬ 
ever,  for  you  to  be  wakeful  and  look  to  your 
interests;  as  you  have  been  making  your  en¬ 
emy  stronger  than  yourself.” 

But  that  which  gave  the  clearest  demonstra¬ 
tion  of  Sulla’s  ill-will  to  Pompey  was  his  last 
will  and  testament;  for  whereas  he  had  be¬ 
queathed  several  legacies  to  all  the  rest  of  his 
friends,  and  appointed  some  of  them  guardi¬ 
ans  to  his  son,  he  passed  by  Pompey  without 
the  least  remembrance.  However,  Pompey  bore 
this  with  great  moderation  and  temper;  and 
when  Lepidus  and  others  were  disposed  to  ob¬ 
struct  his  interment  in  the  Campus  Martius, 
and  to  prevent  any  public  funeral  taking  place, 
came  forward  in  support  of  it,  and  saw  his  ob¬ 
sequies  performed  with  all  honour  and  security. 

Shortly  after  the  death  of  Sulla,  his  pro¬ 
phetic  words  were  fulfilled;  and  Lepidus  pro¬ 
posing  to  be  the  successor  to  all  his  power 
and  authority,  without  any  ambiguities  or  pre¬ 
tences,  immediately  appeared  in  arms,  rousing 
once  more  and  gathering  about  him  all  the 
long  dangerous  remains  of  the  old  factions, 
which  had  escaped  the  hand  of  Sulla. 

Catulus,  his  colleague,  who  was  followed  by 
the  sounder  part  of  the  senate  and  people,  was 
a  man  of  the  greatest  esteem  among  the  Ro¬ 
mans  for  wisdom  and  justice;  but  his  talent  lay 
in  the  government  of  the  city  rather  than  the 
camp,  whereas  the  exigency  required  the  skill 
of  Pompey.  Pompey,  therefore,  was  not  long 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

in  suspense  which  way  to  dispose  of  himself, 
but  joining  with  the  nobility,  was  presently  ap¬ 
pointed  general  of  the  army  against  Lepidus, 
who  had  already  raised  up  war  in  great  part  of 
Italy,  and  held  Cisalpine  Gaul  in  subjection 
with  an  army  under  Brutus.  As  for  the  rest  of 
his  garrisons,  Pompey  subdued  them  with  ease 
in  his  march,  but  Mutina  in  Gaul  resisted  in  a 
formal  siege,  and  he  lay  here  a  long  time  en¬ 
camped  against  Brutus. 

In  the  meantime  Lepidus  marched  in  all 
haste  against  Rome,  and  sitting  down  before  it 
with  a  crowd  of  followers,  to  the  terror  of  those 
within,  demanded  a  second  consulship.  But 
that  fear  quickly  vanished  upon  letters  sent 
from  Pompey,  announcing  that  he  had  ended 
the  war  without  a  battle;  for  Brutus,  either  be¬ 
traying  his  army,  or  being  betrayed  by  their  re¬ 
volt,  surrendered  himself  to  Pompey,  and  re¬ 
ceiving  a  guard  of  horse,  was  conducted  to  a 
little  town  upon  the  river  Po,  where  he  was 
slain  the  next  day  by  Geminius,  in  execution  of 
Pompey’s  commands.  And  for  this  Pompey 
was  much  censured;  for,  having  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  revolt  written  to  the  senate  that 
Brutus  had  voluntarily  surrendered  himself, 
immediately  afterward  he  sent  other  letters, 
with  matter  of  accusation  against  the  man  af¬ 
ter  he  was  taken  off.  Brutus,  who,  with  Cassius, 
slew  Caesar,  was  son  to  this  Brutus;  neither 
in  war  nor  in  his  death  like  his  father,  as  ap¬ 
pears  at  large  in  his  life.  Lepidus,  upon  his  be¬ 
ing  driven  out  of  Italy,  fled  to  Sardinia,  where 
he  fell  sick  and  died  of  sorrow,  not  for  his  pub¬ 
lic  misfortunes,  as  they  say,  but  upon  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  a  letter  proving  his  wife  to  have  been 
unfaithful  to  him. 

There  yet  remained  Sertorius,  a  very  different 
general  from  Lepidus,  in  possession  of  Spain, 
and  making  himself  formidable  to  Rome;  the 
final  disease,  as  it  were,  in  which  the  scattered 
evils  of  the  civil  wars  had  now  collected.  He 
had  already  cut  off  various  inferior  command¬ 
ers,  and  was  at  this  time  coping  with  Metellus 
Pius,  a  man  of  repute  and  a  good  soldier, 
though  perhaps  he  might  now  seem  too  slow, 
by  reason  of  his  age,  to  second  and  improve  the 
happier  moments  of  war,  and  might  be  some¬ 
times  wanting  to  those  advantages  which  Ser¬ 
torius,  by  his  quickness  and  dexterity,  would 
wrest  out  of  his  hands.  For  Sertorius  was  al¬ 
ways  hovering  about,  and  coming  upon  him 
unawares,  like  a  captain  of  thieves  rather  than 
soldiers,  disturbing  him  perpetually  with  am¬ 
buscades  and  light  skirmishes;  whereas  Metel¬ 
lus  was  accustomed  to  regular  conduct,  and 


POMPEY 

fighting  in  battle  array  with  full-armed  sol¬ 
diers. 

Pompey,  therefore,  keeping  his  army  in 
readiness,  made  it  his  object  to  be  sent  in  aid  to 
Metellus;  neither  would  he  be  induced  to  dis¬ 
band  his  forces,  notwithstanding  that  Catulus 
called  upon  him  to  do  so,  but  by  some  colour¬ 
able  device  or  other  he  still  kept  them  in  arms 
about  the  city,  until  the  senate  at  last  thought 
fit,  upon  the  report  of  Lucius  Philippus,  to 
decree  him  that  government.  At  that  time,  they 
say,  one  of  the  senators  there  expressing  his 
wonder  and  demanding  of  Philippus  whether 
his  meaning  was  that  Pompey  should  be  sent 
into  Spain  as  pro-consul,  “No,”  replied  Philip¬ 
pus,  “but  as  pro -consuls!'  as  if  both  consuls 
lor  that  year  were  in  his  opinion  wholly  use¬ 
less. 

When  Pompey  was  arrived  in  Spain,  as  is 
usual  upon  the  fame  of  a  new  leader,  men  be¬ 
gan  to  be  inspired  with  new  hopes,  and  those 
nations  that  had  not  entered  into  a  very  strict 
alliance  with  Sertorius  began  to  waver  and  re¬ 
volt;  whereupon  Sertorius  uttered  various  ar¬ 
rogant  and  scornful  speeches  against  Pompey, 
saying,  in  derision,  that  he  should  want  no 
other  weapon  but  a  ferula  and  rod  to  chastise 
this  boy  with,  if  he  were  not  afraid  of  that  old 
woman,  meaning  Metellus.  Yet  in  deed  and 
reality  he  stood  in  awe  of  Pompey,  and  kept 
on  his  guard  against  him,  as  appeared  by  his 
whole  management  of  the  war,  which  he  was 
observed  to  conduct  much  more  warily  than  be¬ 
fore:  for  Metellus,  which  one  would  not  have 
imagined,  was  grown  excessively  luxurious  in 
his  habits,  having  given  himself  over  to  self- 
indulgence  and  pleasure,  and  from  a  moderate 
and  temperate  became  suddenly  a  sumptuous 
and  ostentatious  liver,  so  that  this  very  thing 
gained  Pompey  great  reputation  and  good¬ 
will,  as  he  made  himself  somewhat  specially  an 
example  of  frugality,  although  that  virtue  was 
habitual  in  him,  and  required  no  great  indus¬ 
try  to  exercise  it,  as  he  was  naturally  inclined 
to  temperance,  and  no  ways  inordinate  in  his 
desires. 

The  fortune  of  the  war  was  very  various; 
nothing,  however,  annoyed  Pompey  so  much  as 
the  taking  of  the  town  of  Lauron  by  Sertorius. 
For  when  Pompey  thought  he  had  him  safe 
enclosed,  and  had  boasted  somewhat  largely  of 
raising  the  siege,  he  found  himself  all  of  a 
sudden  encompassed;  insomuch  that  he  durst 
not  move  out  of  his  camp;  but  was  forced  to 
sit  still  whilst  the  city  was  taken  and  burnt  be¬ 
fore  his  face.  However,  afterwards,  in  a  battle 


507 

near  Valentia,  he  gave  a  great  defeat  to  Heren- 
nius  and  Perpenna,  two  commanders  among 
the  refugees  who  had  fled  to  Sertorius  and 
now  lieutenants  under  him,  in  which  he  slew 
above  ten  thousand  men. 

Pompey,  being  elated  and  filled  with  con¬ 
fidence  by  this  victory,  made  all  haste  to  en¬ 
gage  Sertorius  himself,  and  the  rather  lest  Me¬ 
tellus  should  come  in  for  a  share  in  the  honour 
of  the  victory.  Late  in  the  day  towards  sunset 
they  joined  battle  near  the  river  Sucro,  both 
being  in  fear  lest  Metellus  should  come:  Pom¬ 
pey,  that  he  might  engage  alone,  Sertorius, 
that  he  might  have  one  alone  to  engage  with. 

The  issue  of  the  battle  proved  doubtful,  for 
a  wing  of  each  side  had  the  better,  but  of  the 
generals  Sertorius  had  the  greater  honour,  for 
that  he  maintained  his  post,  having  put  to 
flight  the  entire  division  that  was  opposed  to 
him,  whereas  Pompey  was  himself  almost 
made  a  prisoner;  for  being  set  upon  by  a  strong 
man-at-arms  that  fought  on  foot  (he  being  on 
horseback),  as  they  were  closely  engaged  hand 
to  hand  the  strokes  of  their  swords  chanced  to 
light  upon  their  hands,  but  with  a  different 
success;  for  Pompey’s  was  a  slight  wound  only, 
whereas  he  cut  off  the  other’s  hand.  However, 
it  so  happened,  that  many  now  falling  upon 
Pompey  together,  and  his  own  forces  there 
being  put  to  the  rout,  he  made  his  escape  be¬ 
yond  expectation,  by  quitting  his  horse,  and 
turning  him  out  among  the  enemy.  For  the 
horse  being  richly  adorned  with  golden  trap¬ 
pings,  and  having  a  caparison  of  great  value, 
the  soldiers  quarrelled  among  themselves  for 
the  booty,  so  that  while  they  were  fighting  with 
one  another,  and  dividing  the  spoil,  Pompey 
made  his  escape. 

By  break  of  day  the  next  morning  each 
drew  out  his  forces  into  the  field  to  claim  the 
victory;  but  Metellus  coming  up,  Sertorius  van¬ 
ished,  having  broken  up  and  dispersed  his 
army.  For  this  was  the  way  in  which  he  used 
to  raise  and  disband  his  armies,  so  that  some¬ 
times  he  would  be  wandering  up  and  down  all 
alone,  and  at  other  times  again  he  would  come 
pouring  into  the  field  at  the  head  of  no  less 
than  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  fighting 
men,  swelling  of  a  sudden  like  a  winter  tor¬ 
rent. 

When  Pompey  was  going,  after  the  battle, 
to  meet  and  welcome  Metellus,  and  when  they 
were  near  one  another,  he  commanded  his  at¬ 
tendants  to  lower  their  rods  in  honour  of  Me¬ 
tellus,  as  his  senior  and  superior.  But  Metellus 
on  the  other  side  forbade  it,  and  behaved  him- 


508 

self  in  general  very  obligingly  to  him,  not 
claiming  any  prerogative  either  in  respect  of 
his  consular  rank  or  seniority;  excepting  only 
that  when  they  encamped  together,  the  watch¬ 
word  was  given  to  the  whole  camp  by  Metellus. 
But  generally  they  had  their  camps  asunder,  be¬ 
ing  divided  and  distracted  by  the  enemy,  who 
took  all  shapes,  and  being  always  in  motion, 
would  by  some  skilful  artifice  appear  in  a  va¬ 
riety  of  places  almost  in  the  same  instant,  draw¬ 
ing  them  from  one  attack  to  another.  And  at 
last  keeping  them  from  foraging,  wasting  the 
country,  and  holding  the  dominion  of  the  sea, 
Sertorius  drove  them  both  out  of  that  part  of 
Spain  which  was  under  his  control,  and  forced 
them,  for  want  of  necessaries,  to  retreat  into 
provinces  that  did  not  belong  to  them. 

Pompey,  having  made  use  of  and  expended 
the  greatest  part  of  his  own  private  revenues 
upon  the  war,  sent  and  demanded  moneys  of 
the  senate,  adding  that,  in  case  they  did  not 
furnish  him  speedily,  he  should  be  forced  to 
return  into  Italy  with  his  army.  Lucullus  being 
consul  at  that  time,  though  at  variance  with 
Pompey,  yet  in  consideration  that  he  himself 
was  a  candidate  for  the  command  against 
Mithridates,  procured  and  hastened  these  sup¬ 
plies,  fearing  lest  there  should  be  any  pretence 
or  occasion  given  to  Pompey  of  returning 
home,  who  of  himself  was  no  less  desirous  of 
leaving  Sertorius  and  of  undertaking  the  war 
against  Mithridates,  as  an  enterprise  which  by 
all  appearance  would  prove  much  more  honor¬ 
able  and  not  so  dangerous. 

In  the  meantime,  Sertorius  died,  being 
treacherously  murdered  by  some  of  his  own 
party;  and  Perpenna,  the  chief  among  them, 
took  the  command  and  attempted  to  carry  on 
the  same  enterprises  as  Sertorius,  having  in¬ 
deed  the  same  forces  and  the  same  means, 
only  wanting  the  same  skill  and  conduct  in  the 
use  of  them.  Pompey,  therefore,  marched  di¬ 
rectly  against  Perpenna,  and  finding  him  act¬ 
ing  merely  at  random  in  his  affairs,  had  a  de¬ 
coy  ready  for  him,  and  sent  out  a  detachment 
of  ten  cohorts  into  the  level  country  with  or¬ 
ders  to  range  up  and  down  and  disperse  them¬ 
selves  abroad.  The  bait  took  accordingly,  and 
no  sooner  had  Perpenna  turned  upon  the  prey 
and  had  them  in  chase,  but  Pompey  appeared 
suddenly  with  all  his  army,  and  joining  bat¬ 
tle,  gave  him  a  total  overthrow.  Most  of  his 
officers  were  slain  in  the  field,  and  he  himself 
being  brought  prisoner  to  Pompey,  was  by  his 
order  put  to  death. 

Neither  was  Pompey  guilty  in  this  of  in- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

gratitude  or  unmindfulness  of  what  had  oc¬ 
curred  in  Sicily,  which  some  have  laid  to  his 
charge,  but  was  guided  by  a  high-minded 
policy  and  a  deliberate  counsel  for  the  security 
of  his  country.  For  Perpenna,  having  in  his  cus¬ 
tody  all  Sertorius’s  papers,  offered  to  produce 
several  letters  from  the  greatest  men  in  Rome, 
who,  desirous  of  a  change  and  subversion  of 
the  government,  had  invited  Sertorius  into 
Italy.  And  Pompey,  fearing  that  these  might 
be  the  occasion  of  worse  wars  than  those  which 
were  now  ended,  thought  it  advisable  to  put 
Perpenna  to  death,  and  burnt  the  letters  with¬ 
out  reading  them. 

Pompey  continued  in  Spain  after  this  so 
long  a  time  as  was  necessary  for  the  suppres¬ 
sion  of  all  the  greatest  disorders  in  the  prov¬ 
ince;  and  after  moderating  and  allaying  the 
more  violent  heats  of  affairs  there,  returned 
with  his  army  into  Italy,  where  he  arrived,  as 
chance  would  have  it,  in  the  height  of  the  ser¬ 
vile  war.  Accordingly,  upon  his  arrival,  Cras- 
sus,  the  commander  in  that  war,  at  some  haz¬ 
ard,  precipitated  a  battle,  in  which  he  had  great 
success,  and  slew  upon  the  place  twelve  thou¬ 
sand  three  hundred  of  the  insurgents.  Nor  yet 
was  he  so  quick,  but  that  fortune  reserved  to 
Pompey  some  share  of  honour  in  the  success  of 
this  war,  for  five  thousand  of  those  that  had  es¬ 
caped  out  of  the  battle  fell  into  his  hands;  and 
when  he  had  totally  cut  them  off,  he  wrote  to 
the  senate  that  Crassus  had  overthrown  the 
slaves  in  battle,  but  that  he  had  plucked  up  the 
whole  war  by  the  roots.  And  it  was  agreeable 
in  Rome  both  thus  to  say,  and  thus  to  hear 
said,  because  of  the  general  favour  of  Pompey. 

But  of  the  Spanish  war  and  the  conquest  of 
Sertorius,  no  one,  even  in  jest,  could  have  as¬ 
cribed  the  honour  to  any  one  else.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  all  this  high  respect  for  him,  and  this  de¬ 
sire  to  see  him  come  home,  were  not  unmixed 
with  apprehensions  and  suspicions  that  he 
might  perhaps  not  disband  his  army,  but  take 
his  way  by  force  of  arms  and  a  supreme  com¬ 
mand  to  the  seat  of  Sulla.  And  so  in  the  num¬ 
ber  of  all  those  that  ran  out  to  meet  him  and 
congratulate  his  return,  as  many  went  out  of 
fear  as  affection. 

But  after  Pompey  had  removed  this  alarm, 
by  declaring  beforehand  that  he  would  dis¬ 
charge  the  army  after  his  triumph,  those  that 
envied  him  could  now  only  complain  that  he 
affected  popularity,  courting  the  common  peo¬ 
ple  more  than  the  nobility,  and  that  whereas 
Sulla  had  abolished  the  tribuneship  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  he  designed  to  gratify  the  people  by  restor- 


POMPEY 

ing  that  office,  which  was  indeed  the  fact.  For 
there  was  not  any  one  thing  that  the  people  of 
Rome  were  more  wildly  eager  for,  or  more 
passionately  desired,  than  the  restoration  of 
that  office,  insomuch  that  Pompey  thought 
himself  extremely  fortunate  in  this  opportuni¬ 
ty,  despairing  (if  he  were  anticipated  by  some 
one  else  in  this)  of  ever  meeting  with  any  other 
sufficient  means  of  expressing  his  gratitude  for 
the  favours  which  he  had  received  from  the 
people. 

Though  a  second  triumph  was  decreed  him, 
and  he  was  declared  consul,  yet  all  these  hon¬ 
ours  did  not  seem  so  great  an  evidence  of  his 
power  and  glory  as  the  ascendant  which  he  had 
over.  Crassus;  for  he,  the  wealthiest  among  all 
the  statesmen  of  his  time,  and  the  most  elo¬ 
quent  and  greatest  too,  who  had  looked  down 
on  Pompey  himself  and  on  all  others  beneath 
him,  durst  not  appear  a  candidate  for  the  con¬ 
sulship  before  he  had  applied  to  Pompey.  The 
request  was  made  accordingly,  and  was  eagerly 
embraced  by  Pompey,  who  had  long  sought  an 
occasion  to  oblige  him  in  some  friendly  office; 
so  that  he  solicited  for  Crassus,  and  entreated 
the  people  heartily,  declaring  that  their  favour 
would  be  no  less  to  him  in  choosing  Crassus 
his  colleague,  than  in  making  himself  consul. 

Yet  for  all  this,  when  they  were  created  con¬ 
suls,  they  were  always  at  variance,  and  oppos¬ 
ing  one  another.  Crassus  prevailed  most  in  the 
senate,  and  Pompey ’s  power  was  no  less  with 
the  people,  he  having  restored  to  them  the  of¬ 
fice  of  tribune,  and  having  allowed  the  courts 
of  judicature  to  be  transferred  back  to  the 
knights  by  a  new  law. 

He  himself  in  person,  too,  afforded  them  a 
most  grateful  spectacle,  when  he  appeared  and 
craved  his  discharge  from  the  military  service. 
For  it  is  an  ancient  custom  among  the  Romans 
that  the  knights,  when  they  had  served  out 
their  legal  time  in  the  wars,  should  lead  their 
horses  into  the  market-place  before  the  two  of¬ 
ficers,  called  censors,  and  having  given  an  ac¬ 
count  of  the  commanders  and  generals  under 
whom  they  served,  as  also  of  the  places  and 
actions  of  their  service,  should  be  discharged, 
every  man  with  honour  or  disgrace,  according 
to  his  deserts. 

There  were  then  sitting  in  state  upon  the 
bench  two  censors,  Gellius  and  Lentulus,  in¬ 
specting  the  knights,  who  were  passing  by  in 
muster  before  them,  when  Pompey  was  seen 
coming  down  into  the  Forum,  with  all  the  en¬ 
signs  of  a  consul,  but  leading  his  horse  in  his 
hand.  When  he  came  up,  he  bade  his  lictors 


509 

make  way  for  him,  and  so  he  led  his  horse  to 
the  bench;  the  people  being  all  this  while  in  a 
sort  of  a  maze,  and  all  in  silence,  and  the  cen¬ 
sors  themselves  regarding  the  sight  with  a 
mixture  of  respect  and  gratification. 

Then  the  senior  censor  examined  him: 
“Pompeius  Magnus,  I  demand  of  you  whether 
you  have  served  the  full  time  in  the  wars  that 
is  prescribed  by  the  law?”  “Yes,”  replied  Pom¬ 
pey,  with  a  loud  voice,  “I  have  served  all,  and 
all  under  myself  as  general.”  The  people  hear¬ 
ing  this  gave  a  great  shout,  and  made  such  an 
outcry  for  delight,  that  there  was  no  appeasing 
it;  and  the  censors  rising  from  their  judgment- 
seat  accompanied  him  home  to  gratify  the  mul¬ 
titude  who  followed  after,  clapping  their  hands 
and  shouting. 

Pompey’s  consulship  was  now  expiring,  and 
yet  his  difference  with  Crassus  increasing, 
when  one  Caius  Aurelius,  a  knight,  a  man 
who  had  declined  public  business  all  his  life¬ 
time,  mounted  the  hustings,  and  addressed 
himself  in  an  oration  to  the  assembly,  declaring 
that  Jupiter  had  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream, 
commanding  him  to  tell  the  consuls  that  they 
should  not  give  up  office  until  they  were 
friends.  After  this  was  said,  Pompey  stood 
silent,  but  Crassus  took  him  by  the  hand,  and 
spoke  in  this  manner:  “I  do  not  think,  fellow- 
citizens,  that  I  shall  do  anything  mean  or  dis¬ 
honourable  in  yielding  first  to  Pompey,  whom 
you  were  pleased  to  ennoble  with  the  title  of 
Great,  when  as  yet  he  scarce  had  a  hair  on  his 
face;  and  granted  the  honour  of  two  triumphs 
before  he  had  a  place  in  the  senate.”  Hereupon 
they  were  reconciled  and  laid  down  their  office. 

Crassus  resumed  the  manner  of  life  which  he 
had  always  pursued  before;  but  Pompey  in  the 
great  generality  of  causes  for  judgment  de¬ 
clined  appearing  on  either  side,  and  by  degrees 
withdrew  himself  totally  from  the  Forum, 
showing  himself  but  seldom  in  public;  and, 
whenever  he  did,  it  was  with  a  great  train 
after  him.  Neither  was  it  easy  to  meet  or  visit 
him  without  a  crowd  of  people  about  him;  he 
was  most  pleased  to  make  his  appearance  be¬ 
fore  large  numbers  at  once,  as  though  he 
wished  to  maintain  in  this  way  his  state  and 
majesty,  and  as  if  he  held  himself  bound  to 
preserve  his  dignity  from  contact  with  the  ad¬ 
dresses  and  conversation  of  common  people. 

And  life  in  the  robe  of  peace  is  only  too 
apt  to  lower  the  reputation  of  men  that  have 
grown  great  by  arms,  who  naturally  find  dif¬ 
ficulty  in  adapting  themselves  to  the  habits  of 
civil  equality.  They  expect  to  be  treated  as  the 


510 

first  in  the  city,  even  as  they  were  in  the  camp; 
and  on  the  other  hand,  men  who  in  war  were 
nobody  think  it  intolerable  if  in  the  city  at  any 
rate  they  are  not  to  take  the  lead.  And  so  when 
a  warrior  renowned  for  victories  and  triumphs 
shall  turn  advocate  and  appear  among  them  in 
the  Forum,  they  endeavour  their  utmost  to 
obscure  and  depress  him;  whereas,  if  he  gives 
up  any  pretensions  here  and  retires,  they  will 
maintain  his  military  honour  and  authority  be¬ 
yond  the  reach  of  envy.  Events  themselves  not 
long  after  showed  the  truth  of  this. 

The  power  of  the  pirates  first  commenced  in 
Cilicia,  having  in  truth  but  a  precarious  and 
obscure  beginning,  but  gained  life  and  boldness 
afterwards  in  the  wars  of  Mithridates,  where 
they  hired  themselves  out  and  took  employ¬ 
ment  in  the  king's  service.  Afterwards,  whilst 
the  Romans  were  embroiled  in  their  civil  wars, 
being  engaged  against  one  another  even  before 
the  very  gates  of  Rome,  the  seas  lay  waste  and 
unguarded,  and  by  degrees  enticed  and  drew 
them  on  not  only  to  seize  upon  and  spoil  the 
merchants  and  ships  upon  the  seas,  but  also  to 
lay  waste  the  islands  and  seaport  towns.  So 
that  now  there  embarked  with  these  pirates 
men  of  wealth  and  noble  birth  and  superior 
abilities,  as  if  it  had  been  a  natural  occupation 
to  gain  distinction  in.  They  had  divers  arsen¬ 
als,  or  piratic  harbours,  as  likewise  watch- 
towers  and  beacons,  all  along  the  sea-coast; 
and  fleets  were  here  received  that  were  well 
manned  with  the  finest  mariners,  and  well 
served  with  the  expertest  pilots,  and  composed 
of  swift-sailing  and  light-built  vessels  adapted 
for  their  special  purpose.  Nor  was  it  merely 
their  being  thus  formidable  that  excited  in¬ 
dignation;  they  were  even  more  odious  for 
their  ostentation  than  they  were  feared  for 
their  force.  Their  ships  had  gilded  masts  at 
their  stems;  the  sails  woven  of  purple,  and  the 
oars  plated  with  silver,  as  if  their  delight  were 
to  glory  in  their  iniquity.  There  was  nothing 
but  music  and  dancing,  banqueting  and  revels, 
all  along  the  shore.  Officers  in  command  were 
taken  prisoners,  and  cities  put  under  contribu¬ 
tion,  to  the  reproach  and  dishonour  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  supremacy. 

There  were  of  these  corsairs  above  one  thou¬ 
sand  sail,  and  they  had  taken  no  less  than  four 
hundred  cities,  committing  sacrilege  upon  the 
temples  of  the  gods,  and  enriching  themselves 
with  the  spoils  of  many  never  violated  before, 
such  as  were  those  of  Claros,  Didyma,  and 
Samothrace;  and  the  temple  of  the  Earth  in 
Hermione,  and  that  of  ^Esculapius  in  Epidau- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

rus,  those  of  Neptune  at  the  Isthmus,  at  Tae- 
narus,  and  at  Calauria;  those  of  Apollo  at  Ac- 
tium  and  Leucas,  and  those  of  Juno  in  Samos, 
at  Argos,  and  at  Lacinium.  They  themselves 
offered  strange  sacrifices  upon  Mount  Olym¬ 
pus,  and  performed  certain  secret  rites  or  reli¬ 
gious  mysteries,  among  which  those  of  Mithras 
have  been  preserved  to  our  own  time,  having 
received  their  previous  institution  from  them. 

But  besides  these  insolencies  by  sea,  they  were 
also  injurious  to  the  Romans  by  land;  for  they 
would  often  go  inland  up  the  roads,  plunder¬ 
ing  and  destroying  their  villages  and  country- 
houses.  Once  they  seized  upon  two  Roman 
praetors,  Sextilius  and  Bellinus,  in  their  purple- 
edged  robes,  and  carried  them  off  together 
with  their  officers  and  lictors.  The  daughter 
also  of  Antonius,  a  man  that  had  had  the  hon¬ 
our  of  a  triumph,  taking  a  journey  into  the 
country,  was  seized,  and  redeemed  upon  pay¬ 
ment  of  a  large  ransom. 

But  it  was  most  abusive  of  all  that,  when 
any  of  the  captives  declared  himself  to  be  a 
Roman,  and  told  his  name,  they  affected  to  be 
surprised,  and  feigning  fear,  smote  their  thighs 
and  fell  down  at  his  feet,  humbly  beseeching 
him  to  be  gracious  and  forgive  them.  The  cap¬ 
tives,  seeing  them  so  humble  and  suppliant,  be¬ 
lieved  them  to  be  in  earnest;  and  some  of  them 
now  would  proceed  to  put  Roman  shoes  on  his 
feet,  and  to  dress  him  in  a  Roman  gown,  to 
prevent,  they  said,  his  being  mistaken  another 
time.  After  all  this  pageantry,  when  they  had 
thus  deluded  and  mocked  him  long  enough, 
at  last  putting  out  a  ship's  ladder,  when  they 
were  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  they  told  him  he 
was  free  to  go,  and  wished  him  a  pleasant  jour¬ 
ney;  and  if  he  resisted  they  themselves  threw 
him  overboard  and  drowned  him. 

This  piratic  power  having  got  the  dominion 
and  control  of  all  the  Mediterranean,  there  was 
left  no  place  for  navigation  or  commerce.  And 
this  it  was  which  most  of  all  made  the  Romans, 
finding  themselves  to  be  extremely  straitened 
in  their  markets,  and  considering  that  if  it 
should  continue,  there  would  be  a  dearth  and 
famine  in  the  land,  determine  at  last  to  send 
out  Pompey  to  recover  the  seas  from  the  pi¬ 
rates. 

Gabinius,  one  of  Pompey's  friends,  preferred 
a  law,  whereby  there  was  granted  to  him,  not 
only  the  government  of  the  seas  as  admiral, 
but,  in  direct  words,  sole  and  irresponsible  sov¬ 
ereignty  over  all  men.  For  the  decree  gave  him 
absolute  power  and  authority  in  all  the  seas 
within  the  pillars  of  Hercules,  and  in  the  ad- 


POMPEY 

jacent  mainland  for  the  space  of  four  hundred 
furlongs  from  the  sea.  Now  there  'were  but 
few  regions  in  the  Roman  empire  out  of  that 
compass;  and  the  greatest  of  the  nations  and 
most  powerful  of  the  kings  were  included  in 
the  limit.  Moreover,  by  this  decree  he  had  a 
power  of  selecting  fifteen  lieutenants  out  of  the 
senate,  and  of  assigning  to  each  his  province  in 
charge;  then  he  might  take  likewise  out  of  the 
treasury  and  out  of  the  hands  of  the  revenue- 
farmers  what  moneys  he  pleased;  as  also  two 
hundred  sail  of  ships,  with  a  power  to  press 
and  levy  what  soldiers  and  seamen  he  thought 
fit. 

When  this  law  was  read,  the  common  peo¬ 
ple  approved  of  it  exceedingly,  but  the  chief 
men  and  most  important  among  the  senators 
looked  upon  it  as  an  exorbitant  power,  even 
beyond  the  reach  of  envy,  but  well  deserving 
their  fears.  Therefore,  concluding  with  them¬ 
selves  that  such  unlimited  authority  was  dan¬ 
gerous,  they  agreed  unanimously  to  oppose  the 
bill,  and  all  went  against  it,  except  Caesar,  who 
gave  his  vote  for  the  law,  not  to  gratify  Pom- 
pey,  but  the  people,  whose  favour  he  had  court¬ 
ed  underhand  from  the  beginning,  and  hoped 
to  compass  for  himself.  The  rest  inveighed  bit¬ 
terly  against  Pompey,  insomuch  that  one  of 
the  consuls  told  him  that,  if  he  was  ambitious 
of  the  place  of  Romulus,  he  would  scarce  avoid 
his  end,  but  he  was  in  danger  of  being  torn  in 
pieces  by  the  multitude  for  his  speech. 

Yet  when  Catulus  stood  up  to  speak  against 
the  law,  the  people  in  reverence  to  him  were 
silent  and  attentive.  And  when,  after  saying 
much  in  the  most  honourable  terms  in  favour 
of  Pompey,  he  proceeded  to  advise  the  people 
in  kindness  to  spare  him,  and  not  to  expose  a 
man  of  his  value  to  such  a  succession  of  dan¬ 
gers  and  wars,  “For,”  said  he,  “where  could 
you  find  another  Pompey,  or  whom  would  you 
have  in  case  you  should  chance  to  lose  him?” 
they  all  cried  out  with  one  voice,  “Yourself.” 
And  so  Catulus,  finding  all  his  rhetoric  inef¬ 
fectual,  desisted. 

Then  Roscius  attempted  to  speak,  but  could 
obtain  no  hearing,  and  made  signs  with  his 
fingers,  intimating,  “Not  him  alone,”  but  that 
there  might  be  a  second  Pompey  or  colleague 
in  authority  with  him.  Upon  this,  it  is  said,  the 
multitude,  being  extremely  incensed,  made 
such  a  loud  outcry,  that  a  crow  flying  over  the 
market-place  at  that  instant  was  struck,  and 
dropped  down  among  the  crowd;  whence  it 
would  appear  that  the  cause  of  birds  falling 
down  to  the  ground  is  not  any  rupture  or  divi- 


511 

sion  of  the  air  causing  a  vacuum,  but  purely 
the  actual  stroke  of  the  voice,  which,  when 
carried  up  in  a  great  mass  and  with  violence, 
raises  a  sort  of  tempest  and  billow,  as  it  were, 
in  the  air. 

The  assembly  broke  up  for  that  day;  and 
when  the  day  was  come  on  which  the  bill  was 
to  pass  by  suffrage  into  a  decree,  Pompey  went 
privately  into  the  country;  but  hearing  that  it 
was  passed  and  confirmed,  he  returned  again 
into  the  city  by  night,  to  avoid  the  envy  that 
might  be  occasioned  by  the  concourse  of  people 
that  would  meet  and  congratulate  him. 

The  next  morning  he  came  aboard  and  sacri¬ 
ficed  to  the  gods,  and  having  audience  at  an 
open  assembly,  so  handled  the  matter  that  they 
enlarged  his  power,  giving  him  many  things 
besides  what  was  already  granted,  and  almost 
doubling  the  preparation  appointed  in  the  for¬ 
mer  decree.  Five  hundred  ships  were  manned 
lor  him,  and  an  army  raised  of  one  hundred 
and  twenty  thousand  foot  and  five  thousand 
horse.  Twenty-four  senators  that  had  been  gen¬ 
erals  of  armies  were  appointed  to  serve  as  lieu¬ 
tenants  under  him,  and  to  these  were  added 
two  quaestors.  Now  it  happened  within  this 
time  that  the  prices  of  provisions  were  much 
reduced,  which  gave  an  occasion  to  the  joyful 
people  of  saying  that  the  very  name  of  Pompey 
had  ended  the  war. 

However,  Pompey,  in  pursuance  of  his 
charge,  divided  all  the  seas  and  the  whole  Med¬ 
iterranean  into  thirteen  parts,  allotting  a  squad¬ 
ron  to  each,  under  the  command  of  his  officers; 
and  having  thus  dispersed  his  power  into  all 
quarters,  and  encompassed  the  pirates  every¬ 
where,  they  began  to  fall  into  his  hands  by 
whole  shoals,  which  he  seized  and  brought  in¬ 
to  his  harbours.  As  for  those  that  withdrew 
themselves  betimes,  or  otherwise  escaped  his 
general  chase,  they  all  made  to  Cilicia,  where 
they  hid  themselves  as  in  their  hives;  against 
whom  Pompey  now  proceeded  in  person  with 
sixty  of  his  best  ships,  not,  however,  until  he 
had  first  scoured  and  cleared  all  the  seas  near 
Rome,  the  Tyrrhenian,  and  the  African,  and 
all  the  waters  of  Sardinia,  Corsica,  and  Sicily; 
all  which  he  performed  in  the  space  of  forty 
days  by  his  own  indefatigable  industry  and  the 
zeal  of  his  lieutenants. 

Pompey  met  with  some  interruption  in 
Rome,  through  the  malice  and  envy  of  Piso, 
the  consul,  who  had  given  some  check  to  his 
proceedings  by  withholding  his  stores  and  dis¬ 
charging  his  seamen;  whereupon  he  sent  his 
fleet  round  to  Brundusium,  himself  going  the 


512 

nearest  way  by  land  through  Tuscany  to 
Rome;  which  was  no  sooner  known  by  the 
people  than  they  all  flocked  out  to  meet  him 
upon  the  way  as  if  they  had  not  sent  him  out 
but  a  few  days  before.  What  chiefly  excited 
their  joy  was  the  unexpectedly  rapid  change  in 
the  markets,  which  abounded  now  with  the 
greatest  plenty,  so  that  Piso  was  in  great  dan¬ 
ger  to  have  been  deprived  of  his  consulship, 
Gabinius  having  a  law  ready  prepared  for  that 
purpose;  but  Pompey  forbade  it,  behaving 
himself  as  in  that,  so  in  all  things  else,  with 
great  moderation,  and  when  he  had  made  sure 
of  all  that  he  wanted  or  desired,  he  departed 
for  Brundusium,  whence  he  set  sail  in  pursuit 
of  the  pirates. 

And  though  he  was  straitened  in  time,  and 
his  hasty  voyage  forced  him  to  sail  by  several 
cities  without  touching,  yet  he  would  not  pass 
by  the  city  of  Athens  unsaluted;  but  landing 
there,  after  he  had  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  and 
made  an  address  to  the  people,  as  he  was  re¬ 
turning  out  of  the  city,  he  read  at  the  gates  two 
epigrams,  each  in  a  single  line,  written  in  his 
own  praise;  one  within  the  gates: — 

Thy  humbler  thoughts  ma\e  thee  a  god  the  more; 
the  other  without: — 

Adieu  we  bid,  who  welcome  bade  before. 

Now  because  Pompey  had  shown  himself 
merciful  to  some  of  these  pirates  that  were  yet 
roving  in  bodies  about  the  seas,  having  upon 
their  supplication  ordered  a  seizure  of  their 
ships  and  persons  only,  without  any  further 
process  or  severity,  therefore  the  rest  of  their 
comrades,  in  hopes  of  mercy  too,  made  their 
escape  from  his  other  commanders,  and  sur¬ 
rendered  themselves  with  their  wives  and  chil¬ 
dren  into  his  protection.  He  continued  to  par¬ 
don  all  that  came  in,  and  the  rather  because  by 
them  he  might  make  discovery  of  those  who 
fled  from  his  justice,  as  conscious  that  their 
crimes  were  beyond  an  act  of  indemnity. 

The  most  numerous  and  important  part  of 
these  conveyed  their  families  and  treasures, 
with  all  their  people  that  were  unfit  for  war, 
into  castles  and  strong  forts  about  Mount  Tau¬ 
rus;  but  they  themselves,  having  well  manned 
their  galleys,  embarked  for  Coracesium  in  Ci¬ 
licia,  where  they  received  Pompey  and  gave 
him  battle.  Here  they  had  a  final  overthrow, 
and  retired  to  the  land,  where  they  were  be¬ 
sieged.  At  last,  having  despatched  their  heralds 
to  him  with  a  submission,  they  delivered  up  to 
his  mercy  themselves,  their  towns,  islands,  and 
strongholds,  all  which  they  had  so  fortified 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

that  they  were  almost  impregnable,  and  scarce¬ 
ly  even  accessible. 

Thus  was  this  war  ended,  and  the  whole 
power  of  the  pirates  at  sea  dissolved  every¬ 
where  in  the  space  of  three  months,  wherein, 
besides  a  great  number  of  other  vessels,  he  took 
ninety  men-of-war  with  brazen  beaks;  and 
likewise  prisoners  of  war  to  the  number  of  no 
less  than  twenty  thousand. 

As  regarded  the  disposal  of  these  prisoners, 
he  never  so  much  as  entertained  the  thought 
of  putting  them  to  death;  and  yet  it  might  be 
no  less  dangerous  on  the  other  hand  to  disperse 
them,  as  they  might  reunite  and  make  head 
again,  being  numerous,  poor,  and  warlike. 
Therefore,  wisely  weighing  with  himself  that 
man  by  nature  is  not  a  wild  or  unsocial  crea¬ 
ture,  neither  was  he  born  so,  but  makes  him¬ 
self  what  he  naturally  is  not  by  vicious  habit; 
and  that  again,  on  the  other  side,  he  is  civilised 
and  grows  gentle  by  a  change  of  place,  occupa¬ 
tion,  and  manner  of  life,  as  beasts  themselves 
that  are  wild  by  nature  become  tame  and  tract¬ 
able  by  housing  and  gentler  usage,  upon  this 
consideration  he  determined  to  translate  these 
pirates  from  sea  to  land,  and  give  them  a  taste 
of  an  honest  and  innocent  course  of  life  by 
living  in  towns  and  tilling  the  ground.  Some 
therefore  were  admitted  into  the  small  and 
half-peopled  towns  of  the  Cilicians,  who,  for 
an  enlargement  of  their  territories,  were  will¬ 
ing  to  receive  them.  Others  he  planted  in  the 
city  of  the  Solians,  which  had  been  lately  laid 
waste  by  Tigranes,  King  of  Armenia,  and 
which  he  now  restored.  But  the  largest  number 
were  settled  in  Dyme,  the  town  of  Achaea,  at 
that  time  extremely  depopulated,  and  possess¬ 
ing  an  abundance  of  good  land. 

However,  these  proceedings  could  not  escape 
the  envy  and  censure  of  his  enemies;  and  the 
course  he  took  against  Metellus  in  Crete  was 
disapproved  of  even  by  the  chiefest  of  his 
friends.  For  Metellus,  a  relation  of  Pompey’s 
former  colleague  in  Spain,  had  been  sent  prae¬ 
tor  into  Crete,  before  this  province  of  the  seas 
was  assigned  to  Pompey.  Now  Crete  was  the 
second  source  of  pirates  next  to  Cilicia,  and 
Metellus  having  shut  up  a  number  of  them  in 
their  strongholds  there  was  engaged  in  reduc¬ 
ing  and  extirpating  them.  Those  that  were  yet 
remaining  and  besieged  sent  their  supplica¬ 
tions  to  Pompey,  and  invited  him  into  the  is¬ 
land  as  a  part  of  his  province,  alleging  it  to 
fall,  every  part  of  it,  within  the  distance  from 
the  sea  specified  in  his  commission,  and  so 
within  the  precincts  of  his  charge.  Pompey  re- 


POMPEY 

ceiving  the  submission,  sent  letters  to  Metellus, 
commanding  him  to  leave  off  the  war;  and 
others  in  like  manner  to  the  cities,  in  which  he 
charged  them  not  to  yield  any  obedience  to  the 
commands  of  Metellus. 

And  after  these  he  sent  Lucius  Octavius,  one 
of  his  lieutenants,  to  act  as  general,  who  enter¬ 
ing  the  besieged  fortifications,  and  fighting  in 
defence  of  the  pirates,  rendered  Pompey  not 
odious  only,  but  even  ridiculous  too;  that  he 
should  lend  his  name  as  a  guard  to  a  nest  of 
thieves  that  knew  neither  god  nor  law,  and 
made  his  reputation  serve  as  a  sanctuary  to 
them,  only  out  of  pure  envy  and  emulation  to 
Metellus. 

For  neither  was  Achilles  thought  to  act  the 
part  of  a  man,  but  rather  of  a  mere  boy,  mad 
after  glory,  when  by  signs  he  forbade  the  rest 
of  the  Greeks  to  strike  at  Hector — 

For  fear 

Some  other  hand  should  give  the  blow,  and  he 

Lose  the  first  honour  of  the  victory . 

Whereas  Pompey  even  sought  to  preserve  the 
common  enemies  of  the  world  only  that  he 
might  deprive  a  Roman  praetor,  after  all  his 
labours,  of  the  honour  of  a  triumph.  Metellus, 
however,  was  not  daunted,  but  prosecuted  the 
war  against  the  pirates,  expelled  them  from 
their  strongholds  and  punished  them;  and  dis¬ 
missed  Octavius  with  the  insults  and  reproaches 
of  the  whole  camp. 

When  the  news  came  to  Rome  that  the  war 
with  the  pirates  was  at  an  end,  and  that  Pom¬ 
pey  was  unoccupied,  diverting  himself  in  visits 
to  the  cities  for  want  of  employment,  one  Man¬ 
lius,  a  tribune  of  the  people,  preferred  a  law 
that  Pompey  should  have  all  the  forces  of  Lu- 
cullus,  and  the  provinces  under  his  government, 
together  with  Bithynia,  which  was  under  the 
command  of  Glabrio;  and  that  he  should  forth¬ 
with  conduct  the  war  against  the  two  kings, 
Mithridates  and  Tigranes,  retaining  still  the 
same  naval  forces  and  the  sovereignty  of  the 
seas  as  before. 

But  this  was  nothing  less  than  to  constitute 
one  absolute  monarch  of  all  the  Roman  em¬ 
pire.  For  the  provinces  which  seemed  to  be  ex¬ 
empt  from  his  commission  by  the  former  de¬ 
cree,  such  as  were  Phrygia,  Lycaonia,  Galatia, 
Cappadocia,  Cilicia,  the  upper  Colchis,  and 
Armenia,  were  all  added  in  by  this  latter  law, 
together  with  all  the  troops  and  forces  with 
which  Lucullus  had  defeated  Mithridates  and 
Tigranes. 

And  though  Lucullus  was  thus  simply 
robbed  of  the  glory  of  his  achievements  in  hav- 


513 

ing  a  successor  assigned  him,  rather  to  the  hon¬ 
our  of  his  triumph  than  the  danger  of  the  war; 
yet  this  was  of  less  moment  in  the  eyes  of  the 
aristocratical  party,  though  they  could  not  but 
admit  the  injustice  and  ingratitude  to  Lucul¬ 
lus.  But  their  great  grievance  was  that  the 
power  of  Pompey  should  be  converted  into  a 
manifest  tyranny;  and  they  therefore  exhorted 
and  encouraged  one  another  privately  to  bend 
all  their  forces  in  opposition  to  this  law,  and  not 
tamely  to  cast  away  their  liberty;  yet  when  the 
day  came  on  which  it  was  to  pass  into  a  decree, 
their  hearts  failed  them  for  fear  of  the  people, 
and  all  were  silent  except  Catulus,  who  boldly 
inveighed  against  the  law  and  its  proposer, 
and  when  he  found  that  he  could  do  nothing 
with  the  people,  turned  to  the  senate,  crying 
out  and  bidding  them  seek  out  some  mountain 
as  their  forefathers  had  done,  and  fly  to  the 
rocks  where  they  might  preserve  their  liberty. 

The  law  passed  into  a  decree,  as  it  is  said,  by 
the  suffrages  of  all  the  tribes.  And  Pompey,  in 
his  absence,  was  made  lord  of  almost  all  that 
power  which  Sulla  only  obtained  by  force  of 
arms,  after  a  conquest  of  the  very  city  itself. 

When  Pompey  had  advice  by  letters  of  the 
decree,  it  is  said  that  in  the  presence  of  his 
friends,  who  came  to  give  him  joy  of  his  hon¬ 
our,  he  seemed  displeased,  frowning  and  smit¬ 
ing  his  thigh,  and  exclaimed  as  one  overbur¬ 
dened  and  weary  of  government,  “Alas,  what 
a  series  of  labours  upon  labours!  If  I  am  never 
to  end  my  service  as  a  soldier,  nor  to  escape 
from  this  invidious  greatness,  and  live  at  home 
in  the  country  with  my  wife,  I  had  better  have 
been  an  unknown  man.”  But  all  this  was  look¬ 
ed  upon  as  mere  trifling,  neither  indeed  could 
the  best  of  his  friends  call  it  anything  else,  well 
knowing  that  his  enmity  with  Lucullus,  setting 
a  flame  just  now  to  his  natural  passion  for 
glory  and  empire,  made  him  feel  more  than 
usually  gratified. 

As  indeed  appeared  not  long  afterwards  by 
his  actions,  which  clearly  unmasked  him;  for, 
in  the  first  place,  he  sent  out  his  proclamations 
into  all  quarters,  commanding  the  soldiers  to 
join  him,  and  summoned  all  the  tributary  kings 
and  princes  within  his  charge;  and  in  short,  as 
soon  as  he  had  entered  upon  his  province,  he 
left  nothing  unaltered  that  had  been  done  and 
established  by  Lucullus.  To  some  he  remitted 
their  penalties,  and  deprived  others  of  their  re¬ 
wards,  and  acted  in  all  respects  as  if  with  the 
express  design  that  the  admirers  of  Lucullus 
might  know  that  all  his  authority  was  at  an 
end. 


514 

Lucullus  expostulated  by  friends,  and  it  was 
thought  fitting  that  there  should  be  a  meeting 
betwixt  them;  and  accordingly  they  met  in  the 
country  of  Galatia.  As  they  were  both  great 
and  successful  generals,  their  officers  bore  their 
rods  before  them  all  wreathed  with  branches 
of  laurel;  Lucullus  came  through  a  country 
full  of  green  trees  and  shady  woods,  but  Pom- 
pey’s  march  was  through  a  cold  and  barren 
district.  Therefore  the  lictors  of  Lucullus,  per¬ 
ceiving  that  Pompey’s  laurels  were  withered 
and  dry,  helped  him  to  some  of  their  own,  and 
adorned  and  crowned  his  rods  with  fresh  lau¬ 
rels.  This  was  thought  ominous,  and  looked 
as  if  Pompey  came  to  take  away  the  reward 
and  honour  of  Lucullus’s  victories.  Lucullus 
had  the  priority  in  the  order  of  consulships, 
and  also  in  age;  but  Pompey’s  two  triumphs 
made  him  the  greater  man. 

Their  first  addresses  in  this  interview  were 
dignified  and  friendly,  each  magnifying  the 
other’s  actions,  and  offering  congratulations 
upon  his  success.  But  when  they  came  to  the 
matter  of  their  conference  or  treaty,  they  could 
agree  on  no  fair  or  equitable  terms  of  any 
kind,  but  even  came  to  harsh  words  against 
each  other,  Pompey  upbraiding  Lucullus  with 
avarice,  and  Lucullus  retorting  ambition  upon 
Pompey,  so  that  their  friends  could  hardly 
part  them. 

Lucullus  remaining  in  Galatia,  made  a  dis¬ 
tribution  of  the  lands  within  his  conquests, 
and  gave  presents  to  whom  he  pleased;  and 
Pompey  encamping  not  far  distant  from  him, 
sent  out  his  prohibitions,  forbidding  the  exe¬ 
cution  of  any  of  the  orders  of  Lucullus,  and 
commanded  away  all  his  soldiers,  except  six¬ 
teen  hundred,  whom  he  thought  likely  to  be 
unserviceable  to  himself,  being  disorderly  and 
mutinous,  and  whom  he  knew  to  be  hostile  to 
Lucullus;  and  to  these  acts  he  added  satirical 
speeches,  detracting  openly  from  the  glory  of 
his  actions,  and  giving  out  that  the  battles  of 
Lucullus  had  been  but  with  the  mere  stage- 
shows  and  idle  pictures  of  royal  pomp,  where¬ 
as  the  real  war  against  a  genuine  army,  dis¬ 
ciplined  by  defeat,  was  reserved  to  him,  Mith¬ 
ridates  having  now  begun  to  be  in  earnest,  and 
having  betaken  himself  to  his  shields,  swords, 
and  horses.  Lucullus,  on  the  other  side,  to  be 
even  with  him,  replied,  that  Pompey  came  to 
fight  with  the  mere  image  and  shadow  of  war, 
it  being  his  usual  practice,  like  a  lazy  bird  of 
prey,  to  come  upon  the  carcass  when  others 
had  slain  the  dead,  and  to  tear  in  pieces  the 
relics  of  a  war. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Thus  he  had  appropriated  to  himself  the  vic¬ 
tories  over  Sertorius,  over  Lepidus,  and  over 
the  insurgents  under  Spartacus;  whereas  this 
last  had  been  achieved  by  Crassus,  that  obtain¬ 
ed  by  Catulus,  and  the  first  won  by  Metellus. 
And  therefore  it  was  no  great  wonder  that  the 
glory  of  the  Pontic  and  Armenian  war  should 
be  usurped  by  a  man  who  had  condescended 
to  any  artifices  to  work  himself  into  the  hon¬ 
our  of  a  triumph  over  a  few  runaway  slaves. 

After  this  Lucullus  went  away,  and  Pompey 
having  placed  his  whole  navy  in  guard  upon 
the  seas  betwixt  Phoenicia  and  Bosphorus, 
himself  marched  against  Mithridates,  who  had 
a  phalanx  of  thirty  thousand  foot,  with  two 
thousand  horse,  yet  durst  not  bid  him  battle. 
He  had  encamped  upon  a  strong  mountain 
where  it  would  have  been  hard  to  attack  him, 
but  abandoned  it  in  no  long  time  as  destitute 
of  water. 

No  sooner  was  he  gone  but  Pompey  occu¬ 
pied  it,  and  observing  the  plants  that  were 
thriving  there,  together  with  the  hollows  which 
he  found  in  several  places,  conjectured  that 
such  a  plot  could  not  be  without  springs,  and 
therefore  ordered  his  men  to  sink  wells  in  every 
corner.  After  which  there  was,  in  a  little  time, 
great  plenty  of  water  throughout  all  the  camp, 
insomuch  that  he  wondered  how  it  was  pos¬ 
sible  for  Mithridates  to  be  ignorant  of  this 
during  all  that  time  of  his  encampment  there. 

After  this  Pompey  followed  him  to  his  next 
camp,  and  there  drawing  lines  round  about 
him,  shut  him  in.  But  he,  after  having  endur¬ 
ed  a  siege  of  forty-five  days,  made  his  escape 
secretly,  and  fled  away  with  all  the  best  part 
of  his  army,  having  first  put  to  death  all  the 
sick  and  unserviceable.  Not  long  after  Pom¬ 
pey  overtook  him  again  near  the  banks  of  the 
river  Euphrates,  and  encamped  close  by  him; 
but  fearing  lest  he  should  pass  over  the  river 
and  give  him  the  slip  there  too,  he  drew  up  his 
army  to  attack  him  at  midnight. 

And  at  that  very  time  Mithridates,  it  is  said, 
saw  a  vision  in  his  dream  foreshowing  what 
should  come  to  pass.  For  he  seemed  to  be  un¬ 
der  sail  in  the  Euxine  Sea  with  a  prosperous 
gale,  and  just  in  view  of  Bosphorus,  discours¬ 
ing  pleasantly  with  the  ship’s  company,  as  one 
overjoyed  for  his  past  danger  and  present  se¬ 
curity,  when  on  a  sudden  he  found  himself 
deserted  of  all,  and  floating  upon  a  broken 
plank  of  the  ship  at  the  mercy  of  the  sea. 
Whilst  he  was  thus  labouring  under  these  pas¬ 
sions  and  phantasms,  his  friends  came  and 
awaked  him  with  the  news  of  Pompey’s  ap- 


POMPEY 

proach;  who  was  now  indeed  so  near  at  hand 
that  the  fight  must  be  for  the  camp  itself,  and 
the  commanders  accordingly  drew  up  the 
forces  in  battle  array. 

Pompey  perceiving  how  ready  they  were 
and  well  prepared  for  defence  began  to  doubt 
with  himself  whether  he  should  put  it  to  the 
hazard  of  a  fight  in  the  dark,  judging  it  more 
prudent  to  encompass  them  only  at  present, 
lest  they  should  fly,  and  to  give  them  battle 
with  the  advantage  of  numbers  the  next  day. 
But  his  oldest  officers  were  of  another  opinion, 
and  by  entreaties  and  encouragements  obtained 
permission  that  they  might  charge  them  im¬ 
mediately.  Neither  was  the  night  so  very  dark, 
but  that,  though  the  moon  was  going  down,  it 
yet  gave  light  enough  to  discern  a  body. 

And  indeed  this  was  one  especial  disadvan¬ 
tage  to  the  king’s  army.  For  the  Romans  com¬ 
ing  upon  them  with  the  moon  on  their  backs, 
the  moon,  being  very  low  and  just  upon  set¬ 
ting,  cast  the  shadows  a  long  way  before  their 
bodies,  reaching  almost  to  the  enemy,  whose 
eyes  were  thus  so  much  deceived  that  not  ex¬ 
actly  discerning  the  distance,  but  imagining 
them  to  be  near  at  hand,  they  threw  their  darts 
at  the  shadows  without  the  least  execution.  The 
Romans  therefore,  perceiving  this,  ran  in  upon 
them  with  a  great  shout;  but  the  barbarians, 
all  in  a  panic,  unable  to  endure  the  charge, 
turned  and  fled,  and  were  put  to  great  slaugh¬ 
ter,  above  ten  thousand  being  slain;  the  camp 
also  was  taken. 

As  for  Mithridates  himself,  he  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  onset,  with  a  body  of  eight  hundred 
horse,  charged  through  the  Roman  army,  and 
made  his  escape.  But  before  long  all  the  rest 
dispersed,  some  one  way,  some  another,  and 
he  was  left  only  with  three  persons,  among 
whom  was  his  concubine,  Hypsicratia,  a  girl 
always  of  a  manly  and  daring  spirit,  and  the 
king  called  her  on  that  account  Hypsicrates. 
She  being  attired  and  mounted  like  a  Persian 
horseman,  accompanied  the  king  in  all  his 
flight,  never  weary  even  in  the  longest  journey, 
nor  ever  failing  to  attend  the  king  in  person, 
and  look  after  his  horse  too,  until  they  came  to 
Inora,  a  castle  of  the  king’s,  well  stored  with 
gold  and  treasure.  From  thence  Mithridates 
took  his  richest  apparel,  and  gave  it  among 
those  that  had  resorted  to  him  in  their  flight; 
and  so  to  every  one  of  his  friends  he  gave  a 
deadly  poison,  that  they  might  not  fall  into  the 
power  of  the  enemy  against  their  wills.  From 
thence  he  designed  to  have  gone  to  Tigranes  in 
Armenia,  but  being  prohibited  by  Tigranes, 


515 

who  put  out  a  proclamation  with  a  reward  of 
one  hundred  talents  to  any  one  that  should  ap¬ 
prehend  him,  he  passed  by  the  headwaters  of 
the  river  Euphrates  and  fled  through  the  coun¬ 
try  of  Colchis. 

Pompey  in  the  meantime  made  an  invasion 
into  Armenia  upon  the  invitation  of  young  Ti¬ 
granes,  who  was  now  in  rebellion  against  his 
father,  and  gave  Pompey  a  meeting  about  the 
river  Araxes,  which  rises  near  the  head  of  Eu¬ 
phrates,  but  turning  its  course  and  bending  to¬ 
wards  the  east,  falls  into  the  Caspian  Sea.  They 
two,  therefore,  marched  together  through  the 
country,  taking  in  all  the  cities  by  the  way,  and 
receiving  their  submission. 

But  King  Tigranes,  having  lately  suffered 
much  in  the  war  with  Lucullus,  and  under¬ 
standing  that  Pompey  was  of  a  kind  and  gende 
disposition,  admitted  Roman  troops  into  his 
royal  palaces,  and  taking  along  with  him  his 
friends  and  relations,  went  in  person  to  sur¬ 
render  himself  into  the  hands  of  Pompey.  He 
came  as  far  as  the  trenches  on  horseback,  but 
there  he  was  met  by  two  of  Pompey’s  lictors, 
who  commanded  him  to  alight  and  walk  on 
foot,  for  no  man  ever  was  seen  on  horseback 
within  a  Roman  camp.  Tigranes  submitted  to 
this  immediately,  and  not  only  so,  but  loosing 
his  sword,  delivered  up  that  too;  and  last  of  all, 
as  soon  as  he  appeared  before  Pompey,  he 
pulled  off  his  royal  turban,  and  attempted  to 
have  laid  it  at  his  feet.  Nay,  worst  of  all,  even 
he  himself  had  fallen  prostrate  as  an  humble 
suppliant  at  his  knees  had  not  Pompey  pre¬ 
vented  it,  taking  him  by  the  hand  and  placing 
him  near  him,  Tigranes  himself  on  one  side  of 
him  and  his  son  upon  the  other. 

Pompey  now  told  him  that  the  rest  of  his 
losses  were  chargeable  upon  Lucullus,  by 
whom  he  had  been  dispossessed  of  Syria,  Phoe¬ 
nicia,  Cilicia,  Galatia,  and  Sophene;  but  all 
that  he  had  preserved  to  himself  entire  till  that 
time  he  should  peaceably  enjoy,  paying  the 
sum  of  six  thousand  talents  as  a  fine  or  penalty 
for  injuries  done  to  the  Romans,  and  that  his 
son  should  have  the  kingdom  of  Sophene.  Ti¬ 
granes  himself  was  well  pleased  with  these 
conditions  of  peace,  and  when  the  Romans  sa¬ 
luted  him  king,  seemed  to  be  overjoyed,  and 
promised  to  every  common  soldier  half  a  mina 
of  silver,  to  every  centurion  ten  minae,  and  to 
every  tribune  a  talent;  but  the  son  was  dis¬ 
pleased,  insomuch  that  when  he  was  invited  to 
supper  he  replied  that  he  did  not  stand  in  need 
of  Pompey  for  that  sort  of  honour,  for  he 
would  find  out  some  other  Roman  to  sup  with. 


516 

Upon  this  he  was  put  into  close  arrest,  and  re¬ 
served  for  the  triumph. 

Not  long  after  this  Phraates,  King  of  Par- 
thia,  sent  to  Pompey,  and  demanded  to  have 
young  Tigranes,  as  his  son-in-law,  given  up  to 
him,  and  that  the  river  Euphrates  should  be  the 
boundary  of  the  empires.  Pompey  replied  that 
as  for  Tigranes,  he  belonged  more  to  his  own 
natural  father  than  his  father-in-law,  and  as 
for  the  boundaries,  he  would  take  care  that 
they  should  be  according  to  right  and  justice. 

So  Pompey,  leaving  Armenia  in  the  custody 
of  Afranius,  went  himself  in  chase  of  Mithri- 
dates;  to  do  which  he  was  forced  of  necessity 
to  march  through  several  nations  inhabiting 
about  Mount  Caucasus.  Of  these  the  Albanians 
and  Iberians  were  the  two  chiefest.  The  Iberi¬ 
ans  stretch  out  as  far  as  the  Moschian  moun¬ 
tains  and  the  Pontus;  the  Albanians  lie  more 
eastwardly,  and  towards  the  Caspian  Sea. 

These  Albanians  at  first  permitted  Pompey, 
upon  his  request,  to  pass  through  the  country; 
but  when  winter  had  stolen  upon  the  Romans 
whilst  they  were  still  in  the  country,  and  they 
were  busy  celebrating  the  festival  of  Saturn, 
they  mustered  a  body  of  no  less  than  forty 
thousand  fighting  men,  and  set  upon  them, 
having  passed  over  the  river  Cyrnus,  which 
rising  from  the  mountains  of  Iberia,  and  re¬ 
ceiving  the  river  Araxes  in  its  course  from  Ar¬ 
menia,  discharges  itself  by  twelve  mouths  into 
the  Caspian.  Or,  according  to  others,  the  Ar¬ 
axes  does  not  fall  into  it,  but  they  flow  near  one 
another,  and  so  discharge  themselves  as  neigh¬ 
bours  into  the  same  sea.  It  was  in  the  power 
of  Pompey  to  have  obstructed  the  enemy’s  pas¬ 
sage  over  the  river,  but  he  suffered  them  to 
pass  over  quietly;  and  then  leading  on  his 
forces  and  giving  battle  he  routed  them  and 
slew  great  numbers  of  them  in  the  field.  The 
king  sent  ambassadors  with  his  submission, 
and  Pompey  upon  his  supplication  pardoned 
the  offence,  and  making  a  treaty  with  him,  he 
marched  directly  against  the  Iberians,  a  nation 
no  less  in  number  than  the  other,  but  much 
more  warlike,  and  extremely  desirous  of  grati¬ 
fying  Mithridates  and  driving  out  Pompey. 

These  Iberians  were  never  subject  to  the 
Medes  or  Persians,  and  they  happened  likewise 
to  escape  the  dominion  of  the  Macedonians, 
because  Alexander  was  so  quick  in  his  march 
through  Hyrcania.  But  these  also  Pompey  sub¬ 
dued  in  a  great  battle,  where  there  were  slain 
nine  thousand  upon  the  spot,  and  more  than 
ten  thousand  taken  prisoners.  From  thence  he 
entered  into  the  country  of  Colchis,  where 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Servilius  met  him  by  the  river  Phasis,  bring¬ 
ing  the  fleet  with  which  he  was  guarding  the 
Pontus. 

The  pursuit  of  Mithridates,  who  had  thrown 
himself  among  the  tribes  inhabiting  Bosphorus 
and  the  shores  of  the  Maeotian  Sea,  presented 
great  difficulties.  News  was  also  brought  to 
Pompey  that  the  Albanians  had  again  revolted. 
This  made  him  turn  back,  out  of  anger  and 
determination  not  to  be  beaten  by  them,  and 
with  difficulty  and  great  danger  passed  back 
over  the  Cyrnus,  which  the  barbarous  people 
had  fortified  a  great  way  down  the  banks  with 
palisadoes.  And  after  this,  having  a  tedious 
march  to  make  through  a  waterless  and  diffi¬ 
cult  country,  he  ordered  ten  thousand  skins  to 
be  filled  with  water,  and  so  advanced  towards 
the  enemy,  whom  he  found  drawn  up  in  order 
of  battle  near  the  river  Abas,  to  the  number  of 
sixty  thousand  horse  and  twelve  thousand  foot, 
ill-armed  generally,  and  most  of  them  covered 
only  with  the  skins  of  wild  beasts.  Their  gen¬ 
eral  was  Cosis,  the  king’s  brother,  who,  as  soon 
as  the  battle  was  begun,  singled  out  Pompey, 
and  rushing  in  upon  him  darted  his  javelin 
into  the  joints  of  his  breastplate;  while  Pom¬ 
pey,  in  return,  struck  him  through  the  body 
with  his  lance  and  slew  him. 

It  is  related  that  in  this  battle  there  were 
Amazons  fighting  as  auxiliaries  with  the  bar¬ 
barians,  and  that  they  came  down  from  the 
mountains  by  the  river  Thermodon.  For  that 
after  the  battle,  when  the  Romans  were  taking 
the  spoils  and  plunder  of  the  field,  they  met 
with  several  targets  and  buskins  of  the  Ama¬ 
zons;  but  no  woman’s  body  was  found  among 
the  dead.  They  inhabit  the  parts  of  Mount 
Caucasus  that  reach  down  to  the  Hyrcanian 
Sea,  not  immediately  bordering  upon  the  Al¬ 
banians,  for  the  Gelae  and  the  Leges  lie  be¬ 
twixt;  and  they  keep  company  with  these  peo¬ 
ple  yearly,  for  two  months  only,  near  the  river 
Thermodon;  after  which  they  retire  to  their 
own  habitations,  and  live  alone  all  the  rest  of 
the  year. 

After  this  engagement,  Pompey  was  eager 
to  advance  with  his  forces  upon  the  Hyrcanian 
and  Caspian  Sea,  but  was  forced  to  retreat  at  a 
distance  of  three  days’  march  from  it  by  the 
number  of  venomous  serpents,  and  so  he  re¬ 
treated  into  Armenia  the  Less.  Whilst  he  was 
there,  the  kings  of  the  Elymaeans  and  Medes 
sent  ambassadors  to  him,  to  whom  he  gave 
friendly  answer  by  letter;  and  sent  against  the 
King  of  Parthia,  who  had  made  incursions 
upon  Gordyene,  and  despoiled  the  subjects  of 


POMPEY 

Tigranes,  an  army  under  the  command  of 
Afranius,  who  put  him  to  the  rout, ‘and  fol¬ 
lowed  him  in  chase  as  far  as  the  district  of 
Arbela. 

Of  the  concubines  of  King  Mithridates  that 
were  brought  before  Pompey,  he  took  none  to 
himself,  but  sent  them  all  away  to  their  par¬ 
ents  and  relations;  most  of  them  being  either 
the  daughters  or  wives  of  princes  and  great 
commanders. 

Stratonice,  however,  who  had  the  greatest 
power  and  influence  with  him,  and  to  whom 
he  had  committed  the  custody  of  his  best  and 
richest  fortress,  had  been,  it  seems,  the  daugh¬ 
ter  of  a  musician,  an  old  man,  and  of  no  great 
fortune,  and  happening  to  sing  one  night  be¬ 
fore  Mithridates  at  a  banquet,  she  struck  his 
fancy  so  that  immediately  he  took  her  with 
him,  and  sent  away  the  old  man  much  dissatis¬ 
fied,  the  king  having  not  so  much  as  said  one 
kind  word  to  himself.  But  when  he  rose  in  the 
morning,  and  saw  tables  in  his  house  richly 
covered  with  gold  and  silver  plate,  a  great  ret¬ 
inue  of  servants,  eunuchs,  and  pages  bringing 
him  rich  garments,  and  a  horse  standing  before 
the  door  richly  caparisoned,  in  all  respects  as 
was  usual  with  the  king’s  favourites,  he  looked 
upon  it  all  as  a  piece  of  mockery,  and  thinking 
himself  trifled  with,  attempted  to  make  off  and 
run  away.  But  the  servants  laying  hold  upon 
him,  and  informing  him  really  that  the  king 
had  bestowed  on  him  the  house  and  furniture 
of  a  rich  man  lately  deceased,  and  that  these 
were  but  the  firstfruits  or  earnests  of  greater 
riches  and  possessions  that  were  to  come,  he 
was  persuaded  at  last  with  much  difficulty  to 
believe  them.  And  so  putting  on  his  purple 
robes,  and  mounting  his  horse,  he  rode  through 
the  city,  crying  out,  “All  this  is  mine”;  and  to 
those  that  laughed  at  him,  he  said,  there  was 
no  such  wonder  in  this,  but  it  was  a  wonder 
rather  that  he  did  not  throw  stones  at  all  he 
met,  he  was  so  transported  with  joy.  Such  was 
the  parentage  and  blood  of  Stratonice. 

She  now  delivered  up  this  castle  into  the 
hands  of  Pompey,  and  offered  him  many  pres¬ 
ents  of  great  value,  of  which  he  accepted  only 
such  as  he  thought  might  serve  to  adorn  the 
temples  of  the  gods  and  add  to  the  splendour 
of  his  triumph:  the  rest  he  left  to  Stratonice’s 
disposal,  bidding  her  please  herself  in  the  en¬ 
joyment  of  them. 

And  in  the  same  manner  he  dealt  with  the 
presents  offered  him  by  the  King  of  Iberia, 
who  sent  him  a  bedstead,  table,  and  a  chair  of 
state,  all  of  gold,  desiring  him  to  accept  of 


517 

them;  but  he  delivered  them  all  into  the  cus¬ 
tody  of  the  public  treasurers,  for  the  use  of  the 
commonwealth. 

In  another  castle  called  Caenum,  Pompey 
found  and  read  with  pleasure  several  secret 
writings  of  Mithridates,  containing  much  that 
threw  light  on  his  character.  For  there  were 
memoirs  by  which  it  appeared  that,  besides 
others,  he  had  made  away  with  his  son  Ari- 
arathes  by  poison,  as  also  with  Alcaeus  the  Sar¬ 
dian,  for  having  robbed  him  of  the  first  hon¬ 
ours  in  a  horse-race.  There  were  several  judg¬ 
ments  upon  the  interpretation  of  dreams, 
which  either  he  himself  or  some  of  his  mis¬ 
tresses  had  had;  and  besides  these,  there  was 
a  series  of  wanton  letters  to  and  from  his  con¬ 
cubine  Monime.  Theophanes  tells  us  that  there 
was  found  also  an  address  by  Rutilius,  in 
which  he  attempted  to  exasperate  him  to  the 
slaughter  of  all  the  Romans  in  Asia;  though 
most  men  justly  conjecture  this  to  be  a  mali¬ 
cious  invention  of  Theophanes,  who  probably 
hated  Rutilius  because  he  was  a  man  in  noth¬ 
ing  like  himself;  or  perhaps  it  might  be  to 
gratify  Pompey,  whose  father  is  described  by 
Rutilius  in  his  history  as  the  vilest  man  alive. 

From  thence  Pompey  came  to  the  city  of 
Amisus,  where  his  passion  for  glory  put  him 
into  a  position  which  might  be  called  a  punish¬ 
ment  on  himself.  For  whereas  he  had  often 
sharply  reproached  Lucullus,  in  that  while  the 
enemy  was  still  living  he  had  taken  upon  him 
to  issue  decrees,  and  distribute  rewards  and 
honours,  as  conquerors  usually  do  only  when 
the  war  is  brought  to  an  end,  yet  now  was  he 
himself,  while  Mithridates  was  paramount  in 
the  kingdom  of  Bosphorus,  and  at  the  head  of 
a  powerful  army,  as  if  all  were  ended,  just  do¬ 
ing  the  same  thing,  regulating  the  provinces, 
and  distributing  rewards,  many  great  com¬ 
manders  and  princes  having  flocked  to  him, 
together  with  no  less  than  twelve  barbarian 
kings;  insomuch  that  to  gratify  these  other 
kings,  when  he  wrote  to  the  King  of  Parthia, 
he  would  not  condescend,  as  others  used  to  do, 
in  the  superscription  of  his  letter,  to  give  him 
his  title  of  king  of  kings. 

Moreover,  he  had  a  great  desire  and  emula¬ 
tion  to  occupy  Syria,  and  to  march  through 
Arabia  to  the  Red  Sea,  that  he  might  thus  ex¬ 
tend  his  conquests  every  way  to  the  great  ocean 
that  encompasses  the  habitable  earth;  as  in 
Africa  he  was  the  first  Roman  that  advanced 
his  victories  to  the  ocean;  and  again  in  Spain 
he  made  the  Atlantic  Sea  the  limit  of  the  em¬ 
pire;  and  then  thirdly,  in  his  late  pursuit  of  the 


518 

Albanians,  he  had  wanted  but  little  of  reach¬ 
ing  the  Hyrcanian  Sea.  Accordingly  he  raised 
his  camp,  designing  to  bring  the  Red  Sea  with¬ 
in  the  circuit  of  his  expedition;  especially  as  he 
saw  how  difficult  it  was  to  hunt  after  Mithri- 
dates  with  an  army,  and  that  he  would  prove  a 
worse  enemy  fleeing  than  fighting.  But  yet  he 
declared  that  he  would  leave  a  sharper  enemy 
behind  him  than  himself,  namely,  famine;  and 
therefore  he  appointed  a  guard  of  ships  to  lie 
in  wait  for  the  merchants  that  sailed  to  Bos¬ 
phorus,  death  being  the  penalty  for  any  who 
should  attempt  to  carry  provisions  thither. 

Then  he  set  forward  with  the  greatest  part 
of  his  army,  and  in  his  march  casually  fell  in 
with  several  dead  bodies,  still  uninterred,  of 
those  soldiers  who  were  slain  with  Triarius  in 
his  unfortunate  engagement  with  Mithridates: 
these  he  buried  splendidly  and  honourably. 
The  neglect  of  whom,  it  is  thought,  caused, 
as  much  as  anything,  the  hatred  that  was  felt 
against  Lucullus,  and  alienated  the  affections 
of  the  soldiers  from  him. 

Pompey  having  now  by  his  forces  under  the 
command  of  Afranius  subdued  the  Arabians 
about  the  mountain  Amanus,  himself  entered 
Syria,  and  finding  it  destitute  of  any  natural 
and  lawful  prince,  reduced  it  into  the  form  of 
a  province,  as  a  possession  of  the  people  of 
Rome.  He  conquered  also  Judaea,  and  took  its 
king,  Aristobulus,  captive.  Some  cities  he  built 
anew,  and  to  others  he  gave  their  liberty,  chas¬ 
tising  their  tyrants. 

Most  part  of  the  time  that  he  spent  there  was 
employed  in  the  administration  of  justice,  in 
deciding  controversies  of  kings  and  states;  and 
where  he  himself  could  not  be  present  in  per¬ 
son,  he  gave  commissions  to  his  friends,  and 
sent  them.  Thus  when  there  arose  a  difference 
betwixt  the  Armenians  and  Parthians  about 
some  territory,  and  the  judgment  was  referred 
to  him,  he  gave  a  power  by  commission  to 
three  judges  and  arbiters  to  hear  and  deter¬ 
mine  the  controversy.  For  the  reputation  of  his 
power  was  great;  nor  was  the  fame  of  his  jus¬ 
tice  and  clemency  inferior  to  that  of  his  power, 
and  served  indeed  as  a  veil  for  a  multitude  of 
faults  committed  by  his  friends  and  familiars. 
For  although  it  was  not  in  his  nature  to  check 
or  chastise  wrongdoers,  yet  he  himself  always 
treated  those  that  had  to  do  with  him  in  such 
a  manner  that  they  submitted  to  endure  with 
patience  the  acts  of  covetousness  and  oppres¬ 
sion  done  by  others. 

Among  these  friends  of  his  there  was  one 
Demetrius,  who  had  the  greatest  influence 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

with  him  of  all;  he  was  a  freed  slave,  a  youth 
of  good  understanding,  but  somewhat  too  in¬ 
solent  in  his  good  fortune,  of  whom  there  goes 
this  story. 

Cato,  the  philosopher,  being  as  yet  a  very 
young  man,  but  of  great  repute  and  a  noble 
mind,  took  a  journey  of  pleasure  to  Antioch, 
at  a  time  when  Pompey  was  not  there,  having 
a  great  desire  to  see  the  city.  He,  as  his  custom 
was,  walked  on  foot,  and  his  friends  accom¬ 
panied  him  on  horseback;  and  seeing  before 
the  gates  of  the  city  a  multitude  dressed  in 
white,  the  young  men  on  one  side  of  the  road 
and  the  boys  on  the  other,  he  was  somewhat 
offended  at  it,  imagining  that  it  was  officiously 
done  in  honour  of  him,  which  was  more  than 
he  had  any  wish  for.  However,  he  desired  his 
companions  to  alight  and  walk  with  him;  but 
when  they  drew  near,  the  master  of  the  cere¬ 
monies  in  this  procession  came  out  with  a  gar¬ 
land  and  a  rod  in  his  hand  and  met  them,  in¬ 
quiring  where  they  had  left  Demetrius,  and 
when  he  would  come.  Upon  which  Cato’s  com¬ 
panions  burst  out  into  laughter,  but  Cato  said 
only,  “Alas,  poor  city!”  and  passed  by  without 
any  other  answer. 

However,  Pompey  rendered  Demetrius  less 
odious  to  others  by  enduring  his  presumption 
and  impertinence  to  himself.  For  it  is  reported 
how  that  Pompey,  when  he  had  invited  his 
friends  to  an  entertainment,  would  be  very 
ceremonious  in  waiting  till  they  all  came  and 
were  placed,  while  Demetrius  would  be  already 
stretched  upon  the  couch  as  if  he  cared  for  no 
one,  with  his  dress  over  his  ears,  hanging 
down  from  his  head. 

Before  his  return  into  Italy,  he  had  pur¬ 
chased  the  pleasantest  country-seat  about 
Rome,  with  the  finest  walks  and  places  for  ex¬ 
ercise,  and  there  were  sumptuous  gardens, 
called  by  the  name  of  Demetrius,  while  Pom¬ 
pey  his  master,  up  to  his  third  triumph,  was 
contented  with  an  ordinary  and  simple  habita¬ 
tion.  Afterwards,  it  is  true,  when  he  had 
erected  his  famous  and  stately  theatre  for  the 
people  of  Rome,  he  built  as  a  sort  of  appendix 
to  it  a  house  for  himself,  much  more  splendid 
than  his  former,  and  yet  no  object  even  this  to 
excite  men’s  envy,  since  he  who  came  to  be 
master  of  it  after  Pompey  could  not  but  ex¬ 
press  wonder  and  inquire  where  Pompey  the 
Great  used  to  sup.  Such  is  the  story  told  us. 

The  king  of  the  Arabs  near  Petra,  who  had 
hitherto  despised  the  power  of  the  Romans, 
now  began  to  be  in  great  alarm  at  it,  and  sent 
letters  to  him  promising  to  be  at  his  com- 


POMPEY 

mands,  and  to  do  whatever  he  should  see  fit  to 
order.  However,  Pompey  having  a  desire  to 
confirm  and  keep  him  in  the  same  mind, 
marched  forwards  for  Petra,  an  expedition  not 
altogether  irreprehensible  in  the  opinion  of 
many;  who  thought  it  a  mere  running  away 
from  their  proper  duty,  the  pursuit  of  Mithri- 
dates,  Rome's  ancient  and  inveterate  enemy, 
who  was  now  rekindling  the  war  once  more, 
and  taking  preparations,  it  was  reported,  to 
lead  his  army  through  Scythia  and  Paeonia  into 
Italy.  Pompey,  on  the  other  side,  judging  it 
easier  to  destroy  his  forces  in  battle  than  to 
seize  his  person  in  flight,  resolved  not  to  tire 
himself  out  in  a  vain  pursuit,  but  rather  to 
spend  his  leisure  upon  another  enemy,  as  a 
sort  of  digression  in  the  meanwhile. 

But  fortune  resolved  the  doubt,  for  when  he 
was  now  not  far  from  Petra,  and  had  pitched 
his  tents  and  encamped  for  that  day,  as  he  was 
taking  exercise  with  his  horse  outside  the 
camp,  couriers  came  riding  up  from  Pontus, 
bringing  good  news,  as  was  known  at  once  by 
the  heads  of  their  javelins,  which  it  is  the  cus¬ 
tom  to  carry  crowned  with  branches  of  laurel. 
The  soldiers,  as  soon  as  they  saw  them,  flocked 
immediately  to  Pompey,  who,  notwithstand¬ 
ing,  was  minded  to  finish  his  exercise;  but 
when  they  began  to  be  clamorous  and  impor¬ 
tunate,  he  alighted  from  his  horse,  and  taking 
the  letters  went  before  them  into  the  camp. 

Now  there  being  no  tribunal  erected  there, 
not  even  that  military  substitute  for  one  which 
they  make  by  cutting  up  thick  turfs  of  earth, 
and  piling  them  one  upon  another,  they, 
through  eagerness  and  impatience,  heaped  up 
a  pile  of  pack-saddles,  and  Pompey  standing 
upon  that,  told  them  the  news  of  Mithridates’s 
death,  how  that  he  had  himself  put  an  end  to 
his  life  upon  the  revolt  of  his  son  Pharnaces, 
and  that  Pharnaces  had  taken  all  things  there 
into  his  hands  and  possession,  which  he  did, 
his  letters  said,  in  right  of  himself  and  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  Upon  this  news  the  whole  army,  ex¬ 
pressing  their  joy,  as  was  to  be  expected,  fell  to 
sacrificing  to  the  gods,  and  feasting  as  if  in  the 
person  of  Mithridates  alone  there  had  died 
many  thousands  of  their  enemies. 

Pompey  by  this  event  having  brought  this 
war  to  its  completion,  with  much  more  ease 
than  was  expected,  departed  forthwith  out  of 
Arabia,  and  passing  rapidly  through  the  inter¬ 
mediate  provinces,  he  came  at  length  to  the 
city  Amisus.  There  he  received  many  presents 
brought  from  Pharnaces,  with  several  dead 
bodies  of  the  royal  blood,  and  the  corpse  of 


519 

Mithridates  himself,  which  was  not  easy  to  be 
known  by  the  face,  for  the  physicians  that  em¬ 
balmed  him  had  not  dried  up  his  brain,  but 
those  who  were  curious  to  see  him  knew  him 
by  the  scars  there.  Pompey  himself  would  not 
endure  to  see  him,  but  to  deprecate  the  divine 
jealousy  sent  it  away  to  the  city  of  Sinope.  He 
admired  the  richness  of  his  robes  no  less  than 
the  size  and  splendour  of  his  armour.  His 
sword-belt,  however,  which  had  cost  four  hun¬ 
dred  talents,  was  stolen  by  Publius,  and  sold  to 
Ariarathes;  his  tiara  also,  a  piece  of  admirable 
workmanship,  Gaius,  the  foster-brother  of  Mi¬ 
thridates,  gave  secretly  to  Faustus,  the  son  of 
Sulla,  at  his  request.  All  which  Pompey  was 
ignorant  of,  but  afterwards,  when  Pharnaces 
came  to  understand  it,  he  severely  punished 
those  that  embezzled  them. 

Pompey  now  having  ordered  all  things,  and 
established  that  province,  took  his  journey 
homewards  in  greater  pomp  and  with  more 
festivity.  For  when  he  came  to  Mitylene,  he 
gave  the  city  their  freedom  upon  the  interces¬ 
sion  of  Theophanes,  and  was  present  at  the 
contest,  there  periodically  held,  of  the  poets, 
who  took  at  that  time  no  other  theme  or  sub¬ 
ject  than  the  actions  of  Pompey.  He  was  ex¬ 
tremely  pleased  with  the  theatre  itself,  and  had 
a  model  of  it  taken,  intending  to  erect  one  in 
Rome  on  the  same  design,  but  larger  and  more 
magnificent.  When  he  came  to  Rhodes,  he  at¬ 
tended  the  lectures  of  all  the  philosophers 
there,  and  gave  to  every  one  of  them  a  talent. 
Posidonius  has  published  the  disputation  which 
he  held  before  him  against  Hermagoras  the 
rhetorician,  upon  the  subject  of  Invention  in 
General.  At  Athens,  also,  he  showed  similar 
munificence  to  the  philosophers,  and  gave  fifty 
talents  towards  the  repairing  and  beautifying 
the  city. 

So  that  now  by  all  these  acts  he  well  hoped 
to  return  into  Italy  in  the  greatest  splendour 
and  glory  possible  to  man,  and  find  his  family 
as  desirous  to  see  him  as  he  felt  himself  to  come 
home  to  them.  But  that  supernatural  agency, 
whose  province  and  charge  it  is  always  to  mix 
some  ingredient  of  evil  with  the  greatest  and 
most  glorious  goods  of  fortune,  had  for  some 
time  back  been  busy  in  his  household,  prepar¬ 
ing  him  a  sad  welcome.  For  Mucia  during  his 
absence  had  dishonoured  his  bed.  Whilst  he 
was  abroad  at  a  distance  he  had  refused  all 
credence  to  the  report;  but  when  he  drew  near¬ 
er  to  Italy,  where  his  thoughts  were  more  at 
leisure  to  give  consideration  to  the  charge,  he 
sent  her  a  bill  of  divorce;  but  neither  then  in 


520 

writing,  nor  afterwards  by  word  of  mouth,  did 
he  ever  give  a  reason  why  he  discharged  her; 
the  cause  of  it  is  mentioned  in  Cicero’s  epistles. 

Rumours  of  every  kind  were  scattered  abroad 
about  Pompey,  and  were  carried  to  Rome  be¬ 
fore  him,  so  that  there  was  a  great  tumult  and 
stir,  as  if  he  designed  forthwith  to  march  with 
his  army  into  the  city  and  establish  himself  se¬ 
curely  as  sole  ruler.  Crassus  withdrew  himself, 
together  with  his  children  and  property,  out  of 
the  city,  either  that  he  was  really  afraid,  or  that 
he  counterfeited  rather,  as  is  most  probable,  to 
give  credit  to  the  calumny  and  exasperate  the 
jealousy  of  the  people.  Pompey,  therefore,  as 
soon  as  he  entered  Italy,  called  a  general  mus¬ 
ter  of  the  army;  and  having  made  a  suitable 
address  and  exchanged  a  kind  farewell  with 
his  soldiers,  he  commanded  them  to  depart 
every  man  to  his  country  and  place  of  habita¬ 
tion,  only  taking  care  that  they  should  not  fail 
to  meet  again  at  his  triumph. 

Thus  the  army  being  disbanded,  and  the 
news  commonly  reported,  a  wonderful  result 
ensued.  For  when  the  cities  saw  Pompey  the 
Great  passing  through  the  country  unarmed, 
and  with  a  small  train  of  familiar  friends  only, 
as  if  he  was  returning  from  a  journey  of  pleas¬ 
ure,  not  from  his  conquests,  they  came  pouring 
out  to  display  their  affection  for  him,  attending 
and  conducting  him  to  Rome  with  far  greater 
forces  than  he  disbanded;  insomuch  that  if  he 
had  designed  any  movement  or  innovation  in 
the  state,  he  might  have  done  it  without  his 
army. 

Now,  because  the  law  permitted  no  com¬ 
mander  to  enter  into  the  city  before  his  tri¬ 
umph,  he  sent  to  the  senate,  entreating  them  as 
a  favour  to  him  to  prorogue  the  election  of  con¬ 
suls,  that  thus  he  might  be  able  to  attend  and 
give  countenance  to  Piso,  one  of  the  candidates. 
The  request  was  resisted  by  Cato,  and  met  with 
a  refusal.  However,  Pompey  could  not  but  ad¬ 
mire  the  liberty  and  boldness  of  speech  which 
Cato  alone  had  dared  to  use  in  the  maintenance 
of  law  and  justice. 

He  therefore  had  a  great  desire  to  win  him 
over,  and  purchase  his  friendship  at  any  rate; 
and  to  that  end,  Cato  having  two  nieces,  Pom¬ 
pey  asked  for  one  in  marriage  for  himself,  the 
other  for  his  son.  But  Cato  looked  unfavour¬ 
ably  on  the  proposal,  regarding  it  as  a  design 
for  undermining  his  honesty,  and  in  a  manner 
bribing  him  by  a  family  alliance;  much  to  the 
displeasure  of  his  wife  and  sister,  who  were  in¬ 
dignant  that  he  should  reject  a  connection  with 
Pompey  the  Great. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

About  that  time  Pompey  having  a  design  of 
setting  up  Afranius  for  the  consulship,  gave  a 
sum  of  money  among  the  tribes  for  their  votes, 
and  people  came  and  received  it  in  his  own  gar¬ 
dens,  a  proceeding  which,  when  it  came  to  be 
generally  known,  excited  great  disapprobation, 
that  he  should  thus,  for  the  sake  of  men  who 
could  not  obtain  the  honour  by  their  own  mer¬ 
its,  make  merchandise  of  an  office  which  had 
been  given  to  himself  as  the  highest  reward  of 
his  services.  “Now,”  said  Cato,  to  his  wife  and 
sister,  “had  we  contracted  an  alliance  with 
Pompey,  we  had  been  allied  to  this  dishonour 
too”;  and  this  they  could  not  but  acknowledge, 
and  allow  his  judgment  of  what  was  right  and 
fitting  to  have  been  wiser  and  better  than  theirs. 

The  splendour  and  magnificence  of  Pom- 
pey’s  triumph  was  such  that  though  it  took  up 
the  space  of  two  days,  yet  they  were  extremely 
straitened  in  time,  so  that  of  what  was  pre¬ 
pared  for  that  pageantry,  there  was  as  much 
withdrawn  as  would  have  set  out  and  adorned 
another  triumph.  In  the  first  place,  there  were 
tables  carried,  inscribed  with  the  names  and  ti¬ 
tles  of  the  nations  over  whom  he  triumphed, 
Pontus,  Armenia,  Cappadocia,  Paphlagonia, 
Media,  Colchis,  the  Iberians,  the  Albanians, 
Syria,  Cilicia,  and  Mesopotamia,  together  with 
Phoenicia  and  Palestine,  Judaea,  Arabia,  and 
all  the  power  of  the  pirates  subdued  by  sea  and 
land.  And  in  these  different  countries  there  ap¬ 
peared  the  capture  of  no  less  than  one  thousand 
fortified  places,  nor  much  less  than  nine  hun¬ 
dred  cities,  together  with  eight  hundred  ships 
of  the  pirates,  and  the  foundation  of  thirty- 
nine  towns. 

Besides,  there  was  set  forth  in  these  tables  an 
account  of  all  the  tributes  throughout  the  em¬ 
pire,  and  how  that  before  these  conquests  the 
revenue  amounted  but  to  fifty  millions,  where¬ 
as  from  his  acquisitions  they  had  a  revenue  of 
eighty-five  millions;  and  that  in  present  pay¬ 
ment  he  was  bringing  into  the  common  treas¬ 
ury  ready  money,  and  gold  and  silver  plate, 
and  ornaments,  to  the  value  of  twenty  thou¬ 
sand  talents,  over  and  above  what  had  been  dis¬ 
tributed  among  the  soldiers,  of  whom  he  that 
had  least  had  fifteen  hundred  drachmas  for  his 
share. 

The  prisoners  of  war  that  were  led  in  tri¬ 
umph,  besides  the  chief  pirates,  were  the  son  of 
Tigranes,  King  of  Armenia,  with  his  wife  and 
daughter;  as  also  Zosime,  wife  of  King  Tigra¬ 
nes  himself,  and  Aristobulus,  King  of  Judaea, 
the  sister  of  King  Mithridates,  and  her  five 
sons,  and  some  Scythian  women.  There  were 


POMPEY 

likewise  the  hostages  of  the  Albanians  and  Ibe¬ 
rians,  and  of  the  King  of  Commagene;  besides 
a  vast  number  of  trophies,  one  for  every  battle 
in  which  he  was  conqueror,  either  himself  in 
person  or  by  his  lieutenants. 

But  that  which  seemed  to  be  his  greatest 
glory,  being  one  which  no  other  Roman  ever 
attained  to,  was  this,  that  he  made  his  third  tri¬ 
umph  over  the  third  division  of  the  world.  For 
others  among  the  Romans  had  the  honour  of 
triumphing  thrice,  but  his  first  triumph  was 
over  Africa,  his  second  over  Europe,  and  this 
last  over  Asia;  so  that  he  seemed  in  these  three 
triumphs  to  have  led  the  whole  world  captive. 

As  for  his  age,  those  who  affect  to  make  the 
parallel  exact  in  all  things  betwixt  him  and  Al¬ 
exander  the  Great,  do  not  allow  him  to  have 
been  quite  thirty-four,  whereas  in  truth  at  that 
time  he  was  near  forty.  And  well  had  it  been 
for  him  had  he  terminated  his  life  at  this  date, 
while  he  still  enjoyed  Alexander’s  fortune, 
since  all  his  after-time  served  only  either  to 
bring  him  prosperity  that  made  him  odious,  or 
calamities  too  great  to  be  retrieved. 

For  that  great  authority  which  he  had  gained 
in  the  city  by  his  merits  he  made  use  of  only  in 
patronising  the  iniquities  of  others,  so  that  by 
advancing  their  fortunes  he  detracted  from  his 
own  glory,  till  at  last  he  was  overthrown  even 
by  the  force  and  greatness  of  his  own  power. 
And  as  the  strongest  citadel  or  fort  in  a  town, 
when  it  is  taken  by  an  enemy,  does  then  afford 
the  same  strength  to  the  foe  as  it  had  done  to 
friends  before,  so  Caesar,  after  Pompey’s  aid 
had  made  him  strong  enough  to  defy  his  coun¬ 
try,  ruined  and  overthrew  at  last  the  power 
which  had  availed  him  against  the  rest. 

The  course  of  things  was  as  follows.  Lucul- 
lus,  when  he  returned  out  of  Asia,  where  he 
had  been  treated  with  insult  by  Pompey,  was 
received  by  the  senate  with  great  honour,  which 
was  yet  increased  when  Pompey  came  home; 
to  check  whose  ambition  they  encouraged  him 
to  assume  the  administration  of  the  govern¬ 
ment,  whereas  he  was  now  grown  cold  and  dis¬ 
inclined  to  business,  having  given  himself  over 
to  the  pleasures  of  ease  and  the  enjoyment  of  a 
splendid  fortune.  However,  he  began  for  the 
time  to  exert  himself  against  Pompey,  attacked 
him  sharply,  and  succeeded  in  having  his  own 
acts  and  decrees,  which  were  repealed  by  Pom¬ 
pey,  re-established,  and,  with  the  assistance  of 
Cato,  gained  the  superiority  in  the  senate. 

Pompey  having  fallen  from  his  hopes  in  such 
an  unworthy  repulse,  was  forced  to  flee  to  the 
tribunes  of  the  people  for  refuge,  and  to  attach 


521 

himself  to  the  young  men,  among  whom  was 
Clodius,  the  vilest  and  most  impudent  wretch 
alive,  who  took  him  about,  and  exposed  him  as 
a  tool  to  the  people,  carrying  him  up  and  down 
among  the  throngs  in  the  market-place,  to 
countenance  those  laws  and  speeches  which  he 
made  to  cajole  the  people  and  ingratiate  him¬ 
self.  And  at  last,  for  his  reward,  he  demanded 
of  Pompey,  as  if  he  had  not  disgraced,  but  done 
him  a  great  kindness,  that  he  should  forsake 
(as  in  the  end  he  did  forsake)  Cicero,  his 
friend,  who  on  many  public  occasions  had  done 
him  the  greatest  service.  And  so  when  Cicero 
was  in  danger,  and  implored  his  aid,  he  would 
not  admit  him  into  his  presence,  but  shutting 
up  his  gates  against  those  that  came  to  mediate 
for  him,  slipt  out  at  a  back  door,  whereupon 
Cicero,  fearing  the  result  of  his  trial,  departed 
privately  from  Rome. 

About  that  time  Caesar,  returning  from  mili¬ 
tary  service,  started  a  course  of  policy  which 
brought  him  great  present  favour,  and  much 
increased  his  power  for  the  future,  and  proved 
extremely  destructive  both  to  Pompey  and  the 
commonwealth.  For  now  he  stood  candidate 
for  his  first  consulship,  and  well  observing  the 
enmity  betwixt  Pompey  and  Crassus,  and  find¬ 
ing  that  by  joining  with  one  he  should  make 
the  other  his  enemy,  he  endeavoured  by  all 
means  to  reconcile  them,  an  object  in  itself  hon¬ 
ourable  and  tending  to  the  public  good,  but,  as 
he  undertook  it,  a  mischievous  and  subtle  in¬ 
trigue. 

For  he  well  knew  that  opposite  parties  or 
factions  in  a  commonwealth,  like  passengers  in 
a  boat,  serve  to  trim  and  balance  the  unsteady 
motions  of  power  there;  whereas  if  they  com¬ 
bine  and  come  all  over  to  one  side,  they  cause 
a  shock  which  will  be  sure  to  overset  the  vessel 
and  carry  down  everything.  And  therefore 
Cato  wisely  told  those  who  charged  all  the  ca¬ 
lamities  of  Rome  upon  the  disagreement  be¬ 
twixt  Pompey  and  Caesar  that  they  were  in  er¬ 
ror  in  charging  all  the  crime  upon  the  last 
cause;  for  it  was  not  their  discord  and  enmity, 
but  their  unanimity  and  friendship,  that  gave 
the  first  and  greatest  blow  to  the  common¬ 
wealth. 

Caesar  being  thus  elected  consul,  began  at 
once  to  make  an  interest  with  the  poor  and 
meaner  sort,  by  preferring  and  establishing 
laws  for  planting  colonies  and  dividing  lands, 
lowering  the  dignity  of  his  office,  and  turning 
his  consulship  into  a  sort  of  tribuneship  rather. 
And  when  Bibulus,  his  colleague,  opposed  him, 
and  Cato  was  prepared  to  second  Bibulus,  and 


522 

assist  him  vigorously,  Caesar  brought  Pompey 
upon  the  hustings,  and  addressing  him  in  the 
sight  of  the  people,  demanded  his  opinion  upon 
the  laws  that  were  proposed.  Pompey  gave  his 
approbation.  “Then,”  said  Caesar,  “in  case  any 
man  should  offer  violence  to  these  laws,  will 
you  be  ready  to  give  assistance  to  the  people?” 
“Yes,”  replied  Pompey,  “I  shall  be  ready,  and 
against  those  that  threaten  the  sword,  I  will  ap¬ 
pear  with  sword  and  buckler.” 

Nothing  ever  was  said  or  done  by  Pompey 
up  to  that  day  that  seemed  more  insolent  or 
overbearing;  so  that  his  friends  endeavoured  to 
apologise  for  it  as  a  word  spoken  inadvertently; 
but  by  his  actions  afterwards  it  appeared  plain¬ 
ly  that  he  was  totally  devoted  to  Caesar’s  serv¬ 
ice.  For  on  a  sudden,  contrary  to  all  expecta¬ 
tion,  he  married  Julia,  the  daughter  of  Caesar, 
who  had  been  affianced  before  and  was  to  be 
married  within  a  few  days  to  Caepio.  And  to 
appease  Caepio’s  wrath,  he  gave  him  his  own 
daughter  in  marriage,  who  had  been  espoused 
before  to  Faustus,  the  son  of  Sulla.  Caesar  him¬ 
self  married  Calpurnia,  the  daughter  of  Piso. 

Upon  this  Pompey,  filling  the  city  with  sol¬ 
diers,  carried  all  things  by  force  as  he  pleased. 
As  Bibulus,  the  consul,  was  going  to  the  Fo¬ 
rum,  accompanied  by  Lucullus  and  Cato,  they 
fell  upon  him  on  a  sudden  and  broke  his  rods; 
and  somebody  threw  a  vessel  of  ordure  upon 
the  head  of  Bibulus  himself;  and  two  tribunes 
of  the  people,  who  escorted  him,  were  desper¬ 
ately  wounded  in  the  fray.  And  thus  having 
cleared  the  Forum  of  all  their  adversaries,  they 
got  their  bill  for  the  division  of  lands  estab¬ 
lished  and  passed  into  an  act;  and  not  only  so, 
but  the  whole  populace,  being  taken  with  this 
bait,  became  totally  at  their  devotion,  inquir¬ 
ing  into  nothing  and  without  a  word  giving 
their  suffrages  to  whatever  they  propounded. 
Thus  they  confirmed  all  those  acts  and  decrees 
of  Pompey  which  were  questioned  and  con¬ 
tested  by  Lucullus;  and  to  Caesar  they  granted 
the  provinces  of  Gaul,  both  within  and  with¬ 
out  the  Alps,  together  with  Illyricum,  for  five 
years,  and  likewise  an  army  of  four  entire  le¬ 
gions;  then  they  created  consuls  for  the  year 
ensuing,  Piso,  the  father-in-law  of  Caesar,  and 
Gabinius,  the  most  extravagant  of  Pompey’s 
flatterers. 

During  all  these  transactions,  Bibulus  kept 
close  within  doors,  nor  did  he  appear  publicly 
in  person  for  the  space  of  eight  months  togeth¬ 
er,  notwithstanding  he  was  consul,  but  sent  out 
proclamations  full  of  bitter  invectives  and  accu¬ 
sations  against  them  both.  Cato  turned  prophet, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  as  if  he  had  been  possessed  with  a  spirit  of 
divination,  did  nothing  else  in  the  senate  but 
foretell  what  evils  should  befall  the  common¬ 
wealth  and  Pompey.  Lucullus  pleaded  old  age, 
and  retired  to  take  his  ease,  as  superannuated 
for  affairs  of  state;  which  gave  occasion  to  the 
saying  of  Pompey,  that  the  fatigues  of  luxury 
were  not  more  seasonable  for  an  old  man  than 
those  of  government.  Which  in  truth  proved  a 
reflection  upon  himself;  for  he  not  long  after 
let  his  fondness  for  his  young  wife  seduce  him 
also  into  effeminate  habits.  He  gave  all  his  time 
to  her,  and  passed  his  days  in  her  company  in 
country-houses  and  gardens,  paying  no  heed  to 
what  was  going  on  in  the  Forum. 

Insomuch  that  Clodius,  who  was  then  trib¬ 
une  of  the  people,  began  to  despise  him,  and 
engage  in  the  most  audacious  attempts.  For 
when  he  had  banished  Cicero,  and  sent  away 
Cato  into  Cyprus  under  pretence  of  military 
duty,  and  when  Caesar  was  gone  upon  his  ex¬ 
pedition  to  Gaul,  finding  the  populace  now 
looking  to  him  as  the  leader  who  did  every¬ 
thing  according  to  their  pleasure,  he  attempted 
forthwith  to  repeal  some  of  Pompey’s  decrees; 
he  took  Tigranes,  the  captive,  out  of  prison, 
and  kept  him  about  him  as  his  companion;  and 
commenced  actions  against  several  of  Pom¬ 
pey’s  friends,  thus  designing  to  try  the  extent 
of  his  power.  At  last,  upon  a  time  when  Pom¬ 
pey  was  present  at  the  hearing  of  a  certain 
cause,  Clodius,  accompanied  with  a  crowd  of 
profligate  and  impudent  ruffians,  standing  up 
in  a  place  above  the  rest,  put  questions  to  the 
populace  as  follows:  “Who  is  the  dissolute  gen¬ 
eral?  Who  is  the  man  that  seeks  another  man? 
Who  scratches  his  head  with  one  finger?”  And 
the  rabble,  upon  the  signal  of  his  shaking  his 
gown,  with  a  great  shout  to  every  question, 
like  singers  making  responses  in  a  chorus, 
made  answer,  “Pompey.” 

This  indeed  was  no  small  annoyance  to 
Pompey,  who  was  quite  unaccustomed  to  hear 
anything  ill  of  himself,  and  unexperienced  al¬ 
together  in  such  encounters;  and  he  was  yet 
more  vexed  when  he  saw  that  the  senate  re¬ 
joiced  at  this  foul  usage,  and  regarded  it  as  a 
just  punishment  upon  him  for  his  treachery  to 
Cicero.  But  when  it  came  even  to  blows  and 
wounds  in  the  Forum,  and  that  one  of  Clodi- 
us’s  bond-slaves  was  apprehended  creeping 
through  the  crowd  towards  Pompey  with  a 
sword  in  his  hand,  Pompey  laid  hold  of  this 
pretence,  though  perhaps  otherwise  apprehen¬ 
sive  of  Clodius’s  insolence  and  bad  language, 
and  never  appeared  again  in  the  Forum  dur- 


POMPEY 

in g  all  the  time  he  was  tribune,  but  kept  close 
at  home,  and  passed  his  time  in  consulting  with 
his  friends  by  what  means  he  might  best  allay 
the  displeasure  of  the  senate  and  nobles  against 
him. 

Among  other  expedients,  Culleo  advised  the 
divorce  of  Julia,  and  to  abandon  Caesar’s  friend¬ 
ship  to  gain  that  of  the  senate;  this  he  would 
not  hearken  to.  Others  again  advised  him  to 
call  home  Cicero  from  banishment,  a  man  who 
was  always  the  great  adversary  of  Clodius,  and 
as  great  a  favourite  of  the  senate;  to  this  he  was 
easily  persuaded.  And  therefore  he  brought  Ci¬ 
cero’s  brother  into  the  Forum,  attended  with 
a  strong  party,  to  petition  for  his  return;  where, 
after  a  warm  dispute,  in  which  several  were 
wounded  and  some  slain,  he  got  the  victory 
over  Clodius. 

No  sooner  was  Cicero  returned  home  upon 
this  decree,  but  immediately  he  used  his  efforts 
to  reconcile  the  senate  to  Pompey;  and  by 
speaking  in  favour  of  the  law  upon  the  impor¬ 
tations  of  corn,  did  again,  in  effect,  make  Pom¬ 
pey  sovereign  lord  of  all  the  Roman  posses¬ 
sions  by  sea  and  land.  For  by  that  law  there 
were  placed  under  his  control  all  ports,  mar¬ 
kets,  and  storehouses,  and,  in  short,  all  the  con¬ 
cerns  both  of  the  merchants  and  the  husband¬ 
men  ;  which  gave  occasion  to  the  charge  brought 
against  it  by  Clodius,  that  the  law  was  not 
made  because  of  the  scarcity  of  corn,  but  the 
scarcity  of  corn  was  made  that  they  might  pass 
a  law,  whereby  that  power  of  his,  which  was 
now  grown  feeble  and  consumptive,  might  be 
revived  again,  and  Pompey  reinstated  in  a  new 
empire.  Others  looked  upon  it  as  a  politic  de¬ 
vice  of  Spinther,  the  consul,  whose  design  it 
was  to  secure  Pompey  in  a  greater  authority, 
that  he  himself  might  be  sent  in  assistance  to 
King  Ptolemy.  However,  it  is  certain  that  Ca- 
nidius,  the  tribune,  preferred  a  law  to  despatch 
Pompey  in  the  character  of  an  ambassador, 
without  an  army,  attended  only  with  two  lie- 
tors,  as  a  mediator  betwixt  the  king  and  his 
subjects  of  Alexandria. 

Neither  did  this  proposal  seem  unacceptable 
to  Pompey,  though  the  senate  cast  it  out  upon 
the  specious  pretence  that  they  were  unwilling 
to  hazard  his  person.  However,  there  were 
found  several  writings  scattered  about  the  Fo¬ 
rum  and  near  the  senate-house  intimating  how 
grateful  it  would  be  to  Ptolemy  to  have  Pom¬ 
pey  appointed  for  his  general  instead  of  Spin¬ 
ther.  And  Timagenes  even  asserts  that  Pto¬ 
lemy  went  away  and  left  Egypt,  not  out  of  ne¬ 
cessity,  but  purely  upon  the  persuasion  of  The- 


523 

ophanes,  who  was  anxious  to  give  Pompey  the 
opportunity  for  holding  a  new  command  and 
gaining  further  wealth.  But Theophanes’s  want 
of  honesty  does  not  go  so  far  to  make  this  story 
credible  as  does  Pompey’s  own  nature,  which 
was  averse,  with  all  its  ambition,  to  such  base 
and  disingenuous  acts,  to  render  it  improbable. 

Thus  Pompey,  being  appointed  chief  pur¬ 
veyor,  and  having  within  his  administration 
and  management  all  the  corn  trade,  sent  abroad 
his  factors  and  agents  into  all  quarters,  and  he 
himself  sailing  into  Sicily,  Sardinia,  and  Afri¬ 
ca,  collected  vast  stores  of  corn.  He  was  just 
ready  to  set  sail  upon  his  voyage  home,  when  a 
great  storm  arose  upon  the  sea,  and  the  ships’ 
commanders  doubted  whether  it  were  safe. 
Upon  which  Pompey  himself  went  first  aboard, 
and  bid  the  mariners  weigh  anchor,  declaring 
with  a  loud  voice  that  there  was  a  necessity  to 
sail,  but  no  necessity  to  live.  So  that  with  this 
spirit  and  courage,  and  having  met  with  fa¬ 
vourable  fortune,  he  made  a  prosperous  return, 
and  filled  the  markets  with  corn,  and  the  sea 
with  ships.  So  much  so  that  this  great  plenty 
and  abundance  of  provisions  yielded  a  suffi¬ 
cient  supply,  not  only  to  the  city  of  Rome,  but 
even  to  other  places  too,  dispersing  itself,  like 
waters  from  a  spring,  into  all  quarters. 

Meantime  Caesar  grew  great  and  famous 
with  his  wars  in  Gaul,  and  while  in  appear¬ 
ance  he  seemed  far  distant  from  Rome,  entan¬ 
gled  in  the  affairs  of  the  Belgians,  Suevians, 
and  Britons,  in  truth  he  was  working  craftily 
by  secret  practices  in  the  midst  of  the  people, 
and  counterminingPompey  in  all  political  mat¬ 
ters  of  most  importance.  He  himself,  with  his 
army  close  about  him,  as  if  it  had  been  his  own 
body,  not  with  mere  views  of  conquest  over  the 
barbarians,  but  as  though  his  contests  with 
them  were  but  mere  sports  and  exercises  of  the 
chase,  did  his  utmost  with  this  training  and 
discipline  to  make  it  invincible  and  alarming. 

In  the  meantime  his  gold  and  silver  and 
other  spoils  and  treasure  which  he  took  from 
the  enemy  in  his  conquests,  he  sent  to  Rome  in 
presents,  tempting  people  with  his  gifts,  and 
aiding  aediles,  praetors,  and  consuls,  as  also  their 
wives,  in  their  expenses,  and  thus  purchasing 
himself  numerous  friends.  Insomuch,  that 
when  he  passed  back  again  over  the  Alps,  and 
took  up  his  winter  quarters  in  the  city  of  Lucca, 
there  flocked  to  him  an  infinite  number  of  men 
and  women,  striving  who  should  get  first  to 
him,  two  hundred  senators  included,  among 
whom  were  Pompey  and  Crassus;  so  that  there 
were  to  be  seen  at  once  before  Caesar’s  door  no 


524 

less  than  six  score  rods  of  proconsuls  and  prae¬ 
tors. 

The  rest  of  his  addressers  he  sent  all  away 
full  fraught  with  hopes  and  money;  but  with 
Crassus  and  Pompey  he  entered  into  special  ar¬ 
ticles  of  agreement,  that  they  should  stand  can¬ 
didates  for  the  consulship  next  year;  that  Caesar 
on  his  part  should  send  a  number  of  his  soldiers 
to  give  their  votes  at  the  election;  that  as  soon 
as  they  were  elected,  they  should  use  their  in¬ 
terest  to  have  the  command  of  some  provinces 
and  legions  assigned  to  themselves,  and  that 
Caesar  should  have  his  present  charge  con¬ 
firmed  to  him  for  five  years  more. 

When  these  arrangements  came  to  be  gener¬ 
ally  known,  great  indignation  was  excited 
among  the  chief  men  in  Rome;  and  Marcelli- 
nus,  in  an  open  assembly  of  the  people,  de¬ 
manded  of  them  both,  whether  they  designed 
to  sue  for  the  consulship  or  no.  And  being 
urged  by  the  people  for  their  answer,  Pompey 
spoke  first,  and  told  them,  perhaps  he  would 
sue  for  it,  perhaps  he  would  not.  Crassus  was 
more  temperate,  and  said,  that  he  would  do 
what  should  be  judged  most  agreeable  with  the 
interest  of  the  commonwealth;  and  when  Mar- 
cellinus  persisted  in  his  attack  on  Pompey,  and 
spoke,  as  it  was  thought,  with  some  vehemence, 
Pompey  remarked  that  Marcellinus  was  cer¬ 
tainly  the  unfairest  of  men,  to  show  him  no 
gratitude  for  having  thus  made  him  an  orator 
out  of  a  mute,  and  converted  him  from  a  hun¬ 
gry  starveling  into  a  man  so  well-fed  that  he 
could  not  contain  himself. 

Most  of  the  candidates  nevertheless  aban¬ 
doned  their  canvass  for  the  consulship;  Cato 
alone  persuaded  and  encouraged  Lucius  Domi- 
tius  not  to  desist,  “since,”  said  he,  “the  contest 
now  is  not  for  office,  but  for  liberty  against  ty¬ 
rants  and  usurpers.”  Therefore  those  of  Pom- 
pey’s  party,  fearing  this  inflexible  constancy  in 
Cato,  by  which  he  kept  with  him  the  whole 
senate,  lest  by  this  he  should  likewise  pervert 
and  draw  after  him  all  the  well-affected  part  of 
the  commonalty,  resolved  to  withstand  Domi- 
tius  at  once,  and  to  prevent  his  entrance  into 
the  Forum.  To  this  end,  therefore,  they  sent  in 
a  band  of  armed  men,  who  slew  the  torch- 
bearer  of  Domitius,  as  he  was  leading  the  way 
before  him,  and  put  all  the  rest  to  flight;  last  of 
all,  Cato  himself  retired,  having  received  a 
wound  in  his  right  arm  while  defending  Do¬ 
mitius. 

Thus  by  these  means  and  practices  they  ob¬ 
tained  the  consulship;  neither  did  they  behave 
themselves  with  more  decency  in  their  further 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES  P 

proceedings;  but  in  the  first  place,  when  the  s' 
people  were  choosing  Cato  praetor,  and  just  h 
ready  with  their  votes  for  the  poll,  Pompey  si 
broke  up  the  assembly,  upon  a  pretext  of  some  " 
inauspicious  appearance,  and  having  gained  si 
the  tribes  by  money,  they  publicly  proclaimed  fi 
Vatinius  praetor.  Then,  in  pursuance  of  their  v 
covenants  with  Caesar,  they  introduced  several  ti 
laws  by  Trebonius,  the  tribune,  continuing  Cae-  o 
sar’s  commission  to  another  five  years’  charge  f 
of  his  province;  to  Crassus  there  were  appoint-  c 
ed  Syria  and  the  Parthian  war;  and  to  Pompey  s 
himself,  all  Africa,  together  with  both  Spains,  1 
and  four  legions  of  soldiers,  two  of  which  he  | 
lent  to  Caesar  upon  his  request  for  the  wars  in  t 
Gaul.  t 

Crassus,  upon  the  expiration  of  his  consul-  { 
ship,  departed  forthwith  into  his  province;  but  i  1 
Pompey  spent  some  time  in  Rome,  upon  the 
opening  or  dedication  of  his  theatre,  where  he 
treated  the  people  with  all  sorts  of  games,  i 
shows,  and  exercises,  in  gymnastics  alike  and 
in  music.  There  was  likewise  the  hunting  or 
baiting  of  wild  beasts,  and  combats  with  them, 
in  which  five  hundred  lions  were  slain;  but 
above  all,  the  battle  of  elephants  was  a  specta¬ 
cle  full  of  horror  and  amazement. 

These  entertainments  brought  him  great 
honour  and  popularity;  but  on  the  other  side 
he  created  no  less  envy  to  himself,  in  that  he 
committed  the  government  of  his  provinces 
and  legions  into  the  hands  of  friends  as  his  lieu¬ 
tenants,  whilst  he  himself  was  going  about  and 
spending  his  time  with  his  wife  in  all  the 
places  of  amusement  in  Italy;  whether  it  were 
he  was  so  fond  of  her  himself,  or  she  so  fond 
of  him,  and  he  unable  to  distress  her  by  going 
away,  for  this  also  is  stated.  And  the  love  dis¬ 
played  by  this  young  wife  for  her  elderly  hus¬ 
band  was  a  matter  of  general  note,  to  be  attrib¬ 
uted,  it  would  seem,  to  his  constancy  in  mar¬ 
ried  life,  and  to  his  dignity  of  manner,  which 
in  familiar  intercourse  was  tempered  with 
grace  and  gentleness,  and  was  particularly  at¬ 
tractive  to  women,  as  even  Flora,  the  courtesan, 
may  be  thought  good  enough  evidence  to  prove. 

It  once  happened  in  a  public  assembly,  as 
they  were  at  an  election  of  the  aediles,  that  the 
people  came  to  blows,  and  several  about  Pom¬ 
pey  were  slain,  so  that  he,  finding  himself  all 
bloody,  ordered  a  change  of  apparel;  but  the 
servants  who  brought  home  his  clothes,  mak¬ 
ing  a  great  bustle  and  hurry  about  the  house, 
it  chanced  that  the  young  lady,  who  was  then 
with  child,  saw  his  gown  all  stained  with  blood; 
upon  which  she  dropped  immediately  into  a 


POMPEY 

swoon,  and  was  hardly  brought  to  life  again; 
however,  what  with  her  fright  and  suffering, 
she  fell  into  labour  and  miscarried;  even  those 
who  chiefly  censured  Pompey  for  his  friend¬ 
ship  to  Caesar  could  not  reprove  him  for  his  af¬ 
fection  to  so  attached  a  wife.  Afterwards  she 
was  great  again,  and  brought  to  bed  of  a  daugh¬ 
ter,  but  died  in  childbed;  neither  did  the  infant 
outlive  her  mother  many  days.  Pompey  had 
prepared  all  things  for  the  interment  of  her 
corpse  at  his  house  near  Alba,  but  the  people 
seized  upon  it  by  force,  and  performed  the  so¬ 
lemnities  in  the  field  of  Mars,  rather  in  com¬ 
passion  for  the  young  lady,  than  in  favour  ei¬ 
ther  for  Pompey  or  Caesar;  and  yet  of  these  two, 
the  people  seemed  at  that  time  to  pay  Caesar  a 
greater  share  of  honour  in  his  absence,  than  to 
Pompey,  though  he  was  present. 

For  the  city  now  at  once  began  to  roll  and 
swell,  so  to  say,  with  the  stir  of  the  coming 
storm.  Things  everywhere  were  in  a  state  of 
agitation,  and  everybody’s  discourse  tended  to 
division,  now  that  death  had  put  an  end  to  that 
relation  which  hitherto  had  been  a  disguise 
rather  than  restraint  to  the  ambition  of  these 
men.  Besides,  not  long  after  came  messengers 
from  Parthia  with  intelligence  of  the  death  of 
Crassus  there,  by  which  another  safeguard 
against  civil  war  was  removed,  since  both  Cae¬ 
sar  and  Pompey  kept  their  eyes  on  Crassus,  and 
awe  of  him  held  them  together  more  or  less 
within  the  bounds  of  fair-dealing  all  his  life¬ 
time. 

But  when  fortune  had  taken  away  this  sec¬ 
ond,  whose  province  it  might  have  been  to  re¬ 
venge  the  quarrel  of  the  conquered,  you  might 
then  say  with  the  comic  poet — 

The  combatants  are  waiting  to  begin, 

Smearing  their  hands  with  dust  and  oiling 
each  his  s\in. 

So  inconsiderable  a  thing  is  fortune  in  respect 
of  human  nature,  and  so  insufficient  to  give 
content  to  a  covetous  mind,  that  an  empire  of 
that  mighty  extent  and  sway  could  not  satisfy 
the  ambition  of  two  men;  and  though  they 
knew  and  had  read,  that — 

The  gods,  when  they  divided  out  ’ twixt  three, 
This  massive  universe,  heaven,  hell ,  and  sea , 
Each  one  sat  down  contented  on  his  throne, 
And  undisturbed  each  god  enjoys  his  own, 
yet  they  thought  the  whole  Roman  empire  not 
sufficient  to  contain  them,  though  they  were 
but  two. 

Pompey  once  in  an  oration  to  the  people  told 
them  that  he  had  always  come  into  office  be¬ 
fore  he  expected  he  should,  and  that  he  had  al- 


525 

ways  left  it  sooner  than  they  expected  he  would; 
and,  indeed,  the  disbanding  of  all  his  armies 
witnessed  as  much.  Yet  when  he  perceived  that 
Caesar  would  not  so  willingly  discharge  his 
forces,  he  endeavoured  to  strengthen  himself 
against  him  by  offices  and  commands  in  the 
city;  but  beyond  this  he  showed  no  desire  for 
any  change,  and  would  not  seem  to  distrust,  but 
rather  to  disregard  and  contemn  him.  And 
when  he  saw  how  they  bestowed  the  places  of 
government  quite  contrary  to  his  wishes,  be¬ 
cause  the  citizens  were  bribed  in  their  elec¬ 
tions,  he  let  things  take  their  course,  and  al¬ 
lowed  the  city  to  be  left  without  any  govern¬ 
ment  at  all. 

Hereupon  there  was  mention  straightway 
made  of  appointing  a  dictator.  Lucullus,  a  trib¬ 
une  of  the  people,  was  the  man  who  first  ad¬ 
ventured  to  propose  it,  urging  the  people  to 
make  Pompey  dictator.  But  the  tribune  was  in 
danger  of  being  turned  out  of  his  office  by  the 
opposition  that  Cato  made  against  it.  And  for 
Pompey,  many  of  his  friends  appeared  and  ex¬ 
cused  him,  alleging  that  he  never  was  desirous 
of  that  government,  neither  would  he  accept  of 
it.  When  Cato  therefore  made  a  speech  in  com¬ 
mendation  of  Pompey  and  exhorted  him  to 
support  the  cause  of  good  order  in  the  com¬ 
monwealth,  he  could  not  for  shame  but  yield  to 
it,  and  so  for  the  present  Domitius  and  Messala 
were  elected  consuls. 

But  shortly  afterwards,  when  there  was  an¬ 
other  anarchy,  or  vacancy  in  the  government, 
and  the  talk  of  a  dictator  was  much  louder  and 
more  general  than  before,  those  of  Cato’s  party, 
fearing  lest  they  should  be  forced  to  appoint 
Pompey,  thought  it  policy  to  keep  him  from 
that  arbitrary  and  tyrannical  power  by  giving 
him  an  office  of  more  legal  authority.  Bibulus 
himself,  who  was  Pompey’s  enemy,  first  gave 
his  vote  in  the  senate,  that  Pompey  should  be 
created  consul  alone;  alleging,  that  by  these 
means  either  the  commonwealth  would  be 
freed  from  its  present  confusion,  or  that  its 
bondage  should  be  lessened  by  serving  the 
worthiest. 

This  was  looked  upon  as  a  very  strange  opin¬ 
ion,  considering  the  man  that  spoke  it;  and 
therefore  on  Cato’s  standing  up,  everybody  ex¬ 
pected  that  he  would  have  opposed  it;  but  after 
silence  was  made,  he  said  that  he  would  never 
have  been  the  author  of  that  advice  himself, 
but  since  it  was  propounded  by  another,  his  ad¬ 
vice  was  to  follow  it,  adding,  that  any  form  of 
government  was  better  than  none  at  all;  and 
that  in  a  time  so  full  of  distraction,  he  thought 


526 


no  man  fitter  to  govern  than  Pompey.  This 
counsel  was  unanimously  approved  of,  and  a 
decree  passed  that  Pompey  should  be  made 
sole  consul,  with  this  clause,  that  if  he  thought 
it  necessary  to  have  a  colleague,  he  might 
choose  whom  he  pleased,  provided  it  were  not 
till  after  two  months  expired. 

Thus  was  Pompey  created  and  declared  sole 
consul  by  Sulpicius,  regent  in  this  vacancy; 
upon  which  he  made  very  cordial  acknowledg¬ 
ments  to  Cato,  professing  himself  much  his 
debtor,  and  requesting  his  good  advice  in  con¬ 
ducting  the  government;  to  this  Cato  replied, 
that  Pompey  had  no  reason  to  thank  him,  for 
all  that  he  had  said  was  for  the  service  of  the 
commonwealth,  not  of  Pompey;  but  that  he 
would  be  always  ready  to  give  his  advice  pri¬ 
vately,  if  he  were  asked  for  it;  and  if  not,  he 
should  not  fail  to  say  what  he  thought  in  pub¬ 
lic.  Such  was  Cato’s  conduct  on  all  occasions. 

On  his  return  into  the  city  Pompey  married 
Cornelia,  the  daughter  of  Metellus  Scipio,  not 
a  maiden,  but  lately  left  a  widow  by  Publius, 
the  son  of  Crassus,  her  first  husband,  who  had 
been  killed  in  Parthia.  The  young  lady  had 
other  attractions  besides  those  of  youth  and 
beauty;  for  she  was  highly  educated,  played 
well  upon  the  lute,  and  understood  geometry, 
and  had  been  accustomed  to  listen  with  profit 
to  lectures  on  philosophy;  all  this,  too,  without 
in  any  degree  becoming  unamiable  or  preten¬ 
tious,  as  sometimes  young  women  do  when 
they  pursue  such  studies.  Nor  could  any  fault 
be  found  either  with  her  father’s  family  or  repu¬ 
tation.  The  disparity  of  their  ages  was,  however, 
not  liked  by  everybody;  Cornelia  being  in  this 
respect  a  fitter  match  for  Pompey’s  son. 

And  wiser  judges  thought  it  rather  a  slight 
upon  the  commonwealth  when  he,  to  whom 
alone  they  had  committed  their  broken  for¬ 
tunes,  and  from  whom  alone,  as  from  their 
physician,  they  expected  a  cure  to  these  distrac¬ 
tions,  went  about  crowned  with  garlands  and 
celebrating  his  nuptial  feasts,  never  consider¬ 
ing  that  his  very  consulship  was  a  public  ca¬ 
lamity,  which  would  never  have  been  given 
him,  contrary  to  the  rules  of  law,  had  his  coun¬ 
try  been  in  a  flourishing  state. 

Afterwards,  however,  he  took  cognisance  of 
the  cases  of  those  that  had  obtained  offices  by 
gifts  and  bribery,  and  enacted  laws  and  ordi¬ 
nances,  setting  forth  the  rules  of  judgment  by 
which  they  should  be  arraigned;  and  regulat¬ 
ing  all  things  with  gravity  and  justice,  he  re¬ 
stored  security,  order,  and  silence  to  their  courts 
of  judicature,  himself  giving  his  presence  there 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

with  a  band  of  soldiers.  But  when  his  father- 
in-law,  Scipio,  was  accused,  he  summoned  the 
three  hundred  and  sixty  judges  to  his  house, 
and  entreated  them  to  be  favourable  to  him; 
whereupon  his  accuser,  seeing  Scipio  come  into 
the  court,  accompanied  by  the  judges  them¬ 
selves,  withdrew  the  prosecution. 

Upon  this  Pompey  was  very  ill  spoken  of, 
and  much  worse  in  the  case  of  Plancus;  for 
whereas  he  himself  had  made  a  law  putting  a 
stop  to  the  practice  of  making  speeches  in  praise 
of  persons  under  trial,  yet  notwithstanding 
this  prohibition,  he  came  into  court  and  spoke 
openly  in  commendation  of  Plancus,  insomuch 
that  Cato,  who  happened  to  be  one  of  the 
judges  at  that  time,  stopping  his  ears  with  his 
hands,  told  him  he  could  not  in  conscience  lis¬ 
ten  to  commendations  contrary  to  law.  Cato 
upon  this  was  refused,  and  set  aside  from  be¬ 
ing  a  judge,  before  sentence  was  given,  but 
Plancus  was  condemned  by  the  rest  of  the 
judges,  to  Pompey’s  dishonour.  Shortly  after, 
Hypsaeus,  a  man  of  consular  dignity,  who  was 
under  accusation,  waited  for  Pompey’s  return 
from  his  bath  to  his  supper,  and  falling  down 
at  his  feet,  implored  his  favour;  but  he  disdain¬ 
fully  passed  him  by,  saying  that  he  did  noth¬ 
ing  else  but  spoil  his  supper. 

Such  partiality  was  looked  upon  as  a  great 
fault  in  Pompey  and  highly  condemned;  how¬ 
ever,  he  managed  all  things  else  discreetly,  and 
having  put  the  government  in  very  good  order, 
he  chose  his  father-in-law  to  be  his  colleague  in 
the  consulship  for  the  last  five  months.  His 
provinces  were  continued  to  him  for  the  term 
of  four  years  longer,  with  a  commission  to  take 
one  thousand  talents  yearly  out  of  the  treasury 
for  the  payment  of  his  army. 

This  gave  occasion  to  some  of  Caesar’s  friends 
to  think  it  reasonable  that  some  consideration 
should  be  had  of  him  too,  who  had  done  such 
signal  services  in  war  and  fought  so  many  bat¬ 
tles  for  the  empire,  alleging,  that  he  deserved 
at  least  a  second  consulship,  or  to  have  the  gov¬ 
ernment  of  his  province  continued,  that  so  he 
might  command  and  enjoy  in  peace  what  he 
had  obtained  in  war,  and  no  successor  come  in 
to  reap  the  fruits  of  his  labour  and  carry  off  the 
glory  of  his  actions.  There  arising  some  debate 
about  this,  Pompey  took  it  upon  himself,  as 
it  were  out  of  kindness  to  Caesar,  to  plead  his 
cause,  and  allay  any  jealousy  that  was  con¬ 
ceived  against  him,  telling  them  that  he  had 
letters  from  Caesar,  expressing  his  desire  for  a 
successor,  and  his  own  discharge  from  the  com¬ 
mand;  but  it  would  be  only  right  that  they 


POMPEY 

should  give  him  leave  to  stand  for  the  consul¬ 
ship  though  in  his  absence.  But  those  of  Cato’s 
party  withstood  this,  saying,  that  if  he  expected 
any  favour  from  the  citizens,  he  ought  to  leave 
his  army  and  come  in  a  private  capacity  to  can¬ 
vass  for  it.  And  Pompey’s  making  no  rejoinder, 
but  letting  it  pass  as  a  matter  in  which  he  was 
overruled,  increased  the  suspicion  of  his  real 
feelings  towards  Caesar.  Presently,  also,  under 
pretence  of  a  war  with  Parthia,  he  sent  for  his 
two  legions  which  he  had  lent  him.  However, 
Caesar,  though  he  well  knew  why  they  were 
asked  for,  sent  them  home  very  liberally  re¬ 
warded. 

About  that  time  Pompey  recovered  of  a  dan¬ 
gerous  fit  of  sickness  which  seized  him  at  Na¬ 
ples,  where  the  whole  city,  upon  the  suggestion 
of  Praxagoras,  made  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving 
to  the  gods  for  his  recovery.  The  neighbouring 
towns  likewise  happening  to  follow  their  ex¬ 
ample,  the  thing  then  went  its  course  through¬ 
out  all  Italy,  so  that  there  was  not  a  city,  either 
great  or  small,  that  did  not  feast  and  rejoice 
for  many  days  together.  And  the  company  of 
those  that  came  from  all  parts  to  meet  him  was 
so  numerous  that  no  place  was  able  to  contain 
them,  but  the  villages,  seaport  towns,  and  the 
very  highways  were  all  full  of  people,  feasting 
and  sacrificing  to  the  gods.  Nay,  many  went  to 
meet  him  with  garlands  on  their  heads,  and 
flambeaux  in  their  hands,  casting  flowers  and 
nosegays  upon  him  as  he  went  along;  so  that 
this  progress  of  his,  and  reception,  was  one  of  the 
noblest  and  most  glorious  sights  imaginable. 

And  yet  it  is  thought  that  this  very  thing  was 
not  one  of  the  least  causes  and  occasions  of  the 
civil  war.  For  Pompey,  yielding  to  a  feeling  of 
exultation,  which  in  the  greatness  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  display  of  joy  lost  sight  of  more  solid 
grounds  of  consideration,  and  abandoning  that 
prudent  temper  which  had  guided  him  hither¬ 
to  to  a  safe  use  of  all  his  good  fortune  and  his 
successes,  gave  himself  up  to  an  extravagant 
confidence  in  his  own  and  contempt  of  Caesar’s 
power;  insomuch  that  he  thought  neither  force 
of  arms  nor  care  necessary  against  him,  but 
that  he  could  pull  him  down  much  easier  than 
he  had  set  him  up.  Besides  this,  Appius,  under 
whose  command  those  legions  which  Pompey 
lent  to  Caesar  were  returned,  coming  lately  out 
of  Gaul,  spoke  slightingly  of  Caesar’s  actions 
there,  and  spread  scandalous  reports  about  him, 
at  the  same  time  telling  Pompey  that  he  was 
unacquainted  with  his  own  strength  and  repu¬ 
tation  if  he  made  use  of  any  other  forces  against 
Caesar  than  Caesar’s  own;  for  such  was  the  sol- 


527 

diers’  hatred  to  Caesar,  and  their  love  to  Pom¬ 
pey  so  great,  that  they  would  all  come  over  to 
him  upon  his  first  appearance.  By  these  flatter¬ 
ies  Pompey  was  so  puffed  up,  and  led  on  into 
such  a  careless  security,  that  he  could  not 
choose  but  laugh  at  those  who  seemed  to  fear  a 
war;  and  when  some  were  saying,  that  if  Caesar 
should  march  against  the  city,  they  could  not 
see  what  forces  there  were  to  resist  him,  he  re¬ 
plied  with  a  smile,  bidding  them  to  be  in  no 
concern,  “for,”  said  he,  “whenever  I  stamp 
with  my  foot  in  any  part  of  Italy  there  will  rise 
up  forces  enough  in  an  instant,  both  horse  and 
foot.” 

Caesar,  on  the  other  side,  was  more  and  more 
vigorous  in  his  proceedings,  himself  always  at 
hand  about  the  frontiers  of  Italy,  and  sending 
his  soldiers  continually  into  the  city  to  attend 
all  elections  with  their  votes.  Besides,  he  cor¬ 
rupted  several  of  the  magistrates,  and  kept 
them  in  his  pay;  among  others,  Paulus,  the 
consul,  who  was  brought  over  by  a  bribe  of  one 
thousand  and  five  hundred  talents;  and  Curio, 
tribune  of  the  people,  by  a  discharge  of  the 
debts  with  which  he  was  overwhelmed;  to¬ 
gether  with  Mark  Antony,  who,  out  of  friend¬ 
ship  to  Curio,  had  become  bound  with  him  in 
the  same  obligations  for  them  all.  And  it  was 
stated  as  a  fact,  that  a  centurion  of  Caesar’s, 
waiting  at  the  senate-house,  and  hearing  that 
the  senate  refused  to  give  him  a  longer  term  of 
his  government,  clapped  his  hand  upon  his 
sword,  and  said,  “But  this  shall  give  it.”  And 
indeed  all  his  practices  and  preparations  seemed 
to  bear  this  appearance. 

Curio’s  demands,  however,  and  requests  in 
favour  of  Caesar,  were  more  popular  in  appear¬ 
ance;  for  he  desired  one  of  these  two  things, 
either  that  Pompey  also  should  be  called  upon 
to  resign  his  army,  or  that  Caesar’s  should  not 
be  taken  away  from  him;  for  if  both  of  them 
became  private  persons,  both  would  be  satisfied 
with  simple  justice;  or  if  both  retained  their 
present  power,  each  being  a  match  for  the 
other,  they  would  be  contented  with  what  they 
already  had;  but  he  that  weakens  one,  does  at 
the  same  time  strengthen  the  other,  and  so 
doubles  that  very  strength  and  power  which 
he  stood  in  fear  of  before. 

Marcellus,  the  consul,  replied  nothing  to  all 
this,  but  that  Caesar  was  a  robber,  and  should 
be  proclaimed  an  enemy  to  the  state  if  he  did 
not  disband  his  army.  However,  Curio,  with 
the  assistance  of  Antony  and  Piso,  prevailed, 
that  the  matter  in  debate  should  be  put  to  the 
question,  and  decided  by  vote  in  the  senate.  So 


528 

that  it  being  ordered  upon  the  question  for 
those  to  withdraw  who  were  of  opinion  that 
Cxsar  only  should  lay  down  his  army,  and 
Pompey  command,  the  majority  withdrew.  But 
when  it  was  ordered  again  for  those  to  with¬ 
draw  whose  vote  was  that  both  should  lay 
down  their  arms,  and  neither  command,  there 
were  but  twenty-two  for  Pompey,  all  the  rest 
remained  on  Curio’s  side.  Whereupon  he,  as 
one  proud  of  his  conquest,  leaped  out  in  tri¬ 
umph  among  the  people,  who  received  him 
with  as  great  tokens  of  joy,  clapping  their 
hands  and  crowning  him  with  garlands  and 
flowers.  Pompey  was  not  then  present  in  the 
senate,  because  it  is  not  lawful  for  generals  in 
command  of  an  army  to  come  into  the  city.  But 
Marcellus  rising  up,  said,  that  he  would  not  sit 
there  hearing  speeches,  when  he  saw  ten  le¬ 
gions  already  passing  the  Alps  on  their  march 
toward  the  city,  but  on  his  own  authority 
would  send  some  one  to  oppose  them  in  de¬ 
fence  of  the  country. 

Upon  this  the  city  went  into  mourning,  as  in 
a  public  calamity,  and  Marcellus,  accompanied 
by  the  senate,  went  solemnly  through  the  Fo¬ 
rum  to  meet  Pompey,  and  made  him  this  ad¬ 
dress:  “I  hereby  give  you  orders,  O  Pompey,  to 
defend  your  country,  to  employ  the  troops  you 
now  command,  and  to  levy  more.”  Lentulus, 
consul  elect  for  the  year  following,  spoke  to  the 
same  purpose.  Antony,  however,  contrary  to 
the  will  of  the  senate,  having  in  a  public  assem¬ 
bly  read  a  letter  of  Caesar’s,  containing  various 
plausible  overtures  such  as  were  likely  to  gain 
the  common  people,  proposing,  namely,  that 
both  Pompey  and  he,  quitting  their  govern¬ 
ments  and  dismissing  their  armies,  should  sub¬ 
mit  to  the  judgment  of  the  people,  and  give  an 
account  of  their  actions  before  them,  the  conse¬ 
quence  was  that  when  Pompey  began  to  make 
his  levies,  he  found  himself  disappointed  in  his 
expectations.  Some  few,  indeed,  came  in,  but 
those  very  unwillingly;  others  would  not  an¬ 
swer  to  their  names,  and  the  generality  cried 
out  for  peace. 

Lentulus,  notwithstanding  he  was  now  en¬ 
tered  upon  his  consulship,  would  not  assemble 
the  senate;  but  Cicero,  who  was  lately  returned 
from  Cilicia,  laboured  for  a  reconciliation,  pro¬ 
posing  that  Caesar  should  leave  his  province  of 
Gaul  and  army,  reserving  two  legions  only,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  government  of  Illyricum,  and 
should  thus  be  put  in  nomination  for  a  second 
consulship.  Pompey  disliking  this  motion,  Cae¬ 
sar’s  friends  were  contented  that  he  should  sur¬ 
render  one  of  the  two;  but  Lentulus  still  oppos- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ing,  and  Cato  crying  out  that  Pompey  did  ill  to 
be  deceived  again,  the  reconciliation  did  not 
take  effect. 

In  the  meantime,  news  was  brought  that 
Caesar  had  occupied  Ariminum,  a  great  city  in 
Italy,  and  was  marching  directly  towards  Rome 
with  all  his  forces.  But  this  latter  was  alto¬ 
gether  false,  for  he  had  no  more  with  him  at 
that  time  than  three  hundred  horse  and  five 
thousand  foot;  and  he  did  not  mean  to  tarry  for 
the  body  of  his  army,  which  lay  beyond  the 
Alps,  choosing  rather  to  fall  in  on  a  sudden 
upon  his  enemies,  while  they  were  in  confu¬ 
sion,  and  did  not  expect  him,  than  to  give  them 
time,  and  fight  them  after  they  had  made  prep¬ 
arations. 

For  when  he  came  to  the  banks  of  the  Rubi¬ 
con,  a  river  that  made  the  bounds  of  his  prov¬ 
ince,  there  he  made  a  halt,  pausing  a  little,  and 
considering,  we  may  suppose,  with  himself  the 
greatness  of  the  enterprise  which  he  had  un¬ 
dertaken;  then,  at  last,  like  men  that  are  throw¬ 
ing  themselves  headlong  from  some  precipice 
into  a  vast  abyss,  having  shut,  as  it  were,  his 
mind’s  eye  and  put  away  from  his  sight  the 
idea  of  danger,  he  merely  uttered  to  those  near 
him  in  Greek  the  words,  “ Anerriphtho  \ubos” 
(let  the  die  be  cast),  and  led  his  army  through  it. 

No  sooner  was  the  news  arrived,  but  there 
was  an  uproar  throughout  all  the  city,  and  a 
consternation  in  the  people  even  to  astonish¬ 
ment,  such  as  never  was  known  in  Rome  be¬ 
fore;  all  the  senate  ran  immediately  to  Pompey, 
and  the  magistrates  followed.  And  when  Tullus 
made  inquiry  about  his  legions  and  forces,  Pom¬ 
pey  seemed  to  pause  a  little,  and  answered  with 
some  hesitation  that  he  had  those  two  legions 
ready  that  Caesar  sent  back,  and  that  out  of  the 
men  who  had  been  previously  enrolled  he  be¬ 
lieved  he  could  shortly  make  up  a  body  of  thirty 
thousand  men.  On  which  Tullus  crying  out 
aloud,  “O  Pompey,  you  have  deceived  us,”  gave 
his  advice  to  send  off  a  deputation  to  Caesar. 

Favonius,  a  man  of  fair  character,  except  that 
he  used  to  suppose  his  own  petulance  and  abu¬ 
sive  talking  a  copy  of  Cato’s  straightforward¬ 
ness,  bade  Pompey  stamp  upon  the  ground, 
and  call  forth  the  forces  he  had  promised.  But 
Pompey  bore  patiently  with  this  unseasonable 
raillery;  and  on  Cato  putting  him  in  mind  of 
what  he  had  foretold  from  the  very  beginning 
about  Caesar,  made  this  answer  only,  that  Cato 
indeed  had  spoken  more  like  a  prophet,  but  he 
had  acted  more  like  a  friend.  Cato  then  advised 
them  to  choose  Pompey  general  with  absolute 
power  and  authority,  saying  that  the  same  men 


POMPEY 

who  do  great  evils  know  best  how  to  cure 
them.  He  himself  went  his  way  forthwith  into 
Sicily,  the  province  that  was  allotted  him,  and 
all  the  rest  of  the  senators  likewise  departed 
every  one  to  his  respective  government. 

Thus  all  Italy  in  a  manner  being  up  in  arms, 
no  one  could  say  what  was  best  to  be  done.  For 
those  that  were  without  came  from  all  parts 
flocking  into  the  city;  and  they  who  were 
within,  seeing  the  confusion  and  disorder  so 
great  there,  all  good  things  impotent,  and  dis¬ 
obedience  and  insubordination  grown  too 
strong  to  be  controlled  by  the  magistrates,  were 
quitting  it  as  fast  as  the  others  came  in.  Nay, 
it  was  so  far  from  being  possible  to  allay  their 
fears,  that  they  would  not  suffer  Pompey  to 
follow  out  his  own  judgment,  but  every  man 
pressed  and  urged  him  according  to  his  partic¬ 
ular  fancy,  whether  it  proceeded  from  doubt, 
fear,  grief,  or  any  meaner  passion;  so  that  even 
in  the  same  day  quite  contrary  counsels  were 
acted  upon.  Then,  again,  it  was  as  impossible 
to  have  any  good  intelligence  of  the  enemy;  for 
what  each  man  heard  by  chance  upon  a  flying 
rumour  he  would  report  for  truth,  and  exclaim 
against  Pompey  if  he  did  not  believe  it. 

Pompey,  at  length,  seeing  such  a  confusion 
in  Rome,  determined  with  himself  to  put  an 
end  to  their  clamours  by  his  departure,  and 
therefore  commanding  all  the  senate  to  follow 
him,  and  declaring  that  whosoever  tarried  be¬ 
hind  should  be  judged  a  confederate  of  Cae¬ 
sar’s,  about  the  dusk  of  the  evening  he  went 
out  and  left  the  city.  The  consuls  also  followed 
after  in  a  hurry,  without  offering  the  sacrifices 
to  the  gods  usual  before  a  war.  But  in  all  this, 
Pompey  himself  had  the  glory  that,  in  the 
midst  of  such  calamities,  he  had  so  much  of 
men’s  love  and  good-will.  For  though  many 
found  fault  with  the  conduct  of  the  war,  yet  no 
man  hated  the  general;  and  there  were  more  to 
be  found  of  those  that  went  out  of  Rome,  be¬ 
cause  that  they  could  not  forsake  Pompey,  than 
of  those  that  fled  for  love  of  liberty. 

Some  few  days  after  Pompey  was  gone  out, 
Caesar  came  into  the  city,  and  made  himself 
master  of  it,  treating  every  one  with  a  great 
deal  of  courtesy,  and  appeasing  their  fears,  ex¬ 
cept  only  Metellus,  one  of  the  tribunes;  on 
whose  refusing  to  let  him  take  any  money  out 
of  the  treasury,  Caesar  threatened  him  with 
death,  adding  words  yet  harsher  than  the 
threat,  that  it  was  far  easier  for  him  to  do  it 
than  say  it.  By  this  means  removing  Metellus, 
and  taking  what  moneys  were  of  use  for  his  oc¬ 
casions,  he  set  forward  in  pursuit  of  Pompey, 


529 

endeavoring  with  all  speed  to  drive  him  out  of 
Italy  before  his  army,  that  was  in  Spain,  could 
join  him. 

But  Pompey  arriving  at  Brundusium,  and 
having  plenty  of  ships  there,  bade  the  two 
consuls  embark  immediately,  and  with  them 
shipped  thirty  cohorts  of  foot,  bound  before 
him  for  Dyrrhachium.  He  sent  likewise  his 
father-in-law,  Scipio,  and  Cnaeus,  his  son,  into 
Syria,  to  provide  and  fit  out  a  fleet  there;  him¬ 
self  in  the  meantime  having  blocked  up  the 
gates,  placed  his  lightest  soldiers  as  guards 
upon  the  walls;  and  giving  express  orders  that 
the  citizens  should  keep  within  doors,  he  dug 
up  all  the  ground  inside  the  city,  cutting 
trenches,  and  fixing  stakes  and  palisades 
throughout  all  the  streets  of  the  city,  except 
only  two  that  led  down  to  the  seaside.  Thus  in 
three  days’  space  having  with  ease  put  all  the 
rest  of  his  army  on  shipboard,  he  suddenly  gave 
the  signal  to  those  that  guarded  the  walls,  who 
nimbly  repairing  to  the  ships  were  received  on 
board  and  carried  off.  Caesar  meantime  per¬ 
ceiving  their  departure  by  seeing  the  walls  un¬ 
guarded,  hastened  after,  and  in  the  heat  of  pur¬ 
suit  was  all  but  entangled  himself  among  the 
stakes  and  trenches.  But  the  Brundusians  dis¬ 
covering  the  danger  to  him,  and  showing  him 
the  way,  he  wheeled  about,  and  taking  a  cir¬ 
cuit  round  the  city,  made  towards  the  haven, 
where  he  found  all  the  ships  on  their  way  ex¬ 
cepting  only  two  vessels  that  had  but  a  few 
soldiers  aboard. 

Most  are  of  opinion  that  this  departure  of 
Pompey’s  is  to  be  counted  among  the  best  of 
his  military  performances,  but  Caesar  himself 
could  not  but  wonder  that  he,  who  was  thus 
engarrisoned  in  a  city  well  fortified,  who  was 
in  expectation  of  his  forces  from  Spain,  and 
was  master  of  the  sea  besides,  should  leave  and 
abandon  Italy.  Cicero  accuses  him  of  imitating 
the  conduct  of  Themistocles,  rather  than  of 
Pericles,  when  the  circumstances  were  more 
like  those  of  Pericles  than  they  were  like  those 
of  Themistocles.  However,  it  appeared  plainly, 
and  Caesar  showed  it  by  his  actions,  that  he  was 
in  great  fear  of  delay,  for  when  he  had  taken 
Numerius,  a  friend  of  Pompey’s,  prisoner,  he 
sent  him  as  an  ambassador  to  Brundusium, 
with  offers  of  peace  and  reconciliation  upon 
equal  terms;  but  Numerius  sailed  away  with 
Pompey. 

And  now  Caesar  having  become  master  of  all 
Italy  in  sixty  days,  without  a  drop  of  blood¬ 
shed,  had  a  great  desire  forthwith  to  follow 
Pompey;  but  being  destitute  of  shipping,  he 


530 

was  forced  to  divert  his  course  and  march  into 
Spain,  designing  to  bring  over  Pompey’s  forces 
there  to  his  own. 

In  the  meantime,  Pompey  raised  a  mighty 
army  both  by  sea  and  land.  As  for  his  navy,  it 
was  irresistible.  For  there  were  five  hundred 
men-of-war,  besides  an  infinite  company  of 
light  vessels,  Liburnians,  and  others;  and  for 
his  land  forces,  the  cavalry  made  up  a  body  of 
seven  thousand  horse,  the  very  flower  of  Rome 
and  Italy,  men  of  family,  wealth,  and  high 
spirit;  but  the  infantry  was  a  mixture  of  inex¬ 
perienced  soldiers  drawn  from  different  quar¬ 
ters,  and  these  he  exercised  and  trained  near 
Beroea,  where  he  quartered  his  army;  himself 
noways  slothful,  but  performing  all  his  exer¬ 
cises  as  if  he  had  been  in  the  flower  of  his 
youth,  conduct  which  raised  the  spirits  of  his 
soldiers  extremely.  For  it  was  no  small  encour¬ 
agement  for  them  to  see  Pompey  the  Great, 
sixty  years  of  age  wanting  two,  at  one  time 
handling  his  arms  among  the  foot,  then  again 
mounted  among  the  horse,  drawing  out  his 
sword  with  ease  in  full  career,  and  sheathing  it 
up  as  easily;  and  in  darting  the  javelin,  show¬ 
ing  not  only  skill  and  dexterity  in  hitting  the 
mark,  but  also  strength  and  activity  in  throw¬ 
ing  it  so  far  that  few  of  the  young  men  went 
beyond  him. 

Several  kings  and  princes  of  nations  came 
thither  to  him,  and  there  was  a  concourse  of 
Roman  citizens  who  had  held  the  magistracies, 
so  numerous  that  they  made  up  a  complete  sen¬ 
ate.  Labienus  forsook  his  old  friend  Caesar, 
whom  he  had  served  throughout  all  his  wars 
in  Gaul,  and  came  over  to  Pompey;  and  Bru¬ 
tus,  son  to  that  Brutus  that  was  put  to  death  in 
Gaul,  a  man  of  a  high  spirit,  and  one  that  to 
that  day  had  never  so  much  as  saluted  or  spoke 
to  Pompey,  looking  upon  him  as  the  murderer 
of  his  father,  came  then  and  submitted  himself 
to  him  as  the  defender  of  their  liberty.  Cicero 
likewise,  though  he  had  written  and  advised 
otherwise,  yet  was  ashamed  not  to  be  accounted 
in  the  number  of  those  that  would  hazard  their 
lives  and  fortunes  for  the  safeguard  of  their 
country.  There  came  to  him  also  into  Macedo¬ 
nia,  Tidius  Sextius,  a  man  extremely  old,  and 
lame  of  one  leg;  so  that  others  indeed  mocked 
and  laughed  at  the  spectacle,  but  Pompey,  as 
soon  as  he  saw  him,  rose  and  ran  to  meet  him, 
esteeming  it  no  small  testimony  in  his  favour, 
when  men  of  such  age  and  infirmities  should 
rather  choose  to  be  with  him  in  danger  than 
in  safety  at  home. 

Afterwards  in  a  meeting  of  their  senate  they 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

passed  a  decree,  on  the  motion  of  Cato,  that  no 
Roman  citizen  should  be  put  to  death  but  in 
battle,  and  that  they  should  not  sack  or  plunder 
any  city  that  was  subject  to  the  Roman  empire, 
a  resolution  which  gained  Pompey’s  party  still 
greater  reputation,  insomuch  that  those  who 
were  noways  at  all  concerned  in  the  war,  either 
because  they  dwelt  afar  off,  or  were  thought  in¬ 
capable  of  giving  help,  were  yet,  in  their  good 
wishes,  upon  his  side,  and  in  all  their  words,  so 
far  as  that  went,  supported  the  good  or  just 
cause,  as  they  called  it;  esteeming  those  as  en¬ 
emies  to  the  gods  and  men  that  wished  not  vic¬ 
tory  to  Pompey. 

Neither  was  Pompey’s  clemency  such  but 
that  Caesar  likewise  showed  himself  as  merci¬ 
ful  a  conqueror;  for  when  he  had  taken  and 
overthrown  all  Pompey’s  forces  in  Spain,  he 
gave  them  easy  terms,  leaving  the  commanders 
at  their  liberty,  and  taking  the  common  sol¬ 
diers  into  his  own  pay.  Then  repassing  the 
Alps,  and  making  a  running  march  through 
Italy,  he  came  to  Brundusium  about  the  winter 
solstice,  and  crossing  the  sea  there,  landed  at 
the  port  of  Oricum.  And  having  Jubius,  an  in¬ 
timate  friend  of  Pompey’s,  with  him  as  his 
prisoner,  he  despatched  him  to  Pompey  with 
an  invitation  that  they,  meeting  together  in  a 
conference,  should  disband  their  armies  within 
three  days,  and  renewing  their  former  friend¬ 
ship  with  solemn  oaths,  should  return  together 
into  Italy. 

Pompey  looked  upon  this  again  as  some  new 
stratagem,  and  therefore  marching  down  in  all 
haste  to  the  sea-coast,  possessed  himself  of  all 
forts  and  places  of  strength  suitable  to  encamp 
in,  and  to  secure  his  land-forces,  as  likewise  of 
all  ports  and  harbours  commodious  to  receive 
any  that  came  by  sea,  so  that  what  wind  soever 
blew,  it  must  needs,  in  some  way  or  other,  be 
favourable  to  him,  bringing  in  either  provision, 
men,  or  money;  while  Caesar,  on  the  contrary, 
was  so  hemmed  in  both  by  sea  and  land  that 
he  was  forced  to  desire  battle,  daily  provoking 
the  enemy,  and  assailing  them  in  their  very 
forts,  and  in  these  light  skirmishes  for  the  most 
part  had  the  better.  Once  only  he  was  danger¬ 
ously  overthrown,  and  was  within  a  little  of 
losing  his  whole  army,  Pompey  having  fought 
nobly,  routing  the  whole  force  and  killing  two 
thousand  on  the  spot.  But  either  he  was  not 
able,  or  was  afraid,  to  go  on  and  force  his  way 
into  their  camp  with  them;  so  that  Caesar  made 
the  remark,  that  “To-day  the  victory  had  been 
the  enemy’s  had  there  been  any  one  among 
them  to  gain  it.” 


POMPEY 

Pompey’s  soldiers  were  so  encouraged  by 
this  victory  that  they  were  eager  now  to  have 
all  put  to  the  decision  of  a  battle;  but  Pompey 
himself,  though  he  wrote  to  distant  kings,  gen¬ 
erals,  and  states  in  confederacy  with  him  as  a 
conqueror,  yet  was  afraid  to  hazard  the  success 
of  a  battle,  choosing  rather  by  delays  and  dis¬ 
tress  of  provisions  to  tire  out  a  body  of  men 
who  had  never  yet  been  conquered  by  force  of 
arms,  and  had  long  been  used  to  fight  and  con¬ 
quer  together;  while  their  time  of  life,  now  an 
advanced  one,  which  made  them  quickly  weary 
of  those  other  hardships  of  war,  such  as  were 
long  marches  and  frequent  decampings,  mak¬ 
ing  trenches,  and  building  fortifications,  made 
them  eager  to  come  to  close  combat  and  ven¬ 
ture  a  battle  with  all  speed. 

Pompey  had  all  along  hitherto  by  his  per¬ 
suasions  pretty  well  quieted  his  soldiers;  but 
after  this  last  engagement,  when  Caesar,  for 
want  of  provisions,  was  forced  to  raise  his 
camp,  and  passed  through  Athamania  into 
Thessaly,  it  was  impossible  to  curb  or  allay  the 
heat  of  their  spirits  any  longer.  For  all  crying 
out  with  a  general  voice  that  Caesar  was  fled, 
some  were  for  pursuing  and  pressing  upon 
him,  others  for  returning  into  Italy;  some  there 
were  that  sent  their  friends  and  servants  be¬ 
forehand  to  Rome  to  hire  houses  near  the 
Forum,  that  they  might  be  in  readiness  to  sue 
for  offices;  several  of  their  own  motion  sailed 
off  at  once  to  Lesbos  to  carry  to  Cornelia 
(whom  Pompey  had  conveyed  thither  to  be 
in  safety)  the  joyful  news  that  the  war  was 
ended. 

And  a  senate  being  called  and  the  matter  be¬ 
ing  under  debate,  Afranius  was  of  opinion  that 
Italy  should  first  be  regained,  for  that  it  was 
the  grand  prize  and  crown  of  all  the  war;  and 
they  who  were  masters  of  that  would  quickly 
have  at  their  devotion  all  the  provinces  of  Sic¬ 
ily,  Sardinia,  Corsica,  Spain,  and  Gaul;  but 
what  was  of  greatest  weight  and  moment  to 
Pompey,  it  was  his  own  native  country  that  lay 
near,  reaching  out  her  hand  for  his  help;  and 
certainly  it  could  not  be  consistent  with  his 
honour  to  leave  her  thus  exposed  to  all  indigni¬ 
ties,  and  in  bondage  under  slaves  and  the  flat¬ 
terers  of  a  tyrant. 

But  Pompey  himself,  on  the  contrary,  thought 
it  neither  honourable  to  fly  a  second  time  be¬ 
fore  Caesar,  and  be  pursued,  when  fortune  had 
given  him  the  advantage  of  a  pursuit;  nor  in¬ 
deed  lawful  before  the  gods  to  forsake  Scipio 
and  divers  other  men  of  consular  dignity  dis¬ 
persed  throughout  Greece  and  Thessaly,  who 


531 

must  necessarily  fall  into  Caesar’s  hands,  to¬ 
gether  with  large  sums  of  money  and  numer¬ 
ous  forces;  and  as  to  his  care  for  the  city  of 
Rome,  that  would  most  eminently  appear  by 
removing  the  scene  of  war  to  a  greater  distance, 
and  leaving  her,  without  feeling  the  distress  or 
even  hearing  the  sound  of  these  evils,  to  await 
in  peace  the  return  of  whichever  should  be  the 
victor. 

With  this  determination,  Pompey  marched 
forwards  in  pursuit  of  Caesar,  firmly  resolved 
with  himself  not  to  give  him  battle,  but  rather 
to  besiege  and  distress  him,  by  keeping  close 
at  his  heels,  and  cutting  him  short.  There  were 
other  reasons  that  made  him  continue  this 
resolution,  but  especially  because  a  saying  that 
was  current  among  the  Romans  serving  in  the 
cavalry  came  to  his  ear,  to  the  effect  that  they 
ought  to  beat  Caesar  as  soon  as  possible,  and 
then  humble  Pompey  too.  And  some  report  it 
was  for  this  reason  that  Pompey  never  em¬ 
ployed  Cato  in  any  matter  of  consequence 
during  the  whole  war,  but  now,  when  he 
pursued  Caesar,  left  him  to  guard  his  bag¬ 
gage  by  sea,  fearing  lest,  if  Caesar  should  be 
taken  off,  he  himself  also  by  Cato’s  means 
not  long  after  should  be  forced  to  give  up 
his  power. 

Whilst  he  was  thus  slowly  attending  the 
motions  of  the  enemy,  he  was  exposed  on  all 
sides  to  outcries  and  imputations  of  using  his 
generalship  to  defeat,  not  Caesar,  but  his  coun¬ 
try  and  the  senate,  that  he  might  always  con¬ 
tinue  in  authority,  and  never  cease  to  keep 
those  for  his  guards  and  servants  who  them¬ 
selves  claimed  to  govern  the  world.  Domitius 
iEnobarbus,  continually  calling  him  Agamem¬ 
non,  the  king  of  kings,  excited  jealousy 
against  him;  and  Favonius,  by  his  unseason¬ 
able  raillery,  did  him  no  less  injury  than  those 
who  openly  attacked  him,  as  when  he  cried 
out,  “Good  friends,  you  must  not  expect  to 
gather  any  figs  in  Tusculum  this  year.”  But 
Lucius  Afranius,  who  had  lain  under  an  im¬ 
putation  of  treachery  for  the  loss  of  the  army 
in  Spain,  when  he  saw  Pompey  purposely  de¬ 
clining  an  engagement,  declared  openly  that 
he  could  not  but  admire  why  those  who  were 
so  ready  to  accuse  him  did  not  go  themselves 
and  fight  this  buyer  and  seller  of  their  prov¬ 
inces. 

With  these  and  many  such  speeches  they 
wrought  upon  Pompey,  who  never  could  bear 
reproach,  or  resist  the  expectations  of  his 
friends;  and  thus  they  forced  him  to  break  his 
measures,  so  that  he  forsook  his  own  prudent 


532 

resolution  to  follow  their  vain  hopes  and  de¬ 
sires:  weakness  that  would  have  been  blamable 
in  the  pilot  of  a  ship,  how  much  more  in  the 
sovereign  commander  of  such  an  army,  and  so 
many  nations.  But  he,  though  he  had  often 
commended  those  physicians  who  did  not 
comply  with  the  capricious  appetites  of  their 
patients,  yet  himself  could  not  but  yield  to  the 
malady  and  disease  of  his  companions  and  ad¬ 
visers  in  the  war,  rather  than  use  some  severity 
in  their  cure.  Truly,  who  could  have  said  that 
health  was  not  disordered  and  a  cure  not  re¬ 
quired  in  the  case  of  men  who  went  up  and 
down  the  camp,  suing  already  for  the  consul¬ 
ship  and  office  of  praetor,  while  Spinther, 
Domitius,  and  Scipio  made  friends,  raised  fac¬ 
tions,  and  quarrelled  among  themselves  who 
should  succeed  Caesar  in  the  dignity  of  his 
high-priesthood,  esteeming  all  as  lightly  as  if 
they  were  to  engage  only  with  Tigranes,  King 
of  Armenia,  or  some  petty  Nabathaean  king, 
not  with  that  Caesar  and  his  army  that  had 
stormed  a  thousand  towns,  and  subdued  more 
than  three  hundred  several  nations;  that  had 
fought  innumerable  battles  with  the  Germans 
and  Gauls,  and  always  carried  the  victory;  that 
had  taken  a  million  of  men  prisoners,  and  slain 
as  many  upon  the  spot  in  pitched  battles? 

But  they  went  on  soliciting  and  clamouring, 
and  on  reaching  the  plain  of  Pharsalia,  they 
forced  Pompey  by  their  pressure  and  impor¬ 
tunities  to  call  a  council  of  war,  where  Labie- 
nus,  general  of  the  horse,  stood  up  first  and 
swore  that  he  would  not  return  out  of  the  bat¬ 
tle  if  he  did  not  rout  the  enemies;  and  all  the 
rest  took  the  same  oath.  That  night  Pompey 
dreamed  that,  as  he  went  into  the  theatre,  the 
people  received  him  with  great  applause,  and 
that  he  himself  adorned  the  temple  of  Venus 
the  Victorious  with  many  spoils.  This  vision 
partly  encouraged,  but  partly  also  disheartened 
him,  fearing  lest  that  splendour  and  ornament 
to  Venus  should  be  made  with  spoils  furnished 
by  himself  to  Caesar,  who  derived  his  family 
from  that  goddess.  Besides  there  were  some 
panic  fears  and  alarms  that  ran  through  the 
camp,  with  such  a  noise  that  it  awaked  him 
out  of  his  sleep.  And  about  the  time  of  renew¬ 
ing  the  watch  towards  morning,  there  ap¬ 
peared  a  great  light  over  Caesar’s  camp  whilst 
they  were  all  at  rest,  and  from  thence  a  ball  of 
flaming  fire  was  carried  into  Pompey’s  camp, 
which  Caesar  himself  says  he  saw  as  he  was 
walking  his  rounds. 

Now  Caesar  having  designed  to  raise  his 
camp  with  the  morning  and  move  to  Scotussa, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

whilst  the  soldiers  were  busy  in  pulling  down 
their  tents,  and  sending  on  their  cattle  and 
servants  before  them  with  their  baggage,  there 
came  in  scouts  who  brought  word  that  they 
saw  arms  carried  to  and  fro  in  the  enemy’s 
camp,  and  heard  a  noise  and  running  up  and 
down  as  of  men  preparing  for  battle;  not  long 
after  there  came  in  other  scouts  with  further 
intelligence,  that  the  first  ranks  were  already 
set  in  battle  array.  Thereupon  Caesar,  when  he 
had  told  them  that  the  wished-for  day  was 
come  at  last,  when  they  should  fight  with  men, 
not  with  hunger  and  famine,  instantly  gave 
orders  for  the  red  colours  to  be  set  up  before 
his  tent,  that  being  the  ordinary  signal  of  bat¬ 
tle  among  the  Romans.  As  soon  as  the  soldiers 
saw  that,  they  left  their  tents,  and  with  great 
shouts  of  joy  ran  to  their  arms;  the  officers 
likewise,  on  their  part,  drawing  up  their  com¬ 
panies  in  order  of  battle,  every  man  fell  into 
his  proper  rank  without  any  trouble  or  noise, 
as  quietly  and  orderly  as  if  they  had  been  in  a 
dance. 

Pompey  himself  led  the  right  wing  of  his 
army  against  Antony,  and  placed  his  father- 
in-law,  Scipio,  in  the  middle  against  Lucius 
Calvinus.  The  left  wing  was  commanded  by 
Lucius  Domitius,  and  supported  by  the  great 
mass  of  the  horse.  For  almost  the  whole  cav¬ 
alry  was  posted  there  in  the  hope  of  crushing 
Caesar,  and  cutting  off  the  tenth  legion,  which 
was  spoken  of  as  the  stoutest  in  all  the  army, 
and  in  which  Caesar  himself  usually  fought  in 
person. 

Caesar  observing  the  left  wing  of  the  enemy 
to  be  lined  and  fortified  with  such  a  mighty 
guard  of  horse,  and  alarmed  at  the  gallantry 
of  their  appearance,  sent  for  a  detachment  of 
six  cohorts  out  of  the  reserves,  and  placed  them 
in  the  rear  of  the  tenth  legion,  commanding 
them  not  to  stir,  lest  they  should  be  discovered 
by  the  enemy;  but  when  the  enemy’s  horse 
should  begin  to  charge,  and  press  upon  them, 
that  they  should  make  up  with  all  speed  to  the 
front  through  the  foremost  ranks,  and  not 
throw  their  javelins  at  a  distance,  as  is  usual 
with  brave  soldiers,  that  they  may  come  to  a 
close  fight  with  their  swords  the  sooner,  but 
that  they  should  strike  them  upwards  into  the 
eyes  and  faces  of  the  enemy;  telling  them  that 
those  fine  young  dancers  would  never  endure 
the  steel  shining  in  their  eyes,  but  would  fly  to 
save  their  handsome  faces.  This  was  Caesar’s 
employment  at  that  time. 

But  while  he  was  thus  instructing  his  sol¬ 
diers,  Pompev  on  horseback  was  viewing  the 


POMPEY 

order  of  both  armies,  and  when  he  .saw  how 
well  the  enemy  kept  their  ranks,  expecting 
quietly  the  signal  of  battle,  and,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  how  impatient  and  unsteady  his  own 
men  were,  waving  up  and  down  in  disorder 
for  want  of  experience,  he  was  very  much 
afraid  that  their  ranks  would  be  broken  upon 
the  first  onset;  and  therefore  he  gave  out  orders 
that  the  van  should  make  a  stand,  and  keeping 
close  in  their  ranks  should  receive  the  enemy’s 
charge. 

Caesar  much  condemns  this  command; 
which,  he  says,  not  only  took  of!  from  the 
strength  of  the  blows,  which  would  otherwise 
have  been  made  with  a  spring,  but  also  lost 
the  men  the  impetus,  which,  more  than  any¬ 
thing,  in  the  moment  of  their  coming  upon 
the  enemy,  fills  soldiers  with  impulse  and  in¬ 
spiration,  the  very  shouts  and  rapid  pace  add¬ 
ing  to  their  fury;  of  which  Pompey  deprived 
his  men,  arresting  them  in  their  course  and 
cooling  down  their  heat. 

Caesar’s  army  consisted  of  twenty-two  thou¬ 
sand,  and  Pompey’s  of  somewhat  above  twice 
as  many.  When  the  signal  of  battle  was  given 
on  both  sides,  and  the  trumpets  began  to  sound 
a  charge,  most  men  of  course  were  fully  occu¬ 
pied  with  their  own  matters;  only  some  few  of 
the  noblest  Romans,  together  with  certain 
Greeks  there  present,  standing  as  spectators 
without  the  battle,  seeing  the  armies  now 
ready  to  join,  could  not  but  consider  in  them¬ 
selves  to  what  a  pass  private  ambition  and 
emulation  had  brought  the  empire.  Common 
arms,  and  kindred  ranks  drawn  up  under  the 
selfsame  standards,  the  whole  flower  and 
strength  of  the  same  single  city  here  meeting 
in  collision  with  itself,  offered  plain  proof  how 
blind  and  how  mad  a  thing  human  nature  is 
when  once  possessed  with  any  passion;  for  if 
they  had  been  desirous  only  to  rule,  and  enjoy 
in  peace  what  they  had  conquered  in  war,  the 
greatest  and  best  part  of  the  world  was  subject 
to  them  both  by  sea  and  land. 

But  if  there  was  yet  a  thirst  in  their  ambi¬ 
tion,  that  must  still  be  fed  with  new  trophies 
and  triumphs,  the  Parthian  and  German  wars 
would  yield  matter  enough  to  satisfy  the  most 
covetous  of  honour.  Scythia,  moreover,  was 
yet  unconquered,  and  the  Indians  too,  where 
their  ambition  might  be  coloured  over  with 
the  specious  pretext  of  civilising  barbarous  na¬ 
tions.  And  what  Scythian  horse,  Parthian  ar¬ 
rows,  or  Indian  riches  could  be  able  to  resist 
seventy  thousand  Roman  soldiers,  well  ap¬ 
pointed  in  arms,  under  the  command  of  two 


533 

such  generals  as  Pompey  and  Caesar,  whose 
names  they  had  heard  of  before  that  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  and  whose  prowess,  by  their  conquests 
of  such  wild,  remote,  savage,  and  brutish  na¬ 
tions,  was  spread  further  than  the  fame  of  the 
Romans  themselves? 

To-day  they  met  in  conflict,  and  could  no 
longer  be  induced  to  spare  their  country,  even 
out  of  regard  for  their  own  glory  or  the  fear  of 
losing  the  name  which  till  this  day  both  had 
held,  of  having  never  yet  been  defeated.  As  for 
their  former  private  ties,  and  the  charms  of 
Julia,  and  the  marriage  that  had  made  them 
near  connections,  these  could  now  only  be 
looked  upon  as  tricks  of  state,  the  mere  securi¬ 
ties  of  a  treaty  made  to  serve  the  needs  of  an  oc¬ 
casion,  not  the  pledges  of  any  real  friendship. 

Now,  therefore,  as  soon  as  the  plains  of 
Pharsalia  were  covered  with  men,  horse,  and 
armour,  and  that  the  signal  of  battle  was 
raised  on  either  side,  Caius  Crassianus,  a  cen¬ 
turion,  who  commanded  a  company  of  one 
hundred  and  twenty  men,  was  the  first  that 
advanced  out  of  Caesar’s  army  to  give  the 
charge  and  acquit  himself  of  a  solemn  en¬ 
gagement  that  he  had  made  to  Caesar.  He  had 
been  the  first  man  that  Caesar  had  seen  going 
out  of  the  camp  in  the  morning,  and  Caesar, 
after  saluting  him,  had  asked  him  what  he 
thought  of  the  coming  battle.  To  which  he, 
stretching  out  his  right  hand,  replied  aloud, 
“Thine  is  the  victory,  O  Caesar;  thou  shalt  con¬ 
quer  gloriously,  and  I  myself  this  day  will  be 
the  subject  of  thy  praise  either  alive  or  dead.” 
In  pursuance  of  this  promise  he  hastened  for¬ 
ward,  and  being  followed  by  many  more, 
charged  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy.  There 
they  came  at  once  to  a  close  fight  with  their 
swords,  and  made  a  great  slaughter;  but  as  he 
was  still  pressing  forward,  and  breaking  the 
ranks  of  the  vanguard,  one  of  Pompey’s  sol¬ 
diers  ran  him  in  at  the  mouth,  so  that  the 
point  of  the  sword  came  out  behind  at  his 
neck;  and  Crassianus  being  thus  slain,  the 
fight  became  doubtful,  and  continued  equal  on 
that  part  of  the  battle. 

Pompey  had  not  yet  brought  on  the  right 
wing,  but  stayed  and  looked  about,  waiting  to 
see  what  execution  his  cavalry  would  do  on 
the  left.  They  had  already  drawn  out  their 
squadrons  in  form,  designing  to  turn  Caesar’s 
flank,  and  force  those  few  horse,  which  he  had 
placed  in  the  front,  to  give  back  upon  the  bat¬ 
talion  of  foot.  But  Caesar,  on  the  other  side, 
having  given  the  signal,  his  horse  retreated 
back  a  little,  and  gave  way  to  those  six  sub- 


534 

sidiary  cohorts,  which  had  been  posted  in  the 
rear,  as  a  reserve  to  cover  the  flank,  and  which 
now  came  out,  three  thousand  men  in  num¬ 
ber,  and  met  the  enemy;  and  when  they  came 
up,  standing  by  the  horses,  struck  their  javelins 
upwards,  according  to  their  instructions,  and 
hit  the  horsemen  full  in  their  faces.  They,  un¬ 
skilful  in  any  manner  of  fight,  and  least  of  all 
expecting  or  understanding  such  a  kind  as  this, 
had  not  courage  enough  to  endure  the  blows 
upon  their  faces,  but  turning  their  backs,  and 
covering  their  eyes  with  their  hands,  shame¬ 
fully  took  to  flight. 

Caesar’s  men,  however,  did  not  follow  them, 
but  marched  upon  the  foot,  and  attacked  the 
wing,  which  the  flight  of  the  cavalry  had  left 
unprotected,  and  liable  to  be  turned  and  taken 
in  the  rear,  so  that  this  wing  now  being  at¬ 
tacked  in  the  flank  by  these,  and  charged  in  the 
front  by  the  tenth  legion,  was  not  able  to  abide 
the  charge,  or  make  any  longer  resistance, 
especially  when  they  saw  themselves  surround¬ 
ed  and  circumvented  in  the  very  way  in  which 
they  had  designed  to  invest  the  enemy. 

Thus  these  being  likewise  routed  and  put  to 
flight,  when  Pompey,  by  the  dust  flying  in  the 
air,  conjectured  the  fate  of  his  horse,  it  were 
very  hard  to  say  what  his  thoughts  or  inten¬ 
tions  were,  but  looking  like  one  distracted  and 
beside  himself,  and  without  any  recollection 
or  reflection  that  he  was  Pompey  the  Great,  he 
retired  slowly  towards  his  camp,  without 
speaking  a  word  to  any  man,  exactly  according 
to  the  description  in  the  verses — 

But  ]ove  from  heaven  struck^  Ajax  with  a  fear; 

Ajax  the  bold  then  stood  astonished  there, 

Flung  o’er  his  bac\  the  mighty  sevenfold  shield 

And  trembling  gazed  and  spied  about  the  field. 

In  this  state  and  condition  he  went  into  his 
own  tent  and  sat  down,  speechless  still,  until 
some  of  the  enemy  fell  in  together  with  his 
men  that  were  flying  into  the  camp,  and  then 
he  let  fall  only  this  one  word,  “What!  into  the 
very  camp?”  and  said  no  more,  but  rose  up, 
and  putting  on  a  dress  suitable  to  his  present 
fortune,  made  his  way  secretly  out. 

By  this  time  the  rest  of  the  army  was  put  to 
flight,  and  there  was  a  great  slaughter  in  the 
camp  among  the  servants  and  those  that 
guarded  the  tents,  but  of  the  soldiers  them¬ 
selves  there  were  not  above  six  thousand  slain, 
as  is  stated  by  Asinius  Pollio,  who  himself 
fought  in  this  battle  on  Caesar’s  side.  When 
Caesar’s  soldiers  had  taken  the  camp,  they  saw 
clearly  the  folly  and  vanity  of  the  enemy;  for 
all  their  tents  and  pavilions  were  richly  set  out 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

with  garlands  of  myrtle,  embroidered  carpets 
and  hangings,  and  tables  laid  and  covered  with 
goblets.  There  were  large  bowls  of  wine  ready, 
and  everything  prepared  and  put  in  array,  in 
the  manner  rather  of  people  who  had  offered 
sacrifice  and  were  going  to  celebrate  a  holiday, 
than  of  soldiers  who  had  armed  themselves  to 
go  out  to  battle,  so  possessed  with  the  expecta¬ 
tion  of  success  and  so  full  of  empty  confidence 
had  they  gone  out  that  morning. 

When  Pompey  had  got  a  little  way  from  the 
camp,  he  dismounted  and  forsook  his  horse, 
having  but  a  small  retinue  with  him;  and  find¬ 
ing  that  no  man  pursued  him,  walked  on  soft¬ 
ly  afoot,  taken  up  altogether  with  thoughts, 
such  as  probably  might  possess  a  man  that  for 
the  space  of  thirty-four  years  together  had  been 
accustomed  to  conquest  and  victory,  and  was 
then  at  last,  in  his  old  age,  learning  for  the 
first  time  what  defeat  and  flight  were.  And  it 
was  no  small  affliction  to  consider  that  he  had 
lost  in  one  hour  all  that  glory  and  power  which 
he  had  been  getting  in  so  many  wars  and 
bloody  battles;  and  that  he  who  but  a  little 
before  was  guarded  with  such  an  army  of  foot, 
so  many  squadrons  of  horse,  and  such  a  mighty 
fleet,  was  now  flying  in  so  mean  a  condition, 
and  with  such  a  slender  retinue,  that  his  very 
enemies  who  fought  him  could  not  know  him. 

Thus,  when  he  had  passed  by  the  city  of 
Larissa,  and  came  into  the  pass  of  Tempe,  be¬ 
ing  very  thirsty,  he  kneeled  down  and  drank 
out  of  the  river;  then  rising  up  again,  he  passed 
through  Tempe,  until  he  came  to  the  seaside, 
and  there  he  betook  himself  to  a  poor  fisher¬ 
man’s  cottage,  where  he  rested  the  remainder 
of  the  night.  The  next  morning  about  break  of 
day  he  went  into  one  of  the  river  boats,  and 
taking  none  of  those  that  followed  him  except 
such  as  were  free,  dismissed  his  servants,  ad¬ 
vising  them  to  go  boldly  to  Caesar  and  not  be 
afraid.  As  he  was  rowing  up  and  down  near 
the  shore,  he  chanced  to  spy  a  large  merchant 
ship,  lying  off,  just  ready  to  set  sail;  the  master 
of  which  was  a  Roman  citizen,  named  Peticius, 
who,  though  he  was  not  familiarly  acquainted 
with  Pompey,  yet  knew  him  well  by  sight. 
Now  it  happened  that  this  Peticius  dreamed, 
the  night  before,  that  he  saw  Pompey,  not  like 
the  man  he  had  often  seen  him,  but  in  a  hum¬ 
ble  and  dejected  condition,  and  in  that  posture 
discoursing  with  him. 

He  was  then  telling  his  dream  to  the  people 
on  board,  as  men  do  when  at  leisure,  and  espe¬ 
cially  dreams  of  that  consequence,  when  of  a 
sudden  one  of  the  mariners  told  him  he  saw  a 


POMPEY 

river  boat  with  oars  putting  off  from  shore, 
and  that  some  of  the  men  there  shook  their 
garments,  and  held  out  their  hands,  with  signs 
to  take  them  in;  thereupon  Peticius,  looking 
attentively,  at  once  recognised  Pompey,  just  as 
he  appeared  in  his  dream,  and  smiting  his 
hand  on  his  head,  ordered  the  mariners  to  let 
down  the  ship’s  boat,  he  himself  waving  his 
hand,  and  calling  to  him  by  his  name,  already 
assured  of  his  change  and  the  change  of  his 
fortune  by  that  of  his  garb.  So  that  without 
waiting  for  any  further  entreaty  or  discourse 
he  took  him  into  his  ship,  together  with  as 
many  of  his  company  as  he  thought  fit,  and 
hoisted  sail.  There  were  with  him  the  two  Len- 
tuli  and  Favonius;  and  a  little  after  they  spied 
King  Deiotarus,  making  up  towards  them 
from  the  shore;  so  they  stayed  and  took  him  in 
along  with  them. 

At  supper  time,  the  master  of  the  ship  hav¬ 
ing  made  ready  such  provisions  as  he  had 
aboard,  Pompey,  for  want  of  his  servants,  be¬ 
gan  to  undo  his  shoes  himself,  which  Favonius 
noticing,  ran  to  him  and  undid  them,  and 
helped  him  to  anoint  himself,  and  always  after 
continued  to  wait  upon,  and  attended  him  in 
all  things,  as  servants  do  their  masters,  even  to 
the  washing  of  his  feet  and  preparing  his  sup¬ 
per.  Insomuch  that  any  one  there  present,  ob¬ 
serving  the  free  and  unaffected  courtesy  of 
these  services,  might  have  well  exclaimed — 

O  heavens ,  in  those  that  noble  are, 
Whatever  they  do  is  fit  and  fair. 

Pompey,  sailing  by  the  city  of  Amphipolis, 
crossed  over  from  thence  to  Mitylene,  with  a 
design  to  take  in  Cornelia  and  his  son;  and  as 
soon  as  he  arrived  at  the  port  in  that  island,  he 
despatched  a  messenger  into  the  city  with  news 
very  different  from  Cornelia’s  expectation.  For 
she,  by  all  the  former  messages  and  letters  sent 
to  please  her,  had  been  put  in  hopes  that  the 
war  was  ended  at  Dyrrhachium,  and  that  there 
was  nothing  more  remaining  for  Pompey  but 
the  pursuit  of  Caesar.  The  messenger,  finding 
her  in  the  same  hopes  still,  was  not  able  to 
salute  or  speak  to  her,  but  declaring  the  great¬ 
ness  of  her  misfortune  by  his  tears  rather  than 
his  words,  desired  her  to  make  haste  if  she 
would  see  Pompey,  with  one  ship  only,  and 
that  not  of  his  own.  The  young  lady  hearing 
this,  fell  down  in  a  swoon,  and  continued  a 
long  time  senseless  and  speechless. 

And  when  with  some  trouble  she  was 
brought  to  her  senses  again,  being  conscious  to 
herself  that  this  was  no  time  for  lamentation 
and  tears,  she  started  up  and  ran  through  the 


535 

city  towards  the  seaside,  where  Pompey  meet¬ 
ing  and  embracing  her,  as  she  sank  down,  sup¬ 
ported  by  his  arms,  “This,  sir,”  she  exclaimed, 
“is  the  effect  of  my  fortune,  not  of  yours,  that 
I  see  you  thus  reduced  to  one  poor  vessel,  who 
before  your  marriage  with  Cornelia  were 
wont  to  sail  in  these  seas  with  a  fleet  of  five 
hundred  ships.  Why  therefore  should  you 
come  to  see  me,  or  why  not  rather  have  left  to 
her  evil  genius  one  who  has  brought  upon  you 
her  own  ill  fortune?  How  happy  a  woman  had 
I  been  if  I  had  breathed  out  my  last  before  the 
news  came  from  Parthia  of  the  death  of  Pub¬ 
lius,  the  husband  of  my  youth,  and  how  pru¬ 
dent  if  I  had  followed  his  destiny,  as  I  de¬ 
signed!  But  I  was  reserved  for  a  greater  mis¬ 
chief,  even  the  ruin  of  Pompey  the  Great.” 

Thus,  they  say,  Cornelia  spoke  to  him,  and 
this  was  Pompey’s  reply:  “You  have  had,  Cor¬ 
nelia,  but  one  season  of  a  better  fortune,  which, 
it  may  be,  gave  you  unfounded  hopes,  by  at¬ 
tending  me  a  longer  time  than  is  usual.  It  be¬ 
hooves  us,  who  are  mortals  born,  to  endure 
these  events,  and  to  try  fortune  yet  again; 
neither  is  it  any  less  possible  to  recover  our 
former  state  than  it  was  to  fall  from  that  into 
this.”  Thereupon  Cornelia  sent  for  her  serv¬ 
ants  and  baggage  out  of  the  city. 

The  citizens  also  of  Mitylene  came  out  to 
salute  and  invite  Pompey  into  the  city,  but  he 
refused,  advising  them  to  be  obedient  to  the 
conqueror  and  fear  not,  for  that  Caesar  was  a 
man  of  great  goodness  and  clemency.  Then 
turning  to  Cratippus,  the  philosopher,  who 
came  among  the  rest  out  of  the  city  to  visit 
him,  he  began  to  find  some  fault,  and  briefly 
argued  with  him  upon  Providence,  but  Cratip¬ 
pus  modestly  declined  the  dispute,  putting  him 
in  better  hopes  only,  lest  by  opposing  he  might 
seem  too  austere  or  unseasonable. 

For  he  might  have  put  Pompey  a  question  in 
his  turn  in  defence  of  Providence;  and  might 
have  demonstrated  the  necessity  there  was 
that  the  commonwealth  should  be  turned  into 
a  monarchy,  because  of  their  ill  government 
in  the  state;  and  could  have  asked,  “How,  O 
Pompey,  and  by  what  token  or  assurance  can 
we  ascertain,  that  if  the  victory  had  been  yours, 
you  would  have  used  your  fortune  better  than 
Caesar?”  We  must  leave  the  divine  power  to 
act  as  we  find  it  to  do. 

Pompey  having  taken  his  wife  and  friends 
aboard,  set  sail,  making  no  port,  or  touching 
anywhere,  but  when  he  was  necessitated  to 
take  in  provisions  or  fresh  water.  The  first  city 
he  entered  was  Attalia,  in  Pamphylia,  and 


536 

whilst  he  was  there,  there  came  some  galleys 
thither  to  him  out  of  Cilicia,  together  with  a 
small  body  of  soldiers,  and  he  had  almost  sixty 
senators  with  him  again;  then  hearing  that  his 
navy  was  safe  too,  and  that  Cato  had  rallied  a 
considerable  body  of  soldiers  after  their  over¬ 
throw,  and  was  crossing  with  them  over  into 
Africa,  he  began  to  complain  and  blame  him¬ 
self  to  his  friends  that  he  had  allowed  himself 
to  be  driven  into  engaging  by  land,  without 
making  use  of  his  other  forces,  in  which  he 
was  irresistibly  the  stronger,  and  had  not  kept 
near  enough  to  his  fleet,  that  failing  by  land, 
he  might  have  reinforced  himself  from  the  sea, 
and  would  have  been  again  at  the  head  of  a 
power  quite  sufficient  to  encounter  the  enemy 
on  equal  terms.  And,  in  truth,  neither  did 
Pompey  during  all  the  war  commit  a  greater 
oversight,  nor  Caesar  use  a  more  subtle  strata¬ 
gem,  than  in  drawing  the  fight  so  far  off  from 
the  naval  forces. 

As  it  now  was,  however,  since  he  must  come 
to  some  decision  and  try  some  plan  within  his 
present  ability,  he  despatched  his  agents  to  the 
neighbouring  cities,  and  himself  sailed  about 
in  person  to  others,  requiring  their  aid  in 
money  and  men  for  his  ships.  But,  fearing  lest 
the  rapid  approach  of  the  enemy  might  cut  off 
all  his  preparations,  he  began  to  consider  what 
place  would  yield  him  the  safest  refuge  and 
retreat  at  present.  A  consultation  was  held,  and 
it  was  generally  agreed  that  no  province  of  the 
Romans  was  secure  enough.  As  for  foreign 
kingdoms,  he  himself  was  of  opinion  that  Par- 
thia  would  be  the  fittest  to  receive  and  defend 
them  in  their  present  weakness,  and  best  able 
to  furnish  them  with  new  means,  and  send 
them  out  again  with  large  forces.  Others  of  the 
council  were  for  going  into  Africa,  and  to 
King  Juba. 

But  Theophanes  the  Lesbian  thought  it 
madness  to  leave  Egypt,  that  was  but  at  a  dis¬ 
tance  of  three  days’  sailing,  and  make  no  use 
of  Ptolemy,  who  was  still  a  boy,  and  was  highly 
indebted  to  Pompey  for  the  friendship  and  fa¬ 
vour  he  had  shown  to  his  father,  only  to  put 
himself  under  the  Parthian,  and  trust  the  most 
treacherous  nation  in  the  world;  and  rather 
than  make  any  trial  of  the  clemency  of  a  Ro¬ 
man,  and  his  own  near  connection,  to  whom 
if  he  would  but  yield  to  be  second  he  might  be 
the  first  and  chief  over  all  the  rest,  to  go  and 
place  himself  at  the  mercy  of  Arsaces,  which 
even  Crassus  had  not  submitted  to  while  alive; 
and,  moreover,  to  expose  his  young  wife,  of 
the  family  of  the  Scipios,  among  a  barbarous 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

people,  who  govern  by  their  lusts,  and  meas¬ 
ure  their  greatness  by  their  power  to  commit 
affronts  and  insolencies;  from  whom,  though 
she  suffered  no  dishonour,  yet  it  might  be 
thought  she  did,  being  in  the  hands  of  those 
who  had  the  power  to  do  it.  This  argument 
alone,  they  say,  was  persuasive  enough  to  di¬ 
vert  his  course,  that  was  designed  towards  Eu¬ 
phrates,  if  it  were  so  indeed  that  any  counsel 
of  Pompey’s  and  not  some  superior  power, 
made  him  take  this  other  way. 

As  soon,  therefore,  as  it  was  resolved  upon 
that  he  should  fly  into  Egypt,  setting  sail  from 
Cyprus  in  a  galley  of  Seleucia,  together  with 
Cornelia,  while  the  rest  of  his  company  sailed 
along  near  him,  some  in  ships  of  war,  and 
others  in  merchant  vessels,  he  passed  over  sea 
without  danger.  But  on  hearing  that  King 
Ptolemy  was  posted  with  his  army  at  the  city 
of  Pelusium,  making  war  against  his  sister,  he 
steered  his  course  that  way,  and  sent  a  mes¬ 
senger  before  to  acquaint  the  king  with  his 
arrival,  and  to  crave  his  protection. 

Ptolemy  himself  was  quite  young,  and  there¬ 
fore  Pothinus,  who  had  the  principal  adminis¬ 
tration  of  affairs,  called  a  council  of  the  chief 
men,  those  being  the  greatest  whom  he  pleased 
to  make  so,  and  commanded  them  every  man 
to  deliver  his  opinion  touching  the  reception  of 
Pompey.  It  was,  indeed,  a  miserable  thing  that 
the  fate  of  the  great  Pompey  should  be  left  to 
the  determination  of  Pothinus  the  eunuch, 
Theodotus  of  Chios,  the  paid  rhetoric  master, 
and  Achillas  the  Egyptian.  For  these,  among 
the  chamberlains  and  menial  domestics  that 
made  up  the  rest  of  the  council,  were  the  chief 
and  leading  men.  Pompey,  who  thought  it 
dishonourable  for  him  to  owe  his  safety  to 
Caesar,  riding  at  anchor  at  a  distance  from 
shore,  was  forced  to  wait  the  sentence  of  this 
tribunal. 

It  seems  they  were  so  far  different  in  their 
opinions  that  some  were  for  sending  the  man 
away,  and  others,  again,  for  inviting  and  re¬ 
ceiving  him;  but  Theodotus,  to  show  his  clev¬ 
erness  and  the  cogency  of  his  rhetoric,  under¬ 
took  to  demonstrate  that  neither  the  one  nor 
the  other  was  safe  in  that  juncture  of  affairs. 
For  if  they  entertained  him,  they  would  be 
sure  to  make  Caesar  their  enemy  and  Pompey 
their  master;  or  if  they  dismissed  him,  they 
might  render  themselves  hereafter  obnoxious 
to  Pompey,  for  that  inhospitable  expulsion, 
and  to  Caesar,  for  the  escape;  so  that  the  most 
expedient  course  would  be  to  send  for  him  and 
take  away  his  life,  for  by  that  means  they 


POMPEY 

would  ingratiate  themselves  with  the,  one,  and 
have  no  reason  to  fear  the  other;  adding,  it  is 
related,  with  a  smile,  that  “a  dead  man  cannot 
bite.” 

This  advice  being  approved  of,  they  com¬ 
mitted  the  execution  of  it  to  Achillas.  He, 
therefore,  taking  with  him  as  his  accomplices 
one  Septimius,  a  man  that  had  formerly  held 
a  command  under  Pompey,  and  Salvius,  an¬ 
other  centurion,  with  three  or  four  attendants, 
made  up  towards  Pompey ’s  galley.  In  the 
meantime,  all  the  chiefest  of  those  who  accom¬ 
panied  Pompey  in  this  voyage  were  come  into 
his  ship  to  learn  the  event  of  their  embassy. 
But  when  they  saw  the  manner  of  their  recep¬ 
tion,  that  in  appearance  it  was  neither  princely 
nor  honourable,  nor  indeed  in  any  way  answer- 
able  to  the  hopes  of  Theophanes,  or  their  ex¬ 
pectation  (for  there  came  but  a  few  men  in  a 
fisherman’s  boat  to  meet  them),  they  began  to 
suspect  the  meanness  of  their  entertainment, 
and  gave  warning  to  Pompey  that  he  should 
row  back  his  galley,  whilst  he  was  out  of  their 
reach,  and  make  for  the  sea. 

By  this  time  the  Egyptian  boat  drew  near, 
and  Septimius  standing  up  first,  saluted  Pom¬ 
pey,  in  the  Latin  tongue,  by  the  title  of  Impera- 
tor.  Then  Achillas,  saluting  him  in  the  Greek 
language,  desired  him  to  come  aboard  his  ves¬ 
sel,  telling  him  that  the  sea  was  very  shallow 
towards  the  shore,  and  that  a  galley  of  that  bur¬ 
den  could  not  avoid  striking  upon  the  sands. 
At  the  same  time  they  saw  several  of  the  king’s 
galleys  getting  their  men  on  board,  and  all  the 
shore  covered  with  soldiers;  so  that  even  if 
they  changed  their  minds,  it  seemed  impos¬ 
sible  for  them  to  escape,  and  besides,  their 
distrust  would  have  given  the  assassins  a  pre¬ 
tence  for  their  cruelty. 

Pompey,  therefore,  taking  his  leave  of  Cor¬ 
nelia,  who  was  already  lamenting  his  death 
before  it  came,  bade  two  centurions,  with 
Philip,  one  of  his  freedmen,  and  a  slave  called 
Scythes,  go  on  board  the  boat  before  him.  And 
as  some  of  the  crew  with  Achillas  were  reach¬ 
ing  out  their  hands  to  help  him,  he  turned 
about  towards  his  wife  and  son,  and  repeated 
those  iambics  of  Sophocles — 

He  that  once  enters  at  a  tyrant’s  door 

Becomes  a  slave,  though  he  were  free  before. 

These  were  the  last  words  he  spoke  to  his 
friends,  and  so  he  went  aboard. 

Observing  presently  that  notwithstanding 
there  was  a  considerable  distance  betwixt  his 
galley  and  the  shore,  yet  none  of  the  company 


537 

addressed  any  words  of  friendliness  or  wel¬ 
come  to  him  all  the  way,  he  looked  earnestly 
upon  Septimius,  and  said,  “I  am  not  mistaken, 
surely,  in  believing  you  to  have  been  formerly 
my  fellow-soldier.”  But  he  only  nodded  with 
his  head,  making  no  reply  at  all,  nor  showing 
any  other  courtesy.  Since,  therefore,  they  con¬ 
tinued  silent,  Pompey  took  a  little  book  in  his 
hand,  in  which  was  written  out  an  address  in 
Greek,  which  he  intended  to  make  to  King 
Ptolemy,  and  began  to  read  it. 

When  they  drew  near  to  the  shore,  Cornelia, 
together  with  the  rest  of  his  friends  in  the  gal¬ 
ley,  was  very  impatient  to  see  the  event,  and 
began  to  take  courage  at  last  when  she  saw 
several  of  the  royal  escort  coming  to  meet  him, 
apparently  to  give  him  a  more  honourable  re¬ 
ception;  but  in  the  meantime,  as  Pompey  took 
Philip  by  the  hand  to  rise  up  more  easily,  Sep¬ 
timius  first  stabbed  him  from  behind  with  his 
sword,  and  after  him  likewise  Salvius  and 
Achillas  drew  out  their  swords.  He,  therefore, 
taking  up  his  gown  with  both  hands,  drew  it 
over  his  face,  and  neither  saying  nor  doing 
anything  unworthy  of  himself,  only  groaning 
a  little,  endured  the  wounds  they  gave  him, 
and  so  ended  his  life,  in  the  fifty-ninth  year  of 
his  age,  the  very  next  day  after  the  day  of  his 
birth. 

Cornelia,  with  her  company  from  the  galley, 
seeing  him  murdered,  gave  such  a  cry  that  it 
was  heard  on  the  shore,  and  weighing  anchor 
with  all  speed,  they  hoisted  sail,  and  fled.  A 
strong  breeze  from  the  shore  assisted  their 
flight  into  the  open  sea,  so  that  the  Egyptians, 
though  desirous  to  overtake  them,  desisted 
from  the  pursuit. 

But  they  cut  off  Pompey’s  head,  and  threw 
the  rest  of  his  body  overboard,  leaving  it  naked 
upon  the  shore,  to  be  viewed  by  any  that  had 
the  curiosity  to  see  so  sad  a  spectacle.  Philip 
stayed  by  and  watched  till  they  had  glutted 
their  eyes  in  viewing  it;  and  then  washing  it 
with  sea-water,  having  nothing  else,  he 
wrapped  it  up  in  a  shirt  of  his  own  for  a  wind¬ 
ing-sheet.  Then  seeking  up  and  down  about 
the  sands,  at  last  he  found  some  rotten  planks 
of  a  little  fisher-boat,  not  much,  but  yet  enough 
to  make  up  a  funeral  pile  for  a  naked  body, 
and  that  not  quite  entire. 

As  Philip  was  busy  in  gathering  and  putting 
these  old  planks  together,  an  old  Roman  citi¬ 
zen,  who  in  his  youth  had  served  in  the  wars 
under  Pompey,  came  up  to  him  and  demanded 
who  he  was  that  was  preparing  the  funeral  of 
Pompey  the  Great.  And  Philip  making  answer 


538 

that  he  was  his  freedman,  “Nay,  then,”  said 
he,  “you  shall  not  have  this  honour  alone;  let 
even  me,  too,  I  pray  you,  have  my  share  in 
such  a  pious  office,  that  1  may  not  altogether 
repent  me  of  this  pilgrimage  in  a  strange  land, 
but  in  compensation  of  many  misfortunes  may 
obtain  this  happiness  at  last,  even  with  mine 
own  hands  to  touch  the  body  of  Pompey,  and 
do  the  last  duties  to  the  greatest  general  among 
the  Romans.”  And  in  this  manner  were  the 
obsequies  of  Pompey  performed. 

The  next  day  Lucius  Lentulus,  not  knowing 
what  had  passed,  came  sailing  from  Cyprus 
along  the  shore  of  that  coast,  and  seeing  a  fu¬ 
neral  pile,  and  Philip  standing  by,  exclaimed, 
before  he  was  yet  seen  by  any  one,  “Who  is 
this  that  has  found  his  end  here?”  adding  after 
a  short  pause,  with  a  sigh,  “Possibly  even  thou, 
Pompeius  Magnus!”  and  so  going  ashore,  he 
was  presently  apprehended  and  slain.  This  was 
the  end  of  Pompey. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Not  long  after,  Caesar  arrived  in  the  country 
that  was  polluted  with  this  foul  act,  and  when 
one  of  the  Egyptians  was  sent  to  present  him 
with  Pompey ’s  head,  he  turned  away  from  him 
with  abhorrence  as  from  a  murderer;  and  on 
receiving  his  seal,  on  which  was  engraved  a 
lion  holding  a  sword  in  his  paw,  he  burst  into 
tears.  Achillas  and  Pothinus  he  put  to  death; 
and  King  Ptolemy  himself,  being  overthrown 
in  battle  upon  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  fled  away 
and  was  never  heard  of  afterwards.  Theodotus, 
the  rhetorician,  fleeing  out  of  Egypt,  escaped 
the  hands  of  Caesar’s  justice,  but  lived  a  vaga¬ 
bond  in  banishment,  wandering  up  and  down, 
despised  and  hated  of  all  men,  till  at  last  Mar¬ 
cus  Brutus,  after  he  had  killed  Caesar,  finding 
him  in  his  province  of  Asia,  put  him  to  death 
with  every  kind  of  ignominy.  The  ashes  of 
Pompey  were  carried  to  his  wife  Cornelia,  who 
deposited  them  at  his  country-house  near  Alba. 

V  V  V 


AGESILAUS  and  POMPEY 
Compared 


Thus  having  drawn  out  the  history  of  the 
lives  of  Agesilaus  and  Pompey,  the  next 
thing  is  to  compare  them;  and  in  order  to  this, 
to  take  a  cursory  view,  and  bring  together  the 
points  in  which  they  chiefly  disagree;  which 
are  these. 

In  the  first  place,  Pompey  attained  to  all  his 
greatness  and  glory  by  the  fairest  and  justest 
means,  owing  his  advancement  to  his  own  ef¬ 
forts,  and  to  the  frequent  and  important  aid 
which  he  rendered  Sulla,  in  delivering  Italy 
from  its  tyrants.  But  Agesilaus  appears  to  have 
obtained  his  kingdom,  not  without  offence 
both  towards  gods  and  towards  men,  towards 
these,  by  procuring  judgment  of  bastardy 
against  Leotychides,  whom  his  brother  had  de¬ 
clared  his  lawful  son,  and  towards  those,  by 
putting  a  false  gloss  upon  the  oracle,  and  elud¬ 
ing  its  sentence  against  his  lameness. 

Secondly,  Pompey  never  ceased  to  display  his 
respect  for  Sulla  during  his  lifetime,  and  ex¬ 
pressed  it  also  after  his  death,  by  enforcing  the 
honourable  interment  of  his  corpse,  in  despite 
of  Lepidus,  and  by  giving  his  daughter  in  mar¬ 
riage  to  his  son  Faustus.  But  Agesilaus,  upon  a 
slight  pretence,  cast  off  Lysander  with  reproach 
and  dishonour.  Yet  Sulla  in  fact  had  owed  to 
Pompey  services  as  much  as  Pompey  ever  re¬ 
ceived  from  him,  whereas  Lysander  made  Age¬ 


silaus  King  of  Sparta  and  general  of  all  Greece. 

Thirdly,  Pompey’s  transgressions  of  right 
and  justice  in  his  political  life  were  occasioned 
chiefly  by  his  relations  with  other  people,  and 
most  of  his  errors  had  some  affinity,  as  well  as 
himself,  to  Caesar  and  Scipio,  his  fathers-in- 
law.  But  Agesilaus,  to  gratify  the  fondness  of 
his  son,  saved  the  life  of  Sphodrias  by  a  sort 
of  violence,  when  he  deserved  death  for  the 
wrong  he  had  done  to  the  Athenians;  and 
when  Phcebidas  treacherously  broke  the  peace 
with  Thebes,  zealously  abetted  him  for  the 
sake,  it  was  clear,  of  the  unjust  act  itself.  In 
short,  what  mischief  soever  Pompey  might  be 
said  to  have  brought  on  Rome  through  com¬ 
pliance  with  the  wishes  of  his  friends  or 
through  inadvertency,  Agesilaus  may  be  said 
to  have  brought  on  Sparta  out  of  obstinacy  and 
malice,  by  kindling  the  Boeotian  war. 

And  if,  moreover,  we  are  to  attribute  any 
part  of  these  disasters  to  some  personal  ill-for¬ 
tune,  attaching  to  the  men  themselves,  in  the 
case  of  Pompey,  certainly  the  Romans  had 
no  reason  to  anticipate  it.  Whereas  Agesilaus 
would  not  suffer  the  Lacedaemonians  to  avoid 
what  they  foresaw  and  were  forewarned  must 
attend  the  “lame  sovereignty.”  For  had  Leoty¬ 
chides  been  chargeable  ten  thousand  times  as 
foreign  and  spurious,  yet  the  race  of  the  Eury- 


AGESILAUS  AND  POMPEY 

pontidae  was  still  in  being,  and  could  easily 
have  furnished  Sparta  with  a  lawful  king  that 
was  sound  in  his  limbs,  had  not  Lysander 
darkened  and  disguised  the  true  sense  of  the 
oracle  in  favour  of  Agesilaus. 

Such  a  politic  piece  of  sophistry  as  was  de¬ 
vised  by  Agesilaus,  in  that  great  perplexity  of 
the  people  as  to  the  treatment  to  be  given  to 
those  who  had  played  the  coward  at  the  battle 
of  Leuctra,  when  after  that  unhappy  defeat  he 
decreed  that  the  laws  should  sleep  for  that  day, 
it  would  be  hard  to  find  any  parallel  to;  neither 
have  we  the  fellow  of  it  in  all  Pompey’s  story. 
But,  on  the  contrary,  Pompey  for  a  friend 
thought  it  no  sin  to  break  those  very  laws 
which  he  himself  had  made,  as  if  to  show  at 
once  the  force  of  his  friendship,  and  the  great¬ 
ness  of  his  power;  whereas  Agesilaus,  under 
the  necessity,  as  it  seemed,  of  either  rescinding 
the  laws,  or  not  saving  the  citizens,  contrived 
an  expedient  by  the  help  of  which  the  laws 
should  not  touch  these  citizens,  and  yet  should 
not,  to  avoid  it,  be  overthrown. 

Then  I  must  commend  it  as  an  incompar¬ 
able  act  of  civil  virtue  and  obedience  in  Agesi¬ 
laus,  that  immediately  upon  the  receipt  of  the 
scytala,  he  left  the  wars  in  Asia  and  returned 
into  his  country.  For  he  did  not,  like  Pompey, 
merely  advance  his  country’s  interest  by  acts 
that  contributed  at  the  same  time  to  promote 
his  own  greatness,  but  looking  to  his  country’s 
good,  for  its  sake  laid  aside  as  great  authority 
and  honour  as  ever  any  man  had  before  or 
since,  except  Alexander  the  Great. 

But  now  to  take  another  point  of  view,  if  we 
sum  up  Pompey’s  military  expeditions  and  ex¬ 
ploits  of  war,  the  number  of  his  trophies,  and 
the  greatness  of  the  powers  which  he  subdued, 
and  the  multitude  of  battles  in  which  he  tri¬ 
umphed,  I  am  persuaded  even  Xenophon  him¬ 
self  would  not  put  the  victories  of  Agesilaus  in 
balance  with  his,  though  Xenophon  has  this 
privilege  allowed  him,  as  a  sort  of  special  re¬ 
ward  for  his  other  excellencies,  that  he  may 
write  and  speak,  in  favour  of  his  hero,  what¬ 
ever  he  pleases. 

Methinks,  too,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  differ¬ 
ence  betwixt  these  men  in  their  clemency  and 
moderation  towards  their  enemies.  For  Agesi¬ 
laus,  while  attempting  to  enslave  Thebes  and 
exterminate  Messene,  the  latter,  his  country’s 
ancient  associate,  and  Thebes,  the  mother-city 
of  his  own  royal  house,  almost  lost  Sparta  it¬ 
self,  and  did  really  lose  the  government  of 
Greece;  whereas  Pompey  gave  cities  to  those 
of  the  pirates  who  were  willing  to  change  their 


539 

manner  of  life;  and  when  it  was  in  his  power 
to  lead  Tigranes,  King  of  Armenia,  in  tri¬ 
umph,  he  chose  rather  to  make  him  a  confed¬ 
erate  of  the  Romans,  saying  that  a  single  day 
was  worth  less  than  all  future  time. 

But  if  the  preeminence  in  that  which  relates 
to  the  office  and  virtues  of  a  general  should  be 
determined  by  the  greatest  and  most  important 
acts  and  counsels  of  war,  the  Lacedaemonian 
would  not  a  little  exceed  the  Roman.  For  Age¬ 
silaus  never  deserted  his  city,  though  it  was 
besieged  by  an  army  of  seventy  thousand  men, 
when  there  were  very  few  soldiers  within  to 
defend  it,  and  those  had  been  defeated  too,  but 
a  little  before,  at  the  battle  of  Leuctra.  But 
Pompey,  when  Caesar,  with  a  body  only  of 
fifty-three  hundred  men,  had  taken  but  one 
town  in  Italy,  departed  in  a  panic  out  of  Rome, 
either  through  cowardice,  when  there  were  so 
few,  or  at  least  through  a  false  and  mistaken 
belief  that  there  were  more;  and  having  con¬ 
veyed  away  his  wife  and  children,  he  left  all 
the  rest  of  the  citizens  defenceless,  and  fled; 
whereas  he  ought  either  to  have  conquered  in 
fight  for  the  defence  of  his  country,  or  yielded 
upon  terms  to  the  conqueror,  who  was,  more¬ 
over,  his  fellow-citizen  and  allied  to  him;  but 
now  to  the  same  man  to  whom  he  refused  a 
prolongation  of  the  terms  of  his  government, 
and  thought  it  intolerable  to  grant  another 
consulship,  to  him  he  gave  the  power,  by 
letting  him  take  the  city,  to  tell  Metellus, 
together  with  all  the  rest,  that  they  were  his 
prisoners. 

That  which  is  chiefly  the  office  of  a  general, 
to  force  the  enemy  into  fighting  when  he  finds 
himself  the  stronger,  and  to  avoid  being  driven 
into  it  himself  when  he  is  the  weaker,  this  ex¬ 
cellence  Agesilaus  always  displayed,  and  by  it 
kept  himself  invincible;  whereas  in  contend¬ 
ing  with  Pompey,  Caesar,  who  was  the  weaker, 
successfully  declined  the  danger,  and  his  own 
strength  being  in  his  land-forces,  drove  him 
into  putting  the  conflict  to  issue  with  these, 
and  thus  made  himself  master  of  the  treasure, 
stores,  and  the  sea  too,  which  were  all  in  his 
enemy’s  hands,  and  by  the  help  of  which  the 
victory  could  have  been  secured  without  fight¬ 
ing. 

And  what  is  alleged  as  an  apology  in  vindi¬ 
cation  of  Pompey,  is  to  a  general  of  his  age  and 
standing  the  greatest  of  disgraces.  For,  grant¬ 
ing  that  a  young  commander  might  by  clam¬ 
our  and  outcry  be  deprived  of  his  fortitude  and 
strength  of  mind,  and  weakly  forsake  his  bet¬ 
ter  judgment,  and  the  thing  be  neither  strange 


540 

nor  altogether  unpardonable,  yet  for  Pompey 
the  Great,  whose  camp  the  Romans  called  their 
country,  and  his  tent  the  senate,  styling  the 
consuls,  praetors,  and  all  other  magistrates  who 
were  conducting  the  government  at  Rome  by 
no  better  title  than  that  of  rebels  and  traitors, 
for  him,  whom  they  well  knew  never  to  have 
been  under  the  command  of  any  but  himself, 
having  served  all  his  campaigns  under  himself 
as  sole  general,  for  him  upon  so  small  a  provo¬ 
cation  as  the  scoffs  of  Favonius  and  Domitius, 
and  lest  he  should  bear  the  nickname  of  Aga¬ 
memnon,  to  be  wrought  upon,  and  even  forced 
to  hazard  the  whole  empire  and  liberty  of 
Rome  upon  the  cast  of  a  die,  was  surely  indeed 
intolerable.  Who,  if  he  had  so  much  regarded 
a  present  infamy,  should  have  guarded  the  city 
at  first  with  his  arms,  and  fought  the  battle 
in  defence  of  Rome,  nor  have  left  it  as  he  did: 
nor  while  declaring  his  flight  from  Italy  an 
artifice  in  the  manner  of  Themistocles,  never¬ 
theless  be  ashamed  in  Thessaly  of  a  prudent 
delay  before  engaging. 

Heaven  had  not  appointed  the  Pharsalian 
fields  to  be  the  stage  and  theatre  upon  which 
they  should  contend  for  the  empire  of  Rome, 
neither  was  he  summoned  thither  by  any  her¬ 
ald  upon  challenge,  with  intimation  that  he 
must  either  undergo  the  combat  or  surrender 
the  prize  to  another.  There  were  many  other 
fields,  thousands  of  cities,  and  even  the  whole 
earth  placed  at  his  command,  by  the  advantage 
of  his  fleet  and  his  superiority  at  sea,  if  he 
would  but  have  followed  the  examples  of 
Maximus,  Marius,  Lucullus,  and  even  Agesi- 
laus  himself,  who  endured  no  less  tumults 
within  the  city  of  Sparta,  when  the  Thebans 
provoked  him  to  come  out  and  fight  in  defence 
of  the  land,  and  sustained  in  Egypt  also  nu¬ 
merous  calumnies,  slanders,  and  suspicions  on 
the  part  of  the  king,  whom  he  counselled  to 
abstain  from  a  battle.  And  thus  following  al¬ 
ways  what  he  had  determined  in  his  own 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

judgment  upon  mature  advice,  by  that  means 
he  not  only  preserved  the  Egyptians  against 
their  wills,  not  only  kept  Sparta,  in  those  des¬ 
perate  convulsions,  by  his  sole  act,  safe  from 
overthrow,  but  even  was  able  to  set  up  trophies 
likewise  in  the  city  over  the  Thebans,  having 
given  his  countrymen  an  occasion  of  being 
victorious  afterwards  by  not  at  first  leading 
them  out,  as  they  tried  to  force  him  to  do,  to 
their  own  destruction. 

The  consequence  was  that  in  the  end  Agesi- 
laus  was  commended  by  the  very  men,  when 
they  found  themselves  saved,  upon  whom  he 
had  put  this  compulsion,  whereas  Pompey, 
whose  error  had  been  occasioned  by  others, 
found  those  his  accusers  whose  advice  had  mis¬ 
led  him.  Some  indeed  profess  that  he  was  de¬ 
ceived  by  his  father-in-law  Scipio,  who,  design¬ 
ing  to  conceal  and  keep  to  himself  the  greatest 
part  of  that  treasure  which  he  had  brought  out 
of  Asia,  pressed  Pompey  to  battle,  upon  the 
pretence  that  there  would  be  a  want  of  money. 
Yet  admitting  he  was  deceived,  one  in  his  place 
ought  not  to  have  been  so,  nor  should  have  al¬ 
lowed  so  slight  an  artifice  to  cause  the  hazard 
of  such  mighty  interests.  And  thus  we  have 
taken  a  view  of  each,  by  comparing  together 
their  conduct  and  actions  in  war. 

As  to  their  voyages  into  Egypt,  one  steered 
his  course  thither  out  of  necessity  in  flight;  the 
other  neither  honourably,  nor  of  necessity,  but 
as  a  mercenary  soldier,  having  enlisted  himself 
into  the  service  of  a  barbarous  nation  for  pay, 
that  he  might  be  able  afterwards  to  wage  war 
upon  the  Greeks.  And  secondly,  what  we 
charge  upon  the  Egyptians  in  the  name  of 
Pompey,  the  Egyptians  lay  to  the  charge  of 
Agesilaus.  Pompey  trusted  them  and  was  be¬ 
trayed  and  murdered  by  them;  Agesilaus  ac¬ 
cepted  their  confidence  and  deserted  them, 
transferring  his  aid  to  the  very  enemies  who 
were  now  attacking  those  whom  he  had  been 
brought  over  to  assist. 


ALEXANDER 

356-3x3  B.C. 


It  being  my  purpose  to  write  the  lives  of 
Alexander  the  king,  and  of  Caesar,  by 
whom  Pompey  was  destroyed,  the  multi¬ 
tude  of  their  great  actions  affords  so  large  a 
field  that  I  were  to  blame  if  I  should  not  by 


way  of  apology  forewarn  my  reader  that  I  have 
chosen  rather  to  epitomise  the  most  celebrated 
parts  of  their  story,  than  to  insist  at  large  on 
every  particular  circumstance  of  it.  It  must  be 
borne  in  mind  that  my  design  is  not  to  write 


ALEXANDER 

histories,  but  lives.  And  the  most  glorious  ex¬ 
ploits  do  not  always  furnish  us  with  the  clear¬ 
est  discoveries  of  virtue  or  vice  in  men;  some¬ 
times  a  matter  of  less  moment,  an  expression 
or  a  jest,  informs  us  better  of  their  characters 
and  inclinations,  than  the  most  famous  sieges, 
the  greatest  armaments,  or  the  bloodiest  battles 
whatsoever.  Therefore,  as  portrait-painters  are 
more  exact  in  the  lines  and  features  of  the  face, 
in  which  the  character  is  seen,  than  in  the  other 
parts  of  the  body,  so  I  must  be  allowed  to  give 
my  more  particular  attention  to  the  marks  and 
indications  of  the  souls  of  men,  and  while  I 
endeavour  by  these  to  portray  their  lives,  may 
be  free  to  leave  more  weighty  matters  and 
great  battles  to  be  treated  of  by  others. 

It  is  agreed  on  by  all  hands,  that  on  the 
father’s  side,  Alexander  descended  from  Her¬ 
cules  by  Caranus,  and  from  Abacus  by  Neoptol- 
emus  on  the  mother’s  side.  His  father  Philip, 
being  in  Samothrace,  when  he  was  quite 
young,  fell  in  love  there  with  Olympias,  in 
company  with  whom  he  was  initiated  in  the 
religious  ceremonies  of  the  country,  and  her 
father  and  mother  being  both  dead,  soon  after, 
with  the  consent  of  her  brother,  Arymbas,  he 
married  her. 

The  night  before  the  consummation  of  their 
marriage,  she  dreamed  that  a  thunderbolt  fell 
upon  her  body,  which  kindled  a  great  fire, 
whose  divided  flames  dispersed  themselves  all 
about,  and  then  were  extinguished.  And  Phil¬ 
ip,  some  time  after  he  was  married,  dreamt 
that  he  sealed  up  his  wife’s  body  with  a  seal, 
whose  impression,  as  he  fancied,  was  the  figure 
of  a  lion.  Some  of  the  diviners  interpreted  this 
as  a  warning  to  Philip  to  look  narrowly  to  his 
wife;  but  Aristander  of  Telmessus,  consider¬ 
ing  how  unusual  it  was  to  seal  up  anything 
that  was  empty,  assured  him  the  meaning  of 
his  dream  was  that  the  queen  was  with  child 
of  a  boy,  who  would  one  day  prove  as  stout 
and  courageous  as  a  lion. 

Once,  moreover,  a  serpent  was  found  lying 
by  Olympias  as  she  slept,  which  more  than 
anything  else,  it  is  said,  abated  Philip’s  passion 
for  her;  and  whether  he  feared  her  as  an  en¬ 
chantress,  or  thought  she  had  commerce  with 
some  god,  and  so  looked  on  himself  as  ex¬ 
cluded,  he  was  ever  after  fond  of  her  conversa¬ 
tion.  Others  say,  that  the  women  of  this  coun¬ 
try  having  always  been  extremely  addicted  to 
the  enthusiastic  Orphic  rites,  and  the  wild  wor¬ 
ship  of  Bacchus  (upon  which  account  they 
were  called  Clodones,  and  Mimallones),  imi¬ 
tated  in  many  things  the  practices  of  the  Edo- 


541 

nian  and  Thracian  women  about  Mount  Hx- 
mus,  from  whom  the  word  threskeuein  seems 
to  have  been  derived,  as  a  special  term  for  su¬ 
perfluous  and  over-curious  forms  of  adoration; 
and  that  Olympias,  zealously  affecting  these 
fanatical  and  enthusiastic  inspirations,  to  per¬ 
form  them  with  more  barbaric  dread,  was 
wont  in  the  dances  proper  to  these  ceremonies 
to  have  great  tame  serpents  about  her,  which 
sometimes  creeping  out  of  the  ivy  in  the  mystic 
fans,  sometimes  winding  themselves  about  the 
sacred  spears,  and  the  women’s  chaplets,  made 
a  spectacle  which  men  could  not  look  upon 
without  terror. 

Philip,  after  this  vision,  sent  Chaeron  of 
Megalopolis  to  consult  the  oracle  of  Apollo  at 
Delphi,  by  which  he  was  commanded  to  per¬ 
form  sacrifice,  and  henceforth  pay  particular 
honour,  above  all  other  gods,  to  Ammon;  and 
was  told  he  should  one  day  lose  that  eye  with 
which  he  presumed  to  peep  through  the  chink 
of  the  door,  when  he  saw  the  god,  under  the 
form  of  a  serpent,  in  the  company  of  his  wife. 
Eratosthenes  says  that  Olympias,  when  she  at¬ 
tended  Alexander  on  his  way  to  the  army  in 
his  first  expedition,  told  him  the  secret  of  his 
birth,  and  bade  him  behave  himself  with  cour¬ 
age  suitable  to  his  divine  extraction.  Others 
again  affirm  that  she  wholly  disclaimed  any 
pretensions  of  the  kind,  and  was  wont  to  say, 
“When  will  Alexander  leave  off  slandering  me 
to  Juno?” 

Alexander  was  born  the  sixth  of  Hecatom- 
baeon,  which  month  the  Macedonians  call 
Lous,  the  same  day  that  the  temple  of  Diana  at 
Ephesus  was  burnt;  which  Hegesias  of  Mag¬ 
nesia  makes  the  occasion  of  a  conceit,  frigid 
enough  to  have  stopped  the  conflagration.  The 
temple,  he  says,  took  fire  and  was  burnt  while 
its  mistress  was  absent,  assisting  at  the  birth  of 
Alexander.  And  all  the  Eastern  soothsayers 
who  happened  to  be  then  at  Ephesus,  looking 
upon  the  ruin  of  this  temple  to  be  the  fore¬ 
runner  of  some  other  calamity,  ran  about  the 
town,  beating  their  faces,  and  crying  that  this 
day  had  brought  forth  something  that  would 
prove  fatal  and  destructive  to  all  Asia. 

Just  after  Philip  had  taken  Potidaea,  he  re¬ 
ceived  these  three  messages  at  one  time,  that 
Parmenio  had  overthrown  the  Illyrians  in  a 
great  battle,  that  his  race-horse  had  won  the 
course  at  the  Olympic  games,  and  that  his  wife 
had  given  birth  to  Alexander;  with  which  be¬ 
ing  naturally  well  pleased,  as  an  addition  to  his 
satisfaction,  he  was  assured  by  the  diviners 
that  a  son,  whose  birth  was  accompanied  with 


542 

three  such  successes,  could  not  fail  of  being  in¬ 
vincible. 

The  statues  that  gave  the  best  representation 
of  Alexander’s  person  were  those  of  Lysippus 
(by  whom  alone  he  would  suffer  his  image  to 
be  made),  those  peculiarities  which  many  of 
his  successors  afterwards  and  his  friends  used 
to  affect  to  imitate,  the  inclination  of  his  head 
a  little  on  one  side  towards  his  left  shoulder, 
and  his  melting  eye,  having  been  expressed  by 
this  artist  with  great  exactness.  But  Apelles, 
who  drew  him  with  thunderbolts  in  his  hand, 
made  his  complexion  browner  and  darker  than 
it  was  naturally;  for  he  was  fair  and  of  a  light 
colour,  passing  into  ruddiness  in  his  face  and 
upon  his  breast.  Aristoxenus  in  his  Memoirs 
tells  us  that  a  most  agreeable  odour  exhaled 
from  his  skin,  and  that  his  breath  and  body  all 
over  was  so  fragrant  as  to  perfume  the  clothes 
which  he  wore  next  him;  the  cause  of  which 
might  probably  be  the  hot  and  adust  tempera¬ 
ment  of  his  body.  For  sweet  smells,  Theo¬ 
phrastus  conceives,  are  produced  by  the  con¬ 
coction  of  moist  humours  by  heat,  which  is  the 
reason  that  those  parts  of  the  world  which  are 
driest  and  most  burnt  up  afford  spices  of  the 
best  kind  and  in  the  greatest  quantity;  for  the 
heat  of  the  sun  exhausts  all  the  superfluous 
moisture  which  lies  in  the  surface  of  bodies, 
ready  to  generate  putrefaction. 

And  this  hot  constitution,  it  may  be,  ren¬ 
dered  Alexander  so  addicted  to  drinking,  and 
so  choleric.  His  temperance,  as  to  the  pleasures 
of  the  body,  was  apparent  in  him  in  his  very 
childhood,  as  he  was  with  much  difficulty  in¬ 
cited  to  them,  and  always  used  them  with 
great  moderation;  though  in  other  things  he 
was  extremely  eager  and  vehement,  and  in  his 
love  of  glory,  and  the  pursuit  of  it,  he  showed 
a  solidity  of  high  spirit  and  magnanimity  far 
above  his  age.  For  he  neither  sought  nor  val¬ 
ued  it  upon  every  occasion,  as  his  father  Philip 
did  (who  affected  to  show  his  eloquence  al¬ 
most  to  a  degree  of  pedantry,  and  took  care  to 
have  the  victories  of  his  racing  chariots  at  the 
Olympic  games  engraven  on  his  coin),  but 
when  he  was  asked  by  some  about  him, 
whether  he  would  run  a  race  in  the  Olympic 
games,  as  he  was  very  swift-footed,  he  answer¬ 
ed,  he  would,  if  he  might  have  kings  to  run 
with  him.  Indeed,  he  seems  in  general  to  have 
looked  with  indifference,  if  not  with  dislike, 
upon  the  professed  athletes.  He  often  appoint¬ 
ed  prizes,  for  which  not  only  tragedians  and 
musicians,  pipers  and  harpers,  but  rhapsodists 
also,  strove  to  outvie  one  another;  and  delight- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ed  in  all  manner  of  hunting  and  cudgel-play¬ 
ing,  but  never  gave  any  encouragement  to  con¬ 
tests  either  of  boxing  or  of  the  pancratium. 

While  he  was  yet  very  young,  he  entertained 
the  ambassadors  from  the  King  of  Persia,  in 
the  absence  of  his  father,  and  entering  much 
into  conversation  with  them,  gained  so  much 
upon  them  by  his  affability,  and  the  questions 
he  asked  them,  which  were  far  from  being 
childish  or  trifling  (for  he  inquired  of  them 
the  length  of  the  ways,  the  nature  of  the  road 
into  inner  Asia,  the  character  of  their  king, 
how  he  carried  himself  to  his  enemies,  and 
what  forces  he  was  able  to  bring  into  the  field), 
that  they  were  struck  with  admiration  of  him, 
and  looked  upon  the  ability  so  much  famed  of 
Philip  to  be  nothing  in  comparison  with  the 
forwardness  and  high  purpose  that  appeared 
thus  early  in  his  son. 

Whenever  he  heard  Philip  had  taken  any 
town  of  importance,  or  won  any  signal  victory, 
instead  of  rejoicing  at  it  altogether,  he  would 
tell  his  companions  that  his  father  would  antic¬ 
ipate  everything,  and  leave  him  and  them  no 
opportunities  of  performing  great  and  illustri¬ 
ous  actions.  For  being  more  bent  upon  action 
and  glory  than  either  upon  pleasure  or  riches, 
he  esteemed  all  that  he  should  receive  from  his 
father  as  a  diminution  and  prevention  of  his 
own  future  achievements;  and  would  have 
chosen  rather  to  succeed  to  a  kingdom  involved 
in  troubles  and  wars,  which  would  have  af¬ 
forded  him  frequent  exercise  of  his  courage, 
and  a  large  field  of  honour,  than  to  one  already 
flourishing  and  settled,  where  his  inheritance 
would  be  an  inactive  life,  and  the  mere  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  wealth  and  luxury. 

The  care  of  his  education,  as  it  might  be 
presumed,  was  committed  to  a  great  many  at¬ 
tendants,  preceptors,  and  teachers,  over  the 
whole  of  whom  Leonidas,  a  near  kinsman  of 
Olympias,  a  man  of  an  austere  temper,  pre¬ 
sided,  who  did  not  indeed  himself  decline  the 
name  of  what  in  reality  is  a  noble  and  honour¬ 
able  office,  but  in  general  his  dignity,  and  his 
near  relationship,  obtained  him  from  other 
people  the  title  of  Alexander’s  foster-father  and 
governor.  But  he  who  took  upon  him  the  ac¬ 
tual  place  and  style  of  his  pedagogue  was  Ly- 
simachus  the  Acarnanian,  who,  though  he  had 
nothing  specially  to  recommend  him,  but  his 
lucky  fancy  of  calling  himself  Phoenix,  Alex¬ 
ander  Achilles,  and  Philip  Peleus,  was  there¬ 
fore  well  enough  esteemed,  and  ranked  in  the 
next  degree  after  Leonidas. 

Philonicus  the  Thessalian  brought  the  horse 


ALEXANDER 

Bucephalus  to  Philip,  offering  to  sell  him  for 
thirteen  talents;  but  when  they  went  into  the 
field  to  try  him,  they  found  him  so  very  vicious 
and  unmanageable,  that  he  reared  up  when  they 
endeavoured  to  mount  him,  and  would  not  so 
much  as  endure  the  voice  of  any  of  Philip’s  at¬ 
tendants.  Upon  which,  as  they  were  leading  him 
away  as  wholly  useless  and  untractable,  Alex¬ 
ander,  who  stood  by,  said,  “What  an  excellent 
horse  do  they  lose  for  want  of  address  and 
boldness  to  manage  him!”  Philip  at  first  took 
no  notice  of  what  he  said;  but  when  he  heard 
him  repeat  the  same  thing  several  times,  and 
saw  he  was  much  vexed  to  see  the  horse  sent 
away,  “Do  you  reproach,”  said  he  to  him,  “those 
who  are  older  than  yourself,  as  if  you  knew 
more,  and  were  better  able  to  manage  him  than 
they?”  “I  could  manage  this  horse,”  replied  he, 
“better  than  others  do.”  “And  if  you  do  not,” 
said  Philip,  “what  will  you  forfeit  for  your 
rashness?”  “I  will  pay,”  answered  Alexander, 
“the  whole  price  of  the  horse.” 

At  this  the  whole  company  fell  a-laughing; 
and  as  soon  as  the  wager  was  settled  amongst 
them,  he  immediately  ran  to  the  horse,  and 
taking  hold  of  the  bridle,  turned  him  directly 
towards  the  sun,  having,  it  seems,  observed 
that  he  was  disturbed  at  and  afraid  of  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  his  own  shadow;  then  letting  him  go 
forward  a  little,  still  keeping  the  reins  in  his 
hands,  and  stroking  him  gently  when  he  found 
him  begin  to  grow  eager  and  fiery,  he  let  fall 
his  upper  garment  softly,  and  with  one  nimble 
leap  securely  mounted  him,  and  when  he  was 
seated,  by  little  and  little  drew  in  the  bridle, 
and  curbed  him  without  either  striking  or 
spurring  him.  Presently,  when  he  found  him 
free  from  all  rebelliousness,  and  only  impatient 
for  the  course,  he  let  him  go  at  full  speed,  in¬ 
citing  him  now  with  a  commanding  voice,  and 
urging  him  also  with  his  heel.  Philip  and  his 
friends  looked  on  at  first  in  silence  and  anxiety 
for  the  result,  till  seeing  him  turn  at  the  end 
of  his  career,  and  come  back  rejoicing  and 
triumphing  for  what  he  had  performed,  they 
all  burst  out  into  acclamations  of  applause;  and 
his  father  shedding  tears,  it  is  said,  for  joy, 
kissed  him  as  he  came  down  from  his  horse, 
and  in  his  transport  said,  “O  my  son,  look  thee 
out  a  kingdom  equal  to  and  worthy  of  thyself, 
for  Macedonia  is  too  little  for  thee.” 

After  this,  considering  him  to  be  of  a  temper 
easy  to  be  led  to  his  duty  by  reason,  but  by  no 
means  to  be  compelled,  he  always  endeavoured 
to  persuade  rather  than  to  command  or  force 
him  to  anything;  and  now  looking  upon  the 


543 

instruction  and  tuition  of  his  youth  to  be  of 
greater  difficulty  and  importance  than  to  be 
wholly  trusted  to  the  ordinary  masters  in  music 
and  poetry,  and  the  common  school  subjects, 
and  to  require,  as  Sophocles  says — 

The  bridle  and  the  rudder,  too, 
he  sent  for  Aristotle,  the  most  learned  and 
most  celebrated  philosopher  of  his  time,  and 
rewarded  him  with  a  munificence  proportion- 
able  to  and  becoming  the  care  he  took  to  in¬ 
struct  his  son.  For  he  repeopled  his  native  city 
Stagira,  which  he  had  caused  to  be  demolished 
a  little  before,  and  restored  all  the  citizens,  who 
were  in  exile  or  slavery,  to  their  habitations. 

As  a  place  for  the  pursuit  of  their  studies 
and  exercise,  he  assigned  the  temple  of  the 
Nymphs,  near  Mieza,  where,  to  this  very  day, 
they  show  you  Aristotle’s  stone  seats,  and  the 
shady  walks  which  he  was  wont  to  frequent. 

It  would  appear  that  Alexander  received 
from  him  not  only  his  doctrines  of  morals  and 
of  politics,  but  also  something  of  those  more 
abstruse  and  profound  theories  which  these 
philosophers,  by  the  very  names  they  gave 
them,  professed  to  reserve  for  oral  communica¬ 
tions  to  the  initiated,  and  did  not  allow  many 
to  become  acquainted  with.  For  when  he  was 
in  Asia,  and  heard  Aristotle  had  published 
some  treatises  of  that  kind,  he  wrote  to  him, 
using  very  plain  language  to  him  in  behalf  of 
philosophy,  the  following  letter.  “Alexander  to 
Aristotle,  greeting.  You  have  not  done  well  to 
publish  your  books  of  oral  doctrine;  for  what 
is  there  now  that  we  excel  others  in,  if  those 
things  which  we  have  been  particularly  in¬ 
structed  in  be  laid  open  to  all?  For  my  part,  I 
assure  you,  I  had  rather  excel  others  in  the 
knowledge  of  what  is  excellent,  than  in  the 
extent  of  my  power  and  dominion.  Farewell.” 
And  Aristotle,  soothing  this  passion  for  pre¬ 
eminence,  spoke,  in  his  excuse  for  himself,  of 
these  doctrines  as  in  fact  both  published  and 
not  published:  as  indeed,  to  say  the  truth,  his 
books  on  metaphysics  are  written  in  a  style 
which  makes  them  useless  for  ordinary  teach¬ 
ing,  and  instructive  only,  in  the  way  of  memo¬ 
randa,  for  those  who  have  been  already  con¬ 
versant  in  that  sort  of  learning. 

Doubtless  also  it  was  to  Aristotle  that  he 
owed  the  inclination  he  had,  not  to  the  theory 
only,  but  likewise  to  the  practice  of  the  art  of 
medicine.  For  when  any  of  his  friends  were 
sick,  he  would  often  prescribe  them  their 
course  of  diet,  and  medicines  proper  to  their 
disease,  as  we  may  find  in  his  epistles.  He  was 
naturally  a  great  lover  of  all  kinds  of  learning 


544 

and  reading;  and  Onesicritus  informs  us  that 
he  constantly  laid  Homer’s  Iliad  according  to 
the  copy  corrected  by  Aristotle,  called  the  cas¬ 
ket  copy,  with  his  dagger  under  his  pillow,  de¬ 
claring  that  he  esteemed  it  a  perfect  portable 
treasure  of  all  military  virtue  and  knowledge. 
When  he  was  in  the  upper  Asia,  being  desti¬ 
tute  of  other  books,  he  ordered  Harpalus  to 
send  him  some;  who  furnished  him  with  Philis- 
tus’s  History,  a  great  many  of  the  plays  of 
Euripides,  Sophocles,  and  ffischylus,  and  some 
dithyrambic  odes,  composed  by  Telestes  and 
Philoxenus. 

For  a  while  he  loved  and  cherished  Aristotle 
no  less,  as  he  was  wont  to  say  himself,  than  if 
he  had  been  his  father,  giving  this  reason  for 
it,  that  as  he  had  received  life  from  the  one,  so 
the  other  had  taught  him  to  live  well.  But 
afterwards,  upon  some  mistrust  of  him,  yet 
not  so  great  as  to  make  him  do  him  any  hurt, 
his  familiarity  and  friendly  kindness  to  him 
abated  so  much  of  its  former  force  and  affec¬ 
tionateness,  as  to  make  it  evident  he  was  alien¬ 
ated  from  him.  However,  his  violent  thirst 
after  and  passion  for  learning,  which  were 
once  implanted,  still  grew  up  with  him,  and 
never  decayed;  as  appears  by  his  veneration  of 
Anaxarchus,  by  the  present  of  fifty  talents 
which  he  sent  to  Xenocrates,  and  his  particular 
care  and  esteem  of  Dandamis  and  Calanus. 

While  Philip  went  on  his  expedition  against 
the  Byzantines,  he  left  Alexander,  then  sixteen 
years  old,  his  lieutenant  in  Macedonia,  com¬ 
mitting  the  charge  of  his  seal  to  him;  who,  not 
to  sit  idle,  reduced  the  rebellious  Maedi,  and 
having  taken  their  chief  town  by  storm,  drove 
out  the  barbarous  inhabitants,  and  planting  a 
colony  of  several  nations  in  their  room,  called 
the  place  after  his  own  name,  Alexandropolis. 
At  the  battle  of  Chaeronea,  which  his  father 
fought  against  the  Grecians,  he  is  said  to  have 
been  the  first  man  that  charged  the  Thebans’ 
Sacred  Band.  And  even  in  my  remembrance, 
there  stood  an  old  oak  near  the  river  Cephisus, 
which  people  called  Alexander’s  oak,  because 
his  tent  was  pitched  under  it.  And  not  far  off 
are  to  be  seen  the  graves  of  the  Macedonians 
who  fell  in  that  battle.  This  early  bravery  made 
Philip  so  fond  of  him,  that  nothing  pleased  him 
more  than  to  hear  his  subjects  call  himself  their 
general  and  Alexander  their  king. 

But  the  disorders  of  his  family,  chiefly  caus¬ 
ed  by  his  new  marriages  and  attachments  (the 
troubles  that  began  in  the  women’s  chambers 
spreading,  so  to  say,  to  the  whole  kingdom), 
raised  various  complaints  and  differences  be- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

tween  them,  which  the  violence  of  Olympias, 
a  woman  of  a  jealous  and  implacable  temper, 
made  wider,  by  exasperating  Alexander  against 
his  father.  Among  the  rest,  this  accident  con¬ 
tributed  most  to  their  falling  out. 

At  the  wedding  of  Cleopatra,  whom  Philip 
fell  in  love  with  and  married,  she  being  much 
too  young  lor  him,  her  uncle  Attalus  in  his 
drink  desired  the  Macedonians  would  implore 
the  gods  to  give  them  a  lawful  successor  to  the 
kingdom  by  his  niece.  This  so  irritated  Alex¬ 
ander,  that  throwing  one  of  the  cups  at  his 
head,  “You  villain,”  said  he,  “what,  am  I  then 
a  bastard?”  Then  Philip,  taking  Attalus’s  part, 
rose  up  and  would  have  run  his  son  through; 
but  by  good  fortune  for  them  both,  either  his 
over-hasty  rage,  or  the  wine  he  had  drunk, 
made  his  foot  slip,  so  that  he  fell  down  on  the 
floor.  At  which  Alexander  reproachfully  in¬ 
sulted  over  him:  “See  there,”  said  he,  “the 
man  who  makes  preparations  to  pass  out  of 
Europe  into  Asia,  overturned  in  passing  from 
one  seat  to  another.”  After  this  debauch,  he 
and  his  mother  Olympias  withdrew  from  Phil¬ 
ip’s  company,  and  when  he  had  placed  her  in 
Epirus,  he  himself  retired  into  Illyria. 

About  this  time,  Demaratus  the  Corinthian, 
an  old  friend  of  the  family,  who  had  the  free¬ 
dom  to  say  anything  among  them  without  of¬ 
fence,  coming  to  visit  Philip,  after  the  first 
compliments  and  embraces  were  over,  Philip 
asked  him  whether  the  Grecians  were  at  amity 
with  one  another.  “It  ill  becomes  you,”  replied 
Demaratus,  “to  be  so  solicitous  about  Greece, 
when  you  have  involved  your  own  house  in  so 
many  dissensions  and  calamities.”  He  was  so 
convinced  by  this  seasonable  reproach,  that  he 
immediately  sent  for  his  son  home,  and  by 
Demaratus’s  mediation  prevailed  with  him  to 
return. 

But  this  reconciliation  lasted  not  long;  for 
when  Pixodorus,  viceroy  of  Caria,  sent  Aristoc- 
ritus  to  treat  for  a  match  between  his  eldest 
daughter  and  Philip’s  son,  Arrhidaeus  hoping 
by  this  alliance  to  secure  his  assistance  upon  oc¬ 
casion,  Alexander’s  mother,  and  some  who  pre¬ 
tended  to  be  his  friends,  presently  filled  his 
head  with  tales  and  calumnies,  as  if  Philip,  by 
a  splendid  marriage  and  important  alliance, 
were  preparing  the  way  for  settling  the  king¬ 
dom  upon  Arrhidaeus.  In  alarm  at  this,  he  des¬ 
patched  Thessalus,  the  tragic  actor,  into  Caria, 
to  dispose  Pixodorus  to  slight  Arrhidaeus,  both 
as  illegitimate  and  a  fool,  and  rather  to  accept 
of  himself  for  his  son-in-law.  This  proposition 
was  much  more  agreeable  to  Pixodorus  than 


ALEXANDER 

the  former.  But  Philip,  as  soon  as  he  was  made 
acquainted  with  this  transaction,  went  to  his 
son’s  apartment,  taking  with  him  Philotas, 
the  son  of  Parmenio,  one  of  Alexander’s  inti¬ 
mate  friends  and  companions,  and  there  re¬ 
proved  him  severely,  and  reproached  him  bit¬ 
terly,  that  he  should  be  so  degenerate,  and  un¬ 
worthy  of  the  power  he  was  to  leave  him,  as 
to  desire  the  alliance  of  a  mean  Carian,  who 
was  at  best  but  the  slave  of  a  barbarous  prince. 
Nor  did  this  satisfy  his  resentment,  for  he 
wrote  to  the  Corinthians  to  send  Thessalus  to 
him  in  chains,  and  banished  Harpalus,  Near- 
chus,  Erigyius,  and  Ptolemy,  his  son’s  friends 
and  favourites,  whom  Alexander  afterwards 
recalled  and  raised  to  great  honour  and  pre¬ 
ferment. 

Not  long  after  this,  Pausanias,  having  had 
an  outrage  done  to  him  at  the  instance  of  At- 
talus  and  Cleopatra,  when  he  found  he  could 
get  no  reparation  for  his  disgrace  at  Philip’s 
hands,  watched  his  opportunity  and  murdered 
him.  The  guilt  of  which  fact  was  laid  for  the 
most  part  upon  Olympias,  who  was  said  to 
have  encouraged  and  exasperated  the  enraged 
youth  to  revenge;  and  some  sort  of  suspicion 
attached  even  to  Alexander  himself,  who,  it 
was  said,  when  Pausanias  came  and  com¬ 
plained  to  him  of  the  injury  he  had  received, 
repeated  the  verse  out  of  Euripides’s  Medea — 
On  husband,  and  on  father,  and  on  bride. 
However,  he  took  care  to  find  out  and  punish 
the  accomplices  of  the  conspiracy  severely,  and 
was  very  angry  with  Olympias  for  treating 
Cleopatra  inhumanly  in  his  absence. 

Alexander  was  but  twenty  years  old  when 
his  father  was  murdered,  and  succeeded  to  a 
kingdom,  beset  on  all  sides  with  great  dangers 
and  rancorous  enemies.  For  not  only  the  bar¬ 
barous  nations  that  bordered  on  Macedonia 
were  impatient  of  being  governed  by  any  but 
their  own  native  princes,  but  Philip  likewise, 
though  he  had  been  victorious  over  the  Gre¬ 
cians,  yet,  as  the  time  had  not  been  sufficient 
for  him  to  complete  his  conquest  and  accustom 
them  to  his  sway,  had  simply  left  all  things  in  a 
general  disorder  and  confusion. 

It  seemed  to  the  Macedonians  a  very  critical 
time;  and  some  would  have  persuaded  Alex¬ 
ander  to  give  up  all  thought  of  retaining  the 
Grecians  in  subjection  by  force  of  arms,  and 
rather  to  apply  himself  to  win  back  by  gentle 
means  the  allegiance  of  the  tribes  who  were 
designing  revolt,  and  try  the  effect  of  indul¬ 
gence  in  arresting  the  first  motions  towards 
revolution.  But  he  rejected  this  counsel  as 


545 

weak  and  timorous,  and  looked  upon  it  to  be 
more  prudence  to  secure  himself  by  resolution 
and  magnanimity,  than,  by  seeming  to  truckle 
to  any,  to  encourage  all  to  trample  on  him. 

In  pursuit  of  this  opinion,  he  reduced  the 
barbarians  to  tranquillity,  and  put  an  end  to 
all  fear  of  war  from  them,  by  a  rapid  expedi¬ 
tion  into  their  country  as  far  as  the  river  Dan¬ 
ube,  where  he  gave  Syrmus,  King  of  the 
Triballians,  an  entire  overthrow.  And  hearing 
the  Thebans  were  in  revolt,  and  the  Athenians 
in  correspondence  with  them,  he  immediately 
marched  through  the  pass  of  Thermopylae,  say¬ 
ing  that  to  Demosthenes,  who  had  called  him 
a  child  while  he  was  in  Illyria  and  in  the  coun¬ 
try  of  the  Triballians,  and  a  youth  when  he 
was  in  Thessaly,  he  would  appear  a  man  be¬ 
fore  the  walls  of  Athens. 

When  he  came  to  Thebes,  to  show  how  will¬ 
ing  he  was  to  accept  of  their  repentance  for 
what  was  past,  he  only  demanded  of  them  Phoe¬ 
nix  and  Prothytes,  the  authors  of  the  rebellion, 
and  proclaimed  a  general  pardon  to  those  who 
would  come  over  to  him.  But  when  the  The¬ 
bans  merely  retorted  by  demanding  Philotas 
and  Antipater  to  be  delivered  into  their  hands, 
and  by  a  proclamation  on  their  part  invited  all 
who  would  assert  the  liberty  of  Greece  to  come 
over  to  them,  he  presently  applied  himself  to 
make  them  feel  the  last  extremities  of  war. 

The  Thebans  indeed  defended  themselves 
with  a  zeal  and  courage  beyond  their  strength, 
being  much  outnumbered  by  their  enemies. 
But  when  the  Macedonian  garrison  sallied  out 
upon  them  from  the  citadel,  they  were  so 
hemmed  in  on  all  sides  that  the  greater  part  of 
them  fell  in  the  battle;  the  city  itself  being  tak¬ 
en  by  storm,  was  sacked  and  razed;  Alexan¬ 
der’s  hope  being  that  so  severe  an  example 
might  terrify  the  rest  of  Greece  into  obedience, 
and  also  in  order  to  gratify  the  hostility  of  his 
confederates,  the  Phocians  and  Plataeans.  So 
that,  except  the  priests,  and  some  few  who  had 
heretofore  been  the  friends  and  connections  of 
the  Macedonians,  the  family  of  the  poet  Pindar, 
and  those  who  were  known  to  have  opposed 
the  public  vote  for  the  war,  all  the  rest,  to  the 
number  of  thirty  thousand,  were  publicly  sold 
for  slaves;  and  it  is  computed  that  upwards  of 
six  thousand  were  put  to  the  sword. 

Among  the  other  calamities  that  befell  the 
city,  it  happened  that  some  Thracian  soldiers, 
having  broken  into  the  house  of  a  matron  of 
high  character  and  repute,  named  Timoclea, 
their  captain,  after  he  had  used  violence  with 
her,  to  satisfy  his  avarice  as  well  as  lust,  asked 


546 

her,  if  she  knew  of  any  money  concealed;  to 
which  she  readily  answered  she  did,  and  bade 
him  follow  her  into  a  garden,  where  she 
showed  him  a  well,  into  which,  she  told  him, 
upon  the  taking  of  the  city,  she  had  thrown 
what  she  had  of  most  value.  The  greedy  Thra¬ 
cian  presently  stooping  down  to  view  the  place 
where  he  thought  the  treasure  lay,  she  came 
behind  him  and  pushed  him  into  the  well,  and 
then  flung  great  stones  in  upon  him,  till  she 
had  killed  him. 

After  which,  when  the  soldiers  led  her  away 
bound  to  Alexander,  her  very  mien  and  gait 
showed  her  to  be  a  woman  of  dignity,  and  of  a 
mind  no  less  elevated,  not  betraying  the  least 
sign  of  fear  or  astonishment.  And  when  the 
king  asked  her  who  she  was,  “I  am,”  said  she, 
“the  sister  of  Theagenes,  who  fought  the  battle 
of  Chseronea  with  your  father  Philip,  and  fell 
there  in  command  for  the  liberty  of  Greece.” 
Alexander  was  so  surprised,  both  at  what  she 
had  done  and  what  she  said,  that  he  could  not 
choose  but  give  her  and  her  children  their  free¬ 
dom  to  go  whither  they  pleased. 

After  this  he  received  the  Athenians  into  fa¬ 
vour,  although  they  had  shown  themselves  so 
much  concerned  at  the  calamity  of  Thebes  that 
out  of  sorrow  they  omitted  the  celebration  of 
the  Mysteries,  and  entertained  those  who  es¬ 
caped  with  all  possible  humanity.  Whether  it 
were,  like  the  lion,  that  his  passion  was  now 
satisfied,  or  that,  after  an  example  of  extreme 
cruelty,  he  had  a  mind  to  appear  merciful,  it 
happened  well  for  the  Athenians;  for  he  not 
only  forgave  them  all  past  offences,  but  bade 
them  look  to  their  affairs  with  vigilance,  re¬ 
membering  that  if  he  should  miscarry,  they 
were  likely  to  be  the  arbiters  of  Greece. 

Certain  it  is,  too,  that  in  aftertime  he  often 
repented  of  his  severity  to  the  Thebans,  and  his 
remorse  had  such  influence  on  his  temper  as  to 
make  him  ever  after  less  rigorous  to  all  others. 
He  imputed  also  the  murder  of  Clitus,  which 
he  committed  in  his  wine,  and  the  unwilling¬ 
ness  of  the  Macedonians  to  follow  him  against 
the  Indians,  by  which  his  enterprise  and  glory 
was  left  imperfect,  to  the  wrath  and  vengeance 
of  Bacchus,  the  protector  of  Thebes.  And  it 
was  observed  that  whatsoever  any  Theban, 
who  had  the  good  fortune  to  survive  this  vic¬ 
tory,  asked  of  him,  he  was  sure  to  grant  with¬ 
out  the  least  difficulty. 

Soon  after,  the  Grecians,  being  assembled  at 
the  Isthmus,  declared  their  resolution  of  join¬ 
ing  with  Alexander  in  the  war  against  the  Per¬ 
sians,  and  proclaimed  him  their  general.  While 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

he  stayed  here,  many  public  ministers  and  phi¬ 
losophers  came  from  all  parts  to  visit  him  and 
congratulated  him  on  his  election,  but  contrary 
to  his  expectation,  Diogenes  of  Sinope,  who 
then  was  living  at  Corinth,  thought  so  little  of 
him,  that  instead  of  coming  to  compliment 
him,  he  never  so  much  as  stirred  out  of  the 
suburb  called  the  Cranium,  where  Alexander 
found  him  lying  alone  in  the  sun.  When  he 
saw  so  much  company  near  him,  he  raised  him¬ 
self  a  little,  and  vouchsafed  to  look  upon  Alex¬ 
ander,  and  when  he  kindly  asked  him  whether 
he  wanted  anything,  “Yes,”  said  he,  “I  would 
have  you  stand  from  between  me  and  the  sun.” 
Alexander  was  so  struck  at  this  answer,  and 
surprised  at  the  greatness  of  the  man,  who  had 
taken  so  little  notice  of  him,  that  as  he  went 
away  he  told  his  followers,  who  were  laughing 
at  the  moroseness  of  the  philosopher,  that  if  he 
were  not  Alexander,  he  would  choose  to  be 
Diogenes. 

Then  he  went  to  Delphi,  to  consult  Apollo 
concerning  the  success  of  the  war  he  had  un¬ 
dertaken,  and  happening  to  tome  on  one  of  the 
forbidden  days,  when  it  was  esteemed  improp¬ 
er  to  give  any  answer  from  the  oracle,  he  sent 
messengers  to  desire  the  priestess  to  do  her  of¬ 
fice;  and  when  she  refused,  on  the  plea  of  a  law 
to  the  contrary,  he  went  up  himself,  and  began 
to  draw  her  by  force  into  the  temple,  until  tired 
and  overcome  with  his  importunity,  “My  son,” 
•said  she,  “thou  art  invincible.”  Alexander  tak¬ 
ing  hold  of  what  she  spoke,  declared  he  had 
received  such  an  answer  as  he  wished  for,  and 
that  it  was  needless  to  consult  the  god  any  fur¬ 
ther.  Among  other  prodigies  that  attended  the 
departure  of  his  army,  the  image  of  Orpheus  at 
Libethra,  made  of  cypress-wood,  was  seen  to 
sweat  in  great  abundance,  to  the  discourage¬ 
ment  of  many.  But  Aristander  told  him  that, 
far  from  presaging  any  ill  to  him,  it  signified 
he  should  perform  acts  so  important  and  glori¬ 
ous  as  would  make  the  poets  and  musicians  of 
future  ages  labour  and  sweat  to  describe  and 
celebrate  them. 

His  army,  by  their  computation  who  make 
the  smallest  amount,  consisted  of  thirty  thou¬ 
sand  foot  and  four  thousand  horse;  and  those 
who  make  the  most  of  it,  speak  but  of  forty- 
three  thousand  foot  and  three  thousand  horse. 
Aristobulus  says  he  had  not  a  fund  of  above 
seventy  talents  for  their  pay;  nor  had  he  more 
than  thirty  days’  provision,  if  we  may  believe 
Duris;  Onesicritus  tells  us  he  was  two  hundred 
talents  in  debt. 

However  narrow  and  disproportionable  the 


ALEXANDER 

beginnings  of  so  vast  an  undertaking  might 
seem  to  be,  yet  he  would  not  embark  his  army 
until  he  had  informed  himself  particularly 
what  means  his  friends  had  to  enable  them  to 
follow  him,  and  supplied  what  they  wanted, 
by  giving  good  farms  to  some,  a  village  to  one, 
and  the  revenue  of  some  hamlet  or  harbour- 
town  to  another.  So  that  at  last  he  had  por¬ 
tioned  out  or  engaged  almost  all  the  royal 
property;  which  giving  Perdiccas  an  occasion 
to  ask  him  what  he  would  leave  himself,  he 
replied,  his  hopes.  “Your  soldiers,”  replied 
Perdiccas,  “will  be  your  partners  in  those,” 
and  refused  to  accept  of  the  estate  he  had  as¬ 
signed  him.  Some  others  of  his  friends  did  the 
like,  but  to  those  who  willingly  received  or 
desired  assistance  of  him,  he  liberally  granted 
it,  as  far  as  his  patrimony  in  Macedonia  would 
reach,  the  most  part  of  which  was  spent  in 
these  donations. 

With  such  vigorous  resolutions,  and  his 
mind  thus  disposed,  he  passed  the  Hellespont, 
and  at  Troy  sacrificed  to  Minerva,  and  hon¬ 
oured  the  memory  of  the  heroes  who  were 
buried  there,  with  solemn  libations;  especially 
Achilles,  who  gravestone  he  anointed,  and 
with  his  friends,  as  the  ancient  custom  is,  ran 
naked  about  his  sepulchre,  and  crowned  it  with 
garlands,  declaring  how  happy  he  esteemed 
him,  in  having  while  he  lived  so  faithful  a 
friend,  and  when  he  was  dead,  so  famous 
a  poet  to  proclaim  his  actions.  While  he  was 
viewing  the  rest  of  the  antiquities  and  curiosi¬ 
ties  of  the  place,  being  told  he  might  see  Paris’s 
harp,  if  he  pleased,  he  said  he  thought  it  not 
worth  looking  on,  but  he  should  be  glad  to  see 
that  of  Achilles,  to  which  he  used  to  sing  the 
glories  and  great  actions  of  brave  men. 

In  the  meantime,  Darius’s  captains,  having 
collected  large  forces,  were  encamped  on  the 
further  bank  of  the  river  Granicus,  and  it  was 
necessary  to  fight,  as  it  were,  in  the  gate  of 
Asia  for  an  entrance  into  it.  The  depth  of  the 
river,  with  the  unevenness  and  difficult  ascent 
of  the  opposite  bank,  which  was  to  be  gained 
by  main  force,  was  apprehended  by  most,  and 
some  pronounced  it  an  improper  time  to  en¬ 
gage,  because  it  was  unusual  for  the  kings  of 
Macedonia  to  march  with  their  forces  in  the 
month  called  Daesius.  But  Alexander  broke 
through  these  scruples,  telling  them  they  should 
call  it  a  second  Artemisius.  And  when  Parme- 
nio  advised  him  not  to  attempt  anything  that 
day,  because  it  was  late,  he  told  him  that  he 
should  disgrace  the  Hellespont  should  he  fear 
the  Granicus.  And  so,  without  more  saying,  he 


547 

immediately  took  the  river  with  thirteen  troops 
of  horse,  and  advanced  against  whole  showers 
of  darts  thrown  from  the  steep  opposite  side, 
which  was  covered  with  armed  multitudes  of 
the  enemy’s  horse  and  foot,  notwithstanding 
the  disadvantage  of  the  ground  and  the  rapid¬ 
ity  of  the  stream;  so  that  the  action  seemed  to 
have  more  frenzy  and  desperation  in  it,  than 
of  prudent  conduct. 

However,  he  persisted  obstinately  to  gain 
the  passage,  and  at  last  with  much  ado  making 
his  way  up  the  banks,  which  were  extremely 
muddy  and  slippery,  he  had  instantly  to  join  in 
a  mere  confused  hand-to-hand  combat  with  the 
enemy,  before  he  could  draw  up  his  men,  who 
were  still  passing  over,  into  any  order.  For  the 
enemy  pressed  him  with  loud  and  warlike  out¬ 
cries;  and  charging  horse  against  horse,  plied 
with  their  lances;  after  they  had  broken  and 
spent  these,  they  fell  to  it  with  their  swords. 
And  Alexander,  being  easily  known  by  his 
buckler,  and  a  large  plume  of  white  feathers  on 
each  side  of  his  helmet,  was  attacked  on  all 
sides,  yet  escaped  wounding,  though  his  cuirass 
was  pierced  by  a  javelin  in  one  of  the  joinings. 
And  Rhcesaces  and  Spithridates,  two  Persian 
commanders,  falling  upon  him  at  once,  he 
avoided  one  of  them,  and  struck  at  Rhcesaces, 
who  had  a  good  cuirass  on,  with  such  force 
that,  his  spear  breaking  in  his  hand,  he  was 
glad  to  betake  himself  to  his  dagger. 

While  they  were  thus  engaged,  Spithridates 
came  up  on  one  side  of  him,  and  raising  him¬ 
self  upon  his  horse,  gave  him  such  a  blow  with 
his  battle-axe  on  the  helmet  that  he  cut  off  the 
crest  of  it,  with  one  of  his  plumes,  and  the  hel¬ 
met  was  only  just  so  far  strong  enough  to  save 
him,  that  the  edge  of  the  weapon  touched  the 
hair  of  his  head.  But  as  he  was  about  to  repeat 
his  stroke,  Clitus,  called  the  black  Clitus,  pre¬ 
vented  him,  by  running  him  through  the  body 
with  his  spear.  At  the  same  time  Alexander 
despatched  Rhcesaces  with  his  sword. 

While  the  horse  were  thus  dangerously  en¬ 
gaged,  the  Macedonian  phalanx  passed  the  riv¬ 
er,  and  the  foot  on  each  side  advanced  to  fight. 
But  the  enemy  hardly  sustaining  the  first  on¬ 
set,  soon  gave  ground  and  fled,  all  but  the 
mercenary  Greeks,  who  making  a  stand  upon 
a  rising  ground,  desired  quarter,  which  Alex¬ 
ander,  guided  rather  by  passion  than  judg¬ 
ment,  refused  to  grant,  and  charging  them 
himself  first,  had  his  horse  (not  Bucephalus, 
but  another)  killed  under  him.  And  this  ob¬ 
stinacy  of  his  to  cut  off  these  experienced  des¬ 
perate  men  cost  him  the  lives  of  more  of  his 


548 

own  soldiers  than  all  the  battle  before,  besides 
those  who  were  wounded. 

The  Persians  lost  in  this  battle  twenty  thou¬ 
sand  foot  and  two  thousand  five  hundred 
horse.  On  Alexander’s  side,  Aristobulus  says 
there  were  not  wanting  above  four-and-thirty, 
of  whom  nine  were  foot-soldiers;  and  in  mem¬ 
ory  of  them  he  caused  so  many  statues  of  brass, 
of  Lysippus’s  making,  to  be  erected. 

And  that  the  Grecians  might  participate  in 
the  honor  of  his  victory  he  sent  a  portion  of  the 
spoils  home  to  them,  particularly  to  the  Athe¬ 
nians  three  hundred  bucklers,  and  upon  all  the 
rest  he  ordered  this  inscription  to  be  set:  “Alex¬ 
ander  the  son  of  Philip,  and  the  Grecians,  ex¬ 
cept  the  Lacedaemonians,  won  these  from  the 
barbarians  who  inhabit  Asia.”  All  the  plate 
and  purple  garments,  and  other  things  of  the 
same  kind  that  he  took  from  the  Persians,  ex¬ 
cept  a  very  small  quantity  which  he  reserved 
for  himself,  he  sent  as  a  present  to  his  mother. 

The  battle  presently  made  a  great  change  of 
affairs  to  Alexander’s  advantage.  For  Sardis 
itself,  the  chief  seat  of  the  barbarian’s  power  in 
the  maritime  provinces,  and  many  other  con¬ 
siderable  places,  were  surrendered  to  him;  only 
Halicarnassus  and  Miletus  stood  out,  which  he 
took  by  force,  together  with  the  territory  about 
them. 

After  which  he  was  a  little  unsettled  in  his 
opinion  how  to  proceed.  Sometimes  he  thought 
it  best  to  find  out  Darius  as  soon  as  he  could, 
and  put  all  to  the  hazard  of  a  battle;  another 
while  he  looked  upon  it  as  a  more  prudent 
course  to  make  an  entire  reduction  of  the  sea- 
coast,  and  not  to  seek  the  enemy  till  he  had 
first  exercised  his  power  here  and  made  him¬ 
self  secure  of  the  resources  of  these  provinces. 

While  he  was  thus  deliberating  what  to  do, 
it  happened  that  a  spring  of  water  near  the  city 
of  Xanthus  in  Lycia,  of  its  own  accord,  swelled 
over  its  banks,  and  threw  up  a  copper  plate, 
upon  the  margin  of  which  was  engraven  in 
ancient  characters,  that  the  time  would  come 
when  the  Persian  empire  should  be  destroyed 
by  the  Grecians.  Encouraged  by  this  accident, 
he  proceeded  to  reduce  the  maritime  parts  of 
Cilicia  and  Phoenicia,  and  passed  his  army 
along  the  sea-coasts  of  Pamphylia  with  such 
expedition  that  many  historians  have  described 
and  extolled  it  with  that  height  of  admiration, 
as  if  it  were  no  less  than  a  miracle,  and  an  ex¬ 
traordinary  effect  of  divine  favour,  that  the 
waves  which  usually  come  rolling  in  violently 
from  the  main,  and  hardly  ever  leave  so  much 
as  a  narrow  beach  under  the  steep,  broken 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

cliffs  at  any  time  uncovered,  should  on  a  sud¬ 
den  retire  to  afford  him  passage. 

Menander,  in  one  of  his  comedies,  alludes  to 
this  marvel  when  he  says — 

Was  Alexander  ever  favoured  more? 

Each  man  l  wish  for  meets  me  at  my  door, 

And  should  l  as\  for  passage  through  the  sea, 

The  sea  l  doubt  not  would  retire  me. 

But  Alexander  himself  in  his  epistles  men¬ 
tions  nothing  unusual  in  this  at  all,  but  says 
he  went  from  Phaselis,  and  passed  through 
what  they  call  the  Ladders.  At  Phaselis  he 
stayed  some  time,  and  finding  the  statue  of 
Theodectes,  who  was  a  native  of  this  town  and 
was  now  dead,  erected  in  the  marketplace,  af¬ 
ter  he  had  supped,  having  drunk  pretty  plen¬ 
tifully,  he  went  and  danced  about  it,  and 
crowned  it  with  garlands,  honouring  not  un¬ 
gracefully,  in  his  sport,  the  memory  of  a  phi¬ 
losopher  whose  conversation  he  had  formerly 
enjoyed  when  he  was  Aristotle’s  scholar. 

Then  he  subdued  the  Pisidians  who  made 
head  against  him,  and  conquered  the  Phryg¬ 
ians,  at  whose  chief  city,  Gordium,  which  is 
said  to  be  the  seat  of  the  ancient  Midas,  he  saw 
the  famous  chariot  fastened  with  cords  made 
of  the  rind  of  the  cornel-tree,  which  whoso¬ 
ever  should  untie,  the  inhabitants  had  a  tra¬ 
dition,  that  for  him  was  reserved  the  empire 
of  the  world.  Most  authors  tell  the  story  that 
Alexander  finding  himself  unable  to  untie  the 
knot,  the  ends  of  which  were  secretly  twisted 
round  and  folded  up  within  it,  cut  it  asunder 
with  his  sword.  But  Aristobulus  tells  us  it  was 
easy  for  him  to  undo  it,  by  only  pulling  the  pin 
out  of  the  pole,  to  which  the  yoke  was  tied, 
and  afterwards  drawing  off  the  yoke  itself 
from  below. 

From  hence  he  advanced  into  Paphlagonia 
and  Cappadocia,  both  which  countries  he  soon 
reduced  to  obedience,  and  then  hearing  of  the 
death  of  Memnon,  the  best  commander  Darius 
had  upon  the  sea-coasts,  who,  if  he  had  lived, 
might,  it  was  supposed,  have  put  many  imped¬ 
iments  and  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  prog¬ 
ress  of  his  arms,  he  was  the  rather  encouraged 
to  carry  the  war  into  the  upper  provinces  of 
Asia. 

Darius  was  by  this  time  upon  his  march 
from  Susa,  very  confident,  not  only  in  the  num¬ 
ber  of  his  men,  which  amounted  to  six  hun¬ 
dred  thousand,  but  likewise  in  a  dream,  which 
the  Persian  soothsayers  interpreted  rather  in 
flattery  to  him  than  according  to  the  natural 
probability.  He  dreamed  that  he  saw  the  Mace¬ 
donian  phalanx  all  on  fire,  and  Alexander  wait- 


ALEXANDER 

ing  on  him,  clad  in  the  same  dress  which  he 
himself  had  been  used  to  wear  when  he  was 
courier  to  the  late  king;  after  which,  going  into 
the  temple  of  Belus,  he  vanished  out  of  his 
sight.  The  dream  would  appear  to  have  super- 
naturally  signified  to  him  the  illustrious  ac¬ 
tions  the  Macedonians  were  to  perform,  and 
that  as  he,  from  a  courier’s  place,  had  risen  to 
the  throne,  so  Alexander  should  come  to  be 
master  of  Asia,  and  not  long  surviving  his  con¬ 
quests,  conclude  his  life  with  glory. 

Darius’s  confidence  increased  the  more,  be¬ 
cause  Alexander  spent  so  much  time  in  Cilicia, 
which  he  imputed  to  his  cowardice.  But  it  was 
sickness  that  detained  him  there,  which  some 
say  he  contracted  from  his  fatigues,  others  from 
bathing  in  the  river  Cydnus,  whose  waters 
were  exceedingly  cold.  However,  it  happened, 
none  of  his  physicians  would  venture  to  give 
him  any  remedies,  they  thought  his  case  so  des¬ 
perate,  and  were  so  afraid  of  the  suspicions  and 
ill-will  of  the  Macedonians  if  they  should  fail 
in  the  cure;  till  Philip,  the  Acarnanian,  seeing 
how  critical  his  case  was,  but  relying  on  his 
own  well-known  friendship  for  him,  resolved 
to  try  the  last  efforts  of  his  art,  and  rather  haz¬ 
ard  his  own  credit  and  life  than  suffer  him  to 
perish  for  want  of  physic,  which  he  confidently 
administered  to  him,  encouraging  him  to  take 
it  boldly,  if  he  desired  a  speedy  recovery,  in  or¬ 
der  to  prosecute  the  war. 

At  this  very  time,  Parmenio  wrote  to  Alex¬ 
ander  from  the  camp,  bidding  him  have  a  care 
of  Philip,  as  one  who  was  bribed  by  Darius  to 
kill  him,  with  great  sums  of  money,  and  a 
promise  of  his  daughter  in  marriage.  When  he 
had  perused  the  letter,  he  put  it  under  his  pil¬ 
low,  without  showing  it  so  much  as  to  any  of 
his  most  intimate  friends,  and  when  Philip 
came  in  with  the  potion,  he  took  it  with  great 
cheerfulness  and  assurance,  giving  him  mean¬ 
time  the  letter  to  read.  This  was  a  spectacle 
well  worth  being  present  at,  to  see  Alexander 
take  the  draught  and  Philip  read  the  letter  at 
the  same  time,  and  then  turn  and  look  upon 
one  another,  but  with  different  sentiments;  for 
Alexander’s  looks  were  cheerful  and  open,  to 
show  his  kindness  to  and  confidence  in  his 
physician,  while  the  other  was  full  of  surprise 
and  alarm  at  the  accusation,  appealing  to  the 
gods  to  witness  his  innocence,  sometimes  lift¬ 
ing  up  his  hands  to  heaven,  and  then  throwing 
himself  down  by  the  bedside,  and  beseeching 
Alexander  to  lay  aside  all  fear,  and  follow  his 
directions  without  apprehension.  For  the  med¬ 
icine  at  first  worked  so  strongly  as  to  drive,  so 


549 

to  say,  the  vital  forces  into  the  interior;  he  lost 
his  speech,  and  falling  into  a  swoon,  had  scarce 
any  sense  or  pulse  left.  However,  in  no  long 
time,  by  Philip’s  means,  his  health  and  strength 
returned,  and  he  showed  himself  in  public  to 
the  Macedonians,  who  were  in  continual  fear 
and  dejection  until  they  saw  him  abroad  again. 

There  was  at  this  time  in  Darius’s  army  a 
Macedonian  refugee,  named  Amyntas,  one  who 
was  pretty  well  acquainted  with  Alexander’s 
character.  This  man,  when  he  saw  Darius  in¬ 
tended  to  fall  upon  the  enemy  in  the  passes  and 
defiles,  advised  him  earnestly  to  keep  where 
he  was,  in  the  open  and  extensive  plains,  it  be¬ 
ing  the  advantage  of  a  numerous  army  to  have 
field-room  enough  when  it  engages  with  a 
lesser  force.  Darius,  instead  of  taking  his  coun¬ 
sel,  told  him  he  was  afraid  the  enemy  would 
endeavor  to  run  away,  and  so  Alexander 
would  escape  out  of  his  hands.  “That  fear,” 
replied  Amyntas,  “is  needless,  for  assure  your¬ 
self  that  far  from  avoiding  you,  he  will  make 
all  the  speed  he  can  to  meet  you,  and  is  now 
most  likely  on  his  march  toward  you.”  But 
Amyntas’s  counsel  was  to  no  purpose,  for 
Darius  immediately  decamping,  marched  in¬ 
to  Cilicia  at  the  same  time  that  Alexander  ad¬ 
vanced  into  Syria  to  meet  him;  and  missing 
one  another  in  the  night,  they  both  turned 
back  again. 

Alexander,  greatly  pleased  with  the  event, 
made  all  the  haste  he  could  to  fight  in  the  de¬ 
files,  and  Darius  to  recover  his  former  ground, 
and  draw  his  army  out  of  so  disadvantageous  a 
place.  For  now  he  began  to  perceive  his  error  in 
engaging  himself  too  far  in  a  country  in  which 
the  sea,  the  mountains,  and  the  river  Pinarus 
running  through  the  midst  of  it,  would  ne¬ 
cessitate  him  to  divide  his  forces,  render  his 
horse  almost  unserviceable,  and  only  cover  and 
support  the  weakness  of  the  enemy. 

Fortune  was  not  kinder  to  Alexander  in  the 
choice  of  the  ground,  than  he  was  careful  to 
improve  it  to  his  advantage.  For  being  much 
inferior  in  numbers,  so  far  from  allowing  him¬ 
self  to  be  outflanked,  he  stretched  his  right 
wing  much  further  out  than  the  left  wing  of 
his  enemies,  and  fighting  there  himself  in  the 
very  foremost  ranks,  put  the  barbarians  to 
flight.  In  this  battle  he  was  wounded  in  the 
thigh,  Chares  says,  by  Darius,  with  whom  he 
fought  hand  to  hand.  But  in  the  account 
which  he  gave  Antipater  of  the  battle,  though 
indeed  he  owns  he  was  wounded  in  the  thigh 
with  a  sword,  though  not  dangerously,  yet  he 
takes  no  notice  who  it  was  that  wounded  him. 


550 

Nothing  was  wanting  to  complete  this  vic¬ 
tory,  in  which  he  overthrew  above  an  hundred 
and  ten  thousand  of  his  enemies,  but  the  tak¬ 
ing  of  the  person  of  Darius,  who  escaped  very 
narrowly  by  flight.  However,  having  taken  his 
chariot  and  his  bow,  he  returned  from  pursu¬ 
ing  him,  and  found  his  own  men  busy  in  pil¬ 
laging  the  barbarians’  camp,  which  (though  to 
disburden  themselves  they  had  left  most  of  their 
baggage  at  Damascus)  was  exceedingly  rich. 

But  Darius’s  tent,  which  was  full  of  splendid 
furniture  and  quantities  of  gold  and  silver, 
they  reserved  for  Alexander  himself,  who,  af¬ 
ter  he  had  put  off  his  arms,  went  to  bathe  him¬ 
self,  saying,  “Let  us  now  cleanse  ourselves 
from  the  toils  of  war  in  the  bath  of  Darius.” 
“Not  so,”  replied  one  of  his  followers,  “but  in 
Alexander’s  rather;  for  the  property  of  the  con¬ 
quered  is  and  should  be  called  the  conquer¬ 
or’s.”  Here,  when  he  beheld  the  bathing  ves¬ 
sels,  the  water-pots,  the  pans,  and  the  ointment 
boxes,  all  of  gold  curiously  wrought,  and  smelt 
the  fragrant  odours  with  which  the  whole  place 
was  exquisitely  perfumed,  and  from  thence 
passed  into  a  pavilion  of  great  size  and  height, 
where  the  couches  and  tables  and  preparations 
for  an  entertainment  were  perfectly  magnifi¬ 
cent,  he  turned  to  those  about  him  and  said, 
“This,  it  seems,  is  royalty.” 

But  as  he  was  going  to  supper,  word  was 
brought  him  that  Darius’s  mother  and  wife 
and  two  unmarried  daughters,  being  taken 
among  the  rest  of  the  prisoners,  upon  the  sight 
of  his  chariot  and  bow,  were  all  in  mourning 
and  sorrow,  imagining  him  to  be  dead.  After  a 
little  pause,  more  lively  affected  with  their  af¬ 
fliction  than  with  his  own  success,  he  sent 
Leonnatus  to  them,  to  let  them  know  Darius 
was  not  dead,  and  that  they  need  not  fear  any 
harm  from  Alexander,  who  made  war  upon 
him  only  for  dominion;  they  should  them¬ 
selves  be  provided  with  everything  they  had 
been  used  to  receive  from  Darius. 

This  kind  message  could  not  but  be  very 
welcome  to  the  captive  ladies,  especially  being 
made  good  by  actions  no  less  humane  and  gen¬ 
erous.  For  he  gave  them  leave  to  bury  whom 
they  pleased  of  the  Persians,  and  to  make  use 
for  this  purpose  of  what  garments  and  furni¬ 
ture  they  thought  fit  out  of  the  booty.  He  di¬ 
minished  nothing  of  their  equipage,  or  of  the 
attentions  and  respect  formerly  paid  them,  and 
allowed  larger  pensions  for  their  maintenance 
than  they  had  before.  But  the  noblest  and  most 
royal  part  of  their  usage  was,  that  he  treated 
these  illustrious  prisoners  according  to  their  vir- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

tue  and  character,  not  suffering  them  to  hear, 
or  receive,  or  so  much  as  to  apprehend  any¬ 
thing  that  was  unbecoming.  So  that  they 
seemed  rather  lodged  in  some  temple,  or  some 
holy  virgin  chambers,  where  they  enjoyed  their 
privacy  sacred  and  uninterrupted,  than  in  the 
camp  of  an  enemy. 

Nevertheless,  Darius’s  wife  was  accounted 
the  most  beautiful  princess  then  living,  as  her 
husband  the  tallest  and  handsomest  man  of  his 
time,  and  the  daughters  were  not  unworthy 
of  their  parents.  But  Alexander,  esteeming  it 
more  kingly  to  govern  himself  than  to  con¬ 
quer  his  enemies,  sought  no  intimacy  with  any 
one  of  them,  nor  indeed  with  any  other  woman 
before  marriage,  except  Barsine,  Memnon’s 
widow,  who  was  taken  prisoner  at  Damascus. 
She  had  been  instructed  in  the  Grecian  learn¬ 
ing,  was  of  a  gentle  temper,  and  by  her  father, 
Artabazus,  royally  descended.  These  good 
qualities,  added  to  the  solicitations  and  en¬ 
couragement  of  Parmenio,  as  Aristobulus  tells 
us,  made  him  the  more  willing  to  attach  him¬ 
self  to  so  agreeable  and  illustrious  a  woman. 

Of  the  rest  of  the  female  captives,  though 
remarkably  handsome  and  well  proportioned, 
he  took  no  further  notice  than  to  say  jestingly 
that  Persian  women  were  terrible  eyesores. 
And  he  himself,  retaliating,  as  it  were,  by  the 
display  of  the  beauty  of  his  own  temperance 
and  self-control,  bade  them  be  removed,  as  he 
would  have  done  so  many  lifeless  images. 

When  Philoxenus,  his  lieutenant  on  the  sea- 
coast,  wrote  to  him  to  know  if  he  would  buy 
two  young  boys  of  great  beauty,  whom  one 
Theodorus,  a  Tarentine,  had  to  sell,  he  was 
so  offended  that  he  often  expostulated  with  his 
friends  what  baseness  Philoxenus  had  ever  ob¬ 
served  in  him  that  he  should  presume  to  make 
him  such  a  reproachful  offer.  And  he  immedi¬ 
ately  wrote  him  a  very  sharp  letter,  telling  him 
Theodorus  and  his  merchandise  might  go  with 
his  good-will  to  destruction.  Nor  was  he  less  se¬ 
vere  to  Hagnon,  who  sent  him  word  he  would 
buy  a  Corinthian  youth  named  Crobylus,  as  a 
present  for  him. 

And  hearing  that  Damon  and  Timotheus, 
two  of  Parmenio’s  Macedonian  soldiers,  had 
abused  the  wives  of  some  strangers  who  were 
in  his  pay,  he  wrote  to  Parmenio,  charging  him 
strictly,  if  he  found  them  guilty,  to  put  them  to 
death,  as  wild  beasts  that  were  only  made  for 
the  mischief  of  mankind.  In  the  same  letter  he 
added,  that  he  had  not  so  much  as  seen  or  de¬ 
sired  to  see  the  wife  of  Darius,  no,  nor  suffered 
anybody  to  speak  of  her  beauty  before  him.  He 


ALEXANDER 

was  wont  to  say  that  sleep  and  the  act  of  gener¬ 
ation  chiefly  made  him  sensible  that  he  was 
mortal;  as  much  as  to  say,  that  weariness  and 
pleasure  proceed  both  from  the  same  frailty 
and  imbecility  of  human  nature. 

In  his  diet,  also,  he  was  most  temperate,  as 
appears,  omitting  many  other  circumstances, 
by  what  he  said  to  Ada,  whom  he  adopted, 
with  the  title  of  mother,  and  afterwards  cre¬ 
ated  Queen  of  Caria.  For  when  she,  out  of 
kindness,  sent  him  every  day  many  curious 
dishes  and  sweetmeats,  and  would  have  fur¬ 
nished  him  with  some  cooks  and  pastry-men 
who  were  thought  to  have  great  skill,  he  told 
her  he  wanted  none  of  them,  his  preceptor, 
Leonidas,  having  already  given  him  the  best, 
which  were  a  night  march  to  prepare  for  break¬ 
fast,  and  a  moderate  breakfast  to  create  an  ap¬ 
petite  for  supper.  Leonidas  also,  he  added,  used 
to  open  and  search  the  furniture  of  his  chamber 
and  his  wardrobe,  to  see  if  his  mother  had  left 
him  anything  that  was  delicate  or  superfluous. 

He  was  much  less  addicted  to  wine  than  was 
generally  believed;  that  which  gave  people  oc¬ 
casion  to  think  so  of  him  was,  that  when  he 
had  nothing  else  to  do,  he  loved  to  sit  long  and 
talk,  rather  than  drink,  and  over  every  cup 
hold  a  long  conversation.  For  when  his  affairs 
called  upon  him,  he  would  not  be  detained,  as 
other  generals  often  were,  either  by  wine,  or 
sleep,  nuptial  solemnities,  spectacles,  or  any 
other  diversion  whatsoever;  a  convincing  argu¬ 
ment  of  which  is,  that  in  the  short  time  he 
lived,  he  accomplished  so  many  and  so  great 
actions. 

When  he  was  free  from  employment,  after 
he  was  up,  and  had  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  he 
used  to  sit  down  to  breakfast,  and  then  spend 
the  rest  of  the  day  in  hunting,  or  writing  mem¬ 
oirs,  giving  decisions  on  some  military  ques¬ 
tions,  or  reading.  In  marches  that  required  no 
great  haste,  he  would  practise  shooting  as  he 
went  along,  or  mount  a  chariot  and  alight  from 
it  in  full  speed.  Sometimes,  for  sport’s  sake,  as 
his  journals  tell  us,  he  would  hunt  foxes  and 
go  fowling. 

When  he  came  in  for  the  evening,  after  he 
had  bathed  and  was  anointed,  he  would  call 
for  his  bakers  and  chief  cooks,  to  know  if  they 
had  his  dinner  ready.  He  never  cared  to  dine 
till  it  was  pretty  late  and  beginning  to  be  dark, 
and  was  wonderfully  circumspect  at  meals  that 
every  one  who  sat  with  him  should  be  served 
alike  and  with  proper  attention;  and  his  love 
of  talking,  as  was  said  before,  made  him  de¬ 
light  to  sit  long  at  his  wine.  And  then,  though 


551 

otherwise  no  prince’s  conversation  was  ever  so 
agreeable,  he  would  fall  into  a  temper  of  osten¬ 
tation  and  soldierly  boasting,  which  gave  his 
flatterers  a  great  advantage  to  ride  him,  and 
made  his  better  friends  very  uneasy.  For 
though  they  thought  it  too  base  to  strive  who 
should  flatter  him  most,  yet  they  found  it  haz¬ 
ardous  not  to  do  it;  so  that  between  the  shame 
and  the  danger,  they  were  in  a  great  strait  how 
to  behave  themselves.  After  such  an  entertain¬ 
ment,  he  was  wont  to  bathe,  and  then  perhaps 
he  would  sleep  till  noon,  and  sometimes  all  day 
long. 

He  was  so  very  temperate  in  his  eating  that 
when  any  rare  fish  or  fruits  were  sent  him,  he 
would  distribute  them  among  his  friends,  and 
often  reserve  nothing  for  himself.  His  table, 
however,  was  always  magnificent,  the  expense 
of  it  still  increasing  with  his  good  fortune,  till 
it  amounted  to  ten  thousand  drachmas  a  day, 
to  which  sum  he  limited  it,  and  beyond  this  he 
would  suffer  none  to  lay  out  in  any  entertain¬ 
ment  where  he  himself  was  the  guest. 

After  the  battle  of  Issus,  he  sent  to  Damascus 
to  seize  upon  the  money  and  baggage,  the 
wives  and  children  of  the  Persians,  of  which 
spoil  the  Thessalian  horsemen  had  the  great¬ 
est  share;  for  he  had  taken  particular  notice 
of  their  gallantry  in  the  fight,  and  sent  them 
thither  on  purpose  to  make  their  reward  suit¬ 
able  to  their  courage.  Not  but  that  the  rest  of 
the  army  had  so  considerable  a  part  of  the 
booty  as  was  sufficient  to  enrich  them  all. 

This  first  gave  the  Macedonians  such  a  taste 
of  the  Persian  wealth  and  women  and  barbaric 
splendour  of  living,  that  they  were  ready  to 
pursue  and  follow  upon  it  with  all  the  eager¬ 
ness  of  hounds  upon  a  scent.  But  Alexander, 
before  he  proceeded  any  further,  thought  it 
necessary  to  assure  himself  of  the  sea-coast. 
Those  who  governed  in  Cyprus  put  that  island 
into  his  possession,  and  Phoenicia,  Tyre  only 
excepted,  was  surrendered  to  him. 

During  the  siege  of  this  city,  which,  with 
mounds  of  earth  cast  up,  and  battering  engines, 
and  two  hundred  galleys  by  sea,  was  carried 
on  for  seven  months  together,  he  dreamt  that 
he  saw  Hercules  upon  the  walls,  reaching  out 
his  hands,  and  calling  to  him.  And  many  of 
the  Tyrians  in  their  sleep  fancied  that  Apollo 
told  them  he  was  displeased  with  their  actions, 
and  was  about  to  leave  them  to  go  over  to 
Alexander.  Upon  which,  as  if  the  god  had  been 
a  deserting  soldier,  they  seized  him,  so  to  say, 
in  the  act,  tied  down  the  statue  with  ropes,  and 
nailed  it  to  the  pedestal,  reproaching  him  that 


552 

he  was  a  favourer  of  Alexander.  Another  time 
Alexander  dreamed  he  saw  a  satyr  mocking 
him  at  a  distance,  and  when  he  endeavoured  to 
catch  him,  he  still  escaped  from  him,  till  at  last 
with  much  perseverance,  and  running  about 
after  him,  he  got  him  into  his  power.  The 
soothsayers,  making  two  words  of  Satyrus,  as¬ 
sured  him  that  Tyre  should  be  his  own.  The 
inhabitants  at  this  time  show  a  spring  of  water, 
near  which  they  say  Alexander  slept  when  he 
fancied  the  satyr  appeared  to  him. 

While  the  body  of  the  army  lay  before  Tyre, 
he  made  an  excursion  against  the  Arabians 
who  inhabit  the  Mount  Antilibanus,  in  which 
he  hazarded  his  life  extremely  to  bring  off  his 
master,  Lysimachus,  who  would  needs  go 
along  with  him,  declaring  he  was  neither  older 
nor  inferior  in  courage  to  Phoenix,  Achilles’s 
guardian.  For  when,  quitting  their  horses,  they 
began  to  march  up  the  hills  on  foot,  the  rest  of 
the  soldiers  outwent  them  a  great  deal,  so  that 
night  drawing  on,  and  the  enemy  near,  Alex¬ 
ander  was  fain  to  stay  behind  so  long,  to  en¬ 
courage  and  help  up  the  lagging  and  tired  old 
man,  that  before  he  was  aware  he  was  left  be¬ 
hind,  a  great  way  from  his  soldiers,  with  a  slen¬ 
der  attendance,  and  forced  to  pass  an  extremely 
cold  night  in  the  dark,  and  in  a  very  inconven¬ 
ient  place;  till  seeing  a  great  many  scattered 
fires  of  the  enemy  at  some  distance,  and  trust¬ 
ing  to  his  agility  of  body,  and  as  he  was  always 
wont  by  undergoing  toils  and  labours  him¬ 
self  to  cheer  and  support  the  Macedonians  in 
any  distress,  he  ran  straight  to  one  of  the 
nearest  fires,  and  with  his  dagger  despatching 
two  of  the  barbarians  that  sat  by  it,  snatched 
up  a  lighted  brand,  and  returned  with  it  to 
his  own  men.  They  immediately  made  a  great 
fire,  which  so  alarmed  the  enemy  that  most  of 
them  fled,  and  those  that  assaulted  them  were 
soon  routed,  and  thus  they  rested  securely  the 
remainer  of  the  night.  Thus  Chares  writes. 

But  to  return  to  the  siege,  it  had  this  issue. 
Alexander,  that  he  might  refresh  his  army, 
harassed  with  many  former  encounters,  had 
led  only  a  small  party  towards  the  walls,  rather 
to  keep  the  enemy  busy  than  with  any  prospect 
of  much  advantage.  It  happened  at  this  time 
that  Aristander,  the  soothsayer,  after  he  had 
sacrificed,  upon  view  of  the  entrails,  affirmed 
confidently  to  those  who  stood  by  that  the  city 
should  be  certainly  taken  that  very  month,  up¬ 
on  which  there  was  a  laugh  and  some  mockery 
among  the  soldiers,  as  this  was  the  last  day  of 
it.  The  king,  seeing  him  in  perplexity,  and  al¬ 
ways  anxious  to  support  the  credit  of  the  pre- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

dictions,  gave  order  that  they  should  not  count 
it  as  the  thirtieth,  but  as  the  twenty-third  of  the 
month,  and  ordering  the  trumpets  to  sound, 
attacked  the  walls  more  seriously  than  he  at 
first  intended.  The  sharpness  of  the  assault  so 
inflamed  the  rest  of  his  forces  who  were  left  in 
the  camp,  that  they  could  not  hold  from  ad¬ 
vancing  to  second  it,  which  they  performed 
with  so  much  vigour  that  the  Tyrians  retired, 
and  the  town  was  carried  that  very  day. 

The  next  place  he  sat  down  before  was  Gaza, 
one  of  the  largest  cities  of  Syria,  when  this  ac¬ 
cident  befell  him.  A  large  bird  flying  over  him 
let  a  clod  of  earth  fall  upon  his  shoulder,  and 
then  settling  upon  one  of  the  battering  engines, 
was  suddenly  entangled  and  caught  in  the  nets, 
composed  of  sinews,  which  protected  the  ropes 
with  which  the  machine  was  managed.  This 
fell  out  exactly  according  to  Aristander’s  pre¬ 
diction,  which  was,  that  Alexander  should  be 
wounded  and  the  city  reduced. 

From  hence  he  sent  great  part  of  the  spoils 
to  Olympias,  Cleopatra,  and  the  rest  of  his 
friends,  not  omitting  his  perceptor  Leonidas, 
on  whom  he  bestowed  five  hundred  talents’ 
weight  of  frankincense  and  an  hundred  of 
myrrh,  in  remembrance  of  the  hopes  he  had 
once  expressed  of  him  when  he  was  but  a  child. 
For  Leonidas,  it  seems,  standing  by  him  one 
day  while  he  was  sacrificing,  and  seeing  him 
take  both  his  hands  full  of  incense  to  throw 
into  the  fire,  told  him  it  became  him  to  be  more 
sparing  in  his  offerings,  and  not  to  be  so  pro¬ 
fuse  till  he  was  master  of  the  countries  which 
those  sweet  gums  and  spices  come  from.  So 
Alexander  now  wrote  to  him,  saying,  “We 
have  sent  you  abundance  of  myrrh  and  frank¬ 
incense,  that  for  the  future  you  may  not  be 
stingy  to  the  gods.” 

Among  the  treasures  and  other  booty  that 
was  taken  from  Darius,  there  was  a  very  pre¬ 
cious  casket,  which  being  brought  to  Alexan¬ 
der  for  a  great  rarity,  he  asked  those  about  him 
what  they  thought  fittest  to  be  laid  up  in  it; 
and  when  they  had  delivered  their  various 
opinions,  he  told  them  he  should  keep  Homer’s 
Iliad  in  it.  This  is  attested  by  many  credible 
authors,  and  if  what  those  of  Alexandria  tell 
us,  relying  upon  the  authority  of  Heraclides, 
be  true,  Homer  was  neither  an  idle  nor  an  un¬ 
profitable  companion  to  him  in  his  expedition. 

For  when  he  was  master  of  Egypt,  design¬ 
ing  to  settle  a  colony  of  Grecians  there,  he  re¬ 
solved  to  build  a  large  and  populous  city,  and 
give  it  his  own  name.  In  order  to  which,  after 
he  had  measured  and  staked  out  the  ground 


ALEXANDER 

with  the  advice  of  the  best  architects,  he 
chanced  one  night  in  his  sleep  to  see  a  wonder¬ 
ful  vision;  a  grey-headed  old  man,  of  a  vener¬ 
able  aspect,  appeared  to  stand  by  him,  and 
pronounce  these  verses: — 

An  island  lies,  where  loud  the  billows  roar, 

Pharos  they  call  it,  on  the  Egyptian  shore. 

Alexander  upon  this  immediately  rose  up 
and  went  to  Pharos,  which  at  that  time  was  an 
island  lying  a  little  above  the  Canobic  mouth 
of  the  river  Nile,  though  it  has  now  been  joined 
to  the  mainland  by  a  mole.  As  soon  as  he  saw 
the  commodious  situation  of  the  place,  it  being 
a  long  neck  of  land,  stretching  like  an  isthmus 
between  large  lagoons  and  shallow  waters  on 
one  side  and  the  sea  on  the  other,  the  latter  at 
the  end  of  it  making  a  spacious  harbour,  he 
said  Homer,  besides  his  other  excellences,  was 
a  very  good  architect,  and  ordered  the  plan  of 
a  city  to  be  drawn  out  answerable  to  the  place. 
To  do  which,  for  want  of  chalk,  the  soil  being 
black,  they  laid  out  their  lines  with  flour,  tak¬ 
ing  in  a  pretty  large  compass  of  ground  in  a 
semi-circular  figure,  and  drawing  into  the  in¬ 
side  of  the  circumference  equal  straight  lines 
from  each  end,  thus  giving  it  something  of  the 
form  of  a  cloak  or  cape. 

While  he  was  pleasing  himself  with  his  de¬ 
sign,  on  a  sudden  an  infinite  number  of  great 
birds  of  several  kinds,  rising  like  a  black  cloud 
out  of  the  river,  and  the  lake,  devoured  every 
morsel  of  the  flour  that  had  been  used  in  setting 
out  the  lines;  at  which  omen  even  Alexander 
himself  was  troubled,  till  the  augurs  restored 
his  confidence  again  by  telling  him  it  was  a 
sign  the  city  he  was  about  to  build  would 
not  only  abound  in  all  things  within  itself 
but  also  be  the  nurse  and  feeder  of  many 
nations.  He  commanded  the  workmen  to 
proceed,  while  he  went  to  visit  the  temple 
of  Ammon. 

This  was  a  long  and  painful,  and,  in  two 
respects,  a  dangerous  journey;  first,  if  they 
should  lose  their  provision  of  water,  as  for 
several  days  none  could  be  obtained;  and,  sec¬ 
ondly,  if  a  violent  south  wind  should  rise  upon 
them,  while  they  were  travelling  through  the 
wide  extent  of  deep  sands,  as  it  is  said  to  have 
done  when  Cambyses  led  his  army  that  way, 
blowing  the  sand  together  in  heaps,  and  rais¬ 
ing,  as  it  were,  the  whole  desert  like  a  sea  upon 
them,  till  fifty  thousand  were  swallowed  up 
and  destroyed  by  it. 

All  these  difficulties  were  weighed  and  rep¬ 
resented  to  him;  but  Alexander  was  not  easily 
to  be  diverted  from  anything  he  was  bent  up- 


553 

on.  For  fortune  having  hitherto  seconded  him 
in  his  designs,  made  him  resolute  and  firm  in 
his  opinions,  and  the  boldness  of  his  temper 
raised  a  sort  of  passion  in  him  for  surmount¬ 
ing  difficulties,  as  if  it  were  not  enough  to  be 
always  victorious  in  the  field,  unless  places  and 
seasons  and  nature  herself  submitted  to  him. 

In  this  journey,  the  relief  and  assistance  the 
gods  afforded  him  in  his  distresses  were  more 
remarkable,  and  obtained  greater  belief  than 
the  oracles  he  received  afterwards,  which,  how¬ 
ever,  were  valued  and  credited  the  more  on 
account  of  those  occurrences. 

For  first,  plentiful  rains  that  fell  preserved 
them  from  any  fear  of  perishing  by  drought, 
and,  allaying  the  extreme  dryness  of  the  sand, 
which  now  became  moist  and  firm  to  travel  on, 
cleared  and  purified  the  air.  Besides  this,  when 
they  were  out  of  their  way,  and  were  wander¬ 
ing  up  and  down,  because  the  marks  which 
were  wont  to  direct  the  guides  were  disordered 
and  lost,  they  were  set  right  again  by  some  rav¬ 
ens,  which  flew  before  them  when  on  their 
march,  and  waited  for  them  when  they  lin¬ 
gered  and  fell  behind;  and  the  greatest  miracle, 
as  Callisthenes  tells  us,  was  that  if  any  of  the 
company  went  astray  in  the  night,  they  never 
ceased  croaking  and  making  a  noise  till  by  that 
means  they  had  brought  them  into  the  right 
way  again. 

Having  passed  through  the  wilderness,  they 
came  to  the  place  where  the  high  priest,  at  the 
first  salutation,  bade  Alexander  welcome  from 
his  father  Ammon.  And  being  asked  by  him 
whether  any  of  his  father’s  murderers  had  es¬ 
caped  punishment,  he  charged  him  to  speak 
with  more  respect,  since  his  was  not  a  mortal 
father.  Then  Alexander,  changing  his  expres¬ 
sion,  desired  to  know  of  him  if  any  of  those 
who  murdered  Philip  were  yet  unpunished, 
and  further  concerning  dominion,  whether  the 
empire  of  the  world  was  reserved  for  him? 
This,  the  god  answered,  he  should  obtain,  and 
that  Philip’s  death  was  fully  revenged,  which 
gave  him  so  much  satisfaction  that  he  made 
splendid  offerings  to  Jupiter,  and  gave  the 
priests  very  rich  presents.  This  is  what  most 
authors  write  concerning  the  oracles. 

But  Alexander,  in  a  letter  to  his  mother,  tells 
her  there  were  some  secret  answers,  which  at 
his  return  he  would  communicate  to  her  only. 
Others  say  that  the  priest,  desirous  as  a  piece 
of  courtesy  to  address  him  in  Greek,  “O  Pai- 
dion,”  by  a  slip  in  pronunciation  ended  with 
the  s  instead  of  the  n,  and  said  “O  Paidios,” 
which  mistake  Alexander  was  well  enough 


554 

pleased  with,  and  it  went  for  current  that  the 
oracle  had  called  him  so. 

Among  the  sayings  of  one  Psammon,  a  phi¬ 
losopher,  whom  he  heard  in  Egypt,  he  most 
approved  of  this,  that  all  men  are  governed  by 
God,  because  in  everything,  that  which  is  chief 
and  commands  is  divine.  But  what  he  pro¬ 
nounced  himself  upon  this  subject  was  even 
more  like  a  philosopher,  for  he  said,  God  was 
the  common  father  of  us  all,  but  more  particu¬ 
larly  of  the  best  of  us. 

To  the  barbarians  he  carried  himself  very 
haughtily,  as  if  he  were  fully  persuaded  of  his 
divine  birth  and  parentage;  but  to  the  Grecians 
more  moderately,  and  with  less  affectation  of 
divinity,  except  it  were  once  in  writing  to  the 
Athenians  about  Samos,  when  he  told  them 
that  he  should  not  himself  have  bestowed  upon 
them  that  free  and  glorious  city;  “You  received 
it,”  he  said  “from  the  bounty  of  him  who  at 
that  time  was  called  my  lord  and  father,” 
meaning  Philip.  However,  afterwards  being 
wounded  with  an  arrow,  and  feeling  much 
pain,  he  turned  to  those  about  him,  and  told 
them,  “This,  my  friends,  is  real  flowing  blood, 
not  ichor — 

Such  as  immortal  gods  are  wont  to  shed  ” 

And  another  time,  when  it  thundered  so 
much  that  everybody  was  afraid,  and  Anax- 
archus,  the  sophist,  asking  him  if  he  who  was 
Jupiter’s  son  could  do  anything  like  this, 
“Nay,”  said  Alexander,  laughing,  “I  have  no 
desire  to  be  formidable  to  my  friends,  as  you 
would  have  me,  who  despised  my  table  for 
being  furnished  with  fish,  and  not  with  the 
heads  of  governors  of  provinces.”  For  in  fact 
it  is  related  as  true,  that  Anaxarchus,  seeing  a 
present  of  small  fishes,  which  the  king  sent  to 
Hephaestion,  had  used  this  expression,  in  a  sort 
of  irony,  and  disparagement  of  those  who  un¬ 
dergo  vast  labours  and  encounter  great  haz¬ 
ards  in  pursuit  of  magnificent  objects  which 
after  all  bring  them  little  more  pleasure  or  en¬ 
joyment  than  what  others  have.  From  what  I 
have  said  upon  this  subject,  it  is  apparent  that 
Alexander  in  himself  was  not  foolishly  affect¬ 
ed,  or  had  the  vanity  to  think  himself  really  a 
god,  but  merely  used  his  claims  to  divinity  as 
a  means  of  maintaining  among  other  people 
the  sense  of  his  superiority. 

At  his  return  out  of  Egypt  into  Phoenicia, 
he  sacrificed  and  made  solemn  processions,  to 
which  were  added  shows  of  lyric  dances  and 
tragedies,  remarkable  not  merely  for  the  splen¬ 
dour  of  the  equipage  and  decorations,  but  for 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  competition  among  those  who  exhibited 
them.  For  the  kings  of  Cyprus  were  here  the 
exhibitors,  just  in  the  same  manner  as  at  Ath¬ 
ens  those  who  are  chosen  by  lot  out  of  the 
tribes.  And,  indeed,  they  showed  the  greatest 
emulation  to  outvie  each  other;  especially  Nico- 
creon,  King  of  Salamis,  and  Pasicrates  of  Soli, 
who  furnished  the  chorus,  and  defrayed  the 
expenses  of  the  two  most  celebrated  actors, 
Athenodorus  and  Thessalus,  the  former  per¬ 
forming  for  Pasicrates,  and  the  latter  for  Nico- 
crean.  Thessalus  was  most  favoured  by  Alex¬ 
ander,  though  it  did  not  appear  till  Atheno¬ 
dorus  was  declared  victor  by  the  plurality  of 
votes.  For  then  at  his  going  away,  he  said  the 
judges  deserved  to  be  commended  for  what 
they  had  done,  but  that  he  would  willingly 
have  lost  part  of  his  kingdom  rather  than  to 
have  seen  Thessalus  overcome. 

However,  when  he  understood  Athenodorus 
was  fined  by  the  Athenians  for  being  absent  at 
the  festivals  of  Bacchus,  though  he  refused  his 
request  that  he  would  write  a  letter  in  his  be¬ 
half,  he  gave  him  a  sufficient  sum  to  satisfy 
the  penalty. 

Another  time,  when  Lycon  of  Scarphia  hap¬ 
pened  to  act  with  great  applause  in  the  theatre, 
and  in  a  verse  which  he  introduced  into  the 
comic  part  which  he  was  acting,  begged  for  a 
present  of  ten  talents,  he  laughed  and  gave 
him  the  money. 

Darius  wrote  him  a  letter,  and  sent  friends 
to  intercede  with  him,  requesting  him  to  ac¬ 
cept  as  a  ransom  of  his  captives  the  sum  of  a 
thousand  talents,  and  offering  him  in  exchange 
for  his  amity  and  alliance  all  the  countries  on 
this  side  the  river  Euphrates,  together  with 
one  of  his  daughters  in  marriage.  These  propo¬ 
sitions  he  communicated  to  his  friends,  and 
when  Parmenio  told  him  that,  for  his  part,  if 
he  were  Alexander,  he  should  readily  em¬ 
brace  them,  “So  would  I,”  said  Alexander,  “if 
I  were  Parmenio.”  Accordingly,  his  answer  to 
Darius  was,  that  if  he  would  come  and  yield 
himself  up  into  his  power  he  would  treat  him 
with  all  possible  kindness;  if  not,  he  was  re¬ 
solved  immediately  to  go  himself  and  seek 
him.  But  the  death  of  Darius’s  wife  in  child¬ 
birth  made  him  soon  after  regret  one  part  of 
this  answer,  and  he  showed  evident  marks  of 
grief  at  being  thus  deprived  of  a  further  op¬ 
portunity  of  exercising  his  clemency  and  good 
nature,  which  he  manifested,  however,  as  far 
as  he  could,  by  giving  her  a  most  sumptuous 
funeral. 

Among  the  eunuchs  who  waited  in  the 


ALEXANDER 

queen’s  chamber,  and  were  taken  prisoners 
with  the  women,  there  was  one  Tireus,  who, 
getting  out  of  the  camp,  fled  away  on  horse¬ 
back  to  Darius,  to  inform  him  of  his  wife’s 
death.  He,  when  he  heard  it,  beating  his  head, 
and  bursting  into  tears  and  lamentations,  said, 
“Alas!  how  great  is  the  calamity  of  the  Per¬ 
sians!  Was  it  not  enough  that  their  king’s  con¬ 
sort  and  sister  was  a  prisoner  in  her  lifetime, 
but  she  must,  now  she  is  dead,  also  be  but 
meanly  and  obscurely  buried?”  “O  king,”  re¬ 
plied  the  eunuch,  “as  to  her  funeral  rites,  or 
any  respect  or  honour  that  should  have  been 
shown  in  them,  you  have  not  the  least  reason 
to  accuse  the  ill  fortune  of  your  country;  for 
to  my  knowledge  neither  your  queen  Statira 
when  alive,  nor  your  mother,  nor  children, 
wanted  anything  of  their  former  happy  condi¬ 
tion,  unless  it  were  the  light  of  your  counte¬ 
nance,  which  I  doubt  not  but  the  lord  Oromas- 
des  will  yet  restore  to  its  former  glory.  And 
after  her  decease,  I  assure  you,  she  had  not 
only  all  due  funeral  ornaments,  but  was  hon¬ 
oured  also  with  the  tears  of  your  very  enemies; 
for  Alexander  is  as  gentle  after  victory  as  he  is 
terrible  in  the  field.” 

At  the  hearing  of  these  words,  such  was  the 
grief  and  emotion  of  Darius’s  mind,  that  they 
carried  him  into  extravagant  suspicions;  and 
taking  Tireus  aside  into  a  more  private  part 
of  his  tent,  “Unless  thou  likewise,”  said  he  to 
him,  “hast  deserted  me,  together  with  the  good 
fortune  of  Persia,  and  art  become  a  Macedo¬ 
nian  in  thy  heart;  if  thou  yet  ownest  me  for  thy 
master  Darius,  tell  me,  I  charge  thee,  by  the 
veneration  thou  payest  the  light  of  Mithras, 
and  this  right  hand  of  thy  king,  do  I  not  la¬ 
ment  the  least  of  Statira’s  misfortunes  in  her 
captivity  and  death?  Have  I  not  suffered  some¬ 
thing  more  injurious  and  deplorable  in  her 
lifetime?  And  had  I  not  been  miserable  with 
less  dishonour  if  I  had  met  with  a  more  severe 
and  inhuman  enemy?  For  how  is  it  possible 
a  young  man  as  he  is  should  treat  the  wife 
of  his  opponent  with  so  much  distinction, 
were  it  not  from  some  motive  that  does  me 
disgrace?” 

Whilst  he  was  yet  speaking,  Tireus  threw 
himself  at  his  feet,  and  besought  him  neither  to 
wrong  Alexander  so  much,  nor  his  dead  wife 
and  sister,  as  to  give  utterance  to  any  such 
thoughts,  which  deprived  him  of  the  greatest 
consolation  left  him  in  his  adversity,  the  belief 
that  he  was  overcome  by  a  man  whose  virtues 
raised  him  above  human  nature;  that  he  ought 
to  look  upon  Alexander  with  love  and  admira- 


555 

tion,  who  had  given  no  less  proofs  of  his  con¬ 
tinence  towards  the  Persian  women,  than  of 
his  valour  among  the  men. 

The  eunuch  confirmed  all  he  said  with  sol¬ 
emn  and  dreadful  oaths,  and  was  further  en¬ 
larging  upon  Alexander’s  moderation  and  mag¬ 
nanimity  on  other  occasions,  when  Darius, 
breaking  away  from  him  into  the  other  divi¬ 
sion  of  the  tent,  where  his  friends  and  courtiers 
were,  lifted  up  his  hands  to  heaven  and  uttered 
this  prayer,  “Ye  gods,”  said  he,  “of  my  family, 
and  of  my  kingdom,  if  it  be  possible,  I  beseech 
you  to  restore  the  declining  affairs  of  Persia, 
that  I  may  leave  them  in  as  flourishing  a  con¬ 
dition  as  I  found  them,  and  have  it  in  my  pow¬ 
er  to  make  a  grateful  return  to  Alexander  for 
the  kindness  which  in  my  adversity  he  has 
shown  to  those  who  are  dearest  to  me.  But  if, 
indeed,  the  fatal  time  be  come,  which  is  to  give 
a  period  to  the  Persian  monarchy,  if  our  ruin 
be  a  debt  that  must  be  paid  to  the  divine  jeal¬ 
ousy  and  the  vicissitude  of  things,  then  I  be¬ 
seech  you  grant  that  no  other  man  but  Alexan¬ 
der  may  sit  upon  the  throne  of  Cyrus.”  Such  is 
the  narrative  given  by  the  greater  number  of 
the  historians. 

But  to  return  to  Alexander.  After  he  had  re¬ 
duced  all  Asia  on  this  side  the  Euphrates,  he 
advanced  towards  Darius,  who  was  coming 
down  against  him  with  a  million  of  men.  In 
his  march  a  very  ridiculous  passage  happened. 
The  servants  who  followed  the  camp  for 
sport’s  sake  divided  themselves  into  two  par¬ 
ties,  and  named  the  commander  of  one  of  them 
Alexander,  and  the  other  Darius.  At  first  they 
only  pelted  one  another  with  clods  of  earth,  but 
presently  took  to  their  fists,  and  at  last,  heated 
with  contention,  they  fought  in  good  earnest 
with  stones  and  clubs,  so  that  they  had  much 
ado  to  part  them;  till  Alexander,  upon  hear¬ 
ing  of  it,  ordered  the  two  captains  to  decide  the 
quarrel  by  single  combat,  and  armed  him  who 
bore  his  name  himself,  while  Philotas  did  the 
same  to  him  who  represented  Darius.  The 
whole  army  were  spectators  of  this  encounter, 
willing  from  the  event  of  it  to  derive  an  omen 
of  their  own  future  success.  After  they  had 
fought  stoutly  a  pretty  long  while,  at  last  he 
who  was  called  Alexander  had  the  better,  and 
for  a  reward  of  his  prowess  had  twelve  villages 
given  him,  with  leave  to  wear  the  Persian  dress. 
So  we  are  told  by  Eratosthenes. 

But  the  great  battle  of  all  that  was  fought 
with  Darius  was  not,  as  most  writers  tell  us,  at 
Arbela,  but  at  Gaugamela,  which,  in  their  lan¬ 
guage,  signifies  the  camel’s  house,  forasmuch 


556 

as  one  of  their  ancient  kings  having  escaped 
the  pursuit  of  his  enemies  on  a  swift  camel,  in 
gratitude  to  his  beast,  settled  him  at  this  place, 
with  an  allowance  of  certain  villages  and  rents 
for  his  maintenance. 

It  came  to  pass  that  in  the  month  Boedro- 
mion,  about  the  beginning  of  the  feast  of  Mys¬ 
teries  at  Athens,  there  was  an  eclipse  of  the 
moon,  the  eleventh  night  after  which,  the  two 
armies  being  now  in  view  of  one  another,  Da¬ 
rius  kept  his  men  in  arms,  and  by  torchlight 
took  a  general  review  of  them.  But  Alexander, 
while  his  soldiers  slept,  spent  the  night  before 
his  tent  with  his  diviner,  Aristander,  perform¬ 
ing  certain  mysterious  ceremonies,  and  sacrific¬ 
ing  to  the  god  Fear. 

In  the  meanwhile  the  oldest  of  his  command¬ 
ers,  and  chiefly  Parmenio,  when  they  beheld  all 
the  plain  between  Niphates  and  the  Gordyaean 
mountains  shining  with  the  lights  and  fires 
which  were  made  by  the  barbarians,  and  heard 
the  uncertain  and  confused  sounds  of  voices 
out  of  their  camp,  like  the  distant  roaring  of  a 
vast  ocean,  were  so  amazed  at  the  thoughts  of 
such  a  multitude,  that  after  some  conference 
among  themselves,  they  concluded  it  an  enter¬ 
prise  too  difficult  and  hazardous  for  them  to 
engage  so  numerous  an  enemy  in  the  day,  and 
therefore  meeting  the  king  as  he  came  from 
sacrificing,  besought  him  to  attack  Darius  by 
night,  that  the  darkness  might  conceal  the  dan¬ 
ger  of  the  ensuing  battle. 

To  this  he  gave  them  the  celebrated  answer, 
“I  will  not  steal  a  victory,”  which  though  some 
at  the  time  thought  a  boyish  and  inconsiderate 
speech,  as  if  he  played  with  danger,  others, 
however,  regarded  as  an  evidence  that  he  con¬ 
fided  in  his  present  condition,  and  acted  on  a 
true  judgment  of  the  future,  not  wishing  to 
leave  Darius,  in  case  he  were  worsted,  the  pre¬ 
text  of  trying  his  fortune  again,  which  he  might 
suppose  himself  to  have,  if  he  could  impute  his 
overthrow  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  night,  as 
he  did  before  to  the  mountains,  the  narrow 
passages,  and  the  sea.  For  while  he  had  such 
numerous  forces  and  large  dominions  still  re¬ 
maining,  it  was  not  any  want  of  men  or  arms 
that  could  induce  him  to  give  up  the  war,  but 
only  the  loss  of  all  courage  and  hope  upon  the 
conviction  of  an  undeniable  and  manifest  de¬ 
feat. 

After  they  were  gone  from  him  with  this  an¬ 
swer,  he  laid  himself  down  in  his  tent  and  slept 
the  rest  of  the  night  more  soundly  than  was 
usual  with  him,  to  the  astonishment  of  the 
commanders,  who  came  to  him  early  in  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

morning,  and  were  fain  themselves  to  give  or¬ 
der  that  the  soldiers  should  breakfast.  But  at 
last,  time  not  giving  them  leave  to  wait  any 
longer,  Parmenio  went  to  his  bedside,  and 
called  him  twice  or  thrice  by  his  name,  till  he 
waked  him,  and  then  asked  him  how  it  was 
possible,  when  he  was  to  fight  the  most  impor¬ 
tant  battle  of  all,  he  could  sleep  as  soundly  as  if 
he  were  already  victorious.  “And  are  we  not 
so,  indeed,”  replied  Alexander,  smiling,  “since 
we  are  at  last  relieved  from  the  trouble  of  wan¬ 
dering  in  pursuit  of  Darius  through  a  wide 
and  wasted  country,  hoping  in  vain  that  he 
would  fight  us?” 

And  not  only  before  the  battle,  but  in  the 
height  of  the  danger,  he  showed  himself  great, 
and  manifested  the  self-possession  of  a  just 
foresight  and  confidence.  For  the  battle  for 
some  time  fluctuated  and  was  dubious.  The  left 
wing,  where  Parmenio  commanded,  was  so 
impetuously  charged  by  the  Bactrian  horse  that 
it  was  disordered  and  forced  to  give  ground,  at 
the  same  time  that  Mazaeus  had  sent  a  detach¬ 
ment  round  about  to  fall  upon  those  who 
guarded  the  baggage,  which  so  disturbed  Par¬ 
menio  that  he  sent  messengers  to  acquaint  Al¬ 
exander  that  the  camp  and  baggage  would  be 
all  lost  unless  he  immediately  relieved  the  rear 
by  a  considerable  reinforcement  drawn  out  of 
the  front.  This  message  being  brought  him  just 
as  he  was  giving  the  signal  to  those  about  him 
for  the  onset,  he  bade  them  tell  Parmenio  that 
he  must  have  surely  lost  the  use  of  his  reason, 
and  had  forgotten,  in  his  alarm,  that  soldiers, 
if  victorious,  become  masters  of  their  enemies’ 
baggage;  and  if  defeated,  instead  of  taking  care 
of  their  wealth  or  their  slaves,  have  nothing 
more  to  do  but  to  fight  gallantly  and  die  with 
honour. 

When  he  had  said  this,  he  put  on  his  helmet, 
having  the  rest  of  his  arms  on  before  he  came 
out  of  his  tent,  which  were  a  coat  of  the  Sicilian 
make,  girt  close  about  him,  and  over  that  a 
breastpiece  of  thickly  quilted  linen,  which  was 
taken  among  other  booty  at  the  battle  of  Issus. 
The  helmet,  which  was  made  by  Theophilus, 
though  of  iron,  was  so  well  wrought  and  pol¬ 
ished  that  it  was  as  bright  as  the  most  refined 
silver.  To  this  was  fitted  a  gorget  of  the  same 
metal,  set  with  precious  stones.  His  sword, 
which  was  the  weapon  he  most  used  in  fight, 
was  given  him  by  the  King  of  the  Citieans,  and 
was  of  an  admirable  temper  and  lightness.  The 
belt  which  he  also  wore  in  all  engagements  was 
of  much  richer  workmanship  than  the  rest  of 
his  armour.  It  was  a  work  of  the  ancient  Heli- 


ALEXANDER 

con,  and  had  been  presented  to  him  by  the  Rho¬ 
dians,  as  a  mark  of  their  respect  to  him. 

So  long  as  he  was  engaged  in  drawing  up 
his  men,  or  riding  about  to  give  orders  or  di¬ 
rections,  or  to  view  them,  he  spared  Bucepha¬ 
lus,  who  was  now  growing  old,  and  made  use 
of  another  horse;  but  when  he  was  actually  to 
fight,  he  sent  for  him  again,  and  as  soon  as  he 
was  mounted,  commenced  the  attack. 

He  made  the  longest  address  that  day  to  the 
Thessalians  and  other  Greeks,  who  answered 
him  with  loud  shouts,  desiring  him  to  lead 
them  on  against  the  barbarians,  upon  which  he 
shifted  his  javelin  into  his  left  hand,  and  with 
his  right  lifted  up  towards  heaven,  besought 
the  gods,  as  Callisthenes  tells  us,  that  if  he  was 
of  a  truth  the  son  of  Jupiter,  they  would  be 
pleased  to  assist  and  strengthen  the  Grecians. 
At  the  same  time  the  augur  Aristander,  who 
had  a  white  mantle  about  him,  and  a  crown  of 
gold  on  his  head,  rode  by  and  showed  them  an 
eagle  that  soared  just  over  Alexander,  and  di¬ 
rected  his  flight  towards  the  enemy;  which  so 
animated  the  beholders,  that  after  mutual  en¬ 
couragements  and  exhortations,  the  horse 
charged  at  full  speed,  and  were  followed  in  a 
mass  by  the  whole  phalanx  of  the  foot. 

But  before  they  could  well  come  to  blows 
with  the  first  ranks,  the  barbarians  shrunk 
back,  and  were  hotly  pursued  by  Alexander, 
who  drove  those  that  fled  before  him  into  the 
middle  of  the  battle,  where  Darius  himself  was 
in  person,  whom  he  saw  from  a  distance  over 
the  foremost  ranks,  conspicuous  in  the  midst 
of  his  life-guard,  a  tall  and  fine-looking  man, 
drawn  in  a  lofty  chariot,  defended  by  an  abun¬ 
dance  of  the  best  horse,  who  stood  close  in 
order  about  it  ready  to  receive  the  enemy.  But 
Alexander’s  approach  was  so  terrible,  forcing 
those  who  gave  back  upon  those  who  yet  main¬ 
tained  their  ground,  that  he  beat  down  and 
dispersed  them  almost  all.  Only  a  few  of  the 
bravest  and  valiantest  opposed  the  pursuit,  who 
were  slain  in  their  king’s  presence,  falling  in 
heaps  upon  one  another,  and  in  the  very  pangs 
of  death  striving  to  catch  hold  of  the  horses. 

Darius  now  seeing  all  was  lost,  that  those 
who  were  placed  in  front  to  defend  him  were 
broken  and  beat  back  upon  him,  that  he  could 
not  turn  or  disengage  his  chariot  without  great 
difficulty,  the  wheels  being  clogged  and  entan¬ 
gled  among  the  dead  bodies,  which  lay  in  such 
heaps  as  not  only  stopped,  but  almost  covered 
the  horses,  and  made  them  rear  and  grow  so 
unruly  that  the  frightened  charioteer  could 
govern  them  no  longer,  in  this  extremity  was 


557 

glad  to  quit  his  chariot  and  his  arms,  and 
mounting,  it  is  said,  upon  a  mare  that  had  been 
taken  from  her  foal,  betook  himself  to  flight. 

But  he  had  not  escaped  so  either,  if  Parme- 
nio  had  not  sent  fresh  messengers  to  Alexan¬ 
der,  to  desire  him  to  return  and  assist  him 
against  a  considerable  body  of  the  enemy  which 
yet  stood  together,  and  would  not  give  ground. 
For,  indeed,  Parmenio  is  on  all  hands  accused 
of  having  been  sluggish  and  unserviceable  in 
this  battle,  whether  age  had  impaired  his  cour¬ 
age,  or  that,  as  Callisthenes  says,  he  secretly  dis¬ 
liked  and  envied  Alexander’s  growing  great¬ 
ness.  Alexander,  though  he  was  not  a  little 
vexed  to  be  so  recalled  and  hindered  from  pur¬ 
suing  his  victory,  yet  concealed  the  true  reason 
from  his  men,  and  causing  a  retreat  to  be 
sounded,  as  if  it  were  too  late  to  continue  the 
execution  any  longer,  marched  back  towards 
the  place  of  danger,  and  by  the  way  met  with 
the  news  of  the  enemy’s  total  overthrow  and 
flight. 

This  battle  being  thus  over,  seemed  to  put  a 
period  to  the  Persian  empire;  and  Alexander, 
who  was  now  proclaimed  King  of  Asia,  re¬ 
turned  thanks  to  the  gods  in  magnificent  sacri¬ 
fices,  and  rewarded  his  friends  and  followers 
with  great  sums  of  money,  and  places,  and  gov¬ 
ernments  of  provinces.  Eager  to  gain  honour 
with  the  Grecians,  he  wrote  to  them  that  he 
would  have  all  tyrannies  abolished,  that  they 
might  live  free  according  to  their  own  laws, 
and  specially  to  the  Plataeans,  that  their  city 
should  be  rebuilt,  because  their  ancestors  had 
permitted  their  countrymen  of  old  to  make 
their  territory  the  seat  of  the  war  when  they 
fought  with  the  barbarians  for  their  common 
liberty.  He  sent  also  part  of  the  spoils  into  Italy, 
to  the  Crotoniats,  to  honour  the  zeal  and  cour¬ 
age  of  their  citizen  Phayllus,  the  wrestler,  who, 
in  the  Median  war,  when  the  other  Grecian 
colonies  in  Italy  disowned  Greece,  that  he 
might  have  a  share  in  the  danger,  joined  the 
fleet  at  Salamis,  with  a  vessel  set  forth  at  his 
own  charge.  So  affectionate  was  Alexander  to 
all  kind  of  virtue,  and  so  desirous  to  preserve 
the  memory  of  laudable  actions. 

From  hence  he  marched  through  the  prov¬ 
ince  of  Babylon,  which  immediately  submitted 
to  him,  and  in  Ecbatana  was  much  surprised 
at  the  sight  of  the  place  where  fire  issues  in  a 
continuous  stream,  like  a  spring  of  water,  out 
of  a  cleft  in  the  earth,  and  the  stream  of  naph¬ 
tha,  which,  not  far  from  this  spot,  flows  out  so 
abundantly  as  to  form  a  sort  of  lake.  This  naph¬ 
tha,  in  other  respects  resembling  bitumen,  is 


558 

so  subject  to  take  fire,  that  before  it  touches  the 
flame  it  will  kindle  at  the  very  light  that  sur¬ 
rounds  it,  and  often  inflame  the  intermediate 
air  also.  The  barbarians,  to  show  the  power  and 
nature  of  it,  sprinkled  the  street  that  led  to  the 
king’s  lodgings  with  little  drops  of  it,  and  when 
it  was  almost  night,  stood  at  the  further  end 
with  torches,  which  being  applied  to  the  moist¬ 
ened  places,  the  first  at  once  taking  fire,  instant¬ 
ly,  as  quick  as  a  man  could  think  of  it,  it  caught 
from  one  end  to  another,  in  such  a  manner  that 
the  whole  street  was  one  continued  flame. 

Among  those  who  used  to  wait  on  the  king 
and  find  occasion  to  amuse  him  when  he 
anointed  and  washed  himself,  there  was  one 
Athenophanes,  an  Athenian,  who  desired  him 
to  make  an  experiment  of  the  naphtha  upon 
Stephanus,  who  stood  by  in  the  bathing  place,  a 
youth  with  a  ridiculously  ugly  face,  whose  tal¬ 
ent  was  singing  well,  “For,”  said  he,  “if  it  take 
hold  of  him  and  is  not  put  out,  it  must  unde¬ 
niably  be  allowed  to  be  of  the  most  invincible 
strength.”  The  youth,  as  it  happened,  readily 
consented  to  undergo  the  trial,  and  as  soon  as 
he  was  anointed  and  rubbed  with  it,  his  whole 
body  broke  out  into  such  a  flame,  and  was  so 
seized  by  the  fire,  that  Alexander  was  in  the 
greatest  perplexity  and  alarm  for  him,  and  not 
without  reason;  for  nothing  could  have  pre¬ 
vented  his  being  consumed  by  it,  if  by  good 
chance  there  had  not  been  people  at  hand  with 
a  great  many  vessels  of  water  for  the  service  of 
the  bath,  with  all  which  they  had  much  ado  to 
extinguish  the  fire;  and  his  body  was  so  burned 
all  over  that  he  was  not  cured  of  it  for  a  good 
while  after. 

Thus  it  is  not  without  some  plausibility  that 
they  endeavour  to  reconcile  the  fable  to  truth, 
who  say  this  was  the  drug  in  the  tragedies  with 
which  Medea  anointed  the  crown  and  veil 
which  she  gave  to  Creon’s  daughter.  For  nei¬ 
ther  the  things  themselves,  nor  the  fire,  could 
kindle  of  their  own  accord,  but  being  prepared 
for  it  by  the  naphtha,  they  imperceptibly  at¬ 
tracted  and  caught  a  flame  which  happened  to 
be  brought  near  them.  For  the  rays  and  ema¬ 
nations  of  fire  at  a  distance  have  no  other  effect 
upon  some  bodies  than  bare  light  and  heat,  but 
in  others,  where  they  meet  with  airy  dryness, 
and  also  sufficient  rich  moisture,  they  collect 
themselves  and  soon  kindle  and  create  a  trans¬ 
formation.  The  manner,  however,  of  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  naphtha  admits  of  a  diversity  of 
opinion  ...  or  whether  this  liquid  substance 
that  feeds  the  flame  does  not  rather  proceed 
from  a  soil  that  is  unctuous  and  productive  of 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

fire,  as  that  of  the  province  of  Babylon  is,  where 
the  ground  is  so  very  hot  that  oftentimes  the 
grains  of  barley  leap  up  and  are  thrown  out,  as 
if  the  violent  inflammation  had  made  the  earth 
throb;  and  in  the  extreme  heats  the  inhabitants 
are  wont  to  sleep  upon  skins  filled  with  water. 

Harpalus,  who  was  left  governor  of  this 
country,  and  was  desirous  to  adorn  the  palace 
gardens  and  walks  with  Grecian  plants,  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  raising  all  but  ivy,  which  the  earth 
would  not  bear,  but  constantly  killed.  For  be¬ 
ing  a  plant  that  loves  a  cold  soil,  the  temper  of 
this  hot  and  fiery  earth  was  improper  for  it. 
But  such  digressions  as  these  the  impatient 
reader  will  be  more  willing  to  pardon  if  they 
are  kept  within  a  moderate  compass. 

At  the  taking  of  Susa,  Alexander  found  in 
the  palace  forty  thousand  talents  in  money 
ready  coined,  besides  an  unspeakable  quantity 
of  other  furniture  and  treasure;  amongst  which 
was  five  thousand  talents’  worth  of  Hermio- 
nian  purple,  that  had  been  laid  up  there  an 
hundred  and  ninety  years,  and  yet  kept  its  col¬ 
our  as  fresh  and  lively  as  at  first.  The  reason  of 
which,  they  say,  is  that  in  dyeing  the  purple 
they  made  use  of  honey,  and  of  white  oil  in  the 
white  tincture,  both  which  after  the  like  space 
of  time  preserve  the  clearness  and  brightness  of 
their  lustre.  Dinon  also  relates  that  the  Persian 
kings  had  water  fetched  from  the  Nile  and 
the  Danube,  which  they  laid  up  in  their  trea¬ 
suries  as  a  sort  of  testimony  of  the  greatness  of 
their  power  and  universal  empire. 

The  entrance  into  Persia  was  through  a  most 
difficult  country,  and  was  guarded  by  the  no¬ 
blest  of  the  Persians,  Darius  himself  having  es¬ 
caped  further.  Alexander,  however,  chanced  to 
find  a  guide  in  exact  correspondence  with  what 
the  Pythia  had  foretold  when  he  was  a  child, 
that  a  lycus  should  conduct  him  into  Persia. 
For  by  such  an  one,  whose  father  was  a  Lycian, 
and  his  mother  a  Persian,  and  who  spoke  both 
languages,  he  was  now  led  into  the  country,  by 
a  way  something  about,  yet  without  fetching 
any  considerable  compass. 

Here  a  great  many  of  the  prisoners  were  put 
to  the  sword,  of  which  he  himself  gives  this  ac¬ 
count,  that  he  commanded  them  to  be  killed  in 
the  belief  that  it  would  be  for  his  advantage. 
Nor  was  the  money  found  here  less,  he  says, 
than  at  Susa,  besides  other  movables  and  trea¬ 
sure,  as  much  as  ten  thousand  pair  of  mules  and 
five  thousand  camels  could  well  carry  away. 
Amongst  other  things  he  happened  to  observe 
a  large  statue  of  Xerxes  thrown  carelessly  down 
to  the  ground  in  the  confusion  made  by  the 


ALEXANDER 

multitude  of  soldiers  pressing  into  the  palace. 
He  stood  still,  and  accosting  it  as  if  it  had  been 
alive,  “Shall  we,”  said  he,  “neglectfully  pass 
thee  by,  now  thou  are  prostrate  on  the  ground 
because  thou  once  invadedst  Greece,  or  shall 
we  erect  thee  again  in  consideration  of  the 
greatness  of  thy  mind  and  thy  other  virtues?” 
But  at  last,  after  he  had  paused  some  time,  and 
silently  considered  with  himself,  he  went  on 
without  taking  any  further  notice  of  it. 

In  this  place  he  took  up  his  winter  quarters, 
and  stayed  four  months  to  refresh  his  soldiers. 
It  is  related  that  the  first  time  he  sat  on  the 
royal  throne  of  Persia  under  the  canopy  of 
gold,  Demaratus  the  Corinthian,  who  was 
much  attached  to  him  and  had  been  one  of  his 
father’s  friends,  wept,  in  an  old  man’s  manner, 
and  deplored  the  misfortune  of  those  Greeks 
whom  death  had  deprived  of  the  satisfaction  of 
seeing  Alexander  seated  on  the  throne  of  Da¬ 
rius. 

From  hence  designing  to  march  against  Da¬ 
rius,  before  he  set  out  he  diverted  himself  with 
his  officers  at  an  entertainment  of  drinking  and 
other  pastimes,  and  indulged  so  far  as  to  let 
everyone’s  mistress  sit  by  and  drink  with  them. 

The  most  celebrated  of  them  was  Thais,  an 
Athenian,  mistress  of  Ptolemy,  who  was  after¬ 
wards  King  of  Egypt.  She,  pardy  as  a  sort  of 
well-turned  compliment  to  Alexander,  partly 
out  of  sport,  as  the  drinking  went  on,  at  last 
was  carried  so  far  as  to  utter  a  saying,  not 
misbecoming  her  native  country’s  character, 
though  somewhat  too  lofty  for  her  own  condi¬ 
tion.  She  said  it  was  indeed  some  recompense 
for  the  toils  she  had  undergone  in  following 
the  camp  all  over  Asia,  that  she  was  that  day 
treated  in,  and  could  exult  over,  the  stately 
palace  of  the  Persian  monarchs.  But,  she  added, 
it  would  please  her  much  better  if,  while  the 
king  looked  on,  she  might  in  sport,  with  her 
own  hands,  set  fire  to  the  court  of  that  Xerxes 
who  reduced  the  city  of  Athens  to  ashes,  that  it 
might  be  recorded  to  posterity  that  the  women 
who  followed  Alexander  had  taken  a  severer 
revenge  on  the  Persians  for  the  sufferings  and 
affronts  of  Greece,  than  all  the  famed  com¬ 
manders  had  been  able  to  do  by  sea  or  land. 

What  she  said  was  received  with  such  uni¬ 
versal  liking  and  murmurs  of  applause,  and  so 
seconded  by  the  encouragement  and  eagerness 
of  the  company,  that  the  king  himself,  persuad¬ 
ed  to  be  of  the  party,  started  from  his  seat,  and 
with  a  chaplet  of  flowers  on  his  head  and  a 
lighted  torch  in  his  hand,  led  them  the  way, 
while  they  went  after  him  in  a  riotous  manner, 


559 

dancing  and  making  loud  cries  about  the  place; 
which  when  the  rest  of  the  Macedonians  per¬ 
ceived,  they  also  in  great  delight  ran  thither 
with  torches;  for  they  hoped  the  burning  and 
destruction  of  the  royal  palace  was  an  argu¬ 
ment  that  he  looked  homeward,  and  had  no 
design  to  reside  among  the  barbarians.  Thus 
some  writers  give  their  account  of  this  action, 
while  others  say  it  was  done  deliberately;  how¬ 
ever,  all  agree  that  he  soon  repented  of  it,  and 
gave  order  to  put  out  the  fire. 

Alexander  was  naturally  most  munificent, 
and  grew  more  so  as  his  fortune  increased,  ac¬ 
companying  what  he  gave  with  that  courtesy 
and  freedom  which,  to  speak  truth,  is  neces¬ 
sary  to  make  a  benefit  really  obliging.  I  will 
give  a  few  instances  of  this  kind. 

Ariston,  the  captain  of  the  Paeonians,  having 
killed  an  enemy,  brought  his  head  to  show 
him,  and  told  him  that  in  his  country  such  a 
present  was  recompensed  with  a  cup  of  gold. 
“With  an  empty  one,”  said  Alexander,  smil¬ 
ing,  “but  I  drink  to  you  in  this,  which  I  give 
you  full  of  wine.” 

Another  time,  as  one  of  the  common  soldiers 
was  driving  a  mule  laden  with  some  of  the 
king’s  treasure,  the  beast  grew  tired,  and  the 
soldier  took  it  upon  his  own  back,  and  began 
to  march  with  it,  till  Alexander  seeing  the  man 
so  overcharged  asked  what  was  the  matter; 
and  when  he  was  informed,  just  as  he  was 
ready  to  lay  down  his  burden  for  weariness, 
“Do  not  faint  now,”  said  he  to  him,  “but  finish 
the  journey,  and  carry  what  you  have  there  to 
your  own  tent  for  yourself.” 

He  was  always  more  displeased  with  those 
who  would  not  accept  of  what  he  gave  than 
with  those  who  begged  of  him.  And  therefore 
he  wrote  to  Phocion,  that  he  would  not  own 
him  for  his  friend  any  longer  if  he  refused  his 
presents. 

He  had  never  given  anything  to  Serapion, 
one  of  the  youths  that  played  at  ball  with  him, 
because  he  did  not  ask  of  him,  till  one  day,  it 
coming  to  Serapion’s  turn  to  play,  he  still 
threw  the  ball  to  others,  and  when  the  king 
asked  him  why  he  did  not  direct  it  to  him, 
“Because  you  do  not  ask  for  it,”  said  he;  which 
answer  pleased  him  so  that  he  was  very  liberal 
to  him  afterwards. 

One  Proteas,  a  pleasant,  jesting,  drinking 
fellow,  having  incurred  his  displeasure,  got  his 
friends  to  intercede  for  him,  and  begged  his 
pardon  himself  with  tears,  which  at  last  pre¬ 
vailed,  and  Alexander  declared  he  was  friends 
with  him.  “I  cannot  believe  it,”  said  Proteas, 


560 

“unless  you  first  give  me  some  pledge  of  it.” 
The  king  understood  his  meaning,  and  pres¬ 
ently  ordered  five  talents  to  be  given  him. 

How  magnificent  he  was  in  enriching  his 
friends,  and  those  who  attended  on  his  person, 
appears  by  a  letter  which  Olympias  wrote  to 
him,  where  she  told  him  he  should  reward  and 
honour  those  about  him  in  a  more  moderate 
way.  “For  now,”  said  she,  “you  make  them 
all  equal  to  kings,  you  give  them  power  and 
opportunity  of  making  many  friends  of  their 
own,  and  in  the  meantime  you  leave  yourself 
destitute.”  She  often  wrote  to  him  to  this  pur¬ 
pose,  and  he  never  communicated  her  letters  to 
anybody,  unless  it  were  one  which  he  opened 
when  Hephaestion  was  by,  whom  he  permitted, 
as  his  custom  was,  to  read  it  along  with  him; 
but  then  as  soon  as  he  had  done,  he  took  off 
his  ring,  and  set  the  seal  upon  Hephaestion’s 
lips. 

Mazaeus,  who  was  the  most  considerable 
man  in  Darius’s  court,  had  a  son  who  was  al¬ 
ready  governor  of  a  province.  Alexander  be¬ 
stowed  another  upon  him  that  was  better;  he, 
however,  modestly  refused,  and  told  him,  in¬ 
stead  of  one  Darius,  he  went  the  way  to  make 
many  Alexanders. 

To  Parmenio  he  gave  Bagoas’s  house,  in 
which  he  found  a  wardrobe  of  apparel  worth 
more  than  a  thousand  talents. 

He  wrote  to  Antipater,  commanding  him  to 
keep  a  life-guard  about  him  for  the  security  of 
his  person  against  conspiracies. 

To  his  mother  he  sent  many  presents,  but 
would  never  suffer  her  to  meddle  with  matters 
of  state  or  war,  not  indulging  her  busy  temper, 
and  when  she  fell  out  with  him  on  this  ac¬ 
count,  he  bore  her  ill-humour  very  patiently. 
Nay  more,  when  he  read  a  long  letter  from 
Antipater  full  of  accusations  against  her,  “An¬ 
tipater,”  he  said,  “does  not  know  that  one  tear 
of  a  mother  effaces  a  thousand  such  letters  as 
these.” 

But  when  he  perceived  his  favourites  grow 
so  luxurious  and  extravagant  in  their  way  of 
living  and  expenses  that  Hagnon,  the  Teian, 
wore  silver  nails  in  his  shoes,  that  Leonnatus 
employed  several  camels  only  to  bring  him 
powder  out  of  Egypt  to  use  when  he  wrestled, 
and  that  Philotas  had  hunting  nets  a  hundred 
furlongs  in  length,  that  more  used  precious 
ointment  than  plain  oil  when  they  went  to 
bathe,  and  that  they  carried  about  servants 
everywhere  with  them  to  rub  them  and  wait 
upon  them  in  their  chambers,  he  reproved 
them  in  gentle  and  reasonable  terms,  telling 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

them  he  wondered  that  they  who  had  been  en¬ 
gaged  in  so  many  single  battles  did  not  know 
by  experience,  that  those  who  labour  sleep 
more  sweetly  and  soundly  than  those  who  are 
laboured  for,  and  could  fail  to  see  by  compar¬ 
ing  the  Persians’  manner  of  living  with  their 
own  that  it  was  the  most  abject  and  slavish 
condition  to  be  voluptuous,  but  the  most  noble 
and  royal  to  undergo  pain  and  labour.  He 
argued  with  them  further,  how  it  was  possible 
for  any  one  who  pretended  to  be  a  soldier,  ei¬ 
ther  to  look  well  after  his  horse,  or  to  keep  his 
armour  bright  and  in  good  order,  who  thought 
it  much  to  let  his  hands  be  serviceable  to  what 
was  nearest  to  him,  his  own  body.  “Are  you 
still  to  learn,”  said  he,  “that  the  end  and  per¬ 
fection  of  our  victories  is  to  avoid  the  vices  and 
infirmities  of  those  whom  we  subdue?” 

And  to  strengthen  his  precepts  by  example, 
he  applied  himself  now  more  vigorously  than 
ever  to  hunting  and  warlike  expeditions,  em¬ 
bracing  all  opportunities  of  hardship  and  dan¬ 
ger,  insomuch  that  a  Lacedaemonian,  who  was 
there  on  an  embassy  to  him,  and  chanced  to  be 
by  when  he  encountered  with  and  mastered  a 
huge  lion,  told  him  he  had  fought  gallantly 
with  the  beast,  which  of  the  two  should  be 
king.  Craterus  caused  a  representation  to  be 
made  of  his  adventure,  consisting  of  the  lion 
and  the  dogs,  of  the  king  engaged  with  the 
lion,  and  himself  coming  in  to  his  assistance, 
all  expressed  in  figures  of  brass,  some  of  which 
were  by  Lysippus,  and  the  rest  by  Leochares; 
and  had  it  dedicated  in  the  temple  of  Apollo 
at  Delphi.  Alexander  exposed  his  person  to 
danger  in  this  manner,  with  the  object  both  of 
inuring  himself  and  inciting  others  to  the  per¬ 
formance  of  brave  and  virtuous  actions. 

But  his  followers,  who  were  grown  rich,  and 
consequently  proud,  longed  to  indulge  them¬ 
selves  in  pleasure  and  idleness,  and  were  weary 
of  marches  and  expeditions,  and  at  last  went 
on  so  far  as  to  censure  and  speak  ill  of  him. 
All  which  at  first  he  bore  very  patiently,  say¬ 
ing  it  became  a  king  well  to  do  good  to  others, 
and  be  evil  spoken  of. 

Meantime,  on  the  smallest  occasions  that 
called  for  a  show  of  kindness  to  his  friends, 
there  was  every  indication  on  his  part  of  ten¬ 
derness  and  respect.  Hearing  Peucestes  was 
bitten  by  a  bear,  he  wrote  to  him  that  he  took 
it  unkindly  he  should  send  others  notice  of  it 
and  not  make  him  acquainted  with  it;  “But 
now,”  said  he,  “since  it  is  so,  let  me  know  how 
you  do,  and  whether  any  of  your  companions 
forsook  you  when  you  were  in  danger,  that  I 


ALEXANDER 

may  punish  them.”  He  sent  Hephaestion,  who 
was  absent  about  some  business,  word  how, 
while  they  were  fighting  for  their  diversion 
with  an  ichneumon,  Craterus  was  by  chance 
run  through  both  thighs  with  Perdiccas’s  jave¬ 
lin.  And  upon  Peucestes’s  recovery  from  a  fit 
of  sickness,  he  sent  a  letter  of  thanks  to  his 
physician  Alexippus.  When  Craterus  was  ill, 
he  saw  a  vision  in  his  sleep,  after  which  he  of¬ 
fered  sacrifices  for  his  health,  and  bade  him 
do  so  likewise.  He  wrote  also  to  Pausanias, 
the  physician,  who  was  about  to  purge  Crate¬ 
rus  with  hellebore,  partly  out  of  an  anxious 
concern  for  him,  and  partly  to  give  him  a  cau¬ 
tion  how  he  used  that  medicine. 

He  was  so  tender  of  his  friends’  reputation 
that  he  imprisoned  Ephialtes  and  Cissus,  who 
brought  him  the  first  news  of  Harpalus’s  flight 
and  withdrawal  from  his  service,  as  if  they  had 
falsely  accused  him. 

When  he  sent  the  old  and  infirm  soldiers 
home,  Eurylochus,  a  citizen  of  ALgse,  got  his 
name  enrolled  among  the  sick,  though  he  ailed 
nothing,  which  being  discovered,  he  confessed 
he  was  in  love  with  a  young  woman  named 
Telesippa,  and  wanted  to  go  along  with  her  to 
the  seaside.  Alexander  inquired  to  whom  the 
woman  belonged,  and  being  told  she  was  a  free 
courtesan,  “I  will  assist  you,”  said  he  to  Eury¬ 
lochus,  “in  your  amour  if  your  mistress  be  to 
be  gained  either  by  presents  or  persuasions; 
but  we  must  use  no  other  means,  because  she 
is  free-born.” 

It  is  surprising  to  consider  upon  what  slight 
occasions  he  would  write  letters  to  serve  his 
friends.  As  when  he  wrote  one  in  which  he 
gave  order  to  search  for  a  youth  that  belonged 
to  Seleucus,  who  was  run  away  into  Cilicia; 
and  in  another  thanked  and  commended  Peu- 
cestes  for  apprehending  Nicon,  a  servant  of 
Craterus;  and  in  one  to  Megabyzus,  concern¬ 
ing  a  slave  that  had  taken  sanctuary  in  a  tem¬ 
ple,  gave  direction  that  he  should  not  meddle 
with  him  while  he  was  there,  but  if  he  could 
entice  him  out  by  fair  means,  then  he  gave  him 
leave  to  seize  him.  It  is  reported  of  him  that 
when  he  first  sat  in  judgment  upon  capital 
causes  he  would  lay  his  hand  upon  one  of  his 
ears  while  the  accuser  spoke,  to  keep  it  free  and 
unprejudiced  in  behalf  of  the  party  accused. 
But  afterwards  such  a  multitude  of  accusations 
were  brought  before  him,  and  so  many  proved 
true,  that  he  lost  his  tenderness  of  heart,  and 
gave  credit  to  those  also  that  were  false;  and 
especially  when  anybody  spoke  ill  of  him,  he 
would  be  transported  out  of  his  reason,  and 


561 

show  himself  cruel  and  inexorable,  valuing 
his  glory  and  reputation  beyond  his  life  or 
kingdom. 

He  now,  as  we  said,  set  forth  to  seek  Darius, 
expecting  he  should  be  put  to  the  hazard  of 
another  battle,  but  heard  he  was  taken  and  se¬ 
cured  by  Bessus,  upon  which  news  he  sent 
home  the  Thessalians,  and  gave  them  a  largess 
of  two  thousand  talents  over  and  above  the 
pay  that  was  due  to  them.  This  long  and  pain¬ 
ful  pursuit  of  Darius — for  in  eleven  days  he 
marched  thirty-three  hundred  furlongs — har¬ 
assed  his  soldiers  so  that  most  of  them  were 
ready  to  give  it  up,  chiefly  for  want  of  water. 

While  they  were  in  this  distress,  it  happen¬ 
ed  that  some  Macedonians  who  had  fetched 
water  in  skins  upon  their  mules  from  a  river 
they  had  found  out  came  about  noon  to  the 
place  where  Alexander  was,  and  seeing  him 
almost  choked  with  thirst,  presently  filled  an 
helmet  and  offered  it  him.  He  asked  them  to 
whom  they  were  carrying  the  water;  they  told 
him  to  their  children,  adding,  that  if  his  life 
were  but  saved,  it  was  no  matter  for  them, 
they  should  be  able  well  enough  to  repair  that 
loss,  though  they  all  perished.  Then  he  took 
the  helmet  into  his  hands,  and  looking  round 
about,  when  he  saw  all  those  who  were  near 
him  stretching  their  heads  out  and  looking 
earnestly  after  the  drink,  he  returned  it  again 
with  thanks  without  tasting  a  drop  of  it. 
“For,”  said  he,  “if  I  alone  should  drink,  the 
rest  will  be  out  of  heart.”  The  soldiers  no  soon¬ 
er  took  notice  of  his  temperance  and  magna¬ 
nimity  upon  this  occasion,  but  they  one  and  all 
cried  out  to  him  to  lead  them  forward  boldly, 
and  began  whipping  on  their  horses.  For 
whilst  they  had  such  a  king  they  said  they  de¬ 
fied  both  weariness  and  thirst,  and  looked  up¬ 
on  themselves  to  be  little  less  than  immortal. 

But  though  they  were  all  equally  cheerful 
and  willing,  yet  not  above  threescore  horse 
were  able,  it  is  said,  to  keep  up,  and  to  fall  in 
with  Alexander  upon  the  enemy’s  camp,  where 
they  rode  over  abundance  of  gold  and  silver 
that  lay  scattered  about,  and  passing  by  a  great 
many  chariots  full  of  women  that  wandered 
here  and  there  for  want  of  drivers,  they  en¬ 
deavoured  to  overtake  the  first  of  those  that 
fled,  in  hopes  to  meet  with  Darius  among 
them. 

And  at  last,  after  much  trouble,  they  found 
him  lying  in  a  chariot,  wounded  all  over  with 
darts,  just  at  the  point  of  death.  However,  he 
desired  they  would  give  him  some  drink,  and 
when  he  had  drunk  a  little  cold  water,  he  told 


562 

Polystratus,  who  gave  it  him,  that  it  had  be¬ 
come  the  last  extremity  of  his  ill  fortune  to 
receive  benefits  and  not  be  able  to  return  them. 
“But  Alexander/’  said  he,  “whose  kindness  to 
my  mother,  my  wife,  and  my  children  I  hope 
the  gods  will  recompense,  will  doubtless  thank 
you  for  your  humanity  to  me.  Tell  him,  there¬ 
fore,  in  token  of  my  acknowledgment,  I  give 
him  this  right  hand,”  with  which  words  he 
took  hold  of  Polystratus’s  hand  and  died. 
When  Alexander  came  up  to  them,  he  showed 
manifest  tokens  of  sorrow,  and  taking  off  his 
own  cloak,  threw  it  upon  the  body  to  cover  it. 
And  some  time  afterwards,  when  Bessus  was 
taken,  he  ordered  him  to  be  torn  in  pieces  in 
this  manner.  They  fastened  him  to  a  couple  of 
trees  which  were  bound  down  so  as  to  meet, 
and  then  being  let  loose,  with  a  great  force  re¬ 
turned  to  their  places,  each  of  them  carrying 
that  part  of  the  body  along  with  it  that  was 
tied  to  it.  Darius’s  body  was  laid  in  state,  and 
sent  to  his  mother  with  pomp  suitable  to  his 
quality.  His  brother  Exathres,  Alexander  re¬ 
ceived  into  the  number  of  his  intimate  friends. 

And  now  with  the  flower  of  his  army  he 
marched  into  Hyrcania,  where  he  saw  a  large 
bay  of  an  open  sea,  apparently  not  much  less 
than  the  Euxine,  with  water,  however,  sweeter 
than  that  of  other  seas,  but  could  learn  nothing 
of  certainty  concerning  it,  further  than  that  in 
all  probability  it  seemed  to  him  to  be  an  arm 
issuing  from  the  lake  of  Maeotis.  However,  the 
naturalists  were  better  informed  of  the  truth, 
and  had  given  an  account  of  it  many  years  be¬ 
fore  Alexander’s  expedition;  that  of  four  gulfs 
which  out  of  the  main  sea  enter  into  the  con¬ 
tinent,  this,  known  indifferently  as  the  Cas¬ 
pian  and  as  the  Hyrcanian  Sea,  is  the  most 
northern. 

Here  the  barbarians,  unexpectedly  meeting 
with  those  who  led  Bucephalus,  took  them 
prisoners,  and  carried  the  horse  away  with 
them,  at  which  Alexander  was  so  much  vexed 
that  he  sent  an  herald  to  let  them  know  he 
would  put  them  all  to  the  sword,  men,  women, 
and  children,  without  mercy,  if  they  did  not 
restore  him.  But  on  their  doing  so,  and  at  the 
same  time  surrendering  their  cities  into  his 
hands,  he  not  only  treated  them  kindly,  but 
also  paid  a  ransom  for  his  horse  to  those  who 
took  him. 

From  hence  he  marched  into  Parthia,  where 
not  having  much  to  do,  he  first  put  on  the  bar¬ 
baric  dress,  perhaps  with  the  view  of  making 
the  work  of  civilising  them  the  easier,  as  noth¬ 
ing  gains  more  upon  men  than  a  conformity 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

to  their  fashions  and  customs.  Or  it  may  have 
been  as  a  first  trial,  whether  the  Macedonians 
might  be  brought  to  adore  him  as  the  Persians 
did  their  kings,  by  accustoming  them  by  little 
and  little  to  bear  with  the  alteration  of  his  rule 
and  course  of  life  in  other  things. 

However,  he  followed  not  the  Median  fash¬ 
ion,  which  was  altogether  foreign  and  un¬ 
couth,  and  adopted  neither  the  trousers  nor  the 
sleeved  vest,  nor  the  tiara  for  the  head,  but 
taking  a  middle  way  between  the  Persian 
mode  and  the  Macedonian,  so  contrived  his 
habit  that  it  was  not  so  flaunting  as  the  one, 
and  yet  more  pompous  and  magnificent  than 
the  other. 

At  first  he  wore  this  habit  only  when  he  con¬ 
versed  with  the  barbarians,  or  within  doors, 
among  his  intimate  friends  and  companions, 
but  afterwards  he  appeared  in  it  abroad,  when 
he  rode  out,  and  at  public  audiences,  a  sight 
which  the  Macedonians  beheld  with  grief;  but 
they  so  respected  his  other  virtues  and  good 
qualities  that  they  felt  it  reasonable  in  some 
things  to  gratify  his  fancies  and  his  passion  of 
glory,  in  pursuit  of  which  he  hazarded  himself 
so  far,  that,  besides  his  other  adventures,  he 
had  but  lately  been  wounded  in  the  leg  by  an 
arrow,  which  had  so  shattered  the  shank-bone 
that  splinters  were  taken  out.  And  on  another 
occasion  he  received  a  violent  blow  with  a 
stone  upon  the  nape  of  the  neck,  which  dim¬ 
med  his  sight  for  a  good  while  afterwards. 
And  yet  all  this  could  not  hinder  him  from  ex¬ 
posing  himself  freely  to  any  dangers,  insomuch 
that  he  passed  the  river  Orexartes,  which  he 
took  to  be  the  Tanais,  and  putting  the  Scyth¬ 
ians  to  flight,  followed  them  above  a  hun¬ 
dred  furlongs,  though  suffering  all  the  time 
from  a  diarrhoea. 

Here  many  affirm  that  the  Amazon  came  to 
give  him  a  visit.  So  Clitarchus,  Polyclitus, 
Onesicritus,  Antigenes,  and  Ister  tell  us.  But 
Aristobulus  and  Chares,  who  held  the  office  of 
reporter  of  requests,  Ptolemy  and  Anticlides, 
Philon  the  Theban,  Philip  of  Theangela,  He- 
cataeus  the  Eretrian,  Philip  the  Chalcidian,  and 
Duris  the  Samian,  say  it  is  wholly  a  fiction. 
And  truly  Alexander  himself  seems  to  confirm 
the  latter  statement,  for  in  a  letter  in  which  he 
gives  Antipater  an  account  of  all  that  happen¬ 
ed,  he  tells  him  that  the  King  of  Scythia  offer¬ 
ed  him  his  daughter  in  marriage,  but  makes 
no  mention  at  all  of  the  Amazon.  And  many 
years  after,  when  Onesicritus  read  this  story  in 
his  fourth  book  to  Lysimachus,  who  then 
reigned,  the  king  laughed  quietly  and  asked, 


ALEXANDER 

“Where  could  I  have  been  at  that  time?”  But 
it  signifies  little  to  Alexander  whether  this  be 
credited  or  no. 

Certain  it  is,  that  apprehending  the  Mace¬ 
donians  would  be  weary  of  pursuing  the  war, 
he  left  the  greater  part  of  them  in  their  quar¬ 
ters;  and  having  with  him  in  Hyrcania  the 
choice  of  his  men  only,  amounting  to  twenty 
thousand  foot  and  three  thousand  horse,  he 
spoke  to  them  to  this  effect:  That  hitherto  the 
barbarians  had  seen  them  no  otherwise  than 
as  it  were  in  a  dream,  and  if  they  should  think 
of  returning  when  they  had  only  alarmed 
Asia,  and  not  conquered  it,  their  enemies 
would  set  upon  them  as  upon  so  many  women. 
However,  he  told  them  he  would  keep  none  of 
them  with  him  against  their  will,  they  might 
go  if  they  pleased;  he  should  merely  enter  his 
protest,  that  when  on  his  way  to  make  the 
Macedonians  the  masters  of  the  world,  he  was 
left  alone  with  a  few  friends  and  volunteers. 
This  is  almost  word  for  word,  as  he  wrote  in  a 
letter  to  Antipater,  where  he  added,  that  when 
he  had  thus  spoken  to  them,  they  all  cried  out, 
they  would  go  along  with  him  whithersoever 
it  was  his  pleasure  to  lead  them.  After  succeed¬ 
ing  with  these,  it  was  no  hard  matter  for  him 
to  bring  over  the  multitude,  which  easily  fol¬ 
lowed  the  example  of  their  betters. 

Now,  also,  he  more  and  more  accommo¬ 
dated  himself  in  his  way  of  living  to  that  of  the 
natives,  and  tried  to  bring  them  also  as  near 
as  he  could  to  the  Macedonian  customs,  wisely 
considering  that  whilst  he  was  engaged  in  an 
expedition  which  would  carry  him  far  from 
thence,  it  would  be  wiser  to  depend  upon  the 
good-will  which  might  arise  from  intermixture 
and  association  as  a  means  of  maintaining  tran¬ 
quillity,  than  upon  force  and  compulsion.  In 
order  to  this,  he  chose  out  thirty  thousand 
boys,  whom  he  put  under  masters  to  teach 
them  the  Greek  tongue,  and  to  train  them  up 
to  arms  in  the  Macedonian  discipline. 

As  for  his  marriage  with  Roxana,  whose 
youthfulness  and  beauty  had  charmed  him  at 
a  drinking  entertainment,  where  he  first  hap¬ 
pened  to  see  her  taking  part  in  a  dance,  it  was, 
indeed,  a  love  affair,  yet  it  seemed  at  the  same 
time  to  be  conducive  to  the  object  he  had  in 
hand.  For  it  gratified  the  conquered  people  to 
see  him  choose  a  wife  from  among  themselves, 
and  it  made  them  feel  the  most  lively  affection 
for  him,  to  find  that  in  the  only  passion  which 
he,  the  most  temperate  of  men,  was  overcome 
by,  he  yet  forebore  till  he  could  obtain  her  in 
a  lawful  and  honourable  way. 


563 

Noticing  also  that  among  his  chief  friends 
and  favourites,  Hephaestion  most  approved  all 
that  he  did,  and  complied  with  and  imitated 
him  in  his  change  of  habits,  while  Craterus 
continued  strict  in  the  observation  of  the  cus¬ 
toms  and  fashions  of  his  own  country,  he  made 
it  his  practice  to  employ  the  first  in  all  transac¬ 
tions  with  the  Persians,  and  the  latter  when  he 
had  to  do  with  the  Greeks  or  Macedonians. 
And  in  general  he  showed  more  affection  for 
Hephaestion,  and  more  respect  for  Craterus; 
Hephaestion,  as  he  used  to  say,  being  Alex¬ 
ander’s,  and  Craterus  the  king’s  friend. 

And  so  these  two  friends  always  bore  in 
secret  a  grudge  to  each  other,  and  at  times 
quarrelled  openly,  so  much  so  that  once  in 
India  they  drew  upon  one  another,  and  were 
proceeding  in  good  earnest,  with  their  friends 
on  each  side  to  second  them,  when  Alexander 
rode  up  and  publicly  reproved  Hephaestion, 
calling  him  fool  and  madman,  not  to  be  sensi¬ 
ble  that  without  his  favour  he  was  nothing.  He 
rebuked  Craterus  also  in  private,  severely,  and 
then  causing  them  both  to  come  into  his  pres¬ 
ence,  he  reconciled  them,  at  the  same  time 
swearing  by  Ammon  and  the  rest  of  the  gods, 
that  he  loved  them  two  above  all  other  men, 
but  if  ever  he  perceived  them  fall  out  again 
he  would  be  sure  to  put  both  of  them  to  death, 
or  at  least  the  aggressor.  After  which  they 
neither  ever  did  or  said  anything,  so  much  as 
in  jest,  to  offend  one  another. 

There  was  scarcely  any  one  who  had  greater 
repute  among  the  Macedonians  than  Philotas, 
the  son  of  Parmenio.  For  besides  that  he  was 
valiant  and  able  to  endure  any  fatigue  of  war, 
he  was  also  next  to  Alexander  himself  the  most 
munificent,  and  the  greatest  lover  of  his 
friends,  one  of  whom  asking  him  for  some 
money,  he  commanded  his  steward  to  give  it 
him;  and  when  he  told  him  he  had  not  where¬ 
with,  “Have  you  not  any  plate,  then,”  said  he, 
“or  any  clothes  of  mine  to  sell?”  But  he  car¬ 
ried  his  arrogance  and  his  pride  of  wealth  and 
his  habits  of  display  and  luxury  to  a  degree  of 
assumption  unbecoming  a  private  man;  and 
affecting  all  the  loftiness  without  succeeding 
in  showing  any  of  the  grace  or  gentleness  of 
true  greatness,  by  this  mistaken  and  spurious 
majesty  he  gained  so  much  envy  and  ill-will, 
that  Parmenio  would  sometimes  tell  him, 
“My  son,  to  be  not  quite  so  great  would  be 
better.” 

For  he  had  long  before  been  complained  of, 
and  accused  to  Alexander.  Particularly  when 
Darius  was  defeated  in  Cilicia,  and  an  im- 


564 

mense  booty  was  taken  at  Damascus,  among 
the  rest  of  the  prisoners  who  were  brought  in¬ 
to  the  camp,  there  was  one  Antigone  of  Pydna, 
a  very  handsome  woman,  who  fell  to  Philotas’s 
share.  The  young  man  one  day  in  his  cups,  in 
the  vaunting,  outspoken,  soldier’s  manner,  de¬ 
clared  to  his  mistress,  that  all  the  great  actions 
were  performed  by  him  and  his  father,  the 
glory  and  benefit  of  which,  he  said,  together 
with  the  title  of  king,  the  boy  Alexander  reap¬ 
ed  and  enjoyed  by  their  means. 

She  could  not  hold,  but  discovered  what  he 
had  said  to  one  of  her  acquaintance,  and  he,  as 
is  usual  in  such  cases,  to  another,  till  at  last  the 
story  came  to  the  ears  of  Craterus,  who  brought 
the  woman  secretly  to  the  king.  When  Alex¬ 
ander  had  heard  what  she  had  to  say,  he  com¬ 
manded  her  to  continue  her  intrigue  with  Phi- 
lotas,  and  give  him  an  account  from  time  to 
time  of  all  that  should  fall  from  him  to  this 
purpose.  He,  thus  unwittingly  caught  in  a 
snare,  to  gratify  sometimes  a  fit  of  anger,  some¬ 
times  a  love  of  vainglory,  let  himself  utter 
numerous  foolish,  indiscreet  speeches  against 
the  king  in  Antigone’s  hearing,  of  which, 
though  Alexander  was  informed  and  con¬ 
vinced  by  strong  evidence,  yet  he  would  take 
no  notice  of  it  at  present,  whether  it  was  that  he 
confided  in  Parmenio’s  affection  and  loyalty, 
or  that  he  apprehended  their  authority  and 
interest  in  the  army. 

But  about  this  time,  one  Limnus,  a  Mace¬ 
donian  of  Chalastra,  conspired  against  Alex¬ 
ander’s  life,  and  communicated  his  design  to 
a  youth  whom  he  was  fond  of,  named  Nicoma- 
chus,  inviting  him  to  be  of  the  party.  But  he 
not  relishing  the  thing,  revealed  it  to  his  broth¬ 
er  Balinus,  who  immediately  addressed  him¬ 
self  to  Philotas,  requiring  him  to  introduce 
them  both  to  Alexander,  to  whom  they  had 
something  of  great  moment  to  impart  which 
very  nearly  concerned  him.  But  he,  for  what 
reason  is  uncertain,  went  not  with  them,  pro¬ 
fessing  that  the  king  was  engaged  with  affairs 
of  more  importance. 

And  when  they  had  urged  him  a  second 
time,  and  were  still  slighted  by  him,  they  ap¬ 
plied  themselves  to  another,  by  whose  means 
being  admitted  into  Alexander’s  presence,  they 
first  told  about  Limnus’s  conspiracy,  and  by 
the  way  let  Philotas’s  negligence  appear  who 
had  twice  disregarded  their  application  to  him. 
Alexander  was  greatly  incensed,  and  on  find¬ 
ing  that  Limnus  had  defended  himself,  and 
had  been  killed  by  the  soldier  who  was  sent 
to  seize  him,  he  was  still  more  discomposed, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

thinking  he  had  thus  lost  the  means  of  detect¬ 
ing  the  plot. 

As  soon  as  his  displeasure  against  Philotas 
began  to  appear,  presently  all  his  old  enemies 
showed  themselves,  and  said  openly,  the  king 
was  too  easily  imposed  on,  to  imagine  that  one 
so  inconsiderable  as  Limnus,  a  Chalastrian, 
should  of  his  own  head  undertake  such  an  en¬ 
terprise;  that  in  all  likelihood  he  was  but  sub¬ 
servient  to  the  design,  an  instrument  that  was 
moved  by  some  greater  spring;  that  those 
ought  to  be  more  strictly  examined  about  the 
matter  whose  interest  it  was  so  much  to  conceal 
it.  When  they  had  once  gained  the  king’s  ear 
for  insinuations  of  this  sort,  they  went  on  to 
show  a  thousand  grounds  of  suspicion  against 
Philotas,  till  at  last  they  prevailed  to  have  him 
seized  and  put  to  the  torture,  which  was  done 
in  the  presence  of  the  principal  officers,  Alex¬ 
ander  himself  being  placed  behind  some  tapes¬ 
try  to  understand  what  passed.  Where,  when 
he  heard  in  what  a  miserable  tone,  and  with 
what  abject  submissions  Philotas  applied  him¬ 
self  to  Hephaestion,  he  broke  out,  it  is  said,  in 
this  manner:  “Are  you  so  mean-spirited  and 
effeminate,  Philotas,  and  yet  can  engage  in  so 
desperate  a  design?” 

After  his  death,  he  presently  sent  into  Media, 
and  put  also  Parmenio,  his  father,  to  death, 
who  had  done  brave  service  under  Philip,  and 
was  the  only  man  of  his  older  friends  and  coun¬ 
sellors  who  had  encouraged  Alexander  to  in¬ 
vade  Asia.  Of  three  sons  whom  he  had  had  in 
the  army,  he  had  already  lost  two,  and  now 
was  himself  put  to  death  with  the  third. 

These  actions  rendered  Alexander  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  terror  to  many  of  his  friends,  and  chief¬ 
ly  to  Antipater,  who,  to  strengthen  himself, 
sent  messengers  privately  to  treat  for  an  alli¬ 
ance  with  the  /Etolians,  who  stood  in  fear  of 
Alexander,  because  they  had  destroyed  the 
town  of  the  CEniadae;  on  being  informed  of 
which,  Alexander  had  said  the  children  of  the 
CEniadae  need  not  revenge  their  father’s  quar¬ 
rel,  for  he  would  himself  take  care  to  punish 
the  Titolians. 

Not  long  after  this  happened  the  deplorable 
end  of  Clitus,  which,  to  those  who  barely  hear 
the  matter,  may  seem  more  inhuman  than  that 
of  Philotas;  but  if  we  consider  the  story  with 
its  circumstance  of  time,  and  weigh  the  cause, 
we  shall  find  it  to  have  occurred  rather  through 
a  sort  of  mischance  of  the  king’s,  whose  anger 
and  over-drinking  offered  an  occasion  to  the 
evil  genius  of  Clitus. 

The  king  had  a  present  of  Grecian  fruit 


ALEXANDER 

brought  him  from  the  sea-coast,  which  was  so 
fresh  and  beautiful,  that  he  was  surprised  at 
it,  and  called  Clitus  to  him  to  see  it,  and  to 
give  him  a  share  of  it.  Clitus  was  then  sacri¬ 
ficing,  but  he  immediately  left  oft  and  came, 
followed  by  three  sheep,  on  whom  the  drink- 
offering  had  been  already  poured  preparatory 
to  sacrificing  them.  Alexander,  being  informed 
of  this,  told  his  diviners,  Aristander  and  Cleo- 
mantis  the  Lacedaemonian,  and  asked  them 
what  it  meant;  on  whose  assuring  him  it  was 
an  ill  omen,  he  commanded  them  in  all  haste 
to  offer  sacrifices  for  Clitus’s  safety,  forasmuch 
as  three  days  before  he  himself  had  seen  a 
strange  vision  in  his  sleep,  of  Clitus  all  in 
mourning,  sitting  by  Parmenio’s  sons  who 
were  dead. 

Clitus,  however,  stayed  not  to  finish  his  de¬ 
votions,  but  came  straight  to  supper  with  the 
king,  who  had  sacrificed  to  Castor  and  Pollux. 
And  when  they  had  drunk  pretty  hard,  some 
of  the  company  fell  a-singing  the  verses  of  one 
Pranichus,  or  as  others  say  of  Pierion,  which 
were  made  upon  those  captains  who  had  been 
lately  worsted  by  the  barbarians,  on  purpose 
to  disgrace  and  turn  them  to  ridicule. 

This  gave  offence  to  the  older  men  who  were 
there,  and  they  upbraided  both,  the  author  and 
the  singer  of  the  verses,  though  Alexander  and 
the  younger  men  about  him  were  much  amused 
to  hear  them,  and  encouraged  them  to  go  on, 
till  at  last  Clitus,  who  had  drunk  too  much, 
and  was  besides  of  a  forward  and  wilful  tem¬ 
per,  was  so  nettled  that  he  could  hold  no  long¬ 
er,  saying  it  was  not  well  done  to  expose  the 
Macedonians  before  the  barbarians  and  their 
enemies,  since  though  it  was  their  unhappiness 
to  be  overcome,  yet  they  were  much  better 
men  than  those  who  laughed  at  them. 

And  when  Alexander  remarked  that  Clitus 
was  pleading  his  own  cause,  giving  cowardice 
the  name  of  misfortune,  Clitus  started  up: 
“This  cowardice,  as  you  are  pleased  to  term 
it,”  said  he  to  him,  “saved  the  life  of  a  son  of 
the  gods,  when  in  flight  from  Spithridates’s 
sword;  it  is  by  the  expense  of  Macedonian 
blood,  and  by  these  wounds,  that  you  are  now 
raised  to  such  a  height  as  to  be  able  to  disown 
your  father  Philip,  and  call  yourself  the  son  of 
Ammon.”  “Thou  base  fellow,”  said  Alexander, 
who  was  now  thoroughly  exasperated,  “dost 
thou  think  to  utter  these  things  everywhere  of 
me,  and  stir  up  the  Macedonians  to  sedition, 
and  not  be  punished  for  it?”  “We  are  suffi¬ 
ciently  punished  already,”  answered  Clitus, 
“if  this  be  the  recompense  of  our  toils,  and  we 


565 

must  esteem  theirs  a  happy  lot  who  have  not 
lived  to  see  their  countrymen  scourged  with 
Median  rods  and  forced  to  sue  to  the  Persians 
to  have  access  to  their  king.” 

While  he  talked  thus  at  random,  and  those 
near  Alexander  got  up  from  their  seats  and 
began  to  revile  him  in  turn,  the  elder  men  did 
what  they  could  to  compose  the  disorder. 

Alexander,  in  the  meantime  turning  about 
to  Xenodochus,  the  Pardian,  and  Artemius, 
the  Colophonian,  asked  them  if  they  were  not 
of  opinion  that  the  Greeks,  in  comparison  with 
the  Macedonians,  behaved  themselves  like  so 
many  demigods  among  wild  beasts. 

But  Clitus  for  all  this  would  not  give  over, 
desiring  Alexander  to  speak  out  if  he  had  any¬ 
thing  more  to  say,  or  else  why  did  he  invite 
men  who  were  freeborn  and  accustomed  to 
speak  their  minds  openly  without  restraint  to 
sup  with  him.  He  had  better  live  and  converse 
with  barbarians  and  slaves  who  would  not 
scruple  to  bow  the  knee  to  his  Persian  girdle 
and  his  white  tunic. 

Which  words  so  provoked  Alexander  that, 
not  able  to  suppress  his  anger  any  longer,  he 
threw  one  of  the  apples  that  lay  upon  the 
table  at  him,  and  hit  him,  and  then  looked 
about  for  his  sword.  But  Aristophanes,  one  of 
his  life-guard,  had  hid  that  out  of  the  way, 
and  others  came  about  him  and  besought  him, 
but  in  vain;  for  breaking  from  them,  he  called 
out  aloud  to  his  guards  in  the  Macedonian 
language,  which  was  a  certain  sign  of  some 
great  disturbance  in  him,  and  commanded  a 
trumpeter  to  sound,  giving  him  a  blow  with 
his  clenched  fist  for  not  instantly  obeying  him; 
though  afterwards  the  same  man  was  com¬ 
mended  for  disobeying  an  order  which  would 
have  put  the  whole  army  into  tumult  and  con¬ 
fusion. 

Clitus  still  refusing  to  yield,  was  with  much 
trouble  forced  by  his  friends  out  of  the  room. 
But  he  came  in  again  immediately  at  another 
door,  very  irreverently  and  confidently  sing¬ 
ing  the  verses  out  of  Euripides’s  Andromache, 
In  Greece,  alas !  how  ill  things  ordered  are ! 
Upon  this,  at  last,  Alexander,  snatching  a  spear 
from  one  of  the  soldiers,  met  Clitus  as  he  was 
coming  forward  and  was  putting  by  the  cur¬ 
tain  that  hung  before  the  door,  and  ran  him 
through  the  body.  He  fell  at  once  with  a  cry 
and  a  groan. 

Upon  which  the  king’s  anger  immediately 
vanishing,  he  came  perfectly  to  himself,  and 
when  he  saw  his  friends  about  him  all  in  a 
profound  silence,  he  pulled  the  spear  out  of 


566 

the  dead  body,  and  would  have  thrust  it  into 
his  own  throat,  if  the  guards  had  not  held  his 
hands,  and  by  main  force  carried  him  away 
into  his  chamber,  where  all  that  night  and  the 
next  day  he  wept  bitterly,  till  being  quite  spent 
with  lamenting  and  exclaiming,  he  lay,  as  it 
were,  speechless,  only  fetching  deep  sighs.  His 
friends  apprehending  some  harm  from  his  sil¬ 
ence,  broke  into  the  room,  but  he  took  no  no¬ 
tice  of  what  any  of  them  said,  till  Aristander 
putting  him  in  mind  of  the  vision  he  had  seen 
concerning  Clitus,  and  the  prodigy  that  fol¬ 
lowed,  as  if  all  had  come  to  pass  by  an  unavoid¬ 
able  fatality,  he  then  seemed  to  moderate  his 
grief. 

They  now  brought  Callisthenes,  the  philos¬ 
opher,  who  was  the  near  friend  of  Aristotle, 
and  Anaxarchus  of  Abdera,  to  him.  Callis¬ 
thenes  used  moral  language,  and  gentle  and 
soothing  means,  hoping  to  find  access  for 
words  of  reason,  and  get  a  hold  upon  the  pas¬ 
sion.  But  Anaxarchus,  who  had  always  taken 
a  course  of  his  own  in  philosophy,  and  had  a 
name  for  despising  and  slighting  his  contem¬ 
poraries,  as  soon  as  he  came  in,  cried  aloud,  “Is 
this  the  Alexander  whom  the  whole  world 
looks  to,  lying  here  weeping  like  a  slave,  for 
fear  of  the  censure  and  reproach  of  men,  to 
whom  he  himself  ought  to  be  a  law  and  meas¬ 
ure  of  equity,  if  he  would  use  the  right  his  con¬ 
quests  have  given  him  as  supreme  lord  and 
governor  of  all,  and  not  be  the  victim  of  a  vain 
and  idle  opinion?  Do  not  you  know,”  said  he, 
“that  Jupiter  is  represented  to  have  Justice  and 
Law  on  each  hand  of  him,  to  signify  that  all 
the  actions  of  a  conqueror  are  lawful  and 
just?”  With  these  and  the  like  speeches,  Anax¬ 
archus  indeed  allayed  the  king’s  grief,  but 
withal  corrupted  his  character,  rendering  him 
more  audacious  and  lawless  than  he  had  been. 
Nor  did  he  fail  by  these  means  to  insinuate 
himself  into  his  favour,  and  to  make  Callis- 
thenes’s  company,  which  at  all  times,  because 
of  his  austerity,  was  not  very  acceptable,  more 
uneasy  and  disagreeable  to  him. 

It  happened  that  these  two  philosophers  met 
at  an  entertainment  where  conversation  turned 
on  the  subject  of  climate  and  the  temperature 
of  the  air.  Callisthenes  joined  with  their  opin¬ 
ion  who  held  that  those  countries  were  colder, 
and  the  winter  sharper  there  than  in  Greece. 
Anaxarchus  would  by  no  means  allow  this,  but 
argued  against  it  with  some  heat.  “Surely,” 
said  Callisthenes,  “you  cannot  but  admit  this 
country  to  be  colder  than  Greece,  for  there  you 
used  to  have  but  one  threadbare  cloak  to  keep 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

out  the  coldest  winter,  and  here  you  have  three 
good  warm  mantles  one  over  another.” 

This  piece  of  raillery  irritated  Anaxarchus 
and  the  other  pretenders  to  learning,  and  the 
crowd  of  flatterers  in  general  could  not  endure 
to  see  Callisthenes  so  much  admired  and  fol¬ 
lowed  by  the  youth,  and  no  less  esteemed  by  the 
older  men  for  his  orderly  life  and  his  gravity, 
and  for  being  contented  with  his  condition; 
and  confirming  what  he  had  professed  about 
the  object  he  had  in  his  journey  to  Alexander, 
that  it  was  only  to  get  his  countrymen  recalled 
from  banishment,  and  to  rebuild  and  repeople 
his  native  town. 

Besides  the  envy  which  his  great  reputation 
raised,  he  also,  by  his  own  deportment,  gave 
those  who  wished  him  ill  opportunity  to  do 
him  mischief.  For  when  he  was  invited  to  pub¬ 
lic  entertainments,  he  would  most  times  refuse 
to  come,  or  if  he  were  present  at  any,  he  put  a 
constraint  upon  the  company  by  his  austerity 
and  silence,  which  seemed  to  intimate  his  dis¬ 
approval  of  what  he  saw.  So  that  Alexander 
himself  said  in  application  to  him, — 

That  vain  pretence  to  wisdom  l  detest 
Where  a  man's  blind  to  his  own  interest. 

Being  with  many  more  invited  to  sup  with 
the  king,  he  was  called  upon  when  the  cup 
came  to  him,  to  make  an  oration  extempore  in 
praise  of  the  Macedonians;  and  he  did  it  with 
such  a  flow  of  eloquence,  that  all  who  heard  it 
rose  from  their  seats  to  clap  and  applaud  him, 
and  threw  their  garland  upon  him;  only  Alex¬ 
ander  told  him  out  of  Euripides, — 

/  wonder  not  that  you  have  spoke  so  well, 

*Tis  easy  on  good  subjects  to  excel. 
“Therefore,”  said  he,  “if  you  will  show  the 
force  of  your  eloquence,  tell  my  Macedonians 
their  faults,  and  dispraise  them,  that  by  hear¬ 
ing  their  errors  they  may  learn  to  be  better  for 
the  future.”  Callisthenes  presently  obeyed  him, 
retracting  all  he  had  said  before,  and,  inveigh¬ 
ing  against  the  Macedonians  with  great  free¬ 
dom,  added  that  Philip  thrived  and  grew  pow¬ 
erful,  chiefly  by  the  discord  of  the  Grecians,  ap¬ 
plying  this  verse  to  him, — 

In  civil  strife  e'en  villains  rise  to  fame; 
which  so  offended  the  Macedonians,  that  he 
was  odious  to  them  ever  after. 

And  Alexander  said  that  instead  of  his  elo¬ 
quence,  he  had  only  made  his  ill-will  appear  in 
what  he  had  spoken.  Hermippus  assures  us 
that  one  Stroebus,  a  servant  whom  Callisthenes 
kept  to  read  to  him,  gave  this  account  of  these 
passages  afterwards  to  Aristotle;  and  that  when 
he  perceived  the  king  grow  more  and  more 


ALEXANDER 

averse  to  him,  two  or  three  times,  as  he  was 
going  away,  he  repeated  the  verses, —  • 

Death  seiz'd  at  last  on  great  Patroclus  too. 
Though  he  in  virtue  far  exceeded  you . 

Not  without  reason,  therefore,  did  Aristotle 
give  this  character  of  Callisthenes,  that  he  was, 
indeed,  a  powerful  speaker,  but  had  no  judg¬ 
ment.  He  acted  certainly  a  true  philosopher’s 
part  in  positively  refusing,  as  he  did,  to  pay 
adoration;  and  by  speaking  out  openly  against 
that  which  the  best  and  gravest  of  the  Mace¬ 
donians  only  repined  at  in  secret,  he  delivered 
the  Grecians  and  Alexander  himself  from  a 
great  disgrace,  when  the  practice  was  given  up. 
But  he  ruined  himself  by  it,  because  he  went 
too  roughly  to  work,  as  if  he  would  have 
forced  the  king  to  that  which  he  should  have 
effected  by  reason  and  persuasion. 

Chares  of  Mitylene  writes  that  at  a  banquet 
Alexander,  after  he  had  drunk,  reached  the  cup 
to  one  of  his  friends,  who,  on  receiving  it,  rose 
up  towards  the  domestic  altar,  and  when  he 
had  drunk,  first  adored  and  then  kissed  Alex¬ 
ander,  and  afterwards  laid  himself  down  at  the 
table  with  the  rest.  Which  they  all  did  one 
after  another,  till  it  came  to  Callisthenes’s  turn, 
who  took  the  cup  and  drank,  while  the  king, 
who  was  engaged  in  conversation  with  Heph- 
aestion,  was  not  observing,  and  then  came  and 
offered  to  kiss  him.  But  Demetrius,  surnamed 
Phidon,  interposed,  saying,  “Sir,  by  no  means 
let  him  kiss  you,  for  he  only  of  us  all  has  re¬ 
fused  to  adore  you”;  upon  which  the  king  de¬ 
clined  it,  and  all  the  concern  Callisthenes 
showed  was,  that  he  said  aloud,  “Then  I  go 
away  with  a  kiss  less  than  the  rest.”  The  dis¬ 
pleasure  he  incurred  by  this  action  procured 
credit  for  Hephaestion’s  declaration  that  he  had 
broken  his  word  to  him  in  not  paying  the  king 
the  same  veneration  that  others  did,  as  he  had 
faithfully  promised  to  do. 

And  to  finish  his  disgrace,  a  number  of  such 
men  as  Lysimachus  and  Hagnon  now  came  in 
with  their  asseverations  that  the  sophist  went 
about  everywhere  boasting  of  his  resistance  to 
arbitrary  power,  and  the  young  men  all  ran 
after  him,  and  honoured  him  as  the  only  man 
among  so  many  thousands  who  had  the  cour¬ 
age  to  preserve  his  liberty. 

Therefore,  when  Hermolaus’s  conspiracy 
came  to  be  discovered,  the  charges  which  his 
enemies  brought  against  him  were  the  more 
easily  believed,  particularly  that  when  the 
young  man  asked  him  what  he  should  do  to  be 
the  most  illustrious  person  on  earth,  he  told 
him  the  readiest  way  was  to  kill  him  who  was 


567 

already  so,  and  that  to  incite  him  to  commit  the 
deed,  he  bade  him  not  be  awed  by  the  golden 
couch,  but  remember  Alexander  was  a  man 
equally  infirm  and  vulnerable  as  another.  How¬ 
ever,  none  of  Hermolaus’s  accomplices,  in  the 
utmost  extremity,  made  any  mention  of  Callis¬ 
thenes’s  being  engaged  in  the  design.  Nay, 
Alexander  himself,  in  the  letters  which  he 
wrote  soon  after  to  Craterus,  Attalus,  and  Alce- 
tas,  tells  them  that  the  young  men  who  were 
put  to  the  torture  declared  they  had  entered 
into  the  conspiracy  of  themselves,  without  any 
others  being  privy  to  or  guilty  of  it. 

But  yet  afterwards,  in  a  letter  to  Antipater, 
he  accuses  Callisthenes.  “The  young  men,”  he 
says,  “were  stoned  to  death  by  the  Macedo¬ 
nians,  but  for  the  sophist”  (meaning  Callis¬ 
thenes),  “I  will  take  care  to  punish  him  with 
them,  too,  who  sent  him  to  me,  and  who  har¬ 
bour  those  in  their  cities  who  conspire  against 
my  life,”  an  unequivocal  declaration  against 
Aristotle,  in  whose  house  Callisthenes,  for  his 
relationship’s  sake,  being  his  niece  Hero’s  son, 
had  been  educated. 

His  death  is  variously  related.  Some  say  he 
was  hanged  by  Alexander’s  orders;  others,  that 
he  died  of  sickness  in  prison;  but  Chares  writes 
he  was  kept  in  chains  seven  months  after  he 
was  apprehended,  on  purpose  that  he  might  be 
proceeded  against  in  full  council,  when  Aris¬ 
totle  should  be  present;  and  that  growing  very 
fat,  and  contracting  a  disease  of  vermin,  he 
there  died,  about  the  time  that  Alexander  was 
wounded  in  India,  in  the  country  of  the  Malli 
Oxydracae,  all  which  came  to  pass  afterwards. 

For  to  go  on  in  order,  Demaratus  of  Corinth, 
now  quite  an  old  man,  had  made  a  great  effort, 
about  this  time,  to  pay  Alexander  a  visit;  and 
when  he  had  seen  him,  said  he  pitied  the  mis¬ 
fortune  of  those  Grecians,  who  were  so  un¬ 
happy  as  to  die  before  they  had  beheld  Alex¬ 
ander  seated  on  the  throne  of  Darius.  But  he 
did  not  long  enjoy  the  benefit  of  the  king’s  kind¬ 
ness  for  him,  in  any  way  except  that  soon  after 
falling  sick  and  dying,  he  had  a  magnificent 
funeral,  and  the  army  raised  him  a  monument 
of  earth  fourscore  cubits  high,  and  of  a  vast  cir¬ 
cumference.  His  ashes  were  conveyed  in  a  very 
rich  chariot,  drawn  by  four  horses,  to  the  sea¬ 
side. 

Alexander,  now  intent  upon  his  expedition 
into  India,  took  notice  that  his  soldiers  were  so 
charged  with  booty  that  it  hindered  their 
marching.  Therefore,  at  break  of  day,  as  soon 
as  the  baggage  wagons  were  laden,  first  he  set 
fire  to  his  own,  and  to  those  of  his  friends,  and 


568 

then  commanded  those  to  be  burnt  which  be¬ 
longed  to  the  rest  of  the  army:  an  act  which  in 
the  deliberation  of  it  had  seemed  more  danger¬ 
ous  and  difficult  than  it  proved  in  the  execu¬ 
tion,  with  which  few  were  dissatisfied;  for  most 
of  the  soldiers,  as  if  they  had  been  inspired, 
uttering  loud  outcries  and  warlike  shoutings, 
supplied  one  another  with  what  was  absolutely 
necessary,  and  burnt  and  destroyed  all  that  was 
superfluous,  the  sight  of  which  redoubled  Alex¬ 
ander’s  zeal  and  eagerness  for  his  design. 

And,  indeed,  he  was  now  grown  very  severe 
and  inexorable  in  punishing  those  who  com¬ 
mitted  any  fault.  For  he  put  Menander,  one  of 
his  friends,  to  death  for  deserting  a  fortress 
where  he  had  placed  him  in  garrison,  and  shot 
Orsodates,  one  of  the  barbarians  who  revolted 
from  him,  with  his  own  hand. 

At  this  time  a  sheep  happened  to  yean  a 
lamb,  with  the  perfect  shape  and  colour  of  a 
tiara  upon  the  head,  and  testicles  on  each  side; 
which  portent  Alexander  regarded  with  such 
dislike,  that  he  immediately  caused  his  Baby¬ 
lonian  priests,  whom  he  usually  carried  about 
with  him  for  such  purposes,  to  purify  him,  and 
told  his  friends  he  was  not  so  much  concerned 
for  his  own  sake  as  for  theirs,  out  of  an  appre¬ 
hension  that  after  his  death  the  divine  power 
might  suffer  his  empire  to  fall  into  the  hands  of 
some  degenerate,  impotent  person. 

But  this  fear  was  soon  removed  by  a  wonder¬ 
ful  thing  that  happened  not  long  after,  and  was 
thought  to  presage  better.  For  Proxenus,  a 
Macedonian,  who  was  the  chief  of  those  who 
looked  to  the  king’s  furniture,  as  he  was  break¬ 
ing  up  the  ground  near  the  river  Oxus,  to  set 
up  the  royal  pavilion,  discovered  a  spring  of  a 
fat  oily  liquor,  which,  after  the  top  was  taken 
off,  ran  pure,  clear  oil,  without  any  difference 
either  of  taste  or  smell,  having  exactly  the  same 
smoothness  and  brightness,  and  that,  too,  in  a 
country  where  no  olives  grew.  The  water,  in¬ 
deed,  of  the  river  Oxus,  is  said  to  be  the  smooth¬ 
est  to  the  feeling  of  all  waters,  and  to  leave  a 
gloss  on  the  skins  of  those  who  bathe  them¬ 
selves  in  it.  Whatever  might  be  the  cause,  cer¬ 
tain  it  is  that  Alexander  was  wonderfully 
pleased  with  it,  as  appears  by  his  letters  to  Anti¬ 
pater,  where  he  speaks  of  it  as  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  presages  that  God  had  ever  fa¬ 
voured  him  with.  The  diviners  told  him  it  sig¬ 
nified  his  expedition  would  be  glorious  in  the 
event,  but  very  painful,  and  attended  with 
many  difficulties;  for  oil,  they  said,  was  be¬ 
stowed  on  mankind  by  God  as  a  refreshment 
of  their  labours. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Nor  did  they  judge  amiss,  for  he  exposed 
himself  to  many  hazards  in  the  battles  which 
he  fought,  and  received  very  severe  wounds, 
but  the  greatest  loss  in  his  army  was  occasioned 
through  the  unwholesomeness  of  the  air  and 
the  want  of  necessary  provisions.  But  he  still 
applied  himself  to  overcome  fortune  and  what¬ 
ever  opposed  him,  by  resolution  and  virtue,  and 
thought  nothing  impossible  to  true  intrepidity, 
and  on  the  other  hand  nothing  secure  or  strong 
for  cowardice. 

It  is  told  of  him  that  when  he  besieged  Sisi- 
mithres,  who  held  an  inaccessible,  impregnable 
rock  against  him,  and  his  soldiers  began  to  de¬ 
spair  of  taking  it,  he  asked  Oxyartes  whether 
Sisimithres  was  a  man  of  courage,  who  assur¬ 
ing  him  he  was  the  greatest  coward  alive, 
“Then  you  tell  me,”  said  he,  “that  the  place 
may  easily  be  taken,  since  what  is  in  command 
of  it  is  weak.”  And  in  a  little  time  he  so  terri¬ 
fied  Sisimithres  that  he  took  it  without  any 
difficulty. 

At  an  attack  which  he  made  upon  such  an¬ 
other  precipitous  place  with  some  of  his  Mace¬ 
donian  soldiers,  he  called  to  one  whose  name 
was  Alexander,  and  told  him  he  at  any  rate 
must  fight  bravely  if  it  were  but  for  his  name’s 
sake.  The  youth  fought  gallantly  and  was 
killed  in  the  action,  at  which  he  was  sensibly 
afflicted. 

Another  time,  seeing  his  men  march  slowly 
and  unwillingly  to  the  siege  of  the  place  called 
Nysa,  because  of  a  deep  river  between  them  and 
the  town,  he  advanced  before  them,  and  stand¬ 
ing  upon  the  bank,  “What  a  miserable  man,” 
said  he,  “am  I,  that  I  have  not  learned  to 
swim!”  and  then  was  hardly  dissuaded  from 
endeavouring  to  pass  it  upon  his  shield.  Here, 
after  the  assult  was  over,  the  ambassadors  who 
from  several  towns  which  he  had  blocked  up 
came  to  submit  to  him  and  make  their  peace, 
were  surprised  to  find  him  still  in  his  armour, 
without  any  one  in  waiting  or  attendance  upon 
him,  and  when  at  last  some  one  brought  him  a 
cushion,  he  made  the  eldest  of  them,  named 
Acuphis,  take  it  and  sit  down  upon  it.  The  old 
man,  marvelling  at  his  magnanimity  and  cour¬ 
tesy,  asked  him  what  his  countrymen  should 
do  to  merit  his  friendship.  “I  would  have 
them,”  said  Alexander,  “choose  you  to  govern 
them,  and  send  one  hundred  of  the  most 
worthy  men  among  them  to  remain  with  me  as 
hostages.”  Acuphis  laughed  and  answered,  “I 
shall  govern  them  with  more  ease,  sir,  if  I  send 
you  so  many  of  the  worst,  rather  than  the  best 
of  my  subjects.” 


ALEXANDER 

The  extent  of  King  Taxiles’s  dominions  in 
India  was  thought  to  be  as  large  as  Egypt, 
abounding  in  good  pastures,  and  producing 
beautiful  fruits.  The  king  himself  had  the  rep¬ 
utation  of  a  wise  man,  and  at  his  first  interview 
with  Alexander  he  spoke  to  him  in  these  terms: 
“To  what  purpose,”  said  he,  “should  we  make 
war  upon  one  another,  if  the  design  of  your 
coming  into  these  parts  be  not  to  rob  us  of  our 
water  or  our  necessary  food,  which  are  the  only 
things  that  wise  men  are  indispensably  obliged 
to  fight  for?  As  for  other  riches  and  possessions, 
as  they  are  accounted  in  the  eye  of  the  world, 
if  I  am  better  provided  of  them  than  you,  I  am 
ready  to  let  you  share  with  me;  but  if  fortune 
has  been  more  liberal  to  you  than  me,  I  have  no 
objection  to  be  obliged  to  you.”  This  discourse 
pleased  Alexander  so  much  that,  embracing 
him,  “Do  you  think,”  said  he  to  him,  “your 
kind  words  and  courteous  behaviour  will  bring 
you  off  in  this  interview  without  a  contest?  No, 
you  shall  not  escape  so.  I  shall  contend  and  do 
battle  with  you  so  far,  that  how  obliging  soever 
you  are,  you  shall  not  have  the  better  of  me.” 
Then  receiving  some  presents  from  him,  he  re¬ 
turned  him  others  of  greater  value,  and  to  com¬ 
plete  his  bounty  gave  him  in  money  ready 
coined  one  thousand  talents;  at  which  his  old 
friends  were  much  displeased,  but  it  gained 
him  the  hearts  of  many  of  the  barbarians. 

But  the  best  soldiers  of  the  Indians  now  en¬ 
tering  into  the  pay  of  several  of  the  cities,  un¬ 
dertook  to  defend  them,  and  did  it  so  bravely, 
that  they  put  Alexander  to  a  great  deal  of  trou¬ 
ble,  till  at  last,  after  a  capitulation,  upon  the 
surrender  of  the  place,  he  fell  upon  them  as  they 
were  marching  away,  and  put  them  all  to  the 
sword.  This  one  breach  of  his  word  remains  as 
a  blemish  upon  his  achievements  in  war,  which 
he  otherwise  had  performed  throughout  with 
that  justice  and  honour  that  became  a  king. 
Nor  was  he  less  incommoded  by  the  Indian 
philosophers,  who  inveighed  against  those 
princes  who  joined  his  party,  and  solicited  the 
free  nations  to  oppose  him.  He  took  several  of 
these  also  and  caused  them  to  be  hanged. 

Alexander,  in  his  own  letters,  has  given  us  an 
acount  of  his  war  with  Porus.  He  says  the  two 
armies  were  separated  by  the  river  Hydaspes, 
on  whose  opposite  bank  Porus  continually  kept 
his  elephants  in  order  of  battle,  with  their  heads 
towards  their  enemies,  to  guard  the  passage; 
that  he,  on  the  other  hand,  made  every  day  a 
great  noise  and  clamour  in  his  camp,  to  dissi¬ 
pate  the  apprehensions  of  the  barbarians;  that 
one  stormy  dark  night  he  passed  the  river,  at  a 


569 

distance  from  the  place  where  the  enemy  lay, 
into  a  little  island,  with  part  of  his  foot  and  the 
best  of  his  horse.  Here  there  fell  a  most  violent 
storm  of  rain,  accompanied  with  lightning  and 
whirlwinds,  and  seeing  some  of  his  men  burnt 
and  dying  with  the  lightning,  he  nevertheless 
quitted  the  island  and  made  over  to  the  other 
side.  The  Hydaspes,  he  says,  now  after  the 
storm,  was  so  swollen  and  grown  so  rapid  as  to 
have  made  a  breach  in  the  bank,  and  a  part  of 
the  river  was  now  pouring  in  here,  so  that 
when  he  came  across  it  was  with  difficulty  he 
got  a  footing  on  the  land,  which  was  slippery 
and  unsteady,  and  exposed  to  the  force  of  the 
currents  on  both  sides. 

This  is  the  occasion  when  he  is  related  to 
have  said,  “O  ye  Athenians,  will  ye  believe 
what  dangers  I  incur  to  merit  your  praise?” 
This,  however,  is  Onesicritus’s  story.  Alexan¬ 
der  says,  here  the  men  left  their  boats,  and 
passed  the  breach  in  their  armour,  up  to  the 
breast  in  water,  and  that  then  he  advanced  with 
his  horse  about  twenty  furlongs  before  his  foot, 
concluding  that  if  the  enemy  charged  him  with 
their  cavalry  he  should  be  too  strong  for  them; 
if  with  their  foot,  his  own  would  come  up  time 
enough  to  his  assistance.  Nor  did  he  judge 
amiss;  for  being  charged  by  a  thousand  horse 
and  sixty  armed  chariots,  which  advanced  be¬ 
fore  their  main  body,  he  took  all  the  chariots, 
and  killed  four  hundred  horse  upon  the  place. 

Porus,  by  this  time,  guessing  that  Alexander 
himself  had  crossed  over,  came  on  with  his 
whole  army,  except  a  party  which  he  left  be¬ 
hind,  to  hold  the  rest  of  the  Macedonians  in 
play,  if  they  should  attempt  to  pass  the  river. 
But  he,  apprehending  the  multitude  of  the  en¬ 
emy,  and  to  avoid  the  shock  of  their  elephants, 
dividing  his  forces,  attacked  their  left  wing 
himself,  and  commanded  Ccenus  to  fall  upon 
the  right,  which  was  performed  with  good  suc¬ 
cess.  For  by  this  means  both  wings  being  brok¬ 
en,  the  enemies  fell  back  in  their  retreat  upon 
the  centre,  and  crowded  in  upon  their  ele¬ 
phants.  There  rallying,  they  fought  a  hand-to- 
hand  battle,  and  it  was  the  eighth  hour  of  the 
day  before  they  were  entirely  defeated.  This  de¬ 
scription  the  conqueror  himself  has  left  us  in 
his  own  epistles. 

Almost  all  the  historians  agree  in  relating 
that  Porus  was  four  cubits  and  a  span  high, 
and  that  when  he  was  upon  his  elephant,  which 
was  of  the  largest  size,  his  stature  and  bulk 
were  so  answerable,  that  he  appeared  to  be  pro- 
portionably  mounted,  as  a  horseman  on  his 
horse.  This  elephant,  during  the  whole  battle, 


570 

gave  many  singular  proofs  of  sagacity  and  of 
particular  care  of  the  king,  whom  as  long  as  he 
was  strong  and  in  a  condition  to  fight,  he  de¬ 
fended  with  great  courage,  repelling  those  who 
set  upon  him;  and  as  soon  as  he  perceived  him 
overpowered  with  his  numerous  wounds  and 
the  multitude  of  darts  that  were  thrown  at  him, 
to  prevent  his  falling  off,  he  softly  knelt  down 
and  began  to  draw  out  the  darts  with  his  pro¬ 
boscis. 

When  Porus  was  taken  prisoner,  and  Alex¬ 
ander  asked  him  how  he  expected  to  be  used, 
he  answered,  “As  a  king.”  For  that  expression, 
he  said,  when  the  same  question  was  put  to 
him  a  second  time,  comprehended  every¬ 
thing.  And  Alexander,  accordingly,  not  only 
suffered  him  to  govern  his  own  kingdom  as 
satrap  under  himself,  but  gave  him  also  the  ad¬ 
ditional  territory  of  various  independent  tribes 
whom  he  subdued,  a  district  which,  it  is  said, 
contained  fifteen  several  nations,  and  five  thou¬ 
sand  considerable  towns,  besides  abundance  of 
villages.  To  another  government,  three  times 
as  large  as  this,  he  appointed  Philip,  one  of  his 
friends. 

Some  little  time  after  the  battle  with  Porus, 
Bucephalus  died,  as  most  of  the  authorities 
state,  under  cure  of  his  wounds,  or,  as  Onesicri- 
tus  says,  of  fatigue  and  age,  being  thirty  years 
old.  Alexander  was  no  less  concerned  at  his 
death  than  if  he  had  lost  an  old  companion  or 
an  intimate  friend,  and  built  a  city,  which  he 
named  Bucephalia,  in  memory  of  him,  on  the 
bank  of  the  river  Hydaspes.  He  also,  we  are 
told,  built  another  city,  and  called  it  after  the 
name  of  a  favourite  dog,  Peritas,  which  he  had 
brought  up  himself.  So  Sotion  assures  us  he 
was  informed  by  Potamon  of  Lesbos. 

But  this  last  combat  with  Porus  took  off  the 
edge  of  the  Macedonians’  courage,  and  stayed 
their  further  progress  into  India.  For  having 
found  it  hard  enough  to  defeat  an  enemy  who 
brought  but  twenty  thousand  foot  and  two 
thousand  horse  into  the  field,  they  thought  they 
had  reason  to  oppose  Alexander’s  design  of 
leading  them  on  to  pass  the  Ganges,  too,  which 
they  were  told  was  thirty-two  furlongs  broad 
and  a  hundred  fathoms  deep,  and  the  banks  on 
the  further  side  covered  with  multitudes  of  en¬ 
emies.  For  they  were  told  the  kings  of  the  Gan- 
daritans  and  Praesians  expected  them  there 
with  eighty  thousand  horse,  two  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  foot,  eight  thousand  armed  chariots,  and 
six  thousand  fighting  elephants.  Nor  was  this 
a  mere  vain  report,  spread  to  discourage  them. 
For  Androcottus,  who  not  long  after  reigned  in 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

those  parts,  made  a  present  of  five  hundred  ele¬ 
phants  at  once  to  Seleucus,  and  with  an  army 
of  six  hundred  thousand  men  subdued  all  India. 

Alexander  at  first  was  so  grieved  and  en¬ 
raged  at  his  men’s  reluctancy  that  he  shut  him¬ 
self  up  in  his  tent  and  threw  himself  upon  the 
ground,  declaring,  if  they  would  not  pass  the 
Ganges,  he  owed  them  no  thanks  for  anything 
they  had  hitherto  done,  and  that  to  retreat  now 
was  plainly  to  confess  himself  vanquished.  But 
at  last  the  reasonable  persuasions  of  his  friends 
and  the  cries  and  lamentations  of  his  soldiers, 
who  in  a  suppliant  manner  crowded  about  the 
entrance  of  his  tent,  prevailed  with  him  to 
think  of  returning. 

Yet  he  could  not  refrain  from  leaving  behind 
him  various  deceptive  memorials  of  his  expedi¬ 
tion,  to  impose  upon  aftertimes,  and  to  exag¬ 
gerate  his  glory  with  posterity,  such  as  arms 
larger  than  were  really  worn,  and  mangers  for 
horses,  with  bits  and  bridles  above  the  usual 
size,  which  he  set  up,  and  distributed  in  several 
places.  He  erected  altars,  also,  to  the  gods, 
which  the  kings  of  the  Praesians  even  in  our 
time  do  honour  to  when  they  pass  the  river, 
and  offer  sacrifice  upon  them  after  the  Grecian 
manner. 

Androcottus,  then  a  boy,  saw  Alexander 
there,  and  is  said  often  afterwards  to  have  been 
heard  to  say  that  he  missed  but  little  of  mak¬ 
ing  himself  master  of  those  countries;  their 
king,  who  then  reigned,  was  so  hated  and  de¬ 
spised  for  the  viciousness  of  his  life  and  the 
meanness  of  his  extraction. 

Alexander  was  now  eager  to  see  the  ocean. 
To  which  purpose  he  caused  a  great  many  tow¬ 
boats  and  rafts  to  be  built,  in  which  he  fell 
gently  down  the  rivers  at  his  leisure,  yet  so  that 
his  navigation  was  neither  unprofitable  nor  in¬ 
active.  For  by  several  descents  upon  the  bank, 
he  made  himself  master  of  the  fortified  towns, 
and  consequently  of  the  country  on  both  sides. 
But  at  a  siege  of  a  town  of  the  Mallians,  who 
have  the  repute  of  being  the  bravest  people  of 
India,  he  ran  in  great  danger  of  his  life.  For 
having  beaten  off  the  defendants  with  showers 
of  arrows,  he  was  the  first  man  that  mounted 
the  wall  by  a  scaling-ladder,  which,  as  soon  as 
he  was  up,  broke  and  left  him  almost  alone,  ex¬ 
posed  to  the  darts  which  the  barbarians  threw 
at  him  in  great  numbers  from  below. 

In  this  distress,  turning  himself  as  well  as  he 
could,  he  leaped  down  in  the  midst  of  his  en¬ 
emies,  and  had  the  good  fortune  to  light  upon 
his  feet.  The  brightness  and  clattering  of  his 
armour  when  he  came  to  the  ground  made  the 


ALEXANDER 

barbarians  think  they  saw  rays  of  light,  or 
some  bright  phantom  playing  before  his  body, 
which  frightened  them  so  at  first  that  they  ran 
away  and  dispersed.  Till  seeing  him  seconded 
but  by  two  of  his  guards,  they  fell  upon  him 
hand  to  hand,  and  some,  while  he  bravely  de¬ 
fended  himself,  tried  to  wound  him  through 
his  armour  with  their  swords  and  spears.  And 
one  who  stood  further  off  drew  a  bow  with 
such  just  strength  that  the  arrow,  finding  its 
way  through  his  cuirass,  stuck  in  his  ribs  under 
the  breast.  This  stroke  was  so  violent  that  it 
made  him  give  back,  and  set  one  knee  to  the 
ground,  upon  which  the  man  ran  up  with  his 
drawn  scimitar,  thinking  to  despatch  him,  and 
had  done  it,  if  Peucestes  and  Limnaeus  had  not 
interposed,  who  were  both  wounded,  Limnaeus 
mortally,  but  Peucestes  stood  his  ground,  while 
Alexander  killed  the  barbarians. 

But  this  did  not  free  him  from  danger;  for, 
besides  many  other  wounds,  at  last  he  received 
so  weighty  a  stroke  of  a  club  upon  his  neck 
that  he  was  forced  to  lean  his  body  against  the 
wall,  still,  however,  facing  the  enemy.  At  this 
extremity,  the  Macedonians  made  their  way  in 
and  gathered  round  him.  They  took  him  up, 
just  as  he  was  fainting  away,  having  lost  all 
sense  of  what  was  done  near  him,  and  con¬ 
veyed  him  to  his  tent,  upon  which  it  was  pres¬ 
ently  reported  all  over  the  camp  that  he  was 
dead.  But  when  they  had  with  great  difficulty 
and  pains  sawed  off  the  shaft  of  the  arrow, 
which  was  of  wood,  and  so  with  much  trouble 
got  off  his  cuirass,  they  came  to  cut  the  head  of 
it,  which  was  three  fingers  broad  and  four 
long,  and  stuck  fast  in  the  bone.  During  the 
operation  he  was  taken  with  almost  mortal 
swoonings,  but  when  it  was  out  he  came  to 
himself  again. 

Yet  though  all  danger  was  past,  he  con¬ 
tinued  very  weak,  and  confined  himself  a  great 
while  to  a  regular  diet  and  the  method  of  his 
cure,  till  one  day  hearing  the  Macedonians 
clamouring  outside  in  their  eagerness  to  see 
him,  he  took  his  cloak  and  went  out.  And  hav¬ 
ing  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  without  more  de¬ 
lay  he  went  on  board  again,  and  as  he 
coasted  along  subdued  a  great  deal  of  the 
country  on  both  sides,  and  several  consider¬ 
able  cities. 

In  this  voyage  he  took  ten  of  the  Indian  phi¬ 
losophers  prisoners  who  had  been  most  active 
in  persuading  Sabbas  to  revolt,  and  had  caused 
the  Macedonians  a  great  deal  of  trouble.  These 
men,  called  gymnosophists,  were  reputed  to  be 
extremely  ready  and  succinct  in  their  answers, 


571 

which  he  made  trial  of,  by  putting  difficult 
questions  to  them,  letting  them  know  that 
those  whose  answers  were  not  pertinent  should 
be  put  to  death,  of  which  he  made  the  eldest 
of  them  judge. 

The  first  being  asked  which  he  thought  the 
most  numerous,  the  dead  or  the  living,  an¬ 
swered,  “The  living,  because  those  who  are 
dead  are  not  at  all.”  Of  the  second,  he  desired 
to  know  whether  the  earth  or  the  sea  produced 
the  largest  beasts;  who  told  him,  “The  earth, 
for  the  sea  is  but  a  part  of  it.”  His  question  to 
the  third  was,  “Which  is  the  cunningest  of 
beasts?”  “That,”  said  he,  “which  men  have  not 
yet  found  out.”  He  bade  the  fourth  tell  him 
what  argument  he  used  to  Sabbas  to  persuade 
him  to  revolt.  “No  other,”  said  he,  “than  that 
he  should  either  live  or  die  nobly.”  Of  the  fifth 
he  asked,  which  was  the  eldest,  night  or  day. 
The  philosopher  replied,  “Day  was  eldest,  by 
one  day  at  least.”  But  perceiving  Alexander 
not  well  satisfied  with  that  account,  he  added 
that  he  ought  not  to  wonder  if  strange  ques¬ 
tions  had  as  strange  answers  made  to  them. 
Then  he  went  on  and  inquired  of  the  next, 
what  a  man  should  do  to  be  exceedingly  be¬ 
loved.  “He  must  be  very  powerful,”  said  he, 
“without  making  himself  too  much  feared.” 
The  answer  of  the  seventh  to  his  question,  how 
a  man  might  become  a  god,  was,  “By  doing 
that  which  was  impossible  for  men  to  do.”  The 
eighth  told  him,  “Life  is  stronger  than  death, 
because  it  supports  so  many  miseries.”  And 
the  last  being  asked  how  long  he  thought  it 
decent  for  a  man  to  live,  said,  “Till  death  ap¬ 
peared  more  desirable  than  life.” 

Then  Alexander  turned  to  him  whom  he 
had  made  judge,  and  commanded  him  to  give 
sentence.  “All  that  I  can  determine,”  said 
he,  “is,  that  they  have  every  one  answered 
worse  than  another.”  “Nay,”  said  the  king, 
“then  you  shall  die  first,  for  giving  such  a 
sentence.”  “Not  so,  O  king,”  replied  the 
gymnosophist,  “unless  you  said  falsely  that  he 
should  die  first  who  made  the  worst  answer.” 
In  conclusion  he  gave  them  presents  and 
dismissed  them. 

But  to  those  who  were  in  greatest  reputation 
among  them,  and  lived  a  private  quiet  life,  he 
sent  Onesicritus,  one  of  Diogenes  the  Cynic’s 
disciples,  desiring  them  to  come  to  him.  Cala- 
nus,  it  is  said,  very  arrogantly  and  roughly 
commanded  him  to  strip  himself  and  hear 
what  he  said  naked,  otherwise  he  would  not 
speak  a  word  to  him,  though  he  came  from 
Jupiter  himself.  But  Dandamis  received  him 


572 

with  more  civility,  and  hearing  him  discourse 
of  Socrates,  Pythagoras,  and  Diogenes,  told 
him  he  thought  them  men  of  great  parts  and  to 
have  erred  in  nothing  so  much  as  in  having  too 
great  respect  for  the  laws  and  customs  of  their 
country.  Others  say  Dandamis  only  asked  him 
the  reason  why  Alexander  undertook  so  long 
a  journey  to  come  into  those  parts. 

Taxiles,  however,  persuaded  Calanus  to  wait 
upon  Alexander.  His  proper  name  was  Sphines, 
but  because  he  was  wont  to  say  Cale,  which  in 
the  Indian  tongue  is  a  form  of  salutation,  to 
those  he  met  with  anywhere,  the  Greeks  called 
him  Calanus.  He  is  said  to  have  shown  Alex¬ 
ander  an  instructive  emblem  of  government, 
which  was  this.  He  threw  a  dry  shrivelled  hide 
upon  the  ground,  and  trod  upon  the  edges  of 
it.  The  skin  when  it  was  pressed  in  one  place 
still  rose  up  in  another,  wheresoever  he  trod 
round  about  it,  till  he  set  his  foot  in  the  middle, 
which  made  all  the  parts  lie  even  and  quiet. 
The  meaning  of  this  similitude  being  that  he 
ought  to  reside  most  in  the  middle  of  his  em¬ 
pire,  and  not  spend  too  much  time  on  the  bor¬ 
ders  of  it. 

His  voyage  down  the  rivers  took  up  seven 
months’  time,  and  when  he  came  to  the  sea,  he 
sailed  to  an  island  which  he  himself  called 
Scillustis,  others  Psiltucis,  where  going  ashore, 
he  sacrificed,  and  made  what  observations  he 
could  as  to  the  nature  of  the  sea  and  the  sea- 
coast.  Then  having  besought  the  gods  that  no 
other  man  might  ever  go  beyond  the  bounds 
of  this  expedition,  he  ordered  his  fleet,  of  which 
he  made  Nearchus  admiral  and  Onesicritus 
pilot,  to  sail  round  about,  keeping  the  Indian 
shore  on  the  right  hand,  and  returned  himself 
by  land  through  the  country  of  the  Orites, 
where  he  was  reduced  to  great  straits  for  want 
of  provisions,  and  lost  a  vast  number  of  his 
men,  so  that  of  an  army  of  one  hundred  and 
twenty  thousand  foot  and  fifteen  thousand 
horse,  he  scarcely  brought  back  above  a  fourth 
part  out  of  India,  they  were  so  diminished  by 
disease,  ill  diet,  and  the  scorching  heats,  but 
most  by  famine.  For  their  march  was  through 
an  uncultivated  country  whose  inhabitants 
fared  hardly,  possessing  only  a  few  sheep,  and 
those  of  a  wretched  kind,  whose  flesh  was  rank 
and  unsavoury,  by  their  continual  feeding  upon 
sea-fish. 

After  sixty  days’  march  he  came  into  Gedro- 
sia,  where  he  found  great  plenty  of  all  things, 
which  the  neighboring  kings  and  governors  of 
provinces,  hearing  of  his  approach,  had  taken 
care  to  provide. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

When  he  had  here  refreshed  his  army,  he 
continued  his  march  through  Carmania,  feast¬ 
ing  all  the  way  for  seven  days  together.  He 
with  his  most  intimate  friends  banqueted  and 
revelled  night  and  day  upon  a  platform  erected 
on  a  lofty,  conspicuous  scaffold,  which  was 
slowly  drawn  by  eight  horses.  This  was  fol¬ 
lowed  by  a  great  many  chariots,  some  covered 
with  purple  and  embroidered  canopies,  and 
some  with  green  boughs,  which  were  continu¬ 
ally  supplied  afresh,  and  in  them  the  rest  of 
his  friends  and  commanders  drinking,  and 
crowned  with  garlands  of  flowers.  Here  was 
now  no  target  or  helmet  or  spear  to  be  seen;  in¬ 
stead  of  armour,  the  soldiers  handled  nothing 
but  cups  and  goblets  and  Thericlean  drinking 
vessels,  which,  along  the  whole  way,  they 
dipped  into  large  bowls  and  jars,  and  drank 
healths  to  one  another,  some  seating  themselves 
to  it,  others  as  they  went  along. 

All  places  resounded  with  music  of  pipes 
and  flutes,  with  harping  and  singing,  and 
women  dancing  as  in  the  rites  of  Bacchus.  For 
this  disorderly,  wandering  march,  besides  the 
drinking  part  of  it,  was  accompanied  with  all 
the  sport.iveness  and  insolence  of  bacchanals, 
as  much  as  if  the  god  himself  had  been  there 
to  countenance  and  lead  the  procession. 

As  soon  as  he  came  to  the  royal  palace  of 
Gedrosia,  he  again  refreshed  and  feasted  his 
army;  and  one  day  he  had  drunk  pretty  hard, 
it  is  said,  he  went  to  see  a  prize  of  dancing  con¬ 
tended  for,  in  which  his  favourite,  Bagoas,  hav¬ 
ing  gained  the  victory,  crossed  the  theatre  in 
his  dancing  habit,  and  sat  down  close  by  him, 
which  so  pleased  the  Macedonians  that  they 
made  loud  acclamations  for  him  to  kiss  Bagoas, 
and  never  stopped  clapping  their  hands  and 
shouting  till  Alexander  put  his  arms  round 
him  and  kissed  him. 

Here  his  admiral,  Nearchus,  came  to  him, 
and  delighted  him  so  with  the  narrative  of  his 
voyage,  that  he  resolved  himself  to  sail  out  of 
the  mouth  of  the  Euphrates  with  a  great  fleet, 
with  which  he  designed  to  go  round  by  Arabia 
and  Africa,  and  so  by  Hercules’s  Pillars  into 
the  Mediterranean;  in  order  for  which,  he  di¬ 
rected  all  sorts  of  vessels  to  be  built  at  Thapsa- 
cus,  and  made  great  provisions  everywhere  of 
seamen  and  pilots. 

But  the  tidings  of  the  difficulties  he  had  gone 
through  in  his  Indian  expedition,  the  danger 
of  his  person  among  the  Mallians,  the  reported 
loss  of  a  considerable  part  of  his  forces,  and  a 
general  doubt  as  to  his  own  safety,  had  begun 
to  give  occasion  for  revolt  among  many  of  the 


ALEXANDER 

conquered  nations,  and  for  acts  of  great  injus¬ 
tice,  avarice,  and  insolence  on  the  part  of  the 
satraps  and  commanders  in  the  provinces,  so 
that  there  seemed  to  be  an  universal  fluctua¬ 
tion  and  disposition  to  change. 

Even  at  home,  Olympias  and  Cleopatra  had 
raised  a  faction  against  Antipater,  and  divided 
his  government  between  them,  Olympias  seiz¬ 
ing  upon  Epirus,  and  Cleopatra  upon  Mace¬ 
donia.  When  Alexander  was  told  of  it,  he  said 
his  mother  had  made  the  best  choice,  for  the 
Macedonians  would  never  endure  to  be  ruled 
by  a  woman. 

Upon  this  he  despatched  Nearchus  again  to 
his  fleet,  to  carry  the  war  into  the  maritime 
provinces,  and  as  he  marched  that  way  himself 
he  punished  those  commanders  who  had  be¬ 
haved  ill,  particularly  Oxyartes,  one  of  the  sons 
of  Abuletes,  whom  he  killed  with  his  own 
hand,  thrusting  him  through  the  body  with 
his  spear.  And  when  Abuletes,  instead  of  the 
necessary  provisions  which  he  ought  to  have 
furnished,  brought  him  three  thousand  talents 
in  coined  money,  he  ordered  it  to  be  thrown  to 
his  horses,  and  when  they  would  not  touch  it, 
“What  good,”  he  said,  “will  this  provision  do 
us?”  and  sent  him  away  to  prison. 

When  he  came  into  Persia,  he  distributed 
money  among  the  women,  as  their  own  kings 
had  been  wont  to  do,  who  as  often  as  they 
came  thither  gave  every  one  of  them  a  piece  of 
gold;  on  account  of  which  custom,  some  of 
them,  it  is  said,  had  come  but  seldom,  and 
Ochus  was  so  sordidly  covetous  that,  to  avoid 
this  expense,  he  never  visited  his  native  coun¬ 
try  once  in  all  his  reign.  Then  finding  Cyrus’s 
sepulchre  opened  and  rifled,  he  put  Polyma- 
chus,  who  did  it,  to  death,  though  he  was  a 
man  of  some  distinction,  a  born  Macedonian 
of  Pella.  And  after  he  had  read  the  inscription, 
he  caused  it  to  be  cut  again  below  the  old  one 
in  Greek  characters;  the  words  being  these: 
“O  man,  whosoever  thou  art,  and  from  whence¬ 
soever  thou  comest  (for  I  know  thou  wilt 
come),  I  am  Cyrus,  the  founder  of  the  Persian 
empire;  do  not  grudge  me  this  little  earth 
which  covers  my  body.”  The  reading  of  this 
sensibly  touched  Alexander,  filling  him  with 
the  thought  of  the  uncertainty  and  mutability 
of  human  affairs. 

At  the  same  time  Calanus,  having  been  a 
little  while  troubled  with  a  disease  in  the 
bowels,  requested  that  he  might  have  a  funeral 
pile  erected,  to  which  he  came  on  horseback, 
and,  after  he  had  said  some  prayers  and 
sprinkled  himself  and  cut  off  some  of  his  hair 


573 

to  throw  into  the  fire,  before  he  ascended  it,  he 
embraced  and  took  leave  of  the  Macedonians 
who  stood  by,  desiring  them  to  pass  that  day 
in  mirth  and  good-fellowship  with  their  king, 
whom  in  a  little  time,  he  said,  he  doubted  not 
but  to  see  again  at  Babylon.  Having  thus  said, 
he  lay  down,  and  covering  up  his  face,  he 
stirred  not  when  the  fire  came  near  him,  but 
continued  still  in  the  same  posture  as  at  first, 
and  so  sacrificed  himself,  as  it  was  the  ancient 
custom  of  the  philosophers  in  those  countries 
to  do.  The  same  thing  was  done  long  after  by 
another  Indian  who  came  with  Caesar  to  Ath¬ 
ens,  where  they  still  show  you,  “the  Indian’s 
monument.” 

At  his  return  from  the  funeral  pile,  Alexan¬ 
der  invited  a  great  many  of  his  friends  and 
principal  officers  to  supper,  and  proposed  a 
drinking  match,  in  which  the  victor  should  re¬ 
ceive  a  crown.  Promachus  drank  twelve  quarts 
of  wine,  and  won  the  prize,  which  was  a  talent 
from  them  all;  but  he  survived  his  victory  but 
three  days,  and  was  followed,  as  Chares  says, 
by  forty-one  more,  who  died  of  the  same  de¬ 
bauch,  some  extremely  cold  weather  having 
set  in  shortly  after. 

At  Susa,  he  married  Darius’s  daughter  Sta- 
tira,  and  celebrated  also  the  nuptials  of  his 
friends,  bestowing  the  noblest  of  the  Persian 
ladies  upon  the  worthiest  of  them,  at  the  same 
time  making  it  an  entertainment  in  honour  of 
the  other  Macedonians  whose  marriages  had 
already  taken  place.  At  this  magnificent  fes¬ 
tival,  it  is  reported,  there  were  no  less  than 
nine  thousand  guests,  to  each  of  whom  he  gave 
a  golden  cup  for  the  libations.  Not  to  mention 
other  instances  of  his  wonderful  magnificence, 
he  paid  the  debts  of  his  army,  which  amounted 
to  nine  thousand  eight  hundred  and  seventy 
talents. 

But  Antigenes,  who  had  lost  one  of  his  eyes, 
though  he  owed  nothing,  got  his  name  set 
down  in  the  list  of  those  who  were  in  debt,  and 
bringing  one  who  pretended  to  be  his  creditor, 
and  to  have  supplied  him  from  the  bank,  re¬ 
ceived  the  money.  But  when  the  cheat  was 
found  out,  the  king  was  so  incensed  at  it,  that 
he  banished  him  from  court,  and  took  away  his 
command,  though  he  was  an  excellent  soldier 
and  a  man  of  great  courage.  For  when  he  was 
but  a  youth,  and  served  under  Philip  at  the 
siege  of  Perinthus,  where  he  was  wounded  in 
the  eye  by  an  arrow  shot  out  of  an  engine,  he 
would  neither  let  the  arrow  be  taken  out  nor 
be  persuaded  to  quit  the  field  till  he  had 
bravely  repulsed  the  enemy  and  forced  them  to 


574 

retire  into  the  town.  Accordingly  he  was  not 
able  to  support  such  a  disgrace  with  any  pa¬ 
tience,  and  it  was  plain  that  grief  and  de¬ 
spair  would  have  made  him  kill  himself, 
but  the  king  fearing  it,  not  only  pardoned 
him,  but  let  him  also  enjoy  the  benefit  of  his 
deceit. 

The  thirty  thousand  boys  whom  he  left  be¬ 
hind  him  to  be  taught  and  disciplined  were  so 
improved  at  his  return,  both  in  strength  and 
beauty,  and  performed  their  exercises  with 
such  dexterity  and  wonderful  agility,  that  he 
was  extremely  pleased  with  them,  which 
grieved  the  Macedonians,  and  made  them  fear 
he  would  have  the  less  value  for  them.  And 
when  he  proceeded  to  send  down  the  infirm 
and  maimed  soldiers  to  the  sea,  they  said  they 
were  unjustly  and  infamously  dealt  with,  after 
they  were  worn  out  in  his  service  upon  all  oc¬ 
casions,  now  to  be  turned  away  with  disgrace 
and  sent  home  into  their  country  among  their 
friends  and  relations  in  a  worse  condition  than 
when  they  came  out;  therefore  they  desired 
him  to  dismiss  them  one  and  all,  and  to  ac¬ 
count  his  Macedonians  useless,  now  he  was  so 
well  furnished  with  a  set  of  dancing  boys,  with 
whom,  if  he  pleased,  he  might  go  on  and  con¬ 
quer  the  world.  These  speeches  so  incensed 
Alexander  that,  after  he  had  given  them  a 
great  deal  of  reproachful  language  in  his  pas¬ 
sion,  he  drove  them  away,  and  committed  the 
watch  to  Persians,  out  of  whom  he  chose  his 
guards  and  attendants. 

When  the  Macedonians  saw  him  escorted 
by  these  men,  and  themselves  excluded  and 
shamefully  disgraced,  their  high  spirits  fell, 
and  conferring  with  one  another,  they  found 
that  jealousy  and  rage  had  almost  distracted 
them.  But  at  last  coming  to  themselves  again, 
they  went  without  their  arms,  with  only  their 
under  garments  on,  crying  and  weeping  to  of¬ 
fer  themselves  at  his  tent,  and  desired  him  to 
deal  with  them  as  their  baseness  and  ingrati¬ 
tude  deserved.  However,  this  would  not  pre¬ 
vail;  for  though  his  anger  was  already  some¬ 
thing  mollified,  yet  he  would  not  admit  them 
into  his  presence,  nor  would  they  stir  from 
thence,  but  continued  two  days  and  nights  be¬ 
fore  his  tent,  bewailing  themselves,  and  im¬ 
ploring  him  as  their  lord  to  have  compassion 
on  them. 

But  the  third  day  he  came  out  to  them,  and 
seeing  them  very  humble  and  penitent,  he  wept 
himself  a  great  while,  after  a  gentle  reproof 
spoke  kindly  to  them,  and  dismissed  those  who 
were  unserviceable  with  magnificent  rewards, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  with  his  recommendation  to  Antipater, 
that  when  they  came  home,  at  all  public  shows 
and  in  the  theatres,  they  should  sit  on  the  best 
and  foremost  seats,  crowned  with  chaplets  of 
flowers.  He  ordered,  also,  that  the  children 
of  those  who  had  lost  their  lives  in  his  service 
should  have  their  father’s  pay  continued  to 
them. 

When  he  came  to  Ecbatana  in  Media,  and 
had  despatched  his  most  urgent  affairs,  he  be¬ 
gan  to  divert  himself  again  with  spectacles  and 
public  entertainments,  to  carry  on  which  he 
had  a  supply  of  three  thousand  actors  and  art¬ 
ists,  newly  arrived  out  of  Greece.  But  they 
were  soon  interrupted  by  Hephaestion’s  falling 
sick  of  a  fever,  in  which,  being  a  young  man 
and  a  soldier,  too,  he  could  not  confine  himself 
to  so  exact  a  diet  as  was  necessary;  for  whilst 
his  physician,  Glaucus,  was  gone  to  the  theatre, 
he  ate  a  fowl  for  his  dinner,  and  drank  a  large 
draught  of  wine,  upon  which  he  became  very 
ill,  and  shortly  after  died. 

At  this  misfortune,  Alexander  was  so  beyond 
all  reason  transported  that,  to  express  his  sor¬ 
row,  he  immediately  ordered  the  manes  and 
tails  of  all  his  horses  and  mules  to  be  cut,  and 
threw  down  the  battlements  of  the  neighbour¬ 
ing  cities.  The  poor  physician  he  crucified, 
and  forbade  playing  on  the  flute  or  any  other 
musical  instrument  in  the  camp  a  great  while, 
till  directions  came  from  the  oracle  of  Ammon, 
and  enjoined  him  to  honour  Hephaestion,  and 
sacrifice  to  him  as  to  a  hero. 

Then  seeking  to  alleviate  his  grief  in  war,  he 
set  out,  as  it  were,  to  a  hunt  and  chase  of  men, 
for  he  fell  upon  the  Cossaeans,  and  put  the 
whole  nation  to  the  sword.  This  was  called  a 
sacrifice  to  Hephaestion’s  ghost. 

In  his  sepulchre  and  monument  and  the  j  I 
adorning  of  them  he  intended  to  bestow  ten 
thousand  talents;  and  designing  that  the  excel-  I 
lence  of  the  workmanship  and  the  singularity  1 
of  the  design  might  outdo  the  expense,  his  ;  I 
wishes  turned,  above  all  other  artists,  to  Stasi-  t 
crates,  because  he  always  promised  something  ( 
very  bold,  unusual,  and  magnificent  in  his  j  t 
projects.  Once  when  they  had  met  before,  he  s 
had  told  him  that,  of  all  the  mountains  he 
knew,  that  of  Athos  in  Thrace  was  the  most  :  t 
capable  of  being  adapted  to  represent  the  shape  j  l 
and  lineaments  of  a  man;  that  if  he  pleased  to  t 

command  him,  he  would  make  it  the  noblest  $ 

and  most  durable  statue  in  the  world,  which  in 
its  left  hand  should  hold  a  city  of  ten  thousand  a 
inhabitants,  and  out  of  its  right  should  pour  a  c 
copious  river  into  the  sea.  Though  Alexander  a 


ALEXANDER 

declined  this  proposal,  yet  now  he  spent  a  great 
deal  of  time  with  workmen  to  invent  and  con¬ 
trive  others  even  more  extravagant  and  sump¬ 
tuous. 

As  he  was  upon  his  way  to  Babylon,  Near- 
chus,  who  had  sailed  back  out  of  the  ocean  up 
the  mouth  of  the  river  Euphrates,  came  to  tell 
him  he  had  met  with  some  Chaldaean  diviners, 
who  had  warned  him  against  Alexander’s  go¬ 
ing  thither.  Alexander,  however,  took  no 
thought  of  it,  and  went  on,  and  when  he  came 
near  the  walls  of  the  place,  he  saw  a  great  many 
crows  fighting  with  one  another,  some  of 
whom  fell  down  just  by  him.  After  this,  being 
privately  informed  that  Apollodorus,  the  gov¬ 
ernor  of  Babylon,  had  sacrificed  to  know  what 
would  become  of  him,  he  sent  for  Pythagoras, 
the  soothsayer,  and  on  his  admitting  the  thing, 
asked  him  in  what  condition  he  found  the  vic¬ 
tim;  and  when  he  told  him  the  liver  was  de¬ 
fective  in  its  lobe,  “A  great  presage  indeed!” 
said  Alexander.  However,  he  offered  Pytha¬ 
goras  no  injury,  but  was  sorry  that  he  had  neg¬ 
lected  Nearchus’s  advice,  and  stayed  for  the 
most  part  outside  the  town,  removing  his  tent 
from  place  to  place,  and  sailing  up  and  down 
the  Euphrates. 

Besides  this,  he  was  disturbed  by  many  other 
prodigies.  A  tame  ass  fell  upon  the  biggest  and 
handsomest  lion  that  he  kept,  and  killed  him 
by  a  kick.  And  one  day  after  he  had  undressed 
himself  to  be  anointed,  and  was  playing  at  ball, 
just  as  they  were  going  to  bring  his  clothes 
again,  the  young  men  who  played  with  him 
perceived  a  man  clad  in  the  king’s  robes  with 
a  diadem  upon  his  head,  sitting  silently  upon 
his  throne.  They  asked  him  who  he  was,  to 
which  he  gave  no  answer  a  good  while,  till  at 
last,  coming  to  himself,  he  told  them  his  name 
was  Dionysius,  that  he  was  of  Messena,  that 
for  some  crime  of  which  he  was  accused  he 
was  brought  thither  from  the  seaside,  and  had 
been  kept  long  in  prison,  that  Serapis  appeared 
to  him,  had  freed  him  from  his  chains,  con¬ 
ducted  him  to  that  place,  and  commanded  him 
to  put  on  the  king’s  robe  and  diadem,  and  to 
sit  where  they  found  him,  and  to  say  nothing. 
Alexander,  when  he  heard  this,  by  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  his  soothsayers,  put  the  fellow  to  death, 
but  he  lost  his  spirits,  and  grew  diffident  of 
the  protection  and  assistance  of  the  gods,  and 
suspicious  of  his  friends. 

His  greatest  apprehension  was  of  Antipater 
and  his  sons,  one  of  whom,  Iolaus,  was  his 
chief  cupbearer;  and  Cassander,  who  had  lately 
arrived,  and  had  been  bred  up  in  Greek  man- 


575 

ners,  the  first  time  he  saw  some  of  the  barba¬ 
rians  adore  the  king  could  not  forbear  laugh¬ 
ing  at  it  aloud,  which  so  incensed  Alexander 
that  he  took  him  by  the  hair  with  both  hands 
and  dashed  his  head  against  the  wall. 

Another  time,  Cassander  would  have  said 
something  in  defence  of  Antipater  to  those 
who  accused  him,  but  Alexander  interrupting 
him,  said,  “What  is  it  you  say?  Do  you  think 
people,  if  they  had  received  no  injury,  would 
come  such  a  journey  only  to  calumniate  your 
father?”  To  which  when  Cassander  replied, 
that  their  coming  so  far  from  the  evidence  was 
a  great  proof  of  the  falseness  of  their  charges, 
Alexander  smiled,  and  said  those  were  some 
of  Aristotle’s  sophisms,  which  would  serve 
equally  on  both  sides;  and  added,  that  both  he 
and  his  father  should  be  severely  punished  if 
they  were  found  guilty  of  the  least  injustice  to¬ 
wards  those  who  complained. 

All  which  made  such  a  deep  impression  of 
terror  in  Cassander’s  mind  that,  long  after, 
when  he  was  King  of  Macedonia  and  master 
of  Greece,  as  he  was  walking  up  and  down  at 
Delphi,  and  looking  at  the  statues,  at  the  sight 
of  that  of  Alexander  he  was  suddenly  struck 
with  alarm,  and  shook  all  over;  his  eyes  rolled, 
his  head  grew  dizzy,  and  it  was  long  before 
he  recovered  himself. 

When  once  Alexander  had  given  way  to 
fears  of  supernatural  influence,  his  mind  grew 
so  disturbed  and  so  easily  alarmed  that,  if  the 
least  unusual  or  extraordinary  thing  happened, 
he  thought  it  a  prodigy  or  a  presage,  and  his 
court  was  thronged  with  diviners  and  priests 
whose  business  was  to  sacrifice  and  purify  and 
foretell  the  future.  So  miserable  a  thing  is  in¬ 
credulity  and  contempt  of  divine  power  on  the 
one  hand,  and  so  miserable,  also,  superstition 
on  the  other,  which  like  water,  where  the  level 
has  been  lowered,  flowing  in  and  never  stop¬ 
ping,  fills  the  mind  with  slavish  fears  and 
follies,  as  now  in  Alexander’s  case. 

But  upon  some  answers  which  were  brought 
him  from  the  oracle  concerning  Hephaestion, 
he  laid  aside  his  sorrow,  and  fell  again  to  sacri¬ 
ficing  and  drinking;  and  having  given  Near- 
chus  a  splendid  entertainment,  after  he  had 
bathed,  as  was  his  custom,  just  as  he  was  going 
to  bed,  at  Medius’s  request  he  went  to  supper 
with  him.  Here  he  drank  all  the  next  day,  and 
was  attacked  with  a  fever,  which  seized  him, 
not  as  some  write,  after  he  had  drunk  of  the 
bowl  of  Hercules,  nor  was  he  taken  with  any 
sudden  pain  in  his  back,  as  if  he  had  been 
struck  with  a  lance,  for  these  are  the  inventions 


576 

of  some  authors  who  thought  it  their  duty  to 
make  the  last  scene  of  so  great  an  action  as 
tragical  and  moving  as  they  could.  Aristobulus 
tells  us,  that  in  the  rage  of  his  fever  and  a  vio¬ 
lent  thirst,  he  took  a  draught  of  wine,  upon 
which  he  fell  into  delirium,  and  died  on  the 
thirtieth  day  of  the  month  Daesius. 

But  the  journals  give  the  following  record. 
On  the  eighteenth  day  of  the  month  he  slept 
in  the  bathing-room  on  account  of  his  fever. 
The  next  day  he  bathed  and  removed  into  his 
chamber,  and  spent  his  time  in  playing  at  dice 
with  Medius.  In  the  evening  he  bathed  and 
sacrificed,  and  ate  freely,  and  had  the  fever  on 
him  through  the  night.  On  the  twentieth,  after 
the  usual  sacrifices  and  bathing,  he  lay  in  the 
bathing-room  and  heard  Nearchus’s  narrative 
of  his  voyage,  and  the  observations  he  had 
made  in  the  great  sea.  The  twenty-first  he 
passed  in  the  same  manner,  his  fever  still  in¬ 
creasing,  and  suffered  much  during  the  night. 
The  next  day  the  fever  was  very  violent,  and 
he  had  himself  removed  and  his  bed  set  by  the 
great  bath,  and  discoursed  with  his  principal 
officers  about  finding  fit  men  to  fill  up  the  va¬ 
cant  places  in  the  army.  On  the  twenty-fourth 
he  was  much  worse,  and  was  carried  out  of  his 
bed  to  assist  at  the  sacrifices,  and  gave  order 
that  the  general  officers  should  wait  within  the 
court,  whilst  the  inferior  officers  kept  watch 
without  doors.  On  the  twenty-fifth  he  was  re¬ 
moved  to  his  palace  on  the  other  side  of  the  riv¬ 
er,  where  he  slept  a  little,  but  his  fever  did  not 
abate,  and  when  the  generals  came  into  his 
chamber,  he  was  speechless  and  continued  so 
the  following  day. 

The  Macedonians,  therefore,  supposing  he 
was  dead,  came  with  great  clamours  to  the 
gates,  and  menaced  his  friends  so  that  they 
were  forced  to  admit  them,  and  let  them  all 
pass  through  unarmed  along  by  his  bedside. 
The  same  day  Python  and  Seleucus  were  des¬ 
patched  to  the  temple  of  Serapis  to  inquire  if 
they  should  bring  Alexander  thither,  and  were 
answered  by  the  god  that  they  should  not  re¬ 
move  him.  On  the  twenty-eighth,  in  the  eve- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ning,  he  died.  This  account  is  most  of  it  word 
for  word  as  it  is  written  in  the  diary. 

At  the  time,  nobody  had  any  suspicion  of 
his  being  poisoned,  but  upon  some  information 
given  six  years  after,  they  say  Olympias  put 
many  to  death,  and  scattered  the  ashes  of  Io- 
laus,  then  dead,  as  if  he  had  given  it  him.  But 
those  who  affirm  that  Aristotle  counselled  An¬ 
tipater  to  do  it,  and  that  by  his  means  the 
poison  was  brought,  adduce  one  Hagnothemis 
as  their  authority,  who,  they  say,  heard  King 
Antigonus  speak  of  it,  and  tell  us  that  the  poi¬ 
son  was  water,  deadly  cold  as  ice,  distilled  from 
a  rock  in  the  district  of  Nonacris,  which  they 
gathered  like  a  thin  dew,  and  kept  in  an  ass’s 
hoof;  for  it  was  so  very  cold  and  penetrating 
that  no  other  vessel  would  hold  it.  However, 
most  are  of  opinion  that  all  this  is  a  mere  made- 
up  story,  no  slight  evidence  of  which  is,  that 
during  the  dissensions  among  the  command¬ 
ers,  which  lasted  several  days,  the  body  con¬ 
tinued  clear  and  fresh,  without  any  sign  of 
such  taint  or  corruption,  though  it  lay  neglect¬ 
ed  in  a  close  sultry  place. 

Roxana,  who  was  now  with  child,  and  upon 
that  account  much  honoured  by  the  Mace¬ 
donians,  being  jealous  of  Statira,  sent  for  her 
by  a  counterfeit  letter,  as  if  Alexander  had 
been  still  alive;  and  when  she  had  her  in  her 
power,  killed  her  and  her  sister,  and  threw 
their  bodies  into  a  well,  which  they  filled  up 
with  earth,  not  without  the  privity  and  assist¬ 
ance  of  Perdiccas,  who  in  the  time  immediate¬ 
ly  following  the  king’s  death,  under  cover  of 
the  name  of  Arrhidaeus,  whom  he  carried 
about  him  as  a  sort  of  guard  to  his  person,  ex¬ 
ercised  the  chief  authority. 

Arrhidaeus,  who  was  Philip’s  son  by  an  ob¬ 
scure  woman  of  the  name  of  Philinna,  was 
himself  of  weak  intellect,  not  that  he  had  been 
originally  deficient  either  in  body  or  mind;  on 
the  contrary,  in  his  childhood,  he  had  showed 
a  happy  and  promising  character  enough.  But 
a  diseased  habit  of  body,  caused  by  drugs 
which  Olympias  gave  him,  had  ruined,  not 
only  his  health,  but  his  understanding. 


C/ESAR 

IOO-44  B  C* 


after  Sulla  became  master  of  Rome,  he 

l\  wished  to  make  Caesar  put  away  his 
JL  JL  wife  Cornelia,  daughter  of  Cinna,  the 
late  sole  ruler  of  the  commonwealth,  but  was 
unable  to  effect  it  either  by  promises  or  intimi¬ 
dation,  and  so  contented  himself  with  confiscat¬ 
ing  her  dowry.  The  ground  of  Sulla’s  hostility 
to  Caesar  was  the  relationship  between  him  and 
Marius;  for  Marius,  the  elder,  married  Julia, 
the  sister  of  Caesar’s  father,  and  had  by  her  the 
younger  Marius,  who  consequently  was  Cae¬ 
sar’s  first  cousin. 

And  though  at  the  beginning,  while  so 
many  were  to  be  put  to  death,  and  there  was 
so  much  to  do,  Caesar  was  overlooked  by  Sulla, 
yet  he  would  not  keep  quiet,  but  presented 
himself  to  the  people  as  a  candidate  for  the 
priesthood,  though  he  was  yet  a  mere  boy. 
Sulla,  without  any  open  opposition,  took  meas¬ 
ures  to  have  him  rejected,  and  in  consultation 
whether  he  should  be  put  to  death,  when  it  was 
urged  by  some  that  it  was  not  worth  his  while 
to  contrive  the  death  of  a  boy,  he  answered, 
that  they  knew  little  who  did  not  see  more 
than  one  Marius  in  that  boy. 

Caesar,  on  being  informed  of  this  saying, 
concealed  himself,  and  for  a  considerable  time 
kept  out  of  the  way  in  the  country  of  the  Sa¬ 
bines,  often  changing  his  quarters,  till  one 
night,  as  he  was  removing  from  one  house  to 
another  on  account  of  his  health,  he  fell  into 
the  hands  of  Sulla’s  soldiers,  who  were  search¬ 
ing  those  parts  in  order  to  apprehend  any  who 
had  absconded. 

Caesar,  by  a  bribe  of  two  talents,  prevailed 
with  Cornelius,  their  captain,  to  let  him  go, 
and  was  no  sooner  dismissed  but  he  put  to  sea 
and  made  for  Bithynia.  After  a  short  stay  there 
with  Nicomedes,  the  king,  in  his  passage  back 
he  was  taken  near  the  island  of  Pharmacusa 
by  some  of  the  pirates,  who,  at  that  time,  with 
large  fleets  of  ships  and  innumerable  smaller 
vessels,  infested  the  seas  everywhere. 

When  these  men  at  first  demanded  of  him 
twenty  talents  for  his  ransom,  he  laughed  at 
them  for  not  understanding  the  value  of  their 
prisoner,  and  voluntarily  engaged  to  give  them 


fifty.  He  presently  despatched  those  about  him 
to  several  places  to  raise  the  money,  till  at  last 
he  was  left  among  a  set  of  the  most  blood¬ 
thirsty  people  in  the  world,  the  Cilicians,  only 
with  one  friend  and  two  attendants.  Yet  he 
made  so  little  of  them,  that  when  he  had  a 
mind  to  sleep,  he  would  send  to  them,  and 
order  them  to  make  no  noise. 

For  thirty-eight  days,  with  all  the  freedom 
in  the  world,  he  amused  himself  with  joining 
in  their  exercises  and  games,  as  if  they  had  not 
been  his  keepers,  but  his  guards.  He  wrote 
verses  and  speeches,  and  made  them  his  audi¬ 
tors,  and  those  who  did  not  admire  them,  he 
called  to  their  faces  illiterate  and  barbarous, 
and  would  often,  in  raillery,  threaten  to  hang 
them.  They  were  greatly  taken  with  this,  and 
attributed  his  free  talking  to  a  kind  of  simplic¬ 
ity  and  boyish  playfulness. 

As  soon  as  his  ransom  was  come  from  Mile¬ 
tus,  he  paid  it,  and  was  discharged,  and  pro¬ 
ceeded  at  once  to  man  some  ships  at  the  port 
of  Miletus,  and  went  in  pursuit  of  the  pirates, 
whom  he  surprised  with  their  ships  still  sta¬ 
tioned  at  the  island,  and  took  most  of  them. 
Their  money  he  made  his  prize,  and  the  men 
he  secured  in  prison  at  Pergamus,  andffie  made 
application  to  Junius,  who  was  then  governor 
of  Asia,  to  whose  office  it  belonged,  as  praetor, 
to  determine  their  punishment. 

Junius,  having  his  eye  upon  the  money,  for 
the  sum  was  considerable,  said  he  would  think 
at  his  leisure  what  to  do  with  the  prisoners, 
upon  which  Caesar  took  his  leave  of  him,  and 
went  off  to  Pergamus,  where  he  ordered  the 
pirates  to  be  brought  forth  and  crucified;  the 
punishment  he  had  often  threatened  them  with 
whilst  he  was  in  their  hands,  and  they  little 
dreamt  he  was  in  earnest. 

In  the  meantime  Sulla’s  power  being  now 
on  the  decline,  Caesar’s  friends  advised  him  to 
return  to  Rome,  but  he  went  to  Rhodes,  and 
entered  himself  in  the  school  of  Apollonius, 
Molon’s  son,  a  famous  rhetorician,  one  who 
had  the  reputation  of  a  worthy  man,  and  had 
Cicero  for  one  of  his  scholars.  Caesar  is  said  to 
have  been  admirably  fitted  by  nature  to  make 
577 


578 

a  great  statesman  and  orator,  and  to  have  taken 
such  pains  to  improve  his  genius  this  way  that 
without  dispute  he  might  challenge  the  sec¬ 
ond  place. 

More  he  did  not  aim  at,  as  choosing  to  be 
first  rather  amongst  men  of  arms  and  power, 
and,  therefore,  never  rose  to  that  height  of  elo¬ 
quence  to  which  nature  would  have  carried 
him,  his  attention  being  diverted  to  those  ex¬ 
peditions  and  designs  which  at  length  gained 
him  the  empire.  And  he  himself,  in  his  answer 
to  Cicero’s  panegyric  on  Cato,  desires  his  read¬ 
er  not  to  compare  the  plain  discourse  of  a  sol¬ 
dier  with  the  harangues  of  an  orator  who  had 
not  only  fine  parts,  but  had  employed  his  life 
in  this  study. 

When  he  was  returned  to  Rome,  he  accused 
Dolabella  of  maladministration,  and  many 
cities  of  Greece  came  in  to  attest  it.  Dolabella 
was  acquitted,  and  Caesar,  in  return  for  the 
support  he  had  received  from  the  Greeks,  as¬ 
sisted  them  in  their  prosecution  of  Publius 
Antonius  for  corrupt  practices,  before  Marcus 
Lucullus,  praetor  of  Macedonia.  In  this  course 
he  so  far  succeeded,  that  Antonius  was  forced 
to  appeal  to  the  tribunes  at  Rome,  alleging  that 
in  Greece  he  could  not  have  fair  play  against 
Grecians. 

In  his  pleadings  at  Rome,  his  eloquence  soon 
obtained  him  great  credit  and  favour,  and  he 
won  no  less  upon  the  affections  of  the  people 
by  the  affability  of  his  manners  and  address,  in 
which  he  showed  a  tact  and  consideration  be¬ 
yond  what  could  have  been  expected  at  his 
age;  and  the  open  house  he  kept,  the  entertain¬ 
ments  he  gave,  and  the  general  splendour  of 
his  manner  of  life  contributed  little  by  little  to 
create  and  increase  his  political  influence. 

His  enemies  slighted  the  growth  of  it  at  first, 
presuming  it  would  soon  fail  when  his  money 
was  gone;  whilst  in  the  meantime  it  was  grow¬ 
ing  up  and  flourishing  among  the  common 
people.  When  his  power  at  last  was  established 
and  not  to  be  overthrown,  and  now  openly 
tended  to  the  altering  of  the  whole  constitu¬ 
tion,  they  were  aware  too  late  that  there  is  no 
beginning  so  mean,  which  continued  applica¬ 
tion  will  not  make  considerable,  and  that  de¬ 
spising  a  danger  at  first  will  make  it  at  last 
irresistible. 

Cicero  was  the  first  who  had  any  suspicions 
of  his  designs  upon  the  government,  and  as  a 
good  pilot  is  apprehensive  of  a  storm  when 
the  sea  is  most  smiling,  saw  the  designing  tem¬ 
per  of  the  man  through  this  disguise  of  good 
humour  and  affability,  and  said  that,  in  gen- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

eral,  in  all  he  did  and  undertook,  he  detected 
the  ambition  for  absolute  power,  “but  when  I 
see  his  hair  so  careiully  arranged,  and  observe 
him  adjusting  it  with  one  finger,  I  cannot 
imagine  it  should  enter  into  such  a  man’s 
thoughts  to  subvert  the  Roman  state.”  But  of 
this  more  hereafter. 

The  first  proof  he  had  of  the  people’s  good¬ 
will  to  him  was  when  he  received  by  their  suf¬ 
frages  a  tribuneship  in  the  army,  and  came  out 
on  the  list  with  a  higher  place  than  Caius 
Popilius.  A  second  and  clearer  instance  of  their 
favour  appeared  upon  his  making  a  magnifi¬ 
cent  oration  in  praise  of  his  aunt  julia,  wife  to 
Marius,  publicly  in  the  Forum,  at  whose  fu¬ 
neral  he  was  so  bold  as  to  bring  forth  the  im¬ 
ages  of  Marius,  which  nobody  had  dared  to 
produce  since  the  government  came  into  Sulla’s 
hands,  Marius’s  party  having  from  that  time 
been  declared  enemies  of  the  state.  When  some 
who  were  present  had  begun  to  raise  a  cry 
against  Caesar,  the  people  answered  with  loud 
shouts  and  clapping  in  his  favour,  expressing 
their  joyful  surprise  and  satisfaction  at  his  hav¬ 
ing,  as  it  were,  brought  up  again  from  the 
grave  those  honours  of  Marius,  which  for  so 
long  a  time  had  been  lost  to  the  city. 

It  had  always  been  the  custom  at  Rome  to 
make  funeral  orations  in  praise  of  elderly  ma¬ 
trons,  but  there  was  no  precedent  of  any  upon 
young  women  till  Caesar  first  made  one  upon 
the  death  of  his  own  wife.  This  also  procured 
him  favour,  and  by  this  show  of  affection  he 
won  upon  the  feelings  of  the  people,  who  look¬ 
ed  upon  him  as  a  man  of  great  tenderness  and 
kindness  of  heart. 

After  he  had  buried  his  wife,  he  went  as 
quaestor  into  Spain  under  one  of  the  praetors, 
named  Vetus,  whom  he  honoured  ever  after, 
and  made  his  son  his  own  quaestor,  when  he 
himself  came  to  be  praetor.  After  this  employ¬ 
ment  was  ended,  he  married  Pompeia,  his  third 
wife,  having  then  a  daughter  by  Cornelia,  his 
first  wife,  whom  he  afterwards  married  to 
Pompey  the  Great. 

He  was  so  profuse  in  his  expenses  that,  be¬ 
fore  he  had  any  public  employment,  he  was 
in  debt  thirteen  hundred  talents,  and  many 
thought  that  by  incurring  such  expense  to 
be  popular  he  changed  a  solid  good  for  what 
would  prove  but  a  short  and  uncertain  return; 
but  in  truth  he  was  purchasing  what  was  of 
the  greatest  value  at  an  inconsiderable  rate. 
When  he  was  made  surveyor  of  the  Appian 
Way,  he  disbursed,  besides  the  public  money, 
a  great  sum  out  of  his  private  purse;  and  when 


C/ESAR 

he  was  aedile,  he  provided  such  a  number  of 
gladiators,  that  he  entertained  the  people  with 
three  hundred  and  twenty  single  combats,  and 
by  his  great  liberality  and  magnificence  in 
theatrical  shows,  in  processions,  and  public 
feastings,  he  threw  into  the  shade  all  the  at¬ 
tempts  that  had  been  made  before  him,  and 
gained  so  much  upon  the  people,  that  every 
one  was  eager  to  find  out  new  offices  and  new 
honours  for  him  in  return  for  his  munificence. 

There  being  two  factions  in  the  city,  one 
that  of  Sulla,  which  was  very  powerful,  the 
other  that  of  Marius,  which  was  then  broken 
and  in  a  very  low  condition,  he  undertook  to 
revive  this  and  to  make  it  his  own.  And  to  this 
end,  whilst  he  was  in  the  height  of  his  repute 
with  the  people  for  the  magnificent  shows  he 
gave  as  aedile,  he  ordered  images  of  Marius 
and  figures  of  Victory,  with  trophies  in  their 
hands,  to  be  carried  privately  in  the  night  and 
placed  in  the  capitol.  Next  morning  when  some 
saw  them  bright  with  gold  and  beautifully 
made,  with  inscriptions  upon  them,  referring 
them  to  Marius’s  exploits  over  the  Cimbri, 
they  were  surprised  at  the  boldness  of  him  who 
had  set  them  up,  nor  was  it  difficult  to  guess 
who  it  was. 

The  fame  of  this  soon  spread  and  brought 
together  a  great  concourse  of  people.  Some 
cried  out  that  it  was  an  open  attempt  against 
the  established  government  thus  to  revive  those 
honours  which  had  been  buried  by  the  laws 
and  decrees  of  the  senate;  that  Caesar  had  done 
it  to  sound  the  temper  of  the  people  whom  he 
had  prepared  before,  and  to  try  whether  they 
were  tame  enough  to  bear  his  humour,  and 
would  quietly  give  way  to  his  innovations.  On 
the  other  hand,  Marius’s  party  took  courage, 
and  it  was  incredible  how  numerous  they  were 
suddenly  seen  to  be,  and  what  a  multitude  of 
them  appeared  and  came  shouting  into  the 
capitol.  Many,  when  they  saw  Marius’s  like¬ 
ness,  cried  for  joy,  and  Caesar  was  highly  ex¬ 
tolled  as  the  one  man,  in  the  place  of  all  others, 
who  was  a  relation  worthy  of  Marius. 

Upon  this  the  senate  met,  and  Catulus  Luta- 
tius,  one  of  the  most  eminent  Romans  of  that 
time,  stood  up  and  inveighed  against  Caesar, 
closing  his  speech  with  the  remarkable  saying 
that  Caesar  was  now  not  working  mines,  but 
planting  batteries  to  overthrow  the  state.  But 
when  Caesar  had  made  an  apology  for  himself, 
and  satisfied  the  senate,  his  admirers  were  very 
much  animated,  and  advised  him  not  to  de¬ 
part  from  his  own  thoughts  for  any  one,  since 
with  the  people’s  good  favour  he  would  ere 


579 

long  get  the  better  of  them  all,  and  be  the  first 
man  in  the  commonwealth. 

At  this  time,  Metellus,  the  high  priest,  died, 
and  Catulus  and  Isauricus,  persons  of  the  high¬ 
est  reputation,  and  who  had  great  influence  in 
the  senate,  were  competitors  for  the  office,  yet 
Caesar  would  not  give  way  to  them,  but  pre¬ 
sented  himself  to  the  people  as  a  candidate 
against  them.  The  several  parties  seeming 
very  equal,  Catulus,  who,  because  he  had  the 
most  honour  to  lose,  was  the  most  apprehen¬ 
sive  of  the  event,  sent  to  Caesar  to  buy  him  off, 
with  offers  of  a  great  sum  of  money.  But  his 
answer  was,  that  he  was  ready  to  borrow  a 
larger  sum  than  that  to  carry  on  the  contest. 

Upon  the  day  of  election,  as  his  mother  con¬ 
ducted  him  out  of  doors  with  tears,  after  em¬ 
bracing  her,  “My  mother,”  he  said,  “to-day 
you  will  see  me  either  high  priest  or  an  exile.” 
When  the  votes  were  taken,  after  a  great  strug¬ 
gle,  he  carried  it,  and  excited  among  the  sen¬ 
ate  and  nobility  great  alarm  lest  he  might  now 
urge  on  the  people  to  every  kind  of  insolence. 
And  Piso  and  Catulus  found  fault  with  Cicero 
for  having  let  Caesar  escape,  when  in  the  con¬ 
spiracy  of  Catiline  he  had  given  the  govern¬ 
ment  such  advantage  against  him. 

For  Catiline,  who  had  designed  not  only  to 
change  the  present  state  of  affairs,  but  to  sub¬ 
vert  the  whole  empire  and  confound  all,  had 
himself  taken  to  flight,  while  the  evidence  was 
yet  incomplete  against  him,  before  his  ultimate 
purposes  had  been  properly  discovered.  But 
he  had  left  Lentulus  and  Cethegus  in  the  city 
to  supply  his  place  in  the  conspiracy,  and 
whether  they  received  any  secret  encourage¬ 
ment  and  assistance  from  Caesar  is  uncertain; 
all  that  is  certain  is,  that  they  were  fully  con¬ 
victed  in  the  senate,  and  when  Cicero,  the  con¬ 
sul,  asked  the  several  opinions  of  the  senators, 
how  they  would  have  them  punished,  all  who 
spoke  before  Caesar  sentenced  them  to  death; 
but  Caesar  stood  up  and  made  a  set  speech,  in 
which  he  told  them  that  he  thought  it  without 
precedent  and  not  just  to  take  away  the  lives 
of  persons  of  their  birth  and  distinction  before 
they  were  fairly  tried,  unless  there  was  an  abso¬ 
lute  necessity  for  it;  but  that  if  they  were  kept 
confined  in  any  towns  of  Italy,  Cicero  himself 
should  choose  till  Catiline  was  defeated,  then 
the  senate  might  in  peace  and  at  their  leisure 
determine  what  was  best  to  be  done. 

This  sentence  of  his  carried  so  much  appear¬ 
ance  of  humanity,  and  he  gave  it  such  advan¬ 
tage  by  the  eloquence  with  which  he  urged  it, 
that  not  only  those  who  spoke  after  him  closed 


580 

with  it,  but  even  they  who  had  before  given  a 
contrary  opinion  now  came  over  to  his,  till  it 
came  about  to  Catulus’s  and  Cato’s  turn  to 
speak.  They  warmly  opposed  it,  and  Cato  in¬ 
timated  in  his  speech  the  suspicion  of  Caesar 
himself,  and  pressed  the  matter  so  strongly  that 
the  criminals  were  given  up  to  suffer  execution. 

As  Caesar  was  going  out  of  the  senate,  many 
of  the  young  men  who  at  that  time  acted  as 
guards  to  Cicero  ran  in  with  their  naked 
swords  to  assault  him.  But  Curio,  it  is  said, 
threw  his  gown  over  him,  and  conveyed  him 
away,  and  Cicero  himself,  when  the  young 
men  looked  up  to  see  his  wishes,  gave  a  sign 
not  to  kill  him,  either  for  fear  of  the  people  or 
because  he  thought  the  murder  unjust  and 
illegal. 

If  this  be  true,  I  wonder  how  Cicero  came 
to  omit  all  mention  of  it  in  his  book  about  his 
consulship.  He  was  blamed,  however,  after¬ 
wards,  for  not  having  made  use  of  so  fortunate 
an  opportunity  against  Caesar,  as  if  he  had  let  it 
escape  him  out  of  fear  of  the  populace,  who, 
indeed,  showed  remarkable  solicitude  about 
Caesar,  and  some  time  after,  when  he  went  in¬ 
to  the  senate  to  clear  himself  of  the  suspicions 
he  lay  under,  and  found  great  clamours  raised 
against  him,  upon  the  senate  in  consequence 
sitting  longer  than  ordinary,  they  went  up  to 
the  house  in  a  tumult,  and  beset  it,  demanding 
Caesar,  and  requiring  them  to  dismiss  him. 

Upon  this,  Cato,  much  fearing  some  move¬ 
ment  among  the  poor  citizens,  who  were  al¬ 
ways  the  first  to  kindle  the  flame  among  the 
people,  and  placed  all  their  hopes  in  Caesar, 
persuaded  the  senate  to  give  them  a  monthly 
allowance  of  corn,  an  expedient  which  put  the 
commonwealth  to  the  extraordinary  charge  of 
seven  million  five  hundred  thousand  drachmas 
in  the  year,  but  quite  succeeded  in  removing 
the  great  cause  of  terror  for  the  present,  and 
very  much  weakened  Caesar’s  power,  who  at 
that  time  was  just  going  to  be  made  praetor, 
and  consequently  would  have  been  more  for¬ 
midable  by  his  office. 

But  there  was  no  disturbance  during  his 
praetorship,  only  what  misfortune  he  met  with 
in  his  own  domestic  affairs.  Publius  Clodius 
was  a  patrician  by  descent,  eminent  both  for 
his  riches  and  eloquence,  but  in  licentiousness 
of  life  and  audacity  exceeded  the  most  noted 
profligates  of  the  day.  He  was  in  love  with 
Pompeia,  Caesar’s  wife,  and  she  had  no  aver¬ 
sion  to  him.  But  there  was  strict  watch  kept 
on  her  apartment,  and  Caesar’s  mother,  Aure¬ 
lia,  who  was  a  discreet  woman,  being  contin- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ually  about  her,  made  any  interview  very 
dangerous  and  difficult. 

The  Romans  have  a  goddess  whom  they  call 
Bona,  the  same  whom  the  Greeks  call  Gynae- 
cea.  The  Phrygians,  who  claim  a  peculiar  title 
to  her,  say  she  was  mother  to  Midas.  The  Ro¬ 
mans  profess  she  was  one  of  the  Dryads,  and 
married  to  Faunus.  The  Grecians  affirm  that 
she  is  that  mother  of  Bacchus  whose  name  is 
not  to  be  uttered,  and,  for  this  reason,  the 
women  who  celebrate  her  festival  cover  the 
tents  with  vine-branches,  and,  in  accordance 
with  the  fable,  a  consecrated  serpent  is  placed 
by  the  goddess. 

It  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  be  by,  nor  so 
much  as  in  the  house,  whilst  the  rites  are  cele¬ 
brated,  but  the  women  by  themselves  perform 
the  sacred  offices,  which  are  said  to  be  much 
the  same  with  those  used  in  the  solemnities  of 
Orpheus.  When  the  festival  comes,  the  hus¬ 
band,  who  is  either  consul  or  praetor,  and  with 
him  every  male  creature,  quits  the  house.  The 
wife  then  taking  it  under  her  care  sets  it  in 
order,  and  the  principal  ceremonies  are  per¬ 
formed  during  the  night,  the  women  playing 
together  amongst  themselves  as  they  keep 
watch,  and  music  of  various  kinds  going  on. 

As  Pompeia  was  at  that  time  celebrating 
this  feast,  Clodius,  who  as  yet  had  no  beard, 
and  so  thought  to  pass  undiscovered,  took  up¬ 
on  him  the  dress  and  ornaments  of  a  singing 
woman,  and  so  came  thither,  having  the  air 
of  a  young  girl.  Finding  the  doors  open,  he 
was  without  any  stop  introduced  by  the  maid, 
who  was  in  the  intrigue.  She  presently  ran  to 
tell  Pompeia,  but  as  she  was  away  a  long  time, 
he  grew  uneasy  in  waiting  for  her,  and  left  his 
post  and  traversed  the  house  from  one  room 
to  another,  still  taking  care  to  avoid  the  lights, 
till  at  last  Aurelia’s  woman  met  him,  and  in¬ 
vited  him  to  play  with  her,  as  the  women  did 
among  themselves.  He  refused  to  comply,  and 
she  presently  pulled  him  forward,  and  asked 
him  who  he  was  and  whence  he  came. 

Clodius  told  her  he  was  waiting  for  Pom- 
peia’s  own  maid,  Abra,  being  in  fact  her  own 
name  also,  and  as  he  said  so,  betrayed  himself 
by  his  voice.  Upon  which  the  woman,  shriek¬ 
ing,  ran  into  the  company  where  there  were 
lights,  and  cried  out  she  had  discovered  a  man. 
The  women  were  all  in  a  fright.  Aurelia  cov¬ 
ered  up  the  sacred  things  and  stopped  the  pro¬ 
ceedings,  and  having  ordered  the  doors  to  be 
shut,  went  about  with  lights  to  find  Clodius, 
who  was  got  into  the  maid’s  room  that  he  had 
come  in  with,  and  was  seized  there.  The  worn- 


C/ESAR 

en  knew  him,  and  drove  him  out  df  doors, 
and  at  once,  that  same  night,  went  home  and 
told  their  husbands  the  story. 

In  the  morning,  it  was  all  about  the  town, 
what  an  impious  attempt  Clodius  had  made, 
and  how  he  ought  to  be  punished  as  an  of¬ 
fender,  not  only  against  those  whom  he  had 
offended,  but  also  against  the  public  and  the 
gods.  Upon  which  one  of  the  tribunes  im¬ 
peached  him  for  profaning  the  holy  rites,  and 
some  of  the  principal  senators  combined  to¬ 
gether  and  gave  evidence  against  him,  that  be¬ 
sides  many  other  horrible  crimes,  he  had  been 
guilty  of  incest  with  his  own  sister,  who  was 
married  to  Lucullus.  But  the  people  set  them¬ 
selves  against  this  combination  of  the  nobility, 
and  defended  Clodius,  which  was  of  great 
service  to  him  with  the  judges,  who  took  alarm 
and  were  afraid  to  provoke  the  multitude. 

Caesar  at  once  dismissed  Pompeia,  but  being 
summoned  as  a  witness  against  Clodius,  said 
he  had  nothing  to  charge  him  with.  This  look¬ 
ing  like  a  paradox,  the  accuser  asked  him  why 
he  parted  with  his  wife.  Caesar  replied,  “I 
wished  my  wife  to  be  not  so  much  as  sus¬ 
pected.”  Some  say  that  Caesar  spoke  this  as  his 
real  thought;  others,  that  he  did  it  to  gratify 
the  people,  who  were  very  earnest  to  save  Clo¬ 
dius.  Clodius,  at  any  rate,  escaped;  most  of  the 
judges  giving  their  opinions  so  written  as  to 
be  illegible  that  they  might  not  be  in  danger 
from  the  people  by  condemning  him,  nor  in 
disgrace  with  the  nobility  by  acquitting  him. 

Caesar,  in  the  meantime,  being  out  of  his 
praetorship,  had  got  the  province  of  Spain,  but 
was  in  great  embarrassment  with  his  creditors, 
who,  as  he  was  going  off,  came  upon  him,  and 
were  very  pressing  and  importunate.  This  led 
him  to  apply  himself  to  Crassus,  who  was  the 
richest  man  in  Rome,  but  wanted  Caesar’s 
youthful  vigour  and  heat  to  sustain  the  opposi¬ 
tion  against  Pompey.  Crassus  took  upon  him 
to  satisfy  those  creditors  who  were  most  un¬ 
easy  to  him,  and  would  not  be  put  off  any 
longer,  and  engaged  himself  to  the  amount  of 
eight  hundred  and  thirty  talents,  upon  which 
Caesar  was  now  at  liberty  to  go  to  his  province. 

In  his  journey,  as  he  was  crossing  the  Alps, 
and  passing  by  a  small  village  of  the  barba¬ 
rians  with  but  few  inhabitants,  and  those 
wretchedly  poor,  his  companions  asked  the 
question  among  themselves  by  way  of  mock¬ 
ery,  if  there  were  any  canvassing  for  offices 
there,  any  contention  which  should  be  upper¬ 
most,  or  feuds  of  great  men  one  against  an¬ 
other.  To  which  Caesar  made  answer  seriously, 


581 

“For  my  part,  I  had  rather  be  the  first  man 
among  these  fellows,  than  the  second  man  in 
Rome.” 

It  is  said  that  another  time,  when  free  from 
business  in  Spain,  after  reading  some  part  of 
the  history  of  Alexander,  he  sat  a  great  while 
very  thoughtful,  and  at  last  burst  out  into 
tears.  His  friends  were  surprised,  and  asked 
him  the  reason  of  it.  “Do  you  think,”  said  he, 
“I  have  not  just  cause  to  weep,  when  I  consider 
that  Alexander  at  my  age  had  conquered  so 
many  nations,  and  I  have  all  this  time  done 
nothing  that  is  memorable?” 

As  soon  as  he  came  into  Spain  he  was  very 
active,  and  in  a  few  days  had  got  together  ten 
new  cohorts  of  foot  in  addition  to  the  twenty 
which  were  there  before.  With  these  he  march¬ 
ed  against  the  Calaici  and  Lusitani  and  con¬ 
quered  them,  and  advancing  as  far  as  the 
ocean,  subdued  the  tribes  which  never  before 
had  been  subject  to  the  Romans. 

Having  managed  his  military  affairs  with 
good  success,  he  was  equally  happy  in  the 
course  of  his  civil  government.  He  took  pains 
to  establish  a  good  understanding  amongst  the 
several  states,  and  no  less  care  to  heal  the  dif¬ 
ferences  between  debtors  and  creditors.  He  or¬ 
dered  that  the  creditor  should  receive  two  parts 
of  the  debtor’s  yearly  income,  and  that  the 
other  part  should  be  managed  by  the  debtor 
himself,  till  by  this  method  the  whole  debt  was 
at  last  discharged.  This  conduct  made  him 
leave  his  province  with  a  fair  reputation;  be¬ 
ing  rich  himself,  and  having  enriched  his  sol¬ 
diers,  and  having  received  from  them  the  hon¬ 
ourable  name  of  Imperator. 

There  is  a  law  among  the  Romans,  that  who¬ 
ever  desires  the  honour  of  a  triumph  must  stay 
without  the  city  and  expect  his  answer.  And 
another,  that  those  who  stand  for  the  consul¬ 
ship  shall  appear  personally  upon  the  place. 
Caesar  was  come  home  at  the  very  time  of 
choosing  consuls,  and  being  in  a  difficulty  be¬ 
tween  these  two  opposite  laws,  sent  to  the 
senate  to  desire  that,  since  he  was  obliged  to 
be  absent,  he  might  sue  for  the  consulship  by 
his  friends.  Cato,  being  backed  by  the  law,  at 
first  opposed  his  request;  afterwards  perceiv¬ 
ing  that  Caesar  had  prevailed  with  a  great  part 
of  the  senate  to  comply  with  it,  he  made  it  his 
business  to  gain  time,  and  went  on  wasting  the 
whole  day  in  speaking.  Upon  which  Caesar 
thought  fit  to  let  the  triumph  fall,  and  pur¬ 
sued  the  consulship. 

Entering  the  town  and  coming  forward  im¬ 
mediately,  he  had  recourse  to  a  piece  of  state 


582 

policy  by  which  everybody  was  deceived  but 
Cato.  This  was  the  reconciling  of  Crassus  and 
Pompey,  the  two  men  who  then  were  most 
powerful  in  Rome.  There  had  been  a  quarrel 
between  them,  which  he  now  succeeded  in 
making  up,  and  by  this  means  strengthened 
himself  by  the  united  power  of  both,  and  so 
under  the  cover  of  an  action  which  carried  all 
the  appearance  of  a  piece  of  kindness  and 
good-nature,  caused  what  was  in  effect  a  revo¬ 
lution  in  the  government. 

For  it  was  not  the  quarrel  between  Pompey 
and  Caesar,  as  most  men  imagine,  which  was 
the  origin  of  the  civil  wars,  but  their  union, 
their  conspiring  together  at  first  to  subvert  the 
aristocracy,  and  so  quarrelling  afterwards  be¬ 
tween  themselves.  Cato,  who  often  foretold 
what  the  consequence  of  this  alliance  would 
be,  had  then  the  character  of  a  sullen,  inter¬ 
fering  man,  but  in  the  end  the  reputation  of  a 
wise  but  unsuccessful  counsellor. 

Thus  Caesar,  being  doubly  supported  by  the 
interests  of  Crassus  and  Pompey,  was  pro¬ 
moted  to  the  consulship,  and  triumphantly 
proclaimed  with  Calpurnius  Bibulus.  When 
he  entered  on  his  office  he  brought  in  bills 
which  would  have  been  preferred  with  better 
grace  by  the  most  audacious  of  the  tribunes 
than  by  a  consul,  in  which  he  proposed  the 
plantation  of  colonies  and  the  division  of  lands, 
simply  to  please  the  commonalty.  The  best  and 
most  honourable  of  the  senators  opposed  it, 
upon  which,  as  he  had  long  wished  for  noth¬ 
ing  more  than  for  such  a  colourable  pretext, 
he  loudly  protested  how  much  it  was  against 
his  will  to  be  driven  to  seek  support  from  the 
people,  and  how  the  senate’s  insulting  and 
harsh  conduct  left  no  other  course  possible  for 
him  than  to  devote  himself  henceforth  to  the 
popular  cause  and  interest. 

And  so  he  hurried  out  of  the  senate,  and 
presenting  himself  to  the  people,  and  there 
placing  Crassus  and  Pompey,  one  on  each  side 
of  him,  he  asked  them  whether  they  consented 
to  the  bills  he  had  proposed.  They  owned  their 
assent,  upon  which  he  desired  them  to  assist 
him  against  those  who  had  threatened  to  op¬ 
pose  him  with  their  swords.  They  engaged 
they  would,  and  Pompey  added  further,  that 
he  would  meet  their  swords  with  a  sword  and 
buckler  too.  These  words  the  nobles  much 
resented,  as  neither  suitable  to  his  own  dignity, 
nor  becoming  the  reverence  due  to  the  senate, 
but  resembling  rather  the  vehemence  of  a  boy 
or  the  fury  of  a  madman.  But  the  people  were 
pleased  with  it. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

In  order  to  get  a  yet  firmer  hold  upon  Pom¬ 
pey,  Caesar  having  a  daughter,  Julia,  who  had 
been  before  contracted  to  Servilius  Caepio,  now 
betrothed  her  to  Pompey,  and  told  Servilius  he 
should  have  Pompey’s  daughter,  who  was  not 
unengaged  either,  but  promised  to  Sulla’s  son, 
Faustus.  A  little  time  after,  Caesar  married 
Calpurnia,  the  daughter  of  Piso,  and  got  Piso 
made  consul  for  the  year  following.  Cato  ex¬ 
claimed  loudly  against  this,  and  protested, 
with  a  great  deal  of  warmth,  that  it  was  in¬ 
tolerable  the  government  should  be  prostituted 
by  marriages,  and  that  they  should  advance 
one  another  to  the  commands  of  armies,  prov¬ 
inces,  and  other  great  posts,  by  means  of 
women. 

Bibulus,  Caesar’s  colleague,  finding  it  was  to 
no  purpose  to  oppose  his  bills,  but  that  he  was 
in  danger  of  being  murdered  in  the  Forum, 
as  also  was  Cato,  confined  himself  to  his  house, 
and  there  let  the  remaining  part  of  his  consul¬ 
ship  expire.  Pompey,  when  he  was  married, 
at  once  filled  the  Forum  with  soldiers,  and 
gave  the  people  his  help  in  passing  the  new 
laws,  and  secured  Caesar  the  government  of 
all  Gaul,  both  on  this  and  the  other  side  of  the 
Alps,  together  with  Illyricum,  and  the  com¬ 
mand  of  four  legions  for  five  years. 

Cato  made  some  attempts  against  these  pro¬ 
ceedings,  but  was  seized  and  led  off  on  the 
way  to  prison  by  Caesar,  who  expected  that  he 
would  appeal  to  the  tribunes.  But  when  he 
saw  that  Cato  went  along  without  speaking  a 
word,  and  not  only  the  nobility  were  indig¬ 
nant,  but  the  people  also,  out  of  respect  for 
Cato’s  virtue,  were  following  in  silence,  and 
with  dejected  looks,  he  himself  privately  de¬ 
sired  one  of  the  tribunes  to  rescue  Cato. 

As  for  the  other  senators,  some  few  of  them 
attended  the  house,  the  rest,  being  disgusted, 
absented  themselves.  Hence  Considius,  a  very 
old  man,  took  occasion  one  day  to  tell  Caesar 
that  the  senators  did  not  meet  because  they 
were  afraid  of  his  soldiers.  Caesar  asked,  “Why 
don’t  you,  then,  out  of  the  same  fear,  keep  at 
home?”  To  which  Considius  replied,  that  age 
was  his  guard  against  fear,  and  that  the  small 
remains  of  his  life  were  not  worth  much  cau¬ 
tion. 

But  the  most  disgraceful  thing  that  was 
done  in  Caesar’s  consulship  was  his  assisting 
to  gain  the  tribuneship  for  the  same  Clodius 
who  had  made  the  attempt  on  his  wife’s  chas¬ 
tity  and  intruded  upon  the  secret  vigils.  He 
was  elected  on  purpose  to  effect  Cicero’s  down¬ 
fall;  nor  did  Caesar  leave  the  city  to  join  his 


CESAR 

army  till  they  two  had  overpowered  Cicero 
and  driven  him  out  of  Italy. 

Thus  far  have  we  followed  Caesar’s  actions 
before  the  wars  of  Gaul.  After  this,  he  seems 
to  begin  his  course  afresh,  and  to  enter  upon 
a  new  life  and  scene  of  action.  And  the  period 
of  those  wars  which  he  now  fought,  and  those 
many  expeditions  in  which  he  subdued  Gaul, 
showed  him  to  be  a  soldier  and  general  not  in 
the  least  inferior  to  any  of  the  greatest  and 
most  admired  commanders  who  had  ever  ap¬ 
peared  at  the  head  of  armies.  For  if  we  com¬ 
pare  him  with  the  Fabii,  the  Metelli,  the  Sci- 
pios,  and  with  those  who  were  his  contempo¬ 
raries,  or  not  long  before  him,  Sulla,  Marius, 
the  two  Luculli,  or  even  Pompey  himself, 
whose  glory,  it  may  be  said,  went  up  at  that 
time  to  heaven  for  every  excellence  in  war,  we 
shall  find  Caesar’s  actions  to  have  surpassed 
them  all. 

One  he  may  be  held  to  have  outdone  in  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  difficulty  of  the  country  in 
which  he  fought,  another  in  the  extent  of  ter¬ 
ritory  which  he  conquered;  some,  in  the  num¬ 
ber  and  strength  of  the  enemy  whom  he  de¬ 
feated;  one  man,  because  of  the  wildness  and 
perfidiousness  of  the  tribes  whose  good-will  he 
conciliated,  another  in  his  humanity  and  clem¬ 
ency  to  those  he  overpowered;  others,  again, 
in  his  gifts  and  kindnesses  to  his  soldiers;  all 
alike  in  the  number  of  the  battles  which  he 
fought  and  the  enemies  whom  he  killed.  For 
he  had  not  pursued  the  wars  in  Gaul  full  ten 
years  when  he  had  taken  by  storm  above  eight 
hundred  towns,  subdued  three  hundred  states, 
and  of  the  three  millions  of  men,  who  made 
up  the  gross  sum  of  those  with  whom  at  sev¬ 
eral  times  he  engaged,  he  had  killed  one  mil¬ 
lion  and  taken  captive  a  second. 

He  was  so  much  master  of  the  good-will  and 
hearty  service  of  his  soldiers  that  those  who  in 
other  expeditions  were  but  ordinary  men  dis¬ 
played  a  courage  past  defeating  or  withstand¬ 
ing  when  they  went  upon  any  danger  where 
Caesar’s  glory  was  concerned.  Such  a  one  was 
Acilius,  who,  in  the  sea-fight  before  Marseilles, 
had  his  right  hand  struck  of!  with  a  sword, 
yet  did  not  quit  his  buckler  out  of  his  left,  but 
struck  the  enemies  in  the  face  with  it,  till  he 
drove  them  off  and  made  himself  master  of  the 
vessel.  Such  another  was  Cassius  Scaeva,  who, 
in  a  battle  near  Dyrrhachium,  had  one  of  his 
eyes  shot  out  with  an  arrow,  his  shoulder 
pierced  with  one  javelin,  and  his  thigh  with 
another;  and  having  received  one  hundred  and 
thirty  darts  upon  his  target,  called  to  the  ene- 


583 

my,  as  though  he  would  surrender  himself. 
But  when  two  of  them  came  up  to  him,  he  cut 
off  the  shoulder  of  one  with  a  sword,  and  by  a 
blow  over  the  face  forced  the  other  to  retire, 
and  so  with  the  assistance  of  his  friends,  who 
now  came  up,  made  his  escape. 

Again,  in  Britain,  when  some  of  the  fore¬ 
most  officers  had  accidentally  got  into  a  morass 
full  of  water,  and  there  were  assaulted  by  the 
enemy,  a  common  soldier,  whilst  Caesar  stood 
and  looked  on,  threw  himself  into  the  midst 
of  them,  and  after  many  signal  demonstra¬ 
tions  of  his  valour,  rescued  the  officers  and 
beat  off  the  barbarians.  He  himself,  in  the  end, 
took  to  the  water,  and  with  much  difficulty, 
partly  by  swimming,  partly  by  wading,  passed 
it,  but  in  the  passage  lost  his  shield.  Caesar  and 
his  officers  saw  it  and  admired,  and  went  to 
meet  him  with  joy  and  acclamation.  But  the 
soldier,  much  dejected  and  in  tears,  threw  him¬ 
self  down  at  Caesar’s  feet  and  begged  his  par¬ 
don  for  having  let  go  his  buckler. 

Another  time  in  Africa,  Scipio  having  taken 
a  ship  of  Caesar’s  in  which  Granius  Petro, 
lately  appointed  quaestor,  was  sailing,  gave  the 
other  passengers  as  free  prize  to  his  soldiers, 
but  thought  fit  to  offer  the  quaestor  his  life. 
But  he  said  it  was  not  usual  for  Caesar’s  sol¬ 
diers  to  take  but  give  mercy,  and  having  said 
so,  fell  upon  his  sword  and  killed  himself. 

This  love  of  honour  and  passion  for  distinc¬ 
tion  were  inspired  into  them  and  cherished  in 
them  by  Caesar  himself,  who,  by  his  unspar¬ 
ing  distribution  of  money  and  honours,  show¬ 
ed  them  that  he  did  not  heap  up  wealth  from 
the  wars  for  his  own  luxury,  or  the  gratifying 
his  private  pleasures,  but  that  all  he  received 
was  but  a  public  fund  laid  by  for  the  reward 
and  encouragement  of  valour,  and  that  he 
looked  upon  all  he  gave  to  deserving  soldiers 
as  so  much  increase  to  his  own  riches.  Added 
to  this  also,  there  was  no  danger  to  which  he 
did  not  willingly  expose  himself,  no  labour 
from  which  he  pleaded  an  exemption. 

His  contempt  of  danger  was  not  so  much 
wondered  at  by  his  soldiers  because  they  knew 
how  much  he  coveted  honour.  But  his  endur¬ 
ing  so  much  hardship,  which  he  did  to  all  ap¬ 
pearance  beyond  his  natural  strength,  very 
much  astonished  them.  For  he  was  a  spare 
man,  had  a  soft  and  white  skin,  was  distem¬ 
pered  in  the  head  and  subject  to  an  epilepsy, 
which,  it  is  said,  first  seized  him  at  Corduba. 
But  he  did  not  make  the  weakness  of  his  con¬ 
stitution  a  pretext  for  his  ease,  but  rather  used 
war  as  the  best  physic  against  his  indisposi- 


584 

tions;  whilst,  by  indefatigable  journeys,  coarse 
diet,  frequent  lodging  in  the  field,  and  con¬ 
tinual  laborious  exercise,  he  struggled  with  his 
diseases  and  fortified  his  body  against  all  at¬ 
tacks. 

He  slept  generally  in  his  chariots  or  litters, 
employing  even  his  rest  in  pursuit  of  action. 
In  the  day  he  was  thus  carried  to  the  forts, 
garrisons,  and  camps,  one  servant  sitting  with 
him,  who  used  to  write  down  what  he  dictated 
as  he  went,  and  a  soldier  attending  behind 
him  with  his  sword  drawn.  He  drove  so  rapid¬ 
ly  that  when  he  first  left  Rome  he  arrived  at 
the  river  Rhone  within  eight  days.  He  had 
been  an  expert  rider  from  his  childhood;  for 
it  was  usual  with  him  to  sit  with  his  hands 
joined  together  behind  his  back,  and  so  to  put 
his  horse  to  its  full  speed.  And  in  this  way  he 
disciplined  himself  so  far  as  to  be  able  to  dic¬ 
tate  letters  from  on  horseback,  and  to  give 
directions  to  two  who  took  notes  at  the  same 
time,  or,  as  Oppius  says,  to  more. 

And  it  is  thought  that  he  was  the  first  who 
contrived  means  for  communicating  with 
friends  by  cipher,  when  either  press  of  busi¬ 
ness,  or  the  large  extent  of  the  city,  left  him 
no  time  for  a  personal  conference  about  mat¬ 
ters  that  required  despatch. 

How  little  nice  he  was  in  his  diet  may  be 
seen  in  the  following  instance.  When  at  the 
table  of  Valerius  Leo,  who  entertained  him  at 
supper  at  Milan,  a  dish  of  asparagus  was  put 
before  him  on  which  his  host  instead  of  oil 
had  poured  sweet  ointment.  Caesar  partook  of 
it  without  any  disgust,  and  reprimanded  his 
friends  for  finding  fault  with  it.  “For  it  was 
enough,”  said  he,  “not  to  eat  what  you  did  not 
like;  but  he  who  reflects  on  another  man’s 
want  of  breeding,  shows  he  wants  it  as  much 
nimself.” 

Another  time  upon  the  road  he  was  driven 
by  a  storm  into  a  poor  man’s  cottage,  where 
he  found  but  one  room,  and  that  such  as  would 
afford  but  a  mean  reception  to  a  single  person, 
and  therefore  told  his  companions  places  of 
honour  should  be  given  up  to  the  greater  men, 
and  necessary  accommodations  to  the  weaker, 
and  accordingly  ordered  that  Oppius,  who 
was  in  bad  health,  should  lodge  within,  whilst 
he  and  the  rest  slept  under  a  shed  at  the  door. 

His  first  war  in  Gaul  was  against  the  Hel¬ 
vetians  and  Tigurini,  who  having  burnt  their 
own  towns,  twelve  in  number,  and  four  hun¬ 
dred  villages,  would  have  marched  forward 
through  that  part  of  Gaul  which  was  included 
in  the  Roman  province,  as  the  Cimbri  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Teutones  formerly  had  done.  Nor  were  they 
inferior  to  these  in  courage;  and  in  numbers 
they  were  equal,  being  in  all  three  hundred 
thousand,  of  which  one  hundred  and  ninety 
thousand  were  fighting  men.  Caesar  did  not 
engage  the  Tigurini  in  person,  but  Labienus, 
under  his  directions,  routed  them  near  the 
river  Arar. 

The  Helvetians  surprised  Caesar,  and  unex¬ 
pectedly  set  upon  him  as  he  was  conducting 
his  army  to  a  confederate  town.  He  succeeded, 
however,  in  making  his  retreat  into  a  strong 
position,  where,  when  he  had  mustered  and 
marshalled  his  men,  his  horse  was  brought  to 
him;  upon  which  he  said,  “When  I  have  won 
the  battle,  I  will  use  my  horse  for  the  chase, 
but  at  present  let  us  go  against  the  enemy,” 
and  accordingly  charged  them  on  foot. 

After  a  long  and  severe  combat,  he  drove 
the  main  army  out  of  the  field,  but  found  the 
hardest  work  at  their  carriages  and  ramparts, 
where  not  only  the  men  stood  and  fought,  but 
the  women  also  and  children  defended  them¬ 
selves  till  they  were  cut  to  pieces;  insomuch 
that  the  fight  was  scarcely  ended  till  mid¬ 
night. 

This  action,  glorious  in  itself,  Caesar  crown¬ 
ed  with  another  yet  more  noble,  by  gathering 
in  a  body  all  the  barbarians  that  had  escaped 
out  of  the  battle,  above  one  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  in  number,  and  obliging  them  to  re-oc- 
cupy  the  country  which  they  had  deserted  and 
the  cities  which  they  had  burnt.  This  he  did  for 
fear  the  Germans  should  pass  it  and  possess 
themselves  of  the  land  whilst  it  lay  uninhab¬ 
ited. 

His  second  war  was  in  defence  of  the  Gauls 
against  the  Germans,  though  some  time  be¬ 
fore  he  had  made  Ariovistus,  their  king,  rec¬ 
ognised  at  Rome  as  an  ally.  But  they  were  very 
insufferable  neighbours  to  those  under  his  gov¬ 
ernment;  and  it  was  probable,  when  occasion 
offered,  they  would  renounce  the  present  ar¬ 
rangements,  and  march  on  to  occupy  Gaul. 
But  finding  his  officers  timorous,  and  especially 
those  of  the  young  nobility  who  came  along 
with  him  in  hopes  of  turning  their  campaigns 
with  him  into  a  means  for  their  own  pleasure 
or  profit,  he  called  them  together,  and  advised 
them  to  march  off,  and  not  run  the  hazard 
of  a  battle  against  their  inclinations,  since  they 
had  such  weak  and  unmanly  feelings;  telling 
them  that  he  would  take  only  the  tenth  legion 
and  march  against  the  barbarians,  whom  he 
did  not  expect  to  find  an  enemy  more  formi¬ 
dable  than  the  Cimbri,  nor,  he  added,  should 


C/ESAR 

they  find  him  a  general  inferior  to. Marius. 
Upon  this,  the  tenth  legion  deputed  some  of 
their  body  to  pay  him  their  acknowledgments 
and  thanks,  and  the  other  legions  blamed  their 
officers,  and  all,  with  great  vigour  and  zeal, 
followed  him  many  days’  journey,  till  they  en¬ 
camped  within  two  hundred  furlongs  of  the 
enemy. 

Ariovistus’s  courage  to  some  extent  was 
cooled  upon  their  very  approach;  for  never  ex¬ 
pecting  the  Romans  would  attack  the  Ger¬ 
mans,  whom  he  had  thought  it  more  likely 
they  would  not  venture  to  withstand  even  in 
defence  of  their  own  subjects,  he  was  the  more 
surprised  at  Caesar’s  conduct,  and  saw  his  army 
to  be  in  consternation.  They  were  still  more  dis¬ 
couraged  by  the  prophecies  of  their  holy  wo¬ 
men,  who  foretell  the  future  by  observing  the 
eddies  of  rivers,  and  taking  signs  from  the 
windings  and  noise  of  streams,  and  who  now 
warned  them  not  to  engage  before  the  next 
new  moon  appeared. 

Caesar  having  had  intimation  of  this,  and 
seeing  the  Germans  lie  still,  thought  it  expe¬ 
dient  to  attack  them  whilst  they  were  under 
these  apprehensions,  rather  than  sit  still  and 
wait  their  time.  Accordingly,  he  made  his  ap¬ 
proaches  to  the  strongholds  and  hills  on  which 
they  lay  encamped,  and  so  galled  and  fretted 
them  that  at  last  they  came  down  with  great 
fury  to  engage.  But  he  gained  a  signal  victory, 
and  pursued  them  for  four  hundred  furlongs, 
as  far  as  the  Rhine;  all  which  space  was  cov¬ 
ered  with  spoils  and  bodies  of  the  slain.  Ario- 
vistus  made  shift  to  pass  the  Rhine  with  the 
small  remains  of  an  army,  for  it  is  said  the 
number  of  the  slain  amounted  to  eighty  thou¬ 
sand. 

After  this  action,  Caesar  left  his  army  at 
their  winter  quarters  in  the  country  of  the 
Sequani,  and,  in  order  to  attend  to  affairs  at 
Rome,  went  into  that  part  of  Gaul  which  lies 
on  the  Po,  and  was  part  of  his  province;  for 
the  river  Rubicon  divides  Gaul,  which  is  on 
this  side  the  Alps,  from  the  rest  of  Italy.  There 
he  sat  down  and  employed  himself  in  courting 
people’s  favour;  great  numbers  coming  to  him 
continually,  and  always  finding  their  requests 
answered;  for  he  never  failed  to  dismiss  all 
with  present  pledges  of  his  kindness  in  hand, 
and  further  hopes  for  the  future. 

And  during  all  this  time  of  the  war  in  Gaul, 
Pompey  never  observed  how  Caesar  was  on  the 
one  hand  using  the  arms  of  Rome  to  effect  his 
conquests,  and  on  the  other  was  gaining  over 
and  securing  to  himself  the  favour  of  the  Ro- 


585 

mans  with  the  wealth  which  those  conquests 
obtained  him. 

But  when  he  heard  that  the  Belgae,  who 
were  the  most  powerful  of  all  the  Gauls,  and 
inhabited  a  third  part  of  the  country,  were  re¬ 
volted,  and  had  got  together  a  great  many 
thousand  men  in  arms,  he  immediately  set  out 
and  took  his  way  hither  with  great  expedition, 
and  falling  upon  the  enemy  as  they  were  rav¬ 
aging  the  Gauls,  his  allies,  he  soon  defeated 
and  put  to  flight  the  largest  and  least  scattered 
division  of  them.  For  though  their  numbers 
were  great,  yet  they  made  but  a  slender  de¬ 
fence,  and  the  marshes  and  deep  rivers  were 
made  passable  to  the  Roman  foot  by  the  vast 
quantity  of  dead  bodies. 

Of  those  who  revolted,  all  the  tribes  that 
lived  near  the  ocean  came  over  without  fight¬ 
ing,  and  he,  therefore,  led  his  army  against  the 
Nervii,  the  fiercest  and  most  warlike  people  of 
all  in  those  parts.  These  live  in  a  country  cov¬ 
ered  with  continuous  woods,  and  having 
lodged  their  children  and  property  out  of  the 
way  in  the  depth  of  the  forest,  fell  upon  Caesar 
with  a  body  of  sixty  thousand  men,  before  he 
was  prepared  for  them,  while  he  was  making 
his  encampment.  They  soon  routed  his  cavalry, 
and  having  surrounded  the  twelfth  and  sev¬ 
enth  legions,  killed  all  the  officers,  and  had  not 
Caesar  himself  snatched  up  a  buckler  and 
forced  his  way  through  his  own  men  to  come 
up  to  the  barbarians,  or  had  not  the  tenth  le¬ 
gion,  when  they  saw  him  in  danger,  run  in 
from  the  tops  of  the  hills,  where  they  lay,  and 
broken  through  the  enemy’s  ranks  to  rescue 
him,  in  all  probability  not  a  Roman  would  have 
been  saved. 

But  now,  under  the  influence  of  Caesar’s  bold 
example,  they  fought  a  battle,  as  the  phrase  is, 
of  more  than  human  courage,  and  yet  with 
their  utmost  efforts  they  were  not  able  to  drive 
the  enemy  out  of  the  field,  but  cut  them  down 
fighting  in  their  defence.  For  out  of  sixty  thou¬ 
sand  men,  it  is  stated  that  not  above  five  hun¬ 
dred  survived  the  battle,  and  of  four  hundred 
of  their  senators  not  above  three. 

When  the  Roman  senate  had  received  news 
of  this,  they  voted  sacrifices  and  festivals  to  the 
gods,  to  be  strictly  observed  for  the  space  of 
fifteen  days,  a  longer  space  than  ever  was  ob¬ 
served  for  any  victory  before.  The  danger  to 
which  they  had  been  exposed  by  the  joint  out¬ 
break  of  such  a  number  of  nations  was  felt  to 
have  been  great;  and  the  people’s  fondness  for 
Caesar  gave  additional  lustre  to  successes 
achieved  by  him. 


586 

He  now,  after  settling  everything  in  Gaul, 
came  back  again,  and  spent  the  winter  by  the 
Po,  in  order  to  carry  on  the  designs  he  had  in 
hand  at  Rome.  All  who  were  candidates  for 
offices  used  his  assistance,  and  were  supplied 
with  money  from  him  to  corrupt  the  people 
and  buy  their  votes,  in  return  of  which,  when 
they  were  chosen,  they  did  all  things  to  ad¬ 
vance  his  power.  But  what  was  more  consider¬ 
able,  the  most  eminent  and  powerful  men  in 
Rome  in  great  numbers  came  to  visit  him  at 
Lucca;  Pompey,  and  Crassus,  and  Appius,  the 
governor  of  Sardinia,  and  Nepos,  the  pro-con¬ 
sul  of  Spain,  so  that  there  were  in  the  place  at 
one  time  one  hundred  and  twenty  lictors  and 
more  than  two  hundred  senators. 

In  deliberation  here  held,  it  was  determined 
that  Pompey  and  Crassus  should  be  consuls 
again  for  the  following  year;  that  Caesar  should 
have  a  fresh  supply  of  money,  and  that  his  com¬ 
mand  should  be  renewed  to  him  for  five  years 
more.  It  seemed  very  extravagant  to  all  think¬ 
ing  men  that  those  very  persons  who  had  re¬ 
ceived  so  much  money  from  Caesar  should  per¬ 
suade  the  senate  to  grant  him  more,  as  if  he 
were  in  want.  Though  in  truth  it  was  not  so 
much  upon  persuasion  as  compulsion  that, 
with  sorrow  and  groans  for  their  own  acts,  they 
passed  the  measure.  Cato  was  not  present,  for 
they  had  sent  him  seasonably  out  of  the  way 
into  Cyprus;  but  Favonius,  who  was  a  zealous 
imitator  of  Cato,  when  he  found  he  could  do 
no  good  by  opposing  it,  broke  out  of  the  house, 
and  loudly  declaimed  against  these  proceedings 
to  the  people,  but  none  gave  him  any  hear¬ 
ing;  some  slighting  him  out  of  respect  to 
Crassus  and  Pompey,  and  the  greater  part 
to  gratify  Caesar,  on  whom  depended  their 
hopes. 

After  this,  Caesar  returned  again  to  his  forces 
in  Gaul,  when  he  found  that  country  involved 
in  a  dangerous  war,  two  strong  nations  of  the 
Germans  having  lately  passed  the  Rhine  to 
conquer  it;  one  of  them  called  the  Usipes,  the 
other  the  Tenteritae. 

Of  the  war  with  the  people,  Caesar  himself 
has  given  this  account  in  his  Commentaries , 
that  the  barbarians,  having  sent  ambassadors 
to  treat  with  him,  did,  during  the  treaty,  set 
upon  him  in  his  march,  by  which  means  with 
eight  hundred  men  they  routed  five  thousand 
of  his  horse,  who  did  not  suspect  their  coming; 
that  afterwards  they  sent  other  ambassadors  to 
renew  the  same  fraudulent  practices,  whom  he 
kept  in  custody,  and  led  on  his  army  against 
the  barbarians,  as  judging  it  mere  simplicity  to 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

keep  faith  with  those  who  had  so  faithlessly 
broken  the  terms  they  had  agreed  to. 

But  Tanusius  states  that  when  the  senate  de¬ 
creed  festivals  and  sacrifices  for  this  victory, 
Cato  declared  it  to  be  his  opinion  that  Caesar 
ought  to  be  given  into  the  hands  of  the  bar¬ 
barians,  that  so  the  guilt  which  this  breach  of 
faith  might  otherwise  bring  upon  the  state 
might  be  expiated  by  transferring  the  curse  on 
him,  who  was  the  occasion  of  it. 

Of  those  who  passed  the  Rhine,  there  were 
four  hundred  thousand  cut  off;  those  few  who 
escaped  were  sheltered  by  the  Sugambri,  a  peo¬ 
ple  of  Germany. 

Caesar  took  hold  of  this  pretence  to  invade 
the  Germans,  being  at  the  same  time  ambitious 
of  the  honour  of  being  the  first  man  that  should 
pass  the  Rhine  with  an  army.  He  carried  a 
bridge  across  it,  though  it  was  very  wide,  and 
the  current  at  that  particular  point  very  full, 
strong,  and  violent,  bringing  down  with  its 
waters  trunks  of  trees,  and  other  lumber,  which 
much  shook  and  weakened  the  foundations  of 
his  bridge.  But  he  drove  great  piles  of  wood 
into  the  bottom  of  the  river  above  the  passage, 
to  catch  and  stop  these  as  they  floated  down, 
and  thus  fixing  his  bridle  upon  the  stream,  suc¬ 
cessfully  finished  his  bridge,  which  no  one  who 
saw  could  believe  to  be  the  work  but  of  ten 
days. 

In  the  passage  of  his  army  over  it  he  met 
with  no  opposition;  the  Suevi  themselves,  who 
are  the  most  warlike  people  of  all  Germany, 
flying  with  their  effects  into  the  deepest  and 
most  densely  wooded  valleys.  When  he  had 
burnt  all  the  enemy’s  country,  and  encouraged 
those  who  embraced  the  Roman  interest,  he 
went  back  into  Gaul,  after  eighteen  days’  stay 
in  Germany. 

But  his  expedition  into  Britain  was  the  most 
famous  testimony  of  his  courage.  For  he  was 
the  first  who  brought  a  navy  into  the  western 
ocean,  or  who  sailed  into  the  Atlantic  with  an 
army  to  make  war;  and  by  invading  an  island, 
the  reported  extent  of  which  had  made  its  exis¬ 
tence  a  matter  of  controversy  among  historians, 
many  of  whom  questioned  whether  it  were  not 
a  mere  name  and  fiction,  not  a  real  place,  he 
might  be  said  to  have  carried  the  Roman  em¬ 
pire  beyond  the  limits  of  the  known  world.  He 
passed  thither  twice  from  that  part  of  Gaul 
which  lies  over  against  it,  and  in  several  battles 
which  he  fought  did  more  hurt  to  the  enemy 
than  service  to  himself,  for  the  islanders  were 
so  miserably  poor  that  they  had  nothing  worth 
being  plundered  of.  When  he  found  himself 


CESAR 

unable  to  put  such  an  end  to  the  war  as  he 
wished,  he  was  content  to  take  hostages  from 
the  king,  and  to  impose  a  tribute,  and  then 
quitted  the  island. 

At  his  arrival  in  Gaul,  he  found  letters  which 
lay  ready  to  be  conveyed  over  the  water  to  him 
from  his  friends  at  Rome,  announcing  his 
daughter’s  death,  who  died  in  labour  of  a  child 
by  Pompey.  Caesar  and  Pompey  both  were 
much  afflicted  with  her  death,  nor  were  their 
friends  less  disturbed,  believing  that  the  alli¬ 
ance  was  now  broken,  which  had  hitherto  kept 
the  sickly  commonwealth  in  peace,  for  the 
child  also  died  within  a  few  days  after  the 
mother.  The  people  took  the  body  of  Julia,  in 
spite  of  the  opposition  of  the  tribunes,  and  car¬ 
ried  it  into  the  field  of  Mars,  and  there  her  fu¬ 
neral  rites  were  performed,  and  there  her  re¬ 
mains  are  laid. 

Caesar’s  army  was  now  grown  very  numer¬ 
ous,  so  that  he  was  forced  to  disperse  them  into 
various  camps  for  their  winter  quarters,  and  he 
having  gone  himself  to  Italy  as  he  used  to  do, 
in  his  absence  a  general  outbreak  throughout 
the  whole  of  Gaul  commenced,  and  large 
armies  marched  about  the  country,  and  at¬ 
tacked  the  Roman  quarters,  and  attempted  to 
make  themselves  masters  of  the  forts  where 
they  lay. 

The  greatest  and  strongest  party  of  the  reb¬ 
els,  under  the  command  of  Abriorix,  cut  off 
Cotta  and  Titurius  with  all  their  men,  while  a 
force  sixty  thousand  strong  besieged  the  legion 
under  the  command  of  Cicero,  and  had  almost 
taken  it  by  storm,  the  Roman  soldiers  being  all 
wounded,  and  having  quite  spent  themselves 
by  a  defence  beyond  their  natural  strength. 
But  Caesar,  who  was  at  a  great  distance,  having 
received  the  news,  quickly  got  together  seven 
thousand  men,  and  hastened  to  relieve  Cicero. 
The  besiegers  were  aware  of  it,  and  went  to 
meet  him,  with  great  confidence  that  they 
should  easily  overpower  such  a  handful  of 
men. 

Caesar,  to  increase  their  presumption,  seemed 
to  avoid  fighting,  and  still  marched  off,  till  he 
found  a  place  conveniently  situated  for  a  few 
to  engage  against  many,  where  he  encamped. 
He  kept  his  soldiers  from  making  any  attack 
upon  the  enemy,  and  commanded  them  to 
raise  the  ramparts  higher  and  barricade  the 
gates,  that  by  show  of  fear  they  might  heighten 
the  enemy’s  contempt  of  them.  Till  at  last  they 
came  without  any  order  in  great  security  to 
make  an  assault,  when  he  issued  forth  and  put 
them  in  flight  with  the  loss  of  many  men. 


587 

This  quieted  the  greater  part  of  the  commo¬ 
tions  in  these  parts  of  Gaul,  and  Caesar,  in  the 
course  of  the  winter,  visited  every  part  of  the 
country,  and  with  great  vigilance  took  precau¬ 
tions  against  all  innovations.  For  there  were 
three  legions  now  come  to  him  to  supply  the 
place  of  the  men  he  had  lost,  of  which  Pompey 
furnished  him  with  two  out  of  those  under  his 
command;  the  other  was  newly  raised  in  the 
part  of  Gaul  by  the  Po. 

But  in  a  while  the  seeds  of  war,  which  had 
long  since  been  secretly  sown  and  scattered  by 
the  most  powerful  men  in  those  warlike  na¬ 
tions,  broke  forth  into  the  greatest  and  most 
dangerous  war  that  was  in  those  parts,  both  as 
regards  the  number  of  men  in  the  vigour  of 
their  youth  who  were  gathered  and  armed 
from  all  quarters,  the  vast  funds  of  money  col¬ 
lected  to  maintain  it,  the  strength  of  the  towns, 
and  the  difficulty  of  the  country  where  it  was 
carried  on.  It  being  winter,  the  rivers  were 
frozen,  the  woods  covered  with  snow,  and  the 
level  country  flooded,  so  that  in  some  places  the 
ways  were  lost  through  the  depth  of  the  snow; 
in  others,  the  overflowing  of  marshes  and 
streams  made  every  kind  of  passage  uncertain. 
All  which  difficulties  made  it  seem  impractic¬ 
able  for  Caesar  to  make  any  attempt  upon  the 
insurgents.  Many  tribes  had  revolted  together, 
the  chief  of  them  being  the  Arverni  and  Car- 
nutini;  the  general  who  had  the  supreme  com¬ 
mand  in  war  was  Vercingetorix,  whose  father 
the  Gauls  had  put  to  death  on  suspicion  of  his 
aiming  at  absolute  government. 

He  having  disposed  his  army  in  several 
bodies,  and  set  officers  over  them,  drew  over  to 
him  all  the  country  round  about  as  far  as  those 
that  lie  upon  the  Arar,  and  having  intelligence 
of  the  opposition  which  Caesar  now  experi¬ 
enced  at  Rome,  thought  to  engage  all  Gaul  in 
the  war.  Which  if  he  had  done  a  little  later, 
when  Caesar  was  taken  up  with  the  civil  wars, 
Italy  had  been  put  into  as  great  a  terror  as  be¬ 
fore  it  was  by  the  Cimbri. 

But  Caesar,  who  above  all  men  was  gifted 
with  the  faculty  of  making  the  right  use  of  ev¬ 
erything  in  war,  and  most  especially  of  seizing 
the  right  moment,  as  soon  as  he  heard  of  the 
revolt,  returned  immediately  the  same  way  he 
went,  and  showed  the  barbarians,  by  the  quick¬ 
ness  of  his  march  in  such  a  severe  season,  that 
an  army  was  advancing  against  them  which 
was  invincible.  For  in  the  time  that  one  would 
have  thought  it  scarce  credible  that  a  courier  or 
express  should  have  come  with  a  message  from 
him,  he  himself  appeared  with  all  his  army, 


588 

ravaging  the  country,  reducing  their  posts,  sub¬ 
duing  their  towns,  receiving  into  his  protection 
those  who  declared  for  him.  Till  at  last  the 
Edui,  who  hitherto  had  styled  themselves 
brethren  to  the  Romans,  and  had  been  much 
honoured  by  them,  declared  against  him,  and 
joined  the  rebels,  to  the  great  discouragement 
of  his  army. 

Accordingly  he  removed  thence,  and  passed 
the  country  of  the  Ligones,  desiring  to  reach 
the  territories  of  the  Sequani,  who  were  his 
friends,  and  who  lay  like  a  bulwark  in  front  of 
Italy  against  the  other  tribes  of  Gaul.  There 
the  enemy  came  upon  him,  and  surrounded 
him  with  many  myriads,  whom  he  also  was 
eager  to  engage;  and  at  last,  after  some  time 
and  with  much  slaughter,  he  gained  generally 
a  complete  victory;  though  at  first  he  appears 
to  have  met  with  some  reverse,  and  the  Aru- 
veni  show  you  a  small  sword  hanging  up  in  a 
temple,  which  they  say  was  taken  from  Caesar. 
Caesar  saw  this  afterwards  himself,  and  smiled, 
and  when  his  friends  advised  it  should  be 
taken  down,  would  not  permit  it,  because  he 
looked  upon  it  as  consecrated. 

After  the  defeat,  a  great  part  of  those  who 
had  escaped  fled  with  their  king  into  a  town 
called  Alesia,  which  Caesar  besieged,  though 
the  height  of  the  walls,  and  number  of  those 
who  defended  them,  made  it  appear  impreg¬ 
nable;  and  meantime,  from  without  the  walls, 
he  was  assailed  by  a  greater  danger  than  can  be 
expressed.  For  the  choice  men  of  Gaul,  picked 
out  of  each  nation,  and  well  armed,  came  to 
relieve  Alesia,  to  the  number  of  three  hundred 
thousand;  nor  were  there  in  the  town  less  than 
one  hundred  and  seventy  thousand. 

So  that  Caesar,  being  shut  up  betwixt  two 
such  forces,  was  compelled  to  protect  himself 
by  two  walls,  one  towards  the  town,  the  other 
against  the  relieving  army,  as  knowing  if  these 
forces  should  join,  his  affairs  would  be  en¬ 
tirely  ruined.  The  danger  that  he  underwent 
before  Alesia  justly  gained  him  great  honour 
on  many  accounts,  and  gave  him  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  showing  greater  instances  of  his 
valour  and  conduct  than  any  other  contest 
had  done. 

One  wonders  much  how  he  should  be  able 
to  engage  and  defeat  so  many  thousands  of 
men  without  the  town,  and  not  be  perceived  by 
those  within,  but  yet  more,  that  the  Romans 
themselves,  who  guarded  their  wall  which  was 
next  to  the  town,  should  be  strangers  to  it.  For 
even  they  knew  nothing  of  the  victory,  till  they 
heard  the  cries  of  the  men  and  lamentations  of 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  women  who  were  in  the  town,  and  had 
from  thence  seen  the  Romans  at  a  distance  car¬ 
rying  into  their  camp  a  great  quantity  of  buck¬ 
lers,  adorned  with  gold  and  silver,  many  breast¬ 
plates  stained  with  blood,  besides  cups  and 
tents  made  in  the  Gallic  fashion.  So  soon  did 
so  vast  an  army  dissolve  and  vanish  like  a  ghost 
or  dream,  the  greatest  part  of  them  being  killed 
upon  the  spot. 

Those  who  were  in  Alesia,  having  given 
themselves  and  Caesar  much  trouble,  surren¬ 
dered  at  last;  and  Vercingetorix,  who  was  the 
chief  spring  of  all  the  war,  putting  his  best 
armour  on,  and  adorning  his  horse,  rode  out  of 
the  gates,  and  made  a  turn  about  Caesar  as  he 
was  sitting,  then  quitting  his  horse,  threw  off 
his  armour,  and  remained  quietly  sitting  at 
Caesar’s  feet  until  he  was  led  away  to  be  re¬ 
served  for  the  triumph. 

Caesar  had  long  ago  resolved  upon  the  over¬ 
throw  of  Pompey,  as  had  Pompey,  for  that 
matter,  upon  his.  For  Crassus,  the  fear  of 
whom  had  hitherto  kept  them  in  peace,  having 
now  been  killed  in  Parthia,  if  the  one  of  them 
wished  to  make  himself  the  greatest  man  in 
Rome,  he  had  only  to  overthrow  the  other;  and 
if  he  again  wished  to  prevent  his  own  fall,  he 
had  nothing  for  it  but  to  be  beforehand  with 
him  whom  he  feared. 

Pompey  had  not  been  long  under  any  such  ap¬ 
prehensions,  having  till  lately  despised  Caesar, 
as  thinking  it  no  difficult  matter  to  put  down 
him  whom  he  himself  had  advanced.  But  Cae¬ 
sar  had  entertained  this  design  from  the  begin¬ 
ning  against  his  rivals,  and  had  retired,  like  an 
expert  wrestler,  to  prepare  himself  apart  for 
the  combat.  Making  the  Gallic  wars  his  exer¬ 
cise-ground,  he  had  at  once  improved  the 
strength  of  his  soldiery,  and  had  heightened 
his  own  glory  by  his  great  actions,  so  that  he 
was  looked  on  as  one  who  might  challenge 
comparison  with  Pompey. 

Nor  did  he  let  go  any  of  those  advantages 
which  were  now  given  him  both  by  Pompey 
himself  and  the  times,  and  the  ill-government 
of  Rome,  where  all  who  were  candidates  for 
offices  publicly  gave  money,  and  without  any 
shame  bribed  the  people,  who,  having  received 
their  pay,  did  not  contend  for  their  benefactors 
with  their  bare  suffrages,  but  with  bows, 
swords,  and  slings.  So  that  after  having  many 
times  stained  the  place  of  election  with  blood 
of  men  killed  upon  the  spot,  they  left  the  city 
at  last  without  a  government  at  all,  to  be  carried 
about  like  a  ship  without  a  pilot  to  steer  her; 
while  all  who  had  any  wisdom  could  only  be 


C/ESAR 

thankful  if  a  course  of  such  wild  arid  stormy 
disorder  and  madness  might  end  no  worse 
than  in  a  monarchy. 

Some  were  so  bold  as  to  declare  openly  that 
the  government  was  incurable  but  by  a  mon¬ 
archy,  and  that  they  ought  to  take  that  remedy 
from  the  hands  of  the  gentlest  physician,  mean¬ 
ing  Pompey,  who,  though  in  words  he  pre¬ 
tended  to  decline  it,  yet  in  reality  made  his  ut¬ 
most  efforts  to  be  declared  dictator.  Cato,  per¬ 
ceiving  his  design,  prevailed  with  the  senate  to 
make  him  sole  consul,  that  with  the  offer  of  a 
more  legal  sort  of  monarchy  he  might  be  with¬ 
held  from  demanding  the  dictatorship.  They 
over  and  above  voted  him  the  continuance  of 
his  provinces,  for  he  had  two,  Spain  and  all 
Africa,  which  he  governed  by  his  lieutenants, 
and  maintained  armies  under  him,  at  the  yearly 
charge  of  a  thousand  talents  out  of  the  public 
treasury. 

Upon  this  Caesar  also  sent  and  petitioned  for 
the  consulship  and  the  continuance  of  his  prov¬ 
inces.  Pompey  at  first  did  not  stir  in  it,  but 
Marcellus  and  Lentulus  opposed  it,  who  had 
always  hated  Caesar,  and  now  did  everything, 
whether  fit  or  unfit,  which  might  disgrace  and 
affront  him.  For  they  took  away  the  privilege 
of  Roman  citizens  from  the  people  of  New 
Comum,  who  were  a  colony  that  Caesar  had 
lately  planted  in  Gaul,  and  Marcellus,  who  was 
then  consul,  ordered  one  of  the  senators  of  that 
town,  then  at  Rome,  to  be  whipped,  and  told 
him  he  laid  that  mark  upon  him  to  signify  he 
was  no  citizen  of  Rome,  bidding  him,  when  he 
went  back  again,  to  show  it  to  Caesar. 

After  Marcellus’s  consulship,  Caesar  began  to 
lavish  gifts  upon  all  the  public  men  out  of  the 
riches  he  had  taken  from  the  Gauls;  discharged 
Curio,  the  tribune,  from  his  great  debts;  gave 
Paulus,  then  consul,  fifteen  hundred  talents, 
with  which  he  built  the  noble  court  of  justice 
adjoining  the  Forum,  to  supply  the  place  of 
that  called  the  Fulvian. 

Pompey,  alarmed  at  these  preparations,  now 
openly  took  steps,  both  by  himself  and  his 
friends,  to  have  a  successor  appointed  in  Cae¬ 
sar’s  room,  and  sent  to  demand  back  the  sol¬ 
diers  whom  he  had  lent  him  to  carry  on  the 
wars  in  Gaul.  Caesar  returned  them,  and  made 
each  soldier  a  present  of  two  hundred  and  fifty 
drachmas.  The  officer  who  brought  them  home 
to  Pompey  spread  amongst  the  people  no  very 
fair  or  favourable  report  of  Caesar,  and  flattered 
Pompey  himself  with  false  suggestions  that  he 
was  wished  for  by  Caesar’s  army;  and  though 
his  affairs  here  were  in  some  embarrassment 


589 

through  the  envy  of  some,  and  the  ill  state  of 
the  government,  yet  there  the  army  was  at  his 
command,  and  if  they  once  crossed  into  Italy 
would  presently  declare  for  him;  so  weary  were 
they  of  Caesar’s  endless  expeditions,  and  so  sus¬ 
picious  of  his  designs  for  a  monarchy. 

Upon  this  Pompey  grew  presumptuous,  and 
neglected  all  warlike  preparations,  as  fearing 
no  danger,  and  used  no  other  means  against 
him  than  mere  speeches  and  votes,  for  which 
Caesar  cared  nothing.  And  one  of  his  captains, 
it  is  said,  who  was  sent  by  him  to  Rome,  stand¬ 
ing  before  the  senate  house  one  day,  and  being 
told  that  the  senate  would  not  give  Caesar  a 
longer  time  in  his  government,  clapped  his 
hand  on  the  hilt  of  his  sword  and  said,  “But 
this  shall.” 

Yet  the  demands  which  Caesar  made  had  the 
fairest  colours  of  equity  imaginable.  For  he 
proposed  to  lay  down  his  arms,  and  that  Pom¬ 
pey  should  do  the  same,  and  both  together 
should  become  private  men,  and  each  expect  a 
reward  of  his  services  from  the  public.  For 
that  those  who  proposed  to  disarm  him,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  confirm  Pompey  in  all  the 
power  he  held,  were  simply  establishing  the 
one  in  the  tyranny  which  they  accused  the  other 
of  aiming  at. 

When  Curio  made  these  proposals  to  the 
people  in  Caesar’s  name,  he  was  loudly  ap¬ 
plauded,  and  some  threw  garlands  towards  him, 
and  dismissed  him  as  they  do  successful  wres¬ 
tlers,  crowned  with  flowers.  Antony,  being 
tribune,  produced  a  letter  sent  from  Caesar  on 
this  occasion,  and  read  it,  though  the  consuls 
did  what  they  could  to  oppose  it. 

But  Scipio,  Pompey’s  father-in-law,  proposed 
in  the  senate,  that  if  Caesar  did  not  lay  down 
his  arms  within  such  a  time  he  should  be  voted 
an  enemy;  and  the  consuls  putting  it  to  the 
question,  whether  Pompey  should  dismiss  his 
soldiers,  and  again,  whether  Caesar  should  dis¬ 
band  his,  very  few  assented  to  the  first,  but  al¬ 
most  all  to  the  latter.  But  Antony  proposing 
again,  that  both  should  lay  down  their  com¬ 
missions,  all  but  a  very  few  agreed  to  it.  Scipio 
was  upon  this  very  violent,  and  Lentulus,  the 
consul,  cried  aloud,  that  they  had  need  of  arms, 
and  not  of  suffrages,  against  a  robber;  so  that 
the  senators  for  the  present  adjourned,  and  ap¬ 
peared  in  mourning  as  a  mark  of  their  grief 
for  the  dissension. 

Afterwards  there  came  other  letters  from 
Caesar,  which  seemed  yet  more  moderate,  for 
he  proposed  to  quit  everything  else,  and  only 
to  retain  Gaul  within  the  Alps,  Illyricum,  and 


590 

two  legions,  till  he  should  stand  a  second  time 
for  consul. 

Cicero,  the  orator,  who  was  lately  returned 
from  Cilicia,  endeavoured  to  reconcile  differ¬ 
ences,  and  softened  Pompey,  who  was  willing 
to  comply  in  other  things,  but  not  to  allow  him 
the  soldiers.  At  last  Cicero  used  his  persuasions 
with  Caesar’s  friends  to  accept  of  the  provinces 
and  six  thousand  soldiers  only,  and  so  to  make 
up  the  quarrel.  And  Pompey  was  inclined  to 
give  way  to  this,  but  Lentulus,  the  consul, 
would  not  hearken  to  it,  but  drove  Antony  and 
Curio  out  of  the  senate-house  with  insults,  by 
which  he  afforded  Caesar  the  most  plausible 
pretence  that  could  be,  and  one  which  he  could 
readily  use  to  inflame  the  soldiers,  by  showing 
them  two  persons  of  such  repute  and  authority 
who  were  forced  to  escape  in  a  hired  carriage  in 
the  dress  of  slaves.  For  so  they  were  glad  to  dis¬ 
guise  themselves  when  they  fled  out  of  Rome. 

There  were  not  about  him  at  that  time  above 
three  hundred  horse  and  five  thousand  foot; 
for  the  rest  of  his  army,  which  was  left  behind 
the  Alps,  was  to  be  brought  after  him  by  offi¬ 
cers  who  had  received  orders  for  that  purpose. 
But  he  thought  the  first  motion  towards  the  de¬ 
sign  which  he  had  on  foot  did  not  require  large 
forces  at  present,  and  that  what  was  wanted 
was  to  make  this  first  step  suddenly,  and  so  as 
to  astound  his  enemies  with  the  boldness  of  it; 
as  it  would  be  easier,  he  thought,  to  throw 
them  into  consternation  by  doing  what  they 
never  anticipated  than  fairly  to  conquer  them, 
if  he  had  alarmed  them  by  his  preparations. 

And  therefore  he  commanded  his  captains 
and  other  officers  to  go  only  with  their  swords 
in  their  hands,  without  any  other  arms,  and 
make  themselves  masters  of  Ariminum,  a  large 
city  of  Gaul,  with  as  little  disturbance  and 
bloodshed  as  possible.  He  committed  the  care 
of  these  forces  to  Hortensius,  and  himself  spent 
the  day  in  public  as  a  stander-by  and  spectator 
of  the  gladiators,  who  exercised  before  him. 

A  little  before  night  he  attended  to  his  per¬ 
son,  and  then  went  into  the  hall,  and  conversed 
for  some  time  with  those  he  had  invited  to 
supper,  till  it  began  to  grow  dusk,  when  he 
rose  from  table  and  made  his  excuses  to  the 
company,  begging  them  to  stay  till  he  came 
back,  having  already  given  private  directions 
to  a  few  immediate  friends  that  they  should 
follow  him,  not  all  the  same  way,  but  some  one 
way,  some  another.  He  himself  got  into  one 
of  the  hired  carriages,  and  drove  at  first  an¬ 
other  way,  but  presently  turned  towards  Ari¬ 
minum. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

When  he  came  to  the  river  Rubicon,  which 
parts  Gaul  within  the  Alps  from  the  rest  of 
Italy,  his  thoughts  began  to  work,  now  he  was 
just  entering  upon  the  danger,  and  he  wavered 
much  in  his  mind  when  he  considered  the 
greatness  of  the  enterprise  into  which  he  was 
throwing  himself.  He  checked  his  course  and 
ordered  a  halt,  while  he  revolved  with  himself, 
and  often  changed  his  opinion  one  way  and  the 
other,  without  speaking  a  word.  This  was 
when  his  purposes  fluctuated  most;  presently 
he  also  discussed  the  matter  with  his  friends 
who  were  about  him  (of  which  number  Asi- 
nius  Pollio  was  one),  computing  how  many 
calamities  his  passing  that  river  would  bring 
upon  mankind,  and  what  a  relation  of  it  would 
be  transmitted  to  posterity.  At  last,  in  a  sort  of 
passion,  casting  aside  calculation,  and  aban¬ 
doning  himself  to  what  might  come,  and  using 
the  proverb  frequently  in  their  mouths  who 
enter  upon  dangerous  and  bold  attempts,  “The 
die  is  cast,”  with  these  words  he  took  the  river. 
Once  over,  he  used  all  expedition  possible,  and 
before  it  was  day  reached  Ariminum  and  took 
it.  It  is  said  that  the  night  before  he  passed  the 
river  he  had  an  impious  dream  that  he  was  un¬ 
naturally  familiar  with  his  own  mother. 

As  soon  as  Ariminum  was  taken,  wide  gates, 
so  to  say,  were  thrown  open,  to  let  in  war  upon 
every  land  alike  and  sea,  and  with  the  limits  of 
the  province,  the  boundaries  of  the  laws  were 
transgressed.  Nor  would  one  have  thought 
that,  as  at  other  times,  the  mere  men  and 
women  fled  from  one  town  of  Italy  to  another 
in  their  consternation,  but  that  the  very  towns 
themselves  left  their  sites  and  fled  for  succour 
to  each  other. 

The  city  of  Rome  was  overrun,  as  it  were, 
with  a  deluge,  by  the  conflux  of  people  flying 
in  from  all  the  neighbouring  places.  Magis¬ 
trates  could  no  longer  govern,  nor  the  elo¬ 
quence  of  any  orator  quiet  it;  it  was  all  but  suf¬ 
fering  shipwreck  by  the  violence  of  its  own 
tempestuous  agitation.  The  most  vehement 
contrary  passions  and  impulses  were  at  work 
everywhere.  Nor  did  those  who  rejoiced  at  the 
prospect  of  the  change  altogether  conceal  their 
feelings,  but  when  they  met,  as  in  so  great  a 
city  they  frequently  must,  with  the  alarmed 
and  dejected  of  the  other  party,  they  provoked 
quarrels  by  their  bold  expressions  of  confidence 
in  the  event. 

Pompey,  sufficiently  disturbed  of  himself, 
was  yet  more  perplexed  by  the  clamours  of 
others;  some  telling  him  that  he  justly  suffered 
for  having  armed  Caesar  against  himself  and 


OESAR 

the  government;  others  blaming  him  for  per¬ 
mitting  Caesar  to  be  insolently  used  by  Lentu- 
lus,  when  he  made  such  ample  concessions,  and 
offered  such  reasonable  proposals  towards  an 
accommodation.  Favonius  bade  him  now 
stamp  upon  the  ground;  for  once  talking  big 
in  the  senate,  he  desired  them  not  to  trouble 
themselves  about  making  any  preparations  for 
the  war,  for  that  he  himself,  with  one  stamp  of 
his  foot,  would  fill  all  Italy  with  soldiers.  Yet, 
still  Pompey  at  that  time  had  more  forces  than 
Caesar;  but  he  was  not  permitted  to  pursue  his 
own  thoughts,  but,  being  continually  disturbed 
with  false  reports  and  alarms,  as  if  the  enemy 
was  close  upon  him  and  carrying  all  before 
him,  he  gave  way,  and  let  himself  be  borne 
down  by  the  general  cry.  He  put  forth  an  edict 
declaring  the  city  to  be  in  a  state  of  anarchy, 
and  left  it  with  orders  that  the  senate  should 
follow  him,  and  that  no  one  should  stay  behind 
who  did  not  prefer  tyranny  to  their  country 
and  liberty. 

The  consuls  at  once  fled,  without  making 
even  the  usual  sacrifices;  so  did  most  of  the  sen¬ 
ators,  carrying  off  their  own  goods  in  as  much 
haste  as  if  they  had  been  robbing  their  neigh¬ 
bours.  Some,  who  had  formerly  much  favoured 
Caesar’s  cause,  in  the  prevailing  alarm  quitted 
their  own  sentiments,  and  without  any  pros¬ 
pect  of  good  to  themselves,  were  carried  along 
by  the  common  stream.  It  was  a  melancholy 
thing  to  see  the  city  tossed  in  these  tumults, 
like  a  ship  given  up  by  her  pilots,  and  left  to 
run,  as  chance  guides  her,  upon  any  rock  in 
her  way.  Yet,  in  spite  of  their  sad  condition, 
people  still  esteemed  the  place  of  their  exile  to 
be  their  country  for  Pompey’s  sake,  and  fled 
from  Rome,  as  if  it  had  been  Caesar’s  camp. 
Labienus  even,  who  had  been  one  of  Caesar’s 
nearest  friends,  and  his  lieutenant,  and  who 
had  fought  by  him  zealously  in  the  Gallic 
wars,  now  deserted  him  and  went  over  to 
Pompey. 

Caesar  sent  all  his  money  and  equipage  after 
him,  and  then  sat  down  before  Corfinium, 
which  was  garrisoned  with  thirty  cohorts  un¬ 
der  the  command  of  Domitius.  He,  in  despair 
of  maintaining  the  defence,  requested  a  physi¬ 
cian,  whom  he  had  among  his  attendants,  to 
give  him  poison;  and  taking  the  dose,  drank  it, 
in  hopes  of  being  despatched  by  it.  But  soon 
after,  when  he  was  told  that  Caesar  showed  the 
utmost  clemency  towards  those  he  took  prison¬ 
ers,  he  lamented  his  misfortune,  and  blamed 
the  hastiness  of  his  resolution.  His  physician 
consoled  him  by  informing  him  that  he  had 


591 

taken  a  sleeping  draught,  not  a  poison;  upon 
which,  much  rejoiced,  and  rising  from  his  bed, 
he  went  presently  to  Caesar,  and  gave  him  the 
pledge  of  his  hand,  yet  afterwards  again  went 
over  to  Pompey.  The  report  of  these  actions  at 
Rome  quieted  those  who  were  there,  and  some 
who  had  fled  thence  returned. 

Caesar  took  into  his  army  Domitius’s  sol¬ 
diers,  as  he  did  all  those  whom  he  found  in  any 
town  enlisted  for  Pompey’s  service.  Being  now 
strong  and  formidable  enough,  he  advanced 
against  Pompey  himself,  who  did  not  stay  to 
receive  him,  but  fled  to  Brundusium,  having 
sent  the  consuls  before  with  a  body  of  troops  to 
Dyrrhachium.  Soon  after,  upon  Caesar’s  ap¬ 
proach,  he  set  to  sea,  as  shall  be  more  particu¬ 
larly  related  in  his  Life.  Caesar  would  have  im¬ 
mediately  pursued  him,  but  wanted  shipping, 
and  therefore  went  back  to  Rome,  having 
made  himself  master  of  all  Italy  without  blood¬ 
shed  in  the  space  of  sixty  days. 

When  he  came  thither,  he  found  the  city 
more  quiet  than  he  expected,  and  many  sena¬ 
tors  present,  to  whom  he  addressed  himself 
with  courtesy  and  deference,  desiring  them  to 
send  to  Pompey  about  any  reasonable  accom¬ 
modations  towards  a  peace.  But  nobody  com¬ 
plied  with  this  proposal;  whether  out  of  fear  of 
Pompey,  whom  they  had  deserted,  or  that  they 
thought  Caesar  did  not  mean  what  he  said,  but 
thought  it  his  interest  to  talk  plausibly. 

Afterwards,  when  Metellus,  the  tribune, 
would  have  hindered  him  from  taking  money 
out  of  the  public  treasury,  and  adduced  some 
laws  against  it,  Caesar  replied  that  arms  and 
laws  had  each  their  own  time;  “If  what  I  do 
displeases  you,  leave  the  place;  war  allows  no 
free  talking.  When  I  have  laid  down  my  arms, 
and  made  peace,  come  back  and  make  what 
speeches  you  please.  And  this,”  he  added,  “I 
tell  you  in  diminution  of  my  own  just  right,  as 
indeed  you  and  all  others  who  have  appeared 
against  me  and  are  now  in  my  power  may  be 
treated  as  I  please.”  Having  said  this  to  Metel¬ 
lus,  he  went  to  the  doors  of  the  treasury,  and 
the  keys  being  not  to  be  found,  sent  for  smiths 
to  force  them  open.  Metellus  again  making 
resistance  and  some  encouraging  him  in  it,  Cae¬ 
sar,  in  a  louder  tone,  told  him  he  would  put 
him  to  death  if  he  gave  him  any  further  dis¬ 
turbance.  “And  this,”  said  he,  “you  know, 
young  man,  is  more  disagreeable  for  me  to  say 
than  to  do.”  These  words  made  Metellus  with¬ 
draw  for  fear,  and  obtained  speedy  execution 
henceforth  for  all  orders  that  Caesar  gave  for 
procuring  necessaries  for  the  war. 


592 

He  was  now  proceeding  to  Spain,  with  the 
determination  of  first  crushing  Afranius  and 
Varro,  Pompey’s  lieutenants,  and  making  him¬ 
self  master  of  the  armies  and  provinces  under 
them,  that  he  might  then  more  securely  ad¬ 
vance  against  Pompey,  when  he  had  no  enemy 
left  behind  him.  In  this  expedition  his  person 
was  often  in  danger  from  ambuscades,  and  his 
army  by  want  of  provisions,  yet  he  did  not  de¬ 
sist  from  pursuing  the  enemy,  provoking  them 
to  fight,  and  hemming  them  with  his  fortifi¬ 
cations,  till  by  main  force  he  made  himself 
master  of  their  camps  and  their  forces.  Only 
the  generals  got  off,  and  fled  to  Pompey. 

When  Caesar  came  back  to  Rome,  Piso,  his 
father-in-law,  advised  him  to  send  men  to  Pom¬ 
pey  to  treat  of  a  peace;  but  Isauricus,  to  ingra¬ 
tiate  himself  with  Caesar,  spoke  against  it. 

After  this,  being  created  dictator  by  the  sen¬ 
ate,  he  called  home  the  exiles,  and  gave  back 
their  rights  as  citizens  to  the  children  of  those 
who  had  suffered  under  Sulla;  he  relieved  the 
debtors  by  an  act  remitting  some  part  of  the  in¬ 
terest  on  their  debts,  and  passed  some  other 
measures  of  the  same  sort,  but  not  many.  For 
within  eleven  days  he  resigned  his  dictatorship, 
and  having  declared  himself  consul,  with  Ser- 
vilius  Isauricus,  hastened  again  to  the  war. 

He  marched  so  fast  that  he  left  all  his  army 
behind  him,  except  six  hundred  chosen  horse 
and  five  legions,  with  which  he  put  to  sea  in 
the  very  middle  of  winter,  about  the  beginning 
of  the  month  of  January  (which  corresponds 
pretty  nearly  with  the  Athenian  month  Posei- 
deon),  and  having  passed  the  Ionian  Sea,  took 
Oricum  and  Apollonia,  and  then  sent  back  the 
ships  to  Brundusium,  to  bring  over  the  soldiers 
who  were  left  behind  in  the  march. 

They,  while  yet  on  the  march,  their  bodies 
now  no  longer  in  the  full  vigour  of  youth,  and 
they  themselves  weary  with  such  a  multitude 
of  wars,  could  not  but  exclaim  against  Caesar, 
“When  at  last,  and  where,  will  this  Caesar  let 
us  be  quiet  ?  He  carries  us  from  place  to  place, 
and  uses  us  as  if  we  were  not  to  be  worn  out, 
and  had  no  sense  of  labour.  Even  our  iron  it¬ 
self  is  spent  by  blows,  and  we  ought  to  have 
some  pity  on  our  bucklers  and  breastplates, 
which  have  been  used  so  long.  Our  wounds,  if 
nothing  else,  should  make  him  see  that  we  are 
mortal  men  whom  he  commands,  subject  to 
the  same  pains  and  sufferings  as  other  human 
beings.  The  very  gods  themselves  cannot  force 
the  winter  season,  or  hinder  the  storms  in  their 
time;  yet  he  pushes  forward,  as  if  he  were  not 
pursuing,  but  flying  from  an  enemy.”  So  they 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

talked  as  they  marched  leisurely  towards  Brun¬ 
dusium. 

But  when  they  came  thither,  and  found 
Caesar  gone  off  before  them,  their  feelings 
changed,  and  they  blamed  themselves  as  trai¬ 
tors  to  their  general.  They  now  railed  at  their 
officers  for  marching  so  slowly,  and  placing 
themselves  on  the  heights  overlooking  the  sea 
towards  Epirus,  they  kept  watch  to  see  if  they 
could  espy  the  vessels  which  were  to  transport 
them  to  Caesar. 

He  in  the  meantime  was  posted  in  Apollonia, 
but  had  not  an  army  with  him  able  to  fight  the 
enemy,  the  forces  from  Brundusium  being  so 
long  in  coming,  which  put  him  to  great  sus¬ 
pense  and  embarrassment  what  to  do.  At  last 
he  resolved  upon  a  most  hazardous  experi¬ 
ment,  and  embarked,  without  any  one’s  knowl¬ 
edge,  in  a  boat  of  twelve  oars,  to  cross  over  to 
Brundusium,  though  the  sea  was  at  that  time 
covered  with  a  vast  fleet  of  the  enemy.  He 
got  on  board  in  the  night-time,  in  the  dress  of 
a  slave,  and  throwing  himself  down  like  a  per¬ 
son  of  no  consequence,  lay  along  at  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  the  vessel.  The  river  Anius  was  to  carry 
them  down  to  sea,  and  there  used  to  blow  a 
gentle  gale  every  morning  from  the  land, 
which  made  it  calm  at  the  mouth  of  the  river, 
by  driving  the  waves  forward;  but  this  night 
there  had  blown  a  strong  wind  from  the  sea, 
which  overpowered  that  from  the  land,  so  that 
where  the  river  met  the  influx  of  the  sea-water 
and  the  opposition  of  the  waves  it  was  ex¬ 
tremely  rough  and  angry;  and  the  current  was 
beaten  back  with  such  a  violent  swell  that  the 
master  of  the  boat  could  not  make  good  his 
passage,  but  ordered  his  sailors  to  tack  about 
and  return. 

Caesar,  upon  this,  discovered  himself,  and 
taking  the  man  by  the  hand,  who  was  surprised 
to  see  him  there,  said,  “Go  on,  my  friend,  and 
fear  nothing;  you  carry  Caesar  and  his  fortune 
in  your  boat.”  The  mariners,  when  they  heard 
that,  forgot  the  storm,  and  laying  all  their 
strength  to  their  oars,  did  what  they  could  to 
force  their  way  down  the  river.  But  when  it 
was  to  no  purpose,  and  the  vessel  now  took  in 
much  water,  Caesar  finding  himself  in  such 
danger  in  the  very  mouth  of  the  river,  much 
against  his  will  permitted  the  master  to  turn 
back.  When  he  was  come  to  land,  his  soldiers 
ran  to  him  in  a  multitude,  reproaching  him  for 
what  he  had  done,  and  indignant  that  he 
should  think  himself  not  strong  enough  to  get 
a  victory  by  their  sole  assistance,  but  must  dis¬ 
turb  himself,  and  expose  his  life  for  those  who 


C/ESAR 

were  absent,  as  if  he  could  not  trust  those  who 
were  with  him. 

After  this,  Antony  came  over  with  the  forces 
from  Brundusium,  which  encouraged  Caesar  to 
give  Pompey  battle,  though  he  was  encamped 
very  advantageously,  and  furnished  with  plenty 
of  provisions  both  by  sea  and  land,  whilst  he 
himself  was  at  the  beginning  but  ill  supplied, 
and  before  the  end  was  extremely  pinched  for 
want  of  necessaries,  so  that  his  soldiers  were 
forced  to  dig  up  a  kind  of  root  which  grew 
there,  and  tempering  it  with  milk,  to  feed  on  it. 
Sometimes  they  made  a  kind  of  bread  of  it,  and 
advancing  up  to  the  enemy’s  outposts,  would 
throw  in  these  loaves,  telling  them,  that  as  long 
as  the  earth  produced  such  roots  they  would 
not  give  up  blockading  Pompey.  But  Pompey 
took  what  care  he  could  that  neither  the  loaves 
nor  the  words  should  reach  his  men,  who  were 
out  of  heart  and  despondent  through  terror  at 
the  fierceness  and  hardihood  of  their  enemies, 
whom  they  looked  upon  as  a  sort  of  wild  beasts. 

There  were  continual  skirmishes  about  Pom- 
pey’s  outworks,  in  all  which  Caesar  had  the  bet¬ 
ter,  except  one,  when  his  men  were  forced  to 
fly  in  such  a  manner  that  he  had  like  to  have 
lost  his  camp.  For  Pompey  made  such  a  vigor¬ 
ous  sally  on  them  that  not  a  man  stood  his 
ground;  the  trenches  were  filled  with  the 
slaughter,  many  fell  upon  their  own  ramparts 
and  bulwarks,  whither  they  were  driven  in 
flight  by  the  enemy.  Caesar  met  them  and 
would  have  turned  them  back,  but  could  not. 
When  he  went  to  lay  hold  of  the  ensigns,  those 
who  carried  them  threw  them  down,  so  that 
the  enemy  took  thirty-two  of  them.  He  him¬ 
self  narrowly  escaped;  for  taking  hold  of  one  of 
his  soldiers,  a  big  and  strong  man,  that  was 
flying  by  him,  he  bade  him  stand  and  face 
about;  but  the  fellow,  full  of  apprehensions 
from  the  danger  he  was  in,  laid  hold  of  his 
sword,  as  if  he  would  strike  Caesar,  but  Caesar’s 
armour-bearer  cut  off  his  arm. 

Caesar’s  affairs  were  so  desperate  at  that  time 
that  when  Pompey,  either  through  over-cau¬ 
tiousness  or  his  ill  fortune,  did  not  give  the 
finishing  stroke  to  that  great  success,  but  re¬ 
treated  after  he  had  driven  the  routed  enemy 
within  their  camp,  Caesar,  upon  seeing  his 
withdrawal,  said  to  his  friends,  “The  victory 
to-day  had  been  on  the  enemies’  side  if  they  had 
had  a  general  who  knew  how  to  gain  it.” 

When  he  was  retired  into  his  tent,  he  laid 
himself  down  to  sleep,  but  spent  that  night  as 
miserable  as  ever  he  did  any,  in  perplexity  and 
consideration  with  himself,  coming  to  the  con- 


593 

elusion  that  he  had  conducted  the  war  amiss. 
For  when  he  had  a  fertile  country  before  him, 
and  all  the  wealthy  cities  of  Macedonia  and 
Thessaly,  he  had  neglected  to  carry  the  war 
thither,  and  had  sat  down  by  the  seaside,  where 
his  enemies  had  such  a  powerful  fleet,  so  that 
he  was  in  fact  rather  besieged  by  the  want  of 
necessaries,  than  besieging  others  with  his 
arms.  Being  thus  distracted  in  his  thoughts 
with  the  view  of  the  difficulty  and  distress  he 
was  in,  he  raised  his  camp,  with  the  intention 
of  advancing  towards  Scipio,  who  lay  in  Mace¬ 
donia;  hoping  either  to  entice  Pompey  into  a 
country  where  he  should  fight  without  the  ad¬ 
vantage  he  now  had  of  supplies  from  the  sea, 
or  to  overpower  Scipio  if  not  assisted. 

This  set  all  Pompey’s  army  and  officers  on 
fire  to  hasten  and  pursue  Caesar,  whom  they 
concluded  to  be  beaten  and  flying.  But  Pompey 
was  afraid  to  hazard  a  battle  on  which  so  much 
depended,  and  being  himself  provided  with  all 
necessaries  for  any  length  of  time,  thought  to 
tire  out  and  waste  the  vigour  of  Caesar’s  army, 
which  could  not  last  long.  For  the  best  part  of 
his  men,  though  they  had  great  experience, 
and  showed  an  irresistible  courage  in  all  en¬ 
gagements,  yet  by  their  frequent  marches, 
changing  their  camps,  attacking  fortifications, 
and  keeping  long  night-watches,  were  getting 
worn  out  and  broken;  they  being  now  old, 
their  bodies  less  fit  for  labour,  and  their  cour¬ 
age,  also,  beginning  to  give  way  with  the  fail¬ 
ure  of  their  strength.  Besides,  it  was  said  that 
an  infectious  disease,  occasioned  by  their  ir¬ 
regular  diet,  was  prevailing  in  Caesar’s  army, 
and  what  was  of  greatest  moment,  he  was 
neither  furnished  with  money  nor  provisions, 
so  that  in  a  little  time  he  must  needs  fall  of 
himself. 

For  these  reasons  Pompey  had  no  mind  to 
fight  him,  but  was  thanked  for  it  by  none  but 
Cato,  who  rejoiced  at  the  prospect  of  sparing 
his  fellow-citizens.  For  he,  when  he  saw  the 
dead  bodies  of  those  who  had  fallen  in  the  last 
battle  on  Caesar’s  side,  to  the  number  of  a  thou¬ 
sand,  turned  away,  covered  his  face,  and  shed 
tears.  But  every  one  else  upbraided  Pompey 
for  being  reluctant  to  fight,  and  tried  to  goad 
him  on  by  such  nicknames  as  Agamemnon,  and 
King  of  Kings,  as  if  he  were  in  no  hurry  to  lay 
down  his  sovereign  authority,  but  was  pleased 
to  see  so  many  commanders  attending  on  him, 
and  paying  their  attendance  at  his  tent.  Fa- 
vonius,  who  affected  Cato’s  free  way  of  speak¬ 
ing  his  mind,  complained  bitterly  that  they 
should  eat  no  figs  even  this  year  at  Tusculum, 


594 

because  of  Pompey’s  love  of  command.  Afra- 
nius,  who  was  lately  returned  out  of  Spain, 
and,  on  account  of  his  ill  success  there,  la¬ 
boured  under  the  suspicion  of  having  been 
bribed  to  betray  the  army,  asked  why  they  did 
not  fight  this  purchaser  of  provinces.  Pompey 
was  driven,  against  his  own  will,  by  this  kind 
of  language,  into  offering  battle,  and  proceeded 
to  follow  Caesar. 

Caesar  had  found  great  difficulties  in  his 
march,  for  no  country  would  supply  him  with 
provisions,  his  reputation  being  very  much 
fallen  since  his  late  defeat.  But  after  he  took 
Gomphi,  a  town  of  Thessaly,  he  not  only  found 
provisions  for  his  army,  but  physic  too.  For 
there  they  met  with  plenty  of  wine,  which  they 
took  very  freely,  and  heated  with  this,  sport¬ 
ing  and  revelling  on  their  march  in  bacchana¬ 
lian  fashion,  they  shook  off  the  disease,  and 
their  whole  constitution  was  relieved  and 
changed  into  another  habit. 

When  the  two  armies  were  come  into  Phar- 
salia,  and  both  encamped  there,  Pompey’s 
thoughts  ran  the  same  way  as  they  had  done 
before,  against  fighting,  and  the  more  because 
of  some  unlucky  presages,  and  a  vision  he  had 
in  a  dream.  But  those  who  were  about  him 
were  so  confident  of  success,  that  Domitius, 
and  Spinther,  and  Scipio,  as  if  they  had  already 
conquered,  quarrelled  which  should  succeed 
Caesar  in  the  pontificate.  And  many  sent  to 
Rome  to  take  houses  fit  to  accommodate  con¬ 
suls  and  praetors,  as  being  sure  of  entering  upon 
those  offices  as  soon  as  the  battle  was  over.  The 
cavalry  especially  were  obstinate  for  fighting, 
being  splendidly  armed  and  bravely  mounted, 
and  valuing  themselves  upon  the  fine  horses 
they  kept,  and  upon  their  own  handsome  per¬ 
sons;  as  also  upon  the  advantage  of  their  num¬ 
bers,  for  they  were  five  thousand  against  one 
thousand  of  Caesar’s.  Nor  were  the  numbers  of 
the  infantry  less  disproportionate,  there  being 
forty-five  thousand  of  Pompey’s  against  twen¬ 
ty-two  thousand  of  the  enemy. 

Caesar,  collecting  his  soldiers  together,  told 
them  that  Corfinius  was  coming  up  to  them 
with  two  legions,  and  that  fifteen  cohorts  more 
under  Calenus  were  posted  at  Megara  and 
Athens;  he  then  asked  them  whether  they 
would  stay  till  these  joined  them,  or  would 
hazard  the  battle  by  themselves.  They  all  cried 
out  to  him  not  to  wait,  but  on  the  contrary  to 
do  whatever  he  could  to  bring  about  an  en¬ 
gagement  as  soon  as  possible. 

When  he  sacrificed  to  the  gods  for  the  lustra¬ 
tion  of  his  army,  upon  the  death  of  the  first 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

victim  the  augur  told  him  within  three  days 
he  should  come  to  a  decisive  action.  Caesar 
asked  him  whether  he  saw  anything  in  the  en¬ 
trails  which  promised  a  happy  event.  “That,” 
said  the  priest,  “you  can  best  answer  yourself; 
for  the  gods  signify  a  great  alteration  from  the 
present  posture  of  affairs.  If,  therefore,  you 
think  yourself  well  off  now,  expect  worse  for¬ 
tune;  if  unhappy,  hope  for  better.” 

The  night  before  the  battle,  as  he  walked  the 
rounds  about  midnight,  there  was  a  light  seen 
in  the  heavens,  very  bright  and  flaming,  which 
seemed  to  pass  over  Caesar’s  camp  and  fall  into 
Pompey’s.  And  when  Caesar’s  soldiers  came 
to  relieve  the  watch  in  the  morning,  they  per¬ 
ceived  a  panic  disorder  among  the  enemies. 
However,  he  did  not  expect  to  fight  that  day, 
but  set  about  raising  his  camp  with  the  inten¬ 
tion  of  marching  towards  Scotussa. 

But  when  the  tents  were  now  taken  down, 
his  scouts  rode  up  to  him,  and  told  him  the 
enemy  would  give  him  battle.  With  this  news 
he  was  extremely  pleased,  and  having  per¬ 
formed  his  devotions  to  the  gods,  set  his  army 
in  battle  array,  dividing  them  into  three  bodies. 
Over  the  middlemost  he  placed  Domitius  Cal- 
vinus;  Antony  commanded  the  left  wing,  and 
he  himself  the  right,  being  resolved  to  fight  at 
the  head  of  the  tenth  legion.  But  when  he  saw 
the  enemy’s  cavalry  taking  position  against 
him,  being  struck  with  their  fine  appearance 
and  their  number,  he  gave  private  orders  that 
six  cohorts  from  the  rear  of  the  army  should 
come  round  and  join  him,  whom  he  posted  be¬ 
hind  the  right  wing,  and  instructed  them  what 
they  should  do  when  the  enemy’s  horse  came 
to  charge. 

On  the  other  side,  Pompey  commanded  the 
right  wing,  Domitius  the  left,  and  Scipio, 
Pompey’s  father-in-law,  the  centre.  The  whole 
weight  of  the  cavalry  was  collected  on  the  left 
wing,  with  the  intent  that  they  should  out¬ 
flank  the  right  wing  of  the  enemy,  and  rout 
that  part  where  the  general  himself  command¬ 
ed.  For  they  thought  no  phalanx  of  infantry 
could  be  solid  enough  to  sustain  such  a  shock, 
but  that  they  must  necessarily  be  broken  and 
shattered  all  to  pieces  upon  the  onset  of  so  im¬ 
mense  a  force  of  cavalry. 

When  they  were  ready  on  both  sides  to  give 
the  signal  for  battle,  Pompey  commanded  his 
foot,  who  were  in  the  front,  to  stand  their 
ground,  and  without  breaking  their  order,  re¬ 
ceive,  quietly,  the  enemy’s  first  attack,  till  they 
came  within  javelin’s  cast.  Caesar,  in  this  respect, 
also,  blames  Pompey’s  generalship,  as  if  he  had 


C/ESAR 

not  been  aware  how  the  first  encounter,  when 
made  with  an  impetus  and  upon  the  run,  gives 
weight  and  force  to  the  strokes,  and  fires  the 
men’s  spirits  into  a  flame,  which  the  general 
concurrence  fans  to  full  heat. 

He  himself  was  just  putting  the  troops  into 
motion  and  advancing  to  the  action,  when  he 
found  one  of  his  captains,  a  trusty  and  experi¬ 
enced  soldier,  encouraging  his  men  to  exert 
their  utmost.  Caesar  called  him  by  his  name, 
and  said,  “What  hopes,  Caius  Crassinius,  and 
what  grounds  for  encouragement?”  Crassinius 
stretched  out  his  hand,  and  cried  in  a  loud 
voice,  “We  shall  conquer  nobly,  Caesar;  and  I 
this  day  will  deserve  your  praises,  either  alive 
or  dead.”  So  he  said,  and  was  the  first  man  to 
run  in  upon  the  enemy,  followed  by  the  hun¬ 
dred  and  twenty  soldiers  about  him,  and  break¬ 
ing  through  the  first  rank,  still  pressed  on  for¬ 
wards  with  much  slaughter  of  the  enemy,  till 
at  last  he  was  struck  back  by  the  wound  of  a 
sword,  which  went  in  at  his  mouth  with  such 
force  that  it  came  out  at  his  neck  behind. 

Whilst  the  foot  was  thus  sharply  engaged  in 
the  main  battle,  on  the  flank  Pompey’s  horse 
rode  up  confidently,  and  opened  their  ranks 
very  wide,  that  they  might  surround  the  right 
wing  of  Caesar.  But  before  they  engaged,  Cae¬ 
sar’s  cohorts  rushed  out  and  attacked  them, 
and  did  not  dart  their  javelins  at  a  distance, 
nor  strike  at  the  thighs  and  legs,  as  they  usually 
did  in  close  battle,  but  aimed  at  their  faces.  For 
thus  Caesar  had  instructed  them,  in  hopes  that 
young  gentlemen,  who  had  not  known  much 
of  battles  and  wounds,  but  came  wearing  their 
hair  long,  in  the  flower  of  their  age  and  height 
of  their  beauty,  would  be  more  apprehensive 
of  such  blows,  and  not  care  for  hazarding  both 
a  danger  at  present  and  a  blemish  for  the  fu¬ 
ture.  And  so  it  proved,  for  they  were  so  far 
from  bearing  the  stroke  of  the  javelins,  that 
they  could  not  stand  the  sight  of  them,  but 
turned  about,  and  covered  their  faces  to  secure 
them. 

Once  in  disorder,  presently  they  turned 
about  to  fly;  and  so  most  shamefully  ruined  all. 
For  those  who  had  beat  them  back  at  once  out¬ 
flanked  the  infantry,  and  falling  on  their  rear, 
cut  them  to  pieces.  Pompey,  who  commanded 
the  other  wing  of  the  army,  when  he  saw  his 
cavalry  thus  broken  and  flying,  was  no  longer 
himself,  nor  did  he  now  remember  that  he  was 
Pompey  the  Great,  but,  like  one  whom  some 
god  had  deprived  of  his  senses,  retired  to  his 
tent  without  speaking  a  word,  and  there  sat 
to  expect  the  event,  till  the  whole  army  was 


595 

routed  and  the  enemy  appeared  upon  the 
works  which  were  thrown  up  before  the  camp, 
where  they  closely  engaged  with  his  men  who 
were  posted  there  to  defend  it.  Then  first  he 
seemed  to  have  recovered  his  senses,  and  utter¬ 
ing,  it  is  said,  only  these  words,  “What,  into 
the  camp  too?”  he  laid  aside  his  general’s 
habit,  and  putting  on  such  clothes  as  might 
best  favour  his  flight,  stole  off.  What  fortune 
he  met  with  afterwards,  how  he  took  shelter 
in  Egypt,  and  was  murdered  there,  we  tell  you 
in  his  Life. 

Caesar,  when  he  came  to  view  Pompey’s 
camp,  and  saw  some  of  his  opponents  dead 
upon  the  ground,  others  dying,  said,  with  a 
groan,  “This  they  would  have;  they  brought 
me  to  this  necessity.  I,  Caius  Caesar,  after  suc¬ 
ceeding  in  so  many  wars,  had  been  condemned 
had  I  dismissed  my  army.”  These  words, 
Pollio  says,  Caesar  spoke  in  Latin  at  that  time, 
and  that  he  himself  wrote  them  in  Greek;  add¬ 
ing,  that  those  who  were  killed  at  the  taking  of 
the  camp  were  most  of  them  servants;  and  that 
not  above  six  thousand  soldiers  fell.  Caesar  in¬ 
corporated  most  of  the  foot  whom  he  took  pris¬ 
oners  with  his  own  legions,  and  gave  a  free 
pardon  to  many  of  the  distinguished  persons, 
and  amongst  the  rest  to  Brutus,  who  after¬ 
wards  killed  him.  He  did  not  immediately  ap¬ 
pear  after  the  battle  was  over,  which  put  Cae¬ 
sar,  it  is  said,  into  great  anxiety  for  him;  nor 
was  his  pleasure  less  when  he  saw  him  present 
himself  alive. 

There  were  many  prodigies  that  foreshowed 
this  victory,  but  the  most  remarkable  that  we 
are  told  of  was  that  at  Tralles.  In  the  temple 
of  Victory  stood  Caesar’s  statue.  The  ground 
on  which  it  stood  was  naturally  hard  and  solid, 
and  the  stone  with  which  it  was  paved  still 
harder;  yet  it  is  said  that  a  palm-tree  shot  itself 
up  near  the  pedestal  of  this  statue.  In  the  city 
of  Padua,  one  Caius  Cornelius,  who  had  the 
character  of  a  good  augur,  the  fellow-citizen 
and  acquaintance  of  Livy,  the  historian,  hap¬ 
pened  to  be  making  some  augural  observations 
that  very  day  when  the  battle  was  fought.  And 
first,  as  Livy  tells  us,  he  pointed  out  the  time 
of  the  fight,  and  said  to  those  who  were  by  him 
that  just  then  the  battle  was  begun  and  the 
men  engaged.  When  he  looked  a  second  time, 
and  observed  the  omens,  he  leaped  up  as  if  he 
had  been  inspired,  and  cried  out,  “Caesar,  you 
are  victorious.”  This  much  surprised  the 
standers-by,  but  he  took  the  garland  which  he 
had  on  from  his  head,  and  swore  he  would 
never  wear  it  again  till  the  events  should  give 


596 

authority  to  his  art.  This  Livy  positively  states 
for  a  truth. 

Caesar,  as  a  memorial  of  his  victory,  gave  the 
Thessalians  their  freedom,  and  then  went  in 
pursuit  of  Pompey.  When  he  was  come  into 
Asia,  to  gratify  Theopompus,  the  author  of  the 
collection  of  fables,  he  enfranchised  the  Cni- 
dians,  and  remitted  one-third  of  their  tribute  to 
all  the  people  of  the  province  of  Asia.  When 
he  came  to  Alexandria,  where  Pompey  was  al¬ 
ready  murdered,  he  would  not  look  upon 
Theodotus,  who  presented  him  with  his  head, 
but  taking  only  his  signet,  shed  tears.  Those  of 
Pompey’s  friends  who  had  been  arrested  by 
the  King  of  Egypt,  as  they  were  wandering  in 
those  parts,  he  relieved,  and  offered  them  his 
own  friendship.  In  his  letter  to  his  friends  at 
Rome,  he  told  them  that  the  greatest  and  most 
signal  pleasure  his  victory  had  given  him  was 
to  be  able  continually  to  save  the  lives  of  fellow- 
citizens  who  had  fought  against  him. 

As  to  the  war  in  Egypt,  some  say  it  was  at 
once  dangerous  and  dishonourable,  and  no¬ 
ways  necessary,  but  occasioned  only  by  his  pas¬ 
sion  for  Cleopatra.  Others  blame  the  ministers 
of  the  king,  and  especially  the  eunuch  Pothi- 
nus,  who  was  the  chief  favourite  and  had  lately 
killed  Pompey;  he  had  banished  Cleopatra, 
and  was  now  secretly  plotting  Caesar’s  destruc¬ 
tion  (to  prevent  which,  Caesar  from  that  time 
began  to  sit  up  whole  nights,  under  pretence 
of  drinking,  for  the  security  of  his  person), 
while  openly  he  was  intolerable  in  his  affronts 
to  Caesar,  both  by  his  words  and  actions.  For 
when  Caesar’s  soldiers  had  musty  and  unwhole¬ 
some  corn  measured  out  to  them,  Pothinus  told 
them  they  must  be  content  with  it,  since  they 
were  fed  at  another’s  cost. 

He  ordered  that  his  table  should  be  served 
with  wooden  and  earthen  dishes,  and  said  Cae¬ 
sar  had  carried  off  all  the  gold  and  silver  plate, 
under  pretence  of  arrears  of  debt.  For  the  pres¬ 
ent  king’s  father  owed  Caesar  one  thousand 
seven  hundred  and  fifty  myriads  of  money. 
Caesar  had  formerly  remitted  to  his  children 
the  rest,  but  thought  fit  to  demand  the  thou¬ 
sand  myriads  at  that  time  to  maintain  his  army. 
Pothinus  told  him  that  he  had  better  go  now 
and  attend  to  his  other  affairs  of  greater  conse¬ 
quence,  and  that  he  should  receive  his  money 
at  another  time  with  thanks.  Caesar  replied 
that  he  did  not  want  Egyptians  to  be  his  coun¬ 
sellors,  and  soon  after  privately  sent  for  Cleo¬ 
patra  from  her  retirement. 

She  took  a  small  boat,  and  one  only  of  her 
confidants,  Apollodorus,  the  Sicilian,  along 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

with  her,  and  in  the  dusk  of  the  evening 
landed  near  the  palace.  She  was  at  a  loss  how 
to  get  in  undiscovered,  till  she  thought  of  put¬ 
ting  herself  into  the  coverlet  of  a  bed  and  lying 
at  length,  whilst  Apollodorus  tied  up  the  bed¬ 
ding  and  carried  it  on  his  back  through  the 
gates  to  Caesar’s  apartment.  Caesar  was  first 
captivated  by  this  proof  of  Cleopatra’s  bold  wit, 
and  was  afterwards  so  overcome  by  the  charm 
of  her  society  that  he  made  a  reconciliation  be¬ 
tween  her  and  her  brother,  on  condition  that 
she  should  rule  as  his  colleague  in  the  kingdom. 

A  festival  was  kept  to  celebrate  this  recon¬ 
ciliation,  where  Caesar’s  barber,  a  busy  listen¬ 
ing  fellow,  whose  excessive  timidity  made  him 
inquisitive  into  everything,  discovered  that 
there  was  a  plot  carrying  on  against  Caesar  by 
Achillas,  general  of  the  king’s  forces,  and 
Pothinus,  the  eunuch.  Caesar,  upon  the  first 
intelligence  of  it,  set  a  guard  upon  the  hall 
where  the  feast  was  kept  and  killed  Pothinus. 

Achillas  escaped  to  the  army,  and  raised  a 
troublesome  and  embarrassing  war  against  Cae¬ 
sar,  which  it  was  not  easy  for  him  to  manage 
with  his  few  soldiers  against  so  powerful  a  city 
and  so  large  an  army.  The  first  difficulty  he  met 
with  was  want  of  water,  for  the  enemies  had 
turned  the  canals.  Another  was,  when  the  en¬ 
emy  endeavoured  to  cut  off  his  communica¬ 
tion  by  sea,  he  was  forced  to  divert  that  danger 
by  setting  fire  to  his  own  ships,  which,  after 
burning  the  docks,  thence  spread  on  and  de¬ 
stroyed  the  great  library.  A  third  was,  when 
in  an  engagement  near  Pharos,  he  leaped  from 
the  mole  into  a  small  boat  to  assist  his  soldiers 
who  were  in  danger,  and  when  the  Egyptians 
pressed  him  on  every  side,  he  threw  himself 
into  the  sea,  and  with  much  difficulty  swam  off. 
This  was  the  time  when,  according  to  the  story, 
he  had  a  number  of  manuscripts  in  his  hand, 
which,  though  he  was  continually  darted  at, 
and  forced  to  keep  his  head  often  under  water, 
yet  he  did  not  let  go,  but  held  them  up  safe 
from  wetting  in  one  hand,  whilst  he  swam 
with  the  other.  His  boat,  in  the  meantime,  was 
quickly  sunk.  At  last,  the  king  having  gone  off 
to  Achillas  and  his  party,  Caesar  engaged  and 
conquered  them.  Many  fell  in  that  battle,  and 
the  king  himself  was  never  seen  after.  Upon 
this,  he  left  Cleopatra  Queen  of  Egypt,  who 
soon  after  had  a  son  by  him,  whom  the  Alex¬ 
andrians  called  Caesarion,  and  then  departed 
for  Syria. 

Thence  he  passed  to  Asia,  where  he  heard 
that  Domitius  was  beaten  by  Pharnaces,  son 
of  Mithridates,  and  had  fled  out  of  Pontus  with 


CESAR 

a  handful  of  men;  and  that  Pharnaces  pursued 
the  victory  so  eagerly,  that  though  he  was  al¬ 
ready  master  of  Bithynia  and  Cappadocia,  he 
had  a  further  design  of  attempting  the  Lesser 
Armenia,  and  was  inviting  all  the  kings  and 
tetrarchs  there  to  rise.  Cesar  immediately 
marched  against  him  with  three  legions,  fought 
him  near  Zela,  drove  him  out  of  Pontus,  and 
totally  defeated  his  army.  When  he  gave 
Amantius,  a  friend  of  his  at  Rome,  an  account 
of  this  action,  to  express  the  promptness  and 
rapidity  of  it  he  used  three  words,  “I  came, 
saw,  and  conquered”,  which  in  Latin,  having 
all  the  same  cadence,  carry  with  them  a  very 
suitable  air  of  brevity. 

Hence  he  crossed  into  Italy,  and  came  to 
Rome  at  the  end  of  that  year,  for  which  he  had 
been  a  second  time  chosen  dictator,  though  that 
office  had  never  before  lasted  a  whole  year, 
and  was  elected  consul  for  the  next.  He  was  ill 
spoken  of,  because  upon  a  mutiny  of  some  sol¬ 
diers,  who  killed  Cosconius  and  Galba,  who  had 
been  praetors,  he  gave  them  only  the  slight  rep¬ 
rimand  of  calling  them  Citizens  instead  of 
Fellow-Soldiers,  and  afterwards  assigned  to 
each  man  a  thousand  drachmas,  besides  a  share 
of  lands  in  Italy.  He  was  also  reflected  on  for 
Dolabella’s  extravagance,  Amantius’s  covet¬ 
ousness,  Antony’s  debauchery,  and  Corfinius’s 
profuseness,  who  pulled  down  Pompey’s  house 
and  rebuilt  it,  as  not  magnificent  enough;  for 
the  Romans  were  much  displeased  with  all 
these.  But  Caesar,  for  the  prosecution  of  his 
own  scheme  of  government,  though  he  knew 
their  characters  and  disapproved  them,  was 
forced  to  make  use  of  those  who  would  serve 
him. 

After  the  battle  of  Pharsalia,  Cato  and  Scipio 
fled  into  Africa,  and  there,  with  the  assistance 
of  King  Juba,  got  together  a  considerable  force, 
which  Cesar  resolved  to  engage.  He  accord- 
ingly  passed  into  Sicily  about  the  winter  sol¬ 
stice,  and  to  remove  from  his  officers’  minds 
all  hopes  of  delay  there,  encamped  by  the  sea¬ 
shore,  and  as  soon  as  ever  he  had  a  fair  wind, 
put  to  sea  with  three  thousand  foot  and  a  few 
horse.  When  he  had  landed  them,  he  went 
back  secretly,  under  some  apprehensions  for 
the  larger  part  of  his  army,  but  met  them  upon 
the  sea,  and  brought  them  all  to  the  same 
camp. 

There  he  was  informed  that  the  enemies  re¬ 
lied  much  upon  an  ancient  oracle,  that  the  fam¬ 
ily  of  the  Scipios  should  be  always  victorious 
in  Africa.  There  was  in  his  army  a  man,  other¬ 
wise  mean  and  contemptible,  but  of  the  house 


597 

of  the  Africani,  and  his  name  Scipio  Sallutio. 
This  man  Cesar  (whether  in  raillery  to  ridi¬ 
cule  Scipio,  who  commanded  the  enemy,  or 
seriously  to  bring  over  the  omen  to  his  side,  it 
were  hard  to  say),  put  at  the  head  of  his  troops, 
as  if  he  were  general,  in  all  the  frequent  bat¬ 
tles  which  he  was  compelled  to  fight. 

For  he  was  in  such  want  both  of  victualling 
for  his  men  and  forage  for  his  horses,  that  he 
was  forced  to  feed  the  horses  with  seaweed, 
which  he  washed  thoroughly  to  take  off  its 
saltness,  and  mixed  with  a  little  grass  to  give 
it  a  more  agreeable  taste.  The  Numidians,  in 
great  numbers,  and  well  horsed,  whenever  he 
went,  came  up  and  commanded  the  country. 

Caesar’s  cavalry,  being  one  day  unemployed, 
diverted  themselves  with  seeing  an  African, 
who  entertained  them  with  dancing,  and  at 
the  same  time  played  upon  the  pipe  to  admira¬ 
tion.  They  were  so  taken  with  this,  that  they 
alighted,  and  gave  their  horses  to  some  boys, 
when  on  a  sudden  the  enemy  surrounded 
them,  killed  some,  pursued  the  rest,  and  fell  in 
with  them  into  their  camp;  and  had  not  Cae¬ 
sar  himself  and  Asinius  Pollio  come  to  their 
assistance,  and  put  a  stop  to  their  flight,  the 
war  had  been  then  at  an  end.  In  another  en¬ 
gagement,  also,  the  enemy  had  again  the  bet¬ 
ter,  when  Caesar,  it  is  said,  seized  a  standard- 
bearer,  who  was  running  away,  by  the  neck, 
and  forcing  him  to  face  about,  said,  “Look, 
that  is  the  way  to  the  enemy.” 

Scipio,  flushed  with  this  success  at  first,  had 
a  mind  to  come  to  one  decisive  action.  He 
therefore  left  Afranius  and  Juba  in  two  distinct 
bodies  not  far  distant  and  marched  himself  to¬ 
wards  Thapsus,  where  he  proceeded  to  build 
a  fortified  camp  above  a  lake,  to  serve  as  a 
centre-point  for  their  operations,  and  also  as  a 
place  of  refuge.  Whilst  Scipio  was  thus  em¬ 
ployed,  Caesar  with  incredible  despatch  made 
his  way  through  thick  woods,  and  a  country 
supposed  to  be  impassable,  cut  off  one  part  of 
the  enemy  and  attacked  another  in  the  front. 
Having  routed  these,  he  followed  up  his  op¬ 
portunity  and  the  current  of  his  good  fortune, 
and  on  the  first  onset  carried  Afranius’s  camp, 
and  ravaged  that  of  the  Numidians,  Juba,  their 
king,  being  glad  to  save  himself  by  flight;  so 
that  in  a  small  part  of  a  single  day  he  made 
himself  master  of  three  camps,  and  killed  fifty 
thousand  of  the  enemy,  with  the  loss  only  of 
fifty  of  his  own  men.  This  is  the  account  some 
give  of  that  fight. 

Others  say  he  was  not  in  the  action,  but  that 
he  was  taken  with  his  usual  distemper  just  as 


598 

he  was  setting  his  army  in  order.  He  perceived 
the  approaches  of  it,  and  before  it  had  too  far 
disordered  his  senses,  when  he  was  already  be¬ 
ginning  to  shake  under  its  influence,  withdrew 
into  a  neighbouring  fort  where  he  reposed 
himself.  Of  the  men  of  consular  and  praetorian 
dignity  that  were  taken  after  the  fight,  several 
Caesar  put  to  death,  others  anticipated  him  by 
killing  themselves. 

Cato  had  undertaken  to  defend  Utica,  and 
for  that  reason  was  not  in  the  battle.  The  de¬ 
sire  which  Caesar  had  to  take  him  alive  made 
him  hasten  thither;  and  upon  the  intelligence 
that  he  had  despatched  himself,  he  was  much 
discomposed,  for  what  reason  is  not  so  well 
agreed.  He  certainly  said,  “Cato,  I  must 
grudge  you  your  death,  as  you  grudged  me  the 
honour  of  saving  your  life.”  Yet  the  discourse 
he  wrote  against  Cato  after  his  death  is  no 
great  sign  of  his  kindness,  or  that  he  was  in¬ 
clined  to  be  reconciled  to  him.  For  how  is  it 
probable  that  he  would  have  been  tender  of 
his  life  when  he  was  so  bitter  against  his  mem¬ 
ory?  But  from  his  clemency  to  Cicero,  Brutus, 
and  many  others  who  fought  against  him,  it 
may  be  divined  that  Caesar’s  book  was  not  writ¬ 
ten  so  much  out  of  animosity  to  Cato,  as  in  his 
own  vindication.  Cicero  had  written  an  en¬ 
comium  upon  Cato,  and  called  it  by  his  name.  A 
composition  by  so  great  a  master  upon  so  ex¬ 
cellent  a  subject  was  sure  to  be  in  every  one’s 
hands.  This  touched  Caesar,  who  looked  upon 
a  panegyric  on  his  enemies  as  no  better  than  an 
invective  against  himself;  and  therefore  he 
made  in  his  Anti-Cato  a  collection  of  whatever 
could  be  said  in  his  derogation.  The  two  com¬ 
positions,  like  Cato  and  Caesar  themselves, 
have  each  of  them  their  several  admirers. 

Caesar,  upon  his  return  to  Rome,  did  not 
omit  to  pronounce  before  the  people  a  magnifi¬ 
cent  account  of  his  victory,  telling  them  that 
he  had  subdued  a  country  which  would  supply 
the  public  every  year  with  two  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  attic  bushels  of  corn  and  three  million 
pounds’  weight  of  oil.  He  then  led  three  tri¬ 
umphs  for  Egypt,  Pontus,  and  Africa,  the  last 
for  the  victory  over,  not  Scipio,  but  King  Juba, 
as  it  was  professed,  whose  little  son  was  then 
carried  in  the  triumph,  the  happiest  captive 
that  ever  was,  who,  from  a  barbarian  Numidi- 
an,  came  by  this  means  to  obtain  a  place 
among  the  most  learned  historians  of  Greece. 

After  the  triumphs,  he  distributed  rewards 
to  his  soldiers,  and  treated  the  people  with 
feasting  and  shows.  He  entertained  the  whole 
people  together  at  one  feast,  where  twenty-two 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

thousand  dining  couches  were  laid  out,  and  he 
made  a  display  of  gladiators,  and  of  battles  by 
sea,  in  honour,  as  he  said,  of  his  daughter  Julia, 
though  she  had  been  long  since  dead.  When 
these  shows  were  over,  an  account  was  taken 
of  the  people  who,  from  three  hundred  and 
twenty  thousand,  were  now  reduced  to  one 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand.  So  great  a  waste 
had  the  civil  war  made  in  Rome  alone,  not  to 
mention  what  the  other  parts  of  Italy  and  the 
provinces  suffered. 

He  was  now  chosen  a  fourth  time  consul, 
and  went  into  Spain  against  Pompey’s  sons. 
They  were  but  young,  yet  had  gathered  to¬ 
gether  a  very  numerous  army,  and  showed  they 
had  courage  and  conduct  to  command  it,  so 
that  Caesar  was  in  extreme  danger.  The  great 
battle  was  near  the  town  of  Munda,  in  which 
Caesar,  seeing  his  men  hard  pressed,  and  mak¬ 
ing  but  a  weak  resistance,  ran  through  the 
ranks  among  the  soldiers,  and  crying  out,  asked 
them  whether  they  were  not  ashamed  to  de¬ 
liver  him  into  the  hands  of  boys.  At  last,  with 
great  difficulty,  and  the  best  efforts  he  could 
make,  he  forced  back  the  enemy,  killing  thirty 
thousand  of  them,  though  with  the  loss  of  one 
thousand  of  his  best  men.  When  he  came  back 
from  the  fight,  he  told  his  friends  that  he  had 
often  fought  for  victory,  but  this  was  the  first 
time  he  had  ever  fought  for  life.  This  battle 
was  won  on  the  feast  of  Bacchus,  the  very  day 
in  which  Pompey,  four  years  before,  had  set 
out  for  the  war.  The  younger  of  Pompey’s 
sons  escaped;  but  Didius,  some  days  after  the 
fight,  brought  the  head  of  the  elder  to  Caesar. 
This  was  the  last  war  he  was  engaged  in. 

The  triumph  which  he  celebrated  for  this  vic¬ 
tory  displeased  the  Romans  beyond  anything, 
for  he  had  not  defeated  foreign  generals  or 
barbarian  kings,  but  had  destroyed  the  chil¬ 
dren  and  family  of  one  of  the  greatest  men  of 
Rome,  though  unfortunate;  and  it  did  not  look 
well  to  lead  a  procession  in  celebration  of  the 
calamities  of  his  country,  and  to  rejoice  in  those 
things  for  which  no  other  apology  could  be 
made  either  to  gods  or  men  than  their  being 
absolutely  necessary.  Besides  that,  hitherto  he 
had  never  sent  letters  or  messengers  to  an¬ 
nounce  any  victory  over  his  fellow-citizens,  but 
had  seemed  rather  to  be  ashamed  of  the  action 
than  to  expect  honour  from  it. 

Nevertheless  his  countrymen,  conceding  all 
to  his  fortune,  and  accepting  the  bit,  in  the 
hope  that  the  government  of  a  single  person 
would  give  them  time  to  breathe  after  so  many 
civil  wars  and  calamities,  made  him  dictator 


CESAR 

for  life.  This  was  indeed  a  tyranny ’avowed, 
since  his  power  now  was  not  only  absolute,  but 
perpetual,  too.  Cicero  made  the  first  proposals 
to  the  senate  for  conferring  honours  upon  him, 
which  might  in  some  sort  be  said  not  to  exceed 
the  limits  of  ordinary  human  moderation.  But 
others,  striving  which  should  deserve  most, 
carried  them  so  excessively  high,  that  they 
made  Caesar  odious  to  the  most  indifferent  and 
moderate  sort  of  men,  by  the  pretensions  and 
extravagance  of  the  titles  which  they  decreed 
him.  His  enemies,  too,  are  thought  to  have 
had  some  share  in  this,  as  well  as  his  flatterers. 
It  gave  them  advantage  against  him,  and 
would  be  their  justification  for  any  attempt 
they  should  make  upon  him;  for  since  the  civil 
wars  were  ended,  he  had  nothing  else  that  he 
could  be  charged  with. 

And  they  had  good  reason  to  decree  a  temple 
to  Clemency,  in  token  of  their  thanks  for  the 
mild  use  he  made  of  his  victory.  For  he  not 
only  pardoned  many  of  those  who  fought 
against  him,  but,  further,  to  some  gave  hon¬ 
ours  and  offices;  as  particularly  to  Brutus  and 
Cassius,  who  both  of  them  were  praetors.  Pom- 
pey’s  images  that  were  thrown  down  he  set  up 
again,  upon  which  Cicero  also.said  that  by  rais¬ 
ing  Pompey’s  statues  he  had  fixed  his  own. 
When  his  friends  advised  him  to  have  a  guard, 
and  several  offered  their  services,  he  would  not 
hear  of  it;  but  said  it  was  better  to  suffer  death 
once  than  always  to  live  in  fear  of  it.  He  looked 
upon  the  affections  of  the  people  to  be  the  best 
and  surest  guard,  and  entertained  them  again 
with  public  feasting  and  general  distributions 
of  corn;  and  to  gratify  his  army,  he  sent  out 
colonies  to  several  places,  of  which  the  most 
remarkable  were  Carthage  and  Corinth;  which 
as  before  they  had  been  ruined  at  the  same 
time,  so  now  were  restored  and  repeopled  to¬ 
gether. 

As  for  the  men  of  high  rank,  he  promised  to 
some  of  them  future  consulships  and  praetor- 
ships,  some  he  consoled  with  other  offices  and 
honours,  and  to  all  held  out  hopes  of  favour  by 
the  solicitude  he  showed  to  rule  with  the  gen¬ 
eral  good-will,  insomuch  that  upon  the  death 
of  Maximus  one  day  before  his  consulship  was 
ended,  he  made  Caninius  Revilius  consul  for 
that  day.  And  when  many  went  to  pay  the 
usual  compliments  and  attentions  to  the  new 
consul,  “Let  us  make  haste,”  said  Cicero,  “lest 
the  man  be  gone  out  of  his  office  before  we 
come.” 

Caesar  was  born  to  do  great  things,  and  had 
a  passion  after  honour,  and  the  many  noble  ex- 


599 

ploits  he  had  done  did  not  now  serve  as  an  in¬ 
ducement  to  him  to  sit  still  and  reap  the  fruit 
of  his  past  labours,  but  were  incentives  and  en¬ 
couragements  to  go  on,  and  raised  in  him  ideas 
of  still  greater  actions,  and  a  desire  of  new 
glory,  as  if  the  present  were  all  spent.  It  was 
in  fact  a  sort  of  emulous  struggle  with  himself, 
as  it  had  been  with  another,  how  he  might  out¬ 
do  his  past  actions  by  his  future. 

In  pursuit  of  these  thoughts,  he  resolved  to 
make  war  upon  the  Parthians,  and  when  he 
had  subdued  them,  to  pass  through  Hyrcania; 
thence  to  march  along  by  the  Caspian  Sea  to 
Mount  Caucasus,  and  so  on  about  Pontus,  till 
he  came  into  Scythia;  then  to  overrun  all  the 
countries  bordering  upon  Germany,  and  Ger¬ 
many  itself;  and  so  to  return  through  Gaul  into 
Italy,  after  completing  the  whole  circle  of  his 
intended  empire,  and  bounding  it  on  every 
side  by  the  ocean. 

While  preparations  were  making  for  this  ex¬ 
pedition,  he  proposed  to  dig  through  the  isth¬ 
mus  on  which  Corinth  stands;  and  appointed 
Anienus  to  superintend  the  work.  He  had  also 
a  design  of  diverting  the  Tiber,  and  carrying 
it  by  a  deep  channel  directly  from  Rome  to 
Circeii,  and  so  into  the  sea  near  Tarracina,  that 
there  might  be  a  safe  and  easy  passage  for  all 
merchants  who  traded  to  Rome.  Besides  this, 
he  intended  to  drain  all  the  marshes  by  Pom- 
entium  and  Setia,  and  gain  ground  enough 
from  the  water  to  employ  many  thousands  of 
men  in  tillage.  He  proposed  further  to  make 
great  mounds  on  the  shore  nearest  Rome,  to 
hinder  the  sea  from  breaking  in  upon  the  land, 
to  clear  the  coast  at  Ostia  of  all  the  hidden 
rocks  and  shoals  that  made  it  unsafe  for  ship¬ 
ping,  and  to  form  ports  and  harbours  fit  to  re¬ 
ceive  the  large  number  of  vessels  that  would 
frequent  them. 

These  things  were  designed  without  being 
carried  into  effect;  but  his  reformation  of  the 
calendar  in  order  to  rectify  the  irregularity  of 
time  was  not  only  projected  with  great  scienti¬ 
fic  ingenuity,  but  was  brought  to  its  comple¬ 
tion,  and  proved  of  very  great  use.  For  it  was 
not  only  in  ancient  time  that  the  Romans  had 
wanted  a  certain  rule  to  make  the  revolutions 
of  their  months  fall  in  with  the  course  of  the 
year,  so  that  their  festivals  and  solemn  days  for 
sacrifice  were  removed  by  little  and  little,  till 
at  last  they  came  to  be  kept  at  seasons  quite 
the  contrary  to  what  was  at  first  intended,  but 
even  at  this  time  the  people  had  no  way  of 
computing  the  solar  year;  only  the  priests 
could  say  the  time,  and  they,  at  their  pleasure, 


600 

without  giving  any  notice,  slipped  in  the  in¬ 
tercalary  month,  which  they  called  Merce- 
donius.  Numa  was  the  first  who  put  in  this 
month,  but  his  expedient  was  but  a  poor  one 
and  quite  inadequate  to  correct  all  the  errors 
that  arose  in  the  returns  of  the  annual  cycles, 
as  we  have  shown  in  his  Life. 

Caesar  called  in  the  best  philosophers  and 
mathematicians  of  his  time  to  settle  the  point, 
and  out  of  the  systems  he  had  before  him 
formed  a  new  and  more  exact  method  of  cor¬ 
recting  the  calendar,  which  the  Romans  use 
to  this  day,  and  seem  to  succeed  better  than 
any  nation  in  avoiding  the  errors  occasioned 
by  the  inequality  of  the  cycles.  Yet  even  this 
gave  offence  to  those  who  looked  with  an  evil 
eye  on  his  position,  and  felt  oppressed  by  his 
power.  Cicero  the  orator,  when  some  one  in 
his  company  chanced  to  say  the  next  morning 
Lyra  would  rise,  replied,  “Yes,  in  accordance 
with  the  edict,”  as  if  even  this  were  a  matter 
of  compulsion. 

But  that  which  brought  upon  him  the  most 
apparent  and  mortal  hatred  was  his  desire  of 
being  king;  which  gave  the  common  people 
the  first  occasion  to  quarrel  with  him,  and 
proved  the  most  specious  pretence  to  those 
who  had  been  his  secret  enemies  all  along. 
Those  who  would  have  procured  him  that  title 
gave  it  out  that  it  was  foretold  in  the  Sibyls’ 
books  that  the  Romans  should  conquer  the 
Parthians  when  they  fought  against  them  un¬ 
der  the  conduct  of  a  king,  but  not  before.  And 
one  day,  as  Caesar  was  coming  down  from 
Alba  to  Rome,  some  were  so  bold  as  to  salute 
him  by  the  name  of  king;  but  he,  finding  the 
people  disrelished  it,  seemed  to  resent  it  him¬ 
self,  and  said  his  name  was  Caesar,  not  King. 
Upon  this  there  was  a  general  silence,  and 
he  passed  on  looking  not  very  well  pleased  or 
contented. 

Another  time,  when  the  senate  had  confer¬ 
red  on  him  some  extravagant  honours,  he 
chanced  to  receive  the  message  as  he  was  sit¬ 
ting  on  the  rostra,  where,  though  the  consuls 
and  praetors  themselves  waited  on  him,  attend¬ 
ed  by  the  whole  body  of  the  senate,  he  did  not 
rise,  but  behaved  himself  to  them  as  if  they  had 
been  private  men,  and  told  them  his  honours 
wanted  rather  to  be  retrenched  than  increased. 
This  treatment  offended  not  only  the  senate, 
but  the  commonalty  too,  as  if  they  thought 
the  affront  upon  the  senate  equally  reflected 
upon  the  whole  republic;  so  that  all  who  could 
decently  leave  him  went  off,  looking  much  dis¬ 
composed. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Caesar,  perceiving  the  false  step  he  had  made, 
immediately  retired  home;  and  laying  his 
throat  bare,  told  his  friends  that  he  was  ready 
to  offer  this  to  any  one  who  would  give  the 
stroke.  But  afterwards  he  made  the  malady 
from  which  he  suffered  the  excuse  for  his  sit¬ 
ting,  saying  that  those  who  are  attacked  by  it 
lose  their  presence  of  mind  if  they  talk  much 
standing;  that  they  presently  grow  giddy,  fall 
into  convulsions,  and  quite  lose  their  reason. 
But  this  was  not  the  reality,  for  he  would  will¬ 
ingly  have  stood  up  to  the  senate,  had  not 
Cornelius  Balbus,  one  of  his  friends,  or  rather 
flatterers,  hindered  him.  “Will  you  not  remem¬ 
ber,”  said  he,  “you  are  Caesar,  and  claim  the 
honour  which  is  due  to  your  merit?” 

He  gave  a  fresh  occasion  of  resentment  by 
his  affront  to  the  tribunes.  The  Lupercalia 
were  then  celebrated,  a  feast  at  the  first  insti¬ 
tution  belonging,  as  some  writers  say,  to  the 
shepherds,  and  having  some  connection  with 
the  Arcadian  Lycaea.  Many  young  noblemen 
and  magistrates  run  up  and  down  the  city  with 
their  upper  garments  off,  striking  all  they  meet 
with  thongs  of  hide,  by  way  of  sport;  and 
many  women,  even  of  the  highest  rank,  place 
themselves  in  the  way,  and  hold  out  their  hands 
to  the  lash,  as  boys  in  a  school  do  to  the  master, 
out  of  a  belief  that  it  procures  an  easy  labour 
to  those  who  are  with  child,  and  makes  those 
conceive  who  are  barren.  Caesar,  dressed  in  a 
triumphal  robe,  seated  himself  in  a  golden 
chair  at  the  rostra  to  view  this  ceremony. 

Antony,  as  consul,  was  one  of  those  who 
ran  this  course,  and  when  he  came  into  the 
Forum,  and  the  people  made  way  for  him,  he 
went  up  and  reached  to  Caesar  a  diadem 
wreathed  with  laurel.  Upon  this  there  was  a 
shout,  but  only  a  slight  one,  made  by  the  few 
who  were  planted  there  for  that  purpose;  but 
when  Caesar  refused  it,  there  was  universal  ap¬ 
plause.  Upon  the  second  offer,  very  few,  and 
upon  the  second  refusal,  all  again  applauded. 
Caesar  finding  it  would  not  take,  rose  up,  and 
ordered  the  crown  to  be  carried  into  the  capi- 
tol. 

Caesar’s  statues  were  afterwards  found  with 
royal  diadems  on  their  heads.  Flavius  and 
Marullus,  two  tribunes  of  the  people,  went  pre¬ 
sently  and  pulled  them  off,  and  having  appre¬ 
hended  those  who  first  saluted  Caesar  as  king 
committed  them  to  prison.  The  people  follow¬ 
ed  them  with  acclamations,  and  called  them  by 
the  name  of  Brutus,  because  Brutus  was  the 
first  who  ended  the  succession  of  kings,  and 
transferred  the  power  which  before  was  lodged 


CESAR 

in  one  man  into  the  hands  of  the  senate  and 
people.  Caesar  so  far  resented  this,  that  he  dis¬ 
placed  Marullus  and  Flavius;  and  in  urging 
his  charges  against  them,  at  the  same  time 
ridiculed  the  people,  by  himself  giving  the 
men  more  than  once  the  names  of  Bruti  and 
Cumaei. 

This  made  the  multitude  turn  their  thoughts 
to  Marcus  Brutus,  who,  by  his  father’s  side, 
was  thought  to  be  descended  from  that  first 
Brutus,  and  by  his  mother’s  side  from  the  Ser- 
vilii,  another  noble  family,  being  besides  neph¬ 
ew  and  son-in-law  to  Cato.  But  the  honours 
and  favours  he  had  received  from  Caesar  took 
off  the  edge  from  the  desires  he  might  himself 
have  felt  for  overthrowing  the  new  monarchy. 
For  he  had  not  only  been  pardoned  himself 
after  Pompey’s  defeat  at  Pharsalia,  and  had 
procured  the  same  grace  for  many  of  his 
friends,  but  was  one  in  whom  Caesar  had  a 
particular  confidence. 

He  had  at  that  time  the  most  honourable 
praetorship  for  the  year,  and  was  named  for  the 
consulship  four  years  after,  being  preferred  be¬ 
fore  Cassius,  his  competitor.  Upon  the  ques¬ 
tion  as  to  the  choice,  Caesar,  it  is  related,  said 
that  Cassius  had  the  fairer  pretensions,  but 
that  he  could  not  pass  by  Brutus.  Nor  would 
he  afterwards  listen  to  some  who  spoke  against 
Brutus,  when  the  conspiracy  against  him  was 
already  afoot,  but  laying  his  hand  on  his  body, 
said  to  the  informers,  “Brutus  will  wait  for  this 
skin  of  mine,”  intimating  that  he  was  worthy 
to  bear  rule  on  account  of  his  virtue,  but  would 
not  be  base  and  ungrateful  to  gain  it. 

Those  who  desired  a  change,  and  looked  on 
him  as  the  only,  or  at  least  the  most  proper, 
person  to  effect  it,  did  not  venture  to  speak 
with  him;  but  in  the  night-time  laid  papers 
about  his  chair  of  state,  where  he  used  to  sit 
and  determine  causes,  with  such  sentences  in 
them  as,  “You  are  asleep,  Brutus,”  “You  are 
no  longer  Brutus.”  Cassius,  when  he  perceived 
his  ambition  a  little  raised  upon  this,  was  more 
instant  than  before  to  work  him  yet  further, 
having  himself  a  private  grudge  against  Caesar 
for  most  reasons  that  we  have  mentioned  in  the 
Life  of  Brutus. 

Nor  was  Caesar  without  suspicions  of  him, 
and  said  once  to  his  friends,  “What  do  you 
think  Cassius  is  aiming  at?  I  don’t  like  him, 
he  looks  so  pale.”  And  when  it  was  told  him 
that  Antony  and  Dolabella  were  in  a  plot 
against  him,  he  said  he  did  not  fear  such  fat, 
luxurious  men,  but  rather  the  pale,  lean  fel¬ 
lows,  meaning  Cassius  and  Brutus. 


601 

Fate,  however,  is  to  all  appearance  more  un¬ 
avoidable  than  unexpected.  For  many  strange 
prodigies  and  apparitions  are  said  to  have  been 
observed  shortly  before  this  event.  As  to  the 
lights  in  the  heavens,  the  noises  heard  in  the 
night,  and  the  wild  birds  which  perched  in  the 
Forum,  these  are  not  perhaps  worth  taking 
notice  of  in  so  great  a  case  as  this.  Strabo,  the 
philosopher,  tells  us  that  a  number  of  men 
were  seen,  looking  as  if  they  were  heated 
through  with  fire,  contending  with  each  other; 
that  a  quantity  of  flame  issued  from  the  hand 
of  a  soldier’s  servant,  so  that  they  who  saw  it 
thought  he  must  be  burnt,  but  that  after  all  he 
had  no  hurt.  As  Caesar  was  sacrificing,  the  vic¬ 
tim’s  heart  was  missing,  a  very  bad  omen,  be¬ 
cause  no  living  creature  can  subsist  without 
a  heart.  One  finds  it  also  related  by  many  that 
a  soothsayer  bade  him  prepare  for  some  great 
danger  on  the  Ides  of  March.  When  this  day 
was  come,  Caesar,  as  he  went  to  the  senate,  met 
this  soothsayer,  and  said  to  him  by  way  of  rail¬ 
lery,  “The  Ides  of  March  are  come,”  who  an¬ 
swered  him  calmly,  “Yes,  they  are  come,  but 
they  are  not  past.”  The  day  before  his  assassi¬ 
nation  he  supped  with  Marcus  Lepidus;  and  as 
he  was  signing  some  letters  according  to  his 
custom,  as  he  reclined  at  table,  there  arose  a 
question  what  sort  of  death  was  the  best.  At 
which  he  immediately,  before  any  one  could 
speak,  said,  “A  sudden  one.” 

After  this,  as  he  was  in  bed  with  his  wife, 
all  the  doors  and  windows  of  the  house  flew 
open  together;  he  was  startled  at  the  noise  and 
the  light  which  broke  into  the  room,  and  sat 
up  in  his  bed,  where  by  the  moonshine  he  per¬ 
ceived  Calpurnia  fast  asleep,  but  heard  her 
utter  in  her  dream  some  indistinct  words  and 
inarticulate  groans.  She  fancied  at  that  time 
she  was  weeping  over  Caesar,  and  holding  him 
butchered  in  her  arms.  Others  say  this  was  not 
her  dream,  but  that  she  dreamed  that  a  pin¬ 
nacle,  which  the  senate,  as  Livy  relates,  had 
ordered  to  be  raised  on  Caesar’s  house  by  way 
of  ornament  and  grandeur,  was  tumbling 
down,  which  was  the  occasion  of  her  tears  and 
ejaculations.  When  it  was  day,  she  begged  of 
Caesar,  if  it  were  possible,  not  to  stir  out,  but 
to  adjourn  the  senate  to  another  time;  and  if  he 
slighted  her  dreams,  that  she  would  be  pleased 
to  consult  his  fate  by  sacrifices  and  other  kinds 
of  divination.  Nor  was  he  himself  without 
some  suspicion  and  fears;  for  he  never  before 
discovered  any  womanish  superstition  in 
Calpurnia,  whom  he  now  saw  in  such  great 
alarm.  Upon  the  report  which  the  priests  made 


602 

to  him,  that  they  had  killed  several  sacrifices, 
and  still  found  them  inauspicious,  he  resolved 
to  send  Antony  to  dismiss  the  senate. 

In  this  juncture,  Decimus  Brutus,  surnamed 
Albinus,  one  whom  Caesar  had  such  confidence 
in  that  he  made  him  his  second  heir,  who 
nevertheless  was  engaged  in  the  conspiracy 
with  the  other  Brutus  and  Cassius,  fearing  lest 
if  Caesar  should  put  off  the  senate  to  another 
day  the  business  might  get  wind,  spoke  scof- 
fingly  and  in  mockery  of  the  diviners,  and 
blamed  Caesar  for  giving  the  senate  so  fair  an 
occasion  of  saying  he  had  put  a  slight  upon 
them,  for  that  they  were  met  upon  his  sum¬ 
mons,  and  were  ready  to  vote  unanimously 
that  he  should  be  declared  king  of  all  the  prov¬ 
inces  out  of  Italy,  and  might  wear  a  diadem  in 
any  other  place  but  Italy,  by  sea  or  land.  If  any 
one  should  be  sent  to  tell  them  they  might 
break  up  for  the  present,  and  meet  again  when 
Calpurnia  should  chance  to  have  better  dreams, 
what  would  his  enemies  say?  Or  who  would 
with  any  patience  hear  his  friends,  if  they 
should  presume  to  defend  his  government  as 
not  arbitrary  and  tyrannical?  But  if  he  was 
possessed  so  far  as  to  think  this  day  unfortu¬ 
nate,  yet  it  were  more  decent  to  go  himself  to 
the  senate,  and  to  adjourn  it  in  his  own  per¬ 
son. 

Brutus,  as  he  spoke  these  words,  took  Caesar 
by  the  hand,  and  conducted  him  forth.  He  was 
not  gone  far  from  the  door,  when  a  servant  of 
some  other  person’s  made  towards  him,  but 
not  being  able  to  come  up  to  him,  on  account 
of  the  crowd  of  those  who  pressed  about  him, 
he  made  his  way  into  the  house,  and  commit¬ 
ted  himself  to  Calpurnia,  begging  of  her  to  se¬ 
cure  him  till  Caesar  returned,  because  he  had 
matters  of  great  importance  to  communicate  to 
him. 

Artemidorus,  a  Cnidian,  a  teacher  of  Greek 
logic,  and  by  that  means  so  far  acquainted 
with  Brutus  and  his  friends  as  to  have  got  into 
the  secret,  brought  Caesar  in  a  small  written 
memorial  the  heads  of  what  he  had  to  depose. 
He  had  observed  that  Caesar,  as  he  received 
any  papers,  presently  gave  them  to  the  ser¬ 
vants  who  attended  on  him;  and  therefore 
came  as  near  to  him  as  he  could,  and  said, 
“Read  this,  Caesar,  alone,  and  quickly,  for  it 
contains  matter  of  great  importance  which 
nearly  concerns  you.”  Caesar  received  it,  and 
tried  several  times  to  read  it,  but  was  still  hind¬ 
ered  by  the  crowd  of  those  who  came  to  speak 
to  him.  However,  he  kept  it  in  his  hand  by  it¬ 
self  till  he  came  into  the  senate.  Some  say  it 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

was  another  who  gave  Caesar  this  note,  and  that 
Artemidorus  could  not  get  to  him,  being  all 
along  kept  off  by  the  crowd. 

All  these  things  might  happen  by  chance. 
But  the  place  which  was  destined  for  the  scene 
of  this  murder,  in  which  the  senate  met  that 
day,  was  the  same  in  which  Pompey’s  statue 
stood,  and  was  one  of  the  edifices  which  Pom- 
pey  had  raised  and  dedicated  with  his  theatre  to 
the  use  of  the  public,  plainly  showing  that  there 
was  something  of  a  supernatural  influence 
which  guided  the  action  and  ordered  it  to  that 
particular  place.  Cassius,  just  before  the  act,  is 
said  to  have  looked  towards  Pompey’s  statue, 
and  silently  implored  his  assistance,  though  he 
had  been  inclined  to  the  doctrines  of  Epicurus. 
But  this  occasion,  and  the  instant  danger,  car¬ 
ried  him  away  out  of  all  his  reasonings,  and 
filled  him  for  the  time  with  a  sort  of  inspira¬ 
tion.  As  for  Antony,  who  was  firm  to  Caesar, 
and  a  strong  man,  Brutus  Albinus  kept  him 
outside  the  house,  and  delayed  him  with  a  long 
conversation  contrived  on  purpose. 

When  Caesar  entered,  the  senate  stood  up  to 
show  their  respect  to  him,  and  of  Brutus’s  con¬ 
federates,  some  came  about  his  chair  and  stood 
behind  it,  others  met  him,  pretending  to  add 
their  petitions  to  those  of  Tillius  Cimber,  in 
behalf  of  his  brother  who  was  in  exile;  and 
they  followed  him  with  their  joint  applications 
till  he  came  to  his  seat.  When  he  was  sat  down, 
he  refused  to  comply  with  their  requests,  and 
upon  their  urging  him  further  began  to  re¬ 
proach  them  severely  for  their  importunities, 
when  Tillius,  laying  hold  of  his  robe  with  both 
his  hands,  pulled  it  down  from  his  neck,  which 
was  the  signal  for  the  assault. 

Casca  gave  him  the  first  cut  in  the  neck, 
which  was  not  mortal  nor  dangerous,  as  com¬ 
ing  from  one  who  at  the  beginning  of  such  a 
bold  action  was  probably  very  much  disturbed; 
Caesar  immediately  turned  about,  and  laid  his 
hand  upon  the  dagger  and  kept  hold  of  it.  And 
both  of  them  at  the  same  time  cried  out,  he 
that  received  the  blow,  in  Latin,  “Vile  Casca, 
what  does  this  mean?”  and  he  that  gave  it,  in 
Greek,  to  his  brother,  “Brother,  help!” 

Upon  this  first  onset,  those  who  were  not 
privy  to  the  design  were  astonished,  and  their 
horror  and  amazement  at  what  they  saw  were 
so  great  that  they  durst  not  flee,  nor  assist  Cae¬ 
sar,  nor  so  much  as  speak  a  word.  But  those 
who  came  prepared  for  the  business  enclosed 
him  on  every  side,  with  their  naked  daggers  in 
their  hands.  Which  way  soever  he  turned  he 
met  with  blows,  and  saw  their  swords  levelled 


CESAR 

at  his  face  and  eyes,  and  was  encompassed,  like 
a  wild  beast  in  the  toils,  on  every  side.  * 

For  it  had  been  agreed  they  should  each  of 
them  make  a  thrust  at  him,  and  flesh  them¬ 
selves  with  his  blood;  for  which  reason  Brutus 
also  gave  him  one  stab  in  the  groin.  Some  say 
that  he  fought  and  resisted  all  the  rest,  shifting 
his  body  to  avoid  the  blows,  and  calling  out  for 
help,  but  that  when  he  saw  Brutus’s  sword 
drawn,  he  covered  his  face  with  his  robe  and 
submitted,  letting  himself  fall,  whether  it  were 
by  chance,  or  that  he  was  pushed  in  that  direc¬ 
tion  by  his  murderers,  at  the  foot  of  the  pedes¬ 
tal  on  which  Pompey’s  statue  stood,  and  which 
was  thus  wetted  with  his  blood.  So  that  Pom- 
pey  himself  seemed  to  have  presided,  as  it  were, 
over  the  revenge  done  upon  his  adversary,  who 
lay  here  at  his  feet,  and  breathed  out  his  soul 
through  his  multitude  of  wounds,  for  they  say 
he  received  three-and-twenty.  And  the  conspir¬ 
ators  themselves  were  many  of  them  wounded 
by  each  other,  whilst  they  all  levelled  their 
blows  at  the  same  person. 

When  Caesar  was  despatched,  Brutus  stood 
forth  to  give  a  reason  for  what  they  had  done, 
but  the  senate  would  not  hear  him,  but  flew 
out  of  doors  in  all  haste,  and  filled  the  people 
with  so  much  alarm  and  distraction,  that  some 
shut  up  their  houses,  others  left  their  counters 
and  shops.  All  ran  one  way  or  the  other,  some 
to  the  place  to  see  the  sad  spectacle,  others  back 
again  after  they  had  seen  it.  Antony  and  Lep- 
idus,  Caesar’s  most  faithful  friends,  got  off  pri¬ 
vately,  and  hid  themselves  in  some  friends’ 
houses. 

Brutus  and  his  followers,  being  yet  hot  from 
the  deed,  marched  in  a  body  from  the  senate- 
house  to  the  capitol  with  their  drawn  swords, 
not  like  persons  who  thought  of  escaping,  but 
with  an  air  of  confidence  and  assurance,  and 
as  they  went  along,  called  to  the  people  to  re¬ 
sume  their  liberty,  and  invited  the  company  of 
any  more  distinguished  people  whom  they  met. 
And  some  of  these  joined  the  procession  and 
went  up  along  with  them,  as  if  they  also  had 
been  of  the  conspiracy,  and  could  claim  a  share 
in  the  honour  of  what  had  been  done.  As,  for 
example,  Caius  Octavius  and  Lentulus  Spin- 
ther,  who  suffered  afterwards  for  their  vanity, 
being  taken  off  by  Antony  and  the  young 
Caesar,  and  lost  the  honour  they  desired,  as  well 
as  their  lives,  which  it  cost  them,  since  no  one 
believed  they  had  any  share  in  the  action.  For 
neither  did  those  who  punished  them  profess 
to  revenge  the  fact,  but  the  ill-will. 

The  day  after,  Brutus  with  the  rest  came 


603 

down  from  the  capitol  and  made  a  speech  to 
the  people,  who  listened  without  expressing 
either  any  pleasure  or  resentment,  but  showed 
by  their  silence  that  they  pitied  Caesar  and  re¬ 
spected  Brutus.  The  senate  passed  acts  of  ob¬ 
livion  for  what  was  past,  and  took  measures 
to  reconcile  all  parties.  They  ordered  that 
Caesar  should  be  worshipped  as  a  divinity,  and 
nothing,  even  of  the  slightest  consequence, 
should  be  revoked  which  he  had  enacted  dur¬ 
ing  his  government.  At  the  same  time  they 
gave  Brutus  and  his  followers  the  command  of 
provinces,  and  other  considerable  posts.  So 
that  all  the  people  now  thought  things  were 
well  settled,  and  brought  to  the  happiest  ad¬ 
justment. 

But  when  Caesar’s  will  was  opened,  and  it 
was  found  that  he  had  left  a  considerable  leg¬ 
acy  to  each  one  of  the  Roman  citizens,  and 
when  his  body  was  seen  carried  through  the 
market-place  all  mangled  with  wounds,  the 
multitude  could  no  longer  contain  themselves 
within  the  bounds  of  tranquillity  and  order, 
but  heaped  together  a  pile  of  benches,  bars, 
and  tables,  which  they  placed  the  corpse  on, 
and  setting  fire  to  it,  burnt  it  on  them.  Then 
they  took  brands  from  the  pile  and  ran,  some 
to  fire  the  houses  of  the  conspirators,  others 
up  and  down  the  city  to  find  out  the  men  and 
tear  them  to  pieces,  but  met,  however,  with 
none  of  them,  they  having  taken  effectual  care 
to  secure  themselves. 

One  Cinna,  a  friend  of  Caesar’s,  chanced  the 
night  before  to  have  an  odd  dream.  He  fancied 
that  Caesar  invited  him  to  supper,  and  that 
upon  his  refusal  to  go  with  him,  Caesar  took 
him  by  the  hand  and  forced  him,  though  he 
hung  back.  Upon  hearing  the  report  that 
Caesar’s  body  was  burning  in  the  market-place, 
he  got  up  and  went  thither,  out  of  respect  to 
his  memory,  though  his  dream  gave  him  some 
ill  apprehensions,  and  though  he  was  suffer¬ 
ing  from  a  fever.  One  of  the  crowd  who  saw 
him  there  asked  another  who  that  was,  and 
having  learned  his  name,  told  it  to  his  next 
neighbour.  It  presently  passed  for  a  certainty 
that  he  was  one  of  Caesar’s  murderers,  as,  in¬ 
deed,  there  was  another  Cinna,  a  conspirator, 
and  they,  taking  this  to  be  the  man,  immedi¬ 
ately  seized  him  and  tore  him  limb  from  limb 
upon  the  spot. 

Brutus  and  Cassius,  frightened  at  this,  with¬ 
in  a  few  days  retired  out  of  the  city.  What  they 
afterwards  did  and  suffered,  and  how  they 
died,  is  written  in  the  Life  of  Brutus.  Caesar 
died  in  his  fifty-sixth  year,  not  having  sur- 


604 

vived  Pompey  above  four  years.  That  empire 
and  power  which  he  had  pursued  through 
the  whole  course  of  his  life  with  so  much  haz¬ 
ard,  he  did  at  last  with  much  difficulty  com¬ 
pass,  but  reaped  no  other  fruits  from  it  than 
the  empty  name  and  invidious  glory.  But  the 
great  genius  which  attended  him  through  his 
lifetime  even  after  his  death  remained  as  the 
avenger  of  his  murder,  pursuing  through 
every  sea  and  land  all  those  who  were  con¬ 
cerned  in  it,  and  suffering  none  to  escape,  but 
reaching  all  who  in  any  sort  or  kind  were 
either  actually  engaged  in  the  fact,  or  by  their 
counsels  any  way  promoted  it. 

The  most  remarkable  of  mere  human  coin¬ 
cidences  was  that  which  befell  Cassius,  who, 
when  he  was  defeated  at  Philippi,  killed  him¬ 
self  with  the  same  dagger  which  he  had  made 
use  of  against  Caesar.  The  most  signal  preter¬ 
natural  appearances  were  the  great  comet, 
which  shone  very  bright  for  seven  nights  after 
Caesar’s  death,  and  then  disappeared,  and  the 
dimness  of  the  sun,  whose  orb  continued  pale 
and  dull  for  the  whole  of  that  year,  never  show¬ 
ing  its  ordinary  radiance  at  its  rising,  and  giv¬ 
ing  but  a  weak  and  feeble  heat.  The  air  con¬ 
sequently  was  damp  and  gross  for  want  of 
stronger  rays  to  open  and  rarify  it.  The  fruits, 
for  that  reason,  never  properly  ripened,  and 
began  to  wither  and  fall  off  for  want  of  heat 
before  they  were  fully  formed.  But  above  all, 
the  phantom  which  appeared  to  Brutus  show¬ 
ed  the  murder  was  not  pleasing  to  the  gods. 
The  story  of  it  is  this. 

Brutus,  having  to  pass  his  army  from  Abydos 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

to  the  continent  on  the  other  side,  laid  him¬ 
self  down  one  night,  as  he  used  to  do,  in  his 
tent,  and  was  not  asleep,  but  thinking  of  his 
affairs,  and  what  events  he  might  expect.  For 
he  is  related  to  have  been  the  least  inclined  to 
sleep  of  all  men  who  have  commanded  armies, 
and  to  have  had  the  greatest  natural  capacity 
for  continuing  awake,  and  employing  himself 
without  need  of  rest.  He  thought  he  heard  a 
noise  at  the  door  of  his  tent,  and  looking  that 
way,  by  the  light  of  his  lamp,  which  was  al¬ 
most  out,  saw  a  terrible  figure,  like  that  of  a 
man,  but  of  unusual  stature  and  severe  coun¬ 
tenance.  He  was  somewhat  frightened  at  first, 
but  seeing  it  neither  did  nor  spoke  anything 
to  him,  only  stood  silently  by  his  bedside,  he 
asked  who  it  was.  The  spectre  answered  him, 
“Thy  evil  genius,  Brutus,  and  thou  shalt  see  me 
at  Philippi.”  Brutus  answered  courageously, 
“Well,  I  shall  see  you,”  and  immediately  the 
appearance  vanished. 

When  the  time  was  come,  he  drew  up  his 
army  near  Philippi  against  Antony  and 
Caesar,  and  in  the  first  battle  won  the  day, 
routed  the  enemy,  and  plundered  Caesar’s 
camp.  The  night  before  the  second  battle,  the 
same  phantom  appeared  to  him  again,  but 
spoke  not  a  word.  He  presently  understood  his 
destiny  was  at  hand,  and  exposed  himself  to 
all  the  danger  of  the  battle.  Yet  he  did  not  die 
in  the  fight,  but  seeing  his  men  defeated,  got 
up  to  the  top  of  a  rock,  and  there  presenting 
his  sword  to  his  naked  breast,  and  assisted,  as 
they  say,  by  a  friend,  who  helped  him  to  give 
the  thrust,  met  his  death. 


PHOCION 

402.?~3i7  b.c. 


Demades,  the  orator,  when  in  the  height 
of  the  power  which  he  obtained  at 
Athens,  by  advising  the  state  in  the  in¬ 
terest  of  Antipater  and  the  Macedonians,  be¬ 
ing  necessitated  to  write  and  speak  many 
things  below  the  dignity,  and  contrary  to  the 
character,  of  the  city,  was  wont  to  excuse  him¬ 
self  by  saying  he  steered  only  the  shipwrecks 
of  the  commonwealth.  This  hardy  saying  of  his 
might  have  some  appearance  of  truth,  if  ap¬ 
plied  to  Phocion’s  government.  For  Demades, 
indeed,  was  himself  the  mere  wreck  of  his 
country,  living  and  ruling  so  dissolutely,  that 


Antipater  took  occasion  to  say  of  him,  when  1  t 
he  was  now  grown  old,  that  he  was  like  a  sacri¬ 
ficed  beast,  all  consumed  except  the  tongue  r 
and  the  belly.  But  Phocion’s  was  a  real  virtue,  j  i 
only  overmatched  in  the  unequal  contest  with  < 
an  adverse  time,  and  rendered,  by  the  ill  for-  j 
tunes  of  Greece,  inglorious  and  obscure.  $ 

We  must  not,  indeed,  allow  ourselves  to  con-  | 
cur  with  Sophocles  in  so  far  diminishing  the  a 
force  of  virtue  as  to  say  that —  j  y 

When  fortune  fails,  the  sense  we  had  before  f; 

Deserts  us  also,  and  is  ours  no  more.  p 

Yet  thus  much,  indeed,  must  be  allowed  to  0 


PHOCION 

happen  in  the  conflicts  between  good  men 
and  ill  fortune,  that  instead  of  due*  returns 
of  honour  and  gratitude,  obloquy  and  un¬ 
just  surmises  may  often  prevail,  to  weaken, 
in  a  considerable  degree,  the  credit  of  their 
virtue. 

It  is  commonly  said  that  public  bodies  are 
most  insulting  and  contumelious  to  a  good 
man,  when  they  are  puffed  up  with  prosperity 
and  success.  But  the  contrary  often  happens; 
afflictions  and  public  calamities  naturally  em¬ 
bittering  and  souring  the  minds  and  tempers 
of  men,  and  disposing  them  to  such  peevish¬ 
ness  and  irritability  that  hardly  any  word  or 
sentiment  of  common  vigour  can  be  addressed 
to  them,  but  they  will  be  apt  to  take  offence. 
He  that  remonstrates  with  them  on  their  errors 
is  presumed  to  be  insulting  over  their  misfor¬ 
tunes,  and  any  free-spoken  expostulation  is 
construed  into  contempt.  Honey  itself  is  search¬ 
ing  in  sore  and  ulcerated  parts;  and  the  wisest 
and  most  judicious  counsels  prove  provoking 
to  distempered  minds,  unless  offered  with 
those  soothing  and  compliant  approaches 
which  made  the  poet,  for  instance,  character¬ 
ise  agreeable  things  in  general  by  a  word  ex¬ 
pressive  of  a  grateful  and  easy  touch,  exciting 
nothing  of  offence  or  resistance.  Inflamed  eyes 
require  a  retreat  into  dusky  places,  amongst 
colours  of  the  deepest  shades,  and  are  unable 
to  endure  the  brilliancy  of  light. 

So  fares  it  in  the  body  politic,  in  times  of  dis¬ 
tress  and  humiliation;  a  certain  sensitiveness 
and  soreness  of  humour  prevail,  with  a  weak 
incapacity  of  enduring  any  free  and  open  ad¬ 
vice,  even  when  the  necessity  of  affairs  most  re¬ 
quires  such  plain  dealing,  and  when  the  con¬ 
sequences  of  any  single  error  may  be  beyond 
retrieving.  At  such  times  the  conduct  of  pub¬ 
lic  affairs  is  on  all  hands  most  hazardous. 
Those  who  humour  the  people  are  swallowed 
up  in  the  common  ruin;  those  who  endeavour 
to  lead  them  aright  perish  the  first  in  their  at¬ 
tempt. 

Astronomers  tell  us,  the  sun’s  motion  is 
neither  exactly  parallel  with  that  of  the  heavens 
in  general,  nor  yet  directly  and  diametrically 
opposite,  but  describing  an  oblique  line,  with 
insensible  declination  he  steers  his  course  in 
such  a  gentle,  easy  curve,  as  to  dispense  his 
light  and  influence,  in  his  annual  revolution, 
at  several  seasons  in  just  proportions  to  the 
whole  creation.  So  it  happens  in  political  af¬ 
fairs;  if  the  motions  of  rulers  be  constantly  op¬ 
posite  and  cross  to  the  tempers  and  inclinations 
of  the  people,  they  will  be  resented  as  arbi- 


605 

trary  and  harsh;  as,  on  the  other  side,  too  much 
deference,  or  encouragement,  as  too  often  it 
has  been,  to  popular  faults  and  errors,  is  full 
of  danger  and  ruinous  consequences. 

But  where  concession  is  the  response  to  will¬ 
ing  obedience,  and  a  statesman  gratifies  his 
people,  that  he  may  the  more  imperatively  re¬ 
call  them  to  a  sense  of  the  common  interest, 
then,  indeed,  human  beings,  who  are  ready 
enough  to  serve  well  and  submit  to  much,  if 
they  are  not  always  ordered  about  and  roughly 
handled,  like  slaves,  may  be  said  to  be  guided 
and  governed  upon  the  method  that  leads  to 
safety.  Though  it  must  be  confessed  it  is  a 
nice  point,  and  extremely  difficult,  so  to  temper 
this  lenity  as  to  preserve  the  authority  of  the 
government.  But  if  such  a  blessed  mixture  and 
temperament  may  be  obtained,  it  seems  to  be 
of  all  concords  and  harmonies  the  most  con¬ 
cordant  and  most  harmonious.  For  thus  we 
are  taught  even  God  governs  the  world,  not 
by  irresistible  force,  but  persuasive  argument 
and  reason,  controlling  it  into  compliance  with 
his  eternal  purposes. 

Cato  the  younger  is  a  similar  instance.  His 
manners  were  little  agreeable  or  acceptable  to 
the  people,  and  he  received  very  slender  marks 
of  their  favour;  witness  his  repulse  when  he 
sued  for  the  counsulship,  which  he  lost,  as 
Cicero  says,  for  acting  rather  like  a  citizen  in 
Plato’s  commonwealth,  than  among  the  dregs 
of  Romulus’s  posterity,  the  same  thing  happen¬ 
ing  to  him,  in  my  opinion,  as  we  observe  in 
fruits  ripe  before  their  season,  which  we  rath¬ 
er  take  pleasure  in  looking  at  and  admiring 
than  actually  use;  so  much  was  his  old-fash¬ 
ioned  virtue  out  of  the  present  mode,  among 
the  depraved  customs  which  time  and  luxury 
had  introduced,  that  it  appeared,  indeed,  re¬ 
markable  and  wonderful,  but  was  too  great 
and  too  good  to  suit  the  present  exigencies,  be¬ 
ing  so  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  times.  Yet 
his  circumstances  were  not  altogether  like 
Phocion’s,  who  came  to  the  helm  when  the 
ship  of  the  state  was  just  upon  sinking.  Cato’s 
time  was,  indeed,  stormy  and  tempestuous;  yet 
so,  as  he  was  able  to  assist  in  managing  the 
sails,  and  lend  his  helping  hand  to  those  who 
commanded  at  the  helm,  which  he  was  not  al¬ 
lowed  to  do,  others  were  to  blame  for  the  re¬ 
sult;  yet  his  courage  and  virtue  made  it  in 
spite  of  all  a  hard  task  for  fortune  to  ruin  the 
commonwealth,  and  it  was  only  with  long 
time  and  effort  and  by  slow  degrees,  when  he 
himself  had  all  but  succeeded  in  averting  it, 
that  the  catastrophe  was  at  last  effected. 


606 

Phocion  and  he  may  be  well  compared  to¬ 
gether,  not  for  any  mere  general  resemblances, 
as  though  we  should  say  both  were  good  men 
and  great  statesmen.  For,  assuredly,  there  is 
difference  enough  among  virtues  of  the  same 
denomination,  as  between  the  bravery  of  Al- 
cibiades  and  that  of  Epaminondas,  the  pru¬ 
dence  of  Themistocles  and  that  of  Aristides, 
the  justice  of  Numa  and  that  of  Agesilaus. 
But  these  men’s  virtue,  even  looking  to  the 
most  minute  points  of  difference,  bear  the 
same  colour,  stamp,  and  character  impressed 
upon  them,  so  as  not  to  be  distinguishable. 
The  mixture  is  still  made  in  the  same  exact 
proportions  whether  we  look  at  the  combina¬ 
tion  to  be  found  in  them,  both  of  lenity  on  the 
one  hand,  with  austerity  on  the  other;  their 
boldness  upon  some  occasions,  and  caution  on 
others;  their  extreme  solicitude  for  the  public, 
and  perfect  neglect  of  themselves;  their  fixed 
and  immovable  bent  to  all  virtuous  and  honest 
actions,  accompanied  with  an  extreme  tender¬ 
ness  and  scrupulosity  as  to  doing  anything 
which  might  appear  mean  or  unworthy;  so 
that  we  should  need  a  very  nice  and  subtle 
logic  of  discrimination  to  detect  and  establish 
the  distinctions  between  them. 

As  to  Cato’s  extraction,  it  is  confessed  by  all 
to  have  been  illustrious,  as  will  be  said  here¬ 
after,  nor  was  Phocion’s,  I  feel  assured,  ob¬ 
scure  or  ignoble.  For  had  he  been  the  son  of  a 
turner,  as  Idomeneus  reports,  it  had  certainly 
not  been  forgotten  to  his  disparagement  by 
Glaucippus,  the  son  of  Hyperides,  when  heap¬ 
ing  up  a  thousand  spiteful  things  to  say  against 
him.  Nor,  indeed,  had  it  been  possible  for  him, 
in  such  circumstances,  to  have  had  such  a  lib¬ 
eral  breeding  and  education  in  his  youth,  as  to 
be  first  Plato’s  and  afterwards  Xenocrates’s 
scholar  in  the  Academy,  and  to  have  devoted 
himself  from  the  first  to  the  pursuit  of  the 
noblest  studies  and  practices.  His  countenance 
was  so  composed  that  scarcely  was  he  ever 
seen  by  any  Athenian  either  laughing  or  in 
tears.  He  was  rarely  known,  so  Duffs  has  re¬ 
corded,  to  appear  in  the  public  baths,  or  was 
observed  with  his  hand  exposed  outside  his 
cloak, -when  he  wore  one.  Abroad,  and  in  the 
camp,  he  was  so  hardy  in  going  always  thin 
clad  and  barefoot,  except  in  a  time  of  excessive 
and  intolerable  cold,  that  the  soldiers  used  to 
say  in  merriment,  that  it  was  like  to  be  a  hard 
winter  when  Phocion  wore  his  coat. 

Although  he  was  most  gentle  and  humane 
in  his  disposition,  his  aspect  was  stern  and  for¬ 
bidding,  so  that  he  was  seldom  accosted  alone 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

by  any  who  were  not  intimate  with  him.  When 
Chares  once  made  some  remark  on  his  frown¬ 
ing  looks,  and  the  Athenians  laughed  at  the 
jest,  “My  sullenness,”  said  Phocion,  “never  yet 
made  any  of  you  sad,  but  these  men’s  jollities 
have  given  you  sorrow  enough.”  In  like  man¬ 
ner  Phocion’s  language,  also,  was  full  of  in¬ 
struction,  abounding  in  happy  maxims  and 
wise  thoughts,  but  admitted  no  embellishment 
to  its  austere  and  commanding  brevity.  Zenc 
said  a  philosopher  should  never  speak  till  his 
words  had  been  steeped  in  meaning;  and  such, 
it  may  be  said,  were  Phocion’s,  crowding  the 
greatest  amount  of  significance  into  the  small¬ 
est  allowance  of  space. 

And  to  this,  probably,  Polyeuctus,  the  Sphet- 
tian,  referred,  when  he  said  that  Demosthenes 
was,  indeed,  the  best  orator  of  his  time,  but 
Phocion  the  most  powerful  speaker.  His  ora¬ 
tory,  like  small  coin  of  great  value,  was  to  be 
estimated,  not  by  its  bulk,  but  its  intrinsic 
worth.  He  was  once  observed,  it  is  said,  when 
the  theatre  was  filling  with  the  audience,  to 
walk  musing  alone  behind  the  scenes,  which 
one  of  his  friends  taking  notice  of  said,  “Phoci¬ 
on,  you  seem  to  be  thoughtful.”  “Yes,”  replied 
he,  “I  am  considering  how  I  may  shorten  what 
I  am  going  to  say  to  the  Athenians.”  Even 
Demosthenes  himself,  who  used  to  despise  the 
rest  of  the  haranguers,  when  Phocion  stood  up, 
was  wont  to  say  quietly  to  those  about  him, 
“Here  is  the  pruning-knife  of  my  periods.” 
This,  however,  might  refer,  perhaps,  not  so 
much  to  his  eloquence  as  to  the  influence 
of  his  character,  since  not  only  a  word,  but 
even  a  nod  from  a  person  who  is  esteemed,  is 
of  more  force  than  a  thousand  arguments  or 
studied  sentences  from  others. 

In  his  youth  he  followed  Chabrias,  the  gen¬ 
eral,  from  whom  he  gained  many  lessons  in 
military  knowledge,  and  in  return  did  some¬ 
thing  to  correct  his  unequal  and  capricious  hu¬ 
mour.  For  whereas  at  other  times  Chabrias 
was  heavy  and  phlegmatic,  in  the  heat  of  battle 
he  used  to  be  so  fired  and  transported  that  he 
threw  himself  headlong  into  danger  beyond 
the  forwardest,  which  indeed,  in  the  end,  cost 
him  his  life  in  the  island  of  Chios,  he  having 
pressed  his  own  ship  foremost  to  force  a  land¬ 
ing.  But  Phocion,  being  a  man  of  temper  as 
well  as  courage,  had  the  dexterity  at  some 
times  to  rouse  the  general,  when  in  his  procras¬ 
tinating  mood,  to  action,  and  at  others  to  mod¬ 
erate  and  cool  the  impetuousness  of  his  unsea¬ 
sonable  fury.  Upon  which  account  Chabrias, 
who  was  a  good-natured,  kindly-tempered 


PHOCION 

man,  loved  him  much,  and  procured  him  com¬ 
mands  and  opportunities  for  action;  giving 
himself  means  to  make  himself  knqwn  in 
Greece,  and  using  his  assistance  in  all  his  af¬ 
fairs  of  moment.  Particularly  the  sea-fight  of 
Naxos  added  not  a  little  to  Phocion’s  reputa¬ 
tion,  when  he  had  the  left  squadron  committed 
to  him  by  Chabrias,  as  in  this  quarter  the  battle 
was  sharply  contested,  and  was  decided  by  a 
speedy  victory.  And  this  being  the  first  prosper¬ 
ous  sea-battle  the  city  had  engaged  in  with  its 
own  force  since  its  captivity,  Chabrias  won 
great  popularity  by  it,  and  Phocion,  also,  got 
the  reputation  of  a  good  commander.  The  vic¬ 
tory  was  gained  at  the  time  of  the  Great  Mys¬ 
teries,  and  Chabrias  used  to  keep  the  commem¬ 
oration  of  it  by  distributing  wine  among  the 
Athenians,  yearly,  on  the  sixteenth  day  of  Bo- 
edromion. 

After  this,  Chabrias  sent  Phocion  to  demand 
their  quota  of  the  charges  of  the  war  from  the 
islanders,  and  offered  him  a  guard  of  twenty 
ships.  Phocion  told  him,  if  he  intended  him  to 
go  against  them  as  enemies,  that  force  was  in¬ 
significant;  if  as  to  friends  and  allies,  one  vessel 
was  sufficient.  So  he  took  his  own  single  galley, 
and  having  visited  the  cities,  and  treated  with 
the  magistrates  in  an  equitable  and  open  man¬ 
ner,  he  brought  back  a  number  of  ships,  sent 
by  the  confederates  to  Athens,  to  convey  the 
supplies.  Neither  did  his  friendship  and  at¬ 
tention  close  with  Chabrias ’s  life,  but  after  his 
decease  he  carefully  maintained  it  to  all  that 
were  related  to  him,  and  chiefly  to  his  son, 
Ctesippus,  whom  he  laboured  to  bring  to  some 
good,  and  although  he  was  a  stupid  and  in¬ 
tractable  young  fellow,  always  endeavoured, 
so  far  as  in  him  lay,  to  correct  and  cover  his 
faults  and  follies.  Once,  however,  when  the 
youngster  was  very  impertinent  and  trouble¬ 
some  to  him  in  the  camp,  interrupting  him 
with  idle  questions,  and  putting  forward  his 
opinions  and  suggestions  of  how  the  war 
should  be  conducted,  he  could  not  forbear  ex¬ 
claiming,  “O  Chabrias,  Chabrias,  how  grateful 
I  show  myself  for  your  friendship,  in  submit¬ 
ting  to  endure  your  son!” 

Upon  looking  into  public  matters,  and  the 
way  in  which  they  were  now  conducted,  he 
observed  that  the  administration  of  affairs  was 
cut  and  parcelled  out,  like  so  much  land  by  al¬ 
lotment,  between  the  military  men  and  the 
public  speakers,  so  that  neither  these  nor  those 
should  interfere  with  the  claims  of  the  others. 
As  the  one  were  to  address  the  assemblies,  to 
draw  up  votes  and  prepare  motions,  men,  for 


607 

example,  like  Eubulus,  Aristophon,  Demos¬ 
thenes,  Lycurgus,  and  Hyperides,  and  were  to 
push  their  interests  here;  so,  in  the  meantime, 
Diopithes,  Menestheus,  Leosthenes,  and  Chares 
were  to  make  their  profit  by  war  and  in  mili¬ 
tary  commands. 

Phocion,  on  the  other  hand,  was  desirous 
to  restore  and  carry  out  the  old  system,  more 
complete  in  itself,  and  more  harmonious  and 
uniform,  which  prevailed  in  the  times  of  Peri¬ 
cles,  Aristides,  and  Solon;  when  statesmen 
showed  themselves,  to  use  Archilochus’s 
words — 

Mars'  and  the  Muses'  friends  ali\e  designed, 

To  arts  and  arms  indiff erently  inclined. 
and  the  presiding  goddess  of  his  country  was, 
he  did  not  fail  to  see,  the  patroness  and  protec¬ 
tress  of  both  civil  and  military  wisdom.  With 
these  views,  while  his  advice  at  home  was  al¬ 
ways  for  peace  and  quietness,  he  nevertheless 
held  the  office  of  general  more  frequently  than 
any  of  the  statesmen,  not  only  of  his  own 
times,  but  of  those  preceding,  never,  indeed, 
promoting  or  encouraging  military  expedi¬ 
tions,  yet  never,  on  the  other  hand,  shunning 
or  declining,  when  he  was  called  upon  by  the 
public  voice.  Thus  much  is  well  known,  that 
he  was  no  less  than  forty-five  several  times 
chosen  general,  he  being  never  on  any  one  of 
those  occasions  present  at  the  election,  but 
having  the  command,  in  his  absence,  by  com¬ 
mon  suffrage,  conferred  on  him,  and  he  sent 
for  on  purpose  to  undertake  it.  Insomuch  that 
it  amazed  those  who  did  not  well  consider  to 
see  the  people  always  prefer  Phocion,  who  was 
so  far  from  humouring  them  or  courting  their 
favour,  that  he  always  thwarted  and  opposed 
them. 

But  so  it  was,  as  great  men  and  princes  are 
said  to  call  in  their  flatterers  when  dinner  has 
been  served,  so  the  Athenians,  upon  slight  oc¬ 
casions,  entertained  and  diverted  themselves 
with  their  spruce  speakers  and  trim  orators, 
but  when  it  came  to  action,  they  were  sober 
and  considerate  enough  to  single  out  the  aus- 
terest  and  wisest  for  public  employment,  how¬ 
ever  much  he  might  be  opposed  to  their  wishes 
and  sentiments.  This,  indeed,  he  made  no 
scruple  to  admit,  when  the  oracle  from  Delphi 
was  read,  which  informed  them  that  the  Athe¬ 
nians  were  all  of  one  mind,  a  single  dissentient 
only  excepted,  frankly  coming  forward  and 
declaring  that  they  need  look  no  further;  he 
was  the  man;  there  was  no  one  but  he  who 
was  dissatisfied  with  everything  they  did.  And 
when  once  he  gave  his  opinion  to  the  people, 


608 

and  was  met  with  the  general  approbation  and 
applause  of  the  assembly,  turning  to  some  of 
his  friends,  he  asked  them,  “Have  I  inadver¬ 
tently  said  something  foolish?” 

Upon  occasion  of  a  public  festivity,  being  so¬ 
licited  for  his  contribution  by  the  example  of 
others,  and  the  people  pressing  him  much,  he 
bade  them  apply  themselves  to  the  wealthy; 
for  his  part  he  should  blush  to  make  a  present 
here,  rather  than  a  repayment  there,  turning 
and  pointing  to  Callicles,  the  money-lender. 
Being  still  clamoured  upon  and  importuned, 
he  told  them  this  tale.  A  certain  cowardly  fel¬ 
low  setting  out  for  the  wars,  hearing  the  ravens 
croak  in  his  passage,  threw  down  his  arms,  re¬ 
solving  to  wait.  Presently  he  took  them  and 
ventured  out  again,  but  hearing  the  same  mu¬ 
sic,  once  more  made  a  stop.  “For,”  said  he, 
“you  may  croak  till  you  are  tired,  but  you  shall 
make  no  dinner  upon  me.” 

The  Athenians  urging  him  at  an  unseason¬ 
able  time  to  lead  them  out  against  the  enemy, 
he  peremptorily  refused,  and  being  upbraided 
by  them  with  cowardice  and  pusillanimity,  he 
told  them,  “Just  now,  do  what  you  will,  I  shall 
not  be  brave;  and  do  what  I  will,  you  will  not 
be  cowards.  Nevertheless,  we  know  well 
enough  what  we  are.”  And  when  again,  in  a 
time  of  great  danger,  the  people  were  very 
harsh  upon  him,  demanding  a  strict  account 
how  the  public  money  had  been  employed, 
and  the  like,  he  bade  them,  “First,  good 
friends,  make  sure  you  are  safe.”  After  a  war, 
during  which  they  had  been  very  tractable  and 
timorous,  when,  upon  peace  being  made,  they 
began  again  to  be  confident  and  overbearing, 
and  to  cry  out  upon  Phocion,  as  having  lost 
them  the  honour  of  victory,  to  all  their  clamour 
he  made  only  this  answer,  “My  friends,  you 
are  fortunate  in  having  a  leader  who  knows 
you;  otherwise,  you  had  long  since  been  un¬ 
done.” 

Having  a  controversy  with  the  Bceotians 
about  boundaries,  which  he  counselled  them 
to  decide  by  negotiation,  they  inclined  to 
blows.  “You  had  better,”  said  he,  “carry  on  the 
contest  with  the  weapons  in  which  you  excel 
(your  tongues),  and  not  by  war,  in  which  you 
are  inferior.”  Once  when  he  was  addressing 
them,  and  they  would  not  hear  him  or  let  him 
go  on,  said  he,  “You  may  compel  me  to  act 
against  my  wishes,  but  you  shall  never  force 
me  to  speak  against  my  judgment.”  Among 
the  many  public  speakers  who  opposed  him, 
Demosthenes,  for  example,  once  told  him, 
“The  Athenians,  Phocion,  will  kill  you  some 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

day  when  they  once  are  in  a  rage.”  “And  you,” 
said  he,  “if  they  once  are  in  their  senses.” 

Polyeuctus,  the  Sphettian,  once  on  a  hot  day 
was  urging  war  with  Philip,  and  being  a  cor¬ 
pulent  man,  and  out  of  breath  and  in  a  great 
heat  with  speaking,  took  numerous  draughts 
of  water  as  he  went  on.  “Here,  indeed,”  said 
Phocion,  “is  a  fit  man  to  lead  us  into  a  war! 
What  think  you  he  will  do  when  he  is  carrying 
his  corselet  and  his  shield  to  meet  the  enemy,  if 
even  here,  delivering  a  prepared  speech  to  you 
has  almost  killed  him  with  exhaustion?” 
When  Lycurgus  in  the  assembly  made  many 
reflections  on  his  past  conduct,  upbraiding 
him  above  all  for  having  advised  them  to  de¬ 
liver  up  the  ten  citizens  whom  Alexander  had 
demanded,  he  replied  that  he  had  been  the 
author  of  much  safe  and  wholesome  counsel, 
which  had  not  been  followed. 

There  was  a  man  called  Archibiades,  nick¬ 
named  the  Lacedaemonian,  who  used  to  go 
about  with  a  huge,  over-grown  beard,  wear¬ 
ing  an  old  threadbare  cloak,  and  affecting  a 
very  stern  countenance.  Phocion  once,  when 
attacked  in  council  by  the  rest,  appealed  to  this 
man  for  his  support  and  testimony.  And  when 
he  got  up  and  began  to  speak  on  the  popular 
side,  putting  his  hand  to  his  beard,  “O  Archi¬ 
biades,”  said  he,  “it  is  time  you  should  shave.” 
Aristogiton,  a  common  accuser,  was  a  terrible 
man  of  war  within  the  assembly,  always  in¬ 
flaming  the  people  to  battle,  but  when  the 
muster-roll  came  to  be  produced,  he  appeared 
limping  on  a  crutch,  with  a  bandage  on  his  leg; 
Phocion  descried  him  afar  off,  coming  in,  and 
cried  out  to  the  clerk,  “Put  down  Aristogiton, 
too,  as  lame  and  worthless.” 

So  that  it  is  a  little  wonderful,  how  a  man  so 
severe  and  harsh  upon  all  occasions  should, 
notwithstanding,  obtain  the  name  of  the  Good. 
Yet,  though  difficult,  it  is  not,  I  suppose,  im¬ 
possible  for  men’s  tempers,  any  more  than  for 
wines,  to  be  at  the  same  time  harsh  and  agree¬ 
able  to  the  taste;  just  as  on  the  other  hand 
many  that  are  sweet  at  the  first  taste  are  found, 
on  further  use,  extremely  disagreeable  and  un¬ 
wholesome.  Hyperides,  we  are  told,  once  said 
to  the  people,  “Do  not  ask  yourselves,  men  of 
Athens,  whether  or  not  I  am  bitter,  but  wheth¬ 
er  or  not  I  am  paid  for  being  so,”  as  though  a 
covetous  purpose  were  the  only  thing  that 
should  make  a  harsh  temper  insupportable, 
and  as  if  men  might  not  even  more  justly  ren¬ 
der  themselves  obnoxious  to  popular  dislike 
and  censure,  by  using  their  power  and  in¬ 
fluence  in  the  indulgence  of  their  own  private 


PHOCION 

passions  of  pride  and  jealousy,  anger  and  ani¬ 
mosity. 

Phocion  never  allowed  himself  from  any 
feeling  of  personal  hostility  to  do  hurt  to  any 
fellow-citizen,  nor,  indeed,  reputed  any  man 
his  enemy,  except  so  far  as  he  could  not  but 
contend  sharply  with  such  as  opposed  the  meas¬ 
ures  he  urged  for  the  public  good;  in  which  ar¬ 
gument  he  was,  indeed,  a  rude,  obstinate,  and 
uncompromising  adversary.  For  his  general 
conversation,  it  was  easy,  courteous,  and  oblig¬ 
ing  to  all,  to  that  point  that  he  would  befriend 
his  very  opponents  in  their  distress,  and  es¬ 
pouse  the  cause  of  those  who  differed  most 
from  him,  when  they  needed  his  patronage. 
His  friends  reproaching  him  for  pleading  in 
behalf  of  a  man  of  indifferent  character,  he  told 
them  the  innocent  had  no  need  of  an  advocate. 
Aristogiton,  the  sycophant,  whom  we  men¬ 
tioned  before,  having,  after  sentence  passed  up¬ 
on  him,  sent  earnestly  to  Phocion  to  speak  with 
him  in  the  prison,  his  friends  dissuaded  him 
from  going;  “Nay,  by  your  favour,”  said  he, 
“where  should  I  rather  choose  to  pay  Aristogi¬ 
ton  a  visit?” 

As  for  the  allies  of  the  Athenians,  and  the 
islanders,  whenever  any  admiral  besides  Phoci¬ 
on  was  sent,  they  treated  him  as  an  enemy  sus¬ 
pect,  barricaded  their  gates,  blocked  up  their 
havens,  brought  in  from  the  country  their 
cattle,  slaves,  wives,  and  children,  and  put  them 
in  garrison;  but  upon  Phocion ’s  arrival,  they 
went  out  to  welcome  him  in  their  private  boats 
and  barges,  with  streamers  and  garlands,  and 
received  him  at  landing  with  every  demon¬ 
stration  of  joy  and  pleasure. 

When  King  Philip  was  effecting  his  entry 
into  Euboea,  and  was  bringing  over  troops 
from  Macedonia,  and  making  himself  master 
of  the  cities,  by  means  of  the  tyrants  who  ruled 
in  them,  Plutarch  of  Eretria  sent  to  request  aid 
of  the  Athenians  for  the  relief  of  the  island, 
which  was  in  imminent  danger  of  falling 
wholly  into  the  hands  of  the  Macedonians. 
Phocion  was  sent  thither  with  a  handful  of 
men  in  comparison,  in  expectation  that  the 
Eubceans  themselves  would  flock  in  and  join 
him.  But  when  he  came,  he  found  all  things 
in  confusion,  the  country  all  betrayed,  the 
whole  ground,  as  it  were,  undermined  under 
his  feet,  by  the  secret  pensioners  of  King 
Philip,  so  that  he  was  in  the  greatest  risk  imag¬ 
inable.  To  secure  himself  as  far  as  he  could,  he 
seized  a  small  rising  ground,  which  was  di¬ 
vided  from  the  level  plains  about  Tamynac  by 
a  deep  watercourse,  and  here  he  enclosed  and 


609 

fortified  the  choicest  of  his  army.  As  for  the 
idle  talkers  and  disorderly  bad  citizens  who 
ran  off  from  his  camp  and  made  their  way 
back,  he  bade  his  officers  not  to  regard  them, 
since  here  they  would  have  been  not  only 
useless  and  ungovernable  themselves,  but  an 
actual  hindrance  to  the  rest:  and  further,  being 
conscious  to  themselves  of  the  neglect  of  their 
duty,  they  would  be  less  ready  to  misrepresent 
the  action,  or  raise  a  cry  against  them  at  their 
return  home. 

When  the  enemy  drew  nigh,  he  bade  his 
men  stand  to  their  arms,  until  he  had  finished 
the  sacrifice,  in  which  he  spent  a  considerable 
time,  either  by  some  difficulty  of  the  thing  it¬ 
self,  or  on  purpose  to  invite  the  enemy  nearer. 
Plutarch,  interpreting  this  tardiness  as  a  failure 
in  his  courage,  fell  on  alone  with  the  merce¬ 
naries,  which  the  cavalry  perceiving,  could  not 
be  contained,  but  issuing  also  out  of  the  camp, 
confusedly  and  in  disorder,  spurred  up  to  the 
enemy.  The  first  who  came  up  were  defeated, 
the  rest  were  put  to  the  rout.  Plutarch  himself 
took  to  flight,  and  a  body  of  the  enemy  ad¬ 
vanced  in  the  hope  of  carrying  the  camp,  sup¬ 
posing  themselves  to  have  secured  the  victory. 

But  by  this  time,  the  sacrifice  being  over, 
the  Athenians  within  the  camp  came  forward, 
and  falling  upon  them  put  them  to  flight,  and 
killed  the  greater  number  as  they  fled  among 
the  intrenchments,  while  Phocion,  ordering  his 
infantry  to  keep  on  the  watch  and  rally  those 
who  came  in  from  the  previous  flight,  himself, 
with  a  body  of  his  best  men,  engaged  the  en¬ 
emy  in  a  sharp  and  bloody  fight,  in  which  all 
of  them  behaved  with  signal  courage  and  gal¬ 
lantry.  Thallus,  the  son  of  Cineas,  and  Glaucus 
of  Polymedes,  who  fought  near  the  general, 
gained  the  honours  of  the  day.  Cleophanes, 
also,  did  good  service  in  the  battle.  Recovering 
the  cavalry  from  its  defeat,  and  with  his  shouts 
and  encouragement  bringing  them  up  to  suc¬ 
cour  the  general,  who  was  in  danger,  he  con¬ 
firmed  the  victory  obtained  by  the  infantry. 

Phocion  now  expelled  Plutarch  from  Ere¬ 
tria,  and  possessed  himself  of  the  very  impor¬ 
tant  fort  of  Zaretra,  situated  where  the  island  is 
pinched  in,  as  it  were,  by  the  seas  on  each  side, 
and  its  breadth  most  reduced  to  a  narrow 
girth.  He  released  all  the  Greeks  whom  he 
took,  out  of  fear  of  the  public  speakers  at 
Athens,  thinking  they  might  very  likely  per¬ 
suade  the  people  in  their  anger  into  commit¬ 
ting  some  act  of  cruelty. 

This  affair  thus  despatched  and  settled,  Pho¬ 
cion  set  sail  homewards,  and  the  allies  had 


610 


soon  as  good  reason  to  regret  the  loss  of  his 
just  and  humane  dealing  as  the  Athenians  that 
of  his  experience  and  courage.  Molossus,  the 
commander  who  took  his  place,  had  no  better 
success  than  to  fall  alive  into  the  enemy’s 
hands. 

Philip,  full  of  great  thoughts  and  designs, 
now  advanced  with  all  his  forces  into  the  Hel¬ 
lespont,  to  seize  the  Chersonesus  and  Perin- 
thus,  and  after  them  Byzantium.  The  Atheni¬ 
ans  raised  a  force  to  relieve  them,  but  the  popu¬ 
lar  leaders  made  it  their  business  to  prefer 
Chares  to  be  general,  who,  sailing  thither,  ef¬ 
fected  nothing  worthy  of  the  means  placed 
in  his  hands.  The  cities  were  afraid,  and  would 
not  receive  his  ships  into  their  harbours,  so  that 
he  did  nothing  but  wander  about,  raising 
money  from  their  friends,  and  despised  by 
their  enemies.  When  the  people,  chafed  by 
the  orators,  were  extremely  indignant,  and 
repented  having  ever  sent  any  help  to  the  By¬ 
zantines,  Phocion  rose  and  told  them  they 
ought  not  to  be  angry  with  the  allies  for  dis¬ 
trusting,  but  with  their  generals  for  being  dis¬ 
trusted.  “They  make  you  suspected,”  he  said, 
“even  by  those  who  cannot  possibly  subsist 
without  your  succour.”  The  assembly  being 
moved  with  this  speech  of  his,  changed  their 
minds  on  the  sudden,  and  commanded  him 
immediately  to  raise  another  force,  and  go 
himself  to  assist  their  confederates  in  the  Hel¬ 
lespont:  an  appointment  which,  in  effect,  con¬ 
tributed  more  than  anything  to  the  relief  of 
Byzantium. 

For  Phocion’s  name  was  already  honourably 
known;  and  an  old  acquaintance  of  his,  who 
had  been  his  fellow-student  in  the  Academy, 
Leon,  a  man  of  high  renown  for  virtue  among 
the  Byzantines,  having  vouched  for  Phocion 
to  the  city,  they  opened  their  gates  to  receive 
him,  not  permitting  him,  though  he  desired 
it,  to  encamp  without  the  walls,  but  enter¬ 
tained  him  and  all  the  Athenians  with  perfect 
reliance,  while  they,  to  requite  their  confi¬ 
dence,  behaved  among  their  new  hosts  soberly 
and  inoffensively,  and  exerted  themselves  on 
all  occasions  with  the  greatest  zeal  and  resolu¬ 
tion  for  their  defence.  Thus  King  Philip  was 
driven  out  of  the  Hellespont,  and  was  despised 
to  boot,  whom,  till  now,  it  had  been  thought 
impossible  to  match,  or  even  to  oppose.  Phoci¬ 
on  also  took  some  of  his  ships,  and  recaptured 
some  of  the  places  he  had  garrisoned,  making 
besides  several  inroads  into  the  country,  which 
he  plundered  and  overran,  until  he  received 
a  wound  from  some  of  the  enemy  who  came 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

to  the  defence,  and,  thereupon,  sailed  away 
home. 

The  Megarians  at  this  time  privately  pray¬ 
ing  aid  of  the  Athenians,  Phocion,  fearing  lest 
the  Boeotians  should  hear  of  it,  and  anticipate 
them,  called  an  assembly  at  sunrise,  and 
brought  forward  the  petition  of  the  Megarians, 
and  immediately  after  the  vote  had  been  put, 
and  carried  in  their  favour,  he  sounded  the 
trumpet,  and  led  the  Athenians  straight  from 
the  assembly,  to  arm  and  put  themselves  in 
posture.  The  Megarians  received  them  joy¬ 
fully,  and  he  proceeded  to  fortify  Nisaca,  and 
built  two  new  long  walls  from  the  city  to  the 
arsenal,  and  so  joined  it  to  the  sea,  so  that  hav¬ 
ing  now  little  reason  to  regard  the  enemies  on 
the  land  side,  it  placed  its  dependence  entirely 
on  the  Athenians. 

When  final  hostilities  with  Philip  were  now 
certain,  and  in  Phocion’s  absence  other  gener¬ 
als  had  been  nominated,  he,  on  his  arrival 
from  the  islands,  dealt  earnestly  with  the  Athe¬ 
nians,  that  since  Philip  showed  peaceable  in¬ 
clinations  towards  them,  and  greatly  appre¬ 
hended  the  danger,  they  would  consent  to  a 
treaty.  Being  contradicted  in  this  by  one  of  the 
ordinary  frequenters  of  the  courts  of  justice, 
a  common  accuser,  who  asked  him  if  he  durst 
presume  to  persuade  the  Athenians  to  peace, 
now  their  arms  were  in  their  hands,  “Yes,” 
said  he,  “though  I  know  that  if  there  be  war,  I 
shall  be  in  office  over  you,  and  if  peace,  you 
over  me.”  But  when  he  could  not  prevail,  and 
Demosthenes’s  opinion  carried  it,  advising 
them  to  make  war  as  far  off  from  home  as 
possible,  and  fight  the  battle  out  of  Attica, 
“Good  friends,”  said  Phocion,  “let  us  not  ask 
where  we  shall  fight,  but  how  we  may  conquer 
in  the  war.  That  will  be  the  way  to  keep  it  at 
a  distance.  If  we  are  beaten,  it  will  be  quickly 
at  our  doors.” 

After  the  defeat,  when  the  clamourers  and 
incendiaries  in  the  town  would  have  brought 
up  Charidemus  to  the  hustings,  to  be  nomi¬ 
nated  to  the  command,  the  best  of  the  citizens 
were  in  a  panic,  and  supporting  themselves 
with  the  aid  of  the  council  of  the  Areopagus, 
with  entreaties  and  tears,  hardly  prevailed  up¬ 
on  the  people  to  have  Phocion  entrusted  with 
the  care  of  the  city.  He  was  of  opinion,  in  gen¬ 
eral,  that  the  fair  terms  to  be  expected  from 
Philip  should  be  accepted,  yet  after  Demades 
had  made  a  motion  that  the  city  should  re¬ 
ceive  the  common  conditions  of  peace  in  con¬ 
currence  with  the  rest  of  the  states  of  Greece, 
he  opposed  it,  till  it  were  known  what  the  par- 


PHOCION 

ticulars  were  which  Philip  demanded.  He  was 
overborne  in  this  advice,  under  the  pressure  of 
the  time,  but  almost  immediately  after  the 
Athenians  repented  it,  when  they  understood 
that  by  these  articles  they  were  obliged  to  fur¬ 
nish  Philip  both  with  horse  and  shipping. 

“It  was  the  fear  of  this,”  said  Phocion,  “that 
occasioned  my  opposition.  But  since  the  thing 
is  done,  let  us  make  the  best  of  it,  and  not  be 
discouraged.  Our  forefathers  were  sometimes 
in  command,  and  sometimes  under  it;  and  by 
doing  their  duty,  whether  as  rulers  or  as  sub¬ 
jects,  saved  their  own  country  and  the  rest  of 
Greece.” 

Upon  the  news  of  Philip’s  death,  he  opposed 
himself  to  any  public  demonstrations  of  joy 
and  jubilee,  saying  it  would  be  ignoble  to 
show  malice  upon  such  an  occasion,  and  that 
the  army  that  had  fought  them  at  Chaeronea 
was  only  diminished  by  a  single  man. 

When  Demosthenes  made  his  invectives 
against  Alexander,  now  on  his  way  to  attack 
Thebes,  he  repeated  those  verses  of  Homer: — 
Unwise  one,  wherefore  to  a  second  strode 
His  anger  be  foolhardy  to  provoke? 
and  asked,  “Why  stimulate  his  already  eager 
passion  for  glory?  Why  take  pains  to  expose 
the  city  to  the  terrible  conflagration  now  so 
near?  We,  who  accepted  office  to  save  our  fel¬ 
low-citizens,  will  not,  however  they  desire  it, 
be  consenting  to  their  destruction.” 

After  Thebes  was  lost,  and  Alexander  had 
demanded  Demosthenes,  Lycurgus,  Hyper- 
ides,  and  Charidemus  to  be  delivered  up,  the 
whole  assembly  turning  their  eyes  to  him,  and 
calling  on  him  by  name  to  deliver  his  opin¬ 
ion,  at  last  he  rose  up,  and  showing  them  one 
of  his  most  intimate  friends,  whom  he  loved 
and  confided  in  above  all  others,  told  them, 
“You  have  brought  things  amongst  you  to  that 
pass,  that  for  my  part,  should  he  demand  this 
my  friend  Nicocles,  I  would  not  refuse  to  give 
him  up.  For  as  for  myself,  to  have  it  in  my 
power  to  sacrifice  my  own  life  and  fortune 
for  the  common  safety,  I  should  think  the 
greatest  of  good  fortune.  Truly,”  he  added,  “it 
pierces  my  heart  to  see  those  who  are  fled  hith¬ 
er  for  succour  from  the  desolation  of  Thebes. 
Yet  it  is  enough  for  Greece  to  have  Thebes  to 
deplore.  It  will  be  more  for  the  interest  of  all 
that  we  should  deprecate  the  conqueror’s  an¬ 
ger,  and  intercede  for  both,  than  run  the  haz¬ 
ard  of  another  battle.” 

When  this  was  decreed  by  the  people,  Alex¬ 
ander  is  said  to  have  rejected  their  first  ad¬ 
dress  when  it  was  presented,  throwing  it  from 


611 

him  scornfully,  and  turning  his  back  upon 
the  deputation,  who  left  him  in  affright.  But 
the  second,  which  was  presented  by  Phocion, 
he  received,  understanding  from  the  older 
Macedonians  how  much  Philip  had  admired 
and  esteemed  him.  And  he  not  only  gave  him 
audience  and  listened  to  his  memorial  and  pe¬ 
tition,  but  also  permitted  him  to  advise  him, 
which  he  did  to  this  effect,  that  if  his  designs 
were  for  quietness,  he  should  make  peace  at 
once;  if  glory  were  his  aim,  he  should  make 
war,  not  upon  Greece,  but  on  the  barbarians. 

With  various  counsels  and  suggestions,  hap¬ 
pily  designed  to  meet  the  genius  and  feelings 
of  Alexander,  he  so  won  upon  him,  and  soft¬ 
ened  his  temper,  that  he  bade  the  Athenians 
not  forget  their  position,  as  if  anything  went 
wrong  with  him,  the  supremacy  belonged  to 

them.  And  to  Phocion  himself,  whom  he 
adopted  as  his  friend  and  guest,  he  showed  a 
respect,  and  admitted  him  to  distinctions 
which  few  of  those  who  were  continually  near 
his  person  ever  received.  Duris,  at  any  rate, 
tells  us,  that  when  he  became  great,  and  had 
conquered  Darius,  in  the  heading  of  all  his 
letters  he  left  off  the  word  Greeting,  except  in 
those  he  wrote  to  Phocion.  To  him,  and  to 
Antipater  alone,  he  condescended  to  use  it. 
This  also  is  stated  by  Chares. 

As  for  his  munificence  to  him,  it  is  well 
known  he  sent  him  a  present  at  one  time  of 
one  hundred  talents;  and  this  being  brought 
to  Athens,  Phocion  asked  of  the  bearers  how 
it  came  to  pass  that  among  all  the  Athenians 
he  alone  should  be  the  object  of  this  bounty. 
Being  told  that  Alexander  esteemed  him  alone 
a  person  of  honour  and  worth,  “Let  him, 

then, ”  said  he,  “permit  me  to  continue  so  and 
be  still  so  reputed.”  Following  him  to  his 
house,  and  observing  his  simple  and  plain  way 
of  living,  his  wife  employed  in  kneading  bread 
with  her  own  hands,  himself  drawing  water 
to  wash  his  feet,  they  pressed  him  to  accept 
it,  with  some  indignation,  being  ashamed,  as 
they  said,  that  Alexander’s  friend  should  live 
so  poorly  and  pitifully.  So  Phocion,  pointing 
out  to  them  a  poor  old  fellow,  in  a  dirty  worn- 
out  coat,  passing  by,  asked  them  if  they  thought 
him  in  worse  condition  than  this  man.  They 
bade  him  not  mention  such  a  comparison. 
“Yet,”  said  Phocion,  “he,  with  less  to  live  upon 
than  I,  finds  it  sufficient,  and,  in  brief,”  he  con¬ 
tinued,  “if  I  do  not  use  this  money,  what  good 
is  there  in  my  having  it;  and  if  I  do  use  it,  I 
shall  procure  an  ill  name,  both  for  myself  and 
for  Alexander,  among  my  countrymen.” 


612 

So  the  treasure  went  back  again  from 
Athens,  to  prove  to  Greece,  by  a  signal  ex¬ 
ample,  that  he  who  could  afford  to  give  so 
magnificent  a  present,  was  yet  not  so  rich  as  he 
who  could  afford  to  refuse  it.  And  when  Alex¬ 
ander  was  displeased,  and  wrote  back  to  him 
to  say  that  he  could  not  esteem  those  his 
friends  who  would  not  be  obliged  by  him,  not 
even  would  this  induce  Phocion  to  accept  the 
money,  but  he  begged  leave  to  intercede  with 
him  in  behalf  of  Echecratides,  the  sophist,  and 
Athenodorus,  the  Imbrian,  as  also  for  Demara- 
tus  and  Sparton,  two  Rhodians,  who  had  been 
arrested  upon  some  charges,  and  were  in  cus¬ 
tody  at  Sardis.  This  was  instantly  granted  by 
Alexander,  and  they  were  set  at  liberty. 

Afterwards,  when  sending  Craterus  into 
Macedonia,  he  commanded  him  to  make  him 
an  offer  of  four  cities  in  Asia,  Cius,  Gergithus, 
Mylasa,  and  Elaea,  any  one  of  which,  at  his 
choice,  should  be  delivered  to  him;  insisting 
yet  more  positively  with  him,  and  declaring  he 
should  resent  it,  should  he  continue  obstinate 
in  his  refusal.  But  Phocion  was  not  to  be  pre¬ 
vailed  with  at  all,  and,  shortly  after,  Alexander 
died. 

Phocion ’s  house  is  shown  to  this  day  in 
Melita,  ornamented  with  small  plates  of  cop¬ 
per,  but  otherwise  plain  and  homely.  Concern¬ 
ing  his  wives,  of  the  first  of  them  there  is  little 
said,  except  that  she  was  sister  of  Cephisodotus, 
the  statuary.  The  other  was  a  matron  of  no 
less  reputation  for  her  virtues  and  simple  liv¬ 
ing  among  the  Athenians  than  Phocion  was 
for  his  probity. 

It  happened  once  when  the  people  were  en¬ 
tertained  with  a  new  tragedy,  that  the  actor, 
just  as  he  was  to  enter  the  stage  to  perform 
the  part  of  a  queen,  demanded  to  have  a  num¬ 
ber  of  attendants  sumptuously  dressed,  to  fol¬ 
low  in  his  train,  and  on  their  not  being  pro¬ 
vided,  was  sullen  and  refused  to  act,  keeping 
the  audience  waiting,  till  at  last  Melanthius, 
who  had  to  furnish  the  chorus,  pushed  him 
on  the  stage,  crying  out,  “What,  don’t  you 
know  that  Phocion’s  wife  is  never  attended  by 
more  than  a  single  waiting-woman,  but  you 
must  needs  be  grand,  and  fill  our  women’s 
heads  with  vanity?”  This  speech  of  his,  spok¬ 
en  loud  enough  to  be  heard,  was  received  with 
great  applause,  and  clapped  all  round  the 
theatre.  She  herself,  when  once  entertaining  a 
visitor  out  of  Ionia,  who  showed  her  all  her  rich 
ornaments,  made  of  gold  and  set  with  jewels, 
her  wreaths,  necklaces,  and  the  like,  “For  my 
part,”  said  she,  “all  my  ornament  is  my  hus- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

band,  Phocion,  now  for  the  twentieth  year  in 
office  as  general  at  Athens.” 

He  had  a  son  named  Phocus,  who  wished  to 
take  part  in  the  games  at  the  great  feast  of 
Minerva.  He  permitted  him  so  to  do,  in  the 
contest  of  leaping,  not  with  any  view  to  the 
victory,  but  in  the  hope  that  the  training  and 
discipline  for  it  would  make  him  a  better  man, 
the  youth  being  in  a  general  way  a  lover  of 
drinking,  and  ill-regulated  in  his  habits.  On 
his  having  succeeded  in  the  sports,  many  were 
eager  for  the  honour  of  his  company  at  ban¬ 
quets  in  celebration  of  the  victory.  Phocion 
declined  all  these  invitations  but  one,  and 
when  he  came  to  this  entertainment  and  saw 
the  costly  preparations,  even  the  water  brought 
to  wash  the  guests’  feet  being  mingled  with 
wine  and  spices,  he  reprimanded  his  son,  ask¬ 
ing  him  why  he  would  so  far  permit  his  friend 
to  sully  the  honour  of  his  victory.  And  in  the 
hope  of  wholly  weaning  the  young  man  from 
such  habits  and  company,  he  sent  him  to  Lace¬ 
daemon,  and  placed  him  among  the  youths 
then  under  the  course  of  the  Spartan  disci¬ 
pline. 

This  the  Athenians  took  offence  at,  as 
though  he  slighted  and  contemned  the  educa¬ 
tion  at  home;  and  Demades  twitted  him  with 
it  publicly.  “Suppose,  Phocion,  you  and  I  ad¬ 
vise  the  Athenians  to  adopt  the  Spartan  con¬ 
stitution.  If  you  like,  I  am  ready  to  introduce 
a  bill  to  that  effect,  and  to  speak  in  its  favour.” 
“Indeed,”  said  Phocion,  “you,  with  that  strong 
scent  of  perfumes  about  you,  and  with  that 
mantle  on  your  shoulders,  are  just  the  very 
man  to  speak  in  honour  of  Lycurgus,  and 
recommend  the  Spartan  table.” 

When  Alexander  wrote  to  demand  a  supply 
of  galleys,  and  the  public  speakers  objected  to 
sending  them,  Phocion,  on  the  council  re¬ 
questing  his  opinion,  told  them  freely,  “Sirs, 
I  would  either  have  you  victorious  yourselves, 
or  friends  of  those  who  are  so.”  He  took  up 
Pytheas,  who  about  this  time  first  began  to 
address  the  assembly,  and  already  showed  him¬ 
self  a  confident,  talking  fellow,  by  saying  that 
a  young  slave  whom  the  people  had  but 
bought  yesterday  ought  to  have  the  manners 
to  hold  his  tongue. 

And  when  Harpalus,  who  had  fled  from 
Alexander  out  of  Asia,  carrying  off  a  large  sum 
of  money,  came  to  Attica,  and  there  was  a 
perfect  race  among  the  ordinary  public  men 
of  the  assembly  who  should  be  the  first  to  take 
his  pay,  he  distributed  amongst  these  some 
trifling  sums  by  way  of  a  bait  and  provocative, 


PHOCION 

but  to  Phocion  he  made  an  offer  of  no  less 
than  seven  hundred  talents  and  all  manner  of 
other  advantages  he  pleased  to  demand;  with 
the  compliment  that  he  would  entirely  commit 
himself  and  all  his  affairs  to  his  disposal.  Pho¬ 
cion  answered  sharply,  Harpalus  should  re¬ 
pent  of  it,  if  he  did  not  quickly  leave  off  cor¬ 
rupting  and  debauching  the  city,  which  for 
the  time  silenced  him,  and  checked  his  pro¬ 
ceedings. 

But  afterwards,  when  the  Athenians  were 
deliberating  in  council  about  him,  he  found 
those  that  had  received  money  from  him  to  be 
his  greatest  enemies,  urging  and  aggravating 
matters  against  him,  to  prevent  themselves 
being  discovered,  whereas  Phocion,  who  had 
never  touched  his  pay,  now,  so  far  as  the  pub¬ 
lic  interest  would  admit  of  it,  showed  some  re¬ 
gard  to  his  particular  security.  This  encour¬ 
aged  him  once  more  to  try  his  inclinations, 
and  upon  further  survey  finding  that  he  him¬ 
self  was  a  fortress,  inaccessible  on  every  quar¬ 
ter  to  the  approaches  of  corruption,  he  pro¬ 
fessed  a  particular  friendship  to  Phocion’s  son- 
in-law,  Charicles.  And  admitting  him  into  his 
confidence  in  all  his  affairs,  and  continually 
requesting  his  assistance,  he  brought  him  un¬ 
der  some  suspicion. 

Upon  the  occasion,  for  example,  of  the  death 
of  Pythonice,  who  was  Harpalus’s  mistress, 
for  whom  he  had  a  great  fondness,  and  had  a 
child  by  her,  he  resolved  to  build  her  a  sumptu¬ 
ous  monument,  and  committed  the  care  of  it 
to  his  friend  Charicles.  This  commission,  dis¬ 
reputable  enough  in  itself,  was  yet  further  dis¬ 
paraged  by  the  figure  the  piece  of  workman¬ 
ship  made  after  it  was  finished.  It  is  yet  to  be 
seen  in  the  Hermeum,  as  you  go  from  Athens 
to  Eleusis,  with  nothing  in  its  appearance  an¬ 
swerable  to  the  sum  of  thirty  talents,  with 
which  Charicles  is  said  to  have  charged  Har¬ 
palus  for  its  erection.  After  Harpalus’s  own 
decease,  his  daughter  was  educated  by  Phocion 
and  Charicles  with  great  care. 

But  when  Charicles  was  called  to  account 
for  his  dealings  with  Harpalus,  and  entreated 
his  father-in-law’s  protection,  begging  that  he 
would  appear  for  him  in  the  court,  Phocion  re¬ 
fused,  telling  him,  “I  did  not  choose  you  for 
my  son-in-law  for  any  but  honourable  pur¬ 
poses.” 

Asclepiades,  the  son  of  Hipparchus,  brought 
the  first  tidings  of  Alexander’s  death  to  Athens, 
which  Demades  told  them  was  not  to  be  cred¬ 
ited;  for  were  it  true,  the  whole  world  would 
ere  this  have  stunk  with  the  dead  body.  But 


613 

Phocion,  seeing  the  people  eager  for  an  in¬ 
stant  revolution,  did  his  best  to  quiet  and  re¬ 
press  them.  And  when  numbers  of  them 
rushed  up  to  the  hustings  to  speak,  and  cried 
out  that  the  news  was  true,  and  Alexander  was 
dead,  “If  he  is  dead  to-day,”  said  he,  “he  will 
be  so  to-morrow  and  the  day  after  to-morrow 
equally.  So  that  there  is  no  need  to  take  counsel 
hastily  or  before  it  is  safe.” 

When  Leosthenes  now  had  embarked  the 
city  in  the  Lamian  war,  greatly  against  Pho¬ 
cion’s  wishes,  to  raise  a  laugh  against  Phocion, 
he  asked  him  scoffingly,  what  the  state  had 
been  benefited  by  his  having  now  so  many 
years  been  general.  “It  is  not  a  little,”  said  Pho¬ 
cion,  “that  the  citizens  have  been  buried  in 
their  own  sepulchres.”  And  when  Leosthenes 
continued  to  speak  boldly  and  boastfully  in  the 
assembly,  “Young  man,”  he  said,  “your 
speeches  are  like  cypress-trees,  stately  and  tall, 
and  no  fruit  to  come  of  them.”  When  he  was 
then  attacked  by  Hyperides,  who  asked  him 
when  the  time  would  come  that  he  would  ad¬ 
vise  the  Athenians  to  make  war,  “As  soon,” 
said  he,  “as  I  find  the  young  men  keep  their 
ranks,  the  rich  men  contribute  their  money, 
and  the  orators  leave  off  robbing  the  treasury.” 
Afterwards,  when  many  admired  the  forces 
raised,  and  the  preparations  for  war  that  were 
made  by  Leosthenes,  they  asked  Phocion  how 
he  approved  of  the  new  levies.  “Very  well,” 
said  he,  “for  the  short  course;  but  what  I  fear 
is  the  long  race.  Since,  however  late  the  war 
may  last,  the  city  has  neither  money,  ships,  nor 
soldiers,  but  these.” 

The  event  justified  his  prognostics.  At  first 
all  things  appeared  fair  and  promising.  Leos¬ 
thenes  gained  great  reputation  by  worsting  the 
Boeotians  in  battle,  and  driving  Antipater  with¬ 
in  the  walls  of  Lamia,  and  the  citizens  were 
so  transported  with  the  first  successes,  that  they 
kept  solemn  festivities  for  them,  and  offered 
public  sacrifices  to  the  gods.  So  that  some, 
thinking  Phocion  must  now  be  convinced  of 
his  error,  asked  him  whether  he  would  not 
willingly  have  been  author  of  these  successful 
actions.  “Yes,”  said  he,  “most  gladly,  but  also 
of  the  former  counsel.”  And  when  one  ex¬ 
press  after  another  came  from  the  camp,  con¬ 
firming  and  magnifying  the  victories,  “When,” 
said  he,  “will  the  end  of  them  come?” 

Leosthenes,  soon  after,  was  killed,  and  now 
those  who  feared  lest  if  Phocion  obtained  the 
command  he  would  put  an  end  to  the  war,  ar¬ 
ranged  with  an  obscure  person  in  the  assembly, 
who  should  stand  up  and  profess  himself  to 


614 

be  a  friend  and  old  confidant  of  Phocion’s, 
and  persuade  the  people  to  spare  him  at  this 
time,  and  reserve  him  (with  whom  none  could 
compare)  for  a  more  pressing  occasion,  and 
now  to  give  Antiphilus  the  command  of  the 
army.  This  pleased  the  generality,  but  Phocion 
made  it  appear  he  was  so  far  from  having  any 
friendship  with  him  of  old  standing,  that  he 
had  not  so  much  as  the  least  familiarity  with 
him;  “Yet  now,  sir,”  says  he,  “give  me  leave 
to  put  you  down  among  the  number  of  my 
friends  and  well-wishers,  as  you  have  given  a 
piece  of  advice  so  much  to  my  advantage.” 

When  the  people  were  eager  to  make  an  ex¬ 
pedition  against  the  Boeotians,  he  at  first  op¬ 
posed  it;  and  on  his  friends  telling  him  the 
people  would  kill  him  for  always  running 
counter  to  them,  “That  will  be  unjust  of 
them,”  he  said,  “if  I  give  them  honest  advice; 
if  not,  it  will  be  just  of  them.”  But  when  he 
found  them  persisting  and  shouting  to  him 
to  lead  them  out,  he  commanded  the  crier  to 
make  proclamation  that  all  the  Athenians  un¬ 
der  sixty  should  instantly  provide  themselves 
with  five  days’  provision,  and  follow  him  from 
the  assembly.  This  caused  a  great  tumult. 
Those  in  years  were  startled,  and  clamoured 
against  the  order;  he  demanded  wherein  he 
injured  them,  “For  I,”  says  he,  “am  now  four¬ 
score,  and  am  ready  to  lead  you.”  This  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  pacifying  them  for  the  present. 

But  when  Micion,  with  a  large  force  of 
Macedonians  and  mercenaries,  began  to  pillage 
the  sea-coast,  having  made  a  descent  upon 
Rhamnus,  and  overrun  the  neighbouring 
country,  Phocion  led  out  the  Athenians  to  at¬ 
tack  him.  And  when  sundry  private  persons 
came,  intermeddling  with  his  dispositions,  and 
telling  him  that  he  ought  to  occupy  such  or 
such  a  hill,  detach  the  cavalry  in  this  or  that  di¬ 
rection,  engage  the  enemy  on  this  point  or  that, 
“O  Hercules,”  said  he,  “how  many  generals 
have  we  here,  and  how  few  soldiers!”  After¬ 
wards,  having  formed  the  battle,  one  who 
wished  to  show  his  bravery  advanced  out  of  his 
post  before  the  rest,  but  on  the  enemy’s  ap¬ 
proaching,  lost  heart,  and  retired  back  into  his 
rank.  “Young  man,”  said  Phocion,  “are  you 
not  ashamed  twice  in  one  day  to  desert  your 
station,  first  that  on  which  I  had  placed  you, 
and  secondly  that  on  which  you  had  placed 
yourself?” 

However,  he  entirely  routed  the  enemy,  kill¬ 
ing  Micion  and  many  more  on  the  spot.  The 
Grecian  army,  also,  in  Thessaly,  after  Leon- 
natus  and  the  Macedonians  who  came  with 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

him  out  of  Asia  had  arrived  and  joined  Anti¬ 
pater,  fought  and  beat  them  in  a  battle.  Leon- 
natus  was  killed  in  the  fight,  Antiphilus  com¬ 
manding  the  foot,  and  Menon,  the  Thessalian, 
the  horse. 

But  not  long  after,  Craterus  crossed  from 
Asia  with  numerous  forces;  a  pitched  battle 
was  fought  at  Cranon;  the  Greeks  were  beat¬ 
en;  though  not,  indeed,  in  a  signal  defeat,  nor 
with  any  great  loss  of  men.  But  what  with 
their  want  of  obedience  to  their  commanders, 
who  were  young  and  over-indulgent  with 
them,  and  what  with  Antipater’s  tampering 
and  treating  with  their  separate  cities,  one 
by  one,  the  end  of  it  was  that  the  army  was 
dissolved,  and  the  Greeks  shamefully  surren¬ 
dered  the  liberty  of  their  country. 

Upon  the  news  of  Antipater’s  now  advanc¬ 
ing  at  once  against  Athens,  with  all  his  force, 
Demosthenes  and  Hyperides  deserted  the  city, 
and  Demades,  who  was  altogether  insolvent 
for  any  part  of  the  fines  that  had  been  laid  up¬ 
on  him  by  the  city,  for  he  had  been  condemned 
no  less  than  seven  times  for  introducing  bills 
contrary  to  the  laws,  and  who  had  been  dis¬ 
franchised,  and  was  no  longer  competent  to 
vote  in  the  assembly,  laid  hold  of  this  season 
of  impunity  to  bring  in  a  bill  for  sending  am¬ 
bassadors  with  plenipotentiary  power  to  Anti¬ 
pater,  to  treat  about  a  peace.  But  the  people 
distrusted  him,  and  called  upon  Phocion  to 
give  his  opinion,  as  the  person  they  only  and 
entirely  confided  in.  He  told  them,  “If  my  for¬ 
mer  counsels  had  been  prevalent  with  you,  we 
had  not  been  reduced  to  deliberate  on  the  ques¬ 
tion  at  all.”  However,  the  vote  passed;  and  a 
decree  was  made,  and  he  with  others  deputed 
to  go  to  Antipater,  who  lay  now  encamped  in 
the  Theban  territories,  but  intended  to  dis¬ 
lodge  immediately,  and  pass  into  Attica. 

Phocion’s  first  request  was  that  he  would 
make  the  treaty  without  moving  his  camp. 
And  when  Craterus  declared  that  it  was  not 
fair  to  ask  them  to  be  burdensome  to  the 
country  of  their  friends  and  allies  by  their 
stay,  when  they  might  rather  use  that  of  their 
enemies  for  provisions  and  the  support  of  their 
army,  Antipater,  taking  him  by  the  hand  said, 
“We  must  grant  this  favour  to  Phocion.”  For 
the  rest  he  bade  them  return  to  their  principals, 
and  acquaint  them  that  he  could  only  offer 
them  the  same  terms,  namely,  to  surrender  at 
discretion,  which  Leosthenes  had  offered  to 
him  when  he  was  shut  up  in  Lamia. 

When  Phocion  had  returned  to  the  city  and 
acquainted  them  with  this  answer,  they  made 


PHOCION 

a  virtue  of  necessity  and  complied,  since  it 
would  be  no  better.  So  Phocion  returned  to 
Thebes  with  the  other  ambassadors,  and 
among  the  rest  Xenocrates,  the  philosopher, 
the  reputation  of  whose  virtue  and  wisdom 
was  so  great  and  famous  everywhere,  that  they 
conceived  there  could  not  be  any  pride,  cruelty, 
or  anger  arising  in  the  heart  of  man,  which 
would  not  at  the  mere  sight  of  him  be  sub¬ 
dued  into  something  of  reverence  and  admira¬ 
tion.  But  the  result,  as  it  happened,  was  the 
very  opposite,  Antipater  showed  such  a  want 
of  feeling,  and  such  a  dislike  of  goodness.  He 
saluted  every  one  else,  but  would  not  so  much 
as  notice  Xenocrates.  Xenocrates,  they  tell  us, 
observed  upon  it  that  Antipater,  when  meditat¬ 
ing  such  cruelty  to  Athens,  did  well  to  be 
ashamed  of  seeing  him.  When  he  began  to 
speak,  he  would  not  hear  him,  but  broke  in 
and  rudely  interrupted  him,  until  at  last  he  was 
obliged  to  be  silent. 

But  when  Phocion  had  declared  the  purport 
of  their  embassy,  he  replied  shortly,  that  he 
would  make  peace  with  the  Athenians  on  these 
conditions,  and  no  others:  that  Demosthenes 
and  Hyperides  should  be  delivered  up  to  him; 
that  they  should  retain  their  ancient  form  of 
government,  the  franchise  being  determined 
by  a  property  qualification;  that  they  should 
receive  a  garrison  into  Munychia,  and  pay  a 
certain  sum  for  the  cost  of  the  war.  As  things 
stood,  these  terms  were  judged  tolerable  by  the 
rest  of  the  ambassadors;  Xenocrates  only  said, 
that  if  Antipater  considered  the  Athenians 
slaves,  he  was  treating  them  fairly;  but  if 
free,  severely.  Phocion  pressed  him  only  to 
spare  them  the  garrison,  and  used  many  ar¬ 
guments  and  entreaties.  Antipater  replied, 
“Phocion,  we  are  ready  to  do  you  any  favour 
which  will  not  bring  ruin  both  on  ourselves 
and  on  you.” 

Others  report  it  differently:  that  Antipater 
asked  Phocion,  supposing  he  remitted  the  gar¬ 
rison  to  the  Athenians,  would  he,  Phocion, 
stand  surety  for  the  city’s  observing  the  terms 
and  attempting  no  revolution.  And  when  he 
hesitated,  and  did  not  at  once  reply,  Callime- 
don,  the  Carabus,  a  hot  partisan  and  professed 
enemy  of  free  states,  cried  out,  “And  if  he 
should  talk  so  idly,  Antipater,  will  you  be  so 
much  abused  as  to  believe  him  and  not  carry 
out  your  own  purpose?”  So  the  Athenians  re¬ 
ceived  the  garrison,  and  Menyllus  for  the  gov¬ 
ernor,  a  fair-dealing  man,  and  one  of  Phocion’s 
acquaintance. 

But  the  proceeding  seemed  sufficiently  im- 


615 

perious  and  arbitrary,  indeed  rather  a  spiteful 
and  insulting  ostentation  of  power  than  that 
the  possession  of  the  fortress  would  be  of  any 
great  importance.  The  resentment  felt  upon  it 
was  heightened  by  the  time  it  happened  in,  for 
the  garrison  was  brought  in  on  the  twentieth 
of  the  month  of  Boedromion,  just  at  the  time 
of  the  great  festival,  when  they  carry  forth  Iac- 
chus  with  solemn  pomp  from  the  city  to  Eleu- 
sis;so  that  the  solemnity  being  disturbed,  many 
began  to  call  to  mind  instances,  both  ancient 
and  modern,  of  divine  interventions  and  inti¬ 
mations.  For  in  old  time,  upon  the  occasions  of 
their  happiest  successes,  the  presence  of  the 
shapes  and  voices  of  the  mystic  ceremonies  had 
been  vouchsafed  to  them,  striking  terror  and 
amazement  into  their  enemies;  but  now,  at  the 
very  season  of  their  celebration,  the  gods  them¬ 
selves  stood  witnesses  of  the  saddest  oppres¬ 
sions  of  Greece,  the  most  holy  time  being  pro¬ 
faned,  and  their  greatest  jubilee  made  the  un¬ 
lucky  date  of  their  most  extreme  calamity. 

Not  many  years  before,  they  had  a  warning 
from  the  oracle  at  Dodona  that  they  should 
carefully  guard  the  summits  of  Diana,  lest  hap¬ 
ly  strangers  should  seize  them.  And  about  this 
very  time,  when  they  dyed  the  ribbons  and 
garlands  with  which  they  adorn  the  couches 
and  cars  of  the  procession,  instead  of  a  purple, 
they  received  only  a  faint  yellow  colour;  and 
to  make  the  omen  yet  greater,  all  the  things 
that  were  dyed  for  common  use,  took  the  natu¬ 
ral  colour.  While  a  candidate  for  initiation  was 
washing  a  young  pig  in  the  haven  of  Cantha- 
rus,  a  shark  seized  him,  bit  off  all  his  lower 
parts  up  to  the  belly,  and  devoured  them,  by 
which  the  god  gave  them  manifestly  to  un¬ 
derstand,  that  having  lost  the  lower  town 
and  seacoast,  they  should  keep  only  the  up¬ 
per  city. 

Menyllus  was  sufficient  security  that  the  gar¬ 
rison  should  behave  itself  inoffensively.  But 
those  who  were  now  excluded  from  the  fran¬ 
chise  by  poverty  amounted  to  more  than  twelve 
thousand;  so  that  both  those  that  remained  in 
the  city  thought  themselves  oppressed  and 
shamefully  used,  and  those  who  on  this  account 
left  their  homes  and  went  away  into  Thrace, 
where  Antipater  offered  them  a  town  and  some 
territory  to  inhabit,  regarded  themselves  only 
as  a  colony  of  slaves  and  exiles.  And  when  to 
this  was  added  the  deaths  of  Demosthenes  at 
Calauria,  and  of  Hyperides  at  Cleonae,  as  we 
have  elsewhere  related,  the  citizens  began  to 
think  with  regret  of  Philip  and  Alexander,  and 
almost  to  wish  the  return  of  those  times. 


616 

And  as,  after  Antigonus  was  slain,  when 
those  that  had  taken  him  off  were  afflicting 
and  oppressing  the  people,  a  countryman  in 
Phrygia,  digging  in  the  fields,  was  asked  what 
he  was  doing,  “I  am,”  said  he,  fetching  a  deep 
sigh,  “searching  for  Antigonus”;  so  said  many 
that  remembered  those  days,  and  the  contests 
they  had  with  those  kings,  whose  anger,  how¬ 
ever  great,  was  yet  generous  and  placable; 
whereas  Antipater,  with  the  counterfeit  hu¬ 
mility  of  appearing  like  a  private  man,  in  the 
meanness  of  his  dress  and  his  homely  fare, 
merely  belied  his  real  love  of  that  arbitrary 
power,  which  he  exercised,  as  a  cruel  master 
and  despot,  to  distress  those  under  his  com¬ 
mand. 

Yet  Phocion  had  interest  with  him  to  recall 
many  from  banishment  by  his  intercession,  and 
prevailed  also  for  those  who  were  driven  out, 
that  they  might  not,  like  others,  be  hurried  be¬ 
yond  Taenarus,  and  the  mountains  of  Cerau- 
nia,  but  remain  in  Greece,  and  plant  them¬ 
selves  in  Peloponnesus,  of  which  number  was 
Agnonides,  the  sycophant.  He  was  no  less  stu¬ 
dious  to  manage  the  affairs  within  the  city  with 
equity  and  moderation,  preferring  constantly 
those  that  were  men  of  worth  and  good  educa¬ 
tion  to  the  magistracies,  and  recommending 
the  busy  and  turbulent  talkers,  to  whom  it  was 
a  mortal  blow  to  be  excluded  from  office  and 
public  debating,  to  learn  to  stay  at  home,  and 
be  content  to  till  their  land.  And  observing 
that  Xenocrates  paid  his  alien-tax  as  a  foreign¬ 
er,  he  offered  him  the  freedom  of  the  city, 
which  he  refused,  saying  he  could  not  accept  a 
franchise  which  he  had  been  sent  as  an  ambas¬ 
sador  to  deprecate. 

Menyllus  wished  to  give  Phocion  a  consider¬ 
able  present  of  money,  who,  thanking  him,  said 
neither  was  Menyllus  greater  than  Alexander, 
nor  his  own  occasions  more  urgent  to  receive 
it  now  than  when  he  refused  it  from  him. 
And  on  his  pressing  him  to  permit  his  son  Pho- 
cus  to  receive  it,  he  replied,  “If  my  son  returns 
to  a  right  mind,  his  patrimony  is  sufficient;  if 
not,  all  supplies  will  be  insufficient.”  But  to 
Antipater  he  answered  more  sharply,  who 
would  have  him  engaged  in  something  dis¬ 
honourable.  “Antipater,”  said  he,  “cannot  have 
me  both  as  his  friend  and  his  flatterer.”  And, 
indeed,  Antipater  was  wont  to  say  he  had  two 
friends  at  Athens,  Phocion  and  Demades;  the 
one  would  never  suffer  him  to  gratify  him  at 
all,  the  other  would  never  be  satisfied.  Phocion 
might  well  think  that  poverty  a  virtue,  in 
which,  after  having  so  often  been  general  of 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  Athenians,  and  admitted  to  the  friendship 
of  potentates  and  princes,  he  had  now  grown 
old. 

Demades,  meantime,  delighted  in  lavishing 
his  wealth  even  in  positive  transgressions  of 
the  law.  For  there  having  been  an  order  that 
no  foreigner  should  be  hired  to  dance  in  any 
chorus  on  the  penalty  of  a  fine  of  one  thousand 
drachmas  on  the  exhibitor,  he  had  the  vanity 
to  exhibit  an  entire  chorus  of  a  hundred  for¬ 
eigners,  and  paid  down  the  penalty  of  a  thou¬ 
sand  drachmas  a  head  upon  the  stage  itself. 
Marrying  his  son  Demeas,  he  told  him  with 
the  like  vanity,  “My  son,  when  I  married  your 
mother,  it  was  done  so  privately  it  was  not 
known  to  the  next  neighbours,  but  kings  and 
princes  give  presents  at  your  nuptials.” 

The  garrison  in  Munychia  continued  to  be 
felt  as  a  great  grievance,  and  the  Athenians 
did  not  cease  to  be  importunate  upon  Phocion, 
to  prevail  with  Antipater  for  its  removal;  but 
whether  he  despaired  of  effecting  it,  or  per¬ 
haps  observed  the  people  to  be  more  orderly, 
and  public  matters  more  reasonably  conducted 
by  the  awe  that  was  thus  created,  he  constantly 
declined  the  office,  and  contented  himself  with 
obtaining  from  Antipater  the  postponement 
for  the  present  of  the  payment  of  the  sum  of 
money  in  which  the  city  was  fined. 

So  the  people,  leaving  him  off,  applied  them¬ 
selves  to  Demades,  who  readily  undertook  the 
employment,  and  took  along  with  him  his  son 
also  into  Macedonia;  and  some  superior  power, 
as  it  seems,  so  ordering  it,  he  came  just  at  that 
nick  of  time  when  Antipater  was  already  seized 
with  his  sickness,  and  Cassander,  taking  upon 
himself  the  command,  had  found  a  letter  of 
Demades’s,  formerly  written  by  him  to  Antig¬ 
onus  in  Asia,  recommending  him  to  come 
and  possess  himself  of  the  empire  of  Greece 
and  Macedon,  now  hanging,  he  said  (a  scoff 
at  Antipater),  “by  an  old  and  rotten  thread.” 
So  when  Cassander  saw  him  come,  he  seized 
him;  and  first  brought  out  the  son,  and  killed 
him  so  close  before  his  face  that  the  blood  ran 
all  over  his  clothes  and  person,  and  then,  after 
bitterly  taunting  and  upbraiding  him  with  his 
ingratitude  and  treachery,  despatched  him 
himself. 

Antipater  being  dead,  after  nominating 
Polysperchon  general-in-chief  and  Cassander 
commander  of  the  cavalry,  Cassander  at  once 
set  up  for  himself,  and  immediately  despatch¬ 
ed  Nicanor  to  Menyllus,  to  succeed  him  in  the 
command  of  the  garrison,  commanding  him 
to  possess  himself  of  Munychia  before  the 


PHOCION 

news  of  Antipater’s  death  should  be  heard; 
which  being  done,  and  some  days  after  the 
Athenians  hearing  the  report  of  it,  Phocion 
was  taxed  as  privy  to  it  before  and  censured 
heavily  for  dissembling  it,  out  of  friendship 
for  Nicanor.  But  he  slighted  their  talk,  and 
making  it  his  duty  to  visit  and  confer  contin¬ 
ually  with  Nicanor,  he  succeeded  in  procuring 
his  good-will  and  kindness  for  the  Athenians, 
and  induced  him  even  to  put  himself  to 
trouble  and  expense  to  seek  popularity  with 
them,  by  undertaking  the  office  of  presiding 
at  the  games. 

In  the  meantime  Polysperchon,  who  was  in¬ 
trusted  with  the  charge  of  the  king,  to  counter¬ 
mine  Cassander,  sent  a  letter  to  the  city,  de¬ 
claring,  in  the  name  of  the  king,  that  he  re¬ 
stored  them  their  democracy,  and  that  the 
whole  Athenian  people  were  at  liberty  to  con¬ 
duct  their  commonwealth  according  to  their 
ancient  customs  and  constitutions.  The  object 
of  these  pretences  was  merely  the  overthrow 
of  Phocion’s  influence,  as  the  event  manifested. 
For  Polysperchon’s  design  being  to  possess 
himself  of  the  city,  he  despaired  altogether  of 
bringing  it  to  pass  whilst  Phocion  retained  his 
credit;  and  the  most  certain  way  to  ruin 
him  would  be  again  to  fill  the  city  with  a 
crowd  of  disfranchised  citizens,  and  let  loose 
the  tongues  of  the  demagogues  and  common 
accusers. 

With  this  prospect  the  Athenians  were  all  in 
excitement,  and  Nicanor,  wishing  to  confer 
with  them  on  the  subject,  at  a  meeting  of  the 
council  in  Piraeus,  came  himself,  trusting  for 
the  safety  of  his  person  to  Phocion.  And  when 
Dercyllus,  who  commanded  the  guard  there, 
made  an  attempt  to  seize  him,  upon  notice  of 
it  beforehand,  he  made  his  escape,  and  there 
was  little  doubt  he  would  now  lose  no  time  in 
righting  himself  upon  the  city  for  the  affront; 
and  when  Phocion  was  found  fault  with  for 
letting  him  get  off  and  not  securing  him,  he 
defended  himself  by  saying  that  he  had  no  mis¬ 
trust  of  Nicanor,  nor  the  least  reason  to  expect 
any  mischief  from  him,  but  should  it  prove 
otherwise,  for  his  part  he  would  have  them  all 
know,  he  would  rather  receive  than  do  the 
wrong. 

And  so  far  as  he  spoke  for  himself  alone,  the 
answer  was  honourable  and  high-minded 
enough,  but  he  who  hazards  his  country’s  safe¬ 
ty,  and  that,  too,  when  he  is  her  magistrate  and 
chief  commander,  can  scarcely  be  acquitted,  I 
fear,  of  transgressing  a  higher  and  more  sacred 
obligation  of  justice,  which  he  owed  to  his  fel- 


617 

low-citizens.  For  it  will  not  even  do  to  say  that 
he  dreaded  involving  the  city  in  war,  by  seiz¬ 
ing  Nicanor,  and  hoped  by  professions  of 
confidence  and  just-dealing  to  retain  him  in  the 
observance  of  the  like;  but  it  was,  indeed,  his 
credulity  and  confidence  in  him,  and  an  over¬ 
weening  opinion  of  his  sincerity,  that  imposed 
upon  him. 

Thus,  notwithstanding  the  sundry  intima¬ 
tions  he  had  of  his  making  preparations  to  at¬ 
tack  Piraeus,  sending  soldiers  over  into  Salamis, 
and  tampering  with  and  endeavouring  to  cor¬ 
rupt  various  residents  in  Piraeus,  he  would,  not¬ 
withstanding  all  this  evidence,  never  be  per¬ 
suaded  to  believe  it.  And  even  when  Philo- 
medes  of  Lampra  had  got  a  decree  passed,  that 
all  the  Athenians  should  stand  to  their  arms, 
and  be  ready  to  follow  Phocion  their  general, 
he  yet  sat  still  and  did  nothing,  until  Nicanor 
actually  led  his  troops  out  from  Munychia,  and 
drew  trenches  about  Piraeus;  upon  which, 
when  Phocion  at  last  would  have  let  out  the 
Athenians,  they  cried  out  against  him,  and 
slighted  his  orders. 

Alexander,  the  son  of  Polysperchon,  was  at 
hand  with  a  considerable  force,  and  professed 
to  come  to  give  them  succour  against  Nicanor, 
but  intended  nothing  less,  if  possible,  than  to 
surprise  the  city,  whilst  they  were  in  tumult 
and  divided  among  themselves.  For  all  that 
had  previously  been  expelled  from  the  city, 
now  coming  back  with  him,  made  their  way 
into  it,  and  were  joined  by  a  mixed  multitude 
of  foreigners  and  disfranchised  persons,  and  of 
these  a  motley  and  irregular  public  assembly 
came  together,  in  which  they  presently  divested 
Phocion  of  all  power,  and  chose  other  generals: 
and  if  by  chance  Alexander  had  not  been  spied 
from  the  walls,  alone  in  close  conference  with 
Nicanor,  and  had  not  this,  which  was  often  re¬ 
peated,  given  the  Athenians  cause  of  suspicion, 
the  city  had  not  escaped  the  snare. 

The  orator  Agnonides,  however,  at  once  fell 
foul  upon  Phocion,  and  impeached  him  of  trea¬ 
son;  Callimedon  and  Charicles,  fearing  the 
worst,  consulted  their  own  security  by  fleeing 
from  the  city.  Phocion,  with  a  few  of  his 
friends  that  stayed  with  him,  went  over  to  Poly¬ 
sperchon,  and  out  of  respect  for  him,  Solon  of 
Plataea,  and  Dinarchus  of  Corinth,  who  were 
reputed  friends  and  confidants  of  Polysper¬ 
chon,  accompanied  him.  But  on  account  of 
Dinarchus  falling  ill,  they  remained  several 
days  in  Elatea,  during  which  time,  upon  the 
persuasion  of  Agnonides  and  on  the  motion  of 
Archestratus,  a  decree  passed  that  the  people 


618 

should  send  delegates  thither  to  accuse  Phoci- 
on.  So  both  parties  reached  Polysperchon  at  the 
same  time,  who  was  going  through  the  coun¬ 
try  with  the  king,  and  was  then  at  a  small  vil¬ 
lage  of  Phocis,  Pharyga!,  under  the  mountain 
now  called  Galate,  but  then  Acrurium. 

There  Polysperchon,  having  set  up  the  gold¬ 
en  canopy,  and  seated  the  king  and  his  com¬ 
pany  under  it,  ordered  Dinarchus  at  once  to  be 
taken,  and  tortured,  and  put  to  death;  and  that 
done,  gave  audience  to  the  Athenians,  who 
filled  the  place  with  noise  and  tumult,  accus¬ 
ing  and  recriminating  on  one  another,  till  at 
last  Agnonides  came  forward,  and  requested 
they  might  all  be  shut  up  together  in  one  cage, 
and  conveyed  to  Athens,  there  to  decide  the 
controversy.  At  that  the  king  could  not  forbear 
smiling,  but  the  company  that  attended,  for 
their  own  amusement,  Macedonians  and  stran¬ 
gers,  were  eager  to  hear  the  altercation,  and 
made  signs  to  the  delegates  to  go  on  with  their 
case  at  once.  But  it  was  no  sort  of  fair  hearing. 
Polysperchon  frequently  interrupted  Phocion, 
till  at  last  Phocion  struck  his  staff  on  the 
grounds  and  declined  to  speak  further.  And 
when  Hegemon  said,  Polysperchon  himself 
could  bear  witness  to  his  affection  for  the  peo¬ 
ple,  Polysperchon  called  out  fiercely,  “Give 
over  slandering  me  to  the  king,”  and  the  king 
starting  up  was  about  to  have  run  him  through 
with  his  javelin,  but  Polysperchon  interposed 
and  hindered  him;  so  that  the  assembly  dis¬ 
solved. 

Phocion,  then,  and  those  about  him,  were 
seized;  those  of  his  friends  that  were  not  im¬ 
mediately  by  him,  on  seeing  this,  hid  their 
faces,  and  saved  themselves  by  flight.  The  rest 
Clitus  took  and  brought  to  Athens,  to  be  sub¬ 
mitted  to  trial,  but,  in  truth,  as  men  already 
sentenced  to  die.  The  manner  of  conveying 
them  was  indeed  extremely  moving;  they  were 
carried  in  chariots  through  the  Ceramicus, 
straight  to  the  place  of  judicature,  where  Clitus 
secured  them  till  they  had  convoked  an  assem¬ 
bly  of  the  people,  which  was  open  to  all  com¬ 
ers,  neither  foreigners,  nor  slaves,  nor  those 
who  had  been  punished  with  disfranchisement 
being  refused  admittance,  but  all  alike,  both 
men  and  women,  being  allowed  to  come  into 
the  court,  and  even  upon  the  place  of  speaking. 
So  having  read  the  king’s  letters,  in  which  he 
declared  he  was  satisfied  himself  that  these  men 
were  traitors,  however,  they  being  a  free  city, 
he  willingly  accorded  them  the  grace  of  trying 
and  judging  them  according  to  their  own  laws, 
Clitus  brought  in  his  prisoners. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Every  respectable  citizen,  at  the  sight  of  Pho¬ 
cion,  covered  up  his  face,  and  stooped  down  to 
conceal  his  tears.  And  one  of  them  had  the 
courage  to  say,  that  since  the  king  had  com¬ 
mitted  so  important  a  cause  to  the  judgment 
of  the  people,  it  would  be  well  that  the  stran¬ 
gers,  and  those  of  servile  condition,  should 
withdraw.  But  the  populace  would  not  endure 
it,  crying  out  they  were  oligarchs,  and  enemies 
to  the  liberty  of  the  people,  and  deserved  to  be 
stoned;  after  which  no  man  durst  offer  any¬ 
thing  further  in  Phocion’s  behalf.  He  was  him¬ 
self  with  difficulty  heard  at  all,  when  he  put 
the  question,  “Do  you  wish  to  put  us  to  death 
lawfully  or  unlawfully?”  Some  answered,  “Ac¬ 
cording  to  law.”  He  replied,  “How  can  you, 
except  we  have  a  fair  hearing?”  But  when  they 
were  deaf  to  all  he  said,  approaching  nearer, 
“As  to  myself,”  said  he,  “I  admit  my  guilt,  and 
pronounce  my  public  conduct  to  have  deserved 
sentence  of  death.  But  why,  O  men  of  Athens, 
kill  others  who  have  offended  in  nothing?” 
The  rabble  cried  out  that  they  were  his 
friends;  that  was  enough.  Phocion  therefore 
drew  back,  and  said  no  more. 

Then  Agnonides  read  the  bill,  in  accordance 
with  which  the  people  should  decide  by  show 
of  hands  whether  they  judged  them  guilty,  and 
if  so  it  should  be  found,  the  penalty  should  be 
death.  When  this  had  been  read  out,  some  de¬ 
sired  it  might  be  added  to  the  sentence,  that 
Phocion  should  be  tortured  also,  and  the  rack 
should  be  produced  with  the  executioners.  But 
Agnonides  perceiving  even  Clitus  to  dislike 
this,  and  himself  thinking  it  horrid  and  bar¬ 
barous,  said,  “When  we  catch  that  slave,  Cal- 
limedon,  men  of  Athens,  we  will  put  him  to 
the  rack,  but  I  shall  make  no  motion  of  the 
kind  in  Phocion’s  case.”  Upon  which  one  of 
the  better  citizens  remarked,  he  was  quite 
right;  “If  he  should  torture  Phocion,  what 
could  we  do  to  you?”  So  the  form  of  the  bill 
was  approved  of,  and  the  show  of  hands  called 
for;  upon  which,  not  one  man  retaining  his 
seat,  but  all  rising  up,  and  some  with  garlands 
on  their  heads,  they  condemned  them  all  to 
death. 

There  were  present  with  Phocion,  Nicocles, 
Thudippus,  Hegemon,  and  Pythocles.  Deme¬ 
trius  the  Phalerian,  Callimedon,  Charicles,  and 
some  others,  were  included  in  the  condemna¬ 
tion,  being  absent. 

After  the  assembly  was  dismissed,  they  were 
carried  to  the  prison;  the  rest  with  cries  and 
lamentations,  their  friends  and  relatives  follow¬ 
ing  and  clinging  about  them,  but  Phocion 


PHOCION 

looking  (as  men  observed  with  astonishment 
at  his  calmness  and  magnanimity),  just  the 
same  as  when  he  had  been  used  to  return  to 
his  home  attended,  as  general,  from  the  assem¬ 
bly.  His  enemies  ran  along  by  his  side,  reviling 
and  abusing  him.  And  one  of  them  coming  up 
to  him,  spat  in  his  face;  at  which  Phocion, 
turning  to  the  officers,  only  said,  “You  should 
stop  this  indecency.” 

Thudippus,  on  their  reaching  the  prison, 
when  he  observed  the  executioner  tempering 
the  poison  and  preparing  it  for  them,  gave 
away  to  his  passion,  and  began  to  bemoan  his 
condition  and  the  hard  measure  he  received, 
thus  unjustly  to  suffer  with  Phocion.  “You  can¬ 
not  be  contented,”  said  he,  “to  die  with  Pho¬ 
cion?”  One  of  his  friends  that  stood  by,  asked 
him  if  he  wished  to  have  anything  said  to  his 
son.  “Yes,  by  all  means,”  said  he,  “bid  him 
bear  no  grudge  against  the  Athenians.”  Then 
Nicocles,  the  dearest  and  most  faithful  of  his 
friends,  begged  to  be  allowed  to  drink  the  poi¬ 
son  first.  “My  friend,”  said  he,  “you  ask  what 
I  am  loath  and  sorrowful  to  give,  but  as  I  never 
yet  in  all  my  life  was  so  thankless  as  to  refuse 
you,  I  must  gratify  you  in  this  also.”  After  they 
had  all  drunk  of  it,  the  poison  ran  short;  and 
the  executioner  refused  to  prepare  more,  ex¬ 
cept  they  would  pay  him  twelve  drachmas, 
to  defray  the  cost  of  the  quantity  required. 
Some  delay  was  made,  and  time  spent,  when 
Phocion  called  one  of  his  friends,  and  observ¬ 
ing  that  a  man  could  not  even  die  at  Athens 
without  paying  for  it,  requested  him  to  give 
the  sum. 

It  was  the  nineteenth  day  of  the  month 
Munychion,  on  which  it  was  the  usage  to  have 
a  solemn  procession  in  the  city,  in  honour  of 
Jupiter.  The  horsemen,  as  they  passed  by,  some 
of  them  threw  away  their  garlands,  others 
stopped,  weeping,  and  casting  sorrowful  looks 
towards  the  prison  doors,  and  all  the  citizens 
whose  minds  were  not  absolutely  debauched 
by  spite  and  passion,  or  who  had  any  human¬ 
ity  left,  acknowledged  it  to  have  been  most  im¬ 
piously  done,  not,  at  least,  to  let  that  day  pass, 
and  the  city  so  be  kept  pure  from  death  and  a 
public  execution  at  the  solemn  festival.  But  as 
if  this  triumph  had  been  insufficient,  the  mal- 


619 

ice  of  Phocion’s  enemies  went  yet  further;  his 
dead  body  was  excluded  from  burial  within  the 
boundaries  of  the  country,  and  none  of  the 
Athenians  could  light  a  funeral  pile  to  burn 
the  corpse;  neither  durst  any  of  his  friends  ven¬ 
ture  to  concern  themselves  about  it. 

A  certain  Conopion,  a  man  who  used  to  do 
these  offices  for  hire,  took  the  body  and  carried 
it  beyond  Eleusis,  and  procuring  fire  from  over 
the  frontier  of  Megara,  burned  it.  Phocion’s 
wife,  with  her  servant-maids,  being  present 
and  assisting  at  the  solemnity,  raised  there  an 
empty  tomb,  and  performed  the  customary  li¬ 
bations,  and  gathering  up  the  bones  in  her  lap, 
and  bringing  them  home  by  night,  dug  a  place 
for  them  by  the  fireside  in  her  house,  saying, 
“Blessed  hearth,  to  your  custody  I  commit  the 
remains  of  a  good  and  brave  man,  and,  I  be¬ 
seech  you,  protect  and  restore  them  to  the  sep¬ 
ulchre  of  his  fathers,  when  the  Athenians  re¬ 
turn  to  their  right  minds.” 

And,  indeed,  a  very  little  time  and  their  own 
sad  experience  soon  informed  them  what  an  ex¬ 
cellent  governor,  and  how  great  an  example 
and  guardian  of  justice  and  of  temperance  they 
had  bereft  themselves  of.  And  now  they  de¬ 
creed  him  a  statue  of  brass,  and  his  bones  to  be 
buried  honourably  at  the  public  charge;  and 
for  his  accusers,  Agnonides  they  took  them¬ 
selves,  and  caused  him  to  be  put  to  death.  Epi¬ 
curus  and  Demophilus,  who  fled  from  the  city 
for  fear,  his  son  met  with,  and  took  his  revenge 
upon  them.  This  son  of  his,  we  are  told,  was  in 
general  of  an  indifferent  character,  and  once 
when  enamoured  of  a  slave  girl  kept  by  a  com¬ 
mon  harlot  merchant,  happened  to  hear  Theo- 
dorus,  the  atheist,  arguing  in  the  Lyceum, 
that  if  it  were  a  good  and  honourable  thing  to 
buy  the  freedom  of  a  friend  in  the  masculine, 
why  not  also  of  a  friend  in  the  feminine;  if,  for 
example,  a  master,  why  not  also  a  mistress? 
So  putting  the  good  argument  and  his  passion 
together,  he  went  off  and  purchased  the  girl’s 
freedom. 

The  death  which  was  thus  suffered  by  Pho¬ 
cion  revived  among  the  Greeks  the  memory  of 
that  of  Socrates,  the  two  cases  being  so  similar, 
and  both  equally  the  sad  fault  and  misfortune 
of  the  city. 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

95-46  B.C. 


The  family  of  Cato  derived  its  first  lustre 
from  his  great-grandfather  Cato,  whose 
virtue  gained  him  such  great  reputation 
and  authority  among  the  Romans,  as  we  have 
written  in  his  life. 

This  Cato  was,  by  the  loss  of  both  his  par¬ 
ents,  left  an  orphan,  together  with  his  brother 
Caepio,  and  his  sister  Porcia.  He  had  also  a  half- 
sister,  Servilia,  by  the  mother’s  side.  All  these 
lived  together,  and  were  bred  up  in  the  house 
of  Livius  Drusus,  their  uncle  by  the  mother, 
who,  at  that  time,  had  a  great  share  in  the  gov¬ 
ernment,  being  a  very  eloquent  speaker,  a  man 
of  the  greatest  temperance,  and  yielding  in 
dignity  to  none  of  the  Romans. 

It  is  said  of  Cato  that  even  from  his  infancy, 
in  his  speech,  his  countenance,  and  all  his 
childish  pastimes,  he  discovered  an  inflexible 
temper,  unmoved  by  any  passion,  and  firm  in 
everything.  He  was  resolute  in  his  purposes, 
much  beyond  the  strength  of  his  age,  to  go 
through  with  whatever  he  undertook.  He  was 
rough  and  ungentle  toward  those  that  flat¬ 
tered  him,  and  still  more  unyielding  to  those 
who  threatened  him.  It  was  difficult  to  excite 
him  to  laughter, -his  countenance  seldom  re¬ 
laxed  even  into  a  smile;  he  was  not  quickly  or 
easily  provoked  to  anger,  but  if  once  incensed, 
he  was  no  less  difficult  to  pacify. 

When  he  began  to  learn,  he  proved  dull,  and 
slow  to  apprehend,  but  of  what  he  once  re¬ 
ceived,  his  memory  was  remarkably  tenacious. 
And  such,  in  fact,  we  find  generally  to  be  the 
course  of  nature;  men  of  fine  genius  are  read¬ 
ily  reminded  of  things,  but  those  who  receive 
with  most  pains  and  difficulty,  remember  best; 
every  new  thing  they  learn,  being,  as  it  were, 
burnt  and  branded  in  on  their  minds.  Cato’s 
natural  stubbornness  and  slowness  to  be  per¬ 
suaded  may  also  have  made  it  more  difficult 
for  him  to  be  taught.  For  to  learn  is  to  submit 
to  having  something  done  to  one;  and  persua¬ 
sion  comes  soonest  to  those  who  have  least 
strength  to  resist  it.  Hence  young  men  are 
sooner  persuaded  than  those  that  are  more  in 
years,  and  sick  men,  than  those  that  are  well  in 
health.  In  fine,  where  there  is  least  previous 


doubt  and  difficulty,  the  new  impression  is 
most  easily  accepted.  Yet  Cato,  they  say,  was 
very  obedient  to  his  preceptor,  and  would  do 
whatever  he  was  commanded;  but  he  would 
also  ask  the  reason,  and  inquire  the  cause  of 
everything.  And,  indeed,  his  teacher  was  a 
very  well-bred  man,  more  ready  to  instruct  than 
to  beat  his  scholars.  His  name  was  Sarpedon. 

When  Cato  was  a  child,  the  allies  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans  sued  to  be  made  free  citizens  of  Rome. 
Pompaedius  Silo,  one  of  their  deputies,  a  brave 
soldier  and  a  man  of  great  repute,  who  had 
contracted  a  friendship  with  Drusus,  lodged  at 
his  house  for  several  days,  in  which  time  being 
grown  familiar  with  the  children,  “Well,”  said 
he  to  them,  “will  you  entreat  your  uncle  to  be¬ 
friend  us  in  our  business?”  Caepio,  smiling,  as¬ 
sented,  but  Cato  made  no  answer,  only  he 
looked  steadfastly  and  fiercely  on  the  strangers. 
Then  said  Pompaedius,  “And  you,  young  sir, 
what  say  you  to  us?  Will  not  you,  as  well  as 
your  brother,  intercede  with  your  uncle  in  our 
behalf?”  And  when  Cato  continued  to  give  no 
answer,  by  his  silence  and  his  countenance 
seeming  to  deny  their  petition,  Pompaedius 
snatched  him  up  to  the  window  as  if  he  would 
throw  him  out,  and  told  him  to  consent,  or  he 
would  fling  him  down,  and,  speaking  in  a 
harsher  tone,  held  his  body  out  of  the  window, 
and  shook  him  several  times.  When  Cato  had 
suffered  this  a  good  while,  unmoved  and  un¬ 
alarmed,  Pompaedius,  setting  him  down,  said 
in  an  undervoice  to  his  friend,  “What  a  bless¬ 
ing  for  Italy  that  he  is  but  a  child!  If  he  were 
a  man,  I  believe  we  should  not  gain  one  voice 
among  the  people.” 

Another  time,  one  of  his  relations,  on  his 
birthday,  invited  Cato  and  some  other  children 
to  supper,  and  some  of  the  company  diverted 
themselves  in  a  separate  part  of  the  house,  and 
were  at  play,  the  elder  and  the  younger  togeth¬ 
er,  their  sport  being  to  act  the  pleadings  before 
the  judges,  accusing  one  another,  and  carrying 
away  the  condemned  to  prison.  Among  these 
a  very  beautiful  young  child,  being  bound  and 
carried  by  a  bigger  into  prison,  cried  out  to 
Cato,  who  seeing  what  was  going  on  presently 


620 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

ran  to  the  door,  and  thrusting  away  those  who 
stood  there  as  a  guard,  took  out  the  child,  and 
went  home  in  anger,  followed  by  some  of  his 
companions. 

Cato  at  length  grew  so  famous  among  them, 
that  when  Sulla  designed  to  exhibit  the  sacred 
game  of  young  men  riding  courses  on  horse¬ 
back,  which  they  called  “Troy,”  having  gotten 
together  the  youth  of  good  birth,  he  appointed 
two  for  their  leaders.  One  of  them  they  accept¬ 
ed  for  his  mother’s  sake,  being  the  son  of  Me- 
tella,  the  wife  of  Sulla;  but  as  for  the  other, 
Sextus,  the  nephew  of  Pompey,  they  would  not 
be  led  by  him,  nor  exercise  under  him.  Then 
Sulla  asking  whom  they  would  have,  they  all 
cried  out,  “Cato”;  and  Sextus  willingly  yielded 
the  honour  to  him,  as  the  more  worthy. 

Sulla,  who  was  a  friend  of  their  family,  sent 
at  times  for  Cato  and  his  brother  to  see  them 
and  talk  with  them;  a  favour  which  he  showed 
to  very  few,  after  gaining  his  great  power  and 
authority.  Sarpedon,  full  of  the  advantage  it 
would  be,  as  well  for  the  honour  as  the  safe¬ 
ty  of  his  scholars,  would  often  bring  Cato  to 
wait  upon  Sulla  at  his  house,  which,  for  the 
multitude  of  those  that  were  being  carried  off 
in  custody,  and  tormented  there,  looked  like  a 
place  of  execution.  Cato  was  then  in  his  four¬ 
teenth  year,  and  seeing  the  heads  of  men  said 
to  be  of  great  distinction  brought  thither,  and 
observing  the  secret  sighs  of  those  that  were 
present,  he  asked  his  preceptor,  “Why  does  no¬ 
body  kill  this  man?”  “Because,”  said  he,  “they 
fear  him,  child,  more  than  they  hate  him.” 
“Why,  then,”  replied  Cato,  “did  you  not  give 
me  a  sword,  that  I  might  stab  him,  and  free 
my  country  from  this  slavery?”  Sarpedon  hear¬ 
ing  this,  and  at  the  same  time  seeing  his  coun¬ 
tenance  swelling  with  anger  and  determina¬ 
tion,  took  care  thenceforward  to  watch  him 
strictly,  lest  he  should  hazard  any  desperate 
attempt. 

While  he  was  yet  very  young,  to  some  that 
asked  him  whom  he  loved  best,  he  answered, 
his  brother.  And  being  asked,  whom  next,  he 
replied,  his  brother,  again.  So  likewise  the 
third  time,  and  still  the  same,  till  they  left  off 
to  ask  any  further.  As  he  grew  in  age,  this  love 
to  his  brother  grew  yet  the  stronger.  When  he 
was  about  twenty  years  old,  he  never  supped, 
never  went  out  of  town,  nor  into  the  Forum, 
without  Caepio.  But  when  his  brother  made 
use  of  precious  ointments  and  perfumes,  Cato 
declined  them;  and  he  was,  in  all  his  habits, 
very  strict  and  austere,  so  that  when  Caepio 
was  admired  for  his  moderation  and  temper- 


621 

ance,  he  would  acknowledge  that  indeed  he 
might  be  accounted  such,  in  comparison  with 
some  other  men,  “but,”  said  he,  “when  I  com¬ 
pare  myself  with  Cato,  I  find  myself  scarcely 
different  from  Sippius,”  one  at  that  time  noto¬ 
rious  for  his  luxurious  and  effeminate  living. 

Cato  being  made  priest  of  Apollo,  went  to 
another  house,  took  his  portion  of  their  pater¬ 
nal  inheritance,  amounting  to  a  hundred  and 
twenty  talents,  and  began  to  live  yet  more 
strictly  than  before.  Having  gained  the  inti¬ 
mate  acquaintance  of  Antipater  the  Tyrian, 
the  Stoic  philosopher,  he  devoted  himself  to 
the  study,  above  everything,  of  moral  and  po¬ 
litical  doctrine.  And  though  possessed,  as  it 
were,  by  a  kind  of  inspiration  for  the  pursuit 
of  every  virtue,  yet  what  most  of  all  virtue  and 
excellence  fixed  his  affection  was  that  steady 
and  inflexible  justice  which  is  not  to  be  wrought 
upon  by  favour  or  compassion.  He  learned  also 
the  art  of  speaking  and  debating  in  public, 
thinking  that  political  philosophy,  like  a  great 
city,  should  maintain  for  its  security  the  mili¬ 
tary  and  warlike  element.  But  he  would  never 
recite  his  exercises  before  company,  nor  was 
he  ever  heard  to  declaim.  And  to  one  that  told 
him  men  blamed  his  silence,  “But  I  hope  not 
my  life,”  he  replied.  “I  will  begin  to  speak, 
when  I  have  that  to  say  which  had  not  better 
be  unsaid.” 

The  great  Porcian  Hall,  as  it  was  called,  had 
been  built  and  dedicated  to  the  public  use  by 
the  old  Cato,  when  aedile.  Here  the  tribunes  of 
the  people  used  to  transact  their  business,  and 
because  one  of  the  pillars  was  thought  to  inter¬ 
fere  with  the  convenience  of  their  seats,  they 
deliberated  whether  it  were  best  to  remove  it  to 
another  place,  or  to  take  it  away.  This  occasion 
first  drew  Cato,  much  against  his  will,  into 
the  Forum;  for  he  opposed  the  demand  of  the 
tribunes,  and  in  so  doing  gave  a  specimen  both 
of  his  courage  and  his  powers  of  speaking, 
which  gained  him  great  admiration.  His 
speech  had  nothing  youthful  or  refined  in  it, 
but  was  straightforward,  full  of  matter,  and 
rough,  at  the  same  time  that  there  was  a  cer¬ 
tain  grace  about  his  rough  statements  which 
won  the  attention;  and  the  speaker’s  character, 
showing  itself  in  all  he  said,  added  to  his  se¬ 
vere  language  something  that  excited  feelings 
of  natural  pleasure  and  interest.  His  voice  was 
full  and  sounding,  and  sufficient  to  be  heard 
by  so  great  a  multitude,  and  its  vigour  and 
capacity  of  endurance  quite  indefatigable, 
for  he  often  would  speak  a  whole  day  and 
never  stop. 


622 

When  he  had  carried  this  cause,  he  betook 
himself  again  to  study  and  retirement.  He  em¬ 
ployed  himself  in  inuring  his  body  to  labour 
and  violent  exercise;  and  habituated  himself  to 
go  bareheaded  in  the  hottest  and  the  coldest 
weather,  and  to  walk  on  foot  at  all  seasons. 
When  he  went  on  a  journey  with  any  of  his 
friends,  though  they  were  on  horseback  and  he 
on  foot,  yet  he  would  often  join  now  one,  then 
another,  and  converse  with  them  on  the  way. 
In  sickness  the  patience  he  showed  in  support¬ 
ing,  and  the  abstinence  he  used  for  curing,  his 
distempers  were  admirable.  When  he  had  an 
ague,  he  would  remain  alone,  and  suffer  no¬ 
body  to  see  him,  till  he  began  to  recover,  and 
found  the  fit  was  over.  At  supper,  when  he 
threw  dice  for  the  choice  of  dishes,  and  lost, 
and  the  company  offered  him  nevertheless  his 
choice,  he  declined  to  dispute,  as  he  said,  the 
decision  of  Venus.  At  first,  he  was  wont  to 
drink  only  once  after  supper,  and  then  go 
away;  but  in  process  of  time  he  grew  to  drink 
more,  insomuch  that  oftentimes  he  would  con¬ 
tinue  till  morning.  This  his  friends  explained 
by  saying  that  state  affairs  and  public  business 
took  him  up  all  day,  and  being  desirous  of 
knowledge,  he  liked  to  pass  the  night  at  wine 
in  the  conversation  of  philosophers.  Hence,  up¬ 
on  one  Memmius  saying  in  public,  that  Cato 
spent  whole  nights  in  drinking,  “You  should 
add/’  replied  Cicero,  “that  he  spends  whole 
days  in  gambling.” 

And  in  general  Cato  esteemed  the  customs 
and  manners  of  men  at  that  time  so  corrupt, 
and  a  reformation  in  them  so  necessary,  that 
he  thought  it  requisite,  in  many  things,  to  go 
contrary  to  the  ordinary  way  of  the  world.  See¬ 
ing  the  lightest  and  gayest  purple  was  then 
most  in  fashion,  he  would  always  wear  that 
which  was  the  nearest  black;  and  he  would 
often  go  out  of  doors,  after  his  morning  meal, 
without  either  shoes  or  tunic;  not  that  he 
sought  vain-glory  from  such  novelties,  but  he 
would  accustom  himself  to  be  ashamed  only  of 
what  deserves  shame,  and  to  despise  all  other 
sorts  of  disgrace. 

The  estate  of  one  Cato,  his  cousin,  which 
was  worth  one  hundred  talents,  falling  to  him, 
he  turned  it  all  into  ready  money,  which  he 
kept  by  him  for  any  of  his  friends  that  should 
happen  to  want,  to  whom  he  would  lend  it 
without  interest.  And  for  some  ot  them,  he  suf¬ 
fered  his  own  land  and  his  slaves  to  be  mort¬ 
gaged  to  the  public  treasury. 

When  he  thought  himself  of  an  age  to  mar¬ 
ry,  having  never  before  known  any  woman,  he 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

was  contracted  to  Lepida,  who  had  before 
been  contracted  to  Metellus  Scipio,  but  on 
Scipio’s  own  withdrawal  from  it,  the  contract 
had  been  dissolved,  and  she  left  at  liberty.  Yet 
Scipio  afterwards  repenting  himself,  did  all  he 
could  to  regain  her,  before  the  marriage  with 
Cato  was  completed,  and  succeeded  in  so  do¬ 
ing.  At  which  Cato  was  violently  incensed,  and 
resolved  at  first  to  go  to  law  about  it;  but  his 
friends  persuaded  him  to  the  contrary.  How¬ 
ever,  he  was  so  moved  by  the  heat  of  youth  and 
passion  that  he  wrote  a  quantity  of  iambic 
verses  against  Scipio,  in  the  bitter,  sarcastic 
style  of  Archilochus,  without,  however,  his  li¬ 
cence  and  scurrility.  After  this,  he  married 
Atilia,  the  daughter  of  Soranus,  the  first  but 
not  the  only  woman  he  ever  knew,  less  happy 
thus  far  than  Laelius,  the  friend  of  Scipio,  who 
in  the  whole  course  of  so  long  a  life  never 
knew  but  the  one  woman,  to  whom  he  was 
united  in  his  first  and  only  marriage. 

In  the  war  of  the  slaves,  which  took  its  name 
from  Spartacus,  their  ringleader,  Gellius  was 
general,  and  Cato  went  a  volunteer,  for  the 
sake  of  his  brother  Caepio,  who  was  a  tribune 
in  the  army.  Cato  could  find  here  no  opportu¬ 
nity  to  show  his  zeal  or  exercise  his  valour,  on 
account  of  the  ill  conduct  of  the  general.  How¬ 
ever,  amidst  the  corruption  and  disorders  of 
that  army,  he  showed  such  a  love  of  discipline, 
so  much  bravery  upon  occasion,  and  so  much 
courage  and  wisdom  in  everything,  that  it  ap¬ 
peared  he  was  in  no  way  inferior  to  the  old 
Cato.  Gellius  offered  him  great  rewards,  and 
would  have  decreed  him  the  first  honours; 
which,  however,  he  refused,  saying  he  had 
done  nothing  that  deserved  them.  This  made 
him  to  be  thought  a  man  of  strange  and  eccen¬ 
tric  temper. 

There  was  a  law  passed,  moreover,  that  the 
candidates  who  stood  for  any  office  should  not 
have  prompters  in  their  canvass,  to  tell  them 
the  names  of  the  citizens;  and  Cato,  when  he 
sued  to  be  elected  tribune,  was  the  only  man 
that  obeyed  this  law.  He  took  great  pains  to 
learn  by  his  own  knowledge  to  salute  those  he 
had  to  speak  with,  and  to  call  them  by  their 
names;  yet  even  those  who  praised  him  for 
this,  did  not  do  so  without  some  envy  and  jeal¬ 
ousy,  for  the  more  they  considered  the  excel¬ 
lence  of  what  he  did,  the  more  they  were 
grieved  at  the  difficulty  they  found  to  do  the 
like. 

Being  chosen  tribune,  he  was  sent  into  Mace- 
don  to  join  Rubrius,  who  was  general  there.  It 
is  said  that  his  wife  showing  much  concern, 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

and  weeping  at  his  departure,  Munatius,  one 
of  Cato's  friends,  said  to  her,  “Do  not  trouble 
yourself,  Atilia,  I  will  engage  to  watch  over 
him  for  you.”  “By  all  means,”  replied  Cato; 
and  when  they  had  gone  one  day's  journey  to¬ 
gether,  “Now,”  said  he  to  Munatius,  after  they 
had  supped,  “that  you  may  be  sure  to  keep 
your  promise  to  Atilia,  you  must  not  leave  me 
day  nor  night,”  and  from  that  time,  he  ordered 
two  beds  to  be  made  in  his  own  chamber,  that 
Munatius  might  lie  there.  And  so  he  continued 
to  do,  Cato  making  it  his  jest  to  see  that  he  was 
always  there.  There  went  with  him  fifteen 
slaves,  two  freedmen,  and  four  of  his  friends; 
these  rode  on  horseback,  but  Cato  always  went 
on  foot,  yet  would  he  keep  by  them,  and  talk 
with  each  of  them  in  turn  as  they  went. 

When  he  came  to  the  army,  which  consisted 
of  several  legions,  the  general  gave  him  the 
command  of  one;  and  as  he  looked  upon  it  as 
a  small  matter,  and  not  worthy  a  commander, 
to  give  evidence  of  his  own  signal  valour, 
he  resolved  to  make  his  soldiers,  as  far  as  he 
could,  like  himself,  not,  however,  in  this  relax¬ 
ing  the  terrors  of  his  office,  but  associating  rea¬ 
son  with  his  authority.  He  persuaded  and  in¬ 
structed  every  one  in  particular,  and  bestowed 
rewards  or  punishments  according  to  desert; 
and  at  length  his  men  were  so  well  disciplined, 
that  it  was  hard  to  say  whether  they  were  more 
peaceable  or  more  warlike,  more  valiant  or 
more  just;  they  were  alike  formidable  to  their 
enemies  and  courteous  to  their  allies,  fearful  to 
do  wrong,  and  forward  to  gain  honour. 

And  Cato  himself  acquired  in  the  fullest 
measure  what  it  had  been  his  least  desire  to 
seek,  glory  and  good  repute;  he  was  highly  es¬ 
teemed  by  all  men,  and  entirely  beloved  by  the 
soldiers.  Whatever  he  commanded  to  be  done, 
he  himself  took  part  in  the  performing;  in  his 
apparel,  his  diet,  and  mode  of  travelling,  he 
was  more  like  a  common  soldier  than  an  offi¬ 
cer;  but  in  character,  high  purpose,  and  wis¬ 
dom,  he  far  exceeded  all  that  had  the  names 
and  titles  of  commanders,  and  he  made  him¬ 
self,  without  knowing  it,  the  object  of  general 
affection.  For  the  true  love  of  virtue  is  in  all 
men  produced  by  the  love  and  respect  they  bear 
to  him  that  teaches  it;  and  those  who  praise 
good  men,  yet  do  not  love  them,  may  respect 
their  reputation,  but  do  not  really  admire,  and 
will  never  imitate  their  virtue. 

There  dwelt  at  that  time  in  Pergamus,  Ath- 
enodorus,  surnamed  Cordylio,  a  man  of  high 
repute  for  his  knowledge  of  the  Stoic  philos¬ 
ophy,  who  was  now  grown  old,  and  had  always 


623 

steadily  refused  the  friendship  and  acquain¬ 
tance  of  princes  and  great  men.  Cato  under¬ 
stood  this;  so  that  imagining  he  should  not  be 
able  to  prevail  with  him  by  sending  or  writing, 
and  being  by  the  laws  allowed  two  months’  ab¬ 
sence  from  the  army,  he  resolved  to  go  into 
Asia  to  see  him  in  person,  trusting  to  his  own 
good  qualities  not  to  lose  his  labour.  And  when 
he  had  conversed  with  him,  and  succeeded  in 
persuading  him  out  of  his  former  resolutions, 
he  returned  and  brought  him  to  the  camp  as 
joyful  and  as  proud  of  this  victory  as  if  he  had 
done  some  heroic  exploit,  greater  than  any  of 
those  of  Pompey  or  Lucullus,  who  with  their 
armies  at  that  time  were  subduing  so  many 
nations  and  kingdoms. 

While  Cato  was  yet  in  the  service,  his  broth¬ 
er,  on  a  journey  towards  Asia,  fell  sick  at  Aaius 
in  Thrace,  letters  with  intelligence  of  which 
were  immediately  despatched  to  him.  The  sea 
was  very  rough,  and  no  convenient  ship  of  any 
size  to  be  had;  so  Cato  getting  into  a  small 
trading-vessel,  with  only  two  of  his  friends, 
and  three  servants,  set  sail  from  Thessalonica, 
and  having  very  narrowly  escaped  drowning, 
he  arrived  at  ALnus  just  as  Caepio  expired.  Up¬ 
on  this  occasion,  he  was  thought  to  have  show¬ 
ed  himself  more  a  fond  brother  than  a  philos¬ 
opher,  not  only  in  the  excess  of  his  grief,  be¬ 
wailing  and  embracing  the  dead  body,  but  also 
in  the  extravagant  expenses  of  the  funeral,  the 
vast  quantity  of  rich  perfumes  and  costly  gar¬ 
ments  which  were  burnt  with  the  corpse,  and 
the  monument  of  Thasian  marble,  which  he 
erected,  at  the  cost  of  eight  talents,  in  the  pub¬ 
lic  place  of  the  town  of  Amus. 

For  there  were  some  who  took  upon  them 
to  cavil  at  all  this  as  not  consistent  with  his 
usual  calmness  and  moderation,  not  discerning 
that  though  he  were  steadfast,  firm,  and  inflex¬ 
ible  to  pleasure,  fear  or  foolish  entreaties,  yet 
he  was  full  of  natural  tenderness  and  brotherly 
affection.  Divers  of  the  cities  and  princes  of  the 
country  sent  him  many  presents,  to  honour 
the  funeral  of  his  brother;  but  he  took  none  of 
their  money,  only  the  perfumes  and  ornaments 
he  received,  and  paid  for  them  also.  And  after¬ 
wards,  when  the  inheritance  was  divided  be¬ 
tween  him  and  Caepio’s  daughter,  he  did  not 
require  any  portion  of  the  funeral  expenses  to 
be  discharged  out  of  it.  Notwithstanding  this, 
it  has  been  affirmed  that  he  made  his  brother's 
ashes  be  passed  through  a  sieve,  to  find  the 
gold  that  was  melted  down  when  burnt  with 
the  body.  But  he  who  made  this  statement  ap¬ 
pears  to  have  anticipated  an  exemption  for  his 


624 

pen,  as  much  as  for  his  sword,  from  all  ques¬ 
tion  and  criticism. 

The  time  of  Cato’s  service  in  the  army  be¬ 
ing  expired,  he  received,  at  his  departure,  not 
only  the  prayers  and  praises,  but  the  tears  and 
embraces  of  the  soldiers,  who  spread  their 
clothes  at  his  feet  and  kissed  his  hand  as  he 
passed,  an  honour  which  the  Romans  at  that 
time  scarcely  paid  even  to  a  very  few  of  their 
generals  and  commanders-in-chief.  Having  left 
the  army,  he  resolved,  before  he  would  return 
home  and  apply  himself  to  state  affairs,  to 
travel  in  Asia,  and  observe  the  manners,  the 
customs,  and  the  strength  of  every  province. 
He  was  also  unwilling  to  refuse  the  kindness 
of  Deiotarus,  King  of  Galatia,  who  having  had 
great  familiarity  and  friendship  with  his  fa¬ 
ther,  was  very  desirous  to  receive  a  visit  from 
him. 

Cato’s  arrangements  in  his  journey  were  as 
follows.  Early  in  the  morning  he  sent  out  his 
baker  and  his  cook  towards  the  place  where 
he  designed  to  stay  the  next  night;  these  went 
soberly  and  quietly  into  the  town,  in  which,  if 
there  happened  to  be  no  friend  or  acquain¬ 
tance  of  Cato  or  his  family,  they  provided  for 
him  in  an  inn,  and  gave  no  disturbance  to 
anybody;  but  if  there  were  no  inn,  then,  and  in 
this  case  only,  they  went  to  the  magistrates, 
and  desiring  them  to  help  them  to  lodgings, 
took  without  complaint  whatever  was  allotted 
to  them.  His  servants  thus  behaving  themselves 
towards  the  magistrates,  without  noise  and 
threatening,  were  often  discredited,  or  neg¬ 
lected  by  them,  so  that  Cato  many  times  ar¬ 
rived  and  found  nothing  provided  for  him. 
And  it  was  all  the  worse  when  he  appeared 
himself;  still  less  account  was  taken  of  him. 
When  they  saw  him  sitting,  without  saying 
anything,  on  his  baggage,  they  set  him  down 
at  once  as  a  person  of  no  consequence,  who 
did  not  venture  to  make  any  demand. 

Sometimes,  on  such  occasions,  he  would  call 
them  to  him  and  tell  them,  “Foolish  people, 
lay  aside  this  inhospitality.  All  your  visitors 
will  not  be  Catos.  Use  your  courtesy,  to  take 
off  the  sharp  edge  of  power.  There  are  men 
enough  who  desire  but  a  pretence,  to  take  from 
you  by  force,  what  you  give  with  such  reluct¬ 
ance.” 

While  he  travelled  in  this  manner,  a  divert¬ 
ing  accident  befell  him  in  Syria.  As  he  was  go¬ 
ing  into  Antioch,  he  saw  a  great  multitude  of 
people  outside  the  gates,  ranged  in  order  on 
either  side  the  way;  here  the  young  men  with 
long  cloaks,  there  the  children  decently  dressed; 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

others  wore  garlands  and  white  garments  who 
were  the  priests  and  magistrates.  Cato,  imagin¬ 
ing  all  this  could  mean  nothing  but  a  display 
in  honour  of  his  reception,  began  to  be  angry 
with  his  servants,  who  had  been  sent  before, 
for  suffering  it  to  be  done;  then  making  his 
friends  alight,  he  walked  along  with  them  on 
foot. 

As  soon  as  he  came  near  the  gate,  an  elderly 
man,  who  seemed  to  be  master  of  these  cere¬ 
monies,  with  a  wand  and  a  garland  in  his  hand, 
came  up  to  Cato,  and  without  saluting  him, 
asked  him  where  he  had  left  Demetrius,  and 
how  soon  he  thought  he  would  be  there.  This 
Demetrius  was  Pompey’s  servant,  and  as  at  this 
time  the  whole  world,  so  to  say,  had  its  eyes 
fixed  upon  Pompey,  this  man  also  was  highly 
honoured,  on  account  of  his  influence  with  his 
master.  Upon  this  Cato’s  friends  fell  into  such 
violent  laughter,  that  they  could  not  restrain 
themselves  while  they  passed  through  the 
crowd;  and  he  himself,  ashamed  and  distress¬ 
ed,  uttered  the  words,  “Unfortunate  city!”  and 
said  no  more.  Afterwards,  however,  it  always 
made  him  laugh,  when  he  either  told  the  story 
or  was  otherwise  reminded  of  it. 

Pompey  himself  shortly  after  made  the  peo¬ 
ple  ashamed  of  their  ignorance  and  folly  in 
thus  neglecting  him,  for  Cato,  coming  in  his 
journey  to  Ephesus,  went  to  pay  his  respects  to 
him,  who  was  the  elder  man,  had  gained  much 
honour,  and  was  then  general  of  a  great  army. 
Yet  Pompey  would  not  receive  him  sitting, 
but  as  soon  as  he  saw  him,  rose  up,  and  going 
to  meet  him,  as  the  more  honourable  person, 
gave  him  his  hand,  and  embraced  him  with 
great  show  of  kindness.  He  said  much  in  com¬ 
mendation  of  his  virtue  both  at  that  time  when 
receiving  him,  and  also  yet  more  after  he  had 
withdrawn.  So  that  now  all  men  began  at  once 
to  display  their  respect  for  Cato,  and  discov¬ 
ered  in  him  the  very  same  things  for  which 
they  despised  him  before,  an  admirable  mild¬ 
ness  of  temper  and  greatness  of  spirit. 

And  indeed  the  civility  that  Pompey  himself 
showed  him  appeared  to  come  from  one  that 
rather  respected  than  loved  him;  and  the  gen¬ 
eral  opinion  was,  that  while  Cato  was  there  he 
paid  him  admiration,  but  was  not  sorry  when 
he  was  gone.  For  when  other  young  men  came 
to  see  him  he  usually  urged  and  entreated 
them  to  continue  with  him.  Now  he  did  not  at 
all  invite  Cato  to  stay,  but  as  if  his  own  power 
were  lessened  by  the  other’s  presence,  he  very 
willingly  allowed  him  to  take  his  leave.  Yet  to 
Cato  alone,  of  all  those  who  went  for  Rome, 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

he  recommended  his  children  and  his  wife, 
who  was  indeed  connected  by  relationship 
with  Cato. 

After  this,  all  the  cities  through  which  he 
passed  strove  and  emulated  each  other  in  show¬ 
ing  him  respect  and  honour.  Feasts  and  enter¬ 
tainments  were  made  for  his  reception,  so  that 
he  bade  his  friends  keep  strict  watch  and  take 
care  of  him,  lest  he  should  end  by  making  good 
what  was  said  by  Curio,  who  though  he  were 
his  familiar  friend,  yet  disliking  the  austerity 
of  his  temper,  asked  him  one  day  if,  when  he 
left  the  army,  he  designed  to  see  Asia,  and 
Cato  answering,  “Yes,  by  all  means.”  “You  do 
well,”  replied  Curio,  “you  will  bring  back  with 
you  a  better  temper  and  pleasanter  manners”; 
pretty  nearly  the  very  words  he  used. 

Deiotarus,  being  now  an  old  man,  had  sent 
for  Cato,  to  recommend  his  children  and  fam¬ 
ily  to  his  protection;  and  as  soon  as  he  came, 
brought  him  presents  of  all  sorts  of  things, 
which  he  begged  and  entreated  him  to  accept. 
And  his  importunities  displeased  Cato  so  much, 
that  though  he  came  but  in  the  evening,  he 
stayed  only  that  night,  and  went  away  early 
the  next  morning.  After  he  was  gone  one  day’s 
journey,  he  found  at  Pessinus  a  yet  greater 
quantity  of  presents  provided,  for  him  there, 
and  also  letters  from  Deiotarus  entreating  him 
to  receive  them,  or  at  least  to  permit  his  friends 
to  take  them,  who  for  his  sake  deserved  some 
gratification,  and  could  not  have  much  done 
for  them  out  of  Cato’s  own  means.  Yet  he 
would  not  suffer  it,  though  he  saw  some  of 
them  very  willing  to  receive  such  gifts,  and 
ready  to  complain  of  his  severity;  but  he  an¬ 
swered  that  corruption  would  never  want 
pretence,  and  his  friends  should  share  with 
him  in  whatever  he  should  justly  and  hon¬ 
estly  obtain,  and  so  returned  the  presents  to 
Deiotarus. 

When  he  took  ship  for  Brundusium,  his 
friends  would  have  persuaded  him  to  put  his 
brother’s  ashes  into  another  vessel;  but  he  said 
he  would  sooner  part  with  his  life  than  leave 
them,  and  so  set  sail.  And  as  it  chanced,  he,  we 
are  told,  had  a  very  dangerous  passage,  though 
others  at  the  same  time  went  over  safely 
enough. 

After  he  was  returned  to  Rome,  he  spent  his 
time  for  the  most  part  either  at  home,  in  con¬ 
versation  with  Athenodorus,  or  at  the  Forum, 
in  the  service  of  his  friends.  Though  it  was 
now  the  time  that  he  should  become  quaestor, 
he  would  not  stand  for  the  place  till  he  had 
studied  the  laws  relating  to  it,  and  by  inquiry 


625 

from  persons  of  experience,  had  attained  a  dis¬ 
tinct  understanding  of  the  duty  and  authority 
belonging  to  it. 

With  this  knowledge,  as  soon  as  he  came 
into  the  office,  he  made  a  great  reformation 
among  the  clerks  and  under-officers  of  the 
treasury,  people  who  had  long  practice  and  fa¬ 
miliarity  in  all  the  public  records  and  the  laws, 
and,  when  new  magistrates  came  in  year  by 
year  so  ignorant  and  unskilful  as  to  be  in  abso¬ 
lute  need  of  others  to  teach  them  what  to  do, 
did  not  submit  and  give  way,  but  kept  the  pow¬ 
er  in  their  own  hands,  and  were  in  effect  the 
treasurers  themselves.  Till  Cato,  applying  him¬ 
self  roundly  to  the  work,  showed  that  he  pos¬ 
sessed  not  only  the  title  and  honour  of  a  quaes¬ 
tor,  but  the  knowledge  and  understanding  and 
full  authority  of  his  office. 

Thus,  he  used  the  clerks  and  under-officers 
like  servants  as  they  were,  exposing  their  cor¬ 
rupt  practices,  and  instructing  their  ignorance. 
Being  bold,  impudent  fellows,  they  flattered 
the  other  quaestors,  his  colleagues,  and  by  their 
means  endeavoured  to  maintain  an  opposition 
against  him.  But  he  convicted  the  chiefest  of 
them  of  a  breach  of  trust  in  the  charge  of  an 
inheritance,  and  turned  him  out  of  his  place.  A 
second  he  brought  to  trial  for  dishonesty,  who 
was  defended  by  Lutatius  Catulus,  at  that  time 
censor,  a  man  very  considerable  for  his  office, 
but  yet  more  for  his  character,  as  he  was  emi¬ 
nent  above  all  the  Romans  of  that  age  for  his 
reputed  wisdom  and  integrity.  He  was  also  in¬ 
timate  with  Cato,  and  much  commended  his 
way  of  living.  So  perceiving  he  could  not  bring 
off  his  client,  if  he  stood  a  fair  trial,  he  openly 
began  to  beg  him  off.  Cato  objected  to  his  do¬ 
ing  this.  And  when  he  continued  still  to  be  im¬ 
portunate,  “It  would  be  shameful,  Catulus,” 
he  said,  “that  the  censor,  the  judge  of  all  our 
lives,  should  incur  the  dishonour  of  removal  by 
our  officers.” 

At  this  expression,  Catulus  looked  as  if  he 
would  have  made  some  answer;  but  he  said 
nothing,  and  either  through  anger  or  shame 
went  away  silent,  and  out  of  countenance. 
Nevertheless,  the  man  was  not  found  guilty, 
for  the  voices  that  acquitted  him  were  but  one 
in  number  less  than  those  that  condemned 
him,  and  Marcus  Lollius,  one  of  Cato’s  col¬ 
leagues,  who  was  absent  by  reason  of  sickness, 
was  sent  for  by  Catulus,  and  entreated  to  come 
and  save  the  man.  So  Lollius  was  brought  into 
court  in  a  chair,  and  gave  his  voice  also  for  ac¬ 
quitting  him.  Yet  Cato  never  after  made  use 
of  that  clerk,  and  never  paid  him  his  salary. 


626 

nor  would  he  make  any  account  of  the  vote 
given  by  Lollius. 

Having  thus  humbled  the  clerks,  and  brought 
them  to  be  at  command,  he  made  use  of  the 
books  and  registers  as  he  thought  fit,  and  in  a 
little  while  gained  the  treasury  a  higher  name 
than  the  senate  house  itself;  and  all  men  said, 
Cato  had  made  the  office  of  a  quaestor  equal  to 
the  dignity  of  a  consul.  When  he  found  many 
indebted  to  the  state  upon  old  accounts,  and 
the  state  also  in  debt  to  many  private  persons, 
he  took  care  that  the  public  might  no  longer 
either  do  or  suffer  wrong;  he  strictly  and 
punctually  exacted  what  was  due  to  the  treas¬ 
ury,  and  as  freely  and  speedily  paid  all  those 
to  whom  it  was  indebted.  So  that  the  people 
were  filled  with  sentiments  of  awe  and  respect, 
on  seeing  those  made  to  pay,  who  thought  to 
have  escaped  with  their  plunder,  and  others 
receiving  all  their  due,  who  despaired  of  get¬ 
ting  anything. 

And  whereas  usually  those  who  brought 
false  bills  and  pretended  orders  of  the  senate 
could  through  favour  get  them  accepted,  Cato 
would  never  be  so  imposed  upon;  and  in  the 
case  of  one  particular  order,  on  the  question 
arising  whether  it  had  passed  the  senate,  he 
would  not  believe  a  great  many  witnesses  that 
attested  it,  nor  would  admit  of  it,  till  the  con¬ 
suls  came  and  affirmed  it  upon  oath. 

There  were  at  that  time  a  great  many  whom 
Sulla  had  made  use  of  as  his  agents  in  the  pro¬ 
scription,  and  to  whom  he  had  for  their  serv¬ 
ice  in  putting  men  to  death,  given  twelve  thou¬ 
sand  drachmas  apiece.  These  men  everybody 
hated  as  wicked  and  polluted  wretches,  but  no¬ 
body  durst  be  revenged  upon  them.  Cato 
called  every  one  to  account,  as  wrongfully  pos¬ 
sessed  of  the  public  money,  and  exacted  it  of 
them,  and  at  the  same  time  sharply  reproved 
them  for  their  unlawful  and  impious  actions. 
After  these  proceedings  they  were  presently  ac¬ 
cused  of  murder,  and  being  already  in  a  man¬ 
ner  prejudged  as  guilty,  they  were  easily  found 
so,  and  accordingly  suffered;  at  which  the 
whole  people  rejoiced  and  thought  themselves 
now  to  see  the  old  tyranny  finally  abolished, 
and  Sulla  himself,  so  to  say,  brought  to  punish¬ 
ment. 

Cato’s  assiduity  also,  and  indefatigable  dili¬ 
gence,  won  very  much  upon  the  people.  He  al¬ 
ways  came  first  of  any  of  his  colleagues  to  the 
treasury,  and  went  away  the  last.  He  never 
missed  any  assembly  of  the  people,  or  sitting 
of  the  senate;  being  always  anxious  and  on  the 
watch  for  those  who  lightly,  or  as  a  matter  of 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

interest,  passed  votes  in  favour  of  this  or  that 
person,  for  remitting  debts  or  granting  away 
customs  that  were  owing  to  the  state.  And  at 
length,  having  kept  the  exchequer  pure  and 
clear  from  base  informers,  and  yet  having 
filled  it  with  treasure,  he  made  it  appear  that 
the  state  might  be  rich  without  oppressing  the 
people.  At  first  he  excited  feelings  of  dislike 
and  irritation  in  some  of  his  colleagues,  but 
after  a  while  they  were  well  contented  with 
him,  since  he  was  perfectly  willing  that  they 
should  cast  all  the  odium  on  him,  when  they 
declined  to  gratify  their  friends  with  the  pub¬ 
lic  money,  or  to  give  dishonest  judgments  in 
passing  their  accounts;  and  when  hard-pressed 
by  suitors,  they  could  readily  answer  it  was 
impossible  to  do  anything  unless  Cato  would 
consent. 

On  the  last  day  of  his  office,  he  was  honour¬ 
ably  attended  to  his  house  by  almost  all  the 
people;  but  on  the  way  he  was  informed  that 
several  powerful  friends  were  in  the  treasury 
with  Marcellus,  using  all  their  interest  with 
him  to  pass  a  certain  debt  to  the  public  reve¬ 
nue,  as  if  it  had  been  a  gift.  Marcellus  had 
been  one  of  Cato’s  friends  from  his  childhood, 
and  so  long  as  Cato  was  with  him,  was  one 
of  the  best  of  his  colleagues  in  this  office,  but 
when  alone,  was  unable  to  resist  the  importu¬ 
nity  of  suitors,  and  prone  to  do  anybody  a 
kindness.  So  Cato  immediately  turned  back, 
and  finding  that  Marcellus  had  yielded  to  pass 
the  thing,  he  took  the  book,  and  while  Marcel¬ 
lus  silently  stood  by  and  looked  on,  struck  it 
out.  This  done,  he  brought  Marcellus  out  of 
the  treasury,  and  took  him  home  with  him; 
who  for  all  this,  neither  then,  nor  ever  after, 
complained  of  him,  but  always  continued  his 
friendship  and  familiarity  with  him. 

Cato,  after  he  had  laid  down  his  office,  yet 
did  not  cease  to  keep  a  watch  upon  the  trea¬ 
sury.  He  had  his  servants  who  continually 
wrote  out  the  details  of  the  expenditure,  and 
he  himself  kept  always  by  him  certain  books, 
which  contained  the  accounts  of  the  revenue 
from  Sulla’s  time  to  his  own  quaestorship, 
which  he  had  bought  for  five  talents. 

He  was  always  first  at  the  senate,  and  went 
out  last;  and  often,  while  the  others  were 
slowly  collecting,  he  would  sit  and  read  by 
himself,  holding  his  gown  before  his  book.  He 
was  never  once  out  of  town  when  the  senate 
was  to  meet.  And  when  afterwards  Pompey 
and  his  party,  finding  that  he  could  never  be 
either  persuaded  or  compelled  to  favour  their 
unjust  designs,  endeavoured  to  keep  him  from 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

the  senate,  by  engaging  him  in  business  for  his 
friends,  to  plead  their  causes,  or  arbitrate  in 
their  differences,  or  the  like,  he  quickly  dis¬ 
covered  the  trick,  and  to  defeat  it,  fairly  told 
all  his  acquaintance  that  he  would  never  med¬ 
dle  in  any  private  business  when  the  senate 
was  assembled. 

Since  it  was  not  in  the  hope  of  gaining  hon¬ 
our  or  riches,  nor  out  of  mere  impulse,  or  by 
chance  that  he  engaged  himself  in  politics,  but 
he  undertook  the  service  of  the  state  as  the 
proper  business  of  an  honest  man,  and  there¬ 
fore  he  thought  himself  obliged  to  be  as  con¬ 
stant  to  his  public  duty  as  the  bee  to  the  honey¬ 
comb.  To  this  end,  he  took  care  to  have  his 
friends  and  correspondents  everywhere,  to 
send  him  reports  of  the  edicts,  decrees,  judg¬ 
ments,  and  all  the  important  proceedings  that 
passed  in  any  of  the  provinces. 

Once  when  Clodius,  the  seditious  orator,  to 
promote  his  violent  and  revolutionary  projects, 
traduced  to  the  people  some  of  the  priests  and 
priestesses  (among  whom  Fabia,  sister  to  Cic¬ 
ero’s  wife,  Terentia,  ran  great  danger),  Cato 
having  boldly  interfered,  and  having  made 
Clodius  appear  so  infamous  that  he  was  forced 
to  leave  the  town,  was  addressed,  when  it  was 
over,  by  Cicero,  who  came  to  thank  him  for 
what  he  had  done.  “You  must  thank  the  com¬ 
monwealth,”  said  he,  for  whose  sake  alone  he 
professed  to  do  everything. 

Thus  he  gained  a  great  and  wonderful  repu¬ 
tation;  so  that  an  advocate  in  a  cause,  where 
there  was  only  one  witness  against  him,  told 
the  judges  they  ought  not  to  rely  upon  a  single 
witness,  though  it  were  Cato  himself.  And  it 
was  a  sort  of  proverb  with  many  people,  if 
any  very  unlikely  and  incredible  thing  were 
asserted,  to  say  they  would  not  believe  it, 
though  Cato  himself  should  affirm  it.  One  day 
a  debauched  and  sumptuous  liver  talking  in 
the  senate  about  frugality  and  temperance, 
Anaeus  standing  up,  cried,  “Who  can  endure 
this,  sir,  to  have  you  feast  like  Crassus,  build 
like  Lucullus,  and  talk  like  Cato.”  So  likewise 
those  who  were  vicious  and  dissolute  in  their 
manners,  yet  affected  to  be  grave  and  severe  in 
their  language,  were  in  derision  called  Catos. 

At  first,  when  his  friends  would  have  per¬ 
suaded  him  to  stand  to  be  tribune  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  he  thought  it  undesirable;  for  that  the 
power  of  so  great  an  office  ought  to  be  reserved, 
as  the  strongest  medicines,  for  occasions  of  the 
last  necessity.  But  afterwards  in  a  vacation 
time,  as  he  was  going,  accompanied  with  his 
books  and  philosophers,  to  Lucania,  where  he 


627 

had  lands  with  a  pleasant  residence,  they  met 
by  the  way  a  great  many  horses,  carriages,  and 
attendants,  of  whom  they  understood  that 
Metellus  Nepos  was  going  to  Rome,  to  stand 
to  be  tribune  of  the  people.  Hereupon  Cato 
stopped,  and  after  a  little  pause,  gave  orders 
to  return  back  immediately;  at  which  the  com¬ 
pany  seeming  to  wonder,  “Don’t  you  know,” 
said  he,  “how  dangerous  of  itself  the  madness 
of  Metellus  is?  And  now  that  he  comes  armed 
with  the  support  of  Pompey,  he  will  fall  like 
lightning  on  the  state,  and  bring  it  to  utter 
disorder;  therefore  this  is  no  time  for  idleness 
and  diversion,  but  we  must  go  and  prevent  this 
man  in  his  designs,  or  bravely  die  in  defence 
of  our  liberty.”  Nevertheless,  by  the  persuasion 
of  his  friends,  he  went  first  to  his  country- 
house,  where  he  stayed  but  a  very  little  time, 
and  then  returned  to  town. 

He  arrived  in  the  evening,  and  went  straight 
the  next  morning  to  the  Forum,  where  he  be¬ 
gan  to  solicit  for  the  tribuneship,  in  opposition 
to  Metellus.  The  power  of  this  office  consists 
rather  in  controlling  than  performing  any 
business;  for  though  all  the  rest  except  any  one 
tribune  should  be  agreed,  yet  his  denial  or  in¬ 
tercession  could  put  a  stop  to  the  whole  matter. 
Cato,  at  first,  had  not  many  that  appeared  for 
him;  but  as  soon  as  his  design  was  known,  all 
the  good  and  distinguished  persons  of  the  city 
quickly  came  forward  to  encourage  and  sup¬ 
port  him,  looking  upon  him,  not  as  one  that 
desired  a  favour  of  them,  but  one  that  pro¬ 
posed  to  do  a  great  favour  to  his  country  and 
all  honest  men;  who  had  many  times  refused 
the  same  office,  when  he  might  have  had  it 
without  trouble,  but  now  sought  it  with  dan¬ 
ger,  that  he  might  defend  their  liberty  and 
their  government.  It  is  reported  that  so  great 
a  number  flocked  about  him  that  he  was  like 
to  be  stifled  amidst  the  press,  and  could  scarce 
get  through  the  crowd.  He  was  declared  trib¬ 
une,  with  several  others,  among  whom  was 
Metellus. 

When  Cato  was  chosen  into  this  office,  ob¬ 
serving  that  the  election  of  consuls  was  be¬ 
come  a  matter  of  purchase,  he  sharply  rebuked 
the  people  for  this  corruption,  and  in  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  his  speech  protested  he  would  bring 
to  trial  whomever  he  should  find  giving 
money,  making  an  exception  only  in  the  case  of 
Silanus,  on  account  of  their  near  connection, 
he  having  married  Servilia,  Cato’s  sister.  He 
therefore  did  not  prosecute  him,  but  accused 
Lucius  Murena,  who  had  been  chosen  consul 
by  corrupt  means  with  Silanus.  There  was  a 


628 

law  that  the  party  accused  might  appoint  a  per¬ 
son  to  keep  watch  upon  his  accuser,  that  he 
might  know  fairly  what  means  he  took  in  pre¬ 
paring  the  accusation.  He  that  was  set  upon 
Cato  by  Murena,  at  first  followed  and  observed 
him  strictly,  yet  never  found  him  dealing  any 
way  unfairly  or  insidiously,  but  always  gener¬ 
ously  and  candidly  going  on  in  the  just  and 
open  methods  of  proceeding.  And  he  so  ad¬ 
mired  Cato’s  great  spirit,  and  so  entirely  trust¬ 
ed  to  his  integrity,  that  meeting  him  in  the 
Forum,  or  going  to  his  house,  he  would  ask 
him  if  he  designed  to  do  anything  that  day  in 
order  to  the  accusation,  and  if  Cato  said  no,  he 
went  away,  relying  on  his  word. 

When  the  cause  was  pleaded,  Cicero,  who 
was  then  consul  and  defended  Murena,  took 
occasion  to  be  extremely  witty  and  jocose,  in 
reference  to  Cato,  upon  the  Stoic  philosophers, 
and  their  paradoxes,  as  they  call  them,  and  so 
excited  great  laughter  among  the  judges;  up¬ 
on  which  Cato,  smiling,  said  to  the  standers- 
by,  “What  a  pleasant  consul  we  have,  my 
friends.”  Murena  was  acquitted,  and  after¬ 
wards  showed  himself  a  man  of  no  ill-feeling 
or  want  of  sense;  for  when  he  was  consul,  he 
always  took  Cato’s  advice  in  the  most  weighty 
affairs  and,  during  all  the  time  of  his  office, 
paid  him  much  honour  and  respect.  Of  which 
not  only  Murena’s  prudence,  but  also  Cato’s 
own  behaviour,  was  the  cause;  for  though  he 
were  terrible  and  severe  as  to  matters  of  justice, 
in  the  senate,  and  at  the  bar,  yet  after  the  thing 
was  over  his  manner  to  all  men  was  perfectly 
friendly  and  humane. 

Before  he  entered  on  the  office  of  tribune,  he 
assisted  Cicero,  at  that  time  consul,  in  many 
contests  that  concerned  his  office,  but  most 
especially  in  his  great  and  noble  acts  at  the  time 
of  Catiline’s  conspiracy;  which  owed  their  last 
successful  issue  to  Cato.  Catiline  had  plotted  a 
dreadful  and  entire  subversion  of  the  Roman 
state  by  sedition  and  open  war,  but  being  con¬ 
victed  by  Cicero,  was  forced  to  fly  the  city.  Yet 
Lentulus  and  Cethegus  remained,  with  several 
others,  to  carry  on  the  same  plot;  and  blaming 
Catiline,  as  one  that  wanted  courage,  and  had 
been  timid  and  petty  in  his  designs,  they  them¬ 
selves  resolved  to  set  the  whole  town  on  fire, 
and  utterly  to  overthrow  the  empire,  rousing 
whole  nations  to  revolt  and  exciting  foreign 
wars.  But  the  design  was  discovered  by  Cicero 
(as  we  have  written  in  his  life),  and  the  matter 
brought  before  the  senate. 

Silanus,  who  spoke  first,  delivered  his  opin¬ 
ion,  that  the  conspirators  ought  to  suffer  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

last  of  punishments,  and  was  therein  followed 
by  all  who  spoke  after  him;  till  it  came  to  Cae¬ 
sar,  who  being  an  excellent  speaker,  and  look¬ 
ing  upon  all  changes  and  commotions  in  the 
state  as  materials  useful  for  his  own  purposes, 
desired  rather  to  increase  than  extinguish  them; 
and  standing  up,  he  made  a  very  merciful  and 
persuasive  speech,  that  they  ought  not  to  suffer 
death  without  fair  trial  according  to  law,  and 
moved  that  they  might  be  kept  in  prison.  Thus 
was  the  house  almost  wholly  turned  by  Caesar, 
apprehending  also  the  anger  of  the  people;  in¬ 
somuch  that  even  Silanus  retracted,  and  said  he 
did  not  mean  to  propose  death,  but  imprison¬ 
ment,  for  that  was  the  utmost  a  Roman  could 
suffer. 

Upon  this  they  were  all  inclined  to  the 
milder  and  more  merciful  opinion,  when  Cato, 
standing  up,  began  at  once  with  great  passion 
and  vehemence  to  reproach  Silanus  for  his 
change  of  opinion,  and  to  attack  Caesar,  who 
would,  he  said,  ruin  the  commonwealth  by  soft 
words  and  popular  speeches,  and  was  endeav¬ 
ouring  to  frighten  the  senate,  when  he  himself 
ought  to  fear,  and  be  thankful,  if  he  escaped 
unpunished  or  unsuspected,  who  thus  openly 
and  boldly  dared  to  protect  the  enemies  of  the 
state,  and  while  finding  no  compassion  for  his 
own  native  country,  brought,  with  all  its  glor¬ 
ies,  so  near  to  utter  ruin,  could  yet  be  full  of  pity 
for  those  men  who  had  better  never  have  been 
born,  and  whose  death  must  deliver  the  com¬ 
monwealth  from  bloodshed  and  destruction. 

This  only  of  all  Cato’s  speeches,  it  is  said, 
was  preserved;  for  Cicero,  the  consul,  had  dis¬ 
posed  in  various  parts  of  the  senate-house,  sev¬ 
eral  of  the  most  expert  and  rapid  writers, 
whom  he  had  taught  to  make  figures  compris¬ 
ing  numerous  words  in  a  few  short  strokes;  as 
up  to  that  time  they  had  not  used  those  we  call 
shorthand  writers,  who  then,  as  it  is  said,  es¬ 
tablished  the  first  example  of  the  art. 

Thus  Cato  carried  it,  and  so  turned  the 
house  again,  that  it  was  decreed  the  conspira¬ 
tors  should  be  put  to  death. 

Not  to  omit  any  small  matters  that  may  serve 
to  show  Cato’s  temper,  and  add  something  to 
the  portraiture  of  his  mind,  it  is  reported,  that 
while  Caesar  and  he  were  in  the  very  heat,  and 
the  whole  senate  regarding  them  both,  a  little 
note  was  brought  in  to  Caesar  which  Cato  de¬ 
clared  to  be  suspicious,  and  urging  that  some 
seditious  act  was  going  on,  bade  the  letter  be 
read.  Upon  which  Caesar  handed  the  paper  to 
Cato;  who,  discovering  it  to  be  a  love-letter 
from  his  sister  Servilia  to  Caesar,  by  whom  she 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

had  been  corrupted,  threw  it  to  him  again,  say¬ 
ing,  “Take  it,  drunkard,”  and  so  went  on  with 
his  discourse. 

And,  indeed,  it  seems  Cato  had  but  ill-for¬ 
tune  in  women;  for  this  lady  was  ill-spoken  of 
for  her  familiarity  with  Caesar,  and  the  other 
Servilla,  Cato’s  sister  also,  was  yet  more  ill-con¬ 
ducted;  for  being  married  to  Lucullus,  one  of 
the  greatest  men  in  Rome,  and  having  brought 
him  a  son,  she  was  afterwards  divorced  for 
incontinency.  But  what  was  worst  of  all,  Cato’s 
own  wife  Atilia  was  not  free  from  the  same 
fault;  and  after  she  had  borne  him  two  chil¬ 
dren,  he  was  forced  to  put  her  away  for  her 
misconduct.  After  that,  he  married  Marcia, 
the  daughter  of  Philippus,  a  woman  of  good 
reputation,  who  yet  has  occasioned  much  dis¬ 
course;  and  the  life  of  Cato,  like  a  dramatic 
piece,  has  this  one  scene  or  passage  full  of 
perplexity  and  doubtful  meaning. 

It  is  thus  related  by  Thrasea,  who  refers  to 
the  authority  of  Munatius,  Cato’s  friend  and 
constant  companion.  Among  many  that  loved 
and  admired  Cato,  some  were  more  remark¬ 
able  and  conspicuous  than  others.  Of  these  was 
Quintus  Hortensius,  a  man  of  high  repute  and 
approved  virtue,  who  desired  not  only  to  live 
in  friendship  and  familiarity  with  Cato,  but  al¬ 
so  to  unite  his  whole  house  and  family  with 
him  by  some  sort  or  other  of  alliance  in  mar¬ 
riage.  Therefore  he  set  himself  to  persuade 
Cato  that  his  daughter  Porcia,  who  was  already 
married  to  Bibulus,  and  had  borne  him  two 
children,  might  nevertheless  be  given  to  him 
as  a  fair  plot  of  land,  to  bear  fruit  also  for  him. 

“For,”  said  he,  “though  this  in  the  opinion 
of  men  may  seem  strange,  yet  in  nature  it  is 
honest  and  profitable  for  the  public  that  a 
woman  in  the  prime  of  her  youth  should  not 
lie  useless,  and  lose  the  fruit  of  her  womb,  nor, 
on  the  other  side,  should  burden  and  impov¬ 
erish  one  man,  by  bringing  him  too  many  chil¬ 
dren.  Also  by  this  communication  of  families 
among  worthy  men,  virtue  would  increase, 
and  be  diffused  through  their  posterity;  and 
the  commonwealth  would  be  united  and  ce¬ 
mented  by  their  alliances.” 

Yet  if  Bibulus  would  not  part  with  his  wife 
altogether,  he  would  restore  her  as  soon  as  she 
had  brought  him  a  child,  whereby  he  might  be 
united  to  both  their  families.  Cato  answered, 
that  he  loved  Hortensius  very  well,  and  much 
approved  of  uniting  their  houses,  but  he 
thought  it  strange  to  speak  of  marrying  his 
daughter,  when  she  was  already  given  to  an¬ 
other.  Then  Hortensius,  turning  the  discourse, 


629 

did  not  hesitate  to  speak  openly  and  ask  for 
Cato’s  own  wife,  for  she  was  young  and  fruit¬ 
ful,  and  he  had  already  children  enough.  Nei¬ 
ther  can  it  be  thought  that  Hortensius  did  this, 
as  imagining  Cato  did  not  care  for  Marcia;  for, 
it  is  said,  she  was  then  with  child.  Cato,  per¬ 
ceiving  his  earnest  desire,  did  not  deny  his  re¬ 
quest,  but  said  that  Philippus,  the  father  of 
Marcia,  ought  also  to  be  consulted.  Philippus, 
therefore,  being  sent  for,  came;  and  finding 
they  were  well  agreed,  gave  his  daughter  Mar¬ 
cia  to  Hortensius  in  the  presence  of  Cato,  who 
himself  also  assisted  at  the  marriage.  This  was 
done  at  a  later  time,  but  since  I  was  speaking 
of  women,  I  thought  it  well  to  mention  it  now. 

Lentulus  and  the  rest  of  the  conspirators 
were  put  to  death;  but  Caesar,  finding  so  much 
insinuated  and  charged  against  him  in  the  sen¬ 
ate,  betook  himself  to  the  people,  and  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  stir  up  the  most  corrupt  and  dissolute 
elements  of  the  state  to  form  a  party  in  his  sup¬ 
port.  Cato,  apprehensive  of  what  might  ensue, 
persuaded  the  senate  to  win  over  the  poor  and 
unprovided-for  multitude  by  a  distribution  ol 
corn,  the  annual  charge  of  which  amounted  to 
twelve  hundred  and  fifty  talents.  This  act  of 
humanity  and  kindness  unquestionably  dissi¬ 
pated  the  present  danger.  But  Metellus,  com¬ 
ing  into  his  office  of  tribune,  began  to  hold 
tumultuous  assemblies,  and  had  prepared  a  de¬ 
cree  that  Pompey  the  Great  should  presently 
be  called  into  Italy,  with  all  his  forces,  to  pre¬ 
serve  the  city  from  the  danger  of  Catiline’s 
conspiracy.  This  was  the  fair  pretence;  but  the 
true  design  was  to  deliver  all  into  the  hands  of 
Pompey,  and  to  give  him  an  absolute  power. 

Upon  this  the  senate  was  assembled,  and 
Cato  did  not  fall  sharply  upon  Metellus,  as  he 
often  did,  but  urged  his  advice  in  the  most  rea¬ 
sonable  and  moderate  tone.  At  last  he  de¬ 
scended  even  to  entreaty,  and  extolled  the 
house  of  Metellus  as  having  always  taken  part 
with  the  nobility.  At  this  Metellus  grew  the 
more  insolent,  and  despising  Cato,  as  if  he 
yielded  and  were  afraid,  let  himself  proceed 
to  the  most  audacious  menaces,  openly  threat¬ 
ening  to  do  whatever  he  pleased  in  spite  of  the 
senate.  Upon  this  Cato  changed  his  counte¬ 
nance,  his  voice,  and  his  language;  and  after 
many  sharp  expressions,  boldly  concluded  that, 
while  he  lived,  Pompey  should  never  come 
armed  into  the  city.  The  senate  thought  them 
both  extravagant,  and  not  well  in  their  safe 
senses;  for  the  design  of  Metellus  seemed  to 
be  mere  rage  and  frenzy,  out  of  excess  of  mis¬ 
chief  bringing  all  things  to  ruin  and  confusion, 


630 

and  Cato’s  virtue  looked  like  a  kind  of  ecstasy 
of  contention  in  the  cause  of  what  was  good 
and  just. 

But  when  the  day  came  for  the  people  to 
give  their  voices  for  the  passing  this  decree, 
and  Metellus  beforehand  occupied  the  Forum 
with  armed  men,  strangers,  gladiators,  and 
slaves,  those  that  in  hopes  of  change  followed 
Pompey  were  known  to  be  no  small  part  of  the 
people,  and  besides,  they  had  great  assistance 
from  Caesar,  who  was  then  praetor;  and  though 
the  best  and  chiefest  men  of  the  city  were  no 
less  offended  at  these  proceedings  than  Cato, 
they  seemed  rather  likely  to  suffer  with  him 
than  able  to  assist  him.  In  the  meantime  Cato’s 
whole  family  were  in  extreme  fear  and  appre¬ 
hension  for  him;  some  of  his  friends  neither 
ate  nor  slept  all  the  night,  passing  the  whole 
time  in  debating  the  perplexity;  his  wife  and 
sisters  also  bewailed  and  lamented  him.  But  he 
himself,  void  of  all  fear,  and  full  of  assurance, 
comforted  and  encouraged  them  by  his  own 
words  and  conversation  with  them.  After  sup¬ 
per  he  went  to  rest  at  his  usual  hour,  and  was 
the  next  day  waked  out  of  a  profound  sleep  by 
Minucius  Thermus,  one  of  his  colleagues. 

So  soon  as  he  was  up,  they  two  went  to¬ 
gether  into  the  Forum,  accompanied  by  very 
few,  but  met  by  a  great  many,  who  bade  them 
have  a  care  of  themselves.  Cato,  therefore, 
when  he  saw  the  temple  of  Castor  and  Pollux 
encompassed  with  armed  men,  and  the  steps 
guarded  by  gladiators,  and  at  the  top  Metellus 
and  Caesar  seated  together,  turning  to  his 
friends,  “Behold,”  said  he,  “this  audacious  cow¬ 
ard,  who  has  levied  a  regiment  of  soldiers 
against  one  unarmed  naked  man”;  and  so  he 
went  on  with  Thermus.  Those  who  kept  the 
passages  gave  way  to  these  two  only,  and 
would  not  let  anybody  else  pass.  Yet  Cato  tak¬ 
ing  Munatius  by  the  hand,  with  much  diffi¬ 
culty  pulled  him  through  along  with  him. 
Then  going  directly  to  Metellus  and  Caesar,  he 
sat  himself  down  between  them,  to  prevent 
their  talking  to  one  another,  at  which  they 
were  both  amazed  and  confounded.  And  those 
of  the  honest  party,  observing  the  countenance, 
and  admiring  the  high  spirit  and  boldness  of 
Cato,  went  nearer,  and  cried  out  to  him  to 
have  courage,  exhorting  also  one  another  to 
stand  together,  and  not  betray  their  liberty  nor 
the  defender  of  it. 

Then  the  clerk  took  out  the  bill,  but  Cato 
forbade  him  to  read  it,  whereupon  Metellus 
took  it,  and  would  have  read  it  himself,  but 
Cato  snatched  the  book  away.  Yet  Metellus, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

having  the  decree  by  heart,  began  to  recite  it 
without  book;  but  Thermus  put  his  hand  to 
his  mouth,  and  stopped  his  speech.  Metellus 
seeing  them  fully  bent  to  withstand  him,  and 
the  people  cowed,  and  inclining  to  the  better 
side,  sent  to  his  house  for  armed  men.  And  on 
their  rushing  in  with  great  noise  and  terror, 
all  the  rest  dispersed  and  ran  away,  except 
Cato,  who  alone  stood  still,  while  the  other 
party  threw  sticks  and  stones  at  him  from 
above,  until  Murena,  whom  he  had  formerly 
accused,  came  up  to  protect  him,  and  holding 
his  gown  before  him,  cried  out  to  them  to  leave 
off  throwing;  and,  in  fine,  persuading  and 
pulling  him  along,  he  forced  him  into  the 
temple  of  Castor  and  Pollux. 

Metellus,  now  seeing  the  place  clear,  and 
all  the  adverse  party  fled  out  of  the  Forum, 
thought  he  might  easily  carry  his  point;  so  he 
commanded  the  soldiers  to  retire,  and  recom¬ 
mencing  in  an  orderly  manner,  began  to  pro¬ 
ceed  to  passing  the  decree.  But  the  other  side 
having  recovered  themselves,  returned  very 
boldly,  and  with  loud  shouting,  insomuch  that 
Metellus’s  adherents  were  seized  with  a  panic, 
supposing  them  to  be  coming  with  a  reinforce¬ 
ment  of  armed  men,  fled  every  one  out  of  the 
place.  They  being  thus  dispersed,  Cato  came 
in  again,  and  confirmed  the  courage,  and  com¬ 
mended  the  resolution  of  the  people;  so  that 
now  the  majority  were,  by  all  means,  for  depos¬ 
ing  Metellus  from  his  office.  The  senate  also  be¬ 
ing  assembled,  gave  orders  once  more  for  sup¬ 
porting  Cato,  and  resisting  the  motion  as  of  a 
nature  to  excite  sedition  and  perhaps  civil  war 
in  the  city. 

But  Metellus  continued  still  very  bold  and 
resolute;  and  seeing  his  party  stood  greatly  in 
fear  of  Cato,  whom  they  looked  upon  as  in¬ 
vincible,  he  hurried  out  of  the  senate  into  the 
Forum,  and  assembled  the  people,  to  whom  he 
made  a  bitter  and  invidious  speech  against 
Cato,  crying  out,  he  was  forced  to  fly  from  his 
tyranny,  and  this  conspiracy  against  Pompey; 
that  the  city  would  soon  repent  their  having 
dishonoured  so  great  a  man.  And  from  hence 
he  started  to  go  to  Asia,  with  the  intention,  as 
would  be  supposed,  of  laying  before  Pompey 
all  the  injuries  that  were  done  him.  Cato  was 
highly  extolled  for  having  delivered  the  state 
from  this  dangerous  tribuneship,  and  having 
in  some  measure  defeated,  in  the  person  of 
Metellus,  the  power  of  Pompey;  but  he  was  yet 
more  commended  when,  upon  the  senate  pro¬ 
ceeding  to  disgrace  Metellus  and  depose  him 
from  his  office,  he  altogether  opposed  and  at 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

length  diverted  the  design.  The  common  peo¬ 
ple  admired  his  moderation  and  humanity,  in 
not  trampling  wantonly  on  an  enemy  whom  he 
had  overthrown,  and  wiser  men  acknowledg¬ 
ed  his  prudence  and  policy  in  not  exasperating 
Pompey. 

Lucullus  soon  after  returned  from  the  war 
in  Asia,  the  finishing  of  which,  and  thereby 
the  glory  of  the  whole,  was  thus,  in  all  appear¬ 
ance,  taken  out  of  his  hands  by  Pompey.  And 
he  was  also  not  far  from  losing  his  triumph, 
for  Caius  Memmius  traduced  him  to  the  peo¬ 
ple,  and  threatened  to  accuse  him;  rather,  how¬ 
ever,  out  of  love  to  Pompey,  than  for  any  par¬ 
ticular  enmity  to  him.  But  Cato,  being  allied 
to  Lucullus,  who  had  married  his  sister  Servil- 
ia,  and  also  thinking  it  a  great  injustice,  op¬ 
posed  Memmius,  thereby  exposing  himself  to 
much  slander  and  misrepresentation,  insomuch 
that  they  would  have  turned  him  out  of  his 
office,  pretending  that  he  used  his  power  ty¬ 
rannically.  Yet  at  length  Cato  so  far  prevailed 
against  Memmius  that  he  was  forced  to  let  fall 
the  accusations,  and  abandon  the  contest.  And 
Lucullus  having  thus  obtained  his  triumph, 
yet  more  sedulously  cultivated  Cato’s  friend¬ 
ship,  which  he  looked  upon  as  a  great  guard 
and  defence  for  him  against  Pompey’s  power. 

And  now  Pompey  also  returning  with  glory 
from  the  war,  and  confiding  in  the  good-will 
of  the  people,  shown  in  their  splendid  recep¬ 
tion  of  him,  thought  he  should  be  denied  noth¬ 
ing,  and  sent  therefore  to  the  senate  to  put  off 
the  assembly  for  the  election  of  consuls,  till  he 
could  be  present  to  assist  Piso,  who  stood  for 
that  office.  To  this  most  of  the  senators  were 
disposed  to  yield;  Cato  only,  not  so  much 
thinking  that  this  delay  would  be  of  great  im¬ 
portance,  but  desiring  to  cut  down  at  once 
Pompey’s  high  expectations  and  designs,  with¬ 
stood  his  request,  and  so  overruled  the  senate 
that  it  was  carried  against  him. 

This  not  a  little  disturbed  Pompey,  who 
found  he  should  very  often  fail  in  his  projects 
unless  he  could  bring  over  Cato  to  his  interest. 
He  sent,  therefore,  for  Munatius,  his  friend; 
and  Cato  having  two  nieces  that  were  mar¬ 
riageable,  he  offered  to  marry  the  eldest  him¬ 
self,  and  take  the  youngest  for  his  son.  Some 
say  they  were  not  his  nieces,  but  his  daughters. 
Munatius  proposed  the  matter  to  Cato,  in  pres¬ 
ence  of  his  wife  and  sisters;  the  women  were 
full  of  joy  at  the  prospect  of  an  alliance  with  so 
great  and  important  a  person.  But  Cato,  with¬ 
out  delay  or  balancing,  forming  his  decision 
at  once,  answered,  “Go,  Munatius,  go  and  tell 


631 

Pompey  that  Cato  is  not  assailable  on  the  side 
of  the  women’s  chamber;  I  am  grateful  indeed 
for  the  intended  kindness,  and  so  long  as  his 
actions  are  upright,  I  promise  him  a  friendship 
more  sure  than  any  marriage  alliance,  but  I 
will  not  give  hostages  to  Pompey’s  glory 
against  my  country’s  safety.” 

This  answer  was  very  much  against  the 
wishes  of  the  women,  and  to  all  his  friends 
it  seemed  somewhat  harsh  and  haughty.  But 
afterwards,  when  Pompey,  endeavouring  to 
get  the  consulship  for  one  of  his  friends,  gave 
pay  to  the  people  for  their  votes,  and  the  brib¬ 
ery  was  notorious,  the  money  being  counted 
out  in  Pompey’s  own  gardens,  Cato  then  said 
to  the  women,  they  must  necessarily  have  been 
concerned  in  the  contamination  of  these  mis¬ 
deeds  of  Pompey,  if  they  had  been  allied  to 
his  family;  and  they  acknowledged  that  he  did 
best  in  refusing  it. 

Yet  if  we  may  judge  by  the  event,  Cato  was 
much  to  blame  in  rejecting  that  alliance,  which 
thereby  fell  to  Caesar.  And  then  that  match  was 
made,  which,  uniting  his  and  Pompey’s  pow¬ 
er,  had  well-nigh  ruined  the  Roman  empire, 
and  did  destroy  the  commonwealth.  Nothing 
of  which,  perhaps,  had  come  to  pass,  but  that 
Cato  was  too  apprehensive  of  Pompey’s  least 
faults,  and  did  not  consider  how  he  forced  him 
into  conferring  on  another  man  the  opportu¬ 
nity  of  committing  the  greatest. 

These  things,  however,  were  yet  to  come. 
Lucullus  and  Pompey,  meantime,  had  a  great 
dispute  concerning  their  orders  and  arrange¬ 
ments  in  Pontus,  each  endeavouring  that  his 
own  ordinances  might  stand.  Cato  took  part 
with  Lucullus,  who  was  manifestly  suffering 
wrong;  and  Pompey,  finding  himself  the 
weaker  in  the  senate,  had  recourse  to  the  peo¬ 
ple,  and  to  gain  votes  he  proposed  a  law  for 
dividing  the  lands  among  the  soldiers.  Cato 
opposing  him  in  this  also  made  the  bill  be  re¬ 
jected.  Upon  this  he  joined  himself  with  Clodi- 
us,  at  that  time  the  most  violent  of  all  the 
demagogues,  and  entered  also  into  friendship 
with  Caesar,  upon  an  occasion  of  which  also 
Cato  was  the  cause. 

For  Caesar,  returning  from  his  government 
in  Spain,  at  the  same  time  sued  to  be  chosen 
consul,  and  yet  desired  not  to  lose  his  triumph. 
Now  the  law  requiring  that  those  who  stood 
for  any  office  should  be  present,  and  yet  that 
whoever  expected  a  triumph  should  continue 
without  the  walls,  Caesar  requested  the  senate 
that  his  friends  might  be  permitted  to  canvass 
for  him  in  his  absence.  Many  of  the  senators 


632 


were  willing  to  consent  to  it,  but  Cato  opposed 
it,  and  perceiving  them  inclined  to  favour 
Caesar,  spent  the  whole  day  in  speaking,  and 
so  prevented  the  senate  from  coming  to  any 
conclusion.  Caesar,  therefore,  resolving  to  let 
fall  his  pretensions  to  the  triumph,  came  into 
the  town,  and  immediately  made  a  friendship 
with  Pompey,  and  stood  for  the  consulship.  As 
soon  as  he  was  declared  consul  elect,  he  mar¬ 
ried  his  daughter  Julia  to  Pompey. 

And  having  thus  combined  themselves  to¬ 
gether  against  the  commonwealth,  the  one 
proposed  laws  for  dividing  the  lands  among 
the  poor  people,  and  the  other  was  present  to 
support  the  proposals.  Lucullus,  Cicero,  and 
their  friends,  joined  with  Bibulus,  the  other 
consul,  to  hinder  their  passing,  and,  foremost 
of  them  all,  Cato,  who  already  looked  upon 
the  friendship  and  alliance  of  Pompey  and 
Caesar  as  very  dangerous,  declared  he  did  not 
so  much  dislike  the  advantage  the  people 
should  get  by  this  division  of  the  lands,  as  he 
feared  the  reward  these  men  would  gain,  by 
thus  courting  and  cozening  the  people.  And 
in  this  he  gained  over  the  senate  to  his  opin¬ 
ion,  as  likewise  many  who  were  not  senators, 
who  were  offended  at  Caesar’s  ill  conduct,  that 
he,  in  the  office  of  consul,  should  thus  basely 
and  dishonourably  flatter  the  people;  practis¬ 
ing,  to  win  their  favour,  the  same  means  that 
were  wont  to  be  used  only  by  the  most  rash 
and  rebellious  tribunes. 

Caesar,  therefore,  and  his  party,  fearing  they 
should  not  carry  it  by  fair  dealing,  fell  to  open 
force.  First  a  basket  of  dung  was  thrown  upon 
Bibulus  as  he  was  going  to  the  Forum;  then 
they  set  upon  his  lictors  and  broke  their  rods; 
at  length  several  darts  were  thrown,  and  many 
men  wounded;  so  that  all  that  were  against 
those  laws  fled  out  of  the  Forum,  the  rest  with 
what  haste  they  could,  and  Cato,  last  of  all, 
walking  out  slowly,  often  turning  back  and 
calling  down  vengeance  upon  them. 

Thus  the  other  party  not  only  carried  their 
point  of  dividing  the  lands,  but  also  ordained 
that  all  the  senate  should  swear  to  confirm  this 
law,  and  to  defend  it  against  whoever  should 
attempt  to  alter  it,  inflicting  great  penalties 
on  those  that  should  refuse  the  oath.  All  these 
senators,  seeing  the  necessity  they  were  in,  took 
the  oath,  remembering  the  example  of  Metel- 
lus  in  old  time,  who,  refusing  to  swear  upon 
the  like  occasion,  was  forced  to  leave  Italy. 

As  for  Cato,  his  wife  and  children  with  tears 
besought  him,  his  friends  and  familiars  per¬ 
suaded  and  entreated  him,  to  yield  and  take 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  oath;  but  he  that  principally  prevailed  with 
him  was  Cicero,  the  orator,  who  urged  upon 
him  that  it  was  perhaps  not  even  right  in  itself, 
that  a  private  man  should  oppose  what  the 
public  had  decreed;  that  the  thing  being  al¬ 
ready  past  altering,  it  were  folly  and  madness 
to  throw  himself  into  danger  without  the 
chance  of  doing  his  country  any  good;  it 
would  be  the  greatest  of  all  evils  to  embrace, 
as  it  were,  the  opportunity  to  abandon  the 
commonwealth,  for  whose  sake  he  did  every¬ 
thing,  and  to  let  it  fall  into  the  hands  of  those 
who  designed  nothing  but  its  ruin,  as  if  he 
were  glad  to  be  saved  from  the  trouble  of  de¬ 
fending  it.  “For,”  said  he,  “though  Cato  have 
no  need  of  Rome,  yet  Rome  has  need  of  Cato, 
and  so  likewise  have  all  his  friends.”  Of  whom 
Cicero  professed  he  himself  was  the  chief,  be¬ 
ing  at  that  time  aimed  at  by  Clodius,  who 
openly  threatened  to  fall  upon  him,  as  soon  as 
ever  he  should  get  to  be  tribune. 

Thus  Cato,  they  say,  moved  by  the  entrea¬ 
ties  and  the  arguments  of  his  friends,  went  un¬ 
willingly  to  take  the  oath,  which  he  did  the 
last  of  all,  except  only  Favonius,  one  of  his 
intimate  acquaintance. 

Caesar,  exalted  with  this  success,  proposed 
another  law,  for  dividing  almost  all  the  coun¬ 
try  of  Campania  among  the  poor  and  needy 
citizens.  Nobody  durst  speak  against  it  but 
Cato,  whom  Caesar  therefore  pulled  from  the 
rostra  and  dragged  to  prison:  yet  Cato  did  not 
even  thus  remit  his  freedom  of  speech,  but 
as  he  went  along  continued  to  speak  against 
the  law,  and  advised  the  people  to  put  down 
all  legislators  who  proposed  the  like.  The  sen¬ 
ate  and  the  best  of  the  citizens  followed  him 
with  sad  and  dejected  looks,  showing  their 
grief  and  indignation  by  their  silence,  so  that 
Caesar  could  not  be  ignorant  how  much  they 
were  offended;  but  for  contention’s  sake  he 
still  persisted,  expecting  Cato  should  either 
supplicate  him,  or  make  an  appeal.  But  when 
he  saw  that  he  did  not  so  much  as  think  of 
doing  either,  ashamed  of  what  he  was  doing 
and  of  what  people  thought  of  it,  he  himself 
privately  bade  one  of  the  tribunes  interpose 
and  procure  his  release. 

However,  having  won  the  multitude  by 
these  laws  and  gratifications,  they  decreed  that 
Caesar  should  have  the  government  of  Illyri- 
cum,  and  all  Gaul,  with  an  army  of  four  le¬ 
gions,  for  the  space  of  five  years,  though  Cato 
still  cried  out  they  were,  by  their  own  vote, 
placing  a  tyrant  in  their  citadel.  Publius  Clodi¬ 
us,  a  patrician,  who  illegally  became  a  plebeian, 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

was  declared  tribune  of  the  people,  as  he  had 
promised  to  do  all  things  according  to  their 
pleasure,  on  condition  he  might  banish  Cic¬ 
ero.  And  for  consuls,  they  set  up  Calpur- 
nius  Piso,  the  father  of  Caesar’s  wife,  and 
Aulus  Gabinius,  one  of  Pompey’s  creatures, 
as  they  tell  us,  who  best  knew  his  life  and 
manners. 

Yet  when  they  had  thus  firmly  established 
all  things,  having  mastered  one  part  of  the 
city  by  favour,  and  the  other  by  fear,  they 
themselves  were  still  afraid  of  Cato,  and  re¬ 
membered  with  vexation  what  pains  and  trou¬ 
ble  their  success  over  him  had  cost  them,  and 
indeed  what  shame  and  disgrace,  when  at  last 
they  were  driven  to  use  violence  to  him.  This 
made  Clodius  despair  of  driving  Cicero  out  of 
Italy  while  Cato  stayed  at  home.  Therefore, 
having  first  laid  his  design,  as  soon  as  he  came 
into  his  office,  he  sent  for  Cato,  and  told  him 
that  he  looked  upon  him  as  the  most  incorrupt 
of  all  the  Romans,  and  was  ready  to  show 
he  did  so.  “For  whereas,”  said  he,  “many  have 
applied  to  be  sent  to  Cyprus  on  the  commission 
in  the  case  of  Ptolemy  and  have  solicited  to 
have  the  appointment,  I  think  you  alone  are 
deserving  of  it,  and  I  desire  to  give  you  the 
favour  of  the  appointment.” 

Cato  at  once  cried  out  it  was  a  mere  design 
upon  him,  and  no  favour,  but  an  injury.  Then 
Clodius  proudly  and  fiercely  answered,  “If  you 
will  not  take  it  as  a  kindness,  you  shall  go, 
though  never  so  unwillingly”;  and  immedi¬ 
ately  going  into  the  assembly  of  the  people  he 
made  them  pass  a  decree,  that  Cato  should  be 
sent  to  Cyprus.  But  they  ordered  him  neither 
ship,  nor  soldier,  nor  any  attendant,  except  two 
secretaries,  one  of  whom  was  a  thief  and  a 
rascal,  and  the  other  a  retainer  to  Clodius.  Be¬ 
sides,  as  if  Cyprus  and  Ptolemy  were  not  work 
sufficient,  he  was  ordered  also  to  restore  the  ref¬ 
ugees  of  Byzantium.  For  Clodius  was  resolved 
to  keep  him  far  enough  off  whilst  he  himself 
continued  tribune. 

Cato,  being  in  this  necessity  of  going  away, 
advised  Cicero,  who  was  next  to  be  set  upon,  to 
make  no  resistance,  lest  he  should  throw  the 
state  into  civil  war  and  confusion,  but  to  give 
way  to  the  times,  and  thus  become  once  more 
the  preserver  of  his  country.  He  himself  sent 
forward  Canidius,  one  of  his  friends,  to  Cy¬ 
prus,  to  persuade  Ptolemy  to  yield,  without  be¬ 
ing  forced;  which  if  he  did,  he  should  want 
neither  riches  nor  honour,  for  the  Romans 
would  give  him  the  priesthood  of  the  god¬ 
dess  at  Paphos.  He  himself  stayed  at  Rhodes, 


633 

making  some  preparations,  and  expecting  an 
answer  from  Cyprus. 

In  the  meantime,  Ptolemy,  King  of  Egypt, 
who  had  left  Alexandria,  upon  some  quarrel 
between  him  and  his  subjects,  and  was  sailing 
for  Rome,  in  hopes  that  Pompey  and  Caesar 
would  send  troops  to  restore  him,  in  his  way 
thither  desired  to  see  Cato,  to  whom  he  sent, 
supposing  he  would  come  to  him.  Cato  had 
taken  purging  medicine  at  the  time  when 
the  messenger  came,  and  made  answer  that 
Ptolemy  had  better  come  to  him,  if  he  thought 
fit.  And  when  he  came,  he  neither  went  for¬ 
ward  to  meet  him,  nor  so  much  as  rose  up  to 
him,  but  saluting  him  as  an  ordinary  person, 
bade  him  sit  down. 

This  at  once  threw  Ptolemy  into  some  con¬ 
fusion,  who  was  surprised  to  see  such  stern  and 
haughty  manners  in  one  who  made  so  plain 
and  unpretending  an  appearance;  but  after¬ 
wards,  when  he  began  to  talk  about  his  affairs, 
he  was  no  less  astonished  at  the  wisdom  and 
freedom  of  his  discourse.  For  Cato  blamed  his 
conduct,  and  pointed  out  to  him  what  honour 
and  happiness  he  was  abandoning,  and  what 
humiliations  and  troubles  he  would  run  him¬ 
self  into;  what  bribery  he  must  resort  to,  and 
what  cupidity  he  would  have  to  satisfy  when 
he  came  to  the  leading  men  at  Rome,  whom 
all  Egypt  turned  into  silver  would  scarcely 
content.  He  therefore  advised  him  to  return 
home,  and  be  reconciled  to  his  subjects,  offer¬ 
ing  to  go  along  with  him,  and  assist  him  in 
composing  the  differences. 

And  by  this  language  Ptolemy  being  brought 
to  himself,  as  it  might  be  out  of  a  fit  of  mad¬ 
ness  or  delirium,  and  discerning  the  truth  and 
wisdom  of  what  Cato  said,  resolved  to  follow 
his  advice;  but  he  was  again  over-persuaded 
by  his  friends  to  the  contrary,  and  so,  accord¬ 
ing  to  his  first  design,  went  to  Rome.  When 
he  came  there,  and  was  forced  to  wait  at  the 
gate  of  one  of  the  magistrates,  he  began  to 
lament  his  folly  in  having  rejected,  rather,  as 
it  seemed  to  him,  the  oracle  of  a  god  than  the 
advice  merely  of  a  good  and  wise  man. 

In  the  meantime,  the  other  Ptolemy,  in  Cy¬ 
prus,  very  luckily  for  Cato,  poisoned  himself. 
It  was  reported  he  had  left  great  riches;  there¬ 
fore,  Cato  designing  to  go  first  to  Byzantium, 
sent  his  nephew  Brutus  to  Cyprus,  as  he  would 
not  wholly  trust  Canidius.  Then,  having  rec¬ 
onciled  the  refugees  and  the  people  of  Byzan¬ 
tium,  he  left  the  city  in  peace  and  quietness; 
and  so  sailed  to  Cyprus,  where  he  found  a 
royal  treasure  of  plate,  tables,  precious  stones 


634 

and  purple,  all  which  was  to  be  turned  into 
ready  money.  And  being  determined  to  do 
everything  with  the  greatest  exactness,  and  to 
raise  the  price  of  everything  to  the  utmost,  to 
this  end  he  was  always  present  at  selling  the 
things,  and  went  carefully  into  all  the  ac¬ 
counts.  Nor  would  he  trust  to  the  usual  cus¬ 
toms  of  the  market,  but  looked  doubtfully 
upon  all  alike,  the  officers,  criers,  purchasers, 
and  even  his  own  friends;  and  so  in  fine  he 
himself  talked  with  the  buyers, and  urged  them 
to  bid  high,  and  conducted  in  this  manner  the 
greatest  part  of  the  sales. 

This  mistrustfulness  offended  most  of  his 
friends,  and  in  particular,  Munatius,  the  most 
intimate  of  them  all,  became  almost  irreconcil¬ 
able.  And  this  afforded  Caesar  the  subject  of 
his  severest  censures  in  the  book  he  wrote 
against  Cato.  Yet  Munatius  himself  relates, 
that  the  quarrel  was  not  so  much  occasioned 
by  Cato’s  mistrust,  as  by  his  neglect  of  him, 
and  by  his  own  jealousy  of  Canidius.  For  Mun¬ 
atius  also  wrote  a  book  concerning  Cato,  which 
is  the  chief  authority  followed  by  Thrasea. 
Munatius  says,  that  coming  to  Cyprus  after  the 
other,  and  having  a  very  poor  lodging  pro¬ 
vided  for  him,  he  went  to  Cato’s  house,  but 
was  not  admitted,  because  he  was  engaged  in 
private  with  Canidius;  of  which  he  afterwards 
complained  in  very  gentle  terms  to  Cato,  but 
received  a  very  harsh  answer,  that  too  much 
love,  according  to  Theophrastus,  often  causes 
hatred;  “and  you,”  he  said,  “because  you  bear 
me  much  love,  think  you  receive  too  little  hon¬ 
our,  and  presently  grow  angry.  I  employ  Cani¬ 
dius  on  account  of  his  industry  and  his  fidelity; 
he  has  been  with  me  from  the  first,  and  I  have 
found  him  to  be  trusted.” 

These  things  were  said  in  private  between 
those  two;  but  Cato  afterwards  told  Canidius 
what  had  passed,  on  being  informed  of  which, 
Munatius  would  no  more  go  to  sup  with  him, 
and  when  he  was  invited  to  give  his  counsel, 
refused  to  come.  Then  Cato  threatened  to  seize 
his  goods,  as  was  the  custom  in  the  case  of 
those  who  were  disobedient;  but  Munatius  not 
regarding  his  threats,  returned  to  Rome,  and 
continued  a  long  time  thus  discontented.  But 
afterwards,  when  Cato  was  come  back  also, 
Marcia,  who  as  yet  lived  with  him,  contrived 
to  have  them  both  invited  to  sup  together  at 
the  house  of  one  Barca;  Cato  came  in  last  of 
all,  when  the  rest  were  laid  down,  and  asked 
where  he  should  be.  Barca  answered  him, 
where  he  pleased;  then  looking  about,  he  said 
he  would  be  near  Munatius,  and  went  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

placed  himself  next  to  him;  yet  he  showed  him 
no  other  mark  of  kindness  all  the  time  they 
were  at  table  together.  But  another  time,  at 
the  entreaty  of  Marcia,  Cato  wrote  to  Munati¬ 
us  that  he  desired  to  speak  with  him.  Munati¬ 
us  went  to  his  house  in  the  morning,  and  was 
kept  by  Marcia  till  all  the  company  was  gone; 
then  Cato  came,  threw  both  his  arms  about 
him,  and  embraced  him  very  kindly,  and  they 
were  reconciled. 

I  have  the  more  fully  related  this  passage,  for 
that  I  think  the  manners  and  tempers  of  men 
are  more  clearly  discovered  by  things  of  this 
nature,  than  by  great  and  conspicuous  actions. 

Cato  got  together  little  less  than  seven  thou¬ 
sand  talents  of  silver;  but  apprehensive  of  what 
might  happen  in  so  long  a  voyage  by  sea,  he 
provided  a  great  many  coffers  that  held  two 
talents  and  five  hundred  drachmas  apiece;  to 
each  of  these  he  fastened  a  long  rope,  and  to 
the  other  end  of  the  rope  a  piece  of  cork,  so 
that  if  the  ship  should  miscarry,  it  might  be 
discovered  whereabout  the  chests  lay  under 
water.  Thus  all  the  money,  except  a  very  little, 
was  safely  transported. 

But  he  had  made  two  books,  in  which  all 
the  accounts  of  his  commission  were  carefully 
written  out,  and  neither  of  these  was  pre¬ 
served.  For  his  freedman  Philargyrus,  who  had 
the  charge  of  one  of  them,  setting  sail  from 
Cenchreae,  was  lost,  together  with  the  ship  and 
all  her  freight.  And  the  other  Cato  himself 
kept  safe  till  he  came  to  Corcyra,  but  there  he 
set  up  his  tent  in  the  market-place,  and  the 
sailors,  being  very  cold  in  the  night,  made  a 
great  many  fires,  some  of  which  caught  the 
tents,  so  that  they  were  burnt,  and  the  book 
lost.  And  though  he  had  brought  with  him 
several  of  Ptolemy’s  stewards,  who  could  testi¬ 
fy  to  his  integrity,  and  stop  the  mouths  of  ene¬ 
mies  and  false  accusers,  yet  the  loss  annoyed 
him,  and  he  was  vexed  with  himself  about  the 
matter,  as  he  had  designed  them  not  so  much 
for  a  proof  of  his  own  fidelity,  as  for  a  pat¬ 
tern  of  exactness  to  others. 

The  news  did  not  fail  to  reach  Rome  that 
he  was  coming  up  the  river.  All  the  magis¬ 
trates,  the  priests,  and  the  whole  senate,  with 
great  part  of  the  people,  went  out  to  meet  him; 
both  the  banks  of  the  Tiber  were  covered  with 
people;  so  that  his  entrance  was  in  solemnity 
and  honour  not  inferior  to  a  triumph.  But  it 
was  thought  somewhat  strange,  and  looked 
like  wilfulness  and  pride,  that  when  the  con¬ 
suls  and  praetors  appeared,  he  did  not  disem¬ 
bark,  nor  stay  to  salute  them,  but  rowed  up  the 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

stream  in  a  royal  galley  of  six  banks  of  oars, 
and  stopped  not  till  he  brought  his  vessels  to 
the  dock.  However,  when  the  money  was  car¬ 
ried  through  the  streets,  the  people  much  won¬ 
dered  at  the  vast  quantity  of  it,  and  the  senate 
being  assembled,  decreed  him  in  honourable 
terms  an  extraordinary  praetorship,  and  also 
the  privilege  of  appearing  at  the  public  spec¬ 
tacles  in  a  robe  faced  with  purple.  Cato  declin¬ 
ed  all  these  honours,  but  declaring  what  dili¬ 
gence  and  fidelity  he  had  found  in  Nicias,  the 
steward  of  Ptolemy,  he  requested  the  senate  to 
give  him  his  freedom. 

Philippus,  the  father  of  Marcia,  was  that 
year  consul,  and  the  authority  and  power  of  the 
office  rested  in  a  manner  in  Cato;  for  the  other 
consul  paid  him  no  less  regard  for  his  virtue's 
sake  than  Philippus  did  on  account  of  the  con¬ 
nection  between  them.  And  Cicero,  now  being 
returned  from  his  banishment,  into  which  he 
was  driven  by  Clodius,  and  having  again  ob¬ 
tained  great  credit  among  the  people,  went, 
in  the  absence  of  Clodius,  and  by  force  took 
away  the  records  of  his  tribuneship,  which  had 
been  laid  up  in  the  capitol.  Hereupon  the  sen¬ 
ate  was  assembled  and  Clodius  complained  of 
Cicero,  who  answered  that  Clodius  was  never 
legally  tribune,  and  therefore  whatever  he  had 
done  was  void,  and  of  no  authority. 

But  Cato  interrupted  him  while  he  spoke, 
and  at  last  standing  up  said  that  indeed  he  in 
no  way  justified  or  approved  of  Clodius’s  pro¬ 
ceedings;  but  if  they  questioned  the  validity 
of  what  had  been  done  in  his  tribuneship,  they 
might  also  question  what  himself  had  done  at 
Cyprus,  for  the  expedition  was  unlawful,  if  he 
that  sent  him  had  no  lawful  authority:  for 
himself,  he  thought  Clodius  was  legally  made 
tribune,  who,  by  permission  of  the  law,  was 
from  a  patrician  adopted  into  a  plebeian  fam¬ 
ily;  if  he  had  done  ill  in  his  office,  he  ought  to 
be  called  to  account  for  it,  but  the  authority 
of  the  magistracy  ought  not  to  suffer  for  the 
faults  of  the  magistrate.  Cicero  took  this  ill, 
and  for  a  long  time  discontinued  his  friend¬ 
ship  with  Cato;  but  they  were  afterwards  rec¬ 
onciled. 

Pompey  and  Crassus,  by  agreement  with 
Caesar,  who  crossed  the  Alps  to  see  them,  had 
formed  a  design,  that  they  two  should  stand 
to  be  chosen  consuls  a  second  time,  and  when 
they  should  be  in  their  office,  they  would  con¬ 
tinue  to  Caesar  his  government  for  five  years 
more,  and  take  to  themselves  the  greatest  prov¬ 
inces,  with  armies  and  money  to  maintain 
them.  This  seemed  a  plain  conspiracy  to  sub- 


635 

vert  the  constitution  and  parcel  out  the  empire. 
Several  men  of  high  character  had  intended 
to  stand  to  be  consuls  that  year,  but  upon  the 
appearance  of  these  great  competitors,  they 
all  desisted,  except  only  Lucius  Domitius,  who 
had  married  Porcia,  the  sister  of  Cato,  and 
was  by  him  persuaded  to  stand  it  out,  and  not 
abandon  such  an  undertaking,  which,  he  said, 
was  not  merely  to  gain  the  consulship,  but  to 
save  the  liberty  of  Rome. 

In  the  meantime,  it  was  the  common  topic 
among  the  more  prudent  part  of  the  citizens, 
that  they  ought  not  to  suffer  the  power  of  Pom¬ 
pey  and  Crassus  to  be  united,  which  would 
then  be  carried  beyond  all  bounds,  and  become 
dangerous  to  the  state;  that  therefore  one  of 
them  must  be  denied.  For  these  reasons  they 
took  part  with  Domitius,  whom  they  exhorted 
and  encouraged  to  go  on,  assuring  him  that 
many  who  feared  openly  to  appear  for  him, 
would  privately  assist  him.  Pompey ’s  party 
fearing  this,  laid  wait  for  Domitius,  and  set 
upon  him  as  he  was  going  before  daylight, 
with  torches,  into  the  field.  First,  he  that  bore 
the  light  next  before  Domitius  was  knocked 
down  and  killed;  then  several  others  being 
wounded,  all  the  rest  fled,  except  Cato  and 
Domitius,  whom  Cato  held,  though  himself 
were  wounded  in  the  arm,  and  crying  out,  con¬ 
jured  the  others  to  stay,  and  not,  while  they 
had  any  breath,  forsake  the  defence  of  their 
liberty  against  those  tyrants,  who  plainly  show¬ 
ed  with  what  moderation  they  were  likely  to 
use  the  power  which  they  endeavoured  to  gain 
by  such  violence.  But  at  length  Domitius,  also, 
no  longer  willing  to  face  the  danger,  fled  to 
his  own  house,  and  so  Pompey  and  Crassus 
were  declared  elected. 

Nevertheless,  Cato  would  not  give  over,  but 
resolved  to  stand  himself  to  be  praetor  that  year, 
which  he  thought  would  be  some  help  to  him 
in  his  design  of  opposing  them;  that  he  might 
not  act  as  a  private  man,  when  he  was  to 
contend  with  public  magistrates.  Pompey  and 
Crassus  apprehended  this;  and  fearing  that  the 
office  of  praetor  in  the  person  of  Cato  might  be 
equal  in  authority  to  that  of  consul,  they  as¬ 
sembled  the  senate  unexpectedly,  without  giv¬ 
ing  notice  to  a  great  many  of  the  senators,  and 
made  an  order,  that  those  who  were  chosen 
praetors  should  immediately  enter  upon  their 
office,  without  attending  the  usual  time,  in 
which,  according  to  law,  they  might  be  ac¬ 
cused,  if  they  had  corrupted  the  people  with 
gifts.  When  by  this  order  they  had  got  leave 
to  bribe  freely,  without  being  called  to  account, 


636 

they  set  up  their  own  friends  and  dependents 
to  stand  for  the  prartorship,  giving  money,  and 
watching  the  people  as  they  voted.  Yet  the  vir¬ 
tue  and  reputation  of  Cato  was  like  to  triumph 
over  all  these  stratagems;  for  the  people  gen¬ 
erally  felt  it  to  be  shameful  that  a  price  should 
be  paid  for  the  rejection  of  Cato,  who  ought 
rather  to  be  paid  himself  to  take  upon  him  the 
office.  So  he  carried  it  by  the  voices  of  the  first 
tribe. 

Hereupon  Pompey  immediately  framed  a 
lie,  crying  out  it  thundered;  and  straight  broke 
up  the  assembly,  for  the  Romans  religiously 
observed  this  as  a  bad  omen,  and  never  con¬ 
cluded  any  matter  after  it  had  thundered.  Be¬ 
fore  the  next  time,  they  had  distributed  larger 
bribes,  and  driving  also  the  best  men  out  of 
the  field,  by  these  foul  means  they  procured 
Vatinius  to  be  chosen  praetor,  instead  of  Cato. 
It  is  said,  that  those  who  had  thus  corruptly 
and  dishonestly  given  their  voices  hurried,  as  if 
it  were  in  flight,  out  of  the  field.  The  others 
staying  together,  and  exclaiming  at  the  event, 
one  of  the  tribunes  continued  the  assembly, 
and  Cato  standing  up,  as  it  were  by  inspira¬ 
tion,  foretold  all  the  miseries  that  afterwards 
befell  the  state,  exhorted  them  to  beware  of 
Pompey  and  Crassus,  who  were  guilty  of  such 
things,  and  had  laid  such  designs,  that  they 
might  well  fear  to  have  Cato  praetor.  When  he 
had  ended  this  speech,  he  was  followed  to  his 
house  by  a  greater  number  of  people  than  all 
the  new  praetors  elect  put  together. 

Caius  Trebonius  now  proposed  the  law  for 
alloting  provinces  to  the  consuls,  one  of  whom 
was  to  have  Spain  and  Africa,  the  other  Egypt 
and  Syria,  with  full  power  of  making  war,  and 
carrying  it  on  both  by  sea  and  land,  as  they 
should  think  fit.  When  this  was  proposed,  all 
others  despaired  of  putting  any  stop  to  it,  and 
neither  did  nor  said  anything  against  it.  But 
Cato,  before  the  voting  began,  went  up  into 
the  place  of  speaking,  and  desiring  to  be  heard, 
was  with  much  difficulty  allowed  two  hours  to 
speak.  Having  spent  that  time  in  informing 
them  and  reasoning  with  them,  and  in  fore¬ 
telling  to  them  much  that  was  to  come,  he 
was  not  suffered  to  speak  any  longer;  but  as 
he  was  going  on,  a  serjeant  came  and  pulled 
him  down;  yet  when  he  was  down,  he  still  con¬ 
tinued  speaking  in  a  loud  voice,  and  finding 
many  to  listen  to  him,  and  join  in  his  indigna¬ 
tion.  Then  the  serjeant  took  him,  and  forced 
him  out  of  the  Forum;  but  as  soon  as  he  got 
loose,  he  returned  again  to  the  place  of  speak¬ 
ing,  crying  out  to  the  people  to  stand  by  him. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

When  he  had  done  thus  several  times,  Tre¬ 
bonius  grew  very  angry,  and  commanded  him 
to  be  carried  to  prison;  but  the  multitude  fol¬ 
lowed  him,  and  listened  to  the  speech  which 
he  made  to  them  as  he  went  along;  so  that 
Trebonius  began  to  be  afraid  again,  and  or¬ 
dered  him  to  be  released. 

Thus  that  day  was  expended,  and  the  busi¬ 
ness  staved  off  by  Cato.  But  in  the  days  suc¬ 
ceeding,  many  of  the  citizens  being  overawed 
by  fears  and  threats,  and  others  won  by  gifts 
and  favours,  Aquillius,  one  of  the  tribunes, 
they  kept  by  an  armed  force  within  the  senate- 
house;  Cato,  who  cried  it  thundered,  they 
drove  out  of  the  Forum;  many  were  wounded, 
and  some  slain;  and  at  length  by  open  force 
they  passed  the  law.  At  this  many  were  so 
incensed  that  they  got  together  and  were  go¬ 
ing  to  throw  down  the  statues  of  Pompey;  but 
Cato  went  and  diverted  them  from  that  design. 

Again,  another  law  was  proposed,  concern¬ 
ing  the  provinces  and  legions  of  Caesar.  Upon 
this  occasion  Cato  did  not  apply  himself  to 
the  people,  but  appealed  to  Pompey  himself; 
and  told  him,  he  did  not  consider  now  that  he 
was  setting  Caesar  upon  his  own  shoulders, 
who  would  shortly  grow  too  weighty  for  him; 
and  at  length,  not  able  to  lay  down  the  burden, 
nor  yet  to  bear  it  any  longer,  he  would  precipi¬ 
tate  both  it  and  himself  with  it  upon  the  com¬ 
monwealth;  and  then  he  would  remember  Ca¬ 
to’s  advice,  which  was  no  less  advantageous  to 
him  than  just  and  honest  in  itself.  Thus  was 
Pompey  often  warned,  but  still  disregarded 
and  slighted  it,  never  mistrusting  Caesar’s 
change,  and  always  confiding  in  his  own 
power  and  good  fortune. 

Cato  was  made  praetor  the  following  year; 
but,  it  seems,  he  did  not  do  more  honour  and 
credit  to  the  office  by  his  signal  integrity  than 
he  disgraced  and  diminished  it  by  his  strange 
behaviour.  For  he  would  often  come  to  the 
court  without  his  shoes,  and  sit  upon  the  bench 
without  any  undergarment,  and  in  this  attire 
would  give  judgment  in  capital  causes,  and  up¬ 
on  persons  of  the  highest  rank.  It  is  said,  also, 
he  used  to  drink  wine  after  his  morning  meal, 
and  then  transact  the  business  of  his  office; 
but  this  was  wrongfully  reported  of  him.  The 
people  were  at  that  time  extremely  corrupted 
by  the  gifts  of  those  who  sought  offices,  and 
most  made  a  constant  trade  of  selling  their 
voices. 

Cato  was  eager  utterly  to  root  this  corrup¬ 
tion  out  of  the  commonwealth;  he  therefore 
persuaded  the  senate  to  make  an  order,  that 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

those  who  were  chosen  into  any  office,  though 
nobody  should  accuse  them,  should  be  obliged 
to  come  into  the  court,  and  give  account  upon 
oath  of  their  proceedings  in  their  election.  This 
was  extremely  obnoxious  to  those  who  stood 
for  the  offices,  and  yet  more  to  those  vast  num¬ 
bers  who  took  the  bribes.  Insomuch  that  one 
morning,  as  Cato  was  going  to  the  tribunal,  a 
great  multitude  of  people  flocked  together,  and 
with  loud  cries  and  maledictions  reviled  him, 
and  threw  stones  at  him.  Those  that  were 
about  the  tribunal  presently  fled,  and  Cato 
himself  being  forced  thence,  and  jostled  about 
in  the  throng,  very  narrowly  escaped  the  stones 
that  were  thrown  at  him,  and  with  much  diffi¬ 
culty  got  hold  of  the  rostra;  where,  standing 
up  with  a  bold  and  undaunted  countenance,  he 
at  once  mastered  the  tumult,  and  silenced  the 
clamour;  and  addressing  them  in  fit  terms  for 
the  occasion,  was  heard  with  great  attention, 
and  perfectly  quelled  the  sedition.  Afterwards, 
on  the  senate  commending  him  for  this,  “But 
I,”  said  he,  “do  not  commend  you  for  aban¬ 
doning  your  praetor  in  danger,  and  bringing 
him  no  assistance.” 

In  the  meantime,  the  candidates  were  in 
great  perplexity;  for  every  one  dreaded  to  give 
money  himself,  and  yet  feared’ lest  his  competi¬ 
tors  should.  At  length  they  agreed  to  lay  down 
one  hundred  and  twenty-five  thousand  drach¬ 
mas  apiece,  and  then  all  of  them  to  canvass 
fairly  and  honestly,  on  condition,  that  if  any 
one  was  found  to  make  use  of  bribery  he 
should  forfeit  the  money.  Being  thus  agreed, 
they  chose  Cato  to  keep  the  stakes,  and  arbi¬ 
trate  the  matter;  to  him  they  brought  the  sum 
concluded  on,  and  before  him  subscribed  the 
agreement.  The  money  he  did  not  choose  to 
have  paid  for  them,  but  took  their  securities 
who  stood  bound  for  them.  Upon  the  day  of 
election,  he  placed  himself  by  the  tribune  who 
took  the  votes,  and  very  watchfully  observing 
all  that  passed,  he  discovered  one  who  had 
broken  the  agreement,  and  immediately  order¬ 
ed  him  to  pay  his  money  to  the  rest.  They, 
however,  commending  his  justice  highly,  re¬ 
mitted  the  penalty,  as  thinking  the  discovery 
a  sufficient  punishment. 

This  raised,  however,  as  much  envy  against 
Cato  as  it  gained  him  reputation,  and  many 
were  offended  at  his  thus  taking  upon  himself 
the  whole  authority  of  the  senate,  the  courts  of 
judicature,  and  the  magistracies.  For  there  is 
no  virtue,  the  honour  and  credit  for  which 
procures  a  man  more  odium  than  that  of  jus¬ 
tice;  and  this,  because  more  than  any  other,  it 


637 

acquires  a  man  power  and  authority  among 
the  common  people.  For  they  only  honour 
the  valiant  and  admire  the  wise,  while  in  ad¬ 
dition  they  also  love  just  men,  and  put  entire 
trust  and  confidence  in  them.  They  fear  the 
bold  man,  and  mistrust  the  clever  man,  and 
moreover  think  them  rather  beholding  to 
their  natural  complexion,  than  to  any  goodness 
of  their  will,  for  these  excellences;  they  look 
upon  valour  as  a  certain  natural  strength  of 
the  mind,  and  wisdom  as  a  constitutional 
acuteness;  whereas  a  man  has  it  in  his  power 
to  be  just,  if  he  have  but  the  will  to  be  so, 
and  therefore  injustice  is  thought  the  most 
dishonourable,  because  it  is  least  excusable. 

Cato  upon  this  account  was  opposed  by  all 
the  great  men,  who  thought  themselves  re¬ 
proved  by  his  virtue.  Pompey  especially  looked 
upon  the  increase  of  Cato’s  credit  as  the  ruin 
of  his  own  power,  and  therefore  continually 
set  up  men  to  rail  against  him.  Among  these 
was  the  seditious  Clodius,  now  again  united 
to  Pompey,  who  declared  openly,  that  Cato 
had  conveyed  away  a  great  deal  of  the  treas¬ 
ure  that  was  found  in  Cyprus;  and  that  he 
hated  Pompey  only  because  he  refused  to 
marry  his  daughter.  Cato  answered,  that  al¬ 
though  they  had  allowed  him  neither  horse 
nor  man,  he  had  brought  more  treasure  from 
Cyprus  alone,  than  Pompey  had,  after  so 
many  wars  and  triumphs,  from  the  ransacked 
world;  that  he  never  sought  the  alliance  of 
Pompey;  not  that  he  thought  him  unworthy 
of  being  related  to  him,  but  because  he  differed 
so  much  from  him  in  things  that  concerned 
the  commonwealth. 

“For,”  said  he,  “I  laid  down  the  province 
that  was  given  me,  when  I  went  out  of  my 
praetorship;  Pompey,  on  the  contrary,  retains 
many  provinces  for  himself,  and  he  bestows 
many  on  others;  and  but  now  he  sent  Caesar 
a  force  of  six  thousand  men  into  Gaul,  which 
Caesar  never  asked  the  people  for,  nor  had 
Pompey  obtained  their  consent  to  give.  Men, 
and  horse,  and  arms,  in  any  number,  are  be¬ 
come  the  mutual  gifts  of  private  men  to  one 
another;  and  Pompey,  keeping  the  titles  of 
commander  and  general,  hands  over  the  ar¬ 
mies  and  provinces  to  others  to  govern,  while 
he  himself  stays  at  home  to  preside  at  the  con¬ 
tests  of  the  canvass,  and  to  stir  up  tumults  at 
elections;  out  of  the  anarchy  he  thus  creates 
amongst  us,  seeking,  we  see  well  enough,  a 
monarchy  for  himself.”  Thus  he  retorted  on 
Pompey. 

He  had  an  intimate  friend  and  admirer  of 


638 

the  name  of  Marcus  Favonius,  much  the  same 
to  Cato  as  we  are  told  Apollodorus,  the  Pha- 
lerian,  was  in  old  time  to  Socrates,  whose 
words  used  to  throw  him  into  perfect  trans¬ 
ports  and  ecstasies,  getting  into  his  head,  like 
strong  wine,  and  intoxicating  him  to  a  sort 
of  frenzy.  This  Favonius  stood  to  be  chosen 
aedile,  and  was  like  to  lose  it;  but  Cato,  who 
was  there  to  assist  him,  observed  that  all  the 
votes  were  written  in  one  hand,  and  discover¬ 
ing  the  cheat,  appealed  to  the  tribunes,  who 
stopped  the  election.  Favonius  was  afterwards 
chosen  aedile,  and  Cato,  who  assisted  him  in 
all  things  that  belonged  to  his  office,  also  un¬ 
dertook  the  care  of  the  spectacles  that  were 
exhibited  in  the  theatre;  giving  the  actors 
crowns,  not  of  gold,  but  of  wild  olive,  such 
as  used  to  be  given  at  the  Olympic  games; 
and  instead  of  the  magnificent  presents  that 
were  usually  made,  he  offered  to  the  Greeks 
beet  root,  lettuces,  radishes,  and  pears;  and  to 
the  Romans  earthen  pots  of  wine,  pork,  figs, 
cucumbers,  and  little  faggots  of  wood.  Some 
ridiculed  Cato  for  his  economy,  others  looked 
with  respect  on  this  gentle  relaxation  of  his 
usual  rigour  and  austerity.  In  fine,  Favonius 
himself  mingled  with  the  crowd,  and  sitting 
among  the  spectators,  clapped  and  applauded 
Cato,  bade  him  bestow  rewards  on  those  who 
did  well,  and  called  on  the  people  to  pay  their 
honours  to  him,  as  for  himself  he  had  placed 
his  whole  authority  in  Cato’s  hands. 

At  the  same  time,  Curio,  the  colleague  of 
Favonius,  gave  very  magnificent  entertain¬ 
ments  in  another  theatre;  but  the  people  left 
his,  and  went  to  those  of  Favonius,  which  they 
much  applauded,  and  joined  heartily  in  the 
diversion,  seeing  him  act  the  private  man, 
and  Cato  the  master  of  the  shows,  who,  in 
fact,  did  all  this  in  derision  of  the  great  ex¬ 
penses  that  others  incurred,  and  to  teach  them, 
that  in  amusements  men  ought  to  seek  amuse¬ 
ment  only,  and  the  display  of  a  decent  cheer¬ 
fulness,  not  great  preparations  and  costly  mag¬ 
nificence,  demanding  the  expenditure  of  end¬ 
less  care  and  trouble  about  things  of  little  con¬ 
cern. 

After  this,  Scipio,  Hypsaeus,  and  Milo,  stood 
to  be  consuls,  and  that  not  only  with  the  usual 
and  now  recognised  disorders  of  bribery  and 
corruption,  but  with  arms  and  slaughter,  and 
every  appearance  of  carrying  their  audacity 
and  desperation  to  the  length  of  actual  civil 
war.  Whereupon  it  was  proposed  thatPompey 
might  be  empowered  to  preside  over  that  elec¬ 
tion.  This  Cato  at  first  opposed,  saying  that 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  laws  ought  not  to  seek  protection  from 
Pompey,  but  Pompey  from  the  laws.  Yet  the 
confusion  lasting  a  long  time,  the  Forum  con¬ 
tinually,  as  it  were,  besieged  with  three  armies, 
and  no  possibility  appearing  of  a  stop  being 
put  to  these  disorders,  Cato  at  length  agreed 
that,  rather  than  fall  into  the  last  extremity, 
the  senate  should  freely  confer  all  on  Pompey; 
since  it  was  necessary  to  make  use  of  a  lesser 
illegality  as  a  remedy  against  the  greatest  of 
all,  and  better  to  set  up  a  monarchy  them¬ 
selves  than  to  suffer  a  sedition  to  continue 
that  must  certainly  end  in  one. 

Bibulus,  therefore,  a  friend  of  Cato’s,  moved 
the  senate  to  create  Pompey  sole  consul;  for 
that  either  he  would  re-establish  the  lawful 
government,  or  they  should  serve  under  the 
best  master.  Cato  stood  up,  and,  contrary  to 
all  expectation,  seconded  this  motion,  conclud¬ 
ing  that  any  government  was  better  than  mere 
confusion,  and  that  he  did  not  question  but 
Pompey  would  deal  honourably,  and  take  care 
of  the  commonwealth  thus  committed  to  his 
charge.  Pompey  being  hereupon  declared  con¬ 
sul,  invited  Cato  to  see  him  in  the  suburbs. 
When  he  came,  he  saluted  and  embraced  him 
very  kindly,  acknowledged  the  favour  he  had 
done  him,  and  desired  his  counsel  and  assis¬ 
tance  in  the  management  of  this  office.  Cato 
made  answer,  that  what  he  had  spoken  on 
any  former  occasion  was  not  out  of  hate  to 
Pompey,  nor  what  he  had  now  done  out  of 
love  to  him,  but  all  for  the  good  of  the  com¬ 
monwealth;  that  in  private,  if  he  asked  him, 
he  would  freely  give  his  advice;  and  in  public, 
though  he  asked  him  not,  he  would  always 
speak  his  opinion. 

And  he  did  accordingly.  For  first,  when 
Pompey  made  severe  laws,  for  punishing  and 
laying  great  fines  on  those  who  had  corrupted 
the  people  with  gifts,  Cato  advised  him  to  let 
alone  what  was  already  passed,  and  to  provide 
for  the  future;  for  if  he  should  look  up  past 
misdemeanours,  it  would  be  difficult  to  know 
where  to  stop;  and  if  he  would  ordain  new 
penalties,  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  punish 
men  by  a  law,  which  at  that  time  they  had 
not  the  opportunity  of  breaking.  Afterwards, 
when  many  considerable  men,  and  some  of 
Pompey ’s  own  relations,  were  accused,  and  he 
grew  remiss,  and  disinclined  to  the  prosecu¬ 
tion,  Cato  sharply  reproved  him,  and  urged 
him  to  proceed.  Pompey  had  made  a  law,  also, 
to  forbid  the  custom  of  making  commenda¬ 
tory  orations  in  behalf  of  those  that  were  ac¬ 
cused;  yet  he  himself  wrote  one  for  Munatius 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

Plancus,  and  sent  it  while  the  cause  was  plead¬ 
ing;  upon  which  Cato,  who  was  sitting  as 
one  of  the  judges,  stopped  his  ears  with  his 
hands,  and  would  not  hear  it  read.  Where¬ 
upon  Plancus,  before  sentence  was  given,  ex¬ 
cepted  against  him,  but  was  condemned  not¬ 
withstanding. 

And  indeed  Cato  was  a  great  trouble  and 
perplexity  to  almost  all  that  were  accused  of 
anything,  as  they  feared  to  have  him  one  of 
their  judges,  yet  did  not  dare  to  demand  his 
exclusion.  And  many  had  been  condemned 
because,  by  refusing  him,  they  seemed  to  show 
that  they  could  not  trust  to  their  own  inno¬ 
cence;  and  it  was  a  reproach  thrown  in  the 
teeth  of  some  by  their  enemies,  that  they  had 
not  accepted  Cato  for  their  judge. 

In  the  meanwhile,  Caesar  kept  close  with  his 
forces  in  Gaul,  and  continued  in  arms;  and 
at  the  same  time  employed  his  gifts,  his  riches, 
and  his  friends  above  all  things,  to  increase 
his  power  in  the  city.  And  now  Cato’s  old 
admonitions  began  to  rouse  Pompey  out  of 
the  negligent  security  in  which  he  lay,  into  a 
sort  of  imagination  of  danger  at  hand;  but 
seeing  him  slow  and  unwilling,  and  timorous 
to  undertake  any  measures  of  prevention 
against  Caesar,  Cato  resolved  himself  to  stand 
for  the  consulship,  and  presently  force  Caesar 
either  to  lay  down  his  arms  or  discover  his 
intentions.  Both  Cato’s  competitors  were  per¬ 
sons  of  good  position;  Sulpicius,  who  was  one, 
owed  much  to  Cato’s  credit  and  authority  in 
the  city,  and  it  was  thought  unhandsome  and 
ungratefully  done,  to  stand  against  him;  not 
that  Cato  himself  took  it  ill,  “For  it  is  no 
wonder,”  said  he,  “if  a  man  will  not  yield 
to  another,  in  that  which  he  esteems  the 
greatest  good.” 

He  had  persuaded  the  senate  to  make  an 
order,  that  those  who  stood  for  offices  should 
themselves  ask  the  people  for  their  votes,  and 
not  solicit  by  others,  nor  take  others  about 
with  them  to  speak  for  them,  in  their  canvass. 
And  this  made  the  common  people  very  hos¬ 
tile  to  him,  if  they  were  to  lose  not  only  the 
means  of  receiving  money,  but  also  the  op¬ 
portunity  of  obliging  several  persons,  and  so 
to  become  by  his  means  both  poor  and  less 
regarded.  Besides  this,  Cato  himself  was  by 
nature  altogether  unfit  for  the  business  of 
canvassing,  as  he  was  more  anxious  to  sustain 
the  dignity  of  his  life  and  character  than  to 
obtain  the  office.  Thus  by  following  his  own 
way  of  soliciting,  and  not  suffering  his  friends 
to  do  those  things  which  take  away  the  mul- 


639 

titude,  he  was  rejected  and  lost  the  consulship. 

But  whereas,  upon  such  occasions,  not  only 
those  who  missed  the  office,  but  even  their 
friends  and  relations,  used  to  feel  themselves 
disgraced  and  humiliated,  and  observed  a  sort 
of  mourning  for  several  days  after,  Cato  took 
it  so  unconcernedly  that  he  anointed  himself, 
and  played  at  ball  in  the  field,  and  after  break¬ 
fasting,  went  into  the  Forum,  as  he  used  to 
do,  without  his  shoes  or  his  tunic,  and  there 
walked  about  with  his  acquaintance.  Cicero 
blames  him,  for  that  when  affairs  required 
such  a  consul,  he  would  not  take  more  pains, 
nor  condescend  to  pay  some  court  to  the 
people,  as  also  because  that  he  afterwards  neg¬ 
lected  to  try  again;  whereas  he  had  stood  a 
second  time  to  be  chosen  praetor.  Cato  an¬ 
swered  that  he  lost  the  praetorship  the  first 
time,  not  by  the  voice  of  the  people,  but  by 
the  violence  and  corrupt  dealing  of  his  ad¬ 
versaries;  whereas  in  the  election  of  consuls 
there  had  been  no  foul  play.  So  that  he  plainly 
saw  the  people  did  not  like  his  manners, 
which  an  honest  man  ought  not  to  alter  for 
their  sake;  nor  yet  would  a  wise  man  attempt 
the  same  thing  again,  while  liable  to  the  same 
prejudices. 

Caesar  was  at  this  time  engaged  with  many 
warlike  nations,  and  was  subduing  them  at 
great  hazards.  Among  the  rest,  it  was  believed 
he  had  set  upon  the  Germans,  in  a  time  of 
truce,  and  had  thus  slain  three  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  of  them.  Upon  which,  some  of  his 
friends  moved  the  senate  for  a  public  thanks¬ 
giving;  but  Cato  declared  they  ought  to  de¬ 
liver  Caesar  into  the  hands  of  those  who  had 
been  thus  unjustly  treated,  and  so  expiate  the 
offence  and  not  bring  a  curse  upon  the  city; 
“Yet  we  have  reason,”  said  he,  “to  thank  the 
gods,  for  that  they  spared  the  commonwealth, 
and  did  not  take  vengeance  upon  the  army, 
for  the  madness  and  folly  of  the  general.” 

Hereupon  Caesar  wrote  a  letter  to  the  senate 
which  was  read  openly,  and  was  full  of  re¬ 
proachful  language  and  accusations  against 
Cato;  who,  standing  up,  seemed  not  at  all 
concerned,  and  without  any  heat  or  passion, 
but  in  a  calm  and,  as  it  were,  premeditated 
discourse,  made  all  Caesar’s  charges  against 
him  show  like  mere  common  scolding  and 
abuse,  and  in  fact  a  sort  of  pleasantry  and 
play  on  Caesar’s  part;  and  proceeding  then  to 
go  into  all  Caesar’s  political  courses,  and  to 
explain  and  reveal  (as  though  he  had  been 
not  his  constant  opponent,  but  his  fellow-con¬ 
spirator)  his  whole  conduct  and  purpose  from 


640 

its  commencement,  he  concluded  by  telling 
the  senate,  it  was  not  the  sons  of  the  Britons 
or  the  Gauls  they  need  fear,  but  Caesar  him¬ 
self,  if  they  were  wise.  And  this  discourse  so 
moved  and  awakened  the  senate,  that  Caesar’s 
friends  repented  they  had  had  a  letter  read, 
which  had  given  Cato  an  opportunity  of  say¬ 
ing  so  many  reasonable  things,  and  such  se¬ 
vere  truths  against  him. 

However,  nothing  was  then  decided  upon; 
it  was  merely  said,  that  it  would  be  well  to 
send  him  a  successor.  Upon  that,  Caesar’s 
friends  required  that  Pompey  also  should  lay 
down  his  arms,  and  resign  his  provinces,  or 
else  that  Caesar  might  not  be  obliged  to  either. 
Then  Cato  cried  out,  what  he  had  foretold 
was  come  to  pass;  now  it  was  manifest  he  was 
using  his  forces  to  compel  their  judgment, 
and  was  turning  against  the  state  those  armies 
he  had  got  from  it  by  imposture  and  trickery. 
But  out  of  the  senate-house  Cato  could  do  but 
little,  as  the  people  were  ever  ready  to  mag¬ 
nify  Caesar;  and  the  senate,  though  convinced 
by  Cato,  were  afraid  of  the  people. 

But  when  the  news  was  brought  that  Caesar 
had  seized  Ariminum,  and  was  marching 
with  his  army  toward  Rome,  then  all  men, 
even  Pompey,  and  the  common  people  too, 
cast  their  eyes  on  Cato,  who  had  alone  fore¬ 
seen  and  first  clearly  declared  Caesar’s  inten¬ 
tions.  He  therefore  told  them,  “If  you  had  be¬ 
lieved  me,  or  regarded  my  advice,  you  would 
not  now  have  been  reduced  to  stand  in  fear 
of  one  man,  or  to  put  all  your  hopes  in  one 
alone.”  Pompey  acknowledged  that  Cato  in¬ 
deed  had  spoken  most  like  a  prophet,  while 
he  himself  had  acted  too  much  like  a  friend. 
And  Cato  advised  the  senate  to  put  all  into  the 
hands  of  Pompey;  “For  those  who  can  raise 
up  great  evils,”  said  he,  “can  best  allay  them.” 

Pompey,  finding  he  had  not  sufficient  forces, 
and  that  those  he  could  raise  were  not  very 
resolute,  forsook  the  city.  Cato,  resolving  to 
follow  Pompey  into  exile,  sent  his  younger 
son  to  Munatius,  who  was  then  in  the  coun¬ 
try  of  Brutium,  and  took  his  eldest  son  with 
him;  but  wanting  somebody  to  keep  his  house 
and  take  care  of  his  daughters,  he  took  Marcia 
again,  who  was  now  a  rich  widow,  Horten- 
sius  being  dead,  and  having  left  her  all  his 
estate.  Caesar  afterward  made  use  of  this  ac¬ 
tion  also,  to  reproach  him  with  covetousness, 
and  a  mercenary  design  in  his  marriage.  “For,” 
said  he,  “if  he  had  need  of  a  wife  why  did 
he  part  with  her?  And  if  he  had  not,  why 
did  he  take  her  again?  Unless  he  gave  her 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

only  as  a  bait  to  Hortensius;  and  lent  her 
when  she  was  young,  to  have  her  again  when 
she  was  rich.” 

But  in  answer  to  this,  we  might  fairly  apply 
the  saying  of  Euripides — 

To  speal {  of  mysteries- — the  chief  of  these 

Surely  were  cowardice  in  Hercules. 

For  it  is  much  the  same  thing  to  reproach 
Hercules  for  cowardice,  and  to  accuse  Cato 
of  covetousness;  though  otherwise,  whether 
he  did  altogether  right  in  this  marriage,  might 
be  disputed.  As  soon,  however,  as  he  had 
again  taken  Marcia,  he  committed  his  house 
and  his  daughters  to  her,  and  himself  followed 
Pompey.  And  it  is  said,  that  from  that  day  he 
never  cut  his  hair,  nor  shaved  his  beard,  nor 
wore  a  garland,  but  was  always  full  of  sad¬ 
ness,  grief,  and  dejectedness  for  the  calamities 
of  his  country,  and  continually  showed  the 
same  feeling  to  the  last,  whatever  party  had 
misfortune  or  success. 

The  government  of  Sicily  being  allotted  to 
him,  he  passed  over  to  Syracuse;  where,  un¬ 
derstanding  that  Asinius  Pollio  was  arrived 
at  Messena,  with  forces  from  the  enemy,  Cato 
sent  to  him,  to  know  the  reason  of  his  coming 
thither:  Pollio,  on  the  other  side,  called  upon 
him  to  show  reason  for  the  present  convul¬ 
sions.  And  being  at  the  same  time  informed 
how  Pompey  had  quite  abandoned  Italy,  and 
lay  encamped  at  Dyrrhachium,  he  spoke  of 
the  strangeness  and  incomprehensibility  of  the 
divine  government  of  things;  “Pompey,  when 
he  did  nothing  wisely  nor  honestly,  was  al¬ 
ways  successful;  and  now  that  he  would  pre¬ 
serve  his  country,  and  defend  her  liberty,  he 
is  altogether  unfortunate.”  As  for  Asinius,  he 
said,  he  could  drive  him  out  of  Sicily,  but  as 
there  were  larger  forces  coming  to  his  assis¬ 
tance,  he  would  not  engage  the  island  in  a 
war.  He  therefore  advised  the  Syracusans  to 
join  the  conquering  party  and  provide  for 
their  own  safety;  and  so  set  sail  from  thence. 

When  he  came  to  Pompey,  he  uniformly 
gave  advice  to  protract  the  war;  as  he  always 
hoped  to  compose  matters,  and  was  by  no 
means  desirous  that  they  should  come  to  ac¬ 
tion;  for  the  commonwealth  would  suffer  ex¬ 
tremely,  and  be  the  certain  cause  of  its  own 
ruin,  whoever  were  conqueror  by  the  sword. 
In  like  manner,  he  persuaded  Pompey  and 
the  council  to  ordain  that  no  city  should  be 
sacked  that  was  subject  to  the  people  of  Rome; 
and  that  no  Roman  should  be  killed  but  in 
the  heat  of  battle;  and  hereby  he  got  himself 


641 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

great  honour,  and  brought  over  many  to 
Pompey’s  party,  whom  his  moderation  and 
humanity  attracted.  Afterwards  being  sent 
into  Asia,  to  assist  those  who  were  raising 
men  and  preparing  ships  in  those  parts,  he 
took  with  him  his  sister  Servilia,  and  a  little 
boy  whom  she  had  by  Lucullus.  For  since  her 
widowhood,  she  had  lived  with  her  brother, 
and  much  recovered  her  reputation,  having 
put  herself  under  his  care,  followed  him  in 
his  voyages,  and  complied  with  his  severe  way 
of  living.  Yet  Caesar  did  not  fail  to  asperse 
him  upon  her  account  also. 

Pompey’s  officers  in  Asia,  it  seems,  had  no 
great  need  of  Cato;  but  he  brought  over  the 
people  of  Rhodes  by  his  persuasions,  and  leav¬ 
ing  his  sister  Servilia  and  her  child  there,  he 
returned  to  Pompey,  who  had  now  collected 
very  great  forces  both  by  sea  and  land.  And 
here  Pompey,  more  than  in  any  other  act,  be¬ 
trayed  his  intentions.  For  at  first  he  designed 
to  give  Cato  the  command  of  the  navy,  which 
consisted  of  no  less  than  five  hundred  ships 
of  war,  besides  a  vast  number  of  light  galleys, 
scouts,  and  open  boats.  But  presently  bethink¬ 
ing  himself,  or  put  in  mind  by  his  friends, 
that  Cato’s  principal  and  only  aim  being  to 
free  his  country  from  all  usurpation,  if  he 
were  master  of  such  great  forces,  as  soon  as 
ever  Caesar  should  be  conquered,  he  would 
certainly  call  upon  Pompey,  also,  to  lay  down 
his  arms,  and  be  subject  to  the  laws,  he 
changed  his  mind,  and  though  he  had  already 
mentioned  it  to  Cato,  nevertheless  made  Bibu- 
lus  admiral. 

Notwithstanding  this,  he  had  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  Cato’s  zeal  in  the  cause  was  in 
any  way  diminished.  For  before  one  of  the 
battles  at  Dyrrhachium,  when  Pompey  him¬ 
self,  we  are  told,  made  an  address  to  the  sol¬ 
diers  and  bade  the  officers  do  the  like,  the 
men  listened  to  them  but  coldly  and  with 
silence,  until  Cato,  last  of  all,  came  forward, 
and  in  the  language  of  philosophy,  spoke  to 
them,  as  the  occasion  required,  concerning  lib¬ 
erty,  manly  virtue,  death,  and  a  good  name; 
upon  all  which  he  delivered  himself  with 
strong  natural  passion,  and  concluded  with 
calling  in  the  aid  of  the  gods,  to  whom  he 
directed  his  speech,  as  if  they  were  present  to 
behold  them  fight  for  their  country.  And  at 
this  the  army  gave  such  a  shout  and  showed 
such  excitement  that  their  officers  led  them  on 
full  of  hope  and  confidence  to  the  danger. 
Caesar’s  party  were  routed  and  put  to  flight; 
but  his  presiding  fortune  used  the  advantage 


of  Pompey’s  cautiousness  and  diffidence  to 
render  the  victory  incomplete.  But  of  this  we 
have  spoken  in  the  life  of  Pompey.  While, 
however,  all  the  rest  rejoiced,  and  magnified 
their  success,  Cato  alone  bewailed  his  country, 
and  cursed  that  fatal  ambition  which  made  so 
many  brave  Romans  murder  one  another. 

After  this  Pompey,  following  Caesar  into 
Thessaly,  left  at  Dyrrhachium  a  quantity  of 
munitions,  money,  and  stores,  and  many  of 
his  domestics  and  relations;  the  charge  of  all 
which  he  gave  to  Cato,  with  the  command 
only  of  fifteen  cohorts.  For  though  he  trusted 
him  much,  yet  he  was  afraid  of  him  too. 
knowing  full  well,  that  if  he  had  bad  success, 
Cato  would  be  the  last  to  forsake  him,  but 
if  he  conquered,  would  never  let  him  use  his 
victory  at  his  pleasure.  There  were,  likewise, 
many  persons  of  high  rank  that  stayed  with 
Cato  at  Dyrrhachium. 

When  they  heard  of  the  overthrow  at  Phar- 
salia,  Cato  resolved  with  himself,  that  if  Pom¬ 
pey  were  slain,  he  would  conduct  those  that 
were  with  him  into  Italy,  and  then  retire  as 
far  from  the  tyranny  of  Caesar  as  he  could, 
and  live  in  exile;  but  if  Pompey  were  safe,  he 
would  keep  the  army  together  for  him.  With 
this  resolution  he  passed  over  to  Corcyra, 
where  the  navy  lay;  there  he  would  have  re¬ 
signed  his  command  to  Cicero,  because  he  had 
been  consul,  and  himself  only  a  praetor,  but 
Cicero  refused  it,  and  was  going  for  Italy. 
At  which  Pompey’s  son  being  incensed,  would 
rashly  and  in  heat  have  punished  all  those 
who  were  going  away,  and  in  the  first  place 
have  laid  hands  on  Cicero;  but  Cato  spoke 
with  him  in  private,  and  diverted  him  from 
that  design.  And  thus  he  clearly  saved  the  life 
of  Cicero,  and  rescued  several  others  also  from 
ill-treatment. 

Conjecturing  that  Pompey  the  Great  was 
fled  toward  Egypt  or  Africa,  Cato  resolved  to 
hasten  after  him;  and  having  taken  all  his 
men  aboard,  he  set  sail;  but  first  to  those  who 
were  not  zealous  to  continue  the  contest,  he 
gave  free  liberty  to  depart.  When  they  came 
to  the  coast  of  Africa  they  met  with  Sextus, 
Pompey’s  younger  son,  who  told  them  of  the 
death  of  his  father  in  Egypt;  at  which  they 
were  all  exceedingly  grieved,  and  declared 
that  after  Pompey  they  would  follow  no  other 
leader  but  Cato.  Out  of  compassion,  therefore, 
to  so  many  worthy  persons,  who  had  given 
such  testimonies  of  their  fidelity,  and  whom 
he  could  not  for  shame  leave  in  a  desert  coun¬ 
try,  amidst  so  many  difficulties,  he  took  upon 


642 

himself  the  command,  and  marched  against  the 
city  of  Cyrene,  which  presently  received  him, 
though  not  long  before  they  had  shut  their 
gates  against  Labienus.  Here  he  was  informed 
that  Scipio,  Pompey’s  father-in-law,  was  re¬ 
ceived  by  King  Juba,  and  that  Attius  Varus, 
whom  Pompey  had  made  governor  of  Africa, 
had  joined  them  with  his  forces.  Cato  there¬ 
fore  resolved  to  march  toward  them  by  land, 
it  being  now  winter;  and  got  together  a  num¬ 
ber  of  asses  to  carry  water,  and  furnished  him¬ 
self  likewise  with  plenty  of  all  other  provision, 
and  a  number  of  carriages.  He  took  also  with 
him  some  of  those  they  call  Psylli,  who  cure 
the  biting  of  serpents,  by  sucking  out  the  poi¬ 
son  with  their  mouths,  and  have  likewise  cer¬ 
tain  charms  by  which  they  stupefy  and  lay 
asleep  the  serpents. 

Thus  they  marched  seven  days  together, 
Cato  all  the  time  going  on  foot  at  the  head  of 
his  men,  and  never  making  use  of  any  horse 
or  chariot.  Ever  since  the  battle  of  Pharsalia, 
he  used  to  sit  at  table,  and  added  this  to  his 
other  ways  of  mourning,  that  he  never  lay 
down  but  to  sleep. 

Having  passed  the  winter  in  Africa,  Cato 
drew  out  his  army,  which  amounted  to  little 
less  than  ten  thousand.  The  affairs  of  Scipio 
and  Varus  went  very  ill,  by  reason  of  their 
dissensions  and  quarrels  among  themselves, 
and  their  submissions  and  flatteries  to  King 
Juba,  who  was  insupportable  for  his  vanity, 
and  the  pride  he  took  in  his  strength  and 
riches.  The  first  time  be  came  to  a  conference 
with  Cato,  he  had  ordered  his  own  seat  to  be 
placed  in  the  middle,  between  Scipio  and 
Cato;  which  Cato  observing,  took  up  his  chair 
and  set  himself  on  the  other  side  of  Scipio, 
to  whom  he  thus  gave  the  honour  of  sitting 
in  the  middle,  though  he  were  his  enemy,  and 
had  formerly  published  some  scandalous  writ¬ 
ing  against  him.  There  are  people  who  speak 
as  if  this  were  quite  an  insignificant  matter, 
and  who,  nevertheless,  find  fault  with  Cato, 
because  in  Sicily,  walking  one  day  with  Philo- 
stratus,  he  gave  him  the  middle  place,  to  show 
his  respect  for  philosophy. 

However,  he  now  succeeded  both  in  hum¬ 
bling  the  pride  of  Juba,  who  was  treating  Scip¬ 
io  and  Varus  much  like  a  pair  of  satraps  under 
his  orders,  and  also  in  reconciling  them  to 
each  other.  All  the  troops  desired  him  to  be 
their  leader;  Scipio,  likewise,  and  Varus  gave 
way  to  it,  and  offered  him  the  command;  but 
he  said  he  would  not  break  those  laws  which 
he  sought  to  defend,  and  he,  being  but  pro- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

prietor,  ought  not  to  command  in  the  presence 
of  a  proconsul  (for  Scipio  had  been  created 
proconsul),  besides  that  people  took  it  as  a 
good  omen  to  see  a  Scipio  command  in  Africa, 
and  the  very  name  inspired  the  soldiers  with 
hopes  of  success. 

Scipio,  having  taken  upon  himself  the  com¬ 
mand,  presently  resolved,  at  the  instigation 
of  Juba,  to  put  all  the  inhabitants  of  Utica 
to  the  sword,  and  to  raze  the  city,  for  having, 
as  they  professed,  taken  part  with  Caesar.  Cato 
would  by  no  means  suffer  this;  but  invoking 
the  gods,  exclaiming  and  protesting  against  it 
in  the  council  of  war,  he  with  much  difficulty 
delivered  the  poor  people  from  this  cruelty. 
And  afterwards,  upon  the  entreaty  of  the  in¬ 
habitants,  and  at  the  instance  of  Scipio,  Cato 
took  upon  himself  the  government  of  Utica, 
lest,  one  way  or  the  other,  it  should  fall  into 
Caesar’s  hands;  for  it  was  a  strong  place,  and 
very  advantageous  for  either  party.  And  it  was 
yet  better  provided  and  more  strongly  fortified 
by  Cato,  who  brought  in  great  store  of  corn, 
repaired  the  walls,  erected  towers,  and  made 
deep  trenches  and  palisades  around  the  town. 
The  young  men  of  Utica  he  lodged  among 
these  works,  having  first  taken  their  arms 
from  them;  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants  he  kept 
within  the  town,  and  took  the  greatest  care 
that  no  injury  should  be  done  nor  affront  of¬ 
fered  them  by  the  Romans.  From  hence  he 
sent  great  quantity  of  arms,  money,  and  pro¬ 
vision  to  the  camp,  and  made  this  city  their 
chief  magazine. 

He  advised  Scipio,  as  he  had  before  done 
Pompey,  by  no  means  to  hazard  a  battle 
against  a  man  experienced  in  war,  and  formid¬ 
able  in  the  field,  but  to  use  delay;  for  time 
would  gradually  abate  the  violence  of  the 
crisis,  which  is  the  strength  of  usurpation.  But 
Scipio  out  of  pride  rejected  this  counsel,  and 
wrote  a  letter  to  Cato,  in  which  he  reproached 
him  with  cowardice;  and  that  he  could  not  be 
content  to  lie  secure  himself  within  walls  and 
trenches,  but  he  must  hinder  others  from 
boldly  using  their  own  good  sense  to  seize  the 
right  opportunity.  In  answer  to  this,  Cato 
wrote  word  again,  that  he  would  take  the 
horse  and  foot  which  he  had  brought  into  Af¬ 
rica,  and  go  over  into  Italy,  to  make  a  diver¬ 
sion  there,  and  draw  Caesar  off  from  them. 
But  Scipio  derided  this  proposition  also. 

Then  Cato  openly  let  it  be  seen  that  he  was 
sorry  he  had  yielded  the  command  to  Scipio, 
who  he  saw  would  not  carry  on  the  war  with 
any  wisdom,  and  if,  contrary  to  all  appearance, 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

he  should  succeed,  he  would  use  his  success  as 
unjustly  at  home.  For  Cato  had  then  made  up 
his  mind,  and  so  he  told  his  friends,  that  he 
could  have  but  slender  hopes  in  those  generals 
that  had  so  much  boldness  and  so  little  con¬ 
duct;  yet  if  anything  should  happen  beyond 
expectation,  and  Caesar  should  be  overthrown, 
for  his  part  he  would  not  stay  at  Rome,  but 
would  retire  from  the  cruelty  and  inhumanity 
of  Scipio,  who  had  already  uttered  fierce  and 
proud  threats  against  many. 

But  what  Cato  had  looked  for  fell  out 
sooner  than  he  expected.  Late  in  the  evening 
came  one  from  the  army,  whence  he  had  been 
three  days  coming,  who  brought  word  there 
had  been  a  great  battle  near  Thapsus;  that  all 
was  utterly  lost;  Caesar  had  taken  the  camps, 
Scipio  and  Juba  were  fled  with  a  few  only, 
and  all  the  rest  of  the  army  was  lost.  This 
news  arriving  in  time  of  war,  and  in  the 
night,  so  alarmed  the  people,  that  they  were 
almost  out  of  their  wits,  and  could  scarce  keep 
themselves  within  the  walls  of  the  city.  But 
Cato  came  forward,  and  meeting  the  people 
in  this  hurry  and  clamour,  did  all  he  could  to 
comfort  and  encourage  them,  and  somewhat 
appeased  the  fear  and  amazement  they  were 
in,  telling  them  that  very  likely  things  were 
not  so  bad  in  truth,  but  much  exaggerated  in 
the  report.  And  so  he  pacified  the  tumult  for 
the  present. 

The  next  morning  he  sent  for  the  three  hun¬ 
dred,  whom  he  used  as  his  council;  these  were 
Romans,  who  were  in  Africa  upon  business, 
in  commerce  and  money-lending;  they  were 
also  several  senators  and  their  sons.  They  were 
summoned  to  meet  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter. 
While  they  were  coming  together,  Cato  walked 
about  very  quietly  and  unconcerned,  as  if 
nothing  new  had  happened.  He  had  a  book 
in  his  hand,  which  he  was  reading;  in  this 
book  was  an  account  of  what  provision  he  had 
for  war,  armour,  corn,  ammunition,  and  sol¬ 
diers. 

When  they  were  assembled,  he  began  his 
discourse;  first,  as  regarded  the  three  hundred 
themselves,  and  very  much  commended  the 
courage  and  fidelity  they  had  shown,  and  their 
having  very  well  served  their  country  with 
their  persons,  money,  and  counsel.  Then  he 
entreated  them  by  no  means  to  separate,  as  if 
each  single  man  could  hope  for  any  safety  in 
forsaking  his  companions;  on  the  contrary, 
while  they  kept  together,  Caesar  would  have 
less  reason  to  despise  them,  if  they  fought 
against  him,  and  be  more  forward  to  pardon 


643 

them,  if  they  submitted  to  him.  Therefore  he 
advised  them  to  consult  among  themselves, 
nor  should  he  find  fault  whichever  course 
they  adopted.  If  they  thought  fit  to  submit 
to  fortune,  he  would  impute  their  change  to 
necessity;  but  if  they  resolved  to  stand  firm, 
and  undertake  the  danger  for  the  sake  of 
liberty,  he  should  not  only  commend,  but  ad¬ 
mire  their  courage,  and  would  himself  be 
their  leader  and  companion  too,  till  they  had 
put  to  the  proof  the  utmost  fortune  of  their 
country;  which  was  not  Utica  or  Adrume- 
tum  but  Rome,  and  she  had  often,  by  her 
own  greatness,  raised  herself  after  worse 
disasters. 

Besides,  as  there  were  many  things  that 
would  conduce  to  their  safety,  so  chiefly  this, 
that  they  were  to  fight  against  one  whose  af¬ 
fairs  urgently  claimed  his  presence  in  various 
quarters.  Spain  was  already  revolted  to  the 
younger  Pompey;  Rome  was  unaccustomed  to 
the  bridle,  and  impatient  of  it,  and  would 
therefore  be  ready  to  rise  in  insurrection  upon 
any  turn  of  affairs.  As  for  themselves,  they 
ought  not  to  shrink  from  the  danger;  and  in 
this  might  take  example  from  their  enemy, 
who  so  freely  exposed  his  life  to  effect  the  most 
unrighteous  designs,  yet  never  could  hope  for 
so  happy  a  conclusion  as  they  might  promise 
themselves;  for  notwithstanding  the  uncer¬ 
tainty  of  war,  they  would  be  sure  of  a  most 
happy  life  if  they  succeeded,  or  a  most  glorious 
death  if  they  miscarried.  However,  he  said, 
they  ought  to  deliberate  among  themselves; 
and  he  joined  with  them  in  praying  the  gods 
that  in  recompense  of  their  former  courage  and 
goodwill,  they  would  prosper  their  present  de¬ 
terminations. 

When  Cato  had  thus  spoken,  many  were 
moved  and  encouraged  by  his  arguments,  but 
the  greatest  part  were  so  animated  by  the 
sense  of  his  intrepidity,  generosity,  and  good¬ 
ness,  that  they  forgot  the  present  danger,  and 
as  if  he  were  the  only  invincible  leader,  and 
above  all  fortune,  they  entreated  him  to  em¬ 
ploy  their  persons,  arms,  and  estates,  as  he 
thought  fit;  for  they  esteemed  it  far  better  to 
meet  death  in  following  his  counsel,  than  to 
find  their  safety  in  betraying  one  of  so  great 
virtue.  One  of  the  assembly  proposed  the  mak¬ 
ing  a  decree  to  set  the  slaves  at  liberty;  and 
most  of  the  rest  approved  the  motion.  Cato 
said  that  it  ought  not  to  be  done,  for  it  was 
neither  just  nor  lawful;  but  if  any  of  their 
masters  would  willingly  set  them  free,  those 
that  were  fit  for  service  should  be  received. 


644 

Many  promised  so  to  do,  whose  names  he  or¬ 
dered  to  be  enrolled,  and  then  withdrew. 

Presently  after  this  he  received  letters  from 
Juba  and  Scipio.  Juba,  with  some  few  of  his 
men,  was  retired  to  a  mountain,  where  he 
waited  to  hear  what  Cato  would  resolve  upon; 
and  intended  to  stay  there  for  him,  if  he 
thought  fit  to  leave  Utica,  or  to  come  to  his 
aid  with  his  troops,  if  he  were  besieged.  Scipio 
was  on  shipboard,  near  a  certain  promontory, 
not  far  from  Utica,  expecting  an  answer  upon 
the  same  account.  But  Cato  thought  fit  to  re¬ 
tain  the  messengers  till  the  three  hundred 
should  come  to  some  resolution. 

As  for  the  senators  that  were  there,  they 
showed  great  forwardness,  and  at  once  set  free 
their  slaves,  and  furnished  them  with  arms. 
But  the  three  hundred  being  men  occupied 
in  merchandise  and  money-lending,  much  of 
their  substance  also  consisting  in  slaves,  the 
enthusiasm  that  Cato’s  speech  had  raised  in 
them  did  not  long  continue.  As  there  are  sub¬ 
stances  that  easily  admit  heat,  and  as  suddenly 
lose  it,  when  the  fire  is  removed,  so  these  men 
were  heated  and  inflamed  while  Cato  was 
present;  but  when  they  began  to  reason  among 
themselves,  the  fear  they  had  of  Caesar  soon 
overcame  their  reverence  for  Cato  and  for 
virtue. 

“For  who  are  we,”  said  they,  “and  who  is  it 
we  refuse  to  obey?  Is  it  not  that  Caesar  who  is 
now  invested  with  all  the  power  of  Rome? 
and  which  of  us  is  a  Scipio,  a  Pompey,  or  a 
Cato?  But  now  that  all  men  make  their  hon¬ 
our  give  way  to  their  fear,  shall  we  alone  en¬ 
gage  for  the  liberty  of  Rome,  and  in  Utica 
declare  war  against  him,  before  whom  Cato 
and  Pompey  the  Great  fled  out  of  Italy?  Shall 
we  set  free  our  slaves  against  Caesar,  who  have 
ourselves  no  more  liberty  than  he  is  pleased 
to  allow?  No,  let  us,  poor  creatures,  know  our¬ 
selves,  submit  to  the  victor,  and  send  deputies 
to  implore  his  mercy.” 

Thus  said  the  most  moderate  of  them;  but 
the  greatest  part  were  for  seizing  the  senators, 
that  by  securing  them  they  might  appease 
Caesar’s  anger.  Cato,  though  he  perceived  the 
change,  took  no  notice  of  it;  but  wrote  to  Juba 
and  Scipio  to  keep  away  from  Utica,  because 
he  mistrusted  the  three  hundred. 

A  considerable  body  of  horse,  which  had 
escaped  from  the  late  fight,  riding  up  towards 
Utica,  sent  three  men  before  to  Cato,  who  yet 
did  not  all  bring  the  same  message;  for  one 
party  was  for  going  to  Juba,  another  for  join¬ 
ing  with  Cato,  and  some  again  were  afraid  to 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

go  into  Utica.  When  Cato  heard  this,  he  or¬ 
dered  Marcus  Rubrius  to  attend  upon  the  three 
hundred,  and  quietly  take  the  names  of  those 
who,  of  their  own  accord,  set  their  slaves  at 
liberty,  but  by  no  means  to  force  anybody. 
Then  taking  with  him  the  senators,  he  went 
out  of  the  town,  and  met  the  principal  officers 
of  these  horsemen,  whom  he  entreated  not  to 
abandon  so  many  Roman  senators,  not  to  pre¬ 
fer  Juba  for  their  commander  before  Cato,  but 
consult  the  common  safety,  and  to  come  into 
the  city,  which  was  impregnable,  and  well 
furnished  with  corn  and  other  provision,  suf¬ 
ficient  for  many  years.  The  senators  likewise 
with  tears  besought  them  to  stay.  Hereupon 
the  officers  went  to  consult  their  soldiers,  and 
Cato  with  the  senators  sat  down  upon  an  em¬ 
bankment,  expecting  their  resolution.  In  the 
meantime  came  Rubrius  in  great  disorder, 
crying  out  the  three  hundred  were  all  in  com¬ 
motion  and  exciting  revolt  and  tumult  in  the 
city.  At  this  all  the  rest  fell  into  despair,  la¬ 
menting  and  bewailing  their  condition.  Cato 
endeavoured  to  comfort  them,  and  sent  to 
the  three  hundred,  desiring  them  to  have  pa¬ 
tience. 

Then  the  officers  of  the  horse  returned  with 
no  very  reasonable  demands.  They  said  they 
did  not  desire  to  serve  Juba  for  his  pay,  nor 
should  they  fear  Caesar,  while  they  followed 
Cato,  but  they  dreaded  to  be  shut  up  with  the 
Uticans,  men  of  traitorous  temper,  and  Car¬ 
thaginian  blood;  for  though  they  were  quiet 
at  present,  yet  as  soon  as  Caesar  should  appear, 
without  doubt  they  would  conspire  together, 
and  betray  the  Romans.  Therefore,  if  he  ex¬ 
pected  they  should  join  with  him,  he  must 
drive  out  of  the  town  or  destroy  all  the  Uti¬ 
cans,  that  he  might  receive  them  into  a  place 
clear  both  of  enemies  and  barbarians.  This 
Cato  thought  utterly  cruel  and  barbarous;  but 
he  mildly  answered,  he  would  consult  the 
three  hundred. 

Then  he  returned  to  the  city,  where  he 
found  the  men,  not  framing  excuses,  or  dis¬ 
sembling  out  of  reverence  to  him,  but  openly 
declaring  that  no  one  should  compel  them  to 
make  war  against  Caesar;  which,  they  said, 
they  were  neither  able  nor  willing  to  do.  And 
some  there  were  who  muttered  words  about 
retaining  the  senators  till  Caesar’s  coming;  but 
Cato  seemed  not  to  hear  this,  as  indeed  he  had 
the  excuse  of  being  a  little  deaf.  At  the  same 
time  came  one  to  him  and  told  him  the  horse 
were  going  away.  And  now,  fearing  lest  the 
three  hundred  should  take  some  desperate  res- 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

olution  concerning  the  senators,  he  presently 
went  out  with  some  of  his  friends,  and  seeing 
they  were  gone  some  way,  he  took  horse,  and 
rode  after  them.  They,  when  they  saw  him 
coming,  were  very  glad,  and  received  him  very 
kindly,  entreating  him  to  save  himself  with 
them. 

At  this  time,  it  is  said,  Cato  shed  tears, 
while  entreating  them  on  behalf  of  the  sen¬ 
ators,  and  stretching  out  his  hands  in  sup¬ 
plication.  He  turned  some  of  their  horses’ 
heads,  and  laid  hold  of  the  men  by  their  ar¬ 
mour,  till  in  fine  he  prevailed  with  them  out 
of  compassion  to  stay  only  that  one  day,  to 
procure  a  safe  retreat  for  the  senators.  Having 
thus  persuaded  them  to  go  along  with  him, 
some  he  placed  at  the  gates  of  the  town,  and 
to  others  gave  the  charge  of  the  citadel.  The 
three  hundred  began  to  fear  they  should  suf¬ 
fer  for  their  inconstancy,  and  sent  to  Cato,  en¬ 
treating  him  by  all  means  to  come  to  them; 
but  the  senators  flocking  about  him  would 
not  suffer  him  to  go,  and  said  they  would  not 
trust  their  guardian  and  saviour  to  the  hands 
of  perfidious  traitors. 

For  there  had  never,  perhaps,  been  a  time 
when  Cato’s  virtue  appeared  more  manifestly; 
and  every  class  of  men  in  Utica  could  clearly 
see,  with  sorrow  and  admiration,  how  entirely 
free  was  everything  that  he  was  doing  from 
any  secret  motives  or  any  mixture  of  self- 
regard;  he,  namely,  who  had  long  before  re¬ 
solved  on  his  own  death,  was  taking  such  ex¬ 
treme  pains,  toil,  and  care,  only  for  the  sake 
of  others,  that  when  he  had  secured  their  lives, 
he  might  put  an  end  to  his  own.  For  it  was 
easily  perceived  that  he  had  determined  to  die, 
though  he  did  not  let  it  appear. 

Therefore,  having  pacified  the  senators,  he 
complied  with  the  request  of  the  three  hun¬ 
dred,  and  went  to  them  alone  without  any  at¬ 
tendance.  They  gave  him  many  thanks,  and 
entreated  him  to  employ  and  trust  them  for 
the  future;  and  if  they  were  not  Catos,  and 
could  not  aspire  to  his  greatness  of  mind,  they 
begged  he  would  pity  their  weakness;  and 
told  him  they  had  determined  to  send  to 
Caesar  and  entreat  him,  chiefly  and  in  the  first 
place,  for  Cato,  and  if  they  could  not  prevail 
for  him,  they  would  not  accept  of  pardon  for 
themselves,  but  as  long  as  they  had  breath, 
would  fight  in  his  defence.  Cato  commended 
their  good  intentions,  and  advised  them  to 
send  speedily,  for  their  own  safety,  but  by  no 
means  to  ask  anything  in  his  behalf;  for  those 
who  are  conquered,  entreat,  and  those  who 


645 

have  done  wrong,  beg  pardon;  for  himself, 
he  did  not  confess  to  any  defeat  in  all  his  life, 
but  rather,  so  far  as  he  had  thought  fit,  he 
had  got  the  victory,  and  had  conquered  Caesar 
in  all  points  of  justice  and  honesty.  It  was 
Caesar  that  ought  to  be  looked  upon  as  one 
surprised  and  vanquished;  for  he  was  now 
convicted  and  found  guilty  of  those  designs 
against  his  country,  which  he  had  so  long 
practised  and  so  constantly  denied. 

When  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  went  out  of 
the  assembly,  and  being  informed  that  Caesar 
was  coming  with  his  whole  army,  “Ah,”  said 
he,  “he  expects  to  find  us  brave  men.”  Then 
he  went  to  the  senators,  and  urged  them  to 
make  no  delay,  but  hasten  to  be  gone,  while 
the  horsemen  were  yet  in  the  city.  So  ordering 
all  the  gates  to  be  shut,  except  one  towards 
the  sea,  he  assigned  their  several  ships  to  those 
that  were  to  depart,  and  gave  money  and  pro¬ 
vision  to  those  that  wanted;  all  which  he  did 
with  great  order  and  exactness,  taking  care  to 
suppress  all  tumults,  and  that  no  wrong  should 
be  done  to  the  people. 

Marcus  Octavius,  coming  with  two  legions, 
now  encamped  near  Utica,  sent  to  Cato  to  ar¬ 
range  about  the  chief  command.  Cato  returned 
him  no  answer;  but  said  to  his  friends,  “Can 
we  wonder  all  has  gone  ill  with  us,  when  our 
love  of  office  survives  even  in  our  very  ruin?” 
In  the  meantime,  word  was  brought  him,  that 
the  horse  were  going  away,  and  were  begin¬ 
ning  to  spoil  and  plunder  the  citizens.  Cato 
ran  to  them,  and  from  the  first  he  met, 
snatched  what  they  had  taken;  the  rest  threw 
down  all  they  had  gotten,  and  went  away 
silent  and  ashamed  of  what  they  had  done. 
Then  he  called  together  all  the  people  of 
Utica,  and  requested  them,  upon  the  behalf  of 
the  three  hundred,  not  to  exasperate  Caesar 
against  them,  but  all  to  seek  their  common 
safety  together  with  them. 

After  that,  he  went  again  to  the  port  to  see 
those  who  were  about  to  embark;  and  there 
he  embraced  and  dismissed  those  of  his  friends 
and  acquaintance  whom  he  had  persuaded  to 
go.  As  for  his  son,  he  did  not  counsel  him  to 
be  gone,  nor  did  he  think  fit  to  persuade  him 
to  forsake  his  father.  But  there  was  one  Statyl- 
lius,  a  young  man,  in  the  flower  of  his  age, 
of  a  brave  spirit,  and  very  desirous  to  imitate 
the  constancy  of  Cato.  Cato  entreated  him  to 
go  away,  as  he  was  a  noted  enemy  to  Caesar, 
but  without  success.  Then  Cato  looked  at 
Apollonides,  the  stoic  philosopher,  and  Deme¬ 
trius,  the  peripatetic;  “It  belongs  to  you  to 


646 

cool  the  fever  of  this  young  man’s  spirit,  and 
to  make  him  know  what  is  good  for  him.” 
And  thus,  in  setting  his  friends  upon  their 
way,  and  in  despatching  the  business  of  any 
that  applied  to  him,  he  spent  that  night  and 
the  greatest  part  of  the  next  day. 

Lucius  Caesar,  a  kinsman  of  Caesar’s,  being 
appointed  to  go  deputy  for  the  three  hundred, 
came  to  Cato,  and  desired  he  would  assist 
him  to  prepare  a  persuasive  speech  for  them; 
“And  as  to  you  yourself,”  said  he,  “it  will  be 
an  honour  for  me  to  kiss  the  hands  and  fall 
at  the  knees  of  Caesar,  in  your  behalf.”  But 
Cato  would  by  no  means  permit  him  to  do 
any  such  thing;  “For  as  to  myself,”  said  he, 
“if  I  would  be  preserved  by  Caesar’s  favour,  I 
should  myself  go  to  him;  but  I  would  not  be 
beholden  to  a  tyrant  for  his  acts  of  tyranny. 
For  it  is  but  usurpation  in  him  to  save,  as 
their  rightful  lord,  the  lives  of  men  over  whom 
he  has  no  title  to  reign.  But  if  you  please,  let 
us  consider  what  you  had  best  say  for  the 
three  hundred.”  And  when  they  had  contin¬ 
ued  some  time  together,  as  Lucius  was  going 
away,  Cato  recommended  to  him  his  son  and 
the  rest  of  his  friends;  and  taking  him  by  the 
hand  bade  him  farewell. 

Then  he  retired  to  his  house  again,  and 
called  together  his  son  and  his  friends,  to 
whom  he  conversed  on  various  subjects;  among 
the  rest  he  forbade  his  son  to  engage  himself 
in  the  affairs  of  state.  For  to  act  therein  as  be¬ 
came  him  was  now  impossible;  and  to  do 
otherwise,  would  be  dishonourable.  Toward 
evening  he  went  into  his  bath.  As  he  was 
bathing,  he  remembered  Statyllius  and  called 
out  aloud,  “Apollonides,  have  you  tamed  the 
high  spirit  of  Statyllius,  and  is  he  gone  with¬ 
out  bidding  us  farewell?”  “No,”  said  Apol¬ 
lonides,  “I  have  said  much  to  him,  but  to 
little  purpose;  he  is  still  resolute  and  unalter¬ 
able,  and  declares  he  is  determined  to  follow 
your  example.”  At  this,  it  is  said,  Cato  smiled, 
and  answered,  “That  will  soon  be  tried.” 

After  he  had  bathed,  he  went  to  supper, 
with  a  great  deal  of  company;  at  which  he 
sat  up,  as  he  had  always  used  to  do  ever  since 
the  battle  of  Pharsalia;  for  since  that  time  he 
never  lay  down  but  when  he  went  to  sleep. 
There  supped  with  him  all  his  own  friends 
and  the  magistrates  of  Utica. 

After  supper,  the  wine  produced  a  great 
deal  of  lively  and  agreeable  discourse,  and  a 
whole  series  of  philosophical  questions  was 
discussed.  At  length  they  came  to  the  strange 
dogmas  of  the  stoics,  called  their  Paradoxes; 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  to  this  in  particular,  That  the  good  man 
only  is  free,  and  that  all  wicked  men  are 
slaves.  The  peripatetic,  as  was  to  be  expected, 
opposing  this,  Cato  fell  upon  him  very  warm¬ 
ly;  and  somewhat  raising  his  voice,  he  argued 
the  matter  at  great  length,  and  urged  the 
point  with  such  vehemence,  that  it  was  ap¬ 
parent  to  everybody  he  was  resolved  to  put  an 
end  to  his  life,  and  set  himself  at  liberty.  And 
so,  when  he  had  done  speaking,  there  was  a 
great  silence  and  evident  dejection.  Cato,  there¬ 
fore,  to  divert  them  from  any  suspicion  of  his 
design,  turned  the  conversation,  and  began 
again  to  talk  of  matters  of  present  interest  and 
expectation,  showing  great  concern  for  those 
that  were  at  sea,  as  also  for  the  others,  who, 
travelling  by  land,  were  to  pass  through  a  dry 
and  barbarous  desert. 

When  the  company  was  broke  up,  he  walked 
with  his  friends,  as  he  used  to  do  after  sup¬ 
per,  gave  the  necessary  orders  to  the  officers 
of  the  watch,  and  going  into  his  chamber,  he 
embraced  his  son  and  every  one  of  his  friends 
with  more  than  usual  warmth,  which  again 
renewed  their  suspicion  of  his  design.  Then 
laying  himself  down,  he  took  into  his  hand 
Plato’s  dialogue  concerning  the  soul.  Having 
read  more  than  half  the  book,  he  looked  up, 
and  missing  his  sword,  which  his  son  had 
taken  away  while  he  was  at  supper,  he  called 
his  servant,  and  asked  who  had  taken  away 
his  sword.  The  servant  making  no  answer,  he 
fell  to  reading  again;  and  a  little  after,  not 
seeming  importunate,  or  hasty  for  it,  but  as 
if  he  would  only  know  what  had  become  of  it, 
he  bade  it  be  brought.  But  having  waited 
some  time,  when  he  had  read  through  the 
book,  and  still  nobody  brought  the  sword,  he 
called  up  all  his  servants,  and  in  a  louder  tone 
demanded  his  sword.  To  one  of  them  he  gave 
such  a  blow  in  the  mouth,  that  he  hurt  his  own 
hand;  and  now  grew  more  angry,  exclaiming 
that  he  was  betrayed  and  delivered  naked  to 
the  enemy  by  his  son  and  his  servants. 

Then  his  son,  with  the  rest  of  his  friends, 
came  running  into  the  room,  and  falling  at 
his  feet,  began  to  lament  and  beseech  him. 
But  Cato,  raising  himself  and  looking  fiercely: 
“When,”  said  he,  “and  how  did  I  become  de¬ 
ranged,  and  out  of  my  senses,  that  thus  no 
one  tries  to  persuade  me  by  reason,  or  show 
me  what  is  better,  if  I  am  supposed  to  be  ill- 
advised?  Must  I  be  disarmed,  and  hindered 
from  using  my  own  reason?  And  you,  young 
man,  why  do  you  not  bind  your  father’s  hands 
behind  him  that,  when  Caesar  comes,  he  may 


CATO  THE  YOUNGER 

find  me  unable  to  defend  myself?  To  despatch 
myself  I  want  no  sword;  I  need  but  hold  my 
breath  awhile,  or  strike  my  head  against  the 
wall.” 

When  he  had  thus  spoken,  his  son  went 
weeping  out  of  the  chamber,  and  with  him 
all  the  rest,  except  Demetrius  and  Apollo- 
nides,  to  whom,  being  left  alone  with  him,  he 
began  to  speak  more  calmly.  “And  you,”  said 
he,”  do  you  also  think  to  keep  a  man  of  my 
age  alive  by  force,  and  to  sit  here  and  silently 
watch  me?  Or  do  you  bring  me  some  reasons 
to  prove  that  it  will  not  be  base  and  un¬ 
worthy  for  Cato,  when  he  can  find  his  safety 
no  other  way,  to  seek  it  from  his  enemy?  If 
so,  adduce  your  arguments,  and  show  cause 
why  we  should  now  unlearn  what  we  former¬ 
ly  were  taught,  in  order  that  rejecting  all  the 
convictions  in  which  we  lived,  we  may  now 
by  Caesar’s  help  grow  wiser,  and  be  yet  more 
obliged  to  him  than  for  life  only.  Not  that  I 
have  determined  aught  concerning  myself, 
but  I  would  have  it  in  my  power  to  perform 
what  I  shall  think  fit  to  resolve;  and  I  shall 
not  fail  to  take  you  as  my  advisers,  in  holding 
counsel,  as  I  shall  do,  with  the  doctrines  which 
your  philosophy  teaches;  in  the  meantime,  do 
not  trouble  yourselves,  but  go  tell  my  son  that 
he  should  not  compel  his  father  to  what  he 
cannot  persuade  him  to.” 

They  made  him  no  answer,  but  went  weep¬ 
ing  out  of  the  chamber.  Then  the  sword  being 
brought  in  by  a  little  boy,  Cato  took  it,  drew 
it  out,  and  looked  at  it;  and  when  he  saw 
the  point  was  good,  “Now,”  said  he,  “I  am 
master  of  myself”;  and  laying  down  the  sword, 
he  took  his  book  again,  which,  it  is  related,  he 
read  twice  over.  After  this  he  slept  so  soundly 
that  he  was  heard  to  snore  by  those  that  were 
without. 

About  midnight,  he  called  up  two  of  his 
freedmen,  Cleanthes,  his  physician,  and  Butas, 
whom  he  chiefly  employed  in  public  business. 
Him  he  sent  to  the  port,  to  see  if  all  his  friends 
had  sailed;  to  the  physician  he  gave  his  hand 
to  be  dressed,  as  it  was  swollen  with  the  blow 
he  had  struck  one  of  his  servants.  At  this 
they  all  rejoiced,  hoping  that  now  he  designed 
to  live. 

Butas,  after  a  while,  returned,  and  brought 
word  they  were  all  gone  except  Crassus,  who 
had  stayed  about  some  business,  but  was  just 
ready  to  depart;  he  said,  also,  that  the  wind 
was  high,  and  the  sea  very  rough.  Cato,  on 
hearing  this,  sighed,  out  of  compassion  to 
those  who  were  at  sea,  and  sent  Butas  again 


647 

to  see  if  any  of  them  should  happen  to  return 
for  anything  they  wanted,  and  to  acquaint 
him  therewith. 

Now  the  birds  began  to  sing,  and  he  again 
fell  into  a  little  slumber.  At  length  Butas  came 
back,  and  told  him  all  was  quiet  in  the  port. 
Then  Cato,  laying  himself  down,  as  if  he 
would  sleep  out  the  rest  of  the  night,  bade 
him  shut  the  door  after  him.  But  as  soon  as 
Butas  was  gone  out,  he  took  his  sword,  and 
stabbed  it  into  his  breast;  yet  not  being  able  to 
use  his  hand  so  well,  on  account  of  the  swell¬ 
ing,  he  did  not  immediately  die  of  the  wound; 
but  struggling,  fell  off  the  bed,  and  throwing 
down  a  little  mathematical  table  that  stood 
by,  made  such  a  noise  that  the  servants,  hear¬ 
ing  it,  cried  out.  And  immediately  his  son  and 
all  his  friends  came  into  the  chamber,  where, 
seeing  him  lie  weltering  in  his  blood,  a  great 
part  of  his  bowels  out  of  his  body,  but  himself 
still  alive  and  able  to  look  at  them,  they  all 
stood  in  horror.  The  physician  went  to  him, 
and  would  have  put  in  his  bowels,  which 
were  not  pierced,  and  sewed  up  the  wound; 
but  Cato,  recovering  himself,  and  understand¬ 
ing  the  intention,  thrust  away  the  physician, 
plucked  out  his  own  bowels,  and  tearing  open 
the  wound,  immediately  expired. 

In  less  time  than  one  would  think  his  own 
family  could  have  known  this  accident,  all 
the  three  hundred  were  at  the  door.  And  a 
little  after,  the  people  of  Utica  flocked  thither, 
crying  out  with  one  voice  he  was  their  bene¬ 
factor  and  their  saviour,  the  only  free  and 
only  undefeated  man.  At  the  very  same  time, 
they  had  news  that  Caesar  was  coming;  yet 
neither  fear  of  the  present  danger,  nor  desire 
to  flatter  the  conqueror,  nor  the  commotions 
and  discord  among  themselves,  could  divert 
them  from  doing  honour  to  Cato.  For  they 
sumptuously  set  out  his  body,  made  him  a 
magnificent  funeral,  and  buried  him  by  the 
seaside,  where  now  stands  his  statue,  holding 
a  sword.  And  only  when  this  had  been  done, 
they  returned  to  consider  of  preserving  them¬ 
selves  and  their  city. 

Caesar  had  been  informed  that  Cato  stayed 
at  Utica,  and  did  not  seek  to  fly;  that  he  had 
sent  away  the  rest  of  the  Romans,  but  him¬ 
self,  with  his  son  and  a  few  of  his  friends, 
continued  there  very  unconcernedly,  so  that 
he  could  not  imagine  what  might  be  his  de¬ 
sign.  But  having  a  great  consideration  for  the 
man,  he  hastened  thither  with  his  army.  When 
he  heard  of  his  death,  it  is  related  he  said 
these  words,  “Cato,  I  grudge  you  your  death, 


648 


as  you  have  grudged  me  the  preservation  of 
your  life.”  And,  indeed,  if  Cato  would  have 
suffered  himself  to  owe  his  life  to  Caesar,  he 
would  not  so  much  have  impaired  his  own 
honour,  as  augmented  the  other’s  glory.  What 
would  have  been  done,  of  course,  we  cannot 
know,  but  from  Caesar’s  usual  clemency,  we 
may  guess  what  was  most  likely. 

Cato  was  forty-eight  years  old  when  he  died. 
His  son  suffered  no  injury  from  Caesar;  but, 
it  is  said,  he  grew  idle,  and  was  thought  to  be 
dissipated  among  women.  In  Cappadocia,  he 
stayed  at  the  house  of  Marphadates,  one  of 
the  royal  family  there,  who  had  a  very  hand¬ 
some  wife;  and  continuing  his  visit  longer 
than  was  suitable,  he  made  himself  the  subject 
of  various  epigrams;  such  as,  for  example — 

To-morrow  {being  the  thirtieth  day) 

Cato,  ’tis  thought,  will  go  away; 

Porcius  and  Marphadates,  friends  so  true, 

One  Soul,  they  say,  suffices  for  the  two, 

that  being  the  name  of  the  woman,  and  so 
again,— 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

To  Cato’s  greatness  every  one  confesses, 

A  royal  Soul  he  certainly  possesses. 

But  all  these  stains  were  entirely  wiped  off 
by  the  bravery  of  his  death.  For  in  the  battle 
of  Philippi,  where  he  fought  for  his  country’s 
liberty  against  Caesar  and  Antony,  when  the 
ranks  were  breaking,  he,  scorning  to  fly,  or  to 
escape  unknown,  called  out  to  the  enemy, 
showed  himself  to  them  in  front,  and  encour¬ 
aged  those  of  his  party  who  stayed;  and  at 
length  fell,  and  left  his  enemies  full  of  ad¬ 
miration  of  his  valour. 

Nor  was  the  daughter  of  Cato  inferior  to 
the  rest  of  her  family  for  sober-living  and 
greatness  of  spirit.  She  was  married  to  Brutus, 
who  killed  Caesar;  was  acquainted  with  the 
conspiracy,  and  ended  her  life  as  became  one 
of  her  birth  and  virtue.  All  which  is  related  in 
the  life  of  Brutus. 

Statyllius,  who  said  he  would  imitate  Cato, 
was  at  that  time  hindered  by  the  philosophers, 
when  he  would  have  put  an  end  to  his  life. 
He  afterwards  followed  Brutus,  to  whom  he 
was  very  faithful  and  very  serviceable,  and 
died  in  the  field  of  Philippi. 


AGIS 

2.64-2.41  B.C 


The  fable  of  Ixion,  who,  embracing  a 
cloud  instead  of  Juno,  begot  the  Cen¬ 
taurs,  has  been  ingeniously  enough  sup¬ 
posed  to  have  been  invented  to  represent  to  us 
ambitious  men,  whose  minds,  doting  on  glory, 
which  is  a  mere  image  of  virtue,  produce  noth¬ 
ing  that  is  genuine  or  uniform,  but  only,  as 
might  be  expected  of  such  a  conjunction,  mis¬ 
shapen  and  unnatural  actions.  Running  after 
their  emulations  and  passions,  and  carried 
away  by  the  impulses  of  the  moment,  they 
may  say  with  the  herdsmen  in  the  tragedy  of 
Sophocles — 

We  follow  these,  though  born  their  rightful  lords, 
And  they  command  us,  though  they  spea\  no 
words. 

For  this  is  indeed  the  true  condition  of  men 
in  public  life,  who,  to  gain  the  vain  title  of  be¬ 
ing  the  people’s  leaders  and  governors,  are 
content  to  make  themselves  the  slaves  and  fol¬ 
lowers  of  all  the  people’s  humours  and  ca¬ 
prices.  For  as  the  lookout  men  at  the  ship’s 
prow,  though  they  see  what  is  ahead  before 


the  men  at  the  helm,  yet  constantly  look  back 
to  the  pilots  there,  and  obey  the  orders  they 
give;  so  these  men,  steered,  as  I  may  say,  by 
popular  applause,  though  they  bear  the  name 
of  governors,  are  in  reality  the  mere  under¬ 
lings  of  the  multitude.  The  man  who  is  com¬ 
pletely  wise  and  virtuous  has  no  need  at  all  of 
glory,  except  so  far  as  it  disposes  and  eases  his 
way  to  action  by  the  greater  trust  that  it  pro¬ 
cures  him.  A  young  man,  I  grant,  may  be  per¬ 
mitted,  while  yet  eager  for  distinction,  to 
pride  himself  a  little  in  his  good  deeds;  for 
(as  Theophrastus  says)  his  virtues,  which  are 
yet  tender  and,  as  it  were,  in  the  blade,  cher¬ 
ished  and  supported  by  praises,  grow  strong¬ 
er,  and  take  the  deeper  root.  But  when  this 
passion  is  exorbitant,  it  is  dangerous  in  all 
men,  and  in  those  who  govern  a  common¬ 
wealth,  utterly  destructive.  For  in  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  large  power  and  authority,  it  trans¬ 
ports  men  to  a  degree  of  madness;  so  that 
now  they  no  more  think  what  is  good,  glori¬ 
ous,  but  will  have  those  actions  only  esteemed 


AGIS 

good  that  are  glorious.  As  Phocion,  therefore, 
answered  King  Antipater,  who  sought  his  ap¬ 
probation  of  some  unworthy  action,  “I  cannot 
be  your  flatterer,  and  your  friend,”  so  these 
men  should  answer  the  people,  “I  cannot  gov¬ 
ern  and  obey  you.” 

For  it  may  happen  to  the  commonwealth, 
as  to  the  serpent  in  the  fable,  whose  tail,  ris¬ 
ing  in  rebellion  against  the  head,  complained, 
as  of  a  great  grievance,  that  it  was  always 
forced  to  follow,  and  required  that  it  should 
be  permitted  by  turns  to  lead  the  way.  And 
taking  the  command  accordingly,  it  soon  in¬ 
flicted,  by  its  senseless  courses,  mischiefs  in 
abundance  upon  itself,  while  the  head  was 
torn  and  lacerated  with  following,  contrary  to 
nature,  a  guide  that  was  deaf  and  blind.  And 
such  we  see  to  have  been  the  lot  of  many, 
who,  submitting  to  be  guided  by  the  inclina¬ 
tions  of  an  uninformed  and  unreasoning  mul¬ 
titude,  could  neither  stop,  nor  recover  them¬ 
selves  out  of  the  confusion. 

This  is  what  has  occurred  to  us  to  say  of 
that  glory  which  depends  on  the  voice  of  large 
numbers,  considering  the  sad  effects  of  it  in 
the  misfortunes  of  Caius  and  Tiberius  Grac¬ 
chus,  men  of  noble  nature,  and  whose  gener¬ 
ous  natural  dispositions  were  improved  by  the 
best  of  educations,  and  who  came  to  the  ad¬ 
ministration  of  affairs  with  the  most  laudable 
intentions;  yet  they  were  ruined,  I  cannot  say 
by  an  immoderate  desire  of  glory,  but  by  a 
more  excusable  fear  of  disgrace.  For  being  ex¬ 
cessively  beloved  and  favoured  by  the  people, 
they  thought  it  a  discredit  to  them  not  to 
make  full  repayment,  endeavouring  by  new 
public  acts  to  outdo  the  honours  they  had  re¬ 
ceived,  and  again,  because  of  these  new  kind¬ 
nesses,  incurring  yet  further  distinctions;  till 
the  people  and  they,  mutually  inflamed,  and 
vying  thus  with  each  other  in  honours  and 
benefits,  brought  things  at  last  to  such  a  pass 
that  they  might  say  that  to  engage  so  far  was 
indeed  a  folly,  but  to  retreat  would  now  be  a 
shame. 

This  the  reader  will  easily  gather  from  the 
story.  I  will  now  compare  with  them  two 
Lacedaemonian  popular  leaders,  the  kings 
Agis  and  Cleomenes.  For  they,  being  desirous 
also  to  raise  the  people,  and  to  restore  the 
noble  and  just  form  of  government,  now  long 
fallen  into  disuse,  incurred  the  hatred  of  the 
rich  and  powerful,  who  could  not  endure  to 
be  deprived  of  the  selfish  enjoyment  to  which 
they  were  accustomed.  These  were  not  indeed 
brothers  by  nature,  as  the  two  Romans,  but 


649 

they  had  a  kind  of  brotherly  resemblance  in 
their  actions  and  designs,  which  took  a  rise 
from  such  beginnings  and  occasions  as  I  am 
now  about  to  relate. 

When  the  love  of  gold  and  silver  had  once 
gained  admittance  into  the  Lacedaemonian 
commonwealth,  it  was  quickly  followed  by 
avarice  and  baseness  of  spirit  in  the  pursuit  of 
it,  and  by  luxury,  effeminacy,  and  prodigality 
in  the  use.  Then  Sparta  fell  from  almost  all 
her  former  virtue  and  repute,  and  so  contin¬ 
ued  till  the  days  of  Agis  and  Leonidas,  who 
both  together  were  kings  of  the  Lacedaemo¬ 
nians. 

Agis  was  of  the  royal  family  of  Eurypon, 
son  of  Eudamidas,  and  the  sixth  in  descent 
from  Agesilaus,  who  made  the  expedition  into 
Asia,  and  was  the  greatest  man  of  his  time  in 
Greece.  Agesilaus  left  behind  him  a  son  called 
Archidamus,  the  same  who  was  slain  at  Man- 
donium,  in  Italy,  by  the  Messapians,  and  who 
was  then  succeeded  by  his  eldest  son  Agis.  He 
being  killed  by  Antipater  near  Megalopolis, 
and  leaving  no  issue,  was  succeeded  by  his 
brother  Eudamidas;  he  by  a  son  called  Archi¬ 
damus;  and  Archidamus  by  another  Euda¬ 
midas,  the  father  of  this  Agis  of  whom  we 
now  treat. 

Leonidas,  son  of  Cleonymus,  was  of  the 
other  royal  house  of  the  Agiadae,  and  the 
eighth  in  descent  from  Pausanias,  who  de¬ 
feated  Mardonius  in  the  battle  of  Plataea.  Pau¬ 
sanias  was  succeeded  by  a  son  called  Plisto- 
anax;  and  he  by  another  Pausanias  who  was 
banished,  and  lived  as  a  private  man  at  Tegea, 
while  his  eldest  son,  Agesipolis,  reigned  in  his 
place.  He,  dying  without  issue,  was  succeeded 
by  a  younger  brother,  called  Cleombrotus, 
who  left  two  sons;  the  elder  was  Agesipolis, 
who  reigned  but  a  short  time,  and  died  with¬ 
out  issue;  the  younger,  who  then  became  king, 
was  called  Cleomenes,  and  had  also  two  sons, 
Acrotatus  and  Cleonymus.  The  first  died  be¬ 
fore  his  father,  but  left  a  son  called  Areus, 
who  succeeded,  and  being  slain  at  Corinth, 
left  the  kingdom  to  his  son  Acrotatus.  This 
Acrotatus  was  defeated,  and  slain  near  Megal¬ 
opolis,  in  a  battle  against  the  tyrant  Aristode- 
mus;  he  left  his  wife  big  with  child,  and  on 
her  being  delivered  of  a  son,  Leonidas,  son  of 
the  above-named  Cleonymus,  was  made  his 
guardian,  and  as  the  young  king  died  before 
becoming  a  man,  he  succeeded  in  the  king¬ 
dom. 

Leonidas  was  a  king  not  particularly  suit¬ 
able  to  his  people.  For  though  there  were  at 


650 

that  time  at  Sparta  a  general  decline  in  man¬ 
ners,  yet  a  greater  revolt  from  the  old  habits 
appeared  in  him  than  in  others.  For  having 
lived  a  long  time  among  the  great  lords  of 
Persia,  and  been  a  follower  of  King  Seleucus, 
he  unadvisedly  thought  to  imitate,  among 
Greek  institutions  and  in  a  lawful  govern¬ 
ment,  the  pride  and  assumption  usual  in  those 
courts.  Agis,  on  the  contrary,  in  fineness  of 
nature  and  elevation  of  mind,  not  only  far  ex¬ 
celled  Leonidas,  but  in  a  manner  all  the  kings 
that  had  reigned  since  the  great  Agesilaus. 
For  though  he  had  been  bred  very  tenderly, 
in  abundance  and  even  in  luxury,  by  his 
mother  Agesistrata  and  his  grandmother  Ar- 
chidamia,  who  were  the  wealthiest  of  the 
Lacedaemonians,  yet,  before  the  age  of  twenty, 
he  renounced  all  indulgence  in  pleasures. 
Withdrawing  himself  as  far  as  possible  from 
the  gaiety  and  ornament  which  seemed  be¬ 
coming  to  the  grace  of  his  person,  he  made  it 
his  pride  to  appear  in  the  coarse  Spartan  coat. 
In  his  meals,  his  bathings,  and  in  all  his  exer¬ 
cises,  he  followed  the  old  Laconian  usage,  and 
was  often  heard  to  say  he  had  no  desire  for 
the  place  of  king,  if  he  did  not  hope  by  means 
of  that  authority  to  restore  their  ancient  laws 
and  discipline. 

The  Lacedaemonians  might  date  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  their  corruption  from  their  conquest 
of  Athens,  and  the  influx  of  gold  and  silver 
among  them  that  thence  ensued.  Yet,  never¬ 
theless,  the  number  of  houses  which  Lycurgus 
appointed  being  still  maintained,  and  the  law 
remaining  in  force  by  which  every  one  was 
obliged  to  leave  his  lot  or  portion  of  land  en¬ 
tirely  to  his  son,  a  kind  of  order  and  equality 
was  thereby  preserved,  which  still  in  some  de¬ 
gree  sustained  the  state  amidst  its  errors  in 
other  respects.  But  one  Epitadeus  happening 
to  be  ephor,  a  man  of  great  influence,  and  of 
a  wilful,  violent  spirit,  on  some  occasion  of  a 
quarrel  with  his  son,  proposed  a  decree  that 
all  men  should  have  liberty  to  dispose  of  their 
land  by  gift  in  their  lifetime,  or  by  their  last 
will  and  testament. 

This  being  promoted  by  him  to  satisfy  a 
passion  of  revenge,  and  through  covetousness 
consented  to  by  others,  and  thus  enacted  for  a 
law,  was  the  ruin  of  the  best  state  of  the  com¬ 
monwealth.  For  the  rich  men  without  scruple 
drew  the  estate  into  their  own  hands,  exclud¬ 
ing  the  rightful  heirs  from  their  succession; 
and  all  the  wealth  being  centred  upon  the 
few,  the  generality  were  poor  and  miserable. 
Honourable  pursuits,  for  which  there  was  no 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

longer  leisure,  were  neglected;  the  state  was 
filled  with  sordid  business,  and  with  hatred 
and  envy  of  the  rich.  There  did  not  remain 
above  seven  hundred  of  the  old  Spartan  fami¬ 
lies,  of  which,  perhaps,  one  hundred  might 
have  estates  in  land;  the  rest  were  destitute 
alike  of  wealth  and  of  honour,  were  tardy  and 
unperforming  in  the  defence  of  their  country 
against  its  enemies  abroad,  and  eagerly  watched 
the  opportunity  for  change  and  revolution  at 
home. 

Agis,  therefore,  believing  it  a  glorious  ac¬ 
tion,  as  in  truth  it  was,  to  equalise  and  re¬ 
people  the  state,  began  to  sound  the  inclina¬ 
tions  of  the  citizens.  He  found  the  young  men 
disposed  beyond  his  expectation;  they  were 
eager  to  enter  with  him  upon  the  contest  in 
the  cause  of  virtue,  and  to  fling  aside,  for  free¬ 
dom’s  sake,  their  old  manner  of  life,  as  read¬ 
ily  as  the  wrestler  does  his  garment.  But  the 
old  men,  habituated  and  more  confirmed  in 
their  vices,  were  most  of  them  as  alarmed  at 
the  very  name  of  Lycurgus,  as  a  fugitive  slave 
to  be  brought  back  before  his  offended  mas¬ 
ter.  These  men  could  not  endure  to  hear  Agis 
continually  deploring  the  present  state  of 
Sparta,  and  wishing  she  might  be  restored  to 
her  ancient  glory. 

But  on  the  other  side,  Lysander,  the  son  of 
Libys,  Mandroclidas,  the  son  of  Ecphanes,  to¬ 
gether  with  Agesilaus,  not  only  approved  his 
design,  but  assisted  and  confirmed  him  in  it. 
Lysander  had  a  great  authority  and  credit 
with  the  people;  Mandroclidas  was  esteemed 
the  ablest  Greek  of  his  time  to  manage  an 
affair  and  put  it  in  train,  and,  joined  with 
skill  and  cunning,  had  a  great  degree  of  bold¬ 
ness.  Agesilaus  was  the  king’s  uncle,  by  the 
mother’s  side;  an  eloquent  man,  but  covetous 
and  voluptuous,  who  was  not  moved  by  con¬ 
siderations  of  public  good,  but  rather  seemed 
to  be  persuaded  in  it  by  his  son  Hippomedon, 
whose  courage  and  signal  actions  in  war  had 
gained  him  a  high  esteem  and  great  influence 
among  the  young  men  of  Sparta,  though  in¬ 
deed  the  true  motive  was,  that  he  had  many 
debts,  and  hoped  by  this  means  to  be  freed 
from  them. 

As  soon  as  Agis  had  prevailed  with  his 
uncle,  he  endeavoured  by  his  mediation  to 
gain  his  mother  also,  who  had  many  friends 
and  followers,  and  a  number  of  persons  in  her 
debt  in  the  city,  and  took  a  considerable  part 
in  public  affairs.  At  the  first  proposal  she  was 
very  averse,  and  strongly  advised  her  son  not 
to  engage  in  so  difficult  and  so  unprofitable 


AGIS 

an  enterprise.  But  Agesilaus  endeavoured  to 
persuade  her  that  the  thing  was  not  so ’difficult 
as  she  imagined,  and  that  it  might,  in  all  like¬ 
lihood,  redound  to  the  advantage  of  her  fam¬ 
ily;  while  the  king,  her  son,  besought  her  not 
for  money’s  sake  to  decline  assisting  his  hopes 
of  glory.  He  told  her  he  could  not  pretend  to 
equal  other  kings  in  riches,  the  very  followers 
and  menials  of  the  satraps  and  stewards  of 
Seleucus  or  Ptolemy  abounding  more  in 
wealth  than  all  the  Spartan  kings  put  to¬ 
gether;  but  if  by  contempt  of  wealth  and 
pleasure,  by  simplicity  and  magnanimity,  he 
could  surpass  their  luxury  and  abundance;  if 
he  could  restore  their  former  equality  to  the 
Spartans,  then  he  should  be  a  great  king  in¬ 
deed. 

In  conclusion,  the  mother  and  the  grand¬ 
mother  also  were  so  taken,  so  carried  away 
with  the  inspiration,  as  it  were,  of  the  young 
man’s  noble  and  generous  ambition,  that  they 
not  only  consented,  but  were  ready  on  all  oc¬ 
casions  to  spur  him  on  to  a  perseverance,  and 
not  only  sent  to  speak  on  his  behalf  with  the 
men  with  whom  they  had  an  interest,  but  ad¬ 
dressed  the  other  women  also,  knowing  well 
that  the  Lacedaemonian  wives  had  always  a 
great  power  with  their  husbands,  who  used 
to  impart  to  them  their  state  affairs  with 
greater  freedom  than  the  women  would  com¬ 
municate  with  the  men  in  the  private  busi¬ 
ness  of  their  families.  Which  was  indeed  one 
of  the  greatest  obstacles  to  this  design;  for  the 
money  of  Sparta  being  most  of  it  in  the  wom¬ 
en’s  hands,  it  was  their  interest  to  oppose  it, 
not  only  as  depriving  them  of  those  super¬ 
fluous  trifles,  in  which,  through  want  of  bet¬ 
ter  knowledge  and  experience,  they  placed 
their  chief  felicity,  but  also  because  they  knew 
their  riches  were  the  main  support  of  their 
power  and  credit. 

Those,  therefore,  who  were  of  this  faction 
had  recourse  to  Leonidas,  representing  to  him 
how  it  was  his  part,  as  the  elder  and  more 
experienced,  to  put  a  stop  to  the  ill-advised 
projects  of  a  rash  young  man.  Leonidas,  though 
of  himself  sufficiently  inclined  to  oppose  Agis, 
durst  not  openly,  for  fear  of  the  people,  who 
were  manifestly  desirous  of  this  change;  but 
underhand  he  did  all  he  could  to  discredit 
and  thwart  the  project,  and  to  prejudice  the 
chief  magistrates  against  him,  and  on  all  occa¬ 
sions  craftily  insinuated  that  it  was  at  the 
price  of  letting  him  usurp  arbitrary  power 
that  Agis  thus  proposed  to  divide  the  prop¬ 
erty  of  the  rich  among  the  poor,  and  that  the 


651 

object  of  these  measures  for  cancelling  debts 
and  dividing  the  lands,  was  not  to  furnish 
Sparta  with  citizens,  but  purchase  him  a  ty¬ 
rant’s  body  guard. 

Agis,  nevertheless,  little  regarding  these  ru¬ 
mours,  procured  Lysander’s  election  as  ephor; 
and  then  took  the  first  occasion  of  proposing 
through  him  his  rhetra  to  the  council,  the 
chief  articles  of  which  were  these:  That  every 
one  should  be  free  from  their  debts:  all  the 
lands  to  be  divided  into  equal  portions,  those 
that  lay  betwixt  the  watercourse  near  Pellene 
and  Mount  Taygetus,  and  as  far  as  the  cities 
of  Malea  and  Sellasia,  into  four  thousand  five 
hundred  lots,  the  remainder  into  fifteen  thou¬ 
sand;  these  last  to  be  shared  out  among  those 
of  the  country  people  who  were  fit  for  service 
as  heavy-armed  soldiers,  the  first  among  the 
natural-born  Spartans,  and  their  number  also 
should  be  supplied  from  any  among  the  coun¬ 
try  people  or  strangers  who  had  received  the 
proper  breeding  of  freemen,  and  were  of  vig¬ 
orous  body  and  of  age  for  military  service. 
All  these  were  to  be  divided  into  fifteen  com¬ 
panies,  some  of  four  hundred,  and  some  of 
two,  with  a  diet  and  discipline  agreeable  to 
the  laws  of  Lycurgus. 

This  decree  being  proposed  in  the  council 
of  Elders  met  there  with  opposition;  so  that 
Lysander  immediately  convoked  the  great  as¬ 
sembly  of  the  people,  to  whom  he,  Mandro- 
clidas,  and  Agesilaus  made  orations  exhorting 
them  that  they  would  not  suffer  the  majesty 
of  Sparta  to  remain  abandoned  to  contempt, 
to  gratify  a  few  rich  men,  who  lorded  it  over 
them;  but  that  they  should  call  to  mind  the 
oracles  in  old  times  which  had  forewarned 
them  to  beware  of  the  love  of  money,  as  the 
great  danger  and  probable  ruin  of  Sparta, 
and,  moreover,  those  recently  brought  from 
the  temple  of  Pasiphae.  This  was  a  famous 
temple  and  oracle  at  Thalamae;  and  this  Pasi¬ 
phae  some  say,  was  one  of  the  daughters  of 
Atlas,  who  had  by  Jupiter  a  son  called  Am¬ 
mon;  others  are  of  opinion  it  was  Cassandra, 
the  daughter  of  King  Priam,  who  dying  in 
this  place,  was  called  Pasiphae,  as  the  revealer 
of  oracles  to  all  men.  Phylarchus  says,  that 
this  was  Daphne,  the  daughter  of  Amyclas, 
who,  flying  from  Apollo,  was  transformed  in¬ 
to  a  laurel,  and  honoured  by  that  god  with 
the  gift  of  prophecy. 

But  be  it  as  it  will,  it  is  certain  the  people 
were  made  to  apprehend  that  this  oracle  had 
commanded  them  to  return  to  their  former 
state  of  equality  settled  by  Lycurgus.  As  soon 


652 

as  these  had  done  speaking,  Agis  stood  up, 
and  after  a  few  words,  told  them  he  would 
make  the  best  contribution  in  his  power  to 
the  new  legislation,  which  was  proposed  for 
their  advantage.  In  the  first  place,  he  would 
divide  among  them  all  his  patrimony,  which 
was  of  large  extent  in  tillage  and  pasture;  he 
would  also  give  six  hundred  talents  in  ready 
money,  and  his  mother,  grandmother,  and  his 
other  friends  and  relations,  who  were  the 
richest  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  were  ready  to 
follow  his  example. 

The  people  were  transported  with  admira¬ 
tion  of  the  young  man’s  generosity,  and  with 
joy  that,  after  three  hundred  years’  interval, 
at  last  there  had  appeared  a  king  worthy  of 
Sparta.  But,  on  the  other  side,  Leonidas  was 
now  more  than  ever  averse,  being  sensible 
that  he  and  his  friends  would  be  obliged  to 
contribute  with  their  riches,  and  yet  all  the 
honour  and  obligation  would  redound  to 
Agis.  He  asked  him  then  before  them  all, 
whether  Lycurgus  were  not  in  his  opinion  a 
wise  man,  and  a  lover  of  his  country.  Agis 
answering  he  was,  “And  when  did  Lycur¬ 
gus,”  replied  Leonidas,  “cancel  debts,  or  ad¬ 
mit  strangers  to  citizenship, — he  who  thought 
the  commonwealth  not  secure  unless  from 
time  to  time  the  city  was  cleared  of  all  stran¬ 
gers  ?  ” 

To  this  Agis  replied,  “It  is  no  wonder  that 
Leonidas,  who  was  brought  up  and  married 
abroad,  and  has  children  by  a  wife  taken  out 
of  a  Persian  court,  should  know  little  of  Ly¬ 
curgus  or  his  laws.  Lycurgus  took  away  both 
debts  and  loans,  by  taking  away  money;  and 
objected  indeed  to  the  presence  of  men  who 
were  foreign  to  the  manners  and  customs  of 
the  country,  not  in  any  case  from  an  ill-will 
to  their  persons,  but  lest  the  example  of  their 
lives  and  conduct  should  infect  the  city  with 
the  love  of  riches,  and  of  delicate  and  luxuri¬ 
ous  habits.  For  it  is  well  known  that  he  him¬ 
self  gladly  kept  Terpander,  Thales,  and  Phere- 
cydes  though  they  were  strangers,  because  he 
perceived  they  were  in  their  poems  and  in 
their  philosophy  of  the  same  mind  with  him. 
And  you  that  are  wont  to  praise  Ecprepes, 
who,  being  ephor,  cut  with  his  hatchet  two  of 
the  nine  strings  from  the  instrument  of 
Phrynis  the  musician,  and  to  commend  those 
who  afterwards  imitated  him,  in  cutting  the 
strings  of  Timotheus’s  harp,  with  what  face 
can  you  blame  us  for  designing  to  cut  off 
superfluity  and  luxury  and  display  from  the 
commonwealth?  Do  you  think  those  men 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

were  so  concerned  only  about  a  lute-string,  or 
intended  anything  else  than  to  check  in  music 
that  same  excess  and  extravagance  which  rule 
in  our  present  lives  and  manners,  and  have 
disturbed  and  destroyed  all  the  harmony  and 
order  of  our  city?” 

From  this  time  forward,  as  the  common 
people  followed  Agis,  so  the  rich  men  adhered 
to  Leonidas.  They  besought  him  not  to  for¬ 
sake  their  cause;  and  with  persuasions  and 
entreaties  so  far  prevailed  with  the  council  of 
elders,  whose  power  consisted  in  preparing 
all  laws  before  they  were  proposed  to  the  peo¬ 
ple,  that  the  designed  rhetra  was  rejected, 
though  but  by  only  one  vote.  Whereupon 
Lysander,  who  was  still  ephor,  resolving  to 
be  revenged  on  Leonidas,  drew  up  an  infor¬ 
mation  against  him,  grounded  on  two  old 
laws:  the  one  forbids  any  of  the  blood  of 
Hercules  to  raise  up  children  by  a  foreign 
woman,  and  the  other  makes  it  capital  for  a 
Lacedaemonian  to  leave  his  country  to  settle 
among  foreigners. 

Whilst  he  set  others  on  to  manage  this  ac¬ 
cusation,  he  with  his  colleagues  went  to  ob¬ 
serve  the  sign,  which  was  a  custom  they  had, 
and  performed  in  this  manner.  Every  ninth 
year,  the  ephors,  choosing  a  starlight  night, 
when  there  is  neither  cloud  nor  moon,  sit 
down  together  in  quiet  and  silence,  and  watch 
the  sky.  And  if  they  chance  to  see  the  shoot¬ 
ing  of  a  star,  they  presently  pronounce  their 
king  guilty  of  some  offence  against  the  gods, 
and  thereupon  he  is  immediately  suspended 
from  all  exercise  of  regal  power,  till  he  is  re¬ 
lieved  by  an  oracle  from  Delphi  or  Olympia. 

Lysander,  therefore,  assured  the  people  he 
had  seen  a  star  shoot,  and  at  the  same  time 
Leonidas  was  cited  to  answer  for  himself.  Wit¬ 
nesses  were  produced  to  testify  he  had  married 
an  Asian  woman,  bestowed  on  him  by  one  of 
King  Seleucus’s  lieutenants:  that  he  had  two 
children  by  her,  but  she  so  disliked  and  hated 
him,  that  against  his  wishes,  flying  from  her, 
he  was  in  a  manner  forced  to  return  to  Spar¬ 
ta,  where  his  predecessor  dying  without  issue, 
he  took  upon  him  the  government.  Lysander, 
not  content  with  this,  persuaded  also  Cleom- 
brotus  to  lay  claim  to  the  kingdom.  He  was 
of  the  royal  family,  and  son-in-law  to  Leoni¬ 
das;  who,  fearing  now  the  event  of  this  pro¬ 
cess,  fled  as  a  suppliant  to  the  temple  of  Min¬ 
erva  of  the  Brazen  House,  together  with  his 
daughter,  the  wife  of  Cleombrotus;  for  she  in 
this  occasion  resolved  to  leave  her  husband, 
and  to  follow  her  father.  Leonidas  being  again 


AGIS 

cited,  and  not  appearing,  they  pronounced  a 
sentence  of  deposition  against  him,  and  made 
Cleombrotus  king  in  his  place. 

Soon  after  this  revolution,  Lysander,  his 
year  expiring,  went  out  of  his  office,  and  new 
ephors  were  chosen,  who  gave  Leonidas  assur¬ 
ance  of  safety,  and  cited  Lysander  and  Mandro- 
clidas  to  answer  for  having,  contrary  to  law, 
cancelled  debts,  and  designed  a  new  division 
of  lands.  They,  seeing  themselves  in  danger, 
had  recourse  to  the  two  kings,  and  repre¬ 
sented  to  them  how  necessary  it  was  for  their 
interest  and  safety  to  act  with  united  author¬ 
ity,  and  bid  defiance  to  the  ephors.  For,  in¬ 
deed,  the  power  of  the  ephors,  they  said,  was 
only  grounded  on  the  dissensions  of  the  kings, 
it  being  their  privilege,  when  the  kings  dif¬ 
fered  in  opinion,  to  add  their  suffrage  to 
whichever  they  judged  to  have  given  the  best 
advice;  but  when  the  two  kings  were  unani¬ 
mous,  none  ought  or  durst  resist  their  author¬ 
ity,  the  magistrate,  whose  office  it  was  to  stand 
as  umpire  when  they  were  at  variance,  had 
no  call  to  interfere  when  they  were  of  one 
mind. 

Agis  and  Cleombrotus,  thus  persuaded, 
went  together  with  their  friends  into  the 
market-place,  where  removing  the  ephors  from 
their  seats,  they  placed  others  in  their  room, 
of  whom  Agesilaus  was  one;  proceeding  then 
to  arm  a  company  of  young  men,  and  releas¬ 
ing  many  out  of  prison;  so  that  those  of  the 
contrary  faction  began  to  be  in  great  fear  of 
their  lives;  but  there  was  no  blood  spilt.  On 
the  contrary,  Agis,  having  notice  that  Agesi¬ 
laus  had  ordered  a  company  of  soldiers  to  lie 
in  wait  for  Leonidas,  to  kill  him  as  he  fled  to 
Tegea,  immediately  sent  some  of  his  followers 
to  defend  him,  and  to  convey  him  safely  into 
that  city. 

Thus  far  all  things  proceeded  prosperously, 
none  daring  to  oppose;  but  through  the  sordid 
weakness  of  one  man,  these  promising  begin¬ 
nings  were  blasted,  and  a  most  noble  and 
truly  Spartan  purpose  overthrown  and  ruined 
by  the  love  of  money.  Agesilaus,  as  we  said, 
was  much  in  debt,  though  in  possession  of 
one  of  the  largest  and  best  estates  in  land; 
and  while  he  gladly  joined  in  this  design  to 
be  quit  of  his  debts,  he  was  not  at  all  willing 
to  part  with  his  land.  Therefore,  he  persuaded 
Agis  that  if  both  these  things  should  be  put 
in  execution  at  the  same  time,  so  great  and 
so  sudden  an  alteration  might  cause  some 
dangerous  commotion;  but  if  debts  were  in 
the  first  place  cancelled,  the  rich  men  would 


653 

afterwards  more  easily  be  prevailed  with  to 
part  with  their  land. 

Lysander,  also,  was  of  the  same  opinion, 
being  deceived  in  like  manner  by  the  craft  of 
Agesilaus;  so  that  all  men  were  presently  com¬ 
manded  to  bring  in  their  bonds,  or  deeds  of 
obligation,  by  the  Lacedaemonians  called 
claria,  into  the  market-place,  where  being 
laid  together  in  a  heap,  they  set  fire  to  them. 
The  wealthy,  money-lending  people,  one  may 
easily  imagine,  beheld  it  with  a  heavy  heart; 
but  Agesilaus  told  them  scoffingly,  his  eyes  had 
never  seen  so  bright  and  so  pure  a  flame. 

And  now  the  people  pressed  earnestly  for  an 
immediate  division  of  lands;  the  kings  also 
had  ordered  it  should  be  done;  but  Agesilaus, 
sometimes  pretending  one  difficulty,  and  some¬ 
times  another,  delayed  the  execution,  till  an 
occasion  happened  to  call  Agis  to  the  wars. 
The  Achaeans,  in  virtue  of  a  defensive  treaty 
of  alliance,  sent  to  demand  succours,  as  they 
expected  every  day  that  the  iTtolians  would 
attempt  to  enter  Peloponnesus,  from  the  terri¬ 
tory  of  Megara.  They  had  sent  Aratus,  their 
general,  to  collect  forces  to  hinder  this  incur¬ 
sion.  Aratus  wrote  to  the  ephors,  who  imme¬ 
diately  gave  order  that  Agis  should  hasten  to 
their  assistance  with  the  Lacedaemonian  auxil¬ 
iaries. 

Agis  was  extremely  pleased  to  see  the  zeal 
and  bravery  of  those  who  went  with  him  upon 
this  expedition.  They  were  for  the  most  part 
young  men,  and  poor;  and  being  just  released 
from  their  debts  and  set  at  liberty,  and  hoping 
on  their  return  to  receive  each  man  his  lot  of 
land,  they  followed  their  king  with  wonderful 
alacrity.  The  cities  through  which  they  passed 
were  in  admiration  to  see  how  they  marched 
from  one  end  of  Peloponnesus  to  the  other, 
without  the  least  disorder,  and,  in  a  manner, 
without  being  heard.  It  gave  the  Greeks  occa¬ 
sion  to  discourse  with  one  another,  how  great 
might  be  the  temperance  and  modesty  of  a  La¬ 
conian  army  in  old  time,  under  their  famous 
captains  Agesilaus,  Lysander,  or  Leonidas, 
since  they  saw  such  discipline  and  exact  obe¬ 
dience  under  a  leader  who  perhaps  was  the 
youngest  man  in  all  the  army.  They  saw  also 
how  he  was  himself  content  to  fare  hardly, 
ready  to  undergo  any  labours,  and  not  to  be 
distinguished  by  pomp  or  richness  of  habit  or 
arms  from  the  meanest  of  his  soldiers;  and  to 
people  in  general  it  was  an  object  of  regard 
and  admiration.  But  rich  men  viewed  the  in¬ 
novation  with  dislike  and  alarm,  lest  haply  the 
example  might  spread,  and  work  changes  to 


654 

their  prejudice  in  their  own  countries  as  well. 

Agis  joined  Aratus  near  the  city  of  Corinth, 
where  it  was  still  a  matter  of  debate  whether 
or  no  it  were  expedient  to  give  the  enemy  bat¬ 
tle.  Agis,  on  this  occasion,  showed  great  for¬ 
wardness  and  resolution,  yet  without  temerity 
or  presumption.  He  declared  it  was  his  opin¬ 
ion  they  ought  to  fight,  thereby  to  hinder  the 
enemy  from  passing  the  gates  of  Peloponne¬ 
sus,  but  nevertheless  he  would  submit  to  the 
judgment  of  Aratus,  not  only  as  the  elder  and 
more  experienced  captain,  but  as  he  was  gen¬ 
eral  of  the  Achaeans,  whose  forces  he  would 
not  pretend  to  command,  but  was  only  come 
thither  to  assist  them. 

I  am  not  ignorant  that  Baton  of  Sinope  re¬ 
lates  it  in  another  manner;  he  says  Aratus 
would  have  fought,  and  that  Agis  was  against 
it;  but  it  is  certain  he  was  mistaken,  not  hav¬ 
ing  read  what  Aratus  himself  wrote  in  his 
own  justification,  that  knowing  the  people 
had  well-nigh  got  in  their  harvest,  he  thought 
it  much  better  to  let  the  enemy  pass  than  put 
all  to  the  hazard  of  a  battle.  And,  therefore, 
giving  thanks  to  the  confederates  for  their 
readiness,  he  dismissed  them.  And  Agis,  not 
without  having  gained  a  great  deal  of  honour, 
returned  to  Sparta,  where  he  found  the  peo¬ 
ple  in  disorder,  and  a  new  revolution  immi¬ 
nent,  owing  to  the  ill-government  of  Agesi- 
laus. 

For  he,  being  now  one  of  the  ephors,  and 
freed  from  the  fear  which  formerly  kept  him 
in  some  restraint,  forbore  no  kind  of  oppres¬ 
sion  which  might  bring  in  gain.  Among  other 
things,  he  exacted  a  thirteenth  month’s  tax, 
whereas  the  usual  cycle  required  at  this  time 
no  such  addition  to  the  year.  For  these  and 
other  reasons  fearing  those  whom  he  injured, 
and  knowing  how  he  was  hated  by  the  peo¬ 
ple,  he  thought  it  necessary  to  maintain  a 
guard,  which  always  accompanied  him  to  the 
magistrate’s  office.  And  presuming  now  on  his 
power,  he  was  grown  so  insolent,  that  of  the 
two  kings,  the  one  he  openly  contemned,  and 
if  he  showed  any  respect  towards  Agis,  would 
have  it  thought  rather  an  effect  of  his  near  re¬ 
lationship,  than  any  duty  or  submission  to  the 
royal  authority.  He  gave  it  out  also  that  he 
was  to  continue  ephor  the  ensuing  year. 

His  enemies,  therefore,  alarmed  by  this  re¬ 
port,  lost  no  time  in  risking  an  attempt  against 
him;  and  openly  bringing  back  Leonidas  from 
Tegea,  re-established  him  in  the  kingdom,  to 
which  even  the  people,  highly  incensed  for 
having  been  defrauded  in  the  promised  divi- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

sion  of  lands,  willingly  consented.  Agesilaus 
himself  would  hardly  have  escaped  their  fury, 
if  his  son,  Hippomedon,  whose  manly  virtues 
made  him  dear  to  all,  had  not  saved  him  out 
of  their  hands,  and  then  privately  conveyed 
him  from  the  city. 

During  the  commotion,  the  two  kings  fled, 
Agis  to  the  temple  of  the  Brazen  House,  and 
Cleombrotus  to  that  of  Neptune.  For  Leoni¬ 
das  was  more  incensed  against  his  son-in-law; 
and  leaving  Agis  alone,  went  with  his  soldiers 
to  Cleombrotus’s  sanctuary,  and  there  with 
great  passion  reproached  him  for  having, 
though  he  was  son-in-law,  conspired  with  his 
enemies,  usurped  his  throne,  and  forced  him 
from  his  country.  Cleombrotus,  having  little 
to  say  for  himself,  sat  silent.  His  wife,  Chi- 
lonis,  the  daughter  of  Leonidas,  had  chosen  to 
follow  her  father  in  his  sufferings;  for  when 
Cleombrotus  usurped  the  kingdom,  she  for¬ 
sook  him,  and  wholly  devoted  herself  to  com¬ 
fort  her  father  in  his  affliction;  whilst  he  still 
remained  in  Sparta,  she  remained  also,  as  a 
suppliant,  with  him,  and  when  he  fled,  she 
fled  with  him,  bewailing  his  misfortune,  and 
extremely  displeased  with  Cleombrotus. 

But  now,  upon  this  turn  of  fortune,  she 
changed  in  like  manner,  and  was  seen  sitting 
now,  as  a  suppliant,  with  her  husband,  em¬ 
bracing  him  with  her  arms,  and  having  her 
two  little  children  beside  her.  All  men  were 
full  of  wonder  at  the  piety  and  tender  affec¬ 
tion  of  the  young  woman,  who  pointing  to 
her  robes  and  her  hair,  both  alike  neglected 
and  unattended  to,  said  to  Leonidas,  “I  am 
not  brought,  my  father,  to  this  condition  you 
see  me  in,  on  account  of  the  present  misfor¬ 
tunes  of  Cleombrotus;  my  mourning  habit  is 
long  since  familiar  to  me.  It  was  put  on  to 
condole  with  you  in  your  banishment;  and 
now  you  are  restored  to  your  country,  and  to 
your  kingdom,  must  I  still  remain  in  grief  and 
misery?  Or  would  you  have  me  attired  in  my 
royal  ornaments,  that  I  may  rejoice  with  you, 
when  you  have  killed,  within  my  arms,  the 
man  to  whom  you  gave  me  for  a  wife? 

“Either  Cleombrotus  must  appease  you  by 
mine  and  my  children’s  tears,  or  he  must  suf¬ 
fer  a  punishment  greater  than  you  propose 
for  his  faults,  and  shall  see  me,  whom  he  loves 
so  well,  die  before  him.  To  what  end  should 
I  live,  or  how  shall  I  appear  among  the  Spar¬ 
tan  women,  when  it  shall  so  manifestly  be 
seen,  that  I  have  not  been  able  to  move  to 
compassion  either  a  husband  or  a  father?  I 
was  born,  it  seems,  to  participate  in  the  ill- 


AGIS 

fortune  and  in  the  disgrace,  both  as*  a  wife 
and  a  daughter,  of  those  nearest  and  dearest 
to  me.  As  for  Cleombrotus,  I  sufficiently  sur¬ 
rendered  any  honourable  plea  on  his  behalf, 
when  I  forsook  him  to  follow  you;  but  you 
yourself  offer  the  fairest  excuse  for  his  pro¬ 
ceedings,  by  showing  to  the  world  that  for  the 
sake  of  a  kingdom,  it  is  just  to  kill  a  son-in- 
law,  and  be  regardless  of  a  daughter.” 

Chilonis,  having  ended  this  lamentation, 
rested  her  face  on  her  husband’s  head,  and 
looked  round  with  her  weeping  and  woe¬ 
begone  eyes  upon  those  who  stood  before  her. 

Leonidas,  touched  with  compassion,  with¬ 
drew  a  while  to  advise  with  his  friends;  then 
returning,  bade  Cleombrotus  leave  the  sanc¬ 
tuary  and  go  into  banishment;  Chilonis,  he 
said,  ought  to  stay  with  him,  it  not  being  just 
she  should  forsake  a  father  whose  affection 
had  granted  to  her  intercession  the  life  of  her 
husband.  But  all  he  could  say  would  not  pre¬ 
vail.  She  rose  up  immediately,  and  taking  one 
of  her  children  in  her  arms,  gave  the  other  to 
her  husband;  and  making  her  reverence  to  the 
altar  of  the  goddess,  went  out  and  followed 
him.  So  that,  in  a  word,  if  Cleombrotus  were 
not  utterly  blinded  by  ambition,  he  must  sure¬ 
ly  choose  to  be  banished  with  so  excellent  a 
woman  rather  than  without  her  to  possess  a 
kingdom. 

Cleombrotus  thus  removed,  Leonidas  pro¬ 
ceeded  also  to  displace  the  ephors,  and  to 
choose  others  in  their  room;  then  he  began  to 
consider  how  he  might  entrap  Agis.  At  first, 
he  endeavoured  by  fair  means  to  persuade 
him  to  leave  the  sanctuary,  and  partake  with 
him  in  the  kingdom.  The  people,  he  said, 
would  easily  pardon  the  errors  of  a  young 
man,  ambitious  of  glory,  and  deceived  by  the 
craft  of  Agesilaus.  But  finding  Agis  was  sus¬ 
picious,  and  not  to  be  prevailed  with  to  quit 
his  sanctuary,  he  gave  up  that  design;  yet 
what  could  not  then  be  effected  by  the  dis¬ 
simulation  of  an  enemy,  was  soon  after  brought 
to  pass  by  the  treachery  of  friends. 

Amphares,  Damochares,  and  Arcesilaus  often 
visited  Agis,  and  he  was  so  confident  of  their 
fidelity  that  after  a  while  he  was  prevailed  on 
to  accompany  them  to  the  baths,  which  were 
not  far  distant,  they  constantly  returning  to  see 
him  safe  again  in  the  temple.  They  were  all 
three  his  familiars;  and  Amphares  had  bon 
rowed  a  great  deal  of  plate  and  rich  house¬ 
hold  stuff  from  Agesistrata,  and  hoped  if  he 
could  destroy  her  and  the  whole  family,  he 
might  peaceably  enjoy  those  goods.  And  he,  it 


655 

is  said,  was  the  readiest  of  all  to  serve  the  pur¬ 
poses  of  Leonidas,  and  being  one  of  the  ephors, 
did  all  he  could  to  incense  the  rest  of  his  col¬ 
leagues  against  Agis. 

These  men,  therefore,  finding  that  Agis 
would  not  quit  his  sanctuary,  but  on  occasion 
would  venture  from  it  to  go  to  the  bath,  re¬ 
solved  to  seize  him  on  the  opportunity  thus 
given  them.  And  one  day  as  he  was  returning, 
they  met  and  saluted  him  as  formerly,  con¬ 
versing  pleasantly  by  the  way,  and  jesting,  as 
youthful  friends  might,  till  coming  to  the  turn¬ 
ing  of  a  street  which  led  to  the  prison,  Am¬ 
phares,  by  virtue  of  his  office,  laid  his  hand  on 
Agis,  and  told  him,  “You  must  go  with  me, 
Agis,  before  the  other  ephors,  to  answer  for 
your  misdemeanours.”  At  the  same  time  Da¬ 
mochares,  who  was  a  tall,  strong  man,  drew 
his  cloak  tight  round  his  neck,  and  dragged 
him  after  by  it,  whilst  the  others  went  behind 
to  thrust  him  on. 

None  of  Agis’s  friends  being  near  to  assist 
him,  nor  any  one  by,  they  therefore  easily  got 
him  into  the  prison,  where  Leonidas  was  al¬ 
ready  arrived,  with  a  company  of  soldiers, 
who  strongly  guarded  all  the  avenues;  the 
ephors  also  came  in,  with  as  many  of  the 
elders  as  they  knew  to  be  true  to  their  party, 
being  desirous  to  proceed  with  some  semblance 
of  justice.  And  thus  they  bade  him  give  an 
account  of  his  actions. 

Agis,  smiling  at  their  dissimulation,  an¬ 
swered  not  a  word.  Amphares  told  him  it  was 
more  seasonable  to  weep,  for  now  the  time 
was  come  in  which  he  should  be  punished  for 
his  presumption.  Another  of  the  ephors,  as 
though  he  would  be  more  favourable,  and  of¬ 
fering  as  it  were  an  excuse,  asked  him  whether 
he  was  not  forced  to  what  he  did  by  Agesilaus 
and  Lysander.  But  Agis  answered  he  had  not 
been  constrained  by  any  man,  nor  had  any 
other  intent  in  what  he  did  but  only  to  follow 
the  example  of  Lycurgus,  and  to  govern  con¬ 
formably  to  his  laws.  The  same  ephor  asked 
him  whether  now  at  least  he  did  not  repent 
his  rashness.  To  which  the  young  man  an¬ 
swered  that  though  he  were  to  suffer  the  ex- 
tremest  penalty  for  it,  yet  he  could  never  re¬ 
pent  of  so  just  and  so  glorious  a  design.  Upon 
this  they  passed  sentence  of  death  on  him,  and 
bade  the  officers  carry  him  to  the  Dechas,  as 
it  is  called,  a  place  in  the  prison  where  they 
strangle  malefactors.  And  when  the  officers 
would  not  venture  to  lay  hands  on  him,  and 
the  very  mercenary  soldiers  declined  it,  believ¬ 
ing  it  an  illegal  and  a  wicked  act  to  lay  vio- 


656 

lent  hands  on  a  king,  Demochares,  threaten¬ 
ing  and  reviling  them  for  it,  himself  thrust 
him  into  the  room. 

For  by  this  time  the  news  of  his  being 
seized  had  reached  many  parts  of  the  city,  and 
there  was  a  concourse  of  people  with  lights 
and  torches  about  the  prison  gates,  and  in  the 
midst  of  them  the  mother  and  the  grand¬ 
mother  of  Agis,  crying  out  with  a  loud  voice 
that  their  king  ought  to  appear,  and  to  be 
heard  and  judged  by  the  people.  But  this 
clamour,  instead  of  preventing,  hastened  his 
death;  his  enemies  fearing,  if  the  tumult  should 
increase,  he  might  be  rescued  during  the  night 
out  of  their  hands. 

Agis,  being  now  at  the  point  to  die,  per¬ 
ceived  one  of  the  officers  bitterly  bewailing 
his  misfortune;  “Weep  not,  friend,”  said  he, 
“for  me,  who  die  innocent,  by  the  lawless  act 
of  wicked  men.  My  condition  is  much  better 
than  theirs.”  As  soon  as  he  had  spoken  these 
words,  not  showing  the  least  sign  of  fear,  he 
offered  his  neck  to  the  noose. 

Immediately  after  he  was  dead,  Amphares 
went  out  of  the  prison  gate,  where  he  found 
Agesistrata,  who,  believing  him  still  the  same 
friend  as  before,  threw  herself  at  his  feet.  He 
gently  raised  her  up,  and  assured  her,  she 
need  not  fear  any  further  violence  or  danger 
of  death  for  her  son,  and  that  if  she  pleased 
she  might  go  in  and  see  him.  She  begged  her 
mother  might  also  have  the  favour  to  be  ad¬ 
mitted,  and  he  replied,  nobody  should  hinder 
it.  When  they  were  entered,  he  commanded 
the  gate  should  again  be  locked,  and  Archi- 
damia,the  grandmother,  to  be  first  introduced. 
She  was  now  grown  very  old,  and  had  lived 
all  her  days  in  the  highest  repute  among  her 
fellows. 

As  soon  as  Amphares  thought  she  was  des¬ 
patched,  he  told  Agesistrata  she  might  now 
go  in  if  she  pleased.  She  entered,  and  behold¬ 
ing  her  son’s  body  stretched  on  the  ground, 
and  her  mother  hanging  by  the  neck,  the  first 
thing  she  did  was,  with  her  own  hands,  to 
assist  the  officers  in  taking  down  the  body; 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

then  covering  it  decently,  she  laid  it  out  by 
her  son’s,  whom  then  embracing  and  kissing 
his  cheeks,  “O  my  son,”  said  she,  “it  was  thy 
too  great  mercy  and  goodness  which  brought 
thee  and  us  to  ruin.”  Amphares,  who  stood 
watching  behind  the  door,  on  hearing  this, 
broke  in,  and  said  angrily  to  her,  “Since  you 
approve  so  well  of  your  son’s  actions,  it  is  fit 
you  should  partake  in  his  reward.”  She,  rising 
up  to  offer  herself  to  the  noose,  said  only,  “I 
pray  that  it  may  redound  to  the  good  of 
Sparta.” 

The  three  bodies  being  now  exposed  to 
view,  and  the  fact  divulged,  no  fear  was  strong 
enough  to  hinder  the  people  from  expressing 
their  abhorrence  of  what  was  done,  and  their  j 
detestation  of  Leonidas  and  Amphares,  the 
contrivers  of  it.  So  wicked  and  barbarous  an 
act  had  never  been  committed  in  Sparta  since 
first  the  Dorians  inhabited  Peloponnesus;  the 
very  enemies  in  war,  they  said,  were  always 
cautious  in  spilling  the  blood  of  a  Lacedae¬ 
monian  king,  insomuch  that  in  any  combat 
they  would  decline,  and  endeavour  to  avoid 
them,  from  feelings  of  respect  and  reverence 
for  their  station.  And  certainly  we  see  that  in 
the  many  battles  fought  betwixt  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians  and  the  other  Greeks,  up  to  the  time 
of  Philip  of  Macedon,  not  one  of  their  kings 
was  ever  killed,  except  Cleombrotus  by  a 
javelin-wound  at  the  battle  of  Leuctra.  I  am 
not  ignorant  that  the  Messenians  affirm,  Theo- 
pompus  was  also  slain  by  their  Aristomenes; 
but  the  Lacedaemonians  deny  it,  and  say  he 
was  only  wounded. 

Be  it  as  it  will,  it  is  certain  at  least  that  Agis 
was  the  first  king  put  to  death  in  Lacedaemon 
by  the  ephors,  for  having  undertaken  a  de¬ 
sign  noble  in  itself  and  worthy  of  his  country, 
at  a  time  of  life  when  men’s  errors  usually 
meet  with  an  easy  pardon.  And  if  errors  he 
did  commit,  his  enemies  certainly  had  less 
reason  to  blame  him  than  had  his  friends  for 
that  gentle  and  compassionate  temper  which 
made  him  save  the  life  of  Leonidas  and  be¬ 
lieve  in  other  men’s  professions. 


CLEOMENES 

x63~xi9  b.c. 


Thus  fell  Agis.  His  brother  Archidamus 
was  too  quick  for  Leonidas,  and  saved 
himself  by  a  timely  retreat.  But  his  wife, 
then  mother  of  a  young  child,  he  forced  from 
her  own  house,  and  compelled  Agiatis,  for  that 
was  her  name,  to  marry  his  son  Cleomenes, 
though  at  that  time  too  young  for  a  wife,  be¬ 
cause  he  was  unwilling  that  any  one  else 
should  have  her,  being  heiress  to  her  father  Gy- 
lippus’s  great  estate;  in  person  the  most  youth¬ 
ful  and  beautiful  woman  in  all  Greece  and 
well-conducted  in  her  habits  of  life.  And  there¬ 
fore,  they  say,  she  did  all  she  could  that  she 
might  not  be  compelled  to  this  new  marriage. 
But  being  thus  united  to  Cleomenes,  she  in¬ 
deed  hated  Leonidas,  but  to  the  youth  showed 
herself  a  kind  and  obliging  wife.  He,  as  soon 
as  they  came  together,  began  to  love  her  very 
much,  and  the  constant  kindness  that  she  still 
retained  for  the  memory  of  Agis  brought  some¬ 
what  of  the  like  feeling  in  the  young  man 
for  him,  so  that  he  would  often  inquire  of 
her  concerning  what  had  passed,  and  atten¬ 
tively  listen  to  the  story  of  Agis’s  purpose  and 
design. 

Now  Cleomenes  had  a  generous  and  great 
soul;  he  was  as  temperate  and  moderate  in 
his  pleasures  as  Agis,  but  not  so  scrupulous, 
circumspect,  and  gentle.  There  was  something 
of  heat  and  passion  always  goading  him  on, 
and  an  impetuosity  and  violence  in  his  eager¬ 
ness  to  pursue  anything  which  he  thought 
good  and  just.  To  have  men  obey  him  of  their 
own  free-will,  he  conceived  to  be  the  best 
discipline;  but  likewise,  to  subdue  resistance, 
and  force  them  to  the  better  course  was,  in 
his  opinion,  commendable  and  brave. 

This  disposition  made  him  dislike  the  man¬ 
agement  of  the  city.  The  citizens  lay  dissolved 
in  supine  idleness  and  pleasures,  the  king  let 
everything  take  its  own  way,  thankful  if  no¬ 
body  gave  him  any  disturbance,  nor  called 
him  away  from  the  enjoyment  of  his  wealth 
and  luxury.  The  public  interest  was  neglected, 
and  each  man  intent  upon  his  private  gain. 
It  was  dangerous,  now  Agis  was  killed,  so 
much  as  to  name  such  a  thing  as  the  exercis¬ 


ing  and  training  of  their  youth;  and  to  speak 
of  the  ancient  temperance,  endurance,  and 
equality,  was  a  sort  of  treason  against  the 
state. 

It  is  said  also  that  Cleomenes,  whilst  a  boy, 
studied  philosophy  under  Sphaerus,  the  Bory- 
stenite,  who  crossed  over  to  Sparta,  and  spent 
some  time  and  trouble  in  instructing  the 
youth.  Sphaerus  was  one  of  the  first  of  Zeno 
the  Citiean’s  scholars,  and  it  is  likely  enough 
that  he  admired  the  manly  temper  of  Cleo¬ 
menes  and  inflamed  his  generous  ambition. 
The  ancient  Leonidas,  as  story  tells,  being 
asked  what  manner  of  poet  he  thought  Tyr- 
taeus,  replied,  “Good  to  whet  young  men’s 
courage;”  for  being  filled  with  a  divine  fury 
by  his  poems,  they  rushed  into  any  danger. 
And  so  the  Stoic  philosophy  is  a  dangerous 
incentive  to  strong  and  fiery  dispositions,  but 
where  it  combines  with  a  grave  and  gentle 
temper,  is  most  successful  in  leading  it  to  its 
proper  good. 

Upon  the  death  of  his  father  Leonidas,  he 
succeeded,  and  observing  the  citizens  of  all 
sorts  to  be  debauched,  the  rich  neglecting  the 
public  good,  and  intent  on  their  private  gain 
and  pleasure,  and  the  poor  distressed  in  their 
own  homes,  and  therefore  without  either  spirit 
for  war  or  ambition  to  be  trained  up  as  Spar¬ 
tans,  that  he  had  only  the  name  of  king,  and 
the  ephors  all  the  power,  he  was  resolved  to 
change  the  posture  of  affairs.  He  had  a  friend 
whose  name  was  Xenares,  his  lover  (such  an 
affection  the  Spartans  express  by  the  term,  be¬ 
ing  inspired ,  or  imbreathed  with);  him  he 
sounded,  and  of  him  he  would  commonly  in¬ 
quire  what  manner  of  king  Agis  was,  by  what 
means  and  by  what  assistance  he  began  and 
pursued  his  designs.  Xenares,  at  first,  willing¬ 
ly  complied  with  his  request,  and  told  him 
the  whole  story,  with  all  the  particular  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  the  actions.  But  when  he  ob¬ 
served  Cleomenes  to  be  extremely  affected  at 
the  relation,  and  more  than  ordinarily  taken 
with  Agis’s  new  model  of  the  government, 
and  begging  a  repetition  of  the  story,  he  at 
first  severely  chid  him,  told  him  he  was  fran- 


657 


658 

tic,  and  at  last  left  off  all  sort  of  familiarity 
and  intercourse,  yet  he  never  told  any  man 
the  cause  of  their  disagreement,  but  would 
only  say,  Cleomenes  knew  very  well. 

Cleomenes,  finding  Xenares  averse  to  his 
designs,  and  thinking  all  others  to  be  of  the 
same  disposition,  consulted  with  none,  but 
contrived  the  whole  business  by  himself.  And 
considering  that  it  would  be  easier  to  bring 
about  an  alteration  when  the  city  was  at  war 
than  when  in  peace,  he  engaged  the  common¬ 
wealth  in  a  quarrel  with  the  Achaeans,  who 
had  given  them  fair  occasions  to  complain. 
For  Aratus,  a  man  of  the  greatest  power 
amongst  all  the  Achaeans,  designed  from  the 
very  beginning  to  bring  all  the  Peloponnesians 
into  one  common  body.  And  to  effect  this  was 
the  one  object  of  all  his  many  commander- 
ships  and  his  long  political  course;  as  he 
thought  this  the  only  means  to  make  them  a 
match  for  their  foreign  enemies.  Pretty  nearly 
all  the  rest  agreed  to  his  proposals,  only  the 
Lacedaemonians,  the  Eleans,  and  as  many  of 
the  Arcadians  as  inclined  to  the  Spartan  inter¬ 
est,  remained  unpersuaded. 

And  so,  as  soon  as  Leonidas  was  dead,  he 
began  to  attack  the  Arcadians,  and  wasted 
those  especially  that  bordered  on  Achaea;  by 
this  means  designing  to  try  the  inclinations  of 
the  Spartans,  and  despising  Cleomenes  as  a 
youth,  and  of  no  experience  in  affairs  of  state 
or  war.  Upon  this,  the  ephors  sent  Cleomenes 
to  surprise  the  Athenaeum,  near  Belbina,  which 
is  a  pass  commanding  an  entrance  into  La¬ 
conia,  and  was  then  the  subject  of  litigation 
with  the  Megalopolitans.  Cleomenes  possessed 
himself  of  the  place,  and  fortified  it,  at  which 
action  Aratus  showed  no  public  resentment, 
but  marched  by  night  to  surprise  Tegea  and 
Orchomenus. 

The  design  failed,  for  those  that  were  to  be¬ 
tray  the  cities  into  his  hands  turned  afraid;  so 
Aratus  retreated,  imagining  that  his  design 
had  been  undiscovered.  But  Cleomenes  wrote 
a  sarcastic  letter  to  him,  and  desired  to  know, 
as  from  a  friend,  whither  he  intended  to 
march  at  night;  and  Aratus  answering,  that 
having  heard  of  his  design  to  fortify  Belbina, 
he  meant  to  march  thither  to  oppose  him, 
Cleomenes  rejoined  that  he  did  not  dispute  it, 
but  begged  to  be  informed,  if  he  might  be 
allowed  to  ask  the  question,  why  he  carried 
those  torches  and  ladders  with  him.  Aratus 
laughing  at  the  jest,  and  asking  what  manner 
of  youth  this  was,  Damocrates,  a  Spartan  ex¬ 
ile,  replied,  “If  you  have  any  designs  upon 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

the  Lacedaemonians,  begin  before  this  young 
eagle’s  talons  are  grown.” 

Presently  after  this,  Cleomenes,  encamping 
in  Arcadia  with  a  few  horse  and  three  hun¬ 
dred  foot,  received  orders  from  the  ephors, 
who  feared  to  engage  in  the  war,  command¬ 
ing  him  to  return  home;  but  when  upon  his 
retreat  Aratus  took  Caphyae,  they  commis¬ 
sioned  him  again.  In  this  expedition  he  took 
Methydrium,  and  overran  the  country  of  the 
Argives;  and  the  Achaeans,1  to  oppose  him, 
came  out  with  an  army  of  twenty  thousand 
foot  and  one  thousand  horse,  under  the  com¬ 
mand  of  Aristomachus.  Cleomenes  faced  them 
at  Pallantium,  and  offered  battle,  but  Aratus, 
being  cowed  by  his  bravery,  would  not  suffer 
the  general  to  engage,  but  retreated,  amidst 
the  reproaches  of  the  Achaeans  and  the  deri¬ 
sion  and  scorn  of  the  Spartans,  who  were  not 
above  five  thousand. 

Cleomenes,  encouraged  by  this  success,  be¬ 
gan  to  speak  boldly  among  the  citizens,  and 
reminding  them  of  a  sentence  of  one  of  their 
ancient  kings,  said,  it  was  in  vain  now  that 
the  Spartans  asked  not  how  many  their  ene¬ 
mies  were,  but  where  they  were.  After  this, 
marching  to  the  assistance  of  the  Eleans,  whom 
the  Achaeans  were  attacking,  falling  upon  the 
enemy  in  their  retreat  near  the  Lycaeum,  he 
put  their  whole  army  to  flight,  taking  a  great 
number  of  captives,  and  leaving  many  dead 
upon  the  place;  so  that  it  was  commonly  re¬ 
ported  amongst  the  Greeks  that  Aratus  was 
slain.  But  Aratus,  making  the  best  advantage 
of  the  opportunity,  immediately  after  the  de¬ 
feat  marched  to  Mantinea,  and  before  any¬ 
body  suspected  it,  took  the  city,  and  put  a 
garrison  into  it. 

Upon  this,  the  Lacedaemonians  being  quite 
discouraged,  and  opposing  Cleomenes’s  de¬ 
signs  of  carrying  on  the  war,  he  now  exerted 
himself  to  have  Archidamus,  the  brother  of 
Agis,  sent  for  from  Messene,  as  he,  of  the 
other  family,  had  a  right  to  the  kingdom;  and 
besides,  Cleomenes  thought  that  the  power  of 
the  ephors  would  be  reduced,  when  the  kingly 
state  was  thus  filled  up,  and  raised  to  its 
proper  position.  But  those  that  were  con¬ 
cerned  in  the  murder  of  Agis,  perceiving  the 
design,  and  fearing  that  upon  Archidamus’s 
return  that  they  should  be  called  to  an  ac¬ 
count,  received  him  on  his  coming  privately 
into  town,  and  joined  in  bringing  him  home, 
and  presently  after  murdered  him.  Whether 
Cleomenes  was  against  it,  as  Phylarchus  thinks, 
or  whether  he  was  persuaded  by  his  friends, 


CLEOMENES 

or  let  him  fall  into  their  hands,  is  uncertain; 
however,  they  were  most  blamed,  as*  having 
forced  his  consent. 

He,  still  resolving  to  remodel  the  state, 
bribed  the  ephors  to  send  him  out  to  war;  and 
won  the  affections  of  many  others  by  means 
of  his  mother  Cratesiclea,  who  spared  no  cost 
and  was  very  zealous  to  promote  her  son’s 
ambition;  and  though  of  herself  she  had  no 
inclination  to  marry,  yet  for  his  sake  she  ac¬ 
cepted,  as  her  husband,  one  of  the  chiefest 
citizens  for  wealth  and  power.  Cleomenes, 
marching  forth  with  the  army  now  under  his 
command,  took  Leuctra,  a  place  belonging  to 
Megalopolis;  and  the  Achaeans  quickly  com¬ 
ing  up  to  resist  him  with  a  good  body  of  men 
commanded  by  Aratus,  in  a  battle  under  the 
very  walls  of  the  city,  some  part  of  his  army 
was  routed.  But  whereas  Aratus  had  com¬ 
manded  the  Achaeans  not  to  pass  a  deep  water¬ 
course,  and  thus  put  a  stop  to  the  pursuit, 
Lydiadas,  the  Megalopolitan,  fretting  at  the 
orders,  and  encouraging  the  horse  which  he 
led,  and  following  the  routed  enemy,  got  into 
a  place  full  of  vines,  hedges,  and  ditches;  and 
being  forced  to  break  his  ranks,  began  to  re¬ 
tire  in  disorder. 

Cleomenes,  observing  the  advantage,  com¬ 
manded  the  Tarentines  and  Cretans  to  en¬ 
gage  him,  by  whom,  after  a  brave  defence,  he 
was  routed  and  slain.  The  Lacedaemonians, 
thus  encouraged,  fell  with  a  great  shout  upon 
the  Achaeans,  and  routed  their  whole  army. 
Of  the  slain,  who  were  very  many,  the  rest 
Cleomenes  delivered  up,  when  the  enemy  peti¬ 
tioned  for  them;  but  the  body  of  Lydiadas  he 
commanded  to  be  brought  to  him;  and  then 
putting  on  it  a  purple  robe,  and  a  crown  upon 
its  head,  sent  a  convoy  with  it  to  the  gates  of 
Megalopolis.  This  is  that  Lydiadas  who  re¬ 
signed  his  power  as  tyrant,  restored  liberty  to 
the  citizens,  and  joined  the  city  to  the  Achaean 
interest. 

Cleomenes,  being  very  much  elated  by  this 
success,  and  persuaded  that  if  matters  were 
wholly  at  his  disposal  he  should  soon  be  too 
hard  for  the  Achaeans,  persuaded  Magistonus, 
his  mother’s  husband,  that  it  was  expedient 
for  the  state  to  shake  off  the  power  of  the 
ephors,  and  to  put  all  their  wealth  into  one 
common  stock  for  the  whole  body;  thus  Sparta, 
being  restored  to  its  old  equality,  might  aspire 
again  to  the  command  of  all  Greece.  Megis- 
tonus  liked  the  design,  and  engaged  two  or 
three  more  of  his  friends.  About  that  time, 
one  of  the  ephors,  sleeping  in  Pasiphae’s  tern- 


659 

pie,  dreamed  a  very  surprising  dream;  for  he 
thought  he  saw  the  four  chairs  removed  out 
of  the  place  where  the  ephors  used  to  sit  and 
do  the  business  of  their  office,  and  one  only 
set  there;  and  whilst  he  wondered,  he  heard  a 
voice  out  of  the  temple,  saying,  “This  is  best 
for  Sparta.” 

The  person  telling  Cleomenes  this  dream, 
he  was  a  little  troubled  at  first,  fearing  that 
he  used  this  as  a  trick  to  sift  him,  upon  some 
suspicion  of  his  design,  but  when  he  was  satis¬ 
fied  that  the  relator  spoke  truth,  he  took  heart 
again.  And  carrying  with  him  those  whom  he 
thought  would  be  most  against  his  project,  he 
took  Heraea  and  Alsaea,  two  towns  in  league 
with  the  Achaeans,  furnished  Orchomenus 
with  provisions,  encamped  before  Mantinea, 
and  with  long  marches  up  and  down  so  har¬ 
assed  the  Lacedaemonians  that  many  of  them 
at  their  own  request  were  left  behind  in  Ar¬ 
cadia,  while  he  with  the  mercenaries  went  on 
toward  Sparta,  and  by  the  way  communicated 
his  design  to  those  whom  he  thought  fitted 
for  his  purpose,  and  marched  slowly,  that  he 
might  catch  the  ephors  at  supper. 

When  he  was  come  near  the  city,  he  sent 
Euryclidas  to  the  public  table,  where  the 
ephors  supped,  under  pretence  of  carrying 
some  message  from  him  from  the  army;  The- 
rycion,  Phaebis,  and  two  of  those  who  had 
been  bred  up  with  Cleomenes,  whom  they 
call  mothaces,  followed  with  a  few  soldiers; 
and  whilst  Euryclidas  was  delivering  his  mes¬ 
sage  to  the  ephors,  they  ran  upon  them  with 
their  drawn  swords,  and  slew  them.  The  first 
of  them,  Agylaeus,  on  receiving  the  blow,  fell, 
and  lay  as  dead;  but  in  a  little  time  quietly 
raising  himself,  and  drawing  himself  out  of 
the  room,  he  crept,  without  being  discovered, 
into  a  little  building  which  was  dedicated  to 
Fear,  and  which  always  used  to  be  shut,  but 
then  by  chance  was  open;  and  being  got  in, 
he  shut  the  door,  and  lay  close.  The  other 
four  were  killed,  and  above  ten  more  that 
came  to  their  assistance;  to  those  that  were 
quiet  they  did  no  harm,  stopped  none  that 
fled  from  the  city,  and  spared  Agylaeus  when 
he  came  out  of  the  temple  the  next  day. 

The  Lacedaemonians  have  not  only  sacred 
places  dedicated  to  Fear,  but  also  to  Death, 
Laughter,  and  the  like  passions.  Now  they 
worship  Fear,  not  as  they  do  supernatural 
powers  which  they  dread,  esteeming  it  hurt¬ 
ful,  but  thinking  their  polity  is  chiefly  kept  up 
by  fear.  Therefore  the  ephors,  Aristotle  is  my 
author,  when  they  entered  upon  their  govern- 


660 

ment,  made  proclamation  to  the  people,  that 
they  should  shave  their  mustaches  and  be 
obedient  to  the  laws,  that  the  laws  might  not 
be  hard  upon  them,  making,  I  suppose,  this 
trivial  injunction  to  accustom  their  youth  to 
obedience  even  in  the  smallest  matters.  And 
the  ancients,  I  think,  did  not  imagine  bravery 
to  be  plain  fearlessness,  but  a  cautious  fear  of 
blame  and  disgrace.  For  those  that  show  most 
timidity  towards  the  laws  are  most  bold 
against  their  enemies;  and  those  are  least 
afraid  of  any  danger  who  are  most  afraid  of  a 
just  reproach.  Therefore,  it  was  well  said 
that — 

A  reverence  still  attends  on  fear; 
and  by  Homer, — 

Feared  you  shall  be,  dear  father,  and  revered; 
and  again, — 

In  silence  fearing  those  that  bore  the  sway; 

for  the  generality  of  men  are  most  ready  to 
reverence  those  whom  they  fear.  And,  there¬ 
fore,  the  Lacedaemonians  placed  the  temple  of 
Fear  by  the  Syssitium  of  the  ephors,  having 
raised  that  magistracy  to  almost  royal  author¬ 
ity- 

The  next  day,  Cleomenes  proscribed  eighty 
of  the  citizens  whom  he  thought  necessary  to 
banish,  and  removed  all  the  seats  of  the  ephors, 
except  one,  in  which  he  himself  designed  to 
sit  and  give  audience;  and  calling  the  citizens 
together  he  made  an  apology  for  his  proceed¬ 
ings,  saying,  that  by  Lycurgus  the  counsel  of 
elders  was  joined  to  the  kings,  and  that  that 
model  of  government  had  continued  a  long 
time,  and  no  other  sort  of  magistrates  had 
been  wanted.  But  afterwards,  in  the  long  war 
with  the  Messenians,  when  the  kings,  having 
to  command  the  army,  found  no  time  to  ad¬ 
minister  justice,  they  chose  some  of  their 
friends,  and  left  them  to  determine  the  suits 
of  the  citizens  in  their  stead.  These  were  called 
ephors,  and  at  first  behaved  themselves  as  serv¬ 
ants  to  the  kings;  but  afterwards,  by  degrees, 
they  appropriated  the  power  to  themselves, 
and  erected  a  distinct  magistracy. 

An  evidence  of  the  truth  of  this  was  the 
custom  still  observed  by  the  kings,  who,  when 
the  ephors  send  for  them,  refuse,  upon  the 
first  and  second  summons,  to  go,  but  upon  the 
third  rise  up  and  attend  them.  And  Astero- 
pus,  the  first  that  raised  the  ephors  to  that 
height  of  power,  lived  a  great  many  years 
after  their  institution.  So  long,  therefore,  he 
continued,  as  they  contained  themselves  with¬ 
in  their  own  proper  sphere,  it  had  been  better 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

to  bear  with  them  than  to  make  a  disturbance. 
But  that  an  upstart  introduced  power  should 
so  far  subvert  the  ancient  form  of  govern¬ 
ment  as  to  banish  some  kings,  murder  others, 
without  hearing  their  defence,  and  threaten 
those  who  desired  to  see  the  best  and  most 
divine  constitution  restored  in  Sparta,  was  not 
to  be  borne. 

Therefore,  if  it  had  been  possible  for  him 
without  bloodshed  to  free  Lacedaemon  from 
those  foreign  plagues,  luxury,  sumptuosity, 
debts,  and  usury,  and  from  those  yet  more 
ancient  evils,  poverty  and  riches,  he  should 
have  thought  himself  the  happiest  king  in  the 
world,  to  have  succeeded,  like  an  expert  phy¬ 
sician,  in  curing  the  diseases  of  his  country 
without  pain.  But  now,  in  this  necessity,  Ly- 
curgus’s  example  favoured  his  proceedings, 
who  being  neither  king  nor  magistrate,  but 
a  private  man,  and  aiming  at  the  kingdom, 
came  armed  into  the  market-place,  so  that  King 
Charillus  fled  in  alarm  to  the  altar.  He,  being  a 
good  man,  and  a  lover  of  his  country,  readily 
concurred  in  Lycurgus’s  designs,  and  admitted 
the  revolution  in  the  state.  But,  by  his  own  ac¬ 
tions,  Lycurgus  had  nevertheless  borne  witness 
that  it  was  difficult  to  change  the  government 
without  force  and  fear,  in  the  use  of  which  he 
himself,  he  said,  had  been  so  moderate  as  to  do 
no  more  than  put  out  of  the  way  those  who  op¬ 
posed  themselves  to  Sparta’s  happiness  and 
safety. 

For  the  rest  of  the  nation,  he  told  them,  the 
whole  land  was  now  their  common  property; 
debtors  should  be  cleared  of  their  debts,  and  ex¬ 
amination  made  of  those  who  were  not  citi¬ 
zens,  that  the  bravest  men  might  thus  be  made 
free  Spartans,  and  give  aid  in  arms  to  save  the 
city,  and  “we,”  he  said,  “may  no  longer  see  La¬ 
conia,  for  want  of  men  to  defend  it,  wasted  by 
the  iEtolians  and  Illyrians.” 

Then  he  himself  first,  with  his  step-father, 
Megistonus,  and  his  friends,  gave  up  all  their 
wealth  into  one  public  stock,  and  all  the  other 
citizens  followed  the  example.  The  land  was 
divided,  and  every  one  that  he  had  banished 
had  a  share  assigned  him;  for  he  promised  to 
restore  all  as  soon  as  things  were  settled  and  in 
quiet.  And  completing  the  number  of  citizens 
out  of  the  best  and  most  promising  of  the  coun¬ 
try  people,  he  raised  a  body  of  four  thousand 
men;  and  instead  of  a  spear,  taught  them  to  use 
a  sarissa,  with  both  hands,  and  to  carry  their 
shields  by  a  band,  and  not  by  a  handle,  as  be¬ 
fore.  After  this  he  began  to  consult  about  the 
education  of  the  youth,  and  the  discipline,  as 


CLEOMENES 

they  call  it;  most  of  the  particulars  of  which 
Sphaerus,  being  then  at  Sparta,  assisted  in  ar¬ 
ranging;  and  in  a  short  time  the  schools  of  ex¬ 
ercise  and  the  common  tables  recovered  their 
ancient  decency  and  order,  a  few  out  of  neces¬ 
sity,  but  the  most  voluntarily,  returning  to  that 
generous  and  Laconic  way  of  living.  And,  that 
the  name  of  monarch  might  give  them  no 
jealousy,  he  made  Euclidas,  his  brother,  part¬ 
ner  in  the  throne;  and  that  was  the  only 
time  that  Sparta  had  two  kings  of  the  same 
family. 

Then,  understanding  that  the  Achaeans  and 
Aratus  imagined  that  this  change  had  dis¬ 
turbed  and  shaken  his  affairs,  and  that  he 
would  not  venture  out  of  Sparta  and  leave  the 
city  now  unsettled  in  the  midst  of  so  great  an 
alteration,  he  thought  it  great  and  serviceable 
to  his  designs  to  show  his  enemies  the  zeal  and 
forwardness  of  his  troops.  And,  therefore, 
making  an  incursion  into  the  territories  of 
Megalopolis,  he  wasted  the  country  far  and 
wide,  and  collected  considerable  booty.  And  at 
last,  taking  a  company  of  actors  as  they  were 
travelling  from  Messene,  and  building  a  thea¬ 
tre  in  the  enemy’s  country,  and  offering  a  prize 
of  forty  minae  in  value,  he  sat  spectator  a  whole 
day;  not  that  he  either  desired  <?r  needed  such 
amusement,  but  wishing  to  show  his  disregard 
for  his  enemies,  and  by  a  display  of  his  con¬ 
tempt,  to  prove  the  extent  of  his  superiority  to 
them.  For  his  alone,  of  all  the  Greek  or  royal 
armies,  had  no  stage-players,  no  jugglers,  no 
dancing  or  singing  women  attending  it,  but 
was  free  from  all  sorts  of  looseness,  wanton¬ 
ness,  and  festivity;  the  young  men  being  for  the 
most  part  at  their  exercises,  and  the  old  men 
giving  them  lessons,  or,  at  leisure  times,  di¬ 
verting  themselves  with  their  native  jests,  and 
quick  Laconian  answers;  the  good  results  of 
which  we  have  noticed  in  the  life  of  Lycurgus. 

He  himself  instructed  all  by  his  example;  he 
was  a  living  pattern  of  temperance  before  every 
man’s  eyes;  and  his  course  of  living  was  neither 
more  stately,  nor  more  expensive,  nor  in  any 
way  more  pretentious,  than  that  of  his  people. 
And  this  was  a  considerable  advantage  to  him 
in  his  designs  on  Greece.  For  men  when  they 
waited  upon  other  kings  did  not  so  much  ad¬ 
mire  their  wealth,  costly  furniture,  and  numer¬ 
ous  attendance,  as  they  hated  their  pride  and 
state,  their  difficulty  of  access,  and  imperious 
answers  to  their  addresses. 

But  when  they  came  to  Cleomenes,  who  was 
both  really  a  king  and  bore  that  title,  and  saw 
no  purple,  no  robes  of  state  upon  him,  no 


661 

couches  and  litters  about  him  for  his  ease,  and 
that  he  did  not  receive  requests  and  return  an¬ 
swers  after  a  long  delay  and  difficulty,  through 
a  number  of  messengers  and  door-keepers,  or 
by  memorials,  but  that  he  rose  and  came  for¬ 
ward  in  any  dress  he  might  happen  to  be  wear¬ 
ing,  to  meet  those  that  came  to  wait  upon  him, 
stayed,  talked  freely  and  affably  with  all  that 
had  business,  they  were  extremely  taken,  and 
won  to  his  service,  and  professed  that  he  alone 
was  the  true  son  of  Hercules.  His  common  ev¬ 
ery-day’s  meal  was  in  an  ordinary  room,  very 
sparing,  and  after  the  Laconic  manner;  and 
when  he  entertained  ambassadors,  or  strangers, 
two  more  couches  were  added,  and  a  little  bet¬ 
ter  dinner  provided  by  his  servants,  but  no  sa¬ 
vouring  sauces  or  sweetmeats;  only  the  dishes 
were  larger,  and  the  wine  more  plentiful.  For 
he  reproved  one  of  his  friends  for  entertaining 
some  strangers  with  nothing  but  barley  bread 
and  black  broth,  such  diet  as  they  usually  had 
in  their  phiditia;  saying  that  upon  such  occa¬ 
sions,  and  when  they  entertained  strangers,  it 
was  not  well  to  be  too  exact  Laconians.  After 
the  table  was  removed,  a  stand  was  brought  in 
with  a  brass  vessel  full  of  wine,  two  silver 
bowls,  which  held  about  a  pint  apiece,  a  few 
silver  cups,  of  which  he  that  pleased  might 
drink,  but  wine  was  not  urged  on  any  of  the 
guests. 

There  was  no  music,  nor  was  any  required; 
for  he  entertained  the  company  himself,  some¬ 
times  asking  questions,  sometimes  telling  sto¬ 
ries;  and  his  conversation  was  neither  too  grave 
or  disagreeably  serious,  nor  yet  in  any  way  rude 
or  ungraceful  in  its  pleasantry.  For  he  thought 
those  ways  of  entrapping  men  by  gifts  and  pres¬ 
ents,  which  other  kings  use,  dishonest  and  arti¬ 
ficial;  and  it  seemed  to  him  to  be  the  most  no¬ 
ble  method,  and  most  suitable  to  a  king,  to  win 
the  affections  of  those  that  came  near  him,  by 
personal  intercourse  and  agreeable  conversa¬ 
tion,  since  between  a  friend  and  a  mercenary 
the  only  distinction  is,  that  the  one  is  gained  by 
one’s  character  and  conversation,  the  other  by 
one’s  money. 

The  Mantineans  were  the  first  that  requested 
his  aid;  and  when  he  entered  their  city  by 
night,  they  aided  him  to  expel  the  Achaean  gar¬ 
rison,  and  put  themselves  under  his  protection. 
He  restored  them  their  polity  and  laws,  and  the 
same  day  marched  to  Tegea;  and  a  little  while 
after,  fetching  a  compass  through  Arcadia,  he 
made  a  descent  upon  Pherae,  in  Achaea,  intend¬ 
ing  to  force  Aratus  to  a  battle,  or  bring  him  in¬ 
to  disrepute  for  refusing  to  engage,  and  suffer- 


662 

ing  him  to  waste  the  country.  Hyperbatas  at 
that  time  was  general,  but  Aratus  had  all  the 
power  amongst  the  Achaeans,  marching  forth 
with  their  whole  strength,  and  encamping  in 
Dymae,  near  the  Hecatombaeum.  Cleomenes 
came  up,  and  thinking  it  not  advisable  to  pitch 
between  Dymae,  a  city  of  the  enemies,  and  the 
camp  of  the  Achaeans,  he  boldly  dared  the 
Achaeans,  and  forced  them  to  a  battle,  and  rout¬ 
ing  their  phalanx,  slew  a  great  many  in  the 
fight,  and  took  many  prisoners,  and  thence 
marching  to  Langon,  and  driving  out  the 
Achaean  garrison,  he  restored  the  city  to  the 
Eleans. 

The  affair  of  the  Achaeans  being  in  this  un¬ 
fortunate  condition,  Aratus,  who  was  wont  to 
take  the  office  every  other  year,  refused  the 
command,  though  they  entreated  and  urged 
him  to  accept  it.  And  this  was  ill-done,  when 
the  storm  was  high,  to  put  the  power  out  of 
his  own  hands,  and  set  another  to  the  helm. 
Cleomenes  at  first  proposed  fair  and  easy  con¬ 
ditions  by  his  ambassadors  to  the  Achaeans,  but 
afterwards  he  sent  others,  and  required  the 
chief  command  to  be  settled  upon  him;  in  other 
matters  offering  to  agree  to  reasonable  terms, 
and  to  restore  their  captives  and  their  country. 
The  Achaeans  were  willing  to  come  to  an  agree¬ 
ment  upon  those  terms,  and  invited  Cleomenes 
to  Lerna,  where  an  assembly  was  to  be  held; 
but  it  happened  that  Cleomenes,  hastily  march¬ 
ing  on,  and  drinking  water  at  a  wrong  time, 
brought  up  a  quantity  of  blood  and  lost  his 
voice;  therefore  being  unable  to  continue  his 
journey,  he  sent  the  chiefest  of  the  captives  to 
the  Achaeans,  and,  putting  off  the  meeting  for 
some  time,  retired  to  Lacedaemon. 

This  ruined  the  affairs  of  Greece,  which  was 
just  beginning  in  some  sort  to  recover  from  its 
disasters,  and  to  show  some  capability  of  deliv¬ 
ering  itself  from  the  insolence  and  rapacity  of 
the  Macedonians.  For  Aratus  (whether  fearing 
or  distrusting  Cleomenes,  or  envying  his  un¬ 
looked-for  success,  or  thinking  it  a  disgrace  for 
him  who  had  commanded  thirty-three  years  to 
have  a  young  man  succeed  to  all  his  glory  and 
his  power,  and  be  head  of  that  government 
which  he  had  been  raising  and  settling  so 
many  years),  first  endeavoured  to  keep  the 
Achaeans  from  closing  with  Cleomenes;  but 
when  they  would  not  hearken  to  him,  fearing 
Cleomenes’  daring  spirit,  and  thinking  the 
Lacedaemonians’  proposals  to  be  very  reason¬ 
able,  who  designed  only  to  reduce  Peloponne¬ 
sus  to  its  own  model,  upon  this  he  took  his  last 
refuge  in  an  action  which  was  unbecoming 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

any  of  the  Greeks,  most  dishonourable  to  him, 
and  most  unworthy  his  former  bravery  and  ex¬ 
ploits. 

For  he  called  Antigonus  into  Greece  and 
filled  Peloponnesus  with  Macedonians,  whom 
he  himself,  when  a  youth,  having  beaten  their 
garrison  out  of  the  castle  of  Corinth,  had  driv¬ 
en  from  the  same  country.  And  there  had  been 
constant  suspicion  and  variance  between  him 
and  all  the  kings;  and  of  Antigonus,  in  particu¬ 
lar,  he  has  said  a  thousand  dishonourable 
things  in  the  commentaries  he  has  left  behind 
him.  And  though  he  declares  himself  how  he 
suffered  considerable  losses,  and  underwent 
great  dangers,  that  he  might  free  Athens  from 
the  garrison  of  the  Macedonians,  yet,  after¬ 
wards,  he  brought  the  very  same  men  armed 
into  his  own  country,  and  his  own  house,  even 
to  the  women’s  apartment. 

He  would  not  endure  that  one  of  the  family 
of  Hercules,  and  king  of  Sparta,  and  one  that 
reformed  the  polity  of  his  country,  as  it  were, 
from  a  disordered  harmony,  and  returned  it  to 
the  plain  Doric  measure  and  rule  of  life  of  Ly- 
curgus,  should  be  styled  head  of  the  Tritaeans 
and  Sicyonians;  and  whilst  he  fled  the  barley- 
cake  and  coarse  coat,  and,  which  were  his  chief 
accusations  against  Cleomenes,  the  extirpation 
of  wealth  and  reformation  of  poverty,  he  basely 
subjected  himself,  together  with  Achaea,  to  the 
diadem  and  purple,  to  the  imperious  com¬ 
mands  of  the  Macedonians  and  their  satraps. 
That  he  might  not  seem  to  be  under  Cleome¬ 
nes,  he  offered  sacrifices,  called  Antigonea,  in 
honour  of  Antigonus,  and  sang  paeans  himself, 
with  a  garland  on  his  head,  to  the  praise  of  a 
wasted,  consumptive  Macedonian. 

I  write  this  not  out  of  any  design  to  disgrace 
Aratus,  for  in  many  things  he  showed  himself 
a  true  lover  of  Greece,  and  a  great  man,  but  out 
of  pity  to  the  weakness  of  human  nature, 
which,  in  characters  like  this,  so  worthy  and 
in  so  many  ways  disposed  to  virtue,  cannot 
maintain  its  honours  unblemished  by  some  en¬ 
vious  fault. 

The  Achaeans  meeting  again  in  assembly  at 
Argos,  and  Cleomenes  having  come  from  Te- 
gea,  there  were  great  hopes  that  all  differences 
would  be  composed.  But  Aratus,  Antigonus 
and  he  having  already  agreed  upon  the  chief 
articles  of  their  league,  fearing  that  Cleome¬ 
nes  would  carry  all  before  him,  and  either  win 
or  force  the  multitude  to  comply  with  his  de¬ 
mands,  proposed  that,  having  three  hundred 
hostages  put  into  his  hands,  he  should  come 
alone  into  the  town,  or  bring  his  army  to  the 


CLEOMENES 

place  of  exercise,  called  the  Cyllarabium,  out¬ 
side  the  city,  and  treat  there. 

Cleomenes,  hearing  this,  said  that  he  was  un¬ 
justly  dealt  with;  for  they  ought  to  have  told 
him  so  plainly  at  first,  and  not  now  he  was 
come  even  to  their  doors,  show  their  jealousy 
and  deny  him  admission.  And  writing  a  letter 
to  the  Achaeans  about  the  same  subject,  the 
greatest  part  of  which  was  an  accusation  of 
Aratus,  while  Aratus,  on  the  other  side,  spoke 
violently  against  him  to  the  assembly,  he  hasti¬ 
ly  dislodged,  and  sent  a  trumpeter  to  denounce 
war  against  the  Achaeans,  not  to  Argos,  but  to 
ffigium,  as  Aratus  writes,  that  he  might  not 
give  them  notice  enough  to  make  provision  for 
their  defence.  There  had  also  been  a  movement 
among  the  Achaeans  themselves,  and  the  cities 
were  eager  for  revolt;  the  common  people  ex¬ 
pecting  a  division  of  the  land,  and  a  release 
from  their  debts,  and  the  chief  men  being  in 
many  places  ill-disposed  to  Aratus,  and  some 
of  them  angry  and  indignant  with  him  for 
having  brought  the  Macedonians  into  Pelo¬ 
ponnesus. 

Encouraged  by  these  misunderstandings, 
Cleomenes  invaded  Achaea,  and  first  took  Pel- 
lene  by  surprise,  and  beat  out  the  Achaean  gar¬ 
rison,  and  afterwards  brought  over  Pheneus 
and  Pentelleum  to  his  side.  Now  the  Achaeans, 
suspecting  some  treacherous  designs  at  Cor¬ 
inth  and  Sicyon,  sent  their  horse  and  mercena¬ 
ries  out  of  Argos,  to  have  an  eye  upon  those 
cities,  and  they  themselves  went  to  Argos  to 
celebrate  the  Nemean  games.  Cleomenes,  ad¬ 
vertised  of  this  march,  and  hoping,  as  it  after¬ 
wards  fell  out,  that  upon  an  unexpected  ad¬ 
vance  to  the  city,  now  busied  in  the  solemnity 
of  the  games,  and  thronged  with  numerous 
spectators,  he  should  raise  a  considerable  terror 
and  confusion  amongst  them  by  night,  marched 
with  his  army  to  the  walls,  and  taking  the 
quarter  of  the  town  called  Aspis,  which  lies 
above  the  theatre,  well  fortified,  and  hard  to  be 
approached,  he  so  terrified  them  that  none  of¬ 
fered  to  resist,  but  they  agreed  to  accept  a  gar¬ 
rison,  to  give  twenty  citizens  for  hostages,  and 
to  assist  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  that  he 
should  have  the  chief  command. 

This  action  considerably  increased  his  repu¬ 
tation  and  his  power;  for  the  ancient  Spartan 
kings,  though  they  in  many  ways  endeavoured 
to  effect  it,  could  never  bring  Argos  to  be  per¬ 
manently  theirs.  And  Pyrrhus,  the  most  experi¬ 
enced  captain,  though  he  entered  the  city  by 
force,  could  not  keep  possession,  but  was  slain 
himself,  with  a  considerable  part  of  his  army. 


663 

Therefore  they  admired  the  despatch  and  con¬ 
trivance  of  Cleomenes;  and  those  that  before 
derided  him,  for  imitating,  as  they  said,  Solon 
and  Lycurgus,  in  releasing  the  people  from 
their  debts,  and  in  equalising  the  property  of 
the  citizens,  were  now  fain  to  admit  that  this 
was  the  cause  of  the  change  in  the  Spartans. 
For  before  they  were  very  low  in  the  world, 
and  so  unable  to  secure  their  own,  that  the 
iEtolians,  invading  Laconia,  brought  away  fifty 
thousand  slaves;  so  that  one  of  the  elder  Spar¬ 
tans  is  reported  to  have  said,  that  they  had 
done  Laconia  a  kindness  by  unburdening  it; 
and  yet  a  little  while  after,  by  merely  recurring 
once  again  to  their  native  customs,  and  reen¬ 
tering  the  track  of  the  ancient  discipline,  they 
were  able  to  give,  as  though  it  had  been  under 
the  eyes  and  conduct  of  Lycurgus  himself,  the 
most  signal  instances  of  courage  and  obedience, 
raising  Sparta  to  her  ancient  place  as  the  com¬ 
manding  state  of  Greece,  and  recovering  all 
Peloponnesus. 

When  Argos  was  captured,  and  Cleonae  and 
Phlius  came  over,  as  they  did  at  once,  to  Cleo¬ 
menes,  Aratus  was  at  Corinth,  searching  after 
some  who  were  reported  to  favour  the  Spartan 
interest.  The  news,  being  brought  to  him,  dis¬ 
turbed  him  very  much;  for  he  perceived  the 
city  inclining  to  Cleomenes,  and  willing  to  be 
rid  of  the  Achaeans.  Therefore  he  summoned 
the  citizens  to  meet  in  the  council  hall,  and 
slipping  away  without  being  observed  to  the 
gate,  he  mounted  his  horse  that  had  been 
brought  for  him  thither,  and  fled  to  Sicyon. 
And  the  Corinthians  made  such  haste  to  Cleo¬ 
menes  at  Argos,  that,  as  Aratus  says,  striving 
who  should  be  first  there,  they  spoiled  all  their 
horses;  he  adds  that  Cleomenes  was  very  angry 
with  the  Corinthians  for  letting  him  escape; 
and  that  Megistonus  came  from  Cleomenes  to 
him,  desiring  him  to  deliver  up  the  castle  at 
Corinth,  which  was  then  garrisoned  by  the 
Achaeans,  and  offered  him  a  considerable  sum 
of  money,  and  that  he  answered  that  matters 
were  not  now  in  his  power,  but  he  in  theirs. 
Thus  Aratus  himself  writes. 

But  Cleomenes,  marching  from  Argos,  and 
taking  in  the  Trcezenians,  Epidaurians,  and 
Hermioneans,  came  to  Corinth,  and  blocked 
up  the  castle,  which  the  Achaeans  would  not 
surrender;  and  sending  for  Aratus’s  friends 
and  stewards,  committed  his  house  and  estate 
to  their  care  and  management;  and  sent  Trity- 
mallus,  the  Messenian,  to  him  a  second  time, 
desiring  that  the  castle  might  be  equally  garri¬ 
soned  by  the  Spartans  and  Achaeans,  and  prom- 


664 

ising  to  Aratus  himself  double  the  pension 
that  he  received  from  King  Ptolemy.  But  Ara¬ 
tus,  refusing  the  conditions,  and  sending  his 
own  son  with  the  other  hostages  to  Antigonus, 
and  persuading  the  Achaeans  to  make  a  decree 
for  delivering  the  castle  into  Antigonus’s 
hands,  upon  this  Cleomenes  invaded  the  ter¬ 
ritory  of  the  Sicyonians,  and  by  a  decree  of 
the  Corinthians,  accepted  Aratus’s  estate  as 
a  gift. 

In  the  meantime  Antigonus,  with  a  great 
army,  was  passing  Geranea;  and  Cleomenes, 
thinking  it  more  advisable  to  fortify  and  garri¬ 
son,  not  the  isthmus,  but  the  mountains  called 
Onea,  and  by  a  war  of  posts  and  positions  to 
weary  the  Macedonians,  rather  than  to  venture 
a  set  battle  with  the  highly  disciplined  phalanx, 
put  his  design  into  execution,  and  very  much 
distressed  Antigonus.  For  he  had  not  brought 
victuals  sufficient  for  his  army;  nor  was  it  easy 
to  force  a  way  through  whilst  Cleomenes 
guarded  the  pass.  He  attempted  by  night  to 
pass  through  Lechaeum,  but  failed  and  lost 
some  men;  so  that  Cleomenes  and  his  army 
were  mightily  encouraged,  and  so  flushed  with 
the  victory  that  they  went  merrily  to  supper; 
and  Antigonus  was  very  much  dejected,  being 
driven,  by  the  necessity  he  was  in,  to  most  un¬ 
promising  attempts.  He  was  proposing  to 
march  to  the  promontory  of  Heraeum,  and 
thence  transport  his  army  in  boats  to  Sicyon, 
which  would  take  up  a  great  deal  of  time,  and 
require  much  preparation  and  means.  But 
when  it  was  now  evening,  some  of  Aratus’s 
friends  came  from  Argos  by  sea,  and  invited 
him  to  return,  for  the  Argives  would  revolt 
from  Cleomenes.  Aristoteles  was  the  man  that 
wrought  the  revolt,  and  he  had  no  hard  task 
to  persuade  the  common  people;  for  they  were 
all  angry  with  Cleomenes  for  not  releasing 
them  from  their  debts  as  they  expected. 

Accordingly,  obtaining  fifteen  hundred  of 
Antigonus’s  soldiers,  Aratus  sailed  to  Epidau- 
rus;  but  Aristoteles,  not  staying  for  his  coming, 
drew  out  the  citizens,  and  fought  against  the 
garrison  of  the  castle;  and  Timoxenus,  with 
the  Achaeans  from  Sicyon,  came  to  his  assis¬ 
tance. 

Cleomenes  heard  the  news  about  the  second 
watch  of  the  night,  and  sending  for  Megisto- 
nus,  angrily  commanded  him  to  go  and  set 
things  right  at  Argos.  Megistonus  had  passed 
his  word  for  the  Argives’  loyalty,  and  had  per¬ 
suaded  him  not  to  banish  the  suspected.  There¬ 
fore,  despatching  him  with  two  thousand  sol¬ 
diers,  he  himself  kept  watch  upon  Antigonus, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  encouraged  the  Corinthians,  pretending 
that  there  was  no  great  matter  in  the  commo¬ 
tions  at  Argos,  but  only  a  little  disturbance 
raised  by  a  few  inconsiderable  persons.  But 
when  Megistonus,  entering  Argos,  was  slain, 
and  the  garrison  could  scarce  hold  out,  and  fre¬ 
quent  messengers  came  to  Cleomenes  for  suc¬ 
cours,  he  fearing  lest  the  enemy,  having  taken 
Argos,  should  shut  up  the  passes  and  securely 
waste  Laconia,  and  besiege  Sparta  itself,  which 
he  had  left  without  forces,  dislodged  from 
Corinth,  and  immediately  lost  that  city;  for 
Antigonus  entered  it,  and  garrisoned  the  town. 
He  turned  aside  from  his  direct  march,  and 
assaulting  the  walls  of  Argos,  endeavoured  to 
carry  it  by  a  sudden  attack;  and  then,  having 
collected  his  forces  from  their  march,  breaking 
into  the  Aspis,  he  joined  the  garrison,  which 
still  held  out  against  the  Achaeans;  some  parts 
of  the  city  he  scaled  and  took,  and  his  Cretan 
archers  cleared  the  streets. 

But  when  he  saw  Antigonus  with  his  pha¬ 
lanx  descending  from  the  mountains  into  the 
plain,  and  the  horse  on  all  sides  entering  the 
city,  he  thought  it  impossible  to  maintain  his 
post,  and,  gathering  together  all  his  men,  came 
safely  down  and  made  his  retreat  under  the 
walls,  having  in  so  short  a  time  possessed  him¬ 
self  of  great  power,  and  in  one  journey,  so  to 
say,  having  made  himself  master  of  all  Pelo¬ 
ponnesus,  and  now  lost  all  again  in  as  short  a 
time.  For  some  of  his  allies  at  once  withdrew 
and  forsook  him,  and  others  not  long  after  put  j 
their  cities  under  Antigonus’s  protection.  His 
hopes  thus  defeated,  as  he  was  leading  back 
the  relics  of  his  forces,  messengers  from  Lace¬ 
daemon  met  him  in  the  evening  at  Tegea,  and 
brought  him  news  of  as  great  a  misfortune  as 
that  which  he  had  lately  suffered,  and  this  was 
the  death  of  his  wife,  to  whom  he  was  so  at¬ 
tached,  and  thought  so  much  of  her  that  even 
in  his  most  successful  expeditions,  when  he 
was  most  prosperous,  he  could  not  refrain,  but 
would  every  now  and  then  come  home  to 
Sparta,  to  visit  Agiatis.  , 

The  news  afflicted  him  extremely,  and  he  | 
grieved,  as  a  young  man  would  do,  for  the  loss) 
of  a  very  beautiful  and  excellent  wife;  yet  he  , 
did  not  let  his  passion  disgrace  him  or  impair  . 
the  greatness  of  his  mind,  but  keeping  his'  ( 
usual  voice,  his  countenance,  and  his  habit,  he  j 
gave  necessary  orders  to  his  captains,  and  took  t 
the  precautions  required  for  the  safety  of  Te-  c 
gea.  Next  morning  he  came  to  Sparta,  and  ( 
having  at  home,  with  his  mother  and  children,  tl 
bewailed  the  loss,  and  finished  his  mourning, 


CLEOMENES 

he  at  once  devoted  himself  to  the  public  affairs 
of  the  state. 

Now  Ptolemy,  the  king  of  Egypt,  promised 
him  assistance,  but  demanded  his  mother  and 
children  for  hostages.  This,  for  some  consider¬ 
able  time,  he  was  ashamed  to  discover  to  his 
mother;  and  though  he  often  went  to  her  on 
purpose,  and  was  just  upon  the  discourse,  yet 
he  still  refrained,  and  kept  it  to  himself;  so 
that  she  began  to  suspect,  and  asked  his  friends, 
whether  Cleomenes  had  something  to  say  to 
her,  which  he  was  afraid  to  speak.  At  last, 
Cleomenes  venturing  to  tell  her,  she  laughed 
aloud,  and  said,  “Was  this  the  thing  that  you 
had  so  often  a  mind  to  tell  me,  and  were 
afraid?  Make  haste  and  put  me  on  ship-board, 
and  send  this  carcase  where  it  may  be  most 
serviceable  to  Sparta,  before  age  destroys  it  un- 
profitably  here.”  Therefore,  all  things  being 
provided  for  the  voyage,  they  went  by  land  to 
Taenarus,  and  the  army  waited  on  them.  Cra- 
tesiclea,  when  she  was  ready  to  go  on  board, 
took  Cleomenes  aside  into  Neptune’s  temple, 
and  embracing  him,  who  was  much  dejected 
and  extremely  discomposed,  she  said,  “Go  to, 
King  of  Sparta;  when  we  come  forth  at  the 
door,  let  none  see  us  weep,  or  show  any  pas¬ 
sion  that  is  unworthy  of  Sparta;  for  that  alone 
is  in  our  own  power;  as  for  success  or  disap¬ 
pointment,  those  wait  on  us  as  the  deity  de¬ 
crees.” 

Having  thus  said,  and  composed  her  coun¬ 
tenance,  she  went  to  the  ship  with  her  little 
grandson,  and  bade  the  pilot  put  at  once  out 
to  sea.  When  she  came  to  Egypt,  and  under¬ 
stood  that  Ptolemy  entertained  proposals  and 
overtures  of  peace  from  Antigonus,  and  that 
Cleomenes,  though  the  Achaeans  invited  and 
urged  him  to  an  agreement,  was  afraid,  for 
her  sake,  to  come  to  any,  without  Ptolemy’s 
consent,  she  wrote  to  him,  advising  him  to  do 
that  which  was  most  becoming  and  most  prof¬ 
itable  for  Sparta,  and  not,  for  the  sake  of  an  old 
woman  and  a  little  child,  stand  always  in  fear 
of  Ptolemy.  This  character  she  maintained  in 
her  misfortunes. 

Antigonus,  having  taken  Tegea,  and  plun¬ 
dered  Orchomenus  and  Mantinea,  Cleomenes 
was  shut  up  within  the  narrow  bounds  of  La¬ 
conia;  and  making  such  of  the  helots  as  could 
pay  five  Attic  pounds  free  of  Sparta;  and,  by 
that  means,  getting  together  five  hundred  tal¬ 
ents,  and  arming  two  thousand  after  the  Mace¬ 
donian  fashion,  that  he  might  make  a  body  fit 
to  oppose  Antigonus’s  Leucaspides,  he  under¬ 
took  a  great  and  unexpected  enterprise.  Me- 


665 

galopolis  was  at  that  time  a  city  of  itself  as 
great  and  as  powerful  as  Sparta,  and  had  the 
forces  of  the  Achaeans  and  of  Antigonus  en¬ 
camping  beside  it;  and  it  was  chiefly  the  Me- 
galopolitans’  doing,  that  Antigonus  had  been 
called  in  to  assist  the  Achaeans. 

Cleomenes,  resolving  to  snatch  the  city  (no 
other  word  so  well  suits  so  rapid  and  so  sur¬ 
prising  an  action),  ordered  his  men  to  take 
five  days’  provision,  and  marched  to  Sellasia, 
as  if  he  intended  to  ravage  the  country  of  the 
Argives;  but  from  thence  making  a  descent 
into  the  territories  of  Megalopolis,  and  refresh¬ 
ing  his  army  about  Rhceteum,  he  suddenly 
took  the  road  by  Helicus,  and  advanced  direct¬ 
ly  upon  the  city.  When  he  was  not  far  off  the 
town,  he  sent  Panteus,  with  two  regiments,  to 
surprise  a  portion  of  the  wall  between  two 
towers,  which  he  learnt  to  be  the  most  un¬ 
guarded  quarter  of  the  Megalopolitans’  fortifi¬ 
cations,  and  with  the  rest  of  his  forces  he  fol¬ 
lowed  leisurely.  Panteus  not  only  succeeded  at 
that  point,  but  finding  a  great  part  of  the  wall 
without  guards,  he  at  once  proceeded  to  pull 
it  down  in  some  places,  and  make  openings 
through  it  in  others,  and  killed  all  the  defend¬ 
ers  that  he  found. 

Whilst  he  was  thus  busied,  Cleomenes  came 
up  to  him,  and  was  got  with  his  army  within 
the  city,  before  the  Megalopolitans  knew  of 
the  surprise.  When,  after  some  time,  they 
learned  their  misfortune,  some  left  the  town 
immediately,  taking  with  them  what  property 
they  could;  others  armed  and  engaged  the  en¬ 
emy;  and  though  they  were  not  able  to  beat 
them  out,  yet  they  gave  their  citizens  time  and 
opportunity  safely  to  retire,  so  that  there  were 
not  above  one  thousand  persons  taken  in  the 
town,  all  the  rest  flying,  with  their  wives  and 
children,  and  escaping  to  Messene.  The  great¬ 
er  number,  also,  of  those  that  armed  and 
fought  the  enemy  were  saved,  and  very  few 
taken,  amongst  whom  were  Lysandridas  and 
Thearidas,  two  men  of  great  power  and  repu¬ 
tation  amongst  the  Megalopolitans;  and  there¬ 
fore  the  soldiers,  as  soon  as  they  were  taken, 
brought  them  to  Cleomenes.  And  Lysandri¬ 
das,  as  soon  as  he  saw  Cleomenes  afar  off,  cried 
out,  “Now,  King  of  Sparta,  it  is  in  your  power, 
by  doing  a  most  kingly  and  a  nobler  action 
than  you  have  already  performed,  to  purchase 
the  greatest  glory.” 

Cleomenes,  guessing  at  his  meaning,  replied, 
“What,  Lysandridas,  you  will  not  surely  advise 
me  to  restore  your  city  to  you  again?”  “It  is 
that  which  I  mean,”  Lysandridas  replied;  “and 


666 

I  advise  you  not  to  ruin  so  brave  a  city,  but  to 
fill  it  with  faithful  and  steadfast  friends  and 
allies,  by  restoring  their  country  to  the  Megalo- 
politans,  and  being  the  saviour  of  so  consider¬ 
able  a  people.”  Cleomenes  paused  a  while,  and 
then  said:  “It  is  very  hard  to  trust  so  far  in 
these  matters;  but  with  us  let  profit  always 
yield  to  glory.”  Having  said  this,  he  sent  the 
two  men  to  Messene  with  a  herald  from  him¬ 
self,  offering  the  Megalopolitans  their  city 
again,  if  they  would  forsake  the  Achaean  in¬ 
terest,  and  be  on  his  side.  But  though  Cleome¬ 
nes  made  these  generous  and  humane  propo¬ 
sals,  Philopcemen  would  not  suffer  them  to 
break  their  league  with  the  Achaeans;  and  ac¬ 
cusing  Cleomenes  to  the  people,  as  if  his  de¬ 
sign  was  not  to  restore  the  city,  but  to  take  the 
citizens  too,  he  forced  Thearidas  and  Lysan- 
dridas  to  leave  Messene. 

This  was  that  Philopcemen  who  was  after¬ 
wards  chief  of  the  Achaeans  and  a  man  of  the 
greatest  reputation  amongst  the  Greeks,  as  I 
have  related  it  in  his  own  life. 

This  news  coming  to  Cleomenes,  though  he 
had  before  taken  strict  care  that  the  city  should 
not  be  plundered,  yet  then,  being  in  anger, 
and  out  of  all  patience,  he  despoiled  the  place 
of  all  the  valuables,  and  sent  the  statues  and 
pictures  to  Sparta;  and  demolishing  a  great 
part  of  the  city,  he  marched  away  for  fear  of 
Antigonus  and  the  Achaeans;  but  they  never 
stirred,  for  they  were  at  ffigium,  at  a  council 
of  war.  There  Aratus  mounted  the  speaker’s 
place,  and  wept  a  long  while,  holding  his  man¬ 
tle  before  his  face;  and  at  last,  the  company 
being  amazed,  and  commanding  him  to  speak, 
he  said,  “Megalopolis  is  destroyed  by  Cleome¬ 
nes.”  The  assembly  instantly  dissolved,  the 
Achaeans  being  astounded  at  the  suddenness 
and  greatness  of  the  loss;  and  Antigonus,  in¬ 
tending  to  send  speedy  succours,  when  he 
found  his  forces  gather  very  slowly  out  of  their 
winter-quarters,  sent  them  orders  to  continue 
there  still;  and  he  himself  marched  to  Argos 
with  a  small  body  of  men. 

And  now  the  second  enterprise  of  Cleome¬ 
nes,  though  it  had  the  look  of  a  desperate  and 
frantic  adventure,  yet  in  Polybius’s  opinion, 
was  done  with  mature  deliberation  and  great 
foresight.  For  knowing  very  well  that  the 
Macedonians  were  dispersed  into  their  winter- 
quarters,  and  that  Antigonus  with  his  friends 
and  a  few  mercenaries  about  him  wintered  in 
Argos,  upon  these  considerations  he  invaded 
the  country  of  the  Argives,  hoping  to  shame 
Antigonus  to  a  battle  upon  unequal  terms,  or 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

else  if  he  did  not  dare  to  fight,  to  bring  him 
into  disrepute  with  the  Achaeans.  And  this  ac¬ 
cordingly  happened.  For  Cleomenes  wasting, 
plundering,  and  spoiling  the  whole  country, 
the  Argives,  in  grief  and  anger  at  the  loss, 
gathered  in  crowds  at  the  king’s  gates,  crying 
out  that  he  should  either  fight,  or  surrender 
his  command  to  better  and  braver  men.  But 
Antigonus,  as  became  an  experienced  captain, 
accounting  it  rather  dishonourable  foolishly  to 
hazard  his  army  and  quit  his  security,  than 
merely  to  be  railed  at  by  other  people,  would 
not  march  out  against  Cleomenes,  but  stood 
firm  to  his  convictions.  Cleomenes,  in  the 
meantime,  brought  his  army  up  to  the  very 
walls,  and  having  without  opposition  spoiled 
the  country,  and  insulted  over  his  enemies, 
drew  off  again. 

A  little  while  after,  being  informed  that  An¬ 
tigonus  designed  a  new  advance  to  Tegea,  and 
thence  to  invade  Laconia,  he  rapidly  took  his 
soldiers,  and  marching  by  a  side-road,  ap¬ 
peared  early  in  the  morning  before  Argos,  and 
wasted  the  fields  about  it.  The  corn  he  did  not 
cut  down,  as  is  usual,  with  reaping  hooks  and 
knives,  but  beat  it  down  with  great  wooden 
staves  made  like  broadswords,  as  if,  in  mere 
contempt  and  wanton  scorn,  while  travelling 
on  this  way,  without  any  effort  or  trouble,  he 
spoiled  and  destroyed  their  harvest.  Yet  when 
his  soldiers  would  have  set  Cyllabaris,  the  exer¬ 
cise  ground,  on  fire,  he  stopped  the  attempt,  as 
if  he  felt  that  the  mischief  he  had  done  at  Me¬ 
galopolis  had  been  the  effects  of  his  passion 
rather  than  his  wisdom.  And  when  Antigonus, 
first  of  all,  came  hastily  back  to  Argos,  and 
then  occupied  the  mountains  and  passes  with 
his  posts,  he  professed  to  disregard  and  despise 
it  all;  and  sent  heralds  to  ask  for  the  keys  of 
the  temple  of  Juno,  as  though  he  proposed  to 
offer  sacrifice  there  and  then  return.  And  with 
this  scornful  pleasantry  upon  Antigonus,  hav¬ 
ing  sacrificed  to  the  goddess  under  the  walls  of 
the  temple,  which  was  shut,  he  went  to  Phlius; 
and  from  thence  driving  out  those  that  gar¬ 
risoned  Oligyrtus,  he  marched  down  to  Orcho- 
menus. 

These  enterprises  not  only  encouraged  the 
citizens,  but  made  him  appear  to  the  very  ene¬ 
mies  to  be  a  man  worthy  of  high  command, 
and  capable  of  great  things.  For  with  the 
strength  of  one  city,  not  only  to  fight  the  power 
of  the  Macedonians  and  all  the  Peloponnesians, 
supported  by  all  the  royal  treasures,  not  only 
to  preserve  Laconia  from  being  spoiled,  but  to 
waste  the  enemy’s  country,  and  to  take  so 


CLEOMENES 

many  and  such  considerable  cities,  was  an  ar¬ 
gument  of  no  common  skill  and  genius  for 
command. 

But  he  that  first  said  that  money  was  the 
sinews  of  affairs,  seems  especially  in  that  say¬ 
ing  to  refer  to  war.  Demades,  when  the  Athen¬ 
ians  had  voted  that  their  galleys  should  be 
launched  and  equipped  for  action,  but  could 
produce  no  money,  told  them,  “The  baker  was 
wanted  first,  and  the  pilot  after.”  And  the  old 
Archidamus,  in  the  beginning  of  the  Pelopon¬ 
nesian  war,  when  the  allies  desired  that  the 
amount  of  their  contributions  should  be  deter¬ 
mined,  is  reported  to  have  answered,  that  war 
cannot  be  fed  upon  so  much  a  day.  For  as 
wrestlers,  who  have  thoroughly  trained  and 
disciplined  their  bodies,  in  time  tire  down  and 
exhaust  the  most  agile  and  most  skilful  com¬ 
batant,  so  Antigonus,  coming  to  the  war  with 
great  resources  to  spend  from,  wore  out  Cleo- 
menes,  whose  poverty  made  it  difficult  for  him 
to  provide  the  merest  sufficiency  of  pay  for  the 
mercenaries,  or  of  provisions  for  the  citizens. 
For,  in  all  other  respects,  time  favoured  Cleo- 
menes;  for  Antigonus’s  affairs  at  home  began 
to  be  disturbed.  For  the  barbarians  wasted  and 
overran  Macedonia  whilst  he  was  absent,  and 
at  that  particular  time  a  vast  army  of  Illyrians 
had  entered  the  country;  to  be  freed  from 
whose  devastations,  the  Macedonians  sent  for 
Antigonus,  and  the  letters  had  almost  been 
brought  to  him  before  the  battle  was  fought; 
upon  the  receipt  of  which  he  would  at  once 
have  marched  away  home,  and  left  the  Achae- 
ans  to  look  to  themselves. 

But  Fortune,  that  loves  to  determine  the 
greatest  affairs  by  a  minute,  in  this  conjuncture 
showed  such  an  exact  niceness  of  time,  that 
immediately  after  the  battle  in  Sellasia  was 
over,  and  Cleomenes  had  lost  his  army  and  his 
city,  the  messengers  came  up  and  called  for 
Antigonus.  And  this  above  everything  made 
Cleomenes’s  misfortune  to  be  pitied;  for  if  he 
had  gone  on  retreating  and  had  forborne  fight¬ 
ing  two  days  longer,  there  had  been  no  need 
of  hazarding  a  battle;  since  upon  the  departure 
of  the  Macedonians,  he  might  have  had  what 
conditions  he  pleased  from  the  Achaeans.  But 
now,  as  was  said  before,  for  want  of  money, 
being  necessitated  to  trust  everything  to  arms, 
he  was  forced  with  twenty  thousand  (such  is 
Polybius’s  account),  to  engage  thirty  thousand. 
And  approving  himself  an  admirable  com¬ 
mander  in  this  difficulty,  his  citizens  showing 
an  extraordinary  courage,  and  his  mercenaries 
bravery  enough,  he  was  overborne  by  the  dif- 


667 

ferent  way  of  fighting,  and  the  weight  of  the 
heavy-armed  phalanx.  Phylarchus  also  affirms 
that  the  treachery  of  some  about  him  was  the 
chief  cause  of  Cleomenes’s  ruin. 

For  Antigonus  gave  orders  that  the  Illyrians 
and  Acarnanians  should  march  round  by  a 
secret  way,  and  encompass  the  other  wing, 
which  Euclidas,  Cleomenes’s  brother,  com¬ 
manded;  and  then  drew  out  the  rest  of  his 
forces  to  the  battle.  And  Cleomenes,  from  a 
convenient  rising,  viewing  his  order,  and  not 
seeing  any  of  the  Illyrians  and  Acarnanians, 
began  to  suspect  that  Antigonus  had  sent  them 
upon  some  such  design;  and  calling  for  Damo- 
teles,  who  was  at  the  head  of  those  specially 
appointed  to  such  ambush  duty,  he  bade  him 
carefully  to  look  after  and  discover  the  ene¬ 
my’s  designs  upon  his  rear.  But  Damoteles,  for 
some  say  Antigonus  had  bribed  him,  telling 
him  that  he  should  not  be  solicitous  about  that 
matter,  for  all  was  well  enough,  but  mind  and 
fight  those  that  met  him  in  the  front,  he  was 
satisfied,  and  advanced  against  Antigonus. 

By  the  vigorous  charge  of  his  Spartans,  he 
made  the  Macedonian  phalanx  give  ground, 
and  pressed  upon  them  with  great  advantage 
about  half  a  mile;  but  then  making  a  stand, 
and  seeing  the  danger  which  the  surrounding 
wing,  commanded  by  his  brother  Euclidas, 
was  in,  he  cried  out,  “Thou  art  lost,  dear 
brother,  thou  art  lost,  thou  brave  example  to 
our  Spartan  youth  and  theme  of  our  matrons’ 
songs.”  And  Euclidas’s  wing  being  cut  in 
pieces,  and  the  conquerors  from  that  part  fall¬ 
ing  upon  him,  he  perceived  his  soldiers  to  be 
disordered,  and  unable  to  maintain  the  fight, 
and  therefore  provided  for  his  own  safety. 
There  fell,  we  are  told,  in  the  battle,  besides 
many  of  the  mercenary  soldiers,  all  the  Spar¬ 
tans,  six  thousand  in  number,  except  two  hun¬ 
dred. 

When  Cleomenes  came  into  the  city,  he  ad¬ 
vised  those  citizens  that  he  met  to  receive  Anti¬ 
gonus;  and  as  for  himself,  he  said,  which 
should  appear  most  advantageous  to  Sparta, 
whether  his  life  or  death,  that  he  would 
choose.  Seeing  the  women  running  out  to  those 
that  had  fled  with  him,  taking  their  arms,  and 
bringing  drink  to  them,  he  entered  into  his 
own  house,  and  his  servant,  who  was  a  free¬ 
born  woman,  taken  from  Megalopolis  after  his 
wife’s  death,  offering,  as  usual,  to  do  the  serv¬ 
ice  he  needed  on  returning  from  war,  though 
he  was  very  thirsty,  he  refused  to  drink,  and 
though  very  weary  to  sit  down;  but  in  his 
corselet  as  he  was,  he  laid  his  arm  sideway 


668 

against  a  pillar,  and  leaning  his  forehead  upon 
his  elbow,  he  rested  his  body  a  little  while,  and 
ran  over  in  his  thoughts  all  the  courses  he 
could  take;  and  then  with  his  friends  set  out  at 
once  for  Gythium;  where,  finding  ships  which 
had  been  got  ready  for  this  very  purpose,  they 
embarked. 

Antigonus,  taking  the  city,  treated  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians  courteously,  and  in  no  way  offer¬ 
ing  any  insult  or  offence  to  the  dignity  of 
Sparta,  but  permitting  them  to  enjoy  their  own 
laws  and  polity,  and  sacrificing  to  the  gods,  dis¬ 
lodged  the  third  day.  For  he  heard  that  there 
was  a  great  war  in  Macedonia,  and  that  the 
country  was  devastated  by  the  barbarians.  Be¬ 
sides,  his  malady  had  now  thoroughly  settled 
into  a  consumption  and  continual  catarrh.  Yet 
he  still  kept  up,  and  managed  to  return  and 
deliver  his  country,  and  meet  there  a  most 
glorious  death,  in  a  great  defeat  and  vast 
slaughter  of  the  barbarians.  As  Phylarchus 
says,  and  as  is  probable  in  itself,  he  broke  a 
blood-vessel  by  shouting  in  the  battle  itself.  In 
the  schools  we  used  to  be  told  that,  after  the 
victory  was  won,  he  cried  out  for  joy,  “O  glori¬ 
ous  day!”  and  presently  bringing  up  a  quan¬ 
tity  of  blood,  fell  into  a  fever,  which  never  left 
him  till  his  death.  And  thus  much  concerning 
Antigonus. 

Cleomenes,  sailing  from  Cythera,  touched 
at  another  island  called  iEgialia,  whence  as  he 
was  about  to  depart  for  Cyrene,  one  of  his 
friends,  Therycion  by  name,  a  man  of  a  noble 
spirit  in  all  enterprises,  and  bold  and  lofty  in 
his  talk,  came  privately  to  him,  and  said  thus: 

‘'Sir,  death  in  battle,  which  is  the  most  glori¬ 
ous,  we  have  let  go;  though  all  heard  us  say 
that  Antigonus  should  never  tread  over  the 
King  of  Sparta,  unless  dead.  And  now  that 
course  which  is  next  in  honour  and  virtue  is 
presented  to  us.  Whither  do  we  madly  sail, 
flying  the  evil  which  is  near,  to  seek  that  which 
is  at  a  distance?  For  if  it  is  not  dishonourable 
for  the  race  of  Hercules  to  serve  the  successors 
of  Philip  and  Alexander,  we  shall  save  a  long 
voyage  by  delivering  ourselves  up  to  Antigo¬ 
nus,  who,  probably,  is  as  much  better  than 
Ptolemy,  as  the  Macedonians  are  better  than 
the  Egyptians;  but  if  we  think  it  mean  to  sub¬ 
mit  to  those  whose  arms  have  conquered  us, 
why  should  we  choose  him  for  our  master,  by 
whom  we  have  not  yet  been  beaten?  Is  it  to 
acknowledge  two  superiors  instead  of  one, 
whilst  we  run  away  from  Antigonus,  and 
flatter  Ptolemy?  Or,  is  it  for  vour  mother’s 
sake  that  you  retreat  to  Egypt?  It  will  indeed 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

be  a  very  fine  and  very  desirable  sight  for  her 
to  show  her  son  to  Ptolemy’s  women,  now 
changed  from  a  prince  into  an  exile  and  a 
slave.  Are  we  not  still  masters  of  our  own 
swords?  And  whilst  we  have  Laconia  in  view, 
shall  we  not  here  free  ourselves  from  this  dis¬ 
graceful  misery,  and  clear  ourselves  to  those 
who  at  Sellasia  died  for  the  honour  and  de¬ 
fence  of  Sparta?  Or,  shall  we  sit  lazily  in 
Egypt,  inquiring  what  news  from  Sparta,  and 
whom  Antigonus  hath  been  pleased  to  make 
governor  of  Lacedaemon?” 

Thus  spoke  Therycion;  and  this  was  Cleo- 
menes’s  reply:  “By  seeking  death,  you  coward, 
the  most  easy  and  most  ready  refuge,  you 
fancy  that  you  shall  appear  courageous  and 
brave,  though  this  flight  is  baser  than  the  for¬ 
mer.  Better  men  than  we  have  given  way  to 
their  enemies,  having  been  betrayed  by  for¬ 
tune,  or  oppressed  by  multitude;  but  he  that 
gives  way  under  labour  or  distresses,  under  the 
ill-opinions  or  reports  of  men,  yields  the  vic¬ 
tory  of  his  own  effeminacy.  For  a  voluntary 
death  ought  not  to  be  chosen  as  a  relief  from 
action,  but  as  an  exemplary  action  itself;  and 
it  is  base  either  to  live  or  to  die  only  to  our¬ 
selves.  That  death  to  which  you  now  invite  us, 
is  proposed  only  as  a  release  from  our  present 
miseries,  but  carries  nothing  of  nobleness  or 
profit  in  it.  And  I  think  it  becomes  both  me 
and  you  not  to  despair  of  our  country;  but 
when  there  are  no  hopes  of  that  left,  those  that 
have  an  inclination  may  quickly  die.” 

To  this  Therycion  returned  no  answer;  but 
as  soon  as  he  had  an  opportunity  of  leaving 
Cleomenes ’s  company,  went  aside  on  the  sea¬ 
shore,  and  ran  himself  through. 

But  Cleomenes  sailed  from  /Egialia,  landed 
in  Libya,  and,  being  honourably  conducted 
through  the  king’s  country,  came  to  Alexan¬ 
dria.  When  he  was  first  brought  to  Ptolemy, 
no  more  than  common  civilities  and  usual  at¬ 
tentions  were  paid  him;  but  when,  upon  trial, 
he  found  him  a  man  of  deep  sense  and  great 
reason,  and  that  his  plain  Laconic  way  of  con¬ 
versation  carried  with  it  a  noble  and  becom- 
ing  grace,  that  he  did  nothing  unbecoming  his 
birth,  nor  bent  under  fortune,  and  was  evi¬ 
dently  a  more  faithful  counsellor  than  those 
who  made  it  their  business  to  please  and  flat¬ 
ter,  he  was  ashamed,  and  repented  that  he 
had  neglected  so  great  a  man,  and  suffered 
Antigonus  to  get  so  much  power  and  reputa¬ 
tion  by  ruining  him.  He  now  offered  him 
many  marks  of  respect  and  kindness,  and 
gave  him  hopes  that  he  would  furnish  him 


CLEOMENES 

with  ships  and  money  to  return  to  Greece, 
and  would  reinstate  him  in  his  kingdom.  He 
granted  him  a  yearly  pension  of  four-and- 
twenty  talents;  a  little  part  of  which  sum  sup¬ 
plied  his  and  his  friends’  thrifty  temperance, 
and  the  rest  was  employed  in  doing  good 
offices  to,  and  in  relieving  the  necessities  of, 
the  refugees  that  had  fled  from  Greece,  and  re¬ 
tired  into  Egypt. 

But  the  elder  Ptolemy  dying  before  Cleo¬ 
menes ’s  affairs  had  received  a  full  dispatch, 
and  the  successor  being  a  loose,  voluptuous, 
and  effeminate  prince,  under  the  power  of  his 
pleasures  and  his  women,  his  business  was 
neglected.  For  the  king  was  so  besotted  with 
his  women  and  his  wine,  that  the  employ¬ 
ments  of  his  most  busy  and  serious  hours  con¬ 
sisted  at  the  utmost  in  celebrating  religious 
feasts  in  his  palace,  carrying  a  timbrel,  and 
taking  part  in  the  show;  while  the  greatest 
affairs  of  state  were  managed  by  Agathoclea, 
the  king’s  mistress,  her  mother,  and  the  pimp 
CEnanthes.  At  the  first,  indeed,  they  seemed  to 
stand  in  need  of  Cleomenes;  for  Ptolemy,  be¬ 
ing  afraid  of  his  brother  Magas,  who  by  his 
mother’s  means  had  a  great  interest  among 
the  soldiers,  gave  Cleomenes  a  place  in  his 
secret  councils,  and  acquainted  him  with  the 
design  of  taking  off  his  brother.  He,  though 
all  were  for  it,  declared  his  opinion  to  the  con¬ 
trary,  saying,  “The  king,  if  it  were  possible, 
should  have  more  brothers  for  the  better  se¬ 
curity  and  stability  of  his  affairs.” 

And  Sosibius,  the  greatest  favourite,  reply¬ 
ing  that  they  were  not  secure  of  the  mercen¬ 
aries  whilst  Magas  was  alive,  Cleomenes  re¬ 
turned,  that  he  need  not  trouble  himself  about 
that  matter;  for  amongst  the  mercenaries  there 
were  above  three  thousand  Peloponnesians, 
who  were  his  fast  friends,  and  whom  he 
could  command  at  any  time  with  a  nod.  This 
discourse  made  Cleomenes  for  the  present  to 
be  looked  upon  as  a  man  of  great  influence 
and  assured  fidelity;  but  afterwards,  Ptolemy’s 
weakness  increasing  his  fear,  and  he,  as  it  usu¬ 
ally  happens,  where  there  is  no  judgment  and 
wisdom,  placing  his  security  in  general  dis¬ 
trust  and  suspicion,  it  rendered  Cleomenes 
suspected  to  the  courtiers,  as  having  too  much 
interest  with  the  mercenaries;  and  many  had 
this  saying  in  their  mouths,  that  he  was  a 
lion  amidst  a  flock  of  sheep.  For,  in  fact,  such 
he  seemed  to  be  in  the  court,  quietly  watching 
and  keeping  his  eye  upon  all  that  went  on. 

He  therefore  gave  up  all  thought  of  asking 
for  ships  and  soldiers  from  the  king.  But  re- 


669 

ceiving  news  that  Antigonus  was  dead,  that 
the  Achaeans  were  engaged  in  a  war  with  the 
^Etolians,  and  that  the  affairs  of  Peloponnesus, 
being  now  in  very  great  distraction  and  dis¬ 
order,  required  and  invited  his  assistance,  he 
desired  leave  to  depart  only  with  his  friends, 
but  could  not  obtain  that,  the  king  not  so  much 
as  hearing  his  petition,  being  shut  up  amongst 
his  women,  and  wasting  his  hours  in  bacchana¬ 
lian  rites  and  drinking  parties.  But  Sosibius,  the 
chief  minister  and  counsellor  of  state,  thought 
that  Cleomenes,  being  detained  against  his 
will,  would  grow  ungovernable  and  danger¬ 
ous,  and  yet  that  it  was  not  safe  to  let  him  go, 
being  an  aspiring,  daring  man,  and  well  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  diseases  and  weakness  of  the 
kingdom.  For  neither  could  presents  and  gifts 
conciliate  or  content  him;  but  even  as  Apis, 
while  living  in  all  possible  plenty  and  appar¬ 
ent  delight,  yet  desires  to  live  as  nature  would 
provide  for  him,  to  range  at  liberty,  and  bound 
about  the  fields,  and  can  scarce  endure  to  be 
under  the  priests’  keeping,  so  he  could  not 
brook  their  courtship  and  soft  entertainment, 
but  sat  like  Achilles — 

and  languished  far, 

Desiring  battle  and  the  shout  of  war. 

His  affairs  standing  in  this  condition,  Nica- 
goras,  the  Messenian,  came  to  Alexandria,  a 
man  that  deeply  hated  Cleomenes,  yet  pre¬ 
tended  to  be  his  friend;  for  he  had  formerly 
sold  Cleomenes  a  fair  estate,  but  never  received 
the  money  because  Cleomenes  was  either  un¬ 
able,  as  it  may  be,  or  else,  by  reason  of  his 
engagement  in  the  wars  and  other  distractions, 
had  no  opportunity  to  pay  him.  Cleomenes, 
seeing  him  landing,  for  he  was  then  walking 
upon  the  quay,  kindly  saluted  him,  and  asked 
what  business  brought  him  to  Egypt.  Nicagor- 
as  returned  his  compliment,  and  told  him  that 
he  came  to  bring  some  excellent  war-horses  to 
the  king.  And  Cleomenes,  with  a  smile,  sub¬ 
joined,  “I  could  wish  you  had  rather  brought 
young  boys  and  music-girls;  for  those  now  are 
the  king’s  chief  occupation.” 

Nicagoras  at  the  moment  smiled  at  the  con¬ 
ceit,  but  a  few  days  after,  he  put  Cleomenes  in 
mind  of  the  estate  that  he  had  bought  of  him, 
and  desired  his  money,  protesting  that  he 
would  not  have  troubled  him,  if  his  merchan¬ 
dise  had  turned  out  as  profitable  as  he  had 
thought  it  would.  Cleomenes  replied,  that  he 
had  nothing  left  of  all  that  had  been  given 
him.  At  which  answer,  Nicagoras,  being  net¬ 
tled,  told  Sosibius  Cleomenes’s  scoff  upon  the 
king.  He  was  delighted  to  receive  the  infor- 


670 

mation;  but  desiring  to  have  some  greater  rea¬ 
son  to  excite  the  king  against  Cleomenes,  per¬ 
suaded  Nicagoras  to  leave  a  letter  written 
against  Cleomenes,  importing  that  he  had  a 
design,  if  he  could  have  gotten  ships  and  sol¬ 
diers,  to  surprise  Cyrene.  Nicagoras  wrote  such 
a  letter,  and  left  Egypt.  Four  days  after,  Sosi- 
bius  brought  the  letter  to  Ptolemy,  pretend¬ 
ing  it  was  just  then  delivered  him,  and  excited 
the  young  man’s  fear  and  anger;  upon  which 
it  was  agreed  that  Cleomenes  should  be  in¬ 
vited  into  a  large  house,  and  treated  as  for¬ 
merly,  but  not  suffered  to  go  out  again. 

This  usage  was  grievous  to  Cleomenes,  and 
another  incident  that  occurred  made  him  feel 
his  hopes  to  be  yet  more  encirely  overcast. 
Ptolemy,  the  son  of  Chrysermas,  a  favourite  of 
the  king’s,  had  always  shown  civility  to  Cleo¬ 
menes;  there  was  a  considerable  intimacy  be¬ 
tween  them,  and  they  had  been  used  to  talk 
freely  together  about  the  state.  He,  upon  Cleo- 
menes’s  desire,  came  to  him,  and  spoke  to  him 
in  fair  terms,  softening  down  his  suspicions 
and  excusing  the  king’s  conduct.  But  as  he 
went  out  again,  not  knowing  that  Cleomenes 
followed  him  to  the  door,  he  severely  repri¬ 
manded  the  keepers  for  their  carelessness  in 
looking  after  “so  great  and  so  furious  a  wild 
beast.”  This  Cleomenes  himself  heard,  and 
retiring  before  Ptolemy  perceived  it,  told  his 
friends  what  had  been  said.  Upon  this  they 
cast  off  all  former  hopes  and  determined  for 
violent  proceedings,  resolving  to  be  revenged 
on  Ptolemy  for  his  base  and  unjust  dealing,  to 
have  satisfaction  for  the  affronts,  to  die  as  it 
became  Spartans,  and  not  stay  till,  like  fatted 
sacrifices,  they  were  butchered.  For  it  was  both 
grievous  and  dishonourable  for  Cleomenes, 
who  had  scorned  to  come  to  terms  with  Anti- 
gonus,  a  brave  warrior,  and  a  man  of  action,  to 
wait  an  effeminate  king’s  leisure,  till  he  should 
lay  aside  his  timbrel  and  end  his  dance,  and 
then  kill  him. 

These  courses  being  resolved  on,  and  Ptole¬ 
my  happening  at  the  same  time  to  make  a 
progress  to  Canopus,  they  first  spread  abroad 
a  report  that  his  freedom  was  ordered  by  the 
king,  and,  it  being  the  custom  for  the  king  to 
send  presents  and  an  entertainment  to  those 
whom  he  would  free,  Cleomenes’s  friends 
made  that  provision,  and  sent  it  into  the  pris¬ 
on,  thus  imposing  upon  the  keepers,  who 
thought  it  had  been  sent  by  the  king.  For  he 
sacrificed,  and  gave  them  large  portions,  and 
with  a  garland  upon  his  head,  feasted  and 
made  merry  with  his  friends. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

It  is  said  that  he  began  the  action  sooner 
than  he  designed,  having  understood  that  a 
servant  who  was  privy  to  the  plot  had  gone 
out  to  visit  a  mistress  that  he  loved.  This  made 
him  afraid  of  a  discovery;  and  therefore,  as 
soon  as  it  was  full  moon,  and  all  the  keepers 
sleeping  off  their  wine,  he  put  on  his  coat,  and 
opening  his  seam  to  bare  his  right  shoulder, 
with  his  drawn  sword  in  his  hand,  he  issued 
forth,  together  with  his  friends  provided  in 
the  same  manner,  making  thirteen  in  all.  One 
of  them,  by  name  Hippitas,  was  lame,  and 
followed  the  first  onset  very  well,  but  when 
he  presently  perceived  that  they  were  more 
slow  in  their  advances  for  his  sake,  he  de¬ 
sired  them  to  run  him  through,  and  not  ruin 
their  enterprise  by  staying  for  a  useless,  un¬ 
profitable  man.  By  chance  an  Alexandrian  was 
then  riding  by  the  door;  him  they  threw  off, 
and  setting  Hippitas  on  horseback,  ran  through 
the  streets  and  proclaimed  liberty  to  the  people. 

But  they,  it  seems,  had  courage  enough  to 
praise  and  admire  Cleomenes’s  daring,  but  not 
one  had  the  heart  to  follow  and  assist  him. 
Three  of  them  fell  on  Ptolemy,  the  son  of 
Chrysermas,  as  he  was  coming  out  of  the  pal¬ 
ace,  and  killed  him.  Another  Ptolemy,  the  offi¬ 
cer  in  charge  of  the  city,  advancing  against 
them  in  a  chariot,  they  set  upon,  dispersed  his 
guards  and  attendants,  and  pulling  him  out 
of  the  chariot,  killed  him  upon  the  place.  Then 
they  made  toward  the  castle,  designing  to 
break  open  the  prison,  release  those  who  were 
confined,  and  avail  themselves  of  their  num¬ 
bers;  but  the  keepers  were  too  quick  for  them, 
and  secured  the  passages.  Being  baffled  in  this 
attempt,  Cleomenes  with  his  company  roamed 
about  the  city,  none  joining  with  him,  but  all 
retreating  from  and  flying  his  approach.  There¬ 
fore,  despairing  of  success,  and  saying  to  his 
friends,  that  it  was  no  wonder  that  women 
ruled  over  men  that  were  afraid  of  liberty,  he 
bade  them  all  die  as  bravely  as  became  his  fol¬ 
lowers  and  their  own  past  actions. 

This  said,  Hippitas  was  first,  as  he  desired, 
run  through  by  one  of  the  younger  men,  and 
then  each  of  them  readily  and  resolutely  fell 
upon  his  own  sword,  except  Panteus,  the  same 
who  first  surprised  Megalopolis.  This  man,  be¬ 
ing  of  a  very  handsome  person,  and  a  great 
lover  of  the  Spartan  discipline,  the  king  had 
made  his  dearest  friend;  and  he  now  bade 
him,  when  he  had  seen  him  and  the  rest  fallen, 
die  by  their  example.  Panteus  walked  over 
them  as  they  lay,  and  pricked  every  one  with 
his  dagger,  to  try  whether  any  was  alive;  when 


TIBERIUS  GRACCHUS 

he  pricked  Cleomenes  in  the  ankle,  and  saw 
him  turn  upon  his  back,  he  kissed  him,  sat 
down  by  him,  and  when  he  was  quite  dead, 
covered  up  the  body,  and  then  killed  himself 
over  it. 

Thus  fell  Cleomenes,  after  the  life  which 
we  have  narrated,  having  been  King  of  Sparta 
sixteen  years.  The  news  of  their  fall  being 
noised  through  the  city,  Cratesiclea,  though 
a  woman  of  a  great  spirit,  could  not  bear  up 
against  the  weight  of  this  affliction;  but  em¬ 
bracing  Cleomenes’s  children,  broke  out  into 
lamentations.  But  the  eldest  boy,  none  suspect¬ 
ing  such  a  spirit  in  a  child,  threw  himself 
headlong  from  the  top  of  the  house.  He  was 
bruised  very  much,  but  not  killed  by  the  fall, 
and  was  taken  up  crying,  and  expressing  his 
resentment  for  not  being  permitted  to  destroy 
himself.  Ptolemy,  as  soon  as  an  account  of  the 
action  was  brought  him,  gave  order  that  Cleo¬ 
menes’s  body  should  be  flayed  and  hung  up, 
and  that  his  children,  mother,  and  the  women 
that  were  with  her,  should  be  killed. 

Amongst  these  was  Panteus’s  wife,  a  beauti¬ 
ful  and  noble-looking  woman,  who  had  been 
but  lately  married,  and  suffered  these  disasters 
in  the  height  of  her  love.  Her  parents  would 
not  have  her  embark  with  Panteus  so  shortly 
after  they  were  married,  though  she  eagerly 
desired  it,  but  shut  her  up,  and  kept  her  forci¬ 
bly  at  home.  But  a  few  days  after  she  procured 
a  horse  and  a  little  money,  and  escaping  by 
night,  made  speed  to  Taenarus,  where  she  em¬ 
barked  for  Egypt,  came  to  her  husband,  and 
with  him  cheerfully  endured  to  live  in  a  for¬ 
eign  country.  She  gave  her  hand  to  Cratesiclea, 
as  she  was  going  with  the  soldiers  to  execu¬ 
tion,  held  up  her  robe,  and  begged  her  to  be 
courageous;  who  of  herself  was  not  in  the  least 
afraid  of  death,  and  desired  nothing  else  but 
only  to  be  killed  before  the  children.  When 


671 

they  were  come  to  the  place  of  execution,  the 
children  were  first  killed  before  Cratesiclea’s 
eyes,  and  afterwards  she,  herself,  with  only 
these  words  in  her  mouth,  “O  children,  whith¬ 
er  are  you  gone?” 

But  Panteus’s  wife,  fastening  her  dress  close 
about  her,  and  being  a  strong  woman,  in  si¬ 
lence  and  perfect  composure,  looked  after 
every  one  that  was  slain,  and  laid  them  decent¬ 
ly  out  as  far  as  circumstances  would  permit; 
and  after  all  were  killed,  rearraying  her  dress, 
and  drawing  her  clothes  close  about  her,  suf¬ 
fering  none  to  come  near  or  be  an  eye-witness 
of  her  fall,  besides  the  executioner,  she  coura¬ 
geously  submitted  to  the  stroke,  and  wanted 
nobody  to  look  after  her  or  wind  her  up  after 
she  was  dead.  Thus  in  her  death  the  modesty 
of  her  mind  appeared,  and  set  that  guard  up¬ 
on  her  body  which  she  always  kept  when 
alive.  And  she,  in  the  declining  age  of  the 
Spartans,  showed  that  women  were  no  un¬ 
equal  rivals  of  the  men,  and  was  an  instance  of 
a  courage  superior  to  the  affronts  of  fortune. 

A  few  days  after,  those  that  watched  the 
hanging  body  of  Cleomenes,  saw  a  large  snake 
winding  about  his  head,  and  covering  his  face, 
so  that  no  bird  of  prey  would  fly  at  it.  This 
made  the  king  superstitiously  afraid,  and  set 
the  women  upon  several  expiations,  as  if  he 
had  been  some  extraordinary  being,  and  one 
beloved  by  the  gods,  that  had  been  slain.  And 
the  Alexandrians  made  processions  to  the 
place,  and  gave  Cleomenes  the  title  of  hero, 
and  son  of  the  gods,  till  the  philosophers  satis¬ 
fied  them  by  saying,  that  as  oxen  breed  bees, 
putrifying  horses  breed  wasps,  and  beetles  rise 
from  the  carcasses  of  dead  asses,  so  the  hu¬ 
mours  and  juices  of  the  marrow  of  a  man’s 
body,  coagulating,  produce  serpents.  And  this 
the  ancients  observing,  appropriate  a  serpent, 
rather  than  any  other  creature,  to  heroes. 


TIBERIUS  GRACCHUS 

I^3“I33  BC- 


Having  completed  the  first  two  narra¬ 
tives,  we  now  may  proceed  to  take  a 
view  of  misfortunes,  not  less  remark¬ 
able,  in  the  Roman  couple,  and  with  the  lives 
of  Agis  and  Cleomenes,  compare  these  of  Ti¬ 
berius  and  Caius.  They  were  the  sons  of  Tibe¬ 


rius  Gracchus,  who  though  he  had  been  once 
censor,  twice  consul,  and  twice  had  triumphed, 
yet  was  more  renowned  and  esteemed  for  his 
virtue  than  his  honours.  Upon  this  account, 
after  the  death  of  Scipio  who  overthrew  Han¬ 
nibal,  he  was  thought  worthy  to  match  with 


672 

his  daughter  Cornelia,  though  there  had  been 
no  friendship  or  familiarity  between  Scipio 
and  him,  but  rather  the  contrary.  There  is  a 
story  told  that  he  once  found  in  his  bed-cham¬ 
ber  a  couple  of  snakes,  and  that  the  soothsay¬ 
ers,  being  consulted  concerning  the  prodigy, 
advised  that  he  should  neither  kill  them  both 
nor  let  them  both  escape;  adding,  that  if  the 
male  serpent  was  killed,  Tiberius  should  die, 
and  if  the  female,  Cornelia.  And  that  there¬ 
fore  Tiberius,  who  extremely  loved  his  wife, 
and  thought,  besides,  that  it  was  much  more 
his  part,  who  was  an  old  man,  to  die,  than  it 
was  hers,  who  as  yet  was  but  a  young  woman, 
killed  the  male  serpent,  and  let  the  female  es¬ 
cape;  and  soon  after  himself  died,  leaving  be¬ 
hind  him  twelve  children  borne  to  him  by 
Cornelia. 

Cornelia,  taking  upon  herself  all  the  care  of 
the  household  and  the  education  of  her  chil¬ 
dren,  approved  herself  so  discreet  a  matron,  so 
affectionate  a  mother,  and  so  constant  and 
noble-spirited  a  widow,  that  Tiberius  seemed 
to  all  men  to  have  done  nothing  unreasonable 
in  choosing  to  die  for  such  a  woman;  who, 
when  King  Ptolemy  himself  proffered  her  his 
crown,  and  would  have  married  her,  refused 
it,  and  chose  rather  to  live  a  widow.  In  this 
state  she  continued,  and  lost  all  her  children, 
except  one  daughter,  who  was  married  to 
Scipio  the  younger,  and  two  sons  Tiberius  and 
Caius,  whose  lives  we  are  now  writing. 

These  she  brought  up  with  such  care,  that 
though  they  were  without  dispute  in  natural 
endowments  and  dispositions  the  first  among 
the  Romans  of  their  time,  yet  they  seemed  to 
owe  their  virtues  even  more  to  their  educa¬ 
tion  than  to  their  birth.  And  as  in  the  statues 
and  pictures  made  of  Castor  and  Pollux, 
though  the  brothers  resemble  one  another,  yet 
there  is  a  difference  to  be  perceived  in  their 
countenances,  between  the  one,  who  delighted 
in  the  cestus,  and  the  other,  that  was  famous 
in  the  course,  so  between  these  two  noble 
youths,  though  there  was  a  strong  general  like¬ 
ness  in  their  common  love  of  fortitude  and 
temperance,  in  their  liberality,  their  eloquence, 
and  their  greatness  of  mind,  yet  in  their  ac¬ 
tions  and  administrations  of  public  affairs,  a 
considerable  variation  showed  itself.  It  will  not 
be  amiss  before  we  proceed  to  mark  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  them. 

Tiberius,  in  the  form  and  expression  of  his 
countenance,  and  in  his  gesture  and  motion, 
was  gentle  and  composed;  but  Caius,  earnest 
and  vehement.  And  so  in  their  public  speeches 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

to  the  people,  the  one  spoke  in  a  quiet,  orderly 
manner,  standing  throughout  on  the  same 
spot;  the  other  would  walk  about  on  the 
hustings,  and  in  the  heat  of  his  orations  pull 
his  gown  off  his  shoulders,  and  was  the  first 
of  all  the  Romans  that  used  such  gestures;  as 
Cleon  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  orator 
among  the  Athenians  that  pulled  off  his  cloak 
and  smote  his  thigh,  when  addressing  the 
people.  Caius’s  oratory  was  impetuous  and 
passionate,  making  everything  tell  to  the 
utmost,  whereas  Tiberius  was  gentle  and 
persuasive,  awakening  emotions  of  pity.  His 
diction  was  pure  and  carefully  correct,  while 
that  of  Caius  was  vehement  and  rich.  So  like¬ 
wise  in  their  way  of  living  and  at  their  tables, 
Tiberius  was  frugal  and  plain,  Caius,  com¬ 
pared  with  other  men,  temperate  and  even 
austere,  but  contrasting  with  his  brother  in  a 
fondness  for  new  fashions  and  rarities,  as  ap¬ 
pears  in  Drusus’s  charge  against  him,  that  he 
had  bought  some  silver  dolphins,  to  the  value 
of  twelve  hundred  and  fifty  drachmas  for 
every  pound  weight. 

The  same  difference  that  appeared  in  their 
diction  was  observable  also  in  their  tempers. 
The  one  was  mild  and  reasonable,  the  other 
rough  and  passionate,  and  to  that  degree,  that 
often,  in  the  midst  of  speaking,  he  was  so  hur¬ 
ried  away  by  his  passion  against  his  judgment, 
that  his  voice  lost  its  tone,  and  he  began  to 
pass  into  mere  abusive  talking,  spoiling  his 
whole  speech.  As  a  remedy  to  this  excess,  he 
made  use  of  an  ingenious  servant  of  his,  one 
Licinius,  who  stood  constantly  behind  him 
with  a  sort  of  pitchpipe,  or  instrument  to  regu¬ 
late  the  voice  by,  and  whenever  he  perceived 
his  master’s  tone  alter  and  break  with  anger, 
he  struck  a  soft  note  with  his  pipe,  on  hear¬ 
ing  which  Caius  immediately  checked  the 
vehemence  of  his  passion  and  his  voice,  grew 
quieter,  and  allowed  himself  to  be  recalled  to 
temper.  Such  are  the  differences  between  the 
two  brothers;  but  their  valour  in  war  against 
their  country’s  enemies,  their  justice  in  the 
government  of  its  subjects,  their  care  and  in¬ 
dustry  in  office,  and  their  self-command  in  all 
that  regarded  their  pleasures,  were  equally  re¬ 
markable  in  both. 

Tiberius  was  the  elder  by  nine  years;  owing 
to  which  their  actions  as  public  men  were  di¬ 
vided  by  the  difference  of  the  times  in  which 
those  of  the  one  and  those  of  the  other  were 
performed.  And  one  of  the  principal  causes 
of  the  failure  of  their  enterprises  was  this 
interval  between  their  careers,  and  the  want  of 


TIBERIUS  GRACCHUS 

combination  of  their  efforts.  The  power  they 
would  have  exercised,  had  they  flourished 
both  together,  could  scarcely  have  failed  to 
overcome  all  resistance.  We  must  therefore 
give  an  account  of  each  of  them  singly,  and 
first  of  the  eldest. 

Tiberius,  immediately  on  his  attaining  man¬ 
hood,  had  such  a  reputation  that  he  was  ad¬ 
mitted  into  the  college  of  the  augurs,  and  that 
in  consideration  more  of  his  early  virtue  than 
of  his  noble  birth.  This  appeared  by  what  Ap- 
pius  Claudius  did,  who,  though  he  had  been 
consul  and  censor,  and  was  now  the  head  of 
the  Roman  senate,  and  had  the  highest  sense 
of  his  own  place  and  merit,  at  a  public  feast  of 
the  augurs,  addressed  himself  openly  to  Tibe¬ 
rius,  and  with  great  expressions  of  kindness, 
offered  him  his  daughter  in  marriage.  And 
when  Tiberius  gladly  accepted,  and  the  agree¬ 
ment  had  thus  been  completed,  Appius  return¬ 
ing  home,  no  sooner  had  reached  his  door,  but 
he  called  to  his  wife  and  cried  out  in  a  loud 
voice,  “O  Antistia,  I  have  contracted  our 
daughter  Claudia  to  a  husband.”  She,  being 
amazed,  answered,  “But  why  so  suddenly,  or 
what  means  this  haste?  Unless  you  have  pro¬ 
vided  Tiberius  Gracchus  for  her  husband.”  I 
am  not  ignorant  that  some  apply  this  story  to 
Tiberius,  the  father  of  the  Gracchi,  and  Scipio 
Africanus;  but  most  relate  it  as  we  have  done. 
And  Polybius  writes,  that  after  the  death  of 
Scipio  Africanus,  the  nearest  relations  of  Cor¬ 
nelia,  preferring  Tiberius  to  all  other  competi¬ 
tors,  gave  her  to  him  in  marriage,  not  hav¬ 
ing  been  engaged  or  promised  to  any  one  by 
her  father. 

This  young  Tiberius,  accordingly,  serving 
in  Africa  under  the  younger  Scipio,  who  had 
married  his  sister,  and  living  there  under 
the  same  tent  with  him,  soon  learned  to  esti¬ 
mate  the  noble  spirit  of  his  commander,  which 
was  so  fit  to  inspire  strong  feelings  of  emula¬ 
tion  in  virtue  and  desire  to  prove  merit  in 
action,  and  in  a  short  time  he  excelled  all 
the  young  men  of  the  army  in  obedience  and 
courage;  and  he  was  the  first  that  mounted  the 
enemy’s  wall,  as  Fannius  says,  who  writes  that 
he  himself  climbed  up  with  him,  and  was  par¬ 
taker  in  the  achievement.  He  was  regarded, 
while  he  continued  with  the  army,  with  great 
affection  and  left  behind  him  on  his  departure 
a  strong  desire  for  his  return. 

After  that  expedition,  being  chosen  paymas¬ 
ter,  it  was  his  fortune  to  serve  in  the  war 
against  the  Numantines,  under  the  command 
of  Caius  Mancinus,  the  consul,  a  person  of  no 


673 

bad  character,  but  the  most  unfortunate  of  all 
the  Roman  generals.  Notwithstanding,  amidst 
the  greatest  misfortunes,  and  in  the  most  un¬ 
successful  enterprises,  not  only  the  discretion 
and  valour  of  Tiberius,  but  also,  which  was 
still  more  to  be  admired,  the  great  respect 
and  honour  which  he  showed  for  his  general, 
were  most  eminently  remarkable;  though  the 
general  himself,  when  reduced  to  straits,  for¬ 
got  his  own  dignity  and  office.  For  being  beat¬ 
en  in  various  great  battles,  he  endeavoured  to 
dislodge  by  night  and  leave  his  camp;  which 
the  Numantines  perceiving,  immediately  pos¬ 
sessed  themselves  of  his  camp,  and  pursuing 
that  part  of  the  forces  which  was  in  flight, 
slew  those  that  were  in  the  rear,  hedged  the 
whole  army  in  on  every  side,  and  forced 
them  into  difficult  ground,  whence  there  could 
be  no  possibility  of  an  escape. 

Mancinus,  despairing  to  make  his  way 
through  by  force,  sent  a  messenger  to  desire 
a  truce  and  conditions  of  peace.  But  they  re¬ 
fused  to  give  their  confidence  to  any  one  ex¬ 
cept  Tiberius,  and  required  that  he  should  be 
sent  to  treat  with  them.  This  was  not  only  in 
regard  to  the  young  man’s  own  character,  for 
he  had  a  great  reputation  amongst  the  soldiers, 
but  also  in  remembrance  of  his  father  Tiberius, 
who,  in  his  command  against  the  Spaniards, 
had  reduced  great  numbers  of  them  to  sub¬ 
jection,  but  granted  a  peace  to  the  Numan¬ 
tines,  and  prevailed  upon  the  Romans  to  keep 
it  punctually  and  inviolably. 

Tiberius  was  accordingly  despatched  to  the 
enemy,  whom  he  persuaded  to  accept  of  sev¬ 
eral  conditions,  and  he  himself  complied  with 
others  and  by  this  means,  it  is  beyond  a  ques¬ 
tion,  that  he  saved  twenty  thousand  of  the 
Roman  citizens,  besides  attendants  and  camp 
followers.  However,  the  Numantines  retained 
possession  of  all  the  property  they  had  found 
and  plundered  in  the  encampment;  and 
amongst  other  things  were  Tiberius’s  books  of 
accounts,  containing  the  whole  transactions  of 
his  quaestorship,  which  he  was  extremely  anx¬ 
ious  to  recover.  And  therefore,  when  the  army 
were  already  upon  their  march,  he  returned  to 
Numantia,  accompanied  with  only  three  or 
four  of  his  friends;  and  making  his  application 
to  the  officers  of  the  Numantines,  he  entreated 
that  they  would  return  him  his  books,  lest  his 
enemies  should  have  it  in  their  power  to  re¬ 
proach  him  with  not  being  able  to  give  an  ac¬ 
count  of  the  moneys  intrusted  to  him. 

The  Numantines  joyfully  embraced  this  op¬ 
portunity  of  obliging  him,  and  invited  him 


674 

into  the  city;  as  he  stood  hesitating,  they  came 
up  and  took  him  by  the  hands,  and  begged 
that  he  would  no  longer  look  upon  them  as 
enemies,  but  believe  them  to  be  his  friends, 
and  treat  them  as  such.  Tiberius  thought  it 
well  to  consent,  desirous  as  he  was  to  have  his 
books  returned,  and  was  afraid  lest  he  should 
disoblige  them  by  showing  any  distrust.  As 
soon  as  he  entered  into  the  city,  they  first  of¬ 
fered  him  food,  and  made  every  kind  of  en¬ 
treaty  that  he  would  sit  down  and  eat  some¬ 
thing  in  their  company.  Afterwards  they  re¬ 
turned  his  books,  and  gave  him  the  liberty  to 
take  whatever  he  wished  for  in  the  remaining 
spoils.  He,  on  the  other  hand,  would  accept 
of  nothing  but  some  frankincense,  which  he 
used  in  his  public  sacrifices,  and  bidding  them 
farewell  with  every  expression  of  kindness, 
departed. 

When  he  returned  to  Rome,  he  found  the 
whole  transaction  censured  and  reproached,  as 
a  proceeding  that  was  base  and  scandalous  to 
the  Romans.  But  the  relations  and  friends  of 
the  soldiers,  forming  a  large  body  among  the 
people,  came  flocking  to  Tiberius,  whom  they 
acknowledged  as  the  preserver  of  so  many 
citizens,  imputing  to  the  general  all  the  mis¬ 
carriages  which  had  happened.  Those  who 
cried  out  against  what  had  been  done,  urged 
for  imitation  the  example  of  their  ancestors, 
who  stripped  and  handed  over  to  the  Samnites 
not  only  the  generals  who  had  consented  to 
the  terms  of  release,  but  also  all  the  quaestors, 
for  example,  and  tribunes,  who  had  in  any 
way  implicated  themselves  in  the  agreement, 
laying  the  guilt  of  perjury  and  breach  of  con¬ 
ditions  on  their  heads.  But,  in  this  affair,  the 
populace,  showing  an  extraordinary  kindness 
and  affection  for  Tiberius,  indeed  voted  that 
the  consul  should  be  stripped  and  put  in  irons, 
and  so  delivered  to  the  Numantines;  but,  for 
the  sake  of  Tiberius,  spared  all  the  other  offi¬ 
cers. 

It  may  be  probable,  also,  that  Scipio,  who  at 
that  time  was  the  greatest  and  most  powerful 
man  among  the  Romans,  contributed  to  save 
him,  though  indeed  he  was  also  censured  for 
not  protecting  Mancinus,  too,  and  that  he  did 
not  exert  himself  to  maintain  the  observance 
of  the  articles  of  peace  which  had  been  agreed 
upon  by  his  kinsman  and  friend  Tiberius.  But 
it  may  be  presumed  that  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  them  was  for  the  most  part  due  to 
ambitious  feelings,  and  to  the  friends  and 
reasoners  who  urged  on  Tiberius,  and,  as  it 
was,  it  never  amounted  to  anything  that  might 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

not  have  been  remedied,  or  that  was  really 
bad.  Nor  can  I  think  that  Tiberius  would  ever 
have  met  with  his  misfortunes,  if  Scipio  had 
been  concerned  in  dealing  with  his  measures; 
but  he  was  away  fighting  at  Numantia  when 
Tiberius,  upon  the  following  occasion,  first 
came  forward  as  a  legislator. 

Of  the  land  which  the  Romans  gained  by 
conquest  from  their  neighbours,  part  they  sold 
publicly,  and  turned  the  remainder  into  com¬ 
mon;  this  common  land  they  assigned  to  such 
of  the  citizens  as  were  poor  and  indigent,  for 
which  they  were  to  pay  only  a  small  acknowl¬ 
edgment  into  the  public  treasury.  But  when 
the  wealthy  men  began  to  offer  larger  rents, 
and  drive  the  poorer  people  out,  it  was  en¬ 
acted  by  law  that  no  person  whatever  should  | 
enjoy  more  than  five  hundred  acres  of  ground. 
This  act  for  some  time  checked  the  avarice  of 
the  richer,  and  was  of  great  assistance  to  the 
poorer  people,  who  retained  under  it  their 
respective  proportions  of  ground  which  had 
been  formerly  rented  by  them.  Afterwards 
the  rich  men  of  the  neighbourhood  contrived 
to  get  these  lands  again  into  their  possession, 
under  other  people’s  names,  and  at  last  would 
not  stick  to  claim  most  of  them  publicly  in 
their  own.  The  poor,  who  were  thus  deprived 
of  their  farms,  were  no  longer  either  ready, 
as  they  had  formerly  been,  to  serve  in  war  or 
careful  in  the  education  of  their  children;  in-  j 
somuch  that  in  a  short  time  there  were  com¬ 
paratively  few  freemen  remaining  in  all  Italy,  S 
which  swarmed  with  workhouses  full  of  for¬ 
eign-born  slaves.  These  the  rich  men  employed 
in  cultivating  their  ground  of  which  they  dis¬ 
possessed  the  citizens. 

Caius  Laelius,  the  intimate  friend  of  Scipio, 
undertook  to  reform  this  abuse;  but  meeting 
with  opposition  from  men  of  authority,  and 
fearing  a  disturbance,  he  soon  desisted,  and 
received  the  name  of  the  Wise  or  the  Prudent,  ! 
both  which  meanings  belong  to  the  Latin  j 
word  Sapiens.  But  Tiberius,  being  elected  trib¬ 
une  of  the  people,  entered  upon  that  design 
without  delay,  at  the  instigation,  as  is  most 
commonly  stated,  of  Diophanes,  the  rhetori¬ 
cian,  and  Blossius,  the  philosopher.  Diophanes 
was  a  refugee  from  Mitylene,  the  other  was 
an  Italian,  of  the  city  of  Cuma,  and  was  edu¬ 
cated  there  under  Antipater  of  Tarsus,  who  af¬ 
terwards  did  him  the  honour  to  dedicate  some 
of  his  philosophical  lectures  to  him. 

Some  have  also  charged  Cornelia,  the  moth¬ 
er  of  Tiberius,  with  contributing  towards  it, 
because  she  frequently  upbraided  her  sons,  that 


TIBERIUS  GRACCHUS 

the  Romans  as  yet  rather  called  her  the  daugh¬ 
ter  of  Scipio,  than  the  mother  of  the  Gracchi. 
Others  again  say  that  Spurius  Postumius  was 
the  chief  occasion.  He  was  a  man  of  the  same 
age  with  Tiberius,  and  his  rival  for  reputation 
as  a  public  speaker,  and  when  Tiberius,  at  his 
return  from  the  campaign,  found  him  to  have 
got  far  beyond  him  in  fame  and  influence,  and 
to  be  much  looked  up  to,  he  thought  to  outdo 
him  by  attempting  a  popular  enterprise  of 
this  difficulty  and  of  such  great  consequence. 
But  his  brother  Caius  has  left  it  us  in  writing, 
that  when  Tiberius  went  through  Tuscany  to 
Numantia,  and  found  the  country  almost  de¬ 
populated,  there  being  hardly  any  free  hus¬ 
bandmen  or  shepherds,  but  for  the  most  part 
only  barbarian,  imported  slaves,  he  then  first 
conceived  the  course  of  policy  which  in  the 
sequel  proved  so  fatal  to  his  family.  Though 
it  is  also  most  certain  that  the  people  them¬ 
selves  chiefly  excited  his  zeal  and  determina¬ 
tion  in  the  prosecution  of  it,  by  setting  up  writ¬ 
ings  upon  the  porches,  walls,  and  monuments, 
calling  upon  him  to  reinstate  the  poor  citizens 
in  their  former  possessions. 

However,  he  did  not  draw  up  his  law  with¬ 
out  the  advice  and  assistance  of  those  citizens 
that  were  then  most  eminent  for  their  virtue 
and  authority;  amongst  whom  were  Crassus, 
the  high-priest,  Mucius  Scaevola,  the  lawyer, 
who  at  that  time  was  consul,  and  Claudius  Ap- 
pius,  his  father-in-law.  Never  did  any  law  ap¬ 
pear  more  moderate  and  gentle,  especially 
being  enacted  against  such  great  oppression 
and  avarice.  For  they  who  ought  to  have  been 
severely  punished  for  transgressing  the  former 
laws,  and  should  at  least  have  lost  all  their 
titles  to  such  lands  which  they  had  unjustly 
usurped,  were  notwithstanding  to  receive  a 
price  for  quitting  their  unlawful  claims,  and 
giving  up  their  lands  to  those  fit  owners  who 
stood  in  need  of  help.  But  though  this  refor¬ 
mation  was  managed  with  so  much  tender¬ 
ness  that,  all  the  former  transactions  being 
passed  over,  the  people  were  only  thankful 
to  prevent  abuses  of  the  like  nature  for  the  fu¬ 
ture,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  the  moneyed  men, 
and  those  of  great  estates,  were  exasperated, 
through  their  covetous  feelings  against  the  law 
itself,  and  against  the  lawgiver,  through  an¬ 
ger  and  party-spirit.  They  therefore  endeavour¬ 
ed  to  seduce  the  people,  declaring  that  Tiberi¬ 
us  was  designing  a  general  redivision  of  lands, 
to  overthrow  the  government,  and  put  all 
things  into  confusion. 

But  they  had  no  success.  For  Tiberius,  main- 


675 

taining  an  honourable  and  just  cause,  and  pos¬ 
sessed  of  eloquence  sufficient  to  have  made  a 
less  creditable  action  appear  plausible,  was  no 
safe  or  easy  antagonist,  when,  with  the  people 
crowding  around  the  hustings,  he  took  his 
place,  and  spoke  in  behalf  of  the  poor.  “The 
savage  beasts,”  said  he,  “in  Italy,  have  their 
particular  dens,  they  have  their  places  of  re¬ 
pose  and  refuge;  but  the  men  who  bear  arms, 
and  expose  their  lives  for  the  safety  of  their 
country,  enjoy  in  the  meantime  nothing  more 
in  it  but  the  air  and  light;  and,  having  no 
houses  or  settlements  of  their  own,  are  con¬ 
strained  to  wander  from  place  to  place  with 
their  wives  and  children.”  He  told  them  that 
the  commanders  were  guilty  of  a  ridiculous 
error,  when,  at  the  head  of  their  armies,  they 
exhorted  the  common  soldiers  to  fight  for 
their  sepulchres  and  altars;  when  not  any 
amongst  so  many  Romans  is  possessed  of  either 
altar  or  monument,  neither  have  they  any 
houses  of  their  own,  or  hearths  of  their  ances¬ 
tors  to  defend.  They  fought  indeed  and  were 
slain,  but  it  was  to  maintain  the  luxury  and 
the  wealth  of  other  men.  They  were  styled 
the  masters  of  the  world,  but  in  the  meantime 
had  not  one  foot  of  ground  which  they  could 
call  their  own. 

An  harangue  of  this  nature,  spoken  to  an 
enthusiastic  and  sympathising  audience,  by 
a  person  of  commanding  spirit  and  genuine 
feelings,  no  adversaries  at  that  time  were  com¬ 
petent  to  oppose.  Forbearing,  therefore,  all  dis¬ 
cussion  and  debate,  they  addressed  themselves 
to  Marcus  Octavius,  his  fellow-tribune,  who 
being  a  young  man  of  a  steady,  orderly  char¬ 
acter,  and  an  intimate  friend  of  Tiberius,  upon 
this  account  declined  at  first  the  task  of  op¬ 
posing  him;  but  at  length,  over-persuaded 
with  the  repeated  importunities  of  numerous 
considerable  persons,  he  was  prevailed  upon 
to  do  so,  and  hindered  the  passing  of  the  law; 
it  being  the  rule  that  any  tribune  has  a  power 
to  hinder  an  act,  and  that  all  the  rest  can  effect 
nothing,  if  only  one  of  them  dissents. 

Tiberius,  irritated  at  these  proceedings,  pres¬ 
ently  laid  aside  this  milder  bill,  but  at  the 
same  time  preferred  another;  which,  as  it  was 
more  grateful  to  the  common  people,  so  it 
was  much  more  severe  against  the  wrongdoers, 
commanding  them  to  make  an  immediate  sur¬ 
render  of  all  lands  which,  contrary  to  former 
laws,  had  come  into  their  possession.  Hence 
there  arose  daily  contentions  between  him 
and  Octavius  in  their  orations.  However, 
though  they  expressed  themselves  with  the 


676 

utmost  heat  and  determination,  they  yet  were 
never  known  to  descend  to  any  personal  re¬ 
proaches,  or  in  their  passion  to  let  slip  any 
indecent  expressions,  so  as  to  derogate  from 
one  another. 

For  not  alone — 

In  retellings  and  Bacchic  play, 

but  also  in  contentions  and  political  animosi¬ 
ties,  a  noble  nature  and  a  temperate  education 
stay  and  compose  the  mind.  Observing  that 
Octavius  himself  was  an  offender  against  this 
law,  and  detained  a  great  quantity  of  ground 
from  the  commonalty,  Tiberius  desired  him  to 
forbear  opposing  him  any  further,  and  prof¬ 
fered,  for  the  public  good,  though  he  himself 
had  but  an  indifferent  estate,  to  pay  a  price 
for  Octavius’s  share  at  his  own  cost  and 
charges.  But  upon  the  refusal  of  this  proffer 
by  Octavius,  he  then  interposed  an  edict,  pro¬ 
hibiting  all  magistrates  to  exercise  their  re¬ 
spective  functions,  till  such  time  as  the  law 
was  either  ratified  or  rejected  by  public  votes. 
He  further  sealed  up  the  gates  of  Saturn’s 
temple,  so  that  the  treasurers  could  neither 
take  any  money  out  from  thence,  nor  put 
any  in.  He  threatened  to  impose  a  severe  fine 
upon  those  of  the  praetors  who  presumed  to 
disobey  his  commands,  insomuch  that  all  the 
officers,  for  fear  of  this  penalty,  intermitted 
the  exercise  of  their  several  jurisdictions.  Upon 
this  the  rich  proprietors  put  themselves  into 
mourning,  and  went  up  and  down  melancholy 
and  dejected;  they  entered  also  into  a  con¬ 
spiracy  against  Tiberius,  and  procured  men 
to  murder  him;  so  that  he  also,  with  all  men’s 
knowledge,  whenever  he  went  abroad,  took 
with  him  a  sword-staff,  such  as  robbers  use, 
called  in  Latin  a  dolo. 

When  the  day  appointed  was  come,  and  the 
people  summoned  to  give  their  votes,  the  rich 
men  seized  upon  the  voting  urns  and  carried 
them  away  by  force;  thus  all  things  were  in 
confusion.  But  when  Tiberius’s  party  appeared 
strong  enough  to  oppose  the  contrary  faction, 
and  drew  together  in  a  body,  with  the  resolu¬ 
tion  to  do  so,  Manlius  and  Fulvius,  two  of  the 
consular  quality,  threw  themselves  before  Ti¬ 
berius,  took  him  by  the  hand,  and,  with  tears 
in  their  eyes,  begged  of  him  to  desist.  Tiberius, 
considering  the  mischiefs  that  were  all  but 
now  occurring,  and  having  a  great  respect  for 
two  such  eminent  persons,  demanded  of  them 
what  they  would  advise  him  to  do.  They  ac¬ 
knowledged  themselves  unfit  to  advise  in  a 
matter  of  so  great  importance,  but  earnestly  en- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

treated  him  to  leave  it  to  the  determination  of 
the  senate.  But  when  the  senate  assembled, 
and  could  not  bring  the  business  to  any  re¬ 
sult,  through  the  prevalence  of  the  rich  fac¬ 
tion,  he  then  was  driven  to  a  course  neither 
legal  nor  fair,  and  proposed  to  deprive  Octavi¬ 
us  of  his  tribuneship,  it  being  impossible  for 
him  in  any  other  way  to  get  the  law  brought 
to  the  vote. 

At  first  he  addressed  Octavius  publicly,  with 
entreaties  couched  in  the  kindest  terms,  and 
taking  him  by  his  hands,  besought  him,  that 
now,  in  the  presence  of  all  the  people,  he 
would  take  this  opportunity  to  oblige  them,  in 
granting  only  that  request  which  was  in  it¬ 
self  so  just  and  reasonable,  being  but  a  small 
recompense  in  regard  of  those  many  dangers 
and  hardships  which  they  had  undergone  for 
the  public  safety.  Octavius,  however,  would  by 
no  means  be  persuaded  to  compliance;  upon 
which  Tiberius  declared  openly,  that,  seeing 
they  two  were  united  in  the  same  office,  and  of 
equal  authority,  it  would  be  a  difficult  matter 
to  compose  their  difference  on  so  weighty  a 
matter  without  a  civil  war;  and  that  the  only 
remedy  which  he  knew  must  be  the  deposing 
one  of  them  from  his  office.  He  desired,  there¬ 
fore,  that  Octavius  would  summon  the  people 
to  pass  their  verdict  upon  him  first,  averring 
that  he  would  willingly  relinquish  his  author¬ 
ity  if  the  citizens  desired  it.  Octavius  refused; 
and  Tiberius  then  said  he  would  himself  put 
to  the  people  the  question  of  Octavius’s  depo¬ 
sition,  if  upon  mature  deliberation  he  did  not 
alter  his  mind,  and  after  this  declaration  he  ad¬ 
journed  the  assembly  till  the  next  day. 

When  the  people  were  met  together  again, 
Tiberius  placed  himself  in  the  rostra,  and  en¬ 
deavoured  a  second  time  to  persuade  Octavius. 
But  all  being  to  no  purpose,  he  referred  the 
whole  matter  to  the  people,  calling  on  them 
to  vote  at  once,  whether  Octavius  should  be 
deposed  or  not;  and  when  seventeen  of  the 
thirty-five  tribes  had  already  voted  against  him, 
and  there  wanted  only  the  votes  of  one  tribe 
more  for  his  final  deprivation,  Tiberius  put  a 
short  stop  to  the  proceedings,  and  once  more 
renewed  his  importunities;  he  embraced  and 
kissed  him  before  all  the  assembly,  begging 
with  all  the  earnestness  imaginable,  that  he 
would  neither  suffer  himself  to  incur  the  dis¬ 
honour,  nor  him  to  be  reputed  the  author  and 
promoter  of  so  odious  a  measure.  Octavius, 
we  are  told,  did  seem  a  little  softened  and 
moved  with  these  entreaties;  his  eyes  filled 
with  tears,  and  he  continued  silent  for  a  con- 


TIBERIUS  GRACCHUS 

siderable  time.  But  presently  looking  -towards 
the  rich  men  and  proprietors  of  estates,  who 
stood  gathered  in  a  body  together,  partly  for 
shame,  and  partly  for  fear  of  disgracing  him¬ 
self  with  them,  he  boldly  bade  Tiberius  use 
any  severity  he  pleased. 

The  law  for  his  deprivation  being  thus 
voted,  Tiberius  ordered  one  of  his  servants, 
whom  he  had  made  a  freeman,  to  remove 
Octavius  from  the  rostra,  employing  his  own 
domestic  freed  servants  in  the  stead  of  the 
public  officers.  And  it  made  the  action  seem 
all  the  sadder,  that  Octavius  was  dragged  out 
in  such  an  ignominious  manner.  The  people 
immediately  assaulted  him,  whilst  the  rich  men 
ran  in  to  his  assistance.  Octavius,  with  some 
difficulty,  was  snatched  away  and  safely  con¬ 
veyed  out  of  the  crowd;  though  a  trusty  ser¬ 
vant  of  his,  who  had  placed  himself  in  front  of 
his  master  that  he  might  assist  his  escape,  in 
keeping  off  the  multitude,  had  his  eyes  struck 
out,  much  to  the  displeasure  of  Tiberius,  who 
ran  with  all  haste,  when  he  perceived  the  dis¬ 
turbance,  to  appease  the  rioters. 

This  being  done,  the  law  concerning  the 
lands  was  ratified  and  confirmed,  and  three 
commissioners  were  appointed,  to  make  a  sur¬ 
vey  of  the  grounds,  and  see  the  same  equally 
divided.  These  were  Tiberius  himself,  Claudi¬ 
us  Appius,  his  father-in-law,  and  his  brother, 
Caius  Gracchus,  who  at  this  time  was  not  at 
Rome,  but  in  the  army  under  the  command 
of  Scipio  Africanus  before  Numantia.  These 
things  were  transacted  by  Tiberius  without 
any  disturbance,  none  daring  to  offer  any  re¬ 
sistance  to  him;  besides  which,  he  gave  the  ap¬ 
pointment  as  tribune  in  Octavius’s  place,  not 
to  any  person  of  distinction,  but  to  a  certain 
Mucius,  one  of  his  own  clients. 

The  great  men  of  the  city  were  therefore 
utterly  offended,  and,  fearing  lest  he  grew  yet 
more  popular,  they  took  all  opportunities  of 
affronting  him  publicly  in  the  senate  house. 
For  when  he  requested,  as  was  usual,  to  have 
a  tent  provided  at  the  public  charge  for  his 
use,  while  dividing  the  lands,  though  it  was  a 
favour  commonly  granted  to  persons  employed 
in  business  of  much  less  importance,  it  was 
peremptorily  refused  to  him;  and  the  allow¬ 
ance  made  him  for  his  daily  expenses  was 
fixed  to  nine  obols  only.  The  chief  promoter  of 
these  affronts  was  Publius  Nasica,  who  openly 
abandoned  himself  to  his  feelings  of  hatred 
against  Tiberius,  being  a  large  holder  of  the 
public  lands,  and  not  a  little  resenting  now 
to  be  turned  out  of  them  by  force. 


677 

The  people,  on  the  other  hand,  were  still 
more  and  more  excited,  insomuch  that  a  little 
after  this,  it  happening  that  one  of  Tiberius’s 
friends  died  suddenly,  and  his  body  being 
marked  with  malignant-looking  spots,  they 
ran,  in  a  tumultuous  manner,  to  his  funeral, 
crying  aloud  that  the  man  was  poisoned.  They 
took  the  bier  upon  their  shoulders,  and  stood 
over  it,  while  it  was  placed  on  the  pile,  and 
really  seemed  to  have  fair  grounds  for  their 
suspicion  of  foul  play.  For  the  body  burst  open, 
and  such  a  quantity  of  corrupt  humours  is¬ 
sued  out,  that  the  funeral  fire  was  extinguish¬ 
ed,  and  when  it  was  again  kindled,  the  wood 
still  would  not  burn;  insomuch  that  they  were 
constrained  to  carry  the  corpse  to  another 
place,  where  with  much  difficulty  it  took  fire. 
Besides  this,  Tiberius,  that  he  might  incense 
the  people  yet  more,  put  himself  into  mourn¬ 
ing,  brought  his  children  amongst  the  crowd, 
and  entreated  the  people  to  provide  for  them 
and  their  mother,  as  if  he  now  despaired  of 
his  own  security. 

About  this  time  king  Attalus,  surnamed 
Philometor  died,  and  Eudemus,  a  Perga- 
menian,  brought  his  last  will  to  Rome,  by 
which  he  had  made  the  Roman  people  his 
heirs.  Tiberius,  to  please  the  people,  immedi¬ 
ately  proposed  making  a  law,  that  all  the 
money  which  Attalus  left  should  be  distrib¬ 
uted  amongst  such  poor  citizens  as  were  to  be 
sharers  of  the  public  lands,  for  the  better  ena¬ 
bling  them  to  proceed  in  stocking  and  cultivat¬ 
ing  their  ground;  and  as  for  the  cities  that 
were  in  the  territories  of  Attalus,  he  declared 
that  the  disposal  of  them  did  not  at  all  belong 
to  the  senate,  but  to  the  people,  and  that  he 
himself  would  ask  their  pleasure  herein. 

By  this  he  offended  the  senate  more  than 
ever  he  had  done  before,  and  Pompeius  stood 
up  and  acquainted  them  that  he  was  the  next 
neighbour  to  Tiberius,  and  so  had  the  opportu¬ 
nity  of  knowing  that  Eudemus,  the  Pergame- 
nian,  had  presented  Tiberius  with  a  royal  dia¬ 
dem  and  a  purple  robe,  as  before  long  he  was 
to  be  king  of  Rome.  Quintus  Metellus  also  up¬ 
braided  him,  saying,  that  when  his  father  was 
censor,  the  Romans,  whenever  he  happened  to 
be  going  home  from  a  supper,  used  to  put  out 
all  their  lights,  lest  they  should  be  seen  to  have 
indulged  themselves  in  feasting  and  drinking 
at  unseasonable  hours,  whereas  now  the  most 
indigent  and  audacious  of  the  people  were 
found  with  their  torches  at  night,  following 
Tiberius  home. 

Titus  Annius,  a  man  of  no  great  repute  for 


678 

either  justice  or  temperance,  but  famous  for  his 
skill  in  putting  and  answering  questions,  chal¬ 
lenged  Tiberius  to  the  proof  by  wager,  declar¬ 
ing  him  to  have  deposed  a  magistrate  who  by 
law  was  sacred  and  inviolable.  Loud  clamour 
ensued,  and  Tiberius,  quitting  the  senate  hast¬ 
ily,  called  together  the  people,  and  summon¬ 
ing  Annius  to  appear,  was  proceeding  to  ac¬ 
cuse  him.  But  Annius,  being  no  great  speaker, 
nor  of  any  repute  compared  to  him,  sheltered 
himself  in  his  own  particular  art,  and  desired 
that  he  might  propose  one  or  two  questions  to 
Tiberius  before  he  entered  upon  the  chief  ar¬ 
gument.  This  liberty  being  granted,  and  si¬ 
lence  proclaimed,  Annius  proposed  his  ques¬ 
tion.  “If  you/’  said  he,  “had  a  design  to  dis¬ 
grace  and  defame  me,  and  I  should  apply  my¬ 
self  to  one  of  your  colleagues  for  redress,  and 
he  should  come  forward  to  my  assistance, 
would  you  for  that  reason  fall  into  a  passion, 
and  depose  him?”  Tiberius,  they  say,  was  so 
much  disconcerted  at  this  question,  that, 
though  at  other  times  his  assurance  as  his  read¬ 
iness  of  speech  was  always  remarkable,  yet 
now  he  was  silent  and  made  no  reply. 

For  the  present  he  dismissed  the  assembly. 
But  beginning  to  understand  that  the  course 
he  had  taken  with  Octavius  had  created  of¬ 
fence  even  among  the  populace  as  well  as  the 
nobility,  because  the  dignity  of  the  tribunes 
seemed  to  be  violated,  which  had  always  con¬ 
tinued  till  that  day  sacred  and  honourable,  he 
made  a  speech  to  the  people  in  justification  of 
himself;  out  of  which  it  may  not  be  improper 
to  collect  some  particulars,  to  give  an  impres¬ 
sion  of  his  force  and  persuasiveness  in  speaking. 

“A  tribune,”  he  said,  “of  the  people,  is  sa¬ 
cred  indeed,  and  ought  to  be  inviolable,  be¬ 
cause  in  a  manner  consecrated  to  be  the  guar¬ 
dian  and  protector  of  them;  but  if  he  degener¬ 
ate  so  far  as  to  oppress  the  people,  abridge 
their  powers,  and  take  away  their  liberty  of 
voting,  he  stands  deprived  by  his  own  act  of 
honours  and  immunities,  by  the  neglect  of  the 
duty  for  which  the  honour  was  bestowed  upon 
him.  Otherwise  we  should  be  under  the  obli¬ 
gation  to  let  a  tribune  do  this  pleasure,  though 
he  should  proceed  to  destroy  the  capital  or  set 
fire  to  the  arsenal.  He  who  should  make  these 
attempts  would  be  a  bad  tribune.  He  who  as¬ 
sails  the  power  of  the  people  is  no  longer  a 
tribune  at  all.  Is  it  not  inconceivable  that  a 
tribune  should  have  power  to  imprison  a  con¬ 
sul,  and  the  people  have  no  authority  to  de¬ 
grade  him  when  he  uses  that  honour  which  he 
received  from  them,  to  their  detriment?  For 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  tribunes,  as  well  as  the  consuls,  hold  office 
by  the  people’s  votes. 

“The  kingly  government,  which  compre¬ 
hends  all  sorts  of  authority  in  itself  alone,  is 
moreover  elevated  by  the  greatest  and  most  re¬ 
ligious  solemnity  imaginable  into  a  condition 
of  sanctity.  But  the  citizens,  notwithstanding 
this,  deposed  Tarquin,  when  he  acted  wrong¬ 
fully;  and  for  the  crime  of  one  single  man,  the 
ancient  government  under  which  Rome  was 
built  was  abolished  for  ever.  What  is  there  in 
all  Rome  so  sacred  and  venerable  as  the  vestal 
virgins,  to  whose  care  alone  the  preservation 
of  the  eternal  fire  is  committed?  Yet  if  one  of 
these  transgress  she  is  buried  alive;  the  sanc¬ 
tity  which  for  the  gods’  sakes  is  allowed  them, 
is  forfeited  when  they  offend  against  the  gods. 
So  likewise  a  tribune  retains  not  his  inviola¬ 
bility,  which  for  the  people’s  sake  was  accord¬ 
ed  to  him,  when  he  offends  against  the  people, 
and  attacks  the  foundations  of  that  authority 
from  whence  he  derived  his  own.  We  esteem 
him  to  be  legally  chosen  tribune  who  is  elected 
only  by  the  majority  of  votes;  and  is  not  there¬ 
fore  the  same  person  much  more  lawfully  de¬ 
graded  when,  by  a  general  consent  of  them  all, 
they  agree  to  depose  him? 

“Nothing  is  so  sacred  as  religious  offerings; 
yet  the  people  were  never  prohibited  to  make 
use  of  them,  but  suffered  to  remove  and  carry 
them  wherever  they  pleased;  so  likewise,  as  it 
were  some  sacred  present,  they  have  lawful 
power  to  transfer  the  tribuneship  from  one 
man’s  hands  to  another’s.  Nor  can  that  author¬ 
ity  be  thought  inviolable  and  irremovable 
which  many  of  those  who  have  held  have  of 
their  own  act  surrendered  and  desired  to  be 
discharged  from.” 

These  were  the  principal  heads  of  Tiberius’s 
apology.  But  his  friends,  apprehending  the 
dangers  which  seemed  to  threaten  him,  and 
the  conspiracy  that  was  gathering  head  against 
him,  were  of  opinion  that  the  safest  way  would 
be  for  him  to  petition  that  he  might  be  contin¬ 
ued  tribune  for  the  year  ensuing.  Upon  this 
consideration  he  again  endeavoured  to  secure 
the  people’s  good-will  with  fresh  laws,  mak¬ 
ing  the  years  of  serving  in  the  war  fewer  than 
formerly,  granting  liberty  of  appeal  from  the 
judges  to  the  people,  and  joining  to  the  sena¬ 
tors,  who  were  judges  at  that  time,  an  equal 
number  of  citizens  of  the  horsemen’s  degree, 
endeavouring  as  much  as  in  him  to  lessen  the 
power  of  the  senate,  rather  from  passion  and 
partisanship  than  from  any  rational  regard  to 
equity  and  the  public  good.  And  when  it  came 


TIBERIUS  GRACCHUS 

to  the  question  whether  these  laws  should  be 
passed,  and  they  perceived  that  the  opposite 
party  were  strongest,  the  people  as  yet  being 
not  got  together  in  a  full  body,  they  began 
first  of  all  to  gain  time  by  speeches  in  accusa¬ 
tion  of  some  of  their  fellow-magistrates,  and 
at  length  adjourned  the  assembly  till  the  day 
following. 

Tiberius  then  went  down  into  the  market¬ 
place  amongst  the  people,  and  made  his  ad¬ 
dresses  to  them  humbly  and  with  tears  in  his 
eyes;  and  told  them  he  had  just  reason  to  sus¬ 
pect  that  his  adversaries  would  attempt  in  the 
night-time  to  break  open  his  house  and  mur¬ 
der  him.  This  worked  so  strongly  with  the 
multitude,  that  several  of  them  pitched  tents 
round  about  his  house,  and  kept  guard  all 
night  for  the  security  of  his  person.  By  break 
of  day  came  one  of  the  soothsayers,  who  prog¬ 
nosticate  good  or  bad  success  by  the  pecking  of 
fowls,  and  threw  them  something  to  eat.  The 
soothsayer  used  his  utmost  endeavours  to 
fright  the  fowls  out  of  their  coop;  but  none  of 
them  except  one  would  venture  out,  which 
fluttered  with  his  left  wing,  and  stretched  out 
his  leg,  and  ran  back  again  into  the  coop,  with¬ 
out  eating  anything.  This  put  Tiberius  in 
mind  of  another  ill-omen  which  had  formerly 
happened  to  him.  He  had  a  very  costly  head- 
piece,  which  he  made  use  of  when  he  engaged 
in  any  battle,  and  into  this  piece  of  armour 
two  serpents  crawled,  laid  eggs,  and  brought 
forth  young  ones. 

The  remembrance  of  which  made  Tiberius 
more  concerned  now  than  otherwise  he  would 
have  been.  However,  he  went  towards  the  cap- 
itol  as  soon  as  he  understood  that  the  people 
were  assembled  there;  but  before  he  got  out  of 
the  house  he  stumbled  upon  the  threshold  with 
such  violence,  that  he  broke  the  nail  of  his 
great  toe,  insomuch  that  blood  gushed  out  of 
his  shoes.  He  was  not  gone  very  far  before  he 
saw  two  ravens  fighting  on  the  top  of  a  house 
which  stood  on  his  left  hand  as  he  passed  along; 
and  though  he  was  surrounded  with  a  number 
of  people,  a  stone  struck  from  its  place  by  one 
of  the  ravens,  fell  just  at  his  foot.  This  even  the 
boldest  men  about  him  felt  as  check.  But  Blos- 
sius  of  Cuma,  who  was  present,  told  him  that 
it  would  be  a  shame  and  an  ignominious  thing 
for  Tiberius,  who  was  a  son  of  Gracchus,  the 
grandson  of  Scipio  Africanus,  and  the  protec¬ 
tor  of  the  Roman  people  to  refuse,  for  fear  of 
a  silly  bird,  to  answer  when  his  countrymen 
called  to  him;  and  that  his  adversaries  would 
represent  it  not  as  a  mere  matter  for  their  ridi- 


679 

cule,  but  would  declaim  about  it  to  the  people 
as  the  mark  of  a  tyrannical  temper,  which  felt 
a  pride  in  taking  liberties  with  the  people. 

At  the  same  time  several  messengers  came 
also  from  his  friends,  to  desire  his  presence  at 
the  capitol,  saying  that  all  things  went  there 
according  to  expectation.  And  indeed  Tibe¬ 
rius’s  first  entrance  there  was  in  every  way 
successful;  as  soon  as  ever  he  appeared,  the 
people  welcomed  him  with  loud  acclamations, 
and  as  he  went  up  to  his  place,  they  repeated 
their  expressions  of  joy,  and  gathered  in  a  body 
around  him,  so  that  no  one  who  was  not  well 
known  to  be  his  friend  might  approach.  Mu- 
cius  then  began  to  put  the  business  again  to 
the  vote;  but  nothing  could  be  performed  in 
the  usual  course  and  order,  because  of  the  dis¬ 
turbance  caused  by  those  who  were  on  the  out¬ 
side  of  the  crowd,  where  there  was  a  struggle 
going  on  with  those  of  the  opposite  party,  who 
were  pushing  on  and  trying  to  force  their  way 
in  and  establish  themselves  among  them. 

Whilst  things  were  in  this  confusion,  Fla¬ 
vius  Flaccus,  a  senator,  standing  in  a  place 
where  he  could  be  seen,  but  at  such  a  distance 
from  Tiberius  that  he  could  not  make  him 
hear,  signified  to  him  by  motions  of  his  hand, 
that  he  wished  to  impart  something  of  conse¬ 
quence  to  him  in  private.  Tiberius  ordered  the 
multitude  to  make  way  for  him,  by  which 
means,  though  not  without  some  difficulty, 
Flavius  got  to  him,  and  informed  him  that  the 
rich  men,  in  a  sitting  of  the  senate,  seeing  they 
could  not  prevail  upon  the  consul  to  espouse 
their  quarrel,  had  come  to  a  final  determina¬ 
tion  amongst  themselves  that  he  should  be  as¬ 
sassinated,  and  to  that  purpose  had  a  great 
number  of  their  friends  and  servants  ready 
armed  to  accomplish  it.  Tiberius  no  sooner 
communicated  this  confederacy  to  those  about 
him,  but  they  immediately  tucked  up  their 
gowns,  broke  the  halberts  which  the  officers 
used  to  keep  the  crowd  off  into  pieces,  and 
distributed  them  among  themselves,  resolving 
to  resist  the  attack  with  these.  Those  who 
stood  at  a  distance  wondered,  and  asked  what 
was  the  occasion;  Tiberius,  knowing  that  they 
could  not  hear  him  at  that  distance,  lifted  his 
hand  to  his  head  wishing  to  intimate  the  great 
danger  which  he  apprehended  himself  to  be  in. 

His  adversaries,  taking  notice  of  that  action, 
ran  off  at  once  to  the  senate  house,  and  de¬ 
clared  that  Tiberius  desired  the  people  to  be¬ 
stow  a  crown  upon  him,  as  if  this  were  the 
meaning  of  his  touching  his  head.  This  news 
created  general  confusion  in  the  senators,  and 


680 

Nasica  at  once  called  upon  the  consul  to  pun¬ 
ish  this  tyrant,  and  defend  the  government. 
The  consul  mildly  replied,  that  he  would  not 
be  the  first  to  do  any  violence;  and  as  he  would 
not  suffer  any  freeman  to  be  put  to  death,  be¬ 
fore  sentence  had  lawfully  passed  upon  him, 
so  neither  would  he  allow  any  measure  to  be 
carried  into  effect,  if  by  persuasion  or  compul¬ 
sion  on  the  part  of  Tiberius  the  people  had 
been  induced  to  pass  an  unlawful  vote.  But 
Nasica,  rising  from  his  seat,  “Since  the  con¬ 
sul,”  said  he,  “regards  not  the  safety  of  the 
commonwealth,  let  every  one  who  will  defend 
the  laws,  follow  me.”  He  then,  casting  the 
skirt  of  his  gown  over  his  head,  hastened  to 
the  capitol;  those  who  bore  him  company, 
wrapped  their  gowns  also  about  their  arms, 
and  forced  their  way  after  him. 

As  they  were  persons  of  the  greatest  author¬ 
ity  in  the  city,  the  common  people  did  not 
venture  to  obstruct  their  passing,  but  were 
rather  so  eager  to  clear  the  way  for  them,  that 
they  tumbled  over  one  another  in  haste.  The 
attendants  they  brought  with  them  had  fur¬ 
nished  themselves  with  clubs  and  staves  from 
their  houses,  and  they  themselves  picked  up 
the  feet  and  other  fragments  of  stools  and 
chairs,  which  were  broken  by  the  hasty  flight 
of  the  common  people.  Thus  armed,  they 
made  towards  Tiberius,  knocking  down  those 
whom  they  found  in  front  of  him,  and  those 
were  soon  wholly  dispersed  and  many  of  them 
slain.  Tiberius  tried  to  save  himself  by  flight. 
As  he  was  running,  he  was  stopped  by  one 
who  caught  hold  of  him  by  the  gown;  but  he 
threw  it  off,  and  fled  in  his  under-garment 
only.  And  stumbling  over  those  who  before 
had  been  knocked  down,  as  he  was  endeavour¬ 
ing  to  get  up  again,  Publius  Satureius,  a  trib¬ 
une,  one  of  his  colleagues,  was  observed  to  give 
him  the  first  fatal  stroke,  by  hitting  him  upon 
the  head  with  the  foot  of  a  stool.  The  second 
blow  was  claimed,  as  though  it  had  been  a 
deed  to  be  proud  of,  by  Lucius  Rufus.  And  of 
the  rest  there  fell  above  three  hundred  killed 
by  clubs  and  staves  only,  none  by  an  iron 
weapon. 

This,  we  are  told,  was  the  first  sedition 
amongst  the  Romans,  since  the  abrogation  of 
kingly  government,  that  ended  in  the  effusion 
of  blood.  All  former  quarrels  which  were  nei¬ 
ther  small  nor  about  trivial  matters,  were  al¬ 
ways  amicably  composed,  by  mutual  conces¬ 
sions  on  either  side,  the  senate  yielding  for  fear 
of  the  commons,  and  the  commons  out  of  re¬ 
spect  to  the  senate.  And  it  is  probable  indeed 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

that  Tiberius  himself  might  then  have  been 
easily  induced,  by  mere  persuasion,  to  give 
way,  and  certainly,  if  attacked  at  all,  must  have 
yielded  without  any  recourse  to  violence  and 
bloodshed,  as  he  had  not  at  that  time  above 
three  thousand  men  to  support  him.  But  it  is 
evident,  that  this  conspiracy  was  fomented 
against  him,  more  out  of  the  hatred  and  mal¬ 
ice  which  the  rich  men  had  to  his  person,  than 
for  the  reasons  which  they  commonly  pretend¬ 
ed  against  him. 

In  testimony  of  this,  we  may  adduce  the 
cruelty  and  unnatural  insults  which  they  used 
to  his  dead  body.  For  they  would  not  suffer 
his  own  brother,  though  he  earnestly  begged 
the  favour,  to  bury  him  in  the  night,  but  threw 
him,  together  with  the  other  corpses,  into  the 
river.  Neither  did  their  animosity  stop  here; 
for  they  banished  some  of  his  friends  without 
legal  process,  and  slew  as  many  of  the  others 
as  they  could  lay  their  hands  on;  amongst 
whom  Diophanes,  the  orator,  was  slain,  and 
one  Caius  Villius  cruelly  murdered  by  being 
shut  up  in  a  large  tun  with  vipers  and  serpents. 
Blossius  of  Cuma,  indeed,  was  carried  before 
the  consuls,  and  examined  touching  what  had 
happened,  and  freely  confessed  that  he  had 
done,  without  scruple,  whatever  Tiberius  bade 
him.  “What,”  cried  Nasica,  “then  if  Tiberius 
had  bidden  you  burn  the  capitol,  would  you 
have  burnt  it?”  His  answer  was,  that  Tiberius 
never  would  have  ordered  any  such  thing;  but 
being  pressed  with  the  same  question  by  sev¬ 
eral,  he  declared,  “If  Tiberius  had  command¬ 
ed  it,  it  would  have  been  right  for  me  to  do  it; 
for  he  never  would  have  commanded  it,  if  it 
had  not  been  for  the  people’s  good.”  Blossius 
at  this  time  was  pardoned,  and  afterwards 
went  away  to  Aristonicus  in  Asia,  and  when 
Aristonicus  was  overthrown  and  ruined,  killed 
himself. 

The  senate,  to  soothe  the  people  after  these 
transactions,  did  not  oppose  the  division  of  the 
public  lands,  and  permitted  them  to  choose  an¬ 
other  commissioner  in  the  room  of  Tiberius. 
So  they  elected  Publius  Crassus,  who  was 
Gracchus’s  near  connection,  as  his  daughter 
Licinia  was  married  to  Caius  Gracchus;  al¬ 
though  Cornelius  Nepos  says  that  it  was  not 
Crassus’s  daughter  whom  Caius  married,  but 
Brutus’s,  who  triumphed  for  his  victories  over 
the  Lusitanians;  but  most  writers  state  it  as  we 
have  done.  The  people,  however,  showed  evi¬ 
dent  marks  of  their  anger  at  Tiberius’s  death; 
and  were  clearly  waiting  only  for  the  opportu¬ 
nity  to  be  revenged,  and  Nasica  was  already 


CAIUS  GRACCHUS 

threatened  with  an  impeachment.  The  senate, 
therefore,  fearing  lest  some  mischief  should  be¬ 
fall  him,  sent  him  ambassador  into  Asia, 
though  there  was  no  occasion  for  his  going 
thither.  For  the  people  did  not  conceal  their 
indignation,  even  in  the  open  streets,  but  railed 
at  him  whenever  they  met  him  abroad,  calling 
him  a  murderer  and  a  tyrant,  one  who  had 
polluted  the  most  holy  and  religious  spot  in 
Rome  with  the  blood  of  a  sacred  and  inviola¬ 
ble  magistrate.  And  so  Nasica  left  Italy,  al¬ 
though  he  was  bound,  being  the  chief  priest, 
to  officiate  in  all  principal  sacrifices.  Thus  wan¬ 
dering  wretchedly  and  ignominiously  from 
one  place  to  another,  he  died  in  a  short  time 
after,  not  far  from  Pergamus. 

It  is  no  wonder  that  the  people  had  such  an 
aversion  to  Nasica,  when  even  Scipio  Africa- 


681 

nus,  though  so  much  and  so  deservedly  be¬ 
loved  by  the  Romans,  was  in  danger  of  quite 
losing  the  good  opinion  which  the  people  had 
of  him,  only  for  repeating,  when  the  news  of 
Tiberius’s  death  was  first  brought  to  Numan- 
tia,  the  verse  out  of  Homer — 

Even  so  perish  all  who  do  the  same. 

And  afterwards,  being  asked  by  Caius  and 
Fulvius,  in  a  great  assembly,  what  he  thought 
of  Tiberius’s  death,  he  gave  an  answer  adverse 
to  Tiberius’s  public  actions.  Upon  which  ac¬ 
count,  the  people  thenceforth  used  to  interrupt 
him  when  he  spoke,  which,  until  that  time, 
they  had  never  done,  and  he,  on  the  other 
hand,  was  induced  to  speak  ill  of  the  people. 
But  of  this  the  particulars  are  given  in  the  life 
of  Scipio. 


CAIUS  GRACCHUS 

153-12.1  b.c: 


Caius  Gracchus  at  first,  either  for  fear 
of  his  brother’s  enemies,  or  designing 
to  render  them  more  odious  to  the  peo¬ 
ple,  absented  himself  from  the  public  assem¬ 
blies,  and  lived  quietly  in  his  own  house,  as  if 
he  were  not  only  reduced  for  the  present  to 
live  unambitiously,  but  was  disposed  in  gen¬ 
eral  to  pass  his  life  in  inaction.  And  some,  in¬ 
deed,  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  he  disliked  his 
brother’s  measures,  and  had  wholly  abandoned 
the  defence  of  them.  However,  he  was  not  but 
very  young,  being  not  so  old  as  Tiberius  by 
nine  years;  and  he  was  not  yet  thirty  when  he 
was  slain. 

In  some  little  time,  however,  he  quietly  let 
his  temper  appear,  which  was  one  of  an  utter 
antipathy  to  a  lazy  retirement  and  effeminacy, 
and  not  the  least  likely  to  be  contented  with  a 
life  of  eating,  drinking,  and  money-getting. 
He  gave  great  pains  to  the  study  of  eloquence, 
as  wings  upon  which  he  might  aspire  to  pub¬ 
lic  business;  and  it  was  very  apparent  that  he 
did  not  intend  to  pass  his  days  in  obscurity. 
When  Vettius,  a  friend  of  his,  was  on  his  trial, 
he  defended  his  cause,  and  the  people  were  in 
an  ecstasy,  and  transported  with  joy,  finding 
him  master  of  such  eloquence  that  the  other 
orators  seemed  like  children  in  comparison, 
and  jealousies  and  fears  on  the  other  hand  be¬ 
gan  to  be  felt  by  the  powerful  citizens,  and  it 


was  generally  spoken  of  amongst  them  that 
they  must  hinder  Caius  from  being  made  trib¬ 
une. 

But  soon  after,  it  happened  that  he  was  elect¬ 
ed  quaestor,  and  obliged  to  attend  Orestes,  the 
consul,  into  Sardinia.  This,  as  it  pleased  his 
enemies,  so  it  was  not  ungrateful  to  him,  being 
naturally  of  a  warlike  character,  and  as  well 
trained  in  the  art  of  war  as  in  that  of  pleading. 
And,  besides,  as  yet  he  very  much  dreaded 
meddling  with  state  affairs,  and  appearing 
publicly  in  the  rostra,  which,  because  of  the 
importunity  of  the  people  and  his  friends,  he 
could  not  otherwise  avoid  than  by  taking  this 
journey.  He  was  therefore  most  thankful  for 
the  opportunity  of  absenting  himself.  Not¬ 
withstanding  which,  it  is  the  prevailing  opin¬ 
ion  that  Caius  was  a  far  more  thorough  dema¬ 
gogue,  and  more  ambitious  than  ever  Tiberius 
had  been,  of  popular  applause;  yet  it  is  certain 
that  he  was  borne  rather  by  a  sort  of  necessity 
than  by  any  purpose  of  his  own  into  public 
business.  And  Cicero,  the  orator,  relates,  that 
when  he  declined  all  such  concerns,  and  would 
have  lived  privately,  his  brother  appeared  to 
him  in  a  dream,  and  calling  him  by  his  name, 
said,  “Why  do  you  tarry,  Caius?  There  is  no 
escape;  one  life  and  one  death  is  appointed  for 
us  both,  to  spend  the  one  and  to  meet  the  other 
in  the  service  of  the  people.” 


682 

Caius  was  no  sooner  arrived  in  Sardinia, 
but  he  gave  exemplary  proofs  of  his  high  merit; 
he  not  only  excelled  all  the  young  men  of  his 
age  in  his  actions  against  his  enemies,  in  doing 
justice  to  his  inferiors,  and  in  showing  all  obe¬ 
dience  and  respect  to  his  superior  officer;  but 
likewise  in  temperance,  frugality,  and  indus¬ 
try,  he  surpassed  even  those  who  were  much 
older  than  himself.  Tt  happened  to  be  a  sharp 
and  sickly  winter  in  Sardinia,  insomuch  that 
the  general  was  forced  to  lay  an  imposition 
upon  several  towns  to  supply  the  soldiers  with 
necessary  clothes.  The  cities  sent  to  Rome,  pe¬ 
titioning  to  be  excused  from  that  burden;  the 
senate  found  their  request  reasonable,  and  or¬ 
dered  the  general  to  find  some  other  way  of 
new  clothing  the  army. 

While  he  was  at  a  loss  what  course  to  take  in 
this  affair,  the  soldiers  were  reduced  to  great 
distress;  but  Caius  went  from  one  city  to  an¬ 
other,  and  by  his  mere  representations  he  pre¬ 
vailed  with  them,  that  of  their  own  accord  they 
clothed  the  Roman  army.  This  again  being  re¬ 
ported  to  Rome,  and  seeming  to  be  only  an 
intimation  of  what  was  to  be  expected  of  him 
as  a  popular  leader  hereafter,  raised  new  jeal¬ 
ousies  amongst  the  senators.  And,  besides, 
there  came  ambassadors  out  of  Africa  from 
King  Micipsa,  to  acquaint  the  senate  that  their 
master,  out  of  respect  to  Caius  Gracchus,  had 
sent  a  considerable  quantity  of  corn  to  the  gen¬ 
eral  in  Sardinia;  at  which  the  senators  were 
so  much  offended,  that  they  turned  the  am¬ 
bassadors  out  of  the  senate  house,  and  made  an 
order  that  the  soldiers  should  be  relieved  by 
sending  others  in  their  room;  but  that  Orestes 
should  continue  at  his  post,  with  whom  Caius, 
also,  as  they  presumed,  being  his  quaestor, 
would  remain. 

But  he,  finding  how  things  were  carried,  im¬ 
mediately  in  anger  took  ship  for  Rome,  where 
his  unexpected  appearance  obtained  him  the 
censure  not  only  of  his  enemies,  but  also  of  the 
people;  who  thought  it  strange  that  a  quaestor 
should  leave  before  his  commander.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  when  some  accusation  upon  this  ground 
was  made  against  him  to  the  censors,  he  de¬ 
sired  leave  to  defend  himself,  and  did  it  so  ef¬ 
fectually,  that,  when  he  ended,  he  was  regard¬ 
ed  as  one  who  had  been  very  much  injured. 
He  made  it  then  appear  that  he  had  served 
twelve  years  in  the  army,  whereas  others  are 
obliged  to  serve  only  ten;  that  he  had  contin¬ 
ued  quaestor  to  the  general  three  years,  where¬ 
as  he  might  by  law  have  returned  at  the  end  of 
one  year;  and  alone  of  all  who  went  on  the  ex- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

pedition,  he  had  carried  out  a  full  and  had 
brought  home  an  empty  purse,  while  others, 
after  drinking  up  the  wine  they  had  carried 
out  with  them,  brought  back  the  wine-jars 
filled  again  with  gold  and  silver  from  the  war. 

After  this  they  brought  other  accusations 
and  writs  against  him,  for  exciting  insurrec¬ 
tion  amongst  the  allies,  and  being  engaged  in 
the  conspiracy  that  was  discovered  about  Fre- 
gellae.  But  having  cleared  himself  of  every  sus¬ 
picion,  and  proved  his  entire  innocence,  he 
now  at  once  came  forward  to  ask  for  the  trib- 
uneship;  in  which,  though  he  was  universally 
opposed  by  all  persons  of  distinction,  yet  there 
came  such  infinite  numbers  of  people  from  all 
parts  of  Italy  to  vote  for  Caius,  that  lodgings 
for  them  could  not  be  supplied  in  the  city;  and 
the  Field  being  not  large  enough  to  contain 
the  assembly,  there  were  numbers  who  climbed 
upon  the  roofs  and  the  tilings  of  the  houses  to 
use  their  voices  in  his  favour.  However,  the  no¬ 
bility  so  far  forced  the  people  to  their  pleasure 
and  disappointed  Caius’s  hope,  that  he  was 
not  returned  the  first,  as  was  expected,  but  the 
fourth  tribune. 

But  when  he  came  to  the  execution  of  his 
office,  it  was  seen  presently  who  was  really 
first  tribune,  as  he  was  a  better  orator  than  any 
of  his  contemporaries,  and  the  passion  with 
which  he  still  lamented  his  brother’s  death 
made  him  the  bolder  in  speaking.  He  used  on 
all  occasions  to  remind  the  people  of  what  had 
happened  in  that  tumult,  and  laid  before  them 
the  examples  of  their  ancestors,  how  they  de¬ 
clared  war  against  the  Faliscans,  only  for  giv¬ 
ing  scurrilous  language  to  one  Genucius,  a 
tribune  of  the  people;  and  sentenced  Caius 
Veturius  to  death,  for  refusing  to  give  way  in 
the  forum  to  a  tribune;  “Whereas,”  said  he, 
“these  men  did,  in  the  presence  of  you  all, 
murder  Tiberius  with  clubs,  and  dragged  the 
slaughtered  body  through  the  middle  of  the 
city,  to  be  cast  into  the  river.  Even  his  friends, 
as  many  as  could  be  taken,  were  put  to  death 
immediately,  without  any  trial,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  that  just  and  ancient  custom,  which  has 
always  been  observed  in  our  city,  that  when¬ 
ever  any  one  is  accused  of  a  capital  crime,  and 
does  not  make  his  personal  appearance  in 
court,  a  trumpeter  is  sent  in  the  morning  to 
his  lodging,  to  summon  him  by  sound  of 
trumpet  to  appear;  and  before  this  ceremony  is 
performed,  the  judges  do  not  proceed  to  the 
vote;  so  cautious  and  reserved  were  our  ances¬ 
tors  about  business  of  life  and  death.” 

Having  moved  the  people’s  passion  with 


CAIUS  GRACCHUS 

such  addresses  (and  his  voice  was  of  the  loud¬ 
est  and  strongest),  he  proposed  two  laws.  The 
first  was,  that  whoever  was  turned  out  of  any 
public  office  by  the  people,  should  be  thereby 
rendered  incapable  of  bearing  any  office  after¬ 
wards;  the  second,  that  if  any  magistrate  con¬ 
demn  a  Roman  to  be  banished  without  a  legal 
trial,  the  people  be  authorised  to  take  cogni¬ 
sance  thereof. 

One  of  these  laws  was  manifestly  levelled  at 
Marcus  Octavius,  who,  at  the  instigation  of 
Tiberius,  had  been  deprived  of  his  tribuneship. 
The  other  touched  Popilius,  who,  in  his  prae- 
torship,  had  banished  all  Tiberius’s  friends; 
whereupon  Popilius,  being  unwilling  to  stand 
the  hazard  of  a  trial,  fled  out  of  Italy.  As  for 
the  former  law,  it  was  withdrawn  by  Caius 
himself,  who  said  he  yielded  in  the  case  of  Oc¬ 
tavius,  at  the  request  of  his  mother  Cornelia. 

This  was  very  acceptable  and  pleasing  to  the 
people,  who  had  a  great  veneration  for  Corne¬ 
lia,  not  more  for  the  sake  of  her  father  than  for 
that  of  her  children;  and  they  afterwards  erect¬ 
ed  a  statue  of  brass  in  honour  of  her,  with  this 
inscription,  Cornelia,  the  mother  of  the  Grac¬ 
chi.  There  are  several  expressions  recorded,  in 
which  he  used  her  name  perhaps  with  too 
much  rhetoric,  and  too  little  self-respect,  in  his 
attacks  upon  his  adversaries.  “How,”  said  he, 
“dare  you  presume  to  reflect  upon  Cornelia, 
the  mother  of  Tiberius?”  And  because  the  per¬ 
son  who  made  the  reflections  had  been  sus¬ 
pected  of  effeminate  courses,  “With  what  face,” 
said  he,  “can  you  compare  Cornelia  with  your¬ 
self?  Have  you  brought  forth  children  as  she 
has  done?  And  yet  all  Rome  knows  that  she 
has  refrained  from  the  conversation  of  men 
longer  than  you  yourself  have  done.”  Such  was 
the  bitterness  he  used  in  his  language;  and  nu¬ 
merous  similar  expressions  might  be  adduced 
from  his  written  remains. 

Of  the  laws  which  he  now  proposed,  with 
the  object  of  gratifying  the  people  and  abridg¬ 
ing  the  power  of  the  senate,  the  first  was  con¬ 
cerning  the  public  lands,  which  were  to  be  di¬ 
vided  amongst  the  poor  citizens;  another  was 
concerning  the  common  soldiers,  that  they 
should  be  clothed  at  the  public  charge,  with¬ 
out  any  diminution  of  their  pay,  and  that  none 
should  be  obliged  to  serve  in  the  army  who 
was  not  full  seventeen  years  old;  another  gave 
the  same  right  to  all  the  Italians  in  general,  of 
voting  at  elections,  as  was  enjoyed  by  the  citi¬ 
zens  of  Rome;  a  fourth  related  to  the  price  of 
corn,  which  was  to  be  sold  at  a  lower  rate  than 
formerly  to  the  poor;  and  a  fifth  regulated  the 


683 

courts  of  justice,  greatly  reducing  the  power  of 
the  senators.  For  hitherto,  in  all  causes,  sena¬ 
tors  only  sat  as  judges,  and  were  therefore 
much  dreaded  by  the  Roman  knights  and  the 
people.  But  Caius  joined  three  hundred  ordi¬ 
nary  citizens  of  equestrian  rank  with  the  sena¬ 
tors,  who  were  three  hundred  likewise  in  num¬ 
ber,  and  ordained  that  the  judicial  authority 
should  be  equally  invested  in  the  six  hundred. 

While  he  was  arguing  for  the  ratification 
of  this  law,  his  behaviour  was  observed  to 
show  in  many  respects  unusual  earnestness, 
and  whereas  other  popular  leaders  had  always 
hitherto,  when  speaking,  turned  their  faces 
towards  the  senate  house,  and  the  place  called 
the  comitium,  he,  on  the  contrary,  was  the  first 
man  that  in  his  harangue  to  the  people  turned 
himself  the  other  way,  towards  them,  and  con¬ 
tinued  after  that  time  to  do  so.  An  insignifi¬ 
cant  movement  and  change  of  posture,  yet  it 
marked  no  small  revolution  in  state  affairs,  the 
conversion,  in  a  manner,  of  the  whole  govern¬ 
ment  from  an  aristocracy  to  a  democracy,  his 
action  intimating  that  public  speakers  should 
address  themselves  to  the  people,  not  the  sen¬ 
ate. 

When  the  commonalty  ratified  this  law, 
and  gave  him  power  to  select  those  of  the 
knights  whom  he  approved  of,  to  be  judges, 
he  was  invested  with  a  sort  of  a  kingly  power, 
and  the  senate  itself  submitted  to  receive  his 
advice  in  matters  of  difficulty;  nor  did  he  ad¬ 
vise  anything  that  might  derogate  from  the 
honour  of  that  body.  As,  for  example,  his  reso¬ 
lution  about  the  corn  which  Fabius  the  pro¬ 
prietor  sent  from  Spain  was  very  just  and 
honourable;  for  he  persuaded  the  senate  to 
sell  the  corn,  and  return  the  money  to  the  same 
provinces  which  had  furnished  them  with  it; 
and  also  that  Fabius  should  be  censured  for 
rendering  the  Roman  government  odious  and 
insupportable.  This  got  him  extraordinary  re¬ 
spect  and  favour  among  the  provinces.  Besides 
all  this,  he  proposed  measures  for  the  colonisa¬ 
tion  of  several  cities,  for  making  roads,  and 
for  building  public  granaries;  of  all  which 
works  he  himself  undertook  the  management 
and  superintendence,  and  was  never  wanting 
to  give  necessary  orders  for  the  despatch  of  all 
these  different  and  great  undertakings;  and 
that  with  such  wonderful  expedition  and  dili¬ 
gence,  as  if  he  had  been  but  engaged  upon  one 
of  them;  insomuch  that  all  persons,  even  those 
who  hated  or  feared  him,  stood  amazed  to  see 
what  a  capacity  he  had  for  effecting  and  com¬ 
pleting  all  he  undertook. 


684 

As  for  the  people  themselves,  they  were 
transported  at  the  very  sight,  when  they  saw 
him  surrounded  with  a  crowd  of  contractors, 
artificers,  public  deputies,  military  officers,  sol¬ 
diers,  and  scholars.  All  these  he  treated  with 
an  easy  familiarity,  yet  without  abandoning 
his  dignity  in  his  gentleness;  and  so  accommo¬ 
dated  his  nature  to  the  wants  and  occasions  of 
every  one  who  addressed  him,  that  those  were 
looked  upon  as  no  better  than  envious  detrac¬ 
tors,  who  had  represented  him  as  a  terrible,  as¬ 
suming,  and  violent  character.  He  was  even  a 
greater  master  of  the  popular  leader’s  art  in 
his  common  talk  and  his  actions,  than  he  was 
in  his  public  addresses. 

His  most  especial  exertions  were  given  to 
constructing  the  roads,  which  he  was  careful 
to  make  beautiful  and  pleasant,  as  well  as  con¬ 
venient.  They  were  drawn  by  his  directions 
through  the  fields,  exactly  in  a  straight  line, 
partly  paved  with  hewn  stone,  and  partly  laid 
with  solid  masses  of  gravel.  When  he  met  with 
any  valleys  or  deep  watercourses  crossing  the 
line,  he  either  caused  them  to  be  filled  up  with 
rubbish,  or  bridges  to  be  built  over  them,  so 
well  levelled,  that  all  being  of  an  equal  height 
on  both  sides,  the  work  presented  one  uniform 
and  beautiful  prospect.  Besides  this,  he  caused 
the  roads  to  be  all  divided  into  miles  (each 
mile  containing  little  less  than  eight  furlongs), 
and  erected  pillars  of  stone  to  signify  the  dis¬ 
tance  from  one  place  to  another.  He  likewise 
placed  other  stones  at  small  distances  from  one 
another,  on  both  sides  of  the  way,  by  the  help 
of  which  travellers  might  get  easily  on  horse¬ 
back  without  wanting  a  groom. 

For  these  reasons,  the  people  highly  extolled 
him,  and  were  ready  upon  all  occasions  to  ex¬ 
press  their  affection  towards  him.  One  day,  in 
an  oration  to  them,  he  declared  that  he  had 
only  one  favour  to  request,  which,  if  they 
granted,  he  should  think  the  greatest  obliga¬ 
tion  in  the  world;  yet  if  it  were  denied,  he 
would  never  blame  them  for  the  refusal.  This 
expression  made  the  world  believe  that  his  am¬ 
bition  was  to  be  consul;  and  it  was  generally 
expected  that  he  wished  to  be  both  consul  and 
tribune  at  the  same  time.  When  the  day  for 
election  of  consuls  was  at  hand,  and  all  in 
great  expectation,  he  appeared  in  the  Field 
with  Caius  Fannius,  canvassing  together  with 
his  friends  for  his  election.  This  was  of  great 
effect  in  Fannius’s  favour.  He  was  chosen  con¬ 
sul,  and  Caius  elected  tribune  the  second  time, 
without  his  own  seeking  or  petitioning  for  it, 
but  at  the  voluntary  motion  of  the  people.  But 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

when  he  understood  that  the  senators  were  his 
declared  enemies,  and  that  Fannius  himself 
was  none  of  the  most  zealous  of  friends,  he  be¬ 
gan  again  to  rouse  the  people  with  other  new 
laws.  He  proposed  that  a  colony  of  Roman  cit¬ 
izens  might  be  sent  to  re-people  Tarentum  and 
Capua,  and  that  the  Latins  should  enjoy  the 
same  privileges  with  the  citizens  of  Rome. 

But  the  senate,  apprehending  that  he  would 
at  last  grow  too  powerful  and  dangerous,  took 
a  new  and  unusual  course  to  alienate  the  peo¬ 
ple’s  affections  from  him,  by  playing  the  dema¬ 
gogue  in  opposition  to  him,  and  offering  fa¬ 
vours  contrary  to  all  good  policy.  Livius  Dru- 
sus  was  fellow-tribune  with  Caius,  a  person  of 
as  good  a  family  and  as  well  educated  as  any 
amongst  the  Romans,  and  noways  inferior  to 
those  who  for  their  eloquence  and  riches  were 
the  most  honoured  and  most  powerful  men  of 
that  time.  To  him,  therefore,  the  chief  senators 
made  their  application,  exhorting  him  to  at¬ 
tack  Caius,  and  join  in  their  confederacy 
against  him;  which  they  designed  to  carry  on, 
not  by  using  any  force,  or  opposing  the  com¬ 
mon  people,  but  by  gratifying  and  obliging 
them  with  such  unreasonable  things  as  other¬ 
wise  they  would  have  felt  it  honourable  for 
them  to  incur  the  greatest  unpopularity  in  re¬ 
sisting. 

Livius  offered  to  serve  the  senate  with  his 
authority  in  this  business;  and  proceeded  ac¬ 
cordingly  to  bring  forward  such  laws  as  were 
in  reality  neither  honourable  nor  advanta¬ 
geous  for  the  public;  his  whole  design  being 
to  outdo  Caius  in  pleasing  and  cajoling  the 
populace  (as  if  it  had  been  in  some  comedy), 
with  obsequious  flattery  and  every  kind  of 
gratifications;  the  senate  thus  letting  it  be  seen 
plainly  that  they  were  not  angry  with  Caius’s 
public  measures,  but  only  desirous  to  ruin  him 
utterly,  or  at  least  to  lessen  his  reputation.  For 
when  Caius  proposed  the  settlement  of  only 
two  colonies,  and  mentioned  the  better  class 
of  citizens  for  that  purpose,  they  accused  him 
of  abusing  the  people;  and  yet,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  were  pleased  with  Drusus,  when  he  pro¬ 
posed  the  sending  out  of  twelve  colonies,  each 
to  consist  of  three  thousand  persons,  and  those, 
too,  the  most  needy  that  he  could  find.  When 
Caius  divided  the  public  land  amongst  the 
poor  citizens,  and  charged  them  with  a  small 
rent,  annually  to  be  paid  into  the  exchequer, 
they  were  angry  at  him,  as  one  who  sought  to 
gratify  the  people  only  for  his  own  interest; 
yet  afterwards  they  commended  Livius, 
though  he  exempted  them  from  paying  even 


CAIUS  GRACCHUS 

that  little  acknowledgment.  They  were  dis¬ 
pleased  with  Caius  for  offering  the  Latins  an 
equal  right  with  the  Romans  of  voting  at  the 
election  of  magistrates;  but  when  Livius  pro¬ 
posed  that  it  might  not  be  lawful  for  a  Ro¬ 
man  captain  to  scourge  a  Latin  soldier,  they 
promoted  the  passing  of  that  law. 

For  Livius,  in  all  his  speeches  to  the  people, 
always  told  them  that  he  proposed  no  laws  but 
such  as  were  agreeable  to  the  senate,  who  had 
a  particular  regard  to  the  people’s  advantage. 
And  this  truly  was  the  only  point  in  all  his 
proceedings  which  was  of  any  real  service,  as 
it  created  more  kindly  feelings  towards  the 
senate  in  the  people;  and  whereas  they  former¬ 
ly  suspected  and  hated  the  principal  senators, 
Livius  appeased  and  mitigated  this  perverse¬ 
ness  and  animosity,  by  his  profession  that  he 
had  done  nothing  in  favour  and  for  the  bene¬ 
fit  of  the  commons  without  their  advice  and 
approbation. 

But  the  greatest  credit  which  Drusus  got  for 
kindness  and  justice  towards  the  people  was, 
that  he  never  seemed  to  propose  any  law  for 
his  own  sake,  or  his  own  advantage;  he  com¬ 
mitted  the  charge  of  seeing  the  colonies  rightly 
settled  to  other  commissioners;  neither  did 
he  ever  concern  himself  with  the  distribution 
of  the  moneys;  whereas  Caius  always  took  the 
principal  part  in  any  important  transactions  of 
this  kind.  Rubrius,  another  tribune  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  had  proposed  to  have  Carthage  again  in¬ 
habited,  which  had  been  demolished  by  Scipio, 
and  it  fell  to  Caius’s  lot  to  see  this  performed, 
and  for  that  purpose  he  sailed  to  Africa. 

Drusus  took  this  opportunity  of  his  absence 
to  insinuate  himself  still  more  into  the  people’s 
affections,  which  he  did  chiefly  by  accusing 
Fulvius,  who  was  a  particular  friend  to  Caius, 
and  was  appointed  a  commissioner  with  him 
for  the  division  of  the  lands.  Fulvius  was  a 
man  of  a  turbulent  spirit,  and  notoriously 
hated  by  the  senate;  and  besides,  he  was  sus¬ 
pected  by  others  to  have  fomented  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  citizens  and  their  confeder¬ 
ates,  and  underhand  to  be  inciting  the  Italians 
to  rebel;  though  there  was  little  other  evidence 
of  the  truth  of  these  accusations  than  his  being 
an  unsettled  character  and  of  a  well-known 
seditious  temper.  This  was  one  principal  cause 
of  Caius’s  ruin;  for  part  of  the  envy  which  fell 
upon  Fulvius  was  extended  to  him. 

And  when  Scipio  Africanus  died  suddenly, 
and  no  cause  of  such  an  unexpected  death 
could  be  assigned,  only  some  marks  of  blows 
upon  his  body  seemed  to  intimate  that  he  had 


685 

suffered  violence,  as  is  related  in  the  history  of 
his  life,  the  greatest  part  of  the  odium  attached 
to  Fulvius,  because  he  was  his  enemy,  and  that 
very  day  had  reflected  upon  Scipio  in  a  public 
address  to  the  people.  Nor  was  Caius  himself 
clear  from  suspicion.  However,  this  great  out¬ 
rage,  committed  too  upon  the  person  of  the 
greatest  and  most  considerable  man  in  Rome, 
was  never  either  punished  or  inquired  into 
thoroughly,  for  the  populace  opposed  and  hin¬ 
dered  any  judicial  investigation,  for  fear  that 
Caius  should  be  implicated  in  the  charge  if 
proceedings  were  carried  on.  This,  however 
had  happened  some  time  before. 

But  in  Africa,  where  at  present  Caius  was 
engaged  in  the  re-peopling  of  Carthage,  which 
he  named  Junonia,  many  ominous  appear¬ 
ances,  which  presaged  mischief,  are  reported 
to  have  been  sent  from  the  gods.  For  a  sudden 
gust  of  wind  falling  upon  the  first  standard, 
and  the  standard-bearer  holding  it  fast,  the 
staff  broke;  another  sudden  storm  blew  away 
the  sacrifices,  which  were  laid  upon  the  altars, 
and  carried  them  beyond  the  bounds  laid  out 
for  the  city,  and  the  wolves  came  and  carried 
away  the  very  marks  that  were  set  up  to  show 
the  boundary. 

Caius,  notwithstanding  all  this,  ordered  and 
despatched  the  whole  business  in  the  space  of 
seventy  days,  and  then  returned  to  Rome,  un¬ 
derstanding  how  Fulvius  was  prosecuted  by 
Drusus,  and  that  the  present  juncture  of  af¬ 
fairs  would  not  suffer  him  to  be  absent.  For 
Lucius  Opimius,  one  who  sided  with  the  no¬ 
bility,  and  was  of  no  small  authority  in  the 
senate,  who  had  formerly  sued  to  be  consul, 
but  was  repulsed  by  Caius’s  interest,  at  the 
time  when  Fannius  was  elected,  was  in  a  fair 
way  now  of  being  chosen  consul,  having  a  nu¬ 
merous  company  of  supporters.  And  it  was 
generally  believed,  if  he  did  obtain  it,  that  he 
would  wholly  ruin  Caius,  whose  power  was 
already  in  a  declining  condition;  and  the  peo¬ 
ple  were  not  so  apt  to  admire  his  actions  as  for¬ 
merly,  because  there  were  so  many  others  who 
every  day  contrived  new  ways  to  please  them, 
with  which  the  senate  readily  complied. 

After  his  return  to  Rome,  he  quitted  his 
house  on  the  Palatine  Mount,  and  went  to  live 
near  the  market-place,  endeavouring  to  make 
himself  more  popular  in  those  parts,  where 
most  of  the  humble  and  poorer  citizens  lived. 
He  then  brought  forward  the  remainder  of 
his  proposed  laws,  as  intending  to  have  them 
ratified  by  the  popular  vote;  to  support  which 
a  vast  number  of  people  collected  from  all 


686 

quarters.  But  the  senate  persuaded  Fannius, 
the  consul,  to  command  all  persons  who  were 
not  born  Romans  to  depart  the  city.  A  new  and 
unusual  proclamation  was  thereupon  made, 
prohibiting  any  of  the  allies  or  Confederates 
to  appear  at  Rome  during  that  time.  Caius,  on 
the  contrary,  published  an  edict,  accusing  the 
consul  for  what  he  had  done,  and  setting  forth 
to  the  Confederates,  that  if  they  would  con¬ 
tinue  upon  the  place,  they  might  be  assured  of 
his  assistance  and  protection.  However,  he  was 
not  so  good  as  his  word;  for  though  he  saw 
one  of  his  own  familiar  friends  and  compan¬ 
ions  dragged  to  prison  by  Fannius’s  officers, 
he,  notwithstanding,  passed  by  without  as¬ 
sisting  him;  either  because  he  was  afraid  to 
stand  the  test  of  his  power,  which  was  already 
decreased,  or  because  as  he  himself  reported, 
he  was  unwilling  to  give  his  enemies  an  oppor¬ 
tunity,  which  they  very  much  desired,  of  com¬ 
ing  to  actual  violence  and  fighting. 

About  that  time  there  happened  likewise  a 
difference  between  him  and  his  fellow-officers 
upon  this  occasion.  A  show  of  gladiators  was 
to  be  exhibited  before  the  people  in  the  market¬ 
place,  and  most  of  the  magistrates  erected  scaf¬ 
folds  round  about,  with  an  intention  of  letting 
them  for  advantage.  Caius  commanded  them 
to  take  down  their  scaffolds,  that  the  poor  peo¬ 
ple  might  see  the  sport  without  paying  any¬ 
thing.  But  nobody  obeying  these  orders  of  his, 
he  gathered  together  a  body  of  labourers,  who 
worked  for  him,  and  overthrew  all  the  scaf¬ 
folds  the  very  night  before  the  contest  was  to 
take  place.  So  that  by  the  next  morning  the 
market-place  was  cleared,  and  the  common 
people  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  pas¬ 
time.  In  this,  the  populace  thought  he  had 
acted  the  part  of  a  man;  but  he  much  dis¬ 
obliged  the  tribunes,  his  colleagues,  who  re¬ 
garded  it  as  a  piece  of  violent  and  presumptu¬ 
ous  interference. 

This  was  thought  to  be  the  chief  reason  that 
he  failed  of  being  the  third  time  elected  trib¬ 
une;  not  but  that  he  had  the  most  votes,  but 
because  his  colleagues  out  of  revenge  caused 
false  returns  to  be  made.  But  as  to  this  matter 
there  was  a  controversy.  Certain  it  is,  he  very 
much  resented  this  repulse,  and  behaved  with 
unusual  arrogance  towards  some  of  his  adver¬ 
saries  who  were  joyful  at  his  defeat,  telling 
them  that  all  this  was  but  a  false,  sardonic 
mirth,  as  they  little  knew  how  much  his  ac¬ 
tions  threw  them  into  obscurity. 

As  soon  as  Opimius  also  was  chosen  consul, 
they  presently  cancelled  several  of  Caius’s  laws, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  especially  called  in  question  his  proceed¬ 
ings  at  Carthage,  omitting  nothing  that  was 
likely  to  irritate  him,  that  from  some  effect  of 
his  passion  they  might  find  out  a  tolerable  pre¬ 
tence  to  put  him  to  death.  Caius  at  first  bore 
these  things  very  patiently;  but  afterwards,  at 
the  instigation  of  his  friends,  especially  Ful- 
vius,  he  resolved  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of 
a  body  of  supporters,  to  oppose  the  consul  by 
force.  They  say  also  that  on  this  occasion  his 
mother,  Cornelia,  joined  in  the  sedition,  and 
assisted  him  by  sending  privately  several 
strangers  into  Rome,  under  pretence  as  if  they 
came  to  be  hired  there  for  harvest-men;  for 
that  intimations  of  this  are  given  in  her  letters 
to  him.  However,  it  is  confidently  affirmed  by 
others  that  Cornelia  did  not  in  the  least  ap¬ 
prove  of  these  actions. 

When  the  day  came  in  which  Opimius  de¬ 
signed  to  abrogate  the  laws  of  Caius,  both  par¬ 
ties  met  very  early  at  the  capitol;  and  the  con¬ 
sul  having  performed  all  the  rites  usual  in 
their  sacrifices,  one  Quintus  Antyllius,  an  at¬ 
tendant  on  the  consul,  carrying  out  the  entrails 
of  the  victim,  spoke  to  Fulvius  and  his  friends 
who  stood  about  him,  “Ye  factious  citizens, 
make  way  for  honest  men.”  Some  report  that, 
besides  this  provoking  language,  he  extended 
his  naked  arm  towards  them,  as  a  piece  of 
scorn  and  contempt.  Upon  this  he  was  pres¬ 
ently  killed  with  the  strong  styles  which  are 
commonly  used  in  writing,  though  some  say 
that  on  this  occasion  they  had  been  manufac¬ 
tured  for  this  purpose  only.  This  murder 
caused  a  sudden  consternation  in  the  whole 
assembly,  and  the  heads  of  each  faction  had 
their  different  sentiments  about  it.  As  for 
Caius,  he  was  much  grieved*  and  severely  rep¬ 
rimanded  his  own  party,  because  they  had  giv¬ 
en  their  adversaries  a  reasonable  pretence  to 
proceed  against  them,  which  they  had  so  long 
hoped  for.  Opimius,  immediately  seizing  the 
occasion  thus  offered,  was  in  great  delight,  and 
urged  the  people  to  revenge;  but  there  happen¬ 
ing  a  great  shower  of  rain  on  a  sudden,  it  put 
an  end  to  the  business  of  that  day. 

Early  the  next  morning,  the  consul  sum¬ 
moned  the  senate,  and  whilst  he  advised  with 
the  senators  in  the  senate-house,  the  corpse  of 
Antyllius  was  laid  upon  a  bier,  and  brought 
through  the  market-place,  being  there  exposed 
to  open  view,  just  before  the  senate-house, 
with  a  great  deal  of  crying  and  lamentation. 
Opimius  was  not  at  all  ignorant  that  this  was 
designed  to  be  done;  however,  he  seemed  to  be 
surprised,  and  wondered  what  the  meaning  of 


CAIUS  GRACCHUS 

it  should  be;  the  senators,  therefore,  presently 
went  out  to  know  the  occasion  of  it,  and, 
standing  about  the  corpse,  uttered  exclama¬ 
tions  against  the  inhuman  and  barbarous  act. 
The  people,  meantime,  could  not  but  feel  re¬ 
sentment  and  hatred  for  the  senators,  remem¬ 
bering  how  they  themselves  had  not  only  as¬ 
sassinated  Tiberius  Gracchus,  as  he  was  exe¬ 
cuting  his  office  in  the  very  capitol,  but  had 
also  thrown  his  mangled  body  into  the  river; 
yet  now  they  could  honour  with  their  presence 
and  their  public  lamentations  in  the  Forum  the 
corpse  of  an  ordinary  hired  attendant  (who, 
though  he  might  perhaps  die  wrongfully,  was, 
however,  in  a  great  measure  the  occasion  of  it 
himself),  by  these  means  hoping  to  undermine 
him  who  was  the  only  remaining  defender 
and  safeguard  of  the  people. 

The  senators,  after  some  time,  withdrew, 
and  presently  ordered  that  Opimius,  the  con¬ 
sul,  should  be  invested  with  extraordinary 
power  to  protect  the  commonwealth  and  sup¬ 
press  all  tyrants.  This  being  decreed,  he  pres¬ 
ently  commanded  the  senators  to  arm  them¬ 
selves,  and  the  Roman  knights  to  be  in  readi¬ 
ness  very  early  the  next  morning,  and  every 
one  of  them  to  be  attended  with  two  servants 
well  armed.  Fulvius,  on  the  other  side,  made 
his  preparations  and  collected  the  populace. 
Caius  at  that  time  returning  from  the  market¬ 
place,  made  a  stop  just  before  his  father’s  stat¬ 
ue,  and  fixing  his  eyes  for  some  time  upon  it, 
remained  in  a  deep  contemplation;  at  length 
he  sighed,  shed  tears,  and  departed.  This  made 
no  small  impression  upon  those  who  saw  it, 
and  they  began  to  upbraid  themselves  that 
they  should  desert  and  betray  so  worthy  a  man 
as  Caius.  They  therefore  went  directly  to  his 
house,  remaining  there  as  a  guard  about  it  all 
night,  though  in  a  different  manner  from 
those  who  were  a  guard  to  Fulvius;  for  they 
passed  away  the  night  with  shouting  and 
drinking,  and  Fulvius  himself,  being  the  first 
to  get  drunk,  spoke  and  acted  many  things 
very  unbecoming  a  man  of  his  age  and  char¬ 
acter. 

On  the  other  side,  the  party  which  guarded 
Caius,  were  quiet  and  diligent,  relieving  one 
another  by  turns,  and  forecasting,  as  in  a  pub¬ 
lic  calamity,  what  the  issue  of  things  might  be. 
As  soon  as  daylight  appeared,  they  roused  Ful¬ 
vius,  who  had  not  yet  slept  off  the  effects  of  his 
drinking;  and  having  armed  themselves  with 
the  weapons  hung  up  in  his  house,  that  were 
formerly  taken  from  the  Gauls,  whom  he  con¬ 
quered  in  the  time  of  his  consulship,  they  pres- 


687 

ently,  with  threats  and  loud  acclamations, 
made  their  way  towards  the  Aventine  Mount. 

Caius  could  not  be  persuaded  to  arm  him¬ 
self,  but  put  on  his  gown,  as  if  he  had  been  go¬ 
ing  to  the  assembly  of  the  people,  only  with 
this  difference,  that  under  it  he  had  then  a 
short  dagger  by  his  side.  As  he  was  going  out, 
his  wife  came  running  to  him  at  the  gate,  hold¬ 
ing  him  with  one  hand,  and  with  the  other  a 
young  child  of  his.  She  bespoke  him:  “Alas, 
Caius,  I  do  not  now  part  with  you  to  let  you 
address  the  people  either  as  a  tribune  or  a  law¬ 
giver,  nor  as  if  you  were  going  to  some  hon¬ 
ourable  war,  when,  though  you  might  perhaps 
have  encountered  that  fate  which  all  must 
some  time  or  other  submit  to,  yet  you  had  left 
me  this  mitigation  of  my  sorrow,  that  my 
mourning  was  respected  and  honoured.  You 
go  now  to  expose  your  person  to  the  murderers 
of  Tiberius,  unarmed  indeed,  and  rightly  so, 
choosing  rather  to  suffer  the  worst  of  injuries 
than  do  the  least  yourself.  But  even  your  very 
death  at  this  time  will  not  be  serviceable  to  the 
public  good.  Faction  prevails;  power  and  arms 
are  now  the  only  measures  of  justice.  Had  your 
brother  fallen  before  Numantia,  the  enemy 
would  have  given  back  what  then  had  re¬ 
mained  of  Tiberius;  but  such  is  my  hard  fate, 
that  I  probably  must  be  an  humble  suppliant 
to  the  floods  or  the  waves,  that  they  would 
somewhere  restore  to  me  your  relics;  for  since 
Tiberius  was  not  spared,  what  trust  can  we 
place  either  on  the  laws,  or  in  the  gods?” 

Licinia,  thus  bewailing,  Caius,  by  degrees 
getting  loose  from  her  embraces,  silently  with¬ 
drew  himself,  being  accompanied  by  his 
friends;  she,  endeavouring  to  catch  him  by  the 
gown,  fell  prostrate  upon  the  earth,  lying  there 
for  some  time  speechless.  Her  servants  took 
her  up  for  dead,  and  conveyed  her  to  her 
brother  Crassus. 

Fulvius,  when  the  people  were  gathered  to¬ 
gether  in  a  full  body,  by  the  advice  of  Caius 
sent  his  youngest  son  into  the  market-place, 
with  a  herald’s  rod  in  his  hand.  He,  being  a 
very  handsome  youth,  and  modestly  address¬ 
ing  himself,  with  tears  in  his  eyes  and  a  becom¬ 
ingbashfulness,  offered  proposals  of  agreement 
to  the  consul  and  the  whole  senate.  The  great¬ 
est  part  of  the  assembly  were  inclinable  to  ac¬ 
cept  of  the  proposals;  but  Opimius  said  that  it 
did  not  become  them  to  send  messengers  and 
capitulate  with  the  senate,  but  to  surrender  at 
discretion  to  the  laws,  like  loyal  citizens,  and 
endeavour  to  merit  their  pardon  by  submis¬ 
sion.  He  commanded  the  youth  not  to  return, 


688 

unless  they  would  comply  with  these  condi¬ 
tions. 

Caius,  as  it  is  reported,  was  very  forward  to 
go  and  clear  himself  before  the  senate;  but  none 
of  his  friends  consenting  to  it,  Fulvius  sent  his 
son  a  second  time  to  intercede  for  them,  as  be¬ 
fore.  But  Opimius,  who  was  resolved  that  a 
battle  should  ensue,  caused  the  youthNto  be  ap¬ 
prehended  and  committed  into  custody;  and 
then  with  a  company  of  his  foot-soldiers  and 
some  Cretan  archers  set  upon  the  party  under 
Fulvius.  These  archers  did  such  execution,  and 
inflicted  so  many  wounds,  that  a  rout  and 
flight  quickly  ensued.  Fulvius  fled  into  an  ob¬ 
scure  bathing-house;  but  shortly  after  being 
discovered,  he  and  his  eldest  son  were  slain  to¬ 
gether.  Caius  was  not  observed  to  use  any  vio¬ 
lence  against  any  one;  but,  extremely  disliking 
all  these  outrages,  retired  to  Diana’s  temple. 
There  he  attempted  to  kill  himself,  but  was 
hindered  by  his  faithful  friends,  Pomponius 
and  Licinius;  they  took  his  sword  away  from 
him,  and  were  very  urgent  that  he  would  en¬ 
deavour  to  make  his  escape.  It  is  reported  that, 
falling  upon  his  knee  and  lifting  up  his 
hands,  he  prayed  the  goddess  that  the  Roman 
people,  as  a  punishment  for  their  ingratitude 
and  treachery,  might  always  remain  in  slavery. 
For  as  soon  as  a  proclamation  was  made  of 
a  pardon,  the  greater  part  openly  deserted 
him. 

Caius,  therefore,  endeavoured  now  to  make 
his  escape,  but  was  pursued  so  close  by  his  en¬ 
emies,  as  far  as  the  wooden  bridge,  that  from 
thence  he  narrowly  escaped.  There  his  two 
trusty  friends  begged  of  him  to  preserve  his 
own  person  by  flight,  whilst  they  in  the  mean¬ 
time  would  keep  their  post,  and  maintain  the 
passage;  neither  could  their  enemies,  until  they 
were  both  slain,  pass  the  bridge.  Caius  had  no 
other  companion  in  his  flight  but  one  Philo- 
crates,  a  servant  of  his.  As  he  ran  along,  every¬ 
body  encouraged  him,  and  wished  him  suc¬ 
cess,  as  standers-by  may  do  to  those  who  are 
engaged  in  a  race,  but  nobody  either  lent  him 
any  assistance,  or  would  furnish  him  with  a 
horse,  though  he  asked  for  one;  for  his  ene¬ 
mies  had  gained  ground,  and  got  very  near 
him.  However,  he  had  still  time  enough  to 
hide  himself  in  a  little  grove,  consecrated  to  the 
Furies.  In  that  place,  his  servant  Philocrates 
having  first  slain  him,  presently  afterwards 
killed  himself  also,  and  fell  dead  upon  his  mas¬ 
ter.  Though  some  affirm  it  for  a  truth,  that 
they  were  both  taken  alive  by  their  enemies, 
and  that  Philocrates  embraced  his  master  so 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

close,  that  they  could  not  wound  Caius  until 
his  servant  was  slain. 

They  say  that  when  Caius’s  head  was  cut 
off,  and  carried  away  by  one  of  his  murderers, 
Septimuleius,  Opimius’s  friend,  met  him,  and 
forced  it  from  him;  because,  before  the  battle 
began,  they  had  made  proclamation,  that  who¬ 
ever  should  bring  the  head  either  of  Caius  or 
Fulvius,  should,  as  a  reward,  receive  its  weight 
in  gold.  Septimuleius,  therefore,  having  fixed 
Caius’s  head  upon  the  top  of  his  spear,  came 
and  presented  it  to  Opimius.  They  presently 
brought  the  scales,  and  it  was  found  to  weigh 
above  seventeen  pounds.  But  in  this  affair,  Sep¬ 
timuleius  gave  as  great  signs  of  his  knavery  as 
he  had  done  before  of  his  cruelty;  for  having 
taken  out  the  brains,  he  had  filled  the  skull 
with  lead.  There  were  others  who  brought  the 
head  of  Fulvius,  too,  but,  being  mean,  incon¬ 
siderable  persons,  were  turned  away  without 
the  promised  reward. 

The  bodies  of  these  two  persons,  as  well  as 
of  the  rest  who  were  slain,  to  the  number  of 
three  thousand  men,  were  all  thrown  into  the 
river;  their  goods  were  confiscated,  and  their 
widows  forbidden  to  put  themselves  into 
mourning.  They  dealt  even  more  severely  with 
Licinia,  Caius’s  wife,  and  deprived  her  even 
of  her  jointure;  and  as  in  addition  still  to  all 
their  inhumanity,  they  barbarously  murdered 
Fulvius’s  youngest  son;  his  only  crime  being, 
not  that  he  took  up  arms  against  them,  or  that 
he  was  present  in  the  battle,  but  merely  that  he 
had  come  with  articles  of  agreement;  for  this 
he  was  first  imprisoned,  then  slain. 

But  that  which  angered  the  common  people 
most  was,  that  at  this  time,  in  memory  of  his 
success,  Opimius  built  the  Temple  of  Concord, 
as  if  he  gloried  and  triumphed  in  the  slaughter 
of  so  many  citizens.  Somebody  in  the  night 
time,  under  the  inscription  of  the  temple 
added  this  verse: — 

Folly  and  Discord  Concord's  temple  built. 

Yet  this  Opimius,  the  first  who,  being  con¬ 
sul,  presumed  to  usurp  the  power  of  a  dictator, 
condemning,  without  any  trial,  with  three 
thousand  other  citizens,  Caius  Gracchus  and 
Fulvius  Flaccus,  one  of  whom  had  triumphed 
and  been  consul,  the  other  far  excelled  all  his 
contemporaries  in  virtue  and  honour,  after¬ 
wards  was  found  incapable  of  keeping  his 
hands  from  thieving:  and  when  he  was  sent 
ambassador  to  Jugurtha,  King  of  Numidia,  he 
was  there  corrupted  by  presents,  and  at  his  re¬ 
turn,  being  shamefully  convicted  of  it,  lost  all 
his  honours,  and  grew  old  amidst  the  hatred 


THE  GRACCHI,  AGIS,  AND  CLEOMENES 


and  the  insults  of  the  people;  who,- though 
humble,  and  affrighted  at  the  time,  did  not  fail 
before  long  to  let  everybody  see  what  respect 
and  veneration  they  had  for  the  memory  of 
the  Gracchi.  They  ordered  their  statues  to  be 
made  and  set  up  in  public  view;  they  conse¬ 
crated  the  places  where  they  were  slain,  and 
thither  brought  the  first-fruits  of  everything, 
according  to  the  season  of  the  year,  to  make 
their  offerings.  Many  came  likewise  thither  to 
their  devotions,  and  daily  worshipped  there, 
as  at  the  temple  of  the  gods. 

It  is  reported  that  as  Cornelia,  their  mother, 
bore  the  loss  of  her  two  sons  with  a  noble  and 
undaunted  spirit,  so,  in  reference  to  the  holy 
places  in  which  they  were  slain,  she  said  their 
dead  bodies  were  well  worthy  of  such  sepul¬ 
chres.  She  removed  afterwards,  and  dwelt  near 
the  place  called  Misenum,  not  at  all  altering 
her  former  way  of  living.  She  had  many 
friends,  and  hospitably  received  many  strang¬ 
ers  at  her  house;  many  Greeks  and  learned 


689 

men  were  continually  about  her;  nor  was  there 
any  foreign  prince  but  received  gifts  from  her 
and  presented  her  again. 

Those  who  were  conversant  with  her,  were 
much  interested,  when  she  pleased  to  enter¬ 
tain  them  with  her  recollections  of  her  father 
Scipio  Africanus,  and  of  his  habits  and  way  of 
living.  But  it  was  most  admirable  to  hear  her 
make  mention  of  her  sons,  without  any  tears 
or  sign  of  grief,  and  give  the  full  account  of 
all  their  deeds  and  misfortunes,  as  if  she  had 
been  relating  the  history  of  some  ancient  he¬ 
roes.  This  made  some  imagine,  that  age,  or  the 
greatness  of  her  afflictions,  had  made  her  sense¬ 
less  and  devoid  of  natural  feelings.  But  they 
who  so  thought  were  themselves  more  truly 
insensible  not  to  see  how  much  a  noble  nature 
and  education  avail  to  conquer  any  affliction; 
and  though  fortune  may  often  be  more  suc¬ 
cessful,  and  may  defeat  the  efforts  of  virtue  to 
avert  misfortunes,  it  cannot,  when  we  incur 
them,  prevent  our  bearing  them  reasonably. 


CAIUS  and  TIBERIUS  GRACCHUS 
and 

AGIS  and  CLEOMENES 
Compared 


Having  given  an  account  severally  of  these 
persons,  it  remains  only  that  we  should 
take  a  view  of  them  in  comparison  with  one 
another. 

As  for  the  Gracchi,  the  greatest  detractors 
and  their  worst  enemies  could  not  but  allow 
that  they  had  a  genius  to  virtue  beyond  all 
other  Romans,  which  was  improved  also  by  a 
generous  education.  Agis  and  Cleomenes  may 
be  supposed  to  have  had  stronger  natural  gifts, 
since,  though  they  wanted  all  the  advantages 
of  good  education,  and  were  bred  up  in  those 
very  customs,  manners,  and  habits  of  living 
which  had  for  a  long  time  corrupted  others, 
yet  they  were  public  examples  of  temperance 
and  frugality.  Besides,  the  Gracchi,  happening 
to  live  when  Rome  had  her  greatest  repute  for 
honour  and  virtuous  actions,  might  justly  have 
been  ashamed,  if  they  had  not  also  left  to  the 
next  generation  the  noble  inheritance  of  the 
virtues  of  their  ancestors.  Whereas  the  other 
two  had  parents  of  different  morals,  and 
though  they  found  their  country  in  a  sinking 
condition,  and  debauched,  yet  that  did  not 


quench  their  forward  zeal  to  what  was  just 
and  honourable. 

The  integrity  of  the  two  Romans,  and  their 
superiority  to  money,  was  chiefly  remarkable 
in  this:  that  in  office  and  the  administration  of 
public  affairs,  they  kept  themselves  from  the 
imputation  of  unjust  gain;  whereas  Agis 
might  justly  be  offended  if  he  had  only  that 
mean  commendation  given  him,  that  he  took 
nothing  wrongfully  from  any  man,  seeing  he 
distributed  his  own  fortunes  which,  in  ready 
money  only,  amounted  to  the  value  of  six  hun¬ 
dred  talents,  amongst  his  fellow-citizens.  Ex¬ 
tortion  would  have  appeared  a  crime  of  a 
strange  nature  to  him,  who  esteemed  it  a  piece 
of  covetousness  to  possess,  though  never  so 
justly  gotten,  greater  riches  than  his  neigh¬ 
bours. 

Their  political  actions,  also,  and  the  state 
revolutions  they  attempted,  were  very  difficult 
in  magnitude.  The  chief  things  in  general  that 
the  two  Romans  commonly  aimed  at,  were  the 
settlement  of  cities  and  mending  of  highways; 
and,  in  particular,  the  boldest  design  which 


690 

Tiberius  is  famed  for,  was  the  recovery  of  the 
public  lands;  and  Caius  gained  his  greatest 
reputation  by  the  addition,  for  the  exercise 
of  judiciary  powers,  of  three  hundred  of  the 
order  of  knights  to  the  same  number  of  sena¬ 
tors.  Whereas  the  alteration  which  Agis  and 
Cleomenes  made  was  in  a  quite  different  kind. 
They  did  not  set  about  removing  partial  evils 
and  curing  petty  incidents  of  disease,  which 
would  have  been  (as  Plato  says)  like  cutting 
off  one  of  the  Hydra’s  heads,  the  very  means 
to  increase  the  number;  but  they  instituted  a 
thorough  reformation,  such  as  would  free  the 
country  from  all  its  grievances,  or  rather,  to 
speak  more  truly,  they  reversed  that  former 
change  which  had  been  the  cause  of  all  their 
calamities,  and  so  restored  their  city  to  its 
ancient  state. 

However,  this  must  be  confessed  in  the  be¬ 
half  of  the  Gracchi,  that  their  undertakings 
were  always  opposed  by  men  of  the  greatest 
influence.  On  the  other  side,  those  things  which 
were  first  attempted  by  Agis,  and  afterwards 
consummated  by  Cleomenes,  were  supported 
by  the  great  and  glorious  precedent  of  those  an¬ 
cient  laws  concerning  frugality  and  levelling 
which  they  had  themselves  received  upon  the 
authority  of  Lycurgus,  and  he  had  instituted 
on  that  of  Apollo.  It  is  also  further  observable, 
that  from  the  actions  of  the  Gracchi,  Rome  re¬ 
ceived  no  additions  to  her  former  greatness; 
whereas,  under  the  conduct  of  Cleomenes, 
Greece  presently  saw  Sparta  exert  her  sover¬ 
eign  power  over  all  Peloponnesus,  and  contest 
the  supreme  command  with  the  most  power¬ 
ful  princes  of  the  time;  success  in  which  would 
have  freed  Greece  from  Illyrian  and  Gaulish 
violence,  and  placed  her  once  again  under  the 
orderly  rule  of  the  sons  of  Hercules. 

From  the  circumstances  of  their  deaths,  also, 
we  may  infer  some  difference  in  the  quality  of 
their  courage.  The  Gracchi,  fighting  with 
their  fellow-citizens,  were  both  slain  as  they 
endeavoured  to  make  their  escape:  Agis  will¬ 
ingly  submitted  to  his  fate,  rather  than  any 
citizen  should  be  in  danger  of  his  life.  Cleo¬ 
menes,  being  shamefully  and  unjustly  treated, 
made  an  effort  toward  revenge,  but  failing  of 
that,  generously  fell  by  his  own  hand. 

On  the  other  side  it  must  be  said,  that  Agis 
never  did  a  great  action  worthy  a  commander, 
being  prevented  by  an  untimely  death.  And 
as  for  those  heroic  actions  of  Cleomenes,  we 
may  justly  compare  with  them  that  of  Tiber¬ 
ius,  when  he  was  the  first  who  attempted  to 
scale  the  walls  of  Carthage,  which  was  no 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

mean  exploit.  We  may  add  the  peace  which 
he  concluded  with  the  Numantines,  by  which 
he  saved  the  lives  of  twenty  thousand  Romans, 
who  otherwise  had  certainly  been  cut  off.  And 
Caius,  not  only  at  home,  but  in  war  in  Sar¬ 
dinia,  displayed  distinguished  courage.  So  that 
their  early  actions  were  no  small  argument 
that  afterwards  they  might  have  rivalled  the 
best  of  the  Roman  commanders,  if  they  had 
not  died  so  young. 

In  civil  life,  Agis  showed  a  lack  of  determi¬ 
nation;  he  let  himself  be  baffled  by  the  craft 
of  Agesilaus,  disappointed  the  expectations  of 
the  citizens  as  to  the  division  of  the  lands,  and 
generally  left  all  the  designs,  which  he  had 
deliberately  formed  and  publicly  announced, 
unperformed  and  unfulfilled  through  a  young 
man’s  want  of  resolution.  Cleomenes,  on  the 
other  hand,  proceeded  to  effect  the  revolution 
with  only  too  much  boldness  and  violence,  and 
unjustly  slew  the  ephors  whom  he  might,  by 
superiority  in  arms,  have  gained  over  to  his 
party,  or  else  might  easily  have  banished,  as 
he  did  several  others  of  the  city.  For  to  use  the 
knife,  unless  in  the  extremest  necessity,  is 
neither  good  surgery  nor  wise  policy,  but  in 
both  cases  mere  unskilfulness;  and  in  the  lat¬ 
ter,  unjust  as  well  as  unfeeling. 

Of  the  Gracchi,  neither  the  one  nor  the 
other  was  the  first  to  shed  the  blood  of  his 
fellow-citizens;  and  Caius  is  reported  to  have 
avoided  all  manner  of  resistance,  even  when 
his  life  was  aimed  at,  showing  himself  always 
valiant  against  a  foreign  enemy,  but  wholly 
inactive  in  a  sedition.  This  was  the  reason 
that  he  went  from  his  own  house  unarmed, 
and  withdrew  when  the  battle  began,  and 
in  all  respects  showed  himself  anxious  rather 
not  to  do  any  harm  to  others,  than  not  to  suf¬ 
fer  any  himself.  Even  the  very  flight  of  the 
Gracchi  must  not  be  looked  upon  as  an  argu¬ 
ment  of  their  mean  spirit,  but  an  honourable 
retreat  from  endangering  of  others.  For  if  they 
had  stayed,  they  must  either  have  yielded  to 
those  who  assailed  them,  or  else  have  fought 
them  in  their  own  defence. 

The  greatest  crime  that  can  be  laid  to  Tiber¬ 
ius’s  charge  was  the  deposing  of  his  fellow 
tribune,  and  seeking  afterwards  a  second  trib- 
uneship  for  himself.  As  for  the  death  of  Antyl- 
lius,  it  is  falsely  and  unjustly  attributed  to 
Caius,  for  he  was  slain  unknown  to  him,  and 
much  to  his  grief. 

On  the  contrary,  Cleomenes  (not  to  men¬ 
tion  the  murder  of  the  ephors)  set  all  the  slaves 
at  liberty,  and  governed  by  himself  alone  in 


DEMOSTHENES 

reality,  having  a  partner  only  for  show;  hav¬ 
ing  made  choice  of  his  brother  Euclidas,  who 
was  one  of  the  same  family.  He  prevailed  up¬ 
on  Archidamus,  who  was  the  right  heir  to  the 
kingdom  of  the  other  line,  to  venture  to  re¬ 
turn  home  from  Messene;  but  after  his  being 
slain,  by  not  doing  anything  to  revenge  his 
death,  confirmed  the  suspicion  that  he  was 
privy  to  it  himself.  Lycurgus,  whose  example 
he  professed  to  imitate,  after  he  had  voluntari¬ 
ly  settled  his  kingdom  upon  Charillus,  his 
brother’s  son,  fearing  lest,  if  the  youth  should 
chance  to  die  by  accident,  he  might  be  sus¬ 
pected  for  it,  travelled  a  long  time,  and  would 
not  return  again  to  Sparta  until  Charillus  had 
a  son,  and  an  heir  to  his  kingdom.  But  we 
have  indeed  no  other  Grecian  who  is  worthy 
to  be  compared  with  Lycurgus,  and  it  is  clear 
enough  that  in  the  public  measures  of  Cleome- 
nes  various  acts  of  considerable  audacity  and 
lawlessness  may  be  found. 

Those,  therefore,  who  incline  to  blame  their 
characters  may  observe  that  the  two  Grecians 
were  disturbers  even  from  their  youth,  lovers 
of  contest,  and  aspirants  to  despotic  power; 


691 

that  Tiberius  and  Caius  by  nature  had  an  ex¬ 
cessive  desire  after  glory  and  honours.  Beyond 
this,  their  enemies  could  find  nothing  to  bring 
against  them;  but  as  soon  as  the  contention  be¬ 
gan  with  their  adversaries,  their  heat  and  pas¬ 
sions  would  so  far  prevail  beyond  their  nat¬ 
ural  temper,  that  by  them,  as  by  ill  winds, 
they  were  driven  afterwards  to  all  their  rash 
undertakings.  What  could  be  more  just  and 
honourable  than  their  first  design,  had  not  the 
power  and  the  faction  of  the  rich,  by  endeav¬ 
ouring  to  abrogate  that  law,  engaged  them 
both  in  those  fatal  quarrels,  the  one,  for  his 
own  preservation,  the  other,  to  revenge  his 
brother’s  death,  who  was  murdered  without 
any  law  or  justice? 

From  the  account,  therefore,  which  has 
been  given,  you  yourself  may  perceive  the  dif¬ 
ference;  which  if  it  were  to  be  pronounced  of 
every  one  singly,  I  should  affirm  Tiberius  to 
have  excelled  them  all  in  virtue;  that  young 
Agis  had  been  guilty  of  the  fewest  misdeeds; 
and  that  in  action  and  boldness  Caius  came 
far  short  of  Cleomenes. 

V  V  V 


DEMOSTHENES 

385 ?— 3 B.C. 


Whoever  it  was,  Sosius,  that  wrote  the 
poem  in  honour  of  Alcibiades,  upon 
his  winning  the  chariot-race  at  the 
Olympian  Games,  whether  it  were  Euripides, 
as  is  most  commonly  thought,  or  some  other 
person,  he  tells  us  that  to  a  man’s  being  happy 
it  is  in  the  first  place  requisite  he  should  be 
born  in  “some  famous  city.”  But  for  him  that 
would  attain  to  true  happiness,  which  for  the 
most  part  is  placed  in  the  qualities  and  dispo¬ 
sition  of  the  mind,  it  is,  in  my  opinion,  of  no 
other  disadvantage  to  be  of  a  mean,  obscure 
country,  than  to  be  born  of  a  small  or  plain¬ 
looking  woman.  For  it  were  ridiculous  to 
think  that  Iulis,  a  little  part  of  Ceos,  which  it¬ 
self  is  no  great  island,  and  Angina,  which  an 
Athenian  once  said  ought  to  be  removed,  like 
a  small  eyesore,  from  the  port  of  Piraeus, 
should  breed  good  actors  and  poets,  and  yet 
should  never  be  able  to  produce  a  just,  temper¬ 
ate,  wise,  and  high-minded  man.  Other  arts, 
whose  end  it  is  to  acquire  riches  or  honour,  are 
likely  enough  to  wither  and  decay  in  poor  and 


undistinguished  towns;  but  virtue,  like  a 
strong  and  durable  plant,  may  take  root  and 
thrive  in  any  place  where  it  can  lay  hold  of  an 
ingenuous  nature,  and  a  mind  that  is  industri¬ 
ous. 

I,  for  my  part,  shall  desire  that  for  any  defi¬ 
ciency  of  mine  in  right  judgment  or  action,  1 
myself  may  be,  as  in  fairness,  held  accountable, 
and  shall  not  attribute  it  to  the  obscurity  of  my 
birthplace. 

But  if  any  man  undertake  to  write  a  history 
that  has  to  be  collected  from  materials  gath¬ 
ered  by  observation  and  the  reading  of  works 
not  easy  to  be  got  in  all  places,  nor  written  al¬ 
ways  in  his  own  language,  but  many  of  them 
foreign  and  dispersed  in  other  hands,  for  him, 
undoubtedly,  it  is  in  the  first  place  and  above 
all  things  most  necessary  to  reside  in  some  city 
of  good  note,  addicted  to  liberal  arts,  and  pop¬ 
ulous;  where  he  may  have  plenty  of  all  sorts  of 
books,  and  upon  inquiry  may  hear  and  inform 
himself  of  such  particulars  as,  having  escaped 
the  pens  of  writers,  are  more  faithfully  pre- 


692 

served  in  the  memories  of  men,  lest  his  work 
be  deficient  in  many  things,  even  those  which 
it  can  least  dispense  with. 

But  for  me,  I  live  in  a  little  town,  where  I 
am  willing  to  continue,  lest  it  should  grow 
less;  and  having  had  no  leisure,  while  I  was  in 
Rome  and  other  parts  of  Italy,  to  exercise  my¬ 
self  in  the  Roman  language,  on  account  of 
public  business  and  of  those  who  came  to  be 
instructed  by  me  in  philosophy,  it  was  very 
late,  and  in  the  decline  of  my  age,  before  I 
applied  myself  to  the  reading  of  Latin  authors. 
Upon  which  that  which  happened  to  me  may 
seem  strange,  though  it  be  true;  for  it  was  not 
so  much  by  the  knowledge  of  words  that  I 
came  to  the  understanding  of  things,  as  by  my 
experience  of  things  I  was  enabled  to  follow 
the  meaning  of  words.  But  to  appreciate  the 
graceful  and  ready  pronunciation  of  the  Rom¬ 
an  tongue,  to  understand  the  various  figures 
and  connection  of  words,  and  such  other  orna¬ 
ments,  in  which  the  beauty  of  speaking  con¬ 
sists,  is,  I  doubt  not,  an  admirable  and  delight¬ 
ful  accomplishment;  but  it  requires  a  degree 
of  practice  and  study  which  is  not  easy,  and 
will  better  suit  those  who  have  more  leisure, 
and  time  enough  yet  before  them  for  the  occu¬ 
pation. 

And  so  in  this  fifth  book  of  my  Parallel 
Lives,  in  giving  an  account  of  Demosthenes 
and  Cicero,  my  comparison  of  their  natural 
dispositions  and  their  characters  will  be  form¬ 
ed  upon  their  actions  and  their  lives  as  states¬ 
men,  and  I  shall  not  pretend  to  criticise  their 
orations  one  against  the  other,  to  show  which 
of  the  two  was  the  more  charming  or  the  more 
powerful  speaker.  For  there,  as  Ion  says — 

We  are  but  li\e  a  fish  upon  dry  land; 

a  proverb  which  Caecilius  perhaps  forgot, 
when  he  employed  his  always  adventurous  tal¬ 
ents  in  so  ambitious  an  attempt  as  a  compari¬ 
son  of  Demosthenes  and  Cicero;  and,  possibly, 
if  it  were  a  thing  obvious  and  easy  for  every 
man  to  \now  himself,  the  precept  had  not 
passed  for  an  oracle. 

The  divine  power  seems  originally  to  have 
designed  Demosthenes  and  Cicero  upon  the 
same  plan,  giving  them  many  similarities  in 
their  natural  characters,  as  their  passion  for 
distinction  and  their  love  of  liberty  in  civil 
life,  and  their  want  of  courage  in  dangers  and 
war,  and  at  the  same  time  also  to  have  added 
many  accidental  resemblances.  I  think  there 
can  hardly  be  found  two  other  orators,  who, 
from  small  and  obscure  beginnings,  became 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

so  great  and  mighty;  who  both  contested  with 
kings  and  tyrants,  both  lost  their  daughters, 
were  driven  out  of  their  country,  and  returned 
with  honour;  who,  flying  from  thence  again, 
were  both  seized  upon  by  their  enemies,  and 
at  last  ended  their  lives  with  the  liberty  of 
their  countrymen.  So  that  if  we  were  to  sup¬ 
pose  there  had  been  a  trial  of  skill  between 
nature  and  fortune,  as  there  is  sometimes  be¬ 
tween  artists,  it  would  be  hard  to  judge  wheth¬ 
er  that  succeeded  best  in  making  them  alike  in 
their  dispositions  and  manners,  or  this  in  the 
coincidences  of  their  lives.  We  will  speak  of 
the  eldest  first. 

Demosthenes,  the  father  of  Demosthenes, 
was  a  citizen  of  good  rank  and  quality,  as 
Theopompus  informs  us,  surnamed  the 
Sword-maker,  because  he  had  a  large  work- 
house,  and  kept  servants  skilful  in  that  art  at 
work.  But  of  that  which  /Eschines  the  orator 
said  of  his  mother,  that  she  was  descended  of 
one  Gylon,  who  fled  his  country  upon  an  ac¬ 
cusation  of  treason,  and  of  a  barbarian  wom¬ 
an,  I  can  affirm  nothing,  whether  he  spoke 
true,  or  slandered  and  maligned  her.  This  is 
certain,  that  Demosthenes,  being  as  yet  but 
seven  years  old,  was  left  by  his  father  in  afflu¬ 
ent  circumstances,  the  whole  value  of  his  es¬ 
tate  being  little  short  of  fifteen  talents,  and 
that  he  was  wronged  by  his  guardians,  part  of 
his  fortune  being  embezzled  by  them,  and  the 
rest  neglected;  insomuch  that  even  his  teach¬ 
ers  were  defrauded  of  their  salaries.  This  was 
the  reason  that  he  did  not  obtain  the  liberal 
education  that  he  should  have  had;  besides 
that,  on  account  of  weakness  and  delicate 
health,  his  mother  would  not  let  him  exert 
himself,  and  his  teachers  forbore  to  urge  him. 

He  was  meagre  and  sickly  from  the  first,  and 
hence  had  his  nickname  of  Batalus  given  him, 
it  is  said,  by  the  boys,  in  derision  of  his  appear¬ 
ance;  Batalus  being,  as  some  tell  us,  a  certain 
enervated  flute-player,  in  ridicule  of  whom 
Antiphanes  wrote  a  play.  Others  speak  of  Bat¬ 
alus  as  a  writer  of  wanton  verses  and  drink¬ 
ing  songs.  And  it  would  seem  that  some  part 
of  the  body,  not  decent  to  be  named,  was  at 
that  time  called  batalus  by  the  Athenians.  But 
the  name  of  Argas,  which  also  they  say  was  a 
nickname  of  Demosthenes,  was  given  him  for 
his  behaviour,  as  being  savage  and  spiteful, 
argas  being  one  of  the  poetical  words  for  a 
snake;  or  for  his  disagreeable  way  of  speak¬ 
ing,  Argas  being  the  name  of  a  poet  who  com¬ 
posed  very  harshly  and  disagreeably.  So  much, 
as  Plato  says,  for  such  matters. 


DEMOSTHENES 

The  first  occasion  of  his  eager  inclination  to 
oratory,  they  say,  was  this.  Callistratus,  the 
orator,  going  to  plead  in  open  court  for  Oro- 
pus,  the  expectation  of  the  issue  of  that  cause 
was  very  great,  as  well  for  the  ability  of  the 
orator,  who  was  then  at  the  height  of  his  rep¬ 
utation,  as  also  for  the  fame  of  the  action  itself. 
Therefore,  Demosthenes,  having  heard  the  tu¬ 
tors  and  schoolmasters  agreeing  among  them¬ 
selves  to  be  present  at  this  trial,  with  much 
importunity  persuaded  his  tutor  to  take  him 
along  with  him  to  the  hearing;  who,  having 
some  acquaintance  with  the  doorkeepers,  pro¬ 
cured  a  place  where  the  boy  might  sit  unseen, 
and  hear  what  was  said.  Callistratus  having 
got  the  day,  and  being  much  admired,  the  boy 
began  to  look  upon  his  glory  with  a  kind  of 
emulation,  observing  how  he  was  courted  on 
all  hands,  and  attended  on  his  way  by  the 
multitude;  but  his  wonder  was  more  than  all 
excited  by  the  power  of  his  eloquence,  which 
seemed  able  to  subdue  and  win  over  anything. 

From  this  time,  therefore,  bidding  farewell 
to  other  sorts  of  learning  and  study,  he  now 
began  to  exercise  himself,  and  to  take  pains 
in  declaiming,  as  one  that  meant  to  be  himself 
also  an  orator.  He  made  use  of  Isaeus  as  his 
guide  to  the  art  of  speaking,  though  Isocrates 
at  that  time  was  giving  lessons;  whether,  as 
some  say,  because  he  was  an  orphan,  and  was 
not  able  to  pay  Isocrates  his  appointed  fee  of 
ten  minae,  or  because  he  preferred  Isaeus’s 
speaking,  as  being  more  business-like  and  ef¬ 
fective  in  actual  use.  Hermippus  says  that  he 
met  with  certain  memoirs  without  any  au¬ 
thor’s  name,  in  which  it  was  written  that 
Demosthenes  was  a  scholar  to  Plato,  and  learnt 
much  of  his  eloquence  from  him;  and  he  also 
mentions  Ctesibius,  as  reporting  from  Callias 
of  Syracuse  and  some  others,  that  Demos¬ 
thenes  secretly  obtained  a  knowledge  of  the 
systems  of  Isocrates  and  Alcidamas,  and  mas¬ 
tered  them  thoroughly. 

As  soon,  therefore,  as  he  was  grown  up  to 
man’s  estate,  he  began  to  go  to  law  with  his 
guardians,  and  to  write  orations  against  them; 
who,  in  the  meantime,  had  recourse  to  vari¬ 
ous  subterfuges  and  pleas  for  new  trials,  and 
Demosthenes,  though  he  was  thus,  as  Thucy¬ 
dides  says,  taught  his  business  in  dangers,  and 
by  his  own  exertions  was  successful  in  his  suit, 
was  yet  unable  for  all  this  to  recover  so  much 
as  a  small  fraction  of  his  patrimony.  He  only 
attained  some  degree  of  confidence  in  speak¬ 
ing,  and  some  competent  experience  in  it.  And 
having  got  a  taste  of  the  honour  and  power 


693 

which  are  acquired  by  pleadings,  he  now  ven¬ 
tured  to  come  forth,  and  to  undertake  public 
business. 

And,  as  it  is  said  of  Laomedon,  the  Orcho- 
menian,  that,  by  advice  of  his  physician,  he 
used  to  run  long  distances  to  keep  off  some  dis¬ 
ease  of  his  spleen,  and  by  that  means  having, 
through  labour  and  exercise,  framed  the  habit 
of  his  body,  he  betook  himself  to  the  great 
garland  games,  and  became  one  of  the  best 
runners  at  the  long  race;  so  it  happened  to 
Demosthenes,  who,  first  venturing  upon  ora¬ 
tory  for  the  recovery  of  his  own  private  prop¬ 
erty,  by  this  acquired  ability  in  speaking,  and 
at  length,  in  public  business,  as  it  were  in  the 
great  games,  came  to  have  the  pre-eminence  of 
all  competitors  in  the  assembly.  But  when  he 
first  addressed  himself  to  the  people,  he  met 
with  great  discouragements,  and  was  derided 
for  his  strange  and  uncouth  style,  which  was 
cumbered  with  long  sentences  and  tortured 
with  formal  arguments  to  a  most  harsh  and 
disagreeable  excess.  Besides,  he  had,  it  seems, 
a  weakness  in  his  voice,  a  perplexed  and  in¬ 
distinct  utterance  and  a  shortness  of  breath, 
which,  by  breaking  and  disjointing  his  sen¬ 
tences,  much  obscured  the  sense  and  meaning 
of  what  he  spoke. 

Thus  in  the  end  being  quite  disheartened; 
he  forsook  the  assembly;  and  as  he  was  walk¬ 
ing  carelessly  and  sauntering  about  the  Piraeus, 
Eunomus,  the  Thriasian,  then  a  very  old  man, 
seeing  him,  upbraided  him,  saying  that  his  dic¬ 
tion  was  very  much  like  that  of  Pericles,  and 
that  he  was  wanting  to  himself  through  cow¬ 
ardice  and  meanness  of  spirit,  neither  bearing 
up  with  courage  against  popular  outcry,  nor 
fitting  his  body  for  action,  but  suffering  it  to 
languish  through  mere  sloth  and  negligence. 

Another  time,  when  the  assembly  had  re¬ 
fused  to  hear  him,  and  he  was  going  home 
with  his  head  muffled  up,  taking  it  very 
heavily,  they  relate  that  Satyrus,  the  actor,  fol¬ 
lowed  him,  and  being  his  familiar  acquain¬ 
tance,  entered  into  conversation  with  him.  To 
whom,  when  Demosthenes  bemoaned  himself, 
that  having  been  the  most  industrious  of  all 
the  pleaders,  and  having  almost  spent  the 
whole  strength  and  vigour  of  his  body  in  that 
employment,  he  could  not  yet  find  any  accep¬ 
tance  with  the  people,  that  drunken  sots,  mari¬ 
ners,  and  illiterate  fellows  were  heard,  and 
had  the  hustings  for  their  own,  while  he  him¬ 
self  was  despised,  “You  say  true,  Demosthe¬ 
nes,”  replied  Satyrus,  “but  I  will  quickly  rem¬ 
edy  the  cause  of  all  this,  if  you  will  repeat  to 


694 

me  some  passage  out  of  Euripides  or  Sopho¬ 
cles.”  Which  when  Demosthenes  had  pro¬ 
nounced,  Satyrus  presently  taking  it  up  after 
him,  gave  the  same  passage,  in  his  rendering 
of  it,  such  a  new  form,  by  accompanying  it 
with  the  proper  mien  and  gesture,  that  to 
Demosthenes  it  seemed  quite  another  thing. 

By  this,  being  convinced  how  much  grace 
and  ornament  language  acquires  from  action, 
he  began  to  esteem  it  a  small  matter,  and  as 
good  as  nothing  for  a  man  to  exercise  himself 
in  declaiming,  if  he  neglected  enunciation  and 
delivery.  Hereupon  he  built  himself  a  place  to 
study  in  under  ground  (which  was  still  re¬ 
maining  in  our  time),  and  hither  he  would 
come  constantly  every  day  to  form  his  action 
and  to  exercise  his  voice;  and  here  he  would 
continue,  oftentimes  without  intermission,  two 
or  three  months  together,  shaving  one  half  of 
his  head,  that  so  for  shame  he  might  not  go 
abroad,  though  he  desired  it  ever  so  much. 

Nor  was  this  all,  but  he  also  made  his  con¬ 
versation  with  people  abroad,  his  common 
speech,  and  his  business,  subservient  to  his 
studies,  taking  from  hence  occasions  and  argu¬ 
ments  as  matter  to  work  upon.  For  as  soon  as 
he  was  parted  from  his  company,  down  he 
would  go  at  once  into  his  study,  and  run  over 
everything  in  order  that  had  passed,  and  the 
reasons  that  might  be  alleged  for  and  against 
it.  Any  speeches,  also,  that  he  was  present  at, 
he  would  go  over  again  with  himself,  and  re¬ 
duce  into  periods;  and  whatever  others  spoke 
to  him,  or  he  to  them,  he  would  correct,  trans¬ 
form,  and  vary  several  ways.  Hence  it  was  that 
he  was  looked  upon  as  a  person  of  no  great 
natural  genius,  but  one  who  owed  all  the  pow¬ 
er  and  ability  he  had  in  speaking  to  labour 
and  industry.  Of  the  truth  of  which  it  was 
thought  to  be  no  small  sign  that  he  was  very 
rarely  heard  to  speak  upon  the  occasion,  but 
though  he  were  by  name  frequently  called  up¬ 
on  by  the  people,  as  he  sat  in  the  assembly,  yet 
he  would  not  rise  unless  he  had  previously  con¬ 
sidered  the  subject,  and  came  prepared  for  it. 

Thus  it  was  that  many  of  the  popular  plead¬ 
ers  used  to  make  it  a  jest  against  him;  and 
Pytheas  once,  scoffing  at  him,  said  that  his  ar¬ 
guments  smelt  of  the  lamp.  To  which  Demos¬ 
thenes  gave  the  sharp  answer,  “It  is  true,  in¬ 
deed,  Pytheas,  that  your  lamp  and  mine  are 
not  conscious  of  the  same  things.”  To  others, 
however,  he  would  not  much  deny  it,  but 
would  admit  frankly  enough,  that  he  neither 
entirely  wrote  his  speeches  beforehand,  nor  yet 
spoke  wholly  extempore.  And  he  would  affirm 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

that  it  was  the  more  truly  popular  act  to  use 
premeditation,  such  preparation  being  a  kind 
of  respect  to  the  people;  whereas,  to  slight 
and  take  no  care  how  what  is  said  is  likely  to 
be  received  by  the  audience,  shows  something 
of  an  oligarchical  temper,  and  is  the  course  of 
one  that  intends  force  rather  than  persuasion. 
Of  his  want  of  courage  and  assurance  to  speak 
offhand,  they  make  it  also  another  argument 
that,  when  he  was  at  a  loss  and  discomposed, 
Demades  would  often  rise  up  on  the  sudden 
to  support  him,  but  he  was  never  observed  to 
do  the  same  for  Demades. 

Whence  then,  may  some  say,  was  it,  that 
iEschines  speaks  of  him  as  a  person  so  much 
to  be  wondered  at  for  his  boldness  in  speak¬ 
ing?  Or,  how  could  it  be,  when  Python,  the 
Byzantine,  with  so  much  confidence  and  such 
a  torrent  of  words  inveighed  against  the 
Athenians,  that  Demosthenes  alone  stood  up 
to  oppose  him?  Or  when  Lamarchus,  the  My- 
rinasan,  had  written  a  panegyric  upon  King 
Philip  and  Alexander,  in  which  he  uttered 
many  things  in  reproach  of  the  Thebans  and 
Olynthians,  and  at  the  Olympic  Games  re¬ 
cited  it  publicly,  how  was  it  that  he,  rising  up, 
and  recounting  historically  and  demonstrative¬ 
ly  what  benefits  and  advantages  all  Greece  had 
received  from  the  Thebans  and  Chalcidians, 
and,  on  the  contrary,  what  mischiefs  the  flat¬ 
terers  of  the  Macedonians  had  brought  upon 
it,  so  turned  the  minds  of  all  that  were  present 
that  the  sophist,  in  alarm  at  the  outcry  against 
him,  secretly  made  his  way  out  of  the  assem¬ 
bly? 

But  Demosthenes,  it  should  seem,  regarded 
other  points  in  the  character  of  Pericles  to  be 
unsuited  to  him;  but  his  reserve  and  his  sus¬ 
tained  manner,  and  his  forbearing  to  speak  on 
the  sudden,  or  upon  every  occasion,  as  being 
the  things  to  which  principally  he  owed  his 
greatness,  these  he  followed,  and  endeavoured 
to  imitate,  neither  wholly  neglecting  the  glory 
which  present  occasion  offered,  nor  yet  willing 
too  often  to  expose  his  faculty  to  the  mercy  of 
chance.  For,  in  fact,  the  orations  which  were 
spoken  by  him  had  much  more  of  boldness 
and  confidence  in  them  than  those  that  he 
wrote,  if  we  may  believe  Eratosthenes,  Deme¬ 
trius  the  Phalerian,  and  the  Comedians.  Era¬ 
tosthenes  says  that  often  in  his  speaking  he 
would  be  transported  into  a  kind  of  ecstasy, 
and  Demetrius,  that  he  uttered  the  famous 
metrical  adjuration  to  the  people — 

By  the  earth,  the  springs,  the  rivers,  and  the 
streams, 


DEMOSTHENES 

as  a  man  inspired  and  beside  himself.  One  of 
the  comedians  calls  him  a  rhopoperpcrethras , 
and  another  scoffs  at  him  for  his  use  of  antithe¬ 
sis: — 

And  what  he  took,  took  back',  a  phrase  to  please, 
The  very  fancy  of  Demosthenes. 

Unless,  indeed,  this  also  is  meant  by  Anti- 
phanes  for  a  jest  upon  the  speech  on  Halone- 
sus,  which  Demosthenes  advised  the  Atheni¬ 
ans  not  to  ta\e  at  Philip’s  hands,  but  to  ta\e 
bac\ . 

All,  however,  used  to  consider  Demades,  in 
the  mere  use  of  his  natural  gifts,  an  orator  im¬ 
possible  to  surpass,  and  that  in  what  he  spoke 
on  the  sudden,  he  excelled  all  the  study  and 
preparation  of  Demosthenes.  And  Ariston,  the 
Chian,  has  recorded  a  judgment  which  Theo¬ 
phrastus  passed  upon  the  orators;  for  being 
asked  what  kind  of  orator  he  accounted  De¬ 
mosthenes,  he  answered,  “Worthy  of  the  city 
of  Athens”;  and  then  what  he  thought  of 
Demades,  he  answered,  “Above  it.”  And  the 
same  philosopher  reports  that  Polyeuctus,  the 
Sphettian,  one  of  the  Athenian  politicians 
about  that  time,  was  wont  to  say  that  Demos¬ 
thenes  was  the  greatest  orator,  but  Phocion 
the  ablest,  as  he  expressed  the  .most  sense  in 
the  fewest  words.  And,  indeed,  it  is  related 
that  Demosthenes  himself,  as  often  as  Phocion 
stood  up  to  plead  against  him,  would  say  to 
his  acquaintance,  “Here  comes  the  knife  to  my 
speech.”  Yet  it  does  not  appear  whether  he 
had  this  feeling  for  his  powers  of  speaking,  or 
for  his  life  and  character,  and  meant  to  say 
that  one  word  or  nod  from  a  man  who  was 
really  trusted  would  go  further  than  a  thou¬ 
sand  lengthy  periods  from  others. 

Demetrius,  the  Phalerian,  tells  us  that  he 
was  informed  by  Demosthenes  himself,  now 
grown  old,  that  the  ways  he  made  use  of  to 
remedy  his  natural  bodily  infirmities  and  de¬ 
fects  were  such  as  these;  his  inarticulate  and 
stammering  pronunciation  he  overcame  and 
rendered  more  distinct  by  speaking  with  peb¬ 
bles  in  his  mouth;  his  voice  he  disciplined  by 
declaiming  and  reciting  speeches  or  verses 
when  he  was  out  of  breath,  while  running  or 
going  up  steep  places;  and  that  in  his  house 
he  had  a  large  looking-glass,  before  which  he 
would  stand  and  go  through  his  exercises.  It 
is  told  that  some  one  once  came  to  request 
his  assistance  as  a  pleader,  and  related  how  he 
had  been  assaulted  and  beaten.  “Certainly,” 
said  Demosthenes,  “nothing  of  the  kind  can 
have  happened  to  you.”  Upon  which  the  other, 
raising  his  voice,  exclaimed  loudly,  “What,  De- 


695 

mosthenes,  nothing  has  been  done  to  me?” 
“Ah,”  replied  Demosthenes,  “now  I  hear  the 
voice  of  one  that  has  been  injured  and  beaten.” 
Of  so  great  consequence  towards  the  gaining 
of  belief  did  he  esteem  the  tone  and  action  of 
the  speaker. 

The  action  which  he  used  himself  was  won¬ 
derfully  pleasing  to  the  common  people,  but 
by  well-educated  people,  as,  for  example,  by 
Demetrius,  the  Phalerian,  it  was  looked  upon 
as  mean,  humiliating,  and  unmanly.  And  Her- 
mippus  says  of  y£sion,  that,  being  asked  his 
opinion  concerning  the  ancient  orators,  and 
those  of  his  own  time,  he  answered  that  it  was 
admirable  to  see  with  what  composure  and  in 
what  high  style  they  addressed  themselves  to 
the  people;  but  that  the  orations  of  Demos- 
thenes,  when  they  are  read,  certainly  appear  to 
be  superior  in  point  of  construction,  and  more 
effective.  His  written  speeches,  beyond  all 
question,  are  characterised  by  austere  tone  and 
by  their  severity.  In  his  extempore  retorts  and 
rejoinders,  he  allowed  himself  the  use  of  jest 
and  mockery.  When  Demades  said,  “Demos¬ 
thenes  teach  me!  So  might  the  sow  teach 
Minerva!”  he  replied,  “Was  it  this  Minerva, 
that  was  lately  found  playing  the  harlot  in  Col- 
lytus?”  When  a  thief,  who  had  the  nickname 
of  the  Brazen,  was  attempting  to  upbraid  him 
for  sitting  up  late,  and  writing  by  candle-light, 
“I  know  very  well,”  said  he,  “that  you  had 
rather  have  all  lights  out;  and  wonder  not, 
O  ye  men  of  Athens,  at  the  many  robberies 
which  are  committed,  since  we  have  thieves 
of  brass  and  walls  of  clay.” 

But  on  these  points,  though  we  have  much 
more  to  mention,  we  will  add  nothing  at 
present.  We  will  proceed  to  take  an  estimate 
of  his  character  from  his  actions  and  his  life  as 
a  statesman. 

His  first  entering  into  public  business  was 
much  about  the  time  of  the  Phocian  war,  as 
himself  affirms,  and  may  be  collected  from 
his  Philippic  orations.  For  of  these,  some  were 
made  after  that  action  was  over,  and  the 
earliest  of  them  refer  to  its  concluding  events. 
It  is  certain  that  he  engaged  in  the  accusation 
of  Midias  when  he  was  but  two-and-thirty 
years  old,  having  as  yet  no  interest  or  reputa¬ 
tion  as  a  politician.  And  this  it  was,  I  consider, 
that  induced  him  to  withdraw  the  action,  and 
accept  a  sum  of  money  as  a  compromise.  For 
of  himself — 

He  was  no  easy  or  good-natured  man, 
but  of  a  determined  disposition,  and  resolute 
to  see  himself  righted;  however,  finding  it  a 


696 

hard  matter  and  above  his  strength  to  deal 
with  Midias,  a  man  so  well  secured  on  all  sides 
with  money,  eloquence,  and  friends,  he  yield¬ 
ed  to  the  entreaties  of  those  who  interceded 
for  him.  But  had  he  seen  any  hopes  or  possi¬ 
bility  of  prevailing,  I  cannot  believe  that  three 
thousand  drachmas  could  have  taken  off  the 
edge  of  his  revenge. 

The  object  which  he  chose  for  himself  in 
the  commonwealth  was  noble  and  just,  the 
defence  of  the  Grecians  against  Philip;  and 
in  this  he  behaved  himself  so  worthily  that  he 
soon  grew  famous,  and  excited  attention  every¬ 
where  for  his  eloquence  and  courage  in  speak¬ 
ing.  He  was  admired  through  all  Greece;  the 
King  of  Persia  courted  him,  and  by  Philip 
himself  he  was  more  esteemed  than  all  the 
other  orators.  His  very  enemies  were  forced 
to  confess  that  they  had  to  do  with  a  man  of 
mark;  for  such  a  character  even  /Eschines  and 
Hyperides  give  him,  where  they  accuse  and 
speak  against  him. 

So  that  I  cannot  imagine  what  ground  Theo- 
pompus  had  to  say  that  Demosthenes  was  of  a 
fickle,  unsettled  disposition,  and  could  not 
long  continue  firm  either  to  the  same  men  or 
the  same  affairs;  whereas  the  contrary  is  most 
apparent,  for  the  same  party  and  post  in  poli¬ 
tics  which  he  held  from  the  beginning,  to  these 
he  kept  constant  to  the  end;  and  was  so  far 
from  leaving  them  while  he  lived  that  he 
chose  rather  to  forsake  his  life  than  his  pur¬ 
pose.  He  was  never  heard  to  apologise  for 
shifting  sides  like  Demades,  who  would  say  he 
often  spoke  against  himself,  but  never  against 
the  city;  nor  as  Melanopus,  who,  being  gener¬ 
ally  against  Callistratus,  but  being  often  bribed 
off  with  money,  was  wont  to  tell  the  people, 
“The  man  indeed  is  my  enemy,  but  we  must 
submit  for  the  good  of  our  country”;  nor 
again  as  Nicodemus,  the  Messenian,  who  hav¬ 
ing  first  appeared  on  Cassander’s  side,  and 
afterwards  taken  part  with  Demetrius,  said 
the  two  things  were  not  in  themselves  con¬ 
trary,  it  being  always  most  advisable  to  obey 
the  conqueror.  We  have  nothing  of  this  kind 
to  say  against  Demosthenes,  as  one  who  would 
turn  aside  or  prevaricate,  either  in  word  or 
deed.  There  could  not  have  been  less  varia¬ 
tion  in  his  public  acts  if  they  had  all  been 
played,  so  to  say,  from  first  to  last,  from  the 
same  score. 

Panaetius,  the  philosopher,  said  that  most 
of  his  orations  are  so  written  as  if  they  were 
to  prove  this  one  conclusion,  that  what  is 
honest  and  virtuous  is  for  itself  only  to  be 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

chosen;  as  that  of  the  Crown,  that  against 
Aristocrates,  that  for  the  Immunities,  and  the 
Philippics;  in  all  which  he  persuades  his  fel¬ 
low-citizens  to  pursue  not  that  which  seems 
most  pleasant,  easy,  or  profitable,  but  declares, 
over  and  over  again,  that  they  ought  in  the 
first  place  to  prefer  that  which  is  just  and 
honourable  before  their  own  safety  and  preser¬ 
vation.  So  that  if  he  had  kept  his  hands  clean, 
if  his  courage  for  the  wars  had  been  answer- 
able  to  the  generosity  of  his  principles,  and 
the  dignity  of  his  orations,  he  might  deserved¬ 
ly  have  his  name  placed,  not  in  the  number 
of  such  orators  as  Mcerocles,  Polyeuctus,  and 
Hyperides,  but  in  the  highest  rank  with  Ci- 
mon,  Thucydides,  and  Pericles. 

Certainly  amongst  those  who  were  con¬ 
temporary  with  him,  Phocion,  though  he  ap¬ 
peared  on  the  less  commendable  side  in  the 
commonwealth,  and  was  counted  as  one  of 
the  Macedonian  party,  nevertheless,  by  his 
courage  and  his  honesty,  procured  himself  a 
name  not  inferior  to  those  of  Ephialtes,  Aris¬ 
tides,  and  Cimon.  But  Demosthenes,  being 
neither  fit  to  be  relied  on  for  courage  in  arms, 
as  Demetrius  says,  nor  on  all  sides  inaccessible 
to  bribery  (for  how  invincible  soever  he  was 
against  the  gifts  of  Philip  and  the  Macedoni¬ 
ans,  yet  elsewhere  he  lay  open  to  assault,  and 
was  overpowered  by  the  gold  which  came 
down  from  Susa  and  Ecbatana),  was  there¬ 
fore  esteemed  better  able  to  recommend  than  to 
imitate  the  virtues  of  past  times. 

And  yet  (excepting  only  Phocion),  even  in 
his  life  and  manners,  he  far  surpassed  the 
other  orators  of  his  time.  None  of  them  ad¬ 
dressed  the  people  so  boldly.  He  attacked  the 
faults,  and  opposed  himself  to  the  unreason¬ 
able  desires  of  the  multitude,  as  may  be  seen 
in  his  orations.  Theopompus  writes  that  the 
Athenians  having  by  name  selected  Demos¬ 
thenes,  and  called  upon  him  to  accuse  a  cer¬ 
tain  person,  he  refused  to  do  it;  upon  which 
the  assembly  being  all  in  an  uproar,  he  rose 
up  and  said,  “Your  counsellor,  whether  you 
will  or  no,  O  ye  men  of  Athens,  you  shall  al¬ 
ways  have  me;  but  a  sycophant  or  false  ac¬ 
cuser,  though  you  would  have  me,  I  shall 
never  be.”  And  his  conduct  in  the  case  of 
Antiphon  was  perfectly  aristocratical;  whom, 
after  he  had  been  acquitted  in  the  assembly, 
he  took  and  brought  before  the  court  of  Are¬ 
opagus,  and,  setting  at  naught  the  displeasure 
of  the  people,  convicted  him  there  of  having 
promised  Philip  to  burn  the  arsenal;  where¬ 
upon  the  man  was  condemned  by  that  court, 


DEMOSTHENES 

and  suffered  for  it.  He  accused,  also,  Theoris, 
the  priestess,  amongst  other  misdemeanours,  of 
having  instructed  and  taught  the  slaves  to  de¬ 
ceive  and  cheat  their  masters,  for  which  the 
sentence  of  death  was  passed  upon  her,  and 
she  was  executed. 

The  oration  which  Apollodorus  made  use 
of,  and  by  it  carried  the  cause  against  Timo- 
theus,  the  general,  in  an  action  of  debt,  it  is 
said  was  written  for  him  by  Demosthenes:  as 
also  those  against  Phormion  and  Stephanus, 
in  which  latter  case  he  was  thought  to  have 
acted  dishonourably,  for  the  speech  which 
Phormion  used  against  Apollodorus  was  also 
of  his  making;  he,  as  it  were,  having  simply 
furnished  two  adversaries  out  of  the  same  shop 
with  weapons  to  wound  one  another.  Of  his 
orations  addressed  to  the  public  assemblies, 
that  against  Androtion,  and  those  against  Tim- 
ocrates  and  Aristocrates,  were  written  for 
others,  before  he  had  come  forward  himself  as 
a  politician.  They  were  composed,  it  seems, 
when  he  was  but  seven  or  eight-and-twenty 
years  old.  That  against  Aristogiton,  and  that 
for  the  Immunities,  he  spoke  himself,  at  the 
request,  as  he  says,  of  Ctesippus,  the  son  of 
Chabrias,  but,  as  some  say,  out  of  courtship 
to  the  young  man’s  mother.  Though,  in  fact, 
he  did  not  marry  her,  for  his  wife  was  a  wom¬ 
an  of  Samos,  as  Demetrius,  the  Magnesian, 
writes,  in  his  book  On  Persons  of  the  Same 
Name. 

It  is  not  certain  whether  his  oration  against 
TEschines,  for  misconduct  as  ambassador,  was 
ever  spoken;  although  Idomeneus  says  that 
iTschines  wanted  only  thirty  voices  to  con¬ 
demn  him.  But  this  seems  not  to  be  correct,  at 
least  so  far  as  may  be  conjectured  from  both 
their  orations  concerning  the  crown;  for  in 
these,  neither  of  them  speaks  clearly  or  di¬ 
rectly  of  it,  as  a  cause  that  ever  came  to  trial. 
But  let  others  decide  this  controversy. 

It  was  evident,  even  in  time  of  peace,  what 
course  Demosthenes  would  steer  in  the  com¬ 
monwealth;  for  whatever  was  done  by  the 
Macedonian,  he  criticised  and  found  fault 
with,  and  upon  all  occasions  was  stirring  up 
the  people  of  Athens,  and  inflaming  them 
against  him.  Therefore,  in  the  court  of  Philip, 
no  man  was  so  much  talked  of,  or  of  so  great 
account  as  he;  and  when  he  came  thither,  one 
of  the  ten  ambassadors  who  were  sent  into 
Macedonia,  though  all  had  audience  given 
them,  yet  his  speech  was  answered  with  most 
care  and  exactness.  But  in  other  respects, 
Philip  entertained  him  not  so  honourably  as 


697 

the  rest,  neither  did  he  show  him  the  same 
kindness  and  civility  with  which  he  applied 
himself  to  the  party  of  ^Eschines  and  Philo- 
crates.  So  that,  when  the  others  commended 
Philip  for  his  able  speaking,  his  beautiful  per¬ 
son,  nay,  and  also  for  his  good  companionship 
in  drinking,  Demosthenes  could  not  refrain 
from  cavilling  at  these  praises;  the  first,  he 
said,  was  a  quality  which  might  well  enough 
become  a  rhetorician,  the  second  a  woman, 
and  the  last  was  only  the  property  of  a  sponge; 
no  one  of  them  was  the  proper  commendation 
of  a  prince. 

But  when  things  came  at  last  to  war,  Philip 
on  the  one  side  being  not  able  to  live  in  peace, 
and  the  Athenians,  on  the  other  side,  being 
stirred  up  by  Demosthenes,  the  first  action  he 
put  them  upon  was  the  reducing  of  Euboea, 
which,  by  the  treachery  of  the  tyrants,  was 
brought  under  subjection  to  Philip.  And  on 
his  proposition,  the  decree  was  voted,  and  they 
crossed  over  thither  and  chased  the  Macedo¬ 
nians  out  of  the  island.  The  next  was  the  relief 
of  the  Byzantines  and  Perinthians,  whom  the 
Macedonians  at  that  time  were  attacking.  He 
persuaded  the  people  to  lay  aside  their  enmity 
against  these  cities,  to  forget  the  offences  com¬ 
mitted  by  them  in  the  Confederate  War,  and 
to  send  them  such  succours  as  eventually  saved 
and  secured  them.  Not  long  after,  he  under¬ 
took  an  embassy  through  the  states  of  Greece, 
which  he  solicited  and  so  far  incensed  against 
Philip  that,  a  few  only  excepted,  he  brought 
them  all  into  a  general  league.  So  that,  besides 
the  forces  composed  of  the  citizens  themselves, 
there  was  an  army  consisting  of  fifteen  thou¬ 
sand  foot  and  two  thousand  horse,  and  the 
money  to  pay  these  strangers  was  levied  and 
brought  in  with  great  cheerfulness.  On  which 
occasion  it  was,  says  Theophrastus,  on  the  allies 
requesting  that  their  contributions  for  the  war 
might  be  ascertained  and  stated,  Crobylus,  the 
orator,  made  use  of  the  saying,  “War  can’t  be 
fed  at  so  much  a  day.” 

Now  was  all  Greece  up  in  arms,  and  in 
great  expectation  what  would  be  the  event. 
The  Euboeans,  the  Achaeans,  the  Corinthians, 
the  Megarians,  the  Leucadians,  and  Corcyrae- 
ans,  their  people  and  their  cities,  were  all 
joined  together  in  a  league.  But  the  hardest 
task  was  yet  behind,  left  for  Demosthenes,  to 
draw  the  Thebans  into  this  confederacy  with 
the  rest.  Their  country  bordered  next  upon 
Attica,  they  had  great  forces  for  the  war,  and 
at  that  time  they  were  accounted  the  best  sol¬ 
diers  of  all  Greece,  but  it  was  no  easy  matter 


698 

to  make  them  break  with  Philip,  who,  by 
many  good  offices,  had  so  lately  obliged  them 
in  the  Phocian  war;  especially  considering 
how  the  subjects  of  dispute  and  variance  be¬ 
tween  the  two  cities  were  continually  renewed 
and  exasperated  by  petty  quarrels,  arising  out 
of  the  proximity  of  their  frontiers. 

But  after  Philip,  being  now  grown  high  and 
puffed  up  with  his  good  success  at  Amphissa, 
on  a  sudden  surprised  Elatea  and  possessed 
himself  of  Phocis,  and  the  Athenians  were  in 
a  great  consternation,  none  durst  venture  to 
rise  up  to  speak,  no  one  knew  what  to  say,  all 
were  at  a  loss,  and  the  whole  assembly  in  si¬ 
lence  and  perplexity;  in  this  extremity  of  af¬ 
fairs  Demosthenes  was  the  only  man  who  ap¬ 
peared,  his  counsel  to  them  being  alliance  with 
the  Thebans.  And  having  in  other  ways  en¬ 
couraged  the  people,  and,  as  his  manner  was, 
raised  their  spirits  up  with  hopes,  he,  with 
some  others,  was  sent  ambassador  to  Thebes. 
To  oppose  him,  as  Marsyas  says,  Philip  also 
sent  thither  his  envoys,  Amyntas  and  Clear- 
chus,  two  Macedonians,  besides  Daochus,  a 
Thessalian,  and  Thrasydaeus.  Now,  the  The¬ 
bans,  in  their  consultations,  were  well  enough 
aware  what  suited  best  with  their  own  inter¬ 
est,  but  every  one  had  before  his  eyes  the  ter¬ 
rors  of  war,  and  their  losses  in  the  Phocian 
troubles  were  still  recent:  but  such  was  the 
force  and  power  of  the  orator,  fanning  up,  as 
Theopompus  says,  their  courage,  and  firing 
their  emulation,  that,  casting  away  every 
thought  of  prudence,  fear,  or  obligation,  in 
a  sort  of  divine  possession  they  chose  the 
path  of  honour,  to  which  his  words  invited 
them. 

And  this  success,  thus  accomplished  by  an 
orator,  was  thought  to  be  so  glorious  and  of 
such  consequence,  that  Philip  immediately 
sent  heralds  to  treat  and  petition  for  a  peace: 
all  Greece  was  aroused,  and  up  in  arms  to 
help.  And  the  commanders-in-chief,  not  only 
of  Attica,  but  of  Bceotia,  applied  themselves  to 
Demosthenes,  and  observed  his  directions.  He 
managed  all  the  assemblies  of  the  Thebans,  no 
less  than  those  of  the  Athenians;  he  was  be¬ 
loved  both  by  the  one  and  by  the  other,  and 
exercised  the  same  supreme  authority  with 
both;  and  that  not  by  unfair  means,  or  with¬ 
out  just  cause,  as  Theopompus  professes,  but 
indeed  it  was  no  more  than  was  due  to  his 
merit. 

But  there  was,  it  would  seem,  some  divinely 
ordered  fortune,  commissioned,  in  the  revolu¬ 
tion  of  things,  to  put  a  period  at  this  time  to 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  liberty  of  Greece,  which  opposed  and 
thwarted  all  their  actions,  and  by  many  signs 
foretold  what  should  happen.  Such  were  the 
sad  predictions  uttered  by  the  Pythian  priest¬ 
ess,  and  this  old  oracle  cited  out  of  the  Sibyl’s 
verses: — 

The  battle  on  Thermodon  that  shall  be 

Safe  at  a  distance  I  desire  to  see, 

Far,  like  an  eagle,  watching  in  the  air, 

Conquered  shall  weep,  and  conqueror  perish 
there. 

This  Thermodon,  they  say,  is  a  little  rivulet 
here  in  our  country  in  Chaeronea,  running  into 
the  Cephisus.  But  we  know  of  none  that  is  so 
called  at  the  present  time;  and  can  only  con¬ 
jecture  that  the  streamlet  which  is  now  called 
Haemon,  and  runs  by  the  temple  of  Hercules, 
where  the  Grecians  were  encamped,  might 
perhaps  in  those  days  be  called  Thermodon, 
and  after  the  fight,  being  filled  with  blood  and 
dead  bodies,  upon  this  occasion,  as  we  guess, 
might  change  its  old  name  for  that  which  it 
now  bears.  Yet  Duris  says  that  this  Thermo¬ 
don  was  no  river,  but  that  some  of  the  soldiers, 
as  they  were  pitching  their  tents  and  digging 
trenches  about  them,  found  a  small  stone 
statue,  which,  by  the  inscription,  appeared  to 
be  the  figure  of  Thermodon,  carrying  a 
wounded  Amazon  in  his  arms;  and  that  there 
was  another  oracle  current  about  it,  as  fol¬ 
lows: — 

The  battle  on  Thermodoti  that  shall  be, 

Fail  not,  blacky  raven,  to  attend  and  see; 

The  flesh  of  men  shall  there  abound  for  thee. 

In  fine,  it  is  not  easy  to  determine  what  is 
the  truth.  But  of  Demosthenes  it  is  said  that  he 
had  such  great  confidence  in  the  Grecian 
forces,  and  was  so  excited  by  the  sight  of  the 
courage  and  resolution  of  so  many  brave  men 
ready  to  engage  the  enemy,  that  he  would  by 
no  means  endure  they  should  give  any  heed 
to  oracles,  or  hearken  to  prophecies,  but  gave 
out  that  he  suspected  even  the  prophetess  her¬ 
self,  as  if  she  had  been  tampered  with  to  speak 
in  favour  of  Philip.  The  Thebans  he  put  in 
mind  of  Epaminondas,  the  Athenians  of  Peri¬ 
cles,  who  always  took  their  own  measures  and 
governed  their  actions  by  reason,  looking  up¬ 
on  things  of  this  kind  as  mere  pretexts  for 
cowardice.  Thus  far,  therefore,  Demosthenes 
acquitted  himself  like  a  brave  man.  But  in  the 
fight  he  did  nothing  honourable,  nor  was  his 
performance  answerable  to  his  speeches.  For 
he  fled,  deserting  his  place  disgracefully,  and 
throwing  away  his  arms,  not  ashamed,  as  Py- 
theas  observed,  to  belie  the  inscription  written 


DEMOSTHENES 

on  his  shield,  in  letters  of  gold,  “With  good 
fortune.” 

In  the  meantime,  Philip,  in  the  first  moment 
of  victory,  was  so  transported  with  joy  that  he 
grew  extravagant,  and  going  out  after  he  had 
drunk  largely  to  visit  the  dead  bodies,  he 
chanted  the  first  words  of  the  decree  that  had 
been  passed  on  the  motion  of  Demosthenes — 

The  motion  of  Demosthenes,  Demosthenes’ s  son, 

dividing  it  metrically  into  feet,  and  marking 
the  beats. 

But  when  he  came  to  himself,  and  had  well 
considered  the  danger  he  was  lately  under,  he 
could  not  forbear  from  shuddering  at  the  won¬ 
derful  ability  and  power  of  an  orator  who  had 
made  him  hazard  his  life  and  empire  on  the 
issue  of  a  few  brief  hours.  The  fame  of  it  also 
reached  even  to  the  court  of  Persia,  and  the 
king  sent  letters  to  his  lieutenants  command¬ 
ing  them  to  supply  Demosthenes  with  money, 
and  to  pay  every  attention  to  him,  as  the  only 
man  of  all  the  Grecians  who  was  able  to  give 
Philip  occupation  and  find  employment  for 
his  forces  near  home,  in  the  troubles  of  Greece. 
This  afterwards  came  to  the  knowledge  of 
Alexander,  by  certain  letters  of  Demosthenes 
which  he  found  at  Sardis,  and  by  other  papers 
of  the  Persian  officers,  stating  the  large  sums 
which  had  been  given  him. 

At  this  time,  however,  upon  the  ill-success 
which  now  happened  to  the  Grecians,  those 
of  the  contrary  faction  in  the  commonwealth 
fell  foul  upon  Demosthenes  and  took  the  op¬ 
portunity  to  frame  several  informations  and 
indictments  against  him.  But  the  people  not 
only  acquitted  him  of  these  accusations,  but 
continued  towards  him  their  former  respect, 
and  still  invited  him,  as  a  man  that  meant 
well,  to  take  a  part  in  public  affairs.  Insomuch 
that  when  the  bones  of  those  who  had  been 
slain  at  Chaeronea  were  brought  home  to  be 
solemnly  interred,  Demosthenes  was  the  man 
they  chose  to  make  the  funeral  oration.  They 
did  not  show,  under  the  misfortunes  which  be¬ 
fell  them, a  base  or  ignoble  mind,  as  Theopom- 
pus  writes  in  his  exaggerated  style,  but  on  the 
contrary,  by  the  honour  and  respect  paid  to 
their  counsellor,  they  made  it  appear  that  they 
were  noway  dissatisfied  with  the  counsels  he 
had  given  them.  The  speech,  therefore,  was 
spoken  by  Demosthenes.  But  the  subsequent 
decrees  he  would  not  allow  to  be  passed  in  his 
own  name,  but  made  use  of  those  of  his 
friends,  one  after  another,  looking  upon  his 
own  as  unfortunate  and  inauspicious;  till  at 


699 

length  he  took  courage  again  after  the  death 
of  Philip,  who  did  not  long  outlive  his  victory 
at  Chaeronea.  And  this,  it  seems,  was  that 
which  was  foretold  in  the  last  verse  of  the  or¬ 
acle — 

Co?iquered  shall  weep,  and  conqueror  perish 
there. 

Demosthenes  had  secret  intelligence  of  the 
death  of  Philip,  and  laying  hold  of  this  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  prepossess  the  people  with  courage 
and  better  hopes  for  the  future,  he  came  into 
the  assembly  with  a  cheerful  countenance,  pre¬ 
tending  to  have  had  a  dream  that  presaged 
some  great  good  fortune  for  Athens;  and,  not 
long  after,  arrived  the  messengers  who  brought 
the  news  of  Philip’s  death.  No  sooner  had  the 
people  received  it,  but  immediately  they  of¬ 
fered  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  and  decreed  that 
Pausanias  should  be  presented  with  a  crown. 
Demosthenes  appeared  publicly  in  a  rich  dress, 
with  a  chaplet  on  his  head,  though  it  were  but 
the  seventh  day  since  the  death  of  his  daugh¬ 
ter,  as  is  said  by  ^Tschines,  who  upbraids  him 
upon  this  account,  and  rails  at  him  as  one  void 
of  natural  affection  towards  his  children. 
Whereas,  indeed,  he  rather  betrays  himself  to 
be  of  a  poor,  low  spirit,  and  effeminate  mind, 
if  he  really  means  to  make  wailings  and  lam¬ 
entation  the  only  signs  of  a  gentle  and  affec¬ 
tionate  nature,  and  to  condemn  those  who 
bear  such  accidents  with  more  temper  and  less 
passion. 

For  my  own  part,  I  cannot  say  that  the  be¬ 
haviour  of  the  Athenians  on  this  occasion  was 
wise  or  honourable,  to  crown  themselves  with 
garlands  and  to  sacrifice  to  the  gods  for  the 
death  of  a  prince  who,  in  the  midst  of  his  suc¬ 
cess  and  victories,  when  they  were  a  con¬ 
quered  people,  had  used  them  with  so  much 
clemency  and  humanity.  For  besides  provok¬ 
ing  fortune,  it  was  a  base  thing,  and  unworthy 
in  itself,  to  make  him  a  citizen  of  Athens, 
and  pay  him  honours  while  he  lived,  and  yet 
as  soon  as  he  fell  by  another’s  hand,  to  set  no 
bounds  to  their  jollity,  to  insult  over  him 
dead,  and  to  sing  triumphant  songs  of  victory, 
as  if  by  their  own  valour  they  had  vanquished 
him. 

I  must  at  the  same  time  commend  the  be¬ 
haviour  of  Demosthenes,  who,  leaving  tears 
and  lamentations  and  domestic  sorrows  to  the 
women,  made  it  his  business  to  attend  to  the 
interests  of  the  commonwealth.  And  I  think  it 
the  duty  of  him  who  would  be  accounted  to 
have  a  soul  truly  valiant,  and  fit  for  govern- 


700 


ment,  that,  standing  always  firm  to  the  com¬ 
mon  good,  and  letting  private  griefs  and  trou¬ 
bles  find  their  compensation  in  public  bless¬ 
ings,  he  should  maintain  the  dignity  of  his 
character  and  station,  much  more  than  actors 
who  represent  the  persons  of  kings  and  ty¬ 
rants,  who,  we  see,  when  they  either  laugh  or 
weep  on  the  stage,  follow,  not  their  own  pri¬ 
vate  inclinations,  but  the  course  consistent 
with  the  subject  and  with  their  position.  And 
if,  moreover,  when  our  neighbour  is  in  misfor¬ 
tune,  it  is  not  our  duty  to  forbear  offering  any 
consolation,  but  rather  to  say  whatever  may 
tend  to  cheer  him,  and  to  invite  his  attention 
to  any  agreeable  objects,  just  as  we  tell  people 
who  are  troubled  with  sore  eyes  to  withdraw 
their  sight  from  bright  and  offensive  colours 
to  green  and  those  of  a  softer  mixture,  from 
whence  can  a  man  seek,  in  his  own  case,  bet¬ 
ter  arguments  of  consolation  for  afflictions  in 
his  family,  than  from  the  prosperity  of  his 
country,  by  making  public  and  domestic 
chances  count,  so  to  say,  together,  and  the 
better  fortune  of  the  state  obscure  and  con¬ 
ceal  the  less  happy  circumstances  of  the 
individual? 

I  have  been  induced  to  say  so  much,  because 
I  have  known  many  readers  melted  by  TEs- 
chines’s  language  into  a  soft  and  unmanly  ten¬ 
derness. 

But  now  to  turn  to  my  narrative.  The  cities 
of  Greece  were  inspirited  once  more  by  the  ef¬ 
forts  of  Demosthenes  to  form  a  league  togeth¬ 
er.  The  Thebans,  whom  he  had  provided  with 
arms,  set  upon  their  garrison,  and  slew  many 
of  them;  the  Athenians  made  preparations  to 
join  their  forces  with  them;  Demosthenes 
ruled  supreme  in  the  popular  assembly,  and 
wrote  letters  to  the  Persian  officers  who  com¬ 
manded  under  the  king  in  Asia,  inciting  them 
to  make  war  upon  the  Macedonian,  calling 
him  child  and  simpleton.  But  as  soon  as  Alex¬ 
ander  had  settled  matters  in  his  own  country, 
and  came  in  person  with  his  army  into  Bceotia, 
down  fell  the  courage  of  the  Athenians,  and 
Demosthenes  was  hushed;  the  Thebans,  de¬ 
serted  by  them,  fought  by  themselves,  and 
lost  their  city.  After  which,  the  people  of  Ath¬ 
ens,  all  in  distress  and  great  perplexity,  re¬ 
solved  to  send  ambassadors  to  Alexander,  and 
amongst  others,  made  choice  of  Demosthenes 
for  one;  but  his  heart  failing  him  for  fear  of 
the  king’s  anger,  he  returned  back  from  Cith- 
aeron,  and  left  the  embassy. 

In  the  meantime,  Alexander  sent  to  Athens, 
requiring  ten  of  their  orators  to  be  delivered 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

up  to  him,  as  Idomeneus  and  Duris  have  re¬ 
ported,  but  as  the  most  and  best  historians  say, 
he  demanded  these  eight  only, — Demosthe¬ 
nes,  Polyeuctus,  Ephialtes,  Lycurgus,  Mcero- 
cles,  Demon,  Callisthenes,  and  Charidemus. 
It  was  upon  this  occasion  that  Demosthenes 
related  to  them  the  fable  in  which  the  sheep 
are  said  to  deliver  up  their  dogs  to  the  wolves; 
himself  and  those  who  with  him  contended 
for  the  people’s  safety  being,  in  his  compari¬ 
son,  the  dogs  that  defended  the  flock,  and 
Alexander  “the  Macedonian  arch-wolf.”  He 
further  told  them,  uAs  we  see  corn-masters  sell 
their  whole  stock  by  a  few  grains  of  wheat 
which  they  carry  about  with  them  in  a  dish, 
as  a  sample  of  the  rest,  so  you  by  delivering 
up  us,  who  are  but  a  few,  do  at  the  same  time 
unawares  surrender  up  yourselves  all  to¬ 
gether  with  us”;  so  we  find  it  related  in  the 
history  of  Aristobulus,  the  Cassandrian. 

The  Athenians  were  deliberating,  and  at  a 
loss  what  to  do,  when  Demades,  having 
agreed  with  the  persons  whom  Alexander  had 
demanded,  for  five  talents,  undertook  to  go 
ambassador,  and  to  intercede  with  the  king 
for  them;  and,  whether  it  was  that  he  relied 
on  his  friendship  and  kindness,  or  that  he 
hoped  to  find  him  satiated,  as  a  lion  glutted 
with  slaughter,  he  certainly  went,  and  pre¬ 
vailed  with  him  both  to  pardon  the  men,  and 
to  be  reconciled  to  the  city. 

So  he  and  his  friends,  when  Alexander 
went  away,  were  great  men,  and  Demosthenes 
was  quite  put  aside.  Yet  when  Agis,  the  Spar¬ 
tan,  made  his  insurrection,  he  also  for  a  short 
time  attempted  a  movement  in  his  favour;  but 
he  soon  shrunk  back  again,  as  the  Athenians 
would  not  take  any  part  in  it,  and,  Agis  being 
slain,  the  Lacedaemonians  were  vanquished. 
During  this  time  it  was  that  the  indictment 
against  Ctesiphon,  concerning  the  crown,  was 
brought  to  trial.  The  action  was  commenced 
a  little  before  the  battle  in  Chaeronea,  when 
Chaerondas  was  archon,  but  it  was  not  pro¬ 
ceeded  with  till  about  ten  years  after,  Aristo- 
phon  being  then  archon.  Never  was  any  pub¬ 
lic  cause  more  celebrated  than  this,  alike  for 
the  fame  of  the  orators,  and  for  the  generous 
courage  of  the  judges,  who,  though  at  that 
time  the  accusers  of  Demosthenes  were  in 
the  height  of  power,  and  supported  by  all  the 
favour  of  the  Macedonians,  yet  would  not 
give  judgment  against  him,  but  acquitted  him 
so  honourably,  that  iEschines  did  not  obtain 
the  fifth  part  of  their  suffrages  on  his  side,  so 
that,  immediately  after,  he  left  the  city,  and 


DEMOSTHENES 

spent  the  rest  of  his  life  in  teaching  rhetoric 
about  the  island  of  Rhodes,  and  upon  the  con¬ 
tinent  in  Ionia. 

It  was  not  long  after  that  Harpalus  fled 
from  Alexander,  and  came  to  Athens  out  of 
Asia;  knowing  himself  guilty  of  many  mis¬ 
deeds  into  which  his  love  of  luxury  had  led 
him,  and  fearing  the  king,  who  was  now 
grown  terrible  even  to  his  best  friends.  Yet 
this  man  had  no  sooner  addressed  himself  to 
the  people,  and  delivered  up  his  goods,  his 
ships,  and  himself  to  their  disposal,  but  the 
other  orators  of  the  town  had  their  eyes  quick¬ 
ly  fixed  upon  his  money,  and  came  in  to  his 
assistance,  persuading  the  Athenians  to  receive 
and  protect  their  suppliant.  Demosthenes  at 
first  gave  advice  to  chase  him  out  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  and  to  beware  lest  they  involved  their 
city  in  a  war  upon  an  unnecessary  and  unjust 
occasion.  But  some  few  days  after,  as  they 
were  taking  an  account  of  the  treasure,  Har¬ 
palus,  perceiving  how  much  he  was  pleased 
with  a  cup  of  Persian  manufacture,  and  how 
curiously  he  surveyed  the  sculpture  and  fash¬ 
ion  of  it,  desired  him  to  poise  it  in  his  hand, 
and  consider  the  weight  of  the  gold.  Demos¬ 
thenes,  being  amazed  to  feel  how  heavy  it 
was,  asked  him  what  weight  it  came  to.  “To 
you,”  said  Harpalus,  smiling,  “it  shall  come 
with  twenty  talents.”  And  presently  after, 
when  night  drew  on,  he  sent  him  the  cup  with 
so  many  talents. 

Harpalus,  it  seems,  was  a  person  of  singular 
skill  to  discern  a  man’s  covetousness  by  the  air 
of  his  countenance,  and  the  look  and  move¬ 
ments  of  his  eyes.  For  Demosthenes  could  not 
resist  the  temptation,  but  admitting  the  pres¬ 
ent,  like  an  armed  garrison,  into  the  citadel 
of  his  house,  he  surrendered  himself  up  to  the 
interest  of  Harpalus.  The  next  day,  he  came 
into  the  assembly  with  his  neck  swathed 
about  with  wool  and  rollers,  and  when  they 
called  on  him  to  rise  up  and  speak,  he  made 
signs  as  if  he  had  lost  his  voice.  But  the  wits, 
turning  the  matter  to  ridicule,  said  that  cer¬ 
tainly  the  orator  had  been  seized  that  night 
with  no  other  than  a  silver  quinsy.  And  soon 
after,  the  people,  becoming  aware  of  the  brib¬ 
ery,  grew  angry,  and  would  not  suffer  him  to 
speak,  or  make  any  apology  for  himself,  but 
ran  him  down  with  noise;  and  one  man  stood 
up,  and  cried  out,  “What,  ye  men  of  Athens, 
will  you  not  hear  the  cup-bearer?” 

So  at  length  they  banished  Harpalus  out 
of  the  city;  and  fearing  lest  they  should  be 
called  to  account  for  the  treasure  which  the 


701 

orators  had  purloined,  they  made  a  strict  in¬ 
quiry,  going  from  house  to  house;  only  Cal- 
licles,  the  son  of  Arrhenidas,  who  was  newly 
married,  they  would  not  suffer  to  be  searched, 
out  of  respect,  as  Theopompus  writes,  to  the 
bride,  who  was  within. 

Demosthenes  resisted  the  inquisition,  and 
proposed  a  decree  to  refer  the  business  to  the 
court  of  Areopagus,  and  to  punish  those 
whom  that  court  should  find  guilty.  But  be¬ 
ing  himself  one  of  the  first  whom  the  court 
condemned,  when  he  came  to  the  bar,  he  was 
fined  fifty  talents,  and  committed  to  prison; 
where,  out  of  shame  of  the  crime  for  which 
he  was  condemned,  and  through  the  weak¬ 
ness  of  his  body,  growing  incapable  of  sup¬ 
porting  the  confinement,  he  made  his  escape, 
by  the  carelessness  of  some  and  by  the  con¬ 
trivance  of  others  of  the  citizens.  We  are  told, 
at  least,  that  he  had  not  fled  far  from  the  city 
when,  finding  that  he  was  pursued  by  some 
of  those  who  had  been  his  adversaries,  he  en¬ 
deavoured  to  hide  himself.  But  when  they 
called  him  by  his  name,  and  coming  up  nearer 
to  him,  desired  he  would  accept  from  them 
some  money  which  they  had  brought  from 
home  as  a  provision  for  his  journey,  and  to 
that  purpose  only  had  followed  him,  when 
they  entreated  him  to  take  courage,  and  to 
bear  up  against  his  misfortune,  he  burst  out 
into  much  greater  lamentation,  saying,  “But 
how  is  it  possible  to  support  myself  under  so 
heavy  an  affliction,  since  I  leave  a  city  in  which 
I  have  such  enemies,  while  in  any  other  it  is 
not  easy  to  find  friends.” 

He  did  not  show  much  fortitude  in  his  ban¬ 
ishment,  spending  his  time  for  the  most  part 
in  zEgina  and  Trcezen,  and,  with  tears  in  his 
eyes,  looking  towards  the  country  of  Attica. 
And  there  remain  upon  record  some  sayings 
of  his,  little  resembling  those  sentiments  of 
generosity  and  bravery  which  he  used  to  ex¬ 
press  when  he  had  the  management  of  the 
commonwealth.  For,  as  he  was  departing  out 
of  the  city,  it  is  reported,  he  lifted  up  his 
hands  towards  the  Acropolis,  and  said,  “O 
Lady  Minerva,  how  is  it  that  thou  takest  de¬ 
light  in  three  such  fierce  untractable  beasts, 
the  owl,  the  snake,  and  the  people?”  The 
young  men  that  came  to  visit  and  converse 
with  him  he  deterred  from  meddling  with 
state  affairs,  telling  them  that  if  at  first  two 
ways  had  been  proposed  to  him,  the  one  lead¬ 
ing  to  the  speaker’s  stand  and  the  assembly, 
the  other  going  direct  to  destruction,  and  he 
could  have  foreseen  the  many  evils  which  at- 


702 


tend  those  who  deal  in  public  business,  such 
as  fears,  envies,  calumnies,  and  contentions,  he 
would  certainly  have  taken  that  which  led 
straight  on  to  his  death. 

But  now  happened  the  death  of  Alexander, 
while  Demosthenes  was  in  this  banishment 
which  we  have  been  speaking  of.  And  the 
Grecians  were  once  again  up  in  arms,  encour¬ 
aged  by  the  brave  attempts  of  Leosthenes, 
who  was  then  drawing  a  circumvallation 
about  Antipater,  whom  he  held  close  besieged 
in  Lamia.  Pytheas,  therefore,  the  orator,  and 
Callimedon,  called  the  Crab,  fled  from  Athens, 
and  taking  sides  with  Antipater,  went  about 
with  his  friends  and  ambassadors  to  keep  the 
Grecians  from  revolting  and  taking  part  with 
the  Athenians.  But,  on  the  other  side,  Demos¬ 
thenes,  associating  himself  with  the  ambassa¬ 
dors  that  came  from  Athens,  used  his  utmost 
endeavours  and  gave  them  his  best  assistance 
in  persuading  the  cities  to  fall  unanimously 
upon  the  Macedonians,  and  to  drive  them  out 
of  Greece.  Phylarchus  says  that  in  Arcadia 
there  happened  a  rencounter  between  Pytheas 
and  Demosthenes,  which  came  at  last  to 
downright  railing,  while  the  one  pleaded  for 
the  Macedonians,  and  the  other  for  the  Gre¬ 
cians.  Pytheas  said  that  as  we  always  suppose 
there  is  some  disease  in  the  family  to  which 
they  bring  asses’  milk,  so  wherever  there 
comes  an  embassy  from  Athens  that  city  must 
needs  be  indisposed.  And  Demosthenes  an¬ 
swered  him,  retorting  the  comparison:  “Asses’ 
milk  is  brought  to  restore  health  and  the 
Athenians  come  for  the  safety  and  recovery  of 
the  sick.” 

With  this  conduct  the  people  of  Athens  were 
so  well  pleased  that  they  decreed  the  recall  of 
Demosthenes  from  banishment.  The  decree 
was  brought  in  by  Demon  the  Paeanian,  cous¬ 
in  to  Demosthenes.  So  they  sent  him  a  ship  to 
TEgina,  and  he  landed  at  the  port  of  Piraeus, 
where  he  was  met  and  joyfully  received  by  all 
the  citizens,  not  so  much  as  an  archon  or  a 
priest  staying  behind.  And  Demetrius,  the 
Magnesian,  says  that  he  lifted  up  his  hands 
towards  heaven,  and  blessed  this  day  of  his 
happy  return,  as  far  more  honourable  than 
that  of  Alcibiades;  since  he  was  recalled  by  his 
countrymen,  not  through  any  force  or  con¬ 
straint  put  upon  them,  but  by  their  own  good¬ 
will  and  free  inclinations.  There  remained 
only  his  pecuniary  fine,  which,  according  to 
law,  could  not  be  remitted  by  the  people.  But 
they  found  out  a  way  to  elude  the  law.  It  was 
a  custom  with  them  to  allow  a  certain  quan¬ 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

tity  of  silver  to  those  who  were  to  furnish  and 
adorn  the  altar  for  the  sacrifice  of  Jupiter  So- 
ter.  This  office,  for  that  turn,  they  bestowed 
on  Demosthenes,  and  for  the  performance  of 
it  ordered  him  fifty  talents,  the  very  sum  in 
which  he  was  condemned. 

Yet  it  was  no  long  time  that  he  enjoyed  his 
country  after  his  return,  the  attempts  of  the 
Greeks  being  soon  all  utterly  defeated.  For  the 
battle  of  Cranon  happened  in  Metagitnion,  in 
Boedromion  the  garrison  entered  into  Muny- 
chia,  and  in  the  Pyanepsion  following  died 
Demosthenes  after  this  manner. 

Upon  the  report  that  Antipater  and  Crater- 
us  were  coming  to  Athens,  Demosthenes  with 
his  party  took  their  opportunity  to  escape 
privily  out  of  the  city;  but  sentence  of  death 
was,  upon  the  motion  of  Demades,  passed  up¬ 
on  them  by  the  people.  They  dispersed  them¬ 
selves,  flying  some  to  one  place,  some  to  an¬ 
other;  and  Antipater  sent  about  his  soldiers  in¬ 
to  all  quarters  to  apprehend  them.  Archias  was 
their  captain,  and  was  thence  called  the  Exile- 
hunter.  He  was  a  Thurian  born,  and  is  report¬ 
ed  to  have  been  an  actor  of  tragedies,  and  they 
say  that  Polus,  of  2Egina,  the  best  actor  of  his 
time,  was  his  scholar;  but  Hermippus  reckons 
Archias  among  the  disciples  of  Lacritus,  the 
orator,  and  Demetrius  says  he  spent  some  time 
with  Anaximenes.  This  Archias  finding  Hy- 
perides,  the  orator,  Aritonicus  of  Marathon, 
and  Himeraeus,  the  brother  of  Demetrius  the 
Phalerian,  in  TEgina,  took  them  by  force  out 
of  the  temple  of  iEcus,  whither  they  were  fled 
for  safety,  and  sent  them  to  Antipater,  then 
at  Cleonae,  where  they  were  all  put  to  death; 
and  Hyperides,  they  say,  had  his  tongue  cut 
out. 

Demosthenes,  he  heard,  had  taken  sanctu¬ 
ary  at  the  temple  of  Neptune  in  Calauria,  and, 
crossing  over  thither  in  some  light  vessels,  as 
soon  as  he  had  landed  himself,  and  the  Thra¬ 
cian  spearmen  that  came  with  him,  he  endeav¬ 
oured  to  persuade  Demosthenes  to  accompany 
him  to  Antipater,  as  if  he  should  meet  with 
no  hard  usage  from  him.  But  Demosthenes, 
in  his  sleep  the  night  before,  had  a  strange 
dream.  It  seemed  to  him  that  he  was  acting  a 
tragedy,  and  contended  with  Archias  for  the 
victory;  and  though  he  acquitted  himself  well, 
and  gave  good  satisfaction  to  the  spectators, 
yet  for  want  of  better  furniture  and  provision 
for  the  stage,  he  lost  the  day.  And  so,  while 
Archias  was  discoursing  to  him  with  many 
expressions  of  kindness,  he  sate  still  in  the 
same  posture,  and  looking  up  steadfastly  up- 


DEMOSTHENES 

on  him,  “O  Archias,”  said  he,  “I  am  as  little 
affected  by  your  promises  now  as  I  used  for¬ 
merly  to  be  by  your  acting.”  Archias  at  this 
beginning  to  grow  angry  and  to  threaten  him, 
“Now,”  said  Demosthenes,  “you  speak  like 
the  genuine  Macedonian  oracle;  before  you 
were  but  acting  a  part.  Therefore  forbear  on¬ 
ly  a  little,  while  I  write  a  word  or  two  home 
to  my  family.” 

Having  thus  spoken,  he  withdrew  into  the 
temple,  and  taking  a  scroll,  as  if  he  meant  to 
write,  he  put  the  reed  into  his  mouth,  and  bit¬ 
ing  it  as  he  was  wont  to  do  when  he  was 
thoughtful  or  writing,  he  held  it  there  some 
time.  Then  he  bowed  down  his  head  and  cov¬ 
ered  it.  The  soldiers  that  stood  at  the  door, 
supposing  all  this  to  proceed  from  want  of 
courage  and  fear  of  death,  in  derision  called 
him  effeminate,  and  faint-hearted,  and  cow¬ 
ard.  And  Archias  drawing  near,  desired  him 
to  rise  up,  and  repeating  the  same  kind  of 
thing  he  had  spoken  before,  he  once  more 
promised  to  make  his  peace  with  Antipater. 
But  Demosthenes,  perceiving  that  now  the 
poison  had  pierced,  and  seized  his  vitals,  un¬ 
covered  his  head,  and  fixing  his  eyes  upon 
Archias,  “Now,”  said  he,  “as  soon  as  you 
please,  you  may  commence  the- part  of  Creon 
in  the  tragedy,  and  cast  out  this  body  of  mine 
unburied.  But,  O  gracious  Neptune,  I,  for  my 
part,  while  I  am  yet  alive,  will  rise  up  and  de¬ 
part  out  of  this  sacred  place;  though  Antipater 
and  the  Macedonians  have  not  left  so  much  as 
thy  temple  unpolluted.”  After  he  had  thus 
spoken  and  desired  to  be  held  up,  because  al¬ 
ready  he  began  to  tremble  and  stagger,  as  he 
was  going  forward,  and  passing  by  the  altar, 
he  fell  down,  and  with  a  groan  gave  up  the 
ghost. 

Ariston  says  that  he  took  the  poison  out  of 
a  reed,  as  we  have  shown  before.  But  Pappus, 
a  certain  historian  whose  history  was  recover¬ 
ed  by  Hermippus,  says  that  as  he  fell  near  the 
altar,  there  was  found  in  his  scroll  this  begin¬ 
ning  only  of  a  letter,  and  nothing  more,  “De¬ 
mosthenes  to  Antipater.”  And  that  when  his 
sudden  death  was  much  wondered  at,  the 
Thracians  who  guarded  the  doors  reported 
that  he  took  the  poison  into  his  hand  out  of 
a  rag,  and  put  it  in  his  mouth,  and  that  they 
imagined  it  had  been  gold  which  he  swal¬ 
lowed,  but  the  maid  that  served  him,  being 
examined  by  the  followers  of  Archias,  affirm¬ 
ed  that  he  had  worn  it  in  a  bracelet  for  a  long 
time,  as  an  amulet.  And  Eratosthenes  also  says 
that  he  kept  the  poison  in  a  hollow  ring,  and 


703 

that  that  ring  was  the  bracelet  which  he  wore 
about  his  arm. 

There  are  various  other  statements  made  by 
the  many  authors  who  have  related  the  story, 
but  there  is  no  need  to  enter  into  their  discrep¬ 
ancies;  yet  I  must  not  omit  what  is  said  by 
Demochares,  the  relation  of  Demosthenes, 
who  is  of  opinion  it  was  not  by  the  help  of 
poison  that  he  met  with  so  sudden  and  so  easy 
a  death,  but  that  by  the  singular  favour  and 
providence  of  the  gods  he  was  thus  rescued 
from  the  cruelty  of  the  Macedonians.  He  died 
on  the  sixteenth  of  Pyanepsion,  the  most  sad 
and  solemn  day  of  the  Thesmophoria,  which 
the  women  observe  by  fasting  in  the  temple 
of  the  goddess. 

Soon  after  his  death,  the  people  of  Athens 
bestowed  on  him  such  honours  as  he  had  de¬ 
served.  They  erected  his  statue  of  brass;  they 
decreed  that  the  eldest  of  his  family  should  be 
maintained  in  the  Prytaneum;  and  on  the  base 
of  his  statue  was  engraven  the  famous  inscrip¬ 
tion — 

Had  you  for  Greece  been  strong,  as  wise  you  were, 
The  Macedonian  had  not  conquered  her. 

But  it  is  simply  ridiculous  to  say,  as  some  have 
related,  that  Demosthenes  made  these  verses 
himself  in  Calauria,  as  he  was  about  to  take 
the  poison. 

A  little  before  he  went  to  Athens,  the  fol¬ 
lowing  incident  was  said  to  have  happened.  A 
soldier,  being  summoned  to  appear  before  his 
superior  officer,  and  answer  to  an  accusation 
brought  against  him,  put  that  little  gold  which 
he  had  into  the  hands  of  Demosthenes’s  stat¬ 
ue.  The  fingers  of  this  statue  were  folded  one 
within  another,  and  near  it  grew  a  small 
plane-tree,  from  which  many  leaves,  either 
accidentally  blown  thither  by  the  wind,  or 
placed  so  on  purpose  by  the  man  himself,  fall¬ 
ing  together  and  lying  round  about  the  gold, 
concealed  it  for  a  long  time.  In  the  end,  the 
soldier  returned,  and  found  his  treasure  en¬ 
tire,  and  the  fame  of  this  incident  was  spread 
abroad.  And  many  ingenious  persons  of  the 
city  competed  with  each  other,  on  this  occa¬ 
sion,  to  vindicate  the  integrity  of  Demosthe¬ 
nes  in  several  epigrams  which  they  made  on 
the  subject. 

As  for  Demades,  he  did  not  long  enjoy  the 
new  honours  he  now  came  in  for,  divine 
vengeance  for  the  death  of  Demosthenes  pur¬ 
suing  him  into  Macedonia,  where  he  was 
justly  put  to  death  by  those  whom  he  had 
basely  flattered.  They  were  weary  of  him  be* 


704 

fore,  but  at  this  time  the  guilt  he  lay  under 
was  manifest  and  undeniable.  For  some  of  his 
letters  were  intercepted,  in  which  he  had  en¬ 
couraged  Perdiccas  to  fall  upon  Macedonia, 
and  to  save  the  Grecians,  who,  he  said,  hung 
only  by  an  old  rotten  thread,  meaning  Antipa¬ 
ter.  Of  this  he  was  accused  by  Dinarchus,  the 
Corinthian,  and  Cassander  was  so  enraged, 
that  he  first  slew  Demades’  son  in  his  bosom, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  then  gave  orders  to  execute  Demades; 
who  might  now  at  last,  by  his  own  extreme 
misfortunes,  learn  the  lesson  that  traitors  who 
make  sale  of  their  country  sell  themselves  first; 
a  truth  which  Demosthenes  had  often  foretold 
of  him,  and  he  would  never  believe.  Thus, 
Sosius,  you  have  the  life  of  Demosthenes,  from 
such  accounts  as  we  have  either  read  or  heard 
concerning  him. 


CICERO 

IO6-43  BC* 


It  is  generally  said,  that  Helvia,  the  mother 
of  Cicero,  was  both  well-born  and  lived  a 
fair  life;  but  of  his  father  nothing  is  re¬ 
ported  but  in  extremes.  For  whilst  some 
would  have  him  the  son  of  a  fuller,  and  edu¬ 
cated  in  that  trade,  others  carry  back  the  ori¬ 
gin  of  his  family  to  Tullus  Attius,  an  illustri¬ 
ous  king  of  the  Volscians,  who  waged  war 
not  without  honour  against  the  Romans. 
However,  he  who  first  of  that  house  was  sur- 
named  Cicero  seems  to  have  been  a  person 
worthy  to  be  remembered;  since  those  who 
succeeded  him  not  only  did  not  reject,  but 
were  fond  of  that  name,  though  vulgarly 
made  a  matter  of  reproach.  For  the  Latins  call 
a  vetch  Cicer,  and  a  nick  or  dent  at  the  tip 
of  his  nose,  which  resembled  the  opening  in 
a  vetch,  gave  him  the  surname  of  Cicero. 

Cicero,  whose  story  I  am  writing,  is  said  to 
have  replied  with  spirit  to  some  of  his  friends, 
who  recommended  him  to  lay  aside  or  change 
the  name  when  he  first  stood  for  office  and 
engaged  in  politics,  that  he  would  make  it 
his  endeavour  to  render  the  name  of  Cicero 
more  glorious  than  that  of  the  Scauri  and 
Catuli.  And  when  he  was  quaestor  in  Sicily, 
and  was  making  an  offering  of  silver  plate  to 
the  gods,  and  had  inscribed  his  two  names, 
Marcus  and  Tullius,  instead  of  the  third,  he 
jestingly  told  the  artificer  to  engrave  the  fig¬ 
ure  of  a  vetch  by  them.  Thus  much  is  told  us 
about  his  name. 

Of  his  birth  it  is  reported  that  his  mother 
was  delivered,  without  pain  or  labour,  on  the 
third  of  the  new  calends,  the  same  day  on 
which  now  the  magistrates  of  Rome  pray  and 
sacrifice  for  the  emperor.  It  is  said,  also,  that 
a  vision  appeared  to  his  nurse,  and  foretold 
the  child  she  then  suckled  should  afterwards 


become  a  great  benefit  to  the  Roman  states. 
To  such  presages,  which  might  in  general  be 
thought  mere  fancies  and  idle  talk,  he  himself 
ere  long  gave  the  credit  of  true  prophecies. 
For  as  soon  as  he  was  of  an  age  to  begin  to 
have  lessons,  he  became  so  distinguished  for 
his  talent,  and  got  such  a  name  and  reputa¬ 
tion  amongst  the  boys,  that  their  fathers 
would  often  visit  the  school  that  they  might 
see  young  Cicero,  and  might  be  able  to  say 
that  they  themselves  had  witnessed  the  quick¬ 
ness  and  readiness  in  learning  for  which  he 
was  renowned.  And  the  more  rude  among 
them  used  to  be  angry  with  their  children,  to 
see  them,  as  they  walked  together,  receiving 
Cicero  with  respect  into  the  middle  place. 

And  being,  as  Plato  would  have  the  scholar¬ 
like  and  philosophical  temper,  eager  for  every 
kind  of  learning,  and  indisposed  to  no  descrip¬ 
tion  of  knowledge  or  instruction,  he  showed, 
however,  a  more  peculiar  propensity  to  poet¬ 
ry;  and  there  is  a  poem  now  extant,  made  by 
him  when  a  boy,  in  tetrameter  verse,  called 
Pontius  Glaucus.  And  afterwards,  when  he 
applied  himself  more  curiously  to  these  ac¬ 
complishments,  he  had  the  name  of  being  not 
only  the  best  orator,  but  also  the  best  poet  of 
Rome.  And  the  glory  of  his  rhetoric  still  re¬ 
mains,  notwithstanding  the  many  new  modes 
in  speaking  since  his  time;  but  his  verses  are 
forgotten  and  out  of  all  repute,  so  many  in¬ 
genious  poets  have  followed  him. 

Leaving  his  juvenile  studies,  he  became  an 
auditor  of  Philo  the  Academic,  whom  the 
Romans,  above  all  the  other  scholars  of  Cli- 
tomachus,  admired  for  his  eloquence  and 
loved  for  his  character.  He  also  sought  the 
company  of  the  Mucii,  who  were  eminent 
statesmen  and  leaders  in  the  senate,  and  ac- 


CICERO 

quired  from  them  a  knowledge  of  the  laws. 
For  some  short  time  he  served  in  arms  under 
Sulla,  in  the  Marsian  war.  But  perceiving  the 
commonwealth  running  into  factions,  and 
from  faction  all  things  tending  to  an  absolute 
monarchy,  he  betook  himself  to  a  retired  and 
contemplative  life,  and  conversing  with  the 
learned  Greeks,  devoted  himself  to  study,  till 
Sulla  had  obtained  the  government,  and  the 
commonwealth  was  in  some  kind  of  settle¬ 
ment. 

At  this  time,  Chrysogonus,  Sulla’s  emanci¬ 
pated  slave,  having  laid  an  information  about 
an  estate  belonging  to  one  who  was  said  to 
have  been  put  to  death  by  proscription,  had 
bought  it  himself  for  two  thousand  drachmas. 
And  when  Roscius,  the  son  and  heir  of  the 
dead,  complained,  and  demonstrated  the  es¬ 
tate  to  be  worth  two  hundred  and  fifty  tal¬ 
ents,  Sulla  took  it  angrily  to  have  his  actions 
questioned,  and  preferred  a  process  against 
Roscius  for  the  murder  of  his  father,  Chry¬ 
sogonus  managing  the  evidence.  None  of  the 
advocates  durst  assist  him,  but,  fearing  the 
cruelty  of  Sulla,  avoided  the  cause.  The  young 
man,  being  thus  deserted,  came  for  refuge  to 
Cicero.  Cicero’s  friends  encouraged  him,  say¬ 
ing  he  was  not  likely  ever  to  have  a  fairer  and 
more  honourable  introduction  to  public  life; 
he  therefore  undertook  the  defence,  carried 
the  cause,  and  got  much  renown  for  it. 

But  fearing  Sulla,  he  travelled  into  Greece, 
and  gave  it  out  that  he  did  so  for  the  benefit 
of  his  health.  And  indeed  he  was  lean  and 
meagre,  and  had  such  a  weakness  in  his  stom¬ 
ach  that  he  could  take  nothing  but  a  spare 
and  thin  diet,  and  that  not  till  late  in  the  eve¬ 
ning.  His  voice  was  loud  and  good,  but  so 
harsh  and  unmanaged  that  in  vehemence  and 
heat  of  speaking  he  always  raised  it  to  so  high 
a  tone  that  there  seemed  to  be  reason  to  fear 
about  his  health. 

When  he  came  to  Athens,  he  was  a  hearer 
of  Antiochus  of  Ascalon,  with  whose  fluency 
and  elegance  of  diction  he  was  much  taken, 
although  he  did  not  approve  of  his  innova¬ 
tions  in  doctrine.  For  Antiochus  had  now  fal¬ 
len  off  from  the  New  Academy,  as  they  call 
it,  and  forsaken  the  sect  of  Carneades,  wheth¬ 
er  that  he  was  moved  by  the  argument  of 
manifestness  and  the  senses,  or,  as  some  say, 
had  been  led  by  feelings  of  rivalry  and  oppo¬ 
sition  to  the  followers  of  Clitomachus  and 
Philo  to  change  his  opinions,  and  in  most 
things  to  embrace  the  doctrine  of  the  Stoics. 
But  Cicero  rather  affected  and  adhered  to  the 


705 

doctrines  of  the  New  Academy;  and  purposed 
with  himself,  if  he  should  be  disappointed  of 
any  employment  in  the  commonwealth,  to  re¬ 
tire  hither  from  pleading  and  political  affairs, 
and  to  pass  his  life  with  quiet  in  the  study  of 
philosophy. 

But  after  he  had  received  the  news  of  Sul¬ 
la’s  death,  and  his  body,  strengthened  again 
by  exercise,  was  come  to  a  vigorous  habit,  his 
voice  managed  and  rendered  sweet  and  full 
to  the  ear  and  pretty  well  brought  into  keep¬ 
ing  with  his  general  constitution,  his  friends 
at  Rome  earnestly  soliciting  him  by  letters 
and  Antiochus  also  urging  him  to  return  to 
public  affairs,  he  again  prepared  for  use  his 
orator’s  instrument  of  rhetoric,  and  summon¬ 
ed  into  action  his  political  faculties,  diligently 
exercising  himself  in  declamations,  and  at¬ 
tending  the  most  celebrated  rhetoricians  of 
the  time.  He  sailed  from  Athens  for  Asia  and 
Rhodes.  Amongst  the  Asian  masters,  he  con¬ 
versed  with  Xenocles  of  Adramyttium,  Diony¬ 
sius  of  Magnesia,  and  Menippus  of  Caria;  at 
Rhodes,  he  studied  oratory  with  Apollonius, 
the  son  of  Molon,  and  philosophy  with  Posi¬ 
donius. 

Apollonius,  we  are  told,  not  understanding 
Latin,  requested  Cicero  to  declaim  in  Greek. 
He  complied  willingly,  thinking  that  his 
faults  would  thus  be  better  pointed  out  to  him. 
And  after  he  finished,  all  his  other  hearers 
were  astonished,  and  contended  who  should 
praise  him  most,  but  Apollonius,  who  had 
shown  no  signs  of  excitement  whilst  he  was 
hearing  him,  so  also  now,  when  it  was  over, 
sate  musing  for  some  considerable  time,  with¬ 
out  any  remark.  And  when  Cicero  was  dis¬ 
composed  at  this,  he  said,  “You  have  my 
praise  and  admiration,  Cicero,  and  Greece  my 
pity  and  commiseration,  since  those  arts  and 
that  eloquence  which  are  the  only  glories  that 
remain  to  her,  will  now  be  transferred  by 
you  to  Rome.” 

And  now  when  Cicero,  full  of  expectation, 
was  again  bent  upon  political  affairs,  a  certain 
oracle  blunted  the  edge  of  his  inclination;  for 
consulting  the  god  of  Delphi  how  he  should 
attain  most  glory,  the  Pythoness  answered,  by 
making  his  own  genius  and  not  the  opinion  of 
the  people  the  guide  of  his  life;  and  therefore 
at  first  he  passed  his  time  in  Rome  cautiously, 
and  was  very  backward  in  pretending  to  pub¬ 
lic  offices,  so  that  he  was  at  that  time  in  little 
esteem,  and  had  got  the  names,  so  readily 
given  by  low  and  ignorant  people  in  Rome,  of 
Greek  and  Scholar.  But  when  his  own  desire 


706 

of  fame  and  the  eagerness  of  his  father  and 
relations  had  made  him  take  in  earnest  to 
pleading,  he  made  no  slow  or  gentle  advance 
to  the  first  place,  but  shone  out  in  full  lustre 
at  once,  and  far  surpassed  all  the  advocates 
of  the  bar. 

At  first,  it  is  said,  he,  as  well  as  Demos¬ 
thenes,  was  defective  in  his  delivery,  and  on 
that  account  paid  much  attention  to  the  in¬ 
structions,  sometimes  of  Roscius  the  comedi¬ 
an,  and  sometimes  of  /Esop  the  tragedian. 
They  tell  of  this  iEsop,  that  whilst  he  was  rep¬ 
resenting  on  the  theatre  Atreus  deliberating 
the  revenge  of  Thyestes,  he  was  so  transported 
beyond  himself  in  the  heat  of  action,  that  he 
struck  with  his  sceptre  one  of  the  servants, 
who  was  running  across  the  stage,  so  violently 
that  he  laid  him  dead  upon  the  place.  And 
such  afterwards  was  Cicero’s  delivery  that  it 
did  not  a  little  contribute  to  render  his  elo¬ 
quence  persuasive.  He  used  to  ridicule  loud 
speakers,  saying  that  they  shouted  because 
they  could  not  speak,  like  lame  men  who  get 
on  horseback  because  they  cannot  walk.  And 
his  readiness  and  address  in  sarcasm,  and  gen¬ 
erally  in  witty  sayings,  was  thought  to  suit  a 
pleader  very  well,  and  to  be  highly  attractive, 
but  his  using  it  to  excess  ofTended  many,  and 
gave  him  the  repute  of  ill-nature. 

He  was  appointed  quaestor  in  a  great  scar¬ 
city  of  corn,  and  had  Sicily  for  his  province, 
where,  though  at  first  he  displeased  many,  by 
compelling  them  to  send  in  their  provisions 
to  Rome,  yet  after  they  had  had  experience  of 
his  care,  justice,  and  clemency,  they  honoured 
him  more  than  ever  they  did  any  of  their  gov¬ 
ernors  before.  It  happened,  also,  that  some 
young  Romans  of  good  and  noble  families, 
charged  with  neglect  of  discipline  and  mis¬ 
conduct  in  military  service,  were  brought  be¬ 
fore  the  praetor  in  Sicily.  Cicero  undertook 
their  defence,  which  he  conducted  admirably, 
and  got  them  acquitted. 

So  returning  to  Rome  with  a  great  opinion 
of  himself  for  these  things,  a  ludicrous  inci¬ 
dent  befell  him,  as  he  tells  us  himself.  Meet¬ 
ing  an  eminent  citizen  in  Campania,  whom 
he  accounted  his  friend,  he  asked  him  what 
the  Romans  said  and  thought  of  his  actions, 
as  if  the  whole  city  had  been  filled  with  the 
glory  of  what  he  had  done.  His  friend  asked 
him  in  reply,  “Where  is  it  you  have  been, 
Cicero?”  This  for  the  time  utterly  mortified 
and  cast  him  down,  to  perceive  that  the  re¬ 
port  of  his  actions  had  sunk  into  the  city  of 
Rome  as  into  an  immense  ocean,  without  any 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

visible  effect  or  result  in  reputation.  And  after¬ 
wards  considering  with  himself  that  the  glory 
he  contended  for  was  an  infinite  thing,  and 
that  there  was  no  fixed  end  nor  measure  in  its 
pursuit,  he  abated  much  of  his  ambitious 
thoughts.  Nevertheless,  he  was  always  exces¬ 
sively  pleased  with  his  own  praise,  and  con¬ 
tinued  to  the  very  last  to  be  passionately  fond 
of  glory;  which  often  interfered  with  the  pros¬ 
ecution  of  his  wisest  resolutions. 

On  beginning  to  apply  himself  more  reso¬ 
lutely  to  public  business,  he  remarked  it  as  an 
unreasonable  and  absurd  thing  that  artificers, 
using  vessels  and  instruments  inanimate, 
should  know  the  name,  place,  and  use  of  every 
one  of  them,  and  yet  the  statesman,  whose 
instruments  for  carrying  out  public  measures 
are  men,  should  be  negligent  and  careless  in 
the  knowledge  of  persons.  And  so  he  not  only 
acquainted  himself  with  the  names,  but  also 
knew  the  particular  place  where  every  one  of 
the  more  eminent  citizens  dwelt,  what  lands 
he  possessed,  the  friends  he  made  use  of,  and 
those  that  were  of  his  neighbourhood,  and 
when  he  travelled  on  any  road  in  Italy,  he 
could  readily  name  and  show  the  estates  and 
seats  of  his  friends  and  acquaintance. 

Having  so  small  an  estate,  though  a  suffi¬ 
cient  competency  for  his  own  expenses,  it  was 
much  wondered  at  that  he  took  neither  fees 
nor  gifts  from  his  clients,  and  more  especially  i 
that  he  did  not  do  so  when  he  undertook  the 
prosecution  of  Verres.  This  Verres,  who  had 
been  praetor  of  Sicily,  and  stood  charged  by 
the  Sicilians  of  many  evil  practices  during  his 
government  there,  Cicero  succeeded  in  get¬ 
ting  condemned,  not  by  speaking,  but  in  a 
manner  by  holding  his  tongue.  For  the  prae¬ 
tors,  favouring  Verres,  had  deferred  the  trial 
by  several  adjournments  to  the  last  day,  in 
which  it  was  evident  there  could  not  be  suffi-  ] 
cient  time  for  the  advocates  to  be  heard,  and  j 
the  cause  brought  to  an  issue.  Cicero,  there-  j  I 
fore,  came  forward,  and  said  there  was  no  i 
need  of  speeches;  and  after  producing  and  \ 
examining  witnesses,  he  required  the  judges  t 
to  proceed  to  sentence.  < 

However,  many  witty  sayings  are  on  record,  ‘  t 
as  having  been  used  by  Cicero  on  the  occa-  I 
sion.  When  a  man  named  Caecilius,  one  of  the  t 
freed  slaves,  who  was  said  to  be  given  to  Jew-  £ 
ish  practices,  would  have  put  by  the  Sicilians,  e 
and  undertaken  the  prosecution  of  Verres  e 
himself,  Cicero  asked,  “What  has  a  Jew  to  e 
do  with  swine?”  verres  being  the  Roman  ii 
word  for  a  boar.  And  when  Verres  began  to 


CICERO 

reproach  Cicero  with  effeminate  living,  “You 
ought,”  replied  he,  “to  use  this  language  at 
home,  to  your  sons,”  Verres  having  a  son  who 
had  fallen  into  disgraceful  courses.  Elortensius 
the  orator,  not  daring  directly  to  undertake 
the  defence  of  Verres,  was  yet  persuaded  to 
appear  for  him  at  the  laying  on  of  the  fine, 
and  received  an  ivory  sphinx  for  his  reward; 
and  when  Cicero,  in  some  passage  of  the 
speech,  obliquely  reflected  on  him,  and  Hor- 
tensius  told  him  he  was  not  skilful  in  solving 
riddles,  “No,”  said  Cicero,  “and  yet  you  have 
the  sphinx  in  your  house!” 

Verres  was  thus  convicted;  though  Cicero, 
who  set  the  fine  at  seventy-five  myriads,  lay 
under  the  suspicion  of  being  corrupted  by 
bribery  to  lessen  the  sum.  But  the  Sicilians,  in 
testimony  of  their  gratitude,  came  and 
brought  him  all  sorts  of  presents  from  the  is¬ 
land,  when  he  was  aedile;  of  which  he  made 
no  private  profit  himself,  but  used  their  gener¬ 
osity  only  to  reduce  the  public  price  of  provi¬ 
sions. 

He  had  a  very  pleasant  seat  at  Arpi;  he  had 
also  a  farm  near  Naples,  and  another  about 
Pompeii,  but  neither  of  any  great  value.  The 
portion  of  his  wife,  Terentia,  amounted  to 
ten  myriads,  and  he  had  a  bequest  valued  at 
nine  myriads  of  denarii;  upon  these  he  lived 
in  a  liberal  but  temperate  style  with  the  learn¬ 
ed  Greeks  and  Romans  that  were  his  famil¬ 
iars.  He  rarely,  if  at  any  time,  sat  down  to 
meat  till  sunset,  and  that  not  so  much  on  ac¬ 
count  of  business,  as  for  his  health  and  the 
weakness  of  his  stomach.  He  was  otherwise 
in  the  care  of  his  body  nice  and  delicate,  ap¬ 
pointing  himself,  for  example,  a  set  number  of 
walks  and  rubbings.  And  after  this  manner 
managing  the  habit  of  his  body,  he  brought  it 
in  time  to  be  healthful,  and  capable  of  sup¬ 
porting  many  great  fatigues  and  trials.  His 
father’s  house  he  made  over  to  his  brother, 
living  himself  near  the  Palatine  hill,  that  he 
might  not  give  the  trouble  of  long  journeys  to 
those  that  made  suit  to  him.  And,  indeed, 
there  were  not  fewer  daily  appearing  at  his 
door,  to  do  their  court  to  him,  than  there  were 
that  came  to  Crassus  for  his  riches,  or  to 
Pompey  for  his  power  amongst  the  soldiers, 
these  being  at  that  time  the  two  men  of  the 
greatest  repute  and  influence  in  Rome.  Nay, 
even  Pompey  himself  used  to  pay  court  to  Cic¬ 
ero,  and  Cicero’s  public  actions  did  much  to 
establish  Pompey’s  authority  and  reputation 
in  the  state. 

Numerous  distinguished  competitors  stood 


707 

with  him  for  the  praetor’s  office;  but  he  was 
chosen  before  them  all,  and  managed  the  de¬ 
cision  of  causes  with  justice  and  integrity.  It 
is  related  that  Licinius  Macer,  a  man  himself 
of  great  power  in  the  city,  and  supported  also 
by  the  assistance  of  Crassus,  was  accused  be¬ 
fore  him  of  extortion,  and  that,  in  confidence 
of  his  own  influence  and  the  diligence  of  his 
friends,  whilst  the  judges  were  debating  about 
the  sentence,  he  went  to  his  house,  where  hasti¬ 
ly  trimming  his  hair  and  putting  on  a  clean 
gown  as  already  acquitted,  he  was  setting  off 
again  to  go  to  the  Forum;  but  at  his  hall 
door  meeting  Crassus,  who  told  him  that  he 
was  condemned  by  all  the  votes,  he  went  in 
again,  threw  himself  upon  his  bed,  and  died 
immediately.  This  verdict  was  considered  very 
creditable  to  Cicero,  as  showing  his  careful 
management  of  the  courts  of  justice.  On  an¬ 
other  occasion,  Vatinius,  who  had  large  swell¬ 
ings  on  his  neck,  a  man  of  rude  manners  and 
often  insolent  in  court  to  the  magistrates, 
came  before  his  tribunal  and  made  some  re¬ 
quest,  and  on  Cicero’s  desiring  further  time 
to  consider  it,  told  him  that  he  himself  would 
have  made  no  question  about  it  had  he  been 
praetor.  Cicero,  turning  quickly  upon  him, 
answered,  “But  I,  you  see,  have  not  the  neck 
that  you  have.” 

When  there  were  but  two  or  three  days  re¬ 
maining  in  his  office,  Manilius  was  brought 
before  him,  and  charged  with  peculation. 
Manilius  had  the  good  opinion  and  favour  of 
the  common  people,  and  was  thought  to  be 
prosecuted  only  for  Pompey’s  sake,  whose  par¬ 
ticular  friend  he  was.  And  therefore,  when  he 
asked  a  space  of  time  before  his  trial,  and 
Cicero  allowed  him  but  one  day,  and  that  the 
next  only,  the  common  people  grew  highly 
offended,  because  it  had  been  the  custom  of 
the  praetors  to  allow  ten  days  at  least  to  the  ac¬ 
cused;  and  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  having 
called  him  before  the  people  and  accused  him, 
he,  desiring  to  be  heard,  said,  that  as  he  had 
always  treated  the  accused  with  equity  and 
humanity,  as  far  as  the  law  allowed,  so  he 
thought  it  hard  to  deny  the  same  to  Manilius, 
and  that  he  had  studiously  appointed  that  day 
of  which  alone,  as  praetor,  he  was  master,  and 
that  it  was  not  the  part  of  those  that  were  de¬ 
sirous  to  help  him  to  cast  the  judgment  of  his 
cause  upon  another  praetor.  These  things  be¬ 
ing  said  made  a  wonderful  change  in  the  peo¬ 
ple,  and  commending  him  much  for  it  they 
desired  that  he  himself  would  undertake  the 
defence  of  Manilius;  which  he  willingly  con- 


708 

sented  to,  and  that  principally  for  the  sake  of 
Pompey,  who  was  absent.  And,  accordingly, 
taking  his  place  before  the  people  again,  he 
delivered  a  bold  invective  against  the  oligar¬ 
chical  party  and  on  those  who  were  jealous  of 
Pompey. 

Yet  he  was  preferred  to  the  consulship  no 
less  by  the  nobles  than  the  common  people, 
for  the  good  of  the  city;  and  both  parties 
jointly  assisted  his  promotion,  upon  the  fol¬ 
lowing  reasons.  The  change  of  government 
made  by  Sulla,  which  at  first  seemed  a  sense¬ 
less  one,  by  time  and  usage  had  now  come  to 
be  considered  by  the  people  no  unsatisfactory 
settlement.  But  there  were  some  that  endeav¬ 
oured  to  alter  and  subvert  the  whole  present 
state  of  affairs,  not  from  any  good  motives, 
but  for  their  own  private  gain;  and  Pompey 
being  at  this  time  employed  in  the  wars  with 
the  kings  of  Pontus  and  Armenia,  there  was 
no  sufficient  force  at  Rome  to  suppress  any  at¬ 
tempts  at  a  revolution. 

These  people  had  for  their  head  a  man  of 
bold,  daring,  and  restless  character,  Lucius 
Catiline,  who  was  accused,  besides  other  great 
offences,  of  deflowering  his  virgin  daughter, 
and  killing  his  own  brother;  for  which  latter 
crime,  fearing  to  be  prosecuted  at  law,  he 
persuaded  Sulla  to  set  him  down,  as  though 
he  were  yet  alive,  amongst  those  that  were  to 
be  put  to  death  by  proscription.  This  man  the 
profligate  citizens  choosing  for  their  captain, 
gave  faith  to  one  another,  amongst  other 
pledges,  by  sacrificing  a  man,  and  eating  of 
his  flesh;  and  a  great  part  of  the  young  men 
of  the  city  were  corrupted  by  him,  he  provid¬ 
ing  for  every  one  pleasures,  drink,  and  wom¬ 
en,  and  profusely  supplying  the  expense  of 
these  debauches.  Etruria,  moreover,  had  all 
been  excited  to  revolt,  as  well  as  a  great  part 
of  Gaul  within  the  Alps.  But  Rome  itself  was 
in  the  most  dangerous  inclination  to  change 
on  account  of  the  unequal  distribution  of 
wealth  and  property,  those  of  highest  rank 
and  greatest  spirit  having  impoverished  them¬ 
selves  by  shows,  entertainments,  ambition  of 
offices,  and  sumptuous  buildings,  and  the 
riches  of  the  city  having  thus  fallen  into  the 
hands  of  mean  and  low-born  persons.  So  that 
there  wanted  but  a  slight  impetus  to  set  all  in 
motion,  it  being  in  the  power  of  every  daring 
man  to  overturn  a  sickly  commonwealth. 

Catiline,  however,  being  desirous  of  pro¬ 
curing  a  strong  position  to  carry  out  his  de¬ 
signs,  stood  for  the  consulship,  and  had  great 
hopes  of  success,  thinking  he  should  be  ap- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

pointed,  with  Caius  Antonius  as  his  colleague, 
who  was  a  man  fit  to  lead  neither  in  a  good 
cause  nor  in  a  bad  one,  but  might  be  a  valu¬ 
able  accession  to  another’s  power.  These 
things  the  greatest  part  of  the  good  and  honest 
citizens  apprehending,  put  Cicero  upon  stand¬ 
ing  for  the  consulship;  whom  the  people  read¬ 
ily  receiving,  Catiline  was  put  by,  so  that  he 
and  Caius  Antonius  were  chosen,  although 
amongst  the  competitors  he  was  the  only  man 
descended  from  a  father  of  the  equestrian  and 
not  of  the  senatorial  order. 

Though  the  designs  of  Catiline  were  not 
yet  publicly  known,  yet  considerable  prelimi¬ 
nary  troubles  immediately  followed  upon  Cic¬ 
ero’s  entrance  upon  the  consulship.  For,  on 
the  one  side,  those  who  were  disqualified  by 
the  laws  of  Sulla  from  holding  any  public 
offices,  being  neither  inconsiderable  in  power 
nor  in  number,  came  forward  as  candidates 
and  caressed  the  people  for  them;  speaking 
many  things  truly  and  justly  against  the 
tyranny  of  Sulla,  only  that  they  disturbed  the 
government  at  an  improper  and  unseasonable 
time;  on  the  other  hand,  the  tribunes  of  the 
people  proposed  laws  to  the  same  purpose,  con¬ 
stituting  a  commission  of  ten  persons,  with  un¬ 
limited  powers,  in  whom  as  supreme  gover¬ 
nors  should  be  vested  the  right  of  selling  the 
public  lands  of  all  Italy  and  Syria  and  Pom- 
pey’s  new  conquest,  of  judging  and  banishing 
whom  they  pleased,  of  planting  colonies,  of 
taking  moneys  out  of  the  treasury,  and  of 
levying  and  paying  what  soldiers  should  be 
thought  needful.  And  several  of  the  nobility 
favoured  this  law,  but  especially  Caius  Anto¬ 
nius,  Cicero’s  colleague,  in  hopes  of  being  one 
of  the  ten.  But  what  gave  the  greatest  fear  to 
the  nobles  was,  that  he  was  thought  privy  to 
the  conspiracy  of  Catiline,  and  not  to  dislike 
it  because  of  his  great  debts. 

Cicero,  endeavouring  in  the  first  place  to 
provide  a  remedy  against  this  danger,  pro¬ 
cured  a  decree  assigning  to  him  the  province 
of  Macedonia,  he  himself  declining  that  of 
Gaul,  which  was  offered  to  him.  And  this 
piece  of  favour  so  completely  won  over  An¬ 
tonius,  that  he  was  ready  to  second  and  re¬ 
spond  to,  like  a  hired  player,  whatever  Cicero 
said  for  the  good  of  the  country.  And  now, 
having  made  his  colleague  thus  tame  and  trac¬ 
table,  he  could  with  greater  courage  attack  the 
conspirators.  And,  therefore,  in  the  senate, 
making  an  oration  against  the  law  of  the  ten 
commissioners,  he  so  confounded  those  who 
proposed  it,  that  they  had  nothing  to  reply. 


CICERO 

And  when  they  again  endeavoured,  and,  hav¬ 
ing  prepared  things  beforehand,  had  called 
the  consuls  before  the  assembly  of  the  people, 
Cicero,  fearing  nothing,  went  first  out,  and 
commanded  the  senate  to  follow  him,  and 
not  only  succeeded  in  throwing  out  the  law, 
but  so  entirely  overpowered  the  tribunes  by 
his  oratory,  that  they  abandoned  all  thought 
of  their  other  projects. 

For  Cicero,  it  may  be  said,  was  the  one 
man,  above  all  others,  who  made  the  Romans 
feel  how  great  a  charm  eloquence  lends  to 
what  is  good,  and  how  invincible  justice  is, 
if  it  be  well  spoken;  and  that  it  is  necessary 
for  him  who  would  dexterously  govern  a  com¬ 
monwealth,  in  action,  always  to  prefer  that 
which  is  honest  before  that  which  is  popular, 
and  in  speaking,  to  free  the  right  and  useful 
measure  from  everything  that  may  occasion 
offence. 

An  incident  occurred  in  the  theatre,  during 
his  consulship,  which  showed  what  his  speak¬ 
ing  could  do.  For  whereas  formerly  the 
knights  of  Rome  were  mingled  in  the  theatre 
with  the  common  people,  and  took  their 
places  among  them  as  it  happened,  Marcus 
Otho,  when  he  was  praetor,  was  the  first  who 
distinguished  them  from  the  other  citizens, 
and  appointed  them  a  proper  seat,  which  they 
still  enjoy  as  their  special  place  in  the  theatre. 
This  the  common  people  took  as  an  indignity 
done  to  them,  and,  therefore,  when  Otho  ap¬ 
peared  in  the  theatre  they  hissed  him;  the 
knights,  on  the  contrary,  received  him  with 
loud  clapping.  The  people  repeated  and  in¬ 
creased  their  hissing;  the  knights  continued 
their  clapping.  Upon  this,  turning  upon  one 
another,  they  broke  out  into  insulting  words, 
so  that  the  theatre  was  in  great  disorder.  Cic¬ 
ero  being  informed  of  it,  came  himself  to  the 
theatre,  and  summoning  the  people  into  the 
temple  of  Bellona,  he  so  effectually  chid  and 
chastised  them  for  it,  that  again  returning  into 
the  theatre  they  received  Otho  with  loud  ap¬ 
plause,  contending  with  the  knights  who 
should  give  him  the  greatest  demonstrations 
of  honour  and  respect. 

The  conspirators  with  Catiline,  at  first 
cowed  and  disheartened,  began  presently  to 
take  courage  again.  And  assembling  them¬ 
selves  together,  they  exhorted  one  another 
boldly  to  undertake  the  design  before  Pom- 
pey’s  return,  who,  as  it  was  said,  was  now  on 
his  march  with  his  forces  for  Rome.  But  the 
old  soldiers  of  Sulla  were  Catiline’s  chief  stim¬ 
ulus  to  action.  They  had  been  disbanded  all 


709 

about  Italy,  but  the  greatest  number  and  the 
fiercest  of  them  lay  scattered  among  the  cities 
of  Etruria,  entertaining  themselves  with 
dreams  of  new  plunder  and  rapine  amongst 
the  hoarded  riches  of  Italy.  These,  having  for 
their  leader  Manlius,  who  had  served  with  dis¬ 
tinction  in  the  wars  under  Sulla,  joined  them¬ 
selves  to  Catiline,  and  came  to  Rome  to  assist 
him  with  their  suffrages  at  the  election.  For 
he  again  pretended  to  the  consulship,  having 
resolved  to  kill  Cicero  in  a  tumult  at  the  elec¬ 
tions.  Also,  the  divine  powers  seemed  to  give 
intimation  of  the  coming  troubles,  by  earth¬ 
quakes,  thunderbolts,  and  strange  appear¬ 
ances.  Nor  was  human  evidence  wanting,  cer¬ 
tain  enough  in  itself,  though  not  sufficient  for 
the  conviction  of  the  noble  and  powerful  Cati¬ 
line. 

Therefore  Cicero,  deferring  the  day  of  elec¬ 
tion,  summoned  Catiline  into  the  senate,  and 
questioned  him  as  to  the  charges  made  against 
him.  Catiline,  believing  there  were  many  in 
the  senate  desirous  of  change,  and  to  give  a 
specimen  of  himself  to  the  conspirators  pres¬ 
ent,  returned  an  audacious  answer,  “What 
harm,”  said  he,  “when  I  see  two  bodies,  the 
one  lean  and  consumptive  with  a  head,  the 
other  great  and  strong  without  one,  if  I  put 
a  head  to  that  body  which  wants  one?”  This 
covert  representation  of  the  senate  and  the 
people  excited  yet  greater  apprehensions  in 
Cicero.  He  put  on  armour,  and  was  attended 
from  his  house  by  the  noble  citizens  in  a  body; 
and  a  number  of  the  young  men  went  with 
him  into  the  Plain.  Here,  designedly  letting 
his  tunic  slip  partly  off  from  his  shoulders,  he 
showed  his  armour  underneath,  and  discov¬ 
ered  his  danger  to  the  spectators;  who,  being 
much  moved  at  it,  gathered  round  about  him 
for  his  defence.  At  length,  Catiline  was  by  a 
general  suffrage  again  put  by,  and  Silanus  and 
Murena  chosen  consuls. 

Not  long  after  this,  Catiline’s  soldiers  got 
together  in  a  body  in  Etruria,  and  began  to 
form  themselves  into  companies,  the  day  ap¬ 
pointed  for  the  design  being  near  at  hand. 
About  midnight,  some  of  the  principal  and 
most  powerful  citizens  of  Rome,  Marcus  Cras- 
sus,  Marcus  Marcellus,  and  Scipio  Metellus 
went  to  Cicero’s  house,  where,  knocking  at 
the  gate,  and  calling  up  the  porter,  they  com¬ 
manded  him  to  awake  Cicero,  and  tell  him 
they  were  there.  The  business  was  this:  Cras- 
sus’s  porter  after  supper  had  delivered  to  him 
letters  brought  by  an  unknown  person.  Some 
of  them  were  directed  to  others,  but  one  to 


710 


Crassus,  without  a  name;  this  only  Crassus 
read,  which  informed  him  that  there  was  a 
great  slaughter  intended  by  Catiline,  and  ad¬ 
vised  him  to  leave  the  city.  The  others  he  did 
not  open,  but  went  with  them  immediately 
to  Cicero,  being  affrighted  at  the  danger,  and 
to  free  himself  of  the  suspicion  he  lay  under 
for  his  familiarity  with  Catiline. 

Cicero,  considering  the  matter,  summoned 
the  senate  at  break  of  day.  The  letters  he 
brought  with  him,  and  delivered  them  to 
those  to  whom  they  were  directed,  command¬ 
ing  them  to  read  them  publicly;  they  all  alike 
contained  an  account  of  the  conspiracy.  And 
when  Quintus  Arrius,  a  man  of  praetorian 
dignity,  recounted  to  them  how  soldiers  were 
collecting  in  companies  in  Etruria,  and  Man¬ 
lius  stated  to  be  in  motion  with  a  large  force, 
hovering  about  those  cities,  in  expectation  of 
intelligence  from  Rome,  the  senate  made  a 
decree  to  place  all  in  the  hands  of  the  consuls, 
who  should  undertake  the  conduct  of  every¬ 
thing,  and  do  their  best  to  save  the  state.  This 
was  not  a  common  thing,  but  only  done  by  the 
senate  in  case  of  imminent  danger. 

After  Cicero  had  received  this  power,  he 
committed  all  affairs  outside  to  Quintus  Metel- 
lus,  but  the  management  of  the  city  he  kept  in 
his  own  hands.  Such  a  numerous  attendance 
guarded  him  every  day  when  he  went  abroad, 
that  the  greatest  part  of  the  market-place 
was  filled  with  his  train  when  he  entered  it. 
Catiline,  impatient  of  further  delay,  resolved 
himself  to  break  forth  and  go  to  Manlius, 
but  he  commanded  Marcius  and  Cethegus 
to  take  their  swords,  and  go  early  in  the 
morning  to  Cicero’s  gates,  as  if  only  in¬ 
tending  to  salute  him,  and  then  to  fall  up¬ 
on  him  and  slay  him.  This  a  noble  lady, 
Fulvia,  coming  by  night,  discovered  to  Cic¬ 
ero,  bidding  him  beware  of  Cethegus  and 
Marcius.  They  came  by  break  of  day,  and 
being  denied  entrance,  made  an  outcry  and 
disturbance  at  the  gates,  which  excited  all 
the  more  suspicion. 

But  Cicero,  going  forth,  summoned  the  sen¬ 
ate  into  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Stator,  which 
stands  at  the  end  of  the  Sacred  Street,  going 
up  to  the  Palatine.  And  when  Catiline  with 
others  of  his  party  also  came,  as  intending  to 
make  his  defence,  none  of  the  senators  would 
sit  by  him,  but  all  of  them  left  the  bench 
where  he  had  placed  himself.  And  when  he  be¬ 
gan  to  speak,  they  interrupted  him  with  out¬ 
cries.  At  length  Cicero,  standing  up,  comman¬ 
ded  him  to  leave  the  city,  for  since  one  gov¬ 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

erned  the  commonwealth  with  words,  the 
other  with  arms,  it  was  necessary  there  should 
be  a  wall  betwixt  them.  Catiline,  therefore, 
immediately  left  the  town,  with  three  hundred 
armed  men;  and  assuming,  as  if  he  had  been 
a  magistrate,  the  rods,  axes,  and  military  en¬ 
signs,  he  went  to  Manlius,  and  having  got  to¬ 
gether  a  body  of  near  twenty  thousand  men, 
with  these  he  marched  to  the  several  cities,  en¬ 
deavouring  to  persuade  or  force  them  to  re¬ 
volt.  So  it  being  now  come  to  open  war,  An- 
tonius  was  sent  forth  to  fight  him. 

The  remainder  of  those  in  the  city  whom  he 
had  corrupted,  Cornelius  Lentulus  kept  to¬ 
gether  and  encouraged.  He  had  the  surname 
Sura,  and  was  a  man  of  a  noble  family,  but  a 
dissolute  liver,  who  for  his  debauchery  was  for¬ 
merly  turned  out  of  the  senate,  and  was  now 
holding  the  office  of  praetor  for  the  second  time, 
as  the  custom  is  with  those  who  desire  to  re¬ 
gain  the  dignity  of  senator.  It  is  said  that  he 
got  the  surname  Sura  upon  this  occasion:  be¬ 
ing  quaestor  in  the  time  of  Sulla,  he  had  lav¬ 
ished  away  and  consumed  a  great  quantity  of 
the  public  moneys  at  which  Sulla  being  pro¬ 
voked,  called  him  to  give  an  account  in  the  sen¬ 
ate;  he  appeared  with  great  coolness  and  con¬ 
tempt,  and  said  he  had  no  account  to  give,  but 
they  might  take  this,  holding  up  the  calf  of  his 
leg,  as  boys  do  at  ball,  when  they  have  missed. 
Upon  which  he  was  surnamed  Sura,  sura  be¬ 
ing  the  Roman  word  for  the  calf  of  the  leg.  Be¬ 
ing  at  another  time  prosecuted  at  law,  and 
having  bribed  some  of  the  judges,  he  escaped 
only  by  two  votes,  and  complained  of  the  need¬ 
less  expense  he  had  gone  to  in  paying  for  a  sec¬ 
ond,  as  one  would  have  sufficed  to  acquit  him. 

This  man,  such  in  his  own  nature,  and  now 
inflamed  by  Catiline,  false  prophets  and  for¬ 
tune-tellers  had  also  corrupted  with  vain  hopes, 
quoting  to  him  fictitious  verses  and  oracles, 
and  proving  from  the  Sibylline  prophecies  that 
there  were  three  of  the  name  Cornelius  de¬ 
signed  by  fate  to  be  monarchs  of  Rome;  two  of 
whom,  Cinna  and  Sulla,  had  already  fulfilled 
the  decree,  and  that  divine  fortune  was  now 
advancing  with  the  gift  of  monarchy  for  the 
remaining  third  Cornelius;  and  that  therefore 
he  ought  by  all  means  to  accept  it,  and  not  lose 
opportunity  by  delay,  as  Catiline  had  done.  He 
therefore  designed  no  mean  or  trivial  matter, 
for  he  had  resolved  to  kill  the  whole  senate, 
and  as  many  other  citizens  as  he  could,  to  fire 
the  city,  and  spare  nobody,  except  only  Pom- 
pey’s  children,  intending  to  seize  and  keep 
them  as  pledges  of  his  reconciliation  with  Pom- 


CICERO 

pey.  For  there  was  then  a  common  and  strong 
report  that  Pompey  was  on  his  way  homeward 
from  his  great  expedition. 

The  night  appointed  for  the  design  was  one 
of  the  Saturnalia;  swords,  flax,  and  sulphur 
they  carried  and  hid  in  the  house  of  Cethegus; 
and  providing  one  hundred  men,  and  dividing 
the  city  into  as  many  parts,  they  had  allotted  to 
every  one  singly  his  proper  place,  so  that  in  a 
moment,  many  kindling  the  fire,  the  city  might 
be  in  a  flame  all  together.  Others  were  ap¬ 
pointed  to  stop  up  the  aqueducts,  and  to  kill 
those  who  should  endeavour  to  carry  water  to 
put  it  out.  Whilst  these  plans  were  preparing, 
it  happened  there  were  two  ambassadors  from 
the  Allobroges  staying  in  Rome;  a  nation  at 
that  time  in  a  distressed  condition,  and  very  un¬ 
easy  under  the  Roman  government.  These 
Lentulus  and  his  party  judging  useful  instru¬ 
ments  to  move  and  seduce  Gaul  to  revolt,  ad¬ 
mitted  into  the  conspiracy,  and  they  gave  them 
letters  to  their  own  magistrates,  and  letters  to 
Catiline;  in  those  they  promised  liberty,  in 
these  they  exhorted  Catiline  to  set  all  slaves 
free,  and  to  bring  them  along  with  him  to 
Rome.  They  sent  also  to  accompany  them  to 
Catiline,  one  Titus,  a  native  of  Croton,  who 
was  to  carry  those  letters  to  him. 

These  counsels  of  inconsidering  men,  who 
conversed  together  over  wine  and  with  women, 
Cicero  watched  with  sober  industry  and  fore¬ 
thought,  and  with  most  admirable  sagacity, 
having  several  emissaries  abroad,  who  ob¬ 
served  and  traced  with  him  all  that  was  done, 
and  keeping  also  a  secret  correspondence  with 
many  who  pretended  to  join  in  the  conspiracy. 
He  thus  knew  all  the  discourse  which  passed 
betwixt  them  and  the  strangers;  and  lying  in 
wait  for  them  by  night,  he  took  the  Crotonian 
with  his  letters,  the  ambassadors  of  the  Allo¬ 
broges  acting  secretly  in  concert  with  him. 

By  break  of  day,  he  summoned  the  senate 
into  the  temple  of  Concord,  where  he  read 
the  letters  and  examined  the  informers.  Junius 
Silanus  further  stated  that  several  persons  had 
heard  Cethegus  say  that  three  consuls  and  four 
praetors  were  to  be  slain.  Piso,  also,  a  person 
of  consular  dignity,  testified  other  matters  of 
the  like  nature;  and  Caius  Sulpicius,  one  of  the 
praetors,  being  sent  to  Cethegus’s  house,  found 
there  a  quantity  of  darts  and  of  armour,  and 
a  still  greater  number  of  swords  and  daggers, 
all  recently  whetted.  At  length,  the  senate  de¬ 
creeing  indemnity  to  the  Crotonian  upon  his 
confession  of  the  whole  matter,  Lentulus  was 
convicted,  adjured  his  office  (for  he  was  then 


711 

praetor),  and  put  off  his  robe  edged  with  pur¬ 
ple  in  the  senate,  changing  it  for  another  gar¬ 
ment  more  agreeable  to  his  present  circum¬ 
stances.  He  thereupon,  with  the  rest  of  his  con¬ 
federates  present,  was  committed  to  the  charge 
of  the  praetors  in  free  custody. 

It  being  evening,  and  the  common  people  in 
crowds  expecting  without,  Cicero  went  forth 
to  them,  and  told  them  what  was  done,  and 
then,  attended  by  them,  went  to  the  house  of  a 
friend  and  near  neighbour;  for  his  own  was 
taken  up  by  the  women,  who  were  celebrating 
with  secret  rites  the  feast  of  the  goddess  whom 
the  Romans  call  the  Good,  and  the  Greeks  the 
Women’s  goddess.  For  a  sacrifice  is  annually 
performed  to  her  in  the  consul’s  house,  either 
by  his  wife  or  mother,  in  the  presence  of  the 
vestal  virgins.  And  having  got  into  his  friend’s 
house  privately,  a  few  only  being  present,  he 
began  to  deliberate  how  he  should  treat  these 
men.  The  severest,  and  the  only  punishment 
fit  for  such  heinous  crimes,  he  was  somewhat 
shy  and  fearful  of  inflicting,  as  well  from  the 
clemency  of  his  nature,  as  also  lest  he  should  be 
thought  to  exercise  his  authority  too  insolently, 
and  to  treat  too  harshly  men  of  the  noblest 
birth  and  most  powerful  friendships  in  the 
city;  and  yet,  if  he  should  use  them  more  mild¬ 
ly,  he  had  a  dreadful  prospect  of  danger  from 
them.  For  there  was  no  likelihood,  if  they  suf¬ 
fered  less  than  death,  they  would  be  reconciled, 
but  rather,  adding  new  rage  to  their  former 
wickedness,  they  would  rush  into  every  kind 
of  audacity,  while  he  himself,  whose  character 
for  courage  already  did  not  stand  very  high 
with  the  multitude,  would  be  thought  guilty  of 
the  greatest  cowardice  and  want  of  manliness. 

Whilst  Cicero  was  doubting  what  course  to 
take,  a  portent  happened  to  the  women  in  their 
sacrificing.  For  on  the  altar,  where  the  fire 
seemed  wholly  extinguished,  a  great  and 
bright  flame  issued  forth  from  the  ashes  of  the 
burnt  wood;  at  which  others  were  affrighted, 
but  the  holy  virgins  called  to  Terentia,  Cicero’s 
wife,  and  bade  her  haste  to  her  husband,  and 
command  him  to  execute  what  he  had  re¬ 
solved  for  the  good  of  his  country,  for  the  god¬ 
dess  had  sent  a  great  light  to  the  increase  of 
his  safety  and  glory.  Terentia,  therefore,  as 
she  was  otherwise  in  her  own  nature  neither 
tender-hearted  nor  timorous,  but  a  woman 
eager  for  distinction  (who,  as  Cicero  himself 
says,  would  rather  thrust  herself  into  his  public 
affairs,  than  communicate  her  domestic  mat¬ 
ters  to  him),  told  him  these  things,  and  excited 
him  against  the  conspirators.  So  also  did  Quin- 


712 

tus  his  brother,  and  Publius  Nigidius,  one  of 
his  philosophical  friends,  whom  he  often  made 
use  of  in  his  greatest  and  most  weighty  affairs 
of  state. 

The  next  day,  a  debate  arising  in  the  senate 
about  the  punishment  of  the  men,  Silanus,  be¬ 
ing  the  first  who  was  asked  his  opinion,  said  it 
was  fit  they  should  be  all  sent  to  the  prison,  and 
there  suffer  the  utmost  penalty.  To  him  all 
consented  in  order  till  it  came  to  Caius  Caesar, 
who  was  afterwards  dictator.  He  was  then  but 
a  young  man,  and  only  at  the  outset  of  his  ca¬ 
reer,  but  had  already  directed  his  hopes  and 
policy  to  that  course  by  which  he  afterwards 
changed  the  Roman  state  into  a  monarchy.  Of 
this  others  foresaw  nothing;  but  Cicero  had 
seen  reason  for  strong  suspicion,  though  with¬ 
out  obtaining  any  sufficient  means  of  proof. 
And  there  were  some  indeed  that  said  that  he 
was  very  near  being  discovered,  and  only  just 
escaped  him;  others  are  of  opinion  that  Cicero 
voluntarily  overlooked  and  neglected  the  evi¬ 
dence  against  him,  for  fear  of  his  friends  and 
power;  for  it  was  very  evident  to  everybody 
that  if  Caesar  was  to  be  accused  with  the  con¬ 
spirators,  they  were  more  likely  to  be  saved 
with  him,  than  he  to  be  punished  with  them. 

When,  therefore,  it  came  to  Caesar’s  turn  to 
give  his  opinion,  he  stood  up  and  proposed 
that  the  conspirators  should  not  be  put  to 
death,  but  their  estates  confiscated,  and  their 
persons  confined  in  such  cities  in  Italy  as  Ci¬ 
cero  should  approve,  there  to  be  kept  in  cus¬ 
tody  till  Catiline  was  conquered.  To  this  sen¬ 
tence,  as  it  was  the  most  moderate,  and  he  that 
delivered  it  a  most  powerful  speaker,  Cicero 
himself  gave  no  small  weight,  for  he  stood  up 
and,  turning  the  scale  on  either  side,  spoke  in 
favour  partly  of  the  former,  partly  of  Caesar’s 
sentence.  And  all  Cicero’s  friends,  judging 
Caesar’s  sentence  most  expedient  for  Cicero,  be¬ 
cause  he  would  incur  the  less  blame  if  the  con¬ 
spirators  were  not  put  to  death,  chose  rather 
the  latter;  so  that  Silanus,  also  changing  his 
mind,  retracted  his  opinion,  and  said  he  had 
not  declared  for  capital,  but  only  the  utmost 
punishment,  which  to  a  Roman  senator  is  im¬ 
prisonment. 

The  first  man  who  spoke  against  Caesar’s 
motion  was  Catulus  Lutatius.  Cato  followed, 
and  so  vehemently  urged  in  his  speech  the 
strong  suspicion  against  Caesar  himself,  and  so 
filled  the  senate  with  anger  and  resolution,  that 
a  decree  was  passed  for  the  execution  of  the 
conspirators.  But  Caesar  opposed  the  confisca¬ 
tion  of  their  goods,  not  thinking  it  fair  that 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

those  who  rejected  the  mildest  part  of  his  sen¬ 
tence  should  avail  themselves  of  the  severest. 
And  when  many  insisted  upon  it,  he  appealed 
to  the  tribunes,  but  they  would  do  nothing; 
till  Cicero  himself  yielding,  remitted  that  part 
of  the  sentence. 

After  this,  Cicero  went  out  with  the  senate 
to  the  conspirators;  they  were  not  all  together 
in  one  place,  but  the  several  praetors  had  them, 
some  one,  some  another,  in  custody.  And  first 
he  took  Lentulus  from  the  Palatine,  and 
brought  him  by  the  Sacred  Street,  through  the 
middle  of  the  market-place,  a  circle  of  the 
most  eminent  citizens  encompassing  and  pro¬ 
tecting  him.  The  people,  affrighted  at  what 
was  doing,  passed  along  in  silence,  especially 
the  young  men;  as  if,  with  fear  and  trembling, 
they  were  undergoing  a  rite  of  initiation  into 
some  ancient  sacred  mysteries  of  aristocratic 
power.  Thus  passing  from  the  market-place, 
and  coming  to  the  gaol,  he  delivered  Lentulus 
to  the  officer,  and  commanded  him  to  execute 
him;  and  after  him  Cethegus,  and  so  all  the 
rest  in  order,  he  brought  and  delivered  up  to 
execution.  And  when  he  saw  many  of  the  con¬ 
spirators  in  the  market-place,  still  standing  to¬ 
gether  in  companies,  ignorant  of  what  was 
done,  and  waiting  for  the  night,  supposing  the 
men  were  still  alive  and  in  a  possibility  of  be¬ 
ing  rescued,  he  called  out  in  a  loud  voice,  and 
said,  “They  did  live for  so  the  Romans,  to 
avoid  inauspicious  language,  name  those  that 
are  dead. 

It  was  now  evening,  when  he  returned  from 
the  market-place  to  his  own  house,  the  citizens 
no  longer  attending  him  with  silence,  nor  in 
order,  but  receiving  him,  as  he  passed,  with  ac¬ 
clamations  and  applauses,  and  saluting  him  as 
the  saviour  and  founder  of  his  country.  A 
bright  light  shone  through  the  streets  from  the 
lamps  and  torches  set  up  at  the  doors,  and  the 
women  showed  lights  from  the  tops  of  the 
houses,  to  honour  Cicero,  and  to  behold  him 
returning  home  with  a  splendid  train  of  the 
most  principal  citizens;  amongst  whom  were 
many  who  had  conducted  great  wars,  cele¬ 
brated  triumphs,  and  added  to  the  possessions 
of  the  Roman  empire,  both  by  sea  and  land. 
These,  as  they  passed  along  with  him,  acknowl¬ 
edged  to  one  another,  that  though  the  Roman 
people  were  indebted  to  several  officers  and 
commanders  of  that  age  for  riches,  spoils,  and 
power,  yet  to  Cicero  alone  they  owed  the  safety 
and  security  of  all  these,  for  delivering  them 
from  so  great  and  imminent  a  danger.  For 
though  it  might  seem  no  wonderful  thing  to 


CICERO 

prevent  the  design,  and  punish  the  conspira¬ 
tors,  yet  to  defeat  the  greatest  of  all  conspira¬ 
cies  with  so  little  disturbance,  trouble,  and 
commotion,  was  very  extraordinary. 

For  the  greater  part  of  those  who  had  flocked 
into  Catiline,  as  soon  as  they  heard  the  fate  of 
Lentulus  and  Cethegus,  left  and  forsook  him, 
and  he  himself,  with  his  remaining  forces,  join¬ 
ing  battle  with  Antonius,  was  destroyed  with 
his  army. 

And  yet  there  were  some  who  were  very 
ready  both  to  speak  ill  of  Cicero,  and  to  do  him 
hurt  for  these  actions;  and  they  had  for  their 
leaders  some  of  the  magistrates  of  the  ensuing 
year,  as  Caesar,  who  was  one  of  the  praetors, 
and  Metellus  and  Bestia,  the  tribunes.  These, 
entering  upon  their  office  some  few  days  before 
Cicero’s  consulate  expired,  would  not  permit 
him  to  make  any  address  to  the  people,  but 
throwing  the  benches  before  the  rostra,  hin¬ 
dered  his  speaking,  telling  him  he  might,  if  he 
pleased,  make  the  oath  of  withdrawal  from  of¬ 
fice,  and  then  come  down  again.  Cicero,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  accepting  the  conditions,  came  for¬ 
ward  to  make  his  withdrawal;  and  silence  be¬ 
ing  made,  he  recited  his  oath,  not  in  the  usual, 
but  in  a  new  and  peculiar  form,  namely,  that 
he  had  saved  his  country  and.  preserved  the 
empire;  the  truth  of  which  oath  all  the  people 
confirmed  with  theirs.  Caesar  and  the  tribunes, 
all  the  more  exasperated  by  this,  endeavoured 
to  create  him  further  trouble,  and  for  this  pur¬ 
pose  proposed  a  law  for  calling  Pompey  home 
with  his  army,  to  put  an  end  to  Cicero’s  usur¬ 
pation. 

But  it  was  a  very  great  advantage  for  Cicero 
and  the  whole  commonwealth  that  Cato  was 
at  that  time  one  of  the  tribunes.  For  he,  being 
of  equal  power  with  the  rest,  and  of  greater 
reputation,  could  oppose  their  designs.  He 
easily  defeated  their  other  projects,  and  in  an 
oration  to  the  people  so  highly  extolled  Cicero’s 
consulate,  that  the  greatest  honours  were  de¬ 
creed  him,  and  he  was  publicly  declared  the 
father  of  his  country,  which  title  he  seems  to 
have  obtained,  the  first  man  who  did  so,  when 
Cato  gave  it  to  him  in  this  address  to  the 
people. 

At  this  time,  therefore,  his  authority  was 
very  great  in  the  city;  but  he  created  himself 
much  envy,  and  offended  very  many,  not  by 
any  evil  action,  but  because  he  was  always 
lauding  and  magnifying  himself.  For  neither 
senate,  nor  assembly  of  the  people,  nor  court 
of  judicature  could  meet  in  which  he  was  not 
heard  to  talk  of  Catiline  and  Lentulus.  Indeed, 


713 

he  also  filled  his  books  and  writings  with  his 
own  praises,  to  such  an  excess  as  to  render  a 
style,  in  itself  most  pleasant  and  delightful, 
nauseous  and  irksome  to  his  hearers,  this  un¬ 
grateful  humour,  like  a  disease,  always  cleav¬ 
ing  to  him. 

Nevertheless,  though  he  was  intemperately 
fond  of  his  own  glory,  he  was  very  free  from 
envying  others,  and  was,  on  the  contrary,  most 
liberally  profuse  in  commending  both  the  an¬ 
cients  and  his  contemporaries,  as  any  one  may 
see  in  his  writings.  And  many  such  sayings  of 
his  are  also  remembered;  as  that  he  called  Aris¬ 
totle  a  river  of  flowing  gold,  and  said  of  Plato’s 
dialogues,  that  if  Jupiter  were  to  speak,  it 
would  be  in  language  like  theirs.  He  used  to 
call  Theophrastus  his  special  luxury.  And  be¬ 
ing  asked  which  of  Demosthenes’s  orations  he 
liked  best,  he  answered,  the  longest.  And  yet 
some  affected  imitators  of  Demosthenes  have 
complained  of  some  words  that  occur  in  one  of 
his  letters,  to  the  effect  that  Demosthenes  some¬ 
times  falls  asleep  in  his  speeches;  forgetting  the 
many  high  encomiums  he  continually  passes 
upon  him,  and  the  compliment  he  paid  him 
when  he  named  the  most  elaborate  of  all  his 
orations,  those  he  wrote  against  Antony,  Phi¬ 
lippics. 

And  as  for  the  eminent  men  of  his  own  time, 
either  in  eloquence  or  philosophy,  there  was 
not  one  of  them  whom  he  did  not,  by  writing 
or  speaking  favourably  of  him,  render  more 
illustrious.  He  obtained  of  Caesar,  when  in 
power,  the  Roman  citizenship  for  Cratippus, 
the  Peripatetic,  and  got  the  court  of  Areopa¬ 
gus,  by  public  decree,  to  request  his  stay  at 
Athens,  for  the  instruction  of  their  youth  and 
the  honour  of  their  city.  There  are  letters  ex¬ 
tant  from  Cicero  to  Herodes,  and  others  to  his 
son,  in  which  he  recommends  the  study  of  phi¬ 
losophy  under  Cratippus.  There  is  one  in 
which  he  blames  Gorgias,  the  rhetorician,  for 
enticing  his  son  into  luxury  and  drinking,  and, 
therefore,  forbids  him  his  company.  And  this, 
and  one  other  to  Pelops,  the  Byzantine,  are  the 
only  two  of  his  Greek  epistles  which  seem  to  be 
written  in  anger.  In  the  first,  he  justly  reflects 
on  Gorgias,  if  he  were  what  he  was  thought  to 
be,  a  dissolute  and  profligate  character;  but  in 
the  other,  he  rather  meanly  expostulates  and 
complains  with  Pelops  for  neglecting  to  pro¬ 
cure  him  a  decree  of  certain  honours  from-  the 
Byzantines. 

Another  illustration  of  his  love  of  praise  is 
the  way  in  which  sometimes,  to  make  his  ora¬ 
tions  more  striking,  he  neglected  decorum  and 


714 

dignity.  When  Munatius,  who  had  escaped 
conviction  by  his  advocacy,  immediately  pros¬ 
ecuted  his  friend  Sabinus,  he  said  in  the 
warmth  of  his  resentment,  “Do  you  suppose 
you  were  acquitted  for  your  own  merits,  Mu¬ 
natius,  and  was  it  not  that  I  so  darkened  the 
case  that  the  court  could  not  see  your  guilt  ?” 

When  from  the  rostra  he  had  made  a  eulogy 
on  Marcus  Crassus,  with  much  applause,  and 
within  a  few  days  after  again  as  publicly  re¬ 
proached  him,  Crassus  called  to  him,  and  said, 
“Did  not  you  yourself  two  days  ago,  in  this 
same  place,  commend  me?”  “Yes,”  said  Ci¬ 
cero,  “I  exercised  my  eloquence  in  declaiming 
upon  a  bad  subject.”  At  another  time,  Crassus 
had  said  that  no  one  of  his  family  had  ever 
lived  beyond  sixty  years  of  age,  and  afterwards 
denied  it,  and  asked,  “What  should  put  it  into 
my  head  to  say  so?”  “It  was  to  gain  the  peo¬ 
ple's  favour,”  answered  Cicero;  “you  knew 
how  glad  they  would  be  to  hear  it.”  When 
Crassus  expressed  admiration  of  the  Stoic  doc¬ 
trine,  that  the  good  man  is  always  rich,  “Do 
you  not  mean,”  said  Cicero,  “their  doctrine 
that  all  things  belong  to  the  wise?”  For  Cras¬ 
sus  was  generally  accused  of  covetousness.  One 
of  Crassus’s  sons,  who  was  thought  so  exceed¬ 
ingly  like  a  man  named  Axius  as  to  throw 
some  suspicion  on  his  mother’s  honour,  made  a 
successful  speech  in  the  senate.  Cicero,  on  being 
asked  how  he  liked  it,  replied  with  the  Greek 
words,  “Axios  Crassou”  (Worthy  of  Crassus). 

When  Crassus  was  about  to  go  into  Syria,  he 
desired  to  leave  Cicero  rather  his  friend  than 
his  enemy,  and,  therefore,  one  day  saluting 
him,  told  him  he  would  come  and  sup  with 
him,  which  the  other  as  courteously  received. 
Within  a  few  days  after,  on  some  of  Cicero’s 
acquaintances  interceding  for  Vatinius,  as  de¬ 
sirous  of  reconciliation  and  friendship,  for  he 
was  then  his  enemy,  “What,”  he  replied,  “does 
Vatinius  also  wish  to  come  and  sup  with  me?” 
Such  was  his  way  with  Crassus.  When  Vati¬ 
nius,  who  had  swellings  in  his  neck,  was  plead¬ 
ing  a  cause,  he  called  him  the  tumid  orator; 
and  having  been  told  by  some  one  that  Vati¬ 
nius  was  dead,  on  hearing  presently  after  that 
he  was  alive,  “May  the  rascal  perish,”  said  he, 
“for  his  news  not  being  true.” 

Upon  Caesar’s  bringing  forward  a  law  for 
the  division  of  the  lands  in  Campania  amongst 
the  soldiers,  many  in  the  senate  opposed  it; 
amongst  the  rest,  Lucius  Gellius,  one  of  the 
oldest  men  in  the  house,  said  it  should  never 
pass  whilst  he  lived.  “Let  us  postpone  it,”  said 
Cicero,  “Gellius  does  not  ask  us  to  wait  long.” 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

There  was  a  man  of  the  name  of  Octavius,  sus¬ 
pected  to  be  of  African  descent.  He  once  said, 
when  Cicero  was  pleading,  that  he  could  not 
hear  him:  “Yet  there  are  holes,”  said  Cicero, 
“in  your  ears.”  When  Metellus  Nepos  told 
him  that  he  had  ruined  more  as  a  witness  than 
he  had  saved  as  an  advocate,  “I  admit,”  said 
Cicero,  “that  I  have  more  truth  than  elo¬ 
quence.”  To  a  young  man  who  was  suspected 
of  having  given  a  poisoned  cake  to  his  father, 
and  who  talked  largely  of  the  invectives  he 
meant  to  deliver  against  Cicero,  “Better  these,” 
replied  he,  “than  your  cakes.”  Publius  Sextius, 
having  amongst  others  retained  Cicero  as  his 
advocate  in  a  certain  cause,  was  yet  desirous  to 
say  all  for  himself,  and  would  not  allow  any¬ 
body  to  speak  for  him;  when  he  was  about  to 
receive  his  acquittal  from  the  judges,  and  the 
ballots  were  passing,  Cicero  called  to  him, 
“Make  haste,  Sextius,  and  use  your  time;  to¬ 
morrow  you  will  be  nobody.” 

He  cited  Publius  Cotta  to  bear  testimony  in 
a  certain  cause,  one  who  affected  to  be  thought 
a  lawyer,  though  ignorant  and  unlearned;  to 
whom,  when  he  had  said,  “I  know  nothing  of 
the  matter,”  he  answered,  “You  think,  per¬ 
haps,  we  ask  you  about  a  point  of  law.”  To 
Metellus  Nepos,  who,  in  a  dispute  between 
them,  repeated  several  times,  “Who  was  your 
father,  Cicero?”  he  replied,  “Your  mother  has 
made  the  answer  to  such  a  question  in  your 
case  more  difficult”;  Nepos’s  mother  having 
been  of  ill-repute.  The  son,  also,  was  of  a  giddy, 
uncertain  temper.  At  one  time,  he  suddenly 
threw  up  his  office  of  tribune,  and  sailed  off 
into  Syria  to  Pompey;  and  immediately  after, 
with  as  little  reason,  came  back  again.  He  gave 
his  tutor,  Philagrus,  a  funeral  with  more  than 
necessary  attention,  and  then  set  up  the  stone 
figure  of  a  crow  over  his  tomb.  “This,”  said 
Cicero,  “is  really  appropriate;  as  he  did  not 
teach  you  to  speak,  but  to  fly  about.”  When 
Marcus  Appius,  in  the  opening  of  some  speech 
in  a  court  of  justice,  said  that  his  friend  had 
desired  him  to  employ  industry,  eloquence, 
and  fidelity  in  that  cause,  Cicero  answered, 
“And  how  have  you  had  the  heart  not  to  ac¬ 
cede  to  any  one  of  his  requests?” 

To  use  this  sharp  raillery  against  opponents 
and  antagonists  in  judicial  pleading  seems  al¬ 
lowable  rhetoric.  But  he  excited  much  ill-feel¬ 
ing  by  his  readiness  to  attack  any  one  for  the 
sake  of  a  jest.  A  few  anecdotes  of  this  kind 
may  be  added.  Marcus  Aquinius,  who  had  two 
sons-in-law  in  exile,  received  from  him  the 
name  of  King  Adrastus.  Lucius  Cotta,  an  in- 


CICERO 

temperate  lover  of  wine,  was  censor  when 
Cicero  stood  for  the  consulship.  Cicero,  being 
thirsty  at  the  election,  his  friends  stood  round 
about  him  while  he  was  drinking.  “You  have 
reason  to  be  afraid,”  he  said,  “lest  the  censor 
should  be  angry  with  me  for  drinking  water.” 

Meeting  one  day  Voconius  with  his  three 
very  ugly  daughters,  he  quoted  the  verse — 

He  reared  a  race  without  Apollo's  leave. 

When  Marcus  Gellius,  who  was  reputed  the 
son  of  a  slave,  had  read  several  letters  in  the 
senate  with  a  very  shrill  and  loud  voice,  “Won¬ 
der  not,”  said  Cicero,  “he  comes  of  the  criers.” 
When  Faustus  Sulla,  the  son  of  Sulla  the  dic¬ 
tator,  who  had,  during  his  dictatorship,  by 
public  bills  proscribed  and  condemned  so  many 
citizens,  had  so  far  wasted  his  estate,  and  got 
into  debt,  that  he  was  forced  to  publish  his  bills 
of  sale,  Cicero  told  him  that  he  liked  these  bills 
much  better  than  those  of  his  father.  By  this 
habit  he  made  himself  odious  with  many 
people. 

But  Clodius’s  faction  conspired  against  him 
upon  the  following  occasion.  Clodius  was  a 
member  of  a  noble  family,  in  the  flower  of  his 
youth,  and  of  a  bold  and  resolute  temper.  He, 
being  in  love  with  Pompeia,  Caesar’s  wife,  got 
privately  into  his  house  in  the  dress  and  attire 
of  a  music-girl;  the  women  being  at  that  time 
offering  there  the  sacrifice  which  must  not  be 
seen  by  men,  and  there  was  no  man  present. 
Clodius,  being  a  youth  and  beardless,  hoped  to 
get  to  Pompeia  among  the  women  without  be¬ 
ing  taken  notice  of.  But  coming  into  a  great 
house  by  night,  he  missed  his  way  in  the  pas¬ 
sages,  and  a  servant  belonging  to  Aurelia,  Cae¬ 
sar’s  mother,  spying  him  wandering  up  and 
down,  inquired  his  name.  Thus  being  neces¬ 
sitated  to  speak,  he  told  her  he  was  seeking  for 
one  of  Pompeia’s  maids,  Abra  by  name;  and 
she,  perceiving  it  not  to  be  a  woman’s  voice, 
shrieked  out,  and  called  in  the  women;  who, 
shutting  the  gates,  and  searching  every  place, 
at  length  found  Clodius  hidden  in  the  chamber 
of  the  maid  with  whom  he  had  come  in.  This 
matter  being  much  talked  about,  Caesar  put 
away  his  wife,  Pompeia,  and  Clodius  was  pros¬ 
ecuted  for  profaning  the  holy  rites. 

Cicero  was  at  this  time  his  friend,  for  he  had 
been  useful  to  him  in  the  conspiracy  of  Cati¬ 
line,  as  one  of  his  forwardest  assistants  and  pro¬ 
tectors.  But  when  Clodius  rested  his  defence 
upon  this  point,  that  he  was  not  then  at  Rome, 
but  at  a  distance  in  the  country,  Cicero  testified 
that  he  had  come  to  his  house  that  day,  and 


715 

conversed  with  him  on  several  matters;  which 
thing  was  indeed  true,  although  Cicero  was 
thought  to  testifiy  it  not  so  much  for  the  truth’s 
sake  as  to  preserve  his  quiet  with  Terentia  his 
wife.  For  she  bore  a  grudge  against  Clodius 
on  account  of  his  sister  Clodia’s  wishing,  as  it 
was  alleged,  to  marry  Cicero,  and  having  em¬ 
ployed  for  this  purpose  the  intervention  of 
Tullus,  a  very  intimate  friend  of  Cicero’s;  and 
his  frequent  visits  to  Clodia,  who  lived  in  their 
neighbourhood,  and  the  attentions  he  paid  to 
her  had  excited  Terentia’s  suspicions,  and,  be¬ 
ing  a  woman  of  a  violent  temper,  and  having 
the  ascendant  over  Cicero,  she  urged  him  on 
to  taking  a  part  against  Clodius,  and  deliver¬ 
ing  his  testimony. 

Many  other  good  and  honest  citizens  also 
gave  evidence  against  him,  for  perjuries,  dis 
orders,  bribing  the  people,  and  debauching 
women.  Lucullus  proved,  by  his  women-ser- 
vants,  that  he  had  debauched  his  youngest  sis¬ 
ter  when  she  was  Lucullus’s  wife;  and  there 
was  a  general  belief  that  he  had  done  the  same 
with  his  two  other  sisters,  Tertia,  whom  Mar- 
cius  Rex,  and  Clodia,  whom  Metellus  Celer  had 
married;  the  latter  of  whom  was  called  Quad- 
rantia,  because  one  of  her  lovers  had  deceived 
her  with  a  purse  of  small  copper  money  instead 
of  silver,  the  smallest  copper  coin  being  called 
a  quadrans.  Upon  this  sister’s  account,  in  par¬ 
ticular,  Clodius’s  character  was  attacked. 

Notwithstanding  all  this,  when  the  common 
people  united  against  the  accusers  and  wit¬ 
nesses  and  the  whole  party,  the  judges  were 
affrighted,  and  a  guard  was  placed  about  them 
for  their  defence;  and  most  of  them  wrote  their 
sentences  on  the  tablets  in  such  a  way  that  they 
could  not  well  be  read.  It  was  decided,  how¬ 
ever,  that  there  was  a  majority  for  his  acquittal, 
and  bribery  was  reported  to  have  been  em¬ 
ployed;  in  reference  to  which  Catulus  re¬ 
marked,  when  he  next  met  the  judges.  “You 
were  very  right  to  ask  for  a  guard,  to  prevent 
your  money  being  taken  from  you.”  And  when 
Clodius  upbraided  Cicero  that  the  judges  had 
not  believed  his  testimony,  “Yes,”  said  he, 
“five-and-twenty  of  them  trusted  me  and  con¬ 
demned  you,  and  the  other  thirty  did  not  trust 
you,  for  they  did  not  acquit  you  till  they  had 
got  your  money.” 

Caesar,  though  cited,  did  not  give  his  testi¬ 
mony  against  Clodius,  and  declared  himself 
not  convinced  of  his  wife’s  adultery,  but  that 
he  had  put  her  away  because  it  was  fit  that 
Caesar’s  house  should  not  be  only  free  of  the 
evil  fact,  but  of  the  fame  too. 


716 

Clodius,  having  escaped  this  danger,  and 
having  got  himself  chosen  one  of  the  tribunes, 
immediately  attacked  Cicero,  heaping  up  all 
matters  and  inciting  all  persons  against  him. 
The  common  people  he  gained  over  with  pop¬ 
ular  laws;  to  each  of  the  consuls  he  decreed 
large  provinces,  to  Piso,  Macedonia,  and  to 
Gabinius,  Syria;  he  made  a  strong  party  among 
the  indigent  citizens,  to  support  him  in  his 
proceedings,  and  had  always  a  body  of  armed 
slaves  about  him.  Of  the  three  men  then  in 
greatest  power,  Crassus  was  Cicero’s  open  en¬ 
emy,  Pompey  indifferently  made  advances  to 
both,  and  Caesar  was  going  with  an  army  into 
Gaul.  To  him,  though  not  his  friend  (what 
had  occurred  in  the  time  of  the  conspiracy  hav¬ 
ing  created  suspicions  between  them),  Cicero 
applied,  requesting  an  appointment  as  one  of 
his  lieutenants  in  the  province.  Caesar  accepted 
him,  and  Clodius,  perceiving  that  Cicero  would 
thus  escape  his  tribunician  authority,  professed 
to  be  inclinable  to  a  reconciliation,  laid  the 
greatest  fault  upon  Terentia,  made  always  a 
favourable  mention  of  him,  and  addressed  him 
with  kind  expressions,  as  one  who  felt  no  ha¬ 
tred  or  ill-will,  but  who  merely  wished  to  urge 
his  complaints  in  a  moderate  and  friendly  way. 

By  these  artifices,  he  so  freed  Cicero  of  all 
his  fears,  that  he  resigned  his  appointment  to 
Caesar,  and  betook  himself  again  to  political 
affairs.  At  which  Caesar,  being  exasperated, 
joined  the  party  of  Clodius  against  him,  and 
wholly  alienated  Pompey  from  him;  he  also 
himself  declared  in  a  public  assembly  of  the 
people,  that  he  did  not  think  Lentulus  and 
Cethegus,  with  their  accomplices,  were  fairly 
and  legally  put  to  death  without  being  brought 
to  trial.  And  this,  indeed,  was  the  crime 
charged  upon  Cicero,  and  this  impeachment 
he  was  summoned  to  answer.  And  so,  as  an 
accused  man,  and  in  danger  for  the  result,  he 
changed  his  dress,  and  went  round  with  his 
hair  untrimmed,  in  the  attire  of  a  suppliant, 
to  beg  the  people’s  grace.  But  Clodius  met  him 
in  every  corner,  having  a  band  of  abusive  and 
daring  fellows  about  him,  who  derided  Cicero 
for  his  change  of  dress  and  his  humiliation, 
and  often,  by  throwing  dirt  and  stones  at  him, 
interrupted  his  supplication  to  the  people. 

However,  first  of  all,  almost  the  whole  eques¬ 
trian  order  changed  their  dress  with  him,  and 
no  less  than  twenty  thousand  young  gentlemen 
followed  him  with  their  hair  untrimmed,  and 
supplicating  with  him  to  the  people.  And  then 
the  senate  met,  to  pass  a  decree  that  the  people 
should  change  their  dress  as  in  time  of  public 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES  £ 

sorrow.  But  the  consuls  opposing  it,  and  Clo-  I  Cl 
dius  with  armed  men  besetting  the  senate-  " 
house,  many  of  the  senators  ran  out,  crying  out  ri 
and  tearing  their  clothes.  But  this  sight  moved  " 
neither  shame  nor  pity:  Cicero  must  either  fly  k 
or  determine  it  by  the  sword  with  Clodius.  £ 

He  entreated  Pompey  to  aid  him,  who  was  £ 
on  purpose  gone  out  of  the  way,  and  was  stay-  f 
ing  at  his  country-house  in  the  Alban  hills;  and  t 
first  he  sent  his  son-in-law  Piso  to  intercede  t 
with  him,  and  afterwards  set  out  to  go  himself.  r 
Of  which  Pompey  being  informed,  would  not  t 
stay  to  see  him,  being  ashamed  at  the  remem-  c 
brance  of  the  many  conflicts  in  the  common-  t 
wealth  which  Cicero  had  undergone  in  his  be-  I  t 
half,  and  how  much  of  his  policy  he  had  di-  *  f 
rected  for  his  advantage.  But  being  now  Cae¬ 
sar’s  son-in-law,  at  his  instance  he  had  set  aside  2 
all  former  kindness,  and,  slipping  out  at  an-  $ 
other  door,  avoided  the  interview.  Thus  being  l 
forsaken  by  Pompey,  and  left  alone  to  himself,  1 
he  fled  to  the  consuls.  Gabinius  was  rough  1 
with  him,  as  usual,  but  Piso  spoke  more  cour-  '  5 
teously,  desiring  him  to  yield  and  give  place  1 

for  a  while  to  the  fury  of  Clodius,  and  to  await  ' 

a  change  of  times,  and  to  be  now,  as  before,  his  2 

country’s  saviour  from  the  peril  of  these  trou-  i 
bles  and  commotions  which  Clodius  was  ex-  I 
citing.  ; 

Cicero,  receiving  this  answer,  consulted  with  i 
his  friends.  Lucullus  advised  him  to  stay,  as  be-  .  < 
ing  sure  to  prevail  at  last;  others  to  fly,  because  1 

the  people  would  soon  desire  him  again,  when  : 

they  should  have  enough  of  the  rage  and  mad-  1 

ness  of  Clodius.  This  last  Cicero  approved.  1 

But  first  he  took  a  statue  of  Minerva,  which  t 

had  been  long  set  up  and  greatly  honoured  in  t 

his  house,  and  carrying  it  to  the  capitol,  there  ' 
dedicated  it,  with  the  inscription,  “To  Minerva,  i 
Patroness  of  Rome.”  And  receiving  an  escort  ! 
from  his  friends,  about  the  middle  of  the  night 
he  left  the  city,  and  went  by  land  through  Lu-  1 
cania,  intending  to  reach  Sicily. 

But  as  soon  as  it  was  publicly  known  that  he  1 

was  fled,  Clodius  proposed  to  the  people  a  de-  1 

cree  of  exile,  and  by  his  own  order  interdicted  1 

him  fire  and  water,  prohibiting  any  within  five  : 

hundred  miles  in  Italy  to  receive  him  into  their  I 

houses.  Most  people,  out  of  respect  for  Cicero,  1 

paid  no  regard  to  this  edict,  offering  him  every  1 

attention,  and  escorting  him  on  his  way.  But  ( 

at  Hipponium,  a  city  of  Lucania  now  called  ( 

Vibo,  one  Vibius,  a  Sicilian  by  birth,  who,  1 

amongst  many  other  instances  of  Cicero’s  ; 

friendship,  had  been  made  head  of  the  state  en-  ! 

gineers  when  he  was  consul,  would  not  re-  ! 


717 


CICERO 

ceive  him  into  his  house,  sending  him  word  he 
would  appoint  a  place  in  the  country  ’for  his 
reception.  Caius  Vergilius,  the  praetor  of  Sicily, 
who  had  been  on  the  most  intimate  terms  with 
him,  wrote  to  him  to  forbear  coming  into  Si¬ 
cily.  At  these  things  Cicero,  being  disheart¬ 
ened,  went  to  Brundusium,  whence  putting 
forth  with  a  prosperous  wind,  a  contrary  gale 
blowing  from  the  sea  carried  him  back  to  Italy 
the  next  day.  He  put  again  to  sea,  and  having 
reached  Dyrrachium,  on  his  coming  to  shore 
there,  it  is  reported  that  an  earthquake  and  a 
convulsion  in  the  sea  happened  at  the  same 
time,  signs  which  the  diviners  said  intimated 
that  his  exile  would  not  be  long,  for  these  were 
prognostics  of  change. 

Although  many  visited  him  with  respect, 
and  the  cities  of  Greece  contended  which 
should  honour  him  most,  he  yet  continued  dis¬ 
heartened  and  disconsolate,  like  an  unfortu¬ 
nate  lover,  often  casting  his  looks  back  upon 
Italy;  and,  indeed,  he  was  become  so  poor- 
spirited,  so  humiliated  and  dejected  by  his  mis¬ 
fortunes,  as  none  could  have  expected  in  a  man 
who  had  devoted  so  much  of  his  life  to  study 
and  learning.  And  yet  he  often  desired  his 
friends  not  to  call  him  orator,  but  philosopher, 
because  he  had  made  philosophy  his  business, 
and  had  only  used  rhetoric  as  an  instrument 
for  attaining  his  objects  in  public  life.  But  the 
desire  of  glory  has  great  power  in  washing  the 
tinctures  of  philosophy  out  of  the  souls  of  men, 
and  in  imprinting  the  passions  of  the  common 
people,  by  custom  and  conversation,  in  the 
minds  of  those  that  take  a  part  in  governing 
them,  unless  the  politician  be  very  careful  so 
to  engage  in  public  affairs  as  to  interest  himself 
only  in  the  affairs  themselves,  but  not  partic¬ 
ipate  in  the  passions  that  are  consequent  to 
them. 

Clodius,  having  thus  driven  away  Cicero,  fell 
to  burning  his  farms  and  villas,  and  afterwards 
his  city  house,  and  built  on  the  site  of  it  a  tem¬ 
ple  to  Liberty.  The  rest  of  his  property  he  ex¬ 
posed  to  sale  by  daily  proclamation,  but  no¬ 
body  came  to  buy.  By  these  courses  he  became 
formidable  to  the  noble  citizens,  and  being  fol¬ 
lowed  by  the  commonalty,  whom  he  had  filled 
with  insolence  and  licentiousness,  he  began  at 
last  to  try  his  strength  against  Pompey,  some 
of  whose  arrangements  in  the  countries  he  con¬ 
quered,  he  attacked.  The  disgrace  of  this  made 
Pompey  begin  to  reproach  himself  for  his  cow¬ 
ardice  in  deserting  Cicero,  and  changing  his 
mind,  he  now  wholly  set  himself  with  his 
friends  to  contrive  his  return.  And  when  Clo¬ 


dius  opposed  it,  the  senate  made  a  vote  that  no 
public  measure  should  be  ratified  or  passed  by 
them  till  Cicero  was  recalled.  But  when  Len- 
tulus  was  consul,  the  commotions  grew  so  high 
upon  this  matter,  that  the  tribunes  were 
wounded  in  the  Forum,  and  Quintus,  Cicero’s 
brother,  was  left  as  dead,  lying  unobserved 
amongst  the  slain. 

The  people  began  to  change  in  their  feelings, 
and  Annius  Milo,  one  of  their  tribunes,  was 
the  first  who  took  confidence  to  summon  Clo¬ 
dius  to  trial  for  acts  of  violence.  Many  of  the 
common  people  out  of  the  neighbouring  cities 
formed  a  party  with  Pompey,  and  he  went 
with  them,  and  drove  Clodius  out  of  the  Fo¬ 
rum,  and  summoned  the  people  to  pass  their 
vote.  And,  it  is  said,  the  people  never  passed 
any  suffrage  more  unanimously  than  this.  The 
senate,  also,  striving  to  outdo  the  people,  sent 
letters  of  thanks  to  those  cities  which  had  re¬ 
ceived  Cicero  with  respect  in  his  exile,  and  de¬ 
creed  that  his  house  and  his  country-places, 
which  Clodius  had  destroyed,  should  be  re¬ 
built  at  the  public  charge. 

Thus  Cicero  returned  sixteen  months  after 
his  exile,  and  the  cities  were  so  glad,  and  peo¬ 
ple  so  zealous  to  meet  him,  that  what  he 
boasted  of  afterwards,  that  Italy  had  brought 
him  on  her  shoulders  home  to  Rome,  was 
rather  less  than  the  truth.  And  Crassus  him¬ 
self,  who  had  been  his  enemy  before  his  exile, 
went  then  voluntarily  to  meet  him,  and  was 
reconciled,  to  please  his  son  Publius,  as  he  said, 
who  was  Cicero’s  affectionate  admirer. 

Cicero  had  not  been  long  at  Rome  when, 
taking  the  opportunity  of  Clodius’s  absence,  he 
went  with  a  great  company  to  the  capitol,  and 
there  tore  and  defaced  the  tribunician  tables, 
in  which  were  recorded  the  acts  done  in  the 
time  of  Clodius.  And  on  Clodius  calling  him 
in  question  for  this,  he  answered  that  he,  being 
of  the  patrician  order,  had  obtained  the  office 
of  tribune  against  law,  and  therefore  nothing 
done  by  him  was  valid.  Cato  was  displeased  at 
this,  and  opposed  Cicero,  not  that  he  com¬ 
mended  Clodius,  but  rather  disapproved  of  his 
whole  administration;  yet,  he  contended,  it  was 
an  irregular  and  violent  course  for  the  senate  to 
vote  the  illegality  of  so  many  decrees  and  acts, 
including  those  of  Cato’s  own  government  in 
Cyprus  and  at  Byzantium.  This  occasioned  a 
breach  between  Cato  and  Cicero,  which,  though 
it  came  not  to  open  enmity,  yet  made  a  more 
reserved  friendship  between  them. 

After  this,  Milo  killed  Clodius,  and,  being 
arraigned  for  the  murder,  he  procured  Cicero 


718 

as  his  advocate.  The  senate,  fearing  lest  the 
questioning  of  so  eminent  and  high-spirited  a 
citizen  as  Milo  might  disturb  the  peace  of  the 
city,  committed  the  superintendence  of  this 
and  of  the  other  trials  to  Pompey,  who  should 
undertake  to  maintain  the  security  alike  of  the 
city  and  of  the  courts  of  justice.  Pompey,  there¬ 
fore,  went  in  the  night,  and  occupying  the  high 
grounds  about  it,  surrounded  the  Forum  with 
soldiers.  Milo,  fearing  lest  Cicero,  being  dis¬ 
turbed  by  such  an  unusual  sight,  should  con¬ 
duct  his  cause  the  less  successfully,  persuaded 
him  to  come  in  a  litter  into  the  Forum,  and 
there  repose  himself  till  the  judges  were  set 
and  the  court  filled.  For  Cicero,  it  seems,  not 
only  wanted  courage  in  arms,  but,  in  his  speak¬ 
ing  also,  began  with  timidity,  and  in  many 
cases  scarcely  left  off  trembling  and  shaking 
when  he  had  got  thoroughly  into  the  current 
and  the  substance  of  his  speech.  When  defend¬ 
ing  Licinius  Murena  against  the  prosecution 
of  Cato,  and  being  eager  to  outdo  Hortensius, 
who  had  made  his  plea  with  great  applause,  he 
took  so  little  rest  that  night,  and  was  so  disor¬ 
dered  with  thought  and  overwatching,  that  he 
spoke  much  worse  than  usual. 

And  so  now,  on  quitting  his  litter  to  com¬ 
mence  the  cause  of  Milo,  at  the  sight  of  Pom¬ 
pey,  posted,  as  it  were,  and  encamped  with  his 
troops  above,  and  seeing  arms  shining  round 
about  the  Forum,  he  was  so  confounded  that 
he  could  hardly  begin  his  speech  for  the  trem¬ 
bling  of  his  body  and  hesitance  of  his  tongue; 
whereas  Milo,  meantime,  was  bold  and  in¬ 
trepid  in  his  demeanour,  disdaining  either  to 
let  his  hair  grow  or  to  put  on  the  mourning 
habit.  And  this,  indeed,  seems  to  have  been 
one  principal  cause  of  his  condemnation.  Ci¬ 
cero,  however,  was  thought  not  so  much  to 
have  shown  timidity  for  himself,  as  anxiety 
about  his  friend. 

He  was  made  one  of  the  priests,  whom  the 
Romans  call  Augurs,  in  the  room  of  Crassus 
the  younger,  dead  in  Parthia.  Then  he  was 
appointed  by  lot  to  the  province  of  Cilicia, 
and  set  sail  thither  with  twelve  thousand  foot 
and  two  thousand  six  hundred  horse.  He  had 
orders  to  bring  back  Cappadocia  to  its  alle¬ 
giance  to  Ariobarzanes,  its  king;  which  settle¬ 
ment  he  effected  very  completely  without  re¬ 
course  to  arms.  And  perceiving  the  Cilicians, 
by  the  great  loss  the  Romans  had  suffered  in 
Parthia,  and  the  commotions  in  Syria,  to  have 
become  disposed  to  attempt  a  revolt,  by  a 
gentle  course  of  government  he  soothed  them 
back  into  fidelity. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

He  would  accept  none  of  the  presents  that 
were  offered  him  by  the  kings;  he  remitted  the 
charge  of  public  entertainments,  but  daily  at 
his  own  house  received  the  ingenious  and  ac¬ 
complished  persons  of  the  province,  not  sump¬ 
tuously,  but  liberally.  His  house  had  no  porter, 
nor  was  he  ever  found  in  bed  by  any  man,  but 
early  in  the  morning,  standing  or  walking  be¬ 
fore  his  door,  he  received  those  who  came  to 
offer  their  salutations.  He  is  said  never  once 
to  have  ordered  any  of  those  under  his  com¬ 
mand  to  be  beaten  with  rods,  or  to  have  their 
garments  rent.  He  never  gave  contumelious 
language  in  his  anger,  nor  inflicted  punish¬ 
ment  with  reproach.  He  detected  an  embez¬ 
zlement,  to  a  large  amount,  in  the  public 
money,  and  thus  relieved  the  cities  from  their 
burdens,  at  the  same  time  that  he  allowed 
those  who  made  restitution  to  retain  without 
further  punishment  their  rights  as  citizens.  He 
engaged  in  war,  too,  so  far  as  to  give  a  defeat 
to  the  banditti  who  infested  Mount  Amanus, 
for  which  he  was  saluted  by  his  army  Impera- 
tor.  To  Caecilius,  the  orator,  who  asked  him 
to  send  him  some  panthers  from  Cilicia,  to  be 
exhibited  in  the  theatre  at  Rome,  he  wrote,  in 
commendation  of  his  own  actions,  that  there 
were  no  panthers  in  Cilicia,  for  they  were  all 
fled  to  Caria,  in  anger  that  in  so  general  a  peace 
they  had  become  the  sole  objects  of  attack. 

On  leaving  his  province,  he  touched  at 
Rhodes,  and  tarried  for  some  length  of  time  at 
Athens,  longing  much  to  renew  his  old  studies. 
He  visited  the  eminent  men  of  learning,  and 
saw  his  former  friends  and  companions;  and 
after  receiving  in  Greece  the  honours  that  were 
due  to  him,  returned  to  the  city,  where  every¬ 
thing  was  now  just  as  it  were  in  a  flame,  break¬ 
ing  out  into  a  civil  war. 

When  the  senate  would  have  decreed  him  a 
triumph,  he  told  them  he  had  rather,  so  differ¬ 
ences  were  accommodated,  follow  the  trium¬ 
phal  chariot  of  Caesar.  In  private,  he  gave  ad¬ 
vice  to  both,  writing  many  letters  to  Caesar, 
and  personally  entreating  Pompey;  doing  his 
best  to  soothe  and  bring  to  reason  both  the  one 
and  the  other.  But  when  matters  became  in¬ 
curable,  and  Caesar  was  approaching  Rome, 
and  Pompey  durst  not  abide  it,  but,  with  many 
honest  citizens,  left  the  city,  Cicero  as  yet  did 
not  join  in  the  flight,  and  was  reputed  to  ad¬ 
here  to  Caesar. 

And  it  is  very  evident  he  was  in  his  thoughts 
much  divided,  and  wavered  painfully  between 
both,  for  he  writes  in  his  epistles,  “To  which 
side  should  I  turn?  Pompey  has  the  fair  and 


CICERO 

honourable  plea  for  war;  and  Caesar,  on  the 
other  hand,  has  managed  his  affairs  better,  and 
is  more  able  to  secure  himself  and  his  friends. 
So  that  I  know  whom  I  should  fly,  not  whom 
I  should  fly  to.”  But  when  Trebatius,  one  of 
Caesar’s  friends,  by  letter  signified  to  him  that 
Caesar  thought  it  was  his  most  desirable  course 
to  join  his  party,  and  partake  his  hopes,  but  if 
he  considered  himself  too  old  a  man  for  this, 
then  he  should  retire  into  Greece,  and  stay 
quietly  there,  out  of  the  way  of  either  party, 
Cicero,  wondering  that  Caesar  had  not  written 
himself,  gave  an  angry  reply,  that  he  should 
not  do  anything  unbecoming  his  past  life.  Such 
is  the  account  to  be  collected  from  his  letters. 

But  as  soon  as  Caesar  was  marched  into 
Spain,  he  immediately  sailed  away  to  join 
Pompey.  And  he  was  welcomed  by  all  but 
Cato;  who,  taking  him  privately,  chid  him  for 
coming  to  Pompey.  As  for  himself,  he  said,  it 
had  been  indecent  to  forsake  that  part  in  the 
commonwealth  which  he  had  chosen  from  the 
beginning;  but  Cicero  might  have  been  more 
useful  to  his  country  and  friends,  if,  remaining 
neuter,  he  had  attended  and  used  his  influ¬ 
ence  to  moderate  the  result,  instead  of  coming 
hither  to  make  himself,  without  reason  or  ne¬ 
cessity,  an  enemy  to  Caesar,  and  a  partner  in 
such  great  dangers. 

By  this  language,  partly,  Cicero’s  feelings 
were  altered,  and  partly,  also,  because  Pom¬ 
pey  made  no  great  use  of  him.  Although,  in¬ 
deed,  he  was  himself  the  cause  of  it,  by  his  not 
denying  that  he  was  sorry  he  had  come,  by  his 
depreciating  Pompey ’s  resources,  finding  fault 
underhand  with  his  counsels,  and  continually 
indulging  in  jests  and  sarcastic  remarks  on  his 
fellow-soldiers.  Though  he  went  about  in  the 
camp  with  a  gloomy  and  melancholy  face  him¬ 
self,  he  was  always  trying  to  raise  a  laugh  in 
others,  whether  they  wished  it  or  not.  It  may 
not  be  amiss  to  mention  a  few  instances.  To 
Domitius,  on  his  preferring  to  a  command  one 
who  was  no  soldier,  and  saying,  in  his  defence, 
that  he  was  a  modest  and  prudent  person,  he 
replied,  “Why  did  not  you  keep  him  for  a 
tutor  for  your  children?” 

On  hearing  Theophanes,  the  Lesbian,  who 
was  master  of  the  engineers  in  the  army,  praised 
for  the  admirable  way  in  which  he  had  con¬ 
soled  the  Rhodians  for  the  loss  of  their  fleet, 
“What  a  thing  it  is,”  he  said,  “to  have  a  Greek 
in  command!”  When  Caesar  had  been  acting 
successfully,  and  in  a  manner  blockading  Pom¬ 
pey,  Lentulus  was  saying  it  was  reported  that 
Caesar’s  friends  were  out  of  heart;  “Because,” 


719 

said  Cicero,  “they  do  not  wish  Caesar  well.”  To 
one  Marcius,  who  had  just  come  from  Italy, 
and  told  them  that  there  was  a  strong  report  at 
Rome  that  Pompey  was  blocked  up,  he  said, 
“And  you  sailed  hither  to  see  it  with  your  own 
eyes.”  To  Nonius,  encouraging  them  after  a 
defeat  to  be  of  good  hope,  because  there  were 
seven  eagles  still  left  in  Pompey’s  camp,  “Good 
reason  for  encouragement,”  said  Cicero,  “if  we 
were  going  to  fight  with  jackdaws.”  Labienus 
insisted  on  some  prophecies  to  the  effect  that 
Pompey  would  gain  the  victory;  “Yes,”  said 
Cicero;  “and  the  first  step  in  the  campaign  has 
been  losing  our  camp.” 

After  the  battle  of  Pharsalia  was  over,  at 
which  he  was  not  present  for  want  of  health, 
and  Pompey  was  fled,  Cato,  having  consider¬ 
able  forces  and  a  great  fleet  at  Dyrrachium, 
would  have  had  Cicero  commander-in-chief, 
according  to  law  and  the  precedence  of  his  con¬ 
sular  dignity.  And  on  his  refusing  the  com¬ 
mand,  and  wholly  declining  to  take  part  in 
their  plans  for  continuing  the  war,  he  was  in 
the  greatest  danger  of  being  killed,  young  Pom¬ 
pey  and  his  friends  calling  him  traitor,  and 
drawing  their  swords  upon  him;  only  that  Cato 
interposed,  and  barely  rescued  and  brought 
him  out  of  the  camp. 

Afterwards,  arriving  at  Brundusium,  he  tar¬ 
ried  there  some  time  in  expectation  of  Caesar, 
who  was  delayed  by  his  affairs  in  Asia  and 
Egypt.  And  when  it  was  told  him  that  he  was 
arrived  at  Tarentum,  and  was  coming  thence 
by  land  to  Brundusium,  he  hastened  towards 
him,  not  altogether  without  hope,  and  yet  in 
some  fear  of  making  experiment  of  the  temper 
of  an  enemy  and  conqueror  in  the  presence  of 
many  witnesses.  But  there  was  no  necessity  for 
him  either  to  speak  or  do  anything  unworthy 
of  himself;  for  Caesar,  as  soon  as  he  saw  him 
coming  a  good  way  before  the  rest  of  the  com¬ 
pany,  came  down  to  meet  him,  saluted  him, 
and,  leading  the  way,  conversed  with  him  alone 
for  some  furlongs.  And  from  that  time  forward 
he  continued  to  treat  him  with  honour  and  re¬ 
spect,  so  that,  when  Cicero  wrote  an  oration  in 
praise  of  Cato,  Caesar  in  writing  an  answer  to 
it,  took  occasion  to  commend  Cicero’s  own  life 
and  eloquence,  comparing  him  to  Pericles  and 
Theramenes.  Cicero’s  oration  was  called  “Ca¬ 
to”;  Caesar’s,  “Anti-Cato.” 

So  also  it  is  related  that  when  Quintus  Liga- 
rius  was  prosecuted  for  having  been  in  arms 
against  Caesar,  and  Cicero  had  undertaken  his 
defence,  Caesar  said  to  his  friends,  “Why  might 
we  not  as  well  once  more  hear  a  speech  from 


720 


Cicero P  Ligarius,  there  is  no  question,  is  a 
wicked  man  and  an  enemy.”  But  when  Cicero 
began  to  speak,  he  wonderfully  moved  him, 
and  proceeded  in  his  speech  with  such  varied 
pathos,  and  such  a  charm  of  language,  that  the 
colour  of  Caesar’s  countenance  often  changed, 
and  it  was  evident  that  all  the  passions  of  his 
soul  were  in  commotion.  At  length,  the  orator 
touching  upon  the  Pharsalian  battle,  he  was  so 
affected  that  his  body  trembled,  and  some  of 
the  papers  he  held  dropped  out  of  his  hands. 
And  thus  he  was  overpowered,  and  acquitted 
Ligarius. 

Henceforth,  the  commonwealth  being 
changed  into  a  monarchy,  Cicero  withdrew 
himself  from  public  affairs,  and  employed  his 
leisure  in  instructing  those  young  men  that 
would,  in  philosophy;  and  by  the  near  inter¬ 
course  he  thus  had  with  some  of  the  noblest 
and  highest  in  rank,  he  again  began  to  possess 
great  influence  in  the  city.  The  work  and  ob¬ 
ject  to  which  he  set  himself  was  to  compose  and 
translate  philosophical  dialogues  and  to  render 
logical  and  physical  terms  into  the  Roman  id¬ 
iom.  For  he  it  was,  as  it  is  said,  who  first  or 
principally  gave  Latin  names  to  phantasia,  syn- 
catathesis,  epo\he,  catalepsis,  atamon,  ameres, 
\enon,  and  other  such  technical  terms,  which, 
either  by  metaphors  or  other  means  of  accom¬ 
modation,  he  succeeded  in  making  intelligible 
and  expressible  to  the  Romans.  For  his  recrea¬ 
tion,  he  exercised  his  dexterity  in  poetry,  and 
when  he  was  set  to  it  would  make  five  hundred 
verses  in  a  night. 

He  spent  the  greatest  part  of  his  time  at  his 
country-house  near  Tusculum.  He  wrote  to  his 
friends  that  he  led  the  life  of  Laertes,  either 
jestingly,  as  his  custom  was,  or  rather  from  a 
feeling  of  ambition  for  public  employment, 
which  made  him  impatient  under  the  present 
state  of  affairs.  He  rarely  went  to  the  city,  un¬ 
less  to  pay  his  court  to  Caesar.  He  was  com¬ 
monly  the  first  amongst  those  who  voted  him 
honours,  and  sought  out  new  terms  of  praise 
for  himself  and  for  his  actions.  As,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  what  he  said  of  the  statues  of  Pompey, 
which  had  been  thrown  down,  and  were  after¬ 
wards  by  Caesar’s  orders  set  up  again;  that 
Caesar,  by  this  act  of  humanity,  had  indeed  set 
up  Pompey’s  statues,  but  he  had  fixed  and  es¬ 
tablished  his  own. 

He  had  a  design,  it  is  said,  of  writing  the  his¬ 
tory  of  his  country,  combining  with  it  much  of 
that  of  Greece,  and  incorporating  in  it  all  the 
stories  and  legends  of  the  past  that  he  had  col¬ 
lected.  But  his  purposes  were  interfered  with 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

by  various  public  and  various  private  unhappy 
occurrences  and  misfortunes;  for  most  of  which 
he  was  himself  in  fault.  For  first  of  all,  he  put 
away  his  wife  Terentia,  by  whom  he  had  been 
neglected  in  the  time  of  the  war  and  sent  away 
destitute  of  necessaries  for  his  journey;  neither 
did  he  find  her  kind  when  he  returned  into 
Italy,  for  she  did  not  join  him  at  Brundusium, 
where  he  stayed  a  long  time,  nor  would  allow 
her  young  daughter,  who  undertook  so  long  a 
journey,  decent  attendance,  or  the  requisite  ex¬ 
penses;  besides,  she  left  him  a  naked  and  empty 
house,  and  yet  had  involved  him  in  many  and 
great  debts. 

These  were  alleged  as  the  fairest  reasons  for 
the  divorce.  But  Terentia,  who  denied  them  all, 
had  the  most  unmistakable  defence  furnished 
her  by  her  husband  himself,  who  not  long  after 
married  a  young  maiden  for  the  love  of  her 
beauty,  as  Terentia  upbraided  him;  or  as  Tiro, 
his  emancipated  slave,  has  written,  for  her 
riches,  to  discharge  his  debts.  For  the  young 
woman  was  very  rich,  and  Cicero  had  the  cus¬ 
tody  of  her  estate,  being  left  guardian  in  trust; 
and  being  indebted  many  myriads  of  money, 
he  was  persuaded  by  friends  and  relations  to 
marry  her,  notwithstanding  his  disparity  of 
age,  and  to  use  her  money  to  satisfy  his  cred¬ 
itors.  Antony,  who  mentions  this  marriage  in 
his  answer  to  the  Philippics,  reproaches  him 
for  putting  away  a  wife  with  whom  he  had 
lived  to  old  age;  adding  some  happy  strokes  of 
sarcasm  on  Cicero’s  domestic,  inactive,  unsol- 
dier-like  habits.  Not  long  after  this  marriage, 
his  daughter  died  in  child-bed  at  Lentulus’s 
house,  to  whom  she  had  been  married  after  the 
death  of  Piso,  her  former  husband.  The  philos¬ 
ophers  from  all  parts  came  to  comfort  Cicero; 
for  his  grief  was  so  excessive  that  he  put  away 
his  new-married  wife,  because  she  seemed  to  be 
pleased  at  the  death  of  Tullia.  And  thus  stood 
Cicero’s  domestic  affairs  at  this  time. 

He  had  no  concern  in  the  design  that  was 
now  forming  against  Caesar,  although,  in  gen¬ 
eral,  he  was  Brutus’s  most  principal  confidant, 
and  one  who  was  as  aggrieved  at  the  present, 
and  as  desirous  of  the  former  state  of  public  af¬ 
fairs,  as  any  other  whatsoever.  But  they  feared 
his  temper,  as  wanting  courage,  and  his  old 
age,  in  which  the  most  daring  dispositions  are 
apt  to  be  timorous. 

As  soon,  therefore,  as  the  act  was  committed 
by  Brutus  and  Cassius,  and  the  friends  of  Caesar 
were  got  together,  so  that  there  was  fear  the 
city  would  again  be  involved  in  a  civil  war, 
Antony,  being  consul,  convened  the  senate,  and 


CICERO 

made  a  short  address  recommending  concord. 
And  Cicero  following  with  various  remarks 
such  as  the  occasion  called  for,  persuaded  the 
senate  to  imitate  the  Athenians,  and  decree  an 
amnesty  for  what  had  been  done  in  Caesar’s 
case,  and  to  bestow  provinces  on  Brutus  and 
Cassius.  But  neither  of  these  things  took  effect. 
For  as  soon  as  the  common  people,  of  them¬ 
selves  inclined  to  pity,  saw  the  dead  body  of 
Caesar  borne  through  the  marketplace,  and  An¬ 
tony  showing  his  clothes  filled  with  blood,  and 
pierced  through  in  every  part  with  swords,  en¬ 
raged  to  a  degree  of  frenzy,  they  made  a  search 
for  the  murderers,  and  with  firebrands  in  their 
hands  ran  to  their  houses  to  burn  them.  They, 
however,  being  forewarned,  avoided  this  dan¬ 
ger;  and  expecting  many  more  and  greater  to 
come,  they  left  the  city. 

Antony  on  this  was  at  once  in  exultation,  and 
every  one  was  in  alarm  with  the  prospect  that 
he  would  make  himself  sole  ruler,  and  Cicero 
in  more  alarm  than  any  one.  For  Antony,  see¬ 
ing  his  influence  reviving  in  the  commonwealth 
and  knowing  how  closely  he  was  connected 
with  Brutus,  was  ill-pleased  to  have  him  in  the 
city.  Besides,  there  had  been  some  former  jeal¬ 
ousy  between  them,  occasioned  by  the  differ¬ 
ence  of  their  manners.  Cicero,  fearing  the  event, 
was  inclined  to  go  as  lieutenant  with  Dolabella 
into  Syria.  But  Hirtius  and  Pansa,  consuls  elect 
as  successors  of  Antony,  good  men  and  lovers 
of  Cicero,  entreated  him  not  to  leave  them,  un¬ 
dertaking  to  put  down  Antony  if  he  would 
stay  in  Rome.  And  he,  neither  distrusting 
wholly,  nor  trusting  them,  let  Dolabella  go 
without  him,  promising  Hirtius  that  he  would 
go  and  spend  his  summer  at  Athens,  and  re¬ 
turn  again  when  he  entered  upon  his  office. 

So  he  set  out  on  his  journey;  but  some  delay 
occurring  in  his  passage,  new  intelligence,  as 
often  happens,  came  suddenly  from  Rome,  that 
Antony  had  made  an  astonishing  change,  and 
was  doing  all  things  and  managing  all  public 
affairs  at  the  will  of  the  senate,  and  that  there 
wanted  nothing  but  his  presence  to  bring  things 
to  a  happy  settlement.  And  therefore,  blaming 
himself  for  his  cowardice,  he  returned  again  to 
Rome,  and  was  not  deceived  in  his  hopes  at  the 
beginning.  For  such  multitudes  flocked  out  to 
meet  him,  that  the  compliments  and  civilities 
which  were  paid  him  at  the  gates,  and  at  his  en¬ 
trance  into  the  city,  took  up  almost  one  whole 
day’s  time. 

On  the  morrow,  Antony  convened  the  sen¬ 
ate,  and  summoned  Cicero  thither.  He  came 
not,  but  kept  his  bed,  pretending  to  be  ill  with 


721 

his  journey;  but  the  true  reason  seemed  the  fear 
of  some  design  against  him,  upon  a  suspicion 
and  intimation  given  him  on  his  way  to  Rome. 
Antony,  however,  showed  great  offence  at  the 
affront,  and  sent  soldiers,  commanding  them 
to  bring  him  or  burn  his  house;  but  many  in¬ 
terceding  and  supplicating  for  him,  he  was  con¬ 
tented  to  accept  sureties.  Ever  after,  when  they 
met,  they  passed  one  another  with  silence,  and 
continued  on  their  guard,  till  Caesar,  the  young¬ 
er,  coming  from  Apollonia,  entered  on  the  first 
Caesar’s  inheritance,  and  was  engaged  in  a  dis¬ 
pute  with  Antony  about  two  thousand  five 
hundred  myriads  of  money,  which  Antony  de¬ 
tained  from  the  estate. 

Upon  this,  Philippus,  who  married  the  moth¬ 
er,  and  Marcellus,  who  married  the  sister  of 
young  Caesar,  came  with  the  young  man  to 
Cicero,  and  agreed  with  him  that  Cicero  should 
give  them  the  aid  of  his  eloquence  and  politi¬ 
cal  influence  with  the  senate  and  people,  and 
Caesar  give  Cicero  the  defence  of  his  riches  and 
arms.  For  the  young  man  had  already  a  great 
party  of  the  soldiers  of  Caesar  about  him. 

Cicero’s  readiness  to  join  him  was  founded, 
it  is  said,  on  some  yet  stronger  motives;  for  it 
seems,  while  Pompey  and  Caesar  were  yet  alive, 
Cicero,  in  his  sleep,  had  fancied  himself  en¬ 
gaged  in  calling  some  of  the  sons  of  the  sen¬ 
ators  into  the  capitol,  Jupiter  being  about,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  dream,  to  declare  one  of  them 
the  chief  ruler  of  Rome.  The  citizens,  running 
up  with  curiosity,  stood  about  the  temple,  and 
the  youths,  sitting  in  their  purple-bordered 
robes,  kept  silence.  On  a  sudden  the  doors 
opened,  and  the  youths,  arising  one  by  one  in 
order,  passed  round  the  god,  who  reviewed 
them  all,  and,  to  their  sorrow,  dismissed  them; 
but  when  this  one  was  passing  by,  the  god 
stretched  forth  his  right  hand  and  said,  “O  ye 
Romans,  this  young  man,  when  he  shall  be 
lord  of  Rome,  shall  put  an  end  to  all  your  civil 
wars.”  It  is  said  that  Cicero  formed  from  his 
dream  a  distinct  image  of  the  youth,  and  re¬ 
tained  it  afterwards  perfectly,  but  did  not  know 
who  it  was. 

The  next  day,  going  down  into  the  Campus 
Martius,  he  met  the  boys  returning  from  their 
gymnastic  exercises,  and  the  first  was  he,  just 
as  he  had  appeared  to  him  in  his  dream.  Being 
astonished  at  it,  he  asked  him  who  were  his 
parents.  And  it  proved  to  be  this  young  Caesar, 
whose  father  was  a  man  of  no  great  eminence, 
Octavius,  and  his  mother,  Attia,  Caesar’s  sister’s 
daughter;  for  which  reason,  Caesar,  who  had 
no  children,  made  him  by  will  the  heir  of  his 


722 


house  and  property.  From  that  time,  it  is  said 
that  Cicero  studiously  noticed  the  youth  when¬ 
ever  he  met  him,  and  he  as  kindly  received 
the  civility;  and  by  fortune  he  happened  to 
be  born  when  Cicero  was  consul. 

These  were  the  reasons  spoken  of;  but  it  was 
principally  Cicero’s  hatred  of  Antony,  and  a 
temper  unable  to  resist  honour,  which  fastened 
him  to  Caesar,  with  the  purpose  of  getting  the 
support  of  Caesar’s  power  for  his  own  public 
designs.  For  the  young  man  went  so  far  in  his 
court  to  him,  that  he  called  him  Father;  at 
which  Brutus  was  so  highly  displeased,  that, 
in  his  epistles  to  Atticus,  he  reflected  on  Cicero 
saying,  it  was  manifest,  by  his  courting  Caesar 
for  fear  of  Antony,  he  did  not  intend  liberty 
to  his  country,  but  an  indulgent  master  to 
himself.  Notwithstanding,  Brutus  took  Ci¬ 
cero’s  son,  then  studying  philosophy  at 
Athens,  gave  him  a  command,  and  employed 
him  in  various  ways,  with  a  good  result. 

Cicero’s  own  power  at  this  time  was  at  the 
greatest  height  in  the  city,  and  he  did  whatso¬ 
ever  he  pleased;  he  completely  overpowered 
and  drove  out  Antony,  and  sent  the  two  con¬ 
suls,  Hirtius  and  Pansa,  with  an  army,  to  re¬ 
duce  him;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  persuaded 
the  senate  to  allow  Caesar  the  lictors  and  en¬ 
signs  of  a  praetor,  as  though  he  were  his  coun¬ 
try’s  defender.  But  after  Antony  was  defeated  in 
battle,  and  the  consuls  slain,  the  armies  united, 
and  ranged  themselves  with  Caesar.  And  the 
senate,  fearing  the  young  man,  and  his  extraor¬ 
dinary  fortune,  endeavoured,  by  honours  and 
gifts,  to  call  off  the  soldiers  from  him,  and  to 
lessen  his  power ;  professing  there  was  no  further 
need  of  arms  now  Antony  was  put  to  flight. 

This  giving  Caesar  an  affright,  he  privately 
sent  some  friends  to  entreat  and  persuade 
Cicero  to  procure  the  consular  dignity  for  them 
both  together;  saying  he  should  manage  the 
affairs  as  he  pleased,  should  have  the  supreme 
power,  and  govern  the  young  man  who  was 
only  desirous  of  name  and  glory.  And  Caesar 
himself  confessed  that,  in  fear  of  ruin,  and  in 
danger  of  being  deserted,  he  had  seasonably 
made  use  of  Cicero’s  ambition,  persuading 
him  to  stand  with  him,  and  to  accept  the  offer 
of  his  aid  and  interest  for  the  consulship. 

And  now,  more  than  at  any  other  time, 
Cicero  let  himself  be  carried  away  and  deceiv¬ 
ed,  though  an  old  man,  by  the  persuasion  of  a 
boy.  He  joined  him  in  soliciting  votes,  and  pro¬ 
cured  the  good-will  of  the  senate,  not  without 
blame  at  the  time  on  the  part  of  his  friends; 
and  he,  too,  soon  enough  after,  saw  that  he  had 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ruined  himself,  and  betrayed  the  liberty  of  his 
country.  For  the  young  man,  once  established, 
and  possessed  of  the  office  of  consul,  bade  Ci¬ 
cero  farewell;  and,  reconciling  himself  to  An¬ 
tony  and  Lepidus,  joined  his  power  with  theirs, 
and  divided  the  government,  like  a  piece  of 
property,  with  them.  Thus  united,  they  made 
a  schedule  of  above  two  hundred  persons  who 
were  to  be  put  to  death. 

But  the  greatest  contention  in  all  their  de¬ 
bates  was  on  the  question  of  Cicero’s  case. 
Antony  would  come  to  no  conditions,  unless 
he  should  be  the  first  man  to  be  killed.  Lepidus 
held  with  Antony,  and  Caesar  opposed  them 
both.  They  met  secretly  and  by  themselves,  for 
three  days  together,  near  the  town  of  Bononia. 
The  spot  was  not  far  from  the  camp,  with  a 
river  surrounding  it.  Caesar,  it  is  said,  con¬ 
tended  earnestly  for  Cicero  the  first  two  days; 
but  on  the  third  day  he  yielded,  and  gave  him 
up.  The  terms  of  their  mutual  concessions 
were  these:  that  Caesar  should  desert  Cicero, 
Lepidus  his  brother  Paulus,  and  Antony  Lu¬ 
cius  Caesar,  his  uncle  by  his  mother’s  side. 
Thus  they  let  their  anger  and  fury  take  from 
them  the  sense  of  humanity,  and  demonstrated 
that  no  beast  is  more  savage  than  man  when 
possessed  with  power  answerable  to  his  rage. 

Whilst  these  things  were  contriving,  Cicero 
was  with  his  brother  at  his  country-house  near 
Tusculum;  whence,  hearing  of  the  proscrip¬ 
tions,  they  determined  to  pass  to  Astura,  a 
villa  of  Cicero’s  near  the  sea,  and  to  take  ship¬ 
ping  from  thence  for  Macedonia  to  Brutus,  of 
whose  strength  in  that  province  news  had  al¬ 
ready  been  heard.  They  travelled  together  in 
their  separate  litters,  overwhelmed  with  sor¬ 
row;  and  often  stopping  on  the  way  till  their 
litters  came  together,  condoled  with  one  an¬ 
other.  But  Quintus  was  the  more  disheartened 
when  he  reflected  on  his  want  of  means  for  his 
journey;  for,  as  he  said,  he  had  brought  noth¬ 
ing  with  him  from  home.  And  even  Cicero 
himself  had  but  a  slender  provision.  It  was 
judged,  therefore,  most  expedient  that  Cicero 
should  make  what  haste  he  could  to  flee  and 
Quintus  return  home  to  provide  necessaries, 
and  thus  resolved,  they  mutually  embraced, 
and  parted  with  many  tears. 

Quintus,  within  a  few  days  after,  betrayed 
by  his  servants  to  those  who  came  to  search  for 
him,  was  slain,  together  with  his  young  son. 
But  Cicero  was  carried  to  Astura,  where  find¬ 
ing  a  vessel  he  immediately  went  on  board 
her,  and  sailed  as  far  as  Circaeum  with  a  pros¬ 
perous  gale;  but  when  the  pilots  resolved  im- 


CICERO 

mediately  to  set  sail  from  thence,  whether 
fearing  the  sea,  or  not  wholly  distrusting  the 
faith  of  Caesar,  he  went  on  shore,  and  passed 
by  land  a  hundred  furlongs,  as  if  he  was  going 
for  Rome.  But  losing  resolution  and  changing 
his  mind,  he  again  returned  to  the  sea,  and 
there  spent  the  night  in  fearful  and  perplexed 
thoughts.  Sometimes  he  resolved  to  go  into 
Caesar’s  house  privately,  and  there  kill  himself 
upon  the  altar  of  his  household  gods,  to  bring 
divine  vengeance  upon  him;  but  the  fear  of 
torture  put  him  off  this  course.  And  after  pass¬ 
ing  through  a  variety  of  confused  and  uncer¬ 
tain  counsels,  at  last  he  let  his  servants  carry 
him  by  sea  to  Capitae,  where  he  had  a  house, 
an  agreeable  place  to  retire  to  in  the  heat  of 
summer,  when  the  Etesian  winds  are  so  pleas¬ 
ant. 

There  was  at  that  place  a  chapel  of  Apollo, 
not  far  from  the  seaside,  from  which  a  flight 
of  crows  rose  with  a  great  noise,  and  made  to¬ 
wards  Cicero’s  vessel,  as  it  rowed  to  land,  and 
lighting  on  both  sides  of  the  yard,  some  croak¬ 
ed,  others  pecked  the  ends  of  the  ropes.  This 
was  looked  upon  by  all  as  an  ill-omen;  and, 
therefore,  Cicero  went  again  ashore,  and  enter¬ 
ing  his  house,  lay  down  upon  his  bed  to  com¬ 
pose  himself  to  rest.  Many  of  the  crows  settled 
about  the  window,  making  a  dismal  cawing; 
but  one  of  them  alighted  upon  the  bed  where 
Cicero  lay  covered  up,  and  with  its  bill  by  little 
and  little  pecked  off  the  clothes  from  his  face. 
His  servants,  seeing  this,  blamed  themselves 
that  they  should  stay  to  be  spectators  of  their 
master’s  murder,  and  do  nothing  in  his  de¬ 
fence,  whilst  the  brute  creatures  came  to  assist 
and  take  care  of  him  in  his  undeserved  afflic¬ 
tion;  and  therefore,  partly  by  entreaty,  partly 
by  force,  they  took  him  up,  and  carried  him  in 
his  litter  towards  the  seaside. 

But  in  the  meantime  the  assassins  were  come 
with  a  band  of  soldiers,  Herennius,  a  cen¬ 
turion,  and  Popillius,  a  tribune,  whom  Cicero 
had  formerly  defended  when  prosecuted  for 
the  murder  of  his  father.  Finding  the  doors 
shut,  they  broke  them  open,  and  Cicero  not 
appearing,  and  those  within  saying  they  knew 
not  where  he  was,  it  is  stated  that  a  youth,  who 
had  been  educated  by  Cicero  in  the  liberal  arts 
and  sciences,  an  emancipated  slave  of  his 
brother  Quintus,  Philologus  by  name,  inform¬ 
ed  the  tribune  that  the  litter  was  on  its  way 
to  the  sea  through  the  close  and  shady  walks. 
The  tribune,  taking  a  few  with  him,  ran  to  the 
place  where  he  was  to  come  out.  And  Cicero, 


723 

perceiving  Herennius  running  in  the  walks, 
commanded  his  servants  to  set  down  the  litter; 
and  stroking  his  chin,  as  he  used  to  do,  with 
his  left  hand,  he  looked  steadfastly  upon  his 
murderers,  his  person  covered  with  dust,  his 
beard  and  hair  untrimmed,  and  his  face  worn 
with  his  troubles.  So  that  the  greatest  part  of 
those  that  stood  by  covered  their  faces  whilst 
Herennius  slew  him.  And  thus  was  he  mur¬ 
dered,  stretching  forth  his  neck  out  of  the  lit¬ 
ter,  being  now  in  his  sixty-fourth  year.  Heren¬ 
nius  cut  off  his  head,  and,  by  Antony’s  com¬ 
mand,  his  hands  also,  by  which  his  Philippics 
were  written;  for  so  Cicero  styled  those  ora¬ 
tions  he  wrote  against  Antony,  and  so  they  are 
called  to  this  day. 

When  these  members  of  Cicero  were 
brought  to  Rome,  Antony  was  holding  an  as¬ 
sembly  for  the  choice  of  public  officers;  and 
when  he  heard  it,  and  saw  them,  he  cried  out, 
“Now  let  there  be  an  end  of  our  proscriptions.” 
He  commanded  his  head  and  hands  to  be  fas¬ 
tened  up  over  the  rostra,  where  the  orators 
spoke;  a  sight  which  the  Roman  people  shud¬ 
dered  to  behold,  and  they  believed  they  saw 
there,  not  the  face  of  Cicero,  but  the  image  of 
Antony’s  own  soul.  And  yet  amidst  these  ac¬ 
tions  he  did  justice  in  one  thing,  by  delivering 
up  Philologus  to  Pomponia,  the  wife  of  Quin¬ 
tus;  who,  having  got  his  body  into  her  power, 
besides  other  grievous  punishments,  made  him 
cut  off  his  own  flesh  by  pieces,  and  roast  and 
eat  it;  for  so  some  writers  have  related.  But 
Tiro,  Cicero’s  emancipated  slave,  has  not  so 
much  as  mentioned  the  treachery  of  Philo¬ 
logus. 

Some  long  time  after,  Caesar,  I  have  been 
told,  visiting  one  of  his  daughter’s  sons,  found 
him  with  a  book  of  Cicero’s  in  his  hand.  The 
boy  for  fear  endeavoured  to  hide  it  under  his 
gown;  which  Caesar  perceiving,  took  it  from 
him,  and,  turning  over  a  great  part  of  the  book 
standing,  gave  it  him  again,  and  said,  “My 
child,  this  was  a  learned  man,  and  a  lover  of 
his  country.”  And  immediately  after  he  had 
vanquished  Antony,  being  then  consul,  he 
made  Cicero’s  son  his  colleague  in  the  office; 
and  under  that  consulship  the  senate  took 
down  all  the  statues  of  Antony,  and  abolished 
all  the  other  honours  that  had  been  given  him, 
and  decreed  that  none  of  that  family  should 
thereafter  bear  the  name  of  Marcus;  and  thus 
the  final  acts  of  the  punishment  of  Antony 
were,  by  the  divine  powers,  devolved  upon  the 
family  of  Cicero. 


724 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 


DEMOSTHENES  and  CICERO 
Compared 


These  are  the  most  memorable  circum¬ 
stances  recorded  in  history  of  Demosthenes 
and  Cicero  which  have  come  to  our  knowledge. 
But  omitting  an  exact  comparison  of  their  re¬ 
spective  faculties  in  speaking,  yet  thus  much 
seems  fit  to  be  said;  that  Demosthenes,  to  make 
himself  a  master  in  rhetoric,  applied  all  the 
faculties  he  had,  natural  or  acquired,  wholly 
that  way;  that  he  far  surpassed  in  force  and 
strength  of  eloquence  all  his  contemporaries 
in  political  and  judicial  speaking,  in  grandeur 
and  majesty  all  the  panegyrical  orators,  and 
in  accuracy  and  science  all  the  logicians  and 
rhetoricians  of  his  day;  that  Cicero  was  highly 
educated,  and  by  his  diligent  study  became  a 
most  accomplished  general  scholar  in  all  these 
branches,  having  left  behind  him  numerous 
philosophical  treatises  of  his  own  on  Academic 
principles;  as,  indeed,  even  in  his  written 
speeches,  both  political  and  judicial,  we  see 
him  continually  trying  to  show  his  learning 
by  the  way. 

And  one  may  discover  the  different  temper 
of  each  of  them  in  their  speeches.  For  Demos¬ 
thenes’s  oratory  was  without  all  embellishment 
and  jesting,  wholly  composed  for  real  effect 
and  seriousness;  not  smelling  of  the  lamp,  as 
Pytheas  scoffingly  said,  but  of  the  temperance, 
thoughtfulness,  austerity,  and  grave  earnest¬ 
ness  of  his  temper.  Whereas  Cicero’s  love  of 
mockery  often  ran  him  into  scurrility;  and  in 
his  love  of  laughing  away  serious  arguments  in 
judicial  cases  by  jests  and  facetious  remarks, 
with  a  view  to  the  advantage  of  his  clients,  he 
paid  too  little  regard  to  what  was  decent:  say¬ 
ing,  for  example,  in  his  defence  of  Caelius,  that 
he  had  done  no  absurd  thing  in  such  plenty 
and  affluence  to  indulge  himself  in  pleasures, 
it  being  a  kind  of  madness  not  to  enjoy  the 
things  we  possess,  especially  since  the  most 
eminent  philosophers  have  asserted  pleasures 
to  be  the  chiefest  good.  So  also  we  are  told 
that  when  Cicero,  being  consul,  undertook  the 
defence  of  Murena  against  Cato’s  prosecution, 
by  way  of  bantering  Cato,  he  made  a  long 
series  of  jokes  upon  the  absurd  paradoxes,  as 
they  are  called,  of  the  Stoic  set;  so  that  a  loud 
laughter  passing  from  the  crowd  to  the  judges, 
Cato,  with  a  quiet  smile,  said  to  those  that  sat 
next  him,  “My  friends,  what  an  amusing  con¬ 
sul  we  have.” 


And,  indeed,  Cicero  was  by  natural  temper 
very  much  disposed  to  mirth  and  pleasantry, 
and  always  appeared  with  a  smiling  and  serene 
countenance.  But  Demosthenes  had  constant 
care  and  thoughtfulness  in  his  look,  and  a 
serious  anxiety,  which  he  seldom,  if  ever,  laid 
aside;  and,  therefore,  was  accounted  by  his 
enemies,  as  he  himself  confessed,  morose  and 
ill-mannered. 

Also,  it  is  very  evident,  out  of  their  several 
writings,  that  Demosthenes  never  touched 
upon  his  own  praises  but  decently  and  without 
offence  when  there  was  need  of  it,  and  for 
some  weightier  end;  but  upon  other  occasions 
modestly  and  sparingly.  But  Cicero’s  immeas¬ 
urable  boasting  of  himself  in  his  orations  ar¬ 
gues  him  guilty  of  an  uncontrollable  appetite 
for  distinction,  his  cry  being  evermore  that 
arms  should  give  place  to  the  gown,  and  the 
soldier’s  laurel  to  the  tongue.  And  at  last  we 
find  him  extolling  not  only  his  deeds  and  ac¬ 
tions,  but  his  orations  also,  as  well  those  that 
were  only  spoken,  as  those  that  were  pub¬ 
lished;  as  if  he  were  engaged  in  a  boyish  trial 
of  skill,  who  should  speak  best,  with  the  rhe¬ 
toricians,  Isocrates  and  Anaximenes,  not  as 
one  who  could  claim  the  task  to  guide  and 
instruct  the  Roman  nation,  the — 

Soldier  full-armed,  terrific  to  the  foe. 

It  is  necessary,  indeed,  for  a  political  leader 
to  be  an  able  speaker;  but  it  is  an  ignoble  thing 
for  any  man  to  admire  and  relish  the  glory  of 
his  own  eloquence.  And,  in  this  matter,  De¬ 
mosthenes  had  a  more  than  ordinary  gravity 
and  magnificence  of  mind,  accounting  his 
talent  in  speaking  nothing  more  than  a  mere 
accomplishment  and  matter  of  practice,  the 
success  of  which  must  depend  greatly  on  the 
good-will  and  candour  of  his  hearers,  and  re¬ 
garding  those  who  pride  themselves  on  such 
accounts  to  be  men  of  a  low  and  petty  dispo¬ 
sition. 

The  power  of  persuading  and  governing  the 
people  did,  indeed,  equally  belong  to  both,  so 
that  those  who  had  armies  and  camps  at  com¬ 
mand  stood  in  need  of  their  assistance;  as 
Charas,  Diopithes,  and  Leosthenes  of  Demos¬ 
thenes’s,  Pompey  and  young  Caesar  of  Cicero’s, 
as  the  latter  himself  admits  in  his  Memoirs  ad¬ 
dressed  to  Agrippa  and  Maecenas.  But  what  are 


DEMOSTHENES  AND  CICERO 

thought  and  commonly  said  most  to  ‘demon¬ 
strate  and  try  the  tempers  of  men,  namely, 
authority  and  place,  by  moving  every  passion, 
and  discovering  every  frailty,  these  are  things 
which  Demosthenes  never  received;  nor  was 
he  ever  in  a  position  to  give  such  proof  of 
himself,  having  never  obtained  any  eminent 
office,  nor  led  any  of  those  armies  into  the  field 
against  Philip  which  he  raised  by  his  elo¬ 
quence. 

Cicero,  on  the  other  hand,  was  sent  quaestor 
into  Sicily,  and  proconsul  into  Cilicia  and  Cap¬ 
padocia,  at  a  time  when  avarice  was  at  the 
height,  and  the  commanders  and  governors 
who  were  employed  abroad,  as  though  they 
thought  it  a  mean  thing  to  steal,  set  themselves 
to  seize  by  open  force;  so  that  it  seemed  no 
heinous  matter  to  take  bribes,  but  he  that  did 
it  most  moderately  was  in  good  esteem.  And 
yet  he,  at  this  time,  gave  the  most  abundant 
proofs  alike  of  his  contempt  of  riches  and  of 
his  humanity  and  good-nature.  And  at  Rome, 
when  he  was  created  consul  in  name,  but  in¬ 
deed  received  sovereign  and  dictatorial  author¬ 
ity  against  Catiline  and  his  conspirators,  he  at¬ 
tested  the  truth  of  Plato’s  prediction,  that  then 
the  miseries  of  states  would  be  at  an  end  when, 
by  a  happy  fortune,  supreme  power,  wisdom, 
and  justice  should  be  united  in  one. 

It  is  said,  to  the  reproach  of  Demosthenes, 
that  his  eloquence  was  mercenary;  that  he  pri¬ 
vately  made  orations  for  Phormion  and  Apollo- 
dorus,  though  adversaries  in  the  same  cause; 
that  he  was  charged  with  moneys  received 
from  the  King  of  Persia,  and  condemned  for 
bribes  from  Harpalus.  And  should  we  grant 
that  all  those  (and  they  are  not  few)  who  have 
made  these  statements  against  him  have 
spoken  what  is  untrue,  yet  that  Demosthenes 
was  not  the  character  to  look  without  desire 
on  the  presents  offered  him  out  of  respect  and 
gratitude  by  royal  persons,  and  that  one  who 
lent  money  on  maritime  usury  was  likely  to  be 
thus  indifferent,  is  what  we  cannot  deny.  But 
that  Cicero  refused,  from  the  Sicilians  when 
he  was  quaestor,  from  the  King  of  Cappadocia 


725 

when  he  was  proconsul,  and  from  his  friends 
at  Rome  when  he  was  in  exile,  many  presents, 
though  urged  to  receive  them,  has  been  said 
already. 

Moreover,  Demosthenes’s  banishment  was 
infamous,  upon  conviction  for  bribery;  Cicero’s 
very  honourable,  for  ridding  his  country  of  a 
set  of  villains.  Therefore,  when  Demosthenes 
fled  his  country,  no  man  regarded  it;  for  Ci¬ 
cero’s  sake  the  senate  changed  their  habit,  and 
put  on  mourning,  and  would  not  be  persuaded 
to  make  any  act  before  Cicero’s  return  was  de¬ 
creed.  Cicero,  however,  passed  his  exile  idly  in 
Macedonia.  But  the  very  exile  of  Demosthenes 
made  up  a  great  part  of  the  services  he  did  for 
his  country;  for  he  went  through  the  cities  of 
Greece,  and  everywhere,  as  we  have  said, 
joined  in  the  conflict  on  behalf  of  the  Grecians, 
driving  out  the  Macedonian  ambassadors,  and 
approving  himself  a  much  better  citizen  than 
Themistocles  and  Alcibiades  did  in  the  like 
fortune.  And,  after  his  return,  he  again  de¬ 
voted  himself  to  the  same  public  service,  and 
continued  firm  to  his  opposition  to  Antipater 
and  the  Macedonians.  Whereas  Laelius  re¬ 
proached  Cicero  in  the  senate  for  sitting  silent 
when  Caesar,  a  beardless  youth,  asked  leave  to 
come  forward,  contrary  to  the  law,  as  a  candi¬ 
date  for  the  consulship;  and  Brutus,  in  his 
epistles,  charges  him  with  nursing  and  rearing 
a  greater  and  more  heavy  tyranny  than  that 
they  had  removed. 

Finally,  Cicero’s  death  excites  our  pity;  for 
an  old  man  to  be  miserably  carried  up  and 
down  by  his  servants,  flying  and  hiding  him¬ 
self  from  that  death  which  was,  in  the  course 
of  nature,  so  near  at  hand;  and  yet  at  last  to  be 
murdered.  Demosthenes,  though  he  seemed 
at  first  a  little  to  supplicate,  yet,  by  his  prepar¬ 
ing  and  keeping  the  poison  by  him,  demands 
our  admiration;  and  still  more  admirable  was 
his  using  it.  When  the  temple  of  the  god  no 
longer  afforded  him  a  sanctuary,  he  took  ref¬ 
uge,  as  it  were,  at  a  mightier  altar,  freeing 
himself  from  arms  and  soldiers,  and  laughing 
to  scorn  the  cruelty  of  Antipater. 


DEMETRIUS 

337?-i83  b.c. 


Ingenious  men  have  long  observed  a  resem¬ 
blance  between  the  arts  and  the  bodily 
senses.  And  they  were  first  led  to  do  so,  I 
think,  by  noticing  the  way  in  which,  both  in 
the  arts  and  with  our  senses,  we  examine  oppo¬ 
sites.  Judgment  once  obtained,  the  use  to  which 
we  put  it  differs  in  the  two  cases.  Our  senses 
are  not  meant  to  pick  out  black  rather  than 
white,  to  prefer  sweet  to  bitter,  or  soft  and 
yielding  to  hard  and  resisting  objects;  all  they 
have  to  do  is  to  receive  impressions  as  they 
occur,  and  report  to  the  understanding  the 
impressions  as  received.  The  arts,  on  the  other 
hand,  which  reason  institutes  expressly  to 
choose  and  obtain  some  suitable,  and  to  refuse 
and  get  rid  of  some  unsuitable  object,  have 
their  proper  concern  in  the  consideration  of 
the  former;  though,  in  a  casual  and  contingent 
way,  they  must  also,  for  the  very  rejection  of 
them,  pay  attention  to  the  latter. 

Medicine,  to  produce  health,  has  to  examine 
disease,  and  music,  to  create  harmony,  must 
investigate  discord;  and  the  supreme  arts  of 
temperance,  of  justice,  and  of  wisdom,  as  they 
are  acts  of  judgment  and  selection,  exercised 
not  on  good  and  just  and  expedient  only,  but 
also  on  wicked,  unjust,  and  inexpedient  ob¬ 
jects,  do  not  give  their  commendations  to  the 
mere  innocence  whose  boast  is  its  inexperience 
of  evil,  and  whose  truer  name  is,  by  their 
award,  simpleness  and  ignorance  of  what  all 
men  who  live  aright  should  know.  The  ancient 
Spartans,  at  their  festivals,  used  to  force  their 
Helots  to  swallow  large  quantities  of  raw  wine, 
and  then  to  expose  them  at  the  public  tables, 
to  let  the  young  men  see  what  it  is  to  be  drunk. 

And,  though  I  do  not  think  it  consistent 
with  humanity  or  with  civil  justice  to  correct 
one  man’s  morals  by  corrupting  those  of  an¬ 
other,  yet  we  may,  I  think,  avail  ourselves  of 
the  cases  of  those  who  have  fallen  into  indis¬ 
cretions,  and  have,  in  high  stations,  made 
themselves  conspicuous  for  misconduct;  and  I 
shall  not  do  ill  to  introduce  a  pair  or  two  of 
such  examples  among  these  biographies,  not, 
assuredly,  to  amuse  and  divert  my  readers,  or 
give  variety  to  my  theme,  but  as  Ismenias,  the 

726 


Theban,  used  to  show  his  scholars  good  and 
bad  performers  on  the  flute,  and  to  tell  them, 
“You  should  play  like  this  man,”  and,  “You 
should  not  play  like  that,”  and  as  Antigenidas 
used  to  say,  young  people  would  take  greater 
pleasure  in  hearing  good  playing,  if  first  they 
were  set  to  hear  bad,  so,  in  the  same  manner, 
it  seems  to  me  likely  enough  that  we  shall  be 
all  the  more  zealous  and  more  emulous  to  read, 
observe,  and  imitate  the  better  lives,  if  we  are 
not  left  in  ignorance  of  the  blameworthy  and 
the  bad. 

For  this  reason,  the  following  book  contains 
the  lives  of  Demetrius  Poliorcetes  and  Anto- 
nius  the  Triumvir;  two  persons  who  have 
abundantly  justified  the  words  of  Plato,  that 
great  natures  produce  great  vices  as  well  as 
virtues.  Both  alike  were  amorous  and  intem¬ 
perate,  warlike  and  munificent,  sumptuous  in 
their  way  of  living  and  overbearing  in  their 
manners.  And  the  likeness  of  their  fortunes 
carried  out  the  resemblance  in  their  characters. 
Not  only  were  their  lives  each  a  series  of  great 
successes  and  great  disasters,  mighty  acquisi¬ 
tions  and  tremendous  losses  of  power,  sudden 
overthrows  followed  by  unexpected  recoveries, 
but  they  died,  also,  Demetrius  in  actual  cap¬ 
tivity  to  his  enemies  and  Antony  on  the  verge 
of  it. 

Antigonus  had  by  his  wife,  Stratonice,  the 
daughter  of  Corrhaeus,  two  sons;  the  one  of 
whom,  after  the  name  of  his  uncle,  he  called 
Demetrius,  the  other  had  that  of  his  grand¬ 
father,  Philip,  and  died  young.  This  is  the 
most  general  account,  although  some  have  re¬ 
lated  that  Demetrius  was  not  the  son  of  Antig¬ 
onus,  but  of  his  brother;  and  that  his  own  fa¬ 
ther  dying  young,  and  his  mother  being  after¬ 
wards  married  to  Antigonus,  he  was  ac¬ 
counted  to  be  his  son. 

Demetrius  had  not  the  height  of  his  father 
Antigonus,  though  he  was  a  tall  man.  But  his 
countenance  was  one  of  such  singular  beauty 
and  expression  that  no  painter  or  sculptor  ever 
produced  a  good  likeness  of  him.  It  combined 
grace  and  strength,  dignity  with  boyish  bloom, 
and,  in  the  midst  of  youthful  heat  and  passion, 


DEMETRIUS 

what  was  hardest  of  all  to  represent  was  a 
certain  heroic  look  and  air  of  kingly  greatness. 
Nor  did  his  character  belie  his  looks,  as  no  one 
was  better  able  to  render  himself  both  loved 
and  feared.  For  as  he  was  the  most  easy  and 
agreeable  of  companions,  and  the  most  luxuri¬ 
ous  and  delicate  of  princes  in  his  drinking  and 
banqueting  and  daily  pleasures,  so  in  action 
there  was  never  any  one  that  showed  a  more 
vehement  persistence,  or  a  more  passionate 
energy.  Bacchus,  skilled  in  the  conduct  of  war, 
and  after  war  in  giving  peace  its  pleasures  and 
joys,  seems  to  have  been  his  pattern  among  the 
gods. 

He  was  wonderfully  fond  of  his  father  An- 
tigonus;  and  the  tenderness  he  had  for  his 
mother  led  him,  for  her  sake,  to  redouble  at¬ 
tentions,  which  it  was  evident  were  not  so 
much  owing  to  fear  or  duty  as  to  the  more 
powerful  motives  of  inclination.  It  is  reported 
that,  returning  one  day  from  hunting,  he  went 
immediately  into  the  apartment  of  Antigonus, 
who  was  conversing  with  some  ambassadors, 
and  after  stepping  up  and  kissing  his  father, 
he  sat  down  by  him,  just  as  he  was,  still  hold¬ 
ing  in  his  hand  the  javelins  which  he  had 
brought  with  him.  Whereupon  Antigonus, 
who  had  just  dismissed  the  ambassadors  with 
their  answer,  called  out  in  a  loud  voice  to  them, 
as  they  were  going,  “Mention,  also,  that  this  is 
the  way  in  which  we  two  live  together”;  as  if 
to  imply  to  them  that  it  was  no  slender  mark 
of  the  power  and  security  of  his  government 
that  there  was  so  perfect  good  understanding 
between  himself  and  his  son. 

Such  an  unsociable,  solitary  thing  is  power, 
and  so  much  of  jealousy  and  distrust  in  it,  that 
the  first  and  greatest  of  the  successors  of  Alex¬ 
ander  could  make  it  a  thing  to  glory  in  that  he 
was  not  so  afraid  of  his  son  as  to  forbid  his 
standing  beside  him  with  a  weapon  in  his 
hand.  And,  in  fact,  among  all  the  successors 
of  Alexander,  that  of  Antigonus  was  the  only 
house  which,  for  many  descents,  was  exempted 
from  crime  of  this  kind;  or  to  state  it  exactly, 
Philip  was  the  only  one  of  this  family  who  was 
guilty  of  a  son’s  death.  All  the  other  families, 
we  may  fairly  say,  afforded  frequent  examples 
of  fathers  who  brought  their  children,  hus¬ 
bands  their  wives,  children  their  mothers,  to 
untimely  ends;  and  that  brothers  should  put 
brothers  to  death  was  assumed,  like  the  postu¬ 
late  of  mathematicians,  as  the  common  and 
recognised  royal  first  principle  of  safety. 

Let  us  here  record  an  example  in  the  early 
life  of  Demetrius,  showing  his  natural  humane 


727 

and  kindly  disposition.  It  was  an  adventure 
which  passed  betwixt  him  and  Mithridates,  the 
son  of  Ariobarzanes,  who  was  about  the  same 
age  with  Demetrius,  and  lived  with  him,  in 
attendance  on  Antigonus;  and  although  noth¬ 
ing  was  said  or  could  be  said  to  his  reproach, 
he  fell  under  suspicion,  in  consequence  of 
a  dream  which  Antigonus  had.  Antigonus 
thought  himself  in  a  fair  and  spacious  field, 
where  he  sowed  golden  seed,  and  saw  present¬ 
ly  a  golden  crop  come  up;  of  which,  however, 
looking  presently  again,  he  saw  nothing  re¬ 
main  but  the  stubble,  without  the  ears.  And 
as  he  stood  by  in  anger  and  vexation,  he  heard 
some  voices  saying  Mithridates  had  cut  the 
golden  harvest  and  carried  it  off  into  Pontus. 
Antigonus,  much  discomposed  with  his  dream, 
first  bound  his  son  by  an  oath  not  to  speak, 
and  then  related  it  to  him,  adding  that  he  had 
resolved,  in  consequence,  to  lose  no  time  in 
ridding  himself  of  Mithridates,  and  making 
away  with  him. 

Demetrius  was  extremely  distressed;  and 
when  the  young  man  came,  as  usual,  to  pass 
his  time  with  him,  to  keep  his  oath  he  forbore 
from  saying  a  word,  but,  drawing  him  aside 
little  by  little  from  the  company,  as  soon  as 
they  were  by  themselves,  without  opening  his 
lips,  with  the  point  of  his  javelin  he  traced 
before  him  the  words  “Fly,  Mithridates.” 
Mithridates  took  the  hint,  and  fled  by  night 
into  Cappadocia,  where  Antigonus’s  dream 
about  him  was  quickly  brought  to  its  due  ful¬ 
fillment;  for  he  got  possession  of  a  large  and 
fertile  territory;  and  from  him  descended  the 
line  of  the  kings  of  Pontus,  which,  in  the 
eighth  generation,  was  reduced  by  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  This  may  serve  for  a  specimen  of  the 
early  goodness  and  love  of  justice  that  was  part 
of  Demetrius’s  natural  character. 

But  as  in  the  elements  of  the  world,  Emped¬ 
ocles  tells  us,  out  of  liking  and  dislike,  there 
spring  up  contention  and  warfare,  and  all  the 
more,  the  closer  the  contact,  or  the  nearer  the 
approach  of  the  objects,  even  so  the  perpetual 
hostilities  among  the  successors  of  Alexander 
were  aggravated  and  inflamed,  in  particular 
cases,  by  juxtaposition  of  interests  and  of  ter¬ 
ritories;  as,  for  example,  in  the  case  of  Antig¬ 
onus  and  Ptolemy.  News  came  to  Antigonus 
that  Ptolemy  had  crossed  from  Cyprus  and  in¬ 
vaded  Syria,  and  was  ravaging  the  country  and 
reducing  the  cities.  Remaining,  therefore,  him¬ 
self  in  Phrygia,  he  sent  Demetrius,  now 
twenty-two  years  old,  to  make  his  first  essay  as 
sole  commander  in  an  important  charge. 


728 

He,  whose  youthful  heat  outran  his  experi¬ 
ence,  advancing  against  an  adversary  trained 
in  Alexander’s  school,  and  practised  in  many 
encounters,  incurred  a  great  defeat  near  the 
town  of  Gaza,  in  which  eight  thousand  of  his 
men  were  taken  and  five  thousand  killed.  His 
own  tent,  also  his  money,  and  all  his  private 
effects  and  furniture,  were  captured.  These, 
however,  Ptolemy  sent  back,  together  with  his 
friends,  accompanying  them  with  the  humane 
and  courteous  message,  that  they  were  not 
fighting  for  anything  else  but  honour  and  do¬ 
minion.  Demetrius  accepted  the  gift,  praying 
only  to  the  gods  not  to  leave  him  long  in  Ptol¬ 
emy’s  debt,  but  to  let  him  have  an  early 
chance  of  doing  the  like  to  him.  He  took  his 
disaster,  also,  with  the  temper,  not  of  a  boy 
defeated  in  his  attempt,  but  of  an  old  and 
long-tried  general  familiar  with  reverse  of  for¬ 
tune;  he  busied  himself  in  collecting  his  men, 
replenishing  his  magazines,  watching  the  alle¬ 
giance  of  the  cities,  and  drilling  his  new  re¬ 
cruits. 

Antigonus  received  the  news  of  the  battle 
with  the  remark  that  Ptolemy  had  beaten  boys 
and  would  now  have  to  fight  with  men.  But 
not  to  humble  the  spirit  of  his  son,  he  acceded 
to  his  request,  and  left  him  to  command  on 
the  next  occasion. 

Not  long  after,  Cilles,  Ptolemy’s  lieutenant, 
with  a  powerful  army,  took  the  field,  and  look¬ 
ing  upon  Demetrius  as  already  defeated  by  the 
previous  battle,  he  had  in  his  imagination 
driven  him  out  of  Syria  before  he  saw  him. 
But  he  quickly  found  himself  deceived;  for 
Demetrius  came  so  unexpectedly  upon  him 
that  he  surprised  both  the  general  and  his 
army,  making  him  and  seven  thousand  of  the 
soldiers  prisoners  of  war,  and  possessing  him¬ 
self  of  a  large  amount  of  treasure.  But  his  joy 
in  the  victory  was  not  so  much  for  the  prizes 
he  should  keep,  as  for  those  he  could  restore; 
and  his  thankfulness  was  less  for  the  wealth 
and  glory  than  for  the  means  it  gave  him  of 
requiting  his  enemy’s  former  generosity.  He 
did  not,  however,  take  it  into  his  own  hands, 
but  wrote  to  his  father.  And  on  receiving  leave 
to  do  as  he  liked,  he  sent  back  to  Ptolemy  Cilles 
and  his  friends,  loaded  with  presents.  This  de¬ 
feat  drove  Ptolemy  out  of  Syria,  and  brought 
Antigonus  from  Celaenae  to  enjoy  the  victory 
and  the  sight  of  the  son  who  had  gained  it. 

Soon  after,  Demetrius  was  sent  to  bring  the 
Nabathaean  Arabs  into  obedience.  And  here  he 
got  into  a  district  without  water,  and  incurred 
considerable  danger,  but  by  his  resolute  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

composed  demeanour  he  overawed  the  bar¬ 
barians,  and  returned  after  receiving  from 
them  a  large  amount  of  booty  and  seven  hun¬ 
dred  camels.  Not  long  after,  Seleucus,  whom 
Antigonus  had  formerly  chased  out  of  Baby¬ 
lon,  but  who  had  afterwards  recovered  his  do¬ 
minion  by  his  own  efforts  and  maintained 
himself  in  it,  went  with  large  forces  on  an  ex¬ 
pedition  to  reduce  the  tribes  on  the  confines  of 
India  and  the  provinces  near  Mount  Caucasus. 
And  Demetrius,  conjecturing  that  he  had  left 
Mesopotamia  but  slenderly  guarded  in  his  ab¬ 
sence,  suddenly  passed  the  Euphrates  with  his 
army  and  made  his  way  into  Babylonia  unex¬ 
pectedly,  where  he  succeeded  in  capturing  one 
of  the  two  citadels,  out  of  which  he  expelled 
the  garrison  of  Seleucus,  and  placed  in  it  seven 
thousand  men  of  his  own.  And  after  allowing 
his  soldiers  to  enrich  themselves  with  all  the 
spoil  they  could  carry  with  them  out  of  the 
country,  he  retired  to  the  sea,  leaving  Seleucus 
more  securely  master  of  his  dominions  than 
before,  as  he  seemed  by  this  conduct  to  aban¬ 
don  every  claim  to  a  country  which  he  treated 
like  an  enemy’s.  However,  by  a  rapid  advance, 
he  rescued  Halicarnassus  from  Ptolemy,  who 
was  besieging  it. 

The  glory  which  this  act  obtained  them  in¬ 
spired  both  the  father  and  son  with  a  wonder¬ 
ful  desire  for  freeing  Greece,  which  Cassander 
and  Ptolemy  had  everywhere  reduced  to  slav¬ 
ery.  No  nobler  or  juster  war  was  undertaken 
by  any  of  the  kings;  the  wealth  they  had 
gained  while  humbling,  with  Greek  assistance, 
the  barbarians,  being  thus  employed,  for  hon¬ 
our’s  sake  and  good  repute,  in  helping  the 
Greeks.  When  tbe  resolution  was  taken  to  be¬ 
gin  their  attempt  with  Athens,  one  of  his 
friends  told  Antigonus,  if  they  captured  Ath¬ 
ens,  they  must  keep  it  safe  in  their  own  hands, 
as  by  this  gangway  they  might  step  out  from 
their  ships  into  Greece  when  they  pleased.  But 
Antigonus  would  not  hear  of  it;  he  did  not 
want  a  better  or  a  steadier  gangway  than  peo¬ 
ple’s  good-will;  and  from  Athens,  the  beacon 
of  the  world,  the  news  of  their  conduct  would 
soon  be  handed  on  to  all  the  world’s  inhabi¬ 
tants. 

So  Demetrius,  with  a  sum  of  five  thousand 
talents,  and  a  fleet  of  two  hundred  and  fifty 
ships,  set  sail  for  Athens,  where  Demetrius  the 
Phalerian  was  governing  the  city  for  Cassan¬ 
der,  with  a  garrison  lodged  in  the  port  of  Mu- 
nychia.  By  good  fortune  and  skillful  manage¬ 
ment  he  appeared  before  Piraeus,  on  the  twenty- 
sixth  of  Thargelion,  before  anything  had  been 


DEMETRIUS 

heard  of  him.  Indeed,  when  his  ships  were 
seen,  they  were  taken  for  Ptolemy’s,  and  prepa¬ 
rations  were  commenced  for  receiving  them; 
till  at  last,  the  generals,  discovering  their  mis¬ 
take,  hurried  down,  and  all  was  alarm  and 
confusion,  and  attempts  to  push  forward  prep¬ 
arations  to  oppose  the  landing  of  this  hostile 
force.  For  Demetrius,  having  found  the  en¬ 
trances  of  the  port  undefended,  stood  in  di¬ 
rectly,  and  was  by  this  time  safely  inside,  be¬ 
fore  the  eyes  of  everybody,  and  made  signals 
from  his  ship,  requesting  a  peaceable  hearing. 
And  on  leave  being  given,  he  caused  a  herald 
with  a  loud  voice  to  make  proclamation  that 
he  was  come  thither  by  the  command  of  his 
father,  with  no  other  design  than  what  he 
prayed  the  gods  to  prosper  with  success,  to 
give  the  Athenians  their  liberty,  to  expel  the 
garrison,  and  to  restore  the  ancient  laws  and 
constitution  of  the  country. 

The  people,  hearing  this,  at  once  threw 
down  their  shields,  and  clapping  their  hands, 
with  loud  acclamations  entreated  Demetrius  to 
land,  calling  him  their  deliverer  and  benefac¬ 
tor.  And  the  Phalerian  and  his  party,  who  saw 
that  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  receive  the 
conqueror,  whether  he  should  perform  his 
promises  or  not,  sent,  however,  messengers  to 
beg  for  his  protection;  to  whom  Demetrius 
gave  a  kind  reception,  and  sent  back  with  them 
Aristodemus  of  Miletus,  one  of  his  father’s 
friends.  The  Phalerian,  under  the  change  of 
government,  was  more  afraid  of  his  fellow- 
citizens  than  of  the  enemy;  but  Demetrius 
took  precautions  for  him,  and  out  of  respect 
for  his  reputation  and  character,  sent  him  with 
a  safe  conduct  to  Thebes,  whither  he  desired 
to  go.  For  himself,  he  declared  he  would  not, 
in  spite  of  all  his  curiosity,  put  his  foot  in  the 
city  till  he  had  completed  his  deliverance  by 
driving  out  the  garrison.  So  blockading  Mu- 
nychia  with  a  palisade  and  trench,  he  sailed 
of?  to  attack  Megara,  where  also  there  was  one 
of  Cassander’s  garrisons. 

But,  hearing  that  Cratesipolis,  the  wife  of 
Alexander,  son  of  Polysperchon,  who  was  fa¬ 
mous  for  her  beauty,  was  well  disposed  to  see 
him,  he  left  his  troops  near  Megara,  and  set 
out  with  a  few  light-armed  attendants  for 
Patrae,  where  she  was  now  staying.  And,  quit¬ 
ting  these  also,  he  pitched  his  tent  apart  from 
everybody,  that  the  woman  might  pay  her  visit 
without  being  seen.  This  some  of  the  enemy 
perceived,  and  suddenly  attacked  him;  and,  in 
his  alarm,  he  was  obliged  to  disguise  himself 
in  a  shabby  cloak,  and  run  for  it,  narrowly 


729 

escaping  the  shame  of  being  made  a  prisoner, 
in  reward  for  his  foolish  passion.  And  as  it 
was,  his  tent  and  money  were  taken.  Megara, 
however,  surrendered,  and  would  have  been 
pillaged  by  the  soldiers,  but  for  the  urgent  in¬ 
tercession  of  the  Athenians.  The  garrison  was 
driven  out,  and  the  city  restored  to  independ¬ 
ence. 

While  he  was  occupied  in  this,  he  remem¬ 
bered  that  Stilpo,  the  philosopher,  famous  for 
his  choice  of  a  life  of  tranquillity,  was  residing 
here.  He,  therefore,  sent  for  him,  and  begged 
to  know  whether  anything  belonging  to  him 
had  been  taken.  “No,”  replied  Stilpo,  “I  have 
not  met  with  any  one  to  take  away  knowl¬ 
edge.”  Pretty  nearly  all  the  servants  in  the  city 
had  been  stolen  away;  and  so,  when  Demetrius, 
renewing  his  courtesies  to  Stilpo,  on  taking 
leave  of  him,  said,  “I  leave  your  city,  Stilpo,  a 
city  of  freemen.”  “Certainly,”  replied  Stilpo, 
“there  is  not  one  serving  man  left  among  us 
all.” 

Returning  from  Megara,  he  sat  down  before 
the  citadel  of  Munychia,  which  in  a  few  days 
he  took  by  assault,  and  caused  the  fortifica¬ 
tions  to  be  demolished;  and  thus  having  ac¬ 
complished  his  design,  upon  the  request  and 
invitation  of  the  Athenians  he  made  his  en¬ 
trance  into  the  upper  city,  where,  causing  the 
people  to  be  summoned,  he  publicly  announced 
to  them  that  their  ancient  constitution  was  re¬ 
stored,  and  that  they  should  receive  from  his 
father,  Antigonus,  a  present  of  one  hundred 
and  fifty  thousand  measures  of  wheat,  and 
such  a  supply  of  timber  as  would  enable  them 
to  build  a  hundred  galleys.  In  this  manner  did 
the  Athenians  recover  their  popular  institu¬ 
tions,  after  the  space  of  fifteen  years  from  the 
time  of  the  war  of  Lamia  and  the  battle  before 
Cranon,  during  which  interval  of  time  the 
government  had  been  administered  nominally 
as  an  oligarchy,  but  really  by  a  single  man, 
Demetrius  the  Phalerian  being  so  powerful. 

But  the  excessive  honours  which  the  Athe¬ 
nians  bestowed,  for  these  noble  and  generous 
acts,  upon  Demetrius,  created  offence  and  dis¬ 
gust.  The  Athenians  were  the  first  who  gave 
Antigonus  and  Demetrius  the  title  of  kings, 
which  hitherto  they  had  made  it  a  point  of 
piety  to  decline,  as  the  one  remaining  royal 
honour  still  reserved  for  the  lineal  descen¬ 
dants  of  Philip  and  Alexander,  in  which  none 
but  they  could  venture  to  participate.  Another 
name  which  they  received  from  no  people  but 
the  Athenians  was  that  of  the  Tutelar  Deities 
and  Deliverers.  And  to  enhance  this  flattery, 


730 

by  a  common  vote  it  was  decreed  to  change 
the  style  of  the  city,  and  not  to  have  the  years 
named  any  longer  from  the  annual  archon;  a 
priest  of  the  two  Tutelary  Divinities,  who  was 
to  be  yearly  chosen,  was  to  have  this  honour, 
and  all  public  acts  and  instruments  were  to 
bear  their  date  by  his  name. 

They  decreed,  also,  that  the  figures  of  An- 
tigonus  and  Demetrius  should  be  woven,  with 
those  of  the  gods,  into  the  pattern  of  the  great 
robe.  They  consecrated  the  spot  where  Deme¬ 
trius  first  alighted  from  his  chariot,  and  built 
an  altar  there,  with  the  name  of  the  Altar  of 
the  Descent  of  Demetrius.  They  created  two 
new  tribes,  calling  them  after  the  names  of 
these  princes,  the  Antigonid  and  the  Deme- 
triad;  and  to  the  Council,  which  consisted  of 
five  hundred  persons,  fifty  being  chosen  out 
of  every  tribe,  they  added  one  hundred  more 
to  represent  these  new  tribes.  But  the  wildest 
proposal  was  one  made  by  Stratocles,  the  great 
inventor  of  all  these  ingenious  and  exquisite 
compliments,  enacting  that  the  members  of 
any  deputation  that  the  city  should  send  to 
Demetrius  or  Antigonus  should  have  the  same 
title  as  those  sent  to  Delphi  or  Olympia  for  the 
performance  of  the  national  sacrifices  in  behalf 
of  the  state  at  the  great  Greek  festivals. 

This  Stratocles  was,  in  all  respects,  an  auda¬ 
cious  and  abandoned  character,  and  seemed  to 
have  made  it  his  object  to  copy,  by  his  buffoon¬ 
ery  and  impertinence,  Cleon’s  old  familiarity 
with  the  people.  His  mistress,  Phylacion,  one 
day  bringing  him  a  dish  of  brains  and  neck- 
bones  for  his  dinner,  “Oh,”  said  he,  “I  am  to 
dine  upon  the  things  which  we  statesmen  play 
at  ball  with.”  At  another  time,  when  the  Athe¬ 
nians  received  their  naval  defeat  near  Amor- 
gos,  he  hastened  home  before  the  news  could 
reach  the  city,  and  having  a  chaplet  on  his 
head,  came  riding  through  the  Ceramicus,  an¬ 
nouncing  that  they  had  won  a  victory,  and 
moved  a  vote  for  thanksgivings  to  the  gods, 
and  a  distribution  of  meat  among  the  people 
in  their  tribes.  Presently  after  came  those  who 
brought  home  the  wrecks  from  the  battle;  and 
when  the  people  exclaimed  at  what  he  had 
done,  he  came  boldly  to  face  the  outcry,  and 
asked  what  harm  there  had  been  in  giving 
them  two  days’  pleasure. 

Such  was  Stratocles.  And,  “adding  flame  to 
fire,”  as  Aristophanes  says,  there  was  one  who, 
to  outdo  Stratocles,  proposed  that  it  should  be 
decreed  that,  whensoever  Demetrius  should 
honour  their  city  with  his  presence,  they 
should  treat  him  with  the  same  show  of  hos- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

pitable  entertainment  with  which  Ceres  and 
Bacchus  are  received;  and  the  citizen  who  ex¬ 
ceeded  the  rest  in  the  splendour  and  costliness 
of  his  reception  should  have  a  sum  of  money 
granted  him  from  the  public  purse  to  make  a 
sacred  offering.  Finally,  they  changed  the 
name  of  the  month  of  Munychion,  and  called 
it  Demetrion;  they  gave  the  name  of  the  De- 
metrion  to  the  odd  day  between  the  end  of  the 
old  and  the  beginning  of  the  new  month;  and 
turned  the  feast  of  Bacchus,  the  Dionysia,  into 
the  Demetria  or  feast  of  Demetrius. 

Most  of  these  changes  were  marked  by  the 
divine  displeasure.  The  sacred  robe,  in  which, 
according  to  their  decree,  the  figures  of  Deme¬ 
trius  and  Antigonus  had  been  woven  with 
those  of  Jupiter  and  Minerva,  was  caught  by  a 
violent  gust  of  wind,  while  the  procession  was 
conveying  it  through  the  Ceramicus,  and  was 
torn  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  A  crop  of 
hemlock,  a  plant  which  scarcely  grew  any¬ 
where,  even  in  the  country  thereabouts,  sprang 
up  in  abundance  round  the  altars  which  they 
had  erected  to  these  new  divinities.  They  had 
to  omit  the  solemn  procession  at  the  feast  of 
Bacchus,  as  upon  the  very  day  of  its  celebration 
there  was  such  a  severe  and  rigorous  frost, 
coming  quite  out  of  its  time,  that  not  only  the 
vines  and  fig-trees  were  killed,  but  almost  all 
the  wheat  was  destroyed  in  the  blade.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  Philippides,  an  enemy  to  Stratocles,  at¬ 
tacked  him  in  a  comedy,  in  the  following 
verses: — 

He  for  whom  frosts  that  nipped  your  vines  were 

sent , 

And  for  whose  sins  the  holy  robe  was  rent, 

Who  grants  to  men  the  gods’  own  honours,  he, 
Not  the  poor  stage,  is  now  the  people’s  enemy. 

Philippides  was  a  great  favourite  with  King 
Lysimachus,  from  whom  the  Athenians  re¬ 
ceived,  for  his  sake,  a  variety  of  kindnesses. 
Lysimachus  went  so  far  as  to  think  it  a  happy 
omen  to  meet  or  see  Philippides  at  the  outset 
of  any  enterprise  or  expedition.  And,  in  gen¬ 
eral,  he  was  well  thought  of  for  his  own  char¬ 
acter,  as  a  plain,  uninterfering  person,  with 
none  of  the  officious,  self-important  habits  of  a 
court.  Once,  when  Lysimachus  was  solicitous 
to  show  him  kindness,  and  asked  what  he  had 
that  he  could  make  him  a  present  of,  “Any¬ 
thing,”  replied  Philippides,  “but  your  state 
secrets.”  The  stage-player,  we  thought,  de¬ 
served  a  place  in  our  narrative  quite  as  well  as 
the  public  speaker. 

But  that  which  exceeded  all  the  former  fol¬ 
lies  and  flatteries  was  the  proposal  of  Dromo- 


DEMETRIUS 

elides  of  Sphettus;  who,  when  there  was  a  de¬ 
bate  about  sending  to  the  Delphic  Oracle  to  in¬ 
quire  the  proper  course  for  the  consecration  of 
certain  bucklers,  moved  in  the  assembly  that 
they  should  rather  send  to  receive  an  oracle 
from  Demetrius.  I  will  transcribe  the  very 
words  of  the  order,  which  was  in  these  terms: 
“May  it  be  happy  and  propitious.  The  people 
of  Athens  have  decreed,  that  a  fit  person  shall 
be  chosen  among  the  Athenian  citizens,  who 
shall  be  deputed  to  be  sent  to  the  Deliverer; 
and  after  he  hath  duly  performed  the  sacrifices, 
shall  inquire  of  the  Deliverer,  in  what  most 
religious  and  decent  manner  he  will  please  to 
direct,  at  the  earliest  possible  time,  the  conse¬ 
cration  of  the  bucklers;  and  according  to  the 
answer  the  people  shall  act.”  With  this  befool¬ 
ing  they  completed  the  perversion  of  a  mind 
which  even  before  was  not  so  strong  or  sound 
as  it  should  have  been. 

During  his  present  leisure  in  Athens,  he 
took  to  wife  Eurydice,  a  descendant  of  the  an¬ 
cient  Miltiades,  who  had  been  married  to 
Opheltas,  the  ruler  of  Cyrene,  and  after  his 
death  had  come  back  to  Athens.  The  Athe¬ 
nians  took  the  marriage  as  a  compliment  and 
favour  to  the  city.  But  Demetrius  was  very  free 
in  these  matters,  and  was  the  husband  of  sev¬ 
eral  wives  at  once;  the  highest  place  and  hon¬ 
our  among  all  being  retained  by  Phila,  who 
was  Antipater’s  daughter,  and  had  been  the 
wife  of  Craterus,  the  one  of  all  the  successors 
of  Alexander  who  left  behind  him  the  strong¬ 
est  feelings  of  attachment  among  the  Mace¬ 
donians.  And  for  these  reasons  Antigonus  had 
obliged  him  to  marry  her,  notwithstanding  the 
disparity  of  their  years,  Demetrius  being  quite 
a  youth,  and  she  much  older;  and  when  upon 
that  account  he  made  some  difficulty  in  com¬ 
plying,  Antigonus  whispered  in  his  ear  the 
maxim  from  Euripides,  broadly  substituting  a 
new  word  for  the  original,  serve — 

Natural  or  not, 

A  man  must  wed  where  profit  will  be  got. 
Any  respect,  however,  which  he  showed  either 
to  Phila  or  to  his  other  wives  did  not  go  so  far 
as  to  prevent  him  from  consorting  with  any 
number  of  mistresses,  and  bearing,  in  this  re¬ 
spect,  the  worst  character  of  all  the  princes  of 
his  time. 

A  summons  now  arrived  from  his  father, 
ordering  him  to  go  and  fight  with  Ptolemy  in 
Cyprus,  which  he  was  obliged  to  obey,  sorry 
as  he  was  to  abandon  Greece.  And  in  quitting 
this  nobler  and  more  glorious  enterprise,  he 
sent  to  Cleonides,  Ptolemy’s  general,  who  was 


731 

holding  garrisons  in  Sicyon  and  Corinth,  of¬ 
fering  him  money  to  let  the  cities  be  inde¬ 
pendent.  But  on  his  refusal,  he  set  sail  hastily, 
taking  additional  forces  with  him,  and  made 
for  Cyprus;  where,  immediately  upon  his  ar¬ 
rival,  he  fell  upon  Menelaus,  the  brother  of 
Ptolemy,  and  gave  him  a  defeat.  But  when 
Ptolemy  himself  came  in  person,  with  large 
forces  both  on  land  and  sea,  for  some  little  time 
nothing  took  place  beyond  an  interchange  of 
menaces  and  lofty  talk.  Ptolemy  bade  Deme¬ 
trius  sail  off  before  the  whole  armament  came 
up,  if  he  did  not  wish  to  be  trampled  under 
foot;  and  Demetrius  offered  to  let  him  retire, 
on  condition  of  his  withdrawing  his  garrisons 
from  Sicyon  and  Corinth.  And  not  they  alone, 
but  all  the  other  potentates  and  princes  of  the 
time,  were  in  anxiety  for  the  uncertain  im¬ 
pending  issue  of  the  conflict;  as  it  seemed  evi¬ 
dent  that  the  conqueror’s  prize  would  be,  not 
Cyprus  or  Syria,  but  the  absolute  supremacy. 

Ptolemy  had  brought  a  hundred  and  fifty 
galleys  with  him,  and  gave  orders  to  Menelaus 
to  sally,  in  the  heat  of  the  battle,  out  of  the 
harbour  of  Salamis,  and  attack  with  sixty  ships 
the  rear  of  Demetrius,  Demetrius,  however, 
opposing  to  these  sixty  ten  of  his  galleys,  which 
were  a  sufficient  number  to  block  up  the  nar¬ 
row  entrance  of  the  harbour,  and  drawing  out 
his  land  forces  along  all  the  headlands  running 
out  into  sea,  went  into  action  with  a  hundred 
and  eighty  galleys,  and,  attacking  with  the 
utmost  boldness  and  impetuosity,  utterly  rout¬ 
ed  Ptolemy,  who  fled  with  eight  ships,  the  sole 
remnant  of  his  fleet,  seventy  having  been  taken 
with  all  their  men,  and  the  rest  destroyed  in 
the  battle;  while  the  whole  multitude  of  at¬ 
tendants,  friends,  and  women,  that  had  fol¬ 
lowed  in  the  ships  of  burden,  all  the  arms, 
treasure,  and  military  engines,  fell,  without 
exception,  into  the  hands  of  Demetrius,  and 
were  by  him  collected  and  brought  into  the 
camp. 

Among  the  prisoners  was  the  celebrated  La¬ 
mia,  famed  at  one  time  for  her  skill  on  the 
flute,  and  afterwards  renowned  as  a  mistress. 
And  although  now  upon  the  wane  of  her 
youthful  beauty,  and  though  Demetrius  was 
much  her  junior,  she  exercised  over  him  so 
great  a  charm  that  all  other  women  seemed  to 
be  amorous  of  Demetrius,  but  Demetrius 
amorous  only  of  Lamia. 

After  this  signal  victory,  Demetrius  came  be¬ 
fore  Salamis;  and  Menelaus,  unable  to  make 
any  resistance,  surrendered  himself  and  all  his 
fleet,  twelve  hundred  horse,  and  twelve  thou- 


732 

sand  foot,  together  with  the  place.  But  that 
which  added  more  than  all  to  the  glory  and 
splendour  of  the  success  was  the  humane  and 
generous  conduct  of  Demetrius  to  the  van¬ 
quished.  For,  after  he  had  given  honourable 
funerals  to  the  dead,  he  bestowed  liberty  upon 
the  living;  and  that  he  might  not  forget  the 
Athenians,  he  sent  them,  as  a  present,  com¬ 
plete  arms  for  twelve  hundred  men. 

To  carry  this  happy  news,  Aristodemus  of 
Miletus,  the  most  perfect  flatterer  belonging  to 
the  court,  was  despatched  to  Antigonus;  and 
he,  to  enhance  the  welcome  message,  was  re¬ 
solved,  it  would  appear,  to  make  his  most  suc¬ 
cessful  effort.  When  he  crossed  from  Cyprus, 
he  bade  the  galley  which  conveyed  him  to 
come  to  anchor  off  the  land;  and,  having  or¬ 
dered  all  the  ship’s  crew  to  remain  aboard,  he 
took  the  boat,  and  was  set  ashore  alone.  Thus 
he  proceeded  to  Antigonus,  who,  one  may  well 
imagine,  was  in  suspense  enough  about  the 
issue,  and  suffered  all  the  anxieties  natural  to 
men  engaged  in  so  perilous  a  struggle.  And 
when  he  heard  that  Aristodemus  was  coming 
alone,  it  put  him  into  yet  greater  trouble;  he 
could  scarcely  forbear  from  going  out  to  meet 
him  himself;  he  sent  messenger  on  messenger, 
and  friend  after  friend,  to  inquire  what  news. 

But  Aristodemus,  walking  gravely  and  with 
a  settled  countenance,  without  making  answer, 
still  proceeded  quietly  onward;  until  Antig¬ 
onus,  quite  alarmed  and  no  longer  able  to  re¬ 
frain,  got  up  and  met  him  at  the  gate,  whither 
he  came  with  a  crowd  of  anxious  followers 
now  collected  and  running  after  him.  As  soon 
as  he  saw  Antigonus  within  hearing,  stretching 
out  his  hands,  he  accosted  him  with  the  loud 
exclamation,  “Hail,  King  Antigonus!  We  have 
defeated  Ptolemy  by  sea,  and  have  taken  Cy¬ 
prus  and  sixteen  thousand  eight  hundred  pris¬ 
oners.”  “Welcome,  Aristodemus,”  replied  An¬ 
tigonus,  “but,  as  you  chose  to  torture  us  so 
long  for  your  good  news,  you  may  wait  awhile 
for  the  reward  of  it.” 

Upon  this  the  people  around  gave  Antig¬ 
onus  and  Demetrius,  for  the  first  time,  the 
title  of  kings.  His  friends  at  once  set  a  diadem 
on  the  head  of  Antigonus;  and  he  sent  one 
presently  to  his  son,  with  a  letter  addressed  to 
him  as  King  Demetrius.  And  when  this  news 
was  told  in  Egypt,  that  they  might  not  seem  to 
be  dejected  with  the  late  defeat,  Ptolemy’s  fol¬ 
lowers  also  took  occasion  to  bestow  the  style 
of  king  upon  him;  and  the  rest  of  the  succes¬ 
sors  of  Alexander  were  quick  to  follow  the  ex¬ 
ample.  Lysimachus  began  to  wear  the  diadem, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  Seleucus,  who  had  before  received  the 
name  in  all  addresses  from  the  barbarians,  now 
also  took  it  upon  him  in  all  business  with  the 
Greeks.  Cassander  still  retained  his  usual  su¬ 
perscription  in  his  letters,  but  others,  both  in 
writing  and  speaking,  gave  him  the  royal  title. 

Nor  was  this  the  mere  accession  of  a  name, 
or  introduction  of  a  new  fashion.  The  men’s 
own  sentiments  about  themselves  were  dis¬ 
turbed,  and  their  feelings  elevated;  a  spirit  of 
pomp  and  arrogance  passed  into  their  habits 
of  life  and  conversation,  as  a  tragic  actor  on 
the  stage  modifies,  with  a  change  of  dress,  his 
steps,  his  voice,  his  motions  in  sitting  down, 
his  manner  in  addressing  another.  The  punish¬ 
ments  they  inflicted  were  more  violent  after 
they  had  thus  laid  aside  that  modest  style  un¬ 
der  which  they  formerly  dissembled  their 
power,  and  the  influence  of  which  had  often 
made  them  gentler  and  less  exacting  to  their 
subjects.  A  single  flattering  voice  effected  a 
revolution  in  the  world. 

Antigonus,  extremely  elevated  with  the  suc¬ 
cess  of  his  arms  in  Cyprus,  under  the  conduct 
of  Demetrius,  resolved  to  push  on  his  good 
fortune,  and  to  lead  his  forces  in  person  against 
Ptolemy  by  land  whilst  Demetrius  should  coast 
with  a  great  fleet  along  the  shore,  to  assist  him 
by  sea.  The  issue  of  the  contest  was  intimated 
in  a  dream  which  Medius,  a  friend  to  Antigo¬ 
nus,  had  at  this  time  in  his  sleep.  He  thought  he 
saw  Antigonus  and  his  whole  army  running, 
as  if  it  had  been  a  race;  that,  in  the  first  part  of 
the  course,  he  went  off  showing  great  strength 
and  speed;  gradually,  however,  his  pace  slack¬ 
ened,  and  at  the  end  he  saw  him  come  lagging 
up,  tired  and  almost  breathless  and  quite  spent. 
Antigonus  himself  met  with  many  difficulties 
by  land;  and  Demetrius,  encountering  a  great 
storm  at  sea,  was  driven,  with  the  loss  of  many 
of  his  ships,  upon  a  dangerous  coast  without  a 
harbour.  So  the  expedition  returned  without 
effecting  anything. 

Antigonus,  now  nearly  eighty  years  old,  was 
no  longer  well  able  to  go  through  the  fatigues 
of  a  marching  campaign,  though  rather  on  ac¬ 
count  of  his  great  size  and  corpulence  than 
from  loss  of  strength;  and  for  this  reason  he 
left  things  to  his  son,  whose  fortune  and  ex¬ 
perience  appeared  sufficient  for  all  undertak¬ 
ings,  and  whose  luxury  and  expense  and  rev¬ 
elry  gave  him  no  concern.  For  though  in  peace 
he  vented  himself  in  pleasures,  and,  when 
there  was  nothing  to  do,  ran  headlong  into  any 
excesses,  in  war  he  was  as  sober  and  abstemi¬ 
ous  as  the  most  temperate  character. 


DEMETRIUS 

The  story  is  told  that  once,  after  Lamia  had 
gained  open  supremacy  over  him,  the  old  man, 
when  Demetrius  coming  home  from  abroad 
began  to  kiss  him  with  unusual  warmth,  asked 
him  if  he  took  him  for  Lamia.  At  another 
time,  Demetrius,  after  spending  several  days 
in  a  debauch,  excused  himself  for  his  absence, 
by  saying  he  had  had  a  violent  flux.  “So  I 
heard,”  replied  Antigonus;  “was  it  of  Thasian 
wine,  or  Chian?”  Once  he  was  told  his  son 
was  ill,  and  went  to  see  him.  At  the  door  he 
met  some  young  beauty.  Going  in,  he  sat  down 
by  the  bed  and  took  his  pulse.  “The  fever,” 
said  Demetrius,  “has  just  left  me.”  “Oh,  yes,” 
replied  the  father,  “I  met  it  going  out  at  the 
door.” 

Demetrius’s  great  actions  made  Antigonus 
treat  him  thus  easily.  The  Scythians  in  their 
drinking-bouts  twang  their  bows,  to  keep  their 
courage  awake  amidst  the  dreams  of  indul¬ 
gence;  but  he  would  resign  his  whole  being, 
now  to  pleasure,  and  now  to  action;  and 
though  he  never  let  thoughts  of  the  one  in¬ 
trude  upon  the  pursuit  of  the  other,  yet  when 
the  time  came  for  preparing  for  war,  he  showed 
as  much  capacity  as  any  man. 

And  indeed  his  ability  displayed  itself  even 
more  in  preparing  for  than  in  conducting  a 
war.  He  thought  he  could  never  be  too  well 
supplied  for  every  possible  occasion,  and  took 
a  pleasure,  not  to  be  satiated,  in  great  improve¬ 
ments  in  ship-building  and  machines.  He  did 
not  waste  his  natural  genius  and  power  of 
mechanical  research  on  toys  and  idle  fancies, 
turning,  painting,  and  playing  on  the  flute, 
like  some  kings,  ZEropus,  for  example,  King 
of  Macedon,  who  spent  his  days  in  making 
small  lamps  and  tables;  or  Attalus  Philometor, 
whose  amusement  was  to  cultivate  poisons, 
henbane  and  hellebore,  and  even  hemlock, 
aconite,  and  dorycnium,  which  he  used  to  sow 
himself  in  the  royal  gardens,  and  made  it  his 
business  to  gather  the  fruits  and  collect  the 
juices  in  their  season.  The  Parthian  kings  took 
a  pride  in  whetting  and  sharpening  with  their 
own  hands  the  points  of  their  arrows  and 
javelins. 

But  when  Demetrius  played  the  workman, 
it  was  like  a  king,  and  there  was  magnificence 
in  his  handicraft.  The  articles  he  produced 
bore  marks  upon  the  face  of  them  not  of  in¬ 
genuity  only,  but  of  a  great  mind  and  a  lofty 
purpose.  They  were  such  as  a  king  might  not 
only  design  and  pay  for,  but  use  his  own  hands 
to  make;  and  while  friends  might  be  terrified 
with  their  greatness,  enemies  could  be  charm- 


733 

ed  with  their  beauty;  a  phrase  which  is  not  so 
pretty  to  the  ear  as  it  is  true  to  the  fact.  The 
very  people  against  whom  they  were  to  be 
employed  could  not  forbear  running  to  gaze 
with  admiration  upon  his  galleys  of  five  and 
six  ranges  of  oars,  as  they  passed  along  their 
coasts;  and  the  inhabitants  of  besieged  cities 
came  on  their  walls  to  see  the  spectacles  of  his 
famous  City-taJ^ers.  Even  Lysimachus,  of  all 
the  kings  of  his  time  the  greatest  enemy  of 
Demetrius,  coming  to  raise  the  siege  of  Soli  in 
Cilicia,  sent  first  to  desire  permission  to  see 
his  galleys  and  engines,  and,  having  had  his 
curiosity  gratified  by  a  view  of  them,  expressed 
his  admiration  and  quitted  the  place.  The 
Rhodians,  also,  whom  he  long  besieged,  begged 
him,  when  they  concluded  a  peace,  to  let  them 
have  some  of  his  engines,  which  they  might 
preserve  as  a  memorial  at  once  of  his  power 
and  of  their  own  brave  resistance. 

The  quarrel  between  him  and  the  Rhodians 
was  on  account  of  their  being  allies  to  Ptolemy, 
and  in  the  siege  the  greatest  of  all  the  engines 
was  planted  against  their  walls.  The  base  of  it 
was  exactly  square,  each  side  containing  twenty- 
four  cubits;  it  rose  to  a  height  of  thirty-three 
cubits,  growing  narrower  from  the  base  to  the 
top.  Within  were  several  apartments  or  cham¬ 
bers,  which  were  to  be  filled  with  armed  men, 
and  in  every  story  the  front  towards  the  enemy 
had  windows  for  discharging  missiles  of  all 
sorts,  the  whole  being  filled  with  soldiers  for 
every  description  of  fighting.  And  what  was 
most  wonderful  was  that,  notwithstanding  its 
size,  when  it  was  moved  it  never  tottered  or  in¬ 
clined  to  one  side,  but  went  forward  on  its  base 
in  perfect  equilibrium,  with  a  loud  noise  and 
great  impetus,  astounding  the  minds,  and  yet 
at  the  same  time  charming  the  eyes  of  all  the 
beholders. 

Whilst  Demetrius  was  at  this  same  siege, 
there  were  brought  to  him  two  iron  cuirasses 
from  Cyprus,  weighing  each  of  them  no  more 
than  forty  pounds,  and  Zoilus,  who  had  forged 
them,  to  show  the  excellence  of  their  temper, 
desired  that  one  of  them  might  be  tried  with  a 
catapult  missile,  shot  out  of  one  of  the  engines 
at  no  greater  distance  than  six-and-twenty 
paces;  and,  upon  the  experiment,  it  was  found 
that  though  the  dart  exactly  hit  the  cuirass,  yet 
it  made  no  greater  impression  than  such  a 
slight  scratch  as  might  be  made  with  the  point 
of  a  style  or  graver.  Demetrius  took  this  for  his 
own  wearing,  and  gave  the  other  to  Alcimus 
the  Epirot,  the  best  soldier  and  strongest  man 
of  all  his  captains,  the  only  one  who  used  to 


734 


wear  armour  to  the  weight  of  two  talents,  one 
talent  being  the  weight  which  others  thought 
sufficient.  He  fell  during  this  siege  in  a  battle 
near  the  theatre. 

The  Rhodians  made  a  brave  defence,  inso¬ 
much  that  Demetrius  saw  he  was  making  but 
little  progress,  and  only  persisted  out  of  ob¬ 
stinacy  and  passion;  and  the  rather  because  the 
Rhodians,  having  captured  a  ship  in  which 
some  clothes  and  furniture,  with  letters  from 
herself,  were  coming  to  him  from  Phila  his 
wife,  had  sent  on  everything  to  Ptolemy,  and 
had  not  copied  the  honourable  example  of  the 
Athenians,  who,  having  surprised  an  express 
sent  from  King  Philip,  their  enemy,  opened 
all  the  letters  he  was  charged  with,  excepting 
only  those  directed  to  Queen  Olympias,  which 
they  returned  with  the  seal  unbroken. 

Yet,  although  greatly  provoked,  Demetrius, 
into  whose  power  it  shortly  after  came  to  re¬ 
pay  the  affront,  would  not  suffer  himself  to  re¬ 
taliate.  Protogenes  the  Caunian  had  been  mak¬ 
ing  them  a  painting  of  the  story  of  Ialysus, 
which  was  all  but  completed,  when  it  was  taken 
by  Demetrius  in  one  of  the  suburbs.  The  Rho¬ 
dians  sent  a  herald  begging  him  to  be  pleased 
to  spare  the  work  and  not  let  it  be  destroyed; 
Demetrius’s  answer  to  which  was  that  he  would 
rather  burn  the  pictures  of  his  father  than  a 
piece  of  art  which  had  cost  so  much  labour.  It 
is  said  to  have  taken  Protogenes  seven  years  to 
paint,  and  they  tell  us  that  Apelles,  when  he 
first  saw  it,  was  struck  dumb  with  wonder,  and 
called  it,  on  recovering  his  speech,  “a  great  la¬ 
bour  and  a  wonderful  success,”  adding,  how¬ 
ever,  that  it  had  not  the  graces  which  carried 
his  own  paintings  as  it  were  up  to  the  heavens. 
This  picture,  which  came  with  the  rest  in  the 
general  mass  to  Rome,  there  perished  by  fire. 

While  the  Rhodians  were  thus  defending 
their  city  to  the  utmost,  Demetrius,  who  was 
not  sorry  for  an  excuse  to  retire,  found  one  in 
the  arrival  of  ambassadors  from  Athens,  by 
whose  mediation  terms  were  made  that  the 
Rhodians  should  bind  themselves  to  aid  Antig- 
onus  and  Demetrius  against  all  enemies,  Ptol¬ 
emy  excepted. 

The  Athenians  entreated  his  help  against 
Cassander,  who  was  besieging  the  city.  So  he 
went  thither  with  a  fleet  of  three  hundred  and 
thirty  ships,  and  many  soldiers;  and  not  only 
drove  Cassander  out  of  Attica,  but  pursued 
him  as  far  as  Thermopylae,  routed  him  and 
became  master  of  Heraclea,  which  came  over 
to  him  voluntarily,  and  of  a  body  of  six  thou¬ 
sand  Macedonians,  which  also  joined  him.  Re- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

turning  hence,  he  gave  their  liberty  to  all  the 
Greeks  on  this  side  Thermopylae,  and  made  al¬ 
liance  with  the  Boeotians,  took  Cenchreae,  and 
reducing  the  fortresses  of  Phyle  and  Panactum, 
in  which  were  garrisons  of  Cassander,  restored 
them  to  the  Athenians. 

They,  in  requital,  though  they  had  before 
been  so  profuse  in  bestowing  honours  upon 
him  that  one  would  have  thought  they  had  ex¬ 
hausted  all  the  capacities  of  invention,  showed 
they  had  still  new  refinements  of  adulation  to 
devise  for  him.  They  gave  him,  as  his  lodging, 
the  back  temple  in  the  Parthenon,  and  here  he 
lived,  under  the  immediate  roof,  as  they  meant 
it  to  imply,  of  his  hostess,  Minerva — no  rep¬ 
utable  or  well-conducted  guest  to  be  quartered 
upon  a  maiden  goddess!  When  his  brother 
Philip  was  once  put  into  a  house  where  three 
young  women  were  living,  Antigonus,  saying 
nothing  to  him,  sent  for  his  quartermaster,  and 
told  him,  in  the  young  man’s  presence,  to  find 
some  less  crowded  lodgings  for  him. 

Demetrius,  however,  who  should,  to  say  the 
least,  have  paid  the  goddess  the  respect  due  to 
an  elder  sister,  for  that  was  the  purport  of  the 
city’s  compliment,  filled  the  temple  with  such 
pollutions  that  the  place  seemed  least  profaned 
when  his  licence  confined  itself  to  common 
women  like  Chrysis,  Lamia,  Demo,  and  Anti- 
cyra. 

The  fair  name  of  the  city  forbids  any  further 
plain  particulars;  let  us  only  record  the  severe 
virtue  of  the  young  Damocles,  surnamed,  and 
by  that  surname  pointed  out  to  Demetrius,  the 
beautiful;  who,  to  escape  importunities, avoided 
every  place  of  resort,  and  when  at  last  followed 
into  a  private  bathing  room  by  Demetrius, 
seeing  none  at  hand  to  help  or  deliver,  seized 
the  lid  from  the  cauldron,  and,  plunging  into 
the  boiling  water,  sought  a  death  untimely  and 
unmerited,  but  worthy  of  the  country  and  of 
the  beauty  that  occasioned  it.  Not  so  Cleaenetus, 
the  son  of  Cleomedon,  who,  to  obtain  from 
Demetrius  a  letter  of  intercession  to  the  people 
in  behalf  of  his  father,  lately  condemned  in  a 
fine  of  fifty  talents,  disgraced  himself,  and  got 
the  city  into  trouble.  In  deference  to  the  letter, 
they  remitted  the  fine,  yet  they  made  an  edict 
prohibiting  any  citizen  for  the  future  to  bring 
letters  from  Demetrius. 

But  being  informed  that  Demetrius  resented 
this  as  a  great  indignity,  they  not  only  re¬ 
scinded  in  alarm  the  former  order,  but  put  some 
of  the  proposers  and  advisers  of  it  to  death 
and  banished  others,  and  furthermore  enacted 
and  decreed,  that  whatsoever  King  Demetrius 


DEMETRIUS 

should  in  time  to  come  ordain,  should  be  ac¬ 
counted  right  towards  the  gods  and  just  to¬ 
wards  men;  and  when  one  of  the  better  class 
of  citizens  said  Stratocles  must  be  mad  to  use 
such  words,  Demochares  of  Leuconoe  observed 
he  would  be  a  fool  not  to  be  mad.  For  Stratocles 
was  well  rewarded  for  his  flatteries;  and  the 
saying  was  remembered  against  Demochares, 
who  was  soon  after  sent  into  banishment.  So 
fared  the  Athenians,  after  being  relieved  of  the 
foreign  garrison,  and  recovering  what  was 
called  their  liberty. 

After  this  Demetrius  marched  with  his  forces 
into  Peloponnesus,  where  he  met  with  none  to 
oppose  him,  his  enemies  fleeing  before  him,  and 
allowing  the  cities  to  join  him.  He  received 
into  friendship  all  Acte,  as  it  is  called,  and  all 
Arcadia  except  Mantinea.  He  bought  the  lib¬ 
erty  of  Argos,  Corinth,  and  Sicyon,  by  paying 
a  hundred  talents  to  their  garrisons  to  evacuate 
them.  At  Argos,  during  the  feast  of  Juno,  which 
happened  at  the  time,  he  presided  at  the  games, 
and,  joining  in  the  festivities  with  the  multi¬ 
tude  of  the  Greeks  assembled  there,  he  cele¬ 
brated  his  marriage  with  Deidamia,  daughter 
of  TLacides,  King  of  the  Molossians,  and  sister 
of  Pyrrhus.  At  Sicyon  he  told  the  people  they 
had  put  the  city  just  outside  of  the  city,  and, 
persuading  them  to  remove  to  where  they  now 
live,  gave  their  town  not  only  a  new  site  but  a 
new  name,  Demetrias,  after  himself. 

A  general  assembly  met  on  the  Isthmus, 
where  he  was  proclaimed,  by  a  great  concourse 
of  the  people,  the  Commander  of  Greece,  like 
Philip  and  Alexander  of  old;  whose  superior 
he,  in  the  present  height  of  his  prosperity  and 
power,  was  willing  enough  to  consider  him¬ 
self;  and  certainly,  in  one  respect,  he  outdid 
Alexander,  who  never  refused  their  title  to 
other  kings,  or  took  on  himself  the  style  of 
king  of  kings,  though  many  kings  received 
both  their  title  and  their  authority  as  such  from 
him;  whereas  Demetrius  used  to  ridicule  those 
who  gave  the  name  of  king  to  any  except  him¬ 
self  and  his  father;  and  in  his  entertainments 
was  well  pleased  when  his  followers,  after 
drinking  to  him  and  his  father  as  kings,  went 
on  to  drink  the  healths  of  Seleucus,  with  the 
title  of  Master  of  the  Elephants;  of  Ptolemy,  by 
the  name  of  High  Admiral;  of  Lysimachus, 
with  the  addition  of  Treasurer;  and  of  Aga- 
thocles,  with  the  style  of  Governor  of  the 
Island  of  Sicily. 

The  other  kings  merely  laughed  when  they 
were  told  of  this  vanity;  Lysimachus  alone  ex¬ 
pressed  some  indignation  at  being  considered 


735 

a  eunuch,  such  being  usually  then  selected  for 
the  office  of  treasurer.  And,  in  general,  there 
was  a  more  bitter  enmity  between  him  and 
Lysimachus  than  with  any  of  the  others.  Once, 
as  a  scoff  at  his  passion  for  Lamia,  Lysimachus 
said  he  had  never  before  seen  a  courtesan  act  a 
queen’s  part;  to  which  Demetrius  rejoined  that 
his  mistress  was  quite  as  honest  asLysimachus’s 
own  Penelope. 

But  to  proceed.  Demetrius  being  about  to 
return  to  Athens,  signified  by  letter  to  the  city 
that  he  desired  immediate  admission  to  the 
rites  of  initiation  into  the  mysteries,  and  wished 
to  go  through  all  the  stages  of  the  ceremony, 
from  first  to  last,  without  delay.  This  was  ab¬ 
solutely  contrary  to  the  rules,  and  a  thing  which 
had  never  been  allowed  before;  for  the  lesser 
mysteries  were  celebrated  in  the  month  of  An- 
thesterion,  and  the  great  solemnity  in  Boe- 
dromion,  and  none  of  the  novices  were  finally 
admitted  till  they  had  completed  a  year  after 
this  latter. 

Yet  all  this  notwithstanding,  when  in  the 
public  assembly  these  letters  of  Demetrius  were 
produced  and  read,  there  was  not  one  single 
person  who  had  the  courage  to  oppose  them, 
except  Pythodorus,  the  torch-bearer.  But  it  sig¬ 
nified  nothing,  for  Stratocles  at  once  proposed 
that  the  month  of  Munychion,  then  current, 
should  by  edict  be  reputed  to  be  the  month  of 
Anthesterion;  which  being  voted  and  done, 
and  Demetrius  thereby  admitted  to  the  lesser 
ceremonies,  by  another  vote  they  turned  the 
same  month  of  Munychion  into  the  other 
month  of  Boedromion;  the  celebration  of  the 
greater  mysteries  ensued,  and  Demetrius  was 
fully  admitted.  These  proceedings  gave  the 
comedian,  Philippides,  a  new  occasion  to  exer¬ 
cise  his  wit  upon  Stratocles — 

- whose  flattering  fear 

Into  one  month  hath  crowded  all  the  year. 

And  on  the  vote  that  Demetrius  should  lodge 
in  the  Parthenon — 

Who  turns  the  temple  to  a  common  inn, 

And  ma\es  the  Virgin’s  house  a  house  of  sin. 

Of  all  the  disreputable  and  flagitious  acts  of 
which  he  was  guilty  in  this  visit,  one  that  par¬ 
ticularly  hurt  the  feelings  of  the  Athenians  was 
that,  having  given  command  that  they  should 
forthwith  raise  for  his  service  two  hundred  and 
fifty  talents,  and  they  to  comply  with  his  de¬ 
mands  being  forced  to  levy  it  upon  the  people 
with  the  utmost  rigour  and  severity,  when  they 
presented  him  with  the  money  which  they  had 
with  such  difficulty  raised,  as  if  it  were  a  trifling 


736 

sum,  he  ordered  it  to  be  given  to  Lamia  and 
the  rest  of  his  women,  to  buy  soap.  The  loss, 
which  was  bad  enough,  was  less  galling  than 
the  shame,  and  the  words  more  intolerable  than 
the  act  which  they  accompanied.  Though,  in¬ 
deed,  the  story  is  variously  reported;  and  some 
say  it  was  the  Thessalians,  and  not  the  Atheni¬ 
ans,  who  were  thus  treated.  Lamia,  however, 
exacted  contributions  herself  to  pay  for  an  en¬ 
tertainment  she  gave  to  the  king,  and  her  ban¬ 
quet  was  so  renowned  for  its  sumptuosity  that 
a  description  of  it  was  drawn  up  by  the  Samian 
writer,  Lynceus.  Upon  this  occasion,  one  of  the 
comic  writers  gave  Lamia  the  name  of  the  real 
Helepolis ;  and  Demochares  of  Soli  called  De¬ 
metrius  My  thus,  because  the  fable  always  has 
its  Lamia,  and  so  had  he. 

And,  in  truth,  his  passion  for  this  woman, 
and  the  prosperity  in  which  she  lived  were  such 
as  to  draw  upon  him  not  only  the  envy  and 
jealousy  of  all  his  wives,  but  the  animosity  even 
of  his  friends.  For  example,  on  Lysimachus’s 
showing  to  some  ambassadors  from  Demetrius 
the  scars  of  the  wounds  which  he  had  received 
upon  his  thighs  and  arms  by  the  paws  of  the 
lion  with  which  Alexander  had  shut  him  up, 
after  hearing  his  account  of  the  combat,  they 
smiled  and  answered,  that  their  king,  also,  was 
not  without  his  scars,  but  could  show  upon  his 
neck  the  marks  of  a  Lamia,  a  no  less  dangerous 
beast. 

It  was  also  matter  of  wonder  that,  though  he 
had  objected  so  much  to  Phila  on  account  of 
her  age,  he  was  yet  such  a  slave  to  Lamia  who 
was  so  long  past  her  prime.  One  evening  at  sup¬ 
per,  when  she  played  the  flute,  Demetrius 
asked  Demo,  whom  the  men  called  Madness, 
what  she  thought  of  her.  Demo  answered  she 
thought  her  an  old  woman.  And  when  a  quan¬ 
tity  of  sweetmeats  were  brought  in,  and  the 
king  said  again,  “See  what  presents  I  get  from 
Lamia!”  “My  old  mother,”  answered  Demo, 
“will  send  you  more,  if  you  will  make  her  your 
mistress.” 

Another  story  is  told  of  a  criticism  passed  by 
Lamia  on  the  famous  judgment  of  Bocchoris. 
A  young  Egyptian  had  long  made  suit  to 
Thonis,  the  courtesan,  offering  a  sum  of  gold 
for  her  favour.  But  before  it  came  to  pass,  he 
dreamed  one  night  that  he  had  obtained  it, 
and,  satisfied  with  the  shadow,  felt  no  more  de¬ 
sire  for  the  substance.  Thonis  upon  this  brought 
an  action  for  the  sum.  Bocchoris,  the  judge,  on 
hearing  the  case,  ordered  the  defendant  to 
bring  into  court  the  full  amount  in  a  vessel, 
which  he  was  to  move  to  and  fro  in  his  hand, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  the  shadow  of  it  was  to  be  adjudged  to 
Thonis.  The  fairness  of  this  sentence  Lamia 
contested,  saying  the  young  man’s  desire  might 
have  been  satisfied  with  the  dream,  but  Tho- 
nis’s  desire  for  the  money  could  not  be  relieved 
by  the  shadow.  Thus  much  for  Lamia. 

And  now  the  story  passes  from  the  comic  to 
the  tragic  stage  in  pursuit  of  the  acts  and  for¬ 
tunes  of  its  subjects.  A  general  league  of  the 
kings,  who  were  now  gathering  and  combining 
their  forces  to  attack  Antigonus,  recalled  De¬ 
metrius  from  Greece.  He  was  encouraged  by 
finding  his  father  full  of  a  spirit  and  resolution 
for  the  combat  that  belied  his  years.  Yet  it 
would  seem  to  be  true,  that  if  Antigonus  could 
only  have  borne  to  make  some  trifling  conces¬ 
sions,  and  if  he  had  shown  any  moderation  in 
his  passion  for  empire,  he  might  have  main¬ 
tained  for  himself  till  his  death  and  left  to  his 
son  behind  him  the  first  place  among  the  kings. 
But  he  was  of  a  violent  and  haughty  spirit;  and 
the  insulting  words  as  well  as  actions  which 
he  allowed  himself  could  not  be  borne  by  young 
and  powerful  princes,  and  provoked  them  into 
combining  against  him.  Though  now  when  he 
was  told  of  the  confederacy,  he  could  not  for¬ 
bear  from  saying  that  this  flock  of  birds  would 
soon  be  scattered  by  one  stone  and  a  single 
shout. 

He  took  the  field  at  the  head  of  more  than 
seventy  thousand  foot,  and  of  ten  thousand 
horse,  and  seventy-five  elephants.  His  enemies 
had  sixty-four  thousand  foot,  five  hundred 
more  horse  than  he,  elephants  to  the  number  of 
four  hundred,  and  a  hundred  and  twenty  chari¬ 
ots.  On  their  near  approach  to  each  other,  an 
alteration  began  to  be  observable,  not  in  the 
purposes,  but  in  the  presentiments  of  Antigo¬ 
nus.  For  whereas  in  all  former  campaigns  he 
had  ever  shown  himself  lofty  and  confident, 
loud  in  voice  and  scornful  in  speech,  often  by 
some  joke  or  mockery  on  the  eve  of  battle  ex¬ 
pressing  his  contempt  and  displaying  his  com¬ 
posure,  he  was  now  remarked  to  be  thoughtful, 
silent,  and  retired.  He  presented  Demetrius  to 
the  army,  and  declared  him  his  successor;  and 
what  every  one  thought  stranger  than  all  was 
that  he  now  conferred  alone  in  his  tent  with 
Demetrius;  whereas  in  former  time  he  had 
never  entered  into  any  secret  consultations 
even  with  him;  but  had  always  followed  his 
own  advice,  made  his  resolutions,  and  then 
given  out  his  commands.  Once  when  Deme¬ 
trius  was  a  boy  and  asked  him  how  soon  the 
army  would  move,  he  is  said  to  have  an¬ 
swered  him  sharply,  “Are  you  afraid  lest  you,  of 


DEMETRIUS 

all  the  army,  should  not  hear  the  trumpet?” 

There  were  now,  however,  inauspicious 
signs,  which  affected  his  spirits.  Demetrius,  in 
a  dream,  had  seen  Alexander,  completely 
armed,  appear  and  demand  of  him  what  word 
they  intended  to  give  in  the  time  of  the  battle; 
and  Demetrius  answering  that  he  intended  the 
word  should  be  “Jupiter  and  Victory,”  “Then,” 
said  Alexander,  “I  will  go  to  your  adversaries 
and  find  my  welcome  with  them.”  And  on  the 
morning  of  the  combat,  as  the  armies  were 
drawing  up,  Antigonus,  going  out  of  the  door 
of  his  tent,  by  some  accident  or  other,  stum¬ 
bled  and  fell  flat  upon  the  ground,  hurting  him¬ 
self  a  good  deal.  And  on  recovering  his  feet, 
lifting  up  his  hands  to  heaven,  he  prayed  the 
gods  to  grant  him,  “either  victory,  or  death 
without  knowledge  of  defeat.”  When  the 
armies  engaged,  Demetrius,  who  commanded 
the  greatest  and  best  part  of  the  cavalry,  made 
a  charge  on  Antiochus,  the  son  of  Seleucus, 
and  gloriously  routing  the  enemy,  followed 
the  pursuit,  in  the  pride  and  exultation  of  suc¬ 
cess,  so  eagerly,  and  so  unwisely  far,  that  it 
fatally  lost  him  the  day;  for  when,  perceiving 
his  error,  he  would  have  come  in  to  the  as¬ 
sistance  of  his  own  infantry,  he  was  not  able, 
the  enemy  with  their  elephants  having  cut  off 
his  retreat. 

On  the  other  hand,  Seleucus,  observing  the 
main  battle  of  Antigonus  left  naked  of  their 
horse,  did  not  charge,  but  made  a  show  of 
charging;  and  keeping  them  in  alarm  and 
wheeling  about  and  still  threatening  an  attack, 
he  gave  opportunity  for  those  who  wished  it 
to  separate  and  come  over  to  him;  which  a 
large  body  of  them  did,  the  rest  taking  to 
flight.  But  the  old  King  Antigonus  still  kept 
his  post,  and  when  a  strong  body  of  the  ene¬ 
mies  drew  up  to  charge  him,  and  one  of  those 
about  him  cried  out  to  him,  “Sir,  they  are  com¬ 
ing  upon  you,”  he  only  replied,  “What  else 
should  they  do?  But  Demetrius  will  come  to 
my  rescue.”  And  in  this  hope  he  persisted  to 
the  last,  looking  out  on  every  side  for  his  son’s 
approach,  until  he  was  borne  down  by  a  whole 
multitude  of  darts,  and  fell.  His  other  follow¬ 
ers  and  friends  fled,  and  Thorax  of  Larissa  re¬ 
mained  alone  by  the  body. 

The  battle  having  been  thus  decided,  the 
kings  who  had  gained  the  victory,  carving  up 
the  whole  vast  empire  that  had  belonged  to 
Demetrius  and  Antigonus,  like  a  carcass,  into 
so  many  portions,  added  these  new  gains  to 
their  former  possessions.  As  for  Demetrius, 
with  five  thousand  foot  and  four  thousand 


737 

horse,  he  fled  at  his  utmost  speed  to  Ephesus, 
where  it  was  the  common  opinion  he  would 
seize  the  treasures  of  the  temple  to  relieve  his 
wants;  but  he,  on  the  contrary,  fearing  such 
an  attempt  on  the  part  of  his  soldiers,  hastened 
away,  and  sailed  for  Greece,  his  chief  remain¬ 
ing  hopes  being  placed  in  the  fidelity  of  the 
Athenians,  with  whom  he  had  left  part  of  his 
navy  and  of  his  treasures  and  his  wife  Deida- 
mia.  And  in  their  attachment  he  had  not  the 
least  doubt  but  he  should  in  this  his  extremity 
find  a  safe  resource. 

Accordingly  when,  upon  reaching  the  Cy¬ 
clades,  he  was  met  by  ambassadors  from 
Athens,  requesting  him  not  to  proceed  to  the 
city,  as  the  people  had  passed  a  vote  to  admit 
no  king  whatever  within  their  walls,  and  had 
conveyed  Deidamia  with  honourable  atten¬ 
dance  to  Megara,  his  anger  and  surprise  over¬ 
powered  him,  and  the  constancy  quite  failed 
him  which  he  had  hitherto  shown  in  a  wonder¬ 
ful  degree  under  his  reverses,  nothing  humili¬ 
ating  or  mean-spirited  having  as  yet  been  seen 
in  him  under  all  his  misfortunes.  But  to  be 
thus  disappointed  in  the  Athenians,  and  to 
find  the  friendship  he  had  trusted  prove,  upon 
trial,  thus  empty  and  unreal,  was  a  great  pang 
to  him. 

And,  in  truth,  an  excessive  display  of  out¬ 
ward  honour  would  seem  to  be  the  most  un¬ 
certain  attestation  of  the  real  affection  of  a  peo¬ 
ple  for  any  king  or  potentate.  Such  shows  lose 
their  whole  credit  as  tokens  of  affection  (which 
has  its  virtue  in  the  feelings  and  moral  choice), 
when  we  reflect  that  they  may  equally  proceed 
from  fear.  The  same  decrees  are  voted  upon 
the  latter  motive  as  upon  the  former.  And 
therefore  judicious  men  do  not  look  so  much 
to  statues,  paintings,  or  divine  honours  that 
are  paid  them,  as  to  their  own  actions  and  con¬ 
duct,  judging  hence  whether  they  shall  trust 
these  as  a  genuine,  or  discredit  them  as  a 
forced  homage.  As  in  fact  nothing  is  less  un¬ 
usual  than  for  a  people,  even  while  offering 
compliments,  to  be  disgusted  with  those  who 
accept  them  greedily,  or  arrogantly,  or  without 
respect  to  the  free-will  of  the  givers. 

Demetrius,  shamefully  used  as  he  thought 
himself,  was  in  no  condition  to  revenge  the 
affront.  He  returned  a  message  of  gentle  ex¬ 
postulation,  saying,  however,  that  he  expected 
to  have  his  galleys  sent  to  him,  among  which 
was  that  of  thirteen  banks  of  oars.  And  this 
being  accorded  him,  he  sailed  to  the  Isthmus, 
and,  finding  his  affairs  in  very  ill  condition, 
his  garrisons  expelled,  and  a  general  secession 


738 

going  on  to  the  enemy,  he  left  Pyrrhus  to  at¬ 
tend  to  Greece,  and  took  his  course  to  the 
Chersonesus,  where  he  ravaged  the  territories 
of  Lysimachus,  and  by  the  booty  which  he 
took,  maintained  and  kept  together  his  troops, 
which  were  now  once  more  beginning  to  re¬ 
cover  and  to  show  some  considerable  front. 
Nor  did  any  of  the  other  princes  care  to  med¬ 
dle  with  him  on  that  side;  for  Lysimachus  had 
quite  as  little  claim  to  be  loved,  and  was  more 
to  be  feared  for  his  power. 

But  not  long  after  Seleucus  sent  to  treat  with 
Demetrius  for  a  marriage  betwixt  himself  and 
Stratonice,  daughter  of  Demetrius  by  Phila. 
Seleucus,  indeed,  had  already,  by  Apama,  the 
Persian,  a  son  named  Antiochus,  but  he  was 
possessed  of  territories  that  might  well  satisfy 
more  than  one  successor,  and  he  was  the  rather 
induced  to  this  alliance  with  Demetrius,  be¬ 
cause  Lysimachus  had  just  married  himself  to 
one  daughter  of  King  Ptolemy,  and  his  son 
Agathocles  to  another.  Demetrius,  who  looked 
upon  the  offer  as  an  unexpected  piece  of  good 
fortune,  presently  embarked  with  his  daughter, 
and  with  his  whole  fleet  sailed  for  Syria.  Hav¬ 
ing  during  his  voyage  to  touch  several  times 
on  the  coast,  among  other  places  he  landed  in 
part  of  Cilicia,  which  by  the  apportionment 
of  the  kings  after  the  defeat  of  Antigonus  was 
allotted  to  Plistarchus,  the  brother  of  Cas- 
sander.  Plistarchus,  who  took  this  descent  of 
Demetrius  upon  his  coasts  as  an  infraction  of 
his  rights,  and  was  not  sorry  to  have  something 
to  complain  of,  hastened  to  expostulate  in  per¬ 
son  with  Seleucus  for  entering  separately  into 
relations  with  Demetrius,  the  common  enemy, 
without  consulting  the  other  kings. 

Demetrius,  receiving  information  of  this, 
seized  the  opportunity,  and  fell  upon  the  city 
of  Quinda,  which  he  surprised,  and  took  in  it 
twelve  hundred  talents  still  remaining  of  the 
treasure.  With  this  prize,  he  hastened  back  to 
his  galleys,  embarked,  and  set  sail.  At  Rhosus, 
where  his  wife  Phila  was  now  with  him,  he 
was  met  by  Seleucus,  and  their  communica¬ 
tions  with  each  other  at  once  were  put  on  a 
frank,  unsuspecting,  and  kingly  footing.  First, 
Seleucus  gave  a  banquet  to  Demetrius  in  his 
tent  in  the  camp;  then  Demetrius  received  him 
in  the  ship  of  thirteen  banks  of  oars.  Meetings 
for  amusements,  conferences,  and  long  visits 
for  general  intercourse  succeeded,  all  without 
attendants  or  arms;  until  at  length  Seleucus 
took  his  leave,  and  in  great  state  conducted 
Stratonice  to  Antioch.  Demetrius  meantime 
possessed  himself  of  Cilicia,  and  sent  Phila  to 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

her  brother  Cassander,  to  answer  the  com¬ 
plaints  of  Plistarchus.  And  here  his  wife  Dei- 
damia  came  by  sea  out  of  Greece  to  meet  him, 
but  not  long  after  contracted  an  illness,  of 
which  she  died.  After  her  death,  Demetrius, 
by  the  mediation  of  Seleucus,  became  recon¬ 
ciled  to  Ptolemy,  and  an  agreement  was  made 
that  he  should  marry  his  daughter  Ptolemais. 

Thus  far  all  was  handsomely  done  on  the 
part  of  Seleucus.  But,  shortly  after,  desiring  to 
have  the  province  of  Cilicia  from  Demetrius 
for  a  sum  of  money,  and  being  refused  it,  he 
then  angrily  demanded  of  him  the  cities  of 
Tyre  and  Sidon,  which  seemed  a  mere  piece  of 
arbitrary  dealing,  and,  indeed,  an  outrageous 
thing,  that  he,  who  was  possessed  of  all  the 
vast  provinces  between  India  and  the  Syrian 
sea,  should  think  himself  so  poorly  off  as,  for 
the  sake  of  two  cities  which  he  coveted,  to  dis¬ 
turb  the  peace  of  his  dear  connection,  already 
a  sufferer  under  a  severe  reverse  of  fortune. 
However,  he  did  but  justify  the  saying  of  Plato, 
that  the  only  certain  way  to  be  truly  rich  is 
not  to  have  more  property,  but  fewer  desires. 
For  whoever  is  always  grasping  at  more  avows 
that  he  is  still  in  want,  and  must  be  poor  in  the 
midst  of  affluence. 

But  Demetrius,  whose  courage  did  not  sink, 
resolutely  sent  him  answer,  that,  though  he 
were  to  lose  ten  thousand  battles  like  that  of 
Ipsus,  he  would  pay  no  price  for  the  good-will 
of  such  a  son-in-law  as  Seleucus.  He  reinforced 
these  cities  with  sufficient  garrisons  to  enable 
them  to  make  a  defence  against  Seleucus;  and, 
receiving  information  that  Lachares,  taking 
the  opportunity  of  their  civil  dissensions,  had 
set  up  himself  as  a  usurper  over  the  Athenians, 
he  imagined  that  if  he  made  a  sudden  attempt 
upon  the  city,  he  might  now  without  difficulty 
get  possession  of  it.  He  crossed  the  sea  in  safety 
with  a  large  fleet;  but  passing  along  the  coast 
of  Attica,  was  met  by  a  violent  storm,  and  lost 
the  greater  number  of  his  ships,  and  a  very 
considerable  body  of  men  on  board  them. 
As  for  him,  he  escaped,  and  began  to  make 
war  in  a  petty  manner  with  the  Athenians,  but, 
finding  himself  unable  to  effect  his  design,  he 
sent  back  orders  for  raising  another  fleet,  and, 
with  the  troops  which  he  had,  marched  into 
Peloponnesus  and  laid  siege  to  the  city  of  Mes- 
sena.  In  attacking  which  place  he  was  in  dan¬ 
ger  of  death;  for  a  missile  from  an  engine 
struck  him  in  the  face,  and  passed  through 
the  cheek  into  his  mouth. 

He  recovered,  however,  and,  as  soon  as  he 
was  in  a  condition  to  take  the  field,  won  over 


DEMETRIUS 

divers  cities  which  had  revolted  from  him,  and 
made  an  incursion  into  Attica,  where  he  took 
Eleusis  and  Rhamnus,  and  wasted  the  country 
thereabout.  And  that  he  might  straiten  the 
Athenians  by  cutting  off  all  manner  of  provi¬ 
sion,  a  vessel  laden  with  corn  bound  thither 
falling  into  his  hands,  he  ordered  the  master 
and  the  supercargo  to  be  immediately  hanged, 
thereby  to  strike  a  terror  into  others,  that  so 
they  might  not  venture  to  supply  the  city  with 
provisions.  By  which  means  they  were  reduced 
to  such  extremities  that  a  bushel  of  salt  sold 
for  forty  drachmas,  and  a  peck  of  wheat  for 
three  hundred.  Ptolemy  had  sent  to  their  re¬ 
lief  a  hundred  and  fifty  galleys,  which  came  so 
near  as  to  be  seen  off  TEgina;  but  this  brief 
hope  was  soon  extinguished  by  the  arrival  of 
three  hundred  ships,  which  came  to  reinforce 
Demetrius  from  Cyprus,  Peloponnesus,  and 
other  places;  upon  which  Ptolemy's  fleet  took 
to  flight,  and  Lachares,  the  tyrant,  ran  away, 
leaving  the  city  to  its  fate. 

And  now  the  Athenians,  who  before  had 
made  it  capital  for  any  person  to  propose  a 
treaty  or  accommodation  with  Demetrius,  im¬ 
mediately  opened  the  nearest  gates  to  send  am¬ 
bassadors  to  him,  not  so  much  out  of  hopes  of 
obtaining  any  honourable  conditions  from  his 
clemency  as  out  of  necessity,  to  avoid  death  by 
famine.  For  among  many  frightful  instances  of 
the  distress  they  were  reduced  to,  it  is  said  that 
a  father  and  son  were  sitting  in  a  room  to¬ 
gether,  having  abandoned  every  hope,  when  a 
dead  mouse  fell  from  the  ceiling;  and  for  this 
prize  they  leaped  up  and  came  to  blows.  In  this 
famine,  it  is  also  related,  the  philosopher  Epi¬ 
curus  saved  his  own  life,  and  the  lives  of  his 
scholars,  by  a  small  quantity  of  beans,  which 
he  distributed  to  them  daily  by  number. 

In  this  condition  was  the  city  when  Deme¬ 
trius  made  his  entrance  and  issued  a  proclama¬ 
tion  that  all  the  inhabitants  should  assemble  in 
the  theatre;  which  being  done,  he  drew  up  his 
soldiers  at  the  back  of  the  stage,  occupied  the 
stage  itself  with  his  guards,  and,  presently  com¬ 
ing  in  himself  by  the  actors'  passages,  when 
the  people’s  consternation  had  risen  to  its 
height,  with  his  first  words  he  put  an  end  to  it. 
Without  any  harshness  of  tone  or  bitterness  of 
words,  he  reprehended  them  in  a  gentle  and 
friendly  way,  and  declared  himself  reconciled, 
adding  a  present  of  a  hundred  thousand  bush¬ 
els  of  wheat,  and  appointing  as  magistrates 
persons  acceptable  to  the  people.  So  Dromo- 
clides,  the  orator,  seeing  the  people  at  a  loss 
how  to  express  their  gratitude  by  any  words  or 


739 

acclamations,  and  ready  for  anything  that 
would  outdo  the  verbal  encomiums  of  the  pub¬ 
lic  speakers,  came  forward,  and  moved  a  de¬ 
cree  for  delivering  Piraeus  and  Munychia  into 
the  hands  of  King  Demetrius.  This  was  passed 
accordingly,  and  Demetrius,  of  his  own  mo¬ 
tion,  added  a  third  garrison,  which  he  placed 
in  the  Museum,  as  a  precaution  against  any 
new  restiveness  on  the  part  of  the  people, 
which  might  give  him  the  trouble  of  quitting 
his  other  enterprises. 

He  had  not  long  been  master  of  Athens  be¬ 
fore  he  had  formed  designs  against  Lacedae¬ 
mon;  of  which  Archidamus,  the  king,  being 
advertised,  came  out  and  met  him,  but  he  was 
overthrown  in  a  battle  near  Mantinea;  after 
which  Demetrius  entered  Laconia,  and,  in  a 
second  battle  near  Sparta  itself,  defeated  him 
again  with  the  loss  of  two  hundred  Lacedae¬ 
monians  slain,  and  five  hundred  taken  prison¬ 
ers.  And  now  it  was  almost  impossible  for  the 
city,  which  hitherto  had  never  been  captured, 
to  escape  his  arms. 

But  certainly  there  never  was  any  king  upon 
whom  Fortune  made  such  short  turns,  nor  any 
other  life  or  story  so  filled  with  her  swift  and 
surprising  changes,  over  and  over  again,  from 
small  things  to  great,  from  splendour  back  to 
humiliation  and  from  utter  weakness  once 
more  to  power  and  might.  They  say  in  his 
sadder  vicissitudes  he  used  sometimes  to  apos¬ 
trophise  Fortune  in  the  words  of  ^Eschylus — 

Thou  liftest  up,  to  cast  us  down  again . 

And  so  at  this  moment,  when  all  things  seemed 
to  conspire  together  to  give  him  his  heart’s 
desire  of  dominion  and  power,  news  arrived 
that  Lysimachus  had  taken  all  his  cities  in  Asia, 
that  Ptolemy  had  reduced  all  Cyprus  with  the 
exception  of  Salamis,  and  that  in  Salamis  his 
mother  and  children  were  shut  up  and  close 
besieged;  and  yet,  like  the  woman  in  Archilo¬ 
chus — 

Water  in  one  deceitful  hand  she  shows, 

While  burning  fire  within  her  other  glows . 

The  same  fortune  that  drew  him  off  with 
these  disastrous  tidings  from  Sparta,  in  a  mo¬ 
ment  after  opened  upon  him  a  new  and  won¬ 
derful  prospect,  of  the  following  kind.  Cassan- 
der,  King  of  Macedon,  dying,  and  his  eldest 
son,  Philip,  who  succeeded  him,  not  long  sur¬ 
viving  his  father,  the  two  younger  brothers 
fell  at  variance  concerning  the  succession.  And 
Antipater  having  murdered  his  mother  Thes- 
salonica,  Alexander,  the  younger  brother,  call- 


740 

ed  in  to  his  assistance  Pyrrhus  out  of  Epirus, 
and  Demetrius  out  of  the  Peloponnese.  Pyrrhus 
arrived  first,  and,  taking  in  recompense  for  his 
succour  a  large  slice  of  Macedonia,  had  made 
Alexander  begin  to  be  aware  that  he  had 
brought  upon  himself  a  dangerous  neighbour. 
And,  that  he  might  not  run  a  yet  worse  hazard 
from  Demetrius,  whose  power  and  reputation 
were  so  great,  the  young  man  hurried  away 
to  meet  him  at  Dium,  whither  he,  who  on  re¬ 
ceiving  his  letter  had  set  out  on  his  march,  was 
now  come.  And,  offering  his  greetings  and 
grateful  acknowledgments,  he  at  the  same  time 
informed  him  that  his  affairs  no  longer  re¬ 
quired  the  presence  of  his  ally;  thereupon  he 
invited  him  to  supper. 

There  were  not  wanting  some  feelings  of 
suspicion  on  either  side  already;  and  when 
Demetrius  was  now  on  his  way  to  the  banquet, 
some  one  came  and  told  him  that  in  the  midst 
of  the  drinking  he  would  be  killed.  Demetrius 
showed  little  concern,  but,  making  only  a  little 
less  haste,  he  sent  to  the  principal  officers  of  his 
army  commanding  them  to  draw  out  the  sol¬ 
diers,  and  make  them  stand  to  their  arms,  and 
ordered  his  retinue  (more  numerous  a  good 
deal  than  that  of  Alexander)  to  attend  him  in¬ 
to  the  very  room  of  the  entertainment,  and  not 
to  stir  from  thence  till  they  saw  him  rise  from 
the  table.  Thus  Alexander’s  servants,  finding 
themselves  overpowered,  had  not  courage  to 
attempt  anything.  And,  indeed,  Demetrius 
gave  them  no  opportunity,  for  he  made  a  very 
short  visit,  and  pretending  to  Alexander  that 
he  was  not  at  present  in  health  for  drinking 
wine,  left  early.  And  the  next  day  he  occupied 
himself  in  preparations  for  departing,  telling 
Alexander  he  had  received  intelligence  that 
obliged  him  to  leave,  and  begging  him  to  ex¬ 
cuse  so  sudden  a  parting;  he  would  hope  to 
see  him  further  when  his  affairs  allowed  him 
leisure. 

Alexander  was  only  too  glad,  not  only  that 
he  was  going,  but  that  he  was  doing  so  of  his 
own  motion,  without  any  offence,  and  pro¬ 
posed  to  accompany  him  into  Thessaly.  But 
when  they  came  to  Larissa,  new  invitations 
passed  between  them,  new  professions  of  good¬ 
will,  covering  new  conspiracies;  by  which 
Alexander  put  himself  into  the  power  of 
Demetrius.  For  as  he  did  not  like  to  use  pre¬ 
cautions  on  his  own  part,  for  fear  Demetrius 
should  take  the  hint  to  use  them  on  his,  the 
very  thing  he  meant  to  do  was  first  done  to 
him.  He  accepted  an  invitation,  and  came  to 
Demetrius’s  quarters;  and  when  Demetrius, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

while  they  were  still  supping,  rose  from  the 
table  and  went  forth,  the  young  man  rose  also, 
and  followed  him  to  the  door,  where  Deme¬ 
trius,  as  he  passed  through,  only  said  to  the 
guards,  “Kill  him  that  follows  me,”  and  went 
on;  and  Alexander  was  at  once  despatched  by 
them,  together  with  such  of  his  friends  as  en¬ 
deavoured  to  come  to  his  rescue,  one  of  whom, 
before  he  died,  said,  “You  have  been  one  day 
too  quick  for  us.” 

The  night  following  was  one,  as  may  be  sup¬ 
posed,  of  disorder  and  confusion.  And  with  the 
morning,  the  Macedonians,  still  in  alarm,  and 
fearful  of  the  forces  of  Demetrius,  on  finding 
no  violence  offered,  but  only  a  message  sent 
from  Demetrius  desiring  an  interview  and  op¬ 
portunity  for  explanation  of  his  actions,  at  last 
began  to  feel  pretty  confident  again,  and  pre¬ 
pared  to  receive  him  favourably.  And  when  he 
came,  there  was  no  need  of  much  being  said; 
their  hatred  of  Antipater  for  his  murder  of  his 
mother,  and  the  absence  of  any  one  better  to 
govern  them,  soon  decided  them  to  proclaim 
Demetrius  King  of  Macedon.  And  into  Mace¬ 
donia  they  at  once  started  and  took  him.  And 
the  Macedonians  at  home,  who  had  not  for¬ 
gotten  or  forgiven  the  wicked  deeds  committed 
by  Cassander  on  the  family  of  Alexander,  were 
far  from  sorry  at  the  change.  Any  kind  recol¬ 
lections  that  still  might  subsist  of  the  plain  and 
simple  rule  of  the  first  Antipater  went  also  to 
the  benefit  of  Demetrius,  whose  wife  was  Phila, 
his  daughter,  and  his  son  by  her,  a  boy  already 
old  enough  to  be  serving  in  the  army  with  his 
father,  was  the  natural  successor  to  the  govern¬ 
ment. 

To  add  to  this  unexpected  good  fortune, 
news  arrived  that  Ptolemy  had  dismissed  his 
mother  and  children,  bestowing  upon  them 
presents  and  honours;  and  also  that  his  daugh¬ 
ter  Stratonice,  whom  he  had  married  to  Seleu- 
cus,  was  remarried  to  Antiochus,  the  son  of 
Seleucus,  and  proclaimed  Queen  of  Upper 
Asia. 

For  Antiochus,  it  appears,  had  fallen  pas¬ 
sionately  in  love  with  Stratonice,  the  young 
queen,  who  had  already  made  Seleucus  the 
father  of  a  son.  He  struggled  very  hard  with 
the  beginning  of  this  passion,  and  at  last,  re¬ 
solving  with  himself  that  his  desires  were 
wholly  unlawful,  his  malady  past  all  cure,  and 
his  powers  of  reason  too  feeble  to  act,  he  de¬ 
termined  on  death,  and  thought  to  bring  his 
life  slowly  to  extinction  by  neglecting  his  per¬ 
son  and  refusing  nourishment,  under  the  pre¬ 
tence  of  being  ill. 


DEMETRIUS 

Erasistratus,  the  physician  who  attended 
him,  quickly  perceived  that  love  was  his  dis¬ 
temper,  but  the  difficulty  was  to  discover  the 
object.  He  therefore  waited  continually  in  his 
chamber,  and  when  any  of  the  beauties  of  the 
court  made  their  visit  to  the  sick  prince,  he 
observed  the  emotions  and  alterations  in  the 
countenance  of  Antiochus,  and  watched  for  the 
changes  which  he  knew  to  be  indicative  of  the 
inward  passions  and  inclinations  of  the  soul. 
He  took  notice  that  the  presence  of  other  wo¬ 
men  produced  no  effect  upon  him;  but  when 
Stratonice  came,  as  she  often  did,  alone,  or  in 
company  with  Seleucus,  to  see  him,  he  observed 
in  him  all  Sappho’s  famous  symptoms, — his 
voice  faltered,  his  face  flushed  up,  his  eyes 
glanced  stealthily,  a  sudden  sweat  broke  out  on 
his  skin,  the  beatings  of  his  heart  were  irregu¬ 
lar  and  violent,  and,  unable  to  support  the  ex¬ 
cess  of  his  passion,  he  would  sink  into  a  state 
of  faintness,  prostration,  and  pallor. 

Erasistratus,  reasoning  upon  these  symp¬ 
toms,  and,  upon  the  probabilities  of  things, 
considering  that  the  king’s  son  would  hardly, 
if  the  object  of  his  passion  had  been  any  other, 
have  persisted  to  death  rather  than  reveal  it, 
felt,  however,  the  difficulty  of  making  a  dis¬ 
covery  of  this  nature  to  Seleucus.  But,  trusting 
to  the  tenderness  of  Seleucus  for  the  young 
man,  he  put  on  all  the  assurances  he  could,  and 
at  last,  on  some  opportunity,  spoke  out  and 
told  him  the  malady  was  love,  a  love  impossi¬ 
ble  to  gratify  or  relieve.  The  king  was  extreme¬ 
ly  surprised,  and  asked,  “Why  impossible  to 
relieve?”  “The  fact  is,”  replied  Erasistratus, 
“he  is  in  love  with  my  wife.”  “How!”  said 
Seleucus.  “And  will  our  friend  Erasistratus  re¬ 
fuse  to  bestow  his  wife  upon  my  son  and  only 
successor,  when  there  is  no  other  way  to  save 
his  life?”  “You,”  replied  Erasistratus,  “who 
are  his  father,  would  not  do  so,  if  he  were  in 
love  with  Stratonice.”  “Ah,  my  friend,”  an¬ 
swered  Seleucus,  “would  to  heaven  any  means, 
human  or  divine,  could  but  convert  his  present 
passion  to  that;  it  would  be  well  for  me  to  part 
not  only  with  Stratonice,  but  with  my  empire, 
to  save  Antiochus.”  This  he  said  with  the 
greatest  passion,  shedding  tears  as  he  spoke; 
upon  which  Erasistratus,  taking  him  by  the 
hand,  replied,  “In  that  case,  you  have  no  need 
of  Erasistratus;  for  you,  who  are  the  husband, 
the  father,  and  the  king,  are  the  proper  physi¬ 
cian  for  your  own  family.” 

Seleucus,  accordingly,  summoning  a  general 
assembly  of  his  people,  declared  to  them,  that 
he  had  resolved  to  make  Antiochus  king,  and 


741 

Stratonice  queen,  of  all  the  provinces  of  Upper 
Asia,  uniting  them  in  marriage;  telling  them, 
that  he  thought  he  had  sufficient  power  over 
the  prince’s  will  that  he  should  find  in  him  no 
repugnance  to  obey  his  commands;  and  for 
Stratonice,  he  hoped  all  his  friends  would  en¬ 
deavour  to  make  her  sensible,  if  she  should 
manifest  any  reluctance  to  such  a  marriage, 
that  she  ought  to  esteem  those  things  just  and 
honourable  which  had  been  determined  upon 
by  the  king  as  necessary  to  the  general  good. 
In  this  manner,  we  are  told,  was  brought  about 
the  marriage  of  Antiochus  and  Stratonice. 

To  return  to  the  affairs  of  Demetrius.  Hav¬ 
ing  obtained  the  crown  of  Macedon,  he  pres¬ 
ently  became  master  of  Thessaly,  also.  And 
holding  the  greatest  part  of  Peloponnesus,  and, 
on  this  side  of  the  Isthmus,  the  cities  of  Megara 
and  Athens,  he  now  turned  his  arms  against 
the  Boeotians.  They  at  first  made  overtures  for 
an  accommodation;  but  Cleonymus  of  Sparta 
having  ventured  with  some  troops  to  their 
assistance,  and  having  made  his  way  into 
Thebes,  and  Pisis,  the  Thespian,  who  was 
their  first  man  in  power  and  reputation,  ani¬ 
mating  them  to  make  a  brave  resistance,  they 
broke  off  the  treaty.  No  sooner,  however,  had 
Demetrius  begun  to  approach  the  walls  with 
his  engines,  but  Cleonymus  in  affright  secretly 
withdrew;  and  the  Boeotians,  finding  them¬ 
selves  abandoned,  made  their  submission. 
Demetrius  placed  a  garrison  in  charge  of  their 
towns,  and,  having  raised  a  large  sum  of  mon¬ 
ey  from  them,  he  placed  Hieronymus,  the  his¬ 
torian,  in  the  office  of  governor  and  military 
commander  over  them,  and  was  thought  on 
the  whole  to  have  shown  great  clemency, 
more  particularly  to  Pisis,  to  whom  he  did  no 
hurt,  but  spoke  with  him  courteously  and 
kindly,  and  made  him  chief  magistrate  of 
Thespiae. 

Not  long  after,  Lysimachus  was  taken  pris¬ 
oner  by  Dromichaetes,  and  Demetrius  went  off 
instantly  in  the  hopes  of  possessing  himself  of 
Thrace,  thus  left  without  a  king.  Upon  this, 
the  Boeotians  revolted  again,  and  news  also 
came  that  Lysimachus  had  regained  his  liberty. 
So  Demetrius,  turning  back  quickly  and  in 
anger,  found  on  coming  up  that  his  son  An- 
tigonus  had  already  defeated  the  Boeotians  in 
battle,  and  therefore  proceeded  to  lay  siege 
again  to  Thebes. 

But  understanding  that  Pyrrhus  had  made 
an  incursion  into  Thessaly,  and  that  he  was 
advanced  as  far  as  Thermopylae,  leaving  Antig- 
onus  to  continue  the  siege,  he  marched  with 


742 

the  rest  of  his  army  to  oppose  this  enemy.  Pyr¬ 
rhus,  however,  made  a  quick  retreat.  So,  leav¬ 
ing  ten  thousand  foot  and  a  thousand  horse  for 
the  protection  of  Thessaly,  he  returned  to  the 
siege  of  Thebes,  and  there  brought  up  his  fa¬ 
mous  City-ta\er  to  the  attack,  which,  however, 
was  so  laboriously  and  so  slowly  moved  on  ac¬ 
count  of  its  bulk  and  heaviness,  that  in  two 
months  it  did  not  advance  two  furlongs. 

In  the  meantime  the  citizens  made  a  stout 
defence,  and  Demetrius,  out  of  heat  and  con¬ 
tentiousness  very  often,  more  than  upon  any 
necessity,  sent  his  soldiers  into  danger;  until  at 
last  Antigonus,  observing  how  many  men  were 
losing  their  lives,  said  to  him,  “Why,  my  fa¬ 
ther,  do  we  go  on  letting  the  men  be  wasted  in 
this  way  without  any  need  of  it?”  But  Deme¬ 
trius,  in  a  great  passion,  interrupted  him,  “And 
you,  good  sir,  why  do  you  afflict  yourself  for 
the  matter?  Will  dead  men  come  to  you  for 
rations?”  But  that  the  soldiers  might  see  that 
he  valued  his  own  life  at  no  dearer  rate  than 
theirs,  he  exposed  himself  freely,  and  was 
wounded  with  a  javelin  through  his  neck, 
which  put  him  into  great  hazard  of  his  life. 
But,  notwithstanding,  he  continued  the  siege, 
and  in  conclusion  took  the  town  again.  And 
after  his  entrance,  when  the  citizens  were  in 
fear  and  trembling,  and  expected  all  the  sever¬ 
ities  which  an  incensed  conqueror  could  inflict, 
he  only  put  to  death  thirteen  and  banished 
some  few  others,  pardoning  all  the  rest.  Thus 
the  city  of  Thebes,  which  had  not  yet  been  ten 
years  restored,  in  that  short  space  was  twice  be¬ 
sieged  and  taken. 

Shortly  after,  the  festival  of  the  Pythian 
Apollo  was  to  be  celebrated,  and  the^Ttolians 
having  blocked  up  all  the  passages  to  Delphi, 
Demetrius  held  the  games  and  celebrated  the 
feast  at  Athens,  alleging  there  was  great  reason 
those  honours  should  be  paid  in  that  place, 
Apollo  being  the  paternal  god  of  the  Athenian 
people,  and  the  reputed  first  founder  of  their 
race. 

From  thence  Demetrius  returned  to  Mace- 
don,  and  as  he  not  only  was  of  a  restless  temper 
himself,  but  saw  also  that  the  Macedonians 
were  ever  the  best  subjects  when  employed  in 
military  expeditions,  but  turbulent  and  desir¬ 
ous  of  change  in  the  idleness  of  peace,  he  led 
them  against  the  TEtolians,  and,  having  wast¬ 
ed  their  country,  he  left  Pantauchus  with  a 
great  part  of  his  army  to  complete  the  conquest, 
and  with  the  rest  he  marched  in  person  to  find 
out  Pyrrhus,  who  in  like  manner  was  advanc¬ 
ing  to  encounter  him.  But  so  it  fell  out,  that  by 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

taking  different  ways  the  two  armies  did  not 
meet;  but  whilst  Demetrius  entered  Epirus, 
and  laid  all  waste  before  him,  Pyrrhus  fell  up¬ 
on  Pantauchus,  and  in  a  battle  in  which  the 
two  commanders  met  in  person  and  wounded 
each  other,  he  gained  the  victory,  and  took  five 
thousand  prisoners,  besides  great  numbers 
slain  in  the  field. 

The  worst  thing,  however,  for  Demetrius 
was  that  Pyrrhus  had  excited  less  animosity  as 
an  enemy  than  admiration  as  a  brave  man.  His 
taking  so  large  a  part  with  his  own  hand  in  the 
battle  had  gained  him  the  greatest  name  and 
glory  among  the  Macedonians.  Many  among 
them  began  to  say  that  this  was  the  only  king 
in  whom  there  was  any  likeness  to  be  seen  of 
the  great  Alexander’s  courage;  the  other  kings, 
and  particularly  Demetrius,  did  nothing  but 
personate  him,  like  actors  on  a  stage,  in  his 
pomp  and  outward  majesty.  And  Demetrius 
truly  was  a  perfect  play  and  pageant,  with  his 
robes  and  diadems,  his  gold-edged  purple  and 
his  hats  with  double  streamers,  his  very  shoes 
being  of  the  richest  purple  felt,  embroidered 
over  in  gold.  One  robe  in  particular,  a  most 
superb  piece  of  work,  was  long  in  the  loom  in 
preparation  for  him,  in  which  was  to  be 
wrought  the  representation  of  the  universe  and 
the  celestial  bodies.  This,  left  unfinished  when 
his  reverse  overtook  him,  not  any  one  of  the 
kings  of  Macedon,  his  successors,  though  di¬ 
vers  of  them  haughty  enough,  ever  presumed 
to  use. 

But  it  was  not  this  theatric  pomp  alone 
which  disgusted  the  Macedonians,  but  his  pro¬ 
fuse  and  luxurious  way  of  living;  and,  above 
all,  the  difficulty  of  speaking  with  him  or  of 
obtaining  access  to  his  presence.  For  either  he 
would  not  be  seen  at  all,  or,  if  he  did  give  audi¬ 
ence,  he  was  violent  and  overbearing.  Thus  he 
made  the  envoys  of  the  Athenians,  to  whom 
yet  he  was  more  attentive  than  to  all  the  other 
Grecians,  wait  two  whole  years  before  they 
could  obtain  a  hearing.  And  when  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians  sent  a  single  person  on  an  embassy  to 
him,  he  held  himself  insulted,  and  asked  angri¬ 
ly  whether  it  was  the  fact  that  the  Lacedae¬ 
monians  had  sent  but  one  ambassador.  “Yes,” 
was  the  happy  reply  he  received,  “one  ambas¬ 
sador  to  one  king.” 

Once  when  in  some  apparent  fit  of  a  more 
popular  and  acceptable  temper  he  was  riding 
abroad,  a  number  of  people  came  up  and  pre¬ 
sented  their  written  petitions.  He  courteously 
received  all  these,  and  put  them  up  in  the  skirt 
of  his  cloak,  while  the  poor  people  were  over- 


DEMETRIUS 

joyed,  and  followed  him  close.  But  when  he 
came  upon  the  bridge  of  the  river  Axius,  shak¬ 
ing  out  his  cloak,  he  threw  all  into  the  river. 
This  excited  very  bitter  resentment  among  the 
Macedonians,  who  felt  themselves  to  be  not 
governed,  but  insulted.  They  called  to  mind 
what  some  of  them  had  seen,  and  others  had 
heard  related  of  King  Philip’s  unambitious 
and  open,  accessible  manners.  One  day  when 
an  old  woman  had  assailed  him  several  times 
in  the  road,  and  importuned  him  to  hear  her 
after  he  had  told  her  he  had  no  time,  “If  so,” 
cried  she,  “you  have  no  time  to  be  a  king.” 
And  this  reprimand  so  stung  the  king  that, 
after  thinking  of  it  a  while,  he  went  back  into 
the  house,  and  setting  all  other  matters  apart, 
for  several  days  together  he  did  nothing  else 
but  receive,  beginning  with  the  old  woman, 
the  complaints  of  all  that  would  come.  And  to 
do  justice,  truly  enough,  might  well  be  called 
a  king’s  first  business. 

“Mars,”  as  says  Timotheus,  “is  the  tyrant”; 
but  Law,  in  Pindar’s  words,  the  king  of  all. 
Homer  does  not  say  that  kings  received  at  the 
hands  of  Jove  besieging  engines  or  ships  of 
war,  but  sentences  of  justice,  to  keep  and  ob¬ 
serve;  nor  is  it  the  most  warlike,  unjust,  and 
murderous,  but  the  most  righteous  of  kings, 
that  has  from  him  the  name  of  Jupiter’s  “fa¬ 
miliar  friend”  and  scholar.  Demetrius’s  delight 
was  the  title  most  unlike  the  choice  of  the  king 
of  gods.  The  divine  names  were  those  of  the 
Defender  and  Keeper,  his  was  that  of  the  Be¬ 
sieger  of  Cities.  The  place  of  virtue  was  given 
by  him  to  that  which,  had  he  not  been  as  igno¬ 
rant  as  he  was  powerful,  he  would  have  known 
to  be  vice,  and  honour  by  his  act  was  associat¬ 
ed  with  crime. 

While  he  lay  dangerously  ill  at  Pella,  Pyr¬ 
rhus  pretty  nearly  overran  all  Macedon,  and  ad¬ 
vanced  as  far  as  the  city  of  Edessa.  On  recover¬ 
ing  his  health,  he  quickly  drove  him  out,  and 
came  to  terms  with  him,  being  desirous  not  to 
employ  his  time  in  a  string  of  petty  local  con¬ 
flicts  with  a  neighbour,  when  all  his  thoughts 
were  fixed  upon  another  design.  This  was  no 
less  than  to  endeavour  the  recovery  of  the 
whole  empire  which  his  father  had  possessed; 
and  his  preparations  were  suitable  to  his  hopes 
and  the  greatness  of  the  enterprise.  He  had  ar¬ 
ranged  for  the  levying  of  ninety-eight  thou¬ 
sand  foot  and  nearly  twelve  thousand  horse; 
and  he  had  a  fleet  of  five  hundred  galleys  on 
the  stocks,  some  building  at  Athens,  others  at 
Corinth  and  Chalcis,  and  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  of  Pella.  And  he  himself  was  passing 


743 

evermore  from  one  to  another  of  these  places, 
to  give  his  directions  and  his  assistance  to  the 
plans,  while  all  that  saw  were  amazed,  not  so 
much  at  the  number,  as  at  the  magnitude 
of  the  works.  Hitherto,  there  had  never  been 
seen  a  galley  with  fifteen  or  sixteen  ranges 
of  oars. 

At  a  later  time,  Ptolemy  Philopator  built  one 
of  forty  rows,  which  was  two  hundred  and 
eighty  cubits  in  length  and  the  height  of  her 
to  the  top  of  her  stern,  forty-eight  cubits;  she 
had  four  hundred  sailors  and  four  thousand 
rowers,  and  afforded  room  besides  for  very 
near  three  thousand  soldiers  to  fight  on  her 
decks.  But  this,  after  all,  was  for  show,  and  not 
for  service,  scarcely  differing  from  a  fixed  edi¬ 
fice  ashore,  and  was  not  to  be  moved  without 
extreme  toil  and  peril;  whereas  these  galleys 
of  Demetrius  were  meant  quite  as  much  for 
fighting  as  for  looking  at,  were  not  the  less 
serviceable  for  their  magnificence,  and  were 
as  wonderful  for  their  speed  and  general  per¬ 
formance  as  for  their  size. 

These  mighty  preparations  against  Asia,  the 
like  of  which  had  not  been  made  since  Alex¬ 
ander  first  invaded  it,  united  Seleucus,  Ptol¬ 
emy,  and  Lysimachus  in  a  confederacy  for 
their  defence.  They  also  despatched  ambassa¬ 
dors  to  Pyrrhus,  to  persuade  him  to  make  a 
diversion  by  attacking  Macedonia;  he  need  not 
think  there  was  any  validity  in  a  treaty  which 
Demetrius  had  concluded,  not  as  an  engage¬ 
ment  to  be  at  peace  with  him,  but  as  a  means 
for  enabling  himself  to  make  war  first  upon 
the  enemy  of  his  choice.  So  when  Pyrrhus  ac¬ 
cepted  their  proposals,  Demetrius,  still  in  the 
midst  of  his  preparations,  was  encompassed 
with  war  on  all  sides.  Ptolemy,  with  a  mighty 
navy,  invaded  Greece;  Lysimachus  entered 
Macedonia  upon  the  side  of  Thrace,  and 
Pyrrhus,  from  the  Epirot  border,  both  of  them 
spoiling  and  wasting  the  country. 

Demetrius,  leaving  his  son  to  look  after 
Greece,  marched  to  the  relief  of  Macedon,  and 
first  of  all  to  oppose  Lysimachus.  On  his  way, 
he  received  the  news  that  Pyrrhus  had  taken 
the  city  Bercea;  and  the  report  quickly  getting 
out  among  the  soldiers,  all  discipline  at  once 
was  lost,  and  the  camp  was  filled  with  lamen¬ 
tations  and  tears,  anger  and  execrations  on 
Demetrius;  they  would  stay  no  longer,  they 
would  march  off,  as  they  said,  to  take  care  of 
their  country,  friends,  and  families;  but  in 
reality  the  intention  was  to  revolt  to  Lysima¬ 
chus.  Demetrius,  therefore,  thought  it  his  busi¬ 
ness  to  keep  them  as  far  away  as  he  could  from 


744 

Lysimachus,  who  was  their  own  countryman, 
and  for  Alexander’s  sake  kindly  looked  upon 
by  many;  they  would  be  ready  to  fight  with 
Pyrrhus,  a  new  comer  and  a  foreigner,  whom 
they  could  hardly  prefer  to  himself. 

But  he  found  himself  under  a  great  mistake 
in  these  conjectures.  For  when  he  advanced 
and  pitched  his  camp  near,  the  old  admiration 
for  Pyrrhus’s  gallantry  in  arms  revived  again; 
and  as  they  had  been  used  from  time  imme¬ 
morial  to  suppose  that  the  best  king  was  he 
that  was  the  bravest  soldier,  so  now  they  were 
also  told  of  his  generous  usage  of  his  prisoners, 
and,  in  short,  they  were  eager  to  have  any  one 
in  the  place  of  Demetrius,  and  well  pleased 
that  the  man  should  be  Pyrrhus.  At  first,  some 
straggling  parties  only  deserted,  but  in  a  little 
time  the  whole  army  broke  out  into  a  universal 
mutiny,  insomuch  that  at  last  some  of  them 
went  up  and  told  him  openly  that  if  he  con¬ 
sulted  his  own  safety  he  were  best  to  make 
haste  to  be  gone,  for  that  the  Macedonians 
were  resolved  no  longer  to  hazard  their  lives 
for  the  satisfaction  of  his  luxury  and  pleasure. 
And  this  was  thought  fair  and  moderate  lan¬ 
guage,  compared  with  the  fierceness  of  the 
rest.  So,  withdrawing  into  his  tent,  and,  like 
an  actor  rather  than  a  real  king,  laying  aside 
his  stage-robes  of  royalty,  he  put  on  some  com¬ 
mon  clothes  and  stole  away. 

He  was  no  sooner  gone  but  the  mutinous 
army  were  fighting  and  quarrelling  for  the 
plunder  of  his  tent,  but  Pyrrhus,  coming  im¬ 
mediately,  took  possession  of  the  camp  without 
a  blow,  after  which  he,  with  Lysimachus, 
parted  the  realm  of  Macedon  betwixt  them, 
after  Demetrius  had  securely  held  it  just  seven 
years. 

As  for  Demetrius,  being  thus  suddenly  de¬ 
spoiled  of  everything,  he  retired  to  Cassandrea. 
His  wife  Phila,  in  the  passion  of  her  grief, 
could  not  endure  to  see  her  hapless  husband 
reduced  to  the  condition  of  a  private  and  ban¬ 
ished  man.  She  refused  to  entertain  any  fur¬ 
ther  hope,  and  resolving  to  quit  a  fortune 
which  was  never  permanent  except  for  calam¬ 
ity,  took  poison  and  died.  Demetrius,  de¬ 
termining  still  to  hold  on  by  the  wreck,  went 
off  to  Greece,  and  collected  his  friends  and 
officers  there.  Menelaus,  in  the  play  of  Sopho¬ 
cles,  to  give  an  image  of  his  vicissitudes  of  es¬ 
tate,  says — 

For  me,  my  destiny,  alas,  is  found 
Whirling  upon  the  gods’  swift  wheel  around, 
And  changing  still,  and  as  the  moon’s  fair  frame 
Cannot  continue  for  two  nights  the  same, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

But  out  of  shadow  first  a  crescent  shows, 

Thence  into  beauty  and  perfection  grows, 

And  when  the  form  of  plenitude  it  wears, 
Dwindles  again,  and  wholly  disappears. 

The  simile  is  yet  truer  of  Demetrius  and  the 
phases  of  his  fortunes,  now  on  the  increase, 
presently  on  the  wane,  now  filling  up  and  now 
falling  away.  And  so,  at  this  time  of  apparent 
entire  obscuration  and  extinction,  his  light 
again  shone  out,  and  accessions  of  strength, 
little  by  little,  came  in  to  fulfil  once  more  the 
measure  of  his  hope.  At  first  he  showed  him¬ 
self  in  the  garb  of  a  private  man,  and  went 
about  the  cities  without  any  of  the  badges  of  a 
king.  One  who  saw  him  at  Thebes  applied  to 
him,  not  inaptly,  the  lines  of  Euripides — 

Humbled  to  man,  laid  by  the  godhead’s  pride, 

He  comes  to  Dirce  and  Ismenus’s  side. 

But  ere  long  his  expectations  had  re-entered 
the  royal  track,  and  he  began  once  more  to 
have  about  him  the  body  and  form  of  empire. 
The  Thebans  received  back,  as  his  gift,  their 
ancient  constitution.  The  Athenians  had  de¬ 
serted  him.  They  displaced  Diphilus,  who  was 
that  year  the  priest  of  the  two  Tutelar  Deities, 
and  restored  the  archons,  as  of  old,  to  mark 
the  year;  and  on  hearing  that  Demetrius  was 
not  so  weak  as  they  had  expected,  they  sent  in¬ 
to  Macedonia  to  beg  the  protection  of  Pyrrhus. 
Demetrius,  in  anger,  marched  to  Athens,  and 
laid  close  siege  to  the  city.  In  this  distress,  they 
sent  out  to  him  Crates  the  philosopher,  a  per¬ 
son  of  authority  and  reputation,  who  succeed¬ 
ed  so  far  that,  what  with  his  entreaties  and  the 
solid  reasons  which  he  offered,  Demetrius  was 
persuaded  to  raise  the  siege;  and,  collecting  all 
his  ships,  he  embarked  a  force  of  eleven  thou¬ 
sand  men  with  cavalry,  and  sailed  away  to 
Asia,  to  Caria  and  Lydia,  to  take  those  prov¬ 
inces  from  Lysimachus. 

Arriving  at  Miletus,  he  was  met  there  by 
Eurydice,  the  sister  of  Phila,  who  brought 
along  with  her  Ptolemais,  one  of  her  daugh¬ 
ters  by  King  Ptolemy,  who  had  before  been  af¬ 
fianced  to  Demetrius,  and  with  whom  he  now 
consummated  his  marriage.  Immediately  after, 
he  proceeded  to  carry  out  his  project,  and  was 
so  fortunate  in  the  beginning  that  many  cities 
revolted  to  him;  others,  as  particularly  Sardis, 
he  took  by  force;  and  some  generals  of  Lysi¬ 
machus,  also,  came  over  to  him  with  troops 
and  money.  But  when  Agathocles,  the  son  of 
Lysimachus,  arrived  with  an  army,  he  retreat¬ 
ed  into  Phrygia,  with  an  intention  to  pass  into 
Armenia,  believing  that,  if  he  could  once  plant 
his  foot  in  Armenia,  he  might  set  Media  in 


DEMETRIUS 

revolt,  and  gain  a  position  in  Upper  Asia, 
where  a  fugitive  commander  might  find  a 
hundred  ways  of  evasion  and  escape. 

Agathocles  pressed  hard  upon  him,  and 
many  skirmishes  and  conflicts  occurred,  in 
which  Demetrius  had  still  the  advantage;  but 
Agathocles  straitened  him  much  in  his  forage, 
and  his  men  showed  a  great  dislike  to  his  pur¬ 
pose,  which  they  suspected,  of  carrying  them 
far  away  into  Armenia  and  Media.  Famine 
also  pressed  upon  them,  and  some  mistake  oc¬ 
curred  in  their  passage  of  the  river  Lycus,  in 
consequence  of  which  a  large  number  were 
swept  away  and  drowned.  Still,  however,  they 
could  pass  their  jests,  and  one  of  them  fixed 
upon  Demetrius’s  tent-door  a  paper  with  the 
first  verse,  slightly  altered,  of  the  (Edipus : — 
Child  of  the  blind  old  man,  Antigonus, 

Into  what  country  are  you  bringing  us? 

But  at  last,  pestilence,  as  is  usual  when  ar¬ 
mies  are  driven  to  such  necessities  as  to  subsist 
upon  any  food  they  can  get,  began  to  assail 
them  as  well  as  famine.  So  that,  having  lost 
eight  thousand  of  his  men,  with  the  rest  he  re¬ 
treated  and  came  to  Tarsus,  and  because  that 
city  was  within  the  dominions  of  Seleucus,  he 
was  anxious  to  prevent  any  plundering,  and 
wished  to  give  no  sort  of  offence  to  Seleucus. 
But  when  he  perceived  it  was  impossible  to 
restrain  the  soldiers  in  their  extreme  necessity, 
Agathocles  also  having  blocked  up  all  the  ave¬ 
nues  of  Mount  Taurus,  he  wrote  a  letter  to 
Seleucus,  bewailing  first  all  his  own  sad  for¬ 
tunes,  and  proceeding  with  entreaties  and  sup¬ 
plications  for  some  compassion  on  his  part  to¬ 
wards  one  nearly  connected  with  him,  who 
was  fallen  into  such  calamities  as  might  extort 
tenderness  and  pity  from  his  very  enemies. 

These  letters  so  far  moved  Seleucus,  that  he 
gave  orders  to  the  governors  of  those  provinces 
that  they  should  furnish  Demetrius  with  all 
things  suitable  to  his  royal  rank,  and  with  suffi¬ 
cient  provisions  for  his  troops.  But  Patrocles, 
a  person  whose  judgment  was  greatly  valued, 
and  who  was  a  friend  highly  trusted  by  Seleu¬ 
cus,  pointed  out  to  him  that  the  expense  of 
maintaining  such  a  body  of  soldiers  was  the 
least  important  consideration,  but  that  it  was 
contrary  to  all  policy  to  let  Demetrius  stay  in 
the  country,  since  he,  of  all  the  kings  of  his 
time,  was  the  most  violent,  and  most  addicted 
to  daring  enterprises;  and  he  was  now  in  a 
condition  which  might  tempt  persons  of  the 
greatest  temper  and  moderation  to  unlawful 
and  desperate  attempts. 

Seleucus,  excited  by  this  advice,  moved  with 


745 

a  powerful  army  towards  Cilicia;  and  Deme¬ 
trius,  astonished  at  this  sudden  alteration,  be¬ 
took  himself  for  safety  to  the  most  inaccessible 
places  of  Mount  Taurus;  from  whence  he  sent 
envoys  to  Seleucus,  to  request  from  him  that 
he  would  permit  him  the  liberty  to  settle  with 
his  army  somewhere  among  the  independent 
barbarian  tribes,  where  he  might  be  able  to 
make  himself  a  petty  king,  and  end  his  life 
without  further  travel  and  hardship;  or,  if  he 
refused  him  this,  at  any  rate  to  give  his  troops 
food  during  the  winter,  and  not  expose  him  in 
this  distressed  and  naked  condition  to  the  fury 
of  his  enemies. 

But  Seleucus,  whose  jealousy  made  him  put 
an  ill-construction  on  all  he  said,  sent  him  an¬ 
swer,  that  he  would  permit  him  to  stay  two 
months  and  no  longer  in  Cataonia,  provided 
he  presently  sent  him  the  principal  of  his 
friends  as  hostages  for  his  departure  then;  and, 
in  the  meantime,  he  fortified  all  the  passages 
into  Syria.  So  that  Demetrius,  who  saw  him¬ 
self  thus,  like  a  wild  beast,  in  the  way  to  be  en¬ 
compassed  on  all  sides  in  the  toils,  was  driven 
in  desperation  to  his  defence,  overran  the  coun¬ 
try,  and  in  several  engagements  in  which  Seleu¬ 
cus  attacked  him,  had  the  advantage  of  him. 
Particularly,  when  he  was  once  assailed  by  the 
scythed  chariots,  he  successfully  avoided  the 
charge  and  routed  his  assailants,  and  then,  ex¬ 
pelling  the  troops  that  were  in  guard  of  the 
passes,  made  himself  master  of  the  roads  lead¬ 
ing  into  Syria.  And  now,  elated  himself,  and 
finding  his  soldiers  also  animated  by  these  suc¬ 
cesses,  he  was  resolved  to  push  ahead,  and  to 
have  one  deciding  blow  for  the  empire  with 
Seleucus;  who  indeed  was  in  considerable 
anxiety  and  distress,  being  averse  to  any  as¬ 
sistance  from  Lysimachus,  whom  he  both  mis¬ 
trusted  and  feared,  and  shrinking  from  a  bat¬ 
tle  with  Demetrius,  whose  desperation  he 
knew,  and  whose  fortune  he  had  so  often  seen 
suddenly  pass  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest. 

But  Demetrius,  in  the  meanwhile,  was  taken 
with  a  violent  sickness,  from  which  he  suffered 
extremely  himself,  and  which  ruined  all  his 
prospects.  His  men  deserted  to  the  enemy,  or 
dispersed.  At  last,  after  forty  days,  he  began 
to  be  so  far  recovered  as  to  be  able  to  rally  his 
remaining  forces,  and  marched  as  if  he  directly 
designed  for  Cilicia;  but  in  the  night,  raising 
his  camp  without  sound  of  trumpet,  he  took 
a  countermarch,  and,  passing  the  mountain 
Amanus,  he  ravaged  all  the  lower  country  as 
far  as  Cyrrhestica. 

Upon  this,  Seleucus  advancing  towards  him 


7  46 

and  encamping  at  no  great  distance,  Deme¬ 
trius  set  his  troops  in  motion  to  surprise  him 
by  night.  And  almost  to  the  last  moment  Seleu- 
cus  knew  nothing,  and  was  lying  asleep.  Some 
deserter  came  with  the  tidings  just  so  soon  that 
he  had  time  to  leap,  in  great  consternation,  out 
of  bed,  and  give  the  alarm  to  his  men.  And  as 
he  was  putting  on  his  boots  to  mount  his  horse, 
he  bade  the  officers  about  him  look  well  to  it, 
for  they  had  to  meet  a  furious  and  terrible  wild 
beast.  But  Demetrius,  by  the  noise  he  heard  in 
the  camp,  finding  they  had  taken  the  alarm, 
drew  off  his  troops  in  haste.  With  the  morn¬ 
ing’s  return  he  found  Seleucus  pressing  hard 
upon  him;  so,  sending  one  of  his  officers 
against  the  other  wing,  he  defeated  those  that 
were  opposed  to  himself.  But  Seleucus,  light¬ 
ing  from  his  horse,  pulling  off  his  helmet,  and 
taking  a  target,  advanced  to  the  foremost  ranks 
of  the  mercenary  soldiers,  and,  showing  them 
who  he  was,  bade  them  come  over  and  join 
him,  telling  them  that  it  was  for  their  sakes 
only  that  he  had  so  long  forborne  coming  to 
extremities.  And  thereupon,  without  a  blow 
more,  they  saluted  Seleucus  as  their  king  and 
passed  over. 

Demetrius,  who  felt  that  this  was  his  last 
change  of  fortune,  and  that  he  had  no  more 
vicissitudes  to  expect,  fled  to  the  passes  of 
Amanus,  where,  with  a  very  few  friends  and 
followers,  he  threw  himself  into  a  dense  forest, 
and  there  waited  for  the  night,  purposing,  if 
possible,  to  make  his  escape  towards  Caunus, 
where  he  hoped  to  find  his  shipping  ready  to 
transport  him.  But  upon  inquiry,  finding  that 
they  had  not  provisions  even  for  that  one  day, 
he  began  to  think  of  some  other  project.  Whilst 
he  was  yet  in  doubt,  his  friend  Sosigenes  ar¬ 
rived,  who  had  four  hundred  pieces  of  gold 
about  him,  and,  with  this  relief,  he  again  en¬ 
tertained  hopes  of  being  able  to  reach  the 
coast,  and,  as  soon  as  it  began  to  be  dark,  set 
forward  towards  the  passes. 

But,  perceiving  by  the  fires  that  the  enemies 
had  occupied  them,  he  gave  up  all  thought  of 
that  road,  and  retreated  to  his  old  station  in  the 
wood,  but  not  with  all  his  men;  for  some  had 
deserted,  nor  were  those  that  remained  as  will¬ 
ing  as  they  had  been.  One  of  them,  in  fine, 
ventured  to  speak  out,  and  say  that  Demetrius 
had  better  give  himself  up  to  Seleucus;  which 
Demetrius  overhearing,  drew  out  his  sword, 
and  would  have  passed  it  through  his  body,  but 
that  some  of  his  friends  interposed  and  pre¬ 
vented  the  attempt,  persuading  him  to  do  as 
had  been  said.  So  at  last  he  gave  way,  and  sent 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

to  Seleucus,  to  surrender  himself  at  discretion. 

Seleucus,  when  he  was  told  of  it,  said  it  was 
not  Demetrius’s  good  fortune  that  had  found 
out  this  means  for  his  safety,  but  his  own, 
which  had  added  to  his  other  honours  the  op¬ 
portunity  of  showing  his  clemency  and  gener¬ 
osity.  And  forthwith  he  gave  order  to  his 
domestic  officers  to  prepare  a  royal  pavilion, 
and  all  things  suitable  to  give  him  a  splendid 
reception  and  entertainment.  There  was  in  the 
attendance  of  Seleucus  one  Apollonides,  who 
formerly  had  been  intimate  with  Demetrius. 
He  was,  therefore,  as  the  fittest  person,  de¬ 
spatched  from  the  king  to  meet  Demetrius, 
that  he  might  feel  himself  more  at  his  ease, 
and  might  come  with  the  confidence  of  being 
received  as  a  friend  and  relative.  No  sooner 
was  this  message  known,  but  the  courtiers  and 
officers,  some  few  at  first,  and  afterwards  al¬ 
most  the  whole  of  them,  thinking  Demetrius 
would  presently  become  of  great  power  with 
the  king,  hurried  off,  vying  who  should  be 
foremost  to  pay  him  their  respects.  The  effect 
of  which  was  that  compassion  was  converted 
into  jealousy,  and  ill-natured,  malicious  people 
could  the  more  easily  insinuate  to  Seleucus  that 
he  was  giving  way  to  an  unwise  humanity,  the 
very  first  sight  of  Demetrius  having  been  the 
occasion  of  a  dangerous  excitement  in  the 
army. 

So,  whilst  Apollonides,  in  great  delight,  and 
after  him  many  others,  were  relating  to  Deme¬ 
trius  the  kind  expressions  of  Seleucus,  and  he, 
after  so  many  troubles  and  calamities,  if  in¬ 
deed  he  had  still  any  sense  of  his  surrender  of 
himself  being  a  disgrace,  had  now,  in  confi¬ 
dence  on  the  good  hopes  held  out  to  him,  en¬ 
tirely  forgotten  all  such  thoughts,  Pausanias 
with  a  guard  of  a  thousand  horse  and  foot 
came  and  surrounded  him;  and,  dispersing 
the  rest  that  were  with  him,  carried  him  not  to 
the  presence  of  Seleucus,  but  to  the  Syrian 
Chersonese,  where  he  was  committed  to  the 
safe  custody  of  a  strong  guard.  Sufficient  at¬ 
tendance  and  liberal  provisions  were  here  al¬ 
lowed  him,  space  for  riding  and  walking,  a 
park  with  game  for  hunting,  those  of  his 
friends  and  companions  in  exile  who  wished 
it  had  permission  to  see  him,  and  messages 
of  kindness,  also,  from  time  to  time,  were 
brought  him  from  Seleucus,  bidding  him  fear 
nothing,  and  intimating  that,  as  soon  as  Antio- 
chus  and  Stratonice  should  arrive,  he  would  re¬ 
ceive  his  liberty. 

Demetrius,  however,  finding  himself  in  this 
condition,  sent  letters  to  those  who  were  with 


DEMETRIUS 

his  son,  and  to  his  captains  and  friends  at  Ath¬ 
ens  and  Corinth,  that  they  should  give  no  man¬ 
ner  of  credit  to  any  letters  written  to  them  in 
his  name,  though  they  were  sealed  with  his 
own  signet,  but  that,  looking  upon  him  as  if 
he  were  already  dead,  they  should  maintain 
the  cities  and  whatever  was  left  of  his  power 
for  Antigonus,  as  his  successor.  Antigonus  re¬ 
ceived  the  news  of  his  father’s  captivity  with 
great  sorrow;  he  put  himself  into  mourning 
and  wrote  letters  to  the  rest  of  the  kings,  and 
to  Seleucus  himself,  making  entreaties,  and 
offering  not  only  to  surrender  whatever  they 
had  left,  but  himself  to  be  a  hostage  for  his  fa¬ 
ther.  Many  cities  also  and  princes  joined  in  in¬ 
terceding  for  him;  only  Lysimachus  sent  and 
offered  a  large  sum  of  money  to  Seleucus  to 
take  away  his  life.  But  he,  who  had  always 
shown  his  aversion  to  Lysimachus  before, 
thought  him  only  the  greater  barbarian  and 
monster  for  it.  Nevertheless,  he  still  protract¬ 
ed  the  time,  reserving  the  favour,  as  he  profess¬ 
ed,  for  the  intercession  of  Antiochus  and  Stra- 
tonice. 

Demetrius,  who  had  sustained  the  first 
stroke  of  his  misfortune,  in  time  grew  so  fami¬ 
liar  with  it,  that,  by  continuance,  it  became 
easy.  At  first  he  persevered  one  way  or  other  in 
taking  exercise,  in  hunting,  so  far  as  he  had 
means,  and  in  riding.  Little  by  little,  however, 
after  a  while,  he  let  himself  grow  indolent  and 
indisposed  for  them,  and  took  to  dice  and 
drinking,  in  which  he  passed  most  of  his  time, 
whether  it  were  to  escape  the  thoughts  of  his 
present  condition,  with  which  he  was  haunted 
when  sober,  and  to  drown  reflection  in  drunk¬ 
enness,  or  that  he  acknowledged  to  himself  that 
this  was  the  real  happy  life  he  had  long  desired 
and  wished  for,  and  had  foolishly  let  himself 
be  seduced  away  from  it  by  a  senseless  and  vain 
ambition,  which  had  only  brought  trouble  to 
himself  and  others;  that  highest  good  which 
he  had  thought  to  obtain  by  arms  and  fleets 
and  soldiers  he  had  now  discovered  unexpect¬ 
edly  in  idleness,  leisure,  and  repose.  As,  in¬ 
deed,  what  other  end  or  period  is  there  of  all 
the  wars  and  dangers  which  hapless  princes 
run  into,  whose  misery  and  folly  it  is,  not 
merely  that  they  make  luxury  and  pleasure, 
instead  of  virtue  and  excellence,  the  object  of 
their  lives,  but  that  they  do  not  so  much  as 
know  where  this  luxury  and  pleasure  are  to  be 
found? 

Having  thus  continued  three  years  a  pris- 


747 

oner  in  Chersonesus,  for  want  of  exercise,  and 
by  indulging  himself  in  eating  and  drinking, 
he  fell  into  a  disease,  of  which  he  died  at  the 
age  of  fifty-four.  Seleucus  was  ill  spoken  of, 
and  was  himself  greatly  grieved,  that  he  had 
yielded  so  far  to  his  suspicions,  and  had  let 
himself  be  so  much  outdone  by  the  barbarian 
Dromichaetes  of  Thrace,  who  had  shown  so 
much  humanity  and  such  a  kingly  temper  in 
his  treatment  of  his  prisoner  Lysimachus. 

There  was  something  dramatic  and  theatri¬ 
cal  in  the  very  funeral  ceremonies  with  which 
Demetrius  was  honoured.  For  his  son  Antig¬ 
onus,  understanding  that  his  remains  were 
coming  over  from  Syria,  went  with  all  his  fleet 
to  the  islands  to  meet  them.  They  were  there 
presented  to  him  in  a  golden  urn,  which  he 
placed  in  his  largest  admiral  galley.  All  the 
cities  where  they  touched  in  their  passage  sent 
chaplets  to  adorn  the  urn,  and  deputed  certain 
of  their  citizens  to  follow  in  mourning,  to  as¬ 
sist  at  the  funeral  solemnity.  When  the  fleet 
approached  the  harbour  of  Corinth,  the  urn, 
covered  with  purple,  and  a  royal  diadem  up¬ 
on  it,  was  visible  upon  the  poop,  and  a  troop 
of  young  men  attended  in  arms  to  receive  it 
at  landing.  Xenophantus,  the  most  famous 
musician  of  the  day,  played  on  the  flute  his 
most  solemn  measure,  to  which  the  rowers,  as 
the  ship  came  in,  made  loud  response,  their 
oars,  like  the  funeral  beating  of  the  breast, 
keeping  time  with  the  cadences  of  the  music. 
But  Antigonus,  in  tears  and  mourning  attire, 
excited  among  the  spectators  gathered  on  the 
shore  the  greatest  sorrow  and  compassion. 
After  crowns  and  other  honours  had  been  of¬ 
fered  at  Corinth,  the  remains  were  conveyed 
to  Demetrias,  a  city  to  which  Demetrius  had 
given  his  name,  peopled  from  the  inhabitants 
of  the  small  villages  of  Iolcus. 

Demetrius  left  no  other  children  by  his  wife 
Phila  but  Antigonus  and  Stratonice,  but  he 
had  two  other  sons,  both  of  his  own  name,  one 
surnamed  the  Thin,  by  an  Illyrian  mother,  and 
one  who  ruled  in  Cyrene,  by  Ptolemais.  He 
had  also,  by  Deidamia,  a  son,  Alexander,  who 
lived  and  died  in  Egypt;  and  there  are  some 
who  say  that  he  had  a  son  by  Eurydice,  named 
Corrhabus.  His  family  was  continued  in  a  suc¬ 
cession  of  kings  down  to  Perseus,  the  last,  from 
whom  the  Romans  took  Macedonia. 

And  now,  the  Macedonian  drama  being 
ended,  let  us  prepare  to  see  the  Roman. 


ANTONY 

83?~3o  b.c. 


The  grandfather  of  Antony  was  the  fa¬ 
mous  pleader,  whom  Marius  put  to 
death  for  having  taken  part  with  Sulla. 
His  father  was  Antony,  surnamed  of  Crete, 
not  very  famous  or  distinguished  in  public  life, 
but  a  worthy  good  man,  and  particularly  re¬ 
markable  for  his  liberality,  as  may  appear  from 
a  single  example.  He  was  not  very  rich,  and 
was  for  that  reason  checked  in  the  exercise  of 
his  good  nature  by  his  wife.  A  friend  that 
stood  in  need  of  money  came  to  borrow  of  him. 
Money  he  had  none,  but  he  bade  a  servant 
bring  him  water  in  a  silver  basin,  with  which, 
when  it  was  brought,  he  wetted  his  face,  as  if 
he  meant  to  shave,  and,  sending  away  the  ser¬ 
vant  upon  another  errand,  gave  his  friend  the 
basin,  desiring  him  to  turn  it  to  his  purpose. 
And  when  there  was,  afterwards,  a  great  in¬ 
quiry  for  it  in  the  house,  and  his  wife  was  in 
a  very  ill  humour,  and  was  going  to  put  the 
servants  one  by  one  to  the  search,  he  acknow¬ 
ledged  what  he  had  done,  and  begged  her  par¬ 
don. 

His  wife  was  Julia,  of  the  family  of  the  Cae¬ 
sars,  who,  for  her  discretion  and  fair  beha¬ 
viour,  was  not  inferior  to  any  of  her  time.  Un¬ 
der  her,  Antony  received  his  education,  she 
being,  after  the  death  of  his  father,  remarried 
to  Cornelius  Lentulus,  who  was  put  to  death 
by  Cicero  for  having  been  of  Catiline’s  con¬ 
spiracy.  This,  probably,  was  the  first  ground 
and  occasion  of  that  mortal  grudge  that  An¬ 
tony  bore  Cicero.  He  says,  even,  that  the  body 
of  Lentulus  was  denied  burial,  till,  by  applica¬ 
tion  made  to  Cicero’s  wife,  it  was  granted  to 
Julia.  But  this  seems  to  be  a  manifest  error,  for 
none  of  those  that  suffered  in  the  consulate  of 
Cicero  had  the  right  of  burial  denied  them. 

Antony  grew  up  a  very  beautiful  youth,  but 
by  the  worst  of  misfortunes,  he  fell  into  the  ac¬ 
quaintance  and  friendship  of  Curio,  a  man 
abandoned  to  his  pleasures,  who,  to  make  An¬ 
tony’s  dependence  upon  him  a  matter  of  great¬ 
er  necessity,  plunged  him  into  a  life  of  drink¬ 
ing  and  dissipation,  and  led  him  through  a 
course  of  such  extravagance  that  he  ran,  at 
that  early  age,  into  debt  to  the  amount  of  two 


hundred  and  fifty  talents.  For  this  sum  Curio 
became  his  surety;  on  hearing  which,  the  elder 
Curio,  his  father,  drove  Antony  out  of  his 
house.  After  this,  for  some  short  time  he  took 
part  with  Clodius,  the  most  insolent  and  out¬ 
rageous  demagogue  of  the  time,  in  his  course 
of  violence  and  disorder;  but  getting  weary, 
before  long,  of  his  madness,  and  apprehensive 
of  the  powerful  party  forming  against  him,  he 
left  Italy  and  travelled  into  Greece,  where  he 
spent  his  time  in  military  exercises  and  in  the 
study  of  eloquence.  He  took  most  to  what  was 
called  the  Asiatic  taste  in  speaking,  which  was 
then  at  its  height,  and  was,  in  many  ways, 
suitable  to  his  ostentations,  vaunting  temper, 
full  of  empty  flourishes  and  unsteady  efforts 
for  glory. 

After  some  stay  in  Greece,  he  was  invited  by 
Gabinius,  who  had  been  consul,  to  make  a 
campaign  with  him  in  Syria,  which  at  first  he 
refused,  not  being  willing  to  serve  in  a  private 
character,  but  receiving  a  commission  to  com¬ 
mand  the  horse,  he  went  along  with  him.  His 
first  service  was  against  Aristobulus,  who  had 
prevailed  with  the  Jews  to  rebel.  Here  he  was 
himself  the  first  man  to  scale  the  largest  of  the 
works,  and  beat  Aristobulus  out  of  all  of  them; 
after  which  he  routed,  in  a  pitched  battle,  an 
army  many  times  over  the  number  of  his,  kill¬ 
ed  almost  all  of  them  and  took  Aristobulus  and 
his  son  prisoners.  This  war  ended,  Gabinius 
was  solicited  by  Ptolemy  to  restore  him  to  his 
kingdom  of  Egypt,  and  a  promise  made  of  ten 
thousand  talents  reward.  Most  of  the  officers 
were  against  this  enterprise,  and  Gabinius 
himself  did  not  much  like  it,  though  sorely 
tempted  by  the  ten  thousand  talents. 

But  Antony,  desirous  of  brave  actions,  and 
willing  to  please  Ptolemy,  joined  in  persuad¬ 
ing  Gabinius  to  go.  And  whereas  all  were  of 
opinion  that  the  most  dangerous  thing  before 
them  was  the  march  to  Pelusium,  in  which 
they  would  have  to  pass  over  a  deep  sand, 
where  no  fresh  water  was  to  be  hoped  for, 
along  the  Acregma  and  the  Serbonian  marsh 
(which  the  Egyptians  call  Typhon’s  breathing- 
hole,  and  which  is,  in  probability,  water  left 


ANTONY 

behind  by,  or  making  its  way  through  from, 
the  Red  Sea,  which  is  here  divided  from  the 
Mediterranean  by  a  narrow  isthmus),  Antony, 
being  ordered  thither  with  the  horse,  not  only 
made  himself  master  of  the  passes,  but  won 
Pelusium  itself,  a  great  city,  took  the  garrison 
prisoners,  and  by  this  means  rendered  the 
march  secure  to  the  army,  and  the  way  to  vic¬ 
tory  not  difficult  for  the  general  to  pursue.  The 
enemy  also  reaped  some  benefit  of  his  eager¬ 
ness  for  honour.  For  when  Ptolemy,  after  he 
had  entered  Pelusium,  in  his  rage  and  spite 
against  the  Egyptians,  designed  to  put  them 
to  the  sword,  Antony  withstood  him,  and  hin¬ 
dered  the  execution. 

In  all  the  great  and  frequent  skirmishes  and 
battles  he  gave  continual  proofs  of  his  personal 
valour  and  military  conduct;  and  once  in  par¬ 
ticular,  by  wheeling  about  and  attacking  the 
rear  of  the  enemy,  he  gave  the  victory  to  the 
assailants  in  the  front,  and  received  for  this 
service  signal  marks  of  distinction.  Nor  was 
his  humanity  towards  the  deceased  Archelaus 
less  taken  notice  of.  He  had  been  formerly  his 
guest  and  acquaintance,  and,  as  he  was  now 
compelled,  he  fought  him  bravely  while  alive, 
but  on  his  death,  sought  out  his  body  and 
buried  it  with  royal  honours.  The  consequence 
was  that  he  left  behind  him  a  great  name 
among  the  Alexandrians,  and  all  who  were 
serving  in  the  Roman  army  looked  upon  him 
as  a  most  gallant  soldier. 

He  had  also  a  very  good  and  noble  appear¬ 
ance;  his  beard  was  well  grown,  his  forehead 
large,  and  his  nose  aquiline,  giving  him  al¬ 
together  a  bold,  masculine  look  that  reminded 
people  of  the  faces  of  Hercules  in  paintings 
and  sculptures.  It  was,  moreover,  an  ancient 
tradition,  that  the  Antonys  were  descended 
from  Hercules,  by  a  son  of  his  called  Anton; 
and  this  opinion  he  thought  to  give  credit  to 
by  the  similarity  of  his  person  just  mentioned, 
and  also  by  the  fashion  of  his  dress.  For,  when¬ 
ever  he  had  to  appear  before  large  numbers, 
he  wore  his  tunic  girt  low  about  the  hips,  a 
broadsword  on  his  side,  and  over  all  a  large 
coarse  mantle.  What  might  seem  to  some  very 
insupportable,  his  vaunting,  his  raillery,  his 
drinking  in  public,  sitting  down  by  the  men  as 
they  were  taking  their  food,  and  eating,  as  he 
stood,  off  the  common  soldiers’  tables,  made 
him  the  delight  and  pleasure  of  the  army.  In 
love  affairs,  also,  he  was  very  agreeable:  he 
gained  many  friends  by  the  assistance  he  gave 
them  in  theirs,  and  took  other  people’s  raillery 
upon  his  own  with  good-humour. 


749 

And  his  generous  ways,  his  open  and  lavish 
hand  in  gifts  and  favours  to  his  friends  and 
fellow-soldiers,  did  a  great  deal  for  him  in  his 
first  advance  to  power,  and  after  he  had  be¬ 
come  great,  long  maintained  his  fortunes, 
when  a  thousand  follies  were  hastening  their 
overthrow.  One  instance  of  his  liberality  I 
must  relate.  He  had  ordered  payment  to  one 
of  his  friends  of  twenty-five  myriads  of  money 
or  decks,  as  the  Romans  call  it,  and  his  stew¬ 
ard,  wondering  at  the  extravagance  of  the  sum, 
laid  all  the  silver  in  a  heap,  as  he  should  pass 
by.  Antony,  seeing  the  heap,  asked  what  it 
meant;  his  steward  replied.  “The  money  you 
have  ordered  to  be  given  to  your  friend.”  So, 
perceiving  the  man’s  malice,  said  he,  “I  thought 
the  decks  had  been  much  more;  ’tis  too  little; 
let  it  be  doubled.”  This,  however,  was  at  a 
later  time. 

When  the  Roman  state  finally  broke  up  into 
two  hostile  factions,  the  aristocratical  party 
joining  Pompey,  who  was  in  the  city,  and  the 
popular  side  seeking  help  from  Caesar,  who 
was  at  the  head  of  an  army  in  Gaul,  Curio, 
the  friend  of  Antony,  having  changed  his 
party  and  devoted  himself  to  Caesar,  brought 
over  Antony  also  to  his  service.  And  the  influ¬ 
ence  which  he  gained  with  the  people  by  his 
eloquence  and  by  the  money  which  was  sup¬ 
plied  by  Caesar,  enabled  him  to  make  Antony, 
first,  tribune  of  the  people,  and  then,  augur. 

Antony’s  accession  to  office  was  at  once  of 
the  greatest  advantage  to  Caesar.  In  the  first 
place,  he  resisted  the  consul  Marcellus,  who 
was  putting  under  Pompey ’s  orders  the  troops 
who  were  already  collected,  and  was  giving 
him  power  to  raise  new  levies;  he,  on  the  other 
hand,  making  an  order  that  they  should  be 
sent  into  Syria  to  reinforce  Bibulus,  who  was 
making  war  with  the  Parthians,  and  that  no 
one  should  give  in  his  name  to  serve  under 
Pompey.  Next,  when  the  senators  would  not 
suffer  Caesar’s  letters  to  be  received  or  read  in 
the  senate,  by  virtue  of  his  office  he  read  them 
publicly,  and  succeeded  so  well,  that  many 
were  brought  to  change  their  mind;  Caesar’s 
demands,  as  they  appeared  in  what  he  wrote, 
being  but  just  and  reasonable.  At  length,  two 
questions  being  put  in  the  senate,  the  one, 
whether  Pompey  should  dismiss  his  army,  the 
other,  if  Caesar  his,  some  were  for  the  former, 
for  the  latter  all,  except  some  few,  when  An¬ 
tony  stood  up  and  put  the  question,  if  it  would 
be  agreeable  to  them  that  both  Pompey  and 
Caesar  should  dismiss  their  armies.  This  pro¬ 
posal  met  with  the  greatest  approval,  they  gave 


750 

him  loud  acclamations,  and  called  for  it  to  be 
put  to  the  vote. 

But  when  the  consuls  would  not  have  it  so, 
Caesar’s  friends  again  made  some  few  offers, 
very  fair  and  equitable,  but  were  strongly  op¬ 
posed  by  Cato,  and  Antony  himself  was  com¬ 
manded  to  leave  the  senate  by  the  consul  Len- 
tulus.  So,  leaving  them  with  execrations,  and 
disguising  himself  in  a  servant’s  dress,  hiring 
a  carriage  with  Quintus  Cassius,  he  went 
straight  away  to  Caesar,  declaring  at  once, 
when  they  reached  the  camp,  that  affairs  at 
Rome  were  conducted  without  any  order  or 
justice,  that  the  privilege  of  speaking  in  the 
senate  was  denied  the  tribunes,  and  that  he 
who  spoke  for  common  fair  dealing  was  driven 
out  and  in  danger  of  his  life. 

Upon  this,  Caesar  set  his  army  in  motion, 
and  marched  into  Italy;  and  for  this  reason  it 
is  that  Cicero  writes  in  his  Philippics  that  An¬ 
tony  was  as  much  the  cause  of  the  civil  war  as 
Helen  was  of  the  Trojan.  But  this  is  but  a 
calumny.  For  Caesar  was  not  of  so  slight  or 
weak  a  temper  as  to  suffer  himself  to  be  carried 
away  by  the  indignation  of  the  moment,  in¬ 
to  a  civil  war  with  his  country,  upon  the  sight 
of  Antony  and  Cassius  seeking  refuge  in  his 
camp  meanly  dressed  and  in  a  hired  carriage, 
without  ever  having  thought  of  it  or  taken  any 
such  resolution  long  before.  This  was  to  him, 
who  wanted  a  pretence  of  declaring  war,  a 
fair  and  plausible  occasion;  but  the  true  mo¬ 
tive  that  led  him  was  the  same  that  formerly 
led  Alexander  and  Cyrus  against  all  mankind, 
the  unquenchable  thirst  of  empire,  and  the  dis¬ 
tracted  ambition  of  being  the  greatest  man  in 
the  world,  which  was  impracticable  for  him, 
unless  Pompey  were  put  down. 

So  soon,  then,  as  he  had  advanced  and  oc¬ 
cupied  Rome,  and  driven  Pompey  out  of  Italy, 
he  proposed  first  to  go  against  the  legions  that 
Pompey  had  in  Spain,  and  then  cross  over  and 
follow  him  with  the  fleet  that  should  be  pre¬ 
pared  during  his  absence,  in  the  meantime 
leaving  the  government  of  Rome  to  Lepidus, 
as  praetor,  and  the  command  of  the  troops  and 
of  Italy  to  Antony,  as  tribune  of  the  people. 
Antony  was  not  long  in  getting  the  hearts  of 
the  soldiers,  joining  with  them  in  their  exer¬ 
cises,  and  for  the  most  part  living  amongst 
them  and  making  them  presents  to  the  ut¬ 
most  of  his  abilities;  but  with  all  others  he  was 
unpopular  enough.  He  was  too  lazy  to  pay  at¬ 
tention  to  the  complaints  of  persons  who  were 
injured;  he  listened  impatiently  to  petitions; 
and  he  had  an  ill  name  for  familiarity  with 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

other  people’s  wives.  In  short,  the  government 
of  Caesar  (which,  so  far  as  he  was  concerned 
himself,  had  the  appearance  of  anything  rather 
than  a  tyranny)  got  a  bad  repute  through  his 
friends.  And  of  these  friends,  Antony,  as  he 
had  the  largest  trust,  and  committed  the  great¬ 
est  errors,  was  thought  the  most  deeply  in 
fault. 

Caesar,  however,  at  his  return  from  Spain, 
overlooked  the  charges  against  him,  and  had 
no  reason  ever  to  complain,  in  the  employ¬ 
ments  he  gave  him  in  the  war,  of  any  want  of 
courage,  energy,  or  military  skill.  He  himself, 
going  aboard  at  Brundusium,  sailed  over  the 
Ionian  Sea  with  a  few  troops  and  sent  back  the 
vessels  with  orders  to  Antony  and  Gabinius  to 
embark  the  army,  and  come  over  with  all 
speed  to  Macedonia.  Gabinius,  having  no  mind 
to  put  to  sea  in  the  rough,  dangerous  weather 
of  the  winter  season,  was  for  marching  the 
army  round  by  the  long  land  route. 

Antony,  however,  being  more  afraid  lest  Cae¬ 
sar  might  suffer  from  the  number  of  his  ene¬ 
mies,  who  pressed  him  hard,  beat  back  Libo, 
who  was  watching  with  a  fleet  at  the  mouth 
of  the  haven  of  Brundusium,  by  attacking  his 
galleys  with  a  number  of  small  boats,  and  gain¬ 
ing  thus  an  opportunity,  put  on  board  twenty 
thousand  foot  and  eight  hundred  horse,  and 
so  set  out  to  sea.  And,  being  espied  by  the  ene¬ 
my  and  pursued,  from  this  danger  he  was 
rescued  by  a  strong  south  wind,  which  sprang 
up  and  raised  so  high  a  sea  that  the  enemy’s 
galleys  could  make  little  way.  But  his  own 
ships  were  driving  before  it  upon  a  lee  shore 
of  cliffs  and  rocks  running  sheer  to  the  water, 
where  there  was  no  hope  of  escape,  when  all 
of  a  sudden  the  wind  turned  about  to  south¬ 
west,  and  blew  from  land  to  the  main  sea, 
where  Antony,  now  sailing  in  security,  saw  the 
coast  all  covered  with  the  wreck  of  the  enemy’s 
fleet.  For  hither  the  galleys  in  pursuit  had 
been  carried  by  the  gale,  and  not  a  few  of  them 
dashed  to  pieces.  Many  men  and  much  prop¬ 
erty  fell  into  Antony’s  hands;  he  took  also  the 
town  of  Lissus,  and,  by  the  seasonable  arrival 
of  so  large  a  reinforcement,  gave  Caesar  great 
encouragement. 

There  was  not  one  of  the  many  engagements 
that  now  took  place  one  after  another  in  which 
he  did  not  signalise  himself;  twice  he  stopped 
the  army  in  its  full  flight,  led  them  back  to  a 
charge,  and  gained  the  victory.  So  that  not 
without  reason  his  reputation,  next  to  Caesar’s, 
was  greatest  in  the  army.  And  what  opinion 
Caesar  himself  had  of  him  well  appeared  when, 


ANTONY 

for  the  final  battle  in  Pharsalia,  which  was  to 
determine  everything,  he  himself  chose  to  lead 
the  right  wing,  committing  the  charge  of  the 
left  to  Antony,  as  to  the  best  officer  of  all  that 
served  under  him.  After  the  battle,  Caesar,  be¬ 
ing  created  dictator,  went  in  pursuit  of  Pom- 
pey,  and  sent  Antony  to  Rome,  with  the  char¬ 
acter  of  Master  of  the  Horse,  who  is  in  office 
and  power  next  to  the  dictator,  when  present, 
and  in  his  absence  the  first,  and  pretty  nearly 
indeed  the  sole  magistrate.  For  on  the  appoint¬ 
ment  of  a  dictator,  with  the  one  exception  of 
the  tribunes,  all  other  magistrates  cease  to  exer¬ 
cise  any  authority  in  Rome. 

Dolabella,  however,  who  was  tribune,  being 
a  young  man  and  eager  for  change,  was  now 
for  bringing  in  a  general  measure  for  cancel¬ 
ling  debts,  and  wanted  Antony,  who  was  his 
friend,  and  forward  enough  to  promote  any 
popular  project,  to  take  part  with  him  in  this 
step.  Asinius  and  Trebellius  were  of  the  con¬ 
trary  opinion,  and  it  so  happened,  at  the  same 
time,  Antony  was  crossed  by  a  terrible  suspi¬ 
cion  that  Dolabella  was  too  familiar  with  his 
wife;  and  in  great  trouble  at  this,  he  parted 
with  her  (she  being  his  cousin,  and  daughter 
to  Caius  Antonius,  colleague  of  Cicero),  and, 
taking  part  with  Asinius,  came  to  open  hos¬ 
tilities  with  Dolabella,  who  had  seized 
on  the  Forum,  intending  to  pass  his  law  by 
force. 

Antony,  backed  by  a  vote  of  the  senate  that 
Dolabella  should  be  put  down  by  force  of  arms, 
went  down  and  attacked  him,  killing  some  of 
his,  and  losing  some  of  his  own  men;  and  by 
this  action  lost  his  favour  with  the  common¬ 
alty,  while  with  the  better  class  and  with  all 
well-conducted  people  his  general  course  of 
life  made  him,  as  Cicero  says,  absolutely  odi¬ 
ous,  utter  disgust  being  excited  by  his  drinking 
bouts  at  all  hours,  his  wild  expenses,  his  gross 
amours,  the  day  spent  in  sleeping  or  walking 
off  his  debauches,  and  the  night  in  banquets 
and  at  theatres,  and  in  celebrating  the  nuptials 
of  some  comedian  or  buffoon.  It  is  related  that, 
drinking  all  night  at  the  wedding  of  Hippias, 
the  comedian,  on  the  morning,  having  to  ha¬ 
rangue  the  people,  he  came  forward,  over¬ 
charged  as  he  was,  and  vomited  before  them 
all,  one  of  his  friends  holding  his  gown  for 
him. 

Sergius,  the  player,  was  one  of  the  friends 
who  could  do  most  with  him;  also  Cytheris,  a 
woman  of  the  same  trade,  whom  he  made 
much  of,  and  who,  when  he  went  his  progress, 
accompanied  him  in  a  litter,  and  had  her 


751 

equipage  not  in  anything  inferior  to  his  moth¬ 
er’s;  while  every  one,  moreover,  was  scandal¬ 
ised  at  the  sight  of  the  golden  cups  that  he  took 
with  him,  fitter  for  the  ornaments  of  a  pro¬ 
cession  than  the  uses  of  a  journey,  at  his  hav¬ 
ing  pavilions  set  up,  and  sumptuous  morning 
repasts  laid  out  by  river  sides  and  in  groves, 
at  his  having  chariots  drawn  by  lions,  and  com¬ 
mon  women  and  singing  girls  quartered  upon 
the  houses  of  serious  fathers  and  mothers  of 
families. 

It  seemed  very  unreasonable  that  Caesar,  out 
of  Italy,  should  lodge  in  the  open  field,  and, 
with  great  fatigue  and  danger,  pursue  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  a  hazardous  war,  whilst  others,  by 
favour  of  his  authority,  should  insult  the  citi¬ 
zens  with  their  impudent  luxury.  All  this  ap¬ 
pears  to  have  aggravated  party  quarrels  in 
Rome,  and  to  have  encouraged  the  soldiers  in 
acts  of  licence  and  rapacity.  And,  accordingly, 
when  Caesar  came  home,  he  acquitted  Dola¬ 
bella,  and,  being  created  the  third  time  consul, 
took  not  Antony,  but  Lepidus,  for  his  col¬ 
league.  Pompey’s  house  being  offered  for  sale, 
Antony  bought  it,  and  when  the  price  was  de¬ 
manded  of  him,  loudly  complained.  This,  he 
tells  us  himself,  and  because  he  thought  his 
former  services  had  not  been  recompensed  as 
they  deserved,  made  him  not  follow  Caesar 
with  the  army  into  Libya. 

However,  Caesar,  by  dealing  gently  with  his 
errors,  seems  to  have  succeeded  in  curing  him 
of  a  good  deal  of  his  folly  and  extravagance. 
He  gave  up  his  former  courses,  and  took  a 
wife,  Fulvia,  the  widow  of  Clodius  the  dema¬ 
gogue,  a  woman  not  born  for  spinning  or 
housewifery,  nor  one  that  could  be  content 
with  ruling  a  private  husband,  but  prepared 
to  govern  a  first  magistrate,  or  give  orders  to 
a  commander-in-chief.  So  that  Cleopatra  had 
great  obligations  to  her  for  having  taught 
Antony  to  be  so  good  a  servant,  he  coming  to 
her  hands  tame  and  broken  into  entire  obedi¬ 
ence  to  the  commands  of  a  mistress.  He  used  to 
play  all  sorts  of  sportive,  boyish  tricks,  to  keep 
Fulvia  in  good  humour.  As,  for  example,  when 
Caesar,  after  his  victory  in  Spain,  was  on  his 
return,  Antony,  among  the  rest,  went  out  to 
meet  him;  and,  a  rumour  being  spread  that 
Caesar  was  killed  and  the  enemy  marching  in¬ 
to  Italy,  he  returned  to  Rome,  and,  disguising 
himself,  came  to  her  by  night  muffled  up  as  a 
servant  that  brought  letters  from  Antony.  She, 
with  great  impatience,  before  she  received  the 
letter,  asked  if  Antony  were  well,  and  instead 
of  an  answer  he  gave  her  the  letter;  and,  as 


752 

she  was  opening  it,  took  her  about  the  neck 
and  kissed  her. 

This  little  story,  of  many  of  the  same  nature, 
I  give  as  a  specimen. 

There  was  nobody  of  any  rank  in  Rome 
that  did  not  go  some  days’  journey  to  meet 
Caesar  on  his  return  from  Spain;  but  Antony 
was  the  best  received  of  any,  admitted  to  ride 
the  whole  journey  with  him  in  his  carriage, 
while  behind  came  Brutus  Albinus  and  Octa- 
vian,  his  niece’s  son,  who  afterwards  bore  his 
name  and  reigned  so  long  over  the  Romans. 
Caesar  being  created,  the  fifth  time,  consul, 
without  delay  chose  Antony  for  his  colleague, 
but  designing  himself  to  give  up  his  own  con¬ 
sulate  to  Dolabella,  he  acquainted  the  senate 
with  his  resolution.  But  Antony  opposed  it 
with  all  his  might,  saying  much  that  was  bad 
against  Dolabella,  and  receiving  the  like  lan¬ 
guage  in  return,  till  Caesar  could  bear  with  the 
indecency  no  longer,  and  deferred  the  matter 
to  another  time.  Afterwards,  when  he  came 
before  the  people  to  proclaim  Dolabella,  An¬ 
tony  cried  out  that  the  auspices  were  unfavour¬ 
able,  so  that  at  last  Caesar,  much  to  Dolabella’s 
vexation,  yielded  and  gave  it  up.  And  it  is  cred¬ 
ible  that  Caesar  was  about  as  much  disgusted 
with  the  one  as  the  other.  When  some  one  was 
accusing  them  both  to  him,  “It  is  not,”  said  he, 
“these  well-fed,  long-haired  men  that  I  fear, 
but  the  pale  and  the  hungry-looking”;  mean¬ 
ing  Brutus  and  Cassius,  by  whose  conspiracy 
he  afterwards  fell. 

And  the  fairest  pretext  for  that  conspiracy 
was  furnished,  without  his  meaning  it,  by  An¬ 
tony  himself.  The  Romans  were  celebrating 
their  festival,  called  the  Lupercalia,  when  Cae¬ 
sar,  in  his  triumphal  habit,  and  seated  above 
the  rostra  in  the  marketplace,  was  a  spectator 
of  the  sports.  The  custom  is,  that  many  young 
noblemen  and  of  the  magistracy,  anointed  with 
oil  and  having  straps  of  hide  in  their  hands, 
run  about  and  strike,  in  sport,  at  every  one  they 
meet.  Antony  was  running  with  the  rest;  but, 
omitting  the  old  ceremony,  twining  a  garland 
of  bay  round  a  diadem,  he  ran  up  to  the  rostra, 
and,  being  lifted  up  by  his  companions,  would 
have  put  it  upon  the  head  of  Caesar,  as  if  by 
that  ceremony  he  were  declared  king.  Caesar 
seemingly  refused,  and  drew  aside  to  avoid  it, 
and  was  applauded  by  the  people  with  great 
shouts.  Again  Antony  pressed  it,  and  again  he 
declined  its  acceptance. 

And  so  the  dispute  between  them  went  on 
for  some  time,  Antony’s  solicitations  receiving 
but  little  encouragement  from  the  shouts  of  a 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

few  friends,  and  Caesar’s  refusal  being  accom¬ 
panied  with  the  general  applause  of  the  people; 
a  curious  thing  enough,  that  they  should  sub¬ 
mit  with  patience  to  the  fact,  and  yet  at  the 
same  time  dread  the  name  as  the  destruction  of 
their  liberty.  Caesar,  very  much  discomposed 
at  what  had  passed,  got  up  from  his  seat,  and, 
laying  bare  his  neck,  said  he  was  ready  to  re¬ 
ceive  a  stroke,  if  any  one  of  them  desired  to 
give  it.  The  crown  was  at  last  put  on  one  of  his 
statues,  but  was  taken  down  by  some  of  the 
tribunes,  who  were  followed  home  by  the  peo¬ 
ple  with  shouts  of  applause.  Caesar,  however, 
resented  it,  and  deposed  them. 

These  passages  gave  great  encouragement  to 
Brutus  and  Cassius,  who,  in  making  choice  of 
trusty  friends  for  such  an  enterprise,  were 
thinking  to  engage  Antony.  The  rest  approved, 
except  Trebonius,  who  told  them  that  Antony 
and  he  had  lodged  and  travelled  together  in 
the  last  journey  they  took  to  meet  Caesar,  and 
that  he  had  let  fall  several  words,  in  a  cautious 
way,  on  purpose  to  sound  him;  that  Antony 
very  well  understood  him,  but  did  not  encour¬ 
age  it;  however,  he  had  said  nothing  of  it  to 
Caesar,  but  had  kept  the  secret  faithfully.  The 
conspirators  then  proposed  that  Antony  should 
die  with  him,  which  Brutus  would  not  consent 
to,  insisting  that  an  action  undertaken  in  de¬ 
fence  of  right  and  the  laws  must  be  maintained 
unsullied,  and  pure  of  injustice.  It  was  settled 
that  Antony,  whose  bodily  strength  and  high 
office  made  him  formidable,  should,  at  Caesar’s 
entrance  into  the  senate,  when  the  deed  was 
to  be  done,  be  amused  outside  by  some  of  the 
party  in  a  conversation  about  some  pretended 
business. 

So  when  all  was  proceeded  with,  according 
to  their  plan,  and  Caesar  had  fallen  in  the 
senate-house,  Antony,  at  the  first  moment, 
took  a  servant’s  dress,  and  hid  himself.  But, 
understanding  that  the  conspirators  had  as¬ 
sembled  in  the  Capitol,  and  had  no  further  de¬ 
sign  upon  any  one,  he  persuaded  them  to  come 
down,  giving  them  his  son  as  a  hostage.  That 
night  Cassius  supped  at  Antony’s  house,  and 
Brutus  with  Lepidus.  Antony  then  convened 
the  senate,  and  spoke  in  favour  of  an  act  of 
oblivion,  and  the  appointment  of  Brutus  and 
Cassius  to  provinces.  These  measures  the  senate 
passed;  and  resolved  that  all  Caesar’s  acts 
should  remain  in  force.  Thus  Antony  went  out 
of  the  senate  with  the  highest  possible  reputa¬ 
tion  and  esteem;  for  it  was  apparent  that  he 
had  prevented  a  civil  war,  and  had  composed, 
in  the  wisest  and  most  statesmanlike  way, 


ANTONY 

questions  of  the  greatest  difficulty  and  embar¬ 
rassment. 

But  these  temperate  counsels  were  soon 
swept  away  by  the  tide  of  popular  applause, 
and  the  prospect,  if  Brutus  were  overthrown, 
of  being  without  doubt  the  ruler-in-chief.  As 
Caesar’s  body  was  conveyed  to  the  tomb,  An¬ 
tony,  according  to  the  custom,  was  making  his 
funeral  oration  in  the  market-place,  and  per¬ 
ceiving  the  people  to  be  infinitely  affected  with 
what  he  had  said,  he  began  to  mingle  with  his 
praises  language  of  commiseration,  and  hor¬ 
ror  at  what  had  happened,  and,  as  he  was  end¬ 
ing  his  speech,  he  took  the  under-clothes  of  the 
dead,  and  held  them  up,  showing  them  stains 
of  blood  and  the  holes  of  the  many  stabs,  call¬ 
ing  those  that  had  done  this  act  villains  and 
bloody  murderers.  All  which  excited  the  peo¬ 
ple  to  such  indignation,  that  they  would  not 
defer  the  funeral,  but,  making  a  pile  of  tables 
and  forms  in  the  very  market-place,  set  fire  to 
it;  and  every  one,  taking  a  brand,  ran  to  the 
conspirators’  houses  to  attack  them. 

Upon  this,  Brutus  and  his  whole  party  left 
the  city,  and  Caesar’s  friends  joined  themselves 
to  Antony.  Calpurnia,  Caesar’s  wife,  lodged 
with  him  the  best  part  of  the  property,  to  the 
value  of  four  thousand  talents;  he  got  also  in¬ 
to  his  hands  all  Caesar’s  papers  wherein  were 
contained  journals  of  all  he  had  done,  and 
draughts  of  what  he  designed  to  do,  which 
Antony  made  good  use  of;  for  by  this  means 
he  appointed  what  magistrates  he  pleased, 
brought  whom  he  would  into  the  senate,  re¬ 
called  some  from  exile,  freed  others  out  of  pris¬ 
on,  and  all  this  as  ordered  so  by  Caesar.  The 
Romans,  in  mockery,  gave  those  who  were 
thus  benefited  the  name  of  Charonites,  since, 
if  put  to  prove  their  patents,  they  must  have 
recourse  to  the  papers  of  the  dead.  In  short, 
Antony’s  behaviour  in  Rome  was  very  abso¬ 
lute,  he  himself  being  consul  and  his  two 
brothers  in  great  place;  Caius,  the  one,  being 
praetor,  and  Lucius,  the  other,  tribune  of  the 
people. 

While  matters  went  thus  in  Rome,  the 
young  Caesar,  Caesar’s  niece’s  son,  and  by  tes¬ 
tament  left  his  heir,  arrived  at  Rome  from 
Apollonia,  where  he  was  when  his  uncle  was 
killed.  The  first  thing  he  did  was  to  visit 
Antony,  as  his  father’s  friend.  He  spoke  to  him 
concerning  the  money  that  was  in  his  hands, 
and  reminded  him  of  the  legacy  Caesar  had 
made  of  seventy-five  drachmas  to  every  Roman 
citizen.  Antony,  at  first,  laughing  at  such  dis¬ 
course  from  so  young  a  man,  told  him  he  wish- 


753 

ed  he  were  in  his  health,  and  that  he  wanted 
good  counsel  and  good  friends  to  tell  him  the 
burden  of  being  executor  to  Caesar  would  sit 
very  uneasy  upon  his  young  shoulders.  This 
was  no  answer  to  him;  and,  when  he  persisted 
in  demanding  the  property,  Antony  went  on 
treating  him  injuriously  both  in  word  and 
deed,  opposed  him  when  he  stood  for  the  trib¬ 
une’s  office,  and,  when  he  was  taking  steps 
for  the  dedication  of  his  father’s  golden  chair, 
as  had  been  enacted,  he  threatened  to  send 
him  to  prison  if  he  did  not  give  over  soliciting 
the  people.  This  made  the  young  Caesar  apply 
himself  to  Cicero,  and  all  those  that  hated 
Antony;  by  them  he  was  recommended  to  the 
senate,  while  he  himself  courted  the  people, 
and  drew  together  the  soldiers  from  their  set¬ 
tlements,  till  Antony  got  alarmed,  and  gave 
him  a  meeting  in  the  Capitol,  where,  after 
some  words,  they  came  to  an  accommoda¬ 
tion. 

That  night  Antony  had  a  very  unlucky 
dream,  fancying  that  his  right  hand  was  thun¬ 
derstruck.  And,  some  few  days  after,  he  was 
informed  that  Caesar  was  plotting  to  take  his 
life.  Caesar  explained,  but  was  not  believed,  so 
that  the  breach  was  now  made  as  wide  as  ever; 
each  of  them  hurried  about  all  through  Italy 
to  engage,  by  great  offers,  the  old  soldiers  that 
lay  scattered  in  their  settlements,  and  to  be  the 
first  to  secure  the  troops  that  still  remained  un¬ 
discharged.  Cicero  was  at  this  time  the  man  of 
greatest  influence  in  Rome.  He  made  use  of 
all  his  art  to  exasperate  the  people  against 
Antony,  and  at  length  persuaded  the  senate 
to  declare  him  a  public  enemy,  to  send  Caesar 
the  rods  and  axes  and  other  marks  of  honour 
usually  given  to  praetors,  and  to  issue  orders 
to  Hirtius  and  Pansa,  who  were  the  consuls, 
to  drive  Antony  out  of  Italy.  The  armies  en¬ 
gaged  near  Modena,  and  Caesar  himself  was 
present  and  took  part  in  the  battle.  Antony  was 
defeated,  but  both  the  consuls  were  slain. 
Antony,  in  his  flight,  was  overtaken  by  dis¬ 
tresses  of  every  kind,  and  the  worst  of  all  of 
them  was  famine. 

But  it  was  Antony’s  character  in  calamities 
to  be  better  than  at  any  other  time.  In  mis¬ 
fortune,  he  was  most  nearly  a  virtuous  man. 
It  is  common  enough  for  people,  when  they 
fall  into  great  disasters,  to  discern  what  is 
right,  and  what  they  ought  to  do;  but  there  are 
but  few  who  in  such  extremities  have  the 
strength  to  obey  their  judgment,  either  in 
doing  what  it  approves  or  avoiding  what  it 
condemns;  and  a  good  many  are  so  weak  as 


754 

to  give  way  to  their  habits  all  the  more,  and 
are  incapable  of  using  their  minds.  Antony,  on 
this  occasion,  was  a  most  wonderful  example 
to  his  soldiers.  He,  who  had  just  quitted  so 
much  luxury  and  sumptuous  living,  made  no 
difficulty  now  of  drinking  foul  water  and 
feeding  on  wild  fruits  and  roots.  Nay,  it  is 
related  they  ate  the  very  bark  of  trees,  and, 
in  passing  over  the  Alps,  lived  upon  creatures 
that  no  one  before  had  ever  been  willing  to 
touch. 

The  design  was  to  join  the  army  on  the  other 
side  the  Alps,  commanded  by  Lepidus,  who  he 
imagined  would  stand  his  friend,  he  having 
done  him  many  good  offices  with  Caesar.  On 
coming  up  and  encamping  near  at  hand,  find¬ 
ing  he  had  no  sort  of  encouragement  offered 
him,  he  resolved  to  push  his  fortune  and  ven¬ 
ture  all.  His  hair  was  long  and  disordered,  nor 
had  he  shaved  his  beard  since  his  defeat;  in 
this  guise,  and  with  a  dark  coloured  cloak 
flung  over  him,  he  came  into  the  trenches  of 
Lepidus,  and  began  to  address  the  army.  Some 
were  moved  at  his  habit,  others  at  his  words,  so 
that  Lepidus,  not  liking  it,  ordered  the  trum¬ 
pets  to  sound,  that  he  might  be  heard  no  long¬ 
er.  This  raised  in  the  soldiers  yet  a  greater  pity, 
so  that  they  resolved  to  confer  secretly  with 
him,  and  dressed  Laelius  and  Clodius  in  wo¬ 
men’s  clothes,  and  sent  them  to  see  him.  They 
advised  him  without  delay  to  attack  Lepidus’s 
trenches,  assuring  him  that  a  strong  party 
would  receive  him,  and,  if  he  wished  it,  would 
kill  Lepidus. 

Antony,  however,  had  no  wish  for  this,  but 
next  morning  marched  his  army  to  pass  over 
the  river  that  parted  the  two  camps.  He  was 
himself  the  first  man  that  stepped  in,  and,  as 
he  went  through  towards  the  other  bank,  he 
saw  Lepidus’s  soldiers  in  great  numbers  reach¬ 
ing  out  their  hands  to  help  him,  and  beating 
down  the  works  to  make  him  way.  Being  en¬ 
tered  into  the  camp,  and  finding  himself  ab¬ 
solute  master,  he  nevertheless  treated  Lepidus 
with  the  greatest  civility,  and  gave  him  the 
title  of  Father,  when  he  spoke  to  him,  and 
though  he  had  everything  at  his  own  com¬ 
mand,  he  left  him  the  honour  of  being  called 
the  general.  This  fair  usage  brought  over  to 
him  Munatius  Plancus,  who  was  not  far  off 
with  a  considerable  force.  Thus  in  great 
strength  he  repassed  the  Alps,  leading  with 
him  into  Italy  seventeen  legions  and  ten  thou¬ 
sand  horse,  besides  six  legions  which  he  left  in 
garrison  under  the  command  of  Varius,  one 
of  his  familiar  friends  and  boon  companions, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

whom  they  used  to  call  by  the  nickname  of 
Cotylon. 

Caesar,  perceiving  that  Cicero’s  wishes  were 
for  liberty,  had  ceased  to  pay  any  further  re¬ 
gard  to  him,  and  was  now  employing  the 
mediation  of  his  friends  to  come  to  a  good  un¬ 
derstanding  with  Antony.  They  both  met  to¬ 
gether  with  Lepidus  in  a  small  island,  where 
the  conference  lasted  three  days.  The  empire 
was  soon  determined  of,  it  being  divided 
amongst  them  as  if  it  had  been  their  paternal 
inheritance.  That  which  gave  them  all  the 
trouble  was  to  agree  who  should  be  put  to 
death,  each  of  them  desiring  to  destroy  his  ene¬ 
mies  and  to  save  his  friends.  But,  in  the  end, 
animosity  to  those  they  hated  carried  the  day 
against  respect  for  relations  and  affection  for 
friends:  Caesar  sacrificed  Cicero  to  Antony, 
Antony  gave  up  his  uncle,  Lucius  Caesar,  and 
Lepidus  received  permission  to  murder  his 
brother  Paulus,  or,  as  others  say,  yielded  his 
brother  to  them. 

I  do  not  believe  anything  ever  took  place 
more  truly  savage  or  barbarous  than  this  com¬ 
position,  for,  in  this  exchange  of  blood  for 
blood,  they  were  equally  guilty  of  the  lives 
they  surrendered  and  of  those  they  took;  or, 
indeed,  more  guilty  in  the  case  of  their  friends, 
for  whose  deaths  they  had  not  even  the  justi¬ 
fication  of  hatred.  To  complete  the  reconcilia¬ 
tion,  the  soldiery,  coming  about  them,  de¬ 
manded  that  confirmation  should  be  given  to 
it  by  some  alliance  of  marriage:  Caesar  should 
marry  Clodia,  the  daughter  of  Fulvia,  wife  to 
Antony.  This  also  being  agreed  to,  three  hun¬ 
dred  persons  were  put  to  death  by  proscription. 

Antony  gave  orders  to  those  that  were  to  kill 
Cicero  to  cut  off  his  head  and  right  hand,  with 
which  he  had  written  his  invectives  against 
him;  and,  when  they  were  brought  before  him, 
he  regarded  them  joyfully,  actually  bursting 
out  more  than  once  into  laughter,  and,  when 
he  had  satiated  himself  with  the  sight  of  them, 
ordered  them  to  be  hung  up  above  the  speak¬ 
er’s  place  in  the  Forum,  thinking  thus  to  in¬ 
sult  the  dead,  while  in  fact  he  only  exposed  his 
own  wanton  arrogance,  and  his  unworthiness 
to  hold  the  power  that  fortune  had  given  him. 
His  uncle,  Lucius  Caesar,  being  closely  pur¬ 
sued,  took  refuge  with  his  sister,  who,  when 
the  murderers  had  broken  into  her  house  and 
were  pressing  into  her  chamber,  met  them  at 
the  door,  and  spreading  out  her  hands,  cried 
out  several  times,  “You  shall  not  kill  Lucius 
Caesar  till  you  first  despatch  me,  who  gave 
your  general  his  birth”;  and  in  this  manner 


ANTONY 

she  succeeded  in  getting  her  brother  out  of  the 
way,  and  saving  his  life. 

This  triumvirate  was  very  hateful  to  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  and  Antony  most  of  all  bore  the  blame, 
because  he  was  older  than  Caesar,  and  had 
greater  authority  than  Lepidus,  and  withal  he 
was  no  sooner  settled  in  his  affairs,  but  he 
turned  to  his  luxurious  and  dissolute  way  of 
living.  Besides  the  ill  reputation  he  gained  by 
his  general  behaviour,  it  was  some  consider¬ 
able  disadvantage  to  him  his  living  in  the 
house  of  Pompey  the  Great,  who  had  been  as 
much  admired  for  his  temperance  and  his 
sober,  citizen-like  habits  of  life,  as  ever  he  was 
for  having  triumphed  three  times.  They  could 
not  without  anger  see  the  doors  of  that  house 
shut  against  magistrates,  officers,  and  envoys, 
who  were  shamefully  refused  admittance, 
while  it  was  filled  inside  with  players,  jug¬ 
glers,  and  drunken  flatterers,  upon  whom  were 
spent  the  greatest  part  of  the  wealth  which 
violence  and  cruelty  procured.  For  they  did  not 
limit  themselves  to  the  forfeiture  of  the  estates 
of  such  as  were  proscribed,  defrauding  the 
widows  and  families,  nor  were  they  contented 
with  laying  on  every  possible  kind  of  tax  and 
imposition;  but  hearing  that  several  sums  of 
money  were,  as  well  by  strangers  as  citizens  of 
Rome,  deposited  in  the  hands  of  the  vestal  vir¬ 
gins,  they  went  and  took  the  money  away  by 
force. 

When  it  was  manifest  that  nothing  would 
ever  be  enough  for  Antony,  Caesar  at  last  call¬ 
ed  for  a  division  of  property.  The  army  was 
also  divided  between  them,  upon  their  march 
into  Macedonia  to  make  war  with  Brutus  and 
Cassius,  Lepidus  being  left  with  the  command 
of  the  city. 

However,  after  they  had  crossed  the  sea  and 
engaged  in  operations  of  war,  encamping  in 
front  of  the  enemy,  Antony  opposite  Cassius, 
and  Caesar  opposite  Brutus,  Caesar  did  nothing 
worth  relating,  and  all  the  success  and  victory 
were  Antony’s.  In  the  first  battle,  Caesar  was 
completely  routed  by  Brutus,  his  camp  taken, 
he  himself  very  narrowly  escaping  by  flight. 
As  he  himself  writes  in  his  memoirs,  he  retired 
before  the  battle,  on  account  of  a  dream  which 
one  of  his  friends  had.  But  Antony,  on  the 
other  hand,  defeated  Cassius;  though  some 
have  written  that  he  was  not  actually  pres¬ 
ent  in  the  engagement,  and  only  joined  after¬ 
wards  in  the  pursuit.  Cassius  was  killed,  at  his 
own  entreaty  and  order,  by  one  of  his  most 
trusted  freedmen,  Pindarus,  not  being  aware 
of  Brutus’s  victory.  After  a  few  days’  interval, 


755 

they  fought  another  battle,  in  which  Brutus 
lost  the  day,  and  slew  himself;  and  Caesar  be¬ 
ing  sick,  Antony  had  almost  all  the  honour  of 
the  victory. 

Standing  over  Brutus’s  dead  body,  he  utter¬ 
ed  a  few  words  of  reproach  upon  him  for  the 
death  of  his  brother  Caius,  who  had  been  ex¬ 
ecuted  by  Brutus’s  order  in  Macedonia  in  re¬ 
venge  of  Cicero;  but,  saying  presently  that 
Horten sius  was  most  to  blame  for  it,  he  gave 
order  for  his  being  slain  upon  his  brother’s 
tomb,  and,  throwing  his  own  scarlet  mantle, 
which  was  of  great  value,  upon  the  body  of 
Brutus,  he  gave  charge  to  one  of  his  own  freed¬ 
men  to  take  care  of  his  funeral.  This  man,  as 
Antony  came  to  understand,  did  not  leave  the 
mantle  with  the  corpse,  but  kept  both  it  and  a 
good  part  of  the  money  that  should  have  been 
spent  in  the  funeral  for  himself;  for  which  he 
had  him  put  to  death. 

But  Caesar  was  conveyed  to  Rome,  no  one 
expecting  that  he  would  long  survive.  Antony, 
purposing  to  go  to  the  eastern  provinces  to  lay 
them  under  contribution,  entered  Greece  with 
a  large  force.  The  promise  had  been  made  that 
every  common  soldier  should  receive  for  his 
pay  five  thousand  drachmas;  so  it  was  likely 
there  would  be  need  of  pretty  severe  taxing  and 
levying  to  raise  money.  However,  to  the  Greeks 
he  showed  at  first  reason  and  moderation 
enough;  he  gratified  his  love  of  amusement  by 
hearing  the  learned  men  dispute,  by  seeing  the 
games,  and  undergoing  initiation;  and  in  judi¬ 
cial  matters  he  was  equitable,  taking  pleasure 
in  being  styled  a  lover  of  Greece,  but,  above  all, 
in  being  called  a  lover  of  Athens,  to  which  city 
he  made  very  considerable  presents.  The  peo¬ 
ple  of  Megara  wished  to  let  him  know  that  they 
also  had  something  to  show  him,  and  invited 
him  to  come  and  see  their  senate-house.  So  he 
went  and  examined  it,  and  on  their  asking  him 
how  he  liked  it,  told  them  it  was  “not  very 
large,  but  extremely  ruinous .”  At  the  same 
time,  he  had  a  survey  made  of  the  temple  of 
the  Pythian  Apollo  as  if  he  had  designed  to 
repair  it,  and  indeed  he  had  declared  to  the 
senate  his  intention  so  to  do. 

However,  leaving  Lucius  Censorinus  in 
Greece,  he  crossed  over  into  Asia,  and  there 
laid  his  hands  on  the  stores  of  accumulated 
wealth,  while  kings  waited  at  his  door,  and 
queens  were  rivalling  one  another,  who  should 
make  him  the  greatest  presents  or  appear  most 
charming  in  his  eyes.  Thus,  whilst  Caesar  in 
Rome  was  wearing  out  his  strength  amidst 
seditions  and  wars,  Antony,  with  nothing  to 


756 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES  , 


do  amidst  the  enjoyments  of  peace,  let  his  pas¬ 
sions  carry  him  easily  back  to  the  old  course  of 
life  that  was  familiar  to  him.  A  set  of  harpers 
and  pipers,  Anaxenor  and  Xuthus,  the  danc¬ 
ing-man,  Metrodorus,  and  a  whole  Bacchic 
rout  of  the  like  Asiatic  exhibitors,  far  outdoing 
in  licence  and  buffoonery  the  pests  that  had  fol¬ 
lowed  him  out  of  Italy,  came  in  and  possessed 
the  court;  the  thing  was  past  patience,  wealth 
of  all  kinds  being  wasted  on  objects  like  these. 
The  whole  of  Asia  was  like  the  city  in  Sopho¬ 
cles,  loaded,  at  one  time — 

- with  incense  in  the  air, 

Jubilant  songs,  and  outcries  of  despair. 

When  he  made  his  entry  into  Ephesus,  the 
women  met  him  dressed  up  like  Bacchantes, 
and  the  men  and  boys  like  satyrs  and  fauns, 
and  throughout  the  town  nothing  was  to  be 
seen  but  spears  wreathed  about  with  ivy, 
harps,  flutes,  and  psalteries,  while  Antony  in 
their  songs  was  Bacchus,  the  Giver  of  Joy,  and 
the  Gentle.  And  so  indeed  he  was  to  some, 
but  to  far  more  the  Devourer  and  the  Savage; 
for  he  would  deprive  persons  of  worth  and 
quality  of  their  fortunes  to  gratify  villains  and 
flatterers,  who  would  sometimes  beg  the  es¬ 
tates  of  men  yet  living,  pretending  they  were 
dead,  and,  obtaining  a  grant,  take  possession. 
He  gave  his  cook  the  house  of  a  Magnesian 
citizen,  as  a  reward  for  a  single  highly  suc¬ 
cessful  supper,  and,  at  last,  when  he  was  pro¬ 
ceeding  to  lay  a  second  whole  tribute  on  Asia, 
Hybreas,  speaking  on  behalf  of  the  cities,  took 
courage,  and  told  him  broadly,  but  aptly 
enough  for  Antony’s  taste,  “if  you  can  take 
two  yearly  tributes,  you  can  doubtless  give  us 
a  couple  of  summers  and  a  double  harvest 
time”;  and  put  it  to  him  in  the  plainest  and 
boldest  way,  that  Asia  had  raised  two  hundred 
thousand  talents  for  his  service:  “If  this  has  not 
been  paid  to  you,  ask  your  collectors  for  it;  if 
it  has,  and  is  all  gone,  we  are  ruined  men.” 

These  words  touched  Antony  to  the  quick, 
who  was  simply  ignorant  of  most  things  that 
were  done  in  his  name;  not  that  he  was  so  in¬ 
dolent,  as  he  was  prone  to  trust  frankly  in  all 
about  him.  For  there  was  much  simplicity  in 
his  character;  he  was  slow  to  see  his  faults,  but 
when  he  did  see  them,  was  extremely  repen¬ 
tant,  and  ready  to  ask  pardon  of  those  he  had 
injured;  prodigal  in  his  acts  of  reparation,  and 
severe  in  his  punishments,  but  his  generosity 
was  much  more  extravagant  than  his  severity; 
his  raillery  was  sharp  and  insulting,  but  the 
edge  of  it  was  taken  off  by  his  readiness  to  sub¬ 
mit  to  any  kind  of  repartee;  for  he  was  as  well 


contented  to  be  rallied,  as  he  was  pleased  to 
rally  others.  And  this  freedom  of  speech  was, 
indeed,  the  cause  of  many  of  his  disasters.  He 
never  imagined  those  who  used  so  much  lib¬ 
erty  in  their  mirth  would  flatter  or  deceive  him 
in  business  of  consequence,  not  knowing  how 
common  it  is  with  parasites  to  mix  their  flat¬ 
tery  with  boldness,  as  confectioners  do  their 
sweetmeats  with  something  biting,  to  prevent 
the  sense  of  satiety.  Their  freedoms  and  im¬ 
pertinences  at  table  were  designed  expressly  to 
give  to  their  obsequiousness  in  council  the  air 
of  being  not  complaisance,  but  conviction. 

Such  being  his  temper,  the  last  and  crown¬ 
ing  mischief  that  could  befall  him  came  in  the 
love  of  Cleopatra,  to  awaken  and  kindle  to 
fury  passions  that  as  yet  lay  still  and  dormant 
in  his  nature,  and  to  stifle  and  finely  corrupt 
any  elements  that  yet  made  resistance  in  him 
of  goodness  and  a  sound  judgment.  He  fell 
into  the  snare  thus.  When  making  preparation 
for  the  Parthian  war,  he  sent  to  command  her 
to  make  her  personal  appearance  in  Cilicia,  to 
answer  an  accusation,  that  she  had  given  great 
assistance,  in  the  late  wars,  to  Cassius.  Dellius, 
who  was  sent  on  this  message,  had  no  sooner 
seen  her  face,  and  remarked  her  adroitness 
and  subtlety  in  speech,  but  he  felt  convinced 
that  Antony  would  not  so  much  as  think  of 
giving  any  molestation  to  a  woman  like  this; 
on  the  contrary,  she  would  be  the  first  in  fav¬ 
our  with  him.  So  he  set  himself  at  once  to  pay 
his  court  to  the  Egyptian,  and  gave  her  his  ad¬ 
vice,  “to  go,”  in  the  Homeric  style,  to  Cilicia, 
“in  her  best  attire,”  and  bade  her  fear  nothing 
from  Antony,  the  gentlest  and  kindest  of  sol¬ 
diers. 

She  had  some  faith  in  the  words  of  Dellius, 
but  more  in  her  own  attractions;  which,  hav¬ 
ing  formerly  recommended  her  to  Caesar  and 
the  young  Cnaeus  Pompey,  she  did  not  doubt 
might  prove  yet  more  successful  with  Antony. 
Their  acquaintance  was  with  her  when  a  girl, 
young  and  ignorant  of  the  world,  but  she  was 
to  meet  Antony  in  the  time  of  life  when  wo¬ 
men’s  beauty  is  most  splendid,  and  their  intel¬ 
lects  are  in  full  maturity.  She  made  great  prep¬ 
arations  for  her  journey,  of  money,  gifts,  and 
ornaments  of  value,  such  as  so  wealthy  a  king¬ 
dom  might  afford,  but  she  brought  with  her 
her  surest  hopes  in  her  own  magic  arts  and 
charms. 

She  received  several  letters,  both  from  An¬ 
tony  and  from  his  friends,  to  summon  her,  but 
she  took  no  account  of  these  orders;  and  at  last, 
as  if  in  mockery  of  them,  she  came  sailing  up 


t 

s 

a 

c 

a 

t 

n 

S' 

tl 

(i 

V 

tl 

tl 

q 

a! 

w 

w 

IT 

SI 

to 

at 

fo 

ici 

m 

su 

a 

iti 

SOI 

spi 

k 

suj 

we 

foi 

wa 

the 

ant 

tha 

vci 

rejt 

one 

sen 

f 

itse. 

pan 

wit] 

her 

hie; 

the 

acte 

som 

lytc 

lie 

Pass 


ANTONY 

the  river  Cydnus,  in  a  barge  with  gilded  stem 
and  outspread  sails  of  purple,  while  oars  of 
silver  beat  time  to  the  music  of  flutes  and  fifes 
and  harps.  She  herself  lay  all  along  under  a 
.  canopy  of  cloth  of  gold,  dressed  as  Venus  in 
a  picture,  and  beautiful  young  boys,  like  paint¬ 
ed  Cupids,  stood  on  each  side  to  fan  her.  Her 
i  maids  were  dressed  like  sea  nymphs  and  graces, 

:  some  steering  at  the  rudder,  some  working  at 
the  ropes.  The  perfumes  diffused  themselves 
from  the  vessel  to  the  shore,  which  was  covered 
with  multitudes,  part  following  the  galley  up 
the  river  on  either  bank,  part  running  out  of 
the  city  to  see  the  sight.  The  market-place  was 
quite  emptied,  and  Antony  at  last  was  left 
alone  sitting  upon  the  tribunal;  while  the  word 
went  through  all  the  multitude,  that  Venus 
was  come  to  feast  with  Bacchus,  for  the  com¬ 
mon  good  of  Asia. 

On  her  arrival,  Antony  sent  to  invite  her  to 
supper.  She  thought  it  fitter  he  should  come 
to  her;  so,  willing  to  show  his  good-humour 
and  courtesy,  he  complied,  and  went.  He 
found  the  preparations  to  receive  him  magnif¬ 
icent  beyond  expression,  but  nothing  so  ad¬ 
mirable  as  the  great  number  of  lights;  for  on  a 
sudden  there  was  let  down  altogether  so  great 
a  number  of  branches  with  lights  in  them  so 
ingeniously  disposed,  some  in  squares,  and 
some  in  circles,  that  the  whole  thing  was  a 
spectacle  that  has  seldom  been  equalled  for 
beauty.  The  next  day,  Antony  invited  her  to 
supper,  and  was  very  desirous  to  outdo  her  as 
well  in  magnificence  as  contrivance;  but  he 
found  he  was  altogether  beaten  in  both,  and 
was  so  well  convinced  of  it  that  he  was  himself 
the  first  to  jest  and  mock  at  his  poverty  of  wit 
and  his  rustic  awkwardness.  She,  perceiving 
that  his  raillery  was  broad  and  gross,  and  sa¬ 
voured  more  of  the  soldier  than  the  courtier, 
rejoined  in  the  same  taste,  and  fell  into  it  at 
once,  without  any  sort  of  reluctance  or  re¬ 
serve. 

For  her  actual  beauty,  it  is  said,  was  not  in 
itself  so  remarkable  that  none  could  be  com¬ 
pared  with  her,  or  that  no  one  could  see  her 
without  being  struck  by  it,  but  the  contact  of 
her  presence,  if  you  lived  with  her,  was  irresisti¬ 
ble;  the  attraction  of  her  person,  joining  with 
the  charm  of  her  conversation,  and  the  char¬ 
acter  that  attended  all  she  said  or  did,  was 
something  bewitching.  It  was  a  pleasure  mere¬ 
ly  to  hear  the  sound  of  her  voice,  with  which, 
like  an  instrument  of  many  strings,  she  could 
pass  from  one  language  to  another;  so  that 
there  were  few  of  the  barbarian  nations  that 


757 

she  answered  by  an  interpreter;  to  most  oi 
them  she  spoke  herself,  as  to  the  ^Ethiopians, 
Troglodytes,  Hebrews,  Arabians,  Syrians, 
Medes,  Parthians,  and  many  others,  whose  lan¬ 
guage  she  had  learnt;  which  was  all  the  more 
surprising  because  most  of  the  kings,  her  pred¬ 
ecessors,  scarcely  gave  themselves  the  trouble 
to  acquire  the  Egyptian  tongue,  and  several 
of  them  quite  abandoned  the  Macedonian. 

Antony  was  so  captivated  by  her  that,  while 
Fulvia,  his  wife,  maintained  his  quarrels  in 
Rome  against  Caesar  by  actual  force  of  arms, 
and  the  Parthian  troops,  commanded  by  Labi- 
enus  (the  king’s  generals  having  made  him 
commander-in-chief),  were  assembled  in  Meso¬ 
potamia,  and  ready  to  enter  Syria,  he  could 
yet  suffer  himself  to  be  carried  away  by  her  to 
Alexandria,  there  to  keep  holiday,  like  a  boy, 
in  play  and  diversion,  squandering  and  fool¬ 
ing  away  in  enjoyments  that  most  costly,  as 
Antiphon  says,  of  all  valuables,  time.  They  had 
a  sort  of  company,  to  which  they  gave  a  partic¬ 
ular  name,  calling  it  that  of  the  Inimitable 
Livers.  The  members  entertained  one  another 
daily  in  turn,  with  an  extravagance  of  expendi¬ 
ture  beyond  measure  or  belief. 

Philotas,  a  physician  of  Amphissa,  who  was 
at  that  time  a  student  of  medicine  in  Alexan¬ 
dria,  used  to  tell  my  grandfather  Lamprias 
that,  having  some  acquaintance  with  one  of 
the  royal  cooks,  he  was  invited  by  him,  being 
a  young  man,  to  come  and  see  the  sumptuous 
preparations  for  supper.  So  he  was  taken  into 
the  kitchen,  where  he  admired  the  prodigious 
variety  of  all  things;  but  particularly,  seeing 
eight  wild  boars  roasting  whole,  says  he,  “Sure¬ 
ly  you  have  a  great  number  of  guests.”  The 
cook  laughed  at  his  simplicity,  and  told  him 
there  were  not  above  twelve  to  sup,  but  that 
every  dish  was  to  be  served  up  just  roasted  to  a 
turn,  and  if  anything  was  but  one  minute  ill- 
timed,  it  was  spoiled.  “And,”  said  he,  “maybe 
Antony  will  sup  just  now,  maybe  not  this  hour, 
maybe  he  will  call  for  wine,  or  begin  to  talk, 
and  will  put  it  off.  So  that,”  he  continued,  “it 
is  not  one,  but  many  suppers  must  be  had  in 
readiness,  as  it  is  impossible  to  guess  at  his 
hour.” 

This  was  Philotas’s  story;  who  related  be¬ 
sides,  that  he  afterwards  came  to  be  one  of  the 
medical  attendants  of  Antony’s  eldest  son  by 
Fulvia,  and  used  to  be  invited  pretty  often, 
among  other  companions,  to  his  table,  when 
he  was  not  supping  with  his  father.  One  day 
another  physician  had  talked  loudly,  and  given 
great  disturbance  to  the  company,  whose 


758 

mouth  Philotas  stopped  with  this  sophistical 
syllogism:  “In  some  states  of  fever  the  patient 
should  take  cold  water;  every  one  who  has  a 
fever  is  in  some  state  of  fever;  therefore,  in  a 
fever  cold  water  should  always  be  taken.” 
The  man  was  quite  struck  dumb,  and  An¬ 
tony’s  son,  very  much  pleased,  laughed  aloud, 
and  said,  “Philotas,  I  make  you  a  present  of 
all  you  see  there,”  pointing  to  a  sideboard  cov¬ 
ered  with  plate. 

Philotas  thanked  him  much,  but  was  far 
enough  from  ever  imagining  that  a  boy  of  his 
age  could  dispose  of  things  of  that  value.  Soon 
after,  however,  the  plate  was  all  brought  to 
him,  and  he  was  desired  to  set  his  mark  upon 
it;  and  when  he  put  it  away  from  him,  and 
was  afraid  to  accept  the  present,  “What  ails  the 
man?”  said  he  that  brought  it.  “Do  you  know 
that  he  who  gives  you  this  is  Antony’s  son, 
who  is  free  to  give  it,  if  it  were  all  gold?  But 
if  you  will  be  advised  by  me,  I  would  counsel 
you  to  accept  of  the  value  in  money  from  us; 
for  there  may  be  amongst  the  rest  some  an¬ 
tique  or  famous  piece  of  workmanship,  which 
Antony  would  be  sorry  to  part  with.” 

These  anecdotes,  my  grandfather  told  us, 
Philotas  used  frequently  to  relate. 

To  return  to  Cleopatra;  Plato  admits  four 
sorts  of  flattery,  but  she  had  a  thousand.  Were 
Antony  serious  or  disposed  to  mirth,  she  had 
at  any  moment  some  new  delight  or  charm  to 
meet  his  wishes;  at  every  turn  she  was  upon 
him,  and  let  him  escape  her  neither  by  day  nor 
by  night.  She  played  at  dice  with  him,  drank 
with  him,  hunted  with  him;  and  when  he 
exercised  in  arms,  she  was  there  to  see.  At 
night  she  would  go  rambling  with  him  to  dis¬ 
turb  and  torment  people  at  their  doors  and 
windows,  dressed  like  a  servant-woman,  for 
Antony  also  went  in  servant’s  disguise,  and 
from  these  expeditions  he  often  came  home 
very  scurvily  answered,  and  sometimes  even 
beaten  severely,  though  most  people  guessed 
who  it  was.  However,  the  Alexandrians  in  gen¬ 
eral  liked  it  all  well  enough,  and  joined  good- 
humouredly  and  kindly  in  his  frolic  and  play, 
saying  they  were  much  obliged  to  Antony  for 
acting  his  tragic  parts  at  Rome,  and  keeping 
his  comedy  for  them. 

It  would  be  trifling  without  end  to  be  partic¬ 
ular  in  his  follies,  but  his  fishing  must  not  be 
forgotten.  He  went  out  one  day  to  angle  with 
Cleopatra,  and,  being  so  unfortunate  as  to 
catch  nothing  in  the  presence  of  his  mistress, 
he  gave  secret  orders  to  the  fishermen  to  dive 
under  water,  and  put  fishes  that  had  been  al- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ready  taken  upon  his  hooks;  and  these  he  drew 
so  fast  that  the  Egyptian  perceived  it.  But, 
feigning  great  admiration,  she  told  everybody 
how  dexterous  Antony  was,  and  invited  them 
next  day  to  come  and  see  him  again.  So,  when 
a  number  of  them  had  come  on  board  the  fish¬ 
ing-boats,  as  soon  as  he  had  let  down  his  hook, 
one  of  her  servants  was  beforehand  with  his 
divers,  and  fixed  upon  his  hook  a  salted  fish 
from  Pontus.  Antony,  feeling  his  line  give, 
drew  up  the  prey,  and  when,  as  may  be  imag¬ 
ined,  great  laughter  ensued,  “Leave,”  said 
Cleopatra,  “the  fishing-rod,  general,  to  us  poor 
sovereigns  of  Pharos  and  Canopus;  your  game 
is  cities,  provinces,  and  kingdoms.” 

Whilst  he  was  thus  diverting  himself  and 
engaged  in  this  boy’s  play,  two  despatches  ar¬ 
rived;  one  from  Rome,  that  his  brother  Lu¬ 
cius  and  his  wife  Fulvia,  after  many  quarrels 
among  themselves,  had  joined  in  war  against 
Caesar,  and  having  lost  all,  had  fled  out  of  Italy;  , 
the  other  bringing  little  better  news,  that  Labi-  1 
enus,  at  the  head  of  the  Parthians,  was  over¬ 
running  Asia,  from  Euphrates  and  Syria  as 
far  as  Lydia  and  Ionia.  So,  scarcely  at  last 
rousing  himself  from  sleep,  and  shaking  off 
the  fumes  of  wine,  he  set  out  to  attack  the 
Parthians,  and  went  as  far  as  Phoenicia;  but, 
upon  the  receipt  of  lamentable  letters  from 
Fulvia,  turned  his  course  with  two  hundred  i 
ships  to  Italy.  And,  in  his  way,  receiving  such 
of  his  friends  as  fled  from  Italy,  he  was  given  to  ! 
understand  that  Fulvia  was  the  sole  cause  of 
the  war,  a  woman  of  a  restless  spirit  and  very 
bold,  and  withal  her  hopes  were  that  commo¬ 
tions  in  Italy  would  force  Antony  from  Cleo-  , 
patra. 

But  it  happened  that  Fulvia,  as  she  was  com¬ 
ing  to  meet  her  husband,  fell  sick  by  the  way, 
and  died  at  Sicyon,  so  that  an  accommodation 
was  the  more  easily  made.  For  when  he  reached 
Italy,  and  Caesar  showed  no  intention  of  laying 
anything  to  his  charge,  and  he  on  his  part 
shifted  the  blame  of  everything  on  Fulvia, 
those  that  were  friends  to  them  would  not  suf¬ 
fer  that  the  time  should  be  spent  in  looking 
narrowly  into  the  plea,  but  made  a  reconcilia¬ 
tion  first,  and  then  a  partition  of  the  empire  be¬ 
tween  them,  taking  as  their  boundary  the  Ioni¬ 
an  Sea,  the  eastern  provinces  falling  to  Antony, 
to  Caesar  the  western,  and  Africa  being  left  to 
Lepidus.  And  an  agreement  was  made  that 
every  one  in  their  turn,  as  they  thought  fit, 
should  make  their  friends  consuls,  when  they 
did  not  choose  to  take  the  office  themselves. 

These  terms  were  well  approved  of,  but  yet  pa 


ANTONY 

it  was  thought  some  closer  tie  would  be  desir¬ 
able;  and  for  this,  fortune  offered  occasion. 
Caesar  had  an  elder  sister,  not  of  the  whole 
blood,  for  Attia  was  his  mother’s  name,  hers 
Ancharia.  This  sister,  Octavia,  he  was  ex¬ 
tremely  attached  to,  as  indeed  she  was,  it  is 
said,  quite  a  wonder  of  a  woman.  Her  hus¬ 
band,  Caius  Marcellus,  had  died  not  long  be¬ 
fore,  and  Antony  was  now  a  widower  by  the 
death  of  Fulvia;  for,  though  he  did  not  dis¬ 
avow  the  passion  he  had  for  Cleopatra,  yet  he 
disowned  anything  of  marriage,  reason  as  yet, 
upon  this  point,  still  maintaining  the  debate 
against  the  charms  of  the  Egyptian.  Everybody 
concurred  in  promoting  this  new  alliance, 
fully  expecting  that  with  the  beauty,  honour, 
and  prudence  of  Octavia,  when  her  company 
should,  as  it  was  certain  it  would,  have  en¬ 
gaged  his  affections,  all  would  be  kept  in  the 
safe  and  happy  course  of  friendship.  So,  both 
parties  being  agreed,  they  went  to  Rome  to 
celebrate  the  nuptials,  the  senate  dispensing 
with  the  law  by  which  a  widow  was  not  per¬ 
mitted  to  marry  till  ten  months  after  the  death 
of  her  husband. 

Sextus  Pompeius  was  in  possession  of  Sicily, 
and  with  his  ships,  under  the  command  of 
Menas,  the  pirate,  and  Menecraites,  so  infested 
the  Italian  coast  that  no  vessels  durst  venture 
into  those  seas.  Sextus  had  behaved  with  much 
humanity  towards  Antony,  having  received  his 
mother  when  she  fled  with  Fulvia,  and  it  was 
therefore  judged  fit  that  he  also  should  be  re¬ 
ceived  into  the  peace.  They  met  near  the  prom¬ 
ontory  of  Misenum,  by  the  mole  of  the  port, 
Pompey  having  his  fleet  at  anchor  close  by,  and 
Antony  and  Caesar  their  troops  drawn  up  all 
along  the  shore.  There  it  was  concluded  that 
Sextus  should  quietly  enjoy  the  government 
of  Sicily  and  Sardinia,  he  conditioning  to  scour 
the  seas  of  all  pirates,  and  to  send  so  much  corn 
every  year  to  Rome. 

This  agreed  on,  they  invited  one  another  to 
supper,  and  by  lot  it  fell  to  Pompey’s  turn  to 
give  the  first  entertainment,  and  Antony,  ask¬ 
ing  where  it  was  to  be,  “There,”  said  he,  point¬ 
ing  to  the  admiral-galley,  a  ship  of  six  banks  of 
oars,  “that  is  the  only  house  that  Pompey  is 
heir  to  of  his  father’s.”  And  this  he  said,  re¬ 
flecting  upon  Antony,  who  was  then  in  posses¬ 
sion  of  his  father’s  house.  Having  fixed  the 
ship  on  her  anchors,  and  formed  a  bridgeway 
from  the  promontory  to  conduct  on  board  of 
her,  he  gave  them  a  cordial  welcome.  And 
when  they  began  to  grow  warm,  and  jests  were 
passing  freely  on  Antony  and  Cleopatra’s  loves, 


759 

Menas,  the  pirate,  whispered  Pompey,  in  the 
ear,  “Shall  I,”  said  he,  “cut  the  cables,  and 
make  you  master  not  of  Sicily  only  and  Sar¬ 
dinia,  but  of  the  whole  Roman  empire?”  Pom¬ 
pey,  having  considered  a  little  while,  returned 
him  answer,  “Menas,  this  might  have  been 
done  without  acquainting  me;  now  we  must 
rest  content;  I  do  not  break  my  word.”  And 
so,  having  been  entertained  by  the  other  two 
in  their  turns,  he  set  sail  for  Sicily. 

After  the  treaty  was  completed,  Antony  des¬ 
patched  Ventidius  into  Asia,  to  check  the  ad¬ 
vance  of  the  Parthians,  while  he,  as  a  compli¬ 
ment  to  Caesar,  accepted  the  office  of  priest  to 
the  deceased  Caesar.  And  in  any  state  affair 
and  matter  of  consequence,  they  both  behaved 
themselves  with  much  consideration  and 
friendliness  for  each  other.  But  it  annoyed 
Antony  that  in  all  their  amusements,  on  any 
trial  of  skill  or  fortune,  Caesar  should  be  con¬ 
stantly  victorious.  He  had  with  him  an  Egyp¬ 
tian  diviner,  one  of  those  who  calculate  nativi¬ 
ties,  who,  either  to  make  his  court  to  Cleopatra, 
or  that  by  the  rules  of  his  art  he  found  it  to  be 
so,  openly  declared  to  him  that  though  the  for¬ 
tune  that  attended  him  was  bright  and  glori¬ 
ous,  yet  it  was  overshadowed  by  Caesar’s;  and 
advised  him  to  keep  himself  as  far  distant  as 
he  could  from  that  young  man;  “for  your 
Genius,”  said  he,  “dreads  his;  when  absent 
from  him  yours  is  proud  and  brave,  but  in 
his  presence  unmanly  and  dejected.” 

Incidents  that  occurred  appeared  to  show 
that  the  Egyptian  spoke  truth.  For  whenever 
they  cast  lots  for  any  playful  purpose,  or  threw 
dice,  Antony  was  still  the  loser;  and  repeatedly, 
when  they  fought  game-cocks  or  quails,  Cae¬ 
sar’s  had  the  victory.  This  gave  Antony  a  se¬ 
cret  displeasure,  and  made  him  put  the  more 
confidence  in  the  skill  of  his  Egyptian.  So, 
leaving  the  management  of  his  home  affairs  to 
Caesar,  he  left  Italy,  and  took  Octavia,  who  had 
lately  borne  him  a  daughter,  along  with  him 
into  Greece. 

Here,  whilst  he  wintered  in  Athens,  he  re¬ 
ceived  the  first  news  of  Ventidius’s  successes 
over  the  Parthians,  of  his  having  defeated  them 
in  a  battle,  having  slain  Labienus  and  Pharna- 
pates,  the  best  general  their  king,  Hyrodes,  pos¬ 
sessed.  For  the  celebrating  of  which  he  made 
public  feast  through  Greece,  and  for  the  prizes 
which  were  contested  at  Athens  he  himself 
acted  as  steward,  and,  leaving  at  home  the  en¬ 
signs  that  are  carried  before  the  general,  he 
made  his  public  appearance  in  a  gown  and 
white  shoes,  with  the  steward’s  wands  march- 


760 

ing  before;  and  he  performed  his  duty  in  tak¬ 
ing  the  combatants  by  the  neck,  to  part  them, 
when  they  had  fought  enough. 

When  the  time  came  for  him  to  set  out  for 
the  war,  he  took  a  garland  from  the  sacred 
olive,  and,  in  obedience  to  some  oracle,  he  filled 
a  vessel  with  the  water  of  the  Clepsydra  to 
carry  along  with  him.  In  this  interval,  Pacorus, 
the  Parthian  king’s  son,  who  was  marching 
into  Syria  with  a  large  army,  was  met  by  Ven- 
tidius,  who  gave  him  battle  in  the  country  of 
Cyrrhestica,  slew  a  large  number  of  his  men, 
and  Pacorus  among  the  first.  This  victory  was 
one  of  the  most  renowned  achievements  of  the 
Romans,  and  fully  avenged  their  defeats  under 
Crassus,  the  Parthians  being  obliged,  after  the 
loss  of  three  battles  successively,  to  keep  them¬ 
selves  within  the  bounds  of  Media  and  Meso¬ 
potamia.  Ventidius  was  not  willing  to  push 
his  good  fortune  further,  for  fear  of  raising 
some  jealousy  in  Antony,  but  turning  his  arms 
against  those  that  had  quitted  the  Roman  in¬ 
terest,  he  reduced  them  to  their  former  obedi¬ 
ence. 

Among  the  rest,  he  besieged  Antiochus, 
King  of  Commagene,  in  the  city  of  Samo- 
sata,  who  made  an  offer  of  a  thousand  talents 
for  his  pardon,  and  a  promise  of  submission  to 
Antony’s  commands.  But  Ventidius  told  him 
that  he  must  send  to  Antony,  who  was  already 
on  his  march,  and  had  sent  word  to  Ventidius 
to  make  no  terms  with  Antiochus,  wishing 
that  at  any  rate  this  one  exploit  might  be  as¬ 
cribed  to  him,  and  that  people  might  not  think 
that  all  his  successes  were  won  by  his  lieuten¬ 
ants.  The  siege,  however,  was  long  protracted; 
for  when  those  within  found  their  offers  re¬ 
fused,  they  defended  themselves  stoutly,  till,  at 
last,  Antony,  finding  he  was  doing  nothing,  in 
shame  and  regret  for  having  refused  the  first 
offer,  was  glad  to  make  an  accommodation 
with  Antiochus  for  three  hundred  talents.  And, 
having  given  some  orders  for  the  affairs  of 
Syria,  he  returned  to  Athens;  and,  paying 
Ventidius  the  honours  he  well  deserved,  dis¬ 
missed  him  to  receive  his  triumph. 

He  is  the  only  man  that  has  ever  yet  tri¬ 
umphed  for  victories  obtained  over  the  Par¬ 
thians;  he  was  of  obscure  birth,  but,  by  means 
of  Antony’s  friendship,  obtained  an  opportu¬ 
nity  of  showing  his  capacity,  and  doing  great 
things;  and  his  making  such  glorious  use  of  it 
gave  new  credit  to  the  current  observation 
about  Caesar  and  Antony,  that  they  were  more 
fortunate  in  what  they  did  by  their  lieutenants 
than  in  their  own  persons.  For  Sossius,  also, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

had  great  success,  and  Canidius,  whom  he  left 
in  Armenia,  defeated  the  people  there,  and  also 
the  kings  of  the  Albanians  and  Iberians,  and 
marched  victorious  as  far  as  Caucasus,  by 
which  means  the  fame  of  Antony’s  arms  had 
become  great  among  the  barbarous  nations. 

He,  however,  once  more,  upon  some  unfa¬ 
vourable  stories,  taking  offence  against  Caesar, 
set  sail  with  three  hundred  ships  for  Italy,  and, 
being  refused  admittance  to  the  port  of  Brun-  « 
dusium,  made  for  Tarentum.  There  his  wife 
Octavia,  who  came  from  Greece  with  him,  ob¬ 
tained  leave  to  visit  her  brother,  she  being  then  , 
great  with  child,  having  already  borne  her  hus¬ 
band  a  second  daughter;  and  as  she  was  on 
her  way  she  met  Caesar,  with  his  two  friends  1 
Agrippa  and  Maecenas,  and,  taking  these  two 
aside,  with  great  entreaties  and  lamentations 
she  told  them,  that  of  the  most  fortunate 
woman  upon  earth,  she  was  in  danger  of  be¬ 
coming  the  most  unhappy;  for  as  yet  every 
one’s  eyes  were  fixed  upon  her  as  the  wife  and 
sister  of  the  two  great  commanders,  but,  if 
rash  counsels  should  prevail,  and  war  ensue,  “I 
shall  be  miserable,”  said  she,  “without  redress; 
for  on  what  side  soever  victory  falls,  I  shall  be 
sure  to  be  a  loser.” 

Caesar  was  overcome  by  these  entreaties,  and 
advanced  in  a  peaceable  temper  to  Tarentum, 
where  those  that  were  present  beheld  a  most 
stately  spectacle;  a  vast  army  drawn  up  by  the 
shore,  and  as  great  a  fleet  in  the  harbour,  all 
without  the  occurrence  of  any  act  of  hostility; 
nothing  but  the  salutations  of  friends,  and  < 
other  expressions  of  joy  and  kindness,  passing 
from  one  armament  to  the  other.  Antony  first 
entertained  Caesar,  this  also  being  a  concession 
on  Caesar’s  part  to  his  sister;  and  when  at  length 
an  agreement  was  made  between  them,  that 
Caesar  should  give  Antony  two  of  his  legions 
to  serve  him  in  the  Parthian  war,  and  that  An¬ 
tony  should  in  return  leave  with  him  a  hun¬ 
dred  armed  galleys,  Octavia  further  obtained 
of  her  husband,  besides  this,  twenty  light  ships 
for  her  brother,  and  of  her  brother,  a  thousand 
foot  for  her  husband.  So,  having  parted  good 
friends,  Caesar  went  immediately  to  make  war  l 
with  Pompey  to  conquer  Sicily.  And  Antony, 
leaving  in  Caesar’s  charge  his  wife  and  chil¬ 
dren,  and  his  children  by  his  former  wife  Ful- 
via,  set  sail  for  Asia. 

But  the  mischief  that  thus  long  had  lain  still, 
the  passion  for  Cleopatra,  which  better  thoughts 
had  seemed  to  have  lulled  and  charmed  into 
oblivion,  upon  his  approach  to  Syria  gathered 
strength  again,  and  broke  out  into  a  flame. 


ANTONY 

And,  in  fine,  like  Plato’s  restive  and  rebellious 
horse  of  the  human  soul,  flinging  off  all  good 
and  wholesome  counsel,  and  breaking  fairly 
loose,  he  sent  Fonteius  Capito  to  bring  Cleo¬ 
patra  into  Syria.  To  whom  at  her  arrival  he 
made  no  small  or  trifling  present,  Phoenicia, 
Coele-Syria,  Cyprus,  great  part  of  Cilicia,  that 
side  of  Judaea  which  produces  balm,  that  part 
of  Arabia — where  the  Nabathaeans  extend  to 
the  outer  sea;  profuse  gifts  which  much  dis¬ 
pleased  the  Romans.  For  although  he  had  in¬ 
vested  several  private  persons  in  great  govern¬ 
ments  and  kingdoms,  and  bereaved  many 
kings  of  theirs,  as  Antigonus  of  Judaea,  whose 
head  he  caused  to  be  struck  off  (the  first  ex¬ 
ample  of  that  punishment  being  inflicted  on  a 
king),  yet  nothing  stung  the  Romans  like  the 
shame  of  these  honours  paid  to  Cleopatra. 
Their  dissatisfaction  was  augmented  also  by 
his  acknowledging  as  his  own  the  twin  chil¬ 
dren  he  had  by  her,  giving  them  the  name  of 
Alexander  and  Cleopatra,  and  adding,  as 
their  surnames,  the  titles  of  Sun  and  Moon. 

But  he,  who  knew  how  to  put  a  good  colour 
on  the  most  dishonest  action,  would  say  that 
the  greatness  of  the  Roman  empire  consisted 
more  in  giving  than  in  taking  kingdoms,  and 
that  the  way  to  carry  noble  blood  through  the 
world  was  by  begetting  in  every  place  a  new 
line  and  series  of  kings;  his  own  ancestor  had 
thus  been  born  of  Hercules:  Hercules  had  not 
limited  his  hopes  of  progeny  to  a  single  womb, 
nor  feared  any  law  like  Solon’s  or  any  audit  of 
procreation,  but  had  freely  let  nature  take  her 
will  in  the  foundation  and  first  commencement 
of  many  families. 

After  Phraates  had  killed  his  father,  Hy- 
rodes,  and  taken  possession  of  his  kingdom, 
many  of  the  Parthians  left  their  country; 
among  the  rest  Monaeses,  a  man  of  great  dis¬ 
tinction  and  authority,  sought  refuge  with 
Antony,  who,  looking  on  his  case  as  similar  to 
that  of  Themistocles,  and  likening  his  own 
opulence  and  magnanimity  to  those  of  the  for¬ 
mer  Persian  kings,  gave  him  three  cities,  La¬ 
rissa,  Arethusa,  and  Hierapolis,  which  was  for¬ 
merly  called  Bambyce.  But  when  the  King  of 
Parthia  soon  recalled  him,  giving  him  his  word 
and  honour  for  his  safety,  Antony  was  not  un¬ 
willing  to  give  him  leave  to  return,  hoping 
thereby  to  surprise  Phraates,  who  would  be¬ 
lieve  that  peace  would  continue;  for  he  only 
made  the  demand  of  him  that  he  should  send 
back  the  Roman  ensigns  which  were  taken 
when  Crassus  was  slain,  and  the  prisoners  that 
remained  yet  alive. 


761 

This  done,  he  sent  Cleopatra  to  Egypt,  and 
marched  through  Arabia  and  Armenia;  and, 
when  his  forces  came  together,  and  were  joined 
by  those  of  his  confederate  kings  (of  whom 
there  were  very  many,  and  the  most  consider¬ 
able,  Artavasdes,  King  of  Armenia,  who  came 
at  the  head  of  six  thousand  horse  and  seven 
thousand  foot),  he  made  a  general  muster. 
There  appeared  sixty  thousand  Roman  foot, 
ten  thousand  horse,  Spaniards  and  Gauls,  who 
counted  as  Romans;  and,  of  other  nations, 
horse  and  foot  thirty  thousand.  And  these  great 
preparations,  that  put  the  Indians  beyond  Bac- 
tria  into  alarm,  and  made  all  Asia  shake,  were 
all  we  are  told  rendered  useless  to  him  because 
of  Cleopatra.  For,  in  order  to  pass  the  winter 
with  her,  the  war  was  pushed  on  before  its  due 
time;  and  all  he  did  was  done  without  perfect 
consideration,  as  by  a  man  who  had  no  power 
of  control  over  his  faculties,  who,  under  the 
effect  of  some  drug  or  magic,  was  still  looking 
back  elsewhere,  and  whose  object  was  much 
more  to  hasten  his  return  than  to  conquer  his 
enemies. 

For,  first  of  all,  when  he  should  have  taken 
up  his  winter-quarters  in  Armenia,  to  refresh 
his  men,  who  were  tired  with  long  marches, 
having  come  at  least  eight  thousand  furlongs, 
and  then  having  taken  the  advantage  in  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  spring  to  invade  Media,  before 
the  Parthians  were  out  of  winter-quarters,  he 
had  not  patience  to  expect  his  time,  but 
marched  into  the  province  of  Atropatene,  leav¬ 
ing  Armenia  on  the  left  hand,  and  laid  waste 
all  that  country.  Secondly,  his  haste  was  so 
great  that  he  left  behind  the  engines  absolutely 
required  for  any  siege,  which  followed  the 
camp  in  three  hundred  waggons,  and,  among 
the  rest,  a  ram  eighty  feet  long;  none  of  which 
was  it  possible,  if  lost  or  damaged,  to  repair  or 
to  make  the  like,  as  the  provinces  of  the  Upper 
Asia  produce  no  trees  long  or  hard  enough  for 
such  uses.  Nevertheless,  he  left  them  all  be¬ 
hind,  as  a  mere  impediment  to  his  speed,  in 
the  charge  of  a  detachment  under  the  com¬ 
mand  of  Statianus,  the  waggon  officer. 

He  himself  laid  siege  to  Phraata,  a  principal 
city  of  the  King  of  Media,  wherein  were  that 
king’s  wife  and  children.  And  when  actual 
need  proved  the  greatness  of  his  error,  in  leav¬ 
ing  the  siege-train  behind  him,  he  had  nothing 
for  it  but  to  come  up  and  raise  a  mound  against 
the  walls,  with  infinite  labour  and  great  loss  of 
time.  Meantime  Phraates,  coming  down  with 
a  large  army,  and  hearing  that  the  waggons 
were  left  behind  with  the  battering  engines, 


762 

sent  a  strong  party  of  horse,  by  which  Statianus 
was  surprised,  he  himself  and  ten  thousand  of 
his  men  slain,  the  engines  all  broken  in  pieces, 
many  taken  prisoners,  and  among  the  rest 
King  Polemon. 

This  great  miscarriage  in  the  opening  of  the 
campaign  much  discouraged  Antony’s  army, 
and  Artavasdes,  King  of  Armenia,  deciding 
that  the  Roman  prospects  were  bad,  withdrew 
with  all  his  forces  from  the  camp,  although  he 
had  been  the  chief  promoter  of  the  war.  The 
Parthians,  encouraged  by  their  success,  came 
up  to  the  Romans  at  the  siege,  and  gave  them 
many  affronts;  upon  which  Antony,  fearing 
that  the  despondency  and  alarm  of  his  soldiers 
would  only  grow  worse  if  he  let  them  lie  idle, 
taking  all  the  horse,  ten  legions,  and  three 
praetorian  cohorts  of  heavy  infantry,  resolved 
to  go  out  and  forage,  designing  by  this  means 
to  draw  the  enemy  with  more  advantage  to  a 
battle.  To  effect  this,  he  marched  a  day’s  jour¬ 
ney  from  his  camp,  and  finding  the  Parthians 
hovering  about,  in  readiness  to  attack  him 
while  he  was  in  motion,  he  gave  orders  for  the 
signal  of  battle  to  be  hung  out  in  the  encamp¬ 
ment,  but,  at  the  same  time,  pulled  down  the 
tents,  as  if  he  meant  not  to  fight,  but  to  lead 
his  men  home  again;  and  so  he  proceeded  to 
lead  them  past  the  enemy,  who  were  drawn  up 
in  a  half-moon,  his  orders  being  that  the  horse 
should  charge  as  soon  as  the  legions  were  come 
up  near  enough  to  second  them. 

The  Parthians,  standing  still  while  the  Ro¬ 
mans  marched  by  them,  were  in  great  admira¬ 
tion  of  their  army,  and  of  the  exact  discipline  it 
observed,  rank  after  rank  passing  on  at  equal 
distances  in  perfect  order  and  silence,  their 
pikes  all  ready  in  their  hands.  But  when  the 
signal  was  given,  and  the  horse  turned  short 
upon  the  Parthians,  and  with  loud  cries 
charged  them,  they  bravely  received  them, 
though  they  were  at  once  too  near  for  bowshot; 
but  the  legions  coming  up  with  loud  shouts 
and  rattling  of  their  arms  so  frightened  their 
horses  and  indeed  the  men  themselves,  that 
they  kept  their  ground  no  longer.  Antony 
pressed  them  hard,  in  great  hopes  that  this  vic¬ 
tory  should  put  an  end  to  the  war;  the  foot  had 
them  in  pursuit  for  fifty  furlongs,  and  the 
horse  for  thrice  that  distance,  and  yet,  the  ad¬ 
vantage  summed  up,  they  had  but  thirty  pris¬ 
oners,  and  there  were  but  fourscore  slain.  So 
that  they  were  all  filled  with  dejection  and  dis¬ 
couragement,  to  consider  that  when  they  were 
victorious,  their  advantages  were  so  small,  and 
that  when  they  were  beaten,  they  lost  so  great 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

a  number  of  men  as  they  had  done  when  the 
carriages  were  taken. 

The  next  day,  having  put  the  baggage  in 
order,  they  marched  back  to  the  camp  before 
Phraata,  in  the  way  meeting  with  some  scat¬ 
tering  troops  of  the  enemy,  and,  as  they 
marched  further,  with  greater  parties,  at  length 
with  the  body  of  the  enemy’s  army,  fresh  and 
in  good  order,  who  defied  them  to  battle,  and 
charged  them  on  every  side,  and  it  was  not 
without  great  difficulty  that  they  reached  the 
camp.  There  Antony,  finding  that  his  men 
had  in  a  panic  deserted  the  defence  of  the 
mound,  upon  a  sally  of  the  Medes,  resolved  to 
proceed  against  them  by  decimation,  as  it  is 
called,  which  is  done  by  dividing  the  soldiers 
into  tens,  and,  out  of  every  ten,  putting  one  to 
death,  as  it  happens  by  lot.  The  rest  he  gave 
orders  should  have,  instead  of  wheat,  their  ra¬ 
tions  of  corn  in  barley. 

The  war  was  now  become  grievous  to  both 
parties,  and  the  prospect  of  its  continuance  yet 
more  fearful  to  Antony,  in  respect  that  he  was 
threatened  with  famine;  for  he  could  no  longer 
forage  without  wounds  and  slaughter.  And 
Phraates,  on  the  other  side,  was  full  of  appre¬ 
hension  that  if  the  Romans  were  to  persist  in 
carrying  on  the  siege,  the  autumnal  equinox 
being  past  and  the  air  already  closing  in  for 
cold,  he  should  be  deserted  by  his  soldiers,  who 
would  suffer  anything  rather  than  wintering  in 
open  field.  To  prevent  which,  he  had  recourse 
to  the  following  deceit:  he  gave  orders  to  those 
of  his  men  who  had  made  most  acquaintance 
among  the  Roman  soldiers,  not  to  pursue  too 
close  when  they  met  them  foraging,  but  to  suf¬ 
fer  them  to  carry  off  some  provision;  moreover, 
that  they  should  praise  their  valour,  and  de¬ 
clare  that  it  was  not  without  just  reason  that 
their  king  looked  upon  the  Romans  as  the 
bravest  men  in  the  world. 

This  done,  upon  further  opportunity,  they 
rode  nearer  in,  and,  drawing  up  their  horses 
by  the  men,  began  to  revile  Antony  for  his  ob¬ 
stinacy;  that  whereas  Phraates  desired  nothing 
more  than  peace,  and  an  occasion  to  show  how 
ready  he  was  to  save  the  lives  of  so  many  brave 
soldiers,  he,  on  the  contrary,  gave  no  opening 
to  any  friendly  offers,  but  sat  awaiting  the  ar¬ 
rival  of  the  two  fiercest  and  worst  enemies, 
winter  and  famine,  from  whom  it  would  be 
hard  for  them  to  make  their  escape,  even  with 
all  the  good-will  of  the  Parthians  to  help  them. 
Antony,  having  these  reports  from  many 
hands,  began  to  indulge  the  hope;  neverthe¬ 
less,  he  would  not  send  any  message  to  the 


ANTONY 

Parthian  till  he  had  put  the  question  to  these 
friendly  talkers,  whether  what  they  said  was 
said  by  order  of  their  king.  Receiving  answer 
that  it  was,  together  with  new  encouragement 
to  believe  them,  he  sent  some  of  his  friends  to 
demand  once  more  the  standards  and  prison¬ 
ers,  lest  if  he  should  ask  nothing,  he  might  be 
supposed  to  be  too  thankful  to  have  leave  to 
retreat  in  quiet. 

The  Parthian  king  made  answer  that,  as  for 
the  standards  and  prisoners,  he  need  not 
trouble  himself;  but  if  he  thought  fit  to  re¬ 
treat,  he  might  do  it  when  he  pleased,  in  peace 
and  safety.  Some  few  days,  therefore,  being 
spent  in  collecting  the  baggage,  he  set  out  upon 
his  march.  On  which  occasion,  though  there 
was  no  man  of  his  time  like  him  for  addressing 
a  multitude,  or  for  carrying  soldiers  with  him 
by  the  force  of  words,  out  of  shame  and  sadness 
he  could  not  find  in  his  heart  to  speak  himself 
but  employed  Domitius  Amobarbus.  And  some 
of  the  soldiers  resented  it,  as  an  undervaluing 
of  them;  but  the  greater  number  saw  the  true 
cause,  and  pitied  it,  and  thought  it  rather  a  rea¬ 
son  why  they  on  their  side  should  treat  their 
general  with  more  respect  and  obedience  than 
ordinary. 

Antony  had  resolved  to  return  by  the  same 
way  he  came,  which  was  through  a  level  coun¬ 
try  clear  of  all  trees;  but  a  certain  Mardian 
came  to  him  (one  that  was  very  conversant 
with  the  manners  of  the  Parthians,  and  whose 
fidelity  to  the  Romans  had  been  tried  at  the  bat¬ 
tle  where  the  machines  were  lost),  and  advised 
him  to  keep  the  mountains  close  on  his  right 
hand,  and  not  to  expose  his  men,  heavily 
armed,  in  a  broad,  open,  riding  country,  to  the 
attacks  of  a  numerous  army  of  light  horse  and 
archers;  that  Phraates  with  fair  promises  had 
persuaded  him  from  the  siege  on  purpose  that 
he  might  with  more  ease  cut  him  off  in  his  re¬ 
treat;  but  if  so  he  pleased,  he  would  conduct 
him  by  a  nearer  route,  on  which,  moreover,  he 
should  find  the  necessaries  for  his  army  in 
greater  abundance.  Antony  upon  this  began 
to  consider  what  was  best  to  be  done;  he  was 
unwilling  to  seem  to  have  any  mistrust  of  the 
Parthians  after  their  treaty;  but,  holding  it  to 
be  really  best  to  march  his  army  the  shorter 
and  more  inhabited  way,  he  demanded  of  the 
Mardian  some  assurance  of  his  faith,  who  of¬ 
fered  himself  to  be  bound  until  the  army  came 
safe  into  Armenia. 

Two  days  he  conducted  the  army  bound, 
and,  on  the  third,  when  Antony  had  given  up 
all  thought  of  the  enemy,  and  was  marching 


763 

at  his  ease  in  no  very  good  order,  the  Mardian, 
perceiving  the  bank  of  the  river  broken  down, 
and  the  water  let  out  and  overflowing  the  road 
by  which  they  were  to  pass,  saw  at  once  that 
this  was  the  handiwork  of  the  Parthians,  done 
out  of  mischief,  and  to  hinder  their  march;  so 
he  advised  Antony  to  be  upon  his  guard,  for 
that  the  enemy  was  nigh  at  hand.  And  no 
sooner  had  he  begun  to  put  his  men  in  order, 
disposing  the  slingers  and  dart-men  in  con¬ 
venient  intervals  for  sallying  out,  but  the  Par¬ 
thians  came  pouring  in  on  all  sides,  fully  ex¬ 
pecting  to  encompass  them,  and  throw  the 
whole  army  into  disorder.  They  were  at  once 
attacked  by  the  light  troops,  whom  they  galled 
a  good  deal  with  their  arrows;  but  being  them¬ 
selves  as  warmly  entertained  with  the  slings 
and  darts,  and  many  wounded,  they  made  their 
retreat.  Soon  after,  rallying  up  afresh,  they 
were  beat  back  by  a  battalion  of  Gallic  horse, 
and  appeared  no  more  that  day. 

By  their  manner  of  attack  Antony,  seeing 
what  to  do,  not  only  placed  the  slings  and  darts 
as  a  rear  guard,  but  also  lined  both  flanks  with 
them,  and  so  marched  in  a  square  battle,  giv¬ 
ing  order  to  the  horse  to  charge  and  beat  off 
the  enemy,  but  not  to  follow  them  far  as  they 
retired.  So  that  the  Parthians,  not  doing  more 
mischief  for  the  four  ensuing  days  than  they 
received,  began  to  abate  in  their  zeal,  and,  com¬ 
plaining  that  the  winter  season  was  much  ad¬ 
vanced,  pressed  for  returning  home. 

But,  on  the  fifth  day,  Flavius  Gallus,  a  brave 
and  active  officer,  who  had  a  considerable  com¬ 
mand  in  the  army,  came  to  Antony,  desiring  of 
him  some  light  infantry  out  of  the  rear,  and 
some  horse  out  of  the  front,  with  which  he 
would  undertake  to  do  some  considerable 
service.  Which  when  he  had  obtained,  he  beat 
the  enemy  back,  not  withdrawing,  as  was 
usual,  at  the  same  time,  and  retreating  upon 
the  mass  of  the  heavy  infantry,  but  maintain¬ 
ing  his  own  ground,  and  engaging  boldly.  The 
officers  who  commanded  in  the  rear,  perceiv¬ 
ing  how  far  he  was  getting  from  the  body  of 
the  army,  sent  to  warn  him  back,  but  he  took 
no  notice  of  them. 

It  is  said  that  Titius  the  quaestor  snatched 
the  standards  and  turned  them  round,  up¬ 
braiding  Gallus  with  thus  leading  so  many 
brave  men  to  destruction.  But  when  he  on  the 
other  side  reviled  him  again,  and  commanded 
the  men  that  were  about  him  to  stand  firm, 
Titius  made  his  retreat,  and  Gallus,  charging 
the  enemies  in  the  front,  was  encompassed  by  a 
party  that  fell  upon  his  rear,  which  at  length 


764 

perceiving,  he  sent  a  messenger  to  demand  suc¬ 
cour.  But  the  commanders  of  the  heavy  in¬ 
fantry,  Canidius  amongst  others,  a  particular 
favourite  of  Antony’s,  seem  here  to  have  com¬ 
mitted  a  great  oversight.  For,  instead  of  facing 
about  with  the  whole  body,  they  sent  small 
parties,  and,  when  they  were  defeated,  they 
still  sent  out  small  parties,  so  that  by  their  bad 
management  the  rout  would  have  spread 
through  the  whole  army,  if  Antony  himself 
had  not  marched  from  the  van  at  the  head  of 
the  third  legion,  and,  passing  this  through 
among  the  fugitives,  faced  the  enemies,  and 
hindered  them  from  any  further  pursuit. 

In  this  engagement  were  killed  three  thou¬ 
sand,  five  thousand  were  carried  back  to  the 
camp  wounded,  amongst  the  rest  Gallus,  shot 
through  the  body  with  four  arrows,  of  which 
wounds  he  died.  Antony  went  from  tent  to 
tent  to  visit  and  comfort  the  rest  of  them,  and 
was  not  able  to  see  his  men  without  tears  and  a 
passion  of  grief.  They,  however,  seized  his 
hand  with  joyful  faces,  bidding  him  go  and  see 
to  himself  and  not  be  concerned  about  them, 
calling  him  their  emperor  and  their  general, 
and  saying  that  if  he  did  well  they  were  safe. 

For,  in  short,  never  in  all  these  times  can 
history  make  mention  of  a  general  at  the  head 
of  a  more  splendid  army;  whether  you  consider 
strength  and  youth,  or  patience  and  sufferance 
in  labours  and  fatigues;  but  as  for  the  obedi¬ 
ence  and  affectionate  respect  they  bore  their 
general,  and  the  unanimous  feeling  amongst 
small  and  great  alike,  officers  and  common  sol¬ 
diers,  to  prefer  his  good  opinion  of  them  to 
their  very  lives  and  being,  in  this  part  of  mili¬ 
tary  excellence  it  was  not  possible  that  they 
could  have  been  surpassed  by  the  very  Romans 
of  old.  For  this  devotion,  as  I  have  said  before, 
there  were  many  reasons,  as  the  nobility  of  his 
family,  his  eloquence,  his  frank  and  open  man¬ 
ners,  his  liberal  and  magnificent  habits,  his 
familiarity  in  talking  with  everybody,  and,  at 
this  time  particularly,  his  kindness  in  visiting 
and  pitying  the  sick,  joining  in  all  their  pains, 
and  furnishing  them  with  all  things  necessary, 
so  that  the  sick  and  wounded  were  even  more 
eager  to  serve  than  those  that  were  whole  and 
strong. 

Nevertheless,  this  last  victory  had  so  encour¬ 
aged  the  enemy  that,  instead  of  their  former 
impatience  and  weariness,  they  began  soon  to 
feel  contempt  for  the  Romans,  staying  all  night 
near  the  camp,  in  expectation  of  plundering 
their  tents  and  baggage,  which  they  concluded 
they  must  abandon;  and  in  the  morning  new 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

forces  arrived  in  large  masses,  so  that  their 
number  was  grown  to  be  not  less,  it  is  said, 
than  forty  thousand  horse;  and  the  king  had 
sent  the  very  guards  that  attended  upon  his 
own  person,  as  to  a  sure  and  unquestioned 
victory,  for  he  himself  was  never  present  in 
any  fight. 

Antony,  designing  to  harangue  the  soldiers, 
called  for  a  mourning  habit  that  he  might 
move  them  the  more,  but  was  dissuaded  by  his 
friends;  so  he  came  forward  in  the  general’s 
scarlet  cloak,  and  addressed  them,  praising 
those  that  had  gained  the  victory,  and  re¬ 
proaching  those  that  had  fled,  the  former  an¬ 
swering  him  with  promises  of  success,  and  the 
latter  excusing  themselves,  and  telling  him 
they  were  ready  to  undergo  decimation,  or  any 
other  punishment  he  should  please  to  inflict 
upon  them,  only  entreating  that  he  would  for¬ 
get  and  not  discompose  himself  with  their 
faults.  At  which  he  lifted  up  his  hands  to  heav¬ 
en,  and  prayed  the  gods  that,  if  to  balance  the 
great  favours  he  had  received  of  them  any 
judgment  lay  in  store,  they  would  pour  it  upon 
his  head  alone,  and  grant  his  soldiers  victory. 

The  next  day  they  took  better  order  for  their 
march,  and  the  Parthians,  who  thought  they 
were  marching  rather  to  plunder  than  to  fight, 
were  much  taken  aback,  when  they  came  up 
and  were  received  with  a  shower  of  missiles,  to 
find  the  enemy  not  disheartened,  but  fresh 
and  resolute.  So  that  they  themselves  began  to 
lose  courage.  But  at  the  descent  of  a  hill  where 
the  Romans  were  obliged  to  pass,  they  got  to¬ 
gether,  and  let  fly  their  arrows  upon  them  as 
they  moved  slowly  down.  But  the  full-armed 
infantry,  facing  round,  received  the  light 
troops  within;  and  those  in  the  first  rank  knelt 
on  one  knee,  holding  their  shields  before  them, 
the  next  rank  holding  theirs  over  the  first,  and 
so  again  others  over  these,  much  like  the  tiling 
of  a  house,  or  the  rows  of  seats  in  a  theatre,  the 
whole  affording  sure  defence  against  arrows, 
which  glanced  upon  them  without  doing  any 
harm.  The  Parthians,  seeing  the  Romans  down 
upon  their  knees,  could  not  imagine  but  that  it 
must  proceed  from  weariness;  so  that  they 
laid  down  their  bows,  and,  taking  their  spears, 
made  a  fierce  onset,  when  the  Romans,  with  a 
great  cry,  leaped  upon  their  feet,  striking  hand 
to  hand  with  their  javelins,  slew  the  foremost, 
and  put  the  rest  to  flight. 

After  this  rate  it  was  every  day,  and  the 
trouble  they  gave  made  the  marches  short;  in 
addition  to  which  famine  began  to  be  felt  in 
the  camp,  for  they  could  get  but  little  corn,  and 


ANTONY 

that  which  they  got  they  were  forced  to  fight 
for;  and,  besides  this,  they  were  in  want  of  im¬ 
plements  to  grind  it  and  make  bread.  For  they 
had  left  almost  all  behind,  the  baggage  horses 
being  dead  or  otherwise  employed  in  carrying 
the  sick  and  wounded.  Provision  was  so  scarce 
in  the  army  that  an  Attic  quart  of  wheat  sold 
for  fifty  drachmas,  and  barley  loaves  for  their 
weight  in  silver.  And  when  they  tried  vege¬ 
tables  and  roots,  they  found  such  as  are  com¬ 
monly  eaten  very  scarce,  so  that  they  were  con¬ 
strained  to  venture  upon  any  they  could  get, 
and,  among  others,  they  chanced  upon  an  herb 
that  was  mortal,  first  taking  away  all  sense  and 
understanding.  He  that  had  eaten  of  it  remem¬ 
bered  nothing  in  the  world,  and  employed 
himself  only  in  moving  great  stones  from  one 
place  to  another,  which  he  did  with  as  much 
earnestness  and  industry  as  if  it  had  been  a 
business  of  the  greatest  consequence.  Through 
all  the  camp  there  was  nothing  to  be  seen  but 
men  grubbing  upon  the  ground  at  stones, 
which  they  carried  from  place  to  place.  But  in 
the  end  they  threw  up  bile  and  died,  as  wine, 
moreover,  which  was  the  one  antidote,  failed. 

When  Antony  saw  them  die  so  fast,  and  the 
Parthians  still  in  pursuit,  he  was  heard  to  ex¬ 
claim  several  times  over,  “O,  the  Ten  Thou¬ 
sand!”  as  if  in  admiration  of  the  retreat  of  the 
Greeks,  with  Xenophon,  who,  when  they  had 
a  longer  journey  to  make  from  Babylonia,  and 
a  more  powerful  enemy  to  deal  with,  neverthe¬ 
less  came  home  safe. 

The  Parthians,  finding  that  they  could  not 
divide  the  Roman  army,  nor  break  the  order 
of  their  battle,  and  that  withal  they  had  been 
so  often  worsted,  once  more  began  to  treat  the 
foragers  with  professions  of  humanity;  they 
came  up  to  them  with  their  bows  unbent,  tell¬ 
ing  them  that  they  were  going  home  to  their 
houses,  that  this  was  the  end  of  their  retalia¬ 
tion,  and  that  only  some  Median  troops  would 
follow  for  two  or  three  days,  not  with  any  de¬ 
sign  to  annoy  them,  but  for  the  defence  of 
some  of  the  villages  further  on.  And,  saying 
this,  they  saluted  them  and  embraced  them 
with  a  great  show  of  friendship.  This  made  ‘ 
the  Romans  full  of  confidence  again,  and  An¬ 
tony,  on  hearing  of  it,  was  more  disposed  to 
take  the  road  through  the  level  country,  being 
told  that  no  water  was  to  be  hoped  for  on  that 
through  the  mountains. 

But  while  he  was  preparing  thus  to  do,  Mith- 
ridates  came  into  the  camp,  a  cousin  to  Monae- 
ses,  of  whom  we  related  that  he  sought  refuge 
with  the  Romans,  and  received  in  gift  from 


765 

Antony  three  cities.  Upon  his  arrival,  he  de¬ 
sired  somebody  might  be  brought  to  him  that 
could  speak  Syriac  or  Parthian.  One  Alexan¬ 
der,  of  Antioch,  a  friend  of  Antony’s,  was 
brought  to  him,  to  whom  the  stranger,  giving 
his  name,  and  mentioning  Monaeses  as  the  per¬ 
son  who  desired  to  do  the  kindness,  put  the 
question,  did  he  see  that  high  range  of  hills, 
pointing  at  some  distance.  He  told  him,  yes. 
“It  is  there,”  said  he,  “the  whole  Parthian  army 
lie  in  wait  for  your  passage;  for  the  great 
plains  come  immediately  up  to  them,  and  they 
expect  that,  confiding  in  their  promises,  you 
will  leave  the  way  of  the  mountains,  and  take 
the  level  route.  It  is  true  that  in  passing  over 
the  mountains  you  will  suffer  the  want  of  wa¬ 
ter,  and  the  fatigue  to  which  you  have  become 
familiar,  but  if  you  pass  through  the  plains, 
Antony  must  expect  the  fortune  of  Crassus.” 

This  said,  he  departed.  Antony,  in  alarm 
calling  his  friends  in  council,  sent  for  the  Mar- 
dian  guide,  who  was  of  the  same  opinion.  He 
told  them  that,  with  or  without  enemies,  the 
want  of  any  certain  track  in  the  plain,  and  the 
likelihood  of  their  losing  their  way,  were  quite 
objection  enough;  the  other  route  was  rough 
and  without  water,  but  then  it  was  but  for  a 
day.  Antony,  therefore,  changing  his  mind, 
marched  away  upon  this  road  that  night,  com¬ 
manding  that  every  one  should  carry  water  suf¬ 
ficient  for  his  own  use;  but  most  of  them  being 
unprovided  with  vessels,  they  made  shift  with 
their  helmets,  and  some  with  skins.  As  soon  as 
they  started,  the  news  of  it  was  carried  to  the 
Parthians,  who  followed  them,  contrary  to 
their  custom,  through  the  night,  and  at  sunrise 
attacked  the  rear,  which  was  tired  with  march¬ 
ing  and  want  of  sleep,  and  not  in  condition  to 
make  any  considerable  defence. 

For  they  had  got  through  two  hundred  and 
forty  furlongs  that  night,  and  at  the  end  of 
such  a  march  to  find  the  enemy  at  their  heels 
put  them  out  of  heart.  Besides,  having  to  fight 
for  every  step  of  the  way  increased  their  dis¬ 
tress  from  thirst.  Those  that  were  in  the  van 
came  up  to  a  river,  the  water  of  which  was  ex¬ 
tremely  cool  and  clear,  but  brackish  and  medic¬ 
inal,  and,  on  being  drunk,  produced  immedi¬ 
ate  pains  in  the  bowels  and  a  renewed  thirst. 
Of  this  the  Mardian  had  forewarned  them,  but 
they  could  not  forbear,  and,  beating  back  those 
that  opposed  them,  they  drank  of  it.  Antony 
ran  from  one  place  to  another,  begging  they 
would  have  a  little  patience,  that  not  far  off 
there  was  a  river  of  wholesome  water,  and  that 
the  rest  of  the  way  was  so  difficult  for  the  horse 


766 

that  the  enemy  could  pursue  them  no  further; 
and,  saying  this,  he  ordered  to  sound  a  retreat 
to  call  those  back  that  were  engaged,  and  com¬ 
manded  the  tents  should  be  set  up,  that  the 
soldiers  might  at  any  rate  refresh  themselves 
in  the  shade. 

But  the  tents  were  scarce  well  put  up,  and 
the  Parthians  beginning,  according  to  their 
custom,  to  withdraw,  when  Mithridates  came 
again  to  them,  and  informed  Alexander,  with 
whom  he  had  before  spoken,  that  he  would  do 
well  to  advise  Antony  to  stay  where  he  was  no 
longer  than  needs  he  must,  that,  after  having 
refreshed  his  troops,  he  should  endeavour  with 
all  diligence  to  gain  the  next  river,  that  the 
Parthians  would  not  cross  it,  but  so  far  they 
were  resolved  to  follow  them.  Alexander  made 
his  report  to  Antony,  who  ordered  a  quantity 
of  gold  plate  to  be  carried  to  Mithridates,  who, 
taking  as  much  as  he  could  well  hide  under  his 
clothes,  went  his  way. 

And,  upon  this  advice,  Antony,  while  it  was 
yet  day,  broke  up  his  camp,  and  the  whole 
army  marched  forward  without  receiving  any 
molestation  from  the  Parthians,  though  that 
night  by  their  own  doing  was  in  effect  the  most 
wretched  and  terrible  that  they  passed.  For 
some  of  the  men  began  to  kill  and  plunder 
those  whom  they  suspected  to  have  any  money, 
ransacked  the  baggage,  and  seized  the  money 
there.  In  the  end,  they  laid  hands  on  Antony’s 
own  equipage,  and  broke  all  his  rich  tables  and 
cups,  dividing  the  fragments  amongst  them. 
Antony,  hearing  such  a  noise  and  such  a  stir¬ 
ring  to  and  fro  all  through  the  army,  the  belief 
prevailing  that  the  enemy  had  routed  and  cut 
off  a  portion  of  the  troops,  called  for  one  of  his 
freedmen,  then  serving  as  one  of  his  guards, 
Rhamnus  by  name,  and  made  him  take  an  oath 
that  whenever  he  should  give  him  orders,  he 
would  run  his  sword  through  his  body  and  cut 
off  his  head,  that  he  might  not  fall  alive  into 
the  hands  of  the  Parthians,  nor,  when  dead,  be 
recognised  as  the  general. 

While  he  was  in  this  consternation,  and  all 
his  friends  about  him  in  tears,  the  Mardian 
came  up  and  gave  them  all  new  life.  He  con¬ 
vinced  them,  by  the  coolness  and  humidity  of 
the  air,  which  they  could  feel  in  breathing  it, 
that  the  river  which  he  had  spoken  of  was  now 
not  far  off,  and  the  calculation  of  the  time  that 
had  been  required  to  reach  it  came,  he  said,  to 
the  same  result,  for  the  night  was  almost  spent. 
And,  at  the  same  time,  others  came  with  in¬ 
formation  that  all  the  confusion  in  the  camp 
proceeded  only  from  their  own  violence  and 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

robbery  among  themselves.  To  compose  this 
tumult,  and  bring  them  again  into  some  order 
after  their  distraction,  he  commanded  the  sig¬ 
nal  to  be  given  for  a  halt. 

Day  began  to  break,  and  quiet  and  regular¬ 
ity  were  just  reappearing,  when  the  Parthian 
arrows  began  to  fly  among  the  rear,  and  the 
light-armed  troops  were  ordered  out  to  battle. 
And,  being  seconded  by  the  heavy  infantry, 
who  covered  one  another  as  before  described 
with  their  shields,  they  bravely  received  the 
enemy,  who  did  not  think  convenient  to  ad¬ 
vance  any  further,  while  the  van  of  the  army, 
marching  forward  leisurely  in  this  manner, 
came  in  sight  of  the  river,  and  Antony,  draw¬ 
ing  up  the  cavalry  on  the  banks  to  confront  the 
enemy,  first  passed  over  the  sick  and  wounded. 
And,  by  this  time,  even  those  who  were  en¬ 
gaged  with  the  enemy  had  opportunity  to 
drink  at  their  ease;  for  the  Parthians,  on  seeing 
the  river,  unbent  their  bows,  and  told  the  Ro¬ 
mans  they  might  pass  over  freely,  and  made 
them  great  compliments  in  praise  of  their  val¬ 
our.  Having  crossed  without  molestation,  they 
rested  themselves  awhile,  and  presently  went 
forward,  not  giving  perfect  credit  to  the  fair 
words  of  their  enemies. 

Six  days  after  this  last  battle,  they  arrived  at 
the  river  Araxes,  which  divides  Media  and  Ar¬ 
menia,  and  seemed,  both  by  its  deepness  and 
the  violence  of  the  current,  to  be  very  danger¬ 
ous  to  pass.  A  report,  also,  had  crept  in  amongst 
them,  that  the  enemy  was  in  ambush,  ready  to 
set  upon  them  as  soon  as  they  should  be  occu¬ 
pied  with  their  passage.  But  when  they  were 
got  over  on  the  other  side,  and  found  them¬ 
selves  in  Armenia,  just  as  if  land  was  now 
sighted  after  a  storm  at  sea,  they  kissed  the 
ground  for  joy,  shedding  tears  and  embracing 
each  other  in  their  delight.  But  taking  their 
journey  through  a  land  that  abounded  in  all 
sorts  of  plenty,  they  ate,  after  their  long  want, 
with  that  excess  of  everything  they  met  with 
that  they  suffered  from  dropsies  and  dysen¬ 
teries. 

Here  Antony,  making  a  review  of  his  army, 
found  that  he  had  lost  twenty  thousand  foot 
and  four  thousand  horse,  of  which  the  better 
half  perished,  not  by  the  enemy,  but  by  dis¬ 
eases.  Their  march  was  of  twenty-seven  days 
from  Phraata,  during  which  they  had  beaten 
the  Parthians  in  eighteen  battles,  though  with 
little  effect  or  lasting  result,  because  of  their 
being  so  unable  to  pursue.  By  which  it  is  mani¬ 
fest  that  it  was  Artavasdes  who  lost  Antony  the 
benefit  of  the  expedition.  For  had  the  sixteen 


ANTONY 


thousand  horsemen  whom  he  led  away,  out  of 
Media,  armed  in  the  same  style  as  the  Par- 
thians,  and  accustomed  to  their  manner  of 
fight,  been  there  to  follow  the  pursuit  when  the 
Romans  put  them  to  flight,  it  is  impossible  they 
could  have  rallied  so  often  after  their  defeats, 
and  reappeared  again  as  they  did  to  renew 
their  attacks. 

For  this  reason,  the  whole  army  was  very 
earnest  with  Antony  to  march  into  Armenia  to 
take  revenge.  But  he,  with  more  reflection, 
forbore  to  notice  the  desertion,  and  continued 
all  his  former  courtesies,  feeling  that  the  army 
was  wearied  out,  and  in  want  of  all  manner  of 
necessaries.  Afterwards,  however,  entering 
Armenia,  with  invitations  and  fair  promises 
he  prevailed  upon  Artavasdes  to  meet  him, 
when  he  seized  him,  bound  him,  and  carried 
him  to  Alexandria,  and  there  led  him  in  a  tri¬ 
umph;  one  of  the  things  which  most  offended 
the  Romans,  who  felt  as  if  all  the  honours  and 
solemn  observances  of  their  country  were,  for 
Cleopatra’s  sake,  handed  over  to  the  Egyptians. 

This,  however,  was  at  an  after  time.  For  the 
present,  marching  his  army  in  great  haste  in 
the  depth  of  winter  through  continual  storms 
of  snow,  he  lost  eight  thousand,  of  his  men,  and 
came  with  much  diminished  numbers  to  a 
place  called  the  White  Village,  between  Sidon 
and  Berytus,  on  the  sea-coast,  where  he  waited 
for  the  arrival  of  Cleopatra.  And,  being  im¬ 
patient  of  the  delay  she  made,  he  bethought 
himself  of  shortening  the  time  in  wine  and 
drunkenness,  and  yet  could  not  endure  the 
tediousness  of  a  meal,  but  would  start  from 
table  and  run  to  see  if  she  were  coming.  Till  at 
last  she  came  into  port,  and  brought  with  her 
clothes  and  money  for  the  soldiers.  Though 
some  say  that  Antony  only  received  the  clothes 
from  her  and  distributed  his  own  money  in 
her  name. 

A  quarrel  presently  happened  between  the 
King  of  Media  and  Phraates  of  Parthia,  begin¬ 
ning,  it  is  said,  about  the  division  of  the  booty 
that  was  taken  from  the  Romans,  and  creating 
great  apprehension  in  the  Median  lest  he 
should  lose  his  kingdom.  He  sent,  therefore, 
ambassadors  to  Antony,  with  offers  of  entering 
into  a  confederate  war  against  Phraates.  And 
Antony,  full  of  hopes  at  being  thus  asked,  as  a 
favour,  to  accept  that  one  thing,  horse  and 
archers,  the  want  of  which  had  hindered  his 
beating  the  Parthians  before,  began  at  once  to 
prepare  for  a  return  to  Armenia,  there  to  join 
the  Medes  on  the  Araxes,  and  begin  the  war 
afresh. 


767 

But  Octavia,  in  Rome,  being  desirous  to  see 
Antony,  asked  Caesar’s  leave  to  go  to  him; 
which  he  gave  her,  not  so  much,  say  most  au¬ 
thors,  to  gratify  his  sister,  as  to  obtain  a  fair  pre¬ 
tence  to  begin  the  war  upon  her  dishonourable 
reception.  She  no  sooner  arrived  at  Athens, 
but  by  letters  from  Antony  she  was  informed 
of  his  new  expedition,  and  his  will  that  she 
should  await  him  there.  And,  though  she  were 
much  displeased,  not  being  ignorant  of  the  real 
reason  of  this  usage,  yet  she  wrote  to  him  to 
know  to  what  place  he  would  be  pleased  she 
should  send  the  things  she  had  brought  with 
her  for  his  use;  for  she  had  brought  clothes  for 
his  soldiers,  baggage,  cattle,  money,  and  pres¬ 
ents  for  his  friends  and  officers,  and  two  thou¬ 
sand  chosen  soldiers  sumptuously  armed,  to 
form  praetorian  cohorts.  This  message  was 
brought  from  Octavia  to  Antony  by  Niger,  one 
of  his  friends,  who  added  to  it  the  praises  she 
deserved  so  well. 

Cleopatra,  feeling  her  rival  already,  as  it 
were,  at  hand,  was  seized  with  fear,  lest  if  to 
her  noble  life  and  her  high  alliance,  she  once 
could  add  the  charm  of  daily  habit  and  affec¬ 
tionate  intercourse,  she  should  become  irre¬ 
sistible,  and  be  his  absolute  mistress  forever.  So 
she  feigned  to  be  dying  for  love  of  Antony, 
bringing  her  body  down  by  slender  diet;  when 
he  entered  the  room,  she  fixed  her  eyes  upon 
him  in  a  rapture,  and  when  he  left,  seemed  to 
languish  and  half  faint  away.  She  took  great 
pains  that  he  should  see  her  in  tears,  and,  as 
soon  as  he  noticed  it,  hastily  dried  them  up  and 
turned  away,  as  if  it  were  her  wish  that  he 
should  know  nothing  of  it.  All  this  was  acting 
while  he  prepared  for  Media;  and  Cleopatra’s 
creatures  were  not  slow  to  forward  the  design, 
upbraiding  Antony  with  his  unfeeling,  hard¬ 
hearted  temper,  thus  letting  a  woman  perish 
whose  soul  depended  upon  him  and  him  alone. 

Octavia,  it  was  true,  was  his  wife,  and  had 
been  married  to  him  because  it  was  found  con¬ 
venient  for  the  affairs  of  her  brother  that  it 
should  be  so,  and  she  had  the  honour  of  the 
title;  but  Cleopatra,  the  sovereign  queen  of 
many  nations,  had  been  contented  with  the 
name  of  his  mistress,  nor  did  she  shun  or  de¬ 
spise  the  character  whilst  she  might  see  him, 
might  live  with  him,  and  enjoy  him;  if  she 
were  bereaved  of  this,  she  would  not  survive 
the  loss.  In  fine,  they  so  melted  and  un¬ 
manned  him  that,  fully  believing  she  would  die 
if  he  forsook  her,  he  put  off  the  war  and  re¬ 
turned  to  Alexandria,  deferring  his  Median  ex¬ 
pedition  until  next  summer,  though  news  came 


768 

of  the  Parthians  being  all  in  confusion  with 
intestine  disputes.  Nevertheless,  he  did  some 
time  after  go  into  that  country,  and  made  an 
alliance  with  the  King  of  Media,  by  marriage 
of  a  son  of  his  by  Cleopatra  to  the  king’s  daugh¬ 
ter,  who  was  yet  very  young;  and  so  returned, 
with  his  thoughts  taken  up  about  the  civil  war. 

When  Octavia  returned  from  Athens,  Cae¬ 
sar,  who  considered  she  had  been  injuriously 
treated,  commanded  her  to  live  in  a  separate 
house;  but  she  refused  to  leave  the  house  of  her 
husband,  and  entreated  him,  unless  he  had  al¬ 
ready  resolved,  upon  other  motives,  to  make 
war  with  Antony,  that  he  would  on  her  ac¬ 
count  let  it  alone;  it  would  be  intolerable  to 
have  it  said  of  the  two  greatest  commanders  in 
the  world  that  they  had  involved  the  Roman 
people  in  a  civil  war,  the  one  out  of  passion  for, 
the  other  out  of  resentment  about,  a  woman. 
And  her  behaviour  proved  her  words  to  be 
sincere.  She  remained  in  Antony’s  house  as  if 
he  were  at  home  in  it,  and  took  the  noblest  and 
most  generous  care,  not  only  of  his  children  by 
her,  but  of  those  by  Fulvia  also.  She  received 
all  the  friends  of  Antony  that  came  to  Rome  to 
seek  office  or  upon  any  business,  and  did  her 
utmost  to  prefer  their  requests  to  Caesar;  yet 
this  her  honourable  deportment  did  but,  with¬ 
out  her  meaning  it,  damage  the  reputation  of 
Antony;  the  wrong  he  did  to  such  a  woman 
made  him  hated. 

Nor  was  the  division  he  made  among  his 
sons  at  Alexandria  less  unpopular;  it  seemed 
a  theatrical  piece  of  insolence  and  contempt  of 
his  country.  For  assembling  the  people  in  the 
exercise  ground,  and  causing  two  golden 
thrones  to  be  placed  on  a  platform  of  silver, 
the  one  for  him  and  the  other  for  Cleopatra, 
and  at  their  feet  lower  thrones  for  their  chil¬ 
dren,  he  proclaimed  Cleopatra  Queen  of  Egypt, 
Cyprus,  Libya,  and  Ccele-Syria,  and  with  her 
conjointly  Caesarion,  the  reputed  son  of  the 
former  Caesar,  who  left  Cleopatra  with  child. 
His  own  sons  by  Cleopatra  were  to  have  the 
style  of  kings  of  kings;  to  Alexander  he  gave 
Armenia  and  Media,  with  Parthia,  so  soon  as 
it  should  be  overcome;  to  Ptolemy,  Phoenicia, 
Syria,  and  Cilicia.  Alexander  was  brought  out 
before  the  people  in  Median  costume,  the  tiara 
and  upright  peak,  and  Ptolemy,  in  boots  and 
mantle  and  Macedonian  cap  done  about  with 
the  diadem;  for  this  was  the  habit  of  the  suc¬ 
cessors  of  Alexander,  as  the  other  was  of  the 
Medes  and  Armenians.  And  as  soon  as  they 
had  saluted  their  parents,  the  one  was  received 
by  a  guard  of  Macedonians,  the  other  by  one 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

of  Armenians.  Cleopatra  was  then,  as  at  other 
times  when  she  appeared  in  public,  dressed  in 
the  habit  of  the  goddess  Isis,  and  gave  audience 
to  the  people  under  the  name  of  the  New  Isis. 

Caesar,  relating  these  things  in  the  senate, 
and  often  complaining  to  the  people,  excited 
men’s  minds  against  Antony,  and  Antony  also 
sent  messages  of  accusation  against  Caesar.  The 
principal  of  his  charges  were  these:  first,  that 
he  had  not  made  any  division  with  him  of 
Sicily,  which  was  lately  taken  from  Pompey; 
secondly,  that  he  had  retained  the  ships  he  had 
lent  him  for  the  war;  thirdly,  that,  after  de¬ 
posing  Lepidus,  their  colleague,  he  had  taken 
for  himself  the  army,  governments,  and  rev¬ 
enues  formerly  appropriated  to  him;  and  lastly, 
that  he  had  parcelled  out  almost  all  Italy 
amongst  his  own  soldiers,  and  left  nothing  for 
his.  Caesar’s  answer  was  as  follows:  that  he  had 
put  Lepidus  out  of  government  because  of  his 
own  misconduct;  that  what  he  had  got  in  war 
he  would  divide  with  Antony,  so  soon  as  An¬ 
tony  gave  him  a  share  of  Armenia;  that  An¬ 
tony’s  soldiers  had  no  claims  in  Italy,  being  in 
possession  of  Media  and  Parthia,  the  acquisi¬ 
tions  which  their  brave  actions  under  their  gen¬ 
eral  had  added  to  the  Roman  empire. 

Antony  was  in  Armenia  when  this  answer 
came  to  him,  and  immediately  sent  Canidius 
with  sixteen  legions  towards  the  sea;  but  he,  in 
the  company  of  Cleopatra,  went  to  Ephesus, 
whither  ships  were  coming  in  from  all  quar¬ 
ters  to  form  the  navy,  consisting,  vessels  of  bur¬ 
den  included,  of  eight  hundred  vessels,  of 
which  Cleopatra  furnished  two  hundred,  to¬ 
gether  with  twenty  thousand  talents,  and  pro¬ 
vision  for  the  whole  army  during  the  war. 
Antony,  on  the  advice  of  Domitius  and  some 
others,  bade  Cleopatra  return  into  Egypt,  there 
to  expect  the  event  of  the  war;  but  she,  dread¬ 
ing  some  new  reconciliation  by  Octavia’s 
means,  prevailed  with  Canidius,  by  a  large 
sum  of  money,  to  speak  in  her  favour  with 
Antony,  pointing  out  to  him  that  it  was  not 
just  that  one  that  bore  so  great  a  part  in  the 
charge  of  the  war  should  be  robbed  of  her 
share  of  glory  in  the  carrying  it  on;  nor  would 
it  be  politic  to  disoblige  the  Egyptians,  who 
were  so  considerable  a  part  of  his  naval  forces; 
nor  did  he  see  how  she  was  inferior  in  pru¬ 
dence  to  any  one  of  the  kings  that  were  serving 
with  him;  she  had  long  governed  a  great  king¬ 
dom  by  herself  alone,  and  long  lived  with  him, 
and  gained  experience  in  public  affairs. 

These  arguments  (so  the  fate  that  destined 
all  to  Caesar  would  have  it)  prevailed;  and 


ANTONY 

when  all  their  forces  had  met,  they  sailed  to¬ 
gether  to  Samos,  and  held  high  festivities.  For, 
as  it  was  ordered  that  all  kings,  princes,  and 
governors,  all  nations  and  cities  within  the 
limits  of  Syria,  the  Maeotid  Lake,  Armenia, 
and  Illyria,  should  bring  or  cause  to  be  brought 
all  munitions  necessary  for  war,  so  was  it  also 
proclaimed  that  all  stage-players  should  make 
their  appearance  at  Samos;  so  that,  while  pretty 
nearly  the  whole  world  was  filled  with  groans 
and  lamentations,  this  one  island  for  some  days 
resounded  with  piping  and  harping,  theatres 
filling,  and  choruses  playing.  Every  city  sent 
an  ox  as  its  contribution  to  the  sacrifice,  and 
the  kings  that  accompanied  Antony  competed 
who  should  make  the  most  magnificent  feasts 
and  the  greatest  presents;  and  men  began  to 
ask  themselves,  what  would  be  done  to  cele¬ 
brate  the  victory,  when  they  went  to  such  an 
expense  of  festivity  at  the  opening  of  the  war. 

This  over,  he  gave  Priene  to  his  players  for 
a  habitation,  and  set  sail  for  Athens,  where 
fresh  sports  and  play-acting  employed  him. 
Cleopatra,  jealous  of  the  honours  Octavia  had 
received  at  Athens  (for  Octavia  was  much  be¬ 
loved  by  the  Athenians),  courted  the  favour  of 
the  people  with  all  sorts  of  attentions.  The 
Athenians,  in  requital,  having  decreed  her 
public  honours,  deputed  several  of  the  citizens 
to  wait  upon  her  at  her  house;  amongst  whom 
went  Antony  as  one,  he  being  an  Athenian 
citizen,  and  he  it  was  that  made  the  speech.  He 
sent  orders  to  Rome  to  have  Octavia  removed 
out  of  his  house.  She  left  it,  we  are  told,  ac¬ 
companied  by  all  his  children,  except  the  eldest 
by  Fulvia,  who  was  then  with  his  father,  weep¬ 
ing  and  grieving  that  she  must  be  looked  upon 
as  one  of  the  causes  of  the  war.  But  the  Ro¬ 
mans  pitied,  not  so  much  her,  as  Antony  him¬ 
self,  and  more  particularly  those  who  had  seen 
Cleopatra,  whom  they  could  report  to  have  no 
way  the  advantage  of  Octavia  either  in  youth 
or  in  beauty. 

The  speed  and  extent  of  Antony’s  prepara¬ 
tions  alarmed  Caesar,  who  feared  he  might  be 
forced  to  fight  the  decisive  battle  that  summer. 
For  he  wanted  many  necessaries,  and  the  peo¬ 
ple  grudged  very  much  to  pay  the  taxes;  free¬ 
men  being  called  upon  to  pay  a  fourth  part  of 
their  incomes,  and  freed  slaves  an  eighth  of 
their  property,  so  that  there  were  loud  outcries 
against  him,  and  disturbances  throughout  all 
Italy.  And  this  is  looked  upon  as  one  of  the 
greatest  of  Antony’s  oversights,  that  he  did  not 
then  press  the  war.  For  he  allowed  time  at  once 
for  Caesar  to  make  his  preparations  and  for  the 


769 

commotions  to  pass  over.  For  while  people 
were  having  their  money  called  for,  they  were 
mutinous  and  violent;  but,  having  paid  it,  they 
held  their  peace. 

Titius  and  Plancus,  men  of  consular  dignity 
and  friends  to  Antony,  having  been  ill-used  by 
Cleopatra,  whom  they  had  most  resisted  in  her 
design  of  being  present  in  the  war,  came  over 
to  Caesar  and  gave  information  of  the  contents 
of  Antony’s  will,  with  which  they  were  ac¬ 
quainted.  It  was  deposited  in  the  hands  of  the 
vestal  virgins,  who  refused  to  deliver  it  up,  and 
sent  Caesar  word,  if  he  pleased,  he  should  come 
and  seize  it  himself,  which  he  did.  And,  read¬ 
ing  it  over  to  himself,  he  noted  those  places 
that  were  most  for  his  purpose,  and,  having 
summoned  the  senate,  read  them  publicly. 
Many  were  scandalised  at  the  proceeding, 
thinking  it  out  of  reason  and  equity  to  call  a 
man  to  account  for  what  was  not  to  be  until 
after  his  death.  Caesar  specially  pressed  what 
Antony  said  in  his  will  about  his  burial;  for  he 
had  ordered  that  even  if  he  died  in  the  city  of 
Rome,  his  body,  after  being  carried  in  state 
through  the  Forum,  should  be  sent  to  Cleo¬ 
patra  at  Alexandria. 

Calvisius,  a  dependant  of  Caesar’s,  urged 
other  charges  in  connection  with  Cleopatra 
against  Antony;  that  he  had  given  her  the 
library  of  Pergamus,  containing  two  hundred 
thousand  distinct  volumes;  that  at  a  great  ban¬ 
quet,  in  the  presence  of  many  guests,  he  had 
risen  up  and  rubbed  her  feet,  to  fulfil  some 
wager  or  promise;  that  he  had  suffered  the 
Ephesians  to  salute  her  as  their  queen;  that  he 
had  frequently  at  the  public  audience  of  kings 
and  princes  received  amorous  messages  writ¬ 
ten  in  tablets  made  of  onyx  and  crystal,  and 
read  them  openly  on  the  tribunal;  that  when 
Furnius,  a  man  of  great  authority  and  elo¬ 
quence  among  the  Romans,  was  pleading, 
Cleopatra  happening  to  pass  by  in  her  chair, 
Antony  started  up  and  left  them  in  the  middle 
of  their  cause,  to  follow  at  her  side  and  attend 
her  home. 

Calvisius,  however,  was  looked  upon  as  the 
inventor  of  most  of  these  stories.  Antony’s 
friends  went  up  and  down  the  city  to  gain  him 
credit,  and  sent  one  of  themselves,  Geminius, 
to  him,  to  beg  him  to  take  heed  and  not  allow 
himself  to  be  deprived  by  vote  of  his  authority, 
and  proclaimed  a  public  enemy  to  the  Roman 
state.  But  Geminius  no  sooner  arrived  in 
Greece  but  he  was  looked  upon  as  one  of  Oc- 
tavia’s  spies;  at  their  suppers  he  was  made  a 
continual  butt  for  mockery,  and  was  put  to  sit 


770 

in  the  least  honourable  places;  all  of  which  he 
bore  very  well,  seeking  only  an  occasion  of 
speaking  with  Antony.  So  at  supper,  being 
told  to  say  what  business  he  came  about,  he 
answered  he  would  keep  the  rest  for  a  soberer 
hour,  but  one  thing  he  had  to  say,  whether  full 
or  fasting,  that  all  would  go  well  if  Cleopatra 
would  return  to  Egypt.  And  on  Antony  show¬ 
ing  his  anger  at  it,  “You  have  done  well,  Ge- 
minius,”  said  Cleopatra,  “to  tell  your  secret 
without  being  put  to  the  rack.” 

So  Geminius,  after  a  few  days,  took  occasion 
to  make  his  escape  and  go  to  Rome.  Many 
more  of  Antony’s  friends  were  driven  from 
him  by  the  insolent  usage  they  had  from  Cleo¬ 
patra’s  flatterers,  amongst  who  were  Marcus 
Silanus  and  Dellius  the  historian.  And  Dellius 
says  he  was  afraid  of  his  life,  and  that  Glaucus, 
the  physician,  informed  him  of  Cleopatra’s  de¬ 
sign  against  him.  She  was  angry  with  him  for 
having  said  that  Antony’s  friends  were  served 
with  sour  wine,  while  at  Rome  Sarmentus, 
Caesar’s  little  page  (his  delicia,  as  the  Romans 
call  it),  drank  Falernian. 

As  soon  as  Caesar  had  completed  his  prepa¬ 
rations,  he  had  a  decree  made  declaring  war  on 
Cleopatra,  and  depriving  Antony  of  the  au¬ 
thority  which  he  had  let  a  woman  exercise  in 
his  place.  Caesar  added  that  he  had  drunk  po¬ 
tions  that  had  bereaved  him  of  his  senses,  and 
that  the  generals  they  would  have  to  fight  with 
would  be  Mardion  the  eunuch,  Pothinus,  Iras, 
Cleopatra’s  hair-dressing  girl,  and  Charmion, 
who  were  Antony’s  chief  state-councillors. 

These  prodigies  are  said  to  have  announced 
the  war.  Pisaurum,  where  Antony  had  settled 
a  colony,  on  the  Adriatic  sea,  was  swallowed 
up  by  an  earthquake;  sweat  ran  from  one  of 
the  marble  statues  of  Antony  at  Alba  for  many 
days  together,  and  though  frequently  wiped 
off,  did  not  stop.  When  he  himself  was  in  the 
city  of  Patrae,  the  temple  of  Hercules  was  struck 
by  lightning,  and,  at  Athens,  the  figure  of  Bac¬ 
chus  was  torn  by  a  violent  wind  out  of  the  Bat¬ 
tle  of  the  Giants,  and  laid  flat  upon  the  theatre; 
with  both  which  deities  Antony  claimed  con¬ 
nection,  professing  to  be  descended  from  Her¬ 
cules,  and  from  his  imitating  Bacchus  in  his 
way  of  living  having  received  the  name  of 
young  Bacchus.  The  same  whirlwind  at  Ath¬ 
ens  also  brought  down,  from  amongst  many 
others  which  were  not  disturbed,  the  colossal 
statues  of  Fumenes  and  Attalus,  which  were 
inscribed  with  Antony’s  name.  And  in  Cleo¬ 
patra’s  admiral-galley,  which  was  called  the 
Antonias,  a  most  inauspicious  omen  occurred. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Some  swallows  had  built  in  the  stern  of  the 
galley,  but  other  swallows  came,  beat  the  first 
away,  and  destroyed  their  nests. 

When  the  armaments  gathered  for  the  war, 
Antony  had  no  less  than  five  hundred  ships  of 
war,  including  numerous  galleys  of  eight  and 
ten  banks  of  oars,  as  richly  ornamented  as  if 
they  were  meant  for  a  triumph.  He  had  a  hun¬ 
dred  thousand  foot  and  twelve  thousand  horse. 
He  had  vassal  kings  attending,  Bocchus  of 
Libya,  Tarcondemus  of  the  Upper  Cilicia, 
Archelaus  of  Cappadocia,  Philadelphus  of 
Paphlagonia,  Mithridates  of  Commagene, 
and  Sadalas  of  Thrace;  all  these  were  with  him 
in  person.  Out  of  Pontus  Polemon  sent  him 
considerable  forces,  as  did  also  Malchus  from 
Arabia,  Herod  the  Jew,  and  Amyntus,  King  of 
Lycaonia  and  Galatia;  also  the  Median  king 
sent  some  troops  to  join  him.  Caesar  had  two 
hundred  and  fifty  galleys  of  war,  eighty  thou¬ 
sand  foot,  and  horse  about  equal  to  the  enemy. 
Antony’s  empire  extended  from  Euphrates  and 
Armenia  to  the  Ionian  sea  and  the  Illyrians; 
Caesar’s,  from  Illyria  to  the  westward  ocean, 
and  from  the  ocean  all  along  the  Tuscan  and 
Sicilian  sea.  Of  Africa,  Caesar  had  all  the  coast 
opposite  to  Italy,  Gaul,  and  Spain,  as  far  as  the 
Pillars  of  Hercules,  and  Antony  the  provinces 
from  Cyrene  to  ^Ethiopia. 

But  so  wholly  was  he  now  the  mere  appen¬ 
dage  to  the  person  of  Cleopatra  that,  although 
he  was  much  superior  to  the  enemy  in  land- 
forces,  yet,  out  of  complaisance  to  his  mistress, 
he  wished  the  victory  to  be  gained  by  sea,  and 
that,  too,  when  he  could  not  but  see  how,  for 
want  of  sailors,  his  captains,  all  through  un¬ 
happy  Greece,  were  pressing  every  description 
of  men,  common  travellers  and  ass-drivers, 
harvest  labourers  and  boys,  and  for  all  this  the 
vessels  had  not  their  complements,  but  remain¬ 
ed,  most  of  them,  ill-manned  and  badly  rowed. 
Caesar,  on  the  other  side,  had  ships  that  were 
built  not  for  size  or  show,  but  for  service,  not 
pompous  galleys,  but  light,  swift,  and  perfectly 
manned;  and  from  his  headquarters  at  Taren- 
tum  and  Brundusium  he  sent  messages  to  An¬ 
tony  not  to  protract  the  war,  but  come  out  with 
his  forces;  he  would  give  him  secure  roadsteads 
and  ports  for  his  fleet,  and,  for  his  land  army  to 
disembark  and  pitch  their  camp,  he  would 
leave  him  as  much  ground  in  Italy,  inland 
from  the  sea,  as  a  horse  could  traverse  in  a 
single  course.  Antony,  on  the  other  side,  with 
the  like  bold  language,  challenged  him  to  a 
single  combat,  though  he  were  much  the  older; 
and,  that  being  refused,  proposed  to  meet  him 


ANTONY 

in  the  Pharsalian  fields,  where  Caesar  and  Pom- 
pey  had  fought  before. 

But  whilst  Antony  lay  with  his  fleet  near 
Actium,  where  now  stands  Nicopolis,  Caesar 
seized  his  opportunity  and  crossed  the  Ionian 
sea,  securing  himself  at  a  place  in  Epirus  called 
the  Ladle.  And  when  those  about  Antony  were 
much  disturbed,  their  land  forces  being  a  good 
way  off,  “Indeed,”  said  Cleopatra,  in  mockery, 
“we  may  well  be  frightened  if  Caesar  has  got 
hold  of  the  Ladle!” 

On  the  morrow,  Antony,  seeing  the  enemy 
sailing  up,  and  fearing  lest  his  ships  might  be 
taken  for  want  of  the  soldiers  to  go  on  board 
of  them,  armed  all  the  rowers,  and  made  a 
show  upon  the  decks  of  being  in  readiness  to 
fight;  the  oars  were  mounted  as  if  waiting  to 
be  put  in  motion,  and  the  vessels  themselves 
drawn  up  to  face  the  enemy  on  either  side  of 
the  channel  of  Actium,  as  though  they  were 
properly  manned  and  ready  for  an  engage¬ 
ment.  And  Caesar,  deceived  by  this  stratagem, 
retired.  He  was  also  thought  to  have  shown 
considerable  skill  in  cutting  off  the  water  from 
the  enemy  by  some  lines  of  trenches  and  forts, 
water  not  being  plentiful  anywhere  else,  nor 
very  good.  And  again,  his  conduct  to  Domitius 
was  generous,  much  against  the  will  of  Cleo¬ 
patra.  For  when  he  had  made  his  escape  in  a 
little  boat  to  Caesar,  having  then  a  fever  upon 
him,  although  Antony  could  not  but  resent  it 
highly,  yet  he  sent  after  him  his  whole  equi¬ 
page  with  his  friends  and  servants;  and  Domi¬ 
tius,  as  if  he  would  give  a  testimony  to  the 
world  how  repentant  he  had  become  on  his 
desertion  and  treachery  being  thus  manifest, 
died  soon  after.  Among  the  kings,  also,  Amyn- 
tas  and  Deiotarus  went  over  to  Caesar. 

And  the  fleet  was  so  unfortunate  in  every¬ 
thing  that  was  undertaken,  and  so  unready  on 
every  occasion,  that  Antony  was  driven  again 
to  put  his  confidence  in  the  land  forces.  Cani- 
dius,  too,  who  commanded  the  legions,  when 
he  saw  how  things  stood,  changed  his  opinion, 
and  now  was  of  advice  that  Cleopatra  should 
be  sent  back,  and  that,  retiring  into  Thrace  or 
Macedonia,  the  quarrel  should  be  decided  in  a 
land  fight.  For  Dicomes,  also,  the  King  of  the 
Getse,  promised  to  come  and  join  him  with  a 
great  army,  and  it  would  not  be  any  kind  of 
disparagement  to  him  to  yield  the  sea  to  Caesar, 
who,  in  the  Sicilian  wars,  had  had  such  long 
practice  in  ship-fighting;  on  the  contrary,  it 
would  be  simply  ridiculous  for  Antony,  who 
was  by  land  the  most  experienced  commander 
living,  to  make  no  use  of  his  well-disciplined 


771 

and  numerous  infantry,  scattering  and  wast¬ 
ing  his  forces  by  parcelling  them  out  in  the 
ships. 

But  for  all  this,  Cleopatra  prevailed  that  a 
sea-fight  should  determine  all,  having  already 
an  eye  to  flight,  and  ordering  all  her  affairs, 
not  so  as  to  assist  in  gaining  a  victory,  but  to 
escape  with  the  greatest  safety  from  the  first 
commencement  of  a  defeat. 

There  were  two  long  walls,  extending  from 
the  camp  to  the  station  of  the  ships,  between 
which  Antony  used  to  pass  to  and  fro  without 
suspecting  any  danger.  But  Caesar,  upon  the 
suggestion  of  a  servant  that  it  would  not  be 
difficult  to  surprise  him,  laid  an  ambush, 
which,  rising  up  somewhat  too  hastily,  seized 
the  man  that  came  just  before  him,  he  himself 
escaping  narrowly  by  flight. 

When  it  was  resolved  to  stand  to  a  fight  at 
sea,  they  set  fire  to  all  the  Egyptian  ships  ex¬ 
cept  sixty;  and  of  these  the  best  and  largest, 
from  ten  banks  down  to  three,  he  manned  with 
twenty  thousand  full-armed  men  and  two 
thousand  archers.  Here  it  is  related  that  a  foot 
captain,  one  that  had  fought  often  under  An¬ 
tony,  and  had  his  body  all  mangled  with 
wounds,  exclaimed,  “O  my  general,  what  have 
our  wounds  and  swords  done  to  displease  you, 
that  you  should  give  your  confidence  to  rotten 
timbers?  Let  Egyptians  and  Phoenicians  con¬ 
tend  at  sea,  give  us  the  land,  where  we  know 
well  how  to  die  upon  the  spot  or  gain  the  vic¬ 
tory.”  To  which  he  answered  nothing,  but,  by 
his  look  and  motion  of  his  hand  seeming  to 
bid  him  be  of  good  courage,  passed  forwards, 
having  already,  it  would  seem,  no  very  sure 
hopes,  since  when  the  masters  proposed  leav¬ 
ing  the  sails  behind  them,  he  commanded  they 
should  be  put  aboard,  “For  we  must  not,”  said 
he,  “let  one  enemy  escape.” 

That  day  and  the  three  following  the  sea 
was  so  rough  they  could  not  engage.  But  on 
the  fifth  there  was  a  calm,  and  they  fought; 
Antony  commanding  with  Publicola  the  right, 
and  Ccelius  the  left  squadron,  Marcus  Octa¬ 
vius  and  Marcus  Insteius  the  centre.  Caesar 
gave  the  charge  of  the  left  to  Agrippa,  com¬ 
manding  in  person  on  the  right.  As  for  the 
land  forces,  Canidius  was  general  for  Antony, 
Taurus  for  Caesar;  both  armies  remained 
drawn  up  in  order  along  the  shore.  Antony  in 
a  small  boat  went  from  one  ship  to  another, 
encouraging  his  soldiers,  and  bidding  them 
stand  firm  and  fight  as  steadily  on  their  large 
ships  as  if  they  were  on  land.  The  masters  he 
ordered  that  they  should  receive  the  enemy 


772 

lying  still  as  if  they  were  at  anchor,  and  main¬ 
tain  the  entrance  of  the  port,  which  was  a  nar¬ 
row  and  difficult  passage. 

Of  Caesar  they  relate  that,  leaving  his  tent 
and  going  round,  while  it  was  yet  dark,  to 
visit  the  ships,  he  met  a  man  driving  an  ass, 
and  asked  him  his  name.  He  answered  him 
that  his  own  name  was  “Fortunate,  and  my 
ass/’  says  he,  “is  called  Conqueror.”  And  after¬ 
wards,  when  he  disposed  the  beaks  of  the  ships 
in  that  place  in  token  of  his  victory,  the  statue 
of  this  man  and  his  ass  in  bronze  were  placed 
amongst  them.  After  examining  the  rest  of  his 
fleet,  he  went  in  a  boat  to  the  right  wing,  and 
looked  with  much  admiration  at  the  enemy 
lying  perfectly  still  in  the  straits,  in  all  appear¬ 
ance  as  if  they  had  been  at  anchor.  For  some 
considerable  length  of  time  he  actually  thought 
they  were  so,  and  kept  his  own  ships  at  rest,  at 
a  distance  of  about  eight  furlongs  from  them. 
But  about  noon  a  breeze  sprang  up  from  the 
sea,  and  Antony’s  men,  weary  of  expecting  the 
enemy  so  long,  and  trusting  to  their  large  tall 
vessels,  as  if  they  had  been  invincible,  began  to 
advance  the  left  squadron.  Caesar  was  over¬ 
joyed  to  see  them  move,  and  ordered  his  own 
right  squadron  to  retire,  that  he  might  entice 
them  out  to  sea  as  far  as  he  could,  his  design 
being  to  sail  round  and  round,  and  so  with  his 
light  and  well-manned  galleys  to  attack  these 
huge  vessels,  which  their  size  and  their  want 
of  men  made  slow  to  move  and  difficult  to 
manage. 

When  they  engaged,  there  was  no  charging 
or  striking  of  one  ship  by  another,  because 
Antony’s,  by  reason  of  their  great  bulk,  were 
incapable  of  the  rapidity  required  to  make  the 
stroke  effectual,  and  on  the  other  side,  Caesar’s 
durst  not  charge  head  to  head  on  Antony’s, 
which  were  all  armed  with  solid  masses  and 
spikes  of  brass;  nor  did  they  like  even  to  run 
in  on  their  sides,  which  were  so  strongly  built 
with  great  squared  pieces  of  timber,  fastened 
together  with  iron  bolts,  that  their  vessels’ 
beaks  would  easily  have  been  shattered  upon 
them.  So  that  the  engagement  resembled  a 
land  fight,  or,  to  speak  yet  more  properly,  the 
attack  and  defence  of  a  fortified  place;  for 
there  were  always  three  or  four  vessels  of  Cae¬ 
sar’s  about  one  of  Antony’s,  pressing  them 
with  spears,  javelins,  poles,  and  several  in¬ 
ventions  of  fire,  which  they  flung  among  them, 
Antony’s  men  using  catapults  also,  to  pour 
down  missiles  from  wooden  towers.  Agrippa 
drawing  out  the  squadron  under  his  com¬ 
mand  to  out-flank  the  enemy,  Publicola  was 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

obliged  to  observe  his  motions,  and  gradually 
to  break  off  from  the  middle  squadron,  where 
some  confusion  and  alarm  ensued,  while  Ar- 
runtius  engaged  them. 

But  the  fortune  of  the  day  was  still  unde¬ 
cided,  and  the  battle  equal,  when  on  a  sudden 
Cleopatra’s  sixty  ships  were  seen  hoisting  sail 
and  making  out  to  sea  in  full  flight,  right 
through  the  ships  that  were  engaged.  For  they 
were  placed  behind  the  great  ships,  which,  in 
breaking  through,  they  put  into  disorder.  The 
enemy  was  astonished  to  see  them  sailing  off 
with  a  fair  wind  towards  Peloponnesus.  Here 
it  was  that  Antony  showed  to  all  the  world 
that  he  was  no  longer  actuated  by  the  thoughts 
and  motives  of  a  commander  or  a  man,  or  in¬ 
deed  by  his  own  judgment  at  all,  and  what  was 
once  said  as  a  jest,  that  the  soul  of  a  lover 
lives  in  some  one  else’s  body,  he  proved  to  be 
a  serious  truth.  For,  as  if  he  had  been  born 
part  of  her,  and  must  move  with  her  whereso¬ 
ever  she  went,  as  soon  as  he  saw  her  ship  sail¬ 
ing  away,  he  abandoned  all  that  were  fight¬ 
ing  and  spending  their  lives  for  him,  and  put 
himself  aboard  a  galley  of  five  banks  of  oars, 
taking  with  him  only  Alexander  of  Syria  and 
Scellias,  to  follow  her  that  had  so  well  begun 
his  ruin  and  would  hereafter  accomplish  it. 

She,  perceiving  him  to  follow,  gave  the 
signal  to  come  aboard.  So,  as  soon  as  he  came 
up  with  them,  he  was  taken  into  the  ship.  But 
without  seeing  her  or  letting  himself  be  seen 
by  her,  he  went  forward  by  himself,  and  sat 
alone,  without  a  word,  in  the  ship’s  prow,  cov¬ 
ering  his  face  with  his  two  hands.  In  the  mean¬ 
while,  some  of  Caesar’s  light  Liburnian  ships, 
that  were  in  pursuit,  came  in  sight.  But  on  An¬ 
tony’s  commanding  to  face  about,  they  all 
gave  back  except  Eurycles  the  Laconian,  who 
pressed  on,  shaking  a  lance  from  the  deck,  as 
if  he  meant  to  hurl  it  at  him.  Antony,  stand¬ 
ing  at  the  prow,  demanded  of  him,  “Who  is 
this  that  pursues  Antony,”  “I  am,”  said  he, 
“Eurycles,  the  son  of  Lachares,  armed  with 
Caesar’s  fortune  to  revenge  my  father’s  death.” 
Lachares  had  been  condemned  for  a  robbery, 
and  beheaded  by  Antony’s  orders.  However, 
Eurycles  did  not  attack  Antony,  but  ran  with 
his  full  force  upon  the  other  admiral-galley 
(for  there  were  two  of  them),  and  with  the 
blow  turned  her  round,  and  took  both  her  and 
another  ship,  in  which  was  a  quantity  of  rich 
plate  and  furniture. 

So  soon  as  Eurycles  was  gone,  Antony  re¬ 
turned  to  his  posture  and  sate  silent,  and  thus 
he  remained  for  three  days,  either  in  anger 


ANTONY 

with  Cleopatra,  or  wishing  not  to  upfiraid  her, 
at  the  end  of  which  they  touched  at  Taenarus. 
Here  the  women  of  their  company  succeeded 
first  in  bringing  them  to  speak,  and  after¬ 
wards  to  eat  and  sleep  together.  And,  by  this 
time,  several  of  the  ships  of  burden  and  some 
of  his  friends  began  to  come  in  to  him  from  the 
rout,  bringing  news  of  his  fleet’s  being  quite 
destroyed,  but  that  the  land  forces,  they 
thought,  still  stood  firm.  So  that  he  sent  mes¬ 
sengers  to  Canidius  to  march  the  army  with 
all  speed  through  Macedonia  into  Asia. 

And,  designing  himself  to  go  from  Taenarus 
into  Africa,  he  gave  one  of  the  merchant 
ships,  laden  with  a  large  sum  of  money,  and 
vessels  of  silver  and  gold  of  great  value,  be- 
lcnging  to  the  royal  collections,  to  his  friends, 
desiring  them  to  share  it  amongst  them,  and 
provide  for  their  own  safety.  They  refusing 
his  kindness  with  tears  in  their  eyes,  he  com¬ 
forted  them  with  all  the  goodness  and  human¬ 
ity  imaginable,  entreating  them  to  leave  them, 
and  wrote  letters  in  their  behalf  to  Theophilus, 
his  steward,  at  Corinth,  that  he  would  provide 
for  their  security,  and  keep  them  concealed 
till  such  time  as  they  could  make  their  peace 
with  Caesar.  This  Theophilus  was  the  father  of 
Hipparchus,  who  had  such  interest  with  An¬ 
tony,  who  was  the  first  of  all  his  freedmen 
that  went  over  to  Caesar,  and  who  settled  after¬ 
wards  at  Corinth.  In  this  posture  were  affairs 
with  Antony. 

But  at  Actium,  his  fleet,  after  a  long  resis¬ 
tance  to  Caesar,  and  suffering  the  most  damage 
from  a  heavy  sea  that  set  in  right  ahead,  scarce¬ 
ly  at  four  in  the  afternoon,  gave  up  the  con¬ 
test,  with  the  loss  of  not  more  than  five  thou¬ 
sand  men  killed,  but  of  three  hundred  ships 
taken,  as  Caesar  himself  has  recorded.  Only  a 
few  had  known  of  Antony’s  flight;  and  those 
who  were  told  of  it  could  not  at  first  give  any 
belief  to  so  incredible  a  thing  as  that  a  general 
who  had  nineteen  entire  legions  and  twelve 
thousand  horse  upon  the  seashore,  could  aban¬ 
don  all  and  fly  away;  and  he,  above  all,  who 
had  so  often  experienced  both  good  and  evil 
fortune,  and  had  in  a  thousand  wars  and  bat¬ 
tles  been  inured  to  changes.  His  soldiers,  how¬ 
ever,  would  not  give  up  their  desires  and  ex¬ 
pectations,  still  fancying  he  would  appear  from 
some  part  or  other,  and  showed  such  a  gener¬ 
ous  fidelity  to  his  service  that,  when  they  were 
thoroughly  assured  that  he  was  fled  in  earnest, 
they  kept  themselves  in  a  body  seven  days, 
making  no  account  of  the  messages  that  Caesar 
sent  to  them.  But  at  last,  seeing  that  Canidius 


773 

himself,  who  commanded  them,  was  fled  from 
the  camp  by  night,  and  that  all  their  officers 
had  quite  abandoned  them,  they  gave  way,  and 
made  their  submission  to  the  conqueror. 

After  this,  Caesar  set  sail  for  Athens,  where 
he  made  a  settlement  with  Greece,  and  dis¬ 
tributed  what  remained  of  the  provision  of 
corn  that  Antony  had  made  for  his  army 
among  the  cities,  which  were  in  a  miserable 
condition,  despoiled  of  their  money,  their 
slaves,  their  horses,  and  beasts  of  service.  My 
great-grandfather  Nicharchus  used  to  relate 
that  the  whole  body  of  the  people  of  our  city 
were  put  in  requisition  to  carry  each  one  a  cer¬ 
tain  measure  of  corn  upon  their  shoulders  to 
the  seaside  near  Anticyra,  men  standing  by  to 
quicken  them  with  the  lash.  They  had  made 
one  journey  of  the  kind,  but  when  they  had 
just  measured  out  the  corn,  and  were  putting 
it  on  their  backs  for  a  second,  news  came  of 
Antony’s  defeat,  and  so  saved  Chaeronea,  for 
all  Antony’s  purveyors  and  soldiers  fled  upon 
the  news,  and  left  them  to  divide  the  corn 
among  themselves. 

When  Antony  came  into  Africa,  he  sent  on 
Cleopatra  from  Paraetonium  into  Egypt,  and 
stayed  himself  in  the  most  entire  solitude  that 
he  could  desire,  roaming  and  wandering  about 
with  only  two  friends,  one  a  Greek,  Aristocra- 
tes,  a  rhetorician,  and  the  other  a  Roman,  Lu- 
cilius,  of  whom  we  have  elsewhere  spoken, 
how,  at  Philippi,  to  give  Brutus  time  to  escape, 
he  suffered  himself  to  be  taken  by  the  pursuers, 
pretending  he  was  Brutus.  Antony  gave  him 
his  life,  and  on  this  account  he  remained  true 
and  faithful  to  him  to  the  last. 

But  when  also  the  officer  who  commanded 
for  him  in  Africa,  to  whose  care  he  had  com¬ 
mitted  all  his  forces  there,  took  them  over  to 
Caesar,  he  resolved  to  kill  himself,  but  was  hin¬ 
dered  by  his  friends.  And  coming  to  Alexan¬ 
dria,  he  found  Cleopatra  busied  in  a  most  bold 
and  wonderful  enterprise.  Over  the  small  space 
of  land  which  divides  the  Red  Sea  from  the  sea 
near  Egypt,  which  may  be  considered  also  the 
boundary  between  Asia  and  Africa,  and  in  the 
narrowest  place  is  not  much  above  three  hun¬ 
dred  furlongs  across,  over  this  neck  of  land 
Cleopatra  had  formed  a  project  of  dragging 
her  fleet  and  setting  it  afloat  in  the  Arabian 
Gulf,  thus  with  her  soldiers  and  her  treasure  to 
secure  herself  a  home  on  the  other  side,  where 
she  might  live  in  peace  far  away  from  war  and 
slavery.  But  the  first  galleys  which  were  car¬ 
ried  over  being  burnt  by  the  Arabians  of  Petra, 
and  Antony  not  knowing  but  that  the  army  be- 


774 

fore  Actium  still  held  together,  she  desisted 
from  her  enterprise,  and  gave  orders  for  the 
fortifying  of  all  the  approaches  to  Egypt. 

But  Antony,  leaving  the  city  and  the  conver¬ 
sation  of  his  friends,  built  him  a  dwelling-place 
in  the  water,  near  Pharos,  upon  a  little  mole 
which  he  cast  up  in  the  sea,  and  there,  seclud¬ 
ing  himself  from  the  company  of  mankind, 
said  he  desired  nothing  but  to  live  the  life  of 
Timon;  as  indeed,  his  case  was  the  same,  and 
the  ingratitude  and  injuries  which  he  suffered 
from  those  he  had  esteemed  his  friends  made 
him  hate  and  distrust  all  mankind. 

This  Timon  was  a  citizen  of  Athens,  and 
lived  much  about  the  Peloponnesian  war,  as 
may  be  seen  by  the  comedies  of  Aristophanes 
and  Plato,  in  which  he  is  ridiculed  as  hater  and 
enemy  of  mankind.  He  avoided  and  repelled 
the  approaches  of  every  one,  but  embraced  with 
kisses  and  the  greatest  show  of  affection  Alci- 
biades,  then  in  his  hot  youth.  And  when  Ape- 
mantus  was  astonished,  and  demanded  the  rea¬ 
son,  he  replied  that  he  knew  this  young  man 
would  one  day  do  infinite  mischief  to  the  Athe¬ 
nians.  He  never  admitted  any  one  into  his  com¬ 
pany,  except  at  times  this  Apemantus,  who  was 
of  the  same  sort  of  temper,  and  was  an  imitator 
of  his  way  of  life.  At  the  celebration  of  the  fes¬ 
tival  of  flagons,  these  two  kept  the  feast  to¬ 
gether,  and  Apemantus,  saying  to  him,  “What 
a  pleasant  party,  Timon!”  “It  would  be,”  he 
answered,  “if  you  were  away.”  One  day  he  got 
up  in  a  full  assembly  on  the  speaker’s  place, 
and  when  there  was  a  dead  silence  and  great 
wonder  at  so  unusual  a  sight,  he  said,  “Ye  men 
of  Athens,  I  have  a  little  plot  of  ground,  and  in 
it  grows  a  fig-tree,  on  which  many  citizens 
have  been  pleased  to  hang  themselves;  and 
now,  having  resolved  to  build  in  that  place,  I 
wish  to  announce  it  publicly,  that  any  of  you 
who  may  be  desirous  may  go  and  hang  your¬ 
selves  before  I  cut  it  down.” 

He  died  and  was  buried  at  Halae,  near  the 
sea,  where  it  so  happened  that,  after  his  burial, 
a  land-slip  took  place  on  the  point  of  the  shore, 
and  the  sea,  flowing  in,  surrounded  his  tomb, 
and  made  it  inaccessible  to  the  foot  of  man.  It 
bore  this  inscription: — 

Here  am  /  laid,  my  life  of  misery  done, 

As\  not  my  name,  l  curse  you  every  one. 

And  this  epitaph  was  made  by  himself;  that 
more  generally  known  is  by  Callimachus: — 
Timon,  the  misanthrope,  am  l  below, 

Go,  and  revile  me,  traveller,  only  go. 

Thus  much  of  Timon,  of  whom  much  more 
might  be  said. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Canidius  now  came,  and  he  brought  the 
news  in  person  of  the  loss  of  the  army  before 
Actium.  Then  he  received  news  that  Herod  of 
Judaea  was  gone  over  to  Caesar  with  some  le¬ 
gions  and  cohorts,  and  that  the  other  kings  and 
princes  were  in  like  manner  deserting  him, 
and  that,  out  of  Egypt,  nothing  stood  by  him. 
All  this,  however,  seemed  not  to  disturb  him, 
but,  as  if  he  were  glad  to  put  away  all  hope, 
that  with  it  he  might  be  rid  of  all  care,  and 
leaving  his  habitation  by  the  sea,  which  he 
called  the  Timoneum,  he  was  received  by  Cleo¬ 
patra  in  the  palace,  and  set  the  whole  city  into 
a  course  of  feasting,  drinking,  and  presents. 
The  son  of  Caesar  and  Cleopatra  was  registered 
among  the  youths,  and  Antyllus,  his  own  son 
by  Fulvia,  received  the  gown  without  the  pur¬ 
ple  border  given  to  those  that  are  come  of  age; 
in  honour  of  which  the  citizens  of  Alexandria 
did  nothing  but  feast  and  revel  for  many  days. 

They  themselves  broke  up  the  Order  of  the 
Inimitable  Livers,  and  constituted  another  in 
its  place,  not  inferior  in  splendour,  luxury,  and 
sumptuosity,  calling  it  that  of  the  Diers  To¬ 
gether.  For  all  those  that  said  they  would  die 
with  Antony  and  Cleopatra  gave  in  their 
names,  for  the  present  passing  their  time  in  all 
manner  of  pleasures  and  a  regular  succession 
of  banquets.  But  Cleopatra  was  busied  in  mak¬ 
ing  a  collection  of  all  varieties  of  poisonous 
drugs,  and,  in  order  to  see  which  of  them  were 
the  least  painful  in  the  operation,  she  had  them 
tried  upon  prisoners  condemned  to  die.  But, 
finding  that  the  quick  poisons  always  worked 
with  sharp  pains,  and  that  the  less  painful  were 
slow,  she  next  tried  venomous  animals,  and 
watched  with  her  own  eyes  whilst  they  were 
applied,  one  creature  to  the  body  of  another. 
This  was  her  daily  practice,  and  she  pretty  well 
satisfied  herself  that  nothing  was  comparable 
to  the  bite  of  the  asp,  which,  without  convul¬ 
sion  or  groaning,  brought  on  a  heavy  drowsi¬ 
ness  and  lethargy,  with  a  gentle  sweat  on  the 
face,  the  senses  being  stupefied  by  degrees;  the 
patient,  in  appearance,  being  sensible  of  no 
pain,  but  rather  troubled  to  be  disturbed  or 
awakened  like  those  that  are  in  a  profound 
natural  sleep. 

At  the  same  time,  they  sent  ambassadors  to 
Caesar  into  Asia,  Cleopatra  asking  for  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Egypt  for  her  children,  and  Antony, 
that  he  might  have  leave  to  live  as  a  private 
man  in  Egypt,  or,  if  that  were  thought  too 
much,  that  he  might  retire  to  Athens.  In  lack 
of  friends,  so  many  having  deserted,  and 
others  not  being  trusted,  Euphronius,  his  son’s 


ANTONY 

tutor,  was  sent  on  this  embassy.  For  Alexas  of 
Laodicea,  who,  by  the  recommendation  of 
Timagenes,  became  acquainted  with  Antony 
at  Rome,  and  had  been  more  powerful  with 
him  than  any  Greek,  and  was,  of  all  the  in¬ 
struments  which  Cleopatra  made  use  of  to  per¬ 
suade  Antony,  the  most  violent,  and  the  chief 
subverter  of  any  good  thoughts  that  from  time 
to  time  might  rise  in  his  mind  in  Octavia’s 
favour,  had  been  sent  before  to  dissuade  Herod 
from  desertion;  but  betraying  his  master,  stay¬ 
ed  with  him  and,  confiding  in  Herod’s  interest, 
had  the  boldness  to  come  into  Caesar’s  presence. 
Herod,  however,  was  not  able  to  help  him,  for 
he  was  immediately  put  in  chains  and  sent  into 
his  own  country,  where,  by  Caesar’s  orders, 
he  was  put  to  death.  This  reward  of  his  trea¬ 
son  Alexas  received  while  Antony  was  yet 
alive. 

Caesar  would  not  listen  to  any  proposals  for 
Antony,  but  he  made  answer  to  Cleopatra  that 
there  was  no  reasonable  favour  which  she 
might  not  expect,  if  she  put  Antony  to  death, 
or  expelled  him  from  Egypt.  He  sent  back 
with  the  ambassadors  his  own  freedman,  Thyr¬ 
sus,  a  man  of  understanding,  and  not  at  all  ill- 
qualified  for  conveying  the  messages  of  a 
youthful  general  to  a  woman  so  proud  of  her 
charms  and  possessed  with  the  opinion  of  the 
power  of  her  beauty.  But  by  the  long  audiences 
he  received  from  her,  and  the  special  honours 
which  she  paid  him,  Antony’s  jealousy  began 
to  be  awakened;  he  had  him  seized,  whipped, 
and  sent  back;  writing  Caesar  word  that  the 
man’s  busy,  impertinent  ways  had  provoked 
him;  in  his  circumstances  he  could  not  be  ex¬ 
pected  to  be  very  patient:  “But  if  it  offend 
you,”  he  added,  “you  have  got  my  freedman, 
Hipparchus,  with  you;  hang  him  up  and 
scourge  him  to  make  us  even.” 

But  Cleopatra,  after  this,  to  clear  herself, 
and  to  allay  his  jealousies,  paid  him  all  the  at¬ 
tentions  imaginable.  When  her  own  birthday 
came,  she  kept  it  as  was  suitable  to  their  fallen 
fortunes;  but  his  was  observed  with  the  utmost 
prodigality  of  splendour  and  magnificence,  so 
that  many  of  the  guests  sat  down  in  want,  and 
went  home  wealthy  men.  Meantime,  continual 
letters  came  to  Caesar  from  Agrippa,  telling 
him  his  presence  was  extremely  required  at 
Rome. 

And  so  the  war  was  deferred  for  a  season. 
But,  the  winter  being  over,  he  began  his 
march;  he  himself  by  Syria,  and  his  captains 
through  Africa.  Pelusium  being  taken,  there 
went  a  report  as  if  it  had  been  delivered  up  to 


775 

Caesar  by  Seleucus,  not  without  the  consent  of 
Cleopatra;  but  she,  to  justify  herself,  gave  up 
into  Antony’s  hands  the  wife  and  children  of 
Seleucus  to  be  put  to  death. 

She  had  caused  to  be  built,  joining  to  the 
temple  of  Isis,  several  tombs  and  monuments 
of  wonderful  height,  and  very  remarkable  for 
the  workmanship;  thither  she  removed  her 
treasure,  her  gold,  silver,  emeralds,  pearls, 
ebony,  ivory,  cinnamon,  and,  after  all,  a  great 
quantity  of  torchwood  and  tow.  Upon  which 
Caesar  began  to  fear  lest  she  should,  in  a  des¬ 
perate  fit,  set  all  these  riches  on  fire;  and,  there¬ 
fore,  while  he  was  marching  towards  the  city 
with  his  army,  he  omitted  no  occasion  of  giv¬ 
ing  her  new  assurances  of  his  good  intentions. 
He  took  up  his  position  in  the  Hippodrome, 
where  Antony  made  a  fierce  sally  upon  him, 
routed  the  horse,  and  beat  them  back  into  their 
trenches,  and  so  returned  with  great  satisfac¬ 
tion  to  the  palace,  where,  meeting  Cleopatra, 
armed  as  he  was,  he  kissed  her,  and  commend¬ 
ed  to  her  favour  one  of  his  men,  who  had  most 
signalised  himself  in  the  fight,  to  whom  she 
made  a  present  of  a  breastplate  and  helmet  of 
gold;  which  he  having  received  went  that  very 
night  and  deserted  to  Caesar. 

After  this,  Antony  sent  a  new  challenge  to 
Caesar  to  fight  him  hand-to-hand;  who  made 
him  answer  that  he  might  find  several  other 
ways  to  end  his  life;  and  he,  considering  with 
himself  that  he  could  not  die  more  honourably 
than  in  battle,  resolved  to  make  an  effort  both 
by  land  and  sea.  At  supper,  it  is  said,  he  bade 
his  servants  help  him  freely,  and  pour  him  out 
wine  plentifully,  since  to-morrow,  perhaps, 
they  should  not  do  the  same,  but  be  servants  to 
a  new  master,  whilst  he  should  lie  on  the 
ground,  a  dead  corpse,  and  nothing.  His 
friends  that  were  about  him  wept  to  hear  him 
talk  so;  which  he  perceiving,  told  them  he 
would  not  lead  them  to  a  battle  in  which  he 
expected  rather  an  honourable  death  than 
either  safety  or  victory. 

That  night,  it  is  related,  about  the  middle  of 
it,  when  the  whole  city  was  in  a  deep  silence 
and  general  sadness,  expecting  the  event  of  the 
next  day,  on  a  sudden  was  heard  the  sound  of 
all  sorts  of  instruments,  and  voices  singing  in 
tune,  and  the  cry  of  a  crowd  of  people  shout¬ 
ing  and  dancing,  like  a  troop  of  bacchanals 
on  its  way.  This  tumultuous  procession  seemed 
to  take  its  course  right  through  the  middle  of 
the  city  to  the  gate  nearest  the  enemy;  here  it 
became  the  loudest,  and  suddenly  passed  out. 
People  who  reflected  considered  this  to  signify 


77  6 

that  Bacchus,  the  god  whom  Antony  had  al¬ 
ways  made  it  his  study  to  copy  and  imitate, 
had  now  forsaken  him. 

As  soon  as  it  was  light,  he  marched  his  in¬ 
fantry  out  of  the  city,  and  posted  them  upon  a 
rising  ground,  from  whence  he  saw  his  fleet 
make  up  to  the  enemy.  There  he  stood  in  ex¬ 
pectation  of  the  event;  but  as  soon  as  the  fleets 
came  near  to  one  another,  his  men  saluted 
Caesar’s  with  their  oars;  and  on  their  respond¬ 
ing,  the  whole  body  of  the  ships,  forming  into 
a  single  fleet,  rowed  up  direct  to  the  city.  An¬ 
tony  had  no  sooner  seen  this,  but  the  horse 
deserted  him,  and  went  over  to  Caesar;  and 
his  foot  being  defeated,  he  retired  into  the  city, 
crying  out  that  Cleopatra  had  betrayed  him  to 
the  enemies  he  had  made  for  her  sake.  She, 
being  afraid  lest  in  his  fury  and  despair  he 
might  do  her  a  mischief,  fled  to  her  monument, 
and  letting  down  the  falling  doors,  which  were 
strong  with  bars  and  bolts,  she  sent  messengers 
who  should  tell  Antony  she  was  dead.  He,  be¬ 
lieving  it,  cried  out,  “Now,  Antony,  why  de¬ 
lay  longer?  Fate  has  snatched  away  the  only 
pretext  for  which  you  could  say  you  desired 
yet  to  live.” 

Going  into  his  chamber,  and  there  loosening 
and  opening  his  coat  of  armour,  “I  am  not,” 
said  he,  “troubled,  Cleopatra,  to  be  at  present 
bereaved  of  you,  for  I  shall  soon  be  with  you; 
but  it  distresses  me  that  so  great  a  general 
should  be  found  of  a  tardier  courage  than  a 
woman.”  He  had  a  faithful  servant,  whose 
name  was  Eros;  he  had  engaged  him  formerly 
to  kill  him  when  he  should  think  it  necessary, 
and  now  he  put  him  to  his  promise.  Eros  drew 
his  sword,  as  designing  to  kill  him,  but,  sud¬ 
denly  turning  round,  he  slew  himself.  And  as 
he  fell  dead  at  his  feet,  “It  is  well  done,  Eros,” 
said  Antony;  “you  show  your  master  how  to 
do  what  you  had  not  the  heart  to  do  yourself;” 
and  so  he  ran  himself  into  the  belly,  and  laid 
himself  upon  the  couch.  The  wound,  however, 
was  not  immediately  mortal;  and  the  flow  of 
blood  ceasing  when  he  lay  down,  presently  he 
came  to  himself,  and  entreated  those  that  were 
about  him  to  put  him  out  of  his  pain;  but  they 
all  fled  out  of  the  chamber,  and  left  him  cry¬ 
ing  out  and  struggling,  until  Diomede,  Cleo¬ 
patra’s  secretary,  came  to  him,  having  orders 
from  her  to  bring  him  into  the  monument. 

When  he  understood  she  was  alive,  he  eager¬ 
ly  gave  order  to  the  servants  to  take  him  up, 
and  in  their  arms  was  carried  to  the  door  of 
the  building.  Cleopatra  would  not  open  the 
door,  but,  looking  from  a  sort  of  window,  she 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

let  down  ropes  and  cords,  to  which  Antony 
was  fastened;  and  she  and  her  two  women,  the 
only  persons  she  had  allowed  to  enter  the 
monument,  drew  him  up.  Those  that  were 
present  say  that  nothing  was  ever  more  sad 
than  this  spectacle,  to  see  Antony,  covered  all 
over  with  blood  and  just  expiring,  thus  drawn 
up,  still  holding  up  his  hands  to  her,  and  lift¬ 
ing  up  his  body  with  the  little  force  he  had  left. 
As,  indeed,  it  was  no  easy  task  for  the  women; 
and  Cleopatra,  with  all  her  force,  clinging  to 
the  rope,  and  straining  with  her  head  to  the 
ground,  with  difficulty  pulled  him  up,  while 
those  below  encouraged  her  with  their  cries, 
and  joined  in  all  her  efforts  and  anxiety. 

When  she  had  got  him  up,  she  laid  him  on 
the  bed,  tearing  all  her  clothes,  which  she 
spread  upon  him;  and,  beating  her  breast  with 
her  hands,  lacerating  herself,  and  disfiguring 
her  own  face  with  the  blood  from  his  wounds, 
she  called  him  her  lord,  her  husband,  her  em¬ 
peror,  and  seemed  to  have  pretty  nearly  for¬ 
gotten  all  her  own  evils,  she  was  so  intent  up¬ 
on  his  misfortunes.  Antony,  stopping  her  lam¬ 
entations  as  well  as  he  could,  called  for  wine 
to  drink,  either  that  he  was  thirsty,  or  that  he 
imagined  that  it  might  put  him  the  sooner  out 
of  pain.  When  he  had  drunk,  he  advised  her  to 
bring  her  own  affairs,  so  far  as  might  be  hon¬ 
ourably  done,  to  a  safe  conclusion,  and  that, 
among  all  the  friends  of  Caesar,  she  should  rely 
on  Proculeius;  that  she  should  not  pity  him 
in  this  last  turn  of  fate,  but  rather  rejoice  for 
him  in  remembrance  of  his  past  happiness, 
who  had  been  of  all  men  the  most  illustrious 
and  powerful,  and  in  the  end  had  fallen  not 
ignobly,  a  Roman  by  a  Roman  overcome. 

Just  as  he  breathed  his  last,  Proculeius  ar¬ 
rived  from  Caesar;  for  when  Antony  gave  him¬ 
self  his  wound,  and  was  carried  into  Cleo¬ 
patra,  one  of  his  guards,  Dercetaeus,  took  up 
Antony’s  sword  and  hid  it;  and,  when  he  saw 
his  opportunity,  stole  away  to  Caesar,  and 
brought  him  the  first  news  of  Antony’s  death, 
and  withal  showed  him  the  bloody  sword.  Cae¬ 
sar,  upon  this,  retired  into  the  inner  part  of 
his  tent,  and  giving  some  tears  to  the  death  of 
one  that  had  been  nearly  allied  to  him  in  mar¬ 
riage,  his  colleague  in  empire,  and  companion 
in  so  many  wars  and  dangers,  he  came  out  to 
his  friends,  and,  bringing  with  him  many  let¬ 
ters,  he  read  to  them  with  how  much  reason 
and  moderation  he  had  always  addressed  him¬ 
self  to  Antony,  and  in  return  what  overbear¬ 
ing  and  arrogant  answers  he  received. 

Then  he  sent  Proculeius  to  use  his  utmost 


ANTONY 

endeavours  to  get  Cleopatra  alive  into- his  pow- 
er;  for  he  was  afraid  of  losing  a  great  treasure, 
and,  besides,  she  would  be  no  small  addition 
to  the  glory  of  his  triumph.  She,  however,  was 
careful  not  to  put  herself  in  Proculeius’s  pow¬ 
er;  but  from  within  her  monument,  he  stand¬ 
ing  on  the  outside  of  a  door,  on  the  level  of  the 
ground,  which  was  strongly  barred,  but  so 
that  they  might  well  enough  hear  one  an¬ 
other’s  voice,  she  held  a  conference  with  him; 
she  demanding  that  her  kingdom  might  be 
given  to  her  children,  and  he  binding  her  to 
be  of  good  courage,  and  trust  Caesar  in  every¬ 
thing. 

Having  taken  particular  notice  of  the  place, 
he  returned  to  Caesar,  and  Gallius  was  sent  to 
parley  with  her  the  second  time;  who,  being 
come  to  the  door,  on  purpose  prolonged  the 
conference,  while  Proculeius  fixed  his  scaling- 
ladders  in  the  window  through  which  the 
women  had  pulled  up  Antony.  And  so  enter¬ 
ing,  with  two  men  to  follow  him,  he  went 
straight  down  to  the  door  where  Cleopatra  was 
discoursing  with  Gallius.  One  of  the  two  wo¬ 
men  who  were  shut  up  in  the  monument  with 
her  cried  out,  “Miserable  Cleopatra,  you  are 
taken  prisoner!”  Upon  which  she  turned  quick, 
and,  looking  at  Proculeius,  drew  out  her  dag¬ 
ger  which  she  had  with  her  to  stab  herself. 
But  Proculeius  ran  up  quickly,  and  seizing 
her  with  both  his  hands,  “For  shame,”  said 
he,  “Cleopatra;  you  wrong  yourself  and  Cae¬ 
sar  much,  who  would  rob  him  of  so  fair  an  oc¬ 
casion  of  showing  his  clemency,  and  would 
make  the  world  believe  the  most  gentle  of  com¬ 
manders  to  be  a  faithless  and  implacable  ene¬ 
my.”  And  so,  taking  the  dagger  out  of  her 
hand,  he  also  shook  her  dress  to  see  if  there 
were  any  poison  hid  in  it.  After  this,  Caesar 
sent  Epaphroditus,  one  of  his  freedmen,  with 
orders  to  treat  her  with  all  the  gentleness  and 
civility  possible,  but  to  take  the  strictest  pre¬ 
cautions  to  keep  her  alive. 

In  the  meanwhile,  Caesar  made  his  entry  in¬ 
to  Alexandria,  with  Areius  the  philosopher  at 
his  side,  holding  him  by  the  hand  and  talking 
with  him;  desiring  that  all  his  fellow-citizens 
should  see  what  honour  was  paid  to  him,  and 
should  look  up  to  him  accordingly  from  the 
very  first  moment.  Then,  entering  the  exer¬ 
cise  ground,  he  mounted  a  platform  erected 
for  the  purpose,  and  from  thence  commanded 
the  citizens  (who,  in  great  fear  and  consterna¬ 
tion,  fell  prostrate  at  his  feet)  to  stand  up,  and 
told  them  that  he  freely  acquitted  the  people 
of  all  blame;  first,  for  the  sake  of  Alexander, 


777 

who  built  their  city;  then  for  the  city’s  sake 
itself,  which  was  so  large  and  beautiful;  and, 
thirdly,  to  gratify  his  friend  Areius. 

Such  great  honour  did  Areius  receive  from 
Caesar;  and  by  his  intercession  many  lives  were 
saved,  amongst  the  rest  that  of  Philostratus,  a 
man,  of  all  the  professors  of  logic  that  ever 
were,  the  most  ready  in  extempore  speaking, 
but  quite  destitute  of  any  right  to  call  himself 
one  of  the  philosophers  of  the  Academy.  Cae¬ 
sar,  out  of  disgust  at  his  character,  refused  all 
attention  to  his  entreaties.  So,  growing  a  long 
white  beard,  and  dressing  himself  in  black,  he 
followed  behind  Areius,  shouting  out  the  verse, 

The  wise,  if  they  are  wise,  will  save  the  wise . 
Which  Caesar  hearing,  gave  him  his  pardon, 
to  prevent  rather  any  odium  that  might  attach 
to  Areius,  than  any  harm  that  Philostratus 
might  suffer. 

Of  Antony’s  children,  Antyllus,  his  son  by 
Fulvia,  being  betrayed  by  his  tutor,  Theo- 
dorus,  was  put  to  death;  and  while  the  sol¬ 
diers  were  cutting  off  his  head,  his  tutor  con¬ 
trived  to  steal  a  precious  jewel  which  he  wore 
about  his  neck,  and  put  it  in  his  pocket,  and 
afterwards  denied  the  fact,  but  was  convicted 
and  crucified.  Cleopatra’s  children,  with  their 
attendants,  had  a  guard  set  on  them,  and  were 
treated  very  honourably.  Caesarion,  who  was 
reputed  to  be  the  son  of  Caesar  the  Dictator, 
was  sent  by  his  mother,  with  a  great  sum  of 
money,  through  ^Ethiopia,  to  pass  into  India; 
but  his  tutor,  a  man  named  Rhodon,  about  as 
honest  as  Theodorus,  persuaded  him  to  turn 
back,  for  that  Caesar  designed  to  make  him 
king.  Caesar  consulting  what  was  best  to  be 
done  with  him,  Areius,  we  are  told,  said: 

Too  many  Caesars  are  not  well. 

So,  afterwards,  when  Cleopatra  was  dead  he 
was  killed. 

Many  kings  and  great  commanders  made 
petition  to  Caesar  for  the  body  of  Antony,  to 
give  him  his  funeral  rites;  but  he  would  not 
take  away  his  corpse  from  Cleopatra,  by  whose 
hands  he  was  buried  with  royal  splendour  and 
magnificence,  it  being  granted  to  her  to  employ 
what  she  pleased  on  his  funeral.  In  this  ex¬ 
tremity  of  grief  and  sorrow,  and  having  in¬ 
flamed  and  ulcerated  her  breasts  with  beating 
them,  she  fell  into  a  high  fever,  and  was  very 
glad  of  the  occasion,  hoping,  under  this  pre¬ 
text,  to  abstain  from  food,  and  so  to  die  in  quiet 
without  interference.  She  had  her  own  phy¬ 
sician,  Olympus,  to  whom  she  told  the  truth, 
and  asked  his  advice  and  help  to  put  an  end 
to  herself,  as  Olympus  himself  has  told  us,  in 


778 

a  narrative  which  he  wrote  of  these  events. 
But  Caesar,  suspecting  her  purpose,  took  to 
menacing  language  about  her  children,  and 
excited  her  fears  for  them,  before  which  en¬ 
gines  her  purpose  shook  and  gave  way,  so  that 
she  suffered  those  about  her  to  give  her  what 
meat  or  medicine  they  pleased. 

Some  few  days  after,  Caesar  himself  came  to 
make  her  a  visit  and  comfort  her.  She  lay  then 
upon  her  pallet-bed  in  undress,  and,  on  his  en¬ 
tering,  sprang  up  from  off  her  bed,  having 
nothing  on  but  the  one  garment  next  her  body, 
and  flung  herself  at  his  feet,  her  hair  and  face 
looking  wild  and  disfigured,  her  voice  quiver¬ 
ing,  and  her  eyes  sunk  in  her  head.  The  marks 
of  the  blows  she  had  given  herself  were  visible 
about  her  bosom,  and  altogether  her  whole 
person  seemed  no  less  afflicted  than  her  soul. 
But,  for  all  this,  her  old  charm,  and  the  bold¬ 
ness  of  her  youthful  beauty,  had  not  wholly 
left  her,  and,  in  spite  of  her  present  condition, 
still  sparkled  from  within,  and  let  itself  ap¬ 
pear  in  all  the  movements  of  her  countenance. 
Caesar,  desiring  her  to  repose  herself,  sat  down 
by  her;  and,  on  this  opportunity,  she  said 
something  to  justify  her  actions,  attributing 
what  she  had  done  to  the  necessity  she  was  un¬ 
der,  and  to  her  fear  of  Antony;  and  when 
Caesar,  on  each  point,  made  his  objections,  and 
she  found  herself  confuted,  she  broke  off  at 
once  into  language  of  entreaty  and  depreca¬ 
tion,  as  if  she  desired  nothing  more  than  to 
prolong  her  life. 

And  at  last,  having  by  her  a  list  of  her 
treasure,  she  gave  it  into  his  hands;  and  when 
Seleucus,  one  of  her  stewards,  who  was  by, 
pointed  out  that  various  articles  were  omitted, 
and  charged  her  with  secreting  them,  she  flew 
up  and  caught  him  by  the  hair,  and  struck 
him  several  blows  on  the  face.  Caesar  smiling 
and  withholding  her,  “Is  it  not  very  hard, 
Caesar,”  said  she,  “when  you  do  me  the  honour 
to  visit  me  in  this  condition  I  am  in,  that  I 
should  be  accused  by  one  of  my  own  servants 
of  laying  by  some  women’s  toys,  not  meant  to 
adorn,  be  sure,  my  unhappy  self,  but  that  I 
might  have  some  little  present  by  me  to  make 
your  Octavia  and  your  Livia,  that  by  their  in¬ 
tercession  I  might  hope  to  find  you  in  some 
measure  disposed  to  mercy?”  Caesar  was 
pleased  to  hear  her  talk  thus,  being  now  assured 
that  she  was  desirous  to  live.  And,  therefore, 
letting  her  know  that  the  things  she  had  laid 
by  she  might  dispose  of  as  she  pleased,  and  his 
usage  of  her  should  be  honourable  above  her 
expectation,  he  went  away,  well  satisfied  that 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

he  had  overreached  her,  but,  in  fact,  was  him¬ 
self  deceived. 

There  was  a  young  man  of  distinction 
among  Caesar’s  companions  named  Cornelius 
Dolabella.  He  was  not  without  a  certain  ten¬ 
derness  for  Cleopatra,  and  sent  her  word  pri¬ 
vately,  as  she  had  besought  him  to  do,  that  Cae¬ 
sar  was  about  to  return  through  Syria,  and  that 
she  and  her  children  were  to  be  sent  on  with¬ 
in  three  days.  When  she  understood  this,  she 
made  her  request  to  Caesar  that  he  would  be 
pleased  to  permit  her  to  make  oblations  to  the 
departed  Antony;  which  being  granted,  she 
ordered  herself  to  be  carried  to  the  place 
where  he  was  buried,  and  there,  accompanied 
by  her  women,  she  embraced  his  tomb  with 
tears  in  her  eyes,  and  spoke  in  this  manner: 

“O,  dearest  Antony,”  said  she,  “it  is  not 
long  since  that  with  these  hands  I  buried  you; 
then  they  were  free,  now  I  am  a  captive,  and 
pay  these  last  duties  to  you  with  a  guard  upon 
me,  for  fear  that  my  just  griefs  and  sorrows 
should  impair  my  servile  body,  and  make  it 
less  fit  to  appear  in  their  triumph  over  you. 
No  further  offerings  or  libations  expect  from 
me;  these  are  the  last  honours  that  Cleopatra 
can  pay  your  memory,  for  she  is  to  be  hurried 
away  far  from  you.  Nothing  could  part  us 
whilst  we  lived,  but  death  seems  to  threaten 
to  divide  us.  You,  a  Roman  born,  have  found 
a  grave  in  Egypt;  I,  an  Egyptian,  am  to  seek 
that  favour,  and  none  but  that,  in  your  coun¬ 
try.  But  if  the  gods  below,  with  whom  you 
now  are,  either  can  or  will  do  anything 
(since  those  above  have  betrayed  us),  suffer 
not  your  living  wife  to  be  abandoned;  let  me 
not  be  led  in  triumph  to  your  shame,  but  hide 
me  and  bury  me  here  with  you,  since,  amongst 
all  my  bitter  misfortunes,  nothing  has  afflicted 
me  like  this  brief  time  that  I  have  lived  away 
from  you.” 

Having  made  these  lamentations,  crowning 
the  tomb  with  garlands  and  kissing  it,  she 
gave  orders  to  prepare  her  a  bath,  and,  com¬ 
ing  out  of  the  bath,  she  lay  down  and  made 
a  sumptuous  meal.  And  a  country  fellow 
brought  her  a  little  basket,  which  the  guards 
intercepting  and  asking  what  it  was,  the  fel¬ 
low  put  the  leaves  which  lay  uppermost  aside, 
and  showed  them  it  was  full  of  figs;  and  on 
their  admiring  the  largeness  and  beauty  of  the 
figs,  he  laughed,  and  invited  them  to  take 
some,  which  they  refused,  and,  suspecting 
nothing,  bade  him  carry  them  in.  After  her 
repast,  Cleopatra  sent  to  Caesar  a  letter  which 
she  had  written  and  sealed;  and,  putting  every- 


ANTONY 

body  out  of  the  monument  but  her-  two  wo¬ 
men,  she  shut  the  doors. 

Caesar,  opening  her  letter,  and  finding  pa¬ 
thetic  prayers  and  entreaties  that  she  might  be 
buried  in  the  same  tomb  with  Antony,  soon 
guessed  what  was  doing.  At  first  he  was  going 
himself  in  all  haste,  but,  changing  his  mind, 
he  sent  others  to  see.  The  thing  had  been 
quickly  done.  The  messengers  came  at  full 
speed,  and  found  the  guards  apprehensive  of 
nothing;  but  on  opening  the  doors  they  saw 
her  stone-dead,  lying  upon  a  bed  of  gold,  set 
out  in  all  her  royal  ornaments.  Iras,  one  of  her 
women,  lay  dying  at  her  feet,  and  Charmion, 
just  ready  to  fall,  scarce  able  to  hold  up  her 
head,  was  adjusting  her  mistress’s  diadem. 
And  when  one  that  came  in  said  angrily,  “Was 
this  well  done  of  your  lady,  Charmion,”  “Ex¬ 
tremely  well,”  she  answered,  “and  as  became 
the  descendant  of  so  many  kings;”  and  as  she 
said  this,  she  fell  down  dead  by  the  bedside. 

Some  relate  that  an  asp  was  brought  in 
amongst  those  figs  and  covered  with  the  leaves, 
and  that  Cleopatra  had  arranged  that  it  might 
settle  on  her  before  she  knew,  but,  when  she 
took  away  some  of  the  figs  and  saw  it,  she  said, 
“So  here  it  is,”  and  held  out  her  bare  arm  to  be 
bitten.  Others  say  that  it  was  kept  in  a  vase, 
and  that  she  vexed  and  pricked  it  with  a  gold¬ 
en  spindle  till  it  seized  her  arm.  But  what 
really  took  place  is  known  to  no  one,  since  it 
was  also  said  that  she  carried  poison  in  a  hol¬ 
low  bodkin,  about  which  she  wound  her  hair; 
yet  there  was  not  so  much  as  a  spot  found,  or 
any  symptom  of  poison  upon  her  body,  nor 
was  the  asp  seen  within  the  monument;  only 
something  like  the  trail  of  it  was  said  to  have 
been  noticed  on  the  sand  by  the  sea,  on  the 
part  towards  which  the  building  faced  and 
where  the  windows  were.  Some  relate  that  two 
faint  puncture-marks  were  found  on  Cleo¬ 
patra’s  arm,  and  to  this  account  Caesar  seems 
to  have  given  credit;  for  in  his  triumph  there 
was  carried  a  figure  of  Cleopatra,  with  an  asp 
clinging  to  her.  Such  are  the  various  accounts. 

But  Caesar,  though  much  disappointed  by 
her  death,  yet  could  not  but  admire  the  great¬ 
ness  of  her  spirit,  and  gave  order  that  her 
body  should  be  buried  by  Antony  with  royal 
splendour  and  magnificence.  Her  women,  also, 
received  honourable  burial  by  his  directions. 
Cleopatra  had  lived  nine-and-thirty  years, 


779 

during  twenty-two  of  which  she  had  reigned 
as  queen,  and  for  fourteen  had  been  Antony’s 
partner  in  his  empire.  Antony,  according  to 
some  authorities,  was  fifty-three,  according  to 
others,  fifty-six  years  old.  His  statues  were  all 
thrown  down,  but  those  of  Cleopatra  were  left 
untouched;  for  Archibius,  one  of  her  friends, 
gave  Caesar  two  thousand  talents  to  save  them 
from  the  fate  of  Antony’s. 

Antony  left  by  his  three  wives  seven  chil¬ 
dren,  of  whom  only  Antyllus,  the  eldest,  was 
put  to  death  by  Caesar;  Octavia  took  the  rest, 
and  brought  them  up  with  her  own.  Cleopatra, 
his  daughter  by  Cleopatra,  was  given  in  mar¬ 
riage  to  Juba,  the  most  accomplished  of  kings; 
and  Antony,  his  son  by  Fulvia,  attained  such 
high  favour  that,  whereas  Agrippa  was  con¬ 
sidered  to  hold  the  first  place  with  Caesar,  and 
the  sons  of  Livia  the  second,  the  third,  with¬ 
out  dispute,  was  possessed  by  Antony.  Octavia, 
also,  having  had  by  her  first  husband,  Mar- 
cellus,  two  daughters,  and  one  son  named 
Marcellus,  this  son  Caesar  adopted,  and  gave 
him  his  daughter  in  marriage;  as  did  Octavia 
one  of  the  daughters  to  Agrippa.  But  Mar¬ 
cellus  dying  almost  immediately  after  his  mar¬ 
riage,  she,  perceiving  that  her  brother  was  at 
a  loss  to  find  elsewhere  any  sure  friend  to  be 
his  son-in-law,  was  the  first  to  recommend 
that  Agrippa  should  put  away  her  daughter 
and  marry  Julia.  To  this  Caesar  first,  and  then 
Agrippa  himself,  gave  assent;  so  Agrippa  mar¬ 
ried  Julia,  and  Octavia,  receiving  her  daugh¬ 
ter,  married  her  to  the  young  Antony. 

Of  the  two  daughters  whom  Octavia  had 
borne  to  Antony,  the  one  was  married  to  Domi- 
tius  Ahenobarbus;  and  the  other,  Antonia, 
famous  for  her  beauty  and  discretion,  was 
married  to  Drusus,  the  son  of  Livia,  and  step¬ 
son  to  Caesar.  Of  these  parents  were  born 
Germanicus  and  Claudius.  Claudius  reigned 
later;  and  of  the  children  of  Germanicus, 
Caius,  after  a  reign  of  distinction,  was  killed 
with  his  wife  and  child;  Agrippina,  after  bear¬ 
ing  a  son  Lucius  Domitius,  to  Ahenobarbus, 
was  married  to  Claudius  Caesar,  who  adopted 
Domitius,  giving  him  the  name  of  Nero  Ger¬ 
manicus.  He  was  emperor  in  our  time,  and  put 
his  mother  to  death,  and  with  his  madness  and 
folly  came  not  far  from  ruining  the  Roman 
empire,  being  Antony’s  descendant  in  the  fifth 
generation. 


780 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 


ANTONY  and  DEMETRIUS 
Compared 


As  both  are  great  examples  of  the  vicissi¬ 
tudes  of  fortune,  let  us  first  consider  in 
what  way  they  attained  their  power  and  glory. 
Demetrius  hired  a  kingdom  already  won  for 
him  by  Antigonus,  the  most  powerful  of  the 
successors,  who,  before  Demetrius  grew  to  be 
a  man,  traversed  with  his  armies  and  subdued 
the  greater  part  of  Asia.  Antony’s  father  was 
well  enough  in  other  respects,  but  was  no 
warrior,  and  could  bequeath  no  great  legacy 
of  reputation  to  his  son,  who  had  the  boldness, 
nevertheless,  to  take  upon  him  the  govern¬ 
ment,  to  which  birth  gave  him  no  claim,  which 
had  been  held  by  Caesar,  and  became  the  in¬ 
heritor  of  his  great  labours.  And  such  power 
did  he  attain,  with  only  himself  to  thank  for 
it,  that,  in  a  division  of  the  whole  empire  into 
two  portions,  he  took  and  received  the  nobler 
one;  and,  absent  himself,  by  his  mere  subal¬ 
terns  and  lieutenants  often  defeated  the  Par- 
thians,  and  drove  the  barbarous  nations  of  the 
Caucasus  back  to  the  Caspian  Sea.  Those  very 
things  that  procured  him  ill-repute  bear  wit¬ 
ness  to  his  greatness.  Antigonus  considered 
Antipater’s  daughter  Phila,  in  spite  of  the 
disparity  of  her  years,  an  advantageous  match 
for  Demetrius.  Antony  was  thought  disgraced 
by  his  marriage  with  Cleopatra,  a  queen  supe¬ 
rior  in  power  and  glory  to  all,  except  Arsaces, 
who  were  kings  in  her  time.  Antony  was  so 
great  as  to  be  thought  by  others  worthy  of 
higher  things  than  his  own  desires. 

As  regards  the  right  and  justice  of  their 
aims  at  empire,  Demetrius  need  not  be  blamed 
for  seeking  to  rule  a  people  that  had  always 
had  a  king  to  rule  them.  Antony,  who  enslaved 
the  Roman  people,  just  liberated  from  the  rule 
of  Caesar,  followed  a  cruel  and  tyrannical  ob¬ 
ject.  His  greatest  and  most  illustrious  work, 
his  successful  war  with  Brutus  and  Cassius, 
was  done  to  crush  the  liberties  of  his  country 
and  of  his  fellow-citizens.  Demetrius,  till  he 
was  driven  to  extremity,  went  on,  without  in¬ 
termission,  maintaining  liberty  in  Greece,  and 
expelling  the  foreign  garrisons  from  the  cities; 
not  like  Antony,  whose  boast  was  to  have 
slain  in  Macedonia  those  who  had  set  up  lib¬ 
erty  in  Rome.  As  for  the  profusion  and 
magnificence  of  his  gifts,  one  point  for  which 
Antony  is  lauded,  Demetrius  so  far  outdid 
them  that  what  he  gave  to  his  enemies  was  far 


more  than  Antony  ever  gave  to  his  friends. 
Antony  was  renowned  for  giving  Brutus  hon¬ 
ourable  burial;  Demetrius  did  so  to  all  the 
enemy’s  dead,  and  sent  the  prisoners  back  to 
Ptolemy  with  money  and  presents. 

Both  were  insolent  in  prosperity,  and  aban¬ 
doned  themselves  to  luxuries  and  enjoyments. 
Yet  it  cannot  be  said  that  Demetrius,  in  his 
revellings  and  dissipations,  ever  let  slip  the 
time  for  action;  pleasures  with  him  attended 
only  the  superabundance  of  his  ease,  and  his 
Lamia,  like  that  of  the  fable,  belonged  only 
to  his  playful,  half-waking,  half-sleeping  hours. 
When  war  demanded  his  attention,  his  spear 
was  not  wreathed  with  ivy,  nor  his  helmet 
redolent  of  unguents;  he  did  not  come  out  to 
battle  from  the  women’s  chamber,  but,  hush¬ 
ing  the  bacchanal  shouts  and  putting  an  end 
to  the  orgies,  he  became  at  once,  as  Euripides 
calls  it,  “the  minister  of  the  unpriestly  Mars”; 
and,  in  short,  he  never  once  incurred  disaster 
through  indolence  or  self-indulgence.  Where¬ 
as  Antony,  like  Hercules  in  the  picture  where 
Omphale  is  seen  removing  his  club  and  strip¬ 
ping  him  of  his  lion’s  skin,  was  over  and  over 
again  disarmed  by  Cleopatra,  and  beguiled 
away,  while  great  actions  and  enterprises  of 
the  first  necessity  fell,  as  it  were,  from  his 
hands,  to  go  with  her  to  the  seashore  of  Cano¬ 
pus  and  Taphosiris,  and  play  about.  And  in 
the  end,  like  another  Paris  he  left  the  battle 
to  fly  to  her  arms;  or  rather,  to  say  the  truth, 
Paris  fled  when  he  was  already  beaten;  Antony 
fled  first,  and,  following  Cleopatra,  abandoned 
his  victory. 

There  was  no  law  to  prevent  Demetrius 
from  marrying  several  wives;  from  the  time  of 
Philip  and  Alexander  it  had  become  usual 
with  Macedonian  kings,  and  he  did  no  more 
than  was  done  by  Lysimachus  and  Ptolemy. 
And  those  he  married  he  treated  honourably. 
But  Antony,  first  of  all,  in  marrying  two  wives 
at  once,  did  a  thing  which  no  Roman  had  ever 
allowed  himself;  and  then  he  drove  away  his 
lawful  Roman  wife  to  please  the  foreign  and 
unlawful  woman.  And  so  Demetrius  incurred 
no  harm  at  all;  Antony  procured  his  ruin  by 
his  marriage.  On  the  other  hand,  no  licentious 
act  of  Antony’s  can  be  charged  with  that  im¬ 
piety  which  marks  those  of  Demetrius.  His¬ 
torical  writers  tell  us  that  the  very  dogs  are 


DION 

excluded  from  the  whole  Acropolis  because  of 
their  gross,  uncleanly  habits.  The  very  Par¬ 
thenon  itself  saw  Demetrius  consorting  with 
harlots  and  debauching  free  women  of  Athens. 
The  vice  of  cruelty,  also,  remote  as  it  seems 
from  the  indulgence  of  voluptuous  desires, 
must  be  attributed  to  him,  who,  in  the  pursuit 
of  his  pleasures,  allowed  or,  to  say  more  truly, 
compelled  the  death  of  the  most  beautiful  and 
most  chaste  of  the  Athenians,  who  found  no 
way  but  this  to  escape  his  violence.  In  one 
word,  Antony  himself  suffered  by  his  excesses, 
and  other  people  by  those  of  Demetrius. 

In  his  conduct  to  his  parents,  Demetrius 
was  irreproachable.  Antony  gave  up  his  moth¬ 
er’s  brother,  in  order  that  he  might  have  leave 
to  kill  Cicero,  this  itself  being  so  cruel  and 
shocking  an  act  that  Antony  would  hardly  be 
forgiven  if  Cicero’s  death  had  been  the  price 
of  this  uncle’s  safety.  In  respect  of  breaches  of 
oaths  and  treaties,  the  seizure  of  Artabazes, 
and  the  assassination  of  Alexander,  Antony 
may  urge  the  plea  which  no  one  denies  to  be 
true,  that  Artabazes  first  abandoned  and  be¬ 
trayed  him  in  Media;  Demetrius  is  alleged  by 
many  to  have  invented  false  pretexts  for  his 


781 

act,  and  not  to  have  retaliated  for  injuries, 
but  to  have  accused  one  whom  he  injured 
himself. 

The  achievements  of  Demetrius  are  all  his 
own  work.  Antony’s  noblest  and  greatest  vic¬ 
tories  were  won  in  his  absence  by  his  lieuten¬ 
ants.  For  their  final  disasters  they  have  both 
only  to  thank  themselves;  not,  however,  in  an 
equal  degree.  Demetrius  was  deserted,  the 
Macedonians  revolted  from  him;  Antony  de¬ 
serted  others,  and  ran  away  while  men  were 
fighting  for  him  at  the  risk  of  their  lives.  The 
fault  to  be  found  with  the  one  is  that  he  had 
thus  entirely  alienated  the  affections  of  his 
soldiers;  the  other’s  condemnation  is  that  he 
abandoned  so  much  love  and  faith  as  he  still 
possessed.  We  cannot  admire  the  death  of 
either,  but  that  of  Demetrius  excites  our  great¬ 
er  contempt.  He  let  himself  become  a  prisoner, 
and  was  thankful  to  gain  a  three  years’  acces¬ 
sion  of  life  in  captivity.  He  was  tamed  like  a 
wild  beast  by  his  belly,  and  by  wine;  Antony 
took  himself  out  of  the  world  in  a  cowardly, 
pitiful,  and  ignoble  manner,  but  still  in  time 
to  prevent  the  enemy  having  his  person  in  their 
power. 


DION 

4o8?~353  b.c. 


f  it  be  true,  Sosius  Senecio,  that,  as  Simon¬ 
ides  tells  us — 

Of  the  Corinthians  Troy  does  not  complain 

for  having  taken  part  with  the  Achaeans  in  the 
siege,  because  the  Trojans  also  had  Corinthians 
(Glaucus,  who  sprang  from  Corinth)  fighting 
bravely  on  their  side,  so  also  it  may  be  fairly 
said  that  neither  Romans  nor  Greeks  can  quar¬ 
rel  with  the  Academy,  each  nation  being 
equally  represented  in  the  following  pair  of 
lives,  which  will  give  an  account  of  Brutus 
and  of  Dion — Dion,  who  was  Plato’s  own 
hearer,  and  Brutus,  who  was  brought  up  in 
his  philosophy.  They  came  from  one  and  the 
self-same  school,  where  they  had  been  trained 
alike  to  run  the  race  of  honour;  nor  need  we 
wonder  that  in  the  performance  of  actions 
often  most  nearly  allied  and  akin,  they  both 
bore  evidence  to  the  truth  of  what  their  guide 
and  teacher  said,  that,  without  the  concur¬ 
rence  of  power  and  success,  with  justice  and 


prudence,  public  actions  do  not  attain  their 
proper,  great,  and  noble  character. 

For  as  Hippomachus  the  wrestling-master 
affirmed,  he  could  distinguish  his  scholars  at 
a  distance,  though  they  were  but  carrying  meat 
from  the  shambles,  so  it  is  very  probable  that 
the  principles  of  those  who  have  had  the  same 
good  education  should  appear  with  a  resem¬ 
blance  in  all  their  actions,  creating  in  them  a 
certain  harmony  and  proportion,  at  once  agree¬ 
able  and  becoming. 

We  may  also  draw  a  close  parallel  of  the 
lives  of  the  two  men  from  their  fortunes, 
wherein  chance,  even  more  than  their  own  de¬ 
signs,  made  them  nearly  alike.  For  they  were 
both  cut  off  by  an  untimely  death,  not  being 
able  to  accomplish  those  ends  which  through 
many  risks  and  difficulties  they  aimed  at.  But, 
above  all,  this  is  most  wonderful;  that  by  pre¬ 
ternatural  interposition  both  of  them  had  no¬ 
tice  given  of  their  approaching  death  by  an  un- 
propitious  form,  which  visibly  appeared  to 


782 

them.  And  yet  there  are  people  who  utterly 
deny  any  such  thing,  and  say  that  no  man  in 
his  right  senses  ever  yet  saw  any  supernatural 
phantom  or  apparition,  but  that  children  only, 
and  silly  women,  or  men  disordered  by  sick¬ 
ness,  in  some  aberration  of  the  mind  or  dis- 
temperature  of  the  body,  have  had  empty  and 
extravagant  imaginations,  whilst  the  real  evil 
genius,  superstition,  was  in  themselves. 

Yet  if  Dion  and  Brutus,  men  of  solid  un¬ 
derstanding,  and  philosophers,  not  to  be  easily 
deluded  by  fancy  or  discomposed  by  any  sud¬ 
den  apprehension,  were  thus  affected  by  vi¬ 
sions  that  they  forthwith  declared  to  their 
friends  what  they  had  seen,  I  know  not  how 
we  can  avoid  admitting  again  the  utterly  ex¬ 
ploded  opinion  of  the  oldest  times,  that  evil 
and  beguiling  spirits,  out  of  envy  to  good  men, 
and  a  desire  of  impeding  their  good  deeds, 
make  efforts  to  excite  in  them  feelings  of  ter¬ 
ror  and  distraction,  to  make  them  shake  and 
totter  in  their  virtue,  lest  by  a  steady  and  un¬ 
biassed  perseverance  they  should  obtain  a 
happier  condition  than  these  beings  after 
death. 

But  I  shall  leave  these  things  for  another 
opportunity,  and,  in  this  twelfth  book  of  the 
lives  of  great  men  compared  one  with  another, 
begin  with  his  who  was  the  elder. 

Dionysius  the  First,  having  possessed  him¬ 
self  of  the  government,  at  once  took  to  wife 
the  daughter  of  Hermocrates,  the  Syracusan. 
She,  in  an  outbreak  which  the  citizens  made 
before  the  new  power  was  well  settled,  was 
abused  in  such  a  barbarous  and  outrageous 
manner  that  for  shame  she  put  an  end  to  her 
own  life.  But  Dionysius,  when  he  was  re-es¬ 
tablished  and  confirmed  in  his  supremacy, 
married  two  wives  together,  one  named  Doris, 
of  Locri,  the  other  Aristomache,  a  native  of 
Sicily,  and  daughter  of  Hipparinus,  a  man  of 
the  first  quality  in  Syracuse,  and  colleague 
with  Dionysius  when  he  was  first  chosen  gen¬ 
eral  with  unlimited  powers  for  the  war.  It  is 
said  he  married  them  both  in  one  day,  and  no 
one  ever  knew  which  of  the  two  he  first  made 
his  wife;  and  ever  after  he  divided  his  kindness 
equally  between  them,  both  accompanying 
him  together  at  his  table,  and  in  his  bed  by 
turns. 

Indeed,  the  Syracusans  were  urgent  that 
their  own  countrywoman  might  be  preferred 
before  the  stranger;  but  Doris,  to  compensate 
her  for  her  foreign  extraction,  had  the  good 
fortune  to  be  the  mother  of  the  son  and  heir  of 
the  family,  whilst  Aristomache  continued  a 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

long  time  without  issue,  though  Dionysius  was 
very  desirous  to  have  children  by  her,  and,  in¬ 
deed,  caused  Doris’s  mother  to  be  put  to  death, 
laying  to  her  charge  that  she  had  given  drugs 
to  Aristomache  to  prevent  her  being  with  child. 

Dion,  Aristomache’s  brother,  at  first  found 
an  honourable  reception  for  his  sister’s  sake; 
but  his  own  worth  and  parts  soon  procured 
him  a  nearer  place  in  his  brother-in-law’s  af¬ 
fection,  who,  among  other  favours,  gave  special 
command  to  his  treasurers  to  furnish  Dion 
with  whatever  money  he  demanded,  only  tell¬ 
ing  him  on  the  same  day  what  they  had  deliv¬ 
ered  out.  Now,  though  Dion  was  before  re¬ 
puted  a  person  of  lofty  character,  of  a  noble 
mind,  and  daring  courage,  yet  these  excellent 
qualifications  all  received  a  great  development 
from  the  happy  chance  which  conducted  Plato 
into  Sicily;  not  assuredly  by  any  human  device 
or  calculation,  but  some  supernatural  power, 
designing  that  this  remote  cause  should  here¬ 
after  occasion  the  recovery  of  the  Sicilians’  lost 
liberty  and  the  subversion  of  the  tyrannical 
government,  brought  the  philosopher  out  of 
Italy  to  Syracuse,  and  made  acquaintance  be¬ 
tween  him  and  Dion. 

Dion  was,  indeed,  at  this  time  extremely 
young  in  years,  but  of  all  the  scholars  that  at¬ 
tended  Plato  he  was  the  quickest  and  aptest  to 
learn,  and  the  most  prompt  and  eager  to  prac¬ 
tise  the  lessons  of  virtue,  as  Plato  himself  re¬ 
ports  of  him  and  his  own  actions  sufficiently 
testify.  For  though  he  had  been  bred  up  under 
a  tyrant  in  habits  of  submission,  accustomed  to 
a  life  on  the  one  hand  of  servility  and  intimida¬ 
tion,  and  yet  on  the  other  of  vulgar  display  and 
luxury,  the  mistaken  happiness  of  people  that 
knew  no  better  thing  than  pleasure  and  self- 
indulgence,  yet,  at  the  first  taste  of  reason  and 
a  philosophy  that  demands  obedience  to  virtue, 
his  soul  was  set  in  a  flame,  and  in  the  simple  in¬ 
nocence  of  youth,  concluding,  from  his  own 
disposition,  that  the  same  reason  would  work 
the  same  effects  upon  Dionysius,  he  made  it  his 
business,  and  at  length  obtained  the  favour  of 
him,  at  a  leisure  hour,  to  hear  Plato. 

At  this  their  meeting,  the  subject-matter  of 
their  discourse  in  general  was  human  virtue, 
but,  more  particularly,  they  disputed  concern¬ 
ing  fortitude,  which  Plato  proved  tyrants,  of  all 
men,  had  the  least  pretence  to;  and  thence  pro¬ 
ceeding  to  treat  of  justice,  asserted  the  happy 
estate  of  the  just  and  the  miserable  condition  of 
the  unjust:  arguments  which  Dionysius  would 
not  hear  out,  but,  feeling  himself,  as  it  were, 
convicted  by  his  words,  and  much  displeased 


DION 

to  see  the  rest  of  the  auditors  full  of  admira¬ 
tion  for  the  speaker  and  captivated  with  his 
doctrine,  at  last,  exceedingly  exasperated,  he 
asked  the  philosopher  in  a  rage,  what  business 
he  had  in  Sicily.  To  which  Plato  answered,  “I 
came  to  seek  a  virtuous  man.”  “It  seems,  then,” 
replied  Dionysius,  “you  have  lost  your  labour.” 

Dion,  supposing  that  this  was  all,  and  that 
nothing  further  could  come  of  his  anger,  at 
Plato’s  request  conveyed  him  aboard  a  galley, 
which  was  conveying  Pollis,  the  Spartan,  into 
Greece.  But  Dionysius  privately  dealt  with 
Pollis,  by  all  means  to  kill  Plato  in  the  voyage; 
if  not,  to  be  sure  to  sell  him  for  a  slave:  he 
would,  of  course,  take  no  harm  of  it,  being  the 
same  just  man  as  before;  he  would  enjoy  that 
happiness,  though  he  lost  his  liberty.  Pollis, 
therefore,  it  is  stated,  carried  Plato  to  iEgina, 
and  there  sold  him;  the  ^Eginetans,  then  at  war 
with  Athens,  having  made  a  decree  that  what¬ 
ever  Athenian  was  taken  on  their  coasts  should 
forthwith  be  exposed  to  sale. 

Notwithstanding,  Dion  was  not  in  less  fa¬ 
vour  and  credit  with  Dionysius  than  formerly, 
but  was  intrusted  with  the  most  considerable 
employments,  and  sent  on  important  embassies 
to  Carthage,  in  the  management  of  which  he 
gained  very  great  reputation.  Besides,  the 
usurper  bore  with  the  liberty  he  took  to  speak 
his  mind  freely,  he  being  the  only  man  who, 
upon  any  occasion,  durst  boldly  say  what  he 
thought,  as,  for  example,  in  the  rebuke  he  gave 
him  about  Gelon.  Dionysius  was  ridiculing 
Gelon’s  government,  and,  alluding  to  his  name, 
said  he  had  been  the  laughing-stock  of  Sicily, 
While  others  seemed  to  admire  and  applaud 
the  quibble,  Dion  very  warmly  replied,  “Nev¬ 
ertheless,  it  is  certain  that  you  are  sole  governor 
here,  because  you  were  trusted  for  Gelon’s 
sake;  but  for  your  sake  no  man  will  ever  here¬ 
after  be  trusted  again.”  For,  indeed,  Gelon  had 
made  a  monarchy  appear  the  best,  whereas 
Dionysius  had  convinced  men  that  it  was  the 
worst  of  governments. 

Dionysius  had  three  children  by  Doris,  and 
by  Aristomache  four,  two  of  which  were 
daughters,  Sophrosyne  and  Arete.  Sophrosyne 
was  married  to  his  son  Dionysius;  Arete,  to  his 
brother  Thearides,  after  whose  death  Dion  re¬ 
ceived  his  niece  Arete  to  wife.  Now  when  Dio¬ 
nysius  was  sick  and  like  to  die,  Dion  endeav¬ 
oured  to  speak  with  him  in  behalf  of  the  chil¬ 
dren  he  had  by  Aristomache,  but  was  still  pre¬ 
vented  by  the  physicians,  who  wanted  to  in¬ 
gratiate  themselves  with  the  next  successor, 
who  also,  as  Timaeus  reports,  gave  him  a  sleep- 


783 

ing  potion  which  he  asked  for,  which  produced 
an  insensibility  only  followed  by  his  death. 

Nevertheless,  at  the  first  council  which  the 
young  Dionysius  held  with  his  friends,  Dion 
discoursed  so  well  of  the  present  state  of  affairs 
that  he  made  all  the  rest  appear  in  their  politics 
but  children,  and  in  their  votes  rather  slaves 
than  counsellors,  who  timorously  and  disin¬ 
genuously  advised  what  would  please  the 
young  man,  rather  than  what  would  advance 
his  interest.  But  that  which  startled  them  most 
was  the  proposal  he  made  to  avert  the  immi¬ 
nent  danger  they  feared  of  a  war  with  the 
Carthaginians,  undertaking,  if  Dionysius 
wanted  peace,  to  sail  immediately  over  into 
Africa,  and  conclude  it  there  upon  honourable 
terms;  but,  if  he  rather  preferred  war,  then  he 
would  fit  out  and  maintain  at  his  own  cost  and 
charges  fifty  galleys  ready  for  the  service. 

Dionysius  wondered  much  at  his  greatness 
of  mind,  and  received  his  offer  with  satisfac¬ 
tion.  But  the  other  courtiers,  thinking  his  gen¬ 
erosity  reflected  upon  them,  and  jealous  of  be¬ 
ing  lessened  by  his  greatness,  from  hence  took 
all  occasions  by  private  slanders  to  render  him 
obnoxious,  to  the  young  man’s  displeasure;  as 
if  he  designed,  by  his  power  at  sea,  to  surprise 
the  government,  and  by  the  help  of  those  naval 
forces  confer  the  supreme  authority  upon  his 
sister  Aristomache’s  children. 

But,  indeed,  the  most  apparent  and  the 
strongest  grounds  for  dislike  and  hostility  ex¬ 
isted  already  in  the  difference  of  his  habits,  and 
his  reserved  and  separate  way  of  living.  For 
they,  who,  from  the  beginning  by  flatteries  and 
all  unworthy  artifices,  courted  the  favour  and 
familiarity  of  the  prince,  youthful  and  volup¬ 
tuously  bred,  ministered  to  his  pleasures,  and 
sought  how  to  find  him  daily  some  new 
amours  and  occupy  him  in  vain  amusements, 
with  wine  or  with  women,  and  in  other  dissi¬ 
pations;  by  which  means,  the  tyranny,  like 
iron  softened  in  the  fire,  seemed,  indeed,  to 
the  subject,  to  be  more  moderate  and  gentle, 
and  to  abate  somewhat  of  its  extreme  severity; 
the  edge  of  it  being  blunted,  not  by  the  clem¬ 
ency,  but  rather  the  sloth  and  degeneracy  of 
the  sovereign,  whose  dissoluteness,  gaining 
ground  daily,  and  growing  upon  him,  soon 
weakened  and  broke  those  “adamantine 
chains,”  with  which  his  father,  Dionysius,  said 
he  had  left  the  monarchy  fastened  and  secured. 
It  is  reported  of  him  that,  having  begun  a 
drunken  debauch,  he  continued  it  ninety  days 
without  intermission;  in  all  which  time  no 
person  on  business  was  allowed  to  appear,  nor 


784 

was  any  serious  conversation  heard  at  court, 
but  drinking,  singing,  dancing,  and  buffoon¬ 
ery  reigned  there  without  control. 

It  is  likely  then  they  had  little  kindness  for 
Dion,  who  never  indulged  himself  in  any 
youthful  pleasure  or  diversion.  And  so  his  very 
virtues  were  the  matter  of  their  calumnies,  and 
were  represented  under  one  or  other  plausible 
name  as  vices;  they  called  his  gravity  pride,  his 
plain-dealing  self-will,  the  good  advice  he  gave 
was  all  construed  into  reprimand,  and  he  was 
censured  for  neglecting  and  scorning  those  in 
whose  misdemeanours  he  declined  to  partici¬ 
pate. 

And  to  say  the  truth,  there  was  in  his  natural 
character  something  stately,  austere,  reserved, 
and  unsociable  in  conversation,  which  made 
his  company  unpleasant  and  disagreeable  not 
only  to  the  young  tyrant,  whose  ears  had  been 
corrupted  by  flatteries;  many  also  of  Dion’s 
own  intimate  friends,  though  they  loved  the 
integrity  and  generosity  of  his  temper,  yet 
blamed  his  manner,  and  thought  he  treated 
those  with  whom  he  had  to  do  less  courteously 
and  affably  than  became  a  man  engaged  in  civil 
business.  Of  which  Plato  also  afterwards  wrote 
to  him;  and,  as  it  were,  prophetically  advised 
him  carefully  to  avoid  an  arbitrary  temper, 
whose  proper  helpmate  was  a  solitary  life.  And, 
indeed,  at  this  very  time,  though  circumstances 
made  him  so  important,  and  in  the  danger  of 
the  tottering  government  he  was  recognised  as 
the  only  or  the  ablest  support  of  it,  yet  he  well 
understood  that  he  owed  not  his  high  position 
to  any  good-will  or  kindness,  but  to  the  mere 
necessities  of  the  usurper. 

And,  supposing  the  cause  of  this  to  be  igno¬ 
rance  and  want  of  education,  he  endeavoured 
to  induce  the  young  man  into  a  course  of  lib¬ 
eral  studies,  and  to  give  him  some  knowledge 
of  moral  truths  and  reasonings,  hoping  he 
might  thus  lose  his  fear  of  virtuous  living,  and 
learn  to  take  pleasure  in  laudable  actions.  Dio¬ 
nysius,  in  his  own  nature,  was  not  one  of  the 
worst  kind  of  tyrants,  but  his  father,  fearing 
that  if  he  should  come  to  understand  himself 
better,  and  converse  with  wise  and  reasonable 
men,  he  might  enter  into  some  design  against 
him,  and  dispossess  him  of  his  power,  kept 
him  closely  shut  up  at  home;  where,  for  want 
of  other  company,  and  ignorant  how  to  spend 
his  time  better,  he  busied  himself  in  making 
little  chariots,  candlesticks,  stools,  tables,  and 
other  things  of  wood. 

For  the  elder  Dionysius  was  so  diffident  and 
suspicious,  and  so  continually  on  his  guard 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

against  all  men,  that  he  would  not  so  much  as 
let  his  hair  be  trimmed  with  any  barber’s  or 
hair-cutter’s  instruments,  but  made  one  of  his 
artificers  singe  him  with  a  live  coal.  Neither 
were  his  brother  or  his  son  allowed  to  come 
into  his  apartment  in  the  dress  they  wore,  but 
they,  as  all  others,  were  stript  to  their  skins  by 
some  of  the  guard,  and,  after  being  seen  naked, 
put  on  other  clothes  before  they  were  admitted 
into  his  presence.  When  his  brother  Leptines 
was  once  describing  the  situation  of  a  place, 
and  took  a  javelin  from  one  of  the  guard  to 
draw  the  plan  of  it,  he  was  extremely  angry 
with  him,  and  had  the  soldier  who  gave  him 
the  weapon  put  to  death.  He  declared  the  more 
judicious  his  friends  were  the  more  he  sus¬ 
pected  them;  because  he  knew  that,  were  it  in 
their  choice,  they  would  rather  be  tyrants  them¬ 
selves  than  the  subjects  of  a  tyrant.  He  slew 
Marsyas,  one  of  his  captains  whom  he  had 
preferred  to  a  considerable  command,  for 
dreaming  that  he  killed  him:  without  some 
previous  waking  thought  and  purpose  of  the 
kind,  he  could  not,  he  supposed,  have  had  that 
fancy  in  his  sleep.  So  timorous  was  he,  and  so 
miserable  a  slave  to  his  fears,  yet  very  angry 
with  Plato,  because  he  would  not  allow  him  to 
be  the  valiantest  man  alive. 

Dion,  as  we  said  before,  seeing  the  son  thus 
deformed  and  spoilt  in  character  for  want  of 
teaching,  exhorted  him  to  study,  and  to  use  all 
his  entreaties  to  persuade  Plato,  the  first  of  phi¬ 
losophers,  to  visit  him  in  Sicily,  and  when  he 
came,  to  submit  himself  to  his  direction  and 
advice;  by  whose  instructions  he  might  con¬ 
form  his  nature  to  the  truths  of  virtue,  and, 
living  after  the  likeness  of  the  divine  and  glo¬ 
rious  model  of  Being,  out  of  obedience  to 
whose  control  the  general  confusion  is  changed 
into  the  beautiful  order  of  the  universe,  so  he 
in  like  manner  might  be  the  cause  of  great  hap¬ 
piness  to  himself  and  to  all  his  subjects,  who, 
obliged  by  his  justice  and  moderation,  would 
then  willingly  pay  him  obedience  as  their  fa¬ 
ther,  which  now  grudgingly,  and  upon  neces¬ 
sity,  they  were  forced  to  yield  him  as  their  mas¬ 
ter.  Their  usurping  tyrant  he  would  then  no 
longer  be,  but  their  lawful  king. 

For  fear  and  force,  a  great  navy  and  stand¬ 
ing  army  of  ten  thousand  hired  barbarians  are 
not,  as  his  father  had  said,  the  adamantine 
chains  which  secure  the  regal  power,  but  the 
love,  zeal,  and  affection  inspired  by  clemency 
and  justice;  which,  though  they  seem  more 
pliant  than  the  stiff  and  hard  bonds  of  severity, 
are  nevertheless  the  strongest  and  most  dur- 


DION 

able  ties  to  sustain  a  lasting  government.  More¬ 
over,  it  is  mean  and  dishonourable  that  a  ruler, 
while  careful  to  be  splendid  in  his  dress,  and 
luxurious  and  magnificent  in  his  habitation, 
should,  in  reason  and  power  of  speech,  make 
no  better  show  than  the  commonest  of  his  sub¬ 
jects,  nor  have  the  princely  palace  of  his  mind 
adorned  according  to  his  royal  dignity. 

Dion  frequently  entertaining  the  king  upon 
this  subject,  and,  as  occasion  offered,  repeating 
some  of  the  philosopher’s  sayings,  Dionysius 
grew  impatiently  desirous  to  have  Plato’s  com¬ 
pany,  and  to  hear  him  discourse.  Forthwith, 
therefore,  he  sent  letter  upon  letter  to  him  to 
Athens,  to  which  Dion  added  his  entreaties; 
also  several  philosophers  of  the  Pythagorean 
sect  from  Italy  sent  their  recommendations, 
urging  him  to  come  and  obtain  a  hold  upon 
this  pliant,  youthful  soul,  which  his  solid  and 
weighty  reasonings  might  steady,  as  it  were, 
upon  the  seas  of  absolute  power  and  authority. 
Plato,  as  he  tells  us  himself,  out  of  shame  more 
than  any  other  feeling,  lest  it  should  seem  that 
he  was  all  mere  theory,  and  that  of  his  own 
good-will  he  would  never  venture  into  action, 
hoping  withal,  that  if  he  could  work  a  cure 
upon  one  man,  the  head  and  guide  of  the  rest, 
he  might  remedy  the  distempers  of  the  whole 
island  of  Sicily,  yielded  to  their  requests. 

But  Dion’s  enemies,  fearing  an  alteration  in 
Dionysius,  persuaded  him  to  recall  from  ban¬ 
ishment  Philistus,  a  man  of  learned  education, 
and  at  the  same  time  of  great  experience  in  the 
ways  of  tyrants,  and  who  might  serve  as  a 
counterpoise  to  Plato  and  his  philosophy.  For 
Philistus  from  the  beginning  had  been  a  great 
instrument  in  establishing  the  tyranny,  and  for 
a  long  time  had  held  the  office  of  captain  of  the 
citadel.  There  was  a  report  that  he  had  been 
intimate  with  the  mother  of  Dionysius  the 
First,  and  not  without  his  privity.  And  when 
Leptines,  having  two  daughters  by  a  married 
woman  whom  he  had  debauched,  gave  one  of 
them  in  marriage  to  Philistus,  without  ac¬ 
quainting  Dionysius,  he,  in  great  anger,  put 
Leptine’s  mistress  in  prison,  and  banished  Phi¬ 
listus  from  Sicily.  Whereupon,  he  fled  to  some 
of  his  friends  on  the  Adriatic  coast,  in  which 
retirement  and  leisure  it  is  probable  he  wrote 
the  greatest  part  of  his  history;  for  he  returned 
not  into  his  country  during  the  reign  of  that 
Dionysius. 

But  after  his  death,  as  is  just  related,  Dion’s 
enemies  occasioned  him  to  be  recalled  home,  as 
fitted  for  their  purpose,  and  a  firm  friend  to 
the  arbitrary  government.  And  this,  indeed, 


785 

immediately  upon  his  return  he  set  himself  to 
maintain;  and  at  the  same  time  various  cal¬ 
umnies  and  accusations  against  Dion  were  by 
others  brought  to  the  king:  as  that  he  held  cor¬ 
respondence  with  Theodotes  and  Heraclides, 
to  subvert  the  government;  as,  doubtless,  it  is 
likely  enough,  that  Dion  had  entertained 
hopes,  by  the  coming  of  Plato,  to  mitigate  the 
rigid  and  despotic  severity  of  the  tyranny,  and 
to  give  Dionysius  the  character  of  a  fair  and 
lawful  governor;  and  had  determined,  if  he 
should  continue  averse  to  that,  and  were  not 
to  be  reclaimed,  to  depose  him,  and  restore 
the  commonwealth  to  the  Syracusans;  not  that 
he  approved  a  democratic  government,  but 
thought  it  altogether  preferable  to  a  tyranny, 
when  a  sound  and  good  aristocracy  could  not 
be  procured. 

This  was  the  state  of  affairs  when  Plato  came 
into  Sicily,  who,  at  his  first  arrival,  was  re¬ 
ceived  with  wonderful  demonstration  of  kind¬ 
ness  and  respect.  For  one  of  the  royal  chariots, 
richly  ornamented,  was  in  attendance  to  re¬ 
ceive  him  when  he  came  on  shore;  Dionysius 
himself  sacrificed  to  the  gods  in  thankful  ac¬ 
knowledgment  for  the  great  happiness  which 
had  befallen  his  government.  The  citizens, 
also,  began  to  entertain  marvellous  hopes  of  a 
speedy  reformation,  when  they  observed  the 
modesty  which  now  ruled  in  the  banquets,  and 
the  general  decorum  which  prevailed  in  all  the 
court,  their  tyrant  himself  also  behaving  with 
gentleness  and  humanity  in  all  their  matters  of 
business  that  came  before  him.  There  was  a 
general  passion  for  reasoning  and  philosophy, 
insomuch  that  the  very  palace,  it  is  reported, 
was  filled  with  dust  by  the  concourse  of  the 
students  in  mathematics  who  were  working 
their  problems  there. 

Some  few  days  after,  it  was  the  time  of  one 
of  the  Syracusan  sacrifices,  and  when  the  priest, 
as  he  was  wont,  prayed  for  the  long  and  safe 
continuance  of  the  tyranny,  Dionysius,  it  is 
said,  as  he  stood  by,  cried  out,  “Leave  off  pray¬ 
ing  for  evil  upon  us.”  This  sensibly  vexed  Phi¬ 
listus  and  his  party,  who  conjectured,  that  if 
Plato,  upon  such  brief  acquaintance,  had  so  far 
transformed  and  altered  the  young  man’s 
mind,  longer  converse  and  greater  intimacy 
would  give  him  such  influence  and  authority 
that  it  would  be  impossible  to  withstand  him. 

Therefore,  no  longer  privately  and  apart,  but 
jointly  and  in  public,  all  of  them,  they  began 
to  slander  Dion,  noising  it  about  that  he  had 
charmed  and  bewitched  Dionysius  by  Plato’s 
sophistry,  to  the  end  that  when  he  was  per- 


786 

suaded  voluntarily  to  part  with  his  power,  and 
lay  down  his  authority,  Dion  might  take  it  up, 
and  settle  it  upon  his  sister  Aristomache’s  chil¬ 
dren.  Others  professed  to  be  indignant  that  the 
Athenians,  who  formerly  had  come  to  Sicily 
with  a  great  fleet  and  a  numerous  land  army, 
and  perished  miserably  without  being  able  to 
take  the  city  of  Syracuse,  should  now,  by  means 
of  one  sophister,  overturn  the  sovereignty  of 
Dionysius;  inveighing  him  to  cashier  his  guard 
of  ten  thousand  lances,  dismiss  a  navy  of  four 
hundred  galleys,  disband  an  army  of  ten  thou¬ 
sand  horse  and  many  times  over  that  number 
of  foot,  and  go  seek  in  the  schools  an  unknown 
and  imaginary  bliss,  and  learn  by  mathe¬ 
matics  how  to  be  happy;  while,  in  the  mean¬ 
time,  the  substantial  enjoyments  of  absolute 
power,  riches,  and  pleasure  would  be  handed 
over  to  Dion  and  his  sister’s  children. 

By  these  means,  Dion  began  to  incur  at  first 
suspicion,  and  by  degrees  more  apparent  dis¬ 
pleasure  and  hostility.  A  letter,  also,  was  in¬ 
tercepted  and  brought  to  the  young  prince 
which  Dion  had  written  to  the  Carthaginian 
agents,  advising  them  that,  when  they  treated 
with  Dionysius  concerning  the  peace,  they 
should  not  come  to  their  audience  without 
communicating  with  him:  they  would  not  fail 
to  obtain  by  this  means  all  that  they  wanted. 
When  Dionysius  had  shown  this  to  Philistus, 
and  consulted  with  him,  as  Timaeus  relates, 
about  it,  he  overreached  Dion  by  a  feigned  rec¬ 
onciliation,  professing,  after  some  fair  and  rea¬ 
sonable  expression  of  his  feelings,  that  he  was 
at  friends  with  him,  and  thus,  leading  him 
alone  to  the  seaside,  under  the  castle  wall,  he 
showed  him  the  letter,  and  taxed  him  with  con¬ 
spiring  with  the  Carthaginians  against  him. 
And  when  Dion  essayed  to  speak  in  his  own 
defence,  Dionysius  suffered  him  not;  but  im¬ 
mediately  forced  him  aboard  a  boat,  which 
lay  there  for  that  purpose,  and  commanded 
the  sailors  to  set  him  ashore  on  the  coast  of 
Italy. 

When  this  was  publicly  known,  and  was 
thought  very  hard  usage,  there  was  much  lam¬ 
entation  in  the  tyrant’s  own  household  on  the 
part  of  the  women,  but  the  citizens  of  Syra¬ 
cuse  encouraged  themselves,  expecting  that  for 
his  sake  some  disturbance  would  ensue;  which, 
together  with  the  mistrust  others  would  now 
feel,  might  occasion  a  general  change  and  revo¬ 
lution  in  the  state.  Dionysius  seeing  this,  took 
alarm,  and  endeavoured  to  pacify  the  women 
and  others  of  Dion’s  kindred  and  friends,  as¬ 
suring  them  that  he  had  not  banished,  but  only 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

sent  him  out  of  the  way  for  a  time,  for  fear  of 
his  own  passion,  which  might  be  provoked 
some  day  by  Dion’s  self-will  into  some  act 
which  he  should  be  sorry  for.  He  gave  also  two 
ships  to  his  relations,  with  liberty  to  send  into 
Peloponnesus  for  him  whatever  of  his  property 
or  servants  they  thought  fit. 

Dion  was  very  rich,  and  had  his  house  fur¬ 
nished  with  little  less  than  royal  splendour  and 
magnificence.  These  valuables  his  friends 
packed  up  and  conveyed  to  him,  besides  many 
rich  presents  which  were  sent  him  by  the 
women  and  his  adherents.  So  that,  so  far  as 
wealth  and  riches  went,  he  made  a  noble  ap¬ 
pearance  among  the  Greeks,  and  they  might 
judge,  by  the  affluence  of  the  exile,  what  was 
the  power  of  the  tyrant. 

Dionysius  immediately  removed  Plato  into 
the  castle,  designing,  under  colour  of  an  hon¬ 
ourable  and  kind  reception,  to  set  a  guard  upon 
him,  lest  he  should  follow  Dion,  and  declare 
to  the  world,  in  his  behalf,  how  injuriously  he 
had  been  dealt  with.  And,  moreover,  time  and 
conversation  (as  wild  beasts  by  use  grow  tame 
and  tractable)  had  brought  Dionysius  to  en¬ 
dure  Plato’s  company  and  discourse,  so  that  he 
began  to  love  the  philosopher,  but  with  such 
an  affection  as  had  something  of  the  tyrant  in 
it,  requiring  of  Plato  that  he  should,  in  return 
of  his  kindness,  love  him  only,  and  attend  to 
him  above  all  other  men;  being  ready  to  permit 
to  his  care  the  chief  management  of  affairs, 
and  even  the  government,  too,  upon  condition 
that  he  would  not  prefer  Dion’s  friendship  be¬ 
fore  his.  This  extravagant  affection  was  a  great 
trouble  to  Plato,  for  it  was  accompanied  with 
petulant  and  jealous  humours,  like  the  fond 
passions  of  those  that  are  desperately  in  love; 
frequently  he  was  angry  and  fell  out  with  him, 
and  presently  begged  and  entreated  to  be 
friends  again.  He  was  beyond  measure  desir¬ 
ous  to  be  Plato’s  scholar,  and  to  proceed  in  the 
study  of  philosophy,  and  yet  he  was  ashamed 
of  it  with  those  who  spoke  against  it  and  pro¬ 
fessed  to  think  it  would  ruin  him. 

But  a  war  about  this  time  breaking  out,  he 
sent  Plato  away,  promising  him  in  the  summer 
to  recall  Dion,  though  in  this  he  broke  his 
word  at  once;  nevertheless,  he  remitted  to  him 
his  revenues,  desiring  Plato  to  excuse  him  as  to 
the  time  appointed,  because  of  the  war,  but, 
as  soon  as  he  had  settled  a  peace,  he  would  im¬ 
mediately  send  for  Dion,  requiring  him  in  the 
interim  to  be  quiet,  and  not  raise  any  distur¬ 
bance,  nor  speak  ill  of  him  among  the  Gre¬ 
cians.  This  Plato  endeavoured  to  effect,  by 


DION 

keeping  Dion  with  him  in  the  Academy,  and 
busying  him  in  philosophical  studies. 

Dion  sojourned  in  the  Upper  Town  of  Ath¬ 
ens,  with  Callippus,  one  of  his  acquaintance; 
but  for  his  pleasure  he  bought  a  seat  in  the 
country,  which  afterwards,  when  he  went  into 
Sicily,  he  gave  to  Speusippus,  who  had  been 
his  most  frequent  companion  while  he  was  at 
Athens,  Plato  so  arranging  it,  with  the  hope 
that  Dion’s  austere  temper  might  be  softened 
by  agreeable  company,  with  an  occasional  mix¬ 
ture  of  seasonable  mirth.  For  Speusippus  was 
of  the  character  to  afford  him  this;  we  find  him 
spoken  of  in  Timon’s  Silli,  as  “good  at  a  jest.” 
And  Plato  himself,  as  it  happened,  being  called 
upon  to  furnish  a  chorus  of  boys,  Dion  took 
upon  him  the  ordering  and  management  of  it, 
and  defrayed  the  whole  expense,  Plato  giving 
him  this  opportunity  to  oblige  the  Athenians, 
which  was  likely  to  procure  his  friend  more 
kindness  than  himself  credit.  Dion  went  also  to 
see  several  other  cities,  visiting  the  noblest  and 
most  statesmanlike  persons  in  Greece,  and  join¬ 
ing  in  their  recreations  and  entertainments  in 
their  times  of  festival. 

In  all  which,  no  sort  of  vulgar  ignorance,  or 
tyrannic  assumption,  or  luxuriousness  was  re¬ 
marked  in  him;  but,  on  the  contrary,  a  great 
deal  of  temperance,  generosity,  and  courage, 
and  a  well-becoming  taste  for  reasoning  and 
philosophic  discourses.  By  which  means  he 
gained  the  love  and  admiration  of  all  men,  and 
in  many  cities  had  public  honours  decreed  him; 
the  Lacedaemonians  making  him  a  citizen  of 
Sparta,  without  regard  to  the  displeasure  of 
Dionysius,  though  at  that  time  he  was  aiding 
them  in  their  wars  against  the  Thebans. 

It  is  related  that  once,  upon  invitation,  he 
went  to  pay  a  visit  to  Ptceodorus,  the  Me- 
garian,  a  man,  it  would  seem,  of  wealth  and 
importance;  and  when,  on  account  of  the  con¬ 
course  of  people  about  his  door,  and  the  press 
of  business,  it  was  very  troublesome  and  diffi¬ 
cult  to  get  access  to  him,  turning  about  to  his 
friends,  who  seemed  concerned  and  angry  at 
it,  “What  reason,”  said  he,  “have  we  to  blame 
Ptceodorus,  when  we  ourselves  used  to  do  no 
better  when  we  were  at  Syracuse?” 

After  some  little  time,  Dionysius,  envying 
Dion,  and  jealous  of  the  favour  and  interest  he 
had  among  the  Grecians,  put  a  stop  upon  his 
incomes,  and  no  longer  sent  him  his  revenues, 
making  his  own  commissioners  trustees  of  the 
estate.  But,  endeavouring  to  obviate  the  ill- 
will  and  discredit  which,  upon  Plato’s  account, 
might  accrue  to  him  among  the  philosophers, 


787 

he  collected  in  his  court  many  reputed  learned 
men;  and  ambitiously  desiring  to  surpass  them 
in  their  debates,  he  was  forced  to  make  use, 
often  incorrectly,  of  arguments  he  had  picked 
up  from  Plato.  And  now  he  wished  for  his 
company  again,  repenting  he  had  not  made 
better  use  of  it  when  he  had  it,  and  had  given 
no  greater  heed  to  his  admirable  lessons.  Like 
a  tyrant,  therefore,  inconsiderate  in  his  desires, 
headstrong  and  violent  in  whatever  he  took  a 
will  to,  on  a  sudden  he  was  eagerly  set  on  the 
design  of  recalling  him,  and  left  no  stone  un¬ 
turned,  but  addressed  himself  to  Archytas,  the 
Pythagorean  (his  acquaintance  and  friendly 
relations  with  whom  owed  their  origin  to 
Plato),  and  persuaded  him  to  stand  as  surety 
for  his  engagements,  and  to  request  Plato  to 
revisit  Sicily. 

Archytas,  therefore,  sent  Archedemus  and 
Dionysius  some  galleys,  with  divers  friends,  to 
entreat  his  return;  moreover,  he  wrote  to  him 
himself  expressly  and  in  plain  terms,  that  Dion 
must  never  look  for  any  favour  or  kindness  if 
Plato  would  not  be  prevailed  with  to  come  into 
Sicily;  but  if  Plato  did  come  Dion  should  be 
assured  of  whatever  he  desired.  Dion  also  re¬ 
ceived  letters  full  of  solicitations  from  his  sis¬ 
ter  and  his  wife,  urging  him  to  beg  Plato  to 
gratify  Dionysius  in  this  request,  and  not  give 
him  an  excuse  for  further  ill-doing.  So  that,  as 
Plato  says  himself,  the  third  time  he  set  sail 
for  the  Strait  of  Scylla — 

Venturing  again  Charybdis’ s  dangerous  gulf . 

This  arrival  brought  great  joy  to  Dionysius, 
and  no  less  hopes  to  the  Sicilians,  who  were 
earnest  in  their  prayers  and  good  wishes  that 
Plato  might  get  the  better  of  Philistus,  and 
philosophy  triumph  over  tyranny.  Neither  was 
he  unbefriended  by  the  women,  who  studied 
to  oblige  him;  and  he  had  with  Dionysius  that 
peculiar  credit  which  no  man  else  ever  ob¬ 
tained,  namely,  liberty  to  come  into  his  pres¬ 
ence  without  being  examined  or  searched. 
When  he  would  have  given  him  a  considerable 
sum  of  money,  and,  on  several  repeated  oc¬ 
casions  made  fresh  offers,  which  Plato  as  often 
declined,  Aristippus,  the  Cyrenaean,  then  pres¬ 
ent,  said  that  Dionysius  was  very  safe  in  his 
munificence,  he  gave  little  to  those  who  were 
ready  to  take  all  they  could  get,  and  a  great 
deal  to  Plato,  who  would  accept  of  nothing. 

After  the  first  compliments  of  kindness  were 
over,  when  Plato  began  to  discourse  of  Dion, 
he  was  at  first  diverted  by  excuses  for  delay, 
followed  soon  after  by  complaints  and  disgusts, 


788 

though  not  as  yet  observable  to  others,  Diony¬ 
sius  endeavouring  to  conceal  them,  and,  by 
other  civilities  and  honourable  usage,  to  draw 
him  off  from  his  affection  to  Dion.  And  for 
some  time  Plato  himself  was  careful  not  to  let 
anything  of  this  dishonesty  and  breach  of 
promise  appear,  but  bore  with  it,  and  dissem¬ 
bled  his  annoyance.  While  matters  stood  thus 
between  them,  and,  as  they  thought,  they  were 
unobserved  and  undiscovered,  Helicon,  the 
Cyzicenian,  one  of  Plato’s  followers,  foretold 
an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  which  happened  accord¬ 
ing  to  his  prediction;  for  which  he  was  much 
admired  by  the  tyrant,  and  rewarded  with  a 
talent  of  silver;  whereupon  Aristippus,  jesting 
with  some  others  of  the  philosophers,  told 
them,  he  also  could  predict  something  extra¬ 
ordinary;  and  on  their  entreating  him  to  de¬ 
clare  it,  “I  foretell,”  said  he,  “that  before  long 
there  will  be  a  quarrel  between  Dionysius  and 
Plato.” 

At  length,  Dionysius  made  sale  of  Dion’s 
estate,  and  converted  the  money  to  his  own  use, 
and  removed  Plato  from  an  apartment  he  had 
in  the  gardens  of  the  palace  to  lodgings  among 
the  guards  he  kept  in  pay,  who  from  the  first 
had  hated  Plato,  and  sought  opportunity  to 
make  away  with  him,  supposing  he  advised 
Dionysius  to  lay  down  the  government  and 
disband  his  soldiers. 

When  Archytas  understood  the  danger  he 
was  in,  he  immediately  sent  a  galley  with  mes¬ 
sengers  to  demand  him  of  Dionysius;  alleging 
that  he  stood  engaged  for  his  safety,  upon  the 
confidence  of  which  Plato  had  come  to  Sicily. 
Dionysius,  to  palliate  his  secret  hatred,  before 
Plato  came  away,  treated  him  with  great  enter¬ 
tainments  and  all  seeming  demonstrations  of 
kindness,  but  could  not  forbear  breaking  out 
one  day  into  the  expression,  “No  doubt,  Plato, 
when  you  are  at  home  among  the  philosophers, 
your  companions,  you  will  complain  of  me, 
and  reckon  up  a  great  many  of  my  faults.”  To 
which  Plato  answered  with  a  smile,  “The 
Academy  will  never,  I  trust,  be  at  such  a  loss 
for  subjects  to  discuss  as  to  seek  one  in  you.” 
Thus,  they  say,  Plato  was  dismissed;  but  his 
own  writings  do  not  altogether  agree  with  this 
account. 

Dion  was  angry  at  all  this,  and  not  long  after 
declared  open  enmity  to  Dionysius,  on  hearing 
what  had  been  done  with  his  wife;  on  which 
matter  Plato,  also,  had  had  some  confidential 
correspondence  with  Dionysius.  Thus  it  was. 
After  Dion’s  banishment,  Dionysius,  when  he 
sent  Plato  back,  had  desired  him  to  ask  Dion 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

privately,  if  he  would  be  averse  to  his  wife’s 
marrying  another  man.  For  there  went  a  re¬ 
port,  whether  true,  or  raised  by  Dion’s  ene¬ 
mies,  that  his  marriage  was  not  pleasing  to 
him,  and  that  he  lived  with  his  wife  on  uneasy 
terms.  When  Plato  therefore  came  to  Athens, 
and  had  mentioned  the  subject  to  Dion,  he 
wrote  a  letter  to  Dionysius  speaking  of  other 
matters  openly,  but  on  this  in  language  ex¬ 
pressly  designed  to  be  understood  by  him 
alone,  to  the  effect  that  he  had  talked  with 
Dion  about  the  business,  and  that  it  was  evi¬ 
dent  he  would  highly  resent  the  affront,  if 
it  should  be  put  into  execution.  At  that  time, 
therefore,  while  there  were  yet  great  hopes 
of  an  accommodation,  he  took  no  new  steps 
with  his  sister,  suffering  her  to  live  with 
Dion’s  child. 

But  when  things  were  come  to  that  pass,  that 
no  reconciliation  could  be  expected,  and  Plato, 
after  his  second  visit,  was  again  sent  away  in 
displeasure,  he  then  forced  Arete,  against  her 
will,  to  marry  Timocrates,  one  of  his  favour¬ 
ites,  in  this  action  coming  short  even  of  his 
father’s  justice  and  lenity;  for  he,  when  Polyx- 
enus,  the  husband  of  his  sister,  Theste,  became 
his  enemy,  and  fled  in  alarm  out  of  Sicily,  sent 
for  his  sister,  and  taxed  her,  that,  being  privy 
to  her  husband’s  flight,  she  had  not  declared  it 
to  him.  But  the  lady,  confident  and  fearless, 
made  him  this  reply:  “Do  you  believe  me, 
brother,  so  bad  a  wife,  or  so  timorous  a  woman, 
that,  having  known  my  husband’s  flight,  I 
would  not  have  borne  his  company,  and  shared 
his  fortunes?  I  knew  nothing  of  it;  since  other¬ 
wise  it  had  been  my  better  lot  to  be  called  the 
wife  of  the  exile  Polyxenus  than  the  sister  of 
the  tyrant  Dionysius.”  It  is  said,  he  admired 
her  free  and  ready  answer,  as  did  the  Syra¬ 
cusans  also  her  courage  and  virtue,  insomuch 
that  she  retained  her  dignity  and  princely  ret¬ 
inue  after  the  dissolution  of  the  tyranny,  and 
when  she  died,  the  citizens,  by  public  decree, 
attended  the  solemnity  of  her  funeral.  And 
the  story,  though  a  digression  from  the  pres¬ 
ent  purpose,  was  well  worth  the  telling. 

From  this  time,  Dion  set  his  mind  upon  war¬ 
like  measures;  with  which  Plato,  out  of  respect 
for  past  hospitalities,  and  because  of  his  age, 
would  have  nothing  to  do.  But  Speusippus 
and  the  rest  of  his  friends  assisted  and  encour¬ 
aged  him,  bidding  him  deliver  Sicily,  which 
with  lift-up  hands  implored  his  help,  and  with 
open  arms  was  ready  to  receive  him.  For  when 
Plato  was  staying  at  Syracuse,  Speusippus,  be¬ 
ing  oftener  than  he  in  company  with  the  citi- 


DION 

zens,  had  more  thoroughly  made  out  how  they 
were  inclined;  and  though  at  first  they  had 
been  on  their  guard,  suspecting  his  bold  lan¬ 
guage,  as  though  he  had  been  set  on  by  the 
tyrant  to  trepan  them,  yet  at  length  they 
trusted  him.  There  was  but  one  mind  and  one 
wish  or  prayer  among  them  all,  that  Dion 
would  undertake  the  design,  and  come,  though 
without  either  navy,  men,  horse,  or  arms;  that 
he  would  simply  put  himself  aboard  any  ship, 
and  lend  the  Sicilians  his  person  and  name 
against  Dionysius. 

This  information  from  Speusippus  encour¬ 
aged  Dion,  who,  concealing  his  real  purpose, 
employed  his  friends  privately  to  raise  what 
men  they  could;  and  many  statesmen  and  phi¬ 
losophers  were  assisting  him,  as,  for  instance, 
Eudemus  the  Cyprian,  on  whose  death  Aris¬ 
totle  wrote  his  dialogue  On  the  Soul,  and  Tim- 
onides  the  Leucadian.  They  also  engaged  on 
his  side  Miltas  the  Thessalian,  who  was  a 
prophet,  and  had  studied  in  the  Academy.  But 
of  all  that  were  banished  by  Dionysius,  who 
were  not  fewer  than  a  thousand,  five  and 
twenty  only  joined  in  the  enterprise;  the  rest 
were  afraid,  and  abandoned  it.  The  rendez¬ 
vous  was  in  the  island  Zacy.nthus,  where  a 
small  force  of  not  quite  eight  hundred  men 
came  together,  all  of  them,  however,  persons 
already  distinguished  in  plenty  of  previous 
hard  service,  their  bodies  well  trained  and  prac¬ 
tised,  and  their  experience  and  courage  amply 
sufficient  to  animate  and  embolden  to  action 
the  numbers  whom  Dion  expected  to  join  him 
in  Sicily. 

Yet  these  men,  when  they  first  understood 
the  expedition  was  against  Dionysius,  were 
troubled  and  disheartened,  blaming  Dion,  that, 
hurried  on  like  a  madman  by  mere  passion  and 
despair,  he  rashly  threw  both  himself  and 
them  into  certain  ruin.  Nor  were  they  less 
angry  with  their  commanders  and  muster- 
masters  that  they  had  not  in  the  beginning  let 
them  know  the  design.  But  when  Dion  in  his 
address  to  them  had  set  forth  the  unsafe  and 
weak  condition  of  arbitrary  government,  and 
declared  that  he  carried  them  rather  for  com¬ 
manders  than  soldiers,  the  citizens  of  Syracuse 
and  the  rest  of  the  Sicilians  having  been  long 
ready  for  a  revolt,  and  when,  after  him,  Alci- 
menes,  an  Achaean  of  the  highest  birth  and 
reputation,  who  accompanied  the  expedition, 
harangued  them  to  the  same  effect,  they  were 
contented. 

It  was  now  the  middle  of  summer,  and  the 
Etesian  winds  blowing  steadily  on  the  seas,  the 


789 

moon  was  at  the  full,  when  Dion  prepared  a 
magnificent  sacrifice  to  Apollo,  and  with  great 
solemnity  marched  his  soldiers  to  the  temple 
in  all  their  arms  and  accoutrements.  And  after 
the  sacrifice,  he  feasted  them  all  in  the  race¬ 
course  of  the  Zacynthians,  where  he  had  made 
provision  for  their  entertainment.  And  when 
here  they  beheld  with  wonder  the  quantity  and 
the  richness  of  the  gold  and  silver  plate,  and 
the  tables  laid  to  entertain  them,  all  far  exceed¬ 
ing  the  fortunes  of  a  private  man,  they  con¬ 
cluded  with  themselves  that  a  man  now  past 
the  prime  of  life,  who  was  master  of  so  much 
treasure,  would  not  engage  himself  in  so  haz¬ 
ardous  an  enterprise  without  good  reason  of 
hope,  and  certain  and  sufficient  assurances  of 
aid  from  friends  over  there. 

Just  after  the  libations  were  made,  and  the 
accompanying  prayers  offered,  the  moon  was 
eclipsed;  which  was  no  wonder  to  Dion,  who 
understood  the  revolutions  of  eclipses,  and  the 
way  in  which  the  moon  is  overshadowed  and 
the  earth  interposed  between  her  and  the  sun. 
But  because  it  was  necessary  that  the  soldiers, 
who  were  surprised  and  troubled  at  it,  should 
be  satisfied  and  encouraged,  Miltas  the  diviner, 
standing  up  in  the  midst  of  the  assembly,  bade 
them  be  of  good  cheer,  and  expect  all  happy 
success,  for  that  the  divine  powers  foreshowed 
that  something  at  present  glorious  and  re¬ 
splendent  should  be  eclipsed  and  obscured; 
nothing  at  this  time  being  more  splendid  than 
the  sovereignty  of  Dionysius,  their  arrival  in 
Sicily  should  dim  this  glory,  and  extinguish 
this  brightness.  Thus  Miltas,  in  public  des¬ 
canted  upon  the  incident.  But  concerning  a 
swarm  of  bees  which  settled  on  the  poop  of 
Dion’s  ship,  he  privately  told  him  and  his 
friends  that  he  feared  the  great  actions  they 
were  like  to  perform,  though  for  a  time  they 
should  thrive  and  flourish,  would  be  of  short 
continuance,  and  soon  suffer  a  decay. 

It  is  reported,  also,  that  many  prodigies  hap¬ 
pened  to  Dionysius  at  that  time.  An  eagle, 
snatching  a  javelin  from  one  of  the  guard,  car¬ 
ried  it  aloft,  and  from  thence  let  it  fall  into  the 
sea.  The  water  of  the  sea  that  washed  the  cas¬ 
tle  walls  was  for  a  whole  day  sweet  and  potable, 
as  many  that  tasted  it  experienced.  Pigs  were 
farrowed  perfect  in  all  their  other  parts,  but 
without  ears.  This  the  diviners  declared  to 
portend  revolt  and  rebellion,  for  that  the  sub¬ 
jects  would  no  longer  give  ear  to  the  com¬ 
mands  of  their  superiors.  They  expounded  the 
sweetness  of  the  water  to  signify  to  the  Syra¬ 
cusans  a  change  from  hard  and  grievous  times 


790 

into  easier  and  more  happy  circumstances.  The 
eagle  being  the  bird  of  Jupiter,  and  the  spear 
an  emblem  of  power  and  command,  this  prod¬ 
igy  was  to  denote  that  the  chief  of  the  gods 
designed  the  end  and  dissolution  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  government.  These  things  Theopompus 
relates  in  his  history. 

Two  ships  of  burden  carried  all  Dion’s  men; 
a  third  vessel,  of  no  great  size,  and  two  galleys 
of  thirty  oars  attended  them.  In  addition  to  his 
soldiers’  own  arms,  he  carried  two  thousand 
shields,  a  very  great  number  of  darts  and 
lances,  and  abundant  stores  of  all  manner  of 
provisions,  that  there  might  be  no  want  of  any¬ 
thing  in  their  voyage;  their  purpose  being  to 
keep  out  at  sea  during  the  whole  voyage,  and 
use  the  winds,  since  all  the  land  was  hostile  to 
them,  and  Philistus,  they  had  been  told,  was  in 
Iapygia  with  a  fleet,  looking  out  for  them. 
Twelve  days  they  sailed  with  a  fresh  and  gentle 
breeze;  on  the  thirteenth,  they  made  Pachynus, 
the  Sicilian  cape.  There  Protus,  the  chief  pilot, 
advised  them  to  land  at  once  and  without  de¬ 
lay,  for  if  they  were  forced  again  from  the 
shore,  and  did  not  take  advantage  of  the  head¬ 
land,  they  might  ride  out  at  sea  many  nights 
and  days,  waiting  for  a  southerly  wind  in  the 
summer  season.  But  Dion,  fearing  a  descent 
too  near  his  enemies,  and  desirous  to  begin  at 
a  greater  distance,  and  further  on  in  the  coun¬ 
try,  sailed  on  past  Pachynus. 

They  had  not  gone  far,  before  stress  of 
weather,  the  wind  blowing  hard  at  north, 
drove  the  fleet  from  the  coast;  and  it  being 
now  about  the  time  that  Arcturus  rises,  a  vio¬ 
lent  storm  of  wind  and  rain  came  on,  with 
thunder  and  lightning;  the  mariners  were  at 
their  wits’  end,  and  ignorant  what  course  they 
ran,  until  on  a  sudden  they  found  they  were 
driving  with  the  sea  on  Cercina,  the  island  on 
the  coast  of  Africa,  just  where  it  is  most  craggy 
and  dangerous  to  run  upon.  Upon  the  cliffs 
there  they  escaped  narrowly  being  forced 
and  staved  to  pieces;  but,  labouring  hard  at 
their  oars,  with  much  difficulty  they  kept  clear 
until  the  storm  ceased.  Then,  lighting  by 
chance  upon  a  vessel,  they  understood  they 
were  upon  the  Heads,  as  it  is  called,  of  the 
Great  Syrtis;  and  when  they  were  now  again 
disheartened  by  a  sudden  calm,  and  beating 
to  and  fro  without  making  any  way,  a  soft  air 
began  to  blow  from  the  land,  when  they  ex¬ 
pected  anything  rather  than  wind  from  the 
south,  and  scarce  believed  the  happy  change  of 
their  fortune.  The  gale  gradually  increasing, 
and  beginning  to  blow  fresh,  they  clapped  on 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

all  their  sails,  and,  praying  to  the  gods,  put  out 
again  into  the  open  seas,  steering  right  from 
Africa  for  Sicily. 

And,  running  steady  before  the  wind,  the 
fifth  day  they  arrived  at  Minoa,  a  little  town  of 
Sicily,  in  the  dominion  of  the  Carthaginians, 
of  which  Synalus,  an  acquaintance  and  friend 
of  Dion’s,  happened  at  that  time  to  be  gov¬ 
ernor;  who,  not  knowing  it  was  Dion  and  his 
fleet,  endeavoured  to  hinder  his  men  from 
landing;  but  they  rushed  on  shore  with  their 
swords  in  their  hands,  not  slaying  any  of  their 
opponents  (for  this  Dion  had  forbidden,  be¬ 
cause  of  his  friendship  with  the  Carthagini¬ 
ans),  but  forced  them  to  retreat,  and,  following 
close,  pressed  in  a  body  with  them  into  the 
place,  and  took  it.  As  soon  as  the  two  com¬ 
manders  met,  they  mutually  saluted  each 
other;  Dion  delivered  up  the  place  again  to 
Synalus,  without  the  least  damage  done  to  any 
one  therein,  and  Synalus  quartered  and  enter¬ 
tained  the  soldiers,  and  supplied  Dion  with 
what  he  wanted. 

They  were  most  of  all  encouraged  by  the 
happy  accident  of  Dionysius’s  absence  at  this 
nick  of  time;  for  it  appeared  that  he  was  lately 
gone  with  eighty  sail  of  ships  to  Italy.  There¬ 
fore,  when  Dion  was  desirous  that  tbe  soldiers 
should  refresh  themselves  there,  after  their 
tedious  and  troublesome  voyage,  they  would 
not  be  prevailed  with,  but  earnest  to  make  the 
best  use  of  that  opportunity,  they  urged  Dion 
to  lead  them  straight  on  to  Syracuse.  Leaving, 
therefore,  their  baggage,  and  the  arms  they  did 
not  use,  Dion  desired  Synalus  to  convey  them 
to  him  as  he  had  occasion,  and  marched  di¬ 
rectly  to  Syracuse. 

The  first  that  came  in  to  him  upon  his  march 
were  two  hundred  horse  of  the  Agrigentines 
who  were  settled  near  Ecnomum,  and,  after 
them,  the  Geloans.  But  the  news  soon  flying  to 
Syracuse,  Timocrates,  who  had  married  Dion’s 
wife,  the  sister  of  Dionysius,  and  was  the  prin¬ 
cipal  man  among  his  friends  now  remaining 
in  the  city,  immediately  despatched  a  courier 
to  Dionysius,  with  letters  announcing  Dion’s 
arrival;  while  he  himself  took  all  possible  care 
to  prevent  any  stir  or  tumult  in  the  city,  where 
all  were  in  great  excitement,  but  as  yet  con¬ 
tinued  quiet,  fearing  to  give  too  much  credit  to 
what  was  reported. 

A  very  strange  accident  happened  to  the 
messenger  who  was  sent  with  the  letters;  for 
being  arrived  in  Italy,  as  he  travelled  through 
the  land  of  Rhegium,  hastening  to  Dionysius 
at  Caulonia,  he  met  one  of  his  acquaintance, 


DION 

who  was  carrying  home  part  of  a  sacrifice.  He 
accepted  a  piece  of  the  flesh,  which  his  friend 
offered  him,  and  proceeded  on  his  journey 
with  all  speed;  having  travelled  a  good  part  of 
the  night,  and  being,  through  weariness,  forc¬ 
ed  to  take  a  little  rest,  he  laid  himself  down 
in  the  next  convenient  place  he  came  to,  which 
was  in  a  wood  near  the  road.  A  wolf,  scenting 
the  flesh,  came  and  seized  it  as  it  lay  fastened  to 
the  letter-bag,  and  with  the  flesh  carried  away 
the  bag  also,  in  which  were  the  letters  to 
Dionysius.  The  man,  awaking  and  missing 
his  bag,  sought  for  it  up  and  down  a  great 
while,  and,  not  finding  it,  resolved  not  to  go 
to  the  king  without  his  letters,  but  to  conceal 
himself,  and  keep  out  of  the  way. 

Dionysius,  therefore,  came  to  hear  of  the 
war  in  Sicily  from  other  hands,  and  that  a 
good  while  after.  In  the  meantime,  as  Dion 
proceeded  in  his  march,  the  Camarineans 
joined  his  forces,  and  the  country  people  in  the 
territory  of  Syracuse  rose  and  joined  him  in  a 
large  body.  The  Leontines  and  Campanians, 
who,  with  Timocrates,  guarded  the  Epipolae, 
receiving  a  false  alarm  which  was  spread  on 
purpose  by  Dion,  as  if  he  intended  to  attack 
their  cities  first,  left  Timocrates,  and  hastened 
off  to  carry  succour  to  their  own  homes.  News 
of  which  being  brought  to  Dion,  where  he  lay 
near  Macrae,  he  raised  his  camp  by  night,  and 
came  to  the  river  Anapus  which  is  distant  from 
the  city  about  ten  furlongs;  there  he  made  a 
halt,  and  sacrificed  by  the  river,  offering  vows 
to  the  rising  sun.  The  soothsayers  declared 
that  the  gods  promised  him  victory;  and  they 
that  were  present,  seeing  him  assisting  at  the 
sacrifice  with  a  garland  on  his  head,  one  and 
all  crowned  themselves  with  garlands.  There 
were  about  five  thousand  that  had  joined  his 
forces  in  their  march;  who,  though  but  ill- 
provided,  with  such  weapons  as  came  next  to 
hand,  made  up  by  zeal  and  courage  for  the 
want  of  better  arms;  and  when  once  they  were 
told  to  advance,  as  if  Dion  were  already  con¬ 
queror,  they  ran  forward  with  shouts  and  ac¬ 
clamations,  encouraging  each  other  with  the 
hopes  of  liberty. 

The  most  considerable  men  and  better  sort 
of  the  citizens  of  Syracuse,  clad  all  in  white, 
met  him  at  the  gates.  The  populace  set  upon 
all  that  were  of  Dionysius’s  party,  and  princi¬ 
pally  searched  for  those  they  called  setters  or 
informers,  a  number  of  wicked  and  hateful 
wretches,  who  made  it  their  business  to  go  up 
and  down  the  city,  thrusting  themselves  into 
all  companies,  that  they  might  inform  Diony- 


791 

sius  what  men  said,  and  how  they  stood  af¬ 
fected.  These  were  the  first  that  suffered,  be¬ 
ing  beaten  to  death  by  the  crowd. 

Timocrates,  not  being  able  to  force  his  way 
to  the  garrison  that  kept  the  castle,  took 
horse,  and  fled  out  of  the  city,  filling  all  the 
places  where  he  came  with  fear  and  confu¬ 
sion,  magnifying  the  amount  of  Dion’s  forces 
that  he  might  not  be  supposed  to  have  de¬ 
serted  his  charge  without  good  reason  for  it. 
By  this  time,  Dion  was  come  up,  and  appear¬ 
ed  in  the  sight  of  the  people;  he  marched  first 
in  a  rich  suit  of  arms,  and  by  him  on  one 
hand  his  brother,  Megacles,  on  the  other, 
Callippus  the  Athenian,  crowned  with  gar¬ 
lands.  Of  the  foreign  soldiers,  a  hundred  fol¬ 
lowed  as  his  guard,  and  their  several  officers 
led  the  rest  in  good  order;  the  Syracusans  look¬ 
ing  on  and  welcoming  them,  as  if  they  be¬ 
lieved  the  whole  to  be  a  sacred  and  religious 
procession,  to  celebrate  the  solemn  entrance, 
after  an  absence  of  forty-eight  years,  of  liberty 
and  popular  government. 

Dion  entered  by  the  Menitid  gate,  and, 
having  by  sound  of  trumpet  quieted  the  noise 
of  the  people,  he  caused  proclamation  to  be 
made,  that  Dion  and  Megacles,  who  were 
come  to  overthrow  the  tyrannical  government, 
did  declare  the  Syracusans  and  all  other  Sicil¬ 
ians  to  be  free  from  the  tyrant.  But,  being  de¬ 
sirous  to  harangue  the  people  himself,  he  went 
up  through  the  Achradina.  The  citizens  on 
each  side  the  way  brought  victims  for  sacrifice, 
set  out  their  tables  and  goblets,  and  as  he 
passed  by  each  door  threw  flowers  and  orna¬ 
ments  upon  him,  with  vows  and  acclamations, 
honouring  him  as  a  god. 

There  was  under  the  castle  and  the  Penta- 
pyla  a  lofty  and  conspicuous  sun-dial,  which 
Dionysius  had  set  up.  Getting  up  upon  the  top 
of  that,  he  made  an  oration  to  the  people, 
calling  upon  them  to  maintain  and  defend  their 
liberty;  who,  with  great  expressions  of  joy  and 
acknowledgment,  created  Dion  and  Megacles 
generals,  with  plenary  powers,  joining  in  com¬ 
mission  with  them,  at  their  desire  and  entreaty, 
twenty  colleagues,  of  whom  half  were  of  those 
that  had  returned  with  them  out  of  banish¬ 
ment.  It  seemed  also  to  the  diviners  a  most 
happy  omen  that  Dion,  when  he  made  his  ad¬ 
dress  to  the  people,  had  under  his  feet  the 
stately  monument  which  Dionysius  had  been 
at  such  pains  to  erect;  but  because  it  was  a  sun¬ 
dial  on  which  he  stood  when  he  was  made 
general,  they  expressed  some  fears  that  the 
great  actions  he  had  performed  might  be  sub- 


792 

ject  to  change,  and  admit  some  rapid  turn  and 
declination  of  fortune. 

After  this,  Dion,  taking  the  Epipolae,  releas¬ 
ed  the  citizens  who  were  imprisoned  there, 
and  then  raised  a  wall  to  invest  the  castle. 
Seven  days  after,  Dionysius  arrived  by  sea,  and 
got  into  the  citadel,  and  about  the  same  time 
came  carriages,  bringing  the  arms  and  am¬ 
munition  which  Dion  had  left  with  Synalus. 
These  he  distributed  among  the  citizens;  and 
the  rest  that  wanted  furnished  themselves  as 
well  as  they  could,  and  put  themselves  in  the 
condition  of  zealous  and  serviceable  men-at- 
arms. 

Dionysius  sent  agents,  at  first  privately,  to 
Dion,  to  try  what  terms  they  could  make  with 
him.  But  he  declaring  that  any  overtures  they 
had  to  make  must  be  made  in  public  to  the 
Syracusans  as  a  free  people,  envoys  now  went 
and  came  between  the  tyrant  and  the  people, 
with  fair  proposals,  and  assurances  that  they 
should  have  abatements  of  their  tributes  and 
taxes,  and  freedom  from  the  burdens  of  mili¬ 
tary  expeditions,  all  which  should  be  made  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  own  approbation  and  consent 
with  him.  The  Syracusans  laughed  at  these 
offers,  and  Dion  returned  answer  to  the  envoys, 
that  Dionysius  must  not  think  to  treat  with 
them  upon  any  other  terms  but  resigning  the 
government;  which  if  he  would  actually  do, 
he  would  not  forget  how  nearly  he  was  related 
to  him,  or  be  wanting  to  assist  him  in  procur¬ 
ing  oblivion  for  the  past,  and  whatever  else 
was  reasonable  and  just.  Dionysius  seemed  to 
consent  to  this,  and  sent  his  agents  again,  de¬ 
siring  some  of  the  Syracusans  to  come  into  the 
citadel  and  discuss  with  him  in  person  the 
terms  to  which  on  each  side  they  might  be 
willing,  after  fair  debate,  to  consent.  There 
were,  therefore,  some  deputed,  such  as  Dion 
approved  of;  and  the  general  rumour  from  the 
castle  was,  that  Dionysius  would  voluntarily 
resign  his  authority,  and  rather  do  it  himself 
as  his  own  good  deed  than  let  it  be  the  act  of 
Dion. 

But  this  profession  was  a  mere  trick  to 
amuse  the  Syracusans.  For  he  put  the  deputies 
that  were  sent  to  him  in  custody,  and  by  break 
of  day,  having  first  to  encourage  his  men 
made  them  drink  plentifully  of  raw  wine,  he 
sent  the  garrison  of  mercenaries  out  to  make 
a  sudden  sally  against  Dion’s  works.  The  at¬ 
tack  was  quite  unexpected,  and  the  barbarians 
set  to  work  boldly  with  loud  cries  to  pull  down 
the  cross-wall,  and  assailed  the  Syracusans  so 
furiously  that  they  were  not  able  to  maintain 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

their  post.  Only  a  party  of  Dion’s  hired  sol¬ 
diers,  on  first  taking  the  alarm,  advanced  to 
the  rescue;  neither  did  they  at  first  know  what 
to  do,  or  how  to  employ  the  aid  they  brought, 
not  being  able  to  hear  the  commands  of  their 
officers,  amidst  the  noise  and  confusion  of  the 
Syracusans,  who  fled  from  the  enemy  and  ran 
in  among  them,  breaking  through  their  ranks, 
until  Dion,  seeing  none  of  his  orders  could 
be  heard,  resolved  to  let  them  see  by  example 
what  they  ought  to  do,  and  charged  into  the 
thickest  of  the  enemy. 

The  fight  about  him  was  fierce  and  bloody, 
he  being  as  well  known  by  the  enemy  as  by 
his  own  party,  and  all  running  with  loud  cries 
to  the  quarters  where  he  fought.  Though  his 
time  of  life  was  no  longer  that  of  the  bodily 
strength  and  agility  for  such  a  combat,  still  his 
determination  and  courage  were  sufficient  to 
maintain  him  against  all  that  attacked  him; 
but,  while  bravely  driving  them  back,  he  was 
wounded  in  the  hand  with  a  lance,  his  body 
armour  also  had  been  much  battered,  and  was 
scarcely  any  longer  serviceable  to  protect  him, 
either  against  missiles  or  blows  hand-to-hand. 
Many  spears  and  javelins  had  passed  into  it 
through  the  shield,  and,  on  these  being  brok¬ 
en  back,  he  fell  to  the  ground,  but  was  immed¬ 
iately  rescued,  and  carried  off  by  his  soldiers. 
The  command-in-chief  he  left  to  Timonides, 
and,  mounting  a  horse,  rode  about  the  city, 
rallying  the  Syracusans  that  fled;  and  ordering 
up  a  detachment  of  the  foreign  soldiers  out  of 
Achradina,  where  they  were  posted  on  guard, 
he  brought  them  as  a  fresh  reserve,  eager  for 
battle,  upon  the  tired  and  failing  enemy,  who 
were  already  well  inclined  to  give  up  their 
design. 

For  having  hoped  at  their  first  sally  to  take 
the  whole  city,  when  beyond  their  expecta¬ 
tion  they  found  themselves  engaged  with  bold 
and  practised  fighters,  they  fell  back  towards 
the  castle.  As  soon  as  they  gave  ground,  the 
Greek  soldiers  pressed  the  harder  upon  them, 
till  they  turned  and  fled  within  the  walls. 
There  were  lost  in  this  action  seventy-four  of 
Dion’s  men,  and  a  very  great  number  of  the 
enemy.  This  being  a  signal  victory,  and  princi¬ 
pally  obtained  by  the  valour  of  the  foreign 
soldiers,  the  Syracusans  rewarded  them  in 
honour  of  it  with  a  hundred  minx,  and  the 
soldiers  on  their  part  presented  Dion  with  a 
crown  of  gold. 

Soon  after,  there  came  heralds  from  Diony¬ 
sius  bringing  Dion  letters  from  the  women  of 
his  family,  and  one  addressed  outside,  “To 


DION 

his  father,  from  Hipparinus”;  this  was  the 
name  of  Dion’s  son,  though  Timaeus  says  he 
was,  from  his  mother  Arete’s  name,  called 
Aretaeus;  but  I  think  credit  is  rather  to  be 
given  to  Timonides’s  report,  who  was  his  fa¬ 
ther’s  fellow-soldier  and  confidant.  The  rest 
of  the  letters  were  read  publicly,  containing 
many  solicitations  and  humble  requests  of  the 
women;  that  professing  to  be  from  his  son,  the 
heralds  would  not  have  them  open  publicly, 
but  Dion,  putting  force  upon  them,  broke  the 
seal. 

It  was  from  Dionysius,  written  in  the  terms 
of  it  to  Dion,  but  in  effect  to  the  Syracusans, 
and  so  worded  that,  under  a  plausible  justi¬ 
fication  of  himself  and  entreaty  to  him,  means 
were  taken  for  rendering  him  suspected  by  the 
people.  It  reminded  him  of  the  good  service 
he  had  formerly  done  the  usurping  govern¬ 
ment,  it  added  threats  to  his  dearest  relations, 
his  sister,  son,  and  wife,  if  he  did  not  comply 
with  the  contents,  also  passionate  demands 
mingled  with  lamentations,  and,  most  to  the 
purpose  of  all,  urgent  recommendations  to 
him  not  to  destroy  the  government,  and  put 
the  power  into  the  hands  of  men  who  always 
hated  him,  and  would  never  forget  their  old 
piques  and  quarrels;  let  him  take  the  sover¬ 
eignty  himself,  and  so  secure  the  safety  of  his 
family  and  his  friends. 

When  this  letter  was  read,  the  Syracusans 
were  not,  as  they  should  have  been,  trans¬ 
ported  with  admiration  at  the  unmovable  con¬ 
stancy  and  magnanimity  of  Dion,  who  with¬ 
stood  all  his  dearest  interests  to  be  true  to  vir¬ 
tue  and  justice,  but,  on  the  contrary,  they  saw 
in  this  their  reason  for  fearing  and  suspecting 
that  he  lay  under  an  invincible  necessity  to  be 
favourable  to  Dionysius;  and  they  began,  there¬ 
fore,  to  look  out  for  other  leaders,  and  the 
rather  because  to  their  great  joy  they  received 
the  news  that  Heraclides  was  on  his  way. 

This  Heraclides  was  one  of  those  whom 
Dionysius  had  banished,  a  very  good  soldier, 
and  well  known  for  the  commands  he  had 
formerly  had  under  the  tyrant;  yet  a  man  of  no 
constant  purpose,  of  a  fickle  temper,  and  least 
of  all  to  be  relied  upon  when  he  had  to  act  with 
a  colleague  in  any  honourable  command.  He 
had  had  a  difference  formerly  with  Dion  in 
Peloponnesus,  and  had  resolved,  upon  his  own 
means,  with  what  ships  and  soldiers  he  had, 
to  make  an  attack  upon  Dionysius.  When  he 
arrived  at  Syracuse,  with  seven  galleys  and 
three  small  vessels,  he  found  Dionysius  al¬ 
ready  close  besieged,  and  the  Syracusans  high 


793 

and  proud  of  their  victories.  Forthwith,  there¬ 
fore,  he  endeavoured  by  all  ways  to  make  him¬ 
self  popular;  and,  indeed,  he  had  in  him 
naturally  something  that  was  very  insinuating 
and  taking  with  a  populace  that  loves  to  be 
courted.  He  gained  his  end,  also,  the  easier, 
and  drew  the  people  over  to  his  side,  because 
of  the  dislike  they  had  taken  to  Dion’s  grave 
and  stately  manner,  which  they  thought  over¬ 
bearing  and  assuming;  their  successes  having 
made  them  so  careless  and  confident  that  they 
expected  popular  arts  and  flatteries  from  their 
leaders  before  they  had  in  reality  secured  a 
popular  government. 

Getting,  therefore,  together  in  an  irregular 
assembly,  they  chose  Heraclides  their  admiral; 
but  when  Dion  came  forward,  and  told  them 
that  conferring  this  trust  upon  Heraclides  was 
in  effect  to  withdraw  that  which  they  had 
granted  him,  for  he  was  no  longer  their  gen¬ 
eralissimo  if  another  had  the  command  of  the 
navy,  they  repealed  their  order,  and,  though 
much  against  their  wills,  cancelled  the  new 
appointment.  When  this  business  was  over, 
Dion  invited  Heraclides  to  his  house,  and 
pointed  out  to  him,  in  gentle  terms,  that  he 
had  not  acted  wisely  or  well  to  quarrel  with 
him  upon  a  punctilio  of  honour,  at  a  time 
when  the  least  false  step  might  be  the  ruin 
of  all;  and  then,  calling  a  fresh  assembly  of 
the  people,  he  there  named  Heraclides  admiral, 
and  prevailed  with  the  citizens  to  allow  him  a 
life-guard,  as  he  himself  had. 

Heraclides  openly  professed  the  highest  re¬ 
spect  for  Dion,  and  made  him  great  acknowl¬ 
edgments  for  this  favour,  attending  him  with 
all  deference,  as  ready  to  receive  his  com¬ 
mands;  but  underhand  he  kept  up  his  dealings 
with  the  populace  and  the  unrulier  citizens, 
unsettling  their  minds  and  disturbing  them 
with  his  complaints,  and  putting  Dion  into  the 
utmost  perplexity  and  disquiet.  For  if  he  ad¬ 
vised  to  give  Dionysius  leave  to  quit  the  castle, 
he  would  be  exposed  to  the  imputation  of 
sparing  and  protecting  him;  if,  to  avoid  giv¬ 
ing  offence  or  suspicion,  he  simply  continued 
the  siege,  they  would  say  he  protracted  the  war 
to  keep  his  office  of  general  the  longer  and 
overawe  the  citizens. 

There  was  one  Sosis,  notorious  in  the  city 
for  his  bad  conduct  and  his  impudence,  yet  a 
favourite  with  the  people,  for  the  very  rea¬ 
son  that  they  liked  to  see  it  made  a  part  of 
popular  privileges  to  carry  free  speech  to  this 
excess  of  licence.  This  man,  out  of  a  design 
against  Dion,  stood  up  one  day  in  an  assem- 


794 

bly,  and,  having  sufficiently  railed  at  the  citi¬ 
zens  as  a  set  of  fools  that  could  not  see  how 
they  had  made  an  exchange  of  a  dissolute  and 
drunken  for  a  sober  and  watchful  despotism, 
and  thus  having  publicly  declared  himself 
Dion’s  enemy,  took  his  leave.  The  next  day  he 
was  seen  running  through  the  streets,  as  if  he 
fled  from  some  that  pursued  him,  almost 
naked,  wounded  in  the  head,  and  bloody  all 
over.  In  this  condition,  getting  people  about 
him  in  the  market-place,  he  told  them  that  he 
had  been  assaulted  by  Dion’s  men;  and,  to  con¬ 
firm  what  he  said,  showed  them  the  wounds 
he  had  received  in  his  head.  And  a  good  many 
took  his  part,  exclaiming  loudly  against  Dion 
for  his  cruel  and  tyrannical  conduct,  stopping 
the  mouths  of  the  people  by  bloodshed  and 
peril  of  life. 

Just  as  an  assembly  was  gathering  in  this 
unsettled  and  tumultuous  state  of  mind,  Dion 
came  before  them,  and  made  it  appear  how 
this  Sosis  was  brother  to  one  of  Dionysius’s 
guard,  and  that  he  was  set  on  by  him  to  em¬ 
broil  the  city  in  tumult  and  confusion;  Diony¬ 
sius  having  now  no  way  left  for  his  security 
but  to  make  his  advantage  of  their  dissensions 
and  distractions.  The  surgeons,  also,  having 
searched  the  wound,  found  it  was  rather 
raised  than  cut  with  a  downright  blow;  for 
the  wounds  made  with  a  sword  are,  from  their 
mere  weight,  most  commonly  deepest  in  the 
middle,  but  this  was  very  slight,  and  all  along 
of  an  equal  depth;  and  it  was  not  one  con¬ 
tinued  wound,  as  if  cut  at  once,  but  several 
incisions,  in  all  probability  made  at  several 
times,  as  he  was  able  to  endure  the  pain.  There 
were  credible  persons,  also,  who  brought  a 
razor,  and  showed  it  in  the  assembly,  stating 
that  they  met  Sosis,  running  in  the  street,  all 
bloody,  who  told  them  that  he  was  fleeing  from 
Dion’s  soldiers,  who  had  just  attacked  and 
wounded  him;  they  ran  at  once  to  look  after 
them,  and  met  no  one,  but  spied  this  razor 
lying  under  a  hollow  stone  near  the  place 
from  which  they  observed  he  came. 

Sosis  was  now  likely  to  come  by  the  worst  of 
it.  But,  when  to  back  all  this,  his  own  servants 
came  in,  and  gave  evidence  that  he  had  left  his 
house  alone  before  break  of  day,  with  the  razor 
in  his  hand,  Dion’s  accusers  withdrew  them¬ 
selves,  and  the  people  by  a  general  vote  con¬ 
demned  Sosis  to  die,  being  once  again  well 
satisfied  with  Dion  and  his  proceedings. 

Yet  they  were  still  as  jealous  as  before  of  his 
soldiers,  and  the  rather  because  the  war  was 
now  carried  on  principally  by  sea;  Philistus  be- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ing  come  from  Iapygia  with  a  great  fleet  to 
Dionysius’s  assistance.  They  supposed,  there¬ 
fore,  that  there  would  be  no  longer  need  of  the 
soldiers,  who  were  all  landsmen  and  armed 
accordingly;  these  were  rather,  indeed,  they 
thought,  in  a  condition  to  be  protected  by  them¬ 
selves,  who  were  seamen,  and  had  their  power 
in  their  shipping. 

Their  good  opinion  of  themselves  was  also 
much  enhanced  by  an  advantage  they  got  in  an 
engagement  by  sea,  in  which  they  took  Philis¬ 
tus  prisoner,  and  used  him  in  a  barbarous  and 
cruel  manner.  Ephorus  relates  that  when  he 
saw  his  ship  was  taken,  he  slew  himself.  But 
Timonides,  who  was  with  Dion  from  the  very 
first,  and  was  present  at  all  the  events  as  they 
occurred,  writing  to  Speusippus  the  philoso¬ 
pher,  relates  the  story  thus:  that  Philistus’s  gal¬ 
ley  running  aground,  he  was  taken  prisoner 
alive,  and  first  disarmed,  then  stripped  of  his 
corselet,  and  exposed  naked,  being  now  an  old 
man,  to  every  kind  of  contumely;  after  which 
they  cut  off  his  head,  and  gave  his  body  to  the 
boys  of  the  town,  bidding  them  drag  it  through 
the  Achradina,  and  then  throw  it  into  the 
Quarries.  Timaeus,  to  increase  the  mockery, 
adds  further,  that  the  boys  tied  him  by  his  lame 
leg,  and  so  drew  him  through  the  streets,  while 
the  Syracusans  stood  by  laughing  and  jesting 
at  the  sight  of  that  very  man  thus  tied  and 
dragged  about  by  the  leg,  who  had  told  Diony¬ 
sius  that,  so  far  from  fleeing  on  horseback  from 
Syracuse,  he  ought  to  wait  until  he  should  be 
dragged  out  by  the  heels.  Philistus,  however, 
has  stated  that  this  was  said  to  Dionysius  by 
another,  and  not  by  himself. 

Timaeus  avails  himself  of  this  advantage, 
which  Philistus  truly  enough  affords  against 
himself  in  his  zealous  and  constant  adherence 
to  the  tyranny,  to  vent  his  own  spleen  and  mal¬ 
ice  against  him.  They,  indeed,  who  were  in¬ 
jured  by  him  at  the  time,  are  perhaps  excus¬ 
able,  if  they  carried  their  resentment  to  the 
length  of  indignities  to  his  dead  body;  but  they 
who  write  history  afterwards,  and  were  no¬ 
ways  wronged  by  him  in  his  lifetime,  and  have 
received  assistance  from  his  writings,  in  hon¬ 
our  should  not  with  opprobrious  and  scurri¬ 
lous  language  upbraid  him  for  those  misfor¬ 
tunes  which  may  well  enough  befall  even  the 
best  of  men.  On  the  other  side,  Ephorus  is  as 
much  out  of  the  way  in  his  encomiums.  For, 
however  ingenious  he  is  in  supplying  unjust 
acts  and  wicked  conduct  with  fair  and  worthy 
motives,  and  in  selecting  decorous  and  honour¬ 
able  terms,  yet  when  he  does  his  best,  he  does 


DION 

not  himself  stand  clear  of  the  charge  of  being 
the  greatest  lover  of  tyrants,  and  the  fondest 
admirer  of  luxury  and  power  and  rich  estates 
and  alliances  of  marriage  with  absolute  princes. 
He  that  neither  praises  Philistus  for  his  con¬ 
duct,  nor  insults  over  his  misfortunes,  seems  to 
me  to  take  the  fittest  course. 

After  Philistus’s  death,  Dionysius  sent  to 
Dion,  offering  to  surrender  the  castle,  all  the 
arms,  provisions,  and  garrison  soldiers,  with 
full  pay  for  them  for  five  months,  demanding 
in  return  that  he  might  have  safe  conduct  to 
go  unmolested  into  Italy,  and  there  to  continue, 
and  also  to  enjoy  the  revenues  of  Gyarta,  a 
large  and  fruitful  territory  belonging  to  Syra¬ 
cuse,  reaching  from  the  seaside  to  the  middle 
of  the  country.  Dion  rejected  these  proposals, 
and  referred  him  to  the  Syracusans.  They,  hop¬ 
ing  in  a  short  time  to  take  Dionysius  alive,  dis¬ 
missed  his  ambassadors  summarily.  But  he, 
leaving  his  eldest  son,  Apollocrates,  to  defend 
the  castle,  and  putting  on  board  his  ships  the 
persons  and  the  property  that  he  set  most  value 
upon,  took  the  opportunity  of  a  fair  wind,  and 
made  his  escape,  undiscovered  by  the  admiral, 
Heraclides,  and  his  fleet. 

The  citizens  loudly  exclaimed  against  Hera¬ 
clides  for  this  neglect;  but  he  got  one  of  their 
public  speakers,  Hippo  by  name,  to  go  among 
them,  and  make  proposals  to  the  assembly  for 
a  redivision  of  lands,  alleging  that  the  first  be¬ 
ginning  of  liberty  was  equality,  and  that  pov¬ 
erty  and  slavery  were  inseparable  companions. 
In  support  of  this,  Heraclides  spoke,  and  used 
the  faction  in  favour  of  it  to  overpower  Dion, 
who  opposed  it;  and  in  fine,  he  persuaded  the 
people  to  ratify  it  by  their  vote,  and  further  to 
decree  that  the  foreign  soldiers  should  receive 
no  pay,  and  that  they  would  elect  new  com¬ 
manders,  and  so  be  rid  of  Dion’s  oppression. 

The  people,  attempting,  as  it  were,  after 
their  long  sickness  of  despotism,  all  at  once  to 
stand  on  their  legs,  and  to  do  their  part,  for 
which  they  were  yet  unfit,  of  freemen,  stum¬ 
bled  in  all  their  actions;  and  yet  hated  Dion, 
who,  like  a  good  physician,  endeavoured  to 
keep  the  city  to  a  strict  and  temperate  regimen. 

When  they  met  in  the  assembly  to  choose 
their  commanders,  about  the  middle  of  sum¬ 
mer,  unusual  and  terrible  thunders,  with  other 
inauspicious  appearances,  for  fifteen  days  to¬ 
gether,  dispersed  the  people,  deterring  them, 
on  grounds  of  religious  fear,  from  creating 
new  generals.  But,  at  last,  the  popular  leaders, 
having  found  a  fair  and  clear  day,  and,  having 
got  their  party  together,  were  proceeding  to  an 


795 

election,  when  a  draught-ox,  who  was  used  to 
the  crowd  and  noise  of  the  streets,  but  for  some 
reason  or  other  grew  unruly  to  his  driver, 
breaking  from  his  yoke,  ran  furiously  into  the 
theatre  where  they  were  assembled,  and  set  the 
people  flying  and  running  in  all  directions  be¬ 
fore  him  in  the  greatest  disorder  and  confu¬ 
sion;  and  from  thence  went  on,  leaping  and 
rushing  about,  over  all  that  part  of  the  city 
which  the  enemies  afterwards  made  them¬ 
selves  masters  of. 

However,  the  Syracusans,  not  regarding  all 
this,  elected  five-and-twenty  captains,  and, 
among  the  rest,  Heraclides,  and  underhand 
tampered  with  Dion’s  men,  promising,  if  they 
would  desert  him,  and  enlist  themselves  in 
their  service,  to  make  them  citizens  of  Syra¬ 
cuse,  with  all  the  privileges  of  natives.  But  they 
would  not  hear  the  proposals,  but,  to  show 
their  fidelity  and  courage,  with  their  swords 
in  their  hands,  placing  Dion  for  his  security  in 
the  midst  of  their  battalion,  conveyed  him  out 
of  the  city,  not  offering  violence  to  any  one,  but 
upbraiding  those  they  met  with  their  baseness 
and  ingratitude.  The  citizens,  seeing  they  were 
but  few,  and  did  not  offer  any  violence,  de¬ 
spised  them;  and,  supposing  that  with  their 
large  numbers  they  might  with  ease  overpower 
and  cut  them  off  before  they  got  out  of  the  city, 
fell  upon  them  in  the  rear. 

Here  Dion  was  in  a  great  strait,  being  neces¬ 
sitated  either  to  fight  against  his  own  country¬ 
men  or  tamely  suffer  himself  and  his  faithful 
soldiers  to  be  cut  in  pieces.  He  used  many  en¬ 
treaties  to  the  Syracusans,  stretching 'out  his 
hands  towards  the  castle  that  was  full  of  their 
enemies,  and  showing  them  the  soldiers,  who 
in  great  numbers  appeared  on  the  walls  and 
watched  what  was  doing.  But  when  no  per¬ 
suasions  could  divert  the  impulse  of  the  multi¬ 
tude,  and  the  whole  mass,  like  the  sea  in  a 
storm,  seemed  to  be  driven  before  the  breath 
of  the  demagogues,  he  commanded  his  men, 
not  to  charge  them,  but  to  advance  with  shouts 
and  clashing  of  their  arms;  which  being  done, 
not  a  man  of  them  stood  his  ground;  all  fled 
at  once  through  the  streets,  though  none  pur¬ 
sued  them.  For  Dion  immediately  commanded 
his  men  to  face  about,  and  led  them  towards 
the  city  of  the  Leontines. 

The  very  women  laughed  at  the  new  cap¬ 
tains  for  this  retreat;  so,  to  redeem  their  credit, 
they  bid  the  citizens  arm  themselves  again, 
and  followed  after  Dion,  and  came  up  with 
him  as  he  was  passing  a  river.  Some  of  the 
light-horse  rode  up  and  began  to  skirmish.  But 


79  6 

when  they  saw  Dion  no  more  tame  and  calm, 
and  no  signs  in  his  face  of  any  fatherly  tender¬ 
ness  towards  his  countrymen,  but  with  an 
angry  countenance,  as  resolved  not  to  suffer 
their  indignities  any  longer,  bidding  his  men 
face  round  and  form  in  their  ranks  for  the  on¬ 
set,  they  presently  turned  their  backs  more 
basely  than  before,  and  fled  to  the  city,  with  the 
loss  of  some  few  of  their  men. 

The  Leontines  received  Dion  very  honoura¬ 
bly,  gave  money  to  his  men,  and  made  them 
free  of  their  city;  sending  envoys  to  the  Syra¬ 
cusans,  to  require  them  to  do  the  soldiers  jus¬ 
tice,  who,  in  return,  sent  back  other  agents  to 
accuse  Dion.  But  when  a  general  meeting  of 
the  confederates  met  in  the  town  of  the  Leon¬ 
tines,  and  the  matter  was  heard  and  debated, 
the  Syracusans  were  held  to  be  in  fault.  They, 
however,  refused  to  stand  to  the  award  of  their 
allies,  following  their  own  conceit,  and  making 
it  their  pride  to  listen  to  no  one,  and  not  to 
have  any  commanders  but  those  who  would 
fear  and  obey  the  people. 

About  this  time,  Dionysius  sent  in  a  fleet, 
under  the  command  of  Nypsius  the  Neapoli¬ 
tan,  with  provisions  and  pay  for  the  garrison. 
The  Syracusans  fought  him,  had  the  better, 
and  took  four  of  his  ships;  but  they  made  very 
ill  use  of  their  good  success,  and  for  want  of 
good  discipline,  fell  in  their  joy  to  drinking 
and  feasting  in  an  extravagant  manner,  with 
so  little  regard  to  their  main  interest  that,  when 
they  thought  themselves  sure  of  taking  the 
castle,  they  actually  lost  their  city.  Nypsius, 
seeing  the  citizens  in  this  general  disorder, 
spending  day  and  night  in  their  drunken  sing¬ 
ing  and  revelling,  and  their  commanders  well 
pleased  with  the  frolic,  or  at  least  not  daring 
to  try  and  give  any  orders  to  men  in  their 
drink,  took  advantage  of  this  opportunity, 
made  a  sally,  and  stormed  their  works;  and 
having  made  his  way  through  these,  let  his 
barbarians  loose  upon  the  city,  giving  up  it  and 
all  that  were  in  it  to  their  pleasure. 

The  Syracusans  quickly  saw  their  folly  and 
misfortune,  but  could  not,  in  the  distraction 
they  were  in,  so  soon  redress  it.  The  city  was  in 
actual  process  of  being  sacked,  the  enemy  put¬ 
ting  the  men  to  the  sword,  demolishing  the 
fortifications,  and  dragging  the  women  and 
children,  with  lamentable  shrieks  and  cries, 
prisoners  into  the  castle.  The  commanders, 
giving  all  for  lost,  were  not  able  to  put  the 
citizens  in  any  tolerable  posture  of  defence, 
finding  them  confusedly  mixed  up  and  scat¬ 
tered  among  the  enemy.  While  they  were  in 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

this  condition,  and  the  Achradina  in  danger 
to  be  taken,  every  one  was  sensible  who  he  was 
in  whom  all  their  remaining  hopes  rested,  but 
no  man  for  shame  durst  name  Dion,  whom 
they  had  so  ungratefully  and  foolishly  dealt 
with.  Necessity  at  last  forcing  them,  some  of 
the  auxiliary  troops  and  horsemen  cried  out, 
“Send  for  Dion  and  his  Peloponnesians  from 
the  Leontines.” 

No  sooner  was  the  venture  made  and  the 
name  heard  among  the  people,  but  they  gave 
a  shout  for  joy,  and,  with  tears  in  their  eyes, 
wished  him  there,  that  they  might  once  again 
see  that  leader  at  the  head  of  them  whose  cour¬ 
age  and  bravery  in  the  worst  of  dangers  they 
well  remembered,  calling  to  mind  not  only 
with  what  an  undaunted  spirit  he  always  be¬ 
haved  himself,  but  also  with  what  courage  and 
confidence  he  inspired  them  when  he  led  them 
against  the  enemy.  They  immediately,  there¬ 
fore,  despatched  Archonides  and  Telesides  of 
the  confederate  troops  and  of  the  horsemen, 
Hellanicus  and  four  others.  These,  traversing 
the  road  between  at  their  horses’  full  speed, 
reached  the  town  of  the  Leontines  in  the  eve¬ 
ning.  The  first  thing  they  did  was  to  leap  from 
their  horses  and  fall  at  Dion’s  feet,  relating 
with  tears  the  sad  condition  the  Syracusans 
were  in.  Many  of  the  Leontines  and  Pelo¬ 
ponnesians  began  to  throng  about  them,  guess¬ 
ing  by  their  speed  and  the  manner  of  their 
address  that  something  extraordinary  had  oc¬ 
curred. 

Dion  at  once  led  the  way  to  the  assembly, 
and  the  people  being  gathered  together  in  a 
very  little  time,  Archonides  and  Hellanicus 
and  the  others  came  in  among  them,  and  in 
short  declared  the  misery  and  distress  of  the 
Syracusans,  begging  the  foreign  soldiers  to  for¬ 
get  the  injuries  they  had  received,  and  assist 
the  afflicted,  who  had  suffered  more  for  the 
wrong  they  had  done  than  they  themselves 
who  received  it  would  (had  it  been  in  their 
power)  have  inflicted  upon  them.  When  they 
had  made  an  end,  there  was  a  profound  si¬ 
lence  in  the  theatre;  Dion  then  stood  up,  and 
began  to  speak,  but  tears  stopped  his  words; 
his  soldiers  were  troubled  at  his  grief,  but  bade 
him  take  good  courage  and  proceed. 

When  he  had  recovered  himself  a  little, 
therefore,  “Men  of  Peloponnesus,”  he  said, 
“and  of  the  confederacy,  I  asked  for  your  pres¬ 
ence  here,  that  you  might  consider  your  own 
interests.  For  myself,  I  have  no  interests  to 
consult  while  Syracuse  is  perishing,  and 
though  I  may  not  save  it  from  destruction,  I 


DION 

will  nevertheless  hasten  thither,  and  be  buried 
in  the  ruins  of  my  country.  Yet  if  you  can  find 
in  your  hearts  to  assist  us,  the  most  inconsider¬ 
ate  and  unfortunate  of  men,  you  may  to  your 
eternal  honour  again  retrieve  this  unhappy 
city.  But  if  the  Syracusans  can  obtain  no  more 
pity  nor  relief  from  you,  may  the  gods  reward 
you  for  what  you  have  formerly  valiantly  done 
for  them,  and  for  your  kindness  to  Dion,  of 
whom  speak  hereafter  as  one  who  deserted  you 
not  when  you  were  injured  and  abused,  nor 
afterwards  forsook  his  fellow-citizens  in  their 
afflictions  and  misfortunes.” 

Before  he  had  yet  ended  his  speech,  the  sol¬ 
diers  leapt  up,  and  with  a  great  shout  testified 
their  readiness  for  the  service,  crying  out  to 
march  immediately  to  the  relief  of  the  city. 
The  Syracusan  messengers  hugged  and  em¬ 
braced  them,  praying  the  gods  to  send  down 
blessings  upon  Dion  and  the  Peloponnesians. 
When  the  noise  was  pretty  well  over,  Dion 
gave  orders  that  all  should  go  to  their  quarters 
to  prepare  for  their  march,  and  having  refresh¬ 
ed  themselves,  come  ready  armed  to  their  ren¬ 
dezvous  in  the  place  where  they  now  were,  re¬ 
solving  that  very  night  to  attempt  the  rescue. 

Now  at  Syracuse,  Dionysius’s  soldiers,  as 
long  as  day  continued,  ransacked  the  city,  and 
did  all  the  mischief  they  could;  but  when  night 
came  on,  they  retired  into  the  castle,  having 
lost  some  few  of  their  number.  At  which  the 
factious  ringleaders  taking  heart,  and  hoping 
the  enemy  would  rest  content  with  what  they 
had  done  and  make  no  further  attempt  upon 
them,  persuaded  the  people  again  to  reject 
Dion,  and,  if  he  came  with  the  foreign  sol¬ 
diers,  not  to  admit  him;  advising  them  not  to 
yield,  as  inferior  to  them  in  point  of  honour 
and  courage,  but  to  save  their  city  and  defend 
their  liberties  and  properties  themselves.  The 
populace,  therefore,  and  their  leaders,  sent  mes¬ 
sengers  to  Dion  to  forbid  him  to  advance, 
while  the  noble  citizens  and  the  horse  sent 
others  to  him  to  desire  him  to  hasten  his 
march;  for  which  reason  he  slacked  his  pace, 
yet  did  not  remit  his  advance.  And  in  the 
course  of  the  night,  the  faction  that  was 
against  him  set  a  guard  upon  the  gates  of  the 
city  to  hinder  him  from  coming  in. 

But  Nypsius  made  another  sally  out  of  the 
castle  with  a  far  greater  number  of  men,  and 
those  far  more  bold  and  eager  than  before,  who 
quite  ruined  what  of  the  rampart  was  left 
standing,  and  fell  in,  pell-mell,  to  sack  and 
ravage  the  city.  The  slaughter  was  now  very 
great,  not  only  of  the  men,  but  of  the  women, 


797 

also,  and  children;  for  they  desired  not  so 
much  to  plunder,  as  to  destroy  and  kill  all 
they  met.  For  Dionysius,  despairing  to  regain 
the  kingdom,  and  mortally  hating  the  Syra¬ 
cusans,  resolved  to  bury  his  lost  sovereignty  in 
the  ruin  and  desolation  of  Syracuse.  The  sol¬ 
diers,  therefore,  to  anticipate  Dion’s  succours, 
resolved  upon  the  most  complete  and  ready 
way  of  destruction,  to  lay  the  city  in  ashes, 
firing  all  at  hand  with  torches  and  lamps,  and 
at  distance  with  flaming  arrows,  shot  from 
their  bows.  The  citizens  fled  every  way  before 
them;  they  who,  to  avoid  the  fire,  forsook  their 
houses,  were  taken  in  the  streets  and  put  to 
the  sword;  they  who  betook  themselves  for  ref¬ 
uge  into  the  houses  were  forced  out  again  by 
the  flames,  many  buildings  being  now  in  a 
blaze,  and  many  falling  in  ruins  upon  them  as 
they  fled  past. 

This  fresh  misfortune  by  general  consent 
opened  the  gates  for  Dion.  He  had  given  up 
his  rapid  advance,  when  he  received  advice 
that  the  enemies  were  retreated  into  the  castle, 
but,  in  the  morning,  some  horse  brought  him 
the  news  of  another  assault,  and,  soon  after, 
some  of  those  who  before  opposed  his  coming 
fled  now  to  him,  to  entreat  him  he  would 
hasten  his  relief.  The  pressure  increasing, 
Heraclides  sent  his  brother,  and  after  him  his 
uncle,  Theodotes,  to  beg  him  to  help  them; 
for  that  now  they  were  not  able  to  resist  any 
longer;  he  himself  was  wounded,  and  the 
greatest  part  of  the  city  either  in  ruins  or  in 
flames. 

When  Dion  met  this  sad  news,  he  was  about 
sixty  furlongs  distant  from  the  city.  When  he 
had  acquainted  the  soldiers  with  the  exigency, 
and  exhorted  them  to  behave  themselves  like 
men,  the  army  no  longer  marched  but  ran  for¬ 
wards,  and  by  the  way  were  met  by  messengers 
upon  messengers  entreating  them  to  make 
haste.  By  the  wonderful  eagerness  of  the  sol¬ 
diers,  and  their  extraordinary  speed,  Dion 
quickly  came  to  the  city,  and  entered  what  is 
called  the  Hecatompedon,  sending  his  light¬ 
armed  men  at  once  to  charge  the  enemy,  that, 
seeing  them,  the  Syracusans  might  take  cour¬ 
age.  In  the  meantime,  he  drew  up  in  good 
order  his  full-armed  men  and  all  the  citizens 
that  came  in  and  joined  him;  forming  his  bat¬ 
talions  deep,  and  distributing  his  officers  in 
many  separate  commands,  that  he  might  be 
able  to  attack  from  many  quarters  at  once,  and 
so  be  more  alarming  to  the  enemy. 

So,  having  made  his  arrangements  and  of¬ 
fered  vows  to  the  gods,  when  he  was  seen  in 


798 

the  streets  advancing  at  the  head  of  his  men  to 
engage  the  enemy,  a  confused  noise  of  shouts, 
congratulations,  vows,  and  prayers  was  raised 
by  the  Syracusans,  who  now  called  Dion  their 
deliverer  and  Tutelar  Deity,  and  his  soldiers 
their  friends,  brethren,  and  fellow-citizens. 
And,  indeed,  at  that  moment,  none  seemed 
to  regard  themselves,  or  value  their  safeties, 
but  to  be  concerned  more  for  Dion’s  life  than 
for  all  their  own  together,  as  he  marched  at 
the  head  of  them  to  meet  the  danger,  through 
blood  and  fire  and  over  heaps  of  dead  bodies 
that  lay  in  his  way. 

And  indeed  the  posture  of  the  enemy  was  in 
appearance  terrible;  for  they  were  flushed  and 
ferocious  with  victory,  and  had  posted  them¬ 
selves  very  advantageously  along  the  demol¬ 
ished  works,  which  made  the  access  to  them 
very  hazardous  and  difficult.  Yet  that  which 
disturbed  Dion’s  soldiers  most  was  the  appre¬ 
hension  they  were  in  of  the  fire,  which  made 
their  march  very  troublesome  and  difficult; 
for  the  houses  being  in  flames  on  all  sides,  they 
were  met  everywhere  with  the  blaze,  and, 
treading  upon  burning  ruins  and  every  min¬ 
ute  in  danger  of  being  overwhelmed  with  fall¬ 
ing  houses,  through  clouds  of  ashes  and  smoke 
they  laboured  hard  to  keep  their  order  and 
maintain  their  ranks.  When  they  came  near  to 
the  enemy,  the  approach  was  so  narrow  and 
uneven  that  but  few  of  them  could  engage 
at  a  time;  but  at  length,  with  loud  cheers  and 
much  zeal  on  the  part  of  the  Syracusans,  en¬ 
couraging  them  and  joining  with  them,  they 
beat  off  Nypsius’s  men,  and  put  them  to  flight. 
Most  of  them  escaped  into  the  castle,  which 
was  near  at  hand;  all  that  could  not  get  in  were 
pursued  and  picked  up  here  and  there  by  the 
soldiers,  and  put  to  the  sword. 

The  present  exigency,  however,  did  not  suf¬ 
fer  the  citizens  to  take  immediate  benefit  of 
their  victory  in  such  mutual  congratulations 
and  embraces  as  became  so  great  a  success;  for 
now  all  were  busily  employed  to  save  what 
houses  were  left  standing,  labouring  hard  all 
night,  and  scarcely  so  could  master  the  fire. 

The  next  day,  not  one  of  the  popular  ha- 
ranguers  durst  stay  in  the  city,  but  all  of  them, 
knowing  their  own  guilt,  by  their  flight  con¬ 
fessed  it,  and  secured  their  lives.  Only  Hera- 
clides  and  Theodotes  went  voluntarily  and  sur¬ 
rendered  themselves  to  Dion,  acknowledging 
that  they  had  wronged  him,  and  begging  he 
would  be  kinder  to  them  than  they  had  been 
just  to  him;  adding  how  much  it  would  be¬ 
come  him  who  was  master  of  so  many  excel- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

lent  accomplishments  to  moderate  his  anger 
and  be  generously  compassionate  to  ungrate¬ 
ful  men,  who  were  here  before  him,  making 
their  confession  that,  in  all  the  matter  of  their 
former  enmity  and  rivalry  against  him  they 
were  now  absolutely  overcome  by  his  virtue. 
Though  they  thus  humbly  addressed  him,  his 
friends  advised  him  not  to  pardon  these  tur- 
bulent  and  ill-conditioned  men,  but  to  yield 
them  to  the  desires  of  his  soldiers,  and  utterly 
root  out  of  the  commonwealth  the  ambitious 
affectation  of  popularity,  a  disease  as  pestilent 
and  pernicious  as  the  passion  for  tyranny  itself. 

Dion  endeavoured  to  satisfy  them,  telling 
them  that  other  generals  exercised  and  trained 
themselves  for  the  most  part  in  the  practices  of 
war  and  arms;  but  that  he  had  long  studied  in 
the  Academy  how  to  conquer  anger,  and  not 
let  emulation  and  envy  conquer  him;  that  to 
do  this  it  is  not  sufficient  that  a  man  be  oblig¬ 
ing  and  kind  to  his  friends,  and  those  that  have  | 
deserved  well  of  him,  but,  rather,  gentle  and 
ready  to  forgive  in  the  case  of  those  who  do 
wrong;  that  he  wished  to  let  the  world  see  that 
he  valued  not  himself  so  much  upon  excelling 
Heraclides  in  ability  and  conduct,  as  he  did  in  t 
outdoing  him  in  justice  and  clemency;  herein 
to  have  the  advantage  is  to  excel  indeed;  where¬ 
as  the  honour  of  success  in  war  is  never  entire; 
fortune  will  be  sure  to  dispute  it,  though  no 
man  should  pretend  to  have  a  claim.  What  if 
Heraclides  be  perfidious,  malicious,  and  base, 
must  Dion  therefore  sully  or  injure  his  virtue 
by  passionate  concern  for  it?  For,  though  the 
laws  determine  it  juster  to  revenge  an  injury 
than  to  do  an  injury,  yet  it  is  evident  that  both, 
in  the  nature  of  things,  originally  proceed  from 
the  same  deficiency  and  weakness.  The  mali- 1 
cious  humour  of  men,  though  perverse  and  re¬ 
fractory,  is  not  so  savage  and  invincible  but  it 
may  be  wrought  upon  by  kindness,  and  altered 
by  repeated  obligations. 

Dion,  making  use  of  these  arguments,  par¬ 
doned  and  dismissed  Heraclides  and  Theo-  a 
dotes.  $ 

And  now,  resolving  to  repair  the  blockade  a 
about  the  castle,  he  commanded  all  the  Syr-  c 
acusans  to  cut  each  man  a  stake  and  bring  it  u 
to  the  works;  and  then,  dismissing  them  to  re-  n 
fresh  themselves,  and  take  their  rest,  he  em-  « 
ployed  his  own  men  all  night,  and  by  morning 
had  finished  his  line  of  palisade;  so  that  both 
the  enemy  and  the  citizens  wondered,  when 
day  returned,  to  see  the  work  so  far  advanced 
in  so  short  a  time.  Burying,  therefore,  the  dead  m 
and  redeeming  the  prisoners,  who  were  near  ;  ri 


DION 

two  thousand,  he  called  a  public  assembly, 
where  Heraclides  made  a  motion  that  Dion 
should  be  declared  general,  with  full  powers  at 
land  and  sea.  The  better  citizens  approved 
well  of  it,  and  called  on  the  people  to  vote  it 
so.  But  the  mob  of  sailors  and  handicraftsmen 
would  not  yield  that  Heraclides  should  lose  his 
command  of  the  navy;  believing  him,  if  other¬ 
wise  an  ill  man,  at  any  rate  to  be  more  citizen¬ 
like  than  Dion,  and  readier  to  comply  with  the 
people.  Dion,  therefore,  submitted  to  them  in 
this,  and  consented  that  Heraclides  should 
continue  admiral. 

But  when  they  began  to  press  the  project  of 
the  redistribution  of  lands  and  houses,  he  not 
only  opposed  it,  but  repealed  all  the  votes  they 
had  formerly  made  upon  that  account,  which 
sensibly  vexed  them.  Heraclides,  therefore, 
took  a  new  advantage  of  him,  and,  being  at 
Messene,  harangued  the  soldiers  and  ships’ 
crews  that  sailed  with  him,  accusing  Dion  that 
he  had  a  design  to  make  himself  absolute.  And 
yet  at  the  same  time  he  held  private  corres¬ 
pondence  for  a  treaty  with  Dionysius  by  means 
of  Pharax  the  Spartan.  Which,  when  the  noble 
citizens  of  Syracuse  had  intimation  of,  there 
arose  a  sedition  in  the  army,  and  the  city  was 
in  great  distress  and  want  of  provisions;  and 
Dion  now  knew  not  what  course  to  take,  be¬ 
ing  also  blamed  by  all  his  friends  for  having 
thus  fortified  against  himself  such  a  perverse 
and  jealous  and  utterly  corrupted  man  as 
Heraclides  was. 

Pharax  at  this  time  lay  encamped  at  Nea- 
polis,  in  the  territory  of  Agrigentum.  Dion, 
therefore,  led  out  the  Syracusans,  but  with  an 
intent  not  to  engage  him  till  he  saw  a  fit  op¬ 
portunity.  But  Heraclides  and  his  seamen  ex¬ 
claimed  against  him,  that  he  had  delayed 
fighting  on  purpose  that  he  might  the  longer 
continue  his  command;  so  that,  much  against 
his  will,  he  was  forced  to  an  engagement  and 
was  beaten,  his  loss,  however,  being  inconsider¬ 
able,  and  that  occasioned  chiefly  by  the  dissen¬ 
sion  that  was  in  the  army.  He  rallied  his  men, 
and,  having  put  them  in  good  order  and  en¬ 
couraged  them  to  redeem  their  credit,  resolved 
upon  a  second  battle.  But  in  the  evening,  he 
received  advice  that  Heraclides  with  his  fleet 
was  on  his  way  to  Syracuse,  with  the  purpose 
to  possess  himself  of  the  city  and  keep  him  and 
his  army  out.  Instantly,  therefore,  taking  with 
him  some  of  the  strongest  and  most  active  of 
his  men,  he  rode  off  in  the  dark,  and  about 
nine  the  next  morning  was  at  the  gates,  having 
ridden  seven  hundred  furlongs  that  night. 


799 

Heraclides,  though  he  strove  to  make  all  the 
speed  he  could,  yet,  coming  too  late,  tacked 
and  stood  out  again  to  sea;  and,  being  unre¬ 
solved  what  course  to  steer,  accidentally  he 
met  Gaesylus  the  Spartan,  who  told  him  he  was 
come  from  Lacedaemon  to  head  the  Sicilians, 
as  Gylippus  had  formerly  done.  Heraclides 
was  only  too  glad  to  get  hold  of  him,  and  fast¬ 
ening  him  as  it  might  be  a  sort  of  amulet  to 
himself,  he  showed  him  to  the  confederates, 
and  sent  a  herald  to  Syracuse  to  summon  them 
to  accept  the  Spartan  general.  Dion  returned 
answer  that  they  had  generals  enough,  and, 
if  they  wanted  a  Spartan  to  command  them, 
he  could  supply  that  office,  being  himself  a  citi¬ 
zen  of  Sparta.  When  Gaesylus  saw  this,  he  gave 
up  all  pretensions,  and  sailed  in  to  Dion,  and 
reconciled  Heraclides  to  him,  making  Hera¬ 
clides  swear  the  most  solemn  oaths  to  perform 
what  he  engaged,  Gaesylus  himself  also  under¬ 
taking  to  maintain  Dion’s  right  and  inflict 
chastisement  on  Heraclides  if  he  broke  his 
faith. 

The  Syracusans  then  laid  up  their  navy, 
which  was  at  present  a  great  charge  and  of 
little  use  to  them,  but  an  occasion  of  differ¬ 
ences  and  dissensions  among  the  generals,  and 
pressed  on  the  siege,  finishing  the  wall  of 
blockade  with  which  they  invested  the  castle. 
The  besieged,  seeing  no  hopes  of  succour  and 
their  provisions  failing,  began  to  mutiny;  so 
that  the  son  of  Dionysius,  in  despair  of  holding 
out  longer  for  his  father,  capitulated,  and  arti¬ 
cled  with  Dion  to  deliver  up  the  castle  with 
all  the  garrison  soldiers  and  ammunition;  and 
so,  taking  his  mother  and  sisters  and  manning 
five  galleys,  he  set  out  to  go  to  his  father,  Dion 
seeing  him  safely  out,  and  scarce  a  man  in  all 
the  city  not  being  there  to  behold  the  sight,  as 
indeed  they  called  even  on  those  that  were  not 
present,  out  of  pity,  that  they  could  not  be 
there  to  see  this  happy  day  and  the  sun  shin¬ 
ing  on  a  free  Syracuse.  And  as  this  expulsion 
of  Dionysius  is  even  now  always  cited  as  one 
of  the  greatest  and  most  remarkable  examples 
of  fortune’s  vicissitudes,  how  extraordinary 
may  we  imagine  their  joy  to  have  been,  and 
how  entire  their  satisfaction,  who  had  totally 
subverted  the  most  potent  tyranny  that  ever 
was  by  very  slight  and  inconsiderable  means! 

When  Apollocrates  was  gone,  and  Dion  com¬ 
ing  to  take  possession  of  the  castle,  the  women 
could  not  stay  while  he  made  his  entry,  but  ran 
to  meet  him  at  the  gate.  Aristomache  led  Dion’s 
son,  and  Arete  followed  after  weeping,  fearful 
and  dubious  how  to  salute  or  address  her  hus- 


800 


band,  after  living  with  another  man.  Dion  first 
embraced  his  sister,  then  his  son;  when  Aristo- 
mache  bringing  Arete  to  him,  “O  Dion,”  said 
she,  “your  banishment  made  us  all  equally  mis¬ 
erable;  your  return  and  victory  has  cancelled 
all  sorrows,  excepting  this  poor  sufferer’s, 
whom  I,  unhappy,  was  compelled  to  see  an¬ 
other’s  while  you  were  yet  alive.  Fortune  has 
now  given  you  the  sole  disposal  of  us.  How 
will  you  determine  concerning  her  hard  fate? 
In  what  relation  must  she  salute  you,  as  her 
uncle,  or  as  her  husband?”  This  speech  of 
Aristomache’s  brought  tears  from  Dion,  who 
with  great  affection  embraced  his  wife,  gave 
her  his  son,  and  desired  her  to  retire  to  his  own 
house,  where  he  continued  to  reside  when  he 
had  delivered  up  the  castle  to  the  Syracusans. 

For  though  all  things  had  now  succeeded  to 
his  wish,  yet  he  desired  not  to  enjoy  any  pres¬ 
ent  advantage  of  his  good  fortune,  except  to 
gratify  his  friends,  reward  his  allies,  and  be¬ 
stow  upon  his  companions  of  former  time  in 
Athens,  and  the  soldiers  that  had  served  him, 
some  special  mark  of  kindness  and  honour, 
striving  herein  to  outdo  his  very  means  in  his 
generosity.  As  for  himself,  he  was  content  with 
a  very  frugal  and  moderate  competency,  and 
was  indeed  the  wonder  of  all  men,  that  when 
not  only  Sicily  and  Carthage,  but  all  Greece 
looked  to  him  as  in  the  height  of  prosperity, 
and  no  man  living  greater  than  he,  no  general 
more  renowned,  for  valour  and  success,  yet  in 
his  guard,  his  attendance,  his  table,  he  seemed 
as  if  he  rather  commoned  with  Plato  in  the 
Academy  than  lived  among  hired  captains  and 
paid  soldiers,  whose  solace  of  their  toils  and 
dangers  it  is  to  eat  and  drink  their  fill,  and  en¬ 
joy  themselves  plentifully  every  day. 

Plato  indeed  wrote  to  him  that  the  eyes  of 
all  the  world  were  now  upon  him;  but  it  is  evi¬ 
dent  that  he  himself  had  fixed  his  eye  upon  one 
place  in  one  city,  the  Academy,  and  considered 
that  the  spectators  and  judges  there  regarded 
not  great  actions,  courage,  or  fortune,  but 
watched  to  see  how  temperately  and  wisely  he 
could  use  his  prosperity,  how  evenly  he  could 
behave  himself  in  the  high  condition  he  now 
was  in.  Neither  did  he  remit  anything  of  his 
wonted  stateliness  in  conversation  or  serious 
charge  to  the  people;  he  made  it  rather  a  point 
to  maintain  it,  notwithstanding  that  a  little 
condescension  and  obliging  civility  were  very 
necessary  for  his  present  affairs;  and  Plato,  as 
we  said  before,  rebuked  him,  and  wrote  to  tell 
him  that  self-will  keeps  house  with  solitude. 
But  certainly  his  natural  temperament  was  one 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

that  could  not  bend  to  complaisance;  and,  be¬ 
sides,  he  wished  to  work  the  Syracusans  back 
the  other  way,  out  of  their  present  excess  of  li¬ 
cense  and  caprice. 

Heraclides  began  again  to  set  up  against  him, 
and,  being  invited  by  Dion  to  make  one  of  the 
council,  refused  to  come,  saying  he  would  give 
his  opinion  as  a  private  citizen  in  the  public  as¬ 
sembly.  Next  he  complained  of  Dion  because 
he  had  not  demolished  the  citadel,  and  because 
he  had  hindered  the  people  from  throwing 
down  Dionysius’s  tomb  and  doing  despite  to 
the  dead;  moreover,  he  accused  him  for  send¬ 
ing  to  Corinth  for  counsellors  and  assistants  in 
the  government,  thereby  neglecting  and  slight¬ 
ing  his  fellow-citizens.  And  indeed  he  had  sent 
messages  for  some  Corinthians  to  come  to  him, 
hoping  by  their  means  and  presence  the  better 
to  settle  that  constitution  he  intended,  for  he 
designed  to  suppress  the  unlimited  democratic 
government,  which  indeed  is  not  a  government,  > 
but,  as  Plato  calls  it,  a  market-place  of  govern¬ 
ments,  and  to  introduce  and  establish  a  mixed 
polity,  on  the  Spartan  and  Cretan  model,  be¬ 
tween  a  commonwealth  and  a  monarchy,  ' 
wherein  an  aristocratic  body  should  preside, 
and  determine  all  matters  of  greatest  conse¬ 
quence;  for  he  saw  also  that  the  Corinthians 
were  chiefly  governed  by  something  like  an 
oligarchy,  and  the  people  but  little  concerned 
in  public  business. 

Now  knowing  that  Heraclides  would  be  his 
most  considerable  adversary,  and  that  in  all 
ways  he  was  a  turbulent,  fickle,  and  factious 
man,  he  gave  way  to  some  whom  formerly  he 
hindered  when  they  designed  to  kill  him,  who, 
breaking  in,  murdered  Heraclides  in  his  own 
house.  His  death  was  much  resented  by  the 
citizens.  Nevertheless,  when  Dion  made  him  a 
splendid  funeral,  followed  the  dead  body  with 
all  his  soldiers,  and  then  addressed  them,  they  ; 
understood  that  it  would  have  been  impossible  ; 
to  have  kept  the  city  quiet,  as  long  as  Dion  and 
Heraclides  were  competitors  in  the  govern¬ 
ment.  s 

Dion  had  a  friend  called  Callippus,  an  Athe-  a 
nian,  who,  Plato  says,  first  made  acquaintance 
and  afterwards  obtained  familiarity  with  him,  1 
not  from  any  connection  with  his  philosophic 
studies,  but  on  occasions  afforded  by  the  cele-  I  p 
bration  of  the  mysteries,  and  in  the  way  of  or-  n 
dinary  society.  This  man  went  with  him  in  all  n 
his  military  service,  and  was  in  great  honour  j  si 
and  esteem;  being  the  first  of  his  friends  who  •  qi 
marched  by  his  side  into  Syracuse,  wearing  a  i 
garland  upon  his  head,  having  behaved  him- 


DION 

self  very  well  in  all  the  battles,  and  made  him¬ 
self  remarkable  for  his  gallantry. 

He,  finding  that  Dion’s  principal  and  most 
considerable  friends  were  cut  off  in  the  war, 
Heraclides  now  dead,  and  the  people  without 
a  leader,  and  that  the  soldiers  had  a  great  kind¬ 
ness  for  him,  like  a  perfidious  and  wicked  vil¬ 
lain,  in  hopes  to  get  the  chief  command  of  Si¬ 
cily  as  his  reward  for  the  ruin  of  his  friend  and 
benefactor,  and,  as  some  say,  being  also  bribed 
by  the  enemy  with  twenty  talents  to  destroy 
Dion,  inveigled  and  engaged  several  of  the  sol¬ 
diers  in  a  conspiracy  against  him,  taking  this 
cunning  and  wicked  occasion  for  his  plot.  He 
daily  informed  Dion  of  what  he  heard  or  what 
he  feigned  the  soldiers  said  against  him;  where¬ 
by  he  gained  that  credit  and  confidence,  that  he 
was  allowed  by  Dion  to  consort  privately  with 
whom  he  would,  and  talk  freely  against  him  in 
any  company,  that  he  might  discover  who  were 
his  secret  and  factious  maligners.  By  this  means, 
Callippus  in  a  short  time  got  together  a  cabal 
of  all  the  seditious  malcontents  in  the  city;  and 
if  any  one  who  would  be  drawn  in  advised 
Dion  that  he  was  tampered  with,  he  was  not 
troubled  or  concerned  at  it,  believing  Callippus 
did  it  in  compliance  with  his  directions. 

While  this  conspiracy  was  afoot,  a  strange 
and  dreadful  apparition  was  seen  by  Dion.  As 
he  sat  one  evening  in  a  gallery  in  his  house, 
alone  and  thoughtful,  hearing  a  sudden  noise 
he  turned  about,  and  saw  at  the  end  of  the  col¬ 
onnade,  by  clear  daylight,  a  tall  woman,  in  her 
countenance  and  garb  like  one  of  the  tragical 
Furies,  with  a  broom  in  her  hand,  sweeping 
the  floor.  Being  amazed  and  extremely  affright¬ 
ed,  he  sent  for  some  of  his  friends,  and  told 
them  what  he  had  seen,  entreating  them  to 
stay  with  him  and  keep  him  company  all 
night;  for  he  was  excessively  discomposed  and 
alarmed,  fearing  that  if  he  were  left  alone  the 
spectre  would  again  appear  to  him.  He  saw  it 
no  more.  But  a  few  days  after,  his  only  son, 
being  almost  grown  up  to  man’s  estate,  upon 
some  displeasure  and  pet  he  had  taken  upon 
a  childish  and  frivolous  occasion,  threw  him¬ 
self  headlong  from  the  top  of  the  house  and 
broke  his  neck. 

While  Dion  was  under  this  affliction,  Callip¬ 
pus  drove  on  his  conspiracy,  and  spread  a  ru¬ 
mour  among  the  Syracusans  that  Dion,  being 
now  childless,  was  resolved  to  send  for  Diony¬ 
sius’s  son,  Apollocrates,  who  was  his  wife’s 
nephew  and  sister’s  grandson,  and  make  him 
his  heir  and  successor.  By  this  time,  Dion  and 
his  wife  and  sister  began  to  suspect  what  was 


801 

doing,  and  from  all  hands  information  came  to 
them  of  the  plot.  Dion  being  troubled,  it  is 
probable,  for  Heraclides’s  murder,  which  was 
like  to  be  a  blot  and  stain  upon  his  life  and  ac¬ 
tions,  in  continual  weariness  and  vexation,  he 
had  rather  die  a  thousand  times,  and  open  his 
breast  himself  to  the  assassin,  than  live  not 
only  in  fear  of  his  enemies  but  suspicion  of  his 
friends. 

But  Callippus,  seeing  the  women  very  in¬ 
quisitive  to  search  to  the  bottom  of  the  busi¬ 
ness,  took  alarm,  and  came  to  them,  utterly  de¬ 
nying  it  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  offering  to 
give  them  whatever  assurances  of  his  fidelity 
they  desired.  They  required  that  he  should 
take  the  Great  Oath,  which  was  after  this  man¬ 
ner.  The  juror  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  Ceres 
and  Proserpine,  where,  after  the  performance 
of  some  ceremonies,  he  was  clad  in  the  purple 
vestment  of  the  goddess,  and,  holding  a  light¬ 
ed  torch  in  his  hand,  took  his  oath.  Callippus 
did  as  they  required,  and  forswore  the  fact. 
And  indeed  he  so  little  valued  the  goddesses 
that  he  stayed  but  till  the  very  festival  of  Pros¬ 
erpine,  by  whom  he  had  sworn,  and  on  that 
very  day  committed  his  intended  murder;  as 
truly  he  might  well  enough  disregard  the  day, 
since  he  must  at  any  other  time  as  impiously 
offend  her,  when  he  who  had  acted  as  her  in¬ 
itiating  priest  should  shed  the  blood  of  her  wor¬ 
shipper. 

There  were  a  great  many  in  the  conspiracy; 
and  as  Dion  was  at  home  with  several  of  his 
friends  in  a  room  with  tables  for  entertainment 
in  it,  some  of  the  conspirators  beset  the  house 
around,  others  secured  the  doors  and  windows. 
The  actual  intended  murderers  were  some  Za- 
cynthians,  who  went  inside  in  their  under¬ 
dresses  without  swords.  Those  outside  shut  the 
doors  upon  them  and  kept  them  fast.  The  mur¬ 
derers  fell  on  Dion,  endeavouring  to  stifle  and 
crush  him;  then,  finding  they  were  doing  noth¬ 
ing,  they  called  for  a  sword,  but  none  durst 
open  the  door.  There  were  a  great  many  within 
with  Dion,  but  every  one  was  for  securing  him¬ 
self,  supposing  that  by  letting  him  lose  his  life 
he  should  save  his  own,  and  therefore  no  man 
ventured  to  assist  him.  When  they  had  waited 
a  good  while,  at  length  Lycon  the  Syracusan 
reached  a  short  sword  in  at  the  window  to  one 
of  the  Zacynthians,  and  thus,  like  a  victim  at 
a  sacrifice,  this  long  time  in  their  power  and 
trembling  for  the  blow,  they  killed  him.  His 
sister,  and  wife  big  with  child,  they  hurried  to 
prison,  who,  poor  lady,  in  her  unfortunate  con¬ 
dition  was  there  brought  to  bed  of  a  son,  which, 


802 


by  the  consent  of  the  keepers,  they  intended  to 
bring  up,  the  rather  because  Callippus  began 
already  to  be  embroiled  in  troubles. 

After  the  murder  of  Dion,  he  was  in  great 
glory,  and  had  the  sole  government  of  Syracuse 
in  his  hands;  and  to  that  effect  wrote  to  Athens, 
a  place  which,  next  the  immortal  gods,  being 
guilty  of  such  an  abominable  crime,  he  ought 
to  have  regarded  with  shame  and  fear.  But 
true  it  is,  what  is  said  of  that  city,  that  the 
good  men  she  breeds  are  the  most  excellent, 
and  the  bad  the  most  notorious;  as  their  coun¬ 
try  also  produces  the  most  delicious  honey  and 
the  most  deadly  hemlock. 

Callippus,  however,  did  not  long  continue  to 
scandalise  fortune  and  upbraid  the  gods  with 
his  prosperity,  as  though  they  connived  at  and 
bore  with  the  wretched  man,  while  he  pur¬ 
chased  riches  and  power  by  heinous  impieties, 
but  quickly  received  the  punishment  he  de¬ 
served.  For,  going  to  take  Catana,  he  lost  Syra¬ 
cuse;  whereupon  they  report  he  said,  he  had 
lost  a  city  and  got  a  bauble.  Then  attempting 
Messene,  he  had  most  of  his  men  cut  off,  and, 
among  the  rest,  Dion’s  murderers.  When  no 
city  in  Sicily  would  admit  him,  but  all  hated 


MARCUS 

85?-4z 

Marcus  Brutus  was  descended  from 
that  Junius  Brutus  to  whom  the  an¬ 
cient  Romans  erected  a  statue  of 
brass  in  the  capitol  among  the  images  of  their 
kings  with  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand,  in  re¬ 
membrance  of  his  courage  and  resolution  in 
expelling  the  Tarquins  and  destroying  the 
monarchy.  But  that  ancient  Brutus  was  of  a 
severe  and  inflexible  nature,  like  steel  of  too 
hard  a  temper,  and  having  never  had  his  char¬ 
acter  softened  by  study  and  thought,  he  let 
himself  be  so  far  transported  with  his  rage  and 
hatred  against  tyrants  that,  for  conspiring  with 
them,  he  proceeded  to  the  execution  even  of 
his  own  sons.  But  this  Brutus,  whose  life  we 
now  write,  having  to  the  goodness  of  his  dis¬ 
position  added  the  improvements  of  learning 
and  the  study  of  philosophy,  and  having 
stirred  up  his  natural  parts,  of  themselves 
grave  and  gentle,  by  applying  himself  to  busi¬ 
ness  and  public  affairs,  seems  to  have  been  of 
a  temper  exactly  framed  for  virtue;  insomuch 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  abhorred  him,  he  went  into  Italy  and  took 
Rhegium;  and  there,  being  in  distress  and  not 
able  to  maintain  his  soldiers,  he  was  killed  by 
Leptines  and  Polysperchon,  and,  as  fortune 
would  have  it,  with  the  same  sword  by  which 
Dion  was  murdered,  which  was  known  by  the  j 
size,  being  but  short,  as  the  Spartan  swords, 
and  the  workmanship  of  it  very  curious  and 
artificial.  Thus  Callippus  received  the  reward 
of  his  villainies. 

When  Aristomache  and  Arete  were  released  i 
out  of  prison,  Hicetes,  one  of  Dion’s  friends, 
took  them  to  his  house,  and  seemed  to  intend 
to  entertain  them  well  and  like  a  faithful 
friend.  Afterwards,  being  persuaded  by  Dion’s 
enemies,  he  provided  a  ship  and  pretended  to  i 
send  them  into  Peloponnesus,  but  commanded 
the  sailors,  when  they  came  out  to  sea,  to  kill  j 
them  and  throw  them  overboard.  Others  say 
that  they  and  the  little  boy  were  thrown  alive 
into  the  sea.  This  man  also  escaped  not  the  due 
recompense  of  his  wickedness,  for  he  was  taken 
by  Timoleon  and  put  to  death,  and  the  Syra¬ 
cusans,  to  revenge  Dion,  slew  his  two  daugh¬ 
ters:  of  all  which  I  have  given  a  more  particu¬ 
lar  account  in  the  life  of  Timoleon. 


BRUTUS 

B.C. 

that  they  who  were  most  his  enemies  upon  ac¬ 
count  of  his  conspiracy  against  Caesar,  if  in  » 
that  whole  affair  there  was  any  honourable  or 
generous  part,  referred  it  wholly  to  Brutus,  and 
laid  whatever  was  barbarous  and  cruel  to  the 
charge  of  Cassius,  Brutus’s  connection  and  fa¬ 
miliar  friend,  but  not  his  equal  in  honesty  and  * 
pureness  of  purpose. 

His  mother,  Servilia,  was  of  the  family  of 
Servilius  Ahala,  who  when  Spurius  Maelius  I 
worked  the  people  into  a  rebellion  and  de¬ 
signed  to  make  himself  king,  taking  a  dagger  I 
under  his  arm,  went  forth  into  the  market¬ 
place,  and  upon  pretense  of  having  some  pri¬ 
vate  business  with  him,  came  up  close  to  him, 
and,  as  he  bent  his  head  to  hear  what  he  had  to 
say,  struck  him  with  his  dagger  and  slew  him. 
And  thus  much,  as  concerns  his  descent  by  the 
mother’s  side,  is  confessed  by  all;  but  as  for  his 
father’s  family,  they  who  for  Caesar’s  murder 
bore  any  hatred  or  ill-will  to  Brutus  say  that 
he  came  not  from  that  Brutus  who  expelled  the 


MARCUS  BRUTUS 

Tarquins,  there  being  none  of  his  race  left  after 
the  execution  of  his  two  sons;  but  that  his  an¬ 
cestor  was  a  plebeian,  son  of  one  Brutus,  a 
steward,  and  only  rose  in  the  latest  times  to 
office  or  dignity  in  the  commonwealth.  But 
Posidonius  the  philosopher  writes  that  it  is 
true  indeed  what  the  history  relates,  that  two 
of  the  sons  of  Brutus  who  were  of  men’s  es¬ 
tate  were  put  to  death,  but  that  a  third,  yet  an 
infant,  was  left  alive,  from  whom  the  family 
was  propagated  down  to  Marcus  Brutus;  and 
further,  that  there  were  several  famous  persons 
of  this  house  in  his  time  whose  looks  very 
much  resembled  the  statue  of  Junius  Brutus. 
But  of  this  subject  enough. 

Cato  the  philosopher  was  brother  to  Servilia, 
the  mother  of  Brutus,  and  he  it  was  whom  of 
all  the  Romans  his  nephew  most  admired  and 
studied  to  imitate,  and  he  afterwards  married 
his  daughter  Porcia.  Of  all  the  sects  of  the 
Greek  philosophers,  though  there  was  none  of 
which  he  had  not  been  a  hearer,  and  in  which 
he  had  not  made  some  proficiency,  yet  he 
chiefly  esteemed  the  Platonists;  and  not  much 
approving  of  the  modern  and  middle  Acad¬ 
emy,  as  it  is  called,  he  applied  himself  to  the 
study  of  the  ancient.  He  was  all  his  lifetime  a 
great  admirer  of  Antiochus  of  the  city  of  Asca- 
lon,  and  took  his  brother  Aristus  into  his  own 
house  for  his  friend  and  companion,  a  man 
for  his  learning  inferior  indeed  to  many  of  the 
philosophers,  but  for  the  evenness  of  his  tem¬ 
per  and  steadiness  of  his  conduct  equal  to  the 
best.  As  for  Empylus,  of  whom  he  himself  and 
his  friends  often  make  mention  in  their  epis¬ 
tles,  as  one  that  lived  with  Brutus,  he  was  a 
rhetorician,  and  has  left  behind  him  a  short 
but  well-written  history  of  the  death  of  Caesar, 
entitled  Brutus. 

In  Latin,  he  had  by  exercise  attained  a  suffi¬ 
cient  skill  to  be  able  to  make  public  addresses 
and  to  plead  a  cause;  but  in  Greek,  he  must  be 
noted  for  affecting  the  sententious  and  short 
Laconic  way  of  speaking  in  sundry  passages  of 
his  epistles;  as  when,  in  the  beginning  of  the 
war,  he  wrote  thus  to  the  Pergamenians:  “I 
hear  you  have  given  Dolabella  money;  if  will¬ 
ingly,  you  must  own  you  have  injured  me;  if 
unwillingly,  show  it  by  giving  willingly  to 
me.”  And  another  time  to  the  Samians:  “Your 
counsels  are  remiss  and  your  performances 
slow;  what  think  ye  will  be  the  end?”  And  of 
the  Patareans  thus:  “The  Xanthians,  suspect¬ 
ing  my  kindness,  have  made  their  country  the 
grave  of  their  despair;  the  Patareans,  trusting 
themselves  to  me,  enjoy  in  all  points  their  for- 


803 

mer  liberty;  it  is  in  your  power  to  choose  the 
judgment  of  the  Patareans  or  the  fortune  of 
the  Xanthians.”  And  this  is  the  style  for  which 
some  of  his  letters  are  to  be  noted. 

When  he  was  but  a  very  young  man,  he  ac¬ 
companied  his  uncle  Cato  to  Cyprus,  when  he 
was  sent  there  against  Ptolemy.  But  when 
Ptolemy  killed  himself,  Cato,  being  by  some 
necessary  business  detained  in  the  isle  of 
Rhodes,  had  already  sent  one  of  his  friends, 
named  Canidius,  to  take  into  his  care  and 
keeping  the  treasure  of  the  king;  but  presently, 
not  feeling  sure  of  his  honesty,  he  wrote  to 
Brutus  to  sail  immediately  for  Cyprus  out  of 
Pamphylia,  where  he  then  was  staying  to  re¬ 
fresh  himself,  being  but  just  recovered  of  a  fit 
of  sickness.  He  obeyed  his  orders,  but  with  a 
great  deal  of  unwillingness,  as  well  out  of  re¬ 
spect  to  Canidius,  who  was  thrown  out  of  this 
employment  by  Cato  with  so  much  disgrace, 
as  also  because  he  esteemed  such  a  commission 
mean  and  unsuitable  to  him,  who  was  in  the 
prime  of  his  youth,  and  given  to  books  and 
study.  Nevertheless,  applying  himself  to  the 
business,  he  behaved  himself  so  well  in  it  that 
he  was  highly  commended  by  Cato,  and  hav¬ 
ing  turned  all  the  goods  of  Ptolemy  into  ready 
money,  he  sailed  with  the  greatest  part  of  it  in 
his  own  ship  to  Rome. 

But  upon  the  general  separation  into  two 
factions,  when,  Pompey  and  Caesar  taking  up 
arms  against  one  another,  the  whole  empire 
was  turned  into  confusion,  it  was  commonly 
believed  that  he  would  take  Caesar’s  side;  for 
his  father  in  past  time  had  been  put  to  death 
by  Pompey.  But  he,  thinking  it  his  duty  to 
prefer  the  interest  of  the  public  to  his  own 
private  feelings,  and  judging  Pompey’s  to  be 
the  better  cause,  took  part  with  him;  though 
formerly  he  used  not  so  much  as  to  salute  or 
take  any  notice  of  Pompey,  if  he  happened  to 
meet  him,  esteeming  it  a  pollution  to  have  the 
least  conversation  with  the  murderer  of  his 
father.  But  now,  looking  upon  him  as  the  gen¬ 
eral  of  his  country,  he  placed  himself  under  his 
command,  and  set  sail  for  Cilicia  in  quality  of 
lieutenant  to  Sestius,  who  had  the  government 
of  that  province. 

But  finding  no  opportunity  there  of  doing 
any  great  service,  and  hearing  that  Pompey 
and  Caesar  were  now  near  one  another  and 
preparing  for  the  battle  upon  which  all  de¬ 
pended,  he  came  of  his  own  accord  to  Mace¬ 
donia  to  partake  in  the  danger.  At  his  coming 
it  is  said  that  Pompey  was  so  surprised  and  so 
pleased  that,  rising  from  his  chair  in  the  sight 


804 

of  all  who  were  about  him,  he  saluted  and  em¬ 
braced  him,  as  one  of  the  chiefest  of  his  party. 
All  the  time  that  he  was  in  the  camp,  except¬ 
ing  that  which  he  spent  in  Pompey ’s  company, 
he  employed  in  reading  and  in  study,  which 
he  did  not  neglect  even  the  day  before  the 
great  battle.  It  was  the  middle  of  summer,  and 
the  heat  was  very  great,  the  camp  having  been 
pitched  near  some  marshy  ground,  and  the 
people  that  carried  Brutus's  tent  were  a  long 
while  before  they  came.  Yet  though  upon  these 
accounts  he  was  extremely  harassed  and  out  of 
order,  having  scarcely  by  the  middle  of  the  day 
anointed  himself  and  eaten  a  sparing  meal, 
whilst  most  others  were  either  laid  to  sleep  or 
taken  up  with  the  thoughts  and  apprehensions 
of  what  would  be  the  issue  of  the  fight,  he 
spent  his  time  until  the  evening  in  writing  an 
epitome  of  Polybius. 

It  is  said  that  Caesar  had  so  great  a  regard 
for  him  that  he  ordered  his  commanders  by  no 
means  to  kill  Brutus  in  the  battle,  but  to  spare 
him  if  possible,  and  bring  him  safe  to  him,  if 
he  would  willingly  surrender  himself;  but  if 
he  made  any  resistance,  to  suffer  him  to  escape 
rather  than  do  him  any  violence.  And  this  he 
is  believed  to  have  done  out  of  a  tenderness  to 
Servilia,  the  mother  of  Brutus;  for  Caesar  had, 
it  seems,  in  his  youth  been  very  intimate  with 
her,  and  she  passionately  in  love  with  him; 
and,  considering  that  Brutus  was  born  about 
that  time  in  which  their  loves  were  at  the  high¬ 
est,  Caesar  had  a  belief  that  he  was  his  own 
child. 

The  story  is  told  that,  when  the  great  ques¬ 
tion  of  the  conspiracy  of  Catiline,  which  had 
like  to  have  been  the  destruction  of  the  com¬ 
monwealth,  was  debated  in  the  senate,  Cato 
and  Caesar  were  both  standing  up,  contending 
together  on  the  decision  to  be  come  to;  at 
which  time  a  little  note  was  delivered  to  Caesar 
from  without,  which  he  took  and  read  silently 
to  himself.  Upon  this,  Cato  cried  out  aloud, 
and  accused  Caesar  of  holding  correspondence 
with  and  receiving  letters  from  the  enemies  of 
the  commonwealth;  and  when  many  other 
senators  exclaimed  against  it,  Caesar  delivered 
the  note  as  he  had  received  it  to  Cato,  who 
reading  it  found  it  to  be  a  love-letter  from  his 
own  sister  Servilia,  and  threw  it  back  again  to 
Caesar  with  the  words,  “Keep  it,  you  drunk¬ 
ard,”  and  returned  to  the  subject  of  the  debate. 
So  public  and  notorious  was  Servilia’s  love  to 
Caesar. 

After  the  great  overthrow  at  Pharsalia,  Pom- 
pey  himself  having  made  his  escape  to  the  sea, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

and  Caesar’s  army  storming  the  camp,  Brutus 
stole  privately  out  by  one  of  the  gates  leading 
to  marshy  ground  full  of  water  and  covered 
with  reeds,  and  travelling  through  the  night, 
got  safe  to  Larissa.  From  Larissa  he  wrote  to 
Caesar  who  expressed  a  great  deal  of  joy  to 
hear  that  he  was  safe,  and,  bidding  him  come, 
not  only  forgave  him  freely,  but  honoured  and 
esteemed  him  among  his  chiefest  friends.  Now 
when  nobody  could  give  any  certain  account 
which  way  Pompey  had  fled,  Caesar  took  a  lit¬ 
tle  journey  along  with  Brutus,  and  tried  what 
was  his  opinion  herein,  and  after  some  discus¬ 
sion  which  passed  between  them,  believing 
that  Brutus’s  conjecture  was  the  right  one,  lay¬ 
ing  aside  all  other  thoughts,  he  set  out  directly 
to  pursue  him  towards  Egypt.  But  Pompey, 
having  reached  Egypt,  as  Brutus  guessed  his 
design  was  to  do,  there  met  his  fate. 

Brutus  in  the  meantime  gained  Caesar’s  for¬ 
giveness  for  his  friend  Cassius;  and  pleading 
also  in  defence  of  the  king  of  the  Libyans, 
though  he  was  overwhelmed  with  the  great¬ 
ness  of  the  crimes  alleged  against  him,  yet  by 
his  entreaties  and  deprecations  to  Caesar  in  his 
behalf,  he  preserved  to  him  a  great  part  of  his 
kingdom.  It  is  reported  that  Caesar,  when  he 
first  heard  Brutus  speak  in  public,  said  to  his 
friends,  “I  know  not  what  this  young  man  in¬ 
tends,  but,  whatever  he  intends,  he  intends  ve¬ 
hemently.”  For  his  natural  firmness  of  mind, 
not  easily  yielding,  or  complying  in  favour  of 
every  one  that  entreated  his  kindness,  once  set 
into  action  upon  motives  of  right  reason  and 
deliberate  moral  choice,  whatever  direction  it 
thus  took,  it  was  pretty  sure  to  take  effectively, 
and  to  work  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  fail  in  its 
object.  No  flattery  could  ever  prevail  with  him 
to  listen  to  unjust  petitions,  and  he  held  that 
to  be  overcome  by  the  importunities  of  shame¬ 
less  and  fawning  entreaties,  though  some  com¬ 
pliment  it  with  the  name  of  modesty  and  bash¬ 
fulness,  was  the  worst  disgrace  a  great  man 
could  suffer.  And  he  used  to  say  that  he  always 
felt  as  if  they  who  could  deny  nothing  could 
not  have  behaved  well  in  the  flower  of  their 
youth. 

Caesar,  being  about  to  make  his  expedition 
into  Africa  against  Cato  and  Scipio,  committed 
to  Brutus  the  government  of  Cisalpine  Gaul, 
to  the  great  happiness  and  advantage  of  that 
province.  For  while  people  in  other  provinces 
were  in  distress  with  the  violence  and  avarice 
of  their  governors,  and  suffered  as  much  op¬ 
pression  as  if  they  had  been  slaves  and  captives 
of  war,  Brutus,  by  his  easy  government,  ac- 


MARCUS  BRUTUS 

tually  made  them  amends  for  their  calamities 
under  former  rulers,  directing  moreover  all 
their  gratitude  for  his  good  deeds  to  Caesar 
himself;  insomuch  that  it  was  a  most  welcome 
and  pleasant  spectacle  to  Caesar,  when  in  his 
return  he  passed  through  Italy,  to  see  the  cities 
that  were  under  Brutus’s  command,  and  Bru¬ 
tus  himself  increasing  his  honour  and  joining 
agreeably  in  his  progress. 

Now  several  praetorships  being  vacant,  it 
was  all  men’s  opinions  that  that  of  the  chiefest 
dignity,  which  is  called  the  praetorship  of  the 
city,  would  be  conferred  either  upon  Brutus  or 
Cassius;  and  some  say  that,  there  having  been 
some  little  difference  upon  former  accounts  be¬ 
tween  them,  this  competition  set  them  much 
more  at  variance,  though  they  were  connected 
in  their  families,  Cassius  having  married  Jun- 
ia,  the  sister  of  Brutus.  Others  say  that  the  con¬ 
tention  was  raised  between  them  by  Caesar’s 
doing,  who  had  privately  given  each  of  them 
such  hopes  of  his  favour  as  led  them  on,  and 
provoked  them  at  last  into  this  open  competi¬ 
tion  and  trial  of  their  interests.  Brutus  had  only 
the  reputation  of  his  honour  and  virtue  to  op¬ 
pose  to  the  many  and  gallant  actions  per¬ 
formed  by  Cassius  against  the  Parthians. 

But  Caesar,  having  heard  each  side,  de¬ 
liberating  about  the  matter  among  his  friends, 
said,  “Cassius  has  the  stronger  plea,  but  we 
must  let  Brutus  be  first  praetor.”  So  another 
praetorship  was  given  to  Cassius;  the  gaining 
of  which  could  not  so  much  oblige  him,  as  he 
was  incensed  for  the  loss  of  the  other.  And  in 
all  other  things  Brutus  was  partaker  of  Caesar’s 
power  as  much  as  he  desired:  for  he  might,  if 
he  had  pleased,  have  been  the  chief  of  all  his 
friends,  and  had  authority  and  command  be¬ 
yond  them  all,  but  Cassius  and  the  company 
he  met  with  him  drew  him  off  from  Caesar.  In¬ 
deed,  he  was  not  yet  wholly  reconciled  to  Cas¬ 
sius,  since  that  competition  which  was  between 
them;  but  yet  he  gave  ear  to  Cassius’s  friends, 
who  were  perpetually  advising  him  not  to  be 
so  blind  as  to  suffer  himself  to  be  softened  and 
won  over  by  Caesar,  but  to  shun  the  kindness 
and  favours  of  a  tyrant,  which  they  intimated 
that  Caesar  showed  him,  not  to  express  any  hon¬ 
our  to  his  merit  or  virtue,  but  to  unbend  his 
strength,  and  undermine  his  vigour  of  pur¬ 
pose. 

Neither  was  Caesar  wholly  without  suspicion 
of  him,  nor  wanted  informers  that  accused 
Brutus  to  him;  but  he  feared,  indeed,  the  high 
spirit  and  the  great  character  and  the  friends 
that  he  had,  but  thought  himself  secure  in  his 


805 

moral  disposition.  When  it  was  told  him  that 
Antony  and  Dolabella  designed  some  disturb¬ 
ance,  “It  is  not,”  said  he,  “the  fat  and  the  long¬ 
haired  men  that  I  fear,  but  the  pale  and  the 
lean,”  meaning  Brutus  and  Cassius.  And  when 
some  maligned  Brutus  to  him,  and  advised 
him  to  beware  of  him,  taking  hold  of  his  flesh 
with  his  hand,  “What,”  he  said,  “do  you  think 
that  Brutus  will  not  wait  out  the  time  of  this 
little  body?”  as  if  he  thought  none  so  fit  to 
succeed  him  in  his  power  as  Brutus.  And  in¬ 
deed  it  seems  to  be  without  doubt  that  Brutus 
might  have  been  the  first  man  in  the  common¬ 
wealth,  if  he  had  had  patience  but  a  little  time 
to  be  second  to  Caesar,  and  would  have  suffered 
his  power  to  decline  after  it  was  come  to  its 
highest  pitch,  and  the  fame  of  his  great  actions 
to  die  away  by  degrees. 

But  Cassius,  a  man  of  a  fierce  disposition, 
and  one  that  out  of  private  malice,  rather  than 
love  of  the  public,  hated  Caesar,  not  the  tyrant, 
continually  fired  and  stirred  him  up.  Brutus 
felt  the  rule  an  oppression,  but  Cassius  hated 
the  ruler;  and,  among  other  reasons  on  which 
he  grounded  his  quarrel  against  Caesar,  the  loss 
of  his  lions  which  he  had  procured  when  he 
was  aedile  elect  was  one;  for  Caesar,  finding 
these  in  Megara,  when  that  city  was  taken  by 
Calenus,  seized  them  to  himself.  These  beasts, 
they  say,  were  a  great  calamity  to  the  Megar- 
ians;  for,  when  their  city  was  just  taken,  they 
broke  open  the  lions’  dens,  and  pulled  off  their 
chains  and  let  them  loose  that  they  might  run 
upon  the  enemy  that  was  entering  the  city;  but 
the  lions  turned  upon  them  themselves,  and 
tore  to  pieces  a  great  many  unarmed  persons 
running  about,  so  that  it  was  a  miserable  spec¬ 
tacle  even  to  their  enemies  to  behold. 

And  this,  some  say,  was  the  chief  provoca¬ 
tion  that  stirred  up  Cassius  to  conspire  against 
Caesar;  but  they  are  much  in  the  wrong.  For 
Cassius  had  from  his  youth  a  natural  hatred 
and  rancour  against  the  whole  race  of  tyrants, 
which  he  showed  when  he  was  but  a  boy,  and 
went  to  the  same  school  with  Faustus,  the  son 
of  Sulla;  for,  on  his  boasting  himself  amongst 
the  boys,  and  extolling  the  sovereign  power  of 
his  father,  Cassius  rose  up  and  struck  him  two 
or  three  boxes  on  the  ear;  which  when  the 
guardians  and  relations  of  Faustus  designed  to 
inquire  into  and  to  prosecute,  Pompey  forbade 
them,  and,  sending  for  both  the  boys  together, 
examined  the  matter  himself.  And  Cassius  is 
then  reported  to  have  said  thus,  “Come,  then, 
Faustus,  dare  to  speak  here  those  words  that 
provoked  me,  that  I  may  strike  you  again  as  I 


806 

did  before.”  Such  was  the  disposition  of 
Cassius. 

But  Brutus  was  roused  up  and  pushed  on  to 
the  undertaking  by  many  persuasions  of  his 
familiar  friends,  and  letters  and  invitations 
from  unknown  citizens.  For  under  the  statue 
of  his  ancestor  Brutus,  that  overthrew  the 
kingly  government,  they  wrote  the  words,  “O 
that  we  had  a  Brutus  now!”  and,  “O  that  Bru¬ 
tus  were  alive!”  And  Brutus’s  own  tribunal, 
on  which  he  sat  as  praetor,  was  filled  each 
morning  with  writings  such  as  these:  “You  are 
asleep,  Brutus,”  and,  “You  are  not  a  true  Bru¬ 
tus.”  Now  the  flatterers  of  Caesar  were  the  oc¬ 
casion  of  all  this,  who,  among  other  invidious 
honours  which  they  strove  to  fasten  upon 
Caesar,  crowned  his  statues  by  night  with  dia¬ 
dems,  wishing  to  incite  the  people  to  salute 
him  king  instead  of  dictator.  But  quite  the  con¬ 
trary  came  to  pass,  as  I  have  more  particularly 
related  in  the  life  of  Caesar. 

When  Cassius  went  about  soliciting  friends 
to  engage  in  this  design  against  Caesar,  all 
whom  he  tried  readily  consented,  if  Brutus 
would  be  head  of  it;  for  their  opinion  was  that 
the  enterprise  wanted  not  hands  or  resolution, 
but  the  reputation  and  authority  of  a  man  such 
as  he  was,  to  give,  as  it  were,  the  first  religious 
sanction,  and  by  his  presence,  if  by  nothing 
else,  to  justify  the  undertaking;  that  without 
him  they  should  go  about  this  action  with  less 
heart,  and  should  lie  under  greater  suspicions 
when  they  had  done  it;  for  if  their  cause  had 
been  just  and  honourable,  people  would  be 
sure  that  Brutus  would  not  have  refused  it. 
Cassius,  having  considered  these  things  with 
himself,  went  to  Brutus  and  made  him  the  first 
visit  after  their  falling  out;  and  after  the  com¬ 
pliments  of  reconciliation  had  passed,  and  for¬ 
mer  kindnesses  were  renewed  between  them, 
he  asked  him  if  he  designed  to  be  present  on 
the  calends  of  March,  for  it  was  discoursed,  he 
said,  that  Caesar’s  friends  intended  then  to 
move  that  he  might  be  made  king. 

When  Brutus  answered,  that  he  would  not 
be  there,  “But  what,”  says  Cassius,  “if  they 
should  send  for  us?”  “It  will  be  my  business, 
then,”  replied  Brutus,  “not  to  hold  my  peace, 
but  to  stand  up  boldly,  and  die  for  the  liberty 
of  my  country.”  To  which  Cassius  with  some 
emotion  answered,  “But  what  Roman  will  suf¬ 
fer  you  to  die?  What,  do  you  not  know  your¬ 
self,  Brutus?  Or  do  you  think  that  those  writ¬ 
ings  that  you  find  upon  your  praetor’s  seat  were 
put  there  by  weavers  and  shopkeepers,  and  not 
by  the  first  and  most  powerful  men  of  Rome? 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

From  other  praetors,  indeed,  they  expect  lar¬ 
gesses  and  shows  and  gladiators,  but  from  you 
they  claim,  as  an  hereditary  debt,  the  extirpa¬ 
tion  of  tyranny;  they  are  all  ready  to  suffer 
anything  on  your  account,  if  you  will  but  show 
yourself  such  as  they  think  you  are  and  expect 
you  should  be.”  Which  said,  he  fell  upon  Bru¬ 
tus,  and  embraced  him;  and  after  this,  they 
parted  each  to  try  their  several  friends. 

Among  the  friends  of  Pompey  there  was  one 
Caius  Ligarius,  whom  Caesar  had  pardoned, 
though  accused  for  having  been  in  arms  against 
him.  This  man,  not  feeling  so  thankful  for 
having  been  forgiven  as  he  felt  oppressed  by 
that  power  which  made  him  need  a  pardon, 
hated  Caesar,  and  was  one  of  Brutus’s  most  in¬ 
timate  friends.  Him  Brutus  visited,  and  find¬ 
ing  him  sick,  “O  Ligarius,”  says  he,  “what  a 
time  you  have  found  out  to  be  sick  in!”  At 
which  words  Ligarius,  raising  himself  and 
leaning  on  his  elbow,  took  Brutus  by  the  hand, 
and  said,  “But,  O  Brutus,  if  you  are  on  any  de¬ 
sign  worthy  of  yourself,  I  am  well.” 

From  this  time  they  tried  the  inclinations  of 
all  their  acquaintances  that  they  durst  trust, 
and  communicated  the  secret  to  them,  and 
took  into  the  design  not  only  their  familiar 
friends,  but  as  many  as  they  believed  bold  and 
brave  and  despisers  of  death.  For  which  reason 
they  concealed  the  plot  from  Cicero,  though  he 
was  very  much  trusted  and  as  well  beloved  by 
them  all,  lest,  to  his  own  disposition,  which 
was  naturally  timorous,  adding  now  the  weari¬ 
ness  and  caution  of  old  age,  by  his  weighing, 
as  he  would  do,  every  particular,  that  he  might 
not  make  one  step  without  the  greatest  secur¬ 
ity,  he  should  blunt  the  edge  of  their  forward¬ 
ness  and  resolution  in  a  business  which  re¬ 
quired  all  the  despatch  imaginable. 

As  indeed  there  were  also  two  others  that 
were  companions  of  Brutus,  Statilius  the  Epi¬ 
curean,  and  Favonius,  the  admirer  of  Cato, 
whom  he  left  out  for  this  reason:  as  he  was 
conversing  one  day  with  them,  trying  them  at 
a  distance,  and  proposing  some  such  question 
to  be  disputed  of  as  among  philosophers,  to 
see  what  opinion  they  were  of,  Favonius  de¬ 
clared  his  judgment  to  be  that  a  civil  war  was 
worse  than  the  most  illegal  monarchy;  and 
Statilius  held,  that  to  bring  himself  into  trou¬ 
bles  and  danger  upon  the  account  of  evil  or 
foolish  men  did  not  become  a  man  that  had 
any  wisdom  or  discretion.  But  Labeo,  who  was 
present,  contradicted  them  both;  and  Brutus, 
as  if  it  had  been  an  intricate  dispute,  and  diffi¬ 
cult  to  be  decided,  held  his  peace  for  that  time, 


MARCUS  BRUTUS 

but  afterwards  discovered  the  whole  design  to 
Labeo,  who  readily  undertook  it. 

The  next  thing  that  was  thought  convenient 
was  to  gain  the  other  Brutus,  surnamed  Al- 
binus,  a  man  of  himself  of  no  great  bravery  or 
courage,  but  considerable  for  the  number  of 
gladiators  that  he  was  maintaining  for  a  pub¬ 
lic  show,  and  the  great  confidence  that  Caesar 
put  in  him.  When  Cassius  and  Labeo  spoke 
with  him  concerning  the  matter,  he  gave  them 
no  answer;  but,  seeking  an  interview  with 
Brutus  himself  alone,  and  finding  that  he  was 
their  captain,  he  readily  consented  to  partake 
in  the  action.  And  among  the  others,  also,  the 
most  and  best  were  gained  by  the  name  of 
Brutus.  And,  though  they  neither  gave  nor 
took  any  oath  of  secrecy,  nor  used  any  other 
sacred  rite  to  assure  their  fidelity  to  each  other, 
yet  all  kept  their  design  so  close,  were  so  wary, 
and  held  it  so  silently  among  themselves  that, 
though  by  prophecies  and  apparitions  and 
signs  in  the  sacrifices  the  gods  gave  warning 
of  it,  yet  could  it  not  be  believed. 

Now  Brutus,  feeling  that  the  noblest  spirits 
of  Rome  for  virtue,  birth,  or  courage  were  de¬ 
pending  upon  him,  and  surveying  with  him¬ 
self  all  the  circumstances  of  the  dangers  they 
were  to  encounter,  strove  indeed,  as  much  as 
possible,  when  abroad,  to  keep  his  uneasiness 
of  mind  to  himself,  and  to  compose  his 
thoughts;  but  at  home,  and  especially  at  night, 
he  was  not  the  same  man,  but  sometimes 
against  his  will  his  working  care  would  make 
him  start  out  of  his  sleep,  and  other  times  he 
was  taken  up  with  further  reflection  and  con¬ 
sideration  of  his  difficulties,  so  that  his  wife 
that  lay  with  him  could  not  choose  but  take 
notice  that  he  was  full  of  unusual  trouble,  and 
had  in  agitation  some  dangerous  and  perplex¬ 
ing  question. 

Porcia,  as  was  said  before,  was  the  daughter 
of  Cato,  and  Brutus,  her  cousin  german,  had 
married  her  very  young,  though  not  a  maid, 
but  after  the  death  of  her  former  husband,  by 
whom  she  had  one  son,  that  was  named  Bibu- 
ius;  and  there  is  a  little  book,  a  memoir  of 
Brutus,  written  by  him,  yet  extant.  This  Por¬ 
cia,  being  addicted  to  philosophy,  a  great  lover 
of  her  husband,  and  full  of  an  undemanding 
courage,  resolved  not  to  inquire  into  Brutus’s 
secrets  before  she  had  made  this  trial  of  her¬ 
self.  She  turned  all  her  attendants  out  of  her 
chamber,  and  taking  a  little  knife,  such  as  they 
use  to  cut  nails  with,  she  gave  herself  a  deep 
gash  in  the  thigh;  upon  which  followed  a 
great  flow  of  blood,  and  soon  after,  violent 


807 

pains  and  a  shivering  fever,  occasioned  by  the 
wound. 

Now  when  Brutus  was  extremely  anxious 
and  afflicted  for  her,  she,  in  the  height  of  all 
her  pain,  spoke  thus  to  him:  “I,  Brutus,  being 
the  daughter  of  Cato,  was  given  to  you  in  mar¬ 
riage,  not  like  a  concubine,  to  partake  only  in 
the  common  intercourse  of  bed  and  board,  but 
to  bear  a  part  in  all  your  good  and  all  your  evil 
fortunes;  and  for  your  part,  as  regards  your 
care  for  me,  I  find  no  reason  to  complain;  but 
from  me,  what  evidence  of  my  love,  what  sat¬ 
isfaction  can  you  receive,  if  I  may  not  share 
with  you  in  bearing  your  hidden  griefs,  nor  to 
be  admitted  to  any  of  your  counsels  that  re¬ 
quire  secrecy  and  trust?  I  know  very  well  that 
women  seem  to  be  of  too  weak  a  nature  to  be 
trusted  with  secrets;  but  certainly,  Brutus,  a 
virtuous  birth  and  education,  and  the  company 
of  the  good  and  honourable,  are  of  some  force 
to  the  forming  of  our  manners;  and  I  can  boast 
that  I  am  the  daughter  of  Cato,  and  the  wife 
of  Brutus,  in  which  two  titles  though  before  I 
put  less  confidence,  yet  now  I  have  tried  my¬ 
self,  and  find  that  I  can  bid  defiance  to  pain.” 

Which  words  having  spoken,  she  showed 
him  her  wound,  and  related  to  him  the  trial 
that  she  had  made  of  her  constancy;  at  which 
he  being  astonished,  lifted  up  his  hands  to 
heaven,  and  begged  the  assistance  of  the  gods 
in  his  enterprise,  that  he  might  show  himself 
a  husband  worthy  of  such  a  wife  as  Porcia.  So 
then  he  comforted  his  wife. 

But  a  meeting  of  the  senate  being  appointed, 
at  which  it  was  believed  that  Caesar  would  be 
present,  they  agreed  to  make  use  of  that  oppor¬ 
tunity;  for  then  they  might  appear  all  together 
without  suspicion;  and,  besides,  they  hoped 
that  all  the  noblest  and  leading  men  of  the 
commonwealth,  being  then  assembled,  as  soon 
as  the  great  deed  was  done,  would  immediately 
stand  forward  and  assert  the  common  liberty. 
The  very  place,  too,  where  the  senate  was  to 
meet  seemed  to  be  by  divine  appointment  fa¬ 
vourable  to  their  purpose.  It  was  a  portico,  one 
of  those  joining  the  theatre,  with  a  large  recess, 
in  which  there  stood  a  statue  of  Pompey, 
erected  to  him  by  the  commonwealth,  when  he 
adorned  that  part  of  the  city  with  the  porticos 
and  the  theatre.  To  this  place  it  was  that  the 
senate  was  summoned  for  the  middle  of  March 
(the  Ides  of  March  is  the  Roman  name  for 
the  day);  as  if  some  more  than  human  power 
were  leading  the  man  thither,  there  to  meet  his 
punishment  for  the  death  of  Pompey. 

As  soon  as  it  was  day,  Brutus,  taking  with 


808 

him  a  dagger,  which  none  but  his  wife  knew 
of,  went  out.  The  rest  met  together  at  Cassius’s 
house,  and  brought  forth  his  son  that  was  that 
day  to  put  on  the  manly  gown,  as  it  is  called, 
into  the  Forum;  and  from  thence,  going  all  to 
Pompey’s  porch,  stayed  there,  expecting  Caesar 
to  come  without  delay  to  the  senate.  Here  it 
was  chiefly  that  any  one  who  had  known  what 
they  had  purposed,  would  have  admired  the 
unconcerned  temper  and  the  steady  resolution 
of  these  men  in  their  most  dangerous  under¬ 
taking;  for  many  of  them,  being  praetors,  and 
called  upon  by  their  office  to  judge  and  deter¬ 
mine  causes,  did  not  only  hear  calmly  all  that 
made  application  to  them  and  pleaded  against 
each  other  before  them,  as  if  they  were  free 
from  all  other  thoughts,  but  decided  causes 
with  as  much  accuracy  and  judgment  as  they 
had  heard  them  with  attention  and  patience. 
And  when  one  person  refused  to  stand  to  the 
award  of  Brutus,  and  with  great  clamour  and 
many  attestations  appealed  to  Caesar,  Brutus, 
looking  round  about  him  upon  those  that  were 
present,  said,  “Caesar  does  not  hinder  me,  nor 
will  he  hinder  me,  from  doing  according  to 
the  laws.” 

Yet  there  were  many  unusual  accidents  that 
disturbed  them  and  by  mere  chance  were 
thrown  in  their  way.  The  first  and  chiefest  was 
the  long  stay  of  Caesar,  though  the  day  was 
spent,  and  he  being  detained  at  home  by  his 
wife,  and  forbidden  by  the  soothsayers  to  go 
forth,  upon  some  defect  that  appeared  in  his 
sacrifice.  Another  was  this:  There  came  a  man 
up  to  Casca,  one  of  the  company,  and,  taking 
him  by  the  hand,  “You  concealed,”  said  he, 
“the  secret  from  us,  but  Brutus  has  told  me 
all.”  At  which  words  when  Casca  was  sur¬ 
prised,  the  other  said  laughing,  “How  came 
you  to  be  so  rich  of  a  sudden,  that  you  should 
stand  to  be  chosen  aedile?”  So  near  was  Casca 
to  let  out  the  secret,  upon  the  mere  ambiguity 
of  the  other’s  expression.  Then  Popilius  Laenas, 
a  senator,  having  saluted  Brutus  and  Cassius 
more  earnestly  than  usual,  whispered  them 
softly  in  the  ear,  and  said,  “My  wishes  are  with 
you,  that  you  may  accomplish  what  you  design, 
and  I  advise  you  to  make  no  delay,  for  the 
thing  is  now  no  secret.”  This  said,  he  departed, 
and  left  them  in  great  suspicion  that  the  design 
had  taken  wind.  In  the  meanwhile,  there  came 
one  in  haste  from  Brutus’s  house  and  brought 
him  news  that  his  wife  was  dying. 

For  Porcia,  being  extremely  disturbed  with 
expectation  of  the  event,  and  not  able  to  bear 
the  greatness  of  her  anxiety,  could  scarce  keep 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

herself  within  doors;  and  at  every  little  noise 
or  voice  she  heard,  starting  up  suddenly,  like 
those  possessed  with  the  bacchic  frenzy,  she 
asked  every  one  that  came  in  from  the  Forum 
what  Brutus  was  doing,  and  sent  one  messen¬ 
ger  after  another  to  inquire.  At  last,  after  long 
expectation  and  waiting,  the  strength  of  her 
constitution  could  hold  out  no  longer;  her 
mind  was  overcome  with  her  doubts  and  fears, 
and  she  lost  the  control  of  herself,  and  began 
to  faint  away.  She  had  not  time  to  betake  her¬ 
self  to  her  chamber,  but,  sitting  as  she  was 
amongst  her  women,  a  sudden  swoon  and  a 
great  stupor  seized  her,  and  her  colour  changed, 
and  her  speech  was  quite  lost.  At  this  sight  her 
women  made  a  loud  cry,  and  many  of  the 
neighbours  running  to  Brutus’s  door  to  know 
what  was  the  matter,  the  report  was  soon 
spread  about  that  Porcia  was  dead;  though 
with  her  women’s  help  she  recovered  in  a  little 
while,  and  came  to  herself  again.  When  Bru¬ 
tus  received  this  news,  he  was  extremely  trou¬ 
bled,  not  without  reason,  yet  was  not  so  carried 
away  by  his  private  grief  as  to  quit  his  public 
purpose. 

For  now  news  was  brought  that  Caesar  was 
coming,  carried  in  a  litter.  For,  being  discour¬ 
aged  by  the  ill-omens  that  attended  his  sacri¬ 
fice,  he  had  determined  to  undertake  no  affairs 
of  any  great  importance  that  day,  but  to  defer 
them  till  another  time,  excusing  himself  that 
he  was  sick. 

As  soon  as  he  came  out  of  his  litter,  Popilius 
Laenas,  he  who  but  a  little  before  had  wished 
Brutus  good  success  in  his  undertaking,  com¬ 
ing  up  to  him,  conversed  a  great  while  with 
him,  Caesar  standing  still  all  the  while,  and 
seeming  to  be  very  attentive.  The  conspirators 
(to  give  them  this  name),  not  being  able  to 
hear  what  he  said,  but  guessing  by  what  them¬ 
selves  were  conscious  of  that  this  conference 
was  the  discovery  of  their  treason,  were  again 
disheartened,  and,  looking  upon  one  another, 
agreed  from  each  other’s  countenances  that 
they  should  not  stay  to  be  taken,  but  should 
all  kill  themselves.  And  now  when  Cassius 
and  some  others  were  laying  hands  upon  their 
daggers  under  their  robes,  and  were  drawing 
them  out,  Brutus,  viewing  narrowly  the  looks 
and  gesture  of  Laenas,  and  finding  that  he  was 
earnestly  petitioning  and  not  accusing,  said 
nothing,  because  there  were  many  strangers  to 
the  conspiracy  mingled  amongst  them,  but  by 
a  cheerful  countenance  encouraged  Cassius. 
And  after  a  little  while,  Laenas,  having  kissed 
Caesar’s  hand,  went  away,  showing  plainly  that 


MARCUS  BRUTUS 

all  his  discourse  was  about  some  particular 
business  relating  to  himself. 

Now  when  the  senate  was  gone  in  before  to 
the  chamber  where  they  were  to  sit,  the  rest  of 
the  company  placed  themselves  close  about 
Caesar’s  chair,  as  if  they  had  some  suit  to  make 
to  him,  and  Cassius,  turning  his  face  to  Pom- 
pey’s  statue,  is  said  to  have  invoked  it,  as  if  it 
had  been  sensible  of  his  prayers.  Trebonius,  in 
the  meanwhile,  engaged  Antony’s  attention  at 
the  door,  and  kept  him  in  talk  outside.  When 
Caesar  entered,  the  whole  senate  rose  up  to 
him.  As  soon  as  he  was  sat  down,  the  men 
all  crowded  round  about  him,  and  set  Tullius 
Cimber,  one  of  their  own  number,  to  intercede 
in  behalf  of  his  brother  that  was  banished;  they 
all  joined  their  prayers  with  his,  and  took 
Caesar  by  the  hand,  and  kissed  his  head  and 
his  breast. 

But  he  putting  aside  at  first  their  supplica¬ 
tions,  and  afterwards,  when  he  saw  they  would 
not  desist,  violently  rising  up,  Tullius  with 
both  hands  caught  hold  of  his  robe  and  pulled 
it  ofl  from  his  shoulders,  and  Casca,  that  stood 
behind  him,  drawing  his  dagger,  gave  him  the 
first,  but  a  slight  wound,  about  the  shoulder. 
Caesar  snatching  hold  of  the  handle  of  the  dag¬ 
ger,  and  crying  out  aloud  in  Latin,  “Villain 
Casca,  what  do  you?”  he,  calling  in  Greek  to 
his  brother,  bade  him  come  and  help.  And  by 
this  time,  finding  himself  struck  by  a  great 
many  hands,  and  looking  around  about  him  to 
see  if  he  could  force  his  way  out,  when  he  saw 
Brutus  with  his  dagger  drawn  against  him,  he 
let  go  Casca’s  hand,  that  he  had  hold  of,  and 
covering  his  head  with  his  robe,  gave  up  his 
body  to  their  blows.  And  they  so  eagerly  pressed 
towards  the  body,  and  so  many  daggers  were 
hacking  together,  that  they  cut  one  another; 
Brutus,  particularly,  received  a  wound  in  his 
hand,  and  all  of  them  were  besmeared  with 
the  blood. 

Caesar  being  thus  slain,  Brutus,  stepping 
forth  into  the  midst,  intended  to  have  made  a 
speech,  and  called  back  and  encouraged  the 
senators  to  stay;  but  they  all  affrighted  ran 
away  in  great  disorder,  and  there  was  a  great 
confusion  and  press  at  the  door,  though  none 
pursued  or  followed.  For  they  had  come  to  an 
express  resolution  to  kill  nobody  beside  Caesar, 
but  to  call  and  invite  all  the  rest  to  liberty. 

It  was  indeed  the  opinion  of  all  the  others, 
when  they  consulted  about  the  execution  of 
their  design,  that  it  was  necessary  to  cut  off 
Antony  with  Caesar,  looking  upon  him  as  an 
insolent  man,  an  affecter  of  monarchy,  and  one 


809 

that,  by  his  familiar  intercourse,  had  gained  a 
powerful  interest  with  the  soldiers.  And  this 
they  urged  the  rather,  because  at  that  time  to 
the  natural  loftiness  and  ambition  of  his  tem¬ 
per  there  was  added  the  dignity  of  being  con¬ 
sul  and  colleague  to  Caesar.  But  Brutus  op¬ 
posed  this  counsel,  insisting  first  upon  the  in¬ 
justice  of  it,  and  afterwards  giving  them  hopes 
that  a  change  might  be  worked  in  Antony. 
For  he  did  not  despair  but  that  so  highly  gifted 
and  honourable  a  man,  and  such  a  lover  of 
glory  as  Antony,  stirred  up  with  emulation  of 
their  great  attempt,  might,  if  Caesar  were  once 
removed,  lay  hold  of  the  occasion  to  be  joint 
restorer  with  them  of  the  liberty  of  his  coun¬ 
try.  Thus  did  Brutus  save  Antony’s  life.  He,  in 
the  general  consternation,  put  himself  into  a 
plebeian  habit,  and  fled. 

But  Brutus  and  his  party  marched  up  to  the 
capitol,  on  their  way  showing  their  hands  all 
bloody,  and  their  naked  swords,  and  proclaim¬ 
ing  liberty  to  the  people.  At  first  all  places  were 
filled  with  cries  and  shouts;  and  the  wild  run¬ 
ning  to  and  fro,  occasioned  by  the  sudden  sur¬ 
prise  and  passion  that  every  one  was  in,  in¬ 
creased  the  tumult  in  the  city.  But  no  other 
bloodshed  following,  and  no  plundering  of  the 
goods  in  the  streets,  the  senators  and  many  of 
the  people  took  courage  and  went  up  to  the 
men  in  the  capitol;  and  a  multitude  being 
gathered  together,  Brutus  made  an  oration  to 
them,  very  popular,  and  proper  for  the  state 
that  affairs  were  then  in.  Therefore,  when  they 
applauded  his  speech,  and  cried  out  to  him  to 
come  down,  they  all  took  confidence  and  de¬ 
scended  into  the  Forum;  the  rest  promiscuous¬ 
ly  mingled  with  one  another,  but  many  of  the 
most  eminent  persons,  attending  Brutus,  con¬ 
ducted  him  in  the  midst  of  them  with  great 
honour  from  the  capitol,  and  placed  him  in  the 
rostra. 

At  the  sight  of  Brutus,  the  crowd,  though 
consisting  of  a  confused  mixture  and  all  dis¬ 
posed  to  make  a  tumult,  were  struck  with  rev¬ 
erence,  and  expected  what  he  would  say  with 
order  and  with  silence,  and,  when  he  began  to 
speak,  heard  him  with  quiet  and  attention. 
But  that  all  were  not  pleased  with  this  action 
they  plainly  showed  when,  Cinna  beginning  to 
speak  and  accuse  Caesar,  they  broke  out  into  a 
sudden  rage,  and  railed  at  him  in  such  lan¬ 
guage  that  the  whole  party  thought  fit  again 
to  withdraw  to  the  capitol.  And  there  Brutus, 
expecting  to  be  besieged,  dismissed  the  most 
eminent  of  those  that  had  accompanied  them 
thither,  not  thinking  it  just  that  they  who  were 


810 


not  partakers  of  the  fact  should  share  in  the 
danger. 

But  the  next  day,  the  senate  being  assem¬ 
bled  in  the  temple  of  the  Earth,  and  Antony 
and  Plancus  and  Cicero  having  made  orations 
recommending  concord  in  general  and  an  act 
of  oblivion,  it  was  decreed  that  the  men  should 
not  only  be  put  out  of  all  fear  or  danger,  but 
that  the  consuls  should  see  what  honours  and 
dignities  were  proper  to  be  conferred  upon 
them.  After  which  done,  the  senate  broke  up; 
and,  Antony  having  sent  his  son  as  an  hostage 
to  the  capitol,  Brutus  and  his  company  came 
down,  and  mutual  salutes  and  invitations 
passed  amongst  them,  the  whole  of  them  being 
gathered  together.  Antony  invited  and  enter¬ 
tained  Cassius,  Lepidus  did  the  same  to  Bru¬ 
tus,  and  the  rest  were  invited  and  entertained 
by  others,  as  each  of  them  had  acquaintance  or 
friends.  And  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  the  senate 
met  again,  and  voted  thanks  to  Antony  for 
having  stifled  the  beginning  of  a  civil  war; 
afterwards  Brutus  and  his  associates  that  were 
present  received  encomiums;  and  had  prov¬ 
inces  assigned  and  distributed  among  them. 
Crete  was  allotted  to  Brutus,  Africa  to  Cassius, 
Asia  to  Trebonius,  Bithynia  to  Cimber,  and  to 
the  other  Brutus  Gaul  about  the  Po. 

After  these  things,  they  began  to  consider  of 
Caesar’s  will,  and  the  ordering  of  his  funeral. 
Antony  desired  that  the  will  might  be  read, 
and  that  the  body  should  not  have  a  private  or 
dishonourable  interment,  lest  that  should  fur¬ 
ther  exasperate  the  people.  This  Cassius  vio¬ 
lently  opposed,  but  Brutus  yielded  to  it,  and 
gave  leave;  in  which  he  seems  to  have  a  second 
time  committed  a  fault.  For  as  before  in  spar¬ 
ing  the  life  of  Antony  he  could  not  be  without 
some  blame  from  his  party,  as  thereby  setting 
up  against  the  conspiracy  a  dangerous  and  dif¬ 
ficult  enemy,  so  now,  in  suffering  him  to  have 
the  ordering  of  the  funeral,  he  fell  into  a  total 
and  irrevocable  error.  For  first,  it  appearing  by 
the  will  that  Caesar  had  bequeathed  to  the 
Roman  people  seventy-five  drachmas  a  man, 
and  given  to  the  public  his  gardens  beyond 
Tiber  (where  now  the  temple  of  Fortune 
stands),  the  whole  city  was  fired  with  a  won¬ 
derful  affection  for  him,  and  a  passionate  sense 
of  the  loss  of  him. 

And  when  the  body  was  brought  forth  into 
the  Forum,  Antony,  as  the  custom  was,  making 
a  funeral  oration  in  the  praise  of  Caesar,  and 
finding  the  multitude  moved  with  his  speech, 
passing  into  the  pathetic  tone,  unfolded  the 
bloody  garment  of  Caesar,  showed  them  in  how 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

many  places  it  was  pierced,  and  the  number  of 
his  wounds.  Now  there  was  nothing  to  be  seen 
but  confusion;  some  cried  out  to  kill  the  mur¬ 
derers,  others  (as  was  formerly  done  when 
Clodius  led  the  people)  tore  away  the  benches 
and  tables  out  of  the  shops  round  about,  and, 
heaping  them  altogether,  built  a  great  funeral 
pile,  and  having  put  the  body  of  Caesar  upon 
it,  set  it  on  fire,  the  spot  where  this  was  done 
being  moreover  surrounded  with  a  great 
many  temples  and  other  consecrated  places,  so 
that  they  seemed  to  burn  the  body  in  a  kind 
of  sacred  solemnity.  As  soon  as  the  fire  flamed 
out,  the  multitude,  flocking  in  some  from  one 
part  and  some  from  another,  snatched  the 
brands  that  were  half  burnt  out  of  the  pile, 
and  ran  about  the  city  to  fire  the  houses  of  the 
murderers  of  Caesar.  But  they,  having  before¬ 
hand  well  fortified  themselves,  repelled  this 
danger. 

There  was,  however,  a  kind  of  poet,  one 
Cinna,  not  at  all  concerned  in  the  guilt  of  the 
conspiracy,  but  on  the  contrary  one  of  Caesar’s 
friends.  This  man  dreamed  that  he  was  invited 
to  supper  by  Caesar,  and  that  he  declined  to  go, 
but  that  Ccesar  entreated  and  pressed  him  to  it 
very  earnestly;  and  at  last,  taking  him  by  the 
hand,  led  him  into  a  very  deep  and  dark  place, 
whither  he  was  forced  against  his  will  to  fol¬ 
low  in  great  consternation  and  amazement. 
After  this  vision,  he  had  a  fever  the  most  part 
of  the  night;  nevertheless  in  the  morning,  hear¬ 
ing  that  the  body  of  Caesar  was  to  be  carried 
forth  to  be  interred,  he  was  ashamed  not  to  be 
present  at  the  solemnity,  and  came  abroad  and 
joined  the  people,  when  they  were  already  in¬ 
furiated  by  the  speech  of  Antony.  And  perceiv¬ 
ing  him,  and  taking  him  not  for  that  Cinna 
who  indeed  he  was,  but  for  him  that  a  little 
before  in  a  speech  to  the  people  had  reproached 
and  inveighed  against  Caesar,  they  fell  upon 
him  and  tore  him  to  pieces. 

This  action  chiefly,  and  the  alteration  that 
Antony  had  wrought,  so  alarmed  Brutus  and 
his  party  that  for  their  safety  they  retired  from 
the  city.  The  first  stay  they  made  was  at  An- 
tium,  with  a  design  to  return  again  as  soon  as 
the  fury  of  the  people  had  spent  itself  and  was 
abated,  which  they  expected  would  soon  and 
easily  come  to  pass  in  an  unsettled  multitude, 
apt  to  be  carried  away  with  any  sudden  and 
impetuous  passion,  especially  since  they  had 
the  senate  favourable  to  them;  which,  though 
it  took  no  notice  of  those  that  had  torn  Cinna 
to  pieces,  yet  made  a  strict  search  and  appre¬ 
hended  in  order  to  punishment  those  that  had 


MARCUS  BRUTUS 

assaulted  the  houses  of  the  friends  of  Brutus 
and  Cassius.  By  this  time,  also,  the  people  be¬ 
gan  to  be  dissatisfied  with  Antony,  who  they 
perceived  was  setting  up  a  kind  of  monarchy 
for  himself;  they  longed  for  the  return  of  Bru¬ 
tus,  whose  presence  they  expected  and  hoped 
for  at  the  games  and  spectacles  which  he,  as 
praetor,  was  to  exhibit  to  the  public. 

But  he,  having  intelligence  that  many  of  the 
old  soldiers  that  had  borne  arms  under  Caesar, 
by  whom  they  had  had  lands  and  cities  given 
them,  lay  in  wait  for  them,  and  by  small  par¬ 
ties  at  a  time  had  stolen  into  the  city,  would 
not  venture  to  come  himself;  however,  in  his 
absence  there  were  most  magnificent  and  cost¬ 
ly  shows  exhibited  to  the  people;  for,  having 
brought  up  a  great  number  of  all  sorts  of  wild 
beasts,  he  gave  order  that  not  any  of  them 
should  be  returned  or  saved,  but  that  all  should 
be  spent  freely  at  the  public  spectacles.  He 
himself  made  a  journey  to  Naples  to  procure 
a  considerable  number  of  players,  and  hearing 
of  one  Canutius  that  was  very  much  praised 
for  his  acting  upon  the  stage,  he  wrote  to  his 
friends  to  use  all  their  entreaties  to  bring  him 
to  Rome  (for,  being  a  Grecian,  he  could  not  be 
compelled);  he  wrote  also  to  Cicero,  begging 
him  by  no  means  to  omit  being  present  at  the 
shows. 

This  was  the  posture  of  affairs  when  another 
sudden  alteration  was  made  upon  the  young 
Caesar’s  coming  to  Rome.  He  was  son  to  the 
niece  of  Caesar,  who  adopted  him,  and  left  him 
his  heir  by  his  will.  At  the  time  when  Caesar 
was  killed,  he  was  following  his  studies  at 
Apollonia,  where  he  was  expecting  also  to 
meet  Caesar  on  his  way  to  the  expedition  which 
he  had  determined  on  against  the  Parthians; 
but,  hearing  of  his  death,  he  immediately  came 
to  Rome,  and  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the 
people,  taking  upon  himself  the  name  of  Caesar, 
and  punctually  distributing  among  the  citi¬ 
zens  the  money  that  was  left  them  by  the  will, 
he  soon  got  the  better  of  Antony;  and  by 
money  and  largesses,  which  he  liberally  dis¬ 
persed  amongst  the  soldiers,  he  gathered  to¬ 
gether  and  brought  over  to  his  party  a  great 
number  of  those  that  had  served  under  Caesar. 

Cicero  himself,  out  of  the  hatred  which  he 
bore  to  Antony,  sided  with  young  Caesar;  which 
Brutus  took  so  ill  that  he  treated  with  him  very 
sharply  in  his  letters,  telling  him  that  he  per¬ 
ceived  Cicero  could  well  enough  endure  a  ty¬ 
rant,  but  feared  only  that  he  who  hated  him 
should  be  the  man;  that  in  writing  and  speak¬ 
ing  so  well  of  Caesar,  he  showed  that  his  aim 


811 

was  to  have  an  easy  slavery.  “But  our  fore¬ 
fathers,”  said  Brutus,  “could  not  brook  even 
gentle  masters.”  Further,  he  added  that  for  his 
own  part  he  had  not  as  yet  fully  resolved 
whether  he  should  make  war  or  peace;  but 
that  as  to  one  point  he  was  fixed  and  settled, 
which  was,  never  to  be  a  slave;  that  he  won¬ 
dered  Cicero  should  fear  the  dangers  of  a  civil 
war,  and  not  be  much  more  afraid  of  a  dis¬ 
honourable  and  infamous  peace;  that  the  very 
reward  that  was  to  be  given  him  for  subvert¬ 
ing  Antony’s  tyranny  was  the  privilege  of 
establishing  Caesar  as  tyrant  in  his  place.  This 
is  the  tone  of  Brutus’s  first  letters  to  Cicero. 

The  city  being  now  divided  into  two  fac¬ 
tions,  some  betaking  themselves  to  Caesar  and 
others  to  Antony,  the  soldiers  selling  them¬ 
selves,  as  it  were,  by  public  outcry,  and  going 
over  to  him  that  would  give  them  most,  Bru¬ 
tus  began  to  despair  of  any  good  event  of 
such  proceedings,  and,  resolving  to  leave  Italy, 
passed  by  land  through  Lucania  and  came  to 
Elea  by  the  seaside.  From  hence  it  was  thought 
convenient  that  Porcia  should  return  to  Rome. 
She  was  overcome  with  grief  to  part  from  Bru¬ 
tus,  but  strove  as  much  as  was  possible  to  con¬ 
ceal  it;  but,  in  spite  of  all  her  constancy,  a  pic¬ 
ture  which  she  found  there  accidentally  be¬ 
trayed  it.  It  was  a  Greek  subject,  Hector  part¬ 
ing  from  Andromache  when  he  went  to  en¬ 
gage  the  Greeks,  giving  his  young  son  Asty- 
anax  into  her  arms,  and  she  fixing  her  eyes 
upon  him.  When  she  looked  at  this  piece,  the 
resemblance  it  bore  to  her  own  condition  made 
her  burst  into  tears,  and  several  times  a  day 
she  went  to  see  the  picture,  and  wept  before  it. 

Upon  this  occasion,  when  Acilius,  one  of 
Brutus’s  friends,  repeated  out  of  Homer  the 
verses,  where  Andromache  speaks  to  Hector: — 
But  Hector,  you 

To  me  are  father  and  are  mother  too, 

My  brother,  and  my  loving  husband  true , 

Brutus,  smiling,  replied,  “But  I  must  not  an¬ 
swer  Porcia,  as  Hector  did  Andromache: — - 
Mind  you  your  loom,  and  to  your  maids  give  law , 
“For  though  the  natural  weakness  of  her  body 
hinders  her  from  doing  what  only  the  strength 
of  men  can  perform,  yet  she  has  a  mind  as 
valiant  and  as  active  for  the  good  of  her  coun¬ 
try  as  the  best  of  us.” 

This  narrative  is  in  the  memoirs  of  Brutus 
written  by  Bibulus,  Porcia’s  son. 

Brutus  took  ship  from  thence,  and  sailed  to 
Athens,  where  he  was  received  by  the  people 
with  great  demonstrations  of  kindness,  ex¬ 
pressed  in  their  acclamation  and  the  honours 


812 

that  were  decreed  him.  He  lived  there  with  a 
private  friend,  and  was  a  constant  auditor  of 
Theomnestus,  the  Academic,  and  Cratippus, 
the  Peripatetic,  with  whom  he  so  engaged  in 
philosophical  pursuits  that  he  seemed  to  have 
laid  aside  all  thoughts  of  public  business,  and 
to  be  wholly  at  leisure  for  study.  But  all  this 
while,  being  unsuspected,  he  was  secretly  mak¬ 
ing  preparations  for  war;  in  order  to  which  he 
sent  Herostratus  into  Macedonia  to  secure  the 
commanders  there  to  his  side,  and  he  himself 
won  over  and  kept  at  his  disposal  all  the  young 
Romans  that  were  then  students  at  Athens.  Of 
this  number  was  Cicero’s  son,  whom  he  every¬ 
where  highly  extols,  and  says  that  whether 
sleeping  or  waking  he  could  not  choose  but 
admire  a  young  man  of  so  great  a  spirit  and 
such  a  hater  of  tyranny. 

At  length  he  began  to  act  openly,  and  to  ap¬ 
pear  in  public  business,  and,  being  informed 
that  there  were  several  Roman  ships  full  of 
treasure  that  in  their  course  from  Asia  were  to 
come  that  way,  and  that  they  were  com¬ 
manded  by  one  of  his  friends,  he  went  to  meet 
him  about  Carystus.  Finding  him  there,  and 
having  persuaded  him  to  deliver  up  the  ships, 
he  made  a  more  than  usually  splendid  enter¬ 
tainment,  for  it  happened  also  to  be  his  birth¬ 
day.  Now  when  they  came  to  drink,  and  were 
filling  their  cups  with  hopes  for  victory  to  Bru¬ 
tus  and  liberty  to  Rome,  Brutus,  to  animate 
them  the  more,  called  for  a  larger  bowl,  and 
holding  it  in  his  hand,  on  a  sudden,  upon  no 
occasion  or  forethought,  pronounced  aloud 
this  verse: — 

But  jate  my  death  and  Leto’s  son  have  wrought. 
And  some  writers  add  that  in  the  last  battle 
which  he  fought  at  Philippi,  the  word  that  he 
gave  to  his  soldiers  was  “Apollo,”  and  from 
thence  conclude  that  this  sudden  unaccount¬ 
able  exclamation  of  his  was  a  presage  of  the 
overthrow  that  he  suffered  there. 

Antistius,  the  commander  of  these  ships,  at 
his  parting,  gave  him  fifty  thousand  myriads 
of  the  money  that  he  was  conveying  to  Italy; 
and  all  the  soldiers  yet  remaining  of  Pompey’s 
army,  who  after  their  general’s  defeat  wan¬ 
dered  about  Thessaly,  readily  and  joyfully 
flocked  together  to  join  him.  Besides  this,  he 
took  from  Cinna  five  hundred  horse  that  he 
was  carrying  to  Dolabella  into  Asia.  After  that, 
he  sailed  to  Demetrias,  and  there  seized  a 
great  quantity  of  arms  that  had  been  provided 
by  the  command  of  the  deceased  Caesar  for  the 
Parthian  war,  and  were  now  to  be  sent  to 
Antony.  Then  Macedonia  was  put  into  his 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

hands  and  delivered  up  by  Hortensius,  the 
praetor,  and  all  the  kings  and  potentates  round 
about  came  and  offered  their  services.  So  when 
news  was  brought  that  Caius,  the  brother  of 
Antony,  having  passed  over  from  Italy,  was 
marching  on  directly  to  join  the  forces  that 
Vatinius  commanded  in  Dyrrhachium  and 
Apollonia,  Brutus  resolved  to  anticipate  him, 
and  to  seize  them  first,  and  in  all  haste  moved 
forwards  with  those  that  he  had  about  him. 
His  march  was  very  difficult,  through  rugged 
places  and  in  a  great  snow,  but  so  swift  that 
he  left  those  that  were  to  bring  his  provisions 
for  the  morning  meal  a  great  way  behind. 

And  now,  being  very  near  to  Dyrrhachium, 
with  fatigue  and  cold  he  fell  into  the  distemper 
called  bulimia .  This  is  a  disease  that  seizes  both 
men  and  cattle  after  much  labour,  and  espe¬ 
cially  in  a  great  snow;  whether  it  is  caused  by 
the  natural  heat  when  the  body  is  seized  with 
cold,  being  forced  all  inwards,  and  consuming 
at  once  all  the  nourishment  laid  in,  or  whether 
the  sharp  and  subtle  vapour  which  comes  from 
the  snow  as  it  dissolves  cuts  the  body,  as  it 
were,  and  destroys  the  heat  which  issues 
through  the  pores;  for  the  sweatings  seem  to 
arise  from  the  heat  meeting  with  the  cold,  and 
being  quenched  by  it  on  the  surface  of  the 
body.  But  this  I  have  in  another  place  discussed 
more  at  large. 

Brutus  growing  very  faint,  and  there  being 
none  in  the  whole  army  that  had  anything  for 
him  to  eat,  his  servants  were  forced  to  have  re¬ 
course  to  the  enemy,  and,  going  as  far  as  to  the 
gates  of  the  city,  begged  bread  of  the  sentinels 
that  were  upon  duty.  As  soon  as  they  heard  of 
the  condition  of  Brutus,  they  came  themselves, 
and  brought  both  meat  and  drink  along  with 
them;  in  return  for  which  Brutus,  when  he 
took  the  city,  showed  the  greatest  kindness,  not 
to  them  only,  but  to  all  the  inhabitants,  for 
their  sakes. 

Caius  Antonius,  in  the  meantime,  coming  to 
Apollonia,  summoned  all  the  soldiers  that  were 
near  that  city  to  join  him  there;  but  finding 
that  they  nevertheless  went  all  to  Brutus,  and 
suspecting  that  even  those  of  Apollonia  were 
inclined  to  the  same  party,  he  quitted  that  city, 
and  came  to  Buthrotum,  having  first  lost  three 
cohorts  of  his  men,  that  in  their  march  thither 
were  cut  to  pieces  by  Brutus.  After  this,  at¬ 
tempting  to  make  himself  master  of  some 
strong  places  about  Byllis  which  the  enemy 
had  first  seized,  he  was  overcome  in  a  set  bat¬ 
tle  by  young  Cicero,  to  whom  Brutus  gave  the 
command,  and  whose  conduct  he  made  use  of 


MARCUS  BRUTUS 

often  and  with  much  success.  Caius  himself 
was  surprised  in  a  marshy  place,  at  a  distance 
from  his  support;  and  Brutus  having  him  in 
his  power  would  not  suffer  his  soldiers  to  at¬ 
tack,  but  manoeuvring  about  the  enemy  with 
his  horse,  gave  command  that  none  of  them 
should  be  killed,  for  that  in  a  little  time  they 
would  all  be  of  his  side;  which  accordingly 
came  to  pass,  for  they  surrendered  both  them¬ 
selves  and  their  general.  So  that  Brutus  had  by 
this  time  a  very  great  and  considerable  army. 

He  showed  all  marks  of  honour  and  esteem 
to  Caius  for  a  long  time,  and  left  him  the  use 
of  the  ensigns  of  his  office,  though,  as  some 
report,  he  had  several  letters  from  Rome,  and 
particularly  from  Cicero,  advising  him  to  put 
him  to  death.  But  at  last,  perceiving  that  he 
began  to  corrupt  his  officers,  and  was  trying  to 
raise  a  mutiny  amongst  the  soldiers,  he  put 
him  aboard  a  ship  and  kept  him  close  prisoner. 
In  the  meantime,  the  soldiers  that  had  been 
corrupted  by  Caius  retired  to  Apollonia,  and 
sent  word  to  Brutus,  desiring  him  to  come  to 
them  thither.  He  answered  that  this  was  not 
the  custom  of  the  Romans,  but  that  it  became 
those  who  had  offended  to  come  themselves  to 
their  general  and  beg  forgiveness  for  their  of¬ 
fences;  which  they  did,  and  accordingly  re¬ 
ceived  his  pardon. 

As  he  was  preparing  to  pass  into  Asia,  tid¬ 
ings  reached  him  of  the  alteration  that  had 
happened  at  Rome;  where  the  young  Caesar, 
assisted  by  the  senate,  in  opposition  to  Antony, 
and  having  driven  his  competitor  out  of  Italy, 
had  begun  himself  to  be  very  formidable,  suing 
for  the  consulship  contrary  to  law,  and  main¬ 
taining  large  bodies  of  troops  of  which  the 
commonwealth  had  no  manner  of  need.  And 
then,  perceiving  that  the  senate,  dissatisfied 
with  the  proceedings,  began  to  cast  their  eyes 
abroad  upon  Brutus,  and  decreed  and  con¬ 
firmed  the  government  of  several  provinces  to 
him,  he  had  taken  the  alarm.  Therefore,  des¬ 
patching  messengers  to  Antony,  he  desired 
that  there  might  be  a  reconciliation,  and  a 
friendship  between  them.  Then,  drawing  all 
his  forces  about  the  city,  he  made  himself  to  be 
chosen  consul,  though  he  was  but  a  boy,  being 
scarce  twenty  years  old,  as  he  himself  writes  in 
his  memoirs. 

At  the  first  entry  upon  the  consulship  he  im¬ 
mediately  ordered  a  judicial  process  to  be  is¬ 
sued  out  against  Brutus  and  his  accomplices 
for  having  murdered  a  principal  man  of  the 
city,  holding  the  highest  magistracies  of  Rome, 
without  being  heard  or  condemned;  and  ap- 


813 

pointed  Lucius  Cornificus  to  accuse  Brutus, 
and  Marcus  Agrippa  to  accuse  Cassius.  None 
appearing  to  the  accusation,  the  judges  were 
forced  to  pass  sentence  and  condemn  them 
both.  It  is  reported  that  when  the  crier  from 
the  tribunal,  as  the  custom  was,  with  a  loud 
voice  cried  Brutus  to  appear,  the  people  groaned 
audibly,  and  the  noble  citizens  hung  down 
their  heads  for  grief.  Publicus  Silicius  was  seen 
to  burst  out  into  tears,  which  was  the  reason 
that  not  long  after  he  was  put  down  in  the  list 
of  those  that  were  proscribed.  After  this,  the 
three  men,  Caesar,  Antony,  and  Lepidus,  being 
perfectly  reconciled,  shared  the  provinces 
among  themselves,  and  made  up  the  catalogue 
of  proscription,  wherein  were  set  those  that 
were  designed  for  slaughter,  amounting  to 
two  hundred  men,  in  which  number  Cicero 
was  slain. 

The  news  being  brought  to  Brutus  in  Mace¬ 
donia,  he  was  under  a  compulsion,  and  sent 
orders  to  Hortensius  that  he  should  kill  Caius 
Antonius  in  revenge  of  the  death  of  Cicero  his 
friend,  and  Brutus  his  kinsman,  who  also  was 
proscribed  and  slain.  Upon  this  account  it  was 
that  Antony,  having  afterwards  taken  Horten¬ 
sius  in  the  battle  of  Philippi,  slew  him  upon 
his  brother’s  tomb.  But  Brutus  expresses  him¬ 
self  as  more  ashamed  for  the  cause  of  Cicero’s 
death  than  grieved  for  the  misfortune  of  it, 
and  says  he  cannot  help  accusing  his  friends 
at  Rome,  that  they  were  slaves  more  through 
their  own  doing  than  that  of  those  who  now 
were  their  tyrants;  they  could  be  present  and 
see  and  yet  suffer  those  things  which  even  to 
hear  related  ought  to  them  to  have  been  in¬ 
sufferable. 

Having  made  his  army,  that  was  already 
very  considerable,  pass  into  Asia,  he  ordered  a 
fleet  to  be  prepared  in  Bithynia  and  about  Cyzi- 
cus.  But  going  himself  through  the  country  by 
land,  he  made  it  his  business  to  settle  and  con¬ 
firm  all  the  cities,  and  gave  audience  to  the 
princes  of  the  parts  through  which  he  passed. 
And  he  sent  orders  into  Syria  to  Cassius  to 
come  to  him,  and  leave  his  intended  journey 
into  Egypt;  letting  him  understand  that  it  was 
not  to  gain  an  empire  for  themselves,  but  to 
free  their  country,  that  they  went  thus  wander¬ 
ing  about  and  had  got  an  army  together  whose 
business  it  was  to  destroy  the  tyrants;  that 
therefore,  if  they  remembered  and  resolved  to 
persevere  in  their  first  purpose,  they  ought  not 
to  be  too  far  from  Italy,  but  make  what  haste 
they  could  thither,  and  endeavour  to  relieve 
their  fellow-citizens  from  oppression. 


814 

Cassius  obeyed  his  summons,  and  returned, 
and  Brutus  went  to  meet  him;  and  at  Smyrna 
they  met,  which  was  the  first  time  they  had 
seen  one  another  since  they  parted  at  the 
Piraeus  in  Athens,  one  for  Syria,  and  the  other 
for  Macedonia.  They  were  both  extremely  joy¬ 
ful  and  had  great  confidence  of  their  success  at 
the  sight  of  the  forces  that  each  of  them  had 
got  together,  since  they  who  had  fled  from 
Italy,  like  the  most  despicable  exiles,  without 
money,  without  arms,  without  a  ship  or  a  sol¬ 
dier  or  a  city  to  rely  on,  in  a  little  time  after 
had  met  together  so  well  furnished  with  ship¬ 
ping  and  money,  and  an  army  both  of  horse 
and  foot,  that  they  were  in  a  condition  to  con¬ 
tend  for  the  empire  of  Rome. 

Cassius  was  desirous  to  show  no  less  respect 
and  honour  to  Brutus  than  Brutus  did  to  him; 
but  Brutus  was  still  beforehand  with  him, 
coming  for  the  most  part  to  him,  both  because 
he  was  the  elder  man,  and  of  a  weaker  consti¬ 
tution  than  himself.  Men  generally  reckoned 
Cassius  a  very  expert  soldier,  but  of  a  harsh 
and  angry  nature,  and  one  that  desired  to  com¬ 
mand  rather  by  fear  than  love,  though,  on  the 
other  side,  among  his  familiar  acquaintance  he 
would  easily  give  way  to  jesting  and  play  the 
buffoon.  But  Brutus,  for  his  virtue,  was  es¬ 
teemed  by  the  people,  beloved  by  his  friends, 
admired  by  the  best  men,  and  hated  not  by  his 
enemies  themselves.  For  he  was  a  man  of  a 
singularly  gentle  nature,  of  a  great  spirit,  in¬ 
sensible  of  the  passions  of  anger  or  pleasure  or 
covetousness,  steady  and  inflexible  to  maintain 
his  purpose  for  what  he  thought  right  and 
honest. 

And  that  which  gained  him  the  greatest  af¬ 
fection  and  reputation  was  the  entire  faith  in 
his  intentions.  For  it  had  not  ever  been  sup¬ 
posed  that  Pompey  the  Great  himself,  if  he  had 
overcome  Caesar,  would  have  submitted  his 
power  to  the  laws,  instead  of  taking  the  man¬ 
agement  of  the  state  upon  himself,  soothing 
the  people  with  the  specious  name  of  consul  or 
dictator,  or  some  other  milder  title  than  king. 
And  they  were  well  persuaded  that  Cassius,  be¬ 
ing  a  man  governed  by  anger  and  passion,  and 
carried  often,  for  his  interest’s  sake,  beyond 
the  bounds  of  justice,  endured  all  these  hard¬ 
ships  of  war  and  travel  and  danger  most  as¬ 
suredly  to  obtain  dominion  to  himself,  and  not 
liberty  to  the  people.  And  as  for  the  former  dis¬ 
turbers  of  the  peace  of  Rome,  whether  a  Cinna, 
a  Marius,  or  a  Carbo,  it  is  manifest  that  they, 
having  set  their  country  as  a  stake  for  him  that 
should  win,  did  almost  own  in  express  terms 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

that  they  fought  for  empire.  But  even  the  ene¬ 
mies  of  Brutus  did  not,  they  tell  us,  lay  this  ac¬ 
cusation  to  his  charge;  nay,  many  heard  An¬ 
tony  himself  say  that  Brutus  was  the  only  man 
that  conspired  against  Caesar  out  of  a  sense  of 
the  glory  and  the  apparent  justice  of  the  ac¬ 
tion,  but  that  all  the  rest  rose  up  against  the 
man,  himself,  from  private  envy  and  malice  of 
their  own. 

And  it  is  plain  by  what  he  writes  himself, 
that  Brutus  did  not  so  much  rely  upon  his 
forces,  as  upon  his  own  virtue.  For  thus  he 
speaks  in  a  letter  to  Atticus,  shortly  before  he 
was  to  engage  with  the  enemy:  that  his  affairs 
were  in  the  best  state  of  fortune  that  he  could 
wish;  for  that  either  he  should  overcome,  and 
restore  liberty  to  the  people  of  Rome,  or  die, 
and  be  himself  out  of  the  reach  of  slavery;  that 
other  things  being  certain  and  beyond  all  haz¬ 
ard,  one  thing  was  yet  in  doubt,  whether  they 
should  live  or  die  free  men.  He  adds  further, 
that  Mark  Antony  had  received  a  just  punish¬ 
ment  for  his  folly,  who,  when  he  might  have 
been  numbered  with  Brutus  and  Cassius  and 
Cato,  would  join  himself  to  Octavius;  that 
though  they  should  not  now  be  both  overcome, 
they  soon  would  fight  between  themselves.  And 
in  this  he  seems  to  have  been  no  ill  prophet. 

Now  when  they  were  at  Smyrna,  Brutus  de¬ 
sired  of  Cassius  that  he  might  have  part  of  the 
great  treasure  that  he  had  heaped  up,  because 
all  his  own  was  expended  in  furnishing  out 
such  a  fleet  of  ships  as  was  sufficient  to  keep 
the  whole  interior  sea  in  their  power.  But  Cas¬ 
sius’s  friends  dissuaded  him  from  this;  “for,” 
said  they,  “it  is  not  just  that  the  money  which 
you  with  so  much  parsimony  keep,  and  with 
so  much  envy  have  got,  should  be  given  to  him 
to  be  disposed  of  in  making  himself  popular, 
and  gaining  the  favour  of  the  soldiers.”  Not¬ 
withstanding  this,  Cassius  gave  him  a  third 
part  of  all  that  he  had;  and  then  they  parted 
each  to  their  several  commands.  Cassius,  hav¬ 
ing  taken  Rhodes,  behaved  himself  there  with 
no  clemency;  though  at  his  first  entry,  when 
some  had  called  him  lord  and  king,  he  an¬ 
swered  that  he  was  neither  king  nor  lord,  but 
the  destroyer  and  punisher  of  a  king  and  lord. 
Brutus,  on  the  other  part,  sent  to  the  Lycians 
to  demand  from  them  a  supply  of  money  and 
men,  but  Laucrates,  their  popular  leader,  per¬ 
suaded  the  cities  to  resist,  and  they  occupied 
several  little  mountains  and  hills  with  a  design 
to  hinder  Brutus’s  passage. 

Brutus  at  first  sent  out  a  party  of  horse  which, 
surprising  them  as  they  were  eating,  killed  six 


MARCUS  BRUTUS 

hundred  of  them,  and  afterward,  having  taken 
all  their  small  towns  and  villages  round  about, 
he  set  all  his  prisoners  free  without  ransom, 
hoping  to  win  the  whole  nation  by  good-will. 
But  they  continued  obstinate,  taking  in  anger 
what  they  had  suffered,  and  despising  his 
goodness  and  humanity;  until,  having  forced 
the  most  warlike  of  them  into  the  city  of  Xan- 
thus,  he  besieged  them  there.  They  endeav¬ 
oured  to  make  their  escape  by  swimming  and 
diving  through  the  river  that  flows  by  the 
town,  but  were  taken  by  nets  let  down  for  that 
purpose  in  the  channel,  which  had  little  bells 
at  the  top,  which  gave  present  notice  of  any 
that  were  taken  in  them.  After  that,  they  made 
a  sally  in  the  night,  and  seizing  several  of  the 
battering  engines,  set  them  on  fire;  but  being 
perceived  by  the  Romans,  were  beaten  back  to 
their  walls,  and  there  being  a  strong  wind,  it 
carried  the  flames  to  the  battlements  of  the  city 
with  such  fierceness  that  several  of  the  adjoin¬ 
ing  houses  took  fire.  Brutus,  fearing  lest  the 
whole  city  should  be  destroyed,  commanded 
his  own  soldiers  to  assist  and  quench  the  fire. 

But  the  Lycians  were  on  a  sudden  possessed 
with  a  strange  and  incredible  desperation;  such 
a  frenzy  as  cannot  be  better  expressed  than  by 
calling  it  a  violent  appetite  to  die,  for  both 
women  and  children,  the  bondmen  and  the 
free,  those  of  all  ages  and  of  all  conditions 
strove  to  force  away  the  soldiers  that  came  in 
to  their  assistance  from  the  walls;  and  them¬ 
selves  gathering  together  reeds  and  wood,  and 
whatever  combustible  matter  they  found, 
spread  the  fire  over  the  whole  city,  feeding  it 
with  whatever  fuel  they  could,  and  by  all  pos¬ 
sible  means  exciting  its  fury,  so  that  the  flame, 
having  dispersed  itself  and  encircled  the  whole 
city,  blazed  out  in  so  terrible  a  manner  that 
Brutus,  extremely  afflicted  at  their  calamity,  got 
on  horseback  and  rode  round  the  walls,  ear¬ 
nestly  desirous  to  preserve  the  city,  and  stretch¬ 
ing  forth  his  hands  to  the  Xanthians,  begged 
of  them  that  they  would  spare  themselves  and 
save  the  town. 

Yet  none  regarded  his  entreaties,  but,  by  all 
manner  of  ways,  strove  to  destroy  themselves; 
not  only  men  and  women,  but  even  boys  and 
little  children,  with  a  hideous  outcry,  leaped 
some  into  the  fire,  others  from  the  walls,  others 
fell  upon  their  parents’  swords,  baring  their 
throats  and  desiring  to  be  struck.  After  the  de¬ 
struction  of  the  city,  there  was  found  a  woman 
who  had  hanged  herself  with  her  young  child 
hanging  from  her  neck,  and  the  torch  in  her 
hand  with  which  she  had  fired  her  own  house. 


815 

It  was  so  tragical  a  sight  that  Brutus  could 
not  endure  to  see  it,  but  wept  at  the  very  rela¬ 
tion  of  it  and  proclaimed  a  reward  to  any  sol¬ 
dier  that  could  save  a  Xanthian.  And  it  is  said 
that  an  hundred  and  fifty  only  were  found,  to 
have  their  lives  saved  against  their  wills.  Thus 
the  Xanthians  after  a  long  space  of  years,  the 
fated  period  of  their  destruction  having,  as  it 
were,  run  its  course,  repeated  by  their  desper¬ 
ate  deed  the  former  calamity  of  their  forefath¬ 
ers,  who  after  the  very  same  manner  in  the 
Persian  war  had  fired  their  city  and  destroyed 
themselves. 

Brutus,  after  this,  finding  the  Patareans  re¬ 
solved  to  make  resistance  and  hold  out  their 
city  against  him,  was  very  unwilling  to  besiege 
it,  and  was  in  great  perplexity  lest  the  same 
frenzy  might  seize  them  too.  But  having  in  his 
power  some  of  their  women,  who  were  his  pris¬ 
oners,  he  dismissed  them  all  without  any  ran¬ 
som;  who,  returning  and  giving  an  account  to 
their  husbands  and  fathers,  who  were  of  the 
greatest  rank,  what  an  excellent  man  Brutus 
was,  how  temperate  and  how  just,  persuaded 
them  to  yield  themselves  and  put  their  city  into 
his  hands.  From  this  time  all  the  cities  round 
about  came  into  his  power,  submitting  them¬ 
selves  to  him,  and  found  him  good  and  merci¬ 
ful  even  beyond  their  hopes.  For  though  Cas¬ 
sius  at  the  same  time  had  compelled  the  Rho¬ 
dians  to  bring  in  all  the  silver  and  gold  that 
each  of  them  privately  was  possessed  of,  by 
which  he  raised  a  sum  of  eight  thousand  tal¬ 
ents,  and  besides  this  had  condemned  the  pub¬ 
lic  to  pay  the  sum  of  five  hundred  talents  more, 
Brutus,  not  having  taken  above  a  hundred 
and  fifty  talents  from  the  Lycians,  and  having 
done  them  no  other  manner  of  injury,  parted 
from  thence  with  his  army  to  go  into  Ionia. 

Through  the  whole  course  of  this  expedi¬ 
tion,  Brutus  did  many  memorable  acts  of  jus¬ 
tice  in  dispensing  rewards  and  punishments  to 
such  as  had  deserved  either;  but  one  in  particu¬ 
lar  I  will  relate,  because  he  himself,  and  all  the 
noblest  Romans,  were  gratified  with  it  above 
all  the  rest.  When  Pompey  the  Great,  being 
overthrown  from  his  great  power  by  Caesar,  had 
fled  to  Egypt,  and  landed  near  Pelusium,  the 
protectors  of  the  young  king  consulted  among 
themselves  what  was  fit  to  be  done  on  that  oc¬ 
casion,  nor  could  they  all  agree  in  the  same 
opinion,  some  being  for  receiving  him,  others 
for  driving  him  from  Egypt. 

But  Theodotus,  a  Chian  by  birth,  and  then 
attending  upon  the  king  as  a  paid  teacher  of 
rhetoric,  and  for  want  of  better  men  admitted 


816 

into  the  council,  undertook  to  prove  to  them 
that  both  parties  were  in  the  wrong,  those  that 
counselled  to  receive  Pompey,  and  those  that 
advised  to  send  him  away;  that  in  their  present 
case  one  thing  only  was  truly  expedient,  to 
seize  him  and  to  kill  him;  and  ended  his  argu¬ 
ment  with  the  proverb,  that  “dead  men  don’t 
bite.”  The  council  agreed  to  his  opinion,  and 
Pompey  the  Great  (an  example  of  incredible 
and  unforeseen  events)  was  slain,  as  the  soph- 
ister  himself  had  the  impudence  to  boast, 
through  the  rhetoric  and  cleverness  of  Theo- 
dotus.  Not  long  after,  when  Caesar  came  to 
Egypt,  some  of  the  murderers  received  their 
just  reward  and  suffered  the  evil  death  they 
deserved.  But  Theodotus,  though  he  had  bor¬ 
rowed  from  fortune  a  little  further  time  for 
a  poor,  despicable,  and  wandering  life,  yet  did 
not  lie  hid  from  Brutus  as  he  passed  through 
Asia;  but  being  seized  by  him  and  executed, 
had  his  death  made  more  memorable  than  was 
his  life. 

About  this  time,  Brutus  sent  to  Cassius  to 
come  to  him  at  the  city  of  Sardis,  and,  when  he 
was  on  his  journey,  went  forth  with  his  friends 
to  meet  him;  and  the  whole  army  in  array  sa¬ 
luted  each  of  them  with  the  name  of  Impera- 
tor.  Now  (as  it  usually  happens  in  business  of 
great  concern,  and  where  many  friends  and 
many  commanders  are  engaged),  several  jeal¬ 
ousies  of  each  other  and  matters  of  private  ac¬ 
cusation  having  passed  between  Brutus  and 
Cassius,  they  resolved,  before  they  entered  upon 
any  other  business,  immediately  to  withdraw 
into  some  apartment;  where,  the  door  being 
shut  and  they  two  alone,  they  began  first  to  ex¬ 
postulate,  then  to  dispute  hotly,  and  accuse 
each  other;  and  finally  were  so  transported  into 
passion  as  to  fall  to  hard  words,  and  at  last 
burst  out  into  tears.  Their  friends  who  stood 
without  were  amazed,  hearing  them  loud  and 
angry,  and  feared  lest  some  mischief  might  fol¬ 
low,  but  yet  durst  not  interrupt  them,  being 
commanded  not  to  enter  the  room. 

However,  Marcus  Favonius,  who  had  been 
an  ardent  admirer  of  Cato,  and,  not  so  much 
by  his  learning  or  wisdom  as  by  his  wild,  ve¬ 
hement  manner,  maintained  the  character  of  a 
philosopher,  was  rushing  in  upon  them,  but 
was  hindered  by  the  attendants.  But  it  was  a 
hard  matter  to  stop  Favonius,  wherever  his 
wildness  hurried  him;  for  he  was  fierce  in  all 
his  behaviour,  and  ready  to  do  anything  to  get 
his  will.  And  though  he  was  a  senator,  yet, 
thinking  that  one  of  the  least  of  his  excellences, 
he  valued  himself  more  upon  a  sort  of  cynical 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

liberty  of  speaking  what  he  pleased,  which 
sometimes,  indeed,  did  away  with  the  rudeness 
and  unseasonableness  of  his  addresses  with 
those  that  would  interpret  it  in  jest.  This  Fa¬ 
vonius,  breaking  by  force  through  those  that 
kept  the  doors,  entered  into  the  chamber,  and 
with  a  set  voice  declaimed  the  verses  that  Ho¬ 
mer  makes  Nestor  use — 

Be  ruled,  for  I  am  older  than  ye  both. 

At  this  Cassius  laughed;  but  Brutus  thrust 
him  out,  calling  him  impudent  dog  and  coun¬ 
terfeit  Cynic;  but  yet  for  the  present  they  let  it 
put  an  end  to  their  dispute,  and  parted.  Cassius 
made  a  supper  that  night,  and  Brutus  invited 
the  guests;  and  when  they  were  set  down,  Fa¬ 
vonius,  having  bathed,  came  in  among  them. 
Brutus  called  out  aloud  and  told  him  he  was 
not  invited,  and  bade  him  go  to  the  upper 
couch;  but  he  violently  thrust  himself  in,  and 
lay  down  on  the  middle  one;  and  the  entertain¬ 
ment  passed  in  sportive  talk,  not  wanting  either 
wit  or  philosophy. 

The  next  day  after,  upon  the  accusation  of 
the  Sardians,  Brutus  publicly  disgraced  and 
condemned  Lucius  Pella,  one  that  had  been 
censor  of  Rome,  and  employed  in  offices  of 
trust  by  himself,  for  having  embezzled  the 
public  money.  This  action  did  not  a  little  vex 
Cassius;  for  but  a  few  days  before,  two  of  his 
own  friends  being  accused  of  the  same  crime, 
he  only  admonished  them  in  private,  but  in 
public  absolved  them,  and  continued  them  in 
his  service;  and  upon  this  occasion  he  accused 
Brutus  of  too  much  rigour  and  severity  of  jus¬ 
tice  in  a  time  which  required  them  to  use  more 
policy  and  favour.  But  Brutus  bade  him  re¬ 
member  the  Ides  of  March,  the  day  when  they 
killed  Caesar,  who  himself  neither  plundered 
nor  pillaged  mankind,  but  was  only  the  sup¬ 
port  and  strength  of  those  that  did;  and  bade 
him  consider  that  if  there  was  any  colour  for 
justice  to  be  neglected,  it  had  been  better  to 
suffer  the  injustice  of  Caesar’s  friends  than  to 
give  impunity  to  their  own;  “for  then,”  said  he, 
“we  would  have  been  accused  of  cowardice 
only;  whereas  now  we  are  liable  to  the  accusa¬ 
tion  of  injustice,  after  all  our  pain  and  dangers 
which  we  endure.”  By  which  we  may  perceive 
what  was  Brutus’s  purpose,  and  the  rule  of  his 
actions. 

About  the  time  that  they  were  going  to  pass 
out  of  Asia  into  Europe,  it  is  said  that  a  won¬ 
derful  sign  was  seen  by  Brutus.  He  was  nat¬ 
urally  given  to  much  watching,  and  by  practice 
and  moderation  in  his  diet  had  reduced  his  al¬ 
lowance  of  sleep  to  a  very  small  amount  of 


MARCUS  BRUTUS 

time.  He  never  slept  in  the  daytime,  and  in  the 
night  then  only  when  all  his  business  was  fin¬ 
ished,  and  when,  every  one  else  being  gone  to 
rest,  he  had  nobody  to  discourse  with  him.  But 
at  this  time,  the  war  being  begun,  having  the 
whole  state  of  it  to  consider,  and  being  solici¬ 
tous  of  the  event,  after  his  first  sleep,  which  he 
let  himself  take  after  his  supper,  he  spent  all 
the  rest  of  the  night  in  settling  his  most  urgent 
affairs;  which  if  he  could  despatch  early  and  so 
make  a  saving  of  any  leisure,  he  employed  him¬ 
self  in  reading  until  the  third  watch,  at  which 
time  the  centurions  and  tribunes  were  used  to 
come  to  him  for  orders. 

Thus  one  night  before  he  passed  out  of  Asia, 
he  was  very  late  all  alone  in  his  tent,  with  a 
dim  light  burning  by  him,  all  the  rest  of  the 
camp  being  hushed  and  silent;  and  reasoning 
about  something  with  himself  and  very 
thoughtful,  he  fancied  some  one  came  in,  and, 
looking  up  towards  the  door,  he  saw  a  terrible 
and  strange  appearance  of  an  unnatural  and 
frightful  body  standing  by  him  without  speak¬ 
ing.  Brutus  boldly  asked  it,  “What  are  you,  of 
men  or  gods,  and  upon  what  business  come 
to  me?”  The  figure  answered,  “I  am  your  evil 
genius,  Brutus;  you  shall  see  me  at  Philippi.” 
To  which  Brutus,  not  at  all  disturbed,  replied, 
“Then  I  shall  see  you.” 

As  soon  as  the  apparition  vanished,  he  called 
his  servants  to  him,  who  all  told  him  that  they 
had  neither  heard  any  voice  nor  seen  any  vi¬ 
sion.  So  then  he  continued  watching  till  the 
morning,  when  he  went  to  Cassius,  and  told 
him  of  what  he  had  seen.  He,  who  followed 
the  principles  of  Epicurus’s  philosophy,  and 
often  used  to  dispute  with  Brutus  concerning 
matters  of  this  nature,  spoke  to  him  thus  upon 
this  occasion:  “It  is  the  opinion  of  our  sect, 
Brutus,  that  not  all  that  we  feel  or  see  is  real 
and  true;  but  that  the  sense  is  a  most  slippery 
and  deceitful  thing,  and  the  mind  yet  more 
quick  and  subtle  to  put  the  sense  in  motion 
and  affect  it  with  every  kind  of  change  upon 
no  real  occasion  of  fact;  just  as  an  impression  is 
made  upon  wax;  and  the  soul  of  man,  which 
has  in  itself  both  what  imprints,  and  what  is 
imprinted  on,  may  most  easily,  by  its  own  op¬ 
erations,  produce  and  assume  every  variety  of 
shape  and  figure.  This  is  evident  from  the  sud¬ 
den  changes  of  our  dreams;  in  which  the  im¬ 
aginative  principle,  once  started  by  any  trifling 
matter,  goes  through  a  whole  series  of  most  di¬ 
verse  emotions  and  appearances.  It  is  its  nature 
to  be  ever  in  motion,  and  its  motion  is  fantasy 
or  conception. 


817 

“But  besides  all  this,  in  your  case,  the  body, 
being  tired  and  distressed  with  continual  toil, 
naturally  works  upon  the  mind  and  keeps  it  in 
an  excited  and  unusual  condition.  But  that 
there  should  be  any  such  thing  as  supernatural 
beings,  or,  if  there  were,  that  they  should  have 
human  shape  or  voice  or  power  that  can  reach 
to  us,  there  is  no  reason  for  believing;  though 
I  confess  I  could  wish  that  there  were  such 
beings,  that  we  might  not  rely  upon  our  arms 
only,  and  our  horses  and  our  navy,  all  which 
are  so  numerous  and  powerful,  but  might  be 
confident  of  the  assistance  of  gods  also,  in  this 
our  most  sacred  and  honourable  attempt.” 

With  such  discourses  as  these  Cassius  sooth¬ 
ed  the  mind  of  Brutus.  But  just  as  the  troops 
were  going  on  board,  two  eagles  flew  and 
lighted  on  the  first  two  ensigns,  and  crossed 
over  the  water  with  them,  and  never  ceased  fol¬ 
lowing  the  soldiers  and  being  fed  by  them  till 
they  came  to  Philippi,  and  there,  but  one  day 
before  the  fight,  they  both  flew  away. 

Brutus  had  already  reduced  most  of  the 
places  and  people  of  these  parts;  but  they  now 
marched  on  as  far  as  to  the  coast  opposite  Tha- 
sos,  and,  if  there  were  any  city  or  man  of  pow¬ 
er  that  yet  stood  out,  brought  them  all  to  sub¬ 
jection.  At  this  point  Norbanus  was  encamped, 
in  a  place  called  the  Straits,  near  Symbolum. 
Him  they  surrounded  in  such  sort  that  they 
forced  him  to  dislodge  and  quit  the  place;  and 
Norbanus  narrowly  escaped  losing  his  whole 
army,  Caesar  by  reason  of  sickness  being  too  far 
behind;  only  Antony  came  to  his  relief  with 
such  wonderful  swiftness  that  Brutus  and 
those  with  him  did  not  believe  when  they 
heard  he  was  come.  Caesar  came  up  ten  days 
after,  and  encamped  over  against  Brutus,  and 
Antony  over  against  Cassius. 

The  space  between  the  two  armies  is  called 
by  the  Romans  the  Campi  Philippi.  Never  had 
two  such  large  Roman  armies  come  together 
to  engage  each  other.  That  of  Brutus  was  some¬ 
what  less  in  number  than  that  of  Caesar,  but  in 
the  splendidness  of  the  men’s  arms  and  rich¬ 
ness  of  their  equipage  it  wonderfully  exceeded; 
for  most  of  their  arms  were  of  gold  and  silver, 
which  Brutus  had  lavishly  bestowed  among 
them.  For  though  in  other  things  he  had  ac¬ 
customed  his  commanders  to  use  all  frugality 
and  self-control,  yet  he  thought  that  the  riches 
which  soldiers  carried  about  them  in  their 
hands  and  on  their  bodies  would  add  some¬ 
thing  of  spirit  to  those  that  were  desirous 
of  glory,  and  would  make  those  that  were 
covetous  and  lovers  of  gain  fight  the  more 


818 


valiantly  to  preserve  the  arms  which  were 
their  estate. 

Caesar  made  a  view  and  lustration  of  his 
army  within  his  trenches,  and  distributed  only 
a  little  corn  and  but  five  drachmas  to  each  sol¬ 
dier  for  the  sacrifice  they  were  to  make.  But 
Brutus,  either  pitying  this  poverty,  or  disdain¬ 
ing  this  meanness  of  spirit  in  Caesar,  first,  as  the 
custom  was,  made  a  general  muster  and  lustra¬ 
tion  of  the  army  in  the  open  field,  and  then 
distributed  a  great  number  of  beasts  for  sacri¬ 
fice  to  every  regiment,  and  fifty  drachmas  to 
every  soldier;  so  that  in  the  love  of  his  soldiers 
and  their  readiness  to  fight  for  him  Brutus  had 
much  the  advantage. 

But  at  the  time  of  lustration  it  is  reported 
that  an  unlucky  omen  happened  to  Cassius;  for 
his  lictor,  presenting  him  with  a  garland  that 
he  was  to  wear  at  sacrifice,  gave  it  him  the 
wrong  way  up.  Further,  it  is  said  that  some 
time  before,  at  a  certain  solemn  procession,  a 
golden  image  of  Victory,  which  was  carried  be¬ 
fore  Cassius,  fell  down  by  a  slip  of  him  that 
carried  it.  Besides  this  there  appeared  many 
birds  of  prey  daily  about  the  camp,  and  swarms 
of  bees  were  seen  in  a  place  within  the  trenches, 
which  place  the  soothsayers  ordered  shut  out 
from  the  camp,  to  remove  the  superstition 
which  insensibly  began  to  infect  even  Cassius 
himself  and  shake  him  in  his  Epicurean  philos¬ 
ophy,  and  had  wholly  seized  and  subdued  the 
soldiers;  from  whence  it  was  that  Cassius  was 
reluctant  to  put  all  to  the  hazard  of  a  present 
battle,  but  advised  rather  to  draw  out  the  war 
until  further  time,  considering  that  they  were 
stronger  in  money  and  provisions,  but  in  num¬ 
bers  of  men  and  arms  inferior. 

But  Brutus,  on  the  contrary,  was  still,  as  for¬ 
merly,  desirous  to  come  with  all  speed  to  the 
decision  of  a  battle;  that  so  he  might  either  re¬ 
store  his  country  to  her  liberty,  or  else  deliver 
from  their  misery  all  those  numbers  of  people 
whom  they  harassed  with  the  expenses  and  the 
service  and  exactions  of  the  war.  And  finding 
also  his  light-horse  in  several  skirmishes  still  to 
have  had  the  better,  he  was  the  more  encour¬ 
aged  and  resolved;  and  some  of  the  soldiers 
having  deserted  and  gone  to  the  enemy,  and 
others  beginning  to  accuse  and  suspect  one  an¬ 
other,  many  of  Cassius's  friends  in  the  council 
changed  their  opinions  to  that  of  Brutus.  But 
there  was  one  of  Brutus’s  party,  named  Attel- 
lius,  who  opposed  his  resolution,  advising 
rather  that  they  should  tarry  over  the  winter. 
And  when  Brutus  asked  him  in  how  much 
better  a  condition  he  hoped  to  be  a  year  after, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

his  answer  was,  “If  I  gain  nothing  else,  yet  I 
shall  live  so  much  the  longer.”  Cassius  was 
much  displeased  at  this  answer;  and  among 
the  rest,  Attellius  was  held  in  much  disesteem 
for  it.  And  so  it  was  presently  resolved  to  give 
battle  the  next  day. 

Brutus  that  night  at  supper  showed  himself 
very  cheerful  and  full  of  hope,  and  reasoned 
on  subjects  of  philosophy  with  his  friends,  and 
afterwards  went  to  his  rest.  But  Messala  says 
that  Cassius  supped  privately  with  a  few  of 
his  nearest  acquaintance,  and  appeared 
thoughtful  and  silent,  contrary  to  his  temper 
and  custom;  that  after  supper  he  took  him 
earnestly  by  the  hand,  and  speaking  to  him, 
as  his  manner  was  when  he  wished  to  show 
affection,  in  Greek,  said,  “Bear  witness  for  me, 
Messala,  that  I  am  brought  into  the  same  neces¬ 
sity  as  Pompey  the  Great  was  before  me,  of 
hazarding  the  liberty  of  my  country  upon  one 
battle;  yet  ought  we  to  be  of  courage,  relying 
on  our  good  fortune,  which  it  were  unfair  to 
mistrust,  though  we  take  evil  counsels.” 
These,  Messala  says,  were  the  last  words  that 
Cassius  spoke  before  he  bade  him  farewell; 
and  that  he  was  invited  to  sup  with  him  the 
next  night,  being  his  birthday. 

As  soon  as  it  was  morning,  the  signal  of  bat¬ 
tle,  the  scarlet  coat,  was  set  out  in  Brutus’s 
and  Cassius’s  camps,  and  they  themselves  met 
in  the  middle  space  between  their  two  armies. 
There  Cassius  spoke  thus  to  Brutus:  “Be  it  as 
we  hope,  O  Brutus,  that  this  day  we  may  over¬ 
come,  and  all  the  rest  of  our  time  may  live  a 
happy  life  together;  but  since  the  greatest  of 
human  concerns  are  the  most  uncertain,  and 
since  it  may  be  difficult  for  us  ever  to  see  one 
another  again,  if  the  battle  should  go  against 
us,  tell  me,  what  is  your  resolution  concern¬ 
ing  flight  and  death?” 

Brutus  answered,  “When  I  was  young,  Cas¬ 
sius,  and  unskilful  in  affairs,  I  was  led,  I  know 
not  how,  into  uttering  a  bold  sentence  in  phil¬ 
osophy,  and  blamed  Cato  for  killing  himself, 
as  thinking  it  an  irreligious  act,  and  not  a  val¬ 
iant  one  among  men,  to  try  to  evade  the  di¬ 
vine  course  of  things,  and  not  fearlessly  to  re¬ 
ceive  and  undergo  the  evil  that  shall  happen, 
but  run  away  from  it.  But  now  in  my  own  for¬ 
tunes  I  am  of  another  mind;  for  if  Providence 
shall  not  dispose  what  we  now  undertake  ac¬ 
cording  to  our  wishes,  I  resolve  to  put  no 
further  hopes  or  warlike  preparations  to  the 
proof,  but  will  die  contented  with  my  fortune. 
For  I  already  have  given  up  my  life  to  my 
country  on  the  Ides  of  March;  and  have  lived 


MARCUS  BRUTUS 

since  then  a  second  life  for  her  sake,  with  lib¬ 
erty  and  honour.” 

Cassius  at  these  words  smiled,  and,  embrac¬ 
ing  Brutus,  said,  “With  these  resolutions  let 
us  go  on  upon  the  enemy;  for  either  we  our¬ 
selves  shall  conquer,  or  have  no  cause  to  fear 
those  that  do.”  After  this  they  discoursed 
among  their  friends  about  the  ordering  of  the 
battle;  and  Brutus  desired  of  Cassius  that  he 
might  command  the  right  wing,  though  it 
was  thought  that  this  was  more  fit  for  Cassius, 
in  regard  both  of  his  age  and  his  experience. 
Yet  even  in  this  Cassius  complied  with  Brutus, 
and  placed  Messala  with  the  valiantest  of  all 
his  legions  in  the  same  wing,  so  Brutus  im¬ 
mediately  drew  out  his  horse,  excellently  well 
equipped,  and  was  not  long  in  bringing  up  his 
foot  after  them. 

Antony’s  soldiers  were  casting  trenches  from 
the  marsh  by  which  they  were  encamped  across 
the  plain,  to  cut  off  Cassius’s  communications 
with  the  sea.  Caesar  was  to  be  at  hand  with  his 
troops  to  support  them,  but  he  was  not  able  to 
be  present  himself,  by  reason  of  his  sickness; 
and  his  soldiers,  not  much  expecting  that  the 
enemy  would  come  to  a  set  battle,  but  only 
make  some  excursions  with  their  darts  and 
light  arms  to  disturb  the  men  at  work  in  the 
trenches,  and  not  taking  notice  of  the  troops 
drawn  up  against  them  ready  to  give  battle, 
were  amazed  when  they  heard  the  confused 
and  great  outcry  that  came  from  the  trenches. 

In  the  meanwhile  Brutus  had  sent  his  tick¬ 
ets,  in  which  was  the  word  of  battle,  to  the 
officers;  and  himself  riding  about  to  all  the 
troops,  encouraged  the  soldiers;  but  there  were 
but  few  of  them  that  understood  the  word  be¬ 
fore  they  engaged;  the  most  of  them,  not  stay¬ 
ing  to  have  it  delivered  to  them,  with  one  im¬ 
pulse  and  cry  ran  upon  the  enemy.  This  dis¬ 
order  caused  an  unevenness  in  the  line,  and 
the  legions  got  severed  and  divided  one  from 
another;  that  of  Messala  first,  and  afterwards 
the  other  adjoining,  went  beyond  the  left  wing 
of  Caesar;  and  having  just  touched  the  extrem¬ 
ity,  without  slaughtering  any  great  number, 
passing  around  that  wing,  fell  directly  into  Cae¬ 
sar’s  camp.  Caesar  himself,  as  his  own  mem¬ 
oirs  tell  us,  had  but  just  before  been  conveyed 
away,  Marcus  Artorius,  one  of  his  friends, 
having  had  a  dream  bidding  Caesar  be  carried 
out  of  the  camp.  And  it  was  believed  that  he 
was  slain;  for  the  soldiers  had  pierced  his 
litter,  which  was  left  empty,  in  many  places 
with  their  darts  and  pikes.  There  was  a  great 
slaughter  in  the  camp  that  was  taken;  and  two 


819 

thousand  Lacedaemonians  that  were  newly 
come  to  the  assistance  of  Caesar  were  all  cut 
off  together. 

The  rest  of  the  army,  that  had  not  gone 
round,  but  had  engaged  the  front,  easily  over¬ 
threw  them,  finding  them  in  great  disorder, 
and  slew  upon  the  place  three  legions;  and  be¬ 
ing  carried  on  with  the  stream  of  victory,  pur¬ 
suing  those  that  fled,  fell  into  the  camp  with 
them,  Brutus  himself  being  there.  But  they 
that  were  conquered  took  the  advantage  in 
their  extremity  of  what  the  conquerors  did  not 
consider.  For  they  fell  upon  that  part  of  the 
main  body  which  had  been  left  exposed  and 
separated,  where  the  right  wing  had  broke  off 
from  them  and  hurried  away  in  the  pursuit; 
yet  they  could  not  break  into  the  midst  of 
their  battle,  but  were  received  with  strong 
resistance  and  obstinacy. 

Yet  they  put  to  flight  the  left  wing,  where 
Cassius  commanded,  being  in  great  disorder, 
and  ignorant  of  what  had  passed  on  the  other 
wing;  and  pursuing  them  to  their  camp,  they 
pillaged  and  destroyed  it,  neither  of  their  gen¬ 
erals  being  present;  for  Antony,  they  say,  to 
avoid  the  fury  of  the  first  onset,  had  retired 
into  the  marsh  that  was  hard  by;  and  Caesar 
was  nowhere  to  be  found  after  his  being  con¬ 
veyed  out  of  the  tents;  though  some  of  the  sol¬ 
diers  showed  Brutus  their  swords  bloody,  and 
declared  that  they  had  killed  him,  describing 
his  person  and  his  age.  By  this  time  also  the 
centre  of  Brutus’s  battle  had  driven  back  their 
opponents  with  great  slaughter;  and  Brutus 
was  everywhere  plainly  conqueror,  as  on  the 
other  side  Cassius  was  conquered.  And  this 
one  mistake  was  the  ruin  of  their  affairs,  that 
Brutus  did  not  come  to  the  relief  of  Cassius, 
thinking  that  he,  as  well  as  himself,  was  con¬ 
queror;  and  that  Cassius  did  not  expect  the 
relief  of  Brutus,  thinking  that  he,  too,  was 
overcome. 

For  as  a  proof  that  the  victory  was  on  Bru¬ 
tus’s  side,  Messala  urges  his  taking  three  eagles 
and  many  ensigns  of  the  enemy  without  los¬ 
ing  any  of  his  own.  But  now,  returning  from 
the  pursuit  after  having  plundered  Caesar’s 
camp,  Brutus  wondered  that  he  could  not  see 
Cassius’s  tent  standing  high,  as  it  was  wont, 
and  appearing  above  the  rest,  nor  other  things 
appearing  as  they  had  been;  for  they  had  been 
immediately  pulled  down  and  pillaged  by  the 
enemy  upon  their  first  falling  into  the  camp. 
But  some  that  had  a  quicker  and  longer  sight 
than  the  rest  acquainted  Brutus  that  they  saw 
a  great  deal  of  shining  armour  and  silver  tar- 


820 

gets  moving  to  and  fro  in  Cassius’s  camp,  and 
that  they  thought,  by  their  number  and  the 
fashion  of  their  armour,  they  could  not  be 
those  that  they  left  to  guard  the  camp;  but  yet 
that  there  did  not  appear  so  great  a  number  of 
dead  bodies  thereabouts  as  it  was  probable 
there  would  have  been  after  the  actual  defeat 
of  so  many  legions.  This  first  made  Brutus 
suspect  Cassius’s  misfortune,  and,  leaving  a 
guard  in  the  enemy’s  camp,  he  called  back 
those  that  were  in  the  pursuit,  and  rallied 
them  together  to  lead  them  to  the  relief  of 
Cassius,  whose  fortune  had  been  as  follows. 

First,  he  had  been  angry  at  the  onset  that 
Brutus’s  soldiers  made,  without  the  word  of 
battle  or  command  to  charge.  Then,  after  they 
had  overcome,  he  was  as  much  displeased  to 
see  them  rush  on  to  the  plunder  and  spoil,  and 
neglect  to  surround  and  encompass  the  rest  of 
the  enemy.  Besides  this,  letting  himself  act  by 
delay  and  expectation,  rather  than  command, 
boldly  and  with  a  clear  purpose,  he  got 
hemmed  in  by  the  right  wing  of  the  enemy, 
and,  his  horse  making  with  all  haste  their  es¬ 
cape  and  flying  towards  the  sea,  the  foot  also 
began  to  give  way,  which  he  perceiving  la¬ 
boured  as  much  as  ever  he  could  to  hinder  their 
flight  and  bring  them  back;  and,  snatching  an 
ensign  out  of  the  hand  of  one  that  fled,  he  stuck 
it  at  his  feet,  though  he  could  hardly  keep  even 
his  own  personal  guard  together.  So  that  at  last 
he  was  forced  to  fly  with  a  few  about  him  to 
a  little  hill  that  overlooked  the  plain. 

But  he  himself,  being  weak-sighted,  discov¬ 
ered  nothing,  only  the  destruction  of  his  camp, 
and  that  with  difficulty.  But  they  that  were 
with  him  saw  a  great  body  of  horse  moving  to¬ 
wards  him,  the  same  whom  Brutus  had  sent. 
Cassius  believed  these  were  enemies,  and  in 
pursuit  of  him;  however,  he  sent  away  Titi- 
nius,  one  of  those  that  were  with  him,  to  learn 
what  they  were.  As  soon  as  Brutus’s  horse  saw 
him  coming,  and  knew  him  to  be  a  friend  and 
a  faithful  servant  of  Cassius,  those  of  them  that 
were  his  more  familiar  acquaintance,  shouting 
out  for  joy  and  alighting  from  their  horses, 
shook  hands  and  embraced  him,  and  the  rest 
rode  round  about  him  singing  and  shouting, 
through  their  excess  of  gladness  at  the  sight  of 
him.  But  this  was  the  occasion  of  the  greatest 
mischief  that  could  be.  For  Cassius  really 
thought  that  Titinius  had  been  taken  by  the 
enemy,  and  cried  out,  “Through  too  much 
fondness  of  life,  I  have  lived  to  endure  the  sight 
of  my  friend  taken  by  the  enemy  before  my 
face.” 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

After  which  words  he  retired  into  an  empty 
tent,  taking  along  with  him  only  Pindarus,  one 
of  his  freemen,  whom  he  had  reserved  for  such 
an  occasion  ever  since  the  disasters  in  the  ex¬ 
pedition  against  the  Parthians,  when  Crassus 
was  slain.  From  the  Parthians  he  came  away  in 
safety;  but  now,  pulling  up  his  mantle  over  his 
head,  he  made  his  neck  bare,  and  held  it  forth 
to  Pindarus,  commanding  him  to  strike.  The 
head  was  certainly  found  lying  severed  from 
the  body.  But  no  man  ever  saw  Pindarus  after, 
from  which  some  suspected  that  he  had  killed 
his  master  without  his  command.  Soon  after 
they  perceived  who  the  horsemen  were,  and 
saw  Titinius,  crowned  with  garlands,  making 
what  haste  he  could  towards  Cassius.  But  as 
soon  as  he  understood  by  the  cries  and  lamenta¬ 
tions  of  his  afflicted  friends  the  unfortunate 
error  and  death  of  his  general,  he  drew  his 
sword,  and  having  very  much  accused  and 
upbraided  his  own  long  stay,  that  had  caused 
it,  he  slew  himself. 

Brutus,  as  soon  as  he  was  assured  of  the  de¬ 
feat  of  Cassius,  made  haste  to  him;  but  heard 
nothing  of  his  death  till  he  came  near  his  camp. 
Then  having  lamented  over  his  body,  calling 
him  “the  last  of  the  Romans,”  it  being  impos¬ 
sible  that  the  city  should  ever  produce  another 
man  of  so  great  a  spirit,  he  sent  away  the  body 
to  be  buried  at  Thasos,  lest  celebrating  his  fun¬ 
eral  within  the  camp  might  breed  some  dis¬ 
order.  He  then  gathered  the  soldiers  together 
and  comforted  them;  arid,  seeing  them  desti¬ 
tute  of  all  things  necessary,  he  promised  to  ev¬ 
ery  man  two  thousand  drachmas  in  recom¬ 
pense  of  what  he  had  lost.  They  at  these  words 
took  courage,  and  were  astonished  at  the  mag¬ 
nificence  of  the  gift;  and  waited  upon  him  at 
his  parting  with  shouts  and  praises,  magnify¬ 
ing  him  for  the  only  general  of  all  the  four  who 
was  not  overcome  in  the  battle.  And  indeed 
the  action  itself  testified  that  it  was  not  without 
reason  he  believed  he  should  conquer;  for  with 
a  few  legions  he  overthrew  all  that  resisted 
him;  and  if  all  his  soldiers  had  fought,  and  the 
most  of  them  had  not  passed  beyond  the  en¬ 
emy  in  pursuit  of  the  plunder,  it  is  very  likely 
that  he  had  utterly  defeated  every  part  of  them. 

There  fell  of  his  side  eight  thousand  men, 
reckoning  the  servants  of  the  army,  whom 
Brutus  calls  Briges;  and  on  the  other  side,  Mes- 
sala  says  his  opinion  is  that  there  were  slain 
about  twice  that  number.  For  which  reason 
they  were  more  out  of  heart  than  Brutus,  until 
a  servant  of  Cassius,  named  Demetrius,  came 
in  the  evening  to  Antony,  and  brought  to  him 


MARCUS  BRUTUS 

the  garment  which  he  had  taken  fronVthe  dead 
body,  and  his  sword;  at  the  sight  of  which  they 
were  so  encouraged,  that,  as  soon  as  it  was 
morning,  they  drew  out  their  whole  force  into 
the  field,  and  stood  in  battle  array. 

But  Brutus  found  both  his  camps  wavering 
and  in  disorder;  for  his  own,  being  filled  with 
prisoners,  required  a  guard  more  strict  than 
ordinary  over  them;  and  that  of  Cassius  was 
uneasy  at  the  change  of  general,  besides  some 
envy  and  rancour,  which  those  that  were  con¬ 
quered  bore  to  that  part  of  the  army  which 
had  been  conquerors.  Wherefore  he  thought  it 
convenient  to  put  his  army  in  array,  but  to  ab¬ 
stain  from  fighting.  All  the  slaves  that  were 
taken  prisoners,  of  whom  there  was  a  great 
number  that  were  mixed  up,  not  without  sus¬ 
picion,  among  the  soldiers,  he  commanded  to 
be  slain;  but  of  the  freemen  and  citizens,  some 
he  dismissed,  saying  that  among  the  enemy 
they  were  rather  prisoners  than  with  him,  for 
with  them  they  were  captives  and  slaves,  but 
with  him  freemen  and  citizens  of  Rome.  But 
he  was  forced  to  hide  and  help  them  to  escape 
privately,  perceiving  that  his  friends  and  of¬ 
ficers  were  bent  upon  revenge  against  them. 

Among  the  captives  there  was  one  Volum- 
nius,  a  player,  and  Sacculio,  a  buffoon;  of  these 
Brutus  took  no  manner  of  notice,  but  his 
friends  brought  them  before  him  and  accused 
them  that  even  then  in  that  condition  they  did 
not  refrain  from  their  jests  and  scurrilous  lan¬ 
guage.  Brutus,  having  his  mind  taken  up  with 
other  affairs,  said  nothing  to  their  accusation; 
but  the  judgment  of  Messala  Corvinus  was 
that  they  should  be  whipped  publicly  upon  a 
stage,  and  so  sent  naked  to  the  captains  of  the 
enemy,  to  show  them  what  sort  of  fellow  drink¬ 
ers  and  companions  they  took  with  them  on 
their  campaigns.  At  this  some  that  were  pres¬ 
ent  laughed;  and  Publius  Casca,  he  that  gave 
the  first  wound  to  Caesar,  said,  “We  do  ill  to 
jest  and  make  merry  at  the  funeral  of  Cassius. 
But  you,  O  Brutus,”  he  added,  “will  show 
what  esteem  you  have  for  the  memory  of  that 
general,  according  as  you  punish  or  preserve 
alive  those  who  will  scoff  and  speak  shamefully 
of  him.”  To  this  Brutus,  in  great  discompo¬ 
sure,  replied,  “Why  then,  Casca,  do  you  ask  me 
about  it,  and  not  do  yourselves  what  you  think 
fitting?”  This  answer  of  Brutus  was  taken  for 
his  consent  to  the  death  of  these  wretched 
men;  so  they  were  carried  away  and  slain. 

After  this  he  gave  the  soldiers  the  reward 
that  he  had  promised  them;  and  having  slightly 
reproved  them  for  having  fallen  upon  the  en- 


821 

emy  in  disorder  without  the  word  of  battle  or 
command,  he  promised  them,  that  if  they  be¬ 
haved  themselves  bravely  in  the  next  engage¬ 
ment,  he  would  give  them  up  two  cities  to 
spoil  and  plunder,  Thessalonica  and  Lacedae¬ 
mon.  This  is  the  one  indefensible  thing  of  all 
that  is  found  fault  with  in  the  life  of  Brutus; 
though  true  it  may  be  that  Antony  and  Caesar 
were  much  more  cruel  in  the  rewards  that 
they  gave  their  soldiers  after  victory;  for  they 
drove  out,  one  might  almost  say,  all  the  old 
inhabitants  of  Italy,  to  put  their  soldiers  in 
possession  of  other  men’s  lands  and  cities.  But 
indeed  their  only  design  and  end  in  undertak¬ 
ing  the  war  was  to  obtain  dominion  and  em¬ 
pire,  whereas  Brutus,  for  the  reputation  of  his 
virtue,  could  not  be  permitted  either  to  over¬ 
come  or  save  himself  but  with  justice  and 
honour,  especially  after  the  death  of  Cassius, 
who  was  generally  accused  of  having  been  his 
adviser  to  some  things  that  he  had  done  with 
less  clemency. 

But  now,  as  in  a  ship,  when  the  rudder  is 
broken  by  a  storm,  the  mariners  fit  and  nail  on 
some  other  piece  of  wood  instead  of  it,  striving 
against  the  danger  not  well,  but  as  well  as  in 
that  necessity  they  can,  so  Brutus,  being  at  the 
head  of  so  great  an  army,  in  a  time  of  such  un¬ 
certainty,  having  no  commander  equal  to  his 
need,  was  forced  to  make  use  of  those  that  he 
had,  and  to  do  and  to  say  many  things  accord¬ 
ing  to  their  advice;  which  was,  in  effect,  what¬ 
ever  might  conduce  to  the  bringing  of  Cassi¬ 
us’s  soldiers  into  better  order.  For  they  were 
very  headstrong  and  intractable,  bold  and  in¬ 
solent  in  the  camp  for  want  of  their  general, 
but  in  the  field  cowardly  and  fearful,  remem¬ 
bering  that  they  had  been  beaten. 

Neither  were  the  affairs  of  Caesar  and  An¬ 
tony  in  any  better  posture;  for  they  were  strait¬ 
ened  for  provision,  and,  the  camp  being  in  a 
low  ground,  they  expected  to  pass  a  very  hard 
winter.  For  being  driven  close  upon  the 
marshes,  and  a  great  quantity  of  rain,  as  is 
usual  in  autumn,  having  fallen  after  the  bat¬ 
tle,  their  tents  were  all  filled  with  mire  and 
water,  which  through  the  coldness  of  the 
weather  immediately  froze. 

And  while  they  were  in  this  condition,  there 
was  news  brought  to  them  of  their  loss  at  sea. 
For  Brutus’s  fleet  fell  upon  their  ships,  which 
were  bringing  a  great  supply  of  soldiers  out  of 
Italy,  and  so  entirely  defeated  them,  that  but 
very  few  of  the  men  escaped  being  slain,  and 
they  too  were  forced  by  famine  to  feed  upon 
the  sails  and  tackle  of  the  ship.  As  soon  as  they 


822 


heard  this,  they  made  what  haste  they  could  to 
come  to  the  decision  of  a  battle,  before  Brutus 
should  have  notice  of  his  good  success.  For  it 
had  so  happened  that  the  fight  both  by  sea  and 
land  was  on  the  same  day,  but  by  some  mis¬ 
fortune,  rather  than  the  fault  of  his  command¬ 
ers,  Brutus  knew  not  of  his  victory  twenty  days 
after.  For  had  he  been  informed  of  this,  he 
would  not  have  been  brought  to  a  second  bat¬ 
tle,  since  he  had  sufficient  provisions  for  his 
army  for  a  long  time,  and  was  very  advanta¬ 
geously  posted,  his  camp  being  well  sheltered 
from  the  cold  weather,  and  almost  inaccessible 
to  the  enemy,  and  his  being  absolute  master  of 
the  sea,  and  having  at  land  overcome  on  that 
side  wherein  he  himself  was  engaged,  would 
have  made  him  full  of  hope  and  confidence. 

But  it  seems  the  state  of  Rome  not  enduring 
any  longer  to  be  governed  by  many,  but  neces¬ 
sarily  requiring  a  monarchy,  the  divine  power, 
that  it  might  remove  out  of  the  way  the  only 
man  that  was  able  to  resist  him  that  could  con¬ 
trol  the  empire,  cut  off  his  good  fortune  from 
coming  to  the  ears  of  Brutus;  though  it  came 
but  a  very  little  too  late,  for  the  very  evening 
before  the  fight,  Clodius,  a  deserter  from  the 
enemy,  came  and  announced  that  Caesar  had 
received  advice  of  the  loss  of  his  fleet,  and  for 
that  reason  was  in  such  haste  to  come  to  a 
battle.  But  his  story  met  with  no  credit,  nor 
was  he  so  much  as  seen  by  Brutus,  being  sim¬ 
ply  set  down  as  one  that  had  no  good  informa¬ 
tion,  or  invented  lies  to  bring  himself  into 
favour. 

The  same  night,  they  say,  the  vision  ap¬ 
peared  again  to  Brutus,  in  the  same  shape  that 
it  did  before,  but  vanished  without  speaking. 
But  Publius  Volumnius,  a  philosopher,  and 
one  that  had  from  the  beginning  borne  arms 
with  Brutus,  makes  no  mention  of  this  appari¬ 
tion,  but  says  that  the  first  eagle  was  covered 
with  a  swarm  of  bees,  and  that  there  was  one 
of  the  captains  whose  arm  of  itself  sweated  oil 
of  roses,  and,  though  they  often  dried  and 
wiped  it,  yet  it  would  not  cease;  and  that  im¬ 
mediately  before  the  battle,  two  eagles  falling 
upon  each  other  fought  in  the  space  between 
the  two  armies,  that  the  whole  field  kept  in¬ 
credible  silence  and  all  were  intent  upon  the 
spectacle,  until  at  last  that  which  was  on  Bru¬ 
tus’s  side  yielded  and  fled.  But  the  story  of  the 
Ethiopian  is  very  famous,  who,  meeting  the 
standard-bearer  at  the  opening  of  the  gate  of 
the  camp,  was  cut  to  pieces  by  the  soldiers,  that 
took  it  for  an  ill  omen. 

Brutus,  having  brought  his  army  into  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

field  and  set  them  in  array  against  the  enemy, 
paused  a  long  while  before  he  would  fight;  for 
as  he  was  reviewing  the  troops,  suspicion 
were  excited  and  informations  laid  against 
some  of  them.  Besides,  he  saw  his  horse  not 
very  eager  to  begin  the  action,  and  waiting  to 
see  what  the  foot  would  do.  Then  suddenly 
Camulatus,  a  very  good  soldier,  and  one  whom 
for  his  valour  he  highly  esteemed,  riding  hard 
by  Brutus  himself,  went  over  to  the  enemy, 
the  sight  of  which  grieved  Brutus  exceedingly. 
So  that  partly  out  of  anger,  and  partly  out  of 
fear  of  some  greater  treason  and  desertion,  he 
immediately  drew  on  his  forces  upon  the  en¬ 
emy,  the  sun  now  declining,  about  three  of  the 
clock  in  the  afternoon.  Brutus  on  his  side  had 
the  better,  and  pressed  hard  on  the  left  wing, 
which  gave  way  and  retreated;  and  the  horse 
too  fell  in  together  with  the  foot,  when  they 
saw  the  enemy  in  disorder. 

But  the  other  wing,  when  the  officers  ex¬ 
tended  the  line  to  avoid  its  being  encompassed, 
the  numbers  being  inferior,  got  drawn  out  too 
thin  in  the  centre,  and  was  so  weak  here  that 
they  could  not  withstand  the  charge,  but  at 
the  first  onset  fled.  After  defeating  these,  the 
enemy  at  once  took  Brutus  in  the  rear,  who 
all  the  while  did  all  that  was  possible  for  an 
expert  general  and  valiant  soldier,  doing  every¬ 
thing  in  the  peril,  by  counsel  and  by  hand, 
that  might  recover  the  victory.  But  that  which 
had  been  his  superiority  in  the  first  fight  was 
to  his  prejudice  in  the  second.  For  in  the  first, 
that  part  of  the  enemy  which  was  beaten  was 
killed  on  the  spot;  but  of  Cassius’s  soldiers  that 
fled,  few  had  been  slain,  and  those  that  escaped, 
daunted  with  their  defeat,  infected  the  other 
and  larger  part  of  the  army  with  their  want  of 
spirit  and  their  disorder.  Here  Marcus,  the 
son  of  Cato,  was  slain,  fighting  and  behaving 
himself  with  great  bravery  in  the  midst  of  the 
youth  of  the  highest  rank  and  greatest  valour. 
He  would  neither  flee  nor  give  the  least 
ground,  but  still  fighting  and  declaring  who  he 
was  and  naming  his  father’s  name,  he  fell  upon 
a  heap  of  dead  bodies  of  the  enemy.  And  of  the 
rest,  the  bravest  were  slain  in  defending  Brutus. 

There  was  in  the  field  one  Lucilius,  an  excel¬ 
lent  man  and  a  friend  of  Brutus,  who,  seeing 
some  barbarian  horse  taking  no  notice  of  any 
other  in  the  pursuit,  but  galloping  at  full  speed 
after  Brutus,  resolved  to  stop  them,  though 
with  the  hazard  of  his  life;  and,  letting  himself 
fall  a  little  behind,  he  told  them  that  he  was 
Brutus.  They  believed  him  the  rather,  because 
he  prayed  to  be  carried  to  Antony,  as  if  he 


MARCUS  BRUTUS 

feared  Caesar,  but  durst  trust  him.  They,  over¬ 
joyed  with  their  prey,  and  thinking  themselves 
wonderfully  fortunate,  carried  him  along  with 
them  in  the  night,  having  first  sent  messengers 
to  Antony  of  their  coming.  He  was  much 
pleased,  and  came  to  meet  them;  and  all  the 
rest  that  heard  that  Brutus  was  taken  and 
brought  alive  flocked  together  to  see  him,  some 
pitying  his  fortune,  others  accusing  him  of  a 
meanness  unbecoming  his  former  glory,  that 
out  of  too  much  love  of  life  he  would  be  a  prey 
to  barbarians. 

When  they  came  near  together,  Antony 
stood  still,  considering  with  himself  in  what 
manner  he  should  receive  Brutus;  but  Lucilius, 
being  brought  up  to  him,  with  great  confidence 
said:  “Be  assured,  Antony,  that  no  enemy 
either  has  taken  or  ever  shall  take  Marcus  Bru¬ 
tus  alive  (forbid  it,  heaven,  that  fortune  should 
ever  so  much  prevail  above  virtue!),  but  he 
shall  be  found,  alive  or  dead,  as  becomes  him¬ 
self.  As  for  me,  I  am  come  hither  by  a  cheat 
that  I  put  upon  your  soldiers,  and  am  ready, 
upon  this  occasion,  to  suffer  any  severities  you 
will  inflict.” 

All  were  amazed  to  hear  Lucilius  speak  these 
words.  But  Antony,  turning  himself  to  those 
that  brought  him,  said:  “I  perceive,  my  fellow- 
soldiers,  that  you  are  concerned,  and  take  it  ill 
that  you  have  been  thus  deceived,  and  think 
yourselves  abused  and  injured  by  it;  but  know 
that  you  have  met  with  a  booty  better  than  that 
you  sought.  For  you  were  in  search  of  an  en* 
emy,  but  you  have  brought  me  here  a  friend. 
For  indeed  I  am  uncertain  how  I  should  have 
used  Brutus,  if  you  had  brought  him  alive;  but 
of  this  I  am  sure,  that  it  is  better  to  have  such 
men  as  Lucilius  our  friends  than  our  enemies.” 
Having  said  this,  he  embraced  Lucilius,  and 
for  the  present  commended  him  to  the  care  of 
one  of  his  friends,  and  ever  after  found  him  a 
steady  and  a  faithful  friend. 

Brutus  had  now  passed  a  little  brook,  run¬ 
ning  among  trees  and  under  steep  rocks,  and, 
it  being  night,  would  go  no  further,  but  sat 
down  in  a  hollow  place  with  a  great  rock  pro¬ 
jecting  before  it,  with  a  few  of  his  officers  and 
friends  about  him.  At  first,  looking  up  to 
heaven,  that  was  then  full  of  stars,  he  repeated 
two  verses,  one  of  which,  Volumnius  writes, 
was  this: — 

Punish,  great  Jove,  the  author  of  these  ills . 

The  other  he  says  he  has  forgot.  Soon  after, 
naming  severally  all  his  friends  that  had  been 
slain  before  his  face  in  the  battle,  he  groaned 
heavily,  especially  at  the  mentioning  of  Flavius 


823 

and  Labeo,  the  latter  his  lieutenant,  and  the 
other  chief  officer  of  his  engineers.  In  the 
meantime,  one  of  his  companions,  that  was 
very  thirsty  and  saw  Brutus  in  the  same  condi¬ 
tion,  took  his  helmet  and  ran  to  the  brook  for 
water,  when  a  noise  being  heard  from  the  other 
side  of  the  river,  Volumnius,  taking  Darda- 
nus,  Brutus’s  armour-bearer,  with  him,  went 
out  to  see  what  it  was.  They  returned  in  a 
short  space,  and  inquired  about  the  water. 
Brutus,  smiling  with  much  meaning,  said  to 
Volumnius,  “It  is  all  drunk;  but  you  shall 
have  some  more  fetched.”  But  he  that  had 
brought  the  first  water,  being  sent  again,  was 
in  great  danger  of  being  taken  by  the  enemy, 
and  having  received  a  wound,  with  much 
difficulty  escaped. 

Now  Brutus  guessing  that  not  many  of  his 
men  were  slain  in  the  fight,  Statyllius  under¬ 
took  to  dash  through  the  enemy  (for  there  was 
no  other  way),  and  to  see  what  was  become  of 
their  camp;  and  promised,  if  he  found  all 
things  there  safe,  to  hold  up  a  torch  for  a  sig¬ 
nal,  and  then  return.  The  torch  was  held  up, 
Statyllius  got  safe  to  the  camp;  but  when  after 
a  long  time  he  did  not  return,  Brutus  said,  “If 
Statyllius  be  alive,  he  will  come  back.”  But  it 
happened  that  in  his  return  he  fell  into  the  en¬ 
emy’s  hands,  and  was  slain. 

The  night  now  being  far  spent,  Brutus,  as 
he  was  sitting,  leaned  his  head  towards  his 
servant  Clitus,  and  spoke  to  him;  he  answered 
him  not,  but  fell  a-weeping.  After  that  he  drew 
aside  his  armour-bearer,  Dardanus,  and  had 
some  discourse  with  him  in  private.  At  last, 
speaking  to  Volumnius  in  Greek,  he  reminded 
him  of  their  common  studies  and  former  dis¬ 
cipline  and  begged  that  he  would  take  hold  of 
his  sword  with  him,  and  help  him  to  thrust  it 
through  him.  Volumnius  put  away  his  re¬ 
quest,  and  several  others  did  the  like;  and  some 
one  saying,  that  there  was  no  staying  there, 
but  they  needs  must  fly,  Brutus,  rising  up, 
said,  “Yes,  indeed,  we  must  fly,  but  not  with 
our  feet,  but  with  our  hands.” 

Then  giving  each  of  them  his  right  hand, 
with  a  countenance  full  of  pleasure,  he  said 
that  he  found  an  infinite  satisfaction  in  this, 
that  none  of  his  friends  had  been  false  to  him; 
that  as  for  fortune,  he  was  angry  with  that 
only  for  his  country’s  sake;  as  for  himself,  he 
thought  himself  much  more  happy  than  they 
who  had  overcome,  not  only  as  he  had  been  a 
little  time  ago,  but  even  now  in  his  present 
condition;  since  he  was  leaving  behind  him 
such  a  reputation  of  his  virtue  as  none  of  the 


824 

conquerors  with  all  their  arms  and  riches 
should  ever  be  able  to  acquire,  no  more  than 
they  could  hinder  posterity  from  believing  and 
saying,  that  being  unjust  and  wicked  men,  they 
had  destroyed  the  just  and  the  good,  and 
usurped  a  power  to  which  they  had  no  right. 

After  this,  having  exhorted  and  entreated 
all  about  him  to  provide  for  their  own  safety, 
he  withdrew  from  them  with  two  or  three  only 
of  his  peculiar  friends;  Strato  was  one  of 
these,  with  whom  he  had  contracted  an  ac¬ 
quaintance  when  they  studied  rhetoric  to¬ 
gether.  Him  he  placed  next  to  himself,  and, 
taking  hold  of  the  hilt  of  his  sword  and  direct¬ 
ing  it  with  both  his  hands,  fell  upon  it,  and 
killed  himself.  But  others  say,  that  not  he  him¬ 
self,  but  Strato,  at  the  earnest  entreaty  of 
Brutus,  turning  aside  his  head,  held  the 
sword,  upon  which  he  violently  throwing 
himself,  it  pierced  his  breast,  and  he  immedi¬ 
ately  died. 

This  same  Strato,  Messala,  a  friend  of  Bru¬ 
tus,  being  after  reconciled  to  Caesar,  brought  to 
him  once  at  his  leisure,  and  with  tears  in  his 
eyes  said,  “This,  O  Caesar,  is  the  man  that  did 
the  last  friendly  office  to  my  beloved  Brutus.” 
Upon  which  Caesar  received  him  kindly;  and 
had  good  use  of  him  in  his  labours  and  his 
battles  at  Actium,  being  one  of  the  Greeks 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

that  proved  their  bravery  in  his  service.  It  is 
reported  of  Messala  himself,  that,  when  Caesar 
once  gave  him  this  commendation,  that  though 
he  was  his  fiercest  enemy  at  Philippi  in  the 
cause  of  Brutus,  yet  he  had  shown  himself  his 
most  entire  friend  in  the  fight  of  Actium,  he 
answered,  “You  have  always  found  me,  Caesar, 
on  the  best  and  justest  side.” 

Brutus’s  dead  body  was  found  by  Antony, 
who  commanded  the  richest  purple  mantle 
that  he  had  to  be  thrown  over  it,  and  after¬ 
wards  the  mantle  being  stolen,  he  found  the 
thief,  and  had  him  put  to  death.  He  sent  the 
ashes  of  Brutus  to  his  mother  Servilia.  As  for 
Porcia  his  wife,  Nicolaus  the  philosopher  and 
Valerius  Maximus  write,  that,  being  desirous 
to  die,  but  being  hindered  by  her  friends,  who 
continually  watched  her,  she  snatched  some 
burning  charcoal  out  of  the  fire,  and,  shutting 
it  close  in  her  mouth,  stifled  herself,  and  died. 
Though  there  is  a  letter  current  from  Brutus 
to  his  friends,  in  which  he  laments  the  death 
of  Porcia,  and  accuses  them  for  neglecting  her 
so  that  she  desired  to  die  rather  than  languish 
with  her  disease.  So  that  it  seems  Nicolaus  was 
mistaken  in  the  time;  for  this  epistle  (if  it  in¬ 
deed  is  authentic  and  truly  Brutus’s)  gives  us 
to  understand  the  malady  and  love  of  Porcia, 
and  the  way  in  which  her  death  occurred. 


BRUTUS  and  DION 
Compared 


There  are  noble  points  in  abundance  in  the 
characters  of  these  two  men,  and  one  to  be 
first  mentioned  is  their  attaining  such  a  height 
of  greatness  upon  such  inconsiderable  means; 
and  on  this  score  Dion  has  by  war  the  advan¬ 
tage.  For  he  had  no  partner  to  contest  his 
glory,  as  Brutus  had  in  Cassius,  who  was  not, 
indeed,  his  equal  in  proved  virtue  and  honour, 
yet  contributed  quite  as  much  to  the  service  of 
the  war  by  his  boldness,  skill,  and  activity; 
and  some  there  be  who  impute  to  him  the  rise 
and  beginning  of  the  whole  enterprise,  saying 
that  it  was  he  who  roused  Brutus,  till  then  in¬ 
disposed  to  stir,  into  action  against  Caesar. 
Whereas  Dion  seems  of  himself  to  have  pro¬ 
vided  not  only  arms,  ships,  and  soldiers,  but 
likewise  friends  and  partners  for  the  enter¬ 
prise.  Neither  did  he,  as  Brutus,  collect  money 
and  forces  from  the  war  itself,  but,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  laid  out  of  his  own  substance,  and  em¬ 
ployed  the  very  means  of  his  private  suste¬ 
nance  in  exile  for  the  liberty  of  his  country. 


Besides  this,  Brutus  and  Cassius,  when  they 
fled  to  Rome,  could  not  live  safe  or  quiet,  be¬ 
ing  condemned  to  death  and  pursued,  and 
were  thus  of  necessity  forced  to  take  arms  and 
hazard  their  lives  in  their  own  defence,  to  save 
themselves,  rather  than  their  country.  On  the 
other  hand,  Dion  enjoyed  more  ease,  was  more 
safe,  and  his  life  more  pleasant  in  his  banish¬ 
ment,  than  was  the  tyrant’s  who  had  banished 
him,  when  he  flew  to  action,  and  ran  the  risk 
of  all  to  save  Sicily. 

Take  notice,  too,  that  it  was  not  the  same 
thing  for  the  Sicilians  to  be  freed  from  Diony¬ 
sius,  and  for  the  Romans  to  be  freed  from  Cae¬ 
sar.  The  former  owned  himself  a  tyrant,  and 
vexed  Sicily  with  a  thousand  oppressions; 
whereas  Caesar’s  supremacy,  certainly,  in  the 
process  for  attaining  it,  had  inflicted  no  trou¬ 
ble  on  its  opponents,  but,  once  established  and 
victorious,  it  had  indeed  the  name  and  appear¬ 
ance,  but  fact  that  was  cruel  or  tyrannical 
there  was  none.  On  the  contrary,  in  the  mal- 


BRUTUS  AND  DION 

ady  of  the  times  and  the  need  of  a  monarchi¬ 
cal  government,  he  might  be  thought  to  have 
been  sent  as  the  gentlest  physician,  by  no  other 
than  a  divine  intervention.  And  thus  the 
common  people  instantly  regretted  Caesar,  and 
grew  enraged  and  implacable  against  those 
that  killed  him.  Whereas  Dion’s  chief  offence 
in  the  eyes  of  his  fellow-citizens  was  his  hav¬ 
ing  let  Dionysius  escape,  and  not  having  de¬ 
molished  the  former  tyrant’s  tomb. 

In  the  actual  conduct  of  war,  Dion  was  a 
commander  without  fault,  improving  to  the 
utmost  those  counsels  which  he  himself  gave, 
and  where  others  led  him  into  disaster  correct¬ 
ing  and  turning  everything  to  the  best.  But 
Brutus  seems  to  have  shown  little  wisdom  in 
engaging  in  the  final  battle,  which  was  to  de¬ 
cide  everything,  and  when  he  failed  not  to  have 
done  his  business  in  seeking  a  remedy;  he  gave 
all  up,  and  abandoned  his  hopes,  not  ventur¬ 
ing  against  fortune  even  as  far  as  Pompey  did, 
when  he  had  still  means  enough  to  rely  on  in 
his  troops,  and  was  clearly  master  of  all  the 
seas  with  his  ships. 

The  greatest  thing  charged  on  Brutus  is,  that 
he,  being  saved  by  Caesar’s  kindness,  having 
saved  all  the  friends  whom  he  chose  to  ask  for, 
he  moreover  accounted  a  friend,  and  preferred 
above  many,  did  yet  lay  violent  hands  upon  his 
preserver.  Nothing  like  this  could  be  objected 
against  Dion;  quite  the  contrary;  whilst  he 
was  of  Dionysius’s  family  and  his  friend,  he 
did  good  service  and  was  useful  to  him;  but 
driven  from  his  country,  wronged  in  his  wife, 
and  his  estate  lost,  he  openly  entered  upon  a 
war  just  and  lawful. 

Does  not,  however,  the  matter  turn  the  other 
way?  For  the  chief  glory  of  both  was  their 
hatred  of  tyranny,  and  abhorrence  of  wicked¬ 
ness.  This  was  unmixed  and  sincere  in  Brutus; 
for  he  had  no  private  quarrel  with  Caesar,  but 
went  into  the  risk  singly  for  the  liberty  of  his 
country.  The  other,  had  he  not  been  privately 
injured,  had  not  fought.  This  is  plain  from 
Plato’s  epistles,  where  it  is  shown  that  he  was 
turned  out,  and  did  not  forsake  the  court  to 
wage  war  upon  Dionysius.  Moreover,  the  pub¬ 
lic  good  made  Brutus  Pompey’s  friend  (instead 
of  his  enemy  as  he  had  been)  and  Caesar’s  en¬ 
emy;  since  he  proposed  for  his  hatred  and  his 
friendship  no  other  end  and  standard  but  jus¬ 
tice.  Dion  was  very  serviceable  to  Dionysius 
whilst  in  favour;  when  no  longer  trusted,  he 
grew  angry  and  fell  to  arms.  And,  for  this  rea¬ 
son,  not  even  were  his  own  friends  all  of  them 
satisfied  with  his  undertaking,  or  quite  as- 


825 

sured  that,  having  overcome  Dionysius,  he 
might  not  settle  the  government  on  himself, 
deceiving  his  fellow-citizens  by  some  less  ob¬ 
noxious  name  than  tyranny.  But  the  very  en¬ 
emies  of  Brutus  would  say  that  he  had  no  other 
end  or  aim,  from  first  to  last,  save  only  to  re¬ 
store  to  the  Roman  people  their  ancient  gov¬ 
ernment. 

And  apart  from  what  has  just  been  said,  the 
adventure  against  Dionysius  was  nothing 
equal  with  that  against  Caesar.  For  none  that 
was  familiarly  conversant  with  Dionysius  but 
scorned  him  for  his  life  of  idle  amusement  with 
wine,  women,  and  dice;  whereas  it  required  an 
heroic  soul  and  a  truly  intrepid  and  unquailing 
spirit  so  much  as  to  entertain  the  thought  of 
crushing  Caesar,  so  formidable  for  his  ability, 
his  power,  and  his  fortune,  whose  very  name 
disturbed  the  slumbers  of  the  Parthian  and  In¬ 
dian  kings.  Dion  was  no  sooner  seen  in  Sicily 
but  thousands  ran  in  to  him  and  joined  him 
against  Dionysius;  whereas  the  renown  of 
Caesar,  even  when  dead,  gave  strength  to  his 
friends;  and  his  very  name  so  heightened  the 
person  that  took  it,  that  from  a  simple  boy  he 
presently  became  the  chief  of  the  Romans; 
and  he  could  use  it  for  a  spell  against  the  en¬ 
mity  and  power  of  Antony. 

If  any  object  that  it  cost  Dion  great  trouble 
and  difficulties  to  overcome  the  tyrant,  whereas 
Brutus  slew  Caesar  naked  and  unprovided,  yet 
this  itself  was  the  result  of  the  most  consum¬ 
mate  policy  and  conduct,  to  bring  it  about  that 
a  man  so  guarded  around,  and  so  fortified  at 
all  points,  should  be  taken  naked  and  unpro¬ 
vided.  For  it  was  not  on  the  sudden,  nor  alone, 
nor  with  a  few,  that  he  fell  upon  and  killed 
Caesar;  but  after  long  concerting  the  plot,  and 
placing  confidence  in  a  great  many  men,  not 
one  of  whom  deceived  him.  For  he  either  at 
once  discerned  the  best  men,  or  by  confiding 
in  them  made  them  good.  But  Dion,  either 
making  a  wrong  judgment,  trusted  himself 
with  ill  men,  or  else  by  his  employing  them 
made  ill  men  of  good;  either  of  the  two  would 
be  a  reflection  on  a  wise  man.  Plato  also  is 
severe  upon  him,  for  choosing  such  for  friends 
as  betrayed  him. 

Besides,  when  Dion  was  killed,  none  ap¬ 
peared  to  revenge  his  death.  Whereas  Brutus, 
even  amongst  his  enemies,  had  Antony  that 
buried  him  splendidly;  and  Caesar  also  took 
care  his  honours  should  be  preserved.  There 
stood  at  Milan  in  Gaul,  within  the  Alps,  a 
brazen  statue,  which  Caesar  in  aftertimes  no¬ 
ticed  (being  a  real  likeness,  and  a  fine  work  of 


826 

art),  and  passing  by  it  presently  stopped  short, 
and  in  the  hearing  of  many  commanded  the 
magistrates  to  come  before  him.  He  told  them 
their  town  had  broken  their  league, -harbour¬ 
ing  an  enemy.  The  magistrates  at  first  simply 
denied  the  thing,  and,  not  knowing  what  he 
meant,  looked  one  upon  another,  when  Caesar, 
turning  towards  the  statue  and  gathering  his 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

brows,  said,  “Pray  is  not  that  our  enemy  who 
stands  there?”  They  were  all  in  confusion, 
and  had  nothing  to  answer;  but  he,  smiling, 
much  commended  the  Gauls,  as  who  had  been 
firm  to  their  friends,  though  in  adversity,  and 
ordered  that  the  statue  should  remain  standing 
as  he  found  it. 

V  V  v 


ARATUS 

17I-2.I3  B.C. 


The  Philosopher,  Chrysippus,  O  Poly¬ 
crates,  quotes  an  ancient  proverb,  not 
as  really  it  should  be,  apprehending,  I 
suppose,  that  it  sounded  too  harshly,  but  so 
as  he  thought  it  would  run  best,  in  these 
words: — 

Who  praise  their  fathers  hut  the  generous  sons ? 
But  Dionysodorus,  the  Troezenian,  proves  him 
to  be  wrong,  and  restores  the  true  reading, 
which  is  thus: — 

Who  praise  their  fathers  but  degenerate  sons? 
telling  us  that  the  proverb  is  meant  to  stop  the 
mouth  of  those  who,  having  no  merit  of  their 
own,  take  refuge  in  the  virtues  of  their  ances¬ 
tors,  and  make  their  advantage  of  praising 
them.  But,  as  Pindar  hath  it — 

He  that  by  nature  doth  inherit 
From  ancestors  a  noble  spirit, 

as  you  do,  who  made  your  life  the  copy  of  the 
fairest  originals  of  your  family, — such,  I  say, 
may  take  great  satisfaction  in  being  reminded, 
both  by  hearing  others  speak  and  speaking 
themselves,  of  the  best  of  their  progenitors.  For 
they  assume  not  the  glory  of  praises  earned  by 
others  out  of  any  want  of  worth  of  their  own, 
but  affiliating  their  own  deeds  to  those  of  their 
ancestors,  give  them  honour  as  the  authors 
both  of  their  descent  and  manners. 

Therefore,  I  have  sent  to  you  the  life  which 
I  have  written  of  your  fellow-citizen  and  fore¬ 
father,  Aratus,  to  whom  you  are  no  discredit  in 
point  either  of  reputation  or  of  authority,  not 
as  though  you  had  not  been  most  diligently 
careful  to  inform  yourself  from  the  beginning 
concerning  his  actions,  but  that  your  sons, 
Polycrates  and  Pythocles,  may  both  by  hearing 
and  reading  become  familiar  with  those  fam¬ 
ily  examples  which  it  behooves  them  to  follow 
and  imitate.  It  is  a  piece  of  self-love,  and  not 


of  the  love  of  virtue,  to  imagine  one  has  al¬ 
ready  attained  to  what  is  best. 

The  city  of  Sicyon,  from  the  time  that  it 
first  fell  off  from  the  pure  and  Doric  aristoc¬ 
racy  (its  harmony  being  destroyed,  and  a  mere 
series  of  seditions  and  personal  contests  of  pop¬ 
ular  leaders  ensuing)  continued  to  be  distem¬ 
pered  and  unsettled,  changing  from  one  ty¬ 
rant  to  another,  until,  Cleon  being  slain,  Tim- 
oclides  and  Clinias,  men  of  the  most  repute 
and  power  amongst  the  citizens,  were  chosen 
to  the  magistracy.  And  the  commonwealth 
now  seemed  to  be  in  a  pretty  settled  condi¬ 
tion.  Timoclides  died,  and  Abantidas,  the  son 
of  Paseas,  to  possess  himself  of  the  tyranny, 
killed  Clinias,  and,  of  his  kindred  and  friends, 
slew  some  and  banished  others.  He  sought 
also  to  kill  his  son  Aratus,  whom  he  left  be¬ 
hind  him,  being  but  seven  years  old.  This  boy 
in  the  general  disorder  getting  out  of  the 
house  with  those  that  fled,  and  wandering 
about  the  city  helpless  and  in  great  fear,  by 
chance  got  undiscovered  into  the  house  of  a 
woman  who  was  Abantidas’s  sister,  but  mar¬ 
ried  to  Prophantus,  the  brother  of  Clinias,  her 
name  being  Soso.  She,  being  of  a  generous 
temper,  and  believing  the  boy  had  by  some 
supernatural  guidance  fled  to  her  for  shelter, 
hid  him  in  the  house,  and  at  night  sent  him 
away  to  Argos. 

Aratus,  being  thus  delivered  and  secured 
from  this  danger,  conceived  from  the  first  and 
ever  after  nourished  a  vehement  and  burning 
hatred  against  tyrants,  which  strengthened 
with  his  years.  Being  therefore  bred  up 
amongst  his  father’s  acquaintance  and  friends 
at  Argos  with  a  liberal  education,  and  perceiv¬ 
ing  his  body  to  promise  good  health  and  stat¬ 
ure,  he  addicted  himself  to  the  exercises  of  the 
palaestra,  to  that  degree  that  he  competed  in 


ARATUS 

the  five  games,  and  gained  some  crowns;  and 
indeed  in  his  statues  one  may  observe  a  cer¬ 
tain  kind  of  athletic  cast,  and  the  sagacity  and 
majesty  of  his  countenance  does  not  dissemble 
his  full  diet  and  the  use  of  the  hoe.  Whence  it 
came  to  pass  that  he  less  studied  eloquence 
than  perhaps  became  a  statesman,  and  yet  he 
was  more  accomplished  in  speaking  than  many 
believe,  judging  by  the  commentaries  which 
he  left  behind  him,  written  carelessly  and,  by 
the  way,  as  fast  as  he  could  do  it,  and  in  such 
words  as  first  came  to  his  mind. 

In  the  course  of  time,  Dinias  and  Aristotle 
the  logician  killed  Abantidas,  who  used  to  be 
present  in  the  market-place  at  their  discussions, 
and  to  make  one  in  them;  till  they  taking  the 
occasion,  insensibly  accustomed  him  to  the 
practice,  and  so  had  opportunity  to  contrive 
and  execute  a  plot  against  him.  After  him 
Paseas,  the  father  of  Abantidas,  taking  upon 
him  the  government,  was  assassinated  by  Nico- 
cles,  who  set  himself  up  for  tyrant.  Of  him  it 
is  related  that  he  was  strikingly  like  Periander, 
the  son  of  Cypselus,  just  as  it  is  said  that  Oron- 
tes,  the  Persian,  bore  a  great  resemblance  to 
Alcmaeon,  the  son  of  Amphiaraus,  and  that 
Lacedaemonian  youth,  whom  Myrsilus  relates 
to  have  been  trodden  to  pieces  by  the  crowd  of 
those  that  came  to  see  him  upon  that  report, 
to  Hector. 

This  Nicocles  governed  four  months,  in 
which,  after  he  had  done  all  kinds  of  mischief 
to  the  city,  he  very  nearly  let  it  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  Aitolians.  By  this  time  Aratus, 
being  grown  a  youth,  was  in  much  esteem, 
both  for  his  noble  birth,  and  his  spirit  and  dis¬ 
position,  which,  while  neither  insignificant 
nor  wanting  in  energy,  were  solid,  and  tem¬ 
pered  with  a  steadiness  of  judgment  beyond 
his  years.  For  which  reason  the  exiles  had  their 
eyes  most  upon  him,  nor  did  Nicocles  less  ob¬ 
serve  his  motions,  but  secretly  spied  and 
watched  him,  not  out  of  apprehension  of  any 
such  considerable  or  utterly  audacious  at¬ 
tempt,  but  suspecting  he  held  correspondence 
with  the  kings,  who  were  his  father’s  friends 
and  acquaintance.  And,  indeed,  Aratus  first 
attempted  this  way;  but  finding  that  Anti- 
gonus,  who  had  promised  fair,  neglected  him 
and  delayed  the  time,  and  that  his  hopes  from 
Egypt  and  Ptolemy  were  long  to  wait  for,  he 
determined  to  cut  off  the  tyrant  by  himself. 

And  first  he  broke  his  mind  to  Aristomachus 
and  Ecdelus,  the  one  an  exile  of  Sicyon,  the 
other,  Ecdelus,  an  Arcadian  of  Megalopolis,  a 
philosopher,  and  a  man  of  action,  having  been 


827 

the  familiar  friend  of  Arcesilaus  the  Academic 
at  Athens.  These  readily  consenting,  he  com¬ 
municated  with  the  other  exiles,  whereof  some 
few,  being  ashamed  to  seem  to  despair  of  suc¬ 
cess,  engaged  in  the  design;  but  most  of  them 
endeavoured  to  divert  him  from  his  purpose, 
as  one  that  for  want  of  experience  was  too 
rash  and  daring. 

Whilst  he  was  consulting  to  seize  upon  some 
post  in  Sicyonia,  from  whence  he  might  make 
war  upon  the  tyrant,  there  came  to  Argos  a 
certain  Sicyonian,  newly  escaped  out  of  prison, 
brother  to  Xenocles,  one  of  the  exiles,  who,  be¬ 
ing  by  him  presented  to  Aratus,  informed  him 
that  that  part  of  the  wall  over  which  he  escaped 
was,  inside,  almost  level  with  the  ground,  ad¬ 
joining  a  rocky  and  elevated  place,  and  that 
from  the  outside  it  might  be  scaled  with  lad¬ 
ders.  Aratus,  hearing  this,  despatched  away 
Xenocles  with  two  of  his  own  servants,  Seu- 
thas  and  Technon,  to  view  the  wall,  resolving, 
if  possible,  secretly  and  with  one  risk  to  haz¬ 
ard  all  on  a  single  trial,  rather  than  carry  on  a 
contest  as  a  private  man  against  a  tyrant  by 
long  war  and  open  force.  Xenocles,  therefore, 
with  his  companions,  returning,  having  taken 
the  height  of  the  wall,  and  declaring  the  place 
not  to  be  impossible  or  indeed  difficult  to  get 
over,  but  that  it  was  not  easy  to  approach  it 
undiscovered  by  reason  of  some  small  but  un¬ 
commonly  savage  and  noisy  dogs  belonging  to 
a  gardener  hard  by,  he  immediately  under¬ 
took  the  business. 

Now  the  preparation  of  arms  gave  no  jeal¬ 
ousy,  because  robberies  and  petty  forays  were 
at  that  time  common  everywhere  between  one 
set  of  people  and  another;  and  for  the  ladders, 
Euphranor,  the  machine-maker,  made  them 
openly,  his  trade  rendering  him  unsuspected, 
though  one  of  the  exiles.  As  for  men,  each  of 
his  friends  in  Argos  furnished  him  with  ten 
apiece  out  of  those  few  they  had,  and  he  armed 
thirty  of  his  own  servants,  and  hired  some  few 
soldiers  of  Xenophilus,  the  chief  of  the  robber 
captains,  to  whom  it  was  given  out  that  they 
were  to  march  into  the  territory  of  Sicyon  to 
seize  the  king’s  stud;  most  of  them  were  sent 
before,  in  small  parties,  to  the  tower  of  Polyg- 
notus,  with  orders  to  wait  there;  Caphisias  also 
was  despatched  beforehand  lightly  armed,  with 
four  others,  who  were,  as  soon  as  it  was  dark, 
to  come  to  the  gardener’s  house,  pretending  to 
be  travellers,  and  procuring  their  lodging 
there,  to  shut  up  him  and  his  dogs;  for  there 
was  no  other  way  to  getting  past.  And  for  the 
ladders,  they  had  been  made  to  take  in  pieces, 


828 


and  were  put  into  chests,  and  sent  before,  hid¬ 
den  upon  waggons. 

In  the  meantime,  some  of  the  spies  of  Nico- 
cles  appearing  in  Argos,  and  being  said  to  go 
privately  about  watching  Aratus,  he  came  early 
in  the  morning  into  the  market-place,  show¬ 
ing  himself  openly  and  conversing  with  his 
friends;  then  he  anointed  himself  in  the  exer¬ 
cise  ground,  and,  taking  with  him  thence 
some  of  the  young  men  that  used  to  drink  and 
spend  their  time  with  him,  he  went  home; 
and  presently  after  several  of  his  servants  were 
seen  about  the  market-place,  one  carrying  gar¬ 
lands,  another  buying  flambeaux,  and  a  third 
speaking  to  the  women  that  used  to  sing  and 
play  at  banquets,  all  of  which  things  the  spies 
observing  were  deceived,  and  said,  laughing 
to  one  another,  “Certainly  nothing  can  be 
more  timorous  than  a  tyrant,  if  Nicocles,  be¬ 
ing  master  of  so  great  a  city  and  so  numerous 
a  force,  stands  in  fear  of  a  youth  that  spends 
what  he  has  to  subsist  upon  in  his  banish¬ 
ment  in  pleasures  and  day-debauches”;  and 
being  thus  imposed  upon,  they  returned  home. 

But  Aratus,  departing  immediately  after  his 
morning  meal,  and  coming  to  his  soldiers  at 
Polygnotus’s  tower,  led  them  to  Nemea;  where 
he  disclosed  to  most  of  them,  for  the  first  time, 
his  true  design,  making  them  large  promises 
and  fair  speeches,  and  marched  towards  the 
city,  giving  for  the  word  “Apollo  Victorious,” 
proportioning  his  march  to  the  motion  of  the 
moon,  so  as  to  have  the  benefit  of  her  light 
upon  the  way,  and  to  be  in  the  garden,  which 
was  close  to  the  wall,  just  as  she  was  setting. 
Here  Caphisias  came  to  him,  who  had  not  se¬ 
cured  the  dogs,  which  had  run  away  before  he 
could  catch  them,  but  had  only  made  sure  of 
the  gardener. 

Upon  which  most  of  the  company  being  out 
of  heart  and  desiring  to  retreat,  Aratus  en¬ 
couraged  them  to  go  on,  promising  to  retire  in 
case  the  dogs  were  too  troublesome;  at  the 
same  time  sending  forward  those  that  carried 
the  ladders,  conducted  by  Ecdelus  and  Mnasi- 
theus,  he  followed  them  himself  leisurely,  the 
dogs  already  barking  very  loud  and  following 
the  steps  of  Ecdelus  and  his  companion.  How¬ 
ever,  they  got  to  the  wall,  and  reared  the  lad¬ 
ders  with  safety.  But  as  the  foremost  men  were 
mounting  them,  the  captain  of  the  watch  that 
was  to  be  relieved  by  the  morning  guard  passed 
on  his  way  with  the  bell;  and  there  were  many 
lights,  and  a  noise  of  people  coming  up.  Hear¬ 
ing  which,  they  clapt  themselves  close  to  the 
ladders,  and  so  were  unobserved;  but  as  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

other  watch  also  was  coming  up  to  meet  this, 
they  were  in  extreme  danger  of  being  discov¬ 
ered.  But  when  this  also  went  by  without  ob¬ 
serving  them,  immediately  Mnasitheus  and 
Ecdelus  got  upon  the  wall,  and  possessing 
themselves  of  the  approaches  inside  and  out, 
sent  away  Technon  to  Aratus,  desiring  him  to 
make  all  the  haste  he  could. 

Now  there  was  no  great  distance  from  the 
garden  to  the  wall  and  to  the  tower  in  which 
latter  a  large  hound  was  kept.  The  hound  did 
not  hear  their  steps  of  himself,  whether  that  he 
were  naturally  drowsy,  or  overwearied  the  day 
before,  but,  the  gardener’s  curs  awaking  him, 
he  first  began  to  growl  and  grumble  in  re¬ 
sponse,  and  then  as  they  passed  by  to  bark  out 
aloud.  And  the  barking  was  now  so  great,  that 
the  sentinel  opposite  shouted  out  to  the  dog’s 
keeper  to  know  why  the  dog  kept  such  a  bark¬ 
ing,  and  whether  anything  was  the  matter; 
who  answered,  that  it  was  nothing  but  only 
that  his  dog  had  been  set  barking  by  the  lights 
of  the  watch  and  the  noise  of  the  bell.  This  re¬ 
ply  much  encouraged  Aratus’s  soldiers,  who 
thought  the  dog’s  keeper  was  privy  to  their  de¬ 
sign,  and  wished  to  conceal  what  was  passing, 
and  that  many  others  in  the  city  were  of  the 
conspiracy.  But  when  they  came  to  scale  the 
wall,  the  attempt  then  appeared  both  to  require 
time  and  to  be  full  of  danger,  for  the  ladders 
shook  and  tottered  extremely  unless  they 
mounted  them  leisurely  and  one  by  one,  and 
time  pressed,  for  the  cocks  began  to  crow,  and 
the  country  people  that  used  to  bring  things  to 
the  market  would  be  coming  to  the  town  di¬ 
rectly. 

Therefore  Aratus  made  haste  to  get  up  him¬ 
self,  forty  only  of  the  company  being  already 
upon  the  wall,  and,  staying  but  for  a  few  more 
of  those  that  were  below,  he  made  straight  to 
the  tyrant’s  house  and  the  general’s  office, 
where  the  mercenary  soldiers  passed  the  night, 
and,  coming  suddenly  upon  them,  and  taking 
them  prisoners  without  killing  any  one  of 
them,  he  immediately  sent  to  all  his  friends  in 
their  houses  to  desire  them  to  come  to  him, 
which  they  did  from  all  quarters.  By  this  time 
the  day  began  to  break,  and  the  theatre  was 
filled  with  a  multitude  that  were  held  in  sus¬ 
pense  by  uncertain  reports  and  knew  nothing 
distinctly  of  what  had  happened,  until  a  public 
crier  came  forward  and  proclaimed  that  Ara¬ 
tus,  the  son  of  Clinias,  invited  the  citizens  to 
recover  their  liberty. 

Then  at  last  assured  that  what  they  had  so 
long  looked  for  was  come  to  pass,  they  pressed 


ARATUS 

in  throngs  to  the  tyrant’s  gates  to  set  them  on 
fire.  And  such  a  flame  was  kindled,  the  whole 
house  catching  fire,  that  it  was  seen  as  far  as 
Corinth;  so  that  the  Corinthians,  wondering 
what  the  matter  could  be,  were  upon  the  point 
of  coming  to  their  assistance.  Nicocles  fled 
away  secretly  out  of  the  city  by  means  of  cer¬ 
tain  underground  passages,  and  the  soldiers 
helping  the  Sicyonians  to  quench  the  fire,  plun¬ 
dered  the  house.  This  Aratus  hindered  not,  but 
divided  also  the  rest  of  the  riches  of  the  tyrant 
amongst  the  citizens. 

In  this  exploit,  not  one  of  these  engaged  in  it 
was  slain,  nor  any  of  the  contrary  party,  fortune 
so  ordering  the  action  as  to  be  clear  and  free 
from  civil  bloodshed.  He  restored  eighty  exiles 
who  had  been  expelled  by  Nicocles,  and  no  less 
than  five  hundred  who  had  been  driven  out  by 
former  tyrants  and  had  endured  a  long  banish¬ 
ment,  pretty  nearly,  by  this  time,  of  fifty  years’ 
duration.  These  returning,  most  of  them  very 
poor,  were  impatient  to  enter  upon  their  for¬ 
mer  possessions,  and,  proceeding  to  their  sev¬ 
eral  farms  and  houses,  gave  great  perplexity  to 
Aratus,  who  considered  that  the  city  without 
was  envied  for  its  liberty  and  aimed  at  by  An- 
tigonus,  and  within  was  full  of  disorder  and 
sedition. 

Wherefore,  as  things  stood,  he  thought  it  best 
to  associate  it  to  the  Achaean  community,  and 
so,  although  Dorians,  they  of  their  own  will 
took  upon  them  the  name  and  citizenship  of 
the  Achaeans,  who  at  that  time  had  neither 
great  repute  nor  much  power.  For  the  most  of 
them  lived  in  small  towns,  and  their  territory 
was  neither  large  nor  fruitful,  and  the  neigh¬ 
bouring  sea  was  almost  wholly  without  a  har¬ 
bour,  breaking  direct  upon  a  rocky  shore.  But 
yet  these  above  others  made  it  appear  that  the 
Grecian  courage  was  invincible,  whensoever  it 
could  only  have  order  and  concord  within  itself 
and  a  prudent  general  to  direct  it.  For  though 
they  had  scarcely  been  counted  as  any  part  of 
the  ancient  Grecian  power,  and  at  this  time  it 
did  not  equal  the  strength  of  one  ordinary  city, 
yet  by  prudence  and  unanimity,  and  because 
they  knew  not  how  to  envy  and  malign,  but  to 
obey  and  follow  him  amongst  them  that  was 
most  eminent  for  virtue,  they  not  only  pre¬ 
served  their  own  liberty  in  the  midst  of  so  many 
great  cities,  military  powers,  and  monarchies, 
but  went  on  steadily  saving  and  delivering 
from  slavery  great  numbers  of  the  Greeks. 

As  for  Aratus,  he  was  in  his  behaviour  a 
true  statesman,  high-minded,  and  more  intent 
upon  the  public  than  his  private  concerns,  a 


829 

bitter  hater  of  tyrants,  making  the  common 
good  the  rule  and  law  of  his  friendships  and 
enmities.  So  that  indeed  he  seems  not  to  have 
been  so  faithful  a  friend,  as  he  was  a  reason¬ 
able  and  gentle  enemy,  ready,  according  to  the 
needs  of  the  state,  to  suit  himself  on  occasion  to 
either  side;  concord  between  nations,  brother¬ 
hood  between  cities,  the  council  and  the  assem¬ 
bly  unanimous  in  their  votes,  being  the  objects 
above  all  other  blessings  to  which  he  was  pas¬ 
sionately  devoted;  backward,  indeed,  and  diffi¬ 
dent  in  the  use  of  arms  and  open  force,  but  in 
effecting  a  purpose  underhand,  and  outwitting 
cities  and  potentates  without  observation,  most 
politic  and  dexterous.  Therefore,  though  he 
succeeded  beyond  hope  in  many  enterprises 
which  he  undertook,  yet  he  seems  to  have  left 
quite  as  many  unattempted,  though  feasible 
enough,  for  want  of  assurance. 

For  it  should  seem,  that  as  the  sight  of  cer¬ 
tain  beasts  is  strong  in  the  night  but  dim  by 
day,  the  tenderness  of  the  humours  of  their 
eyes  not  bearing  the  contact  of  the  light,  so 
there  is  also  one  kind  of  human  skill  and  sa¬ 
gacity  which  is  easily  daunted  and  disturbed 
in  actions  done  in  the  open  day  and  before  the 
world,  and  recovers  all  its  self-possession  in  se¬ 
cret  and  covert  enterprises;  which  inequality  is 
occasioned  in  noble  minds  for  want  of  philoso¬ 
phy,  a  mere  wild  and  uncultivated  fruit  of  a 
virtue  without  true  knowledge  coming  up;  as 
might  be  made  out  by  examples. 

Aratus,  therefore,  having  associated  himself 
and  his  city  to  the  Achaeans,  served  in  the  cav¬ 
alry,  and  made  himself  much  beloved  by  his 
commanding  officers  for  his  exact  obedience; 
for  though  he  had  made  so  large  an  addition 
to  the  common  strength  as  that  of  his  own 
credit  and  the  power  of  his  country,  yet  he  was 
as  ready  as  the  most  ordinary  person  to  be  com¬ 
manded  by  the  Achaean  general  of  the  time 
being,  whether  he  were  a  man  of  Dynae,  or  of 
Tritaea,  or  any  yet  meaner  town  than  these. 
Having  also  a  present  of  five-and-twenty  tal¬ 
ents  sent  him  from  the  king,  he  took  them,  but 
gave  them  all  to  his  fellow-citizens,  who  want¬ 
ed  money,  amongst  other  purposes,  for  the  re¬ 
demption  of  those  who  had  been  taken  pris¬ 
oners. 

But  the  exiles  being  insatiable,  disturbing 
continually  those  that  were  in  possession  of 
their  estates,  Sicyon  was  in  great  danger  of  fall¬ 
ing  into  perfect  desolation;  so  that,  having  no 
hope  left  but  in  the  kindness  of  Ptolemy,  he 
resolved  to  sail  to  him,  and  to  beg  so  much 
money  of  him  as  might  reconcile  all  parties.  So 


830 

he  set  sail  from  Mothone  beyond  Malea,  de¬ 
signing  to  make  the  direct  passage.  But  the 
pilot  not  being  able  to  keep  the  vessel  up  against 
a  strong  wind  and  high  waves  that  came  in 
from  the  open  sea,  he  was  driven  from  his 
course,  and  with  much  ado  got  to  shore  in  An- 
dras,  an  enemy’s  land,  possessed  by  Antigonus, 
who  had  a  garrison  there.  To  avoid  which  he 
immediately  landed,  and,  leaving  the  ship,  went 
up  into  the  country  a  good  way  from  the  sea, 
having  along  with  him  only  one  friend,  called 
Timanthes;  and  throwing  themselves  into 
some  ground  thickly  covered  with  wood,  they 
had  but  an  ill  night’s  rest  of  it. 

Not  long  after,  the  commander  of  the  troops 
came,  and,  inquiring  for  Aratus,  was  deceived 
by  his  servants,  who  had  been  instructed  to  say 
that  he  had  fled  at  once  over  into  the  island  of 
Euboea.  However,  he  declared  the  ship,  the 
property  on  board  of  her,  and  the  servants,  to 
be  lawful  prize,  and  detained  them  according¬ 
ly.  As  for  Aratus,  after  some  few  days  in  his 
extremity,  by  good  fortune  a  Roman  ship  hap¬ 
pened  to  put  in  just  at  the  spot  in  which  he 
made  his  abode,  sometimes  peeping  out  to  seek 
his  opportunity,  sometimes  keeping  close.  She 
was  bound  for  Syria;  but  going  aboard,  he 
agreed  with  the  master  to  land  him  in  Caria. 
In  which  voyage  he  met  with  no  less  danger 
on  the  sea  than  before. 

From  Caria  being  after  much  time  arrived 
in  Egypt,  he  immediately  went  to  the  king, 
who  had  a  great  kindness  for  him,  and  had  re¬ 
ceived  from  him  many  presents  of  drawings 
and  paintings  out  of  Greece.  Aratus  had  a  very 
good  judgment  in  them,  and  always  took  care 
to  collect  and  send  him  the  most  curious  and 
finished  works,  especially  those  of  Pamphilus 
and  Melanthus.  For  the  Sicyonian  pieces  were 
still  in  the  height  of  their  reputation,  as  being 
the  only  ones  whose  colours  were  lasting;  so 
that  Apelles  himself,  even  after  he  had  be¬ 
come  well  known  and  admired,  went  thither, 
and  gave  a  talent  to  be  admitted  into  the  so¬ 
ciety  of  the  painters  there,  not  so  much  to  par¬ 
take  of  their  skill,  which  he  wanted  not,  but 
of  their  credit. 

And  accordingly  Aratus,  when  he  freed  the 
city,  immediately  took  down  the  representa¬ 
tions  of  the  rest  of  the  tyrants,  but  demurred  a 
long  time  about  that  of  Aristratus,  who  flour¬ 
ished  in  the  time  of  Philip.  For  this  Aristratus 
was  painted  by  Melanthus  and  his  scholars, 
standing  by  a  chariot,  in  which  a  figure  of  Vic¬ 
tory  was  carried,  Apelles  himself  having  had 
a  hand  in  it,  as  Polemon  the  geographer  re- 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

ports.  It  was  an  extraordinary  piece,  and  there¬ 
fore  Aratus  was  fain  to  spare  it  for  the  work¬ 
manship,  and  yet,  instigated  by  the  hatred  he 
bore  the  tyrants,  commanded  it  to  be  taken 
down.  But  Neacles  the  painter,  one  of  Ara- 
tus’s  friends,  entreated  him,  it  is  said,  with 
tears  in  his  eyes,  to  spare  it,  and  finding  he 
did  not  prevail  with  him,  told  him  at  last  he 
should  carry  on  his  war  with  the  tyrants,  but 
with  the  tyrants  alone:  “Let  therefore  the 
chariot  and  the  Victory  stand,  and  I  will  take 
means  for  the  removal  of  Aristratus”;  to 
which  Aratus  consenting,  Neacles  blotted  out 
Aristratus,  and  in  his  place  painted  a  palm- 
tree,  not  daring  to  add  anything  else  of  his 
own  invention.  The  feet  of  the  defaced  figure 
of  Aristratus  are  said  to  have  escaped  notice, 
and  to  be  hid  under  the  chariot. 

By  these  means  Aratus  got  favour  with  the 
king,  who,  after  he  was  more  fully  acquainted 
with  him,  loved  him  so  much  the  more,  and 
gave  him  for  the  relief  of  his  city  one  hundred 
and  fifty  talents;  forty  of  which  he  immediate¬ 
ly  carried  away  with  him,  when  he  sailed  to 
Peloponnesus,  but  the  rest  the  king  divided 
into  instalments,  and  sent  them  to  him  after¬ 
wards  at  different  times. 

Assuredly  it  was  a  great  thing  to  procure  for 
his  fellow-citizens  a  sum  of  money,  a  small  por¬ 
tion  of  which  had  been  sufficient,  when  pre¬ 
sented  by  a  king  to  other  captains  and  popular 
leaders,  to  induce  them  to  turn  dishonest,  and 
betray  and  give  away  their  native  countries  to 
him.  But  it  was  a  much  greater,  that  by  means 
of  this  money  he  effected  a  reconciliation  and 
good  understanding  between  the  rich  and  poor, 
and  created  quiet  and  security  for  the  whole 
people.  His  moderation,  also,  amidst  so  great 
power  was  very  admirable.  For  being  declared 
sole  arbitrator  and  plenipotentiary  for  settling 
the  questions  of  property  in  the  case  of  the 
exiles,  he  would  not  accept  the  commission 
alone,  but,  associating  with  himself  fifteen  of 
the  citizens,  with  great  pains  and  trouble  he 
succeeded  in  adjusting  matters,  and  established 
peace  and  good-will  in  the  city,  for  which  good 
service,  not  only  all  the  citizens  in  general  be¬ 
stowed  extraordinary  honours  upon  him,  but 
the  exiles,  apart  by  themselves,  erecting  his 
statue  in  brass,  inscribed  on  it  these  elegiac 
verses: — 

Your  counsels ,  deeds,  and  skill  for  Greece  in  war 

Known  beyond  Hercules ’s  pillars  are; 

But  we  this  image,  O  Aratus,  gave, 

Of  you  who  saved  us,  to  the  gods  who  save, 

By  you  from  exile  to  our  homes  restored, 


ARATUS 

That  virtue  and  that  justice  to  record,  - 

To  which  the  blessing  Sicyon  owes  this  day 

Of  wealth  thafs  shared  ali\e,  and  laws  that  all 
obey . 

By  his  success  in  effecting  these  things,  Ara- 
tus  secured  himself  from  the  envy  of  his  fellow- 
citizens,  on  account  of  the  benefits  they  felt 
he  had  done  them;  but  King  Antigonus  being 
troubled  in  his  mind  about  him,  and  design¬ 
ing  either  wholly  to  bring  him  over  to  his 
party,  or  else  to  make  him  suspected  by  Ptol¬ 
emy,  besides  other  marks  of  his  favour  shown 
to  him,  who  had  little  mind  to  receive  them, 
added  this  too,  that,  sacrificing  to  the  gods  in 
Corinth,  he  sent  portions  to  Aratus  at  Sicyon, 
and  at  the  feast,  where  were  many  guests,  he 
said  openly,  “I  thought  this  Sicyonian  youth 
had  been  only  a  lover  of  liberty  and  of  his 
fellow-citizens,  but  now  I  look  upon  him  as  a 
good  judge  of  the  manners  and  actions  of 
kings.  For  formerly  he  despised  us,  and,  plac¬ 
ing  his  hopes  further  off,  admired  the  Egyp¬ 
tian  riches,  hearing  so  much  of  their  elephants, 
fleets,  and  palaces.  But  after  seeing  all  these  at 
a  nearer  distance,  perceiving  them  to  be  but 
mere  stage  show  and  pageantry,  he  is  now  come 
over  to  us.  And  for  my  part  I  willingly  receive 
him,  and,  resolving  to  make  great  use  of  him 
myself,  command  you  to  look  upon  him  as  a 
friend.” 

These  words  were  soon  taken  hold  of  by 
those  that  envied  and  maligned  him, who  strove 
which  of  them  should,  in  their  letters  to  Ptol¬ 
emy,  attack  him  with  the  worst  calumnies,  so 
that  Ptolemy  sent  to  expostulate  the  matter 
with  him;  so  much  envy  and  ill-will  did  there 
always  attend  the  so  much  contended  for,  and 
so  ardently  and  passionately  aspired  to,  friend¬ 
ships  of  princes  and  great  men. 

But  Aratus,  being  now  for  the  first  time  cho¬ 
sen  general  of  the  Achaeans,  ravaged  the  coun¬ 
try  of  Locris  and  Calydon,  just  over  against 
Achaea,  and  then  went  to  assist  the  Boeotians 
with  ten  thousand  soldiers,  but  came  not  up  to 
them  until  after  the  battle  near  Chaeronea  had 
been  fought,  in  which  they  were  beaten  by  the 
iEtolians,  with  the  loss  of  Aboeocritus  the  Bceo- 
tarch,  and  a  thousand  men  besides.  A  year 
after,  being  again  elected  general,  he  resolved 
to  attempt  the  capture  of  the  Acro-Corinthus, 
not  so  much  for  the  advantage  of  the  Sicyo- 
nians  or  Achaeans,  as  considering  that  by  ex¬ 
pelling  the  Macedonian  garrison  he  should  free 
all  Greece  alike  from  a  tyranny  which  op¬ 
pressed  every  part  of  her.  Chares,  the  Athe¬ 
nian,  having  the  good  fortune  to  get  the  better, 


831 

in  a  certain  battle,  of  the  king’s  generals,  wrote 
to  the  people  of  Athens  that  this  victory  was 
“sister  to  that  at  Marathon.” 

And  so  may  this  action  be  very  safely  termed 
sister  to  those  of  Pelopidas  the  Theban  and 
Thrasybulus  the  Athenian,  in  which  they  slew 
the  tyrants;  except,  perhaps,  it  exceed  them 
upon  this  account,  that  it  was  not  against  nat¬ 
ural  Grecians,  but  against  a  foreign  and  stran¬ 
ger  domination. 

The  Isthmus,  rising  like  a  bank  between  the 
seas,  collects  into  a  single  spot  and  compresses 
together  the  whole  continent  of  Greece;  and 
Acro-Corinthus,  being  a  high  mountain  spring¬ 
ing  up  out  of  the  very  middle  of  what  here  is 
Greece,  whensoever  it  is  held  with  a  garrison, 
stands  in  the  way  and  cuts  off  all  Peloponnesus 
from  intercourse  of  every  kind,  free  passage  of 
men  and  arms,  and  all  traffic  by  sea  and  land, 
and  makes  him  lord  of  all  that  is  master  of  it. 
Wherefore  the  younger  Philip  did  not  jest,  but 
said  very  true,  when  he  called  the  city  of  Cor¬ 
inth  “the  fetters  of  Greece.”  So  that  this  post 
was  always  much  contended  for,  especially  by 
the  kings  and  tyrants;  and  so  vehemently  was 
it  longed  for  by  Antigonus,  that  his  passion  for 
it  came  little  short  of  that  of  frantic  love;  he 
was  continually  occupied  with  devising  how  to 
take  it  by  surprise  from  those  that  were  then 
masters  of  it,  since  he  despaired  to  do  it  by 
open  force. 

Therefore  Alexander,  who  held  the  place, 
being  dead,  poisoned  by  him,  as  is  reported, 
and  his  wife  Nicaea  succeeding  in  the  govern¬ 
ment  and  the  possession  of  Acro-Corinthus,  he 
immediately  made  use  of  his  son,  Demetrius, 
and,  giving  her  pleasing  hopes  of  a  royal  mar¬ 
riage  and  of  a  happy  life  with  a  youth,  whom 
a  woman  now  growing  old  might  well  find 
agreeable,  with  this  lure  of  his  son  he  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  taking  her;  but  the  place  itself  she 
did  not  deliver  up,  but  continued  to  hold  it 
with  a  very  strong  garrison,  of  which  he  seem¬ 
ing  to  take  no  notice,  celebrated  the  wedding 
in  Corinth,  entertaining  them  with  shows  and 
banquets  every  day,  as  one  that  had  nothing 
else  in  his  mind  but  to  give  himself  up  for  a 
while  to  indulgence  in  pleasure  and  mirth.  But 
when  the  moment  came,, and  Amoebeus  began 
to  sing  in  the  theatre,  he  waited  himself  upon 
Nicaea  to  the  play,  she  being  carried  in  a  roy¬ 
ally  decorated  chair,  extremely  pleased  with 
her  new  honour,  not  dreaming  of  what  was  in¬ 
tended.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  they  were  come 
to  the  turning  which  led  up  to  the  citadel,  he 
desired  her  to  go  on  before  him  to  the  theatre, 


832 

but  for  himself,  bidding  farewell  to  the  music, 
farewell  to  the  wedding,  he  went  on  faster 
than  one  would  have  thought  his  age  would 
have  admitted  to  the  Acro-Corinthus,  and, 
finding  the  gate  shut,  knocked  with  his  staff, 
commanding  them  to  open,  which  they  within, 
being  amazed,  did. 

And  having  thus  made  himself  master  of  the 
place,  he  could  not  contain  himself  for  joy;  but, 
though  an  old  man,  and  one  that  had  seen  so 
many  turns  of  fortune,  he  must  needs  revel  in 
the  open  streets  and  in  the  midst  of  the  market¬ 
place,  crowned  with  garlands  and  attended 
with  flute-women,  inviting  everybody  he  met 
to  partake  in  his  festivity.  So  much  more  does 
joy  without  discretion  transport  and  agitate 
the  mind  than  either  fear  or  sorrow.  Antigo- 
nus,  therefore,  having  in  this  manner  possessed 
himself  of  Acro-Corinthus,  put  a  garrison  into 
it  of  those  he  trusted  most,  making  Persaeus 
the  philosopher  governor. 

Now  Aratus,  even  in  the  lifetime  of  Alex¬ 
ander,  had  made  an  attempt,  but,  a  confed¬ 
eracy  being  made  between  Alexander  and  the 
Achaeans,  he  desisted.  But  now  he  started 
afresh,  with  a  new  plan  of  effecting  the  thing, 
which  was  this:  there  were  in  Corinth  four 
brothers,  Syrians  born,  one  of  whom,  called 
Diodes,  served  as  a  soldier  in  the  garrison,  but 
the  three  others,  having  stolen  some  gold  of  the 
king’s,  came  to  Sicyon,  to  one  ^Egias,  a  banker, 
whom  Aratus  made  use  of  in  his  business.  To 
him  they  immediately  sold  part  of  their  gold, 
and  the  rest,  one  of  them,  called  Erginus,  com¬ 
ing  often  thither,  exchanged  by  parcels.  Be¬ 
coming,  by  this  means,  familiarly  acquainted 
with  iEgias,  and  being  by  him  led  into  dis¬ 
courses  concerning  the  fortress,  he  told  him 
that  in  going  up  to  his  brother  he  had  observed, 
in  the  face  of  the  rock,  a  side  cleft,  leading  to 
that  part  of  the  wall  of  the  castle  which  was 
lower  than  the  rest.  At  which  iEgias  joking 
with  him  and  saying,  “So,  you  wise  man,  for 
the  sake  of  a  little  gold  you  have  broken  into 
the  king’s  treasure;  when  you  might,  if  you 
chose,  get  money  in  abundance  for  a  single 
hour’s  work,  burglary,  you  know,  and  treason 
being  punished  with  the  same  death.” 

Erginus  laughed  and  told  him  then,  he 
would  break  the  thing  to  Diodes  (for  he  did 
not  altogether  trust  his  older  brothers),  and, 
returning  within  a  few  days,  he  bargained  to 
conduct  Aratus  to  that  part  of  the  wall  where 
it  was  no  more  than  fifteen  feet  high,  and  to 
do  what  else  should  be  necessary,  together  with 
his  brother  Diodes. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Aratus,  therefore,  agreed  to  give  them  sixty 
talents  if  he  succeeded,  but  if  he  failed  in  his 
enterprise,  and  yet  he  and  they  came  ofi  safe, 
then  he  would  give  each  of  them  a  house  and  a 
talent.  Now  the  threescore  talents  having  to  be 
deposited  in  the  hands  of  digias  for  Erginus 
and  his  partners,  and  Aratus  neither  having  so 
much  by  him,  nor  willing,  by  borrowing  it 
from  others,  to  give  any  one  a  suspicion  of  his 
design,  he  pawned  his  plate  and  his  wife’s  gold¬ 
en  ornaments  to  JEg ias  for  the  money.  For  so 
high  was  his  temper,  and  so  strong  his  passion 
for  noble  actions,  that,  even  as  he  had  heard 
that  Phocion  and  Epaminondas  were  the  best 
and  justest  of  the  Greeks,  because  they  refused 
the  greatest  presents,  and  would  not  surrender 
their  duty  for  money,  so  he  now  chose  to  be  at 
the  expense  of  this  enterprise  privately,  and  to 
advance  all  the  cost  out  of  his  own  property, 
taking  the  whole  hazard  on  himself  for  the 
sake  of  the  rest  that  did  not  so  much  as  know 
what  was  doing.  And  who  indeed  can  with¬ 
hold,  even  now,  his  admiration  for,  and  his 
sympathy  with,  the  generous  mind  of  one  who 
paid  so  largely  to  purchase  so  great  a  risk,  and 
lent  out  his  richest  possessions  to  have  an  op¬ 
portunity  to  expose  his  own  life,  by  entering 
among  his  enemies  in  the  dead  of  the  night, 
without  desiring  any  other  security  for  them 
than  the  hope  of  a  noble  success. 

Now  the  enterprise,  though  dangerous 
enough  in  itself,  was  made  much  more  so  by 
an  error  happening  through  mistake  in  the 
very  beginning.  For  Technon,  one  of  Aratus’s 
servants,  was  sent  away  to  Diodes,  that  they 
might  together  view  the  wall.  Now  he  had 
never  seen  Diodes,  but  made  no  question  of 
knowing  him  by  the  marks  Erginus  had  given 
him  of  him;  namely,  that  he  had  curly  hair,  a 
swarthy  complexion,  and  no  beard.  Being 
come,  therefore,  to  the  appointed  place,  he 
stayed  waiting  for  Erginus  and  Diodes  outside 
the  town,  in  front  of  the  place  called  Ornis.  In 
the  meantime,  Dionysius,  elder  brother  to  Er¬ 
ginus  and  Diodes,  who  knew  nothing  at  all  of 
the  matter,  but  much  resembled  Diodes,  hap¬ 
pened  to  pass  by.  Technon,  upon  this  likeness, 
all  being  in  accordance  with  what  he  had  been 
told,  asked  him  if  he  knew  Erginus;  and  on  his 
replying  that  he  was  his  brother,  taking  it  for 
granted  that  he  was  speaking  with  Diodes,  not 
so  much  as  asking  his  name  or  staying  for  any 
other  token,  he  gave  him  his  hand,  and  began 
to  discourse  with  him  and  ask  him  questions 
about  matters  agreed  upon  with  Erginus. 

Dionysius,  cunningly  taking  the  advantage 


ARATUS 

of  his  mistake,  seemed  to  understand  him  very 
well,  and  returning  towards  the  city,  led  him 
on,  still  talking,  without  any  suspicion.  And 
being  now  near  the  gate,  he  was  just  about  to 
seize  on  him,  when  by  chance  again  Erginus 
met  them,  and,  apprehending  the  cheat  and 
the  danger,  beckoned  to  Technon  to  make  his 
escape,  and  immediately  both  of  them,  betaking 
themselves  to  their  heels,  ran  away  as  fast  as 
they  could  to  Aratus,  who  for  all  this  despaired 
not,  but  immediately  sent  away  Erginus  to 
Dionysius  to  bribe  him  to  hold  his  tongue. 
And  he  not  only  effected  that,  but  also  brought 
him  along  with  him  to  Aratus.  But  when  they 
had  him,  they  no  longer  left  him  at  liberty,  but 
binding  him,  they  kept  him  close  shut  up  in  a 
room,  whilst  they  prepared  for  executing  their 
design. 

All  things  being  now  ready,  he  commanded 
the  rest  of  his  forces  to  pass  the  night  by  their 
arms,  and  taking  with  him  four  hundred  cho¬ 
sen  men,  few  of  whom  knew  what  they  were 
going  about,  he  led  them  to  the  gates  by  the 
temple  of  Juno.  It  was  the  midst  of  summer, 
and  the  moon  was  at  full,  and  the  night  so  clear 
without  any  clouds  that  there  was  danger  lest 
the  arms  glistening  in  the  moonlight  should 
discover  them.  But  as  the  foremost  of  them 
came  near  the  city,  a  mist  came  off  from  the 
sea,  and  darkened  the  city  itself  and  the  out¬ 
skirts  about  it.  Then  the  rest  of  them,  sitting 
down,  put  off  their  shoes,  because  men  both 
make  less  noise  and  also  climb  surer  if  they  go 
up  ladders  barefooted,  but  Erginus,  taking 
with  him  seven  young  men  dressed  like  travel¬ 
lers,  got  unobserved  to  the  gate,  and  killed  the 
sentry  with  the  other  guards.  And  at  the  same 
time  the  ladders  were  clapped  to  the  walls,  and 
Aratus,  having  in  great  haste  got  up  a  hundred 
men,  commanded  the  rest  to  follow  as  they 
could,  and  immediately  drawing  up  his  lad¬ 
ders  after  him,  he  marched  through  the  city 
with  his  hundred  men  towards  the  castle,  being 
already  overjoyed  that  he  was  undiscovered, 
and  not  doubting  of  the  success. 

But  while  still  they  were  some  way  off,  a 
watch  of  four  men  came  with  a  light,  who  did 
not  see  them,  because  they  were  still  in  the 
shade  of  the  moon,  but  were  seen  plainly 
enough  themselves  as  they  came  on  directly 
towards  them.  So  withdrawing  a  little  way 
amongst  some  walls  and  plots  for  houses,  they 
lay  in  wait  for  them;  and  three  of  them  they 
killed.  But  the  fourth,  being  wounded  in  the 
head  with  a  sword,  fled,  crying  out  that  the  en¬ 
emy  was  in  the  city.  And  immediately  the 


833 

trumpets  sounded,  and  all  the  city  was  in  an 
uproar  at  what  had  happened,  and  the  streets 
were  full  of  people  running  up  and  down,  and 
many  lights  were  seen  shining  both  below  in 
the  town,  and  above  in  the  castle,  and  a  con¬ 
fused  noise  was  to  be  heard  in  all  parts. 

In  the  meantime,  Aratus  was  hard  at  work 
struggling  to  get  up  the  rocks,  at  first  slowly 
and  with  much  difficulty,  straying  continually 
from  the  path,  which  lay  deep,  and  was  over¬ 
shadowed  with  the  crags,  leading  to  the  wall 
with  many  windings  and  turnings;  but  the 
moon  immediately,  and  as  if  by  miracle,  it  is 
said,  dispersing  the  clouds,  shone  out  and  gave 
light  to  the  most  difficult  part  of  the  way,  until 
he  got  to  that  part  of  the  wall  he  desired,  and 
there  she  overshadowed  and  hid  him,  the 
clouds  coming  together  again. 

Those  soldiers  whom  Aratus  had  left  out¬ 
side  the  gate,  near  Juno’s  temple,  to  the  num¬ 
ber  of  three  hundred,  entering  the  town,  now 
full  of  tumult  and  lights,  and  not  knowing  the 
way  by  which  the  former  had  gone,  and  find¬ 
ing  no  track  of  them,  slunk  aside,  and  crowded 
together  in  one  body  under  a  flank  of  the  cliff 
that  cast  a  strong  shadow,  and  there  stood  and 
waited  in  great  distress  and  perplexity.  For,  by 
this  time,  those  that  had  gone  with  Aratus 
were  attacked  with  missiles  from  the  citadel, 
and  were  busy  fighting,  and  a  sound  of  cries  of 
battle  came  down  from  above,  and  a  loud 
noise  echoed  back  and  back  from  the  moun¬ 
tain  sides,  and  therefore  confused  and  uncer¬ 
tain  whence  it  proceeded,  was  heard  on  all 
sides.  They  being  thus  in  doubt  which  way  to 
turn  themselves,  Archelaus,  the  commander  of 
Antigonus’s  troops,  having  a  great  number  of 
soldiers  with  him,  made  up  towards  the  castle 
with  great  shouts  and  noise  of  trumpets  to  fall 
upon  Aratus’s  people,  and  passed  by  the  three 
hundred,  who,  as  if  they  had  risen  out  of  an 
ambush,  immediately  charged  him,  killing  the 
first  they  encountered,  and  so  affrighted  the 
rest,  together  with  Archelaus,  that  they  put 
them  to  flight  and  pursued  them  until  they 
had  quite  broken  and  dispersed  them  about  the 
city. 

No  sooner  were  these  defeated,  but  Erginus 
came  to  them  from  those  that  were  fighting 
above,  to  acquaint  them  that  Aratus  was  en¬ 
gaged  with  the  enemy,  who  defended  them¬ 
selves  very  stoutly,  and  there  was  a  fierce  con¬ 
flict  at  the  very  wall,  and  need  of  speedy  help. 
They  therefore  desired  him  to  lead  them  on 
without  delay,  and,  marching  up,  by  their 
shouts  made  their  friends  understand  who  they 


834 


were, and  encouraged  them;  and  the  full  moon, 
shining  on  their  arms,  made  them,  in  the  long 
line  by  which  they  advanced,  appear  more  in 
number  to  the  enemy  than  they  were;  and  the 
echo  of  the  night  multiplied  their  shouts.  In 
short,  falling  on  with  the  rest,  they  made  the 
enemy  give  way,  and  were  masters  of  the  castle 
and  garrison,  day  now  beginning  to  be  bright, 
and  the  rising  sun  shining  out  upon  their  suc¬ 
cess.  By  this  time,  also,  the  rest  of  his  army 
came  up  to  Aratus  from  Sicyon,  the  Corinthi¬ 
ans  joyfully  receiving  them  at  the  gates  and 
helping  them  to  secure  the  king’s  party. 

And  now,  having  put  all  things  into  a  safe 
posture,  he  came  down  from  the  castle  to  the 
theatre,  an  infinite  number  of  people  crowding 
thither  to  see  him  and  to  hear  what  he  would 
say  to  the  Corinthians.  Therefore,  drawing  up 
the  Achaeans  on  each  side  of  the  stage-passages, 
he  came  forward  himself  upon  the  stage,  with 
his  corselet  still  on,  and  his  face  showing  the 
effects  of  all  his  hard  work  and  want  of  sleep, 
so  that  his  natural  exultation  and  joyfulness  of 
mind  were  overborne  by  the  weariness  of  his 
body.  The  people,  as  soon  as  he  came  forth, 
breaking  out  into  great  applauses  and  congrat¬ 
ulations,  he  took  his  spear  in  his  right  hand, 
and,  resting  his  body  upon  it  with  his  knee  a 
little  bent,  stood  a  good  while  in  that  posture, 
silently  receiving  their  shouts  and  acclama¬ 
tions,  while  they  extolled  his  valour  and  won¬ 
dered  at  his  fortune;  which  being  over,  stand¬ 
ing  up,  he  began  an  oration  in  the  name  of  the 
Achaeans,  suitable  to  the  late  action,  persuad¬ 
ing  the  Corinthians  to  associate  themselves  to 
the  Achaeans,  and  withal  delivered  up  to  them 
the  keys  of  their  gates,  which  had  never  been 
in  their  power  since  the  time  of  King  Philip. 
Of  the  captains  of  Antigonus,  he  dismissed 
Archelaus,  whom  he  had  taken  prisoner,  and 
Theophrastus,  who  refused  to  quit  his  post,  he 
put  to  death. 

As  for  Persaeus,  when  he  saw  the  castle  was 
lost,  he  had  got  away  to  Cenchreae,  where,  some 
time  after,  discoursing  with  one  that  said  to 
him  that  the  wise  man  only  is  a  true  general, 
“Indeed,”  he  replied,  “none  of  Zeno’s  maxims 
once  pleased  me  better  than  this,  but  I  have 
been  converted  to  another  opinion  by  the  young 
man  of  Sicyon.”  This  is  told  by  many  of  Per¬ 
saeus. 

Aratus  immediately  after  made  himself  mas¬ 
ter  of  the  temple  of  Juno  and  haven  of  Lechae- 
um,  seized  upon  five-and-twenty  of  the  king’s 
ships,  together  with  five  hundred  horses  and 
four  hundred  Syrians:  these  he  sold.  The 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

Achaeans  kept  guard  in  the  Acro-Corinthus 
with  a  body  of  four  hundred  soldiers,  and  fifty 
dogs  with  as  many  keepers. 

The  Romans,  extolling  Philopcemen,  called 
him  the  last  of  the  Grecians,  as  if  no  great  man 
had  ever  since  his  time  been  bred  amongst 
them.  But  I  should  call  this  capture  of  the 
Acro-Corinthus  the  last  of  the  Grecian  exploits, 
being  comparable  to  the  best  of  them,  both  for 
the  daringness  of  it,  and  the  success,  as  was 
presently  seen  by  the  consequences.  For  the 
Megarians,  revolting  from  Antigonus,  joined 
Aratus,  and  the  Trcezenians  and  Epidaurians 
enrolled  themselves  in  the  Achaean  commu¬ 
nity,  and  issuing  forth  for  the  first  time,  he 
entered  Attica,  and  passing  over  into  Salamis, 
he  plundered  the  island,  turning  the  Achaean 
force  every  way,  as  if  it  were  just  let  loose  out 
of  prison  and  set  at  liberty.  All  freemen  whom 
he  took  he  sent  back  to  the  Athenians  without 
ransom,  as  a  sort  of  first  invitation  to  them  to 
come  over  to  the  league.  He  made  Ptolemy  be¬ 
come  a  confederate  of  the  Achaeans,  with  the 
privilege  of  command  both  by  sea  and  land. 

And  so  great  was  his  power  with  them,  that 
since  he  could  not  by  law  be  chosen  their  gen¬ 
eral  every  year,  yet  every  other  year  he  was, 
and  by  his  counsels  and  actions  was  in  effect 
always  so.  For  they  perceived  that  neither 
riches  nor  reputation,  nor  the  friendship  of 
kings,  nor  the  private  interest  of  his  own  coun¬ 
try,  nor  anything  else  was  so  dear  to  him  as  the 
increase  of  the  Achaeans’  power  and  greatness. 
For  he  believed  that  the  cities,  weak  individu¬ 
ally,  could  be  preserved  by  nothing  else  but  a 
mutual  assistance  under  the  closest  bond  of  the 
common  interest,  and,  as  the  members  of  the 
body  live  and  breathe  by  the  union  of  all  in  a 
single  natural  growth,  and  on  the  dissolution 
of  this,  when  once  they  separate,  pine  away 
and  putrify,  in  the  same  manner  are  cities 
ruined  by  being  dissevered,  as  well  as  preserv¬ 
ed  when,  as  the  members  of  one  great  body, 
they  enjoy  the  benefit  of  that  province  and 
counsel  that  govern  the  whole. 

Now  being  distressed  to  see  that,  whereas 
the  chief  neighbouring  cities  enjoyed  their  own 
laws  and  liberties,  the  Argives  were  in  bond¬ 
age,  he  took  counsel  for  destroying  their  tyrant, 
Aristomachus,  being  very  desirous  both  to  pay 
his  debt  of  gratitude  to  the  city  where  he  had 
been  bred  up,  by  restoring  it  its  liberty,  and  to 
add  so  considerable  a  town  to  the  Achaeans. 
Nor  were  there  some  wanting  who  had  the 
courage  to  undertake  the  thing,  of  whom 
^Eschylus  and  Charimenes  the  soothsayer 


ARATUS 

were  the  chief.  But  they  wanted  swords;  for 
the  tyrant  had  prohibited  the  keeping  of  any 
under  a  great  penalty.  Therefore  Aratus,  hav¬ 
ing  provided  some  small  daggers  at  Corinth 
and  hidden  them  in  the  pack-saddles  of  some 
pack-horses  that  carried  ordinary  ware,  sent 
them  to  Argos.  But  Charimenes  letting  an¬ 
other  person  into  the  design,  /Eschylus  and 
his  partners  were  angry  at  it,  and  henceforth 
would  have  no  more  to  do  with  him,  and  took 
their  measures  by  themselves,  and  Charimen¬ 
es,  on  finding  this,  went,  out  of  anger,  and  in¬ 
formed  against  them,  just  as  they  were  on 
their  way  to  attack  the  tyrant;  however,  the 
most  of  them  made  a  shift  to  escape  out  of 
the  marketplace,  and  fled  to  Corinth. 

Not  long  after,  Aristomachus  was  slain  by 
some  slaves,  and  Aristippus,  a  worse  tyrant 
than  he,  seized  the  government.  Upon  this, 
Aratus,  mustering  all  the  Achaeans  present  that 
were  of  age,  hurried  away  to  the  aid  of  the 
city,  believing  that  he  should  find  the  people 
ready  to  join  with  him.  But  the  greater  num¬ 
ber  being  by  this  time  habituated  to  slavery 
and  content  to  submit,  and  no  one  coming  to 
join  him,  he  was  obliged  to  retire,  having 
moreover  exposed  the  Achseans  to  the  charge 
of  committing  acts  of  hostility  in  the  midst  of 
peace;  upon  which  account  they  were  sued  be¬ 
fore  the  Mantineans,  and,  Aratus  not  making 
his  appearance,  Aristippus  gained  the  cause, 
and  had  damages  allowed  him  to  the  value  of 
thirty  minae.  And  now  hating  and  fearing  Ara¬ 
tus,  he  sought  means  to  kill  him,  having  the 
assistance  herein  of  King  Antigonus;  so  that 
Aratus  was  perpetually  dogged  and  watched 
by  those  that  waited  for  an  opportunity  to  do 
this  service. 

But  there  is  no  such  safeguard  of  a  ruler  as 
the  sincere  and  steady  good-will  of  his  subjects, 
for  where  both  the  common  people  and  the 
principal  citizens  have  their  fears  not  of,  but 
for,  their  governor,  he  sees  with  many  eyes  and 
hears  with  many  ears  whatsoever  is  doing. 
Therefore  I  cannot  but  here  stop  short  a  little 
in  the  course  of  my  narrative  to  describe  the 
manner  of  life  which  the  so  much  envied  arbi¬ 
trary  power  and  the  so  much  celebrated  and 
admired  pomp  and  pride  of  absolute  govern¬ 
ment  obliged  Aristippus  to  lead. 

For  though  Antigonus  was  his  friend  and 
ally,  and  though  he  maintained  numerous  sol¬ 
diers  to  act  as  his  body-guard,  and  had  not  left 
one  enemy  of  his  alive  in  the  city,  yet  he  was 
forced  to  make  his  guards  encamp  in  the  colon¬ 
nade  about  his  house;  and  for  his  servants,  he 


835 

turned  them  all  out  immediately  after  supper, 
and  then  shutting  the  doors  upon  them,  he 
crept  up  into  a  small  upper  chamber,  together 
with  his  mistress,  through  a  trap-door,  upon 
which  he  placed  his  bed,  and  there  slept  after 
such  a  fashion,  as  one  in  his  condition  can  be 
supposed  to  sleep,  that  is,  interruptedly  and  in 
fear.  The  ladder  was  taken  away  by  the  wom¬ 
an’s  mother,  and  locked  up  in  another  room; 
in  the  morning  she  brought  it  again,  and 
putting  it  to,  called  up  this  brave  and  wonder¬ 
ful  tyrant,  who  came  crawling  out  like  some 
creeping  thing  out  of  its  hole. 

Whereas  Aratus,  not  by  force  of  arms,  but 
lawfully  and  by  his  virtue,  lived  in  possession 
of  a  firmly  settled  command,  wearing  the  or¬ 
dinary  coat  and  cloak,  being  the  common  and 
declared  enemy  of  all  tyrants,  and  has  left  be¬ 
hind  him  a  noble  race  of  descendants  surviving 
among  the  Grecians  to  this  day;  while  those 
occupiers  of  citadels  and  maintainers  of  body¬ 
guards,  who  made  all  this  use  of  arms  and 
gates  and  bolts  to  protect  their  lives,  in  some 
few  cases  perhaps  escaped  like  the  hare  from 
the  hunters;  but  in  no  instance  have  we  either 
house  or  family,  or  so  much  as  a  tomb  to 
which  any  respect  is  shown,  remaining  to  pre¬ 
serve  the  memory  of  any  one  of  them. 

Against  this  Aristippus,  therefore,  Aratus 
made  many  open  and  many  secret  attempts, 
whilst  he  endeavoured  to  take  Argos,  though 
without  success;  once,  particularly,  clapping 
scaling  ladders  in  the  night  to  the  walls,  he 
desperately  got  up  upon  it  with  a  few  of  his 
soldiers,  and  killed  the  guards  that  opposed 
him.  But  the  day  appearing,  the  tyrant  set 
upon  him  on  all  hands,  whilst  the  Argives,  as 
if  it  had  not  been  their  liberty  that  was  con¬ 
tended  for,  but  some  Nemean  game  going  on 
for  which  it  was  their  privilege  to  assign  the 
prize,  like  fair  and  impartial  judges,  sat  look¬ 
ing  on  in  great  quietness.  Aratus,  fighting 
bravely,  was  run  through  the  thigh  with  a 
lance,  yet  he  maintained  his  ground  against 
the  enemy  till  night,  and,  had  he  been  able  to 
go  on  and  hold  out  that  night  also,  he  had 
gained  his  point;  for  the  tyrant  thought  of 
nothing  but  fleeing,  and  had  already  shipped 
most  of  his  goods.  But  Aratus,  having  no  in¬ 
telligence  of  this,  and  wanting  water,  being 
disabled  himself  by  his  wound,  retreated  with 
his  soldiers. 

Despairing  henceforth  to  do  any  good  this 
way,  he  fell  openly  with  his  army  into  Argolis, 
and  plundered  it,  and  in  a  fierce  battle  with 
Aristippus  near  the  river  Chares,  he  was  ac- 


836 

cused  of  having  withdrawn  out  of  the  fight, 
and  thereby  abandoned  the  victory.  For  where¬ 
as  one  part  of  his  army  had  unmistakably  got 
the  better,  and  was  pursuing  the  enemy  at  a 
good  distance  from  him,  he  yet  retreated  in 
confusion  into  his  camp,  not  so  much  because 
he  was  overpressed  by  those  with  whom  he 
was  engaged,  as  out  of  mistrust  of  success  and 
through  a  panic  fear.  But  when  the  other  wing, 
returning  from  the  pursuit,  showed  themselves 
extremely  vexed,  that  though  they  had  put  the 
enemy  to  flight  and  killed  many  more  of  his 
men  than  they  had  lost,  yet  those  that  were  in 
a  manner  conquered  should  erect  a  trophy  as 
conquerors,  being  much  ashamed  he  resolved 
to  fight  them  again  about  the  trophy,  and  the 
next  day  but  one  drew  up  his  army  to  give 
them  battle.  But,  perceiving  that  they  were  re¬ 
inforced  with  fresh  troops,  and  came  on  with 
better  courage  than  before,  he  durst  not  hazard 
a  fight,  but  retired  and  sent  to  request  a  truce 
to  bury  his  dead. 

However,  by  his  dexterity  in  dealing  per¬ 
sonally  with  men  and  managing  political  af¬ 
fairs,  and  by  his  general  favour,  he  excused 
and  obliterated  this  fault,  and  brought  in 
Cleonae  to  the  Achaean  association,  and  cele¬ 
brated  the  Nemean  games  at  Cleonae,  as  the 
proper  and  more  ancient  place  for  them.  The 
games  were  also  celebrated  by  the  Argives  at 
the  same  time,  which  gave  the  first  occasion 
to  the  violation  of  the  privilege  of  safe  con¬ 
duct  and  immunity  always  granted  to  those 
that  came  to  compete  for  the  prizes,  the 
Achaeans  at  that  time  selling  as  enemies  all 
those  they  caught  going  through  their  country 
after  joining  in  the  games  at  Argos.  So  vehe¬ 
ment  and  implacable  a  hater  was  he  of  the 
tyrants. 

Not  long  after,  having  notice  that  Aristippus 
had  a  design  upon  Cleonae,  but  was  afraid  of 
him,  because  he  then  was  staying  in  Corinth, 
he  assembled  an  army  by  public  proclamation, 
and  commanding  them  to  take  along  with 
them  provisions  for  several  days,  he  marched 
to  Cenchreae,  hoping  by  this  stratagem  to  en¬ 
tice  Aristippus  to  fall  upon  Cleonae,  when  he 
supposed  him  far  enough  off.  And  so  it  hap¬ 
pened,  for  he  immediately  brought  his  forces 
against  it  from  Argos.  But  Aratus,  returning 
from  Cenchreae  to  Corinth  in  the  dusk  of  the 
evening,  and  setting  posts  of  his  troops  in  all 
the  roads,  led  on  the  Achaeans,  who  followed 
in  such  good  order  and  with  so  much  speed 
and  alacrity,  that  they  were  undiscovered  by 
Aristippus,  not  only  whilst  upon  their  march, 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

but  even  when  they  got,  still  in  the  night,  into 
Cleonae,  and  drew  up  in  order  of  battle.  As 
soon  as  it  was  morning,  the  gates  being  opened 
and  the  trumpets  sounding,  he  fell  upon  the 
enemy  with  great  cries  and  fury,  routed  them 
at  once,  and  kept  close  in  pursuit,  following 
the  course  which  he  most  imagined  Aristippus 
would  choose,  there  being  many  turns  that 
might  be  taken.  And  so  the  chase  lasted  as  far 
as  Mycenae,  where  the  tyrant  was  slain  by  a 
certain  Cretan  called  Tragiscus,  as  Dinias  re¬ 
ports.  Of  the  common  soldiers,  there  fell  above 
fifteen  hundred. 

Yet  though  Aratus  had  obtained  so  great  a 
victory  and  that,  too,  without  the  loss  of  a  man, 
he  could  not  make  himself  master  of  Argos, 
nor  set  it  at  liberty,  because  Agias  and  the 
younger  Aristomachus  got  into  the  town  with 
some  of  the  king’s  forces,  and  seized  upon 
the  government.  However,  by  this  exploit  he 
spoiled  the  scoffs  and  jests  of  those  that  flat¬ 
tered  the  tyrants,  and  in  their  raillery  would 
say  that  the  Achaean  general  was  usually  trou¬ 
bled  with  a  looseness  when  he  was  to  fight  a 
battle,  that  the  sound  of  a  trumpet  struck  him 
with  a  drowsiness  and  a  giddiness,  and  that 
when  he  had  drawn  up  his  army  and  given 
the  word,  he  used  to  ask  his  lieutenants  and 
officers  whether  there  was  any  further  need  of 
his  presence  now  the  die  was  cast,  and  then 
went  aloof,  to  await  the  result  at  a  distance. 
For  indeed  these  stories  were  so  generally  lis¬ 
tened  to,  that,  when  the  philosophers  disputed 
whether  to  have  one’s  heart  beat  and  to  change 
colour  upon  any  apparent  danger  be  an  argu¬ 
ment  of  fear,  or  rather  of  some  distempera- 
ture  and  chilliness  of  bodily  constitution,  Ara¬ 
tus  was  always  quoted  as  a  good  general  who 
was  always  thus  affected  in  time  of  battle. 

Having  thus  despatched  Aristippus,  he  ad¬ 
vised  with  himself  how  to  overthrow  Lydiades, 
the  Megalopolitan,  who  held  usurped  power 
over  his  country.  This  person  was  naturally  of 
a  generous  temper,  and  not  insensible  of  true 
honour,  and  had  been  led  into  this  wickedness, 
not  by  the  ordinary  motives  of  other  tyrants, 
licentiousness  and  rapacity,  but  being  young, 
and  stimulated  with  the  desire  of  glory,  he  had 
let  his  mind  be  unwarily  prepossessed  with  the 
vain  and  false  applauses  given  to  tyranny,  as 
some  happy  and  glorious  thing.  But  he  no 
sooner  seized  the  government,  than  he  grew 
weary  of  the  pomp  and  burden  of  it.  And  at 
once  emulating  the  tranquillity  and  fearing  the 
policy  of  Aratus,  he  took  the  best  resolutions, 
first,  to  free  himself  from  hatred  and  fear,  from 


ARATUS 

soldiers  and  guards,  and,  secondly,  to  be  the 
public  benefactor  of  his  country.  And  sending 
for  Aratus,  he  resigned  the  government,  and 
incorporated  his  city  into  the  Achaean  com¬ 
munity. 

The  Achaeans,  applauding  this  generous  ac¬ 
tion,  chose  him  their  general;  upon  which,  de¬ 
siring  to  outdo  Aratus  in  glory,  amongst  many 
other  uncalled-for  things,  he  declared  war 
against  the  Lacedaemonians;  which  Aratus  op¬ 
posing  was  thought  to  do  so  out  of  envy;  and 
Lydiades  was  the  second  time  chosen  general, 
though  Aratus  acted  openly  against  him,  and 
laboured  to  have  the  office  conferred  upon 
another.  For  Aratus  himself  had  the  command 
every  other  year,  as  has  been  said.  Lydiades, 
however,  succeeded  so  well  in  his  pretensions, 
that  he  was  thrice  chosen  general,  governing 
alternately,  as  did  Aratus;  but  at  last,  declaring 
himself  his  professed  enemy,  and  accusing  him 
frequently  to  the  Achaeans,  he  was  rejected, 
and  fell  into  contempt,  people  now  seeing  that 
it  was  a  contest  between  a  counterfeit  and  a 
true,  unadulterated  virtue,  and,  as  iEsop  tells 
us  that  the  cuckoo  once,  asking  the  little  birds 
why  they  flew  away  from  her,  was  answered, 
because  they  feared  she  would  one  day  prove 
a  hawk,  so  Lydiades’s  former  tyranny  still  cast 
a  doubt  upon  the  reality  of  his  change. 

But  Aratus  gained  new  honour  in  the 
Affolian  war.  For  the  Achaeans  resolving  to  fall 
upon  the  Affolians  on  the  Megarian  confines, 
and  Agis  also,  the  Lacedaemonian  king,  who 
came  to  their  assistance  with  an  army,  encour¬ 
aging  them  to  fight,  Aratus  opposed  this  de¬ 
termination.  And  patiently  enduring  many  re¬ 
proaches,  many  scoffs  and  jeerings  at  his  soft 
and  cowardly  temper,  he  would  not,  for  any 
appearance  of  disgrace,  abandon  what  he 
judged  to  be  true  common  advantage,  and  suf¬ 
fered  the  enemy  to  pass  over  Geranea  into 
Peloponnesus  without  a  battle. 

But  when,  after  they  passed  by,  news  came 
that  they  had  suddenly  captured  Pellene,  he 
was  no  longer  the  same  man,  nor  would  he 
hear  of  any  delay,  or  wait  to  draw  together  his 
whole  force,  but  marched  towards  the  enemy, 
with  such  as  he  had  about  him,  to  fall  upon 
them,  as  they  were  indeed  now  much  less 
formidable  through  the  intemperances  and  dis¬ 
orders  committed  in  their  success.  For  as  soon 
as  they  entered  the  city,  the  common  soldiers 
dispersed  and  went  hither  and  thither  into  the 
houses,  quarrelling  and  fighting  with  one  an¬ 
other  about  the  plunder,  and  the  officers  and 
commanders  were  running  about  after  the 


837 

wives  and  daughters  of  the  Pellenians,  on 
whose  heads  they  put  their  own  helmets,  to 
mark  each  man  his  prize,  and  prevent  another 
from  seizing  it.  And  in  this  posture  were  they 
when  news  came  that  Aratus  was  ready  to  fall 
upon  them.  And  in  the  midst  of  the  consterna¬ 
tion  likely  to  ensue  in  the  confusion  they  were 
in  before  all  of  them  heard  of  the  danger,  the 
outmost  of  them,  engaging  at  the  gates  and  in 
the  suburbs  with  the  Achaeans,  were  already 
beaten  and  put  to  flight,  and  as  they  came 
headlong  back,  filled  with  their  panic  those 
who  had  taken  her  and  put  his  crested  helmet 
assistance. 

In  this  confusion,  one  of  the  captives,  daugh¬ 
ter  of  Epigethes,  a  citizen  of  repute,  being  ex¬ 
tremely  handsome  and  tall,  happened  to  be 
sitting  in  the  temple  of  Diana,  placed  there  by 
the  commander  of  the  band  of  chosen  men, 
who  had  taken  her  and  put  his  crested  helmet 
upon  her.  She,  hearing  the  noise,  and  running 
out  to  see  what  was  the  matter,  stood  in  the 
temple  gates,  looking  down  from  above  upon 
those  that  fought,  having  the  helmet  upon  her 
head;  in  which  posture  she  seemed  to  the  citi¬ 
zens  to  be  something  more  than  human,  and 
struck  fear  and  dread  into  the  enemy,  who  be¬ 
lieved  it  to  be  a  divine  apparition;  so  that  they 
lost  all  courage  to  defend  themselves.  But  the 
Pellenians  tell  us  that  the  image  of  Diana 
stands  usually  untouched,  and  when  the  priest¬ 
ess  happens  at  any  time  to  remove  it  to  some 
other  place,  nobody  dares  look  upon  it,  but  all 
turn  their  faces  from  it;  for  not  only  is  the 
sight  of  it  terrible  and  hurtful  to  mankind,  but 
it  makes  even  the  trees,  by  which  it  happens 
to  be  carried,  become  barren  and  cast  fruit. 
This  image,  therefore,  they  say,  the  priestess 
produced  at  that  time,  and  holding  it  directly 
in  the  faces  of  the  ^Etolians,  made  them  lose 
their  reason  and  judgment. 

But  Aratus  mentions  no  such  thing  in  his 
commentaries,  but  saying  that  having  put  to 
flight  the  A^tolians,  and  falling  in  pell-mell 
with  them  into  the  city,  he  drove  them  out  by 
main  force,  and  killed  seven  hundred  of  them. 
And  the  action  was  extolled  as  one  of  the  most 
famous  exploits,  and  Timanthes,  the  painter, 
made  a  picture  of  the  battle,  giving  by  his 
composition  a  most  lively  representation  of  it. 

But  many  great  nations  and  potentates  com¬ 
bining  against  the  Achaeans,  Aratus  immedi¬ 
ately  treated  for  friendly  arrangements  with 
the  iEtolians,  and,  making  use  of  the  assis¬ 
tance  of  Pantaleon,  the  most  powerful  man 
amongst  them,  he  not  only  made  a  peace,  but 


838 

an  alliance  between  them  and  the  Achacans. 
But  being  desirous  to  free  the  Athenians,  he 
got  into  disgrace  and  ill-repute  among  the 
Achaeans,  because,  notwithstanding  the  truce 
and  suspension  of  arms  made  between  them 
and  the  Macedonians,  he  had  attempted  to 
take  the  Piraeus.  He  denies  this  fact  in  his 
commentaries,  and  lays  the  blame  on  Ergi- 
nus,  by  whose  assistance  he  took  Acro-Corin- 
thus,  alleging  that  he  upon  his  own  private 
account  attacked  the  Piraeus,  and  his  ladders 
happening  to  break,  being  hotly  pursued, 
he  called  out  upon  Aratus,  as  if  present,  by 
which  means  deceiving  the  enemy  he  got 
safely  off. 

This  excuse,  however,  sounds  very  improb¬ 
able;  for  it  is  not  in  any  way  likely  that  Er- 
ginus,  a  private  man  and  a  Syrian  stranger, 
should  conceive  in  his  mind  so  great  an  at¬ 
tempt,  without  Aratus  at  his  back,  to  tell  him 
how  and  when  to  make  it,  and  to  supply  him 
with  the  means.  Nor  was  it  twice  or  thrice, 
but  very  often,  that,  like  an  obstinate  lover,  he 
repeated  his  attempts  on  the  Piraeus,  and  was 
so  far  from  being  discouraged  by  his  disap¬ 
pointments,  that  his  missing  his  hopes  but  nar¬ 
rowly  was  an  incentive  to  him  to  proceed  the 
more  boldly  in  a  new  trial.  One  time  amongst 
the  rest,  in  making  his  escape  through  the 
Thrasian  plain,  he  put  his  leg  out  of  joint,  and 
was  forced  to  submit  to  many  operations 
with  the  knife  before  he  was  cured,  so  that 
for  a  long  time  he  was  carried  in  a  litter  to 
the  wars. 

And  when  Antigonus  was  dead,  and  De¬ 
metrius  succeeded  him  in  the  kingdom,  he  was 
more  bent  than  ever  upon  Athens,  and  in  gen¬ 
eral  quite  despised  the  Macedonians.  And  so, 
being  overthrown  in  battle  near  Phylacia  by 
Bithys,  Demetrius’s  general,  and  there  being 
a  very  strong  report  that  he  was  either  taken 
or  slain,  Diogenes,  the  governor  of  the  Pi¬ 
raeus,  sent  letters  to  Corinth,  commanding  the 
Achaeans  to  quit  that  city,  seeing  Aratus  was 
dead.  When  these  letters  came  to  Corinth,  Ara¬ 
tus  happened  to  be  there  in  person,  so  that  Di¬ 
ogenes’s  messengers  being  sufficiently  mocked 
and  derided,  were  forced  to  return  to  their 
master.  King  Demetrius  himself  also  sent  a 
ship,  wherein  Aratus  was  to  be  brought  to  him 
in  chains.  And  the  Athenians,  exceeding  all 
possible  fickleness  of  flattery  to  the  Macedoni¬ 
ans,  crowned  themselves  with  garlands  upon 
the  first  news  of  his  death.  And  so  in  anger  he 
went  at  once  and  invaded  Attica,  and  pene¬ 
trated  as  far  as  the  Academy,  but  then  suffer- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ing  himself  to  be  pacified  he  did  no  further  act 
of  hostility. 

And  the  Athenians  afterwards,  coming  to  a 
due  sense  of  his  virtue  when  upon  the  death 
of  Demetrius  they  attempted  to  recover  their 
liberty,  called  him  to  their  assistance;  although 
at  that  time  another  person  was  general  of  the 
Achaeans,  and  he  himself  had  long  kept  his  bed 
with  a  sickness,  yet  rather  than  fail  the  city  in 
a  time  of  need,  he  was  carried  thither  in  a  lit¬ 
ter,  and  helped  to  persuade  Diogenes  the  gov¬ 
ernor  to  deliver  up  the  Piraeus,  Munychia,  Sala- 
mis,  and  Sunium  to  the  Athenians  in  consid¬ 
eration  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  talents,  of  which 
Aratus  himself  contributed  twenty  to  the  city. 
Upon  this,  the  iEginetans  and  the  Hermionians 
immediately  joined  the  Achaeans,and  the  great¬ 
est  part  of  Arcadia  entered  their  confederacy; 
and  the  Macedonians  being  occupied  with 
various  wars  upon  their  own  confines  and  with 
their  neighbours,  the  Achaean  power,  the  iEto- 
lians  also  being  in  alliance  with  them,  rose  to 
great  height. 

But  Aratus,  still  bent  on  effecting  his  old 
project,  and  impatient  that  tyranny  should 
maintain  itself  in  so  near  a  city  as  Argos,  sent 
to  Aristomachus  to  persuade  him  to  restore 
liberty  to  that  city,  and  to  associate  it  to  the 
Achaeans,  and  that,  following  Lydiades’s  ex¬ 
ample,  he  should  rather  choose  to  be  the  gen¬ 
eral  of  a  great  nation,  with  esteem  and  honour, 
than  the  tyrant  of  one  city,  with  continual 
hatred  and  danger.  Aristomachus  slighted  not 
the  message,  but  desired  Aratus  to  send  him 
fifty  talents,  with  which  he  might  pay  off  the 
soldiers.  In  the  meantime,  whilst  the  money 
was  providing,  Lydiades,  being  then  general, 
and  extremely  ambitious  that  this  advantage 
might  seem  to  be  of  his  procuring  for  the 
Achaeans,  accused  Aratus  to  Aristomachus,  as 
one  that  bore  an  irreconcilable  hatred  to  the 
tyrants,  and,  persuading  him  to  commit  the 
affair  to  his  management,  he  presented  him 
to  the  Achaeans. 

But  there  the  Achaean  council  gave  a  mani¬ 
fest  proof  of  the  great  credit  Aratus  had  with 
them  and  the  good-will  they  bore  him.  For 
when  he,  in  anger,  spoke  against  Aristo- 
machus’s  being  admitted  into  the  association, 
they  rejected  the  proposal,  but  when  he  was  aft¬ 
erwards  pacified  and  came  himself  and  spoke 
in  its  favour,  they  voted  everything  cheerfully 
and  readily,  and  decreed  that  the  Argives  and 
Phliasians  should  be  incorporated  into  their 
commonwealth,  and  the  next  year  they  chose 
Aristomachus  general.  He,  being  in  good  credit 


ARATUS 

with  the  Achaeans,  was  very  desirous  to  invade 
Laconia,  and  for  that  purpose  sent  for  Aratus 
from  Athens.  Aratus  wrote  to  him  to  dissuade 
him  as  far  as  he  could  from  that  expedition, 
being  very  unwilling  the  Achaeans  should  be 
engaged  in  a  quarrel  with  Cleomenes,  who  was 
a  daring  man,  and  making  extraordinary  ad¬ 
vances  to  power.  But  Aristomachus  resolving 
to  go  on,  he  obeyed  and  served  in  person,  on 
which  occasion  he  hindered  Aristomachus  from 
fighting  a  battle  when  Cleomenes  came  upon 
them  at  Pallantium;  and  for  this  act  was  ac¬ 
cused  by  Lydiades,  and,  coming  to  an  open 
conflict  with  him  in  a  contest  for  the  office  of 
general,  he  carried  it  by  the  show  of  hands, 
and  was  chosen  general  the  twelfth  time. 

This  year,  being  routed  by  Cleomenes,  near 
the  Lycaeum,  he  fled,  and,  wandering  out  of 
the  way  in  the  night,  was  believed  to  be  slain; 
and  once  more  it  was  confidently  reported  so 
throughout  all  Greece.  He,  however,  having 
escaped  this  danger  and  rallied  his  forces,  was 
not  content  to  march  off  in  safety,  but  making 
a  happy  use  of  the  present  conjuncture,  when 
nobody  dreamed  of  any  such  thing,  he  fell  sud¬ 
denly  upon  the  Mantineans,  allies  of  Cle¬ 
omenes,  and,  taking  the  city,  put  a  garrison 
into  it,  and  made  the  stranger  inhabitants  free 
of  the  city;  procuring,  by  this  means,  those  ad¬ 
vantages  for  the  beaten  Achaeans,  which  being 
conquerors,  they  would  not  easily  have  ob¬ 
tained.  The  Lacedaemonians  again  invading 
the  Megalopolitan  territories,  he  marched  to 
the  assistance  of  the  city,  but  refused  to  give 
Cleomenes,  who  did  all  he  could  to  provoke 
him  to  it,  any  opportunity  of  engaging  him  in 
a  battle,  nor  could  be  prevailed  upon  by  the 
Megalopolitans,  who  urged  him  to  it  extremely. 
For  besides  that  by  nature  he  was  ill-suited  for 
set  battles,  he  was  then  much  inferior  in  num¬ 
bers,  and  was  to  deal  with  a  daring  leader,  still 
in  the  heat  of  youth,  while  he  himself,  now 
past  the  prime  of  courage  and  come  to  a 
chastised  ambition,  felt  it  his  business  to  main¬ 
tain  by  prudence  the  glory  which  he  had  ob¬ 
tained,  and  the  other  was  only  aspiring  to  by 
forwardness  and  daring. 

So  that  though  the  light-armed  soldiers  had 
sallied  out  and  driven  the  Lacedaemonians  as 
far  as  their  camp,  and  had  come  even  to  their 
tents,  yet  would  not  Aratus  lead  his  men  for¬ 
ward,  but,  posting  himself  in  a  hollow  water¬ 
course  in  the  way  thither,  stopped  and  pre¬ 
vented  the  citizens  from  crossing  this.  Lydi¬ 
ades,  extremely  vexed  at  what  was  going  on, 
and  loading  Aratus  with  reproaches,  entreated 


839 

the  horse  that,  together  with  him,  they  would 
second  them  that  had  the  enemy  in  chase,  and 
not  let  a  certain  victory  slip  out  of  their  hands, 
nor  forsake  him  that  was  going  to  venture  his 
life  for  his  country.  And  being  reinforced  with 
many  brave  men  that  turned  after  him,  he 
charged  the  enemy’s  right  wing,  and  routing 
it  followed  the  pursuit  without  measure  or  dis¬ 
cretion,  letting  his  eagerness  and  hopes  of  glory 
tempt  him  on  into  broken  ground,  full  of 
planted  fruit-trees  and  cut  up  with  broad 
ditches,  where,  being  engaged  by  Cleomenes, 
he  fell,  fighting  gallantly  the  noblest  of  battles, 
at  the  gate  of  his  country.  The  rest,  flying  back 
to  their  main  body  and  troubling  the  ranks  of 
the  full-armed  infantry,  put  the  whole  army  to 
the  rout. 

Aratus  was  extremely  blamed,  being  sus¬ 
pected  to  have  betrayed  Lydiades,  and  was 
constrained  by  the  Achaeans,  who  withdrew  in 
great  anger,  to  accompany  them  to  ^Egium, 
where  they  called  a  council,  and  decreed  that 
he  should  no  longer  be  furnished  with  money, 
nor  have  any  more  soldiers  hired  for  him,  but 
that,  if  he  would  make  war,  he  should  pay 
them  himself. 

This  affront  he  resented  so  far  as  to  resolve 
to  give  up  the  seal  and  lay  down  the  office  of 
general;  but  upon  second  thoughts  he  found 
it  best  to  have  patience,  and  presently  marched 
with  the  Achaeans  to  Orchomenus  and  fought 
a  battle  with  Megistonus,  the  stepfather  of 
Cleomenes,  where  he  got  the  victory,  killing 
three  hundred  men  and  taking  Megistonus 
prisoner.  But  whereas  he  used  to  be  chosen 
general  every  other  year,  when  his  turn  came 
and  he  was  called  to  take  upon  him  that  charge, 
he  declined  it,  and  Timoxenus  was  chosen  in 
his  stead;  the  true  cause  of  which  was  not  the 
pique  he  was  alleged  to  have  taken  at  the  peo¬ 
ple,  but  the  ill  circumstances  of  the  Achaean  af¬ 
fairs.  For  Cleomenes  did  not  now  invade  them 
gently  and  tenderly  as  hitherto,  as  one  con¬ 
trolled  by  the  civil  authorities,  but  having 
killed  the  ephors,  divided  the  lands,  and  made 
many  of  the  stranger  residents  free  of  the  city, 
he  was  responsible  to  no  one  in  his  govern¬ 
ment;  and  therefore  fell  in  good  earnest  upon 
the  Achaeans,  and  put  forward  his  claim  to  the 
supreme  military  command. 

Wherefore  Aratus  is  much  blamed,  that  in  a 
stormy  and  tempestuous  time,  like  a  cowardly 
pilot,  he  should  forsake  the  helm  when  it  was 
even  perhaps  his  duty  to  have  insisted,  whether 
they  would  or  no,  on  saving  them;  or  if  he 
thought  the  Achaean  affairs  desperate,  to  have 


840 

yielded  all  up  to  Cleomenes,  and  not  to  have 
let  Peloponnesus  fall  once  again  into  barbarism 
with  Macedonian  garrisons,  and  Acro-Corin- 
thus  be  occupied  with  Illyric  and  Gaulish  sol¬ 
diers,  and,  under  the  specious  name  of  con¬ 
federates,  to  have  made  those  masters  of  the 
cities  whom  he  had  held  it  his  business  by 
arms  and  by  policy  to  baffle  and  defeat,  and,  in 
the  memoirs  he  left  behind  him,  loaded  with 
reproaches  and  insults.  And  say  that  Cleo¬ 
menes  was  arbitrary  and  tyrannical,  yet  was  he 
descended  from  the  Heraclidae,  and  Sparta  was 
his  country,  the  obscurest  citizens  of  which  de¬ 
served  to  be  preferred  to  the  generalship  before 
the  best  of  the  Macedonians  by  those  that  had 
any  regard  to  the  honour  of  Grecian  birth.  Be¬ 
sides,  Cleomenes  sued  for  that  command  over 
the  Achaeans  as  one  that  would  return  the  hon¬ 
our  of  that  title  with  real  kindnesses  to  the 
cities;  whereas  Antigonus,  being  declared  ab¬ 
solute  general  by  sea  and  land,  would  not  ac¬ 
cept  the  office  unless  Acro-Corinthus  were  by 
special  agreement  put  into  his  hands,  following 
the  example  of  JEsop's  hunter;  for  he  would 
not  get  up  and  ride  the  Achaeans,  who  desired 
him  so  to  do,  and  offered  their  backs  to  him  by 
embassies  and  popular  decrees,  till,  by  a  garri¬ 
son  and  hostages,  they  had  allowed  him  to  bit 
and  bridle  them. 

Aratus  exhausts  all  his  powers  of  speech  to 
show  the  necessity  that  was  upon  him.  But 
Polybius  writes,  that  long  before  this,  and  be¬ 
fore  there  was  any  necessity,  apprehending  the 
daring  temper  of  Cleomenes,  he  communi¬ 
cated  secretly  with  Antigonus,  and  that  he  had 
beforehand  prevailed  with  the  Megalopolitans 
to  press  the  Achaeans  to  crave  aid  from  Antig¬ 
onus.  For  they  were  the  most  harassed  by  the 
war,  Cleomenes  continually  plundering  and 
ransacking  their  country.  And  so  writes  also 
Phylarchus,  who,  unless  seconded  by  the  tes¬ 
timony  of  Polybius,  would  not  be  altogether 
credited;  for  he  is  seized  with  enthusiasm  when 
he  so  much  as  speaks  a  word  of  Cleomenes, 
and  as  if  he  were  pleading,  not  writing  a  his¬ 
tory,  goes  on  throughout  defending  the  one 
and  accusing  the  other. 

The  Achaeans,  therefore,  lost  Mantinea,  which 
was  recovered  by  Cleomenes,  and  being  beaten 
in  a  great  fight  near  Hecatombaeum,  so  general 
was  the  consternation  that  they  immediately 
sent  to  Cleomenes  to  desire  him  to  come  to  Ar¬ 
gos  and  take  the  command  upon  himself.  Ara¬ 
tus,  as  soon  as  he  understood  that  he  was  com¬ 
ing,  and  was  got  as  far  as  Lerna  with  his 
troops,  fearing  the  result,  sent  ambassadors  to 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

him  to  request  him  to  come  accompanied  with 
three  hundred  only,  as  to  friends  and  confed¬ 
erates,  and,  if  he  mistrusted  anything,  he  should 
receive  hostages.  Upon  which  Cleomenes,  say¬ 
ing  this  was  mere  mockery  and  affront,  went 
away,  sending  a  letter  to  the  Achaeans  full  of 
reproaches  and  accusation  against  Aratus.  And 
Aratus  also  wrote  letters  against  Cleomenes; 
and  bitter  revilings  and  railleries  were  current 
on  both  hands,  not  sparing  even  their  mar¬ 
riages  and  wives. 

Hereupon  Cleomenes  sent  a  herald  to  declare 
war  against  the  Achaeans,  and  in  the  mean¬ 
time  missed  very  narrowly  taking  Sicyon  by 
treachery.  Turning  off  at  a  little  distance,  he 
attacked  and  took  Pellene  which  the  Achaean 
general  abandoned,  and  not  long  after  took  also 
Pheneus  and  Penteleum.  Then  immediately 
the  Argives  voluntarily  joined  with  him,  and 
the  Phliasians  received  a  garrison,  and  in  short 
nothing  among  all  their  new  acquisitions  held 
firm  to  the  Achaeans.  Aratus  was  encompassed 
on  every  side  with  clamour  and  confusion;  he 
saw  the  whole  of  Peloponnesus  shaking  hands 
around  him,  and  the  cities  everywhere  set  in 
revolt  by  men  desirous  of  innovations. 

Indeed  no  place  remained  quiet  or  satisfied 
with  the  present  condition;  even  amongst  the 
Sicyonians  and  Corinthians  themselves,  many 
were  well  known  to  have  had  private  confer¬ 
ences  with  Cleomenes,  who  long  since,  out  of 
desire  to  make  themselves  masters  of  their  sev¬ 
eral  cities,  had  been  discontented  with  the  pres¬ 
ent  order  of  things.  Aratus,  having  absolute 
power  given  him  to  bring  these  to  condign 
punishment,  executed  as  many  of  them  as  he 
could  find  at  Sicyon,  but  going  about  to  find 
them  out  and  punish  them  at  Corinth  also,  he 
irritated  the  people,  already  unsound  in  feel¬ 
ing  and  weary  of  the  Achaean  government. 
So  collecting  tumultuously  in  the  temple  of 
Apollo,  they  sent  for  Aratus,  having  deter¬ 
mined  to  take  or  kill  him  before  they  broke 
out  into  open  revolt.  He  came,  accordingly, 
leading  his  horse  in  his  hand,  as  if  he  sus¬ 
pected  nothing.  Then  several  leaping  up  and 
accusing  and  reproaching  him,  with  mild 
words  and  a  settled  countenance  he  bade  them 
sit  down,  and  not  stand  crying  out  upon  him 
in  a  disorderly  manner,  desiring  also,  that  those 
that  were  about  the  door  might  be  let  in,  and 
saying  so,  he  stepped  out  quietly,  as  if  he  would 
give  his  horse  to  somebody. 

Clearing  himself  thus  of  the  crowd,  and 
speaking  without  discomposure  to  the  Corin¬ 
thians  that  he  met,  commanding  them  to  go  to 


ARATUS 

Apollo’s  temple,  and  being  now,  before  they 
were  aware,  got  near  to  the  citadel,  he  leaped 
upon  his  horse,  and  commanding  Cleopater, 
the  governor  of  the  garrison,  to  have  a  special 
care  of  his  charge,  he  galloped  to  Sicyon,  fol¬ 
lowed  by  thirty  of  his  soldiers,  the  rest  leaving 
him  and  shifting  for  themselves.  And  not  long 
after,  it  being  known  that  he  was  fled,  the 
Corinthians  pursued  him;  but  not  overtaking 
him,  they  immediately  sent  for  Cleomenes  and 
delivered  up  the  city  to  him,  who,  however, 
thought  nothing  they  could  give  was  so  great 
a  gain  as  was  the  loss  of  their  having  let  Ara- 
tus  get  away.  Nevertheless,  being  strengthened 
by  the  accession  of  the  people  of  the  Acte,  as  it 
is  called,  who  put  their  towns  into  his  hands, 
he  proceeded  to  carry  a  palisade  and  lines  of 
circumvallation  around  the  Acro-Corinthus. 

But  Aratus  being  arrived  at  Sicyon,  the  body 
of  the  Achaeans  there  flocked  to  him,  and,  in  an 
assembly  there  held,  he  was  chosen  general 
with  absolute  power,  and  he  took  about  him  a 
guard  of  his  own  citizens,  it  being  now  three- 
and-thirty  years  since  he  first  took  a  part  in 
public  affairs  among  the  Achaeans,  having  in 
that  time  been  the  chief  man  in  credit  and 
power  of  all  Greece;  but  he  was  now  deserted 
on  all  hands,  helpless  and  overpowered,  drift¬ 
ing  about  amidst  the  waves  and  danger  on  the 
shattered  hulk  of  his  native  city.  For  the  JEto- 
lians,  whom  he  applied  to,  declined  to  assist 
him  in  his  distress,  and  the  Athenians  who 
were  well  affected  to  him  were  diverted  from 
lending  him  any  succour  by  the  authority  of 
Euclides  and  Micion. 

Now  whereas  he  had  a  house  and  property 
in  Corinth,  Cleomenes  meddled  not  with  it, 
nor  suffered  anybody  else  to  do  so,  but  calling 
for  his  friends  and  agents,  he  bade  them  hold 
themselves  responsible  to  Aratus  for  every¬ 
thing,  as  to  him  they  would  have  to  render 
their  account;  and  privately  he  sent  to  him 
Tripylus,  and  afterwards  Megistonus,  his  own 
stepfather,  to  offer  him,  besides  several  other 
things,  a  yearly  pension  of  twelve  talents,  which 
was  twice  as  much  as  Ptolemy  allowed  him, 
for  he  gave  him  six;  and  all  that  he  demanded 
was  to  be  declared  commander  of  the  Achaeans, 
and  together  with  them  to  have  the  keeping  of 
the  citadel  of  Corinth.  To  which  Aratus  re¬ 
turning  answer  that  affairs  were  not  so  prop¬ 
erly  in  his  power  as  he  was  in  the  power  of 
them,  Cleomenes,  believing  this  a  mere  evasion, 
immediately  entered  the  country  of  Sicyon,  de¬ 
stroying  all  with  fire  and  sword,  and  besieged 
the  city  three  months,  whilst  Aratus  held  firm, 


841 

and  was  in  dispute  with  himself  whether  he 
should  call  in  Antigonus  upon  condition  of  de¬ 
livering  up  the  citadel  of  Corinth  to  him;  for 
he  would  not  lend  him  assistance  upon  any 
other  terms. 

In  the  meantime,  the  Achaeans  assembled  at 
iEgium,  and  called  for  Aratus;  but  it  was  very 
hazardous  for  him  to  pass  thither,  while  Cleo¬ 
menes  was  encamped  before  Sicyon;  besides, 
the  citizens  endeavoured  to  stop  him  by  their 
entreaties,  protesting  that  they  would  not  suf¬ 
fer  him  to  expose  himself  to  so  evident  danger, 
the  enemy  being  so  near;  the  women,  also,  and 
children  hung  about  him,  weeping  and  em¬ 
bracing  him  as  their  common  father  and  de¬ 
fender.  But  he,  having  comforted  and  encour¬ 
aged  them  as  well  as  he  could,  got  on  horse¬ 
back,  and  being  accompanied  with  ten  of  his 
friends  and  his  son,  then  a  youth,  got  away  to 
the  seaside,  and  finding  vessels  there  waiting 
off  the  shore,  went  on  board  them  and  sailed 
to  iTgium  to  the  assembly;  in  which  it  was  de¬ 
creed  that  Antigonus  should  be  called  in  to 
their  aid,  and  should  have  the  Acro-Corinthus 
delivered  to  him.  Aratus  also  sent  his  son  to 
him  with  the  other  hostages.  The  Corinthians, 
extremely  angry  at  this  proceeding,  now  plun¬ 
dered  his  property,  and  gave  his  house  as  a 
present  to  Cleomenes. 

Antigonus  being  now  near  at  hand  with  his 
army,  consisting  of  twenty  thousand  Mace¬ 
donian  foot  and  one  thousand  three  hundred 
horse,  Aratus,  with  the  members  of  council, 
went  to  meet  him  by  sea,  and  got,  unobserved 
by  the  enemy,  to  Pegae,  having  no  great  con¬ 
fidence  either  in  Antigonus  or  the  Macedoni¬ 
ans.  For  he  was  very  sensible  that  his  own  great¬ 
ness  had  been  made  out  of  the  losses  he  had 
caused  them,  and  that  the  first  great  principle 
of  his  public  conduct  had  been  hostility  to  the 
former  Antigonus.  But  perceiving  the  neces¬ 
sity  that  was  now  upon  him,  and  the  pressure 
of  the  time,  that  lord  and  master  of  those  we 
call  rulers  to  be  inexorable,  he  resolved  to  put 
all  to  the  venture.  So  soon,  therefore,  as  An¬ 
tigonus  was  told  that  Aratus  was  coming  up 
to  him,  he  saluted  the  rest  of  the  company  af¬ 
ter  the  ordinary  manner,  but  him  he  received 
at  the  very  first  approach  with  especial  hon¬ 
our,  and  finding  him  afterwards  to  be  both 
good  and  wise,  admitted  him  to  his  nearer  fa¬ 
miliarity.  For  Aratus  was  not  only  useful  to 
him  in  the  management  of  great  affairs,  but 
singularly  agreeable  also  as  the  private  com¬ 
panion  of  a  king  in  his  recreations.  And  there¬ 
fore,  though  Antigonus  was  young,  yet  as 


842 

soon  as  he  observed  the  temper  of  the  man  to 
be  proper  for  a  prince’s  friendship,  he  made 
more  use  of  him  than  of  any  other,  not  only 
of  the  Achaeans,  but  also  of  the  Macedonians 
that  were  about  him. 

So  that  the  thing  fell  out  to  him  just  as  the 
god  had  foreshown  in  a  sacrifice.  For  it  is  re¬ 
lated  that,  as  Aratus  was  not  long  before  offer¬ 
ing  sacrifice,  there  were  found  in  the  liver  two 
gall-bags  inclosed  in  the  same  caul  of  fat; 
whereupon  the  soothsayer  told  him  that  there 
should  very  soon  be  the  strictest  friendship  im¬ 
aginable  between  him  and  his  greatest  and 
most  mortal  enemies;  which  prediction  he  at 
that  time  slighted,  having  in  general  no  great 
faith  in  soothsayings  and  prognostications,  but 
depending  most  upon  rational  deliberation.  At 
an  after  time,  however,  when,  things  succeed¬ 
ing  well  in  the  war,  Antigonus  made  a  great 
feast  at  Corinth,  to  which  he  invited  a  great 
number  of  guests,  and  placed  Aratus  next 
above  him,  and  presently  calling  for  a  coverlet, 
asked  him  if  he  did  not  find  it  cold,  and  on 
Aratus’s  answering,  “Yes,  extremely  cold,”  bade 
him  come  nearer,  so  that  when  the  servants 
brought  the  coverlet,  they  threw  it  over  them 
both,  then  Aratus,  remembering  the  sacrifice, 
fell  a-laughing,  and  told  the  king  the  sign 
which  had  happened  to  him,  and  the  inter¬ 
pretation  of  it.  But  this  fell  out  a  good  while 
after. 

So  Aratus  and  the  king,  plighting  their  faith 
to  each  other  at  Pegae,  immediately  marched 
toward  the  enemy,  with  whom  they  had  fre¬ 
quent  engagements  near  the  city,  Cleomenes 
maintaining  a  strong  position,  and  the  Co¬ 
rinthians  making  a  very  brisk  defence.  In 
the  meantime,  Aristotle  the  Argive,  Aratus’s 
friend,  sent  privately  to  him  to  let  him  know 
that  he  would  cause  Argos  to  revolt  if  he 
would  come  thither  in  person  with  some  sol¬ 
diers.  Aratus  acquainted  Antigonus,  and  tak¬ 
ing  fifteen  hundred  men  with  him,  sailed  in 
boats  along  the  shore  as  quickly  as  he  could 
from  the  Isthmus  to  Epidaurus.  But  the  Ar- 
gives  had  not  patience  till  he  could  arrive,  but, 
making  a  sudden  insurrection,  fell  upon  Cleo- 
menes’s  soldiers,  and  drove  them  into  the  cita¬ 
del.  Cleomenes  having  news  of  this,  and  fear¬ 
ing  lest,  if  the  enemy  should  possess  themselves 
of  Argos,  they  might  cut  off  his  retreat  home, 
left  the  Acro-Corinthus  and  marched  away 
by  night  to  help  his  men.  He  got  thither  first, 
and  beat  off  the  enemy,  but  Aratus  appearing 
not  long  after,  and  the  king  approaching  with 
his  forces,  he  retreated  to  Mantinea,  upon 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

which  all  the  cities  again  came  over  to  the 
Achaeans,  and  Antigonus  took  possession  of 
the  Acro-Corinthus. 

Aratus,  being  chosen  general  by  the  Argives, 
persuaded  them  to  make  a  present  to  Antig¬ 
onus  of  the  property  of  the  tyrants  and  the 
traitors.  As  for  Aristomachus,  after  having  put 
him  to  the  rack  in  the  town  of  Cenchreae,  they 
drowned  him  in  the  sea;  for  which,  more  than 
anything  else,  Aratus  was  reproached,  that  he 
could  suffer  a  man  to  be  so  lawlessly  put  to 
death,  who  was  no  bad  man,  had  been  one  of 
his  long  acquaintance,  and  at  his  persuasion 
had  abdicated  his  power  and  annexed  the  city 
to  the  Achaeans. 

And  already  the  blame  of  the  other  things 
that  were  done  began  to  be  laid  to  his  account; 
as  that  they  so  lightly  gave  up  Corinth  to  An¬ 
tigonus,  as  if  it  had  been  an  inconsiderable  vil¬ 
lage;  that  they  had  suffered  him,  after  first 
sacking  Orchomenus,  then  to  put  into  it  a 
Macedonian  garrison;  that  they  made  a  decree 
that  no  letters  nor  embassy  should  be  sent  to 
any  other  king  without  the  consent  of  Antig¬ 
onus,  that  they  were  forced  to  furnish  pay 
and  provision  for  the  Macedonian  soldiers,  and 
celebrated  sacrifices,  processions,  and  games  in 
honour  of  Antigonus,  Aratus’s  citizens  setting 
the  example  and  receiving  Antigonus,  who 
was  lodged  and  entertained  at  Aratus’s  house. 
All  these  things  they  treated  as  his  fault,  not 
knowing  that  having  once  put  the  reins  into 
Antigonus’s  hands  and  let  himself  be  borne  by 
the  impetus  of  regal  power,  he  was  no  longer 
master  of  anything  but  one  single  voice,  the 
liberty  of  which  it  was  not  so  very  safe  for  him 
to  use. 

For  it  was  very  plain  that  Aratus  was  much 
troubled  at  several  things,  as  appeared  by  the 
business  about  the  statues.  For  Antigonus  re¬ 
placed  the  statues  of  the  tyrants  of  Argos  that 
had  been  thrown  down,  and  on  the  contrary 
threw  down  the  statues  of  all  those  that  had 
taken  the  Acro-Corinthus,  except  that  of  Ara¬ 
tus,  nor  could  Aratus,  by  all  his  entreaties,  dis¬ 
suade  him.  Also,  the  usage  of  the  Mantineans 
by  the  Achaeans  seemed  not  in  accordance  with 
the  Grecian  feelings  and  manners.  For  being 
master  of  their  city  by  the  help  of  Antigonus, 
they  put  to  death  the  chief  and  most  noted  men 
amongst  them;  and  of  the  rest,  some  they  sold, 
others  they  sent,  bound  in  fetters,  into  Mace¬ 
donia,  and  made  slaves  of  their  wives  and  chil¬ 
dren;  and  of  the  money  thus  raised,  a  third 
part  they  divided  among  themselves,  and  the 
other  two-thirds  were  distributed  among  the 


ARATUS 

Macedonians.  And  this  might  seem  .to  have 
been  justified  by  the  law  of  retaliation;  for  al¬ 
though  it  be  a  barbarous  thing  for  men  of  the 
same  nation  and  blood  thus  to  deal  with  one 
another  in  their  fury,  yet  necessity  makes  it,  as 
Simonides  says,  sweet  and  something  excus¬ 
able,  being  the  proper  thing,  in  the  mind’s 
painful  and  inflamed  condition,  to  give  allevia¬ 
tion  and  relief. 

But  for  what  was  afterwards  done  to  that 
city,  Aratus  cannot  be  defended  on  any  ground 
either  of  reason  or  necessity.  For  the  Argives 
having  had  the  city  bestowed  on  them  by  An- 
tigonus,  and  resolving  to  people  it,  he  being 
then  chosen  as  the  new  founder,  and  being 
general  at  that  time,  decreed  that  it  should  no 
longer  be  called  Mantinea,  but  Antigonea, 
which  name  it  still  bears.  So  that  he  may  be 
said  to  have  been  the  cause  that  the  old  mem¬ 
ory  of  the  “beautiful  Mantinea”  has  been 
wholly  extinguished  and  the  city  to  this  day 
has  the  name  of  the  destroyer  and-  slayer  of  its 
citizens. 

After  this,  Cleomenes,  being  overthrown  in 
a  great  battle  near  Sellasia,  forsook  Sparta  and 
fled  into  Egypt,  and  Antigonus,  having  shown 
all  manner  of  kindness  and  fair-dealing  to 
Aratus,  retired  into  Macedonia-.  There,  falling 
sick,  he  sent  Philip,  the  heir  of  the  kingdom, 
into  Peloponnesus,  being  yet  scarce  a  youth, 
commanding  him  to  follow  above  all  the  coun¬ 
sel  of  Aratus,  to  communicate  with  the  cities 
through  him,  and  through  him  to  make  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  the  Achaeans;  and  Aratus,  re¬ 
ceiving  him  accordingly,  so  managed  him  as  to 
send  him  back  to  Macedon  both  well  affected 
to  himself  and  full  of  desire  and  ambition  to 
take  an  honourable  part  in  the  affairs  of 
Greece. 

When  Antigonus  was  dead,  the  iEtolians, 
despising  the  sloth  and  negligence  of  the 
Achaeans,  who  having  learnt  to  be  defended  by 
other  men’s  valour  and  to  shelter  themselves 
under  the  Macedonian  arms,  lived  in  ease  and 
without  any  discipline,  now  attempted  to  inter¬ 
fere  in  Peloponnesus.  And  plundering  the  land 
of  Patrae  and  Dyme  in  their  way,  they  invaded 
Messene  and  ravaged  it;  at  which  Aratus  being 
indignant,  and  finding  that  Timoxenus,  then 
general,  was  hesitating  and  letting  the  time  go 
by,  being  now  on  the  point  of  laying  down  his 
office,  in  which  he  himself  was  chosen  to  suc¬ 
ceed  him,  he  anticipated  the  proper  term  by 
five  days,  that  he  might  bring  relief  to  the  Mes- 
senians.  And  mustering  the  Achaeans,  who 
were  both  in  their  persons  unexercised  in  arms 


843 

and  in  their  minds  relaxed  and  averse  to  war, 
he  met  with  a  defeat  at  Caphyae. 

Having  thus  begun  the  war,  as  it  seemed, 
with  too  much  heat  and  passion,  he  then  ran 
into  the  other  extreme,  cooling  again  and  de¬ 
sponding  so  much  that  he  let  pass  and  over¬ 
looked  many  fair  opportunities  of  advantage 
given  by  the  Aitolians,  and  allowed  them  to 
run  riot,  as  it  were,  throughout  all  Pelopon¬ 
nesus,  with  all  manner  of  insolence  and  licen¬ 
tiousness.  Wherefore,  holding  forth  their 
hands  once  more  to  the  Macedonians,  they  in¬ 
vited  and  drew  in  Philip  to  intermeddle  in  the 
affairs  of  Greece,  chiefly  hoping,  because  of  the 
affection  and  trust  that  he  felt  for  Aratus,  they 
should  find  him  easy-tempered,  and  ready  to 
be  managed  as  they  pleased. 

But  the  king,  being  now  persuaded  by  Apel¬ 
les,  Megaleas,  and  other  courtiers,  that  en¬ 
deavoured  to  ruin  the  credit  Aratus  had  with 
him,  took  the  side  of  the  contrary  faction  and 
joined  them  in  canvassing  to  have  Eperatus 
chosen  general  by  the  Achaeans.  But  he  being 
altogether  scorned  by  the  Achaeans,  and,  for 
the  want  of  Aratus  to  help,  all  things  going 
wrong,  Philip  saw  he  had  quite  mistaken  his 
part,  and,  turning  about  and  reconciling  him¬ 
self  to  Aratus,  he  was  wholly  his;  and  his  af¬ 
fairs,  now  going  on  favourably  both  for  his 
power  and  reputation,  he  depended  upon  him 
altogether  as  the  author  of  all  his  gains  in 
both  respects;  Aratus  hereby  giving  a  proof 
to  the  world  that  he  was  as  good  a  nursing 
father  of  a  kingdom  as  he  had  been  of  a 
democracy,  for  the  actions  of  the  king  had  in 
them  the  touch  and  colour  of  his  judgment 
and  character. 

The  moderation  which  the  young  man 
showed  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  had  in¬ 
curred  his  displeasure,  and  his  affability  to  the 
Cretans,  by  which  in  a  few  days  he  brought 
over  the  whole  island  to  his  obedience,  and  his 
expedition  against  the  iEtolians,  so  wonder¬ 
fully  successful,  brought  Philip  reputation  for 
hearkening  to  good  advice,  and  to  Aratus  for 
giving  it;  for  which  things  the  king’s  follow¬ 
ers  envying  him  more  than  ever  and  finding 
they  could  not  prevail  against  him  by  their  se¬ 
cret  practices,  began  openly  to  abuse  and  af¬ 
front  him  at  the  banquets  and  over  their  wine 
with  every  kind  of  petulance  and  impudence; 
so  that  once  they  threw  stones  at  him  as  he  was 
going  back  from  supper  to  his  tent.  At  which 
Philip  being  much  offended,  immediately  fined 
them  twenty  talents,  and  finding  afterwards 
that  they  still  went  on  disturbing  matters  and 


844 

doing  mischief  in  his  affairs,  he  put  them  to 
death. 

But  with  his  run  of  good  success,  prosperity 
began  to  puff  him  up,  and  various  extravagant 
desires  began  to  spring  and  show  themselves 
in  his  mind;  and  his  natural  bad  inclinations 
breaking  through  the  artificial  restraints  he 
had  put  upon  them,  in  a  little  time  laid  open 
and  discovered  his  true  and  proper  character. 
In  the  first  place,  he  privately  injured  the 
younger  Aratus  in  his  wife,  which  was  not 
known  for  a  good  while,  because  he  was  lodged 
and  entertained  at  their  house;  then  he  began 
to  be  more  rough  and  untractable  in  the  do¬ 
mestic  politics  of  Greece,  and  showed  plainly 
that  he  was  wishing  to  shake  himself  loose  of 
Aratus.  This  the  Messenian  affairs  first  gave 
occasion  to  suspect.  For  they  falling  into  sedi¬ 
tion,  and  Aratus  being  just  too  late  with  his 
succours,  Philip,  who  got  into  the  city  one  day 
before  him,  at  once  blew  up  the  flame  of  con¬ 
tention  amongst  them,  asking  privately,  on  the 
one  hand,  the  Messenian  generals,  if  they  had 
not  laws  whereby  to  suppress  the  insolence  of 
the  common  people,  and  on  the  other,  the  lead¬ 
ers  of  the  people,  whether  they  had  not  hands 
to  help  themselves  against  their  oppressors. 
Upon  which  gathering  courage,  the  officers  at¬ 
tempted  to  lay  hands  on  the  heads  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  and  they  on  the  other  side,  coming  upon 
the  officers  with  the  multitude,  killed  them, 
and  very  near  two  hundred  persons  with  them. 

Philip  having  committed  this  wickedness, 
and  doing  his  best  to  set  the  Messenians  by  the 
ears  together  more  than  before,  Aratus  arrived 
there,  and  both  showed  plainly  that  he  took  it 
ill  himself,  and  also  he  suffered  his  son  bitterly 
to  reproach  and  revile  him.  It  should  seem  that 
the  young  man  had  an  attachment  for  Philip, 
and  so  at  this  time  one  of  his  expressions  to 
him  was  that  he  no  longer  appeared  to  him 
the  handsomest,  but  the  most  deformed  of  all 
men,  after  so  foul  an  action.  To  all  which 
Philip  gave  him  no  answer,  though  he  seemed 
so  angry  as  to  make  it  expected  he  would,  and 
though  several  times  he  cried  out  aloud  while 
the  young  man  was  speaking. 

But  as  for  the  elder  Aratus,  seeming  to  take 
all  that  he  said  in  good  part,  and  as  if  he  were 
by  nature  a  politic  character  and  had  a  good 
command  of  himself,  he  gave  him  his  hand 
and  led  him  out  of  the  theatre,  and  carried  him 
with  him  to  the  Ithomatas,  to  sacrifice  there  to 
Jupiter,  and  take  a  view  of  the  place,  for  it  is  a 
post  as  fortifiable  as  the  Acro-Corinthus,  and, 
with  a  garrison  in  it,  quite  as  strong  and  as  im- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

pregnable  to  the  attacks  of  all  around  it.  Philip 
therefore  went  up  thither,  and  having  offered 
sacrifice,  receiving  the  entrails  of  the  ox  with 
both  his  hands  from  the  priest,  he  showed 
them  to  Aratus  and  Demetrius  the  Pharian, 
presenting  them  sometimes  to  the  one  and 
sometimes  to  the  other,  asking  them  what  they 
judged,  by  the  tokens  in  the  sacrifice,  was  to  be 
done  with  the  fort;  was  he  to  keep  it  for  him¬ 
self,  or  restore  it  to  the  Messenians?  Demetrius 
laughed  and  answered,  “If  you  have  in  you  the 
soul  of  a  soothsayer,  you  will  restore  it,  but  if 
of  a  prince  you  will  hold  the  ox  by  both  the 
horns,”  meaning  to  refer  to  Peloponnesus, 
which  would  be  wholly  in  his  power  and  at  his 
disposal  if  he  added  the  Ithomatas  to  the  Acro- 
Corinthus. 

Aratus  said  not  a  word  for  a  good  while;  but 
Philip  entreating  him  to  declare  his  opinion, 
he  said:  “Many  and  great  hills  are  there  in 
Crete,  and  many  rocks  in  Bceotia  and  Phocis, 
and  many  remarkable  strongholds  both  near 
the  sea  and  in  the  midland  in  Acarnania,  and 
yet  all  these  people  obey  your  orders,  though 
you  have  not  possessed  yourself  of  any  one  of 
those  places.  Robbers  nest  themselves  in  rocks 
and  precipices;  but  the  strongest  fort  a  king 
can  have  is  confidence  and  affection.  These 
have  opened  to  you  the  Cretan  sea;  these  make 
you  master  of  Peloponnesus,  and  by  the  help  of 
these,  young  as  you  are,  are  you  become  cap¬ 
tain  of  the  one,  and  lord  of  the  other.”  While 
he  was  still  speaking,  Philip  returned  the  en¬ 
trails  to  the  priest,  and  drawing  Aratus  to  him 
by  the  hand,  “Come,  then,”  said  he,  “let  us 
follow  the  same  course”;  as  if  he  felt  himself 
forced  by  him,  and  obliged  to  give  up  the  town. 

From  this  time  Aratus  began  to  withdraw 
from  court,  and  retired  by  degrees  from  Phi¬ 
lip’s  company;  when  he  was  preparing  to 
march  into  Epirus,  and  desired  him  that  he 
would  accompany  him  thither,  he  excused  him¬ 
self  and  stayed  at  home,  apprehending  that  he 
should  get  nothing  but  discredit  by  having  any¬ 
thing  to  do  with  his  actions.  But  then,  after¬ 
wards,  having  shamefully  lost  his  fleet  against 
the  Romans  and  miscarried  in  all  his  designs, 
he  returned  into  Peloponnesus,  where  he  tried 
once  more  to  beguile  the  Messenians  by  his 
artifices,  and  failing  in  this,  began  openly  to  at¬ 
tack  them  and  to  ravage  their  country.  Then 
Aratus  fell  out  with  him  downright,  and  ut¬ 
terly  renounced  his  friendship;  for  he  had  be¬ 
gun  then  to  be  fully  aware  of  the  injuries  done 
to  his  son  in  his  wife,  which  vexed  him  greatly, 
though  he  concealed  them  from  his  son,  as  he 


ARATUS 

could  but  know  he  had  been  abused,  without 
having  any  means  to  revenge  himself.  For  in¬ 
deed,  Philip  seems  to  have  been  an  instance  of 
the  greatest  and  strangest  alteration  of  char¬ 
acter;  after  being  a  mild  king  and  modest  and 
chaste  youth,  he  became  a  lascivious  man  and 
most  cruel  tyrant;  though  in  reality  this  was 
not  a  change  of  his  nature,  but  a  bold  unmask¬ 
ing,  when  safe  opportunity  came,  of  the  evil 
inclinations  which  his  fear  had  for  a  long  time 
made  him  dissemble. 

For  that  the  respect  he  at  the  beginning  bore 
to  Aratus  had  a  great  alloy  of  fear  and  awe 
appears  evident  from  what  he  did  to  him  at 
last.  For  being  desirous  to  put  him  to  death, 
not  thinking  himself,  whilst  he  was  alive,  to  be 
properly  free  as  a  man,  much  less  at  liberty  to 
do  his  pleasure  as  king  or  tyrant,  he  durst  not 
attempt  to  do  it  by  open  force,  but  commanded 
Taurion,  one  of  his  captains  and  familiars,  to 
make  him  away  secretly  by  poison,  if  possible, 
in  his  absence.  Taurion,  therefore,  made  him¬ 
self  intimate  with  Aratus,  and  gave  him  a  dose 
not  of  your  strong  and  violent  poisons,  but 
such  as  cause  gentle,  feverish  heats  at  first,  and 
a  dull  cough,  and  so  by  degrees  bring  on  cer¬ 
tain  death.  Aratus  perceived  what  was  done  to 
him,  but,  knowing  that  it  was  in  vain  to  make 
any  words  of  it,  bore  it  patiently  and  with  si¬ 
lence,  as  if  it  had  been  some  common  and  usual 
distemper.  Only  once,  a  friend  of  his  being 
with  him  in  his  chamber,  he  spat  some  blood, 
which  his  friend  observing  and  wondering  at, 
“These,  O  Cephalon,”  said  he,  “are  the  wages 
of  a  king’s  love.” 

Thus  died  he  in  iEgium,  in  his  seventeenth 
generalship.  The  Achaeans  were  very  desirous 
that  he  should  be  buried  there  with  a  funeral 
and  monument  suitable  to  his  life,  but  the  Si- 
cyonians  treated  it  as  a  calamity  to  them  if  he 
were  interred  anywhere  but  in  their  city,  and 
prevailed  with  the  Achaeans  to  grant  them  the 
disposal  of  the  body. 

But  there  being  an  ancient  law  that  no  per¬ 
son  should  be  buried  within  the  walls  of  their 
city,  and  besides  the  law  also  a  strong  religious 
feeling  about  it,  they  sent  to  Delphi  to  ask 
counsel  of  the  Pythoness,  who  returned  this 
answer : — 

Sicyon,  whom  oft  he  rescued,  “Where”  you  say , 

“ Shall  we  the  relics  of  Aratus  lay?” 

The  soil  that  would  not  lightly  o’er  him  rest , 

Or  to  be  under  him  would  feel  opprest, 

Were  in  the  sight  of  earth  and  seas  and  s\ies 

unblest 

This  oracle  being  brought,  all  the  Achaeans 


845 

were  well  pleased  at  it,  but  especially  the  Si- 
cyonians,  who,  changing  their  mourning  into 
public  joy,  immediately  fetched  the  body  from 
/Egium,  and  in  a  kind  of  solemn  procession 
brought  it  into  the  city,  being  crowned  with 
garlands,  and  arrayed  in  white  garments,  with 
singing  and  dancing,  and,  choosing  a  conspicu¬ 
ous  place,  they  buried  him  there,  as  the  found¬ 
er  and  saviour  of  their  city.  The  place  is  to 
this  day  called  Aratium,  and  there  they  yearly 
make  two  solemn  sacrifices  to  him,  the  one  on 
the  day  he  delivered  the  city  from  tyranny, 
being  the  fifth  of  the  month  Daesius,  which  the 
Athenians  call  Anthesterion,  and  this  sacrifice 
they  call  Soteria;  the  other  in  the  month  of  his 
birth,  which  is  still  remembered. 

Now  the  first  of  these  was  performed  by  the 
priest  of  Jupiter  Soter,  the  second  by  the  priest 
of  Aratus,  wearing  a  band  around  his  head,  not 
pure  white,  but  mingled  with  purple.  Hymns 
were  sung  to  the  harp  by  the  singers  of  the 
feasts  of  Bacchus;  the  procession  was  led  up  by 
the  president  of  the  public  exercises,  with  the 
boys  and  young  men;  these  were  followed  by 
the  councillors  wearing  garlands,  and  other 
citizens  such  as  pleased.  Of  these  observances, 
some  small  traces  it  is  still  made  a  point  of  re¬ 
ligion  not  to  omit  on  the  appointed  days;  but 
the  greatest  part  of  the  ceremonies  have 
through  time  and  other  intervening  accidents 
been  disused. 

And  such,  as  history  tells  us,  was  the  life  and 
manners  of  the  elder  Aratus.  And  as  for  the 
younger,  his  son,  Philip,  abominably  wicked 
by  nature  and  a  savage  abuser  of  his  power, 
gave  him  such  baneful  medicines  that  though 
they  did  not  kill  him  indeed,  yet  made  him 
lose  his  senses,  and  run  into  wild  and  absurd 
attempts  and  desire  to  do  actions  and  satisfy 
appetites  that  were  ridiculous  and  shameful. 
So  that  his  death,  which  happened  to  him 
while  he  was  yet  young  and  in  the  flower  of 
his  age,  cannot  be  so  much  esteemed  a  mis¬ 
fortune  as  a  deliverance  and  end  of  his  misery. 

However  Philip  paid  dearly,  all  through  the 
rest  of  his  life,  for  these  impious  violations  of 
friendship  and  hospitality.  For,  being  over¬ 
come  by  the  Romans,  he  was  forced  to  put 
himself  wholly  into  their  hands,  and,  being 
deprived  of  his  other  dominions  and  surren¬ 
dering  all  his  ships  except  five,  he  had  also  to 
pay  a  fine  of  a  thousand  talents,  and  to  give  his 
son  for  hostage,  and  only  out  of  mere  pity  he 
was  suffered  to  keep  Macedonia  and  its  de¬ 
pendencies;  where  continually  putting  to  death 
the  noblest  of  his  subjects  and  the  nearest  rela- 


846 


tions  he  had,  he  filled  the  whole  kingdom  with 
horror  and  hatred  of  him.  And  whereas  amidst 
so  many  misfortunes  he  had  but  one  good 
chance,  which  was  the  having  a  son  of  great 
virtue  and  merit,  him,  through  jealousy  and 
envy  at  the  honour  the  Romans  had  for  him, 
he  caused  to  be  murdered,  and  left  his  king- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

dom  to  Perseus,  who,  as  some  say,  was  not  his 
own  child,  but  supposititious,  born  of  a  semps¬ 
tress,  Gnatharnion.  This  was  he  whom  Paulus 
/Emilius  led  in  trumph,  and  in  whom  ended 
the  succession  of  Antigonus’s  line  and  king¬ 
dom.  But  the  posterity  of  Aratus  continued 
still  in  our  days  at  Sicyon  and  Pellene. 


ARTAXERXES 

c-  437-359  B  C- 


The  first  Artaxerxes,  among  all  the 
kings  of  Persia  the  most  remarkable 
for  a  gentle  and  noble  spirit,  was  sur- 
named  the  Long-handed,  his  right  hand  be¬ 
ing  longer  than  his  left,  and  was  the  son  of 
Xerxes.  The  second,  whose  story  I  am  now 
writing,  who  had  the  surname  of  the  Mind¬ 
ful,  was  the  grandson  of  the  former,  by  his 
daughter  Parysatis,  who  brought  Darius  four 
sons,  the  eldest  Artaxerxes,  the  next  Cyrus, 
and  two  younger  than  these,  Ostanes  and  Oxa- 
thres.  Cyrus  took  his  name  of  the  ancient  Cy¬ 
rus,  as  he,  they  say,  had  his  from  the  sun, 
which,  in  the  Persian  language,  is  called  Cy¬ 
rus.  Artaxerxes  was  at  first  called  Arsicas;  Di- 
non  says  Oarses;  but  it  is  utterly  improbable 
that  Ctesias  (however  otherwise  he  may  have 
filled  his  books  with  a  perfect  farrago  of  in¬ 
credible  and  senseless  fables)  should  be  igno¬ 
rant  of  the  name  of  the  king  with  whom  he 
lived  as  his  physician,  attending  upon  himself, 
his  wife,  his  mother,  and  his  children. 

Cyrus,  from  his  earliest  youth,  showed  some¬ 
thing  of  a  headstrong  and  vehement  character; 
Artaxerxes,  on  the  other  side,  was  gentler  in 
everything,  and  of  a  nature  more  yielding  and 
soft  in  its  action.  He  married  a  beautiful  and 
virtuous  wife,  at  the  desire  of  his  parents,  but 
kept  her  as  expressly  against  their  wishes.  For 
King  Darius,  having  put  her  brother  to  death, 
was  purposing  likewise  to  destroy  her.  But 
Arsicas,  throwing  himself  at  his  mother’s  feet, 
by  many  tears,  at  last,  with  much  ado,  per¬ 
suaded  her  that  they  should  neither  put  her  to 
death  nor  divorce  her  from  him.  However, 
Cyrus  was  his  mother’s  favourite,  and  the  son 
whom  she  most  desired  to  settle  in  the  throne. 
And  therefore,  his  father  Darius  now  lying  ill, 
he,  being  sent  for  from  the  sea  to  the  court,  set 
out  thence  with  full  hopes  that  by  her  means 
he  was  to  be  declared  the  successor  to  the  king¬ 


dom.  For  Parysatis  had  the  specious  plea  in  his 
behalf,  which  Xerxes  on  the  advice  of  Dema- 
ratus  had  of  old  made  use  of,  that  she  had  j 
borne  him  Arsicas  when  he  was  a  subject,  but 
Cyrus,  when  a  king.  Notwithstanding,  she 
prevailed  not  with  Darius,  but  the  eldest  son, 
Arsicas,  was  proclaimed  king,  his  name  being  , 
changed  into  Artaxerxes;  and  Cyrus  remained 
satrap  of  Lydia,  and  commander  in  the  mari¬ 
time  provinces. 

It  was  not  long  after  the  decease  of  Darius 
that  the  king,  his  successor,  went  to  Pasargadae, 
to  have  the  ceremony  of  his  inauguration  con¬ 
summated  by  the  Persian  priests.  There  is  a 
temple  dedicated  to  a  warlike  goddess,  whom 
one  might  liken  to  Minerva,  into  which  when 
the  royal  person  to  be  initiated  has  passed,  he 
must  strip  himself  of  his  own  robe,  and  put  on 
that  which  Cyrus  the  first  wore  before  he  was 
king;  then,  having  devoured  a  frail  of  figs,  he 
must  eat  turpentine,  and  drink  a  cup  of  sour 
milk.  To  which  if  they  superadd  any  other 
rites,  it  is  unknown  to  any  but  those  that  are 
present  at  them.  Now  Artaxerxes  being  about 
to  address  himself  to  this  solemnity,  Tisapher- 
nes  came  to  him,  bringing  a  certain  priest, 
who,  having  trained  up  Cyrus  in  his  youth  in 
the  established  discipline  of  Persia,  and  hav¬ 
ing  taught  him  the  Magian  philosophy,  was 
likely  to  be  as  much  disappointed  as  any  man 
that  his  pupil  did  not  succeed  to  the  throne.  j 
And  for  that  reason  his  veracity  was  the  less  j 
questioned  when  he  charged  Cyrus  as  though 
he  had  been  about  to  lie  in  wait  for  the  king  !  * 
in  the  temple,  and  to  assault  and  assassinate  i 
him  as  he  was  putting  off  his  garment. 

Some  affirm  that  he  was  apprehended  upon  s 
this  impeachment,  others  that  he  had  entered 
the  temple  and  was  pointed  out  there,  as  he  1 
lay  lurking  by  the  priest.  But  as  he  was  on  the  J 
point  of  being  put  to  death,  his  mother  clasped 


ARTAXERXES 

him  in  her  arms,  and  entwining  him  with  the 
tresses  of  her  hair,  joined  his  neck  close  to  her 
own,  and  by  her  bitter  lamentation  and  inter¬ 
cession  to  Artaxerxes  for  him,  succeeded  in 
saving  his  life;  and  sent  him  away  again  to  the 
sea  and  to  his  former  province.  This,  however, 
could  no  longer  content  him;  nor  did  he  so 
well  remember  his  delivery  as  his  arrest,  his 
resentment  for  which  made  him  more  eagerly 
desirous  of  the  kingdom  than  before. 

Some  say  that  he  revolted  from  his  brother, 
because  he  had  not  a  revenue  allowed  him  suf¬ 
ficient  for  his  daily  meals;  but  this  is  on  the 
face  of  it  absurd.  For  had  he  had  nothing  else, 
yet  he  had  a  mother  ready  to  supply  him  with 
whatever  he  could  desire  out  of  her  own  means. 
But  the  great  number  of  soldiers  who  were 
hired  from  all  quarters  and  maintained,  as 
Xenophon  informs  us,  for  his  service,  by  his 
friends  and  connections,  is  in  itself  a  sufficient 
proof  of  his  riches.  He  did  not  assemble  them 
together  in  a  body,  desiring  as  yet  to  conceal 
his  enterprise;  but  he  had  agents  everywhere, 
enlisting  foreign  soldiers  upon  various  pre¬ 
tences;  and,  in  the  meantime,  Parysatis,  who 
was  with  the  king,  did  her  best  to  put  aside  all 
suspicions,  and  Cyrus  himself  always  wrote  in 
a  humble  and  dutiful  manner,  to  him,  some¬ 
times  soliciting  favour,  sometimes  making 
countercharges  against  Tisaphernes,  as  if  his 
jealousy  and  contest  had  been  wholly  with 
him.  Moreover,  there  was  a  certain  natural 
dilatoriness  in  the  king,  which  was  taken  by 
many  for  clemency.  And,  indeed,  in  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  his  reign,  he  did  seem  really  to 
emulate  the  gentleness  of  the  first  Artaxerxes, 
being  very  accessible  in  his  person,  and  liberal 
to  a  fault  in  the  distribution  of  honours  and 
favours. 

Even  in  his  punishments,  no  contumely  or 
vindictive  pleasure  could  be  seen;  and  those 
who  offered  him  presents  were  as  much 
pleased  with  his  manner  of  accepting,  as  were 
those  who  received  gifts  from  him  with  his 
graciousness  and  amiability  in  giving  them. 
Nor  truly  was  there  anything,  however  incon¬ 
siderable,  given  him,  which  he  did  not  deign 
kindly  to  accept  of;  insomuch  that  when  one 
Omises  had  presented  him  with  a  very  large 
pomegranate,  “By  Mithras,”  said  he,  “this 
man,  were  he  intrusted  with  it,  would  turn  a 
small  city  into  a  great  one.” 

Once  when  some  were  offering  him  one 
thing,  some  another,  as  he  was  on  a  progress, 
a  certain  poor  labourer,  having  got  nothing  at 
hand  to  bring  him,  ran  to  the  river  side,  and, 


847 

taking  up  water  in  his  hands,  offered  it  to  him; 
with  which  Artaxerxes  was  so  well  pleased 
that  he  sent  him  a  goblet  of  gold  and  a  thou¬ 
sand  darics.  To  Euclidas,  the  Lacedaemonian, 
who  had  made  a  number  of  bold  and  arrogant 
speeches  to  him,  he  sent  word  by  one  of  his  of¬ 
ficers,  “You  have  leave  to  say  what  you  please 
to  me,  and  I,  you  should  remember,  may  both 
say  and  do  what  I  please  to  you.” 

Teribazus  once,  when  they  were  hunting, 
came  up  and  pointed  out  to  the  king  that  his 
royal  robe  was  torn;  the  king  asked  him  what 
he  wished  him  to  do;  and  when  Teribazus  re¬ 
plied,  “May  it  please  you  to  put  on  another 
and  give  me  that,”  the  king  did  so,  saying 
withal,  “I  give  it  you,  Teribazus,  but  I  charge 
you  not  to  wear  it.”  He,  little  regarding  the  in¬ 
junction,  being  not  a  bad,  but  a  lightheaded, 
thoughtless  man,  immediately  the  king  took 
it  off,  put  it  on,  and  bedecked  himself  further 
with  royal  golden  necklaces  and  women’s  or¬ 
naments,  to  the  great  scandal  of  everybody, 
the  thing  being  quite  unlawful.  But  the  king 
laughed  and  told  him,  “You  have  my  leave  to 
wear  the  trinkets  as  a  woman,  and  the  robe  of 
state  as  a  fool.” 

And  whereas  none  usually  sat  down  to  eat 
with  the  king,  besides  his  mother  and  his 
wedded  wife,  the  former  being  placed  above, 
the  other  below  him,  Artaxerxes  invited  also  to 
his  table  his  two  younger  brothers,  Ostanes  and 
Oxathres.  But  what  was  the  most  popular 
thing  of  all  among  the  Persians  was  the  sight 
of  his  wife  Statira’s  chariot,  which  always  ap¬ 
peared  with  its  curtains  down,  allowing  her 
country-women  to  salute  and  approach  her, 
which  made  the  queen  a  great  favourite  with 
the  people. 

Yet  Susy,  factious  men,  that  delighted  in 
change,  professed  it  to  be  their  opinion  that 
the  times  needed  Cyrus,  a  man  of  great  spirit, 
an  excellent  warrior,  and  a  lover  of  his  friends, 
and  that  the  largeness  of  their  empire  abso¬ 
lutely  required  a  bold  and  enterprising  prince. 
Cyrus,  then,  not  only  relying  upon  those  of  his 
own  province  near  the  sea,  but  upon  many  of 
those  in  the  upper  countries  near  the  king, 
commenced  the  war  against  him. 

He  wrote  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  bidding 
them  come  to  his  assistance  and  supply  him 
with  men,  assuring  them  that  to  those  who 
came  to  him  on  foot  he  would  give  horses,  and 
to  the  horsemen  chariots;  that  upon  those  who 
had  farms  he  would  bestow  villages,  and  those 
who  were  lords  of  villages  he  would  make  so 
of  cities;  and  that  those  who  would  be  his  sol- 


848 


diers  should  receive  their  pay,  not  by  count, 
but  by  weight.  And  among  many  other  high 
praises  of  himself,  he  said  he  had  the  stronger 
soul;  was  more  a  philosopher  and  a  better 
Magian;  and  could  drink  and  bear  more  wine 
than  his  brother,  who,  as  he  averred,  was  such 
a  coward  and  so  little  like  a  man,  that  he  could 
neither  sit  his  horse  in  hunting  nor  his  throne 
in  time  of  danger.  The  Lacedaemonians,  his 
letter  being  read,  sent  a  staff  to  Clearchus, 
commanding  him  to  obey  Cyrus  in  all  things. 

So  Cyrus  marched  towards  the  king,  having 
under  his  conduct  a  numerous  host  of  bar¬ 
barians,  and  but  little  less  than  thirteen  thou¬ 
sand  stipendiary  Grecians;  alleging  first  one 
cause,  then  another,  for  his  expedition.  Yet  the 
true  reason  lay  not  long  concealed,  but  Tisa- 
phernes  went  to  the  king  in  person  to  declare 
it.  Thereupon,  the  court  was  all  in  an  uproar 
and  tumult,  the  queen-mother  bearing  almost 
the  whole  blame  of  the  enterprise,  and  her  re¬ 
tainers  being  suspected  and  accused.  Above  all, 
Statira  angered  her  by  bewailing  the  war  and 
passionately  demanding  where  were  now  the 
pledges  and  the  intercession  which  saved  the 
life  of  him  that  conspired  against  his  brother; 
“to  the  end,”  she  said,  “that  he  might  plunge 
us  all  into  war  and  trouble.”  For  which  words 
Parysatis  hating  Statira,  and  being  naturally 
implacable  and  savage  in  her  anger  and  re¬ 
venge,  consulted  how  she  might  destroy  her. 

But  since  Dinon  tells  us  that  her  purpose 
took  effect  in  the  time  of  the  war,  and  Ctesias 
says  it  was  after  it,  I  shall  keep  the  story  for 
the  place  to  which  the  latter  assigns  it,  as  it  is 
very  unlikely  that  he,  who  was  actually  pres¬ 
ent,  should  not  know  the  time  when  it  hap¬ 
pened,  and  there  was  no  motive  to  induce  him 
designedly  to  misplace  its  date  in  his  narrative 
of  it,  though  it  is  not  infrequent  with  him  in 
his  history  to  make  excursions  from  truth  into 
mere  fiction  and  romance. 

As  Cyrus  was  upon  the  march,  rumours  and 
reports  were  brought  him,  as  though  the  king 
still  deliberated,  and  were  not  minded  to  fight 
and  presently  to  join  battle  with  him;  but  to 
wait  in  the  heart  of  his  kingdom  until  his 
forces  should  have  come  in  thither  from  all 
parts  of  his  dominions.  He  had  cut  a  trench 
through  the  plain  ten  fathoms  in  breadth,  and 
as  many  in  depth,  the  length  of  it  being  no  less 
than  four  hundred  furlongs.  Yet  he  allowed 
Cyrus  to  pass  across  it,  and  to  advance  almost 
to  the  city  of  Babylon.  Then  Teribazus,  as  the 
report  goes,  was  the  first  that  had  the  boldness 
to  tell  the  king  that  he  ought  not  to  avoid  the 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

conflict,  nor  to  abandon  Media,  Babylon,  and 
even  Susa,  and  hide  himself  in  Persis,  when  all 
the  while  he  had  an  army  many  times  over 
more  numerous  than  his  enemies,  and  an  in¬ 
finite  company  of  governors  and  captains  that 
were  better  soldiers  and  politicians  than  Cyrus. 
So  at  last  he  resolved  to  fight,  as  soon  as  it  was 
possible  for  him. 

Making,  therefore,  his  first  appearance,  all 
on  a  sudden,  at  the  head  of  nine  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  well-marshalled  men,  he  so  startled  and 
surprised  the  enemy,  who  with  the  confidence 
of  contempt  were  marching  on  their  way  in  no 
order,  and  with  their  arms  not  ready  for  use, 
that  Cyrus,  in  the  midst  of  such  noise  and  tu¬ 
mult,  was  scarcely  able  to  form  them  for  battle. 
Moreover,  the  very  manner  in  which  he  led  on 
his  men,  silently  and  slowly,  made  the  Gre¬ 
cians  stand  amazed  at  his  good  discipline;  who 
had  expected  irregular  shouting  and  leaping, 
much  confusion  and  separation  between  one 
body  of  men  and  another,  in  so  vast  a  multi¬ 
tude  of  troops.  He  also  placed  the  choicest  of 
his  armed  chariots  in  the  front  of  his  own 
phalanx  over  against  the  Grecian  troops,  that 
a  violent  charge  with  these  might  cut  open 
their  ranks  before  they  closed  with  them. 

But  as  this  battle  is  described  by  many  his¬ 
torians,  and  Xenophon  in  particular  as  good 
as  shows  it  us  by  eyesight,  not  as  a  past  event, 
but  as  a  present  action,  and  by  his  vivid  ac¬ 
count  makes  his  hearers  feel  all  the  passions 
and  join  in  all  the  dangers  of  it,  it  would  be 
folly  in  me  to  give  any  larger  account  of  it  than 
barely  to  mention  any  things  omitted  by  him 
which  yet  deserve  to  be  recorded.  The  place, 
then,  in  which  the  two  armies  were  drawn  out 
is  called  Cunaxa,  being  about  five  hundred 
furlongs  distant  from  Babylon.  And  here 
Clearchus  beseeching  Cyrus  before  the  fight  to 
retire  behind  the  combatants,  and  not  expose 
himself  to  hazard,  they  say  he  replied,  “What 
is  this,  Clearchus?  Would  you  have  me,  who 
aspire  to  empire,  show  myself  unworthy  of  it?” 

But  if  Cyrus  committed  a  great  fault  in  en¬ 
tering  headlong  into  the  midst  of  danger,  and 
not  paying  any  regard  to  his  own  safety, 
Clearchus  was  as  much  to  blame,  if  not  more, 
in  refusing  to  lead  the  Greeks  against  the  main 
body  of  the  enemy,  where  the  king  stood,  and 
in  keeping  his  right  wing  close  to  the  river,  for 
fear  of  being  surrounded.  For  if  he  wanted, 
above  all  other  things,  to  be  safe,  and  consid¬ 
ered  it  his  first  object  to  sleep  in  a  whole  skin, 
it  had  been  his  best  way  not  to  have  stirred 
from  home.  But,  after  marching  in  arms  ten 


ARTAXERXES 

thousand  furlongs  from  the  sea-coast,  simply 
on  his  choosing,  for  the  purpose  of  placing 
Cyrus  on  the  throne,  to  look  about  and  select 
a  position  which  would  enable  him,  not  to  pre¬ 
serve  him  under  whose  pay  and  conduct  he 
was,  but  himself  to  engage  with  more  ease  and 
security,  seemed  much  like  one  that  through 
fear  of  present  dangers  had  abandoned  the 
purpose  of  his  actions,  and  been  false  to  the  de¬ 
sign  of  his  expedition. 

For  it  is  evident  from  the  very  event  of  the 
battle  that  none  of  those  who  were  in  array 
around  the  king’s  person  could  have  stood  the 
shock  of  the  Grecian  charge;  and  had  they  been 
beaten  out  of  the  field,  and  Artaxerxes  either 
fled  or  fallen,  Cyrus  would  have  gained  by  the 
victory,  not  only  safety,  but  a  crown.  And, 
therefore,  Clearchus  by  his  caution  must  be 
considered  more  to  blame  for  the  result  in  the 
destruction  of  the  life  and  fortune  of  Cyrus, 
than  he  by  his  heat  and  rashness.  For  had  the 
king  made  it  his  business  to  discover  a  place, 
where  having  posted  the  Grecians  he  might 
encounter  them  with  the  least  hazard,  he 
would  never  have  found  out  any  other  but  that 
which  was  most  remote  from  himself  and  those 
near  him;  of  his  defeat  in  which  he  was  insen¬ 
sible,  and,  though  Clearchus  had  the  victory, 
yet  Cyrus  could  not  know  of  it,  and  could  take 
no  advantage  of  it  before  his  fall.  Cyrus  knew 
well  enough  what  was  expedient  to  be  done, 
and  commanded  Clearchus  with  his  men  to 
take  their  place  in  the  centre.  Clearchus  re¬ 
plied  that  he  would  take  care  to  have  all  ar¬ 
ranged  as  was  best,  and  then  spoiled  all. 

For  the  Grecians,  where  they  were,  defeated 
the  barbarians  till  they  were  weary,  and  chased 
them  successfully  a  very  great  way.  But  Cyrus 
being  mounted  upon  a  noble  but  a  headstrong 
and  hard-mouthed  horse,  bearing  the  name,  as 
Ctesias  tells  us,  of  Pasacas,  Artagerses,  the 
leader  of  the  Cadusians,  galloped  up  to  him, 
crying  aloud,  “O  most  unjust  and  senseless  of 
men,  who  are  the  disgrace  of  the  honoured 
name  of  Cyrus,  are  you  come  here  leading  the 
wicked  Greeks  on  a  wicked  journey,  to  plunder 
the  good  things  of  the  Persians,  and  this  with 
the  intent  of  slaying  your  lord  and  brother,  the 
master  of  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand 
servants  that  are  better  men  than  you?  As  you 
shall  see  this  instant;  for  you  shall  lose  your 
head  here,  before  you  look  upon  the  face  of 
the  king.”  Which  when  he  had  said,  he  cast 
his  javelin  at  him.  But  his  coat  of  mail  stoutly 
repelled  it,  and  Cyrus  was  not  wounded;  yet 
the  stroke  falling  heavy  upon  him,  he  reeled 


849 

under  it.  Then  Artagerses  turning  his  horse, 
Cyrus  threw  his  weapon,  and  sent  the  head  of 
it  through  his  neck  near  the  shoulder  bone. 
So  that  it  is  almost  universally  agreed  to  by  all 
the  authors  that  Artagerses  was  slain  by  him. 

But  as  to  the  death  of  Cyrus,  since  Xeno¬ 
phon,  as  being  himself  no  eye-witness  of  it, 
has  stated  it  simply  and  in  few  words,  it  may 
not  be  amiss  perhaps  to  run  over  on  the  one 
hand  what  Dinon,  and  on  the  other,  what 
Ctesias  had  said  of  it. 

Dinon  then  affirms  that,  after  the  death  of 
Artagerses,  Cyrus,  furiously  attacking  the 
guard  of  Artaxerxes,  wounded  the  king’s  horse, 
and  so  dismounted  him,  and  when  Teribazus 
had  quickly  lifted  him  up  upon  another,  and 
said  to  him,  “O  king,  remember  this  day, 
which  is  not  one  to  be  forgotten,”  Cyrus,  again 
spurring  up  his  horse,  struck  down  Artaxerxes. 
But  at  the  third  assault  the  king  being  en¬ 
raged  and  saying  to  those  near  him  that  death 
was  better,  rode  out  against  Cyrus,  who  fu¬ 
riously  and  blindly  rushed  in  the  face  of  the 
weapons  opposed  to  him.  So  the  king  struck 
him  with  a  javelin,  as  likewise  did  those  that 
were  about  him.  And  thus  Cyrus  fell,  as  some 
say,  by  the  hand  of  the  king;  as  others,  by  the 
dart  of  a  Carian,  to  whom  Artaxerxes  for  a 
reward  of  his  achievement  gave  the  privilege 
of  carrying  ever  after  a  golden  cock  upon  his 
spear  before  the  first  ranks  of  the  army  in  all 
expeditions.  For  the  Persians  call  the  men  of 
Caria  cocks,  because  of  the  crests  with  which 
they  adorn  their  helmets. 

But  the  account  of  Ctesias,  to  put  it  shortly, 
omitting  many  details,  is  as  follows:  Cyrus, 
after  the  death  of  Artagerses,  rode  up  against 
the  king,  as  he  did  against  him,  neither  ex¬ 
changing  a  word  with  the  other.  But  Ariaeus, 
Cyrus’s  friend,  was  beforehand  with  him,  and 
darted  first  at  the  king,  yet  wounded  him  not. 
Then  the  king  cast  his  lance  at  his  brother,  but 
missed  him,  though  he  both  hit  and  slew  Sati- 
phernes,  a  noble  man  and  a  faithful  friend  to 
Cyrus.  Then  Cyrus  directed  his  lance  against 
the  king,  and  pierced  his  breast  with  it  quite 
through  his  armour,  two  inches  deep,  so  that 
he  fell  from  his  horse  with  the  stroke.  At 
which  those  that  attended  him  being  put  to 
flight  and  disorder,  he,  rising  with  a  few, 
among  whom  was  Ctesias,  and  making  his  way 
to  a  little  hill  not  far  off,  rested  himself. 

But  Cyrus,  in  the  thick  of  the  enemy,  was 
carried  off  a  great  way  by  the  wildness  of  his 
horse,  the  darkness  which  was  now  coming  on 
making  it  hard  for  them  to  know  him,  and 


850 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 


for  his  followers  to  find  him.  However,  being 
made  elate  with  victory,  and  full  of  confidence 
and  force,  he  passed  through  them,  crying  out, 
and  that  more  than  once,  in  the  Persian  lan¬ 
guage,  “Clear  the  way,  villains,  clear  the  way”; 
which  they  indeed  did,  throwing  themselves 
down  at  his  feet.  But  his  tiara  dropped  off  his 
head,  and  a  young  Persian,  by  name  Mithri- 
dates,  running  by,  struck  a  dart  into  one  of  his 
temples  near  his  eye,  not  knowing  who  he  was; 
out  of  which  wound  much  blood  gushed,  so 
that  Cyrus,  swooning  and  senseless,  fell  off  his 
horse.  The  horse  escaped,  and  ran  about  the 
field;  but  the  companion  of  Mithridates  took 
the  trappings  which  fell  off,  soaked  with  blood. 
And  as  Cyrus  slowly  began  to  come  to  himself, 
some  eunuchs  who  were  there  tried  to  put  him 
on  another  horse,  and  so  convey  him  safe  away. 
And  when  he  was  not  able  to  ride,  and  desired 
to  walk  on  his  feet,  they  led  and  supported 
him,  being  indeed  dizzy  in  the  head  and  reel¬ 
ing,  but  convinced  of  his  being  victorious, 
hearing,  as  he  went,  the  fugitives  saluting  Cy¬ 
rus  as  king,  and  praying  for  grace  and  mercy. 

In  the  meantime,  some  wretched,  poverty- 
stricken  Caunians,  who  in  some  pitiful  em¬ 
ployment  as  camp  followers  had  accompanied 
the  king’s  army,  by  chance  joined  these  at¬ 
tendants  of  Cyrus,  supposing  them  to  be  of 
their  own  party.  But  when,  after  a  while,  they 
made  out  that  their  coats  over  their  breast¬ 
plates  were  red,  whereas  all  the  king’s  people 
wore  white  ones,  they  knew  that  they  were  en¬ 
emies.  One  of  them,  therefore,  not  dreaming 
that  it  was  Cyrus,  ventured  to  strike  him  be¬ 
hind  with  a  dart.  The  vein  under  the  knee  was 
cut  open,  and  Cyrus  fell,  and  at  the  same  time 
struck  his  wounded  temple  against  a  stone, 
and  so  died.  Thus  runs  Ctesias’s  account,  tar¬ 
dily,  with  the  slowness  of  a  blunt  weapon  ef¬ 
fecting  the  victim’s  death. 

When  he  was  now  dead,  Artasyras,  the 
king’s  eye,  passed  by  on  horseback,  and,  hav¬ 
ing  observed  the  eunuchs  lamenting,  he  asked 
the  most  trusty  of  them,  “Who  is  this,  Pariscas, 
whom  you  sit  here  deploring?”  He  replied, 
“Do  not  you  see,  O  Artasyras,  that  it  is  my 
master,  Cyrus?”  Then  Artasyras  wondering, 
bade  the  eunuch  be  of  good  cheer,  and  keep 
the  dead  body  safe.  And  going  in  all  haste  to 
Artaxerxes,  who  had  now  given  up  all  hope  of 
his  affairs,  and  was  in  great  suffering  also  with 
his  thirst  and  his  wound,  he  with  much  joy  as¬ 
sured  him  that  he  had  seen  Cyrus  dead.  Upon 
this,  at  first,  he  set  out  to  go  in  person  to  the 
place,  and  commanded  Artasyras  to  conduct 


him  where  he  lay.  But  when  there  was  a  great 
noise  made  about  the  Greeks,  who  were  said 
to  be  in  full  pursuit,  conquering  and  carrying 
all  before  them,  he  thought  it  best  to  send  a 
number  of  persons  to  see;  and  accordingly 
thirty  men  went  with  torches  in  their  hands. 

Meantime,  as  he  seemed  to  be  almost  at  the 
point  of  dying  from  thirst,  his  eunuch  Sati- 
barzanes  ran  about  seeking  drink  for  him;  for 
the  place  had  no  water  in  it  and  he  was  at  a 
good  distance  from  his  camp.  After  a  long 
search  he  at  last  met  one  of  those  poor  Cau- 
nian  camp-followers,  who  had  in  a  wretched 
skin  about  four  pints  of  foul  and  stinking  wa¬ 
ter,  which  he  took  and  gave  to  the  king;  and 
when  he  had  drunk  all  off,  he  asked  him  if  he 
did  not  dislike  the  water;  but  he  declared  by 
all  the  gods  that  he  never  so  much  relished 
either  wine,  or  water  out  of  the  lightest  or 
purest  stream.  “And  therefore,”  said  he,  “if  I 
fail  myself  to  discover  and  reward  him  who 
gave  it  to  you,  I  beg  of  heaven  to  make  him 
rich  and  prosperous.” 

Just  after  this,  came  back  the  thirty  mes¬ 
sengers,  with  joy  and  triumph  in  their  looks, 
bringing  him  the  tidings  of  his  unexpected 
fortune.  And  now  he  was  also  encouraged  by 
the  number  of  soldiers  that  again  began  to 
flock  in  and  gather  about  him;  so  that  he  pres¬ 
ently  descended  into  the  plain  with  many  lights 
and  flambeaux  round  about  him.  And  when 
he  had  come  near  the  dead  body,  and,  accord¬ 
ing  to  a  certain  law  of  the  Persians,  the  right 
hand  and  head  had  been  lopped  off  from  the 
trunk,  he  gave  orders  that  tbe  latter  should  be 
brought  to  him,  and,  grasping  the  hair  of  it, 
which  was  long  and  bushy,  he  showed  it  to 
those  who  were  still  uncertain  and  disposed  to 
fly.  They  were  amazed  at  it,  and  did  him 
homage;  so  that  there  were  presently  seventy 
thousand  of  them  got  about  him,  and  entered 
the  camp  again  with  him.  He  had  led  out  to 
the  fight,  as  Ctesias  affirms,  four  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  men.  But  Dinon  and  Xenophon  aver  that 
there  were  many  more  than  forty  myriads  ac¬ 
tually  engaged.  As  to  the  number  of  the  slain, 
as  the  catalogue  of  them  was  given  up  to  Ar¬ 
taxerxes,  Ctesias  says,  they  were  nine  thou¬ 
sand,  but  that  they  appeared  to  him  no  fewer 
than  twenty  thousand.  Thus  far  there  is  some¬ 
thing  to  be  said  on  both  sides. 

But  it  is  a  flagrant  untruth  on  the  part  of 
Ctesias  to  say  that  he  was  sent  along  with  Phal- 
inus  the  Zacynthian  and  some  others  to  the 
Grecians.  For  Xenophon  knew  well  enough 
that  Ctesias  was  resident  at  court;  for  he  makes 


i 

i 

( 

•  I 

t 

\ 

a 

1 

c 

s 

c 

!  t 

I  0 

[i 

Si 

tJ 

I  31 

k 

it 

t 

tl 

•  tl 
h 

O’ 

w 

tl 

w 

ICC 

ki 

k 

tr; 

Is 

m, 

rei 
1 1  fir 
kii 
tin 
res 
be 
Fo 
pri 
ten 

I  thi: 

I  ^ 


ARTAXERXES 

mention  of  him,  and  had  evidently  met  with 
his  writings.  And,  therefore,  had  he  come,  and 
been  deputed  the  interpreter  of  such  momen¬ 
tous  words,  Xenophon  surely  would  not  have 
struck  his  name  out  of  the  embassy  to  mention 
only  Phalinus.  But  Ctesias,  as  is  evident,  being 
excessively  vainglorious  and  no  less  a  favourer 
of  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Clearchus,  never 
fails  to  assume  to  himself  some  province  in  his 
narrative,  taking  opportunity,  in  these  situa¬ 
tions,  to  introduce  abundant  high  praise  of 
Clearchus  and  Sparta. 

When  the  battle  was  over,  Artaxerxes  sent 
goodly  and  magnificent  gifts  to  the  son  of  Ar- 
tagerses,  whom  Cyrus  slew.  He  conferred  like¬ 
wise  high  honours  upon  Ctesias  and  others, 
and,  having  found  out  the  Caunian  who  gave 
him  the  bottle  of  water,  he  made  him — a  poor, 
obscure  man — a  rich  and  an  honourable  per¬ 
son.  As  for  the  punishments  he  inflicted  upon 
delinquents,  there  was  a  kind  of  harmony  be¬ 
twixt  them  and  the  crimes.  He  gave  order  that 
one  Arbaces,  a  Mede,  that  had  fled  in  the  fight 
to  Cyrus  and  again  at  his  fall  had  come  back, 
should,  as  a  mark  that  he  was  considered  a  das¬ 
tardly  and  effeminate,  not  a  dangerous  or  trea¬ 
sonable  man,  have  a  common  harlot  set  upon 
his  back,  and  carry  her  about  for  a  whole  day 
in  the  market-place.  Another,  besides  that  he 
had  deserted  to  them,  having  falsely  vaunted 
that  he  had  killed  two  of  the  rebels,  he  decreed 
that  three  needles  should  be  struck  through 
his  tongue.  And  both  supposing  that  with  his 
own  hand  he  had  cut  off  Cyrus,  and  being 
willing  that  all  men  should  think  and  say  so, 
he  sent  rich  presents  to  Mithridates,  who  first 
wounded  him,  and  charged  those  by  whom  he 
conveyed  the  gifts  to  him  to  say  to  him:  “The 
king  has  honoured  you  with  these  his  favours, 
because  you  found  and  brought  him  the  horse- 
trappings  of  Cyrus.” 

The  Carian,  also,  from  whose  wound  in  the 
ham  Cyrus  died,  suing  for  his  reward,  he  com¬ 
manded  those  that  brought  it  him  to  declare: 
“The  king  presents  you  with  this  as  a  second 
remuneration  for  the  good  news  told  him;  for 
first  Artasyras,  and,  next  to  him,  you  assured 
him  of  the  decease  of  Cyrus.”  Mithridates  re¬ 
tired  without  complaint,  though  not  without 
resentment.  But  the  unfortunate  Carian  was 
fool  enough  to  give  way  to  a  natural  infirmity. 
For  being  ravished  with  the  sight  of  the 
princely  gifts  that  were  before  him,  and  being 
tempted  thereupon  to  challenge  and  aspire  to 
things  above  him,  he  deigned  not  to  accept  the 
king’s  present  as  a  reward  for  good  news,  but 


851 

indignantly  crying  out  and  appealing  to  wit¬ 
nesses,  he  protested  that  he,  and  none  but  he, 
had  killed  Cyrus,  and  that  he  was  unjustly  de¬ 
prived  of  the  glory.  These  words,  when  they 
came  to  his  ear,  much  offended  the  king,  so 
that  forthwith  he  sentenced  him  to  be  be¬ 
headed. 

But  the  queen  mother,  being  in  the  king’s 
presence,  said,  “Let  not  the  king  so  lightly  dis¬ 
charge  this  pernicious  Carian;  let  him  receive 
from  me  the  fitting  punishment  of  what  he 
dares  to  say.”  So  when  the  king  had  consigned 
him  over  to  Parysatis,  she  charged  the  execu¬ 
tioners  to  take  up  the  man,  and  stretch  him 
upon  the  rack  for  ten  days,  then,  tearing  out 
his  eyes,  to  drop  molten  brass  into  his  ears  till 
he  expired. 

Mithridates,  also,  within  a  short  time  after, 
miserably  perished  by  the  like  folly;  for  being 
invited  to  a  feast  where  were  the  eunuchs  both 
of  the  king  and  of  the  queen  mother,  he  came 
arrayed  in  the  dress  and  the  golden  ornaments 
which  he  had  received  from  the  king.  After 
they  began  to  drink,  the  eunuch  that  was  the 
greatest  in  power  with  Parysatis  thus  spoke 
to  him:  “A  magnificent  dress,  indeed,  O  Mith¬ 
ridates,  is  this  which  the  king  has  given  you; 
the  chains  and  bracelets  are  glorious,  and  your 
scymetar  of  invaluable  worth;  how  happy  has 
he  made  you,  the  object  of  every  eye!”  To 
whom  he,  being  a  little  overcome  with  the 
wine,  replied,  “What  are  these  things,  Spara- 
mizes?  Sure  I  am,  I  showed  myself  to  the  king 
in  that  day  of  trial  to  be  one  deserving  greater 
and  costlier  gifts  than  these.”  At  which  Spara- 
mizes  smiling,  said,  “I  do  not  grudge  them  to 
you,  Mithridates;  but  since  the  Grecians  tell  us 
that  wine  and  truth  go  together,  let  me  hear 
now,  my  friend,  what  glorious  or  mighty  mat¬ 
ter  was  it  to  find  some  trappings  that  had 
slipped  off  a  horse,  and  to  bring  them  to  the 
king?” 

And  this  he  spoke,  not  as  ignorant  of  the 
truth,  but  desiring  to  unbosom  him  to  the 
company,  irritating  the  vanity  of  the  man, 
whom  drink  had  now  made  eager  to  talk  and 
incapable  of  controlling  himself.  So  he  forbore 
nothing,  but  said  out,  “Talk  you  what  you 
please  of  horse-trappings  and  such  trifles;  I 
tell  you  plainly,  that  this  hand  was  the  death 
of  Cyrus.  For  I  threw  not  my  darts  as  Arta- 
gerses  did,  in  vain  and  to  no  purpose,  but  only 
just  missing  his  eye,  and  hitting  him  right 
on  the  temple,  and  piercing  him  through,  I 
brought  him  to  the  ground;  and  of  that 
wound  he  died.”  The  rest  of  the  company, 


852 

who  saw  the  end  and  the  hapless  fate  of  Mith- 
ridates  as  if  it  were  already  completed,  bowed 
their  heads  to  the  ground;  and  he  who  enter¬ 
tained  them  said,  “Mithridates,  my  friend,  let 
us  eat  and  drink  now,  revering  the  fortune  of 
our  prince,  and  let  us  waive  discourse  which 
is  too  weighty  for  us.” 

Presently  after,  Sparamizes  told  Parysatis 
what  he  said,  and  she  told  the  king,  who  was 
greatly  enraged  at  it,  as  having  the  lie  given 
him,  and  being  in  danger  to  forfeit  the  most 
glorious  and  most  pleasant  circumstance  of 
his  victory.  For  it  was  his  desire  that  every  one, 
whether  Greek  or  barbarian,  should  believe 
that  in  the  mutual  assaults  and  conflicts  be¬ 
tween  him  and  his  brother,  he,  giving  and  re¬ 
ceiving  a  blow,  was  himself  indeed  wounded, 
but  that  the  other  lost  his  life.  And,  therefore, 
he  decreed  that  Mithridates  should  be  put  to 
death  in  boats;  which  execution  is  after  the 
following  manner: 

Taking  two  boats  framed  exactly  to  fit  and 
answer  each  other,  they  lay  down  in  one  of 
them  the  malefactor  that  suffers,  upon  his 
back;  then,  covering  it  with  the  other,  and  so 
setting  them  together  that  the  head,  hands,  and 
feet  of  him  are  left  outside,  and  the  rest  of  his 
body  lies  shut  up  within,  they  offer  him  food, 
and  if  he  refuse  to  eat  it,  they  force  him  to  do 
it  by  pricking  his  eyes; then,  after  he  has  eaten, 
they  drench  him  with  a  mixture  of  milk  and 
honey,  pouring  it  not  only  into  his  mouth,  but 
all  over  his  face.  They  then  keep  his  face  con¬ 
tinually  turned  towards  the  sun:  and  it  be¬ 
comes  completely  covered  up  and  hidden  by 
the  multitude  of  flies  that  settle  on  it.  And  as 
within  the  boats  he  does  what  those  that  eat 
and  drink  must  needs  do,  creeping  things  and 
vermin  spring  out  of  the  corruption  and  rot¬ 
tenness  of  the  excrement,  and  these  entering 
into  the  bowels  of  him,  his  body  is  consumed. 
When  the  man  is  manifestly  dead,  the  up¬ 
permost  boat  being  taken  off,  they  find  his 
flesh  devoured,  and  swarms  of  such  noisome 
creatures  preying  upon  and,  as  it  were,  grow¬ 
ing  to  his  inwards. 

In  this  way  Mithridates,  after  suffering  for 
seventeen  days,  at  last  expired. 

Masabates,  the  king’s  eunuch,  who  had  cut 
off  the  hand  and  head  of  Cyrus,  remained  still 
as  a  mark  for  Parysatis’s  vengeance.  Whereas, 
therefore,  he  was  so  circumspect,  that  he  gave 
her  no  advantage  against  him,  she  framed  this 
kind  of  snare  for  him.  She  was  a  very  inge¬ 
nious  woman  in  other  ways,  and  was  an  excel¬ 
lent  player  at  dice,  and,  before  the  war,  had 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

often  played  with  the  king.  After  the  war,  too, 
when  she  had  been  reconciled  to  him,  she 
joined  readily  in  all  amusements  with  him, 
played  at  dice  with  him,  was  his  confidant  in 
his  love  matters,  and  in  every  way  did  her  best 
to  leave  him  as  little  as  possible  in  the  com¬ 
pany  of  Statira,  both  because  she  hated  her 
more  than  any  other  person,  and  because  she 
wished  to  have  no  one  so  powerful  as  herself. 
And  so  once  when  Artaxerxes  was  at  leisure, 
and  inclined  to  divert  himself,  she  challenged 
him  to  play  at  dice  with  her  for  a  thousand 
darics,  and  purposely  let  him  win  them,  and 
paid  him  down  in  gold. 

Yet,  pretending  to  be  concerned  for  her  loss, 
and  that  she  would  gladly  have  her  revenge 
for  it,  she  pressed  him  to  begin  a  new  game  for 
a  eunuch;  to  which  he  consented.  But  first  they 
agreed  that  each  of  them  might  except  five  of 
their  most  trusty  eunuchs,  and  that  out  of  the 
rest  of  them  the  loser  should  yield  up  any  the 
winner  should  make  choice  of.  Upon  these 
conditions  they  played.  Thus  being  bent  upon 
her  design,  and  thoroughly  in  earnest  with  her 
game,  and  the  dice  also  running  luckily  for 
her,  when  she  had  got  the  game,  she  de¬ 
manded  Masabates,  who  was  not  in  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  five  excepted.  And  before  the  king 
could  suspect  the  matter,  having  delivered  him 
up  to  the  tormentors,  she  enjoined  them  to  flay 
him  alive,  to  set  his  body  upon  three  stakes, 
and  to  stretch  his  skin  upon  stakes  separately 
from  it. 

These  things  being  done,  and  the  king  tak¬ 
ing  them  ill,  and  being  incensed  against  her, 
she  with  raillery  and  laughter  told  him,  “You 
are  a  comfortable  and  happy  man  indeed,  if 
you  are  so  much  disturbed  for  the  sake  of  an 
old  rascally  eunuch,  when  I,  though  I  have 
thrown  away  a  thousand  darics,  hold  my 
peace  and  acquiesce  in  my  fortune.”  So  the 
king,  vexed  with  himself  for  having  been  thus 
deluded,  hushed  up  all.  But  Statira  both  in 
other  matters  openly  opposed  her,  and  was 
angry  with  her  for  thus,  against  all  law  and 
humanity,  sacrificing  to  the  memory  of  Cyrus 
the  king’s  faithful  friend  and  eunuch. 

Now  after  that  Tisaphernes  had  circum¬ 
vented  and  by  a  false  oath  had  betrayed  Clear- 
chus  and  the  other  commanders,  and,  taking 
them,  had  sent  them  bound  in  chains  to  the 
king,  Ctesias  says  that  he  was  asked  by  Clear- 
chus  to  supply  him  with  a  comb;  and  that 
when  he  had  it,  and  had  combed  his  head  with 
it,  he  was  much  pleased  with  this  good  office, 
and  gave  him  a  ring,  which  might  be  a  token 


ARTAXERXES 

of  the  obligation  to  his  relatives  and  friends  in 
Sparta;  and  that  the  engraving  upon  this  signet 
was  a  set  of  Caryatides  dancing.  He  tells  us 
that  the  soldiers,  his  fellow-captives,  used  to 
purloin  a  part  of  the  allowance  of  food  sent  to 
Clearchus,  giving  him  but  little  of  it;  which 
thing  Ctesias  says  he  rectified,  causing  a  better 
allowance  to  be  conveyed  to  him,  and  that  a 
separate  share  should  be  distributed  to  the 
soldiers  by  themselves;  adding  that  he  minis¬ 
tered  to  and  supplied  him  thus  by  the  interest 
and  at  the  instance  of  Parysatis.  And  there  be¬ 
ing  a  portion  of  ham  sent  daily  with  his  other 
food  to  Clearchus,  she,  he  says,  advised  and  in¬ 
structed  him,  that  he  ought  to  bury  a  small 
knife  in  the  meat,  and  thus  send  it  to  his  friend, 
and  not  leave  his  fate  to  be  determined  by  the 
king’s  cruelty;  which  he,  however,  he  says, 
was  afraid  to  do. 

However,  Artaxerxes  consented  to  the  en¬ 
treaties  of  his  mother,  and  promised  her  with 
an  oath  that  he  would  spare  Clearchus;  but 
afterwards,  at  the  instigation  of  Statira,  he  put 
every  one  of  them  to  death  except  Menon.  And 
thenceforth,  he  says,  Parysatis  watched  her 
advantage  against  Statira  and  made  up  poison 
for  her,  not  a  very  probable  story,  or  a  very 
likely  motive  to  account  for  her  conduct,  if  in¬ 
deed  he  means  that  out  of  respect  to  Clearchus 
she  dared  to  attempt  the  life  of  the  lawful 
queen,  that  was  mother  of  those  who  were 
heirs  of  the  empire. 

But  it  is  evident  enough,  that  this  part  of  his 
history  is  a  sort  of  funeral  exhibition  in  honour 
of  Clearchus.  For  he  would  have  us  believe 
that,  when  the  generals  were  executed,  the  rest 
of  them  were  torn  in  pieces  by  dogs  and  birds; 
but  as  for  the  remains  of  Clearchus,  that  a  vio¬ 
lent  gust  of  wind,  bearing  before  it  a  vast  heap 
of  earth,  raised  a  mound  to  cover  his  body, 
upon  which,  after  a  short  time,  some  dates  hav¬ 
ing  fallen  there,  a  beautiful  grove  of  trees 
grew  up  and  overshadowed  the  place,  so  that 
the  king  himself  declared  his  sorrow,  conclud¬ 
ing  that  in  Clearchus  he  put  to  death  a  man 
beloved  of  the  gods. 

Parysatis,  therefore,  having  from  the  first 
entertained  a  secret  hatred  and  jealousy  against 
Statira,  seeing  that  the  power  she  herself  had 
with  Artaxerxes  was  founded  upon  feelings  of 
honour  and  respect  for  her,  but  that  Statira’s 
influence  was  firmly  and  strongly  based  upon 
love  and  confidence,  was  resolved  to  contrive 
her  ruin,  playing  at  hazard,  as  she  thought,  for 
the  greatest  stake  in  the  world.  Among  her  at¬ 
tendant  women  there  was  one  that  was  trusty 


853 

and  in  the  highest  esteem  with  her,  whose 
name  was  Gigis;  who,  as  Dinon  avers,  assisted 
in  making  up  the  poison.  Ctesias  allows  her 
only  to  have  been  conscious  of  it,  and  that 
against  her  will;  charging  Belitaras  with  ac¬ 
tually  giving  the  drug,  whereas  Dinon  says  it 
was  Melantas. 

The  two  women  had  begun  again  to  visit 
each  other  and  to  eat  together;  but  though  they 
had  thus  far  relaxed  their  former  habits  of 
jealousy  and  variance,  still,  out  of  fear  and  as  a 
matter  of  caution,  they  always  ate  of  the  same 
dishes  and  of  the  same  parts  of  them.  Now 
there  is  a  small  Persian  bird,  in  the  inside  of 
which  no  excrement  is  found,  only  a  mass  of 
fat,  so  that  they  suppose  the  little  creature  lives 
upon  air  and  dew.  It  is  called  rhyntaces .  Cte¬ 
sias  affirms,  that  Parysatis,  cutting  a  bird  of  this 
kind  into  two  pieces  with  a  knife  one  side  of 
which  had  been  smeared  with  the  drug,  the 
other  side  being  clear  of  it,  ate  the  untouched 
and  wholesome  part  herself,  and  gave  Statira 
that  which  was  thus  infected;  but  Dinon  will 
not  have  it  to  be  Parysatis,  but  Melantas,  that 
cut  up  the  bird  and  presented  the  envenomed 
part  of  it  to  Statira;  who,  dying  with  dreadful 
agonies  and  convulsions,  was  herself  sensible 
of  what  had  happened  to  her,  and  aroused  in 
the  king’s  mind  suspicion  of  his  mother,  whose 
savage  and  implacable  temper  he  knew. 

And  therefore  proceeding  instantly  to  an  in¬ 
quest,  he  seized  upon  his  mother’s  domestic 
servants  that  attended  at  her  table  and  put 
them  upon  the  rack.  Parysatis  kept  Gigis  at 
home  with  her  a  long  time,  and  though  the 
king  commanded  her,  she  would  not  produce 
her.  But  she,  at  last  herself  desiring  that  she 
might  be  dismissed  to  her  own  home  by  night, 
Artaxerxes  had  intimation  of  it,  and  lying  in 
wait  for  her,  hurried  her  away,  and  adjudged 
her  to  death.  Now  poisoners  in  Persia  suffer 
thus  by  law.  There  is  a  broad  stone,  on  which 
they  place  the  head  of  the  culprit,  and  then 
with  another  stone  beat  and  press  it,  until  the 
face  and  the  head  itself  are  all  pounded  to 
pieces;  which  was  the  punishment  Gigis  lost 
her  life  by.  But  to  his  mother,  Artaxerxes 
neither  said  nor  did  any  other  hurt,  save  that 
he  banished  and  confined  her,  not  much 
against  her  will,  to  Babylon,  protesting  that 
while  she  lived  he  would  not  come  near  that 
city.  Such  was  the  condition  of  the  king’s  af¬ 
fairs  in  his  own  house. 

But  when  all  his  attempts  to  capture  the 
Greeks  that  had  come  with  Cyrus,  though  he 
desired  to  do  so  no  less  than  he  had  desired 


854 

to  overcome  Cyrus  and  maintain  his  throne, 
proved  unlucky,  and  they,  though  they  had  lost 
both  Cyrus  and  their  own  generals,  neverthe¬ 
less  escaped,  as  it  were,  out  of  his  very  palace, 
making  it  plain  to  all  men  that  the  Persian 
king  and  his  empire  were  mighty  indeed  in 
gold  and  luxury  and  women,  but  otherwise 
were  a  mere  show  and  vain  display,  upon  this 
all  Greece  took  courage  and  despised  the  bar¬ 
barians;  and  especially  the  Lacedaemonians 
thought  it  strange  if  they  should  not  now  de¬ 
liver  their  countrymen  that  dwelt  in  Asia  from 
their  subjection  to  the  Persians,  nor  put  an 
end  to  the  contumelious  usage  of  them. 

And  first  having  an  army  under  the  conduct 
of  Thimbron,  then  under  Dercyllidas,  but  do¬ 
ing  nothing  memorable,  they  at  last  committed 
the  war  to  the  management  of  their  King  Age- 
silaus,  who,  when  he  had  arrived  with  his  men 
in  Asia,  as  soon  as  he  had  landed  them,  fell  ac¬ 
tively  to  work,  and  got  himself  great  renown. 
He  defeated  Tisaphernes  in  a  pitched  battle, 
and  set  many  cities  in  revolt.  Upon  this,  Ar- 
taxerxes,  perceiving  what  was  his  wisest  way 
of  waging  the  war,  sent  Timocrates  the  Rho¬ 
dian  into  Greece,  with  large  sums  of  gold,  com¬ 
manding  him  by  a  free  distribution  of  it  to  cor¬ 
rupt  the  leading  men  in  the  cities,  and  to  ex¬ 
cite  a  Greek  war  against  Sparta.  So  Timoc¬ 
rates  following  his  instructions,  the  most  con¬ 
siderable  cities  conspiring  together,  and  Pelo¬ 
ponnesus  being  in  disorder,  the  ephors  re¬ 
manded  Agesilaus  from  Asia.  At  which  time, 
they  say,  as  he  was  upon  his  return,  he  told 
his  friends  that  Artaxerxes  had  driven  him 
out  of  Asia  with  thirty  thousand  archers; 
the  Persian  coin  having  an  archer  stamped 
upon  it. 

Artaxerxes  scoured  the  seas,  too,  of  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians,  Conon  the  Athenian  and  Pharna- 
bazus  being  his  admirals.  For  Conon,  after  the 
battle  of  ^Egospotami,  resided  in  Cyprus;  not 
that  he  consulted  his  own  mere  security,  but 
looking  for  a  vicissitude  of  affairs  with  no  less 
hope  than  men  wait  for  a  change  of  wind  at 
sea.  And  perceiving  that  his  skill  wanted 
power,  and  that  the  king’s  power  wanted  a 
wise  man  to  guide  it,  he  sent  him  an  account  of 
his  projects,  and  charged  the  bearer  to  hand  it 
to  the  king,  if  possible,  by  the  mediation  of 
Zeno  the  Cretan,  or  Polycritus  the  Mendaean, 
(the  former  being  a  dancing-master,  the  latter 
a  physician),  or,  in  the  absence  of  them  both, 
by  Ctesias;  who  is  said  to  have  taken  Conon’s 
letter,  and  foisted  into  the  contents  of  it  a  re¬ 
quest  that  the  king  would  also  be  pleased  to 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

send  over  Ctesias  to  him,  who  was  likely  to  be 
of  use  on  the  sea-coast.  Ctesias,  however,  de¬ 
clares  that  the  king,  of  his  accord,  deputed  him 
to  his  service. 

Artaxerxes,  however,  defeating  the  Lace¬ 
daemonians  in  a  sea-fight  at  Cnidos,  under  the 
conduct  of  Pharnabazus  and  Conon,  after  he 
had  stripped  them  of  their  sovereignty  by  sea, 
at  the  same  time  brought,  so  to  say,  the  whole 
of  Greece  over  to  him,  so  that  upon  his  own 
terms  he  dictated  the  celebrated  peace  among 
them,  styled  the  peace  of  Antalcidas.  This  An- 
talcidas  was  a  Spartan,  the  son  of  one  Leon, 
who,  acting  for  the  king’s  interest,  induced  the 
Lacedaemonians  to  covenant  to  let  all  the  Greek 
cities  in  Asia  and  the  islands  adjacent  to  it  be¬ 
come  subject  and  tributary  to  him,  peace  being 
upon  these  conditions  established  among  the 
Greeks,  if  indeed  the  honourable  name  of 
peace  can  fairly  be  given  to  what  was  in  fact 
the  disgrace  and  betrayal  of  Greece,  a  treaty 
more  inglorious  than  had  ever  been  the  result  ! 
of  any  war  to  those  defeated  in  it. 

And  therefore  Artaxerxes,  though  always 
abominating  other  Spartans,  and  looking  upon 
them,  as  Dinon  says,  to  be  the  most  impudent 
men  living,  gave  wonderful  honour  to  Antal¬ 
cidas  when  he  came  to  him  into  Persia;  so 
much  so  that  one  day,  taking  a  garland  of  flow¬ 
ers  and  dipping  it  in  the  most  precious  oint-  1 
ment,  he  sent  it  to  him  after  supper,  a  favour  { 
which  all  were  amazed  at.  Indeed  he  was  a  [ 
person  fit  to  be  thus  delicately  treated,  and  to  f 
have  such  a  crown,  who  had  among  the  Per-  1 
sians  thus  made  fools  of  Leonidas  and  Callic- 
ratidas.  Agesilaus,  it  seems,  on  some  one  hav-  " 
ing  said,  “O  the  deplorable  fate  of  Greece,  now  a 
that  the  Spartans  turn  Medes!”  replied,  “Nay,  d 
rather  it  is  the  Medes  who  become  Spartans.”  ^  tl 

But  the  subtilty  of  the  repartee  did  not  wipe  tl 
off  the  infamy  of  the  action.  The  Lacedae-  d 
monians  soon  after  lost  their  sovereignty  in  n 
Greece  by  their  defeat  at  Leuctra;  but  they  had  I  hi 
already  lost  their  honour  by  this  treaty.  So  long  in 
then  as  Sparta  continued  to  be  the  first  state  in  w 
Greece,  Artaxerxes  continued  to  Antalcidas  (ji 
the  honour  of  being  called  his  friend  and  his  f  lo 
guest;  but  when,  routed  and  humbled  at  the  tci 
battle  of  Leuctra,  being  under  great  distress  for  pa 
money,  they  had  despatched  Agesilaus  into  wt 
Egypt,  and  Antalcidas  went  up  to  Artaxerxes,  i  gii 
beseeching  him  to  supply  their  necessities,  he  .  As 
so  despised,  slighted,  and  rejected  him,  that 
finding  himself,  on  his  return,  mocked  and  in-  for 
suited  by  his  enemies,  and  fearing  also  the  to 
ephors,  he  starved  himself  to  death.  Ismenias,  J  In 


ARTAXERXES 

also,  the  Theban,  and  Pelopidas,  who  had  al¬ 
ready  gained  the  victory  at  Leuctra,  arrived  at 
the  Persian  court;  where  the  latter  did  nothing 
unworthy  of  himself.  But  Ismenias,  being  com¬ 
manded  to  do  obeisance  to  the  king,  dropped 
his  ring  before  him  upon  the  ground,  and  so, 
stooping  to  take  it  up,  made  a  show  of  doing 
him  homage. 

Artaxerxes  was  so  gratified  with  some  secret 
intelligence  which  Timagoras  the  Athenian 
sent  in  to  him  by  the  hand  of  his  secretary,  Be- 
luris,  that  he  bestowed  upon  him  ten  thousand 
darics,  and  because  he  was  ordered,  on  account 
of  some  sickness,  to  drink  cow’s  milk,  there 
were  fourscore  milch  kine  driven  after  him; 
also,  he  sent  him  a  bed,  furniture,  and  servants 
for  it,  the  Grecians  not  having  skill  enough  to 
make  it,  as  also  chairmen  to  carry  him,  being 
infirm  in  body,  to  the  seaside.  Not  to  mention 
the  feast  made  for  him  at  court,  which  was  so 
princely  and  splendid  that  Ostanes,  the  king’s 
brother,  said  to  him,  “O  Timagoras,  do  not 
forget  the  sumptuous  table  you  have  sat  at 
here;  it  was  not  put  before  you  for  nothing”; 
which  was  indeed  rather  a  reflection  upon  his 
treason  than  to  remind  him  of  the  king’s 
bounty.  And  indeed  the  Athenians  condemned 
Timagoras  to  death  for  taking  bribes. 

But  Artaxerxes  gratified  the  Grecians  in  one 
thing  in  lieu  of  the  many  wherewith  he 
plagued  them,  and  that  was  by  taking  of?  Tisa- 
phernes,  their  most  hated  and  malicious  en¬ 
emy,  whom  he  put  to  death,  Parysatis  adding 
her  influence  to  the  charges  made  against  him. 

For  the  king  did  not  persist  long  in  his  wrath 
with  his  mother,  but  was  reconciled  to  her,  and 
sent  for  her,  being  assured  that  she  had  wis¬ 
dom  and  courage  fit  for  royal  power,  and 
there  being  now  no  cause  discernible  but  that 
they  might  converse  together  without  suspi¬ 
cion  or  offence.  And  from  thenceforward  hu¬ 
mouring  the  king  in  all  things  according  to 
his  heart’s  desire,  and  finding  fault  with  noth¬ 
ing  that  he  did,  she  obtained  great  power 
with  him,  and  was  gratified  in  all  her  re¬ 
quests.  She  perceived  he  was  desperately  in 
love  with  Atossa,  one  of  his  own  two  daugh¬ 
ters,  and  that  he  concealed  and  checked  his 
passion  chiefly  for  fear  of  herself,  though,  if 
we  may  believe  some  writers,  he  had  privately 
given  way  to  it  with  the  young  girl  already. 
As  soon  as  Parysatis  suspected  it,  she  displayed 
a  greater  fondness  for  the  young  girl  than  be¬ 
fore,  and  extolled  both  her  virtue  and  beauty 
to  him,  as  being  truly  imperial  and  majestic. 
In  fine,  she  persuaded  him  to  marry  her  and 


855 

declare  her  to  be  his  lawful  wife,  over-riding 
all  the  principles  and  the  laws  by  which  the 
Greeks  hold  themselves  bound,  and  regarding 
himself  as  divinely  appointed  for  a  law  to  the 
Persians,  and  the  supreme  arbitrator  of  good 
and  evil. 

Some  historians  further  affirm,  in  which 
number  is  Heraclides  of  Cuma,  that  Arta¬ 
xerxes  married  not  only  this  one,  but  a  second 
daughter  also,  Amestris,  of  whom  we  shall 
speak  by  and  by.  But  he  so  loved  Atossa  when 
she  became  his  consort,  that  when  leprosy  had 
run  through  her  whole  body,  he  was  not  in  the 
least  offended  at  it;  but  putting  up  his  prayers 
to  Juno  for  her,  to  this  one  alone  of  all  the 
deities  he  made  obeisance,  by  laying  his  hands 
upon  the  earth;  and  his  satraps  and  favourites 
made  such  offerings  to  the  goddess  by  his  di¬ 
rection,  that  all  along  for  sixteen  furlongs  be¬ 
twixt  the  court  and  her  temple,  the  road  was 
filled  up  with  gold  and  silver,  purple  and 
horses,  devoted  to  her. 

He  waged  war  out  of  his  own  kingdom  with 
the  Egyptians,  under  the  conduct  of  Pharna- 
bazus  and  Iphicrates,  but  was  unsuccessful  by 
reason  of  their  dissensions.  In  his  expedition 
against  the  Cadusians,  he  went  himself  in  per¬ 
son  with  three  hundred  thousand  footmen  and 
ten  thousand  horse,  and  making  an  incursion 
into  their  country,  which  was  so  mountain¬ 
ous  as  scarcely  to  be  passable,  and  withal  very 
misty,  producing  no  sort  of  harvest  of  corn  or 
the  like,  but  with  pears,  apples,  and  other  tree- 
fruits  feeding  a  war-like  and  valiant  breed  of 
men,  he  unawares  fell  into  great  distresses  and 
dangers.  For  there  was  nothing  to  be  got,  fit 
for  his  men  to  eat,  of  the  growth  of  that  place, 
nor  could  anything  be  imported  from  any 
other.  All  they  could  do  was  to  kill  their  beasts 
of  burden,  and  thus  an  ass’s  head  could  scarcely 
be  bought  for  sixty  drachmas.  In  short,  the 
king’s  own  table  failed;  and  there  were  but  few 
horses  left;  the  rest  they  had  spent  for  food. 

Then  Teribazus,  a  man  often  in  great  favour 
with  his  prince  for  his  valour  and  as  often  out 
of  it  for  his  buffoonery,  and  particularly  at 
that  time  in  humble  estate  and  neglected,  was 
the  deliverer  of  the  king  and  his  army.  There 
being  two  kings  amongst  the  Cadusians,  and 
each  of  them  encamping  separately,  Teribazus, 
after  he  had  made  his  application  to  Artaxerxes 
and  imparted  his  design  to  him,  went  to  one  of 
the  princes,  and  sent  away  his  son  privately  to 
the  other.  So  each  of  them  deceived  his  man, 
assuring  him  that  the  other  prince  had  deput¬ 
ed  an  ambassador  to  Artaxerxes,  suing  for 


856 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES  * 


friendship  and  alliance  for  himself  alone;  and, 
therefore,  if  he  were  wise,  he  told  him,  he 
must  apply  himself  to  his  master  before  he  had 
decreed  anything,  and  he,  he  said,  would  lend 
him  his  assistance  in  all  things.  Both  of  them 
gave  credit  to  these  words,  and  because  they 
supposed  they  were  each  intrigued  against  by 
the  other,  they  both  sent  their  envoys,  one 
along  with  Teribazus,  and  the  other  with  his 
son.  All  this  taking  some  time  to  transact, 
fresh  surmises  and  suspicions  of  Teribazus 
were  expressed  to  the  king,  who  began  to  be 
out  of  heart,  sorry  that  he  had  confided  in 
him,  and  ready  to  give  ear  to  his  rivals  who 
impeached  him.  But  at  last  he  came,  and  so 
did  his  son,  bringing  the  Cadusian  agents 
along  with  them,  and  so  there  was  a  cessation 
of  arms  and  a  peace  signed  with  both  the 
princes. 

And  Teribazus,  in  great  honour  and  distinc¬ 
tion,  set  out  homewards  in  the  company  of  the 
king;  who,  indeed,  upon  this  journey  made  it 
appear  plainly  that  cowardice  and  effeminacy 
are  the  effects,  not  of  delicate  and  sumptuous 
living,  as  many  suppose,  but  of  a  base  and  vi¬ 
cious  nature,  actuated  by  false  and  bad  opin¬ 
ions.  For  notwithstanding  his  golden  orna¬ 
ments,  his  robe  of  state,  and  the  rest  of  that 
costly  attire,  worth  no  less  than  twelve  thou¬ 
sand  talents,  with  which  the  royal  person  was 
constantly  clad,  his  labours  and  toils  were  not 
a  whit  inferior  to  those  of  the  meanest  persons 
in  his  army.  With  his  quiver  by  his  side  and 
his  shield  on  his  arm,  he  led  them  on  foot,  quit¬ 
ting  his  horse,  through  craggy  and  steep  ways, 
insomuch  that  the  sight  of  his  cheerfulness  and 
unwearied  strength  gave  wings  to  the  soldiers, 
and  so  lightened  the  journey  that  they  made 
daily  marches  of  above  two  hundred  furlongs. 

After  they  had  arrived  at  one  of  his  own 
mansions,  which  had  beautiful  ornamented 
parks  in  the  midst  of  a  region  naked  and  with¬ 
out  trees,  the  weather  being  very  cold,  he  gave 
full  commission  to  his  soldiers  to  provide  them¬ 
selves  with  wood  by  cutting  down  any,  without 
exception,  even  the  pine  and  cypress.  And 
when  they  hesitated  and  were  for  sparing  them, 
being  large  and  goodly  trees,  he,  taking  up  an 
axe  himself,  felled  the  greatest  and  most  beau¬ 
tiful  of  them.  After  which  his  men  used  their 
hatchets,  and  piling  up  many  fires,  passed  away 
the  night  at  their  ease.  Nevertheless,  he  re¬ 
turned  not  without  the  loss  of  many  and  val¬ 
iant  subjects,  and  of  almost  all  his  horses.  And 
supposing  that  his  misfortunes  and  the  ill-suc¬ 
cess  of  his  expedition  made  him  despised  in  the 


eyes  of  his  people,  he  looked  jealously  on  his 
nobles,  many  of  whom  he  slew  in  anger,  and 
yet  more  out  of  fear.  As,  indeed,  fear  is  the 
bloodiest  passion  in  princes;  confidence,  on 
the  other  hand,  being  merciful,  gentle,  and  un¬ 
suspicious.  So  we  see  among  wild  beasts,  the 
intractable  and  least  tamable  are  the  most  tim¬ 
orous  and  most  easily  startled;  the  nobler  crea¬ 
tures,  whose  courage  makes  them  trustful,  are 
ready  to  respond  to  the  advances  of  men. 

Artaxerxes,  now  being  an  old  man,  perceived 
that  his  sons  were  in  controversy  about  his 
kingdom,  and  that  they  made  parties  among 
his  favourites  and  peers.  Those  that  were  equi¬ 
table  among  them  thought  it  fit  that  as  he  had 
received  it,  so  he  should  bequeath  it,  by  right 
of  age,  to  Darius.  The  younger  brother,  Ochus, 
who  was  hot  and  violent,  had  indeed  a  consid¬ 
erable  number  of  the  courtiers  that  espoused 
his  interest,  but  his  chief  hope  was  that  by 
Atossa’s  means  he  should  win  his  father.  For 
he  flattered  her  with  the  thoughts  of  being  his 
wife  and  partner  in  the  kingdom  after  the 
death  of  Artaxerxes.  And  truly  it  was  ru¬ 
moured  that  already  Ochus  maintained  a  too 
intimate  correspondence  with  her.  This,  how¬ 
ever,  was  quite  unknown  to  the  king;  who, 
being  willing  to  put  down  in  good  time  his 
son  Ochus ’s  hopes,  lest,  by  his  attempting  the 
same  things  his  uncle  Cyrus  did,  wars  and 
contentions  might  again  afflict  his  kingdom, 
proclaimed  Darius,  then  twenty-five  years  old, 
his  successor,  and  gave  him  leave  to  wear  the 
upright  hat,  as  they  called  it. 

It  was  a  rule  and  usage  of  Persia,  that  the 
heir  apparent  to  the  crown  should  beg  a  boon, 
and  that  he  that  declared  him  so  should  give 
whatever  he  asked,  provided  it  were  within 
the  sphere  of  his  power.  Darius  therefore  re¬ 
quested  Aspasia,  in  former  time  the  most 
prized  of  the  concubines  of  Cyrus,  and  now 
belonging  to  the  king.  She  was  by  birth  a  Pho- 
caean,  of  Ionia,  born  of  free  parents,  and  well 
educated.  Once  when  Cyrus  was  at  supper, 
she  was  led  in  to  him  with  other  women,  who, 
when  they  were  sat  down  by  him,  and  he  be¬ 
gan  to  sport  and  dally  and  talk  jestingly  with 
them,  gave  way  freely  to  his  advances.  But  she 
stood  by  in  silence,  refusing  to  come  when 
Cyrus  called  her,  and  when  his  chamberlains 
were  going  to  force  her  towards  him,  said, 
“Whosoever  lays  hands  on  me  shall  rue  it”;  so 
that  she  seemed  to  the  company  a  sullen  and 
rude-mannered  person.  However,  Cyrus  was 
well  pleased,  and  laughed,  saying  to  the  man 
that  brought  the  women,  “Do  you  not  see  to  a 


ci 

c 

3' 

t 

G 

tl 

l 

0 

t 

c 

n 

o 

fi 

ti 

P 

d 

tl 

l< 

f« 

a 

s! 


tl 

j  0 

j11 
1  SC 

\\\ 

tl 

'Jtl 

It' 

!  w 
ei 
1 01 
j  ai 

i  ti 
•  ti 

w 

k 

■  ar 
0 
al 

|  in 
j  ar 
!  A 
j  an 
lie 
en 
at 
ev 

W( 

of 

od 


ARTAXERXES 

certainty  that  this  woman  alone  of  all  that 
came  with  you  is  truly  noble  and  pure  in  char¬ 
acter?”  After  which  time  he  began  to  regard 
her,  and  loved  her,  above  all  of  her  sex,  and 
called  her  the  Wise.  But  Cyrus  being  slain  in 
the  fight,  she  was  taken  among  the  spoils  of 
his  camp. 

Darius,  in  demanding  her,  no  doubt  much 
offended  his  father,  for  the  barbarian  people 
keep  a  very  jealous  and  watchful  eye  over  their 
carnal  pleasures,  so  that  it  is  death  for  a  man 
not  only  to  come  near  and  touch  any  concubine 
of  his  prince,  but  likewise  on  a  journey  to  ride 
forward  and  pass  by  the  carriages  in  which 
they  are  conveyed.  And  though,  to  gratify  his 
passion,  he  had  against  all  law  married  his 
daughter  Atossa,  and  had  besides  her  no  less 
than  three  hundred  and  sixty  concubines  se¬ 
lected  for  their  beauty,  yet  being  importuned 
for  that  one  by  Darius,  he  urged  that  she  was 
a  free-woman,  and  allowed  him  to  take  her,  if 
she  had  an  inclination  to  go  with  him,  but  by 
no  means  to  force  her  away  against  it. 

Aspasia,  therefore,  being  sent  for,  and,  con¬ 
trary  to  the  kings  expectation,  making  choice 
of  Darius,  he  gave  him  her  indeed,  being  con¬ 
strained  by  law,  but  when  he  had  done  so,  a 
little  after  he  took  her  from  him.  For  he  con¬ 
secrated  her  priestess  to  Diana  of  Ecbatana, 
whom  they  name  Anaitis,  that  she  might  spend 
the  remainder  of  her  days  in  strict  chastity, 
thinking  thus  to  punish  his  son,  not  rigorously, 
but  with  moderation,  by  a  revenge  checkered 
with  jest  and  earnest.  But  he  took  it  heinously, 
either  that  he  was  passionately  fond  of  Aspasia, 
or  because  he  looked  upon  himself  as  affronted 
and  scorned  by  his  father. 

Teribazus,  perceiving  him  thus  minded,  did 
his  best  to  exasperate  him  yet  further,  seeing  in 
his  injuries  a  representation  of  his  own,  of 
which  the  following  is  the  account:  Artaxerxes, 
having  many  daughters,  promised  to  give  Ap- 
ama  to  Pharnabazus  to  wife,  Rhodogune  to 
Orontes,  and  Amestris  to  Teribazus;  whom 
alone  of  the  three  he  disappointed,  by  marry¬ 
ing  Amestris  himself.  However,  to  make  him 
amends,  he  betrothed  his  youngest  daughter 
Atossa  to  him.  But  after  he  had,  being  en¬ 
amoured  of  her  too,  as  has  been  said,  married 
her,  Teribazus  entertained  an  irreconcilable 
enmity  against  him.  As  indeed  he  was  seldom 
at  any  other  time  steady  in  his  temper,  but  un¬ 
even  and  inconsiderate;  so  that  whether  he 
were  in  the  number  of  the  choicest  favourites 
of  his  prince,  or  whether  he  were  offensive  and 
odious  to  him,  he  demeaned  himself  in  neither 


857 

condition  with  moderation,  but  if  he  was  ad¬ 
vanced  he  was  intolerably  insolent,  and  in  his 
degradation  not  submissive  and  peaceable  in 
his  deportment,  but  fierce  and  haughty. 

And  therefore  Teribazus  was  to  the  young 
prince  flame  added  upon  flame,  ever  urging 
him,  and  saying,  that  in  vain  those  wear  their 
hats  upright  who  consult  not  the  real  success 
of  their  affairs,  and  that  he  was  ill-befriended 
of  reason  if  he  imagined,  whilst  he  had  a 
brother,  who,  through  the  women’s  apart¬ 
ments,  was  seeking  a  way  to  the  supremacy, 
and  a  father  of  so  rash  and  fickle  a  humour, 
that  he  should  by  succession  infallibly  step  up 
into  the  throne.  For  he  that  out  of  fondness  to 
an  Ionian  girl  has  eluded  a  law  sacred  and  in¬ 
violable  among  the  Persians  is  not  likely  to 
be  faithful  in  the  performance  of  the  most 
important  promises.  He  added,  too,  that  it 
was  not  all  one  for  Ochus  not  to  attain  to,  and 
for  him  to  be  put  by  his  crown;  since  Ochus 
as  a  subject  might  live  happily,  and  nobody 
could  hinder  him;  but  he,  being  proclaimed 
king,  must  either  take  up  his  sceptre  or  lay 
down  his  life. 

These  words  presently  inflamed  Darius: 
what  Sophocles  says  being  indeed  generally 
true: — 

Quic\  travels  the  persuasion  to  what’s  wrong. 

For  the  path  is  smooth,  and  upon  an  easy  de¬ 
scent,  that  leads  us  to  our  own  will;  and  the 
most  part  of  us  desire  what  is  evil  through  our 
strangeness  to  and  ignorance  of  good.  And  in 
this  case,  no  doubt,  the  greatness  of  the  empire 
and  the  jealousy  Darius  had  of  Ochus  fur¬ 
nished  Teribazus  with  material  for  his  persua¬ 
sions.  Nor  was  Venus  wholly  unconcerned  in 
the  matter,  in  regard,  namely,  of  his  loss  of 
Aspasia. 

Darius,  therefore,  resigned  himself  up  to  the 
dictates  of  Teribazus;  and  many  now  conspir¬ 
ing  with  them,  a  eunuch  gave  information  to 
the  king  of  their  scheme  and  the  way  it  was 
to  be  managed,  having  discovered  the  certainty 
of  it,  that  they  had  resolved  to  break  into  his 
bed-chamber  by  night,  and  there  to  kill  him  as 
he  lay.  After  Artaxerxes  had  been  thus  adver¬ 
tised,  he  did  not  think  fit,  by  disregarding  the 
discovery,  to  despise  so  great  a  danger,  nor  to 
believe  it  when  there  was  little  or  no  proof  of 
it.  Thus  then  he  did:  he  charged  the  eunuch 
constantly  to  attend  and  accompany  the  con¬ 
spirators  wherever  they  were;  in  the  mean¬ 
while,  he  broke  down  the  party-wall  of  the 
chamber  behind  his  bed,  and  placed  a  door  in 


858 

it  to  open  and  shut,  which  he  covered  up  with 
tapestry;  so  the  hour  approaching,  and  the 
eunuch  having  told  him  the  precise  time  in 
which  the  traitors  designed  to  assassinate  him, 
he  waited  for  them  in  his  bed,  and  rose  not  up 
till  he  had  seen  the  faces  of  his  assailants  and 
recognised  every  man  of  them. 

As  soon  as  he  saw  them  with  their  swords 
drawn  and  coming  up  to  him,  throwing  up  the 
hanging,  he  made  his  retreat  into  the  inner 
chamber,  and,  bolting  the  door,  raised  a  cry. 
Thus  when  the  murderers  had  been  seen  by 
him,  and  had  attempted  him  in  vain,  they  with 
speed  went  back  through  the  same  doors  they 
came  in  by;  enjoining  Teribazus  and  his 
friends  to  flee,  as  their  plot  had  been  certainly 
detected.  They,  therefore,  made  their  escape 
different  ways;  but  Teribazus  was  seized  by 
the  king’s  guards,  and  after  slaying  many, 
while  they  were  laying  hold  on  him,  at  length 
being  struck  through  with  a  dart  at  a  distance, 
fell. 

As  for  Darius,  who  was  brought  to  trial  with 
his  children,  the  king  appointed  the  royal 
judges  to  sit  over  him,  and  because  he  was  not 
himself  present,  but  accused  Darius  by  proxy, 
he  commanded  his  scribes  to  write  down  the 
opinion  of  every  one  of  the  judges,  and  show  it 
to  him.  And  after  they  had  given  their  sen¬ 
tences,  all  as  one  man,  and  condemned  Darius 
to  death,  the  officers  seized  on  him,  and  hur¬ 
ried  him  to  a  chamber  not  far  off.  To  which 
place  the  executioner,  when  summoned,  came 
with  a  razor  in  his  hand,  with  which  men  of 
his  employment  cut  off  the  heads  of  offend¬ 
ers.  But  when  he  saw  that  Darius  was  the  per¬ 
son  thus  to  be  punished  he  was  appalled  and 
started  back,  offering  to  go  out,  as  one  that 
had  neither  power  nor  courage  enough  to  be¬ 
head  a  king;  yet  at  the  threats  and  commands 
of  the  judges  who  stood  at  the  prison  door,  he 
returned  and  grasping  the  hair  of  his  head 
and  bringing  his  face  to  the  ground  with  one 
hand,  he  cut  through  his  neck  with  the  razor 
he  had  in  the  other. 

Some  affirm  that  sentence  was  passed  in  the 
presence  of  Artaxerxes;  that  Darius,  after  he 
had  been  convicted  by  clear  evidence,  falling 
prostrate  before  him,  did  humbly  beg  his  par¬ 
don;  that  instead  of  giving  it,  he  rising  up  in 
rage  and  drawing  his  scymetar,  smote  him  till 
he  had  killed  him;  and  then,  going  forth  into 
the  court,  he  worshipped  the  sun,  and  said, 
“Depart  in  peace,  ye  Persians,  and  declare  to 
your  fellow-subjects  how  the  mighty  Oromas- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

des  hath  dealt  out  vengeance  to  the  contrivers 
of  unjust  and  unlawful  things.” 

Such,  then,  was  the  issue  of  this  conspiracy. 
And  now  Ochus  was  high  in  his  hopes,  being 
confident  in  the  influence  of  Atossa;  but  yet 
was  afraid  of  Ariaspes,  the  only  male  surviv¬ 
ing,  besides  himself,  of  the  legitimate  offspring 
of  his  father,  and  of  Arsames,  one  of  his  nat¬ 
ural  sons.  For  indeed  Ariaspes  was  already 
claimed  as  their  prince  by  the  wishes  of  the 
Persians,  not  because  he  was  the  elder  brother, 
but  because  he  excelled  Ochus  in  gentleness, 
plain  dealing,  and  good-nature;  and  on  the 
other  hand  Arsames  appeared,  by  his  wisdom, 
fitted  for  the  throne,  and  that  he  was  dear  to 
his  father  Ochus  well  knew. 

So  he  laid  snares  for  them  both,  and  being  no 
less  treacherous  than  bloody,  he  made  use  of 
the  cruelty  of  his  nature  against  Arsames,  and 
of  his  craft  and  wiliness  against  Ariaspes.  For 
he  suborned  the  king’s  eunuchs  and  favourites 
to  convey  to  him  menacing  and  harsh  expres¬ 
sions  from  his  father,  as  though  he  had  decreed 
to  put  him  to  a  cruel  and  ignominious  death. 
When  they  daily  communicated  these  things 
as  secrets,  and  told  him  at  one  time  that  the 
king  would  do  so  to  him  ere  long,  and  at  an¬ 
other,  that  the  blow  was  actually  close  impend¬ 
ing,  they  so  alarmed  the  young  man,  struck 
such  a  terror  into  him,  and  cast  such  a  confu¬ 
sion  and  anxiety  upon  his  thoughts,  that,  hav¬ 
ing  prepared  some  poisonous  drugs,  he  drank 
them,  that  he  might  be  delivered  from  his  life. 

The  king,  on  hearing  what  kind  of  death  he 
died,  heartily  lamented  him,  and  was  not  with¬ 
out  a  suspicion  of  the  cause  of  it.  But  being 
disabled  by  his  age  to  search  into  and  prove  it, 
he  was,  after  the  loss  of  this  son,  more  affec¬ 
tionate  than  before  to  Arsames,  did  manifestly 
place  his  greatest  confidence  in  him,  and  made 
him  privy  to  his  counsels.  Whereupon  Ochus 
had  no  longer  patience  to  defer  the  execution 
of  his  purpose,  but  having  procured  Arpates, 
Teribazus’s  son,  for  the  undertaking,  he  killed 
Arsames  by  his  hand.  Artaxerxes  at  that  time 
had  but  a  little  hold  on  life,  by  reason  of  his 
extreme  age,  and  so,  when  he  heard  of  the  fate 
of  Arsames,  he  could  not  sustain  it  at  all,  but 
sinking  at  once  under  the  weight  of  his  grief 
and  distress,  expired,  after  a  life  of  ninety-four 
years,  and  a  reign  of  sixty-two.  And  then  he 
seemed  a  moderate  and  gracious  governor, 
more  especially  as  compared  to  his  son  Ochus, 
who  outdid  all  his  predecessors  in  blood-thirsti¬ 
ness  and  cruelty. 


GALBA 


5  B.C.?- 

Iphicrates  the  Athenian  used  to  say  that  it  is 
best  to  have  a  mercenary  soldier  fond  of 
money  and  of  pleasures,  for  thus  he  will 
fight  the  more  boldly,  to  procure  the  means  to 
gratify  his  desires.  But  most  have  been  of  opin¬ 
ion  that  the  body  of  an  army,  as  well  as  the 
natural  one,  when  in  its  healthy  condition, 
should  make  no  efforts  apart,  but  in  compli¬ 
ance  with  its  head.  Wherefore  they  tell  us  that 
Paulus  dEmilius,  on  taking  command  of  the 
forces  in  Macedonia,  and  finding  them  talka¬ 
tive  and  impertinently  busy,  as  though  they 
were  all  commanders,  issued  out  his  orders 
that  they  should  have  only  ready  hands  and 
keen  swords,  and  leave  the  rest  to  him.  And 
Plato,  who  can  discern  no  use  of  a  good  ruler 
or  general  if  his  men  are  not  on  their  part  obe¬ 
dient  and  comformable  (the  virtue  of  obeying, 
as  of  ruling,  being,  in  his  opinion,  one  that 
does  not  exist  without  first  a  noble  nature,  and 
then  a  philosophic  education,  where  the  eager 
and  active  powers  are  allayed  with  the  gentler 
and  humaner  sentiments),  may  claim  in  con¬ 
firmation  of  his  doctrine  sundry  mournful  in¬ 
stances  elsewhere,  and,  in  particular,  the  events 
that  followed  among  the  Romans  upon  the 
death  of  Nero,  in  which  plain  proofs  were 
given  that  nothing  is  more  terrible  than  a  mili¬ 
tary  force  moving  about  in  an  empire  upon 
uninstructed  and  unreasoning  impulses. 

Demuades,  after  the  death  of  Alexander, 
compared  the  Macedonian  army  to  the  Cy¬ 
clops  after  his  eye  was  out,  seeing  their  many 
disorderly  and  unsteady  motions.  But  the 
calamities  of  the  Roman  government  might 
be  likened  to  the  motions  of  the  giants  that  as¬ 
sailed  heaven,  convulsed  as  it  was,  and  dis¬ 
tracted,  and  from  every  side  recoiling,  as  it 
were,  upon  itself,  not  so  much  by  the  ambi¬ 
tion  of  those  who  were  proclaimed  emperors, 
as  by  the  covetousness  and  licence  of  the  sol¬ 
diery,  who  drove  commander  after  command¬ 
er  out,  like  nails  one  upon  another. 

Dionysius,  in  raillery,  said  of  the  Pheraean 
who  enjoyed  the  government  of  Thessaly  only 
ten  months,  that  he  had  been  a  tragedy-king, 
but  the  Caesars’  house  in  Rome,  the  Palatium, 


l.D.  69 

received  in  a  shorter  space  of  time  no  less  than 
four  emperors,  passing,  as  it  were,  across  the 
stage,  and  one  making  room  for  another  to 
enter. 

This  was  the  only  satisfaction  of  the  dis¬ 
tressed,  that  they  need  not  require  any  other 
justice  on  their  oppressors,  seeing  them  thus 
murder  each  other,  and  first  of  all,  and  that 
most  justly,  the  one  that  ensnared  them  first, 
and  taught  them  to  expect  such  happy  results 
from  a  change  of  emperors,  sullying  a  good 
word  by  the  pay  he  gave  for  its  being  done  and 
turning  revolt  against  Nero  into  nothing  better 
than  treason. 

For,  as  already  related,  Nymphidius  Sabinus, 
captain  of  the  guards,  together  with  Tiggeli- 
nus,  after  Nero’s  circumstances  were  now  des¬ 
perate,  and  it  was  perceived  that  he  designed 
to  flee  into  Egypt,  persuaded  the  troops  to  de¬ 
clare  Galba  emperor,  as  if  Nero  had  been  al¬ 
ready  gone,  promising  to  all  the  court  and  prae¬ 
torian  soldiers,  as  they  are  called,  seven  thou¬ 
sand  five  hundred  drachmas  apiece,  and  to 
those  in  service  abroad  twelve  hundred  and 
fifty  drachmas  each;  so  vast  a  sum  for  a  largess 
as  it  was  impossible  any  one  could  raise,  but  he 
must  be  infinitely  more  exacting  and  oppres¬ 
sive  than  ever  Nero  was.  This  quickly  brought 
Nero  to  his  grave,  and  soon  after  Galba,  too; 
they  murdered  the  first  in  expectation  of  the 
promised  gift,  and  not  long  after  the  other  be¬ 
cause  they  did  not  obtain  it  from  him;  and 
then,  seeking  about  to  find  some  one  who 
would  purchase  at  such  a  rate,  they  consumed 
themselves  in  a  succession  of  treacheries  and 
rebellions  before  they  obtained  their  demands. 
But  to  give  a  particular  relation  of  all  that 
passed  would  require  a  history  in  full  form;  I 
have  only  to  notice  what  is  properly  to  my  pur¬ 
pose,  namely  what  the  Caesars  did  and  suf¬ 
fered. 

Sulpicius  Galba  is  owned  by  all  to  have  been 
the  richest  private  person  that  ever  came  to  the 
imperial  seat.  And  besides  the  additional  hon¬ 
our  of  being  of  the  Servii,  he  valued  himself 
more  especially  for  his  relationship  to  Catulus, 
the  most  eminent  citizen  of  his  time  both  for 


860 


virtue  and  renown,  however  he  may  have  vol¬ 
untarily  yielded  to  others  as  regards  power  and 
authority.  Galba  was  also  akin  to  Livia,  the 
wife  of  Augustus,  by  whose  interest  he  was  pre¬ 
ferred  to  the  consulship  by  the  emperor.  It  is 
said  of  him  that  he  commanded  the  troops 
well  in  Germany,  and,  being  made  proconsul 
in  Libya,  gained  a  reputation  that  few  ever 
had.  But  his  quiet  manner  of  living  and  his 
sparingness  in  expenses  and  his  disregard  of 
appearances  gave  him,  when  he  became  em¬ 
peror,  an  ill-name  for  meanness,  being,  in  fact, 
his  worn-out  credit  for  regularity  and  modera¬ 
tion.  He  was  entrusted  by  Nero  with  the  gov¬ 
ernment  of  Spain,  before  Nero  had  yet  learned 
to  be  apprehensive  of  men  of  great  repute.  To 
the  opinion,  moreover,  entertained  of  his  mild 
natural  temper,  his  old  age  added  a  belief  that 
he  would  never  act  incautiously. 

There  while  Nero’s  iniquitous  agents  sav¬ 
agely  and  cruelly  harassed  the  provinces  under 
Nero’s  authority,  he  could  afford  no  succour, 
but  merely  ofTer  this  only  ease  and  consolation, 
that  he  seemed  plainly  to  sympathise,  as  a  fel¬ 
low-sufferer,  with  those  who  were  condemned 
upon  suits  and  sold.  And  when  lampoons 
were  made  upon  Nero  and  circulated  and  sung 
everywhere  about,  he  neither  prohibited  them, 
nor  showed  any  indignation  on  behalf  of  the 
emperor’s  agents,  and  for  this  was  the  more 
beloved;  as  also  that  he  was  now  well  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  them,  having  been  in  chief  power 
there  eight  years  at  the  time  when  Junius  Vin- 
dex,  general  of  the  forces  in  Gaul,  began  his 
insurrection  against  Nero.  And  it  is  reported 
that  letters  came  to  Galba  before  it  fully  broke 
out  into  an  open  rebellion,  which  he  neither 
seemed  to  give  credit  to,  nor  on  the  other  hand 
to  take  means  to  let  Nero  know  as  other  of¬ 
ficers  did,  sending  to  him  the  letters  which 
came  to  them,  and  so  spoiled  the  design,  as 
much  as  in  them  lay,  who  yet  afterwards 
shared  in  the  conspiracy,  and  confessed  they 
had  been  treacherous  to  themselves  as  well  as 
him. 

At  last  Vindex,  plainly  declaring  war,  wrote 
to  Galba,  encouraging  him  to  take  the  govern¬ 
ment  upon  him,  and  give  a  head  to  this  strong 
body,  the  Gaulish  provinces,  which  could  al¬ 
ready  count  a  hundred  thousand  men  in  arms, 
and  were  able  to  arm  a  yet  greater  number  if 
necessary.  Galba  then  laid  the  matter  before 
his  friends,  some  of  whom  thought  it  fit  to 
wait,  and  see  what  movement  there  might  be 
and  what  inclinations  displayed  at  Rome  for 
the  revolution.  But  Titus  Vinius,  captain  of  his 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

praetorian  guard,  spoke  thus:  “Galba,  what 
means  this  inquiry?  To  question  whether  we 
shall  continue  faithful  to  Nero  is,  in  itself,  to 
cease  to  be  faithful.  Nero  is  our  enemy,  and  we 
must  by  no  means  decline  the  help  of  Vindex; 
or  else  we  must  at  once  denounce  him,  and 
march  to  attack  him,  because  he  wishes  you  to 
be  the  governor  of  the  Romans,  rather  than 
Nero  their  tyrant.” 

Thereupon  Galba,  by  an  edict,  appointed  a 
day  when  he  would  receive  manumissions,  and 
general  rumour  and  talk  beforehand  about 
his  purpose  brought  together  a  great  crowd  of 
men  so  ready  for  a  change,  that  he  scarcely  ap¬ 
peared,  stepping  up  to  the  tribunal,  but  they 
with  one  consent  saluted  him  emperor.  That 
title  he  refused  at  present  to  take  upon  him; 
but  after  he  had  a  while  inveighed  against 
Nero,  and  bemoaned  the  loss  of  the  more  con¬ 
spicuous  of  those  that  had  been  destroyed  by 
him,  he  offered  himself  and  service  to  his  coun¬ 
try,  not  by  the  titles  of  Caesar  or  emperor,  but 
as  the  lieutentant  of  the  Roman  senate  and 
people. 

Now  that  Vindex  did  wisely  in  inviting  Gal¬ 
ba  to  the  empire,  Nero  himself  bore  testimony; 
who,  though  he  seemed  to  despise  Vindex  and 
altogether  to  slight  the  Gauls  and  their  con¬ 
cerns,  yet  when  he  heard  of  Galba  (as  by 
chance  he  had  just  bathed  and  sat  down  to  his 
morning  meal),  at  this  news  he  overturned 
the  table.  But  the  senate  having  voted  Galba  an 
enemy,  presently,  to  make  his  jest,  and  likewise 
to  personate  a  confidence  among  his  friends, 
“This  is  a  very  happy  opportunity,”  he  said, 
“for  me,  who  sadly  want  such  a  booty  as  that 
of  the  Gauls,  which  must  all  fall  in  as  lawful 
prize;  and  Galba’s  estate  I  can  use  or  sell  at 
once,  he  being  now  an  open  enemy.”  And  ac¬ 
cordingly  he  had  Galba’s  property  exposed  to 
sale,  which  when  Galba  heard  of,  he  seques¬ 
tered  all  that  was  Nero’s  in  Spain,  and  found 
far  readier  bidders. 

Many  now  began  to  revolt  from  Nero,  and 
pretty  nearly  all  adhered  to  Galba;  only  Clodi- 
us  Macer  in  Africa,  and  Virginius  Rufus,  com¬ 
mander  of  the  German  forces  in  Gaul,  followed 
counsel  of  their  own;  yet  these  two  were  not  of 
one  and  the  same  advice,  for  Clodius,  being 
sensible  of  the  rapines  and  murders  to  which 
he  had  been  led  by  cruelty  and  covetousness, 
was  in  perplexity,  and  felt  it  was  not  safe  for 
him  either  to  retain  or  quit  his  command.  But 
Virginius,  who  had  the  command  of  the  strong¬ 
est  legions,  by  whom  he  was  many  repeated 
times  saluted  emperor  and  pressed  to  take  the 


GALBA 

title  upon  him,  declared  that  he  neither  would 
assume  that  honour  himself,  nor  see  it  given  to 
any  other  than  whom  the  senate  should  elect. 

These  things  at  first  did  not  a  little  disturb 
Galba,  but  when  presently  Virginius  and  Vin- 
dex  were  in  a  manner  forced  by  their  armies, 
having  got  the  reins,  as  it  were,  out  of  their 
hands,  to  a  great  encounter  and  battle,  in  which 
Vindex,  having  seen  twenty  thousand  of  the 
Gauls  destroyed,  died  by  his  own  hand,  and 
when  the  report  straight  spread  abroad  that 
all  desired  Virginius,  after  this  great  victory,  to 
take  the  empire  upon  him,  or  else  they  would 
return  to  Nero  again,  Galba,  in  great  alarm  at 
this,  wrote  to  Virginius,  exhorting  him  to  join 
with  him  for  the  preservation  of  the  empire  and 
the  liberty  of  the  Romans,  and  so  retiring  with 
his  friends  into  Clunia,  a  town  in  Spain,  he 
passed  away  his  time,  rather  repenting  his  for¬ 
mer  rashness,  and  wishing  for  his  wonted  ease 
and  privacy,  than  setting  about  what  was  fit  to 
be  done. 

It  was  now  summer,  when  on  a  sudden,  a  lit¬ 
tle  before  dusk,  comes  a  freedman,  Icelus  by 
name,  having  arrived  in  seven  days  from  Rome; 
and  being  informed  where  Galba  was  reposing 
himself  in  private,  he  went  straight  on,  and 
pushing  by  the  servants  of  the  chamber,  opened 
the  door  and  entered  the  room,  and  told  him 
that  Nero  being  yet  alive  but  not  appearing, 
first  the  army,  and  then  the  people  and  senate, 
declared  Galba  emperor;  not  long  after,  it  was 
reported  that  Nero  was  dead;  “but  I,”  said  he, 
“not  giving  credit  to  common  fame,  went  my¬ 
self  to  the  body  and  saw  him  lying  dead,  and 
only  then  set  out  to  bring  you  word.”  This 
news  at  once  made  Galba  great  again,  and  a 
crowd  of  people  came  hastening  to  the  door,  all 
very  confident  of  the  truth  of  his  tidings, 
though  the  speed  of  the  man  was  almost  incred¬ 
ible.  Two  days  after  came  Titus  Vinius  with 
sundry  others  from  the  camp,  who  gave  an  ac¬ 
count  in  detail  of  the  orders  of  the  senate,  and 
for  this  service  was  considerably  advanced.  On 
the  freedman,  Galba  conferred  the  honour  of 
the  gold  ring,  and  Icelus,  as  he  had  been  before, 
now  taking  the  name  of  Marcianus,  held  the 
first  place  of  the  freedmen. 

But  at  Rome,  Nymphidius  Sabinus,  not  gen¬ 
tly,  and  little  by  little,  but  at  once,  and  without 
exception,  engrossed  all  power  to  himself;  Gal¬ 
ba,  being  an  old  man  (seventy-three  years  of 
age),  would  scarcely,  he  thought,  live  long 
enough  to  be  carried  in  a  litter  to  Rome;  and 
the  troops  in  the  city  were  from  old  time  at¬ 
tached  to  him,  and  now  bound  by  the  vastness 


861 

of  the  promised  gift,  for  which  they  regarded 
him  as  their  benefactor,  and  Galba  as  their 
debtor.  Thus  presuming  on  his  interest,  he 
straightway  commanded  Tigellinus,  who  was 
in  joint  commission  with  himself,  to  lay  down 
his  sword;  and  giving  entertainments,  he  in¬ 
vited  the  former  consuls  and  commanders, 
making  use  of  Galba’s  name  for  the  invitation; 
but  at  the  same  time  prepared  many  in  the 
camp  to  propose  that  a  request  should  be  sent 
to  Galba  that  he  should  appoint  Nymphidius 
sole  prefect  for  life  without  a  colleague. 

And  the  modes  which  the  senate  took  to 
show  him  honour  and  increase  his  power,  styl¬ 
ing  him  their  benefactor,  and  attending  daily 
at  his  gates,  and  giving  him  the  compliment  of 
heading  with  his  own  name  and  confirming  all 
their  acts,  carried  him  on  to  a  yet  greater  de¬ 
gree  of  arrogance,  so  that  in  a  short  time  he  be¬ 
came  an  object,  not  only  of  dislike,  but  of  ter¬ 
ror,  to  those  that  sought  his  favour.  When  the 
consuls  themselves  had  despatched  their  couri¬ 
ers  with  the  decrees  of  the  senate  to  the  em¬ 
peror,  together  with  the  sealed  diplomas, 
which  the  authorities  in  all  the  towns  where 
horses  or  carriages  are  changed  look  at,  and 
on  that  certificate  hasten  the  couriers  forward 
with  all  their  means,  he  was  highly  displeased 
that  his  seal  had  not  been  used,  and  none  of 
his  soldiers  employed  on  the  errand.  Nay,  he 
even  deliberated  what  course  to  take  with  the 
consuls  themselves,  but  upon  their  submission 
and  apology  he  was  at  last  pacified. 

To  gratify  the  people,  he  did  not  interfere 
with  their  beating  to  death  any  that  fell  into 
their  hands  of  Nero’s  party.  Amongst  others, 
Spiclus,  the  gladiator,  was  killed  in  the  Forum 
by  being  thrown  under  Nero’s  statues,  which 
they  dragged  about  the  place  over  his  body. 
Aponius,  one  of  those  who  had  been  concerned 
in  accusations,  they  knocked  to  the  ground, 
and  drove  carts  loaded  with  stones  over  him. 
And  many  others  they  tore  in  pieces,  some  of 
them  no  way  guilty,  insomuch  that  Mauriscus, 
a  person  of  great  account  and  character,  told 
the  senate  that  he  feared,  in  a  short  time,  they 
might  wish  for  Nero  again. 

Nymphidius,  now  advancing  towards  the 
consummation  of  his  hopes,  did  not  refuse  to 
let  it  be  said  that  he  was  the  son  of  Caius  Cae¬ 
sar,  Tiberius’s  successor;  who,  it  is  told,  was 
well  acquainted  with  his  mother  in  his  early 
youth,  a  woman  indeed  handsome  enough,  the 
offspring  of  Callistus,  one  of  Caesar’s  freedmen, 
and  a  certain  sempstress.  But  it  is  plain  that 
Caius’s  familiarity  with  his  mother  was  of  too 


862 

late  date  to  give  him  any  pretensions,  and  it 
was  suspected  he  might,  if  he  pleased,  claim  a 
father  in  Martianus,  the  gladiator,  whom  his 
mother,  Nymphidia,  took  a  passion  for,  being 
a  famous  man  in  his  way,  whom  also  he  much 
more  resembled.  However,  though  he  certainly 
owned  Nymphidia  for  his  mother,  he  ascribed 
meantime  the  downfall  of  Nero  to  himself 
alone,  and  thought  he  was  not  sufficiently  re¬ 
warded  with  the  honours  and  riches  he  en¬ 
joyed  (nay,  though  to  all  was  added  the  com¬ 
pany  of  Sporus,  whom  he  immediately  sent  for 
while  Nero’s  body  was  yet  burning  on  the  pile, 
and  treated  as  his  consort  with  the  name  of 
Poppaea),  but  he  must  also  aspire  to  the  empire. 
And  at  Rome  he  had  friends  who  took  mea¬ 
sures  for  him  secretly,  as  well  as  some  women 
and  some  members  of  the  senate  also,  who 
worked  underhand  to  assist  him.  And  into 
Spain  he  despatched  one  of  his  friends,  named 
Gellianus,  to  view  the  posture  of  affairs. 

But  all  things  succeeded  well  with  Galba 
after  Nero’s  death;  only  Virginius  Rufus,  still 
standing  doubtful,  gave  him  some  anxiety,  lest 
he  should  listen  to  the  suggestions  of  some  who 
encouraged  him  to  take  the  government  upon 
him,  having,  at  present,  besides  the  command 
of  a  large  and  warlike  army,  the  new  honours 
of  the  defeat  of  Vindex  and  the  subjugation  of 
one  considerable  part  of  the  Roman  empire, 
namely,  the  entire  Gaul,  which  had  seemed 
shaking  about  upon  the  verge  of  open  revolt. 
Nor  had  any  man  indeed  a  greater  name  and 
reputation  than  Virginius,  who  had  taken  a 
part  of  so  much  consequence  in  the  deliver¬ 
ance  of  the  empire  at  once  from  a  cruel  tyr¬ 
anny  and  a  Gallic  war.  But  he,  standing  to 
his  first  resolves,  reserved  to  the  senate  the 
power  of  electing  an  emperor. 

Yet  when  it  was  now  manifest  that  Nero 
was  dead,  the  soldiers  pressed  him  hard  to  it, 
and  one  of  the  tribunes,  entering  his  tent  with 
his  drawn  sword,  bade  him  either  take  the  gov¬ 
ernment  or  that.  But  after  Fabius  Valens,  hav¬ 
ing  the  command  of  one  legion,  had  first  sworn 
fealty  to  Galba,  and  letters  from  Rome  came 
with  tidings  of  the  resolves  of  the  senate,  at  last 
with  much  ado  he  persuaded  the  army  to  de¬ 
clare  Galba  emperor.  And  when  Flaccus  Hor- 
deonius  came  by  Galba’s  commission  as  his  suc¬ 
cessor,  he  handed  over  to  him  his  forces,  and 
went  himself  to  meet  Galba  on  his  way,  and 
having  met  him  turned  back  to  attend  him;  in 
all  which  no  apparent  displeasure  nor  yet  hon¬ 
our  was  shown  him.  Galba’s  feelings  of  respect 
for  him  prevented  the  former;  the  latter  was 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

checked  by  the  envy  of  his  friends,  and  particu¬ 
larly  of  Titus  Vinius,  who,  acting  in  the  desire 
of  hindering  Virginius’s  promotion,  unwitting¬ 
ly  aided  his  happy  genius  in  rescuing  him  from 
those  hazards  and  hardships  which  other  com¬ 
manders  were  involved  in,  and  securing  him 
the  safe  enjoyment  of  a  quiet  life  and  peaceable 
old  age. 

Near  Narbo,  a  city  in  Gaul,  the  deputation 
of  the  senate  met  Galba,  and  after  they  had  de¬ 
livered  their  compliments,  begged  him  to  make 
what  haste  he  could  to  appear  to  the  people  that 
impatiently  expected  him.  He  discoursed  with 
them  courteously  and  unassumingly,  and  in  his 
entertainment,  though  Nymphidius  had  sent 
him  royal  furniture  and  attendance  of  Nero’s, 
he  put  all  aside,  and  made  use  of  nothing  but 
his  own,  for  which  he  was  well  spoken  of,  as 
one  who  had  a  great  mind,  and  was  superior 
to  little  vanities.  But  in  a  short  time,  Vinius, 
by  declaring  to  him  that  these  noble,  unpom- 
pous,  citizen-like  ways  were  a  mere  affectation 
of  popularity  and  a  petty  bashfulness  at  assum¬ 
ing  his  proper  greatness,  induced  him  to  make 
use  of  Nero’s  supplies,  and  in  his  entertain¬ 
ments  not  to  be  afraid  of  a  regal  sumptuosity. 
And  in  more  than  one  way  the  old  man  let  it 
gradually  appear  that  he  had  put  himself  un¬ 
der  Vinius’s  disposal. 

Vinius  was  a  person  of  an  excessive  covetous¬ 
ness,  and  not  quite  free  from  blame  in  respect 
to  women.  For  being  a  young  man,  newly  en¬ 
tered  into  the  service  under  Calvisius  Sabinus, 
upon  his  first  campaign,  he  brought  his  com¬ 
mander’s  wife,  a  licentious  woman,  in  a  sol¬ 
dier’s  dress,  by  night  into  the  camp,  and  was 
found  with  her  in  the  very  general’s  quarters, 
the  principia,  as  the  Romans  call  them.  For 
which  insolence  Caius  Caesar  cast  him  into 
prison,  from  whence  he  was  fortunately  deliv¬ 
ered  by  Caius’s  death.  Afterwards,  being  in¬ 
vited  by  Claudius  Caesar  to  supper,  he  privily 
conveyed  away  a  silver  cup,  which  Caesar  hear¬ 
ing  of,  invited  him  again  the  next  day,  and 
gave  order  to  his  servants  to  set  before  him  no 
silver  plate,  but  only  earthenware.  And  this  of¬ 
fence,  through  the  comic  mildness  of  Caesar’s 
reprimand,  was  treated  rather  as  a  subject  of 
jest  than  as  a  crime.  But  the  acts  to  which  now, 
when  Galba  was  in  his  hands  and  his  power 
was  so  extensive,  his  covetous  temper  led  him 
were  the  causes,  in  part,  and  in  part  the  prov¬ 
ocation,  of  tragical  and  fatal  mischiefs. 

Nymphidius  became  very  uneasy  upon  the 
return  out  of  Spain  of  Gellianus,  whom  he  had 
sent  to  pry  into  Galba’s  actions,  understanding 


GALBA 

that  Cornelius  Laco  was  appointed  command¬ 
er  of  the  court  guards,  and  that  Vinius  was  the 
great  favourite,  and  that  Gellianus  had  not 
been  able  so  much  as  to  come  nigh,  much  less 
have  any  opportunity  to  offer  any  words  in  pri¬ 
vate,  so  narrowly  had  he  been  watched  and  ob¬ 
served.  Nymphidius,  therefore,  called  together 
the  officers  of  the  troops,  and  declared  to  them 
that  Galba  of  himself  was  a  good,  well-meaning 
old  man,  but  did  not  act  by  his  own  counsel, 
and  was  ill-guided  by  Vinius  and  Laco;  and 
lest,  before  they  were  aware,  they  should  en¬ 
gross  the  authority  Tigellinus  had  with  the 
troops,  he  proposed  to  them  to  send  deputies 
from  the  camp,  acquainting  him  that  if  he 
pleased  to  remove  only  these  two  from  his  coun¬ 
sel  and  presence,  he  would  be  much  more  wel¬ 
come  to  all  at  his  arrival. 

Wherein,  when  he  saw  he  did  not  prevail  (it 
seeming  absurd  and  unmannerly  to  give  rules 
to  an  old  commander  what  friends  to  retain  or 
displace,  as  if  he  had  been  a  youth  newly  tak¬ 
ing  the  reins  of  authority  into  his  hands), 
adopting  another  course,  he  wrote  himself  to 
Galba  letters  in  alarming  terms,  one  time  as 
if  the  city  were  unsettled,  and  had  not  yet  re¬ 
covered  its  tranquillity;  then  that  Clodius  Ma- 
cer  withheld  the  corn-ships  from  Africa;  that 
the  legions  in  Germany  began  to  be  mutinous, 
and  that  he  heard  the  like  of  those  in  Syria  and 
Judaea.  But  Galba  not  minding  him  much  or 
giving  credit  to  his  stories,  he  resolved  to  make 
his  attempt  beforehand,  though  Clodius  Celsus, 
a  native  of  Antioch,  a  person  of  sense,  and 
friendly  and  faithful  to  Nymphidius,  told  him 
he  was  wrong,  saying  he  did  not  believe  one 
single  street  in  Rome  would  ever  give  him  the 
title  of  Caesar.  Nevertheless  many  also  derided 
Galba,  amongst  the  rest  Mithridates  of  Pontus, 
saying,  that  as  soon  as  this  wrinkled,  bald- 
headed  man  should  be  seen  publicly  at  Rome, 
they  would  think  it  an  utter  disgrace  even  to 
have  had  such  a  Caesar. 

At  last  it  was  resolved,  about  midnight,  to 
bring  Nymphidius  into  the  camp,  and  declare 
him  emperor.  But  Antonius  Honoratus,  who 
was  first  among  the  tribunes,  summoning  to¬ 
gether  in  the  evening  those  under  his  com¬ 
mand,  charged  himself  and  them  severely  with 
their  many  and  unreasonable  turns  and  altera¬ 
tions,  made  without  any  purpose  or  regard  to 
merit,  simply  as  if  some  evil  genius  hurried 
them  from  one  reason  to  another.  “What 
though  Nero’s  miscarriages,”  said  he,  “gave 
some  colour  to  your  former  acts,  can  you  say 
you  have  any  plea  for  betraying  Galba  in  the 


863 

death  of  a  mother,  the  blood  of  a  wife,  or  the 
degradation  of  the  imperial  power  upon  the 
stage  and  amongst  players?  Neither  did  we  de¬ 
sert  Nero  for  all  this,  until  Nymphidius  had 
persuaded  us  that  he  had  first  left  us  and  fled 
into  Egypt.  Shall  we,  therefore,  send  Galba 
after,  to  appease  Nero’s  shade,  and,  for  the 
sake  of  making  the  son  of  Nymphidia  emperor, 
take  off  one  of  Livia’s  family,  as  we  have  al¬ 
ready  the  son  of  Agrippina?  Rather,  doing  jus¬ 
tice  on  him,  let  us  revenge  Nero’s  death,  and 
show  ourselves  true  and  faithful  by  preserving 
Galba.” 

The  tribune  having  ended  his  harangue,  the 
soldiers  assented,  and  encouraged  all  they  met 
with  to  persist  in  their  fidelity  to  the  emperor, 
and,  indeed,  brought  over  the  greatest  part. 
But  presently  hearing  a  great  shout,  Nymphi¬ 
dius,  imagining,  as  some  say,  that  the  soldiers 
called  for  him,  or  hastening  to  be  in  time  to 
check  any  opposition  and  gain  the  doubtful, 
came  on  with  many  lights,  carrying  in  his  hand 
a  speech  in  writing,  made  by  Cingonius  Varro, 
which  he  had  got  by  heart,  to  deliver  to  the 
soldiers.  But  seeing  the  gates  of  the  camp  shut 
up,  and  large  numbers  standing  armed  about 
the  walls,  he  began  to  be  afraid.  Yet  drawing 
nearer  he  demanded  what  they  meant,  and  by 
whose  orders  they  were  then  in  arms;  but  hear¬ 
ing  a  general  acclamation,  all  with  one  consent 
crying  out  that  Galba  was  their  emperor,  ad¬ 
vancing  towards  them,  he  joined  in  the  cry, 
and  likewise  commanded  those  that  followed 
him  to  do  the  same.  The  guard  notwithstand¬ 
ing  permitted  him  to  enter  the  camp  only  with 
a  few,  where  he  was  presently  struck  with  a 
dart,  which  Septimius,  being  before  him,  re¬ 
ceived  on  his  shield;  others,  however,  assaulted 
him  with  their  naked  swords,  and  on  his  flee¬ 
ing,  pursued  him  into  a  soldier’s  cabin,  where 
they  slew  him.  And  dragging  his  body  thence, 
they  placed  a  railing  about  it,  and  exposed  it 
next  day  to  public  view. 

When  Galba  heard  of  the  end  which  Nym¬ 
phidius  had  thus  come  to,  he  commanded  that 
all  his  confederates  who  had  not  at  once  killed 
themselves  should  immediately  be  despatched; 
amongst  whom  were  Cingonius,  who  made  his 
oration,  and  Mithridates,  formerly  mentioned. 
It  was,  however,  regarded  as  arbitrary  and  il¬ 
legal,  and  though  it  might  be  just,  yet  by  no 
means  popular,  to  take  off  men  of  their  rank 
and  equality  without  a  hearing.  For  every  one 
expected  another  scheme  of  government,  being 
deceived,  as  is  usual,  by  the  first  plausible  pre¬ 
tences;  and  the  death  of  Petronius  Turpilianus, 


864 

who  was  of  consular  dignity,  and  bad  remained 
faithful  to  Nero,  was  yet  more  keenly  resented. 
Indeed,  the  taking  off  of  Macer  in  Africa  by 
Trebonius,  and  Fonteius  by  Valens  in  Ger¬ 
many,  had  a  fair  pretence,  they  being  dreaded 
as  armed  commanders,  having  their  soldiers  at 
their  bidding;  but  why  refuse  Turpilianus,  an 
old  man  and  unarmed,  permission  to  try  to 
clear  himself,  if  any  part  of  the  moderation 
and  equity  at  first  promised  were  really  to  come 
to  a  performance?  Such  were  the  comments  to 
which  these  actions  exposed  Galba. 

When  he  came  within  five-and-twenty  fur¬ 
longs  or  thereabouts  of  the  city,  he  happened 
to  light  on  a  disorderly  rabble  of  the  seamen, 
who  beset  him  as  he  passed.  These  were  they 
whom  Nero  made  soldiers,  forming  them  into 
a  legion.  They  so  rudely  crowded  to  have  their 
commission  confirmed  that  they  did  not  let 
Galba  either  be  seen  or  heard  by  those  that  had 
come  out  to  meet  their  new  emperor;  but  tu¬ 
multuously  pressed  on  with  loud  shouts  to  have 
colours  to  their  legion,  and  quarters  assigned 
them.  Galba  put  them  off  until  another  time, 
which  they  interpreted  as  a  denial,  grew  more 
insolent  and  mutinous,  following  and  crying 
out,  some  with  their  drawn  swords  in  their 
hands.  Upon  seeing  which,  Galba  commanded 
the  horse  to  ride  over  them,  when  they  were 
soon  routed,  not  a  man  standing  his  ground, 
and  many  of  them  were  slain,  both  there  and 
in  the  pursuit;  an  ill-omen,  that  Galba  should 
make  his  first  entry  through  so  much  blood  and 
among  dead  bodies.  And  now  he  was  looked 
upon  with  terror  and  alarm  by  any  one  who 
had  entertained  contempt  of  him  at  the  sight 
of  his  age  and  apparent  infirmities. 

But  when  he  desired  presently  to  let  it  ap¬ 
pear  what  a  change  would  be  made  from  Ne¬ 
ro’s  profuseness  and  sumptuosity  in  giving 
presents,  he  much  missed  his  aim,  and  fell  so 
short  of  magnificence,  that  he  scarcely  came 
within  the  limits  of  decency.  When  Canus, 
who  was  a  famous  musician,  played  at  supper 
for  him,  he  expressed  his  approbation,  and 
bade  the  bag  be  brought  to  him;  and  taking  a 
few  gold  pieces,  put  them  in  with  this  remark, 
that  it  was  out  of  his  own  purse,  and  not  on  the 
public  account.  He  ordered  the  largesses  which 
Nero  had  made  to  actors  and  wrestlers  and 
such  like  to  be  strictly  required  again,  allow¬ 
ing  only  the  tenth  part  to  be  retained;  though 
it  turned  to  very  small  account,  most  of  those 
persons  expending  their  daily  income  as  fast  as 
they  received  it,  being  rude,  improvident  liv¬ 
ers;  upon  which  he  had  further  inquiry  made 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

as  to  those  who  had  bought  or  received  from 
them,  and  called  upon  these  people  to  refund. 

The  trouble  was  infinite,  the  exactions  being 
prosecuted  far,  touching  a  great  number  of  per¬ 
sons,  bringing  disrepute  on  Galba  and  general 
hatred  on  Vinius,  who  made  the  emperor  ap¬ 
pear  base-hearted  and  mean  to  the  world, 
whilst  he  himself  was  spending  profusely,  tak¬ 
ing  whatever  he  could  get,  and  selling  to  any 
buyer.  Hesiod  tells  us  to  drink  without  stinting 
of — 

The  end  and  the  beginning  of  the  cas\. 
And  Vinius,  seeing  his  patron  old  and  decay¬ 
ing,  made  the  most  of  what  he  considered  to 
be  at  once  the  first  of  his  fortune  and  the  last 
of  it. 

Thus  the  aged  man  suffered  in  two  ways, 
first,  through  the  evil  deeds  which  Vinius  did 
himself,  and,  next,  by  his  preventing  or  bring¬ 
ing  into  disgrace  those  just  acts  which  he  him¬ 
self  designed.  Such  was  the  punishing  of  Ne¬ 
ro’s  adherents.  When  he  destroyed  the  bad, 
amongst  whom  were  Helius,  Polycletus,  Peti- 
nus,  and  Patrobius,  the  peoples  mightily  ap¬ 
plauded  the  act,  crying  out,  as  they  were 
dragged  through  the  Forum,  that  it  was  a 
goodly  sight,  grateful  to  the  gods  themselves, 
adding,  however,  that  the  gods  and  men  alike 
demanded  justice  on  Tigellinus,  the  very  tutor 
and  prompter  of  all  the  tyranny.  This  good 
man,  however,  had  taken  his  measures  before¬ 
hand,  in  the  shape  of  a  present  and  a  promise 
to  Vinius.  Turpilianus  could  not  be  allowed  to 
escape  with  life,  though  his  one  and  only 
crime  had  been  that  he  had  not  betrayed  or 
shown  hatred  to  such  a  ruler  as  Nero. 

But  he  who  had  made  Nero  what  he  be¬ 
came,  and  afterwards  deserted  and  betrayed 
him  whom  he  had  so  corrupted,  was  allowed 
to  survive  as  an  instance  that  Vinius  could  do 
anything,  and  an  advertisement  that  those  that 
had  money  to  give  him  need  despair  of  noth¬ 
ing.  The  people,  however,  were  so  possessed 
with  the  desire  of  seeing  Tigellinus  dragged  to 
execution  that  they  never  ceased  to  require  it 
at  the  theatre  and  in  the  race-course,  till  they 
were  checked  by  an  edict  from  the  emperor, 
himself,  announcing  that  Tigellinus  could  not 
live  long,  being  wasted  with  a  consumption, 
and  requesting  them  not  to  seek  to  make  his 
government  appear  cruel  and  tyrannical.  So  the 
dissatisfied  populace  were  laughed  at,  and  Ti¬ 
gellinus  made  a  splendid  feast,  and  sacrificed 
in  thanksgiving  for  his  deliverance;  and  after 
supper,  Vinius,  rising  from  the  emperor’s  ta¬ 
ble,  went  to  revel  with  Tigellinus,  taking  his 


GALBA 

daughter,  a  widow,  with  him;  to  whom  Tigel- 
linus  presented  his  compliments,  with  a  gift  of 
twenty-five  myriads  of  money,  and  bade  the 
superintendent  of  his  concubines  take  off  a  rich 
necklace  from  her  own  neck  and  tie  it  about 
hers,  the  value  of  it  being  estimated  at  fifteen 
myriads. 

After  this,  even  reasonable  acts  were  cen¬ 
sured;  as,  for  example,  the  treatment  of  the 
Gauls  who  had  been  in  the  conspiracy  with 
Vindex.  For  people  looked  upon  their  abate¬ 
ment  of  tribute  and  admission  of  citizenship  as 
a  piece,  not  of  clemency  on  the  part  of  Galba, 
but  of  money-making  on  that  of  Vinius.  And 
thus  the  mass  of  the  people  began  to  look  with 
dislike  upon  the  government.  The  soldiers 
were  kept  on  a  while  in  expectation  of  the 
promised  donative,  supposing  that  if  they  did 
not  receive  the  full,  yet  they  should  have  at 
least  as  much  as  Nero  gave  them.  But  when 
Galba,  on  hearing  they  began  to  complain,  de¬ 
clared  greatly,  and  like  a  general,  that  he  was 
used  to  enlist  and  not  to  buy  his  soldiers, -when 
they  heard  of  this,  they  conceived  an  implaca¬ 
ble  hatred  against  him;  for  he  did  not  seem  to 
defraud  them  merely  himself  in  their  present 
expectations,  but  to  give  an  ill  precedent,  and 
instruct  his  successors  to  do  the  like. 

This  heart-burning,  however,  was  as  yet  at 
Rome  a  thing  undeclared,  and  a  certain  respect 
for  Galba’s  personal  presence  somewhat  re¬ 
tarded  their  motions,  and  took  off  their  edge, 
and  their  having  no  obvious  occasion  for  begin¬ 
ning  a  revolution  curbed  and  kept  under,  more 
or  less,  their  resentments.  But  those  forces  that 
had  been  formerly  under  Virginius,  and  now 
were  under  Flaccus  in  Germany,  valuing  them¬ 
selves  much  upon  the  battle  they  had  fought 
with  Vindex,  and  finding  now  no  advantage 
of  it,  grew  very  refractory  and  intractable 
towards  their  officers;  and  Flaccus  they  wholly 
disregarded,  being  incapacitated  in  body  by  un¬ 
intermitted  gout,  and,  besides,  a  man  of  little 
experience  in  affairs.  So  at  one  of  their  festivals, 
when  it  was  customary  for  the  officers  of  the 
army  to  wish  all  health  and  happiness  to  the 
emperor,  the  common  soldiers  began  to  mur¬ 
mur  loudly,  and  on  their  officers  persisting  in 
the  ceremony,  responded  with  the  words,  “If 
he  deserves  it.” 

When  some  similar  insolence  was  committed 
by  the  legions  under  Vitellius,  frequent  letters 
with  the  information  came  to  Galba  from  his 
agents;  and  taking  alarm  at  this,  and  fearing 
that  he  might  be  despised  not  only  for  his  old 
age,  but  also  for  want  of  issue,  he  determined 


865 

to  adopt  some  young  man  of  distinction,  and 
declare  him  his  successor. 

There  was  at  this  time  in  the  city  Marcus 
Otho,  a  person  of  fair  extraction,  but  from  his 
childhood  one  of  the  few  most  debauched,  vol¬ 
uptuous,  and  luxurious  livers  in  Rome.  And  as 
Homer  gives  Paris  in  several  places  the  title  “of 
fair  Helen’s  love,”  making  a  woman’s  name 
the  glory  and  addition  to  his,  as  if  he  had  noth¬ 
ing  else  to  distinguish  him,  so  Otho  was  re¬ 
nowned  in  Rome  for  nothing  more  than  his 
marriage  with  Poppaea,  whom  Nero  had  a  pas¬ 
sion  for  when  she  was  Crispinus’s  wife.  But  be¬ 
ing  as  yet  respectful  to  his  own  wife,  and  stand¬ 
ing  in  awe  of  his  mother,  he  engaged  Otho  un¬ 
derhand  to  solicit  her.  For  Nero  lived  famil¬ 
iarly  with  Otho,  whose  prodigality  won  his  fa¬ 
vour,  and  he  was  well  pleased  when  he  took 
the  freedom  to  jest  upon  him  as  mean  and  pe¬ 
nurious.  Thus  when  Nero  one  day  perfumed 
himself  with  some  rich  essence  and  favoured 
Otho  with  a  sprinkle  of  it,  he,  entertaining  Ne¬ 
ro  next  day,  ordered  gold  and  silver  pipes  to 
disperse  the  like  on  a  sudden  freely,  like  water, 
throughout  the  room. 

As  to  Poppaea,  he  was  beforehand  with  Ne¬ 
ro,  and  first  seducing  her  himself,  then,  with 
the  hope  of  Nero’s  favour,  he  prevailed  with 
her  to  part  with  her  husband,  and  brought  her 
to  his  own  house  as  his  wife,  and  was  not  con¬ 
tent  afterwards  to  have  a  share  in  her,  but 
grudged  to  have  Nero  for  a  claimant,  Poppaea 
herself,  they  say,  being  rather  pleased  than 
otherwise  with  this  jealousy;  she  sometimes  ex¬ 
cluded  Nero,  even  when  Otho  was  not  present, 
either  to  prevent  his  getting  tired  with  her,  or, 
as  some  say,  not  liking  the  prospect  of  an  im¬ 
perial  marriage,  though  willing  enough  to  have 
the  emperor  as  her  lover.  So  that  Otho  ran  the 
risk  of  his  life,  and  strange  it  was  he  escaped, 
when  Nero,  for  this  very  marriage,  killed  his 
wife  and  sister.  But  he  was  beholden  to  Sene¬ 
ca’s  friendship,  by  whose  persuasions  and  en¬ 
treaty  Nero  was  prevailed  with  to  despatch 
him  as  praetor  into  Lusitania,  on  the  shores  of 
the  Ocean;  where  he  behaved  himself  very 
agreeably  and  indulgently  to  those  he  had  to 
govern,  well  knowing  this  command  was  but 
to  colour  and  disguise  his  banishment. 

When  Galba  revolted  from  Nero,  Otho  was 
the  first  governor  of  any  of  the  provinces  that 
came  over  to  him,  bringing  all  the  gold  and 
silver  he  possessed  in  the  shape  of  cups  and  ta¬ 
bles,  to  be  coined  into  money,  and  also  what 
servants  he  had  fitly  qualified  to  wait  upon  a 
prince.  In  all  other  points,  too,  he  was  faithful 


866 

to  him,  and  gave  him  sufficient  proof  that  he 
was  inferior  to  none  in  managing  public  busi¬ 
ness.  And  he  so  far  ingratiated  himself  that  he 
rode  in  the  same  carriage  with  him  during  the 
whole  journey,  several  days  together.  And  in 
this  journey  and  familiar  companionship  he 
won  over  Vinius  also,  both  by  his  conversation 
and  presents,  but  especially  by  conceding  to 
him  the  first  place,  securing  the  second,  by  his 
interest,  for  himself.  And  he  had  the  advantage 
of  him  in  avoiding  all  odium  and  jealousy,  as¬ 
sisting  all  petitioners,  without  asking  for  any 
reward,  and  appearing  courteous  and  of  easy 
access  towards  all,  especially  to  the  military 
men,  for  many  of  whom  he  obtained  com¬ 
mands,  some  immediately  from  the  emperor, 
others  by  Vinius’s  means,  and  by  the  assistance 
of  the  two  favourite  freedmen,  Icelus  and  Asia- 
ticus,  these  being  the  men  in  chief  power  in  the 
court.  As  often  as  he  entertained  Galba,  Otho 
gave  the  cohort  on  duty,  in  addition  to  their 
pay,  a  piece  of  gold  for  every  man  there,  upon 
pretence  of  respect  to  the  emperor,  while  really 
he  undermined  him,  and  stole  away  his  popu¬ 
larity  with  the  soldiers. 

So  Galba  consulting  about  a  successor,  Vini¬ 
us  introduced  Otho,  yet  not  even  this  gratis,  but 
upon  promise  that  he  would  marry  his  daugh¬ 
ter  if  Galba  should  make  him  his  adopted  son 
and  successor  to  the  empire.  But  Galba,  in  all 
his  actions,  showed  clearly  that  he  preferred 
the  public  good  before  his  own  private  interest, 
not  aiming  so  much  to  pleasure  himself  as  to 
advantage  the  Romans  by  his  selection.  Indeed 
he  does  not  seem  to  have  been  so  much  as  in¬ 
clined  to  make  choice  of  Otho  had  it  been  but 
to  inherit  his  own  private  fortune,  knowing  his 
extravagant  and  luxurious  character,  and  that 
he  was  already  plunged  in  debt  five  thousand 
myriads  deep.  So  he  listened  to  Vinius,  and 
made  no  reply,  but  mildly  suspended  his  de¬ 
termination.  Only  he  appointed  himself  consul, 
and  Vinius  his  colleague,  and  it  was  the  general 
expectation  that  he  would  declare  his  successor 
at  the  beginning  of  the  new  year.  And  the  sol¬ 
diers  desired  nothing  more  than  that  Otho 
should  be  the  person. 

But  the  forces  in  Germany  broke  out  into 
their  mutiny  whilst  he  was  yet  deliberating, 
and  anticipated  his  design.  All  the  soldiers  in 
general  felt  much  resentment  against  Galba  for 
not  having  given  them  their  expected  largess, 
but  these  troops  made  a  pretence  of  a  more  par¬ 
ticular  concern,  that  Virginius  Rufus  was  cast 
off  dishonourably,  and  that  the  Gauls  who  had 
fought  with  them  were  well  rewarded,  while 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

those  who  had  refused  to  take  part  with  Vin- 
dex  were  punished;  and  Galba’s  thanks  seemed 
all  to  be  for  him,  to  whose  memory  he  had  done 
honour  after  his  death  with  public  solemnities 
as  though  he  had  been  made  emperor  by  his 
means  only.  Whilst  these  discourses  passed 
openly  throughout  the  army,  on  the  first  day  of 
the  first  month  of  the  year,  the  calends,  as  they 
call  it,  of  January,  Flaccus  summoning  them 
to  take  the  usual  anniversary  oath  of  fealty  to 
the  emperor,  they  overturned  and  pulled  down 
Galba’s  statues,  and  having  sworn  in  the  name 
of  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome,  departed. 

But  the  officers  now  feared  anarchy  and  con¬ 
fusion,  as  much  as  rebellion;  and  one  of  them 
came  forward  and  said:  “What  will  become  of 
us,  my  fellow-soldiers,  if  we  neither  set  up  an¬ 
other  general,  nor  retain  the  present  one?  This 
will  be  not  so  much  to  desert  from  Galba  as  to 
decline  all  subjection  and  command.  It  is  use¬ 
less  to  try  and  maintain  Flaccus  Hordeonius, 
who  is  but  a  mere  shadow  and  image  of  Galba. 
But  Vitellius,  commander  of  the  other  Ger¬ 
many,  is  but  one  day’s  march  distant,  whose 
father  was  censor  and  thrice  consul,  and  in  a 
manner  co-emperor  with  Claudius  Caesar;  and 
he  himself  has  the  best  proof  to  show  of  his 
bounty  and  largeness  of  mind,  in  the  poverty 
with  which  some  reproach  him.  Him  let  us 
make  choice  of,  that  all  may  see  we  know  how 
to  choose  an  emperor  better  than  either  Span¬ 
iards  or  Lusitanians.” 

Which  motion  whilst  some  assented  to,  and 
others  gainsaid,  a  certain  standard-bearer 
slipped  out  and  carried  the  news  to  Vitellius, 
who  was  entertaining  much  company  by  night. 
This,  taking  air,  soon  passed  through  the  troops, 
and  Fabius  Valens,  who  commanded  one  le¬ 
gion,  riding  up  next  day  with  a  large  body  of 
horse,  saluted  Vitellius  emperor.  He  had  hith¬ 
erto  seemed  to  decline  it,  professing  a  dread  he 
had  to  undertake  the  weight  of  the  govern¬ 
ment;  but  on  this  day,  being  fortified,  they  say, 
by  wine  and  a  plentiful  noon-day  repast,  he  be¬ 
gan  to  yield,  and  submitted  to  take  on  him  the 
title  of  Germanicus  they  gave  him,  but  desired 
to  be  excused  as  to  that  of  Caesar.  And  immedi¬ 
ately  the  army  under  Flaccus  also,  putting 
away  their  fine  and  popular  oaths  in  the  name 
of  the  senate,  swore  obedience  to  Vitellius  as 
emperor,  to  observe  whatever  he  commanded. 

Thus  Vitellius  was  publicly  proclaimed  em¬ 
peror  in  Germany;  which  news  coming  to  Gal¬ 
ba’s  ear,  he  no  longer  deferred  his  adoption; 
yet  knowing  that  some  of  his  friends  were  us¬ 
ing  their  interest  for  Dolabella,  and  the  greatest 


GALBA 

number  of  them  for  Otho,  neither  of  whom  he 
approved  of,  on  a  sudden,  without  any  one’s 
privity,  he  sent  for  Piso,  the  son  of  Crassus  and 
Scribonia,  whom  Nero  slew,  a  young  man  in 
general  of  excellent  disposition  for  virtue,  but 
his  most  eminent  qualities  those  of  steadiness 
and  austere  gravity.  And  so  he  set  out  to  go  to 
the  camp  to  declare  him  Caesar  and  successor 
to  the  empire. 

But  at  his  very  first  going  forth  many  signs 
appeared  in  the  heavens,  and  when  he  began 
to  make  a  speech  to  the  soldiers,  partly  extem¬ 
pore,  and  partly  reading  it,  the  frequent  claps 
of  thunder  and  flashes  of  lightning,  and  the 
violent  storm  of  rain  that  burst  on  both  the 
camp  and  the  city,  were  plain  discoveries  that 
the  divine  powers  did  not  look  with  favour  or 
satisfaction  on  this  act  of  adoption  that  would 
come  to  no  good  result.  The  soldiers,  also, 
showed  symptoms  of  hidden  discontent,  and 
wore  sullen  looks,  no  distribution  of  money  be¬ 
ing  even  now  made  to  them.  However,  those 
that  were  present  and  observed  Piso’s  counte¬ 
nance  and  voice  could  not  but  feel  admiration 
to  see  him  so  little  overcome  by  so  great  a  fa¬ 
vour,  of  the  magnitude  of  which  at  the  same 
time  he  seemed  not  at  all  insensible.  Otho’s 
aspect,  on  the  other  hand,  did  not  fail  to  let 
many  marks  appear  of  his  bitterness  and  an¬ 
ger  at  his  disappointment;  since  to  have  been 
the  first  man  thought  of  for  it,  and  to  have 
come  to  the  very  point  of  being  chosen,  and 
now  to  be  put  by,  was  in  his  feelings  a  sign 
of  the  displeasure  and  ill-will  of  Galba  to¬ 
wards  him. 

This  filled  him  with  fears  and  apprehen¬ 
sions,  and  sent  him  home  with  a  mind  full  of 
various  passions,  whilst  he  dreaded  Piso,  hated 
Galba,  and  was  full  of  wrath  and  indignation 
against  Vinius.  And  the  Chaldeans  and  sooth¬ 
sayers  about  him  would  not  permit  him  to  lay 
aside  his  hopes  or  quit  his  design,  chiefly  Ptol- 
emaeus,  insisting  much  on  a  prediction  he  had 
made,  that  Nero  should  not  murder  Otho,  but 
he  himself  should  die  first,  and  Otho  succeed 
as  emperor;  for  the  first  proving  true,  he 
thought  he  could  not  distrust  the  rest.  But 
none  perhaps  stimulated  him  more  than  those 
that  professed  privately  to  pity  his  hard  fate 
and  compassionate  him  for  being  thus  ungrate¬ 
fully  dealt  with  by  Galba;  especially  Nym- 
phidius’s  and  Tigellinus’s  creatures,  who,  being 
now  cast  off  and  reduced  to  low  estate,  were 
eager  to  put  themselves  upon  him,  exclaiming 
at  the  indignity  he  had  suffered,  and  provok¬ 
ing  him  to  revenge  himself. 


867 

Amongst  these  were  Veturius  and  Barbius, 
the  one  an  optio,  the  other  a  tesserarius  (these 
are  men  who  have  the  duties  of  messengers 
and  scouts),  with  whom  Onomastus,  one  of 
Otho’s  freedmen,  went  to  the  camp  to  tamper 
with  the  army,  and  brought  over  some  with 
money,  others  with  fair  promises,  which  was 
no  hard  matter,  they  being  already  corrupted, 
and  only  wanting  a  fair  pretence.  It  had  been 
otherwise  more  than  the  work  of  four  days 
(which  elapsed  between  the  adoption  and  mur¬ 
der),  so  completely  to  infect  them  as  to  cause 
a  general  revolt.  On  the  sixth  day  ensuing,  the 
eighteenth,  as  the  Romans  call  it,  before  the 
calends  of  February,  the  murder  was  done. 
On  that  day,  in  the  morning,  Galba  sacrificed 
in  the  Palatium  in  the  presence  of  his  friends, 
when  Umbricius,  the  priest,  taking  up  the 
entrails,  and  speaking  not  ambiguously,  hut  in 
plain  words,  said  that  there  were  signs  of  great 
troubles  ensuing,  and  dangerous  snares  laid  for 
the  life  of  the  emperor. 

Thus  Otho  had  even  been  discovered  by  the 
finger  of  the  god,  being  there  just  behind  Gal¬ 
ba,  hearing  all  that  was  said,  and  seeing  what 
was  pointed  out  to  them  by  Umbricius.  His 
countenance  changed  to  every  colour  in  his 
fear,  and  he  was  betraying  no  small  discom¬ 
posure,  when  Onomastus,  his  freedman,  came 
up  and  acquainted  him  that  the  master  build¬ 
ers  had  come,  and  were  waiting  for  him  at 
home.  Now  that  was  the  signal  for  Otho  to 
meet  the  soldiers.  Pretending  then  that  he  had 
purchased  an  old  house,  and  was  going  to  show 
the  defects  to  those  that  had  sold  it  to  him,  he 
departed;  and  passing  through  what  is  called 
Tiberius’s  house,  he  went  on  into  the  Forum, 
near  the  spot  where  a  golden  pillar  stands,  at 
which  all  the  several  roads  through  Italy  ter¬ 
minate. 

Here,  it  is  related,  no  more  than  twenty- 
three  received  and  saluted  him  emperor;  so 
that,  although  he  was  not  in  mind  as  in  body 
enervated  with  soft  living  and  effeminacy,  be¬ 
ing  in  his  nature  bold  and  fearless  enough  in 
danger,  nevertheless,  he  was  afraid  to  go  on. 
But  the  soldiers  that  were  present  would  not 
suffer  him  to  recede,  but  came  with  their 
swords  drawn  around  his  chair,  commanding 
the  bearers  to  take  him  up,  whom  he  hastened 
on,  saying  several  times  over  to  himself,  “I  am 
a  lost  man.”  Several  persons  overheard  the 
words,  who  stood  by  wondering,  rather  than 
alarmed,  because  of  the  small  number  that  at¬ 
tempted  such  an  enterprise.  But  as  they  marched 
on  through  the  Forum,  about  as  many  more 


868 

met  him,  and  here  and  there  three  or  four  at 
a  time  joined  in.  Thus  returning  towards  the 
camp,  with  their  bare  swords  in  their  hands, 
they  saluted  him  as  Caesar;  whereupon  Martial- 
ias,  the  tribune  in  charge  of  the  watch,  who 
was,  they  say,  noways  privy  to  it,  but  was  sim¬ 
ply  surprised  at  the  unexpectedness  of  the 
thing,  and  afraid  to  refuse,  permitted  him  en¬ 
trance.  And  after  this,  no  man  made  any  resis¬ 
tance;  for  they  that  knew  nothing  of  the  de¬ 
sign,  being  purposely  encompassed  by  the  con¬ 
spirators  as  they  were  straggling  here  and 
there,  first  submitted  for  fear,  and  afterwards 
were  persuaded  into  compliance. 

Tidings  came  immediately  to  Galba  in  the 
Palatium,  whilst  the  priests  were  still  present 
and  the  sacrifices  at  hand,  so  that  persons  who 
were  most  entirely  incredulous  about  such 
things,  and  most  positive  in  their  neglect  of 
them,  were  astonished,  and  began  to  marvel 
at  the  divine  event.  A  multitude  of  all  sorts  of 
people  now  began  to  run  together  out  of  the 
Forum;  Vinius  and  Laco  and  some  of  Galba’s 
freedmen  drew  their  swords  and  placed  them¬ 
selves  beside  him;Piso  went  forth  and  addressed 
himself  to  the  guards  on  duty  in  the  court;  and 
Marius  Celsus,  a  brave  man,  was  despatched  to 
the  Illyrian  legion,  stationed  in  what  is  called 
the  Vipsanian  chamber,  to  secure  them. 

Galba  now  consulting  whether  he  should  go 
out,  Vinius  dissuaded  him,  but  Celsus  and 
Laco  encouraged  him  by  all  means  to  do  so, 
and  sharply  reprimanded  Vinius.  But  on  a 
sudden  a  rumour  came  hot  that  Otho  was  slain 
in  the  camp;  and  presently  appeared  one  Julius 
Atticus,  a  man  of  some  distinction  in  the 
guards,  running  up  with  his  drawn  sword, 
crying  out  that  he  had  slain  Caesar’s  enemy; 
and  pressing  through  the  crowd  that  stood  in 
his  way,  he  presented  himself  before  Galba 
with  his  bloody  weapon,  who,  looking  on  him, 
demanded,  “Who  gave  you  your  orders?”  And 
on  his  answering  that  it  had  been  his  duty  and 
the  obligation  of  the  oath  he  had  taken,  the 
people  applauded,  giving  loud  acclamations, 
and  Galba  got  into  his  chair  and  was  carried 
out  to  sacrifice  to  Jupiter,  and  so  to  show  him¬ 
self  publicly.  But  coming  into  the  Forum,  there 
met  him  there,  like  a  turn  of  wind,  the  op¬ 
posite  story,  that  Otho  had  made  himself  mas¬ 
ter  of  the  camp.  And  as  usual  in  a  crowd  of 
such  a  size,  some  called  to  him  to  return  back, 
others  to  move  forwards;  some  encouraged 
him  to  be  bold  and  fear  nothing,  others  bade 
him  to  be  cautious  and  distrust.  And  thus 
whilst  his  chair  was  tossed  to  and  fro,  as  it 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

were  on  the  waves,  often  tottering,  there  ap¬ 
peared  first  horse,  and  straightway  heavy¬ 
armed  foot,  coming  through  Paulus’s  court, 
and  all  with  one  accord  crying  out,  “Down 
with  this  private  man.” 

Upon  this,  the  crowd  of  people  set  oft  run¬ 
ning,  not  to  flee  and  disperse,  but  to  possess 
themselves  of  the  colonnades  and  elevated 
places  of  the  Forum,  as  it  might  be  to  get  places 
to  see  a  spectacle.  And  as  soon  as  Atillius  Ver- 
gilio  knocked  down  one  of  Galba’s  statues,  this 
was  taken  as  the  declaration  of  war,  and  they 
sent  a  discharge  of  darts  upon  Galba’s  litter, 
and  missing  their  aim,  came  up  and  attacked 
him  nearer  at  hand  with  their  naked  swords. 
No  man  resisted  or  offered  to  stand  up  in  his 
defence,  save  one  only,  a  centurion,  Sempro- 
nius  Densus,  the  single  man  among  so  many 
thousands  that  the  sun  beheld  that  day  act 
worthily  of  the  Roman  empire,  who,  though 
he  had  never  received  any  favour  from  Galba, 
yet  out  of  bravery  and  allegiance  endeavoured 
to  defend  the  litter.  First,  lifting  up  his  switch 
of  vine,  with  which  the  centurions  correct  the 
soldiers  when  disorderly,  he  called  aloud  to  the 
aggressors,  charging  them  not  to  touch  their 
emperor.  And  when  they  came  upon  him 
hand-to-hand,  he  drew  his  sword,  and  made 
a  defence  for  a  long  time,  until  at  last  he  was 
cut  under  the  knees  and  brought  to  the  ground. 

Galba’s  chair  was  upset  at  the  spot  called  the 
Lacus  Curtius,  where  they  ran  up  and  struck 
at  him  as  he  lay  in  his  corselet.  He,  however, 
offered  his  throat,  bidding  them,  “Strike,  if  it 
be  for  the  Romans’  good.”  He  received  several 
wounds  on  his  legs  and  arms,  and  at  last  was 
struck  in  the  throat,  as  most  say,  by  one  Camu- 
rius,  a  soldier  of  the  fifteenth  legion.  Some 
name  Terentius,  others  Lecanius;  and  there 
are  others  that  say  it  was  Fabius  Fabulus,  who 
it  is  reported  cut  off  the  head  and  carried  it 
away  in  the  skirt  of  his  coat,  the  baldness  mak¬ 
ing  it  a  difficult  thing  to  take  hold  of.  But  those 
that  were  with  him  would  not  allow  him  to 
keep  it  covered  up,  but  bade  him  let  every  one 
see  the  brave  deed  he  had  done;  so  that  after 
a  while  he  stuck  upon  the  lance  the  head  of 
the  aged  man  that  had  been  their  grave  and 
temperate  ruler,  their  supreme  priest  and  con¬ 
sul,  and,  tossing  it  up  in  the  air,  ran  like  a 
bacchanal,  twirling  and  flourishing  with  it, 
while  the  blood  ran  down  the  spear. 

But  when  they  brought  the  head  to  Otho, 
“Fellow-soldiers,”  he  cried  out,  “this  is  noth¬ 
ing,  unless  you  show  me  Piso’s  too,”  which 
was  presented  him  not  long  after.  The  young 


OTHO 

man,  retreating  upon  a  wound  received,  was 
pursued  by  one  Murcus,  and  slain  at  the  tem¬ 
ple  of  Vesta.  Titus  Vinius  was  also  despatched, 
avowing  himself  to  have  been  privy  to  the  con¬ 
spiracy  against  Galba  by  calling  out  that  they 
were  killing  him  contrary  to  Otho’s  pleasure. 
However,  they  cut  off  his  head,  and  Laco’s 
too,  and  brought  them  to  Otho,  requesting  a 
boon. 

And  as  Archilochus  says — 

When  six  or  seven  lie  breathless  on  the  ground, 

’Twas  l,  ’twas  l,  say  thousands,  gave  the  wound. 

Thus  many  that  had  no  share  in  the  murder 
wetted  their  hands  and  swords  in  blood,  and 
came  and  showed  them  to  Otho,  presenting 
memorials  suing  for  a  gratuity.  Not  less  than 
one  hundred  and  twenty  were  identified  after¬ 
wards  from  their  written  petitions;  all  of 
whom  Vitellius  sought  out  and  put  to  death. 
There  came  also  into  the  camp  Marius  Celsus, 
and  was  accused  by  many  voices  of  encourag¬ 
ing  the  soldiers  to  assist  Galba,  and  was  de¬ 
manded  to  death  by  the  multitude.  Otho  had 
no  desire  for  this,  yet,  fearing  an  absolute 
denial,  he  professed  that  he  did  not  wish  to 
take  him  off  so  soon,  having  many  matters  yet 
to  learn  from  him;  and  so  committed  him  safe 
to  the  custody  of  those  he  most  confided  in. 

Forthwith  a  senate  was  convened,  and  as  if 
they  were  not  the  same  men,  or  had  other  gods 
to  swear  by,  they  took  that  oath  in  Otho’s 
name  which  he  himself  had  taken  in  Galba ’s 
and  had  broken;  and  withal  conferred  on  him 
the  titles  of  Caesar  and  Augustus;  whilst  the 
dead  carcasses  of  the  slain  lay  yet  in  their  con¬ 
sular  robes  in  the  market-place.  As  for  their 
heads,  when  they  could  make  no  other  use  of 
them,  Vinius’s  they  sold  to  his  daughter  for 
two  thousand  five  hundred  drachmas;  Piso’s 
was  begged  by  his  wife,  Verania;  Galba’s  they 


869 

gave  to  Patrobius’s  servants;  who  when  they 
had  it,  after  all  sorts  of  abuse  and  indignities, 
tumbled  it  into  the  place  where  those  that  suf¬ 
fer  death  by  the  emperor’s  orders  are  usually 
cast,  called  Sessorium.  Galba’s  body  was  con¬ 
veyed  away  by  Priscus  Helvidius  by  Otho’s 
permission,  and  buried  in  the  night  by  Argius, 
his  freedman. 

Thus  you  have  the  history  of  Galba,  a  per¬ 
son  inferior  to  few  Romans,  either  for  birth 
or  riches,  rather  exceeding  all  of  his  time  in 
both,  having  lived  in  great  honour  and  reputa¬ 
tion  in  the  reigns  of  five  emperors,  insomuch 
that  he  overthrew  Nero  rather  by  his  fame 
and  repute  in  the  world  than  by  actual  force 
and  power.  Of  all  the  others  that  joined  in 
Nero’s  deposition,  some  were  by  general  con¬ 
sent  regarded  as  unworthy,  others  had  only 
themselves  to  vote  them  deserving  of  the  em¬ 
pire.  To  him  the  title  was  offered,  and  by  him 
it  was  accepted;  and  simply  lending  his  name 
to  Vindex’s  attempt,  he  gave  to  what  had  been 
called  rebellion  before,  the  name  of  a  civil  war, 
by  the  presence  of  one  that  was  accounted  fit 
to  govern. 

And  therefore,  as  he  considered  that  he  had 
not  so  much  sought  the  position  as  the  posi¬ 
tion  had  sought  him,  he  proposed  to  command 
those  whom  Nymphidius  and  Tigellinus  had 
wheedled  into  obedience  no  otherwise  than 
Scipio  formerly  and  Fabricius  and  Camillus 
had  commanded  the  Romans  of  their  times.  But 
being  now  overcome  with  age,  he  was  indeed 
among  the  troops  and  legions  an  upright  ruler 
upon  the  antique  model;  but  for  the  rest,  giv¬ 
ing  himself  up  to  Vinius,  Laco,  and  his  freed- 
men,  who  make  their  gain  of  all  things,  no 
otherwise  than  Nero  had  done  to  his  insatiate 
favourites,  he  left  none  behind  him  to  wish 
him  still  in  power,  though  many  to  compas¬ 
sionate  his  death. 


OTHO 

A.D.  32.-69 


The  new  emperor  went  early  in  the 
morning  to  the  capitol,  and  sacrificed; 
and,  having  commanded  Marius  Celsus 
to  be  brought,  he  saluted  him,  and  with  oblig¬ 
ing  language  desired  him  rather  to  forget  his 
accusation  than  remember  his  acquittal;  to 
which  Celsus  answered  neither  meanly  nor  un¬ 


gratefully,  that  his  very  crime  ought  to  rec¬ 
ommend  his  integrity,  since  his  guilt  had  been 
his  fidelity  to  Galba,  from  whom  he  had  never 
received  any  personal  obligations.  Upon  which 
they  were  both  of  them  admired  by  those  that 
were  present,  and  applauded  by  the  soldiers. 

In  the  senate,  Otho  said  much  in  a  gentle 


870 

and  popular  strain.  He  was  to  have  been  con¬ 
sul  for  part  of  that  year  himself,  but  he  gave 
the  office  to  Virginius  Rufus,  and  displaced 
none  that  had  been  named  for  the  consulship 
by  either  Nero  or  Galba.  Those  that  were  re¬ 
markable  for  their  age  and  dignity  he  promot¬ 
ed  to  the  priesthoods;  and  restored  the  remains 
of  their  fortunes,  that  had  not  yet  been  sold,  to 
all  those  senators  that  were  banished  by  Nero, 
and  recalled  by  Galba.  So  that  the  nobility  and 
chief  of  the  people,  who  were  at  first  appre¬ 
hensive  that  no  human  creature,  but  some  su¬ 
pernatural,  or  penal  vindictive  power  had 
seized  the  empire,  began  now  to  flatter  them¬ 
selves  with  hopes  of  a  government  that  smiled 
upon  them  thus  early. 

Besides,  nothing  gratified  or  gained  the 
whole  Roman  people  more  than  his  justice  in 
relation  to  Tigellinus.  It  was  not  seen  how  he 
was  in  fact  already  suffering  punishment,  not 
only  by  the  very  terror  of  retribution  which  he 
saw  the  whole  city  requiring  as  a  just  debt, 
but  with  several  incurable  diseases  also;  not  to 
mention  those  unhallowed  frightful  excesses 
among  impure  and  prostitute  women,  to 
which,  at  the  very  close  of  life,  his  lewd  nature 
clung,  and  in  them  gasped  out,  as  it  were,  its 
last;  these,  in  the  opinion  of  all  reasonable 
men,  being  themselves  the  extremest  punish¬ 
ment,  and  equal  to  many  deaths.  But  it  was 
felt  like  a  grievance  by  people  in  general  that 
he  continued  yet  to  see  the  light  of  day,  who 
had  been  the  occasion  of  the  loss  of  it  to  so 
many  persons,  and  such  persons,  as  had  died 
by  his  means.  Wherefore  Otho  ordered  him  to 
be  sent  for,  just  as  he  was  contriving  his  escape 
by  means  of  some  vessels  that  lay  ready  for  him 
on  the  coast  near  where  he  lived,  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood  of  Sinuessa.  At  first  he  endeavoured 
to  corrupt  the  messenger,  by  a  large  sum  of 
money,  to  favour  his  design;  but  when  he 
found  this  was  to  no  purpose,  he  made  him  as 
considerable  a  present  as  if  he  had  really  con¬ 
nived  at  it,  only  entreating  him  to  stay  till  he 
had  shaved;  and  so  took  that  opportunity,  and 
with  his  razor  despatched  himself. 

And  while  giving  the  people  this  most  right¬ 
eous  satisfaction  of  their  desires,  for  himself 
he  seemed  to  have  no  sort  of  regard  for  any 
private  injuries  of  his  own.  And  at  first,  to 
please  the  populace,  he  did  not  refuse  to  be 
called  Nero  in  the  theatre,  and  did  not  inter¬ 
fere  when  some  persons  displayed  Nero’s  stat¬ 
ues  to  public  view.  And  Cluvius  Rufus  says, 
imperial  letters,  such  as  are  sent  with  couriers, 
went  into  Spain  with  the  name  of  Nero  affixed 


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES 

adoptively  to  that  of  Otho;  but  as  soon  as  he 
perceived  this  gave  offence  to  the  chief  and 
most  distinguished  citizens,  it  was  omitted. 

After  he  had  begun  to  model  the  govern¬ 
ment  in  this  manner,  the  paid  soldiers  began  to 
murmur,  and  endeavoured  to  make  him  sus¬ 
pect  and  chastise  the  nobility,  either  really  out 
of  a  concern  for  his  safety,  or  wishing,  upon 
this  pretence,  to  stir  up  trouble  and  warfare. 
Thus,  whilst  Crispinus,  whom  he  had  ordered 
to  bring  him  the  seventeenth  cohort  from 
Ostia,  began  to  collect  what  he  wanted  after 
it  was  dark,  and  was  putting  the  arms  upon 
the  waggons,  some  of  the  most  turbulent  cried 
out  that  Crispinus  was  disaffected,  that  the 
senate  was  practising  something  against  the 
emperor,  and  that  those  arms  were  to  be  em¬ 
ployed  against  Caesar,  and  not  for  him.  When 
this  report  was  once  set  afoot,  it  got  the  belief 
and  excited  the  passions  of  many;  they  broke 
out  into  violence;  some  seized  the  waggons, 
and  others  slew  Crispinus  and  two  centurions 
that  opposed  them;  and  the  whole  number  of 
them,  arraying  themselves  in  their  arms,  and 
encouraging  one  another  to  stand  by  Caesar, 
marched  to  Rome.  And  hearing  there  that 
eighty  of  the  senators  were  at  supper  with 
Otho,  they  flew  into  the  palace,  and  declared 
it  was  a  fair  opportunity  to  take  off  Caesar’s 
enemies  at  one  stroke. 

A  general  alarm  ensued  of  an  immediate 
coming  sack  of  the  city.  All  were  in  confusion 
about  the  palace,  and  Otho  himself  in  no  small 
consternation,  being  not  only  concerned  for 
the  senators  (some  of  whom  had  brought  their 
wives  to  supper  thither),  but  also  feeling  him¬ 
self  to  be  an  object  of  alarm  and  suspicion  to 
them,  whose  eyes  he  saw  fixed  on  him  in  si¬ 
lence  and  terror.  Therefore  he  gave  orders  to 
the  prefects  to  address  the  soldiers  and  do  their 
best  to  pacify  them,  while  he  bade  the  guests 
rise,  and  leave  by  another  door.  They  had  only 
just  made  their  way  out,  when  the  soldiers 
rushed  into  the  room,  and  called  out,  “Where 
are  Caesar’s  enemies?” 

Then  Otho,  standing  up  on  his  couch,  made 
use  both  of  arguments  and  entreaties,  and  by 
actual  tears  at  last,  with  great  difficulty,  per¬ 
suaded  them  to  desist.  The  next  day  he  went 
to  the  camp,  and  distributed  a  bounty  of  twelve 
hundred  and  fifty  drachmas  a  man  amongst 
them;  then  commended  them  for  the  regard 
and  zeal  they  had  for  his  safety,  but  told  them 
that  there  were  some  who  were  intriguing 
among  them,  who  not  only  accused  his  own 
clemency,  but  had  also  misrepresented  their 


OTHO 

loyalty;  and,  therefore,  he  desired  their  assis¬ 
tance  in  doing  justice  upon  them.  To  which, 
when  they  all  consented,  he  was  satisfied  with 
the  execution  of  two  only,  whose  deaths  he 
knew  would  be  regretted  by  no  one  man  in  the 
whole  army. 

Such  conduct,  so  little  expected  from  him, 
was  regarded  by  some  with  gratitude  and  con¬ 
fidence;  others  looked  upon  his  behaviour  as 
a  course  to  which  necessity  drove  him,  to  gain 
the  people  to  the  support  of  the  war.  For  now 
there  were  certain  tidings  that  Vitellius  had 
assumed  the  sovereign  title  and  authority,  and 
frequent  expresses  brought  accounts  of  new 
accessions  to  him;  others,  however,  came,  an¬ 
nouncing  that  the  Pannonian,  Dalmatian,  and 
Moesian  legions,  with  their  officers,  adhered  to 
Otho.  Ere  long  also  came  favourable  letters 
from  Mucianus  and  Vespasian,  generals  of  two 
formidable  armies,  the  one  in  Syria,  the  other 
in  Judaea,  to  assure  him  of  their  firmness  to  his 
interest:  in  confidence  whereof  he  was  so  ex¬ 
alted,  that  he  wrote  to  Vitellius  not  to  attempt 
anything  beyond  his  post;  and  offered  him 
large  sums  of  money  and  a  city,  where  he 
might  live  his  time  out  in  pleasure  and  ease. 

These  overtures  at  first  were  responded  to  by 
Vitellius  with  equivocating  civilities;  which 
soon,  however,  turned  into  an  interchange  of 
angry  words;  and  letters  passed  between  the 
two,  conveying  bitter  and  shameful  terms  of 
reproach,  which  were  not  false  indeed,  for  that 
matter,  only  it  was  senseless  and  ridiculous  for 
each  to  assail  the  other  with  accusations  to 
which  both  alike  must  plead  guilty.  For  it  were 
hard  to  determine  which  of  the  two  had  been 
most  profuse,  most  effeminate,  which  was  most 
a  novice  in  military  affairs,  and  most  involved 
in  debt  through  previous  want  of  means. 

As  to  the  prodigies  and  apparitions  that  hap¬ 
pened  about  this  time,  there  were  many  re¬ 
ported  which  none  could  answer  for,  or  which 
were  told  in  different  ways;  but  one  which 
everybody  actually  saw  with  their  eyes,  was 
the  statue,  in  the  capitol,  of  Victory  carried 
in  a  chariot,  with  the  reins  dropped  out  of  her 
hands,  as  if  she  were  grown  too  weak  to  hold 
them  any  longer;  and  a  second,  that  Caius 
Caesar’s  statue  in  the  island  of  Tiber,  without 
any  earthquake  or  wind  to  account  for  it, 
turned  round  from  west  to  east;  and  this,  they 
say,  happened  about  the  time  when  Vespasian 
and  his  party  first  openly  began  to  put  them¬ 
selves  forward.  Another  incident,  which  the 
people  in  general  thought  an  evil  sign,  was 
the  inundation  of  the  Tiber;  for  though  it  hap- 


871 

pened  at  a  time  when  rivers  are  usually  at  their 
fullest,  yet  such  height  of  water  and  so  tre¬ 
mendous  a  flood  had  never  been  known  before, 
nor  such  a  destruction  of  property,  great  part 
of  the  city  being  under  water,  and  especially 
the  corn  market,  so  that  it  occasioned  a  great 
dearth  for  several  days. 

But  when  news  was  now  brought  that  Cae- 
cina  and  Valens,  commanding  for  Vitellius, 
had  possessed  themselves  of  the  Alps,  Otho 
sent  Dolabella  (a  patrician,  who  was  suspected 
by  the  soldiery  of  some  evil  purpose),  for 
whatever  reason,  whether  it  were  fear  of  him 
or  of  any  one  else,  to  the  town  of  Aquinum,  to 
give  encouragement  there;  and  proceeding 
then  to  choose  which  of  the  magistrates  should 
go  with  him  to  the  war,  he  named  amongst 
the  rest  Lucius,  Vitellius’s  brother,  without 
distinguishing  him  by  any  new  marks  either 
of  his  favour  or  displeasure.  He  also  took  the 
greatest  precautions  for  Vitellius’s  wife  and 
mother,  that  they  might  be  safe,  and  free  from 
all  apprehension  for  themselves.  He  made 
Flavius  Sabinus,  Vespasian’s  brother,  governor 
of  Rome,  either  in  honour  to  the  memory  of 
Nero,  who  had  advanced  him  formerly  to  that 
command,  which  Galba  had  taken  away,  or 
else  to  show  his  confidence  in  Vespasian  by  his 
favour  to  his  brother. 

After  he  came  to  Brixillum,  a  town  of  Italy 
near  the  Po,  he  stayed  behind  himself,  and  or¬ 
dered  the  army  to  march  under  the  conduct  of 
Marius  Celsus,  Suetonius  Paulinus,  Gallus, 
and  Spurina,  all  men  of  experience  and  reputa¬ 
tion,  but  unable  to  carry  their  own  plans  and 
purposes  into  effect,  by  reason  of  the  ungovern¬ 
able  temper  of  the  army,  which  would  take 
orders  from  none  but  the  emperor  whom  they 
themselves  had  made  their  master.  Nor  was  the 
enemy  under  much  better  discipline,  the  sol¬ 
diers  there  also  being  haughty  and  disobedient 
upon  the  same  account,  but  they  were  more 
experienced  and  used  to  hard  work;  whereas 
Otho’s  men  were  soft  from  their  long  easy  liv¬ 
ing  and  lack  of  service,  having  spent  most  of 
their  time  in  the  theatres  and  at  state  shows 
and  on  the  stage;  while  moreover  they  tried 
to  cover  their  deficiencies  by  arrogance  and 
vain  display,  pretending  to  decline  their  duty, 
not  because  they  were  unable  to  do  the  thing 
commanded,  but  because  they  thought  them¬ 
selves  above  it.  So  that  Spurina  had  like  to  have 
been  cut  in  pieces  for  attempting  to  force  them 
to  their  work;  they  assailed  him  with  insolent 
language,  accusing  him  of  a  design  to  betray 
and  ruin  Caesar’s  interest;  nay,  some  of  them 


872 

that  were  in  drink  forced  his  tent  in  the  night, 
and  demanded  money  for  the  expenses  of  their 
journey,  which  they  must  at  once  take,  they 
said,  to  the  emperor,  to  complain  of  him. 

However,  the  contemptuous  treatment  they 
met  with  at  Placentia  did  for  the  present  good 
service  to  Spurina,  and  to  the  cause  of  Otho. 
For  Vitellius’s  men  marched  up  to  the  walls, 
and  upbraided  Otho’s  upon  the  ramparts,  call¬ 
ing  them  players,  dancers,  idle  spectators  of 
Pythian  and  Olympic  games,  but  novices  in  the 
art  of  war,  who  never  so  much  as  looked  on  at 
a  battle;  mean  souls,  that  triumphed  in  the  be¬ 
heading  of  Galba,  an  old  man  unarmed,  but 
had  no  desire  to  look  real  enemies  in  the  face. 
Which  reproaches  so  inflamed  them  that  they 
kneeled  at  Spurina’s  feet,  entreated  him  to  give 
his  orders,  and  assured  him  no  danger  or  toil 
should  be  too  great  or  too  difficult  for  them. 
Whereupon  when  Vitellius’s  forces  made  a 
vigorous  attack  on  the  town,  and  brought  up 
numerous  engines  against  the  walls,  the  be¬ 
sieged  bravely  repulsed  them,  and,  repelling 
the  enemy  with  great  slaughter,  secured  the 
safety  of  a  noble  city,  one  of  the  most  flourish¬ 
ing  places  in  Italy. 

Besides,  it  was  observed  that  Otho’s  officers 
were  much  more  inoffensive,  both  towards  the 
public  and  to  private  men,  than  those  of  Vitel- 
lius;  among  whom  was  Caecina,  who  used 
neither  the  language  nor  the  apparel  of  a  citi¬ 
zen,  an  overbearing,  foreign-seeming  man,  of 
gigantic  stature,  and  always  dressed  in  trews 
and  sleeves,  after  the  manner  of  the  Gauls, 
whilst  he  conversed  with  Roman  officials  and 
magistrates.  His  wife,  too,  travelled  along  with 
him,  riding  in  splendid  attire  on  horseback, 
with  a  chosen  body  of  cavalry  to  escort  her. 
And  Fabius  Valens,  the  other  general,  was  so 
rapacious  that  neither  what  he  plundered  from 
enemies,  nor  what  he  stole  or  got  as  gifts  and 
bribes  from  his  friends  and  allies,  could  satisfy 
his  wishes.  And  it  was  said  that  it  was  in  order 
to  have  time  to  raise  money  that  he  had  marched 
so  slowly  that  he  was  not  present  at  the  former 
attack.  But  some  lay  the  blame  on  Caecina,  say¬ 
ing,  that  out  of  a  desire  to  gain  the  victory  by 
himself  before  Fabius  joined  him,  he  commit¬ 
ted  sundry  other  errors  of  lesser  consequence, 
and  by  engaging  unseasonably  and  when  he 
could  not  do  so  thoroughly,  he  very  nearly 
brought  all  to  ruin. 

When  he  found  himself  beat  off  at  Placentia, 
he  set  off  to  attack  Cremona,  another  large  and 
rich  city.  In  the  meantime,  Annius  Gallus 
marched  to  join  Spurina  at  Placentia;  but  hav- 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

ing  intelligence  that  the  siege  was  raised,  and 
that  Cremona  was  in  danger,  he  turned  to  its 
relief,  and  encamped  just  by  the  enemy,  where 
he  was  daily  reinforced  by  other  officers.  Cae- 
cina  placed  a  strong  ambush  of  heavy  infantry 
in  some  rough  and  woody  country,  and  gave 
orders  to  his  horse  to  advance,  and  if  the  enemy 
should  charge  them,  then  to  make  a  slow  re¬ 
treat,  and  draw  them  into  the  snare.  But  his 
stratagem  was  discovered  by  some  deserters  to 
Celsus,  who  attacked  with  a  good  body  of 
horse,  but  followed  the  pursuit  cautiously,  and 
succeeded  in  surrounding  and  routing  the 
troops  in  the  ambuscade;  and  if  the  infantry 
which  he  ordered  up  from  the  camp  had  come 
soon  enough  to  sustain  the  horse,  Caecina’s 
whole  army,  in  all  appearance,  had  been  totally 
routed. 

But  Paulinus,  moving  too  slowly,  was  ac¬ 
cused  of  acting  with  a  degree  of  needless  cau¬ 
tion  not  to  have  been  expected  from  one  of  his 
reputation.  So  that  the  soldiers  incensed  Otho 
against  him,  accused  him  of  treachery,  and 
boasted  loudly  that  the  victory  had  been  in 
their  power,  and  that  if  it  was  not  complete, 
it  was  owing  to  the  mismanagement  of  their 
generals;  all  which  Otho  did  not  so  much  be¬ 
lieve  as  he  was  willing  to  appear  not  to  disbe¬ 
lieve.  He  therefore  sent  his  brother  Titianus, 
with  Proculus,  the  prefect  of  the  guards,  to  the 
army,  where  the  latter  was  general  in  reality, 
and  the  former  in  appearance.  Celsus  and  Pau¬ 
linus  had  the  title  of  friends  and  counsellors, 
but  not  the  least  authority  or  power.  At  the 
same  time,  there  was  nothing  but  quarrel  and 
disturbance  amongst  the  enemy,  especially 
where  Valens  commanded;  for  the  soldiers 
here,  being  informed  of  what  had  happened  at 
the  ambuscade,  were  enraged  because  they  had 
not  been  permitted  to  be  present  to  strike  a 
blow  in  defence  of  the  lives  of  so  many  men 
that  had  died  in  that  action;  Valens,  with  much 
difficulty,  quieted  their  fury,  after  they  had 
now  begun  to  throw  missiles  at  him,  and  quit¬ 
ting  his  camp,  joined  Caecina. 

About  this  time,  Otho  came  to  Bedriacum, 
a  little  town  near  Cremona,  to  the  camp,  and 
called  a  council  of  war;  where  Proculus  and 
Titianus  declared  for  giving  battle,  while  the 
soldiers  were  flushed  with  their  late  success, 
saying  they  ought  not  to  lose  their  time  and  op¬ 
portunity  and  present  height  of  strength,  and 
wait  for  Vitellius  to  arrive  out  of  Gaul.  But 
Paulinus  told  them  that  the  enemy’s  whole 
force  was  present,  and  that  there  was  no  body 
of  reserve  behind;  but  that  Otho,  if  he  would 


OTHO 

not  be  too  precipitate,  and  chose  the  enemy’s 
time,  instead  of  his  own,  for  the  battle,  might 
expect  reinforcements  out  of  Moesia  and  Pan- 
nonia,  not  inferior  in  numbers  to  the  troops 
that  were  already  present.  He  thought  it  prob¬ 
able,  too,  that  the  soldiers,  who  were  then  in 
heart  before  they  were  joined,  would  not  be 
less  so  when  the  forces  were  all  come  up.  Be¬ 
sides,  the  deferring  battle  could  not  be  incon¬ 
venient  to  them  that  were  sufficiently  provided 
with  all  necessaries;  but  the  others,  being  in  an 
enemy’s  country,  must  needs  be  exceedingly 
straitened  in  a  little  time.  Marius  Celsus  was 
of  Paulinus’s  opinion;  Annius  Gallus,  being 
absent  and  under  the  surgeon’s  hands  through 
a  fall  from  his  horse,  was  consulted  by  letter, 
and  advised  Otho  to  stay  for  those  legions  that 
were  marching  from  Moesia.  But  after  all  he 
did  not  follow  the  advice;  and  the  opinion  of 
those  that  declared  for  a  battle  prevailed. 

There  are  several  reasons  given  for  this  de¬ 
termination,  but  the  most  apparent  is  this;  that 
the  praetorian  soldiers,  as  they  are  called,  who 
serve  as  guards,  not  relishing  the  military  dis¬ 
cipline  which  they  now  had  begun  a  little  more 
to  experience,  and  longing  for  their  amuse¬ 
ments  and  unwarlike  life  among  the  shows  of 
Rome,  would  not  be  commanded,  but  were 
eager  for  a  battle,  imagining  that  upon  the  first 
onset  they  should  carry  all  before  them.  Otho 
also  himself  seems  not  to  have  shown  the  prop¬ 
er  fortitude  in  bearing  up  against  the  uncer¬ 
tainty,  and,  out  of  effeminacy  and  want  of  use, 
had  not  patience  for  the  calculations  of  danger, 
and  was  so  uneasy  at  the  apprehension  of  it 
that  he  shut  his  eyes,  and  like  one  going  to 
leap  from  a  precipice,  left  everything  to  for¬ 
tune. 

This  is  the  account  Secundus  the  rhetori¬ 
cian,  who  was  his  secretary,  gave  of  the  matter. 
But  others  would  tell  you  that  there  were  many 
movements  in  both  armies  for  acting  in  con¬ 
cert;  and  if  it  were  possible  for  them  to  agree, 
then  they  should  proceed  to  choose  one  of  their 
most  experienced  officers  that  were  present;  if 
not,  they  should  convene  the  senate,  and  in¬ 
vest  it  with  the  power  of  election.  And  it  is 
not  improbable  that,  neither  of  the  emperors 
then  bearing  the  title  having  really  any  reputa¬ 
tion,  such  purposes  were  really  entertained 
among  the  genuine,  serviceable,  and  sober- 
minded  part  of  the  soldiers.  For  what  could  be 
more  odious  and  unreasonable  than  that  the 
evils  which  the  Roman  citizens  had  formerly 
thought  it  so  lamentable  to  inflict  upon  each 
other  for  the  sake  of  a  Sulla  or  a  Marius,  a  Cae- 


873 

sar  or  a  Pompey,  should  now  be  undergone 
anew,  for  the  object  of  letting  the  empire  pay 
the  expenses  of  the  gluttony  and  intemperance 
of  Vitellius,  or  the  looseness  and  effeminacy  of 
Otho?  It  is  thought  that  Celsus,  upon  such  re¬ 
flections,  protracted  the  time  in  order  to  effect 
a  possible  accommodation;  and  that  Otho 
pushed  on  things  to  an  extremity  to  prevent  it. 

He  himself  returned  to  Brixillum,  which 
was  another  false  step,  both  because  he  with¬ 
drew  from  the  combatants  all  the  motives  of 
respect  and  desire  to  gain  his  favour  which  his 
presence  would  have  supplied,  and  because  he 
weakened  the  army  by  detaching  some  of  his 
best  and  most  faithful  troops  for  his  horse  and 
foot  guards. 

About  the  same  time  also  happened  a  skir¬ 
mish  on  the  Po.  As  Caecina  was  laying  a  bridge 
over  it,  Otho’s  men  attacked  him,  and  tried  to 
prevent  it.  And  when  they  did  not  succeed,  on 
their  putting  into  their  boats  torchwood,  with 
a  quantity  of  sulphur  and  pitch,  the  wind  on 
the  river  suddenly  caught  their  material  that 
they  had  prepared  against  the  enemy,  and 
blew  it  into  a  light.  First  came  smoke,  and 
then  a  clear  flame,  and  the  men,  getting  into 
great  confusion  and  jumping  overboard,  upset 
the  boats,  and  put  themselves  ludicrously  at 
the  mercy  of  their  enemies.  Also  the  Germans 
attacked  Otho’s  gladiators  upon  a  small  island 
in  the  river,  routed  them,  and  killed  a  good 
many. 

All  which  made  the  soldiers  at  Bedriacum 
full  of  anger,  and  eagerness  to  be  led  to  battle. 
So  Proculus  led  them  out  of  Bedriacum  to  a 
place  fifty  furlongs  off,  where  he  pitched  his 
camp  so  ignorantly  and  with  such  a  ridiculous 
want  of  foresight  that  the  soldiers  suffered  ex¬ 
tremely  for  want  of  water,  though  it  was  the 
spring  time,  and  the  plains  all  around  were  full 
of  running  streams  and  rivers  that  never  dried 
up.  The  next  day  he  proposed  to  attack  the 
enemy,  first  making  a  march  of  not  less  than  a 
hundred  furlongs;  but  to  this  Paulinus  object¬ 
ed,  saying  they  ought  to  wait,  and  not  immedi¬ 
ately  after  a  journey  engage  men  who  would 
have  been  standing  in  their  arms  and  arrang¬ 
ing  themselves  for  battle  at  their  leisure,  whilst 
they  were  making  a  long  march,  with  all  their 
beasts  of  burden  and  their  camp  followers  to 
encumber  them.  As  the  generals  were  arguing 
about  this  matter,  a  Numidian  courier  came 
from  Otho  with  orders  to  lose  no  time,  but  give 
battle.  Accordingly  they  consented,  and  moved. 
As  soon  as  Caecina  had  notice,  he  was  much 
surprised,  and  quitted  his  post  on  the  river  to 


874 

hasten  to  the  camp.  In  the  meantime,  the  men 
had  armed  themselves  mostly,  and  were  receiv¬ 
ing  the  word  from  Valens;  so  while  the  legions 
took  up  their  position,  they  sent  out  the  best  of 
their  horse  in  advance. 

Otho’s  foremost  troops,  upon  some  ground¬ 
less  rumour,  took  up  the  notion  that  the  com¬ 
manders  on  the  other  side  would  come  over; 
and  accordingly,  upon  their  first  approach, 
they  saluted  them  with  the  friendly  title  of  fel¬ 
low-soldiers.  But  the  others  returned  the  com¬ 
pliment  with  anger  and  disdainful  words; 
which  not  only  disheartened  those  that  had 
given  the  salutation,  but  excited  suspicions  of 
their  fidelity  amongst  the  others  on  their  side, 
who  had  not.  This  caused  a  confusion  at  the 
very  first  onset.  And  nothing  else  that  followed 
was  done  upon  any  plan;  the  baggage-carriers, 
mingling  up  with  the  fighting  men,  created 
great  disorder  and  division;  as  well  as  the 
nature  of  the  ground,  the  ditches  and  pits  in 
which  were  so  many  that  they  were  forced  to 
break  their  ranks  to  avoid  and  go  round  them, 
and  so  to  fight  without  order,  and  in  small 
parties. 

There  were  but  two  legions,  one  of  Vitel- 
lius’s,  called  The  Ravenous,  and  another  of 
Otho’s,  called  The  Assistant,  that  got  out  into 
the  open  out-spread  level  and  engaged  in  prop¬ 
er  form,  fighting,  one  main  body  against  the 
other,  for  some  length  of  time.  Otho’s  men 
were  strong  and  bold,  but  had  never  been  in 
battle  before;  Vitellius’s  had  seen  many  wars, 
but  were  old  and  past  their  strength.  So  Otho’s 
legion  charged  boldly,  drove  back  their  oppo¬ 
nents,  and  took  the  eagle,  killing  pretty  nearly 
every  man  in  the  first  rank,  till  the  others,  full 
of  rage  and  shame,  returned  the  charge,  slew 
Orfidius,  the  commander  of  the  legion,  and 
took  several  standards.  Varus  Alfenus,  with 
his  Batavians,  who  are  the  natives  of  an  island 
of  the  Rhine,  and  are  esteemed  the  best  of  the 
German  horse,  fell  upon  the  gladiators,  who 
had  a  reputation  both  for  valour  and  skill  in 
fighting.  Some  few  of  these  did  their  duty,  but 
the  greatest  part  of  them  made  towards  the  riv¬ 
er,  and,  falling  in  with  some  cohorts  stationed 
there,  were  cut  off.  But  none  behaved  so  ill  as 
the  praetorians,  who,  without  ever  so  much  as 
meeting  the  enemy,  ran  away,  broke  through 
their  own  body  that  stood,  and  put  them  into 
disorder.  Notwithstanding  this,  many  of  Otho’s 
men  routed  those  that  were  opposed  to  them, 
broke  right  into  them,  and  forced  their  way  to 
the  camp  through  the  very  middle  of  their  con¬ 
querors. 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

As  for  their  commanders,  neither  Proculus 
nor  Paulinus  ventured  to  re-enter  with  the 
troops;  they  turned  aside,  and  avoided  the  sol¬ 
diers,  who  had  already  charged  the  miscar¬ 
riage  upon  their  officers.  Annius  Gallus  re¬ 
ceived  into  the  town  and  rallied  the  scattered 
parties,  and  encouraged  them  with  an  assur¬ 
ance  that  the  battle  was  a  drawn  one  and  the 
victory  had  in  many  parts  been  theirs.  Marius 
Celsus,  collecting  the  officers,  urged  the  pub¬ 
lic  interest;  Otho  himself,  if  he  were  a  brave 
man,  would  not,  after  such  an  expense  of  Ro¬ 
man  blood,  attempt  anything  further;  espe¬ 
cially  since  even  Cato  and  Scipio,  though  the 
liberty  of  Rome  was  then  at  stake,  had  been  ac¬ 
cused  of  being  too  prodigal  of  so  many  brave 
men’s  lives  as  were  lost  in  Africa,  rather  than 
submit  to  Caesar  after  the  battle  of  Pharsalia 
had  gone  against  them.  For  though  all  persons 
are  equally  subject  to  the  caprice  of  fortune, 
yet  all  good  men  have  one  advantage  she  can¬ 
not  deny,  which  is  this,  to  act  reasonably  un¬ 
der  misfortunes. 

This  language  was  well  accepted  amongst 
the  officers,  who  sounded  the  private  soldiers, 
and  found  them  desirous  of  peace;  and  Titia- 
nus  also  gave  directions  that  envoys  be  sent  in 
order  to  make  a  treaty.  And  accordingly  it 
was  agreed  that  the  conference  should  be  be¬ 
tween  Celsus  and  Gallus  on  one  part,  and 
Valens  with  Caecina  on  the  other.  As  the  two 
first  were  upon  their  journey,  they  met  some 
centurions,  who  told  them  the  troops  were  al¬ 
ready  in  motion,  marching  for  Bedriacum,  but 
that  they  themselves  were  deputed  by  their 
generals  to  carry  proposals  for  an  accommoda¬ 
tion.  Celsus  and  Gallus  expressed  their  ap¬ 
proval,  and  requested  them  to  turn  back  and 
carry  them  to  Caecina.  However,  Celsus,  upon 
his  approach,  was  in  danger  from  the  van¬ 
guard,  who  happened  to  be  some  of  the  horse 
that  had  suffered  at  the  ambush.  For  as  soon 
as  they  saw  him,  they  hallooed,  and  were  com¬ 
ing  down  upon  him;  but  the  centurions  came 
forward  to  protect  him,  and  the  other  officers 
crying  out  and  bidding  them  desist,  Caecina 
came  up  to  inform  himself  of  the  tumult,  which 
he  quieted,  and  giving  a  friendly  greeting  to 
Celsus,  took  him  in  his  company  and  pro¬ 
ceeded  towards  Bedriacum. 

Titianus,  meantime,  had  repented  of  having 
sent  the  messengers;  and  placed  those  of  the 
soldiers  who  were  more  confident  upon  the 
walls  once  again,  bidding  the  others  also  go 
and  support  them.  But  when  Caecina  rode  up 
on  his  horse  and  held  out  his  hand,  no  one  did 


OTHO 

or  said  to  the  contrary;  those  on  the  walls  greet¬ 
ed  his  men  with  salutations,  others  opened  the 
gates  and  went  out,  and  mingled  freely  with 
those  they  met;  and  instead  of  acts  of  hostility, 
there  was  nothing  but  mutual  shaking  of  hands 
and  congratulations,  every  one  taking  the  oaths 
and  submitting  to  Vitellius. 

This  is  the  account  which  the  most  of  those 
that  were  present  at  the  battle  give  of  it,  yet 
own  that  the  disorder  they  were  in,  and  the 
absence  of  any  unity  of  action,  would  not  give 
them  leave  to  be  certain  as  to  particulars.  And 
when  I  myself  travelled  afterwards  over  the 
field  of  battle,  Mestrius  Florus,  a  man  of  con¬ 
sular  degree,  one  of  those  who  had  been,  not 
willingly,  but  by  command,  in  attendance  on 
Otho  at  the  time,  pointed  out  to  me  an  ancient 
temple,  and  told  me,  that  as  he  went  that  way 
after  the  battle,  he  observed  a  heap  of  bodies 
piled  up  there  to  such  a  height  that  those  on 
the  top  of  it  touched  the  pinnacles  of  the  roof. 
How  it  came  to  be  so,  he  could  neither  dis¬ 
cover  himself  nor  learn  from  any  other  person; 
as  indeed,  he  said,  in  civil  wars  it  generally 
happens  that  greater  numbers  are  killed  when 
an  army  is  routed,  quarter  not  being  given,  be¬ 
cause  captives  are  of  no  advantage  to  the  con¬ 
querors;  but  why  the  carcasses  should  be  heap¬ 
ed  up  after  that  manner  is  not  easy  to  deter¬ 
mine. 

Otho,  at  first,  as  it  frequently  happens,  re¬ 
ceived  some  uncertain  rumours  of  the  issue  of 
the  battle.  But  when  some  of  the  wounded  that 
returned  from  the  field  informed  him  rightly 
of  it,  it  is  not,  indeed,  so  much  to  be  wondered 
at  that  his  friends  should  bid  him  not  give  all 
up  as  lost  or  let  his  courage  sink;  but  the  feel¬ 
ing  shown  by  the  soldiers  is  something  that  ex¬ 
ceeds  all  belief.  There  was  not  one  of  them 
would  either  go  over  to  the  conqueror  or  show 
any  disposition  to  make  terms  for  himself,  as 
if  their  leader’s  cause  was  desperate;  on  the 
contrary,  they  crowded  his  gates,  called  out  to 
him  the  title  of  emperor,  and  as  soon  as  he  ap¬ 
peared,  cried  out  and  intreated  him,  catching 
hold  of  his  hand,  and  throwing  themselves  up¬ 
on  the  ground,  and  with  all  the  moving  lan¬ 
guage  of  tears  and  persuasion,  besought  him  to 
stand  by  them,  not  abandon  them  to  their  ene¬ 
mies,  but  employ  in  his  service  their  lives  and 
persons,  which  would  not  cease  to  be  his  so 
long  as  they  had  breath;  so  urgent  was  their 
zealous  and  universal  importunity.  And  one 
obscure  and  private  soldier,  after  he  had  drawn 
his  sword,  addressed  himself  to  Otho:  “By  this, 
Caesar,  judge  our  fidelity;  there  is  not  a  man 


875 

amongst  us  but  would  strike  thus  to  serve 
you”;  and  so  stabbed  himself. 

Notwithstanding  this,  Otho  stood  serene 
and  unshaken,  and,  with  a  face  full  of  con¬ 
stancy  and  composure,  turned  himself  about 
and  looked  at  them,  replying  thus:  “This  day, 
my  fellow-soldiers,  which  gives  me  such  proofs 
of  your  affection,  is  preferable  even  to  that  on 
which  you  saluted  me  emperor;  deny  me  not, 
therefore,  the  yet  higher  satisfaction  of  laying 
down  my  life  for  the  preservation  of  so  many 
brave  men;  in  this,  at  least,  let  me  be  worthy 
of  the  empire,  that  is,  to  die  for  it.  I  am  of 
opinion  the  enemy  has  neither  gained  an  en¬ 
tire  nor  a  decisive  victory;  I  have  advice  that 
the  Mcesian  army  is  not  many  days’  journey 
distant,  on  its  march  to  the  Adriatic;  Asia, 
Syria,  and  Egypt,  and  the  legions  that  are  serv¬ 
ing  against  the  Jews,  declare  for  us;  the  senate 
is  also  with  us,  and  the  wives  and  children  of 
our  opponents  are  in  our  power;  but  alas,  it  is 
not  in  defence  of  Italy  against  Hannibal  or 
Pyrrhus  or  the  Cimbri  that  we  fight;  Romans 
combat  here  against  Romans,  and,  whether  we 
conquer  or  are  defeated  our  country  suffers 
and  we  commit  a  crime:  victory,  to  whichever 
it  fall,  is  gained  at  her  expense.  Believe  it  many 
times  over,  I  can  die  with  more  honour  than  I 
can  reign.  For  I  cannot  see  at  all  how  I  should 
do  any  such  great  good  to  my  country  by  gain¬ 
ing  the  victory,  as  I  shall  by  dying  to  establish 
peace  and  unanimity  and  to  save  Italy  from 
such  another  unhappy  day.” 

As  soon  as  he  had  done,  he  was  resolute 
against  all  manner  of  argument  or  persuasion, 
and  taking  leave  of  his  friends  and  the  senators 
that  were  present,  he  bade  them  depart,  and 
wrote  to  those  that  were  absent,  and  sent  let¬ 
ters  to  the  towns,  that  they  might  have  every 
honour  and  facility  in  their  journey.  Then  he 
sent  for  Cocceius,  his  brother’s  son,  who  was 
yet  a  boy,  and  bade  him  be  in  no  apprehension 
of  Vitellius,  whose  mother  and  wife  and  fami¬ 
ly  he  had  treated  with  the  same  tenderness  as 
his  own;  and  also  told  him  that  this  had  been 
his  reason  for  delaying  to  adopt  him,  which 
he  had  meant  to  do  as  his  son;  he  had  desired 
that  he  might  share  his  power,  if  he  conquered, 
but  not  be  involved  in  his  ruin  if  he  failed. 
“Take  notice,”  he  added,  “my  boy,  of  these  my 
last  words,  that  you  neither  too  negligently 
forget,  nor  too  zealously  remember,  that  Caesar 
was  your  uncle.”  By  and  by  he  heard  a  tumult 
amongst  the  soldiers  at  the  door,  who  were 
treating  the  senators  with  menaces  for  prepar¬ 
ing  to  withdraw;  upon  which,  out  of  regard  to 


876 

their  safety,  he  showed  himself  once  more  in 
public,  but  not  with  a  gentle  aspect  and  in  a 
persuading  manner  as  before;  on  the  contrary, 
with  a  countenance  that  discovered  indigna¬ 
tion  and  authority,  he  commanded  such  as 
were  disorderly  to  leave  the  place,  and  was  not 
disobeyed. 

It  was  now  evening,  and  feeling  thirsty,  he 
drank  some  water,  and  then  took  two  daggers 
that  belonged  to  him,  and  when  he  had  care¬ 
fully  examined  their  edges,  he  laid  one  of  them 
down,  and  put  the  other  in  his  robe,  under  his 
arm,  then  called  his  servants,  and  distributed 
some  money  amongst  them,  but  not  inconsider¬ 
ately,  nor  like  one  too  lavish  of  what  was  not 
his  own;  for  to  some  he  gave  more,  to  others 
less,  all  strictly  in  moderation,  and  distinguish¬ 
ing  every  one’s  particular  merit.  When  this 
was  done,  he  dismissed  them,  and  passed  the 
rest  of  the  night  in  so  sound  a  sleep  that  the 
officers  of  his  bed-chamber  heard  him  snore. 
In  the  morning,  he  called  for  one  of  his  freed- 
men,  who  had  assisted  him  in  arranging  about 
the  senators,  and  bade  him  bring  him  an  ac¬ 
count  if  they  were  safe.  Being  informed  they 
were  all  well  and  wanted  nothing,  “Go  then,” 
said  he,  “and  show  yourself  to  the  soldiers,  lest 
they  should  cut  you  to  pieces  for  being  acces¬ 
sory  to  my  death.” 

As  soon  as  he  was  gone,  he  held  his  sword 
upright  under  him  with  both  his  hands,  and 
falling  upon  it  expired  with  no  more  than  one 
single  groan  to  express  his  sense  of  the  pang, 
or  to  inform  those  that  waited  without.  When 
his  servants,  therefore,  raised  their  exclama¬ 
tions  of  grief,  the  whole  camp  and  city  were  at 
once  filled  with  lamentation;  the  soldiers  im¬ 
mediately  broke  in  at  the  doors  with  a  loud 
cry,  in  passionate  distress,  and  accusing  them¬ 
selves  that  they  had  been  so  negligent  in  look¬ 
ing  after  that  life  which  was  laid  down  to  pre¬ 
serve  theirs.  Nor  would  a  man  of  them  quit  the 
body  to  secure  his  own  safety  with  the  ap¬ 
proaching  enemy;  but  having  raised  a  funeral 
pile,  and  attired  the  body,  they  bore  it  thither, 
arrayed  in  their  arms,  those  among  them  great¬ 
ly  exulting  who  succeeded  in  getting  first  un¬ 
der  the  bier  and  becoming  its  bearers.  Of  the 
others,  some  threw  themselves  down  before 


PLUTARCH’S  LIVES 

the  body  and  kissed  his  wound,  others  grasped 
his  hand,  and  others  that  were  at  a  distance 
knelt  down  to  do  him  obeisance.  There  were 
some  who,  after  putting  their  torches  to  the 
pile,  slew  themselves,  though  they  had  not,  so 
far  as  appeared,  either  any  particular  obliga¬ 
tions  to  the  dead,  or  reason  to  apprehend  ill 
usage  from  the  victor. 

Simply,  it  would  seem,  no  king,  legal  or  il¬ 
legal,  had  ever  been  possessed  with  so  extreme 
and  vehement  a  passion  to  command  others, 
as  was  that  of  these  men  to  obey  Otho.  Nor  did 
their  love  of  him  cease  with  his  death;  it  sur¬ 
vived  and  changed  ere  long  into  a  mortal  ha¬ 
tred  to  his  successor,  as  will  be  shown  in  its 
proper  place. 

They  placed  the  remains  of  Otho  in  the 
earth,  and  raised  over  them  a  monument 
which  neither  by  its  size  nor  the  pomp  of  its 
inscription  might  excite  hostility.  I  myself  have 
seen  it,  at  Brixillum;  a  plain  structure,  and  the 
epitaph  only  this:  “To  the  memory  of  Marcus 
Otho.  He  died  in  his  thirty-eighth  year,  after  a 
short  reign  of  about  three  months,  his  death 
being  as  much  applauded  as  his  life  was  cen¬ 
sured;  for  if  he  lived  not  better  than  Nero,  he 
died  more  nobly.” 

The  soldiers  were  displeased  with  Pollio, 
one  of  their  two  prefects,  who  bade  them  im¬ 
mediately  swear  allegiance  to  Vitellius;  and 
when  they  understood  that  some  of  the  sena¬ 
tors  were  still  upon  the  spot,  they  made  no  op¬ 
position  to  the  departure  of  the  rest,  but  only 
disturbed  the  tranquillity  of  Virginius  Rufus 
with  an  offer  of  the  government,  and  moving 
in  one  body  to  his  house  in  arms,  they  first  en¬ 
treated  him,  and  then  demanded  of  him  to  ac¬ 
cept  of  the  empire,  or  at  least  to  be  their  media¬ 
tor.  But  he,  that  refused  to  command  them 
when  conquerors,  thought  it  ridiculous  to  pre¬ 
tend  to  it  now  they  were  beat,  and  was  unwill¬ 
ing  to  go  as  their  envoy  to  the  Germans,  whom 
in  past  time  he  had  compelled  to  do  various 
things  that  they  had  not  liked;  and  for  these 
reasons  he  slipped  away  through  a  private 
door.  As  soon  as  the  soldiers  perceived  this, 
they  owned  Vitellius,  and  so  got  their  pardon, 
and  served  under  Caecina. 

V  V  V 


INDEX 


Abantidas,  826,  827 
Abillius,  21 
Abriorix,  587 
Abrotonon,  88 
Abydos,  168,  169 
Academus,  13 
Acca  Larentia,  16 
Acestodorus,  94 
AcharnjE,  137 
Achillas,  596 

Achilles,  14,  189,  266,  293,  296,  314,  388,  482, 
5!3>  547 

Acilius,  Caius,  25,  288 

Acilius,  Manius,  282,  283,  309,  310,  374 

Acron,  22,  30,  249 

Acrotatus,  649 

Actium,  77 1,  773,  824 

Adimantus,  173 

Admetus,  king  of  Pherae,  51 

Admetus,  king  of  the  Molossians,  98 

Adranum,  200,  202 

Adrastus,  11,  12 

./Eacides,  314,  315 

./Eacus,  4,  541 

JEgje,  98,  328 

TEgeus,  1,  2,  4,  5,  6,  8,  31 

Aigias,  832 

,/Egina,  95,  96,  125,  138,  266,  357,  691 
./Egle,  11 

TEgOSPOTAMI,  173,  357,  358 
/Elius,  Sextus,  303 

./Emilia,  daughter  of  L.  ./Emilius  Paulus,  214 

./Emilia,  stepdaughter  of  Sulla,  503 

/Emilius,  origin  of  name,  53 

./Emilius,  Marcus,  121 

./Eneas,  15,  16,  no 

TEropus,  733 

/Eschines,  68,  133,  137,  275,  692,  694,  696, 
697,  699,  700 

/Eschylus,  i,  12,  19,  94,  264,  393,  499,  544 
/Eschylus,  of  Argos,  834,  835 
TEsculapius,  51 
/Esion,  695 

TEsop,  66,  75,  245,  837,  840 
^Esop,  tragedian,  706 
/Ethra,  2,  3,  12,  13,  14 
Afranius,  520,  531,  592,  597 
Agamemnon,  135,  240,  425,  457,  482 


Agariste,  122 

Agatharchus,  128,  162 

Agathocles,  735,  738,  744,  745 

Agesilaus,  king  of  Sparta,  38,  48,  21 1,  237, 

24°>  243>  3°7>  363>  364>  365>  366>  368>  399; 
education,  480-481;  declared  king,  482;  at 
Aulis  and  Ephesus,  483;  in  Phrygia,  484-487; 
recalled  to  Sparta,  487;  battle  near  Coronea, 
488;  in  Acarnania,  490;  Spartan  defeat  at 
Leuctra,  493;  Sparta  saved,  495;  and  Tachos, 
497-498;  death,  499;  compared  with  Pompey, 
538-540;  649, 854 

Agesilaus,  uncle  of  Agis,  650,  651,  653,  655, 
690 

Agesipolis,  233,  489,  491,  649 
Agesistrata,  650,  655,  656 
Agias,  836 
Agiatis,  657 

Agis,  son  of  Archidamus  II,  38,  42,  43,  47, 
165,  166,  171,  357,  360,  363,  480,  481,  482 
Agis,  son  of  Archidamus  III,  487 
Agis,  son  of  Eudamidas  II,  lineage,  649;  and 
Leonidas,  651-652;  revolution  in  Sparta,  652- 
654;  death,  656;  657;  compared  with  the 
Gracchi,  689-691;  837 
Agnonides,  616,  617,  618,  619 
Agrigentum,  21 1,  325 

Agrippa,  Marcus  Vipsanius,  724,  760,  771, 

775,  779,  813 
Agrippa,  Menenius,  177 
Agrippina,  779,  863 
Ahala,  Caius  Servilius,  802 
Ajax,  ii,  67,  155,  534 
Alba,  18,  19 
Albinius,  Lucius,  no 
Albinus,  Postumius,  282 
AlcjEus,  306 
Alcander,  37 
Alcetas,  567 

Alcibiades,  41,  53,  132,  139;  youth,  155-1 57; 
at  Potidaea,  158;  and  Hipponicus,  158;  as 
an  orator,  159;  as  a  politician,  160,  161; 
duplicity  of,  161;  battle  of  Mantinea,  161; 
arrogance  of,  161-162;  plans  conquest  of  Sic¬ 
ily,  162-163;  accused  of  profanation,  163;  at¬ 
tacks  Sicily,  163;  recalled  for  trial,  164;  con¬ 
demned  in  absentia,  165;  goes  over  to  Tisa- 
phernes,  166;  recalled,  168;  Cyzicus  cap- 


877 


INDEX 


878 

tured,  169;  Selymbria  captured,  169;  returns 
to  Athens,  170;  172;  in  Phrygia,  173;  as¬ 
sassinated,  174;  compared  with  Coriolanus, 

I93'I95‘>  233>  266,  276,  307.  355.  35^,  358. 
362,  427,  428-430,  455,  456,  481,  691,  702, 

725.  774 
Alcidamas,  693 
Alcimenes,  789 
AlcmjEon,  68,  155,  275,  827 
Alcman,  46,  386 
Alcmena,  3,  29,  367 
Alexander,  son  of  Antony,  761,  768 
Alexander,  son  of  Cassander,  316,  317,  739, 
740 

Alexander,  son  of  Demetrius,  747 
Alexander,  son  of  Polysperchon,  617,  729 
Alexander,  tyrant  of  Corinth,  831,  832 
Alexander,  tyrant  of  Pherae,  241,  242,  243, 
244,  246 

Alexander  the  Great,  2,  109,  no,  121,  218, 
223,  225,  227,  245,  268,  294,  305,  312,  317, 
318,  323,  457,  470,  472,  487,  516,  521,  539; 
birth,  541;  tames  Bucephalus,  543;  and 
Aristotle,  543-544;  at  battle  of  Chaeronea, 
544;  becomes  king,  545;  and  Diogenes,  546; 
at  Gordium,  548;  defeats  Darius,  549-550; 
character,  550-551;  Tyre  taken,  552;  in 
Egypt*  553;554;  at  Gaugamela,  555-557;  pro¬ 
claimed  king  of  Asia,  557;  in  Persia,  558; 
liberality  of,  559-561;  in  Hyrcania,  562;  in 
Parthia,  562;  plots  against,  564;  baggage 
wagons,  burned,  567-568;  in  India,  569; 
death  of  Bucephalus,  570;  at  Gedrosia,  572; 
marries  Statira,  573;  at  Ecbatana,  574; 
death,  576;  581,  612,  613,  616,  694,  699,  700, 
701,  702,  727,  729,  732,  735,  736,  742,  744, 
780,  859 

Alexander  the  Myndian,  339 
Alexandria,  401,  757,  768,  769,  773,  777 
Alexandrides  of  Delphi,  361 
Alfenus,  Varus,  874 
Allia,  battle  of,  109,  112 
Amazons,  10,  ii 

Ambustus,  Fabius,  55,  104,  108,  109 
Amestris,  855,  857 
Aminias,  94,  291 
Amompharetus,  67 

Amompharetus,  soldier  of  Pausanias,  270,  271 

Amphares,  655,  656 

Amphipolis,  223,  393,  427,  428,  535 

Amphitheus,  366 

Amphitryon,  367 

Amphiaraus,  264 

Amulius,  16,  17,  18,  25,  30 

Amyntas,  771 

Anacharsis,  65,  66 


Anacreon,  121,  134 

Anaxagoras,  123,  130,  137,  359,  435 

Anaxarchus,  544,  554,  5 66 

Anaxilas,  67 

Anaxilaus,  170 

Anaximenes,  80,  724 

Anaxo,  ii,  31 

Ancus,  Marcius,  54,  60,  174 
Andocides,  102,  164,  430 
Andro  of  Halicarnassus,  10 
Androclides,  233,  234,  366 
Androcottus,  570 
Androcydes,  241 
Androgeus,  5,  30 
Andromache,  243,  81 1 
Andros,  127,  172,  232 
Androtion,  69,  697 
Anicius,  Lucius,  219 
Annius,  Caius,  460 
Annius,  Titus,  677,  678 
AntjEus,  4,  461 

Antalcidas,  39,  237,  243,  490,  492,  494,  854 
Antenor,  53 
Anthemocritus,  136 
Antho,  16 

Antias,  Quintus  Valerius,  21,  61,  31 1 

Anticrates,  496 

Antidides,  562 

Antigenes,  562,  573 

Antigone,  wife  of  Pyrrhus,  316 

Antigonea,  843 

Antigonus,  son  of  Demetrius,  741,  742,  747 
Antigonus  Doson,  179,  294,  295,  296,  662, 
664,  665,  666,  667,  668,  827,  828,  830,  831, 
833,  835,  838,  841,  842,  843,  846 
Antigonus  Gonatas,  216,  327,  328,  331,  332 
Antigonus  the  one-eyed,  father  of  Demetrius 
Poliorcetes,  23,  216,  232,  458,  471,  474-480, 
576,  616,  667,  668,  669,  670,  726-733,  736, 
737,  780 

Antigonus  of  Judaea,  761 
Antimachus  of  Colophon,  21 1,  362 
Antimachus  the  Teian,  20 
Antioch,  624 

Antiochus,  son  of  Seleucus  Nicator,  737, 
738, 741, 746, 747 

Antiochus,  king  of  Commagene,  760 
Antiochus  of  Ascalon,  414,  420,  703,  803 
Antiochus  the  Great,  214,  216,  282,  283,  291, 
299, 300, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 31 1, 375, 

4°5>  4r5>  45i. 

Antiop e,  10,  11,  31 

Antipater,  iio,  194,  291,  316,  471-474,  476, 

487>  549.  56o>  562'564>  568,  573.  575.  61  r> 
613,  615,  616,  617,  702-704,  725 
Antipater  of  Tarsus,  354 


INDEX 

Antipater,  son  of  Cassander,  731,*  739,  740 
Antiphanes,  692,  695,  696 
Antiphon,  156,  425 
Antisthenes,  48,  121,  155 
Antistia,  501,  503 
Antistius,  500,  503 
Antium,  141,  183,  184,  192 
Antonia,  daughter  of  Antony  and  Octavia, 
779 

Antonius,  Caius,  708,  713,  751 
Antonius,  Caius,  brother  of  Antony,  753,  755, 
812,  813 

Antonius,  Lucius,  753,  758 
Antonius,  Marcus,  grandfather  of  Mark 
Antony,  748 

Antonius,  Marcus,  orator,  352 
Antonius,  Marcus,  son  of  Mark  Antony,  779 
Antonius  Creticus,  Marcus,  father  of  Mark 
Antony,  748 

Antony,  Mark,  59,  229,  527,  528,  532,  589, 
593,  600,  601,  602,  603,  604,  648,  713,  720, 
722,  723,  726;  youth,  748;  takes  Pelusium, 
749;  captures  Lissus,  750;  consul,  751;  at 
Lupercalia,  752;  defeated  near  Modena,  753; 
conference  with  Caesar  and  Lepidus,  754;  in 
Asia,  755-756;  and  Cleopatra,  757-758;  mar¬ 
ries  Octavia,  759;  sends  for  Cleopatra,  761; 
at  Phraata,  761-762;  retreats  from  Parthians, 
763-766;  at  Alexandria,  767;  deposed  by 
Caesar,  770;  battle  of  Actium,  771-773; 
death,  776,  778,  779;  compared  with  Demetri¬ 
us,  780-781;  805,  809,  810,  811,  813,  814,  817, 
819,  820,  821,  823,  824,  825 
Antyllius,  Quintus,  686,  690 
Antyllus,  774,  777,  779 
Anytus,  157,  180 
Apelles,  542,  734,  830 
Apemantus,  774 

Apollocrates,  son  of  Dionysius  II,  795,  799, 
801 

Apollodorus,  32 

Apollodorus,  Athenian,  697,  725 
Apollodorus  the  Phalerian,  638 
Apollonides,  646,  647 
Apollonius,  446 

Apollonius,  son  of  Molon,  577,  705 
Apollophanes  of  Cyzicus,  485 
Appius,  229,  230 
Appius,  Marcus,  714 
Aquilius,  Manius,  338 
Aquinius,  Marcus,  714 
Aratus,  son  of  Aratus,  844,  845 
Aratus,  son  of  Clinias,  293,  296,  653,  654  658, 
659,  661,  662-664,  666;  childhood,  826;  plot 
against  Nicocles,  827-828;  joins  Achaeans, 
829;  general  of  the  Achaeans,  831;  in  Acro- 


879 

Corinthus,  832-834;  attacks  Argos,  835; 
TEtolian  war,  837;  and  Cleomenes,  839;  calls 
for  aid  from  Antigonus,  840;  general  of  the 
Argives,  842;  and  Philip,  843-845;  death,  845 
Arcesilaus,  philosopher,  293,  827 
Archedemus,  787 

Archelaus,  general  of  Mithridates,  376,  377, 

378>  379>  38o>  4°3>  4°4>  4°5 
Archelaus,  son  of  Archelaus  the  general, 

749 

Archeptolis,  ioi,  102 
Archestratus,  162,  263,  362,  617 
Archias,  233,  234,  235,  236,  491,  702,  703 
Archibiades,  608 
Archidamia,  650,  656 
Archidamidas,  43 

Archidamus,  son  of  Eudamidas  II,  657,  691 
Archidamus,  son  of  Eudamidas  I,  739 
Archidamus  II,  son  of  Zeuxidamus,  125,  136, 
J37,  397>  48o>  48i>  667 

Archidamus  III,  son  of  Agesilaus  II,  no,  491, 
492,  495,  496,  649 

Archilochus,  2,  51,  121,  341,  622,  739,  869 

Archimedes,  252,  253,  254,  255 

Archippe,  ioi 

Archippus,  155 

Archytas,  252,  787,  788 

Areopagus,  71,  125 

Arete,  210 

Arete,  daughter  of  Dionysius  I,  783,  788, 
799,  802 
Argileonis,  45 
Arginus,e,  140,  356 
Argius,  869 

Argos,  35,  97,  159,  161,  165,  193,  196,  240, 
330,  331,  662,  663,  664,  735,  842 
Ariadne,  6,  7,  8,  n,  30,  31 
ArijEus,  849 
Ariamenes,  94 
Ariamnes,  448 
Ariarathes,  471,  472,  519 
Ariaspes,  858 

Ariobarzanes,  370,  380,  381,  718 
Ariovistus,  584,  585 
Ariphron,  155,  156 

Aristander  of  Telmessus,  541,  546,  552,  556, 

557. 566 

Aristeas,  28 

Aristides,  89,  90,  92,  93,  96,  97,  124,  193,  194, 
233;  262;  rival  of  Themistocles,  263;  revenue 
impeachment,  264;  archon,  265;  ostracized, 
266;  recalled,  266;  attacks  Psyttalea,  267;  La¬ 
cedaemonian  and  Persian  terms  refused,  267; 
at  Plataea,  268-272;  disputes  as  to  honor, 
272;  Eleutherian  games  instituted,  273; 
Greek  assessment,  274;  poverty  of,  275;  death 


880 


INDEX 


of,  275;  compared  with  Cato,  290-292;  394, 
395,  429,  454,  455,  607.  696 
Aristides  the  Locrian,  198 
Aristion,  54,  374,  375,  380 
Aristippus,  tyrant  of  Argos,  835,  836 
Aristippus  the  Cyrenean,  787,  788 
Aristobulus,  king  of  Judaea,  518,  520,  748 
Aristobulus  of  Cassandrea,  546,  548,  550, 
562,  576,  700 

Aristocrates,  34,  48,  300,  69 7 
Aristodemus,  293,  489 
Aristodemus  of  Miletus,  729,  732 
Aristodicus,  126 

Aristogiton,  slayer  of  Hipparchus,  276 
Aristogiton,  697 

Aristomache,  sister  of  Dion,  210,  786,  799, 
802 

Aristomache,  wife  of  Dionysius  I,  782,  783 
Aristomachus,  tyrant  of  Argos,  834,  835,  838, 
839,  842 

Aristomachus,  son  of  Aristomachus,  tyrant  of 
Argos,  836 

Aristomachus  of  Sicyon,  827 
Aristomenes,  27,  656 
Ariston  of  Chias,  89,  263,  285,  695,  703 
Aristonicus,  312,  680 
Aristophanes,  96,  155,  161,  426,  730,  774 
Aristoteles,  of  Argos,  827,  842 
Aristotle,  i,  5,  9,  32,  35,  39,  46,  48,  68,  73, 
77,  hi,  125,  135,  194,  276,  291,355,  381,394, 
423,  439,  543,  544,  548,  566,  567,  575,  576, 
7T3,  789 

Aristoxenus,  48,  276,  542 
Aristratus,  830 
Aristus,  803 
Arpates,  858 
Arrhid^eus,  544,  57 6 
Arsaces,  446,  451,  536,  780 
Artabanus,  99 
Arsames,  858 
Artagerses,  849,  851 
Artasyras,  850,  851 

Artavasdes,  Artabazes,  447,  448,  454,  761, 
762, 766, 767, 781 
Artaxas,  415 
Artaxata,  415 

Artaxerxes  I,  Longimanus,  846,  847 
Artaxerxes  II,  Mnemon,  173,  243,  846;  revolt 
of  Cyrus,  847-849;  death  of  Cyrus,  850;  and 
Mithridates,  851-852;  and  Parysatis,  853;  and 
the  Spartans,  854;  marries  Atossa,  855;  pro¬ 
claims  Darius  his  successor,  856;  executes 
Darius,  858;  death,  858 
Artemidorus,  602 
Artemisia,  94 
Artemisium,  90,  92,  155 


Artemon,  134 

Arthmiadas,  34 

Arthmius  of  Zelea,  90 

Artorius,  Marcus,  819 

Aruns,  son  of  Porsenna,  84 

Aruns,  son  of  Tarquinius  Superbus,  80 

Ascalis,  461 

Ascanius,  15 

Asclepiades,  64 

Asiaticus,  866 

Aspasia,  the  elder,  133,  136,  137 
Aspasia,  the  younger,  856,  857 
Asteropus,  660 
Astyanax,  81 1 
Astyochus,  167 
Athanis,  206,  212 
Athenodorus,  623 

Athens,  i,  2,  3,  4,  6;  founding  of,  9;  10;  44, 
54,  66,  68,  73,  77,  83,  87,  92,  96,  101,  127, 
129,  134,  136,  155,  160,  164,  167,  180,  237, 

267,  275,  279,  282,  290,  319,  359,  363,  366, 

374;  393;  397;  398,  4°9;  426;  43°;  432;  456> 

490,  612,  662,  718,  728,  731,  739,  742,  800, 

8ll,  8l2 

Atilia,  622,  623,  629 
Atilius,  Marcus,  59 
Atossa,  855,  856,  857,  858 
Attalus,  i  10,  305,  544,  545,  567 
Attalus  Philometor,  677,  733 
Atticus,  Julius,  868 
Atticus,  Pomponius,  814 
Attis,  50,  457 
Attius,  Tullus,  704 

Aufidius,  Tullus,  184,  185,  188,  192,  193 
Augustus  Caesar,  Caius  Octavius,  59,  260, 
261,  603,  721,  722,  724,  752,  753,  754,  755, 

757-  758;  760, 768, 769, 770, 771, 772, 773, 

775;  776;  777;  778,  779;  811,  813,  814,  815, 
817,  818,  819,  821,  823,  825,  826 
Aulis,  240,  366,  483 
Aurelia,  580,  715 
Aurelius,  Onatius,  444 
Autoclides,  435 

Babylon,  412,  446,  471,  557,  728,  848,  853 

B^bius,  Marcus,  61 

Balbus,  Postumius,  85 

Bantia,  259 

Bantius,  250 

Barbius,  867 

Barcas,  149 

Barsine,  550 

Basillus,  Lucius,  373 

Baton  of  Sinope,  654 

Bedriacum,  872,  873,  874 

Berenice,  315,  316 


INDEX 

Bessus,  561,  562 
Bias,  65 

Bibulus,  son  of  M.  Calpurnius  Bibulus,  81 1 
Bibulus,  Marcus  Calpurnius,  521,  582,  629, 
632, 638, 641, 749 
Bibulus,  Publius,  259 
Bion,  10 

Blossius  of  Cuma,  674,  679,  680 
Bocchus,  369,  370 
Brasidas,  45,  48,  361,  427 
Bceorix,  343 
Brennus,  108,  hi,  1 14 

Brundusium,  229,  283,  381,  446,  51 1,  512, 

593,  7*7 

Brutus,  Decimus  Junius,  Brutus  Albinus,  602, 
752,  807,  810 

Brutus,  Junius,  177,  179,  600 

Brutus,  Lucius  Junius,  77,  78,  79,  81,  83,  802 

Brutus,  Marcus  Junius,  slayer  of  Caesar,  506, 

53°,  538>  595,  599,  60  L  6o2>  6o3,  6o4,  720, 
721, 722, 725, 752, 753, 755, 780, 781, 782; 
family,  802;  in  Macedonia,  803-804;  praetor, 
805;  conspiracy  against  Caesar,  806-809;  and 
Antony,  810;  retires  to  Antium,  840;  at  Dyr- 
rhachium,  812;  and  Cassius,  814;  Xanthus 
burned,  815;  at  Philippi,  817-823;  death, 
824;  compared  with  Dion,  824-826 
Brutus,  Marcus  Junius,  father  of  Brutus,  506, 
807 

Buteo,  Fabius,  145 
Byzantium,  131,  394,  610,  633 

Cabira,  406,  407,  408,  422 
Cecina  Alienus,  Aulus,  871,  872,  873,  876 
Cedicius,  Marcus,  107,  114 
Cepio,  620,  621,  622,  623 
Cepio,  Cnaeus  Servilius,  no,  339,  340,  458, 
582 

Cesar,  Caius  Julius,  23,  25,  59,  121,  229,  261, 
334,  37°,  420,  439,  441,  444,  445,  446,  456, 
457,  511,  521,  523”525,  526,  528,  529,  531, 
532~534,  536,  538,  539,  54^,  573;  captured  by 
pirates,  577;  at  Rhodes,  577;  Catiline  con¬ 
spiracy,  579;  in  Spain,  581;  consul,  582;  char¬ 
acter,  583-584;  in  Gaul,  584;  in  Germany, 
586;  at  Alesia,  588;  at  the  Rubicon,  590;  dic¬ 
tatorship,  592;  at  Pharsalia,  594;  in  Egypt, 
596;  in  Africa,  597;  at  Munda,  598;  reforms 
calendar,  600;  assassinated,  602-603;  604, 
628,  629,  630,  631,  632,  633,  634,  635,  636, 

637,  639,  640,  641,  642,  643,  644,  645,  647, 

648,  712,  713,  714,  715,  716,  719,  720,  721, 

722,  723,  725,  749,  751,  752,  753,  780,  802, 

804,  805,  806,  807,  808;  funeral,  810;  81 1, 
812,  814,  816,  824,  873 
Cesar,  Lucius,  646,  722,  754 


881 

Cesarion,  596,  768,  777 
Calanus,  544,  572,  573 
Caligula,  Caius  Caesar,  779,  861,  862 
Calliades,  425 

Callias,  133,  158,  275,  292,  391,  396 

Callias  of  Syracuse,  693 

Callibius,  360,  361 

Callicles,  701 

Callicrates,  Athenian,  128 

Callicrates,  Lacedaemonian,  271 

Callicratidas,  48,  232,  356,  357 

Callimachus,  774 

Callimedon,  615,  617,  618,  702 

Callippides,  170,  490 

Callippus,  231,  431,  791,  800,  801,  802 

Callisthenes,  109,  238,  276,  395,  396,  496, 

553. 557. 566, 567, 700 

Callistratus,  693,  696 
Calpurnia,  582,  601,  602,  753 
Cambyses,  553 
Camillus,  Lucius,  117 

Camillus,  Marcus  Furius,  29,  54,  56,  102; 
siege  of  Veii,  103;  dictator,  104;  sack  of  Veii, 
104;  military  tribune,  106;  banished,  107; 
war  with  the  Gauls,  108-114;  Rome  rebuilt, 
1 15;  war  with  Latins  and  Volscians,  116;  re¬ 
lief  of  Sutrium,  117;  Tusculan  revolt,  118; 
chosen  dictator  for  fifth  time,  119;  second 
war  with  Gauls,  1 19-120;  death,  121;  142 
Camurius,  868 

Canidius,  633,  634,  760,  764,  768,  771,  803 

Cannae,  148,  214,  249,  250,  257 

Canusium,  250 

Capaneus,  233 

Caphisias,  827,  828 

Capitolinus,  Quintius,  117 

Capua,  149,  154,  382 

Carbo,  Cnaeus  Papirius,  460,  467,  501,  502, 

5°3>  8i4 

Carmenta,  25 

Carneades,  287,  288,  420,  705 
Carrh^e,  451,  452 

Carthage,  145,  153,  162,  196,  209,  21 1,  223, 
254, 289, 290, 312, 350, 504, 599, 685 
Carvilius,  Spurius,  31,  63 
Casca,  Publius  Servilius,  602,  808,  809,  821 
Cassander,  315,  316,  476,  575,  616,  617,  704, 
728, 729, 732, 734, 738, 739, 740 
Cassandra,  651 

Cassius  Longinus,  Caius,  442,  448,  449,  452, 

506,  599,  601,  602,  603,  604,  720,  721,  752, 

755,  756,  780,  802,  804,  805,  806,  807,  808, 

809,  810,  814,  815,  816,  817,  818,  819,  820, 

821,  822,  824 

Castor  and  Pollux,  13,  44,  56,  128,  175,  224, 
361 


882 


INDEX 


Catana,  203,  204,  210,  21 1,  260,  431 
Catiline,  Lucius  Sergius,  419,  444,  579,  628, 
708,  710,  71 1,  712,  713,  715,  725,  748,  804 
Cato,  Marcus,  222 

Cato,  Marcus  Porcius  Uticensis,  290,  420,  421, 
441,  445,  456,  518,  520,  524,  525,  526,  529, 

53°>  53:>  536>  58o>  58i>  582>  586,  589>  593. 
597,  598,  601,  605,  606;  childhood,  620-621; 
war  of  Spartacus,  622-623;  death  of  Caepio, 
623;  at  Antioch,  624;  quaestor,  625;  tribune, 
627;  and  Caesar,  628;  and  Pompey,  629-632; 
and  Ptolemy,  633;  and  Cicero,  635;  praetor, 
636;  stands  for  consulship,  639;  at  Dyrrha- 
chium,  640;  in  Utica,  642-646;  death,  647; 
712,  713,  717,  718,  719,  724,  750,  803,  804, 
814,  818,  874 

Cato,  Marcus,  son  of  Cato  Uticensis,  646,  647, 
648,  822 

Cato,  Marcus  Porcius,  232,  276;  at  Tarentum, 
277;  accuses  Scipio,  278;  character,  278-281; 
in  Sardinia,  279;  consul  in  Hither  Spain,  281; 
in  Greece,  282-283;  censor,  284-285;  family 
relations,  286-287;  aversion  to  Greek  philos¬ 
ophers,  288;  sent  to  Carthage,  289;  death, 
290;  compared  with  Aristides,  290-292;  31 1, 
456,  620,  621,  622 
Cato  Salonius,  289,  290 
Catulus,  Quintus  Lutatius,  342, 343,  344, 369, 
386, 444, 506, 507, 511, 513, 514, 580, 625, 
7J5 

Celsus,  Clodius,  863 

Celsus,  Marius,  868,  869,  871,  872,  873,  874 
Censorinus,  174,  370,  450 
Censorinus,  Lucius,  755 
Cethegus,  Caius  Cornelius,  402,  403,  579, 
628, 710, 711, 712, 713, 716 
Chabrias,  109,  497,  606,  607 
Celeron  of  Megalopolis,  541 
Ch^ronea,  no,  239,  367,  374,  377,  379,  380, 
389,  390,  401,  405,  488 
Chalcedon,  169,  170,  404 
Chalcis,  307,  308,  378,  379 
Charas,  724 

Chares,  232,  549,  552,  562,  567,  607,  61 1,  831 

Charicles,  613,  617,  618 

Charidemus,  457,  700 

Charilaus,  33,  34,  42 

Charillus,  660,  691 

Charimenes,  834,  835 

Charinus,  136 

Charmion,  77 o,  779 

Charon,  234,  235,  236,  237,  241 

Charon  of  Lampsacus,  99 

Chileus,  90 

Chilonis,  654,  655 

Chcerilus,  362 


Chrysifpus,  826 
Chrysogonus,  705 

Cicero,  Marcus  Tullius,  217,  285,  31 1,  419- 
421,  439>  444.  523.  528-530,  577,  579,  580, 
582,  59O,  598-60O,  605,  622,  627,  628,  632, 
633,  635,  641,  681,  692;  birth,  704;  in  Athens, 
705;  trial  of  Verres,  706;  consul,  708;  Cati¬ 
line  conspiracy,  708-713;  character,  713-71 5; 
Clodius’s  faction,  7 15-7 17;  Milo  and  Mure- 
na,  717-718;  joins  Pompey,  719;  and  Antony, 
721-722;  death,  723;  compared  with  Demos- 
thenes,  724-725;  748,  750,  753,  754,  755,  781, 
806,  8l  I,  813 

Cicero,  Marcus  Tullius,  younger,  812 
Cicero,  Quintus,  712,  717,  722,  723 
Cilles,  728 

Cimber,  Lucius  Tillius,  809,  810 
Cimon,  14,  90,  97,  98,  101,  123,  124,  125,  126, 
13°,  135, 154, 155, 233, 268, 273, 274, 275, 
279,  307,  390;  lineage,  391;  and  Pausanias, 
392;  character,  393-394;  treaty  with  king  of 
Persia,  396;  subdues  Chersonese,  396;  earth¬ 
quake  at  Sparta,  397;  death,  399;  compared 
with  Lucullus,  421-422;  696 
Cineas,  320,  321,  323,  324,  325 
Cinna,  Helvius,  603,  810 
Cinna,  Lucius  Cornelius,  elder,  351,  353,  373, 
375,  440,  459,  460,  500,  501,  577,  710,  814 
Cinna,  Lucius  Cornelius,  younger,  603,  809, 
812 

Claudius,  Appius,  673,  675,  677 
Claudius  Caesar,  779,  862,  866 
Clausus,  Appius,  85 
Cleander,  293 
Cleandrides,  132,  437 
Cleanthes,  157 

Clearchus,  848,  849,  851,  852,  853 
Cleobis  and  Biton,  75 
Cleocritus,  266,  272 

Cleombrotus  II,  237,  239,  388,  491,  492,  493 
Cleombrotus  III,  son-in-law  of  Leonidas  II, 
652,  653,  654,  655,  656 

Cleomenes,  294,  295;  becomes  king,  657; 
takes  Leuctra,  659;  divides  land,  660;  at  Dy- 
mae,  662;  captures  Argos,  663;  and  Ptolemy, 
665;  Sparta  taken  by  Antigonus,  668;  in 
Egypt,  668-670;  death,  670-671;  compared 
with  the  Gracchi,  689-691;  839,  841,  842,  843 
Cleon,  of  Athens,  138,  139,  423,  424,  425, 
426,  427,  456,  672 
Cleon,  of  Sicyon,  826 
Cleon  the  Halicarnassian,  365,  489 
Cleons,  196,  836 
Cleonides,  731 

Cleonymus,  328,  329,  649,  741 
Cleonymus,  son  of  Sphodrias,  491,  492,  493 


INDEX 

Cleopater,  841 

Cleopatra,  daughter  of  Antony,  761,  779 
Cleopatra,  queen  of  Egypt,  596,  751,  756, 
757.  758,  759.  76o>  761,  767>  769>  77°,  771. 
772.  773.  774.  775.  776.  777.  778.  78o 
Cleopatra,  wife  of  Philip,  544,  545,  552,  573 
Cleophantus,  ioi 
Clidemus,  6,  11,  92,  272 
Clinias,  father  of  Alcibiades,  155,  159 
Clinias,  father  of  Aratus,  826 
Clisthenes,  122,  263,  397 
Clitarchus,  99,  562 
Clitomachus,  704,  705 
Clitus,  546,  547,  564,  565,  566,  618 
Clodia,  daughter  of  Fulvia,  754 
Clodia,  sister  of  P.  Clodius  Pulcher,  715 
Clodius,  Appius,  409,  410,  41 1,  415 
Clodius,  Publius,  417 

Clodius  Pulcher,  Publius,  521,  523,  580,  581, 
582,  627,  631,  632,  633,  635,  637,  715,  716, 

7X7>  748>  75L  810 
Clcelia,  84 
Cocceius,  875 
Cocles,  Horatius,  83 
CoDRUS,  64 

Collatinus,  Lucius  Tarquinius,  78,  79 
CoMINIUS,  1 77,  178,  I79 
Cominius,  Pontius,  112,  113 
CoNON,  70,  173,  358,  488,  490,  854 
CORCYRA,  I35,  198,  229,  634 
Corinth,  4,  65,  196,  197,  198,  201,  202,  205, 
206,  209,  212,  302,  307,  308,  332,  398,  488, 
489,  599,  663,  731,  735,  831,  838,  841,  842 
Coriolanus,  Caius  Marcius,  174;  crowned  for 
courage,  175;  victory  at  Leuctra,  176;  Corioli 
taken,  177-178;  Volscians  beaten,  178;  civil 
disorders,  179-183;  banished,  184;  retires  to 
Antium,  184;  takes  up  Volscian  cause,  1 85— 
186;  besieges  Lavinium,  187;  Volscian  de¬ 
mands,  188;  women's  appeal  to,  189-191; 
quarrel  with  Tullus,  192;  death,  192;  com¬ 
pared  with  Alcibiades,  1 93-1 95 
Corioli,  177 

Cornelia,  daughter  of  Metellus  Scipio,  526, 

535. 536, 537. 538 

Cornelia,  mother  of  the  Gracchi,  67 2,  674, 
683,  686,  689 

Cornelia,  wife  of  Caesar,  577 
Cornelius,  Cnaeus,  248 
Cornelius,  Publius,  61 
Cornificus,  Lucius,  813 
CoRCEBUS,  128 
CoRONEA,  13 1,  155,  488 
Corvinus,  Valerius,  345 
Cossus,  Cornelius,  249 
Cossus,  Licinius,  104 


883 

Cossus,  Servius  Cornelius,  22 

Cotta,  Caius,  333 

Cotta,  Lucius,  715 

Cotta,  Lucius  Aurunculeius,  587 

Cotta,  Marcus,  402,  403 

Cotta,  Publius,  714 

Cotys,  485 

Crassus,  Marcus  Licinius,  383-384,  418-420, 
423,  438;  hides  in  cave,  440;  and  Pompey, 
440-441;  war  of  Spartacus,  442-444;  at  Rhe- 
gium,  443;  consul,  444;  agreement  with  Cae¬ 
sar  and  Pompey,  444-445;  in  Syria,  446;  in¬ 
vades  Parthia,  447;  duped  by  Ariamnes,  448; 
attacked  by  Parthians,  449;  retreats  to  Car- 
rhae,  452;  death,  454;  compared  with  Nicias, 

455-457;  5o8>  5°9>  5X4>  520>  52X>  523"525, 
581,  582,  586,  588,  627,  635,  636,  707,  709, 
710,  714,  716,  717,  761 

Crassus,  Publius,  444,  446,  449,  450,  526,  535 
Craterus,  275,  472,  473,  474,  475,  560,  561, 
563,  564,  567,  612,  614,  702,  731 
Crates,  744 
Cratesiclea,  659,  67 1 
Cratinus,  73,  122,  128,  133,  394 
Cratippus,  535,  713,  812 
Creophylus,  34 
Crispinus,  870 
Critias,  171,  174,  394,  398 
Crito,  263 
Critolaus,  124 
Crobylus,  697 
Crcesus,  65,  74,  75,  86 
Ctesias,  846,  849,  850,  851,  852,  853,  854 
Ctesibius,  693 
Ctesiphon,  700 

Ctesippus,  son  of  Chabrias,  607,  697 
CuNAXA,  848 

Curio,  Caius  Scribonius,  589,  590,  748,  749 
Curius,  Manius,  277,  280,  292,  302,  327 
Curtius,  Mettus,  23 
Cylon,  68 

Cynoscephal^e,  11,  244 
Cyrus  the  Elder,  75,  573 
Cyrus  the  Younger,  133,  355,  356,  357,  361, 
388,  846,  847,  848,  849,  850,  851,  853,  854, 
856,  857 

Daimachus  of  Plataea,  87,  359 

DAMARATUS,  22 

Damascus,  550,  551 
Damastes,  109 
Damippus,  254 
Damochares,  655,  656 
Damoclides,  236 

Damon,  teacher  of  Pericles,  122,  263,  425 
Damon  Peripoltas,  389,  390 


884 

Damonides  of  CEa,  125 
Dandamis,  544,  572 
Daphne,  651 
Dardanus,  iio 
Darius  I,  89,  264 
Darius  II  Nothus,  846 

Darius  III,  109,  487,  547,  548,  549,  550,  552, 

554.  555-559,  560,  56i>  562>  563 
Darius,  son  of  Artaxerxes  II,  856,  857,  858 
Datis,  264 

Decelea,  165,  171,  357 

Deidamia,  daughter  of  ^Eacides,  735,  737,  738, 

747 

Deiotarus,  446,  535,  624,  625,  77 1 
Delium,  battle  of,  158 
Dellius,  756,  770 
Delos,  7,  8,  127,  275,  424 
Delphi,  i,  2,  5,  6,  9,  10,  14,  29,  35,  47,  54,  65, 
67,  74,  104,  105,  132,  149,  198,  209,  225,  268, 

293>  354>  36i>  367>  374>  398>  43°.  488>  541* 
546,  607,  705,  742,  845 
Demades,  70,  604,  610,  612,  613,  614,  616, 
667,  694,  695,  696,  700,  702,  703 
Demaratus,  43,  100,  487,  544,  559,  567,  846 
Demaretus,  205,  207,  208 
Demariste,  196 
Demetrias,  307,  747 

Demetrius,  freedman  of  Pompey,  518,  624 
Demetrius,  philosopher,  646,  647 
Demetrius,  son  of  Aratus,  831 
Demetrius,  Poliorcetes,  216,  315,  316,  317, 
318,  319;  birth,  726;  and  Mithridates,  727; 
at  Athens,  728-729;  marries  Eurydice,  731; 
siege  of  Rhodes,  733-734;  and  Cassander, 
734;  and  Seleucus,  738;  declared  king  of 
Macedonia,  740;  siege  of  Thebes,  741-742; 
retires  to  Cassandrea,  744;  surrenders  to 
Seleucus,  746;  death,  747;  compared  with 
Antony,  780-781;  838 
Demetrius  the  Magnesian,  697,  702 
Demetrius  the  Phalerian,  44,  73,  262,  263, 
265,  2 76,  618,  694,  695,  696,  728,  729 
Demetrius  the  Pharian,  844 
Demochares  of  Leuconce,  735 
Demochares  of  Soli,  736 
Democrates,  156 
Democritus,  195 
Demon,  6,  700 
Demophanes,  293 
Demophon,  74 

Demosthenes,  Athenian  general,  425,  426, 

433, 437, 438 

Demosthenes,  orator,  155,  277,  278,  320,  545, 
606,  607,  608,  610,  61 1,  614,  615;  family, 
692;  sues  his  guardians,  693;  bodily  infirmi¬ 
ties,  695;  sent  on  embassy,  697;  and  Philip, 


INDEX 

698;  withdraws  from  embassy  to  Alexander, 
700;  fined  and  imprisoned,  701;  death,  702; 
706,  713;  compared  with  Cicero,  724-725 
Demostratus,  162,  429,  487 
Densus,  Sempronius,  868 
Dercyllidas,  39,  854 
Diagoras,  245 
Dicjearchus,  8,  13,  489 
Dinarchus,  205,  207,  617,  618,  704 
Dinias,  827,  836 
Dinocrates,  300,  301,  310 
Dinomache,  155 

Dinon,  99,  558,  846,  848,  850,  853,  854 
Diocles,  governor  of  Eleusis,  4 
Diocles  of  Peparethus,  16,  18 
Diocles,  son  of  Themistocles,  101 
Diocles,  Syrian,  832 
Diodorus,  15,  102,  397 
Diodorus,  son  of  Sophax,  461 
Diogenes  of  Sinope,  48,  145,  202,  546 
Diogenes  the  Stoic,  287 
Diogiton,  236 

Dion,  195,  201,  205,  210,  231,  263,  431,  435, 
781;  pupil  of  Plato,  782,  783;  banished,  786; 
expedition  against  Dionysius,  789-790;  takes 
Minoa,  790;  enters  Syracuse,  791;  and  Her- 
aclides,  793;  discord  in  Syracuse,  795;  ex¬ 
pulsion  of  Dionysius,  799;  death,  801;  com¬ 
pared  with  Brutus,  824-826 
Dionysius  I,  198,  355,  495,  782-784,  785,  800 
Dionysius  II,  195,  196,  200-202,  210,  213, 
231,  244,  245,  783,  784,  785,  786,  787,  788, 
789, 790, 791, 792, 793, 794, 795, 796, 797, 
799>  824,  825 

Dionysius,  brother  of  Erginus,  832,  833 

Dionysius  of  Colophon,  21 1 

Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus,  22,  193,  322,  325 

Dionysius  of  Magnesia,  705 

Dionysodorus,  826 

Diophanes,  299,  314,  674,  680 

Diophantus  of  Amphitrope,  275 

Diopithes,  137,  364,  481,  724 

Dioscorides,  37,  496 

Diphilus,  423,  744 

Dolabella,  866,  871 

Dolabella,  Cnaeus  Cornelius,  383,  388,  578 
Dolabella,  Publius  Cornelius,  601,  721,  751, 
803,  805,  812 
Domitian,  83 

Domitius  ^Enobarbus,  Lucius,  503,  504,  525, 

531)  532>  54°.  59i.  594.  596>  635.  7J9.  7^3. 

768,  779 

Domitius,  Lucius,  779 

Doris,  wife  of  Dionysius  I,  782,  783 

Draco,  70,  73 

Dromoclides  of  Sphettus,  730,  731,  739 


INDEX 

Drusus,  stepson  of  Augustus,  779 
Drusus,  Livius,  uncle  of  Cato,  620,  684,  685 
Duris,  135,  170,  361,  470,  481,  546,  562,  606, 
61 1,  700 
Dyivle,  662,  843 

Ecbatana,  243,  487,  557,  574 
Ecdelus,  827,  828 
Ecdemus,  293 
Ecprepes,  652 
Egeria,  50,  56,  57 
Eleus,  135 

Eleusis,  4,  12,  94,  128,  165,  237,  268,  491,  739 
Elis,  48,  240 

Elpinice,  126,  135,  391,  396 
Empedocles,  727 
Empylus,  803 

Epaminondas,  38,  154,  176,  194,  21 1,  233,  234, 
236,  239,  240,  241,  242,  243,  256,  261,  262, 
263,  280,  292,  293,  298,  388,  489,  493,  494, 
495,  496,  698 

Ephesus,  169,  256,  355,  356,  381,  410,  412, 
483,  484,  624,  756 

Ephialtes,  124,  125,  126,  130,  394,  396,  397, 
398,  696,  700 

Ephorus,  99,  109,  134,  135,  170,  238,  361,  363, 

365>  3 67>  395>  794 
Epicharmus,  53,  83 
Epicrates  of  Acharnae,  98 
Epicurus,  421,  739,  817 
Epicydes,  90 
Epidaurus,  138,  374 
Epimenides,  68 
Epirus,  314,  315,  316 
Epitadeus,  650 
Epitymus,  139 
Epixyes,  100 
Erasistratus,  741 

Eratosthenes,  32,  99,  541,  555,  694,  703 

Erginus,  832,  833,  838 

Ergoteles,  98 

Eryx,  325 

Eteocles,  362 

Euclidas,  661,  667,  691,  847 
Euclides,  263 
Eudamidas  I,  649 
Eudamidas  II,  649 
Eudemus  the  Cyprian,  789 
Eudoxus,  252 
Eumenes,  280 

Eumenes  of  Cardia,  458,  470;  governor  of 
Cappadocia,  471;  and  Perdiccas,  472;  beaten 
at  Orcynii,  474;  besieged  in  Nora,  475;  and 
Peucestes,  476-477;  death,  479;  compared 
with  Sertorius,  479-480 
Eunomus,  32 


885 

Eunomus  the  Thriasian,  693 
Euphorion,  64 
Euphranor,  827 
Euphrantides,  94,  267 
Eupolis,  122,  133,  159,  425 
Euripides,  i,  ii,  12,  48,  63,  72,  149,  155,  159, 
233, 243, 256, 262, 320, 360, 369, 391, 432, 
438,  455»  457»  544>  545>  565>  5^6,  640,  691, 
73h  744 

Eurybiades,  91,  93,  95,  266 
Eurycles,  437 

Eurydice,  sister  of  Phila,  744 

Eurydice,  wife  of  Demetrius,  731,  747 

Euryptolemus,  171 

Eurysaces,  67,  155 

Euthydemus,  433 

Euthymus,  209,  210 

Evander,  20,  25 

Evangelus,  130,  294 

Evanthes,  68 

Execestides,  64 

Fabia,  627 

Fabius  Maximus,  Quintus,  122;  141;  con¬ 
troversy  with  Flaminius,  142;  dictator,  142; 
and  Hannibal,  143-153;  ransoms  his  soldiers, 
145;  rescues  Minucius,  147;  general  policy, 
149-15 1 ;  secures  Tarentum  by  stratagem, 
1 51;  opposes  invasion  of  Carthage,  153; 
death,  154;  compared  with  Pericles,  154- 

x55;  2I5>  2I9>  228>  25°>  256>  257>  258>  277> 
278 

Fabius  Maximus  Rullianus,  141 
Fabius  Pictor,  Quintus,  16,  18,  21,  149 
Fabricius,  Caius,  292,  324 
Fabulus,  Fabius,  868 
Fannius,  Caius,  684,  685,  686 
Faustulus,  16,  17,  18,  19 
Favonius,  Marcus,  586,  591,  632,  806,  816 
Fenestella,  383,  440 

Fimbria,  Caius  Flavius,  312,  375,  380,  381, 
401,  468 

Flaccus,  Lucius  Valerius,  277,  278,  281,  284, 
345.  375.  379>  380 

Flaccus,  Marcus  Fulvius,  685,  686,  687,  688 
Flaminius,  Caius,  142,  247,  248 
Flaminius,  Lucius,  303,  31 1 
Flaminius,  Titus  Quintius,  216,  282,  284, 
286,  293,  299,  302;  consul,  303;  in  Epirus, 
303-304;  in  Boeotia,  305;  at  Scotussa,  305- 
306;  Greece  declared  free,  307;  at  Corinth, 
308;  and  Manius,  309-310;  censor,  310;  in 
Bithynia,  312;  compared  with  Philopoemen, 

3I3"3I4;  374 
Flora,  499,  500,  524 
Florus,  Mestrius,  875 


INDEX 


886 

Fulvia,  751,  757,  758,  759,  760,  768,  769,  774, 

111 

Fulvius,  Cnaeus,  257 
Fulvius,  Quintus,  258,  302 
Furius,  Lucius,  118 

Gabinius,  Aulus,  510,  633,  716,  748,  750 
G^sylus,  799 
Galba,  Servilius,  284 
Galba,  Servius,  226,  291 

Galba,  Servius  Sulpicius,  859,  860,  861;  de¬ 
clared  emperor,  862;  at  Narbo,  862-863;  and 
Nero’s  adherents,  864;  Vitellius  proclaimed 
emperor  in  Germany,  866;  revolt  of  Otho, 
867;  death,  868;  870 
Gallus,  Annius,  871,  872,  873,  874 
Gaugamela,  555 
Gellianus,  862,  863 
Gellius,  Lucius,  714 
Gellius,  Marcus,  715 
Geminius,  499,  506,  769,  770 
Genthius,  217,  218 
Germanicus,  Caesar,  779 
Gisco,  148,  209,  21 1 
Glaucias,  315 
Glaucippus,  606 
Glaucus,  781 
Glycon,  137 
Gongylus,  432,  433 
Gorgias  of  Athens,  713 
Gorgias  of  Leontini,  394 
Gorgidas,  237,  238,  239 
Gracchus,  Caius,  649,  671,  672,  677;  quaestor, 
681;  proposes  laws,  683;  sent  to  Carthage, 
685;  murder  of  Antyllius,  686;  death,  688; 
compared  with  Agis  and  Cleomenes,  689-691 
Gracchus,  Tiberius,  649,  671,  672;  Numan- 
tine  war,  673;  tribune,  674;  deposition  of  Oc¬ 
tavius,  677;  apology  of,  678;  death,  680;  682, 
687;  compared  with  Agis  and  Cleomenes, 
689-691 

Gracchus,  Tiberius,  father  of  the  Gracchi, 
671,  672,  673,  679 

Gylippus,  48,  132,  165,  231,  361,  432,  433, 

434>  436,  437>  799 

Hagnon,  137 
Haliartus,  367,  388 
Halicarnassus,  548,  728 
Hamilcar,  207,  280 

Hannibal,  122,  141,  142,  143,  144,  145,  146, 
147,  148,  149,  150,  151,  152,  153,  154,  233, 

246,  249,  250,  251,  257,  258,  259,  260,  261, 

262,  277,  282,  302,  303,  306,  307,  31 1,  312, 

313,  317,  415,  416,  458,  468,  487,  875 


Hanno,  204 

Harp alus,  220,  544,  558,  561,  612,  613,  701, 
725 

Hasdrubal,  207,  303 

HECATiEUS,  471,  562 

Hector,  14,  81 1,  827 
Hecuba,  31,  243 
Hegemon,  618 
Hegesias  of  Magnesia,  541 
Helen,  ii,  12,  13,  31,  65,  750 
Helenus,  331,  332 
Helicon  the  Cyzicenian,  788 
Helius,  864 
Hellanicus,  10,  12,  164 
Helvia,  704 
Helvidius,  Priscus,  869 

HEPHiESTION,  245,  470,  554,  560,  561,  563, 
564,  567,  574,  575 

Heraclides,  785,  793,  795,  797,  798,  799,  800, 
801 

Heraclides  of  Cuma,  855 

Heraclides  Ponticus,  64,  72,  76,  77,  99,  hi, 

H4>  T39>  552 
Heraclitus,  29,  109,  192 
Hercules,  2,  3,  4,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  19, 
32, 47, 239, 256, 355, 391, 423, 457, 461, 

499>  541)  64°>  76i>  7So 
Hereas,  7,  13,  67 
Herennius,  Caius,  334 
Herippidas,  485 
Hermagoras,  519 
Herminius,  83 
Hermione,  63 

Hermippus,  34,  44,  64,  66,  68,  566,  693,  695, 

7°3 

Hermocrates,  431,  436,  437,  438,  782 
Hermolaus,  567 
Herod,  770,  774,  775 
Herodes,  713 
Herodorus,  10,  II,  12 
Herodorus  Ponticus,  19 
Herodotus,  50,  91,  95,  97,  270,  272,  291 
Herophytus,  394 
Herostratus,  812 
Hersilia,  21,  24,  31 
Hesiod,  i,  5,  7,  51,  65,  109,  291,  864 
HlCETES,  195,  196,  198,  199,  200,  201,  202, 
203,  204,  205,  206,  209,  210 
Hiempsal,  504 
Hierapolis,  446 
Hiero,  98,  249,  252 

Hieronymus  of  Cardia,  322,  325,  329,  741 
Hieronymus  the  Rhodian,  276,  486 
Hipparchus  the  Cholargian,  429 
Hipparete,  158 

Hipparinus,  father  of  Aristomache,  782 


INDEX 

Hipparinus,  son  of  Dion,  793 
Hippias,  49 
Hippius,  44 
Hippo,  211,  212 

Hippocrates,  mathematician,  65 
Hippocrates,  physician,  288 
Hippocrates,  Syracusan  general,  252,  254 
Hippodamia,  3 
Hippolyta,  11 

Hippolytus,  son  of  Theseus,  1,  11 
Hippolytus  the  Sicyonian,  51 
Hippomachus,  781 
Hippomedon,  650,  654 
Hipponicus,  70,  133,  158 
Hirtius,  A.,  229,  721,  722,  753 
Homer,  2,  5,  9,  32,  34,  67,  74,  76,  158,  189, 

21 1,  228,  232,  239,  246,  291,  293,  294,  296, 

336,  458,  482,  544,  552,  553,  61 1,  660,  681, 

743,  81 1,  816,  865 

Honoratus,  Antonius,  863 
Horatius  Flaccus,  Quintus,  419 
Horatius,  Marcus,  82 
Hordeonius,  Flaccus,  862,  865,  866 
Hortensius,  lieutenant  of  Sulla,  376,  377,  378 
Hortensius,  Quintus,  lawyer,  400 
Hortensius,  Quintus,  orator,  629,  640,  707, 
718 

Hortensius  Hortalus,  Quintus,  755,  813 

Hostilius,  21,  23 

Hostius,  Lucius,  26 

Hybreas,  756 

Hypates,  236 

Hyperbolus,  160,  266,  428,  429,  456 
Hyperides,  608,  613,  614,  615,  696,  702 
HypsjEus,  638 
Hypsechidas,  67 

Hyrodes,  447,  448,  454,  455,  759,  761 

Iarbas,  504 
Ibycus,  63 
Icelus,  861,  866 
Ictinus,  128 

Idomeneus,  126,  139,  263,  264,  268,  606,  697, 
700 

Iolaus,  239 

Ion,  of  Chios,  7,  123,  135,  392,  393 

Iphicrates,  490,  855,  859 

Iphitus,  2,  32,  44 

Ipsus,  battle  of,  315 

Iras,  770,  779 

ISADAS,  496 

ISAURICUS,  592 

ISiEUS,  693 

IsMENIAS,  854,  855 

Isocrates,  159,  288,  693,  724 

Isodice,  391 


887 

Issus,  battle  of,  551,  556 
Ister,  13,  562 
IxiON,  648 

Jason,  6,  11,  390 

Juba,  21,  23,  52,  261,  377,  461,  536,  597,  598, 
642,  643,  644,  779 
JUDAEA,  518 

JuGURTHA,  334,  335,  337,  346,  369,  688 
Julia,  daughter  of  Augustus,  779 
Julia,  daughter  of  Caesar,  582,  587,  598,  632 
Julia,  mother  of  Mark  Antony,  748 
Junia,  sister  of  M.  Junius  Brutus,  805 
Junius,  Marcus,  145 

Labeo,  Antistius,  elder,  806,  807,  823 

Labienus,  Quintus,  759 

Labienus,  Titus,  530,  532,  584,  642,  719,  757 

Laced^monius,  135 

Lachares,  738,  739 

Laco,  Cornelius,  863,  868,  869 

Lacratidas,  139,  368 

L^elius  Sapiens,  Caius,  674 

LiENAs,  Popilius,  808 

L.evinus,  321,  322,  323 

Lais,  174,  431 

Laius,  239 

Lamachus,  132,  155,  162,  163,  164,  429,  430, 
432 

Lamarchus,  694 

Lamia,  731,  733,  734,  735,  736,  780 
Lampon,  123 
Lamprias,  757 

Lampsacus,  ioo,  173,  357,  358 
Laomedon,  423,  457 
Laomedon  the  Orchomenian,  693 
Larentia,  16,  17,  18 
Larissa,  487,  534 
Lartius,  83 

Lartius,  Titus,  177,  178 
Latinus,  15 
Latinus,  Titus,  185 
Lattamyas,  109 
Laucrates,  814 
Lavinium,  187 
Lecanius,  868 

Lentulus,  Publius  Cornelius,  148,  149,  579, 
589,  590,  591,  628,  629,  710,  71 1,  712,  713, 
716,  717,  719,  720,  748,  750 
Leo  of  Byzantium,  435 
Leobotes,  97 
Leocrates,  130,  154,  272 
Leonidas,  son  of  Anaxandrides,  42,  240,  657 
Leonidas,  son  of  Cleonymus,  649,  650,  651, 
652,  653,  654,  655,  656,  657,  658 
Leonidas,  teacher  of  Alexander,  542,  552 


888 

Leonnatus,  471,  472,  550,  560,  614 
Leontidas,  233,  234,  236,  491 
Leontini,  203,  430 

Leosthenes,  197,  198,  613,  614,  702,  724 
Leotychides,  king  of  Sparta,  38,  422 
Leotychides,  supposed  son  of  Alcibiades,  165, 
166,  363,  364,  481,  482,  538 
Lepidus,  Marcus,  386,  387,  506,  514,  538,  601, 

603 >  722.  75°.  751.  752.  754.  758.  768.  810 
Leptines,  Athenian,  202,  206 
Leptines,  brother  of  Dionysius  I,  784,  785, 
802 

Leuctra,  48,  109,  238,  239,  240,  241,  243,  261, 
361, 388, 493, 539 
Leutychidas,  97 
Licinia,  438 
Licinius,  Publius,  217 
Ligarius,  Caius,  806 
Ligarius,  Quintus,  719,  720 
Lilyb,eum,  207 
Lissus,  750 

Livia,  wife  of  Augustus,  779,  860,  863 
Livius,  Marcus,  152 

Livy,  104,  251,  260,  261,  285,  311,  312,  414, 

4i6>  595.  596.  601 
Lollius,  Marcus,  625,  626 
Lucilius,  822,  823 

Lucretia,  wife  of  L.  Tarquinius  Collatinus, 
77 

Lucretia,  wife  of  Numa  Pompilius,  60 
Lucretius,  Lucius,  J15 
Lucretius,  Titus,  83,  85 
Lucullus,  Lucius  Licinius,  no,  289,  313, 
347.  371.  374»  39°;  youth  of,  400;  in  Egypt, 
400-401;  consul,  402;  siege  of  Cyzicus,  404- 
405;  at  Amisus  and  Cabira,  406-408;  defeats 
Mithridates,  407;  reforms  in  Asia,  409;  Sin¬ 
ope  besieged,  41 1;  in  Armenia,  41 1;  Tigra- 
nocerta  taken,  414;  battle  at  Artaxata,  415- 
416;  and  Pompey,  418;  luxurious  living, 
419-420;  death,  421;  compared  with  Cimon, 
421-422;  443, 445, 447, 451, 456, 457, 500, 
5°8, 514, 515, 517, 518, 521, 540, 581, 623, 
627,  631,  632,  641,  715,  716 
Lucullus,  Marcus,  400,  418,  456 
Lutatius,  Catulus,  342,  343,  344,  353,  579, 
712 

Lycomedes,  94 
Lycophron,  426 

Lycurgus,  1;  genealogy,  32;  prodicus  of 
Sparta,  33;  in  Ionia  and  Egypt,  33-34;  es¬ 
tablishes  the  senate,  34-35;  division  of  the 
land,  36;  coinage,  36;  laws,  36-38;  marriage 
customs,  39-40;  training  of  boys,  41-42;  as 
soldier  and  commander,  44;  election  regula¬ 
tions,  45;  burial  regulations,  46;  travel  for- 


INDEX 

bidden,  46;  Helots,  46;  death  of,  47,  48;  51; 
compared  with  Numa,  61-64;  7°.  72>  75. 
165, 263, 291, 300, 354, 361, 482, 492, 495, 
651,  652,  655,  660,  661,  663,  691 
Lycurgus,  Athenian,  607,  608,  700 
Lydiades,  836,  837,  838,  839 
Lysander,  48,  132,  173,  174,  307;  youth, 

354;  and  Cyrus,  355;  at  Lampsacus,  357— 
358;  takes  Sestos,  360;  in  Thrace,  361;  duped 
by  Pharnabazus,  362-363;  in  Asia,  364; 
death,  367;  compared  with  Sulla,  387-389; 

437.  48i>  482.  483.  484.  489.  538 
Lysander,  son  of  Libys,  650,  651,  652,  653, 

655 

Lysander  of  Alopece,  10 1 
Lysandridas,  665,  666 
Lysias,  279 

Lysimachus,  316,  318,  319,  329,  562,  730,  733, 

735.  736,  738,  739.  74 r.  743.  744.  745.  747. 
780 

Lysimachus,  son  of  Aristides,  276 
Lysippus,  542,  548,  560 

Macer,  Clodius,  860,  863,  864 
Macer,  Licinius,  707 
Machanidas,  296,  297 
Machares,  41 1 

Maecenas,  Caius  Cilnius,  724,  760 
Mvelius,  Spurius,  802 
Magnus,  174 

Magnesia,  ioo,  ioi,  102,  308 
Mago,  203,  204,  205,  206 
Mamercus,  tyrant  of  Catana,  201,  209,  210, 
211,  212 

Mancinus,  Caius,  673,  674 
Mandroclidas,  650,  651,  653 
Manilius,  285 
Manilius,  Caius,  707 
Manlius,  Lucius,  282,  462,  470 
Manlius,  Marcus,  113,  117 
Manlius,  Titus,  59 

Mantinea,  battle  of,  161;  193,  233,  297,  495, 
496,  658,  659,  665,  739,  840;  name  changed  to 
Antigonea,  843 

Marathon,  bull  of,  5;  name,  13;  battle  of,  14, 
89,  109,  264,  265,  270,  307,  392 
Marcellinus,  524 

Marcellus,  Caius  Claudius,  261,  721,  759,  779 
Marcellus,  Marcus  Claudius,  consul  b.c.  222, 
22,  150,  151,  152,  232,  246;  augur,  247;  Gal¬ 
lic  war,  248;  consul,  248;  kills  Britomartus, 
249;  takes  Milan,  249;  Punic  war,  249;  mili¬ 
tary  tactics,  250-251;  takes  Leontini,  252; 
siege  of  Syracuse,  252-254;  captures  Megara, 
254;  takes  Syracuse,  254;  Sicilian  trophies, 
256;  impeached  by  Syracusans,  256;  defeats 


INDEX 

Hannibal  at  Numistro,  257;  in  Etruria,  259; 
death,  260;  compared  with  Pelopidas,  261; 
302,  444 

Marcellus,  Marcus  Claudius,  consul  b.c.  51, 
589, 709 

Marcellus,  Marcus  Claudius,  son  of  Octavia, 
261, 779 

Marcia,  629,  634,  640 
Marcius,  51,  52,  60 
Marcius,  Caius,  248 
Marcius,  Publius,  174 
Marcius,  Quintus,  174 

Mardonius,  89,  95,  265,  267,  269,  270,  271, 

649 

Marius,  Caius,  313,  332;  at  Numantia,  333; 
praetor,  334;  in  Africa,  334;  consul,  335;  in¬ 
vasion  of  Teutones  and  Cimbri,  336-344;  dis¬ 
cipline  in  camp,  337;  and  the  Ambrones, 
338-340;  at  Vercellae,  343-344;  murder  of 
Nonius,  345;  in  Pontus,  346;  in  exile,  348- 
350;  in  Etruria,  351;  death,  353;  369,  371, 

372,  373>  375>  383>  384.  385>  402>  4°3,  4!9> 

439,  440,  458,  460,  504,  505,  540,  577,  578, 

579)  583>  748>  8i4>  873 

Marius,  Caius,  son  of  Marius,  350,  354,  382, 

577 

Martianus,  862 
Masabates,  852 
Masinissa,  289 
Massilia,  65,  341 
Mauriscus,  861 
Megabacchus,  450,  451 
Megabates,  485 

Megacles,  brother  of  Dion,  791 
Megalopolis,  293,  294,  295,  299,  300,  301, 
302,  328,  661,  665,  667 
Mecara,  3,  9,  131,  254,  255,  297,  653,  729 
Megistonus,  659,  660,  663,  664,  839,  841 
Melissus,  88,  134 
Melon,  235,  236,  237,  241,  491 
Melos,  162 

Memmius,  Caius,  418,  631 
Memphis,  401 

Menander,  playwright,  474,  475,  548 

Menander,  Athenian  general,  173,  433 

Meneclidas,  241 

Menelaus,  744 

Menestheus,  13,  14 

Menippus,  129 

Menippus  of  Caria,  705 

Menon,  general,  853 

Menon,  sculptor,  136,  137 

Menyllus,  615,  616 

Messala  Corvinus,  Marcus  Valerius,  525,  818, 
819,  820,  821,  824 
Messena,  164,  204,  209,  21 1,  326 


889 

Messene,  298,  300,  496,  539,  843 
Metagenes,  128 
Metapontum,  150 

Metella,  Caecilia,  371,  375,  380,  385,  386, 
387, 502, 503, 621 
Metellus,  629,  630 
Metellus,  Quintus,  19,  710 
Metellus  Celer,  Quintus  Caecilius,  715 
Metellus  Numidicus,  Quintus  Caecilius,  194, 

333.  334.  335.  336,  345>  400-  458 
Metellus  Pius,  Caecilius,  289,  351,  383,  403, 
440,  462,  463,  464,  465,  466,  467,  468,  470, 
500,  502,  506,  507,  508,  514 
Metellus  Pius  Scipio,  Quintus  Caecilius,  804 
Metilius,  145 
Meton,  162,  430 
Micion,  614 
Midas,  312,  548 
Midias,  695,  696 
Milan,  249 

Miletus,  65,  66,  68,  356,  357,  548,  577 
Milo  Papinianus,  Titus  Annius,  638,  717,  718 
Miltas  the  Thessalian,  789 
Miltiades,  3,  89,  264,  265,  270,  275,  291,  391, 

398?  73 1 
Milto,  133 
Mimnermus,  86 
Mindarus,  168,  169 
Minos,  5,  6,  51 
Minucius,  Caius,  78 

Minucius,  Lucius,  142,  143,  144,  145,  146,  147 
Minucius,  Marcus,  82,  154,  155 
Mithridates  VI,  the  Great,  312,  346,  347,  351, 

353.  37°>  371)  374)  379-  38o>  38i>  382)  389- 
401,  402-408, 41 1,  412,  414-417, 418,  422, 445, 
468,  508,  510,  513,  514-518 
Mithridates,  son  of  Ariobarzanes,  727 
Mithridates  of  Pontus,  863 
Mithrobarzanes,  412 
Mithropaustes,  1 00 
Mitylene,  519,  535 
Mnasitheus,  828 
Mnesicles,  128 
Mnesiphilus,  88 
Mnesiptolema,  ioi,  102 
Mcerocles,  696,  700 
Mucianus,  871 
Mummius,  Caius,  373 
Mummius,  Lucius,  332 
Munatius,  629,  630,  631,  634,  638,  640,  714 
Murena,  Lucius,  Licinius,  elder,  377,  378, 
409,  412,  413 

Murena,  Lucius  Licinius,  younger,  627,  628, 

63°.  7°9)  724 

MuSiEUS,  348 
MyCALE,  109,  122,  224 


INDEX 


Numitor,  i  6,  17,  18,  27 
Nympiiidia,  862,  863 
Nypsius,  796,  797,  798 
NysjEus,  195 


890 

Myron  of  Phlya,  68 

Myronides,  130,  133,  154,  268,  272 

Myrsilus,  827 

Myrto,  276 

My  us,  100 

Nabis,  298,  299,  301,  308,  314 
Naples,  421 

Nasica,  Publius,  677,  680,  681 
Nausicrates,  399 
Naxos,  7,  109,  127,  424,  431 
Neacles,  830 
Neanthes,  88,  100 

Nearchus,  277,  471,  479,  572,  575,  576 
Nectarabis,  497,  498 
Nemea,  131 
Neocles,  ioi,  102 

Neoptolemus,  315,  316,  401,  402,  470,  472, 
4 73>  474>  54 1 . 

Nepos,  Cornelius,  260,  261,  421,  680 
Nepos,  Metellus,  627,  714 
Nero,  emperor,  308,  779,  859,  860,  861,  863, 
864,  865,  870,  876 
Nestor,  239,  284,  816 
N1C2EA,  831 
Nicagoras,  669,  670 
Nicanor,  478,  616,  617 
Niceratus  of  Heraclea,  362 
Nicias,  155,  159,  160-164,  233,  266,  307,  423; 
character,  424-425;  silver  mines  at  Laurium, 
424;  takes  Thyrea,  426;  siege  of  Sphacteria, 
426;  Peace  of  Nicias,  427;  and  Alcibiades, 
427-430;  expedition  against  Syracuse,  430; 
Plemmyrium  lost,  433;  and  Demosthenes, 
434;  retreat,  436;  surrender,  437;  death,  438; 
compared  with  Crassus,  455-457 
Nicocles,  Athenian,  618,  619 
Nicocles,  tyrant  of  Sicyon,  293,  827,  828,  829 
Nicodemus  the  Messenian,  696 
Nicogenes,  98,  99 
Nicolaus,  824 
Nicomache,  102 
Nicomachus,  21 1 
Nicomedes,  102,  380,  381 
Nigidius,  Publius,  712 
NiSiEA,  67,  68,  426,  610 
Nisibis,  416,  418,  422 
Nola,  250,  251,  372 
Norbanus,  Caius,  460 

Numa  Pompilius,  1,  25,  26,  49;  elected  king, 
50,  51;  accepts  kingship,  52;  religious  prac¬ 
tices,  53;  pontifices  appointed,  53;  vestals, 
54-55;  Fecials  and  Salii,  55-56;  traditions  of, 
57;  reforms  of,  58;  calendar,  58-59;  death, 
60;  compared  with  Lycurgus,  61-64;  I09> 
no,  1 15,  174,  186,  192,  214,  249,  600 


Ochus,  856,  857,  858 

Octavia,  sister  of  Augustus,  759,  760,  767, 
768,  769,  779 
Octavius,  Caius,  603,  722 
Octavius,  Cnaeus,  224,  225,  375 
Octavius,  Marcus,  675,  676,  677,  678,  683, 
771 

Olorus,  391 
Olthacus,  407 
Olympia,  374 

Olympias,  476,  541,  542,  544,  545,  552,  560, 
573.  576,  734 

Onesicritus,  544,  546,  562,  569,  572 
Onomarchus,  209 
Opheltas,  731 

Opimius,  Lucius,  685,  686,  687 

Oppius,  Caius,  503,  584 

Orchomenus,  379,  401,  405,  658,  659,  665 

Orfidius,  874 

Orontes,  827 

Orpheus,  421 

Osca,  464,  469 

Ostanes,  846,  847,  855 

Otho,  Marcus,  emperor,  865,  866,  867,  868, 
869;  and  Vitellius,  871-872;  at  Brixillum, 
871;  at  Bedriacum,  873-874;  death,  876 
Otho,  Marcus,  praetor,  709 
Oxatfires,  846,  847 

Paches,  275,  425 

Pacianus,  Vibius,  440 

Pacorus,  760 

Pammenes,  239,  242 

Pamphilus,  830 

Panactum,  428 

PaNjETIUS,  263,  391,  696 

Pansa,  Caius  Vibius,  229,  721,  722,  753 

Pantaleon,  837 

Pantauchus,  742 

Panthoides,  of  Chios,  102 

Papiria,  215 

Papirius,  Marcus,  m 

Pappus,  703 

Paralus,  133 

Paris,  14,  31,  388,  780,  865 
Parmenides,  122 

Parmenio,  541,  547,  549,  550,  554,  556,  557, 
560,  563,  564,  565 
Parrhasius,  2 

Parysatis,  846,  847,  848,  851,  852,  853,  855 
Paseas,  827 


INDEX 

PasiphjE,  6,  651 
Pasiphon,  424 
Patrobius,  864,  869 

Paulinus,  Suetonius,  871,  872,  873,  874 
Paulus,  Lucius  iEmilius,  147,  148,  149,  195 
Paulus,  Lucius  iEmilius  (Macedonicus),  214; 
sent  to  Spain,  215;  family  relations,  215;  war 
with  the  Ligurians,  215;  consul,  215;  pro¬ 
claimed  general,  217;  at  Mount  Olympus, 
219;  battle  near  Pydna,  221-223;  conquers 
Macedonia,  224;  Perseus  surrenders,  225;  in 
Greece,  225;  in  Epirus,  226;  receives  a  tri¬ 
umph,  227;  family  misfortunes,  228;  death, 
230;  compared  with  Timoleon,  231;  250, 
284,  287,  288,  374,  846,  859 
Pausanias,  43,  97,  98,  268,  269,  270,  271,  272, 

274,  29T-  36o>  363  >  366-  367>  392>  422>  649> 

699,746 

Pella,  Lucius,  816 

Pelopidas,  21 1,  232;  and  Epaminondas,  233; 
liberality  of,  233;  in  exile,  234;  plot  for  re¬ 
turn,  234-235;  slays  Leontidas,  236;  cap¬ 
tures  the  Cadmea,  237;  at  Tegyrae,  238;  bat¬ 
tle  of  Leuctra,  240;  trial,  241;  takes  Larissa, 
241;  and  Ptolemy,  242;  and  Artaxerxes,  243; 
restitution  of  Messenia,  244;  death,  245; 
compared  with  Marcellus,  261-262;  263,  491, 

83 r>  855 

Perdiccas,  456,  470,  471,  472,  474,  547,  561, 
576,  704 

Periander,  65,  68,  827 

Pericles,  41,  88;  birth  and  education,  122- 
123;  adopts  democratic  party,  124;  policies, 
125-127;  public  buildings,  128;  gains  com¬ 
plete  control  of  Athens,  129-130;  character, 
129-130;  military  system,  131;  foreign  pol¬ 
icy,  132-133;  and  Aspasia,  133;  in  Samos, 
I33~I35;  Peloponnesian  war,  135-139; 
plague  at  Athens,  138-140;  family  difficul¬ 
ties,  139-140;  death,  140;  compared  with  Fa- 
bius,  154-155;  157,  158,  233,  274,  275,  280, 

396-  397-  398.  423>  424-  425>  427-  435-  529. 
607,  693,  694,  696,  698,  719 
Peripoltas,  389 

Perpenna  Vento,  Marcus,  464,  469,  470,  503, 
507,  508 

Perseus,  832,  834 

Perseus,  king  of  Macedon,  216,  217,  218,  220, 
223,  224,  225,  226,  228,  229,  231,  284,  287, 
747,  846 

Peticius,  534,  535 
Petilius,  61 
Petinus,  864 

Peucestes,  476,  478,  560,  561,  571 
PfLEAX,  159,  429 
PtUEDO,  14 


891 

Ph.enippus,  265 

Phalinus,  850,  851 

Phanias  the  Eresian,  77 

Phanias  the  Lesbian,  69,  88,  91,  94,  99,  100 

Phanodemus,  94,  395,  399 

Pharax,  200,  231,  799 

Pharnabazus,  166,  168,  169,  170,  173,  174, 
362, 363, 365, 483, 485, 486, 488, 490, 854, 

855 

Pharnaces,  519,  596,  597 
Pharnapates,  759 

Pharsalia,  battle  of,  532-534,  719,  720,  751, 
804 

Pharsalus,  242,  244 
PherjE,  661 

Pherecydes,  6,  10,  652 

Pherenicus,  234 

Phidias,  121,  128,  136,  225 

Phila,  731,  734,  736,  740,  744,  747,  780 

PhILjEUS,  67 

Philetas,  121 

Philip,  Theban,  233  234,  236 
Philip  II  of  Macedon,  no,  121,  202,  216,  217, 
218, 227, 239, 242, 458, 470, 541, 542, 544, 

545. 553-  554-  565. 566, 573, 608, 609, 610, 

61 1, 694, 696, 697, 698, 699, 725, 729, 734, 
743, 780 

Philip  V  of  Macedon,  son  of  Demetrius  II, 
296, 297, 299, 303, 305, 306, 310, 313, 727, 

843. 844-  855 

Philip  of  Theangela,  562 
Philip  the  Acarnanian,  549 
Philip  the  Chalcidian,  562 
Philippi,  604,  648,  812,  813,  817,  824 
Philippides,  730,  735 
Philippus,  Lucius,  499,  507 
Philippus,  Marcius,  721 

Philistus,  202,  245,  423,  433,  438,  544,  785, 
786,  787,  790,  794,  795 
Phillidas,  234,  235,  236 
Philo,  420,  704,  705 
Philochorus,  5,  6,  10,  12,  14,  435 
Philocles,  64,  357,  359,  389 
Philocrates,  697 
Philocyprus,  74 
Philombrotus,  69 
Philomedes  of  Lampra,  617 
Philomelus,  209 
Philon  the  Theban,  562 
Philopcemen,  293;  at  Sellasia,  294;  at  Laris- 
sus,  295;  at  Mantinea,  296-297;  rescues  Mes- 
sene,  298;  abolishes  laws  of  Lycurgus,  300; 
captured,  301;  death,  301;  compared  with 
Flaminius,  3 13-3 14;  666,  834 
Philostratus,  642,  777 
Philotas,  physician,  757,  758 


INDEX 


892 

Philotas,  son  of  Parmenio,  545,  555,  560, 
563,  564 

Philotis,  29,  11 6 
Philoxenus,  544 

Phocion,  604,  605;  as  an  orator,  606;  and  the 
Boeotians,  608;  at  Nisaea,  610;  and  Alexan¬ 
der,  61 1 ;  and  Antipater,  614-616;  impeached 
of  treason,  617;  death,  619;  649,  695,  696 
Phocus,  son  of  Phocion,  612,  616 
Phcebidas,  233,  234,  237,  491,  538 
Phormion,  155,  697,  725 
Phraata,  761 

Phraates,  516,  761,  762,  763,  767 
Phrasicles,  102 
Phrixus,  495 

Phrynichus,  164,  166,  167,  425 
Phrynis,  652 

Phylarchus,  102,  109,  329,  651,  658,  667, 
668,  702,  840 

Pindar,  29,  43,  51,  91,  256,  260,  345,  423,  545, 
743,  826 

Piraeus,  96,  125,  167 

PlRITHOUS,  12,  13,  14 
PlSANDER,  167,  485,  488 
Pisis  the  Thespian,  741 

PlSISTRATUS,  7,  64,  67,  75,  76,  77,  87,  122,  1 24, 
289 

Piso,  son  of  Crassus  and  Scribonia,  867, 868,  869 
Piso,  Caius,  353 

Piso,  Lucius  Calpurnius,  582,  592,  716 

Piso,  Marcus  Calpurnius,  631,  633 

Piso  Frugi,  Caius  Calpurnius,  720 

Pisuthnes,  133,  134 

PlTTACUS,  69 

PlTTHEUS,  I,  2,  3,  10 

PlXODORUS,  544 

Plancus,  Lucius  Munatius,  639,  754,  769,  810 
Plat^ea,  95,  109,  224,  237,  241,  263,  265,  270, 
271, 272, 274, 307, 367, 388, 396 
Plato,  comedian,  102,  429,  774 
Plato,  philosopher,  34,  35,  39,  41,  46,  47,  48, 
52,  55,  60,  74,  76,  77,  89,  124,  129,  133,  157, 
194,  198,  202,  239,  252,  263,  275,  279,  298, 

333>  353»  355>  36*,  400>  42I>  422>  423>  435> 

606,  646,  690,  693,  704,  713,  725,  738,  761, 

781,  782,  783,  784,  785,  786,  787,  788,  800, 

825,  859 

Plistarchus,  738 
Plistoanax,  43,  132 
Plutarch  of  Eretria,  609 
Polemon,  geographer,  830 
Poleuctus,  101 
PoLIARCHUS,  96 

Pollio,  Asinius,  534,  590,  595,  597,  640 

PoLLIS,  783 

Pollux,  13,  56,  128 


PoLYALCES,  136 

Polybius,  219,  220,  238,  261,  280,  281,  300, 
666,  667,  804,  840 
PoLYCLETUS,  864 
Polyclitus,  121,  562 
Polycrates,  826 
Polycrates  of  Samos,  134,  357 
Polycrite,  276 

POLYDECTES,  33 
POLYDORUS,  35,  36 
Polyeuctus,  orator,  696,  700 
Polyeuctus  the  Sphettian,  606,  608,  695 
POLYGNOTUS,  39 1 

POLYSPERCHON,  476,  6l6,  617,  6l8,  802 

POLYXENUS,  788 

POLYZELUS,  70 

PoMPEIA,  578,  580,  581,  715 

P ompeius,  Cnaeus,  son  of  Pompey  the  Great, 
529>  643 

P ompeius,  Quintus,  371,  372 
P ompeius,  Sextus,  641,  759 
Pompey  (Pompeius  Magnus,  Cneius),  59, 
no,  383,  385-388,  400,  402,  403,  419-422, 
439-44 r>  443-446)  448,  456-458,  462,  464- 
4 66,  470;  character,  499-500;  marries  Antis- 
tia,  501;  and  Sulla,  502;  in  Gaul,  502;  mar¬ 
ries  TEmilia,  503;  in  Africa,  504;  battles  at 
Valentia  and  Sucro,  507;  consul,  509;  sent 
against  Cilician  pirates,  510;  given  command 
in  the  east,  513;  in  Armenia,  515-518;  in 
Syria,  518;  at  Amisus,  519;  and  Caesar,  521- 
522;  declared  sole  consul,  526;  leaves  Rome, 
529;  at  Brundusium,  530;  at  Pharsalia,  532- 
534;  death,  537;  compared  with  Agesilaus, 
538-540,  581,  582,  583,  585,  586,  587,  588, 
589, 590, 591, 593, 594, 595, 596, 598, 599, 
601,  602,  603,  604,  623,  624,  626,  627,  629, 

630,  631,  632,  633,  635,  636,  637,  639,  640, 

641,  642,  644,  707,  708,  709,  71 1,  713,  714, 

716,  717,  718,  719,  720,  724,  749,  750,  751, 

7 55>  759>  76o>  768>  8o3>  8o4>  8o7>  8i2>  8i4> 

815,  816,  825,  873 

PoMPILIA,  60 
P OMPONIUS,  I42 

Pompon ius,  father  of  Numa  Pompilius,  50 
Popilius,  Caius,  578 

Poplicola,  Publius  Valerius,  77;  consulship 
instituted,  77;  Tarquin  conspiracy  discov¬ 
ered,  78-79;  becomes  consul,  79;  battle 
against  Tuscans,  80;  laws,  81;  quaestors  ap¬ 
pointed,  82;  defeat  of  Porsenna,  83-84;  rout 
of  the  Sabines,  85;  death,  86;  compared  with 
Solon,  86-87 
Popp^a,  865 

Porcia,  daughter  of  Cato  Uticensis,  629,  648, 
803,  807,  808,  81 1,  824 


INDEX 

Porcia,  sister  of  Cato  Uticensis,  620 
Porsenna,  Lars,  83,  84,  87 
Porus,  569,  570 

Posidonius,  222,  223,  246,  250,  255,  261,  332, 
353, 519, 803 
Postumius,  Livius,  29 
Postumius,  Spurius,  675 
Potamon  of  Lesbos,  570 
PoTHINUS,  536,  596,  770 
PoTIDvEA,  135,  541 
Potitus,  Valerius,  104 
Proculeius,  776,  777 
Proculus,  872,  873,  874 
Proculus,  Julius,  28,  49,  51 
Protagoras,  139,  435 
Protogenes  the  Caunian,  734 
Prusias,  312 
PsENOPHIS,  74 

Ptceodorus,  787 
Ptolemais,  738,  744 
Ptolemy,  king  of  Cyprus,  803 
Ptolemy,  son  of  Antony,  768 
Ptolemy,  son  of  Chrysermas,  670 
Ptolemy,  son  of  Pyrrhus,  329,  330 
Ptolemy  Auletes,  401,  633,  748,  749 
Ptolemy  Euergetes,  664,  665,  668,  669,  670 
Ptolemy  Lathy rus,  179 
Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  827,  829,  841 
Ptolemy  Philopator,  669,  743 
Ptolemy  Soter,  315,  318,  559,  727,  731,  732, 
733.  735.  738>  739.  74<>.  743.  744.  7So 

PYDNA,  221,  223,  224 

Pylades,  297 

Pylos,  160,  180,  426,  427,  428 
Pyrilampes,  129 

Pyrrhus,  277,  304,  312,  314;  battle  of  Ipsus, 
315;  and  Pantauchus,  317;  in  Macedonia, 
318;  returns  to  Epirus,  319;  at  Tarentum, 
321;  and  Fabricius,  324;  at  Asculum,  325; 
war  with  Mamertines,  326;  defeated  at  Bene- 
ventum,  327;  at  Sparta,  328-330;  encamps  at 
Nauplia,  330;  at  Argos,  331;  death,  332;  468, 

74  L  742?  743?  744?  875 
Pythagoras,  49,  53,  61,  214 
Pytheas,  698,  702,  724 
Pythocles,  618 
Pythoclides,  122 
Pythodorus,  98 
Python,  694 
Pythopolis,  10 

Quintius,  Lucius,  284,  285,  417 

Ravenna,  333 
Remonia,  Mount,  19 

Remus,  birth,  15;  captured  by  Numitor,  17, 
18;  death,  19;  compared  with  Theseus,  31 


893 

Rex,  Marcius,  715 
Rhadamanthus,  5,  367 
Rhea  Silvia,  16 

Rhegium,  151,  163,  199,  204,  443 
Rhcesaces,  394 
Roma,  15 

Roma  Quadrata,  19 
Romanus,  15 

Rome,  i;  origin  of  name,  15;  building  of,  19; 
naming  of,  24;  27,  49,  50,  61,  62,  64,  102, 
109;  captured  by  Gauls,  III;  recovered,  114; 
120,  144,  145,  147,  149,  150,  153,  175,  180, 

181,  183,  186,  187,  190,  191,  194,  214,  225, 

247,  250,  251,  255,  256,  258,  279,  280,  289, 

29°?  337?  384?  388?  443?  451?  456?  538?  578? 

59°?  598?  599?  620,  625,  633,  634,  640,  643, 

69°?  75°?  75 r?  822 

Romulus,  i;  birth,  15,  attacks  Amulius,  18; 
founds  Rome,  19,  20;  seizes  Sabine  women, 
21,  22;  war  against  Sabines,  22-24;  institutes 
new  feasts,  25;  makes  laws,  26;  appoints 
vestals,  26;  war  against  Veientes,  27;  death, 
28,  29;  compared  with  Theseus,  30,  31;  49, 

51?  52?  58?  59?  63?  79?  11 5?  249 
Roscius,  Quintus,  706 
Roscius,  Sextus,  705 
Roxana,  563,  576 
Roxanes,  ioo 
Rufus,  Cluvius,  870 

Rufus,  Virginius,  860,  861,  862,  865,  866,  870, 
876 

Rutilius,  345,  517 

Sabaco,  Caius,  334 
Sabbas,  571 

Sabines,  rape  of  the,  21;  war  with  Romans, 
22-24 

Sabinus,  Calvisius,  862 
Sabinus,  Flavius,  871 

Sabinus,  Nymphidius,  859,  861,  862,  863,  867 
Sais,  76 

Salamis,  66,  67,  68,  87,  92;  battle  of,  94;  109, 
240, 266, 267, 270, 279, 307, 357, 360, 391, 

392. 396. 73  r>  739 

Salinator,  Julius,  460 

Sallust,  388,  405,  416 

Samos,  166,  167,  168,  232,  360,  554 

Sandauce,  267 

Sappho,  741 

Sardis,  75,  101,  264,  355,  356,  357,  548,  744, 
816 

Sarpedon,  teacher  of  Cato,  620,  621 
Satibarzanes,  850 
Satiphernes,  849 

Saturninus,  Lucius  Appuleius,  345,  346,  347 
Satyrus,  693,  694 


INDEX 


894 

Soevola,  Caius  Mucius,  83-84 
Scipio,  Metellus,  526,  538,  540,  622 
Scipio,  Publius  Cornelius,  104 
Scipio  iEmilianus  Africanus  Minor,  Publius 
Cornelius,  215,  223,  228,  229,  230,  280,  284, 
289,  672,  673,  674,  677,  681,  685,  689,  874 
Scipio  Africanus,  Publius  Cornelius,  28,  152, 
153,  154,  214,  215,  261,  278,  281,  283,  284, 
285,  289,  291,  303,  311,  312,  317,  333,  337, 
419,  451,  505,  671,  672,  673,  679 
Scipio  Asiaticus,  Lucius  Cornelius,  283,  313, 
460 

Scipio  Metellus,  Quintus,  709 
Scipio  Nasica,  Publius  Cornelius,  219,  220, 
221,  223,  224,  248,  290,  589,  593,  594,  597, 
642,  643,  644 
SCIRON,  3,  4,  10,  30 
Scopas  the  Thessalian,  285 
Scotussa,  11,  243 
Scythes,  487 
Secundus,  873 
Seleucia,  446,  447 

Seleucus  Nicator,  282,  570,  650-652,  728, 

732>  738,  74°.  741.  743.  745.  746.  747 

Selymbria,  169 

Sempronius,  Tiberius,  248,  282 
Seneca,  Lucius  Annaeus,  865 
Seriphus,  95 

Sertorius,  Quintus,  332,  353,  402,  403,  405, 
444,  457;  in  Spain,  458;  joins  Cinna,  459; 
returns  to  Spain,  460;  in  Africa,  461-462; 
in  Lusitania,  462-464;  and  the  Characitan- 
ians,  465;  takes  Lauron,  466;  battle  near 
Saguntum,  467;  sends  Marcus  Marius  into 
Asia,  469;  assassinated,  470;  compared  with 
Eumenes,  479-480;  505,  506,  507,  508,  514 
Servilia,  sister  of  Cato  Uticensis,  620,  627, 
629,  631,  641,  802,  803,  804,  824 
Servilius,  Marcus,  227 
Sestos,  357,  358,  360,  394 
Seuthas,  827 
Sextius,  Lucius,  1 21 
Sextius,  Publius,  714 
Sicinnus,  93 

SlCYON,  731,  735,  827,  829,  841,  845,  846 
SlDON,  738 
SlLANIO,  2 

Silanus,  Decimus,  627,  628 
Silanus,  Junius,  71 1,  712 
Silanus,  Marcus,  770 
Silenus,  365,  366 
Silicius,  Publius,  813 
Silo,  Pompaedius,  620 
SlMMIAS,  I39 

Simonides,  3,  6,  32,  88,  90,  94,  212,  480,  781, 

843 


Sinope,  132,  422 

Sisenna,  Lucius  Cornelius,  400 

SlSIMITHRES,  568 

Smyrna,  458 

Socrates,  48,  128,  133,  155,  156,  157,  158, 
162, 263, 275, 279, 286, 288, 354, 355, 430, 
435.  6i9.  638 

Solon,  64;  becomes  a  merchant,  64;  poems, 
65,  69,  70,  71,  74,  76,  77;  and  Thales,  65,  66; 
war  with  Megarians,  67;  Cylonian  sedition, 
68;  becomes  archon,  69;  cancels  debts,  69- 
70;  laws,  70-74;  in  Egypt,  74;  visits  Croesus, 
74—75;  76;  death,  77;  compared  with  Popli- 
cola,  86-87;  6°7>  663 
SoNCHIS,  74 
SoPHAX,  461 

Sophocles,  51,  63,  125,  21 1,  393,  431,  537, 

543.  544.  6o4>  648>  744.  756 

SOPHROSYNE,  783 
SORNATIUS,  41 1,  415,  417 

Sosibius,  45 
SOSICLES,  94 
Sosis,  793,  794 
Sosius,  1,  691,  704,  781 
SoTION,  57O 
Sous,  32 

Sparamizes,  851,  852 

Sparta,  12,  32,  33,  34,  36,  42,  45,  46-48,  61, 
136,  161,  165,  170,  237,  241,  243,  261,  267, 

27x>  299>  3°°.  3X4>  328>  356>  362.  366.  3 67> 

368>  388.  392>  428>  433.  48°.  487>  492>  495. 

496,  538,  650,  651,  656,  664,  690,  739,  787, 

851 

Spartacus,  442,  443,  456,  514,  622 
Speusippus,  787,  788,  789,  794 
Sph,erus,  35 

Sph^erus  the  Borystenite,  657,  661 
Sphodrias,  237,  491,  492,  538 
Spinther,  Lentulus,  603 
Spithridates,  365,  483,  485,  565 
Sporus,  862 
Spurina,  871,  872 
Stagira,  543 
Stasicrates,  575 

Statira,  wife  of  Darius  III,  550,  554,  555 
Statira,  daughter  of  Darius  III,  573,  576 
Statira,  wife  of  Artaxerxes  II,  847,  848,  852, 

853 

Statyllius,  645,  646,  648,  823 
Stephanus,  697 
Stesilaus  of  Ceos,  89,  263 
Stesimbrotus,  88,  89,  98,  125,  129,  134,  139, 

391.  396.  397 
Sthenis,  503 
Stilpo,  729 
Stolo,  Licinius,  119 


INDEX 

Strabo,  father  of  Pompey,  499,  500  * 

Strabo,  geographer,  381,  414,  601 
Strato,  824 
Stratocles,  730,  735 
Stratonice,  daughter  of  Demetrius,  738 
Stratonice,  daughter  of  Ptolemy  Soter,  740, 
741, 746, 747 

Stratonice,  mother  of  Demetrius,  726 
Stratonicus,  48 
Sulla,  Faustus,  715,  805 
Sulla,  Lucius  Cornelius,  82,  312,  336,  343, 
346,  347,  348,  351,  354;  family,  368;  in  Libya, 
369;  praetor,  370;  consul,  371;  at  Nola,  372, 
in  Greece,  374;  Athens  taken,  375-376;  at 
Thurium,  377-378;  at  Orchomenus,  379;  at 
Dardanus,  381;  and  Scipio,  382;  treachery  at 
Antemna,  384;  at  Praeneste,  385;  death,  387; 
compared  with  Lysander,  387-389;  400,  401, 
402,  409,  41 1,  421,  439,  440,  455,  458,  459, 

460,  469,  501-502,  503,  504-505,  506,  508, 

5J3>  538>  577)  578)  579)  583)  592)  621,  626, 

705,  708,  709,  710,  748,  805,  873 

Sulla,  Sextius,  21 
Sulpicius,  Quintus,  248 
Sulpicius  Rufus,  Publius,  347,  348,  372, 
373 

SURENA,  448,  452,  453,  454,  455 
Susa,  243,  487,  558 

SUSAMITHRES,  1 74 
SuTRIUM,  1 16 
Sybaris,  127 
Synalus,  790,  792 

Syracuse,  162,  181,  195,  196,  198,  199,  202, 
203,  204,  205,  206,  208,  209,  210,  21 1,  212, 
231, 251, 255, 256, 260, 261, 262, 325, 431, 
432>  434.  457.  64°>  788>  79°.  793.  799.  802 

Tachos,  497,  498 
Tanagra,  125,  237,  398 
Tarchetius,  15,  16 

Tarentum,  151,  152,  154,  256,  258,  283,  302, 

327>  3 82 
Tarpeia,  23 
Tarpeius,  23 
Tarquinia,  80 

Tarquinius  Priscus,  Lucumo,  22,  23,  82 
Tarquinius  Superbus,  Lucius,  63,  77,  78,  80, 
82,  83,  87,  175,  678 
Tarrutius,  husband  of  Larentia,  17 
Tarrutius,  philosopher,  20 
Tarsus,  745 
Tatia,  50,  60 

Tatius,  Titus,  23,  24,  25,  26,  49,  50,  52 
Tauromenium,  199,  200 
Taxiles,  569,  572 
Technon,  827,  828,  832,  833 


895 

Tegea,  367,  496,  653,  658,  661,  662,  664,  665, 

666 

TegyraE,  battle  of,  237-238,  239,  261,  492 
Teleclides,  122,  130,  198,  425 
Telestes,  544 
Teleutias,  489 

Terentia,  wife  of  Cicero,  627,  707,  71 1,  715, 
716,  720 
Terentius,  868 
Terentius,  Lucius,  500 
Teribazus,  847,  848,  849,  855,  856,  857,  858 
Terpander,  43,  46,  652 
Tertia,  715 
Teutamus,  478 
Thais,  559 

Thales,  33,  65,  66,  68,  652 
Thapgelia,  133 
Tharrhypas,  314 
Thearidas,  665,  666 
Thearides,  783 
Thebe,  242,  246 

Thebes,  ii,  no,  154,  233,  237,  241,  244,  261, 
305,  366,  367,  491,  496,  538,  539,  545,  546, 
611,741,742,744 

Themistocles,  3;  youth  and  education,  88; 
policy  of,  89-90;  bribes  Epicydes,  90;  aban¬ 
dons  Athens,  92;  recalls  Aristides,  92-93; 
stratagem  at  Phalerum,  93-94;  95;  fortifies 
Athens,  96;  banished,  97;  flees  to  Epirus,  98; 
and  Xerxes,  99-101;  death,  101;  family,  101- 

102;  124,  173,  193,  233,  240,  263,  264,  265, 

266,  273,  274,  275,  280,  290,  291,  292,  312, 

360,  391,  394,  395,  396,  397,  399,  422,  456, 

529,  540,  725 
Theodectes,  548 
Theodotes,  785,  797,  798 
Theodotus,  538,  596,  816 
Theogiton,  272 
Theomnestus,  812 
Theophanes,  519,  523,  536,  537,  719 
Theophrastus,  37,  65,  76,  98,  132,  139,  140, 

x59)  275)  359)  362)  38L  427)  429)  463)  48L 
497)  542)  634)  648,  695,  697,  713 
Theopompus,  35,  43,  48,  96,  98,  170,  197,  238, 

359)  361,  367)  485)  494)  495)  596)  656,  696, 
698)  699,  701,  790 
Theoris,  697 
Theorus,  155 

Theramenes,  155,  170,  360,  423,  719 
Thermodon,  698 

Thermopylae,  91,  282,  304,  307,  309,  488,  545, 
734 

Therycion,  668 

Theseus,  Birth,  1;  lineage,  1,  2;  travels,  3,  4; 
at  Athens,  4,  5;  Pallantidae  dispersed,  4;  slays 
Minotaur,  6;  and  Ariadne,  7,  8;  founds  com- 


INDEX 


896 

mon wealth,  9;  Amazon  invasion,  10,  11;  and 
Pirithous,  12;  war  against  Castor  and  Pollux, 
13;  death,  14;  compared  with  Romulus,  30, 

31;  393 

Thespis,  76 
Theste,  788 
Thimbron,  854 

Thrasea,  Publius  Paetus,  629,  634 
Thrasybulus,  155,  172,  234,  237,  366,  367, 
831 

Thrasyllus,  169 

Thucydides,  son  of  Melesias,  123,  125,  126, 
129,  155,  423 

Thucydides,  son  of  Olorus,  historian,  46,  99, 
125, 130, 135, 141, 157, 159, 164, 193, 274, 
277,  391,  423,  424,  429,  433,  434,  438,  495, 
693,  696 

Thudippus,  618,  619 
Thurii,  127,  164,  165,  204 
Tigellinus,  Sophonius,  859,  861,  864,  865, 
867,  870 

Tigranes,  404,  406,  408,  409,  410,  41 1,  412, 

4I3>  4X4>  4r5>  4i6>  4l7>  4i8>  422,  445»  451. 
512,  513,  515,  517,  522,  532,  539 
Tigranocerta,  412,  414,  418,  422 
TIMiEA,  165,  364,  481 

T1M2EUS,  32,  48,  199,  21 1,  231,  423,  433,  437, 
438,  786 

Timagenes,  523,  775 

Timagoras,  244,  855 

Timandra,  174 

Timanthes,  830,  837 

Timasitheus,  106 

Timesileus,  132 

Timoclides,  826 

Timocrates,  Athenian,  697 

Timocrates,  Rhodian,  854 

Timocrates,  Syracusan,  788,  790,  791 

Timocreon,  97 

Timodemus,  196,  213 

Timolaus,  299 

Timoleon,  109;  195;  rescues  Timophanes, 
196;  retirement,  197;  sent  to  Sicily,  198;  ar¬ 
rives  at  Tauromenium,  199;  defeats  Hicetes, 
200;  conquers  Dionysius,  201;  attempt  on 
life  of,  203;  takes  Messena,  204;  takes  Syra¬ 
cuse,  205;  revival  of  Syracuse,  206;  battle  at 
river  Crimesus,  207-209;  executes  Hicetes, 
210;  takes  Catana,  21 1;  death,  213;  com¬ 
pared  with  iEmilius  Paulus,  231;  802 
Timon  of  Athens,  162,  774 
Timon  of  Phlius,  53,  123 
Timonides  the  Leucadian,  789,  792,  794 
Timophanes,  196,  197 
Timotheus,  general,  21 1,  232,  370,  697 
Timotheus,  poet,  297,  486,  743 


Timoxenus,  839,  843 
Tiribazus,  490 

Tiro,  Marcus  Tullius,  720,  723 
Tisamenus,  268 
Tisander,  139 

Tisaphernes,  165,  166,  167,  168,  194,  355, 
484,  485,  846,  848,  852,  854 
Tithraustes,  484,  485 
Titianus,  872 
Titinius,  820 
Titurius,  587 

Tolmides,  130,  131,  154,  155,  488 
Tolumnius,  249 

Torquatus,  Titus  Manlius  Imperiosus,  145 
Tragiscus,  836 
Trebia,  142 

Trebonius,  Caius,  636,  752,  809,  810 
Triarius,  417,  518 
Trcezen,  1,  15,  92 

Troy,  13,  15,  16,  31,  no,  457,  547,  781 

Tubero,  iElius,  215,  225,  226 

Tubertus,  Postumius,  84,  102 

Tuditanus,  309 

Tullia,  720 

Tullius,  Servius,  54 

Tullus  Hostilius,  24,  60,  61,  174 

Turpilianus,  Petronius,  863,  864 

Turpillius,  335 

Tusculum,  276 

Tydeus,  173 

TyNDARUS,  12 
Tynnondas,  69 
Tyre,  551,  552,  738 
TyrTjEUS,  35,  657 

Ulysses,  15,  164,  184,  280,  337,  482 
Umbricius,  867 

Utica,  504,  598,  642,  644,  645,  646,  647 

Valens,  Fabius,  862,  864,  866,  871,  872,  874 

Valeria,  daughter  of  Poplicola,  84 

Valeria,  sister  of  Poplicola,  189 

Valerius,  Marcus,  82,  84 

Valerius,  Quintus,  503 

Valerius  Maximus,  824 

Varro,  Cingonius,  863 

Varro,  Marcus,  20,  22 

Varro,  Terentius,  147,  148,  149 

Varus,  Attius,  642 

Vatinius,  Publius,  636,  714,  812 

Veii,  103,  109,  1 12,  1 15 

Velesus,  51 

VELITRiE,  179 

Vellutus,  Sicinnius,  177,  179,  182,  183 
Ventidius,  Publius,  759,  760 
Venusia,  148,  259 
Vercingetorix,  587,  588 


INDEX 

Vergilia,  189,  190 

Vergilio,  Atillius,  868 

Verres,  Caius,  706,  707 

Vespasian,  82,  83,  871 

Vettius,  Spurius,  52 

Veturius,  867 

Veturius,  Mamurius,  56 

Veturius,  Publius,  82 

Vindex,  Junius,  860,  861,  862,  865,  866 

V INDICIUS,  78,  79,  80 

Vinius,  Titus,  860,  861,  863,  864,  865,  866, 
867,  868,  869 

V IRIDOMARUS,  22 

V itellius,  Aulus,  865,  866,  869,  871,  872,  873, 
875 

V ITELLIUS,  Lucius,  871,  876 
Voconius,  715 

VoLUMNIA,  176,  189,  I90,  I9I 
Volumnius,  Publius,  822,  823 

Xanthippides,  265 


897 

XaNTHIPPUS,  97,  122,  268,  279 
Xanthippus,  son  of  Pericles,  133,  139 
Xenarchus,  423 
Xenares,  657,  658 
Xenocles,  of  Sicyon,  827 
Xenocles,  Spartan,  487 
Xenocles  of  Adramyttium,  705 
Xenocles  of  Cholargus,  128 
Xenocrates,  333,  421,  544,  606,  615,  616 
Xenophon,  32,  170,  256,  262,  360,  425,  482, 
484, 488, 493, 496, 539, 765, 847, 848, 849, 
850,  851 

Xerxes  I,  89,  90,  91,  92,  93,  94,  95,  96,  99, 
266,  267,  292,  487,  558,  846 

Zaleucus,  51 
Zeno,  48,  122,  123,  657 
Zenodotus,  21 
Zeugma,  447,  452 
Zeuxis,  128 
Zoroaster,  51 


ARCHBISHIP  M1TTY  HIGH  SCHOOL 


rary 

5000  Mifty  Avenue 


San  Jose,  CA 


L  „  ii  r  ft  1  ^ 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.  S.  A. 


xaam 


.  • 

..  ••  >vt  ; 

'It  '.'  ?.'■  u. 

y>  ,, 

> 

■  i  ■  ■  - 

•:  •  •  •:  *■ 

’  :  ■  :  . .  •  /• 


. 

-  '  .1  Millt  7 

i  ;o  ff  8  /  / 

.7^<’w  {'•  .  .01  •"'  *  i V 


.0'  r>  7 


■  -.num  f 

.rW  f,"  .o<*  .:<)g  •••"  .r  .  .  .1  /  I 


■  ,  , .  ;  '  ;v  ,  o  :  ’  ,  .  •  •  V 


•*•  oac  ' 

•  —  '* 
:•  /,  • 

^  -  \rvv •  ; 


1 '  i  p8i  .dr,s 


■ 


. 


r  Ml  O  -i 


■ 


h 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


r. 


y? 


$ 


•^7^  & 


y£ 


y£ 


I 


ir?^?^ 


£ 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


»7S»35 


'hrziP^ 


MATTER 

RELATION 

MECHANICS 

RELIGION 

REVOLUTION 

MEDICINE 

MEMORY  AND 

RHETORIC 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

IMAGINATION 

METAPHYSICS 

SCIENCE 

MIND 

SENSE 

MONARCHY 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 

NATURE 

SIN 

NECESSITY  AND 

SLAVERY 

CONTINGENCY 

SOUL 

OLIGARCHY 

SPACE 

ONE  AND  MANY 

STATE 

OPINION 

TEMPERANCE 

OPPOSITION 

THEOLOGY 

PHILOSOPHY 

TIME 

PHYSICS 

TRUTH 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

TYRANNY 

POETRY 

UNIVERSAL  AND 

PRINCIPLE 

PARTICULAR 

PROGRESS 

VIRTUE  AND  VICE 

PROPHECY 

WAR  AND  PEACE 

PRUDENCE 

WEALTH 

PUNISHMENT 

WILL 

QUALITY 

WISDOM 

QUANTITY 

WORLD 

REASONING 

