GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  m 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 

13.  VIRGIL 


14.  PLUTARCH 


15.  TACITUS 


4.  HOMER 
« 

5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 


16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 

17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 


6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 


19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 


7.  PLATO 


21.  DANTE 


8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 

10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 


22.  CHAUCER 

23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 

24.  RABELAIS 


11.  EUCLID 

ARCHIMEDES 

APOLLONIUS 

NICOMACHUS 


25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 

27.  SHAKESPEARE  II 


2^ 


GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  ggj 


|£ 

7^ 

7^ 

7^ 

7^ 

7^ 

7^ 

7^ 

7^ 

7^ 

ri^£> 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 

29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 

31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 

32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 

34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 

43.  AMERICAN  STATE 

PAPERS’ 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 

44.  BOSWELL 

45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 

46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 


7^75^ 


"7^ 

7^ 

7^ 

77^ 


7^^" 

7^” 


35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 

36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 

37.  FIELDING 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 

39.  ADAM  SMITH 


48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 

50.  MARX 
ENGELS 

51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 


' 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


10. 

FRANCIS  BACON 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants :  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


' 


Advancement  of  Learning 
Novum  Organum 
New  Atlantis 

BY  SIR  FRANCIS  BACON 


William  Benton,  Publisher 

ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 
CHICAGO  ■  LONDON  ■  TORONTO  ■  GENEVA  ■  SYDNEY  ■  TOKYO  •  MANILA 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 
The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 


No  part  of  this  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 
publisher. 

© 

1952 

by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10337 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Francis  Bacon,  1561-1626 


Bacon  was  born  January  22,  1561,  in  York 
House,  London.  He  was  the  youngest  son  of 
Sir  Nicholas  Bacon,  Lord  Keeper  of  the  Seal 
and  Chancellor.  His  mother,  Lady  Anne  Cooke, 
enjoyed  some  renown  as  a  classicist  and  was 
sister-in-law  to  Sir  William  Cecil,  Lord  Burgh- 
ley. 

At  the  age  of  twelve  Bacon  entered  Trinity 
College,  where  he  resided  for  three  years  with 
his  elder  brother.  He  later  claimed  that  it  was 
at  Cambridge  as  a  student  not  yet  sixteen  that 
“he  first  fell  into  the  dislike  of  the  philosophy 
of  Aristotle,”  which  he  judged  to  be  “barren  of 
the  production  of  works  for  the  benefit  of  the 
life  of  man.”  On  leaving  the  university,  he  was 
sent  to  Paris  in  the  retinue  of  the  English  am¬ 
bassador  to  complete  his  political  education. 
While  there  he  attempted  to  perfect  a  new  dip¬ 
lomatic  code  and,  according  to  later  anecdotes, 
became  interested  for  the  first  time  in  experi¬ 
mental  observation. 

Recalled  to  England  by  the  sudden  death  of 
his  father  in  1579,  Bacon  returned  to  find  that 
he  had  been  left  the  “narrow  portion”  of  a 
younger  son  and  had  his  livelihood  to  gain.  He 
applied  himself  to  the  study  of  law  at  Gray’s 
Inn  and  in  1582  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  A 
“competitor  at  the  bottom  of  the  ladder  for 
patronage  and  countenance,”  he  passed  twenty- 
five  years  in  the  shadow  of  Burghley,  Essex, 
and  Coke.  In  1584  he  wrote  his  first  political 
memoir,  the  Letter  of  Advice  to  Queen  Eliza¬ 
beth ,  but  his  efforts  to  win  favor  with  the  Queen 
were  unsuccessful.  His  uncle,  Lord  Burghley, 
appears  to  have  “taken  his  zeal  for  ambition,” 
and  the  most  he  would  do  was  to  help  him  ob¬ 
tain  a  seat  in  Parliament.  His  most  ambitious 
Parliamentary  effort,  opposing  a  royal  demand 
in  1 593,  incurred  the  strong  displeasure  of  both 
Elizabeth  and  Burghley. 

Bacon’s  only  political  success  under  Eliza¬ 
beth  came  as  a  result  of  the  trial  against  the 
Earl  of  Essex.  He  had  been  the  intimate  and 
protege  of  Essex,  who  had  attempted  to  use  his 
influence  with  the  Queen  on  his  friend’s  be¬ 
half.  After  one  failure  to  obtain  Bacon  a  place, 
the  Earl  presented  him  with  an  estate  worth 


£  1,800;  Bacon  never  lived  within  his  income, 
and  once,  in  1 598,  he  was  arrested  and  impris¬ 
oned  for  debt.  During  the  trial  against  Essex, 
Bacon  came  to  take  a  leading  role,  although 
he  had  little  to  do  with  the  preliminary  case. 
He  was  one  of  the  Queen’s  counsel  and  vigor¬ 
ously  pressed  the  suit  against  his  erstwhile 
patron.  After  the  execution  he  was  charged  with 
drafting  the  defense  of  the  Queen’s  conduct, 
which  appeared  as  the  Declaration  of  the  Prac¬ 
tices  and  Treasons  attempted  and  committed  by 
Robert ,  late  Earl  of  Essex. 

During  these  years  Bacon  was  also  engaged 
in  scientific  and  literary  work  that  even  at  the 
time  enhanced  his  reputation.  In  a  long  letter 
to  his  uncle,  written  when  he  was  thirty-one, 
he  confessed,  “I  have  as  vast  contemplative 
ends  as  I  have  moderate  civil  ends,  for  I  have 
taken  all  knowledge  for  my  province.”  In  1597 
he  published  the  first  edition  of  his  Essays.  In¬ 
cluded  with  them  was  a  short  tract  entitled 
Colours  of  Good  and  Evil.  This  was  the  first 
published  part  of  his  ambitious  project  for  the 
“Great  Instauration”  of  science  to  restore  to 
man  the  command  over  nature.  In  1605  he 
published  the  Advancement  of  Learnings  which 
was  to  occupy  the  first  part  in  his  plan. 

With  the  accession  of  James  I,  Bacon  rapid¬ 
ly  rose  to  power  in  the  political  world.  Writing 
in  defense  of  the  royal  policies,  he  became  one 
of  the  leaders  of  the  King’s  cause  against  Par¬ 
liament.  Solicitor  in  1607,  he  was  Attorney- 
General  by  1613,  Lord  Keeper  of  the  Seal  in 
1617,  and  Chancellor  the  following  year,  when 
he  was  made  Baron  Verulam;  in  1621  he  was 
created  Viscount  St.  Albans. 

In  defending  the  royal  prerogative,  Bacon 
was  opposed  to  Sir  Edward  Coke,  the  greatest 
lawyer  of  the  time,  who  had  long  been  his  riv¬ 
al.  Bacon  at  first  triumphed,  and  the  King 
demoted  and  then  removed  Coke  from  all  his 
offices,  although  he  still  continued  to  lead  the 
Parliamentary  forces.  In  1621  Bacon  became 
the  object  of  Parliamentary  attack,  which  was 
directed  not  only  against  him  but  also  against 
the  King.  He  was  accused  of  receiving  gifts,  or 
bribes,  from  suitors  in  Chancery.  When  con- 


V 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


vi 

fronted  with  a  list  of  twenty-eight  charges, 
Bacon  decided  that  defense  would  be  of  little 
use.  He  submitted  a  statement,  declaring:  “It 
resteth  therefore  that,  without  fig-leaves,  I  do 
ingenuously  confess  and  acknowledge,  that 
having  understood  the  particulars  of  the  charge, 
...  I  find  matter  sufficient  and  full,  both  to 
move  me  to  desert  the  defense,  and  to  move 
your  lordships  to  condemn  and  censure  me.” 
He  admitted  receiving  “gifts,”  but  maintained 
that  his  intentions  were  pure  and  that  his 
judgment  had  not  been  swayed  by  them;  and 
none  of  the  cases  he  had  decided  were  ever  re¬ 
tried.  Pointing  out  that  it  was  common  practice 
for  judges  to  accept  gifts,  he  claimed  he  was  “the 
justest  chancellor  that  had  been  in  the  five 
changes  since  Sir  Nicholas  Bacon’s  time,”  al¬ 
though  he  also  added  that  “it  was  the  justest 
censure  in  Parliament  that  was  these  two  hun¬ 
dred  years.”  He  was  found  guilty  by  the  high 
court  of  Parliament  which  decided  that  he 
should  pay  a  fine  of  £  40,000,  be  imprisoned  in 
the  tov/er  at  the  King’s  pleasure,  and  neither 
hold  any  public  office  nor  come  “within  the 
verge  of  the  court.” 


Although  the  sentence  was  not  fully  carried 
out,  Bacon  never  again  held  public  office.  He 
devoted  the  last  years  of  his  life  to  the  elabora¬ 
tion  of  his  “Instauratio  Magna.”  His  efforts, 
however,  were  limited  almost  entirely  to  his 
own  writings,  and  he  appears  to  have  had 
little  knowledge  of  the  work  of  other  scientists. 
He  did  not  know  William  Gilbert,  physician  to 
both  Elizabeth  and  James  I,  nor  was  he  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  scientific  association  that  regularly 
gathered  at  Gilbert’s  house.  He  was  a  patient 
of  William  Harvey,  yet  seems  not  to  have 
known  of  his  investigations;  Harvey  in  fact 
later  remarked  that  Bacon  “writes  philosophy 
like  a  lord  chancellor.”  Bacon’s  last  works,  ex¬ 
cept  for  the  New  Atlantis ,  written  between 
1614  and  1617,  were  fitted  into  his  over-all  pro¬ 
ject.  The  Novum  Organum  (1620)  was  to  serve 
as  the  second  of  the  six  parts  of  his  plan.  In 
1623  under  the  title  Be  Augmentis  Scientiarum 
he  brought  out  a  Latin  translation  of  the  Ad¬ 
vancement  of  Learning, ,  containing  many  addi¬ 
tions  designed  to  fill  out  the  other  parts  of  his 
system.  When  death  overtook  him,  April  9, 
1626,  he  was  still  engaged  in  that  task. 


GENERAL  CONTENTS 

ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING,  Page  i 
NOVUM  ORGANUM,  Page  105 
NEW  ATLANTIS,  Page  199 


Contents:  Advancement  of  Learning 
First  Book,  i.  Second  Book,  29. 


Of  the  Proficience  and 
ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 
Divine  and  Humane 

$$$$$$$$$$$ 

FIRST  BOOK 


TO  THE  KING 

i.  There  were  under  the  law,  excellent  King, 
both  daily  sacrifices  and  freewill  offerings;  the 
one  proceeding  upon  ordinary  observance,  the 
other  upon  a  devout  cheerfulness:  in  like  man¬ 
ner  there  belongeth  to  kings  from  their  serv¬ 
ants  both  tribute  of  duty  and  presents  of  affec¬ 
tion.  In  the  former  of  these  I  hope  I  shall  not 
live  to  be  wanting,  according  to  my  most  hum¬ 
ble  duty,  and  the  good  pleasure  of  your  Majes¬ 
ty’s  employments:  for  the  latter,  I  thought  it 
more  respective  to  make  choice  of  some  obla¬ 
tion,  which  might  rather  refer  to  the  propriety 
and  excellency  of  your  individual  person,  than 
to  the  business  of  your  crown  and  state. 

2.  Wherefore,  representing  your  Majesty 
many  times  unto  my  mind,  and  beholding  you 
not  with  the  inquisitive  eye  of  presumption,  to 
discover  that  which  the  Scripture  telleth  me  is 
inscrutable,  but  with  the  observant  eye  of  duty 
and  admiration;  leaving  aside  the  other  parts 
of  your  virtue  and  fortune,  I  have  been  touched, 
yea,  and  possessed  with  an  extreme  wonder  at 
those  your  virtues  and  faculties,  which  the  phi¬ 
losophers  call  intellectual;  the  largeness  of  your 
capacity,  the  faithfulness  of  your  memory,  the 
swiftness  of  your  apprehension,  the  penetration 
of  your  judgement,  and  the  facility  and  order 
of  your  elocution:  and  I  have  often  thought, 
that  of  all  the  persons  living  that  I  have  known, 
your  Majesty  were  the  best  instance  to  make  a 
man  of  Plato’s  opinion,  that  all  knowledge  is 
but  remembrance,  and  that  the  mind  of  man 
by  nature  knoweth  all  things,  and  hath  but  her 
own  native  and  original  notions  (which  by  the 
strangeness  and  darkness  of  this  tabernacle  of 


the  body  are  sequestered)  again  revived  and  re¬ 
stored:  such  a  light  of  nature  I  have  observed 
in  your  Majesty,  and  such  a  readiness  to  take 
flame  and  blaze  from  the  least  occasion  present¬ 
ed,  or  the  least  spark  of  another’s  knowledge 
delivered.  And  as  the  Scripture  saith  of  the  wis¬ 
est  king,  “That  his  heart  was  as  the  sands  of 
the  sea”;  which  though  it  be  one  of  the  largest 
bodies,  yet  it  consisteth  of  the  smallest  and  fin¬ 
est  portions;  so  hath  God  given  your  Majesty 
a  composition  of  understanding  admirable,  be¬ 
ing  able  to  compass  and  comprehend  the  great¬ 
est  matters,  and  nevertheless  to  touch  and  ap¬ 
prehend  the  least;  whereas  it  should  seem  an 
impossibility  in  nature,  for  the  same  instrument 
to  make  itself  fit  for  great  and  small  works.  And 
for  your  gift  of  speech,  I  call  to  mind  what  Cor¬ 
nelius  Tacitus  saith  of  Augustus  Caesar  “Au- 
gusto  profluens ,  et  quae  principem  decerety  elo- 
quentia  fuit -”1  For  if  we  note  it  well,  speech  that 
is  uttered  with  labour  and  difficulty,  or  speech 
that  savoureth  of  the  affectation  of  art  and  pre¬ 
cepts,  or  speech  that  is  framed  after  the  imita¬ 
tion  of  some  pattern  of  eloquence,  though  never 
so  excellent;  all  this  hath  somewhat  servile,  and 
holding  of  the  subject.  But  your  Majesty’s  man¬ 
ner  of  speech  is  indeed  prince-like,  flowing  as 
from  a  fountain,  and  yet  streaming  and  branch¬ 
ing  itself  into  nature’s  order,  full  of  facility  and 
felicity,  imitating  none,  and  inimitable  by  any. 
And  as  in  your  civil  estate  there  appeareth  to 
be  an  emulation  and  contention  of  your  Maj¬ 
esty’s  virtue  with  your  fortune;  a  virtuous  dis¬ 
position  with  a  fortunate  regiment;  a  virtuous 
expectation  (when  time  was)  of  your  greater 

1  Tacitus,  Annals ,  Bk.  xm.  3:  '‘Augustus  possessed  a 
flowing  and  regal  eloquence.” 

I 


k 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


2 

fortune,  with  a  prosperous  possession  thereof  in 
the  due  time;  a  virtuous  observation  of  the  laws 
of  marriage,  with  most  blessed  and  happy  fruit 
of  marriage;  a  virtuous  and  most  Christian  de¬ 
sire  of  peace,  with  a  fortunate  inclination  in 
your  neighbour  princes  thereunto:  so  likewise 
in  these  intellectual  matters,  there  seemeth  to 
be  no  less  contention  between  the  excellency  of 
your  Majesty’s  gifts  of  nature  and  the  univer¬ 
sality  and  perfection  of  your  learning.  Fori  am 
well  assured  that  this  which  I  shall  say  is  no  am¬ 
plification  at  all,  but  a  positive  and  measured 
truth;  which  is,  that  there  hath  not  been  since 
Christ’s  time  any  king  or  temporal  monarch, 
which  hath  been  so  learned  in  all  literature  and 
erudition,  divine  and  human.  For  let  a  man  se¬ 
riously  and  diligently  revolve  and  peruse  the 
succession  of  the  emperors  of  Rome,  of  which 
Caesar  the  Dictator,  who  lived  some  years  be¬ 
fore  Christ,  and  Marcus  Antoninus  were  the 
best  learned;  and  so  descend  to  the  emperors  of 
Grecia,  or  of  the  West,  and  then  to  the  lines  of 
France,  Spain,  England,  Scotland,  and  the  rest, 
and  he  shall  find  this  judgement  is  truly  made. 
For  it  seemeth  much  in  a  king,  if,  by  the  com¬ 
pendious  extractions  of  other  men’s  wits  and 
labours,  he  can  take  hold  of  any  superficial  or¬ 
naments  and  shows  of  learning;  or  if  he  counte¬ 
nance  and  prefer  learning  and  learned  men:  but 
to  drink  indeed  of  the  true  fountains  of  learning, 
nay,  to  have  such  a  fountain  of  learning  in  him¬ 
self,  in  a  king,  and  in  a  king  born,  is  almost  a 
miracle.  And  the  more,  because  there  is  met  in 
your  Majesty  a  rare  conjunction,  as  well  of  di¬ 
vine  and  sacred  literature,  as  of  profane  and 
human;  so  as  your  Majesty  standeth  invested 
of  that  triplicity,  which  in  great  veneration  was 
ascribed  to  the  ancient  Hermes;  the  power  and 
fortune  of  a  king,  the  knowledge  and  illumina¬ 
tion  of  a  priest,  and  the  learning  and  universal¬ 
ity  of  a  philosopher.  This  propriety  inherent 
and  individual  attribute  in  your  Majesty  de- 
serveth  to  be  expressed  not  only  in  the  fame  and 
admiration  of  the  present  time,  not  in  the  his¬ 
tory  or  tradition  of  the  ages  succeeding,  but  also 
in  some  solid  work,  fixed  memorial,  and  immor¬ 
tal  monument,  bearing  a  character  or  signature 
both  of  the  power  of  a  king  and  the  difference 
and  perfection  of  such  a  king. 

3.  Therefore  I  did  conclude  with  myself,  that 
I  could  not  make  unto  your  Majesty  a  better 
oblation  than  of  some  treatise  tending  to  that 
end,  whereof  the  sum  will  consist  of  these  two 
parts;  the  former  concerning  the  excellency  of 
learning  and  knowledge,  and  the  excellency  of 
the  merit  and  true  glory  in  the  augmentation 


and  propagation  thereof:  the  latter,  what  the 
particular  acts  and  works  are,  which  have  been 
embraced  and  undertaken  for  the  advance¬ 
ment  of  learning;  and  again,  what  defects  and 
undervalues  I  find  in  such  particular  acts:  to 
the  end  that  though  I  cannot  positively  or  af¬ 
firmatively  advise  your  Majesty,  or  propound 
unto  you  framed  particulars,  yet  I  may  excite 
your  princely  cogitations  to  visit  the  excellent 
treasure  of  your  own  mind,  and  thence  to  ex¬ 
tract  particulars  for  this  purpose,  agreeable  to 
your  magnanimity  and  wisdom. 

1.  1.  In  the  entrance  to  the  former  of  these, 
to  clear  the  way,  and  as  it  were  to  make  silence, 
to  have  the  true  testimonies  concerning  the 
dignity  of  learning  to  be  better  heard,  without 
the  interruption  of  tacit  objections;  I  think 
good  to  deliver  it  from  the  discredits  and  dis¬ 
graces  which  it  hath  received,  all  from  igno¬ 
rance;  but  ignorance  severally  disguised;  ap¬ 
pearing  sometimes  in  the  zeal  and  jealousy  of 
divines;  sometimes  in  the  severity  and  arro- 
gancy  of  politiques;  and  sometimes  in  the  er¬ 
rors  and  imperfections  of  learned  men  them¬ 
selves. 

2.  I  hear  the  former  sort  say,  that  knowledge 
is  of  those  things  which  are  to  be  accepted  of 
with  great  limitation  and  caution:  that  the  as¬ 
piring  to  overmuch  knowledge  was  the  original 
temptation  and  sin  whereupon  ensued  the  fall 
of  man:  that  knowledge  hath  in  it  somewhat  of 
the  serpent,  and  therefore  where  it  entereth  in¬ 
to  a  man  it  makes  him  swell;  “ Scientia  inflat ”:1 
that  Salomon  gives  a  censure,  “That  there  is 
no  end  of  making  books,  and  that  much  read¬ 
ing  is  weariness  of  the  flesh’’;  and  again  in 
another  place,  “That  in  spacious  knowledge 
there  is  much  contestation,  and  that  he  that 
increaseth  knowledge  increaseth  anxiety’’  :2  that 
Saint  Paul  gives  a  caveat,  “That  we  be  not 
spoiled  through  vain  philosophy”:3  that  ex¬ 
perience  demonstrates  how  learned  men  have 
been  arch-heretics,  how  learned  times  have 
been  inclined  to  atheism,  and  how  the  contem¬ 
plation  of  second  causes  doth  derogate  from 
our  dependence  upon  God,  who  is  the  first 
cause. 

3.  To  discover  then  the  ignorance  and  error 
of  this  opinion,  and  the  misunderstanding  in 
the  grounds  thereof,  it  may  well  appear  these 
men  do  not  observe  or  consider  that  it  was  not 
the  pure  knowledge  of  nature  and  universality, 

^‘Knowledge  puffs  up.” 

2Eccles.  12.  12,  and  1.  18. 

3I  Cor.  8.  1. 


FIRST 


a  knowledge  by  the  light  whereof  man  did  give 
names  unto  other  creatures  in  Paradise,  as 
they  were  brought  before  him,  according  unto 
their  proprieties,  which  gave  the  occasion  to 
the  fall:  but  it  was  the  proud  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil,  with  an  intent  in  man  to  give 
law  unto  himself,  and  to  depend  no  more  upon 
God's  commandments,  which  was  the  form  of 
the  temptation.  Neither  is  it  any  quantity  of 
knowledge,  how  great  soever,  that  can  make 
the  mind  of  man  to  swell;  for  nothing  can  fill, 
much  less  extend  the  soul  of  man,  but  God  and 
the  contemplation  of  God;  and  therefore  Salo¬ 
mon,  speaking  of  the  two  principal  senses  of  in¬ 
quisition,  the  eye  and  the  ear,  affirmeth  that 
“the  eye  is  never  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor  the 
ear  with  hearing”;1  and  if  there  be  no  fulness, 
then  is  the  continent  greater  than  the  content: 
so  of  knowledge  itself,  and  the  mind  of  man, 
whereto  the  senses  are  but  reporters,  he  defin- 
eth  likewise  in  these  words,  placed  after  that 
Kalendar  or  Ephemerides  which  he  maketh  of 
the  diversities  of  times  and  seasons  for  all  ac¬ 
tions  and  purposes;  and  concludeth  thus:  “God 
hath  made  all  things  beautiful,  or  decent,  in 
the  true  return  of  their  seasons:  Also  he  hath 
placed  the  world  in  man’s  heart,  yet  cannot 
man  find  out  the  work  which  God  worketh 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end”:2  declaring  not 
obscurely,  that  God  hath  framed  the  mind  of 
man  as  a  mirror  or  glass,  capable  of  the  image 
of  the  universal  world,  and  joyful  to  receive 
the  impression  thereof,  as  the  eye  joyeth  to  re¬ 
ceive  light;  and  not  only  delighted  in  beholding 
the  variety  of  things  and  vicissitude  of  times, 
but  raised  also  to  find  out  and  discern  the  ordi¬ 
nances  and  decrees,  which  throughout  all  those 
changes  are  infallibly  observed.  And  although 
he  doth  insinuate  that  the  supreme  or  sum¬ 
mary  law  of  nature,  which  he  calleth  “The 
work  which  God  worketh  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end,”  is  not  possible  to  be  found  out  by 
man;  yet  that  doth  not  derogate  from  the  ca¬ 
pacity  of  the  mind,  but  may  be  referred  to  the 
impediments,  as  of  shortness  of  life,  ill  con¬ 
junction  of  labours,  ill  tradition  of  knowledge 
over  from  hand  to  hand,  and  many  other  in¬ 
conveniences,  whereunto  the  condition  of  man 
is  subject.  For  that  nothing  parcel  of  the  world 
is  denied  to  man’s  inquiry  and  invention,  he 
doth  in  another  place  rule  over,  when  he  saith, 
“The  spirit  of  man  is  as  the  lamp  of  God, 
wherewith  he  searcheth  the  inwardness  of  all 
secrets.”  If  then  such  be  the  capacity  and  re¬ 
ceipt  of  the  mind  of  man,  it  is  manifest  that 
Neeles,  i.  8.  2Eccles.  3.  2. 


BOOK  3 

there  is  no  danger  at  all  in  the  proportion  or 
quantity  of  knowledge,  how  large  soever,  lest  it 
should  make  it  swell  or  out-compass  itself;  no, 
but  it  is  merely  the  quality  of  knowledge, 
which,  be  it  in  quantity  more  or  less,  if  it  be 
taken  without  the  true  corrective  thereof,  hath 
in  it  some  nature  of  venom  or  malignity,  and 
some  effects  of  that  venom,  which  is  ventositv 
or  swelling.  This  corrective  spice,  the  mixture 
whereof  maketh  knowledge  so  sovereign,  is 
charity,  which  the  Apostle  immediately  addeth 
to  the  former  clause:  for  so  he  saith,  “Knowl¬ 
edge  bloweth  upy  but  charity  buildeth  up”;3  not 
unlike  unto  that  which  he  delivereth  in  anoth¬ 
er  place:  “If  I  spake,”  saith  he,  “with  the 
tongues  of  men  and  angels,  and  had  not  char¬ 
ity,  it  were  but  as  a  tinkling  cymbal”;  not  but 
that  it  is  an  excellent  thing  to  speak  with  the 
tongues  of  men  and  angels,  but  because,  if  it  be 
severed  from  charity,  and  not  referred  to  the 
good  of  men  and  mankind,  it  hath  rather  a 
sounding  and  unworthy  glory,  than  a  meriting 
and  substantial  virtue.  And  as  for  that  censure 
of  Salomon,  concerning  the  excess  of  writing 
and  reading  books,  and  the  anxiety  of  spirit 
which  redoundeth  from  knowledge;  and  that 
admonition  of  Saint  Paul,  “That  we  be  not  se¬ 
duced  by  vain  philosophy”;  let  those  places  be 
rightly  understood,  and  they  do  indeed  excel¬ 
lently  set  forth  the  true  bounds  and  limita¬ 
tions,  whereby  human  knowledge  is  confined 
and  circumscribed;  and  yet  without  any  such 
contracting  or  coarctation,  but  that  it  may 
comprehend  all  the  universal  nature  of  things; 
for  these  limitations  are  three:  the  first,  that 
we  do  not  so  place  our  felicity  in  knowledge, 
as  we  forget  our  mortality;  the  second,  that  we 
make  application  of  our  knowledge,  to  give 
ourselves  repose  and  contentment,  and  not  dis¬ 
taste  or  repining:  the  third,  that  we  do  not  pre¬ 
sume  by  the  contemplation  of  nature  to  attain 
to  the  mysteries  of  God.  For  as  touching  the 
first  of  these,  Salomon  doth  excellently  ex¬ 
pound  himself  in  another  place  of  the  same 
book,  where  he  saith:  “I  saw  well  that  knowl¬ 
edge  recedeth  as  far  from  ignorance  as  light 
doth  from  darkness;  and  that  the  wise  man’s 
eyes  keep  watch  in  his  head,  whereas  the  fool 
roundeth  about  in  darkness:  but  withal  I 
learned,  that  the  same  mortality  involveth 
them  both.”4  And  for  the  second,  certain  it  is, 
there  is  no  vexation  or  anxiety  of  mind  which 
resulteth  from  knowledge  otherwise  than  mere¬ 
ly  by  accident;  for  all  knowledge  and  wonder 
(which  is  the  seed  of  knowledge)  is  an  impres- 
3I  Cor.  8.  1.  4Eccles.  2.  13,  14. 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


sion  of  pleasure  in  itself:  but  when  men  fall  to 
framing  conclusions  out  of  their  knowledge, 
applying  it  to  their  particular,  and  ministering 
to  themselves  thereby  weak  fears  or  vast  de¬ 
sires,  there  groweth  that  carefulness  and  trou¬ 
ble  of  mind  which  is  spoken  of:  for  then  knowl¬ 
edge  is  no  more  Lumen  siccum ,  whereof  Hera¬ 
clitus  the  profound  said,  liLumen  siccum  opti¬ 
ma  anima but  it  becometh  lumen  madidum , 
or  maceratum ,2  being  steeped  and  infused  in 
the  humours  of  the  affections.  And  as  for  the 
third  point,  it  deserveth  to  be  a  little  stood 
upon,  and  not  to  be  lightly  passed  over:  for  if 
any  man  shall  think  by  view  and  inquiry  into 
these  sensible  and  material  things  to  attain 
that  light,  whereby  he  may  reveal  unto  him¬ 
self  the  nature  or  will  of  God,  then  indeed  is  he 
spoiled  by  vain  philosophy:  for  the  contempla¬ 
tion  of  God’s  creatures  and  works  produceth 
(having  regard  to  the  works  and  creatures 
themselves)  knowledge,  but  having  regard  to 
God,  no  perfect  knowledge,  but  wonder  which 
is  broken  knowledge.  And  therefore  it  was 
most  aptly  said  by  one  of  Plato’s  school,  “That 
the  sense  of  man  carrieth  a  resemblance  with 
the  sun,  which  (as  we  see)  openeth  and  reveal- 
eth  all  the  terrestrial  globe;  but  then  again 
it  obscureth  and  concealeth  the  stars  and  celes¬ 
tial  globe:  so  doth  the  sense  discover  natural 
things,  but  it  darkeneth  and  shutteth  up  di¬ 
vine.”3  And  hence  i t is  true  that  it  hath  proceed¬ 
ed,  that  divers  great  learned  men  have  been 
heretical,  whilst  they  have  sought  to  fly  up  to 
the  secrets  of  the  Deity  by  the  waxen  wings  of 
the  senses.  And  as  for  the  conceit  that  too  much 
knowledge  should  incline  a  man  to  atheism, 
and  that  the  ignorance  of  second  causes  should 
make  a  more  devout  dependence  upon  God, 
which  is  the  first  cause;  first,  it  is  good  to  ask 
the  question  which  Job  asked  of  his  friends: 
“Will  you  lie  for  God,  as  one  man  will  do  for 
another,  to  gratify  him  ?”4  For  certain  it  is  that 
God  worketh  nothing  in  nature  but  by  second 
causes:5  and  if  they  would  have  it  otherwise 
believed,  it  is  mere  imposture,  as  it  were  in  fa¬ 
vour  towards  God;  and  nothing  else  but  to  of¬ 
fer  to  the  author  of  truth  the  unclean  sacrifice 
of  a  lie.  But  further,  it  is  an  assured  truth,  and 
a  conclusion  of  experience,  that  a  little  or  su¬ 
perficial  knowledge  of  philosophy  may  incline 
the  mind  of  man  to  atheism,  but  a  further  pro- 

1<€The  dry  light  is  the  best  soul.” 

2A  light  saturated  with  moisture. 

3Philo  Judaeus,  De  Somnisy  p.  41. 

4J°b,  13.  7. 

6Hooker,  Ecclesiastical  Polity ,  1.  2;  Butler,  The  Analogy 
of  Religion ,  1.  2. 


ceeding  therein  doth  bring  the  mind  back 
again  to  religion.  For  in  the  entrance  of  philos¬ 
ophy,  when  the  second  causes,  which  are  next 
unto  the  senses,  do  offer  themselves  to  the 
mind  of  man,  if  it  dwell  and  stay  there  it  may 
induce  some  oblivion  of  the  highest  cause;  but 
when  a  man  passeth  on  further,  and  seeth  the 
dependence  of  causes,  and  the  works  of  Provi¬ 
dence,  then,  according  to  the  allegory  of  the 
poets,  he  will  easily  believe  that  the  highest 
link  of  nature’s  chain  must  needs  be  tied  to  the 
foot  of  Jupiter’s  chair.6  To  conclude  therefore, 
let  no  man  upon  a  weak  conceit  of  sobriety  or 
an  ill-applied  moderation  think  or  maintain, 
that  a  man  can  search  too  far,  or  be  too  well 
studied  in  the  book  of  God’s  word,  or  in  the 
book  of  God’s  works,  divinity  or  philosophy; 
but  rather  let  men  endeavour  an  endless  prog¬ 
ress  or  proficience  in  both;  only  let  men  be¬ 
ware  that  they  apply  both  to  charity,  and  not 
to  swelling:  to  use,  and  not  to  ostentation;  and 
again,  that  they  do  not  unwisely  mingle  or 
confound  these  learnings  together. 

II.  1.  And  as  for  the  disgraces  which  learn¬ 
ing  receiveth  from  politiques,  they  be  of  this 
nature;  that  learning  doth  soften  men’s  minds, 
and  makes  them  more  unapt  for  the  honour 
and  exercise  of  arms;  that  it  doth  mar  and  per¬ 
vert  men’s  dispositions  for  matter  of  govern¬ 
ment  and  policy,  in  making  them  too  curious 
and  irresolute  by  variety  of  reading,  or  too  per¬ 
emptory  or  positive  by  strictness  of  rules  and 
axioms,  or  too  immoderate  and  overweening  by 
reason  of  the  greatness  of  examples,  or  too  in¬ 
compatible  and  differing  from  the  times  by  rea¬ 
son  of  the  dissimilitude  of  examples;  or  at  least, 
that  it  doth  divert  men’s  travails  from  action 
and  business,  and  bringeth  them  to  a  love  of 
leisure  and  privateness:  and  that  it  doth  bring 
into  states  a  relaxation  of  discipline,  whilst 
every  man  is  more  ready  to  argue  than  to  obey 
and  execute.  Out  of  this  conceit,  Cato,  sur- 
named  the  Censor,  one  of  the  wisest  men  indeed 
that  ever  lived,  when  Carneades  the  philoso¬ 
pher  came  in  embassage  to  Rome,  and  that  the 
young  men  of  Rome  began  to  flock  about  him, 
being  allured  with  the  sweetness  and  majesty 
of  his  eloquence  and  learning,  gave  counsel  in 
open  senate  that  they  should  give  him  his  dis¬ 
patch  with  all  speed,  lest  he  should  infect  and 
enchant  the  minds  and  affections  of  the  youth, 
and  at  unawares  bring  in  an  alteration  of  the 
manners  and  customs  of  the  state.7  Out  of  the 
same  conceit  or  humour  did  Virgil,  turning  his 

*Iliady  Bk.  viii.  19;  and  also  Plato,  Theatetus ,  Bk.  1.  153. 

7Plutarch,  Marcus  Cato . 


FIRST  BOOK 


pen  to  the  advantage  of  his  country,  and  the 
disadvantage  of  his  own  profession,  make  a 
kind  of  separation  between  policy  and  govern¬ 
ment,  and  between  arts  and  sciences,  in  the 
verses  so  much  renowned,  attributing  and  chal¬ 
lenging  the  one  to  the  Romans,  and  leaving  and 
yielding  the  other  to  the  Grecians:  “Tu  regere 
imperio  populos ,  Romane ,  memento ,  Hae  tibi 
erunt  artes ,”  &C.1  So  likewise  we  see  that  Any- 
tus,  the  accuser  of  Socrates,  laid  it  as  an  article 
of  charge  and  accusation  against  him,  that  he 
did,  with  the  variety  and  power  of  his  dis¬ 
courses  and  disputations,  withdraw  young  men 
from  due  reverence  to  the  laws  and  customs  of 
their  country,  and  that  he  did  profess  a  danger¬ 
ous  and  pernicious  science,  which  was,  to  make 
the  worse  matter  seem  the  better,  and  to  sup¬ 
press  truth  by  force  of  eloquence  and  speech.2 

2.  But  these  and  the  like  imputations  have 
rather  a  countenance  of  gravity  than  any  ground 
of  justice:  for  experience  doth  warrant,  that 
both  in  persons  and  in  times  there  hath  been  a 
meeting  and  concurrence  in  learning  and  arms, 
flourishing  and  excelling  in  the  same  men  and 
the  same  ages.  For  as  for  men,  there  cannot  be 
a  better  nor  the  like  instance,  as  of  that  pair, 
Alexander  the  Great  and  Julius  Caesar  the  Dic¬ 
tator;  whereof  the  one  was  Aristotle's  scholar 
in  philosophy,  and  the  other  was  Cicero's  rival 
in  eloquence:  or  if  any  man  had  rather  call  for 
scholars  that  were  great  generals,  than  generals 
that  were  great  scholars,  let  him  take  Epami- 
nondas  the  Theban,  or  Xenophon  the  Atheni¬ 
an;  whereof  the  one  was  the  first  that  abated 
the  power  of  Sparta,  and  the  other  was  the  first 
that  made  way  to  the  overthrow  of  the  mon¬ 
archy  of  Persia.  And  this  concurrence  is  yet 
more  visible  in  times  than  in  persons,  by  how 
much  an  age  is  [a]  greater  object  than  a  man. 
For  both  in  Egypt,  Assyria,  Persia,  Grecia,  and 
Rome,  the  same  times  that  are  most  renowned 
for  arms,  are  likewise  most  admired  for  learn¬ 
ing;  so  that  the  greatest  authors  and  philoso¬ 
phers  and  the  greatest  captains  and  governors 
have  lived  in  the  same  ages.  Neither  can  it  other¬ 
wise  be:  for  as  in  man  the  ripeness  of  strength 
of  the  body  and  mind  cometh  much  about  an 
age,  save  that  the  strength  of  the  body  cometh 
somewhat  the  more  early,  so  in  states,  arms  and 
learning,  whereof  the  one  correspondeth  to  the 
body,  the  other  to  the  soul  of  man,  have  a  con¬ 
currence  or  near  sequence  in  times. 

3.  And  for  matter  of  policy  and  government, 

1Virgil,  Aeneidy  Bk.  vi.  851 :  “Roman,  remember  that  you 
will  rule  peoples  with  sovereign  sway;  this  will  be  your  arts.” 

2Plato,  Apology . 


5 

that  learning  should  rather  hurt,  than  enable 
thereunto,  is  a  thing  very  improbable:  we  see 
it  is  accounted  an  error  to  commit  a  natural 
body  to  empiric  physicians,  which  commonly 
have  a  few  pleasing  receipts  whereupon  they 
are  confident  and  adventurous,  but  know 
neither  the  cause  ol  diseases,  nor  the  complex¬ 
ions  of  patients,  nor  peril  of  accidents,  nor  the 
true  method  of  cures:  we  see  it  is  a  like  error  to 
rely  upon  advocates  or  lawyers,  which  are  only 
men  of  practice  and  not  grounded  in  their 
books,  who  are  many  times  easily  surprised 
when  matter  falleth  out  besides  their  experi¬ 
ence,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  causes  they  han¬ 
dle:  so  by  like  reason  it  cannot  be  but  a  matter 
of  doubtful  consequence  if  states  be  managed 
by  empiric  statesmen,  not  well  mingled  with 
men  grounded  in  learning.  But  contrariwise,  it 
is  almost  without  instance  contradictory  that 
ever  any  government  was  disastrous  that  was 
in  the  hands  of  learned  governors.  For  howso¬ 
ever  it  hath  been  ordinary  with  politique  men 
to  extenuate  and  disable  learned  men  by  the 
names  of  pedantes;  yet  in  the  records  of  time  it 
appeareth  in  many  particulars  that  the  govern¬ 
ments  of  princes  in  minority  (notwithstanding 
the  infinite  disadvantage  of  that  kind  of  state) 
have  nevertheless  excelled  the  government  of 
princes  of  mature  age,  even  for  that  reason 
which  they  seek  to  traduce,  which  is,  that  by 
that  occasion  the  state  hath  been  in  the  hands 
o {pedantes:  for  so  was  the  state  of  Rome  for  the 
first  five  years,  which  are  so  much  magnified, 
during  the  minority  of  Nero,  in  the  hands  of 
Seneca  a pedanti:  so  it  was  again,  for  ten  years' 
space  or  more,  during  the  minority  of  Gordian  us 
the  younger,  with  great  applause  and  conten- 
tation  in  the  hands  of  Misitheus  a  pedanti :  so 
was  it  before  that,  in  the  minority  of  Alexander 
Severus,  in  like  happiness,  in  hands  not  much 
unlike,  by  reason  of  the  rule  of  the  women,  who 
were  aided  by  the  teachers  and  preceptors.  Nay, 
let  a  man  look  into  the  government  of  the 
bishops  of  Rome,  as  by  name,  into  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  Pius  Quintus  and  Sextus  Quintus  in 
our  times,  who  were  both  at  their  entrance  es¬ 
teemed  but  as  pedantical  friars,  and  he  shall  find 
that  such  popes  do  greater  things,  and  proceed 
upon  truer  principles  of  estate,  than  those  which 
have  ascended  to  the  papacy  from  an  educa¬ 
tion  and  breeding  in  affairs  of  estate  and  courts 
of  princes;  for  although  men  bred  in  learning 
are  perhaps  to  seek  in  points  of  convenience  and 
accommodating  for  the  present,  which  the  Ital¬ 
ians  call  ragioni  di  stato ,3  whereof  the  same  P  ius 
3“Reasons  of  state.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


6 

Ouintus  could  not  hear  spoken  with  patience, 
terming  them  inventions  against  religion  and 
the  moral  virtues;  yet  on  the  other  side,  to  rec¬ 
ompense  that,  they  are  perfect  in  those  same 
plain  grounds  of  religion,  justice,  honour,  and 
moral  virtue,  which  if  they  be  well  and  watch¬ 
fully  pursued,  there  will  be  seldom  use  of  those 
other,  no  more  than  of  physic  in  a  sound  or  well- 
dieted  body.  Neither  can  the  experience  of  one 
man's  life  furnish  examples  and  precedents  for 
the  events  of  one  man's  life.  For  as  it  happeneth 
sometimes  that  the  grandchild,  or  other  descend¬ 
ant,  resembleth  the  ancestor  more  than  the 
son;  so  many  times  occurrences  of  present  times 
may  sort  better  with  ancient  examples  than 
with  those  of  the  later  or  immediate  times:  and 
lastly,  the  wit  of  one  man  can  no  more  counter¬ 
vail  learning  than  one  man's  means  can  hold 
way  with  a  common  purse. 

4.  And  as  for  those  particular  seducements 
or  indispositions  of  the  mind  for  policy  and 
government,  which  learning  is  pretended  to  in¬ 
sinuate;  if  it  be  granted  that  any  such  thing  be, 
it  must  be  remembered  withal,  that  learning 
ministereth  in  every  of  them  greater  strength 
of  medicine  or  remedy  than  it  offereth  cause  of 
indisposition  or  infirmity.  For  if  by  a  secret  op¬ 
eration  it  make  men  perplexed  and  irresolute, 
on  the  other  side  by  plain  precept  it  teacheth 
them  when  and  upon  what  ground  to  resolve; 
yea,  and  how  to  carry  things  in  suspense  with¬ 
out  prejudice,  till  they  resolve.  If  it  make  men 
positive  and  regular,  it  teacheth  them  what 
things  are  in  their  nature  demonstrative,  and 
what  are  conjectural,  and  as  well  the  use  of 
distinctions  and  exceptions,  as  the  latitude  of 
principles  and  rules.  If  it  mislead  by  dispropor¬ 
tion  or  dissimilitude  of  examples,  it  teacheth 
men  the  force  of  circumstances,  the  errors  of 
comparisons,  and  all  the  cautions  of  applica¬ 
tion;  so  that  in  all  these  it  doth  rectify  more 
effectually  than  it  can  pervert.  And  these  med¬ 
icines  it  conveyeth  into  men's  minds  much 
more  forcibly  by  the  quickness  and  penetra¬ 
tion  of  examples.  For  let  a  man  look  into  the 
errors  of  Clement  the  seventh,  so  lively  de¬ 
scribed  by  Guicciardine,  who  served  under 
him,  or  into  the  errors  of  Cicero,  painted  out 
by  his  own  pencil  in  his  Epistles  to  Atticus, 
and  he  will  fly  apace  from  being  irresolute.  Let 
him  look  into  the  errors  of  Phocion,  and  he  will 
beware  how  he  be  obstinate  or  inflexible.  Let 
him  but  read  the  fable  of  Ixion,1  and  it  will 
hold  him  from  being  vaporous  or  imaginative. 
Let  him  look  into  the  errors  of  Cato  the  second, 
Pindar,  Pythian  Odes ,  11.  21. 


and  he  will  never  be  one  of  the  Antipodes,  to 
tread  opposite  to  the  present  world.2 

5.  And  for  the  conceit  that  learning  should 
dispose  men  to  leisure  and  privateness,  and 
make  men  slothful;  it  were  a  strange  thing  if 
that  which  accustometh  the  mind  to  a  perpet¬ 
ual  motion  and  agitation  should  induce  sloth¬ 
fulness:  whereas  contrariwise  it  may  be  truly 
affirmed,  that  no  kind  of  men  love  business  for 
itself  but  those  that  are  learned;  for  other  per¬ 
sons  love  it  for  profit,  as  an  hireling,  that  loves 
the  work  for  the  wages;  or  for  honour,  as  be¬ 
cause  it  beareth  them  up  in  the  eyes  of  men, 
and  refresheth  their  reputation,  which  other¬ 
wise  would  wear;  or  because  it  putteth  them  in 
mind  of  their  fortune,  and  giveth  them  occa¬ 
sion  to  pleasure  and  displeasure;  or  because  it 
exerciseth  some  faculty  wherein  they  take 
pride,  and  so  entertaineth  them  in  good  hu¬ 
mour  and  pleasing  conceits  toward  themselves; 
or  because  it  advanceth  any  other  their  ends. 
So  that  as  it  is  said  of  untrue  valours,  that 
some  men's  valours  are  in  the  eyes  of  them  that 
look  on;  so  such  men's  industries  are  in  the 
eyes  of  others,  or  at  least  in  regard  of  their  own 
designments:  only  learned  men  love  business 
as  an  action  according  to  nature,  as  agreeable 
to  health  of  mind  as  exercise  is  to  health  of 
body,  taking  pleasure  in  the  action  itself,  and 
not  in  the  purchase:  so  that  of  all  men  they  are 
the  most  indefatigable,  if  it  be  towards  any 
business  which  can  hold  or  detain  their  mind. 

6.  And  if  any  man  be  laborious  in  reading 
and  study  and  yet  idle  in  business  and  action, 
it  groweth  from  some  weakness  of  body  or  soft¬ 
ness  of  spirit;  such  as  Seneca  speaketh  of: 
“Sjuidam  tam  sunt  umbratiles ,  ut  putent  in  tur- 
bido  esse  quicquid  in  luce  est”;z  and  not  of  learn¬ 
ing:  well  may  it  be  that  such  a  point  of  a  man’s 
nature  may  make  him  give  himself  to  learning, 
but  it  is  not  learning  that  breedeth  any  such 
point  in  his  nature. 

7.  And  that  learning  should  take  up  too 
much  time  or  leisure;  I  answer,  the  most  active 
or  busy  man  that  hath  been  or  can  be,  hath  (no 
question)  many  vacant  times  of  leisure,  while 
he  expecteth  the  tides  and  returns  of  business 
(except  he  be  either  tedious  and  of  no  dispatch, 
or  lightly  and  unworthily  ambitious  to  meddle 
in  things  that  may  be  better  done  by  others), 
and  then  the  question  is  but  how  those  spaces 
and  times  of  leisure  shall  be  filled  and  spent; 

2Cicero,  Ad  Atticum ,  1.  1. 

3Seneca,  Epistle sy  in:  “Some  men  are  so  fond  of  the 
shade  that  they  think  they  are  in  trouble  whenever  they 
are  in  the  light.” 


FIRST  BOOK 


whether  in  pleasures  or  in  studies;  as  was  well 
answered  by  Demosthenes  to  his  adversary 
Aeschines,  that  was  a  man  given  to  pleasure 
and  told  him  “That  his  orations  did  smell  of 
the  lamp”:  “Indeed  (said  Demosthenes)  there 
is  a  great  difference  between  the  things  that 
you  and  I  do  by  lamp-light.”1  So  as  no  man 
need  doubt  that  learning  will  expulse  business, 
but  rather  it  will  keep  and  defend  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  mind  against  idleness  and  pleasure, 
which  otherwise  at  unawares  may  enter  to  the 
prejudice  of  both. 

8.  Again,  for  that  other  conceit  that  learning 
should  undermine  the  reverence  of  laws  and 
government,  it  is  assuredly  a  mere  depravation 
and  calumny,  without  all  shadow  of  truth.  For 
to  say  that  a  blind  custom  of  obedience  should 
be  a  surer  obligation  than  duty  taught  and  un¬ 
derstood,  it  is  to  affirm,  that  a  blind  man  may 
tread  surer  by  a  guide  than  a  seeing  man  can 
by  a  light.  And  it  is  without  all  controversy, 
that  learning  doth  make  the  minds  of  men  gen¬ 
tle,  generous,  maniable,  and  pliant  to  govern¬ 
ment;  whereas  ignorance  makes  them  churlish, 
thwart,  and  mutinous:  and  the  evidence  of 
time  doth  clear  this  assertion,  considering  that 
the  most  barbarous,  rude,  and  unlearned  times 
have  been  most  subject  to  tumults,  seditions, 
and  changes. 

9.  And  as  to  the  judgement  of  Cato  the  Cen¬ 
sor,  he  was  well  punished  for  his  blasphemy 
against  learning,  in  the  same  kind  wherein  he 
offended;  for  when  he  was  past  threescore 
years  old,  he  was  taken  with  an  extreme  desire 
to  go  to  school  again,  and  to  learn  the  Greek 
tongue,  to  the  end  to  peruse  the  Greek  au¬ 
thors;  which  doth  well  demonstrate  that  his 
former  censure  of  the  Grecian  learning  was 
rather  an  affected  gravity,  than  according  to 
the  inward  sense  of  his  own  opinion.2  And  as  for 
Virgil’s  verses,  though  it  pleased  him  to  brave 
the  world  in  taking  to  the  Romans  the  art  of 
empire,  and  leaving  to  others  the  arts  of  sub¬ 
jects;  yet  so  much  is  manifest  that  the  Romans 
never  ascended  to  that  height  of  empire,  till  the 
time  they  had  ascended  to  the  height  of  other 
arts.  For  in  the  time  of  the  two  first  Caesars, 
which  had  the  art  of  government  in  greatest 
perfection,  there  lived  the  best  poet,  Virgilius 
Maro;  the  best  historiographer,  Titus  Livius; 
the  best  antiquary,  Marcus  Varro;  and  the  best, 
or  second  orator,  Marcus  Cicero,  that  to  the 
memory  of  man  are  known.  As  for  the  accusa¬ 
tion  of  Socrates,  the  time  must  be  remembered 

Plutarch,  Demosthenes ;  said  of  Pytheas,  not  Aeschines. 

2PIutarch,  Marcus  Cato. 


when  it  was  prosecuted;  which  was  under  the 
Thirty  Tyrants,  the  most  base,  bloody,  and  en¬ 
vious  persons  that  have  governed;  which  revo¬ 
lution  of  state  was  no  sooner  over,  but  Socrates, 
whom  they  had  made  a  person  criminal,  was 
made  a  person  heroical,  and  his  memory  accu¬ 
mulate  with  honours  divine  and  human;  and 
those  discourses  of  his  which  were  then  termed 
corrupting  ofmanners,  were  after  acknowledged 
for  sovereign  medicines  of  the  mind  and  man¬ 
ners,3  and  so  have  been  received  ever  since  till 
this  day.  Let  this  therefore  serve  for  answer  to 
politiques,  which  in  their  humorous  severity, 
or  in  their  feigned  gravity,  have  presumed  to 
throw  imputations  upon  learning;  which  redar- 
gution  nevertheless  (save  that  we  know  not 
whether  our  labours  may  extend  to  other  ages) 
were  not  needful  for  the  present,  in  regard  of 
the  love  and  reverence  towards  learning,  which 
the  example  and  countenance  of  two  so  learned 
princes,  Queen  Elizabeth  and  your  Majesty, 
being  as  Castor  and  Pollux,  lucida  sidera ,  stars 
of  excellent  light  and  most  benign  influence, 
hath  wrought  in  all  men  of  place  and  authority 
in  our  nation. 

III.  1.  Now  therefore  we  come  to  that  third 
sort  of  discredit  or  diminution  of  credit  that 
groweth  unto  learning  from  learned  men  them¬ 
selves,  which  commonly  cleaveth  fastest:  it  is 
either  from  their  fortune,  or  from  their  man¬ 
ners,  or  from  the  nature  of  their  studies.  For 
the  first,  it  is  not  in  their  power;  and  the  second 
is  accidental;  the  third  only  is  proper  to  be 
handled:  but  because  we  are  not  in  hand  with 
true  measure,  but  with  popular  estimation  and 
conceit,  it  is  not  amiss  to  speak  somewhat  of 
the  two  former.  The  derogations  therefore 
which  grow  to  learning  from  the  fortune  or  con¬ 
dition  of  learned  men,  are  either  in  respect  of 
scarcity  of  means,  or  in  respect  of  privateness 
of  life  and  meanness  of  employments. 

2.  Concerning  want,  and  that  it  is  the  case  of 
learned  men  usually  to  begin  with  little,  and 
not  to  grow  rich  so  fast  as  other  men,  by  reason 
they  convert  not  their  labours  chiefly  to  lucre 
and  increase,  it  were  good  to  leave  the  common¬ 
place  in  commendation  of  poverty  to  some  friar 
to  handle,  to  whom  much  was  attributed  by 
Machiavel  in  this  point;  when  he  said,  “That 
the  kingdom  of  the  clergy  had  been  long  before 
at  an  end,  if  the  reputation  and  reverence  to¬ 
wards  the  poverty  of  friars  had  not  borne  out 
the  scandal  of  the  superfluities  and  excesses  of 
bishops  and  prelates.”4  So  a  man  might  say 
that  the  felicity  and  delicacy  of  princes  and 
3Plato,  Apology.  4Machiavelli,  1 storie  Florentine ,  x. 


8 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


great  persons  had  long  since  turned  to  rudeness 
and  barbarism,  if  the  poverty  oflearning  had 
not  kept  up  civility  and  honour  oflife:  but  with¬ 
out  any  such  advantages,  it  is  worthy  the  ob¬ 
servation  what  a  reverent  and  honoured  thing 
poverty  of  fortune  was  for  some  ages  in  the 
Roman  state,  which  nevertheless  was  a  state 
without  paradoxes.  For  we  see  what  Titus  Li- 
vius  saith  in  his  introduction:  “ Caeterum  aut 
me  amor  negotii  suscepti fallit,  aut  nulla  unquam 
respublica  nec  major ,  nec  sanctior ,  nec  bonis  ex- 
emplis  c litiorfuit ;  nec  in  quam  tarn  serae  avaritia 
luxuriaque  immigraverint;  nec  ubi  tantus  ac  tarn 
diu  paupertati  ac  parsimoniae  honos  fuerit T1 
We  see  likewise,  after  that  the  state  of  Rome 
was  not  itself,  but  did  degenerate,  how  that 
person  that  took  upon  him  to  be  counsellor  to 
Julius  Caesar  after  his  victory  where  to  begin  his 
restoration  of  the  state,  maketh  it  of  all  points 
the  most  summary  to  take  away  the  estimation 
of  wealth:  “ Ferum  haec  et  omnia  mala  pariter 
cum  honore  pecuniae  desinent;  si  neque  magis- 
tratuSy  neque  alia  vulgo  cupienday  venalia  erunt .”2 
To  conclude  this  point,  as  it  was  truly  said, 
that  “ Rubor  est  virtutis  color ,”3  though  some¬ 
times  it  comes  from  vice;  so  it  may  be  fitly  said 
that  “ Paupertas  est  virtutis  jortuna ,”4  though 
sometimes  it  may  proceed  from  misgovernment 
and  accident.  Surely  Salomon  hath  pronounced 
it  both  in  censure,  “Qui festinat  ad  divitias  non 
erit  insons"  ;h  and  in  precept;  “Buy  the  truth, 
and  sell  it  not;  and  so  of  wisdom  and  knowl¬ 
edge”;  judging  that  means  were  to  be  spent 
upon  learning,  and  not  learning  to  be  applied 
to  means.  And  as  for  the  privateness  or  ob¬ 
scureness  (as  it  may  be  in  vulgar  estimation 
accounted)  of  life  of  contemplative  men;  it  is  a 
theme  so  common  to  extol  a  private  life,  not 
taxed  with  sensuality  and  sloth,  in  comparison 
and  to  the  disadvantage  of  a  civil  life,  for  safe¬ 
ty,  liberty,  pleasure,  and  dignity,  or  at  least 
freedom  from  indignity,  as  no  man  handleth  it 
but  handleth  it  well;  such  a  consonancy  it  hath 
to  men’s  conceits  in  the  expressing,  and  to 
men’s  consents  in  the  allowing.  This  only  I 
will  add,  that  learned  men  forgotten  in  states 

^ivy,  History:  “If  love  of  my  subject  does  not  blind 
me,  no  republic  was  ever  greater,  purer,  or  richer  in  good 
examples;  nor  any  in  which  avarice  and  luxury  came  so 
late,  and  in  which  poverty  and  thrift  were  honoured  for  so 
long  a  time.” 

2“Truly  these  and  other  evils  will  cease  at  the  very  time 
when  honour  ceases  to  be  paid  to  wealth,  and  if  neither 
magistracies  nor  other  things  desired  by  the  mob  will  be 
for  sale.” 

3“A  blush  is  virtue’s  colour.” 

4“Poverty  is  virtue’s  fortune.” 

&“He  who  hastens  to  riches  will  not  be  innocent.” 


and  not  living  in  the  eyes  of  men,  are  like  the 
images  of  Cassius  and  Brutus  in  the  funeral  of 
Junia;  of  which  not  being  represented,  as  many 
others  were,  Tacitus  saith,  “ Eo  ipso  praefulge- 
banty  quod  non  visebantur .”6 

3.  And  for  meanness  of  employment,  that 
which  is  most  traduced  to  contempt  is  that  the 
government  of  youth  is  commonly  allotted  to 
them;  which  age,  because  it  is  the  age  of  least 
authority,  it  is  transferred  to  the  disesteeming 
of  those  employments  wherein  youth  is  con¬ 
versant,  and  which  are  conversant  about  youth. 
But  how  unjust  this  traducement  is  (if  you  will 
reduce  things  from  popularity  of  opinion  to 
measure  of  reason)  may  appear  in  that  we  see 
men  are  more  curious  what  they  put  into  a 
new  vessel  than  into  a  vessel  seaspned;  and 
what  mould  they  lay  about  a  young  plant  than 
about  a  plant  corroborate;  so  as  the  weakest 
terms  and  times  of  all  things  use  to  have  the  best 
applications  and  helps.  And  will  you  hearken 
to  the  Hebrew  rabbins?  “Your  young  men 
shall  see  visions,  and  your  old  men  shall  dream 
dreams”;7  say  they  youth  is  the  worthier  age, 
for  that  visions  are  nearer  apparitions  of  God 
than  dreams?  And  let  it  be  noted,  that  howso¬ 
ever  the  condition  of  life  o { pedantes  hath  been 
scorned  upon  theatres,  as  the  ape  of  tyranny; 
and  that  the  modern  looseness  or  negligence 
hath  taken  no  due  regard  to  the  choice  of  school¬ 
masters  and  tutors;  yet  the  ancient  wisdom  of 
the  best  times  did  always  make  a  just  complaint, 
that  states  were  too  busy  with  their  laws  and 
too  negligent  in  point  of  education:  which  ex¬ 
cellent  part  of  ancient  discipline  hath  been  in 
some  sort  revived  of  late  times  by  the  colleges 
of  the  Jesuits;  of  whom,  although  in  regard  of 
their  superstition  I  may  say,  “Quo  melioresy  eo 
deter  iores" ,*8  yet  in  regard  to  this,  and  some 
other  points  concerning  human  learning  and 
moral  matters,  I  may  say,  as  Agesilaus  said  to 
his  enemy  Pharnabazus,  “ Talis  quum  sisy  nti- 
nam  noster  esses. ”9  And  thus  much  touchingthe 
discredits  drawn  from  the  fortunes  of  learned 
men. 

4.  As  touching  the  manners  of  learned  men, 
it  is  a  thing  personal  and  individual:  and  no 
doubt  there  be  amongst  them,  as  in  other  pro¬ 
fessions,  of  all  temperatures:  but  yet  so  as  it  is 
not  without  truth  which  is  said,  that  “ Abeunt 
studia  in  mores"  studies  have  an  influence  and 

*  Annals,  Bk.  in.  76:  “They  outshone  the  rest,  because 
not  seen.” 

7Joel,  2.  28. 

8“Thev  are  worse  by  as  much  as  they  are  better.” 

9Plutarch,  Agesilaus:  “You  are  such  a  person  that  I  wish 
you  were  one  of  us.” 


FIRST  BOOK 


operation  upon  the  manners  of  those  that  are 
conversant  in  them. 

But  upon  an  attentive  and  indifferent  re¬ 
view,  I  for  my  part  cannot  find  any  disgrace  to 
learning  can  proceed  from  the  manners  of 
learned  men;  not  inherent  to  them  as  they  are 
learned;  except  it  be  a  fault  (which  was  the 
supposed  fault  of  Demosthenes,  Cicero,  Cato 
the  second,  Seneca,  and  many  more)  that  be¬ 
cause  the  times  they  read  of  are  commonly  bet¬ 
ter  than  the  times  they  live  in,  and  the  duties 
taught  better  than  the  duties  practised,  they 
contend  sometimes  too  far  to  bring  things  to 
perfection,  and  to  reduce  the  corruption  of 
manners  to  honesty  of  precepts  or  examples  of 
too  great  height.  And  yet  hereof  they  have 
caveats  enough  in  their  own  walks.  For  Solon, 
when  he  was  asked  whether  he  had  given  his 
citizens  the  best  laws,  answered  wisely,  “Yea 
of  such  as  they  would  receive”:1  and  Plato, 
finding  that  his  own  heart  could  not  agree  with 
the  corrupt  manners  of  his  country,  refused  to 
bear  place  or  office;  saying,  “That  a  man's 
country  was  to  be  used  as  his  parents  were, 
that  is,  with  humble  persuasions,  and  not  with 
contestations.”2  And  Caesar's  counsellor  put  in 
the  same  caveat,  “ Non  ad  vetera  instituta  revo- 
cans  quae  jampridem  corruptis  moribus  ludibrio 
sunt”:z  and  Cicero  noteth  this  error  directly  in 
Cato  the  second,  when  he  writes  to  his  friend 
Atticus;  “Cato  optime  sentit ,  sed  nocet  interdum 
reipublicae;  loquitur  enim  tanquam  in  repub  lied 
Platonis ,  non  tanquam  in  faece  Romuli .”4  And 
the  same  Cicero  doth  excuse  and  expound  the 
philosophers  for  going  too  far  and  being  too 
exact  in  their  prescripts,  when  he  saith,  “ Isti 
ipsi  praeceptores  virtutis  et  magistri  videntur 
fines  officiorum  paulo  longius  quam  natura  vellet 
protulisse ,  ut  cum  ad  ultimum  animo  contendis- 
semus ,  ibi  tamen ,  ubi  oportet ,  consisteremus” :h 
and  yet  himself  might  have  said,  “Monitis  sum 
minor  ipse  meis ”;6  for  it  was  his  own  fault 
though  not  in  so  extreme  a  degree. 

Tlutarch,  Solon. 

2Epistle  Z,  iii.  331;  and  cf.  Epistle  D,  hi.  316. 

3Sallust,  Bellum  Catalinarium ,  “Not  to  bring  back  to 
their  old  institution  things  which  are  held  up  to  contempt 
because  of  the  conception  of  morals.” 

4Cicero,  Ad  Atticum ,  11.  I.  “Cato  means  very  well,  but 
he  sometimes  injures  the  republic,  for  he  talks  as  if  we 
were  living  in  Plato’s  republic  and  not  in  the  excrement  of 
Romulus.” 

6 Oratio  pro  L.  Murenay  xxxi.  65.  “These  preceptors 
have  stretched  the  lines  and  limits  of  duties  beyond  their 
natural  boundaries,  thinking  that  we  might  safely  reform 
when  we  had  reached  the  highest  point  of  perfection.” 

^Ovid,  Ars  Amatoriay  n.  548.  “I  am  unequal  to  my 
t  eaching.” 


6.  Another  fault  likewise  much  of  this  kind 
hath  been  incident  to  learned  men;  which  is, 
that  they  have  esteemed  the  preservation, 
good  and  honour  of  their  countries  or  masters 
before  their  own  fortunes  or  safeties.  For  so 
saith  Demosthenes  unto  the  Athenians;  “If  it 
please  you  to  note  it,  my  counsels  unto  you  are 
not  such  whereby  I  should  grow  great  amongst 
you,  and  you  become  little  amongst  the  Gre¬ 
cians;  but  they  be  of  that  nature,  as  they  are 
sometimes  not  good  for  me  to  give,  but  are  al¬ 
ways  good  for  you  to  follow.”7  And  so  Seneca, 
after  he  had  consecrated  that  “Quinquennium 
Neronis ”8  to  the  eternal  glory  of  learned  gover¬ 
nors,  held  on  his  honest  and  loyal  course  of 
good  and  free  counsel,  after  his  master  grew 
extremely  corrupt  in  his  government.  Neither 
can  this  point  otherwise  be;  for  learning  endu- 
eth  men's  minds  with  a  true  sense  of  the  frailty 
of  their  persons,  the  casualty  of  their  fortunes, 
and  the  dignity  of  their  soul  and  vocation:  so 
that  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  esteem  that 
any  greatness  of  their  own  fortune  can  be  a 
true  or  worthy  end  of  their  being  and  ordain- 
ment;  and  therefore  are  desirous  to  give  their 
account  to  God,  and  so  likewise  to  their  mas¬ 
ters  under  God  (as  kings  and  the  states  that 
they  serve)  in  these  words;  “Ecce  tibi  lucre- 
fed ,”9  and  not  “Ecce  mihi  lucrefeci ':10  whereas 
the  corrupter  sort  of  mere  politiques,  that  have 
not  their  thoughts  established  by  learning  in 
the  love  and  apprehension  of  duty,  nor  never 
look  abroad  into  universality,  do  refer  all 
things  to  themselves,  and  thrust  themselves 
into  the  centre  of  the  world,  as  if  all  lines  should 
meet  in  them  and  their  fortunes;  never  caring 
in  all  tempests  what  becomes  of  the  ship  of  es¬ 
tates,  so  they  may  save  themselves  in  the  cock¬ 
boat  of  their  own  fortune:  whereas  men  that 
feel  the  weight  of  duty  and  know  the  limits  of 
self-love,  use  to  make  good  their  places  and 
duties,  though  with  peril;  and  if  they  stand  in 
seditious  and  violent  alterations,  it  is  rather 
the  reverence  which  many  times  both  adverse 
parts  do  give  to  honesty,  than  any  versatile  ad¬ 
vantage  of  their  own  carriage.  But  for  this 
point  of  tender  sense  and  fast  obligation  of  duty 
which  learning  doth  endue  the  mind  withal, 
howsoever  fortune  may  tax  it,  and  many  in  the 
depth  of  their  corrupt  principles  may  despise 
it,  yet  it  will  receive  an  open  allowance,  and 
therefore  needs  the  less  disproof  or  excusation. 

1Oration  on  the  Crown. 

8The  five  years  of  Nero’s  minority. 

9“Lo,  I  have  gained  for  you.” 

10“Lo,  I  have  gained  for  myself.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


io 

7.  Another  fault  incident  commonly  to  learned 
men,  which  may  be  more  probably  defended 
than  truly  denied,  is,  that  they  fail  sometimes 
in  applying  themselves  to  particular  persons: 
which  want  of  exact  application  ariseth  from 
two  causes;  the  one,  because  the  largeness  of 
their  mind  can  hardly  confine  itself  to  dwell  in 
the  exquisite  observation  or  examination  of  the 
nature  and  customs  of  one  person:  for  it  is  a 
speech  for  a  lover,  and  not  for  a  wise  man,  “ Sa¬ 
tis  magnum  alter  alteri  theatrum  sumus”1  Nev¬ 
ertheless  I  shall  yield,  that  he  that  cannot  con¬ 
tract  the  sight  of  his  mind  as  well  as  disperse 
and  dilate  it,  wanteth  a  great  faculty.  But  there 
is  a  second  cause,  which  is  no  inability,  but  a 
rejection  upon  choice  and  judgement.  For  the 
honest  and  just  bounds  of  observation  by  one 
person  upon  another,  extend  no  further  but  to 
understand  him  sufficiently,  whereby  not  to 
give  him  offence,  or  whereby  to  be  able  to  give 
him  faithful  counsel,  or  whereby  to  stand  upon 
reasonable  guard  and  caution  in  respect  of  a 
man’s  self.  But  to  be  speculative  into  another 
man  to  the  end  to  know  how  to  work  him,  or 
wind  him,  or  govern  him,  proceedeth  from  a 
heart  that  is  double  and  cloven  and  not  entire 
and  ingenuous;  which  as  in  friendship  it  is  want 
of  integrity,  so  towards  princes  or  superiors  is 
want  of  duty.  For  the  custom  of  the  Levant, 
which  is  that  subjects  do  forbear  to  gaze  or  fix 
their  eyes  upon  princes,  is  in  the  outward  cere¬ 
mony  barbarous,  but  the  moral  is  good :  for  men 
ought  not  by  cunning  and  bent  observations  to 
pierce  and  penetrate  into  the  hearts  of  kings, 
which  the  scripture  hath  declared  to  be  inscru¬ 
table.2 

8.  There  is  yet  another  fault  (with  which  I 
will  conclude  this  part)  which  is  often  noted  in 
learned  men,  that  they  do  many  times  fail  to 
observe  decency  and  discretion  in  their  behav¬ 
iour  and  carriage,  and  commit  errors  in  small 
and  ordinary  points  of  action,  so  as  the  vulgar 
sort  of  capacities  do  make  a  judgement  of  them 
in  greater  matters  by  that  which  they  find 
wanting  in  them  in  smaller.  But  this  conse¬ 
quence  doth  oft  deceive  men,  for  which  I  do 
refer  them  over  to  that  which  was  said  by 
Themistocles,  arrogantly  and  uncivilly  being 
applied  to  himself  out  of  his  own  mouth,  but, 
being  applied  to  the  general  state  of  this  ques¬ 
tion,  pertinently  and  justly;  when  being  in¬ 
vited  to  touch  a  lute  he  said  “He  could  not 
fiddle,  but  he  could  make  a  small  town  a  great 

Seneca,  Epistulae  Morales  ad  l.ucilium ,  1.  7.  “We  are 
each  a  sufficiently  large  theatre  to  the  other.” 

2Prov.  25. 


state.”3  So  no  doubt  many  may  be  well  seen  in 
the  passages  of  government  and  policy,  which 
are  to  seek  in  little  and  punctual  occasions.  I 
refer  them  also  to  that  which  Plato  said  of  his 
master  Socrates,  whom  he  compared  to  the 
gallipots  of  apothecaries,  which  on  the  outside 
had  apes  and  owls  and  antiques  but  contained 
within  sovereign  and  precious  liquors  and  con¬ 
fections;4  acknowledging  that  to  an  external 
report  he  was  not  without  superficial  levities 
and  deformities,  but  was  inwardly  replenished 
with  excellent  virtues  and  powers.  And  so  much 
touching  the  point  of  manners  of  learned  men. 

9.  But  in  the  mean  time  I  have  no  purpose  to 
give  allowance  to  some  conditions  and  courses 
base  and  unworthy,  wherein  divers  professors 
of  learning  have  wronged  themselves  and  gone 
too  far;  such  as  were  those  trencher  philoso¬ 
phers  which  in  the  later  age  of  the  Roman  state 
were  usually  in  the  houses  of  great  persons, 
being  little  better  than  solemn  parasites;  of 
which  kind,  Lucian  maketh  a  merry  descrip¬ 
tion  of  the  philosopher  that  the  great  lady  took 
to  ride  with  her  in  her  coach,  and  would  needs 
have  him  carry  her  little  dog,  which  he  doing 
officiously  and  yet  uncomely,  the  page  scoffed 
and  said,  “That  he  doubted  the  philosopher  of 
a  Stoic  would  turn  to  be  a  Cynic.”  But  above 
all  the  rest,  the  gross  and  palpable  flattery, 
whereunto  many  not  unlearned  have  abased 
and  abused  their  wits  and  pens,  turning  (as  Du 
Bartas  saith)  Hecuba  into  Helena,  and  Faus¬ 
tina  into  Lucretia,  hath  most  diminished  the 
price  and  estimation  of  learning.5  Neither  is 
the  modern  dedication  of  books  and  writings, 
as  to  patrons,  to  be  commended:  for  that 
books  (such  as  are  worthy  the  name  of  books) 
ought  to  have  no  patrons  but  truth  and  reason. 
And  the  ancient  custom  was  to  dedicate  them 
only  to  private  and  equal  friends,  or  to  entitle 
the  books  with  their  names:  or  if  to  kings  and 
great  persons,  it  was  to  some  such  as  the  argu¬ 
ment  of  the  book  was  fit  and  proper  for:  but 
these  and  the  like  courses  may  deserve  rather 
reprehension  than  defence. 

10.  Not  that  I  can  tax  or  condemn  the  mori- 
geration  or  application  of  learned  men  to  men 
in  fortune.  For  the  answer  was  good  that  Diog¬ 
enes  made  to  one  that  asked  him  in  mockery, 
“How  it  came  to  pass  that  philosophers  were 
the  followers  of  rich  men,  and  not  rich  men  of 
philosophers?”  He  answered  soberly,  and  yet 

3Cicero,  Tusculanae  Disputationesy  1. 2;  Plutarch,  Themis - 
tocles. 

ASymposiumy  215  B;  cj Xenophon,  Symposium ,  v.  7. 

bBcthulians  Rescue ,  v. 


FIRST  BOOK 


sharply,  “Because  the  one  sort  knew  what  they 
had  need  of,  and  the  other  did  not/’1  And  of 
the  like  nature  was  the  answer  which  Aristip¬ 
pus  made,  when  having  a  petition  to  Diony¬ 
sius,  and  no  ear  given  to  him,  he  fell  down  at 
his  feet;  whereupon  Dionysius  stayed  and  gave 
him  the  hearing,  and  granted  it;  and  afterward 
some  person,  tender  on  the  behalf  of  philoso¬ 
phy,  reproved  Aristippus  that  he  would  offer 
the  profession  of  philosophy  such  an  indignity 
as  for  a  private  suit  to  fall  at  a  tyrant's  feet: 
but  he  answered,  “It  was  not  his  fault,  but  it 
was  the  fault  of  Dionysius,  that  had  his  ears  in 
his  feet."2  Neither  was  it  accounted  weakness 
but  discretion  in  him3  that  would  not  dispute 
his  best  with  Adrianus  Caesar;  excusing  him¬ 
self,  “That  it  was  reason  to  yield  to  him  that 
commanded  thirty  legions."4  These  and  the 
like  applications  and  stooping  to  points  of  ne¬ 
cessity  and  convenience  cannot  be  disallowed; 
for  though  they  may  have  some  outward  base¬ 
ness,  yet  in  a  judgement  truly  made  they  are  to 
be  accounted  submissions  to  the  occasion  and 
not  to  the  person. 

IV.  i.  Now  I  proceed  to  those  errors  and 
vanities  which  have  intervened  amongst  the 
studies  themselves  of  the  learned,  which  is  that 
which  is  principal  and  proper  to  the  present 
argument;  wherein  my  purpose  is  not  to  make 
a  justification  of  the  errors,  but  by  a  censure 
and  separation  of  the  errors  to  make  a  justi¬ 
fication  of  that  which  is  good  and  sound,  and 
to  deliver  that  from  the  aspersion  of  the  other. 
For  we  see  that  it  is  the  manner  of  men  to 
scandalize  and  deprave  that  which  retaineth 
the  state  and  virtue,  by  taking  advantage  upon 
that  which  is  corrupt  and  degenerate:  as  the 
heathens  in  the  primitive  church  used  to  blem¬ 
ish  and  taint  the  Christians  with  the  faults  and 
corruptions  of  heretics.  But  nevertheless  I  have 
no  meaning  at  this  time  to  make  any  exact  ani¬ 
madversion  of  the  errors  and  impediments  in 
matters  of  learning,  which  are  more  secret  and 
remote  from  vulgar  opinion,  but  only  to  speak 
unto  such  as  do  fall  under  or  near  unto  a  popu¬ 
lar  observation. 

2.  There  be  therefore  chiefly  three  vanities 
in  studies,  whereby  learning  hath  been  most 
traduced.  For  those  things  we  do  esteem  vain, 
which  are  either  false  or  frivolous,  those  which 
either  have  no  truth  or  no  use:  and  those  per¬ 
sons  we  esteem  vain,  which  are  either  credu¬ 
lous  or  curious;  and  curiosity  is  either  in  mat¬ 
ter  or  words:  so  that  in  reason  as  well  as  in 

Laertius,  Diogenes.  3Laertiu  s,  Aristippus. 

2Demonax.  4Spartianus,  Vita  Adrianiy  §15. 


I  I 

experience  there  fall  out  to  be  these  three  dis¬ 
tempers  (as  I  may  term  them)  of  learning:  the 
first,  fantastical  learning;  the  second,  conten¬ 
tious  learning;  and  the  last,  delicate  learning; 
vain  imaginations,  vain  altercations,  and  vain 
affectations;  and  with  the  last  I  will  begin.  Mar¬ 
tin  Luther,  conducted  (no  doubt)  by  an  higher 
providence,  but  in  discourse  of  reason,  finding 
what  a  province  he  had  undertaken  against  the 
bishop  of  Rome  and  the  degenerate  traditions 
of  the  church,  and  finding  his  own  solitude,  be¬ 
ing  no  ways  aided  by  the  opinions  of  his  own 
time,  was  enforced  to  awake  all  antiquity,  and 
to  call  former  times  to  his  succours  to  make  a 
party  against  the  present  time:  so  that  the  an¬ 
cient  authors,  both  in  divinity  and  in  human¬ 
ity,  which  had  long  time  slept  in  libraries,  be¬ 
gan  generally  to  be  read  and  revolved.  This  by 
consequence  did  draw  on  a  necessity  of  a  more 
exquisite  travail  in  the  languages  original, 
wherein  those  authors  did  write,  for  the  better 
understanding  of  those  authors,  and  the  better 
advantage  of  pressing  and  applying  their  words. 
And  thereof  grew  again  a  delight  in  their  man¬ 
ner  of  style  and  phrase,  and  an  admiration  of 
.that  kind  of  writing;  which  was  much  furthered 
and  precipitated  by  the  enmity  and  opposition 
that  the  propounders  of  those  primitive  but 
seeming  new  opinions  had  against  the  school¬ 
men;  who  were  generally  of  the  contrary  part, 
and  whose  writings  were  altogether  in  a  differ¬ 
ent  style  and  form;  taking  liberty  to  coin  and 
frame  new  terms  of  art  to  express  their  own 
sense,  and  to  avoid  circuit  of  speech,  without 
regard  to  the  pureness,  pleasantness,  and  (as  I 
may  call  it)  lawfulness  of  the  phrase  or  word. 
And  again,  because  the  great  labour  then  was 
with  the  people  (of  whom  the  Pharisees  were 
wont  to  say,  “ Execrabilis  ista  turbay  quae  non 
novit  legem')*  for  the  winning  and  persuading 
of  them,  there  grew  of  necessity  in  chief  price  and 
request  eloquence  and  variety  of  discourse,  as 
the  fittest  and  forciblest  access  into  the  capac¬ 
ity  of  the  vulgar  sort:  so  that  these  four  causes 
concurring,  the  admiration  of  ancient  authors, 
the  hate  of  the  schoolmen,  the  exact  study  of 
languages,  and  the  efficacy  of  preaching,  did 
bring  in  an  affectionate  study  of  eloquence  and 
copie  of  speech,  which  then  began  to  flourish. 
This  grew  speedily  to  an  excess;  for  men  began 
to  hunt  more  after  words  than  matter;  more  af¬ 
ter  the  choiceness  of  the  phrase,  and  the  round 
and  clean  composition  of  the  sentence,  and  the 
sweet  falling  of  the  clauses,  and  the  varying  and 
illustration  of  their  works  with  tropes  and  fig- 
5“The  wretched  mob  that  does  not  know  the  law.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


12 

ures,  than  after  the  weight  of  matter,  worth  of 
subject,  soundness  of  argument,  life  of  inven¬ 
tion,  or  depth  of  judgement.  Then  grew  the 
flowing  and  watery  vein  of  Osorius,1  the  Por¬ 
tugal  bishop,  to  be  in  price.  Then  did  Sturmius 
spend  such  infinite  and  curious  pains  upon  Cic¬ 
ero  the  Orator,  and  Hermogenes  the  Rhetori¬ 
cian,  besides  his  own  books  of  Periods  and  Imi¬ 
tation,  and  the  like.  Then  did  Car  of  Cambridge 
and  Ascham  with  their  lectures  and  writings 
almost  deify  Cicero  and  Demosthenes,  and  al¬ 
lure  all  young  men  that  were  studious  unto  that 
delicate  and  polished  kind  of  learning.  Then 
did  Erasmus  take  occasion  to  make  the  scoffing 
echo,  “ Decern  annos  consumpsi  in  legendo  Cic¬ 
erone”  ?  and  the  echo  answered  in  Greek  One , 
Asine.  Then  grew  the  learning  of  the  school¬ 
men  to  be  utterly  despised  as  barbarous.  In 
sum,  the  whole  inclination  and  bent  of  those 
times  was  rather  towards  copie  than  weight. 

3.  Here  therefore  is  the  first  distemper  of 
learning,  when  men  study  words  and  not  mat¬ 
ter;  whereof,  though  I  have  represented  an 
example  of  late  times,  yet  it  hath  been  and  will 
be  secundum  majus  et  minus  in  all  times.  And 
how  is  it  possible  but  this  should  have  an 
operation  to  discredit  learning,  even  with  vul¬ 
gar  capacities,  when  they  see  learned  men's 
works  like  the  first  letter  of  a  patent,  or  limned 
book;  which  though  it  hath  large  flourishes, 
yet  it  is  but  a  letter?  It  seems  to  me  that  Pyg¬ 
malion’s  frenzy  is  a  good  emblem  or  portraiture 
of  this  vanity:3  for  words  are  but  the  images  of 
matter;  and  except  they  have  life  of  reason 
and  invention,  to  fall  in  love  with  them  is  all 
one  as  to  fall  in  love  with  a  picture. 

4.  But  yet  notwithstanding  it  is  a  thing  not 
hastily  to  be  condemned,  to  clothe  and  adorn 
the  obscurity  even  of  philosophy  itself  with 
sensible  and  plausible  elocution.  For  hereof  we 
have  great  examples  in  Xenophon,  Cicero,  Sen¬ 
eca,  Plutarch,  and  of  Plato  also  in  some  degree; 
and  hereof  likewise  there  is  great  use:  for  sure¬ 
ly,  to  the  severe  inquisition  of  truth  and  the 
deep  progress  into  philosophy,  it  is  some  hin¬ 
drance;  because  it  is  too  early  satisfactory  to 
the  mind  of  man,  and  quencheth  the  desire  of 
further  search,  before  we  come  to  a  just  period. 
But  then  if  a  man  be  to  have  any  use  of  such 
knowledge  in  civil  occasions,  of  conference, 
counsel,  persuasion,  discourse,  or  the  like,  then 

Osorius  (d.  1580)  was  bishop  of  Silves  in  Algarres, 
and  also  an  historian  of  Portuguese  conquests  and  dis¬ 
coveries. 

2 “I  have  spent  ten  years  in  reading  Cicero.” 

3 Ovid,  Metamorphoses ,  x.  243. 


shall  he  find  it  prepared  to  his  hands  in  those 
authors  which  write  in  that  manner.  But  the 
excess  of  this  is  so  justly  contemptible,  that  as 
Hercules,  when  he  saw  the  image  of  Adonis, 
Venus’  minion,  in  a  temple,  said  in  disdain, 
“Nil  sacri  es”\*  so  there  is  none  of  Hercules’  fol¬ 
lowers  in  learning,  that  is,  the  more  severe  and 
laborious  sort  of  inquirers  into  truth,  but  will 
despise  those  delicacies  and  affectations,  as  in¬ 
deed  capable  of  no  divineness.  And  thus  much 
of  the  first  disease  or  distemper  of  learning. 

5.  The  second  which  followeth  is  in  nature 
worse  than  the  former:  for  as  substance  of  mat¬ 
ter  is  better  than  beauty  of  words,  so  contrari¬ 
wise  vain  matter  is  worse  than  vain  words: 
wherein  it  seemeth  the  reprehension  of  Saint 
Paul  was  not  only  proper  for  those  times,  but 
prophetical  for  the  times  following;  and  not  on¬ 
ly  respective  to  divinity,  but  extensive  to  all 
knowledge:  “Devita  prof  anas  vocum  novitates , 
et  oppositiones  falsi  nominis  scientiae.”h  For  he 
assigneth  two  marks  and  badges  of  suspected 
and  falsified  science:  the  one,  the  novelty  and 
strangeness  of  terms;  the  other,  the  strictness 
of  positions,  which  of  necessity  doth  induce  op¬ 
positions,  and  so  questions  and  altercations. 
Surely,  like  as  many  substances  in  nature  which 
are  solid  do  putrify  and  corrupt  into  worms;  so 
it  is  the  property  of  good  and  sound  knowledge 
to  putrify  and  dissolve  into  a  number  of  subtle, 
idle,  unwholesome,  and  (as  I  may  term  them) 
vermiculate questions,  which  haveindeed  a  kind 
of  quickness  and  life  of  spirit,  but  no  soundness 
of  matter  or  goodness  of  quality.  This  kind  of 
degenerate  learning  did  chiefly  reign  amongst 
the  schoolmen:  who  having  sharp  and  strong 
wits,  and  abundance  of  leisure,  and  small  vari¬ 
ety  of  reading,  but  their  wits  being  shut  up  in 
the  cells  of  a  few  authors  (chiefly  Aristotle  their 
dictator)  as  their  persons  were  shut  up  in  the 
cells  of  monasteries  and  colleges,  and  knowing 
little  history,  either  of  nature  or  time,  did  out 
of  no  great  quantity  of  matter  and  infinite  agi¬ 
tation  of  wit  spin  out  unto  us  those  laborious 
webs  of  learning  which  are  extant  in  their  books. 
For  the  wit  and  mind  of  man,  if  it  work  upon 
matter,  which  is  the  contemplation  of  the  crea¬ 
tures  of  God,  worketh  according  to  the  stuff 
and  is  limited  thereby;  but  if  it  work  upon  itself, 
as  the  spider  worketh  his  web,  then  it  is  endless, 
and  brings  forth  indeed  cobwebs  of  learning, 
admirable  for  the  fineness  of  thread  and  work, 
but  of  no  substance  or  profit. 

4“There  is  no  divinity  in  thee.” 

5 1  Tim.  6.  20:  ‘‘Avoid  profane  and  vain  babblings,  and 
oppositions  of  science  falsely  so  called.” 


FIRST  BOOK 


6.  This  same  unprofitable  subtility  or  curios¬ 
ity  is  of  two  sorts;  either  in  the  subject  itself 
that  they  handle,  when  it  is  a  fruitless  specula¬ 
tion  or  controversy  (whereof  there  are  no  small 
number  both  in  divinity  and  philosophy),  or  in 
the  manner  or  method  of  handling  of  a  knowl¬ 
edge,  which  amongst  them  was  this;  upon 
every  particular  position  or  assertion  to  frame 
objections,  and  to  those  objections,  solutions; 
which  solutions  were  for  the  most  part  not  con¬ 
futations,  but  distinctions:  whereas  indeed  the 
strength  of  all  sciences,  is  as  the  strength  of  the 
old  man’s  faggot,  in  the  bond.  For  the  harmo¬ 
ny  of  a  science,  supporting  each  part  the  other, 
is  and  ought  to  be  the  true  and  brief  confuta¬ 
tion  and  suppression  of  all  the  smaller  sort  of 
objections.  But,  on  the  other  side,  if  you  take 
out  every  axiom,  as  the  sticks  of  the  faggot, 
one  by  one,  you  may  quarrel  with  them  and 
bend  them  and  break  them  at  your  pleasure:  so 
that  as  was  said  of  Seneca,  “  V erborum  minutiis 
rerum  frangit  pondera”1  so  a  man  may  truly 
say  of  the  schoolmen,  “ ^uaesttonum  minutiis 
scientiarum  jrangunt  soliditatem ,”2  For  were  it 
not  better  for  a  man  in  a  fair  room  to  set  up  one 
great  light,  or  branching  candlestick  of  lights, 
than  to  go  about  with  a  small  watch  candle  into 
every  corner?  And  such  is  their  method,  that 
rests  not  so  much  upon  evidence  of  truth  proved 
by  arguments,  authorities,  similitudes,  exam¬ 
ples,  as  upon  particular  confutations  and  solu¬ 
tions  of  every  scruple,  cavillation,  and  objec¬ 
tion;  breeding  for  the  most  part  one  question  as 
fast  as  it  solveth  another;  even  as  in  the  former 
resemblance,  when  you  carry  the  light  into  one 
corner,  you  darken  the  rest;  so  that  the  fable 
and  fiction  of  Scylla  seemeth  to  be  a  lively  im¬ 
age  of  this  kind  of  philosophy  or  knowledge; 
which  was  transformed  into  a  comely  virgin  for 
the  upper  parts;  but  then  “ Candida  succinctam 
latrantibus  inquina  monstris”  :3  so  the  generali¬ 
ties  of  the  schoolmen  are  for  a  while  good  and 
proportionable;  but  then  when  you  descend 
into  their  distinctions  and  decisions,  instead  of 
a  fruitful  womb  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  man’s 
life,  they  end  in  monstrous  altercations  and 
barking  questions.  So  as  it  is  not  possible  but 
this  quality  of  knowledge  must  fall  under  pop¬ 
ular  contempt,  the  people  being  apt  to  contemn 
truth  upon  occasion  of  controversies  and  alter¬ 
cations,  and  to  think  they  are  all  out  of  their 

1  Quintilian,  x.  i.  §130:  “He  weakened  the  weight  of 
things  by  trivial  expression.” 

2“They  broke  the  solidity  of  the  sciences  by  the  minute¬ 
ness  of  their  questions.” 

3 Virgil,  Eclogues ,  Bk.  vi.  75.  “Her  white  loins  were  girt 
with  monsters.” 


*3 

way  which  never  meet;  and  when  they  see  such 
digladiation  about  subtilties,  and  matter  of  no 
use  or  moment,  they  easily  fall  upon  that  judge¬ 
ment  of  Dionysius  of  Syracusa,  “ Verba  ista 
sunt  senum  otiosorum .”4 

7.  Notwithstanding,  certain  it  is  that  if  those 
schoolmen  to  their  great  thirst  of  truth  and  un¬ 
wearied  travail  of  wit  had  joined  variety  and 
universality  of  reading  and  contemplation,  they 
had  proved  excellent  lights,  to  the  greatadvance- 
ment  of  all  learning  and  knowledge;  but  as  they 
are,  they  are  great  undertakers  indeed,  and  fierce 
with  dark  keeping.  But  as  in  the  inquiry  of  the 
divine  truth,  their  pride  inclined  to  leave  the 
oracle  of  God’s  word,  and  to  vanish  in  the  mix¬ 
ture  of  their  own  inventions;  so  in  the  inquisi¬ 
tion  of  nature,  they  ever  left  the  oracle  of  God’s 
works,  and  adored  the  deceiving  and  deformed 
images  which  the  unequal  mirror  of  their  own 
minds,  or  a  few  received  authors  or  principles, 
did  represent  unto  them.  And  thus  much  for 
the  second  disease  of  learning. 

8.  For  the  third  vice  or  disease  of  learning, 
which  concerneth  deceit  or  untruth,  it  is  of  all 
the  rest  the  foulest;  as  that  which  doth  destroy 
the  essential  form  of  knowledge,  which  is  no¬ 
thing  but  a  representation  of  truth:  for  the  truth 
of  being  and  the  truth  of  knowing  are  one,  dif¬ 
fering  no  more  than  the  direct  beam  and  the 
beam  reflected.  This  vice  therefore  brancheth 
itself  into  two  sorts;  delight  in  deceiving  and 
aptness  to  be  deceived;  imposture  and  credu¬ 
lity;  which,  although  they  appear  to  be  of  a  di¬ 
verse  nature,  the  one  seeming  to  proceed  of  cun¬ 
ning  and  the  other  of  simplicity,  yet  certainly 
they  do  for  the  most  part  concur:  for,  as  the 
verse  noteth, 

Percontatorem  fugito ,  nam  garrulus  idem  est.h 

an  inquisitive  man  is  a  prattler;  so  upon  the  like 
reason  a  credulous  man  is  a  deceiver:  as  we  see 
it  in  fame,  that  he  that  will  easily  believe  ru¬ 
mours,  will  as  easily  augment  rumours  and  add 
somewhat  to  them  of  his  own;  which  Tacitus 
wisely  noteth,  when  he  saith,  ilFingunt  simul 
creduntque” :6  so  great  an  affinity  hath  fiction 
and  belief. 

9.  This  facility  of  credit  and  accepting  or  ad¬ 
mitting  things  weakly  authorized  or  warranted, 
is  of  two  kinds  according  to  the  subject:  for  it 
is  either  a  belief  of  history,  or,  as  the  lawyers 

4Laertius,  Platoym.  18.  “It  is  old  men’s  idle  talk.” 

5Horace,  Epistles ,  I,  xvm.  69.  “I  flee  the  inquisitive  man, 
for  he  is  also  a  tattler.” 

6Tacitus,  History ,  Bk.  1.  51.  “They  add  to  rumours  as 
soon  as  they  hear  them.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


speak,  matter  of  fact;  or  else  of  matter  of  art 
and  opinion.  As  to  the  former,  we  see  the  ex¬ 
perience  and  inconvenience  of  this  error  in  ec¬ 
clesiastical  history;  which  hath  too  easily  re¬ 
ceived  and  registered  reports  and  narrations  of 
miracles  wrought  by  martyrs,  hermits,  or  monks 
of  the  desert,  and  other  holy  men,  and  their  rel¬ 
ics,  shrines,  chapels,  and  images:  which  though 
they  had  a  passage  for  a  time  by  the  ignorance 
of  the  people,  the  superstitious  simplicity  of 
some,  and  the  politic  toleration  of  others,  hold¬ 
ing  them  but  as  divine  poesies;  yet  after  a  per¬ 
iod  of  time,  when  the  mist  began  to  clear  up, 
they  grew  to  be  esteemed  but  as  old  wives’  fa¬ 
bles,  impostures  of  the  clergy,  illusions  of  spir¬ 
its,  and  badges  of  Antichrist,  to  the  great  scan¬ 
dal  and  detriment  of  religion. 

10.  So  in  natural  history,  we  see  there  hath 
not  been  that  choice  and  judgement  used  as 
ought  to  have  been;  as  may  appear  in  the  writ¬ 
ings  of  Plinius,  Cardanus,  Albertus,  and  divers 
of  the  Arabians,  being  fraught  with  much  fabu¬ 
lous  matter,  a  great  part  not  only  untried,  but 
notoriously  untrue,  to  the  great  derogation  of 
the  credit  of  natural  philosophy  with  the  grave 
and  sober  kind  of  wits:  wherein  the  wisdom  and 
integrity  of  Aristotle  is  worthy  to  be  observed; 
that,  having  made  so  diligent  and  exquisite  a 
history  of  living  creatures,  hath  mingled  it  spar¬ 
ingly  with  any  vain  or  feigned  matter:  and  yet 
on  the  other  side  hath  cast  all  prodigious  nar¬ 
rations,  which  he  thought  worthy  the  record¬ 
ing,  into  one  book:1  excellently  discerning  that 
matter  of  manifest  truth,  such  whereupon  ob¬ 
servation  and  rule  was  to  be  built,  was  not  to  be 
mingled  or  weakened  with  matter  of  doubtful 
credit;  and  yet  again,  that  rarities  and  reports 
that  seem  uncredible  are  not  to  be  suppressed 
or  denied  to  the  memory  of  men. 

11.  And  as  for  the  facility  of  credit  which  is 
yielded  to  arts  and  opinions,  it  is  likewise  of 
two  kinds;  either  when  too  much  belief  is  at¬ 
tributed  to  the  arts  themselves,  or  to  certain 
authors  in  any  art.  The  sciences  themselves, 
which  have  had  better  intelligence  and  confed¬ 
eracy  with  the  imagination  of  man  than  with 
his  reason,  are  three  in  number;  astrology,  na¬ 
tural  magic,  and  alchemy:  of  which  sciences, 
nevertheless,  the  ends  or  pretences  are  noble. 
For  astrology  pretendeth  to  discover  that  cor¬ 
respondence  or  concatenation  which  is  between 
the  superior  globe  and  the  inferior:  natural  ma¬ 
gic  pretendeth  to  call  and  reduce  natural  phi¬ 
losophy  from  variety  of  speculations  to  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  works:  and  alchemy  pretendeth  to 

’Gaujudaia  ’ AKovafxara . 


make  separation  of  all  the  unlike  parts  of  bodies 
which  in  mixtures  of  nature  are  incorporate. 
But  the  derivations  and  prosecutions  to  these 
ends,  both  in  the  theories  and  in  the  practices, 
are  full  of  error  and  vanity;  which  the  great 
professors  themselves  have  sought  to  veil  over 
and  conceal  by  enigmatical  writings,  and  refer¬ 
ring  themselves  to  auricular  traditions  and  such 
other  devices,  to  save  the  credit  of  impostures. 
And  yet  surely  to  alchemy  this  right  is  due,  that 
it  may  be  compared  to  the  husbandman  where¬ 
of  Aesop  makes  the  fable;  that,  when  he  died, 
told  his  sons  that  he  had  left  unto  them  gold 
buried  under  ground  in  his  vineyard;  and  they 
digged  over  all  the  ground,  and  gold  they  found 
none;  but  by  reason  of  their  stirring  and  dig¬ 
ging  the  mould  about  the  roots  of  their  vines, 
they  had  a  great  vintage  the  year  following:  so 
assuredly  the  search  and  stir  to  make  gold  hath 
brought  to  light  agreat  number  of  good  and  fruit¬ 
ful  inventions  and  experiments,  as  well  for  the 
disclosing  of  nature  as  for  the  use  of  man’s  life. 

12.  And  as  for  the  overmuch  credit  that  hath 
been  given  unto  authors  in  sciences,  in  making 
them  dictators,  that  their  words  should  stand, 
and  not  consuls  to  give  advice;  the  damage  is 
infinite  that  sciences  have  received  thereby,  as 
the  principal  cause  that  hath  kept  them  low  at 
a  stay  without  growth  or  advancement.  For 
hence  it  hath  comen,  that  in  arts  mechanical 
the  first  deviser  comes  shortest,  and  time  add- 
eth  and  perfecteth;  but  in  sciences  the  first  au¬ 
thor  goeth  furthest,  and  time  leeseth  and  cor- 
rupteth.  So  we  see,  artillery,  sailing,  printing, 
and  the  like,  were  grossly  managed  at  the  first, 
and  by  time  accommodated  and  refined:  but 
contrariwise,  the  philosophies  and  sciences  of 
Aristotle,  Plato,  Democritus,  Hippocrates,  Eu- 
clides,  Archimedes,  of  most  vigour  at  the  first 
and  by  time  degenerate  and  imbased;  whereof 
the  reason  is  no  other,  but  that  in  the  former 
many  wits  and  industries  have  contributed  in 
one;  and  in  the  latter  many  wits  and  industries 
have  been  spent  about  the  wit  of  some  one,  whom 
many  times  they  have  rather  depraved  than  il¬ 
lustrated.  For  as  water  will  not  ascend  higher 
than  the  level  of  the  first  springhead  from 
whence  it  descendeth,  so  knowledge  derived 
from  Aristotle,  and  exempted  from  liberty  of 
examination,  will  not  rise  again  higher  than  the 
knowledge  of  Aristotle.  And  therefore  although 
the  position  be  good,  “ Oportet  discentem  cre¬ 
dere”2  yet  it  must  be  coupled  with  this,  “Opor¬ 
tet  edoc  turn  judicare” ;3  for  disciples  do  owe  unto 

2“The  learner  should  believe  what  he  is  taught.” 

3“The  educated  man  should  exercise  his  judgement.” 


FIRST  BOOK 


masters  only  a  temporary  belief  and  a  suspen¬ 
sion  of  their  own  judgement  till  they  be  fully 
instructed,  and  not  an  absolute  resignation  or 
perpetual  captivity:  and  therefore,  to  conclude 
this  point,  I  will  say  no  more,  but  so  let  great 
authors  have  their  due,  as  time,  which  is  the 
author  of  authors,  be  not  deprived  of  his  due, 
which  is,  further  and  further  to  discover  truth. 
Thus  have  I  gone  over  these  three  diseases  of 
learning;  besides  the  which  there  are  some  other 
rather  peccant  humours  than  formed  diseases, 
which  nevertheless  are  not  so  secret  and  intrin¬ 
sic  but  that  they  fall  under  a  popular  observa¬ 
tion  and  traducement,  and  therefore  are  not  to 
be  passed  over. 

V.  i.  The  first  of  these  is  the  extreme  affect¬ 
ing  of  two  extremities:  the  one  antiquity,  the 
other  novelty;  wherein  it  seemeth  the  children 
of  time  do  take  after  the  nature  and  malice  of 
the  father.  For  as  he  devoureth  his  children,  so 
one  of  them  seeketh  to  devour  and  suppress  the 
other;  while  antiquity  envieth  there  should  be 
new  additions,  and  novelty  cannot  be  content 
to  add  but  it  must  deface:  surely  the  advice  of 
the  prophet  is  the  true  direction  in  this  matter, 
“State  super  vias  antiquas ,  et  videte  quaenam  sit 
via  recta  et  bona  et  ambulate  in  ea”1  Antiquity 
deserveth  that  reverence,  that  men  should  make 
a  stand  thereupon  and  discover  what  is  the  best 
way;  but  when  the  discovery  is  well  taken,  then 
to  make  progression.  And  to  speak  truly,  “  An- 
tiquitas  saeculi  juventus  mundi A2  These  times 
are  the  ancient  times,  when  the  world  is  an¬ 
cient,  and  not  those  which  we  account  ancient 
ordine  retrogrado ,  by  a  computation  backward 
from  ourselves. 

2.  Another  error  induced  by  the  former  is  a 
distrust  that  anything  should  be  now  to  be  found 
out,  which  the  world  should  have  missed  and 
passed  over  so  long  time;  as  if  the  same  objec¬ 
tion  were  to  be  made  to  time,  that  Lucian  mak- 
eth  to  Jupiter  and  other  the  heathen  gods;  of 
which  he  wondereth  that  they  begot  so  many 
children  in  old  time,  and  begot  none  in  his  time; 
and  asketh  whether  they  were  become  septua- 
genary,  or  whether  the  law  Papia*  made  against 
old  men's  marriages,  had  restrained  them.  So 
it  seemeth  men  doubt  lest  time  is  become  past 
children  and  generation;  wherein  contrariwise 
we  see  commonly  the  levity  and  unconstancy 
of  men’s  judgements,  which  till  a  matter  be 

xJer.  6.  16.^‘Stand  in  the  old  paths,  and  see  which  is  the 
straight  and  good  way,  and  walk  in  that.” 

2“The  antiquity  of  time  is  the  youth  of  the  world.” 

3Seneca  as  quoted  in  Lactantius,  Divine  Institutes ,  i. 
26,  13. 


done,  wonder  that  it  can  be  done;  and  as  soon 
as  it  is  done,  wonder  again  that  it  was  no  sooner 
done:  as  we  see  in  the  expedition  of  Alexander 
into  Asia,  which  at  first  was  prejudged  as  a  vast 
and  impossible  enterprise;  and  yet  afterwards 
it  pleaseth  Livy  to  make  no  more  of  it  than 
this,  “Nil  aliud  quam  bene  ausus  vana  contem- 
nereP 4  And  the  same  happened  to  Columbus  in 
the  western  navigation.  But  in  intellectual 
matters  it  is  much  more  common;  as  may  be 
seen  in  most  of  the  propositions  of  Euclid;  which 
till  they  be  demonstrate,  they  seem  strange  to 
our  assent;  but  being  demonstrate,  our  mind 
accepteth  of  them  by  a  kind  of  relation  (as  the 
lawyers  speak)  as  if  we  had  known  them  before. 

3.  Another  error,  that  hath  also  some  affinity 
with  the  former,  is  a  conceit  thatof  former  opin¬ 
ions  or  sects  after  variety  and  examination  the 
best  hath  still  prevailed  and  suppressed  the  rest; 
so  as  if  a  man  should  begin  the  labour  of  a  new 
search,  he  were  but  like  to  light  upon  somewhat 
formerly  rejected,  and  by  rejection  brought  in¬ 
to  oblivion:  as  if  the  multitude,  or  the  wisest 
for  the  multitude’s  sake,  were  not  ready  to  give 
passage  rather  to  that  which  is  popular  and  su¬ 
perficial,  than  to  that  which  is  substantial  and 
profound;  for  the  truth  is,  that  time  seemeth 
to  be  of  the  nature  of  a  river  or  stream,  which 
carrieth  down  to  us  that  which  is  light  and 
blown  up,  and  sinketh  and  drowneth  that  which 
is  weighty  and  solid. 

4.  Another  error,  of  a  diverse  nature  from  all 
the  former,  is  the  over-early  and  peremptory 
reduction  of  knowledge  into  arts  and  methods; 
from  which  time  commonly  sciences  receive 
small  or  no  augmentation.  But  as  young  men, 
when  they  knit  and  shape  perfectly,  do  seldom 
grow  to  a  further  stature;  so  knowledge,  while 
it  is  in  aphorisms  and  observations,  it  is  in 
growth;  but  when  it  once  is  comprehended  in 
exact  methods,  it  may  perchance  be  further  po¬ 
lished  and  illustrate  and  accommodated  for  use 
and  practice;  but  it  increaseth  no  more  in  bulk 
and  substance. 

5.  Another  error  which  doth  succeed  that 
which  we  last  mentioned,  is,  that  after  the  dis¬ 
tribution  of  particular  arts  and  sciences,  men 
have  abandoned  universality,  or  philosophia 
prima\  which  cannot  but  cease  and  stop  all  pro¬ 
gression.  For  no  perfect  discovery  can  be  made 
upon  a  flat  or  a  level:  neither  is  it  possible  to 
discover  the  more  remote  and  deeper  parts  of 
any  science,  if  you  stand  but  upon  the  level  of  the 
same  science,  and  ascend  not  to  a  higher  science. 

4Livy,  x.  17.  “It  was  nothing  but  being  bold  enough  to 
despise  empty  apprehensions.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


16 

6.  Another  error  hath  proceeded  from  too 
great  a  reverence,  and  a  kina  of  adoration  of 
the  mind  and  understanding  of  man;  by  means 
whereof,  men  have  withdrawn  themselves  too 
much  from  the  contemplation  of  nature,  and 
the  observations  of  experience,  and  have  tum¬ 
bled  up  and  down  in  their  own  reason  and  con¬ 
ceits.  Upon  these  intellectualists,  which  are  not¬ 
withstanding  commonly  taken  for  the  most  sub¬ 
lime  and  divine  philosophers,  Heraclitus  gave 
a  just  censure,  saying,  “Men  sought  truth  in 
their  own  little  worlds,  and  not  in  the  great  and 
common  world”;1  for  they  disdain  to  spell,  and 
so  by  degrees  to  read  in  the  volume  of  God’s 
works:  and  contrariwise  by  continual  medita¬ 
tion  and  agitation  of  wit  do  urge  and,  as  it  were, 
invocate  their  own  spirits  to  divine  and  give 
oracles  unto  them,  whereby  they  are  deserved¬ 
ly  deluded. 

7.  Another  error  that  hath  some  connexion 
with  this  latter  is,  that  men  have  used  to  infect 
their  meditations,  opinions,  and  doctrines,  with 
some  conceits  which  they  have  most  admired, 
or  some  sciences  which  they  have  most  applied; 
and  given  all  things  else  a  tincture  according 
to  them,  utterly  untrue  and  unproper.  So  hath 
Plato  intermingled  his  philosophy  with  theol¬ 
ogy,  and  Aristotle  with  logic;  and  the  second 
school  of  Plato,  Proclus  and  the  rest,  with  the 
mathematics.  For  these  were  the  arts  which  had 
a  kind  of  primogeniture  with  them  severally. 
So  have  the  alchemists  made  a  philosophy  out 
of  a  few  experiments  of  the  furnace;  and  Gil- 
bertus  our  countryman  hath  made  a  philoso¬ 
phy  out  of  the  observations  of  a  loadstone.  So 
Cicero,  when,  reciting  the  several  opinions  of 
the  nature  of  the  soul,  he  found  a  musician  that 
held  the  soul  was  but  a  harmony,  saith  pleas¬ 
antly,  “ Hie  ab  arte  sua  non  recessit ,”2  &c.  But 
of  these  conceits  Aristotle  speaketh  seriously 
and  wisely  when  he  saith,  “Qui  respiciunt  ad 
pauca  de  facili  pronunciant.y>z 

8.  Another  error  is  an  impatience  of  doubt, 
and  haste  to  assertion  without  due  and  mature 
suspension  of  judgement.  For  the  two  ways  of 
contemplation  are  not  unlike  the  two  ways  of 
action  commonly  spoken  of  by  the  ancients :  the 
one  plain  and  smooth  in  the  beginning,  and  in 
the  end  impassable;  the  other  rough  and  trouble¬ 
some  in  the  entrance,  but  after  a  while  fair  and 
even:  so  it  is  in  contemplation;  if  a  man  will 

Sextus  Empiricus,  Against  the  Logicians ,  1.  133. 

2Tusculanae  Disputationes ,  1.  10.  “He  did  not  with¬ 
draw  from  his  own  art.” 

3 Aristotle,  Generation  and  Corruption ,  Bk,  I.  2.  “They 
who  observe  only  a  few  circumstances  make  easy  pro¬ 
nouncements.” 


begin  with  certainties,  he  shall  end  in  doubts; 
but  if  he  will  be  content  to  begin  with  doubts,  he 
shall  end  in  certainties. 

9.  Another  error  is  in  the  manner  of  the  tra¬ 
dition  and  delivery  of  knowledge,  which  is  for 
the  most  part  magistral  and  peremptory,  and 
not  ingenuous  and  faithful;  in  a  sort  as  may  be 
soonest  believed,  and  not  easiliest  examined.  It 
is  true  that  in  compendious  treatises  for  prac¬ 
tice  that  form  is  not  to  be  disallowed:  but  in 
the  true  handling  of  knowledge,  men  ought  not 
to  fall  either  on  the  one  side  into  the  vein  of 
Velleius  the  Epicurean,  “ Niltam  metuens,  quam 
tie  dubitare  aliqua  de  re  videretur"  f  nor  on  the 
other  side  into  Socrates  his  ironical  doubting  of 
all  things;  but  to  propound  things  sincerely  with 
more  or  less  asseveration,  as  they  stand  in  a 
man’s  own  judgement  proved  more  or  less. 

10.  Other  errors  there  are  in  the  scope  that 
men  propound  to  themselves,  whereunto  they 
bend  their  endeavours;  for  whereas  the  more 
constant  and  devote  kind  of  professors  of  any 
scienceought  to  propound  to  themselves  tomake 
some  additions  to  their  science,  they  convert 
their  labours  to  aspire  to  certain  second  prizes: 
as  to  be  a  profound  interpreter  or  commenter, 
to  be  a  sharp  champion  or  defender,  to  be  a  me¬ 
thodical  compounder  or  abridger,  and  so  the 
patrimony  of  knowledge  cometh  to  be  some¬ 
times  improved,  but  seldom  augmented. 

1 1.  But  the  greatest  error  of  all  the  rest  is  the 
mistaking  or  misplacing  of  the  last  or  furthest 
end  of  knowledge.  For  men  have  entered  into  a 
desire  of  learning  and  knowledge,  sometimes  up¬ 
on  a  natural  curiosity  and  inquisitive  appetite; 
sometimes  to  entertain  their  minds  with  vari¬ 
ety  and  delight;  sometimes  for  ornament  and 
reputation;  and  sometimes  to  enable  them  to 
victory  of  wit  and  contradiction ;  and  most  times 
for  lucre  and  profession;  and  seldom  sincerely 
to  give  a  true  account  of  their  gift  of  reason,  to 
the  benefit  and  use  of  men:  as  if  there  were 
sought  in  knowledge  a  couch  whereupon  to  rest 
a  searching  and  restless  spirit;  or  a  terrace  for 
a  wandering  and  variable  mind  to  walk  up  and 
down  with  a  fair  prospect;  or  a  tower  of  state 
for  a  proud  mind  to  raise  itself  upon;  or  a  fort 
or  commanding  ground  for  strife  and  conten¬ 
tion;  or  a  shop  for  profit  or  sale;  and  not  a  rich 
storehouse  for  the  glory  of  the  Creator  and  the 
relief  of  man’s  estate.  But  this  is  that  which  will 
indeed  dignify  and  exalt  knowledge,  if  contem¬ 
plation  and  action  may  be  more  nearly  and 
straitly  conjoined  and  united  together  than  they 

4 Cicero,  De  natura  Deorum ,  1.  8.  “He  feared  nothing  so 
much  as  to  appear  in  doubt  regarding  anything.” 


FIRST  BOOK 


have  been;  a  conjunction  like  unto  that  of  the 
two  highest  planets,  Saturn,  the  planet  of  rest 
and  contemplation,  and  Jupiter,  the  planet  of 
civil  society  and  action.  Howbeit,  I  do  not  mean, 
when  I  speak  of  use  and  action,  that  end  before- 
mentioned  of  the  applying  of  knowledge  to  lucre 
and  profession;  for  I  am  not  ignorant  how  much 
that  diverteth  and  interrupteth  the  prosecution 
and  advancement  of  knowledge,  like  unto  the 
golden  ball  thrown  before  Atalanta,  which  while 
she  goeth  aside  and  stoopeth  to  take  up,  the 
race  is  hindered, 

Declinat  cursus ,  aurumque  volubile  tollit.1 

Neither  is  my  meaning,  as  was  spoken  of  Soc¬ 
rates,  to  call  philosophy  down  from  heaven  to 
converse  upon  the  earth;2 3  that  is,  to  leave  na¬ 
tural  philosophy  aside,  and  to  apply  knowledge 
only  to  manners  and  policy.  But  as  both  hea¬ 
ven  and  earth  do  conspire  and  contribute  to  the 
use  and  benefit  of  man  so  the  end  ought  to  be, 
from  both  philosophies  to  separate  and  reject 
vain  speculations,  and  whatsoever  is  empty  and 
void,  and  to  preserve  and  augment  whatsoever 
is  solid  and  fruitful:  that  knowledge  may  not 
be  as  a  courtesan,  for  pleasure  and  vanity  only, 
or  as  a  bond-woman,  to  acquire  and  gain  to  her 
master’s  use;  but  as  a  spouse,  for  generation, 
fruit,  and  comfort. 

12.  Thus  have  I  described  and  opened,  as  by 
a  kind  of  dissection,  those  peccant  humours  (the 
principal  of  them)  which  have  not  only  given 
impediment  to  the  proficience  of  learning,  but 
have  given  also  occasion  to  the  traducement 
thereof :  wherein  if  I  have  been  too  plain,  it  must 
be  remembered,  “jidelia  vulnera  amantis ,  sed do- 
losa  oscula  malignantis.”z  This  I  think  I  have 
gained,  that  I  ought  to  be  the  better  believed 
in  that  which  I  shall  say  pertaining  to  commen¬ 
dation;  because  I  have  proceeded  so  freely  in 
that  which  concerneth  censure.  And  yet  I  have 
no  purpose  to  enter  into  a  laudative  of  learn¬ 
ing,  or  to  make  a  hymn  to  the  Muses  (though 
1  am  of  opinion  that  it  is  long  since  their  rites 
were  duly  celebrated),  but  my  intent  is,  with¬ 
out  varnish  or  amplification  justly  to  weigh  the 
dignity  of  knowledge  in  the  balance  with  other 
things,  and  to  take  the  true  value  thereof  by 
testimonies  and  arguments  divine  and  human. 

VI.  i.  First  therefore,  let  us  seek  the  dignity 
of  knowledge  in  the  arch-type  or  first  platform, 

1Ovid,  Metamorphoses ,  x.  667.  “She  swerves  from  the 
course  and  picks  up  the  golden  ball.” 

2  Cicero,  Tusculanae  Disputationes ,  v.  4. 

3Prov.  17.  6.  “The  wounds  of  a  friend  are  faithful,  but 

the  kisses  of  an  enemy  are  deceitful.” 


l7 

which  is  in  the  attributes  and  acts  of  God,  as 
far  as  they  are  revealed  to  man  and  may  be  ob¬ 
served  with  sobriety;  wherein  we  may  not  seek 
it  by  the  name  of  learning;  for  all  learning  is 
knowledge  acquired,  and  all  knowledge  in  God 
is  original:  and  therefore  we  must  look  for  it  by 
another  name,  that  of  wisdom  or  sapience,  as 
the  Scriptures  call  it. 

2.  It  is  so  then,  that  in  the  work  of  the  crea¬ 
tion  we  see  a  double  emanation  of  virtue  from 
God;  the  one  referring  more  properly  to  power, 
the  other  to  wisdom;  the  one  expressed  in  mak¬ 
ing  the  subsistence  of  the  matter,  and  the  other 
in  disposing  the  beauty  of  the  form.  This  being 
supposed,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  for  anything 
which  appeareth  in  the  history  of  the  creation, 
the  confused  mass  and  matter  of  heaven  and 
earth  was  made  in  a  moment;  and  the  order 
and  disposition  of  that  chaos  or  mass  was  the 
work  of  six  days;  such  a  note  of  difference  it 
pleased  God  to  put  upon  the  works  of  power, 
and  the  works  of  wisdom;  wherewith  concur- 
reth,  that  in  the  former  it  is  not  set  down  that 
God  said,  “Let  there  be  heaven  and  earth,”  as 
it  is  set  down  of  the  works  following;  but  actu¬ 
ally,  that  God  made  heaven  and  earth:  the  one 
carrying  the  style  of  a  manufacture,  and  the 
other  of  a  law,  decree,  or  counsel. 

3.  To  proceed  to  that  wffiich  is  next  in  order 
from  God  to  spirits;  we  find,  as  far  as  credit  is 
to  be  given  to  the  celestial  hierarchy  of  that  sup¬ 
posed  Dionysius  the  senator  of  Athens,  the  first 
place  or  degree  is  given  to  the  angels  of  love, 
which  are  termed  seraphim;  the  second  to  the 
angels  of  light,  which  are  termed  cherubim;  and 
the  third,  and  so  following  places,  to  thrones, 
principalities,  and  the  rest,  which  are  all  angels 
of  power  and  ministry ;  so  as  the  angels  of  knowl¬ 
edge  and  illumination  are  placed  before  the  an¬ 
gels  of  office  and  domination.4 

4.  To  descend  from  spirits  and  intellectual 
forms  to  sensible  and  material  forms,  we  read 
the  first  form  that  was  created  was  light,5  which 
hath  a  relation  and  correspondence  in  nature 
and  corporal  things  to  knowledge  in  spirits  and 
incorporal  things. 

5.  So  in  the  distribution  of  days  we  see  the 
day  wherein  God  did  rest  and  contemplate  his 
own  w'orks,  was  blessed  above  all  the  days 
wherein  he  did  effect  and  accomplish  them.6 

6.  After  the  creation  was  finished,  it  is  set 
down  unto  us  that  man  was  placed  in  the  gar¬ 
den  to  work  therein;  which  work,  so  appointed 

4See  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  Celestial  Hierarchy ,  7-9. 

6  Gen.  1.  3. 

6Gen.  2.  3. 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


18 

to  him,  could  be  no  other  than  work  of  contem¬ 
plation;  that  is,  when  the  end  of  work  is  but 
for  exercise  and  experiment,  not  for  necessity; 
for  there  being  then  no  reluctation  of  the  crea¬ 
ture,  nor  sweat  of  the  brow,  man’s  employment 
must  of  consequence  have  been  matter  of  de¬ 
light  in  the  experiment,  and  not  matter  of  la¬ 
bour  for  the  use.  Again,  the  first  acts  which  man 
performed  in  Paradise  consisted  of  the  two  sum¬ 
mary  parts  of  knowledge;  the  view  of  creatures, 
and  the  imposition  of  names.1  As  for  the  knowl¬ 
edge  which  induced  the  fall,  it  was,  as  was 
touched  before,  not  the  natural  knowledge  of 
creatures,  but  the  moral  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil;  wherein  the  supposition  was,  that  God’s 
commandments  or  prohibitions  were  not  the 
originals  of  good  and  evil,  but  that  they  had 
other  beginnings,  which  man  aspired  to  know; 
to  the  end  to  make  a  total  defection  from  God 
and  to  depend  wholly  upon  himself. 

7.  To  pass  on :  in  the  first  event  or  occurrence 
after  the  fall  of  man,  we  see  (as  the  Scriptures 
have  infinite  mysteries,  not  violating  at  all  the 
truth  of  the  story  or  letter)  an  image  of  the  two 
estates,  the  contemplative  state  and  the  active 
state,  figured  in  the  two  persons  of  Abel  and 
Cain,  and  in  the  two  simplest  and  most  primi¬ 
tive  trades  of  life;  that  of  the  shepherd  (who, 
by  reason  of  his  leisure,  rest  in  a  place,  and  liv¬ 
ing  in  view  of  heaven,  is  a  lively  image  of  a  con¬ 
templative  life),  and  that  of  the  husbandman:2 
where  we  see  again  the  favour  and  election  of 
God  went  to  the  shepherd,  and  not  to  the  tiller 
of  the  ground. 

8.  So  in  the  age  before  the  flood,  the  holy  rec¬ 
ords  within  those  few  memorials  which  are 
there  entered  and  registered,  have  vouchsafed 
to  mention  and  honour  the  name  of  the  inven¬ 
tors  and  authors  of  music  and  works  in  metal.3 
In  the  age  after  the  flood,  the  first  great  judge¬ 
ment  of  God  upon  the  ambition  of  man  was  the 
confusion  of  tongues;4  whereby  the  open  trade 
and  intercourse  of  learning  and  knowledge  was 
chiefly  imbarred. 

9.  To  descend  to  Moses  the  lawgiver,  and 
God’s  first  pen:  he  is  adorned  by  the  Scriptures 
with  this  addition  and  commendation,  “That 
he  was  seen  in  all  the  learning  of  the  Egyp¬ 
tians’’;5  which  nation  we  know  was  one  of  the 
most  ancient  schools  of  the  world:  for  so  Plato 
brings  in  the  Egyptian  priest  saying  unto  Solon, 
“You  Grecians  are  ever  children;  you  have  no 
knowledge  of  antiquity,  nor  antiquity  of  knowl- 

*Gen.  2.  19.  4Gen.  1 1. 

2  Gen.  4.  6 Acts,  7.  22. 

3Gen.  4.  21,  22. 


edge.’’6  Take  a  view  of  the  ceremonial  law  of 
Moses;  you  shall  find,  besides  the  prefiguration 
of  Christ,  the  badge  or  difference  of  the  people 
of  God,  the  exercise  and  impression  of  obedi¬ 
ence,  and  other  divine  uses  and  fruits  thereof, 
that  some  of  the  most  learned  rabbins  have  tra¬ 
vailed  profitably  and  profoundly  to  observe, 
some  of  them  a  natural,  some  of  them  a  moral, 
sense  or  reduction  of  many  of  the  ceremonies 
and  ordinances.  As  in  the  law  of  the  leprosy, 
where  it  is  said,  “If  the  whiteness  have  over¬ 
spread  the  flesh,  the  patient  may  pass  abroad 
for  clean;  but  if  there  be  any  whole  flesh  remain¬ 
ing,  he  is  to  be  shut  up  for  unclean”;7  one  of 
them  noteth  a  principle  of  nature,  that  putre¬ 
faction  is  more  contagious  before  maturity  than 
after:  and  another  noteth  a  position  of  moral 
philosophy,  that  men  abandoned  to  vice  do  not 
so  much  corrupt  manners,  as  those  that  are  half 
good  and  half  evil.  So  in  this  and  very  many 
other  places  in  that  law,  there  is  to  be  found, 
besides  the  theological  sense,  much  aspersion 
of  philosophy. 

10.  So  likewise  in  that  excellent  book  of  Job,8 
if  it  be  revolved  with  diligence,  it  will  be  found 
pregnant  and  swelling  with  natural  philosophy; 
as  for  example,  cosmography,  and  the  round¬ 
ness  of  the  world,  “Qui  extendit  aquilonem  super 
vacuum ,  et  appenait  terram  super  nihilum” ;9 
wherein  the  pensileness  of  the  earth,  the  pole  of 
the  north,  and  the  finiteness  or  convexity  of  hea¬ 
ven  are  manifestly  touched.  So  again,  matter 
of  astronomy;  “Spiritus  ejus  ornavit  caelos ,  et 
obstetric  ante  manu  eius  e  ductus  est  Coluber  tor - 
tuosus .”10  And  in  another  place,  “ Nunquid  con- 
jungere  valebis  micantes  Stellas  Pleiadas ,  aut  gy- 
rum  Arcturi  poteris  dissipare .?”11  Where  the  fix¬ 
ing  of  the  stars,  ever  standing  at  equal  distance, 
is  with  great  elegancy  noted.  And  in  another 
place, “Qui facit  Arcturum ,  et  Oriona ,  et  Hyadas , 
et  interiora  Austri”  ;12  where  again  he  takes 
knowledge  of  the  depression  of  the  southern 
pole,  calling  it  the  secrets  of  the  south,  because 
the  southern  stars  were  in  that  climate  un- 

6Plato,  Timaeus ,  Bk.  in.  22. 

7Leviticus,  13. 

8See  Job,  26,  38. 

9“Who  stretcheth  out  the  north  upon  the  empty  space, 
and  hangeth  the  earth  upon  nothing.” 

10Job,  26.  7,  13.  “By  his  spirit  he  has  garnished  the 
heavens;  his  hand  formed  the  crooked  serpent.” 

uJob,  38.  31.  “Canst  thou  bring  together  the  glittering 
stars  of  the  Pleiades,  or  scatter  the  array  of  Arcturus?” 

12 “Which  maketh  Arcturus,  Orion,  and  Hyades,  and 
the  secrets  of  the  South.”  The  Hyades  nearly  approach 
the  letter  V  in  appearance.  “Interiora  Austri”  refers  to  the 
crown  of  stars  which  forms  an  imperfect  circle  near 
Arcturus. 


FIRST  BOOK 


seen.  Matter  of  generation;  “ Annon  sicut  lac 
mulsisti  me ,  et  sicut  caseum  coagulasti  me?”1 
&c.  Matter  of  minerals;  “ Habet  argentum  ven- 
arum  suarum  principia:  et  auro  locus  est  in 
quo  conflatur ,  ferrum  de  terra  tollitur ,  et  lapis 
solutus  calore  in  aes  vertitur”  :2  and  so  forwards 
in  that  chapter. 

11.  So  likewise  in  the  person  of  Salomon  the 
king,  we  see  the  gift  or  endowment  of  wisdom 
and  learning,  both  in  Salomon’s  petition  and  in 
God’s  assent  thereunto,  preferred  before  all  oth¬ 
er  terrene  and  temporal  felicity.  By  virtue  of 
which  grant  or  donative  of  God  Salomon  be¬ 
came  enabled  not  only  to  write  those  excellent 
parables  or  aphorisms  concerning  divine  and 
moral  philosophy;  but  also  to  compile  a  natu¬ 
ral  history  of  all  verdure,  from  the  cedar  upon 
the  mountain  to  the  moss  upon  the  wall  (which 
is  but  a  rudiment  between  putrefaction  and  an 
herb),  and  also  of  all  things  that  breathe  or 
move.  Nay,  thesameSalomon  the  king,  although 
he  excelled  in  the  glory  of  treasure  and  magni¬ 
ficent  buildings,  of  shipping  and  navigation,  of 
service  and  attendance,  of  fame  and  renown, 
and  the  like,  yet  he  maketh  no  claim  to  any  of 
those  glories,  but  only  to  the  glory  of  inquisi¬ 
tion  of  truth;  for  so  he  saith  expressly,  “The 
glory  of  God  is  to  conceal  a  thing,  but  the  glory 
of  the  king  is  to  find  it  out”;  as  if,  according  to 
the  innocent  play  of  children,  the  Divine  Ma¬ 
jesty  took  delight  to  hide  his  works,  to  the  end 
to  have  them  found  out;  and  as  if  kings  could 
not  obtain  a  greater  honour  than  to  be  God’s 
play-fellows  in  that  game;  considering  the  great 
commandment  of  wits  and  means,  whereby  no¬ 
thing  needeth  to  be  hidden  from  them. 

12.  Neither  did  the  dispensation  of  God  vary 
in  the  times  after  our  Saviour  came  into  the 
world;  for  our  Saviour  himself  did  first  show 
his  power  to  subdue  ignorance,  by  his  confer¬ 
ence  with  the  priests  and  doctors  of  the  law, 
before  he  showed  his  power  to  subdue  nature  by 
his  miracles.  And  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
was  chiefly  figured  and  expressed  in  the  simili¬ 
tude  and  gift  of  tongues,  which  are  but  vehicula 
scientiaef 

13.  So  in  the  election  of  those  instruments, 
which  it  pleased  God  to  use  for  the  plantation 
of  the  faith,  notwithstanding  that  at  the  first 
hedidemploy  persons  altogether  unlearned,  oth¬ 
erwise  than  by  inspiration,  more  evidently  to 

1“Hast  thou  not  drawn  me  forth  like  milk,  and  curdled 
me  like  cheese?” 

2  “Surely  there  is  a  vein  for  silver,  and  a  place  for  gold 
where  they  fine  it.  Iron  is  taken  out  of  the  earth,  and 
brass  is  molten  out  of  stone.” 

3“The  conveyants  of  knowledge.” 


l9 

declare  his  immediate  working,  and  to  abase  all 
human  wisdom  or  knowledge;  yet  nevertheless 
that  counsel  of  his  was  no  sooner  performed, 
but  in  the  next  vicissitude  and  succession  he  did 
send  his  divine  truth  into  the  world,  waited  on 
with  other  learnings,  as  with  servants  or  hand¬ 
maids:  for  so  we  see  Saint  Paul,  who  was  only 
learned  amongst  the  Apostles,  had  his  pen  most 
used  in  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament. 

14.  So  again  we  find  that  many  of  the  ancient 
bishops  and  fathers  of  the  church  were  excel¬ 
lently  read  and  studied  in  all  the  learning  of  the 
heathen;  insomuch  that  the  edict  of  the  Emper¬ 
or  Julianus  (whereby  it  was  interdicted  unto 
Christians  to  be  admitted  into  schools,  lectures, 
or  exercises  of  learning)  was  esteemed  and  ac¬ 
counted  a  more  pernicious  engine  and  machi¬ 
nation  against  the  Christian  faith,  than  were  all 
the  sanguinary  prosecutions  of  his  predeces¬ 
sors;4  neither  could  the  emulation  and  jealou¬ 
sy  of  Gregory  the  first  of  that  name,  bishop  of 
Rome,  ever  obtain  the  opinion  of  piety  or  devo¬ 
tion;  but  contrariwise  received  the  censure  of 
humour,  malignity,  and  pusillanimity,  even 
amongst  holy  men;  in  that  he  designed  to  oblit¬ 
erate  and  extinguish  the  memory  of  heathen 
antiquity5  and  authors.  But  contrariwise  it  was 
the  Christian  church,  which,  amidst  the  inun¬ 
dations  of  the  Scythians  on  the  one  side  from 
the  north-west,  and  the  Saracens  from  the  east, 
did  preserve  in  the  sacred  lap  and  bosom  there¬ 
of  the  precious  relics  even  of  heathen  learning, 
which  otherwise  had  been  extinguished  as  if  no 
such  thing  had  ever  been. 

15.  And  we  see  before  our  eyes,  that  in  the 
age  of  ourselves  and  our  fathers,  when  it  pleased 
God  to  call  the  Church  of  Rome  to  account  for 
their  degenerate  manners  and  ceremonies,  and 
sundry  doctrines  obnoxious  and  framed  to  up¬ 
hold  the  same  abuses;  at  one  and  the  same  time 
it  was  ordained  by  the  Divine  Providence,  that 
there  should  attend  withal  a  renovation  and  new 
spring  of  all  other  knowledges.  And,  on  the  oth¬ 
er  side  we  see  the  Jesuits,  who  partly  in  them¬ 
selves  and  partly  by  the  emulation  and  provo¬ 
cation  of  their  example,  have  much  quickened 
and  strengthened  the  state  of  learning,  we  see 
(I  say)  what  notable  service  and  reparation  they 
have  done  to  the  Roman  see. 

16.  Wherefore  to  conclude  this  part,  let  it  be 
observed,  that  there  be  two  principal  duties  and 
services,  besides  ornament  and  illustration, 
which  philosophy  and  human  learning  do  per- 

4 Epistula  ad  Jamblichus.  Gibbon,  The  Decline  and  Fall 
of  the  Roman  Empire ,  11.  23 

bIbid.y  iv.  45. 


20 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


form  to  faith  and  religion.  The  one,  because  they 
are  an  effectual  inducement  to  the  exaltation 
of  the  glory  of  God.  For  as  the  Psalms  and  oth¬ 
er  Scriptures  do  often  invite  us  to  consider  and 
magnify  the  great  and  wonderful  works  of  God, 
so  if  we  should  rest  only  in  the  contemplation 
of  the  exterior  of  them  as  they  first  offer  them¬ 
selves  to  our  senses,  we  should  do  a  like  injury 
unto  the  majesty  of  God,  as  if  we  should  judge 
or  construe  of  the  store  of  some  excellent  jewel¬ 
ler,  by  that  only  which  is  set  out  toward  the 
street  in  his  shop.  The  other,  because  they  min¬ 
ister  a  singular  help  and  preservative  against 
unbelief  and  error.  For  our  Saviour  saith,  “You 
err,  not  knowing  the  Scriptures,  nor  the  power 
of  God”;1  laying  before  us  two  books  or  vol¬ 
umes  to  study,  if  we  will  be  secured  from  error; 
first  the  Scriptures,  revealing  the  will  of  God, 
and  then  the  creatures  expressing  his  power; 
whereof  the  latter  is  a  key  unto  the  former:  not 
only  opening  our  understanding  to  conceive  the 
true  sense  of  the  Scriptures,  by  the  general  no¬ 
tions  of  reason  and  rules  of  speech;  but  chiefly 
opening  our  belief,  in  drawingus  into  a  due  med¬ 
itation  of  the  omnipotency  of  God,  which  is  chief¬ 
ly  signed  and  engraven  upon  his  works.  Thus 
much  therefore  for  divine  testimony  and  evi¬ 
dence  concerning  the  true  dignity  and  value  of 
learning. 

VII.  i.  As  for  human  proofs,  it  is  so  large  a 
field,  as  in  a  discourse  of  this  nature  and  brevi¬ 
ty  it  is  fit  rather  to  use  choice  of  those  things 
which  we  shall  produce,  than  to  embrace  the 
variety  of  them.  First  therefore,  in  the  degrees 
of  human  honour  amongst  the  heathen,  it  was 
the  highest  to  obtain  to  a  veneration  and  adora¬ 
tion  as  a  God.  This  unto  the  Christians  is  as 
the  forbidden  fruit.  But  we  speak  now  separate¬ 
ly  ofhuman  testimony:  according  to  which,  that 
which  the  Grecians  call  apotheosis ,  and  the  La¬ 
tins  relatio  inter  divosy  was  the  supreme  honour 
which  man  could  attribute  unto  man:  specially 
when  it  w*as  given,  not  by  a  formal  decree  or 
act  of  state,  as  it  was  used  among  the  Roman 
emperors,  but  by  an  inward  assent  and  belief. 
Which  honour,  being  so  high,  had  also  a  degree 
or  middle  term:  for  there  were  reckoned  above 
human  honours,  honours  heroical  and  divine: 
in  the  attribution  and  distribution  of  which  hon¬ 
ours  we  see  antiquity  made  this  difference:  that 
whereas  founders  and  uniters  of  states  and  ci¬ 
ties,  lawgivers,  extirpers  of  tyrants,  fathers  of 
the  people,  and  other  eminent  persons  in  civil 
merit,  wrere  honoured  but  with  the  titles  of  wor¬ 
thies  or  demi-gods;  such  as  were  Hercules,  The- 

1Matt.  22.  29. 


seus,  Minos,  Romulus,  and  the  like:  on  the  oth¬ 
er  side,  such  as  were  inventors  and  authors  of 
new  arts,  endowments,  and  commodities  to¬ 
wards  man’s  life,  were  ever  consecrated  amongst 
the  gods  themselves;  as  was  Ceres,  Bacchus, 
Mercurius,  Apollo,  and  others;  and  justly;  for 
the  merit  of  the  former  is  confined  within  the 
circle  of  an  age  or  a  nation;  and  is  like  fruitful 
showers,  which  though  they  be  profitable  and 
good,  yet  serve  but  for  that  season,  and  for  a 
latitude  of  ground  where  they  fall;  but  the  oth¬ 
er  is  indeed  like  the  benefits  of  heaven,  w'hich 
are  permanent  and  universal.  The  former  again 
is  mixed  with  strife  and  perturbation;  but  the 
latter  hath  the  true  character  of  Divine  Pres¬ 
ence,  coming  in  aura  leni ,2  without  noise  or 
agitation. 

2.  Neither  is  certainly  that  other  merit  of 
learning,  in  repressing  the  inconveniences  which 
grow  from  man  to  man,  much  inferior  to  the 
former,  of  relieving  the  necessities  which  arise 
from  nature;  which  merit  wras  lively  set  forth 
by  the  ancients  in  that  feigned  relation  of  Or¬ 
pheus’  theatre,  where  all  beasts  and  birds  assem¬ 
bled  ;  and  forgetting  their  several  appetites,  some 
of  prey,  some  of  game,  some  of  quarrel,  stood 
all  sociably  together  listening  unto  the  airs  and 
accords  of  the  harp ;  the  sound  whereof  no  soon¬ 
er  ceased,  or  was  drowned  by  some  louder  noise, 
but  every  beast  returned  to  his  own  nature: 
wherein  is  aptly  described  the  nature  and  con¬ 
dition  of  men,  who  are  full  of  savage  and  unre¬ 
claimed  desires,  of  profit,  of  lust,  of  revenge; 
which  as  long  as  they  give  ear  to  precepts,  to 
laws,  to  religion,  sweetly  touched  with  eloquence 
and  persuasion  of  books,  of  sermons,  of  ha¬ 
rangues,  so  long  is  society  and  peace  maintained; 
but  if  these  instruments  be  silent,  or  that  sedi¬ 
tion  and  tumult  make  them  not  audible,  all 
things  dissolve  into  anarchy  and  confusion. 

3.  But  this  appeareth  more  manifestly,  when 
kings  themselves,  or  persons  of  authority  under 
them,  or  other  governors  in  commonwealths  and 
popular  estates,  are  endued  with  learning.  For 
although  he  might  be  thought  partial  to  his  own 
profession,  that  said,  “Then  should  people  and 
estates  be  happy,  when  either  kings  were  phi¬ 
losophers,  or  philosophers  kings”;3  yet  so  much 
is  verified  by  experience,  that  under  learned 
princes  and  governors  there  have  been  ever  the 
best  times:  for  howsoever  kings  may  have  their 
imperfections  in  their  passions  and  customs;  yet 
if  they  be  illuminate  by  learning,  they  have 
those  notions  of  religion,  policy,  and  morality, 

*“A  gentle  movement  of  air.” 

3 Plato,  The  Republic ,  Bit.  v.  473. 


FIRST  BOOK 


which  do  preserve  them  and  refrain  them  from 
all  ruinous  and  peremptory  errors  and  excesses; 
whispering  evermore  in  their  ears,  when  coun¬ 
sellors  and  servants  stand  mute  and  silent.  And 
senators  or  counsellors  likewise,  which  be 
learned,  do  proceed  upon  more  safe  and  sub¬ 
stantial  principles,  than  counsellors  which  are 
only  men  of  experience:  the  one  sort  keeping 
dangers  afar  off,  whereas  the  other  discover 
them  not  till  they  come  near  hand,  and  then 
trust  to  the  agility  of  their  wit  to  ward  or  a- 
void  them. 

4.  Which  felicity  of  times  under  learned  prin¬ 
ces  (to  keep  still  the  law  of  brevity,  by  using 
the  most  eminent  and  selected  examples)  doth 
best  appear  in  the  age  which  passed  from  the 
death  of  Domitianus  the  emperor  until  the  reign 
of  Commodus;  comprehending  a  succession  of 
six  princes,  all  learned,  or  singular  favourers 
and  advancers  of  learning,  which  age  for  tem¬ 
poral  respects  was  the  most  happy  and  flour¬ 
ishing  that  ever  the  Roman  empire  (which  then 
was  a  model  of  the  world)  enjoyed;  a  matter  re¬ 
vealed  and  prefigured  unto  Domitian  in  a  dream 
the  night  before  he  was  slain;1  for  he  thought 
there  was  growm  behind  upon  his  shoulders  a 
neck  and  a  head  of  gold:  which  came  accord¬ 
ingly  to  pass  in  those  golden  times  which  suc¬ 
ceeded  :  of  which  princes  we  will  make  some  com¬ 
memoration;  wherein  although  the  matter  will 
be  vulgar,  and  may  be  thought  fitter  for  a  dec¬ 
lamation  than  agreeable  to  a  treatise  infolded 
as  this  is,  yet  because  it  is  pertinent  to  the  point 
in  hand,  “ Neque  semper  arcum  tendit  Apollo”2 
and  to  name  them  only  were  too  naked  and  cur¬ 
sory,  I  will  not  omit  it  altogether.  The  first  was 
Nerva;  the  excellent  temper  of  whose  govern¬ 
ment  is  by  aglance  in  CorneliusTacitus  touched 
to  the  life:  “ Postquam  divus  Nerva  res  olim  in- 
sociabiles  miscuisset ,  imperium  et  libertatem.”z 
And  in  token  of  his  learning,  the  last  act  of  his 
short  reign  left  to  memory  was  a  missive  to  his 
adopted  son  Trajan,  proceeding  upon  some  in¬ 
ward  discontent  at  the  ingratitude  of  the  times, 
comprehended  in  a  verse  of  Homer’s: 

Telis,  Phoebe ,  tuts  lacrymas  ulciscere  nostras .4 

5.  Trajan,  who  succeeded,  was  for  his  person 
not  learned:  but  if  we  will  hearken  to  the  speech 
of  our  Saviour,  that  saith,  “He  that  receiveth  a 
prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet  shall  have  a 

1  Suetonius,  Life  of  Domitian,  23 

2“And  Apollo  does  not  always  bend  his  bow.” 

3Tacitus:  ‘‘He  united  and  reconciled  two  things  which 
used  not  to  go  together — government  and  liberty.” 

4  Homer,  Iliad ,  Bk.  1. 42:  “Phoebus,  with  thy  darts  avenge 
our  tears.” 


2T 

prophet’s  reward,”  he  deserveth  to  be  placed 
amongst  the  most  learned  princes:  for  there  was 
not  a  greater  admirer  of  learning  or  benefactor 
of  learning;  a  founder  of  famous  libraries,  a  per¬ 
petual  advancer  of  learned  men  to  office,  and  a 
familiar  converser  with  learned  professors  and 
preceptors,  who  were  noted  to  have  then  most 
credit  in  court.  On  the  other  side,  how  much 
Trajan’s  virtue  and  government  was  admired 
and  renowned,  surely  no  testimony  of  grave  and 
faithful  history  doth  more  lively  set  forth,  than 
that  legend  tale  of  Gregorius  Magnus,  bishop 
of  Rome,  who  was  noted  for  the  extreme  envy 
he  bare  towards  all  heathen  excellency:  and  yet 
he  is  reported,  out  of  the  love  and  estimation 
of  Trajan’s  moral  virtues,  to  have  made  unto 
God  passionate  and  fervent  prayers  for  the  de¬ 
livery  of  his  soul  out  of  hell:  and  to  have  ob¬ 
tained  it,  with  a  caveat  that  he  should  make  no 
more  such  petitions.  In  this  prince’s  time  also 
the  persecutions  against  the  Christians  received 
intermission,  upon  the  certificate  of  Plinius  Se- 
cundus,  a  man  of  excellent  learning  and  by  Tra¬ 
jan  advanced. 

6.  Adrian,  his  successor,  was  the  most  curi¬ 
ous  man  that  lived,  and  the  most  universal  in¬ 
quirer;  insomuch  as  it  was  noted  for  an  error  in 
his  mind,  that  he  desired  to  comprehend  all 
things,  and  not  to  reserve  himself  for  the  wor¬ 
thiest  things:  falling  into  the  like  humour  that 
was  long  before  noted  in  Philip  of  Macedon; 
who,  when  he  would  needs  over-rule  and  put 
down  an  excellent  musician  in  an  argument 
touching  music,  was  well  answered  by  him 
again,  “God  forbid,  sir  (saith  he),  that  your  for¬ 
tune  should  be  so  bad,  as  to  know  these  things 
better  than  I.”  It  pleased  God  likewise  to  use 
the  curiosity  of  this  emperor  as  an  inducement 
to  the  peace  of  his  church  in  those  days.  For 
having  Christ  in  veneration,  not  as  a  God  or 
Saviour  but  as  a  wonder  or  novelty,  and  hav¬ 
ing  his  picture  in  his  gallery,  matched  with  Apol¬ 
lonius  (with  whom  in  his  vain  imagination  he 
thought  he  had  some  conformity),  yet  it  served 
the  turn  to  allay  the  bitter  hatred  of  those  times 
against  the  Christian  name,  so  as  the  church 
had  peace  during  his  time.  And  for  his  govern¬ 
ment  civil,  although  he  did  not  attain  to  that 
of  Trajan’s  in  glory  of  arms  or  perfection  of  jus¬ 
tice,  yet  in  deserving  of  the  weal  of  the  subject 
he  did  exceed  him.  For  Trajan  erected  many 
famous  monuments  and  buildings;  insomuch  as 
Constantine  the  Great  in  emulation  was  wont 
to  call  him  Parietaria ,  wall-flower,5  because  his 

b(3orapr)  roLxov.  He  called  Adrian  kpyaXelov  fory- 

pa(f>LKOP. 


22 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


name  was  upon  so  many  walls:  but  his  build¬ 
ings  and  works  were  more  of  glory  and  truimph 
than  use  and  necessity.  But  Adrian  spent  his 
whole  reign,  which  was  peaceable,  in  a  perum- 
bulation  or  survey  of  the  Roman  empire;  giv¬ 
ing  order  and  making  assignation  where  he  went, 
for  re-edifying  of  cities,  towns,  and  forts  de¬ 
cayed;  and  for  cutting  of  rivers  and  streams, 
and  for  making  bridges  and  passages,  and  for 
policing  of  cities  and  commonalties  with  new 
ordinances  and  constitutions,  and  granting  new 
franchises  and  incorporations;  so  that  his  whole 
time  was  a  very  restoration  of  all  the  lapses  and 
decays  of  former  times. 

7.  Antoninus  Pius,  who  succeeded  him,  was 
a  prince  excellently  learned,  and  had  the  pa¬ 
tient  and  subtle  wit  of  a  schoolman;  insomuch 
as  in  common  speech  (which  leaves  no  virtue 
un taxed)  he  was  called  Cymini  Sector ,  a  carver 
or  a  divider  of  cummin  seed,1  which  is  one  of 
the  least  seeds;  such  a  patience  he  had  and  set¬ 
tled  spirit,  to  enter  into  the  least  and  most  ex¬ 
act  differences  of  causes;  a  fruit  no  doubt  of  the 
exceeding  tranquillity  and  serenity  of  his  mind; 
which  being  no  ways  charged  or  incumbered, 
either  with  fears,  remorses,  or  scruples,  but  hav¬ 
ing  been  noted  for  a  man  of  the  purest  good¬ 
ness,  without  all  fiction  or  affectation,  that  hath 
reigned  or  lived,  made  his  mind  continually 
present  and  entire.  He  likewise  approached  a 
degree  nearer  unto  Christianity,  and  became, 
as  Agrippa  said  unto  Saint  Paul,  “half  a  Christ¬ 
ian”;  holding  their  religion  and  law  in  good 
opinion,  and  not  only  ceasing  persecution, 
but  giving  way  to  the  advancement  of  Chris¬ 
tians. 

8.  There  succeeded  him  the  first  Divi Jratres , 
the  two  adoptive  brethren,  Lucius  Commodus 
Yerus,  son  to  Aelius  Verus,  who  delighted  much 
in  the  softer  kind  of  learning,  and  was  wont  to 
call  the  poet  Martial  his  Virgil;  and  Marcus  Au¬ 
relius  Antoninus;  whereof  the  latter,  wTho  ob¬ 
scured  his  colleague  and  survived  him  long,  was 
named  the  Philosopher:  who,  as  he  excelled  all 
the  rest  in  learning,  so  he  excelled  them  like¬ 
wise  in  perfection  of  all  royal  virtues;  insomuch 
as  Julianus  the  emperor,  in  his  book  intituled 
Caesaresy  being  as  a  pasquil  or  satire  to  deride 
all  his  predecessors,  feigned  that  they  were  all 
invited  to  a  banquet  of  the  gods,  and  Silenus 
the  jester  sat  at  the  nether  end  of  the  table, 
and  bestowed  a  scoff  on  every  one  as  they  came 
in;  but  when  Marcus  Philosophus  came  in,  Si¬ 
lenus  was  gravelled  and  out  of  countenance,  not 

lttUnum  de  istis  puto  qui  cuminum  secant .”  Julian, 
Caesares. 


knowing  where  to  carp  at  him;  save  at  the  last 
he  gave  a  glance  at  his  patience  towards  his 
wife.2  And  the  virtue  of  this  prince,  continued 
with  that  of  his  predecessor,  made  the  name  of 
Antoninus  so  sacred  in  the  world,  that  though 
it  were  extremely  dishonoured  in  Commodus, 
Caracalla,  and  Heliogabalus,  who  all  bare  the 
name,  yet  when  Alexander  Severus  refused  the 
name  because  he  was  a  stranger  to  the  family, 
the  senate  with  one  acclamation  said,  “Quomo- 
do  Augustus ,  sic  et  Antoninus .”3  In  such  renown 
and  veneration  was  the  name  of  these  two  prin¬ 
ces  in  those  days,  that  they  would  have  had  it 
as  a  perpetual  addition  in  all  theemperors’style. 
In  this  emperor’s  time  also  the  Church  for  the 
most  part  was  in  peace;  so  as  in  this  sequence 
of  six  princes  we  do  see  the  blessed  effects  of 
learning  in  sovereignty,  painted  forth  in  the 
greatest  table  of  the  world. 

9.  But  for  a  tablet  or  picture  of  smaller  vol¬ 
ume  (not  presuming  to  speak  of  your  Majesty 
that  liveth),  in  my  judgement  the  most  excel¬ 
lent  is  that  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  your  immedi¬ 
ate  predecessor  in  this  part  of  Britain;  a  prince 
that,  if  Plutarch  were  now  alive  to  write  lives 
by  parallels,  would  trouble  him  I  think  to  find 
for  her  a  parallel  amongst  women.  This  lady 
was  endued  with  learning  in  her  sex  singular, 
and  rare  even  amongst  masculine  princes;  wheth¬ 
er  we  speak  of  learning,  of  language,  or  of  sci¬ 
ence,  modern  or  ancient,  divinity  or  humanity: 
and  unto  the  very  last  year  of  her  life  she  accus¬ 
tomed  to  appoint  set  hours  for  reading,  scarce¬ 
ly  any  young  student  in  an  university  more 
daily  or  more  duly.  As  for  her  government,  I 
assure  myself,  I  shall  not  exceed,  if  I  do  affirm 
that  this  part  of  the  island  never  had  forty-five 
years  of  better  times;  and  yet  not  through  the 
calmness  of  the  season,  but  through  the  wis¬ 
dom  of  her  regiment.  For  if  there  be  considered 
of  the  one  side,  the  truth  of  religion  established, 
the  constant  peace  and  security,  the  good  ad¬ 
ministration  of  justice,  the  temperate  use  of  the 
prerogative,  not  slackened,  nor  much  strained, 
the  flourishing  state  of  learning,  sortable  to  so 
excellent  a  patroness,  the  convenient  estate  of 
wealth  and  means,  both  of  crown  and  subject, 
the  habit  of  obedience,  and  the  moderation  of 
discontents;  and  there  be  considered  on  the  oth¬ 
er  side  the  differences  of  religion,  the  troubles 
of  neighbour  countries,  the  ambition  of  Spain, 
and  opposition  of  Rome;  and  then  that  she  was 
solitary  and  of  herself:  these  things  I  say  con- 

2 Julian,  Caesares. 

3“Let  the  name  of  Antoninus  be  as  the  name  of 
Augustus.” 


FIRST  BOOK 


sidered,  as  I  could  not  have  chosen  an  instance 
so  recent  and  so  proper,  so  I  suppose  I  could 
not  have  chosen  one  more  remarkable  or  emi¬ 
nent  to  the  purpose  now  in  hand,  which  is  con¬ 
cerning  the  conjunction  of  learning  in  the  prince 
with  felicity  in  the  people. 

10.  Neither  hath  learning  an  influence  and 
operation  only  upon  civil  merit  and  moral  vir¬ 
tue,  and  the  arts  or  temperature  of  peace  and 
peaceable  government;  but  likewise  it  hath  no 
less  power  and  efficacy  in  enablement  towards 
martial  and  military  virtue  and  prowess;  as 
may  be  notably  represented  in  the  examples  of 
Alexander  the  Great  and  Caesar  the  dictator, 
mentioned  before,  but  now  in  fit  place  to  be  re¬ 
sumed:  of  whose  virtues  and  acts  in  war  there 
needs  no  note  or  recital,  having  been  the  won¬ 
ders  of  time  in  that  kind:  but  of  their  affections 
towards  learning,  and  perfections  in  learning, 
it  is  pertinent  to  say  somewhat. 

11.  Alexander  was  bred  and  taught  under 
Aristotle1  the  great  philosopher,  who  dedicated 
divers  of  his  books  of  philosophy  unto  him:  he 
was  attended  with  Callisthenes  and  divers  oth¬ 
er  learned  persons,  that  followed  him  in  camp, 
throughout  his  journeys  and  conquests.  What 
price  and  estimation  he  had  learning  in  doth 
notably  appear  in  these  three  particulars:  first, 
in  the  envy  he  used  to  express  that  he  bare  to¬ 
wards  Achilles,  in  this,  that  he  had  so  good  a 
trumpet  of  his  praises  as  Homer’s  verses:  sec¬ 
ondly,  in  the  judgement  or  solution  he  gave 
touching  that  precious  cabinet  of  Darius,  which 
was  found  among  his  jewels;  whereof  question 
was  made  what  thing  was  worthy  to  be  put  in¬ 
to  it;  and  he  gave  his  opinion  for  Homer’s  works : 
thirdly,  in  his  letter  to  Aristotle,  after  he  had 
set  forth  his  books  of  nature,  wherein  he  expos¬ 
tulated  with  them  for  publishing  the  secrets  or 
mysteries  of  philosophy;  and  gave  him  to  un¬ 
derstand  that  himself  esteemed  it  more  to  excel 
other  men  in  learning  and  knowledge  than  in 
power  and  empire.  And  what  use  he  had  of  learn- 
ingdoth  appear,  or  rather  shine,  in  all  his  speech¬ 
es  and  answers,  being  full  of  science  and  use  of 
science,  and  that  in  all  variety. 

12.  And  herein  again  it  may  seem  a  thing 
scholastical,  and  somewhat  idle,  to  recite  things 
that  every  man  knoweth;  but  yet,  since  the  ar¬ 
gument  I  handle  leadeth  me  thereunto,  I  am 
glad  that  men  shall  perceive  I  am  as  willing  to 
flatter  (if  they  will  so  call  it)  an  Alexander,  or 
a  Caesar,  or  an  Antoninus,  that  are  dead  many 
hundred  years  since,  as  any  that  now  liveth: 
for  it  is  the  displaying  of  the  glory  of  learning 

1For  these  anecdotes,  see  Plutarch,  Alexander . 


23 

in  sovereignty  that  I  propound  to  myself,  and 
not  an  humour  of declaimingin  anyman’s  prais¬ 
es.  Observe  then  the  speech  he  used  of  Dioge¬ 
nes,  and  see  if  it  tend  not  to  the  true  state  of 
one  of  the  gretaest  questions  of  moral  philos¬ 
ophy;  whether  the  enjoying  of  outward  things, 
or  the  contemning  of  them,  be  the  greatest  hap¬ 
piness:  for  when  he  saw  Diogenes  so  perfectly 
contented  with  so  little,  he  said  to  those  that 
mocked  at  his  condition,  “Were  I  not  Alexan¬ 
der,  I  would  wish  to  be  Diogenes.”  But  Seneca 
inverteth  it,  and  saith;  “ Plus  erat ,  quod  hie  nol¬ 
le  t  accipere ,  quam  quod  ille  posset  dare.”  There 
were  more  things  which  Diogenes  would  have 
refused,  than  those  were  which  Alexander  could 
have  given  or  enjoyed.2 

13.  Observe  again  that  speech  which  was  us¬ 
ual  with  him,  “That  he  felt  his  mortality  chief¬ 
ly  in  two  things,  sleep  and  lust”3  and  see  if  it 
were  not  a  speech  extracted  out  of  the  depth  of 
natural  philosophy,  and  liker  to  have  comen  out 
of  the  mouth  of  Aristotle  or  Democritus,  than 
from  Alexander. 

14.  See  again  that  speech  of  humanity  and 
poesy;  when  upon  the  bleeding  of  his  wounds, 
he  called  unto  him  one  of  his  flatterers,  that  was 
wont  to  ascribe  to  him  divine  honour,  and  said, 
“Look,  this  is  very  blood;  this  is  not  such  a  li¬ 
quor  as  Homer  speaketh  of,  which  ran  from 
Venus’  hand,  when  it  was  pierced  by  Diome- 
des.”4 

15.  See  likewise  his  readiness  in  reprehension 
of  logic,  in  the  speech  he  used  to  Cassander,  up¬ 
on  a  complaint  that  was  made  against  his  fa¬ 
ther  Antipater:  for  when  Alexander  happed  to 
say,  “Do  you  think  these  men  would  have  come 
from  so  far  to  complain,  except  they  had  just 
cause  of  grief?”  and  Cassander  answered,  “Yea, 
that  was  the  matter,  because  they  thought  they 
should  not  be  disproved” ;  said  Alexander  laugh¬ 
ing:  “See  the  subtilties  of  Aristotle,  to  take  a 
matter  both  ways.  pro  et  contra ,  &c.” 

16.  But  note  again  how  well  he  could  use  the 
same  art,  which  he  reprehended,  to  serve  his 
own  humour:  when  bearing  a  secret  grudge  to 
Callisthenes,  because  he  was  against  the  new 
ceremony  of  his  adoration,  feasting  one  night 
where  the  same  Callisthenes  was  at  the  table, 
it  was  moved  by  some  after  supper,  for  enter¬ 
tainment  sake,  that  Callisthenes,  who  was  an 
eloquent  man,  might  speak  of  some  theme  or 
purpose  at  his  own  choice;  which  Callisthenes 
did;  choosing  the  praise  of  the  Macedonian  na- 

2 Seneca,  De  beneficiis ,  v.  5. 

3Seneca,  Epistulae  Morales  ad  Lucilium ,  vi.  7. 

*  Iliad,  Bk.  iv.  340. 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


tion  for  his  discourse,  and  performing  the  same 
with  so  good  manner  as  the  hearers  were  much 
ravished:  whereupon  Alexander,  nothing  pleas¬ 
ed,  said,  “It  was  easy  to  be  eloquent  upon  so 
good  a  subject”:  but  saith  he,  “Turn  your  style, 
and  let  us  hear  what  you  can  say  against  us”: 
which  Callisthenes  presently  undertook,  and 
did  with  that  sting  and  life,  that  Alexander  in¬ 
terrupted  him  and  said,  “The  goodness  of  the 
cause  made  him  eloquent  before,  and  despite 
made  him  eloquent  then  again.” 

17.  Consider  further,  for  tropes  of  rhetoric, 
that  excellent  use  of  a  metaphor  or  translation 
wherewith  he  taxed  Antipater,  who  was  an  im¬ 
perious  and  tyrannous  governor:  for  when  one 
of  Antipater’s  friends  commended  him  to  Alex¬ 
ander  for  his  moderation,  that  he  did  not  degen¬ 
erate,  as  his  other  lieutenants  did,  into  the  Per¬ 
sian  pride,  in  use  of  purple,  but  kept  the  anci¬ 
ent  habit  of  Macedon,  of  black;  “True  (saith 
Alexander),  but  Antipater  is  all  purple  within.”1 
Or  that  other,  when  Parmenio  came  to  him  in 
the  plain  of  Arbela,  and  showed  him  the  innum¬ 
erable  multitude  of  his  enemies,  specially  as  they 
appeared  by  the  infinite  number  of  lights,  as  it 
had  been  a  new  firmament  of  stars,  and  there¬ 
upon  advised  him  to  assail  them  by  night :  where¬ 
upon  he  answered,  “That  he  would  not  steal 
the  victory.” 

18.  For  matter  of  policy,  weigh  that  signifi¬ 
cant  distinction,  so  much  in  all  ages  embraced, 
that  he  made  between  his  two  friends  Hephaes- 
tion  and  Craterus,  when  he  said,  “That  the  one 
loved  Alexander,  and  the  other  loved  the  king” : 
describing  the  principal  difference  of  princes’ 
best  servants,  that  some  in  affection  love  their 
person,  and  other  in  duty  love  their  crown. 

19.  Weigh  also  that  excellent  taxation  of  an 
error,  ordinary  with  counsellors  of  princes,  that 
they  counsel  their  masters  according  to  the  mo¬ 
del  of  their  own  mind  and  fortune,  and  not  of 
their  masters’;  when  upon  Darius’  great  offers, 
Parmenio  had  said,  “Surely  I  would  accept  these 
offers,  were  I  as  Alexander”;  saith  Alexander, 
“So  would  I  were  I  as  Parmenio.” 

20.  Lastly,  weigh  that  quick  and  acute  reply, 
which  he  made  when  he  gave  so  large  gifts  to 
his  friends  and  servants,  and  was  asked  what 
he  did  reserve  for  himself,  and  he  answered, 
“Hope”:  weigh,  I  say,  whether  he  had  not  cast 
up  his  account  right,  because  hope  must  be  the 
portion  of  all  that  resolve  upon  great  enterpris¬ 
es.  For  this  was  Caesar’s  portion  when  he  went 
first  into  Gaul,  his  estate  being  then  utterly 

1d\oirop4>vpos.  Plutarch,  Apophthegmata  regum  et  im - 
peratorum. 


overthrown  with  largesses.  And  this  was  like¬ 
wise  the  portion  of  that  noble  prince,  howso¬ 
ever  transported  with  ambition,  Henry  Duke 
of  Guise,  of  whom  it  was  usually  said,  that  he 
was  the  greatest  usurer  in  France,  because  he 
had  turned  all  his  estate  into  obligations. 

21.  To  conclude  therefore:  as  certain  critics 
are  used  to  say  hyperbolically,  “That  if  all  sci¬ 
ences  were  lost  they  might  be  found  in  Virgil,” 
so  certainly  this  may  be  said  truly,  there  are 
the  prints  and  footsteps  of  learning  in  those  few 
speeches  which  are  reported  of  this  prince:  the 
admiration  of  whom,  when  I  consider  him  not 
as  Alexander  the  Great,  but  as  Aristotle’s  scho¬ 
lar,  hath  carried  me  too  far. 

22.  As  for  Julius  Caesar,  the  excellency  of  his 
learning  needeth  not  to  be  argued  from  his  ed¬ 
ucation,  or  his  company,  or  his  speeches;  but 
in  a  further  degree  doth  declare  itself  in  his  writ¬ 
ings  and  works;  whereof  some  are  extant  and 
permanent,  and  some  unfortunately  perished. 
For  first,  we  see  there  is  left  unto  us  that  excel¬ 
lent  history  of  his  own  wars,  which  he  intituled 
only  a  Commentary,  wherein  all  succeeding  times 
have  admired  the  solid  weight  of  matter,  and 
the  real  passages  and  lively  images  of  actions 
and  persons,  expressed  in  the  greatest  propri¬ 
ety  of  words  and  perspicuity  of  narration  that 
ever  was;  which  that  it  was  not  the  effect  of  a 
natural  gift,  but  of  learning  and  precept,  is  well 
witnessed  by  that  work  of  his  intituled  De  Ana- 
logia ,2  being  a  grammatical  philosophy,  where¬ 
in  he  did  labour  to  make  this  same  Vox  ad  pla- 
citum  to  become  V ox  ad  licitum ,  and  to  reduce 
custom  of  speech  to  congruity  of  speech;  and 
took  as  it  were  the  pictures  of  words  from  the 
life  of  reason. 

23.  So  we  receive  from  him,  as  a  monument 
both  of  his  power  and  learning,  the  then  re¬ 
formed  computation  of  the  year;  well  expressing 
that  he  took  it  to  be  as  great  a  glory  to  himself 
to  observe  and  know  the  law  of  the  heavens,  as 
to  give  law  to  men  upon  the  earth. 

24.  So  likewise  in  that  book  of  his,  Anti-Cato ,3 
it  may  easily  appear  that  he  did  aspire  as  well 
to  victory  of  wit  as  victory  of  war:  undertaking 
therein  a  conflict  against  the  greatest  champion 
with  the  pen  that  then  lived,  Cicero  the  orator. 

25.  So  again  in  his  book  of  Apophthegms 
which  he  collected,  we  see  that  he  esteemed  it 
more  honour  to  make  himself  but  a  pair  of  ta¬ 
bles,  to  take  the  wise  and  pithy  words  of  others, 
than  to  have  every  word  of  his  own  to  be  made 

2See  Cicero,  Brutus ,  72. 

3See  Cicero,  Ad  Atticum ,  xn.  40,  41;  xm.  50;  and 
Topic  a,  xxv. 


FIRST  BOOK 


an  apophthegm  or  an  oracle;  as  vain  princes, 
by  custom  of  flattery,  pretend  to  do.1  And  yet 
if  I  should  enumerate  divers  of  his  speeches,  as 
1  did  those  of  Alexander,  they  are  truly  such  as 
Salomon  noteth,  when  he  saith,  “  Verba  sapi- 
entum  tanquam  aculei ,  et  tanquam  clavi  in  altum 
defix  i' ’2:  whereof  I  will  only  recite  three,  not  so 
delectable  for  elegancy,  but  admirable  for  vi¬ 
gour  and  efficacy. 

2 6.  As  first,  it  is  reason  he  be  thought  a  mas¬ 
ter  of  words,  that  could  with  one  word  appease 
a  mutiny  in  his  army,  which  was  thus.  The  Ro¬ 
mans,  when  their  generals  did  speak  to  their 
army,  did  use  the  word  Milites ,  but  when  the 
magistrates  spake  to  the  people,  they  did  use 
the  word  Quirites.  The  soldiers  were  in  tumult, 
and  seditiously  prayed  to  be  cashiered;  not  that 
they  so  meant,  but  by  expostulation  thereof  to 
draw  Caesar  to  other  conditions;  wherein  he  be¬ 
ing  resolute  not  to  give  way,  after  some  silence, 
he  began  his  speech,  “Ego  Quirites”*  which  did 
admit  them  already  cashiered;  wherewith  they 
were  so  surprised,  crossed,  and  confused,  as  they 
would  not  suffer  him  to  go  on  in  his  speech,  but 
relinquished  their  demands,  and  made  it  their 
suit  to  be  again  called  by  the  name  of  Milites. 

27.  The  second  speech  was  thus:  Caesar  did 
extremely  affect  the  name  of  king;  and  some 
were  set  on  as  he  passed  by,  in  popular  accla¬ 
mation  to  salute  him  king.  Whereupon,  finding 
the  cry  weak  and  poor,  he  put  it  off  thus,  in  a 
kind  of  jest,  as  if  they  had  mistaken  his  sur¬ 
name;  “Non  rex  sum ,  sed  Caesar' ;4  a  speech, 
that  if  it  be  searched,  the  life  and  fullness  of  it 
can  scarce  be  expressed.  For,  first,  it  was  a  re¬ 
fusal  of  the  name,  but  yet  not  serious:  again,  it 
did  signify  an  infinite  confidence  and  magnanim¬ 
ity,  as  if  he  presumed  Caesar  was  the  greater 
title;  as  by  his  worthiness  it  is  come  to  pass  till 
this  day.  But  chiefly  it  was  a  speech  of  great  al¬ 
lurement  toward  his  own  purpose;  as  if  the  state 
did  strive  with  him  but  for  a  name,  whereof  mean 
families  were  vested;  for  Rex  was  a  surname  with 
the  Romans,  as  well  as  King  is  with  us. 

28.  The  last  speech  which  I  will  mention  was 
used  to  Metellus:  when  Caesar,  after  war  de¬ 
clared,  did  possess  himself  of  the  city  of  Rome; 
at  which  time  entering  into  the  inner  treasury 
to  take  the  money  there  accumulate,  Metellus 
being  tribune  forbade  him.  Whereto  Caesar  said, 
“That  if  he  did  not  desist,  he  would  lay  him 

Cicero,  Ad  Familiaresy  ix.  16. 

2Eccles.  12.  11.  “The  words  of  the  wise  are  as  goads, 
and  as  nails  fixed  deep  in.” 

3 Suetonius,  Julius  Caesar ,  70. 

AIbid.s  79:  “I  am  not  king,  but  Caesar.” 


25 

dead  in  the  place.”  And  presently  taking  him¬ 
self  up,  he  added,  “Young  man,  it  is  harder  for 
me  to  speak  it  than  to  do  it;  Adolescensy  durius 
est  mihi  hoc  dicere  quam facere.”h  A  speech  com¬ 
pounded  of  the  greatest  terror  and  greatest  cle¬ 
mency  that  could  proceed  out  of  the  mouth  of 
man. 

29.  But  to  return  and  conclude  with  him,  it 
is  evident  himself  knew  well  his  own  perfection 
in  learning,  and  took  it  upon  him;  as  appeared 
when,  upon  occasion  that  some  spake  what  a 
strange  resolution  it  was  in  Lucius  Sylla  to  re¬ 
sign  his  dictature;  he  scoffing  at  him,  to  his  own 
advantage,  answered, “ThatSyllacould  not  skill 
of  letters,  and  therefore  knew  not  how  to  dic¬ 
tate.”6 

30.  And  here  it  were  fit  to  leave  this  point, 
touching  the  concurrence  of  military  virtue  and 
learning  (for  what  example  should  come  with 
any  grace  after  those  two  of  Alexander  and  Cae¬ 
sar?),  were  it  not  in  regard  of  the  rareness  of 
circumstance,  that  I  find  in  one  other  particu¬ 
lar,  as  that  which  did  so  suddenly  pass  from  ex¬ 
treme  scorn  to  extreme  wonder:  and  it  is  of 
Xenophon  the  philosopher,  who  went  from  So¬ 
crates’  school  into  Asia,  in  the  expedition  of 
Cyrus  the  younger  against  King  Artaxerxes. 
This  Xenophon  at  that  time  was  very  young, 
and  never  had  seen  the  wars  before;  neither 
had  any  command  in  the  army,  but  only  fol¬ 
lowed  the  war  as  a  voluntary,  for  the  love  and 
conversation  ofProxenus  his  friend.7  He  was 
present  when  Falinus  came  in  message  from  the 
great  king  to  the  Grecians,  after  that  Cyrus  was 
slain  in  the  field,  and  they  a  handful  of  men  left 
to  themselves  in  the  midst  of  the  king’s  territo¬ 
ries,  cut  off  from  their  country  by  many  naviga¬ 
ble  rivers,  and  many  hundred  miles.  The  mes¬ 
sage  imported  that  they  should  deliver  up  their 
arms  and  submit  themselves  to  the  king’s  mer¬ 
cy.  To  which  message  before  answer  was  made, 
divers  of  the  armyconferred  familiarly  with  Fali¬ 
nus;  and  amongst  the  rest  Xenophon  happened 
to  say,  “Why,  Falinus,  we  have  now  but  these 
two  things  left,  our  arms  and  our  virtues;  and  if 
we  yield  up  our  arms,  how  shall  we  make  use  of 
our  virtue?”  Whereto  Falinus  smiling  on  him 
said,  “If  I  be  not  deceived,  young  gentleman, 
you  are  an  Athenian:  and  I  believe  you  study 
philosophy,  and  it  is  pretty  that  you  say:  but 
you  are  much  abused,  if  you  think  your  virtue 
can  withstand  the  king’s  power.”8  Here  was  the 

6Plutarch;  cf.  Cicero  Ad  Atticum ,  x.  8. 

6 Suetonius,  Julius  Caesar ,  77. 

7Xenophon,  Anabasis ,  11,  towards  the  end. 

8  Ibid.,  11.  1-12. 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


26 

scorn ;  the  wonder  followed:  which  was,  that  this 
young  scholar,  or  philosopher,  after  all  the  cap¬ 
tains  were  murdered  in  parley  by  treason,  con¬ 
ducted  those  ten  thousand  foot,  through  the 
heart  of  all  the  king’s  high  countries,  from  Bab¬ 
ylon  to  Grecia  in  safety,  in  despite  of  all  the 
king’s  forces,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  world, 
and  the  encouragement  of  the  Grecians  in  times 
succeeding  to  make  invasion  upon  the  kings 
of  Persia;  as  was  after  proposed  by  Jason  the 
Thessalian,  attempted  by  Agesilaus  the  Spar¬ 
tan,  and  achieved  by  Alexander  the  Macedo¬ 
nian,  all  upon  the  ground  of  the  act  of  that 
young  scholar. 

VIII.  1.  To  proceed  now  from  imperial  and 
military  virtue  to  moral  and  private  virtue; 
first,  it  is  an  assured  truth,  which  is  contained 
in  the  verses, 

Scilicet  ingenuas  didicisse  fi deli ter  artes 
Emollit  mores ,  nec  sinit  esse  jeros } 

It  taketh  away  the  wildness  and  barbarism  and 
fierceness  of  men’s  minds;  but  indeed  the  ac¬ 
cent  had  need  be  upon  fideliter\ 2  fora  little  su¬ 
perficial  learning  doth  rather  work  a  contrary 
effect.  It  taketh  away  all  levity,  temerity,  and 
insolency,  by  copious  suggestion  of  all  doubts 
and  difficulties,  and  acquainting  the  mind  to 
balance  reasons  on  both  sides,  and  to  turn  back 
the  first  offers  and  conceits  of  the  mind,  and  to 
accept  of  nothing  but  examined  and  tried.  It 
taketh  away  vain  admiration  of  anything, which 
is  the  root  of  all  weakness.  For  all  things  are  ad¬ 
mired  either  because  they  are  new,  or  because 
they  are  great.  For  novelty,  no  man  that  wadeth 
in  learning  or  contemplation  throughly  but  will 
find  that  printed  in  his  heart,  “Nil  novi  super  ter - 
ram”z Neither  can  any  man  marvel  at  the  play 
of  puppets,  that  goeth  behind  the  curtain,  and 
adviseth  well  of  the  motion.  And  for  magnitude, 
as  Alexander  the  Great,  after  that  he  was  used 
to  great  armies,  and  the  great  conquests  of  the 
spacious  provinces  in  Asia,  when  he  received 
letters  out  of  Greece,  of  some  fights  and  services 
there,  which  were  commonly  for  a  passage,  or  a 
fort,  or  some  walled  town  at  the  most,  he  said, 
“It  seemed  to  him,  that  he  was  advertised  of  the 
battles  of  the  frogs  and  the  mice,  that  the  old 
tales  went  of.”  So  certainly,  if  a  man  meditate 
much  upon  the  universal  frame  of  nature,  the 
earth  with  men  upon  it  (the  divineness  of  souls 
except)  will  not  seem  much  other  than  an  ant- 

^vid,  Epistulae  ex  Ponto,  11.  9.47.  “A  true  proficiency 
in  liberal  learning  softens  and  humanizes  the  manners.” 

2 It  must  be  a  true  proficiency. 

3“There  is  nothing  new  upon  the  earth.” 


hill,  whereas  some  ants  carry  corn,  and  some 
carry  their  young,  and  some  go  empty,  and  all 
to  and  fro  a  little  heap  of  dust.  It  taketh  away 
or  mitigateth  fear  of  death  or  adverse  fortune; 
which  is  one  of  the  greatest  impediments  of  vir¬ 
tue,  and  imperfections  of  manners.  For  if  a 
man’s  mind  be  deeply  seasoned  with  the  consid¬ 
eration  of  the  mortality  and  corruptible  nature 
of  things,  he  will  easily  concur  with  Epictetus, 
who  went  forth  one  day  and  saw  a  woman  weep¬ 
ing  for  her  pitcher  of  earth  that  was  broken,  and 
went  forth  the  next  day  and  saw  a  woman  weep¬ 
ing  for  her  son  that  was  dead,  and  thereupon 
said,  “ Heri  vidi  f r  agile  m frangi ,  hodie  vidi  mor - 
talem  mori .”4  And  therefore  Virgil  did  excellent¬ 
ly  and  profoundly  couple  the  knowledge  of 
causes  and  the  conquests  of  all  fears  together, 
as  concomitantia .5 

Felix ,  qui  potuit  rerum  cognoscere  causas , 
Sjiique  metus  omnes ,  et  inexorabile  fatum 
Subjecit  pedibus ,  strepitumque  Acherontis 
avari.& 

2.  It  were  too  long  to  go  over  the  particular 
remedies  which  learning  doth  minister  to  all  the 
diseases  of  the  mind;  sometimes  purging  the  ill 
humours,  sometimes  opening  the  obstructions, 
sometimes  helping  digestion,  sometimes  increas¬ 
ing  appetite,  sometimes  healing  the  wounds  and 
exulcerations  thereof,  and  the  like;  and  there¬ 
fore  I  will  conclude  with  that  which  hath  ratio- 
nem  totius :  which  is,  that  it  disposeth  the  con¬ 
stitution  of  the  mind  not  to  be  fixed  or  settled 
in  the  defects  thereof,  but  still  to  be  capable 
and  susceptible  of  growth  and  reformation.  For 
the  unlearned  man  knows  not  what  it  is  to  des¬ 
cend  into  himself,  or  to  call  himself  to  account, 
nor  the  pleasure  of  that  suavissima  vita ,  indies 
sentire  se fieri  meliorem?  The  good  parts  he  hath 
he  will  learn  to  show  to  the  full,  and  use  them 
dexterously,  but  not  much  to  increase  them. 
The  faults  he  hath  he  will  learn  how  to  hide 
and  colour  them,  but  not  much  to  amend  them; 
like  an  ill  mower,  that  mows  on  still,  and  never 
whets  his  scythe.  Whereas  with  the  learned  man 
it  fares  otherwise,  that  he  doth  ever  intermix 
the  correction  and  amendment  of  his  mind  with 

4See  Epictetus,  Encheiridion ,  33,  with  the  commentary 
of  Simplicus.  “Yesterday  I  saw  a  brittle  thing  broken, 
and  today  a  mortal  die.” 

5  “Concomitants.” 

6Yirgil,  Georgies ,  Bk.  11.  490.  “Happy  the  man  who  doth 
the  causes  know  of  all  that  is:  serene  he  stands,  above 
all  fears;  above  the  inexorable  fate,  and  that  insatiate 
gulf  that  roars  below.” 

7“To  feel  himself  each  day  a  better  man  than  he  was 
the  day  before.” 


FIRST  BOOK 


the  use  and  employment  thereof.  Nay  further, 
in  general  and  in  sum,  certain  it  is  that  Feritas 
and  Bonitas  differ  but  as  the  seal  and  the  print: 
for  Truth  prints  Goodness,  and  they  be  the 
clouds  of  error  which  descend  in  the  storms  of 
passions  and  perturbations. 

3.  From  moral  virtue  let  us  pass  on  to  mat¬ 
ter  of  power  and  commandment,  and  consider 
whether  in  right  season  there  be  any  compar¬ 
able  with  that  wherewith  knowledge  investeth 
and  crowneth  man’s  nature.  We  see  the  digni¬ 
ty  of  the  commandment  is  according  to  the  dig¬ 
nity  of  the  commanded:  to  have  commandment 
over  beasts,  as  herdmen  have,  is  a  thing  con¬ 
temptible:  to  have  commandment  over  children, 
as  schoolmasters  have,  is  a  matter  of  small  hon¬ 
our:  to  have  commandment  over  galley-slaves 
is  a  disparagement  rather  than  an  honour.  Nei¬ 
ther  is  the  commandment  of  tyrants  much  bet¬ 
ter,  over  people  which  have  put  off  the  gener¬ 
osity  of  their  minds:  and  therefore  it  was  ever 
holden  that  honours  in  free  monarchies  and  com¬ 
monwealths  had  a  sweetness  more  than  in  ty¬ 
rannies,  because  the  commandment  extendeth 
more  over  the  wills  of  men,  and  not  only  over 
their  deeds  and  services.  And  therefore,  when 
Virgil  putteth  himself  forth  to  attribute  to  Au¬ 
gustus  Caesar  the  best  of  human  honours,  he 
doth  it  in  these  words: 

Victorque  volentes 

Per  populos  dat  jura ,  viamque  affectat  Olympo } 

But  yet  the  commandment  of  knowledge  is  yet 
higher  than  the  commandment  over  the  will: 
for  it  is  a  commandment  over  the  reason,  belief, 
and  understanding  of  man,  which  is  the  high¬ 
est  part  of  the  mind,  and  giveth  law  to  the  will 
itself.  For  there  is  no  power  on  earth  which  set- 
teth  up  a  throne  or  chair  of  estate  in  the  spirits 
and  souls  of  men,  and  in  their  cogitations,  ima¬ 
ginations,  opinions,  and  beliefs,  but  knowledge 
and  learning.  And  therefore  we  see  the  detest¬ 
able  and  extreme  pleasure  that  arch-heretics, 
and  false  prophets,  and  impostors  are  trans¬ 
ported  with,  when  they  once  find  in  themselves 
that  they  have  a  superiority  in  the  faith  and 
conscience  of  men;  so  great  as  if  they  have  once 
tasted  of  it,  it  is  seldom  seen  that  any  torture 
or  persecution  can  make  them  relinquish  or 
abandon  it.  But  as  this  is  that  which  the  author 
of  the  Revelation  calleth  the  depth  or  profound¬ 
ness  of  Satan,1 2  so  by  argument  of  contraries, 

1  Virgil,  Georgies  y  Bk.  iv.  561.  “Moving  in  conquest  on¬ 
ward,  at  his  will  to  willing  peoples  he  gives  laws,  and  shapes 
through  worthiest  deeds  his  course  to  Heaven.” 

2  Rev.  2.  24. 


27 

the  just  and  lawful  sovereignty  over  men’s  un¬ 
derstanding,  by  force  of  truth  rightly  inter¬ 
preted,  is  that  which  approacheth  nearest  to 
the  similitude  of  the  divine  rule. 

4.  As  for  fortune  and  advancement,  the  ben¬ 
eficence  of  learning  is  not  so  confined  to  give 
fortune  only  to  states  and  commonwealths,  as 
it  does  not  likewise  give  fortune  to  particular 
persons.  For  it  was  well  noted  long  ago,  that 
Homer  hath  given  more  men  their  livings,  than 
either  Sylla,  or  Caesar,  or  Augustus  ever  did, 
notwithstanding  their  great  largesses  and  do¬ 
natives,  and  distributions  of  lands  to  so  many 
legions.  And  no  doubt  it  is  hard  to  say  whether 
arms  or  learning  have  advanced  greater  num¬ 
bers.  And  in  case  of  sovereignty  we  see,  that  if 
arms  or  descent  have  carried  away  the  kingdom, 
yet  learning  hath  carried  the  priesthood,  which 
ever  hath  been  in  some  competition  with  empire. 

5.  Again,  for  the  pleasure  and  delight  of  knowl¬ 
edge  and  learning,  it  far  surpasseth  all  other  in 
nature.  For,  shall  the  pleasures  of  the  affections 
so  exceed  the  pleasure  of  the  sense,  as  much  as 
the  obtaining  of  desire  or  victory  exceedeth  a 
song  or  a  dinner?  and  must  not  of  consequence 
the  pleasures  of  the  intellect  or  understanding 
exceed  the  pleasures  of  the  affections?  We  see 
in  all  other  pleasures  there  is  satiety,  and  after 
they  be  used,  their  verdure  departeth;  which 
showeth  well  they  be  but  deceits  of  pleasure, 
and  not  pleasures:  and  that  it  was  the  novelty 
which  pleased,  and  not  the  quality.  And  there¬ 
fore  we  see  that  voluptuous  men  turn  friars, 
and  ambitious  princes  turn  melancholy.  But  of 
knowledge  there  is  no  satiety,  but  satisfaction 
and  appetite  are  perpetually  interchangeable; 
and  therefore  appeareth  to  be  good  in  itself  simp¬ 
ly,  without  fallacy  or  accident.  Neither  is  that 
pleasure  of  small  efficacy  and  contentment  to 
the  mind  of  man,  which  the  poet  Lucretius  de¬ 
scribed  elegantly, 

Suave  mart  magno ,  turbantibus  aequora  ventis ,  &c. 

“It  is  a  view  of  delight  (saith  he)  to  stand  or 
walk  upon  the  shore  side,  and  to  see  a  ship  tossed 
with  tempest  upon  the  sea;  or  to  be  in  a  forti¬ 
fied  tower,  and  to  see  two  battles  join  upon  a 
plain.  But  it  is  a  pleasure  incomparable,  for  the 
mind  of  man  to  be  settled,  landed,  and  fortified 
in  the  certainty  of  truth;  and  from  thence  to 
descry  and  behold  the  errors,  perturbations,  la¬ 
bours,  and  wanderings  up  and  down  of  other 
men.”3 

6.  Lastly,  leaving  the  vulgar  arguments,  that 
by  learning  man  excelled  man  in  that  wherein 

3Lucretius,  Nature  of  Things ,  Bk.  11.  1— 13. 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


28 

man  excelleth  beasts;  that  by  learning  man  as- 
cendeth  to  the  heavens  and  their  motions,  where 
in  body  he  cannot  come;  and  the  like;  let  us  con¬ 
clude  with  the  dignity  and  excellency  of  knowl¬ 
edge  and  learning  in  that  whereunto  man’s  na¬ 
ture  doth  most  aspire,  which  is  immortality  or 
continuance;  for  to  this  tendeth  generation,  and 
raising  of  houses  and  families;  to  this  tend  build¬ 
ings,  foundations,  and  monuments;  to  this  tend¬ 
eth  the  desire  of  memory,  fame,  and  celebra¬ 
tion;  and  in  effect  the  strength  of  all  other  hu¬ 
man  desires.  We  see  then  how  far  the  monu¬ 
ments  of  wit  and  learning  are  more  durable  than 
the  monuments  of  power  or  of  the  hands.  For 
have  not  the  verses  of  Homer  continued  twenty- 
five  hundred  years,  or  more,  without  the  loss 
of  a  syllable  or  letter;  during  which  time  infi¬ 
nite  palaces,  temples,  castles,  cities,  have  been 
decayed  and  demolished?  It  is  not  possible  to 
have  the  true  pictures  or  statues  of  Cyrus,  Al¬ 
exander,  Caesar,  no  nor  of  the  kings  or  great 
personages  of  much  later  years;  for  the  origi¬ 
nals  cannot  last,  and  the  copies  cannot  but  leese 
of  the  life  and  truth.  But  the  images  of  men’s 
wits  and  knowledges  remain  in  books,  exempt¬ 
ed  from  the  wrong  of  time  and  capable  of  per¬ 
petual  renovation.  Neither  are  they  fitly  to  be 
called  images,  because  they  generate  still,  and 
cast  their  seeds  in  the  minds  of  others,  provok¬ 
ing  and  causing  infinite  actions  and  opinions  in 
succeeding  ages.  So  that  if  the  invention  of  the 
ship  was  thought  so  noble,  which  carrieth  rich¬ 
es  and  commodities  from  place  to  place,  and 
consociateth  the  most  remote  regions  in  parti¬ 
cipation  of  their  fruits,  how  much  more  are  let¬ 
ters  to  be  magnified,  which  as  ships  pass  through 
the  vast  seas  of  time,  and  make  ages  so  distant 
to  participate  of  the  wisdom,  illuminations,  and 
inventions,  the  one  of  the  other?  Nay  further, 
we  see  some  of  the  philosophers  which  were  least 
divine,  and  most  immersed  in  the  senses,  and 


denied  generally  the  immortality  of  the  soul, 
yet  came  to  this  point,  that  whatsoever  mo¬ 
tions  the  spirit  of  man  could  act  and  perform 
without  the  organs  of  the  body,  they  thought 
might  remain  after  death;  which  were  only  those 
of  the  understanding,  and  not  of  the  affection; 
soimmortal  andincorruptible  a  thing  did  knowl¬ 
edge  seem  unto  them  to  be.  But  we,  that  know 
by  divine  revelation  that  not  only  the  under¬ 
standing  but  the  affections  purified,  not  only 
the  spirit  but  the  body  changed,  shall  be  ad¬ 
vanced  to  immortality,  do  disclaim  in  these  ru¬ 
diments  of  the  senses.  But  it  must  be  remem¬ 
bered,  both  in  this  last  point,  and  so  it  may  like¬ 
wise  be  needful  in  other  places,  that  in  proba¬ 
tion  of  the  dignity  of  knowledge  or  learning,  I 
did  in  the  beginning  separate  divine  testimony 
from  human,  which  method  I  have  pursued, 
and  so  handled  them  both  apart. 

7.  Nevertheless  I  do  not  pretend,  and  I  know 
it  will  be  impossible  for  me,  by  any  pleading  of 
mine,  to  reverse  the  judgement,  either  of  Ae¬ 
sop’s  cock,  that  preferred  the  barley-corn  be¬ 
fore  the  gem;  or  of  Midas,  that  being  chosen 
judge  between  Apollo,  president  of  the  Muses, 
and  Pan,  god  of  the  flocks,  judged  for  plenty; 
or  of  Paris,  that  judged  for  beauty  and  love 
against  wisdom  and  power;  or  of  Agrippina, 
“occidat  matremy  modo  imperet,'1  that  preferred 
empire  with  any  condition  never  so  detestable; 
or  of  Ulysses,  “ qui  vetulam  praeiulit  immortali- 
tati ,”2  being  a  figure  of  those  which  prefer  cus¬ 
tom  and  habit  before  all  excellency;  or  of  a  num¬ 
ber  of  the  like  popular  judgements.  For  these 
things  must  continue  as  they  have  been:  but  so 
will  that  also  continue  whereupon  learning  hath 
ever  relied,  and  which  faileth  not:  “ JustiJicata 
est  sapientia  a  filiis  suis.”z 

14‘Let  him  kill  his  mother  so  he  be  emperor.” 

2 “That  preferred  an  old  woman  to  an  immortality.’ 

3Matt.  11.  19.  “Wisdom  is  justified  by  her  children.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


TO  THE  KING 

i.  It  might  seem  to  have  more  convenience, 
though  it  come  often  otherwise  to  pass  (excel¬ 
lent  King),  that  those  which  are  fruitful  in  their 
generations,  and  have  in  themselves  the  fore- 
sightofimmortalityin  their  descendants,  should 
likewise  be  more  careful  of  the  good  estate  of 
future  times,  unto  which  they  know  they  must 
transmit  and  commend  over  their  dearest 
pledges.  Queen  Elizabeth  wasasojourner  in  the 
world  in  respect  of  her  unmarried  life,  and  was  a 
blessing  to  her  own  times;  and  yet  so  as  the 
impression  of  her  good  government,  besides  her 
happy  memory,  is  not  without  some  effect  which 
doth  survive  her.  But  to  your  Majesty,  whom 
God  hath  already  blessed  with  so  much  royal 
issue,  worthy  to  continue  and  represent  you  for 
ever,  and  whose  youthful  and  fruitful  bed  doth 
yet  promise  many  the  like  renovations,  it  is  pro¬ 
per  and  agreeable  to  be  conversant  not  only  in 
the  transitory  parts  of  good  government,  but 
in  those  acts  also  which  are  in  their  nature  per¬ 
manent  and  perpetual.  Amongst  the  which  (if 
affection  do  not  transport  me)  there  is  not  any 
more  worthy  than  the  further  endowment  of 
the  world  with  sound  and  fruitful  knowledge. 
For  why  should  a  few  received  authors  stand 
up  like  Hercules'  columns,  beyond  which  there 
should  be  no  sailing  or  discovering,  since  we 
have  so  bright  and  benign  a  star  as  your  Maj¬ 
esty  to  conduct  and  prosper  us  ?  To  return  there¬ 
fore  where  we  left,  it  remaineth  to  consider  of 
what  kind  those  acts  are  which  have  been  un¬ 
dertaken  and  performed  by  kings  and  others 
for  the  increase  and  advancement  of  learning: 
wherein  I  purpose  to  speak  actively  without  di¬ 
gressing  or  dilating. 

2.  Let  this  ground  therefore  be  laid,  that  all 
works  are  overcommen  by  amplitude  of  reward, 
by  soundness  of  direction,  and  by  the  conjunc¬ 
tion  of  labours.  The  first  multiplieth  endeav¬ 
our,  the  second  preventeth  error,  and  the  third 
supplieth  the  frailty  of  man.  But  the  principal 
of  these  is  direction:  for  “ claudus  in  via  ante- 
vertit  cursorem  extra  viam”;1  and  Salomon  ex¬ 
cellently  setteth  it  down,  “If  the  iron  be  not 

l“The  cripple  that  keeps  the  way  gets  to  the  end  of  the 
journey  sooner  than  the  runner  who  goes  astray." 


sharp,  it  requireth  more  strength;  but  wisdom 
is  that  which  prevaileth”;2  signifying  that  the 
invention  or  election  of  the  mean  is  more  effec¬ 
tual  than  any  inforcement  or  accumulation  of 
endeavours.  This  I  am  induced  to  speak,  for 
that  (not  derogating  from  the  noble  intention 
of  any  that  have  been  deservers  towards  the 
state  of  learning)  I  do  observe  nevertheless  that 
their  works  and  acts  are  rather  matters  of  mag¬ 
nificence  and  memory,  than  of  progression  and 
proficience,  and  tend  rather  to  augment  the  mass 
of  learning  in  the  multitude  of  learned  men,  than 
to  rectify  or  raise  the  sciences  themselves. 

3.  The  works  or  acts  of  merit  towards  learn¬ 
ing  are  conversant  about  three  objects;  the  pi  aces 
of  learning,  the  books  of  learning,  and  the  per¬ 
sons  of  the  learned.  For  as  water,  whether  it  be 
the  dew  of  heaven,  or  the  springs  of  the  earth, 
doth  scatter  and  leese  itself  in  the  ground,  ex¬ 
cept  it  be  collected  into  some  receptacle,  where 
it  may  by  union  comfort  and  sustain  itself:  and 
for  that  cause  the  industry  of  man  hath  made 
and  framed  spring-heads,  conduits,  cisterns,  and 
pools,  which  men  have  accustomed  likewise 
to  beautify  and  adorn  with  accomplishments 
of  magnificence  and  state,  as  well  as  of  use 
and  necessity:  so  this  excellent  liquor  of  knowl¬ 
edge,  whether  it  descend  from  divine  inspira¬ 
tion,  or  spring  from  human  sense,  would  soon 
perish  and  vanish  to  oblivion,  if  it  were  not 
preserved  in  books,  traditions,  conferences,  and 
places  appointed,  as  universities,  colleges,  and 
schools,  for  the  receipt  and  comforting  of  the 
same. 

4.  The  works  which  concern  the  seats  and 
places  of  learning  are  four;  foundations  and 
buildings,  endowments  with  revenues,  endow¬ 
ments  with  franchises  and  privileges,  institu¬ 
tions  andordinances  forgovernment;  all  tending 
to  quietness  and  privateness  of  life,  and  dis¬ 
charge  of  cares  and  troubles;  much  like  the  sta¬ 
tions  which  Virgil  prescribeth  for  the  hiving  of 
bees: 

Principio  sedes  apibus  statioque  petenday 

Quo  neque  sit  ventis  aditus ,  3  &c. 

2Eccles.  10.  10. 

3 Virgil,  Georgies,  Bk.  iv.  8.  “First  an  abode  and  station 
must  be  found  for  the  bees,  to  which  the  wind  may  not 
have  access." 


29 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


5.  The  works  touching  books  are  two:  first, 
libraries  which  are  as  the  shrines  where  all  the 
relics  of  the  ancient  saints,  full  of  true  virtue, 
and  that  without  delusion  or  imposture,  are  pre¬ 
served  and  reposed;  secondly,  new  editions  of 
authors,  with  more  correct  impressions,  more 
faithful  translations,  more  profitable  glosses, 
more  diligent  annotations,  and  the  like. 

6.  The  works  pertaining  to  the  personsof  learn¬ 
ed  men  (besides  the  advancement  and  counte¬ 
nancing  of  them  in  general)  are  two:  the  reward 
and  designation  of  readers  in  sciences  already 
extant  and  invented;  and  the  reward  and  desig¬ 
nation  of  writers  and  inquirers  concerning  any 
parts  of  learning  not  sufficiently  laboured  and 
prosecuted. 

7.  These  are  summarily  the  works  and  acts, 
wherein  the  merits  of  many  excellent  princes 
and  other  worthy  personages  have  been  con¬ 
versant.  As  for  any  particular  commemorations, 
I  call  to  mind  what  Cicero  said,  when  he  gave 
general  thanks;  “ Difficile  non  aliquem ,  ingra- 
tum  quenquam  praeterire”1  Let  us  rather,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  Scriptures,  look  unto  that  part 
of  the  race  which  is  before  us,  than  look  back 
to  that  which  is  already  attained. 

8.  First  therefore,  amongst  so  many  great 
foundations  of  colleges  in  Europe,  I  find  strange 
that  they  are  all  dedicated  to  professions,  and 
none  left  free  to  arts  and  sciences  at  large.  For  if 
men  judge  that  learning  should  be  referred  to 
action,  they  judge  well:  but  in  this  they  fall  into 
the  error  described  in  the  ancient  fable,2  in  which 
the  other  parts  of  the  body  did  suppose  the  stom¬ 
ach  had  been  idle,  because  it  neither  performed 
the  office  of  motion,  as  the  limbs  do,  nor  of  sense, 
as  the  head  doth:  but  yet  notwithstanding  it  is 
the  stomach  that  digesteth  and  distributeth  to 
all  the  rest.  So  if  any  man  think  philosophy  and 
universality  to  be  idle  studies,  he  doth  not  con¬ 
sider  that  all  professions  are  from  thence  served 
and  supplied.  And  this  I  take  to  be  a  great  cause 
that  hath  hindered  the  progression  of  learning, 
because  these  fundamental  knowledges  have 
been  studied  but  in  passage.  For  if  you  will  have 
a  tree  bear  more  fruit  than  it  hath  used  to  do, 
it  is  not  anything  you  can  do  to  the  boughs, 
but  it  is  the  stirring  of  the  earth  and  putting 
new  mould  about  the  roots  that  must  work  it. 
Neither  is  it  to  be  forgotten,  that  this  dedicat¬ 
ing  of  foundations  and  dotations  to  professory 
learning  hath  not  only  had  a  malign  aspect  and 

1  Cicero,  apocryphal  ovation,  Post  Reditum ,  in  Senatu , 
xii.  30;  cf.  Pro  Plancio ,  xxx.  74.  “It  were  hard  to  re¬ 
member  all,  and  yet  ungracious  to  forget  any.” 

2Speech  of  Menenius  Agrippa,  Livy  11.  32. 


influence  upon  the  growth  of  sciences,  but  hath 
also  been  prejudicial  to  states  and  governments. 
For  hence  it  proceedeth  that  princes  find  a  sol¬ 
itude  in  regard  of  able  men  to  serve  them  in 
causes  of  estate,  because  there  is  no  education 
collegiate  which  is  free;  where  such  as  were  so 
disposed  mought  give  themselves  to  histories, 
modern  languages,  books  of  policy  and  civil  dis¬ 
course,  and  other  the  like  enablements  unto 
service  of  estate. 

9.  And  because  founders  of  colleges  do  plant, 
and  founders  of  lectures  do  water,  it  followeth 
well  in  order  to  speak  of  the  defect  which  is  in 
public  lectures;  namely  in  the  smallness  and 
meanness  of  the  salary  or  reward  which  in  most 
places  is  assigned  unto  them;  whether  they  be 
lectures  of  arts,  or  of  professions.  For  it  is  nec¬ 
essary  to  the  progression  of  sciences  that  read¬ 
ers  be  of  the  most  able  and  sufficient  men;  as 
those  which  are  ordained  for  generating  and 
propagating  of  sciences,  and  not  for  transitory 
use.  This  cannot  be,  except  their  condition  and 
endowment  be  such  as  may  content  the  ablest 
man  to  appropriate  his  whole  labour  and  con¬ 
tinue  his  whole  age  in  that  function  and  attend¬ 
ance;  and  therefore  must  have  a  proportion  an¬ 
swerable  to  that  mediocrity  or  competency  of 
advancement,  which  may  be  expected  from  a 
profession  or  the  practice  of  a  profession.  So  as, 
if  you  will  have  sciences  flourish,  you  must  ob¬ 
serve  David’s  military  law,  which  was,  'That 
those  which  staid  with  the  carriage  should  have 
equal  part  with  those  which  were  in  the  action”; 
else  will  the  carriages  be  ill  attended.  So  read¬ 
ers  in  sciences  are  indeed  the  guardians  of  the 
stores  and  provisions  of  sciences,  whence  men 
in  active  courses  are  furnished,  and  therefore 
ought  to  have  equal  entertainment  with  them; 
otherwise  if  the  fathers  in  sciences  be  of  the 
weakest  sort  or  be  ill  maintained, 

Et  patrum  invalidi  referent  jejunia  nati. 3 

10.  Another  defect  I  note,  wherein  I  shall  need 
some  alchemist  to  help  me,  who  call  upon  men 
to  sell  their  books,  and  to  build  furnaces;  quit¬ 
ting  and  forsaking  Minerva  and  the  Muses  as 
barren  virgins,  and  relying  upon  Vulcan.  But 
certain  it  is,  that  unto  the  deep,  fruitful,  and 
operative  study  of  many  sciences,  specially  nat¬ 
ural  philosophy  and  physic,  books  be  not  only 
the  instrumentals;  wherein  also  the  beneficence 
of  men  hath  not  been  altogether  wanting.  For 
we  see  spheres,  globes,  astrolabes,  maps,  and 

3 Virgil,  Georgies ,  Bk.  III.  128.  “The  poor  keeping  of 
the  parents  will  appear  in  the  poor  constitution  of  the 
offspring.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


the  like,  have  been  provided  as  appurtenances 
to  astronomy  and  cosmography,  as  well  as  books. 
We  see  likewise  that  some  places  instituted  for 
physic  have  annexed  the  commodity  of  gardens 
for  simples  of  all  sorts,  and  do  likewise  com¬ 
mand  the  use  of  dead  bodies  for  anatomies.  But 
these  do  respect  but  a  few  things.  In  general, 
there  will  hardly  be  any  main  proficience  in  the 
disclosing  of  nature,  except  there  be  some  al¬ 
lowance  for  expenses  about  experiments ;  wheth¬ 
er  they  be  experiments  appertaining  to  Vulcan- 
us  or  Daedalus,  furnace  or  engine,  or  any  other 
kind.  And  therefore  as  secretaries  and  spials  of 
princes  and  states  bring  in  bills  for  intelligence, 
so  you  must  allow  the  spials  and  intelligencers 
of  nature  to  bring  in  their  bills;  or  else  you  shall 
be  ill  advertised. 

H.  And  if  Alexander  made  such  a  liberal  as¬ 
signation  to  Aristotle  of  treasure  for  the  allow¬ 
ance  of  hunters,  fowlers,  fishers,  and  the  like, 
that  he  mought  compile  an  history  of  nature, 
much  better  do  they  deserve  it  that  travail  in 
arts  of  nature. 

12.  Another  defect  which  I  note,  is  an  inter¬ 
mission  or  neglect,  in  those  which  are  governors 
in  universities,  of  consultation,  and  in  princes 
or  superior  persons,  of  visitation:  to  enter  into 
account  and  consideration,  whether  the  read¬ 
ings,  exercises,  and  other  customs  appertaining 
unto  learning,  anciently  began  and  since  con¬ 
tinued,  be  well  instituted  or  no;  and  thereupon 
to  ground  an  amendment  or  reformation  in  that 
which  shall  be  found  inconvenient.  For  it  is  one 
of  your  Majesty’s  own  most  wise  and  princely 
maxims,  “That  in  all  usages  and  precedents,  the 
times  be  considered  wherein  they  first  began; 
which  if  they  were  weak  or  ignorant,  it  dero- 
gateth  from  the  authority  of  the  usage,  and 
leaveth  it  for  suspect.”  And  therefore  inasmuch 
as  most  of  the  usages  and  orders  of  the  univer¬ 
sities  were  derived  from  more  obscure  times,  it 
is  the  more  requisite  they  be  re-examined.  In 
this  kind  I  will  give  an  instance  or  two,  for  ex¬ 
ample  sake,  of  things  that  are  the  most  obvious 
and  familiar.  The  one  is  a  matter,  which  though 
it  be  ancient  and  general,  yet  I  hold  to  be  an 
error ;  which  is,  that  schol  ars  in  uni  versi  ties  come 
too  soon  and  too  unripe  to  logic  and  rhetoric, 
arts  fitter  for  graduates  than  children  and  nov¬ 
ices.  For  these  two,  rightly  taken,  are  the  grav¬ 
est  of  sciences,  being  the  arts  of  arts;  the  one 
forjudgement,  the  other  for  ornament.  And  they 
be  the  rules  and  directions  how  to  set  forth  and 
dispose  matter:  and  therefore  for  minds  empty 
and  unfraught  with  matter,  and  which  have  not 
gathered  that  which  Cicero  calleth  sylva  and  su- 


pelle. v,1  stuff  and  variety,  to  begin  with  those 
arts  (as  if  one  should  learn  to  weigh,  or  to  meas¬ 
ure,  or  to  paint  the  wind)  doth  work  but  this 
effect,  that  the  wisdom  of  those  arts,  which  is 
great  and  universal,  is  almost  made  contempti¬ 
ble,  andisdegenerateintochildishsophistry  and 
ridiculous  affectation.  And  further,  the  untime¬ 
ly  learning  of  them  hath  drawn  on  by  conse¬ 
quence  the  superficial  and  unprofitable  teaching 
and  writing  of  them,  as  fitteth  indeed  to  the  ca¬ 
pacity  of  children.  Another  is  a  lack  I  find  in 
the  exercises  used  in  the  universities,  which  do 
make  too  great  a  divorce  between  invention  and 
memory.  For  their  speeches  are  either  premedi¬ 
tate,  in  verbis  conceptis ,2  where  nothing  is  left 
to  invention;  or  merely  extemporal,  where  little 
is  left  to  memory.  Whereas  in  life  and  action 
there  is  least  use  of  either  of  these,  but  rather 
of  intermixtures  of  premeditation  and  inven¬ 
tion,  notes  and  memory.  So  as  the  exercise  fit¬ 
teth  not  the  practice,  nor  the  image  the  life;  and 
it  is  ever  a  true  rule  in  exercises,  that  they  be 
framed  as  near  as  maybe  to  the  life  of  practice; 
for  otherwise  they  do  pervert  the  motions  and 
faculties  of  the  mind,  and  not  prepare  them. 
The  truth  whereof  is  not  obscure,  when  scholars 
come  to  the  practices  of  professions,  or  other 
actions  of  civil  life;  which  when  they  set  into, 
this  want  is  soon  found  by  themselves,  and  soon¬ 
er  by  others.  But  this  part,  touching  the  amend¬ 
ment  of  the  institutions  and  orders  of  universi¬ 
ties,  I  will  conclude  with  the  clause  of  Caesar’s 
letter  to  Oppius  and  Balbus,  “ Hoc  quemadmo- 
dum  fieri  possity  nonnulla  mihi  in  mentem  veni- 
unty  et  multa  reperiri  possunt'.  de  iis  rebus  rogo 
vos  ut  cogitationem  suscipiatis .”3 

13.  Another  defect  which  I  note,  ascendeth 
a  little  higher  than  the  precedent.  For  as  the 
proficience  of  learning  consisteth  much  in  the 
orders  and  institutions  of  universities  in  the 
same  states  and  kingdoms,  so  it  would  be  yet 
more  advanced,  if  there  were  more  intelligence 
mutual  between  the  universities  of  Europe  than 
now  there  is.  We  see  there  be  many  orders  and 
foundations,  which  though  they  be  divided  un¬ 
der  several  sovereignties  and  territories,  yet  they 
take  themselves  to  have  a  kind  of  contract,  fra¬ 
ternity,  and  correspondence  one  with  the  other, 
insomuch  as  they  have  provincials  and  generals. 
And  surely  as  nature  createth  brotherhood  in 
families,  and  arts  mechanical  contract  brother- 

1  Sylva:  De  oratore ,  in.  26;  Supellex:  De  Oratore ,  xxiv. 

2“In  preconceived  words.” 

3Cicero,  Ad  Atticum ,  ix.  7.  “Some  things  occur  to  me, 
how  this  may  be  done,  and  more  may  be  thought  of;  I 
ask  you  to  take  these  things  under  consideration.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


hoods  in  communalties,  and  the  anointment  of 
God  superinduceth  a  brotherhood  in  kings  and 
bishops,  so  in  like  manner  there  cannot  but  be 
a  fraternity  in  learning  and  illumination,  relat¬ 
ing  to  that  paternity  which  is  attributed  to  God, 
who  is  called  the  Father  of  illuminations  or 
lights. 

14.  The  last  defect  which  I  will  note  is,  that 
there  hath  not  been,  or  very  rarely  been,  any 
public  designation  of  writers  or  inquirers,  con¬ 
cerning  such  parts  of  knowledge  as  may  appear 
not  to  have  been  already  sufficiently  laboured 
or  undertaken;  unto  which  point  it  is  an  induce¬ 
ment  to  enter  into  a  view  and  examination  what 
partsoflearning  have  been  prosecuted  and  what 
omitted.  For  the  opinion  of  plenty  is  amongst 
the  causes  of  want,  and  the  great  quantity  of 
books  maketh  a  show  rather  of  superfluity  than 
lack;  which  surcharge  nevertheless  is  not  to  be 
remedied  by  making  no  more  books,  but  by  mak¬ 
ing  more  good  books,  which,  as  the  serpent  of 
Moses,  mought  devour  the  serpents  of  the  en¬ 
chanters.1 

15.  The  removing  of  all  the  defects  formerly 
enumerate,  except  thelast,  and  of  the  active  part 
also  of  the  last  (which  is  the  designation  of  writ¬ 
ers),  are  opera  basilica ;2  towards  which  the  en¬ 
deavours  of  a  private  man  may  be  but  as  an 
image  in  a  crossway,  that  may  point  at  the  way, 
but  cannot  go  it.  But  the  inducing  part  of  the 
latter  (which  is  the  survey  of  learning)  may  be 
set  forward  by  private  travail.  Wherefore  I  will 
now  attempt  to  make  a  general  and  faithful  per¬ 
ambulation  of  learning,  with  an  inquiry  what 
parts  thereof  lie  fresh  and  waste,  and  not  im¬ 
proved  and  converted  by  the  industry  of  man; 
to  the  end  that  such  a  plot  made  and  recorded 
to  memory,  may  both  minister  light  to  any  pub¬ 
lic  designation,  and  also  serve  to  excite  volun¬ 
tary  endeavours.  Wherein  nevertheless  my  pur¬ 
pose  is  at  this  time  to  note  only  omissions  and 
deficiencies,  and  not  to  make  any  redargution 
of  errors  or  incomplete  prosecutions.  For  it  is 
one  thing  to  set  forth  what  ground  lieth  unma¬ 
nured,  and  another  thing  to  correct  ill  husband¬ 
ry  in  that  which  is  manured. 

In  the  handling  and  undertaking  of  which 
work  I  am  not  ignorant  what  it  is  that  I  do  now 
move  and  attempt,  nor  insensible  of  mine  own 
weakness  to  sustain  my  purpose.  But  my  hope 
is,  that  if  my  extreme  love  to  learning  carry  me 
too  far,  I  may  obtain  the  excuse  of  affection;  for 
that  “It  is  not  granted  to  man  to  love  and  to  be 
wise.”  But  I  know  well  I  can  use  no  other  liberty 

^xod.  7.  10. 

2 “Royal  works.” 


of  j  udgement  than  I  must  leave  to  others;  and  I 
for  my  part  shall  be  indifferently  glad  either  to 
perform  myself,  or  accept  from  another,  that 
duty  o{\\umanity;“  Nam  qui  erranti  comifermon- 
strat  viam”z  &c.  I  do  foresee  likewise  that  of 
those  things  which  1  shall  enter  and  register  as 
deficiencies  and  omissions,  many  will  conceive 
and  censure  that  some  of  them  are  already  done 
and  extant;  others  to  be  but  curiosities,  and 
things  of  no  great  use;  and  others  to  be  of  too 
great  difficulty,  and  almost  impossibility  to  be 
compassed  and  effected.  But  for  the  two  first,  I 
refer  myself  to  the  particulars.  For  the  last, 
touching  impossibility,  I  take  it  those  things  are 
to  be  held  possible  which  may  be  done  by  some 
person,  though  not  by  every  one;  and  which  may 
be  done  by  many,  though  not  by  any  one;  and 
which  may  be  done  in  succession  of  ages,  though 
not  within  the  hourglass  of  one  man’s  life;  and 
which  may  bedone  by  public  designation, though 
not  by  private  endeavour.  But  notwithstand¬ 
ing,  if  any  man  will  take  to  himself  rather  that 
of  Salomon,  “Dicit  piger,  Leo  esi  in  via”*  than 
that  of  Virgil,  “ Possunt  quia  posse  videntur”b  I 
shall  be  content  that  my  labours  be  esteemed 
but  as  the  better  sort  of  wishes:  for  as  it  asketh 
some  knowledge  to  demand  a  question  not  im¬ 
pertinent,  so  it  requireth  some  sense  to  make  a 
wish  not  absurd. 

1.  1 .  The  parts  of  human  learning  have  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  three  parts  of  man’s  understanding, 
which  is  the  seat  of  learning:  history  to  his  mem¬ 
ory,  poesy  to  his  imagination,  and  philosophy 
to  his  reason.  Divine  learning  recei  veth  the  same 
distribution;  for  the  spirit  of  man  is  the  same, 
though  the  revelation  of  oracle  and  sense  be  di¬ 
verse.  So  as  theology  consisteth  also  of  history 
of  the  church:  of  parables,  which  is  divine  poe¬ 
sy;  and  of  holy  doctrine  or  precept.  For  as 
for  that  part  which  seemeth  supernumerary, 
which  is  prophecy,  it  is  but  divine  history; 
which  hath  that  prerogative  over  human,  as 
the  narration  may  be  before  the  fact  as  well 
as  after. 

2.  History  is  natural,  civil,  ecclesiastical,  and 
literary ;  whereof  the  three  first  I  allow  as  extant, 
the  fourth  I  note  as  deficient.  For  no  man  hath 
propounded  to  himself  the  general  state  of  learn¬ 
ing  to  be  described  and  represented  from  age 
to  age,  as  many  have  done  the  works  of  nature, 
and  the  state  civil  and  ecclesiastical;  without 

3Cicero,  De  Officiis^  1.  66.  “for  he  who  shows  the  way 
courteously  to  the  wanderer.” 

4Prov.  22.  13.  “The  slothful  man  saith  there  is  a  lion  in 
the  path.” 

5“They  hnd  it  possible  because  they  think  it  possible.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


which  the  history  of  the  world  seemeth  to  me 
to  be  as  the  statua  of  Polyphemus  with  his  eye 
out;  that  part  being  wanting  which  doth  most 
show  the  spirit  and  life  of  the  person.  And  yet 
I  am  not  ignorant  that  in  divers  particular  sci¬ 
ences,  as  of  the  jurisconsults,  the  mathemati¬ 
cians,  the  rhetoricians,  the  philosophers,  there 
aresetdownsomesmallmemorialsoftheschools, 
authors,  and  books;  and  so  likewise  some  barren 
relations  touching  the  invention  of  arts  or  us¬ 
ages.  But  a  just  story  of  learning,  containing  the 
antiquities  and  originals  of  knowledges  and  their 
sects,  their  inventions,  their  traditions,  their  di¬ 
verse  administrations  and  managings,  their 
flourishings,  their  oppositions,  decays,  depres¬ 
sions,  oblivions,  removes,  with  the  causes  and  oc¬ 
casions  of  them,  and  all  other  events  concerning 
learning,  throughout  the  ages  of  the  world,  I 
may  truly  affirm  to  be  wanting.  The  use  and  end 
of  which  work  I  do  not  so  much  design  for  curi¬ 
osity  or  satisfaction  of  those  that  are  the  lovers 
of  learning,  but  chiefly  for  a  more  serious  and 
grave  purpose,  which  is  this  in  few  words,  that 
it  will  make  learned  men  wise  in  the  use  and  ad¬ 
ministration  of  learning.  For  it  is  not  Saint  x\u- 
gustine’s  nor  Saint  Ambrose’  works  that  will 
make  so  wise  a  divine,  as  ecclesiastical  history, 
throughly  read  and  observed;  and  the  same  rea¬ 
son  is  of  learning. 

3.  History  of  nature  is  of  three  sorts :  of  nature 
in  course;  of  nature  erring  or  varying;  and  of 
nature  altered  or  wrought;  that  is,  history  of 
creatures,  history  of  marvels,  and  history  of  arts. 
The  first  of  these  no  doubt  is  extant,  and  that 
in  good  perfection:  the  two  latter  are  handled 
so  weakly  and  unprofitably,  as  I  am  moved  to 
note  them  as  deficient.  For  I  find  no  sufficient 
or  competent  collection  of  the  works  of  nature 
which  have  a  digression  and  deflexion  from  the 
ordinary  course  of  generations,  productions,  and 
motions;  whether  they  be  singularities  of  place 
and  religion,  or  the  strange  events  of  time  and 
chance,  or  the  effects  of  yet  unknown  proprie¬ 
ties,  or  the  instances  of  exception  to  general  kinds. 
It  is  true,  I  find  a  number  of  books  of  fabulous 
experiments  and  secrets,  and  frivolous  impos¬ 
tures  for  pleasure  and  strangeness;  but  a  sub¬ 
stantial  and  severe  collection  of  the  heteroclites 
or  irregulars  of  nature,  well  examined  and  de¬ 
scribed,  I  find  not:  specially  not  with  due  rejec¬ 
tion  of  fables  and  popular  errors.  For  as  things 
now  are,  if  an  untruth  in  nature  be  once  on  foot, 
what  by  reason  of  the  neglect  of  examination, 
and  countenance  of  antiquity,  and  what  by  rea¬ 
son  of  the  use  of  the  opinion  in  similitudes  and 
ornaments  of  speech,  it  is  never  called  down. 


4.  The  use  of  this  work,  honoured  with  a  pre¬ 
cedent  in  Aristotle,  is  nothing  less  than  to  give 
contentment  to  the  appetite  of  curious  and  vain 
wits,  as  the  manner  of  ivlirabilaries  is  to  do;  but 
for  two  reasons,  both  of  great  weight;  the  one 
to  correct  the  partiality  of  axioms  and  opinions, 
which  are  commonly  framed  only  upon  common 
and  familiar  examples;  the  other  because  from 
the  wonders  of  nature  is  the  nearest  intelligence 
and  passage  towards  the  wonders  of  art:  for  it 
is  no  more  but  by  following,  and  as  it  were  hound¬ 
ing  nature  in  her  wanderings,  to  be  able  to  lead 
her  afterwards  to  the  same  place  again.  Neither 
am  1  of  opinion,  in  this  history  of  marvels,  that 
superstitious  narrations  of  sorceries,  witchcrafts, 
dreams,  divinations,  and  the  like,  where  there 
is  an  assurance  and  clear  evidence  of  the  fact, 
be  altogether  excluded.  For  it  is  not  yet  known 
in  what  cases  and  how  far  effects  attributed  to 
superstition  do  participate  of  natural  causes:  and 
therefore  howsoever  the  practice  of  such  things 
is  to  be  condemned,  yet  from  the  speculation 
and  consideration  of  them  light  may  be  taken, 
not  only  for  the  discerning  of  the  offences,  but 
for  the  further  disclosing  of  nature.  Neither  ought 
a  man  to  make  scruple  of  entering  into  these 
things  for  inquisition  of  truth,  as  your  Majesty 
hath  showed  in  your  own  example;  who  with 
the  two  clear  eyes  of  religion  and  natural  philo¬ 
sophy  have  looked  deeply  and  wisely  into  these 
shadows,  and  yet  proved  yourself  to  be  of  the 
nature  of  the  sun,  which  passeth  through  pol¬ 
lutions  and  itself  remains  as  pure  as  before.  But 
this  I  hold  fit,  that  these  narrations,  which  have 
mixture  with  superstition,  be  sorted  by  them¬ 
selves,  and  not  to  be  mingled  with  the  narrations 
which  are  merely  and  sincerely  natural.  But  as 
for  the  narrations  touching  the  prodigies  and 
miracles  of  religions,  they  are  either  not  true, 
or  not  natural;  and  therefore  impertinent  for 
the  story  of  nature. 

5.  For  history  of  nature  wrought  or  mechani¬ 
cal,  I  find  some  collections  made  of  agriculture, 
and  likewise  of  manual  arts ;  but  commonly  with 
a  rejection  of  experiments  familiar  and  vulgar. 
For  it  is  esteemed  a  kind  of  dishonour  unto  learn¬ 
ing  to  descend  to  inquiry  or  meditation  upon 
matters  mechanical,  except  they  be  such  as  may 
be  thought  secrets,  rarities,  and  special  subtil- 
ties;  which  humour  of  vain  and  supercilious  ar- 
rogancyisjustlvderided  in  Plato;  wherehe  brings 
in  Hippias,  a  vaunting  sophist,  disputing  with 
Socrates,  a  trueandunfeignedinquisitoroftruth; 
where  the  subject  being  touching  beauty,  Socra¬ 
tes,  after  his  wandering  manner  of  inductions, 
put  first  an  example  of  a  fair  virgin,  and  then 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


of  a  fair  horse,  and  then  of  a  fair  pot  well  glazed, 
whereat  Hippias  was  offended,  and  said,  “More 
than  for  courtesy’s  sake,  he  did  think  much  to 
dispute  with  any  that  did  allege  such  base  and 
sordid  instances.”  Whereunto  Socrates  answer- 
eth,  “You  have  reason,  and  it  becomes  you  well, 
being  a  man  so  trim  in  your  vestiments,”1  &c., 
and  so  goeth  on  in  an  irony.  But  the  truth  is, 
they  be  not  the  highest  instances  that  give  the 
securest  information;  as  may  be  well  expressed 
in  the  tale  so  common  of  the  philosopher,2  that 
while  he  gazed  upwards  to  the  stars  fell  into  the 
water;3  for  if  he  had  looked  down  he  might  have 
seen  the  stars  in  the  water,  but  looking  aloft  he 
could  not  see  the  water  in  thestars.So itcometh 
often  topass,that  mean  and  small  thingsdiscover 
great,  better  than  great  can  discover  the  small: 
and  therefore  Aristotle  noteth  well,  “That  the 
nature  of  everything  is  best  seen  in  his  smallest 
portions.”4  And  for  that  cause  he  inquireth  the 
nature  of  a  commonwealth,  first  in  a  family,  and 
the  simple  conjugations  of  man  and  wife,  par¬ 
ent  and  child,  master  and  servant,  which  are  in 
every  cottage.  Even  so  likewise  the  nature  of 
this  great  city  of  the  world,  and  the  policy  there¬ 
of,  must  be  first  sought  in  mean  concordances 
and  small  portions.  So  we  see  how  that  secret 
of  nature,  of  the  turning  of  iron  touched  with 
the  loadstone  towards  the  north,  was  found  out 
in  needles  of  iron,  not  in  bars  of  iron. 

6.  But  if  my  judgement  be  of  any  weight,  the 
use  of  history  mechanical  isofallothersthemost 
radical  and  fundamental  towards  natural  philos¬ 
ophy;  such  natural  philosophy  as  shall  not  vanish 
in  the  fume  of  subtile,  sublime,  or  delectable 
speculation,  but  such  as  shall  be  operative  to 
the  endowment  and  benefit  of  man’s  life.  For  it 
will  not  only  minister  and  suggest  for  the  present 
many  ingenious  practices  in  all  trades,  by  a  con¬ 
nexion  and  transferring  of  the  observations  of 
one  art  to  the  use  of  another,  when  the  experi¬ 
ences  of  several  mysteries  shall  fall  under  the 
consideration  of  one  man’s  mind;  but  further, 
it  will  give  a  more  true  and  real  illumination  con¬ 
cerning  causes  and  axioms  than  is  hitherto  at¬ 
tained.  For  like  as  a  man’s  disposition  is  never 
well  known  till  he  be  crossed,  nor  Proteus  ever 
changed  shapes  till  he  was  straitened  and  held 
fast;  so  the  passages  and  variations  of  nature 
cannot  appear  so  fully  in  the  liberty  of  nature 
as  in  the  trials  and  vexations  of  art. 

II.  i.  For  civil  history,  it  is  of  three  kinds; 

1  Plato,  Hippias  Major ,  in.  291. 

2Thales;  see  Plato,  Theeetetusy  1.  174. 

3 Laertius,  Life  of  Thales. 

4Aristotle,  Politics ,  Bk.  1,  and  Physics ,  Bk.  1. 


not  unfitly  to  be  compared  with  the  three  kinds 
of  pictures  or  images.  For  of  pictures  or  images, 
we  see  some  are  unfinished,  some  are  perfect, 
and  some  are  defaced.  So  of  histories  we  may 
find  three  kinds,  memorials,  perfect  histories, 
and  antiquities;  for  memorials  are  history  un¬ 
finished,  or  the  first  or  rough  draughts  of  history ; 
and  antiquities  are  history  defaced,  or  some  rem¬ 
nants  of  history  which  have  casually  escaped 
the  shipwreck  of  time. 

2.  Memorials,  or  preparatory  history,  are  of 
two  sorts;  whereof  the  one  may  be  termed  com¬ 
mentaries,  and  the  other  registers.  Commenta¬ 
ries  are  they  which  set  down  a  continuance  of 
the  naked  events  and  actions,  without  the  mo¬ 
tives  or  designs,  the  counsels,  the  speeches,  the 
pretexts,  the  occasions  and  other  passages  of 
action:  for  this  is  the  true  nature  of  a  commen¬ 
tary  (though  Caesar,  in  modesty  mixed  with 
greatness,  did  for  his  pleasure  apply  the  name 
ofacommentarytothebest  history  of  the  world). 
Registers  are  collections  of  public  acts,  as  de¬ 
crees  of  council,  judicial  proceedings,  declara¬ 
tions  and  letters  of  estate,  orations  and  the  like, 
without  a  perfect  continuance  or  contexture  of 
the  thread  of  the  narration. 

3.  Antiquities,  or  remnants  of  history,  are,  as 
was  said,  “ tanquam  tabula  naufragii”  :5  when  in¬ 
dustrious  persons,  by  an  exact  and  scrupulous 
diligence  and  observation,  out  of  monuments, 
names,  words,  proverbs,  traditions,  private  re¬ 
cords  and  evidences,  fragments  of  stories,  pas¬ 
sages  of  books  that  concern  not  story,  and  the 
like,  do  save  and  recover  somewhat  from  the 
deluge  of  time. 

4.  In  these  kinds  of  unperfect  histories  I  do 
assign  no  deficience,  for  they  are  tanquam  im- 
perfecte  mistaf  and  therefore  any  deficience  in 
them  is  but  their  nature.  As  for  the  corruptions 
and  moths  of  history,  which  are  epitomes,  the 
use  of  them  deserveth  to  be  banished,  as  all  men 
of  sound  judgement  have  confessed,  as  those 
that  have  fretted  and  corroded  the  sound  bodies 
of  many  excellent  histories,  and  wrought  them 
into  base  and  unprofitable  dregs. 

5.  History,  which  may  be  called  just  and  per¬ 
fect  history,  is  of  three  kinds,  according  to  the 
object  which  it  propoundeth,  or  pretendeth  to 
represent:  for  it  either  representeth  a  time,  or  a 
person,  or  an  action.  The  first  we  call  chronicles, 
the  second  lives,  and  the  third  narrations  or  re¬ 
lations.  Of  these,  although  the  first  be  the  most 
complete  and  absolute  kind  of  history,  and  hath 
most  estimation  and  glory,  yet  the  second  ex- 

6“Like  the  planks  of  a  shipwreck.” 

6‘‘Things  imperfectly  compounded.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


celleth  it  in  profit  and  use,  and  the  third  in  ver¬ 
ity  and  sincerity.  For  history  of  times  repre¬ 
sented  the  magnitude  of  actions,  and  the  public 
faces  and  deportments  of  persons,  and  passeth 
over  in  silence  the  smaller  passages  and  mo¬ 
tions  of  men  and  matters.  But  such  being  the 
workmanship  of  God,  as  he  doth  hang  the 
greatest  weight  upon  the  smallest  wires,  maxi¬ 
ma  e  minimis  suspendens ,  it  comes  therefore  to 
pass,  that  such  histories  do  rather  set  forth  the 
pomp  of  business  than  the  true  and  inward  re¬ 
sorts  thereof.  But  lives,  if  they  be  well  written, 
propounding  to  themselves  a  person  to  repre¬ 
sent,  in  whom  actions  both  greater  and  smaller, 
public  and  private,  have  a  commixture,  must 
of  necessity  contain  a  more  true,  native,  and 
lively  representation.  So  again  narrations  and 
relations  of  actions,  as  the  war  of  Peloponnesus, 
the  expedition  of  Cyrus  Minor,  the  conspiracy 
of  Catiline,  cannot  but  be  more  purely  and 
exactly  true  than  histories  of  times,  because 
they  may  choose  an  argument  comprehensible 
within  the  notice  and  instructions  of  the  writer: 
whereas  he  that  undertaketh  the  story  of  a  time, 
specially  of  any  length,  cannot  but  meet  with 
many  blanks  and  spaces  which  he  must  be 
forced  to  fill  up  out  of  his  own  wit  and  conj  ecture. 

6.  For  the  history  of  times  (I  mean  of  civil 
history),  the  providence  of  God  hath  made  the 
distribution.  For  it  hath  pleased  God  to  ordain 
and  illustrate  two  exemplar  states  of  the  world 
for  arms,  learning,  moral  virtue,  policy,  and 
laws;  the  state  of  Grecia  and  the  state  of  Rome; 
the  histories  whereof,  occupying  the  middle 
part  of  time,  have  more  ancient  to  them  his¬ 
tories  which  may  by  one  common  name  be 
termed  the  antiquities  of  the  world:  and  after 
them,  histories  which  may  be  likewise  called 
by  the  name  of  modern  history. 

7.  Now  to  speak  of  the  deficiencies.  As  to  the 
heathen  antiquities  of  the  world,  it  is  in  vain  to 
note  them  for  deficient.  Deficient  they  are  no 
doubt,  consisting  most  of  fables  and  fragments; 
but  the  deficience  cannot  be  holpen;  for  anti¬ 
quity  is  like  fame,  caput  inter  nubila  condit ,  her 
head  is  muffled  from  our  sight.  For  the  history 
of  the  exemplar  states  it  is  extant  in  good 
perfection.  Not  but  I  could  wish  there  were  a 
perfect  course  of  history  for  Grecia  from  Theseus 
to  Philopoemen  (what  time  the  affairs  of  Grecia 
drowned  and  extinguished  in  the  affairs  of 
Rome),  and  for  Rome  from  Romulus  to  Justin- 
ianus,  who  may  be  truly  said  to  be  ultimus 
Romanorum }  In  which  sequences  of  story  the 
text  of  Thucydides  and  Xenophon  in  the  one, 

1“The  last  of  the  Romans.” 


and  the  texts  of  Livius,  Polybius,  Sallustius, 
Caesar,  Appianus,  Tacitus,  Herodianus  in  the 
other,  to  be  kept  entire  without  any  diminution 
at  all,  and  only  to  be  supplied  and  continued. 
But  this  is  matter  of  magnificence,  rather  to  be 
commended  than  required:  and  we  speak  now 
of  parts  of  learning  supplemental  and  not  of 
supererogation. 

8.  But  for  modern  histories,  whereof  there 
are  some  few  very  worthy,  but  the  greater  part 
beneath  mediocrity,  leaving  the  care  of  foreign 
stories  to  foreign  states,  because  I  will  not  be 
curiosus  in  aliena  republican  I  cannot  fail  to 
represent  to  your  Majesty  the  unworthiness  of 
the  history  of  England  in  the  main  continuance 
thereof,  and  the  partiality  and  obliquity  of  that 
of  Scotland  in  the  latest  and  largest  author 
that  I  have  seen:  supposing  that  it  would  be 
honour  for  your  Majesty,  and  a  work  very 
memorable,  if  this  island  of  Great  Brittany,  as 
it  is  now  joined  in  monarchy  for  the  ages  to 
come,  so  were  joined  in  one  history  for  the 
times  passed;  after  the  manner  of  the  sacred 
history,  which  draweth  down  the  story  of  the 
ten  tribes  and  of  the  two  tribes  as  twins  together. 
And  if  it  shall  seem  that  the  greatness  of  this 
work  may  make  it  less  exactly  performed,  there 
is  an  excellent  period  of  a  much  smaller  com¬ 
pass  of  time,  as  to  the  story  of  England;  that  is 
to  say,  from  the  uniting  of  the  Roses  to  the 
uniting  of  the  kingdoms;  a  portion  of  time 
wherein,  to  my  understanding,  there  hath  been 
the  rarest  varieties  that  in  like  number  of  suc¬ 
cessions  of  any  hereditary  monarchy  hath  been 
known.  For  it  beginneth  with  the  mixed  adep- 
tion  of  a  crown  by  arms  and  title;  an  entry  by 
battle,  an  establishment  by  marriage;  and 
therefore  times  answerable,  like  waters  after  a 
tempest,  full  of  working  and  swelling,  though 
without  extremity  of  storm;  but  well  passed 
through  by  the  wisdom  of  the  pilot,3  being  one 
of  the  most  sufficient  kings  of  all  the  number. 
Then  followeth  the  reign  of  a  king,  whose  ac¬ 
tions,  howsoever  conducted,  had  much  inter¬ 
mixture  with  the  affairs  of  Europe,  balancing 
and  inclining  them  variably;  in  whose  time  also 
began  that  great  alteration  in  the  state  ecclesi¬ 
astical,  an  action  which  seldom  cometh  upon 
the  stage.  Then  the  reign  of  a  minor:  then  an 
offer  of  an  usurpation  (though  it  was  but  as 
febris  ephemeral).  Then  the  reign  of  a  queen 
matched  with  a  foreigner:  then  of  a  queen  that 
lived  solitary  and  unmarried,  and  yet  her  gov¬ 
ernment  so  masculine,  as  it  had  greater  impres- 

2“A  meddler  in  other  nations’  matters.” 

3Henry  VII.  4“A  diary  ague.” 


36  ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


sion  and  operation  upon  the  states  abroad  than 
it  any  ways  received  from  thence.  And  new  last, 
this  most  happy  and  glorious  event,  that  this 
island  of  Brittany,  divided  from  all  the  world, 
should  be  united  in  itself:  and  that  oracle  of 
rest  given  to  Aeneas,  “ antiquam  exquirite  mat- 
rem”x  should  now  be  performed,  and  fulfilled 
upon  the  nations  of  England  and  Scotland, 
being  now  reunited  in  the  ancient  mother  name 
of  Brittany,  as  a  full  period  of  all  instability 
and  peregrinations.  So  that  as  it  cometh  to  pass 
in  massive  bodies,  that  they  have  certain  trep¬ 
idations  and  waverings  before  they  fix  and  settle, 
so  it  seemeth  that  by  the  providence  of  God 
this  monarchy,  before  it  was  to  settle  in  your 
Majesty  and  your  generations  (in  which  I  hope 
it  is  now  established  for  ever),  it  had  these  pre¬ 
lusive  changes  and  varieties. 

9.  For  lives,  I  do  find  strange  that  these  times 
have  so  little  esteemed  the  virtues  of  the  times, 
as  that  the  writings  of  lives  should  be  no  more 
frequent.  For  although  there  be  not  many  sov¬ 
ereign  princes  or  absolute  commanders,  and 
that  states  are  most  collected  into  monarchies, 
yet  are  there  many  worthy  personages  that  de¬ 
serve  better  than  dispersed  report  or  barren 
elogies.  For  herein  the  invention  of  one  of  the 
late  poets  is  proper,  and  doth  well  enrich  the 
ancient  fiction.  For  he  feigneth  that  at  the  end 
of  the  thread  or  web  of  every  man’s  life  there 
was  a  little  medal  containing  the  person’s  name, 
and  that  Time  waited  upon  the  shears,  and  as 
soon  as  the  thread  was  cut,  caught  the  medals, 
and  carried  them  to  the  river  of  Lethe;  and 
about  the  bank  there  were  many  birds  flying 
up  and  down,  that  would  get  the  medals  and 
carry  them  in  their  beak  a  little  while,  and  then 
let  them  fall  into  the  river.  Only  there  were  a  few 
swans,  which  if  they  got  a  name  would  carry  it  to 
a  temple,  where  it  was  consecrate.  And  although 
many  men,  more  mortal  in  their  affections  than 
in  their  bodies,  do  esteem  desire  of  name  and 
memory  but  as  a  vanity  and  ventosity, 

Anirni  nil  magnae  laudis  egentes ;2 

which  opinion  cometh  from  that  root,  Nonprius 
laudes  contempsimus ,  quam  laudanda  jacere 
desivimus" '?  yet  that  will  not  alter  Salomon’s 
judgement,  “ Memoria  justi  cum  laudibus ,  at 
impiorum  nomen  putrescet”  :4  the  one  flourisheth, 

1  Virgil,  Aincid ,  Bk.  in.  96.  “Seek  out  your  ancient 
mother.” 

2 1 1? id.,  Bk.  v.  751.  “Souls  that  have  no  care  for  praise.” 

3“Men  hardly  despise  praise  till  they  have  ceased  to 
deserve  it.” 

4Prov.  10.  7.  “The  memory  of  the  just  shall  be  with 
praises;  but  the  name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot.” 


the  other  either  consumeth  to  present  oblivion, 
or  turneth  to  an  ill  odour.  And  therefore  in 
that  style  or  addition,  which  is  and  hath  been 
long  well  received  and  brought  in  use,  ‘ jelicis 
memoriae ,  piae  memoriae ,  bonae  memoriae 
we  do  acknowledge  that  which  Cicero  saith, 
borrowing  it  from  Demosthenes,  that  “ bona 
jama  propria  possessio  defunctorum” ;6  which 
possession  I  cannot  but  note  that  in  our  times 
it  lieth  much  waste,  and  that  therein  there  is  a 
deficience. 

10.  For  narrations  and  relations  of  particular 
actions,  there  were  also  to  be  wished  a  greater 
diligence  therein;  for  there  is  no  great  action 
but  hath  some  good  pen  which  attends  it.  And 
because  it  is  an  ability  not  common  to  write  a 
good  history,  as  may  well  appear  by  the  small 
number  of  them;  yet  if  particularity  of  actions 
memorable  were  but  tolerably  reported  as  they 
pass,  the  compiling  of  a  complete  history  of 
times  mought  be  the  better  expected,  when  a 
writer  should  arise  that  were  fit  for  it:  for  the 
collection  of  such  relations  mought  be  as  a  nur¬ 
sery  garden,  whereby  to  plant  a  fair  and  stately 
garden,  when  time  should  serve. 

11.  There  is  yet  another  partition  of  history 
which  Cornelius  Tacitus  maketh,  which  is  not 
to  be  forgotten,  specially  with  that  application 
which  he  accoupleth  it  withal,  annals  and  jour¬ 
nals:  appropriating  to  the  former  matters  of 
estate,  and  to  the  latter  acts  and  accidents  of  a 
meaner  nature.  Forgiving  but  a  touch  of  certain 
magnificent  buildings,  he  addeth,  “ Cum  ex  dig - 
nitate  populi  Romani  repertum  sit ,  res  illustres 
annalibus ,  talia  diurnis  urbis  actis  mandare .”7 
So  as  there  is  a  kind  of  contemplative  heraldry, 
as  well  as  civil.  And  as  nothing  doth  derogate 
from  the  dignity  of  a  state  more  than  confusion 
of  degrees,  so  it  doth  not  a  little  imbase  the  au¬ 
thority  of  an  history,  to  intermingle  matters  of 
triumph,  or  matters  of  ceremony,  or  matters  of 
novelty,  with  matters  of  state.  But  the  use  of 
a  journal  hath  not  only  been  in  the  history  of 
time,  but  likewise  in  the  history  of  persons,  and 
chiefly  of  actions;  for  princes  in  ancient  time 
had,  upon  pointof  honour  and  policy  both,  jour¬ 
nals  kept,  what  passed  day  by  day.  For  we  see 
the  chronicle  which  was  read  before  Ahasue- 
rus,  when  he  could  not  take  rest,8 contained  mat- 

B“Of  happy  memory!  of  pious  memory!  of  good  me¬ 
mory!” 

6 Demosthenes,  Against  Ltptincs,  488.  “A  good  name  is 
the  proper  inheritance  of  the  deceased.” 

1  Annals,  13.  “It  was  found  suitable  to  the  Roman 
dignity  that  illustrious  things  should  be  committed  to  an¬ 
nals,  but  such  as  these  to  the  public  journals  of  the  city.” 

8 Esther,  6.  I. 


SECOND  BOOK 


ter  of  affairs  indeed,  but  such  as  had  passed  in 
his  own  time  and  very  lately  before.  But  the 
journal  of  Alexander’s  house  expressed  every 
small  particularity,1  even  concerning  his  person 
and  court;  and  it  is  yet  an  use  well  received  in 
enterprises  memorable,  as  expeditions  of  war, 
navigations,  and  the  like,  to  keep  diaries  of  that 
which  passeth  continually. 

12. 1  cannot  likewise  be  ignorant  of  a  form  of 
writing  which  some  grave  and  wise  men  have 
used,  containing  a  scattered  history  of  those 
actions  which  they  have  thought  worthy  of 
memory,  with  politic  discourse  and  observation 
thereupon:  not  incorporate  into  the  history, 
but  separately,  and  as  the  more  principal  in 
their  intention;  which  kind  of  ruminated  history 
I  think  more  fit  to  place  amongst  books  of 
policy,  whereof  we  shall  hereafter  speak,  than 
amongst  books  of  history.  For  it  is  the  true 
office  of  history  to  represent  the  events  them¬ 
selves  together  with  the  counsels,  and  to  leave 
the  observations  and  conclusions  thereupon  to 
the  liberty  and  faculty  of  every  man’s  judge¬ 
ment.  But  mixtures  are  things  irregular,  whereof 
no  man  can  define. 

13.  So  also  is  there  another  kind  of  history 
manifoldly  mixed,  and  that  is  history  of  cos¬ 
mography:  being  compounded  of  natural  his¬ 
tory,  in  respect  of  the  regions  themselves;  of 
history  civil,  in  respect  of  the  habitiations,regi- 
ments,  and  manners  of  the  people;  and  the 
mathematics,  in  respect  of  the  climates  and 
configurations  towards  the  heavens:  which  part 
of  learning  of  all  others  in  this  latter  time  hath 
obtained  most  proficience.  For  it  may  be  truly 
affirmed  to  the  honour  of  these  times,  and  in  a 
virtuous  emulation  with  antiquity,  that  this 
great  building  of  the  world  had  never  through- 
lights  made  in  it,  till  the  age  of  us  and  our 
fathers.  For  although  they  had  knowledge  of 
the  antipodes, 

Nosque  ubi  primus  equis  Oriens  afflavit  anhelis , 

Illic  sera  rubens  accendit  lumina  Vesper ,2 

yet  that  mought  be  by  demonstration,  and  not 
in  fact;  and  if  by  travel,  it  requireth  the  voyage 
but  of  half  the  globe.  But  to  circle  the  earth,  as 
the  heavenly  bodies  do,  was  not  done  nor  enter- 
prised  till  these  later  times:  and  therefore  these 
times  may  justly  bear  in  their  word,  not  only 
plus  ultra ,  in  precedence  of  the  ancient  non 

'Plutarch,  Symposium ,  1.  qu.  6;  and  Alexander,  xxiii. 

76; 

2\ irgil,  GeorgicSy  Bk.  1.  251.  “And  while  on  us  the  fresh 
East  breathes  from  far,  for  them  the  red  West  lights  her 
evening  star.” 


ultra,  and  imitabile  fulmen ,  in  precedence  of 
the  ancient  non  imitabile  fulmen , 

Demens  qui  nimbos  et  non  imitabile  fulmen ,3  &c. 

but  likewise  imitabile  caelum ;  in  respect  of  the 
many  memorable  voyages  after  the  manner  of 
heaven  about  the  globe  of  the  earth. 

14.  And  this  proficience  in  navigation  and 
discoveries  may  plant  also  an  expectation  of 
the  further  proficience  and  augmentation  of  all 
sciences;  because  it  may  seem  they  are  ordained 
by  God  to  be  coevals,  that  is,  to  meet  in  one 
age.  For  so  the  prophet  Daniel  speaking  of  the 
latter  times  foretelleth Plurimi pertransibunt, 
et  multiplex  erit  scientia”  :4  as  if  the  openness 
and  through-passage  of  the  world  and  the  in¬ 
crease  of  knowledge  were  appointed  to  be  in  the 
same  ages;  as  we  see  it  is  already  performed  in 
great  part:  the  learning  of  these  later  times  not 
much  giving  place  to  the  former  two  periods  or 
returns  of  learning,  the  one  of  the  Grecians, 
the  other  of  the  Romans. 

III.  1.  History  ecclesiastical  receiveth  the 
same  divisions  with  history  civil:  but  further  in 
the  propriety  thereof  may  be  divided  into  the 
history  of  the  church,  by  a  general  name;  his¬ 
tory  of  prophecy;  and  history  of  providence. 
The  first  describeth  the  times  of  the  militant 
church,  whether  it  be  fluctuant,  as  the  ark  of 
Noah,  or  movable,  as  the  ark  in  the  wilderness, 
or  at  rest,  as  the  ark  in  the  temple:  that  is,  the 
state  of  the  church  in  persecution,  in  remove, 
and  in  peace.  This  part  I  ought  in  no  sort  to 
note  as  deficient;  only  I  would  the  virtue  and 
sincerity  of  it  were  according  to  the  mass  and 
quantity.  But  I  am  not  now  in  hand  with  cen¬ 
sures,  but  with  omissions. 

2.  The  second,  which  is  history  of  prophecy, 
consisteth  of  two  relatives,  the  prophecy,  and 
the  accomplishment;  and  therefore  the  nature 
of  such  a  work  ought  to  be,  that  every  prophecy 
of  the  Scripture  be  sorted  with  the  event  ful¬ 
filling  the  same,  throughout  the  ages  of  the 
world;  both  for  the  better  confirmation  of  faith, 
and  for  the  better  illumination  of  the  Church 
touching  those  parts  of  prophecies  which  are 
yet  unfulfilled:  allowing  nevertheless  that  lati¬ 
tude  which  is  agreeable  and  familiar  unto  divine 
prophecies;  being  of  the  nature  of  their  author, 
with  whom  a  thousand  years  are  but  as  one 
day;5  and  therefore  are  not  fulfilled  punctually 
at  once,  but  have  springing  and  germinant  ac- 

3 Virgil,  AZncidy  Bk.  vi.  590 

4 Dan.  12.  4.  “Many  shall  go  to  and  fro  on  the  earth, 
and  knowledge  shall  be  increased.” 

6Ps.  89.  4. 


38  ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


complishment  throughout  many  ages;  though 
the  height  or  fulness  of  them  may  refer  to  some 
one  age.  This  is  a  work  which  I  find  deficient; 
but  is  to  be  done  with  wisdom,  sobriety,  and 
reverence,  or  not  at  all. 

3.  The  third,  which  is  history  of  providence, 
containeth  that  excellent  correspondence  which 
is  between  God’s  revealed  will  and  his  secret 
will:  which  though  it  be  so  secure,  as  for  the 
most  part  it  is  not  legible  to  the  natural  man;1 
no,  nor  many  times  to  those  that  behold  it 
from  the  tabernacle;  yet  at  some  times  it 
pleaseth  God,  for  our  better  establishment  and 
the  confuting  of  those  which  are  without  God 
in  the  world,  to  write  it  in  such  text  and  capital 
letters  that,  as  the  prophet  saith,  “He  that 
runneth  by  may  read  it”;2  that  is,  mere  sensual 
persons,  which  hasten  by  God’s  judgements, 
and  never  bend  or  fix  their  cogitations  upon 
them,  are  nevertheless  in  their  passage  and  race 
urged  to  discern  it.  Such  are  the  notable  events 
and  examples  of  God’s  judgements,  chastise¬ 
ments,  deliverances,  and  blessings:  and  this  is 
a  work  which  hath  passed  through  the  labour 
of  many,  and  therefore  I  cannot  present  as 
omitted. 

4.  There  are  also  other  parts  of  learning  which 
are  appendices  to  history.  For  all  the  exterior 
proceedings  of  man  consist  of  words  and  deeds; 
whereof  history  doth  properly  receive  and  retain 
in  memory  the  deeds,  and  if  words,  yet  but  as 
inducements  and  passages  to  deeds;  so  are 
there  other  books  and  writings,  which  are  ap¬ 
propriate  to  the  custody  and  receipt  of  words 
only;  which  likewise  are  of  three  sorts;  orations, 
letters,  and  brief  speeches  or  sayings.  Orations 
are  pleadings,  speeches  of  counsel,  laudatives, 
invectives,  apologies,  reprehensions,  orations 
of  formality  or  ceremony,  and  the  like.  Letters 
are  according  to  all  the  variety  of  occasions, 
advertisements,  advices,  directions,  proposi¬ 
tions,  petitions,  commendatory,  expostulatory, 
satisfactory,  of  compliment,  of  pleasure,  of  dis¬ 
course,  and  all  other  passages  of  action.  And 
such  as  are  written  from  wise  men  are  of  all  the 
words  of  man,  in  my  judgement,  the  best;  for 
they  are  more  natural  than  orations,  and  public 
speeches,  and  more  advised  than  conferences 
or  present  speeches.  So  again  letters  of  affairs 
from  such  as  manage  them,  or  are  privy  to 
them,  are  of  all  others  the  best  instructions  for 
history,  and  to  a  diligent  reader  the  best  histories 
in  themselves.  For  apophthegms,  it  is  a  great 
loss  of  that  book  of  Caesar’s;  for  as  his  history, 

1l.  Cor.  2. 

2Eph.  2;  and  Hab.  2. 


and  those  few  letters  of  his  which  we  have,  and 
those  apophthegms  which  were  of  his  own,  excel 
all  men’s  else,  so  I  suppose  would  his  collection 
of  apophthegms  havedone.  Forasforthosewhich 
are  collected  by  others,  either  I  have  no  taste 
in  such  matters,  or  else  their  choice  hath  not 
been  happy.  But  upon  these  three  kinds  of  writ¬ 
ings  I  do  not  insist,  because  I  have  no  deficiencies 
to  propound  concerning  them. 

5.  Thus  much  therefore  concerning  history, 
which  is  that  part  of  learning  which  answereth 
to  one  of  the  cells,  domiciles,  or  offices  of  the 
mind  of  man;  which  is  that  of  the  memory. 

IV.  1.  Poesy  is  a  part  of  learning  in  measure 
of  words  for  the  most  part  restrained,  but  in  all 
other  points  extremely  licensed,  and  doth  truly 
refer  to  the  imagination;  which,  being  not  tied 
to  the  laws  of  matter,  may  at  pleasure  join 
that  which  nature  hath  severed,  and  sever  that 
which  nature  hath  joined;  and  so  make  unlaw¬ 
ful  matches  and  divorces  of  things;  “ Pictoribus 
atque  poetis”z  &c.  It  is  taken  in  two  senses  in 
respect  of  words  or  matter.  In  the  first  sense  it 
is  but  a  character  of  style,  and  belongeth  to  arts 
of  speech,  and  is  not  pertinent  for  the  present. 
In  the  latter  it  is  (as  hath  been  said)  one  of  the 
principal  portions  of  learning,  and  is  nothing 
else  but  feigned  history,  which  may  be  styled 
as  well  in  prose  as  in  verse. 

2.  The  use  of  this  feigned  history  hath  been 
to  give  some  shadow  of  satisfaction  to  the  mind 
of  man  in  those  points  wherein  the  nature  of 
things  doth  deny  it,  the  world  being  in  propor¬ 
tion  inferior  to  the  soul;  by  reason  whereof 
there  is,  agreeable  to  the  spirit  of  man,  a  more 
ample  greatness,  a  more  exact  goodness,  and  a 
more  absolute  variety,  than  can  be  found  in  the 
nature  of  things.  Therefore,  because  the  acts 
or  events  of  true  history  have  not  that  magni¬ 
tude  which  satisfieth  the  mind  of  man,  poesy 
feigneth  acts  and  events  greater  and  more  hero- 
ical.  Because  true  history  propoundeth  the  suc¬ 
cesses  and  issues  of  actions  not  so  agreeable  to 
the  merits  of  virtue  and  vice,  therefore  poesy 
feigns  them  more  just  in  retribution,  and  more 
according  to  revealed  providence.  Because  true 
history  representeth  actions  and  events  more 
ordinary  and  less  interchanged,  therefore  poesy 
endueth  them  with  more  rareness,  and  more  un¬ 
expected  and  alternative  variations.  So  as  it  ap- 
peareth  that  poesy  serveth  and  conferreth  to 
magnanimity, morality,  and  todelectation.  And 
therefore  it  was  ever  thought  to  have  some  par¬ 
ticipation  of  divineness,  because  it  doth  raise 

3"Painters  and  poets  have  always  been  allowed  to  take 
what  liberties  they  would.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


and  erect  the  mind,  by  submitting  the  shows 
of  things  to  the  desires  of  the  mind;  whereas 
reason  doth  buckle  and  bow  the  mind  unto 
the  nature  of  things.  And  we  see  that  by  these 
insinuations  and  congruities  with  man's  na¬ 
ture  and  pleasure,  joined  also  with  the  agree¬ 
ment  and  consort  it  hath  with  music,  it  hath 
had  access  and  estimation  in  rude  times  and 
barbarous  regions,  where  other  learning  stood 
excluded. 

3.  The  division  of  poesy  which  is  aptest  in  the 
propriety  thereof  (besides  those  divisions  which 
are  common  unto  it  with  history,  as  feigned 
chronicles,  feigned  lives,  and  the  appendices  of 
history,  as  feigned  epistles,  feigned  orations,  and 
the  rest)  is  into  poesy  narrative,  representative, 
and  allusive.  The  narrative  is  a  mere  imitation 
of  history,  with  the  excesses  before  remember¬ 
ed;  choosing  for  subject  commonly  wars  and 
love,  rarely  state,  and  sometimes  pleasure  or 
mirth.  Representative  is  as  a  visible  history; 
and  is  an  image  of  actions  as  if  they  were  pres¬ 
ent,  as  history  is  of  actions  in  nature  as  they  are, 
(that  is)  past.  Allusive  or  parabolical  is  a  nar¬ 
ration  applied  only  to  express  some  special  pur¬ 
pose  or  conceit.  Which  latter  kind  of  paraboli¬ 
cal  wisdom  was  much  more  in  use  in  the  ancient 
times,  as  by  the  fables  of  Aesop,  and  the  brief 
sentences  of  the  seven,  and  the  use  of  hierogly¬ 
phics  may  appear.  And  the  cause  was,  for  that 
it  was  then  of  necessity  to  express  any  point  of 
reason  which  was  more  sharp  or  subtile  than 
the  vulgar  in  that  manner,  because  men  in  those 
times  wanted  both  variety  of  examples  and  sub¬ 
tility  of  conceit.  And  as  hieroglyphics  were  be¬ 
fore  letters,  so  parables  were  before  arguments: 
and  nevertheless  now  and  at  all  times  they  do 
retain  much  life  and  vigour,  because  reason  can¬ 
not  be  so  sensible,  nor  examples  so  fit. 

4.  But  there  remaineth  yet  another  use  of 
poesy  parabolical,  opposite  to  that  which  we 
last  mentioned :  for  that  tendeth  to  demonstrate 
and  illustrate  that  which  is  taught  or  delivered, 
and  this  other  to  retire  and  obscure  it:  that  is, 
when  the  secrets  and  mysteries  of  religion,  pol¬ 
icy,  or  philosophy,  are  involved  in  fables  or  para¬ 
bles.  Of  this  in  divine  poesy  we  see  the  use  is 
authorized.  In  heathen  poesy  we  see  the  expo¬ 
sition  of  fables  doth  fall  out  sometimes  with 
great  felicity;  as  in  the  fable  that  the  giants 
being  overthrown  in  their  war  against  the 
gods,  the  earth  their  mother  in  revenge  thereof 
brought  forth  Fame: 

I llam  terra  parens ,  Ira  irritata  Deorum , 

Extrernam ,  at  per hi bent ,  Coeo  Enceladoque 
sororem  Progenuit. 


Expounded  that  when  princes  and  monarchs 
have  suppressed  actual  and  open  rebels,  then 
the  malignity  of  people  (which  is  the  mother  of 
rebellion)  doth  bring  forth  libels  and  slanders, 
and  taxations  of  the  states,  which  is  of  the  same 
kind  with  rebellion,  but  more  feminine.  So  in 
the  fable  that  the  rest  of  the  gods  having  con¬ 
spired  to  bind  Jupiter,  Pallas  called  Briareus 
with  his  hundred  hands  to  his  aid:  expounded 
that  monarchies  need  not  fear  any  curbing  of 
their  absoluteness  by  mighty  subjects,  as  long 
as  by  wisdom  they  keep  the  hearts  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  who  will  be  sure  to  come  in  on  their  side. 
So  in  the  fable  that  Achilles  was  brought  up 
under  Chiron  the  centaur,  who  was  part  a  man 
and  part  a  beast,  expounded  ingeniously  but 
corruptly  by  Machiavel,  that  it  belongeth  to 
the  education  and  discipline  of  princes  to  know 
as  well  how  to  play  the  part  of  the  lion  in  vio¬ 
lence,  and  the  fox  in  guile,  as  of  the  man  in  vir¬ 
tue  and  justice.  Nevertheless,  in  many  the  like 
encounters,  I  do  rather  think  that  the  fable  was 
first,  and  the  exposition  devised,  than  that  the 
moral  was  first,  and  thereupon  the  fable  fram¬ 
ed.  For  I  find  it  was  an  ancient  vanity  in  Chry- 
sippus,  that  troubled  himself  with  great  conten¬ 
tion  to  fasten  the  assertions  of  the  Stoics  upon 
the  fictions  of  the  ancient  poets;  but  yet  that 
all  the  fables  and  fictions  of  the  poets  were  but 
pleasure  and  not  figure,  I  interpose  no  opinion. 
Surely  of  those  poets  which  are  now  extant,  even 
Homer  himself  (notwithstanding  he  was  made 
a  kind  of  scripture  by  the  later  schools  of  the 
Grecians),  yet  I  should  without  any  difficulty 
pronounce  that  his  fables  had  no  such  inward¬ 
ness  in  his  own  meaning.  But  what  they  might 
have  upon  a  more  original  tradition,  is  not  easy 
to  affirm;  for  he  was  not  the  inventor  ot  many 
of  them. 

5.  In  this  third  part  of  learning,  which  is  poe¬ 
sy,  I  can  report  no  deficience.  For  being  as  a 
plant  that  cometh  of  the  lust  of  the  earth,  with¬ 
out  a  formal  seed,  it  hath  sprung  up  and  spread 
abroad  more  than  any  other  kind.  But  to  as¬ 
cribe  unto  it  that  which  is  due  for  the  express¬ 
ing  of  affections,  passions,  corruptions,  and  cus¬ 
toms,  we  are  beholding  to  poets  more  than  to 
the  philosophers’  works;  and  for  wit  and  elo¬ 
quence,  not  much  less  than  to  orators’  ha¬ 
rangues.  But  it  is  not  good  to  stay  too  long  in 
the  theatre.  Let  us  now  pass  on  to  the  judicial 
place  or  palace  of  the  mind,  which  we  are  to 
approach  and  view  with  more  reverence  and 
attention. 

V.  1.  The  knowledge  of  man  is  as  the  waters, 
some  descending  from  above,  and  some  spring- 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


ing  from  beneath;  the  one  informed  by  the  light 
of  nature,  the  other  inspired  by  divine  revela¬ 
tion.  The  light  of  nature  consisteth  in  the  no¬ 
tions  of  the  mind  and  the  reports  of  the  senses: 
for  as  for  knowledge  which  man  receiveth  by 
teaching,  it  is  cumulative  and  not  original;  as 
in  a  water  that  besides  his  own  spring-head  is 
fed  with  other  springs  and  streams.  So  then, 
according  to  these  two  differing  illuminations 
or  originals,  knowledge  is  first  of  all  divided  into 
divinity  and  philosophy. 

2.  In  philosophy,  the  contemplations  of  man 
either  penetrate  unto  God,  or  are  circumferred 
to  nature,  or  are  reflected  or  reverted  upon  him¬ 
self.  Out  of  which  several  inquiries  there  do  arise 
three  knowledges;  divine  philosophy,  natural 
philosophy,  and  human  philosophy  or  human¬ 
ity.  For  all  things  are  marked  and  stamped  with 
this  triple  character,  of  the  power  of  God,  the 
difference  of  nature,  and  the  use  of  man.  But 
because  the  distributions  and  partitions  of  knowl¬ 
edge  are  not  like  several  lines  that  meet  in  one 
angle,  and  so  touch  but  in  a  point;  but  are  like 
branches  of  a  tree,  that  meet  in  a  stem,  which 
hath  a  dimension  and  quantity  of  entireness 
and  continuance,  before  it  come  to  discontinue 
and  break  itself  into  arms  and  boughs:  there¬ 
fore  it  is  good,  before  we  enter  into  the  former 
distribution,  to  erect  and  constitute  one  univer¬ 
sal  science,  by  the  name  of  philosophia  primay 
primitive  or  summary  philosophy,  as  the  main 
and  common  way,  before  we  come  where  the 
ways  part  and  divide  themselves;  which  science 
whether  I  should  report  as  deficient  or  no,  I 
stand  doubtful.  For  I  find  a  certain  rhapsody 
of  natural  theology,  and  of  divers  parts  of  logic; 
and  of  that  part  of  natural  philosophy  which 
concerneth  the  principles,  and  of  that  other  part 
of  natural  philosophy  which  concerneth  the  soul 
or  spirit;  all  these  strangely  commixed  and  con¬ 
fused;  but  being  examined,  it  seemeth  to  me 
rather  a  depredation  of  other  sciences,  advanc¬ 
ed  and  exalted  unto  some  height  of  terms,  than 
anything  solid  or  substantive  of  itself.  Never¬ 
theless  I  cannot  be  ignorant  of  the  distinction 
which  iscurrent,  that  thesame  things  are  handled 
but  in  several  respects.  As  for  example,  that 
logic  considereth  of  many  things  as  they  are  in 
notion,  and  this  philosophy  as  they  are  in  na¬ 
ture;  the  one  in  appearance,  the  other  in  exist¬ 
ence;  but  I  find  this  difference  better  made  than 
pursued.  For  if  they  had  considered  quantity, 
similitude,  diversity,  and  the  rest  of  those  ex¬ 
tern  characters  of  things,  as  philosophers,  and 
in  nature,  their  inquiries  must  of  force  have  been 
ot  a  far  other  kind  than  they  are.  For  doth  any 


of  them,  in  handling  quantity,  speak  of  the  force 
of  union,  how  and  how  far  it  multiplieth  virtue? 
Doth  any  give  the  reason,  why  some  things  in 
nature  are  so  common,  and  in  so  great  mass, 
and  others  so  rare,  and  in  so  small  quantity? 
Doth  any,  in  handling  similitude  and  diversity 
assign  the  cause  why  iron  should  not  move  to 
iron,  which  is  more  like,  but  move  to  the  load¬ 
stone,  which  is  less  like?  Why  in  all  diversities 
of  things  there  should  be  certain  participles  in 
nature,  which  are  almost  ambiguous  to  which 
kind  they  should  be  referred?  But  there  is  a 
mere  and  deep  silence  touching  the  nature  and 
operation  of  those  common  adjuncts  of  things, 
as  in  nature:  and  only  a  resuming  and  repeat¬ 
ing  of  the  force  and  use  of  them  in  speech  or 
argument.  Therefore,  because  in  a  writing  of 
this  nature  I  avoid  all  subtility,  my  meaning 
touching  this  original  or  universal  philosophy 
is  thus,  in  a  plain  and  gross  description  bv  neg¬ 
ative:  “That  it  be  a  receptacle  for  all  such  pro¬ 
fitable  observations  and  axioms  as  fall  not  with¬ 
in  the  compass  of  any  of  the  special  parts  of 
philosophy  or  sciences,  but  are  more  common 
and  of  a  higher  stage.” 

3.  Now  that  there  are  many  of  that  kind  need 
not  be  doubted.  For  example:  is  not  the  rule, 
“Si  inaequalibus  aequalia  addas ,  omnia  erunt 
inaequaliaf1  an  axiom  as  well  of  justice  as  of 
the  mathematics?  and  is  there  not  a  true  co¬ 
incidence  between  commutative  and  distribu¬ 
tive  justice,  and  arithmetical  and  geometrical 
proportion?  Is  not  that  other  rule,  “Qjiae  in 
eodem  tertio  conveniunty  et  inter  se  conveniunt ,”2 
a  rule  taken  from  the  mathematics,  but  so  po¬ 
tent  in  logic  as  all  syllogisms  are  built  upon  it?3 
Is  not  the  observation,  “Omnia  mutantury  nil 
interit“x  a  contemplation  in  philosophy  thus, 
that  the  quantum  of  nature  is  eternal?  in  na¬ 
tural  theology  thus,  that  it  requireth  the  same 
omnipotency  to  make  somewhat  nothing,  which 
at  the  first  made  nothing  somewhat?  according 
to  the  Scripture,  “Didici  quod  omnia  opera ,  quae 
fecit  Deus ,  persevere nt  in  perpetuum;  non  possu- 
mus  eis  quicquam  addere  nec  auferre.“b  Is  not 
the  ground,  which  Machiavelli  wisely  and  large¬ 
ly  discoursethconcerninggovernments,  that  the 

l“If  equals  be  added  to  unequals,  the  wholes  will  be  un¬ 
equal.” 

2“Things  agreeing  to  the  same  third,  agree  also  with 
one  another.” 

3\Yhately’s  Logic ,  11.  3,  §1. 

4Cf.  Plato,  Theatetus ,  Bk.  1.  152.  “All  things  change, 
but  nothing  is  lost.” 

5F.ccles.  3.  14,  and  42.  21.  “I  know  that  whatsoever 
God  doeth,  it  shall  be  forever;  nothing  can  be  put  to  it, 
nor  anything  taken  from  it.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


way  to  establish  and  preserve  them,  is  to  re¬ 
duce  them  ad  principia'  a  rule  in  religion  and 
nature,  as  well  as  in  civil  administration?  Was 
not  the  Persian  magic  a  reduction  or  corre¬ 
spondence  of  the  principles  and  architectures 
of  nature  to  the  rules  and  policy  of  governments  ? 
Is  not  the  precept  of  a  musician,  to  fall  from  a 
discord  or  harsh  accord  upon  a  concord  or  sweet 
accord,  alike  true  in  affection?  Is  not  the  trope 
of  music,  to  avoid  or  slide  from  the  close  or  ca¬ 
dence,  common  with  the  trope  of  rhetoric  of  de¬ 
ceiving  expectation?  Is  not  the  delight  of  the 
quavering  upon  a  stop  in  music  the  same  with 
the  playing  of  light  upon  the  water? 

Splendet  tremulo  sub  lumine  pontusd 

Are  not  the  organs  of  the  senses  of  one  kind  with 
the  organs  of  reflection,  the  eye  with  a  glass,  the 
ear  with  a  cave  or  strait,  determined  and  bound¬ 
ed?  Neither  are  these  only  similitudes,  as  men 
of  narrow  observation  may  conceive  them  to  be, 
but  the  same  footsteps  of  nature,  treading  or 
printing  upon  several  subjects  or  matters.  This 
science  therefore  (as  I  understand  it)  I  may  just¬ 
ly  report  as  deficient:  for  I  see  sometimes  the 
profounder  sort  of  wits,  in  handling  some  par¬ 
ticular  argument,  will  nowand  thendrawa’buck- 
et  of  water  out  of  this  well  for  their  present  use; 
but  the  spring-head  thereof  seemeth  to  me  not 
to  have  been  visited;  being  of  so  excellent  use 
both  for  the  disclosingof  nature  and  the  abridge¬ 
ment  of  art. 

VI.  i .  This  science  being  therefore  first  placed 
as  a  common  parent  like  unto  Berecynthia,  which 
had  so  much  heavenly  issue,  “ omnes  caelicolas , 
omnes  supera  alta  tenentes ”3  we  may  return  to 
the  former  distribution  of  the  three  philosophies, 
divine,  natural,  and  human.  And  as  concerning 
divine  philosophy  or  natural  theology,  it  is  that 
knowledge  or  rudiment  of  knowledge  concern¬ 
ing  God,  which  may  be  obtained  by  the  contem¬ 
plation  of  his  creatures;  which  knowledge  may 
be  truly  termed  divine  in  respect  of  the  object, 
and  natural  in  respect  of  the  light.  The  bounds 
of  this  knowledge  are,  that  it  sufficeth  to  con¬ 
vince  atheism,  but  not  to  inform  religion:  and 
therefore  there  was  never  miracle  wrought  by 
God  to  convert  an  atheist,  because  the  light  of 
nature  might  have  led  him  to  confess  a  God: 
but  miracles  have  been  wrought  to  convert 
idolaters  and  the  superstitious,  because  no  light 

^‘To  theif  principles.”  Discorso  sopra  la  prima  deca  di 
Tito  Livio ,  in. 

2 Virgil,  ALneid ,  Bk.  vii.  9.  “Beneath  the  trembling 
light  glitters  the  sea.” 

3 Virgil,  ALneid,  Bk.  vi.  *787.  “All  dwellers  in  the  heaven 
and  upper  sky.” 


of  nature  extendeth  to  declare  the  will  and  true 
worship  of  God.  For  as  all  works  do  show  forth 
the  power  and  skill  of  the  workman,  and  not 
his  image,  so  it  is  of  the  works  of  God,  which  do 
show  the  omnipotency  and  wisdom  of  the  maker, 
but  not  his  image.  And  therefore  therein  the  hea¬ 
then  opinion  differeth  from  the  sacred  truth; 
for  they  supposed  the  world  to  be  the  image  of 
God,  and  man  to  be  an  extract  or  compendious 
image  of  the  world;  but  the  Scriptures  never 
vouchsafe  to  attribute  to  the  world  that  honour, 
as  to  be  the  image  of  God,  but  only  ‘‘the  work 
of  his  hands” ;  neither  do  they  speak  of  any  other 
image  of  God,  but  man.4  Wherefore  by  the  con¬ 
templation  of  nature  to  induce  and  enforce  the 
acknowledgement  of  God,  and  to  demonstrate 
his  power,  providence,  and  goodness,  is  an  ex¬ 
cellent  argument,  and  hath  been  excellently  han¬ 
dled  by  divers.  But  on  the  other  side,  out  of  the 
contemplation  of  nature,  or  ground  of  human 
knowledges,  to  induce  any  verity  or  persuasion 
concerning  the  points  of  faith,  is  in  my  judge¬ 
ment  not  safe:  “Da  fidei  quae  fidei  sunt.“b  For 
the  heathen  themselves  conclude  as  much  in  that 
excellent  and  divine  fable  of  the  golden  chain: 
“That  men  and  gods  were  not  able  to  draw  Ju¬ 
piter  down  to  the  earth;  but  contrariwise  Jupiter 
was  able  to  draw  them  up  to  heaven.”  So  as  we 
ought  not  to  attempt  to  draw  down  or  to  submit 
the  mysteries  of  God  to  our  reason ;  but  contrari¬ 
wise  to  raise  and  advance  our  reason  to  the  di¬ 
vine  truth.  So  as  in  this  part  of  knowledge, 
touching  divine  philosophy,  I  am  so  far  from 
noting  any  deficience,  as  I  rather  note  an  excess: 
whereunto  I  have  digressed  because  of  the  ex¬ 
treme  prejudice  which  both  religion  and  phil¬ 
osophy  hath  received  and  may  receive  by  being 
commixed  together;  as  that  which  undoubtedly 
will  make  an  heretical  religion,  and  an  imagin¬ 
ary  and  fabulous  philosophy.6 

2.  Otherwise  it  is  of  the  nature  of  angels  and 
spirits,  which  is  an  appendix  of  theology,  both 
divine  and  natural,  and  is  neither  inscrutable 
nor  interdicted.  For  although  the  Scripture  sa- 
ith,  “Let  no  man  deceive  you  in  sublime  dis¬ 
course  touching  the  worship  of  angels,  pressing 
into  that  he  knoweth  not,”  &c.,  yet  notwith¬ 
standing,  if  you  observe  well  that  precept,  it 
may  appear  thereby  that  there  be  two  things 
only  forbidden,  adoration  of  them,  and  opinion 
fantastical  of  them,7  either  to  extol  them  further 
than  appertaineth  to  the  degree  of  a  creature, 

4Ps.  8.  3,  102.  25,  and  others. 

5“Give  unto  faith  the  things  that  are  faith's.” 

*  Iliad,  Bk.  ix. 

7Col.  11.  5,  18. 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


or  to  extol  a  man’s  knowledge  of  them  further 
than  he  hath  ground.  But  the  sober  and  ground¬ 
ed  inquiry,  which  may  arise  out  of  the  passages 
of  holy  Scriptures,  or  out  of  the  gradations  of 
nature,  is  not  restrained.  So  of  degenerate  and 
revolted  spirits,  the  conversing  with  them  or  the 
employment  of  them  is  prohibited,  much  more 
any  veneration  towards  them;  but  the  contem¬ 
plation  or  science  of  their  nature,  their  power, 
their  illusions,  either  by  Scripture  or  reason,  is 
a  part  of  spiritual  wisdom.  For  so  the  apostle 
saith,  “We  are  not  ignorant  of  his  stratagems.”1 
And  it  is  no  more  unlawful  to  inquire  the  nature 
of  evil  spirits,  than  to  inquire  the  force  of  poisons 
in  nature,  or  the  nature  of  sin  and  vice  in  mor¬ 
ality.  But  this  part  touching  angels  and  spirits 
I  cannot  note  as  deficient,  for  many  have  occu¬ 
pied  themselves  in  it;  I  may  rather  challenge  it, 
in  many  of  the  writers  thereof,  as  fabulous  and 
fantastical. 

VII.  i.  Leaving  therefore  divine  philosophy 
or  natural  theology  (not  divinity  or  inspired  the¬ 
ology,  which  we  reserve  for  the  last  of  all  as  the 
haven  and  sabbath  of  all  man’s  contemplations) 
we  will  now  proceed  to  natural  philosophy.  If 
then  it  be  true  that  Democritus  said,  “that  the 
truth  of  nature  lieth  hid  in  certain  deep  mines 
and  caves”;'2  and  if  it  be  true  likewise  that  the 
alchemists  do  so  much  inculcate,  that  Vulcan 
is  a  second  nature,  and  imitateth  that  dexter¬ 
ously  and  compendiously  which  nature  worketh 
by  ambages  and  length  of  time;3  it  were  good  to 
divide  natural  philosophy  into  the  mine  and  the 
furnace,  and  to  make  two  professions  or  occu¬ 
pations  of  natural  philosophers,  some  to  be  pi¬ 
oneers  and  some  smiths:  some  to  dig,  and  some 
to  refine  and  hammer.  And  surely  I  do  best  allow 
of  a  division  of  that  kind,  though  in  more  fam¬ 
iliar  and  scholastical  terms;  namely,  that  these 
be  the  two  parts  of  natural  philosophy,  the  in¬ 
quisition  of  causes,  and  the  production  ofeffects; 
speculative,  and  operative;  natural  science,  and 
natural  prudence.  For  as  in  civil  matters  there 
is  a  wisdom  of  discourse,  and  a  wisdom  of  direc¬ 
tion;  so  is  it  in  natural.  And  here  I  will  make  a 
request,  that  for  the  latter  (or  at  least  for  a  part 
thereof)  I  may  revive  and  reintegrate  the  mis¬ 
applied  and  abused  nameof  natural  magic;  which 
in  thetruesenseisbutnatural  wisdom, ornatural 
prudence ;  taken  according  to  the  ancient  accep- 
tion,  purged  from  vanity  and  superstition.  Now 
although  it  be  true,  and  I  know  it  well,  that  there 
is  an  intercourse  between  causes  and  effects,  so 

'll  Cor.  2.  II. 

2Laertius,  Seneca. 

3Paracelsus,  De philosophia  Sagax  (. Astronomia  Magna). 


as  both  these  knowledges,  speculative  and  op¬ 
erative,  have  a  great  connexion  between  them¬ 
selves  yet  because  all  true  and  fruitful  natural 
philosophy  hath  a  double  scale  or  ladder,  ascend¬ 
ent  and  descendent,  ascending  from  experi¬ 
ments  to  the  invention  of  causes,  and  descend¬ 
ing  from  causes  to  the  invention  of  new  experi¬ 
ments;  therefore  I  judge  it  most  requisite  that 
these  two  parts  be  severally  considered  and 
handled. 

.  2.  Natural  science  or  theory  is  divided  into 
physic  and  metaphysic:  wherein  I  desire  it  mav 
be  conceived  that  I  use  the  word  metaphysic  in 
a  differing  sense  from  that  that  is  received.  And 
in  like  manner,  I  doubt  not  but  it  will  easily  ap¬ 
pear  to  men  of  judgement,  that  in  this  and  other 
particulars,  wheresoever  my  conception  and  no¬ 
tion  may  differ  from  the  ancient,  yet  I  am  studi¬ 
ous  to  keep  the  ancient  terms.  For  hoping  well  to 
deliver  myself  from  mistaking,  by  the  order  and 
perspicuous  expressing  of  that  I  do  propound; 
I  am  otherwise  zealous  and  affectionate  to  recede 
as  little  from  antiquity,  either  in  terms  or  opin¬ 
ions,  as  may  stand  with  truth  and  theproficience 
of  knowledge.  And  herein  I  cannot  a  little  mar¬ 
vel  at  the  philosopher  Aristotle,  that  did  proceed 
in  such  a  spirit  of  difference  and  contradiction 
towards  all  antiquity:  undertaking  not  only  to 
frame  new  words  of  science  at  pleasure,  but  to 
confound  and  extinguish  all  ancient  wisdom :  in¬ 
somuch  as  he  never  nameth  or  mentioneth  an 
ancient  author  or  opinion,  but  to  confute  and 
reprove ;  wherein  for  glory,  and  drawing  followers 
and  disciples,  he  took  the  right  course.  For  cer¬ 
tainly  there  cometh  to  pass,  and  hath  place  in 
human  truth,  that  which  was  noted  and  pro¬ 
nounced  in  the  highest  truth:  “Veniin  nomine 
patris ,  nec  recipitis  me\  si  quis  venerit  in  nomine 
suo  eum  recipietis .”4  But  in  this  divine  aphorism 
(considering  to  whom  it  was  applied,  namely 
to  Antichrist,  the  highest  deceiver)  we  may  dis¬ 
cern  well  that  the  coming  in  a  man’s  own  name, 
without  regard  of  antiquity  or  paternity,  is  no 
good  sign  of  truth,  although  it  be  joined  with 
the  fortune  and  success  of  an  eum  recipietis. 
But  for  this  excellent  person  Aristotle,  I  will 
think  of  him  that  he  learned  that  humour  of 
his  scholar,  with  whom  it  seemeth  he  did  emu¬ 
late;  the  one  to  conquer  all  opinions,  as  the 
other  to  conquer  all  nations.  Wherein  never¬ 
theless,  it  may  be,  he  may  at  some  men’s  hands, 
that  are  of  a  bitter  disposition,  get  a  like  title 
as  his  scholar  did: 

4John  5.  43.  “I  came  in  the  name  of  my  father,  and  ye 
received  me  not;  but  if  another  should  come  in  his  own 
name,  ye  would  receive  him.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


Felix  terrarum  praedo ,  non  utile  mundo 
Editus  exemplum &c. 

So, 

Felix  doctrinae  praedo .2 

But  to  me  on  the  other  side  that  do  desire  as 
much  as  lieth  in  my  pen  to  ground  a  sociable  in¬ 
tercourse  between  antiquity  and  proficience,  it 
seemeth  best  to  keep  way  with  antiquity  usque  ad 
aras ;3  and  therefore  to  retain  the  ancient  terms, 
though  I  sometimes  alter  the  uses  and  defini¬ 
tions,  according  to  the  moderate  proceeding  in 
civil  government;  where  although  there  besome 
alteration,  yet  that  holdeth  whichTacitus  wise¬ 
ly  noteth,  “eadem  magistratuum  vocabula ,”4 

3.  To  return  therefore  to  the  use  and  accep- 
tion  of  rhe  term  metaphysic,  as  I  do  now  under¬ 
stand  the  word;  it  appeareth,  by  that  which 
hath  been  already  said,  that  I  intend  philosophy 
ia  prima,  summary  philosophy  and  metaphys¬ 
ic,  which  heretofore  have  been  confounded  as 
one,  to  be  two  distinct  things.  For  the  one  I 
have  made  as  a  parent  or  common  ancestor  to 
all  knowledge;  and  the  other  I  have  now  brought 
in  as  a  branch  or  descendant  of  natural  science. 
It  appeareth  likewise  that  I  have  assigned  to 
summary  philosophy  thecommon  principles  and 
axioms  which  are  promiscuous  and  indifferent 
to  several  sciences:  I  have  assigned  unto  it  like¬ 
wise  the  inquiry  touching  the  operation  of  the 
relative  and  adventive  characters  of  essences, 
as  quantity,  similitude,  diversity,  possibility, 
and  the  rest:  with  this  distinction  and  provi¬ 
sion;  that  they  be  handled  as  they  have  effica¬ 
cy  in  nature,  and  not  logically.  It  appeareth 
likewise  that  natural  theology,  which  hereto¬ 
fore  hath  been  handled  confusedly  with  meta¬ 
physic,  I  have  inclosed  and  bounded  by  itself. 
It  is  therefore  now  a  question  what  is  left  re¬ 
maining  for  metaphysic;  wherein  I  may  with¬ 
out  prejudice  preserve  thus  much  of  the  conceit 
of  antiquity,  that  physic  should  contemplate 
that  which  is  inherent  in  matter,  and  therefore 
transitory;  and  metaphysic  that  which  is  ab¬ 
stracted  andfixed.  And  again,  that  physic  should 
handle  that  which  supposeth  in  nature  only  a  be¬ 
ing  and  moving;  and  metaphysic  should  handle 
that  which  supposeth  further  in  nature  a  reason, 
understanding, and  platform.  But  thedifFerence, 
perspicuously  expressed,  is  most  familiar  and 
sensible.  For  as  we  divided  natural  philosophy 

1  Lucan:  “A  fortunate  robber,  who  made  a  prize  of 
nations.’ 

2“A  fortunate  robber  who  made  a  prize  of  learning.” 

3“To  the  very  altars.” 

4Tacitus,  Annals ,  Bk.  1.  “The  names  of  the  magistracies 
are  not  changed.” 


in  general  into  the  inquiry  of  causes,  and  pro¬ 
ductions  of  effects:  so  that  part  which  concern- 
eth  the  inquiry  of  causes  we  do  subdivide  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  received  and  sound  division  of 
causes.  The  one  part,  which  is  physic,  inquireth 
and  handleth  the  material  and  efficient  causes; 
and  the  other,  which  is  metaphysic,  handleth 
the  formal  and  final  causes. 

4.  Physic  (taking  it  according  to  the  deriva¬ 
tion,  and  not  according  to  our  idiom  for  medi¬ 
cine)  is  situate  in  a  middle  term  or  distance  be¬ 
tween  natural  history  and  metaphysic.  For  na¬ 
tural  history  describeth  the  variety  of  things; 
physic  the  causes,  but  variable  or  respective 
causes;  and  metaphysic  the  fixed  and  constant 
causes. 

Litnus  ut  hie  durescit ,  et  haec  ut  cera  liquescit , 

Uno  eodemque  igni.h 

Fire  is  the  cause  of  induration,  but  respective 
to  clay;  fire  is  the  cause  of  colliquation,  but  re¬ 
spective  to  wax.  But  fire  is  no  constant  cause 
either  of  induration  or  colliquation:  so  then  the 
physical  causes  are  but  the  efficient  and  the  mat¬ 
ter.  Physic  hath  three  parts,  whereof  two  re¬ 
spect  nature  united  or  collected,  the  third  con- 
templateth  nature  diffused  or  distributed.  Na¬ 
ture  is  collected  either  into  one  entire  total,  or 
else  into  the  same  principles  or  seeds.  So  as  the 
first  doctrine  is  touching  the  contexture  or  con¬ 
figuration  of  things,  as  de  mundo ,  de  universi- 
tate  rerum*  The  second  is  the  doctrine  concern- 
ingtheprinciplesororiginalsof things. The  third 
is  the  doctrine  concerning  all  variety  and  par¬ 
ticularity  of  things;  whether  it  be  of  the  differ¬ 
ing  substances,  or  their  differing  qualities  and 
natures;  whereof  there  needeth  no  enumeration, 
this  part  being  but  as  a  gloss  or  paraphrase  that 
attendeth  upon  the  text  of  natural  history.  Of 
these  three  I  cannot  report  any  as  deficient.  In 
what  truth  or  perfection  they  are  handled,  I 
make  not  now  any  judgement ;  but  they  are  parts 
of  knowledge  not  deserted  by  the  labour  of  man. 

5.  For  metaphysic,  we  have  assigned  unto  it 
the  inquiry  of  formal  and  final  causes;  which 
assignation,  as  to  the  former  of  them,  may  seem 
to  be  nugatory  and  void,  because  of  the  received 
and  inveterate  opinion,  that  the  inquisition  of 
man  is  not  competent  to  find  out  essential  forms 
or  true  differences:  of  which  opinion  we  will  take 
this  hold,  that  the  invention  of  forms  is  of  all 
other  parts  of  knowledge  the  worthiest  to  be 
sought,  if  it  be  possible  to  be  found.  As  for  the 

5 Virgil,  Eclogues ,  Bk.  vii.  80.  “As  the  same  fire  which 
makes  the  soft  clay  hard  makes  hard  wax  soft.” 

6“Concerning  the  world  and  the  universe  of  things.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


possibility,  they  are  ill  discoverers  that  think 
there  is  no  land,  when  they  can  see  nothing  but 
sea.  But  it  is  manifest  that  Plato,  in  his  opinion 
of  ideas,  as  one  that  had  a  wit  of  elevation  situ¬ 
ate  as  upon  a  cliff,  did  descry  that  forms  ware 
the  true  object  of  knowledge ;l  but  lost  the  real 
fruit  of  his  opinion,  by  considering  of  forms  as 
absolutely  abstracted  from  matter,  and  not  con¬ 
fined  and  determined  by  matter;  and  so  turn¬ 
ing  his  opinion  upon  theology,  wherewith  all 
his  natural  philosophy  is  infected.  But  if  any 
man  shall  keep  a  continual  watchful  and  severe 
eye  upon  action, operation, and  the  use  of  knowl¬ 
edge,  he  may  advise  and  take  notice  what  are 
the  forms,  the  disclosures  whereof  are  fruitful 
and  important  to  the  state  of  man.  For  as  to 
the  forms  of  substances  (man  only  except,  of 
whom  it  is  said,  “ Formavit  hominem  de  limo  ter- 
rae ,  et  spiravit  in  faciem  eius  spiraculum  vitae  f'1 
and  not  as  of  all  other  creatures,  “ Producant 
aquae ,  producat  terra ”3),  the  forms  of  substan¬ 
ces  I  say  (as  they  are  now  by  compounding  and 
transplanting  multiplied)  are  so  perplexed,  as 
they  are  not  to  be  inquired;  no  more  than  it 
were  either  possible  or  to  purpose  to  seek  in 
gross  the  forms  of  those  sounds  which  make 
words,  which  by  composition  and  transposition 
of  letters  are  infinite.  But,  on  the  other  side,  to 
inquire  the  form  of  those  sounds  or  voices  which 
make  simple  letters  is  easily  comprehensible; 
and  being  known  induceth  and  manifesteth  the 
forms  of  all  words,  which  consist  and  are  com¬ 
pounded  of  them.  In  the  same  manner  to  in¬ 
quire  the  form  of  a  lion,  of  an  oak,  of  gold;  nay, 
of  water,  of  air,  is  a  vain  pursuit:  but  to  inquire 
the  forms  of  sense,  of  voluntary  motion,  of  ve¬ 
getation,  of  colours,  of  gravity  and  levity,  of 
density,  of  tenuity,  of  heat,  of  cold,  and  all  oth¬ 
er  natures  and  qualities,  which,  like  an  alpha¬ 
bet,  are  not  many,  and  of  which  the  essences 
(upheld  by  matter)  of  all  creatures  do  consist; 
to  inquire,  1  say,  the  true  forms  of  these,  is  that 
part  of  metaphysic  which  we  now  define  of.  Not 
but  that  physic  doth  make  inquiry  and  take  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  same  natures:  but  how?  Only 
as  to  the  material  and  efficient  causes  of  them, 
and  not  as  to  the  forms.  For  example,  if  the 
cause  of  whiteness  in  snow  or  froth  be  inquired, 
and  it  be  rendered  thus,  that  the  subtile  inter¬ 
mixture  of  air  and  water  is  the  cause,  it  is  well 
rendered;  but  nevertheless  is  this  the  form  of 

dn  the  Timceus,  passim,  and  Republic ,  Bk.  x.,  at  the  be¬ 
ginning;  ^/".Hooker  i.  3,  4;  compare  also  Hallam’s  Litera¬ 
ture  of  Europe ,  hi,  3,  page  402. 

2“He  formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and 
breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life.” 

3“Let  the  waters  bring  forth,  let  the  earth  bring  forth.” 


whiteness?  No;  but  it  is  the  efficient,  which  is 
ever  but  vehiculum formae .4  This  part  of  meta¬ 
physic  I  do  not  find  laboured  and  performed: 
whereat  I  marvel  not:  because  1  hold  it  not  pos¬ 
sible  to  be  invented  by  that  course  of  invention 
which  hath  been  used;  in  regard  that  men  (which 
is  the  root  of  all  error)  have  made  too  untimely 
a  departure  and  too  remote  a  recess  from  par¬ 
ticulars. 

6.  But  the  use  of  this  part  of  metaphysic, 
which  I  report  as  deficient,  is  of  the  rest  the 
most  excellent  in  two  respects:  the  one,  because 
it  is  the  duty  and  virtue  of  all  knowledge  to 
abridge  the  infinity  of  individual  experience,  as 
much  as  the  conception  of  truth  will  permit, 
and  to  remedy  the  complaint  of  vita  brevis ,  ars 
longaf  which  is  performed  by  uniting  the  no¬ 
tions  and  conceptions  of  sciences.  For  knowl¬ 
edges  are  as  pyramides,  whereof  history  is  the 
basis.  So  of  natural  philosophy,  the  basis  is  na¬ 
tural  history;  the  stage  next  the  basis  is  physic; 
the  stage  next  the  vertical  point  is  metaphysic. 
As  for  the  vertical  point,  “ opus  quod  operatur 
Deus  dprincipio  usque  ad finem ,”6  the  summary 
law  of  nature,  we  know  not  whether  man’s  in¬ 
quiry  can  attain  unto  it.  But  these  three  be  the 
true  stages  of  knowledge,  and  are  to  them  that 
are  depraved  no  better  than  the  giants’  hills: 

Ter  sunt  conati  imponere  Pelio  Ossatn , 

Scilicet ,  atque  Ossae  frondosum  involvere 
Olympum? 

But  to  those  which  refer  all  things  to  the  glory 
of  God,  they  are  as  the  three  acclamations,  Sancte , 
sancte ,  sancte!  holy  in  the  description  or  dilata¬ 
tion  of  his  works;  holy  in  the  connexion  or  con¬ 
catenation  of  them;  and  holy  in  the  union  of 
them  in  a  perpetual  and  uniform  law.8  And  there¬ 
fore  the  speculation  was  excellent  in  Parmeni¬ 
des  and  Plato,  although  but  a  speculation  in 
them,  that  all  things  by  scale  did  ascend  to  uni¬ 
ty.9  So  then  always  that  knowledge  is  worthiest 
which  is  charged  with  least  multiplicity,  which 
appeareth  to  be  metaphysic;  as  that  which  con¬ 
sidered  thesimpleformsordifferencesof  things, 
which  are  few  in  number,  and  the  degrees  and 
co-ordinations  whereof  make  all  this  variety. 
The  second  respect,  which  valueth  and  com- 

4“The  vehicle  of  the  form.” 

5“Life  is  short,  but  art  is  long.”  Compare  Plato, 
Thecetetus ,  Bk.  1.  155,  156. 

6Eccles.  3.  “The  work  which  God  worketh  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end.” 

7  Virgil,  Georgies ,  Bk.  1.  281.  "Pelion,  Ossa,  and  Olym¬ 
pus,  piled  upon  each  other.” 

8Revelation  4. 

9See  conclusion  of  Plato’s  Parmenides . 


SECOND  BOOK 


mendeth  this  part  of  metaphysic,  is  that  it  doth 
enfranchise  the  power  of  man  unto  the  greatest 
liberty  and  possibility  of  works  and  effects.  For 
physic  carrieth  men  in  narrow  and  restrained 
ways,  subject  tomany  accidentsof  impediments, 
imitating  the  ordinary  flexuous  courses  of  na¬ 
ture.  But  “ latae  undique  sunt sapientibus  viae:” 
to  sapience  (which  was  anciently  defined  to  be 
“rerum  divinarum  et  humanarum  scientia ”I) 
there  isever  choice  of  means.  For  physical  causes 
give  light  to  new  invention  in  simili  materia ,2 
But  whosoever  knoweth  any  form,  knoweth  the 
utmost  possibility  of  super  inducing  that  na¬ 
ture  upon  any  variety  of  matter;  and  so  is  less 
restrained  in  operation,  either  to  the  basis  of 
the  matter,  or  the  condition  of  the  efficient; 
which  kind  of  knowledge  Salomon  likewise, 
though  in  a  more  divine  sense,  elegantly  de- 
scribeth;  “non  arctabuntur  gressus  tui ,  et  cur- 
rens  non  habebis  offendiculum .”3  The  ways  of 
sapience  are  not  much  liable  either  to  partic¬ 
ularity  or  chance. 

7.  The  second  part  of  metaphysic  is  the  in¬ 
quiry  of  final  causes,  which  I  am  moved  to  report 
not  as  omitted  but  as  misplaced.  And  yet  if  it 
were  but  a  fault  in  order,  I  would  not  speak  of 
it:  for  order  is  matter  of  illustration,  but  per- 
taineth  not  to  the  substance  of  sciences.  But 
this  misplacing  hath  caused  a  deficience,  or  at 
least  a  great  improficience  in  the  sciences  them¬ 
selves.  For  the  handling  of  final  causes,  mixed 
with  the  rest  in  physical  inquiries,  hath  inter¬ 
cepted  the  severe  and  diligent  inquiry  of  all  real 
and  physical  causes,  and  given  men  the  occasion 
to  stay  upon  these  satisfactory  and  specious 
causes,  to  the  great  arrest  and  prejudice  of 
further  discovery.  For  this  I  find  done  not  only 
by  Plato,  who  ever  anchoreth  upon  that  shore, 
but  by  Aristotle,  Galen,  and  others  which  do 
usually  likewise  fall  upon  these  fiats  of  dis¬ 
coursing  causes.  For  to  say  that  “the  hairs  of 
the  eye-lids  are  for  a  quickset  and  fence  about 
the  sight”;4  or  that  “the  firmness  of  the  skins 
and  hides  of  living  creatures  is  to  defend  them 
from  the  extremities  of  heat  and  cold”;  or  that 
“the  bones  are  for  the  columns  or  beams,  where¬ 
upon  the  frames  of  the  bodies  of  living  creatures 
are  built”:  or  that  “the  leaves  of  trees  are  for 
protecting  of  the  fruit”;  or  that  “the  clouds  are 
for  watering  of  the  earth”;  or  that  “the  solid¬ 
ness  of  the  earth  is  for  the  station  and  mansion 

^‘Knowledge  of  things  human  and  divine.”  Plato, 
Phcedo ;  Cicero,  Tusculanae  Disputationes ,  4,  defin.  2. 

2<<A  like  case.” 

3Prov.  4.  12.  “Thy  steps  shall  not  be  straitened;  thou 
shalt  run  and  not  stumble.” 

4C/.,  e.g.,  Aristotle,  Physics ,  Bk.  u.  8. 


of  living  creatures, ”and  the  like,  is  well  inquired 
and  collected  in  metaphysic,  but  in  physic  they 
are  impertinent.  Nay,  they  are  indeed  but  re- 
moraes  and  hindrances  to  stay  and  slug  the  ship 
from  further  sailing;  and  have  brought  this  to 
pass,  that  the  search  of  the  physical  causes  hath 
been  neglected  and  passed  in  silence.  And  there¬ 
fore  the  natural  philosophy  of  Democritus  and 
some  others,  who  did  not  suppose  a  mind  or 
reason  in  the  frame  of  things,  but  attributed 
the  form  thereof  able  to  maintain  itself  to  in¬ 
finite  essays  or  proofs  of  nature,  which  thev  term 
fortune,  seemeth  to  me  (as  far  as  I  can  judge 
by  the  recital  and  fragments  which  remain  unto 
us)  in  particularities  of  physical  causes  more 
real  and  better  inquired  than  that  of  Aristotle 
and  Plato;  whereof  bothintermingled  final  caus¬ 
es,  the  one  as  a  part  of  theology,  and  the  other 
as  a  part  of  logic,  which  were  the  favourite  stud¬ 
ies  respectively  of  both  those  persons.  Not  be¬ 
cause  those  final  causes  are  not  true,  and  worthy 
to  be  inquired,  beingkept  within  theirown  prov¬ 
ince;  but  because  their  excursions  into  the 
limits  of  physical  causes  hath  bred  a  vastness 
andsolitudein  that  tract.  Forotherwise, keeping 
their  precincts  and  borders,  men  are  extremely 
deceived  if  they  think  there  is  an  enmity  or  re¬ 
pugnancy  at  all  between  them.  For  the  cause 
rendered,  that  “the  hairs  about  the  eye-lids  are 
for  the  safeguard  of  the  sight,”  doth  not  im¬ 
pugn  the  cause  rendered,  that  “pilosity  is  in¬ 
cident  to  orifices  of  moisture”;  muscosi fontes ,5 
&c.  Nor  the  cause  rendered,  that  “the  firmness 
of  hides  is  for  the  armour  of  the  body  against 
extremities  of  heat  or  cold,”  doth  not  impugn 
the  cause  rendered,  that  “contraction  of  pores 
is  incident  to  the  outwardest  parts,  in  regard  of 
their  adjacence  to  foreign  or  unlike  bodies” :  and 
so  of  the  rest:  both  causes  being  true  and  com¬ 
patible,  theonedeclaringan  intention,  theother 
a  consequence  only.  Neither  doth  this  call  in 
question,  or  derogate  from  divine  providence, 
but  highly  confirm  and  exalt  it.  For  as  in  civil 
actions  he  is  the  greater  and  deeper  politique, 
that  can  make  other  men  the  instruments  of 
his  will  and  ends,  and  yet  never  acquaint  them 
with  his  purpose,  so  as  they  shall  do  it  and  yet 
not  know  what  they  do,  than  he  that  imparteth 
his  meaning  to  those  he  employeth;so  is  the 
wisdom  of  God  more  admirable,  when  nature 
intendeth  one  thing,  and  providence  draweth 
forth  another,  than  if  He  had  communicated  to 
particular  creatures  and  motions  the  characters 
and  impressions  of  His  providence.  And  thus 
much  for  metaphysic:  the  latter  part  whereof 
5 Virgil,  Eclogues ,  Bk.  vii.  45.  “The  mossy  springs.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


46 

I  allow  as  extant,  but  wish  it  confined  to  his 
proper  place. 

VIII.  1.  Nevertheless  there  remaineth  yet 
another  part  of  natural  philosophy,  which  is 
commonly  made  a  principal  part,  and  holdeth 
rank  with  physic  special  and  metaphysic,  which 
is  mathematic;  but  I  think  it  more  agreeable  to 
the  nature  of  things,  and  to  the  light  of  order, 
to  place  it  as  a  branch  of  metaphysic.  For  the 
subject  of  it  being  quantity,  not  quantity  in¬ 
definite,  which  is  but  a  relative,  and  belongeth 
to  philosophia  prima  (as  hath  been  said),  but 
quantity  determined  or  proportionable,  it  ap- 
peareth  to  be  one  of  the  essential  forms  of 
things  as  that  that  is  causative  in  nature  of  a 
number  of  effects;  insomuch  as  we  see  in  the 
schools  both  of  Democritus  and  of  Pythagoras, 
that  the  one  did  ascribe  figure  to  the  first  seeds 
of  things,  and  the  other  did  suppose  numbers 
to  be  the  principles  and  originals  of  things.  And 
it  is  true  also  that  of  all  other  forms  (as  we 
understand  forms)  it  is  the  most  abstracted 
and  separable  from  matter,  and  therefore  most 
proper  to  metaphysic;  which  hath  likewise  been 
the  cause  why  it  hath  been  better  laboured  and 
inquired  than  any  of  the  other  forms,  which 
are  more  immersed  into  matter.  For  it  being 
the  nature  of  the  mind  of  man  (to  the  extreme 
prejudice  of  knowledge)  to  delight  in  the  spa¬ 
cious  liberty  of  generalities,  as  in  a  champain 
region,  and  not  in  the  inclosures  of  particularity, 
the  mathematics  of  all  other  knowledge  were 
the  goodliest  fields  to  satisfy  that  appetite. 
But  for  the  placing  of  this  science,  it  is  not 
much  material:  only  we  have  endeavoured  in 
these  our  partitions  to  observe  a  kind  of  per¬ 
spective,  that  one  part  may  cast  light  upon 
another. 

2.  The  mathematics  are  either  pure  or  mixed. 
To  the  pure  mathematics  are  those  sciences 
belonging  which  handle  quantity  determinate, 
merely  severed  from  any  axioms  of  natural 
philosophy;  and  these  are  two,  geometry  and 
arithmetic;  the  one  handling  quantity  contin¬ 
ued,  and  the  other  dissevered.  Mixed  hath  for 
subject  some  axioms  or  parts  of  natural  philos¬ 
ophy,  and  considereth  quantity  determined,  as 
it  is  auxiliary  and  incident  unto  them.  For 
many  parts  of  nature  can  neither  be  invented 
with  sufficient  subtilty,  nor  demonstrated  with 
sufficient  perspicuity,  nor  accommodated  unto 
use  with  sufficient  dexterity,  without  the  aid 
and  intervening  of  the  mathematics;  of  which 
sort  are  perspective,  music,  astronomy,  cosmog¬ 
raphy,  architecture,  enginery,  and  divers  others. 
In  the  mathematics  I  can  report  no  deficience, 


except  it  be  that  men  do  not  sufficiently  under¬ 
stand  theexcellent  useofthepuremathematics, 
in  that  they  do  remedy  and  cure  many  defects 
in  the  wit  and  faculties  intellectual.  For  if  the 
wit  be  too  dull,  they  sharpen  it;  if  too  wandering, 
they  fix  it;  if  too  inherent  in  the  sense,  they 
abstract  it.  So  that  as  tennis  is  a  game  of  no 
use  in  itself,  but  ofgreat  use  in  respect  it  maketh 
a  quick  eye  and  a  body  ready  to  put  itself  into 
all  postures;  so  in  the  mathematics,  that  use 
which  is  collateral  and  intervenient  is  no  less 
worthy  than  that  which  is  principal  and  intend¬ 
ed.  And  as  for  the  mixed  mathematics,  1  may 
only  make  this  prediction,  that  there  cannot  fail 
to  be  more  kinds  of  them,  as  nature  grows  fur¬ 
ther  disclosed.  Thus  much  of  natural  science, 
or  the  part  of  nature  speculative. 

3.  For  natural  prudence,  or  the  part  operative 
of  natural  philosophy,  we  will  divide  it  into 
three  parts,  experimental,  philosophical,  and 
magical:  which  three  parts  active  have  a  cor¬ 
respondence  and  analogy  with  the  three  parts 
speculative,  natural  history,  physic,  and  meta¬ 
physic.  For  many  operations  have  been  invent¬ 
ed,  sometime  by  a  casual  incidence  and  occur¬ 
rence,  sometimes  by  a  purposed  experiment :  and 
of  those  which  have  been  found  by  an  intention¬ 
al  experiment,  some  have  been  found  out  by 
varying  or  extending  the  same  experiment, 
some  by  transferring  and  compounding  divers 
experiments  the  one  into  the  other,  which  kind 
of  invention  an  empiric  may  manage.  Again  by 
the  knowledge  of  physical  causes  there  cannot 
fail  to  follow  many  indications  and  designa¬ 
tions  of  new  particulars,  if  men  in  their  specu¬ 
lation  will  keep  one  eye  upon  use  and  practice. 
But  these  are  but  coastings  along  the  shore 
premendo  littus  iniquum for  it  seemeth  to  me 
there  can  hardly  be  discovered  any  radical  or 
fundamental  alterations  and  innovations  in 
nature,  either  by  the  fortune  and  essays  of  ex¬ 
periments,  or  by  the  light  and  direction  of 
physical  causes.  If  therefore  we  have  reported 
metaphysic  deficient,  it  must  follow  that  we  do 
the  like  of  natural  magic,  which  hath  relation 
thereunto.  For  as  for  the  natural  magic  whereof 
now  there  is  mention  in  books,  containing  cer¬ 
tain  credulous  and  superstitious  conceits  and 
observations  of  sympathies  and  antipathies, 
and  hidden  proprieties,  and  some  frivolous  ex¬ 
periments,  strange  rather  by  disguisement  than 
in  themselves,  it  is  as  far  differing  in  truth  of 
nature  from  such  a  knowledge  as  we  require,  as 
the  story  of  King  Arthur  of  Britain,  of  Hugh  of 
Bourdeaux,  differs  from  Caesar’s  Commentaries 
Horace,  Odes>  book  ii,  ode  x.  3 


SECOND  BOOK 


in  truth  of  story.  For  it  is  manifest  that  Caesar 
did  greater  things  de  veto 1  than  those  imaginary 
heroes  were  feigned  to  do.  But  he  did  them  not 
in  that  fabulous  manner.  Of  this  kind  of  learn¬ 
ing  the  fable  of  Ixion2  was  a  figure,  who  designed 
to  enjoy  Juno,  the  goddess  of  power;  and  in¬ 
stead  of  her  had  copulation  with  a  cloud,  of 
which  mixture  were  begotten  centaurs  and  chi¬ 
meras.  So  whosoever  shall  entertain  high  and 
vaporous  imaginations,  instead  of  a  laborious 
and  sober  inquiry  of  truth,  shall  beget  hopes 
and  beliefs  of  strange  and  impossible  shapes. 
And  therefore  we  may  note  in  these  sciences 
which  hold  so  much  of  imagination  and  belief,  as 
this  degenerate  natural  magic,  alchemy,  astrol- 
ogy,  and  the  like,  that  in  their  propositions  the 
description  of  the  means  is  ever  more  monstrous 
than  the  pretence  or  end.  For  it  is  a  thing  more 
probable,  that  he  that  knoweth  well  the  natures 
of  weight,  of  colour,  of  pliant  and  fragile  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  hammer,  of  volatile  and  fixed  in  re¬ 
spect  of  the  fire,  and  the  rest,  may  superinduce 
upon  some  metal  the  nature  and  form  of  gold 
by  such  mechanique  as  longeth  to  the  production 
of  the  natures  afore  rehearsed,  than  that  some 
grains  of  the  medicine  projected  should  in  a  few 
moments  of  time  turn  a  sea  of  quicksilver  or 
other  material  into  gold.  So  it  is  more  probable 
that  he  that  knoweth  the  nature  of  rarefaction, 
the  nature  of  assimilation  of  nourishment  to  the 
thing  nourished,  the  manner  of  increase  and 
clearing  of  spirits,  the  manner  of  the  depreda¬ 
tions  which  spirits  make  upon  the  humours  and 
solid  parts,  shall  by  ambages  of  diets,  bathings, 
anointings,  medicines,  motions,  and  the  like, 
prolong  life,  or  restore  some  degree  of  youth  or 
vivacity,  than  that  it  can  be  done  with  the  use 
of  a  few  drops  or  scruples  of  a  liquor  or  receipt.  To 
concludetherefore,thetruenaturalmagic,  which 
is  that  great  liberty  and  latitude  of  operation 
which  dependeth  upon  the  knowledge  of  forms, 
I  may  report  deficient,  as  the  relative  thereof 
is.  To  which  part,  if  we  be  serious  and  incline 
not  to  vanities  and  plausible  discourse,  besides 
the  deriving  and  deducing  the  operations  them¬ 
selves  from  metaphysic,  there  are  pertinent 
two  points  of  much  purpose,  the  one  by  way  of 
preparation,  the  other  by  way  of  caution.  The 
first  is,  that  there  be  made  a  kalendar,  resem¬ 
bling  an  inventory  of  the  estate  of  man,  con¬ 
taining  all  the  inventions  (being  the  works  or 
fruits  of  nature  or  art)  which  are  now  extant, 
and  whereof  man  is  already  possessed;  out  of 
which  doth  naturally  result  a  note,  what  things 
are  yet  held  impossible,  or  not  invented:  which 
x“In  reality."  2Pindar,  Pythian  Odes ,  n.  n. 


kalendar  will  be  the  more  artificial  and  service¬ 
able,  if  to  every  reputed  impossibility  you  add 
what  thing  is  extant  which  cometh  the  nearest 
in  degree  to  that  impossibility;  to  the  end  that 
by  these  optatives  and  potentials  man’s  inquiry 
may  be  the  more  awake  in  deducing  direction 
of  works  from  the  speculation  of  causes.  And 
secondly,  that  those  experiments  be  not  only 
esteemed  which  have  an  immediate  and  present 
use,  but  those  principally  which  are  of  most 
universal  consequence  for  invention  of  other  ex¬ 
periments,  and  those  which  give  most  light  to 
the  invention  of  causes.  For  the  invention  of 
themariner’s  needle,  which  giveth  the  direction, 
is  of  no  less  benefit  for  navigation  than  the  in¬ 
vention  of  the  sails  which  give  the  motion. 

4.  Thus  have  I  passed  through  natural  phi¬ 
losophy  and  the  deficiencies  thereof;  wherein  if 
I  have  differed  from  the  ancient  and  received 
doctrines,  and  thereby  shall  move  contradic¬ 
tion,  for  my  part,  as  I  affect  not  to  dissent,  so 
I  purpose  not  to  contend.  If  it  be  truth, 

Non  canimus  surdis ,  respondent  omnia  sylvae;z 

the  voice  of  nature  will  consent,  whether  the 
voice  of  man  do  or  no.  And  as  Alexander  Bor¬ 
gia  was  wont  to  say  of  the  expedition  of  the 
French  for  Naples,  that  they  came  with  chalk 
in  their  hands  to  mark  up  their  lodgings,  and 
not  with  weapons  to  fight;  so  I  like  better  that 
entry  of  truth  which  cometh  peaceably  with 
chalk  to  mark  up  those  minds  which  are  capable 
to  lodge  and  harbour  it,  than  that  which  cometh 
with  pugnacity  and  contention. 

5.  But  there  remaineth  a  division  of  natural 
philosophy  according  to  the  report  of  the  in¬ 
quiry,  and  nothing  concerning  the  matter  or 
subject:  and  that  is  positive  and  considerative; 
when  the  inquiry  reporteth  either  an  assertion 
or  a  doubt.  These  doubts  or  non  liquets  are  of 
two  sorts,  particular  and  total.  For  the  first,  we 
see  a  good  example  thereof  in  Aristotle’s  Prob¬ 
lems,  which  deserved  to  have  had  a  better  con¬ 
tinuance;  but  so  nevertheless  as  there  is  one 
point  whereof  warning  is  to  be  given  and  taken. 
The  registering  of  doubts  hath  two  excellent 
uses:  the  one,  that  it  saveth  philosophy  from 
errors  and  falsehoods;  when  that  which  is  not 
fully  appearing  is  not  collected  into  assertion, 
whereby  error  might  draw  error,  but  reserved 
in  doubt:  the  other,  that  the  entry  of  doubts 
are  as  so  many  suckers  or  sponges  to  draw  use 
of  knowledge;  insomuch  as  that  which,  if  doubts 
had  not  preceded,  a  man  should  never  have 

3Virgil,  Eclogues ,  Bk.  x.  8.  “All  as  we  sing  the  listening 
woods  reply.” 


48  ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


advised,  but  passed  it  over  without  note,  by 
the  suggestion  and  solicitation  of  doubts  is 
made  to  be  attended  and  applied.  But  both 
these  commodities  do  scarcely  countervail  an 
inconvenience,  which  will  intrude  itself  if  it  be 
not  debarred;  which  is,  that  when  a  doubt  is 
once  received,  men  labour  rather  how  to  keep 
it  a  doubt  still,  than  how  to  solve  it;  and  ac¬ 
cordingly  bend  their  wits.  Of  this  we  see  the 
familiar  example  in  lawyers  and  scholars,  both 
which,  if  they  have  once  admitted  a  doubt,  it 
goeth  ever  after  authorized  for  a  doubt.  But 
that  use  of  wit  and  knowledge  is  to  be  allowed, 
which  laboureth  to  make  doubtful  things  cer¬ 
tain,  and  not  those  which  labour  to  make  certain 
things  doubtful.  Therefore  these  kalendars  of 
doubts  I  commend  as  excellent  things;  so  that 
there  be  this  caution  used,  that  when  they  be 
thoroughly  sifted  and  brought  to  resolution, 
they  be  from  thenceforth  omitted,  decarded, 
and  not  continued  to  cherish  and  encourage 
men  in  doubting.  To  which  kalendar  of  doubts 
or  problems,  I  advise  be  annexed  another  kal¬ 
endar,  as  much  or  more  material,  which  is  a 
kalendar  of  popular  errors:  I  mean  chiefly  in 
natural  history,  such  as  pass  in  speech  and  con¬ 
ceit,  and  are  nevertheless  apparently  detected 
and  convicted  of  untruth;  that  man’s  knowl¬ 
edge  be  not  weakened  nor  imbased  by  such 
dross  and  vanity.  As  for  the  doubts  or  non 
liquets  general  or  in  total,  I  understand  those 
differences  of  opinions  touching  the  principles 
of  nature,  and  the  fundamental  points  of  the 
same,  which  have  caused  the  diversity  of  sects, 
schools,  and  philosophies,  as  that  of  Empedocles, 
Pythagoras,  Democritus,  Parmenides,  and  the 
rest.  For  although  Aristotle,  as  though  he  had 
been  of  the  race  of  the  Ottomans,  thought  he 
could  not  reign  except  the  first  thing  he  did  he 
killed  all  his  brethren;  yet  to  those  that  seek 
truth  and  not  magistrality,  it  cannot  but  seem 
a  matter  of  great  profit,  to  see  before  them  the 
several  opinions  touching  the  foundations  of 
nature.  Not  for  any  exact  truth  that  can  be 
expected  in  those  theories;  for  as  the  same 
phenomena  in  astronomy  are  satisfied  by  the 
received  astronomy  of  the  diurnal  motion,  and 
the  proper  motions  of  the  planets,  with  their 
eccentrics  and  epicycles,  and  likewise  by  the 
theory  of  Copernicus,  who  supposed  the  earth 
to  move,  and  the  calculations  are  indifferently 
agreeable  to  both,  so  the  ordinary  face  and  view 
of  experience  is  many  times  satisfied  by  several 
theories  and  philosophies;  whereas  to  find  the 
real  truth  requireth  another  manner  of  severity 
and  attention.  For  as  Aristotle  saith,  that  chil¬ 


dren  at  the  first  will  call  every  woman  mother, 
but  afterward  they  come  to  distinguish  accord¬ 
ing  to  truth;  so  experience,  if  it  be  in  childhood, 
will  call  every  philosophy  mother,  but  when  it 
cometh  to  ripeness  it  will  discern  the  true  mother. 
So  as  in  the  mean  time  it  is  good  to  see  the  sev¬ 
eral  glosses  and  opinions  upon  nature,  whereof 
it  may  be  every  one  in  some  one  point  hath  seen 
clearer  than  his  fellows,  therefore  I  wish  some 
collection  to  be  made  painfully  and  understand¬ 
ing^  de  antiquis  philosophiis,1  out  of  all  the  pos¬ 
sible  light  which  remaineth  to  us  of  them:  which 
kind  of  work  I  find  deficient.  But  here  I  must 
give  warning,  that  it  be  done  distinctly  and  se- 
veredly;  the  philosophies  of  every  one  through¬ 
out  by  themselves,  and  not  by  titles  packed  and 
faggoted  up  together,  as  hath  been  done  by  Plu¬ 
tarch.  For  it  is  the  harmony  of  a  philosophy  in 
itself  which  giveth  it  light  and  credence;  whereas 
if  it  be  singled  and  broken,  it  will  seem  more 
foreign  and  dissonant.  For  as  when  I  read  in 
Tacitus  the  actions  of  Nero  or  Claudius,  with 
circumstances  of  times,  inducements,  and  oc¬ 
casions,  I  find  them  not  so  strange;  but  when  I 
read  them  in  Suetonius  Tranquillus,  gathered 
into  titles  and  bundles  and  not  in  order  of  time, 
they  seem  more  monstrous  and  incredible:  so 
it  is  of  any  philosophy  reported  entire,  and  dis¬ 
membered  by  articles.  Neither  do  I  exclude  opin¬ 
ions  of  latter  times  to  be  likewise  represented 
in  this  calendar  of  sects  of  philosophy,  as  that 
of  Theophrastus  Paracelsus,  eloquently  reduced 
into  an  harmony  by  the  pen  of  Severinus  the 
Dane;  and  that  of  Tilesius,  and  his  scholar  Don- 
ius,  being  as  a  pastoral  philosophy,  full  of  sense, 
but  of  no  great  depth;  and  that  of  Fracastorius, 
who,  though  he  pretended  not  to  make  any  new 
philosophy,  yet  did  use  the  absoluteness  of  his 
own  sense  upon  the  old;  and  that  of  Gilbertus 
our  countryman,  who  revived,  with  some  alter¬ 
ations  and  demonstrations,  theopinionsofXen- 
ophanes;  and  any  other  worthy  to  be  admitted. 

6.  Thus  have  we  now  dealt  with  two  of  the 
three  beams  of  man’s  knowledge;  that  is  radius 
directus ,  which  is  referred  to  nature,  radius  re- 
Jractus ,  which  is  referred  to  God,  and  cannot  re¬ 
port  truly  because  of  the  inequality  of  the  me¬ 
dium.  There  resteth  radius  reflexus ,  whereby 
man  beholdeth  and  contemplateth  himself. 

IX.  i.  We  come  therefore  now  to  that  knowl¬ 
edge  whereunto  the  ancient  oracle  directeth  us,2 
which  is  the  knowledge  of  ourselves;  which  de- 
serveth  the  more  accurate  handling,  by  how 
much  it  toucheth  us  more  nearly.  This  knowl- 

1MOf  the  ancient  philosophers.” 

2  Plato,  Alcibiades. 


SECOND  BOOK 


edge,  as  it  is  the  end  and  term  of  natural  phi¬ 
losophy  in  the  intention  of  man,  so  notwith- 
standingitis  but  a  portion  of  natural  philosophy 
in  the  continent  of  nature.  And  generally  let  this 
be  a  rule,  that  all  partitions  of  knowledges  be 
accepted  rather  for  lines  and  veins  than  for  sec¬ 
tions  and  separations ;  and  that  the  continuance 
and  entireness  of  knowledge  be  preserved.1  For 
the  contrary  hereof  hath  made  particular  sci¬ 
ences  to  become  barren,  shallow,  and  erroneous, 
while  they  have  not  been  nourished  and  main¬ 
tained  from  the  common  fountain.  So  we  see 
Cicero  the  orator  complained  of  Socrates  and 
his  school,  that  he  was  the  first  that  separated 
philosophy  and  rhetoric ;  whereupon  rhetoric  be¬ 
came  an  empty  and  verbal  art.2  So  we  may  see 
that  the  opinion  of  Copernicus  touching  the  ro¬ 
tation  of  the  earth,  which  astronomy  itself  can¬ 
not  correct,  because  it  is  not  repugnant  to  any 
of  th zphainomena,  yet  natural  philosophy  may 
correct.  So  we  see  also  that  the  science  of  medi¬ 
cine  if  it  be  destituted  and  forsaken  by  natural 
philosophy,  it  is  not  much  better  than  an  em¬ 
pirical  practice.  With  this  reservation  therefore 
we  proceed  to  human  philosophy  or  humanity, 
which  hath  two  parts:  the  one  considereth  man 
segregate  or  distributively;  the  other  congre¬ 
gate,  or  in  society.  So  as  human  philosophy  is 
either  simple  and  particular,  or  conjugate  and 
civil.  Humanity  particular  consisteth  of  the 
same  parts  whereof  man  consisteth;  that  is,  of 
knowledges  which  respect  the  body,  and  of 
knowledges  that  respect  the  mind.  But  before 
we  distribute  so  far,  it  is  good  to  constitute. 
For  I  do  take  the  consideration  in  general,  and 
at  large,  of  human  nature  to  be  fit  to  be  emanci¬ 
pate  and  made  a  knowledge  by  itself:  not  so 
much  in  regard  of  those  delightful  and  elegant 
discourses  which  have  been  made  of  the  dig¬ 
nity  of  man,  of  his  miseries,  of  his  state  and 
life,  and  the  like  adjuncts  of  his  common  and 
undivided  nature;  but  chiefly  in  regard  of  the 
knowledge  concerning  the  sympathies  and  con¬ 
cordances  between  the  mind  and  body,  which 
being  mixed  cannot  be  properly  assigned  to 
the  sciences  of  either. 

1.  This  knowledge  hath  two  branches:  for  as 
all  leagues  and  amities  consist  of  mutual  intelli¬ 
gence  and  mutual  offices,  so  this  league  of  mind 
and  body  hath  these  two  parts;  how  the  one  dis- 
closeth  the  other,  and  how  the  one  worketh  up¬ 
on  the  other;  discovery  and  impression.  The 
former  of  these  hath  begotten  two  arts,  both  of 
prediction  or  prenotion;  whereof  the  one  is  hon¬ 
oured  with  the  inquiry  of  Aristotle,  and  the  oth- 

1  Seneca,  Epistles^  §89.  2De  Oratore. 


er  of  Hippocrates.  And  although  they  have  of 
later  time  been  used  to  be  coupled  with  super¬ 
stitious  and  fantastical  arts,  yet  being  purged 
and  restored  to  their  true  state,  they  have  both 
of  them  a  solid  ground  in  nature,  and  a  profita¬ 
ble  use  in  life.  The  first  is  physiognomy,  which 
discovereth  the  disposition  of  the  mind  by  the 
lineaments  of  the  body.  The  second  is  the  ex¬ 
position  of  natural  dreams,  which  discovereth 
the  state  of  the  body  by  the  imaginations  of  the 
mind.  In  the  former  of  these  I  note  a  deficience. 
For  Aristotle  hath  very  ingeniously  and  dili¬ 
gently  handled  the  factures  of  the  body,  but 
not  the  gestures  of  the  body,  which  are  no  less 
comprehensible  by  art,  and  of  greater  use  and 
advantage.  For  the  lineaments  of  the  body  do 
disclose  the  disposition  and  inclination  of  the 
mind  in  general;  but  the  motions  of  the  counte¬ 
nance  and  parts  do  not  only  so,  but  do  further 
disclose  the  present  humour  and  state  of  the 
mind  and  will.  For  as  your  Majesty  saith  most 
aptly  and  elegantly,  “As  the  tongue  speaketh  to 
the  ear  so  the  gesture  speaketh  to  the  eye.”  And 
therefore  a  number  ofsubtilepersons,  whose  eyes 
do  dwell  upon  the  faces  and  fashions  of  men,  do 
well  know  the  advantage  of  this  observation,  as 
being  most  part  of  their  ability;  neither  can  it 
be  denied,  but  that  it  is  a  great  discovery  of  dis¬ 
simulations,  and  a  great  direction  in  business. 

3.  The  latter  branch,  touching  impression, 
hath  not  been  collected  into  art,  but  hath  been 
handled  dispersedly;  and  it  hath  the  same  re¬ 
lation  or  antistrophe  that  the  former  hath.  For 
the  consideration  is  double :  either,  how  and  how 
far  the  humours  and  affects  of  the  body  do  alter 
or  work  upon  the  mind;  or  again,  how  and  how 
far  the  passions  or  apprehensions  of  the  mind 
do  alter  or  work  upon  the  body.  The  former  of 
these  hath  been  inquired  and  considered  as  a 
part  and  appendix  of  medicine,  but  much  more 
as  a  part  of  religion  or  superstition.  For  the  phy¬ 
sician  prescribeth  cures  of  the  mind  in  frenzies 
and  melancholy  passions;  and  pretendeth  also 
to  exhibit  medicines  to  exhilarate  the  mind,  to 
confirm  the  courage,  to  clarify  the  wits,  to  cor¬ 
roborate  the  memory,  and  the  like :  but  the  scru¬ 
ples  and  superstitions  of  diet  and  other  regi¬ 
ment  of  the  body  in  the  sect  of  the  Pythagoreans, 
in  the  heresy  of  the  Manichees,  and  in  the  law 
of  Mahomet,  do  exceed.  So  likewise  the  ordi¬ 
nances  in  the  ceremonial  law,  interdicting  the 
eating  of  the  blood  and  the  fat,  distinguishing 
between  beasts  clean  and  unclean  for  meat,  are 
many  and  strict.3  Nay  the  faith  itself  being  clear 
and  serene  from  all  clouds  of  ceremony,  yet  re- 
3  Deu  t.  12. 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


taineth  the  use  of  fastings,  abstinences,  and  oth¬ 
er  macerations  and  humiliations  of  the  body,  as 
things  real,  and  not  figurative.  The  root  and 
life  of  all  which  prescripts  is  (besides  the  cere¬ 
mony)  the  consideration  of  that  dependency 
which  the  affections  of  the  mind  are  submitted 
unto  upon  the  state  and  disposition  of  the  body. 
And  if  any  man  of  weak  judgement  do  conceive 
that  this  suffering  of  the  mind  from  the  body 
doth  either  question  the  immortality,  or  dero¬ 
gate  from  the  sovereignty  of  the  soul,  he  may 
be  taught  in  easy  instances,  that  the  infant  in 
the  mother’s  womb  is  compatible  with  the  moth¬ 
er  and  yet  separable;  and  the  most  absolute 
monarch  is  sometimes  led  by  his  servants  and 
yet  without  subjection.  As  for  the  reciprocal 
knowledge,  which  is  the  operation  of  the  con¬ 
ceits  and  passions  of  the  mind  upon  the  body, 
we  see  all  wise  physicians,  in  the  prescriptions 
of  their  regiments  to  their  patients,  do  ever  con¬ 
sider  accidentia  animi 1  as  of  great  force  to  fur¬ 
ther  or  hinder  remedies  or  recoveries:  and  more 
especially  it  is  an  inquiry  of  great  depth  and 
worth  concerning  imagination,  how  and  how 
far  it  altereth  the  body  proper  of  the  imaginant. 
For  although  it  hath  a  manifest  power  to  hurt, 
it  followeth  not  it  hath  the  same  degree  of  pow¬ 
er  to  help.  No  more  than  a  man  can  conclude, 
that  because  there  be  pestilent  airs,  able  sud¬ 
denly  to  kill  a  man  in  health,  therefore  there 
should  be  sovereign  airs,  able  suddenly  to  cure 
a  man  in  sickness.  But  the  inquisition  of  this 
part  is  of  great  use,  though  it  needeth,  as  So¬ 
crates  said,  “a  Delian  diver,”  being  difficult  and 
profound.2  But  unto  all  this  knowledge  de  com- 
muni  vinculo ,3  of  the  concordances  between  the 
mind  and  the  body,  that  part  of  inquiry  is  most 
necessary,  which  considereth  of  the  seats  and 
domiciles  which  the  several  faculties  of  the  mind 
do  take  and  occupate  in  the  organs  of  the  body; 
which  knowledge  hath  been  attempted,  and  is 
controverted,  and  deserveth  to  be  much  better 
inquired.  For  the  opinion  of  Plato,  who  placed 
the  understanding  in  the  brain,  animosity  (which 
he  did  unfitly  call  anger,  having  a  greater  mix¬ 
ture  with  pride)  in  the  heart,  and  concupiscence 
or  sensuality  in  the  liver,  deserveth  not  to  be 
despised;  but  much  less  to  be  allowed.4  So  then 
we  have  constituted  (as  in  our  own  wish  and 
advice)  the  inquiry  touching  human  nature  en¬ 
tire,  as  a  just  portion  of  knowledge  to  be  han¬ 
dled  apart. 

^‘Accidents  of  the  mind.” 

2 Laertius,  Socrates. 

3“Of  the  common  bond.” 

4  Plato,  Timceus ;  Aristotle,  Generation  and  Corruption. 


X.  I.  The  knowledge  that  concerneth  man’s 
body  is  divided  as  the  good  of  man’s  body  is 
divided,  unto  which  it  referreth.  The  good  of 
man’s  body  is  of  four  kinds,  health,  beauty, 
strength,  and  pleasure:  so  the  knowledges  are 
medicine,  or  art  of  cure:  art  of  decoration,  which 
is  called  cosmetic;  art  of  activity,  which  is  call¬ 
ed  athletic;  and  art  voluptuary,  which  Tacitus 
truly  calleth  eruditus  luxus.h  This  subject  of 
man’s  body  is  of  all  other  things  in  nature 
most  susceptible  of  remedy;  but  then  that  rem¬ 
edy  is  most  susceptible  of  error.  For  the  same 
subtility  of  the  subject  doth  cause  large  possi¬ 
bility  and  easy  failing;  and  therefore  the  in¬ 
quiry  ought  to  be  the  more  exact. 

2.  To  speak  therefore  of  medicine,  and  to  re¬ 
sume  that  we  have  said,  ascending  a  little  high¬ 
er:  the  ancient  opinion  that  man  was  microcos- 
mus ,  an  abstract  or  model  of  the  world,  hath 
been  fantastically  strained  by  Paracelsus  and 
the  alchemists,  as  if  there  were  to  be  found  in 
man’s  body  certain  correspondences  and  paral¬ 
lels,  which  should  have  respect  to  all  varieties 
of  things,  as  stars,  planets,  minerals,  which  are 
extant  in  the  great  world.  But  thus  much  is  evi¬ 
dently  true,  that  of  all  substances  which  nature 
hath  produced,  man’s  body  is  the  most  extreme¬ 
ly  compounded.  For  we  see  herbs  and  plants 
are  nourished  by  earth  and  water;  beasts  for 
the  most  part  by  herbs  and  fruits;  man  by  the 
flesh  of  beasts,  birds,  fishes,  herbs,  grains,  fruits, 
water,  and  the  manifold  alterations,  dressings 
and  preparations  of  these  several  bodies,  before 
they  come  to  be  his  food  and  aliment.  Add  here¬ 
unto  that  beasts  have  a  more  simple  order  of 
life,  and  less  change  of  affections  to  work  upon 
their  bodies;  whereas  man  in  his  mansion,  sleep, 
exercise,  passions,  hath  infinite  variations:  and 
it  cannot  be  denied  but  that  the  body  of  man 
of  all  other  things  is  of  the  most  compounded 
mass.  The  soul  on  the  other  side  is  the  simplest 
of  substances,  as  is  well  expressed: 

Purumque  reliquit 

Aethereum  sensum  atque  aurai  simplicis  ignem ,6 

So  that  it  is  no  marvel  though  the  soul  so  placed 
enjoy  no  rest,  if  that  principle  be  true,  that 
“ Motus  rerum  est  rapidus  extra  locum ,  placidus 
in  loco.”1  But  to  the  purpose:  this  variable 
composition  of  man’s  body  hath  made  it  as  an 
instrument  easy  to  distemper;  and  therefore 

5 Annals^  Bk.  xvi.  18.  “Educated  luxury.” 

6 Virgil,  /Eneid ,  Bk.  vi.  746.  “Pure  and  unmixed  the 
etherial  sense  is  left — mere  air  and  fire.” 

7Aristotle,  Heavens.  “Things  move  rapidly  to  their 
place  and  smoothly  in  their  place.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


the  poets  did  well  to  conjoin  music  and  med¬ 
icine  in  Apollo,  because  the  office  of  medicine  is 
but  to  tune  this  curious  harp  of  man’s  body 
and  to  reduce  it  to  harmony.  So  then  the  sub¬ 
ject  being  so  variable,  hath  made  the  art  by 
consequent  more  conjectural;  and  the  art  being 
conjectural  hath  made  so  much  the  more  place 
to  be  left  for  imposture.  For  almost  all  other 
arts  and  sciences  are  judged  by  acts  or  master¬ 
pieces,  as  I  may  term  them,  and  not  by  the 
successes  and  events.  The  lawyer  is  judged  by 
the  virtue  of  his  pleading,  and  not  by  the  issue 
of  the  cause.  The  master  in  the  ship  is  judged 
by  the  directing  his  course  aright,  and  not  by 
the  fortune  of  the  voyage.  But  the  physician, 
and  perhaps  the  politique,  hath  no  particular 
acts  demonstrative  of  his  ability,  but  is  judged 
most  by  the  event;  which  is  ever  but  as  it  is 
taken:  for  who  can  tell,  if  a  patient  die  or  re¬ 
cover,  or  if  a  state  be  preserved  or  ruined, 
whether  it  be  art  or  accident?  And  therefore 
many  times  the  impostor  is  prized,  and  the  man 
of  virtue  taxed.  Nay,  we  see  [the]  weakness  and 
credulity  of  men  is  such,  as  they  will  often  pre¬ 
fer  a  mountebank  or  witch  before  a  learned  phy¬ 
sician.  And  therefore  the  poets  were  clear-sight¬ 
ed  in  discerning  this  extreme  folly,  when  they 
made  Aesculapius  and  Circe  brother  and  sister, 
both  children  of  the  sun,  as  in  the  verses, 

Ipse  repertorem  medicinae  tails  et  art  is 

Fulmine  Phoebigenan  Stygias  detrusit  ad  undas : 

And  again, 

Dives  inaccessos  ubi  Solis  filia  lucos &c. 

For  in  all  times,  in  the  opinion  of  the  multitude, 
witches  and  old  women  and  impostors  have  had 
a  competition  with  physicians.  And  what  fol- 
loweth  ?  Even  this,  that  physicians  say  to  them¬ 
selves,  as  Salomon  expresseth  it  upon  an  high¬ 
er  occasion,  “If  it  befall  to  me  as  befalleth  to 
the  fools,  why  should  I  labour  to  be  more  wise  ?”1 2 
And  therefore  I  cannot  much  blame  physicians, 
that  they  use  commonly  to  intend  some  other 
art  or  practice,  which  they  fancy,  more  than 
their  profession.  For  you  shall  have  of  them  anti¬ 
quaries,  poets,  humanists,  statesmen,  mer¬ 
chants,  divines,  and  in  every  of  these  better  seen 
than  in  their  profession;  and  no  doubt  upon  this 
ground,  that  they  find  that  mediocrity  and  ex¬ 
cellency  in  their  art  maketh  no  difference  in  pro¬ 

1  Virgil,  JEndidy  Bk.  vn.  772-3;  vii.  11.  “Apollo  s  son  from 
whom  that  art  did  grow,  Jove  struck  with  thunder  to  the 
shades  below.”  “Now  by  the  shelves  of  Circe’s  coast  they 
run — Circe  the  rich,  the  daughter  of  the  Sun.” 

2Eccles.  2.  15. 


fit  or  reputation  towards  their  fortune;  for  the 
weakness  of  patients,  and  sweetness  of  life,  and 
nature  of  hope,  maketh  men  depend  upon  phy¬ 
sicians  with  all  their  defects.  But  nevertheless 
these  things  which  we  have  spoken  of  are  courses 
begotten  between  a  little  occasion,  and  a  great 
deal  of  sloth  and  default;  for  if  we  will  excite 
and  awake  our  observation,  we  shall  see  in  fa¬ 
miliar  instances  what  a  predominant  faculty  the 
subtilty  of  spirit  hath  over  the  variety  of  mat¬ 
ter  or  form.  Nothing  more  variable  than  faces 
and  countenances:  yet  men  can  bear  in  mem¬ 
ory  the  infinite  distinctions  of  them;  nay,  a 
painter  with  a  few  shells  of  colours,  and  the  ben¬ 
efit  of  his  eye,  and  habit  of  his  imagination, 
can  imitate  them  all  that  ever  have  been,  are,  or 
may  be,  if  they  were  brought  before  him.  Noth¬ 
ing  more  variable  than  voices;  yet  men  can  like¬ 
wise  discern  them  personally:  nay,  you  shall 
have  a  buff  on  or pantomimus,  will  express  as  many 
as  he  pleaseth.  Nothing  more  variable  than  the 
differing  sounds  of  words;  yet  men  have  found 
the  way  to  reduce  them  to  a  few  simple  letters. 
So  that  it  is  not  the  insufficiency  or  incapacity 
of  man’s  mind,  but  it  is  the  remote  standing  or 
placing  thereof,  that  breedeth  these  mazes  and 
incomprehensions.  For  as  the  sense  afar  off  is 
full  of  mistaking,  but  is  exact  at  hand,  so  is  it  of 
the  understanding:  the  remedy  whereof  is,  not 
to  quicken  or  strengthen  the  organ,  but  to  go 
nearer  to  the  object;  and  therefore  there  is  no 
doubt  but  if  the  physicians  will  learn  and  use 
the  true  approaches  and  avenues  of  nature,  they 
may  assume  as  much  as  the  poet  saith: 

Et  quoniam  variant  morbi ,  variabimus  artes ; 

Mille  mali  species ,  mi  lie  salutis  eruntl 

Which  that  they  should  do,  the  nobleness  of 
their  art  doth  deserve;  well  shadowed  by  the 
poets,  in  that  they  made  Aesculapius  to  be  the 
son  of  [the]  sun,  the  one  being  the  fountain  of 
life,  the  other  as  the  second  stream:  but  infi¬ 
nitely  more  honoured  by  the  example  of  our 
Saviour,  who  made  the  body  of  man  the  object 
of  his  miracles,  as  the  soul  was  the  object  of  his 
doctrine.  For  we  read  not  that  ever  he  vouch¬ 
safed  to  do  any  miracle  about  honour  or  money 
(except  that  one  for  giving  tribute  to  Caesar), 
but  only  about  the  preserving,  sustaining,  and 
healing  the  body  of  man. 

3.  Medicine  is  a  science  which  hath  been(as 
we  have  said)  more  professed  than  laboured, 
and  yet  more  laboured  than  advanced;  the  la- 

3Ovid,  Remedia  Amoris ,  525.  “Varying  their  arts  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  variety  of  diseases,  for  a  thousand  forms  of 
sickness  a  thousand  methods  of  cure.” 


52  ADVANCEMENT 

bour  having  been,  in  my  judgement,  rather  in 
circle  than  in  progression.  For  I  find  much  iter¬ 
ation,  but  small  addition.  It  considereth  causes 
of  diseases,  with  the  occasions  or  impulsions; 
the  diseases  themselves,  with  the  accidents;  and 
the  cures,  with  the  preservations.  The  deficien¬ 
cies  which  I  think  good  to  note,  being  a  few  of 
many,  and  those  such  as  are  of  a  more  open 
and  manifest  nature,  I  will  enumerate  and  not 
place. 

4.  The  first  is  the  discontinuance  of  the 
ancient  and  serious  diligence  of  Hippocrates,1 
which  used  to  set  down  a  narrative  of  the  special 
cases  of  his  patients,  and  how  they  proceeded, 
and  how  they  were  j  udged  by  recovery  or  death. 
Therefore  having  an  example  proper  in  the  fa¬ 
ther  of  the  art,  I  shall  not  need  to  allege  an  ex¬ 
ample  foreign,  of  the  wisdom  of  the  lawyers, 
who  are  careful  to  report  new  cases,  and  de¬ 
cisions  for  the  direction  of  future  judgements. 
This  continuance  of  medicinal  history  I  find  de¬ 
ficient;  which  I  understand  neither  to  be  so  in¬ 
finite  as  to  extend  to  every  common  case,  nor 
so  reserved  as  to  admit  none  but  wonders:  for 
many  things  are  new  in  the  manner,  which 
are  not  new  in  the  kind;  and  if  men  will  in¬ 
tend  to  observe,  they  shall  find  much  worthy  to 
observe. 

5.  In  the  inquiry  which  is  made  by  anatomy, 

I  find  much  deficience:  for  they  inquire  of  the 
parts,  and  their  substances,  figures,  and  collo¬ 
cations;  but  they  inquire  not  of  the  diversities 
of  the  parts,  the  secrecies  of  the  passages,  and 
the  seats  or  nestling  of  the  humours,  nor  much 
of  the  footsteps  and  impressions  of  diseases.  The 
reason  of  which  omission  I  suppose  to  be,  be¬ 
cause  the  first  inquiry  may  be  satisfied  in  the 
view  of  one  or  a  few  anatomies:  but  the  latter, 
being  comparative  and  casual,  must  arise  from 
the  view  of  many.  And  as  to  the  diversity  of 
parts,  there  is  no  doubt  but  the  facture  or  fram¬ 
ing  of  the  inward  parts  is  as  full  of  difference 
as  the  outward,  and  in  that  is  the  cause  con¬ 
tinent  of  many  diseases;  which  not  being  ob¬ 
served,  they  quarrel  many  times  with  the  hu¬ 
mours,  which  are  not  in  fault;  the  fault  being 
in  the  very  frame  and  mechanique  of  the  part, 
which  cannot  be  removed  by  medicine  altera¬ 
tive,  but  must  be  accommodate  and  palliate  by 
diets  and  medicines  familiar.  And  for  the  pas¬ 
sages  and  pores,  it  is  true  which  was  anciently 
noted,  that  the  more  subtile  of  them  appear  not 
in  anatomies,  because  they  are  shut  and  latent 
in  dead  bodies,  though  they  be  open  and  mani¬ 
fest  in  live:  which  being  supposed,  though  the 

1  Narrationes  Medicevals. 


OF  LEARNING 

inhumanity  of  anatomia  mvoruni1  was  by  Celsus3 
justly  reproved,  yet  in  regard  of  the  great  use 
of  this  observation,  the  inquiry  needed  not  by 
him  so  slightly  to  have  been  relinquished  alto¬ 
gether,  or  referred  to  the  casual  practices  of  sur¬ 
gery;  but  mought  have  been  well  diverted  up¬ 
on  the  dissection  of  beasts  alive,  which  not¬ 
withstanding  the  dissimilitude  of  their  parts  may 
sufficiently  satisfy  this  inquiry.  And  for  the  hu¬ 
mours,  they  are  commonly  passed  over  in  an¬ 
atomies  as  purgaments;  whereas  it  is  most  nec¬ 
essary  to  observe,  what  cavities,  nests,  and  re¬ 
ceptacles  the  humours  do  find  in  the  parts,  with 
the  differing  kind  of  the  humour  so  lodged  and 
received.  And  as  for  the  footsteps  of  diseases, 
and  their  devastations  of  the  inward  parts,  im- 
postumations,  exulcerations,  discontinuations, 
putrefactions,  consumptions,  contractions,  ex¬ 
tensions,  convulsions,  dislocations,  obstruc¬ 
tions,  repletions,  together  with  all  preternat¬ 
ural  substances,  as  stones,  carnosities,  excres¬ 
cences,  worms  and  the  like;  they  ought  to  have 
been  exactly  observed  by  multitude  of  anato¬ 
mies,  and  the  contribution  of  men’s  several  ex¬ 
periences,  and  carefully  set  down  both  histori¬ 
cally  according  to  the  appearances,  and  arti- 
fici  ally  with  a  reference  to  the  diseases  and  symp¬ 
toms  which  resulted  from  them,  in  case  where 
the  anatomy  is  of  a  defunct  patient;  whereas 
now  upon  opening  of  bodies  they  are  passed 
over  slightly  and  in  silence. 

6.  In  the  inquiry  of  diseases,  they  do  abandon 
the  cures  of  many,  some  as  in  their  nature  in¬ 
curable,  and  others  as  passed  the  period  of  cure; 
so  that  Sylla  and  the  Triumvirs  never  proscrib¬ 
ed  so  many  men  to  die,  as  they  do  by  their  ig¬ 
norant  edicts:  whereof  numbers  do  escape  with 
less  difficulty  than  they  did  in  the  Roman  pro¬ 
scriptions.  Therefore  I  will  not  doubt  to  note 
as  a  deficience,  that  they  inquire  not  the  per¬ 
fect  cures  of  many  diseases,  or  extremities  of 
diseases;  but  pronouncing  them  incurable  do 
enact  a  law  of  neglect,  and  exempt  ignorance 
from  discredit. 

7.  Nay  further,  I  esteem  it  the  office  of  a  phy¬ 
sician  not  only  to  restore  health,  but  to  miti¬ 
gate  pain  and  dolors;  and  not  only  when  such 
mitigation  may  conduce  to  recovery,  but  when 
it  may  serve  to  make  a  fair  and  easy  passage. 
For  it  is  no  small  felicity  which  Augustus  Cae¬ 
sar  was  wont  to  wish  to  himself,  that  same 
Euthanasia ;4  and  which  was  specially  noted  in 
the  death  of  Antoninus  Pius,  whose  death  was 

2“Anatomy  of  the  living  subject.” 

3Dc  Re  Medica ,  1.  5. 

4 Suetonius,  Julius  Caesar ,  1 00. 


SECOND  BOOK 


after  the  fashion  and  semblance  of  a  kindly  and 
pleasant  sleep.  So  it  is  written  of  Epicurus,  that 
after  his  disease  was  judged  desperate,  he 
drowned  his  stomach  and  senses  with  a  large 
draught  and  ingurgitation  of  wine;  whereupon 
the  epigram  was  made,  “ Hinc  Stygias  ebrius 
hausit  aquas ’V  he  was  not  sober  enough  to 
taste  any  bitterness  of  the  Stygian  water.  But 
the  physicians  contrariwise  do  make  a  kind  of 
scruple  and  religion  to  stay  with  the  patient 
after  the  disease  is  deplored;  whereas  in  my 
judgement  they  ought  both  to  inquire  the  skill, 
and  to  give  the  attendances,  for  the  facilitating 
and  assuaging  of  the  pains  and  agonies  of  death. 

8.  In  the  consideration  of  the  cures  of  diseas¬ 
es,  I  find  a  deficience  in  the  receipts  of  propriety, 
respecting  the  particular  cures  of  diseases:  for 
the  physicians  have  frustrated  the  fruit  of  tra¬ 
dition  and  experience  by  their  magistralities, 
in  adding  and  taking  out  and  changing  quid  pro 
quo 2  in  their  receipts,  at  their  pleasures;  com¬ 
manding  so  over  the  medicine,  as  the  medicine 
cannot  command  over  the  disease.  For  except 
it  be  treacle  and  mithridatura ,  and  of  late  dia- 
scordium ,  and  a  few  more,  they  tie  themselves 
to  no  receipts  severely  and  religiously.  For  as 
to  the  confections  of  sale  which  are  in  the  shops, 
they  are  for  readiness  and  not  for  propriety. 
For  they  are  upon  general  intentions  of  purg¬ 
ing,  opening,  comforting,  altering,  and  not  much 
appropriate  to  particular  diseases.  And  this  is 
the  cause  why  empirics  and  old  women  are  more 
happy  many  times  in  their  cures  than  learned 
physicians,  because  they  are  more  religious  in 
holding  their  medicines.  Therefore  here  is  the 
deficience  which  I  find,  that  physicians  have 
not,  partly  out  of  their  own  practice,  partly  out 
of  the  constant  probations  reported  in  books, 
and  partly  out  of  the  traditions  of  empirics,  set 
down  and  delivered  over  certain  experimental 
medicines  for  the  cure  of  particular  diseases, 
besides  their  own  conjectural  and  magistral  de¬ 
scriptions.  For  as  they  were  the  men  of  the  best 
composition  in  the  state  of  Rome,  which  either 
being  consuls  inclined  to  the  people,  or  being 
tribunes  inclined  to  the  senate;  so  in  the  matter 
we  now  handle,  they  be  the  best  physicians, 
which  being  learned  incline  to  the  traditions  of 
experience,  or  being  empirics  incline  to  the  me¬ 
thods  of  learning. 

9.  In  preparation  ofmedicines  I  do  find  strange 
specially  considering  how  mineral  medicines 
have  been  extolled,  and  that  they  are  safer  for 
the  outward  than  inw'ard  parts,  that  no  man 

Laertius,  Epicurus ,  x.  15. 

2“One  thing  for  another.” 


hath  sought  to  make  an  imitation  by  art  of  na¬ 
tural  baths  and  medicinable  fountains:  which 
nevertheless  are  confessed  to  receive  their  vir¬ 
tues  from  minerals:  and  not  so  only,  but  dis¬ 
cerned  and  distinguished  from  what  particular 
mineral  they  receive  tincture,  as  sulphur,  vit¬ 
riol,  steel,  or  the  like:  which  nature,  if  it  may 
be  reduced  to  compositions  of  art,  both  the  va¬ 
riety  of  them  will  be  increased,  and  the  temper 
of  them  will  be  more  commanded. 

10.  But  lest  I  grow  to  be  more  particular  than 
is  agreeable  either  to  my  intention  or  to  pro¬ 
portion,  I  will  conclude  this  part  with  the  note 
of  one  deficience  more,  which  seemeth  to  me  of 
greatest  consequence;  which  is,  that  the  pre¬ 
scripts  in  use  are  too  compendious  to  attain  their 
end:  for,  to  my  understanding,  it  is  a  vain  and 
flattering  opinion  to  think  any  medicine  can  be 
so  sovereign  or  so  happy,  as  that  the  receipt  or 
use  of  it  can  work  any  great  effect  upon  the 
body  of  man.  It  were  a  strange  speech  which 
spoken,  or  spoken  oft,  should  reclaim  a  man 
from  a  vice  to  which  he  were  by  nature  subject. 
It  is  order,  pursuit,  sequence,  and  interchange 
of  application,  which  is  mighty  in  nature;  which 
although  it  require  more  exact  knowledge  in 
prescribing,  and  more  precise  obedience  in 
observing,  yet  is  recompensed  with  the  magni¬ 
tude  of  effects.  And  although  a  man  would 
think,  by  thedaily  visitations  of  the  physicians, 
that  there  were  a  pursuance  in  the  cure:  yet  let 
a  man  look  into  their  prescripts  and  ministra¬ 
tions,  and  he  shall  find  them  but  inconstancies 
and  every  day’s  devices,  without  any  settled 
providence  or  project.  Not  that  every  scrupu¬ 
lous  or  superstitious  prescript  is  effectual,  no 
more  than  every  straight  way  is  the  way  to 
heaven;  but  the  truth  of  the  direction  must 
precede  severity  of  observance. 

1 1 .  For  cosmetic,  it  hath  parts  civil,  and  parts 
effeminate:  for  cleanness  of  body  was  ever  es¬ 
teemed  to  proceed  from  a  due  reverence  to  God, 
to  society,  and  to  ourselves.  As  for  artificial  dec¬ 
oration, it  is  well  worthy  of  the  deficiencies  which 
it  hath;  being  neither  fine  enough  to  deceive, 
nor  handsome  to  use,  nor  wholesome  to  please. 

12.  For  athletic,  I  take  the  subject  of  it  large¬ 
ly,  that  is  to  say,  for  any  point  of  ability  where- 
unto  the  body  of  man  may  be  brought,  whether 
it  be  of  activity,  or  of  patience;  whereof  activ¬ 
ity  hath  two  parts,  strength  and  swiftness; 
and  patience  likewise  hath  two  parts,  hardness 
against  wants  and  extremities,  and  endurance 
of  pain  or  torment;  whereof  we  see  the  practices 
in  tumblers,  in  savages,  and  in  those  that  suffer 
punishment.  Nay,  if  there  be  any  other  faculty 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


which  tails  not  within  any  of  the  former  div¬ 
isions,  as  in  those  that  dive,  that  obtain  a 
strange  power  of  containing  respiration,  and 
the  like,  l  refer  it  to  this  part.  Of  these 
things  the  practices  are  known,  but  the  phil- 
osophv  which  concerneth  them  is  not  much 
inquired;  the  rather,  I  think,  because  they  are 
supposed  to  be  obtained,  either  by  an  aptness 
of  nature,  which  cannot  be  taught,  or  only  by 
continual  custom,  which  is  soon  prescribed: 
which  though  it  be  not  true,  yet  I  forbear  to 
note  any  deficiencies:  for  the  Olympian  games 
are  down  long  since,  and  the  mediocrity  of 
these  things  is  for  use;  as  for  the  excellency  of 
them  it  serveth  for  the  most  part  but  for  mer¬ 
cenary  ostentation. 

13.  For  arts  of  pleasure  sensual,  the  chief  de- 
ficience  in  them  is  of  laws  to  repress  them.  For 
as  it  hath  been  well  observed,  that  the  arts  which 
flourish  in  times  while  virtue  is  in  growth,  are 
military;  and  while  virtue  is  in  state,  areliberal; 
and  while  virtue  is  in  declination,  are  voluptu¬ 
ary:  so  I  doubt  that  this  age  of  the  world  is 
somewhat  upon  the  descent  of  the  wheel.  With 
arts  voluptuary  I  couple  practices  joculary;  for 
the  deceiving  of  the  senses  is  one  of  the  plea¬ 
sures  of  the  senses.  As  for  games  of  recreation, 
I  hold  them  to  belong  to  civil  life  and  educa¬ 
tion.  And  thus  much  of  that  particular  human 
philosophy  which  concerns  the  body,  which  is 
but  the  tabernacle  of  the  mind. 

XI.  1.  For  human  knowledge  which  concerns 
the  mind,  it  hath  two  parts;  the  one  that  in- 
quireth  of  the  substance  or  nature  of  the  soul 
or  mind,  the  other  that  inquireth  of  the  facul¬ 
ties  or  functions  thereof.  Unto  the  first  of  these, 
the  considerations  of  the  original  of  the  soul, 
whether  it  be  native  or  adventive,  and  how  far 
it  is  exempted  from  laws  of  matter,  and  of  the 
immortality  thereof,  and  many  other  points, 
do  appertain:  which  have  been  not  more  labor¬ 
iously  inquired  than  variously  reported;  so  as 
the  travail  therein  taken  seemeth  to  have  been 
rather  in  a  maze  than  in  a  way.  But  although  I 
am  of  opinion  that  this  knowledge  may  be  more 
really  and  soundly  inquired,  even  in  nature,  than 
it  hath  been;  yet  I  hold  that  in  the  end  it  must 
be  bounded  by  religion,  or  else  it  will  be  sub¬ 
ject  to  deceit  and  delusion.  For  as  the  substance 
of  the  soul  in  the  creation  was  not  extracted  out 
of  the  mass  of  heaven  and  earth  by  the  benedic¬ 
tion  of  a  producat?  but  was  immediately  inspired 
from  God,  so  it  is  not  possible  that  it  should  be 
(otherwise  than  by  accident)  subject  to  the  laws 
of  heaven  and  earth,  which  are  the  subject  of 

1“Let  it  be  brought  forth. ” 


philosophy;  and  therefore  the  true  knowledge 
of  the  nature  and  state  of  the  soul  must  come 
by  thesameinspiration  thatgavethe  substance. 
Unto  this  part  of  knowledge  touching  the  soul 
there  be  two  appendices;  which,  as  they  have 
been  handled,  have  rather  vapoured  forth  fables 
than  kindled  truth;  divination  and  fascination. 

2.  Divination  hath  been  anciently  and  fitly 
divided  into  artificial  and  natural;  whereof  ar¬ 
tificial  is,  when  the  mind  maketh  a  prediction 
by  argument,  concluding  upon  signs  and  tokens; 
natural  is,  when  the  mind  hath  a  presentation 
by  an  internal  power,  without  the  inducement 
of  a  sign.  Artificial  is  of  two  sorts;  either  when 
the  argument  is  coupled  with  a  derivation  of 
causes,  which  is  rational;  or  when  it  is  only 
grounded  upon  a  coincidence  of  the  effect,  which 
is  experimental:  whereof  the  latter  for  the  most 
part  is  superstitious;  such  as  were  the  heathen 
observations  upon  the  inspection  of  sacrifices, 
the  flights  of  birds,  the  swarming  of  bees;  and 
such  as  was  the  Chaldean  astrology,  and  the  like. 
For  artificial  divination,  the  several  kinds  there¬ 
of  are  distributed  amongst  particular  knowl¬ 
edges.  The  astronomer  hath  his  predictions,  as 
of  conjunctions,  aspects,  eclipses,  and  the  like. 
The  physician  hath  his  predictions,  of  death, 
of  recovery,  of  the  accidents  and  issues  of  dis¬ 
eases.  The  politique  hath  his  predictions;  “0 
urbem  venalem ,  et  cito  perituram ,  si  emptorem  in- 
venerit /”2  which  stayed  not  long  to  be  performed, 
in  Sylla  first,  and  after  in  Caesar.  So  as  these 
predictions  are  now  impertinent,  and  to  be  re¬ 
ferred  over.  But  the  divination  which  springeth 
from  the  internal  nature  of  the  soul,  is  that 
which  we  now  speak  of;  which  hath  been  made 
to  be  of  two  sorts,  primitive  and  by  influxion. 
Primitive  is  grounded  upon  the  supposition,  that 
the  mind,  when  it  is  withdrawn  and  collected 
into  itself,  and  not  diffused  into  the  organs  of 
the  body,  hath  some  extent  and  latitude  of  pre¬ 
notion  ;  which  therefore  appeareth  most  in  sleep, 
in  ecstasies,  and  near  death,  and  more  rarely 
in  waking  apprehensions;  and  is  induced  and 
furthered  by  those  abstinences  and  observan¬ 
ces  which  make  the  mind  most  to  consist  in  it¬ 
self.  By  influxion,  is  grounded  upon  the  conceit 
that  the  mind,  as  a  miiror  or  glass,  should  take 
illumination  from  the  foreknowledge  of  God  and 
spirits:  unto  which  the  same  regiment  doth  like¬ 
wise  conduce.  For  the  retiring  of  the  mind  with- 
in  itself  is  the  state  which  is  most  susceptible  ot 
divine  influxions;  save  that  it  is  accompanied 
in  this  case  with  a  fervency  and  elevation 

2SalIust,  Bellum  Jugurthum ,  35.  “O  city  set  to  sale, 
whose  destruction  is  at  hand,  if  it  find  a  purchaser!” 


SECOND  BOOK 


(which  the  ancients  noted  by  fury),  and  not 
with  a  repose  and  quiet,  as  it  is  in  the  other. 

3.  Fascination  is  the  power  and  act  of  imagi¬ 
nation  intensive  upon  other  bodies  than  the  body 
of  the  imaginant,  for  of  that  we  spake  in  the 
proper  place.  Wherein  the  school  of  Paracelsus, 
and  the  disciples  of  pretended  natural  magic 
have  been  so  intemperate,  as  they  have  exalted 
the  power  of  the  imagination  to  be  much  one 
with  the  power  ofmiracle- working  faith.  Others, 
that  draw  nearer  to  probability,  calling  to  their 
view  the  secret  passages  of  things,  and  specially 
of  the  contagion  that  passeth  from  body  to 
body,  do  conceive  it  should  likewise  be  agree¬ 
able  to  nature,  that  there  should  be  some  trans¬ 
missions  and  operations  from  spirit  to  spirit 
without  the  mediation  of  the  senses;  whence 
theconceitshavegrown  (now  almost  made  civil) 
of  the  mastering  spirit,  and  the  force  of  confi¬ 
dence  and  the  like.  Incident  unto  this  is  the  in¬ 
quiry  how  to  raise  and  fortify  the  imagination: 
for  if  the  imagination  fortified  have  power,  then 
it  is  material  to  know  how  to  fortify  and  exalt 
it.  And  herein  comes  in  crookedly  and  danger¬ 
ously  a  palliation  of  a  great  part  of  ceremonial 
magic.  For  it  may  be  pretended  that  ceremo¬ 
nies,  characters,  and  charms  do  work,  not  by 
any  tacit  or  sacramental  contract  with  evil  spi¬ 
rits,  but  serve  only  to  strengthen  the  imagina¬ 
tion  of  him  that  useth  it;  as  images  are  said  by 
the  Roman  church  to  fix  the  cogitations  and 
raise  the  devotions  of  them  that  pray  before 
them.  But  for  mine  own  judgement,  if  it  be  ad¬ 
mitted  that  imagination  hath  power,  and  that 
ceremonies  fortify  imagination,  and  that  they 
be  used  sincerely  and  intentionally  for  that  pur¬ 
pose;  yet  I  should  hold  them  unlawful,  as  op¬ 
posing  to  that  first  edict  which  God  gave  unto 
man,  “In  sudore  vultus  comedes  panem  tuum .”x 
For  they  propound  those  noble  effects,  which 
God  hath  set  forth  unto  man  to  be  bought  at 
the  price  of  labour,  to  be  attained  by  a  few  easy 
and  slothful  observances.  Deficiencies  in  these 
knowledges  I  will  report  none,  other  than 
the  general  deficience,  that  it  is  not  known 
how  much  of  them  is  verity,  and  how  much 
vanity. 

XII.  1.  The  knowledge  which  respecteth  the 
faculties  of  the  mind  of  man  is  of  two  kinds; 
the  one  respecting  his  understanding  and  rea¬ 
son,  and  the  other  his  will,  appetite,  and  affec¬ 
tion;  whereof  the  former  produceth  position  or 
decree,  the  latter  action  or  execution.  It  is  true 
that  the  imagination  is  an  agent  or  nuncius ,  in 
both  provinces,  both  the  judicial  and  the  min- 

1“In  the  sweat  of  thy  brow  thou  shalt  eat  thy  bread.” 


isterial.  For  sense  sendeth  over  to  imagination 
before  reason  have  judged:  and  reason  sendeth 
over  to  imagination  before  the  decree  can  be 
acted.  For  imagination  ever  precedeth  volun¬ 
tary  motion.  Saving  that  this  Janus  of  imagi¬ 
nation  hath  differing  faces:  for  the  face  towards 
reason  hath  the  print  of  truth,  but  the  face  to¬ 
wards  action  hath  the  print  of  good;  which 
nevertheless  are  faces, 

Quales  decet  esse  sororum2 

Neither  is  the  imagination  simply  and  only  a 
messenger;  but  is  invested  with,  or  at  leastwise 
usurpeth  no  small  authority  in  itself,  besides 
the  duty  of  the  message.  For  it  was  well  said 
by  Aristotle,  “That  the  mind  hath  over  the  body 
that  commandment,  which  the  lord  hath  over 
a  bondman;  but  that  reason  hath  over  the  imag¬ 
ination  that  commandment  whichamagistrate 
hath  over  a  free  citizen3  who  may  come  also 
to  rule  in  his  turn.”  For  we  see  that,  in  matters 
of  faith  and  religion,  we  raise  our  imagination 
above  our  reason;  which  is  the  cause  why  reli¬ 
gion  sought  ever  access  to  the  mind  by  simili¬ 
tudes,  types,  parables,  visions,  dreams.  And  a- 
gain,  in  all  persuasions  that  are  wrought  by  elo¬ 
quence,  and  other  impressions  of  like  nature, 
which  do  paint  and  disguise  the  true  appear¬ 
ance  of  things,  the  chief  recommendation  unto 
reason  is  from  the  imagination.  Nevertheless, 
because  I  find  not  any  science  that  doth  prop¬ 
erly  or  fitly  pertain  to  the  imagination,  I  see 
no  cause  to  alter  the  former  division.  For  as  for 
poesy,  it  is  rather  a  pleasure  or  play  of  imagina¬ 
tion,  than  a  work  or  duty  thereof.  And  if  it  be 
a  work,  we  speak  not  now  of  such  parts  of  learn¬ 
ing  as  the  imagination  produceth,  but  of  such 
sciences  as  handle  and  consider  of  the  imagina¬ 
tion.  No  more  than  we  shall  speak  now  of  such 
knowledges  as  reason  produceth  (for  that  ex- 
tendeth  to  all  philosophy),  but  of  such  knowl¬ 
edges  as  do  handle  and  inquire  of  the  faculty 
of  reason:  so  as  poesy  had  his  true  place.  As  for 
the  power  of  the  imagination  in  nature,  and  the 
manner  of  fortifying  the  same,  we  have  men¬ 
tioned  it  in  the  doctrine  De  Anima ,4  whereunto 
most  fitly  it  belongeth.  And  lastly,  for  imagi¬ 
native  or  insinuative  reason,  which  is  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  rhetoric,  we  think  it  best  to  refer  to  the 
arts  of  reason.  So  therefore  we  content  ourselves 
with  the  former  division,  that  human  philoso¬ 
phy,  which  respecteth  the  faculties  of  the  mind 
of  man,  hath  two  parts,  rational  and  moral. 

2Ovid  Metamorphoses ,  11.  14.  “Sister-faces.” 

3  Aristotle,  Politics ,  Bk.  1.  5,  6. 

4“On  the  soul.” 


c6  ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


2.  The  part  of  human  philosophy  which  is 
rational,  is  of  all  knowledges,  to  the  most  wits, 
the  least  delightful,  and  seemeth  but  a  net  of 
subtiltv  and  spinosity.  For  as  it  was  truly  said, 
that  knowledge  is  pabulum  animi ;*  so  in  the  na¬ 
ture  of  men’s  appetite  to  this  food,  most  men 
are  of  the  taste  and  stomach  of  the  Israelites 
in  the  desert,  that  would  fain  have  returned  ad 
ollas  carniump  and  were  weary  ofmanna;  which, 
though  it  were  celestial,  yet  seemed  less  nutri¬ 
tive  and  comfortable.  So  generally  men  taste 
well  knowledges  that  are  drenched  in  flesh  and 
blood,  civil  history,  morality,  policy,  about  the 
which  men’s  affections,  praises,  fortunes  do  turn 
and  are  conversant.  But  this  same  lumen  sic- 
cumz  doth  parch  and  offend  most  men’s  watery 
and  soft  natures.  But  to  speak  truly  of  things 
as  they  are  in  worth,  rational  knowledges  are 
the  keys  of  all  other  arts:  for  as  Aristotle  saith 
aptly  and  elegantly,  “That  the  hand  is  the  in¬ 
strument  of  instruments,  and  the  mind  is  the 
form  of  forms”;  so  these  be  truly  said  to  be  the 
art  of  arts.  Neither  do  they  only  direct,  but  like¬ 
wise  confirm  and  strengthen:  even  as  the  habit 
of  shooting  doth  not  only  enable  to  shoot  a  near¬ 
er  shoot,  but  also  to  draw  a  stronger  bow. 

3.  The  arts  intellectual  are  four  in  number: 
divided  according  to  the  ends  whereunto  they 
are  referred:  for  man’s  labour  is  to  invent  that 
wffiich  is  sought  or  propounded;  or  to  judge  that 
which  is  invented;  or  to  retain  that  which  is 
judged;or  todeliver  over  that  whichis  retained. 
So  as  the  arts  must  be  four:  art  of  inquiry  or  in¬ 
vention:  art  of  examination  or  judgement:  art 
of  custody  or  memory:  and  art  of  elocution  or 
tradition. 

XIII.  1.  Invention  is  of  two  kinds  much  dif¬ 
fering:  the  one  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  the  other 
of  speech  and  arguments.  The  former  of  these 
I  do  report  deficient;  which  seemeth  to  me  to 
be  such  a  deficience  as  if,  in  the  making  of  an 
inventory  touching  the  state  of  a  defunct,  it 
should  be  set  down  that  there  is  no  ready  mon¬ 
ey.  For  as  money  will  fetch  all  other  commodi¬ 
ties,  so  this  knowledge  is  that  which  should  pur¬ 
chase  all  the  rest.  And  like  as  the  West  Indies 
had  never  been  discovered  if  the  use  of  the  mar¬ 
iner’s  needle  had  not  been  first  discovered, 
though  the  one  be  vast  regions,  and  the  other 
a  small  motion;  so  it  cannot  be  found  strange 
if  sciences  be  no  further  discovered,  if  the  art 
itself  of  invention  and  discovery  hath  been 
passed  over. 

•“Food  of  the  mind.” 

2“To  the  fleshpots.” 

3“Dry  light." 


2.  That  this  part  of  knowledge  is  wanting,  to 
my  judgement  standeth  plainly  confessed;  for 
first,  logic  doth  not  pretend  to  invent  sciences, 
or  the  axioms  of  sciences,  but  passeth  it  over 
wfith  a  cuique  in  sua  arte  credendumf  And  Celsus 
acknowledgeth  it  gravely,  speaking  of  the  em¬ 
pirical  and  dogmatical  sects  of  physicians, 
“That  medicines  and  cures  were  first  found  out, 
and  then  after  the  reasons  and  causes  were  dis¬ 
coursed;  and  not  the  causes  first  found  out, 
and  by  light  from  them  the  medicines  and  cures 
discovered.”5  And  Plato  in  his  Theaetetus  no- 
teth  well,  “That  particulars  are  infinite,  and 
the  higher  generalities  give  no  sufficient  direc¬ 
tion*  and  that  the  pith  of  all  sciences,  which 
maketh  the  artsman  differ  from  the  inexpert, 
is  in  the  middle  propositions,  which  in  everv 
particular  knowledge  are  taken  from  tradition 
and  experience. ’’And  therefore  we  see,  that  they 
which  discourse  of  the  inventions  and  originals 
of  things  refer  them  rather  to  chance  than  to 
art,  and  rather  to  beasts,  birds,  fishes,  serpents, 
than  to  men. 

Dictamnum  genetrix  Cretaea  carpit  ab  Ida , 
Puberibus  caulem  foliis  et  J lore  comantem 
Purpureo ;  non  ilia  feris  incognita  capris 
Graminay  cum  tergo  volucres  haesere  sagittae .6 

So  that  it  was  no  marvel  (the  manner  of  anti¬ 
quity  being  to  consecrate  inventors)  that  the 
Egyptians  had  so  few  human  idols  in  their  tem¬ 
ples,  but  almost  all  brute: 

Omnigenumque  Deum  monstray  et  latrator  Anubis, 

Contra  Neptunumy  et  Venerem ,  contraque 
Miner  cam?  f£c. 

And  if  you  like  better  the  tradition  of  the  Gre¬ 
cians,  and  ascribe  the  first  inventions  to  men, 
yet  you  will  rather  believe  that  Prometheus  first 
stroke  the  Hints,  and  marvelled  at  the  spark, 
than  that  when  he  first  stroke  the  flints  he  ex¬ 
pected  the  spark:  and  therefore  we  see  the  West 
Indian  Prometheus  had  no  intelligence  with  the 
European,  because  of  the  rareness  with  them 
of  flint,  that  gave  the  first  occasion.  So  as  it 

4 “Believe  every  artist  in  his  own  art."  See  Whately’s 
Introduction  §5,  book  hi;  also  Aristotle,  Ethics ,  Bk.  1. 
I-1?. 

bDc  Re  Medica,  1.  3. 

6 Virgil,  /Eneidy  Bk.  xii.  4 12. 

A  sprig  0/  dittany  his  mother  brought 
Gathered  by  Cretan  Ide;  a  stalk  it  is 
Of  woolly  leaf ,  crested  with  purple  flower; 

Which  well  the  wild-goat  knows  when  in  his  side 
Sticks  the  winged  shaft. 

7 Ibid.,  Bk.  viii.  698.  “All  kinds  and  shapes  of  Gods,  a 
monstrous  host,  the  dog  Anubis  foremost,  stood  arrayed 
’gainst  Neptune,  Venus,  Pallas." 


SECOND  BOOK 


should  seem,  that  hitherto  men  are  rather  be¬ 
holden  to  a  wild  goat  for  surgery,  or  to  a  night¬ 
ingale  for  music,  or  to  the  ibis  for  some  part  of 
physic,  or  to  the  pot-lid  that  flew  open  for  ar¬ 
tillery,  or  generally  to  chance  or  anything  else 
than  to  logic  for  the  invention  of  arts  and  sci¬ 
ences.  Neither  is  the  form  of  invention  which 
Virgil  describeth  much  other: 

Ut  varias  usus  meditando  extunderet  artes 
Paulatim.1 2 

For  if  you  observe  the  words  well,  it  is  no  other 
method  than  that  which  brute  beasts  are  capa¬ 
ble  of,  and  do  put  in  use;  which  is  a  perpetual 
intending  or  practising  some  one  thing,  urged 
and  imposed  by  an  absolute  necessity  of  con¬ 
servation  of  being.  For  so  Cicero  saith  very 
truly,  “Usus  uni  rei  deditus  et  naturam  et  artem 
saepe  vincit." 2  And  therefore  if  it  be  said  of  men, 

Labor  omnia  vincit 

Improbus ,  et  duris  urge  ns  in  rebus  egestas ,3 

it  is  likewise  said  of  beasts,  “Quis  psittaco  doc- 
uit  suum  xcupe”4  Who  taught  the  raven  in  a 
drowth  to  throw  pebbles  into  an  hollow  tree, 
where  she  spied  water,  that  the  water  might 
rise  so  as  she  might  come  to  it  ?  Who  taught  the 
bee  to  sail  through  such  a  vast  sea  of  air,  and 
to  find  the  way  from  a  field  in  flower  a  great 
way  off  to  her  hive?5  Who  taught  the  ant  to 
bite  every  grain  of  corn  that  she  burieth  in  her 
hill,  lest  it  should  take  root  and  grow  ?  Add  then 
the  word  extundere ,  which  importeth  the  ex¬ 
treme  difficulty,  and  the  w or d paulatim ,  which 
importeth  the  extreme  slowness,  and  we  are 
where  we  were,  even  amongst  the  Egyptians' 
gods;  there  being  little  left  to  the  faculty  of  rea¬ 
son,  and  nothing  to  the  duty  of  art,  for  matter 
of  invention. 

3.  Secondly,  the  induction  which  the  logi¬ 
cians  speak  of,  and  which  seemeth  familiar  with 
Plato,  whereby  the  principles  of  sciences  may 
be  pretended  to  be  invented,  and  so  the  middle 
propositions  by  derivation  from  the  principles; 
their  form  of  induction,  I  say,  is  utterly  vicious 
and  incompetent :  wherein  their  error  is  the  foul¬ 
er,  because  it  is  the  duty  of  art  to  perfect  and 

1  Virgil,  Georgies ,  Bk.  1.  133.  “That  practice  with  medita¬ 
tion  might  by  degrees  hammer  out  the  arts.” 

2 Oratio  pro  L.  cor.  Balboy  xx.  “Practice  applied  con¬ 
stantly  to  one  thing  will  often  do  more  than  either  nature 
or  art  can.” 

3 Virgil,  Georgies ,  Bk.  1.  145.  “Stern  labour  masters  all, 
and  want  in  poverty  importunate.” 

4  Euripides,  Perseus ,  Prol.  8.  “Who  taught  the  parrot  to 
say  ‘how  d’ye  do’?” 

5  Pliny,  Natural  History. 


exalt  nature;  but  they  contrariwise  have  wrong¬ 
ed,  abused,  and  traduced  nature.  For  he  that 
shall  attentively  observe  how  the  mind  doth 
gather  this  excellent  dew  of  knowledge,  like  un¬ 
to  that  which  the  poet  speaketh  of,  “ A'erei  niel¬ 
li  s  caelestia  dona ,”6  distilling  and  contriving  it 
out  of  particulars  natural  and  artificial,  as  the 
flowers  of  the  field  and  garden,  shall  find  that 
the  mind  of  herself  by  nature  doth  manage  and 
act  an  induction  much  better  than  they  des¬ 
cribe  it.  For  to  conclude  upon  an  enumeration 
of  particulars,  without  instance  contradictory, 
is  no  conclusion,  but  a  conjecture;  for  who  can 
assure  (in  many  subjects)  upon  those  particu¬ 
lars  which  appear  of  a  side,  that  there  are  not 
other  on  the  contrary  side  which  appear  not? 
As  if  Samuel  should  have  rested  upon  those  sons 
of  Issay  which  were  brought  before  him,  and 
failed  of  David  which  was  in  the  field.  And  this 
form  (to  say  truth)  is  so  gross,  as  it  had  not 
been  possible  for  wits  so  subtile  as  have  man¬ 
aged  these  things  to  have  offered  it  to  the  world, 
but  that  they  hasted  to  their  theories  and  dog¬ 
matical,  and  were  imperious  and  scornful  to¬ 
ward  particulars;  which  their  manner  was  to 
use  but  as  lictores  and  viatores ,  for  sergeants  and 
whifflers,^  summovendam  turbam ,7  to  make  way 
and  make  room  for  their  opinions,  rather  than 
in  their  true  use  and  service.  Certainly  it  is  a 
thing  may  touch  a  man  with  a  religious  wonder, 
to  see  how  the  footsteps  of  seducement  are  the 
very  same  in  divine  and  human  truth:  for  as  in 
divine  truth  man  cannot  endure  to  become  as  a 
child;  so  in  human,  they  reputed  the  attending 
the  inductions  (whereof  we  speak)  as  if  it  were 
a  second  infancy  or  childhood. 

4.  Thirdly,  allow  some  principles  or  axioms 
were  rightly  induced,  yet  nevertheless  certain 
it  is  that  middle  propositions  cannot  be  deduced 
from  them  in  subject  of  nature  by  syllogism, 
that  is,  by  touch  and  reduction  of  them  to  pri  nci- 
ples  in  a  middle  term.  It  is  true  that  in  sciences 
popular,  as  moralities,  laws,  and  the  like,  yea, 
and  divinity  (because  it  pleaseth  God  to  apply 
himself  to  the  capacity  of  the  simplest),  that 
form  may  have  use;  and  in  natural  philosophy 
likewise,  by  way  of  argument  or  satisfactory  rea¬ 
son,  “Quae  assensum  parity  operis  effoeta  est"  :8 
but  the  subtilty  of  nature  and  operations  will 
not  be  enchained  in  those  bonds.  For  arguments 
consist  of  propositions,  and  propositions  of 
words,  and  words  are  but  the  current  tokens 

6Virgil,  Georgies ,  Bk.  iv.  1.  “The  gift  of  heaven,  aerial 
honey.” 

7“To  keep  the  crowd  off.” 

8“\Yhich  procures  assent  but  can  do  no  work.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


58 

or  marks  of  popular  notions  of  things;  which 
notions,  if  they  begrossly  and  variably  collect¬ 
ed  out  of  particulars,  it  is  not  the  laborious  ex¬ 
amination  either  of  consequences  or  arguments, 
or  of  the  truth  of  propositions,  that  can  ever  cor¬ 
rect  that  error,  being  (as  the  physicians  speak) 
in  the  first  digestion.  And  therefore  it  was  not 
without  cause,  that  so  many  excellent  philos¬ 
ophers  became  Sceptics  and  Academics,  and 
denied  any  certainty  of  knowledge  or  com¬ 
prehension;  and  held  opinion  that  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  man  extended  only  to  appearances  and 
probabilities.  It  is  true  that  in  Socrates 
it  was  supposed  to  be  but  a  form  of  irony, 
“ Scientiam  dissimulando  simulavit"  :l  for  he 
used  to  disable  his  knowledge,  to  the  end  to 
enhance  his  knowledge:  like  the  humour  of  Ti¬ 
berius  in  his  beginnings,  that  would  reign,  but 
would  not  acknowledge  so  much.  And  in  the  later 
Academy,  which  Cicero  embraced,  this  opinion 
also  of  acatalepsia  (I  doubt)  was  not  held  sin¬ 
cerely:  for  that  all  those  which  excelled  in  copie 
of  speech  seem  to  have  chosen  that  sect,  as  that 
which  was  fittest  to  give  glory  to  their  eloquence 
and  variable  discourses;  being  rather  like  prog¬ 
resses  of  pleasure,  than  journeys  to  an  end.  But 
assuredly  many  scattered  inboth  Academiesdid 
hold  it  in  subtilty  and  integrity.  But  here  was 
their  chief  error;  they  charged  the  deceit  upon 
the  senses;  which  in  my  judgement  (notwith¬ 
standing  all  their  cavillations)  are  very  sufficient 
to  certify  and  report  truth,  though  not  always 
immediately,  yet  by  comparison,  by  help  of  in¬ 
strument,  and  by  producing  and  urging  such 
things  as  are  too  subtile  for  the  sense  to  some 
effect  comprehensible  by  the  sense,  and  other 
like  assistance.  But  they  ought  to  have  charged 
the  deceit  upon  the  weakness  of  the  intellectual 
powers,  and  upon  the  manner  of  collecting  and 
concluding  upon  the  reports  of  the  senses.  This 
I  speak,  not  to  disable  the  mind  of  man,  but  to 
stir  it  up  to  seek  help:  for  no  man,  be  he  never 
so  cunning  or  practised,  can  make  a  straight 
line  or  perfect  circle  by  steadiness  of  hand, 
which  may  be  easily  done  by  help  of  a  ruler  or 
compass. 

5.  This  part  of  invention,  concerning  the  in¬ 
vention  of  sciences,  I  purpose  (if  God  give  me 
leave)  hereafter  to  propound,  having  digested 
it  into  two  parts;  whereof  the  one  I  term  exper- 
ientia  literata ,2  and  the  other  interpretatio  natur¬ 
ae :3  the  former  being  but  a  degree  and  rudiment 

l4,An  affectation  of  knowledge  under  pretence  of  igno¬ 
rance. 

2“Learned  experience.” 

^‘Interpretation  of  nature.” 


of  the  latter.  But  I  will  not  dwell  too  long,  nor 
speak  too  great  upon  a  promise. 

6.  The  invention  of  speech  or  argument  is  not 
properly  an  invention:  for  to  invent  is  to  dis¬ 
cover  that  we  know  not,  and  not  to  recover  or 
resummon  that  which  we  already  know:  and  the 
use  o t  this  invention  is  no  other  but,  out  of  the 
knowledge  whereof  our  mind  is  already  pos¬ 
sessed,  to  draw  forth  or  call  before  us  that  which 
may  be  pertinent  to  the  purpose  which  we  take 
into  our  consideration.  So  as  to  speak  truly,  it 
is  no  invention,  but  a  remembrance  or  sugges¬ 
tion,  with  an  application;  which  is  the  cause 
why  the  schools  do  place  it  after  judgement,  as 
subsequent  and  not  precedent.  Nevertheless, 
because  we  do  account  it  a  chase  as  well  of  deer 
in  an  inclosed  park  as  in  a  forest  at  large,  and 
that  it  hath  already  obtained  the  name,  let 
it  be  called  invention:  so  as  it  be  perceived 
and  discerned,  that  the  scope  and  end  of  this 
invention  is  readiness  and  present  use  of  our 
knowledge,  and  not  addition  or  amplification 
thereof. 

7.  To  procure  this  ready  use  of  knowledge  there 
are  two  courses,  preparation  and  suggestion. 
The  former  of  these  seemeth  scarcely  a  part  of 
knowledge, consistingratherofdiligence  than  of 
any  artificial  erud  ition.  And  here  in  Aristotle  wit¬ 
tily,  but  hurtfully,  doth  deride  the  Sophists  near 
his  time,  saying,  “They  did  as  if  one  that  pro¬ 
fessed  the  art  of  shoe-making  should  not  teach 
how  to  make  up  a  shoe,  but  only  exhibit  in  a 
readiness  a  number  of  shoes  of  all  fashions  and 
sizes.”4  But  yet  a  man  might  reply,  that  if  a 
shoemaker  should  have  no  shoes  in  his  shop,  but 
only  work  as  he  is  bespoken,  he  should  be  weakly 
customed.  But  our  Saviour,  speaking  of  divine 
knowledge,  saith,  “That  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  like  a  good  householder,  that  bringeth  forth 
both  new  and  old  store”:5 and  wesee  the  ancient 
writers  of  rhetoric  do  give  it  in  precept,  that 
pleaders  should  have  the  places,  whereof  they 
have  most  continual  use,  ready  handled  in  all 
the  variety  that  may  be;  as  that,  to  speak  for 
the  literal  interpretation  of  the  law  against  eq¬ 
uity,  and  contrary;  and  to  speak  for  presump¬ 
tions  and  inferences  against  testimony,  and  con¬ 
trary.6  And  Cicero  himself,  being  broken  unto 
it  by  great  experience,  delivereth  it  plainly,  that 
whatsoever  a  man  shall  have  occasion  to  speak 
of  (if  he  will  take  the  pains),  he  may  have  it  in 
effect  premeditate  and  handled  in  thesi.  So  that 
when  he  cometh  to  a  particular  he  shall  have 

4 Sophistical  Refutations ,  Bk.  11.  9. 

5Matt.  ij.  52. 

6 Rhetoric . 


SECOND  BOOK 


nothing  to  do,  but  to  put  to  names,  and  times, 
and  places,  and  such  other  circumstances  of  in¬ 
dividuals.1  We  see  likewise  the  exact  diligence 
of  Demosthenes ;  who,  in  regard  of  the  great  force 
that  the  entrance  and  access  into  causes  hath 
to  make  a  good  impression,  had  ready  framed 
a  number  of  prefaces  for  orations  and  speeches. 
All  which  authorities  and  precedents  may  over¬ 
weigh  Aristotle’s  opinion,  that  would  have  us 
change  a  rich  wardrobe  for  a  pair  of  shears. 

8.  But  the  nature  of  the  collection  of  this  pro¬ 
vision  or  preparatory  store,  though  it  be  com¬ 
mon  both  to  logic  and  rhetoric,  yet  having  made 
an  entry  of  it  here,  where  it  came  first  to  be 
spoken  of,  I  think  fit  to  refer  over  the  further 
handling  of  it  to  rhetoric. 

9.  The  other  part  of  invention,  which  I  term 
suggestion,  doth  assign  and  direct  us  to  certain 
marks,  or  places,  which  may  excite  our  mind  to 
return  and  produce  such  knowledge  as  it  hath 
formerly  collected,  to  the  end  we  may  make  use 
thereof.  Neither  is  this  use  (truly  taken)  only 
to  furnish  argument  to  dispute  probably  with 
others,  but  likewise  to  minister  unto  our  judge¬ 
ment  to  conclude  aright  within  ourselves.  Nei¬ 
ther  may  these  places  serve  only  to  apprompt 
our  invention,  but  also  to  direct  our  inquiry. 
For  a  facultyofwiseinterrogatingis  half  a  knowl¬ 
edge.  For  as  Plato  saith,  “Whosoever  seeketh, 
knoweth  that  which  he  seeketh  for  in  a  general 
notion:  else  how  shall  he  know  it  when  he  hath 
found  it  ?”2  And  therefore  the  larger  your  antici¬ 
pation  is,  the  more  direct  and  compendious  is 
your  search.  But  the  same  places  which  will  help 
us  what  to  produce  of  that  which  we  know  al¬ 
ready,  will  also  help  us,  if  a  man  of  experience 
were  before  us,  what  questions  to  ask;  or,  if 
we  have  books  and  authors  to  instruct  us,  what 
points  to  search  and  revolve;  so  as  I  cannot  re¬ 
port  that  this  part  of  invention,  which  is  that 
which  the  schools  call  topics,  is  deficient. 

10.  Nevertheless,  topics  are  of  two  sorts,  gen¬ 
eral  and  special.  The  general  we  have  spoken 
to;  but  the  particular  hath  been  touched  by  some, 
but  rejected  generally  as  inartificial  and  vari¬ 
able.  But  leaving  the  humour  which  hath  reigned 
too  much  in  the  schools  (which  is,  to  be  vainly 
subtile  in  a  few  things  which  are  within  their 
command,  and  to  reject  the  rest),  I  do  receive 
particular  topics,  that  is,  places  or  directions  of 
invention  and  inquiryin  everyparticularknowl- 
edge,  as  things  of  great  use,  being  mixtures  of 
logic  with  the  matter  of  sciences.  For  in  these 
it  holdeth,  “ ars  inveniendi  adolescit  cum  invert - 

1  Ad  Atticum. 

2Meno}  Bk.  11.  80. 


//j”;3  for  as  in  going  of  a  way,  we  do  not  only 
gain  that  part  of  the  way  which  is  passed,  but 
we  gain  the  better  sight  of  that  part  of  the  way 
which  remaineth:  so  every  degree  of  proceeding 
in  a  science  giveth  a  light  to  that  which  follow- 
eth;  which  light  if  we  strengthen  by  drawing  it 
forth  into  questions  or  places  of  inquiry,  we  do 
greatly  advance  our  pursuit. 

XIV.  1.  Now  we  pass  unto  the  arts  of  judge¬ 
ment,  which  handle  the  natures  of  proofs  and 
demonstrations;  which  as  to  induction  hath  a 
coincidence  with  invention.  For  in  all  inductions, 
whether  in  good  or  vicious  form,  the  same  ac¬ 
tion  of  the  mind  which  inventeth,  judgeth;  all 
one  as  in  the  sense.  But  otherwise  it  is  in  proof 
by  syllogism ;  for  the  proof  being  not  immediate, 
but  by  mean,  the  invention  of  the  mean  is  one 
thing,  and  the  judgement  of  the  consequence  is 
another;  the  one  exciting  only,  the  other  exam¬ 
ining.  Therefore,  for  the  real  and  exact  form  of 
judgement,  we  refer  ourselves  to  that  which  we 
have  spoken  of  interpretation  of  nature. 

2.  For  the  other  judgement  by  syllogism,  as 
it  is  a  thing  most  agreeable  to  the  mind  of  man, 
so  it  hath  been  vehemently  and  excellently  la¬ 
boured.  For  the  nature  of  man  doth  extremely 
covet  to  have  somewhat  in  his  understanding 
fixed  and  unmoveable,  and  as  a  rest  and  support 
of  the  mind.  And  therefore  as  Aristotle  endeav- 
oureth  to  prove,  that  in  all  motion  there  is  some 
point  quiescent;  and  as  he  elegantly  expound- 
eth  the  ancient  fable  of  Atlas  (that  stood  fixed, 
and  bare  up  the  heaven  from  falling)  tobemeant 
of  the  poles  or  axle-tree  of  heaven,  whereupon 
the  conversion  is  accomplished:4  so  assuredly 
men  have  a  desire  to  have  an  Atlas  or  axle-tree 
within  to  keep  them  from  fluctuation,  which  is 
like  to  a  perpetual  peril  of  falling.  Therefore  men 
did  hasten  to  set  down  some  principles  about 
which  the  variety  of  their  disputations  might 
turn. 

3.  So  then  this  art  of  judgement  is  but  the  re¬ 
duction  of  propositions  to  principles  in  a  middle 
term.  The  principles  to  be  agreed  by  all  and  ex¬ 
empted  from  argument;  the  middle  term  to  be 
elected  at  the  liberty  of  every  man’s  invention; 
the  reduction  to  be  of  two  kinds,  direct  and  in¬ 
verted;  the  one  when  the  proposition  is  reduced 
to  the  principle,  which  they  term  a  probation 
ostensive;  the  other,  when  the  contradictory  of 
the  proposition  is  reduced  to  the  contradictory 
of  the  principle,  which  is  that  which  they  call 
per  incommodum,  or  pressing  an  absurdity;  the 

3“The  art  of  invention  grows  with  inventions  them¬ 
selves.” 

4 Motion  of  Animals ,  3. 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


60 

number  of  middle  terms  to  be  as  the  proposition 
standeth  degrees  more  or  less  removed  from  the 
principle. 

4.  But  this  art  hath  two  several  methods  of 
doctrine,  the  one  by  way  of  direction,  the  other 
by  way  of  caution;  the  former  frameth  and  set- 
teth  down  a  true  form  of  consequence,  by  the 
variations  and  deflections  from  which  errors  and 
inconsequences  may  be  exactly  judged.  Toward 
the  composition  and  structure  of  which  form, 
it  is  incident  to  handle  the  parts  thereof,  which 
are  propositions,  and  the  parts  of  propositions, 
which  are  simple  words.  And  this  is  that  part 
of  logic  which  is  comprehended  in  the  Analytics. 

5.  The  second  method  of  doctrine  was  intro¬ 
duced  for  expedite  use  and  assurance  sake;  dis¬ 
covering  the  more  subtile  forms  of  sophisms  and 
illaqueations  with  their  redargutions,  which  is 
that  which  is  termed  elenches.  For  although  in 
the  more  gross  sorts  of  fallacies  it  happeneth 
(as  Seneca  maketh  the  comparison  well)  as  in 
juggling  feats,1  which,  though  we  know  not  how 
they  are  done,  yet  we  know  well  it  is  not  as  it 
seemeth  to  be;  yet  the  more  subtile  sort  of  them 
doth  not  only  put  a  man  besides  his  answer,  but 
doth  many  times  abuse  his  judgement. 

6.  This  part  concerning  elenches  is  excellently 
handled  by  Aristotle  in  precept,  but  more  ex¬ 
cellently  by  Plato  in  example;  not  only  in  the 
persons  of  the  Sophists,  but  even  in  Socrates 
himself,2  who,  professing  to  affirm  nothing,  but 
to  infirm  that  which  was  affirmed  by  another, 
hath  exactly  expressed  all  the  forms  of  objec¬ 
tion,  fallace,  and  redargution.  And  although  we 
have  said  that  the  use  of  this  doctrine  is  for  re¬ 
dargution,  yet  it  is  manifest  the  degenerate  and 
corrupt  use  is  for  caption  and  contradiction, 
which  passeth  for  a  great  faculty,  and  no  doubt 
is  of  very  great  advantage :  though  the  difference 
be  good  which  was  made  between  orators  and 
sophisters,  that  the  one  is  as  the  greyhound, 
which  hath  his  advantage  in  the  race,  and  the 
other  as  the  hare,  which  hath  her  advantage  in 
the  turn,  so  as  it  is  the  advantage  of  the  weaker 
creature. 

7.  But  yet  further,  this  doctrine  of  elenches 
hath  a  more  ample  latitude  and  extent  than  is 
perceived;  namely,  unto  divers  parts  of  knowl¬ 
edge;  whereof  some  are  laboured  and  other 
omitted.  For  first,  I  conceive  (though  it  may 
seem  at  first  somewhat  strange)  that  that  part 
which  is  variably  referred,  sometimes  to  logic, 
sometimes  to  metaphysic,  touching  the  com¬ 
mon  adjuncts  of  essences,  is  but  an  elenche.  For 

1  Epistle,  45.7. 

2 See  the  opening  of  the  Theatetus. 


the  great  sophism  ol  all  sophisms  being  equivo¬ 
cation  or  ambiguity  of  words  and  phrase,  spe¬ 
cially  of  such  words  as  are  most  general  and  in¬ 
tervene  in  every  inquiry,  it  seemeth  to  me  that 
the  true  and  fruitful  use  (leaving  vain  subtilities 
and  speculations)  of  the  inquiry  of  majority,  mi¬ 
nority,  priority,  posteriority,  identity,  diversi¬ 
ty,  possibility,  act,  totality,  parts,  existence, 
privation,  and  the  like,  are  but  wise  cautions 
against  ambiguities  of  speech.  So  again 
the  distribution  of  things  into  certain  tribes, 
which  we  call  categories  or  predicaments,  are 
but  cautions  against  the  confusion  of  definitions 
and  divisions. 

8. Secondly,  there  is  a  seducement  that  work- 
eth  by  the  strength  of  the  impression,  and  not  by 
the  subtilty  of  the  illaqueation;  not  so  much 
perplexing  the  reason,  as  overruling  it  by  power 
of  the  imagination.  But  this  part  I  think  more 
proper  to  handle  when  I  shall  speak  of  rhetoric. 

9.  But  lastly,  there  is  yet  a  much  more  im¬ 
portant  and  profound  kind  of  fallacies  in  the 
mind  of  man,  which  I  find  not  observed  or  in¬ 
quired  at  all,  and  think  good  to  place  here,  as 
that  which  of  all  others  appertaineth  most  to 
rectify  judgement:  the  force  whereof  is  such,  as 
it  does  not  dazzle  or  snare  the  understanding 
in  some  particulars,  but  doth  more  generally 
and  inwardly  infect  and  corrupt  the  state  there¬ 
of.  For  the  mind  of  man  is  far  from  the  nature 
of  a  clear  and  equal  glass,  wherein  the  beams  of 
things  should  reflect  according  to  their  true  in¬ 
cidence;  nay,  it  is  rather  like  an  enchanted  glass, 
full  of  superstition  and  imposture,  if  it  be  not 
delivered  and  reduced.  For  this  purpose,  let  us 
consider  the  false  appearances  that  are  imposed 
upon  us  by  the  general  nature  of  the  mind,  be¬ 
holding  them  in  an  example  or  two;  as  first,  in 
that  instance  which  is  the  root  of  all  supersti¬ 
tion,  namely,  that  to  the  nature  of  the  mind  of 
all  men  it  is  consonant  for  the  affirmative  or 
active  to  affect  more  than  the  negative  or  pri¬ 
vative.  So  that  a  few  times  hitting  or  presence, 
countervails  oft-times  failing  or  absence;  as  was 
well  answered  by  Diagoras  to  him  that  showed 
him  in  Neptune’s  temple  the  great  number  of 
pictures  of  such  as  had  scaped  shipwreck,  and 
had  paid  their  vows  toNeptune,  saying, ‘‘Advise 
now,  you  that  think  it  folly  to  invocate  Neptune 
in  tempest.”  “Yea,  but  (saith  Diagoras)  where 
are  they  painted  that  are  drowned?”3  Let  us 
behold  it  in  another  instance,  namely,  that  the 
spirit  of  man,  being  of  an  equal  and  uniform 
substance,  doth  usually  suppose  and  feign  in 
nature  a  greater  equality  and  uniformity  than 

3  Cicero,  De  nat:  *-a  Deorum,  v.  9. 


SECOND  BOOK 


is  in  truth.  Hence  it  cometh,  that  the  mathe¬ 
maticians  cannot  satisfy  themselves  except  they 
reduce  the  motions  of  the  celestial  bodies  to  per¬ 
fect  circles,  rejecting  spiral  lines,  and  labouring 
to  be  discharged  of  eccentrics.  Hence  it  cometh, 
that  whereas  there  are  many  things  in  nature, 
as  it  were  monodica ,  sui  juris?  yet  the  cogita¬ 
tions  of  man  do  feign  unto  them  relatives,  par¬ 
allels,  and  conjugates,  whereas  no  such  thing 
is;  as  they  have  feigned  an  element  of  fire,  to 
keep  square  with  earth,  water,  and  air,  and  the 
like.  Nay,  it  is  not  credible,  till  it  be  opened, 
what  a  number  of  fictions  and  fantasies  the  simil¬ 
itude  of  human  actions  and  arts,  together  with 
the  making  of  man  communis  mensura ,1 2  have 
brought  into  natural  philosophy;  not  much  bet¬ 
ter  than  the  heresy  of  the  Anthropomorphites, 
bred  in  the  cells  of  gross  and  solitary  monks,3 
and  the  opinion  of  Epicurus,  answerable  to  the 
same  in  heathenism,  who  supposed  the  gods  to 
be  of  human  shape.  And  therefore  Velleius  the 
Epicurean  needed  not  to  have  asked,  why  God 
should  have  adorned  the  heavens  with  stars,  as 
if  he  had  been  an  aedilis ,  one  that  should  have 
set  forth  some  magnificent  shows  or  plays.  For 
if  that  great  work-master  had  been  of  an  human 
disposition,  he  would  have  cast  the  stars  into 
some  pleasant  and  beautiful  works  and  orders, 
like  the  frets  in  the  roofs  of  houses;  whereas  one 
can  scarce  find  a  posture  in  square,  or  triangle, 
or  straight  line,  amongst  such  an  infinite  num¬ 
ber;  so  differing  an  harmony  there  is  between 
the  spirit  of  man  and  the  spirit  of  nature. 

10.  Let  us  consider  again  the  false  appearances 
imposed  upon  us  by  every  man's  own  individual 
nature  and  custom,  in  that  feigned  supposition 
that  Plato  maketh  of  the  cave:4  for  certainly  if 
a  child  were  continued  in  a  grot  or  cave  under 
the  earth  until  maturity  of  age,  and  came  sud¬ 
denly  abroad,  he  would  have  strange  and  absurd 
imaginations.  So  in  like  manner,  although  our 
persons  live  in  the  view  of  heaven,  yet  our  spirits 
are  included  in  the  caves  of  our  own  complex¬ 
ions  and  customs,  which  minister  unto  us  in¬ 
finite  errors  and  vain  opinions,  if  they  be  not 
recalled  to  examination.  But  hereof  we  have 
given  many  examples  in  one  of  the  errors,  or 
peccant  humours,  which  we  ran  briefly  over  in 
our  first  book. 

11.  And  lastly,  let  us  consider  the  false  ap¬ 
pearances  that  are  imposed  upon  us  by  words, 

1  “Single,  of  its  own  right.” 

2 “Of  the  common  measure.” 

3Epiphanius,  Panarion ,  p.  811,  in  which  the  heresy  of 

Audins  is  explained. 

*  Republic >  Bk.  vii. 


6l 

which  are  framed  and  applied  according  to  the 
conceit  and  capacities  of  the  vulgar  sort:  and 
although  we  think  we  govern  our  words,  and 
prescribe  it  well  “  loquendum  ut  vulgus  sentien- 
dum  ut  sapientes” ;5  yet  certain  it  is  that  words, 
as  a  Tartar’s  bow,  do  shoot  back  upon  the  un- 
derstandingof  the  wisest,  and  mightily  entangle 
and  pervert  the  judgement.  So  as  it  is  almost 
necessary,  in  all  controversies  and  disputations, 
to  imitate  the  wisdom  of  the  mathematicians, 
in  setting  down  in  the  very  beginning  the  defi¬ 
nitions  of  our  words  and  terms,  that  others  may 
know  how  we  accept  and  understand  them,  and 
whether  they  concur  with  us  or  no.  For  it  cometh 
to  pass,  for  want  of  this,  that  we  are  sure  to  end 
there  where  wTe  ought  to  have  begun,  which  is, 
in  questions  and  differences  about  words.  To 
conclude  therefore,  it  must  be  confessed  that  it 
is  not  possible  to  divorce  ourselves  from  these 
fallacies  and  false  appearances,  because  they  are 
inseparable  from  our  nature  and  condition  of 
life;  so  yet  nevertheless,  the  caution  of  them 
(for  all  elenches ,  as  was  said,  are  but  cautions) 
doth  extremely  import  the  true  conduct  of  hu¬ 
man  judgement.  The  particular  elenches  or  cau¬ 
tions  against  these  three  false  appearances,  I 
find  altogether  deficient. 

12.  There  remaineth  one  part  of  judgement 
of  great  excellency,  which  to  mine  understand¬ 
ing  is  so  slightly  touched,  as  I  may  report  that 
also  deficient;  which  is  the  application  of  the 
differing  kinds  of  proofs  to  the  differing  kinds 
of  subjects.  For  there  being  but  four  kinds  of 
demonstrations,  that  is,  by  the  immediate  con¬ 
sent  of  the  mind  or  sense,  by  induction,  by  syl¬ 
logism,  and  by  congruity,  which  is  that  which 
Aristotle  calleth  demonstration  in  orb  or  circle, 
and  not  a  notioribus ,  every  of  these  hath  certain 
subjects  in  the  matter  of  sciences,  in  which  re¬ 
spectively  they  have  chiefest  use;  and  certain 
others,  from  which  respectively  they  ought  to 
be  excluded;  and  the  rigour  and  curiosity  in  re¬ 
quiring  the  more  severe  proofs  in  some  things, 
and  chiefly  the  facility  in  contenting  ourselves 
with  the  more  remiss  proofs  in  others,  hath  been 
amongst  the  greatest  causes  of  detriment  and 
hindrance  to  knowledge.  The  distributions  and 
assignations  of  demonstrations,  according  to  the 
analogy  of  sciences,  I  note  as  deficient. 

XV.  i .  The  custody  or  retaining  of  knowledge 
is  either  in  writing  or  memory;  whereof  writing 
hath  two  parts,  the  nature  of  the  character,  and 
the  order  of  the  entry.  For  the  art  of  the  char¬ 
acters,  or  other  visible  notes  of  words  or  things, 

B“Speaking  with  the  vulgar  and  thinking  with  the 
wise.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


62 

it  hath  nearest  conjugation  with  grammar;  and 
therefore  I  refer  it  to  thedueplace.  For  thedispo- 
sition  and  collocation  of  that  knowledge  which 
we  preserve  in  writing,  it  consisteth  in  a  good 
digest  of  common-places;  wherein  I  am  not  ig¬ 
norant  of  the  prejudice  imputed  to  the  use  of 
common-place  books,  as  causing  a  retardation 
of  reading,  and  some  sloth  or  relaxation  of  mem¬ 
ory.  But  because  it  is  but  a  counterfeit  thing  in 
knowledges  to  be  forward  and  pregnant,  except 
a  man  be  deep  and  full,  I  hold  the  entry  of  com¬ 
mon-places  to  be  a  matter  of  great  use  and  es¬ 
sence  in  studying,  as  that  which  assureth  copie 
of  invention,  and  contracteth  judgement  to  a 
strength.  But  this  is  true,  that  of  the  methods 
of  common-places  that  I  have  seen,  there  is  none 
of  any  sufficient  worth:  all  of  them  carrying 
merely  the  face  of  a  school,  and  not  of  a  world; 
and  referring  to  vulgar  matters  and  pedantical 
divisions,  without  all  life  or  respect  to  action. 

2.  For  the  other  principal  part  of  the  custody 
of  knowledge,  which  is  memory,  I  find  that  fac¬ 
ulty  in  my  judgement  weakly  inquired  of.  An 
art  there  is  extant  of  it;  but  it  seemeth  to  me 
that  there  are  better  precepts  than  that  art,  and 
better  practices  of  that  art  than  those  received. 
It  is  certain  the  art  (as  it  is)  may  be  raised  to 
points  of  ostentation  prodigious:  but  in  use  (as 
it  is  now  managed)  it  is  barren,  not  burdensome, 
nor  dangerous  to  natural  memory,  as  it  is  im¬ 
agined,  but  barren,  that  is,  not  dexterous  to  be 
applied  to  the  serious  use  of  business  and  oc¬ 
casions.  And  therefore  I  make  no  more  estima¬ 
tion  of  repeating  a  great  number  of  names  or 
words  upon  once  hearing,  or  the  pouring  forth 
of  a  number  of  verses  or  rhymes  ex  tempore ,*  or 
the  making  of  a  satirical  simile  of  everything, 
or  the  turning  of  everything  to  a  jest,  or  the  fal¬ 
sifying  or  contradicting  of  everything  by  cavil, 
or  the  like  (whereof  in  the  faculties  of  the  mind 
there  is  great  copie,  and  such  as  by  device  and 
practice  may  be  exalted  to  an  extreme  degree 
of  wonder),  than  I  do  of  the  tricks  of  tumblers, 
funambuloes,  baladines;  the  one  being  the  same 
in  the  mind  that  the  other  is  in  the  body,  mat¬ 
ters  of  strangeness  without  worthiness. 

3.  This  art  of  memory  is  but  built  upon  two 
intentions;  the  one  prenotion,  theother  emblem. 
Prenotion  dischargeth  the  indefinite  seeking  of 
that  we  would  remember,  and  directeth  us  to 
seek  in  a  narrow  compass,  that  is,  somewhat 
that  hath  congruity  with  our  place  of  memory. 
Emblem  reduceth  conceits  intellectual  to  im¬ 
ages  sensible,  which  strike  the  memory  more; 
out  of  which  axioms  may  be  drawTn  much  bet- 

1  “Without  premeditation.” 


ter  practique  than  that  in  use;  and  besides  which 
axioms,  there  are  divers  more  touching  help  of 
memory,  not  inferior  to  them.  But  I  did  in  the 
beginning  distinguish,  not  to  report  those  things 
deficient,  which  are  but  only  ill  managed. 

XVI.  1.  There  remaineth  the  fourth  kind  of 
rational  knowledge,  whichis  transitive, concern¬ 
ing  the  expressing  or  transferring  our  knowledge 
to  others;  which  I  will  term  by  the  general  name 
of  tradition  or  delivery.  Tradition  hath  three 
parts;  the  first  concerning  the  organ  of  tradi¬ 
tion;  the  second  concerning  the  method  of  tra¬ 
dition;  and  the  third  concerning  the  illustration 
of  tradition. 

2.  For  the  organ  of  tradition,  it  is  either  speech 
or  writing:  for  Aristotle  saith  well,  “Words  are 
the  images  of  cogitations,  and  letters  are  the 
images  of  words.”2  But  yet  it  is  not  of  necessity 
that  cogitations  be  expressed  by  the  medium 
of  words.  For  whatsoever  is  capable  of  sufficient 
differences,  and  those  perceptible  by  the  sense, 
is  in  nature  competent  to  express  cogitations. 
And  therefore  we  see  in  the  commerce  of  bar¬ 
barous  people,  that  understand  not  one  anoth¬ 
er’s  language,  and  in  the  practice  of  divers  that 
are  dumb  and  deaf,  that  men’sminds  are  expres¬ 
sed  in  gestures,  though  not  exactly,  yet  to  serve 
the  turn.  And  we  understand  further,  that  it  is 
the  use  of  China,  and  the  kingdoms  of  the  High 
Levant,  to  write  in  characters  real,  which  ex¬ 
press  neither  letters  nor  words  in  gross,  but 
things  or  nations;  insomuch  as  countries  and 
provinces,  which  understand  not  one  another’s 
language,  can  nevertheless  read  one  another’s 
writings,  because  the  characters  are  accepted 
more  generally  than  the  languages  do  extend; 
and  therefore  they  have  a  vast  multitude  of  char¬ 
acters,  as  many  (I  suppose)  as  radical  words. 

3.  These  notes  of  cogitations  are  of  two  sorts; 
the  one  when  the  note  hath  some  similitude  or 
congruity  with  the  notion:  the  other  ad  placi- 
tum ,  having  force  only  by  contract  or  accepta¬ 
tion.  Of  the  former  sort  are  hieroglyphics  and 
gestures.  For  as  to  hieroglyphics  (things  of  an¬ 
cient  use,  and  embraced  chiefly  by  the  Egyp¬ 
tians,  one  of  the  most  ancient  nations),  they  are 
but  as  continued  impreses  and  emblems.  And 
as  for  gestures,  they  are  as  transitory  hierogly¬ 
phics,  and  are  to  hieroglyphics  as  words  spoken 
are  to  words  written,  in  that  they  abide  not; 
but  they  have  evermore,  as  well  as  the  other, 
an  affinity  with  the  things  signified.  As  Peri- 
ander,  being  consulted  with  how  to  preserve  a 
tyranny  newly  usurped,  bid  the  messenger  at¬ 
tend  and  report  what  he  saw  him  do;  and  went 

2 Interpretation ,  Bk.  1.  2. 


SECOND  BOOK 


into  his  garden  and  topped  all  the  highest  flow¬ 
ers:  signifying,  that  it  consisted  in  the  cutting 
off  and  keepinglowof  the  nobility  andgrandees.1 
Ad placitum,  are  the  characters  real  before  men¬ 
tioned,  and  words:  although  some  have  been 
willing  by  curious  inquiry,  or  rather  by  apt  feign¬ 
ing,  to  have  derived  imposition  of  names  from 
reason  and  intendment;  a  speculation  elegant, 
and,  by  reason  it  searcheth  into  antiquity,  rev¬ 
erent;  but  sparingly  mixed  with  truth,  and  of 
small  fruit.  This  portion  of  knowledge,  touch¬ 
ing  the  notes  of  things,  and  cogitations  in  gen¬ 
eral,  I  find  not  inquired,  but  deficient.  And  al¬ 
though  it  may  seem  of  no  great  use,  consider¬ 
ing  that  words  and  writings  by  letters  do  far 
excel  all  the  other  ways;  yet  because  this  part 
concerneth,  as  it  were,  the  mint  of  knowledge 
(for  words  are  the  tokens  current  and  accepted 
for  conceits,  as  moneys  are  for  values,  and  that 
it  is  fit  men  be  not  ignorant  that  moneys  may 
be  of  another  kind  than  gold  and  silver),  I 
thought  good  to  propound  it  to  better  inquiry. 

4.  Concerning  speech  and  words,  the  consid¬ 
eration  of  them  hath  produced  the  science  of 
grammar.  For  man  still  striveth  to  reintegrate 
himself  in  those  benedictions,  from  which  by  his 
fault  he  hath  been  deprived ;  and  as  he  hath  striv¬ 
en  against  the  first  general  curse  by  the  inven¬ 
tion  of  all  other  arts,  so  hath  he  sought  to  come 
forth  of  the  second  general  curse  (which  was  the 
confusion  of  tongues)  by  the  art  of  grammar; 
whereof  the  use  in  a  mother  tongue  is  small,  in 
a  foreign  tongue  more;  but  most  in  such  for¬ 
eign  tongues  as  have  ceased  to  be  vulgar  tongues, 
and  are  turned  only  tolearned  tongues.  The  duty 
of  it  is  of  two  natures:  the  one  popular,  which 
is  for  thespeedy  and  perfect  attaininglanguages, 
as  well  for  intercourse  of  speech  as  for  under¬ 
standing  of  authors;  the  other  philosophical,  ex¬ 
amining  the  power  and  nature  of  words,  as  they 
are  the  footsteps  and  prints  of  reason :  which  kind 
of  analogy  between  words  and  reason  is  han¬ 
dled  sparsim ,  brokenly  though  not  entirely;  and 
therefore  I  cannot  report  it  deficient,  though  I 
think  it  very  worthy  to  be  reduced  into  a  science 
by  itself. 

5.  Unto  grammar  also  belongeth,  as  an  ap¬ 
pendix,  the  consideration  of  the  accidents  of 
words ;  which  are  measure,  sound,  and  elevation 
or  accent,  and  the  sweetness  and  harshness  of 
them;  whence  hath  issued  some  curious  obser- 

1  Aristotle,  Politics  Bk.  in.  13.  The  person  who  sent  to 
consult  Periander  was  Thrasybulus  of  Miletus.  Herodo¬ 
tus  (Bk.  v.  92)  gives  the  opposite  version  of  the  story, 
making  Periander  consult  Thrasybulus.  Compare  the 
story  of  Tarquin,  told  by  Ovid,  Fasti,  11.  701. 


vations  in  rhetoric,  but  chiefly  poesy,  as  we  con¬ 
sider  it,  in  respect  of  the  verse  and  not  of  the 
argument.  Wherein  though  men  in  learned 
tongues  do  tie  themselves  to  the  ancient  meas¬ 
ures,  yet  in  modern  languages  it  seemeth  to  me 
as  free  to  make  new  measures  of  verses  as  of 
dances :  for  a  dance  is  a  measured  pace,  as  a  verse 
is  a  measured  speech.  In  these  things  the  sense 
is  better  judge  than  the  art; 

Coenae  fercula  nos  true 
Mallem  convivis  quam  placuisse  cocis2 

And  of  the  servile  expressing  antiquity  in  an  un¬ 
like  and  an  unfit  subject,  it  is  well  said,  “Quod 
tempore  antiquum  videtur ,  id  incongruitate  est 
maxime  novum .”3 

6.  For  ciphers,  they  are  commonly  in  letters, 
or  alphabets,  but  may  be  in  words.  The  kinds 
of  ciphers  (besides  the  simple  ciphers,  with 
changes,  and  intermixtures  of  nulls  and  non-sig¬ 
nificants)  are  many,  according  to  the  nature  or 
rule  of  the  infolding,  wheel-ciphers,  key-ciphers, 
doubles,  &c.  But  the  v  irtues  of  them,  whereby 
they  are  to  be  preferred,  are  three;  that  they  be 
not  laborious  to  write  and  read;  that  they  be 
impossible  to  decipher;  and,  in  some  cases,  that 
they  be  without  suspicion.  The  highest  degree 
whereof  is  to  write  omnia  per  omnia;  which  is 
undoubtedly  possible,  with  a  proportion  quin¬ 
tuple  atmost  of  the  writing  infolding  to  the  writ¬ 
ing  infolded,  and  no  other  restraint  whatsoever. 
This  art  of  ciphering  hath  for  relative  an  art  of 
deciphering,  by  supposition  unprofitable,  but, 
as  things  are,  of  great  use.  For  suppose  that  ci¬ 
phers  were  well  managed,  there  be  multitudes  of 
them  which  exclude  the  decipherer.  Butin  regard 
of  the  rawness  and  unskilfulness  of  the  hands 
through  which  they  pass,  the  greatest  matters 
?t*e  many  times  carried  in  the  weakest  ciphers. 

7.  In  the  enumeration  of  these  private  and 
retired  arts,  it  may  be  thought  I  seek  to  make 
a  great  muster-roll  of  sciences,  naming  them  for 
show  and  ostentation,  and  to  little  other  pur¬ 
pose.  But  let  those  which  are  skilful  in  them 
judge  whether  I  bring  them  in  only  for  appear¬ 
ance,  or  whether  in  that  which  I  speak  of  them 
(though  in  few  words)  there  be  not  some  seed 
of  proficience.  And  this  must  be  remembered, 
that  as  there  be  many  of  great  account  in  their 
countries  and  provinces,  which,  when  they  come 
up  to  the  seat  of  the  estate,  are  but  of  mean 
rank  and  scarcely  regarded; so  these  arts,  being 

2 Martial,  Epigrams,  ix.  82.  “The  dinner  is  to  please  the 
guests  that  eat  it,  not  the  cook  that  dresses  it.” 

3“There  is  nothing  more  new  than  an  old  thing  that  has 
ceased  to  fit.” 


64  ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


here  placed  with  the  principal  and  supreme  sci¬ 
ences,  seem  petty  things;  yet  to  such  as  have 
chosen  them  to  spend  their  labours  and  studies 
in  them,  they  seem  great  matters. 

XVII.  i.  For  the  method  of  tradition,  I  see 
it  hath  moved  a  controversy  in  our  time.  But 
as  in  civil  business,  if  there  be  a  meeting,  and 
men  fall  at  words,  there  is  commonly  an  end  of 
the  matter  for  that  time,  and  no  proceeding  at 
all;  so  in  learning,  where  there  is  much  contro¬ 
versy,  there  is  many  times  little  inquiry.  For 
this  part  of  knowledge  of  method  seemeth  to 
me  so  weakly  inquired  as  I  shall  report  it  de¬ 
ficient. 

2.  Method  hath  been  placed  and  that  not 
amiss,  in  logic,  as  a  part  of  judgement.  For  as 
the  doctrine  of  syllogisms  comprehendeth  the 
rules  of  judgement  upon  that  which  is  invent¬ 
ed,  so  the  doctrine  of  method  containeth  the 
rules  of  judgement  upon  that  which  is  to  be  de¬ 
livered;  for  judgement  precedeth  delivery,  as  it 
followeth  invention.  Neither  is  the  method  or 
the  nature  of  the  tradition  material  only  to  the 
use  of  knowledge,  but  likewise  to  the  progres¬ 
sion  of  knowledge:  for  since  the  labour  and  life 
of  one  man  cannot  attain  to  perfectionof  knowl¬ 
edge,  the  wisdom  of  the  tradition  is  that  which 
inspireth  the  felicity  of  continuance  and  pro¬ 
ceeding.  And  therefore  the  most  real  diversity  of 
method  is  of  method  referred  to  use,  and  meth¬ 
od  referred  to  progression:  whereof  the  one 
may  be  termed  magistral,  and  the  other  of  pro¬ 
bation. 

3.  The  latter  whereof  seemeth  to  be  via  deserta 
et  interclusa}  For  as  knowledges  are  now  deliv¬ 
ered,  there  is  a  kind  of  contract  of  error  between 
the  deliverer  and  the  receiver.  For  he  that  de¬ 
livered  knowledge,  desireth  to  deliver  it  in 
such  form  as  may  be  best  believed,  and  not  as 
may  be  best  examined;  and  he  that  receiveth 
knowledge,  desireth  rather  present  satisfac¬ 
tion,  than  expectant  inquiry;  and  so  rather  not 
to  doubt,  than  not  to  err:  glory  making  the 
author  not  to  lay  open  his  weakness,  and  sloth 
making  the  disciple  not  to  know  his  strength. 

4.  But  knowledge  that  is  delivered  as  a  thread 
to  be  spun  on,  ought  to  be  delivered  and  inti¬ 
mated,  if  it  were  possible,  in  the  same  method 
wherein  it  was  invented:  and  so  is  it  possible  of 
knowledgeinduced.  But  in  thissame  anticipated 
and  prevented  knowledge,  no  man  knoweth  how 
he  came  to  the  knowledge  which  he  hath  ob¬ 
tained.  But  yet  nevertheless,  secundum  majus 
et  minus*  a  man  may  revisit  and  descend  unto 

1"A  wav  that  is  abandoned  and  stopped  up.” 

2‘‘In  a  greater  or  less  degree.” 


the  foundations  of  his  knowledge  and  consent; 
and  so  transplant  it  into  another,  as  it  grew  in 
his  own  mind.  For  it  is  in  knowledges  as  it  is  in 
plants:  if  you  mean  to  use  the  plant,  it  is  no 
matter  for  the  roots;  but  if  you  mean  to  remove 
it  to  grow,  then  it  is  more  assured  to  rest  upon 
roots  than  slips;  so  the  delivery  of  knowledges 
(as  it  is  now  used)  is  as  of  fair  bodies  of  trees 
without  the  roots;  good  for  the  carpenter,  but 
not  for  the  planter.  But  if  you  will  have  sciences 
grow,  it  is  less  matter  for  the  shaft  or  body  of 
the  tree,  so  you  look  well  to  the  taking  up  of 
the  roots.  Of  which  kind  of  delivery  the  method 
of  the  mathematics,  in  that  subject,  hath  some 
shadow:  but  generally  I  see  it  neither  put  in  use 
nor  put  in  inquisition,  and  therefore  note  it  for 
deficient. 

5.  Another  diversity  of  method  there  is,  which 
hath  some  affinity  with  the  former,  used  in  some 
cases  by  the  discretion  of  the  ancients,  but  dis¬ 
graced  since  by  the  impostures  of  many  vain 
persons,  who  have  made  it  as  a  false  light  for 
their  counterfeit  merchandises;  and  that  is, 
enigmatical  and  disclosed.  The  pretence  whereof 
is,  to  remove  the  vulgar  capacities  from  being 
admitted  to  the  secrets  of  knowledges,  and  to 
reserve  them  to  selected  auditors,  or  wits  of  such 
sharpness  as  can  pierce  the  veil. 

6.  Another  diversity  of  method,  wffiereof  the 
consequence  is  great,  is  the  delivery  of  know¬ 
ledge  in  aphorisms,  or  in  methods;  wherein  we 
may  observe  that  it  hath  been  too  much  taken 
into  custom,  out  of  a  few  axioms  or  observa¬ 
tions  upon  any  subject,  to  make  a  solemn  and 
formal  art,  filling  it  with  some  discourses,  and 
illustrating  it  w'ith  examples,  and  digesting  it 
into  a  sensible  method.  But  the  writing  in  aph¬ 
orisms  hath  many  excellent  virtues,  whereto 
the  writing  in  method  doth  not  approach. 

7.  For  first,  it  trieth  the  writer,  whether  he 
be  superficial  or  solid :  for  aphorisms,  except  they 
should  be  ridiculous,  cannot  be  made  but  of  the 
pith  and  heart  of  sciences;  for  discourse  of  illus¬ 
tration  is  cut  off;  recitals  of  examples  are  cut 
off;  discourse  of  connexion  and  order  is  cut  off; 
descriptions  of  practice  are  cut  off.  So  there  re- 
maineth  nothing  to  fill  the  aphorisms  but  some 
good  quantity  of  observation:  and  therefore  no 
man  can  suffice,  nor  in  reason  will  attempt,  to 
write  aphorisms,  but  he  th  at  is  sound  and  ground¬ 
ed.  But  in  methods, 

Tantum  series  juncturaque  pallet , 
Tantum  de  medio  sumptis  accedit  honoris ,3 

3 Horace,  Ars  Poetica ,  242.  "The  arrangement  and  con¬ 
nexion  and  joining  of  the  parts  has  so  much  effect.” 


SECOND  BOOK  65 


as  a  man  shall  make  a  great  show  of  an  art,  which, 
if  it  were  disjointed,  would  come  to  little.  Sec¬ 
ondly,  methods  are  more  fit  to  win  consent  or 
belief,  but  less  fit  to  point  to  action;  for  they 
carry  a  kind  of  demonstration  in  orb  or  circle, 
one  part  illuminating  another,  and  therefore  sat¬ 
isfy.  But  particulars  being  dispersed  do  best 
agree  with  dispersed  directions.  And  lastly,  aph¬ 
orisms,  representing  a  knowledge  broken,  do 
invite  men  to  inquire  further;  whereas  methods, 
carrying  the  show  of  a  total,  do  secure  men,  as 
if  they  were  at  furthest. 

8.  Another  diversity  of  method,  which  is  like¬ 
wise  of  great  weight,  is  the  handling  of  know¬ 
ledge  by  assertions  and  their  proofs,  or  by  ques¬ 
tions  and  their  determinations.  The  latter  kind 
whereof,  if  it  be  immoderately  followed,  is  as 
prejudicial  to  the  proceeding  of  learning,  as  it 
is  to  the  proceeding  of  an  army  to  go  about  to 
besiege  every  little  fort  or  hold.  For  if  the  field 
be  kept,  and  the  sum  of  the  enterprise  pursued, 
those  smaller  things  will  come  in  of  themselves: 
indeed  a  man  would  not  leave  some  important 
piece  enemy  at  his  back.  In  like  manner,  the  use 
of  confutation  in  the  delivery  of  sciences  ought 
to  be  very  sparing;  and  to  serve  to  remove  strong 
preoccupations  and  prejudgements,  and  not  to 
minister  and  excite  disputations  and  doubts. 

9.  Another  diversity  of  methods  is,  according 
to  the  subject  or  matter  which  is  handled.  For 
there  is  a  great  difference  in  delivery  of  the 
mathematics,  which  are  the  most  abstracted  of 
knowledges,  and  policy,  which  is  the  most  im¬ 
mersed.  And  howsoever  contention  hath  been 
moved,  touching  an  uniformity  of  method  in 
multiformity  of  matter,  yet  we  see  how  that 
opinion,  besides  the  weakness  of  it,  hath  been 
of  ill  desert  towards  learning,  as  that  which 
taketh  the  way  to  reduce  learning  to  certain 
empty  and  barren  generalities;  being  but  the 
very  husks  and  shells  of  sciences,  all  the  ker¬ 
nel  being  forced  out  and  expulsed  with  the  tor¬ 
ture  and  press  of  the  method.  And  therefore  as 
I  did  allow  well  of  particular  topics  for  inven¬ 
tion,  so  I  do  likewise  of  particular  methods  of 
tradition. 

10.  Another  diversity  of  judgement  in  the  de¬ 
livery  and  teaching  of  knowledge,  is  according 
unto  the  light  and  presuppositions  of  that  which 
is  delivered.  For  that  knowledge  which  is  new, 
and  foreign  from  opinions  received,  is  to  be  de¬ 
livered  in  another  form  than  that  that  is  agree¬ 
able  and  familiar;  and  therefore  Aristotle,  when 
he  thinks  to  tax  Democritus,  doth  in  truth  com¬ 
mend  him,  where  he  saith,  “If  we  shall  indeed 
dispute,  and  not  follow  after  similitudes, ”  &c. 


For  those  whose  conceits  are  seated  in  popular 
opinions,  need  only  but  to  prove  or  dispute;  but 
those  whose  conceits  are  beyond  popular  opin¬ 
ions,  have  a  double  labour ;  the  one  to  make  them¬ 
selves  conceived,  and  the  other  to  prove  and 
demonstrate.  So  that  it  is  of  necessity  with  them 
to  have  recourse  to  similitudes  and  translations 
to  express  themselves.  And  therefore  in  the  in¬ 
fancy  of  learning,  and  in  rude  times,  when  those 
conceits  which  are  now  trivial  were  then  new, 
the  world  was  full  of  parables  and  similitudes; 
for  else  would  men  either  have  passed  over  with¬ 
out  mark,  or  else  rejected  for  paradoxes  that 
which  was  offered,  before  they  had  understood 
or  judged.  So  in  divine  learning,  we  see  how  fre¬ 
quent  parables  and  tropes  are:  for  it  is  a  rule, 
that  whatsoever  science  is  not  consonant  to  pre¬ 
suppositions,  must  pray  in  aid  of  similitudes. 

11.  There  be  also  other  diversities  of  methods 
vulgar  and  received :  as  that  of  resolution  or  anal¬ 
ysis,  of  constitution  or  systasis,  of  concealment 
or  cryptic,  &c.,  which  I  do  allow  well  of,  though 
I  have  stood  upon  those  which  are  least  han¬ 
dled  and  observed.  All  which  I  have  remembered 
to  this  purpose,  because  I  would  erect  and  con¬ 
stitute  one  general  inquiry  (which  seems  to  me 
deficient)  touching  the  wisdom  of  tradition. 

12.  But  unto  this  part  of  knowledge,  concern¬ 
ing  method,  doth  further  belong  not  only  the 
architecture  of  the  whole  frame  of  a  work,  but 
also  the  several  beams  and  columns  thereof;  not 
as  to  their  stuff,  but  as  to  their  quantity  and 
figure.  And  therefore  method  considereth  not 
only  the  disposition  of  the  argument  or  subject, 
but  likewise  the  propositions:  not  as  to  their 
truth  or  matter,  but  as  to  their  limitation  and 
manner.  For  herein  Ramusmerited  better  a  great 
deal  in  reviving  the  good  rules  of  propositions, 
Ka06\ou7rpwTOZ',/cara7rai'T6s,1&c.,thanhedidin 
introducing  the  canker  of  epitomes;  and  yet  (as 
it  is  the  condition  of  human  things  that,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  ancient  fables,  “the  most  precious 
things  have  the  most  pernicious  keepers”)  it  was 
so,  that  the  attempt  of  the  one  made  him  fall 
upon  the  other.  For  he  had  need  be  well  con¬ 
ducted  that  should  design  to  make  axioms  con¬ 
vertible,  if  he  make  them  not  withal  circular, 
and  non-promovent,  or  incurring  into  them¬ 
selves;  but  yet  the  intention  was  excellent. 

13.  The  other  considerations  of  method,  con¬ 
cerning  propositions,  are  chiefly  touching  the 
utmost  propositions,  whichlimit  the  dimensions 
of  sciences:  for  every  knowledge  may  be  fitly 
said,  besides  the  profundity  (which  is  the  truth 

^hat  they  should  be  true  generally,  primarily,  and 
essentially. 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


66 

and  substance  of  it,  that  makes  it  solid),  to  have 
a  longitude  and  a  latitude;  accounting  the  lati¬ 
tude  towards  other  sciences,  and  the  longitude 
towards  action;  that  is,  from  the  greatest  gen¬ 
erality  to  the  most  particular  precept.  The  one 
giveth  rule  how  far  one  knowledge  ought  to  in¬ 
termeddle  within  theprovinceof another,  which 
is  the  rule  they  call  Kaflauro;1  the  other  giveth 
rule  unto  what  degree  of  particularity  a  knowl¬ 
edge  should  descend:  which  latter  I  find  passed 
over  in  silence,  being  in  my  judgement  the 
morematerial.  For  certainly  there  must  be  some¬ 
what  left  to  practice;  but  how  much  is  worthy 
the  inquiry.  We  see  remote  and  superficial  gen¬ 
eralities  do  but  offer  knowledge  to  scorn  of  prac¬ 
tical  men;  and  are  no  more  aiding  to  practice, 
than  an  Ortelius’  universal  map  is  to  direct  the 
way  between  London  and  York.  The  better  sort 
of  rules  have  been  not  unfitly  compared  to  glasses 
of  steel  unpolished,  where  you  may  see  the  im¬ 
ages  of  things,  but  first  they  must  be  filed:  so 
the  rules  will  help,  if  they  be  laboured  and  pol¬ 
ished  by  practice.  But  how  crystalline  they  may 
be  made  at  the  first,  and  how  far  forth  they  may 
be  polished  aforehand  is  the  question;  the  in¬ 
quiry  whereof  seemeth  to  me  deficient. 

14.  There  hath  been  also  laboured  and  put 
in  practice  a  method,  which  is  not  alawful  meth¬ 
od,  but  a  method  of  imposture;  which  is,  to  de¬ 
liver  knowledges  in  such  manner,  as  men  may 
speedily  come  to  make  a  show  of  learning  who 
have  it  not.  Such  was  the  travail  of  Raymun- 
dus  Lullius,  in  making  that  art  which  bears  his 
name:  not  unlike  to  some  books  of  typocosmy, 
which  have  been  made  since;  being  nothing  but 
a  mass  of  words  of  all  arts,  to  give  men  counte¬ 
nance,  that  those  which  use  the  terms  might  be 
thought  to  understand  the  art;  which  collections 
are  much  like  a  fripper’s  or  broker’s  shop,  that 
hath  ends  of  everything,  but  nothing  of  worth. 

XVIII.  1 .  Now  we  descend  to  that  part  which 
concerneth  the  illustration  of  tradition,  com¬ 
prehended  in  that  science  which  we  call  rheto¬ 
ric,  or  art  of  eloquence;  a  science  excellent,  and 
excellently  well  laboured.  For  although  in  true 
value  it  is  inferior  to  wisdom,  as  it  is  said  by 
God  to  Moses,  when  he  disabled  himself  for  want 
of  this  faculty,  “Aaron  shall  be  thy  speaker, 
and  thou  shalt  be  to  him  as  God”;2  yet  with 
people  it  is  the  more  mighty:  for  so  Salomon 
saith,  “ Sapiens  corde  appellabitur  prudens,  sed 
dulcis  eloquio  majora  reperiet ”;3  signifying  that 

*That  propositions  should  be  true  essentially. 

2Exod.  4.  14,  15,  16. 

3Frov.  1.  21.  “The  wise  in  heart  shall  be  called  prudent, 
but  the  sweet  of  tongue  shall  find  greater  things.” 


profoundness  of  wisdom  will  help  a  man  to  a 
name  or  admiration,  but  that  it  is  eloquence 
that  prevaileth  in  an  active  life.  And  as  to  the 
labouring  of  it,  the  emulation  of  Aristotle  with 
the  rhetoricians  of  his  time,  and  the  experience 
of  Cicero,  hath  made  them  in  their  works  of 
rhetorics  exceed  themselves.  Again,  the  excel¬ 
lency  of  examples  of  eloquence  in  the  orations 
of  Demosthenes  and  Cicero,  added  to  the  per¬ 
fection  of  the  precepts  of  eloquence,  hath  dou¬ 
bled  the  progression  in  this  art;  and  therefore 
the  deficiencies  which  I  shall  note  will  rather 
be  in  some  collections,  which  may  as  handmaids 
attend  the  art,  than  in  the  rules  or  use  of  the 
art  itself. 

2.  Notwithstanding,  to  stir  the  earth  a  little 
about  the  roots  of  this  science,  as  we  have  done 
of  the  rest;  the  duty  and  office  of  rhetoric  is  to 
apply  reason  to  imagination  for  the  better  mov¬ 
ing  of  the  will.  For  we  see  reason  is  disturbed  in 
the  administration  thereof  by  three  means;  by 
illaqueation  or  sophism,  which  pertains  to  logic; 
by  imagination  or  impression,  which  pertains 
to  rhetoric:  and  by  passion  or  affection,  which 
pertains  to  morality.  And  as  in  negotiation  with 
others,  men  are  wrought  by  cunning,  by  impor¬ 
tunity,  and  by  vehemency;  so  in  this  negotia¬ 
tion  within  ourselves,  men  are  undermined  by 
inconsequences,  solicited  and  importuned  by 
impressions  or  observations,  and  transported 
by  passions.  Neither  is  the  nature  of  man  so  un¬ 
fortunately  built,  as  that  those  powers  and  arts 
should  have  force  to  disturb  reason,  and  not  to 
establish  and  advance  it.  For  the  end  of  logic  is 
to  teach  a  form  of  argument  to  securereason,  and 
not  to  entrap  it.  Theendof  morality  is  to  procure 
the  affections  to  obey  reason,  and  not  to  invade 
it.  The  end  of  rhetoric  is  to  fill  the  imagination 
to  second  reason,  and  not  tooppress  it :  for  these 
abuses  of  arts  come  in  but  ex  obliquo ,  for  caution. 

3.  And  therefore  it  was  great  injustice  in  Pla¬ 
to,  though  springing  out  of  a  just  hatred  to  the 
rhetoricians  of  his  time,  to  esteem  of  rhetoric 
but  as  a  voluptuary  art,  resembling  it  to  cook¬ 
ery,  that  did  mar  wholesome  meats,  and  help 
unwholesome  by  variety  of  sauces  to  the  pleas¬ 
ure  of  the  taste.  For  we  see  that  speech  is  much 
more  conversant  in  adorning  that  which  is  good, 
than  in  colouring  that  which  is  evil;  for  there 
is  no  man  but  speaketh  more  honestly  than  he 
can  do  or  think:  and  it  was  excellently  noted 
by  Thucydides  in  Cleon*  that  because  he  used 
to  hold  on  the  bad  side  in  causes  of  estate,  there¬ 
fore  he  was  ever  inveighing  against  eloquence 
and  good  speech ;  knowing  that  no  man  can  speak 

4  Book  in.  42. 


SECOND  BOOK  67 


fair  of  courses  sordid  and  base.  And  therefore 
as  Plato  said  elegantly,  “That  virtue,  if  she  could 
be  seen,  would  move  great  love  and  affection’’;1 
so  seeing  that  she  cannot  be  showed  to  the  sense 
by  corporal  shape,  the  next  degree  is  to  show 
her  to  the  imagination  in  lively  representation: 
for  to  show  her  to  reason  only  in  subtility  of 
argument  was  a  thing  ever  derided  in  Chrysip- 
pus  and  many  of  the  Stoics,  who  thought  to 
thrust  virtue  upon  men  by  sharp  disputations 
and  conclusions,2  which  have  no  sympathy  with 
the  will  of  man. 

4.  Again,  if  the  affections  in  themselves  were 
pliant  and  obedient  to  reason,  it  were  true  there 
should  be  no  great  use  of  persuasions  and  in¬ 
sinuations  to  the  will,  more  than  of  naked  pro¬ 
position  and  proofs;  but  in  regard  of  the  con¬ 
tinual  mutinies  and  seditions  of  the  affections, 

Video  meliora ,  proboque , 

Deter i ora  sequor ,3 

reason  would  become  captive  and  servile,  if  elo¬ 
quence  of  persuasions  did  not  practise  and  win 
the  imagination  from  the  affections’  part,  and 
contract  a  confederacy  between  the  reason  and 
imagination  against  the  affections;  for  the  af¬ 
fections  themselves  carry  over  an  appetite  to 
good,  as  reason  doth.  The  difference  is,  that  the 
affection  beholdeth  merely  the  present;  reason 
beholdeth  the  future  and  sum  of  time.  And  there¬ 
fore  the  present  filling  the  imagination  more, rea¬ 
son  is  commonly  vanquished;  but  after  that  force 
of  eloquence  and  persuasion  hath  made  things 
future  and  remote  appear  as  present,  then  upon 
the  revolt  of  the  imagination  reason  prevaileth. 

5.  We  conclude  therefore  that  rhetoric  can 
be  no  more  charged  with  the  colouring  of  the 
worse  part,  than  logic  with  sophistry,  or  mo¬ 
rality  with  vice.  For  we  know  the  doctrines  of 
contraries  are  the  same,  though  the  use  be  op¬ 
posite.  It  appeareth  also  that  logic  differeth  from 
rhetoric,  not  only  as  the  fist  from  the  palm,  the 
one  close,  the  other  at  large;  but  much  more  in 
this,  that  logic  handleth  reason  exact  and  in 
truth,  and  rhetoric  handleth  it  as  it  is  planted 
in  popular  opinions  and  manners.  And  there¬ 
fore  Aristotle  doth  wisely  place  rhetoric  as  be¬ 
tween  logic  on  the  one  side,  and  moral  or  civil 
knowledge  on  the  other,  as  participating  of  both: 
for  the  proofs  and  demonstrators  of  logic  are 
toward  all  men  indifferent  and  the  same;  but 

1  Phaedrus. 

zDe  Oratore ,  n.  38;  Tusculanac  Disputationes ,  11.  18,  42. 

3Ovid,  Metamorphoses ,  vii.  20.  “Whereby  they  who  not 

only  see  the  better  course,  but  approve  it  also,  neverthe¬ 

less  follow  the  worse.” 


the  proofs  and  persuasions  of  rhetoric  ought  to 
differ  according  to  the  auditors: 

Orpheus  in  sylvis ,  inter  delphinas  Arion .4 

Which  application,  in  perfection  of  idea,  ought 
to  extend  so  far,  that  if  a  man  should  speak  of 
the  same  thing  to  several  persons,  he  should 
speak  to  them  all  respectively  and  several  ways: 
though  this  politic  part  of  eloquence  in  private 
speech  it  is  easy  for  the  greatest  orators  to  want: 
whilst,  by  the  observing  their  well-graced  forms 
of  speech,  they  leese  the  volubility  of  applica¬ 
tion:  and  therefore  it  shall  not  be  amiss  to  rec¬ 
ommend  this  to  better  inquiry,  not  being  curi¬ 
ous  whether  we  place  it  here,  or  in  that  part 
which  concerneth  policy. 

6.  Now  therefore  will  I  descend  to  the  defi¬ 
ciencies,  which  (as  I  said)  are  but  attendances: 
and  first,  I  do  not  find  the  wisdom  and  diligence 
of  Aristotle  well  pursued,  who  began  to  make  a 
collection  of  the  popular  signs  and  colours  of 
good  and  evil,  both  simple  and  comparative,5 
which  are  as  the  sophisms  of  rhetoric  (as  I 
touched  before).  For  example: 

Sophisma. 

Quod  laudatur ,  bonurn:  quod  vituperatur ,  malum .6 

Redargutio  ? 

Laudat  venales  qui  vult  extrudere  merces .8 

“ Malum  est,  malum  est  ( inquit  emptor);  sed 
cum  recesserit ,  turn  gloriabitur /”9  The  defects  in 
the  labour  of  Aristotle  are  three:  one,  that  there 
be  but  a  few  of  many ;  another,  that  their  elenches 
are  not  annexed;  and  the  third,  that  he  con¬ 
ceived  but  a  part  of  the  use  of  them:  for  their 
use  is  not  only  in  probation,  but  much  more  in 
impression.  For  many  forms  are  equal  in  sig¬ 
nification  which  are  differing  in  impression;  as 
the  difference  is  great  in  the  piercing  of  that 
which  is  sharp  and  that  which  is  flat,  though 
the  strength  of  the  percussion  be  the  same.  For 
there  is  no  man  but  will  be  a  little  more  raised 
by  hearing  it  said,  “Your  enemies  will  be  glad 
of  this,” 

Hoc  Ithacus  velit,  et  magno  mercentur  Atridae ,10 

4 Virgil,  Eclogues ,  Bk.  vm.  56.  “To  be  in  the  woods 
an  Orpheus,  among  the  dolphins  an  Arion.” 

5 Rhetoric ,  Bk.  n.  3-8. 

6“Sophism.  What  men  praise  is  good;  what  men  censure 
is  evil.” 

7“Refutation.” 

8Horace,  Epistle  11.  11.  “He  praises  his  wares  who 
wants  to  get  them  off  his  hands.” 

9Prov.  20.  “It  is  faulty,  it  is  faulty,  says  the  buyer;  but, 
when  he  is  gone,  he  congratulates  himself  upon  the 
bargain.” 

10  Virgil  /Eneid ,  Bk.  11.  104. 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


68 

than  by  hearing  it  said  only,  “This  is  evil  for 
you.” 

7.  Secondly,  I  do  resume  also  that  which  I 
mentioned  before,  touching  provision  or  prepar¬ 
atory  store  for  the  furniture  of  speech  and  readi¬ 
ness  of  invention,  which  appeareth  to  be  of  two 
sorts;  the  one  in  resemblance  to  a  shop  of  pieces 
unmade  up,  the  other  to  a  shop  of  things  ready 
made  up;  both  to  be  applied  to  that  which  is 
frequent  and  most  in  request.  The  former  of 
these  I  will  call  antitheta ,  and  the  latter formulae. 

8.  Antitheta  are  theses  argued  pro  et  contra\ 
wherein  men  may  be  more  large  and  laborious: 
but  (in  such  as  are  able  to  do  it)  to  avoid  pro¬ 
lixity  of  entry,  I  wish  the  seeds  of  the  several 
arguments  to  be  cast  up  into  some  brief  and 
acute  sentences,  not  to  be  cited,  but  to  be  as 
skeins  or  bottoms  of  thread,  to  be  unwinded  at 
large  when  they  come  to  be  used;  supplying  au¬ 
thorities  and  examples  by  reference. 

Pro  verbis  legis. 

Non  est  interpretation  sed  divinatioy  quae  recedit 
a  literal 

Cum  receditur  a  litera,  judex  transit  in  legisla¬ 
tor  e?n. 

Pro  sententia  legis. 

Ex  omnibus  verbis  est  eliciendus  sensus  qui 
interpretatur  singula.1 

9.  Formulae  are  but  decent  and  apt  passages 
or  conveyances  of  speech,  which  may  serve  in¬ 
differently  for  differing  subjects;  as  of  preface, 
conclusion,  digression,  transition,  excusation, 
&c.  For  as  in  buildings  there  is  great  pleasure 
and  use  in  the  well  casting  of  the  staircases,  en¬ 
tries,  doors,  windows,  and  the  like;  so  in  speech, 
the  conveyances  and  passages  are  of  special  or¬ 
nament  and  effect. 

A  conclusion  in  a  deliberative. 

So  may  zee  redeem  the  faults  pas  sed ,  and  prevent 
the  inconveniences  future. 

XIX.  i.  There  remain  two  appendices  touch¬ 
ing  the  tradition  of  knowledge,  the  one  critical, 
the  other  pedantical.  For  all  knowledge  is  either 
delivered  by  teachers,  or  attained  by  men’s  pro¬ 
per  endeavours:  and  therefore  as  the  principal 
part  of  tradition  of  knowledge  concerneth 
chiefly  writing  of  books,  so  the  relative  part 
thereof  concerneth  reading  of  books;  whereunto 
appertain  incidently  these  considerations.  The 
first  is  concerning  the  true  correction  and  edi- 

1  “For  the  letter  of  the  law.  It  is  not  expounding  but 
divining  to  recede  from  the  letter  of  the  law;  To  leave  the 
letter  of  the  law  makes  the  judge  a  legislator. 

For  the  spirit  of  the  law.  Generalities  are  to  be  con¬ 
strued  so  as  to  explain  particulars.” 


tion  of  authors;  wherein  nevertheless  rash  dili¬ 
gence  hath  done  great  prejudice.  For  these  critics 
have  often  presumed  that  that  which  they  un¬ 
derstand  not  is  false  set  down :  as  the  priest  that, 
where  he  found  it  written  of  Saint  Paul  “ Demis - 
sus  est  per  sportam”- mended  his  book,  and  made 
it  “Demissus  est  per  portam"*  because  sporta  was 
an  hard  word,  and  out  of  his  reading:  and  surely 
their  errors,  though  they  be  not  so  palpable  and 
ridiculous,  yet  are  of  the  same  kind.  And  there¬ 
fore,  as  it  hath  been  wisely  noted,  the  most  cor¬ 
rected  copies  are  commonly  the  least  correct. 

The  second  is  concerning  the  exposition  and 
explication  of  authors,  which  resteth  in  anno¬ 
tations  and  commentaries:  wherein  it  is  over 
usual  to  blanch  the  obscure  places  and  discourse 
upon  the  plain. 

The  third  is  concerning  the  times,  which  in 
many  cases  give  great  light  to  true  interpreta¬ 
tions. 

The  fourth  is  concerning  some  brief  censure 
and  judgement  of  the  authors;  that  men  there¬ 
by  may  make  some  election  unto  themselves 
what  books  to  read. 

And  the  fifth  is  concerning  the  syntax  and 
disposition  of  studies;  that  men  may  know  in 
what  order  or  pursuit  to  read. 

2.  For  pedantical  knowledge,  it  containeth 
that  difference  of  tradition  which  is  proper  for 
youth;  whereunto  appertain  divers  considera¬ 
tions  of  great  fruit. 

As  first,  the  timing  and  seasoning  of  know¬ 
ledges;  as  w’ith  what  to  initiate  them,  and  from 
what  for  a  time  to  refrain  them. 

Secondly,  the  consideration  where  to  begin 
with  the  easiest,  and  so  proceed  to  the  more  dif¬ 
ficult;  and  in  what  courses  to  press  the  more 
difficult,  and  then  to  turn  them  to  the  more 
easy:  for  it  is  one  method  to  practise  swimming 
with  bladders,  and  another  to  practise  dancing 
with  heavy  shoes. 

A  third  is  the  application  of  learning  accord¬ 
ing  unto  the  propriety  of  the  wits;  for  there  is 
no  defect  in  the  faculties  intellectual,  but  seem- 
eth  to  have  a  proper  cure  contained  in  some 
studies:  as,  for  example,  if  a  child  be  bird-wit- 
ted,  that  is,  hath  not  the  faculty  of  attention, 
the  mathematics  giveth  a  remedy  thereunto; 
for  in  them,  if  the  wit  be  caught  away  but  a 
moment,  one  is  new  to  begin.  And  as  sciences 
have  a  propriety  towards  faculties  for  cure  and 
help,  so  faculties  or  powers  have  a  sympathy 
towards  sciences  for  excellency  or  speedy  pro¬ 
fiting:  and  therefore  it  is  an  inquiry  of  great  wis- 

2“He  was  let  down  in  a  basket.” 

3“He  was  let  out  by  the  gate.” 


SECOND  BOOK  69 


dom,  what  kinds  of  wits  and  natures  are  most 
apt  and  proper  for  what  sciences. 

Fourthly,  the  ordering  of  exercises  is  matter 
of  great  consequence  to  hurt  or  help:  for,  as  is 
well  observed  by  Cicero,  men  in  exercising  their 
faculties,  if  they  be  not  well  advised,  do  exer¬ 
cise  their  faults  and  get  ill  habits  as  well  as  good; 
so  as  there  is  a  great  judgement  to  be  had  in 
the  continuance  and  intermission  of  exercises. 
It  were  too  long  to  particularize  a  number  of 
other  considerations  of  this  nature,  things  but 
of  mean  appearance,  but  of  singular  efficacy. 
For  as  the  wronging  or  cherishing  of  seeds  or 
young  plants  is  that  that  is  most  important  to 
their  thriving,  and  as  it  was  noted  that  the  first 
six  kings  being  in  truth  as  tutors  of  the  state  of 
Rome  in  the  infancy  thereof  was  the  principal 
cause  of  the  immense  greatness  of  that  state 
which  followed,  so  the  culture  and  manurance 
of  minds  in  youth  had  such  a  forcible  (though 
unseen)  operation,  as  hardly  any  length  of  time 
or  contention  of  labour  can  countervail  it  after¬ 
wards.  And  it  is  not  amiss  to  observe  also  how 
small  and  mean  faculties  gotten  by  education, 
yet  when  they  fall  into  great  men  or  great  mat¬ 
ters,  do  work  great  and  important  effects :  where¬ 
of  we  see  a  notable  example  in  Tacitus  of  two 
stage  players,  Percennius  and  Vibulenus,  who 
by  their  faculty  of  playing  put  the  Pannonian 
armies  into  an  extreme  tumult  and  combustion. 
For  there  arising  a  mutiny  amongst  them  upon 
the  death  of  Augustus  Caesar,  Blaesus  the  lieu¬ 
tenant  had  committed  some  of  the  mutiners, 
which  were  suddenly  rescued;  whereupon  Vib¬ 
ulenus  got  to  be  heard  speak,  which  he  did  in 
this  manner:  “These  poor  innocent  wretches  ap¬ 
pointed  to  cruel  death,  you  have  restored  to  be¬ 
hold  the  light;  but  who  shall  restore  my  brother 
to  me,  or  life  unto  my  brother,  that  was  sent 
hither  in  message  from  the  legions  of  Germany, 
to  treat  of  the  common  cause?  and  he  hath  mur¬ 
dered  him  this  last  night  by  some  of  his  fencers 
and  ruffians,  that  he  hath  about  him  for  his  ex¬ 
ecutioners  upon  soldiers.  Answer,  Blaesus,  what 
is  done  with  his  body?  The  mortalest  enemies 
do  not  deny  burial.  When  I  have  performed  my 
last  duties  to  the  corpse  with  kisses,  with  tears, 
command  me  to  be  slain  besides  him;  so  that 
these  my  fellows,  for  our  good  meaning  and  our 
true  hearts  to  the  legions,  may  have  leave  to 
bury  us.”1  With  which  speech  he  put  the  army 
into  an  infinite  fury  and  uproar:  whereas  truth 
was  he  had  no  brother,  neither  was  there  any 
such  matter;  but  he  played  it  merely  as  if  he 
had  been  upon  the  stage. 

1 Annals ,  Bk.  i.  22. 


3.  But  to  return:  we  are  now  come  to  a  pe¬ 
riod  of  rational  knowledges;  wherein  if  I  have 
made  the  divisions  other  than  those  that  are 
received,  yet  would  I  not  be  thought  to  disallow 
all  those  divisions  which  I  do  not  use.  For  there 
is  a  double  necessity  imposed  upon  me  of  alter¬ 
ing  the  divisions.  The  one,  because  it  differeth 
in  end  and  purpose,  to  sort  together  those  things 
which  are  next  in  nature  and  those  things  which 
are  next  in  use.  For  if  a  secretary  of  estate 
should  sort  his  papers,  it  is  like  in  his  study  or 
general  cabinet  he  would  sort  together  things  of 
a  nature,  as  treaties,  instructions,  &c.  But  in 
his  boxes  or  particular  cabinet  he  would  sort 
together  those  that  he  were  like  to  use  together, 
though  of  several  natures.  So  in  this  general 
cabinet  of  knowledge  it  was  necessary  for  me 
to  follow  the  divisions  of  the  nature  of  things; 
whereas  if  myself  had  been  to  handle  any  par¬ 
ticular  knowledge,  I  would  have  respected  the 
divisions  fittest  for  use.  The  other,  because  the 
bringingin  of  thedeficiencies  did  by  consequence 
alter  the  partitions  of  the  rest.  For  let  the  knowl¬ 
edge  extant  (for  demonstration  sake)  be  fifteen. 
Let  the  knowledge  with  the  deficiencies  be  twen¬ 
ty;  the  parts  of  fifteen  are  not  the  parts  of  twen¬ 
ty;  for  the  parts  of  fifteen  are  three  and  five;  the 
parts  of  twenty  are  two,  four,  five,  and  ten.  So 
as  these  things  are  without  contradiction,  and 
could  not  otherwise  be. 

XX.  1.  We  proceed  now  to  that  knowledge 
which  considereth  of  the  appetite  and  will  of 
man:  whereof  Salomon  saith,  “ Ante  omnia,  fili, 
custodi  cor  tuum;  nan 1  inde  procedunt  actiones 
vitae.”'1  In  the  handling  of  this  science,  those 
which  have  written  seem  to  me  to  have  done 
as  if  a  man,  that  professed  to  teach  to  write, 
did  only  exhibit  fair  copies  of  alphabets  and  let¬ 
ters  joined,  without  giving  any  precepts  or  di¬ 
rections  for  the  carriage  of  the  hand  and  fram¬ 
ing  of  the  letters.  So  have  they  made  good  and 
fair  exemplars  and  copies,  carrying  the  draughts 
and  portraitures  of  good,  virtue,  duty,  felicity; 
propounding  them  well  described  as  the  true 
objects  and  scopes  of  man's  will  and  desires. 
But  how  to  attain  these  excellent  marks,  and 
how  to  frame  and  subdue  the  will  of  man  to  be¬ 
come  true  and  conformable  to  these  pursuits, 
they  pass  it  over  altogether,  or  slightly  and  un- 
profitably.  For  it  is  not  the  disputing,  that  mo¬ 
ral  virtues  are  in  the  mind  of  man  by  habit  and 
not  by  nature;  or  the  distinguishing,  that  gen¬ 
erous  spirits  are  won  by  doctrines  and  persua¬ 
sions,  and  the  vulgar  sort  by  reward  and  punish- 

2Prov.  4.  23.  “Keep  thy  heart  with  all  thy  diligence; 
for  out  of  it  are  the  actions  of  life.” 


70  ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


ment;  and  the  likescatteredglances  and  touches, 
that  can  excuse  the  absence  of  this  part. 

2.  The  reason  of  this  omission  I  suppose  to 
be  that  hidden  rock  whereupon  both  this  and 
many  other  barks  of  knowledge  have  been  cast 
away;  which  is,  that  men  have  despised  to  be 
conversant  in  ordinary  and  common  matters, 
the  judicious  direction  whereof  nevertheless  is 
the  wisest  doctrine  (for  life  consisteth  not  in 
novelties  nor  subtilities),  but  contrariwise  they 
have  compounded  sciences  chiefly  of  a  certain 
resplendent  or  lustrous  mass  of  matter,  chosen 
to  give  glory  either  to  the  subtility  of  disputa¬ 
tions,  or  to  the  eloquence  of  discourses.  But 
Seneca  giveth  an  excellent  check  to  eloquence, 
“ Socet  illis  eloquentia ,  quibus  non  rerum  cupi- 
ditatem facit ,  sed  sui.’>l  Doctrine  should  be  such 
as  should  make  men  in  love  with  the  lesson, 
and  not  with  the  teacher;  being  directed  to  the 
auditor’s  benefit,  and  not  to  the  author’s  com¬ 
mendation.  And  therefore  those  are  of  the  right 
kind  which  may  be  concluded  as  Demosthenes 
concludes  his  counsel,  “Quae  si  feceritis ,  non  o 
atorem  duntaxat  in  praesentia  laudabitis ,  sed  vos- 
me  tips  os  etiam  non  it  a  multo  post  statu  rerum 
vestrarum  meliore.yi 2 

3.  Neither  needed  men  of  so  excellent  parts 
to  have  despaired  of  a  fortune,  which  the  poet 
Virgil  promised  himself,  and  indeed  obtained, 
who  got  as  much  glory  of  eloquence,  wit,  and 
learning  in  the  expressing  of  the  observations 
of  husbandry,  as  of  the  heroical  acts  of  Aeneas: 

Xec  sum  animi  dubius,  verbis  ea  vincere  magnum 

Quam  sit ,  et  angustis  his  adder e  rebus  honorem3 

And  surely,  if  the  purpose  be  in  good  earnest, 
not  to  write  at  leisure  that  which  men  may  read 
at  leisure,  but  really  to  instruct  and  suborn  ac¬ 
tion  and  active  life,  these  Georgies  of  the  mind, 
concerning  the  husbandry  and  tillage  thereof, 
are  no  less  worthy  than  the  heroical  descrip¬ 
tions  of  virtue,  duty,  and  felicity.  Wherefore 
the  main  and  primitive  division  of  moral  knowl¬ 
edge  seemeth  to  be  into  the  exemplar  or  plat¬ 
form  of  good,  and  the  regiment  or  culture  of 
the  mind :  the  one  describing  the  nature  of  good, 
the  other  prescribing  rules  how  to  subdue,  apply, 
and  accommodate  the  will  of  man  thereunto. 

4.  The  doctrine  touching  the  platform  or  na- 

1  Epistle  100,  towards  the  end.  “Eloquence  is  hurtful  to 
those  it  inspires  with  a  desire  of  itself,  and  not  of  things.” 

'Olynthiacs ,  25,  towards  the  end.  “If  you  put  these 
things  in  execution,  you  shall  not  only  praise  the  orator 
for  the  present,  but  yourselves  also  soon  after,  when  your 
affairs  are  in  a  better  posture.” 

3Georgics,  Bk.  in.  289.  “How  hard  the  task  alas  full  well 
I  know,  with  charm  of  words  to  grace  a  theme  so  low.” 


ture  of  good  considereth  it  either  simple  or  com¬ 
pared;  either  the  kinds  of  good,  or  the  degrees 
of  good;  in  the  latter  whereof  those  infinite  dis¬ 
putations  which  were  touching  the  supreme  de¬ 
gree  thereof,  which  they  term  felicity,  beati¬ 
tude,  or  the  highest  good,  the  doctrines  con¬ 
cerning  which  were  as  the  heathen  divinity,  are 
by  the  Christian  faith  discharged.  And  as  Aris¬ 
totle  saith,  “That  young  men  may  be  happy, 
but  not  otherwise  but  by  hope”;4  so  we  must 
all  acknowledge  our  minority,  and  embrace  the 
felicity  which  is  by  hope  of  the  future  world. 

5.  Freed  therefore  and  delivered  from  this  doc¬ 
trine  of  the  philosopher’s  heaven,  whereby  they 
feigned  an  higher  elevation  of  man's  nature  than 
was  (for  we  see  in  what  height  of  style  Seneca 
writeth  “ Veremagnum,haberefragilitatem homi- 
nis ,  securitatem  Dei”)b  we  may  with  more  so¬ 
briety  and  truth  receive  the  rest  of  their  in¬ 
quiries  and  labours.  Wherein  for  the  nature  of 
good  positive  or  simple,  they  have  set  it  down 
excellently  in  describing  the  forms  of  virtue  and 
duty,  with  their  situations  and  postures;  in  dis¬ 
tributing  them  into  their  kinds,  parts,  provinces, 
actions,  and  administrations,  and  the  like:  nay 
further,  they  have  commended  them  toman’s 
nature  and  spirit  with  great  quickness  of  argu¬ 
ment  and  beauty  ot  persuasions;  yea,  and  forti¬ 
fied  and  entrenched  them  (as  much  as  discourse 
can  do)  against  corrupt  and  popular  opinions. 
Again,  for  the  degrees  and  comparative  nature 
of  good,  they  have  also  excellently  handled  it 
in  their  triplicity  of  good,  in  the  comparisons 
between  a  contemplative  and  an  active  life,6  in 
the  distinction  between  virtue  with  reluctation 
and  virtue  secured,  in  their  encounters  between 
honesty  and  profit,  in  their  balancing  of  virtue 
with  virtue,  and  the  like;  so  as  this  part  deserv- 
eth  to  be  reported  for  excellently  laboured. 

6.  Notwithstanding,  if  before  they  had  comen 
to  the  popular  and  received  notions  of  virtue 
and  vice,  pleasure  and  pain,  and  the  rest,  they 
had  stayed  a  little  longer  upon  the  inquiry  con¬ 
cerning  the  roots  ot  good  and  evil,  and  the  strings 
of  those  roots,  they  had  given,  in  my  opinion, 
a  great  light  to  that  which  followed;  and  spe¬ 
cially  if  they  had  consulted  with  nature,  they 
had  made  their  doctrines  less  prolix  and  more 
profound:  which  being  by  them  in  part  omitted 
and  in  part  handled  with  much  confusion,  we 
will  endeavour  to  resume  and  open  in  a  more 
clear  manner. 

4 Ethics ,  Bk.  1.  10;  Rhetoric,  Bk.  11.  12,  8. 

bEpistle  53,  §12.  “It  is  true  greatness  to  have  in  one  the 
frailty  of  a  man  and  the  security  of  a  god.” 

6See  Aristotle,  Ethics,  Bk.  1.8  sq. 


SECOND  BOOK 


7.  There  is  formed  in  everything  a  double  na¬ 
ture  of  good:  the  one,  as  everything  is  a  total 
or  substantive  in  itself;  the  other,  as  it  is  a  part 
or  member  of  a  greater  body:  whereof  the  latter 
is  in  degree  the  greater  and  the  worthier,  be¬ 
cause  it  tendeth  to  the  conservation  of  a  more 
general  form.  Therefore  we  see  the  iron  in  par¬ 
ticular  sympathy  moveth  to  the  loadstone;  but 
yet  if  it  exceed  a  certain  quantity,  it  forsaketh 
the  affection  to  the  loadstone,  and  like  a  good 
patriot  moveth  to  the  earth,  which  is  the  region 
and  country  of  massy  bodies:  so  may  we  go  for¬ 
ward,  and  see  that  water  and  massy  bodies  move 
to  the  centre  of  the  earth;  but  rather  than  to 
suffer  a  divulsion  in  the  continuance  of  nature, 
they  will  move  upwards  from  the  centre  of  the 
earth,  forsaking  their  duty  to  the  earth  in  re¬ 
gard  of  their  duty  to  the  world.  This  double  na¬ 
ture  of  good,  and  the  comparative  thereof,  is 
much  more  engraven  upon  man,  if  he  degener¬ 
ate  not:  unto  whom  the  conservation  of  duty  to 
the  public  ought  to  be  much  more  precious  than 
the  conservation  of  life  and  being:  according  to 
that  memorable  speech  of  Pompeius  Magnus, 
when  being  in  commission  of  purveyance  for  a 
famine  at  Rome,  and  being  dissuaded  with  great 
vehemency  and  instance  by  his  friends  about 
him,  that  he  should  not  hazard  himself  to  sea 
in  an  extremity  of  weather,  he  said  only  to  them, 
“Necesse  est  ut  earn ,  non  ut  vivam  ”l  But  it  may 
be  truly  affirmed  that  there  was  never  any  phi¬ 
losophy,  religion,  or  other  discipline,  which  did 
so  plainly  and  highly  exalt  the  good  which  is 
communicative,  and  depress  the  good  which  is 
private  and  particular,  as  the  Holy  Faith;  well 
declaring  that  it  was  the  same  God  that  gave 
the  Christian  law  to  men,  who  gave  those  laws 
of  nature  to  inanimate  creatures  that  we  spake 
of  before;  for  we  read  that  the  elected  saints  of 
God  have  wished  themselves  anathematized 
and  razed  out  of  the  book  of  life,  in  an  ecstasy 
of  charity  and  infinite  feeling  of  communion.2 

8.  This  being  set  down  and  strongly  planted, 
doth  judge  and  determine  most  of  the  contro¬ 
versies  wherein  moral  philosophy  is  conversant. 
For  first,  it  decideth  the  question  touching  the 
preferment  of  the  contemplative  or  active  life, 
and  decideth  it  against  Aristotle.  For  all  the 
reasons  which  he  bringeth  for  the  contempla¬ 
tive  are  private,  and  respecting  the  pleasure 
and  dignity  of  a  man’s  self  (in  which  respects 
no  question  the  contemplative  life  hath  the  pre¬ 
eminence),  not  much  unlike  to  that  comparison, 

1  Plutarch,  Pompey.  “My  going  is  necessary,  but  not 
my  life.” 

2 Rom.  9. 


which  Pythagoras  made  for  the  gracing  and 
magnifying  of  philosophy  and  contemplation:3 
who  being  asked  what  he  was,  answered,  “That 
if  Hiero  were  ever  at  the  Olympian  games,  he 
knew  the  manner,  that  some  came  to  try  their 
fortune  for  the  prizes,  and  some  came  as  mer¬ 
chants  to  utter  their  commodities,  and  some 
came  to  make  good  cheer  and  meet  their  friends, 
and  some  came  to  look  on;  and  that  he  was  one 
of  them  that  came  to  look  on.”  But  men  must 
know,  that  in  this  theatre  of  man’s  life  it  is  re¬ 
served  only  for  God  and  angels  to  be  lookers 
on.  Neither  could  the  like  question  ever  have 
been  received  in  the  church,  notwithstanding 
their  “ Pretiosa  in  oculis  Domini  mors  sanctorum 
ejus ,”4  by  which  place  they  would  exalt  their 
civil  death  and  regular  professions,  but  upon 
this  defence,  that  the  monastical  lifeisnotsimple 
contemplative,  but  performeth  the  duty  either 
of  incessant  prayers  and  supplications,  which 
hath  been  truly  esteemed  as  an  office  in  the 
church,  or  else  of  writing  or  taking  instructions 
for  writing  concerning  the  law  of  God,  as  Moses 
did  when  he  abode  so  long  in  the  mount.  And  so 
we  see  Henoch  the  seventh  from  Adam,  who  was 
the  first  contemplative  and  walked  with  God, 
yet  did  also  endow  the  church  with  prophecy, 
which  Saint  Jude  citeth.  But  for  contemplation 
which  should  be  finished  in  itself,  without  cast¬ 
ing  beams  upon  society,  assuredly  divinity 
knoweth  it  not. 

9.  It  decideth  also  the  controversies  between 
Zeno  and  Socrates,  and  their  schools  and  suc¬ 
cessions,  on  the  one  side,  who  placed  felicity  in 
virtue  simply  or  attended,  the  actions  and  ex¬ 
ercises  whereof  do  chiefly  embrace  and  concern 
society;  and  on  the  other  side,  the  Cyrenaics 
and  Epicureans,  who  placed  it  in  pleasure,  and 
made  virtue  (as  it  is  used  in  some  comedies  of 
errors,  wherein  the  mistress  and  the  maid  change 
habits)  to  be  but  as  a  servant,  without  which 
pleasure  cannot  be  served  and  attended;  and 
the  reformed  school  of  the  Epicureans,  which 
placed  it  in  serenity  of  mind  and  freedom  from 
perturbation;  as  if  they  would  have  deposed 
Jupiter  again,  and  restored  Saturn  and  the  first 
age,  when  there  was  no  summer  nor  winter, 
spring  nor  autumn,  but  all  after  one  air  and  sea¬ 
son;  and  Herillus,  which  placed  felicity  in  ex¬ 
tinguishment  of  the  disputes  of  the  mind,  mak¬ 
ing  no  fixed  nature  of  good  and  evil,  esteeming 

3Iamblichus,  Life  of  Pythagoras ,  xii.  58;  Tusculanae 
DisputationeSj  v.  3.  Cicero  substitutes  Leontius,  prince  of 
the  Phoenicians,  for  Hieron. 

4“Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  his 
saints.”  Ps.  106.15. 


72  ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


things  according  to  the  clearness  of  the  desires, 
or  the  reluctation;  which  opinion  was  revived 
in  the  heresy  of  the  Anabaptists,  measuring 
things  according  to  the  motions  of  the  spirit, 
and  the  constancy  or  wavering  of  belief :  all  which 
are  manifest  to  tend  to  private  repose  and  con¬ 
tentment,  and  not  to  point  of  society. 

io.  It  censureth  also  the  philosophy  of  Epic¬ 
tetus,  which  presupposeth  that  felicity  must  be 
placed  in  those  things  which  are  in  our  power, 
lest  we  be  liable  to  fortune  and  disturbance:1 
as  if  it  were  not  a  thing  much  more  happy  to 
fail  in  good  and  virtuous  ends  for  the  public, 
than  to  obtain  all  that  we  can  wish  to  ourselves 
in  our  proper  fortune;  as  Consalvo  said  to  his 
soldiers,  showing  them  Naples,  and  protesting 
he  had  rather  die  one  foot  forwards,  than  to 
have  his  life  secured  for  long  by  one  foot  of  re¬ 
treat.  Whereunto  the  wisdom  of  that  heavenly 
leader  hath  signed,  who  hath  affirmed  that  “a 
good  conscience  is  a  continual  feast”;2  showing 
plainly  that  the  conscience  of  good  intentions, 
howsoever  succeeding,  is  a  more  continual  joy 
to  nature,  than  all  the  provision  which  can  be 
made  for  security  and  repose. 

n.  It  censureth  likewise  that  abuse  of  phi¬ 
losophy,  which  grew  general  about  the  time  of 
Epictetus,  in  converting  it  into  an  occupation 
or  profession;  as  if  the  purpose  had  been,  not 
to  resist  and  extinguish  perturbations,  but  to 
fly  and  avoid  the  causes  of  them,  and  to  shape 
a  particular  kind  and  course  of  life  to  that  end; 
introducing  such  an  health  of  mind,  as  was  that 
health  of  body  of  which  Aristotle  speaketh  of 
Herodicus,  who  did  nothing  all  his  life  long  but 
intend  his  health:3  whereas  if  men  refer  them¬ 
selves  to  duties  of  society,  as  that  health  of  body 
is  best,  which  is  ablest  to  endure  all  alterations 
and  extremities;  so  likewise  that  health  of  mind 
is  most  proper,  which  can  go  through  the  great¬ 
est  temptations  and  perturbations.  So  as  Diog- 
enes’opinion  is  to  be  accepted,  who  commended 
not  them  which  abstained,  but  them  which  sus¬ 
tained,4  and  could  refrain  their  mind  in  prae- 
cipitio ,5  and  could  give  unto  the  mind  (as  is  used 
in  horsemanship)  the  shortest  stop  or  turn. 

12.  Lastly,  it  censureth  the  tenderness  and 
want  of  application  in  some  of  the  most  ancient 
and  reverend  philosophers  and  philosophical 
men,  that  did  retire  too  easily  from  civil  busi¬ 
ness,  for  avoiding  of  indignities  and  perturba¬ 
tions:  whereas  the  resolution  of  men  truly  moral 
ought  to  be  such  as  the  same  Consalvo  said  the 

Arrian,  Ertcheiridton ,  i.  4But  cf.  Laertius,  Aristip- 

2Prov.  15.  15.  pus,  11.  75. 

3 Rhetoric ,  Bk.  1.  5,  10.  5“On  a  precipice.” 


honour  of  a  soldier  should  be,  e  teld  crassiore ,6 
and  not  so  fine  as  that  everything  should  catch 
in  it  and  endanger  it. 

XXI.  1 .  To  resume  private  or  particular  good, 
it  falieth  into  the  division  of  good  active  and 
passive:  for  the  difference  of  good  (not  unlike  to 
that  which  amongst  the  Romans  was  expressed 
in  the  familiar  or  household  terms  of  promus 
and  condus)  is  formed  also  in  all  things,  and  is 
best  disclosed  in  the  two  several  appetites  in 
creatures;  the  one  to  preserve  or  continue  them¬ 
selves,  and  the  other  to  dilate  or  multiply  them¬ 
selves;  whereof  the  latter  seemeth  to  be  the 
worthier;  for  in  nature  the  heavens,  which  are 
the  more  worthy,  are  the  agent;  and  the  earth, 
which  is  the  less  worthy,  is  the  patient.  In  the 
pleasures  of  living  creatures,  that  of  generation 
is  greater  than  that  of  food.  In  divine  doctrine, 
“ beatius  est  dare  quam  accipere .”7  And  in  life, 
there  is  no  man’s  spirit  so  soft,  but  esteemeth 
the  effecting  of  somewhat  that  he  hath  fixed  in 
his  desire,  more  than  sensuality:  which  priority 
of  the  active  good,  is  much  upheld  by  the  con¬ 
sideration  of  our  estate  to  be  mortal  and  expos¬ 
ed  to  fortune.  For  if  we  mought  have  a  perpe¬ 
tuity  and  certainty  in  our  pleasures,  the  state 
of  them  would  advance  their  price.  But  when 
we  see  it  is  but  “ magni  aestimamus  mori  tardi- 
us”8  and  “ne  glorieris  de  eras  tin  0,  nescis  par  turn 
diei ,”9  it  maketh  us  to  desire  to  have  somewhat 
secured  and  exempted  from  time,  which  are  only 
our  deeds  and  works:  as  it  is  said,  “ Opera  eo- 
rum  sequuntur  eos .”10The  pre-eminence  likewise 
of  this  active  good  is  upheld  by  the  affection 
which  is  natural  in  man  towards  variety  and 
proceeding;  which  in  the  pleasures  of  the  sense, 
which  is  the  principal  part  of  passive  good,  can 
have  no  great  latitude.  “ Cogita  quamdiu  eadem 
feceris ;  cibus  somnus ,  ludus;  per  hanc  circulum 
curritur;  mori  velle  non  tantum  jortis ,  aut  miser , 
aut  prudens^  sed  etiam  jastidiosus  potest .”n  But 
in  enterprises,  pursuits,  and  purposes  of  life, 
there  is  much  variety;  whereof  men  are  sensible 
with  pleasure  in  their  inceptions,  progressions, 
recoils,  reintegrations,  approaches  and  attain- 
ings  to  their  ends.  So  as  it  was  well  said  “Vita 

6“Of  a  stouter  web.” 

7 Acts,  20.  35.  “It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  re¬ 
ceive.” 

8“A  great  happiness  to  die  late.” 

9 “We  cannot  boast  of  tomorrow  when  we  know  not 
what  a  day  may  bring  forth.” 

10Seneca,  Apocolocyntcsis ,  xiv.  13.  “Their  works  follow 
them.” 

uSeneca:  “To  consider  how  often  the  same  things  come 
over  in  life — as  meals,  sleep,  and  diversion — it  might 
make  not  only  a  resolute,  a  wretched  or  a  wise,  but  even 
a  delicate  person  wish  to  die.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


sine proposito  languida  et  vaga Neither  hath 
this  active  good  any  identity  with  the  good  of 
society,  though  in  some  case  it  hath  an  inci¬ 
dence  into  it.  For  although  it  do  many  times 
bring  forth  acts  of  beneficence,  yet  it  is  with  a 
respect  private  to  a  man’s  own  power,  glory,  am¬ 
plification,  continuance;  as  appeareth  plainly, 
when  it  findeth  a  contrary  subject.  For  that  gi- 
gantine  state  of  mind  which  possesseth  the  trou¬ 
bles  of  the  world,  such  as  was  Lucius  Sylla  and 
infinite  other  in  smaller  model,  who  would  have 
all  men  happy  or  unhappy  as  they  were  their 
friends  or  enemies,  and  would  give  form  to  the 
world,  according  to  their  own  humours  (which 
is  the  true  theomachy),  pretendeth  and  aspireth 
to  active  good,  though  it  recedeth  furthest  from 
good  of  society,  which  we  have  determined  to 
be  the  greater. 

2.  To  resume  passive  good,  it  receiveth  a  sub¬ 
division  of  conservative  and  perfective.  For  let 
us  take  a  brief  review  of  that  which  we  have 
said:  we  have  spoken  first  of  the  good  of  society, 
the  intention  whereof  embraceth  the  form  of 
human  nature,  whereof  we  are  members  and 
portions,  and  not  our  own  proper  and  individual 
form:  we  have  spoken  of  active  good,  and  sup¬ 
posed  it  as  a  part  of  private  and  particular  good. 
And  rightly,  for  there  is  i mpressed upon  all  things 
a  triple  desire  or  appetite  proceeding  from  love 
to  themselves;  one  of  preserving  and  continu¬ 
ing  their  form;  another  of  advancing  and  per¬ 
fecting  their  form;  and  a  third  of  multiplying 
and  extending  their  form  upon  other  things: 
whereof  the  multiplying,  or  signature  of  it  upon 
other  things,  is  that  which  we  handled  by  the 
name  of  active  good.  So  as  there  remaineth  the 
conserving  of  it,  and  perfecting  or  raising  of  it; 
which  latter  is  the  highest  degree  of  passive 
good.  For  to  preserve  in  state  is  the  less,  to 
preserve  with  advancement  is  the  greater.  So 
in  man, 

Igneus  est  ollis  vigor ,  et  caelestis  origo.1 2 

His  approach  or  assumption  to  divine  or  an¬ 
gelical  nature  is  the  perfection  of  his  form;  the 
error  or  false  imitation  of  which  good  is  that 
which  is  the  tempest  of  human  life;  while  man, 
upon  the  instinct  of  an  advancement  formal  and 
essential,  is  carried  to  seek  an  advancement  lo¬ 
cal.  For  as  those  which  are  sick,  and  find  no  rem¬ 
edy,  do  tumble  up  and  down  and  change  place, 
as  if  by  a  remove  local  they  could  obtain  a  re- 

1  Seneca,  Epistle  xxiv.  §  23-25.  “Life  without  pursuit  is 
a  vague  and  languid  thing.” 

2 Virgil,  SEneid,  Bk.  vi.  730.  “The  living  fire  that  glows 

those  seeds  within,  remembers  its  celestial  origin.” 


move  internal;  so  is  it  with  men  in  ambition, 
when  failing  of  the  mean  to  exalt  their  nature, 
they  are  in  a  perpetual  estuation  to  exalt  their 
place.  So  then  passive  good  is,  as  was  said,  ei¬ 
ther  conservative  or  perfective. 

3.  To  resume  the  good  of  conservation  or  com¬ 
fort,  which  consisteth  in  the  fruition  of  that 
which  is  agreeable  to  our  natures;  it  seemeth  to 
be  the  most  pure  and  natural  of  pleasures,  but 
yet  the  softest  and  the  lowest.  And  this  also  re¬ 
ceiveth  a  difference,  which  hath  neither  been 
well  judged  of,  nor  well  inquired:  for  the  good 
of  fruition  or  contentment  is  placed  either  in 
the  sincereness  of  the  fruition,  or  in  the  quick¬ 
ness  and  vigour  of  it;  the  one  superinduced  by 
equality,  the  other  by  vicissitude;  the  one  hav¬ 
ing  less  mixture  of  evil,  the  other  more  impres¬ 
sion  of  good.  Whether  of  these  is  the  greater 
good  is  a  question  controverted;  but  whether 
man’s  nature  may  not  be  capable  of  both,  is  a 
question  not  inquired. 

4.  The  former  question  being  debated  between 
Socrates  and  a  sophist,  Socrates  placing  felicity 
in  an  equal  and  constant  peace  of  mind,  and 
the  sophist  in  much  desiring  and  much  enjoy¬ 
ing,  they  fell  from  argument  to  ill  words:  the 
sophist  saying  that  Socrates’  felicity  was  the 
felicity  of  a  block  or  stone;  and  Socrates  saying 
that  the  sophist’s  felicity  was  the  felicity  of  one 
that  had  the  itch,  who  did  nothing  but  itch  and 
scratch.  And  both  these  opinions  do  not  want 
their  supports.3  For  the  opinion  of  Socrates  is 
much  upheld  by  the  general  consent  even  of  the 
Epicures  themselves,  that  virtue  beareth  a 
great  part  in  felicity;  and  if  so,  certain  it  is,  that 
virtue  hath  more  use  in  clearing  perturbations 
than  in  compassing  desires.  The  sophist’s  opin¬ 
ion  is  much  favoured  by  the  assertion  we  last 
spake  of,  that  good  of  advancement  is  greater 
than  good  of  simple  preservation;  because  every 
obtaining  a  desire  hath  a  show  of  advancement, 
as  motion  though  in  a  circle  hath  a  show  of 
progression. 

5.  But  the  second  question,  decided  the  true 
way,  maketh  the  former  superfluous.  For  can 
it  be  doubted,  but  that  there  are  some  who  take 
more  pleasure  in  enjoying  pleasures  than  some 
other,  and  yet,  nevertheless,  are  less  troubled 
with  the  loss  or  leaving  of  them  ?  So  as  this  same, 
“ Non  uti  ut  non  appetas ,  non  appetere  ut  non 
metuas ,  sunt  animi  pusilli  et  diffidentis.'H  And 
it  seemeth  to  me,  that  most  of  the  doctrines  of 

3Plato,  GorgiaSy  Bk.  1.  492. 

4“To  use  not,  that  you  may  not  wish;  to  wish  not,  that 
you  may  not  fear:  these  are  the  precautions  of  weak  and 
diffident  minds.” 


74  ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


the  philosophers  are  more  fearful  and  caution¬ 
ary  than  the  nature  of  things  requireth.  So  have 
they  increased  the  fear  of  death  in  offering  to 
cure  it.  For  when  they  would  have  a  man’s  whole 
life  to  be  but  a  discipline  or  preparation  to  die, 
they  must  needs  make  men  think  that  it  is  a 
terrible  enemy,  against  whom  there  is  no  end 
of  preparing.  Better  saith  the  poet: 

Qui  finem  vitae  extremum  inter  munera  ponat 

Naturae} 

So  have  they  sought  to  make  men’s  minds  too 
uniform  and  harmonical,  by  not  breaking  them 
sufficiently  to  contrary  motions:  the  reason 
whereof  I  suppose  to  be,  because  they  them¬ 
selves  were  men  dedicated  to  a  private,  free, 
and  unapplied  course  of  life.  For  as  we  see,  up¬ 
on  the  lute  or  like  instrument,  a  ground,  though 
it  be  sweet  and  have  show  of  many  changes, 
yet  breaketh  not  the  hand  to  such  strange  and 
hard  stops  and  passages,  as  a  set  song  or  volun¬ 
tary;  much  after  the  same  manner  was  the  di¬ 
versity  between  a  philosophical  and  a  civil  life. 
And  therefore  men  are  to  imitate  the  wisdom 
of  jewellers;  who,  if  there  be  a  grain,  or  a  cloud, 
or  an  ice  which  may  be  ground  forth  without 
taking  too  much  of  the  stone,  they  help  it;  but 
if  it  should  lessen  and  abate  the  stone  too  much, 
they  will  not  meddle  with  it:  so  ought  men  so 
to  procure  serenity  as  they  destroy  not  mag¬ 
nanimity. 

6.  Having  therefore  deduced  the  good  of  man 
which  is  private  and  particular,  as  far  as  seem- 
eth  fit,  we  will  now  return  to  that  good  of  man 
which  respecteth  and  beholdeth  society,  which 
we  may  term  duty;  because  the  term  of  duty  is 
more  proper  to  a  mind  well  framed  and  dispos¬ 
ed  towards  others,  as  the  term  of  virtue  is  ap¬ 
plied  to  a  mind  well  formed  and  composed  in 
itself:  though  neither  can  a  man  understand 
virtue  without  some  relation  to  society,  nor  duty 
without  an  inward  disposition.  This  part  may 
seem  at  first  to  pertain  to  science  civil  and  poli¬ 
tic:  but  not  if  it  be  well  observed.  For  it  con¬ 
cerned  the  regiment  and  government  of  every 
man  over  himself,  and  not  over  others.  And  as 
in  architecture  thedirectionofframingtheposts, 
beams,  and  other  parts  of  building,  is  not  the 
same  with  the  manner  of  joining  them  and  erect¬ 
ing  the  building;  and  in  mechanicals,  the  direc¬ 
tion  how  to  frame  an  instrument  or  engine,  is 
not  the  same  with  the  manner  of  setting  it  on 
work  and  employing  it;  and  yet  nevertheless  in 
expressing  of  the  one  you  incidentlv  express  the 

1  Juvenal,  Satires ,  x.  360.  “That  reckons  the  close  of  life 
one  of  nature’s  boons.” 


aptness  towards  the  other;  so  the  doctrine  of 
conjugation  of  men  in  society  differed  from  that 
of  their  conformity  thereunto. 

7.  This  part  of  duty  is  subdivided  into  two 
parts:  the  common  duty  of  every  man,  as  a  man 
or  member  of  a  state;  the  other,  the  respective 
or  special  duty  of  every  man,  in  his  profession, 
vocation,  and  place.  The  first  of  these  is  extant 
and  well  laboured,  as  hath  been  said.  The  sec¬ 
ond  likewise  I  may  report  rather  dispersed  than 
deficient;  which  manner  of  dispersed  writing  in 
this  kind  of  argument  I  acknowledge  to  be 
best.  For  who  can  take  upon  him  to  write  of  the 
proper  duty,  virtue,  challenge,  and  right  of  ev¬ 
ery  several  vocation,  profession,  and  placer  For 
although  sometimes  a  looker  on  may  see  more 
than  a  gamester,  and  there  be  a  proverb  more 
arrogant  than  sound,  “That  the  vale  best  dis¬ 
covered  the  hill”;  yet  there  is  small  doubt  but 
that  men  can  write  best  and  most  really  and 
materially  in  their  own  professions;  and  that 
the  writing  of  speculative  men  of  active  matter 
for  the  most  part  doth  seem  to  men  of  experi¬ 
ence,  as  Phormio’s  argument  of  the  wars  seem¬ 
ed  to  Hannibal,  to  be  but  dreams  and  dotage. 
Only  there  is  one  vice  which  accompanieth  them 
that  write  in  their  own  professions,  that  they 
magnify  them  in  excess.  But  generally  it  were 
to  be  wished  (as  that  which  would  make  learn¬ 
ing  indeed  solid  and  fruitful)  that  active  men 
would  or  could  become  writers. 

8.  In  which  kind  I  cannot  but  mention,  honoris 
causa ,  your  Majesty’s  excellent  book  touching 
the  duty  of  a  king:  a  work  richly  compounded 
of  divinity,  morality,  and  policy,  with  great  as¬ 
persion  of  all  other  arts;  and  being  in  mine  opin¬ 
ion  one  of  the  most  sound  and  healthful  writ¬ 
ings  that  I  have  read;  not  distempered  in  the 
heat  of  invention,  nor  in  the  coldness  of  negli¬ 
gence;  not  sick  of  dizziness,  as  those  are  who 
leese  themselves  in  their  order,  nor  of  convul¬ 
sions,  as  those  which  cramp  in  matters  imper¬ 
tinent;  not  savouring  of perfumes  and  paintings, 
as  those  do  who  seek  to  please  the  reader  more 
than  nature  beareth;  and  chiefly  well  disposed 
in  the  spirits  thereof,  being  agreeable  to  truth 
and  apt  for  action;  and  far  removed  from  that 
natural  infirmity,  whereunto  I  noted  those  that 
write  in  their  own  professions  to  be  subject, 
which  is,  that  they  exalt  it  above  measure.  For 
your  Majesty  hath  truly  described,  not  a  king 
of  Assyria  or  Persia  in  their  extern  glory,  but  a 
Moses  or  a  David,  pastors  of  their  people.  Nei¬ 
ther  can  I  ever  leese  out  of  my  remembrance 
what  I  heard  your  Majesty  in  the  same  sacred 
spirit  of  government  deliver  in  a  great  cause  of 


SECOND  BOOK 


judicature,  which  was,  “That  kings  ruled  by 
their  laws,  as  God  did  by  the  laws  of  nature; 
and  ought  as  rarely  to  put  in  use  their  supreme 
prerogative,  as  God  doth  his  power  of  working 
miracles.”  And  yet  notwithstanding,  in  your 
book  of  a  free  monarchy,  you  do  well  give  men 
to  understand,  that  you  know  the  plenitude  of 
the  power  and  right  of  a  king,  as  well  as  the 
circle  of  his  office  and  duty.  Thus  have  I  pre¬ 
sumed  to  allege  this  excellent  writing  of  your 
Majesty,  as  a  prime  or  eminent  example  of  trac¬ 
tates  concerning  special  and  respective  duties: 
wherein  I  should  have  said  as  much,  if  it  had 
been  written  a  thousand  years  since.  Neither 
am  I  moved  with  certain  courtly  decencies,  which 
esteem  it  flattery  to  praise  in  presence.  No,  it 
is  flattery  to  praise  in  absence;  that  is,  when 
either  the  virtue  is  absent,  or  the  occasion  is  ab¬ 
sent;  and  so  the  praise  is  not  natural,  but  forced, 
either  in  truth  or  in  time.  But  let  Cicero  be  read 
in  his  oration  pro  Marcello ,  which  is  nothing  but 
an  excellent  table  of  Caesar's  virtue,  and  made 
to  his  face;  besides  the  example  of  many  other 
excellent  persons,  wiser  a  great  deal  than  such 
observers;  and  we  will  never  doubt,  upon  a  full 
occasion,  to  give  just  praises  to  present  or 
absent. 

9.  But  to  return:  there  belongeth  further  to 
the  handling  of  this  part,  touching  the  duties 
of  professions  and  vocations,  a  relative  or  op¬ 
posite,  touching  the  frauds,  cautels,  impostures, 
and  vices  of  every  profession,  which  hath  been 
likewise  handled:  but  how?  rather  in  a  satire 
and  cynically,  than  seriously  and  wisely:  for  men 
have  rather  sought  by  wit  to  deride  and  traduce 
much  of  that  which  is  good  in  professions,  than 
withjudgement  todiscover  and  sever  that  which 
is  corrupt.  For,  as  Salomon  saith,  he  that  cometh 
to  seek  after  knowledge  with  a  mind  to  scorn 
and  censure,  shall  be  sure  to  find  matter  for  his 
humour,  butnomatterforhisinstruction  \“§{uae- 
renti  derisori  scientiam  ipsa  se  abscondit;  sed  stu- 
dioso  fit  obviam”1  But  the  managing  of  this  ar¬ 
gument  with  integrity  and  truth,  which  I  note 
as  deficient,  seemeth  to  me  to  be  one  of  the  best 
fortifications  for  honesty  and  virtue  that  can 
be  planted.  For,  as  the  fable  goeth  of  the  basil¬ 
isk,  that  if  he  see  you  first,  you  die  for  it;  but 
if  you  see  him  first,  he  dieth:  so  is  it  with  deceits 
and  evil  arts;  which,  if  they  be  first  espied  they 
leese  their  life;  but  if  they  prevent,  they  endan¬ 
ger.  So  that  we  are  much  beholden  to  Machiavel 
and  others,  that  write  what  men  do,  and  not 
what  they  ought  to  do.  For  it  is  not  possible  to 

1  Prov.  14.  6.  “A  scorner  seeks  wisdom,  and  finds  it 
not;  but  knowledge  is  easy  to  him  that  understands.” 


join  serpentine  wisdom  with  the  columbine  in- 
nocency,  except  men  know  exactly  all  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  the  serpent;  his  baseness  and  going 
upon  his  belly,  his  volubility  and  lubricity,  his 
envy  and  sting,  and  the  rest;  that  is,  all  forms 
and  natures  of  evil.  For  without  this,  virtue  li- 
eth  open  and  unfenced.  Nay,  an  honest  man  can 
do  no  good  upon  those  that  are  wicked,  to  re¬ 
claim  them,  without  the  help  of  the  knowledge 
of  evil.  For  men  of  corrupted  minds  presuppose 
that  honesty  groweth  out  of  simplicity  of  man¬ 
ners,  and  believing  of  preachers,  schoolmasters, 
and  men's  exterior  language.  So  as,  except  you 
can  make  them  perceive  that  you  know  the  ut¬ 
most  reaches  of  their  own  corrupt  opinions,  they 
despise  all  morality.  “Non  recipit  stultus  verba 
prudentiae ,  nisi  ea  dixeris  quae  versantur  in  corde 
ejus .''2 

10.  Unto  this  part,  touching  respective  duty, 
doth  also  appertain  the  duties  between  husband 
and  wife,  parent  and  child,  master  and  servant. 
So  likewise  thelaws  of  friendship  and  gratitude, 
the  civil  bond  of  companies,  colleges,  and  politic 
bodies,  of  neighbourhood;  and  all  other  propor¬ 
tionate  duties;  not  as  they  are  parts  of  govern¬ 
ment  and  society,  but  as  to  the  framing  of  the 
mind  of  particular  persons. 

11.  The  knowledge  concerning  good  respect¬ 
ing  society  doth  handle  it  also,  not  simply  alone, 
but  comparatively;  whereunto  belongeth  the 
weighing  of  duties  between  person  and  person, 
case  and  case,  particular  and  public.  As  we  see 
in  the  proceeding  of  Lucius  Brutus  against  his 
own  sons,  which  was  so  much  extolled;  yet  what 
was  said? 

Infelixi  utcunque  ferent  ea  fata  minores .3 

So  the  case  was  doubtful,  and  had  opinion  on 
both  sides.  Again,  we  see  when  M.  Brutus  and 
Cassius  invited  to  a  supper  certain  whose  opin¬ 
ions  they  meant  to  feel,  whether  they  were  fit 
to  be  made  their  associates,  and  cast  forth  the 
question  touching  the  killing  of  a  tyrant  being 
an  usurper,  they  were  divided  in  opinion;4  some 
holding  that  servitude  was  the  extreme  of  evils, 
and  others  that  tyranny  was  better  than  a  civil 
war:  and  a  number  of  the  like  cases  there  are 
of  comparative  duty.  Amongst  which  that  of 
all  others  is  the  most  frequent,  where  the  ques¬ 
tion  is  of  a  great  deal  of  good  to  ensue  of  a  small 
injustice.  Which  Jason  of  Thessalia  determined 

2 Prov.  18.  2.  “A  fool  receives  not  the  words  of  the 
wise,  unless  thou  speakest  the  very  things  that  are  in  his 
heart.” 

3 Virgil,  /Eneidy  Bk.  vi.  823.  “Unhappy  man!  whatever 
judgement  posterity  shall  pass  upon  that  deed.” 

4 Plutarch  Brutus. 


76  ADVANCEMENT 

against  the  truth:*  Aliqua  sunt  injuste facienday 
ut  multa  juste  fieri  possint.”1  But  the  reply  is 
good,  “ Auctorem praesentis  justitiae  habeSy  spon- 
sorem  futurae  non  habes.” 2  Men  must  pursue 
things  which  are  just  in  present,  and  leave  the 
future  to  the  divine  Providence.3  So  then  we  pass 
on  from  this  general  part  touching  the  exemplar 
and  description  of  good. 

XXII.  i.  Now  therefore  that  we  have  spoken 
of  this  fruit  of  life,  it  remaineth  to  speak  of  the 
husbandry  that  belongeth  thereunto;  without 
which  part  the  former  seemeth  to  be  no  better 
than  a  fair  image,  or  statua,  which  is  beautiful 
to  contemplate,  but  is  without  life  and  motion; 
whereunto  Aristotle  himself  subscribeth  in  these 
words:  “ Necesse  est  scilicet  de  virtute  dicer e,  et 
quid  sit,  et  ex  quibus  gignatur.  Inutile  enim  fere 
fuerit  virtutem  quidem  nossey  acquirendae  autem 
ejus  modos  et  vias  ignorare .4  Non  enim  de  virtute 
tantumy  qua  specie  sit ,  quaerendum  estySed  et  quo- 
modo  suicopiam  faciat:  utrumque  enim  volumuSy 
et  rem  ipsam  nossey  et  ejus  compotes  fieri:  hoc  au¬ 
tem  ex  voto  non  succedety  nisi  sciamus  et  ex  quibus 
et  quomodo.” 5  In  such  full  words  and  with  such 
iteration  doth  he  inculcate  this  part.  So  saith 
Cicero  in  great  commendation  of  Cato  the  sec¬ 
ond,  that  he  had  applied  himself  to  philosophy, 

“ Non  ita  disputandi  causa ,  sed ita  vivendi .”6  And 
although  the  neglect  of  our  times,  wherein  few 
men  do  hold  any  consultations  touching  the  re¬ 
formation  of  their  life  (as  Seneca  excellently  sa¬ 
ith,  “De  partibus  vitae  quisque  deliberaty  de  sum- 
ma  nemo”)j  may  make  this  part  seem  superflu¬ 
ous;  yet  I  must  conclude  with  that  aphorism  of 
Hippocrates,  “Q [ui  gravi  morbo  correpti  dolores 
nonsentiunty  iis  mens  aegrotat.”* They  need  med¬ 
icine,  not  only  to  assuage  the  disease,  but  to 
awake  the  sense.  And  if  it  be  said,  that  the  cure 
of  men’s  minds  belongeth  to  sacred  divinity,  it 

^‘Some  things  must  be  done  unjustly,  that  many  more 
may  be  done  justly.” 

2“Present  justice  is  in  our  power,  but  of  future  justice 
we  have  no  security.” 

3Plutarch,  Moraliay  Prcecepta  Gerendae  Ret  public  ae,  i. 

24. 

4 Ethics ,  beginning.  ‘‘It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  speak 
of  virtue,  what  it  is,  and  whence  it  proceeds.  For  it  were 
in  a  manner  useless  to  know  virtue,  and  yet  be  ignorant 
of  the  ways  to  acquire  her.” 

bEthicsy  1.  “for  we  have  to  consider  not  only  what  it 
is,  but  how  it  is  to  be  had,  for  we  want  both  to  know 
virtue  and  to  be  virtuous;  which  we  cannot  be  without 
knowing  both  the  whence  and  the  how.” 

6 Pro  L.  Murenay  xxx.  62.  “Not  for  the  sake  of  (above) 
disputing  but  as  a  rule  of  life.” 

1  Epistle  lxxi.  §1.  “Every  man  takes  thought  about 
the  parts  of  his  life,  no  man  about  the  whole.” 

8 “Those  who  labour  under  a  violent  disease  yet  seem 
insensible  of  their  pain,  are  of  a  disordered  mind.” 


OF  LEARNING 

is  most  true:  but  yet  moral  philosophy  may  be 
preferred  unto  her  as  a  wise  servant  and  humble 
handmaid.  For  as  the  Psalm  saith,  “That  the 
eyes  of  the  handmaid  look  perpetually  towards 
the  mistress,’’9  and  yet  no  doubt  many  things 
are  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  handmaid,  to 
discern  of  the  mistress’  will ;  so  ought  moral  phil¬ 
osophy  to  give  a  constant  attention  to  the  doc¬ 
trines  of  divinity,  and  yet  so  as  it  may  yield  of 
herself  (within  due  limits)  many  sound  and  prof¬ 
itable  directions. 

2.  This  part  therefore,  because  of  the  excel¬ 
lency  thereof,  I  cannot  but  find  exceeding 
strange  that  it  is  not  reduced  to  written  inquiry: 
the  rather,  because  it  consisteth  of  much  mat¬ 
ter,  wherein  both  speech  and  action  is  often  con¬ 
versant;  and  such  wherein  the  common  talk  of 
men  (which  is  rare,  but  yet  cometh  sometimes 
to  pass)  is  wiser  than  their  books.  It  is  reason¬ 
able  therefore  that  we  propound  it  in  the  more 
particularity,  both  for  the  worthiness,  and  be¬ 
cause  we  may  acquit  ourselves  for  reporting  it 
deficient;  which  seemeth  almost  incredible,  and 
is  otherwise  conceived  and  presupposed  by  those 
themselves  that  have  written.  We  will  therefore 
enumerate  some  heads  or  points  thereof,  that 
it  may  appear  the  better  what  it  is,  and  whether 
it  be  extant. 

3.  First  therefore  in  this,  as  in  all  things  which 
are  practical,  we  ought  to  cast  up  our  account, 
what  is  in  our  power,  and  what  not;  for  the  one 
may  be  dealt  with  by  way  of  alteration,  but  the 
other  by  way  of  application  only.  The  husband¬ 
man  cannot  command,  neither  the  nature  of  the 
earth,  nor  the  seasons  of  the  weather;  no  more 
can  the  physician  the  constitution  of  the  patient, 
nor  the  variety  of  accidents.  So  in  the  culture 
and  cure  of  the  mind  of  man,  two  things  are 
without  our  command;  points  of  nature,  and 
points  of  fortune.  For  to  the  basis  of  the  one, 
and  the  conditions  of  the  other,  our  work  is  limit¬ 
ed  and  tied.  In  these  things  therefore  it  is  left 
unto  us  to  proceed  by  application: 

Vincenda  est  omnis  fortuna  ferendo :10 
and  so  likewise, 

Vincenda  est  omnis  Natura  ferendoN 

But  when  that  we  speak  of  suffering,  we  do  not 
speak  of  a  dull  and  neglected  suffering,  but  of 
a  wise  and  industrious  suffering,  which  draweth 
and  contriveth  use  and  advantage  out  of  that 

9Ps.  122.  3. 

10“A11  fortune  may  be  overcome  by  endurance  or  suf¬ 
fering.” 

11  “All  nature  may  be  overcome  by  suffering.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


which  seemeth  adverse  and  contrary;  which  is 
that  properly  which  we  call  accommodating  or 
applying.  Now  the  wisdom  of  application  res- 
teth  principally  in  the  exact  and  distinct  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  precedent  state  or  disposition,  unto 
which  we  do  apply:  for  we  cannot  lit  a  garment, 
except  we  first  take  measure  of  the  body. 

4.  So  then  the  first  article  of  this  knowledge 
is,  to  set  down  sound  and  true  distributions  and 
descriptions  of  the  several  characters  and  tem¬ 
pers  of  men’s  natures  and  dispositions;  specially 
having  regard  to  those  differences  which  are 
most  radical  in  being  the  fountains  and  causes 
of  the  rest,  or  most  frequent  in  concurrence  or 
commixture;  wherein  it  is  not  the  handling  of  a 
few  of  them  in  passage,  the  better  to  describe 
the  mediocrities  of  virtues,  that  can  satisfy  this 
intention.  For  if  it  deserve  to  be  considered,  that 
there  are  minds  which  are  proportioned  to  great 
matters,  and  others  to  small  (which  Aristotle 
handleth  or  ought  to  have  handled  by  the  name 
of  magnanimity),  doth  it  not  deserve  as  well  to 
be  considered,  that  there  are  minds  proportion¬ 
ed  to  intend  many  matters,  and  others  to  few? 
So  that  some  can  divide  themselves:  others  can 
perchance  do  exactly  well,  but  it  must  be  but 
in  few  things  at  once:  and  so  there  cometh  to 
be  a  narrowness  of  mind,  as  well  as  a  pusilla¬ 
nimity.  And  again,  that  some  minds  are  pro¬ 
portioned  to  that  which  may  be  dispatched  at 
once,  or  within  a  short  return  of  time;  others  to 
that  which  begins  afar  off,  and  is  to  be  won  with 
length  of  pursuit: 

Jam  turn  tenditque  fovetque .l 

So  that  there  may  be  fitly  said  to  be  a  longan¬ 
imity,  which  is  commonly  also  ascribed  to  God 
as  a  magnanimity.  So  further  deserved  it  to  be 
considered  by  Aristotle,  ‘‘That  there  is  a  dis¬ 
position  in  conversation  (supposing  it  in  things 
which  do  in  no  sort  touch  or  concern  a  man's 
self)  to  soothe  and  please;  and  a  disposition  con¬ 
trary  to  contradict  and  cross”:  and  deserveth 
it  not  much  better  to  be  considered,  “That  there 
is  a  disposition,  not  in  conversation  or  talk,  but 
in  matter  of  more  serious  nature  (and  supposing 
it  still  in  thingsmerely  indifferent),  to  take  plea¬ 
sure  in  the  good  of  another:  and  a  disposition 
contrariwise,  to  take  distaste  at  the  good  of  an¬ 
other”?  which  is  that  properly  which  we  call 
good  nature  or  ill  nature,  benignity  or  malignity : 
and  therefore  I  cannot  sufficiently  marvel  that 
this  part  of  knowledge,  touching  the  several 
characters  of  natures  and  dispositions,  should 

1“He  begins  to  attend  and  nurse  his  project  while  it  is 
yet  in  the  cradle.” 


be  omitted  both  in  morality  and  policy;  con¬ 
sidering  it  is  of  so  great  ministry  and  suppedi- 
tation  to  them  both.  A  man  shall  find  in  the 
traditions  of  astrology  some  pretty  and  apt  divi¬ 
sions  of  men’s  natures,  according  to  the  predom¬ 
inances  of  the  planets;  lovers  of  quiet,  lovers  of 
action,  lovers  of  victory,  lovers  of  honour,  lov¬ 
ers  of  pleasure,  lovers  of  arts,  lovers  of  change, 
and  so  forth.  A  man  shall  find  in  the  wisest  sort 
of  these  relations  which  the  Italians  make  touch¬ 
ing  conclaves,  the  natures  of  the  several  card¬ 
inals  handsomely  and  lively  painted  forth.  A 
man  shall  meet  with  in  every  day’s  conference 
thedenominationsofsensitive,  dry,  formal, real, 
humorous,  certain,  “ huomo  di  prima  impressi- 
one ,  huomo  di  ultima  impressione ,  ”  and  the  like: 
and  yet  nevertheless  this  kind  of  observations 
wandereth  in  words,  but  is  not  fixed  in  inquiry. 
For  the  distinctions  are  found  (many  of  them), 
but  we  conclude  no  precepts  upon  them :  where¬ 
in  our  fault  is  the  greater;  because  both  history, 
poesy  and  daily  experience  are  as  goodly  fields 
where  these  observations  grow;  whereof  we 
make  a  few  posies  to  hold  in  our  hands,  but 
no  man  bringeth  them  to  the  confectionary, 
that  receipts  mought  be  made  of  them  for  use 
of  life. 

5.  Of  much  like  kind  are  those  impressions  of 
nature,  which  are  imposed  upon  the  mind  by 
the  sex,  by  the  age,  by  the  region,  by  health 
and  sickness,  by  beauty  and  deformity,  and  the 
like,  which  are  inherent  and  not  extern;  and 
again,  those  which  are  caused  by  extern  fortune; 
as  sovereignty,  nobility,  obscure  birth,  riches, 
want,  magistracy,  privateness,  prosperity,  ad¬ 
versity,  constant  fortune,  variable  fortune,  ris¬ 
ing  per  saltum ,  per  gradus ,2  and  the  like.  And 
therefore  we  see  that  Plautus  maketh  it  a  won¬ 
der  to  see  an  old  man  beneficent,  “ benignitas 
hujus  ut  adolescentuli  est .”3  Saint  Paul  conclud¬ 
ed  that  severity  of  discipline  was  to  be  used  to 
the  Cretans,  “ increpa  eos  dure ,”4  upon  the  dis¬ 
position  of  theircountry,  “Cretenses semper  men- 
daces ,  malae  bestiae ,  ventres  pigri.”b  Sallust  no- 
teth  that  it  is  usual  with  kings  to  desire  contra¬ 
dictories:  “Sed  plerumque  regiae  voluntates ,  ut 
vehementes  sunty  sic  mobiles ,  saepeque  ipsae  sibi 
adversae .”6  Tacitus  observeth  how  rarely  raising 

2“By  a  leap,  by  degrees.” 

3 Miles  Gloriosus ,  Act  3,  Sc.  i,  v.  39.  “He  is  as  generous 
as  if  he  were  a  young  man.” 

4“Rebuke  them  sharply.” 

5Titus,  1.  12.  “The  Cretans  are  always  liars,  evil 
beasts,  and  slow  bellies.” 

6 Bellum  Jugurthum ,  1.  50.  “Royal  desires,  as  they  are 
violent,  so  are  they  changeable,  and  often  incompatible 
with  each  other.” 


78  ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


of  the  fortune  mendeth  the  disposition:  “ solus 
Vespasianus  mutatus  in  melius”1  Pindarus  mak- 
eth  an  observation,  that  great  and  sudden  for¬ 
tune  for  the  most  part  defeateth  men  “ qui  mag- 
nam  jelicitatem  concoquere  non  possunt”  }  So  the 
Psalm  showeth  it  is  more  easy  to  keep  a  measure 
in  the  enjoying  of  fortune,  than  in  the  increase 
of  fortune:  “ Divitiae  si  affluant ,  nolite  cor  ap- 
ponere.”z  These  observations  and  the  like  I  de¬ 
ny  not  but  are  touched  a  little  by  Aristotle  as 
in  passage  in  his  Rhetorics ,  and  are  handled  in 
some  scattered  discourses:  but  they  were  never 
incorporate  into  moral  philosophy,  to  which 
they  do  essentially  appertain;  as  the  knowledge 
of  the  diversity  of  grounds  and  moulds  doth  to 
agriculture,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  diversity 
of  complexions  and  constitutions  doth  to  the 
physician;  except  we  mean  to  follow  the  indis¬ 
cretion  of  empirics,  which  minister  the  same 
medicines  to  all  patients. 

6.  Another  article  of  this  knowledge  is  the 
inquiry  touching  the  affections;  for  as  in  med- 
icining  of  the  body,  it  is  in  order  first  to  know 
the  divers  complexions  and  constitutions;  sec¬ 
ondly,  the  diseases;  and  lastly,  the  cures:  so  in 
medicining  of  the  mind,  after  knowledge  of  the 
divers  characters  of  men’s  natures,  it  followeth 
in  order  to  know  the  diseases  and  infirmities  of 
the  mind,  which  are  no  other  than  the  pertur¬ 
bations  and  distempers  of  the  affections.  For  as 
the  ancient  politiques  in  popular  estates  were 
wont  to  compare  the  people  to  the  sea,  and  the 
orators  to  the  winds;  because  as  the  sea  would 
of  itself  be  calm  and  quiet,  if  the  winds  did  not 
move  and  trouble  it;  so  the  people  would  be 
peaceable  and  tractable,  if  the  seditious  orators 
did  not  set  them  in  working  and  agitation:  so 
it  may  be  fitly  said,  that  the  mind  in  the  nature 
thereof  would  be  temperate  and  stayed,  if  the 
affections,  as  winds,  did  not  put  it  into  tumult 
and  perturbation.  And  here  again  I  find  strange, 
as  before,  that  Aristotle  should  have  written 
divers  volumes  of  Ethics,  and  never  handled  the 
affections,  which  is  theprincipal  subject  thereof; 
and  yet  in  his  Rhetorics ,  where  they  are  consid¬ 
ered  but  collaterally  and  in  a  second  degree  (as 
they  may  be  moved  by  speech),4  he  findeth  place 
for  them,  and  handleth  them  well  for  the  quan¬ 
tity;  but  where  their  true  place  is,  he  preter- 
mitteth  them.  For  it  is  not  his  disputations 

1  Histories,  Bk.  i.  53.  “Vespasian  alone  changed  for  the 
better.” 

2 Olympian  Odes,  1.  55.  “That  cannot  digest  great 
felicity.” 

3Ps.  61.  11.  “If  riches  fly  to  thee,  set  not  thy  heart 
upon  them.” 

4See  Book  11,  and  Ethics ,  Bk.  n.  4.1. 


about  pleasure  and  pain  that  can  satisfy  this 
inquiry,  no  more  than  he  that  should  generally 
handle  the  nature  of  light  can  be  said  to  handle 
the  nature  of  colours;  for  pleasure  and  pain  are 
to  the  particular  affections,  as  light  is  to  par¬ 
ticular  colours.  Better  travails,  I  suppose,  had 
the  Stoics  taken  in  this  argument,  as  far  as  I 
can  gather  by  that  which  we  have  at  second 
hand.  But  yet  it  is  like  it  was  after  their  man¬ 
ner,  rather  in  subtilty  of  definitions  (which  in 
a  subject  of  this  nature  are  but  curiosities),  than 
in  active  and  ample  descriptions  and  observa¬ 
tions.  So  likewise  I  find  some  particular  writ¬ 
ings  of  an  elegant  nature,  touching  some  of  the 
affections;  as  of  anger,  of  comfort  upon  adverse 
accidents,  of  tenderness  of  countenance,  and 
other.  But  the  poets  and  writers  of  histories  are 
the  best  doctors  of  this  knowledge;  where  we 
may  find  painted  forth  with  great  life,  how  af¬ 
fections  are  kindled  and  incited;  and  how  paci¬ 
fied  and  refrained;  and  how  again  contained 
from  act  and  further  degree;  how  they  disclose 
themselves ;  how  they  work ;  how  they  vary;  how 
they  gather  and  fortify ;  how  they  are  enwrapped 
one  within  another;  and  how  they  do  fight  and 
encounter  one  with  another;  and  other  the  like 
particularities.  Amongst  the  which  this  last  is 
of  special  use  in  moral  and  civil  matters;  how, 
I  say,  to  set  affection  against  affection,  and  to 
master  one  by  another;  even  as  we  use  to  hunt 
beast  with  beast,  and  fly  bird  with  bird,  which 
otherwise  percase  we  could  not  so  easily  recover; 
upon  which  foundation  is  erected  that  excellent 
use  o  {praemiumh  and  poena*  whereby  civil  states 
consist:  employing  the  predominant  affections 
of  fear  and  hope,  for  the  suppressing  and  brid¬ 
ling  the  rest.  For  as  in  the  government  of  states 
it  is  sometimes  necessary  to  bridle  one  faction 
with  another,  so  it  is  in  the  government  within. 

7.  Now  come  we  to  those  points  which  are 
within  our  own  command,  and  have  force  and 
operation  upon  the  mind,  to  affect  the  will  and 
appetite,  and  to  alter  manners:  wherein  they 
ought  to  have  handled  custom,  exercise,  habit, 
education,  example,  imitation,  emulation,  com¬ 
pany,  friends, praise, reproof, exhortation,  fame, 
laws,  books,  studies:  these  as  they  have  deter¬ 
minate  use  in  moralities,  from  these  the  mind 
suffereth ;  and  of  these  are  such  receipts  and  regi¬ 
ments  compounded  and  described,  as  may  serve 
to  recover  or  preserve  the  health  and  good  es¬ 
tate  of  the  mind,  as  far  as  pertaineth  to  human 
medicine:  of  which  number  we  will  insist  upon 
some  one  or  two,  as  an  example  of  the  rest,  be¬ 
cause  it  were  too  long  to  prosecute  all;  and  there- 

5“Reward.”  6“Punishment.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


fore  we  do  resume  custom  and  habit  to  speak  of. 

8.  The  opinion  of  Aristotle  seemeth  to  me  a 
negligent  opinion,  that  of  those  things  which 
consist  by  nature,  nothing  can  be  changed  by 
custom;1  using  for  example,  that  if  a  stone  be 
thrown  ten  thousand  times  up,  it  will  not  learn 
to  ascend;  and  that  by  often  seeing  or  hearing, 
we  do  not  learn  to  see  or  hear  the  better.  For 
though  this  principle  be  true  in  things  wherein 
nature  is  peremptory  (the  reason  whereof  we 
cannot  now  stand  to  discuss),  yet  it  is  otherwise 
in  things  wherein  nature  admitteth  a  latitude. 
For  he  mought  see  that  a  strait  glove  will  come 
more  easily  on  with  use;  and  that  a  wand  will 
by  use  bend  otherwise  than  it  grew;  and  that 
by  use  of  the  voice  we  speak  louder  and  stronger; 
and  that  by  use  of  enduring  heat  or  cold,  we 
endure  it  the  better,  and  the  like:  which  latter 
sort  have  a  nearer  resemblance  unto  that  sub¬ 
ject  ofmanners  he  handleth,  than  those  instan¬ 
ces  which  he  allegeth.  But  allowing  his  conclu¬ 
sion,  that  virtues  and  vices  consist  in  habit,  he 
ought  so  much  the  more  to  have  taught  the 
manner  of  superinducing  that  habit:  for  there 
be  many  precepts  of  the  wise  ordering  the  ex¬ 
ercises  of  the  mind,  as  there  is  of  ordering  the 
exercises  of  the  body;  whereof  we  will  recite  a 
few. 

9.  The  first  shall  be,  that  we  beware  we  take 
not  at  the  first,  either  too  high  a  strain,  or  too 
weak:  for  if  too  high,  in  a  diffident  nature  you 
discourage,  in  a  confident  nature  you  breed  an 
opinion  of  facility,  and  so  a  sloth;  and  in  all  na¬ 
tures  you  breed  a  further  expectation  than  can 
hold  out,  and  so  an  insatisfaction  in  the  end: 
if  too  weak,  of  the  other  side,  you  may  not  look 
to  perform  and  overcome  any  great  task. 

10.  Another  precept  is,  to  practise  all  things 
chiefly  at  two  several  times,  the  one  when  the 
mind  is  best  disposed,  the  other  when  it  is  worst 
disposed;  that  by  the  one  you  may  gain  a  great 
step,  by  the  other  you  may  work  out  the  knots 
and  stonds  of  the  mind,  and  make  the  middle 
times  the  more  easy  and  pleasant. 

11.  Another  precept  is,  that  which  Aristotle 
mentioneth  by  the  way,  which  is  to  bear  ever 
towards  the  contrary  extreme  of  that  where- 
unto  we  are  by  nature  inclined:  like  unto  the 
rowing  against  the  stream,  or  making  a  wand 
straight  by  bending  him  contrary  to  his  natural 
crookedness.2 

1 2.  Another  precept  is,  that  the  mind  is  brought 
toanythingbetter,and  with  more  sweetness  and 
happiness,  if  that  whereunto  you  pretend  be  not 

lEthics>  Bk.  11,  last  chapter. 

2 Ethics ,  Bk.  11.  95,  towards  the  end. 


first  in  the  intention,  but  tanquam  aliud agendo ,3 
because  of  the  natural  hatred  of  the  mind  against 
necessity  and  constraint.  Many  other  axioms 
there  are  touching  the  managing  of  exercise  and 
custom;  which  being  so  conducted,  doth  prove 
indeed  another  nature;  but  being  governed  by 
chance,  doth  commonly  prove  but  an  ape  of  na¬ 
ture,  and  bringeth  forth  that  which  is  lame  and 
counterfeit. 

13.  So  if  we  should  handle  books  and  studies, 
and  what  influence  and  operation  they  have  up¬ 
on  manners,  are  there  not  divers  precepts  of 
great  caution  and  direction  appertaining  there¬ 
unto?  Did  not  one  of  the  fathers  in  great  indig¬ 
nation  call  poesy  vinum  daemonum ,4  because  it 
increaseth  temptations,  perturbations,  and  vain 
opinions?  Is  not  the  opinion  of  Aristotle  worthy 
to  be  regarded,  wherein  he  saith,  “That  young 
men  are  no  fit  auditors  of  moral  philosophy,  be¬ 
cause  they  are  not  settled  from  the  boiling  heat 
of  their  affections,  nor  attempered  with  time 
and  experience”  ?5  And  doth  it  not  hereof  come, 
that  those  excellent  books  and  discourses  of  the 
ancient  writers  (whereby  they  have  persuaded 
unto  virtue  most  effectually,  by  representing 
her  in  state  and  majesty,  and  popular  opinions 
against  virtue  in  their  parasites’  coats  fit  to  be 
scorned  and  derided),  are  of  so  little  effect  to¬ 
wards  honesty  of  life,  because  they  are  not  read 
and  revolved  by  men  in  their  mature  and  set¬ 
tled  years,  but  confined  almost  to  boys  and  be¬ 
ginners?  But  is  it  not  true  also,  that  much  less 
young  men  are  fit  auditors  of  matters  of  policy, 
till  they  have  been  thoroughly  seasoned  in  re¬ 
ligion  and  morality;  lest  their  judgements  be 
corrupted,  and  made  apt  to  think  that  there  are 
no  true  differences  of  things,  but  according  to 
utility  and  fortune,  as  the  verse  describes  it, 
“ Prosperum  etfelix  scelus  virtus  vocatur'f  and 
again,  “Ille  crucem  pretium  sceleris  tulit ,  hie  di- 
adema”  :7  which  the  poets  do  speak  satirically, 
and  in  indignation  on  virtue’s  behalf;  but  books 
of  policy  do  speak  it  seriously  and  positively; 
for  so  it  pleaseth  Machiavel  to  say,  “That  if 
Caesar  had  been  overthrown,  he  would  have 
been  more  odious  than  ever  was  Catiline”;  as 
if  there  had  been  no  difference,  but  in  fortune, 
between  a  very  fury  of  lust  and  blood,  and  the 
most  excellent  spirit  (his  ambition  reserved)  of 
the  world?  Again,  is  there  not  a  caution  like- 

3“As  some  other  intention.” 

4“The  devil’s  wine.” 

5 Ethics ,  Bk.  1.  15. 

6Seneca,  Hercules  jurens ,  v.  251.  “Successful  villainy  is 
called  virtue.” 

7Juvenai,  Satires ,  xm.  105.  “The  same  crime  is  rewarded 
in  one  man  with  a  gibbet  and  in  another  with  a  crown.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


80 

wise  to  be  given  of  the  doctrines  of  moralities 
themselves  (somekindsof  them), lest  they  make 
men  too  precise,  arrogant,  incompatible;  as  Cic¬ 
ero  saith  of  Cato,  “In  Marco  Catone  haec  bona 
quae  videmus  divina  et  egregia,  ipsius  scitote  esse 
propria ;  quae  nonnunquam  requirimus ,  ea  sunt 
omnia  non  a  natura ,  sed  a  magistro?”1 2  Many 
other  axioms  and  advices  there  are  touching 
those  proprieties  and  effects,  which  studies  do 
infuse  and  instil  into  manners.  And  so  likewise 
is  there  touching  the  use  of  all  those  other  points, 
of  company,  fame,  laws,  and  the  rest,  which  we 
recited  in  the  beginning  in  the  doctrine  of  mo¬ 
rality. 

14.  But  there  is  a  kind  of  culture  of  the  mind 
that  seemeth  yet  more  accurate  and  elaborate 
than  the  rest,  and  is  built  upon  this  ground; 
that  the  minds  of  all  men  are  at  some  times  in 
a  state  more  perfect,  and  at  other  times  in  a 
state  more  depraved.  The  purpose  therefore  of 
this  practice  is  to  fix  and  cherish  the  good  hours 
of  the  mind,  and  to  obliterate  and  take  forth 
the  evil.  The  fixing  of  the  good  hath  been  prac¬ 
tised  by  two  means,  vows  or  constant  resolu¬ 
tions,  and  observances  or  exercises;  which  are 
not  to  be  regarded  so  much  in  themselves,  as 
because  they  keep  the  mind  in  continual  obed¬ 
ience.  The  obliteration  of  the  evil  hath  been 
practised  by  two  means,  some  kind  of  redemp¬ 
tion  or  expiation  of  that  which  is  past,  and  an 
inception  or  account  de  novo 2  for  the  time  to 
come.  But  this  part  seemeth  sacred  and  reli¬ 
gious,  and  justly;  for  all  good  moral  philosophy 
(as  was  said)  is  but  an  handmaid  to  religion. 

15.  Wherefore  we  will  conclude  with  that  last 
point,  which  is  of  all  other  means  the  most  com¬ 
pendious  and  summary,  and  again,  the  most  no¬ 
ble  and  effectual  to  the  reducing  of  the  mind 
unto  virtue  and  good  estate;  which  is,  the  elect¬ 
ing  and  propounding  unto  a  man's  self  good  and 
virtuous  ends  of  his  life,  such  as  may  be  in  a 
reasonable  sort  within  his  compass  to  attain. 
For  if  these  two  things  be  supposed,  that  a  man 
set  before  him  honest  and  good  ends,  and  again, 
that  he  beresolute, constant,  and  trueunto  them ; 
it  will  follow  that  he  shall  mould  himself  into 
all  virtue  at  once.  And  this  is  indeed  like  the 
work  of  nature;  whereas  the  other  course  is  like 
the  work  of  the  hand.  For  as  when  a  carver 
makes  an  image,  he  shapes  only  that  part  where¬ 
upon  he  worketh;  as  if  he  be  upon  the  face,  that 

lPro  L.  Murena ,  39.  “The  divine  and  excellent  qualities 
we  see  in  him  are  his  own;  but  the  things  he  sometimes 
fails  in  are  all  derived,  not  from  nature  but  from  his 
instructors.” 

2“Anew.” 


part  which  shall  be  the  body  is  but  a  rude  stone 
still,  till  such  time  as  he  comes  to  it.  But  con¬ 
trariwise  when  nature  makes  a  flower  or  living 
creature,  she  formeth  rudiments  of  all  the  parts 
at  one  time.  So  in  obtaining  virtue  by  habit, 
while  a  man  practiseth  temperance,  he  doth  not 
profit  much  to  fortitude,  nor  the  like:  but  when 
hededicateth  and  applieth  himself  to  good  ends, 
look,  what  virtue  soever  the  pursuit  and  passage 
towards  those  ends  doth  commend  unto  him, 
he  is  invested  of  a  precedent  disposition  to  con¬ 
form  himself  thereunto.  Which  state  of  mind 
Aristotle  doth  excellently  express  himself,  that 
it  ought  not  to  be  called  virtuous,  but  divine: 
his  words  are  these:  “Immanitati  autem  consen- 
taneum  est  opponere  earn ,  quae  supra  humanita- 
tem  est ,  heroicam  sive  divinam  virtutem"  :3  and  a 
little  after,  “Nam  ut  ferae  neque  vitium  neque 
virtus  esty  sic  neque  Dei:  sed  hie  quidem  status 
altius  quiddam  virlute  est ,  ille  aliud  quiddam  a 
vitio.”4  And  therefore  we  may  see  what  celsitude 
of  honour  Plinius  Secundus  attributeth  to  Tra¬ 
jan  in  his  funeral  oration;  where  he  said,  “That 
men  needed  to  make  no  other  prayers  to  the 
gods,  but  that  they  would  continue  as  good  lords 
to  them  as  Trajan  had  been”:5  as  if  he  had  not 
been  only  an  imitation  of  divine  nature,  but  a 
pattern  of  it.  But  these  be  heathen  and  profane 
passages,  having  but  a  shadow  of  that  divine 
state  of  mind,  which  religion  and  the  holy  faith 
doth  conduct  men  unto,  by  imprinting  upon 
their  souls  charity,  which  is  excellently  called 
the  bond  of  perfection,6  because  it  comprehend- 
eth  and  fasteneth  all  virtues  together.  And  as 
it  is  elegantly  said  by  Menander  of  vain  love, 
which  is  but  a  false  imitation  of  divine  love, 
“Amor  melior  Sophista  laevo  ad  humanam  vi- 
tamy ”  that  love  teacheth  a  man  to  carry  him¬ 
self  better  than  the  sophist  or  preceptor,  which 
he  calleth  left-handed,  because,  with  all  his  rules 
and  preceptions,  he  cannot  form  a  man  so  dex- 
teriously,  nor  with  that  facility  to  prize  him¬ 
self  and  govern  himself,  as  love  can  do:  so  cer¬ 
tainly,  if  a  man’s  mind  be  truly  inflamed  with 
charity,  it  doth  work  him  suddenly  into  greater 
perfection  than  all  the  doctrine  of  morality  can 
do,  which  is  but  a  sophist  in  comparison  of  the 
other.  Nay  further,  as  Xenophon  observed  tru¬ 
ly,7  that  all  other  affections,  though  they  raise 

3“We  may  contrast  humanity  with  that  virtue  which 
is  above  it,  as  being  heroic  and  divine.” 

4“For  as  savage  creatures  are  incapable  of  vice  or 
virtue,  so  is  the  Deity  for  the  divine  state  is  above  virtue, 
which  is  only  the  absence  of  vice.” 

b  Pancgyricus,  lxxiv.  §  4,  5. 

6  Col.  in. 

7  Cyropcedia. 


SECOND  BOOK 


the  mind,  yet  they  do  it  by  distorting  and  un¬ 
comeliness  of  ecstasies  or  excesses;  but  only  love 
doth  exalt  the  mind,  and  nevertheless  at  the 
same  instant  doth  settle  and  compose  it:  so  in 
all  other  excellencies,  though  they  advance  na¬ 
ture,  yet  they  are  subject  to  excess.  Only  char¬ 
ity  admitteth  no  excess.  For  so  we  see,  aspiring 
to  be  like  God  in  power,  the  angels  transgressed 
and  fell;  “ Ascendamy  et  ero  similis  altissimo” d 
by  aspiring  to  be  like  God  in  knowledge,  man 
transgressed  and  fell;  “ Eritis  sicut  Dii ,  scientes 
bonum  et  malum”  ?  but  by  aspiring  to  a  simili¬ 
tude  of  God  in  goodness  or  love,  neither  man 
nor  angel  ever  transgressed,  or  shall  transgress. 
For  unto  that  imitation  we  are  called:  “Diligite 
inimicos  vestros ,  benefacite  eis  qui  oderunt  vosy  et 
orate  pro  persequentibus  et  calumniantibus  vos , 
ut  sitis  filii  Patris  vestri  qui  in  coelis  est ,  qui  so- 
lem  suum  oriri facit  super  bonos  et  malosy  et pluit 
super  justos  et  injustos.”z  So  in  the  first  platform 
of  the  divine  nature  itself,  the  heathen  religion 
speaketh  thus,  “ Optimus  Maximus” :  and  the 
sacred  Scriptures  thus,  “ Misericordia  ejus  super 
omnia  opera  ejus.”A 

1 6.  Wherefore  I  do  conclude  this  part  of  mor¬ 
al  knowledge,  concerning  the  culture  and  regi¬ 
ment  of  the  mind;  wherein  it  any  man,  consid¬ 
ering  the  parts  thereof  which  I  have  enumer¬ 
ated,  do  judge  that  my  labour  is  but  to  collect 
into  an  art  or  science  that  which  hath  been  pre- 
termitted  by  others,  as  matter  of  common  sense 
and  experience,  he  judgeth  well.  But  as  Philoc- 
rates  sported  with  Demosthenes,  “You  may  not 
marvel  (Athenians)  that  Demosthenes  and  I  do 
differ;  for  he  drinketh  water,  and  I  drink  wine”; 
and  like  as  we  read  of  an  ancient  parable  of  the 
two  gates  of  sleep. 

Sunt  geminae  somni  portae :  quarum  altera  fertur 

Cornea ,  qua  veris  facilis  datur  exitus  umbris: 

Altera  candenti  perjecta  nitens  elephanto, 

Sed falsa  ad  coelum  mittunt  insomnia  manes:5 

so  if  we  put  on  sobriety  and  attention,  we  shall 
find  it  a  sure  maxim  in  knowledge,  that  the  more 
pleasant  liquor  ( of  wine)  is  the  more  vaporous, 

1Isa.  14.  14.  “I  will  ascend,  and  be  like  the  Most  High.” 

2 “Ye  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil.” 

3Matt.  5.  44.  “Love  your  enemies;  do  good  to  those 
that  hate  you;  pray  for  those  that  despitefully  use  and 
persecute  you;  that  ye  may  be  the  children  of  your  father, 
which  is  in  heaven,  for  he  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  upon  the 
good  and  upon  the  evil,  and  sends  his  rain  upon  the  just 
and  upon  the  unjust.” 

4Eccles.  18.  12.  “His  mercy  is  above  all  his  works.” 

5  Virgil  ALneidy  Bk.  vi.  893.  “Two  gates  there  are  of  sleep; 
of  horn  the  one,  by  which  the  true  shades  pass;  of  ivory 
burnished  and  white  the  other,  but  through  it  into  the 
upper  world  false  dreams  are  sent.” 


8l 

and  the  braver  gate  {of  ivory)  sendeth  forth  the 
falser  dreams. 

17.  But  we  have  now  concluded  that  general 
part  of  human  philosophy,  which  contemplat- 
eth  man  segregate,  and  as  he  consisteth  of  body 
and  spirit.  Wherein  we  may  further  note,  that 
there  seemeth  to  be  a  relation  or  conformity  be¬ 
tween  the  good  of  the  mind  and  the  good  of  the 
body.  For  as  we  divided  the  good  of  the  body 
into  health,  beauty,  strength,  and  pleasure;  so 
the  good  of  the  mind,  inquired  in  rational  and 
moral  knowledges,  tendeth  to  this,  to  make  the 
mind  sound,  and  without  perturbation;  beau¬ 
tiful,  and  graced  with  decency;  and  strong  and 
agile  for  all  duties  of  life.  These  three,  as  in  the 
body,  so  in  the  mind,  seldom  meet,  and  com¬ 
monly  sever.  For  it  is  easy  to  observe,  that  many 
have  strength  of  wit  and  courage,  but  have  nei¬ 
ther  health  from  perturbations,  nor  any  beauty 
or  decency  in  their  doings:  some  again  have  an 
elegancy  and  fineness  of  carriage,  which  have 
neither  soundness  of  honesty,  nor  substance  of 
sufficiency:  and  some  again  have  honest  and  re¬ 
formed  minds,  that  can  neither  become  them¬ 
selves  nor  manage  business:  and  sometimes  two 
of  them  meet,  and  rarely  all  three.  As  for  plea¬ 
sure,  we  have  likewise  determined  that  the  mind 
ought  not  to  be  reduced  to  stupid,  but  to  retain 
pleasure;  confined  rather  in  the  subject  of  it, 
than  in  the  strength  and  vigour  of  it. 

XXIII.  1.  Civil  knowledge  is  conversant 
about  a  subject  which  of  all  others  is  most  im¬ 
mersed  in  matter,  and  hardliest  reduced  to  ax¬ 
iom.  Nevertheless,  as  Cato  the  Censor  said, 
“That  the  Romans  were  like  sheep,  for  that  a 
man  were  better  drive  a  flock  ol  them,  than  one 
of  them;  for  in  a  flock,  if  you  could  get  but  some 
few  go  right,  the  rest  would  follow”:  so  in  that 
respect  moral  philosophy  is  more  difficile  than 
policy.6  Again,  moral  philosophy  propoundeth 
to  itself  the  framing  of  internal  goodness;  but 
civil  knowledge  requireth  only  an  external  good¬ 
ness;  for  that  as  to  society  sufficeth.  And  there¬ 
fore  it  cometh  oft  to  pass  that  there  be  evil 
times  in  good  governments:  tor  so  we  find  in 
the  holy  story,  when  the  kings  were  good,  yet 
it  is  added,  “Sed  adhuc  populus  non  direxerat 
cor  suun  ad  Dominum  Deum  patrum  suorum .”7 
Again,  states,  as  great  engines,  move  slowly, 
and  are  not  so  soon  put  out  of  frame:  for  as  in 
Egypt  the  seven  good  years  sustained  the  seven 
bad,  so  governments  for  a  time  well  grounded, 
do  bear  out  errors  following;  but  the  resolution 

6 Plutarch,  Cato. 

7“But  the  people  had  not  yet  turned  their  hearts  to  the 
Lord  God  of  their  fathers.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


82 

of  particular  persons  is  more  suddenly  subvert¬ 
ed.  These  respects  do  somewhat  qualify  the  ex¬ 
treme  difficulty  of  civil  knowledge. 

2.  This  knowledge  hath  three  parts,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  three  summary  actions  of  society; 
which  are  conversation,  negotiation,  and  gov¬ 
ernment.  For  man  seeketh  in  society  comfort, 
use,  and  protection:  and  they  be  three  wisdoms 
of  divers  natures,  which  do  often  sever:  wis¬ 
dom  of  the  behaviour,  wisdom  of  business,  and 
wisdom  of  state. 

3.  The  wisdom  of  conversation  ought  not  to 
be  over  much  affected,  but  much  less  despised; 
for  it  hath  not  only  an  honour  in  itself,  but  an 
influence  also  into  business  and  government. 
The  poet  saith,  “Nec  vultu.  destrue  verba  tuo”:1 
a  man  may  destroy  the  force  of  his  words  with 
his  countenance:  so  may  he  of  his  deeds,  saith 
Cicero,  recommending  to  his  brother  affability 
and  easy  access;  “Nil  interest  habere  ostium  aper- 
tumy  vultum  clausum” ;2  it  is  nothing  won  to  ad¬ 
mit  men  with  an  open  door,  and  to  receive  them 
with  a  shut  and  reserved  countenance.  So  we 
see  Atticus,  before  the  first  interview  between 
Caesar  and  Cicero,  the  war  depending,  did  ser¬ 
iously  advise  Cicero  touching  the  composing  and 
ordering  of  his  countenance  and  gesture.  And 
if  the  government  of  the  countenance  be  of  such 
effect,  much  more  is  that  of  the  speech,  and 
other  carriage  appertaining  to  conversation ;  the 
true  model  whereof  seemeth  to  me  well  expressed 
by  Livy,  though  not  meant  for  this  purpose: 
“Ne  aut  arrogans  videar ,  aut  obnoxius;  quorum 
alterum  est  alienae  libertatis  obliti ,  alterum  su¬ 
ae”  :3  the  sum  of  behaviour  is  to  retain  a  man’s 
own  dignity,  without  intruding  upon  the  liberty 
of  others.  On  the  other  side,  if  behaviour  and 
outward  carriage  be  intended  too  much,  first  it 
may  pass  into  affectation,  and  then  “Quid  de- 
formius  quam  scenam  in  vitam  transferred*  to 
act  a  man’s  life?  But  although  it  proceed  not 
to  that  extreme,  yet  it  consumeth  time,  and  em- 
ployeth  the  mind  too  much.  And  therefore  as 
we  use  to  advise  young  students  from  company 
keeping,  by  saying,  “Amici fures  temporis” :5  so 
certainly  the  intending  of  the  discretion  of  be¬ 
haviour  is  a  great  thief  of  meditation.  Again, 
such  as  are  accomplished  in  that  form  of  urban¬ 
ity  please  themselves  in  it,  and  seldom  aspire 

^vid,  Ars  Amatoria,  1.  312. 

2Quintus  Cicero,  Petitionis  Consulatusy  xi.  44. 

3Speech  of  Hanno.  “That  I  may  seem  neither  arrogant 
nor  obnoxious;  that  is,  forget  neither  my  own  nor  other's 
liberty.” 

4 “What  is  more  preposterous  than  to  copy  the  theatres 
in  real  life?” 

3“Friends  are  the  thieves  of  time.” 


to  higher  virtue;  whereas  those  that  have  de¬ 
fect  in  it  do  seek  comeliness  by  reputation:  for 
where  reputation  is,  almost  everything  becom- 
eth;  but  where  that  is  not,  it  must  be  supplied 
by  puntos  and  compliments.  Again,  there  is  no 
greater  impediment  of  action  than  an  over-cu¬ 
rious  observance  of  decency,  and  the  guide  of 
decency,  which  is  time  and  season.  For  as  Salo¬ 
mon  saith,  “Qui  respicit  ad  ventos ,  non  seminat; 
et  qui  respicit  ad  nubes ,  non  metet”  :6  a  man  must 
make  his  opportunity,  as  oft  as  find  it.  To  con¬ 
clude,  behaviour  seemeth  to  me  as  a  garment 
of  the  mind,  and  to  have  the  conditions  of  a 
garment.  For  it  ought  to  be  made  in  fashion; 
it  ought  not  to  be  too  curious;  it  ought  to  be 
shaped  so  as  to  set  forth  any  good  making  of 
the  mind  and  hide  any  deformity;  and  above 
all,  it  ought  not  to  be  too  strait  or  restrained 
for  exercise  or  motion.  But  this  part  of  civil 
knowledge  hath  been  elegantly  handled,  and 
therefore  1  cannot  report  it  for  deficient. 

4.  The  wisdom  touching  negotiation  or  busi¬ 
ness  hath  not  been  hitherto  collected  into  writ¬ 
ing,  to  the  great  derogation  of  learning,  and  the 
professors  of  learning.  For  from  this  root  spring- 
eth  chiefly  that  note  or  opinion,  which  by  us  is 
expressed  in  adage  to  this  effect,  that  there  is 
no  great  concurrence  between  learning  and  wis¬ 
dom.  For  of  the  three  wisdoms  which  we  have 
set  down  to  pertain  to  civil  life,  for  wisdom  of 
behaviour,  it  is  by  learned  men  for  the  most 
part  despised,  as  an  inferior  to  virtue  and  an 
enemy  to  meditation;  for  wisdom  of  govern¬ 
ment,  they  acquit  themselves  well  when  they 
are  called  to  it,  but  that  happeneth  to  few;  but 
for  the  wisdom  of  business,  wherein  man’s  life 
is  most  conversant,  there  be  no  books  of  it,  ex¬ 
cept  some  few  scattered  advertisements,  that 
have  no  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  this  sub¬ 
ject.  For  if  books  were  written  of  this  as  the 
other,  I  doubt  not  but  learned  men  with  mean 
experience,  would  far  excel  men  of  long  exper¬ 
ience  without  learning,  and  outshoot  them  in 
their  own  bow. 

5.  Neither  needeth  it  at  all  to  be  doubted, 
that  this  knowledge  should  be  so  variable  as  it 
falleth  not  under  precept;  for  it  is  much  less  in¬ 
finite  than  science  of  government,  which  we  see 
is  laboured  and  in  some  part  reduced.  Of  this 
wisdom  it  seemeth  some  of  the  ancient  Romans 
in  the  saddest  and  wisest  times  were  professors; 
for  Cicero  reporteth,  that  it  was  then  in  use  for 
senators  that  had  name  and  opinion  for  gen¬ 
eral  wise  men,  as  Coruncanius,  Curius,  Laelius, 

6Eccles.  11.  4.  “He  that  regards  the  winds  shall  not 
sow;  and  he  that  regards  the  clouds  shall  not  reap.” 


SECOND  BOOK  83 


and  many  others,  to  walk  at  certain  hours  in 
the  Place,  and  to  give  audience  to  those  that 
would  use  their  advice;  and  that  the  particular 
citizens  would  resort  unto  them,  and  consult 
with  them  of  the  marriage  of  a  daughter,  or  of 
the  employing  of  a  son,  or  of  a  purchase  or  bar¬ 
gain,  or  of  an  accusation,  and  every  other  occa¬ 
sion  incident  to  man’s  life.  So  as  there  is  a  wis¬ 
dom  of  counsel  and  advice  even  in  private  cau¬ 
ses,  arising  out  of  an  universal  insight  into  the 
affairs  of  the  world;  which  is  used  indeed  upon 
particular  cases  propounded,  but  gathered  by 
general  observation  of  cases  of  like  nature.  For 
so  we  see  in  the  book  which  Q.  Cicero  writeth 
to  his  brother,  De  petitione  consulatus  (being 
the  only  book  of  business  that  I  know  written 
by  the  ancients),  although  it  concerned  a  par¬ 
ticular  action  then  on  foot,  yet  the  substance 
thereof  consisteth  of  many  wise  and  politic  ax¬ 
ioms,  which  contain  not  a  temporary,  but  a  per¬ 
petual  direction  in  the  case  of  popular  elections. 
But  chiefly  we  may  see  in  those  aphorisms,  which 
have  place  amongst  divine  writings,  composed 
by  Salomon  the  king,  of  whom  the  Scriptures 
testify  that  his  heart  was  as  the  sands  of  the 
sea,  encompassing  the  world  and  all  worldly  mat¬ 
ters,  we  see,  I  say,  not  a  few  profound  and  ex¬ 
cellent  cautions,  precepts,  positions,  extending 
to  much  variety  of  occasions ;  whereupon  we  will 
stay  a  while,  offering  to  consideration  some  num¬ 
ber  of  examples. 

6.  “ Sed  et  cunctis  sermonibus  qui  dicuntur  ne 
accommodes  aurem  tuam ,  ne  forte  audias  servum 
tuum  maledicentem  tibi d’1  Here  is  commended 
the  provident  stay  of  inquiry  of  that  which  we 
would  be  loath  to  find:  as  it  was  judged  great 
wisdom  in  Pompeius  Magnus  that  he  burned 
Sertorius’  papers  unperused. 

“  Vir  sapiens,  si  cumstulto  contenderit ,  sive  ira- 
scatur ,  sive  rideat ,  non  inveniet  requiem.”2  Here 
is  described  the  great  disadvantage  which  a  wise 
man  hath  in  undertaking  a  lighter  person  than 
himself ;  which  is  such  an  engagement  as,  wheth¬ 
er  a  man  turn  the  matter  to  jest,  or  turn  it  to 
heat,  or  howsoever  he  change  copy,  he  can  no 
ways  quit  himself  well  of  it. 

“Qui  delicate  a  pueritia  nutrit  servum  suum , 
postea  sentiet  eum  contumacem .”3  Here  is  signi¬ 
fied,  that  if  a  man  begin  too  high  a  pitch  in  his 
favours,  it  doth  commonly  end  in  unkindness 
and  unthankfulness. 

1  Eccles.  7.  22.  “Listen  not  to  all  that  is  spoken,  lest 
thou  shouldst  hear  thy  servant  curse  thee.” 

2Prov.  19.  9.  “If  a  wise  man  contends  with  a  fool, 
whether  he  be  in  anger  or  in  jest,  there  is  no  quiet.” 

3Prov.  29.  21.  “He  who  brings  up  his  servant  deli¬ 
cately,  shall  find  him  stubborn  in  the  end.” 


“ Vidisti  virum  velocem  in  opere  suo?  coram 
regibus  stabit ,  nec  erit  inter  ignobiles .”4  Here  is 
observed,  that  of  all  virtues  for  rising  to  hon¬ 
our,  quickness  of  despatch  is  the  best;  for  su¬ 
periors  many  times  love  not  to  have  those  they 
employ  too  deep  or  too  sufficient,  but  ready  and 
diligent. 

“ Vidi  cunctos  viventes  qui  ambulant  sub  sole , 
cum  adolescente  sec  undo  qui  consurgit  pro  eo.”b 
Here  is  expressed  that  which  was  noted  by  Sylla 
first,  and  after  him  by  Tiberius;  “P lures  ado- 
rant  solem  orientem  quam  occidentem  vel  merid- 
ianum .”6 

“Si  spiritus  potestatem  habentis  ascenderit  su¬ 
per  te ,  locum  tuum  ne  dimiseris ;  quia  curatiofa- 
ciet  cess  are  peccata  maxima.”1  Here  caution  is 
given,  that  upon  displeasure,  retiring  is  of  all 
courses  the  unfittest;  for  a  man  leaveth  things 
at  worst,  and  depri  veth  himself  of  means  to  make 
them  better. 

“ Erat  civitas  parva ,  et  pauci  in  ea  viri:  venit 
contra  earn  rex  magnus ,  et  vallavit  earn ,  instrux- 
itque  munitiones  per  gy rum ,  et  perfecta  est  obsid- 
io ;  inventusque  est  in  ea  vir  pauper  et  sapiens ,  et 
liberavit  earn  per  sapientiam  suam ;  et  nullus  de- 
inceps  recordatus  est  hominis  illius  pauperis.”* 
Here  the  corruption  of  states  is  set  forth,  that 
esteem  not  virtue  or  merit  longer  than  they  have 
use  of  it. 

“ Mollis  responsio frangit  iram.'  ’8  Here  is  noted 
that  silence  or  rough  answer  exasperateth;  but 
an  answer  present  and  temperate  pacifieth. 

”Iter  pigrorum  quasi  sepes  spinarum .”9  Here 
is  lively  represented  how  laborious  sloth  prov- 
eth  in  the  end:  for  when  things  are  deferred  till 
the  last  instant,  and  nothing  prepared  before¬ 
hand,  every  step  findeth  a  brier  or  impediment, 
which  catcheth  or  stoppeth. 

“Melior  est  finis  orationis  quam  principium.”™ 

4Prov.  22.  29.  “A  man  diligent  in  his  business  shall 
stand  before  kings,  and  not  be  ranked  among  the  vulgar.” 

5Eccles.  4.  15.  “I  saw  all  the  living  which  walk  under 
the  sun,  with  the  succeeding  young  prince  that  shall  rise 
up  in  his  stead.” 

6Tacitus,  Annals ,  Bk.  vi.  “The  sun  has  more  adorers 
rising  than  setting.” 

7Eccles.  10.  4.  “If  the  displeasure  of  great  men  rise  up 
against  thee,  forsake  not  thy  place;  for  pliant  behaviour 
extenuates  great  offenses.” 

8Eccles.  9.  14.  “There  was  a  little  city  manned  but  by 
a  few,  and  a  mighty  king  drew  his  army  to  it,  erecting 
bulwarks  against  it,  and  intrenched  it  round:  now  there 
was  found  within  the  walls  a  poor  wise  man,  and  he  by 
his  wisdom  delivered  the  city;  but  none  remembered  the 
same  poor  man.” 

9Prov.  15.  1.  “A  soft  answer  appeases  anger.” 

10Prov.  15.  10.  “The  way  of  the  slothful  is  a  hedge  of 
thorns.” 

11  Eccles.  7.  9.  “The  end  of  a  discourse  is  better  than 
the  beginning.” 


84  ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


Here  is  taxed  the  vanity  of  formal  speakers,  that 
study  more  about  prefaces  and  inducements, 
than  upon  the  conclusions  and  issues  of  speech. 

“  $$ui  cognoscit  in  judiciojaciem ,  non  benefacit; 
iste  etpro  buccella  panis  deseret  veritatem  A1  Here 
is  noted,  that  a  judge  were  better  be  a  briber 
than  a  respecter  of  persons;  for  a  corrupt  judge 
offendeth  not  so  lightly  as  a  facile. 

“  Vir  pauper  calumnians  pauperes  similis  est 
imbri  vehementi,  in  quo  par atur  James. ”2 3  Here  is 
expressed  the  extremity  of  necessitous  extor¬ 
tions,  figured  in  the  ancient  fable  of  the  full  and 
the  hungry  horseleech. 

“  Fons  turbatus  pede>  et  vena  corrupta ,  est  Jus¬ 
tus  cadens  coram  impio.”z  Here  is  noted,  that 
one  judicial  and  exemplar  iniquity  in  the  face 
of  the  world  doth  trouble  the  fountains  of  jus¬ 
tice  more  than  many  particular  injuries  passed 
over  by  connivance. 

“  Qui  subtrahit  aliquid  a  patre  et  a  matre>  et 
dicit  hoc  non  esse  peccatum ,  particeps  est  homi- 
cidii.”4  Here  is  noted,  that  whereas  men  in 
wronging  their  best  friends  use  to  extenuate 
their  fault,  as  if  they  mought  presume  or  be 
bold  upon  them,  it  doth  contrariwise  indeed  ag¬ 
gravate  their  fault,  and  turneth  it  from  injury 
to  impiety. 

“ Noli  esse  amicus  homini  iracundo ,  nec  am- 
bulato  cum  homine  furioso.”b  Here  caution  is 
given,  that  in  the  election  of  our  friends  we  do 
principally  avoid  those  which  are  impatient,  as 
those  that  will  espouse  us  to  many  factions  and 
quarrels. 

“  Qui  conturbat  domum  suam ,  possidebit  ven- 
tum.* >c  Here  is  noted,  that  in  domestical  sepa¬ 
rations  and  breaches  men  do  promise  to  them¬ 
selves  quieting  of  their  mind  and  contentment; 
but  still  they  are  deceived  of  their  expectation, 
and  it  turneth  to  wind. 

“  Filius  sapiens  laetificat  patrem:  filius  vero 
stultus  moestitia  est  matri  suae.”1 6 7  Here  is  distin¬ 
guished,  that  fathers  have  most  discomfort  of 
the  good  proof  of  their  sons;  but  mothers  have 

1  Prov.  28.  31.  “He  who  respects  persons  in  judgement 
does  ill,  and  will  forsake  the  truth  for  a  piece  of  bread.” 

2Prov.  28.  3.  “A  poor  man,  that  by  extortion  oppresses 
the  poor,  is  like  a  land-flood  that  causes  famine.” 

3  Prov.  25.  29.  “A  just  man  falling  before  the  wicked,  is  a 
troubled  fountain  and  a  corrupted  spring.” 

4Prov.  28.  24.  “Whoso  robbeth  his  father  and  his 
mother,  and  saith  it  is  no  transgression,  is  the  compan¬ 
ion  of  a  destroyer.” 

5Prov.  22.  24.  “Contract  no  friendship  with  an  angry 
man,  nor  walk  with  a  furious  one.” 

6Prov.  II.  29.  “He  who  troubles  his  own  house  shall 
inherit  the  wind.” 

7Prov.  10. 1.  “A  wise  son  rejoices  his  father,  but  a  foolish 

son  is  a  sorrow  to  his  mother.” 


most  discomfort  ot  their  ill  proof,  because  wo¬ 
men  have  little  discerning  of  virtue,  but  of  for¬ 
tune. 

”  Qui  celat  delictum ,  quaerit  amici tiam;  sedqui 
alter  0  sermone  repet  it ,  separat foederatos  .”8  Here 
caution  is  given,  that  reconcilement  is  better 
managed  by  an  amnesty,  and  passing  over  that 
which  is  past,  than  by  apologies  and  excusa- 
tions. 

“  In  omni  opere  bono  erit  abundantia ;  ubi  au- 
tem  verba  sunt  plurimay  ibi  frequenter  egestas.”9 
Here  is  noted,  that  words  and  discourse  abound- 
eth  most  where  there  is  idleness  and  want. 

“  Primus  in  sua  causa  just  us;  sed  venit  altera 
pars ,  et  inquiret  in  eum.”l{)  Here  is  observed,  that 
in  all  causes  the  first  tale  possesseth  much:  in 
sort,  that  the  prejudice  thereby  wrought  will 
be  hardly  removed,  except  some  abuse  or  falsi¬ 
ty  in  the  information  be  detected. 

“  Verba  bi Unguis  quasi  simplicia ,  et  ipsa  per- 
veniunt  ad  interior  a  ventris.”11  Here  is  distin¬ 
guished,  that  Hattery  and  insinuation,  which 
seemeth  set  and  artificial,  sinketh  not  far;  but 
that  entereth  deep  which  hath  show  of  nature, 
liberty,  and  simplicity. 

“  Qui  erudit  derisorem ,  ipse  sibi  injuriam fa- 
cit;  et  qui  arguit  impium ,  sibi  maculu m  generat. 1  ’ 12 
Here  caution  is  given  how  we  tender  reprehen¬ 
sion  to  arrogant  and  scornful  natures,  whose 
manner  is  to  esteem  it  for  contumely,  and  ac¬ 
cordingly  to  return  it. 

“Da  sapienti  occasionem ,  et  addetur  ei  sapien- 
tia.  ”13Here  is  distinguished  the  wisdom  brought 
into  habit,  and  that  which  is  but  verbal  and 
swimming  only  in  conceit;  for  the  one  upon  the 
occasion  presented  is  quickened  and  redoubled, 
the  other  is  amazed  and  confused. 

“ffuomodo  in  aquis  resplendent  vultus  prospici- 
entium ,  sic  corda  hominum  manifesta  sunt  pru- 
dentibus.”14  Here  the  mind  of  a  wise  man  is  com¬ 
pared  to  a  glass,  wherein  the  images  of  all  di¬ 
versity  of  natures  and  customs  are  represent- 

8Prov.  17.  9.  “He  who  conceals  a  fault  seeks  friendship; 
but  he  who  repeats  a  matter  separates  friends.” 

9Prov.  1 4.  23.  “In  every  good  work  is  plenty;  but 
where  words  abound,  there  is  commonly  a  want.” 

10Prov.  17.  17;  but  the  sense  is  different.  “The  first  in 
his  own  cause  is  just,  then  comes  the  other  party,  and 
inquires  into  him.” 

11  “The  words  of  the  double-tongued  man  which  seem 
artless  are  they  that  go  down  to  the  innermost  parts  of 
the  belly.” 

12  Prov.  9.  7.  “He  who  instructs  a  scoffer,  procures  to 
himself  reproach;  and  he  who  reproves  a  wicked  man, 
procures  to  himself  a  stain.” 

13Prov.  9.  9.  “Give  occasion  to  a  wise  man,  and  his 
wisdom  will  be  increased. 

14  Prov.  27.  19.  “As  the  face  shines  in  the  water,  so  are 
men’s  hearts  manifest  to  the  wise.” 


SECOND  BOOK  85 


ed;  from  which  representation  proceedeth  that 
application, 

Qui  sapit,  innumeris  moribus  apt  us  erit .l 

7.  Thus  have  I  stayed  somewhat  longer  upon 
these  sentences  politic  of  Salomon  than  is  agree¬ 
able  to  the  proportion  of  an  example;  led  with 
a  desire  to  give  authority  to  this  part  of  knowl¬ 
edge,  which  I  noted  as  deficient,  by  so  excellent 
a  precedent:  and  have  also  attended  them  with 
brief  observations,  such  as  to  my  understand¬ 
ing  offer  no  violence  to  the  sense,  though  I  know 
they  may  be  applied  to  a  more  divine  use:  but 
it  is  allowed,  even  in  divinity,  that  some  inter¬ 
pretations,  yea,  and  some  writings,  have  more 
of  the  eagle  than  others;  but  taking  them  as  in¬ 
structions  for  life,  they  mought  have  received 
large  discourse,  if  I  would  have  broken  them 
and  illustrated  them  by  deducements  and  ex¬ 
amples. 

8.  Neither  was  this  in  use  only  with  the  He¬ 
brews,  but  it  is  generally  to  be  found  in  the  wis¬ 
dom  of  the  more  ancient  times;  that  as  men 
found  out  any  observation  that  they  thought 
was  good  for  life,  they  would  gather  it  and  ex¬ 
press  it  in  parable  or  aphorism  or  fable.  But  for 
fables,  they  were  vicegerents  and  supplies  where 
examples  failed:nowthat  the  times  abound  with 
history,  the  aim  is  better  when  the  mark  is  alive. 
And  therefore  the  form  of  writing  which  of  all 
others  is  fittest  for  this  variable  argument  of  ne¬ 
gotiation  and  occasions  is  that  which  Machiavel 
chose  wisely  and  aptly  for  government;  name¬ 
ly,  discourse  upon  histories  or  examples.2  For 
knowledge  drawn  freshly  and  in  our  view  out 
of  particulars,  knoweth  the  way  best  to  partic¬ 
ulars  again.  And  it  hath  much  greater  life  for 
practice  when  the  discourse  attendeth  upon  the 
example,  than  when  the  example  attendeth  up¬ 
on  the  discourse.  For  this  is  no  point  of  order,  as 
it  seemeth  at  first,  but  of  substance.  For  when 
the  example  is  the  ground,  being  set  down  in  an 
history  at  large,  it  is  set  down  with  all  circum¬ 
stances,  which  may  sometimes  control  the  dis¬ 
course  thereupon  made,  and  sometimes  supply 
it,  as  a  very  pattern  for  action;  whereas  the  ex¬ 
amples  alleged  for  the  discourse’s  sake  are  cited 
succinctly,  and  without  particularity,  and  carry 
a  servile  aspect  towards  the  discourse  which 
they  are  brought  in  to  make  good. 

9.  But  this  difference  is  not  amiss  to  be  re¬ 
membered,  that  as  history  of  times  is  the  best 
ground  for  discourse  of  government,  such  as 

^vid,  Ars  Amatoria,  i.  760.  “A  wise  man  will  know 
how  to  apply  himself  to  all  sorts  of  characters. ” 

2Discorso  sopra  la  prima  deca  di  Tito  Livio,  i. 


Machiavel  handleth,  so  histories  of  lives  is  the 
most  proper  for  discourse  of  business,  because 
it  is  more  conversant  in  private  actions.  Nav, 
there  is  a  ground  of  discourse  for  this  purpose 
fitter  than  them  both,  which  is  discourse  upon 
letters,  such  as  are  wise  and  weighty,  as  many 
are  of  Cicero  ad  Atticum ,  and  others.  For  letters 
have  a  great  and  more  particular  representation 
of  business  than  either  chronicles  or  lives.  Thus 
have  we  spoken  both  of  the  matter  and  form  of 
this  part  of  civil  knowledge,  touching  negotia¬ 
tion,  which  we  note  to  be  deficient. 

10.  But  yet  there  is  another  part  of  this  part, 
which  differeth  as  much  from  that  whereof  we 
have  spoken  as  sapere  and  si  hi  sapere ,3  the  one 
moving  as  it  were  to  the  circumference,  the  other 
to  the  centre.  For  there  is  a  wisdom  of  counsel 
and  again  there  is  a  wisdom  of  pressing  a  man’s 
own  fortune;  and  they  do  sometimes  meet,  and 
oftensever.  For  many  are  wise  in  their  own  ways 
that  are  weak  for  government  or  counsels;  like 
ants,  which  is  a  wise  creature  for  itself,  but  very 
hurtful  for  thegarden.  This  wisdom  the  Romans 
did  take  much  knowledge  of:  “  Nam  pol sapiens 
(saith  the  comical  poet)  fingit fortunam  sibi”\ 4 
and  it  grew  to  an  adage,  “ Faber  quisque  fortu- 
nae  propriae” ;5  and  Livy  attributed  it  to  Cato 
the  first,  “In  hoc  viro  tanta  vis  animi  et  ingenii 
ineraty  ut  quocunque  loco  natus  esset  sibi  ipse for¬ 
tunam  jacturus  videretur.” 6 

11.  This  conceit  or  position,  if  it  be  too  much 
declared  and  professed,  hath  been  thought  a 
thing  impolitic  and  unlucky,  as  was  observed  in 
Timotheus  the  Athenian,  who,  having  done 
many  great  services  to  the  estate  in  his  govern¬ 
ment,  and  giving  an  account  thereof  to  the  peo¬ 
ple  as  the  manner  was,  did  conclude  every  par¬ 
ticular  with  this  clause,  “And  in  this  fortune 
had  no  part.”7  And  it  came  so  to  pass,  that  he 
never  prospered  in  any  thing  he  took  in  hand 
afterward.  For  this  is  too  high  and  too  arrogant, 
savouring  of  that  which  Ezekiel  saith  of  Phara¬ 
oh,  “  DiciSy  Fluvius  est  meus  et  ego  feci  ?nemet 
ipsum ”:8  or  of  that  which  another  prophet 
speaketh  that  men  offer  sacrifices  to  their 
nets  and  snares;9  and  that  which  the  poet  ex¬ 
pressed, 

3“Being  wise  in  general  and  being  wise  for  one’s  self.” 

4 Plautus,  Trinuniy  act  11,  sc.  2,  v.  84.  “The  wist  man 
fashions  his  fortune  for  himself.” 

5“Every  man’s  fortune  lies  in  his  own  hand.” 

eLivy,  xxxix.  40.  “Such  was  his  force  of  mind  and 
genius  that  wherever  he  had  been  born  he  seemed  formed 
for  making  his  own  fortune.” 

7 Plutarch,  Sylla. 

8Ezek.  29.  3.  “Thou  sayest,  The  river  is  mine,  and  I 
made  mvself.” 

9Hab.  1.  15. 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


86 

Dextra  mihi  Dens,  et  telum  quod  missile  libro, 
Nunc  ads  inf!1 

For  these  confidences  were  ever  unhallowed, 
and  unblessed:  and  therefore  those  that  were 
great  politiques  indeed  ever  ascribed  their  suc¬ 
cesses  to  their  felicity,  and  not  to  their  skill  or 
virtue.  For  so  Sylia  surnamed  himself  Felix,  not 
Magnus.2  So  Caesar  said  to  the  master  of  the 
ship,  “  Caesarem  portas  et  fortunam  ejus.”z 

12.  But  yet  nevertheless  these  positions, 
“  Faber  quisque fortunae  suae  ”  :4  “  Sapiens  domi- 
nabitur  astris:b  Invia  virtuti  nulla  est  via ,”6  and 
the  like,  being  taken  and  used  as  spurs  to  in¬ 
dustry,  and  not  as  stirrups  to  insolency,  rather 
for  resolution  than  for  the  presumption  or  out¬ 
ward  declaration,  have  been  ever  thought  sound 
and  good;  and  are  no  question  imprinted  in  the 
greatest  minds,  who  are  so  sensible  of  this  opin¬ 
ion,  as  they  can  scarce  contain  it  within.  As  we 
see  in  Augustus  Caesar  (who  was  rather  diverse 
from  his  uncle  than  inferior  in  virtue),  how  when 
he  died  he  desired  his  friends  about  him  to  give 
him  a  plaudite ,  as  if  he  were  conscient  to  him¬ 
self  that  he  had  played  his  part  well  upon  the 
stage.7  This  part  of  knowledge  we  do  report  also 
as  deficient :  not  but  that  it  is  practised  too  much, 
but  it  hath  not  been  reduced  to  writing.  And 
therefore  lest  it  should  seem  to  any  that  it  is  not 
comprehensible  by  axiom,  it  is  requisite,  as  we 
did  in  the  former,  that  we  set  down  some  heads 
or  passages  of  it. 

13.  Wherein  it  may  appear  at  the  first  a  new 
and  unwonted  argument  to  teach  men  how  to 
raise  and  make  their  fortune;  a  doctrine  where¬ 
in  every  man  perchance  will  be  ready  to  yield 
himself  a  disciple,  till  he  see  the  difficulty:  for 
fortune  layeth  as  heavy  impositions  as  virtue; 
and  it  is  as  hard  and  severe  a  thing  to  be  a  true 
politique,  as  to  be  truly  moral.  But  the  handling 
hereof  concerneth  learning  greatly,  both  in  hon¬ 
our  and  in  substance.  In  honour,  because  prag¬ 
matical  men  may  not  go  away  with  an  opinion 
that  learning  is  like  a  lark,  that  can  mount,  and 
sing,  and  please  herself,  and  nothing  else;  but 
may  know  that  she  holdeth  as  well  of  the  hawk, 
that  can  soar  aloft,  and  can  also  descend  and 
strike  upon  the  prey.  In  substance,  because  it 
is  the  perfect  law  of  inquiry  of  truth,  that  noth¬ 
ing  be  in  the  globe  of  matter,  which  should  not 

1  Virgil  ALneid,  Bk.  x.  773.  “My  right  hand  and  my  spear 
are  the  God  I  trust  in.” 

2The  fortunate,  not  the  great. 

3Plutarch.  “Thou  carriest  Caesar  and  his  fortune.” 

4“Every  one’s  fortune  is  in  his  own  hand.” 

5 “A  wise  man  shall  control  the  stars.” 

6“Every  way  is  passable  to  virtue.” 

7Suetonius. 


be  likewise  in  the  globe  of  crystal,  or  form;  that 
is,  that  there  be  not  any  thing  in  being  and  ac¬ 
tion,  which  should  not  be  drawn  and  collected 
into  contemplation  and  doctrine.  Neither  doth 
learning  admire  or  esteem  of  this  architecture 
of  fortune,  otherwise  than  as  of  an  inferior  work : 
for  no  man’s  fortune  can  be  an  end  worthy  of 
his  being;  and  many  times  the  worthiest  men 
do  abandon  their  fortune  willingly  for  better  re¬ 
spects:  but  nevertheless,  fortune  as  an  organ  of 
virtue  and  merit  deserveth  the  consideration. 

14.  First  therefore,  the  precept  which  I  con¬ 
ceive  to  be  most  summary  towards  the  prevail¬ 
ing  in  fortune,  is  to  obtain  that  window  which 
Momus  did  require:  who  seeing  in  the  frame  of 
man’s  heart  such  angles  and  recesses,  found 
fault  there  was  not  a  window  tolook  into  them;8 
that  is,  to  procure  good  informations  of  partic¬ 
ulars  touching  persons,  their  natures,  their  de¬ 
sires  and  ends,  their  customs  and  fashions,  their 
helps  and  advantages,  and  whereby  they  chief¬ 
ly  stand:  so  again  their  weaknesses  and  disad¬ 
vantages,  and  where  they  lie  most  open  and  ob¬ 
noxious;  their  friends,  factions,  dependences; 
and  again  their  opposites,  enviers,  competitors, 
their  moods  and  times,  “ Sola  viri  molles  aditus 
et  tempora  noras  ”;9  their  principles,  rules,  and 
observations,  and  the  like:  and  this  not  only  of 
persons,  but  of  actions;  what  are  on  foot  from 
time  to  time,  and  how  they  are  conducted,  fa¬ 
voured,  opposed,  and  how  they  import,  and  the 
like.  For  the  knowledge  of  present  actions  is  not 
only  material  in  itself,  but  without  it  also  the 
knowledge  of  persons  is  very  erroneous :  for  men 
change  with  the  actions;  and  whiles  they  are  in 
pursuit  they  are  one,  and  when  they  return  to 
their  nature  they  are  another.  These  informa¬ 
tions  of  particulars,  touching  persons  and  ac¬ 
tions,  are  as  the  minor  propositions  in  every  ac¬ 
tive  syllogism;  for  no  excellency  of  observations 
(which  are  as  the  major  propositions)  can  suf¬ 
fice  to  ground  a  conclusion,  if  there  be  error  and 
mistaking  in  the  minors. 

15.  That  this  knowledge  is  possible,  Salomon 
is  our  surety,  who  saith,  “ Consilium  in  corde 
viri  tanquam  aqua  profunda ;  sed  vir prudens  ex- 
hauriet  illud.”10  And  although  the  knowledge  it¬ 
self  falleth  not  under  precept,  because  it  is  of 
individuals,  yet  the  instructions  for  the  obtain¬ 
ing  of  it  may. 

16.  We  will  begin  therefore  with  this  precept, 

8 Plato,  Republic ;  Lucian,  Hcrmotimus ,  xx;  and  Eras¬ 
mus,  Chiliades  Adagiorum ,  j.  74. 

9  Virgil  ALneid,  Bk.  iv.  423. 

10Prov.  20.  5.  “Counsel  in  the  heart  of  man  is  like  a  deep 
water,  but  a  wise  man  will  draw  it  out.” 


SECOND  BOOK  87 


according  to  the  ancient  opinion,  that  the  sin¬ 
ews  of  wisdom  are  slowness  of  belief  and  dis¬ 
trust;  that  more  trust  be  given  to  countenances 
and  deeds  than  to  words;  and  in  words  rather 
to  sudden  passages  and  surprised  words  than 
to  set  and  purposed  words.  Neither  let  that  be 
feared  which  is  said,  “  Fronti  nulla fides  which 
is  meant  of  a  general  outward  behaviour,  and 
not  of  the  private  and  subtile  motions  and  la¬ 
bours  of  the  countenance  and  gesture;  which, 
as  Q.  Cicero  elegantly  saith,  is  “  Animi  janua , 
the  gate  of  the  mind.  ”2  None  more  close  than 
Tiberius,  and  yet  Tacitus  saith  of  Gallus,  “  Ete - 
nim  vultu  ojfensionem  conjectaverat'n  So  again, 
noting  the  differing  character  and  manner  of 
his  commending  Germanicus  and  Drusus  in  the 
senate,  he  saith,  touching  his  fashion  wherein 
he  carried  his  speech  of  Germanicus,  thus;  “  Ma- 
gis  in  speciem  adornatis  verbis ,  quarn  ut  penitus 
sentire  crederetur” :4  but  of  Drusus  thus;  “  Pau- 
cioribus  sed  intention ,  et  fida  oratione”\h  and  in 
another  place,  speaking  of  his  character  of 
speech,  when  he  did  anything  that  was  gracious 
and  popular,  he  saith,  that  in  other  things  he 
was  “  velut  eluctantium  verborum” ;6  but  then 
again,  “  solutius  loquebatur  quando  subveniretP1 
So  that  there  is  no  such  artificer  of  dissimula¬ 
tion,  nor  no  such  commanded  countenance  ( vul - 
tus  jussus),  that  can  sever  from  a  feigned  tale 
some  of  these  fashions,  either  a  more  slight  and 
careless  fashion,  or  more  set  and  formal,  or  more 
tedious  and  wandering,  or  coming  from  a  man 
more  drily  and  hardly. 

17.  Neither  are  deeds  such  assured  pledges, 
as  that  they  may  be  trusted  without  a  judicious 
consideration  of  their  magnitude  and  nature: 
“  Fraus  sibi  in  parvis  fidem  praestruit  ut  majore 
emolumento  fallat” ;8  and  the  Italian  thinketh 
himself  upon  the  point  to  be  bought  and  sold, 
when  he  is  better  used  than  he  was  wont  to  be 
without  manifest  cause.  For  small  favours,  they 
do  but  lull  men  asleep,  both  as  to  caution  and 
as  to  industry;  and  are,  as  Demosthenes  calleth 
them,  “  Alimenta  socordiaeP 9  So  again  we  see 
how  false  the  nature  of  some  deeds  are,  in  that 

1  Martial  i,  Ep.  25,  v.  4.  “No  trusting  to  the  face.” 

2 Quintus  Cicero,  Petitionis  Consulates,  §2. 

3  “He  had  seen  displeasure  in  his  countenance.” 

4  Annals,  Bk.  1.  52.  “It  was  in  words  too  laboured  and 
specious  to  be  taken  for  what  he  really  felt.” 

5  “He  said  less,  but  more  earnestly,  and  in  a  style  of 
sincerity.” 

6  Annals,  Bk.  iv.  31.  “Of  a  kind  of  struggling  speech.” 

7  “He  spoke  with  more  freedom  when  he  was  speaking 
in  a  man’s  favour.” 

8  “Deceit  gets  itself  a  credit  in  small  things,  that  it  may 
practise  to  more  advantage  in  larger.” 

9  “The  habits  of  sloth.” 


particular  which  Mutianus  practised  upon  An- 
tonius  Primus,  upon  that  hollow  and  unfaith¬ 
ful  reconcilement  which  was  made  between 
them;  whereupon  Mutianus  advanced  many  of 
the  friends  of  Antonius,“<S7 mul amicis  ejusprae- 
fecturas  et  tribunatus  largitur” :10  wherein,  under 
pretence  to  strengthen  him,  he  did  desolate 
him,  and  won  from  him  his  dependences. 

18.  As  for  words,  though  they  be  like  waters 
to  physicians,  full  of  flattery  and  uncertainty, 
yet  they  are  not  to  be  despised,  specially  with 
the  advantage  of  passion  and  affection.  For  so 
we  see  Tiberius,  upon  a  stinging  and  incensing 
speech  of  Agrippina,  came  a  step  forth  of  his 
dissimulation,  when  he  said,  “You  are  hurt  be¬ 
cause  you  do  not  reign”;11  of  which  Tacitus  saith, 
“ Audita  haec  raram  occulti  pectoris  vocem  elicu- 
ere;  correptamque  Graeco  versu  admonuit ,  ideo 
laedi  quia  non  regnaretP12  And  therefore  the  po¬ 
et  doth  elegantly  call  passions  tortures,  that 
urge  men  to  confess  their  secrets: 

Vino  tortus  et  ira 13 

And  experience  showeth,  there  are  few  men  so 
true  to  themselves  and  so  settled,  but  that, 
sometimes  upon  heat,  sometimes  upon  bravery, 
sometimes  upon  kindness,  sometimes  upon 
trouble  of  mind  and  weakness,  they  open  them¬ 
selves;  specially  if  they  be  put  to  it  with  a  coun¬ 
ter-dissimulation,  according  to  the  proverb  of 
Spain,  Di  mentira^y  sacaras  verdad\  “Tell  a  lie 
and  find  a  truth.” 

19.  As  for  the  knowing  of  men  which  is  at 
second  hand  from  reports;  men’s  weaknesses 
and  faults  are  best  known  from  their  enemies, 
their  virtues  and  abilities  from  their  friends, 
their  customs  and  times  from  their  servants, 
their  conceits  and  opinions  from  their  familiar 
friends,  with  whom  they  discourse  most.  Gen¬ 
eral  fame  is  light,  and  the  opinions  conceived 
by  superiors  or  equals  are  deceitful;  for  to  such 
men  are  more  masked:  “  Verior  jama  e  domesti- 
cis  emanar.”u 

20.  But  the  soundest  disclosing  and  expound¬ 
ing  of  men  is  by  their  natures  and  ends,  where¬ 
in  the  weakest  sort  of  men  are  best  interpreted 
by  their  natures,  and  the  wisest  by  their  ends. 
For  it  was  both  pleasantly  and  wisely  said 

10 Tacitus,  Histories,  Bk.  iv.  “Making  them  prefects  and 
tribunes.” 

11  Annals,  Bk.  iv.  52. 

12  “These  words  drew  from  Tiberius  the  voice,  so  rarely 
heard,  of  his  secret  heart:  he  retorted  upon  her  with  a 
greek  verse,  that  she  was  hurt.” 

13  Horace,  Ep.  n.  18,  v.  38. 

14Quintus  Cicero,  Petitionis  Consulatus.  “The  truer  kind 
of  report  comes  from  those  who  see  them  at  home.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


88 

(though  I  think  very  untruly)  by  a  nuncio  of 
the  pope,  returning  from  a  certain  nation 
where  he  served  as  lidger;  whose  opinion  being 
asked  touching  the  appointment  of  one  to  go  in 
his  place,  he  wished  that  in  any  case  they  did 
not  send  one  that  was  too  wise;  because  no  very 
wise  man  would  ever  imagine  what  they  in  that 
country  were  like  to  do.  And  certainly  it  is  an 
error  frequent  for  men  to  shoot  over,  and  to  sup¬ 
pose  deeper  ends,  and  more  compass  reaches 
than  are:  the  Italian  proverb  being  elegant,  and 
for  the  most  part  true: 

Di  danar  'i ,  di  senna ,  e  di  jede , 

Ce  ne  manco  che  non  credi:1 

There  is  commonly  less  money,  less  wisdom,  and 
less  good  faith  than  men  do  account  upon. 

21.  But  princes,  upon  a  far  other  reason,  are 
best  interpreted  by  their  natures,  and  private 
persons  by  their  ends.  For  princes  being  at  the 
top  of  human  desires,  they  have  for  the  most 
part  no  particular  ends  whereto  they  aspire,  by 
distance  from  which  a  man  mought  take  meas¬ 
ure  and  scale  of  the  rest  of  their  actions  and  de¬ 
sires;  which  is  one  of  the  causes  that  maketh 
their  hearts  more  inscrutable.  Neither  is  it  suf¬ 
ficient  to  inform  ourselves  in  men's  ends  and 
natures  of  the  variety  of  them  only,  but  also  of 
the  predominancy,  what  humour  reigneth  most, 
and  what  end  is  principally  sought.  For  so  we 
see,  when  Tigellinus  saw  himself  outstripped  by 
Petronius  Turpilianus  in  Nero’s  humours  of 
pleasures,  “  metus  ejus  rimatur ,”2  he  wrought 
upon  Nero’s  fears,  whereby  he  brake  the  oth¬ 
er’s  neck. 

22.  But  to  all  this  part  of  inquiry  the  most 
compendious  way  resteth  in  three  things:  the 
first,  to  have  general  acquaintance  and  inward¬ 
ness  with  those  which  have  general  acquaint¬ 
ance  and  look  most  into  the  world;  and  special¬ 
ly  according  to  the  diversity  of  business,  and 
the  diversity  of  persons,  to  have  privacy  and 
conversation  with  some  one  friend  at  least  which 
is  perfect  and  well  intelligenced  in  every  sever¬ 
al  kind.  The  second  is  to  keep  a  good  mediocri¬ 
ty  in  liberty  of  speech  and  secrecy;  in  most 
things  liberty:  secrecy  where  it  importeth;  for 
liberty  of  speech  inviteth  and  provoketh  liberty 
to  be  used  again,  and  so  bringeth  much  to  a 

1  “There  is  always  less  money,  less  wisdom  and  less 
honesty,  than  people  imagine.” 

2Tacitus,  Annahy  Bk.  xiv.  57.  This  was  spoken,  how¬ 
ever,  of  the  intrigues  of  Tigellinus  against  Plautus  and 
Sulla,  by  which  he  induced  Nero  to  have  both  of  them 
murdered.  Petronius  Turpilianus  was  put  to  death  by 
Galba,  because  he  had  enjoyed  Nero’s  confidence.  Annals , 
Bk.  xvi.  18,  19. 


man’s  knowledge;  and  secrecy  on  the  other  side 
induceth  trust  and  inwardness.  The  last  is  the 
reducing  of  a  man’s  self  to  this  watchful  and 
serene  habit,  as  to  make  account  and  purpose, 
in  every  conference  and  action,  as  well  to  ob¬ 
serve  as  to  act.  For  as  Epictetus  would  have  a 
philosopher  in  every  particular  action  to  say  to 
himself,  “£/  hoc  volo>  et  etiam  institution  serva- 
re ;  ”3  so  a  politic  man  in  everything  should  say 
to  himself,  “  Et  hoc  volo ,  ac  etiam  aliquid  addis- 
cere .”4  I  have  stayed  the  longer  upon  this  pre¬ 
cept  of  obtaining  good  information,  because  it 
is  a  main  part  by  itself,  which  answereth  to  all 
the  rest.  But,  above  all  things,  caution  must  be 
taken  that  men  have  a  good  stay  and  hold  of 
themselves,  and  that  this  much  knowing  do  not 
draw  on  much  meddling;  for  nothing  is  more 
unfortunate  than  light  and  rash  intermeddling 
in  many  matters.  So  that  this  variety  of  knowl¬ 
edge  tendeth  in  conclusion  but  only  to  this,  to 
make  a  better  and  freer  choice  of  those  actions 
which  may  concern  us,  and  to  conduct  them 
with  the  less  error  and  the  more  dexterity. 

23.  The  second  precept  concerning  this  knowl¬ 
edge  is,  for  men  to  take  good  information  touch¬ 
ing  their  own  person,  and  well  to  understand 
themselves:  knowing  that,  as  Saint  James  saith, 
‘‘Though  men  look  oft  in  a  glass,  yet  they  do 
suddenly  forget  themselves”;5  wherein  as  the 
divine  glass  is  the  word  of  God,  so  the  politic 
glass  is  the  state  of  the  world,  or  times  wherein 
we  live,  in  the  which  we  are  to  behold  ourselves. 

24.  For  men  ought  to  take  an  impartial  view 
of  their  own  abilities  and  virtues;  and  again  of 
their  wants  and  impediments;  accounting  these 
with  the  most,  and  those  other  with  the  least; 
and  from  this  view  and  examination  to  frame 
the  considerations  following. 

25.  First,  to  consider  how  the  constitution  of 
their  nature  sorteth  with  the  general  state  of 
the  times;  which  if  they  find  agreeable  and  fit, 
then  in  all  things  to  give  themselves  more  scope 
and  liberty;  but  if  differing  and  dissonant,  then 
in  the  whole  course  of  their  life  to  be  more  close 
retired,  and  reserved :  as  we  see  in  Tiberius,  who 
was  never  seen  at  a  play,  and  came  not  into  the 
Senate  in  twelve  of  his  last  years:  whereas  Au¬ 
gustus  Caesar  lived  ever  in  men’s  eyes,  which 
Tacitus  observeth,  “alia  Tiberio  morum  via.”6 

26.  Secondly,  to  consider  how  their  nature 
sorteth  with  professions  and  courses  of  life,  and 

3 Enchiridion,  iv.  “I  will  do  this,  yet  keep  my  rule.” 

4  “I  will  drive  this  point,  yet  learn  some  what  of  future 
use.” 

5  Ep.  1.  23,  24. 

6 “Tiberius’  ways  were  different.” 


SECOND  BOOK  89 


accordingly  to  make  election,  if  they  be  free; 
and,  if  engaged,  to  make  the  departure  at  the 
first  opportunity:  as  we  see  was  done  by  Duke 
Valentine,  that  was  designed  by  his  father  to 
a  sacerdotal  profession,  but  quitted  it  soon  after 
inregardofhispartsandinclination;beingsuch, 
nevertheless,  as  a  man  cannot  tell  well  whether 
they  were  worse  for  a  prince  or  for  a  priest. 

27.  Thirdly,  to  consider  how  they  sort  with 
those  whom  they  are  like  to  have  competitors 
and  concurrents;  and  to  take  that  course  where¬ 
in  there  is  most  solitude,  and  themselves  like 
to  be  most  eminent:  as  Caesar  Julius  did,  who 
at  first  was  an  orator  or  pleader;  but  when  he 
saw  the  excellency  of  Cicero,  Hortensius,  Catu- 
lus,  and  others,  for  eloquence,  and  saw  there 
was  no  man  of  reputation  for  the  wars  but  Pom- 
peius,  upon  whom  the  state  was  forced  to  rely, 
he  forsook  his  course  begun  toward  a  civil  and 
popular  greatness,  and  transferred  his  designs 
to  a  martial  greatness. 

28.  Fourthly,  in  the  choice  of  their  friends 
and  dependencies,  to  proceed  according  to  the 
composition  of  their  own  nature:  as  we  may  see 
in  Caesar,  all  whose  friends  and  followers  were 
men  active  and  effectual,  but  not  solemn,  or  of 
reputation. 

29.  Fifthly,  to  take  special  heed  how  they 
guide  themselves  by  examples,  in  thinking  they 
can  do  as  they  see  others  do;  whereas  perhaps 
their  natures  and  carriages  are  far  differing.  In 
which  error  it  seemeth  Pompey  was,  of  whom 
Cicero  saith,  that  he  was  wont  often  to  say, 
“ Sylla  potuity  ego  non  potero?”1  Wherein  he  was 
much  abused,  the  natures  and  proceedings  of 
himself  and  his  example  being  the  unlikest  in 
the  world ;  the  one  being  fierce,  violent,  and  pres¬ 
sing  the  fact;  the  other  solemn,  and  full  of  ma¬ 
jesty  and  circumstance,  and  therefore  the  less 
effectual. 

But  this  precept  touching  the  politic  knowl¬ 
edge  of  ourselves  hath  many  other  branches, 
whereupon  we  cannot  insist. 

30.  Next  to  the  well  understanding  and  dis¬ 
cerning  of  a  man's  self,  there  followeth  the  well 
opening  and  revealing  a  man's  self;  wherein  we 
see  nothing  more  usual  than  for  the  more  able 
man  to  make  the  less  show.  For  there  is  a  great 
advantage  in  the  well  setting  forth  of  a  man’s 
virtues,  fortunes,  merits;  and  again,  in  the  arti¬ 
ficial  covering  of  a  man’s  weaknesses,  defects, 
disgraces;  staying  upon  the  one,  sliding  from 
the  other;  cherishing  the  one  by  circumstances, 
gracing  the  other  by  exposition,  and  the  like. 

1  Ad  Atticum ,  ix,  Ep.  io.  “Sylla  could  do  this,  why  shall 
not  I?” 


Wherein  we  see  what  Tacitus  saith  of  Mutia- 
nus,  who  was  the  greatest  politique  of  his  time, 
“ Omnium  quae  dixerat  feceratque  arte  quadarn 
ostentator”  :2  which  requireth  indeed  some  art, 
lest  it  turn  tedious  and  arrogant;  but  yet  so,  as 
ostentation  (though  it  be  to  the  first  degree  of 
vanity)  seemeth  to  me  rather  a  vice  in  manners 
than  in  policy:  for  as  it  is  said,  “ Audacter  ca- 
lumniare>  semper  aliquid  haeret ”:3  so,  except  it 
be  in  a  ridiculous  degree  of  deformity,  “Audac¬ 
ter  te  vendita ,  semper  aliquid  haeret.”**  For  it  will 
stick  with  the  more  ignorant  and  inferior  sort 
of  men,  though  men  of  wisdom  and  rank  do  smile 
at  it  and  despise  it;  and  yet  the  authority  won 
with  many  doth  countervail  the  disdain  of  a  few. 
But  if  it  be  carried  with  decency  and  govern¬ 
ment,  as  with  a  natural,  pleasant,  and  ingeni¬ 
ous  fashion;  or  at  times  when  it  is  mixed  with 
some  peril  and  unsafety  (as  in  military  persons) ; 
or  at  times  when  others  are  most  envied;  or  with 
easy  and  careless  passage  to  it  and  from  it,  with¬ 
out  dwelling  too  long,  or  being  too  serious;  or 
with  an  equal  freedom  of  taxing  a  man’s  self, 
as  well  as  gracing  himself;  or  by  occasion  of  re¬ 
pelling  or  putting  down  others’  injury  or  inso- 
lency;  it  doth  greatly  add  to  reputation:  and 
surely  not  a  few  solid  natures,  that  want  this 
ventosity  and  cannot  sail  in  the  height  of  the 
winds,  are  not  without  some  prejudice  and  dis¬ 
advantage  by  their  moderation. 

3 1 .  But  for  these  flourishes  and  enhancements 
of  virtue,  as  they  are  not  perchance  unneces¬ 
sary,  so  it  is  at  least  necessary  that  virtue  be 
not  disvalued  and  imbased  under  the  just  price; 
which  is  done  in  three  manners:  by  offering  and 
obtruding  a  man’s  self;  wherein  men  think  he 
is  rewarded,  when  he  is  accepted;  by  doing  too 
much,  which  will  not  give  that  which  is  well 
done  leave  to  settle,  and  in  the  end  induceth 
satiety;  and  by  finding  too  soon  the  fruit  of  a 
man’s  virtue,  in  commendation,  applause,  hon¬ 
our,  favour;  wherein  if  a  man  be  pleased  with 
a  little,  let  him  hear  what  is  truly  said;  “ Cave 
ne  insuetus  rebus  majoribus  videaris ,  si  haec  te 
res  parva  sicuti  magna  delectat.”h 

32.  But  the  covering  of  defects  is  of  no  less 
importance  than  the  valuing  of  good  parts; 
which  may  be  done  likewise  in  three  manners, 
by  caution,  by  colour,  and  by  confidence.  Cau¬ 
tion  is  when  men  do  ingeniously  and  discreetly 
avoid  to  be  put  into  those  things  for  which  they 

2 HistorieSy  Bk.  n.  80.  “He  had  an  art  of  showing  the  fair 
side  of  whatever  he  spoke  or  acted.” 

3  “If  calumny  is  laid  on  boldly,  some  of  it  will  stick.” 

4  “Paint  yourself  strongly,  and  some  of  it  will  last.” 

5  “Beware  lest  thou  seem  unaccustomed  to  great  things 
if  such  small  ones  delight  thee.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


are  not  proper:  whereas  contrariwise  bold  and 
unquiet  spirits  will  thrust  themselves  into  mat¬ 
ters  without  difference,  and  so  publish  and  pro¬ 
claim  all  their  wants.  Colour  is  when  men  make 
a  way  for  themselves  to  have  a  construction 
made  of  their  faults  or  wants,  as  proceeding 
from  a  better  cause  or  intended  for  some  other 
purpose.  For  of  the  one  it  is  well  said, 

Saepe  latet  vitium  proximitate  boni ,l 

and  therefore  whatsoever  want  a  man  hath,  he 
must  see  that  he  pretend  the  virtue  that  sha- 
doweth  it;  as  if  he  be  dull,  he  must  affect  grav¬ 
ity;  if  a  coward,  mildness;  and  so  the  rest.  For 
the  second,  a  man  must  frame  some  probable 
cause  why  he  should  not  do  his  best,  and  why 
he  should  dissemble  his  abilities;  and  for  that 
purpose  must  use  to  dissemble  those  abilities 
which  are  notorious  in  him,  to  give  colour  that 
his  true  wants  are  but  industries  and  dissimu¬ 
lations.  For  confidence,  it  is  the  last  but  the  sur¬ 
est  remedy;  namely,  to  depress  and  seem  to  de¬ 
spise  whatsoever  a  man  cannot  attain;  observ¬ 
ing  the  good  principle  of  the  merchants,  who 
endeavour  to  raise  the  price  of  their  own  com¬ 
modities,  and  to  beat  down  the  price  of  others. 
But  there  is  a  confidence  that  passeth  this  oth¬ 
er;  which  is  to  face  out  a  man’s  own  defects, 
in  seeming  to  conceive  that  he  is  best  in  those 
things  wherein  he  is  failing;  and,  to  help  that 
again,  to  seem  on  the  other  side  that  he  hath 
least  opinion  of  himself  in  those  things  wherein 
he  is  best:  like  as  we  shall  see  it  commonly  in 
poets,  that  if  they  show  their  verses,  and  you 
except  to  any,  they  will  say,  “That  that  line 
cost  them  more  labour  than  any  of  the  rest”; 
and  presently  will  seem  to  disable  and  suspect 
rather  some  other  line,  which  they  know  well 
enough  to  be  the  best  in  the  number.  But  above 
all,  in  this  righting  and  helping  of  a  man’s  self 
in  his  own  carriage,  he  must  take  heed  he  show 
not  himself  dismantled  and  exposed  to  scorn 
and  injury,  by  too  much  dulceness,  goodness, 
and  facility  of  nature;  but  show  some  sparkles 
of  liberty,  spirit,  and  edge.  Which  kind  of  for¬ 
tified  carriage,  with  a  ready  rescussing  of  a 
man’s  self  from  scorns,  is  sometimes  of  neces¬ 
sity  imposed  upon  men  by  somewhat  in  their 
person  or  fortune;  but  it  ever  succeedeth  with 
good  felicity. 

33.  Another  precept  of  this  knowledge  is  by 
all  possible  endeavour  to  frame  the  mind  to  be 
pliant  and  obedient  to  occasion;  for  nothing 
hindereth  men’s  fortunes somuch  as  this:  “Idem 

1Ovid,  Ars  Amatoria ,  1.  661.  “A  vice  will  often  hide  it¬ 
self  under  the  shadow  of  a  neighboring  virtue.” 


manebat ,  neque  idem  decebat ,”2  men  are  where 
they  were,  when  occasions  turn:  and  therefore 
to  Cato,  whom  Livy  maketh  such  an  architect 
of  fortune,  he  addeth  that  he  had  versatile  in- 
genium .3  And  thereof  it  cometh  that  these  grave 
solemn  wits,  which  must  be  like  themselves  and 
cannot  make  departures,  have  more  dignity 
than  felicity.  But  in  some  it  is  nature  to  be 
somewhat  viscous  and  inwrapped,  and  not  easy 
to  turn.  In  some  it  is  a  conceit  that  is  almost  a 
nature,  which  is,  that  men  can  hardly  make 
themselves  believe  that  they  ought  to  change 
their  course,  when  they  have  found  good  by  it 
in  former  experience.  For  Machiavel  noted 
wisely,  how  Fabius  Maximus  would  have  been 
temporizing  still,  according  to  his  old  bias,  when 
the  nature  of  the  war  was  altered  and  required 
hot  pursuit.  In  some  other  it  is  want  of  point 
and  penetration  in  their  judgement,  that  they 
do  not  discern  when  things  have  a  period,  but 
come  in  too  late  after  the  occasion;  as  Demos¬ 
thenes  compareth  the  people  of  Athens  to  coun¬ 
try  fellows,  when  they  play  in  a  fence  school, 
that  if  they  have  a  blow,  then  they  remove  their 
weapon  to  that  ward,  and  not  before.4  In  some 
other  it  is  a  loathness  to  leese  labours  passed, 
and  a  conceit  that  they  can  bring  about  occa¬ 
sions  to  their  ply;  and  yet  in  the  end,  when  they 
see  no  other  remedy,  then  they  come  to  it  with 
disadvantage;  as  Tarquinius,  that  gave  for  the 
third  part  of  Sibylla’s  books  the  treble  price, 
when  he  mought  at  first  have  had  all  three  for 
the  simple.  But  from  whatsoever  root  or  cause 
this  restiveness  of  mind  proceedeth,  it  is  a  thing 
most  prejudicial;  and  nothing  is  more  politic 
than  to  make  the  wheels  of  our  mind  concen¬ 
tric  and  voluble  with  the  wheels  of  fortune. 

34.  Another  precept  of  this  knowledge,  which 
hath  some  affinity  with  that  we  last  spake  of, 
but  with  difference,  is  that  which  is  well  ex¬ 
pressed,  “ Fatis  accede  deisque ,”5  that  men  do  not 
only  turn  with  the  occasions,  but  also  run  with 
the  occasions,  and  not  strain  their  credit  or 
strength  to  over-hard  or  extreme  points;  but 
choose  in  their  actions  that  which  is  most  pass¬ 
able:  for  this  will  preserve  men  from  foil,  not 
occupy  them  too  much  about  one  matter,  win 
opinion  of  moderation,  please  the  most,  and 
make  a  show  of  a  perpetual  felicity  in  all  they 
undertake;  which  cannot  but  mightily  increase 
reputation. 

2  “He  remained  the  same,  when  it  was  no  longer  be¬ 
coming  to  him.” 

3  “A  pliant  temper.” 

4  Philippics ,  1. 

6  Lucan,  Pharsalia ,  vm.  486.  “Take  the  way  which  the 
Fates  and  the  Gods  offer.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


35.  Another  part  of  this  knowledge  seemeth 
to  have  some  repugnancy  with  the  former  two, 
but  not  as  I  understand  it;  and  it  is  that  which 
Demosthenes  uttereth  in  high  terms;  “Et  quem- 
admodum  receptum  est ,  ut  exercitum  ducat  im- 
perator ,  sic  et  a  cordatis  viris  res  ipsae  ducendae; 
ut  quae  ipsis  videntur ,  ea  gerantur ,  et  non  ipsi 
event  us  persequi  cogantur.”1  For  if  we  observe 
we  shall  find  two  differing  kinds  of  sufficiency 
in  managing  of  business:  some  can  make  use  of 
occasions  aptly  and  dexterously,  but  plot  little; 
some  can  urge  and  pursue  their  own  plots  well, 
but  cannot  accommodate  nor  take  in;  either  of 
which  is  very  unperfect  without  the  other. 

36.  Another  part  of  this  knowledge  is  the  ob¬ 
serving  a  good  mediocrity  in  the  declaring,  or 
not  declaring  a  man’s  self:  for  although  depth 
of  secrecy,  and  making  way  (“ qualis  est  via  na¬ 
vis  in  mari ,”2  which  the  French  calleth  sourdes 
meneeSy  when  men  set  things  in  work  without 
opening  themselves  at  all),  be  sometimes  both 
prosperous  and  admirable;  yet  many  times  “dis- 
simulatio  errores  parity  qui  dissimulatorem  ip- 
sum  illaqueant ,”3  And  therefore  we  see  the 
greatest  politiques  have  in  a  natural  and  free 
manner  professed  their  desires,  rather  than  been 
reserved  and  disguised  in  them.  For  so  we  see 
that  Lucius  Sylla  made  a  kind  of  profession, 
“that  he  wished  all  men  happy  or  unhappy,  as 
they  stood  his  friends  or  enemies.”4  So  Caesar, 
when  he  went  first  into  Gaul,  made  no  scruple 
to  profess  “That  he  had  rather  be  first  in  a  vil¬ 
lage  than  second  at  Rome.”5  So  again,  as  soon 
as  he  had  begun  the  war,  we  see  what  Cicero 
saith  of  him,  “Alter”  (meaning  of  Caesar)  “ non 
recusaty  sed  quodammodo  postulaty  ut  ( ut  est)  sic 
appelletur  tyrannus .”6  So  we  may  see  in  a  letter 
of  Cicero  to  Atticus,  that  Augustus  Caesar,  in 
his  very  entrance  into  affairs,  when  he  was  a 
darling  of  the  senate,  yet  in  his  harangues  to 
the  people  would  swear,  “ Ita  parentis  honor es 
consequi  lice  at”1  (which  was  no  less  than  the  ty¬ 
ranny),  save  that,  to  help  it,  he  would  stretch 
forth  his  hand  towards  a  statue  of  Caesar’s  that 
was  erected  in  the  place:  and  men  laughed,  and 
wondered,  and  said,  “Is  it  possible?”  or,  “Did 

1  Philippics,  1,  51.  “As  it  is  a  maxim  for  a  general  to 
lead  his  army,  so  a  wise  man  should  lead  things,  make 
them  execute  his  will,  and  not  himself  be  obliged  to  fol¬ 
low  events.” 

2  “Like  the  way  of  a  ship  through  the  water.” 

3 “Dissimulation  produces  errors  which  prove  snares.” 

4  Plutarch. 

6  Plutarch. 

6  Ad  Atticum,  x,  Ep.  iv.  “The  other  did  not  refuse,  but 
in  a  manner  required  to  be  called  tyrant,  as  he  was.” 

1  Ad  Atticum,  xvi,  Ep.  15.  “As  I  hope  to  attain  my 
father’s  honours.” 


you  ever  hear  the  like?”  and  yet  thought  he 
meant  no  hurt;  he  did  it  so  handsomely  and  in¬ 
genuously.  And  all  these  were  prosperous: 
whereas  Pompey,  who  tended  to  the  same  ends, 
but  in  a  more  dark  and  dissembling  manner,  as 
Tacitus  saith  of  him,  “ Occultior  non  melior ,”8 
wherein  Sallust  concurreth,  “ Ore  proboy  animo 
inverecundoy ”9  made  it  his  design,  by  infinite  se¬ 
cret  engines,  to  cast  the  state  into  an  absolute 
anarchy  and  confusion,  that  the  state  mought 
cast  itself  into  his  arms  for  necessity  and  pro¬ 
tection,  and  so  the  sovereign  power  be  put  up¬ 
on  him,  and  he  never  seen  in  it:  and  when  he 
had  brought  it  (as  he  thought)  to  that  point, 
when  he  was  chosen  consul  alone,  as  never  any 
was,  yet  he  could  make  no  great  matter  of  it, 
because  men  understood  him  not;  but  was  fain 
in  the  end  to  go  the  beaten  track  of  getting  arms 
into  his  hands,  by  colour  of  the  doubt  of  Cae¬ 
sar’s  designs:  so  tedious,  casual,  and  unfortu¬ 
nate  are  these  deep  dissimulations:  whereof  it 
seemeth  Tacitus  made  this  judgement,  that 
they  were  a  cunning  of  an  inferior  form  in  re¬ 
gard  of  true  policy;  attributing  the  one  to  Au¬ 
gustus,  the  other  to  Tiberius;  where,  speaking 
of  Livia,  he  saith,  “Et  cum  artibus  mariti  simu- 
latione  filii  bene  composita”  :10  for  surely  the  con¬ 
tinual  habit  of  dissimulation  is  but  a  weak  and 
sluggish  cunning,  and  not  greatly  politic. 

37.  Another  precept  of  this  architecture  of 
fortune  is  to  accustom  our  minds  to  judge  of 
the  proportion  or  value  of  things,  as  they  con¬ 
duce  and  are  material  to  our  particular  ends: 
and  that  to  do  substantially,  and  not  superfi¬ 
cially.  For  we  shall  find  the  logical  part  (as  I 
may  term  it)  of  some  men’s  minds  good,  but 
the  mathematical  part  erroneous;  that  is,  they 
can  well  judge  of  consequences,  but  not  of  pro¬ 
portions  and  comparison,  preferring  things  of 
show  and  sense  before  things  of  substance  and 
effect.  So  some  fall  in  love  with  access  to  princes, 
others  with  popular  fame  and  applause,  suppos¬ 
ing  they  are  things  of  great  purchase,  when  in 
many  cases  they  are  but  matter  of  envy,  peril, 
and  impediment.  So  some  measure  things  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  labour  and  difficulty  or  assidu¬ 
ity  which  are  spent  about  them;  and  think,  if 
they  be  ever  moving,  that  they  must  needs  ad¬ 
vance  and  proceed;  as  Caesar  saith  in  a  despis¬ 
ing  manner  of  Cato  the  second,  when  he  describ¬ 
ed!  how  laborious  and  indefatigable  he  was  to 

8 “Having  his  intentions  better  concealed  but  not 
better.” 

9  “An  honest  tongue  but  a  shameless  mind.” 

10  Annals ,  Bk.  v.  1.  “She  was  well  tempered  with  the  arts 
of  her  husband  and  the  dissimulation  of  her  son.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


92 

no  great  purpose,  “ Haec  omnia  magno  studio  age- 
bat”1  So  in  most  things  men  are  ready  to  abuse 
themselves  in  thinking  the  greatest  means  to 
be  best,  when  it  should  be  the  fittest. 

38.  As  for  the  true  marshalling  of  men’s  pur¬ 
suits  towards  their  fortune,  as  they  are  more  or 
less  material,  I  hold  them  to  stand  thus.  First 
the  amendment  of  their  own  minds.  For  the  re¬ 
move  of  the  impediments  of  the  mind  will  sooner 
clear  the  passages  of  fortune,  than  the  obtain¬ 
ing  fortune  wiil  remove  the  impediments  of  the 
mind.  In  the  second  place  I  set  down  wealth 
and  means;  which  I  know  most  men  would  have 
placed  first,  because  of  the  general  use  which  it 
beareth  towards  all  variety  of  occasions.  But 
that  opinion  I  may  condemn  with  like  reason 
as  Machiavel  doth  thatother,  that  moneys  were 
the  sinews  of  the  wars;  whereas  (saith  he)  the 
true  sinews  of  the  wars  are  the  sinews  of  men’s 
arms,  that  is,  a  valiant,  populous,  and  military 
nation:  and  he  voucheth  aptly  the  authority  of 
Solon,  who,  when  Croesus  showed  him  his  trea¬ 
sury  of  gold,  said  to  him,  that  if  another  came 
that  had  better  iron,  he  would  be  master  of  his 
gold.  In  like  manner  it  may  be  truly  affirmed, 
that  it  is  not  moneys  that  are  the  sinews  of  for¬ 
tune,  but  it  is  the  sinews  and  steel  of  men’s 
minds,  wit,  courage,  audacity,  resolution,  tem¬ 
per,  industry,  and  the  like.  In  the  third  place 
I  set  down  reputation,  because  of  the  peremp¬ 
tory  tides  and  currents  it  hath;  which,  if  they 
be  not  taken  in  their  due  time,  are  seldom  re¬ 
covered,  it  being  extreme  hard  to  play  an  after 
game  of  reputation.  And  lastly  I  place  honour, 
which  is  more  easily  won  by  any  of  the  other 
three,  much  more  by  all,  than  any  of  them  can 
be  purchased  by  honour.  To  conclude  this  pre¬ 
cept,  as  there  is  order  and  priority  in  matter, 
so  is  there  in  time,  the  preposterous  placing 
whereof  is  one  of  the  commonest  errors:  while 
men  fly  to  their  ends  when  they  should  intend 
their  beginnings,  and  do  not  take  things  in  order 
of  time  as  they  come  on,  but  marshal  them  ac¬ 
cording  to  greatness  and  not  according  to  in¬ 
stance;  not  observing  the  good  precept,  “Quod 
nunc  instat  agamus .”2 3 

39.  Another  precept  of  this  knowledge  is  not 
to  embrace  any  matters  which  do  occupy  too 
greataquantitvoftime,buttohave  that  sound¬ 
ing  in  a  man’s  ears,  “Sed fugit  interea  jugit  ir- 
reparabile  tempus”:z  and  that  is  the  cause  why 
those  which  take  their  course  of  rising  by  pro¬ 

1  “He  did  all  things  with  great  labour.” 

2  Virgil,  Eclogues  y  Bk.  ix.  66.  “Attend  to  what  is  imme¬ 
diately  before  us.” 

3  Virgil,  Georgies,  Bk.  111.  2P4. 


fessions  of  burden,  as  lawyers,  orators,  painful 
divines,  and  the  like,  are  not  commonly  so  poli¬ 
tic  for  their  own  fortune,  otherwise  than  in  their 
ordinary  way,  because  they  want  time  to  learn 
particulars,  to  wait  occasions,  and  to  devise 
plots. 

40.  Another  precept  of  this  knowledge  is  to 
imitate  nature  which  doth  nothing  in  vain; 
which  surely  a  man  may  do  if  he  do  well  inter¬ 
lace  his  business,  and  bend  not  his  mind  too 
much  upon  that  which  he  principally  intendeth. 
For  a  man  ought  in  every  particular  action  so 
to  carry  the  motions  of  his  mind,  and  so  to  have 
one  thing  under  another,  as  if  he  cannot  have 
that  he  seeketh  in  the  best  degree,  yet  to  have 
it  in  a  second,  or  so  in  a  third;  and  if  he  can 
have  no  part  of  that  which  he  purposed,  yet  to 
turn  the  use  of  it  to  somewhat  else;  and  if  he 
cannot  make  anything  of  it  for  the  present,  yet 
to  make  it  as  a  seed  of  somewhat  in  time  to 
come;  and  if  he  can  contrive  no  effect  or  sub¬ 
stance  from  it,  yet  to  win  some  good  opinion 
by  it,  or  the  like.  So  that  he  should  exact  an  ac¬ 
count  of  himself  of  every  action,  to  reap  some¬ 
what,  and  not  to  stand  amazed  and  confused  if 
he  fail  of  that  he  chiefly  meant:  for  nothing  is 
more  impolitic  than  to  mind  actions  wholly  one 
by  one.  For  he  that  doth  so  leeseth  infinite  occa¬ 
sions  which  intervene,  and  are  many  times  more 
proper  and  propitious  forsomewhat  that  he  shall 
need  afterwards,  than  for  that  which  he  urgeth 
for  the  present;  and  therefore  men  must  be  per¬ 
fect  in  that  rule,  “Haec  oportetfacere ,  et  ilia  non 
omittere .”4 

41 .  Another  precept  of  this  knowledge  is,  not 
toengage  aman’sseltperemptorily  in  any  thing, 
though  it  seem  not  liable  to  accident;  but  ever 
to  have  a  window  to  fly  out  at,  or  a  way  to  re¬ 
tire:  following  the  wisdom  in  the  ancient  fable 
of  the  two  frogs,  which  consulted  when  their 
plash  was  dry  whither  they  should  go:  and  the 
one  moved  to  go  down  into  a  pit,  because  it  was 
not  likely  the  water  would  dry  there;  but  the 
other  answered,  “True,  but  if  it  do,  how  shall 
we  get  out  again?’’ 

42.  Another  precept  of  this  knowledge  is  that 
ancient  precept  of  Bias,  construed  not  to  any 
point  of  perfidiousness,  but  only  to  caution  and 
moderation,  “Et  ama  tanquain  inimicus  Juturus 
etodi  tanquam  amaturus .”5  For  it  utterly  betray- 
eth  all  utility  for  men  to  embark  themselves  too 
far  into  unfortunate  friendships,  troublesome 

4 “These  things  must  be  done,  but  those  should  not  be 
omitted.” 

5 “Love  vour  friend  as  if  he  were  to  become  an  enemy, 
and  hate  your  enemy  as  if  he  were  to  become  your  friend.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


spleens,  and  childish  and  humorous  envies  or 
emulations. 

43.  But  I  continue  this  beyond  the  measure 
of  an  example;  led,  because  I  would  not  have 
such  knowledges,  which  I  note  as  deficient,  to 
be  thought  things  imaginative  or  in  the  air,  or 
an  observation  or  two  much  made  of,  but  things 
of  bulk  and  mass,  whereof  an  end  is  hardlier 
made  than  a  beginning.  It  must  be  likewise  con¬ 
ceived,  that  in  these  points  which  I  mention  and 
set  down,  they  are  far  from  complete  tractates 
of  them,  but  only  as  small  pieces  for  patterns. 
And  lastly,  no  man  I  suppose  will  think  that  I 
mean  fortunes  are  not  obtained  without  all  this 
ado;  for  I  know  they  come  tumbling  into  some 
men’s  laps;  and  a  number  obtain  good  fortunes 
by  diligence  in  a  plain  way,  little  intermeddling, 
and  keeping  themselves  from  gross  errors. 

44.  But  as  Cicero,  when  he  setteth  down  an 
idea  of  a  perfect  orator,  doth  not  mean  that 
every  pleader  should  be  such;  and  so  likewise, 
when  a  prince  or  a  courtier  hath  been  described 
by  such  as  have  handled  those  subjects,  the 
mould  hath  used  to  be  made  according  to  the 
perfection  of  the  art,  and  not  according  to  com¬ 
mon  practice:  so  I  understand  it,  that  it  ought 
to  be  done  in  the  description  of  a  politic  man, 
I  mean  politic  for  his  own  fortune. 

45.  But  it  must  be  remembered  all  this  while, 
that  the  precepts  which  we  have  set  down  are 
of  that  kind  which  may  be  counted  and  called 
Ronae  Artes.  As  for  evil  arts,  if  a  man  would 
set  down  for  himself  that  principle  of  Machia- 
vel,  “That  a  man  seek  not  to  attain  virtue  it¬ 
self,  but  the  appearance  only  thereof;  because 
the  credit  of  virtue  is  a  help,  but  the  use  of  it  is 
cumber’’:1  or  that  other  of  his  principles,  “That 
he  presuppose,  that  men  are  not  fitly  to  be 
wrought  otherwise  but  by  fear;  and  therefore 
that  he  seek  to  have  every  man  obnoxious,  low, 
and  in  strait,’’  which  the  Italians  call  seminar 
spine ,  to  sow  thorns:  or  that  other  principle,  con¬ 
tained  in  the  verse  w'hich  Cicero  citeth,  “ Cadant 
amici ,  dummodo  inimici  intercidant ,”2  as  the  tri- 

i  umvirs,  which  sold  every  one  to  other  the  lives 
of  their  friends  for  the  deaths  of  their  enemies: 
or  that  other  protestation  of  L.  Catilina,  to  set 
on  fire  and  trouble  states,  to  the  end  to  fish  in 
droumy  waters,  and  to  unwrap  their  fortunes, 
“ Ego  si  quid  in  fortunis  meis  excitatum ,  sit  in- 
cendiutn ,  id  non  aqua  sed  ruina  restinguam ”3  or 

1  The  Prince. 

2“I.et  our  friends  fall,  provided  our  enemies  perish.” 

3  Cicero,  Pro  L.  Murenn;  and  Sallust,  Bellum  Catalina- 

rium ,  31.  “If  my  fortune  is  set  on  fire,  I  will  quench  it  not 

with  water  but  with  destruction.” 


that  other  principle  of  Lysander,  “That  children 
are  to  be  deceived  with  comfits,  and  men  with 
oaths’’:  and  the  like  evil  and  corrupt  positions, 
whereof  (as  in  all  things)  there  are  more  in  num¬ 
ber  than  of  the  good:  certainly  with  these  dis¬ 
pensations  from  the  laws  of  charity  and  integ¬ 
rity,  the  pressing  of  a  man’s  fortune  may  be  more 
hasty  and  compendious.  But  it  is  in  life  as  it 
is  in  ways,  the  shortest  way  is  commonly  the 
foulest,  and  surely  the  fairer  way  is  not  much 
about. 

46.  But  men,  if  they  be  in  their  own  power, 
and  do  bear  and  sustain  themselves,  and  be  not 
carried  away  wi  th  a  whirlwind  or  tempest  of  am¬ 
bition,  ought  in  the  pursuit  of  their  own  fortune 
to  set  before  their  eyes  not  only  that  general 
map  of  the  world,  “That  all  things  are  vanity 
and  vexation  of  spirit,’’4 *  but  many  other  more 
particular  cards  anddirections -.chiefly  that,  that 
being  without  well-being  is  a  curse,  and  the 
greater  being  the  greater  curse;  and  that  all  vir¬ 
tue  is  most  rewarded,  and  all  wickedness  most 
punished  in  itself:  according  as  the  poet  saith 
excellently: 

Quae  vo bis,  quae  digna ,  t'iri,  pro  laudibus  istis 

Praemia  posse  rear  solvi?  pulcherrima  primum 

Dii  moresque  dabunt  vestri.b 

Andsoofthecontrary.  Andsecondly,  they  ought 
to  look  up  to  the  eternal  providence  and  divine 
judgement,  which  often  subverteth  the  wisdom 
of  evil  plots  and  imaginations,  according  to  that 
Scripture,  “He  hath  conceived  mischief,  and 
shall  bring  forth  a  vain  thing.’’  And  although 
men  should  refrain  themselves  from  injury  and 
evil  arts,  yet  this  incessant  and  Sabbathless  pur¬ 
suit  of  aman’s  fortune  leaveth  not  tribute  which 
we  owe  to  God  of  our  time;  who  (we  see)  de- 
mandeth  a  tenth  ofour  substance,  and  a  seventh, 
which  is  more  strict,  of  our  time:  and  it  is  to 
small  purpose  to  have  an  erected  face  towards 
heaven,  and  a  perpetual  groveling  spirit  upon 
earth,  eating  dust  as  doth  the  serpent,  “ Atque 
affigit  humo  divinae  particulam  aurae .”6  And  if 
any  man  flatter  himself  that  he  will  employ  his 
fortune  well,  though  he  should  obtain  it  ill,  as 
was  said  concerning  Augustus  Caesar,  and  af¬ 
ter  of  Septimius  Severus,  “That  either  they 
should  never  have  been  born,  or  else  they  should 
never  have  died,’’  they  did  so  much  mischief  in 
the  pursuit  and  ascent  of  their  greatness,  and 

4Eccles.  1.  2-14. 

5  Virgil  i TLneid,  Bk.  ix.  252.  “What  recompense,  O  friends, 
can  I  hold  out,  worthy  such  deeds?  The  best  is  that  ye 
have,  God’s  blessing  and  your  proper  nobleness.” 

6  Horace,  Satires ,  n.  79.  ‘‘Fixing  to  earth  the  ethereal 
spark  divine.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


so  much  good  when  they  were  established:  yet 
these  compensations  and  satisfactions  are  good 
to  be  used,  but  never  good  to  be  purposed.  And 
lastly,  it  is  not  amiss  for  men  in  their  race  to¬ 
ward  their  fortune,  to  cool  themselves  a  little 
with  that  conceit  which  is  elegantly  expressed 
by  the  Emperor  Charles  the  Fifth,  in  his  instruc¬ 
tions  to  the  king  his  son,  “That  fortune  hath 
somewhat  of  the  nature  of  a  woman,  that  if  she 
be  too  much  wooed  she  is  the  farther  off.”  But 
this  last  is  but  a  remedy  for  those  whose  tastes 
are  corrupted:  let  men  rather  build  upon  that 
foundation  which  is  as  a  corner-stone  of  divinity 
and  philosophy,  wherein  they  join  close,  name¬ 
ly  that  same  Primum  quaerite.  For  divinity  saith 
“ Primum  quaerite  regnum  Dei ,  et  ista  omnia  adii - 
cientur  vobis ’V  and  philosophy  saith,  “ Primum 
quaerite  bona  animi;  caetera  aut  aderunt ,  aut  non 
oberunt .”2  And  although  the  human  foundation 
hath  somewhat  of  the  sands,  as  we  see  in  M. 
Brutus,  when  he  brake  forth  into  that  speech, 

Te  colui  ( Virtus )  ut  rem;  ast  tu  nomen  inane  es;z 

yet  the  divine  foundation  is  upon  the  rock.  But 
this  may  serve  for  a  taste  of  that  knowledge 
which  I  noted  as  deficient. 

47.  Concerning  government,  it  is  a  part  of 
knowledge  secret  and  retired  in  both  these  re¬ 
spects  in  which  things  are  deemed  secret;  for 
some  things  are  secret  because  they  are  hard  to 
know,  and  some  because  they  are  not  fit  to  ut¬ 
ter.  We  see  all  governments  are  obscure  and  in¬ 
visible: 

Totamque  infusa  per  artus 

Mens  agitat  molem ,  et  magno  se  corpore  miscet.k 

Such  is  the  description  of  governments.  We  see 
the  government  of  God  over  the  world  is  hid¬ 
den,  insomuch  as  it  seemeth  to  participate  of 
much  irregularity  and  confusion.  The  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  soul  in  moving  the  body  is  inward 
and  profound,  and  the  passages  thereof  hardly 
to  be  reduced  to  demonstration.  Again  the  wis¬ 
dom  of  antiquity  (the  shadows  whereof  are  in 
the  poets)  in  the  description  of  torments  and 
pains,  next  unto  the  crime  of  rebellion,  which 
was  the  giants’  offence,  doth  detest  the  offence 
offutility,asinSisyphus  and  Tantalus.  But  this 
was  meant  of  particulars:  nevertheless,  even 

1Matt.  6.  33.  ‘‘Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
all  other  things  shall  be  added  unto  you.” 

2  “Seek  the  goods  of  the  mind,  and  the  rest  will  either 
be  supplied  or  not  much  wanted.” 

3  Dion  Cassius,  xlvii.  49.  “O  virtue,  I  have  reverenced 
thee  as  a  being,  but,  alas,  thou  art  an  empty  name!” 

4  “In  every  pore  diffused  the  great  mind  works,  stirs 
all  the  mass,  and  thro’  the  huge  frame  lives.” 


unto  the  general  rules  and  discourses  of  policy 
and  government  there  is  due  a  reverent  and  re¬ 
served  handling. 

48.  Butcontrariwisein  thegovernors  towards 
thegoverned,  all  thingsought  as  far  as  the  frailty 
of  man  permitteth  to  be  manifest  and  revealed. 
For  so  it  is  expressed  in  the  Scriptures  touching 
the  government  of  God,  that  this  globe,  which 
seemeth  to  us  a  dark  and  shady  body,  is  in  the 
view  of  God  as  crystal:  “£/  in  conspectu  sedis 
tanquam  mare  vitreum  simile  crystallo.”b  So  unto 
princes  and  states,  and  specially  towards  wise 
senates  and  councils,  the  natures  and  disposi¬ 
tions  of  the  people,  their  conditions  and  neces¬ 
sities,  their  factions  and  combinations,  their 
animosities  and  discontents,  ought  to  be,  in  re¬ 
gard  of  the  variety  of  their  intelligences,  the 
wisdom  of  their  observations,  and  the  height  of 
their  station  where  they  keep  sentinel,  in  great 
part  clear  and  transparent.  Wherefore,  consid¬ 
ering  that  I  write  to  a  king  that  is  a  master  of 
this  science,  and  is  so  well  assisted,  I  think  it 
decent  to  pass  over  this  part  in  silence,  as  will¬ 
ing  to  obtain  the  certificate  which  one  of  the 
ancient  philosophers  aspired  unto;  who  being 
silent,  when  others  contended  to  make  demon¬ 
stration  of  their  abilities  by  speech,  desired  it 
mought  be  certified  for  his  part,  “That  there 
was  one  that  knew  how  to  hold  his  peace.” 

49.  Notwithstanding, for themorepublicpart 
of  government,  which  is  laws,  I  think  good  to 
note  only  one  deficience;  which  is,  that  all  those 
which  have  written  of  laws,  have  written  either 
as  philosophers  or  as  lawyers,  and  none  as  states¬ 
men.  As  for  the  philosophers,  they  make  imag¬ 
inary  laws  for  imaginary  commonwealths,  and 
their  discourses  are  as  the  stars,  which  give  lit¬ 
tle  light  because  they  are  so  high.  For  the  law¬ 
yers,  they  write  according  to  the  states  where 
they  live  what  is  received  law,  and  not  what 
ought  to  be  law:  for  the  wisdom  of  a  lawmaker 
is  one,  and  of  a  lawyer  is  another.  For  there  are 
in  nature  certain  fountains  of  justice,  whence 
all  civil  laws  are  derived  but  as  streams:  and 
like  as  waters  do  take  tinctures  and  tastes  from 
the  soils  through  which  they  run,  so  do  civil  laws 
vary  according  to  the  regions  and  governments 
where  they  are  planted,  though  they  proceed 
from  the  same  fountains.  Again,  the  wisdom  of 
a  lawmaker  consisteth  not  only  in  a  platform 
of  justice,  but  in  the  application  thereof;  tak¬ 
ing  into  consideration  by  what  means  laws  may 
be  made  certain,  and  what  are  the  causes  and 
remedies  of  the  doubtfulness  and  incertainty  of 

5  “And  before  the  Throne  there  was  a  sea  of  glass,  like 
unto  crystal.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


law;  by  what  means  laws  may  be  made  apt  and 
easy  to  be  executed,  and  what  are  the  impedi¬ 
ments  and  remedies  in  the  execution  of  laws; 
what  influence  laws  touching  private  right  of 
meum  and  tuum  have  into  the  public  state,  and 
how  they  may  be  made  apt  and  agreeable;  how 
laws  are  to  be  penned  and  delivered,  whether 
in  texts  or  in  acts,  brief  or  large,  with  preambles, 
or  without;  how  they  are  to  be  pruned  and  re¬ 
formed  from  time  to  time,  and  what  is  the  best 
means  to  keep  them  from  being  too  vast  in  vol¬ 
umes,  or  too  full  of  multiplicity  and  crossness; 
how  they  are  to  be  expounded,  when  upon  causes 
emergent  and  judicially  discussed,  and  when 
upon  responses  and  conferences  touching  gen¬ 
eral  points  or  questions;  how  they  are  to  be 
pressed,  rigorously  or  tenderly;  how  they  are 
to  be  mitigated  by  equity  and  good  conscience, 
and  whether  discretion  and  strict  law  are  to  be 
mingled  in  the  same  courts,  or  kept  apart  in  sev¬ 
eral  courts;  again,  how  the  practice,  profession, 
and  erudition  of  law  is  to  be  censured  and  gov¬ 
erned;  and  many  other  points  touching  the  ad¬ 
ministration,  and  (as  I  may  term  it)  animation 
of  laws.  Upon  which  I  insist  the  less,  because 
I  purpose  (if  God  give  me  leave),  having  begun 
a  work  of  this  nature  in  aphorisms,  to  propound 
it  hereafter,  noting  it  in  the  meantime  for  defi¬ 
cient. 

50.  And  for  your  Majesty’s  laws  of  England, 
I  could  say  much  of  their  dignity,  and  some¬ 
what  of  their  defect;  but  they  cannot  but  excel 
the  civil  laws  in  fitness  for  the  government:  for 
the  civil  law  was  “ non  hos  quaesitum  munus  in 
usus” ;  it  was  not  made  for  the  countries  which 
it  governeth.  Hereof  I  cease  to  speak,  because 
I  will  not  intermingle  matter  of  action  with  mat¬ 
ter  of  general  learning. 

XXIV.  Thus  have  I  concluded  this  portion 
of  learning  touching  civil  knowledge;  and  with 
civil  knowledge  have  concluded  human  philos¬ 
ophy;  and  with  human  philosophy,  philosophy 
in  general.  And  being  now  at  some  pause,  look¬ 
ing  back  into  that  I  have  passed  through,  this 
writing  seemeth  to  me  (“si  nunquamfallit  ima¬ 
go”),  as  far  as  a  man  can  judge  of  his  own  work, 
not  much  better  than  that  noise  or  sound  which 
musicians  make  while  they  are  in  tuning  their 
instruments:  which  is  nothing  pleasant  to  hear, 
but  yet  is  a  cause  why  the  music  is  sweeter  af¬ 
terwards.  So  have  I  been  content  to  tune  the 
instruments  of  the  Muses,  that  they  may  play 
that  have  better  hands.  And  surely,  when  I  set 
before  me  the  condition  of  these  times,  in  which 
learning  hath  made  her  third  visitation  or  cir¬ 
cuit  in  all  the  qualities  thereof;  as  the  excellency 


and  vivacity  of  the  wits  of  this  age;  the  noble 
helps  and  lights  which  we  have  by  the  travails 
of  ancient  writers:  the  art  ofprinting,  whichcom- 
municateth  books  to  men  of  all  fortunes;  the 
openness  of  the  world  by  navigation,  which  hath 
disclosed  multitudes  of  experiments,  and  a  mass 
of  natural  history;  the  leisure  wherewith  these 
times  abound,  not  employing  men  so  generally 
in  civil  business,  as  the  states  of  Grecia  did,  in 
respect  of  their  popularity,  and  the  state  of 
Rome,  in  respect  of  the  greatness  of  their  mon¬ 
archy;  the  present  disposition  of  these  times  at 
thisinstant  to  peace;  the  consumption  of  all  that 
ever  can  be  said  in  controversies  of  religion, 
which  have  so  much  diverted  men  from  other 
sciences;  the  perfection  of  your  Majesty’s  learn¬ 
ing,  which  as  a  phoenix  may  call  whole  vollies 
of  wits  to  follow  you;  and  the  inseparable  pro¬ 
priety  of  time,  which  is  ever  more  and  more  to 
disclose  truth;  I  cannot  but  be  raised  to  this  per¬ 
suasion  that  this  third  period  of  time  will  far 
surpass  that  of  the  Grecian  and  Roman  learn¬ 
ing:  only  if  men  will  know  their  own  strength, 
and  their  own  weakness  both ;  and  take,  one  from 
the  other,  light  of  invention,  and  not  fire  of  con¬ 
tradiction  ;  and  esteem  of  the  inquisition  of  truth 
as  of  an  enterprise,  and  not  as  of  a  quality  or 
ornament;  and  employ  wit  and  magnificence  to 
things  of  worth  and  excellency,  and  not  to  things 
vulgar  and  of  popular  estimation.  As  for  my  la¬ 
bours,  if  any  man  shall  please  himself  or  others 
in  the  reprehension  of  them,  they  shall  make 
that  ancient  and  patient  request,  “  Verbera ,  sed 
audi”  j1  let  men  reprehend  them,  so  they  observe 
and  weigh  them.  For  the  appeal  islawful  (though 
it  may  be  it  shall  not  be  needful)  from  the  first 
cogitations  of  men  to  their  second,  and  from  the 
nearer  times  to  the  times  further  off.  Now  let 
us  come  to  that  learning,  which  both  the  former 
times  were  not  so  blessed  as  to  know,  sacred 
and  inspired  divinity,  the  Sabbath  and  port  of 
all  men’s  labours  and  peregrinations. 

XXV.  1.  The  prerogative  of  God  extendeth 
as  well  to  the  reason  as  to  the  will  of  man;  so 
that  as  we  are  to  obey  his  law,  though  we  find 
a  reluctation  in  our  will,  so  we  are  to  believe 
his  word,  though  we  find  a  reluctation  in  our 
reason.  For  if  we  believe  only  that  which  is  agree¬ 
able  to  our  sense,  we  give  consent  to  the  mat¬ 
ter,  and  not  to  the  author;  which  is  no  more 
than  we  would  do  towards  a  suspected  and  dis¬ 
credited  witness;  but  that  faith  which  was  ac¬ 
counted  to  Abraham  for  righteousness  was  of 

1Themistocles  to  Eurybiades,  Plutarch,  Apophthegmata 
regu?n  et  imperatorunr.  “Strike  me  if  you  will,  only  hear 
me.” 


ADVANCEMENT  OK  LEARNING 


96 

such  a  point  as  whereat  Sarah  laughed,’  who 
therein  was  an  image  of  natural  reason. 

2.  Howbeit  (if  we  will  truly  consider  of  it) 
more  worthy  it  is  to  believe  than  to  know  as 
we  now  know.  For  in  knowledge  man’s  mind 
suffereth  from  sense;  but  in  belief  it  suffereth 
from  spirit,  such  one  as  it  holdeth  for  more  au¬ 
thorized  than  itself,  and  so  suffereth  from  the 
worthier  agent.  Otherwise  it  is  of  the  state  of 
man  glorified;  for  then  faith  shall  cease,  and  we 
shall  know  as  we  are  known.2 

3.  Wherefore  we  conclude  that  sacred  theol¬ 
ogy  (which  in  our  idiom  we  call  divinity)  is 
grounded  only  upon  the  word  and  oracle  of  God,3 
and  not  upon  the  light  of  nature:  for  it  is  writ¬ 
ten,  “ Coeli  enarrant  gloriam  Dei” ;4  but  it  is  not 
written,  “ Coeli  enarrant  voluntatem  Dei”,b  but 
of  that  it  is  said,  “Ad  legem  et  testimonium :  si 
non  jecerint  secundum  verbum  istud ,”6  &c.  This 
holdeth  not  only  in  those  points  of  faith  which 
concern  the  great  mysteries  of  the  Deity,  of  the 
creation,  of  the  redemption,  but  likewise  those 
which  concern  the  law  moral  truly  interpreted: 
“Love  your  enemies:  do  good  to  them  that  hate 
you:  Be  like  to  your  heavenly  Father,  that  suf¬ 
fereth  his  rain  to  fall  upon  the  just  and  unjust.”7 
To  this  it  ought  to  be  applauded,  “Nec  vox  ho - 
minem  sonat” :8  it  is  a  voice  beyond  the  light  of 
nature.  So  we  see  the  heathen  poets,  when  they 
fall  upon  a  libertine  passion,  do  still  expostu¬ 
late  with  laws  and  moralities,  as  if  they  were 
opposite  and  malignant  to  nature;  “Et  quod  na- 
tura  remittit ,  invida  jura  negant .”9  So  said  Den- 
damis  the  Indian  unto  Alexander’s  messengers, 
that  he  had  heard  somewhat  of  Pythagoras,  and 
some  other  of  the  wise  men  of  Grecia,  and  that 
he  held  them  for  excellent  men:  but  that  they 
had  a  fault,  which  was  that  they  had  in  too  great 
reverence  and  veneration  a  thing  they  calledlaw 
and  manners.10  So  it  must  be  confessed,  that  a 
great  part  of  the  law  moral  is  of  that  perfection, 
whereunto  the  light  of  nature  cannot  aspire: 
how  then  is  it  that  man  is  said  to  have  by  the 
light  and  law  of  nature,  some  notions  and  con¬ 
ceits  of  virtue  and  vice,  justice  and  wrong,  good 
and  evil?  Thus,  because  the  light  of  nature  is 

1  Gen.  18. 

2 1  Cor.  13.  12. 

3Ps.  18. 

4  “The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God.” 

5  “The  heavens  declare  the  will  of  God.” 

6 “To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony:  if  they  do  not  ac¬ 
cording  to  this  word.” 

7  Matt.  5.  44,  4 5- 

8  Virgil  ALneid ,  Bk.  1.  332. 

9Ovid,  Metamorphoses ,  x.  330.  “What  nature  suffers 
envious  laws  forbid.” 

10  Strabo,  xv. 


used  in  two  several  senses;  the  one,  that  which 
springeth  from  reason,  sense  induction,  argu¬ 
ment,  accordi  ng  to  the  laws  of  heaven  and  earth; 
the  other,  that  which  is  imprinted  upon  the  spirit 
of  man  by  an  inward  instinct,  according  to  the 
law  of  conscience,  which  is  a  sparkle  of  the  pu¬ 
rity  of  his  first  estate;  in  which  latter  sense  only 
he  is  participant  of  some  light  and  discerning 
touching  the  perfection  of  the  moral  law:  but 
how?  sufficient  to  check  the  vice,  but  not  to  in¬ 
form  the  duty.  So  then  the  doctrine  of  religion, 
as  well  moral  as  mystical,  is  not  to  be  attained 
but  by  inspiration  and  revelation  from  God. 

4.  The  use  notwithstanding  of  reason  in  spir¬ 
itual  things,  and  the  latitude  thereof,  is  very 
great  and  general:  for  it  is  not  for  nothing  that 
the  apostle  calleth  religion  “our  reasonable  serv¬ 
ice  of  God”;11  insomuch  as  the  very  ceremonies 
and  figures  of  the  old  law  were  full  of  reason 
and  signification,  much  more  than  the  ceremo¬ 
nies  of  idolatry  and  magic,  that  are  full  of  non¬ 
significants  and  surd  characters.  But  most  spe¬ 
cially  the  Christian  faith,  as  in  all  things  so  in 
this,  deserveth  to  be  highly  magnified;  holding 
and  preserving  the  golden  mediocrity  in  this 
point  between  the  law  of  the  heathen  and  the 
law  of  Mahomet,  which  have  embraced  the  two 
extremes.  For  the  religion  of  the  heathen  had 
no  constant  belief  or  confession,  but  left  all  to 
the  liberty  of  argument;  and  the  religion  of  Ma- 
humet  on  the  other  side  interdicteth  argument 
altogether:  the  one  having  the  very  face  of  er¬ 
ror,  and  the  other  of  imposture:  whereas  the 
faith  doth  but  admit  and  reject  disputation 
with  difference.12 

5.  The  use  of  human  reason  in  religion  is  of 
two  sorts:  the  former,  in  the  conception  and  ap¬ 
prehension  of  the  mysteries  of  God  to  us  reveal¬ 
ed;  the  other,  in  the  inferring  and  deriving  of 
doctrine  and  direction  thereupon.  The  former 
extendeth  to  the  mysteries  themselves ;  but  how  ? 
by  way  of  illustration,  and  not  by  way  of  argu¬ 
ment.  The  latter  consisteth  indeed  of  probation 
and  argument.  In  the  former,  we  see  God  vouch¬ 
safed  to  descend  to  our  capacity,  in  the  expres¬ 
sing  of  his  mysteries  in  sort  as  may  be  sensible 
unto  us;  and  doth  grift  his  revelations  and  holy 
doctrine  upon  the  notions  of  our  reason,  and  ap¬ 
plied  his  inspirations  to  open  our  understand¬ 
ing,  as  the  form  of  the  key  to  the  ward  of  the 
lock.  For  the  latter,  there  is  allowed  us  an  use 
of  reason  and  argument,  secondary  and  respec¬ 
tive,  although  not  original  and  absolute.  For  af¬ 
ter  the  articles  and  principles  of  religion  are 

11  Rom.  12.  1. 

12  Hooker,  Ecclesiastical  Polity. 


SECOND  BOOK 


placed  and  exempted  from  examination  of  rea¬ 
son,  it  is  then  permitted  unto  us  to  make  deri¬ 
vations  and  inferences  from  and  according  to 
the  analogy  of  them,  for  our  better  direction. 
In  nature  this  holdeth  not;  for  both  the  prin¬ 
ciples  are  examinable  by  induction,  though  not 
by  a  medium  or  syllogism;  and  besides,  those 
principles  or  first  positions  have  no  discordance 
with  that  reason  which  draweth  down  and  de- 
duceth  the  inferior  positions.  But  yet  it  holdeth 
not  in  religion  alone,  but  in  many  knowledges, 
both  of  greater  and  smaller  nature,  namely, 
wherein  there  are  not  only  posita  but  placita\ 
for  in  such  there  can  be  no  use  of  absolute  rea¬ 
son.  We  see  it  familiarly  in  games  of  wit,  as  chess, 
or  the  like.  The  draughts  and  first  laws  of  the 
game  are  positive,  but  how  ?  merely  adplacitum , 
and  not  examinable  by  reason;  but  then  how 
to  direct  our  play  thereupon  with  best  advan¬ 
tage  to  win  the  game,  is  artificial  and  rational. 
So  in  human  laws  there  be  many  grounds  and 
maxims  which  are  placita  juris ,  positive  upon 
authority,  and  not  upon  reason,  and  therefore 
not  to  be  disputed:  but  what  is  most  just,  not 
absolutely  but  relatively,  and  according  to  those 
maxims,  that  affordeth  a  long  field  of  disputa¬ 
tion.  Such  therefore  is  that  secondary  reason, 
which  hath  place  in  divinity,  which  is  ground¬ 
ed  upon  the  placets  of  God. 

6.  Here  therefore  I  note  this  deficience,  that 
there  hath  not  been,  to  my  understanding,  suf¬ 
ficiently  inquired  and  handled  the  true  limits 
and  use  of  reason  in  spiritual  things,  as  a  kind 
of  divine  dialectic:  which  for  that  it  is  not  done, 
it  seemeth  to  me  a  thing  usual,  by  pretext  of 
true  conceiving  that  which  is  revealed,  to  search 
and  mine  into  that  which  is  not  revealed;  and 
by  pretext  of  enucleating  inferences  and  contra¬ 
dictories,  to  examine  that  which  is  positive.  The 
one  sort  falling  into  the  error  of  Nicodemus,  de¬ 
manding  to  have  things  made  more  sensible  than 
it  pleaseth  God  to  reveal  them,  “Quomodo  pos- 
sit  homo  nasci  cum  sit  senexV n  The  other  sort 
into  the  error  of  the  disciples,  which  were  scan¬ 
dalized  at  a  show  of  contradiction,  “Quid  esthoc 
quod  dicit  nobis?  Modicum ,  et  non  videbitis  me; 
et  iterum ,  modicum ,  et  videbitis  me ,”1 2  &c. 

7.  Upon  this  I  have  insisted  the  more,  in  re¬ 
gard  of  the  great  and  blessed  use  thereof;  for 
this  point  well  laboured  and  defined  of  would, 
in  my  judgement,  be  an  opiate  to  stay  and  bridle 
not  only  the  vanity  of  curious  speculations, 

1  John  3.  4.  “How  can  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  old?” 

2  “What  is  this  that  he  saith  unto  us?  A  little  while  and 

ye  shall  not  see  me,  and  again  a  little  while  and  ye  shall 

see  me.” 


wherewith  the  schools  labour,  but  the  fury  of 
controversies,  wherewith  the  church  laboureth. 
For  it  cannot  but  open  men’s  eyes,  to  see  that 
many  controversies  do  merely  pertain  to  that 
which  is  either  not  revealed  or  positive;  and  that 
many  others  do  grow  upon  weak  and  obscure 
inferences  or  derivations:  which  latter  sort,  if 
men  would  revive  the  blessed  style  of  that  great 
doctor  of  the  Gentiles,  would  be  carried  thus, 
ego ,  non  dominus ;3  and  again,  secundum  consi¬ 
lium  meum ,4  in  opinions  and  counsels,  and  not 
in  positions  and  oppositions.  But  men  are  now 
over-ready  to  usurp  the  style,  non  ego ,  sed  do¬ 
minus ;5  and  not  so  only,  but  to  bind  it  with  the 
thunder  and  denunciation  of  curses  and  anathe¬ 
mas,  to  the  terror  of  those  which  have  not  suf¬ 
ficiently  learned  out  of  Salomon,  that  “The 
causeless  curse  shall  not  come.” 

8.  Divinity  hath  two  principal  parts;  the  mat¬ 
ter  informed  or  revealed,  and  the  nature  of  the 
information  or  revelation:  and  with  the  latter 
we  will  begin,  because  it  hath  most  coherence 
with  that  which  we  have  now  last  handled.  The 
nature  of  the  information  consisteth  of  three 
branches;  the  limits  of  the  information,  the  suf¬ 
ficiency  of  the  information,  and  the  acquiring 
or  obtaining  the  information.  Unto  the  limits  of 
the  information  belong  these  considerations; 
how  far  forth  particular  persons  continue  to  be 
inspired;  how  far  forth  the  church  is  inspired; 
and  how  far  forth  reason  may  be  used:  the  last 
point  whereof  I  have  noted  as  deficient.  Unto 
the  sufficiency  of  the  information  belong  two 
considerations;  what  points  of  religion  are  fun¬ 
damental,  and  what  perfective,  being  matter  of 
further  building  and  perfection  upon  one  and 
the  same  foundation;  and  again,  how  the  gra¬ 
dations  of  light  according  to  the  dispensation 
of  times  are  material  to  the  sufficiency  of  belief. 

9.  Here  again  I  may  rather  give  it  in  advice 
than  note  it  as  deficient,  that  the  points  funda¬ 
mental,  and  the  points  of  further  perfection 
only,  ought  to  be  with  piety  and  wisdom  dis¬ 
tinguished:  a  subject  tending  to  much  like  end 
as  that  I  noted  before;  for  as  that  other  were 
likely  to  abate  the  number  of  controversies,  so 
this  is  like  to  abate  the  heat  of  many  of  them. 
We  see  Moses  when  he  saw  the  Israelite  and 
the  Egyptian  fight,  he  did  not  say,  “  Why  strive 
you?”  but  drew  his  sword  and  slew  the  Egyp¬ 
tian:  but  when  he  saw  the  two  Israelites  fight, 
he  said,  “You  are  brethren,  why  strive  you?”6 

3 “I,  not  the  Lord.” 

4“According  to  my  judgement.”  I  Cor.  7.  12. 

5  “Not  I,  but  the  Lord.” 

6  Exodus,  2.  13. 


98  ADVANCEMENT 

If  the  point  of  doctrine  be  an  Egyptian,  it  must 
be  slain  by  the  sword  of  the  spirit,  and  not  rec¬ 
onciled;  but  if  it  be  an  Israelite,  though  in  the 
wrong,  then,  “  Why  strive  you  ?  ”  We  see  of  the 
fundamental  points,  our  Saviour  penneth  the 
league  thus,  “He  that  is  not  with  us  is  against 
us”;1  but  of  points  not  fundamental,  thus,  “He 
that  is  not  against  us  is  with  us.”2  So  we  see  the 
coat  of  our  Saviour  was  entire  without  seam,3 
and  so  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Scriptures  in  itself; 
but  the  garment  of  the  church  was  of  divers 
colours  and  yet  not  divided.  We  see  the  chaff 
may  and  ought  to  be  severed  from  the  corn  in 
the  ear,  but  the  tares  may  not  be  pulled  up  from 
the  corn  in  the  field.  So  as  it  is  a  thing  of  great 
use  well  to  define  what,  and  of  what  latitude 
those  points  are,  which  do  make  men  merely  al¬ 
iens  and  disincorporate  from  the  church  of  God. 

io.  For  the  obtaining  of  the  information,  it 
resteth  upon  the  true  and  sound  interpretation 
of  the  Scriptures,  which  are  the  fountains  of  the 
water  of  life.  The  interpretations  of  the  scrip¬ 
tures  are  of  two  sorts;  methodical,  and  solute 
or  at  large.  For  this  divine  water,  which  excel- 
leth  so  much  that  of  J acob’s  well,  is  drawn  forth 
much  in  the  same  kind  as  natural  water  useth 
to  be  out  of  wells  and  fountains;  either  it  is  first 
forced  up  into  a  cistern,  and  from  thence  fetched 
and  derived  for  use;  or  else  it  is  drawn  and  re¬ 
ceived  in  buckets  and  vessels  immediately  where 
it  springeth.  The  former  sort  whereof,  though 
it  seem  to  be  the  more  ready,  yet  in  my  judge¬ 
ment  is  more  subject  to  corrupt.  This  is  that 
method  which  hath  exhibited  unto  us  the  scho- 
lastical  divinity ;  whereby  divinity  hath  been  re¬ 
duced  into  an  art,  as  into  a  cistern,  and  the 
streams  of  doctrine  or  positions  fetched  and  de¬ 
rived  from  thence. 

n.  In  this  men  have  sought  three  things,  a 
summary  brevity,  a  compacted  strength,  and  a 
complete  perfection;  whereof  the  two  first  they 
fail  to  find,  and  the  last  they  ought  not  to  seek. 
For  as  to  brevity,  we  see  in  all  summary  meth¬ 
ods,  while  men  purpose  to  abridge,  they  give 
cause  to  dilate.  For  the  sum  or  abridgement  by 
contraction  becometh  obscure;  the  obscurity  re- 
quireth  exposition,  and  the  exposition  is  de¬ 
duced  into  large  commentaries,  or  into  common 
places  and  titles,  which  grow  to  be  more  vast 
than  the  original  writings,  whence  the  sum  was 
at  first  extracted.  So  we  see  the  volumes  of  the 
schoolmen  are  greater  much  than  the  first  writ¬ 
ings  of  the  fathers,  whence  the  Master  of  the 

1  Matt.  12.  jo;  Luke  n.  2j. 

2  Luke  9.  50. 

3John  19.  23. 


OF  LEARNING 

Sentences  made  his  sum  or  collection.  So  in  like 
manner  the  volumes  of  the  modern  doctors  of 
the  civil  law  exceed  those  of  the  ancient  juris¬ 
consults,  of  which  Tribonian  compiled  the  di¬ 
gest.  So  as  this  course  of  sums  and  commenta¬ 
ries  is  that  which  doth  infallibly  make  the  body 
of  sciences  more  immense  in  quantity,  and  more 
base  in  substance. 

12.  And  for  strength,  it  is  true  that  knowl¬ 
edges  reduced  into  exact  methods  have  a  show 
of  strength  in  that  each  part  seemeth  to  support 
and  sustain  the  other;  but  this  is  more  satis¬ 
factory  than  substantial:  like  unto  buildings 
which  stand  by  architecture  and  compaction, 
which  are  more  subject  to  ruin  than  those  which 
are  built  more  strong  in  their  several  parts, 
though  less  compacted.  But  it  is  plain  that  the 
more  you  recede  from  your  grounds,  the  weak¬ 
er  do  you  conclude:  and  as  in  nature,  the  more 
you  remove  yourself  from  particulars,  the  great¬ 
er  peril  of  error  you  do  incur:  so  much  more  in 
divinity,  the  more  you  recede  from  the  Scrip¬ 
tures  by  inferences  and  consequences,  the  more 
weak  and  dilute  are  your  positions. 

13.  And  as  for  perfection  or  completeness  in 
divinity,  it  is  not  to  be  sought ;  which  makes  this 
course  of  artificial  divinity  the  more  suspect. 
For  he  that  will  reduce  a  knowledge  into  an  art, 
will  make  it  round  and  uniform:  but  in  divinity 
many  things  must  be  left  abrupt,  and  conclud¬ 
ed  with  this:  “0  altitudo  sapientiae  et  scientiae 
Dei!  quam  incomprehensibilia  sunt  judicia  ejus , 
et  non  investigabiles  viae  ejus."A  So  again  the 
apostle  saith,  “  Ex  parte  scimus”:b  and  to  have 
the  form  of  a  total,  where  there  is  but  matter 
for  a  part,  cannot  be  without  supplies  by  sup¬ 
position  and  presumption.  And  therefore  I  con¬ 
clude,  that  the  true  use  of  these  sums  and  meth¬ 
ods  hath  place  in  institutions  or  introductions 
preparatory  unto  knowledge:  but  in  them,  or 
by  deducement  from  them,  to  handle  the  main 
body  and  substance  of  a  knowledge,  is  in  all  sci¬ 
ences  prejudicial,  and  in  divinity  dangerous. 

14.  As  to  the  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures 
solute  and  at  large,  there  have  been  divers  kinds 
introduced  and  devised;  some  of  them  rather 
curious  and  unsafe  than  sober  and  warranted. 
Notwithstanding,  thus  much  must  be  confessed, 
that  the  Scriptures,  being  given  by  inspiration 
and  not  by  human  reason, do  differ  from  all  other 
books  in  the  author:  which  by  consequence  doth 
draw  on  some  difference  to  be  used  by  the  ex- 

4“0  the  depth  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God! 
How  incomprehensible  are  his  judgements,  and  his  ways 
past  finding  out.” 

6 “We  know  in  part.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


positor.  For  the  inditer  of  them  did  know  four 
things  which  no  man  attains  to  know;  which 
are,  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  glory,  the 
perfection  of  the  laws  of  nature,  the  secrets  of 
the  heart  of  man,  and  the  future  succession  of 
all  ages.  For  as  to  the  first  it  is  said,  “He  that 
presseth  into  the  light,  shall  be  oppressed  of  the 
glory. ”  And  again,  “No  man  shall  see  my  face 
and  live.”  To  the  second,  “When  he  prepared 
the  heavens  I  was  present,  when  by  law  and 
compass  he  inclosed  the  deep.”  To  the  third, 
“Neither  was  it  needful  that  any  should  bear 
witness  to  him  of  man,  for  he  knew  well  what 
was  in  man.”  And  to  the  last,  “From  the  be¬ 
ginning  are  known  to  the  Lord  all  his  works.” 

15.  From  the  former  two  of  these  have  been 
drawn  certain  senses  and  expositions  of  Scrip¬ 
tures,  which  had  need  be  contained  within  the 
bounds  of  sobriety;  the  one  anagogical,  and  the 
other  philosophical.  But  as  to  the  former,  man 
is  not  to  prevent  his  time:  “  Videmus  nunc  per 
speculum  in  aenigmate ,  tunc  autem  facie  ad 
faciem” •}  wherein  nevertheless  there  seemeth 
to  be  a  liberty  granted,  as  far  forth  as  the  pol¬ 
ishing  of  this  glass,  or  some  moderate  explica¬ 
tion  of  this  aenigma.  But  to  press  too  far  into 
it,  cannot  but  cause  a  dissolution  and  overthrow 
of  the  spirit  of  man.  For  in  the  body  there  are 
three  degrees  of  that  we  receive  into  it,  aliment, 
medicine,  and  poison:  whereof  aliment  is  that 
which  the  nature  of  man  can  perfectly  alter  and 
overcome;  medicine  is  that  which  is  partly  con¬ 
verted  by  nature,  and  partly  converteth  nature; 
and  poison  is  that  which  worketh  wholly  upon 
nature,  without  that,  that  nature  can  in  any 
part  work  upon  it.  So  in  the  mind,  whatsoever 
knowledge  reason  cannot  at  all  work  upon  and 
convert  is  a  mere  intoxication,  and  endangereth 
a  dissolution  of  the  mind  and  understanding. 

16.  But  for  the  latter,  it  hath  been  extremely 
set  on  foot  of  late  time  by  the  school  of  Para¬ 
celsus,  and  some  others,  that  have  pretended 
to  find  the  truth  of  all  natural  philosophy  in  the 
Scriptures;  scandalizing  and  traducing  all  oth¬ 
er  philosophy  as  heathenish  and  profane.  But 
there  is  no  such  enmity  between  God’s  word  and 
his  works;  neither  do  they  give  honour  to  the 
Scriptures,  as  they  suppose,  but  much  imbase 
them.  For  to  seek  heaven  and  earth  in  the  word 
of  God,  whereof  it  is  said,  “Heaven  and  earth 
shall  pass,  but  my  word  shall  not  pass,”  is  to 
seek  temporary  things  amongst  eternal:  and  as 
to  seek  divinity  in  philosophy  is  to  seek  the  liv¬ 
ing  amongst  the  dead,  so  to  seek  philosophy  in 

1  “Now  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly,  but  then  face  to 
face.” 


divinity  is  to  seek  the  dead  amongst  the  living: 
neither  are  the  pots  or  lavers,  whose  place  was 
in  the  outward  part  of  the  temple,  to  be  sought 
in  the  holiest  place  of  all,  where  the  ark  of  the 
testimony  was  seated.  And  again,  the  scope  or 
purpose  of  the  spirit  of  God  is  not  to  express 
matters  of  nature  in  the  Scriptures,  otherwise 
than  in  passage,  and  for  application  to  man’s 
capacity  and  to  matters  moral  or  divine.  And 
it  is  a  true  rule,  “  Auctoris  aliud  agentis  parva 
auctoritas .”2  For  it  were  a  strange  conclusion, 
if  a  man  should  use  a  similitude  for  ornament 
or  illustration  sake,  borrowed  from  nature  or 
history  according  to  vulgar  conceit,  as  of  a  basi¬ 
lisk,  an  unicorn,  a  centaur,  a  Briareus,  an  hydra, 
or  the  like,  that  therefore  he  must  needs  be 
thought  to  affirm  the  matter  thereof  positively 
to  be  true.  To  conclude  therefore  these  two  in¬ 
terpretations,  the  one  by  reduction  or  aenig- 
matical,  the  other  philosophical  or  physical, 
which  have  been  received  and  pursued  in  imi¬ 
tation  of  the  rabbins  and  cabalists,  are  to  be 
confined  with  a  noli  altum  sap  ere ,  sed  tune} 

17.  But  the  two  latter  points,  known  to  God 
and  unknown  to  man,  touching  the  secrets  of 
the  heart  and  the  successions  of  time,  doth  make 
a  just  and  sound  difference  between  the  manner 
of  the  exposition  of  the  Scriptures  and  all  other 
books.  For  it  is  an  excellent  observation  which 
hath  been  made  upon  the  answers  of  our  Saviour 
Christ  to  many  of  the  questions  which  were  pro¬ 
pounded  to  him,  how  that  they  are  impertinent 
to  the  state  of  the  question  demanded;  the  rea¬ 
son  whereof  is,  because  not  being  like  man, 
which  knows  man’s  thoughts  by  his  words,  but 
knowing  man’s  thoughts  immediately,  he  nev¬ 
er  answered  their  words,  but  their  thoughts. 
Much  in  the  like  manner  it  is  with  the  Scrip¬ 
tures,  which  being  written  to  the  thoughts  of 
men,  and  to  the  succession  of  all  ages,  with  a 
foresight  of  all  heresies,  contradictions,  differ¬ 
ing  estates  of  the  church,  yea  and  particularly 
of  the  elect,  are  not  to  be  interpreted  only  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  latitude  of  the  proper  sense  of 
the  place,  and  respectively  towards  that  pres¬ 
ent  occasion  whereupon  the  words  were  uttered, 
or  in  precise  congruity  or  contexture  with  the 
words  before  or  after,  or  in  contemplation  of 
the  principal  scope  of  the  place;  but  have  in 
themselves,  not  only  totally  or  collectively,  but 
distributively  in  clauses  and  words,  infinite 
springs  and  streams  of  doctrine  to  water  the 
church  in  every  part.  And  therefore  as  the  liter- 

2 “What  a  man  says  incidentally  about  matters  which 
are  not  in  question  has  little  authority.” 

3 “Be  not  overwise,  but  fear.” 


IOO 


ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING 


al  sense  is,  as  it  were,  the  main  stream  or  rivet; 
so  the  moral  sense  chiefly,  and  sometimes  the 
allegorical  or  typical,  are  they  whereof  the 
church  hath  most  use:  not  that  I  wish  men  to  be 
bold  in  allegories,  or  indulgent  or  light  in  allu¬ 
sions;  but  that  I  do  much  condemn  that  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  Scripture  which  is  only  after  the 
manner  as  men  use  to  interpret  a  profane  book. 

1 8.  In  this  part  touching  the  exposition  of  the 
Scriptures,  I  can  report  no  deficience;  but  by 
way  of  remembrance  this  I  will  add.  In  perus¬ 
ing  books  of  divinity,  I  find  many  books  of  con¬ 
troversies,  and  many  of  commonplaces  and 
treatises,  a  mass  of  positive  divinity,  as  it  is 
made  an  art:  a  number  of  sermons  and  lectures, 
and  many  prolix  commentaries  upon  the  Scrip¬ 
tures,  with  harmonies  and  concordances.  But 
that  form  of  writing  in  divinity  which  in  my 
judgement  is  of  all  others  most  rich  and  pre¬ 
cious,  is  positive  divinity,  collected  upon  par¬ 
ticular  texts  of  Scriptures  in  brief  observations; 
not  dilated  into  commonplaces,  not  chasing 
after  controversies,  not  reduced  into  method  of 
art;  a  thing  abounding  in  sermons,  which  will 
vanish,  but  defective  in  books  which  will  re¬ 
main,  and  a  thing  wherein  this  age  excelleth. 
For  I  am  persuaded,  and  I  may  speak  it  with 
an  absit  invidia  verba}  and  no  ways  in  deroga¬ 
tion  of  antiquity,  but  as  in  a  good  emulation 
between  the  vine  and  the  olive,  that  if  the  choice 
and  best  of  those  observations  upon  texts  of 
Scriptures,  which  have  been  made  dispersedly 
in  sermons  within  this  your  Majesty’s  island  of 
Brittany  by  the  space  of  these  forty  years  and 
more  (leaving  out  the  largeness  of  exhortations 
and  applications  thereupon)  had  been  set  down 
in  a  continuance,  it  had  been  the  best  work  in 
divinity  which  had  been  written  since  the  Apos¬ 
tles’  times. 

19.  The  matter  informed  by  divinity  is  of  two 
kinds;  matter  of  belief  and  truth  of  opinion,  and 
matter  of  service  and  adoration;  which  is  also 
judged  and  directed  by  the  former:  the  one  be¬ 
ing  as  the  internal  soul  of  religion,  and  the  other 
as  the  external  body  thereof.  And  therefore  the 
heathen  religion  was  not  only  a  worship  of  idols, 
but  the  whole  religion  was  an  idol  in  itself;  for 
it  had  no  soul,  that  is,  no  certainty  of  belief  or 
confession:  as  a  man  may  well  think,  consider¬ 
ing  the  chief  doctors  of  their  church  were  the 
poets:  and  the  reason  was,  because  the  heathen 
gods  were  no  jealous  gods,  but  were  glad  to  be 
admitted  into  part,  as  they  had  reason.  Neither 
did  they  respect  the  pureness  of  heart,  so  they 
mought  have  external  honour  and  rites. 

^‘Meaning  no  offense.” 


20.  But  out  of  these  two  do  result  and  issue 
four  main  branches  of  divinity;  faith,  manners, 
liturgy,  and  government.  Faith  containeth  the 
doctrine  of  the  nature  of  God,  of  the  attributes 
of  God,  and  of  the  works  of  God.  The  nature  of 
God  consisteth  of  three  persons  in  unity  of  God¬ 
head.  The  attributes  of  God  are  either  common 
to  the  Deity,  or  respective  to  the  persons.  The 
works  of  God  summary  are  two,  that  of  the  cre¬ 
ation  and  that  of  the  redemption ;  and  both  these 
works,  as  in  total  they  appertain  to  the  unity 
of  the  Godhead,  so  in  their  parts  they  refer  to 
the  three  persons:  that  of  the  creation,  in  the 
mass  of  the  matter,  to  the  Father:  in  the  dispo¬ 
sition  of  the  form,  to  the  Son;  and  in  the  con¬ 
tinuance  and  conservation  of  the  being,  to  the 
Holy  Spirit.  So  that  of  the  redemption,  in  the 
election  and  counsel,  to  the  Father;  in  the  whole 
act  and  consummation,  to  the  Son;  and  in  the 
application,  to  the  Holy  Spirit;  for  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  Christ  conceived  in  flesh,  and  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  are  the  elect  regenerate  in  spirit. 
This  work  likewise  we  consider  either  effectu¬ 
ally,  in  the  elect;  or  privately,  in  the  reprobate; 
or  according  to  appearance,  in  the  visible 
church. 

21 .  For  manners,  the  doctrine  thereof  is  con¬ 
tained  in  the  law,  which  discloseth  sin.  The  law 
itself  is  divided,  according  to  the  edition  there¬ 
of,  into  the  law  of  nature,  the  law  moral,  and 
the  law  positive;  and  according  to  the  style,  in¬ 
to  negative  and  affirmative,  prohibitions  and 
commandments.  Sin,  in  the  matter  and  subject 
thereof,  is  divided  according  to  the  command¬ 
ments;  in  the  form  thereof,  it  referreth  to  the 
three  persons  in  Deity:  sins  of  infirmity  against 
the  Father,  whose  more  special  attribute  is  pow¬ 
er;  sins  of  ignorance  against  the  Son,  whose  at¬ 
tribute  is  wisdom ;  and  sins  of  malice  against  the 
Holy  Ghost,  whose  attribute  is  grace  or  love. 
In  the  motionsofit,  iteither  moveth  to  the  right 
hand  or  to  the  left;  either  to  blind  devotion,  or 
to  profane  and  libertine  transgression;  either  in 
imposing  restraint  where  God  granteth  liberty, 
or  in  taking  liberty  where  God  imposeth  re¬ 
straint.  In  the  degrees  and  progress  of  it,  it  di- 
videth  itself  into  thought,  word,  or  act.  And 
in  this  part  I  commend  much  the  deducing  of 
the  law  of  God  to  cases  of  conscience;  for  that  I 
take  indeed  to  be  a  breaking,  and  not  exhibit¬ 
ing  whole  of  the  bread  of  life.  But  that  which 
quickeneth  both  these  doctrines  of  faith  and 
manners,  is  the  elevation  and  consent  of  the 
heart;  whereunto  appertain  books  of  exhorta¬ 
tion,  holy  meditation,  Christian  resolution,  and 
the  like. 


SECOND  BOOK 


22.  For  the  liturgy  or  service,  it  consisteth  of 
the  reciprocal  acts  between  God  and  man; 
which,  on  the  part  of  God,  are  the  preaching  of 
the  word,  and  the  sacraments,  which  are  seals 
to  the  covenant,  or  as  the  visible  word;  and  on 
the  part  of  man,  invocation  of  the  name  of  God; 
and  under  the  law,  sacrifices;  which  were  as  visi¬ 
ble  prayers  or  confessions:  but  now  the  adora¬ 
tion  being  in  spiritu  et  veritate ,l  there  remaineth 
only  vituli  labiorum ;2  although  the  use  of  holy 
vows  of  thankfulness  and  retribution  may  be 
accounted  also  as  sealed  petitions. 

23.  And  for  the  government  of  the  church,  it 
consisteth  of  the  patrimony  of  the  church,  the 
franchises  of  the  church,  and  the  offices  and 
jurisdictions  of  the  church,  and  the  laws  of  the 
church  directing  the  whole;  all  which  have  two 
considerations,  the  one  in  themselves,  the  other 
how  they  stand  compatible  and  agreeable  to 
the  civil  estate. 

24.  This  matter  of  divinity  is  handled  either 
in  form  of  instruction  of  truth,  or  in  form  of  con¬ 
futation  of  falsehood.  The  declinations  from  re¬ 
ligion,  besides  the  privative,  which  is  atheism 
and  the  branches  thereof,  are  three;  heresies, 
idolatry,  and  witchcraft:  heresies,  when  we 
serve  the  true  God  with  a  false  worship;  idola¬ 
try,  when  we  worship  false  gods,  supposing  them 
to  be  true;  and  witchcraft,  when  we  adore  false 
gods,  knowing  them  to  be  wicked  and  false.  For 
so  your  Majesty  doth  excellently  well  observe, 
that  witchcraft  is  the  height  of  idolatry.  And 
yet  we  see  though  these  be  true  degrees,  Samuel 
teacheth  us  that  they  are  all  of  a  nature,  when 
there  is  once  a  receding  from  the  word  of  God; 
for  so  he  saith,  “  Quasi peccatum  ariolandi  est  re¬ 
pugn  are,  et  quasi  scelus  idololatriae  nolle  acqui - 
esc  ere.  ”3 

1“In  spirit  and  in  truth.” 

2  “Offerings  of  the  lips.” 

3 “Rebellion  is  as  the  sin  of  witchcraft  and  stubborn¬ 

ness  as  the  crime  of  idolatry.” 


IOI 

25.  These  things  I  have  passed  over  so  briefly 
because  I  can  report  no  deficience  concerning 
them:  for  I  can  find  no  space  or  ground  that  li- 
eth  vacant  and  unsown  in  the  matter  of  divini¬ 
ty:  so  diligent  have  men  been,  either  in  sowing 
of  good  seed,  or  in  sowing  of  tares. 

Thus  have  I  made  as  it  were  a  small  globe  of 
the  intellectual  world,  as  truly  and  faithfully  as 
I  could  discover;  with  a  note  and  description  of 
those  parts  which  seem  to  me  not  constantly  oc- 
cupate,  or  not  well  converted  by  the  labour  of 
man.  In  which,  if  I  have  in  any  point  receded 
from  that  which  is  commonly  received,  it  hath 
been  with  a  purpose  of  proceeding  in  melius ,4 
and  not  in  aliud ;5  a  mind  of  amendment  and 
proficience,  and  not  of  change  and  difference. 
For  I  could  not  be  true  and  constant  to  the  ar¬ 
gument  I  handle,  if  I  were  not  willing  to  go  be¬ 
yond  others;  but  yet  not  more  willing  than  to 
have  others  go  beyond  me  again :  which  may  the 
better  appear  by  this,  that  I  have  propounded 
my  opinions  naked  and  unarmed,  not  seeking 
to  preoccupate  the  liberty  of  men’s  judgements 
by  confutations.  For  in  anything  which  is  well 
set  down,  I  am  in  good  hope,  that  if  the  first 
reading  move  an  objection,  the  second  reading 
will  make  an  answer.  And  in  those  things  where¬ 
in  I  have  erred,  I  am  sure  I  have  not  prejudiced 
the  right  by  litigious  arguments;  which  certain¬ 
ly  have  this  contrary  effect  and  operation,  that 
they  add  authority  to  error,  and  destroy  the  au¬ 
thority  of  that  which  is  well  invented.  For  ques¬ 
tion  is  an  honour  and  preferment  to  falsehood, 
as  on  the  other  side  it  is  a  repulse  to  truth.  But 
the  errors  I  claim  and  challenge  to  myself  as 
mine  own.  The  good,  if  any  be,  is  due  tanquam 
adeps  sacrificii ,6  to  be  incensed  to  the  honour, 
first  of  the  Divine  Majesty,  and  next  of  your 
Majesty,  to  whom  on  earth  I  am  most  bounden. 

4  “Towards  the  better.” 

5  “Towards  something  different.” 

6  “As  the  fat  of  the  sacrifice.” 


Contents:  Novum  Organum 


Preface,  105  First  Book,  107  Second  Book,  137 


PREFACE 


They  who  have  presumed  to  dogmatize  on  na¬ 
ture,  as  on  some  well  investigated  subject,  ei¬ 
ther  from  self-conceit  or  arrogance,  and  in  the 
professorial  style,  have  inflicted  the  greatest 
injury  on  philosophy  and  learning.  For  they 
have  tended  to  stifle  and  interrupt  inquiry  ex¬ 
actly  in  proportion  as  they  have  prevailed  in 
bringing  others  to  their  opinion;  and  their  own 
activity  has  not  counterbalanced  the  mischief 
they  have  occasioned  by  corrupting  and  de¬ 
stroying  that  of  others.  They  again  who  have 
entered  upon  a  contrary  course,  and  asserted 
that  nothing  whatever  can  be  known,  whether 
they  have  fallen  into  this  opinion  from  their 
hatred  of  the  ancient  sophists,  or  from  the  hes¬ 
itation  of  their  minds,  or  from  an  exuberance 
of  learning,  have  certainly  adduced  reasons  for 
it  which  are  by  no  means  contemptible.  They 
have  not,  however,  derived  their  opinion  from 
true  sources,  and,  hurried  on  by  their  zeal  and 
some  affectation,  have  certainly  exceeded  due 
moderation.  But  the  more  ancient  Greeks 
(whose  writings  have  perished),  held  a  more 
prudent  mean,  between  the  arrogance  of  dog¬ 
matism,  and  the  despair  of  scepticism;  and 
though  toofrequentlyinterminglingcom  plaints 
and  indignation  at  the  difficulty  of  inquiry,  and 
the  obscurity  of  things,  and  champing,  as  it 
were,  the  bit,  have  still  persisted  in  pressing 
their  point,  and  pursuing  their  intercourse  with 
nature;  thinking,  as  it  seems,  that  the  better 
method  was  not  to  dispute  upon  the  very  point 
of  the  possibility  of  anything  being  known,  but 
to  put  it  to  the  test  of  experience.  Yet  they 
themselves,  by  only  employing  the  power  of 
the  understanding,  have  not  adopted  a  fixed 
rule,  but  have  laid  their  whole  stress  upon  in¬ 
tense  meditation,  and  a  continual  exercise  and 
perpetual  agitation  of  the  mind. 

Our  method,  though  difficult  in  its  operation, 
is  easily  explained.  It  consists  in  determining 
the  degrees  of  certainty,  whilst  we,  as  it  were, 
restore  the  senses  to  their  former  rank,  but 
generally  reject  that  operation  of  the  mind 
which  follows  close  upon  the  senses,  and  open 
and  establish  a  new  and  certain  course  for  the 
mind  from  the  first  actual  perceptions  of  the 
senses  themselves.  This,  no  doubt,  was  the 
view  taken  by  those  who  have  assigned  so 
much  to  logic;  showing  clearly  thereby  that 


they  sought  some  support  for  the  mind,  and 
suspected  its  natural  and  spontaneous  mode  of 
action.  But  this  is  now  employed  too  late  as  a 
remedy,  when  all  is  clearly  lost,  and  after  the 
mind,  by  the  daily  habit  and  intercouse  of  life, 
has  come  prepossessed  with  corrupted  doc¬ 
trines,  and  filled  with  the  vainest  idols.  The  art 
of  logic,  therefore,  being  (as  we  have  mention¬ 
ed),  too  late  a  precaution,  and  in  no  way  reme¬ 
dying  the  matter,  has  tended  more  to  confirm 
errors,  than  to  disclose  truth.  Our  only  remain¬ 
ing  hope  and  salvation  is  to  begin  the  whole  la¬ 
bor  of  the  mind  again;  not  leaving  it  to  itself 
but  directing  it  perpetually  from  the  very  first, 
and  attaining  our  end  as  it  were  by  mechanical 
aid.  If  men,  for  instance,  had  attempted  me¬ 
chanical  labors  with  their  hands  alone,  and 
without  the  power  and  aid  of  instruments,  as 
they  have  not  hesitated  to  carry  on  the  labors 
of  their  understanding  with  the  unaided  efforts 
of  their  mind,  they  would  have  been  able  to 
move  and  overcome  but  little,  though  they 
had  exerted  their  utmost  and  united  powers. 
And  just  to  pause  awhile  on  this  comparison, 
and  look  into  it  as  a  mirror;  let  us  ask,  if  any 
obelisk  of  a  remarkable  size  were  perchance  re¬ 
quired  to  be  moved,  for  the  purpose  of  gracing 
a  triumph  or  any  similar  pageant,  and  men 
were  to  attempt  it  with  their  bare  hands, 
would  not  any  sober  spectator  avow  it  to  be  an 
act  of  the  greatest  madness?  And  if  they 
should  increase  the  number  of  workmen,  and 
imagine  that  they  could  thus  succeed,  would 
he  not  think  so  still  more?  But  if  they  chose  to 
make  a  selection,  and  to  remove  the  weak,  and 
only  employ  the  strong  and  vigorous,  thinking 
by  this  means,  at  any  rate,  to  achieve  their  ob¬ 
ject,  would  he  not  say  that  they  were  more 
fondly  deranged?  Nay,  if  not  content  with 
this,  they  were  to  determine  on  consulting  the 
athletic  art,  and  were  to  give  orders  for  all  to 
appear  with  their  hands,  arms,  and  muscles 
regularly  oiled  and  prepared,  would  he  not  ex¬ 
claim  that  they  were  taking  pains  to  rave  by 
method  and  design?  Yet  men  are  hurried  on  with 
the  same  senseless  energy  and  useless  combina¬ 
tion  in  intellectual  matters,  as  long  as  they  ex¬ 
pect  great  results  either  from  the  number  and 
agreement,  or  the  excellence  and  acuteness  of 
their  wits;  or  even  strengthen  their  minds  with 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


106 

logic,  which  may  be  considered  as  an  athletic 
preparation,  but  yet  do  not  desist  (if  we  right¬ 
ly  consider  the  matter)  from  applying  their  own 
understandings  merely  with  all  this  zeal  and  ef¬ 
fort.  Whilst  nothing  is  more  clear,  than  that  in 
every  great  work  executed  by  the  hand  of  man 
without  machines  or  implements,  it  is  impossi¬ 
ble  for  the  strength  of  individuals  to  be  increased, 
or  that  of  the  multitude  to  combine. 

Having  premised  so  much,  we  lay  down  two 
points  on  which  we  would  admonish  mankind, 
lest  they  should  fail  to  see  or  to  observe  them. 
The  first  of  these  is,  that  it  is  our  good  fortune 
(as  we  consider  it),  for  the  sake  of  extinguish¬ 
ing  and  removing  contradiction  and  irritation 
of  mind,  to  leave  the  honor  and  reverence  due 
to  the  ancients  untouched  and  undiminished,  so 
that  we  can  perform  our  intended  work,  and  yet 
enjoy  the  benefit  of  our  respectful  moderation. 
For  if  we  should  profess  to  offer  something  bet¬ 
ter  than  the  ancients,  and  yet  should  pursue  the 
same  course  as  they  have  done,  we  could  nev¬ 
er,  by  any  artifice,  contrive  to  avoid  the  impu¬ 
tation  of  having  engaged  in  a  contest  or  rivalry 
as  to  our  respective  wits,  excellencies,  or  talents; 
which,  though  neither  inadmissible  or  new  (for 
why  should  we  not  blame  and  point  out  anything 
that  is  imperfectly  discovered  or  laid  down  by 
them,  of  our  own  right,  a  right  common  to  all), 
yet  however  just  and  allowable,  would  perhaps 
be  scarcely  an  equal  match,  on  account  of  the 
disproportion ofour strength.  Butsinceourpres- 
ent  plan  leads  up  to  open  an  entirely  different 
course  to  theunderstanding,  and  oneunattempt- 
ed  and  unknown  to  them,  the  case  is  altered. 
There  is  an  end  to  party  zeal,  and  we  only  take 
upon  ourselves  the  character  of  a  guide,  which 
requires  a  moderate  share  ofauthority  and  good 
fortune,  rather  than  talents  and  excellence. 
The  first  admonition  relates  to  persons,  the 
next  to  things. 

We  make  no  attempt  to  disturb  the  system 
of  philosophy  that  now  prevails,  or  any  other 
which  may  or  will  exist,  either  more  correct  or 
more  complete.  For  we  deny  not  that  the  re¬ 
ceived  system  of  philosophy,  and  others  of  a  simi¬ 
lar  nature,  encourage  discussion,  embellish  ha¬ 
rangues,  are  employed,  and  are  of  service  in  the 
duties  of  the  professor,  and  the  affairs  of  civil 
life.  Nay,  we  openly  express  and  declare  that  the 
philosophy  we  offer  will  not  be  very  useful  in 
such  respects.  It  is  not  obvious,  nor  to  be  un¬ 
derstood  in  a  cursory  view,  nor  does  it  flatter 
the  mind  in  its  preconceived  notions,  nor  will 
it  descend  to  the  level  of  the  generality  of  man¬ 
kind  unless  by  its  advantages  and  effects. 


Let  there  exist,  then  (and  may  it  be  of  advan¬ 
tage  to  both),  twosources,  and  twodistributions 
of  learning,  and  in  like  manner  two  tribes,  and 
as  it  were  kindred  families  of  contemplators  or 
philosophers,  without  any  hostility  or  alienation 
between  them;  but  rather  allied  and  united  by 
mutual  assistance.  Let  there  be,  in  short,  one 
method  of  cultivating  the  sciences,  and  another 
of  discovering  them.  And  as  for  those  who  pre¬ 
fer  and  more  readily  receive  the  former,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  their  haste  or  from  motives  arising  from 
their  ordinary  life,  or  because  they  are  unable 
from  weakness  of  mind  to  comprehend  and  em¬ 
brace  the  other  (which  must  necessarily  be  the 
case  with  by  far  the  greater  number),  let  us  wish 
that  they  may  prosper  as  they  desire  in  their 
undertaking,  and  attain  what  they  pursue.  But 
if  any  individual  desire,  and  is  anxious  not  mere¬ 
ly  to  adhere  to,  and  make  use  of  present  dis¬ 
coveries,  but  to  penetrate  still  further,  and  not 
to  overcome  his  adversaries  in  disputes,  but  na¬ 
ture  by  labor,  not  in  short  to  give  elegant  and 
specious  opinions,  but  to  know  to  a  certainty 
and  demonstration,  let  him,  as  a  true  son  of  sci¬ 
ence  (if  such  be  his  wish),  join  with  us;  that  when 
he  has  left  the  antechambers  of  nature  trod¬ 
den  by  the  multitude,  an  entrance  may  at  last 
be  discovered  to  her  inner  apartments.  And  in 
order  to  be  better  understood,  and  to  render  our 
meaning  more  familiar  by  assigning  determin¬ 
ate  names,  we  have  accustomed  ourselves  to  call 
the  one  method  the  anticipation  of  the  mind, 
and  the  other  the  interpretation  of  nature. 

We  have  still  one  request  left.  We  have  at 
least  reflected  and  taken  pains,  in  order  to  ren¬ 
der  our  propositions  not  only  true,  but  of  easy 
and  familiar  access  to  men’s  minds,  however 
wonderfully  prepossessed  and  limited.  Yet  it  is 
but  just  that  we  should  obtain  this  favor  from 
mankind  (especially  in  so  great  a  restoration  of 
learning  and  the  sciences),  that  whosoever  may 
be  desirous  of  forming  any  determination  upon 
an  opinion  of  this  our  work  either  from  his  own 
perceptions,  or  the  crowd  of  authorities,  or  the 
forms  of  demonstrations,  he  will  not  expect  to 
be  able  to  do  so  in  a  cursory  manner,  and  whilst 
attending  to  other  matters;  but  in  order  to  have 
a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  subject,  will  him¬ 
self,  by  degrees,  attempt  the  course  which  we 
describe  and  maintain;  will  be  accustomed  to 
the  subtilty  of  things  which  is  manifested  by 
experience;  and  will  correct  the  depraved  and 
deeply-rooted  habits  of  his  mind  by  a  season¬ 
able,  and,  as  it  were,  just  hesitation:  and  then, 
finally  (if  he  will),  use  his  judgment  when  he 
has  begun  to  be  master  of  himself. 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 
Aphorisms 

Concerning  the  Interpretation  of  Nature 
and  the  Kingdom  of  Man 

FIRST  BOOK 


I.  Man,  as  the  minister  and  interpreter  of  na¬ 
ture,  does  and  understands  as  much  as  his  ob¬ 
servations  on  the  order  of  nature,  either  with 
regard  to  things  or  the  mind,  permit  him,  and 
neither  knows  nor  is  capable  of  more. 

2.  The  unassisted  hand  and  the  understanding 
left  to  itself  possess  but  little  power.  Effects  are 
produced  by  the  means  of  instruments  and  helps, 
which  the  understanding  requires  no  less  than 
the  hand;  and  as  instruments  either  promote  or 
regulate  the  motion  of  the  hand,  so  those  that 
are  applied  to  the  mind  prompt  or  protect  the 
understanding. 

3.  Knowledge  and  human  power  are  synony¬ 
mous,  since  the  ignorance  of  the  cause  frus¬ 
trates  the  effect;  for  nature  is  only  subdued  by 
submission,  and  that  which  in  contemplative 
philosophy  corresponds  with  the  cause  in  prac¬ 
tical  science  becomes  the  rule. 

4.  Man  whilst  operating  can  only  apply  or 
withdraw  natural  bodies;  nature  internally  per¬ 
forms  the  rest. 

5.  Those  who  become  practically  versed  in 
nature  are,  the  mechanic,  the  mathematician, 
the  physician,  the  alchemist,  and  the  magi¬ 
cian,  but  all  (as  matters  now  stand)  with  faint 
efforts  and  meagre  success. 

6.  It  would  be  madness  and  inconsistency  to 
suppose  that  things  which  have  never  yet  been 
performed  can  be  performed  without  employ¬ 
ing  some  hitherto  untried  means. 

7.  The  creations  of  the  mind  and  hand  ap¬ 
pear  very  numerous,  if  we  judge  bv  books  and 
manufactures;  but  all  that  variety  consists  of 


an  excessive  refinement,  and  of  deductions 
from  a  few  well-known  matters — not  of  a  num¬ 
ber  of  axioms. 

8.  Even  the  effects  already  discovered  are 
due  to  chance  and  experiment,  rather  than  to 
the  sciences;  for  our  present  sciences  are  noth¬ 
ing  more  than  peculiar  arrangements  of  mat¬ 
ters  already  discovered,  and  not  methods  for 
discovery  or  plans  for  new  operations. 

9.  The  sole  cause  and  root  of  almost  every 
defect  in  the  sciences  is  this,  that  while  we 
falsely  admire  and  extol  the  powers  of  the  hu¬ 
man  mind,  we  do  not  search  for  its  real  helps. 

10.  The  subtilty  of  nature  is  far  beyond  that 
of  sense  or  of  the  understanding;  so  that  the 
specious  meditations,  speculations,  and  theo¬ 
ries  of  mankind  are  but  a  kind  of  insanity,  only 
there  is  no  one  to  stand  by  and  observe  it. 

1 1.  As  the  present  sciences  are  useless  for  the 
discovery  of  effects,  so  the  present  system  of 
logic  is  useless  for  the  discovery  of  the  sciences. 

12.  The  present  system  of  logic  rather  as¬ 
sists  in  confirming  and  rendering  inveterate 
the  errors  founded  on  vulgar  notions  than  in 
searching  after  truth,  and  is  therefore  more 
hurtful  than  useful. 

13.  The  syllogism  is  not  applied  to  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  sciences,  and  is  of  no  avail  in  inter¬ 
mediate  axioms,  as  being  very  unequal  to  the 
subtilty  of  nature.  It  forces  assent,  therefore, 
and  not  things. 

1 4.  The  syllogism  consists  of  propositions, 
propositions  of  words;  words  are  the  signs  of 
notions.  If,  therefore,  the  notions  (which  form 


io8 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


the  basis  of  the  whole)  be  confused  and  care¬ 
lessly  abstracted  from  things,  there  is  no  solid¬ 
ity  in  the  superstructure.  Our  only  hope,  then, 
is  in  genuine  induction. 

15.  We  have  no  sound  notions  either  in  logic 
or  physics;  substance,  quality,  action,  passion, 
and  existence  are  not  clear  notions;  much  less 
weight,  levity,  density,  tenuity,  moisture,  dry¬ 
ness,  generation,  corruption,  attraction,  repul¬ 
sion,  element,  matter,  form,  and  the  like.  They 
are  all  fantastical  and  ill-defined. 

16.  The  notions  of  less  abstract  natures,  as 
man,  dog,  dove,  and  the  immediate  percep¬ 
tions  of  sense,  as  heat,  cold,  white,  black,  do 
not  deceive  us  materially,  yet  even  these  are 
sometimes  confused  by  the  mutability  of  mat¬ 
ter  and  the  intermixture  of  things.  All  the  rest 
which  men  have  hitherto  employed  are  errors, 
and  improperly  abstracted  and  deduced  from 
things. 

17.  There  is  the  same  degree  of  licentiousness 
and  error  in  forming  axioms  as  in  abstracting 
notions,  and  that  in  the  first  principles,  which 
depend  on  common  induction;  still  more  is  this 
the  case  in  axioms  and  inferior  propositions  de¬ 
rived  from  syllogisms. 

18.  The  present  discoveries  in  science  are 
such  as  lie  immediately  beneath  the  surface  of 
common  notions.  It  is  necessary,  however,  to 
penetrate  the  more  secret  and  remote  parts 
of  nature,  in  order  to  abstract  both  notions  and 
axioms  from  things  by  a  more  certain  and 
guarded  method. 

19.  There  are  and  can  exist  but  two  ways  0/ 
investigating  and  discovering  truth.  The  one 
hurries  on  rapidly  from  the  senses  and  parti 
culars  to  the  most  general  axioms,  and  from 
them,  as  principles  and  their  supposed  indis¬ 
putable  truth,  derives  and  discovers  the  inter¬ 
mediate  axioms.  This  is  the  way  now  in  use.  The 
other  constructs  its  axioms  from  the  senses  and 
particulars,  by  ascending  continually  and  grad¬ 
ually,  till  it  finally  arrives  at  the  most  general 
axioms,  which  is  the  true  but  unattempted 
way. 

20.  The  understanding  when  left  to  itself  pro¬ 
ceeds  by  the  same  way  as  that  which  it  would 
have  adopted  under  the  guidance  of  logic,  name¬ 
ly,  the  first;  for  the  mind  is  fond  of  starting  off  to 
generalities,  that  it  may  avoid  labor,  and  after 
dwelling  a  little  on  a  subject  is  fatigued  by  ex¬ 
periment.  But  those  evils  are  augmented  by  log¬ 
ic,  for  the  sake  of  the  ostentation  of  dispute. 

21.  The  understanding,  when  left  to  itself  in  a 
man  of  a  steady,  patient,  and  reflecting  dispo¬ 
sition  (especially  when  unimpeded  by  received 


doctrines),  makes  some  attempt  in  the  right  way, 
but  with  little  effect,  since  the  understanding, 
undirected  and  unassisted,  is  unequal  to  and  un¬ 
fit  for  the  task  of  vanquishing  the  obscurity  of 
things. 

22.  Each  of  these  two  ways  begins  from  the 
senses  and  particulars,  and  ends  in  the  greatest 
generalities.  But  they  are  immeasurably  differ¬ 
ent;  for  the  one  merely  touches  cursorily  the  lim¬ 
its  of  experiment  and  particulars,  whilst  the 
other  runs  duly  and  regularly  through  them; 
the  one  from  the  very  outset  lays  down  some 
abstract  and  useless  generalities,  theother  grad¬ 
ually  rises  to  those  principles  which  are  really  the 
mostcommon  in  nature. 

23.  There  is  no  small  difference  between  the 
idols  of  the  human  mind  and  the  ideas  of  the 
Divine  mind;  that  is  to  say,  between  certain 
idle  dogmas  and  the  real  stamp  and  impression 
of  created  objects,  as  they  are  found  in  nature. 

24.  Axioms  determined  upon  in  argument  can 
never  assist  in  the  discovery  of  new  effects;  for 
the  subtiltv  of  nature  is  vastly  superior  to  that 
of  argument.  But  axioms  properly  and  regular¬ 
ly  abstracted  from  particulars  easily  point  out 
and  define  new  particulars,  and  therefore  im¬ 
part  activity  to  the  sciences. 

25.  The  axioms  now  in  use  are  derived  from  a 
scanty  handful,  as  it  were,  of  experience,  and  a 
few  particulars  of  frequent  occurrence,  whence 
they  are  of  much  the  same  dimensions  or  ex¬ 
tent  as  their  origin.  And  if  any  neglected  or  un¬ 
known  instance  occurs,  the  axiom  is  saved  by 
some  frivolous  distinction,  when  it  would  be 
more  consistent  with  truth  to  amend  it. 

26.  We  are  wont,  for  the  sake  of  distinction, 
to  call  that  human  reasoning  which  we  apply 
to  nature  the  anticipation  of  nature  (as  being 
rash  and  premature),  and  that  which  is  prop¬ 
erly  deduced  from  things  the  interpretation  of 
nature. 

27.  Anticipations  are  sufficiently  powerful  in 
producing  unanimity,  for  if  men  were  all  to  be¬ 
come  even  uniformly  mad,  they  might  agree 
tolerably  well  with  each  other. 

28.  Anticipations,  again,  will  be  assented  to 
much  more  readily  than  interpretations,  be¬ 
cause  being  deduced  from  a  few  instances,  and 
these  principally  of  familiar  occurrence,  they 
immediately  hit  the  understanding  and  satisfy 
theimagination;  whilston  the  contrary  interpre¬ 
tations,  being  deduced  from  various  subjects, 
and  these  widely  dispersed,  cannot  suddenly 
strike  the  understanding,  so  that  in  common 
estimation  they  must  appear  difficult  and  dis¬ 
cordant,  and  almost  like  the  mysteries  of  faith. 


FIRST  BOOK 


29.  In  sciences  founded  on  opinions  and  dog¬ 
mas,  it  is  right  to  make  use  of  anticipations  and 
logic  if  you  wish  to  force  assent  rather  than 
things. 

30.  If  all  the  capacities  of  all  ages  should 
unite  and  combine  and  transmit  their  labors,  no 
great  progress  will  be  made  in  learning  by  an¬ 
ticipations,  because  the  radical  errors,  and  those 
which  occur  in  the  first  process  of  the  mind,  are 
not  cured  by  the  excellence  of  subsequent  means 
and  remedies. 

31.  It  is  in  vain  to  expect  any  great  progress  in 
the  sciences  by  the  superinducing  or  engrafting 
new  matters  upon  old.  An  instauration  must  be 
made  from  the  very  foundations,  if  we  do  not 
wish  to  revolve  forever  in  a  circle,  making  only 
some  slight  and  contemptible  progress. 

32.  The  ancient  authors  and  all  others  are  left 
in  undisputed  possession  of  their  honors;  for  we 
enter  into  no  comparison  of  capacity  or  talent, 
but  of  method,  and  assume  the  part  of  a  guide 
rather  than  of  a  critic. 

33.  To  speak  plainly,  no  correct  judgment 
can  be  formed  either  of  our  method  or  its  dis¬ 
coveries  by  those  anticipations  which  are  now 
in  common  use;  for  it  is  not  to  be  required  of  us 
to  submit  ourselves  to  the  judgment  of  the 
very  method  we  ourselves  arraign. 

34.  Nor  is  it  an  easy  matter  to  deliver  and 
explain  our  sentiments;  for  those  things  which 
are  in  themselves  new  can  yet  be  only  under¬ 
stood  from  some  analogy  to  what  is  old. 

35.  Alexander  Borgia  said  of  the  expedition 
of  the  French  into  Italy  that  they  came  with 
chalk  in  their  hands  to  mark  up  their  lodgings, 
and  not  with  weapons  to  force  their  passage. 
Even  so  do  we  wish  our  philosophy  to  make  its 
way  quietly  into  those  minds  that  are  fit  for  it, 
and  of  good  capacity;  for  we  have  no  need  of 
contention  where  we  differ  in  first  principles, 
and  in  our  very  notions,  and  even  in  our  forms 
of  demonstration. 

36.  We  have  but  one  simple  method  of  deliv- 
eringour sentiments,  namely,  wemust  bring  men 
to  particulars  and  their  regular  series  and  or¬ 
der,  and  they  must  for  a  while  renounce  their 
notions,  and  begin  to  form  an  acquaintance  with 
things. 

37.  Our  method  and  that  of  the  sceptics  agree 
in  some  respects  at  first  setting  out,  but  differ 
most  widely,  and  are  completely  opposed  to  each 
other  in  their  conclusion;  for  they  roundly  as¬ 
sert  that  nothing  can  be  known;  we,  that  but  a 
small  part  of  nature  can  be  known,  by  the  pres¬ 
ent  method;  their  next  step,  however,  is  to  de¬ 
stroy  the  authori  ty  of  the  senses  and  understand¬ 


109 

ing,  whilst  we  invent  and  supply  them  with  as¬ 
sistance. 

38.  The  idols  and  false  notions  which  have  al¬ 
ready  preoccupied  the  human  understanding, 
and  are  deeply  rooted  in  it,  not  only  so  beset 
men's  minds  that  they  become  difficult  of  ac¬ 
cess,  but  even  when  access  is  obtained  will  again 
meet  and  trouble  us  in  the  instauration  of  the 
sciences,  unless  mankind  when  forewarned  guard 
themselves  with  all  possible  care  against  them. 

39.  Four  species  ofidols  beset  the  human  mind, 
to  which  (fordistinction’ssake)  we  have  assigned 
names,  calling  the  first  idols  of  the  tribe,  the  sec¬ 
ond  idols  of  the  den,  the  third  idols  of  the  mar¬ 
ket,  the  fourth  idols  of  the  theatre. 

40.  The  formation  of  notions  and  axioms  on 
the  foundation  of  true  induction  is  the  only  fit¬ 
ting  remedy  by  which  we  can  ward  off  and  ex¬ 
pel  these  idols.  It  is,  however,  of  great  service  to 
point  them  out;  for  the  doctrine  of  idols  bears 
the  same  relation  to  the  interpretation  of  na¬ 
ture  as  that  of  the  confutation  of  sophisms  does 
to  common  logic. 

41.  The  idols  of  the  tribe  are  inherent  in  hu¬ 
man  nature  and  the  very  tribe  or  race  of  man ;  for 
man’s  sense  is  falsely  asserted  to  be  the  stand¬ 
ard  of  things;  on  the  contrary,  all  the  percep¬ 
tions  both  of  the  senses  and  the  mind  bear  ref¬ 
erence  to  man  and  not  to  the  universe,  and  the 
human  mind  resembles  those  uneven  mirrors 
which  impart  their  own  properties  to  different 
objects,  from  which  rays  are  emitted  and  dis¬ 
tort  and  disfigure  them. 

42.  The  idols  of  the  den  are  those  of  each  in¬ 
dividual;  for  everybody  (in  addition  to  the  er¬ 
rors  common  to  the  race  of  man)  has  his  own 
individual  den  or  cavern,  which  intercepts  and 
corrupts  the  light  of  nature,  either  from  his 
own  peculiar  and  singffiar  disposition,  or  from 
his  education  and  intercourse  with  others,  or 
from  his  reading,  and  the  authority  acquired 
by  those  whom  he  reverences  and  admires,  or 
from  the  different  impressions  produced  on  the 
mind,  as  it  happens  to  be  preoccupied  and  pre¬ 
disposed,  or  equable  and  tranquil,  and  the  like; 
so  that  the  spirit  of  man  (according  to  its  sev¬ 
eral  dispositions),  is  variable,  confused,  and,  as 
it  were,  actuated  by  chance;  and  Heraclitus 
said  well  that  men  search  for  knowledge  in  les¬ 
ser  worlds,  and  not  in  the  greater  or  common 
world. 

43.  There  are  also  idols  formed  by  the  recip¬ 
rocal  intercourse  and  society  of  man  with  man, 
which  we  call  idols  of  the  market,  from  the 
commerce  and  association  of  men  with  each 
other;  for  men  converse  by  means  of  language, 


I  IO 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


but  words  are  formed  at  the  will  of  the  general¬ 
ity,  and  there  arises  from  a  bad  and  unapt  for¬ 
mation  of  words  a  wonderful  obstruction  to  the 
mind.  Nor  can  the  definitions  and  explanations 
with  which  learned  men  are  wont  to  guard  and 
protect  themselves  in  some  instances  afford  a 
complete  remedy;  words  still  manifestly  force 
the  understanding,  throw  everything  into  con¬ 
fusion,  and  lead  mankind  into  vain  and  innu¬ 
merable  controversies  and  fallacies. 

44.  Lastly,  there  are  idols  which  have  crept 
into  men’s  minds  from  the  various  dogmas  of  pe¬ 
culiar  systems  of  philosophy,  and  also  from  the 
perverted  rules  of  demonstration,  and  these  w'e 
denominate  idols  of  the  theatre:  for  we  regard 
all  the  systems  of  philosophy  hitherto  received 
or  imagined,  as  so  many  plays  brought  out  and 
performed,  creating  fictitious  and  theatrical 
worlds.  Nor  do  we  speak  only  of  the  present  sys¬ 
tems,  or  of  the  philosophy  and  sects  of  the  an¬ 
cients,  since  numerous  other  plays  of  a  similar 
nature  can  be  still  composed  and  made  to  agree 
with  each  other,  the  causes  of  the  most  oppo¬ 
site  errors  being  generally  the  same.  Nor,  again, 
do  we  allude  merely  to  general  systems,  but  also 
to  many  elements  and  axioms  of  sciences  which 
have  become  inveterate  by  tradition,  implicit 
credence,  and  neglect.  We  must,  however,  dis¬ 
cuss  each  species  of  idols  more  fully  and  distinct¬ 
ly  in  order  to  guard  the  human  understanding 
against  them. 

45.  The  human  understanding,  from  its  pe¬ 
culiar  nature,  easily  supposes  a  greater  degree 
of  order  and  equality  in  things  than  it  really 
finds;  and  although  many  things  in  nature  be 
sui  generis  and  most  irregular,  will  yet  invent 
parallels  and  conjugates  and  relatives,  where  no 
such  thing  is.  Hence  the  fiction,  that  all  celes¬ 
tial  bodies  move  in  perfect  circles,  thus  reject¬ 
ing  entirely  spiral  and  serpentine  lines  (except 
as  explanatory  terms).  Hence  also  the  element 
of  fire  is  introduced  with  its  peculiar  orbit,  to 
keep  square  with  those  other  three  which  are 
objects  of  our  senses.  The  relative  rarity  of  the 
elements  (as  they  are  called)  is  arbitrarily  made 
to  vary  in  tenfold  progression,  with  many  other 
dreams  of  the  like  nature.  Nor  is  this  folly  con¬ 
fined  to  theories,  but  it  is  to  be  met  with  even 
in  simple  notions. 

46.  The  human  understanding,  when  any 
proposition  has  been  oncelaid  down  (either  from 
general  admission  and  belief,  or  from  the  pleas¬ 
ure  it  affords),  forces  everything  else  to  add  fresh 
support  and  confirmation;  and  although  most 
cogent  and  abundant  instances  may  exist  to  the 
contrary,  yet  either  does  not  observe  or  despises 


them,  or  gets  rid  of  and  rejects  them  by  some 
distinction,  with  violen  t  and  injurious  prejudice, 
rather  than  sacrifice  the  authority  of  its  first  con¬ 
clusions.  It  was  well  answered  by  him1  who  was 
shown  in  a  temple  the  votive  tablets  suspended 
by  such  as  had  escaped  the  peril  of  shipwreck, 
and  was  pressed  as  to  whether  he  would  then 
recognize  the  power  of  the  gods,  by  an  inquiry. 
But  where  are  the  portraits  of  those  who  have 
perished  in  spite  of  their  vows?  All  superstition 
is  much  the  same,  whether  it  be  that  of  astrol¬ 
ogy,  dreams,  omens,  retributive  judgment,  or 
the  like,  in  all  of  which  the  deluded  believers 
observe  events  which  are  fulfilled,  but  neglect 
and  pass  over  their  failure,  though  it  be  much 
more  common.  But  this  evil  insinuates  itself 
still  more  craftily  in  philosophy  and  the  sci¬ 
ences,  in  which  a  settled  maxim  vitiates  and 
governs  every  other  circumstance,  though  the 
latter  be  much  more  worthy  of  confidence.  Be¬ 
sides,  even  in  the  absence  of  that  eagerness  and 
want  of  thought  (which  we  have  mentioned), 
it  is  the  peculiar  and  perpetual  error  of  the 
human  understanding  to  be  more  moved  and 
excited  by  affirmatives  than  negatives,  where¬ 
as  it  ought  duly  and  regularly  to  be  impartial; 
nay,  in  establishing  any  true  axiom  the  nega¬ 
tive  instance  is  the  most  powerful. 

47.  The  human  understanding  is  most  excit¬ 
ed  by  that  which  strikes  and  enters  the  mind 
at  once  and  suddenly,  and  by  which  the  imagi¬ 
nation  is  immediately  filled  and  inflated.  1 1  then 
begins  almost  imperceptibly  to  conceive  and  sup¬ 
pose  that  everything  is  similar  to  the  few  ob 
jects  which  have  taken  possession  of  the  mind, 
whilst  it  is  very  slow  and  unfit  for  the  transi¬ 
tion  to  the  remote  and  heterogeneous  instances 
by  wffiich  axioms  are  tried  as  by  fire,  unless  the 
office  be  imposed  upon  it  by  severe  regulations 
and  a  powerful  authority. 

48.  The  human  understanding  is  active  and 
cannot  halt  or  rest,  but  even,  though  without  ef¬ 
fect,  still  presses  forward.  Thus  wre  cannot  con¬ 
ceive  of  any  end  or  external  boundary  of  the 
world,  and  it  seems  necessarily  to  occur  to  us 
that  there  must  be  something  beyond.  Nor  can 
we  imagine  how  eternity  has  flowed  on  dowm 
to  the  present  day,  since  the  usually  received 
distinction  of  an  infinity,  a  parte  ante  and  a 
parte  post  cannot  hold  good;  for  it  w'ould  thence 
follow'  that  one  infinity  is  greater  than  another, 
and  also  that  infinity  is  wasting  away  and  tend¬ 
ing  to  an  end.  There  is  the  same  difficulty  in  con¬ 
sidering  the  infinite  divisibility  of  lines  arising 
from  the  weakness  of  our  minds,  which  wreak- 

^iagoras. 


FIRST  BOOK 


ness  interferes  to  still  greater  disadvantage  with 
the  discovery  of  causes;  for  although  the  great¬ 
est  generalities  in  nature  must  be  positive,  just 
as  they  are  found,  and  in  fact  not  causable,  yet 
the  human  understanding,  incapable  of  resting, 
seeks  for somethingmoreintelligible.  Thus,  how¬ 
ever,  whilst  aiming  at  further  progress,  it  falls 
back  to  what  is  actually  less  advanced,  name¬ 
ly,  final  causes;  for  they  are  clearly  more  allied 
to  man’s  own  nature,  than  the  system  of  the 
universe,  and  from  this  source  they  have  won¬ 
derfully  corrupted  philosophy.  But  he  would 
be  an  unskilful  and  shallow  philosopher  who 
should  seek  for  causes  in  the  greatest  generali¬ 
ties,  and  not  be  anxious  to  discover  them  in 
subordinate  objects. 

49.  The  human  understanding  resembles  not 
a  dry  light,  but  admits  a  tincture  of  the  will  and 
passions,  which  generate  their  own  system  ac¬ 
cordingly;  for  man  always  believes  more  readi¬ 
ly  that  which  he  prefers.  He,  therefore,  rejects 
difficulties  for  want  of  patience  in  investigation ; 
sobriety,  because  it  limits  his  hope;  the  depths 
of  nature,  from  superstition;  the  light  of  exper¬ 
iment,  from  arrogance  and  pride,  lest  his  mind 
should  appear  to  be  occupied  with  common  and 
varying  objects;  paradoxes,  from  a  fear  of  the 
opinion  of  the  vulgar;  in  short,  his  feelings  im¬ 
bue  and  corrupt  his  understanding  in  innumer¬ 
able  and  sometimes  imperceptible  ways. 

50.  But  by  far  the  greatest  impediment  and 
aberration  of  the  human  understanding  pro¬ 
ceeds  from  the  dullness,  incompetency,  and  er¬ 
rors  of  the  senses;  since  whatever  strikes  the 
senses  preponderates  over  everything,  however 
superior,  which  does  not  immediately  strike 
them.  Hence  contemplation  mostly  ceases  with 
sight,  and  a  very  scanty,  or  perhaps  no  regard 
is  paid  to  invisible  objects.  The  entire  opera¬ 
tion,  therefore,  of  spirits  enclosed  in  tangible 
bodies  is  concealed,  and  escapes  us.  All  that  more 
delicate  change  of  formation  in  the  parts  of  coars¬ 
er  substances  (vulgarly  called  alteration,  but  in 
fact  a  change  of  position  in  the  smallest  parti¬ 
cles)  is  equally  unknown;  and  yet,  unless  the 
two  matters  we  have  mentioned  be  explored  and 
brought  to  light,  no  great  effect  can  be  produced 
in  nature.  Again,  the  very  nature  of  common 
air,  and  all  bodies  of  less  density  (of  which  there 
are  many)  is  almost  unknown;  for  the  senses  are 
weak  and  erring,  nor  can  instruments  be  of  great 
use  in  extending  their  sphere  or  acuteness.  All 
the  better  interpretations  of  nature  are  worked 
out  by  instances,  and  fit  and  apt  experiments, 
where  the  senses  only  judge  of  the  experiment, 
the  experiment  of  nature  and  the  thing  itself. 


Ill 

51.  The  human  understanding  is,  by  its  own 
nature,  prone  to  abstraction,  and  supposes  that 
which  is  fluctuating  to  be  fixed.  But  it  is  better 
to  dissect  than  abstract  nature;  such  was  the 
method  employed  by  the  school  of  Democritus, 
which  made  greater  progress  in  penetrating  na¬ 
ture  than  the  rest.  It  is  best  to  consider  matter, 
its  conformation,  and  the  changes  of  that  con¬ 
formation,  its  own  action,  and  the  law  of  this 
action  or  motion;  for  forms  are  a  mere  fiction 
of  the  human  mind,  unless  you  will  call  the  laws 
of  action  by  that  name. 

52.  Such  are  the  idols  of  the  tribe,  which  arise 
either  from  the  uniformity  of  the  constitution 
of  man’s  spirit,  or  its  prejudices,  or  its  limited 
faculties  or  restless  agitation,  or  from  the  inter¬ 
ference  of  the  passions,  or  the  incompetency  of 
the  senses,  or  the  mode  of  their  impressions. 

53 .  The  idols  of  the  den  derive  their  origin  from 
the  peculiar  nature  of  each  individual’s  mind 
and  body,  and  also  from  education,  habit,  and 
accident ;  and  although  they  be  various  andman- 
ifold,  yet  we  will  treat  of  some  that  require  the 
greatest  caution,  and  exert  the  greatest  power 
in  polluting  the  understanding. 

54.  Some  men  become  attached  to  particular 
sciences  and  contemplations,  either  from  sup¬ 
posing  themselves  the  authors  and  inventors  of 
them,  or  from  having  bestowed  the  greatest 
pains  upon  such  subjects,  and  thus  become  most 
habituated  to  them.  If  men  of  this  description 
apply  themselves  to  philosophy  and  contempla¬ 
tions  of  a  universal  nature,  they  wrest  and  cor¬ 
rupt  them  by  theirpreconceivedfancies,ofwhich 
Aristotle  affords  us  a  signal  instance,  who  made 
his  natural  philosophy  completely  subservient 
to  his  logic,  and  thus  rendered  it  little  more  than 
useless  and  disputatious.  The  chemists,  again, 
have  formed  a  fanciful  philosophy  with  the  most 
confined  views,  from  a  few  experiments  of  the 
furnace.  Gilbert,  too,  having  employed  himself 
most  assiduously  in  theconsideration  of  themag- 
net,  immediately  established  a  system  of  phi¬ 
losophy  to  coincide  with  his  favorite  pursuit. 

55.  The  greatest  and,  perhaps,  most  radical  dis¬ 
tinction  between  different  men’s  dispositions  for 
philosophy  and  the  sciences  is  this,  that  some 
are  more  vigorous  and  active  in  observing  the 
differences  of  things,  others  in  observing  their 
resemblances;  for  a  steady  and  acute  disposi¬ 
tion  can  fix  its  thoughts,  and  dwell  upon  and 
adhere  to  a  point,  through  all  the  refinements 
of  differences,  but  those  that  are  sublime  and 
discursive  recognize  and  compare  even  the  most 
delicate  and  general  resemblances;  each  of  them 
readily  falls  into  excess,  by  catching  either  at 


I  12 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


nice  distinctions  or  shadows  of  resemblance. 

56.  Some  dispositions  evince  an  unbounded 
admiration  of  antiquity,  others  eagerly  embrace 
novelty,  and  but  few  can  preserve  the  just  me¬ 
dium,  so  as  neither  to  tear  up  what  the  ancients 
have  correctly  laid  down,  nor  to  despise  the  just 
innovations  of  the  moderns.  But  this  is  very 
prejudicial  to  the  sciences  and  philosophy,  and 
instead  of  a  correct  judgment  we  have  but  the 
factions  of  the  ancients  and  moderns.  Truth  is 
not  to  be  sought  in  the  good  fortune  of  any  par¬ 
ticular  conjuncture  of  time,  which  is  uncertain, 
but  in  the  light  of  nature  and  experience,  which 
is  eternal.  Such  factions,  therefore,  are  to  be 
abjured,  and  the  understanding  must  not  allow 
them  to  hurry  it  on  to  assent. 

57.  The  contemplation  of  nature  and  of  bod¬ 
ies  in  their  individual  form  distracts  and  weak¬ 
ens  the  understanding;  but  the  contemplation 
of  nature  and  of  bodies  in  their  general  com¬ 
position  and  formation  stupefies  and  relaxes  it. 
We  have  a  good  instance  of  this  in  the  school 
of  Leucippus  and  Democritus  compared  with 
others,  for  they  applied  themselves  so  much  to 
particulars  as  almost  to  neglect  the  general  struc¬ 
ture  of  things,  whilst  the  others  were  so  astound¬ 
ed  whilst  gazing  on  the  structure  that  they  did 
not  penetrate  the  simplicity  of  nature.  These 
two  species  of  contemplation  must,  therefore, 
be  interchanged,  and  each  employed  in  its  turn, 
in  order  to  render  the  understanding  at  once 
penetrating  and  capacious,  and  to  avoid  the  in¬ 
conveniences  we  have  mentioned,  and  the  idols 
that  result  from  them. 

58.  Let  such,  therefore,  be  our  precautions  in 
contemplation,  that  we  may  ward  off  and  expel 
the  idols  of  the  den,  which  mostly  owe  their 
birth  either  to  some  predominant  pursuit,  or, 
secondly,  to  an  excess  in  synthesis  and  analysis, 
or,  thirdly,  to  a  party  zeal  in  favor  of  certain 
ages,  or,  fourthly,  to  the  extent  or  narrowness 
of  the  subject.  In  general,  he  who  contemplates 
nature  should  suspect  whatever  particularly 
takes  and  fixes  his  understanding,  and  should 
use  so  much  the  more  caution  to  preserve  it 
equable  and  unprejudiced. 

59.  The  idols  of  the  market  are  the  most  trou¬ 
blesome  of  all,  those  namely  which  have  en¬ 
twined  themselves  round  the  understanding 
from  the  associations  of  words  and  names.  For 
men  imagine  that  their  reason  governs  words, 
whilst,  in  fact,  words  react  upon  the  understand- 
i  ng ;  and  this  has  rendered  philosophy  and  thesci- 
ences  sophistical  and  inactive.  Words  are  gener¬ 
ally  formed  in  a  popular  sense,  and  define  things 
by  those  broad  lines  which  are  most  obvious  to 


the  vulgar  mind;  but  when  a  more  acute  under¬ 
standing,  or  more  diligent  observation  is  anx¬ 
ious  to  vary  those  lines,  and  to  adapt  them  more 
accurately  to  nature,  words  oppose  it.  Hence 
the  great  and  solemn  disputes  of  learned  men 
often  terminate  in  controversies  about  words 
and  names,  in  regard  to  which  it  would  be  bet¬ 
ter  (imitating  the  caution  of  mathematicians) 
to  proceed  more  advisedly  in  the  first  instance, 
and  to  bring  such  disputes  to  a  regular  issue  bv 
definitions.  Such  definitions,  however,  cannot 
remedy  the  evil  in  natural  and  material  objects, 
because  they  consist  themselves  of  words,  and 
these  words  produce  others;  so  that  we  must 
necessarily  have  recourse  to  particular  instan¬ 
ces,  and  their  regular  series  and  arrangement, 
as  we  shall  mention  when  we  come  to  the  mode 
and  scheme  of  determining  notions  and  axioms. 

60.  The  idols  imposed  upon  the  understand¬ 
ing  by  words  are  of  two  kinds.  They  are  either 
the  names  of  things  which  have  no  existence 
(for  as  some  objects  are  from  inattention  left 
without  a  name,  so  names  are  formed  by  fanci¬ 
ful  imaginations  which  are  without  an  object), 
or  they  are  the  names  of  actual  objects,  but 
confused,  badly  defined,  and  hastily  and  irreg¬ 
ularly  abstracted  from  things.  Fortune,  the  pri- 
mum  mobile,  the  planetary  orbits,  the  element 
of  fire,  and  the  like  fictions,  which  owe  their 
birth  to  futile  and  false  theories,  are  instances 
of  the  first  kind.  And  this  species  of  idols  is  re¬ 
moved  with  greater  facility,  because  it  can  be 
exterminated  by  the  constant  refutation  or  the 
desuetude  of  the  theories  themselves.  The  oth¬ 
ers,  which  are  created  by  vicious  and  unskilful 
abstraction,  are  intricate  and  deeply  rooted. 
Take  some  word  for  instance,  as  moist,  and  let 
us  examine  how  far  the  different  significations 
of  this  word  are  consistent.  It  will  be  found  that 
the  word  moist  is  nothing  but  a  confused  sign 
of  different  actions  admitted  of  no  settled  and 
defined  uniformity.  Foi  it  means  that  which  eas¬ 
ily  diffuses  itself  over  another  body;  that  which 
is  indeterminable  and  cannot  be  brought  to  a 
consistency;  that  which  yields  easily  in  every 
direction;  that  which  is  easily  divided  and  dis¬ 
persed;  that  which  is  easily  united  and  collect¬ 
ed;  that  which  easily  flows  and  is  putin  motion; 
that  which  easily  adheres  to,  and  wets  another 
body;  that  which  is  easily  reduced  to  a  liquid 
state  though  previously  solid.  When,  therefore, 
you  come  to  predicate  or  impose  this  name,  in 
one  sense  flame  is  moist,  in  another  air  is  not 
moist,  in  another  fine  powder  is  moist,  in  an¬ 
other  glass  is  moist;  so  that  it  is  quite  clear  that 
this  notion  is  hastily  abstracted  from  water  only, 


FIRST  BOOK 


and  common  ordinary  liquors,  without  any  due 
verification  ofit. 

There  are,  however,  different  degrees  of  dis¬ 
tortion  and  mistake  in  words.  One  of  the  least 
faulty  classes  is  that  of  the  names  of  substan¬ 
ces,  particularly  of  the  less  abstract  and  more 
defined  species  (those  then  of  chalk  and  mud 
are  good,  of  earth  bad);  words  signifying  ac¬ 
tions  are  more  faulty,  as  to  generate,  to  corrupt, 
to  change;  but  the  most  faulty  are  those  denot¬ 
ing  qualities  (except  the  immediate  objects  of 
sense),  as  heavy,  light,  rare,  dense.  Yet  in  all  of 
these  there  must  be  some  notions  a  little  better 
than  others,  in  proportion  as  a  greater  or  less 
number  of  things  come  before  the  senses. 

61.  The  idols  of  the  theatre  are  not  innate, 
nor  do  they  introduce  themselves  secretly  into 
the  understanding,  but  they  are  manifestly  in¬ 
stilled  and  cherished  by  the  fictions  of  theories 
and  depraved  rules  of  demonstration.  To  at¬ 
tempt,  however,  or  undertake  their  confutation 
would  not  be  consistent  with  our  declarations. 
For  since  we  neither  agree  in  our  principles  nor 
our  demonstrations,  all  argument  is  out  of  the 
question.  And  it  is  fortunate  that  the  ancients 
are  left  in  possession  of  their  honors.  We  detract 
nothing  from  them,  seeing  our  whole  doctrine 
relates  only  to  the  path  to  be  pursued.  The  lame 
(as  they  say)  in  the  path  outstrip  the  swift  who 
wander  from  it,  and  it  is  clear  that  the  very 
skill  and  swiftness  of  him  who  runs  not  in  the 
right  direction  must  increase  his  aberration. 

Our  method  of  discovering  the  sciences  is  such 
as  to  leave  little  to  the  acuteness  and  strength 
of  wit,  and  indeed  rather  to  level  wit  and  intel¬ 
lect.  For  as  in  the  drawing  of  a  straight  line,  or 
accurate  circle  by  the  hand,  much  depends  on 
its  steadiness  and  practice,  but  if  a  ruler  or  com¬ 
pass  be  employed  there  is  little  occasion  for  ei¬ 
ther;  so  it  is  with  our  method.  Although,  how¬ 
ever,  we  enter  into  no  individual  confutations, 
yet  a  little  must  be  said,  first,  of  the  sects  and 
general  divisions  of  these  species  of  theories; 
secondly,  something  further  to  show  that  there 
are  external  signs  of  their  weakness;  and,  last¬ 
ly,  we  must  consider  the  causes  of  so  great  a 
misfortune,  and  so  long  and  general  a  unanimi¬ 
ty  in  error,  that  we  may  thus  render  the  access 
to  truth  less  difficult,  and  that  the  human  under¬ 
standing  may  the  more  readily  be  purified,  and 
brought  to  dismiss  its  idols. 

62.  The  idols  of  the  theatre,  or  of  theories, 
are  numerous,  and  may,  and  perhaps  will,  bestill 
more  so.  For  unless  men’s  minds  had  been  now 
occupied  for  many  ages  in  religious  and  theolo¬ 
gical  considerations,  and  civil  governments  (es¬ 


JI3 

pecially  monarchies)  had  been  averse  to  novel¬ 
ties  of  that  nature  even  in  theory  (so  that  men 
must  apply  to  them  with  some  risk  and  injury 
to  their  own  fortunes,  and  not  only  without  re¬ 
ward,  but  subject  to  contumely  and  envy),  there 
is  no  doubt  that  many  other  sects  of  philoso¬ 
phers  and  theorists  would  have  been  intro¬ 
duced,  like  those  which  formerly  flourished  in 
such  diversified  abundance  amongst  the  Greeks. 
For  as  many  imaginary  theories  of  the  heavens 
can  be  deduced  from  the  phenomena  of  the  sky, 
so  it  is  even  more  easy  to  found  many  dogmas  up¬ 
on  the  phenomena  of  philosophy;  and  the  plot 
of  this  our  theatre  resembles  those  of  the  poet¬ 
ical,  where  the  plots  which  are  invented  for  the 
stage  are  more  consistent,  elegant,  and  pleasur¬ 
able  than  those  taken  from  real  history. 

In  general,  men  take  for  the  groundwork  of 
their  philosophy  either  too  much  from  a  few 
topics,  or  too  little  from  many;  in  either  case 
their  philosophy  is  founded  on  too  narrow  a  ba¬ 
sis  of  experiment  and  natural  history,  and  de¬ 
cides  on  too  scanty  grounds.  For  the  theoretic 
philosopher  seizes  various  common  circum¬ 
stances  by  experiment,  without  reducing  them 
to  certainty  or  examining  and  frequently  con¬ 
sidering  them,  and  relies  for  the  rest  upon  med¬ 
itation  and  the  activity  of  his  wit. 

There  are  other  philosophers  who  have  dili¬ 
gently  and  accurately  attended  to  a  few  experi¬ 
ments,  and  have  thence  presumed  to  deduce  and 
invent  systems  of  philosophy,  forming  every¬ 
thing  to  conformity  with  them. 

A  third  set,  from  their  faith  and  religious  ven¬ 
eration,  introduce  theology  and  traditions;  the 
absurdity  of  some  among  them  having  proceed¬ 
ed  so  far  as  to  seek  and  derive  the  sciences  from 
spirits  and  genii.  There  are,  therefore,  three 
sources  of  error  and  three  species  of  false  phil¬ 
osophy;  the  sophistic,  empiric,  and  supersti¬ 
tious. 

63.  Aristotle  affords  the  most  eminent  instance 
of  the  first;  for  he  corrupted  natural  philosophy 
by  logic.  Thus  he  formed  the  world  of  categories, 
assigned  to  the  human  soul,  the  noblest  of  sub¬ 
stances,  a  genus  determined  by  words  of  secon¬ 
dary  operation,  treated  of  density  and  rarity 
(by  which  bodies  occupy  a  greater  or  lesser  space) , 
by  the  frigid  distinctions  of  action  and  power, 
asserted  that  there  was  a  peculiar  and  proper 
motion  in  all  bodies,  and  that  if  they  shared  in 
any  other  motion,  it  was  owing  to  an  external 
moving  cause,  and  imposed  innumerable  arbi¬ 
trary  distinctions  upon  the  nature  of  things ;  being 
everywhere  more  anxious  as  to  definitions  in 
teaching  and  the  accuracy  of  the  wording  of  his 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


1 14 

propositions,  than  the  internal  truth  of  things. 
And  this  is  best  shown  by  a  comparison  of  his 
philosophy  with  the  others  of  greatest  repute 
among  the  Greeks.  For  the  similar  parts  of  An¬ 
axagoras,  the  atoms  of  Leucippus  and  Demo¬ 
critus,  the  heaven  and  earth  of  Parmenides,  the 
discord  and  concord  of  Empedocles,  the  reso¬ 
lution  of  bodies  into  the  common  nature  of  fire, 
and  theircondensation  according  to  Heraclitus, 
exhibit  some  sprinkling  of  natural  philosophy, 
thenatureof  things,  andexperiment;  whilst  Aris¬ 
totle’s  physics  are  mere  logical  terms,  and  he 
remodelled  the  same  subject  in  his  metaphysics 
under  a  more  imposing  title,  and  more  as  a  real¬ 
ist  than  a  nominalist.  Nor  is  much  stress  to  be 
laid  on  his  frequent  recourse  to  experiment  in 
his  books  on  animals,  his  problems,  and  other 
treatises;  for  he  had  already  decided,  without 
having  properly  consulted  experience  as  the  ba¬ 
sis  of  his  decisions  and  axioms,  and  after  having 
so  decided,  he  drags  experiment  along  as  a  cap¬ 
tive  constrained  to  accommodate  herself  to  his 
decisions;  so  that  he  is  even  more  to  be  blamed 
than  his  modern  followers  (of  the  scholastic 
school)  who  have  deserted  her  altogether. 

64.  The  empiric  school  produces  dogmas  of  a 
more  deformed  and  monstrous  nature  than  the 
sophistic  or  theoretic  school;  not  being  found¬ 
ed  in  the  light  of  common  notions  (which  how¬ 
ever  poor  and  superstitious,  is  yet  in  a  manner 
universal  and  of  a  general  tendency),  but  in  the 
confined  obscurity  of  a  few  experiments.  Hence 
this  species  of  philosophy  appears  probable,  and 
almost  certain  to  those  who  are  daily  practised 
in  such  experiments,  and  have  thus  corrupted 
their  imagination,  but  incredible  and  futile  to 
others.  We  have  a  strong  instance  of  this  in  the 
alchemists  and  their  dogmas;  it  would  be  diffi¬ 
cult  to  find  another  in  this  age,  unless  perhaps 
in  the  philosophy  of  Gilbert.  We  could  not,  how¬ 
ever,  neglect  to  caution  others  against  this  school, 
because  we  already  foresee  and  argue,  that  if 
men  be  hereafter  induced  by  our  exhortations 
to  apply  seriously  to  experiments  (bidding  fare¬ 
well  to  the  sophistic  doctrines),  there  will  then 
be  imminent  danger  from  empirics;  owing  to  the 
premature  and  forward  haste  of  the  understand¬ 
ing,  and  its  jumping  or  flying  to  generalities  and 
the  principles  of  things.  We  ought,  therefore, 
already  to  meet  the  evil. 

65.  The  corruption  of  philosophy  by  the  mix¬ 
ing  of  it  up  with  superstition  and  theology,  is  of 
a  much  wider  extent,  and  is  most  injurious  to 
it  both  as  a  whole  and  in  parts.  For  the  human 
understanding  is  no  less  exposed  to  the  impres¬ 
sions  of  fancy  than  to  those  of  vulgar  no¬ 


tions.  The  disputatious  and  sophistic  school  en¬ 
traps  the  understanding,  whilst  the  fanciful, 
bombastic,  and,  as  it  were,  poetical  school,  rath¬ 
er  flatters  it.  There  is  a  clear  example  of  this 
among  the  Greeks,  especially  in  Pythagoras, 
where,  however,  the  superstition  is  coarse  and 
overcharged,  but  it  is  more  dangerous  and  re¬ 
fined  in  Plato  and  his  school.  This  evil  is  found 
also  in  some  branches  of  other  systems  of  philo¬ 
sophy,  where  it  introduces  abstracted  forms,  fi¬ 
nal  and  first  causes,  omitting  frequently  the  in¬ 
termediate  and  the  like.  Against  it  we  must  use 
the  greatest  caution;  for  the  apotheosis  of  error 
is  the  greatest  evil  of  all,  and  when  folly  is  wor¬ 
shipped,  it  is,  as  it  were,  a  plague  spot  upon  the 
understanding.  Yet  some  of  the  moderns  have 
indulged  this  folly  with  such  consummate  in¬ 
considerateness,  that  they  have  endeavored  to 
build  a  system  of  natural  philosophy  on  the  first 
chapter  of  Genesis,  the  book  of  Job,  and  other 
parts  of  Scripture;  seeking  thus  the  dead  amongst 
the  living.  And  this  folly  is  the  more  to  be  pre¬ 
vented  and  restrained,  because  not  only  fan¬ 
tastical  philosophy,  but  heretical  religion  spring 
from  the  absurd  mixture  of  matters  divine  and 
human.  It  is  therefore  most  wise  soberly  to  ren¬ 
der  unto  faith  the  things  that  are  faith’s. 

66.  Having  spoken  of  the  vicious  authority 
of  the  systems  founded  either  on  vulgar  notions, 
or  on  a  few  experiments,  or  on  superstition,  we 
must  now  consider  the  faulty  subjects  for  con¬ 
templation,  especially  in  natural  philosophy. 
The  human  understanding  is  perverted  by  ob¬ 
serving  the  power  of  mechanical  arts,  in  which 
bodies  are  very  materially  changed  by  compo¬ 
sition  or  separation,  and  is  induced  to  suppose 
that  something  similar  takes  place  in  the  uni¬ 
versal  nature  of  things.  Hence  the  fiction  of  ele¬ 
ments,  and  their  co-operation  in  forming  na¬ 
tural  bodies.  Again,  when  man  reflects  upon  the 
entire  liberty  of  nature,  he  meets  with  parti¬ 
cular  species  of  things,  as  animals,  plants,  min¬ 
erals,  and  is  thence  easily  led  to  imagine  that 
there  exist  in  nature  certain  primary  forms  which 
she  strives  to  produce,  and  that  all  variation 
from  them  arises  from  some  impediment  or  error 
which  she  is  exposed  to  in  completing  her  work, 
or  from  the  collision  or  metamorphosis  of  differ¬ 
ent  species.  The  first  hypothesis  has  produced 
the  doctrine  of  elementary  properties,  the  sec¬ 
ond  that  of  occult  properties  and  specific  powers ; 
and  both  lead  to  trifling  courses  of  reflection,  in 
which  the  mind  acquiesces,  and  is  thus  diverted 
from  more  important  subjects.  But  physicians 
exercise  a  much  more  useful  labor  in  the  consid¬ 
eration  of  the  secondary  qualities  of  things,  and 


FIRST  BOOK 


the  operations  of  attraction,  repulsion,  attenu¬ 
ation,  inspissation,  dilation,  astringency,  sepa¬ 
ration,  maturation,  and  the  like;  and  would  do 
still  more  if  they  would  not  corrupt  these  prop¬ 
er  observations  by  the  two  systems  I  have  al¬ 
luded  to,  of  elementary  qualities  and  specific 
powers,  by  which  they  either  reduce  the  second¬ 
ary  to  first  qualities,  and  their  subtile  and  im¬ 
measurable  composition,  or  at  any  rate  neglect 
to  advance  by  greater  and  more  diligent  ob¬ 
servation  to  the  third  and  fourth  qualities,  thus 
terminating  their  contemplation  prematurely. 
Nor  are  these  powers  (or  the  like)  to  be  inves¬ 
tigated  only  among  the  medicines  for  the  human 
body,  but  also  in  all  changes  of  other  natural 
bodies. 

A  greater  evil  arises  from  the  contemplation 
and  investigation  rather  of  the  stationary  prin¬ 
ciples  of  things  from  which,  than  of  the  active 
by  which  things  themselves  are  created.  For  the 
former  only  serve  for  discussion,  the  latter  for 
practice.  Nor  is  any  value  to  be  set  on  those 
common  differences  of  motion  which  are  observ¬ 
ed  in  the  received  system  of  natural  philosophy, 
as  generation,  corruption,  augmentation,  dim¬ 
inution,  alteration,  and  translation.  For  this  is 
their  meaning:  if  a  body,  unchanged  in  other 
respects,  is  moved  from  its  place,  this  is  trans¬ 
lation;  if  the  places  and  species  be  given,  but 
the  quantity  changed,  it  is  alteration;  but,  if 
from  such  a  change,  the  mass  and  quantity  of 
the  body  do  not  continue  the  same,  this  is  the 
motion  of  augmentation  and  diminution;  if  the 
change  be  continued  so  as  to  vary  the  species 
and  substance,  and  transfuse  them  to  others, 
this  is  generation  and  corruption.  All  this  is  mere¬ 
ly  popular,  and  by  no  means  penetrates  into 
nature;  and  these  are  but  the  measures  and 
bounds  of  motion,  and  not  different  species  of 
it;  they  merely  suggest  how  far,  and  not  how 
or  whence.  For  they  exhibit  neither  the  affec¬ 
tions  of  bodies  nor  the  process  of  their  parts, 
but  merely  establish  a  division  of  that  motion, 
which  coarsely  exhibits  to  the  senses  matter  in 
its  varied  form.  Even  when  they  wish  to  point 
out  something  relative  to  the  causes  of  motion, 
and  to  establish  a  division  of  them,  they  most 
absurdly  introduce  natural  and  violent  motion, 
which  is  also  a  popular  notion,  since  every  vio¬ 
lent  motion  is  also  in  fact  natural;  that  is  to 
say,  the  external  efficient  puts  nature  in  action 
in  a  different  manner  to  that  which  she  had  pre¬ 
viously  employed. 

But  if,  neglecting  these,  any  one  were  for  in¬ 
stance  to  observe  that  there  is  in  bodies  a  tend¬ 
ency  of  adhesion,  so  as  not  to  suffer  the  unity 


XI5 

of  nature  to  be  completely  separated  or  broken, 
and  a  vacuum  to  be  formed,  or  that  they  have 
a  tendency  to  return  to  their  natural  dimensions 
or  tension,  so  that,  if  compressed  or  extended 
within  or  beyond  it,  they  immediately  strive  to 
recover  themselves,  and  resume  their  former  vol¬ 
ume  and  extent;  or  that  they  have  a  tendency 
to  congregate  into  masses  with  similar  bodies 
—  the  dense,  for  instance,  towards  the  circum¬ 
ference  of  the  earth,  the  thin  and  rare  towards 
that  of  the  heavens.  These  and  the  like  are  true 
physical  genera  of  motions,  but  the  others  are 
clearly  logical  and  scholastic,  as  appears  plain¬ 
ly  from  a  comparison  of  the  two. 

Another  considerable  evil  is,  that  men  in  their 
systems  and  contemplations  bestow  their  labor 
upon  the  investigation  and  discussion  of  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  things  and  the  extreme  limits  of  na¬ 
ture,  although  all  utility  and  means  of  action 
consist  in  the  intermediate  objects.  Hence  men 
cease  not  to  abstract  nature  till  they  arrive  at 
potential  and  shapeless  matter,  and  still  persist 
in  their  dissection,  till  they  arrive  at  atoms;  and 
yet  were  all  this  true,  it  would  be  of  little  use 
to  advance  man’s  estate. 

67.  The  understanding  must  also  be  caution¬ 
ed  against  the  intemperance  of  systems,  so  far 
as  regards  its  giving  or  withholding  its  assent; 
for  such  intemperance  appears  to  fix  and  per¬ 
petuate  idols,  so  as  to  leave  no  means  of  remov¬ 
ing  them. 

These  excesses  are  of  two  kinds.  The  first  is 
seen  in  those  who  decide  hastily,  and  render  the 
sciences  positive  and  dictatorial.  The  other  in 
those  who  have  introduced  scepticism,  and  vague 
unbounded  inquiry.  The  former  subdues,  the 
latter  enervates  the  understanding.  The  Aris¬ 
totelian  philosophy,  after  destroying  other  sys¬ 
tems  (as  the  Ottomans  do  their  brethren)  by 
its  disputatious  confutations,  decided  upon  ev¬ 
erything,  and  Aristotle  himself  then  raises  up 
questions  at  will,  in  order  to  settle  them;  so  that 
everything  should  be  certain  and  decided,  a 
method  now  in  use  among  his  successors. 

The  school  of  Plato  introduced  scepticism, 
first,  as  it  were  in  joke  and  irony,  from  their 
dislike  to  Protagoras,  Hippias,  and  others,  who 
were  ashamed  of  appearing  not  to  doubt  upon 
any  subject.  But  the  new  academy  dogmatized 
in  their  scepticism,  and  held  it  as  their  tenet. 
Although  this  method  be  more  honest  than  ar¬ 
bitrary  decision  (fori  ts  followers  allege  that  they 
by  no  means  confound  all  inquiry,  like  Pyrrho 
and  his  disciples,  but  hold  doctrines  which  they 
can  follow  as  probable,  though  they  cannot  main¬ 
tain  them  to  be  true),  yet  when  the  human  mind 


1 1 6  NOVUM  ORGANUM 


has  once  despaired  of  discovering  truth,  every¬ 
thing  begins  to  languish.  Hence  men  turn  aside 
into  pleasant  controversies  and  discussions,  and 
into  a  sort  of  wandering  over  subjects  rather 
than  sustain  any  rigorous  investigation.  Rut  as 
we  observed  at  first,  we  are  not  to  deny  the  au¬ 
thority  of  the  human  senses  and  understanding, 
although  weak,  but  rather  to  furnish  them  with 
assistance. 

68.  We  have  now  treated  of  each  kind  of  idols, 
and  their  qualities,  all  of  which  must  be  abjur¬ 
ed  and  renounced  with  firm  and  solemn  resolu¬ 
tion,  and  the  understanding  must  be  complete¬ 
ly  freed  and  cleared  of  them,  so  that  the  access 
to  the  kingdom  of  man,  which  is  founded  on  the 
sciences,  may  resemble  that  to  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  where  no  admission  is  conceded  except 
to  children. 

69.  Vicious  demonstrations  are  the  muniments 
and  support  of  idols,  and  those  which  we  pos¬ 
sess  in  logic,  merely  subject  and  enslave  the  world 
to  human  thoughts,  and  thoughts  to  words.  But 
demonstrations  are  in  some  manner  themselves 
systems  of  philosophy  and  science;  for  such  as 
they  are,  and  accordingly  as  they  are  regularly 
or  improperly  established,  such  will  be  the  re¬ 
sulting  systems  of  philosophy  and  contempla¬ 
tion.  But  those  which  we  employ  in  the  whole 
process  leading  from  the  senses  and  things  to 
axioms  and  conclusions,  are  fallacious  and  in¬ 
competent.  This  process  is  fourfold,  and  the  er¬ 
rors  are  in  equal  number.  In  the  first  place  the 
impressions  of  the  senses  are  erroneous,  for  they 
fail  and  deceive  us.  We  must  supply  defects  by 
substitutions,  and  fallacies  by  their  correction. 
Secondly,  notions  arc  improperly  abstracted 
from  the  senses,  and  indeterminate  and  con¬ 
fused  when  they  ought  to  be  the  reverse.  Third¬ 
ly,  the  induction  that  is  employed  is  improper, 
for  it  determines  the  principles  of  sciences  by 
simple  enumeration,  without  adopting  exclu¬ 
sions  and  resolutions,  or  just  separations  of  na¬ 
ture.  Lastly,  the  usual  method  of  discovery  and 
proof,  by  first  establishing  the  most  general  prop¬ 
ositions,  then  applying  and  proving  the  inter¬ 
mediate  axioms  according  to  them,  is  the  parent 
of  error  arid  the  calamity  of  every  science.  But 
we  will  treat  more  fully  of  that  which  we  now 
slightly  touch  upon,  when  we  come  to  lay  down 
the  true  way  of  interpreting  nature,  after  hav¬ 
ing  gone  through  the  above  expiatory  process 
and  purification  of  the  mind. 

70.  But  experience  is  by  far  the  best  demon¬ 
stration,  provided  it  adhere  to  the  experiment 
actually  made,  for  if  that  experiment  be  trans¬ 
ferred  to  other  subjects  apparently  similar,  un¬ 


less  with  proper  and  methodical  caution  it  be¬ 
comes  fallacious.  The  present  method  of  exper¬ 
iment  is  blind  and  stupid;  hence  men  wander¬ 
ing  and  roaming  without  any  determined  course, 
and  consulting  mere  chance,  are  hurried  about 
to  various  points,  and  advance  but  little — at 
one  time  they  are  happy,  at  another  their  atten¬ 
tion  is  distracted,  and  they  always  find  that  they 
want  something  further.  Men  generally  make 
their  experiments  carelessly,  and  as  it  were  in 
sport,  making  some  little  variation  in  a  known 
experiment,  and  then  if  they  fail  they  become 
disgusted  and  give  up  the  attempt;  nay,  if  they 
set  to  work  more  seriously,  steadily,  and  assid¬ 
uously,  yet  they  waste  all  their  time  on  probing 
some  solitary  matter,  as  Gilbert  on  the  magnet, 
and  the  alchemists  on  gold.  But  such  conduct 
shows  their  method  to  be  no  less  unskilful  than 
mean;  for  nobody  can  successfully  investigate 
the  nature  of  any  object  by  considering  that  ob¬ 
ject  alone;  the  inquiry  must  be  more  generally 
extended. 

Even  when  men  build  any  science  and  theory 
upon  experiment,  yet  they  almost  always  turn 
with  premature  and  hasty  zeal  to  practise,  not 
merely  on  account  of  the  advantage  and  benefit 
to  be  derived  from  it,  but  in  order  to  seize  upon 
some  security  in  a  new  undertaking  of  their  not 
employing  the  remainder  of  their  labor  unpro- 
fitably,  and  by  making  themselves  conspicuous, 
to  acquire  a  greater  name  for  their  pursuit. 
Hence,  like  Atalanta,  they  leave  the  course  to 
pickup  thegolden  apple,  interrupting  their  speed, 
and  giving  up  the  victory.  But  in  the  true  course 
of  experiment,  and  in  extending  it  to  new  ef¬ 
fects,  we  should  imitate  the  Divine  foresight  and 
order ;  for  God  on  the  first  day  only  created  light, 
and  assigned  a  whole  day  to  that  work  without 
creating  any  material  substance  thereon.  In  like 
manner  we  must  first,  by  every  kind  of  experi¬ 
ment,  elicit  the  discovery  of  causes  and  true  ax¬ 
ioms,  and  seek  for  experiments  which  may  afford 
light  rather  than  profit.  Axioms,  when  rightly 
investigated  and  established,  prepare  us  not  for 
a  limited  but  abundant  practice,  and  bring  in 
their  train  whole  troops  of  effects.  But  we  will 
treat  hereafter  of  the  ways  of  experience,  which 
are  not  less  beset  and  interrupted  than  those  of 
judgment;  having  spoken  at  present  of  common 
experience  only  as  a  bad  species  of  demonstra¬ 
tion,  the  order  of  our  subject  now  requires  some 
mention  of  those  external  signs  of  the  weakness 
in  practice  of  the  received  systems  of  philoso¬ 
phy  and  contemplation1  which  we  referred  to 

xSee  Axiom  61,  towards  the  end.  This  subject  extends 
to  Axiom  78. 


FIRST  BOOK 


above,  and  of  the  causes  of  a  circumstance  at 
first  sight  so  wonderful  and  incredible.  For  the 
knowledge  of  these  external  signs  prepares  the 
way  for  assent,  and  the  explanation  of  the  caus¬ 
es  removes  the  wonder;  and  these  two  circum¬ 
stances  are  of  material  use  in  extirpating  more 
easily  and  gently  the  idols  from  the  understand¬ 
ing. 

71.  The  sciences  we  possess  have  been  prin¬ 
cipally  derived  from  the  Greeks;  for  the  addi¬ 
tions  of  the  Roman,  Arabic,  or  more  modern 
writers,  are  but  few  and  of  small  importance, 
and  such  as  they  are,  are  founded  on  the  basis 
of  Greek  invention.  But  the  wisdom  of  the  Greeks 
wasprofessional  anadisputatious,andthus  most 
adverse  to  the  investigation  of  truth.  The  name, 
therefore,  of  sophists,  w  hich  the  contemptuous 
spirit  of  those  who  deemed  themselves  philoso¬ 
phers,  rejected  and  transferred  to  the  rhetori¬ 
cians — Gorgias,  Protagoras,  Hippias,  Polus — 
might  well  suit  the  whole  tribe,  such  as  Plato, 
Aristotle,  Zeno,  Epicurus,  Theophrastus,  and 
their  successors — Chrysippus,  Carneades,  and 
the  rest.  There  was  only  this  difference  between 
them:  the  former  were  mercenary  vagabonds, 
travelling  about  to  different  states,  making  a 
show  of  their  wisdom,  and  requiring  pav;  the 
latter  more  dignified  and  noble,  in  possession 
of  fixed  habitations,  opening  schools,  and  teach¬ 
ing  philosophy  gratuitously.  Both,  however 
(though  differing  in  other  respects),  were  pro¬ 
fessorial,  and  reduced  every  subject  to  contro¬ 
versy,  establishing  and  defending  certain  sects 
and  dogmas  of  philosophy,  so  that  their  doc¬ 
trines  were  nearly  (what  Dionysius  not  unaptly 
objected  to  Plato)  the  talk  of  idle  old  men  to 
ignorant  youths.  But  the  more  ancient  Greeks, 
as  Empedocles,  Anaxagoras,  Leucippus,  Demo¬ 
critus,  Parmenides,  Heraclitus,  Xenophanes, 
Philolaus,  and  the  rest  (for  I  omit  Pythagoras 
as  being  superstitious),  did  not  (that  we  are 
aware)  open  schools,  but  betook  themselves  to 
the  investigation  of  truth  with  greater  silence 
and  with  more  severity  and  simplicity,  that  is, 
with  less  affectation  and  ostentation.  Hence  in 
our  opinion  they  acted  more  advisedly,  however 
their  works  may  have  been  eclipsed  in  course 
of  time  by  those  lighter  productions  which  bet¬ 
ter  correspond  with  and  please  the  apprehen¬ 
sions  and  passions  of  the  vulgar;  for  time,  like 
a  river,  bears  down  to  us  that  which  is  light  and 
inflated,  and  sinks  that  which  is  heavy  and 
solid.  Nor  were  even  these  more  ancient  philoso¬ 
phers  free  from  the  national  defect,  but  inclin¬ 
ed  toomuch  to  the  ambition  and  vanity  of  form¬ 
ing  a  sect,  and  captivating  public  opinion,  and 


TI7 

we  must  despair  of  any  inquiry  after  truth  when 
it  condescends  to  such  trifles.  Nor  must  we  omit 
the  opinion,  or  rather  prophecy,  of  an  Egyptian 
priest  wi  th  regard  to  the  Greeks,  that  they  would 
forever  remain  children,  without  any  antiquity 
of  knowledgeor  knowledge  of  antiquity ;  for  they 
certainly  have  this  in  common  with  children, 
that  they  are  prone  to  talking,  and  incapable 
of  generation,  their  wisdom  being  loquacious 
and  unproductive  of  effects.  Hence  the  external 
signs  derived  from  the  origin  and  birthplace  of 
our  present  philosophy  are  not  favorable. 

72.  Nor  are  those  much  better  which  can  be 
deduced  from  the  character  of  the  time  and  age, 
than  the  former  from  that  of  the  country  and 
nation;  for  in  that  age  the  knowledge  both  of 
time  and  of  the  world  was  confined  and  meagre, 
which  is  one  of  the  worst  evils  for  those  who 
rely  entirely  on  experience.  They  had  not  a  thou¬ 
sand  years  of  history  worthy  of  that  name,  but 
mere  fables  and  ancient  traditions;  they  were 
acquainted  with  but  a  small  portion  of  the  re¬ 
gions  and  countries  of  the  world,  for  they  in¬ 
discriminately  called  all  nations  situated  far  to¬ 
wards  the  north  Scythians,  all  those  to  the  west 
Celts;  they  knew  nothing  of  Africa  but  the  near¬ 
est  part  of  Ethiopia,  or  of  Asia  beyond  the  Gan¬ 
ges,  and  had  not  even  heard  any  sure  and  clear 
tradition  of  the  regions  of  the  New  World.  Be¬ 
sides,  a  vast  number  of  climates  and  zones,  in 
which  innumerable  nations  live  and  breathe, 
were  pronounced  by  them  to  be  uninhabitable; 
nay,  the  travels  of  Democritus,  Plato,  and  Pyth¬ 
agoras,  which  were  not  extensive,  but  rather 
mere  excursions  from  home,  were  considered  as 
something  vast.  But  in  our  times  many  parts 
of  the  New  World,  and  every  extremity  of  the 
Old  are  well  known,  and  the  mass  of  experi¬ 
ments  has  been  infinitely  increased;  wherefore, 
if  external  signs  were  to  be  taken  from  the  time 
of  the  nativity  or  procreation  (as  in  astrology), 
nothing  extraordinary  could  be  predicted  of  these 
early  systems  of  philosophy. 

73.  Of  all  signs  there  is  none  more  certain  or 
worthy  than  that  of  the  fruits  produced,  for  the 
fruits  and  effects  are  the  sureties  and  vouchers, 
as  it  were,  for  the  truth  of  philosophy.  Now, 
from  the  systems  of  the  Greeks  and  their  sub¬ 
ordinate  divisions  in  particular  branches  ot  the 
sciences  during  so  long  a  period,  scarcely  one 
single  experiment  can  be  culled  that  has  a  tend¬ 
ency  to  elevate  or  assist  mankind,  and  can  be 
fairly  set  down  to  the  speculations  and  doctrines 
of  their  philosophy.  Celsus  candidly  and  wisely 
confesses  as  much,  when  he  observes  that  ex¬ 
periments  were  first  discovered  in  medicine,  and 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


1 1 8 

that  men  afterwards  built  their  philosophical 
systems  upon  them,  and  searched  for  and  as¬ 
signed  causes,  instead  of  the  inverse  method  of 
discovering  and  deriving  experiments  from  phil¬ 
osophy  and  the  knowledge  of  causes;  it  is  not, 
therefore,  wonderful  that  the  Egyptians  (who 
bestowred  divinity  and  sacred  honors  on  the  au¬ 
thors  of  new  inventions)  should  have  consecrat¬ 
ed  more  images  of  brutes  than  of  men,  for  the 
brutes  by  their  natural  instinct  made  many  dis¬ 
coveries,  whilst  men  derived  but  few  from  dis¬ 
cussion  and  the  conclusions  of  reason. 

The  industry  of  the  alchemists  has  produced 
some  effect,  by  chance,  however,  and  casualty, 
or  from  varying  their  experiments  (as  mechan¬ 
ics  also  do),  and  not  from  any  regular  art  or 
theory,  the  theory  they  have  imagined  rather 
tending  to  disturb  than  to  assist  experiment. 
Those,  too,  who  have  occupied  themselves  with 
natural  magic  (as  they  term  it)  have  made  but 
few  discoveries,  and  those  of  small  import,  and 
bordering  on  imposture;  for  which  reason,  in 
the  same  manner  as  we  are  cautioned  by  reli¬ 
gion  to  show  our  faith  by  our  works,  we  may 
very  properly  apply  the  principle  to  philosophy, 
and  judge  of  it  by  its  works,  accounting  that  to 
be  futile  which  is  unproductive,  and  still  more  so 
if,  instead  of  grapes  and  olives,  it  yield  but  the 
thistle  and  thorns  of  dispute  and  contention. 

74.  Other  signs  may  be  selected  from  the  in¬ 
crease  and  progress  of  particular  systems  of  phil¬ 
osophy  and  the  sciences;  for  those  which  are 
founded  on  nature  grow  and  increase,  whilst 
those  which  are  founded  on  opinion  change  and 
increase  not.  If,  therefore,  the  theories  we  have 
mentioned  were  not  like  plants,  torn  up  by  the 
roots,  but  grew  in  the  womb  of  nature,  and  were 
nourished  by  her,  that  which  for  the  last  two 
thousand  years  has  taken  place  would  never  have 
happened,  namely,  that  the  sciences  still  con¬ 
tinue  in  their  beaten  track,  and  nearly  station¬ 
ary,  without  having  received  any  important  in¬ 
crease,  nay,  having  on  the  contrary  rather  bloom¬ 
ed  under  the  hands  of  their  first  author,  and 
then  faded  away.  But  we  see  that  the  case  is  re¬ 
versed  in  the  mechanical  arts,  which  are  found¬ 
ed  on  nature  and  the  light  of  experience,  for 
they  (as  long  as  they  are  popular)  seem  full  of 
life,  and  uninterruptedly  thrive  and  grow,  be¬ 
ing  at  first  rude,  then  convenient,  lastly  polish¬ 
ed,  and  perpetually  improved. 

75.  There  is  yet  another  sign  (if  such  it  may 
be  termed,  being  rather  an  evidence,  and  one  of 
the  strongest  nature),  namely,  the  actual  con¬ 
fession  of  those  very  authorities  whom  men  now 
follow;  for  even  they  who  decide  on  things  so 


daringly,  yet  at  times,  when  they  reflect,  betake 
themselves  to  complaints  about  the  subtiltv  of 
nature,  the  obscurity  of  things,  and  the  weak¬ 
ness  of  man’s  wit.  If  they  would  merely  do  this, 
they  might  perhaps  deter  those  who  are  of  a  tim¬ 
id  disposition  from  further  inquiry,  but  would 
excite  and  stimulate  those  of  a  more  active  and 
confident  turn  to  further  advances.  They  are 
not,  however,  satisfied  with  confessing  so  much 
of  themselves,  but  consider  everything  which 
has  been  either  unknown  or  unattempted  by 
themselves  or  their  teachers,  as  beyond  the  lim¬ 
its  of  possibility,  and  thus,  with  most  consum¬ 
mate  pride  and  envy,  convert  thedefectsof  their 
own  discoveries  into  a  calumny  on  nature  and 
a  source  of  despair  to  every  one  else.  Hence 
arose  the  New  Academy,  which  openly  profess¬ 
ed  scepticism,  and  consigned  mankind  to  eter¬ 
nal  darkness;  hence  the  notion  that  forms, or  the 
true  differences  of  things  (which  are  in  fact  the 
laws  of  simple  action),  are  beyond  man’s  reach, 
and  cannot  possibly  be  discovered;  hence  those 
notions  in  the  active  and  operative  branches, 
that  the  heat  of  the  sun  and  of  fire  are  totally 
different,  so  as  to  prevent  men  from  supposing 
that  they  can  elicit  or  form,  by  means  of  fire, 
anything  similar  to  the  operations  of  nature; 
and  again,  that  composition  only  is  the  work  of 
man  and  mixture  of  nature,  so  as  to  prevent 
men  from  expecting  the  generation  or  transfor¬ 
mation  of  natural  bodies  by  art.  Men  will,  there¬ 
fore,  easily  allow  themselves  to  be  persuaded 
by  this  sign  not  to  engage  their  fortunes  and 
labor  in  speculations,  which  are  not  only  des¬ 
perate,  but  actually  devoted  to  desperation. 

76.  Nor  should  we  omit  the  sign  afforded  by 
the  great  dissension  formerly  prevalent  among 
philosophers,  and  the  variety  of  schools,  which 
sufficiently  show  that  the  way  was  not  well  pre¬ 
pared  that  leads  from  the  senses  to  the  under¬ 
standing,  since  the  same  groundwork  of  philos¬ 
ophy  (namely,  the  nature  of  things)  was  torn 
and  divided  into  such  widely  differing  and  mul¬ 
tifarious  errors.  And  although  in  these  days  the 
dissensions  and  differences  of  opinions  with  re¬ 
gard  to  first  principles  and  entire  systems  are 
nearly  extinct,  yet  there  remain  innumerable 
questions  and  controversies  with  regard  to 
particular  branches  of  philosophy.  So  that  it  is 
manifest  that  there  is  nothing  sure  or  sound 
either  in  the  systems  themselves  or  in  the 
methods  of  demonstration. 

77.  With  regard  to  the  supposition  that  there 
is  a  general  unanimity  as  to  the  philosophy  of 
Aristotle,  because  the  other  systems  of  the  an¬ 
cients  ceased  and  became  obsolete  on  its  pro- 


FIRST  BOOK 


mulgation,  and  nothing  better  has  been  since 
discovered;  whence  it  appears  that  it  is  so  well 
determined  and  founded,  as  to  have  united  the 
suffrages  of  both  ages;  we  will  observe —  ist.  That 
the  notion  of  other  ancient  systems  having  ceas¬ 
ed  after  the  publication  of  the  works  of  Aristotle 
is  false,  for  the  works  of  the  ancient  philosophers 
subsisted  long  after  that  event,  even  to  the  time 
of  Cicero,  and  the  subsequent  ages.  But  at  a 
later  period,  when  human  learning  had,  as  it 
were,  been  wrecked  in  the  inundation  of  bar¬ 
barians  into  the  Roman  empire,  then  the  sys¬ 
tems  of  Aristotle  and  Plato  were  preserved  in 
the  waves  of  ages,  like  planks  of  a  lighter  and 
less  solid  nature.  2d.  The  notion  of  unanimity, 
on  a  clear  inspection,  is  found  to  be  fallacious. 
For  true  unanimity  is  that  which  proceeds 
from  a  free  judgment,  arriving  at  the  same 
conclusion,  after  an  investigation  of  the  fact. 
Now,  by  far  the  greater  number  of  those  who 
have  assented  to  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle, 
have  bound  themselves  down  to  it  from  prej¬ 
udice  and  the  authority  of  others,  so  that  it  is 
rather  obsequiousness  and  concurrence  than 
unanimity.  But  even  if  it  were  real  and  exten¬ 
sive  unanimity,  so  far  from  being  esteemed 
a  true  and  solid  confirmation,  it  should  even 
lead  to  a  violent  presumption  to  the  contrary. 
For  there  is  no  worse  augury  in  intellectual 
matters  than  that  derived  from  unanimity, 
with  theexceptionofdivinity  and  politics,  where 
suffrages  are  allowed  to  decide.  For  nothing  pleas¬ 
es  the  multitude,  unless  it  strike  the  imagina¬ 
tion  or  bind  down  the  understanding,  as  we  have 
observed  above,  with  the  shackles  of  vulgar  no¬ 
tions.  Hence  we  may  well  transfer  Phocion’s  re¬ 
mark  from  morals  to  the  intellect:  “That  men 
should  immediately  examine  what  error  or  fault 
they  have  committed,  when  the  multitude  con¬ 
curs  with,  and  applauds  them/’  This  then  is  one 
of  the  most  unfavorable  signs.  All  the  signs,  there¬ 
fore,  of  the  truth  and  soundness  of  the  received 
systems  of  philosophy  and  the  sciences  are  un- 
propitious,  whether  takenfromtheirorigin,  their 
progress,  theconfessionsoftheir  authors, or  from 
unanimity. 

78.  We  now  come  to  the  causes  of  errors1,  and 
of  such  perseverance  in  them  for  ages.  These 
are  sufficiently  numerous  and  powerful  to  re¬ 
move  all  wonder,  that  what  we  now  offer  should 
have  so  long  been  concealed  from,  and  have  es¬ 
caped  the  notice  of  mankind,  and  to  render  it 
more  worthy  of  astonishment,  that  it  should 
even  now  have  entered  any  one’s  mind,  or  be¬ 
come  the  subject  of  his  thoughts;  and  that  it 

^ee  end  of  Axiom  61. 


II9 

should  have  done  so,  we  consider  rather  the  gift 
of  fortune  than  of  any  extraordinary  talent,  and 
as  the  offspring  of  time  rather  than  wit.  But,  in 
the  first  place,  the  number  of  ages  is  reduced  to 
very  narrow  limits,  on  a  proper  consideration 
of  the  matter.  For  out  of  twenty-five  centuries, 
with  which  the  memory  and  learning  of  man 
are  conversant,  scarcely  six  can  be  set  apart  and 
selected  as  fertile  in  science  and  favorable  to  its 
progress.  For  there  are  deserts  and  wastes  in 
times  as  in  countries,  and  we  can  only  reckon 
up  three  revolutions  and  epochs  of  philosophy. 
1.  The  Greek.  2.  The  Roman.  3.  Our  own,  that 
is  the  philosophy  of  the  western  nations  of  Eu¬ 
rope:  and  scarcely  two  centuries  can  with  jus¬ 
tice  be  assigned  to  each.  The  intermediate  ages 
of  the  world  were  unfortunate  both  in  the  quan¬ 
tity  and  richness  of  the  sciences  produced.  Nor 
need  we  mention  the  Arabs,  or  the  scholastic 
philosophy,  which,  in  those  ages,  ground  down 
the  sciences  by  their  numerous  treatises,  more 
than  they  increased  their  weight.  The  first  cause, 
then,  of  such  insignificant  progress  in  the  sci¬ 
ences,  is  rightly  referred  to  the  small  pro¬ 
portion  of  time  which  has  been  favorable 
thereto. 

79.  A  second  cause  offers  itself,  which  is  cer¬ 
tainly  of  the  greatest  importance;  namely,  that 
in  those  very  ages  in  which  men’s  wit  and  liter¬ 
ature  flourished  considerably,  or  even  moder¬ 
ately,  but  a  small  part  of  their  industry  was  be¬ 
stowed  on  natural  philosophy,  the  great  mother 
of  the  sciences.  For  every  art  and  science  torn 
from  this  root  may,  perhaps,  be  polished,  and 
put  into  a  serviceable  shape,  but  can  admit  of 
little  growth.  It  is  well  known,  that  after  the 
Christian  religion  had  been  acknowledged,  and 
arrived  at  maturity,  by  far  the  best  wits  were 
busiedupon  theology,  where  the  highest  rewards 
offered  themselves,  and  every  species  of  assist¬ 
ance  was  abundantly  supplied,  and  the  study 
of  which  was  the  principal  occupation  of  the 
western  European  nations  during  the  third  ep¬ 
och;  the  rather  because  literature  flourished 
about  the  very  time  when  con  troversies  concern¬ 
ing  religion  first  began  to  bud  forth.  2.  In  the 
preceding  age,  during  the  second  epoch  (that  of 
the  Romans),  philosophical  meditation  and  la¬ 
bor  were  chiefly  occupied  and  wasted  in  moral 
philosophy  (the  theology  of  the  heathens):  be¬ 
sides,  the  greatest  minds  in  these  times  applied 
themselves  to  civil  affairs,  on  account  of  the 
magnitude  of  the  Roman  empire,  which  requir¬ 
ed  the  labor  of  many.  3.  The  age  during  which 
the  natural  philosophy  appeared  principally  to 
flourish  among  the  Greeks,  was  but  a  short  pe- 


120 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


riod,  since  in  the  more  ancient  times  the  seven 
sages  (with  the  exception  or  Thales)  applied 
themselves  to  moral  philosophy  and  politics,  and 
at  a  later  period,  after  Socrates  had  brought 
down  philosophy  from  heaven  to  earth,  moral 
philosophy  became  more  prevalent,  and  divert¬ 
ed  men’s  attention  from  natural.  Nay,  the  very 
period  during  which  physical  inquiries  flourish¬ 
ed,  was  corrupted  and  rendered  useless  by  con¬ 
tradictions,  and  the  ambition  of  new  opinions. 
Since,  therefore,  during  these  three  epochs,  na¬ 
tural  philosophy  has  been  materially  neglected 
or  impeded,  it  is  not  at  all  surprising  that  men 
should  have  made  but  little  progress  in  it,  see¬ 
ing  they  were  attending  to  an  entirely  different 
matter. 

80.  Add  to  this  that  natural  philosophy,  es- 
peciallyoflate,  has  seldom  gained  exclusive  pos¬ 
session  of  an  individual  free  from  all  other  pur¬ 
suits,  even  among  those  who  have  applied  them¬ 
selves  to  it,  unless  there  may  be  an  example  or 
two  of  some  monk  studying  in  his  cell,  or  some 
nobleman  in  his  villa.  She  has  rather  been  made 
a  passage  and  bridge  to  other  pursuits. 

Thus  has  this  great  mother  of  the  sciences 
been  degraded  most  unworthily  to  the  situation 
of  a  handmaid,  and  made  to  wait  upon  medi¬ 
cine  or  mathematical  operations,  and  to  wash 
the  immature  minds  of  youth,  and  imbue  them 
with  a  first  dye,  that  they  may  afterwards  be 
,more  ready  to  receive  and  retain  another.  In 
the  mean  time,  let  no  one  expect  any  great  prog¬ 
ress  in  the  sciences  (especially  their  operative 
part),  unless  natural  philosophy  be  applied  to 
particular  sciences,  and  particular  sciences 
again  referred  back  to  natural  philosophy.  For 
want  of  this,  astronomy,  optics,  music,  many 
mechanical  arts,  medicine  itself,  and  (what  per¬ 
haps  is  more  wonderful)  moral  and  political  phi¬ 
losophy,  and  the  logical  sciences  have  no  depth, 
but  only  glide  over  the  surface  and  variety  of 
things;  because  these  sciences,  when  they  have 
been  once  partitioned  out  and  established,  are 
no  longer  nourished  by  natural  philosophy,  which 
would  have  imparted  fresh  vigor  and  growth  to 
them  from  the  sources  and  genuine  contempla¬ 
tion  of  motion,  rays,  sounds,  texture,  and  con¬ 
formation  of  bodies,  and  the  affections  and  ca¬ 
pacity  of  the  understanding.  But  we  can  little 
wonder  that  the  sciences  grow  not  when  sepa¬ 
rated  from  their  roots. 

8 1 .  There  is  another  powerful  and  great  cause 
of  the  little  advancement  of  the  sciences,  which 
is  this:  it  is  impossible  to  advance  properly  in 
the  course  when  the  goal  is  not  properly  fixed. 
But  the  real  and  legitimate  goal  of  the  sciences, 


is  the  endowment  of  human  life  with  new  in¬ 
ventions  and  riches.  The  great  crowd  of  teach¬ 
ers  know  nothing  of  this,  but  consist  of  dictato¬ 
rial  hirelings:  unless  it  so  happen  that  some  ar¬ 
tisan  of  an  acute  genius,  and  ambitious  of  fame, 
gives  up  his  time  to  a  new  discovery,  which  is 
generally  attended  with  a  loss  of  property.  The 
majority,  so  far  from  proposing  to  themselves 
the  augmentations  of  the  mass  of  arts  and  sci¬ 
ences,  make  no  other  use  of  an  inquiry  into  the 
mass  already  before  them,  than  is  afforded  by 
the  conversion  of  it  to  some  use  in  their  lectures, 
or  to  gain,  or  to  the  acquirement  of  a  name,  and 
the  like.  But  ifoneoutof  the  multitude  be  found, 
who  courts  science  from  real  zeal,  and  on  his 
own  account,  even  he  will  be  seen  rather  to  fol¬ 
low  contemplation,  and  the  variety  of  theories, 
than  a  severe  and  strict  investigation  of  truth. 
Again,  if  there  even  be  an  unusually  strict  in¬ 
vestigator  of  truth,  yet  will  he  propose  to  him¬ 
self,  as  the  test  of  truth,  the  satisfaction  of  his 
mind  and  understanding,  as  to  the  causes  of 
things  long  since  known,  and  not  such  a  test  as 
to  lead  to  some  new  earnest  of  effects,  and  a  new- 
light  in  axioms.  If,  therefore,  no  one  have  laid 
dowrn  the  real  end  of  science,  we  cannot  wonder 
that  there  should  be  error  in  points  subordinate 
to  that  end. 

82.  But,  in  like  manner,  as  the  end  and  goal 
of  science  is  ill  defined,  so,  even  were  the  case 
otherwise,  men  have  chosen  an  erroneous  and 
impassable  direction.  For  it  is  sufficient  to  as¬ 
tonish  any  reflecting  mind,  that  nobody  should 
have  cared  or  wished  to  open  and  complete  a 
way  for  the  understanding,  setting  off  from  the 
senses,  and  regular,  well-conducted  experiment; 
but  that  everything  has  been  abandoned  either 
to  the  mists  of  tradition,  the  whirl  and  confu¬ 
sion  of  argument,  or  the  waves  and  mazes  of 
chance,  and  desultory,  ill-combined  experiment. 
Now,  let  anyone  but  consider  soberly  and  dili¬ 
gently  the  nature  of  the  path  men  have  been 
accustomed  to  pursue  in  the  investigation  and 
discovery  of  any  matter,  and  he  will  doubtless 
first  observe  the  rude  and  inartificial  manner  of 
discovery  most  familiar  to  mankind:  which  is 
no  other  than  this.  When  anyone  prepares  him¬ 
self  for  discovery,  he  first  inquires  and  obtains 
a  full  account  of  all  that  has  been  said  on  the 
subject  by  others,  then  adds  hisown  reflections, 
and  stirs  up  and,  as  it  were,  invokes  his  own 
spirit,  after  much  mental  labor,  to  disclose  its 
oracles.  All  which  is  a  method  without  founda¬ 
tion,  and  merelv  turns  on  opinion. 

Another,  perhaps,  calls  in  logic  to  assist  him 
in  discovery,  which  bears  only  a  nominal  rela- 


FIRST  BOOK 


tion  to  his  purpose.  For  the  discoveries  of  logic 
are  not  discoveries  of  principles  and  leading  ax¬ 
ioms,  but  only  of  what  appears  to  accord  with 
them.  And  when  men  become  curious  and  im¬ 
portunate,  and  give  trouble,  interrupting  her 
about  her  proofs,  and  the  discovery  of  princi¬ 
ples  or  first  axioms,  she  puts  them  off  with  her 
usual  answer,  referring  them  to  faith,  and  or¬ 
dering  them  to  swear  allegiance  to  each  art  in 
its  own  department. 

There  remains  but  mere  experience,  which, 
when  it  offers  itself,  is  called  chance;  when  it  is 
sought  after,  experiment.1  But  this  kind  of  ex¬ 
perience  is  nothing  but  a  loose  fagot;  and  mere 
groping  i  n  the  dark,  as  men  at  night  try  all  means 
of  discovering  the  right  road,  whilst  it  would  be 
better  and  more  prudent  either  to  wait  for  day, 
or  procure  a  light,  and  then  proceed.  On  the 
contrary,  the  real  order  of  experience  begins  by 
i  setting  up  a  light,  and  then  shows  the  road  by 
it,  commencing  with  a  regulated  and  digested, 
not  a  misplaced  and  vague  course  of  experiment, 
and  thence  deducing  axioms,  and  from  those 
axioms  new  experiments;  for  not  even  the  Di¬ 
vine  word  proceeded  to  operate  on  the  general 
mass  of  things  without  due  order. 

Let  men,  therefore,  cease  to  wonder  if  the 
whole  course  of  science  be  not  run,  when  all 
have  wandered  from  the  path;  quitting  it  en¬ 
tirely,  and  deserting  experience,  or  involving 
themselves  in  its  mazes,  and  wandering  about, 
whilst  a  regularly  combined  system  would  lead 
them  in  a  sure  track  through  its  wilds  to  the 
open  day  of  axioms. 

83.  The  evil,  however,  has  been  wonderfully 
increased  by  an  opinion,  or  inveterate  conceit, 
which  is  both  vainglorious  and  prejudicial, 
namely,  that  the  dignity  of  the  human  mind  is 
lowered  by  long  and  frequent  intercourse  with 
experiments  and  particulars,  which  are  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  sense,  and  confined  tomatter  especially 
since  such  matters  generally  require  labor  in  in¬ 
vestigation,  are  mean  subjects  for  meditation, 
harsh  in  discourse,  unproductiveinpractice,  in¬ 
finite  in  number,  and  delicate  in  their  subtilty. 
Hence  we  have  seen  the  true  path  not  only  de¬ 
serted,  but  intercepted  and  blocked  up,  exper¬ 
ience  being  rejected  with  disgust,  and  not  mere¬ 
ly  neglected  or  improperly  applied. 

84.  Again,  the  reverence  for  antiquity,  and 
the  authority  of  men  who  have  been  esteemed 
great  in  philosophy,  and  general  unanimity,  have 
retarded  men  from  advancing  in  science,  and 
almost  enchanted  them.  As  to  unanimity,  we 
have  spoken  of  it  above. 

1See  Aphorism  95. 


1 21 

The  opinion  which  men  cherish  of  antiquity 
is  altogether  idle  and  scarcely  affords  with  the 
term.  For  the  old  age  and  increasing  years  of 
the  world  should  in  reality  be  considered  as  anti¬ 
quity,  and  is  this  rather  thecharacter  of  our  own 
times  than  of  the  less  advanced  age  of  the  world 
in  those  of  the  ancients;  for  the  latter,  with 
respect  to  ourselves,  are  ancient  and  elder,  with 
respect  to  the  world  modern  and  younger.  And 
as  we  expect  a  greater  knowledge  of  human  af¬ 
fairs,  and  more  mature  judgment  from  an  old 
man  than  from  a  youth,  on  account  of  his  ex¬ 
perience,  and  the  variety  andnumberof  things 
he  has  seen,  heard,  and  meditated  upon,  so  we 
have  reason  to  expect  much  greater  things  of 
our  own  age  (if  it  knew  but  its  strength  and 
would  essay  and  exert  it)  than  from  antiquity, 
since  the  world  has  grown  older,  and  its  stock 
has  been  increased  and  accumulated  with  an  in¬ 
finite  number  of  experiments  and  observations. 

We  must  also  take  into  our  consideration 
that  many  objects  in  nature  fit  to  throw  light 
upon  philosophy  have  been  exposed  to  our  view, 
and  discovered  by  means  of  long  voyages  and 
travels,  in  which  our  times  have  abounded.  It 
would,  indeed,  be  dishonorable  to  mankind,  if 
the  regions  of  the  material  globe,  the  earth,  the 
sea,  and  stars,  should  be  so  prodigiously  devel¬ 
oped  and  illustrated  in  our  age,  and  yet  the 
boundaries  of  the  intellectual  globe  should  be  con¬ 
fined  to  the  narrow  discoveries  of  the  ancients. 

With  regard  to  authority,  it  is  the  greatest 
weakness  to  attribute  infinite  credit  to  partic¬ 
ular  authors,  and  to  refuse  his  own  prerogative 
to  time,  the  author  of  all  authors,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  of  all  authority.  For  truth  is  rightly  named 
the  daughter  of  time,  not  of  authority.  It  is 
not  wonderful,  therefore,  if  the  bonds  of  antiq¬ 
uity,  authority,  and  unanimity,  haveso  enchain¬ 
ed  the  power  of  man,  that  he  is  unable  (as  if  be¬ 
witched)  to  become  familiar  with  things  them¬ 
selves. 

85.  Nor  is  it  only  the  admirationofantiquity, 
authority,  and  unanimity,  that  has  forced  man’s 
industry  to  rest  satisfied  with  present  discover¬ 
ies,  but,  also,  the  admiration  of  the  effects  al¬ 
ready  placed  within  his  power.  For  whoever 
passes  in  review  the  variety  of  subjects,  and  the 
beautiful  apparatus  collected  and  introduced  by 
the  mechanical  arts  for  the  service  of  mankind, 
will  certainly  be  rather  inclined  to  admire  our 
wealth  than  to  perceive  our  poverty:  not  con¬ 
sidering  that  the  observations  of  man  and  oper¬ 
ations  of  nature  (which  are  the  souls  and  first 
movers  of  that  variety)  are  few,  and  not  of  deep 
research;  the  rest  must  be  attributed  merely  to 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


122 

man’s  patience,  and  the  delicate  and  well  regu¬ 
lated  motion  of  the  hand  or  of  instruments.  To 
take  an  instance,  the  manufacture  of  clocks  is 
delicate  and  accurate,  and  appears  toimitate  the 
heavenly  bodies  in  its  wheels,  and  the  pulse  of 
animals  in  its  regular  oscillation,  yet  it  only  de- 
pendsupon  one  or  two  axioms  of  nature. 

Again,  if  one  consider  the  refinement  of  the 
liberal  arts,  or  even  that  exhibited  in  the  pre¬ 
paration  of  natural  bodies  in  mechanical  arts 
and  the  like,  as  the  discovery  of  the  heavenly 
motions  in  astronomy,  of  harmony  in  music,  of 
the  letters  of  the  alphabet  (still  unadopted  by 
the  Chinese)  in  grammar;  or,  again,  in  mech¬ 
anical  operations,  the  productions  of  Bacchus 
and  Ceres,  that  is,  the  preparation  of  wine  and 
beer,  the  making  of  bread,  or  even  the  luxuries 
of  the  table,  distillation,  and  the  like;  if  one  re¬ 
flect  also,  and  consider  for  how  long  a  period  of 
ages  (for  all  the  above,  except  distillation,  are 
ancient)  these  things  have  been  brought  to  their 
present  state  of  perfection,  and  (as  we  instanc¬ 
ed  in  clocks)  to  how  few  observations  and  ax¬ 
ioms  of  nature  they  may  be  referred,  and  how 
easily,  and,  as  it  were,  by  obvious  chance  or 
contemplation,  they  might  be  discovered,  one 
would  soon  cease  to  admire  and  rather  pity  the 
human  lot,  on  account  of  its  vast  want  and  dearth 
of  things  and  discoveries  for  so  many  ages.  Yet 
even  the  discoveries  we  have  mentioned  were 
more  ancient  than  philosophy  and  the  intellec¬ 
tual  arts;  so  that  (to  say  the  truth),  when  con¬ 
templation  and  doctrinal  science  began,  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  useful  works  ceased. 

But  if  anyone  turn  from  the  manufactories 
to  libraries,  and  be  inclined  to  admire  the  im¬ 
mense  variety  of  books  offered  to  our  view,  let 
him  butexamineanddiligently inspect  the  mat¬ 
ter  and  contents  of  these  books,  and  his  aston¬ 
ishment  will  certainly  change  its  object:  for  when 
he  finds  no  end  of  repetitions,  and  how  much 
men  do  and  speak  the  same  thing  over  again, 
he  will  pass  from  admiration  of  this  variety  to 
astonishment  at  the  poverty  and  scarcity  of  mat¬ 
ter,  which  has  hitherto  possessed  and  filled  men’s 
minds. 

But  if  anyone  should  condescend  to  consider 
such  sciences  as  are  deemed  rather  curious  than 
sound,  and  take  a  full  view  of  the  operations  of 
the  alchemists  or  magi,  he  will  perhaps  hesitate 
whether  he  ought  rather  to  laugh  or  to  weep. 
For  the  alchemist  cherishes  eternal  hope,  and 
whenhislaborssucceednot,  accuseshis  own  mis¬ 
takes,  deeming,  in  his  self-accusation,  that  he 
has  not  properly  understood  the  words  of  art  or 
of  his  authors;  upon  which  he  listens  to  tradi¬ 


tion  and  vague  whispers,  or  imagines  there  is 
some  slight  unsteadiness  in  the  minute  details 
of  his  practice,  and  then  has  recourse  to  an  end¬ 
less  repetition  of  experiments:  and  in  the  mean 
time,  when,  in  his  casual  experiments,  he  falls 
upon  something  in  appearance  new,  or  of  some 
degree  of  utility,  he  consoles  himself  with  such 
an  earnest,  and  ostentatiously  publishes  them, 
keeping  up  his  hope  of  the  final  result.  Nor  can 
it  be  denied  that  the  alchemists  have  made  sev¬ 
eral  discoveries,  and  presented  mankind  with 
useful  inventions.  But  we  may  well  apply  to 
them  the  fable  of  the  old  man,  who  bequeathed 
to  his  sons  some  gold  buried  in  his  garden,  pre¬ 
tending  not  to  know  the  exact  spot,  whereupon 
they  worked  diligently  in  digging  the  vineyard, 
and  though  they  found  no  gold,  the  vintage  was 
rendered  more  abundant  by  their  labor. 

The  followers  of  natural  magic,  who  explain 
everything  by  sympathy  and  antipathy,  have 
assigned  false  powers  and  marvellous  operations 
to  things  by  gratuitous  and  idle  conjectures: 
and  if  they  have  ever  produced  any  effects,  they 
are  rather  wonderful  and  novel  than  of  any  real 
benefit  or  utility. 

In  superstitious  magic  (if  we  say  anything  at 
all  about  it)  we  must  chiefly  observe,  that  there 
are  only  some  peculiar  and  definite  objects  with 
which  the  curious  and  superstitious  arts  have, 
in  every  nation  and  age,  and  even  under  every 
religion,  been  able  to  exercise  and  amuse  them¬ 
selves.  Let  us,  therefore,  pass  them  over.  In  the 
mean  time  we  cannot  wonder  that  the  false  no¬ 
tion  of  plenty  should  have  occasioned  want. 

86.  The  admiration  of  mankind  with  regard 
to  the  arts  and  sciences,  which  is  of  itself  suffi¬ 
ciently  simple  and  almost  puerile,  has  been  in¬ 
creased  by  the  craft  and  artifices  of  those  who 
have  treated  the  sciences,  and  delivered  them 
down  to  posterity.  For  they  propose  and  pro¬ 
duce  them  to  our  view  so  fashioned,  and  as  it 
were  masked,  as  to  make  them  pass  for  perfect 
and  complete.  For  if  you  consider  their  method 
and  divisions,  they  appear  to  embrace  and  com¬ 
prise  everything  which  can  relate  to  the  sub¬ 
ject.  And  although  this  frame  be  badly  filled  up 
and  resemble  an  empty  bladder,  yet  it  presents 
to  the  vulgar  understanding  the  form  and  ap¬ 
pearance  of  a  perfect  science. 

The  first  and  most  ancient  investigators  of 
truth  were  wont,  on  the  contrary,  with  more 
honesty  and  success,  to  throw  all  the  knowledge 
they  wished  to  gather  from  contemplation,  and 
to  lay  up  for  use,  into  aphorisms,  or  short  scat¬ 
tered  sentences  unconnected  by  any  method, 
and  without  pretending  or  professing  to  com- 


FIRST  BOOK 


prehend  any  entire  art.  But  according  to  the 
presentsystem,  wecannot  wonderthat  men  seek 
nothing  beyond  that  which  is  handed  down  to 
them  as  perfect,  and  already  extended  to  its  full 
complement. 

87.  The  ancient  theories  have  received  addi¬ 
tional  support  and  credit  from  the  absurdity 
and  levity  of  those  who  have  promoted  the  new, 
especially  in  the  active  and  practical  part  of  na¬ 
tural  philosophy.  For  there  have  been  many  silly 
and  fantastical  fellows  who,  from  credulity  or 
imposture,  have  loaded  mankind  with  promis¬ 
es,  announcing  and  boasting  of  the  prolonga¬ 
tion  of  life,  the  retarding  of  old  age,  the  allevia¬ 
tion  of  pains,  the  remedying  of  natural  defects, 
the  deception  of  the  senses,  therestraint  and  ex¬ 
citement  of  the  passions,  the  illumination  and 
exaltation  of  the  intellectual  faculties,  the  trans¬ 
mutation  of  substances,  the  unlimited  intensity 
and  multiplication  of  motion,  the  impressions 
and  changes  of  the  air,  the  bringing  into  our 
power  the  management  of  celestial  influences, 
the  divination  of  future  events,  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  distant  objects,  the  revelation  of  hidden 
objects,  and  the  like.  One  would  not  be  very 
wrong  in  observing  with  regard  tosuch  pretend¬ 
ers,  that  there  is  as  much  difference  in  philos¬ 
ophy,  between  their  absurdity  and  real  science, 
as  there  is  in  history  between  the  exploits  of 
Caesar  or  Alexander,  and  those  of  Amadis  de 
Gaul  and  Arthur  of  Britain.  For  those  illustrious 
generals  are  found  to  have  actually  performed 
greater  exploits  than  such  fictitious  heroes  are 
even  pretended  to  have  accomplished,  by  the 
means,  however,  of  real  action,  and  not  by  any 
fabulous  and  portentous  power.  Yet  it  is  not 
right  to  suffer  our  belief  in  true  history  to  be 
diminished,  because  it  is  sometimes  injuredand 
violated  by  fables.  In  the  mean  time  we  cannot 
wonder  that  great  prejudice  has  been  excited 
against  any  new  propositions  (especially  when 
coupled  with  any  mention  of  effects  to  be  pro¬ 
duced),  by  the  conduct  of  impostors  who  have 
made  a  similar  attempt;  for  their  extreme  ab¬ 
surdity,  and  the  disgust  occasioned  by  it,  have 
even  to  this  day  overpowered  every  spirited  at¬ 
tempt  of  the  kind. 

88.  Want  of  energy,  and  the  littleness  and 
futility  of  the  tasks  that  human  industry  has 
undertaken,  have  produced  much  greater  in¬ 
jury  to  the  sciences:  and  yet  (to  make  it  still 
worse)  that  very  want  of  energy  manifests  it¬ 
self  to  conjunction  with  arrogance  and  disdain. 

For,  in  the  first  place,  one  excuse,  now  from 
its  repetition  become  familiar,  is  to  be  observed 
in  every  art,  namely,  that  its  promoters  con¬ 


123 

vert  the  weakness  of  the  art  itself  into  a  cal¬ 
umny  upon  nature:  and  whatever  it  in  theirhands 
fails  to  effect,  they  pronounce  to  be  physically 
impossible.  But  how  can  the  art  ever  be  con¬ 
demned  whilst  it  acts  as  judge  in  its  own  causer 
Even  the  present  system  of  philosophy  cherish¬ 
es  in  its  bosom  certain  positions  or  dogmas,  which 
(it  will  be  found  on  diligent  inquiry)  are  cal¬ 
culated  to  produce  a  full  conviction  that  no  dif¬ 
ficult,  commanding,  andpowerfuloperationup- 
on  nature  ought  to  be  anticipated  through  the 
means  of  art;  we  instanced1  above  the  alleged 
different  quality  of  heat  in  the  sun  and  fire,  and 
composition  and  mixture.  Upon  an  accurate  ob¬ 
servation  the  whole  tendency  of  such  positions 
is  wilfully  to  circumscribe  man’s  power,  and  to 
produce  a  despair  of  the  means  of  invention  and 
contrivance,  which  would  not  only  confound  the 
promises  of  hope,  but  cut  the  very  springs  and 
sinews  of  industry,  and  throw  aside  even  the 
chances  of  experience.  The  only  object  of  such 
philosophers  is  to  acquire  the  reputation  of  per¬ 
fection  for  their  own  art,  and  they  are  anxious 
to  obtain  the  most  silly  and  abandoned  renown, 
by  causing  a  belief  that  whatever  has  not  yet 
been  invented  and  understood  can  never  be  so 
hereafter.  But  if  anyone  attempt  to  give  him¬ 
self  up  to  things,  and  to  discover  something  new, 
yet  he  will  only  propose  and  destine  for  his  ob¬ 
ject  the  investigation  and  discovery ofsome  one 
invention,  and  nothing  more;  as  the  nature  of 
the  magnet,  the  tides,  the  heavenly  system,  and 
the  like,  which  appear  enveloped  in  some  de¬ 
gree  of  mystery,  and  have  hitherto  been  treat¬ 
ed  with  but  little  success.  Now  it  is  the  greatest 
proof  of  want  and  skill,  to  investigate  the  na¬ 
ture  of  any  object  in  itself  alone;  for  that  same 
nature,  which  seems  concealed  and  hidden  in 
some  instances,  is  manifest  and  almost  palpable 
in  others,  and  excites  wonder  in  the  former,  whilst 
it  hardly  attracts  attention  in  the  latter.  Thus 
the  nature  of  consistency  is  scarcely  observed 
in  wood  or  stone,  but  passed  over  by  the  term 
solid  without  any  further  inquiry  about  the  re¬ 
pulsion  of  separation  or  the  solution  of  contin¬ 
uity.  But  in  water-bubbles  the  same  circum¬ 
stance  appears  matter  of  delicate  and  ingen¬ 
ious  research,  for  they  form  themselves  into 
thin  pellicles,  curiously  shaped  into  hemi¬ 
spheres,  so  as  for  an  instant  to  avoid  the  solution 
of  continuity. 

In  general,  those  very  things  which  are  con¬ 
sidered  as  secret  are  manifest  and  common  in 
other  objects,  but  will  never  be  clearly  seen  if 
the  experiments  and  contemplation  of  man  be 
1  See  Axiom  75. 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


124 

directed  to  themselves  only.  Yet  it  commonly 
happens,  that  it,  in  the  mechanical  arts,  anyone 
bring  old  discoveries  to  a  finer  polish,  or  more 
elegant  height  of  ornament,  or  unite  and  com¬ 
pound  them,  or  apply  them  more  readily  to  prac¬ 
tice,  or  exhibit  them  on  a  less  heavy  and  volum¬ 
inous  scale,  and  the  like,  they  will  pass  off  as 
new. 

We  cannot,  therefore,  wonder  that  no  mag¬ 
nificent  discoveries  worthy  ot  mankind,  have 
been  brought  to  light,  whilst  men  are  satisfied 
and  delighted  with  such  scanty  and  puerile  tasks, 
nay,  even  think  that  they  have  pursued  or  at¬ 
tained  some  great  object  in  their  accomplish¬ 
ment. 

89.  Nor  should  we  neglect  to  observe  that  na¬ 
tural  philosophy  has,  in  every  age,  met  with  a 
troublesome  and  difficult  opponent:  I  mean  su¬ 
perstition,  and  a  blind  and  immoderate  zeal  for 
religion.  For  we  see  that,  among  the  Greeks, 
those  who  first  disclosed  the  natural  causes  of 
thunder  and  storms  to  the  yet  untrained  ears 
of  man  were  condemned  as  guilty  of  impiety 
towards  the  gods.  Nor  did  some  of  the  old  fa¬ 
thers  of  Christianity  treat  those  much  better 
who  showed  by  the  most  positive  proofs  (such 
as  no  one  now  disputes)  that  the  earth  is  spher¬ 
ical,  and  thence  asserted  that  there  were  anti¬ 
podes. 

Even  in  the  present  state  of  things  the  con¬ 
dition  of  discussions  on  natural  philosophy  is 
rendered  more  difficult  and  dangerous  by  the 
summaries  and  methods  of  divines,  who,  after 
reducing  divinity  into  such  order  as  they  could 
and  brought  it  into  a  scientific  form,  have  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  mingle  an  undue  proportion  of  the 
contentious  and  thorny  philosophy  of  Aristotle 
with  the  substance  of  religion. 

The  fictions  of  those  who  have  not  feared  to 
deduce  and  confirm  the  truth  of  the  Christian 
religion  by  the  principles  and  authority  of  phi¬ 
losophers,  tend  to  the  same  end,  though  in  a 
different  manner.  They  celebrate  the  union  of 
faith  and  the  senses  as  though  it  were  legiti¬ 
mate,  with  great  pomp  and  solemnity,  and  grat¬ 
ify  men’s  pleasing  minds  with  a  variety,  but  in 
the  mean  timeconfound  most  improperly  things 
div  ine  and  human.  Moreover, in  these  mixtures 
of  divinity  and  philosophy  the  received  doc¬ 
trines  of  the  latter  are  alone  included,  and  any 
novelty,  even  though  it  be  an  improvement, 
scarcely  escapes  banishment  and  extermination. 

In  short,  you  may  find  all  access  to  any  spe¬ 
cies  of  philosophy,  however  pure,  intercepted 
by  the  ignorance  of  div  ines.  Some  in  their  sim¬ 
plicity  are  apprehensive  that  a  too  deep  inquiry 


bounds  of  decorum,  transferring  and  absurdly 
applying  what  is  said  of  sacred  mysteries  in  Holy 
\\  rit  against  those  who  pry  into  divine  secrets, 
to  the  mysteries  of  nature,  which  are  not  for- 
bidden  by  any  prohibition.  Others  with  more 
cunning  imagine  and  consider, thatifsecondary 
causes  be  unknown,  everything  may  more  eas¬ 
ily  be  referred  to  the  Divine  hand  and  wand,  a 
matter,  as  they  think,  of  the  greatest  conse¬ 
quence  to  religion,  but  which  can  only  really 
mean  that  God  wishes  to  be  gratified  by  means 
of  falsehood.  Others  fear,  from  past  example, 
lest  motion  and  change  in  philosophy  should 
terminate  in  an  attack  upon  religion.  Lastly, 
there  are  others  who  appear  anxious  lest  there 
should  be  something  discovered  in  the  invest¬ 
igation  of  nature  to  overthrow,  or  at  least  shake, 
religion,  particularly  among  the  unlearned.  The 
two  last  apprehensions  appear  to  resemble  ani¬ 
mal  instinct,  as  if  men  were  diffident, in  thebot- 
tom  of  their  minds  and  secret  meditations,  of 
the  strength  of  religion  and  the  empire  of  faith 
over  the  senses,  and  therefore  feared  that  some 
danger  awaited  them  from  an  inquiry  into  na¬ 
ture.  But  anyone  who  properly  considers  the 
subject  will  find  natural  philosophy  to  be,  after 
the  Word  of  God,  the  surest  remedy  against 
superstition,  and  the  most  approved  support  of 
faith.  She  is,  therefore,  rightly  bestowed  upon 
religion  as  a  most  faithful  attendant,  fortheone 
exhibits  the  will  and  the  other  the  power  of  God. 
Nor  was  he  wrong  who  observed,  “Ye  err,  not 
knowing  the  Scriptures  and  the  power  of  God,’’ 
thus  uniting  in  one  bond  the  revelation  of  his 
will  and  the  contemplation  of  his  power.  In  the 
mean  while,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  the  pro¬ 
gress  of  natural  philosophy  has  been  restrained, 
since  religion,  which  has  so  much  influence  on 
men’s  minds,  has  been  led  and  hurried  to  op¬ 
pose  her  through  the  ignorance  of  some  and  the 
imprudent  zeal  of  others. 

90.  Again,  in  the  habits  and  regulations  of 
schools,  universities,  and  the  like  assemblies, 
destined  for  the  abode  of  learned  men  and  the 
improvement  of  learning,  everything  is  found 
to  be  opposed  to  the  progress  of  the  sciences; 
for  the  lectures  and  exercises  are  so  ordered, 
that  anything  out  of  the  common  track  can 
scarcely  enterthe  thoughts  and  contemplations 
of  the  mind.  If,  however,  one  or  two  have  per¬ 
haps  dared  to  use  their  liberty,  they  can  only 
impose  the  labor  on  themselves,  without  deriv¬ 
ing  any  advantage  from  the  association  of  oth¬ 
ers;  and  if  they  put  up  with  this,  they  will  find 
their  industry  and  spirit  of  no  slight  disadvan- 


FIRST  BOOK 


tage  to  them  in  making  their  fortune;  for  the 
pursuits  of  men  in  such  situations  are,  as  it  were, 
chained  down  to  the  writings  of  particular  au¬ 
thors,  and  if  anyone  dare  to  dissent  from  them 
he  is  immediately  attacked  as  a  turbulent  and 
revolutionary  spirit.  Yet  how  great  is  thediffer- 
ence  between  civil  matters  and  the  arts,  for  there 
is  not  the  same  danger  from  new  activity  and 
new  light.  In  civil  matters  even  a  change  for 
the  better  is  suspected  on  account  of  the  com¬ 
motion  it  occasions,  for  civil  government  is  sup¬ 
ported  by  authority,  unanimity,  fame,  and  pub¬ 
lic  opinion,  and  not  by  demonstration.  In  the 
arts  and  sciences,  on  the  contrary,  every  de¬ 
partment  should  resound,  as  in  mines,  with  new 
works  and  advances.  And  this  is  the  rational, 
though  not  the  actual  view  of  the  case,  for  that 
administration  and  government  of  science  we 
have  spoken  of  is  wont  too  rigorously  to  repress 
its  growth. 

91.  And  even  should  the  odium  I  have  allud¬ 
ed  to  be  avoided,  yet  it  is  sufficient  to  repress 
the  increase  of  science  that  such  attempts  and 
industry  pass  unrewarded;  for  the  cultivation 
of  science  and  its  reward  belong  not  to  the  same 
individual.  The  advancement  of  science  is  the 
work  of  a  powerful  genius,  the  prize  and  reward 
belong  to  the  vulgar  or  to  princes,  who  (with  a 
few  exceptions)  are  scarcely  moderately  well  in¬ 
formed.  Nay,  such  progress  is  not  only  depriv¬ 
ed  of  the  rewards  and  beneficence  of  individuals, 
but  even  of  popular  praise;  for  it  is  above  the 
reach  of  the  generality,  and  easily  overwhelmed 
and  extinguished  by  the  winds  of  common 
opinions.  It  is  not  wonderful,  therefore,  that  lit¬ 
tle  success  has  attended  that  which  has  been 
little  honored. 

92.  But  by  far  the  greatest  obstacle  to  the  ad¬ 
vancement  of  the  sciences,  and  the  undertak¬ 
ing  of  any  new  attempt  or  department,  is  to  be 
found  in  men's  despair  and  the  idea  of  impos¬ 
sibility;  for  men  of  a  prudent  and  exact  turn  of 
thought  are  altogether  diffident  in  matters  of 
this  nature,  considering  the  obscurity  ofnature, 
the  shortness  of  life,  the  deception  of  thesenses, 
and  weakness  of  the  judgment.  They  think,  there¬ 
fore,  that  in  the  revolutions  of  ages  and  of  the 
world  there  are  certain  floods  and  ebbs  of  the 
sciences,  and  that  they  grow  and  flourish  at  one 
time,  and  wither  and  fall  off  at  another,  that 
when  they  have  attained  a  certain  degree  and 
condition  they  can  proceed  no  further. 

If, therefore, any  one  believe  or  promise  great¬ 
er  things,  they  impute  it  to  an  uncurbed  and 
immature  mind,  and  imagine  that  such  efforts 
begin  pleasantly,  then  become  laborious,  and 


125 

end  in  confusion.  And  since  such  thoughts  eas¬ 
ily  enter  the  minds  of  men  of  dignity  and  ex¬ 
cellent  judgment,  we  must  really  take  heed  lest 
we  should  be  captivated  by  our  affection  for  an 
excellent  and  most  beautiful  object,  and  relax 
or  diminish  the  severity  of  our  judgment;  and 
we  must  diligently  examine  what  gleam  of  hope 
shines  upon  us,  and  in  what  direction  it  mani- 
festsitselfjSo  that,  banishing  her  lighter  dreams, 
we  may  discuss  and  weigh  whatever  appears  of 
more  sound  importance.  We  must  consult  the 
prudence  of  ordinary  life,  too,  which  is  diffident 
upon  principle,  and  in  all  human  matters  au¬ 
gurs  the  worst.  Let  us,  then,  speak  of  hope,  es¬ 
pecially  as  we  are  not  vain  promisers,  nor  are 
willing  to  enforce  or  ensnare  men’s  judgment, 
but  would  rather  lead  them  willingly  forward. 
And  although  we  shall  employ  the  most  cogent 
means  of  enforcing  hope  when  we  bring  them 
to  particulars,  and  especially  those  which  are 
digested  and  arranged  in  our  tablesofinvention 
(the  subject  partly  of  the  second,  but  princi¬ 
pally  of  the  fourth  part  of  the  instauration), 
which  are,  indeed,  rather  the  very  object  of  our 
hopes  than  hope  itself;  yet  to  proceed  more  len¬ 
iently  we  must  treat  of  the  preparationofmen’s 
minds,  of  which  the  manifestation  of  hope  forms 
no  slight  part;  for  without  it  all  that  we  have 
said  tends  rather  to  produce  a  gloom  than  to 
encourage  activity  or  quicken  the  industry  of 
experiment,  by  causing  them  to  have  a  worse 
and  more  contemptuous  opinion  of  things  as 
they  are  than  they  now  entertain,  and  to  per¬ 
ceive  and  feel  more  thoroughly  their  unfortu¬ 
nate  condition.  Wemust,  therefore,  disclose  and 
prefix  our  reasons  for  not  thinking  the  hope  of 
success  improbable,  as  Columbus,  before  his 
wonderful  voyage  over  the  Atlantic,  gave  rea¬ 
sons  of  his  conviction  that  new  lands  and  con¬ 
tinents  might  be  discovered  besides  those  al¬ 
ready  known;  and  these  reasons,  though  at  first 
rejected,  were  yet  proved  by  subsequent  ex¬ 
perience,  and  were  the  causes  and  beginnings  of 
the  greatest  events. 

93.  Let  us  begin  from  God,  and  show  that 
our  pursuit  from  its  exceeding  goodness  clearly 
proceeds  from  him,  the  Author  of  good  and  Fa¬ 
ther  of  light.  Now,  in  all  divine  works  the  small¬ 
est  beginnings  lead  assuredly  to  some  result,  and 
the  remark  in  spiritual  matters  that  “the  king¬ 
dom  of  God  cometh  without  observation,”  is 
also  found  to  be  true  in  every  great  work  of  Di¬ 
vine  Providence,  so  that  everything  glides  quiet¬ 
ly  on  without  confusion  or  noise,  and  the  mat¬ 
ter  is  achieved  before  men  either  think  or  per¬ 
ceive  that  it  is  commenced.  Nor  should  we  ne- 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


126 

gleet  to  mention  the  prophecy  of  Daniel,  of  the 
last  days  of  the  world,  “Many  shall  run  to  and 
fro,  and  knowledge  shall  be  increased,”1  thus 
plainly  hinting  and  suggesting  that  fate  (which 
is  Providence)  would  cause  the  complete  cir¬ 
cuit  of  the  globe  (now  accomplished,  or  at  least 
going  forward  by  means  of  so  many  distant 
voyages),  and  the  increase  of  learning  to  happen 
at  the  same  epoch. 

94.  We  will  next  give  a  most  potent  reason 
for  hope  deduced  from  the  errors  of  the  past, 
and  the  ways  still  unattempted;  for  well  was  an 
ill-governed  state  thus  reproved,  “That  which 
is  worst  with  regard  to  the  past  should  appear 
most  consolatory  for  the  future;  for  if  you  had 
done  all  that  your  duty  commanded,  and  your 
affairs  proceeded  no  better,  you  could  not  even 
hope  for  their  improvement ;  but  since  their  pres¬ 
ent  unhappy  situation  is  not  owing  to  the  force  of 
circumstances,  but  to  your  own  errors,  you  have 
reason  to  hope  that  by  banishing  or  correcting 
the  latter  you  can  produce  a  great  change  for  the 
better  in  the  former.”  So  if  men  had,  during  the 
many  years  that  have  elapsed,  adhered  to  the 
right  way  of  discovering  and  cultivating  the  sci¬ 
ences  without  being  able  to  advance,  it  would 
be  assuredly  bold  and  presumptuous  to  imagine 
it  possible  to  improve;  but  if  they  have  mis¬ 
taken  the  way  and  wasted  their  labor  on  im¬ 
proper  objects,  it  follows  that  the  difficulty  does 
not  arise  from  things  themselves,  which  are  not 
in  our  power,  but  from  the  human  understand¬ 
ing,  its  practice  and  application,  which  is  sus¬ 
ceptible  of  remedy  and  correction.  Our  best  plan, 
therefore,  is  to  expose  these  errors;  for  in  pro¬ 
portion  as  they  impeded  the  past,  so  do  they 
afFord  reason  to  hope  for  the  future.  And  al¬ 
though  we  have  touched  upon  them  above,  yet 
we  think  it  right  to  give  a  brief,  bare,  and  simple 
enumeration  of  them  in  this  place. 

95.  Those  who  have  treated  of  the  sciences 
have  been  either  empirics  or  dogmatical.  The 
former  like  ants  only  heap  up  and  use  their  store, 
the  latter  like  spiders  spin  out  their  own  webs. 
The  bee,  a  mean  between  both,  extracts  matter 
from  the  flowers  of  the  garden  and  the  field, 
but  works  and  fashions  it  by  its  own  efforts. 
The  true  labor  of  philosophy  resembles  hers,  for 
it  neither  relies  entirely  nor  principally  on  the 
powers  of  the  mind,  nor  yet  lays  up  in  the  mem¬ 
ory  the  matter  afforded  by  the  experiments  of 
natural  history  and  mechanics  in  its  raw  state, 
but  changes  and  works  it  in  the  understanding. 
We  have  good  reason,  therefore,  to  derive  hope 
from  a  closer  and  purer  alliance  of  these  facul- 

1  Daniel  12.  4. 


ties  (the  experimental  and  rational)  than  has 
yet  been  attempted. 

96.  Natural  philosophy  is  not  yet  to  be  found 
unadulterated,  but  is  impure  and  corrupted — 
by  logic  in  the  school  of  Aristotle,  by  natural 
theology  in  that  of  Plato,  by  mathematics  in  the 
second  school  of  Plato  (that  of  Proclus  and  oth¬ 
ers)  which  ought  rather  to  terminate  natural 
philosophy  than  to  generate  or  create  it.  We 
may,  therefore,  hope  for  better  results  from  pure 
and  unmixed  natural  philosophy. 

97.  No  one  has  yet  been  found  possessed  of 
sufficient  firmness  and  severity  to  resolve  upon 
and  undertake  the  task  of  entirely  abolishing 
common  theories  and  notions,  and  applying  the 
mind  afresh,  when  thus  cleared  and  leveled,  to 
particular  researches;  hence  our  human  reason¬ 
ing  is  a  mere  farrago  and  crude  mass  made  up 
of  a  great  deal  of  credulity  and  accident,  and 
the  puerile  notions  it  originally  contracted. 

But  if  a  man  of  mature  age,  unprejudiced  sen¬ 
ses,  and  clear  mind,  would  betake  himself  anew 
to  experience  and  particulars,  we  might  hope 
much  more  from  such  a  one;  in  which  respect 
we  promise  ourselves  the  fortune  of  Alexander 
the  Great,  and  let  none  accuse  us  of  vanity  till 
they  have  heard  the  tale,  which  is  intended  to 
check  vanity. 

For  /Eschines  spoke  thus  of  Alexander  and 
his  exploits:  “We  live  not  the  life  of  mortals, 
but  are  born  at  such  a  period  that  posterity  will 
relate  and  declare  our  prodigies”;  as  if  he  con¬ 
sidered  the  exploits  of  Alexander  to  be  miracu¬ 
lous. 

But  in  succeeding  ages  Livy  took  a  better 
view  of  the  fact,  and  has  made  some  such  ob¬ 
servation  as  this  upon  Alexander:  “That  he  did 
no  more  than  dare  to  despise  insignificance.” 
So  in  our  opinion  posterity  will  judge  of  us,  that 
we  have  achieved  no  great  matters,  but  only 
set  less  account  upon  what  is  considered  im¬ 
portant;  for  the  mean  time  (as  we  have  before 
observed)  our  only  hope  is  in  the  regeneration 
of  the  sciences,  by  regularly  raising  them  on  the 
foundation  of  experience  and  building  them 
anew,  which  I  think  none  can  venture  to  affirm 
to  have  been  already  done  or  even  thought  of. 

98.  The  foundations  of  experience  (our  sole 
resource)  have  hitherto  failed  completely  or  have 
been  very  weak;  nor  has  a  store  and  collection 
of  particular  facts,  capable  of  informing  the 
mind  or  in  any  way  satisfactory,  been  either 
sought  after  or  amassed.  On  the  contrary, 
learned,  but  idle  and  indolent,  men  have  re¬ 
ceived  some  mere  reports  of  experience,  tradi¬ 
tions  as  it  were  of  dreams,  as  establishing  or 


FIRST  BOOK 


confirming  their  philosophy,  and  have  not  hesi¬ 
tated  to  allow  them  the  weight  of  legitimate 
evidence.  So  that  a  system  has  been  pursued  in 
philosophy  with  regard  to  experience  resem¬ 
bling  that  of  a  kingdom  or  state  which  would  di¬ 
rect  its  councils  and  affairs  according  to  the  gos¬ 
sip  of  city  and  street  politicians,  instead  of  the 
letters  and  reports  of  ambassadors  and  messen¬ 
gers  worthy  of  credit. Nothing  is  rightly  inquired 
into,  or  verified,  noted,  weighed,  or  measured,  in 
natural  history;  indefinite  and  vague  observa¬ 
tion  produces  fallacious  and  uncertain  informa¬ 
tion.  If  this  appear  strange,  or  our  complaint 
somewhat  too  unjust  ( because  Aristotle  himself, 
so  distinguished  a  man  and  supported  by  the 
wealth  of  so  great  a  king,  has  completed  an 
accurate  history  of  animals,  to  which  others  with 
greater  diligence  but  less  noise  have  made  con¬ 
siderable  additions, and  others  again  have  com¬ 
posed  copious  histories  and  notices  of  plants, 
metals,  and  fossils),  it  will  arise  from  a  want  of 
sufficiently  attending  to  and  comprehending 
our  present  observations;  for  a  natural  history 
compiled  on  its  own  account,  and  one  collected 
for  the  mind’s  information  as  a  foundation  for 
philosophy,  are  two  different  things.  They  dif¬ 
fer  in  several  respects,  but  principally  in  this: 
the  former  contains  only  the  varieties  of  na¬ 
tural  species  without  the  experiments  of  me¬ 
chanical  arts;  for  as  in  ordinary  life  every  per¬ 
son’s  disposition,  and  the  concealed  feelings  of 
the  mind  and  passions  are  most  drawn  out  when 
they  are  disturbed — so  the  secrets  of  nature  be¬ 
tray  themselves  more  readily  when  tormented 
by  art  than  when  left  to  their  own  course.  We 
must  begin,  therefore,  to  entertain  hopes  of  na¬ 
tural  philosophy  then  only,  when  we  have  a 
better  compilation  of  natural  history,  its  real 
basis  and  support. 

99.  Again,  even  in  the  abundance  of  mechan¬ 
ical  experiments,  there  is  a  very  great  scarcity 
of  those  which  best  inform  and  assist  the  under¬ 
standing.  For  the  mechanic,  little  solicitous 
about  the  investigation  of  truth,  neither  directs 
his  attention,  nor  applies  his  hand  to  anything 
that  is  not  of  service  to  his  business.  But  our 
hope  of  further  progress  in  the  sciences  will  then 
only  be  well  founded,  when  numerous  experi¬ 
ments  shall  be  received  and  collected  into  nat¬ 
ural  history,  which,  though  of  no  use  in  them¬ 
selves,  assist  materially  in  the  discovery  of 
causes  and  axioms;  which  experiments  we 
have  termed  enlightening,  to  distinguish  them 
from  those  which  are  profitable.  They  possess 
this  wonderful  property  and  nature,  that  they 
never  deceive  or  fail  you;  for  being  used  only 


127 

to  discover  the  natural  cause  of  some  object, 
whatever  be  the  result,  they  equally  satisfy  your 
aim  by  deciding  the  question. 

100.  We  must  not  only  search  for,  and  pro¬ 
cure  a  greater  number  of  experiments,  but  also 
introduce  a  completely  different  method,  order, 
and  progress  of  continuing  and  promoting  ex¬ 
perience.  For  vague  and  arbitrary  experience  is 
(as  we  have  observed)  mere  groping  in  the  dark, 
and  rather  astonishes  than  instructs.  But  when 
experience  shall  proceed  regularly  and  uninter¬ 
ruptedly  by  a  determined  rule,  we  may  enter¬ 
tain  better  hopes  of  the  sciences. 

101.  But  after  having  collected  and  prepared 
an  abundance  and  store  of  natural  history,  and 
of  the  experience  required  for  the  operations  of 
the  understanding  or  philosophy,  still  the  under¬ 
standing  is  as  incapable  of  acting  on  such  ma¬ 
terials  of  itself,  with  the  aid  of  memory  alone, 
as  any  person  would  be  of  retaining  and  achiev¬ 
ing,  by  memory,  the  computation  of  an  almanac. 
Yet  meditation  has  hitherto  done  more  for  dis¬ 
covery  than  writing,  and  no  experiments  have 
been  committed  to  paper.  We  cannot,  however, 
approve  of  any  mode  of  discovery  without 
writing,  and  when  that  comes  into  more  general 
use,  we  may  have  further  hopes. 

102.  Besides  this,  there  is  such  a  multitude 
and  host,  as  it  were,  of  particular  objects,  and 
lying  so  widely  dispersed,  as  to  distract  and 
confuse  the  understanding;  and  we  can,  there¬ 
fore,  hope  for  no  advantage  from  its  skirmish¬ 
ing,  and  quick  movements  and  incursions,  unless 
we  put  its  forces  in  due  order  and  array,  by 
means  of  proper  and  well  arranged,  and,  as  it 
were,  living  tables  of  discovery  of  these  mat¬ 
ters,  which  are  the  subject  of  investigation,  and 
the  mind  then  apply  itself  to  the  ready  prepared 
and  digested  aid  which  such  tables  afford. 

103.  When  we  have  thus  properly  and  reg¬ 
ularly  placed  before  the  eyes  a  collection  of  par¬ 
ticulars,  we  must  not  immediately  proceed  to 
the  investigation  and  discovery  of  new  particu¬ 
lars  or  effects,  or,  at  least,  if  we  do  so,  must  not 
rest  satisfied  therewith.  For,  though  we  do  not 
deny  that  by  transferring  the  experiments  from 
one  art  to  another  (when  all  the  experiments  of 
each  have  been  collected  and  arranged,  and 
have  been  acquired  by  the  knowledge,  and 
subjected  to  the  judgment  of  a  single  individ¬ 
ual),  many  new  experiments  may  be  discov¬ 
ered  tending  to  benefit  society  and  mankind, 
by  what  we  term  literate  experience;  yet  com¬ 
paratively  insignificant  results  are  to  be  expec¬ 
ted  thence,  whilst  the  more  important  are  to 
be  derived  from  the  new  light  of  axioms,  deduced 


128 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


by  certain  method  and  rule  from  the  above  par¬ 
ticulars,  and  pointing  out  and  defining  new 
particulars  in  their  turn.  Our  road  is  not  a  long 
plain,  but  rises  and  falls,  ascending  to  axioms, 
and  descending  to  effects. 

104.  Nor  can  we  suffer  the  understanding  to 
jump  and  fly  from  particulars  to  remote  and 
most  general  axioms  (such  as  are  termed  the 
principles  of  arts  and  things),  and  thus  prove 
and  make  out  their  intermediate  axioms  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  supposed  unshaken  truth  of  the  for¬ 
mer.  This,  however,  has  always  been  done  to 
the  present  time  from  the  natural  bent  of  the 
understanding,  educated  too,  and  accustomed 
to  this  very  method,  by  the  syllogistic  mode  of 
demonstration.  But  we  can  then  only  augur  well 
for  the  sciences,  when  the  ascent  shall  proceed 
by  a  true  scale  and  successive  steps,  without 
interruption  or  breach,  from  particulars  to  the 
lesser  axioms,  thence  to  the  intermediate  (rising 
one  above  the  other),  and  lastly,  to  the  most 
general.  For  the  lowest  axioms  differ  but  little 
from  bare  experiments;  the  highest  and  most 
general  (as  they  are  esteemed  at  present),  are 
notional,  abstract,  and  of  no  real  weight.  The 
intermediate  are  true,  solid,  full  of  life,  and  up¬ 
on  them  depend  the  business  and  fortune  of 
mankind;  beyond  these  are  the  really  general, 
but  not  abstract,  axioms,  which  are  truly  lim¬ 
ited  by  the  intermediate. 

We  must  not  then  add  wings,  but  rather  lead 
and  ballast  to  the  understanding,  to  prevent  its 
jumping  or  flying,  which  has  not  yet  been  done; 
but  whenever  this  takes  place,  we  may  enter¬ 
tain  greater  hopes  of  the  sciences. 

105.  In  forming  axioms,  we  must  invent  a 
different  form  of  induction  from  that  hitherto 
in  use;  not  only  for  the  proof  and  discovery  of 
principles  (as  they  are  called),  but  also  of  min¬ 
or,  intermediate,  and,  in  short,  every  kind  of 
axioms.  The  induction  which  proceeds  by  simple 
enumeration  is  puerile,  leads  to  uncertain  con¬ 
clusions,  and  is  exposed  to  danger  from  one  con¬ 
tradictory  instance,  deciding  generally  from  too 
small  a  number  of  facts,  and  those  only  the  most 
obvious.  But  a  really  useful  induction  for  the 
discovery  and  demonstration  of  the  arts  and  sci¬ 
ences,  should  separate  nature  by  proper  rejec¬ 
tions  and  exclusions,  and  then  conclude  for  the 
affirmative,  after  collecting  a  sufficient  number 
of  negatives.  Now  this  has  not  been  done,  nor 
even  attempted,  except  perhaps  by  Plato,  who 
certainly  uses  this  form  of  induction  in  some 
measure,  to  sift  definitions  and  ideas.  But  much 
ot  what  has  never  yet  entered  the  thoughts  of 
man  must  necessarily  be  employed,  in  order  to 


exhibit  a  good  and  legitimate  mode  of  induction 
or  demonstration,  so  as  even  to  render  it  essen¬ 
tial  for  us  to  bestow  more  pains  upon  it  than 
have  hitherto  been  bestowed  on  syllogisms.  The 
assistance  of  induction  is  to  serve  us  not  onlv 
in  the  discovery  of  axioms,  but  also  in  defining 
our  notions.  Much  indeed  is  to  be  hoped  from 
such  an  induction  as  has  been  described. 

106.  In  forming  our  axioms  from  induction, 
we  must  examine  and  try  whether  the  axiom 
we  derive  be  only  fitted  and  calculated  for  the 
particular  instances  from  which  it  is  deduced, 
or  whether  it  be  more  extensive  and  general.  If 
it  be  the  latter,  we  must  observe,  whether  it  con¬ 
firm  its  own  extent  and  generality  by  giving 
surety,  as  it  were,  in  pointing  out  new  particu¬ 
lars,  so  that  we  may  neither  stop  at  actual  dis¬ 
coveries,  nor  with  a  careless  grasp  catch  at  shad¬ 
ows  and  abstract  forms,  instead  of  substances 
of  a  determinate  nature:  and  as  soon  as  we  act 
thus,  well  authorized  hope  may  with  reason,  be 
said  to  beam  upon  us. 

107.  Here,  too,  we  may  again  repeat  what  we 
have  said  above,  concerning  the  extending  of 
natural  philosophy  and  reducing  particular  sci¬ 
ences  to  that  one,  so  as  to  prevent  any  schism 
or  dismembering  of  the  sciences;  without  which 
we  cannot  hope  to  advance. 

108.  Such  are  theobservations  we  would  make 
in  order  to  remove  despair  and  excite  hope,  by 
bidding  farewell  to  the  errors  of  past  ages,  or 
by  their  correction.  Let  us  examine  whether 
there  be  other  grounds  for  hope.  And,  first,  if 
many  useful  discoveries  have  occurred  to  man¬ 
kind  by  chance  or  opportunity,  without  inves¬ 
tigation  or  attention  on  their  part,  it  must  nec¬ 
essarily  be  acknowledged  that  much  more  may 
be  brought  to  light  by  investigation  and  atten¬ 
tion,  if  it  be  regular  and  orderly,  not  hasty  and 
interrupted.  For  although  it  may  now  and  then 
happen  that  one  falls  by  chance  upon  something 
that  had  before  escaped  considerable  efforts  and 
laborious  inquiries,  yet  undoubtedly  the  reverse 
is  generally  the  case.  We  may,  therefore,  hope 
for  further,  better,  and  more  frequent  results 
from  man’s  reason,  industry,  method,  and  ap¬ 
plication,  than  from  chance  and  mere  animal 
instinct,  and  the  like,  which  have  hitherto  been 
the  sources  of  invention. 

109.  We  may  also  derive  some  reason  for  hope 
from  the  circumstance  of  several  actual  inven¬ 
tions  being  of  such  a  nature,  that  scarcely  any 
one  could  have  formed  a  conjecture  about  them 
previously  to  their  discovery,  but  would  rather 
have  ridiculed  them  as  impossible.  For  men  are 
wont  to  guess  about  new  subjects  from  those 


FIRST 

rhey  are  already  acquainted  with,  and  the  hasty 
and  vitiated  fancies  they  have  thence  formed: 
than  which  there  cannot  be  a  more  fallacious 
mode  of  reasoning,  because  much  of  that  which 
is  derived  from  the  sources  of  things  does  not 
flow  in  their  usual  channel. 

If,  for  instance,  before  the  discovery  of  can¬ 
non,  one  had  described  its  effects  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  manner:  There  is  a  new  invention  by  which 
walls  and  the  greatest  bulwarks  can  be  shaken 
and  overthrown  from  a  considerable  distance; 
men  would  have  begun  to  contrive  various  means 
of  multiplying  the  force  of  projectiles  and  ma¬ 
chines  by  means  of  weights  and  wheels,  and 
other  modes  of  battering  and  projecting.  But 
it  is  improbable  that  any  imagination  or  fancy 
would  have  hit  upon  a  fiery  blast,  expanding 
and  developing  itself  so  suddenly  and  violently, 
because  none  would  have  seen  an  instance  at 
all  resembling  it,  except  perhaps  in  earthquakes 
or  thunder,  which  they  would  have  i  mmediately 
rejected  as  the  great  operations  of  nature,  not 
to  be  imitated  by  man. 

So,  if  before  the  discovery  of  silk  thread,  any 
one  had  observed,  That  a  species  of  thread  had 
been  discovered,  fit  for  dresses  and  furniture, 
far  surpassing  the  thread  of  worsted  or  flax  in 
fineness,  and  at  the  same  time  in  tenacity,  beau¬ 
ty,  and  softness;  men  would  have  begun  to  im¬ 
agine  something  about  Chinese  plants,  or  the 
fine  hair  of  some  animals,  or  the  feathers  or  down 
of  birds,  but  certainly  would  never  have  had  an 
idea  of  its  being  spun  by  a  small  worm,  in  so 
copious  a  manner,  and  renewed  annually.  But 
if  anyone  had  ventured  to  suggest  the  silkworm, 
he  would  have  been  laughed  at  as  if  dreaming 
of  some  new  manufacture  from  spiders. 

So  again,  if  before  the  discovery  of  the  com¬ 
pass,  any  one  had  said,  That  an  instrument  had 
been  invented,  by  which  the  quarters  and  points 
of  the  heavens  could  be  exactly  taken  and  dis¬ 
tinguished,  men  would  have  entered  into  dis¬ 
quisitions  on  the  refinement  of  astronomical  in¬ 
struments,  and  the  like,  from  the  excitement  of 
their  imaginations;  but  the  thought  of  anything 
being  discovered,  which,  not  being  a  celestial 
body,  but  a  mere  mineral  or  metallic  substance, 
should  yet  in  its  motion  agree  with  that  of  such 
bodies,  would  have  appeared  absolutely  incred¬ 
ible.  Yet  were  these  facts,  and  thelike  (unknown 
for  so  many  ages)  not  discovered  at  last  either 
by  philosophy  or  reasoning,  but  by  chance  and 
opportunity;  and  (as  we  have  observed),  they 
are  of  a  nature  most  heterogeneous,  and  remote 
from  what  was  hitherto  known,  so  that  no  pre¬ 
vious  knowledge  could  lead  to  them. 


BOOK  129 

We  may,  therefore,  well  hope  that  many  ex¬ 
cellent  and  useful  matters  are  yet  treasured  up 
in  the  bosom  of  nature,  bearing  no  relation  or 
analogy  to  our  actual  discoveries,  but  out  of  the 
common  track  of  our  imagination,  and  still  un¬ 
discovered,  and  which  will  doubtless  be  brought 
to  light  in  the  course  and  lapse  of  years,  as  the 
others  have  been  before  them;  but  in  the  way 
we  now  point  out,  they  may  rapidly  and  at  once 
be  both  represented  and  anticipated. 

no.  There  are,  moreover,  some  inventions 
which  render  it  probable  that  men  may  pass 
and  hurry  over  the  most  noble  discoveries  which 
lie  immediately  before  him.  For  however  the 
discovery  of  gunpowder,  silk,  the  compass,  sug¬ 
ar,  paper,  or  the  like,  may  appear  to  depend 
on  peculiar  properties  of  things  and  nature, 
printing  at  least  involves  no  contrivance  which 
is  not  clear  and  almost  obvious.  But  from  want 
of  observing  that  although  the  arrangement  of 
the  types  of  letters  required  more  trouble  than 
writing  with  the  hand,  yet  these  types  once  ar¬ 
ranged  serve  for  innumerable  impressions, 
whilst  manuscript  only  affords  one  copy;  and 
again,  from  want  of  observing  that  ink  might 
be  thickened  so  as  to  stain  without  running 
(which  was  necessary,  seeing  the  letters  face 
upwards,  and  the  impression  is  made  from 
above),  this  most  beautiful  invention  (which 
assists  so  materially  the  propagation  of  learn¬ 
ing)  remained  unknown  for  so  many  ages. 

The  human  mind  is  often  so  awkward  and 
ill-regulated  in  the  career  of  invention  that  it 
is  at  first  diffident,  and  then  despises  itself.  For 
it  appears  at  first  incredible  that  any  such  dis¬ 
covery  should  be  made,  and  when  it  has  been 
made,  it  appears  incredible  that  it  should  so 
long  have  escaped  men’s  research.  All  which  af¬ 
fords  good  reason  for  the  hope  that  a  vast  mass 
of  inventions  yet  remains,  which  may  be  de¬ 
duced  not  only  from  the  investigation  of  new 
modes  of  operation,  but  also  from  transferring, 
comparing,  and  applying  these  already  known, 
by  the  method  of  what  we  have  termed  literate 
experience. 

in.  Nor  should  we  omit  another  ground  of 
hope.  Let  men  only  consider  (if  they  will)  their 
infinite  expenditureof  talent,  time,  and  fortune, 
in  matters  and  studies  of  far  inferior  importance 
and  value;  a  small  portion  of  which  applied  to 
sound  and  solid  learning  would  be  sufficient  to 
overcome  every  difficulty.  And  we  have  thought 
right  to  add  this  observation,  because  we  can¬ 
didly  own  that  such  a  collection  of  natural  and 
experimental  history  as  we  have  traced  in  our 
own  mind,  and  as  is  really  necessary,  is  a  great 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


13° 

and,  as  it  were,  royal  work,  requiring  much  la¬ 
bor  and  expense. 

1 12.  In  the  mean  time  let  no  one  be  alarmed 
at  the  multitude  of  particulars,  but  rather  in¬ 
clined  to  hope  on  that  very  account.  For  the 
particular  phenomena  of  the  arts  and  nature 
are  in  reality  but  as  a  handful,  when  compared 
with  the  fictions  of  the  imagination  removed 
and  separated  from  the  evidence  of  facts.  The 
termination  of  our  method  is  clear,  and  I  had 
almost  said  near  at  hand;  the  other  admits  of 
no  termination,  but  only  of  infinite  confusion. 
Formen  have  hithertodwelt  but  little,  orrather 
only  slightly  touched  upon  experience,  whilst 
they  have  wasted  much  time  on  theories  and 
the  fictions  of  the  imagination.  If  we  had  but 
anyone  who  could  actually  answer  our  interro- 
gationsof  nature,  the  invention  of  all  causes  and 
sciences  would  be  the  labor  of  but  a  few  years. 

1 13.  We  think  some  ground  of  hope  is  afford¬ 
ed  by  our  own  example,  which  is  not  mentioned 
for  the  sake  of  boasting,  but  as  a  useful  remark. 
Let  those  who  distrust  their  own  powers  observe 
myself,  one  who  have  amongst  my  contempo¬ 
raries  been  the  most  engaged  in  public  business, 
who  am  not  very  strong  in  health  (which  causes 
a  great  loss  of  time),  and  am  the  first  explorer 
of  this  course,  following  the  guidance  of  none, 
nor  even  communicating  my  thoughts  to  a  sin¬ 
gle  individual;  yet  having  once  firmly  entered 
in  the  right  way,  and  submitting  the  powers  of 
my  mind  to  things,  I  have  somewhat  advanced 
(as  I  make  bold  to  think)  the  matter  I  now  treat 
of.  Then  let  others  consider  what  may  be  hoped 
from  men  who  enjoy  abundant  leisure,  from 
united  labors,  and  the  succession  of  ages,  after 
these  suggestions  on  our  part,  especially  in  a 
course  which  is  not  confined,  like  theories,  to 
individuals,  but  admits  of  the  best  distribution 
and  union  of  labor  and  effect,  particularly  in 
collecting  experiments.  For  men  will  then  only 
begin  to  know  their  own  power,  when  each  per¬ 
forms  a  separate  part,  instead  of  undertaking 
in  crowds  the  same  work. 

1 14.  Lastly,  though  a  much  more  faint  and 
uncertain  breeze  of  hope  were  to  spring  up  from 
our  new  continent,  yet  we  consider  it  necessary 
to  make  the  experiment,  if  we  would  not  show 
a  dastard  spirit.  For  the  risk  attending  want  of 
success  is  not  to  be  compared  with  that  of  neg¬ 
lecting  the  attempt;  the  former  is  attended  with 
the  loss  of  a  little  human  labor,  the  latter  with 
that  of  an  immense  benefit.  For  these  and  other 
reasons  it  appears  to  us  that  there  is  abundant 
ground  to  hope,  and  to  induce  not  only  those 
who  are  sanguine  to  make  experiment,  but  even 


those  who  are  cautious  and  sober  to  give  their 
assent. 

1 1 5.  Such  are  the  grounds  for  banishing  des¬ 
pair,  hitherto  one  of  the  most  powerful  causes 
of  the  delay  and  restraint  to  which  the  sciences 
have  been  subjected;  in  treating  of  which  we 
have  at  the  same  time  discussed  the  signs  and 
causes  of  the  errors,  idleness,  and  ignorance, 
that  have  prevailed;  seeing  especially  that  the 
more  refined  causes,  which  are  not  open  to 
popular  judgment  and  observation,  may  be 
referred  to  our  remarks  on  the  idols  of  the  hu¬ 
man  mind. 

Here,  too,  we  should  close  the  demolishing 
branch  of  our  instauration,  which  is  comprised 
in  three  confutations:  1,  the  confutation  of  na¬ 
tural  human  reason  left  to  itself;  2  the  confu¬ 
tation  of  demonstration;  3,  the  confutation  of 
theories,  or  received  systems  of  philosophy  and 
doctrines.  Our  confutation  has  followed  such  a 
course  as  was  open  to  it,  namely,  the  exposing 
of  the  signs  of  error,  and  the  producing  evidence 
of  the  causes  of  it;  for  we  could  adopt  no  other, 
differing  as  we  do  both  in  first  principles  and 
demonstrations  from  others. 

It  is  time  for  us  therefore  to  come  to  the  art 
itself,  and  the  rule  for  the  interpretation  of  na¬ 
ture:  there  is,  however,  still  something  which 
must  not  be  passed  over.  For  the  intent  of  this 
first  book  of  aphorisms  being  to  prepare  the 
mind  for  understanding,  as  well  as  admitting, 
what  follows,  we  must  now,  after  having 
cleansed,  polished, and  levelled  its  surface,  place 
it  in  a  good  position,  and  as  it  were  a  benevolent 
aspect  towards  our  propositions;  seeing  that 
prejudice  in  new  matters  may  be  produced  not 
onlybythestrength  of  preconceived  notions, but 
also  by  a  false  anticipation  or  expectation  of  the 
matter  proposed.  We  shall  therefore  endeavor 
to  induce  good  and  correct  opinions  of  what  we 
offer,  although  this  be  only  necessary  for  the 
moment,  and  as  it  were  laid  out  at  interest,  un¬ 
til  the  matter  itself  be  well  understood. 

1 16.  First,  then,  we  must  desire  men  not  to 
suppose  that  we  are  ambitious  of  founding  any 
philosophical  sect,  like  the  ancient  Greeks,  or 
some  moderns,  as  Telesius,  Patricius,  and  Se¬ 
verinus.  For  neither  is  this  our  intention,  nor 
do  we  think  that  peculiar  abstract  opinions  on 
nature  and  the  principles  of  things  are  of  much 
importance  to  men’s  fortunes,  since  it  were  easy 
to  revive  many  ancient  theories,  and  to  intro¬ 
duce  many  new  ones;  as  for  instance,  many  hy¬ 
potheses  with  regard  to  the  heavens  can  be 
formed,  differing  in  themselves,  and  yet  suffi¬ 
ciently  according  with  the  phenomena. 


FIRST  BOOK 


We  bestow  not  our  labor  on  such  theoretical, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  useless  topics.  On  the 
contrary,  our  determination  is  that  of  trying, 
whether  we  can  lay  a  firmer  foundation,  and  ex¬ 
tend  to  a  greater  distance  the  boundaries  of  hu¬ 
man  power  and  dignity.  And  although  here  and 
there,  upon  some  particular  points,  we  hold  (in 
our  own  opinion)  more  true  and  certain,  and  I 
might  even  say,  more  advantageous  tenets  than 
those  in  general  repute  (which  we  have  collected 
in  the  fifth  part  of  our  instauration),  yet  we  of¬ 
fer  no  universal  or  complete  theory.  The  time 
does  not  yet  appear  to  us  to  be  arrived,  and  we 
entertain  no  hope  of  our  life  being  prolonged  to 
the  completion  of  the  sixth  part  of  the  instau¬ 
ration  (which  is  destined  for  philosophy  discov¬ 
ered  by  the  interpretation  of  nature),  but  are 
content  if  we  proceed  quietly  and  usefully  in 
our  intermediate  pursuit,  scattering,  in  the 
mean  time,  the  seeds  of  less  adulterated  truth 
for  posterity,  and,  at  least,  commence  the  great 
work. 

1 17.  And,  as  we  pretend  not  to  found  a  sect, 
so  do  we  neither  offer  nor  promise  particular  ef¬ 
fects;  which  may  occasion  some  to  object  to  us, 
that  since  we  so  often  speak  of  effects,  and  con¬ 
sider  everything  in  its  relation  to  that  end,  we 
ought  also  to  give  some  earnest  of  producing 
them.  Our  course  and  method,  however  (as  we 
have  often  said,  and  again  repeat),  are  such  as 
not  to  deduce  effects  from  effects,  nor  experi¬ 
ments  from  experiments  (as  the  empirics  do), 
but  in  our  capacity  of  legitimate  interpreters  of 
nature,  to  deduce  causes  and  axioms  from  ef¬ 
fects  and  experiments;  and  new  effects  and  ex¬ 
periments  from  those  causes  and  axioms. 

And  although  anyone  of  moderate  intelligence 
and  ability  will  observe  the  indications  and- 
sketches  of  many  noble  effects  in  our  tables  of 
inventions  (which  form  the  fourth  part  of  the 
instauration),  and  also  in  the  examples  of  par¬ 
ticular  instances  cited  in  the  second  part,  as 
well  as  in  our  observations  on  history  (which  is 
the  subject  of  the  third  part);  yet  we  candidly 
confess  that  our  present  natural  history,  wheth¬ 
er  compiled  from  books  or  our  own  inquiries,  is 
not  sufficiently  copious  and  well  ascertained  to 
satisfy,  or  even  assist,  a  proper  interpretation. 

If,  therefore,  there  be  any  one  who  is  more 
disposed  and  prepared  for  mechanical  art,  and 
ingenious  in  discovering  effects,  than  in  the 
mere  management  of  experiment,  we  allow  him 
to  employ  his  industry  in  gathering  many  of  the 
fruits  of  our  history  and  tables  in  this  way,  and 
applying  them  to  effects,  receiving  them  as  in¬ 
terest  till  he  can  obtain  the  principal.  For  our 


L31 

own  part,  having  a  greater  object  in  view,  we 
condemn  all  hasty  and  premature  rest  in  such 
pursuits  as  we  would  Atalanta’s  apple  (to  use 
a  common  allusion  of  ours) ;  for  we  are  not  child¬ 
ishly  ambitious  of  golden  fruit,  but  use  all  our 
efforts  to  make  the  course  of  art  outstrip  na¬ 
ture,  and  we  hasten  not  to  reap  moss  or  the 
green  blade,  but  wait  for  a  ripe  harvest. 

1 1 8.  There  will  be  some,  without  doubt,  who, 
on  a  perusal  of  our  history  and  tables  of  inven¬ 
tion,  will  meet  with  some  uncertainty,  or  per¬ 
haps  fallacy,  in  the  experiments  themselves,  and 
will  hence  perhaps  imagine  that  our  discoveries 
are  built  on  false  foundations  and  principles. 
There  is,  however,  really  nothing  in  this,  since 
it  must  needs  happen  in  beginnings.  For  it  is  the 
same  as  if  in  writing  or  printing  one  or  two 
letters  were  wrongly  turned  or  misplaced, which 
is  no  great  inconvenience  to  the  reader,  who  can 
easily  by  his  own  eye  correct  the  error;  let  men 
in  the  same  way  conclude,  that  many  experi¬ 
ments  in  natural  history  may  be  erroneously 
believed  and  admitted,  which  are  easily  ex¬ 
punged  and  rejected  afterwards,  by  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  causes  and  axioms.  It  is,  however, 
true,  that  if  these  errors  in  natural  history  and 
experiments  become  great,  frequent,  and  con¬ 
tinued,  they  cannot  be  corrected  and  amended 
by  any  dexterity  of  wit  or  art.  If  then,  even  in 
our  natural  history,  well  examined  and  compil¬ 
ed  with  such  diligence,  strictness,  and  (I  might 
say)  reverential  scruples,  there  be  now  and  then 
something  false  and  erroneous  in  the  details, 
what  must  we  say  of  the  common  natural  his¬ 
tory,  which  is  so  negligent  and  careless  when 
compared  with  ours,  or  of  systems  of  philosophy 
and  the  sciences,  based  on  such  loose  soil  (or 
rather  quicksand)  ?  Let  none  then  be  alarmed 
by  such  observations. 

1 19.  Again,  our  history  and  experiments  will 
contain  much  that  is  light  and  common,  mean 
andilliberal,  too  refined  and  merely  speculative, 
and,  as  it  were,  of  no  use,  and  this  perhaps  may 
divert  and  alienate  the  attention  of  mankind. 

With  regard  to  what  is  common;  let  men  re¬ 
flect,  that  they  have  hitherto  been  used  to  do 
nothing  but  refer  and  adapt  the  causes  of  things 
of  rare  occurrence  to  those  of  things  which  more 
frequently  happen,  without  any  investigation 
of  the  causes  of  the  latter,  taking  them  for 
granted  and  admitted. 

Hence,  they  do  not  inquire  into  the  causes  of 
gravity,  the  rotation  of  the  heavenly  bodies, 
heat,  cold,  light,  hardness,  softness,  rarity,  den¬ 
sity,  liquidity,  solidity,  animation,  inanima¬ 
tion,  similitude,  difference,  organic  formation, 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


but  taking  them  to  be  self-evident,  manifest, 
and  admitted,  they  dispute  and  decide  upon 
other  matters  of  less  frequent  and  familiar  oc¬ 
currence. 

But  we  (who  know  that  no  judgment  can  be 
formed  of  that  which  is  rare  or  remarkable,  and 
much  less  anything  new  brought  to  light,  with¬ 
out  a  previous  regular  examination  and  discov¬ 
ery  of  the  causes  of  that  which  is  common,  and 
the  causes  again  of  those  causes)  are  necessarily 
compelled  to  admit  the  most  common  objects 
into  our  history.  Besides,  we  have  observed  that 
nothing  has  been  so  injurious  to  philosophy  as 
this  circumstance,  namely,  that  familiar  and 
frequent  objects  do  not  arrest  and  detain  men’s 
contemplation,  but  arecarelessly  admitted,  and 
their  causes  never  inquired  after;  so  that  infor¬ 
mation  on  unknown  subjects  is  not  more  often 
wanted  than  attention  to  those  which  are  known. 

120.  With  regard  to  the  meanness,  or  even 
the  filthiness  of  particulars,  for  which  (as  Pliny 
observes)  an  apology  is  requisite,  such  subjects 
are  no  less  worthy  of  admission  into  natural  his¬ 
tory  than  the  most  magnificent  and  costly;  nor 
do  they  at  all  pollute  natural  history,  for  the  sun 
enters  alike  the  palace  and  the  privy,  and  is  not 
thereby  polluted.  We  neither  dedicate  nor  raise 
a  capitol  or  pyramid  to  the  pride  of  man,  but 
rear  a  holy  temple  in  his  mind,  on  the  model  of 
the  universe,  which  model  therefore  we  imitate. 
For  that  which  is  deserving  of  existence  is  de¬ 
serving  of  knowledge,  the  image  of  existence. 
Now  the  mean  and  splendid  alike  exist.  Nay, 
as  the  finest  odors  are  sometimes  produced  from 
putrid  matter  (such  as  musk  and  civet),  so  does 
valuable  light  and  information  emanate  from 
mean  and  sordid  instances.  But  we  have  already 
said  too  much,  for  such  fastidious  feelings  are 
childish  and  effeminate. 

1 21.  The  next  point  requires  a  more  accurate 
consideration,  namely,  that  many  parts  of  our 
history  will  appear  to  the  vulgar,  or  even  any 
mind  accustomed  to  the  present  state  of  things, 
fantastically  and  uselessly  refined.  Hence,  we 
have  in  regard  to  this  matter  said  from  the  first, 
and  must  again  repeat,  that  we  look  for  experi¬ 
ments  that  shall  afford  light  rather  than  profit, 
imitatingthe  Divine  creation,  which,  as  we  have 
often  observed,  only  produced  light  on  the  first 
day,  and  assigned  that  whole  day  to  its  crea¬ 
tion,  without  adding  any  material  work. 

If  anyone,  then,  imagine  such  matters  to  be 
of  no  use,  he  might  equally  suppose  light  to  be 
of  no  use,  because  it  is  neither  solid  nor  mate¬ 
rial.  For,  in  fact,  the  knowledge  of  simple  na¬ 
tures,  when  sufficiently  investigated  and  de¬ 


fined,  resembles  light,  which,  though  of  nogreat 
use  in  itself,  affords  access  to  the  general  mys¬ 
teries  of  effects,  and  with  a  peculiar  power  com¬ 
prehends  and  draws  with  it  whole  bands  and 
troops  of  effects,  and  the  sources  of  the  most 
valuable  axioms.  So  also  the  elements  of  letters 
have  of  themselves  separately  no  meaning,  and 
are  of  no  use,  yet  are  they,  as  it  were,  the  origi¬ 
nal  matter  in  the  composition  and  preparation 
of  speech.  The  seeds  of  substances,  whose  effect 
is  powerful,  are  of  no  use  except  in  their  growth, 
and  the  scattered  rays  of  light  itself  avail  not 
unless  collected. 

But  if  speculative  subtilties  give  offence, 
what  must  we  say  of  the  scholastic  philosophers 
who  indulged  in  them  to  such  excess  ?  And  those 
subtilties  were  wasted  on  words,  or,  at  least, 
common  notions  (which  is  the  same  thing),  not 
on  things  or  nature,  and  alike  unproductive  of 
benefit  in  their  origin  and  their  consequences: 
in  no  way  resembling  ours,  which  are  at  present 
useless,  but  in  their  consequences  of  infinite 
benefit.  Let  men  be  assured  that  all  subtile  dis¬ 
putes  and  discursive  efforts  of  the  mind  are  late 
and  preposterous,  when  they  are  introduced 
subsequently  to  the  discovery  of  axioms,  and 
that  their  true,  or,  at  any  rate,  chief  opportun¬ 
ity  is,  when  experiment  is  to  be  weighed  and 
axioms  to  be  derived  from  it.  They  otherwise 
catch  and  grasp  at  nature,  but  never  seize  or 
detain  her:  and  we  may  well  apply  to  nature 
that  which  has  been  said  of  opportunity  or  for¬ 
tune,  that  she  wears  a  lock  in  front,  but  is  bald 
behind. 

In  short,  we  may  reply  decisively  to  those 
who  despise  any  part  of  natural  history  as  be¬ 
ing  vulgar,  mean,  or  subtile,  and  useless  in  its 
origin,  in  the  words  of  a  poor  woman  to  a  haughty 
prince,1  who  had  rejected  her  petition  as  un¬ 
worthy,  and  beneath  the  dignity  of  his  majesty: 
“Then  cease  to  reign,”  for  it  is  quite  certain  that 
the  empire  of  nature  can  neither  be  obtained 
nor  administered  by  one  who  refuses  to  pay  at¬ 
tention  to  such  matters  as  being  poor  and  too 
minute. 

1 22.  Again,  it  may  be  objected  to  us  as  being 
singular  and  harsh,  that  we  should  with  one 
stroke  and  assault,  as  it  were,  banish  all  author¬ 
ities  and  sciences,  and  that  too  by  our  own  ef¬ 
forts,  without  requiring  the  assistance  and  sup¬ 
port  of  any  of  the  ancients. 

Now  we  are  aware,  that  had  we  been  ready 
to  act  otherwise  than  sincerely,  it  was  not  diffi¬ 
cult  to  refer  our  present  method  to  remote  ages, 
prior  to  those  of  the  Greeks  (since  the  sciences 

1  Philip  of  Macedon. 


FIRST  BOOK 


in  all  probability  flourished  more  in  their  nat¬ 
ural  state,  though  silently,  than  when  they  were 
paraded  with  the  files  and  trumpets  of  the 
Greeks);  or  even  (in  parts,  at  least),  to  some  of 
the  Greeks  themselves,  and  to  derive  authority 
and  honor  from  thence;  as  men  of  no  family  la¬ 
bor  to  raise  and  form  nobility  for  themselves  in 
some  ancient  line,  by  the  help  of  genealogies. 
Trusting,  however,  to  the  evidence  of  facts,  we 
reject  every  kind  of  fiction  and  imposture;  and 
think  it  of  no  more  consequence  to  our  subject, 
whether  future  discoveries  were  known  to  the 
ancients,  and  set  or  rose  according  to  the  vicis¬ 
situdes  of  events  and  lapse  of  ages,  than  it  would 
be  of  importance  to  mankind  to  know  whether 
the  new  world  be  the  island  of  Atlantis,1  and 
known  to  the  ancients,  or  be  now  discovered  for 
the  first  time. 

With  regard  to  the  universal  censure  we  have 
bestowed,  it  is  quite  clear  to  any  one  who  prop¬ 
erly  considers  the  matter,  that  it  is  both  more 
probable  and  more  modest  than  any  partial  one 
could  have  been.  For  if  the  errors  had  not  been 
rooted  in  the  primary  notions,  some  well  con¬ 
ducted  discoveries  must  have  corrected  others 
that  were  deficient.  But  since  the  errors  were 
fundamental,  and  of  such  a  nature,  that  men 
may  be  said  rather  to  have  neglected  or  passed 
over  things,  than  to  have  formed  a  wrong  or 
false  judgment  of  them,  it  is  little  to  be  won¬ 
dered  at,  that  they  did  not  obtain  what  they 
never  aimed  at,  nor  arrive  at  a  goal  which  they 
had  not  determined,  nor  perform  a  course  which 
they  had  neither  entered  upon  nor  adhered  to. 

With  regard  to  our  presumption,  we  allow 
that  if  we  were  to  assume  a  power  of  drawing  a 
more  perfect  straight  line  or  circle  than  anyone 
else,  by  superior  steadiness  of  hand  or  acute¬ 
ness  of  eye,  it  would  lead  to  a  comparison  of 
talent;  but  if  one  merely  assert  that  he  can  draw 
a  more  perfect  line  or  circle  with  a  ruler  or  com¬ 
passes,  than  another  can  by  his  unassisted  hand 
or  eye,  he  surely  cannot  be  said  to  boast  of  much. 
Now  this  applies  not  only  to  our  first  original 
attempt,  but  also  to  those  who  shall  hereafter 
apply  themselves  to  the  pursuit.  For  our  meth¬ 
od  of  discovering  the  sciences  merely  levels 
men’s  wits,  and  leaves  but  little  to  their  super¬ 
iority,  since  it  achieves  everything  by  the  most 
certain  rules  and  demonstrations.  Whence  (as 
we  have  often  observed),  our  attempt  is  to  be 
attributed  to  fortune  rather  than  talent,  and  is 
the  offspring  of  time  rather  than  of  wit.  For  a 
certain  sort  of  chance  has  no  less  effect  upon 
our  thoughts  than  on  our  acts  and  deeds. 

lSee  Plato,  Timaeus ,  24E-25D. 


133 

123.  We  may,  therefore,  apply  to  ourselves 
the  joke  of  him  who  said,  that  water  and  wine 
drinkers  could  not  think  alike,  especially  as  it 
hits  the  matter  so  well.  For  others,  both  an¬ 
cients  and  moderns,  have  in  the  sciences  drank  a 
crude  liquor  like  water,  either  flowing  of  itself 
from  the  understanding,  or  drawn  up  by  logic 
as  the  wheel  draws  up  the  bucket.  But  we  drink 
and  pledge  others  with  a  liquor  made  of  many 
well  ripened  grapes,  collected  and  plucked  from 
particular  branches,  squeezed  in  the  press,  and 
at  last  clarified  and  fermented  in  a  vessel.  It  is 
not,  therefore,  wonderful  that  we  should  not 
agree  with  others. 

124.  Another  objection  will  without  doubt  be 
made,  namely,  that  we  have  not  ourselves  es¬ 
tablished  a  correct,  or  the  best  goal  or  aim  of 
the  sciences  (the  very  defect  we  blame  in  oth¬ 
ers).  For  they  will  say  that  the  contemplation 
of  truth  is  more  dignified  and  exalted  than  any 
utility  or  extent  of  effects;  but  that  our  dwell¬ 
ing  so  long  and  anxiously  on  experience  and 
matter,  and  the  fluctuating  state  of  particulars, 
fastens  the  mind  to  earth,  or  rather  casts  it 
down  into  an  abyss  of  confusion  and  disturb¬ 
ance,  and  separates  and  removes  it  from  a  much 
more  divine  state,  the  quiet  and  tranquillity  of 
abstract  wisdom.  We  willingly  assent  to  their 
reasoning,  and  are  most  anxious  to  effect  the 
very  point  they  hint  at  and  require.  For  we  are 
founding  a  real  model  of  the  world  in  the  un¬ 
derstanding,  such  as  it  is  found  to  be,  not  such 
as  man’s  reason  has  distorted.  Now  this  cannot 
be  done  without  dissecting  and  anatomizing  the 
world  most  diligently;  but  we  declare  it  neces¬ 
sary  to  destroy  completely  the  vain  little,  and 
as  it  were,  apish  imitations  of  the  world,  which 
have  been  formed  in  various  systems  of  philos¬ 
ophy  by  men’s  fancies.  Let  men  learn  (as  we 
have  said  above),  the  difference  that  exists  be¬ 
tween  the  idols  of  the  human  mind  and  the  ideas 
of  the  divine  mind.  The  former  are  mere  arbi¬ 
trary  abstractions;  the  latter  the  true  marks  of 
the  Creator  on  his  creatures,  as  they  are  im¬ 
printed  on,  and  defined  in  matter,  by  true  and 
exquisite  touches.  Truth,  therefore,  and  utility, 
are  here  perfectly  identical,  and  the  effects  are 
of  more  value  as  pledges  of  truth  than  from  the 
benefit  they  confer  on  men. 

125.  Others  may  object  that  we  are  only  do¬ 
ing  that  which  has  already  been  done,  and  that 
the  ancients  followed  the  same  course  as  our¬ 
selves.  They  may  imagine,  therefore,  that,  after 
all  this  stir  and  exertion,  we  shall  at  last  arrive 
at  some  of  those  systems  that  prevailed  among 
the  ancients:  for  that  they,  too,  when  commenc- 


134  NOVUM  ORGANUM 


ing  their  meditations,  laid  up  a  great  store  of 
instances  and  particulars,  and  digested  them 
under  topics  and  titles  in  their  common-place 
books,  and  so  worked  out  their  systems  and 
arts,  and  then  decided  upon  what  they  discov¬ 
ered,  and  related  now  and  then  some  examples 
to  confirm  and  throw  light  upon  their  doctrine; 
but  thought  it  superfluous  and  troublesome  to 
publish  their  notes,  minutes,  and  common¬ 
places,  and  therefore  followed  the  example  of 
builders  who  remove  the  scaffolding  and  lad¬ 
ders  when  the  building  is  finished.  Nor  can  we 
indeed  believe  the  case  to  have  been  otherwise. 
But  to  anyone,  not  entirely  forgetful  of  our  pre¬ 
vious  observations,  it  will  be  easy  to  answer 
this  objection,  or  rather  scruple;  for  we  allow 
that  the  ancients  had  a  particular  form  of  in¬ 
vestigation  and  discovery,  and  their  writings 
show  it.  But  it  was  of  such  a  nature,  that  they 
immediately  flew  from  a  few  instances  and  par¬ 
ticulars  (after  adding  some  common  notions, 
and  a  few  generally  received  opinions  most  in 
vogue)  to  the  most  general  conclusions  or  the 
principles  of  the  sciences,  and  then  by  their  in¬ 
termediate  propositions  deduced  their  inferior 
conclusions,  and  tried  them  by  the  test  of  the 
immovable  and  settled  truth  of  the  first,  and 
so  constructed  their  art.  Lastly,  if  some  new 
particulars  and  instances  were  brought  forward, 
which  contradicted  their  dogmas,  they  either 
with  great  subtilty  reduced  them  to  one  system, 
by  distinctions  or  explanations  of  their  own 
rules,  or  got  rid  of  them  clumsily  as  exceptions, 
laboring  most  pertinaciously  in  the  mean  time 
to  accommodate  the  causes  of  such  as  were  not 
contradictory  to  their  own  principles.  Their 
natural  history  and  their  experience  were  both 
far  from  being  what  they  ought  to  have  been, 
and  their  flying  off  to  generalities  ruined  every¬ 
thing. 

126.  Another  objection  will  be  made  against 
us,  that  we  prohibit  decisions,  and  the  laying 
down  of  certain  principles,  till  we  arrive  regu¬ 
larly  at  generalities  by  the  intermediate  steps, 
and  thus  keep  the  judgment  in  suspense  and 
lead  to  uncertainty.  But  our  object  is  not  un¬ 
certainty  but  fitting  certainty,  for  we  derogate 
not  from  the  senses  but  assist  them,  and  despise 
not  the  understanding  but  direct  it.  It  is  better 
to  know  what  is  necessary,  and  not  to  imagine 
we  are  fully  in  possession  of  it,  than  to  imagine 
that  we  are  fully  in  possession  of  it,  and  yet  in 
reality  to  know  nothing  which  we  ought. 

127.  Again,  some  may  raise  this  question 
rather  than  objection,  whether  we  talk  of  per¬ 
fecting  natural  philosophy  alone  according  to 


our  method,  or  the  other  sciences  also,  such  as 
logic,  ethics,  politics.  We  certainly  intend  to 
comprehend  them  all.  And  as  common  logic, 
which  regulates  matters  by  syllogisms,  is  ap¬ 
plied  not  only  to  natural,  but  also  to  every  oth¬ 
er  science,  so  our  inductive  method  likewise 
comprehends  them  all.  For  we  form  a  history 
and  tables  of  invention  for  anger,  fear,  shame, 
and  the  like,  and  also  for  examples  in  civil  life, 
and  the  mental  operations  of  memory,  compo¬ 
sition,  division,  judgment,  and  the  rest,  as  well 
as  for  heat  and  cold,  light,  vegetation,  and  the 
like.  But  since  our  method  of  interpretation, 
after  preparing  and  arranging  a  history,  does 
not  content  itself  with  examining  the  opera¬ 
tions  and  disquisitions  of  the  mind  like  common 
logic,  but  also  inspects  the  nature  of  things,  we 
so  regulate  the  mind  that  it  may  be  enabled  to 
apply  itself  in  every  respect  correctly  to  that 
nature.  On  that  account  we  deliver  numerous 
and  various  precepts  in  our  doctrine  of  inter¬ 
pretation,  so  that  they  may  apply  in  some  meas¬ 
ure  to  the  method  of  discovering  the  qualitv 
and  condition  of  the  subject  matter  of  investi¬ 
gation. 

1 28.  Let  none  even  doubt  whether  we  are  anx¬ 
ious  to  destroy  and  demolish  the  philosophy, 
arts,  and  sciences,  which  are  now  in  use.  On  the 
contrary,  we  readily  cherish  their  practice,  cul¬ 
tivation,  and  honor;  for  we  by  no  means  inter¬ 
fere  to  prevent  the  prevalent  system  from  en¬ 
couraging  discussion,  adorning  discourses,  or 
being  employed  serviceably  in  the  chair  of  the 
professor  or  the  practice  of  common  life,  and 
being  taken,  in  short,  by  general  consent  as  cur¬ 
rent  coin.  Nay,  we  plainly  declare,  that  the  sys¬ 
tem  we  offer  will  not  be  very  suitable  for  such 
purposes,  not  being  easily  adapted  to  vulgar  ap¬ 
prehensions,  except  by  effects  and  works.  To 
show  our  sincerity  in  professing  our  regard  and 
friendly  disposition  towards  the  received  sci¬ 
ences,  we  can  refer  to  the  evidence  of  our  pub¬ 
lished  writings  (especially  our  books  on  the  Ad¬ 
vancement  of  Learning).  We  will  not,  therefore, 
endeavor  to  evince  it  any  further  by  words;  but 
content  ourselves  with  steadily  and  professedly 
premising,  that  no  great  progress  can  be  made 
by  the  present  methods  in  the  theory  or  con¬ 
templation  of  science,  and  that  they  cannot  be 
made  to  produce  any  very  abundant  effects. 

129.  It  remains  for  us  to  say  a  few  words  on 
the  excellence  of  our  proposed  end.  If  we  had 
done  so  before,  we  might  have  appeared  merely 
to  express  our  wishes,  but  now’  that  wre  have  ex¬ 
cited  hope  and  removed  prejudices,  it  w’ill  per¬ 
haps  have  greater  weight.  Had  wre  performed 


FIRST  BOOK 


and  completely  accomplished  the  whole,  with¬ 
out  frequently  calling  in  others  to  assist  in  our 
labors,  we  should  then  have  refrained  from  say¬ 
ing  any  more,  lest  we  should  be  thought  to  ex¬ 
tol  our  own  deserts.  Since,  however,  the  indus¬ 
try  of  others  must  be  quickened,  and  their  cour¬ 
age  roused  and  inflamed,  it  is  right  to  recall 
some  points  to  their  memory. 

First,  then,  the  introduction  of  great  inven¬ 
tions  appears  one  of  the  most  distinguished  of 
human  actions,  and  the  ancients  so  considered 
it;  for  they  assigned  divine  honors  to  the  au¬ 
thors  of  inventions,  but  only  heroic  honors  to 
those  who  displayed  civil  merit  (such  as  the 
founders  of  cities  and  empires,  legislators,  the 
deliverers  of  their  country  from  lasting  misfor¬ 
tunes,  the  quellers  of  tyrants,  and  the  like).  And 
if  anyone  rightly  compare  them,  he  will  find  the 
judgment  of  antiquity  to  be  correct;  for  the  ben¬ 
efits  derived  from  inventions  may  extend  to 
mankind  in  general,  but  civil  benefits  to  par¬ 
ticular  spots  alone;  the  latter,  moreover,  last 
but  for  a  time,  the  former  forever.  Civil  refor¬ 
mation  seldom  is  carried  on  without  violence 
and  confusion,  whilst  inventions  are  a  blessing 
and  a  benefit  without  injuring  or  afflicting  any. 

Inventions  are  also,  as  it  were,  new  creations 
and  imitations  of  divine  works,  as  was  expressed 
by  the  poet: 

Primum  frugiferos  foetus  mortalibus  cegris 
Dididerant  quondam  prcestanti  nomine  Athence 
Et  recreaverunt  vitam  legesque  rogarunt } 

And  it  is  worthy  of  remark  in  Solomon,  that 
whilst  he  flourished  in  the  possession  of  his  em¬ 
pire,  in  wealth,  in  the  magnificence  of  his  works, 
in  his  court,  his  household,  his  fleet,  the  splen¬ 
dor  of  his  name,  and  the  most  unbounded  ad¬ 
miration  of  mankind,  he  still  placed  his  glory 
in  none  of  these,  but  declared2  that  it  is  the  glo¬ 
ry  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing,  but  the  glory  of  a 
king  to  search  it  out. 

Again,  let  anyone  but  consider  the  immense 
difference  between  men’s  lives  in  the  most  pol¬ 
ished  countries  of  Europe,  and  in  any  wild  and 
barbarous  region  of  the  new  Indies,  he  will  think 
it  so  great,  that  man  may  be  said  to  be  a  god 
unto  man,  not  only  on  account  of  mutual  aid 
and  benefits,  but  from  their  comparative  states 

1  Bacon  was  quoting  from  memory.  Primum  should  be 
Primae ,  and  praestanti  should  be praeclaro.  See  Lucretius, 
On  the  Nature  of  things ,  Bk.  vi.  1-3. 

The  teeming  corn>  that  feeble  mortals  crave , 

First ,  and  long  since ,  renowned  Athens  gave , 

And  cheered  their  life — then  taught  to  frame  their 
laws. 

2Prov.  25.  2. 


T35 

—  the  result  of  the  arts,  and  not  of  the  soil  or 
climate. 

Again,  we  should  notice  the  force,  effect,  and 
consequences  of  inventions,  which  are  nowhere 
more  conspicuous  than  in  those  three  which 
were  unknown  to  the  ancients;  namely,  print¬ 
ing,  gunpowder,  and  the  compass.  For  these 
three  have  changed  the  appearance  and  state 
of  the  whole  world:  first  in  literature,  then  in 
warfare,  and  lastly  in  navigation;  and  innumer¬ 
able  changes  have  been  thence  derived,  so  that 
no  empire,  sect,  or  star,  appears  to  have  exer¬ 
cised  a  greater  power  and  influence  on  human 
affairs  than  these  mechanical  discoveries. 

It  will,  perhaps,  be  as  well  to  distinguish  three 
species  and  degrees  of  ambition.  First,  that  of 
men  who  are  anxious  to  enlarge  their  own  power 
in  their  country,  which  is  a  vulgar  and  degen¬ 
erate  kind;  next,  that  of  men  who  strive  to  en¬ 
large  the  power  and  empire  of  their  country 
over  mankind^  which  is  more  dignified  but  not 
less  covetous;  but  if  one  were  to  endeavor  to 
renew  and  enlarge  the  power  and  empire  of 
mankind  in  general  over  the  universe,  such  am¬ 
bition  (if  it  may  be  so  termed)  is  both  more 
sound  and  more  noble  than  the  other  two.  Now 
the  empire  of  man  over  things  is  founded  on  the 
arts  and  sciences  alone,  for  nature  is  only  to  be 
commanded  by  obeying  her. 

Besides  this,  if  the  benefit  of  any  particular 
invention  has  had  such  an  effect  as  to  induce 
men  to  consider  him  greater  than  a  man,  who 
has  thus  obliged  the  whole  race,  how  much  more 
exalted  will  that  discovery  be,  which  leads  to 
the  easy  discovery  of  everything  else!  Yet  (to 
speak  the  truth)  in  the  same  manner  as  we  are 
very  thankful  for  light  which  enables  us  to  en¬ 
ter  on  our  way,  to  practise  arts,  to  read,  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  each  other,  and  yet  sight  is  more  ex¬ 
cellent  and  beautiful  than  the  various  uses  of 
light;  so  is  the  contemplation  of  things  as  they 
are,  free  from  superstition  or  imposture,  error 
or  confusion,  much  more  dignified  in  itself  than 
all  the  advantage  to  be  derived  from  discoveries. 

Lastly,  let  none  be  alarmed  at  the  objection 
of  the  arts  and  sciences  becoming  depraved  to 
malevolent  or  luxurious  purposes  and  the  like, 
for  the  same  can  be  said  of  every  worldly  good; 
talent,  courage,  strength,  beauty,  riches,  light 
itself,  and  the  rest.  Only  let  mankind  regain 
their  rights  over  nature,  assigned  to  them  by 
the  gift  of  God,  and  obtain  that  power,  whose 
exercise  will  be  governed  by  right  reason  and 
true  religion. 

130.  But  it  is  time  for  us  to  lay  down  the  art 
of  interpreting  nature,  to  which  we  attribute  no 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


136 

absolute  necessity  (as  if  nothing  could  be  done 
without  it)  nor  perfection,  although  we  think 
that  our  precepts  are  most  useful  and  correct. 
For  we  are  of  opinion,  that  if  men  had  at  their 
command  a  proper  history  of  nature  and  exper¬ 
ience,  and  would  apply  themselves  steadily  to 
it,  and  could  bind  themselves  to  two  things:  1. 
to  lay  aside  received  opinions  and  notions;  2.  to 
restrain  themselves,  till  the  proper  season,  from 
generalization,  they  might,  by  the  proper  and 
genuine  exertion  of  their  minds,  fall  into  our 


way  of  interpretation  without  the  aid  of  any 
art.  For  interpretation  is  the  true  and  natural 
act  of  the  mind,  when  all  obstacles  are  removed: 
certainly,  however,  everything  will  be  more 
ready  and  better  fixed  by  our  precepts. 

Yet  do  we  not  affirm  that  no  addition  can  be 
made  to  them;  on  the  contrary,  considering  the 
mind  in  its  connection  with  things,  and  not 
merely  relatively  to  its  own  powers,  we  ought 
to  be  persuaded  that  the  art  of  invention  can 
bemadetogrow  with  the  inventions  themselves. 


SECOND  BOOK 


i.  To  generate  and  superinduce  a  new  nature 
or  new  natures,  upon  a  given  body,  is  the  labor 
and  aim  of  human  power:  whilst  to  discover 
the  form  or  true  difference  of  a  given  nature,  or 
the  nature1  to  which  such  nature  is  owing,  or 
source  from  which  it  emanates  (for  these  terms 
approach  nearest  to  an  explanation  of  our  mean¬ 
ing),  is  the  labor  and  discovery  of  human 
knowledge;  and  subordinate  to  these  primary 
labors  are  two  others  of  a  secondary  nature  and 
inferior  stamp.  Under  the  first  must  be  ranked 
the  transformation  of  concrete  bodies  from  one 
to  another,  which  is  possible  within  certain 
limits;  under  the  second,  the  discovery,  in  every 
species  of  generation  and  motion,  of  the  latent 
and  uninterrupted  process  from  the  manifest 
efficient  and  manifest  subject  matter  up  to  the 
given  form:  and  a  like  discovery  of  the  latent 
conformation  of  bodies  which  are  at  rest  in¬ 
stead  of  being  in  motion. 

2.  The  unhappy  state  of  man’s  actual  knowl¬ 
edge  is  manifested  even  by  the  common  asser¬ 
tions  of  the  vulgar.  It  is  rightly  laid  down  that 
true  knowledge  is  that  which  is  deduced  from 
causes.  The  division  of  four  causes  also  is  not 
amiss:  matter,  form,  the  efficient,  and  end  or 
final  cause.  Of  these,  however,  the  latter  is  so 
far  from  being  beneficial,  that  it  even  corrupts 
the  sciences,  except  in  the  intercourse  of  man 
with  man.  The  discovery  of  form  is  considered 
desperate.  As  for  the  efficient  cause  and  matter 
(according  to  the  present  system  of  inquiry 
and  the  received  opinions  concerning  them,  by 
which  they  are  placed  remote  from,  and  with¬ 
out  any  latent  process  towards  form),  they  are 
but  desultory  and  superficial,  and  of  scarcely 
any  avail  to  real  and  active  knowledge.  Nor 
are  we  unmindful  of  our  having  pointed  out 
and  corrected  above  the  error  of  the  human 
mind,  in  assigning  the  first  qualities  of  essence 
to  forms.2  For  although  nothing  exists  in  na¬ 
ture  except  individual  bodies,  exhibiting  clear 
individual  effects  according  to  particular  laws, 
yet  in  each  branch  of  learning,  that  very  law, 
its  investigation,  discovery,  and  development, 
are  the  foundation  both  of  theory  and  practice. 

1  Cf.  Aristotle,  Metaphysics ,  Bk.  hi. 

2See  Aphorism  51,  and  second  paragraph  of  Aphorism 
65,  in  Book  1. 


This  law,  therefore,  and  its  parallel  in  each 
science,  is  what  we  understand  by  the  term 
form,  adopting  that  word  because  it  has  grown 
into  common  use,  and  is  of  familiar  occurrence. 

3.  He  who  has  learnt  the  cause  of  a  particu¬ 
lar  nature  (such  as  whiteness  or  heat),  in  par¬ 
ticular  subjects  only,  has  acquired  but  an  im¬ 
perfect  knowledge:  as  he  who  can  induce  a 
certain  effect  upon  particular  substances  only, 
among  those  which  are  susceptible  of  it,  has 
acquired  but  an  imperfect  power.  But  he  who 
has  only  learnt  the  efficient  and  material  cause 
(which  causes  are  variable  and  mere  vehicles 
conveying  form  to  particular  substances)  may 
perhaps  arrive  at  some  new  discoveries  in  mat¬ 
ters  of  a  similar  nature,  and  prepared  for  the 
purpose,  but  does  not  stir  the  limits  of  things 
which  are  much  more  deeply  rooted:  whilst  he 
who  is  acquainted  with  forms,  comprehends 
the  unity  of  nature  in  substances  apparently 
most  distinct  from  each  other.  He  can  disclose 
and  bring  forward,  therefore,  (though  it  has 
never  yet  been  done)  things  which  neither  the 
vicissitudes  of  nature,  nor  the  industry  of  ex¬ 
periment,  nor  chance  itself,  would  ever  have 
brought  about,  and  which  would  forever  have 
escaped  man’s  thoughts;  from  the  discovery  of 
forms,  therefore,  results  genuine  theory  and 
free  practice. 

4.  Although  there  is  a  most  intimate  connec¬ 
tion,  and  almost  an  identity  between  the  ways 
of  human  power  and  human  knowledge,  yet, 
on  account  of  the  pernicious  and  inveterate 
habit  of  dwelling  upon  abstractions,  it  is  by  far 
the  safest  method  to  commence  and  build  up 
the  sciences  from  those  foundations  which  bear 
a  relation  to  the  practical  division,  and  to  let 
them  mark  out  and  limit  the  theoretical.  We 
must  consider,  therefore,  what  precepts,  or 
what  direction  or  guide,  a  person  would  most 
desire,  in  order  to  generate  and  superinduce 
any  nature  upon  a  given  body:  and  this  not  in 
abstruse,  but  in  the  plainest  language. 

For  instance,  if  a  person  should  wish  to  su¬ 
perinduce  the  yellow  color  of  gold  upon  silver, 
or  an  additional  weight  (observing  always  the 
laws  of  matter)  or  transparency  on  an  opaque 
stone,  or  tenacity  in  glass,  or  vegetation  on  a 
substance  which  is  not  vegetable,  we  must  (I 


137 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


*38 

sav)  consider  what  species  of  precept  or  guide 
this  person  would  prefer.  And  firstly,  he  will 
doubtless  be  anxious  to  be  shown  some  method 
that  will  neither  fail  in  effect,  nor  deceive  him 
in  the  trial  of  it;  secondly,  he  will  be  anxious 
that  the  prescribed  method  should  not  restrict 
him  and  tie  him  down  to  peculiar  means,  and 
certain  particular  methods  of  acting;  for  he 
will,  perhaps,  be  at  loss,  and  without  the  power 
or  opportunity  of  collecting  and  procuring  such 
means.  Now  if  there  be  other  means  and  meth¬ 
ods  (besides  those  prescribed)  of  creating  such 
a  nature,  they  will  perhaps  be  of  such  a  kind  as 
are  in  his  power,  yet  by  the  confined  limits  of 
the  precept  he  will  be  deprived  of  reaping  any 
advantage  from  them;  thirdly,  he  will  be  an¬ 
xious  to  be  shown  something  not  so  difficult  as 
the  required  effect  itself,  but  approaching  more 
nearly  to  practice. 

We  will  lay  this  down,  therefore,  as  the  gen¬ 
uine  and  perfect  rule  of  practice,  that  it  should 
be  certain,  free,  and  preparatory,  or  having 
relation  to  practice.  And  this  is  the  same  thing 
as  the  discovery  of  a  true  form;  for  the  form  of 
any  nature  is  such,  that  when  it  is  assigned  the 
particular  nature  infallibly  follows.  It  is,  there¬ 
fore,  always  present  when  that  nature  is  pres¬ 
ent,  and  universally  attests  such  presence,  and 
is  inherent  in  the  whole  of  it.  The  same  form  is 
of  such  a  character,  that  if  it  be  removed  the 
particular  nature  infallibly  vanishes.  It  is, 
therefore,  absent,  whenever  that  nature  is  ab¬ 
sent,  and  perpetually  testifies  such  absence, 
and  exists  in  no  other  nature.  Lastly,  the  true 
form  is  such,  that  it  deduces  the  particular  na¬ 
ture  from  some  source  of  essence  existing  in 
many  subjects,  and  more  known  (as  they  term 
it)  to  nature,  than  the  form  itself.  Such,  then, 
is  our  determination  and  rule  with  regard  to  a 
genuine  and  perfect  theoretical  axiom,  that  a 
nature  be  found  convertible  with  a  given  na¬ 
ture,  and  yet  such  as  to  limit  the  more  known 
nature,  in  the  manner  of  a  real  genus.  But 
these  two  rules,  the  practical  and  theoretical, 
are  in  fact  the  same,  and  that  which  is  most 
useful  in  practice  is  most  correct  in  theory. 

5.  But  the  rule  or  axiom  for  the  transforma¬ 
tion  of  bodies  is  of  two  kinds.  The  first  regards 
the  body  as  an  aggregate  or  combination  of 
simple  natures.  Thus,  in  gold  are  united  the 
following  circumstances:  it  is  yellow,  heavy,  of 
a  certain  weight,  malleable  and  ductile  to  a 
certain  extent;  it  is  not  volatile,  loses  part  of 
its  substance  by  fire,  melts  in  a  particular  man¬ 
ner,  is  separated  and  dissolved  by  particular 
methods,  and  so  of  the  other  natures  observ¬ 


able  in  gold.  An  axiom,  therefore,  of  this  kind 
deduces  the  subject  from  the  forms  of  simple 
natures;  for  he  who  has  acquired  the  forms  and 
methods  of  superinducing  yellowness,  weight, 
ductility,  stability,  deliquescence,  solution,  and 
the  like,  and  their  degrees  and  modes,  will  con¬ 
sider  and  contrive  how  to  unite  them  in  any 
body,  so  as  to  transform  it  into  gold.  And  this 
method  of  operating  belongs  to  primary  action: 
for  it  is  the  same  thing  to  produce  one  or  manv 
simple  natures,  except  that  man  is  more  con¬ 
fined  and  restricted  in  his  operations,  if  many 
be  required,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  unit¬ 
ing  many  natures  together.  It  must,  however, 
be  observed,  that  this  method  of  operating 
(which  considers  natures  as  simple  though  in  a 
concrete  body)  sets  out  from  what  is  constant, 
eternal,  and  universal  in  nature,  and  opens 
such  broad  paths  to  human  power,  as  the 
thoughts  of  man  can  in  the  present  state  of 
things  scarcely  comprehend  or  figure  to  itself. 

The  second  kind  of  axiom  (which  depends 
on  the  discovery  of  the  latent  process)  does  not 
proceed  by  simple  natures,  but  by  concrete 
bodies,  as  they  are  found  in  nature  and  in  its 
usual  course.  For  instance,  suppose  the  inquiry 
to  be,  from  what  beginnings,  in  what  manner, 
and  by  what  process  gold  or  any  metal  or  stone 
is  generated  from  the  original  menstruum,  or 
its  elements,  up  to  the  perfect  mineral:  or,  in 
like  manner,  by  what  process  plants  are  gen¬ 
erated,  from  the  first  concretion  of  juices  in  the 
earth,  or  from  seeds,  up  to  the  perfect  plant, 
with  the  whole  successive  motion,  and  varied 
and  uninterrupted  efforts  of  nature;  and  the 
same  inquiry  be  made  as  to  a  regularly  deduced 
system  of  the  generation  of  animals  from  coi¬ 
tion  to  birth,  and  so  on  of  other  bodies. 

Nor  is  this  species  of  inquiry  confined  to  the 
mere  generation  of  bodies,  but  it  is  applicable 
to  other  changes  and  labors  of  nature.  For  in¬ 
stance,  where  an  inquiry  is  made  into  the  whole 
series  and  continued  operation  of  the  nutritive 
process,  from  the  first  reception  of  the  food  to 
its  complete  assimilation  to  the  recipient;  or 
into  the  voluntary  motion  of  animals,  from  the 
first  impression  of  the  imagination,  and  the 
continuous  effects  of  the  spirits,  up  to  the 
bending  and  motion  of  the  joints;  or  into  the 
free  motion  of  the  tongue  and  lips,  and  other 
accessories  which  give  utterance  to  articulate 
sounds.  For  all  these  investigations  relate  to 
concrete  or  associated  natures  artificially 
brought  together,  and  take  into  consideration 
certain  particular  and  special  habits  of  nature, 
and  not  those  fundamental  and  general  laws 


SECOND  HOOK 


which  constitute  forms.  It  must,  however,  be 
plainly  owned,  that  this  method  appears  more 
prompt  and  easy,  and  of  greater  promise  than 
the  primary  one. 

In  like  manner  the  operative  branch,  which 
answers  to  this  contemplative  branch,  extends 
and  advances  its  operation  from  that  which  is 
usually  observed  in  nature,  to  other  subjects 
immediately  connected  with  it,  or  not  very  re¬ 
mote  from  such  immediate  connection.  But  the 
higher  and  radical  operations  upon  nature  de¬ 
pend  entirely  on  the  primary  axioms.  Besides, 
even  where  man  has  not  the  means  of  acting, 
but  only  of  acquiring  knowledge,  as  in  astron¬ 
omy  (for  man  cannot  act  upon,  change,  or 
transform  the  heavenly  bodies),  the  investiga¬ 
tion  of  facts  or  truth,  as  well  as  the  knowledge 
of  causes  and  coincidences,  must  be  referred  to 
those  primary  and  universal  axioms  that  regard 
simple  natures;  such  as  the  nature  of  spontan¬ 
eous  rotation,  attraction,  or  the  magnetic  force, 
and  many  others  which  are  more  common  than 
the  heavenly  bodies  themselves.  For  let  no  one 
hope  to  determine  the  question  whether  the 
earth  or  heaven  revolve  in  the  diurnal  motion, 
unless  he  have  first  comprehended  the  nature 
of  spontaneous  rotation. 

6.  But  the  latent  process  of  which  we  speak, 
is  far  from  being  obvious  to  men’s  minds,  beset 
as  they  now  are.  For  we  mean  not  the  meas¬ 
ures,  symptoms,  or  degrees  of  any  process  which 
can  be  exhibited  in  the  bodies  themselves,  but 
simply  a  continued  process,  which,  for  the  most 
part,  escapes  the  observation  of  the  senses. 

For  instance,  in  all  generations  and  transfor¬ 
mations  of  bodies,  we  must  inquire,  what  is  in 
the  act  of  being  lost  and  escaping,  what  re¬ 
mains,  what  is  being  added,  what  is  being  di¬ 
luted,  what  is  being  contracted,  what  is  being 
united,  what  is  being  separated,  what  is  con¬ 
tinuous,  what  is  broken  off,  what  is  urging  for¬ 
ward,  what  impedes,  what  predominates,  what 
is  subservient,  and  many  other  circumstances. 

Nor  are  these  inquiries  again  to  be  made  in 
the  mere  generation  and  transformation  of 
bodies  only,  but  in  all  other  alterations  and 
fluctuations,  we  must  in  like  manner  inquire; 
what  precedes,  what  succeeds,  what  is  quick, 
what  is  slow,  what  produces  and  what  governs 
motion,  and  the  like.  All  which  matters  are  un¬ 
known  and  unattempted  by  the  sciences,  in 
their  present  heavy  and  inactive  state.  For, 
since  every  natural  act  is  brought  about  by  the 
smallest  efforts,  or,  at  least,  such  as  are  too 
small  to  strike  our  senses,  let  no  one  hope  that 
he  will  be  able  to  direct  or  change  nature  unless 


he  have  properly  comprehended  and  observed 
these  efforts. 

7.  In  like  manner,  the  investigation  and  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  latent  conformation  in  bodies  is 
no  less  new,  than  the  discovery  of  the  latent 
process  and  form.  For  we  as  yet  are  doubtless 
only  admitted  to  the  ante-chamber  of  nature, 
and  do  not  prepare  an  entrance  into  her  pres¬ 
ence-room.  But  nobody  can  endue  a  given 
body  with  a  new  nature,  or  transform  it  suc¬ 
cessfully  and  appropriately  into  a  new  body, 
without  possessing  a  complete  knowledge  of 
the  body  so  to  be  changed  or  transformed.  For 
he  will  run  into  vain,  or,  at  least,  into  difficult 
and  perverse  methods,  ill  adapted  to  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  body  upon  which  he  operates.  A 
clear  path,  therefore,  towards  this  object  also 
must  be  thrown  open,  and  well  supported. 

Labor  is  well  and  usefully  bestowed  upon 
the  anatomy  of  organized  bodies,  such  as  those 
of  men  and  animals,  which  appears  to  be  a  sub¬ 
tile  matter,  and  a  useful  examination  of  na¬ 
ture.  The  species  of  anatomy,  however,  is  that 
of  first  sight,  open  to  the  senses,  and  takes 
place  only  in  organized  bodies.  It  is  obvious, 
and  of  ready  access,  when  compared  with  the 
real  anatomy  of  latent  conformation  in  bodies 
which  are  considered  similar,  particularly  in 
specific  objects  and  their  parts;  as  those  of  iron, 
stone,  and  the  similar  parts  of  plants  and  ani¬ 
mals,  as  the  root,  the  leaf,  the  flower,  the  flesh, 
the  blood,  and  bones,  etc.  Yet  human  industry 
has  not  completely  neglected  this  species  of 
anatomy;  for  we  have  an  instance  of  it  in  the 
separation  of  similar  bodies  by  distillation,  and 
other  solutions,  which  shows  the  dissimilarity 
of  the  compound  by  the  union  of  the  homogen¬ 
eous  parts.  These  methods  are  useful,  and  of 
importance  to  our  inquiry,  although  attended 
generally  with  fallacy:  for  many  natures  are 
assigned  and  attributed  to  the  separate  bodies, 
as  if  they  had  previously  existed  in  the  com¬ 
pound,  which,  in  reality,  are  recently  bestowed 
and  superinduced  by  fire  and  heat,  and  the 
other  modes  of  separation.  Besides,  it  is,  after 
all,  but  a  small  part  of  the  labor  of  discovering 
the  real  conformation  in  the  compound,  which 
is  so  subtile  and  nice,  that  it  is  rather  confused 
and  lost  by  the  operation  of  the  fire,  than  dis¬ 
covered  and  brought  to  light. 

A  separation  and  solution  of  bodies,  there¬ 
fore,  is  to  be  effected,  not  by  fire  indeed,  but 
rather  by  reasoning  and  true  induction,  with 
the  assistance  of  experiment,  and  by  a  compar¬ 
ison  with  other  bodies,  and  a  reduction  to  those 
simple  natures  and  their  forms  which  meet, 


1 4o  NOVUM 

and  arc  combined  in  the  compound;  and  we 
must  assuredly  pass  from  V  ulcan  to  Minerva, 
if  we  wish  to  bring  to  light  the  real  texture  and 
conformation  of  bodies,  upon  which  every  oc¬ 
cult  and  (as  it  is  sometimes  called)  specific 
property  and  virtue  of  things  depends,  and 
whence  also  every  rule  of  powerful  change  and 
transformation  is  deduced. 

For  instance,  we  must  examine  what  spirit 
is  in  every  body,  what  tangible  essence;  whether 
that  spirit  is  copious  and  exuberant,  or  meagre 
and  scarce,  fine  or  coarse,  aeriform  or  igniform, 
active  or  sluggish,  weak  or  robust,  progressive 
or  retrograde,  abrupt  or  continuous,  agreeing 
with  external  and  surrounding  objects,  or  dif¬ 
fering  from  them,  etc.  In  like  manner  must  we 
treat  tangible  essence  (which  admits  of  as  many 
distinctions  as  the  spirit),  and  its  hairs,  fibres, 
and  varied  texture.  Again,  the  situation  of  the 
spirit  in  the  corporeal  mass,  its  pores,  passages, 
veins,  and  cells,  and  the  rudiments  or  first  es¬ 
says  of  the  organic  body,  are  subject  to  the 
same  examination.  In  these,  however,  as  in  our 
former  inquiries,  and  therefore  in  the  whole 
investigation  of  latent  conformation,  the  only 
genuine  and  clear  light  which  completely  dis¬ 
pels  all  darkness  and  subtile  difficulties,  is  ad¬ 
mitted  by  means  of  the  primary  axioms. 

8.  This  method  will  not  bring  us  to  atoms, 
which  takes  for  granted  the  vacuum,  and  im¬ 
mutability  of  matter  (neither  of  which  hypo¬ 
theses  is  correct),  but  to  the  real  particles  such 
as  we  discover  them  to  be.  Nor  is  there  any 
ground  for  alarm  at  this  refinement  as  if  it  were 
inexplicable,  for,  on  the  contrary,  the  more  in¬ 
quiry  is  directed  to  simple  natures,  the  more 
will  everything  be  placed  in  a  plain  and  per¬ 
spicuous  light,  since  we  transfer  our  attention 
from  the  complicated  to  the  simple,  from  the 
incommensurable  to  the  commensurable,  from 
surds  to  rational  quantities,  from  the  indefinite 
and  vague  to  the  definite  and  certain;  as  when 
we  arrive  at  the  elements  of  letters,  and  the 
simple  tones  of  concords.  The  investigation  of 
nature  is  best  conducted  when  mathematics 
are  applied  to  physics.  Again,  let  none  be 
alarmed  at  vast  numbers  and  fractions,  for  in 
calculation  it  is  as  easy  to  set  down  or  to  reflect 
upon  a  thousand  as  a  unit,  or  the  thousandth 
part  of  an  integer  as  an  integer  itself. 

9.  From  the  two  kinds  of  axioms  above  spec¬ 
ified,  arise  the  two  divisions  of  philosophy  and 
the  sciences,  and  we  will  use  the  commonly 
adopted  terms  which  approach  the  nearest  to 
our  meaning,  in  our  own  sense.  Let  the  inves¬ 
tigation  of  forms,  which  (in  reasoning  at  least, 


ORGANUM 

and  after  their  own  laws),  are  eternal  and  im¬ 
mutable,  constitute  metaphysics,  and  let  the 
investigation  of  the  efficient  cause  of  matter, 
latent  process,  and  latent  conformation  (which 
all  relate  merely  to  the  ordinary  course  of  na¬ 
ture,  and  not  to  her  fundamental  and  eternal 
laws),  constitute  physics.  Parallel  to  these,  let 
there  be  two  practical  divisions;  to  physics 
that  of  mechanics,  and  to  metaphysics  that  of 
magic,  in  the  purest  sense  of  the  term,  as  ap¬ 
plied  to  its  ample  means,  and  its  command 
over  nature. 

10.  The  object  of  our  philosophy  being  thus 
laid  down,  we  proceed  to  precepts,  in  the  most 
clear  and  regular  order.  The  signs  for  the  in¬ 
terpretation  of  nature  comprehend  two  divi¬ 
sions,  the  first  regards  the  eliciting  or  creating 
of  axioms  from  experiment,  the  second  the  de¬ 
ducing  or  deriving  of  new  experiments  from 
axioms.  The  first  admits  of  three  subdivisions 
into  ministrations:  1.  To  the  senses.  2.  To  the 
memory.  3.  To  the  mind  or  reason. 

For  we  must  first  prepare  as  a  foundation  for 
the  whole,  a  complete  and  accurate  natural 
and  experimental  history.  We  must  not  imag¬ 
ine  or  invent,  but  discover  the  acts  and  proper¬ 
ties  of  nature. 

But  natural  and  experimental  history  is  so 
varied  and  diffuse,  that  it  confounds  and  dis¬ 
tracts  the  understanding  unless  it  be  fixed  and 
exhibited  in  due  order.  We  must,  therefore, 
form  tables  and  co-ordinations  of  instances, 
upon  such  a  plan,  and  in  such  order,  that  the 
understanding  may  be  enabled  to  act  upon 
them. 

Even  when  this  is  done,  the  understanding, 
left  to  itself  and  to  its  own  operation,  is  incom¬ 
petent  and  unfit  to  construct  its  axioms  with¬ 
out  direction  and  support.  Our  third  ministra¬ 
tion,  therefore,  must  be  true  and  legitimate 
induction,  the  very  key  of  interpretation.  We 
must  begin,  however,  at  the  end,  and  go  back 
again  to  the  others. 

1 1.  The  investigation  of  forms  proceeds  thus: 
a  nature  being  given,  we  must  first  present  to 
the  understanding  all  the  known  instances 
which  agree  in  the  same  nature,  although  the 
subject  matter  be  considerably  diversified.  And 
this  collection  must  be  made  as  a  mere  history, 
and  without  any  premature  reflection,  or  too 
great  degree  of  refinement.  For  instance;  take 
the  investigation  of  the  form  of  heat. 

Table  I  Instances  agreeing  in  the  Form  of  Heat 

(1)  The  rays  of  the  sun,  particularly  in  sum¬ 
mer,  and  at  noon. 


SECOND  BOOK 


(2)  The  same  reflected  and  condensed,  as  be¬ 
tween  mountains,  or  along  walls,  and  particu¬ 
larly  in  burning  mirrors. 

(3)  Ignited  meteors. 

(4)  Burning  lightning. 

(5)  Eruptions  of  flames  from  the  cavities  of 
mountains,  etc. 

(6)  Flame  of  every  kind. 

(7)  Ignited  solids. 

(8)  Natural  warm  baths. 

(9)  Warm  or  heated  liquids. 

(10)  Warm  vapors  and  smoke;  and  the  air 
itself,  which  admits  a  most  powerful  and  vio¬ 
lent  heat  if  confined,  as  in  reverberating  fur¬ 
naces. 

(n)  Damp  hot  weather,  arising  from  the 
constitution  of  the  air,  without  any  reference 
to  the  time  of  the  year. 

(12)  Confined  and  subterraneous  air  in  some 
caverns,  particularly  in  winter. 

(13)  All  shaggy  substances,  as  wool,  the 
skins  of  animals,  and  the  plumage  of  birds, 
contain  some  heat. 

(14)  All  bodies,  both  solid  and  liquid,  dense 
and  rare  (as  the  air  itself),  placed  near  fire  for 
any  time. 

(15)  Sparks  arising  from  the  violent  percus¬ 
sion  of  flint  and  steel. 

(16)  All  bodies  rubbed  violently,  as  stone, 
wood,  cloth,  etc.,  so  that  rudders,  and  axles  of 
wheels,  sometimes  catch  fire,  and  the  West 
Indians  obtain  fire  by  attrition. 

(17)  Green  and  moist  vegetable  matter  con¬ 
fined  and  rubbed  together,  as  roses,  peas  in 
baskets;  so  hay,  if  it  be  damp  when  stacked, 
often  catches  fire. 

(18)  Quick  lime  sprinkled  with  water. 

(19)  Iron,  when  first  dissolved  by  acids  in  a 
glass,  and  without  any  application  to  fire;  the 
same  of  tin,  but  not  so  intensely. 

(20)  Animals,  particularly  internally;  al¬ 
though  the  heat  is  not  perceivable  by  the  touch 
in  insects,  on  account  of  their  small  size. 

(21)  Horse  dung,  and  the  like  excrement 
from  other  animals,  when  fresh. 

(22)  Strong  oil  of  sulphur  and  of  vitriol  ex¬ 
hibit  the  operation  of  heat  in  burning  linen. 

(23)  As  does  the  oil  of  marjoram,  and  like 
substances,  in  burning  the  bony  substance  of 
the  teeth. 

(24)  Strong  and  well  rectified  spirits  of  wine 
exhibit  the  same  effects;  so  that  white  of  eggs 
when  thrown  into  it  grows  hard  and  white, 
almost  in  the  same  manner  as  when  boiled,  and 
bread  becomes  burnt  and  brown  as  if  toasted. 

(25)  Aromatic  substances  and  warm  plants, 


as  the  dracunculus  [arum],  old  nasturtium, 
etc.,  which,  though  they  be  not  warm  to  the 
touch  (whether  whole  or  pulverized),  yet  are 
discovered  by  the  tongue  and  palate  to  be  warm 
and  almost  burning  when  slightly  masticated. 

(26)  Strong  vinegar  and  all  acids,  on  any 
part  of  the  body  not  clothed  with  the  epider¬ 
mis,  as  the  eye,  tongue,  or  any  wounded  part, 
or  where  the  skin  is  removed,  excite  a  pain  dif¬ 
fering  but  little  from  that  produced  by  heat. 

(27)  Even  a  severe  and  intense  cold  pro¬ 
duces  a  sensation  of  burning. 

Nec  Borece  penetrabile  jrigus  adurit. — Virgil. 1 

(28)  Other  instances. 

We  are  wont  to  call  this  a  Table  of  existence 
and  presence. 

12.  We  must  next  present  to  the  understand¬ 
ing  instances  which  do  not  admit  of  the  given 
nature,  for  form  (as  we  have  observed)  ought 
no  less  to  be  absent  where  the  given  nature  is 
absent,  than  to  be  present  where  it  is  present. 
If,  however,  we  were  to  examine  every  in¬ 
stance,  our  labor  would  be  infinite. 

Negatives,  therefore,  must  be  classed  under 
the  affirmatives,  and  the  want  of  the  given  na¬ 
ture  must  be  inquired  into  more  particularly 
in  objects  which  have  a  very  close  connection 
with  those  others  in  which  it  is  present  and 
manifest.  And  this  we  are  wont  to  term  a  table 
of  deviation  or  of  absence  in  proximity. 

Table  II.  Proximate  Instances  wanting  the 
Nature  of  Heat 

(1)  The  rays  of  the  moon,  stars,  and  comets, 
are  not  found  to  be  warm  to  the  touch,  nay, 
the  severest  cold  has  been  observed  to  take 
place  at  the  full  of  the  moon.  Yet  the  larger 
fixed  stars  are  supposed  to  increase  and  render 
more  intense  the  heat  of  the  sun,  as  he  ap¬ 
proaches  them,  when  the  sun  is  in  the  sign  of 
the  Lion  for  instance,  and  in  the  dog-days. 

(2)  The  rays  of  the  sun  in  what  is  called  the 
middle  region  of  the  air  give  no  heat,  to  ac¬ 
count  for  which  the  commonly  assigned  reason 
is  satisfactory;  namely,  that  that  region  is  nei¬ 
ther  sufficiently  near  to  the  body  of  the  sun 
whence  the  rays  emanate,  nor  to  the  earth 
whence  they  are  reflected.  And  the  fact  is  man¬ 
ifested  by  snow  being  perpetual  on  the  tops  of 
mountains,  unless  extremely  lofty.  But  it  is 
observed  on  the  other  hand  by  some,  that  at 

1  Cf.  Virgil,  Georgies ,  Bk.  1.  92,  93.  “Nor  burns  the  sharp 
cold  of  the  northern  blast.” 


1 42  NOVUM  ORGANUM 


the  Peak  of  Teneritfe,  and  also  among  the  An¬ 
des  of  Peru,  the  tops  of  the  mountains  are  free 
from  snow,  which  only  lies  in  the  lower  part  as 
you  ascend.  Besides,  the  air  on  the  summit  of 
these  mountains  is  found  to  be  by  no  means 
cold,  but  only  thin  and  sharp;  so  much  so,  that 
in  the  Andes  it  pricks  and  hurts  the  eyes  from 
its  extreme  sharpness,  and  even  excites  the 
orifice  of  the  stomach  and  produces  vomiting. 
The  ancients  also  observed,  that  the  rarity  of 
the  air  on  the  summit  of  Olympus  was  such, 
that  those  who  ascended  it  were  obliged  to  carry 
sponges  moistened  with  vinegar  and  water,  and 
to  apply  them  now  and  then  to  their  nostrils, 
as  the  air  was  not  dense  enough  for  their  res¬ 
piration;  on  the  summit  of  which  mountain  it 
is  also  related,  there  reigned  so  great  a  serenity 
and  calm,  free  from  rain,  snow,  or  wind,  that 
the  letters  traced  upon  the  ashes  of  the  sacri¬ 
fices  on  the  altar  of  Jupiter,  by  the  fingers  of 
those  who  had  offered  them,  would  remain  un¬ 
disturbed  till  the  next  year.  Those  even,  who 
at  this  day  go  to  the  top  of  the  Peak  of  Ten- 
eriffe,  walk  by  night  and  not  in  the  day-time, 
and  are  advised  and  pressed  by  their  guides,  as 
soon  as  the  sun  rises,  to  make  haste  in  their 
descent,  on  account  of  the  danger  (apparently 
arising  from  the  rarity  of  the  atmosphere),  lest 
their  breathing  should  be  relaxed  and  suffo¬ 
cated. 

(3)  The  reflection  of  the  solar  rays  in  the 
polar  regions  is  found  to  be  weak  and  ineffi¬ 
cient  in  producing  heat,  so  that  the  Dutch, 
who  wintered  in  Nova  Zembla,  and  expected 
that  their  vessel  would  be  freed  about  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  July  from  the  obstruction  of  the 
mass  of  ice  which  had  blocked  it  up,  were  dis¬ 
appointed  and  obliged  to  embark  in  their  boat. 
Hence  the  direct  rays  of  the  sun  appear  to  have 
but  little  power  even  on  the  plain,  and  when 
reflected,  unless  they  are  multiplied  and  con¬ 
densed,  which  takes  place  when  the  sun  tends 
more  to  the  perpendicular;  for,  then,  the  inci¬ 
dence  of  the  rays  occurs  at  more  acute  angles, 
so  that  the  reflected  rays  are  nearer  to  each 
other,  whilst,  on  the  contrary,  when  the  sun  is 
in  a  very  oblique  position,  the  angles  of  inci¬ 
dence  are  very  obtuse,  and  the  reflected  rays 
at  a  greater  distance.  In  the  mean  time  it  must 
be  observed,  that  there  may  be  many  opera¬ 
tions  of  the  solar  rays,  relating,  too,  to  the  na, 
ture  of  heat,  which  are  not  proportioned  to  our 
touch,  so  that,  with  regard  to  us,  they  do  not 
tend  to  produce  warmth,  but,  with  regard  to 
some  other  bodies,  have  their  due  effect  in 
producing  it. 


(4)  Let  the  following  experiment  be  made. 
Take  a  lens  the  reverse  of  a  burning-glass,  and 
place  it  between  the  hand  and  the  solar  rays, 
and  observe  whether  it  diminish  the  heat  of 
the  sun  as  a  burning  glass  increases  it.  For  it  is 
clear,  with  regard  to  the  visual  rays,  that  in 
proportion  as  the  lens  is  made  of  unequal  thick¬ 
ness  in  the  middle  and  at  its  sides,  the  images 
appear  either  more  diffused  or  contracted.  It 
should  be  seen,  therefore,  if  the  same  be  true 
with  regard  to  heat. 

(5)  Let  the  experiment  be  well  tried,  whether 
the  lunar  rays  can  be  received  and  collected  by 
the  strongest  and  best  burning-glasses,  so  as  to 
produce  even  the  least  degree  of  heat.  But  if 
that  degree  be,  perhaps,  so  subtile  and  weak, 
as  not  to  be  perceived  or  ascertained  by  the 
touch,  we  must  have  recorse  to  those  glasses 
which  indicate  the  warm  or  cold  state  of  the 
atmosphere,  and  let  the  lunar  rays  fall  through 
the  burning-glass  on  the  top  of  this  thermome¬ 
ter,  and  then  notice  if  the  water  be  depressed 
by  the  heat 

(6)  Let  the  burning-glass  be  tried  on  warm 
objects  which  emit  no  luminous  rays,  as  heated 
but  not  ignited  iron  or  stone,  or  hot  water,  or 
the  like;  and  observe  whether  the  heat  become 
increased  and  condensed,  as  happens  with  the 
solar  rays. 

(7)  Let  it  be  tried  on  common  flame. 

(8)  The  effect  of  comets  (if  we  can  reckon 
them  amongst  meteors)  in  augmenting  the 
heat  of  the  season  is  not  found  to  be  constant 
or  clear,  although  droughts  have  generally  been 
observed  to  follow  them.  However,  luminous 
lines,  and  pillars,  and  openings,  and  the  like, 
appear  more  often  in  winter  than  in  summer, 
and  especially  with  the  most  intense  cold  but 
joined  with  drought.  Lightning,  and  corusca¬ 
tions,  and  thunder,  however,  rarely  happen  in 
winter,  and  generally  at  the  time  of  the  great¬ 
est  heats.  The  appearances  we  term  falling 
stars  are  generally  supposed  to  consist  of  some 
shining  and  inflamed  viscous  substance,  rather 
than  of  violently  hot  matter;  but  let  this  be 
further  investigated. 

(9)  Some  coruscations  emit  light  without 
burning,  but  are  never  accompanied  by  thun¬ 
der. 

(10)  Eructations  and  eruptions  of  flame  are 
to  be  found  in  cold  climates  as  well  as  in  hot, 
as  in  Iceland  and  Greenland;  just  as  the  trees 
of  cold  countries  are  sometimes  inflammable 
and  more  pitchy  and  resinous  than  in  warm, 
as  the  fir,  pine,  and  the  like.  But  the  position 
and  nature  of  the  soil,  where  such  eruptions 


SECOND  BOOK 


are  wont  to  happen,  are  not  yet  sufficiently  in¬ 
vestigated  to  enable  us  to  subjoin  a  negative 
instance  to  the  affirmative. 

(11)  All  flame  is  constantly  more  or  less 
warm,  and  this  instance  is  not  altogether  neg¬ 
ative;  yet  it  is  said  that  the  ignis  fatuus  (as  it 
is  called),  and  which  sometimes  is  driven  against 
walls,  has  but  little  heat;  perhaps  it  resembles 
that  of  spirits  of  wine,  which  is  mild  and  gen¬ 
tle.  That  flame,  however,  appears  yet  milder, 
which  in  some  well  authenticated  and  serious 
histories  is  said  to  have  appeared  round  the 
head  and  hair  of  boys  and  virgins,  and  instead 
of  burning  their  hair,  merely  to  have  played 
about  it.  And  it  is  most  certain  that  a  sort  of 
flash,  without  any  evident  heat,  has  sometimes 
been  seen  about  a  horse  when  sweating  at 
night,  or  in  damp  weather.  It  is  also  a  well- 
known  fact,  and  it  was  almost  considered  as  a 
miracle,  that  a  few  years  since  a  girl’s  apron 
sparkled  when  a  little  shaken  or  rubbed,  which 
was,  perhaps,  occasioned  by  the  alum  or  salts 
with  which  the  apron  was  imbued,  and  which, 
after  having  been  stuck  together  and  incrusted 
rather  strongly  were  broken  by  the  friction. 
It  is  well  known  that  all  sugar,  whether  can¬ 
died  or  plain,  if  it  be  hard,  will  sparkle  when 
broken  or  scraped  in  the  dark.  In  like  manner 
sea  and  salt  water  is  sometimes  found  to  shine 
at  night  when  struck  violently  by  the  oar.  The 
foam  of  the  sea  when  agitated  by  tempests  also 
sparkles  at  night,  and  the  Spaniards  call  this 
appearance  the  sea's  lungs.  It  has  not  been 
sufficiently  ascertained  what  degree  of  heat  at¬ 
tends  the  flame  which  the  ancient  sailors  called 
Castor  and  Pollux,  and  the  moderns  call  St. 
Ermu’s  fire. 

Every  ignited  body  that  is  red-hot  is  always 
warm,  although  without  flame,  nor  is  any  neg¬ 
ative  instance  subjoined  to  this  affirmative. 
Rotten  wood,  however,  approaches  nearly  to 
it,  for  it  shines  at  night,  and  yet  is  not  found 
to  be  warm;  and  the  putrefying  scales  of  fish 
which  shine  in  the  same  manner  are  not  warm 
to  the  touch,  nor  the  body  of  the  glowworm,  or 
of  the  fly  called  Luciola. 

(13)  The  situation  and  nature  of  the  soil  of 
natural  warm  baths  have  not  been  sufficiently 
investigated,  and  therefore  a  negative  instance 
is  not  subjoined. 

(14)  To  the  instances  of  warm  liquids  we 
may  subjoin  the  negative  one  of  the  peculiar 
nature  of  liquids  in  general;  for  no  tangible  liq¬ 
uid  is  known  that  is  at  once  warm  in  its  nature 
and  constantly  continues  warm;  but  their  heat 
is  only  superinduced  as  an  adventitious  nature 


for  a  limited  time,  so  that  those  which  are  ex¬ 
tremely  warm  in  their  power  and  effect,  as 
spirits  of  wine,  chemical  aromatic  oils,  the  oils 
of  vitriol  and  sulphur,  and  the  like,  and  which 
speedily  burn,  are  yet  cold  at  first  to  the  touch, 
and  the  water  of  natural  baths,  poured  into 
any  vessel  and  separated  from  its  source,  cools 
down  like  water  heated  by  the  fire.  It  is,  how¬ 
ever,  true  that  oily  substances  are  rather  less 
cold  to  the  touch  than  those  that  are  aqueous, 
oil  for  instance  than  water,  silk  than  linen;  but 
this  belongs  to  the  table  of  degrees  of  cold. 

(15)  In  like  manner  we  may  subjoin  a  nega¬ 
tive  instance  to  that  of  warm  vapor,  derived 
from  the  nature  of  vapor  itself,  as  far  as  we  are 
acquainted  with  it.  For  exhalations  from  oily 
substances,  though  easily  inflammable,  are  yet 
never  warm  unless  recently  exhaled  from  some 
warm  substance. 

(16)  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  instance  of 
air;  for  we  never  perceive  that  air  is  warm  un¬ 
less  confined  or  pressed,  or  manifestly  heated 
by  the  sun,  by  fire,  or  some  other  warm  body. 

(17)  A  negative  instance  in  exhibited  in 
weather  by  its  coldness  with  an  east  or  north 
wind,  beyond  what  the  season  would  lead  us  to 
expect,  just  as  the  contrary  takes  place  with 
the  south  or  west  winds.  An  inclination  to  rain 
(especially  in  winter)  attends  warm  weather, 
and  to  frost  cold  weather. 

(18)  A  negative  instance  as  to  air  confined  in 
caverns  may  be  observed  in  summer.  Indeed, 
we  should  make  a  more  diligent  inquiry  into 
the  nature  of  confined  air.  For  in  the  first  place 
the  qualities  of  air  in  its  own  nature  with  re¬ 
gard  to  heat  and  cold  may  reasonably  be  the 
subject  of  doubt;  for  air  evidently  derives  its 
heat  from  the  effects  of  celestial  bodies,  and 
possibly  its  cold  from  the  exhalation  of  the 
earth,  and  in  the  mid  region  of  air  (as  it  is 
termed)  from  cold  vapors  and  snow,  so  that  no 
judgment  can  be  formed  of  the  nature  of  air  by 
that  which  is  out  of  doors  and  exposed,  but  a 
more  correct  one  might  be  derived  from  con¬ 
fined  air.  It  is  necessary,  however,  that  the  air 
should  be  enclosed  in  a  vessel  of  such  materials 
as  would  not  imbue  it  with  heat  or  cold  of  it¬ 
self,  nor  easily  admit  the  influence  of  the  ex¬ 
ternal  atmosphere.  The  experiment  should  be 
made  therefore  with  an  earthen  jar,  covered 
with  folds  of  leather  to  protect  it  from  the  ex¬ 
ternal  air,  and  the  air  should  be  kept  three  or 
four  days  in  this  vessel  well  closed.  On  opening 
the  jar,  the  degree  of  heat  may  be  ascertained 
either  by  the  hand  or  a  graduated  glass  tube. 

(19)  There  is  a  similar  doubt  as  to  whether 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


x44 

the  warmth  of  wool,  skins,  feathers,  and  the 
like,  is  derived  from  a  slight  inherent  heat, 
since  they  are  animal  excretions,  or  from  their 
being  of  a  certain  fat  and  oily  nature  that 
accords  with  heat,  or  merely  from  the  confine¬ 
ment  and  separation  of  air  which  we  spoke  of 
in  the  preceding  paragraph;  for  all  air  appears 
to  possess  a  certain  degree  of  warmth  when 
separated  from  the  external  atmosphere.  Let 
an  experiment  be  made,  therefore,  with  fibrous 
substances  of  linen,  and  not  of  wool,  feathers, 
or  silk,  which  are  animal  excretions.  For  it  is  to 
be  observed  that  all  powders  (where  air  is  man¬ 
ifestly  enclosed)  are  less  cold  than  the  sub¬ 
stances  when  whole,  just  as  we  imagine  froth 
(which  contains  air)  to  be  less  cold  than  the 
liquid  itself. 

(20)  We  have  here  no  exactly  negative  in¬ 
stance,  for  we  are  not  acquainted  with  any  body 
tangible  or  spirituous  which  does  not  admit  of 
heat  when  exposed  to  the  fire.  There  is,  how¬ 
ever,  this  difference,  that  some  admit  it  more 
rapidly,  as  air,  oil,  and  water;  others  more 
slowly,  as  stone  and  metals.  This,  however,  be¬ 
longs  to  the  table  of  degrees. 

(21)  No  negative  is  here  subjoined,  except 
the  remark  that  sparks  are  not  kindled  by  flint 
and  steel,  or  any  other  hard  substance,  unless 
some  small  particles  of  the  stone  or  metal  are 
struck  off,  and  that  the  air  never  forms  them 
by  friction,  as  is  commonly  supposed;  besides, 
the  sparks  from  the  weight  of  the  ignited  sub¬ 
stance  have  a  tendency  todescend  rather  than  to 
rise,  and  when  extinguished  become  a  sort  of 
dark  ash. 

(22)  We  are  of  opinion  that  here  again  there 
is  no  negative;  for  we  are  not  acquainted  with 
any  tangible  body  which  does  not  become  de¬ 
cidedly  warm  by  friction,  so  that  the  ancients 
feigned  that  the  gods  had  no  other  means  or 
power  of  creating  heat  than  the  friction  of  air, 
by  rapid  and  violent  rotation.  On  this  point, 
however,  furtherinquirymust  bemade,  whether 
bodies  projected  by  machines  (as  balls  from 
cannon)  do  not  derive  some  degree  of  heat 
from  meeting  the  air,  which  renders  them  some¬ 
what  warm  when  they  fall.  The  air  in  motion 
rather  cools  than  heats,  as  in  the  winds,  the 
bellows,  or  breath  when  the  mouth  is  con¬ 
tracted.  The  motion,  however,  in  such  in¬ 
stances  is  not  sufficiently  rapid  to  excite  heat, 
and  is  applied  to  a  body  of  air,  and  not  to  its 
component  parts,  so  that  it  is  not  surprising 
that  heat  should  not  be  generated. 

(23)  We  must  make  a  more  diligent  inquiry 
into  thisinstance;for  herbs  and  green  and  moist 


vegetables  appear  to  possess  a  latent  heat  so 
small,  however,  as  not  to  be  perceived  by  the 
touch  in  single  specimens,  but  when  thev  are 
united  and  confined,  so  that  their  spirit  cannot 
exhale  into  the  air,  and  they  rather  warm  each 
other,  their  heat  is  at  once  manifested,  and  even 
flame  occasionally  in  suitable  substances. 

(24)  Here,  too,  we  must  make  a  more  diligent 
inquiry;  for  quick  lime,  when  sprinkled  with 
water,  appears  to  conceive  heat,  either  from  its 
being  collected  into  one  point  (as  we  observed 
of  herbs  when  confined),  or  from  the  irritation 
and  exasperation  of  the  fiery  spirit  by  water 
which  occasions  a  conflict  and  struggle.  The 
true  reason  will  more  readily  be  shown  if  oil  be 
used  instead  of  water,  for  oil  will  equally  tend 
to  collect  the  confined  spirit,  but  not  to  irritate. 
The  experiment  may  be  made  more  general, 
both  by  using  the  ashes  and  calcined  products 
of  different  bodies  and  by  pouring  different  liq¬ 
uids  upon  them. 

(25)  A  negative  instance  may  be  subjoined 
of  other  metals  which  are  more  soft  and  soluble; 
for  leaf  gold  dissolved  by  aqua  regia,  or  lead  by 
aqua  fortis,  are  not  warm  to  the  touch  whilst 
dissolving,  no  more  is  quicksilver  (as  far  as  I 
remember),  but  silver  excites  a  slight  heat,  and 
so  does  copper,  and  tin  yet  more  plainly,  and 
most  of  all  iron  and  steel,  which  excite  not  only 
a  powerful  heat,  but  a  violent  bubbling.  The 
heat,  therefore,  appears  to  be  occasioned  by  the 
struggle  which  takes  place  when  these  strong 
dissolvents  penetrate,  dig  into,  and  tear  asun¬ 
der  the  parts  of  those  substances,  whilst  the 
substances  themselves  resist.  When,  however, 
the  substances  yield  more  easily,  scarcely  any 
heat  is  excited. 

(26)  There  is  no  negative  instance  with  regard 
to  the  heat  of  animals,  except  in  insects  (as  has 
been  observed),  owing  to  their  small  size;  for  in 
fishes,  as  compared  with  land  animals,  a  lower 
degree  rather  than  a  deprivation  of  heat  is  ob¬ 
servable.  In  plants  and  vegetables,  both  as  to 
theirexudations  and  pith  when  freshly  exposed, 
there  is  no  sensible  degree  of  heat.  But  in  ani¬ 
mals  there  is  a  great  difference  in  the  degree, 
both  in  particular  parts  (for  the  heat  varies  neat* 
the  heart,  the  brain,  and  the  extremities)  and 
in  the  circumstances  in  which  they  are  placed, 
such  as  violent  exercise  and  fevers. 

(27)  Here,  again,  there  is  scarcely  a  negative 
instance.  I  might  add  that  the  excrements  of  ani¬ 
mals,  even  when  they  are  no  longer  fresh,  pos¬ 
sess  evidently  some  effective  heat,  as  is  shown 
by  their  enriching  the  soil. 

(28)  Such  liquids  (whether  oily  or  watery)  as 


SECOND  BOOK 


are  intensely  acrid  exhibit  the  effects  of  heat, 
by  the  separation  and  burning  of  bodies  after 
some  little  action  upon  them,  yet  they  are  not 
at  first  warm  to  the  touch,  but  they  act  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  affinity  and  the  pores  of  the 
substances  to  which  they  are  applied;  for  aqua 
regia  dissolves  gold  but  not  silver — on  the  con¬ 
trary,  aqua  fortis  dissolves  silver  but  not  gold; 
neither  of  them  dissolves  glass,  and  so  of  the 
rest. 

(29)  Let  spirits  of  wine  be  tried  on  wood,  or 
butter,  wax,  or  pitch,  to  see  if  this  will  melt  them 
at  all  by  their  heat;  for  the  twenty-fourth  in¬ 
stance  shows  that  they  possess  properties  re¬ 
sembling  those  of  heat  in  causing  incrustation. 
Let  an  experiment  also  be  made  with  a  grad¬ 
uated  glass  or  colander,  concave  at  the  top,  by 
pouring  well-rectified  spirits  of  wine  into  the 
cavity,  and  covering  it  up  in  order  that  they 
may  the  better  retain  their  heat,  then  observe 
whether  their  heat  make  the  water  descend. 

(30)  Spices  and  acrid  herbs  are  sensibly  warm 
to  the  palate,  and  still  more  so  when  taken  in¬ 
ternally ;  one  should  see,  therefore,  on  what  other 
substances  they  exhibit  the  effects  of  heat.  Now, 
sailors  tell  us  that  when  large  quantities  of  spices 
are  suddenly  opened,  after  having  been  shut 
up  for  some  time,  there  is  some  danger  of  fever 
and  inflammation  to  those  who  stir  them  or 
take  them  out.  An  experiment  might,  therefore, 
be  made  whether  such  spices  and  herbs,  when 
produced,  will,  like  smoke,  dry  fish  and  meat 
hung  up  over  them. 

(31)  There  is  an  acrid  effect  and  a  degree  of 
penetration  in  cold  liquids,  such  as  vinegar  and 
oil  of  vitriol,  as  well  as  in  warm,  such  as  oil  of 
marjoram  and  the  like;  they  have,  therefore, 
an  equal  effect  in  causing  animated  substances 
to  smart,  and  separating  and  consuming  inani¬ 
mate  parts.  There  is  not  any  negative  instance 
as  to  this,  nor  does  there  exist  any  animal  pain 
unaccompanied  by  the  sensation  of  heat. 

(32)  There  are  many  effects  common  to  cold 
and  heat,  however,  different  in  their  process; 
for  snowballs  appear  to  burn  boys’  hands  after 
a  little  time,  and  cold  no  less  than  fire  preserves 
bodies  from  putrefaction — besides  both  heat 
and  cold  contract  bodies.  But  it  is  better  to  re¬ 
fer  these  instances  and  the  like  to  the  investi¬ 
gation  of  cold. 

13.  In  the  third  place  we  must  exhibit  to  the 
understanding  the  instances  in  which  that  na¬ 
ture,  which  is  the  object  of  our  inquiries,  is  pres¬ 
ent  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  either  by  com¬ 
paring  its  increase  and  decrease  in  the  same  ob¬ 
ject,  or  its  degree  in  different  objects;  for  since 


the  form  of  a  thing  is  its  very  essence,  and  the 
thing  only  differs  from  its  form  as  the  apparent 
from  the  actual  object,  or  the  exterior  from  the 
interior,  or  that  which  is  considered  with  rela¬ 
tion  to  man  from  that  which  is  considered  with 
relation  to  the  universe;  it  necessarily  follows 
that  no  nature  can  be  considered  a  real  form 
which  does  not  uniformly  diminish  and  in¬ 
crease  with  the  given  nature.  We  are  wont  to 
call  this  our  Table  of  degrees  or  comparative  in¬ 
stances. 

Table  III.  Degrees  or  Comparative 
Instances  of  Heat 

We  will  first  speak  of  those  bodies  which  ex¬ 
hibit  no  degree  of  heat  sensible  to  the  touch, 
but  appear  rather  to  possess  a  potential  heat, 
or  disposition  and  preparation  for  it.  We  will 
then  go  on  to  others,  which  are  actually  warm 
to  the  touch,  and  observe  the  strength  and  de¬ 
gree  of  it. 

(1)  There  is  no  known  solid  or  tangible  body 
which  is  by  its  own  nature  originally  warm;  for 
neither  stone,  metal,  sulphur,  fossils,  wood,  wa¬ 
ter,  nor  dead  animal  carcasses  are  found  warm. 
The  warm  springs  in  baths  appear  to  be  heated 
accidentally,  by  flame,  subterraneous  fire  (such 
as  is  thrown  up  by  Etna  and  many  other  moun¬ 
tains),  or  by  the  contact  of  certain  bodies,  as 
heat  is  exhibited  in  the  dissolution  of  iron  and 
tin.  The  degree  of  heat,  therefore,  in  inanimate 
objects  is  not  sensible  to  our  touch;  but  they 
differ  in  their  degrees  of  cold,  for  wood  and  met¬ 
al  are  not  equally  cold.  This,  however,  belongs 
to  the  table  of  degrees  of  cold. 

(2)  But  with  regard  to  potential  heat  and  pre¬ 
disposition  to  flame,  we  find  many  inanimate 
substances  wonderfully  adapted  to  it,  as  sul¬ 
phur,  naphtha,  and  saltpetre. 

(3)  Bodies  which  have  previously  acquired 
heat,  as  horse-dung  from  the  animal,  or  lime, 
and  perhaps  ashes  and  soot  from  fire,  retain 
some  latent  portion  of  it.  Hence  distillations 
and  separations  of  substances  are  effected  by 
burying  them  in  horse-dung,  and  heat  is  excit¬ 
ed  in  lime  by  sprinkling  it  with  water  (as  has 
been  before  observed). 

(4)  In  the  vegetable  world  we  know  of  no 
plant,  nor  part  of  any  plant  (as  the  exudations 
or  pith)  that  is  warm  to  man’s  touch.  Yet  (as 
we  have  before  observed)  green  weeds  grow 
warm  when  confined,  and  some  vegetables  are 
warm  and  others  cold  to  our  internal  touch,  i.e.> 
the  palate  and  stomach,  or  even  after  a  while 
to  our  external  skin  (as  is  shown  in  plasters  and 
ointments). 


i46  NOVUM  ORGANUM 


(5)  We  know  of  nothing  in  the  various  parts 
of  animals,  when  dead  or  detached  from  the 
rest,  that  is  warm  to  the  touch;  for  horse-dung 
itself  does  not  retain  its  heat,  unless  it  be  con¬ 
fined  and  buried.  All  dung,  however,  appears 
to  possess  a  potential  heat,  as  in  manuring  fields; 
so  also  dead  bodies  are  endued  with  this  latent 
and  potential  heat  to  such  a  degree,  that  in  cem¬ 
eteries  where  people  are  interred  daily  the  earth 
acquires  a  secret  heat,  which  consumes  any  re¬ 
cently-deposited  body  much  sooner  than  pure 
earth;  and  they  tell  you  that  the  people  of  the 
East  are  acquainted  with  a  fine  soft  cloth,  made 
of  the  down  of  birds,  which  can  melt  butter 
wrapped  gently  up  in  it  by  its  own  warmth. 

(6)  Manures,  such  as  every  kind  of  dung, 
chalk,  sea-sand,  salt,  and  the  like,  have  some 
disposition  towards  heat. 

(7)  All  putrefaction  exhibits  some  slight  de¬ 
gree  of  heat,  though  not  enough  to  be  percept¬ 
ible  by  the  touch;  for  neither  the  substances 
which  by  putrefaction  are  converted  into  ani- 
malculae,  as  flesh  and  cheese,  nor  rotten  wood 
which  shines  in  the  dark,  are  warm  to  the  touch. 
The  heat,  however,  of  putrid  substances  dis¬ 
plays  itself  occasionally  in  a  disgusting  and 
strong  scent. 

(8)  The  first  degree  of  heat,  therefore,  in  sub¬ 
stances  which  are  warm  to  the  human  touch 
appears  to  be  that  of  animals,  and  this  admits 
of  a  great  variety  of  degrees,  for  the  lowest  (as 
in  insects)  is  scarcely  perceptible,  the  highest 
scarcely  equals  that  of  the  sun's  rays  in  warm 
climates  and  weather,  and  is  not  so  acute  as  to 
be  insufferable  to  the  hand.  It  is  said,  however, 
of  Constantius,  and  some  others  of  a  very  dry 
constitution  and  habit  of  body,  that  when  at¬ 
tacked  with  violent  fevers,  they  became  so 
warm  as  to  appear  almost  to  burn  the  hand  ap¬ 
plied  to  them. 

(9)  Animals  become  more  warm  by  motion 
and  exercise,  wine  and  feasting,  venery,  burn¬ 
ing  fevers,  and  grief. 

(10)  In  the  paroxysm  of  intermittent  fevers 
the  patients  are  at  first  seized  with  cold  and 
shivering,  but  soon  afterwards  become  more 
heated  than  at  first— in  burning  and  pestilen¬ 
tial  fevers  they  are  hot  from  the  beginning. 

(11)  Let  further  inquiry  be  made  into  the 
comparative  heat  of  different  animals,  as  fishes, 
quadrupeds,  serpents,  birds,  and  also  of  the  dif¬ 
ferent  species,  as  the  lion,  the  kite,  or  man;  for, 
according  to  the  vulgar  opinion,  fishes  are  the 
least  warm  internally,  and  birds  the  most,  par¬ 
ticularly  doves,  hawks,  and  ostriches. 

(12)  Let  further  inquiry  be  made  as  to  the 


comparative  heat  in  different  parts  and  limbs 
ot  the  same  animal;  for  milk,  blood,  seed,  and 
eggs  are  moderately  warm,  and  less  hot  than  the 
outward  flesh  of  the  animal  when  in  motion  or 
agitated.  The  degree  of  heat  of  the  brain,  stom¬ 
ach,  heart,  and  the  rest,  has  not  yet  been  equal¬ 
ly  well  investigated. 

(13)  All  animals  are  externally  cold  in  win¬ 
ter  and  cold  weather,  but  are  thought  to  be  in¬ 
ternally  warmer. 

(14)  The  heat  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  even 
in  the  warmest  climates  and  seasons,  never 
reaches  such  a  pitch  as  to  light  or  burn  the 
driest  wood  or  straw,  or  even  tinder  without 
the  aid  of  burning-glasses.  It  can,  however, 
raise  vapor  from  moist  substances. 

(15)  Astronomers  tell  us  that  some  stars  are 
hotter  than  others.  Mars  is  considered  the 
warmest  after  the  Sun,  then  Jupiter,  then  Ve¬ 
nus.  The  Moon  and,  above  all,  Saturn,  are  con¬ 
sidered  to  be  cold.  Among  the  fixed  stars  Sirius 
is  thought  the  warmest,  then  Cor  Leonis  or 
Regulus,  then  the  lesser  Dog-star. 

(16)  The  sun  gives  out  more  heat  as  it  ap¬ 
proaches  towards  the  perpendicular  or  zenith, 
which  may  be  supposed  to  be  the  case  with  the 
other  planets,  according  to  their  degree  of  heat; 
for  instance,  that  Jupiter  gives  out  more  heat 
when  situated  beneath  Cancer  or  Leo  than  when 
he  is  beneath  Capricorn  and  Aquarius. 

(17)  It  is  to  be  supposed  that  the  sun  and 
other  planets  give  more  heat  in  perigee,  from 
their  approximation  to  the  earth,  than  when  in 
apogee.  But  if  in  any  country  the  sun  should  be 
both  in  its  perigee  and  nearer  to  the  perpendic¬ 
ular  at  the  same  time,  it  must  necessarily  give 
out  more  heat  than  in  a  country  where  it  is  also 
in  perigee,  but  situated  more  obliquely;  so  that 
the  comparative  altitude  of  the  planets  should 
be  observed,  and  their  approach  to  or  declina¬ 
tion  from  the  perpendicular  in  different  coun¬ 
tries. 

(18)  The  sun  and  other  planets  are  thought 
also  to  give  out  more  heat  in  proportion  as  they 
are  nearer  to  the  larger  fixed  stars,  as  when  the 
sun  is  in  Leo  he  is  nearer  Cor  Leonis,  Cauda 
Leonis,  Spica  Virginis,  Sirius,  and  the  lesser 
Dog-star,  than  when  he  is  in  Cancer,  where, 
however,  he  approaches  nearer  to  the  perpen¬ 
dicular.  It  is  probable,  also,  that  the  quarters 
of  the  heavens  produce  a  greater  heat  (though 
not  perceptibly),  in  proportion  as  they  are 
adorned  with  a  greater  number  of  stars,  partic¬ 
ularly  those  of  the  first  magnitude. 

(19)  On  the  whole,  the  heat  of  the  heavenly 
bodies  is  augmented  in  three  ways:  1.  The  ap- 


SECOND  BOOK 


proach  to  the  perpendicular;  2.  Proximity  or 
their  perigee;  3.  The  conjunction  or  union  of 
stars. 

(20)  There  is  a  very  considerable  difference 
between  the  degree  of  heat  in  animals,  and  even 
in  the  rays  of  the  heavenly  bodies  (as  they 
reach  us),  and  the  heat  of  the  most  gentle  flame, 
and  even  of  all  ignited  substances,  nay  liquids, 
or  the  air  itself  when  unusually  heated  by  fire. 
For  the  flame  of  spirit  of  wine,  though  diffused 
and  uncollected,  is  yet  able  to  set  straw,  linen, 
or  paper  on  fire,  which  animal  heat,  or  that  of 
the  sun,  will  never  accomplish  without  a  burn¬ 
ing-glass. 

(21)  There  are,  however,  many  degrees  of 
strength  and  weakness  in  flame  and  ignited 
bodies;  but  no  diligent  inquiry  has  been  made 
in  this  respect,  and  we  must,  therefore,  pass  it 
hastily  over.  Of  all  flames,  that  of  spirits  of  wine 
appears  to  be  the  most  gentle,  except,  perhaps, 
the  Ignis  Fatuus ,  or  the  flashes  from  the  per¬ 
spiration  of  animals.  After  this  we  should  be  in¬ 
clined  to  place  the  flame  of  light  and  porous 
vegetables,  such  as  straw,  reeds,  and  dried 
leaves;  from  which  the  flame  of  hair  or  feathers 
differs  but  little.  Then,  perhaps,  comes  the 
flame  of  wood,  particularly  that  which  contains 
but  little  rosin  or  pitch;  that  of  small  wood, 
however,  (such  as  is  usually  tied  up  in  fagots), 
is  milder  than  that  of  the  trunks  or  roots 
of  trees.  This  can  be  easily  tried  in  iron  fur¬ 
naces,  where  a  fire  of  fagots  or  branches  of  trees 
is  of  little  service.  Next  follows  the  flame  of  oil, 
tallow,  wax,  and  the  like  oily  and  fat  substances, 
which  are  not  very  violent.  But  a  most  power¬ 
ful  heat  is  found  in  pitch  and  rosin,  and  a  still 
greater  in  sulphur,  camphor,  naphtha,  saltpe¬ 
tre,  and  salts  (after  they  have  discharged  their 
crude  matter),  and  in  their  compounds;  as  in 
gunpowder,  Greek  fire  (vulgarly  called  wildfire), 
and  its  varieties,  which  possess  such  a  stubborn 
heat  as  scarcely  to  be  extinguished  by  water. 

(22)  We  consider  that  the  flame  which  results 
from  some  imperfect  metals  is  very  strong  and 
active;  but  on  all  these  points  further  inquiry 
should  be  made. 

(23)  The  flame  of  vivid  lightning  appears  to 
exceed  all  the  above,  so  as  sometimes  to  have 
melted  even  wrought  iron  into  drops,  which  the 
other  flames  cannot  accomplish. 

(24)  In  ignited  bodies  there  are  different  de¬ 
grees  of  heat,  concerning  which,  also,  a  diligent 
inquiry  has  not  been  made.  We  consider  the 
faintest  heat  to  be  that  of  tinder,  touchwood, 
and  dry  match-rope,  such  as  is  used  for  dis¬ 
charging  cannon.  Next  follows  that  of  ignited 


charcoal  or  cinders,  and  even  bricks,  and  the 
like;  but  the  most  violent  is  that  of  ignited  met¬ 
als,  as  iron,  copper,  and  the  like.  Further  in¬ 
quiry,  however,  must  be  made  into  this  also. 

(25)  Some  ignited  bodies  are  found  to  be 
much  warmer  than  some  flames;  for  instance, 
red  hot  iron  is  much  warmer,  and  burns  more 
than  the  flame  of  spirits  of  wine. 

(26)  Some  bodies  even  not  ignited,  but  only 
heated  by  the  fire,  as  boiling  water,  and  the  air 
confined  in  reverberatories,  surpass  in  heat 
many  flames  and  ignited  substances. 

(27)  Motion  increases  heat,  as  is  shown  in  the 
bellows  and  the  blow-pipe;  for  the  harder  met¬ 
als  are  not  dissolved  or  melted  by  steady  quiet 
fire,  without  the  aid  of  the  blow-pipe. 

(28)  Let  an  experiment  be  made  with  burn¬ 
ing-glasses;  in  which  respect  I  have  observed, 
that  if  a  glass  be  placed  at  the  distance  of  ten 
inches,  for  instance,  from  the  combustible  ob¬ 
ject,  it  does  not  kindle  or  burn  it  so  readily,  as 
if  the  glass  be  placed  at  the  distance  of  five 
inches  (for  instance),  and  be  then  gradually  and 
slowly  withdrawn  to  the  distance  of  ten  inches. 
The  cone  and  focus  of  the  rays,  however,  are 
the  same,  but  the  mere  motion  increases  the  ef¬ 
fect  of  the  heat. 

(29)  Conflagrations,  which  take  place  with  a 
high  wind,  are  thought  to  make  greater  way 
against  than  with  the  wind,  because  when  the 
wind  slackens,  the  flame  recoils  more  rapidly 
than  it  advances  when  the  wind  is  favorable. 

(30)  Flame  does  not  burst  out  or  arise  unless 
it  have  some  hollow  space  to  move  and  exert 
itself  in,  except  in  the  exploding  flame  of  gun¬ 
powder,  and  the  like,  where  the  compression 
and  confinement  of  the  flame  increase  its  fury. 

(31)  The  anvil  becomes  so  hot  by  the  ham¬ 
mer,  that  if  it  were  a  thin  plate  it  might  prob¬ 
ably  grow  red,  like  ignited  iron  by  repeated 
strokes.  Let  the  experiment  be  tried. 

(32)  But  in  ignited  bodies  that  are  porous,  so 
as  to  leave  room  for  the  fire  to  move  itself,  if 
its  motion  be  prevented  by  strong  compression, 
the  fire  is  immediately  extinguished;  thus  it  is 
with  tinder,  or  the  burning  snuff  of  a  candle  or 
lamp,  or  even  hot  charcoal  or  cinders;  for  when 
they  are  squeezed  by  snuffers,  or  the  foot,  and 
the  like,  the  effect  of  the  fire  instantly  ceases. 

(33)  The  approach  towards  a  hot  body  in¬ 
creases  heat  in  proportion  to  the  approxima¬ 
tion;  a  similar  effect  to  that  of  light,  for  the 
nearer  any  object  is  placed  towards  the  light, 
the  more  visible  it  becomes. 

(34)  The  union  of  different  heats  increases 
heat,  unless  the  substances  be  mixed;  for  a  large 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


148 

and  small  fire  in  the  same  spot  tend  mutually 
to  increase  each  other’s  heat,  but  lukewarm  wa¬ 
ter  poured  into  boiling  water  cools  it. 

(35)  The  continued  neighborhood  of  a  warm 
body  increases  heat.  For  the  heat,  which  per¬ 
petually  passes  and  emanates  from  it,  being 
mixed  with  that  which  preceded  it,  multiplies 
the  whole.  A  fire,  for  instance,  does  not  warm 
a  room  in  half  an  hour  as  much  as  the  same  fire 
would  in  an  hour.  This  does  not  apply  to  light, 
for  a  lamp  or  candle  placed  in  a  spot  gives  no 
more  light  by  remaining  there,  than  it  did  at 
first. 

(36)  The  irritation  of  surrounding  cold  in¬ 
creases  heat,  as  may  be  seen  in  fires  during  a 
sharp  frost.  We  think  that  this  is  owing  not 
merely  to  the  confinement  and  compression  of 
the  heat  (which  forms  a  sort  of  union),  but  also 
by  the  exasperation  of  it,  as  when  the  air  or  a 
stick  is  violently  compressed  or  bent,  it  recoils, 
not  only  to  the  point  it  first  occupied,  but  still 
fartherback.  Let  an  accurateexperiment,  there¬ 
fore,  be  made  with  a  stick,  or  something  of  the 
kind,  put  into  the  flame,  in  order  to  see  wheth¬ 
er  it  be  not  sooner  burnt  at  the  sides  than  in 
the  middle  of  it. 

(37)  There  are  many  degrees  in  the  suscepti¬ 
bility  of  heat.  And,  first,  it  must  be  observed 
how  much  a  low  gentle  heat  changes  and  par¬ 
tially  warms  even  the  bodies  least  susceptible 
of  it.  For  even  the  heat  of  the  hand  imparts  a 
little  warmth  to  a  ball  of  lead  or  other  metal 
held  a  short  time  in  it;  so  easily  is  heat  trans¬ 
mitted  and  excited,  without  any  apparent 
change  in  the  body. 

(38)  Of  all  bodies  that  we  are  acquainted 
with,  air  admits  and  loses  heat  the  most  read¬ 
ily,  which  is  admirably  seen  in  weather-glasses, 
whose  construction  is  as  follows.  Take  a  glass 
with  a  hollow  belly,  and  a  thin  and  long  neck; 
turn  it  upside  down,  and  place  it  with  its  mouth 
downwards  into  another  glass  vessel  containing 
water;  the  end  of  the  tube  touching  the  bottom 
of  the  vessel,  and  the  tube  itself  leaning  a  little 
on  the  edge,  so  as  to  be  fixed  upright.  In  order  to 
do  this  more  readily,  let  a  little  wax  be  applied 
to  the  edge,  not  however  so  as  to  block  up  the 
orifice,  lest  by  preventing  the  air  from  escap¬ 
ing,  the  motion,  which  we  shall  presently  speak 
of,  and  which  is  very  gentle  and  delicate,  should 
be  impeded. 

Before  the  first  glass  be  inserted  in  the  other, 
its  upper  part  (the  belly)  should  be  warmed  at 
the  fire.  Then  upon  placing  it  as  we  have  de¬ 
scribed,  the  air  (which  was  dilated  by  the  heat), 
after  a  sufficient  time  has  been  allowed  for  it  to 


lose  the  additional  temperature,  will  restore 
and  contract  itself  to  the  same  dimensions  as 
that  of  the  external  or  common  atmosphere  at 
the  moment  of  immersion,  and  the  water  will 
be  attracted  upwards  in  the  tube  to  a  propor¬ 
tionate  extent.  A  long  narrow  slip  of  paper 
should  be  attached  to  the  tube,  divided  into  as 
many  degrees  as  you  please.  You  will  then  per¬ 
ceive,  as  the  weather  grows  warmer  or  colder, 
that  the  air  contracts  itself  into  a  narrower 
space  in  cold  weather  and  dilates  in  the  warm, 
which  will  be  exhibited  by  the  rising  of  the  wa¬ 
ter  as  the  air  contracts  itself,  and  its  depression 
as  the  air  dilates.  The  sensibility  of  the  air  with 
regard  to  heat  or  cold  is  so  delicate  and  exqui¬ 
site,  that  it  far  exceeds  the  human  touch,  so 
that  a  ray  of  sunshine,  the  heat  of  the  breath, 
and  much  more,  that  of  the  hand  placed  on  the 
top  of  the  tube,  immediately  causes  an  evident 
depression  of  the  water.  We  think,  however, 
that  the  spirit  of  animals  possesses  a  much  more 
delicate  susceptibility  of  heat  and  cold,  only 
that  it  is  impeded  and  blunted  by  the  grossness 
of  their  bodies. 

(39)  After  air,  we  consider  those  bodies  to  be 
most  sensible  of  heat,  which  have  been  recent¬ 
ly  changed  and  contracted  by  cold,  as  snow  and 
ice;  for  they  begin  to  be  dissolved  and  melt  with 
the  first  mild  weather.  Next,  perhaps,  follows 
quicksilver;  then  greasy  substances,  as  oil,  but¬ 
ter,  and  the  like;  then  wood;  then  water;  lastly, 
stones  and  metals,  which  do  not  easily  grow 
hot,  particularly  towards  their  centre.  When 
heated,  however,  they  retain  their  temperature 
for  a  very  long  time;  so  that  a  brick  or  stone, 
or  hot  iron,  plunged  in  a  basin  of  cold  water, 
and  kept  there  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  there¬ 
abouts,  retains  such  a  heat  as  not  to  admit  of 
being  touched. 

(40)  The  less  massive  the  body  is,  the  more 
readily  it  grows  warm  at  the  approach  of  a  heat¬ 
ed  body,  which  shows  that  heat  with  us  is  some¬ 
what  averse  to  a  tangible  mass. 

(41)  Heat  with  regard  to  the  human  senses 
and  touch  is  various  and  relative,  so  that  luke¬ 
warm  water  appears  hot  if  the  hand  be  cold, 
and  cold  if  the  hand  be  hot. 

14.  Anyone  may  readily  see  how  poor  we 
are  in  history,  since  in  the  above  tables,  besides 
occasionally  inserting  traditions  and  report  in¬ 
stead  of  approved  history  and  authentic  in¬ 
stances  (always,  however,  adding  some  note  if 
their  credit  or  authority  be  doubtful),  we  are 
often  forced  to  subjoin,  “Let  the  experiment 
be  tried.  Let  further  inquiry  be  made.” 


SECOND  BOOK 


15.  We  are  wont  to  term  the  office  and  use  of 
these  three  tables  the  presenting  a  review  of  in¬ 
stances  to  the  understanding:  and  when  this 
has  been  done,  induction  itself  is  to  be  brought 
into  action.  For  on  an  individual  review  of  all 
the  instances  a  nature  is  to  be  found,  such  as 
always  to  be  present  and  absent  with  the  given 
nature,  to  increase  and  decrease  with  it,  and, 
as  we  have  said,  to  form  a  more  common  limit 
of  the  nature.  If  the  mind  attempt  this  affirm¬ 
atively  from  the  first  (which  it  always  will  when 
left  to  itself),  there  will  spring  up  phantoms, 
mere  theories  and  ill-defined  notions,  with  ax¬ 
ioms  requiring  daily  correction.  These  will, 
doubtless,  be  better  or  worse,  according  to  the 
power  and  strength  of  the  understanding  which 
creates  them.  But  it  is  only  for  God  (the  be- 
stower  and  creator  of  forms),  and  perhaps  for 
angels  and  intelligences,  at  once  to  recognize 
forms  affirmatively  at  the  first  glance  of  con¬ 
templation:  man,  at  least,  is  unable  to  do  so, 
and  is  only  allowed  to  proceed  first  by  negatives, 
and  then  to  conclude  with  affirmatives,  after 
every  species  of  exclusion. 

16.  We  must,  therefore,  effect  a  complete  so¬ 
lution  and  separation  of  nature;  not  by  fire, 
but  by  the  mind,  that  divine  fire.  The  first 
work  of  legitimate  induction,  in  the  discovery 
of  forms,  is  rejection,  or  the  exclusive  instances 
of  individual  natures,  which  are  not  found  in 
some  one  instance  where  the  given  nature  is 
present,  or  are  found  in  any  one  instance  where 
it  is  absent,  or  are  found  to  increase  in  any  one 
instance  where  the  given  nature  decreases,  or 
the  reverse.  After  an  exclusion  correctly  affect¬ 
ed,  an  affirmative  form  will  remain  as  the  re¬ 
siduum,  solid,  true,  and  well  defined,  whilst  all 
volatile  opinions  go  off  in  smoke.  This  is  read¬ 
ily  said;  but  we  must  arrive  at  it  by  a  circui¬ 
tous  route.  We  shall  perhaps,  however,  omit 
nothing  that  can  facilitate  our  progress. 

17.  The  first  and  almost  perpetual  precau¬ 
tion  and  warning  which  we  consider  necessary 
is  this;  that  none  should  suppose  from  the  great 
part  assigned  by  us  to  forms,  that  we  mean  such 
forms  as  the  meditations  and  thoughts  of  men 
have  hitherto  been  accustomed  to.  In  the  first 
place,  we  do  not  at  present  mean  the  concrete 
forms,  which  (as  we  have  observed)  are  in  the 
common  course  of  things  compounded  of  sim¬ 
ple  natures,  as  those  of  a  lion,  an  eagle,  a  rose, 
gold,  or  the  like.  The  moment  for  discussing 
these  will  arrive  when  we  come  to  treat  of  the 
latent  process  and  latent  conformation,  and  the 
discovery  of  them  as  they  exist  in  what  are 
called  substances,  or  concrete  natures. 


Nor  again,  would  we  be  thought  to  mean 
(even  when  treating  of  simple  natures)  any  ab¬ 
stract  forms  or  ideas,  either  undefined  or  badly 
defined  in  matter.  For  when  we  speak  of  forms, 
we  mean  nothing  else  than  those  laws  and  reg¬ 
ulations  of  simple  action  which  arrange  and 
constitute  any  simple  nature,  such  as  heat,  light, 
weight,  in  every  species  of  matter,  and  in  a  sus¬ 
ceptible  subject.  The  form  of  heat  or  form  of 
light,  therefore,  means  no  more  than  the  law  of 
heat  or  the  law  of  light.  Nor  do  we  ever  ab¬ 
stract  or  withdraw  ourselves  from  things,  and 
the  operative  branch  of  philosophy.  When 
therefore,  we  say  (for  instance)  in  our  investi¬ 
gation  of  the  form  of  heat,  “Reject  rarity,”  or, 
“Rarity  is  not  of  the  form  of  heat,”  it  is  the 
same  as  if  we  were  to  say,  “Man  can  superin¬ 
duce  heat  on  a  dense  body,”  or  the  reverse, 
“Man  can  abstract  or  ward  off  heat  from  a  rare 
body.” 

But  if  our  forms  appear  to  any  one  to  be 
somewhat  abstracted,  from  their  mingling  and 
uniting  heterogeneous  objects  (the  heat,  for  in¬ 
stance,  of  the  heavenly  bodies  appears  to  be 
very  different  from  that  of  fire;  the  fixed  red  of 
the  rose  and  the  like,  from  that  which  is  appar¬ 
ent  in  the  rainbow,  or  the  radiation  of  opal  or 
the  diamond;  death  by  drowning,  from  that  by 
burning,  the  sword,  apoplexy,  or  consumption; 
and  yet  they  all  agree  in  the  common  natures 
of  heat,  redness,  and  death),  let  him  be  assured 
that  his  understanding  is  enthralled  by  habit, 
by  general  appearances  and  hypotheses.  For  it 
is  most  certain  that,  however  heterogeneous 
and  distinct,  they  agree  in  the  form  or  law  which 
regulates  heat,  redness,  or  death;  and  that  hu¬ 
man  power  cannot  be  emancipated  and  freed 
from  the  common  course  of  nature,  and  expand¬ 
ed  and  exalted  to  new  efficients  and  new  modes 
of  operation,  except  by  the  revelation  and  in¬ 
vention  of  forms  of  this  nature.  But  after  this 
union  of  nature,  which  is  the  principal  point, 
we  will  afterwards,  in  its  proper  place,  treat  of 
the  divisions  and  ramifications  of  nature,  wheth¬ 
er  ordinary  or  internal  and  more  real. 

18.  We  must  now  offer  an  example  of  the  ex¬ 
clusion  or  rejection  of  natures  found  by  the  ta¬ 
bles  of  review,  not  to  be  of  the  form  of  heat;  first 
premising  that  not  only  each  table  is  sufficient 
for  the  rejection  of  any  nature,  but  even  each 
single  instance  contained  in  them.  For  it  is  clear 
from  what  has  been  said  that  every  contradic¬ 
tory  instance  destroys  an  hypothesis  as  to  the 
form.  Still,  however,  for  the  sake  of  clearness, 
and  in  order  to  show  more  plainly  the  use  of  the 
tables,  we  redouble  or  repeat  the  exclusive. 


150 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


Table  IV.  An  Example  of  the  Exclusive  Table , 
or  of  the  Rejection  of  Natures  from  the  Form 
of  Heat 

(1)  On  account  of  the  sun’s  rays,  reject  ele¬ 
mentary  (or  terrestrial)  nature. 

(2)  On  account  of  common  fire,  and  partic¬ 
ularly  subterranean  fires  (which  are  the  most 
remote  and  secluded  from  the  rays  of  the  heav¬ 
enly  bodies),  reject  celestial  nature. 

(3)  On  account  of  the  heat  acquired  by  every 
description  of  substances  (as  minerals,  vegeta¬ 
bles,  the  external  parts  of  animals,  water,  oil, 
air,  etc.)  by  mere  approximation  to  the  fire  or 
any  warm  body,  reject  all  variety  and  delicate 
texture  of  bodies. 

(4)  On  account  of  iron  and  ignited  metals, 
which  warm  other  bodies,  and  yet  neither  lose 
their  weight  nor  substance,  reject  the  impart¬ 
ing  or  mixing  of  the  substance  of  the  heating 
body. 

(5)  On  account  of  boiling  water  and  air,  and 
also  those  metals  and  other  solid  bodies  which 
are  heated,  but  not  to  ignition,  or  red  heat,  re¬ 
ject  flame  or  light. 

(6)  On  account  of  the  rays  of  the  moon  and 
other  heavenly  bodies  (except  the  sun),  again 
reject  flame  or  light. 

(7)  On  account  of  the  comparison  between 
red-hot  iron  and  the  flame  of  spirits  of  wine  (for 
the  iron  is  more  hot  and  less  bright,  whilst  the 
flame  of  spirits  of  wine  is  more  bright  and  less 
hot),  again  reject  flame  and  light. 

(8)  On  account  of  gold  and  other  ignited  met¬ 
als,  which  are  of  the  greatest  specific  density, 
reject  rarity. 

(9)  On  account  of  air,  which  is  generally 
found  to  be  cold  and  yet  continues  rare,  reject 
rarity. 

(10)  On  account  of  ignited  iron,  which  does 
not  swell  in  bulk,  but  retains  the  same  appar¬ 
ent  dimension,  reject  the  absolute  expansive 
motion  of  the  whole. 

(11)  On  account  of  the  expansion  of  the  air 
in  thermometers  and  the  like,  which  is  abso¬ 
lutely  moved  and  expanded  to  the  eye,  and  yet 
acquires  no  manifest  increase  of  heat,  again 
reject  absolute  or  expansive  motion  of  the 
whole. 

(12)  On  account  of  the  ready  application  of 
heat  to  all  substances  without  any  destruction 
or  remarkable  alteration  of  them,  reject  de¬ 
structive  nature  or  the  violent  communication 
of  any  new  nature. 

(13)  On  account  of  the  agreement  and  con¬ 
formity  of  the  effects  produced  by  cold  and 


heat,  reject  both  expansive  and  contracting  mo¬ 
tion  as  regards  the  whole. 

(14)  On  account  of  the  heat  excited  by  fric¬ 
tion,  reject  principal  nature,  by  which  we  mean 
that  which  exists  positively,  and  is  not  caused 
by  a  preceding  nature. 

There  are  other  natures  to  be  rejected;  but 
we  are  merely  offering  examples,  and  not  per¬ 
fect  tables. 

None  of  the  above  natures  is  of  the  form  of 
heat;  and  man  is  freed  from  them  all  in  his  op¬ 
eration  upon  heat. 

j 

19.  In  the  exclusive  table  are  laid  the  foun¬ 
dations  of  true  induction,  which  is  not,  how¬ 
ever,  com  pletedun  til  the  affirmative  be  attained. 

Nor  is  the  exclusive  table  perfect,  nor  can  it  be 
so  at  first.  For  it  is  clearly  a  rejection  of  simple 
natures;  but  if  we  have  not  as  yet  good  and  just 
notions  of  simple  natures,  how  can  the  exclu¬ 
sive  table  be  made  correct?  Some  of  the  above, 
as  the  notion  of  elementary  and  celestial  na¬ 
ture,  and  rarity,  are  vague  and  ill-defined.  We, 
therefore,  who  are  neither  ignorant  nor  forget¬ 
ful  of  the  great  work  which  we  attempt,  in  ren¬ 
dering  the  human  understanding  adequate  to 
things  and  nature,  by  no  means  rest  satisfied 
with  what  we  have  hitherto  enforced,  but  push 
the  matter  further,  and  contrive  and  prepare 
more  powerful  aid  for  the  useof  the  understand¬ 
ing,  which  we  will  next  subjoin.  And,  indeed, 
in  the  interpretation  of  nature  the  mind  is  to 
be  so  prepared  and  formed,  as  to  rest  itself  on 
proper  degrees  of  certainty,  and  yet  to  remem¬ 
ber  (especially  at  first)  that  what  is  present  de¬ 
pends  much  upon  what  remains  behind. 

20.  Since,  however,  truth  emerges  more  read¬ 
ily  from  error  than  confusion,  we  consider  it  use¬ 
ful  to  leave  the  understanding  at  liberty  to  ex¬ 
ert  itself  and  attempt  the  interpretation  of  na¬ 
ture  in  the  affirmative,  after  having  construct¬ 
ed  and  weighed  the  three  tables  of  preparation, 
such  as  we  have  laid  them  down,  both  from  the 
instances  there  collected,  and  others  occurring 
elsewhere.  Which  attempt  we  are  wont  to  call 
the  liberty  of  the  understanding,  or  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  interpretation,  or  the  first  vin-  I  • 
tage. 

The  First  Vintage  of  the  Form  of  Heat 


It  must  be  observed  that  the  form  of  anything 
is  inherent  (as  appears  clearly  from  our  premis¬ 
es)  in  each  individual  instance  in  which  the  thing 
itself  is  inherent,  or  it  would  not  be  a  form.  No 
contradictory  instance,  therefore,  can  be  al¬ 
leged.  The  form,  however,  is  found  to  be  much 


SECOND  BOOK 


more  conspicuous  and  evident  in  some  instanc¬ 
es  than  in  others;  in  those  (for  example)  where 
its  nature  is  less  restrained  and  embarrassed, 
and  reduced  to  rule  by  other  natures.  Such  in¬ 
stances  we  are  wont  to  term  coruscations,  or  con¬ 
spicuous  instances.  We  must  proceed,  then,  to 
the  first  vintage  of  the  form  of  heat. 

From  the  instances  taken  collectively,  as  well 
as  singly,  the  nature  whose  limit  is  heat  appears 
to  be  motion.  This  is  chiefly  exhibited  in  flame, 
which  is  in  constant  motion,  and  in  warm  or 
boiling  liquids,  which  are  likewise  in  constant 
motion.  It  is  also  shown  in  the  excitement  or 
increase  of  heat  by  motion,  as  by  bellows  and 
drafts:  for  which  see  Inst.  29,  Tab. Ill,  and  by 
other  species  of  motion,  as  in  Inst.  28  and  31, 
Tab.  III.  It  is  also  shown  by  the  extinction  of 
fire  and  heat  upon  any  strong  pressure,  which 
restrains  and  puts  a  stop  to  motion;  for  which 
see  Inst.  30  and  32,  Tab.  III.  It  is  further  shown 
by  this  circumstance,  namely,  that  every  sub¬ 
stance  is  destroyed,  or  at  least  materially 
changed,  by  strong  and  powerful  fire  and  heat: 
whence  it  is  clear  that  tumult  and  confusion  are 
occasioned  by  heat,  together  with  a  violent  mo¬ 
tion  in  the  internal  parts  of  bodies;  and  this 
gradually  tends  to  their  dissolution. 

What  we  have  said  with  regard  to  motion 
must  be  thus  understood,  when  taken  as  the 
genus  of  heat;  it  must  not  be  thought  that  heat 
generates  motion,  or  motion  heat  (though  in 
some  respects  this  be  true),  but  that  the  very 
essence  of  heat,  or  the  substantial  self  of  heat, 
is  motion  and  nothing  else,  limited,  however, 
by  certain  differences  which  we  will  presently 
add,  after  giving  some  cautions  for  avoiding 
ambiguity. 

Sensible  heat  is  relative,  and  regards  man,  not 
universe;  and  is  rightly  held  to  be  merely  the 
effect  of  heat  on  animal  spirit.  It  is  even  vari¬ 
able  in  itself,  since  the  same  body  (in  different 
states  of  sensation)  excites  the  feeling  of  heat 
and  of  cold;  this  is  shown  by  Inst.  41,  Tab. III. 

Nor  should  we  confound  the  communication 
of  heat  or  its  transitive  nature,  by  which  a  body 
grows  warm  at  the  approach  of  a  heated  body, 
with  the  form  of  heat;  for  heat  is  one  thing  and 
heating  another.  Heat  can  be  excited  by  fric¬ 
tion  without  any  previous  heating  body,  and, 
therefore,  heating  is  excluded  from  the  form  of 
heat.  Even  when  heat  is  excited  by  the  approach 
of  a  hot  body,  this  depends  not  on  the  form  of 
heat,  but  on  another  more  profound  and  com¬ 
mon  nature;  namely,  that  of  assimilation  and 


multiplication,  about  which  a  separate  inquiry 
must  be  made. 

The  notion  of  fire  is  vulgar,  and  of  no  assist¬ 
ance;  it  is  merely  compounded  of  the  conjunc¬ 
tion  of  heat  and  light  in  any  body,  as  in  ordi¬ 
nary  flame  and  red-hot  substances. 

Laying  aside  all  ambiguity,  therefore,  we 
must  lastly  consider  the  true  differences  which 
limit  motion  and  render  it  the  form  of  heat. 

(1)  The  first  difference  is,  that  heat  is  an  ex¬ 
pansive  motion,  by  which  the  body  strives  to 
dilate  itself,  and  to  occupy  a  greater  space  than 
before.  This  difference  is  principally  seen  in 
flame,  where  the  smoke  or  thick  vapor  is  clear¬ 
ly  dilated  and  bursts  into  flame. 

It  is  also  shown  in  all  boiling  liquids,  which 
swell,  rise,  and  boil  up  to  the  sight,  and  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  expansion  is  urged  forward  till  they  are 
converted  into  a  much  more  extended  and  di¬ 
lated  body  than  the  liquid  itself,  such  as  steam, 
smoke,  or  air. 

It  is  also  shown  in  wood  and  combustibles 
where  exudation  sometimes  takes  place,  and 
evaporation  always. 

It  is  also  shown  in  the  melting  of  metals, 
which,  being  very  compact,  do  not  easily  swell 
and  dilate,  but  yet  their  spirit,  when  dilated  and 
desirous  of  further  expansion,  forces  and  urges 
its  thicker  parts  into  dissolution,  and  if  the  heat 
be  pushed  still  further,  reduces  a  considerable 
part  of  them  into  a  volatile  state. 

It  is  also  shown  in  iron  or  stones,  which, 
though  not  melted  or  dissolved,  are  however 
softened.  The  same  circumstance  takes  place  in 
sticks  of  wood,  which  become  flexible  when  a 
little  heated  in  warm  ashes. 

It  is  most  readily  observed  in  air,  which  in¬ 
stantly  and  manifestly  expands  with  a  small  de¬ 
gree  of  heat,  as  stated  in  Inst.  38,  Tab.  III. 

It  is  also  shown  in  the  contrary  nature  of  cold : 
for  cold  contracts  and  narrows  every  substance; 
so  that  in  intense  frosts  nails  fall  out  of  the  wall 
and  brass  cracks,  and  heated  glass  exposed  sud¬ 
denly  to  the  cold  cracks  and  breaks.  So  the  air 
by  a  slight  degree  of  cold,  contracts  itself,  as  in 
Inst.  38,  Tab.  III.  More  will  be  said  of  this  in 
the  inquiry  into  cold. 

Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at  if  cold  and  heat 
exhibit  many  common  effects  (for  which  see 
Inst. 32, Tab.  II),sincetwodifferences,of  which 
we  shall  presently  speak,  belong  to  each  nature: 
although  in  the  present  difference  the  effects  be 
diametrically  opposed  to  each  other.  For  heat 
occasions  an  expansive  and  dilating  motion,  but 
cold  a  contracting  and  condensing  motion. 


NOVUM  ORCANUM 


I52 

(2)  The  second  difference  is  a  modification  of 
the  preceding,  namely,  that  heat  is  an  expans¬ 
ive  motion,  tending  towards  the  exterior,  but 
at  the  same  time  bearing  the  body  upwards.  For 
there  is  no  doubt  that  there  be  many  compound 
motions,  as  an  arrow  or  dart,  tor  instance,  has 
both  a  rotatory  and  progressive  motion.  In  the 
same  way  the  motion  of  heat  is  both  expansive 
and  tending  upwards. 

This  difference  is  shown  by  putting  the  tongs 
or  poker  into  the  fire.  If  placed  perpendicularly 
with  the  hand  above,  they  soon  burn  it,  but 
much  less  speedily  if  the  hand  hold  them  slop¬ 
ing  or  from  below. 

It  is  also  conspicuous  in  distillations /)^r 
scensum ,  which  men  are  wont  to  employ  with 
delicate  flowers,  whose  scent  easily  evaporates. 
Their  industry  has  devised  placing  the  fire  above 
instead  of  below,  that  it  may  scorch  less;  for  not 
only  flame  but  all  heat  has  an  upward  tendency. 

Let  an  experiment  be  made  on  the  contrary 
nature  of  cold,  whether  its  contraction  be  down¬ 
wards,  as  the  expansion  of  heat  is  upwards. 
Take,  therefore,  two  iron  rods  or  two  glass  tubes, 
alike  in  other  respects,  and  warm  them  a  little, 
and  place  a  sponge,  dipped  in  cold  water,  or 
some  snow,  below  the  one  and  above  the  other. 
We  are  of  opinion  that  the  extremities  will  grow 
cold  in  that  rod  first  where  it  is  placed  beneath, 
as  the  contrary  takes  place  with  regard  to  heat. 

(3)  The  third  difference  is  this;  that  heat  is 
not  a  uniform  expansive  motion  of  the  whole, 
but  of  the  small  particles  of  the  body;  and  this 
motion  being  at  the  same  time  restrained,  re¬ 
pulsed,  and  reflected,  becomes  alternating,  per¬ 
petually  hurrying,  striving,  struggling,  and  ir¬ 
ritated  by  the  repercussion,  which  is  the  source 
of  the  violence  of  flame  and  heat. 

But  this  difference  is  chieffv  shown  in  flame 
and  boiling  liquids,  which  always  hurry,  swell, 
and  subside  again  in  detached  parts. 

It  is  also  shown  in  bodies  of  such  hard  texture 
as  not  to  swell  or  dilate  in  bulk,  such  as  red-hot 
iron,  in  which  the  heat  is  most  violent. 

It  is  also  shown  by  the  fires  burning  most 
briskly  in  the  coldest  weather. 

It  is  also  shown  by  this,  that  when  the  air  is 
dilated  in  the  thermometer  uniformly  and 
equably,  without  any  impediment  or  repulsion, 
the  heat  is  not  perceptible.  In  confined  drafts 
also,  although  they  break  out  very  violently, 
no  remarkable  heat  is  perceived,  because  the 
motion  affects  the  whole,  without  any  alter¬ 
nating  motion  in  the  particles;  for  which  reason 
try  whether  flame  do  not  burn  more  at  the  sides 
than  at  its  centre. 


It  is  also  shown  in  this,  that  all  burning  pro¬ 
ceeds  by  the  minute  pores  of  bodies— under¬ 
mining,  penetrating,  piercing,  and  pricking 
them  as  if  with  an  infinite  number  of  needle- 
oints.  Hence  all  strong  acids  (if  adapted  to  the 
ody  on  which  they  act)  exhibit  the  effect  of 
fire,  from  their  corroding  and  pungent  nature. 

The  difference  of  which  we  now  speak  is  com¬ 
mon  also  to  the  nature  of  cold,  in  which  the 
contracting  motion  is  restrained  by  the  resist-  1 
ance  of  expansion,  as  in  heat  the  expansive  mo¬ 
tion  is  restrained  by  the  resistance  of  contrac¬ 
tion. 

Whether,  therefore,  the  particles  of  matter 
penetrate  inwards  or  outwards,  the  reasoning 
is  the  same,  though  the  power  be  very  different, 
because  we  have  nothing  on  earth  which  is  in¬ 
tensely  cold. 

(4)  The  fourth  difference  is  a  modification  of 
the  preceding,  namely,  that  this  stimulating  or 
penetrating  motion  should  be  rapid  and  never 
sluggish,  and  should  take  place  not  in  the  very  } 
minutest  particles,  but  rather  in  those  of  some 
tolerable  dimensions. 

It  is  shown  by  comparing  the  effects  of  fire 
with  those  of  time.  Time  dries,  consumes,  un¬ 
dermines,  and  reduces  to  ashes  as  well  as  fire, 
and  perhaps  to  a  much  finer  degree;  but  as  its 
motion  is  very  slow,  and  attacks  very  minute 
particles,  no  heat  is  perceived. 

It  is  also  shown  in  a  comparison  of  the  dis¬ 
solution  of  iron  and  gold;  for  gold  is  dissolved 
without  the  excitement  of  any  heat,  but  iron 
with  a  vehement  excitement  of  it,  although 
most  in  the  same  time,  because  in  the  former 
the  penetration  of  the  separating  acid  is  mild, 
and  gently  insinuates  itself,  and  the  particles 
of  gold  yield  easily,  but  the  penetration  of  iron 
is  violent,  and  attended  with  some  struggle, 
and  its  particles  are  more  obstinate. 

1 1  is  partially  shown,  also,  in  some  gangrenes 
and  mortifications  of  flesh,  which  do  not  excite 
great  heat  or  pain,  from  the  gentle  nature  of 
the  putrefaction. 

Let  this  suffice  for  a  first  vintage,  or  the 
commencement  of  the  interpretation  of  the 
form  of  heat  by  the  liberty  of  the  understand-  < 
ing. 

From  this  first  vintage  the  form  or  true  def¬ 
inition  of  heat  (considered  relatively  to  the 
universe  and  not  to  the  sense)  is  briefly  thus: — 
Heat  is  an  expansive  motion  restrained,  and 
striving  to  exert  itself  in  the  smaller  particles. 
The  expansion  is  modified  by  its  tendency  to 
rise,  though  expanding  towards  the  exterior; 


SECOND  BOOK 


and  the  effort  is  modified  by  its  not  being  slug¬ 
gish,  but  active  and  somewhat  violent. 

With  regard  to  the  operative  definition,  the 
matter  is  the  same.  If  you  are  able  to  excite  a 
dilating  or  expansive  motion  in  any  natural 
body,  and  so  to  repress  that  motion  and  force 
it  on  itself  as  not  to  allow  the  expansion  to  pro¬ 
ceed  equally,  but  only  to  be  partially  exerted 
and  partially  repressed,  you  will  beyond  all 
doubt  produce  heat,  without  any  considera¬ 
tion  as  to  whether  the  body  be  of  earth  (or 
elementary,  as  they  term  it),  or  imbued  with 
celestial  influence,  luminous  or  opaque,  rare  or 
dense,  locally  expanded  or  contained  within 
the  bounds  of  its  first  dimensions,  verging  to 
dissolution  or  remaining  fixed,  animal,  vege¬ 
table,  or  mineral,  water,  or  oil,  or  air,  or  any 
other  substance  whatever  susceptible  or  such 
motion.  Sensible  heat  is  the  same,  but  consid¬ 
ered  relatively  to  the  senses.  Let  us  now  pro¬ 
ceed  to  further  helps. 

21.  After  our  tables  of  first  review,  our  re¬ 
jection  or  exclusive  table,  and  the  first  vintage 
derived  from  them,  we  must  advance  to  the 
remaining  helps  of  the  understanding  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  interpretation  of  nature,  and  a  true 
and  perfect  induction,  in  offering  which  we  will 
take  examples  of  cold  and  heat  where  tables 
are  necessary,  but  where  fewer  instances  are 
required,  we  will  go  through  a  variety  of  others, 
so  as  neither  to  confound  investigation  nor  to 
narrow  our  doctrine. 

In  the  first  place,  therefore,  we  will  treat  of 
prerogative  instances;  2.  Of  the  supports  of  in¬ 
duction;  3.  Of  the  correction  of  induction;  4. 
Of  varying  the  investigation  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  subject;  5.  Of  the  prerogative  na¬ 
tures  with  respect  to  investigation,  or  of  what 
should  be  the  first  or  last  objects  of  our  re¬ 
search.  6.  Of  the  limits  of  investigation,  or  a 
synopsis  of  all  natures  that  exist  in  the  uni¬ 
verse;  7.  Of  the  application  to  practical  pur¬ 
poses,  or  of  what  relates  to  man;  8.  Of  the  prep¬ 
arations  for  investigation;  9.  And  lastly,  of  the 
ascending  and  descending  scale  of  axioms. 

22.  Amongst  the  prerogative  instances  we 
will  first  mention  solitary  instances.  Solitary 
instances  are  those  which  exhibit  the  required 
nature  in  subjects  that  have  nothing  in  com¬ 
mon  with  any  other  subject  than  the  nature  in 

j  question,  or  which  do  not  exhibit  the  required 

I  nature  in  subjects  resembling  others  in  every 
respect  except  that  of  the  nature  in  question; 
lor  these  instances  manifestly  remove  prolixity, 
and  accelerate  and  confirm  exclusion,  so  that  a 
few  of  them  are  of  as  much  avail  as  many. 


For  instance,  let  the  inquiry  be  the  nature  of 
color.  Prisms,  crystalline  gems,  which  yield 
colors  not  only  internally  but  on  the  wall,  dews, 
etc.,  are  solitary  instances;  for  they  have  noth¬ 
ing  in  common  with  the  fixed  colors  in  flowers 
and  colored  gems,  metals,  woods,  etc.,  except 
the  color  itself.  Hence  we  easily  deduce  that 
color  is  nothing  but  a  modification  of  the  image 
of  the  incident  and  absorbed  light,  occasioned 
in  the  former  case  by  the  different  degrees  of 
incidence,  in  the  latter  by  the  various  textures 
and  forms  of  bodies.  These  are  solitary  instances 
as  regards  similitude. 

Again,  in  the  same  inquiry  the  distinct  veins 
of  white  and  black  in  marble,  and  the  varie¬ 
gated  colors  of  flowers  of  the  same  species,  are 
solitary  instances;  for  the  black  and  white  of 
marble,  and  the  spots  of  white  and  purple  in 
the  flowers  of  the  stock,  agree  in  every  respect 
but  that  of  color.  Thence  we  easily  deduce  that 
color  has  not  much  to  do  with  the  intrinsic  na¬ 
tures  of  any  body,  but  depends  only  on  the 
coarser  and  as  it  were  mechanical  arrangement 
of  the  parts.  These  are  solitary  instances  as 
regards  difference.  We  call  them  both  solitary 
or  wild,  to  borrow  a  word  from  the  astron¬ 
omers. 

23.  In  the  second  rank  of  prerogative  in¬ 
stances  we  will  consider  migrating  instances. 
In  these  the  required  nature  passes  towards 
generation,  having  no  previous  existence,  or 
towards  corruption,  having  first  existed.  In 
each  of  these  divisions,  therefore,  the  instances 
are  always  twofold,  or  rather  it  is  one  instance, 
first  in  motion  or  on  its  passage,  and  then 
brought  to  the  opposite  conclusion.  These  in¬ 
stances  not  only  hasten  and  confirm  exclusion, 
but  also  reduce  affirmation,  or  the  form  itself, 
to  a  narrow  compass;  for  the  form  must  be 
something  conferred  by  this  migration,  or,  on 
the  contrary,  removed  and  destroyed  by  it; 
and  although  all  exclusion  advances  affirma¬ 
tion,  yet  this  takes  place  more  directly  in  the 
same  than  in  different  subjects;  but  if  the  form 
(as  it  is  quite  clear  from  what  has  been  ad¬ 
vanced)  exhibit  itself  in  one  subject,  it  leads  to 
all.  The  more  simple  the  migration  is,  the  more 
valuable  is  the  instance.  These  migrating  in¬ 
stances  are,  moreover,  very  useful  in  practice, 
for  since  they  manifest  the  form,  coupled  with 
that  which  causes  or  destroys  it,  they  point  out 
the  right  practice  in  some  subjects,  and  thence 
there  is  an  easy  transition  to  those  with  which 
they  are  most  allied.  There  is,  however,  a  de¬ 
gree  of  danger  which  demands  caution,  name¬ 
ly,  lest  they  should  refer  the  form  too  much  to 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


*54 

its  efficient  cause,  and  imbue,  or  at  least  tinge, 
the  understanding  with  a  false  notion  of  the 
form  from  the  appearance  of  such  cause,  which 
is  never  more  than  a  vehicle  or  conveyance  of 
the  form.  This  may  easily  be  remedied  by  a 
proper  application  of  exclusion. 

Let  us  then  give  an  example  of  a  migrating 
instance.  Let  whiteness  be  the  required  nature. 
An  instance  which  passes  towards  generation 
is  glass  in  its  entire  and  in  its  powdered  state, 
or  water  in  its  natural  state,  and  when  agitated 
to  froth;  for  glass  when  entire,  and  water  in  its 
natural  state,  are  transparent  and  not  white, 
but  powdered  glass  and  the  froth  of  water  are 
white  and  not  transparent.  We  must  inquire, 
therefore,  what  has  happened  to  the  glass  or 
water  in  the  course  of  this  migration;  for  it  is 
manifest  that  the  form  of  whiteness  is  con¬ 
veyed  and  introduced  by  the  bruising  of  the 
glass  and  the  agitation  of  the  water;  but  noth¬ 
ing  is  found  to  have  been  introduced  but  a 
diminishing  of  the  parts  of  the  glass  and  water 
and  the  insertion  of  air.  Yet  this  is  no  slight 
progress  towards  discovering  the  form  of  white¬ 
ness,  namely,  that  two  bodies,  in  themselves 
more  or  less  transparent  (as  air  and  water,  or 
air  and  glass),  when  brought  into  contact  in 
minute  portions,  exhibit  whiteness  from  the 
unequal  refraction  of  the  rays  of  light. 

But  here  we  must  also  give  an  example  of 
the  danger  and  caution  of  which  we  spoke;  for 
instance,  it  will  readily  occur  to  an  understand¬ 
ing  perverted  by  efficients,  that  air  is  always 
necessary  for  producing  the  form  of  whiteness, 
or  that  whiteness  is  only  generated  by  trans¬ 
parent  bodies,  which  suppositions  are  both 
false,  and  proved  to  be  so  by  many  exclusions; 
nay,  it  will  rather  appear  (without  any  partic¬ 
ular  regard  to  air  or  the  like),  that  all  bodies 
which  are  even  in  such  of  their  parts  as  affect 
the  sight  exhibit  transparency,  those  which  are 
uneven  and  of  simple  texture  whiteness,  those 
which  are  uneven  and  of  compound  but  regular 
texture  all  the  other  colors  except  black,  but 
those  which  are  uneven  and  of  a  compound 
irregular  and  confused  texture  exhibit  black¬ 
ness.  An  example  has  been  given,  therefore,  of 
an  instance  migrating  towards  generation  in 
the  required  nature  of  whiteness.  An  instance 
migrating  towards  corruption  in  the  same  na¬ 
ture  is  that  of  dissolving  froth  or  snow,  for 
they  lose  their  whiteness  and  assume  the  trans¬ 
parency  of  water  in  its  pure  state  without  air. 

Nor  should  we  by  any  means  omit  to  state, 
that  under  migrating  instances  we  must  com¬ 
prehend  not  only  those  which  pass  towards 


generation  and  destruction,  but  also  those 
which  pass  towards  increase  or  decrease,  for 
they,  too,  assist  in  the  discovery  of  the  form,  as 
is  clear  from  our  definition  of  a  form  and  the  : 
table  of  degrees .  Hence  paper,  which  is  white 
when  dry,  is  less  white  when  moistened  (from 
the  exclusion  of  air  and  admission  of  water), 
and  tends  more  to  transparency.  The  reason  is 
the  same  as  in  the  above  instances. 

24.  In  the  third  rank  of  prerogative  instances 
we  will  class  conspicuous  instances,  of  which 
we  spoke  in  our  first  vintage  of  the  form  of 
heat,  and  which  we  are  also  wont  to  call  corus¬ 
cations,  or  free  and  predominant  instances. 
They  are  such  as  show  the  required  nature  in 
its  bare  substantial  shape,  and  at  its  height  or 
greatest  degree  of  power,  emancipated  and  free 
from  all  impediments,  or  at  least  overcoming, 
suppressing,  and  restraining  them  by  the 
strength  of  its  qualities;  for  since  every  body  is 
susceptible  of  many  united  forms  of  natures  in 
the  concrete,  the  consequence  is  that  they  mu¬ 
tually  deaden,  depress,  break,  and  confine  each 
other,  and  the  individual  forms  are  obscured. 
But  there  are  some  subjects  in  which  the  re¬ 
quired  nature  exists  in  its  full  vigor  rather  than 
in  others,  either  from  the  absence  of  any  im¬ 
pediment,  or  the  predominance  of  its  quality. 
Such  instances  are  eminently  conspicuous.  But 
even  in  these  care  must  be  taken,  and  the  hast¬ 
iness  of  the  understanding  checked,  for  what¬ 
ever  makes  a  show  of  the  form,  and  forces  it 
forward,  is  to  be  suspected,  and  recourse  must 
be  had  to  severe  and  diligent  exclusion. 

For  example,  let  heat  be  the  required  nature. 
The  thermometer  is  a  conspicuous  instance  of 
the  expansive  motion,  which  (as  has  been  ob¬ 
served)  constitutes  the  chief  part  of  the  form  of 
heat;  for  although  flame  clearly  exhibits  ex¬ 
pansion,  yet  from  its  being  extinguished  every 
moment,  it  does  not  exhibit  the  progress  of  ex-  l 
pansion.  Boiling  water  again,  from  its  rapid 
conversion  into  vapor,  does  not  so  well  exhibit 
the  expansion  of  water  in  its  own  shape,  whilst 
red-hot  iron  and  the  like  are  so  far  from  show¬ 
ing  this  progress  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  ex¬ 
pansion  itself  is  scarcely  evident  to  the  senses, 
on  account  of  its  spirit  being  repressed  and 
weakened  by  the  compact  and  coarse  particles 
which  subdue  and  restrain  it.  But  the  ther¬ 
mometer  strikingly  exhibits  the  expansion  of 
the  air  as  being  evident  and  progressive,  dur¬ 
able  and  not  transitory. 

Take  another  example.  Let  the  required  na¬ 
ture  be  weight.  Quicksilver  is  a  conspicuous 
instance  of  weight;  for  it  is  far  heavier  than 


SECOND  BOOK 


any  other  substance  except  gold,  which  is  not 
much  heavier,  and  it  is  a  better  instance  than 
gold  for  the  purpose  of  indicating  the  form  ol 
weight;  for  gold  is  solid  and  consistent,  which 
qualities  must  be  referred  to  density,  but  quick¬ 
silver  is  liquid  and  teeming  with  spirit,  yet 
much  heavier  than  the  diamond  and  other  sub¬ 
stances  considered  to  be  most  solid;  whence  it 
is  shown  that  the  form  of  gravity  or  weight  pre¬ 
dominates  only  in  the  quantity  of  matter,  and 
not  in  the  close  fitting  of  it. 

25.  In  the  fourth  rank  of  prerogative  in¬ 
stances  we  will  class  clandestine  instances, 
which  we  are  also  wont  to  call  twilight  in¬ 
stances;  they  are,  as  it  were,  opposed  to  the 
conspicuous  instances,  for  they  show  the  re¬ 
quired  nature  in  its  lowest  state  of  efficacy,  and 
as  it  were  its  cradle  and  first  rudiments,  mak¬ 
ing  an  effort  and  a  sort  of  first  attempt,  but 
concealed  and  subdued  by  a  contrary  nature. 
Such  instances  are,  however,  of  great  import¬ 
ance  in  discovering  forms,  for  as  the  conspicu¬ 
ous  tend  easily  to  differences,  so  do  the  clan¬ 
destine  best  lead  to  genera,  that  is,  to  those 
common  natures  of  which  the  required  na¬ 
tures  are  only  the  limits. 

As  an  example,  let  consistency,  or  that  which 
confines  itself,  be  the  required  nature,  the  op¬ 
posite  of  which  is  a  liquid  or  flowing  state.  The 
clandestine  instances  are  such  as  exhibit  some 
weak  and  low  degree  of  consistency  in  fluids, 
as  a  water  bubble,  which  is  a  sort  of  consistent 
and  bounded  pellicle  formed  out  of  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  the  water.  So  eaves’  droppings,  if 
there  be  enough  water  to  follow  them,  draw 
themselves  out  into  a  thin  thread,  not  to  break 
the  continuity  of  the  water,  but  if  there  be  not 
enough  to  follow,  the  water  forms  itself  into  a 
round  drop,  which  is  the  best  form  to  prevent 
a  breach  of  continuity;  and  at  the  moment  the 
thread  ceases,  and  the  water  begins  to  fall  in 
drops,  the  thread  of  water  recoils  upwards  to 
avoid  such  a  breach.  Nay,  in  metals,  which 
when  melted  are  liquid  but  more  tenacious,  the 
melted  drops  often  recoil  and  are  suspended. 
There  is  something  similar  in  the  instance  of 
the  child’s  looking-glass,  which  little  boys  will 
sometimes  form  of  spittle  between  rushes,  and 
where  the  same  pellicle  of  water  is  observable; 
and  still  more  in  that  other  amusement  of  chil¬ 
dren,  when  they  take  some  water  rendered  a 
little  more  tenacious  by  soap,  and  inflate  it 
with  a  pipe,  forming  the  water  into  a  sort  of 
castle  of  bubbles,  which  assumes  such  consist¬ 
ency,  by  the  interposition  of  the  air,  as  to  ad¬ 
mit  ot  being  thrown  some  little  distance  with¬ 


out  bursting.  The  best  example  is  that  of  froth 
and  snow,  which  assume  such  consistency  as 
almost  to  admit  of  being  cut,  although  com¬ 
posed  of  air  and  water,  both  liquids.  All  these 
circumstances  clearly  show  that  the  terms  liq¬ 
uid  and  consistent  are  merely  vulgar  notions 
adapted  to  the  sense,  and  that  in  reality  all 
bodies  have  a  tendency  to  avoid  a  breach  of 
continuity,  faint  and  weak  in  bodies  composed 
of  homogeneous  parts  (as  is  the  case  with  liq¬ 
uids),  but  more  vivid  and  powerful  in  those 
composed  of  heterogeneous  parts,  because  the 
approach  of  heterogeneous  matter  binds  bodies 
together,  whilst  the  insinuation  of  homogene¬ 
ous  matter  loosens  and  relaxes  them. 

Again,  to  take  another  example,  let  the  re¬ 
quired  nature  be  attraction  or  the  cohesion  of 
bodies.  The  most  remarkable  conspicuous  in¬ 
stance  with  regard  to  its  form  is  the  magnet. 
The  contrary  nature  to  attraction  is  non¬ 
attraction,  though  in  a  similar  substance.  Thus 
iron  does  not  attract  iron,  lead  lead,  wood 
wood,  nor  water  water.  But  the  clandestine  in¬ 
stance  is  that  of  the  magnet  armed  with  iron, 
or  rather  that  of  iron  in  the  magnet  so  armed. 
For  its  nature  is  such  that  the  magnet  when 
armed  does  not  attract  iron  more  powerfully  at 
any  given  distance  than  when  unarmed;  but  if 
the  iron  be  brought  in  contact  with  the  armed 
magnet,  the  latter  will  sustain  a  much  greater 
weight  than  the  simple  magnet,  from  the  re¬ 
semblance  of  substance  in  the  two  portions  of 
iron,  a  quality  altogether  clandestine  and  hid¬ 
den  in  the  iron  until  the  magnet  was  intro¬ 
duced.  It  is  manifest,  therefore,  that  the  form 
of  cohesion  is  something  which  is  vivid  and  ro¬ 
bust  in  the  magnet,  and  hidden  and  weak  in 
the  iron.  It  is  to  be  observed,  also,  that  small 
wooden  arrows  without  an  iron  point,  when 
discharged  from  large  mortars,  penetrate  far¬ 
ther  into  wooden  substances  (such  as  ribs  of 
ships  or  the  like),  than  the  same  arrows  pointed 
with  iron,  owing  to  the  similarity  of  substance, 
though  this  quality  was  previously  latent  in 
the  wood.  Again,  although  in  the  mass  air  does 
not  appear  to  attract  air,  nor  water  water,  yet 
when  one  bubble  is  brought  near  another,  they 
are  both  more  readily  dissolved,  from  the  tend¬ 
ency  to  contact  of  the  water  with  the  water, 
and  the  air  with  the  air.  These  clandestine  in¬ 
stances  (which  are,  as  has  been  observed,  of 
the  most  important  service)  are  principally  to 
be  observed  in  small  portions  of  bodies,  for  the 
larger  masses  observe  more  universal  and  gen¬ 
eral  forms,  as  will  be  mentioned  in  its  proper 
place. 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


156 

26.  In  the  fifth  rank  of  prerogative  instances 
we  will  class  constitutive  instances,  which  we 
are  wont  also  to  call  collective  instances.  They 
constitute  a  species  or  lesser  form,  as  it  were, 
of  the  required  nature.  For  since  the  real  forms 
(which  are  always  convertible  with  the  given 
nature)  lie  at  some  depth,  and  are  not  easily 
discovered,  the  necessity  of  the  case  and  the 
infirmity  of  the  human  understanding  require 
that  the  particular  forms,  which  collect  certain 
groups  of  instances  (but  by  no  means  all)  into 
some  common  notion,  should  not  be  neglected, 
but  most  diligently  observed.  For  whatever 
unites  nature,  even  imperfectly,  opens  the  way 
to  the  discovery  of  the  form.  The  instances, 
therefore,  which  are  serviceable  in  this  respect 
are  of  no  mean  power  but  endowed  with  some 
degree  of  prerogative. 

Here,  nevertheless,  great  care  must  be  taken 
that,  after  the  discovery  of  several  of  these  par¬ 
ticular  forms,  and  the  establishing  of  certain 
partitions  or  divisions  of  the  required  nature 
derived  from  them,  the  human  understanding 
do  not  at  once  rest  satisfied,  without  preparing 
for  the  investigation  of  the  great  or  leading 
form,  and  taking  it  for  granted  that  nature  is 
compound  and  divided  from  its  very  root,  de¬ 
spise  and  reject  any  further  union  as  a  point  of 
superfluous  refinement,  and  tending  to  mere 
abstraction. 

For  instance,  let  the  required  nature  be  mem¬ 
ory,  or  that  which  excites  and  assists  memory. 
The  constitutive  instances  are  order  or  distri¬ 
bution,  which  manifestly  assists  memory;  top¬ 
ics  or  common-places  in  artificial  memory, 
which  may  be  either  places  in  their  literal  sense, 
as  a  gate,  a  corner,  a  window,  and  the  like,  or 
familiar  persons  and  marks,  or  anything  else 
(provided  it  be  arranged  in  a  determinate  or¬ 
der),  as  animals,  plants,  and  words,  letters, 
characters,  historical  persons,  and  the  like,  of 
which,  however,  some  are  more  convenient 
than  others.  All  these  common-places  materi¬ 
ally  assist  memory,  and  raise  it  far  above  its 
natural  strength.  Verse,  too,  is  recollected  and 
learnt  more  easily  than  prose.  From  this  group 
of  three  instances — order,  the  common-places 
of  artificial  memory,  and  verses — is  constituted 
one  species  of  aid  for  the  memory,  which  may 
be  well  termed  a  separation  from  infinity.  For 
when  a  man  strives  to  recollect  or  recall  any¬ 
thing  to  memory,  without  a  preconceived  no¬ 
tion  or  perception  of  the  object  of  his  search, 
he  inquires  about,  and  labors,  and  turns  from 
point  to  point,  as  if  involved  in  infinity.  But  if 
he  have  any  preconceived  notion,  this  infinity 


is  separated  off,  and  the  range  of  his  memory 
is  brought  within  closer  limits.  In  the  three 
instances  given  above,  the  preconceived  notion 
is  clear  and  determined.  In  the  first,  it  must  be 
something  that  agrees  with  order;  in  the  sec¬ 
ond,  an  image  which  has  some  relation  or  agree¬ 
ment  with  the  fixed  common-places;  in  the 
third,  words  which  fall  into  a  verse:  and  thus 
infinity  is  divided  off.  Other  instances  will  offer 
another  species,  namely,  that  whatever  brings 
the  intellect  into  contact  with  something  that 
strikes  the  sense  (the  principal  point  of  artifi¬ 
cial  memory),  assists  the  memory.  Others  again 
offer  another  species,  namely,  whatever  excites 
an  impression  by  any  powerful  passion,  as  fear, 
wonder,  shame,  delight,  assists  the  memory. 
Other  instances  will  afford  another  species: 
thus  those  impressions  remain  most  fixed  in 
the  memory  which  are  taken  from  the  mind 
when  clear  and  least  occupied  by  preceding  or 
succeeding  notions,  such  as  the  things  we  learn 
in  childhood,  or  imagine  before  sleep,  and  the 
first  time  of  any  circumstance  happening. 
Other  instances  afford  the  following  species: 
namely,  that  a  multitude  of  circumstances  or 
handles  assist  the  memory,  such  as  writing  in 
paragraphs,  reading  aloud,  or  recitation.  Last¬ 
ly,  other  instances  afford  still  another  species: 
thus  the  things  we  anticipate,  and  which  rouse 
our  attention,  are  more  easily  remembered 
than  transient  events;  as  if  you  read  any  work 
twenty  times  over,  you  will  not  learn  it  by 
heart  so  readily  as  if  you  were  to  read  it  but 
ten  times,  trying  each  time  to  repeat  it,  and 
when  your  memory  fails  you  looking  into  the 
book.  There  are,  therefore,  six  lesser  forms,  as 
it  were,  of  things  which  assist  the  memory: 
namely — 1,  the  separation  of  infinity;  2,  the 
connection  of  the  mind  with  the  senses;  3,  the 
impression  in  strong  passion;  4,  the  impression 
on  the  mind  when  pure;  5,  the  multitude  of 
handles;  6,  anticipation. 

Again,  for  example’s  sake,  let  the  required 
nature  be  taste  or  the  power  of  tasting.  The  fol¬ 
lowing  instances  are  constitutive:  1 .  Those  who 
do  not  smell,  but  are  deprived  by  nature  of 
that  sense,  do  not  perceive  or  distinguish  ran¬ 
cid  or  putrid  food  by  their  taste,  nor  garlic 
from  roses,  and  the  like.  2.  Again,  those  whose 
nostrils  are  obstructed  by  accident  (such  as  a 
cold)  do  not  distinguish  any  putrid  or  rancid 
matter  from  anything  sprinkled  with  rose¬ 
water.  3.  If  those  who  suffer  from  a  cold  blow 
their  noses  violently  at  the  very  moment  in 
which  they  have  anything  fetid  or  perfumed  in 
their  mouth,  or  on  their  palate,  they  instantly 


SECOND  BOOK 


have  a  clear  perception  of  the  fetor  or  perfume. 
These  instances  afford  and  constitute  this  spe¬ 
cies  or  division  of  taste,  namely,  that  it  is  in 
part  nothing  else  than  an  internal  smelling, 
passing  and  descending  through  the  upper  pas¬ 
sages  of  the  nostrils  to  the  mouth  and  palate. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  those  whose  power  of 
smelling  is  deficient  or  obstructed,  perceive 
what  is  salt,  sweet,  pungent,  acid,  rough,  and 
bitter,  and  the  like,  as  well  as  anyone  else:  so 
that  the  taste  is  clearly  something  compounded 
of  the  internal  smelling,  and  an  exquisite  spe¬ 
cies  of  touch  which  we  will  not  here  discuss. 

Again,  as  another  example,  let  the  required 
nature  be  the  communication  of  quality,  with¬ 
out  intermixture  of  substance.  The  instance  of 
light  will  afford  or  constitute  one  species  of 
communication,  heat  and  the  magnet  another. 
For  the  communication  of  light  is  momentary 
and  immediately  arrested  upon  the  removal  of 
the  original  light.  But  heat,  and  the  magnetic 
force,  when  once  transmitted  to  or  excited  in 
another  body,  remain  fixed  for  a  considerable 
time  after  the  removal  of  the  source. 

In  fine,  the  prerogative  of  constitutive  in¬ 
stances  is  considerable,  for  they  materially 
assist  the  definitions  (especially  in  detail)  and 
the  divisions  or  partitions  of  natures,  concern¬ 
ing  which  Plato  has  well  said,  “He  who  can 
properly  define  and  divide  is  to  be  considered  a 
god.” 

27.  In  the  sixth  rank  of  prerogative  instances 
we  will  place  similar  or  proportionate  instances, 
which  we  are  also  wont  to  call  physical  parallels, 
or  resemblances.  They  are  such  as  exhibit  the 
resemblances  and  connection  of  things,  not  in 
minor  forms  (as  the  constitutive  do),  but  at 
once  in  the  concrete.  They  are  therefore,  as  it 
were,  the  first  and  lowest  steps  toward  the 
union  of  nature;  nor  do  they  immediately  es¬ 
tablish  any  axiom,  but  merely  indicate  and  ob¬ 
serve  a  certain  relation  of  bodies  to  each  other. 
But  although  they  be  not  of  much  assistance  in 
discovering  forms,  yet  they  are  of  great  advan¬ 
tage  in  disclosing  the  frame  of  parts  of  the  uni¬ 
verse,  upon  whose  members  they  practise  a 
species  of  anatomy,  and  thence  occasionally 
lead  us  gently  on  to  sublime  and  noble  axioms, 
especially  such  as  relate  to  the  construction  of 
the  world,  rather  than  to  simple  natures  and 
forms. 

As  an  example,  take  the  following  similar  in¬ 
stances:  a  mirror  and  the  eye;  the  formation  of 
the  ear,  and  places  which  return  an  echo.  From 
such  similarity,  besides  observing  the  resem¬ 
blance  (which  is  useful  for  many  purposes),  it 


is  easy  to  collect  and  form  this  axiom.  That  the 
organs  of  the  senses,  and  bodies  which  produce 
reflections  to  the  senses,  are  of  a  similar  nature. 
Again,  the  understanding  once  informed  of  this, 
rises  easily  to  a  higher  and  nobler  axiom: 
namely,  that  the  only  distinction  between  sen¬ 
sitive  and  inanimate  bodies,  in  those  points  in 
which  they  agree  and  sympathize,  is  this;  in 
the  former,  animal  spirit  is  added  to  the  ar¬ 
rangement  of  the  body,  in  the  latter  it  is  want¬ 
ing.  So  that  there  might  be  as  many  senses  in 
animals  as  there  are  points  of  agreement  with 
inanimate  bodies,  if  the  animated  body  were 
perforated,  so  as  to  allow  the  spirit  to  have 
access  to  the  limb  properly  disposed  for  action, 
as  a  fit  organ.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  there 
are,  without  doubt,  as  many  motions  in  an  in¬ 
animate  as  there  are  senses  in  the  animated 
body,  though  the  animal  spirit  be  absent.  There 
must,  however,  be  many  more  motions  in  inan¬ 
imate  bodies  than  senses  in  the  animated,  from 
the  small  number  of  organs  of  sense.  A  very 
plain  example  of  this  is  afforded  by  pains.  For, 
as  animals  are  liable  to  many  kinds  and  vari¬ 
ous  descriptions  of  pains  (such  as  those  of 
burning,  of  intense  cold,  of  pricking,  squeezing, 
stretching,  and  the  like),  so  is  it  most  certain, 
that  the  same  circumstances,  as  far  as  motion 
is  concerned,  happen  to  inanimate  bodies,  such 
as  wood  or  stone  when  burnt,  frozen,  pricked, 
cut,  bent,  bruised,  and  the  like;  although  there 
be  no  sensation,  owing  to  the  absence  of  ani¬ 
mal  spirit. 

Again,  wonderful  as  it  may  appear,  the  roots 
and  branches  of  trees  are  similar  instances.  For 
every  vegetable  swells  and  throws  out  its  con¬ 
stituent  parts  towards  the  circumference,  both 
upwards  and  downwards.  And  there  is  no  dif¬ 
ference  between  the  roots  and  branches,  except 
that  the  root  is  buried  in  the  earth,  and  the 
branches  are  exposed  to  the  air  and  sun.  For  if 
one  take  a  young  and  vigorous  shoot,  and  bend 
it  down  to  a  small  portion  of  loose  earth,  al¬ 
though  it  be  not  fixed  to  the  ground,  yet  will  it 
immediately  produce  a  root,  and  not  a  branch. 
And,  vice  versa,  if  earth  be  placed  above,  and  so 
forced  down  with  a  stone  or  any  hard  sub¬ 
stance,  as  to  confine  the  plant  and  prevent  its 
branching  upwards,  it  will  throw  out  branches 
into  the  air  downwards. 

The  gum  of  trees,  and  most  rock  gems,  are 
similar  instances;  for  both  of  them  are  exuda¬ 
tions  and  filtered  juices,  derived  in  the  former 
instance  from  trees,  in  the  latter  from  stones; 
the  brightness  and  clearness  of  both  arising 
from  a  delicate  and  accurate  filtering.  For 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


158 

nearly  the  same  reason,  the  hair  of  animals  is 
less  beautiful  and  vivid  in  its  color  than  the 
plumage  of  most  birds,  because  the  juices  are 
less  delicately  filtered  through  the  skin  than 
through  the  quills. 

The  scrotum  of  males  and  matrix  of  females 
are  also  similar  instances;  so  that  the  noble 
formation  which  constitutes  the  difference  of 
the  sexes  appears  to  differ  only  as  to  the  one 
being  internal  and  the  other  external;  a  greater 
degree  of  heat  causing  the  genitals  to  protude 
in  the  male,  whilst  the  heat  of  the  female  being 
too  weak  to  effect  this,  they  are  retained  in¬ 
ternally. 

The  fins  of  fishes  and  the  feet  of  quadrupeds, 
or  the  feet  and  wings  of  birds,  are  similar  in¬ 
stances;  to  which  Aristotle  adds  the  four  folds 
in  the  motion  of  serpents;  so  that  in  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  the  universe,  the  motion  of  animals 
appears  to  be  chiefly  effected  by  four  joints  or 
bendings. 

The  teeth  of  land  animals,  and  the  beaks  of 
birds,  are  similar  instances,  whence  it  is  clear, 
that  in  all  perfect  animals  there  is  a  determina¬ 
tion  of  some  hard  substance  towards  the  mouth. 

Again,  the  resemblance  and  conformity  of 
man  to  an  inverted  plant  is  not  absurd.  For  the 
head  is  the  root  of  the  nerves  and  animal  fac¬ 
ulties,  and  the  seminal  parts  are  the  lowest,  not 
including  the  extremities  of  the  legs  and  arms. 
But  in  the  plant,  the  root  (which  resembles  the 
head)  is  regularly  placed  in  the  lowest,  and  the 
seeds  in  the  highest  part. 

Lastly,  we  must  particularly  recommend  and 
suggest,  that  man’s  present  industry  in  the  in¬ 
vestigation  and  compilation  of  natural  history 
be  entirely  changed,  and  directed  to  the  reverse 
of  the  present  system.  For  it  has  hitherto  been 
active  and  curious  in  noting  the  variety  of  things, 
and  explaining  the  accurate  differences  of  ani¬ 
mals,  vegetables,  and  minerals,  most  of  which 
are  the  mere  sport  of  nature,  rather  than  of  any 
real  utility  as  concerns  the  sciences.  Pursuits  of 
this  nature  are  certainly  agreeable,  and  some¬ 
times  of  practical  advantage,  but  contribute  lit¬ 
tle  or  nothing  to  the  thorough  investigation  of 
nature.  Our  labor  must  therefore  be  directed  to¬ 
wards  inquiring  into  and  observing  resem¬ 
blances  and  analogies,  both  in  the  whole  and 
its  parts,  for  they  unite  nature,  and  lay  the 
foundation  of  the  sciences. 

Here,  however,  a  severe  and  rigorous  caution 
must  be  observed,  that  we  only  consider  as  sim¬ 
ilar  and  proportionate  instances,  those  which 
(as  we  first  observed)  point  out  physical  resem¬ 
blances;  that  is,  real  and  substantial  resem¬ 


blances,  deeply  founded  in  nature,  and  not  cas¬ 
ual  and  superficial,  much  less  superstitious  or 
curious;  such  as  those  which  are  constantly  put 
forward  by  the  writers  on  natural  magic  (the 
most  idle  of  men,  and  who  are  scarcely  fit  to 
be  named  in  connection  with  such  serious  mat¬ 
ters  as  we  now  treat  of),  who,  with  much  van¬ 
ity  and  folly,  describe,  and  sometimes  too,  in¬ 
vent,  unmeaning  resemblances  and  sympathies. 

But  leaving  such  to  themselves,  similar  in¬ 
stances  are  not  to  be  neglected,  in  the  greater 
portions  of  the  world’s  conformation;  such  as 
Africa  and  the  Peruvian  continent,  which 
reaches  to  the  Straits  of  Magellan;  both  of  which 
possess  a  similar  isthmus  and  similar  capes,  a 
circumstance  not  to  be  attributed  to  mere  ac¬ 
cident. 

Again,  the  New  and  Old  World  are  both  of 
them  broad  and  expanded  towards  the  north, 
and  narrow  and  pointed  towards  the  south. 

Again,  we  have  very  remarkable  similar  in¬ 
stances  in  the  intense  cold,  towards  the  middle 
regions  (as  it  is  termed)  of  the  air,  and  the  vio¬ 
lent  fires  which  are  often  found  to  burst  from 
subterraneous  spots,  the  similarity  consisting  in 
both  being  ends  and  extremes;  the  extreme  of 
the  nature  of  cold,  for  instance,  is  towards  the 
boundary  of  heaven,  and  that  of  the  nature  of 
heat  towards  the  centre  of  the  earth,  by  a  sim¬ 
ilar  species  of  opposition  or  rejection  of  the  con¬ 
trary  nature. 

Lastly,  in  the  axioms  of  the  sciences,  there 
is  a  similarity  of  instances  worthy  of  observa¬ 
tion.  Thus  the  rhetorical  trope  which  is  called 
surprise,  is  similar  to  that  of  music  termed  the 
declining  of  a  cadence.  Again,  the  mathemati¬ 
cal  postulate  that  things  which  are  equal  to  the 
same  are  equal  to  one  another,  is  similar  to  the 
form  of  the  syllogism  in  logic,  which  unites  things 
agreeing  in  the  middle  term.  Lastly,  a  certain 
degree  of  sagacity,  in  collecting  and  searching 
for  physical  points  of  similarity,  is  very  useful 
in  many  respects. 

28.  In  the  seventh  rank  of  prerogative  in¬ 
stances,  we  will  place  singular  instances,  which 
we  are  also  wont  to  call  irregular  or  heteroclite 
(to  borrow  a  term  from  the  grammarians).  They 
are  such  as  exhibit  bodies  in  the  concrete,  of  an 
apparently  extravagant  and  separate  nature, 
agreeing  but  little  with  other  things  of  the  same 
species.  For,  whilst  the  similar  instances  re¬ 
semble  each  other,  those  we  now  speak  ot  are 
only  like  themselves.  Their  use  is  much  the  same 
with  that  of  clandestine  instances:  they  bring 
out  and  unite  nature,  and  discover  genera  or 
common  natures,  which  must  afterwards  be 


SECOND  BOOK 


limited  by  real  differences.  Nor  should  we  de¬ 
sist  from  inquiry,  until  the  properties  and  qual¬ 
ities  of  those  things,  which  may  be  deemed  mira¬ 
cles,  as  it  were,  of  nature,  be  reduced  to,  and 
comprehended  in,  some  form  or  certain  law;  so 
that  all  irregularity  or  singularity  may  be  found 
to  depend  on  some  common  form;  and  the  mir¬ 
acle  only  consists  in  accurate  differences,  de¬ 
gree,  and  rare  coincidence,  not  in  the  species  it¬ 
self.  Man’s  meditation  proceeds  no  further  at 
present,  than  just  to  consider  things  of  this  kind 
as  the  secrets  and  vast  efforts  of  nature,  with¬ 
out  an  assignable  cause,  and,  as  it  were,  excep¬ 
tions  to  general  rules. 

As  examples  of  singular  instances,  we  have 
the  sun  and  moon  amongst  the  heavenly  bodies; 
the  magnet  amongst  minerals;  quicksilver 
amongst  metals;  the  elephant  amongst  quad¬ 
rupeds;  the  venereal  sensation  amongst  the  dif¬ 
ferent  kinds  of  touch;  the  scent  of  sporting  dogs 
amongst  those  of  smell.  The  letter  S,  too,  is  con¬ 
sidered  by  the  grammarians  as  sui  generis ,  from 
its  easily  uniting  with  double  or  triple  conso¬ 
nants,  which  no  other  letter  will.  These  instances 
are  of  great  value,  because  they  excite  and  keep 
alive  inquiry,  and  correct  an  understanding  de¬ 
praved  by  habit  and  the  common  course  of 
things. 

29.  In  the  eighth  rank  of  prerogative  in¬ 
stances,  we  will  place  deviating  instances,  such 
as  the  errors  of  nature,  or  strange  and  monstrous 
objects,  in  which  nature  deviates  and  turns  from 
her  ordinary  course.  For  the  errors  of  nature  dif¬ 
fer  from  singular  instances,  inasmuch  as  the  lat¬ 
ter  are  the  miracles  of  species,  the  former  of  in¬ 
dividuals.  Their  use  is  much  the  same,  for  they 
recitfy  the  understanding  in  opposition  to  hab¬ 
it,  and  reveal  common  forms.  For  with  regard 
to  these,  also,  we  must  not  desist  from  inquiry, 
till  we  discern  the  cause  of  the  deviation.  The 
cause  does  not,  however,  in  such  cases  rise  to 
a  regular  form,  but  only  to  the  latent  process 
towards  such  a  form.  For  he  who  is  acquainted 
with  the  paths  of  nature,  will  more  readily  ob¬ 
serve  her  deviations;  and  vice  versa,  he  who  has 
learnt  her  deviations,  will  be  able  more  accurate¬ 
ly  to  describe  her  paths. 

They  differ  again  from  singular  instances,  by 
being  much  more  apt  for  practice  and  the  oper¬ 
ative  branch.  For  it  would  be  very  difficult  to 
generate  new  species,  but  less  so  to  vary  known 
species,  and  thus  produce  many  rare  and  un¬ 
usual  results.  The  passage  from  the  miracles  of 
nature  to  those  of  art  is  easy;  for  if  nature  be 
once  seized  in  her  variations,  and  the  cause  be 
manifest,  it  will  be  easy  to  lead  her  by  art  to 


such  deviation  as  she  was  at  first  led  to  by  chance ; 
and  not  only  to  that  but  others,  since  devia¬ 
tions  on  the  one  side  lead  and  open  the  way  to 
others  in  every  direction.  Of  this  we  do  not  re¬ 
quire  any  examples,  since  they  are  so  abundant. 
For  a  compilation,  or  particular  natural  history, 
must  be  made  of  all  monsters  and  prodigious 
births  of  nature;  of  everything,  in  short,  which 
is  new,  rare,  and  unusual  in  nature.  This  should 
be  done  with  a  rigorous  selection,  so  as  to  be 
worthy  of  credit.  Those  are  most  to  be  suspect¬ 
ed  which  depend  upon  superstition,  as  the  prod¬ 
igies  of  Livy,  and  those  perhaps,  but  little  less, 
which  are  found  in  the  works  of  writers  on  nat¬ 
ural  magic,  or  even  alchemy,  and  the  like;  for 
such  men,  as  it  were,  are  the  very  suitors  and 
lovers  of  fables;  but  our  instances  should  be  de¬ 
rived  from  some  grave  and  credible  history,  and 
faithful  narration. 

30.  In  the  ninth  rank  of  prerogative  instances, 
we  will  place  bordering  instances,  which  we  are 
also  wont  to  term  participants.  They  are  such 
as  exhibit  those  species  of  bodies  which  appear 
to  be  composed  of  two  species,  or  to  be  the  ru¬ 
diments  between  the  one  and  the  other.  They 
may  well  be  classed  with  the  singular  or  heteroc- 
lite  instances:  for  in  the  whole  system  of  things, 
they  are  rare  and  extraordinary.  Yet  from  their 
dignity,  they  must  be  treated  of  and  classed 
separately,  for  they  point  out  admirably  the  or¬ 
der  and  constitution  of  things,  and  suggest  the 
causes  of  the  number  and  quality  of  the  more 
common  species  in  the  universe,  leading  the  un¬ 
derstanding  from  that  which  is,  to  that  which 
is  possible. 

We  have  examples  of  them  in  moss,  which  is 
something  between  putrescence  and  a  plant;  in 
some  comets,  which  hold  a  place  between  stars 
and  ignited  meteors;  in  flying  fishes,  between 
fishes  and  birds;  and  in  bats,  between  birds  and 
quadrupeds.  Again, 

Simia  quam  similis  turpissima  bestia  nobis. 

We  have  also  biformed  fetus,  mingled  spe¬ 
cies,  and  the  like. 

31.  In  the  tenth  rank  of  prerogative  instances, 
we  will  place  the  instances  of  power,  or  the 
fasces  (to  borrow  a  term  from  the  insignia  ot 
empire),  which  we  are  also  wont  to  call  the  wit 
or  hands  of  man.  These  are  such  works  as  are 
most  noble  and  perfect,  and,  as  it  were,  the 
masterpieces  in  every  art.  For  since  our  princi¬ 
pal  object  is  to  make  nature  subservient  to  the 
state  and  wants  of  man,  it  becomes  us  well  to 
note  and  enumerate  the  works,  which  have 
long  since  been  in  the  power  of  man,  especially 


NOVUM  organum 


160 

those  which  are  most  polished  and  perfect:  be¬ 
cause  the  passage  from  these  to  new  and  hith¬ 
erto  undiscovered  works,  is  more  easy  and  fea¬ 
sible.  For  if  anyone,  after  an  attentive  contem¬ 
plation  of  such  works  as  are  extant,  be  willing 
to  push  forward  in  his  design  with  alacrity  and 
vigor,  he  will  undoubtedly  either  advance  them, 
or  turn  them  to  something  within  their  imme¬ 
diate  reach,  or  even  apply  and  transfer  them  to 
some  more  noble  purpose. 

Nor  is  this  all:  for  as  the  understanding  is 
elevated  and  raised  by  rare  and  unusual  works 
of  nature,  to  investigate  and  discover  the  forms 
which  include  them  also,  so  is  the  same  effect 
frequently  produced  by  the  excellent  and  won¬ 
derful  works  of  art;  and  even  to  a  greater  de¬ 
gree,  because  the  mode  of  effecting  and  con¬ 
structing  the  miracles  of  art  is  generally  plain, 
whilst  that  of  effecting  the  miracles  of  nature 
is  more  obscure.  Great  care,  however,  must  be 
taken,  that  they  do  not  depress  the  under¬ 
standing,  and  fix  it,  as  it  were,  to  earth. 

For  there  is  some  danger,  lest  the  understand- 
ing  should  be  astonished  and  chained  down, 
and  as  it  were  bewitched,  by  such  works  of  art, 
as  appear  to  be  the  very  summit  and  pinnacle 
of  human  industry,  so  as  not  to  become  familiar 
with  them,  but  rather  to  suppose  that  nothing 
of  the  kind  can  be  accomplished,  unless  the 
same  means  be  employed,  with  perhaps  a  little 
more  diligence,  and  more  accurate  preparation. 

Now,  on  the  contrary,  it  may  be  stated  as  a 
fact,  that  the  ways  and  means  hitherto  discov¬ 
ered  and  observed,  of  effecting  any  matter  or 
work,  are  for  the  most  part  of  little  value,  and 
that  all  really  efficient  power  depends,  and  is 
really  to  be  deduced  from  the  sources  of  forms, 
none  of  which  have  yet  been  discovered. 

Thus  (as  we  have  before  observed),  had  any 
one  meditated  on  ballistic  machines,  and  bat¬ 
tering  rams,  as  they  were  used  by  the  ancients, 
whatever  application  he  might  have  exerted, 
and  though  he  might  have  consumed  a  whole 
life  in  the  pursuit,  yet  would  he  never  have  hit 
upon  the  invention  of  flaming  engines,  acting 
by  means  of  gunpowder;  nor  would  any  per¬ 
son,  who  had  made  woollen  manufactories  and 
cotton  the  subject  of  his  observation  and  re¬ 
flection,  have  ever  discovered  thereby  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  silkworm  or  of  silk. 

Hence  all  the  most  noble  discoveries  have 
(if  you  observe)  come  to  light,  not  by  any  grad¬ 
ual  improvement  and  extension  of  the  arts,  but 
merely  by  chance;  whilst  nothing  imitates  or 
anticipates  chance  (which  is  wont  to  act  at  in¬ 
tervals  of  ages)  but  the  invention  of  forms. 


There  is  no  necessity  for  adducing  any  par¬ 
ticular  examples  of  these  instances,  since  they 
are  abundant.  The  plan  to  be  pursued  is  this: 
all  the  mechanical,  and  even  the  liberal  arts  fas 
far  as  they  are  practical),  should  be  visited  and 
thoroughly  examined,  and  thence  there  should 
be  formed  a  compilation  or  particular  history 
of  the  great  masterpieces,  or  most  finished 
works  in  each,  as  well  as  of  the  mode  of  carry¬ 
ing  them  into  effect. 

Nor  do  we  confine  the  diligence  to  be  used  in 
such  a  compilation  to  the  leading  works  and 
secrets  only  of  every  art,  and  such  as  excite 
wonder;  for  wonder  is  engendered  by  rarity, 
since  that  which  is  rare,  although  it  be  com¬ 
pounded  of  ordinary  natures,  always  begets 
wonder. 

On  the  contrary,  that  which  is  really  won¬ 
derful,  from  some  specific  difference  distinguish¬ 
ing  it  from  other  species,  is  carelessly  observed, 
if  it  be  but  familiar.  Yet  the  singular  instances 
of  art  should  be  observed  no  less  than  those  of 
nature,  which  we  have  before  spoken  of:  and 
as  in  the  latter  we  have  classed  the  sun,  the 
moon,  the  magnet,  and  the  like,  all  of  them 
most  familiar  to  us,  but  yet  in  their  nature  sin¬ 
gular,  so  should  we  proceed  with  the  singular 
instances  of  art. 

For  example:  paper,  a  very  common  sub¬ 
stance,  is  a  singular  instance  of  art;  for  if  you 
consider  the  subject  attentively,  you  will  find 
that  artificial  substances  are  either  woven  by 
straight  and  transverse  lines,  as  silk,  woollen, 
or  linen  cloth,  and  the  like;  or  coagulated  from 
concrete  juices,  such  as  brick,  earthenware, 
glass,  enamel,  porcelain,  and  the  like,  which 
admit  of  a  polish  if  they  be  compact,  but  if  not, 
become  hard  without  being  polished;  all  which 
latter  substances  are  brittle,  and  not  adherent 
or  tenacious.  On  the  contrary,  paper  is  a  tena¬ 
cious  substance,  which  can  be  cut  and  torn,  so 
as  to  resemble  and  almost  rival  the  skin  of  any 
animal,  or  the  leaf  of  vegetables,  and  the  like 
works  of  nature;  being  neither  brittle  like  glass, 
nor  woven  like  cloth,  but  having  fibres  and  not 
distinct  threads,  just  as  natural  substances,  so 
that  scarcely  anything  similar  can  be  found 
amongst  artificial  substances,  and  it  is  abso¬ 
lutely  singular.  And  in  artificial  works  we 
should  certainly  prefer  those  which  approach 
the  nearest  to  an  imitation  of  nature,  or,  on  the 
other  hand,  powerfully  govern  and  change  her 
course. 

Again,  in  these  instances  which  we  term  the 
wit  and  hands  of  man,  charms  and  conjuring 
should  not  be  altogether  despised,  for  although 


SECOND  BOOK 


mere  amusements,  and  of  little  use,  yet  they 
mav  afford  considerable  information. 

Lastly,  superstition  and  magic  (in  its  com¬ 
mon  acceptation)  are  not  to  be  entirely  omit¬ 
ted;  for  although  they  be  overwhelmed  by  a 
mass  of  lies  and  fables,  yet  some  investigation 
should  be  made,  to  see  if  there  be  really  any 
latent  natural  operation  in  them;  as  in  fascina¬ 
tion,  and  the  fortifying  of  the  imagination,  the 
sympathy  of  distant  objects,  the  transmission 
of  impressions  from  spirit  to  spirit  no  less  than 
from  body  to  body,  and  the  like. 

32.  From  the  foregoing  remarks,  it  is  clear 
that  the  five  last  species  of  instances  (the  simi¬ 
lar,  singular,  deviating,  and  bordering  instances, 
and  those  of  power)  should  not  be  reserved  for 
the  investigation  of  any  given  nature,  as  the 
preceding  and  many  of  the  succeeding  instances 
must,  but  a  collection  of  them  should  be  made 
at  once,  in  the  style  of  a  particular  history,  so 
that  they  may  arrange  the  matter  which  enters 
the  understanding,  and  correct  its  depraved 
habit,  for  it  is  necessarily  imbued,  corrupted, 
perverted,  and  distorted  by  daily  and  habitual 
impressions. 

They  are  to  be  used,  therefore,  as  a  prepara¬ 
tive,  for  the  purpose  of  rectifying  and  purifying 
the  understanding;  for  whatever  withdraws  it 
from  habit,  levels  and  planes  down  its  surface 
for  the  reception  of  the  dry  and  pure  light  of 
true  notions. 

These  instances,  moreoever,  level  and  pre¬ 
pare  the  way  for  the  operative  branch,  as  we 
will  mention  in  its  proper  place  when  speaking 
of  the  practical  deductions. 

33.  In  the  eleventh  rank  of  prerogative  in¬ 
stances  we  will  place  accompanying  and  hostile 
instances.  These  are  such  as  exhibit  any  body 
or  concrete,  where  the  required  nature  is  con¬ 
stantly  found,  as  an  inseparable  companion, 
or,  on  the  contrary,  where  the  required  nature 
is  constantly  avoided,  and  excluded  from  at¬ 
tendance,  as  an  enemy.  From  these  instances 
may  be  formed  certain  and  universal  proposi¬ 
tions,  either  affirmative  or  negative;  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  which  will  be  the  concrete  body,  and  the 
predicate  the  required  nature.  For  particular 
propositions  are  by  no  means  fixed,  when  the 
required  nature  is  found  to  fluctuate  and  change 
in  the  concrete,  either  approaching  and  ac¬ 
quired,  or  receding  and  laid  aside.  Hence  par¬ 
ticular  propositions  have  no  great  prerogative, 
except  in  the  case  of  migration,  of  which  we 
have  spoken  above.  Yet  such  particular  propo¬ 
sitions  are  of  great  use,  when  compared  with 
the  universal,  as  will  be  mentioned  in  its  proper 


161 

place.  Nor  do  we  require  absolute  affirmation 
or  negation,  even  in  universal  propositions,  for 
if  the  exceptions  be  singular  or  rare,  it  is  suffi¬ 
cient  for  our  purpose. 

The  use  of  accompanying  instances  is  to  nar¬ 
row  the  affirmative  of  form;  for  as  it  is  nar¬ 
rowed  by  the  migrating  instances,  where  the 
form  must  necessarily  be  something  commu¬ 
nicated  or  destroyed  by  the  act  of  migration, 
so  it  is  narrowed  by  accompanying  instances, 
where  the  form  must  necessarily  be  something 
which  enters  into  the  concretion  of  the  body, 
or,  on  the  contrary,  is  repugnant  to  it;  and  one 
who  is  well  acquainted  with  the  constitution  or 
formation  of  the  body,  will  not  be  far  from 
bringing  to  light  the  form  of  the  required  nature. 

For  example:  let  the  required  nature  be  heat. 
Flame  is  an  accompanying  instance;  for  in 
water,  air,  stone,  metal,  and  many  other  sub¬ 
stances,  heat  is  variable,  and  can  approach  or 
retire;  but  all  flame  is  hot,  so  that  heat  always 
accompanies  the  concretion  of  flame.  We  have 
no  hostile  instance  of  heat;  for  the  senses  are 
unacquainted  with  the  interior  of  the  earth, 
and  there  is  no  concretion  of  any  known  body 
which  is  not  susceptible  of  heat. 

Again,  let  solidity  be  the  required  nature. 
Air  is  a  hostile  instance;  for  metals  may  be 
liquid  or  solid,  so  may  glass;  even  water  may 
become  solid  by  congelation,  but  air  cannot 
become  solid  or  lose  its  fluidity. 

With  regard  to  these  instances  of  fixed  prop¬ 
ositions,  there  are  two  points  to  be  observed, 
which  are  of  importance.  First,  that  if  there  be 
no  universal  affirmative  or  negative,  it  be  care¬ 
fully  noted  as  not  existing.  Thus,  in  heat,  we 
have  observed  that  there  exists  no  universal 
negative,  in  such  substances,  at  least,  as  have 
come  to  our  knowledge.  Again,  if  the  required 
nature  be  eternity  or  incorruptibility,  we  have 
no  universal  affirmative  within  our  sphere,  lor 
these  qualities  cannot  be  predicated  of  any 
bodies  below  the  heavens,  or  above  the  interior 
of  the  earth.  Secondly,  to  our  general  proposi¬ 
tions  as  to  any  concrete,  whether  affirmative 
or  negative,  we  should  subjoin  the  concretes 
which  appear  to  approach  nearest  to  the  non¬ 
existing  substances;  such  as  the  most  gentle  or 
least-burning  flames  in  heat,  or  gold  in  incor¬ 
ruptibility,  since  it  approaches  nearest  to  it. 
For  they  all  serve  to  show  the  limit  of  existence 
and  non-existence,  and  circumscribe  forms,  so 
that  they  cannot  wander  beyond  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  matter. 

34.  In  the  twelfth  rank  of  prerogative  in¬ 
stances,  we  will  class  those  subjunctive  in- 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


162 

stances,  of  which  we  spoke  in  the  last  aphorism, 
and  which  we  are  also  wont  to  call  instances  of 
extremity  or  limits;  for  they  are  not  only  serv¬ 
iceable  wThen  subjoined  to  fixed  propositions, 
but  also  of  themselves  and  from  their  own  na¬ 
ture.  They  indicate  with  sufficient  precision 
the  real  divisions  of  nature,  and  measures  of 
things,  and  the  “how  far”  nature  effects  or 
allows  of  anything,  and  her  passage  thence  to 
something  else.  Such  are  gold  in  weight,  iron 
in  hardness,  the  whale  in  the  size  of  animals, 
the  dog  in  smell,  the  flame  of  gunpowder  in 
rapid  expansion,  and  others  of  a  like  nature. 
Nor  are  we  to  pass  over  the  extremes  in  defect, 
as  well  as  in  abundance,  as  spirits  of  wine  in 
weight,  the  touchstone  in  softness,  the  worms 
upon  the  skin  in  the  size  of  animals,  and  the 
like. 

35.  In  the  thirteenth  rank  of  prerogative  in¬ 
stances,  we  will  place  those  of  alliance  or  union. 
They  are  such  as  mingle  and  unite  natures  held 
to  be  heterogeneous,  and  observed  and  marked 
as  such  in  received  classifications. 

These  instances  show  that  the  operation  and 
effect,  which  is  considered  peculiar  to  some 
one  of  such  heterogeneous  natures,  may  also  be 
attributed  to  another  nature  styled  heteroge¬ 
neous,  so  as  to  prove  that  the  difference  of  the 
natures  is  not  real  nor  essential,  but  a  mere 
modification  of  a  common  nature.  They  are 
very  serviceable,  therefore,  in  elevating  and 
carrying  on  the  mind,  from  differences  to  gen¬ 
era,  and  in  removing  those  phantoms  and  im¬ 
ages  of  things,  which  meet  it  in  disguise  in  con¬ 
crete  substances. 

For  example:  let  the  required  nature  be  heat. 
The  classification  of  heat  into  three  kinds,  that 
of  the  celestial  bodies,  that  of  animals,  and 
that  of  fire,  appears  to  be  settled  and  admitted; 
and  these  kinds  of  heat,  especially  one  of  them 
compared  with  the  other  two,  are  supposed  to 
be  different,  and  clearly  heterogeneous  in  their 
essence  and  species,  or  specific  nature,  since 
the  heat  of  the  heavenly  bodies  and  of  animals 
generates  and  cherishes,  whilst  that  of  fire  cor¬ 
rupts  and  destroys.  We  have  an  instance  of 
alliance,  then,  in  a  very  common  experiment, 
that  of  a  vine  branch  admitted  into  a  building 
where  there  is  a  constant  fire,  by  which  the 
grapes  ripen  a  whole  month  sooner  than  in  the 
air;  so  that  fruit  upon  the  tree  can  be  ripened 
by  fire,  although  this  appear  the  peculiar  effect 
of  the  sun.  From  this  beginning,  therefore,  the 
understanding  rejects  all  essential  difference, 
and  easily  ascends  to  the  investigation  of  the 
real  differences  between  the  heat  of  the  sun 


and  that  of  fire,  by  which  their  operation  is 
rendered  dissimilar,  although  they  partake  of 
a  common  nature. 

These  differences  will  be  found  to  be  four  in 
number  .  1.  The  heat  of  the  sun  is  much  milder 
and  gentler  in  degree  than  that  of  fire.  2.  It  is 
much  more  moist  in  quality,  especially  as  it  is 
transmitted  to  us  through  the  air.  3.  Which  is 
the  chief  point,  it  is  very  unequal,  advancing 
and  increased  at  one  time,  retiring  and  dimin¬ 
ished  at  another,  which  mainly  contributes  to 
the  generation  of  bodies.  For  Aristotle  rightly 
asserted  that  the  principal  cause  of  generation 
and  corruption  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  was 
the  oblique  path  of  the  sun  in  the  zodiac,  whence 
its  heat  becomes  very  unequal,  partly  from  the 
alternation  of  night  and  day,  partly  from  the 
succession  of  summer  and  winter.  Yet  must  he 
immediately  corrupt  and  pervert  his  discovery, 
by  dictating  to  nature  according  to  his  habit, 
and  dogmatically  assigning  the  cause  of  gener¬ 
ation  to  the  approach  of  the  sun,  and  that  of 
corruption  to  its  retreat;  whilst  in  fact,  each 
circumstance  indifferently  and  not  respectively 
contributes  both  to  generation  and  corruption; 
for  unequal  heat  tends  to  generate  and  cor¬ 
rupt,  as  equable  heat  does  to  preserve.  4.  The 
fourth  difference  between  the  heat  of  the  sun 
and  fire  is  of  great  consequence;  namely,  that 
the  sun,  gradually,  and  for  a  length  of  time, 
insinuates  its  effects,  whilst  those  of  fire  (urged 
by  the  impatience  of  man)  are  brought  to  a 
termination  in  a  shorter  space  of  time.  But  if 
anyone  were  to  pay  attention  to  the  tempering 
of  fire,  and  reducing  it  to  a  more  moderate  and 
gentle  degree  (which  may  be  done  in  various 
ways),  and  then  were  to  sprinkle  and  mix  a 
degree  of  humidity  with  it;  and,  above  all, 
were  to  imitate  the  sun  in  its  inequality;  and 
lastly,  were  patiently  to  suffer  some  delay  (not 
such,  however,  as  is  proportioned  to  the  effects 
of  the  sun,  but  more  than  men  usually  admit 
of  in  those  of  fire),  he  would  soon  banish  the 
notion  of  any  difference,  and  w^ould  attempt, 
or  equal,  or  perhaps  sometimes  surpass  the 
effect  of  the  sun,  by  the  heat  of  fire.  A  like  in¬ 
stance  of  alliance  is  that  of  reviving  butterflies, 
benumbed  and  nearly  dead  from  cold,  by  the 
gentle  warmth  of  fire;  so  that  fire  is  no  less  able 
to  revive  animals  than  to  ripen  vegetables.  We 
may  also  mention  the  celebrated  invention  of 
Fracastorius,  of  applying  a  pan  considerably 
heated  to  the  head  in  desperate  cases  of  apo¬ 
plexy,  which  clearly  expands  the  animal  spirits, 
when  compressed  and  almost  extinguished  by 
the  humors  and  obstructions  of  the  brain,  and 


SECOND  BOOK  i6? 


excites  them  to  action,, as  the  fire  would  oper¬ 
ate  on  water  or  air,  and  in  the  result  produces 
life.  Eggs  are  sometimes  hatched  by  the  heat 
of  fire,  an  exact  imitation  of  animal  heat;  and 
there  are  many  instances  of  the  like  nature,  so 
that  no  one  can  doubt  that  the  heat  of  fire,  in 
many  cases,  can  be  modified  till  it  resemble 
that  of  the  heavenly  bodies  and  of  animals. 

Again,  let  the  required  natures  be  motion 
and  rest.  There  appears  to  be  a  settled  classifi¬ 
cation,  grounded  on  the  deepest  philosophy, 
that  natural  bodies  either  revolve,  move  in  a 
straight  line,  or  stand  still  and  rest.  For  there 
is  either  motion  without  limit,  or  continuance 
within  a  certain  limit,  or  a  translation  towards 
a  certain  limit.  The  eternal  motion  of  revolu¬ 
tion  appears  pecular  to  the  heavenly  bodies, 
rest  to  this  our  globe,  and  the  other  bodies 
(heavy  and  light,  as  they  are  termed,  that  is  to 
say,  placed  out  of  their  natural  position)  are 
borne  in  a  straight  line  to  masses  or  aggregates 
which  resemble  them,  the  light  towards  the 
heaven,  the  heavy  towards  the  earth;  and  all 
this  is  very  fine  language. 

But  we  have  an  instance  of  alli-ance  in  low 
comets,  which  revolve  though  far  below  the 
heavens;  and  the  fiction  of  Aristotle,  of  the 
comet  being  fixed  to,  or  necessarily  following 
some  star,  has  been  long  since  exploded;  not 
only  because  it  is  improbable  in  itself,  but 
from  the  evident  fact  of  the  discursive  and 
irregular  motion  of  comets  through  various 
parts  of  the  heavens. 

Another  instance  of  alliance  is  that  of  the 
motion  of  air,  which  appears  to  revolve  from 
east  to  west  within  the  tropics,  where  the  circles 
of  revolution  are  the  greatest. 

The  flow  and  ebb  of  the  sea  would  perhaps 
be  another  instance,  if  the  water  were  once 
found  to  have  a  motion  of  revolution,  though 
slow  and  hardly  perceptible,  from  east  to  west, 
subject,  however,  to  a  reaction  twice  a  day.  If 
this  be  so,  it  is  clear  that  the  motion  of  revolu¬ 
tion  is  not  confined  to  the  celestial  bodies,  but 
is  shared,  also,  by  air  and  water. 

Again,  the  supposed  peculiar  disposition  of 
light  bodies  to  rise  is  rather  shaken;  and  here 
we  may  find  an  instance  of  alliance  in  a  water 
bubble.  For  if  air  be  placed  under  water,  it 
rises  rapidly  towards  the  surface  by  that  strik¬ 
ing  motion  (as  Democritus  terms  it)  with  which 
the  descending  water  strikes  the  air  and  raises 
it,  not  by  any  struggle  or  effort  of  the  air 
itself;  and  when  it  has  reached  the  surface  of 
the  water,  it  is  prevented  from  ascending  any 
farther,  by  the  slight  resistance  it  meets  with 


in  the  water  which  does  not  allow  an  immedi¬ 
ate  separation  of  its  parts,  so  that  the  tendency 
of  the  air  to  rise  must  be  very  slight. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  weight.  It 
is  certainly  a  received  classification,  that  dense 
and  solid  bodies  are  borne  towards  the  centre 
of  the  earth,  and  rare  and  light  bodies  to  the 
circumference  of  the  heavens,  as  their  appro¬ 
priate  places.  As  far  as  relates  to  places  (though 
these  things  have  much  weight  in  the  schools), 
the  notion  of  there  being  any  determinate  place 
is  absurd  and  puerile.  Philosophers  trifle,  there¬ 
fore,  when  they  tell  you,  that  if  the  earth  were 
perforated,  heavy  bodies  would  stop  on  their 
arrival  at  the  centre.  This  centre  would  indeed 
be  an  efficacious  nothing,  or  mathematical 
point,  could  it  affect  bodies  or  be  sought  by 
them,  for  a  body  is  not  acted  upon  except  by  a 
body.  In  fact,  this  tendency  to  ascend  and  de¬ 
scend  is  either  in  the  conformation  of  the  mov¬ 
ing  body,  or  in  its  harmony  and  sympathy 
with  another  body.  But  if  any  dense  and  solid 
body  be  found,  which  does  not,  however,  tend 
towards  the  earth,  the  classification  is  at  an 
end.  Now,  if  we  allow  of  Gilberts  opinion,  that 
the  magnetic  power  of  the  earth,  in  attracting 
heavy  bodies,  is  not  extended  beyond  the  limit 
of  its  peculiar  virtue  (which  operates  always  at 
a  fixed  distance  and  no  farther),  and  this  be 
proved  by  some  instance,  such  an  instance  will 
be  one  of  alliance  in  our  present  subject.  The 
nearest  approach  to  it  is  that  of  waterspouts, 
frequently  seen  by  persons  navigating  the 
Atlantic  towards  either  of  the  Indies.  For  the 
force  and  mass  of  the  water  suddenly  effused 
by  waterspouts,  appear  to  be  so  considerable, 
that  the  water  must  have  been  collected  pre¬ 
viously,  and  have  remained  fixed  where  it  was 
formed,  until  it  was  afterwards  forced  down  by 
some  violent  cause,  rather  than  made  to  fall  by 
the  natural  motion  of  gravity;  so  that  it  may 
be  conjectured  that  a  dense  and  compact  mass, 
at  a  great  distance  from  the  earth,  may  be  sus¬ 
pended  as  the  earth  itself  is,  and  would  not 
fall,  unless  forced  down.  We  do  not,  however, 
affirm  this  as  certain.  In  the  mean  while,  both 
in  this  respect  and  many  others,  it  will  readily 
be  seen  how  deficient  we  are  in  natural  history, 
since  we  are  forced  to  have  recourse  to  supposi¬ 
tions  for  examples,  instead  of  ascertained 
instances. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  the  dis¬ 
cursive  power  of  the  mind.  The  classification 
of  human  reason  and  animal  instinct  appears 
to  be  perfectly  correct.  Yet  there  are  some  in¬ 
stances  of  the  actions  of  brutes  which  seem  to 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


164 

show  that  they,  too,  can  syllogize.  Thus  it  is 
related,  that  a  crow,  which  had  nearly  perished 
from  thirst  in  a  great  drought,  saw  some  water 
in  the  hollow  trunk  of  a  tree,  but  as  it  was  too 
narrow  for  him  to  get  into  it,  he  continued  to 
throw  in  pebbles,  which  made  the  water  rise 
till  he  could  drink;  and  it  afterwards  became  a 
proverb. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  vision.  The 
classification  appears  real  and  certain,  which 
considers  light  as  that  which  is  originally  vis¬ 
ible,  and  confers  the  power  of  seeing;  and  color, 
as  being  secondarily  visible,  and  not  capable  of 
being  seen  without  light,  so  as  to  appear  a 
mere  image  or  modification  of  light.  Yet  there 
are  instances  of  alliance  in  each  respect;  as  in 
snow  when  in  great  quantities,  and  in  the  flame 
of  sulphur;  the  one  being  a  color  originally  and 
in  itself  light,  the  other  a  light  verging  towards 
color. 

36.  In  the  fourteenth  rank  of  prerogative 
instances,  we  will  place  the  instances  of  the 
cross,  borrowing  our  metaphor  from  the  crosses 
erected  where  two  roads  meet,  to  point  out  the 
different  directions.  We  are  wont  also  to  call 
them  decisive  and  judicial  instances,  and  in 
some  cases  instances  of  the  oracle  and  of  com¬ 
mand.  Their  nature  is  as  follows.  When  in  in¬ 
vestigating  any  nature  the  understanding  is,  as 
it  were,  balanced,  and  uncertain  to  which  of 
two  or  more  natures  the  cause  of  the  required 
nature  should  be  assigned,  on  account  of  the 
frequent  and  usual  concurrence  of  several  na¬ 
tures,  the  instances  of  the  cross  show  that  the 
union  of  one  nature  with  the  required  nature 
is  firm  and  indissoluble,  whilst  that  of  the  other 
is  unsteady  and  separable;  by  which  means  the 
question  is  decided,  and  the  first  is  received  as 
the  cause,  whilst  the  other  is  dismissed  and  re¬ 
jected.  Such  instances,  therefore,  afford  great 
light,  and  are  of  great  weight,  so  that  the  course 
of  interpretation  sometimes  terminates,  and  is 
completed  in  them.  Sometimes,  however,  they 
are  found  amongst  the  instances  already  ob¬ 
served,,  but  they  are  generally  new,  beirg  ex¬ 
pressly  and  purposely  sought  for  and  applied, 
and  brought  to  light  only  by  attentive  and  ac¬ 
tive  diligence. 

For  example:  let  the  required  nature  be  the 
flow  and  ebb  of  the  sea,  which  is  repeated  twice 
a  day,  at  intervals  of  six  hours  between  each 
advance  and  retreat,  with  some  little  differ¬ 
ence,  agreeing  with  the  motion  of  the  moon. 
We  have  here  the  following  cross-ways. 

This  motion  must  be  occasioned  either  by 
the  advancing  and  the  retiring  of  the  sea,  like 


water  shaken  in  a  basin,  which  leaves  one  side 
while  it  washes  the  other;  or  by  the  rising  of 
the  sea  from  the  bottom,  and  its  again  sub¬ 
siding,  like  boiling  water.  But  a  doubt  arises, 
to  which  of  these  causes  we  should  assign  the 
flow  and  ebb.  If  the  first  assertion  be  admitted, 
it  follows,  that  when  there  is  a  flood  on  one 
side,  there  must  at  the  same  time  be  an  ebb  on 
another,  and  the  question  therefore  is  reduced 
to  this.  Now  Acosta,  and  some  others,  after  a 
diligent  inquiry,  have  observed  that  the  flood 
tide  takes  place  on  the  coast  of  Florida,  and 
the  opposite  coasts  of  Spain  and  Africa,  at  the 
same  time,  as  does  also  the  ebb;  and  that  there 
is  not,  on  the  contrary,  a  flood  tide  at  Florida 
when  there  is  an  ebb  on  the  coasts  of  Spain  and 
Africa.  Yet  if  one  consider  the  subject  atten¬ 
tively,  this  does  not  prove  the  necessity  of  a 
rising  motion,  nor  refute  the  notion  of  a  pro¬ 
gressive  motion.  For  the  motion  may  be  pro¬ 
gressive,  and  yet  inundate  the  opposite  shores 
of  a  channel  at  the  same  time;  as  if  the  waters 
be  forced  and  driven  together  from  some  other 
quarter,  for  instance,  which  takes  place  in  riv¬ 
ers,  for  they  flow  and  ebb  towards  each  bank 
at  the  same  time,  yet  their  motion  is  clearly 
progressive,  being  that  of  the  waters  from  the 
sea  entering  their  mouths.  So  it  may  happen, 
that  the  waters  coming  in  a  vast  body  from  the 
eastern  Indian  Ocean  are  driven  together,  and 
forced  into  the  channel  of  the  Atlantic,  and 
therefore  inundate  both  coasts  at  once.  We 
must  inquire,  therefore,  if  there  be  any  other 
channel  by  which  the  waters  can  at  the  same 
time  sink  and  ebb:  and  the  Southern  Ocean  at 
once  suggests  itself,  which  is  not  less  than  the 
Atlantic,  but  rather  broader  and  more  exten- 
tive  than  is  requisite  for  this  effect. 

We  at  length  arrive,  then,  at  an  instance  of 
the  cross,  which  is  this.  If  it  be  positively  dis¬ 
covered,  that  when  the  flood  sets  in  towards 
the  opposite  coasts  of  Florida  and  Spain  in  the 
Atlantic,  there  is  at  the  same  time  a  flood  tide 
on  the  coasts  of  Peru  and  the  back  part  of  Chi¬ 
na,  in  the  Southern  Ocean,  then  assuredly,  from 
this  decisive  instance,  we  must  reject  the  asser¬ 
tion,  that  the  flood  and  ebb  of  the  sea,  about 
which  we  inquire,  takes  place  by  progressive 
motion;  for  no  other  sea  or  place  is  left  where 
there  can  be  an  ebb.  But  this  may  most  easily 
be  learnt,  by  inquiring  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Panama  and  Lima  (where  the  two  oceans  are 
separated  by  a  narrow  isthmus),  whether  the 
flood  and  ebb  takes  place  on  the  opposite  sides 
of  the  isthmus  at  the  same  time,  or  the  reverse. 
This  decision  or  rejection  appears  certain,  if  it 


SECOND  BOOK 


be  granted  that  the  earth  is  fixed;  but  if  the 
earth  revolves,  it  may  perhaps  happen,  that 
from  the  unequal  revolution  (as  regards  veloc¬ 
ity)  of  the  earth  and  the  waters  of  the  sea,  there 
may  be  a  violent  forcing  of  the  waters  into  a 
mass,  forming  the  flood,  and  a  subsequent  re¬ 
laxation  of  them  (when  they  can  no  longer  bear 
the  accumulation),  forming  the  ebb.  A  sepa¬ 
rate  inquiry  must  be  made  into  this.  Even  with 
this  hypothesis,  however,  it  remains  equally 
true,  that  there  must  be  an  ebb  somewhere,  at 
the  same  time  that  there  is  a  flood  in  another 
quarter. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  the  latter  of 
the  two  motions  we  have  supposed ;  namely,  that 
of  a  rising  and  subsiding  motion,  if  it  should 
happen  that  upon  diligent  examination  the 
progressive  motion  be  rejected.  We  have,  then, 
three  ways  before  us,  with  regard  to  this  na¬ 
ture.  The  motion,  by  which  the  waters  raise 
themselves,  and  again  fall  back,  in  the  floods 
and  ebbs,  without  the  addition  of  any  other 
water  rolled  towards  them,  must  take  place  in 
one  of  the  three  following  ways.  Either  the  sup¬ 
ply  of  water  emanates  from  the  interior  of  the 
earth,  and  returns  back  again;  or  there  is  really 
no  greater  quantity  of  water,  but  the  same 
water  (without  any  augmentation  of  its  quan¬ 
tity)  is  extended  or  rarefied,  so  as  to  occupy  a 
greater  space  and  dimension,  and  again  con¬ 
tracts  itself;  or  there  is  neither  an  additional 
supply  nor  any  extension,  but  the  same  waters 
(with  regard  to  quantity,  density,  or  rarity) 
raise  themselves  and  fall  from  sympathy,  by 
some  magnetic  power  attracting  and  calling 
them  up,  as  it  were,  from  above.  Let  us  then 
(passing  over  the  first  two  motions)  reduce  the 
investigation  to  the  last,  and  inquire  if  there 
be  any  such  elevation  of  the  water  by  sympa¬ 
thy  or  a  magnetic  force;  and  it  is  evident,  in 
the  first  place,  that  the  whole  mass  of  water 
being  placed  in  the  trench  or  cavity  of  the  sea, 
cannot  be  raised  at  once,  because  there  would 
not  be  enough  to  cover  the  bottom,  so  that  if 
there  be  any  tendency  of  this  kind  in  the  water 
to  raise  itself,  yet  it  would  be  interrupted  and 
checked  by  the  cohesion  of  things,  or  (as  the 
common  expression  is)  that  there  may  be  no 
vacuum.  The  water,  therefore,  must  rise  on 
one  side,  and  for  that  reason  be  diminished  and 
ebb  on  another.  But  it  will  again  necessarily 
follow  that  the  magnetic  power  not  being  able 
to  operate  on  the  whole,  operates  most  intense¬ 
ly  on  the  centre,  so  as  to  raise  the  waters  there, 
which,  when  thus  raised  successively,  desert 
and  abandon  the  sides. 


165 

We  at  length  arrive,  then,  at  an  instance  of 
the  cross,  which  is  this:  if  it  be  found,  that  dur¬ 
ing  the  ebb  the  surface  of  the  waters  at  sea  is 
more  curved  and  round,  from  the  waters  rising 
in  the  middle,  and  sinking  at  the  sides  or 
coast,  and  if,  during  a  flood,  it  be  more  even 
and  level,  from  the  waters  returning  to  their 
former  position,  then  assuredly,  by  this  decisive 
instance,  the  raising  of  them  by  a  magnetic  force 
can  be  admitted;  if  otherwise,  it  must  be  en¬ 
tirely  rejected.  It  is  not  difficult  to  make  the 
experiment  (by  sounding  in  straits),  whether  the 
sea  be  deeper  towards  the  middle  in  ebbs,  than 
in  floods.  But  it  must  be  observed,  if  this  be  the 
case,  that  (contrary  to  common  opinion)  the 
waters  rise  in  ebbs,  and  only  return  to  their 
former  position  in  floods,  so  as  to  bathe  and  in¬ 
undate  the  coast. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  the  spon¬ 
taneous  motion  of  revolution,  and  particularly, 
whether  the  diurnal  motion,  by  which  the  sun 
and  stars  appear  to  us  to  rise  and  set,  be  a  real 
motion  of  revolution  in  the  heavenly  bodies,  or 
only  apparent  in  them,  and  real  in  the  earth. 
There  may  be  an  instance  of  the  cross  of  the 
following  nature.  If  there  be  discovered  any  mo¬ 
tion  in  the  ocean  from  east  to  west,  though  very 
languid  and  weak,  and  if  the  same  motion  be 
discovered  rather  more  swift  in  the  air  (partic¬ 
ularly  within  the  tropics,  where  it  is  more  per¬ 
ceptible  from  the  circles  being  greater).  If  it  be 
discovered  also  in  the  low  comets,  and  be  al¬ 
ready  quick  and  powerful  in  them;  if  it  be  found 
also  in  the  planets,  but  so  tempered  and  regu¬ 
lated  as  to  be  slower  in  those  nearest  the  earth, 
and  quicker  in  those  at  the  greatest  distance, 
being  quickest  of  all  in  the  heavens,  then  the 
diurnal  motion  should  certainly  be  considered 
as  real  in  the  heavens,  and  that  of  the  earth 
must  be  rejected;  for  it  will  be  evident  that  the 
motion  from  east  to  west  is  part  of  the  system 
of  the  world  and  universal;  since  it  is  most  rap¬ 
id  in  the  height  of  the  heavens,  and  gradually 
grows  weaker,  till  it  stops  and  is  extinguished 
in  rest  at  the  earth. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  that  other 
motion  of  revolution,  so  celebrated  amongst 
astronomers,  which  is  contrary  to  the  diurnal, 
namely,  from  west  to  east — and  which  the  an¬ 
cient  astronomers  assign  to  the  planets,  and 
even  to  the  starry  sphere,  but  Copernicus  and 
his  followers  to  the  earth  also — and  let  it  be  ex¬ 
amined  whether  any  such  motion  be  found  in 
nature,  or  it  be  rather  a  fiction  and  hypothesis 
for  abridging  and  facilitating  calculation,  and 
for  promoting  that  fine  notion  of  effecting  the 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


1 66 

heavenly  motions  by  perfect  circles;  for  there 
is  nothing  which  proves  such  a  motion  in  heav¬ 
enly  objects  to  be  true  and  real,  either  in  a 
planet’s  not  returning  in  its  diurnal  motion  to 
the  same  point  of  the  starry  sphere,  or  in  the 
pole  of  the  zodiac  being  different  from  that  of 
the  world,  which  two  circumstances  have  occa¬ 
sioned  this  notion.  For  the  first  phenomenon  is 
well  accounted  for  by  the  spheres  overtaking 
or  falling  behind  each  other,  and  the  second  by 
spiral  lines;  so  that  the  inaccuracy  of  the  return 
and  declination  to  the  tropics  may  be  rather 
modifications  of  the  one  diurnal  motion  than 
contrary  motions,  or  about  different  poles.  And 
it  is  most  certain,  if  we  consider  ourselves  for 
a  moment  as  part  of  the  vulgar  (setting  aside 
the  fictions  of  astronomers  and  the  school,  who 
are  wont  undeservedly  to  attack  the  senses  in 
many  respects,  and  to  affect  obscurity),  that  the 
apparent  motion  is  such  as  we  have  said,  a  model 
of  which  we  have  sometimes  caused  to  be  rep¬ 
resented  by  wires  in  a  sort  of  a  machine. 

We  may  take  the  following  instances  of  the 
cross  upon  this  subject.  If  it  be  found  in  any 
history  worthy  of  credit,  that  there  has  existed 
any  comet,  high  or  low,  which  has  not  revolved 
in  manifest  harmony  (however  irregularly)  with 
the  diurnal  motion,  then  we  may  decide  so  far 
as  to  allow  such  a  motion  to  be  possible  in  na¬ 
ture.  But  if  nothing  of  the  sort  be  found,  it  must 
be  suspected,  and  recourse  must  be  had  to  other 
instances  of  the  cross. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  weight  or 
gravity.  Heavy  and  ponderous  bodies  must,  ei¬ 
ther  of  their  own  nature,  tend  towards  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  the  earth  by  their  peculiar  formation,  or 
must  be  attracted  and  hurried  by  the  corporeal 
mass  of  the  earth  itself,  as  being  an  assemblage 
of  similar  bodies,  and  be  drawn  to  it  by  sym¬ 
pathy.  But  if  the  latter  be  the  cause,  it  follows 
that  the  nearer  bodies  approach  to  the  earth, 
the  more  powerfully  and  rapidly  they  must  be 
borne  towards  it,  and  the  farther  they  are  dis¬ 
tant,  the  more  faintly  and  slowly  (as  is  the  case 
in  magnetic  attractions),  and  that  this  must 
happen  within  a  given  distance;  so  that  if  they 
be  separated  at  such  a  distance  from  the  earth 
that  the  power  of  the  earth  cannot  act  upon 
them,  they  will  remain  suspended  like  the  earth, 
and  not  fall  at  all. 

The  following  instance  of  the  cross  may  be 
adopted.  Take  a  clock  moved  by  leaden  weights, 
and  another  by  a  spring,  and  let  them  be  set 
well  together,  so  that  one  be  neither  quicker  nor 
slower  than  the  other;  then  let  the  clock  moved 
by  weights  be  placed  on  the  top  of  a  very  high 


church,  and  the  other  be  kept  below,  and  let  it 
be  well  observed,  if  the  former  move  slower  than 
it  did,  from  the  diminished  power  of  the  weights. 
Let  the  same  experiment  be  made  at  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  mines  worked  to  a  considerable  depth, 
in  order  to  see  whether  the  clock  move  more 
quickly  from  the  increased  power  of  the  weights. 
But  if  this  power  be  found  to  diminish  at  a  height, 
and  to  increase  in  subterraneous  places,  the  at¬ 
traction  of  the  corporeal  mass  of  the  earth  may 
be  taken  as  the  cause  of  weight. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  the  polarity 
of  the  steel  needle  when  touched  with  the  mag¬ 
net.  We  have  these  two  ways  with  regard  to  this 
nature:  either  the  touch  of  the  magnet  must 
communicate  polarity  to  the  steel  towards  the 
north  and  south,  or  else  it  may  only  excite  and 
prepare  it,  whilst  the  actual  motion  is  occasioned 
by  the  presence  of  the  earth,  which  Gilbert  con¬ 
siders  to  be  the  case,  and  endeavors  to  prove 
with  so  much  labor.  The  particulars  he  has  in¬ 
quired  into  with  such  ingenious  zeal  amount  to 
this: — i.  An  iron  bolt  placed  for  a  long  time  to- 
wardsthenorthandsouthacquires  polarity  from 
this  habit,  without  the  touch  of  the  magnet,  as 
if  the  earth  itself  operating  but  weakly  from  its 
distance  (for  the  surface  or  outer  crust  of  the 
earth  does  not,  in  his  opinion,  possess  the  mag¬ 
netic  power),  yet,  by  long-continued  motion, 
could  supply  the  place  of  the  magnet,  excite  the 
iron,  and  convert  and  change  it  when  excited. 
2.  Iron,  at  a  red  or  white  heat,  when  quenched 
in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  north  and  south, 
also  acquires  polarity  without  the  touch  of  the 
magnet,  as  if  the  parts  of  iron  being  put  in  mo¬ 
tion  by  ignition,  and  afterwards  recovering 
themselves,  were,  at  the  moment  of  being 
quenched,  more  susceptible  and  sensitive  of  the 
power  emanating  from  the  earth,  than  at  other 
times,  and  therefore  as  it  were  excited.  But  these 
points,  though  well  observed,  do  not  complete¬ 
ly  prove  his  assertion. 

Aninstanceof  thecrosson  thispointmight  be 
as  follows:  let  a  small  magnetic  globe  be  taken, 
and  its  poles  marked,  and  placed  towards  the 
east  and  west,  not  towards  the  north  and  south, 
and  let  it  continue  thus.  Then  let  an  untouched 
needle  be  placed  over  it,  and  suffered  to  remain 
so  for  six  or  seven  days.  Now,  the  needle  (for 
this  is  not  disputed),  whilst  it  remains  over  the 
magnet,  will  leave  the  poles  of  the  world  and 
turn  to  those  of  the  magnet,  and  therefore,  as 
long  as  it  remains  in  the  above  position,  will  turn 
to  the  east  and  west.  But  if  the  needle,  when 
removed  from  the  magnet  and  placed  upon  a 
pivot,  be  found  immediately  to  turn  to  the  north 


SECOND  BOOK  167 


and  south,  or  even  by  degrees  to  return  thither, 
then  the  presence  of  the  earth  must  be  consid¬ 
ered  as  the  cause,  but  if  it  remains  turned  as  at 
first,  towards  the  east  and  west,  or  lose  its  po¬ 
larity,  then  that  cause  must  be  suspected,  and 
further  inquiry  made. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  the  corpor¬ 
eal  substance  of  the  moon,  whether  it  be  rare, 
fiery,  and  aerial  (as  most  of  the  ancient  philos¬ 
ophers  have  thought),  or  solid  and  dense  (as 
Gilbert  and  many  of  the  moderns,  with  some  of 
the  ancients,  hold).  The  reasons  for  this  latter 
opinion  are  grounded  chiefly  upon  this  that  the 
moon  reflects  the  sun’s  rays,  and  that  light  does 
not  appear  capable  of  being  reflected  except  by 
solids.  The  instances  of  the  cross  will  therefore 
(if  any)  be  such  as  to  exhibit  reflection  by  a  rare 
body,  such  as  flame,  if  it  be  but  sufficiently 
dense.  Now,  certainly,  one  of  the  reasons  of  twi¬ 
light  is  the  reflection  of  the  rays  of  the  sun  by 
the  upper  part  of  the  atmosphere.  We  see  the 
sun’s  rays  also  reflected  on  fine  evenings  by 
streaks  of  moist  clouds,  with  a  splendor  not  less, 
but  perhaps  more  bright  and  glorious  than  that 
reflected  from  the  body  of  the  moon,  and  yet  it 
is  not  clear  that  those  clouds  have  formed  into 
a  dense  body  of  water.  We  see,  also,  that  the 
dark  air  behind  the  windows  at  night  reflects 
the  light  of  a  candle  in  the  same  manner  as  a 
dense  body  would  do.  The  experiment  should 
also  be  made  of  causing  the  sun’s  rays  to  fall 
through  a  hole  upon  some  dark  and  bluish  flame. 
The  unconfined  rays  of  the  sun  when  falling  on 
faint  flames,  docertainly  appear  todeaden  them, 
and  render  them  more  like  white  smoke  than 
flames.  These  are  the  only  instances  which  oc¬ 
cur  at  present  of  the  nature  of  those  of  the  cross, 
and  better  perhaps  can  be  found.  But  it  must 
always  be  observed  that  reflection  is  not  to  be 
expected  from  flame,  unless  it  be  of  some  depth, 
for  otherwise  it  becomes  nearly  transparent. 
This  at  least  may  be  considered  certain,  that 
light  is  always  either  received  and  transmitted 
or  reflected  by  an  even  surface. 

Again,  let  the  require  nature  be  the  motion 
of  projectiles  (such  as  darts,  arrows,  and  balls) 
through  the  air.  The  school,  in  its  usual  man¬ 
ner,  treats  this  very  carelessly,  considering  it 
enough  to  distinguish  it  by  the  name  of  violent 
motion,  from  that  which  they  term  natural,  and 
as  far  as  regards  the  first  percussion  or  impulse, 
satisfies  itself  by  its  axiom,  that  two  bodies  can¬ 
not  exist  in  one  place,  or  there  would  be  a  pen¬ 
etration  of  dimensions.  With  regard  to  this  na¬ 
ture  we  have  these  two  cross-ways:  the  motion 
must  arise  either  from  the  air  carrying  the  pro¬ 


jected  body,  and  collecting  behind  it,  like  a 
stream  behind  boats,  or  the  wind  behind  straws; 
or  from  the  parts  of  the  body  itself  not  sup¬ 
porting  the  impression,  but  pushing  themselves 
forward  in  succession  to  ease  it.  Fracastorius, 
and  nearly  all  those  who  have  entered  into  any 
refined  inquiry  upon  the  subject,  adopt  the  first. 
Nor  can  it  be  doubted  that  the  air  has  some  ef¬ 
fect,  yet  the  other  motion  is  without  doubt  real, 
as  is  clear  from  a  vast  number  of  experiments. 
Amongst  others  we  may  take  this  instance  of 
the  cross,  namely,  that  a  thin  plate  or  wire  of 
iron  rather  stiff,  or  even  a  reed  or  pen  split  in 
two,  when  drawn  up  and  bent  between  the  fin¬ 
ger  and  thumb,  will  leap  forward;  for  it  is  clear 
that  this  cannot  be  attributed  to  the  air  being 
collected  behind  the  body,  because  the  source 
of  motion  is  in  the  centre  of  the  plate  or  pen, 
and  not  in  its  extremities. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  the  rapid 
and  powerful  motion  of  the  explosion  of  gun¬ 
powder,  by  which  such  vast  masses  are  upheav- 
ed,  and  such  weights  discharged  as  we  observe 
in  large  mines  and  mortars,  there  are  two  cross- 
ways  before  us  with  regard  to  this  nature.  This 
motion  is  excited  either  by  the  mere  effort  of 
the  body  expanding  itself  when  inflamed,  or  by 
the  assisting  effort  of  the  crude  spirit,  which 
escapes  rapidly  from  fire,  and  bursts  violently 
from  the  surrounding  flame  as  from  a  prison. 
The  school,  however,  and  common  opinion  on¬ 
ly  consider  the  first  effort;  for  men  think  that 
they  are  great  philosophers  when  they  assert 
that  flame,  from  the  form  of  the  element,  is  en¬ 
dowed  with  a  kind  of  necessity  of  occupying  a 
greater  space  than  the  same  body  had  occupied 
when  in  the  form  of  powder,  and  that  thence 
proceeds  the  motion  in  question.  In  the  mean 
time  they  do  not  observe,  that  although  this 
may  be  true,  on  the  supposition  of  flame  being 
generated,  yet  the  generation  may  be  impeded 
by  a  weight  of  sufficient  force  to  compress  and 
suffocate  it,  so  that  no  such  necessity  exists  as 
they  assert.  They  are  right,  indeed,  in  imagin¬ 
ing  that  the  expansion  and  the  consequent 
emission  or  removal  of  the  opposing  body,  is 
necessary  if  flame  be  once  generated,  but  such 
a  necessity  is  avoided  if  the  solid  opposing  mass 
suppress  the  flame  before  it  be  generated;  and 
we  in  fact  see  that  flame,  especially  at  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  its  generation,  is  mild  and  gentle,  and 
requires  a  hollow  space  where  it  can  play  and 
try  its  force.  The  great  violence  of  the  effect, 
therefore,  cannot  be  attributed  to  this  cause; 
but  the  truth  is,  that  the  generation  of  these 
exploding  flames  and  fiery  blasts  arises  from 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


168 

the  conflict  of  two  bodies  of  a  decidedly  oppo¬ 
site  nature — the  one  very  inflammable,  as  is 
the  sulphur,  the  other  having  an  antipathy  to 
flame,  namely,  the  crude  spirit  of  the  nitre;  so 
that  an  extraordinary  conflict  takes  place  whilst 
the  sulphur  is  becoming  inflamed  as  far  as  it 
can  (for  the  third  body,  the  willow  charcoal, 
merely  incorporates  and  conveniently  unites  the 
two  others),  and  the  spirit  of  nitre  is  escaping, 
as  far  also  as  it  can,  and  at  the  same  time  ex¬ 
panding  itself  (for  air,  and  all  crude  substances, 
and  water  are  expanded  by  heat),  fanning  thus, 
in  every  direction,  the  flame  of  the  sulphur  by 
its  escape  and  violence,  just  as  if  by  invisible 
bellows. 

Two  kinds  of  instances  of  the  cross  might  here 
be  used — the  one  of  very  inflammable  sub¬ 
stances,  such  as  sulphur  and  camphor,  naphtha 
and  the  like,  and  their  compounds,  which  take 
fire  more  readily  and  easily  than  gunpowder  if 
left  to  themselves  (and  this  shows  that  the  ef¬ 
fort  to  catch  fire  does  not  of  itself  produce  such 
a  prodigious  effect);  the  other  of  substances 
which  avoid  and  repel  flame,  such  as  all  salts; 
for  we  see  that  when  they  are  cast  into  the  fire, 
the  aqueous  spirit  escapes  with  a  crackling  noise 
before  flame  is  produced,  which  also  happens  in 
a  less  degree  in  stiffleaves,  from  the  escape  of 
the  aqueous  part  before  the  oily  part  has  caught 
fire.  This  is  more  particularly  observed  in  quick¬ 
silver,  which  is  not  improperly  called  mineral 
water,  and  which,  without  any  inflammation, 
nearly  equals  the  force  of  gunpowder  by  simple 
explosion  and  expansion,  and  is  said,  when  mixed 
with  gunpowder,  to  increase  its  force. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  the  transi¬ 
tory  nature  of  flame  and  its  momentaneous  ex¬ 
tinction;  for  to  us  the  nature  of  flame  does  not 
appear  to  be  fixed  or  settled,  but  to  be  gener¬ 
ated  from  moment  to  moment,  and  to  be  every 
instant  extinguished;  it  being  clear  that  those 
flames  which  continue  and  last,  do  not  owe  their 
continuance  to  the  same  mass  of  flame,  but  to 
a  continued  succession  of  new  flame  regularly 
generated,  and  that  the  same  identical  flame 
does  not  continue.  This  is  easily  shown  by  re¬ 
moving  the  food  or  source  of  the  flame,  when  it 
at  once  goes  out.  We  have  the  two  following 
cross-ways  with  regard  to  this  nature:  this  mo¬ 
mentary  nature  either  arises  from  the  cessation 
of  the  cause  which  first  produced  it,  as  in  light, 
sounds,  and  violent  motions,  as  they  are  term¬ 
ed,  or  flame  may  be  capable,  by  its  own  nature, 
of  duration,  but  is  subjected  to  some  violence 
from  the  contrary  natures  which  surround  it, 
and  is  destroyed. 


We  may  therefore  adopt  the  following  in¬ 
stance  of  the  cross.  We  see  to  what  a  height  the 
flames  rise  in  great  conflagrations;  for  as  the 
base  of  the  flame  becomes  more  extensive,  its 
vertex  is  more  lofty.  It  appears,  then,  that  the 
commencement  of  the  extinction  takes  place  at 
the  sides,  where  the  flame  is  compressed  by  the 
air,  and  is  ill  at  ease;  but  the  centre  of  the 
flame,  which  is  untouched  by  the  air  and  sur¬ 
rounded  by  flame,  continues  the  same,  and  is 
not  extinguished  until  compressed  by  degrees 
by  the  air  attacking  it  from  the  sides.  All  flame, 
therefore,  is  pyramidal,  having  its  base  near  the 
source,  and  its  vertex  pointed  from  its  being  re¬ 
sisted  by  the  air,  and  not  supplied  from  the 
source.  On  the  contrary,  the  smoke,  which  is 
narrow  at  the  base,  expands  in  its  ascent,  and 
resembles  an  inverted  pyramid,  because  the  air 
admits  the  smoke,  but  compresses  the  flame; 
for  let  no  one  dream  that  the  lighted  flame  is 
air,  since  they  are  clearly  heterogeneous. 

The  instance  of  the  cross  will  be  more  accur¬ 
ate,  if  the  experiment  can  be  made  by  flames  of 
different  colors.  Take,  therefore,  a  small  metal 
sconce,  and  place  a  lighted  taper  in  it,  then  put 
it  in  a  basin,  and  pour  a  small  quantity  of  spir¬ 
its  of  wine  round  the  sconce,  so  as  not  to  reach 
its  edge,  and  light  the  spirit.  Now  the  flame  of 
the  spirit  will  be  blue,  and  that  of  the  taper  yel¬ 
low;  observe,  therefore,  whether  the  latter 
(which  can  easily  be  distinguished  from  the  for¬ 
mer  by  its  color,  for  flames  do  not  mix  immedi¬ 
ately,  as  liquids  do)  continue  pyramidal,  or 
tend  more  to  a  globular  figure,  since  there  is 
nothing  to  destroy  or  compress  it.  If  the  latter 
result  be  observed,  it  must  be  considered  as 
settled,  that  flame  continues  positively  the 
same,  whilst  inclosed  within  another  flame,  and 
not  exposed  to  the  resisting  force  of  the  air. 

Let  this  suffice  for  the  instances  of  the  cross. 
We  have  dwelt  the  longer  upon  them  in  order 
gradually  to  teach  and  accustom  mankind  to 
judge  of  nature  by  these  instances,  and  enlight¬ 
ening  experiments,  and  not  by  probable  reasons. 

37.  We  will  treat  of  the  instances  of  divorce 
as  the  fifteenth  of  our  prerogative  instances. 
They  indicate  the  separation  of  natures  of  the 
most  common  occurrence.  They  differ,  how¬ 
ever,  from  those  subjoined  to  the  accompany¬ 
ing  instances;  for  the  instances  of  divorce  point 
out  the  separation  of  a  particular  nature  from 
some  concrete  substance  with  which  it  is  usual¬ 
ly  found  in  conjunction,  whilst  the  hostile  in¬ 
stances  point  out  the  total  separation  of  one 
nature  from  another.  They  differ,  also,  from  the 
instances  of  the  cross,  because  they  decide  noth- 


SECOND  BOOK  169 


ing,  but  only  inform  us  that  the  one  nature  is 
capable  of  being  separated  from  the  other.  They 
are  of  use  in  exposing  false  forms,  and  dissipa¬ 
ting  hasty  theories  derived  from  obvious  facts; 
so  that  they  add  ballast  and  weight,  as  it  were, 
to  the  understanding. 

For  instance,  let  the  required  natures  be  those 
four  which  Telesius  terms  associates,  and  of  the 
same  family,  namely,  heat,  light,  rarity,  and 
mobility,  or  promptitude  to  motion;  yet  many 
instances  of  divorce  can  be  discovered  between 
them.  Air  is  rare  and  easily  moved,  but  neither 
hot  nor  light;  the  moon  is  light  but  not  hot; 
boiling  water  is  warm  but  not  light;  the  motion 
of  the  needle  in  the  compass  is  swift  and  active, 
and  yet  its  substance  is  cold,  dense,  and  opaque; 
and  there  are  many  similar  examples. 

Again,  let  the  required  natures  be  corporeal 
nature  and  natural  action.  The  latter  appears 
incapable  of  subsisting  without  some  body,  yet 
may  we,  perhaps,  even  here  find  an  instance  of 
divorce,  as  in  the  magnetic  motion,  which  draws 
the  iron  to  the  magnet,  and  heavy  bodies  to  the 
globe  of  the  earth;  to  which  we  may  add  other 
actions  which  operate  at  a  distance.  For  such 
action  takes  place  in  time,  by  distinct  moments, 
not  in  an  instant;  and  in  space,  by  regular  de¬ 
grees  and  distances.  There  is,  therefore,  some 
one  moment  of  time  and  some  interval  of  space, 
in  which  the  power  or  action  is  suspended  be¬ 
twixt  the  two  bodies  creating  the  motion.  Our 
consideration,  then,  is  reduced  to  this,  whether 
the  bodies  which  are  the  extremes  of  motion 
prepare  or  alter  the  intermediate  bodies,  so  that 
the  power  advances  from  one  extreme  to  the 
other  by  succession  and  actual  contact,  and  in 
the  mean  timeexistsin  some  intermediate  body; 
or  whether  there  exists  in  reality  nothing  but 
the  bodies,  the  power,  and  the  space?  In  the 
case  of  the  rays  of  light,  sounds,  and  heat,  and 
some  other  objects  which  operate  at  a  distance, 
it  is  indeed  probable  that  the  intermediate  bod¬ 
ies  are  prepared  and  altered,  the  more  so  be¬ 
cause  a  qualified  medium  is  required  for  their 
operation.  But  the  magnetic  or  attractive  pow¬ 
er  admits  of  an  indifferent  medium,  and  it  is  not 
impeded  in  any.  But  if  that  power  or  action  is 
independent  of  the  intermediate  body,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  it  is  a  natural  power  or  action  existing 
in  a  certain  time  and  space  without  any  body, 
since  it  exists  neither  in  the  extreme  nor  in  the 
intermediate  bodies.  Hence  the  magnetic  action 
may  be  taken  as  an  instance  of  divorce  of  cor¬ 
poreal  nature  and  natural  action;  to  which  we 
may  add,  as  a  corollary  and  an  advantage  not 
to  be  neglected,  that  it  may  be  taken  as  a  proof 


of  essence  and  substance  being  separate  and  in¬ 
corporeal,  even  by  those  who  philosophize  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  senses.  For  if  natural  power  and 
action  emanating  from  a  body  can  exist  at  any 
time  and  place  entirely  without  any  body,  it  is 
nearly  a  proof  that  it  can  also  emanate  origin¬ 
ally  from  an  incorporeal  substance;  for  a  cor¬ 
poreal  nature  appears  to  be  no  less  necessary 
for  supporting  and  conveying,  than  for  exciting 
or  generating  natural  action. 

38.  Next  follow  five  classes  of  instances  which 
we  are  wont  to  call  by  the  general  term  of  in¬ 
stances  of  the  lamp,  or  of  immediate  informa¬ 
tion.  They  are  such  as  assist  the  senses;  for  since 
every  interpretation  of  nature  sets  out  from  the 
senses,  and  leads,  by  a  regular  fixed  and  well- 
established  road,  from  the  perceptions  of  the 
senses  to  those  of  the  understanding  (which  are 
true  notions  and  axioms),  it  necessarily  follows, 
that  in  proportion  as  the  representatives  or  min- 
isterings  of  the  senses  are  more  abundant  and 
accurate,  everything  else  must  be  more  easy 
and  successful. 

The  first  of  these  five  sets  of  instances  of  the 
lamp,  strengthen,  enlarge,  and  correct  the  im¬ 
mediate  operations  of  the  senses;  the  second  re¬ 
duce  to  the  sphere  of  the  senses  such  matters  as 
are  beyond  it;  the  third  indicate  the  continued 
process  or  series  of  such  things  and  motions,  as 
for  the  most  part  are  only  observed  in  their  ter¬ 
mination,  or  in  periods;  the  fourth  supply  the 
absolute  wants  of  the  senses;  the  fifth  excite 
their  attention  and  observation,  and  at  the  same 
time  limit  the  subtilty  of  things.  We  will  now 
proceed  to  speak  of  them  singly. 

39.  In  the  sixteenth  rank,  then,  of  preroga¬ 
tive  instances,  we  will  place  the  instances  of  the 
door  or  gate,  by  which  name  we  designate  such 
as  assist  the  immediate  action  of  the  senses.  It 
is  obvious,  that  sight  holds  the  first  rank  among 
the  senses,  with  regard  to  information  for  which 
reason  we  must  seek  principally  helps  for  that 
sense.  These  helps  appear  to  be  threefold,  either 
to  enable  it  to  perceive  objects  not  naturally 
seen,  or  to  see  them  from  a  greater  distance,  or 
to  see  them  more  accurately  and  distinctly. 

We  have  an  example  of  the  first  (not  to  speak 
of  spectacles  and  the  like,  which  only  correct 
and  remove  the  infirmity  of  a  deficient  sight, 
and  therefore  give  no  further  information)  in 
the  lately  invented  microscopes,  which  exhibit 
the  latent  and  invisible  minutiae  of  substances, 
and  their  hidden  formation  and  motion,  by  won¬ 
derfully  increasing  their  apparent  magnitude. 
By  their  assistance  we  behold  with  astonish¬ 
ment  the  accurate  form  and  outline  of  a  flea, 


NOVUM  ORGAN UM 


moss,  and  animalculae,  as  well  as  their  previous¬ 
ly  invisible  color  and  motion.  It  is  said,  also, 
that  an  apparently  straight  line,  drawn  with  a 
pen  or  pencil,  is  discovered  by  such  a  micro¬ 
scope  to  be  very  uneven  and  curved,  because 
neither  the  motion  of  the  hand,  wrhen  assisted 
by  a  ruler,  nor  the  impression  of  ink  or  color,  is 
really  regular,  although  the  irregularities  are  so 
minute  as  not  to  be  perceptible  without  the  as¬ 
sistance  of  the  microscope.  Men  have  (as  is  usual 
in  new  and  wonderful  discoveries)  added  a  su¬ 
perstitious  remark,  that  the  microscope  sheds 
a  lustre  on  the  works  of  nature,  and  dishonor 
on  those  of  art,  which  only  means  that  the  tis¬ 
sue  of  nature  is  much  more  delicate  than  that 
of  art.  For  the  microscope  is  only  of  use  for  mi¬ 
nute  objects,  and  Democritus,  perhaps,  if  he 
had  seen  it,  would  have  exulted  in  the  thought 
of  a  means  being  discovered  for  seeing  his  atom, 
which  he  affirmed  to  be  entirely  invisible.  But 
the  inadequacy  of  these  microscopes,  for  the 
observation  of  any  but  the  most  minute  bod¬ 
ies,  and  even  of  those  if  parts  of  a  larger  body, 
destroys  their  utility;  for  if  the  invention  could 
be  extended  to  greater  bodies,  or  the  minute 
parts  of  greater  bodies,  so  that  a  piece  of  cloth 
would  appear  like  a  net,  and  the  latent  minutiae 
and  irregularities  of  gems,  liquids,  urine,  blood, 
wounds,  and  many  other  things  could  be  ren¬ 
dered  visible,  the  greatest  advantage  would, 
writhout  doubt,  be  derived. 

We  have  an  instance  of  the  second  kind  in 
the  telescope,  discovered  by  the  wonderful  ex¬ 
ertions  of  Galileo;  by  the  assistance  of  which  a 
nearer  intercourse  may  be  opened  (as  by  boats 
or  vessels)  between  ourselves  and  the  heavenly 
objects.  For  by  its  aid  we  are  assured  that  the 
Milky  Way  is  but  a  knot  or  constellation  of 
small  stars,  clearly  defined  and  separate,  which 
the  ancients  only  conjectured  to  be  the  case; 
whence  it  appears  to  be  capable  of  demonstra¬ 
tion,  that  the  spaces  of  the  planetary  orbits  (as 
they  are  termed)  are  not  quite  destitute  of  other 
stars,  but  that  the  heaven  begins  to  glitter  with 
stars  before  we  arrive  at  the  starry  sphere,  al¬ 
though  they  may  be  too  small  to  be  visible  with¬ 
out  the  telescope.  By  the  telescope,  also,  we  can 
behold  the  revolutions  of  smaller  stars  round 
Jupiter, whence  itmay  beconjectured  that  there 
are  several  centres  of  motion  among  the  stars. 
By  its  assistance,  also,  the  irregularity  of  light 
and  shade  on  the  moon’s  surface  is  more  clear¬ 
ly  observed  and  determined,  so  as  to  allow  of  a 
sort  of  selenography.  By  the  telescope  we  see 
the  spots  in  the  sun,  and  other  similar  phenom¬ 
ena;  all  of  which  are  most  noble  discoveries,  as 


far  as  credit  can  be  safely  given  to  demonstra¬ 
tions  of  this  nature,  which  are  on  this  account 
very  suspicious,  namely,  that  experiment  stops 
at  these  few,  and  nothing  further  has  yet  been 
discovered  by  the  same  method,  among  objects 
equally  worthy  of  consideration. 

We  have  instances  of  the  third  kind  in  meas¬ 
uring-rods,  astrolabes,  and  the  like,  which  do 
not  enlarge,  but  correct  and  guide  the  sight.  If 
there  be  other  instances  which  assist  the  other 
senses  in  their  immediate  and  individual  ac¬ 
tion,  yet  if  they  add  nothing  further  to  their  in¬ 
formation  they  are  not  apposite  to  our  present 
purpose,  and  we  have  therefore  said  nothing  of 
them. 

40.  In  the  seventeenth  rank  of  prerogative  in¬ 
stances  wre  will  place  citing  instances  (to  bor¬ 
row  a  term  from  the  tribunals),  because  they 
cite  those  things  to  appear,  which  have  not  yet 
appeared.  We  are  wont  also  to  call  them  invok¬ 
ing  instances,  and  their  property  is  that  of  re¬ 
ducing  to  the  sphere  of  the  senses  objects  which 
do  not  immediately  fall  within  it. 

Objects  escape  the  senses  either  from  their 
distance,  or  the  intervention  of  other  bodies,  or 
because  they  are  not  calculated  to  make  an  im¬ 
pression  upon  the  senses,  or  because  they  are 
not  in  sufficient  quantity  to  strike  the  senses, 
or  because  there  is  not  sufficient  time  for  their 
acting  upon  the  senses,  or  because  the  impres¬ 
sion  is  too  violent,  or  because  the  senses  are 
previously  filled  and  possessed  by  the  object, 
so  as  to  leave  no  room  for  any  new  motion. 
These  remarks  apply  principally  to  sight,  and 
next  to  touch,  which  two  senses  act  extensively 
in  giving  information,  and  that  too  upon  gen¬ 
eral  objects,  whilst  the  remaining  three  inform 
us  only,  as  it  were,  by  their  immediate  action, 
and  as  to  specific  objects. 

There  can  be  no  reduction  to  the  sphere  of 
the  senses  in  the  first  case,  unless  in  the  place 
of  the  object,  which  cannot  be  perceived  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  distance,  there  be  added  or  substi¬ 
tuted  some  other  object,  wrhich  can  excite  and 
strike  the  sense  from  a  greater  distance,  as  in 
the  communication  of  intelligence  by  fires, 
bells,  and  the  like. 

In  the  second  case  we  effect  this  reduction  by 
rendering  those  things  which  are  concealed  by 
the  interposition  of  other  bodies,  and  which 
cannot  easily  be  laid  open,  evident  to  the  senses 
by  means  of  that  wffiich  lies  at  the  surface,  or 
proceeds  from  the  interior;  thus  the  state  of  the 
body  is  judged  of  by  the  pulse,  urine,  etc. 

The  third  and  fourth  cases  apply  to  many 
subjects,  and  the  reduction  to  the  sphere  of  the 


SECOND  BOOK 


senses  must  be  obtained  from  every  quarter  in 
the  investigation  of  things.  There  are  many  ex¬ 
amples.  It  is  obvious  that  air,  and  spirit,  and 
the  like,  whose  whole  substance  is  extremely 
rare  and  delicate,  can  neither  be  seen  nor  touch¬ 
ed — a  reduction,  therefore,  to  the  senses  be¬ 
comes  necessary  in  every  investigation  relating 
to  such  bodies. 

Let  the  required  nature,  therefore,  be  the  ac¬ 
tion  and  motion  of  the  spirit  enclosed  in  tangi¬ 
ble  bodies;  for  every  tangible  body  with  which 
we  are  acquainted,  contains  an  invisible  and  in¬ 
tangible  spirit,  over  which  it  is  drawn,  and 
which  it  seems  to  clothe.  This  spirit  being  emit¬ 
ted  from  a  tangible  substance,  leaves  the  body 
contracted  and  dry;  when  retained,  it  softens 
and  melts  it;  when  neither  wholly  emitted  nor 
retained,  it  models  it,  endows  it  with  limbs,  as¬ 
similates,  manifests,  organizes  it,  and  the  like. 
All  these  points  are  reduced  to  the  sphere  of  the 
senses  by  manifest  effects. 

For  in  every  tangible  and  inanimate  body  the 
enclosed  spirit  at  first  increases,  and  as  it  were 
feeds  on  the  tangible  parts  which  are  most  open 
and  prepared  for  it;  and  when  it  has  digested 
and  modified  them,  and  turned  them  into  spir¬ 
it,  it  escapes  with  them.  This  formation  and  in¬ 
crease  of  spirit  is  rendered  sensible  by  the  dim¬ 
inution  of  weight ;  for  in  every  desiccation  some¬ 
thing  is  lost  in  quantity,  not  only  of  the  spirit 
previously  existing  in  the  body,  but  of  the  body 
itself,  which  was  previously  tangible,  and  has 
been  recently  changed,  for  the  spirit  itself  has 
no  weight.  The  departure  or  emission  of  spirit 
is  rendered  sensible  in  the  rust  of  metals,  and 
other  putrefactions  of  a  like  nature,  which  stop 
before  they  arrive  at  the  rudiments  of  life, 
which  belong  to  the  third  species  of  process.  In 
compact  bodies  the  spirit  does  not  find  pores 
and  passages  for  its  escape,  and  is  therefore 
obliged  to  force  out,  and  drive  before  it,  the  tan¬ 
gible  parts  also,  which  consequently  protrude, 
whence  arises  rust  and  the  like.  The  contrac¬ 
tion  of  the  tangible  parts,  occasioned  by  the 
emission  of  part  of  the  spirit  (whence  arises  des¬ 
iccation),  is  rendered  sensible  by  the  increased 
hardness  of  the  substance,  and  still  more  by  the 
fissures,  contractions,  shrivelling,  and  folds  of 
the  bodies  thus  produced.  For  the  parts  of  wood 
split  and  contract,  skins  become  shrivelled,  and 
not  only  that,  but,  if  the  spirit  be  emitted  sud¬ 
denly  by  the  heat  of  the  fire,  become  so  hastily 
contracted  as  to  twist  and  roll  themselves  up. 

On  the  contrary,  when  the  spirit  is  retained, 
and  yet  expanded  and  excited  by  heat  or  the 
like  (which  happens  in  solid  and  tenacious  bod¬ 


ies),  then  the  bodies  are  softened,  as  in  hot  iron; 
or  flow,  as  in  metals;  or  melt,  as  in  gums,  wax, 
and  the  like.  The  contrary  effects  of  heat,  there¬ 
fore  (hardening  some  substances  and  melting 
others),  are  easily  reconciled,1  because  the  spir¬ 
it  is  emitted  in  the  former,  and  agitated  and  re¬ 
tained  in  the  latter;  the  latter  action  is  that  of 
heat  and  the  spirit,  the  former  that  of  the  tan¬ 
gible  parts  themselves,  after  the  spirit’s  emis¬ 
sion. 

But  when  the  spirit  is  neither  entirely  retained 
nor  emitted,  but  only  strives  and  exercises  it¬ 
self,  within  its  limits,  and  meets  with  tangible 
parts,  which  obey  and  readily  follow  it  wher¬ 
ever  it  leads  them,  then  follows  the  formation 
of  an  organic  body,  and  of  limbs,  and  the  other 
vital  actions  of  vegetables  and  animals.  These 
are  rendered  sensible  chiefly  by  diligent  obser¬ 
vation  of  the  first  beginnings,  and  rudiments  or 
effects  of  life  in  animalculae  sprung  from  putre¬ 
faction,  as  in  the  eggs  of  ants,  worms,  mosses, 
frogs  after  rain,  etc.  Both  a  mild  heat  and  a 
pliant  substance,  however,  are  necessary  for  the 
production  of  life,  in  order  that  the  spirit  may 
neither  hastily  escape,  nor  be  restrained  by  the 
obstinacy  of  the  parts,  so  as  not  to  be  able  to 
bend  and  model  them  like  wax. 

Again,  the  difference  of  spirit  which  is  impor¬ 
tant  and  of  effect  in  many  points  (as  unconnec¬ 
ted  spirit,  branching  spirit,  branching  and  cel¬ 
lular  spirit,  the  first  of  which  is  that  of  all  inani¬ 
mate  substances,  the  second  of  vegetables,  and 
the  third  of  animals),  is  placed,  as  it  were,  be¬ 
fore  the  eyes  by  many  reducing  instances. 

Again,  it  is  clear  that  the  more  refined  tissue 
and  conformation  of  things  (though  forming 
the  whole  body  of  visible  or  tangible  objects) 
are  neither  visible  nor  tangible.  Our  informa¬ 
tion,  therefore,  must  here  also  be  derived  from 
reduction  to  the  sphere  of  the  senses.  But  the 
most  radical  and  primary  difference  of  forma¬ 
tion  depends  on  the  abundance  or  scarcity  ol 
matter  within  the  same  space  or  dimensions. 
For  the  other  formations  which  regard  the  dis¬ 
similarity  of  the  parts  contained  in  the  same 
body,  and  their  collocation  and  position,  are 
secondary  in  comparison  with  the  former. 

Let  the  required  nature  then  be  the  expan¬ 
sion  or  coherence  of  matter  in  different  bodies, 
or  the  quantity  of  matter  relative  to  the  dimen¬ 
sions  of  each.  For  there  is  nothing  in  nature 
more  true  than  the  twofold  proposition — that 
nothing  proceeds  from  nothing  and  that  noth¬ 
ing  is  reduced  to  nothing,  but  that  the  quan¬ 
tum,  or  sum  total  of  matter,  is  constant,  and  is 
1  Cf.  Virgil,  Eclogues ,  Bk.  vm. 


1?2 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


neither  increased  nor  diminished.  Nor  is  it  less 
true,  that  out  of  this  given  quantity  of  matter, 
there  is  a  greater  or  less  quantity,  contained 
within  the  same  space  or  dimensions  according 
to  the  difference  of  bodies;  as,  for  instance,  wa¬ 
ter  contains  more  than  air.  So  that  if  anyone 
were  to  assert  that  a  given  content  of  water  can 
be  changed  into  an  equal  content  of  air,  it  is  the 
same  as  if  he  were  to  assert  that  something 
can  be  reduced  into  nothing.  On  the  contrary, 
if  anyone  were  to  assert  that  a  given  content  of 
air  can  be  changed  into  an  equal  content  of  wa¬ 
ter,  it  is  the  same  as  if  he  were  to  assert  that 
something  can  proceed  from  nothing.  From  this 
abundance  or  scarcity  of  matter  are  properly 
derived  the  notions  of  density  and  rarity,  which 
are  taken  in  various  and  promiscuous  senses. 

This  third  assertion  may  be  considered  as 
being  also  sufficiently  certain:  namely,  that  the 
greater  or  less  quantity  ofmatter  in  this  or  that 
body,  may,  by  comparison,  be  reduced  to  cal¬ 
culation,  and  exact,  or  nearly  exact,  propor¬ 
tion.  Thus,  if  one  should  say  that  there  is  such 
an  accumulation  of  matter  in  a  given  quan¬ 
tity  of  gold,  that  it  would  require  twenty-one 
times  the  quantity  in  dimension  of  spirits  of 
wine,  to  make  up  the  same  quantity  of  mat¬ 
ter,  it  would  not  be  far  from  the  truth. 

The  accumulation  of  matter,  however,  and 
its  relative  quantity,  are  rendered  sensible  by 
weight;  for  weight  is  proportionate  to  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  matter,  as  regards  the  parts  of  a  tangi¬ 
ble  substance,  but  spirit  and  its  quantity  of 
matter  are  not  to  be  computed  by  weight, 
which  spirit  rather  diminishes  than  augments. 

We  have  made  a  tolerably  accurate  table  of 
weight,  in  which  we  have  selected  the  weights 
and  size  of  all  the  metals,  the  principal  miner¬ 
als,  stones,  liquids,  oils,  and  many  other  natur¬ 
al  and  artificial  bodies:  a  very  useful  proceed¬ 
ing  both  as  regards  theory  and  practice,  and 
which  is  capable  of  revealing  many  unexpected 
results.  Nor  is  this  of  little  consequence,  that  it 
serves  to  demonstrate  that  the  whole  range  of 
the  variety  of  tangible  bodies  with  which  we 
are  acquainted  (we  mean  tolerably  close,  and 
not  spongy,  hollow  bodies,  which  are  for  a  con¬ 
siderable  part  filled  with  air),  does  not  exceed 
the  ratio  of  one  to  twenty-one.  So  limited  is  na¬ 
ture,  or  at  least  that  part  of  it  to  which  we  are 
most  habituated. 

We  have  also  thought  it  deserving  our  indus¬ 
try,  to  try  if  we  could  arrive  at  the  ratio  of  in¬ 
tangible  or  pneumatic  bodies  to  tangible  bodies, 
which  we  attempted  by  the  following  contriv¬ 
ance.  We  took  a  vial  capable  of  containing 


about  an  ounce,  using  a  small  vessel  in  order  to 
effect  the  subsequent  evaporation  with  less 
heat.  We  filled  this  vial,  almost  to  the  neck, 
with  spirits  of  wine,  selecting  it  as  the  tangible 
body  which,  by  our  table,  was  the  rarest,  and 
contained  a  less  quantity  of  matter  in  a  given 
space  than  all  other  tangible  bodies  which  are 
compact  and  not  hollow.  Then  we  noted  exact¬ 
ly  the  weight  of  the  liquid  and  vial.  We  next 
took  a  bladder,  containing  about  two  pints,  and 
squeezed  all  the  air  out  of  it,  as  completely  as 
possible,  and  until  the  sides  of  the  bladder  met. 
We  first,  however,  rubbed  the  bladder  gently 
with  oil,  so  as  to  make  it  air-tight,  by  closing 
its  pores  with  the  oil.  We  tied  the  bladder  tight¬ 
ly  round  the  mouth  of  the  vial,  which  we  had 
inserted  in  it,  and  with  a  piece  of  waxed  thread 
to  make  it  fit  better  and  more  tightly,  and  then 
placed  the  vial  on  some  hot  coals  in  a  brazier. 
The  vapor  or  steam  of  the  spirit,  dilated  and 
become  aeriform  by  the  heat,  gradually  swell¬ 
ed  out  the  bladder,  and  stretched  it  in  every  di¬ 
rection  like  a  sail.  As  soon  as  that  was  accom¬ 
plished,  we  removed  the  vial  from  the  fire  and 
placed  it  on  a  carpet,  that  it  might  not  be  crack¬ 
ed  by  the  cold;  we  also  pricked  the  bladder  im¬ 
mediately,  that  the  steam  might  not  return  to 
a  liquid  state  by  the  cessation  of  heat,  and  con¬ 
found  the  proportions.  We  then  removed  the 
bladder,  and  again  took  the  weight  of  the  spir¬ 
it  which  remained;  and  so  calculated  the  quan¬ 
tity  which  had  been  converted  into  vapor,  or 
an  aeriform  shape,  and  then  examined  how 
much  space  had  been  occupied  by  the  body  in 
its  form  of  spirits  of  wine  in  the  vial,  and  how 
much,  on  the  other  hand,  had  been  occupied  by 
it  in  its  aeriform  shape  in  the  bladder,  and  sub¬ 
tracted  the  results;  from  which  it  was  clear, 
that  the  body,  thus  converted  and  changed,  ac¬ 
quired  an  expansion  of  one  hundred  times  be¬ 
yond  its  former  bulk. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  heat  or  cold, 
of  such  a  degree  as  not  to  be  sensible  from  its 
weakness.  They  are  rendered  sensible  by  the 
thermometer,  as  we  described  it  above;  for  the 
cold  and  heat  are  not  actually  perceived  by  the 
touch,  but  heat  expands  and  cold  contracts  the 
air.  Nor,  again,  is  that  expansion  or  contrac¬ 
tion  of  the  air  in  itself  visible,  but  the  air  when 
expanded  depresses  the  water,  and  when  con¬ 
tracted  raises  it,  which  is  the  first  reduction  to 
sight. 

Again,  let  the  required  nature  be  themixture 
of  bodies;  namely,  how  much  aqueous,  oleagin¬ 
ous  or  spirituous,  ashy  or  salt  parts  they  con¬ 
tain;  or,  as  a  particular  example,  how  much 


SECOND  BOOK 


butter,  cheese,  and  whey  there  is  in  milk,  and 
the  like?  These  things  are  rendered  sensible  by 
artificial  and  skilful  separations  in  tangible  sub¬ 
stances;  and  the  nature  of  the  spirit  in  them, 
though  not  immediately  perceptible,  is  never¬ 
theless  discovered  by  the  various  motions  and 
efforts  of  bodies.  And,  indeed,  in  this  branch 
men  have  laboured  hard  in  distillations  and  arti¬ 
ficial  separations,  but  with  little  more  success 
than  in  their  other  experiments  now  in  use;  their 
methods  being  mere  guesses  and  blind  attempts, 
and  more  industrious  than  intelligent;  and  what 
is  worst  of  all, without  any  imitation  or  rivalry  of 
nature,  but  rather  by  violent  heats  and  too  ener¬ 
getic  agents,  to  the  destruction  of  any  delicate 
conformation,  in  which  principally  consist  the 
hidden  virtues  and  sympathies.  Nor  do  men  in 
these  separations  ever  attend  to  or  observe 
what  we  have  before  pointed  out;  namely,  that 
in  attacking  bodies  by  fire,  or  other  methods, 
many  qualities  are  superinduced  by  the  fire  it¬ 
self,  and  the  other  bodies  used  to  effect  the  se¬ 
paration,  which  were  not  originally  in  the  com¬ 
pound.  Hence  arise  most  extraordinary  falla¬ 
cies;  for  the  mass  of  vapor  which  is  emitted 
from  water  by  fire,  for  instance,  did  not  exist  as 
vapor  or  air  in  the  water,  but  is  chiefly  created 
by  the  expansion  of  the  water  by  the  heat  of 
the  fire. 

So,  in  general,  all  delicate  experiments  on  nat¬ 
ural  or  artificial  bodies,  by  which  the  genuine 
are  distinguished  from  the  adulterated,  and  the 
better  from  the  more  common,  should  be  re¬ 
ferred  to  this  division;  for  they  bring  that  which 
is  not  the  object  of  the  senses  within  their 
sphere.  They  are  therefore  to  be  everywhere 
diligently  sought  after. 

With  regard  to  the  fifth  cause  of  objects  es¬ 
caping  our  senses,  it  is  clear  that  the  action  of 
the  sense  takes  place  by  motion,  and  this  mo¬ 
tion  is  time.  If,  therefore,  the  motion  of  any 
body  be  either  so  slow  or  so  swift  as  not  to  be 
proportioned  to  the  necessary  momentum  which 
operates  on  the  senses,  the  object  is  not  per¬ 
ceived  at  all;  as  in  the  motion  of  the  hour  hand, 
and  that,  again,  of  a  musket-ball.  The  motion 
which  is  imperceptible  by  the  senses  from  its 
slowness,  is  readily  and  usually  rendered  sensi¬ 
ble  by  the  accumulation  of  motion;  that  which 
is  imperceptible  from  its  velocity,  has  not  as 
yet  been  well  measured;  it  is  necessary,  how¬ 
ever,  that  this  should  be  done  in  some  cases, 
with  a  view  to  a  proper  investigation  of  nature. 

The  sixth  case,  where  the  sense  is  impeded 
by  the  power  of  the  object,  admits  of  a  reduc¬ 
tion  to  the  sensible  sphere,  either  by  removing 


the  object  to  a  greater  distance,  or  by  deaden¬ 
ing  its  effects  by  the  interposition  of  a  medi¬ 
um,  which  may  weaken  and  not  destroy  the 
object;  or  by  the  admission  of  its  reflection 
where  the  direct  impression  is  too  strong,  as 
that  of  the  sun  in  a  basin  of  water. 

The  seventh  case,  where  the  senses  are  so 
overcharged  with  the  object  as  to  leave  no  fur¬ 
ther  room,  scarcely  occurs  except  in  the  smell 
or  taste,  and  is  not  of  much  consequence  as  re¬ 
gards  our  present  subject.  Let  what  we  have 
said,  therefore,  suffice  with  regard  to  the  reduc¬ 
tion  to  the  sensible  sphere  of  objects  not  nat¬ 
urally  within  its  compass. 

Sometimes,  however,  this  reduction  is  not  ex¬ 
tended  to  the  senses  of  man,  but  to  those  of 
some  other  animal,  whose  senses,  in  some  points, 
exceed  those  of  man;  as  (with  regard  to  some 
scents)  to  those  of  the  dog,  and  with  regard  to 
light  existing  imperceptibly  in  the  air,  when  not 
illuminated  from  any  extraneous  source,  to  the 
sense  of  the  cat,  the  owl,  and  other  animals 
which  see  by  night.  For  Telesius  has  well  ob¬ 
served,  that  there  appears  to  be  an  original  por¬ 
tion  of  light  even  in  the  air  itself,  although  but 
slight  and  meagre,  and  of  no  use  for  the  most  part 
to  the  eyes  of  men,  and  those  of  the  generality  of 
animals;  because  those  animals  to  whose  senses 
this  light  is  proportioned  can  see  by  night,  which 
does  not,  in  all  probability,  proceed  from  their 
seeing  either  without  light  or  by  any  internal 
light. 

Here,  too,  we  would  observe,  that  we  at  pres¬ 
ent  discuss  only  the  wants  of  the  senses,  and  their 
remedies;  for  their  deceptions  must  be  referred 
to  the  inquiries  appropriated  to  the  senses,  and 
sensible  objects;  except  that  important  decep¬ 
tion,  which  makes  them  define  objects  in  their 
relation  to  man,  and  not  in  their  relation  to  the 
universe,  and  which  is  only  corrected  by  uni¬ 
versal  reasoning  and  philosophy. 

41.  In  the  eighteenth  rank  of  prerogative  in¬ 
stances  we  will  class  the  instances  of  the  road, 
which  we  are  also  wont  to  call  itinerant  and 
jointed  instances.  They  are  such  as  indicate  the 
gradually  continued  motions  of  nature.  This 
species  of  instances  escapes  rather  our  observa¬ 
tion  than  our  senses;  for  men  are  wonderfully 
indolent  upon  this  subject,  consulting  nature 
in  a  desultory  manner,  and  at  periodic  inter¬ 
vals,  when  bodies  have  been  regularly  finished 
and  completed,  and  not  during  her  work.  But 
if  anyone  were  desirous  of  examining  and  con¬ 
templating  the  talents  and  industry  of  an  arti¬ 
ficer,  he  would  not  merely  wish  to  see  the  rude 
materials  of  his  art,  and  then  his  work  when  fin- 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


ished,  but  rather  to  be  present  whilst  he  is  at 
labor,  and  proceeding  with  his  work.  Something 
of  the  same  kind  should  be  done  with  regard  to 
nature.  For  instance,  if  anyone  investigate  the 
vegetation  of  plants,  he  should  observe  from  the 
first  sowingof  any  seed  (which  can  easily  be  done, 
by  pulling  up  every  day  seeds  which  have  been 
two,  three,  or  four  days  in  the  ground,  and  ex¬ 
amining  them  diligently)  how  and  when  the 
seed  begins  to  swell  and  break,  and  be  filled,  as  it 
were,  with  spirit;  then  how  it  begins  to  burst  the 
bark  and  push  out  fibres,  raising  itself  a  little  at 
the  same  time,  unless  the  ground  be  very  stiff; 
then  how  it  pushes  out  these  fibres,  some  down¬ 
ward  for  roots,  others  upwards  for  the  stem, 
sometimes  also  creeping  laterally,  if  it  find  the 
earth  open  and  more  yielding  on  one  side,  and  the 
like.  The  same  should  be  done  in  observing  the 
hatching  of  eggs,  where  we  may  easily  see  the 
process  of  animation  and  organization,  and 
what  parts  are  formed  of  the  yolk,  and  what  of 
the  white  of  the  egg,  and  the  like.  The  same 
may  be  said  of  the  inquiry  into  the  formation 
of  animals  from  putrefaction;  for  it  would  not  be 
so  humane  to  inquire  into  perfect  and  terres¬ 
trial  animals,  by  cutting  the  foetus  from  the 
womb;  but  opportunities  may  perhaps  be  offer¬ 
ed  of  abortions,  animals  killed  in  hunting,  and 
the  like.  Nature,  therefore,  must,  as  it  were,  be 
watched,  as  being  more  easily  observed  by  night 
than  by  day:  for  contemplations  of  this  kind 
may  be  considered  as  carried  on  by  night,  from 
the  minuteness  and  perpetual  burning  of  our 
watch-light. 

The  same  must  be  attempted  with  inanimate 
objects,  which  we  have  ourselves  done  by  inquir¬ 
ing  into  the  opening  of  liquids  by  fire.  For  the 
mode  in  which  water  expands  is  different  from 
that  observed  in  wine,  vinegar,  or  verjuice,  and 
very  different,  again,  from  that  observed  in  milk 
and  oil,  and  the  like;  and  this  was  easily  seen 
by  boiling  them  with  slow  heat,  in  a  glass  ves¬ 
sel,  through  which  the  whole  may  be  clearly  per¬ 
ceived.  But  we  merely  mention  this,  intending 
to  treat  of  it  more  at  large  and  more  closely 
when  we  come  to  the  discovery  of  the  latent 
process;  for  it  should  always  be  remembered 
that  we  do  not  here  treat  of  things  themselves, 
but  merely  propose  examples. 

42.  In  the  nineteenth  rank  of  prerogative  in¬ 
stances,  we  will  class  supplementary  or  substi¬ 
tutive  instances,  which  we  are  also  wont  to  call 
instances  of  refuge.  They  are  such  as  supply  in¬ 
formation,  where  the  senses  are  entirely  defi¬ 
cient,  and  we  therefore  have  recourse  to  them 
when  appropriate  instances  cannot  be  obtain¬ 


ed.  This  substitution  is  twofold,  either  by  ap¬ 
proximation  or  by  analogy.  For  instance,  there 
is  no  known  medium  which  entirely  prevents  the 
effect  of  the  magnet  in  attracting  iron — neither 
gold,  nor  silver,  nor  stone,  nor  glass,  wood, 
water,  oil,  cloth,  or  fibrous  bodies,  air,  flame,  or 
the  like.  Yet  by  accurate  experiment,  a  medium 
may  perhaps  be  found  which  would  deaden  its  ef¬ 
fect,  more  than  another  comparatively  and  in 
degree;  as,  for  instance,  the  magnet  would  not 
perhaps  attract  iron  through  the  same  thickness 
of  gold  as  of  air,  or  the  same  quantity  of  ignited 
as  of  cold  silver,  and  so  on;  for  we  have  notour- 
selves  made  the  experiment,  but  it  will  suffice 
as  an  example.  Again,  there  is  no  known  body 
which  is  not  susceptible  of  heat,  when  brought 
near  the  fire;  yet  air  becomes  warm  much  sooner 
than  stone.  These  are  examples  of  substitution 
by  approximation. 

Substitution  by  analogy  is  useful,  but  less 
sure,  and  therefore  to  be  adopted  with  some 
judgment.  It  serves  to  reduce  that  which  is  not 
the  object  of  the  senses  to  their  sphere,  not  by 
the  perceptible  operations  of  the  imperceptible 
body,  but  by  the  consideration  of  some  similar 
perceptible  body.  For  instance,  let  the  subject 
for  inquiry  be  the  mixture  of  spirits,  which  are 
invisible  bodies.  There  appears  to  be  some  re¬ 
lation  between  bodies  and  their  sources  or  sup¬ 
port.  Now,  the  source  of  flame  seems  to  be  oil  and 
fat;  that  of  air,  water,  and  watery  substances; 
for  flame  increases  over  the  exhalation  of  oil,  and 
air  over  that  of  water.  One  must  therefore  con¬ 
sider  the  mixture  of  oil  and  water,  which  is  man¬ 
ifest  to  the  senses,  since  that  of  air  and  flame 
in  general  escapes  the  senses.  But  oil  and  water 
mix  very  imperfectly  by  composition  or  stir¬ 
ring,  whilst  they  are  exactly  and  nicely  mixed  in 
herbs,  blood,  and  the  parts  of  animals.  Some¬ 
thing  similar,  therefore,  may  take  place  in  the 
mixtureof  flame  and  air  in  spirituous  substances, 
not  bearing  mixture  very  well  by  simple  collision, 
whilst  they  appear,  however,  to  be  well  mixed  in 
the  spirits  of  plants  and  animals. 

Again,  if  the  inquiry  do  not  relate  to  perfect 
mixtures  of  spirits,  but  merely  to  their  composi¬ 
tion,  as  whether  they  easily  incorporate  with 
each  other,  or  there  be  rather  (as  an  example) 
certain  winds  and  exhalations, or  other  spiritual 
bodies,  which  do  not  mix  with  common  air,  but 
only  adhere  to  and  float  in  it  in  globules  and 
drops,  and  are  rather  broken  and  pounded  by  the 
air,  than  received  into,  and  incorporated  with  it ; 
this  cannot  be  perceived  in  common  air,  and  oth¬ 
er  aeriform  substances,  on  account  of  the  rarity 
of  the  bodies,  but  an  image,  as  it  were,  of  this 


SECOND  BOOK 


process  may  be  conceived  in  such  liquids  as 
quicksilver,  oil,  water,  and  even  air,  which,  when 
broken  and  dissipated,  ascends  in  small  portions 
through  water;  and  also  in  the  thicker  kinds  of 
smoke;  lastly,  in  dust,  raised  and  remaining  in 
the  air,  in  all  of  which  there  is  no  incorpora¬ 
tion:  and  the  above  representation  in  this  re¬ 
spect  is  not  a  bad  one,  if  it  be  first  diligently  in¬ 
vestigated,  whether  there  can  be  such  a  differ¬ 
ence  of  nature  between  spirituous  substances, 
as  between  liquids,  for  then  these  images  might 
conveniently  be  substituted  by  analogy. 

And  although  we  have  observed  of  these  sup¬ 
plementary  instances,  that  information  is  to  be 
derived  from  them,  when  appropriate  instances 
are  wanting,  by  way  of  refuge,  yet  we  would  have 
it  understood,  that  they  are  also  of  great  use, 
when  the  appropriate  instances  are  at  hand, 
in  order  to  confirm  the  information  afforded 
by  them;  of  which  we  will  speak  more  at  length, 
when  our  subject  leads  us,  in  due  course,  to  the 
support  of  induction. 

43.  In  the  twentieth  rank  of  prerogative  in¬ 
stances  we  will  place  lancing  instances,  which 
we  are  also  wont  (but  for  a  different  reason)  to 
call  twitching  instances.  We  adopt  the  latter 
name,  because  they  twitch  the  understanding, 
and  the  former  because  they  pierce  nature, 
whence  westyle  them  occasionally  the  instances 
of  Democritus.  They  are  such  as  warn  the  under¬ 
standing  of  the  admirable  and  exquisite  sub- 
tilty  of  nature,  so  that  it  becomes  roused  and 
awakened  to  attention,  observation,  and  prop¬ 
er  inquiry;  as,  for  instance,  that  a  little  drop  of 
ink  should  be  drawn  out  into  so  many  letters; 
that  silver  merely  gilt  on  its  surface  should  be 
stretched  to  such  a  . length  of  gilt  wire;  that  a 
little  worm,  such  as  you  may  find  on  the  skin, 
should  possess  both  a  spirit  and  a  varied  con¬ 
formation  ofitsparts;  that  alittle  saffron  should 
imbue  a  whole  tub  of  water  with  its  color;  that 
a  little  musk  or  aroma  should  imbue  a  much 
greater  extent  of  air  with  its  perfume;  that  a 
cloud  of  smoke  should  be  raised  by  a  little  in¬ 
cense;  that  such  accurate  differences  of  sound 
as  articulate  words  should  be  conveyed  in  all 
directions  through  the  air,  and  even  penetrate 
the  pores  of  wood  and  water  (though  they  be¬ 
come  much  weakened),  that  they  should  be, 
moreover,  reflected,  and  that  with  such  distinct¬ 
ness  and  velocity;  that  light  and  color  should 
for  such  an  extent  and  so  rapidly  pass  through 
solid  bodies,  such  as  glass  and  water,  with  so 
great  and  so  exquisite  a  variety  of  images,  and 
should  be  refracted  and  reflected;  that  the  mag¬ 
net  should  attract  through  every  description  of 


body,  even  the  most  compact;  but  (what  is  still 
more  wonderful)  that  in  all  these  cases  the  action 
of  one  should  not  impede  that  of  another  in  a 
common  medium,  such  as  air;  and  that  there 
should  be  borne  through  the  air,  at  the  same 
time,  so  many  images  of  visible  objects,  so 
many  impulses  of  articulation,  so  many  differ¬ 
ent  perfumes,  as  of  the  violet,  rose,  etc.,  besides 
cold  and  heat,  and  magnetic  attractions;  all  of 
them,  I  say,  at  once,  without  any  impediment 
from  each  other,  as  if  each  had  its  paths  and 
peculiar  passage  set  apart  for  it,  without  in¬ 
fringing  against  or  meeting  each  other. 

To  these  lancing  instances,  however,  we  are 
wont,  not  without  some  advantage,  to  add  those 
which  we  call  the  limits  of  such  instances.  Thus, 
in  the  cases  we  have  pointed  out,  one  action 
does  not  disturb  or  impede  another  of  a  different 
nature,  yet  those  of  a  similar  nature  subdue  and 
extinguish  eachother;  as  thelight  of  the  sun  does 
that  of  the  candle,  the  sound  of  a  cannon  that 
of  the  voice,  a  strong  perfume  a  more  delicate 
one,  a  powerful  heat  a  more  gentle  one,  a  plate 
of  iron  between  the  magnet  and  other  iron  the 
effect  of  the  magnet.  But  the  proper  place  for 
mentioning  these  will  be  also  amongst  the  sup¬ 
ports  of  induction. 

44.  We  have  now  spoken  of  the  instances 
which  assist  the  senses,  and  which  are  principally 
of  service  as  regards  information;  for  informa¬ 
tion  begins  from  the  senses.  But  our  whole  labor 
terminates  in  practice,  and  as  the  former  is  the 
beginning,  so  is  the  latter  the  end  of  our  subject. 
The  following  instances,  therefore,  will  be  those 
which  are  chiefly  useful  in  practice.  They  are 
comprehended  in  two  classes,  and  are  seven  in 
number.  We  call  them  all  by  the  general  name 
of  practical  instances.  Now  there  are  two  de¬ 
fects  in  practice,  and  as  many  divisions  of  im¬ 
portant  instances.  Practice  is  either  deceptive 
or  too  laborious.  It  is  generally  deceptive  (es¬ 
pecially  after  a  diligent  examination  of  natures), 
on  account  of  the  power  and  actions  of  bodies  be¬ 
ing  ill  defined  and  determined.  Now  the  powers 
and  actions  of  bodies  are  defined  and  determined 
either  by  space  or  by  time,  or  by  the  quantity  at 
a  given  period,  or  by  the  predominance  of  en¬ 
ergy;  and  if  these  four  circumstances  be  not 
well  and  diligently  considered,  the  sciences  may 
indeed  be  beautiful  in  theory,  but  are  of  no  ef¬ 
fect  in  practice.  We  call  the  four  instances  re¬ 
ferred  to  this  class,  mathematical  instances  and 
instances  of  measure. 

Practice  is  laborious  either  from  the  multi¬ 
tude  of  instruments,  or  the  bulk  of  matter  and 
substances  requisite  for  any  given  work.  These 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


176 

instances,  therefore,  are  valuable,  which  either 
direct  practice  to  that  which  is  of  most  conse¬ 
quence  to  mankind,  or  lessen  the  number  of  in¬ 
struments  or  of  matter  to  be  worked  upon.  We 
assign  to  the  three  instances  relating  to  this 
class,  the  common  name  of  propitious  or  benev¬ 
olent  instances.  We  will  now  separately  discuss 
these  seven  instances,  and  conclude  with  them 
that  part  of  our  work  which  relates  to  the  pre¬ 
rogative  or  illustrious  instances. 

45.  In  the  twenty-first  rank  of  prerogative  in¬ 
stances  we  will  place  the  instances  of  the  rod 
or  rule,  which  we  are  also  wont  to  call  the  in¬ 
stances  of  completion  or  non  ultra.  For  the 
powers  and  motions  of  bodies  do  not  act  and  take 
effect  through  indefinite  and  accidental,  but 
through  limited  and  certain  spaces;  and  it  is  of 
great  importance  to  practice  that  these  should 
be  understood  and  noted  in  every  nature  which 
is  investigated,  not  only  to  prevent  deception, 
but  to  render  practice  more  extensive  and  ef¬ 
ficient.  For  it  is  sometimes  possible  to  extend 
these  powers,  and  bring  the  distance,  as  it  were, 
nearer,  as  in  the  example  of  telescopes. 

Many  powers  act  and  take  effect  only  by  ac¬ 
tual  touch,  as  in  the  percussion  of  bodies,  where 
the  one  does  not  remove  the  other,  unless  the 
impelling  touch  the  impelled  body.  External  ap¬ 
plications  in  medicine,  as  ointment  and  plas¬ 
ters,  do  not  exercise  their  efficacy  except  when 
in  contact  with  the  body.  Lastly,  the  objects  of 
touch  and  taste  only  strike  those  senses  w'hen 
in  contact  with  their  organs. 

Other  powers  act  at  a  distance,  though  it  be 
very  small,  of  which  but  few  have  as  yet  been 
noted,  although  there  be  more  than  men  sus¬ 
pect;  this  happens  (to  take  everyday  instances) 
when  amber  or  iet  attracts  straw's,  bubbles  dis¬ 
solve  bubbles,  some  purgative  medicines  draw 
humors  from  above,  and  the  like.  The  magnetic 
power  by  which  iron  and  the  magnet,  or  two 
magnets,  are  attracted  together,  acts  within  a 
definite  and  narrow  sphere,  but  if  there  be  any 
magnetic  power  emanating  from  the  earth  a  little 
below  its  surface,  and  affecting  the  needle  in  its 
polarity,  it  must  act  at  a  great  distance. 

Again,  if  there  be  any  magnetic  force  which 
acts  by  sympathy  between  the  globe  of  the  earth 
and  heavy  bodies,  or  between  that  of  the  moon 
and  the  waters  of  the  sea  (as  seems  most  prob¬ 
able  from  the  particular  floods  and  ebbs  which 
occur  twice  in  the  month),  or  between  the  starry 
sphere  and  the  planets,  by  which  they  are  sum¬ 
moned  and  raised  to  their  apogees,  these  must 
all  operate  at  very  great  distances.  Again,  some 
conflagrations  and  the  kindling  of  flames  take 


place  at  very  considerable  distances  with  par¬ 
ticular  substances,  as  they  report  of  the  naph¬ 
tha  of  Babylon.  Heat,  too,  insinuates  itself  at 
wide  distances,  as  does  also  cold,  so  that  the 
masses  of  ice  which  are  broken  off  and  float  upon 
the  Northern  Ocean,  and  are  borne  through  the 
Atlantic  to  the  coast  of  Canada,  become  percep¬ 
tible  by  the  inhabitants,  and  strike  them  with 
cold  from  a  distance.  Perfumes  also  (though  here 
there  appears  to  be  always  some  corporeal  emis¬ 
sion)  act  at  remarkable  distances,  as  is  experi¬ 
enced  by  persons  sailing  by  the  coast  of  Florida, 
or  parts  of  Spain,  where  there  are  whole  woods 
of  lemons,  oranges,  and  other  odoriferous  plants, 
or  rosemary  and  marjoram  bushes,  and  the  like. 
Lastly,  the  rays  of  light  and  the  impressions  of 
sound  act  at  extensive  distances. 

Yet  all  these  powers,  whether  acting  at  a  small 
or  great  distance,  certainly  act  within  definite 
distances,  which  are  well  ascertained  by  nature, 
so  that  thereis  a  limit  depending  either  on  the 
mass  or  quantity  of  the  bodies,  the  vigor  or  faint¬ 
ness  of  the  powers,  or  the  favorable  or  impeding 
nature  of  the  medium,  all  of  which  should  be 
taken  into  account  and  observed.  We  must  also 
note  the  boundaries  of  violent  motions,  such  as 
missiles,  projectiles,  wheels,  and  the  like,  since 
they  are  also  manifestly  confined  to  certain 
limits. 

Some  motions  and  virtues  are  to  be  found  of 
a  directly  contrary  nature  to  these,  which  act 
in  contact  but  not  at  a  distance;  namely,  such 
as  operate  at  a  distance  and  not  in  contact,  and 
again  act  with  less  force  at  a  less  distance,  and 
the  reverse.  Sight,  for  instance,  is  not  easily  ef¬ 
fective  in  contact,  but  requires  a  medium  and 
distance;  although  I  remember  having  heard 
from  a  person  deserving  of  credit,  that  in  being 
cured  of  a  cataract  (which  was  done  by  putting 
a  small  silver  needle  within  the  first  coat  of  the 
eye,  to  remove  the  thin  pellicle  of  the  cataract, 
and  force  it  into  a  corner  of  the  eye),  he  had  dis¬ 
tinctly  seen  the  needle  moving  across  the  pupil. 
Still,  though  this  may  be  true,  it  is  clear  that 
large  bodies  cannot  be  seen  well  or  distinctly, 
unless  at  the  vertex  of  a  cone,  where  the  rays 
from  the  object  meet  at  some  distance  from  the 
eye.  In  old  persons  the  eye  sees  better  if  the  ob¬ 
ject  be  moved  a  little  farther,  and  not  nearer. 
Again,  it  is  certain  that  in  projectiles  the  im¬ 
pact  is  not  so  violent  at  too  short  a  distance  as 
a  little  afterwards.  Such  are  the  observations 
to  be  made  on  the  measure  of  motions  as  re¬ 
gards  distance. 

There  is  another  measure  of  motion  in  space 
which  must  not  be  passed  over,  not  relating  to 


SECOND  BOOK  177 


progressive  but  spherical  motion  —  that  is,  the 
expansion  of  bodies  into  a  greater,  or  their  con¬ 
traction  into  a  lesser  sphere.  For  in  our  meas¬ 
ure  of  this  motion  we  must  inquire  what  de¬ 
gree  of  compression  or  extension  bodies  easily 
and  readily  admit  of,  according  to  their  nature, 
and  at  what  point  they  begin  to  resist  it,  so  as 
at  last  to  bear  it  no  further;  as  when  an  inflated 
bladder  is  compressed,  it  allows  a  certain  com¬ 
pression  of  the  air,  but  if  this  be  increased,  the 
air  does  not  suffer  it,  and  the  bladder  is  burst. 

We  have  proved  this  by  a  more  delicate  ex¬ 
periment.  YVe  took  a  metal  bell,  of  a  light  and 
thin  sort,  such  as  is  used  for  saltcellars,  and  im¬ 
mersed  it  in  a  basin  of  water,  so  as  to  carry  the 
air  contained  in  its  interior  down  with  it  to  the 
bottom  of  the  basin.  We  had  first,  however, 
placed  a  small  globe  at  the  bottom  of  the  basin, 
over  which  we  placed  the  bell.  The  result  was, 
that  if  the  globe  were  small  compared  with  the 
interior  of  the  bell,  the  air  would  contract  itself, 
and  be  compressed  without  being  forced  out, 
but  if  it  were  too  large  for  the  air  readily  to 
yield  to  it,  the  latter  became  impatient  of  the 
pressure,  raised  the  bell  partly  up,  and  ascend¬ 
ed  in  bubbles. 

To  prove,  also,  the  extension  (as  well  as  the 
compression)  which  air  admits  of,  we  adopted 
the  following  method:  we  took  a  glass  egg,  with 
a  small  hole  at  one  end;  we  drew  out  the  air  by 
violent  suction  at  this  hole,  and  then  closed  the 
hole  with  the  finger,  immersed  the  egg  in  wa¬ 
ter,  and  then  removed  the  finger.  The  air  be¬ 
ing  constrained  by  the  effort  made  in  suction, 
and  dilated  beyond  its  natural  state,  and  there¬ 
fore  striving  to  recover  and  contract  itself  (so 
that  if  the  egg  had  not  been  immersed  in  wa¬ 
ter,  it  would  have  drawn  in  the  air  with  a  his¬ 
sing  sound),  now  drew  in  a  sufficient  quantity 
of  water  to  allow  the  air  to  recover  its  former 
dimensions. 

It  is  well  ascertained  that  rare  bodies  (such 
as  air)  admit  of  considerable  contraction,  as  has 
been  before  observed;  but  tangible  bodies  (such 
as  water)  admit  of  it  much  less  readily,  and  to 
a  less  extent.  We  investigated  the  latter  point 
by  the  following  experiment: — 

We  had  a  leaden  globe  made,  capable  of  con¬ 
taining  about  two  pints,  wine  measure,  and  of 
tolerable  thickness,  so  as  to  support  consider¬ 
able  pressure.  We  poured  water  into  it  through 
an  aperture,  which  we  afterwards  closed  with 
melted  lead,  as  soon  as  the  globe  was  filled  with 
water,  so  that  the  whole  became  perfectly  solid. 
We  next  flattened  the  two  opposite  sides  with 
a  heavy  hammer,  which  necessarily  caused  the 


water  to  occupy  a  less  space,  since  the  sphere  is 
the  solid  of  greatest  content;  and  when  ham¬ 
mering  failed  from  the  resistance  of  the  water, 
we  made  use  of  a  mill  or  press,  till  at  last  the 
water,  refusing  to  submit  to  a  greater  pressure, 
exuded  like  a  fine  dew  through  the  solid  lead. 
\Y7e  then  computed  the  extent  to  which  the  orig¬ 
inal  space  had  been  reduced,  and  concluded 
that  water  admitted  such  a  degree  of  compres¬ 
sion  when  constrained  by  great  violence. 

The  more  solid,  dry,  or  compact  bodies,  such 
as  stones,  wood,  and  metals,  admit  of  much 
less,  and  indeed  scarcely  any  perceptible  com¬ 
pression  or  expansion,  but  escape  by  breaking, 
slipping  forward,  or  other  efforts;  as  appears  in 
bending  wood,  or  steel  for  watch-springs,  in 
projectiles,  hammering,  and  many  other  mo¬ 
tions,  all  of  which,  together  with  their  degrees, 
are  to  be  observed  and  examined  in  the  investi¬ 
gation  of  nature,  either  to  a  certainty,  or  by  es¬ 
timation,  or  comparison,  as  opportunity  per¬ 
mits. 

46.  In  the  twenty-second  rank  of  preroga¬ 
tive  instances  we  will  place  the  instances  of  the 
course,  which  we  are  also  wont  to  call  water  in¬ 
stances,  borrowing  our  expression  from  the  wa¬ 
ter  hour-glasses  employed  by  the  ancients  in¬ 
stead  of  those  with  sand.  They  are  such  as 
measure  nature  by  the  moments  of  time,  as  the 
last  instances  do  by  the  degrees  of  space.  For 
all  motion  or  natural  action  takes  place  in  time, 
more  or  less  rapidly,  but  still  in  determined  mo¬ 
ments  well  ascertained  by  nature.  Even  those 
actions  which  appear  to  take  effect  suddenly, 
and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  (as  we  express 
it),  are  found  to  admit  of  greater  or  less  rapid- 
ity. 

I  n  the  first  place,  then,  we  see  that  the  return 
of  the  heavenly  bodies  to  the  same  place  takes 
place  in  regular  times,  as  does  the  flood  and  ebb 
of  the  sea.  The  descent  of  heavy  bodies  to¬ 
wards  the  earth,  and  the  ascent  of  light  bodies 
towards  the  heavenly  sphere,  take  place  in  defi¬ 
nite  times,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  body, 
and  of  the  medium  through  which  it  moves. 
The  sailing  of  ships,  the  motions  of  animals, 
the  transmission  of  projectiles,  all  take  place  in 
times  the  sums  of  which  can  be  computed.  With 
regard  to  heat,  we  see  that  boys  in  winter  bathe 
their  hands  in  the  flame  without  being  burnt; 
and  conjurers,  by  quick  and  regular  movements, 
overturn  vessels  filled  with  wine  or  water,  and 
replace  them  without  spilling  the  liquid,  with 
several  similar  instances.  The  compression,  ex¬ 
pansion  and  eruption  of  several  bodies,  take 
place  more  or  less  rapidly,  according  to  the  na- 


178  NOVUM  ORGANUM 


ture  of  the  body  and  its  motion,  but  still  in 
definite  moments. 

In  the  explosion  of  several  cannon  at  once 
(which  are  sometimes  heard  at  the  distance  of 
thirty  miles),  the  sound  ol  those  nearest  to  the 
spot  is  heard  before  that  of  the  most  distant. 
Even  in  sight  (whose  action  is  most  rapid),  it  is 
clear  that  a  definite  time  is  necessary  for  its  ex¬ 
ertion,  which  is  proved  by  certain  objects  being 
invisible  from  the  velocity  of  their  motion,  such 
as  a  musket-ball;  for  the  flight  of  the  ball  is  too 
swift  to  allow  an  impression  of  its  figure  to  be 
conveyed  to  the  sight. 

This  last  instance,  and  others  of  a  like  na¬ 
ture,  have  sometimes  excited  in  us  a  most  mar¬ 
vellous  doubt,  no  less  than  whether  the  image 
of  the  sky  and  stars  is  perceived  as  at  the  act¬ 
ual  moment  of  its  existence,  or  rather  a  little 
after,  and  whether  there  is  not  (with  regard  to 
the  visible  appearance  of  the  heavenly  bodies) 
a  true  and  apparent  time,  as  well  as  a  true  and 
apparent  place,  which  is  observed  by  astron¬ 
omers  in  parallaxes.  It  appeared  so  incredible 
to  us,  that  the  images  or  radiations  of  heavenly 
bodies  could  suddenly  be  conveyed  through 
such  immense  spaces  to  the  sight,  and  it  seemed 
that  they  ought  rather  to  be  transmitted  in  a 
definite  time.  That  doubt,  however  (as  far  as 
regards  any  great  difference  between  the  true 
and  apparent  time),  was  subsequently  com¬ 
pletely  set  at  rest,  when  we  considered  the  in¬ 
finite  loss  and  diminution  of  size  as  regards  the 
real  and  apparent  magnitude  of  a  star,  occa¬ 
sioned  by  its  distance,  and  at  the  same  time  ob¬ 
served  at  how  great  a  distance  (at  least  sixty 
miles)  bodies  which  are  merely  white  can  be 
suddenly  seen  by  us.  For  there  is  no  doubt,  that 
the  light  of  the  heavenly  bodies  not  only  far 
surpasses  the  vivid  appearance  of  white,  but 
even  the  light  of  any  flame  (with  which  we  are 
acquainted)  in  the  vigor  of  its  radiation.  The 
immense  velocity  of  the  bodies  themselves, 
which  is  perceived  in  their  diurnal  motion,  and 
has  so  astonished  thinking  men,  that  they  have 
been  more  ready  to  believe  in  the  motion  of  the 
earth,  renders  the  motion  of  radiation  from 
them  (marvellous  as  it  is  in  its  rapidity)  more 
worthy  of  belief.  That  which  has  weighed 
most  with  us,  however,  is,  that  if  there  were 
any  considerable  interval  of  time  between  the 
reality  and  the  appearance,  the  images  would 
often  be  interrupted  and  confused  by  clouds 
formed  in  the  mean  time,  and  similar  disturb¬ 
ances  of  the  medium.  Let  this  suffice  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  simple  measures  of  time. 

It  is  not  merely  the  absolute,  but  still  more 


the  relative  measure  of  motions  and  actions 
which  must  be  inquired  into,  for  this  latter  is 
of  great  use  and  application.  We  perceive  that 
the  flame  of  fire-arms  is  seen  sooner  than  the 
sound  is  heard,  although  the  ball  must  have 
struck  the  air  before  the  flame,  which  was  be¬ 
hind  it,  could  escape:  the  reason  of  which  is, 
that  light  moves  with  greater  velocity  than 
sound.  We  perceive,  also,  that  visible  images 
are  received  by  the  sight  with  greater  rapidity 
than  they  are  dismissed,  and  for  this  reason,  a 
violin  string  touched  with  the  finger  appears 
double  or  triple,  because  the  new  image  is  re¬ 
ceived  before  the  former  one  is  dismissed.  Hence, 
also,  rings  when  spinning  appear  globular,  and 
a  lighted  torch,  borne  rapidly  along  at  night, 
appears  to  have  a  tail.  Upon  the  principle  of 
the  inequality  of  motion,  also,  Galileo  attempt¬ 
ed  an  explanation  of  the  flood  and  ebb  of  the 
sea,  supposing  the  earth  to  move  rapidly,  and 
the  water  slowly,  by  which  means  the  water, 
after  accumulating,  would  at  intervals  fall 
back,  as  is  shown  in  a  vessel  of  water  made  to 
move  rapidly.  He  has,  however,  imagined  this 
on  data  which  cannot  be  granted  (namely,  the 
earth’s  motion),  and  besides,  does  not  satisfac¬ 
torily  account  for  the  tide  taking  place  every 
six  hours. 

An  example  of  our  present  point  (the  rela¬ 
tive  measure  of  motion)  and,  at  the  same  time, 
of  its  remarkable  use  of  which  we  have  spoken, 
is  conspicuous  in  mines  filled  with  gunpowder, 
where  immense  weights  of  earth,  buildings,  and 
the  like,  are  overthrown  and  prostrated  by  a 
small  quantity  of  powder;  the  reason  of  which 
is  decidedly  this,  that  the  motion  of  the  expan¬ 
sion  of  the  gunpowder  is  much  more  rapid  than 
that  of  gravity,  which  would  resist  it,  so  that 
the  former  has  terminated  before  the  latter  has 
commenced.  Hence,  also,  in  missiles,  a  strong 
blow  will  not  carry  them  so  far  as  a  sharp  and 
rapid  one.  Nor  could  a  small  portion  of  animal 
spirit  in  animals,  especially  in  such  vast  bodies 
as  those  of  the  whale  and  elephant,  have  ever 
bent  or  directed  such  a  mass  of  body,  were  it 
not  owing  to  the  velocity  of  the  former,  and 
the  slowness  of  the  latter  in  resisting  its  mo¬ 
tion. 

In  short,  this  point  is  one  of  the  principal 
foundations  of  the  magic  experiments  (of  which 
we  shall  presently  speak),  where  a  small  mass 
of  matter  overcomes  and  regulates  a  much  larg¬ 
er,  if  there  but  be  an  anticipation  of  motion,  by 
the  velocity  of  one  before  the  other  is  prepared 
to  act. 

Finally,  the  point  of  the  first  and  last  should 


SECOND  BOOK 


be  observed  in  all  natural  actions.  Thus,  in  an 
infusion  of  rhubarb  the  purgative  property  is 
first  extracted,  and  then  the  astringent ;  we  have 
experienced  something  of  the  same  kind  in 
steeping  violets  in  vinegar,  which  first  extracts 
the  sweet  and  delicate  odor  of  the  flower,  and 
then  the  more  earthy  part,  which  disturbs  the 
perfume;  so  that  if  the  violets  be  steeped  a 
whole  day,  a  much  fainter  perfume  is  extract¬ 
ed  than  if  they  were  steeped  for  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  only,  and  then  taken  out;  and  since  the 
odoriferous  spirit  in  the  violet  is  not  abundant, 
let  other  and  fresh  violets  be  steeped  in  the 
vinegar  every  quarter  of  an  hour,  as  many  as 
sixtimes,  when  theinfusion  becomes  sostrength- 
ened,  that  although  the  violets  have  not  alto¬ 
gether  remained  there  for  more  than  one  hour 
and  a  half,  there  remains  a  most  pleasing  per¬ 
fume,  not  inferior  to  the  flower  itself,  for  a 
whole  year.  It  must  be  observed,  however,  that 
the  perfume  does  not  acquire  its  full  strength, 
till  about  a  month  after  the  infusion.  In  the 
distillation  of  aromatic  plants  macerated  in 
spirits  of  wine,  it  is  well  known  that  an  aque¬ 
ous  and  useless  phlegm  rises  first,  then  water 
containing  more  of  the  spirit,  and  lastly,  water 
containing  more  of  the  aroma;  and  many  ob¬ 
servations  of  the  like  kind,  well  worthy  of  no¬ 
tice,  are  to  be  made  in  distillations.  But  let 
these  suffice  as  examples. 

47.  In  the  twenty-third  rank  of  prerogative 
instances  we  will  place  instances  of  quantity, 
which  we  are  also  wont  to  call  the  doses  of  na¬ 
ture  (borrowing  a  word  from  medicine).  They 
are  such  as  measure  the  powers  by  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  bodies,  and  point  out  the  effect  of  the 
quantity  in  the  degree  of  power.  And  in  the 
first  place,  some  powers  only  subsist  in  the  uni¬ 
versal  quantity,  or  such  as  bears  a  relation  to 
the  confirmation  and  fabric  of  the  universe. 
Thus  the  earth  is  fixed,  its  parts  fall.  The  wa¬ 
ters  in  the  sea  flow  and  ebb,  but  not  in  the  riv¬ 
ers,  except  by  the  admission  of  the  sea.  Then, 
again,  almost  all  particular  powers  act  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  greater  or  less  quantity  of  the  body. 
Large  masses  of  water  are  not  easily  rendered 
foul,  small  are.  New  wine  and  beer  become  ripe 
and  drinkable  in  small  skins  much  more  read¬ 
ily  than  in  large  casks.  If  an  herb  be  placed  in 
a  considerable  quantity  of  liquid,  infusion  takes 
place  rather  than  impregnation;  if  in  less,  the 
reverse.  A  bath,  therefore,  and  a  light  sprink¬ 
ling,  produce  different  effects  on  the  human 
body.  Light  dew,  again,  never  falls,  but  is  dissi¬ 
pated  and  incorporated  with  the  air;  thus  we 
see  that  in  breathing  on  gems,  the  slight  quan¬ 


tity  of  moisture,  like  a  small  cloud  in  the  air,  is 
immediately  dissolved.  Again,  a  piece  of  the 
same  magnet  does  not  attract  so  much  iron  as 
the  whole  magnet  did.  There  are  some  powers 
where  the  smallness  of  the  quantity  is  of  more 
avail;  as  in  boring,  a  sharp  point  pierces  more 
readily  than  a  blunt  one;  the  diamond,  when 
pointed,  makes  an  impression  on  glass,  and  the 
like. 

Here,  too,  we  must  not  rest  contented  with 
a  vague  result,  but  inquire  into  the  exact  pro¬ 
portion  of  quantity  requisite  for  a  particular 
exertion  of  power;  for  one  would  be  apt  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  the  power  bears  an  exact  proportion 
to  the  quantity;  that  if  a  leaden  bullet  of  one 
ounce,  for  instance,  would  fall  in  a  given  time, 
one  of  two  ounces  ought  to  fall  twice  as  rapid¬ 
ly,  which  is  most  erroneous.  Nor  does  the  same 
ratio  prevail  in  every  kind  of  power,  their  dif¬ 
ference  being  considerable.  The  measure,  there¬ 
fore,  must  be  determined  by  experiment,  and 
not  by  probability  or  conjecture. 

Lastly,  we  must  in  all  our  investigations  of 
nature  observe  what  quantity,  or  dose,  of  the 
body  is  requisite  for  a  given  effect,  and  must  at 
the  same  time  be  guarded  against  estimating  it 
at  too  much  or  too  little. 

48.  In  the  twenty-fourth  rank  of  prerogative 
instances  we  will  place  wrestling  instances, 
which  we  are  also  wont  to  call  instances  of  pre¬ 
dominance.  They  are  such  as  point  out  the  pre¬ 
dominance  and  submission  of  powers  compared 
with  each  other,  and  which  of  them  is  the  more 
energetic  and  superior,  or  more  weak  and  in¬ 
ferior.  For  the  motions  and  effects  of  bodies  are 
compounded,  decomposed,  and  combined,  no 
less  than  the  bodies  themselves.  We  will  exhib¬ 
it,  therefore,  the  principal  kinds  of  motions  or 
active  powers,  in  order  that  their  comparative 
strength,  and  thence  a  demonstration  and  defi¬ 
nition  of  the  instances  in  question,  may  be  ren¬ 
dered  more  clear. 

Let  the  first  motion  be  that  of  the  resistance 
of  matter,  which  exists  in  every  particle,  and 
completely  prevents  its  annihilation;  so  that  no 
conflagration,  weight,  pressure,  violence,  or 
length  of  time  can  reduce  even  the  smallest  por¬ 
tion  of  matter  to  nothing,  or  prevent  it  from 
being  something,  and  occupying  some  space, 
and  delivering  itself  (whatever  straits  it  be  put 
to),  by  changing  its  form  or  place,  or,  if  that  be 
impossible,  remaining  as  it  is;  nor  can  it  ever 
happen  that  it  should  either  be  nothing  or  no¬ 
where.  This  motion  is  designated  by  the  schools 
(which  generally  name  and  define  everything 
by  its  effects  and  inconveniences  rather  than 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


180 

by  its  inherent  cause)  by  the  axiom,  that  two 
bodies  cannot  exist  in  the  same  place,  or  they 
call  it  a  motion  to  prevent  the  penetration  of 
dimensions.  It  is  useless  to  give  examples  of 
this  motion,  since  it  exists  in  every  body. 

Let  the  second  motion  be  that  which  we 
term  the  motion  of  connection,  by  which  bodies 
do  not  allow  themselves  to  be  separated  at  any 
point  from  the  contact  of  another  body,  de¬ 
lighting,  as  it  were,  in  the  mutual  connection 
and  contact.  This  is  called  by  the  schools  a  mo¬ 
tion  to  prevent  a  vacuum.  It  takes  place  when 
water  is  drawn  up  by  suction  or  a  syringe,  the 
flesh  by  cupping,  or  when  the  water  remains 
without  escaping  from  perforated  jars,  unless 
the  mouth  be  opened  to  admit  the  air,  and 
innumerable  instances  of  a  like  nature. 

Let  the  third  be  that  which  we  term  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  liberty,  by  which  bodies  strive  to  deliver 
themselves  from  any  unnatural  pressure  or  ten¬ 
sion,  and  to  restore  themselves  to  the  dimen¬ 
sions  suited  to  their  mass;  and  of  which,  also, 
there  are  innumerable  examples.  Thus,  we  have 
examples  of  their  escaping  from  pressure,  in 
the  water  in  swimming,  in  the  air  in  flying,  in 
the  water  again  in  rowing,  and  in  the  air  in  the 
undulation  of  the  winds,  and  in  springs  of 
watches.  An  exact  instance  of  the  motion  of 
compressed  air  is  seen  in  children’s  popguns, 
which  they  make  by  scooping  out  elder- 
branches  or  some  such  matter,  and  forcing  in  a 
piece  of  some  pulpy  root  or  the  like,  at  each 
end;  then  they  force  the  root  or  other  pellet 
with  a  ramrod  to  the  opposite  end,  from  which 
the  lower  pellet  is  emitted  and  projected  with 
a  report,  and  that  before  it  is  touched  by  the 
other  piece  of  root  or  pellet,  or  by  the  ramrod. 
We  have  examples  of  their  escape  from  tension, 
in  the  motion  of  the  air  that  remains  in  glass 
eggs  after  suction,  in  strings,  leather,  and  cloth, 
which  recoil  after  tension,  unless  it  be  long  con¬ 
tinued.  The  schools  define  this  by  the  term  of 
motion  from  the  form  of  the  element;  injudi¬ 
ciously  enough,  since  this  motion  is  to  be  found 
not  only  in  air,  water,  or  fire,  but  in  every  spe¬ 
cies  of  solid,  as  wood,  iron,  lead,  cloth,  parch¬ 
ment,  etc.,  each  of  which  has  its  own  proper 
size,  and  is  with  difficulty  stretched  to  any 
other.  Since,  however,  this  motion  of  liberty  is 
the  most  obvious  of  all,  and  to  be  seen  in  an  in¬ 
finite  number  of  cases,  it  will  be  as  well  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  it  correctly  and  clearly;  for  some  most 
carelessly  confound  this  with  the  two  others  of 
resistance  and  connection;  namely,  the  free¬ 
dom  from  pressure  with  the  former,  and  that 
from  tension  with  the  latter,  as  it  bodies  when 


compressed  yielded  or  expanded  to  prevent  a 
penetration  of  dimensions,  and  when  stretched 
rebounded  and  contracted  themselves  to  pre¬ 
vent  a  vacuum.  But  if  the  air,  when  compressed, 
could  be  brought  to  the  density  of  water,  or 
wood  to  that  of  stone,  there  would  be  no  need 
of  any  penetration  of  dimensions,  and  yet  the 
compression  would  be  much  greater  than  they 
actually  admit  of.  So  if  water  could  be  expand¬ 
ed  till  it  became  as  rare  as  air,  or  stone  as  rare 
as  wood,  there  would  be  no  need  of  a  vacuum, 
and  yet  the  expansion  would  be  much  greater 
than  they  actually  admit  of.  We  do  not,  there¬ 
fore,  arrive  at  a  penetration  of  dimensions  or  a 
vacuum  before  the  extremes  of  condensation 
and  rarefaction,  whilst  the  motion  we  speak  of 
stops  and  exerts  itself  much  within  them,  and 
is  nothing  more  than  a  desire  of  bodies  to  pre¬ 
serve  their  specific  density  (or,  if  it  be  pre¬ 
ferred,  their  form),  and  not  to  desert  them  sud¬ 
denly,  but  only  to  change  by  degrees,  and  of 
their  own  accord.  It  is,  however,  much  more 
necessary  to  intimate  to  mankind  (because 
many  other  points  depend  upon  this),  that  the 
violent  motion  which  we  call  mechanical,  and 
Democritus  (who,  in  explaining  his  primary 
motions,  is  to  be  ranked  even  below  the  mid¬ 
dling  class  of  philosophers)  termed  the  motion 
of  a  blow,  is  nothing  else  than  this  motion  of  lib¬ 
erty,  namely,  a  tendency  to  relaxation  from 
compression.  For  in  all  simple  impulsion  or 
flight  through  the  air,  the  body  is  not  displaced 
or  moved  in  space,  until  its  parts  are  placed  in 
an  unnatural  state,  and  compressed  by  the  im¬ 
pelling  force.  When  that  takes  place,  the  differ¬ 
ent  parts  urging  the  other  in  succession,  the 
whole  is  moved,  and  that  with  a  rotatory  as 
well  as  progressive  motion,  in  order  that  the 
parts  may,  by  this  means  also,  set  themselves 
at  liberty,  or  more  readily  submit.  Let  this  suf¬ 
fice  for  the  motion  in  question. 

Let  the  fourth  be  that  which  we  term  the 
motion  of  matter,  and  which  is  opposed  to  the 
last;  for  in  the  motion  of  liberty,  bodies  abhor, 
reject,  and  avoid  a  new  size  or  volume,  or  any 
new  expansion  or  contraction  (for  these  differ¬ 
ent  terms  have  the  same  meaning),  and  strive, 
with  all  their  power,  to  rebound  and  resume 
their  former  density;  on  the  contrary,  in  the 
motion  of  matter,  they  are  anxious  to  acquire 
a  new  volume  or  dimension,  and  attempt  it  will¬ 
ingly  and  rapidly,  and  occasionally  by  a  most 
vigorous  effort,  as  in  the  example  of  gunpow¬ 
der.  The  most  powerful,  or  at  least  most  fre¬ 
quent,  though  not  the  only  instruments  of  this 
motion,  are  heat  and  cold.  For  instance,  the 


SECOND  BOOK 


air,  if  expanded  by  tension  (as  by  suction  in  the 
glass  egg),  struggles  anxiously  to  restore  itself; 
but  if  heat  be  applied,  it  strives,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  to  dilate  itself,  and  longs  for  a  larger 
volume,  regularly  passing  and  migrating  into 
it,  as  into  a  new  form  (as  it  is  termed);  nor  aft¬ 
er  a  certain  degree  of  expansion  is  it  anxious  to 
return,  unless  it  be  invited  to  do  so  by  the  ap¬ 
plication  of  cold,  which  is  not  indeed  a  return, 
but  a  fresh  change.  So  also  water,  when  con¬ 
fined  by  compression,  resists,  and  wishes  to  be¬ 
come  as  it  was  before,  namely,  more  expanded; 
but  if  there  happen  an  intense  and  continued 
cold,  it  changes  itself  readily,  and  of  its  own  ac¬ 
cord,  into  the  condensed  state  of  ice;  and  if  the 
cold  be  long  continued,  without  any  interven¬ 
ing  warmth  (as  in  grottoes  and  deep  caves),  it 
is  changed  into  crystal  or  similar  matter,  and 
never  resumes  its  form. 

Let  the  fifth  be  that  which  we  term  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  continuity.  We  do  not  understand  by 
this  simple  and  primary  continuity  with  any 
other  body  (for  that  is  the  motion  of  connec¬ 
tion),  but  the  continuity  of  a  particular  body 
in  itself;  for  it  is  most  certain  that  all  bodies  ab¬ 
hor  a  solution  of  continuity,  some  more  and 
some  less,  but  all  partially.  In  hard  bodies 
(such  as  steel  and  glass)  the  resistance  to  an  in¬ 
terruption  of  continuity  is  most  powerful  and 
efficacious,  whilst  although  in  liquids  it  appears 
to  be  faint  and  languid,  yet  it  is  not  altogether 
null,  but  exists  in  the  lowest  degree,  and  shows 
itself  in  many  experiments,  such  as  bubbles, 
the  round  form  of  drops,  the  thin  threads  which 
drip  from  roofs,  the  cohesion  of  glutinous  sub¬ 
stances,  and  the  like.  It  is  most  conspicuous, 
however,  if  an  attempt  be  made  to  push  this 
separation  to  still  smaller  particles.  Thus,  in 
mortars,  the  pestle  produces  no  effect  after  a 
certain  degree  of  contusion,  water  does  not  pene¬ 
trate  small  fissures,  and  the  air  itself,  notwith¬ 
standing  its  subtilty,  does  not  penetrate  the 
pores  of  solid  vessels  at  once,  but  only  by  long- 
continued  insinuation. 

Let  the  sixth  be  that  which  we  term  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  acquisition,  or  the  motion  of  need.  It  is 
that  by  which  bodies  placed  amongst  others  of 
a  heterogeneous  and,  as  it  were,  hostile  nature, 
if  they  meet  with  the  means  or  opportunity  of 
avoiding  them,  and  uniting  themselves  with 
others  of  a  more  analogous  nature,  even  when 
these  latter  are  not  closely  allied  to  them,  im¬ 
mediately  seize  and,  as  it  were,  select  them,  and 
appear  to  consider  it  as  something  acquired 
(whence  we  derive  the  name),  and  to  have 
need  of  these  latter  bodies.  For  instance,  gold, 


1 8 1 

or  any  other  metal  in  leaf,  does  not  like  the 
neighborhood  of  air;  if,  therefore,  they  meet 
with  any  tangible  and  thick  substance  (such 
as  the  finger,  paper,  or  the  like)  they  immedi¬ 
ately  adhere  to  it,  and  are  not  easily  torn  from 
it.  Paper,  too,  and  cloth,  and  the  like,  do  not 
agree  with  the  air,  which  is  inherent  and  mixed 
in  their  pores.  They  readily,  therefore,  imbibe 
water  or  other  liquids,  and  get  rid  of  the  air. 
Sugar,  or  a  sponge,  dipped  in  water  or  wine,  and 
though  part  of  it  be  out  of  the  water  or  wine, 
and  at  some  height  above  it,  will  yet  gradually 
absorb  them. 

Hence  an  excellent  rule  is  derived  from  the 
opening  and  dissolution  of  bodies;  for  (not  to 
mention  corrosive  and  strong  waters,  which 
force  their  way)  if  a  body  can  be  found  which 
is  more  adapted,  suited,  and  friendly  to  a  given 
solid,  than  that  with  which  it  is  by  some  neces¬ 
sity  united,  the  given  solid  immediately  opens 
and  dissolves  itself  to  receive  the  former,  and 
excludes  or  removes  the  latter.  Nor  is  the  ef¬ 
fect  or  power  of  this  motion  confined  to  con¬ 
tact,  for  the  electric  energy  (of  which  Gilbert 
and  others  after  him  have  told  so  many  fables) 
is  only  the  energy  excited  in  a  body  by  gentle 
friction,  and  which  does  not  endure  the  air,  but 
prefers  some  tangible  substance  if  there  be  any 
at  hand. 

Let  the  seventh  be  that  which  we  term  the 
motion  of  greater  congregation,  by  which  bod¬ 
ies  are  borne  towards  masses  of  a  similar  na¬ 
ture,  for  instance,  heavy  bodies  towards  the 
earth,  light  to  the  sphere  of  heaven.  The  schools 
termed  this  natural  motion,  by  a  superficial 
consideration  of  it,  because  produced  by  no  ex¬ 
ternal  visible  agent,  which  made  them  consider 
it  innate  in  the  substances;  or  perhaps  because 
it  does  not  cease,  which  is  little  to  be  wondered 
at,  since  heaven  and  earth  are  always  present, 
whilst  the  causes  and  sources  of  many  other 
motions  are  sometimes  absent  and  sometimes 
present.  They  therefore  called  this  perpetual 
and  proper,  because  it  is  never  interrupted,  but 
instantly  takes  place  when  the  others  are  in¬ 
terrupted,  and  they  called  the  others  adsciti- 
tious.  The  former,  however,  is  in  reality  weak 
and  slow,  since  it  yields,  and  is  inferior  to  the 
others  as  long  as  they  act,  unless  the  mass  of 
the  body  be  great;  and  although  this  motion 
have  so  filled  men’s  minds,  as  almost  to  have 
obscured  all  others,  yet  they  know  but  little 
about  it,  and  commit  many  errors  in  its  esti¬ 
mate. 

Let  the  eighth  be  that  which  we  term  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  lesser  congregation,  by  which  the  homo- 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


182 

geneous  parts  in  any  body  separate  themselves 
from  the  heterogeneous  and  unite  together,  and 
whole  bodies  of  a  similar  substance  coalesce 
and  tend  towards  each  other,  and  are  some 
times  congregated,  attracted,  and  meet,  from 
some  distance;  thus  in  milk  the  cream  rises  aft¬ 
er  a  certain  time,  and  in  wine  the  dregs  and  tar¬ 
tar  sink;  which  effects  are  not  to  be  attributed 
to  gravity  and  levity  only,  so  as  to  account  for 
the  rising  of  some  parts  and  the  sinking  of  oth¬ 
ers,  but  much  more  to  the  desire  of  the  homo¬ 
geneous  bodies  to  meet  and  unite.  This  motion 
differs  from  that  of  need  in  two  points:  1st,  be¬ 
cause  the  latter  is  the  stimulus  of  a  malignant 
and  contrary  nature,  whilst  in  this  of  which  we 
treat  (if  there  be  no  impediment  or  restraint), 
the  parts  are  united  by  their  affinity,  although 
there  be  no  foreign  nature  to  create  a  struggle: 
2dly,  because  the  union  is  closer  and  more  se¬ 
lect.  For  in  the  other  motion,  bodies  which  have 
no  great  affinity  unite,  if  they  can  but  avoid 
the  hostile  body,  whilst  in  this,  substances  which 
are  connected  by  a  decided  kindred  resem¬ 
blance  come  together  and  are  moulded  into  one. 
It  is  a  motion  existing  in  all  compound  bodies, 
and  would  be  readily  seen  in  each,  if  it  were  not 
confined  and  checked  by  the  other  affections 
and  necessities  of  bodies  which  disturb  the 
union. 

This  motion  is  usually  confined  in  the  three 
following  manners:  by  the  torpor  of  the  bodies; 
by  the  power  of  the  predominating  body;  by 
external  motion.  With  regard  to  the  first,  it  is 
certain  that  there  is  more  or  less  sluggishness 
in  tangible  bodies,  and  an  abhorrence  of  loco¬ 
motion;  so  that  unless  excited  they  prefer  re¬ 
maining  contented  with  their  actual  state,  to 
placing  themselves  in  a  better  position.  There 
are  three  means  of  breaking  through  this  slug¬ 
gishness — heat;  the  active  power  of  a  similar 
body;  vivid  and  powerful  motion.  With  regard 
to  the  first,  heat  is,  on  this  account,  defined  as 
that  which  separates  heterogeneous,  and  draws 
together  homogeneous  substances;  a  definition 
of  the  Peripatetics  which  is  justly  ridiculed  by 
Gilbert,  who  says  it  is  as  if  one  were  to  define 
man  to  be  that  which  sows  wheat  and  plants 
vineyards;  being  only  a  definition  deduced 
from  effects,  and  those  but  partial.  But  it  is 
still  more  to  be  blamed,  because  those  effects, 
such  as  they  are,  are  not  a  peculiar  property  of 
heat,  but  a  mere  accident  (for  cold,  as  we  shall 
afterwards  show,  does  the  same),  arising  from 
the  desire  of  the  homogeneous  parts  to  unite; 
the  heat  then  assists  them  in  breaking  through 
that  sluggishness  which  before  restrained  their 


desire.  With  regard  to  the  assistance  derived 
from  the  power  of  a  similar  body,  it  is  most  con¬ 
spicuous  in  the  magnet  when  armed  with  steel, 
for  it  excites  in  the  steel  a  power  of  adhering  to 
steel,  as  a  homogeneous  substance,  the  power 
of  the  magnet  breaking  through  the  sluggish¬ 
ness  of  the  steel.  With  regard  to  the  assistance 
of  motion,  it  is  seen  in  wooden  arrows  or  points, 
which  penetrate  more  deeply  into  wood  than  if 
they  were  tipped  with  iron,  from  the  similarity 
of  the  substance,  the  swiftness  of  the  motion 
breaking  through  the  sluggishness  of  the  wood; 
of  which  two  last  experiments  we  have  spoken 
above  in  the  aphorism  on  clandestine  in¬ 
stances.1 

The  confinement  of  the  motion  of  lesser  con¬ 
gregation,  which  arises  from  the  power  of  the 
predominant  body,  is  shown  in  the  decomposi¬ 
tion  of  blood  and  urine  by  cold.  For  as  long  as 
these  substances  are  filled  with  the  active  spirit, 
which  regulates  and  restrains  each  of  their  com¬ 
ponent  parts,  as  the  predominant  ruler  of  the 
whole,  the  several  different  parts  do  not  collect 
themselves  separately  on  account  of  the  check; 
but  as  soon  as  that  spirit  has  evaporated,  or 
has  been  choked  by  the  cold,  then  the  decom¬ 
posed  parts  unite,  according  to  their  natural 
desire.  Hence  it  happens,  that  all  bodies  which 
contain  a  sharp  spirit  (as  salts  and  the  like), 
last  without  decomposition,  owing  to  the  per¬ 
manent  and  durable  power  of  the  predominat¬ 
ing  and  imperious  spirit. 

The  confinement  of  the  motion  of  lesser  con¬ 
gregation,  which  arises  from  external  motion, 
is  very  evident  in  that  agitation  of  bodies  which 
preserves  them  from  putrefaction.  For  all  pu¬ 
trefaction  depends  on  the  congregation  of  the 
homogeneous  parts,  whence,  by  degrees,  there 
ensues  a  corruption  of  the  first  form  (as  it  is 
called),  and  the  generation  of  another.  For  the 
decomposition  of  the  original  form,  which  is  it¬ 
self  the  union  of  the  homogeneous  parts,  pre¬ 
cedes  the  putrefaction,  which  prepares  the  way 
for  the  generation  of  another.  This  decomposi¬ 
tion,  if  not  interrupted,  is  simple;  but  if  there 
be  various  obstacles,  putrefactions  ensue,  which 
are  the  rudiments  of  a  new  generation.  But  if 
(to  come  to  our  present  point)  a  frequent  agita¬ 
tion  be  excited  by  external  motion,  the  motion 
towards  union  (which  is  delicate  and  gentle, 
and  requires  to  be  free  from  all  external  influ¬ 
ence),  is  disturbed,  and  ceases;  which  we 
perceive  to  be  the  case  in  innumerable  in¬ 
stances.  Thus,  the  daily  agitation  or  flowing 
of  water  prevents  putrefaction;  winds  prevent 

^ee  Aphorism  25. 


SECOND  BOOK  183 


the  air  from  being  pestilent;  corn  turned  about 
and  shaken  in  granaries  continues  clean:  in 
short,  everything  which  is  externally  agitated 
will  with  difficulty  rot  internally. 

We  must  not  omit  that  union  of  the  parts  of 
bodies  which  is  the  principal  cause  of  indura¬ 
tion  and  desiccation.  When  the  spirit  or  mois¬ 
ture,  which  has  evaporated  into  spirit,  has 
escaped  from  a  porous  body  (such  as  wood,  bone, 
parchment,  and  the  like),  the  thicker  parts  are 
drawn  together,  and  united  with  a  greater  effort, 
and  induration  or  desiccation  is  the  consequence ; 
and  this  we  attribute  not  so  much  to  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  connection  (in  order  to  prevent  a  vacu¬ 
um),  as  to  this  motion  of  friendship  and  union. 

Union  from  a  distance  is  rare,  and  yet  is  to 
be  met  with  in  more  instances  than  are  gener¬ 
ally  observed.  We  perceive  it  when  one  bubble 
dissolves  another,  when  medicines  attract  hu¬ 
mors  from  a  similarity  of  substance,  when  one 
string  moves  another  in  unison  with  it  on  dif¬ 
ferent  instruments,  and  the  like.  We  are  of 
opinion  that  this  motion  is  very  prevalent  also 
in  animal  spirits,  but  are  quite  ignorant  of  the 
fact.  It  is,  however,  conspicuous  in  the  mag¬ 
net,  and  magnetized  iron.  Whilst  speaking  of 
the  motions  of  the  magnet,  we  must  plainly 
distinguish  them,  for  there  are  four  distinct 
powers  or  effects  of  the  magnet  which  should 
not  be  confounded,  although  the  wonder  and 
astonishment  of  mankind  has  classed  them  to¬ 
gether.  1.  The  attraction  of  the  magnet  to  the 
magnet,  or  of  iron  to  the  magnet,  or  of  magne¬ 
tized  iron  to  iron.  2.  Its  polarity  towards  the 
north  and  south,  and  its  variation.  3.  Its  pene¬ 
tration  through  gold,  glass,  stone,  and  all  other 
substances.  4.Thecommunication  of  power  from 
the  mineral  to  iron,  and  from  iron  to  iron,  with¬ 
out  any  communication  of  the  substances.  Here, 
however,  we  only  speak  of  the  first.  There  is 
also  a  singular  motion  of  attraction  between 
quicksilver  and  gold,  so  that  the  gold  attracts 
quicksilver  even  when  made  use  of  in  ointment; 
and  those  who  work  surrounded  by  the  vapors 
of  quicksilver,  are  wont  to  hold  a  piece  of  gold 
in  their  mouths,  to  collect  the  exhalations 
which  would  otherwise  attack  their  heads  and 
bones,  and  this  piece  soon  grows  white.  Let  this 
suffice  for  the  motion  of  lesser  congregation. 

Let  the  ninth  be  the  magnetic  motion,  which, 
although  of  the  nature  of  that  last  mentioned, 
yet,  when  operating  at  great  distances,  and  on 
great  masses,  deserves  a  separate  inquiry,  espe¬ 
cially  if  it  neither  begin  in  contact,  as  most  mo¬ 
tions  of  congregation  do,  nor  end  by  bringing 
the  substances  into  contact,  as  all  do,  but  only 


raise  them,  and  make  them  swell  without  any 
further  effect.  For  if  the  moon  raise  the  waters, 
or  cause  moist  substances  to  swell,  or  if  the 
starry  sphere  attract  the  planets  towards  their 
apogees,  or  the  sun  confine  the  planets  Mercury 
and  Venus  to  within  a  certain  distance  of  his 
mass;  these  motions  do  not  appear  capable  of 
being  classed  under  either  of  those  of  congrega¬ 
tion,  but  to  be,  as  it  were,  intermediately  and 
imperfectly  congregative,  and  thus  to  form  a 
distinct  species. 

Let  the  tenth  motion  be  that  of  avoidance, 
or  that  which  is  opposed  to  the  motion  of  lesser 
congregation,  by  which  bodies,  with  a  kind  of 
antipathy,  avoid  and  disperse,  and  separate 
themselves  from,  or  refuse  to  unite  themselves 
with  others  of  a  hostile  nature.  For  although  this 
may  sometimes  appear  to  be  an  accidental  mo¬ 
tion,  necessarily  attendant  upon  that  of  the 
lesser  congregation,  because  the  homogeneous 
parts  cannot  unite,  unless  the  heterogeneous  be 
first  removed  and  excluded,  yet  it  is  still  to  be 
classed  separately,  and  considered  as  a  distinct 
species,  because,  in  many  cases,  the  desire  of 
avoidance  appears  to  be  more  marked  than 
that  of  union. 

It  is  very  conspicuous  in  the  excrements  of 
animals,  nor  less,  perhaps,  in  objects  odious  to 
particular  senses,  especially  the  smell  and 
taste;  for  a  fetid  smell  is  rejected  by  the  nose, 
so  as  to  produce  a  sympathetic  motion  of  ex¬ 
pulsion  at  the  mouth  of  the  stomach;  a  bitter 
and  rough  taste  is  rejected  by  the  palate  or 
throat,  so  as  to  produce  a  sympathetic  concus¬ 
sion  and  shivering  of  the  head.  This  motion  is 
visible  also  in  other  cases.  Thus  it  is  observed 
in  some  kinds  of  antiperistasis,  as  in  the  middle 
region  of  the  air,  the  cold  of  which  appears  to 
be  occasioned  by  the  rejection  of  cold  from  the 
regions  of  the  heavenly  bodies;  and  also  in  the 
heat  and  combustion  observed  in  subterranean 
spots,  which  appear  to  be  owing  to  the  rejec¬ 
tion  of  heat  from  the  centre  of  the  earth.  For 
heat  and  cold,  when  in  small  quantities,  mutu¬ 
ally  destroy  each  other,  whilst  in  larger  quan¬ 
tities,  like  armies  equally  matched,  they  re¬ 
move  and  eject  each  other  in  open  conflict.  It 
is  said,  also,  that  cinnamon  and  other  per¬ 
fumes  retain  their  odor  longer  when  placed  near 
privies  and  foul  places,  because  they  will  not 
unite  and  mix  with  stinks.  It  is  well  known  that 
quicksilver,  which  would  otherwise  reunite  in¬ 
to  a  complete  mass,  is  prevented  from  so  doing 
by  man’s  spittle,  pork  lard,  turpentine,  and  the 
like,  from  the  little  affinity  of  its  parts  with 
those  substances,  so  that  when  surrounded  by 


1 84  NOVUM  ORGANTM 


them  it  draws  itselt  back,  and  its  avoidance  of 
these  intervening  obstacles  is  greater  than  its 
desire  of  reuniting  itself  to  its  homogeneous 
parts;  which  is  what  they  term  the  mortifica¬ 
tion  of  quicksilver.  Again,  the  difference  in 
weight  of  oil  and  water  is  not  the  only  reason 
for  their  refusing  to  mix,  but  it  is  also  owing  to 
the  little  affinity  of  the  two;  for  spirits  of  wine, 
which  is  lighter  than  oil,  mixes  very  well  with 
water.  A  very  remarkable  instance  of  the  mo¬ 
tion  in  question  is  seen  in  nitre,  and  crude  bod¬ 
ies  of  a  like  nature,  which  abhor  flame,  as  may 
be  observed  in  gunpowder,  quicksilver,  and 
gold.  The  avoidance  of  one  pole  of  the  magnet 
by  iron  is  not  (as  Gilbert  has  well  observed), 
strictly  speaking,  an  avoidance,  but  a  conform¬ 
ity,  or  attraction  to  a  more  convenient  situ¬ 
ation. 

Let  the  eleventh  motion  be  that  of  assimila¬ 
tion,  or  self-multiplication,  or  simple  genera¬ 
tion,  by  which  latter  term  we  do  not  mean  the 
simple  generation  ot  integral  bodies,  such  as 
plants  or  animals,  but  ot  homogeneous  bodies. 
By  this  motion  homogeneous  bodies  convert 
those  which  are  allied  to  them,  or  at  least  well 
disposed  and  prepared,  into  their  own  sub¬ 
stance  and  nature.  Thus  ffame  multiplies  itselt 
over  vapors  and  oily  substances,  and  generates 
fresh  flame;  the  air  over  water  and  watery  sub¬ 
stances  multiplies  itself  and  generates  tresh  air; 
the  vegetable  and  animal  spirit,  over  the  thin 
particles  of  a  watery  or  oleaginous  spirit  con¬ 
tained  in  its  food,  multiplies  itselt  and  gener¬ 
ates  fresh  spirit;  the  solid  parts  ot  plants  and 
animals,  as  the  leat,  flower,  the  flesh,  bone,  and 
the  like,  each  of  them  assimilates  some  part  of 
the  juices  contained  in  their  food,  and  generate 
a  successive  and  daily  substance.  For  let  none 
rave  with  Paracelsus,  who  (blinded  by  his  dis¬ 
tillations)  would  have  it,  that  nutrition  takes 
place  by  mere  separation,  and  that  the  eye,  nose, 
brain,  and  liver,  lie  concealed  in  bread  and 
meat,  the  root,  leal,  and  flower,  in  the  juice  ot 
the  earth;  asserting  that  just  as  the  artist  brings 
out  a  leat,  flower,  eye,  nose,  hand  toot,  and  the 
like,  from  a  rude  mass  of  stone  or  wood  by  the 
separation  and  rejection  ot  what  is  superfluous; 
so  the  great  artist  within  us  brings  out  our  sev¬ 
eral  limbs  and  parts  by  separation  and  rejec¬ 
tion.  But  to  leave  such  trifling,  it  is  most  cer¬ 
tain  that  all  the  parts  ot  vegetables  and  ani¬ 
mals,  as  well  the  homogeneous  as  organic,  first 
of  all  attract  those  juices  contained  in  their 
food,  which  are  nearly  common,  or  at  least  not 
very  different,  and  then  assimilate  and  convert 
them  into  their  own  nature.  Nor  does  this  as¬ 


similation,  or  simple  generation,  take  place  in 
animated  bodies  only,  but  the  inanimate  also 
participate  in  the  same  property  (as  we  have 
observed  ot  flame  and  air),  and  that  languid 
spirit,  which  is  contained  in  every  tangible  ani¬ 
mated  substance,  is  perpetually  working  upon 
the  coarser  parts,  and  converting  them  into 
spirit,  which  atterwards  is  exhaled,  whence  en¬ 
sues  a  diminution  of  weight,  and  a  desiccation 
ot  which  we  have  spoken  elsewhere. !Xor 
should  we,  in  speaking  of  assimilation,  neglect 
to  mention  the  accretion  which  is  usually  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  aliment,  and  which  is  observed 
when  mud  grows  into  a  mass  between  stones, 
and  is  converted  into  a  stony  substance,  and 
the  scaly  substance  round  the  teeth  is  convert¬ 
ed  into  one  no  less  hard  than  the  teeth  them¬ 
selves;  for  we  are  ot  opinion  that  there  exists  in 
all  bodies  a  desire  ot  assimilation,  as  well  as  of 
uniting  with  homogeneous  masses.  Each  of 
these  powers,  however,  is  confined,  although  in 
different  manners,  and  should  be  diligently  in¬ 
vestigated,  because  they  are  connected  with  the 
revival  ot  old  age.  Lastly,  it  is  worthy  of  obser¬ 
vation,  that  in  the  nine  preceding  motions, 
bodies  appear  to  aim  at  the  mere  preservation 
of  their  nature,  whilst  in  this  they  attempt  its 
propagation. 

Let  the  twelfth  motion  be  that  of  excitement, 
which  appears  to  be  a  species  of  the  last,  and 
is  sometimes  mentioned  by  us  under  that  name. 
It  is,  like  that,  a  diffusive,  communicative, 
transitive,  and  multiplying  motion;  and  they 
agree  remarkably  in  their  effect,  although  they 
differ  in  their  mode  of  action,  and  in  their  sub¬ 
ject  matter.  The  former  proceeds  imperiously, 
and  with  authority;  it  orders  and  compels  the 
assimilated  to  be  converted  and  changed  into 
the  assimilating  body.  The  latter  proceeds  by 
art,  insinuation,  and  stealth,  inviting  and  dis¬ 
posing  the  excited  towards  the  nature  of  the 
exciting  body.  The  former  both  multiplies  and 
transforms  bodies  and  substances;  thus  a  great¬ 
er  quantity  ot  flame,  air,  spirit,  and  flesh  is 
formed;  but  in  the  latter,  the  powers  only  are 
multiplied  and  changed,  and  heat,  the  mag¬ 
netic  power,  and  putrefaction,  in  the  above  in¬ 
stances,  are  increased.  Heat  does  not  diffuse  it¬ 
self  when  heating  other  bodies  by  any  commu¬ 
nication  ot  the  original  heat,  but  only  by  excit¬ 
ing  the  parts  of  the  heated  body  to  that  motion 
which  is  the  form  of  heat,  and  ot  w  hich  w*e 
spoke  in  the  first  vintage  of  the  nature  ot  heat. 
Heat,  therefore,  is  excited  much  less  rapidly 
and  readily  in  stone  or  metal  than  in  air,  on  ac- 
1  See  Aphorism  40. 


SECOND  BOOK  185 


count  of  the  inaptitude,  and  sluggishness  of 
those  bodies  in  acquiring  that  motion,  so  that 
it  is  probable,  that  there  may  be  some  sub¬ 
stances,  towards  the  centre  of  the  earth,  quite 
incapable  of  being  heated,  on  account  of  their 
density,  which  may  deprive  them  of  the  spirit 
by  which  the  motion  of  excitement  is  usually 
commenced.  Thus  also  the  magnet  creates  in 
the  iron  a  new  disposition  of  its  parts,  and  a 
conformable  motion,  without  losing  any  of  its 
virtue.  So  the  leaven  of  bread,  yeast,  rennet, 
and  some  poisons,  excite  and  invite  successive 
and  continued  motion  in  dough,  beer,  cheese, 
or  the  human  body;  not  so  much  from  the  pow¬ 
er  of  the  exciting,  as  the  predisposition  and 
yielding  of  the  excited  body. 

Let  the  thirteenth  motion  be  that  of  impres¬ 
sion,  which  is  also  a  species  of  motion  of  assim¬ 
ilation,  and  the  most  subtile  of  diffusive  mo¬ 
tions.  We  have  thought  it  right,  however,  to 
consider  it  as  a  distinct  species,  on  account  of 
its  remarkable  difference  from  the  two  last;  for 
the  simple  motion  of  assimilation  transforms 
the  bodies  themselves,  so  that  if  you  remove 
the  first  agent,  you  diminish  not  the  effect  of 
those  which  succeed;  thus,  neither  the  first 
lighting  of  flame,  nor  the  first  conversion  into 
air,  is  of  any  importance  to  the  flame  or  air 
next  generated.  So,  also,  the  motion  of  excite¬ 
ment  still  continues  for  a  considerable  time  aft¬ 
er  the  removal  of  the  first  agent,  as  in  a  heated 
body  on  the  removal  of  the  original  heat,  in 
the  excited  iron  on  the  removal  of  the  magnet, 
and  in  the  dough  on  the  removal  of  the  leaven. 
But  the  motion  of  impression,  although  diffu¬ 
sive  and  transitive,  appears,  nevertheless,  to 
depend  on  the  first  agent,  so  that  upon  the  re¬ 
moval  of  the  latter  the  former  immediately  fails 
and  perishes;  for  which  reason  also  it  takes  ef¬ 
fect  in  a  moment,  or  at  least  a  very  short  space 
of  time.  We  are  wont  to  call  the  two  former  mo¬ 
tions  the  motions  of  the  generation  of  Jupiter, 
because  when  born  they  continue  to  exist;  and 
the  latter,  the  motion  of  the  generation  of  Sat¬ 
urn,  because  it  is  immediately  devoured  and 
absorbed.  It  may  be  seen  in  three  instances: 
1.  In  the  rays  of  light;  2.  in  the  percussions  of 
sounds;  3.  in  magnetic  attractions  as  regards 
communication.  For,  on  the  removal  of  light, 
colors  and  all  its  other  images  disappear,  as  on 
the  cessation  of  the  first  percussion  and  the  vi¬ 
bration  of  the  body,  sound  soon  fails,  and  al¬ 
though  sounds  are  agitated  by  the  wind,  like 
waves,  yet  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  same 
sound  does  not  last  during  the  whole  time  of 
the  reverberation.  Thus,  when  a  bell  is  struck, 


the  sound  appears  to  be  continued  for  a  con¬ 
siderable  time,  and  one  might  easily  be  led  into 
the  mistake  of  supposing  it  to  float  and  remain 
in  the  air  during  the  whole  time,  which  is  most 
erroneous.  For  the  reverberation  is  not  one 
identical  sound,  but  the  repetition  of  sounds, 
which  is  made  manifest  by  stopping  and  con¬ 
fining  the  sonorous  body;  thus,  if  a  bell  be 
stopped  and  held  tightly,  so  as  to  be  immov¬ 
able,  the  sound  fails,  and  there  is  no  further  re¬ 
verberation,  and  if  a  musical  string  be  touched 
after  the  first  vibration,  either  with  the  finger 
(as  in  the  harp),  or  a  quill  (as  in  the  harpsi¬ 
chord),  the  sound  immediately  ceases.  If  the 
magnet  be  removed  the  iron  falls.  The  moon, 
however,  cannot  be  removed  from  the  sea,  nor 
the  earth  from  a  heavy  falling  body,  and  we 
can,  therefore,  make  no  experiment  upon  them; 
but  the  case  is  the  same. 

Let  the  fourteenth  motion  be  that  configura¬ 
tion  or  position,  by  which  bodies  appear  to  de¬ 
sire  a  peculiar  situation,  collocation,  and  con¬ 
figuration  with  others,  rather  than  union  or 
separation.  This  is  a  very  abstruse  notion,  and 
has  not  been  well  investigated;  and,  in  some 
instances,  appears  to  occur  almost  without  any 
cause,  although  we  be  mistaken  in  supposing 
this  to  be  really  the  case.  For  if  it  be  asked, 
why  the  heavens  revolve  from  east  to  west,  ra¬ 
ther  than  from  west  to  east,  or  why  they  turn 
on  poles  situate  near  the  Bears,  rather  than 
round  Orion  or  any  other  part  of  the  heaven, 
such  a  question  appears  to  be  unreasonable, 
since  these  phenomena  should  be  received  as 
determinate  and  the  objects  of  our  experience. 
There  are,  indeed,  some  ultimate  and  self-ex¬ 
isting  phenomena  in  nature,  but  those  which  we 
have  just  mentioned  are  not  to  be  referred  to 
that  class:  for  we  attribute  them  to  a  certain 
harmony  and  consent  of  the  universe,  which  has 
not  yet  been  properly  observed.  But  if  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  earth  from  west  to  east  be  allowed, 
the  same  question  may  be  put,  for  it  must  also 
revolve  round  certain  poles,  and  why  should 
they  be  placed  where  they  are,  rather  than  else¬ 
where  ?  The  polarity  and  variation  of  the  needle 
come  under  our  present  head.  There  is  also  ob¬ 
served  in  both  natural  and  artificial  bodies,  es¬ 
pecially  solids  rather  than  fluids,  a  particular 
collocation  and  position  of  parts,  resembling 
hairs  or  fibres,  which  should  be  diligently  in¬ 
vestigated,  since,  without  a  discovery  of  them, 
bodies  cannot  be  conveniently  controlled  or 
wrought  upon.  The  eddies  observable  in  liquids 
by  which,  when  compressed,  they  successively 
raise  different  parts  of  their  mass  before  they 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


1 86 

can  escape,  so  as  to  equalize  the  pressure,  is 
more  correctly  assigned  to  the  motion  of  liberty. 

Let  the  fifteenth  motion  be  that  of  transmis¬ 
sion  or  of  passage,  by  which  the  powers  of  bod¬ 
ies  are  more  or  less  impeded  or  advanced  by  the 
medium,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  bodies 
and  their  effective  powers,  and  also  according 
to  that  of  the  medium.  For  one  medium  is 
adapted  to  light,  another  to  sound,  another  to 
heat  and  cold,  another  to  magnetic  action,  and 
so  on  with  regard  to  the  other  actions. 

Let  the  sixteenth  be  that  which  we  term  the 
royal  or  political  motion,  by  which  the  predom¬ 
inant  and  governing  parts  of  any  body  check, 
subdue,  reduce,  and  regulate  the  others,  and 
force  them  to  unite,  separate,  stand  still,  move, 
or  assume  a  certain  position,  not  from  any  in¬ 
clination  of  their  own,  but  according  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  order,  and  as  best  suits  the  convenience 
of  the  governing  part,  so  that  there  is  a  sort  of 
dominion  and  civil  government  exercised  by  the 
ruling  part  over  its  subjects.  The  motion  is  very 
conspicuous  in  the  spirits  of  animals,  where,  as 
long  as  it  is  in  force,  it  tempers  all  the  motions 
of  the  other  parts.  It  is  found  in  a  less  degree  in 
other  bodies,  as  we  have  observed  in  blood  and 
urine,  which  are  not  decomposed  until  the  spirit, 
which  mixed  and  retained  their  parts,  has  been 
emitted  or  extinguished.  Nor  is  this  motion  pe¬ 
culiar  to  spirits  only,  although  in  most  bodies 
the  spirit  predominates,  owing  to  its  rapid  mo¬ 
tion  and  penetration;  for  the  grosser  parts  pre¬ 
dominate  in  denser  bodies,  which  are  not  filled 
with  a  quick  and  active  spirit  (such  as  exists  in 
quicksilver  or  vitriol),  so  that  unless  this  check 
or  yoke  be  thrown  off  by  some  contrivance,  there 
is  no  hope  of  any  transformation  of  such  bodies. 
And  let  not  anyone  suppose  that  we  have  for¬ 
gotten  our  subject,  because  we  speak  of  pre¬ 
dominance  in  this  classification  of  motions, 
which  is  made  entirely  with  the  view  of  assist¬ 
ing  the  investigation  of  wrestling  instances,  or 
instances  of  predominance.  For  we  do  not  now 
treat  of  the  general  predominance  of  motions 
or  powers,  but  of  that  of  parts  in  whole  bodies, 
which  constitutes  the  particular  species  here 
considered. 

Let  the  seventeenth  motion  be  the  spontane¬ 
ous  motion  of  revolution,  by  which  bodies  hav¬ 
ing  a  tendency  to  move,  and  placed  in  a  favor¬ 
able  situation,  enjoy  their  peculiar  nature, 
pursuing  themselves  and  nothing  else,  and  seek¬ 
ing,  as  it  were,  to  embrace  themselves.  For 
bodies  seem  either  to  move  without  any  limit, 
or  to  tend  towards  a  limit,  arrived  at  which  they 
either  revolve  according  to  their  peculiar  na¬ 


ture,  or  rest.  Those  which  are  favorably  situ¬ 
ated,  and  have  a  tendency  to  motion,  move  in 
a  circle  with  an  eternal  and  unlimited  motion; 
those  which  are  favorably  situated  and  abhor 
motion,  rest.  Those  which  are  not  favorably 
situated  move  in  a  straight  line  (as  their  short¬ 
est  path),  in  order  to  unite  with  others  of  a  con¬ 
genial  nature.  This  motion  of  revolution  admits 
of  nine  differences:  I.  with  regard  to  the  centre 
about  which  the  bodies  move;  2.  the  poles  round 
which  they  move;  3.  the  circumference  or  orbit 
relatively  to  its  distance  from  the  centre;  4.  the 
velocity  or  greater  or  less  speed  with  which  they 
revolve;  5.  the  direction  of  the  motion  as  from 
east  to  west,  or  the  reverse;  6.  the  deviation 
from  a  perfect  circle,  by  spiral  lines  at  a  greater 
or  less  distance  from  the  centre;  7.  the  devia¬ 
tion  from  the  circle,  by  spiral  lines  at  a  greater 
or  less  distance  from  the  poles;  8.  the  greater  or 
less  distance  of  these  spirals  from  each  other; 
9.  and  lastly,  the  variation  of  the  poles  if  they 
be  movable;  which,  however,  only  affects  revo¬ 
lution  when  circular.  The  motion  in  question  is, 
according  to  common  and  long-received  opin¬ 
ion,  considered  to  be  that  of  the  heavenly  bod¬ 
ies.  There  exists,  however,  with  regard  to  this, 
a  considerable  dispute  between  some  of  the  an¬ 
cients  as  well  as  moderns,  who  have  attributed 
a  motion  of  revolution  to  the  earth.  A  much 
more  reasonable  controversy,  perhaps,  exists  (if 
it  be  not  a  matter  beyond  dispute),  whether  the 
motion  in  question  (on  the  hypothesis  of  the 
earth’s  being  fixed)  is  confined  to  the  heavens, 
or  rather  descends  and  is  communicated  to  the 
air  and  water.  The  rotation  of  missiles,  as  in 
darts,  musket-balls,  and  the  like,  we  refer  en¬ 
tirely  to  the  motion  of  liberty. 

Let  the  eighteenth  motion  b6  that  of  trepida¬ 
tion,  to  which  (in  the  sense  assigned  to  it  by 
astronomers)  we  do  not  give  much  credit;  but 
in  our  serious  and  general  search  after  the  ten¬ 
dencies  of  natural  bodies,  this  motion  occurs, 
and  appears  worthy  of  forming  a  distinct  spe¬ 
cies.  It  is  the  motion  of  an  (as  it  were)  eternal 
captivity;  when  bodies,  for  instance,  being 
placed  not  altogether  according  to  their  nature, 
and  yet  not  exactly  ill,  constantly  tremble,  and 
are  restless,  not  contented  with  their  position, 
and  yet  not  daring  to  advance.  Such  is  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  heart  and  pulse  of  animals,  and  it 
must  necessarily  occur  in  all  bodies  which  are 
situated  in  a  mean  state,  between  conveniences 
and  inconveniences;  so  that  beingremoved  from 
their  proper  position,  they  strive  to  escape,  are 
repulsed,  and  again  continue  to  make  the  at¬ 
tempt. 


SECOND  BOOK  187 


Let  the  nineteenth  and  last  motion  be  one 
which  can  scarcely  be  termed  a  motion,  and  yet 
is  one;  and  which  we  may  call  the  motion  of  re¬ 
pose,  or  of  abhorrence  of  motion.  It  is  by  this 
motion  that  the  earth  stands  by  its  own  weight, 
whilst  its  extremes  move  towards  the  middle, 
not  to  an  imaginary  centre,  but  in  order  to 
unite.  It  is  owing  to  the  same  tendency,  that  all 
bodies  of  considerable  density  abhor  motion, 
and  their  only  tendency  is  not  to  move,  which 
nature  they  preserve,  although  excited  and 
urged  in  a  variety  of  ways  to  motion.  But  if 
they  be  compelled  to  move,  yet  do  they  always 
appear  anxious  to  recover  their  former  state, 
and  to  cease  from  motion,  in  which  respect  they 
certainly  appear  active,  and  attempt  it  with 
sufficient  swiftness  and  rapidity,  as  if  fatigued, 
and  impatient  of  delay.  We  can  only  have  a 
partial  representation  of  this  tendency,  because 
with  us  every  tangible  substance  is  not  only  not 
condensed  to  the  utmost,  but  even  some  spirit 
is  added,  owing  to  the  action  and  concocting 
influence  of  the  heavenly  bodies. 

We  have  now,  therefore,  exhibited  the  spe¬ 
cies,  or  simple  elements  of  the  motions,  tenden¬ 
cies,  and  active  powers,  which  are  most  univer¬ 
sal  in  nature;  and  no  small  portion  of  natural 
science  has  been  thus  sketched  out.  We  do  not, 
however,  deny  that  other  instances  can  perhaps 
be  added,  and  our  divisions  changed  according 
to  some  more  natural  order  of  things,  and  also 
reduced  to  a  less  number;  in  which  respect  we 
do  not  allude  to  any  abstract  classification,  as 
if  one  were  to  say,  that  bodies  desire  the  pres¬ 
ervation,  exaltation,  propagation,  or  fruition  of 
their  nature;  or,  that  motion  tends  to  the  pres¬ 
ervation  and  benefit  either  of  the  universe  (as 
in  the  case  of  those  of  resistance  and  connec¬ 
tion),  or  of  extensive  wholes,  as  in  the  case  of 
those  of  the  greater  congregation,  revolution, 
and  abhorrence  of  motion,  or  of  particular 
forms,  as  in  the  case  of  the  others.  For  although 
such  remarks  be  just,  yet,  unless  they  terminate 
in  matter  and  construction,  according  to  true 
definitions,  they  are  speculative,  and  of  little 
use.  In  the  mean  time,  our  classification  will 
suffice,  and  be  of  much  use  in  the  consideration 
of  the  predominance  of  powers,  and  examining 
the  wrestling  instances  which  constitute  our 
present  subject. 

For  of  the  motions  here  laid  down,  some  are 
quite  invincible,  some  more  powerful  than  oth¬ 
ers,  which  they  confine,  check,  and  modify; 
others  extend  to  a  greater  distance,  others  are 
more  immediate  and  swift,  others  strengthen, 
increase,  and  accelerate  the  rest. 


The  motion  of  resistance  is  most  adamantine 
and  invincible.  We  are  yet  in  doubt  whether 
such  be  the  nature  of  that  of  connection;  for  we 
cannot  with  certainty  determine  whether  there 
be  a  vacuum,  either  extensive  or  intermixed 
with  matter.  Of  one  thing,  however,  we  are  sat¬ 
isfied,  that  the  reason  assigned  by  Leucippus 
and  Democritus  for  the  introduction  of  a  vacu¬ 
um  (namely,  that  the  same  bodies  could  not 
otherwise  comprehend,  and  fill  greater  and  less 
spaces)  is  false.  For  there  is  clearly  a  folding  of 
matter,  by  which  it  wraps  and  unwraps  itself 
in  space  within  certain  limits,  without  the  in¬ 
tervention  of  a  vacuum.  Nor  is  there  two  thou¬ 
sand  times  more  of  vacuum  in  air  than  in  gold, 
as  there  should  be  on  this  hypothesis;  a  fact 
demonstrated  by  the  very  powerful  energies  of 
fluids  (which  would  otherwise  float  like  fine  dust 
in  vacuo),  and  many  other  proofs.  The  other 
motions  direct,  and  are  directed  by  each  other, 
according  to  their  strength,  quantity,  excite¬ 
ment,  emission,  or  the  assistance  of  impedi¬ 
ments  they  meet  with. 

For  instance;  some  armed  magnets  hold  and 
support  iron  of  sixty  times  their  own  weight; 
so  far  does  the  motion  of  lesser  congregation 
predominate  over  that  of  the  greater;  but  if  the 
weight  be  increased,  it  yields.  A  lever  of  a  cer¬ 
tain  strength  will  raise  a  given  weight,  and  so 
far  the  motion  of  liberty  predominates  over 
that  of  the  greater  congregation,  but  if  the 
weight  be  greater,  the  former  motion  yields.  A 
piece  of  leather  stretched  to  a  certain  point 
does  not  break,  and  so  far  the  motion  of  con¬ 
tinuity  predominates  over  that  of  tension,  but 
if  the  tension  be  greater,  the  leather  breaks,  and 
the  motion  of  continuity  yields.  A  certain  quan¬ 
tity  of  water  flows  through  a  chink,  and  so  far 
the  motion  of  greater  congregation  predomi¬ 
nates  over  that  of  continuity,  but  if  the  chink 
be  smaller  it  yields.  If  a  musket  be  charged  with 
ball  and  powdered  sulphur  alone,  and  fire  be 
applied,  the  ball  is  not  discharged,  in  which 
case  the  motion  of  greater  congregation  over¬ 
comes  that  of  matter;  but  when  gunpowder  is 
used,  the  motion  of  matter  in  the  sulphur  pre¬ 
dominates,  being  assisted  by  that  motion,  and 
the  motion  of  avoidance  in  the  nitre;  and  so  of 
the  rest.  For  wrestling  instances(which  show 
the  predominance  of  powers,  and  in  what  man¬ 
ner  and  proportion  they  predominate  and  yield) 
must  be  searched  for  with  active  and  industri¬ 
ous  diligence. 

The  methods  and  nature  of  this  yielding  must 
also  be  diligently  examined,  as  for  instance, 
whether  the  motions  completely  cease,  or  exert 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


1 88 

themselves,  but  are  constrained.  For  in  the 
bodies  with  which  we  are  acquainted,  there  is 
no  real  but  an  apparent  rest,  either  in  the  whole 
or  in  parts.  This  apparent  rest  is  occasioned 
either  by  equilibrium,  or  the  absolute  predomin¬ 
ance  of  motions.  By  equilibrium,  as  in  the  scales 
ot  the  balance,  which  rest  if  the  weights  be  equal. 
By  predomi nance,  as  in  perforated  j ars,  in  which 
the  water  rests,  and  is  prevented  from  falling 
by  the  predominance  of  the  motion  of  connec¬ 
tion.  It  is,  however,  to  be  observed  (as  we  have 
said  before),  how  far  the  yielding  motions  ex¬ 
ert  themselves.  For  if  a  man  be  held  stretched 
out  on  the  ground  against  his  will,  with  arms 
and  legs  bound  down,  or  otherwise  confined, 
and  yet  strive  with  all  his  power  to  get  up,  the 
struggle  is  not  the  less,  although  ineffectual. 
The  real  state  of  the  case  (namely,  whether  the 
yielding  motion  be,  as  it  were,  annihilated  by 
the  predominance,  or  there  be  rather  a  contin¬ 
ued,  although  an  invisible  effort)  will,  perhaps, 
appear  in  the  concurrence  of  motions,  although 
it  escape  our  notice  in  their  conflict.  For  in¬ 
stance;  let  an  experiment  be  made  with  mus¬ 
kets;  whether  a  musket-ball,  at  its  utmost  range 
in  a  straight  line,  or  (as  it  is  commonly  called) 
point  blank,  strike  with  less  force  when  pro¬ 
jected  upwards,  where  the  motion  of  the  blow  is 
simple,  than  when  projected  down  wards, where 
the  motion  of  gravity  concurs  with  the  blow. 

The  rules  of  such  instances  of  predominance 
as  occur  should  be  collected:  such  as  the  follow¬ 
ing;  the  more  general  the  desired  advantage  is, 
the  stronger  will  be  the  motion;  the  motion  of 
connection,  for  instance,  which  relates  to  the 
intercourse  of  the  parts  of  the  universe,  is  more 
powerful  than  that  of  gravity,  which  relates  to 
the  intercourse  of  dense  bodies  only.  Again,  the 
desire  of  a  private  good  does  not  in  general  pre¬ 
vail  against  that  of  a  public  one,  except  where 
the  quantities  are  small.  Would  that  such  were 
the  case  in  civil  matters! 

49.  In  the  twenty-fifth  rank  of  prerogative 
instances  we  will  place  suggesting  instances; 
such  as  suggest,  or  point  out,  that  which  is  ad¬ 
vantageous  to  mankind;  for  bare  power  and 
knowledge  in  themselves  exalt  rather  than  en¬ 
rich  human  nature.  We  must,  therefore,  select 
from  the  general  store,  such  things  as  are  most 
useful  to  mankind.  We  shall  have  a  better  op¬ 
portunity  of  discussing  these  when  we  treat  of 
the  application  to  practice;  besides,  in  the  work 
of  interpretation,  we  leave  room,  on  every  sub¬ 
ject,  for  the  human  or  optative  chart;  for  it  is 
a  part  of  science  to  make  judicious  inquiries 
and  wishes. 


50.  In  the  twenty-sixth  rank  of  prerogative 
instances  we  will  place  the  generally  useful  in¬ 
stances.  They  are  such  as  relate  to  various 
points,  and  frequently  occur,  sparing  by  that 
means  considerable  labor  and  new  trials.  The 
proper  place  for  treating  of  instruments  and 
contrivances,  will  be  that  in  which  we  speak  of 
the  application  to  practice,  and  the  methods  of 
experiment.  All  that  has  hitherto  been  ascer¬ 
tained,  and  made  use  of,  will  be  described  in  the 
particular  history  of  each  art.  At  present,  we 
will  subjoin  a  few  general  examples  of  the  in¬ 
stances  in  question. 

Man  acts,  then,  upon  natural  bodies  (besides 
merely  bringing  them  together  or  removing, 
them)  by  seven  principal  methods:  I.  By  the 
exclusion  of  all  that  impedes  and  disturbs;  II. 
by  compression,  extension,  agitation,  and  the 
like;  III.  by  heat  and  cold;  IV.  by  detention  in 
a  suitable  place;  V.  by  checking  or  directing 
motion;  VI.  by  peculiar  harmonies;  VII.  by  a 
seasonable  and  proper  alternation,  series,  and 
succession  of  all  these,  or,  at  least,  of  some  of 
them. 

I.  With  regard  to  the  first — common  air, 
which  is  always  at  hand,  and  forces  its  admis¬ 
sion,  as  also  the  rays  of  the  heavenly  bodies, 
create  much  disturbance.  Whatever,  therefore, 
tends  to  exclude  them  may  well  be  considered 
as  generally  useful.  The  substance  and  thick¬ 
ness  of  vessels  in  which  bodies  are  placed  when 
prepared  for  operations  may  be  referred  to  this 
head.  So  also  may  the  accurate  methods  of  clos¬ 
ing  vessels  by  consolidation,  or  the  lutum  sa¬ 
piential,  as  the  chemists  call  it.  The  exclusion 
of  air  by  means  of  liquids  at  the  extremity  is 
also  very  useful,  as  when  they  pour  oil  on  wine, 
or  the  juices  of  herbs,  which  by  spreading  itself 
upon  the  top  like  a  cover,  preserves  them  un¬ 
injured  from  the  air.  Powders,  also,  are  service¬ 
able,  for  although  they  contain  air  mixed  up  in 
them,  yet  they  ward  off  the  power  of  the  mass 
of  circumambient  air,  which  is  seen  in  the  pres¬ 
ervation  of  grapes  and  other  fruits  in  sand  or 
flour.  Wax,  honey,  pitch,  and  other  resinous 
bodies,  are  well  used  in  order  to  make  the  ex¬ 
clusion  more  perfect,  and  to  remove  the  air  and 
celestial  influence.  We  have  sometimes  made 
an  experiment  by  placing  a  vessel  or  other  bod¬ 
ies  in  quicksilver,  the  most  dense  of  all  sub¬ 
stances  capable  of  being  poured  round  others. 
Grottoes  and  subterraneous  caves  are  of  great 
use  in  keeping  off  the  effects  of  the  sun,  and  the 
predatory  action  of  air,  and  in  the  north  of 
Germany  are  used  for  granaries.  The  deposit¬ 
ing  of  bodies  at  the  bottom  of  water  may  be  al- 


SECOND 

so  mentioned  here;  and  I  remember  having 
heard  of  some  bottles  of  wine  being  let  down 
into  a  deep  well  in  order  to  cool  them,  but  left 
there  by  chance,  carelessness,  and  forgetfulness, 
for  several  years,  and  then  taken  out;  by  which 
means  the  wine  not  only  escaped  becoming  flat 
or  dead,  but  was  much  more  excellent  in  flavor, 
arising  (as  it  appears)  from  a  more  complete 
mixture  of  its  parts.  But  if  the  case  require  that 
bodies  should  be  sunk  to  the  bottom  of  water, 
as  in  rivers  or  the  sea,  and  yet  should  not  touch 
the  water,  nor  be  enclosed  in  sealed  vessels,  but 
surrounded  only  by  air,  it  would  be  right  to  use 
that  vessel  which  has  been  sometimes  employed 
under  water  above  ships  that  have  sunk,  in  or¬ 
der  to  enable  the  divers  to  remain  below  and 
breathe  occasionally  by  turns.  It  was  of  the  fol¬ 
lowing  nature:  a  hollow  tub  of  metal  was 
formed,  and  sunk  so  as  to  have  its  bottom  par¬ 
allel  with  the  surface  of  the  water;  it  thus  car¬ 
ried  down  with  it  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea  all 
the  air  contained  in  the  tub.  It  stood  upon  three 
feet  (like  a  tripod),  being  of  rather  less  height 
than  a  man,  so  that,  when  the  diver  was  in  want 
of  breath,  he  could  put  his  head  into  the  hollow 
of  the  tub,  breathe,  and  then  continue  his  work. 
We  hear  that  some  sort  of  boat  or  vessel  has 
now  been  invented,  capable  of  carrying  men 
some  distance  under  water.  Any  bodies,  how¬ 
ever,  can  easily  be  suspended  under  some  such 
vessel  as  we  have  mentioned,  which  has  occa¬ 
sioned  our  remarks  upon  the  experiment. 

Another  advantage  of  the  careful  and  her- 
metical  closing  of  bodies  is  this;  not  only  the 
admission  of  external  air  is  prevented  (of  which 
we  have  treated),  but  the  spirit  of  bodies  also 
is  prevented  from  making  its  escape,  which  is 
an  internal  operation.  For  anyone  operating  on 
natural  bodies  must  be  certain  as  to  their  quan¬ 
tity,  and  that  nothing  has  evaporated  or  es¬ 
caped,  since  profound  alterations  take  place  in 
bodies,  when  art  prevents  the  loss  or  escape  of 
any  portion,  whilst  nature  prevents  their  anni¬ 
hilation.  With  regard  to  this  circumstance,  a 
false  idea  has  prevailed  (which  if  true  would 
make  us  despair  of  preserving  quantity  without 
diminution),  namely,  that  the  spirit  of  bodies, 
and  air  when  rarefied  by  a  great  degree  of  heat, 
cannot  be  so  kept  in  by  being  enclosed  in  any 
vessel  as  not  to  escape  by  the  small  pores.  Men 
are  led  into  this  idea  by  the  common  experi¬ 
ments  of  a  cup  inverted  over  water,  with  a  can¬ 
dle  or  piece  of  lighted  paper  in  it,  by  which  the 
water  is  drawn  up,  and  of  those  cups  which, 
when  heated,  draw  up  the  flesh.  For  they  think 
that  in  each  experiment  the  rarefied  air  escapes, 


BOOK  189 

and  that  its  quantity  is  therefore  diminished, 
by  which  means  the  water  or  flesh  rises  by  the 
motion  of  connection.  This  is,  however,  most 
incorrect.  For  the  air  is  not  diminished  in  quan¬ 
tity,  but  contracted  in  dimensions,  nor  does  this 
motion  of  the  rising  of  the  water  begin  till  the 
flame  is  extinguished,  or  the  air  cooled,  so  that 
physicians  place  cold  sponges,  moistened  with 
water,  on  the  cups,  in  order  to  increase  their 
attraction.  There  is,  therefore,  no  reason  why 
men  should  fear  much  from  the  ready  escape  of 
air:  for  although  it  be  true  that  the  most  solid 
bodies  have  their  pores,  yet  neither  air,  nor 
spirit,  readily  suffers  itself  to  be  rarefied  to  such 
an  extreme  degree;  just  as  water  will  not  escape 
by  a  small  chink. 

II.  With  regard  to  the  second  of  the  seven 
above-mentioned  methods,  we  must  especially 
observe,  that  compression  and  similar  violence 
have  a  most  powerful  effect  either  in  producing 
locomotion,  and  other  motions  of  the  same  na¬ 
ture,  as  may  be  observed  in  engines  and  projec¬ 
tiles,  or  in  destroying  the  organic  body,  and 
those  qualities,  which  consist  entirely  in  mo¬ 
tion  (for  all  life,  and  every  description  of  flame 
and  ignition  are  destroyed  by  compression, 
which  also  injures  and  deranges  every  machine) ; 
or  in  destroying  those  qualities  which  consist 
in  position  and  a  coarse  difference  of  parts,  as 
in  colors;  for  the  color  of  a  flower  when  whole, 
differs  from  that  it  presents  when  bruised,  and 
the  same  may  be  observed  of  whole  and  pow¬ 
dered  amber;  or  in  tastes,  for  the  taste  of  a  pear 
before  it  is  ripe,  and  of  the  same  pear  when 
bruised  and  softened,  is  different,  since  it  be¬ 
comes  perceptibly  more  sweet.  But  such  vio¬ 
lence  is  of  little  avail  in  the  more  noble  trans¬ 
formations  and  changes  of  homogeneous  bod¬ 
ies,  for  they  do  not,  by  such  means,  acquire  any 
constantly  and  permanently  new  state,  but  one 
that  is  transitory,  and  always  struggling  to  re¬ 
turn  to  its  former  habit  and  freedom.  It  would 
not,  however,  be  useless  to  make  some  more  dili¬ 
gent  experiments  with  regard  to  this;  whether, 
for  instance,  the  condensation  of  a  perfectly 
homogeneous  body  (such  as  air,  water,  oil,  and 
the  like)  or  their  rarefaction,  when  effected  by 
violence,  can  become  permanent,  fixed,  and,  as 
it  were,  so  changed,  as  to  become  a  nature.  This 
might  at  first  be  tried  by  simple  perseverance, 
and  then  by  means  of  helps  and  harmonies.  It 
might  readily  have  been  attempted  (if  we  had 
but  thought  of  it),  when  we  condensed  water 
(as  was  mentioned  above),  by  hammering  and 
compression,  until  it  burst  out.  For  we  ought 
to  have  left  the  flattened  globe  untouched  for 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


190 

some  days,  and  then  to  have  drawn  off  the  wa¬ 
ter,  in  order  to  try  whether  it  would  have  im¬ 
mediately  occupied  the  same  dimensions  as  it 
did  before  the  condensation.  If  it  had  not  done 
so,  either  immediately,  or  soon  afterwards,  the 
condensation  would  have  appeared  to  have 
been  rendered  constant;  if  not,  it  would  have 
appeared  that  a  restitution  took  place,  and  that 
the  condensation  had  been  transitory.  Some¬ 
thing  of  the  same  kind  might  have  been  tried 
with  the  glass  eggs;  the  egg  should  have  been 
sealed  up  suddenly  and  firmly,  after  a  complete 
exhaustion  of  the  air,  and  should  have  been  al¬ 
lowed  to  remain  so  for  some  days,  and  it  might 
then  have  been  tried  whether,  on  opening  the 
aperture,  the  air  wrould  be  drawn  in  with  a  hiss¬ 
ing  noise,  or  whether  as  much  water  would  be 
drawn  into  it  when  immersed,  as  would  have 
been  drawn  into  it  at  first,  if  it  had  not  contin¬ 
ued  sealed.  For  it  is  probable  (or,  at  least,  worth 
making  the  experiment)  that  this  might  have 
happened,  or  might  happen,  because  persever¬ 
ance  has  a  similar  effect  upon  bodies  which  are 
a  little  less  homogeneous.  A  stick  bent  together 
for  some  time  does  not  rebound,  which  is  not 
owing  to  any  loss  of  quantity  in  the  wood  dur¬ 
ing  the  time,  for  the  same  would  occur  (after  a 
larger  time)  in  a  plate  of  steel,  which  does  not 
evaporate.  If  the  experiment  of  simple  perse¬ 
verance  should  fail,  the  matter  should  not  be 
given  up,  but  other  means  should  be  employed. 
For  it  would  be  no  small  advantage,  if  bodies 
could  be  endued  with  fixed  and  constant  na¬ 
tures  by  violence.  Air  could  then  be  converted 
into  water  by  condensation,  with  other  similar 
effects;  for  man  is  more  the  master  of  violent 
motions  than  of  any  other  means. 

III.  The  third  of  our  seven  methods  is  re¬ 
ferred  to  that  great  practical  engine  of  nature, 
as  well  as  of  art,  cold  and  heat.  Here,  man’s 
power  limps,  as  it  were,  with  one  leg.  For  we 
possess  the  heat  of  fire,  which  is  infinitely  more 
powerful  and  intense  than  that  of  the  sun  (as 
it  reaches  us),  and  that  of  animals.  But  wTe  want 
cold,  except  such  as  we  can  obtain  in  winter,  in 
caverns,  or  by  surrounding  objects  with  snow 
and  ice,  which,  perhaps,  may  be  compared  in 
degree  with  the  noontide  heat  of  the  sun  in  trop¬ 
ical  countries,  increased  by  the  reflection  of 
mountains  and  walls.  For  this  degree  of  heat 
and  cold  can  be  borne  for  a  short  period  only 
by  animals,  yet  it  is  nothing  compared  with  the 
heat  of  a  burning  furnace,  or  the  corresponding 
degree  of  cold.  Everything  with  us  has  a  ten¬ 
dency  to  become  rarefied,  dry,  and  wasted,  and 
nothing  to  become  condensed  or  soft,  except  by 


mixtures,  and,  as  it  were,  spurious  methods.  In¬ 
stances  of  cold,  therefore,  should  be  searched 
for  most  diligently,  such  as  may  be  found  by 
exposing  bodies  upon  buildings  in  a  hard  frost, 
in  subterraneous  caverns,  by  surrounding  bod¬ 
ies  with  snow  and  ice  in  deep  places  excavated 
for  that  purpose,  by  letting  bodies  down  into 
wells,  by  burying  bodies  in  quicksilver  and 
metals,  by  immersing  them  in  streams  which 
petrify  wood,  by  burying  them  in  the  earth 
(which  the  Chinese  are  reported  to  do  with  their 
china,  masses  of  which,  made  for  that  purpose, 
are  said  to  remain  in  the  ground  for  forty  or 
fifty  years,  and  to  be  transmitted  to  their  heirs 
as  a  sort  of  artificial  mine),  and  the  like.  The 
condensations  which  take  place  in  nature,  by 
means  of  cold,  should  also  be  investigated,  that 
by  learning  their  causes,  they  may  be  intro¬ 
duced  into  the  arts;  such  as  are  observed  in  the 
exudation  of  marble  and  stones,  in  the  dewr  up¬ 
on  the  panes  of  glass  in  a  room  towards  morning 
after  a  frosty  night,  in  the  formation  and  the 
gathering  of  vapors  under  the  earth  into  water, 
whence  spring  fountains,  and  the  like. 

Besides  the  substances  which  are  cold  to  the 
touch,  there  are  others  which  have  also  the  ef¬ 
fect  of  cold,  and  condense;  they  appear,  howr- 
ever,  to  act  only  upon  the  bodies  of  animals, 
and  scarcely  any  further.  Of  these  we  have  many 
instances,  in  medicines  and  plasters.  Some  con¬ 
dense  the  flesh  and  tangible  parts,  such  as  as¬ 
tringent  and  inspissating  medicines,  others  the 
spirits,  such  as  soporifics.  There  are  twTo  modes 
of  condensing  the  spirits,  by  soporifics  or  pro¬ 
vocatives  to  sleep;  the  one  by  calming  the  mo¬ 
tion,  the  other  by  expelling  the  spirit.  The 
violet,  dried  roses,  lettuces,  and  other  benign 
or  mild  remedies,  by  their  friendly  and  gently 
cooling  vapors,  invite  the  spirits  to  unite,  and 
restrain  their  violent  and  perturbed  motion. 
Rosewater,  for  instance,  applied  to  the  nos¬ 
trils  in  fainting  fits,  causes  the  resolved  and  re¬ 
laxed  spirits  to  recover  themselves,  and,  as  it 
were,  cherishes  them.  But  opiates,  and  the  like, 
banish  the  spirits  by  their  malignant  and  hos¬ 
tile  quality.  If  they  be  applied,  therefore,  ex¬ 
ternally,  the  spirits  immediately  quit  the  part 
and  no  longer  readily  flow  into  it;  but  if  they 
be  taken  internally,  their  vapor,  mounting  to 
the  head,  expels,  in  all  directions,  the  spirits 
contained  in  the  ventricles  of  the  brain,  and 
since  these  spirits  retreat,  but  cannot  escape, 
they  consequently  meet  and  are  condensed,  and 
are  sometimes  completely  extinguished  and  suf¬ 
focated;  although  the  same  opiates,  when  taken 
in  moderation,  by  a  secondary  accident  (the 


SECOND  BOOK 


condensation  which  succeeds  their  union), 
strengthen  the  spirits,  render  them  more  ro¬ 
bust,  and  check  their  useless  and  inflammatory 
motion,  by  which  means  they  contribute  not  a 
little  to  the  cure  of  diseases,  and  the  prolonga¬ 
tion  of  life. 

The  preparations  of  bodies,  also,  for  the  re¬ 
ception  of  cold  should  not  be  omitted,  such  as 
that  water  a  little  warmed  is  more  easily  frozen 
than  that  which  is  quite  cold,  and  the  like. 

Moreover,  since  nature  supplies  cold  so  spar¬ 
ingly,  we  must  act  like  the  apothecaries,  who, 
when  they  cannot  obtain  any  simple  ingredi¬ 
ent,  take  a  succedaneum,  or  quid  pro  quo,  as 
they  term  it,  such  as  aloes  for  xylobalsamum, 
cassia  for  cinnamon.  In  the  same  manner  we 
should  look  diligently  about  us,  to  ascertain 
whether  there  may  be  any  substitutes  for  cold; 
that  is  to  say,  in  what  other  manner  condensa¬ 
tion  can  be  effected,  which  is  the  peculiar  oper¬ 
ation  of  cold.  Such  condensations  appear  hith¬ 
erto  to  be  of  four  kinds  only.  i.  By  simple  com¬ 
pression,  which  is  of  little  avail  towards  perma¬ 
nent  condensation,  on  account  of  the  elasticity 
of  substances,  but  may  still  however  be  of  some 
assistance.  2.  By  the  contraction  of  the  coarser, 
after  the  escape  or  departure  of  the  finer  parts 
of  a  given  body;  as  is  exemplified  in  induration 
by  fire,  and  the  repeated  heating  and  extin¬ 
guishing  of  metals,  and  the  like.  3.  By  the  co¬ 
hesion  of  the  most  solid  homogeneous  parts  of 
a  given  body,  which  were  previously  separated, 
and  mixed  with  others  less  solid,  as  in  the  re¬ 
turn  of  sublimated  mercury  to  its  simple  state, 
in  which  it  occupies  much  less  space  than  it  did 
in  powder,  and  the  same  may  be  observed  of 
the  cleansing  of  all  metals  from  their  dross.  4. 
By  harmony  or  the  application  of  substances 
which  condense  by  some  latent  power.  These 
harmonies  are  as  yet  but  rarely  observed,  at 
which  we  cannot  be  surprised,  since  there  is 
little  to  hope  for  from  their  investigation,  un¬ 
less  the  discovery  of  forms  and  confirmation  be 
attained.  With  regard  to  animal  bodies,  it  is 
not  to  be  questioned  that  there  are  many  in¬ 
ternal  and  external  medicines  which  condense 
by  harmony,  as  we  have  before  observed,  but 
this  action  is  rare  in  inanimate  bodies.  Written 
accounts,  as  well  as  report,  have  certainly  spo¬ 
ken  of  a  tree  in  one  of  the  Tercera  or  Canary 
Islands  (for  I  do  not  exactly  recollect  which) 
that  drips  perpetually,  so  as  to  supply  the  in¬ 
habitants  in  some  degree,  with  water;  and  Par¬ 
acelsus  says  that  the  herb  called  ros  solis  is 
filled  with  dew  at  noon,  whilst  the  sun  gives 
out  its  greatest  heat,  and  all  other  herbs  around 


it  are  dry.  We  treat  both  these  accounts  as  fa¬ 
bles;  they  would,  however,  if  true,  be  of  the 
most  important  service,  and  most  worthv  of 
examination.  As  to  the  honey-dew,  resembling 
manna,  which  is  found  in  May  on  the  leaves  of 
the  oak,  we  are  of  opinion  that  it  is  not  con¬ 
densed  by  any  harmony  or  peculiarity  of  the 
oak-leaf,  but  that  whilst  it  falls  equally  upon 
other  leaves  it  is  retained  and  continues  on  those 
of  the  oak,  because  their  texture  is  closer,  and 
not  so  porous  as  that  of  most  of  the  other 
leaves. 

With  regard  to  heat,  man  possesses  abundant 
means  and  power;  but  his  observation  and  in¬ 
quiry  are  defective  in  some  respects,  and  those 
of  the  greatest  importance,  notwithstanding 
the  boasting  of  quacks.  For  the  effects  of  in¬ 
tense  heat  are  examined  and  observed,  whilst 
those  of  a  more  gentle  degree  of  heat,  being  of 
the  most  frequent  occurrence  in  the  paths  of 
nature,  are,  on  that  very  account,  least  known. 
We  see,  therefore,  the  furnaces,  which  are  most 
esteemed,  employed  in  increasing  the  spirits  of 
bodies  to  a  great  extent,  as  in  the  strong  acids, 
and  some  chemical  oils;  whilst  the  tangible  parts 
are  hardened,  and,  when  the  volatile  part  has 
escaped,  become  sometimes  fixed;  the  homo¬ 
geneous  parts  are  separated,  and  the  hetero¬ 
geneous  incorporated  and  agglomerated  in  a 
coarse  lump;  and  (what  is  chiefly  worthy  of  re¬ 
mark)  the  junction  of  compound  bodies,  and 
the  more  delicate  conformations  are  destroyed 
and  confounded.  But  the  operation  of  a  less 
violent  heat  should  be  tried  and  investigated, 
by  which  more  delicate  mixtures,  and  regular 
conformations  may  be  produced  and  elicited, 
according  to  the  example  of  nature,  and  in  imi¬ 
tation  of  the  effect  of  the  sun,  which  we  have 
alluded  to  in  the  aphorism  on  the  instances  of 
alliance.  For  the  works  of  nature  are  carried  on 
in  much  smaller  portions,  and  in  more  delicate 
and  varied  positions  than  those  of  fire,  as  we 
now  employ  it.  But  man  will  then  appear  to  have 
really  augmented  his  power,  when  the  works  of 
nature  can  be  imitated  in  species,  perfected  in 
power,  and  varied  in  quantity;  to  which  should 
be  added  the  acceleration  in  point  of  time.  Rust, 
for  instance,  is  the  result  of  a  long  process,  but 
crocus  martis  is  obtained  immediately;  and  the 
same  may  be  observed  of  natural  verdigris  and 
ceruse.  Crystal  is  formed  slowly,  whilst  glass  is 
blown  immediately:  stones  increase  slowly 
whilst  bricks  are  baked  immediately,  etc.  In 
the  mean  time  (with  regard  to  our  present  sub¬ 
ject)  every  different  species  of  heat  should,  with 
its  peculiar  effects,  be  diligently  collected  and 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


192 

inquired  into;  that  of  the  heavenly  bodies, 
whether  their  rays  be  direct,  reflected,  or  re¬ 
fracted,  or  condensed  by  a  burning-glass;  that 
of  lightning,  flame,  and  ignited  charcoal;  that 
of  fire  of  different  materials,  either  open  or  con¬ 
fined,  straitened  or  overflowing,  qualified  by 
the  different  forms  of  the  furnaces,  excited  by 
the  bellows,  or  quiescent,  removed  to  a  greater 
or  less  distance,  or  passing  through  different 
media;  moist  heats,  such  as  the  balneum  Ma¬ 
ria*,  and  the  dunghill;  the  external  and  internal 
heat  of  animals;  dry  heats,  such  as  the  heat  of 
ashes,  lime,  warm  sand;  in  short,  the  nature  of 
every  kind  of  heat,  and  its  degrees. 

We  should,  however,  particularly  attend  to 
the  investigation  and  discovery  of  the  effects 
and  operations  of  heat,  when  made  to  approach 
and  retire  by  degrees,  regularly,  periodically, 
and  by  proper  intervals  of  space  and  time.  For 
this  systematical  inequality  is  in  truth  the 
daughter  of  heaven  and  mother  of  generation, 
nor  can  any  great  result  be  expected  from  a 
vehement,  precipitate,  or  desultory  heat.  For 
this  is  not  only  most  evident  in  vegetables,  but 
in  the  wombs  of  animals  also  there  arises  a  great 
inequality  of  heat,  from  the  motion,  sleep,  food, 
and  passions  of  the  female.  The  same  inequality 
prevails  in  those  subterraneous  beds  where  met¬ 
als  and  fossils  are  perpetually  forming,  which 
renders  yet  more  remarkable  the  ignorance  of 
some  of  the  reformed  alchemists,  who  imagined 
they  could  attain  their  object  by  the  equable 
heat  of  lamps,  or  the  like,  burning  uniformly. 
Let  this  suffice  concerning  the  operation  and 
effects  of  heat;  nor  is  it  time  for  us  to  investi¬ 
gate  them  thoroughly  before  the  forms  and 
conformations  of  bodies  have  been  further  ex¬ 
amined  and  brought  to  light.  When  we  have 
determined  upon  our  models,  we  may  seek,  ap¬ 
ply,  and  arrange  our  instruments. 

IV.  The  fourth  mode  of  action  is  by  continu¬ 
ance,  the  very  steward  and  almoner,  as  it  were, 
of  nature.  We  apply  the  term  continuance  to 
the  abandonment  of  a  body  to  itself  for  an  ob¬ 
servable  time,  guarded  and  protected  in  the 
mean  while  from  all  external  force.  For  the  in¬ 
ternal  motion  then  commences  to  betray  and 
exert  itself  when  the  external  and  adventitious 
is  removed.  The  effects  of  time,  however,  are 
far  more  delicate  than  those  of  fire.  Wine,  for 
instance,  cannot  be  clarified  by  fire  as  it  is  by 
continuance.  Nor  are  the  ashes  produced  by 
combustion  so  fine  as  the  particles  dissolved  or 
wasted  by  the  lapse  of  ages.  The  incorporations 
and  mixtures,  which  are  hurried  by  fire,  are 
very  inferior  to  those  obtained  by  continuance; 


and  the  various  conformations  assumed  by  bod¬ 
ies  left  to  themselves,  such  as  mouldiness,  etc., 
are  put  a  stop  to  by  fire  or  a  strong  heat.  It  is 
not,  in  the  mean  time,  unimportant  to  remark 
that  there  is  a  certain  degree  of  violence  in  the 
motion  of  bodies  entirely  confined;  for  the  con¬ 
finement  impedes  the  proper  motion  of  the 
body.  Continuance  in  an  open  vessel,  there¬ 
fore,  is  useful  for  separations,  and  in  one  her¬ 
metically  sealed  for  mixtures,  that  in  a  vessel 
partly  closed,  but  admitting  the  air,  for  putre¬ 
faction.  But  instances  of  the  operation  and  ef¬ 
fect  of  continuance  must  be  collected  diligently 
from  every  quarter. 

.  The  direction  of  motion  (which  is  the  fifth 
method  of  action)  is  of  no  small  use.  We  adopt 
this  term,  when  speaking  of  a  body  which,  meet¬ 
ing  with  another,  either  arrests,  repels,  allows, 
or  directs  its  original  motion.  This  is  the  case 
principally  in  the  figure  and  position  of  vessels. 
An  upright  cone,  for  instance,  promotes  the 
condensation  of  vapor  in  alembics,  but  when 
reversed,  as  in  inverted  vessels,  it  assists  the 
refining  of  sugar.  Sometimes  a  curved  form,  or 
one  alternately  contracted  and  dilated,  is  re¬ 
quired.  Strainers  may  be  ranged  under  this 
head,  where  the  opposed  body  opens  a  way  for 
one  portion  of  another  substance  and  impedes 
the  rest.  Nor  is  this  process  or  any  other  direc¬ 
tion  of  motion  carried  on  externally  only,  but 
sometimes  by  one  body  within  another.  Thus, 
pebbles  are  thrown  into  water  to  collect  the 
muddy  particles,  and  syrups  are  refined  by  the 
white  of  an  egg,  which  glues  the  grosser  par¬ 
ticles  together  so  as  to  facilitate  their  removal. 
Telesius,  indeed,  rashly  and  ignorantly  enough 
attributes  the  formation  of  animals  to  this 
cause,  by  means  of  the  channels  and  folds  of 
the  womb.  He  ought  to  have  observed  a  simi¬ 
lar  formation  of  the  young  in  eggs  which  have 
no  wrinkles  or  inequalities.  One  may  observe  a 
real  result  of  this  direction  of  motion  in  casting 
and  modelling. 

VI.  The  effects  produced  by  harmony  and 
aversion  (which  is  the  sixth  method)  are  fre¬ 
quently  buried  in  obscurity;  for  these  occult 
and  specific  properties  (as  they  are  termed), 
the  sympathies  and  antipathies,  are  for  the 
most  part  but  a  corruption  of  philosophy.  Nor 
can  we  form  any  great  expectation  of  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  harmony  w7hich  exists  between 
natural  objects,  before  that  of  their  forms  and 
simple  conformations,  for  it  is  nothing  more 
than  the  symmetry  between  these  forms  and 
conformations. 

The  greater  and  more  universal  species  of 


SECOND  BOOK  193 


harmony  are  not,  however,  so  wholly  obscure, 
and  with  them,  therefore,  we  must  commence. 
The  first  and  principal  distinction  between  them 
is  this;  that  some  bodies  differ  considerably  in 
the  abundance  and  rarity  of  their  substance, 
but  correspond  in  their  conformation;  others, 
on  the  contrary,  correspond  in  the  former  and 
differ  in  the  latter.  Thus  the  chemists  have  well 
observed,  that  in  their  trial  of  first  principles 
sulphur  and  mercury,  as  it  were,  pervade  the 
universe;  their  reasoning  about  salt,  however, 
is  absurd,  and  merely  introduced  to  compro¬ 
mise  earthy  dry  fixed  bodies.  In  the  other  two, 
indeed,  one  of  the  most  universal  species  of  nat¬ 
ural  harmony  manifests  itself.  Thus  there  is  a 
correspondence  between  sulphur,  oil,  greasy  ex¬ 
halations,  flame,  and,  perhaps,  the  substance 
of  the  stars.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  like 
correspondence  between  mercury,  water,  aque¬ 
ous  vapor,  air,  and  perhaps  pure  inter-sidereal 
ether.  Yet  do  these  two  quaternions,  or  great 
natural  tribes  (each  within  its  own  limits),  dif¬ 
fer  immensely  in  quantity  and  density  of  sub¬ 
stance,  whilst  they  generally  agree  in  confor¬ 
mation,  as  is  manifest  in  many  instances.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  metals  agree  in  such  quan¬ 
tity  and  density  (especially  when  compared  with 
vegetables,  etc.),  but  differ  in  many  respects  in 
conformation.  Animals  and  vegetables,  in  like 
manner,  vary  in  their  almost  infinite  modes  of 
conformation,  but  range  within  very  limited 
degrees  of  quantity  and  density  of  substance. 

The  next  most  general  correspondence  is  that 
between  individual  bodies  and  those  which  sup¬ 
ply  them  by  way  of  menstruum  or  support.  In¬ 
quiry,  therfore,  must  be  made  as  to  the  climate, 
soil,  and  depth  at  which  each  metal  is  gener¬ 
ated,  and  the  same  of  gems,  whether  produced 
in  rocks  or  mines,  also  as  to  the  soil  in  which 
particular  trees,  shrubs,  and  herbs,  mostly  grow 
and,  as  it  were,  delight;  and  as  to  the  best  spe¬ 
cies  of  manure,  whether  dung,  chalk,  sea  sand, 
or  ashes,  etc.,  and  their  different  propriety  and 
advantage  according  to  the  variety  of  soils.  So 
also  the  grafting  and  setting  of  trees  and  plants 
(as  regards  the  readiness  of  grafting  one  par¬ 
ticular  species  on  another)  depends  very  much 
upon  harmony,  and  it  would  be  amusing  to  try 
an  experiment  I  have  lately  heard  of,  in  graft¬ 
ing  forest  trees  (garden  trees  alone  having  hith¬ 
erto  been  adopted),  by  which  means  the  leaves 
and  fruit  are  enlarged,  and  the  trees  produce 
more  shade.  The  specific  food  of  animals  again 
should  be  observed,  as  well  as  that  which  can¬ 
not  be  used.  Thus  the  carnivorous  cannot  be 
fed  on  herbs,  for  which  reason  the  order  of 


feuilletans,  the  experiment  having  been  made, 
has  nearly  vanished;  human  nature  being  in¬ 
capable  of  supporting  their  regimen,  although 
the  human  will  has  more  power  over  the  bodily 
frame  than  that  of  other  animals.  The  different 
kinds  of  putrefaction  from  which  animals  are 
generated  should  be  noted. 

The  harmony  of  principal  bodies  with  those 
subordinate  to  them  (such  indeed  may  be 
deemed  those  we  have  alluded  to  above)  are 
sufficiently  manifest,  to  which  may  be  added 
those  that  exist  between  different  bodies  and 
their  objects,  and,  since  these  latter  are  more 
apparent,  they  may  throw  great  light  when 
well  observed  and  diligently  examined  upon 
those  which  are  more  latent. 

The  more  internal  harmony  and  aversion,  or 
friendship  and  enmity  (for  superstition  and 
folly  have  rendered  the  terms  of  sympathy  and 
antipathy  almost  disgusting)  have  been  either 
falsely  assigned,  or  mixed  with  fable,  or  most 
rarely  discovered  from  neglect.  For  if  one  were 
to  allege  that  there  is  an  enmity  between  the 
vine  and  the  cabbage,  because  they  will  not 
come  up  well  when  sown  together,  there  is  a 
sufficient  reason  for  it  in  the  succulent  and  ab¬ 
sorbent  nature  of  each  plant,  so  that  the  one 
defrauds  the  other.  Again,  if  one  were  to  say 
that  there  is  a  harmony  and  friendship  between 
the  corn  and  the  corn-flower,  or  the  wild  poppy, 
because  the  latter  seldom  grow  anywhere  but 
in  cultivated  soils,  he  ought  rather  to  say,  there 
is  an  enmity  between  them,  for  the  poppy  and 
the  corn-flower  are  produced  and  created  by 
those  juices  which  the  corn  has  left  and  rejected, 
so  that  the  sowing  of  the  corn  prepares  the 
ground  for  their  production.  And  there  are  a 
vast  number  of  similar  false  assertions.  As  for 
fables,  they  must  be  totally  exterminated. 
There  remains,  then,  but  a  scanty  supply  of 
such  species  of  harmony  as  has  borne  the  test 
of  experiment,  such  as  that  between  the  mag¬ 
net  and  iron,  gold  and  quicksilver,  and  the  like. 
In  chemical  experiments  on  metals,  however, 
there  are  some  others  worthy  of  notice,  but  the 
greatest  abundance  (where  the  whole  are  so 
few  in  numbers)  is  discovered  in  certain  medi¬ 
cines,  which,  from  their  occult  and  specific  qual¬ 
ities  (as  they  are  termed),  affect  particular 
limbs,  humors,  diseases,  or  constitutions.  Nor 
should  we  omit  the  harmony  between  the  mo¬ 
tion  and  phenomena  of  the  moon,  and  their 
effects  on  lower  bodies,  which  may  be  brought 
together  by  an  accurate  and  honest  selection 
from  the  experiments  of  agriculture,  naviga¬ 
tion,  and  medicine,  or  of  other  sciences.  By  as 


NOVUM  ORGANUM 


much  as  these  general  instances,  however,  of 
more  latent  harmony,  are  rare,  with  so  much 
the  more  diligence  are  they  to  be  inquired  after, 
through  tradition,  and  faithful  and  honest  re¬ 
ports,  but  without  rashness  and  credulity,  with 
an  anxious  and,  as  it  were,  hesitating  degree  of 
reliance.  There  remains  one  species  of  harmony 
which,  though  simple  in  its  mode  of  action,  is 
yet  most  valuable  in  its  use,  and  must  by  no 
means  be  omitted,  but  rather  diligently  inves¬ 
tigated.  It  is  the  ready  or  difficult  coition  or 
union  of  bodies  in  composition,  or  simple  jux¬ 
taposition.  For  some  bodies  readily  and  will¬ 
ingly  mix,  and  are  incorporated,  others  tardily 
and  perversely;  thus  powders  mix  best  with 
water,  chalk  and  ashes  with  oils,  and  the  like. 
Nor  are  these  instances  of  readiness  and  aver¬ 
sion  to  mixture  to  be  alone  collected,  but  others, 
also,  of  the  collocation,  distribution,  and  diges¬ 
tion  of  the  parts  when  mingled,  and  the  pre¬ 
dominance  after  the  mixture  is  complete. 

VII.  Lastly,  there  remains  the  seventh,  and 
last  of  the  seven,  modes  of  action;  namely  that 
by  the  alternation  and  interchange  of  the  other 
six;  but  of  this,  it  will  not  be  the  right  time  to 
offer  any  examples,  until  some  deeper  investi¬ 
gation  shall  have  taken  place  of  each  of  the 
others.  The  series,  or  chain  of  this  alternation, 
in  its  mode  of  application  to  separate  effects, 
is  no  less  powerful  in  its  operation,  than  diffi¬ 
cult  to  be  traced.  But  men  are  possessed  with 
the  most  extreme  impatience,  both  of  such  in¬ 
quiries,  and  their  practical  application,  al¬ 
though  it  be  the  clue  of  the  labyrinth  in  all 
greater  works.  Thus  far  of  the  generally  useful 
instances. 

5 1 .  The  twenty-seventh  and  last  place  we  will 
assign  to  the  magical  instances,  a  term  which 
we  apply  to  those  where  the  matter  or  efficient 
agent  is  scanty  or  small,  in  comparison  with 
the  grandeur  of  the  work  or  effect  produced;  so 
that  even  when  common  they  appear  miracu¬ 
lous,  some  at  first  sight,  others  even  upon  more 
attentive  observation.  Nature,  however,  of  her¬ 
self,  supplies  these  but  sparingly.  What  she 
will  do  when  her  whole  store  is  thrown  open, 
and  after  the  discovery  of  forms,  processes,  and 
conformation,  will  appear  hereafter.  As  far  as 
we  can  yet  conjecture,  these  magic  effects  are 
produced  in  three  ways,  either  by  self-multi¬ 
plication,  as  in  fire,  and  the  poisons  termed 
specific,  and  the  motions  transferred  and  mul¬ 
tiplied  from  wheel  to  wheel;  or  by  the  excite¬ 
ment,  or,  as  it  were,  invitation  of  another 
substance,  as  in  the  magnet,  which  excites  in¬ 
numerable  needles  without  losing  or  diminish¬ 


ing  its  power;  and  again  in  leaven,  and  the  like; 
or  by  the  excess  of  rapidity  of  one  species  of 
motion  over  another,  as  has  been  observed  in 
the  case  of  gunpowder,  cannon,  and  mines.  The 
two  former  require  an  investigation  of  harmo¬ 
nies,  the  latter  of  a  measure  of  motion.  Whether 
there  be  any  mode  of  changing  bodies  per  min¬ 
ima  (as  it  is  termed),  and  transferring  the  deli¬ 
cate  conformations  of  matter,  which  is  of  im¬ 
portance  in  all  transformations  of  bodies,  so  as 
to  enable  art  to  effect,  in  a  short  time,  that 
which  nature  works  out  by  divers  expedients, 
is  a  point  of  which  we  have  as  yet  no  indication. 
But,  as  we  aspire  to  the  extremest  and  highest 
results  in  that  which  is  solid  and  true,  so  do  we 
ever  detest,  and,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  expel  all 
that  is  empty  and  vain. 

52.  Let  this  suffice  as  to  the  respective  digni¬ 
ty  of  prerogatives  of  instances.  But  it  must  be 
noted,  that  in  this  our  organ,  we  treat  of  logic, 
and  not  of  philosophy.  Seeing,  however,  that  our 
logic  instructs  and  informs  the  understanding, 
in  order  that  it  may  not,  with  the  small  hooks,  as 
it  were,  of  the  mind,  catch  at  and  grasp  mere  ab¬ 
stractions,  but  rather  actually  penetrate  nature, 
and  discover  the  properties  and  effects  of  bod¬ 
ies,  and  the  determinate  laws  of  their  substance 
(so  that  this  science  of  ours  springs  from  the  na¬ 
ture  of  things,  as  well  as  from  that  of  the  mind); 
it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  if  it  have  been  continu¬ 
ally  interspersed  and  illustrated  with  natural  ob¬ 
servations  and  experiments,  as  instances  of  our 
method.  The  prerogative  instances  are,  as  ap¬ 
pears  from  what  has  preceded,  twenty-seven  in 
number,  and  are  termed,  solitary  instances,  mi¬ 
grating  instances,  conspicuous  instances,  clan¬ 
destine  instances,  constitutive  instances,  simi¬ 
lar  instances,  singular  instances,  deviating  in¬ 
stances,  bordering  instances,  instances  of  power, 
accompanying  and  hostile  instances,  subjunc¬ 
tive  instances,  instances  of  alliance,  instances  of 
the  cross,  instances  of  divorce,  instances  of  the 
gate,  citing  instances,  instances  of  the  road,  sup¬ 
plementary  instances,  lancing  instances,  instan¬ 
ces  of  the  rod,  instances  of  the  course,  doses  of 
nature,  wrestling  instances,  suggesting  instan¬ 
ces,  generally  useful  instances,  and  magical  in¬ 
stances.  Thead  vantage,  by  which  theseinstances 
excel  the  more  ordinary,  regards  specifically 
either  theory  or  practice,  or  both.  With  regard 
to  theory,  they  assist  either  the  senses  or  the  un¬ 
derstanding;  the  senses,  as  in  the  five  instances 
of  the  lamp;  the  understanding,  either  by  expe¬ 
diting  the  exclusive  mode  of  arriving  at  the  form, 
as  in  solitary  instances,  or  by  confining,  and  more 
immediately  indicating  the  affirmative,  as  in  the 


SECOND  BOOK 


migrating, conspicuous, accompanying, and  sub¬ 
junctive  instances;  or  by  elevating  the  under¬ 
standing,  and  leading  it  to  general  and  common 
natures,  and  that  either  immediately,  as  in  the 
clandestine  and  singular  instances,  and  those  of 
alliance;  or  very  nearly  so,  as  in  the  constitutive; 
or  still  less  so,  as  in  the  similar  instances;  or  by 
correcting  the  understanding  of  its  habits,  as 
in  the  deviating  instances;  or  by  leading  to  the 
grand  form  or  fabric  of  the  universe,  as  in  the  bor¬ 
dering  instances;  or  by  guarding  it  from  false 
forms  and  causes,  as  in  those  of  the  cross  and 
of  divorce.  With  regard  to  practice,  they  either 
point  it  out,  or  measure,  or  elevate  it.  They  point 
it  out,  either  bv  showing  where  we  must  com¬ 
mence  in  order  not  to  repeat  the  labors  of  others, 
as  in  the  instances  of  power;  or  by  inducing  us 
to  aspire  to  that  which  may  be  possible,  as  in 
the  suggesting  instances;  the  four  mathematical 
instances  measure  it.  The  generally  useful  and 
the  magical  elevate  it. 

Again,  out  of  these  twenty-seven  instances, 
some  must  be  collected  immediately,  without 
waiting  for  a  particular  investigation  of  proper¬ 
ties.  Such  are  the  similar,  singular,  deviating, 
and  bordering  instances,  those  of  power,  and  of 
the  gate,  and  suggesting,  generally  useful,  and 
magical  instances ;  for  these  either  assist  and  cure 
the  understanding  and  senses,  or  furnish  our  gen¬ 
eral  practice.  The  remainder  are  to  be  collected 
when  we  finish  our  synoptical  tables  for  the  work 
of  the  interpreter,  upon  any  particular  nature; 


for  these  instances,  honored  and  gifted  with  such 
prerogatives,  are  like  the  soul  amid  the  vulgar 
crowd  of  instances,  and  (as  we  from  the  first  ob¬ 
served)  a  few  of  them  are  worth  a  multitude  of 
the  others.  When,  therefore,  we  are  forming  our 
tables  they  must  be  searched  out  with  the  great¬ 
est  zeal,  and  placed  in  the  table.  And,  since  men¬ 
tion  must  be  made  of  them  in  what  follows,  a 
treatise  upon  their  nature  has  necessarily  been 
prefixed.  We  must  next,  however,  proceed  to  the 
supports  and  corrections  of  induction,  and 
thence  to  concretes,  the  latent  process,  and  la¬ 
tent  conformations,  and  the  other  matters 
which  we  have  enumerated  in  their  order  in  the 
twenty-first  aphorism,  in  order  that,  like  good 
and  faithful  guardians,  we  may  yield  up  their 
fortune  to  mankind  upon  the  emancipation  and 
majority  of  their  understanding;  from  which 
must  necessarily  follow  an  improvement  of  their 
estate,  and  an  increase  of  their  power  over  na¬ 
ture.  For  man,  by  the  fall,  lost  at  once  his  state 
of  innocence,  and  his  empire  over  creation,  both 
of  which  can  be  partially  recovered  even  in  this 
life,  the  first  by  religion  and  faith,  the  second 
by  the  arts  and  sciences.  For  creation  did  not 
become  entirely  and  utterly  rebellious  by  the 
curse,  but  in  consequence  of  the  Divine  decree, 
“in  the  sweat  of  thy  brow  shalt  thou  eat  bread,” 
she  is  compelled  by  our  labors  (not  assuredly 
by  our  disputes  or  magical  ceremonies),  at  length 
to  afford  mankind  in  some  degree  his  bread,  that 
is  to  say,  to  supply  man’s  daily  wants. 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


We  sailed  from  Peru  (where  we  had  continued 
by  the  space  of  one  whole  year)  for  China  and 
Japan,  by  the  South  Sea,  taking  with  us  vict¬ 
uals  for  twelve  months;  and  had  good  winds 
from  the  east,  though  soft  and  weak,  for  five 
months’  space  and  more.  But  then  the  wind 
came  about,  and  settled  in  the  west  for  many 
days,  so  as  we  could  make  little  or  no  way,  and 
were  sometimes  in  purpose  to  turn  back.  But 
then  again  there  arose  strong  and  great  winds 
from  the  south,  with  a  point  east;  which  car¬ 
ried  us  up,  for  all  that  we  could  do,  towards 
the  north:  by  which  time  our  victuals  failed  us, 
though  we  had  made  good  spare  of  them.  So 
that  finding  ourselves,  in  the  midst  of  the 
greatest  wilderness  of  waters  in  the  world, 
without  victual,  we  gave  ourselves  for  lost  men, 
and  prepared  for  death.  Yet  we  did  lift  up  our 
hearts  and  voices  to  God  above,  who  “showeth 
His  wonders  in  the  deep”;  beseeching  Him  of 
His  mercy,  that  as  in  the  beginning  He  discov¬ 
ered  the  face  of  the  deep,  and  brought  forth 
dry  land,  so  He  would  now  discover  land  to  us, 
that  we  might  not  perish. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  next  day  about 
evening  we  saw  within  a  kenning  before  us, 
towards  the  north,  as  it  were  thick  clouds, 
which  did  put  us  in  some  hope  of  land;  know¬ 
ing  how  that  part  of  the  South  Sea  was  utterly 
unknown;  and  might  have  islands  or  conti¬ 
nents  that  hitherto  were  not  come  to  light. 
Wherefore  we  bent  our  course  thither,  where 
we  saw  the  appearance  of  land,  all  that  night; 
and  in  the  dawning  of  the  next  day,  we  might 
plainly  discern  that  it  was  a  land,  flat  to  our 
sight,  and  full  of  boscage,  which  made  it  show 
the  more  dark.  And  after  an  hour  and  a  half’s 
sailing,  we  entered  into  a  good  haven,  being 
the  port  of  a  fair  city:  not  great  indeed,  but 
well  built,  and  that  gave  a  pleasant  view  from 
the  sea.  And  we  thinking  every  minute  long 
till  we  were  on  land,  came  close  to  the  shore 
and  offered  to  land.  But  straightways  we  saw 
divers  of  the  people,  with  bastons  in  their 
hands,  as  it  were,  forbidding  us  toland:  yet  with¬ 
out  any  cries  or  fierceness,  but  only  as  warning 


us  off,  by  signs  that  they  made.  Whereupon  be¬ 
ing  not  a  little  discomforted,  we  were  advising 
with  ourselves  what  we  should  do. 

During  which  time  there  made  forth  to  us  a 
small  boat,  with  about  eight  persons  in  it, 
whereof  one  of  them  had  in  his  hand  a  tipstaff 
of  a  yellow  cane,  tipped  at  both  ends  with 
blue,  who  came  aboard  our  ship,  without  any 
show  of  distrust  at  all.  And  when  he  saw  one 
of  our  number  present  himself  somewhat  afore 
the  rest,  he  drew  forth  a  little  scroll  of  parch¬ 
ment  (somewhat  yellower  than  our  parch¬ 
ment,  and  shining  like  the  leaves  of  writing 
tables,  but  otherwise  soft  and  flexible),  and 
delivered  it  to  our  foremost  man.  In  which 
scroll  were  written  in  ancient  Hebrew,  and  in 
ancient  Greek,  and  in  good  Latin  of  the  School, 
and  in  Spanish,  these  words:  “Land  ye  not, 
none  of  you,  and  provide  to  be  gone  from  this 
coast  within  sixteen  days,  except  you  have  fur¬ 
ther  time  given  you.  Meanwhile,  if  you  want 
fresh  water,  or  victual,  or  help  for  your  sick,  or 
that  your  ship  needeth  repair,  write  down  your 
wants,  and  you  shall  have  that  which  belongeth 
to  mercy.”  This  scroll  was  signed  with  a  stamp 
of  cherubin’s  wings,  not  spread,  but  hanging 
downwards;  and  by  them  a  cross.  This  being 
delivered,  the  officer  returned,  and  left  only  a 
servant  with  us  to  receive  our  answer. 

Consulting  hereupon  amongst  ourselves,  we 
were  much  perplexed.  The  denial  of  landing, 
and  hasty  warning  us  away,  troubled  us  much: 
on  the  other  side,  to  find  that  the  people  had 
languages,  and  were  so  full  of  humanity,  did 
comfort  us  not  a  little.  And  above  all,  the  sign 
of  the  Cross  to  that  instrument,  was  to  us  a 
great  rejoicing,  and  as  it  were  a  certain  presage 
of  good.  Our  answer  was  in  the  Spanish  tongue, 
“That  for  our  ship,  it  was  well:  for  we  had 
rather  met  with  calms  and  contrary  winds, 
than  any  tempests.  For  our  sick,  they  were 
many,  and  in  very  ill  case;  so  that  if  they  were 
not  permitted  to  land,  they  ran  in  danger  of 
their  lives.”  Our  other  wants  we  set  down  in 
particular,  adding,  “That  we  had  some  little 
store  of  merchandize,  which  if  it  pleased  them 


200 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


to  deal  for,  it  might  supply  our  wants,  without 
being  chargeable  unto  them.”  We  offered  some 
reward  in  pistolets  unto  the  servant,  and  a 
piece  of  crimson  velvet  to  be  presented  to  the 
officer:  but  the  servant  took  them  not,  nor 
would  scarce  look  upon  them;  and  so  left  us, 
and  went  back  in  another  little  boat  which  was 
sent  for  him. 

About  three  hours  after  we  had  dispatched 
our  answer  there  came  towards  us  a  person  (as 
it  seemed)  of  place.  He  had  on  him  a  gown 
with  wide  sleeves,  of  a  kind  of  water  chamolet, 
of  an  excellent  azure  colour,  far  more  glossy 
than  ours:  his  under  apparel  was  green,  and  so 
was  his  hat,  being  in  the  form  of  a  turban, 
daintily  made,  and  not  so  huge  as  the  Turkish 
turbans;  and  the  locks  of  his  hair  came  down 
below  the  brims  of  it.  A  reverend  man  was  he 
to  behold.  He  came  in  a  boat,  gilt  in  some  parts 
of  it,  with  four  persons  more  only  in  that  boat; 
and  was  followed  by  another  boat,  wherein 
were  some  twenty.  When  he  was  come  within 
a  flight-shot  of  our  ship,  signs  were  made  to  us 
that  we  should  send  forth  some  to  meet  him 
upon  the  water,  which  we  presently  did  in  our 
ship-boat,  sending  the  principal  man  amongst 
us  save  one,  and  four  of  our  number  with  him. 

When  we  were  come  within  six  yards  of 
their  boat,  they  called  to  us  to  stay,  and  not  to 
approach  farther,  which  we  did.  And  there¬ 
upon  the  man,  whom  I  before  described,  stood 
up,  and  with  a  loud  voice,  in  Spanish,  asked, 
‘‘Are  ye  Christians?”  We  answered,  we  were; 
fearing  the  less,  because  of  the  Cross  we  had 
seen  in  the  subscription.  At  which  answer  the 
said  person  lift  up  his  right  hand  towards 
Heaven,  and  drew  it  softly  to  his  mouth  (which 
is  the  gesture  they  use,  when  they  thank  God), 
and  then  said:  ‘‘If  ye  will  swear,  all  of  you,  by 
the  merits  of  the  Saviour,  that  ye  are  no 
pirates,  nor  have  shed  blood,  lawfully  nor  un¬ 
lawfully,  within  forty  days  past,  you  may  have 
license  to  come  on  land.”  We  said,  we  were  all 
ready  to  take  that  oath.  Whereupon  one  of 
those  that  were  with  him,  being  (as  it  seemed) 
a  notary,  made  an  entry  of  this  act.  Which  done, 
another  of  the  attendants  of  the  great  person, 
which  was  with  him  in  the  same  boat,  after  his 
lord  had  spoken  a  little  to  him,  said  aloud:  “My 
lord  would  have  you  know,  that  it  is  not  of  pride, 
or  greatness,  that  he  cometh  not  aboard  your 
ship:  but  for  that,  in  your  answer,  you  declare 
that  you  have  many  sick  amongst  you,  he  was 
warned  by  the  Conservator  of  Health  of  the 
city  that  he  should  keep  a  distance.”  We  bowed 
ourselves  towards  him,  and  answered,  we  were 


his  humble  servants;  and  accounted  for  great 
honour  and  singular  humanity  towards  us,  that 
which  was  already  done:  but  hoped  well,  that 
the  nature  of  the  sickness  of  our  men  was  not 
infectious.  So  he  returned;  and  a  while  after 
came  the  notary  to  us  aboard  our  ship,  holding 
in  his  hand  a  fruit  of  that  country,  like  an 
orange,  but  of  colour  between  orange-tawney 
and  scarlet:  which  cast  a  most  excellent  odour. 
He  used  it  (as  it  seemed)  for  a  preservative 
against  infection.  He  gave  us  our  oath,  “By  the 
name  of  Jesus,  and  His  merits”:  and  after  told 
us,  that  the  next  day,  by  six  of  the  clock  in  the 
morning,  we  should  be  sent  to,  and  brought  to 
the  Strangers’  House  (so  he  called  it),  where  we 
should  be  accommodated  of  things,  both  for  our 
whole  and  for  our  sick.  So  he  left  us;  and  when 
we  offered  him  some  pistolets,  he  smiling,  said, 
he  must  not  be  twice  paid  for  one  labour:  mean¬ 
ing  (as  I  take  it)  that  he  had  salary  sufficient  of 
the  State  for  his  service.  For  (as  I  after  learned) 
they  call  an  officer  that  taketh  rewards,  twice- 
paid. 

The  next  morning  early,  there  came  to  us 
the  same  officer  that  came  to  us  at  first  with 
his  cane,  and  told  us:  “He  came  to  conduct  us 
to  the  Strangers’  House:  and  that  he  had  pre¬ 
vented  the  hour,  because  we  might  have  the 
whole  day  before  us  for  our  business.  For  (said 
he)  if  you  will  follow  my  advice,  there  shall 
first  go  with  me  some  few  of  you,  and  see  the 
place,  and  how  it  may  be  made  convenient  for 
you;  and  then  you  may  send  for  your  sick,  and 
the  rest  of  your  number,  which  ye  will  bring 
on  land.”  We  thanked  him,  and  said,  that  this 
care  which  he  took  of  desolate  strangers,  God 
would  reward.  And  so  six  of  us  went  on  land 
with  him;  and  when  we  were  on  land,  he  went 
before  us,  and  turned  to  us,  and  said,  he  was  but 
our  servant,  and  our  guide.  He  led  us  through 
three  fair  streets;  and  all  the  way  we  went  there 
were  gathered  some  people  on  both  sides,  stand¬ 
ing  in  a  row;  but  in  so  civil  a  fashion,  as  if  it 
had  been,  not  to  wonder  at  us,  but  to  welcome 
us;  and  divers  of  them,  as  we  passed  by  them, 
put  their  arms  a  little  abroad,  which  is  their 
gesture  wffien  they  bid  any  welcome. 

The  Strangers’  House  is  a  fair  and  spacious 
house,  built  of  brick,  of  somewhat  a  bluer  col¬ 
our  than  our  brick;  and  with  handsome  win¬ 
dows,  some  of  glass,  some  of  a  kind  of  cambric 
oiled.  He  brought  us  first  into  a  fair  parlour 
above  stairs,  and  then  asked  us,  what  number 
of  persons  we  were?  and  how  many  sick?  We 
answered,  we  were  in  all  (sick  and  whole)  one 
and  fifty  persons,  whereof  our  sick  were  seven- 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


teen.  He  desired  us  to  have  patience  a  little, 
and  to  stay  till  he  came  back  to  us,  which  was 
about  an  hour  after;  and  then  he  led  us  to  see 
the  chambers  which  were  provided  for  us,  being 
in  number  nineteen.  They  having  cast  it  (as  it 
seemeth)  that  four  of  those  chambers,  which 
were  better  than  the  rest,  might  receive  four  of 
the  principal  men  of  our  company;  and  lodge 
them  alone  by  themselves;  and  the  other  fifteen 
chambers  were  to  lodge  us,  two  and  two  togeth¬ 
er.  The  chambers  were  handsome  and  cheerful 
chambers,  and  furnished  civilly.  Then  he  led  us 
to  a  long  gallery,  like  a  dorture,  where  he  showed 
us  all  along  the  one  side  (for  the  other  side  was 
but  wall  and  window)  seventeen  cells,  very  neat 
ones,  having  partitions  of  cedar  wood.  Which 
gallery  and  cells,  being  in  all  forty  (many  more 
than  we  needed),  where  instituted  as  an  infirm¬ 
ary  for  sick  persons.  And  he  told  us  withal,  that 
as  any  of  our  sick  waxed  well,  he  might  be  re¬ 
moved  from  his  cell  to  a  chamber:  for  which 
purpose  there  were  set  forth  ten  spare  cham¬ 
bers,  besides  the  number  we  spake  of  before. 
This  done,  he  brought  us  back  to  the  parlour, 
and  lifting  up  his  cane  a  little  (as  they  do  when 
they  give  any  charge  or  command),  said  to  us, 
“Ye  are  to  know  that  the  custom  of  the  land 
requireth,  that  after  this  day  and  to-morrow 
(which  we  give  you  for  removing  your  people 
from  your  ship),  you  are  to  keep  within  doors 
for  three  days.  But  let  it  not  trouble  you,  nor 
do  not  think  yourselves  restrained,  but  rather 
left  to  your  ease  and  rest.  You  shall  want  noth¬ 
ing,  and  there  are  six  of  our  people  appointed 
to  attend  you  for  any  business  you  may  have 
abroad. ”  We  gave  him  thanks  with  all  affection 
and  respect,  and  said,  “God  surely  is  mani¬ 
fested  in  this  land.”  We  offered  him  also  twenty 
pistolets;  but  he  smiled,  and  only  said:  “What? 
twice  paid!”  And  so  he  left  us. 

Soon  after  our  dinner  was  served  in;  which 
was  right  good  viands,  both  for  bread  and  mea t : 
better  than  any  collegiate  diet  that  I  have  known 
in  Europe.  We  had  also  drink  of  three  sorts,  all 
wholesome  and  good;  wine  of  the  grape;  a  drink 
of  grain,  such  as  is  with  us  our  ale,  but  more 
clear;  and  a  kind  of  cider  made  of  a  fruit  of  that 
country;  a  wonderful  pleasing  and  refreshing 
drink.  Besides,  there  were  brought  in  to  us  great 
store  of  those  scarlet  oranges  for  our  sick;  which 
(they  said)  were  an  assured  remedy  for  sick¬ 
ness  taken  at  sea.  There  was  given  us  also  a 
box  of  small  grey  or  whitish  pills,  which  they 
wished  our  sick  should  take,  one  of  the  pills 
every  night  beforesleep;  which  (they  said)  would 
hasten  their  recovery. 


201 

The  next  day,  after  that  our  trouble  of  car¬ 
riage  and  removing  of  our  men  and  goods  out 
of  our  ship  was  somewhat  settled  and  quiet,  I 
thought  good  to  call  our  company  together, 
and  when  they  were  assembled,  said  unto 
them,  “My  dear  friends,  let  us  know  ourselves, 
and  how  it  standeth  with  us.  We  are  men  cast 
on  land,  as  Jonas  was  out  of  the  whale’s  belly, 
when  we  were  as  buried  in  the  deep;  and  now 
we  are  on  land,  we  are  but  between  death  and 
life,  for  we  are  beyond  both  the  Old  World  and 
the  New;  and  whether  ever  we  shall  see  Europe, 
God  only  knoweth.  It  is  a  kind  of  miracle  hath 
brought  us  hither,  and  it  must  be  little  less 
that  shall  bring  us  hence.  Therefore  in  regard 
of  our  deliverance  past,  and  our  danger  present 
and  to  come,  let  us  look  up  to  God,  and  every 
man  reform  his  own  ways.  Besides  we  are  come 
here  amongst  a  Christian  people,  full  of  piety 
and  humanity:  let  us  not  bring  that  confusion 
of  face  upon  ourselves,  as  to  show  our  vices  or 
unworthiness  before  them.  Yet  there  is  more, 
for  they  have  by  commandment  (though  in 
form  of  courtesy)  cloistered  us  within  these 
walls  for  three  days:  who  knoweth  whether  it 
be  not  to  take  some  taste  of  our  manners  and 
conditions?  And  if  they  find  them  bad,  to  ban¬ 
ish  us  straightways;  if  good,  to  give  us  further 
time.  For  these  men  that  they  have  given  us 
for  attendance,  may  withal  have  an  eye  upon 
us.  Therefore,  for  God’s  love,  and  as  we  love 
the  weal  of  our  souls  and  bodies,  let  us  so  be¬ 
have  ourselves,  as  we  may  be  at  peace  with 
God,  and  may  find  grace  in  the  eyes  of  this 
people.”  Our  company  with  one  voice  thanked 
me  for  my  good  admonition,  and  promised  me 
to  live  soberly  and  civilly,  and  without  giving 
any  the  least  occasion  of  offence.  So  we  spent 
our  three  days  joyfully,  and  without  care,  in 
expectation  what  would  be  done  with  us  when 
they  were  expired.  During  which  time,  we  had 
every  hour  joy  of  the  amendment  of  our  sick, 
who  thought  themselves  cast  into  some  divine 
pool  of  healing,  they  mended  so  kindly  and  so 
fast. 

The  morrow  after  our  three  days  were  past, 
there  came  to  us  a  new  man,  that  we  had  not 
seen  before,  clothed  in  blue  as  the  former  was, 
save  that  his  turban  was  white  with  a  small 
red  cross  on  the  top.  He  had  also  a  tippet  of 
fine  linen.  At  his  coming  in,  he  did  bend  to  us 
a  little,  and  put  his  arms  abroad.  We  of  our 
parts  saluted  him  in  a  very  lowly  and  submis¬ 
sive  manner;  as  looking  that  from  him  we 
should  receive  sentence  of  life  or  death.  He 
desired  to  speak  with  some  few  of  us.  Where- 


202 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


upon  six  of  us  only  stayed,  and  the  rest  avoided 
the  room.  He  said,  “I  am  by  office  Governor  of 
this  House  of  Strangers,  and  by  vocation  I  am 
a  Christian  priest;  and  therefore  am  come  to 
you  to  offer  you  my  service,  both  as  strangers, 
and  chiefly  as  Christians.  Some  things  I  may 
tell  you,  which  1  think  you  will  not  be  unwill¬ 
ing  to  hear.  The  State  hath  given  you  licence 
to  stay  on  land  for  the  space  of  six  weeks:  and 
let  it  not  trouble  you,  if  your  occasions  ask 
further  time,  for  the  law  in  this  point  is  not 
precise;  and  I  do  not  doubt  but  myself  shall  be 
able  to  obtain  for  you  such  further  time  as 
shall  be  convenient.  Ye  shall  also  understand, 
that  the  Strangers’  House  is  at  this  time  rich, 
and  much  aforehand;  for  it  hath  laid  up  reve¬ 
nue  these  thirty-seven  years:  for  so  long  it  is 
since  any  stranger  arrived  in  this  part:  and 
therefore  take  ye  no  care;  the  State  will  defray 
you  all  the  time  you  stay.  Neither  shall  you 
stay  one  day  the  less  for  that.  As  for  any  mer¬ 
chandize  ye  have  brought,  ye  shall  be  well 
used,  and  have  your  return,  either  in  merchan¬ 
dise  or  in  gold  and  silver:  for  to  us  it  is  all  one. 
And  if  you  have  any  other  request  to  make, 
hide  it  not;  for  ye  shall  find  we  will  not  make 
your  countenance  to  fall  by  the  answer  ye  shall 
receive.  Only  this  I  must  tell  you,  that  none  of 
you  must  go  above  a  karan  (that  is  with  them 
a  mile  and  a  half)  from  the  walls  of  the  city, 
without  especial  leave.” 

We  answered,  after  we  had  looked  awhile  one 
upon  another,  admiring  this  gracious  and  par¬ 
ent-like  usage,  that  we  could  not  tell  what  to  say, 
for  we  wanted  words  to  express  our  thanks; 
and  his  noble  free  offers  left  us  nothing  to  ask. 
It  seemed  to  us,  that  we  had  before  us  a  picture 
of  our  salvation  in  Heaven;  for  we  that  were  a 
while  since  in  the  jaws  of  death,  were  now 
brought  into  a  place  where  we  found  nothing 
but  consolations.  For  the  commandment  laid 
upon  us,  we  would  not  fail  to  obey  it,  though  it 
was  impossible  but  our  hearts  should  be  in¬ 
flamed  to  tread  further  upon  this  happy  and 
holy  ground.  We  added,  that  our  tongues  should 
first  cleave  to  the  roofs  of  our  mouths,  ere  we 
should  forget,  either  his  reverend  person,  or 
this  whole  nation,  in  our  prayers.  We  also  most 
humbly  besought  him  to  accept  of  us  as  his  true 
servants,  by  as  just  a  right  as  ever  men  on  earth 
were  bounden;  laying  and  presenting  both  our 
persons  and  all  we  had  at  his  feet.  He  said  he 
was  a  priest,  and  looked  for  a  priest’s  reward; 
which  was  our  brotherly  love,  and  the  good  of 
our  souls  and  bodies.  So  he  went  from  us,  not 
without  tears  of  tenderness  in  his  eyes,  and  left 


us  also  confused  with  joy  and  kindness,  saying 
amongst  ourselves  that  we  were  come  into  a 
land  of  angels,  which  did  appear  to  us  daily, 
and  present  us  with  comforts,  which  we  thought 
not  of,  much  Jess  expected. 

The  next  day,  about  ten  of  the  clock,  the 
Governor  came  to  us  again,  and  after  saluta¬ 
tions,  said  familiarly,  that  he  was  come  to 
visit  us;  and  called  for  a  chair,  and  sat  him 
down;  and  we,  being  some  ten  of  us  (the  rest 
were  of  the  meaner  sort,  or  else  gone  abroad), 
sat  down  with  him;  and  when  we  were  set,  he 
began  thus:  “We  of  this  island  of  Bensalem  (for 
so  they  called  it  in  their  language)  have  this: 
that  by  means  of  our  solitary  situation,  and  of 
the  laws  of  secrecy,  which  we  have  for  our  trav¬ 
ellers,  and  our  rare  admission  of  strangers,  we 
know  well  most  part  of  the  habitable  world,  and 
are  ourselves  unknown.  Therefore  because  he 
that  knoweth  least  is  fitted  to  ask  questions,  it  is 
more  reason,  for  the  entertainment  of  the  time, 
that  ye  ask  me  questions,  than  that  I  ask  you.” 

We  answered,  that  we  humbly  thanked  him, 
that  he  would  give  us  leave  so  to  do:  and  that 
we  conceived,  by  the  taste  we  had  already, 
that  there  was  no  worldly  thing  on  earth  more 
worthy  to  be  known  than  the  state  of  that  happy 
land.  But  above  all  (we  said)  since  that  we 
were  met  from  the  several  ends  of  the  world, 
and  hoped  assuredly  that  we  should  meet  one 
day  in  the  kingdom  of  Heaven  (for  that  we 
were  both  part  Christians),  we  desired  to  know 
(in  respect  that  land  was  so  remote,  and  so  di¬ 
vided  by  vast  and  unknown  seas  from  the  land 
where  our  Saviour  walked  on  earth)  who  was 
the  apostle  of  that  nation,  and  how  it  was  con¬ 
verted  to  the  faith  ?  1 1  appeared  in  his  face,  that 
he  took  great  contentment  in  this  our  question; 
he  said,  “Ye  knit  my  heart  to  you,  by  asking 
this  question  in  the  first  place:  for  it  showeth 
that  you  first  seek  the  kingdom  of  Heaven:  and 
I  shall  gladly,  and  briefly,  satisfy  your  demand. 

“About  twenty  years  after  the  Ascension  of 
our  Saviour  it  came  to  pass,  that  there  was 
seen  by  the  people  of  Renfusa  (a  city  upon  the 
eastern  coast  of  our  island),  within  sight,  (the 
night  was  cloudy  and  calm),  as  it  might  be 
some  mile  in  the  sea,  a  great  pillar  of  light;  not 
sharp,  but  in  form  of  a  column,  or  cylinder,  ris¬ 
ing  from  the  sea,  a  great  way  up  towards  Heav¬ 
en;  and  on  the  top  of  it  was  seen  a  large  cross  of 
light,  more  bright  and  resplendent  than  the 
body  of  the  pillar.  Upon  which  so  strange  a 
spectacle  the  people  of  the  city  gathered  apace 
together  upon  the  sands,  to  wonder;  and  so 
after  put  themselves  into  a  number  of  small 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


boats  to  go  nearer  to  this  marvellous  sight.  But 
when  the  boats  were  come  within  about  sixty 
yards  of  the  pillar  they  found  themselves  all 
bound,  and  could  go  no  further,  yet  so  as  they 
might  move  to  go  about,  but  might  not  ap¬ 
proach  nearer:  so  as  the  boats  stood  all  as  in  a 
theatre,  beholding  this  light,  as  an  heavenly 
sign.  It  so  fell  out,  that  there  was  in  one  of  the 
boats  one  of  our  wise  men,  of  the  Society  of 
Salomon's  House;  which  house  or  college,  my 
good  brethren,  is  the  very  eye  of  this  kingdom, 
who  having  awhile  attentively  and  devoutly 
viewed  and  contemplated  this  pillar  and  cross, 
fell  down  upon  his  face;  and  then  raised  him¬ 
self  upon  his  knees,  and  lifting  up  his  hands  to 
Heaven,  made  his  prayers  in  this  manner: 

“  ‘Lord  God  of  Heaven  and  Earth;  Thou 
hast  vouchsafed  of  Thy  grace,  to  those  of  our 
order,  to  know  Thy  works  of  creation,  and  the 
secrets  of  them;  and  to  discern  (as  far  as  ap¬ 
pertained  to  the  generations  of  men)  between 
divine  miracles,  works  of  Nature,  works  of  art, 
and  impostures  and  illusions  of  all  sorts.  I  do 
here  acknowledge  and  testify  before  this  peo¬ 
ple,  that  the  thing  which  we  now  see  before 
our  eyes  is  Thy  finger,  and  a  true  miracle.  And 
forasmuch  as  we  learn  in  our  books  that  Thou 
never  workest  miracles,  but  to  a  divine  and 
excellent  end  (for  the  laws  of  nature  are  Thine 
own  laws,  and  Thou  exceedest  them  not  but 
upon  great  cause),  we  most  humbly  beseech 
Thee  to  prosper  this  great  sign,  and  to  give  us 
the  interpretation  and  use  of  it  in  mercy; 
which  Thou  dost  in  some  part  secretly  prom¬ 
ise,  by  sending  it  unto  us.'  " 

“When  he  had  made  his  prayer,  he  presently 
found  the  boat  he  was  in  movable  and  un¬ 
bound;  whereas  all  the  rest  remained  still  fast; 
and  taking  that  for  an  assurance  of  leave  to 
approach,  he  caused  the  boat  to  be  softly  and 
with  silence  rowed  towards  the  pillar.  But  ere 
he  came  near  it,  the  pillar  and  cross  of  light 
broke  up,  and  cast  itself  abroad,  as  it  were,  into 
a  firmament  of  many  stars,  which  also  van¬ 
ished  soon  after,  and  there  was  nothing  left  to 
be  seen  but  a  small  ark,  or  chest  of  cedar,  dry, 
and  not  wet  at  all  with  water,  though  it  swam. 
And  in  the  fore-end  of  it,  which  was  towards 
him,  grew  a  small  green  branch  of  palm;  and 
when  the  wise  man  had  taken  it  with  all  rever¬ 
ence  into  his  boat,  it  opened  of  itself,  and  there 
were  found  in  it  a  book  and  a  letter,  both  writ¬ 
ten  in  fine  parchment,  and  wrapped  in  sindons 
of  linen.  The  book  contained  all  the  canonical 
books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  accord¬ 
ing  as  you  have  them  (for  we  know  well  what 


the  churches  w’ith  you  receive),  and  the  Apoca¬ 
lypse  itself;  and  some  other  books  of  the  New 
Testament,  which  were  not  at  that  time  writ¬ 
ten,  were  nevertheless  in  the  book.  And  for  the 
letter,  it  was  in  these  words: 

“  ‘I  Bartholomew,  a  servant  of  the  Highest, 
and  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  was  warned  by  an 
angel  that  appeared  to  me  in  a  vision  of  glory, 
that  I  should  commit  this  ark  to  the  Roods  of 
the  sea.  Therefore  I  do  testify  and  declare  unto 
that  people  where  God  shall  ordain  this  ark  to 
come  to  land,  that  in  the  same  day  is  come 
unto  them  salvation  and  peace,  and  goodwill, 
from  the  Father,  and  from  the  Lord  Jesus.' 

“There  was  also  in  both  these  writings,  as 
well  the  book  as  the  letter,  wrought  a  great 
miracle,  conform  to  that  of  the  apostles,  in  the 
original  gift  of  tongues.  For  there  being  at  that 
time,  in  this  land,  Hebrews,  Persians,  and  In¬ 
dians,  besides  the  natives,  every  one  read  upon 
the  book  and  letter,  as  if  they  had  been  written 
in  his  own  language.  And  thus  was  this  land 
saved  from  infidelity  (as  the  remain  of  the  Old 
World  was  from  water)  by  an  ark,  through  the 
apostolical  and  miraculous  evangelism  of  St. 
Bartholomew."  And  here  he  paused,  and  a  mes¬ 
senger  came,  and  called  him  forth  from  us.  So 
this  was  all  that  passed  in  that  conference. 

The  next  day,  the  same  Governor  came 
again  to  us,  immediately  after  dinner,  and  ex¬ 
cused  himself,  saying,  that  the  day  before  he 
was  called  from  us  somewhat  abruptly,  but 
now  he  would  make  us  amends,  and  spend 
time  with  us,  if  wTe  held  his  company  and  con¬ 
ference  agreeable.  We  answered,  that  we  held 
it  so  agreeable  and  pleasing  to  us,  as  we  forgot 
both  dangers  past,  and  fears  to  come,  for  the 
time  we  heard  him  speak;  and  that  we- thought 
an  hour  spent  with  him. was  worth  years  of 
our  former  life.  He  bowed  himself  a  little  to  us, 
and  after  we  were  set  again,  he  said,  “Well, 
the  questions  are  on  your  part." 

One  of  our  number  said,  after  a  little  pause, 
that  there  was  a  matter  we  were  no  less  desir¬ 
ous  to  know  than  fearful  to  ask,  lest  we  might 
presume  too  far.  But  encouraged  by  his  rare  hu¬ 
manity  towards  us  (that  could  scarce  think  our¬ 
selves  strangers,  being  his  vowed  and  professed 
servants),  we  would  take  the  hardness  to  pro¬ 
pound  it;  humbly  beseeching  him,  if  he  thought 
it  not  fit  to  be  answered,  that  he  would  pardon 
it,  though  he  rejected  it.  We  said,  we  well  ob¬ 
served  those  his  words,  which  he  formerly  spa  ke, 
that  this  happy  island,  where  we  now  stood, 
w’as  known  to  few’,  and  yet  knew  most  of  the 
nations  of  the  world,  w’hich  we  found  to  be  true, 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


considering  they  had  the  languages  of  Europe, 
and  knew  much  of  our  state  and  business;  and 
yet  we  in  Europe  (notwithstanding  all  the  re¬ 
mote  discoveries  and  navigations  of  this  last 
age)  never  heard  any  of  the  least  inkling  or 
glimpse  of  this  island.  This  we  found  wonder¬ 
ful  strange;  for  that  all  nations  have  inter¬ 
knowledge  one  of  another,  either  by  voyage  in¬ 
to  foreign  parts,  or  by  strangers  that  come  to 
them;  and  though  the  traveller  into  a  foreign 
country  doth  commonly  know  more  by  the  eye 
than  he  that  stayeth  at  home  can  by  relation 
of  the  traveller;  yet  both  ways  suffice  to  make 
a  mutual  knowledge,  in  some  degree,  on  both 
parts.  But  for  this  island,  we  never  heard  tell 
of  any  ship  of  theirs  that  had  been  seen  to  ar¬ 
rive  upon  any  shore  of  Europe;  no,  nor  of  eich- 
er  the  East  or  West  Indies,  nor  yet  of  any  ship 
of  any  other  part  of  the  world,  that  had  made 
return  from  them.  And  yet  the  marvel  rested 
not  in  this;  for  the  situation  of  it  (as  his  lord- 
ship  said)  in  the  secret  conclave  of  such  a  vast 
sea  mought  cause  it.  But  then,  that  they  should 
have  knowledge  of  the  languages,  books,  affairs, 
of  those  that  lie  such  a  distance  from  them,  it 
was  a  thing  we  could  not  tell  what  to  make  of; 
for  that  it  seemed  to  us  a  condition  and  propri¬ 
ety  of  divine  powers  and  beings,  to  be  hidden 
and  unseen  to  others,  and  yet  to  have  others 
open,  and  as  in  a  light  to  them. 

At  this  speech  the  Governor  gave  a  gracious 
smile  and  said,  that  we  did  well  to  ask  pardon 
for  this  question  we  now  asked,  for  that  it 
imported,  as  if  we  thought  this  land  a  land  of 
magicians,  that  sent  forth  spirits  of  the  air  into 
all  parts,  to  bring  them  news  and  intelligence 
of  other  countries.  It  was  answered  by  us  all,  in 
all  possible  humbleness,  but  yet  with  a  counte¬ 
nance  taking  knowledge,  that  we  knew  he  spake 
it  but  merrily;  that  we  were  apt  enough  to  think 
there  was  somewhat  supernatural  in  this  island, 
but  yet  rather  as  angelical  than  magical.  But 
to  let  his  lordship  know  truly  what  it  was  that 
made  us  tender  and  doubtful  to  ask  this  ques¬ 
tion,  it  was  not  any  such  conceit,  but  because 
we  remembered  he  had  given  a  touch  in  his 
former  speech  that  this  land  had  laws  of  se¬ 
crecy  touching  strangers.  To  this  he  said,  “You 
remember  it  aright;  and  therefore  in  that  I  shall 
say  to  you,  I  must  reserve  some  particulars, 
which  it  is  not  lawful  for  me  to  reveal,  but  there 
will  be  enough  left  to  give  you  satisfaction. 

“You  shall  understand  (that  which  perhaps 
you  will  scarce  think  credible)  that  about  three 
thousand  years  ago,  or  somewhat  more,  the 
navigation  of  the  world  (especially  for  remote 


voyages)  was  greater  than  at  this  day.  Do  not 
think  with  yourselves,  that  1  know  not  how 
much  it  is  increased  with  you,  within  these  six- 
score  years;  I  know  it  well,  and  yet  I  say,  greater 
then  than  now;  whether  it  was,  that  the  exam¬ 
ple  of  the  Ark,  that  saved  the  remnant  of  men 
from  the  universal  deluge,  gave  men  confidence 
to  adventure  upon  the  waters,  or  what  it  was; 
but  such  is  the  truth.  The  Phoenicians,  and 
specially  the  Tyrians,  had  great  fleets;  so  had 
the  Carthaginians  their  colony,  which  is  yet 
further  west.  Toward  the  east  the  shipping  of 
Egypt,  and  of  Palestine,  was  likewise  great. 
China  also,  and  the  great  Atlantis  (that  you 
call  America),  which  have  now  but  junks  and 
canoes,  abounded  then  in  tall  ships.  This  island 
(as  appeareth  by  faithful  registers  of  those  times) 
had  then  fifteen  hundred  strong  ships,  of  great 
content.  Of  all  this  there  is  with  you  sparing 
memory,  or  none;  but  we  have  large  knowl¬ 
edge  thereof. 

“At  that  time,  this  land  was  known  and 
frequented  by  the  ships  and  vessels  of  all  the 
nations  before  named.  And  (as  it  cometh  to 
pass)  they  had  many  times  men  of  other  coun¬ 
tries,  that  were  no  sailors,  that  came  wi  th  them ; 
as  Persians,  Chaldeans,  Arabians,  so  as  almost 
all  nations  of  might  and  fame  resorted  hither; 
of  whom  we  have  some  stirps  and  little  tribes 
with  us  at  this  day.  And  for  our  own  ships,  they 
went  sundry  voyages,  as  well  to  your  straits, 
which  you  call  the  Pillars  of  Hercules,  as  toother 
parts  in  the  Atlantic  and  Mediterranean  Seas; 
as  to  Paguin  (which  is  the  same  with  Camba- 
line)  and  Quinzy,  upon  the  Oriental  Seas,  as 
far  as  to  the  borders  of  the  East  Tartary. 

“At  the  same  time,  and  an  age  after  or  more, 
the  inhabitants  of  the  great  Atlantis  did  flour¬ 
ish.  For  though  the  narration  and  description 
which  is  made  by  a  great  man  with  you,  that 
the  descendants  of  Neptune  planted  there,  and 
of  the  magnificent  temple,  palace,  city,  and 
hill;  and  the  manifold  streams  of  goodly  navi¬ 
gable  rivers  (which  as  so  many  chains  envi¬ 
roned  the  same  site  and  temple;  and  the  sev¬ 
eral  degrees  of  ascent,  whereby  men  did  climb 
up  to  the  same,  as  if  it  had  been  a  Scala  Caeli; 
be  all  poetical  and  fabulous;  yet  so  much  is 
true,  that  the  said  country  of  Atlantis,  as  well 
that  of  Peru,  then  called  Coya,  as  that  of  Mex¬ 
ico,  then  named  Tyrambel,  w'ere  mighty  and 
proud  kingdoms,  in  arms,  shipping,  and  riches: 
so  mighty  as  at  one  time  (or  at  least  within  the 
space  of  ten  years),  they  both  made  two  great 
expeditions;  they  of  Tyrambel  through  the  At¬ 
lantic  to  the  Mediterranean  Sea;  and  they  of 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


Coya,  through  the  South  Sea  upon  this  our  is¬ 
land;  and  for  the  former  of  these,  which  was  in¬ 
to  Europe,  the  same  author  amongst  you  (as  it 
seemeth)  had  some  relation  from  the  Egyptian 
priest,  whom  he  citeth.  For  assuredly  such  a 
thing  there  was.  But  whether  it  were  the  an¬ 
cient  Athenians  that  had  the  glory  of  the  re¬ 
pulse  and  resistance  of  those  forces,  I  can  say 
nothing;  but  certain  it  is  there  never  came  back 
either  ship  or  man  from  that  voyage.  Neither 
had  the  other  voyage  of  those  of  Coya  upon  us 
had  better  fortune,  if  they  had  not  met  with 
enemies  of  greater  clemency.  For  the  king  of 
this  island,  by  name  Altabin,  a  wise  man  and 
a  great  warrior,  knowing  well  both  his  own 
strength  and  that  of  his  enemies,  handled  the 
matter  so,  as  he  cut  off  their  land  forces  from 
their  ships,  and  entoiled  both  their  navy  and 
their  camp  with  a  greater  power  than  theirs,  both 
by  sea  and  land,  and  compelled  them  to  render 
themselves  without  striking  stroke;  and  after 
they  were  at  his  mercy,  contenting  himself  only 
with  their  oath,  that  they  should  no  more  bear 
arms  against  him,  dismissed  them  all  in  safety. 

But  the  divine  revenge  overtook  not  long  af¬ 
ter  those  proud  enterprises.  For  within  less  than 
the  space  of  one  hundred  years  the  Great  At¬ 
lantis  was  utterly  lost  and  destroyed;  not  by  a 
great  earthquake,  as  your  man  saith  (for  that 
whole  tract  is  little  subject  to  earthquakes),  but 
by  a  particular  deluge  or  inundation,  those 
countries  having  at  this  day  far  greater  rivers 
and  far  higher  mountains  to  pour  down  waters, 
than  any  part  of  the  Old  World.  But  it  is  true 
that  the  same  inundation  was  not  deep,  not  past 
forty  foot  in  most  places  from  the  ground,  so 
that  although  it  destroyed  man  and  beast  gen¬ 
erally,  yet  some  few  wild  inhabitants  of  the  wood 
escaped.  Birds  also  were  saved  by  flying  to  the 
high  trees  and  woods.  For  as  for  men,  although 
they  had  buildings  in  many  places  higher  than 
the  depth  of  the  water,  yet  that  inundation, 
though  it  were  shallow,  had  a  long  continu¬ 
ance,  whereby  they  of  the  vale  that  were  not 
drowned  perished  for  want  of  food,  and  other 
things  necessary. 

“So  as  marvel  you  not  at  the  thin  popula¬ 
tion  of  America,  nor  at  the  rudeness  and  igno¬ 
rance  of  the  people;  for  you  must  account  your 
inhabitants  of  America  as  a  young  people, 
younger  a  thousand  years  at  the  least  than  the 
rest  of  the  world,  for  that  there  was  so  much 
time  between  the  universal  flood  and  their  par¬ 
ticular  inundation.  For  the  poor  remnant  of 
human  seed  which  remained  in  their  mountains 
peopled  the  country  again  slowly,  by  little  and 


little,  and  being  simple  and  savage  people  (not 
like  Noah  and  his  sons,  which  was  the  chief 
family  of  the  earth)  they  were  not  able  to  leave 
letters,  arts,  and  civility  to  their  posterity;  and 
having  likewise  in  their  mountainous  habita¬ 
tions  been  used  (in  respect  of  the  extreme  cold 
of  those  regions)  to  clqthe  themselves  with  the 
skins  of  tigers,  bears,  and  great  hairy  goats,  that 
they  have  in  those  parts;  when  after  they  came 
down  into  the  valley,  and  found  the  intolerable 
heats  which  are  there,  and  knew  no  means  of 
lighter  apparel,  they  were  forced  to  begin  the 
custom  of  going  naked,  which  continueth  at  this 
day.  Only  they  take  great  pride  and  delight  in 
the  feathers  of  birds,  and  this  also  they  took 
from  those  their  ancestors  of  the  mountains, 
who  were  invited  unto  it,  by  the  infinite  flight 
of  birds  that  came  up  to  the  high  grounds,  while 
the  waters  stood  below.  So  you  see,  by  this  main 
accident  of  time,  we  lost  our  traffic  with  the 
Americans,  with  whom  of  all  others,  in  regard 
they  lay  nearest  to  us,  we  had  most  commerce. 

“As  for  the  other  parts  of  the  world,  it  is  most 
manifest  that  in  the  ages  following  (whether  it 
were  in  respect  of  wars,  or  by  a  natural  revolu¬ 
tion  of  time)  navigation  did  everywhere  great¬ 
ly  decay,  and  specially  far  voyages  (the  rather 
by  the  use  of  galleys,  and  such  vessels  as  could 
hardly  brook  the  ocean)  were  altogether  left  and 
omitted.  So  then,  that  part  of  intercourse  which 
could  be  from  other  nations,  to  sail  to  us,  you 
see  how  it  hath  long  since  ceased;  except  it  were 
by  some  rare  accident,  as  this  of  yours.  But  now 
of  the  cessation  of  that  other  part  of  intercourse, 
which  mought  be  by  our  sailing  to  other  nations, 
I  must  yield  you  some  other  cause.  For  I  can¬ 
not  say,  if  I  shall  say  truly,  but  our  shipping, 
for  number,  strength,  mariners,  pilots,  and  all 
things  that  appertain  to  navigation,  is  as  great 
as  ever;  and  therefore  why  we  should  sit  at  home, 
I  shall  now  give  you  an  account  by  itself;  and 
it  will  draw  nearer,  to  give  you  satisfaction,  to 
your  principal  question. 

“There  reigned  in  this  island  about  1,900 
years  ago,  a  king,  whose  memory  of  all  others 
we  most  adore;  not  superstitiously,  but  as  a  di¬ 
vine  instrument,  though  a  mortal  man :  his  name 
was  Solamona;  and  we  esteem  him  as  the  law¬ 
giver  of  our  nation.  This  king  had  a  large  heart, 
inscrutable  for  good,  and  was  wholly  bent  to 
make  his  kingdom  and  people  happy.  He  there¬ 
fore  taking  into  consideration  how  sufficient 
and  substantive  this  land  was,  to  maintain  it¬ 
self  without  any  aid  at  all  of  the  foreigner;  be¬ 
ing  5,600  miles  in  circuit,  and  of  rare  fertility 
of  soil,  in  the  greatest  part  thereof;  and  finding 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


206 

also  the  shipping  of  this  country  mought  be 
plentifully  set  on  work,  both  by  fishing  and  by 
transportations  from  port  to  port,  and  likewise 
by  sailing  unto  some  small  islands  that  are  not 
far  from  us,  and  are  under  the  crown  and  laws 
of  this  State;  and  recalling  into  his  memory  the 
happy  and  flourishing  estate  wherein  this  land 
then  was,  so  as  it  mought  be  a  thousand  ways 
altered  to  the  worse,  but  scarce  any  one  way  to 
the  better;  though  nothing  wanted  to  his  noble 
and  heroical  intentions,  but  only  (as  far  as  hu¬ 
man  foresight  mought  reach)  to  give  perpetu¬ 
ity  to  that  which  was  in  his  time  so  happily  es¬ 
tablished.  Therefore  amongst  his  other  funda¬ 
mental  laws  of  this  kingdom  he  did  ordain  the 
interdicts  and  prohibitions  which  we  have 
touching  entrance  of  strangers;  which  at  that 
time  (though  it  was  after  the  calamity  of  Amer¬ 
ica)  was  frequent;  doubting  novelties  and  com¬ 
mixture  of  manners.  It  is  true,  the  like  law 
against  the  admission  of  strangers  without  li¬ 
cence  is  an  ancient  law  in  the  kingdom  of  China, 
and  yet  continued  in  use.  But  there  it  is  a  poor 
thing;  and  hath  made  them  a  curious,  ignorant, 
fearful,  foolish  nation.  But  our  lawgiver  made 
his  law  of  another  temper.  For  first,  he  hath  pre¬ 
served  all  points  of  humanity,  in  taking  order 
and  making  provision  for  the  relief  of  strangers 
distressed;  whereof  you  have  tasted.” 

At  which  speech  (as  reason  was)  we  all  rose 
up,  and  bowed  ourselves.  He  went  on: 

“That  king  also  still  desiring  to  join  human¬ 
ity  and  policy  together;  and  thinking  it  against 
humanity,  to  detain  strangers  here  against  their 
wills;  and  against  policy,  that  they  should  re¬ 
turn,  and  discover  their  knowledge  of  this  es¬ 
tate,  he  took  this  course:  he  did  ordain,  that  of 
the  strangers  that  should  be  permitted  to  land, 
as  many  (at  all  times)  mought  depart  as  would; 
but  as  many  as  would  stay,  should  have  very 
good  conditions,  and  means  to  live  from  the 
State.  Wherein  he  saw  so  far,  that  now  in  so 
many  ages  since  the  prohibition,  we  have  mem¬ 
ory  not  of  one  ship  that  ever  returned,  and  but 
of  thirteen  persons  only,  at  several  times,  that 
chose  to  return  in  our  bottoms.  What  those  few 
that  returned  may  have  reported  abroad  I  know 
not.  But  you  must  think,  whatsoever  they  have 
said,  could  be  taken  where  they  came  but  lor 
a  dream.  Now  for  our  travelling  from  hence  in¬ 
to  parts  abroad,  our  lawgiver  thought  fit  alto¬ 
gether  to  restrain  it.  So  is  it  not  in  China.  For 
the  Chinese  sail  where  they  will,  or  can;  which 
showeth,  that  their  law  of  keeping  out  stran¬ 
gers  is  a  law  of  pusillanimity  and  fear.  But  this 
restraint  of  ours  hath  one  only  exception,  which 


is  admirable;  preserving  the  good  which  cometh 
by  communicating  with  strangers,  and  avoid¬ 
ing  the  hurt:  and  I  will  now  open  it  to  you.  And 
here  I  shall  seem  a  little  to  digress,  but  you  will 
by  and  by  find  it  pertinent. 

“Ye  shall  understand,  my  dear  friends,  that 
amongst  the  excellent  acts  of  that  king,  one 
above  all  hath  the  pre-eminence.  It  was  the 
erection  and  institution  of  an  order,  or  society, 
which  we  call  Salomon’s  House;  the  noblest 
foundation,  as  we  think,  that  ever  was  upon 
the  earth,  and  the  lantern  of  this  kingdom.  It 
is  dedicated  to  the  study  of  the  works  and  crea¬ 
tures  of  God.  Some  think  it  beareth  the  found¬ 
er’s  name  a  little  corrupted,  as  if  it  should  be 
Solamona’s  House.  But  the  records  write  it  as 
it  is  spoken.  So  as  I  take  it  to  be  denominate 
of  the  king  of  the  Hebrews,  which  is  famous  with 
you,  and  no  stranger  to  us;  for  we  have  some 
parts  of  his  works  which  with  you  are  lost; 
namely,  that  Natural  History  which  he  wrote 
of  all  plants,  from  the  cedar  of  Libanus  to  the 
moss  that  groweth  out  of  the  wall;  and  of  all 
things  that  have  life  and  motion.  This  maketh 
me  think  that  our  king  finding  himself  to  sym¬ 
bolize,  in  many  things,  with  that  king  of  the 
Hebrews  (which  lived  many  years  before  him) 
honoured  him  with  the  title  of  this  foundation. 
And  I  am  the  rather  induced  to  be  of  this  opin¬ 
ion,  for  that  I  find  in  ancient  records,  this  order 
or  society  is  sometimes  called  Salomon’s  House, 
and  sometimes  the  College  of  the  Six  Day’s 
Works;  whereby  I  am  satisfied  that  our  excel¬ 
lent  king  had  learned  from  the  Hebrews  that 
God  had  created  the  world,  and  all  that  therein 
is,  within  six  days:  and  therefore  he  instituting 
that  house,  for  the  finding  out  of  the  true  na¬ 
ture  of  all  things  (whereby  God  mought  have 
the  more  glory  in  the  workmanship  of  them,  and 
men  the  more  fruit  in  the  use  of  them),  did  give 
it  also  that  second  name. 

“But  now  to  come  to  our  present  purpose. 
When  the  king  had  forbidden  to  all  his  people 
navigation  into  any  part  that  was  not  under  his 
crown,  he  made  nevertheless  this  ordinance: 
that  every  twelve  years  there  should  be  set  forth 
out  of  this  kingdom  two  ships,  appointed  to 
several  voyages;  that  in  either  of  these  ships 
there  should  be  a  mission  of  three  of  the  fellows 
or  brethren  of  Salomon’s  House,  whose  errand 
was  only  to  give  us  knowledge  of  the  affairs  and 
state  of  those  countries  to  which  they  were 
designed;  and  especially  of  the  sciences,  arts, 
manufactures,  and  inventions  of  all  the  world; 
and  withal  to  bring  unto  us  books,  instruments, 
and  patterns  in  every  kind:  that  the  ships,  af- 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


ter  they  had  landed  the  brethren,  should  return ; 
and  that  the  brethren  should  stay  abroad  till 
the  new  mission.  These  ships  are  not  otherwise 
fraught  than  with  store  of  victuals,  and  good 
quantity  of  treasure  to  remain  with  the  breth¬ 
ren,  for  the  buying  of  such  things,  and  reward¬ 
ing  of  such  persons,  as  they  should  think  fit. 
Now  for  me  to  tell  you  how  the  vulgar  sort  of 
mariners  are  contained  from  being  discovered 
at  land,  and  how  they  that  must  be  put  on  shore 
for  any  time,  colour  themselves  under  the  names 
of  other  nations,  and  to  what  places  these  voy¬ 
ages  have  been  designed,  and  what  places  of 
rendezvous  are  appointed  for  the  new  missions, 
and  the  like  circumstances  of  the  practice, 
I  may  not  do  it,  neither  is  it  much  to  your  de¬ 
sire.  But  thus  you  see  we  maintain  a  trade,  not 
for  gold,  silver,  or  jewels,  nor  for  silks,  nor  for 
spices,  nor  any  other  commodity  of  matter;  but 
only  for  God’s  first  creature,  which  was  light: 
to  have  light,  I  say,  of  the  growth  of  all  parts 
of  the  world.” 

And  when  he  had  said  this,  he  was  silent,  and 
so  were  we  all;  for  indeed  we  were  all  astonished 
to  hear  so  strange  things  so  probably  told. 
And  he  perceiving  that  we  were  willing  to  say 
somewhat,  but  had  it  not  ready,  in  great  cour¬ 
tesy  took  us  off,  and  descended  to  ask  us  ques¬ 
tions  of  our  voyage  and  fortunes,  and  in  the  end 
concluded  that  we  mought  do  well  to  think  with 
ourselves,  what  time  of  stay  we  would  demand 
of  the  State,  and  bade  us  not  to  scant  ourselves; 
for  he  would  procure  such  time  as  we  desired. 
Whereupon  we  all  rose  up  and  presented  our¬ 
selves  to  kiss  the  skirt  of  his  tippet,  but  he  would 
not  suffer  us,  and  so  took  his  leave.  But  when 
it  came  once  amongst  our  people,  that  the  State 
used  to  offer  conditions  to  strangers  that  would 
stay,  we  had  work  enough  to  get  any  of  our  men 
to  look  to  our  ship,  and  to  keep  them  from  go¬ 
ing  presently  to  the  Governor,  to  crave  condi¬ 
tions;  but  with  much  ado  we  restrained  them, 
till  we  mought  agree  what  course  to  take. 

We  took  ourselves  now  for  free  men,  seeing 
there  was  no  danger  of  our  utter  perdition,  and 
lived  most  joyfully,  going  abroad  and  seeing 
what  was  to  be  seen  in  the  city  and  places  ad¬ 
jacent,  within  our  tedder;  and  obtaining  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  many  of  the  city,  not  of  the 
meanest  quality,  at  whose  hands  we  found  such 
humanity,  and  such  a  freedom  and  desire  to 
take  strangers,  as  it  were,  into  their  bosom,  as 
was  enough  to  make  us  forget  all  that  was  dear 
to  us  in  our  own  countries;  and  continually  we 
met  with  many  things,  right  worthy  of  obser¬ 
vation  and  relation;  as  indeed,  if  there  be  a  mir¬ 


ror  in  the  world,  worthy  to  hold  men’s  eyes,  it 
is  that  country. 

One  day  there  were  two  of  our  company  bid¬ 
den  to  a  feast  of  the  family,  as  they  call  it;  a 
most  natural,  pious,  and  reverend  custom  it  is, 
showing  that  nation  to  be  compounded  of  all 
goodness.  This  is  the  manner  of  it.  It  is  granted 
to  any  man  that  shall  live  to  see  thirty  persons 
descended  of  his  body,  alive  together,  and  all 
above  three  years  old,  to  make  this  feast,  which 
is  done  at  the  cost  of  the  State.  The  father  of 
the  family,  whom  they  call  the  Tirsan,  two  days 
before  the  feast,  taketh  to  him  three  of  such 
friends  as  he  liketh  to  choose,  and  is  assisted 
also  by  the  Governor  of  the  city  or  place  where 
the  feast  is  celebrated,  and  all  the  persons  of 
the  family,  of  both  sexes,  are  summoned  to  at¬ 
tend  him.  These  two  days  the  Tirsan  sitteth  in 
consultation,  concerning  the  good  estate  of  the 
family.  There,  if  there  be  any  discord  or  suits 
between  any  of  the  family,  they  are  compounded 
and  appeased.  There,  if  any  of  the  family  be 
distressed  or  decayed,  order  is  taken  for  their 
relief,  and  competent  means  to  live.  There,  if 
any  be  subject  to  vice,  or  take  ill  courses,  they 
are  reproved  and  censured.  So  likewise  direc¬ 
tion  is  given  touching  marriages,  and  the  courses 
of  life  which  any  of  them  should  take,  with  di¬ 
vers  other  the  like  orders  and  advices.  The  Gov¬ 
ernor  assisteth,  to  the  end  to  put  in  execution, 
by  his  public  authority,  the  decrees  and  orders 
of  the  Tirsan,  if  they  should  be  disobeyed 
though  that  seldom  needeth;  such  reverence 
and  obedience  they  give  to  the  order  of  Nature. 
The  Tirsan  doth  also  then  ever  choose  one  man 
from  amongst  his  sons,  to  live  in  house  with 
him ;  who  is  called  ever  after  the  Son  of  the  Vine. 
The  reason  will  hereafter  appear. 

On  the  feast  day,  the  father  or  Tirsan  cometh 
forth  after  divine  service  into  a  large  room  where 
the  feast  is  celebrated;  which  room  hath  an  half¬ 
pace  at  the  upper  end.  Against  the  wall,  in  the 
middle  of  the  half-pace,  is  a  chair  placed  for 
him,  with  a  table  and  carpet  before  it.  Over  the 
chair  is  a  state,  made  round  or  oval,  and  it  is 
of  ivy;  an  ivy  somewhat  whiter  than  ours,  like 
the  leaf  of  a  silver  asp,  but  more  shining;  for  it 
is  green  all  winter.  And  the  state  is  curiously 
wrought  with  silver  and  silk  of  divers  colours, 
broiding  or  binding  in  the  ivy;  and  is  ever  of 
the  work  of  some  of  the  daughters  of  the  fam¬ 
ily,  and  veiled  over  at  the  top,  with  a  fine  net 
of  silk  and  silver.  But  the  substance  of  it  is  true 
ivy;  whereof,  after  it  is  taken  down,  the  friends 
of  the  family  are  desirous  to  have  some  leaf  or 
sprig  to  keep. 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


208 

The  Tirsan  cometh  forth  with  all  his  genera¬ 
tion  or  lineage,  the  males  before  him,  and  the 
females  following  him;  and  if  there  be  a  mother 
from  whose  body  the  whole  lineage  is  descended, 
there  is  a  traverse  placed  in  a  loft  above,  on  the 
right  hand  of  the  chair,  with  a  privy  door,  and 
a  carved  window  of  glass,  leaded  with  gold  and 
blue;  where  she  sitteth,  but  is  not  seen.  When 
the  Tirsan  is  come  forth,  he  sitteth  down  in  the 
chair;  and  all  the  lineage  place  themselves 
against  the  wall,  both  at  his  back,  and  upon  the 
return  of  the  half-pace,  in  order  of  their  years, 
without  difference  of  sex,  and  stand  upon  their 
feet.  When  he  is  set,  the  room  being  always  full 
of  company,  but  well  kept  and  without  disorder, 
after  some  pause  there  cometh  in  from  the  lower 
end  of  the  room  a  Taratan  (which  is  as  much  as 
an  herald),  and  on  either  side  of  him  two  young 
lads:  whereof  one  carrieth  a  scroll  of  their  shin¬ 
ing  yellow  parchment,  and  the  other  a  cluster 
of  grapes  of  gold,  with  a  long  foot  or  stalk.  The 
herald  and  children  are  clothed  with  mantles  of 
sea-water  green  satin;  but  the  herald’s  mantle 
is  streamed  with  gold,  and  hath  a  train. 

Then  the  herald  with  three  curtsies,  or  rather 
inclinations,  cometh  up  as  far  as  the  half-pace 
and  there  first  taketh  into  his  hand  the  scroll. 
This  scroll  is  the  king’s  charter,  containing  gift 
of  revenue,  and  many  privileges,  exemptions, 
and  points  of  honour,  granted  to  the  father  of 
the  family;  and  it  is  ever  styled  and  directed, 
“To  such  an  one,  our  well-beloved  friend  and 
creditor,”  which  is  a  title  proper  only  to  this 
case.  For  they  say,  the  king  is  debtor  to  no  man, 
but  for  propagation  of  his  subjects.  The  seal  set 
to  the  king’s  charter  is  the  king’s  image,  em¬ 
bossed  or  moulded  in  gold;  and  though  such 
charters  be  expedited  of  course,  and  as  of  right, 
yet  they  are  varied  by  discretion,  according  to 
the  number  and  dignity  of  the  family.  This 
charter  the  herald  readeth  aloud;  and  while  it 
is  read,  the  father  or  Tirsan  standeth  up,  sup¬ 
ported  by  two  of  his  sons,  such  as  he  chooseth. 
Then  the  herald  mounteth  the  half-pace,  and 
delivereth  the  charter  into  his  hand;  and  with 
that  there  is  an  acclamation,  by  all  that  are 
present,  in  their  language,  which  is  thus  much, 
“Happy  are  the  people  of  Bensalem.” 

Then  the  herald  taketh  into  his  hand  from 
the  other  child  the  cluster  of  grapes,  which  is 
of  gold;  both  the  stalk  and  the  grapes.  But  the 
grapes  are  daintily  enamelled;  and  if  the  males 
of  the  family  be  the  greater  number,  the  grapes 
are  enamelled  purple,  with  a  little  sun  set  on 
the  top;  if  the  females,  then  they  are  enamelled 
into  a  greenish  yellow,  with  a  crescent  on  the 


top.  The  grapes  are  in  number  as  many  as  there 
are  descendants  of  the  family.  This  golden  clus¬ 
ter  the  herald  delivereth  also  to  the  Tirsan;  who 
presently  delivereth  it  over  to  that  son  that  he 
had  formerly  chosen  to  be  in  house  with  him; 
who  beareth  it  before  his  father,  as  an  ensign  of 
honour,  when  he  goeth  in  public  ever  after;  and 
is  thereupon  called  the  Son  of  the  Vine. 

After  this  ceremony  ended  the  father  or  Tir¬ 
san  retireth;  and  after  some  time  cometh  forth 
again  to  dinner,  where  he  sitteth  alone  under 
the  state,  as  before;  and  none  of  his  descend¬ 
ants  sit  with  him,  of  what  degree  or  dignity  so 
ever,  except  he  hap  to  be  of  Salomon’s  House. 
He  is  served  only  by  his  own  children,  such  as 
are  male;  who  perform  unto  him  all  service  of 
the  table  upon  the  knee,  and  the  women  only 
stand  about  hirn,  leaning  against  the  wall.  The 
room  below  the  half-pace  hath  tables  on  the 
sides  for  the  guests  that  are  bidden;  who  are 
served  with  great  and  comely  order;  and  to¬ 
wards  the  end  of  dinner  (which  in  the  greatest 
feasts  with  them  lasteth  never  above  an  hour 
and  a  half)  there  is  a  hymn  sung,  varied  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  invention  of  him  that  composeth  it 
(for  they  have  excellent  poesy);  but  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  it  is  always  the  praises  of  Adam,  and  No¬ 
ah,  and  Abraham;  whereof  the  former  two  peo¬ 
pled  the  world,  and  the  last  was  the  father  of 
the  faithful:  concluding  ever  with  a  thanksgiv¬ 
ing  for  the  nativity  of  our  Saviour,  in  whose 
birth  the  births  of  all  are  only  blessed. 

Dinner  being  done,  the  Tirsan  retireth  again; 
and  having  withdrawn  himself  alone  into  a 
place,  where  he  maketh  some  private  prayers, 
he  cometh  forth  the  third  time,  to  give  the 
blessing,  with  all  his  descendants,  who  stand 
about  him  as  at  the  first.  Then  he  calleth  them 
forth  by  one  and  by  one,  by  name  as  he  pleas- 
eth,  though  seldom  the  order  of  age  be  inverted. 
The  person  that  is  called  (the  table  being  be¬ 
fore  removed)  kneeleth  down  before  the  chair, 
and  the  father  layeth  his  hand  upon  his  head, 
or  her  head,  and  giveth  the  blessing  in  these 
words:  “Son  of  Bensalem  (or  daughter  of  Ben¬ 
salem),  thy  father  saith  it;  the  man  by  whom 
thou  hast  breath  and  life  speaketh  the  word; 
the  blessing  of  the  everlasting  Father,  the  Prince 
of  Peace,  and  the  Holy  Dove,  be  upon  thee,  and 
make  the  days  of  thy  pilgrimage  good  and 
many.”  This  he  saith  to  every  of  them;  and 
that  done*  if  there  be  any  of  his  sons  of  eminent 
merit  and  virtue  (so  they  be  not  above  two),  he 
calleth  for  them  again,  and  saith, laying  his  arm 
over  their  shoulders,  they  standing:  “Sons,  it 
is  well  ye  are  born,  give  God  the  praise,  and 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


persevere  to  the  end.”  And  withal  delivereth  to 
either  of  them  a  jewel,  made  in  the  figure  of  an 
ear  of  wheat,  which  they  ever  after  wear  in  the 
front  of  their  turban,  or  hat.  This  done,  they 
fall  to  music  and  dances,  and  other  recreations, 
after  their  manner,  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  This 
is  the  full  order  of  that  feast. 

By  that  time  six  or  seven  days  were  spent,  I 
was  fallen  into  straight  acquaintance  with  a 
merchant  of  that  city,  whose  name  was  Joabin. 
He  was  a  Jew  and  circumcised;  for  they  have 
some  few  stirps  of  Jews  yet  remaining  amongst 
them,  whom  they  leave  to  their  own  religion. 
Which  they  may  the  better  do,  because  they 
are  of  a  far  differing  disposition  from  the  Jews 
in  other  parts.  For  whereas  they  hate  the  name 
of  Christ,  and  have  a  secret  inbred  rancour 
against  the  people  amongst  whom  they  live; 
these,  contrariwise,  give  unto  our  Saviour  many 
high  attributes,  and  love  the  nation  of  Bensa- 
lem  extremely.  Surely  this  man  of  whom  I  speak 
would  ever  acknowledge  that  Christ  was  born 
of  a  Virgin  and  that  He  was  more  than  a  man; 
and  he  would  tell  how  God  made  Him  ruler  of 
the  seraphim,  which  guard  His  throne;  and  they 
call  Him  also  the  Milken  Way,  and  the  Eliah 
of  the  Messiah,  and  many  other  high  names, 
which  though  they  be  inferior  to  His  divine  ma¬ 
jesty,  yet  they  are  far  from  the  language  of 
other  Jews. 

And  for  the  country  of  Bensalem,  this  man 
would  make  no  end  of  commending  it,  being  de¬ 
sirous  by  tradition  among  the  Jews  there  to  have 
it  believed  that  the  people  thereof  were  of  the 
generations  of  Abraham,  by  another  son,  whom 
they  call  Nachoran;  and  that  Moses  by  a  se¬ 
cret  cabala  ordained  the  laws  of  Bensalem  which 
they  now  use;  and  that  when  the  Messiah  should 
come,  and  sit  in  His  throne  at  Jerusalem,  the 
King  of  Bensalem  should  sit  at  His  feet,  where¬ 
as  other  kings  should  keep  a  great  distance.  But 
yet  setting  aside  these  Jewish  dreams,  the 
man  was  a  wise  man  and  learned,  and  of  great 
policy,  and  excellently  seen  in  the  laws  and 
customs  of  that  nation. 

Amongst  other  discourses  one  day  I  told  him, 
I  was  much  affected  with  the  relation  I  had 
from  some  of  the  company  of  their  custom  in 
holding  the  feast  of  the  family,  for  that,  me- 
thought,  I  had  never  heard  of  a  solemnity 
wherein  Nature  did  so  much  preside.  And  be¬ 
cause  propagation  of  families  proceedeth  from 
the  nuptial  copulation,  I  desired  to  know  of  him 
what  laws  and  customs  they  had  concerning 
marriage,  and  whether  they  kept  marriage  well, 
and  whether  they  were  tied  to  one  wife?  For 


209 

that  where  population  is  so  much  affected,  and 
such  as  with  them  it  seemed  to  be,  there  is  com¬ 
monly  permission  of  plurality  of  wives. 

To  this  he  said:  “You  have  reason  for  to  com¬ 
mend  that  excellent  institution  of  the  feast  of 
the  family;  and  indeed  we  have  experience,  that 
those  families  that  are  partakers  of  the  bless¬ 
ings  of  that  feast,  do  flourish  and  prosper  ever 
after  in  an  extraordinary  manner.  But  hear  me 
now,  and  I  will  tell  you  what  I  know.  You  shall 
understand  that  there  is  not  under  the  heavens 
so  chaste  a  nation  as  this  of  Bensalem,  nor  so 
free  from  all  pollution  or  foulness.  It  is  the  vir¬ 
gin  of  the  world. 

“I  have  not  read  of  any  such  chastity  in  any 
people  as  theirs.  And  their  usual  saying  is,  that 
whosoever  is  unchaste  cannot  reverence  himself; 
and  they  say  that  the  reverence  of  a  man’s  self, 
is,  next  religion,  the  chiefest  bridle  of  all  vices.” 

And  when  he  had  said  this  the  good  Jew 
paused  a  little;  whereupon  I,  far  more  willing 
to  hear  him  speak  on  than  to  speak  myself,  yet 
thinking  it  decent  that  upon  his  pause  of  speech 
I  should  not  be  altogether  silent,  said  only  this; 
that  I  would  say  to  him,  as  the  widow  of  Sa- 
repta  said  to  Elias,  that  he  was  come  to  bring 
to  memory  our  sins;  and  that  I  confess  theright- 
eousness  of  Bensalem  was  greater  than  the 
righteousness  of  Europe.  At  which  speech  he 
bowed  his  head,  and  went  on  this  manner. 

“They  have  also  many  wise  and  excellent 
laws  touching  marriage.  They  allow  no  poly¬ 
gamy.  They  have  ordained  that  none  do  inter¬ 
marry,  or  contract,  until  a  month  be  past  from 
their  first  interview.  Marriage  without  consent 
of  parents  they  do  not  make  void,  but  they 
mulct  it  in  the  inheritors;  for  the  children  of 
such  marriages  are  not  admitted  to  inherit  above 
a  third  part  of  their  parents’  inheritance.” 

And  as  we  were  thus  in  conference,  there 
came  one  that  seemed  to  be  a  messenger,  in  a 
rich  huke,  that  spake  with  the  Jew;  whereupon 
he  turned  to  me,  and  said,  “You  will  pardon 
me,  for  I  am  commanded  away  in  haste.”  The 
next  morning  he  came  to  me  again,  joyful  as  it 
seemed,  and  said,  “There  is  word  come  to  the 
Governor  of  the  city,  that  one  of  the  fathers  of 
Salomon’s  House  will  be  here  this  day  seven- 
night;  we  have  seen  none  of  them  this  dozen 
years.  His  coming  is  in  state;  but  the  cause  of 
his  coming  is  secret.  I  will  provide  you  and  your 
fellows  of  a  good  standing  to  see  his  entry.”  I 
thanked  him,  and  told  him  I  was  most  glad  of 
the  news. 

The  day  being  come  he  made  his  entry.  He 
was  a  man  of  middle  stature  and  age,  comely 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


210 

of  person,  and  had  an  aspect  as  if  he  pitied  men. 
He  was  clothed  in  a  robe  of  fine  black  cloth, 
with  wide  sleeves,  and  a  cape:  his  under  gar¬ 
ment  was  of  excellent  white  linen  down  to  the 
foot,  girt  with  a  girdle  of  the  same;  and  a  sin- 
don  or  tippet  of  the  same  about  his  neck.  He 
had  gloves  that  were  curious,  and  set  with  stone; 
and  shoes  of  peach-coloured  velvet.  His  neck 
was  bare  to  the  shoulders.  His  hat  was  like  a 
helmet,  or  Spanish  montero;  and  his  locks  curl¬ 
ed  below  it  decently:  they  were  of  colour  brown. 
His  beard  was  cut  round  and  of  the  same  col¬ 
our  with  his  hair,  somewhat  lighter.  He  was 
carried  in  a  rich  chariot,  without  wheels,  litter- 
wise,  with  two  horses  at  either  end,  richly  trap¬ 
ped  in  blue  velvet  embroidered;  and  two  foot¬ 
men  on  each  side  in  the  like  attire.  The  chariot 
was  all  of  cedar,  gilt,  and  adorned  with  crystal; 
save  that  the  fore-end  had  panels  of  sapphires, 
set  in  borders  of  gold,  and  the  hinder-end  the 
like  of  emeralds  of  the  Peru  colour.  There  was 
also  a  sun  of  gold,  radiant  upon  the  top,  in  the 
midst;  and  on  the  top  before,  a  small  cherub  of 
gold,  with  wings  displayed.  The  chariot  was 
covered  with  cloth  of  gold  tissued  upon  blue. 
He  had  before  him  fifty  attendants,  young  men 
all,  in  white  satin  loose  coats  to  the  midleg;  and 
stockings  of  white  silk,  and  shoes  of  blue  vel¬ 
vet;  and  hats  of  blue  velvet,  with  fine  plumes 
of  divers  colours,  set  round  like  hat-bands.  Next 
before  the  chariot  went  two  men,  bare-headed, 
in  linen  garments  down  to  the  foot,  girt,  and 
shoes  of  blue  velvet,  who  carried  the  one  a  cro¬ 
sier,  the  other  a  pastoral  staff  like  a  sheep-hook: 
neither  of  them  of  metal,  but  the  crosier  of 
balm-wood,  the  pastoral  staff  of  cedar.  Horse¬ 
men  he  had  none,  neither  before  nor  behind  his 
chariot:  as  it  seemeth,  to  avoid  all  tumult  and 
trouble.  Behind  his  chariot  went  all  the  officers 
and  principals  of  the  companies  of  the  city.  He 
sat  alone,  upon  cushions,  of  a  kind  of  excellent 
plush,  blue;  and  under  his  foot  curious  carpets 
of  silk  of  divers  colours,  like  the  Persian,  but 
far  finer.  He  held  up  his  bare  hand,  as  he  went, 
as  blessing  the  people,  but  in  silence.  The  street 
was  wonderfully  well  kept;  so  that  there  was 
never  any  army  had  their  men  stand  in  better 
battle-array  than  the  people  stood.  The  windows 
likewise  were  not  crowded,  but  every  one  stood 
in  them,  as  if  they  had  been  placed. 

When  the  show  was  passed,  the  Jew  said  to 
me,  “I  shall  not  be  able  to  attend  you  as  I  would, 
in  regard  of  some  charge  the  city  hath  laid  upon 
me  for  the  entertaining  of  this  great  person.” 
Three  days  after  the  Jew  came  to  me  again,  and 
said,  “Ye  are  happy  men;  for  the  father  of 


Salomon’s  House  taketh  knowledge  of  your  be¬ 
ing  here,  and  commanded  me  to  tell  you,  that 
he  will  admit  all  your  company  to  his  presence, 
and  have  private  conference  with  one  of  vou, 
that  ye  shall  choose;  and  for  this  hath  appoint¬ 
ed  the  next  day  after  to-morrow.  And  because 
he  meaneth  to  give  you  his  blessing,  he  hath 
appointed  it  in  the  forenoon.” 

We  came  at  our  day  and  hour,  and  I  was 
chosen  by  my  fellows  for  the  private  access.  We 
found  him  in  a  fair  chamber,  richly  hanged, 
and  carpeted  under  foot,  without  any  decrees 
to  the  state.  He  was  set  upon  a  low  throne  rich¬ 
ly  adorned,  and  a  rich  cloth  of  state  over  his 
head,  of  blue  satin  embroidered.  He  was  alone, 
save  that  he  had  two  pages  of  honour,  on  ei¬ 
ther  hand  one,  finely  attired  in  white.  His  un¬ 
der  garments  were  the  like  that  we  saw  him 
wear  in  the  chariot;  but  instead  of  his  gown,  he 
had  on  him  a  mantle  with  a  cape,  of  the  same 
fine  black,  fastened  about  him.  When  we  came 
in,  as  we  were  taught,  we  bowed  low  at  our  first 
entrance;  and  when  we  were  come  near  his 
chair,  he  stood  up,  holding  forth  his  hand  un¬ 
gloved,  and  in  posture  of  blessing;  and  we  every 
one  of  us  stooped  down,  and  kissed  the  hem  of 
his  tippet.  That  done,  the  rest  departed,  and  I 
remained.  Then  he  warned  the  pages  forth  of 
the  room,  and  caused  me  to  sit  down  beside  him, 
and  spake  to  me  thus  in  the  Spanish  tongue: 

“God  bless  thee,  my  son;  I  will  give  thee  the 
greatest  jewel  I  have.  For  I  will  impart  unto 
thee,  for  the  love  of  God  and  men,  a  relation  of 
the  true  state  of  Salomon’s  House.  Son,  to  make 
you  know  the  true  state  of  Salomon’s  House,  I 
will  keep  this  order.  First,  I  will  set  forth  unto 
you  the  end  of  our  foundation.  Secondly,  the 
preparations  and  instruments  we  have  for  our 
works.  Thirdly,  the  several  employments  and 
functions  whereto  our  fellows  are  assigned.  And 
fourthly,  the  ordinances  and  rites  which  we  ob¬ 
serve. 

“The  end  of  our  foundation  is  the  knowledge 
of  causes,  and  secret  motions  of  things;  and  the 
enlarging  of  the  bounds  of  human  empire,  to 
the  effecting  of  all  things  possible. 

“The  preparations  and  instruments  are  these. 
We  have  large  and  deep  caves  of  several  depths: 
the  deepest  are  sunk  six  hundred  fathoms;  and 
some  of  them  are  digged  and  made  under  great 
hills  and  mountains;  so  that  if  you  reckon  to¬ 
gether  the  depth  of  the  hill,  and  the  depth  of 
the  cave,  they  are,  some  of  them,  above  three 
miles  deep.  For  we  find  that  the  depth  of  a  hill, 
and  the  depth  of  a  cave  from  the  flat,  is  the 
same  thing;  both  remote  alike  from  the  sun  and 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


heaven’s  beams,  and  from  the  open  air.  These 
caves  we  call  the  lower  region,  and  we  use  them 
for  all  coagulations,  indurations,  refrigerations, 
and  conservations  of  bodies.  We  use  them  like¬ 
wise  for  the  imitation  of  natural  mines,  and  the 
producing  also  of  new  artificial  metals,  by  com¬ 
positions  and  materials  which  we  use,  and  lay 
there  for  many  years.  We  use  them  also  some¬ 
times  (which  may  seem  strange)  for  curing  of 
some  diseases,  and  for  prolongation  of  life,  in 
some  hermits  that  choose  to  live  there,  well  ac¬ 
commodated  of  all  things  necessary,  and  indeed 
live  very  long;  by  whom  also  we  learn  many 
things. 

“We  have  burials  in  several  earths,  where  we 
put  divers  cements,  as  the  Chinese  do  their  por¬ 
celain.  But  we  have  them  in  greater  variety, 
and  some  of  them  more  fine.  We  also  have  great 
variety  of  composts  and  soils,  for  the  making 
of  the  earth  fruitful. 

“We  have  high  towers,  the  highest  about  half 
a  mile  in  height,  and  some  of  them  likewise  set 
upon  high  mountains,  so  that  the  vantage  of 
the  hill,  with  the  tower,  is  in  the  highest  of  them 
three  miles  at  least.  And  these  places  we  call 
the  upper  region,  accounting  the  air  between 
the  high  places  and  the  low  as  a  middle  region. 
We  use  these  towers,  according  to  their  several 
heights  and  situations,  for  insulation,  refrigera¬ 
tion,  conservation,  and  for  the  view  of  divers 
meteors — as  winds,  rain,  snow,  hail;  and  some 
of  the  fiery  meteors  also.  And  upon  them,  in 
some  places,  are  dwellings  of  hermits,  whom  we 
visit  sometimes,  and  instruct  what  to  observe. 

“We  have  great  lakes,  both  salt  and  fresh, 
whereof  we  have  use  for  the  fish  and  fowl.  We 
use  them  also  for  burials  of  some  natural  bodies, 
for  we  find  a  difference  in  things  buried  in  earth, 
or  in  air  below  the  earth,  and  things  buried  in 
water.  We  have  also  pools,  of  which  some  do 
strain  fresh  water  out  of  salt,  and  others  by  art 
do  turn  fresh  water  into  salt.  We  have  also  some 
rocks  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  and  some  bays 
upon  the  shore  for  some  works,  wherein  is  re¬ 
quired  the  air  and  vapour  of  the  sea.  We  have 
likewise  violent  streams  and  cataracts,  which 
serve  us  for  many  motions;  and  likewise  engines 
for  multiplying  and  enforcing  of  winds  to  set 
also  on  divers  motions. 

“We  have  also  a  number  of  artificial  wells 
and  fountains,  made  in  imitation  of  the  natural 
sources  and  baths,  as  tincted  upon  vitriol,  sul¬ 
phur,  steel,  brass,  lead,  nitre,  and  other  miner¬ 
als;  and  again,  we  have  little  wells  for  infusions 
ol  many  things,  where  the  waters  take  the  vir¬ 
tue  quicker  and  better  than  in  vessels  or  ba¬ 


21 1 

sins.  And  amongst  them  we  have  a  water,  which 
we  call  Water  of  Paradise,  being  by  that  we  do 
to  it  made  very  sovereign  for  health  and  pro¬ 
longation  of  life. 

“We  have  also  great  and  spacious  houses, 
where  we  imitate  and  demonstrate  meteors-as 
snow,  hail,  rain,  some  artificial  rains  of  bodies, 
and  not  of  water,  thunders,  lightnings;  also 
generations  of  bodies  in  air — as  frogs,  flies,  and 
divers  others. 

“We  have  also  certain  chambers,  which  we 
call  chambers  of  health,  where  we  qualify  the 
air  as  we  think  good  and  proper  for  the  cure  of 
divers  diseases,  and  preservation  of  health. 

“We  have  also  fair  and  large  baths,  of  sev¬ 
eral  mixtures,  for  the  cure  of  diseases,  and  the 
restoring  of  man’s  body  from  arefaction;  and 
others  for  the  confirming  of  it  in  strength  of 
sinews,  vital  parts,  and  the  very  juice  and  sub¬ 
stance  of  the  body. 

“We  have  also  large  and  various  orchards 
and  gardens,  wherein  we  do  not  so  much  respect 
beauty  as  variety  of  ground  and  soil,  proper  for 
divers  trees  and  herbs,  and  some  very  spacious, 
where  trees  and  berries  are  set,  whereof  we 
make  divers  kinds  of  drinks,  besides  the  vine¬ 
yards.  In  these  we  practise  likewise  all  conclu¬ 
sions  of  grafting  and  inoculating,  as  well  of  wild- 
trees  as  fruit-trees,  which  produceth  many  ef¬ 
fects.  And  we  make  by  art,  in  the  same  orchards 
and  gardens,  trees  and  flowers,  to  come  earlier 
or  later  than  their  seasons,  and  to  come  up  and 
bear  more  speedily  than  by  their  natural  course 
they  do.  We  make  them  also  by  art  greater 
much  than  their  nature;  and  their  fruit  greater 
and  sweeter,  and  of  differing  taste,  smell,  colour, 
and  figure,  from  their  nature.  And  many  of  them 
we  so  order  as  they  become  of  medicinal  use. 

“We  have  also  means  to  make  divers  plants 
rise  by  mixtures  of  earths  without  seeds,  and  like¬ 
wise  to  make  divers  new  plants,  differing  from 
the  vulgar,  and  to  make  one  tree  or  plant  turn 
into  another. 

“We  have  also  parks,  and  enclosures  of  all 
sorts,  of  beasts  and  birds;  which  we  use  not  only 
for  view  or  rareness,  but  likewise  for  dissections 
and  trials,  that  thereby  we  may  take  light  what 
may  be  wrought  upon  the  body  of  man.  Wherein 
we  find  many  strange  effects:  as  continuing  life 
in  them,  though  divers  parts,  which  you  account 
vital,  be  perished  and  taken  forth;  resuscitating 
of  some  that  seem  dead  in  appearance,  and  the 
like.  We  try  also  all  poisons,  and  other  medicines 
upon  them,  as  well  of  chirurgery  as  physic.  By  art 
likewise  we  make  them  greater  or  taller  than  their 
kind  is,  and  contrariwise  dwarf  them  and  stay 


212 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


their  growth;  we  make  them  more  fruitful  and 
bearing  than  their  kind  is,  and  contrariwise  bar¬ 
ren  and  not  generative.  Also  we  make  them  differ 
in  colour,  shape,  activity,  many  ways.  We  find 
means  to  make  commixtures  and  copulations  of 
divers  kinds,  which  have  produced  many  new 
kinds,  and  them  not  barren,  as  the  general  opin¬ 
ion  is.  We  make  a  number  of  kinds,  of  serpents, 
worms,  flies,  fishes,  of  putrefaction,  whereof 
some  are  advanced  (in  effect)  to  be  perfect  crea¬ 
tures,  like  beasts  or  birds,  and  have  sexes,  and 
do  propagate.  Neither  do  we  this  by  chance,  but 
we  know  beforehand  of  w  hat  matter  and  com¬ 
mixture,  what  kind  of  those  creatures  will  arise. 

“We  have  also  particular  pools  where  we 
make  trials  upon  fishes,  as  we  have  said  before 
of  beasts  and  birds. 

“We  have  also  places  for  breed  and  genera¬ 
tion  of  those  kinds  of  worms  and  flies  which  are 
of  special  use;  such  as  are  with  you  your  silk¬ 
worms  and  bees. 

“I  will  not  hold  you  long  with  recounting  of 
our  brew-houses,  bake-houses,  and  kitchens, 
where  are  made  divers  drinks,  breads,  and 
meats,  rare  and  of  special  effects.  Wines  we  have 
of  grapes,  and  drinks  of  other  juice,  of  fruits, 
of  grains,  and  of  roots,  and  of  mixtures  with 
honey,  sugar,  manna,  and  fruits  dried  and  de¬ 
cocted;  also  of  the  tears  or  woundings  of  trees, 
and  of  the  pulp  of  canes.  And  these  drinks  are 
of  several  ages,  some  to  the  age  or  last  of  forty 
years.  We  have  drinks  also  brewed  with  several 
herbs,  and  roots  and  spices;  yea,  with  several 
fleshes  and  white-meats;  whereof  some  of  the 
drinks  are  such  as  they  are  in  effect  meat  and 
drink  both,  so  that  divers,  especially  in  age,  do 
desire  to  live  with  them  with  little  or  no  meat 
or  bread.  And  above  all  we  strive  to  have 
drinks  of  extreme  thin  parts,  to  insinuate  into 
the  body,  and  yet  without  all  biting,  sharpness, 
or  fretting;  insomuch  as  some  of  them,  put  up¬ 
on  the  back  of  your  hand,  w  ill  with  a  little  stay 
pass  through  to  the  palm,  and  taste  yet  mild 
to  the  mouth.  We  have  also  waters,  which  we 
ripen  in  that  fashion,  as  they  become  nourish¬ 
ing,  so  that  they  are  indeed  excellent  drinks, 
and  many  will  use  no  other.  Bread  we  have  of 
several  grains,  roots,  and  kernels;  yea,  and 
some  of  flesh,  and  fish,  dried;  with  divers  kinds 
of  leavenings  and  seasonings;  so  that  some  do 
extremely  move  appetites,  some  do  nourish  so, 
as  divers  do  live  of  them,  without  any  other 
meat,  who  live  very  long.  So  for  meats,  we  have 
some  of  them  so  beaten,  and  made  tender,  and 
mortified,  yet  without  all  corrupting,  as  a  weak 
heat  of  the  stomach  will  turn  them  into  good 


chilus,  as  well  as  a  strong  heat  would  meat  oth¬ 
erwise  prepared.  We  have  some  meats  also, 
and  breads,  and  drinks,  which  taken  by  men, 
enable  them  to  fast  long  after;  and  some  other, 
that  used  make  the  very  flesh  of  men’s  bodies 
sensibly  more  hard  and  tough,  and  their  strength 
far  greater  than  otherwise  it  would  be. 

“We  have  dispensatories  or  shops  of  medi¬ 
cines;  wherein  you  may  easily  think,  if  we  have 
such  variety  of  plants,  and  living  creatures, 
more  than  you  have  in  Europe  (for  we  know' 
what  you  have),  the  simples,  drugs  and  ingre¬ 
dients  of  medicines,  must  likewise  be  in  so  much 
the  greater  variety.  We  have  them  likewise  of 
divers  ages,  and  long  fermentations.  And  for 
their  preparations,  we  have  not  only  all  manner 
of  exquisite  distillations  and  separations, and 
especially  by  gentle  heats,  and  percolations 
through  divers  strainers,  yea,  and  substances; 
but  also  exact  forms  of  composition,  whereby 
they  incorporate  almost  as  they  were  natural 
simples. 

“We  have  also  divers  mechanical  arts,  which 
you  have  not;  and  stuffs  made  by  them,  as  pa¬ 
pers,  linen,  silks,  tissues,  dainty  works  of  feath¬ 
ers  of  wronderful  lustre,  excellent  dyes,  and 
many  others:  and  shops  likewise,  as  well  for 
such  as  are  not  brought  into  vulgar  use  amongst 
us,  as  for  those  that  are.  For  you  must  know, 
that  of  the  things  before  recited,  many  of  them 
are  grown  into  use  throughout  the  kingdom, 
but  yet,  if  they  did  flow  from  our  invention,  we 
have  of  them  also  for  patterns  and  principles. 

“We  have  also  furnaces  of  great  diversities, 
and  that  keep  great  diversity  of  heats:fierce 
and  quick,  strong  and  constant,  soft  and  mild; 
blowm,  quiet,  dry,  moist,  and  the  like.  But 
above  all  we  have  heats,  in  imitation  of  the 
sun’s  and  heavenly  bodies’  heats,  that  pass  di¬ 
vers  inequalities,  and  (as  it  were)  orbs,  pro¬ 
gresses,  and  returns,  w'hereby  we  produce  ad¬ 
mirable  effects.  Besides,  we  have  heats  of  dungs, 
and  of  bellies  and  maws  of  living  creatures  and 
of  their  bloods  and  bodies,  and  of  hays  and 
herbs  laid  up  moist,  of  lime  unquenched,  and 
such  like.  Instruments  also  which  generate  heat 
only  by  motion.  And  farther,  places  for  strong 
insulations;  and  again,  places  under  the  earth, 
which  by  nature  or  art  yield  heat.  These  divers 
heats  we  use  as  the  nature  of  the  operation 
which  w'e  intend  requireth. 

“We  have  also  perspective  houses,  where  we 
make  demonstrations  of  all  lights  and  radia¬ 
tions,  and  of  all  colours;  and  out  of  things  un¬ 
coloured  and  transparent,  we  can  represent  un¬ 
to  you  all  several  colours,  not  in  rainbows  (as 


NEW  ATLANTIS 


it  is  in  gems  and  prisms),  but  of  themselves  sin¬ 
gle.  We  represent  also  all  multiplications  of 
light,  which  we  carry  to  great  distance,  and 
make  so  sharp,  as  to  discern  small  points  and 
lines.  Also  all  colourations  of  light;  all  delusions 
and  deceits  of  the  sight,  in  figures,  magnitudes, 
motions,  colours;  all  demonstrations  of  shadows. 
We  find  also  divers  means  yet  unknown  to  you, 
of  producing  of  light,  originally  from  divers 
bodies.  We  procure  means  of  seeing  objects  afar 
oflf,  as  in  the  heaven  and  remote  places;  and 
represent  things  near  as  afar  off,  and  things  afar 
off  as  near;  making  feigned  distances.  We  have 
also  helps  for  the  sight,  far  above  spectacles  and 
glasses  in  use.  We  have  also  glasses  and  means 
to  see  small  and  minute  bodies,  perfectly  and 
distinctly;  as  the  shapes  and  colours  of  small 
flies  and  worms,  grains,  and  flaws  in  gems  which 
cannot  otherwise  be  seen,  observations  in  urine 
and  blood  not  otherwise  to  be  seen.  We  make 
artificial  rainbows,  halos,  and  circles  about  light. 
We  represent  also  all  manner  of  reflections,  re¬ 
fractions,  and  multiplications  of  visual  beams 
of  objects. 

“We  have  also  precious  stones  of  all  kinds, 
many  of  them  of  great  beauty  and  to  you  un¬ 
known;  crystals  likewise,  and  glasses  of  divers 
kinds;  and  amongst  them  some  of  metals  vitrifi- 
cated,  and  other  materials,  besides  those  of 
which  you  make  glass.  Also  a  number  of  fossils 
and  imperfect  minerals,  which  you  have  not. 
Likewise  loadstones  of  prodigious  virtue:  and 
other  rare  stones,  both  natural  and  artificial. 

“We  have  also  sound-houses,  where  we  prac¬ 
tise  and  demonstrate  all  sounds  and  their  gen¬ 
eration.  We  have  harmonies  which  you  have  not, 
of  quarter-sounds  and  lesser  slides  of  sounds. 
Divers  instruments  of  music  likewise  to  you  un¬ 
known,  somesweeter  than  any  you  have;  togeth¬ 
er  with  bells  and  rings  that  are  dainty  and  sweet. 
We  represent  small  sounds  as  great  and  deep; 
likewise  great  sounds,  extenuate  and  sharp;  we 
make  divers  tremblings  and  warblingsofsounds, 
which  in  their  original  are  entire.  We  represent 
and  imitate  all  articulate  sounds  andletters,  and 
the  voices  and  notes  of  beasts  and  birds.  We  have 
certain  helps,  which  set  to  the  ear  do  further  the 
hearing  greatly.  We  have  also  divers  strange  and 
artificial  echoes,  reflecting  the  voice  many  times, 
and  as  it  were  tossing  it ;  and  some  that  give  back 
the  voice  louder  than  it  came,  some  shriller  and 
some  deeper;  yea,  some  rendering  the  voice,  dif- 
feringin  the  letters  or  articulate  sound  from  that 
they  receive.  We  have  also  means  to  convey 
sounds  in  trunks  and  pipes,  in  strange  lines  and 
distances. 


213 

“We  have  also  perfume-houses,  wherewith  we 
join  also  practices  of  taste.  We  multiply  smells, 
which  may  seem  strange:  we  imitate  smells, 
making  all  smells  to  breathe  out  of  other  mix¬ 
tures  than  those  that  give  them.  We  makedi  vers 
imitations  of  taste  likewise,  so  that  they  will  de¬ 
ceive  any  man’s  taste.  And  in  this  house  we 
contain  also  a  confiture-house,  where  we  make 
all  sweetmeats,  dry  and  moist,  and  divers  pleas¬ 
ant  wines,  milks,  broths,  and  salads,  far  in 
greater  variety  than  you  have. 

“We  have  also  engine-houses,  where  are  pre¬ 
pared  engines  and  instruments  for  all  sorts  of 
motions.  There  we  imitate  and  practise  to  make 
swifter  motions  than  any  you  have,  either  out 
of  your  muskets  or  any  engine  that  you  have; 
and  to  make  them  and  multiply  them  more  easi¬ 
ly  and  with  small  force,  by  wheels  and  other 
means,  and  to  make  them  stronger  and  more 
violent  than  yours  are,  exceeding  your  greatest 
cannons  and  basilisks.  We  represent  also  ord¬ 
nance  and  instruments  of  war  and  engines  of  all 
kinds;  and  likewise  new  mixtures  and  composi¬ 
tions  of  gunpowder,  wild-fires  burning  in  water 
and  unquenchable,  also  fire-works  of  all  variety, 
both  for  pleasure  and  use.  We  imitate  also  flights 
of  birds;  we  have  some  degrees  of  flying  in  the 
air.  We  have  ships  and  boats  for  going  under 
water  and  brooking  of  seas,  also  swimming-gir¬ 
dles  and  supporters.  We  have  divers  curious 
clocks,  and  other  like  motions  of  return,  and 
some  perpetual  motions.  We  imitate  also  mo¬ 
tions  of  living  creatures  by  images  of  men,  beasts, 
birds,  fishes,  and  serpents;  we  have  also  a  great 
number  of  other  various  motions,  strange  for 
equality,  fineness,  and  subtilty. 

“We  have  also  a  mathematical-house,  where 
are  represented  all  instruments,  as  well  of  geom¬ 
etry  as  astronomy,  exquisitely  made. 

“We  have  also  houses  of  deceits  of  the  senses, 
where  we  represent  all  manner  of  feats  of  jug¬ 
gling,  false  apparitions,  impostures,  and  illu¬ 
sions,  and  their  fallacies.  And  surely  you  will 
easily  believe  that  we,  that  have  so  many  things 
truly  natural  which  induce  admiration,  could 
in  a  world  of  particulars  deceive  the  senses  if 
we  would  disguise  those  things,  and  labour  to 
make  them  seem  more  miraculous.  But  we  do 
hate  all  impostures  and  lies,  insomuch  as  we  have 
severely  forbidden  it  to  all  our  fellows,  under 
pain  ofignominy  and  fines,  that  they  do  not  show 
any  natural  work  or  thing  adorned  or  swelling, 
but  only  pure  as  it  is,  and  without  all  affectation 
of  strangeness. 

“These  are,  my  son,  the  riches  of  Salomon’s 
House. 


2 id  NEW  ATLANTIS 


“For  the  several  employments  and  offices  of 
our  fellows,  we  have  twelve  that  sail  into  foreign 
countries  under  the  names  of  other  nations  (for 
our  own  we  conceal),  who  bring  us  the  books 
and  abstracts,  and  patterns  of  experiments  of 
all  other  parts.  These  we  call  Merchants  of  Light. 

“We  have  three  that  collect  the  experiments 
which  arein  all  books. These  wecall  Depredators. 

“We  have  three  that  collect  the  experiments 
of  all  mechanical  arts,  and  alsoofliberal  sciences, 
and  also  of  practises  which  are  not  brought  into 
arts.  These  we  call  Mystery-men. 

“We  have  three  that  try  new  experiments, 
such  as  themselves  think  good.  These  we  call 
Pioneers  or  Miners. 

“We  have  three  that  draw  the  experiments 
of  the  former  four  into  titles  and  tables,  to  give 
the  better  light  for  the  drawing  of  observations 
and  axiomsout  of  them.  These  wecall  Compilers. 

“We  have  three  that  bend  themselves,  look¬ 
ing  into  the  experiments  of  their  fellows,  and 
cast  about  how  to  draw  out  of  them  things  of 
use  and  practice  for  man’s  life  and  knowledge, 
as  well  for  works  as  for  plain  demonstration  of 
causes,  means  of  natural  divinations,  and  the 
easy  and  clear  discovery  of  the  virtues  and  parts 
of  bodies.  These  we  call  Dowry-men  or  Bene¬ 
factors. 

“Then  after  divers  meetings  and  consults  of 
our  whole  number,  to  consider  of  the  former  la¬ 
bours  and  collections,  we  have  three  that  take 
care  out  of  them  to  direct  new  experiments,  of 
a  higher  light,  more  penetrating  into  Nature 
than  the  former.  These  we  call  Lamps. 

“We  have  three  others  that  do  execute  the 
experiments  so  directed,  and  report  them .  These 
we  call  Inoculators. 

“Lastly,  we  have  three  that  raise  the  former 
discoveries  by  experiments  intogreater  observa¬ 
tions,  axioms,  and  aphorisms.  These  we  call  In¬ 
terpreters  of  Nature. 

“We  have  also,  as  you  must  think,  novices 
and  apprentices,  that  the  succession  of  the  for¬ 
mer  employed  men  do  not  fail;  besides  a  great 
number  of  servants  and  attendants,  men  and 
women.  And  this  we  do  also:  we  have  consul¬ 
tations,  which  of  the  inventions  and  experiences 
which  we  have  discovered  shall  be  published, 
and  which  not:  and  take  all  an  oath  of  secrecy 
for  the  concealing  of  those  which  we  think  fit 
to  keep  secret :  though  some  of  those  we  do  reveal 
sometimes  to  the  State,  and  some  not. 

“For  our  ordinances  and  rites,  we  have  two 
very  long  and  fair  galleries:  in  one  of  these  we 

PRINTED  IN 


place  patterns  and  samples  of  all  manner  of  the 
more  rare  and  excellent  inventions:  in  the  other 
we  place  the  statues  of  all  principal  inventors. 
There  we  have  thestatueofyour  Columbus,  that 
discovered  the  West  Indies:  also  the  inventor 
of  ships:  your  Monk  that  was  the  inventor  of 
ordnance  and  of  gunpowder :  the  in  ventor  of  mu¬ 
sic:  theinventorofletters:  the  inventor  ofprint- 
ing:  the  inventor  of  observations  of  astronomy: 
the  inventor  of  works  in  metal:  the  inventor  of 
glass:  the  inventor  of  silk  of  the  worm:  the  in¬ 
ventor  of  wine:  the  inventor  of  corn  and  bread: 
the  inventor  of  sugars:  and  all  these  by  more 
certain  tradition  than  you  have.  Then  we  have 
divers  inventors  of  our  own,  of  excellent  works, 
which  since  you  have  not  seen,  it  were  too  long 
to  make  descriptions  of  them;  and  besides,  in 
the  right  understanding  of  those  descriptions 
you  might  easily  err.  For  upon  every  invention 
of  value  we  erect  a  statue  to  the  inventor,  and 
give  him  a  liberal  and  honourable  reward.  These 
statues  are  some  of  brass,  some  of  marble  and 
touchstone,  some  of  cedar  and  other  special 
woods  gilt  and  adorned;  some  of  iron,  some  of 
silver,  some  of  gold. 

“We  have  certain  hymns  and  services,  which 
we  say  daily,  of  laud  and  thanks  to  God  for  His 
marvellous  works.  And  forms  of  prayer,  implor¬ 
ing  His  aid  and  blessing  for  the  illumination  of 
our  labours,  and  the  turning  of  them  into  good 
and  holy  uses. 

“Lastly,  we  have  circuits  or  visits,  of  divers 
principal  ci  ties  ofthe  kingdom;  where,  as  it  com- 
eth  to  pass,  we  do  publish  such  new  profitable 
inventions  as  we  think  good.  And  we  do  also  de¬ 
clare  natural  divinations  of  diseases,  plagues, 
swarms  of  hurtful  creatures,  scarcity,  tempests, 
earthquakes,  great  inundations,  comets,  tem¬ 
perature  of  the  year,  and  divers  other  things; 
and  we  give  counsel  thereupon,  what  the  people 
shall  do  fortheprevention  and  remedy  of  them.” 

And  when  he  had  said  this  he  stood  up;  and 
I,  as  I  had  been  taught,  knelt  down;  and  he  laid 
his  right  hand  upon  my  head,  and  said,  “God 
bless  thee,  my  son,  and  God  bless  this  relation 
which  I  have  made.  I  give  thee  leave  to  publish 
it,  for  the  good  of  other  nations;  for  we  here  are 
in  God’s  bosom,  a  land  unknown.”  And  so  he 
left  me;  having  assigned  a  value  of  about  two 
thousand  ducats  for  a  bounty  to  me  and  my  fel¬ 
lows.  For  they  give  great  largesses,  where  they 
come,  upon  all  occasions. 

The  rest  was  not  perfected 

THE  U.S.A. 


. 


^rT^T^T^rV^? 


^  *  —  «  --»  «  - 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


T^i, 


F'^PV^1 


iT?^^ 


PWP?^ 


SPP^F’V^F* 


TWPW^ 


P-P^PP^- 


1^77^ 


PP^f^ 


PT^PT^ 


’"P3^P:^ 


F>P^^ 


F^FP^ 


F^V^ 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 

BEAUTY 

BEING 


CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 


EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 
GOVERNMENT 
HABIT 
HAPPINESS 


HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 


JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 


MATHEMATICS 


T^PP. 


?^7r 


ppppH 

7^7 

7^7r 


TiT? 

PpPP^ 


7^7?; 

p^t^; 

7^7^' 

7^7^; 

7^7=' 

7^75 

75^75 

7^75 


7^75 

7^P75 


T^P^I 

WP^ 


^-P  a^r1  •^r1 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


)?(vv,v rj-^'  *v  r~  ^-r=J  .•v^-.^  ^vV  ^  ~j-r^-  %• :  /  -,'V .-  :  v  -  ,v  *  ,%  --, 


^7^ 


5^73^ 

K?7^ 


51^7^ 


f5^7^ 


^T^- 


f^T^- 


f^T^ 


y^& 

IH& 


^7^- 


&?& 


MATTER 
MECHANICS 
MEDICINE 
MEMORY  AND 
IMAGINATION 
METAPHYSICS 
MIND 


MONARCHY 
NATURE 
NECESSITY  AND 
CONTINGENCY 
OLIGARCHY 
ONE  AND  MANY 
OPINION 


RELATION 

RELIGION 

REVOLUTION 

RHETORIC 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

SCIENCE 

SENSE 


SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 


OPPOSITION 

PHILOSOPHY 

PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 


7^7^ 


T^TT^ST- 


7^77^S7 


^7^ 


7^7^ 


7^77^7 


7^7757 


7^7^ 


7^7^ 


*W7^ 


7^77^7 


7^77^ 


^77^7 


737W7 


7^7=^ 


7=^7^ 


^77$7i 


7^7^ 


7^7^ 


7^7^ 


7^7^77 


7^7^77 


T^7^7 


=^^7^^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^7^^7^7 


