I  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


& 

a 

28.  GILBERT 

41.  GIBBON  II 

GALILEO 

HARVEY 

42.  KANT 

29.  CERVANTES 

43.  AMERICAN  STATE 

i-'” 

PAPERS 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 

THE  FEDERALIST 

s> 

k  » 

J.  S.  MILL 

•■A. 

31.  DESCARTES 

SPINOZA 

44.  BOSWELL 

32.  MILTON 

45.  LAVOISIER 

^A- 

FOURIER 

^  <L 

*^r 

33.  PASCAL 

FARADAY 

34.  NEWTON 

46.  HEGEL 

HUYGENS 

* 

47.  GOETHE 

*3*r 

■k. « 

35.  LOCKE 

£> 

BERKELEY 

48.  MELVILLE 

a* 

HUME 

- 

49.  DARWIN 

36.  SWIFT 

*  N 

STERNE 

50.  MARX 

ENGELS 

Sf 

37.  FIELDING 

51.  TOLSTOY 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 

ROUSSEAU 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

The  university  of  Chicago 
The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  oj  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 


by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc, 

Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Karl  Marx,  1818-1883 


On  his  father’s  side,  Marx  was  descended  from 
a  family  of  eminent  rabbis.  His  father,  a  pros¬ 
perous  lawyer,  holding  an  official  post  in  the 
Prussian  service,  adopted  Lutheranism  for  him¬ 
self  and  his  family  in  1824.  His  mother  was  a 
simple  woman  of  Hungarian  origin,  who  never 
learned  to  speak  or  read  German. 

Marx  was  born  May  j,  1818,  in  the  ancient 
city  of  Trier  in  the  Rhineland,  where  he  com¬ 
pleted  his  early  schooling.  At  seventeen  he  was 
sent  to  the  University  of  Bonn  to  study  law, 
but  appears  to  have  devoted  most  of  his  time  to 
“wild  frolics,"  and  the  following  year,  after 
engaging  in  a  duel,  he  was  transferred  to  the 
University  of  Berlin,  which  had  the  reputation 
of  being  a '  workshop"  rather  than  a  “tavern." 
Instead  of  applying  himself  to  the  study  of  the 
law,  Marx  read  the  Latin,  English,  and  Italian 
classics  and  began  to  “wrestle  with  philosophy," 
as  he  wrote  his  family.  At  nineteen  he  became 
the  youngest  member  of  the  “Doktor  Klub,"  a 
group  of  “young  Hegelians"  who  gathered  to 
discuss  the  rival  interpretations  of  Hegel’s  re¬ 
ligious  and  philosophic  views.  They  criticized 
religious  orthodoxy  along  the  lines  suggested 
by  Feuerbach’s  Essence  of  Christianity  and 
adopted  positions  on  political  questions  “at 
the  extreme  left  wing  of  the  republican  move¬ 
ment."  The  triumph  of  conservatism  in  gov¬ 
ernmental  and  educational  circles  led  Marx  to 
hasten  the  completion  of  his  university  work. 
He  finished  a  dissertation  On  the  Difference  be - 
tween  the  Natural  Philosophies  of  Democritus 
and  the  Epicureansy  submitted  it  to  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Jena,  then  notorious  for  its  readiness 
to  grant  diplomas,  and  received  his  doctoral 
degree  in  1841. 

Convinced  that  an  academic  career  was 
closed  because  of  the  conservative  reaction, 
Marx  turned  to  journalism.  In  October,  1842 
he  became  an  editor  of  the  liberal  paper  of 
Cologne,  the  Rheinische  Zeitung .  In  its  pages 
he  defended  the  wine-growing  peasants  of  the 
Moselle  against  the  wood-theft  laws  enacted 
by  the  Rhenish  diet,  and  expressed  his  growing 
awareness  of  economic  issues.  The  paper  was 
suppressed,  and  he  came  reluctantly  to  the 


view  that  “physical  force  must  be  overthrown 
with  physical  force,  and  theory  will  be  a  phys¬ 
ical  force  as  soon  as  the  masses  understand  it." 
The  experience  on  the  Rheinische  Zeitung ,  he 
later  testified,  led  him  “to  move  from  pure 
politics  to  socialism." 

After  the  suppression  of  the  paper  Marx 
married  his  boyhood  sweetheart,  the  aristo¬ 
cratic  Jenny  von  Westphalen,  and  went  to  Paris 
to  further  his  knowledge  of  economics  and  so¬ 
cialism.  He  was  soon  associated  with  Louis 
Blanc,  Proudhon,  Heine,  and  the  other  Ger¬ 
man  6migr6s  and  French  socialists  whose  efforts 
made  Paris  the  intellectual  center  of  the  Social¬ 
ist  movement.  With  the  well-known  literary 
leader  of  Radical  Hegelianism,  Arnold  Ruge, 
he  edited  the  Deutsch-franzosische  Jahrbiichery 
which  in  its  first  and  only  issue  contained  arti¬ 
cles  by  Feuerbach,  Bakunin,  and  Engels,  as 
well  as  two  by  Marx,  one  on  the  Jewish  ques¬ 
tion  and  the  other  on  Hegel’s  philosophy  of 
law.  Marx’s  journalistic  efforts  in  Paris  were 
then  devoted  chiefly  to  the  radical  magazine, 
the  Vorw'drts . 

While  in  Paris  Marx  met  Friedrich  Engels 
(1820-1895),  with  whom  he  began  a  lifelong 
friendship  and  collaboration.  Engels,  the  son 
of  a  cotton  -manufacturer  of  Barmen,  Germany, 
was  then  working  in  one  of  his  father’s  facto¬ 
ries  in  England,  where  he  associated  with  the 
Owenites  and  Chartists  and  had  the  opportu¬ 
nity,  denied  to  Marx,  of  studying  at  close  range 
the  organization  of  modern  manufacture  and 
its  impact  upon  the  workers.  His  Position  of 
the  Working  Classes  in  Etigland  (1844)  was 
written  from  this  experience. 

In  1845  the  entire  staff  of  the  Vorw&rts  re¬ 
ceived  orders,  instigated  by  the  Prussian  Gov¬ 
ernment,  to  leave  France,  and  Marx  went  to 
Brussels,  where  he  was  soon  joined  by  Engels. 
By  this  time  he  had  sketched  his  theory  of  his¬ 
tory,  and  with  Engels  as  his  collaborator,  be¬ 
gan  to  work  it  out  in  detail.  Together  they 
wrote  the  German  Ideologyy  which,  however, 
was  not  published  until  1932.  They  acquired  a 
local  German  weekly,  the  Briisseller  Deutsche 
Zeitungy  and  “commenced  political  agitation," 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


v! 

as  Engels  later  wrote,  by  joining  a  commu¬ 
nistic  society,  the  League  of  the  Just,  which 
had  branches  in  Brussels,  London,  Paris,  and 
several  Swiss  towns.  This  group  had  become 
the  League  of  the  Communists,  when  it  met  in 
London  in  1847,  and  Marx  and  Engels  were 
assigned  the  task  of  stating  its  aims.  They 
produced  the  Communist  Manifesto  \  Engels 
wrote  a  first  draft  which  was  rewritten  by 
Marx. 

Shortly  after  its  publication,  the  February 
Revolution  of  1848  broke  out  in  France.  Marx 
and  Engels,  expelled  from  Belgium,  paid  a 
brief  visit  to  that  country  before  going  to  Co¬ 
logne  to  aid  the  revolution  there.  They  founded 
a  daily  newspaper,  the  Neue  Rheinische  Zeitung , 
as  “An  Organ  of  Democracy,”  and  were  able  to 
carry  on  their  campaign  for  revolution  for  al¬ 
most  a  year  before  the  paper  was  suppressed. 
Marx  was  prosecuted  for  high  treason  and, 
though  acquitted  by  the  jury,  he  was  forced  to 
leave  Prussian  territory.  He  turned  again  to 
France,  but  was  soon  presented  with  the  choice 
of  either  settling  in  Brittany  or  leaving  France; 
he  preferred  to  go  to  England  for  “the  next 
dance.” 

Marx  passed  the  last  thirty-four  years  of  his 
life  in  England,  living  with  his  family  in  the 
slums  of  Soho,  almost  completely  dependent 
upon  the  small  sums  Engels  could  send  him.  In 
1852  he  became  a  political  correspondent  for 
the  New  York  Tribune ,  but  his  articles  never 
brought  more  than  two  pounds  and  usually  not 
that  much.  Most  of  his  time  was  spent  in#por- 
ing  over  books  and  newspapers  in  the  British 
Museum  or  writing  at  home.  While  suffering 
from  the  loss  of  three  of  his  six  children,  and 
from  poverty,  liver  attacks,  carbuncles,  and 


boils —  “Plagued  like  Job,  though  not  so  God¬ 
fearing,”  he  wrote  to  Engels— Marx  produced 
the  Critique  of  Political  Economy  (1859)  and 
the  first  volume  of  Capital  (1867). 

In  1864  Marx  again  became  active  in  the 
field  of  politics.  He  organized  the  International 
Working  Men’s  Association  (the  First  Inter¬ 
national)  and  served  as  actual  head  of  its  gen¬ 
eral  council.  While  its  first  years  were  more 
than  usually  successful,  the  anarchist  agitation 
of  Bakunin,  the  Franco-Prussian  war,  and  the 
Paris  Commune  created  conditions  that  made 
it  impossible  to  maintain  a  centralized  federa¬ 
tion.  At  the  instigation  of  Marx  the  general 
council  was  moved  to  the  United  States  and,  in 
1876,  formally  dissolved  in  a  conference  at 
Philadelphia. 

Marx  regarded  his  main  work  as  finishing 
the  Capital .  He  wrote  to  a  friend:  “I  laugh  at 
the  so-called  ‘practical’  men  and  their  wisdom. 
If  one  wants  to  be  an  ox  one  can  easily  turn 
one's  back  on  human  suffering  and  look  after 
one’s  own  skin.  But  I  should  have  regarded 
myself  as  really  impractical  had  I  died  without 
finishing  my  book,  at  least  in  manuscript.”  He 
was  unable,  however,  to  complete  the  work, 
and  Engels  brought  out  the  second  and  third 
volumes  after  his  death. 

With  an  improvement  in  fortune  in  his  last 
years  Marx  sought  relief  for  his  seriously  de¬ 
clining  health  at  various  European  spas,  but 
returned  to  England  without  any  marked  im¬ 
provement.  When  the  news  of  his  wife's  death 
was  brought  to  him  as  he  lay  ill  with  pleurisy, 
he  murmured:  “The  Moor”-— so  he  was  called 
by  his  children—  “is  dead  too.”  He  died  fifteen 
months  later,  March  14,  1883,  in  London,  and 
was  buried  at  Highgate  Cemetery. 


GENERAL  CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note,  Page  v 

CAPITAL,  by  Karl  Marx,  Page  1 

Trans lated from  the  third  German  edition 
by  Samuel  Moore  and  Edwaru  Aveling 
Edited  by  Friedrich  Engels 

Revised ,  with  additional  translation  from 
the  fourth  German  edition , 
by  Marie  Sachey  and  Herbert  Lamm 

MANIFESTO  OF  THE 
COMMUNIST  PARTY,  Page  415 

By  Karl  Marx  and  Friedrich  Engels 
Trans lated  by  Samuel  Moore, 
and  edited  by  Friedrich  Engels 


Contents 


Editor's  Preface  to  the  First  English  Edition  x 
Editor's  Preface  to  the  Fourth  German  Edi¬ 
tion  3 

Author's  Preface  to  the  First  Edition  6 

Author's  Preface  to  the  Second  Edition  8 

Part  I.  Commodities  and  Money 

CHAP. 

I.  Commodities  13 

x.  The  two  Factors  of  a  Commodity :  Use-Value 

and  Value  (the  Substance  of  Value  and  the 
Magnitude  of  Value)  13 

2.  The  Two-fold  Character  of  the  Labour  em¬ 
bodied  in  Commodities  16 

3.  The  Form  of  Value ,  or  Exchange  Value  19 

A.  Elementary  or  Accidental  Form  of  Value  19 

1.  The  two  Poles  of  the  Expression  of  Value : 

ReU'itr  r'>rm  and  Equivalent  Form  19 

2.  The  Relative  Form  of  Value  20 

(a)  The  Nature  and  Import  of  this  Form  20 

(b)  Quantitative  Determination  of  Relative 

Value  22 

3.  The  Equivalent  Form  of  Value  23 

4.  The  Elementary  Form  of  Value  consid¬ 
ered  as  a  Whole  25 

B.  Total  or  Expanded  Form  of  Value  26 

1.  The  Expanded  Relative  Form  of  Value  27 

2.  The  Particular  Equivalent  Form  27 

3.  Defects  of  the  Total  or  Expanded  Form  of 

Value  27 

C.  The  General  Form  of  Value  28 

1.  The  altered  Character  of  the  Form  of 

Value  28 

2.  The  interdependent  Development  of  the 

Relative  Form  of  Value ^  and  of  the  Equiva¬ 
lent  Form  29 

3.  Transition  from  the  General  Form  of 

Value  to  the  Money  Form  30 

D.  The  Money  Form  30 

4.  The  Fetishism  of  Commodities  and  the  Secret 

thereof  31 

II.  Exchange  37 

III.  Money,  or  the  Circulation  of  Commod¬ 
ities  4 2 

1.  The  Measure  of  Value  42 

2.  The  Medium  of  Circulation  47 

a.  The  Metamorphosis  of  Commodities  47 

b.  The  Currency  of  Money  52 

c.  Coin ,  and  Symbols  of  Value  58 

3.  Money  6° 

a.  Hoarding  60 

b.  Means  of  Payment  62 

c.  Universal  Money  66 


Part  II.  The  Transformation  of  Money 
into  Capital 

IV.  The  General  Formula  for  Capital  69 

V.  Contradictions  in  the  General  Formula  of 
Capital  74 

VI.  The  Buying  and  Selling  of  Labour-Power  79 

Part  III.  The  Production  of  Absolute 
Surplus  Value 

VII.  The  Labour  Process  and  the  Process  of 


producing  Surplus  Value  85 

1.  The  Labour  Process  or  the  Production  of 

Use-Values  85 

2.  The  t  reduction  of  Surplus  Value  89 

VIII.  Constant  Capital  and  Variable  Capital  96 

IX.  The  Rate  of  Surplus  Value  102 

1.  The  Degree  of  Exploitation  of  Labour  Power  102 

2.  The  Representation  of  the  Components  of  the 

V alue  of  the  Product  by  corresponding  propor¬ 
tional  Parts  of  the  Product  itself  106 

3.  Senior's  “ Last  Hour "  108 

4.  Surplus  Produce  1 1 1 

X.  The  Working  Day  in 

1.  The  Limits  of  the  Working  Day  XI I 

2.  The  Greed  for  Surplus  Labour .  Manufac¬ 
turer  and  Boyard  1 13 

3.  Branches  of  English  Industry  without  Legal 

Limits  to  Exploitation  1 17 


4.  Day  and  Night  Work .  The  Relay  System  124 

5.  The  struggle  for  a  Normal  Working  Day . 
Compul'ury  Laws  for  the  Extension  of  the 
Working  Day  from  the  Middle  of  the  four¬ 
teenth  to  the  End  of  the  seventeenth  Century  127 

6.  The  Struggle  for  a  Normal  Working  Day . 

Compulsory  Limitation  by  Law  of  the  Work¬ 
ing  Time .  The  English  Factory  Acts ,  i8jj  to 
1864  134 

7.  The  Struggle  for  a  Normal  Working  Day . 

Reaction  of  the  English  Factory  Acts  on  Other 
Countries  144 

XL  Rate  and  Mass  of  Surplus  Value  146 

Part  IV.  Production  of  Relative 
Surplus  Value 

XII.  The  Concept  of  Relative  Surplus  Value  152 


XIII.  Cooperation  157 

XIV.  Division  of  Labour  and  Manufacture  164 

1.  Twofold  Origin  of  Manufacture  164 

2.  The  Detail  Labourer  and  his  Implements  165 

3.  The  Two  Fundamental  Forms  of  Manufac¬ 

ture:  Heterogeneous  Manufacture ,  Serial 
Manufacture  167 


CONTENTS 


4.  Division  oj  Labour  in  Manufacture ,  and 

Division  of  labour  in  Society  171 

5.  The  Capitalistic  Character  of  Manufacture  176 

XV.  Machinery  and  Modern  Industry  180 

1.  The  Development  of  Machinery  180 

2.  The  Value  transferred  by  Machinery  to  the 

Product  188 

3.  The  Proximate  Effects  of  Machinery  on  the 

Workman  192 

a.  Appropriation  of  Supplementary  Labour 

Power  by  Capital.  The  Employment  of 
Women  and  Children  192 

b.  Prolongation  of  the  Working  Day  197 

c.  Intensification  of  Labour  200 

4.  The  Factory  205 

5.  The  Strife  between  Workman  and  Machin¬ 
ery  209 

6.  The  Theory  of  Compensate  n  as  regards  the 

Workpeople  displaced  by  Machinery  215 

7.  Repulsion  and  Attraction  of  Workpeople  by 

the  Factory  System .  Crises  of  the  Cotton 
Trade  219 

8.  Revolution  effected  in  Manufacture ,  Handi¬ 

crafts 3  and  Domestic  Industry  by  Modern  In¬ 
dustry  226 

a.  Overthrow  of  Cooperation  based  on  Handi¬ 
craft  and  on  Division  of  Labour  226 

b.  Reaction  of  the  Factory  System  on  Manu¬ 
facture  and  Domestic  Industries  226 

c.  Modern  Manufacture  227 

d.  Modern  Domestic  Industry  229 


c.  Passage  of  Modern  Manufacture  and  Do¬ 
mestic  Industry  into  Modern  Mechanical  In¬ 
dustry.  The  Hastening  of  this  Revolution  by 
the  Application  of  the  Factory  Acts  to  those 
Industries  23 1 

9.  The  Factory  Acts.  Sanitary  and  Education¬ 

al  Clauses  of  the  same.  Their  general  Exten¬ 
sion  in  England  236 

10.  Modern  Industry  and  Agriculture  249 

Part  V.  The  Production  of  Absolute 
and  of  Relative  Surplus  Value 

XVI.  Absolute  and  Relative  Surplus  Value  251 

XVII.  Changes  of  Magnitude  in  the  Price  of 

Labour  Power  and  in  Surplus  Value  25 6 

I.  Length  of  the  Working  Day  and  Intensity  of 
Labour  constant.  Productiveness  of  Labour 
variable  256 

11.  Working  Day  constant.  Productiveness  of 
Labour  constant.  Intensity  of  Labour  variable  258 

III.  Productiveness  and  Intensity  of  Labour 
constant.  Length  of  the  Working  Day  variable  259 

IV.  Simultaneous  Variations  in  the  Duration , 

Productiveness ,  and  Intensity  of  Labour  260 

(1)  Diminishing  Productiveness  of  Labour 

with  a  simultaneous  Lengthening  of  the 
Working  Day  260 

(2)  Increasing  Intensity  and  Productiveness 

of  Labour  with  simultaneous  Shortening  of 
the  Working  Day  261 


XVIII.  Various  Formulae  for  the  Rate  of  Sur¬ 
plus  Value  262 

Part  VI.  Wages 

XIX.  The  Transformation  of  the  Value  (and 
respectively  the  Price)  of  Labour  Power  into 


Wages  964 

XX.  Time-Wages  267 

XXL  Piece-Wages  271 

XXII.  National  Differences  of  Wages  275 


Part  VII.  The  Accumulation  of 
Capital 

XXIII.  Simple  Reproduction  279 

XXIV.  Conversion  of  Surplus  Value  into  Capi¬ 
tal  286 

1.  Capitalist  Production  on  a  progressively 

increasing  Scale.  Transition  of  the  Laws  of 
Property  that  characterize  Production  of  Com¬ 
modities  into  Laws  of  Capitalist  Appropria¬ 
tion  286 

2.  Erroneous  Conception  by  Political  Economy 

of  Reproduction  on  a  progressively  increasing 
Scale  290 

3.  Separation  of  Surplus  Value  into  Capital 

and  Revenue.  The  Abstinence  Theory  292 

4.  Circumstances  that9  independently  of  the 
proportional  Division  of  Surplus  Value  into 
Capital  and  Revenue ,  determine  the  Amount 
of  Accumulation.  Degree  of  Exploitation  of 
Labour  Power.  Productivity  of  Labour.  Crow¬ 
ing  Difference  in  Amount  between  Capital 
Employed  and  Capital  Consumed.  Magnitude 


of  Capital  Advanced  296 

The  so-called  Labour  Fund  301 

XXV.  The  General  Law  of  Capitalist  Accumu¬ 
lation  302 

1.  The  increased  Demand  for  Labour  Power 

that  accompanies  Accumulation ,  the  Composi¬ 
tion  of  Capital  remaining  the  same  302 

2.  Relative  Diminution  of  the  Variable  Part  of 

Capital  simultaneously  with  the  Progress  of 
Accumulation  and  of  the  Concentration  that 
accompanies  it  307 

3.  Progressive  Production  of  a  Relative  Surplus 

Population ,  or  Industrial  Reserve  Army  31 1 

4.  Different  Forms  of  the  Relative  Surplus 

Population.  The  General  Law  of  Capitalistic 
Accumulation  317 

5.  Illustrations  of  the  General  Law  of  Capitalist 

Accumulation  321 

a.  England  from  1846  to  1866  321 

b.  The  badly  paid  Strata  of  the  British  In¬ 
dustrial  Class  324 

c.  The  Nomad  Population  328 

d.  Effect  of  Crises  on  the  best  paid  Part  of  the 

Working  Class  330 

e.  The  British  Agricultural  Proletariat  333 

f.  Ireland  345 


CONTENTS 


Part  VIII.  The  So-called  Primitive 
Accumulation 

XXVI.  The  Secret  of  Primitive  Accumulation  354 
XXVII.  Expropriation  of  the  Agricultural 
Population  from  the  Land  3 jj 

XXVIII.  Bloody  Legislation  against  the  Ex¬ 
propriated,  from  the  End  of  the  fifteenth  Cen¬ 
tury.  Forcing  down  of  Wages  by  Acts  of 
Parliament  364 


XI 

XXIX.  Genesis  of  the  Capitalist  Farmer  368 

XXX.  Reaction  of  the  Agricultural  Revolution 

on  Industry.  Creation  of  the  Home  Market  for 
Industrial  Capital  369 

XXXI.  Genesis  of  the  Industrial  Capitalist  371 

XXXII,  Historical  Tendency  of  Capitalistic 

Accumulation  3*7-7 

XXXI II.  The  Modern  Theory  of  Colonization  379 
Bibliography  385 

Index  ^9$ 


Prefaces 


EDITOR'S  PREFACE 
TO  THE  FIRST  ENGUSH  EDITION 


The  publication  of  an  English  version  of  Das 
Kapital  needs  no  apology.  On  the  contrary,  an 
explanation  might  be  expected  why  this  English 
version  has  been  delayed  until  now,  seeing 
that  for  some  years  past  the  theories  advo¬ 
cated  in  this  book  have  been  constantly  re¬ 
ferred  to,  attacked  and  defended,  interpreted 
and  misinterpreted,  in  the  periodical  press  and 
the  current  literature  of  both  England  and 
America. 

When,  soon  after  the  author's  death  in  1883, 
it  became  evident  that  an  English  edition  of  the 
work  was  really  required,  Mr.  Samuel  Moore, 
for  many  yeai  s  a  friend  of  Marx  and  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  writer,  and  than  whom,  perhaps,  no  one  is 
more  conversant  with  the  book  itself,  consented 
to  undertake  the  translation  which  the  literary 
executors  of  Marx  were  anxious  to  lay  before 
the  public.  It  was  understood  that  1  should  com¬ 
pare  the  MS.  with  the  original  work,  and  sug¬ 
gest  such  alterations  as  1  might  deem  advisable. 
When,  by  and  by,  it  was  found  that  Mr.  Moore’s 
professional  occupations  prevented  him  from 
finishing  the  translation  as  quickly  as  we  all  de¬ 
sired,  we  gladly  accepted  Dr.  Aveling’s  offer  to 
undertake  a  portion  of  the  work;  at  the  same 
time  Mrs.  Aveling,  Marx's  youngest  daughter, 
offered  to  check  the  quotations  and  to  restore 
the  original  text  of  the  numerous  passages  taken 
from  English  authors  and  Blue  Books  and  trans¬ 
lated  by  Marx  into  German.  This  has  been  done 
throughout,  with  but  a  few  unavoidable  excep¬ 
tions. 

The  following  portions  of  the  book  have  been 
translated  by  Dr.  Aveling:  (1)  Chapters  X  (The 
Working  Day)  and  XI  (Rate  and  Mass  of  Sur¬ 
plus  Value);  (2)  Part  VI  (Wages,  comprising 
Chapters  XIX  to  XXII);  (3)  from  Ch^ter 
XXIV,  Section  4  (Circumstances  that  etc.)  to 
the  end  of  the  book,  comprising  the  latter  part 
of  Chapter  XXIV,  Chapter  XXV,  and  the 
whole  of  Part  VIII  (Chapters  XXVI  to  XXX- 
III);  (4)  the  two  Author's  Prefaces.  All  the  rest 
of  the  book  has  been  done  by  Mr.  Moore.  While, 
thus,  each  of  the  translators  is  responsible  for 


his  share  of  the  work  only,  I  bear  a  joint  respon¬ 
sibility  for  the  whole. 

The  third  German  edition,  which  has  been 
made  the  basis  of  our  work  throughout,  was' 
prepared  by  me,  in  1883,  with  the  assistance  of 
notes  left  by  the  author,  indicating  the  passages 
of  the  second  edition  to  be  replaced  by  desig¬ 
nated  passages  from  the  French  text  published 
in  1873.1  The  alterations  thus  effected  in  the 
text  of  the  second  edition  generally  coincided 
with  changes  prescribed  by  Marx  in  a  set  of  MS. 
instructions  for  an  English  translation  that  was 
planned,  about  ten  years  ago,  in  America,  but 
abandoned  chiefly  for  want  of  a  fit  and  proper 
translator.  This  MS.  was  placed  at  our  disposal 
by  our  old  friend,  Mr.  F.  A.  Sorge,  of  Hoboken, 
N.  J.  It  designates  some  further  interpolations 
from  the  French  edition;  but,  being  so  many 
years  older  than  the  final  instructions  for  the 
third  edition,  I  did  not  consider  myself  at  lib¬ 
erty  to  make  use  of  it  otherwise  than  sparingly, 
and  chiefly  in  cases  where  it  helped  us  over  dif¬ 
ficulties.  In  the  same  way,  the  French  text  has 
been  referred  to  in  most  of  the  difficult  passages, 
as  an  indicator  of  what  the  author  himself  was 
prepared  to  sacrifice  wherever  something  of  the 
full  import  of  the  original  had  to  be  sacrificed  in 
the  rendering. 

There  is.  however,  one  difficulty  we  could  not 
spare  the  reader:  the  use  of  certain  terms  in  a 
sense  different  from  what  they  have,  not  only 
in  common  life,  but  in  ordinary  political  econ¬ 
omy.  But  this  was  unavoidable.  Every  new  as¬ 
pect  of  a  science  involves  a  revolution  in  the 
technical  terms  of  that  science.  This  is  best 
shown  by  chemistry,  where  the  whole  of  the 
terminology  is  radically  changed  about  once  in 
twenty  years,  and  where  you  will  hardly  find  a 
single  organic  compound  that  has  not  gone 
through  a  whole  series  of  different  names.  Polit¬ 
ical  economy  has  generally  been  content  to 
take,  just  as  they  were,  the  terms  of  commercial 
and  industrial  life,  and  to  operate  with  them, 
entirely  failing  to  see  that  by  so  doing  it  con- 

1  Lt  Capital , "  par  Karl  Marx .  Traduction  de  M.  J.  Roy , 
entihrement  revisit  par V auteur ,  Pans ,  LachAtre ."  This 
translation,  especially  in  the  latter  part  of  the  book, 
contains  considerable  alterations  in  and  additions  to  the 
text  of  the  second  German  edition. 


PREFACES 


2 

fined  itself  within  the  narrow  circle  of  ideas  ex¬ 
pressed  by  those  terms.  Thus,  though  perfectly 
aware  that  both  profits  and  rent  are  but  sub¬ 
divisions,  fragments  of  that  unpaid  part  of  the 
product  which  the  labourer  has  to  supply  to  his 
employer  (its  first  appropriator,  though  not  its 
ultimate  exclusive  owner),  yet  even  classical 
political  economy  never  went  beyond  the  re¬ 
ceived  notions  of  profits  and  rent,  never  exam¬ 
ined  this  unpaid  part  of  the  product  (called  by 
Marxsurplus  product)  in  its  integrity  as  a  whole, 
and  therefore  never  arrived  at  a  clear  compre¬ 
hension,  either  of  its  origin  and  nature,  or  of  the 
laws  that  regulate  the  subsequent  distribution 
of  its  value.  Similarly,  all  industry,  not  agricul¬ 
tural  or  handicraft,  is  indiscriminately  com¬ 
prised  in  the  term  of  manufacture,  and  thereby 
the  distinction  is  obliterated  between  two  great 
and  essentially  different  periods  of  economic 
history:  the  period  of  manufacture  proper, 
based  on  the  division  of  manual  labour,  and  the 
period  of  modern  industry  based  on  machinery. 
It  is,  however,  self-evident  that  a  theory  which 
views  modern  capitalist  production  as  a  mere 
passing  stage  in  the  economic  history  of  man¬ 
kind  must  make  use  of  terms  different  from 
those  habitual  to  writers  who  look  upon  that 
form  of  production  as  imperishable  and  final. 

A  word  respecting  the  author’s  method  of 
quoting  may  not  be  out  of  place.  In  the  majority 
of  cases,  the  quotations  serve,  in  the  usual  way, 
as  documentary  evidence  in  support  of  asser¬ 
tions  made  in  the  text.  But  in  many  instances, 
passages  from  economic  writers  are  quQted  in 
order  to  indicate  when,  where,  and  by  whom  a 
certain  proposition  was  for  the  first  time  clearly 
enunciated.  This  is  done  in  cases  where  the 
proposition  quoted  is  of  importance  as  being  a 
more  or  less  adequate  expression  of  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  social  production  and  exchange  preva¬ 
lent  at  the  time,  and  quite  irrespective  of  Marx’s 
recognition,  or  otherwise,  of  its  general  validity. 
These  quotations,  therefore,  supplement  the 
text  by  a  running  commentary  taken  from  the 
history  of  the  science. 

Our  translation  comprises  the  first  book  of 
the  work  only.  But  this  first  book  is  in  a  great 
measure  a  whole  in  itself,  and  has  for  twenty 
years  ranked  as  an  independent  work.  The  sec¬ 
ond  book,  edited  in  German  by  me,  in  1885,  is 
decidedly  incomplete  without  the  third,  which 
cannot  be  published  before  the  end  of  1887. 
When  Book  III  has  been  brought  out  in  the 
original  German,  it  will  then  be  soon  enough  to 
think  about  preparing  an  English  edition  of 
both. 


Das  KapitaJis  often  called,  on  the  Continent, 
“the  Bible  of  the  working  class.”  That  the  con¬ 
clusions  arrived  at  in  this  work  are  daily  more 
and  more  becoming  the  fundamental  principles 
of  the  great  working  class  movement,  not  only 
in  Germany  and  Switzerland,  but  in  France,  in 
Holland  and  Belgium,  in  America,  and  even  in 
Italy  and  Spain;  that  everywhere  the  working 
class  more  and  more  recognizes,  in  these  con¬ 
clusions,  the  most  adequate  expression  of  its 
condition  and  of  its  aspirations,  nobody  ac¬ 
quainted  with  that  movement  will  deny.  And  in 
England,  too,  the  theories  of  Marx,  even  at  this 
moment,  exercise  a  powerful  influence  upon  the 
socialist  movement  which  is  spreading  in  the 
ranks  of  “cultured”  people  no  less  than  in  those 
of  the  working  class.  But  that  is  not  all.  The 
time  is  rapidly  approaching  when  a  thorough 
examination  of  England’s  economic  position 
will  impose  itself  as  an  irresistible  national  nec¬ 
essity.  The  working  of  the  industrial  system  of 
this  country,  impossible  without  a  constant  and 
rapid  extension  of  production,  and  therefore  of 
markets,  is  coming  to  a  dead  stop.  Free  Trade 
has  exhausted  its  resources;  even  Manchester 
doubts  this  its  quondam  economic  gospel.1  For¬ 
eign  industry,  rapidly  developing,  stares  Eng¬ 
lish  production  in  the  face  everywhere,  not  only 
in  protected  but  also  in  neutral  markets,  and 
even  on  this  side  of  the  Channel.  While  the  pro¬ 
ductive  power  increases  in  a  geometric,  the  ex¬ 
tension  of  markets  proceeds  at  best  in  an  arith¬ 
metic  ratio.  The  decennial  cycle  of  stagnation, 
prosperity,  over-production,  and  crisis,  ever  re¬ 
current  from  1 825  to  1 867,  seems  indeed  to  have 
run  its  course;  but  only  to  land  us  in  the  slough 
of  despond  of  a  permanent  and  chronic  depres¬ 
sion.  The  sighed-for  period  of  prosperity  will 
not  come;  as  often  as  we  seem  to  perceive  its 
heralding  symptoms,  so  often  do  they  again 
vanish  into  air.  Meanwhile,  each  succeeding 
winter  brings  up  afresh  the  great  question, 
“what  to  do  with  the  unemployed”;  but  while 
the  number  of  the  unemployed  keeps  swelling 
from  year  to  year,  there  is  nobody  to  answer 
that  question;  and  we  can  almost  calculate  the 
moment  when  the  unemployed,  losing  pa¬ 
tience,  will  take  their  own  fate  into  their  own 

1  At  the  quarterly  meeting  of  the  Manchester  Chamber 
of  Commerce,  held  this  afternoon,  a  warm  discussion  took 
place  on  the  subject  of  Free  Trade.  A  resolution  was  moved 
to  the  effect  that  “having  waited  in  vain  40  years  for  other 
nations  to  follow  the  Free  Trade  example  of  England,  this 
Chamber  thinks  the  time  has  now  arrived  to  reconsider 
that  position."  The  resolution  was  rejected  by  a  majority 
of  one  only,  the  figures  being  21  for,  and  22  against. — 
Evening  Standard >  Nov.  1, 1886. 


PREFACES 


hands.  Surely,  at  such  a  moment,  the  voice 
ought  to  be  heard  of  a  man  whose  whole  theory 
is  the  result  of  a  life-long  study  of  the  economic 
history  and  condition  of  England,  and  whom 
that  study  led  to  the  conclusion  that,  at  least  in 
Europe,  England  is  the  only  country  where  the 
inevitable  social  revolution  might  be  effected 
entirely  by  peaceful  and  legal  means.  He  cer¬ 
tainly  never  forgot  to  add  that  he  hardly  ex¬ 
pected  the  English  ruling  classes  to  submit, 
without  a  “pro-slavery  rebellion,”  to  this  peace¬ 
ful  and  legal  revolution. 

Friedrich  Engels 

November  j,  1886 


EDITOR'S  PREFACE 
TO  THE  FOURTH  GERMAN  EDITION 


The  fourth  edition  imposed  upon  me  the  task 
of  putting  both  the  text  and  the  footnotes  in 
their  final  form,  as  far  as  this  was  possible.  The 
following  brief  comment  will  indicate  how  I 
performed  this  task:  After  repeated  comparison 
of  the  rrencii  edition  and  Marx's  manuscript 
notes,  I  transferred  a  few  additional  passages 
from  the  French  edition  to  the  German  text. 
These  are  found  on  page  80  (page  88,  third  edi¬ 
tion);  pages  458-60  (pages  509-10,  third  edi¬ 
tion);  pages  547-51  (page  600,  third  edition); 
pages  591-93  (page  644,  third  edition) ;  and  page 
596  in  note  79  (page  648,  third  edition).1  In 
keeping  with  the  procedure  followed  in  the 
French  and  English  editions,  the  long  note  on 
the  mine  workers  has  also  been  placed  in  the 
text.  In  the  third  edition,  this  note  appears  on 
pages  509-15,  and  on  pages  461-67  in  the  fourth 
edition.  Other  small  changes  are  purely  tech¬ 
nical  in  character.  Finally,  where  changed  his¬ 
torical  circumstances  seemed  to  require  it,  I 
have  inserted  a  few  explanatory  notes.  All  these 
additional  notes  are  placed  in  brackets  and  des¬ 
ignated  either  by  “D.  H."or  my  initials.2 

A  complete  review  of  the  numerous  quota¬ 
tions  had  been  made  necessary  by  the  appear¬ 
ance,  in  the  meantime,  of  the  English  edition. 
For  this  review,  Marx's  youngest  daughter, 
Eleanor,  took  pains  to  compare  all  the  quoted 
passages  with  their  originals.  As  a  result  c  her 
efforts,  the  citations  from  English  sources,  which 
predominate,  appear  in  the  original  English  text 
itself,  rather  than  as  re-translations  from  the 

1  In  this  edition  these  passages  are  found  on  pages  243, 

29°"3»  310-321,  and  312. 

2  The  initials  “F.  E.**  are  used  throughout  in  the  present 

edition. 


3 

German.  Hence  in  preparing  the  fourth  edition, 
it  was  incumbent  upon  me  to  consult  the  Eng¬ 
lish  text.  In  doing  this,  I  found  many  small  in¬ 
accuracies.  There  were  inaccurate  references  to 
page  numbers,  partly  due  to  mistakes  in  copy¬ 
ing  from  notebooks,  and  partly  to  typographi¬ 
cal  errors  that  accumulated  in  the  course  of  three 
editions.  There  were  also  incorrectly  placed  quo¬ 
tation  marks  or  incomplete  sentences  such  as 
would  unavoidably  occur  in  making  very  exten* 
si  ve  quotations  from  excerpts  contained  in  note* 
books.  Here  and  there  the  word  chosen  in  trans¬ 
lating  was  not  quite  felicitous.  Certain  passages 
were  cited  from  the  old  Paris  manuscripts  of 
1843-45,  when  Marx  as  yet  understood  no  Eng¬ 
lish  and  read  the  English  economists  in  French 
translations.  In  those  places  where  this  double 
translation  occasioned  aslightchangein  nuance, 
forcxamplc,inthecaseofSteuartandUre  among 
others,  the  English  text  had  now  to  be  utilized. 
And  other  minor  inaccuracies  and  inadverten¬ 
cies  have  been  corrected.  Now,  if  one  compares 
the  fourth  edition  with  the  preceding  ones,  one 
will  be  con  vi  need  that  in  this  whole  tedious  proc¬ 
ess  of  correction,  nothing  in  the  book  worth 
mentioning  has  in  the  least  -been  changed. 
There  was  only  a  single  quotation  that  could 
not  be  found.  This  was  from  Richard  Jones 
(fourth  edition,  page  562,  note  47 ).3  In  this 
case  Marx  apparently  made  a  slip  in  giving  the 
title  of  the  book.  In  their  present  exact  form, 
all  other  quotations  have  their  cogency  main¬ 
tained  or  enhanced. 

At  this  point  I  find  it  necessary  to  go  back  to 
an  old  story:  I  know  of  only  one  case  in  which 
the  accuracy  of  citation  by  Marx  has  been  ques¬ 
tioned.  Inasmuch  as  this  case  has  been  made  an 
issue  even  after  Marx's  death,  I  cannot  appro¬ 
priately  pass  it  by. 

The  anonymous  article  “How  Karl  Marx 
Quotes”  appeared  on  March  7, 1872,  in  the  Ber¬ 
lin  Concordia ,  the  organ  of  the  German  Manu¬ 
facturer's  Association.  Here,  in  uncivil  language 
and  in  an  excessive  display  of  moral  indignation, 
it  was  contended  that  Marx  had  falsified  the 
quotation  from  Gladstone’s  budget  speech  of 
Apiil  16,  1863.4  It  is  charged  that  not  a  word 
of  the  following  sentence  is  to  be  found  in  the 
semi-official  Hansard  stenographic  report: 
“This  intoxicating  augmentation  of  wealth  and 
power  ...  is  confined  wholly  to  the  propertied 

*  In  the  present  edition,  see  footnote  2,  page  296. 

4  The  citation  first  occurred  in  Marx’s  Inaugural  Ad¬ 
dress  of  the  International  Workingmen’s  Association  in 
1864.  It  was  repeated  in  Capital  I  (fourth  edition),  page 
617;  third  edition,  page  671.  In  the  present  edition  it  ap¬ 
pears  on  page  322-3. 


PREFACES 


4 

classes.”  Furthermore,  “This  statement  is  no¬ 
where  to  be  found  in  Gladstone's  speech.  Quite 
the  contrary  is  stated  therein.  This  sentence ,  in 
form  and  content ,  is  a  lying  invention  of  Marx!'* 

The  issue  of  the  Concordia  which  carried  this 
anonymous  article  was  received  by  Marx  the 
following  May.  Marx  replied  to  it  in  the  Volks - 
stoat  of  June  i.  As  Marx  no  longer  recalled  the 
newspaper  report  from  which  he  quoted,  he  lim¬ 
ited  himself  to  pointing  out  that  a  quotation 
similar  in  content  had  appeared  in  two  English 
papers,  and  then  cited  The  Times  >  according  to 
which  Gladstone  said:  “That  is  the  state  of  the 
case  as  regards  the  wealth  of  this  country.  I  must 
say  for  one,  1  should  look  almost  with  appre¬ 
hension  and  with  pain  upon  this  intoxicating 
augmentation  of  wealth  and  power,  if  it  were 
my  belief  that  it  was  confined  to  classes  who  are 
in  easy  circumstances.  This  takes  no  cognizance 
at  all  of  the  condition  of  the  labouring  popula¬ 
tion.  The  augmentation  I  have  described  and 
which  is  founded,  I  think,  upon  accurate  returns, 
is  an  augmentation  entirely  confined  to  classes 
of  property.” 

Thus,Gladstonesaysherethatitwouldgrieve 
him  if  that  were  so,  but  he  virtually  says  that 
it  isso:Thisintoxicatingaugmentation  of wealth 
and  power,  he  says,  is  confined  wholly  to  the 
propertied  classes.  And  with  respect  to  the  qua¬ 
si-official  Hansard  report,  Marx  further  re¬ 
marked:  “In  the  subsequent  adjustment  of  his 
speech  for  publication,  Mr.  Gladstone  was 
shrewd  enough  to  eliminate  a  passage  which, 
coming  from  the  mouth  of  an  English  Chancel¬ 
lor  of  the  Exchequer,  was  indeed  compromis¬ 
ing.  Moreover,  this  procedure  is  the  tradition¬ 
al  practice  in  the  English  parliament,  and  in 
no  way  a  device  by  Lasker  against  Rebel.” 

The  anonymous  writer  now  becomes  still  more 
aroused.  Setting  aside  the  secondhand  source  of 
his  reply  in  the  Concordia  of  July  4th,  he  mod¬ 
estly  suggests  that  it  is  the  customary  practice 
to  quote  parliamentary  speeches  from  the  sten¬ 
ographic  report;  that  the  report  of  The  Times 
(in  which  is  to  be  found  the  lying  and  invented 
statement)  and  the  report  from  Hansard  (which 
did  not  contain  it)  “completely  agree  in  con¬ 
tent”;  and,  finally,  that  the  report  of  The  Times 
even  contained  “the  very  opposite  of  that  no¬ 
torious  passage  in  the  Inaugural  Address.”  In 
the  process,  the  man  carefully  passes  over  in 
silence  the  fact  that  The  Times '  report  ex¬ 
pressly  contains  “the  notorious  passage”  along 
with  “the  very  opposite.”  Despite  all  this,  the 
anonymous  writer  feels  that  he  is  cornered  and 
that  only  a  new  trick  can  save  him.  While  he 


thus  interlards  his  article  (which  abounds  in 
“shameless  lying,”  as  I  have  just  shown)  with 
edifying  denunciation— for  example,  “bad 
faith,”  "dishonesty,”  “mendacious  account,” 
“that  lying  citation,”  “shameless  lying,”  “a 
completely  falsified  citation,”  “this  falsifica¬ 
tion,”  “simply  infamous,”  etc.— he  finds  it  nec¬ 
essary  to  shift  the  controversy  to  another  area, 
promising  to  explain  “in  a  second  article  the 
meaning  we  (the  Anonymous  who  does  not  lie) 
ascribe  to  the  text  of  Gladstone’s  words.”  As  if 
this,  his  inconsequential  opinion,  had  any  bear¬ 
ing  on  the  case!  This  second  article  appeared  in 
the  Concordia  of  July  1 1 . 

Marx  again  replied  in  the  Volks staat  of  Au¬ 
gust  2.  In  this  reply  he  now  inserted  the  pas¬ 
sage  as  reported  by  the  Morning  Star  and  by  the 
Morning  Advertiser  of  April  17, 1863.  According 
to  both  reports,  Gladstone  stated  that  he  would 
regard  with  apprehension,  etc.,  this  intoxicat¬ 
ing  augmentation  of  wealth  and  power,  if  he 
thought  it  was  confined  to  the  “classes  in  easy 
circumstances”;  but  that  this  augmentation 
was  “entirely  confined  to  classes  possessed  of 
property.”  Indeed,  both  reports  contained 
word  for  word  the  sentence  alleged  to  be  the 
lying  invention  of  Marx.  Furthermore,  Marx 
compared  the  text  of  The  Times  with  Hansard's 
report  and,  in  doing  so,  demonstrated  that 
the  quotation,  omitted  in  Hansard,  in  keeping 
with  “traditional  usage,”  had  appeared  in 
three  papers  the  morning  following  the  speech; 
that  the  three  reports  appeared  independently 
of  each  other  and  had  the  same  content;  and 
that  Gladstone  had,  in  Marx’s  words,  “subse¬ 
quently  conjured”  the  passage  out  of  existence. 
Marx  finally  explains  that  he  had  no  time  for 
further  communication  with  the  anonymous 
author.  The  latter,  it  is  evident,  had  had 
enough.  In  any  event  Marx  was  in  receipt  of 
no  further  issues  of  the  Concordia. 

With  this,  the  issue  was  apparently  dead  and 
buried.  Of  course,  since  that  time  mysterious 
rumours  came  to  us  now  and  then  concerning 
a  terribl  e  literary  crime  that  Marx  was  supposed 
to  have  commi  t ted  i  n  CapitalmThese  reports  em- 
anated  from  people  who  wefe  in  close  contact 
with  Cambridge  University.  But,  in  spite  of  all 
investigation,  nothing  more  definite  could  be 
learned.  Suddenly,  on  November  29, 1883,  eight 
months  after  Marx’s  death,  *  letter,  signed  by 
Sedley  Taylor  and  dated  Trinity  College,  ap¬ 
peared  in  The  Times.  In  thii  letter,  this  little 
man,  who  engages  in  the  tamest  of  cooperative 
enterprises,  finally  saw  fit  to  enlighten  us  con¬ 
cerning  the  gossip  not  only  around  Cambridge, 


PREFACES 


but  on  our  Anonymous  One  in  the  Concordat. 

“What  appears  quite  extraordinary,”  the  lit¬ 
tle  man  of  Trinity  College  declares,  “is  that  it 
remained  for  Professor  Brentano  (then  at  Bres¬ 
lau,  now  at  Strassburg)  to  reveal  the  bad  faith 
which  evidently  had  been  in  back  of  the  quota¬ 
tion  from  Gladstone's  speech  in  the  (Inaugural) 
Address.  Mr.  Karl  Marx,  who  sought  to  justify 
the  quotation,  had  the  temerity,  as  a  result  of 
the  deadly  shifts  to  which  Brentano's  masterly 
attacks  had  quickly  reduced  him,  to  maintain 
that  Mr.  Gladstone  had  doctored  the  report  of 
his  speech  in  The  Times  of  April  1 2, 1 863,  before 
it  was  published  in  Hansard,  in  order  to  elim¬ 
inate  a  passage  which  would  of  course  be  com¬ 
promising  to  an  English  Chancellor  of  the  Ex¬ 
chequer.  When,  by  a  detailed  comparison  of  the 
different  texts,  Brentano  shows  that  the  reports 
of  The  Times  and  of  Hansard  agree,  that  both 
absolutely  exclude  the  meaning  imputed  to 
Gladstone's  words  by  craftily  isolated  quota¬ 
tion,  then  Marx  withdrew  from  the  scene  un¬ 
der  the  pretext  of  having  no  time*'* 

This,  then,  was  the  essence  of  the  matter !  And 
so  the  anonymous  campaign  of  Mr.  Brentano 
in  the  Concordia  is  reflected  in  the  fantasy  cre¬ 
ated  by  the  produc  ti  ve  fellowship  of  Cam  bridge 
So  there  he  lay,  and  thus  has  he  handled  his 
sword,  in  “masterly  directed  attack,”  this  Saint 
George  of  the  German  Manufacturers'  Associa¬ 
tion,  while  the  fiery  dragon  Marx  soon  expires 
at  his  feet  “in  deadly  shifts !” 

To  be  sure,  this  whole  Ariostian  account  of 
the  controversy  only  serves  to  conceal  the  sinu¬ 
ous  subterfuges  of  our  Saint  George.  There  is  no 
longer  any  mention  here  of  “added  lies,”  of  “fal¬ 
sification,”  but  of  “craftily  isolated  quotation.” 
The  whole  question  has  been  conjured  out  of  ex¬ 
istence,  and  Saint  George  and  his  shield-bearer 
from  Cambridge  very  well  knew  the  reason. 

Eleanor  Marx  replied  in  the  monthly  maga 
zinc,  Today ,  February  1884,  since  The  Times  re¬ 
fused  publication.  She  reduced  the  debate  to 
the  only  point  that  was  in  question,  namely, 
was  the  sentence  the  lying  invention  of  Marx 
or  not?  To  this  Mr.  Scdley  Taylor  countered: 
“The  question,  whether  a  certain  sentence  ac¬ 
tually  appeared  in  Mr.  Gladstone’s  speech”  was, 
in  his  view,  “of  very  minor  significance,”  ;  1  the 
controversybetweenMarxandBrentano, “com¬ 
pared  with  the  question  as  to  whether  the  cita¬ 
tion  had  been  made  with  the  intention  of  ren¬ 
dering  faithfully  the  meaning  of  Gladstone's 
speech,  or  of  distorting  it.”  And  then  he  grants 
that  The  Times '  report  “contains,  in  fact,  a  ver¬ 
bal  contradiction,”  but  that  the  rest  of  the  con¬ 


5 

text  correctly  explained,  that  is,  in  a  liberal- 
Gladstonian  sense,  shows  what  Mr.  Gladstone 
intended  to  say.  ( Today ,  March,  1884.)  What  is 
most  absurd  about  this  is  the  fact  that  our  little 
man  from  Cambridge  now  insists  on  quoting 
this  speech,  not  as  it  was  reported  by  Hansard, 
as  in  “the  traditional  practice”  according  to  the 
anonymous  Brentano,  but  rather  from  the  re¬ 
port  of  The  Times  designated  by  the  same  Bren¬ 
tano  as  “necessarily  bungling.”  Naturally,  since 
the  fatal  sentence  is  in  fact  missing  in  Hansard  !* 

In  the  same  issue  of  Today ,  Eleanor  Marx 
easily  disposed  of  this  argument.  Either  Mr. 
Taylor  had  read  the  controversy  of  1872,  or  he 
had  not  read  it.  If  he  had  read  it,  he  now  “lied,” 
not  only  by  “adding”  but  also  by  “subtracting.” 
If  he  had  not  read  it,  then  the  only  thing  to  do 
was  to  keep  his  mouth  shut.  In  any  case,  it  was 
definitely  clear  that  he  would  not  for  a  moment 
dare  to  support  the  charge  of  his  friend,  Bren¬ 
tano,  that  Marx  had  “added  a  lie.”  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  now  it  turns  out  that  Marx  had  not  “add¬ 
ed  a  lie”  but  rather  had  suppressed  an  impor¬ 
tant  sentence.  And  yet  this  very  sentence  is 
cited  on  page  5  of  the  Inaugural  Address  just  a 
few  lines  before  the  alleged  “added  lie.”And  with 
respect  to  the  “contradiction”  in  Gladstone's 
speech,  who  but  Marx  himself  in  Capital ,  page 
618  (third  edition  page  672),  Note  105,  speaks 
of  the  “constant  and  crying  contradictions 
throughout  Gladstone's  budget-speeches  of 
1863  and  1864”?  Only  Marx  does  not,  h  la 
Sedley  Taylor,  undertake  to  resolve  these  con¬ 
tradictions  with  liberal  complaceny.  The  final 
resume  in  Eleanor  Marx's  reply  goes  as  follows: 
“On  the  contrary,  Marx  has  neither  kept  out 
anything  which  called  for  inclusion,  nor  has  he 
in  the  least  added  a  lie.  But  he  has  reproduced 
and  rescued  from  oblivion  a  sentence  of  a 
Gladstonian  speech,  which  had  undoubtedly 
been  uttered,  but  which,  by  some  means  or 
other,  had  managed  to  escape  Hansard.” 

By  now,  Mr.  Sedley  Taylor  had  obviously 
had  enough.  The  final  outcome  of  this  whole 
web  of  professional  gossip,  which  extended 
throughout  two  decades  and  over  two  great 
countries,  was  that,  since  that  time,  no  one  has 
dared  to  make  an  issue  of  Marx’s  literary  scru¬ 
pulousness;  and  to  be  sure  Mr.  Sedley  Taylor 
will  henceforth  place  about  as  much  trust  in  the 
literary  and  war  bulletins  of  Mr.  Brentano  as 
does  Mr.  Brentano  in  the  papal  infallibility  of 
Hansard. 

Friedrich  Encels 

London,  June  25, 1 890 


6  PREFACES 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE 
TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

The  work,  the  first  volume  of  which  I  now  sub¬ 
mit  to  the  public,  forms  the  continuation  of  my 
Zur  Kritik  der  Politischcn  Ockonomie  {A  Con¬ 
tribution  to  the  Criticism  of  Political  Economy ), 
published  in  1859.  The  long  pause  between  the 
first  part  and  the  continuation  is  due  to  an  ill¬ 
ness  of  many  years’  duration  that  again  and 
again  interrupted  my  work. 

The  substance  of  that  earlier  work  is  sum¬ 
marized  in  the  first  three  chapters  of  this  vol¬ 
ume.  This  is  done  not  merely  for  the  sake  of 
connection  and  completeness.  The  presentation 
of  the  subject  matter  is  improved.  As  far  as  cir¬ 
cumstances  in  any  way  permit,  many  points 
only  hinted  at  in  the  earlier  book  are  here 
worked  out  more  fully,  whilst,  conversely,  points 
worked  out  fully  there  are  only  touched  upon 
in  this  volume.  The  sections  on  the  history  of 
the  theories  of  value  and  of  money  are  now,  of 
course,  left  out  altogether.  The  reader  of  the 
earlier  work  will  find,  however,  in  the  notes  to 
the  first  chapter  additional  sources  of  reference 
relative  to  the  history  of  those  theories. 

That  every  beginning  is  difficult  holds  in  all 
sciences.  To  understand  the  first  chapter,  espe¬ 
cially  the  section  that  contains  the  analysis  of 
commodities,  will,  therefore,  present  the  great¬ 
est  difficulty.  That  which  concerns  more  espe¬ 
cially  the  analysis  of  the  substance  of  value 
and  the  magnitude  of  value,  1  have,  as  much  as 
it  was  possible,  popularized.1  The  value  form, 
whose  fully  developed  shape  is  the  money  form, 
is  very  elementary  and  simple.  Nevertheless, 
the  human  mind  has  for  more  than  two  thous¬ 
and  years  sought  in  vain  to  get  to  the  bottom  of 
it,  whilst  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  successful 
analysis  of  much  more  composite  and  complex 
forms,  there  has  been  at  least  an  approximation. 
Why?  Because  the  body,  as  an  organic  whole, 
is  more  easy  of  study  than  are  the  cells  of  that 

1  This  is  the  more  necessary,  as  even  the  section  of  Fer¬ 
dinand  Lassalle's  work  against  Schulze-Delitzsch,  in  which 
he  professes  to  give  "the  intellectual  quintessence"  of  my 
explanations  on  these  subjects,  contains  important  mis¬ 
takes.  If  Ferdinand  Lassalle  has  borrowed  almost  literally 
from  my  writings,  and  without  any  acknowledgment,  all 
the  general  theoretical  propositions  in  his  economic  works, 
e.g.,  those  on  the  historical  character  of  capital,  on  the 
connection  between  the  conditions  of  production  and  the 
mode  of  production,  etc.,  even  to  the  terminology  created 
by  me,  this  may  perhaps  be  due  to  purposes  of  propa¬ 
ganda.  I  am  here,  of  course,  not  speaking  of  his  detailed 
working  out  and  application  of  these  propositions,  with 
which  I  have  nothing  to  do. 


body.  In  the  analysis  of  economic  forms,  more¬ 
over,  neither  microscopes  nor  chemical  reagents 
are  of  use.  The  force  of  abstraction  must  replace 
both.  But  in  bourgeois  society  the  commodity 
form  of  the  product  of  labour— or  the  value 
form  of  the  commodity — is  the  economic  cell- 
form.  To  the  superficial  observer,  the  analysis 
of  these  forms  seems  to  turn  upon  minutiae.  It 
does  in  fact  deal  with  minutiae,  but  they  are  of 
the  same  order  as  those  dealt  with  in  microscop¬ 
ic  anatomy. 

With  the  exception  of  the  section  on  value 
form,  therefore,  this  volume  cannot  stand  ac¬ 
cused  on  the  score  of  difficulty.  I  presuppose,  of 
course,  a  reader  who  is  willing  to  learn  some¬ 
thing  new  and  therefore  to  think  for  himself. 

The  physicist  either  observes  physical  phe¬ 
nomena  where  they  occur  in  their  most  typical 
form  and  most  free  from  disturbing  influence, 
or,  wherever  possible,  he  makes  experiments 
under  conditions  that  assure  the  occurrence  of 
the  phenomenon  in  its  normality.  In  this  work 
I  have  to  examine  the  capitalist  mode  of  pro¬ 
duction,  and  the  conditions  of  production  and 
exchange  corresponding  to  that  mode.  Up  to 
the  present  time,  their  classic  ground  is  Eng¬ 
land.  That  is  the  reason  why  England  is  used  as 
the  chief  illustration  in  the  development  of  my 
theoretical  ideas.  If,  however,  the  German  read¬ 
er  shrugs  his  shoulders  at  the  condition  of  the 
English  industrial  and  agricultural  labourers, 
or  in  optimistic  fashion  comforts  himself  with 
the  thought  that  in  Germany  things  are  not 
nearly  so  bad;  I  must  plainly  tell  him,  “De  te 
fabula  narratur!'"1 

Intrinsically,  it  is  not  a  question  of  the  higher 
or  lower  degree  of  development  of  the  social 
antagonisms  that  result  from  the  natural  laws 
of  capitalist  production.  It  is  a  question  of  these 
laws  themselves,  of  these  tendencies  working 
with  iron  necessity  towards  inevitable  results. 
The  country  that  is  more  developed  industrially 
only  shows,  to  the  less  developed,  the  image  of 
its  own  future. 

But,  apart  from  this,  where  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction  is  fully  naturalized  among  the  Germans 
(for  instance,  in  the  factories  proper)  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  things  is  much  worse  than  in  England, 
because  the  counterpoise  of  the  Factory  Acts  is 
wanting.  In  all  other  spheres,  we,  like  all  the 
rest  of  Continental  Western  Europe,  suffer  not 
only  from  the  development  of  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction,  but  also  from  the  incompleteness  of 
that  development.  Alongside  of  modern  evils,  a 
whole  series  of  inherited  evils  oppress  us,  arising 

*  "Change  the  names  and  the  story  is  about  you." 


PREFACES 


from  the  passive  survival  of  antiquated  modes 
of  production,  with  their  inevitable  train  of  so¬ 
cial  and  political  anachronisms.  We  suffer  not 
only  from  the  living,  but  from  the  dead.  he  mart 
saisit  le  vif!1 

The  social  statistics  of  Germany  and  the  rest 
of  Continental  Western  Europe  are,  in  compar¬ 
ison  with  those  of  England,  wretchedly  com¬ 
piled.  But  they  raise  the  veil  just  enough  to  let 
us  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  Medusa  head  behind 
it.  We  should  be  appalled  at  the  state  of  things 
at  home,  if,  as  in  England,  our  governments  and 
parliaments  appointed  periodically  commis¬ 
sions  of  enquiry  into  economic  conditions;  if 
these  commissions  were  armed  with  the  same 
plenary  powers  to  get  at  the  truth;  if  it  were 
possible  to  find  for  this  purpose  men  as  compe¬ 
tent,  as  free  from  partisanship  and  respect  of 
persons  as  are  the  English  factory  inspectors, 
her  medical  reporters  on  public  health,  her  com¬ 
missioners  of  enquiry  into  the  exploitation  of 
women  and  children,  into  housing  and  food. 
Perseus  wore  a  magic  cap,  that  the  monsters  he 
hunted  down  might  not  see  him.  We  draw  the 
magic  cap  down  over  eyes  and  cars  as  a  make- 
believe  that  there  are  no  monsters. 

Let  us  not  deceive  ourselves  on  this.  As  in  the 
eighteenth  century  the  American  War  of  Inde¬ 
pendence  sounded  the  tocsin  for  the  European 
middle  class,  so  in  the  nineteenth  century  the 
American  Civil  War  sounded  it  for  the  Euro¬ 
pean  working  class.  In  England  the  progress  of 
social  disintegration  is  palpable.  When  it  has 
reached  a  certain  point,  it  must  react  on  the 
Continent.  There  it  will  take  a  form  more  bru¬ 
tal  or  more  humane,  according  to  the  degree  of 
development  of  the  working  class  itself.  Apart 
from  higher  motives,  therefore,  their  own  most 
important  interests  dictate  to  the  classes  that 
are  for  the  nonce  the  ruling  ones,  the  removal 
of  all  legally  removable  hindrances  to  the  free  de¬ 
velopment  of  the  working  class.  For  this  reason, 
as  well  as  others,  I  have  given  so  large  a  space  in 
this  volume  to  the  history,  the  details,  and  the 
results  of  English  factory  legislation.  One  na¬ 
tion  can  and  should  learn  from  others.  And  even 
when  a  society  has  got  upon  the  right  track  for 
the  discovery  of  the  natural  laws  of  its  move¬ 
ment— and  it  is  the  ultimate  aim  of  this  *  >rk 
to  lay  bare  the  economic  law  of  motion  of  mod¬ 
ern  society— it  can  neither  clear  by  bold  leaps, 
nor  remove  by  legal  enactments,  the  obstacles 
offered  by  the  successive  phases  of  its  normal 
development.  But  it  can  shorten  and  lessen  the 
birth-pangs. 

1  The  dead  lay  hold  of  the  living! 


7 

To  prevent  possible  misunderstanding,  a 
word.  I  paint  the  capitalist  and  the  landlord  in 
no  sense  couleur  de  rose?  But  here  individuals 
are  dealt  with  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  the  per¬ 
sonifications  of  economic  categories,  embodi¬ 
ments  of  particular  class  relations  and  class  in¬ 
terests.  My  standpoint,  from  which  the  evolu¬ 
tion  of  the  economic  formation  of  society  is 
viewed  as  a  process  of  natural  history,  can  less 
than  any  other  make  the  individual  responsible 
for  relations  whose  creature  he  socially  remains/ 
however  much  he  may  subjectively  raise  him¬ 
self  above  them. 

In  the  domain  of  political  economy,  free 
scientific  enquiry  meets  not  merely  the  same 
enemies  as  in  all  other  domains.  The  peculiar 
nature  of  the  material  it  deals  with,  summons 
as  foes  into  the  field  of  battle  the  most  violent, 
mean,  and  malignant  passions  of  the  human 
breast,  the  Furies  of  private  interest.  The  Eng¬ 
lish  Established  Church,  e.g.,  will  more  readily 
pardon  an  attack  on  thirty  eight  of  its  thirty- 
nine  Articles  than  on  one-thirty-ninth  of  its  in¬ 
come.  Now-a-days  atheism  itself  is  culpa  levit? 
as  compared  with  criticism  of  existing  proper¬ 
ty  relations.  Nevertheless,  there  is  an  unmis¬ 
takable  advance.  I  refer,  e.g.,  to  the  Blue  Book 
published  within  the  last  few  weeks:  Corre¬ 
spondence  with  Her  Majesty's  Missions  Abroad , 
regarding  Industrial  Questions  and  Trades' 
Unions .  The  representatives  of  the  English 
Crown  in  foreign  countries  there  declare  in  so 
many  words  that  in  Germany,  in  France,  to 
be  brief,  in  all  the  civilized  states  of  the  Eu¬ 
ropean  continent,  a  radical  change  in  the  exist¬ 
ing  relations  between  capital  and  labour  is  as 
evident  aiid  inevitable  as  in  England.  At  the 
same  time,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic 
Ocean,  Mr.  Wade,  Vice  President  of  the  United 
States,  declared  in  public  meetings  that,  after 
the  abolition  of  slavery,  a  radical  change  of  the 
relations  of  capital  and  of  property  in  land  is  next 
upon  the  order  of  the  day.  These  are  signs  of 
the  times,  not  to  be  hidden  by  purple  mantles 
or  black  cassocks.  They  do  not  signify  that  to¬ 
morrow  a  miracle  will  happen.  They  show  that, 
within  the  ruling  classes  themselves,  a  forebod¬ 
ing  is  dawning  that  the  present  society  is  no 
solid  crystal,  but  an  organism  capable  of 
change,  and  is  constantly  changing. 

The  second  volume  of  this  work  will  treat  of 
the  process  of  the  circulation  of  capital4  (Book 

*  In  rosy  colours. 

1 A  minor  transgression. 

4  On  p.  278  the  author  explains  what  he  comprises  under 
this  head. 


S  PREFACES 


II),  and  of  the  varied  forms  assumed  by  capital 
in  the  course  of  its  development  (Book  III),  the 
third  and  last  volume  (Book  IV),  the  history  of 
the  theory. 

Every  opinion  based  on  scientific  criticism  I 
welcome.  As  to  the  prejudices  of  so-called  pub¬ 
lic  opinion,  to  which  I  have  never  made  conces" 
sions,  now  as  aforetime  the  maxim  of  the  great 
Florentine  is  mine: 

Segui  il  tuo  cor so>  e  lascia  dir  le  genti.1 

Karl  Marx 

London,  July  25, 1867 

AUTHOR’S  PREFACE 
TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

To  the  present  moment  political  economy,  in 
Germany,  is  a  foreign  science.  Gustav  von  G0- 
lich  in  his  Historical  Description  of  Commerce , 
Industry ,  etc.,9  especially  in  the  two  first  vol¬ 
umes  published  in  1830,  has  examined  at  length 
the  historical  circumstances  that  prevented,  in 
Germany,  the  development  of  the  capitalist 
mode  of  production,  and  consequently  the  de¬ 
velopment  in  that  country  of  modern  bourgeois 
society.  Thus  the  soil  whence  political  economy 
springs  was  wanting.  This  “science”  had  to  be 
imported  from  England  and  France  as  a  ready¬ 
made  article;  its  German  professors  remained 
schoolboys.  The  theoretical  expression  of  a  for¬ 
eign  reality  was  turned,  in  their  hands,  into  a 
collection  of  dogmas,  interpreted  by  them  in 
terms  of  the  petty  trading  world  around  them, 
and  therefore  misinterpreted.  The  feeling  of 
scientific  impotence,  a  feeling  not  wholly  to  be 
repressed,  and  the  uneasy  consciousness  of  hav¬ 
ing  to  touch  a  subject  in  reality  foreign  to  them, 
was  but  imperfectly  concealed,  either  under  a 
parade  of  literary  and  historical  erudition,  or 
by  an  admixture  of  extraneous  material,  bor¬ 
rowed  from  the  so-called  Kameral*  sciences — 
a  medley  of  smatterings  through  whose  pur¬ 
gatory  the  hopeless  candidate  for  the  German 
bureaucracy  has  to  pass. 

Since  1848  capitalist  production  has  devel¬ 
oped  rapidly  in  Germany,  and  at  the  present 
time  it  is  in  the  full  bloom  of  speculation  and 
swindling.  But  fate  is  still  unpropitious  to  our 
professional  economists.  At  the  time  when  they 
were  able  to  deal  with  political  economy  in  a 

1  "Pursue  your  own  course,  no  matter  what  the  people 
aav." 

* Geschichtliche  Darstellung des  Handels  ^der Gewerbe  and 
des  Aekerbaus ,  etc.— Gustav  von  Galich,  5  vols.,  Jena, 

■■tei 


straightforward  fashion,  modern  economic  con¬ 
ditions  did  not  actually  exist  in  Germany.  And 
as  soon  as  these  conditions  did  come  into  exist¬ 
ence,  they  did  so  under  circumstances  that  no 
longer  allowed  of  their  being  really  and  impar¬ 
tially  investigated  within  the  bounds  of  the 
bourgeois  horizon.  In  so  far  as  political  economy 
remains  within  that  horizon,  in  so  far,  i.e.,  as 
the  capitalist  regime  is  looked  upon  as  the  abso¬ 
lutely  final  form  of  social  production,  instead  of 
as  a  passing  historical  phase  of  its  evolution, 
political  economy  can  remain  a  science  only  so 
long  as  the  class  struggle  is  latent  or  manifests 
itself  only  in  isolated  and  sporadic  phenomena. 

Let  us  take  England.  Its  political  economy 
belongs  to  the  period  in  which  the  class  struggle 
was  as  yet  undeveloped.  Its  last  great  represen¬ 
tative,  Ricardo,  in  the  end,  consciously  makes 
the  antagonism  of  class  interests,  of  wages  and 
rofits,  of  profits  and  rent,  the  starting  point  of 
is  investigations,  naively  taking  this  antag¬ 
onism  for  a  social  law  of  nature.  But  by  this 
start  the  science  of  bourgeois  economy  had 
reached  the  limits  beyond  which  it  could  not 
pass.  Already  in  the  lifetime  of  Ricardo,  and  in 
opposition  to  him,  it  was  met  by  criticism,  in 
the  person  of  Sismondi . 4 

The  succeeding  period,  from  1820  to  1830, 
was  notable  in  England  for  scientific  activity  in 
thedomainof  political  economy.  It  was  the  time 
as  well  of  the  vulgarizing  and  extending  of  Ric¬ 
ardo’s  theory,  as  of  the  contest  of  that  theory 
with  the  old  school.  Splendid  tournaments  were 
held.  What  was  done  then  is  little  known  to  the 
Continent  generally,  because  the  polemic  is  for 
the  most  part  scattered  through  articles  in  re¬ 
views,  occasional  literature,  and  pamphlets. 
The  unprejudiced  character  of  this  polemic— 
although  the  theory  of  Ricardo  already  serves, 
in  exceptional  cases,  as  a  weapon  of  attack  upon 
bourgeois  economy— is  explained  by  the  cir- 
cumstancesof  the  time.  On  theone  hand,  modern 
industry  itself  was  only  just  emerging  from  the 
age  of  childhood,  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that, 
with  the  crisis  of  1825,  it  for  the  first  time  opens 
the  periodic  cycle  of  its  modern  life.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  class  struggle  between  capital  and  la¬ 
bour  is  forced  into  the  background;  politically, 
by  the  discord  between  the  governments  and 
the  feudal  aristocracy  gathered  around  the  Holy 
Alliance  on  the  one  hand,  and  thepopular  mass¬ 
es  led  by  the  bourgeoisie  on  the  other;  economic¬ 
ally,  by  the  quarrel  between  industrial  capital 
and  aristocratic  landed  property— a  quarrel 
that  in  France  was  concealed  by  the  opposition 
4  See  my  work  Zur  Kritik ,  etc.,  p.  39. 


PREFACES  9 


between  small  and  large  landed  property,  and 
that  in  England  broke  out  openly  after  the  Corn 
Laws.  The  literature  of  political  economy  in 
England  at  this  time  calls  to  mind  the  stormy 
forward  movement  in  France  after  Dr.  Ques- 
nay’s  death,  but  only  as  a  Saint  Martin's  sum¬ 
mer  reminds  us  of  spring.  With  the  year  1830 
came  the  decisive  crisis. 

In  France  and  in  England  the  bourgeoisie 
had  conquered  political  power.  Thenceforth, 
the  class  struggle,  practically  as  well  as  theo¬ 
retically,  took  on  more  and  more  outspoken  and 
threatening  forms.  It  sounded  the  knell  of  sci¬ 
entific  bourgeois  economy.  It  was  thenceforth 
no  longer  a  question  whether  this  theorem  or 
that  was  true,  but  whether  it  was  useful  to  cap¬ 
ital  or  harmful,  expedient  or  inexpedient,  polit¬ 
ically  dangerous  or  not.  In  place  of  disinterested 
enquirers,  there  were  hired  prize-fighters;  in 
place  of  genuine  scientific  research,  the  bad  con¬ 
science  and  the  evil  intent  of  apologetic.  Still, 
even  the  obtrusive  pamphlets  with  which  the 
Anti-Corn  L? w  League,  led  by  the  manufac¬ 
turers  Cobden  and  Bright,  deluged  the  world, 
have  a  historic  interest,  if  no  scientific  one,  on 
account  of  their  polemic  against  the  landed 
aristocracy.  But  since  then  the  Free  Trade  leg¬ 
islation,  inaugurated  by  Sir  Robert  Peel,  has 
deprived  vulgar  economy  of  this  its  last  sting. 

The  Continental  revolution  of  1848-9  also 
had  its  reaction  in  England.  Men  who  still 
claimed  some  scientific  standing  and  aspired  to 
be  something  more  than  mere  sophists  and 
sycophants  of  the  ruling  classes,  tried  to  har¬ 
monize  the  political  economy  of  capital  with  the 
claims,  no  longer  to  be  ignored,  of  the  proletar¬ 
iat.  Hence  a  shallow  syncretism,  of  which  John 
Stuart  Mill  is  the  best  representative.  It  is  a 
declaration  of  bankruptcy  by  bourgeois  econ¬ 
omy,  an  event  on  which  the  great  Russian 
scholar  and  critic,  N.  Tschernysheflfsky,  has 
thrown  the  light  of  a  master  mind  in  his  0«/- 
lines  of  Political  Economy  according  to  Mill. 

In  Germany,  therefore,  the  capitalist  mode 
of  production  came  to  a  head,  after  its  antagon¬ 
istic  character  had  already,  in  France  and  Eng¬ 
land,  shown  itself  in  a  fierce  strife  of  classes. 
And  meanwhile,  moreover,  the  German  pro*  *  - 
tariat  had  attained  a  much  more  clear  class 
consciousness  than  the  German  bourgeoisie. 
Thus,  at  the  very  moment  when  a  bourgeois 
science  of  political  economy  seemed  at  last  pos¬ 
sible  in  Germany,  it  had  in  reality  again  become 
impossible. 

Under  these  circumstances  its  professors  fell 
into  two  groups.  The  one  set,  prudent,  practical 


business  folk,  flocked  to  the  banner  of  Bastiat, 
the  most  superficial  and  therefore  the  most  ade¬ 
quate  representative  of  the  apologetic  of  vulgar 
economy;  the  other,  proud  of  the  professorial 
dignity  of  their  science,  followed  John  Stuart 
Mill  in  his  attempt  to  reconcile  irreconcilables. 
Just  as  in  the  classical  time  of  bourgeois  econ¬ 
omy,  so  also  in  the  time  of  its  decline,  the  Ger¬ 
mans  remained  mere  schoolboys,  imitators  and 
followers,  petty  retailers  and  hawkers  in  the 
service  of  the  great  foreign  wholesale  concern. 

The  peculiar  historic  development  of  Ger¬ 
man  society  therefore  forbids,  in  that  country, 
all  original  work  in  bourgeois  economy;  but  not 
the  criticism  of  that  economy.  So  far  as  such 
cri  ticism  represents  a  class,  it  can  only  represent 
the  class  whose  vocation  in  history  is  the  over¬ 
throw  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production  and 
the  final  abolition  of  all  classes— the  proletariat. 

The  learned  and  unlearned  spokesmen  of  the 
German  bourgeoisie  tried  at  first  to  kill  Das 
Kapital  by  silence,  as  they  had  managed  to  do 
with  my  earlier  writings.  As  soon  as  they  found 
that  these  tactics  no  longer  fitted  in  with  the 
conditions  of  the  time,  they  wrote,  under  pre¬ 
tence  of  criticizing  my  book,  prescriptions  “for 
the  tranquillization  of  the  bourgeois  mind." 
But  they  found  in  the  workers’  press — see,  e.g., 
Joseph  Dietzgen's  articles  in  the  Volksstaat — 
antagonists  stronger  than  themselves,  to  whom 
(down  to  this  very  day)  they  owe  a  reply.1 

An  excellent  Russian  translation  of  Das  Kap- 
ital  appeared  in  the  spring  of  1872.  The  edition 
of  3000  copies  is  already  nearly  exhausted.  As 
early  as  1071,  A.  Sieber,  Professor  of  Political 
Economy  in  the  University  of  Kiev,  in  his  work 
David  Ricardo's  Theory  oj  Value  and  of  Capital , 
referred  to  my  theory  of  value,  of  money,  and  of 
capital,  as  in  its  fundamentals  a  necessary  se¬ 
quel  to  the  teaching  of  Smith  and  Ricardo. 

1  The  mealy-mouthed  babblers  of  German  vulgar  econ¬ 
omy  fell  foul  of  the  style  of  my  book.  No  one  can  feel  the 
literary  shortcomings  in  Das  Kapital  more  strongly  than 
I  myself.  Yet  I  will,  for  the  benefit  and  the  enjoyment  of 
these  gentlemen  and  their  public,  quote  in  this  connection 
one  English  and  one  Russian  notice.  The  Saturday  Review , 
always  hostile  to  my  views,  said  in  its  notice  of  the  first 
edition:  "The  presentation  of  the  subject  invests  the  driest 
economic  questions  with  a  certain  peculiar  charm."  The 
St.  Petersburg  Journal  {Sankt-Peterburgskie  Ftedomosti ), 
in  its  issue  of  April  20,  1872,  says:  "The  presentation  of 
the  subject,  with  the  exception  of  one  or  two  exceptionally 
special  parts,  is  distinguished  by  its  comprehensibility  by 
the  general  reader,  its  clearness,  and,  in  spite  of  the  scien¬ 
tific  intricacy  of  the  subject,  by  an  unusual  liveliness.  In 
this  respect  the  author  in  no  way  resembles  . . .  the  ma¬ 
jority  of  German  scholars  who  . . .  write  their  books  in  a 
language  so  dry  and  obscure  that  the  heads  of  ordinary 
mortals  are  cracked  by  it." 


PREFACES 


10 

That  which  astonishes  the  western  European 
in  the  reading  of  this  excellent  work  is  the  au¬ 
thor's  consistent  and  Arm  grasp  of  the  purely 
theoretical  position. 

That  the  method  employed  in  Das  Kapital 
has  been  little  understood  is  shown  by  the  vari¬ 
ous  conceptions,  contradictory  one  to  another, 
that  have  been  formed  of  it. 

Thus  the  Paris  Revue  Positiviste  reproaches 
me  in  that  on  the  one  hand,  I  treat  economics 
metaphysically,  and  on  the  other  hand— -imag¬ 
ine! — confine  myself  to  the  mere  critical  anal¬ 
ysis  of  actual  facts,  instead  of  writing  recipes 
(Comtist  ones?)  for  the  cook-shops  of  the  fu¬ 
ture.  In  answer  to  the  reproach  in  re  metaphys¬ 
ics,  Professor  Sieber  has  it:  “In  so  far  as  it  deals 
with  actual  theory,  the  method  of  Marx  is  the 
deductive  method  of  the  whole  English  school, 
a  school  whose  failings  and  virtues  are  common 
to  the  best  theoretic  economists.”  M.  Block— 
“ Les  thloriciens  du  soeialisme  en  Allemagne*'  ex¬ 
tract  from  the  Journal  des  Economistes ,  July 
and  August,  1872— makes  the  discovery  that 
my  method  is  analytic  and  says:  “ Par  cet 
outrage  M.  Marx  se  class e  parmi  les  e sprits 
analytiques  les  plus  iminents.'*1  German  reviews, 
of  course,  shriek  out  at  “Hegelian  sophistics.” 
The  European  Messenger  of  St.  Petersburg,  in 
an  article  dealing  exclusively  with  the  method 
of  Das  Kapital  (May  ,1872,  pp.  427-436),  fiods 
my  method  of  inquiry  severely  realistic,  but  my 
method  of  presentation,  unfortunately,  Ger¬ 
man-dialectical.  It  says:  “At  first  sight,  if  the 
judgment  is  based  on  the  external  form  of  the 
presentation  of  the  subject,  Marx  is  the  most 
ideal  of  ideal  philosophers,  always  in  the  Ger¬ 
man,  i.e.,  the  bad,  sense  of  the  word.  But  in 
point  of  fact  he  is  infinitely  more  realistic  than 
all  his  forerunners  in  the  work  of  economic  crit¬ 
icism.  He  can  in  no  sense  be  called  an  idealist.” 
I  cannot  answer  the  writer  better  than  by  aid 
of  a  few  extracts  from  his  own  criticism,  which 
may  interest  some  of  my  readers  to  whom  the 
Russian  original  is  inaccessible. 

After  a  quotation  from  the  preface  to  my 
Criticism  of  Political  Economy ,  Berlin,  1 859,  pp. 
4-7,  where  I  discuss  the  materialistic  basis  of 
my  method,  the  writer  goes  on:  “The  one  thing 
which  is  of  moment  to  Marx  is  to  find  the  law  of 
the  phenomena  with  whose  investigation  he  is 
concerned;  and  not  only  is  that  law  of  moment 
to  him  which  governs  these  phenomena  in  so 
far  as  they  have  a  definite  form  and  mutual  con¬ 
nection  within  a  given  historical  period.  Of  still 

1  "By  this  work,  Marx  has  made  for  himself  a  place 
among  the  most  eminent  analytical  minds." 


greater  moment  to  him  is  the  law  of  their  varia¬ 
tion,  of  their  development,  i.e.,  of  their  transi¬ 
tion  from  one  form  into  another,  from  one  series 
of  connections  into  a  different  one.  This  law 
once  discovered,  he  investigates  in  detail  the 
effects  in  which  it  manifests  itself  in  social  life. 
Consequently,  Marx  only  troubles  himself 
about  one  thing;  to  show,  by  rigid  scientific  in¬ 
vestigation,  the  necessity  of  successive  determi¬ 
nate  orders  of  social  condi  tions,  and  to  establish, 
as  impartially  as  possible,  the  facts  that  serve 
him  for  fundamental  starting  points.  For  this  it 
is  quite  enough  if  he  proves,  at  the  same  time, 
both  the  necessity  of  the  present  order  of  things, 
and  the  necessity  of  another  order  into  which 
the  first  must  inevitably  pass  over;  and  this  all 
the  same,  whether  men  believe  or  do  not  believe 
it,  whether  they  are  conscious  or  unconscious  of 
it.  Marx  treats  the  social  movement  as  a  process 
of  natural  history,  governed  by  laws  not  only 
independent  of  human  will,  consciousness,  and 
intelligence,  but  rather,  on  the  contrary,  deter¬ 
mining  that  will,  consciousness,  and  intelli¬ 
gence.  ...  If  in  the  history  of  civilization  the 
conscious  element  plays  a  part  so  subordinate, 
then  it  is  self-evident  that  a  critical  inquiry 
whose  subject  matter  is  civilization  can,  less 
than  anything  else,  have  for  its  basis  any  form 
of,  or  any  result  of,  consciousness.  That  is  to 
say,  that  not  the  idea,  but  the  material  phe¬ 
nomenon  alone  can  serve  as  Its  starting  point. 
Such  an  inquiry  will  confine  itself  to  the  con¬ 
frontation  and  the  comparison  of  a  fact,  not 
with  ideas,  but  with  another  fact.  For  this  in¬ 
quiry,  the  one  thing  of  moment  is  that  both 
facts  be  investigated  as  accurately  as  possible, 
and  that  they  actually  form,  each  with  respect 
to  the  other,  different  momenta  of  an  evolution ; 
but  most  important  of  all  is  the  rigid  analysis  of 
the  series  of  successions,  of  the  sequences  and 
concatenations  in  which  the  different  stages  of 
such  an  evolution  present  themselves.  But,  it 
will  be  said,  the  general  laws  of  economic  life 
are  one  and  the  same,  no  matter  whether  they 
are  applied  to  the  present  or  the  past.  This 
Marx  directly  denies.  According  to  him,  such 
abstract  laws  do  not  exist.  On  the  contrary,  in 
his  opinion  every  historical  period  has  laws  of 
its  own.  ...  As  soon  as  society  has  outlived  a 
given  period  of  development,  and  is  passing  over 
from  one  given  stage  to  another,  it  begins  to  be 
subject  also  to  other  laws.  In  a  word,  economic 
life  offers  us  a  phenomenon  analogous  to  the 
history  of  evolution  i  n  other  branches  of  biology. 
The  old  economists  misunderstood  the  nature 
of  economic  laws  when  they  likened  them  to  the 


PREFACES  11 


laws  of  physics  and  chemistry.  A  more  thorough 
analysis  of  phenomena  shows  that  social  organ¬ 
isms  differ  among  themselves  as  fundamentally 
as  plants  or  animals.  Nay,  one  and  the  same 
phenomenon  falls  under  quite  different  laws  in 
consequence  of  the  different  structure  of  those 
organisms  as  a  whole,  of  the  variations  of  their 
individual  organs,  of  the  different  conditions  in 
which  those  organs  function,  etc.  Marx,  e.g., 
denies  that  the  law  of  population  is  the  same  at 
all  times  and  in  all  places.  He  asserts,  on  the 
contrary,  that  every  stage  of  development  has 
its  own  law  of  population. . . .  With  the  varying 
degree  of  development  of  productive  power, 
social  conditions  and  the  laws  governing  them 
vary  too.  Whilst  Marx  sets  himself  the  task  of 
following  and  explaining  from  this  point  of  view 
the  economic  system  established  by  the  sway  of 
capital,  he  is  only  formulating,  in  a  strictly  sci¬ 
entific  manner,  the  aim  that  every  accurate  in¬ 
vestigation  into  economic  life  must  have.  The 
scientific  value  of  such  an  inquiry  lies  in  the  dis¬ 
closing  of  the  special  laws  that  regulate  the 
origin,  exloUuo ,  development,  death  of  a  given 
social  organism,  and  its  replacement  by  another 
and  higher  one.  And  it  is  this  value  that,  in 
point  of  fact,  Marx’s  book  has.” 

Whilst  the  writer  pictures  what  he  takes  to 
be  actually  my  method,  in  this  striking  and  (as 
far  as  concerns  my  own  application  of  it)  gener¬ 
ous  way,  what  else  is  he  picturing  but  the  dia¬ 
lectic  method? 

Of  course,  the  method  of  presentation  must 
differ  in  form  from  that  of  inquiry.  The  latter 
has  to  appropriate  the  material  in  detail,  to 
analyse  its  different  forms  of  development,  to 
trace  out  their  inner  connection.  Only  after  this 
work  is  done  can  the  actual  movement  be  ade¬ 
quately  described.  If  this  is  done  successfully, 
if  the  life  of  the  subject  matter  is  ideally  re¬ 
flected  as  in  a  mirror,  then  it  may  appear  as  if 
we  had  before  us  a  mere  a  priori  construction. 

My  dialectic  method  is  not  only  different  from 
the  Hegelian,  but  is  its  direct  opposite.  To  He¬ 
gel,  the  life-process  of  the  human  brain,  i.e.,  the 
process  of  thinking,  which,  under  the  name  of 
“the  Idea,*’  he  even  transforms  into  an  inde¬ 
pendent  subject,  is  the  demiurge  of  the  real 
world,  and  the  real  world  is  only  the  external, 
phenomenal  form  of  “the  Idea.”  With  me,  on 
the  contrary,  the  ideal  is  nothing  else  than  the 


material  world  reflected  by  the  human  mind, 
and  translated  into  forms  of  thought. 

The  mystifying  side  of  Hegelian  dialectic  I 
criticized  nearly  thirty  years  ago,  at  a  time  when 
it  was  still  the  fashion.  But  just  as  I  was  work¬ 
ing  at  the  first  volume  of  Das  Kapital ,  it  was  the 
good  pleasure  of  the  peevish,  arrogant,  medi¬ 
ocre  Emyovoi1  who  now  talk  large  in  cultured 
Germany,  to  treat  Hegel  in  the  same  way  as  the 
brave  Moses  Mendelssohn  in  Lessing’s  time 
treated  Spinoza,  i.e.,  as  a  “dead  dog.’’  1,  there¬ 
fore,  openly  avowed  myself  the  pupil  of  that 
mighty  thinker,  and  even  here  and  there,  in  the 
chapter  on  the  theory  of  value,  coquetted  with 
the  modes  of  expression  peculiar  to  him.  The 
mystification  which  dialectic  suffers  in  Hegel’s 
hands  by  no  means  prevents  him  from  being  the 
first  to  present  its  general  form  of  working  in  a 
comprehensive  andconscious manner.  With  him 
it  is  standing  on  its  head.  It  must  be  turned 
right  side  up  again  if  you  would  discover  the 
rational  kernel  within  the  mystical  shell. 

In  its  mystified  form,  dialectic  became  the 
fashion  in  Germany  because  it  seemed  to  trans¬ 
figure  and  to  glorify  the  existing  state  of  things. 
In  its  rational  form  it  is  a  scandal  and  an  abom¬ 
ination  to  bourgeoisdom  and  its  doctrinaire  pro¬ 
fessors  because  it  includes  in  its  comprehension 
and  affirmative  recognition  of  the  existing  state 
of  things,  at  the  same  time,  also,  the  recognition 
of  the  negation  of  that  state,  of  its  inevitable 
breaking  up;  because  it  regards  every  histori¬ 
cally  developed  social  form  as  in  fluid  move¬ 
ment,  and  therefore  takes  into  account  its  tran¬ 
sient  natun*  not  less  than  its  momentary  exist¬ 
ence;  became  it  lets  nothing  impose  upon  it, 
and  is  in  its  essence  critical  and  revolutionary. 

The  contradictions  inherent  in  the  movement 
of  capitalist  society  impress  themselves  upon 
the  practical  bourgeois  most  strikingly  in  the 
changes  of  the  periodic  cycle,  through  which 
modern  industry  runs,  and  whose  crowning  point 
is  the  universal  crisis.  That  crisis  is  once  again 
approaching,  although  as  yet  but  in  its  prelim¬ 
inary  stage;  and  by  the  universality  of  its  thea¬ 
tre  and  the  intensity  of  its  action  it  will  drum  di¬ 
alectics  even  intothe  heads  of  the  mushroom-up- 
starts  of  the  new,  holy  Prusso-German  empire. 

Karl  Marx 

London,  January  24, 1873 

1  Disciples. 


Part  One 


COMMODITIES  AND  MONEY 


CHAPTER  I.  COMMODITIES 


I.  The  two  Factors  of  a  Commodity:  Use-Value 
and  Value  (the  Substance  of  Value  and  the 
Magnitude  of  Value) 

The  wealth  of  those  societies  in  which  the  cap¬ 
italist  mode  of  production  prevails,  presents  it¬ 
self  as  “an  immense  accumulation  of  commod¬ 
ities/*1  its  unit  being  a  single  commodity.  Our 
investigation  must  therefore  begin  with  the 
analysis  of  a  commodity. 

A  commodity  is,  in  the  first  place,  an  object 
outside  us,  a  thing  that  by  its  properties  satis¬ 
fies  human  wants  of  some  sort  or  another.  The 
nature  of  such  wants,  whether,  for  instance,  they 
spring  from  the  stomach  or  from  fancy,  makes 
no  difference.2  Neither  are  we  here  concerned  to 
know  how  the  object  satisfies  these  wants, 
whether  directly  as  means  of  subsistence,  or  in¬ 
directly  as  means  of  production. 

Every  useful  thing,  as  iron,  paper,  etc.,  may 
be  looked  at  from  the  two  points  of  view  of  qual¬ 
ity  and  quantity.  Tt  is  an  assemblage  of  many 
properties,  and  may  therefore  be  of  use  in  vaii 
ous  ways.  To  discover  the  various  uses  of  things 
is  the  work  of  history.3  So  also  is  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  socially  recognized  standards  of  meas¬ 
ure  for  the  quantities  of  these  useful  objects. 
The  diversity  of  these  measures  has  its  origin 
partly  in  the  diverse  nature  of  the  objects  to  be 
measured,  partly  in  convention. 

The  utility  of  a  thing  makes  it  a  use-value.4 

'Karl  Marx,  Zur  Kritik  der  Politischcn  Oekonomit , 
Berlin,  1859,  p.  4. 

3  “Desire  implies  want;  it  is  the  appetite  of  the  mind, 
and  as  natural  as  hunger  to  the  body. . . .  The  greatest 
number  (of  things)  have  their  value  from  supplying 
wants  of  the  mind. ’—Nicolas  Barbon,  A  Discourse  on 
coining  the  new  money  lighter ,  in  answer  to  Mr.  Locke* s  Con - 
siderations ,  etc.,  London,  1 696,  pp.  2,  3. 

*  “Things  have  an  intrinsic  vcrtue”  (this  is  Barbon's 
special  term  for  value  in  use)  "which  in  all  places  have  the 
same  venue;  as  the  loadstone  to  attract  iron"  {ibid.,  p.  6). 
The  property  which  the  magnet  possesses  of  attracting 
iron  became  of  use  only  after  by  means  of  that  property 
the  polarity  of  the  magnet  had  been  discovered. 

4  "The  natural  worth  of  anything  consists  in  its  fitness 


But  this  utility  is  not  a  thing  of  air.  Being  lim¬ 
ited  by  the  physical  properties  of  the  commod¬ 
ity,  it  has  no  existence  apart  from  that  com¬ 
modity.  A  commodity,  such  as  iron,  corn,  or  a 
diamond,  is,  therefore,  so  far  as  it  is  a  material 
thing,  a  use-value,  something  useful.  This  prop¬ 
erty  of  a  commodity  is  independent  of  the 
amount  of  labour  required  to  appropriate  its 
useful  qualities.  When  treating  of  use-value, 
we  always  assume  to  be  dealing  with  definite 
quantities,  such  as  dozens  of  watches,  yards  of 
linen,  or  tons  of  iron.  The  use- values  of  com¬ 
modities  furnish  the  material  for  a  special 
study,  that  of  the  commercial  knowledge  of 
commodities.6  Use- values  become  a  reality 
only  by  use  or  consumption;  they  also  con¬ 
stitute  the  substance  of  all  wealth,  whatever 
may  be  the  social  form  of  that  wealth.  In 
the  form  of  society  we  are  about  to  consider, 
they  are,  in  addition,  the  material  depositories 
of  exchange  value. 

Exchange  value,  at  first  sight,  presents  itself 
as  a  quantitative  relation,  as  the  proportion  in 
which  values  in  use  of  one  sort  are  exchanged 
for  those  of  another  sort,8  a  relation  constantly 
changing  with  time  and  place.  Hence,  exchange 
value  appears  to  be  something  accidental  and 
purely  relative,  and  consequently  an  intrinsic 
value,  i.e.,  an  exchange  value  that  is  insepara^ 
bly  connected  with,  inherent  in,  commodities, 

to  supply  the  necessities,  or  serve  the  conveniences  of  hu¬ 
man  life.”  (John  Locke,  Some  Considerations  on  the  Con¬ 
sequences  of  the  Lowering  of  Interest,  1691,  in  H'orks,  Lon¬ 
don,  1777,  VoL  II,  p.  28.)  In  English  writers  of  the  seven¬ 
teenth  century  we  frequently  find  "worth”  in  the  sense  of 
value  in  use,  and  "value”  in  the  sense  of  exchange  value. 
This  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  a  language 
that  likes  to  use  a  Teutonic  word  for  the  actual  thing,  and 
a  Romance  word  for  its  reflexion. 

8  In  bourgeois  societies  the  economical  Jiclio  juris  [legal 
fiction)  prevails:  that  every  one,  as  a  buyer,  possesses  an 
encyclopedic  knowledge  of  commodities. 

0  "Value  consists  in  the  relation  of  exchange  which  takes 
place  between  one  thing  and  another  thing,  as  well  as  be¬ 
tween  the  measure  of  one  product,  and  that  of  another 
product.”— Le  Trosne,  De  VlntirU  Social,  in  Physiocrates, 
ed.  Daire,  Paris,  1845,  P*  889. 

13 


CAPITAL 


14 

seems  a  contradiction  in  terms.1 1«et  us  consider 
the  matter  a  little  more  closely. 

A  given  commodity,  e.g.,  a  quarter  of  wheat, 
i$  exchanged  for  x  blacking,^  silk,  or  z gold,  etc. 
— in  short,  for  other  commodities  in  the  most 
different  proportions.  Instead  of  one  exchange 
value,  the  wheat  has,  therefore,  a  great  many. 
But  since  x  blacking, y  silk,  or  z  gold,  etc.,  each 
represent  the  exchange  value  of  one  quarter  of 
wheat,  x  blacking,  y  silk,  z  gold,  etc.,  must,  as 
exchange  values,  be  replaceable  by  each  other, 
or  equal  to  each  other.  Therefore,  first:  the  val¬ 
id  exchange  values  of  a  given  commodity  ex¬ 
press  something  equal;  secondly,  exchange  val¬ 
ue,  generally,  is  only  the  mode  of  expression, 
the  phenomenal  form,  of  something  contained 
in  it,  yet  distinguishable  from  it. 

Let  us  take  two  commodities,  e.g.,  corn  and 
iron.  The  proportions  in  which  they  are  ex¬ 
changeable,  whatever  those  proportions  may  be, 
can  always  be  represented  by  an  equation  in 
which  a  given  quantity  of  corn  is  equated  to 
some  quantity  of  iron:  e.g.,  i  quarter  corn = x 
cwt.  iron.  What  does  this  equation  tell  us?  It 
tells  us  that  in  two  different  things,— in  i  quar¬ 
ter  of  corn  and  x  cwt.  of  iron,  there  exists  in 
equal  quantities  something  common  to  both. 
The  two  things  must  therefore  be  equal  to  a 
third,  which  in  itself  is  neither  the  one  nor  the 
other.  Each  of  them,  so  far  as  it  is  exchange 
value,  must  therefore  be  reducible  to  this 
third. 

A  simple  geometrical  illustration  will, make 
this  clear.  In  order  to  calculate  and  compare  the 
areas  of  rectilinear  figures,  wc  decompose  them 
into  triangles.  But  the  area  of  the  triangle  itself 
is  expressed  by  something  totally  different  from 
its  visible  figure,  namely,  by  half  the  product  of 
the  base  into  the  altitude.  In  the  same  way  the 
exchange  values  of  commodities  must  be  capa¬ 
ble  of  being  expressed  in  terms  of  something 
common  to  them  all,  of  which  thing  they  repre¬ 
sent  a  greater  or  less  quantity. 

This  common  “something”  cannot  be  either 
a  geometrical,  a  chemical,  or  any  other  natural 
property  of  commodities.  Such  properties  claim 
our  attention  only  in  so  far  as  the;  affect  the 
utility  of  those  commodities,  make  them  use- 
values.  But  the  exchange  of  commodities  is  evi¬ 
dently  an  act  characterized  by  a  total  abstrac¬ 
tion  from  use-value.  Then  one  use-value  is  just 
as  good  as  another,  provided  only  it  be  present 

1  “Nothing  can  have  an  intrinsic  value."— N.  Barbon, 
op,  cit.t  p.  6;  or  as  Butler  says — 

The  value  oja  thing 
Is  just  as  much  as  it  will  bring. 


in  sufficient  quantity.  Or,  as  old  Barbon  says, 
“one  sort  of  wares  are  as  good  as  another,  if  the 
values  be  equal.  There  is  no  difference  or  dis¬ 
tinction  in  things  of  equal  value.  ...  An  hun¬ 
dred  pounds’  worth  of  lead  or  iron  is  of  as  great 
value  as  one  hundred  pounds'  worth  of  silver  or 
gold.”2  As  use- values,  commodities  are,  above 
all,  of  different  qualities,  but  as  exchange  values 
they  are  merely  different  quantities,  and  con¬ 
sequently  do  not  contain  an  atom  of  use-value. 

If  then  we  leave  out  of  consideration  the  use- 
value  of  commodities,  they  have  only  one  com¬ 
mon  property  left,  that  of  being  products  of  la¬ 
bour.  But  even  the  product  of  labour  itself  has 
undergone  a  change  in  our  hands.  If  we  make 
abstraction  from  its  use-value,  we  make  abstrac¬ 
tion  at  thesame  time  from  the  material  elements 
and  shapes  that  make  the  product  a  use-value; 
we  see  in  it  no  longer  a  table,  a  house,  yarn,  or 
any  other  useful  thing.  Its  existence  as  a  mate¬ 
rial  thing  is  put  out  of  sight.  Neither  can  it  any 
longer  be  regarded  as  the  product  of  the  labour 
of  the  joiner,  the  mason,  the  spinner,  or  of  any 
other  definite  kind  of  productive  labour.  Along 
with  the  useful  qualities  of  the  products  them¬ 
selves,  we  put  out  of  sight  both  the  useful  char¬ 
acter  of  the  various  kinds  of  labour  embodied  in 
them,  and  the  concrete  forms  of  that  labour; 
there  is  nothi  ng  left  but  what  is  common  to  them 
all;  all  are  reduced  to  one  and  the  same  sort  of 
labour,  human  labour  in  tho-abstract. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  residue  of  each  of 
these  products;  it  consists  of  the  same  unsub¬ 
stantial  reality  in  each,  a  mere  congelation  of 
homogeneous  human  labour,  of  labour  power 
expended  without  regard  to  the  mode  of  its  ex¬ 
penditure.  All  that  these  things  now  tell  us  is 
that  human  labour  power  has  been  expended  in 
their  production,  that  human  labour  is  embod¬ 
ied  in  them.  When  looked  at  as  crystals  of  this 
social  substance,  common  to  them  all,  they  are 
— values. 

We  have  seen  that  when  commodities  are  ex¬ 
changed,  their  exchange  value  manifests  itself 
as  something  totally  independent  of  their  use- 
value.  But  if  we  abstract  from  their  use-value, 
there  remains  their  value  as  defined  above. 
Therefore,  the  common  substance  that  mani¬ 
fests  itself  in  the  exchange  value  of  commod¬ 
ities,  whenever  they  are  exchanged,  is  their  val¬ 
ue.  The  progress  of  our  investigation  will  show 
that  exchange  value  is  the  only  form  in  which 
the  value  of  commodities  can  manifest  itself  or 
be  expressed.  For  the  present,  however,  we  have 

*  N.  Barbon,  loc .  cit.%  pp.  53, 57. 


COMMODITIES 


to  consider  the  nature  of  value  independently 
of  this,  its  form. 

A  use-value,  or  useful  article,  therefore,  has 
value  only  because  human  labour  in  the  abstract 
has  been  embodied  or  materialized  in  it.  How, 
then,  is  the  magnitude  of  this  value  to  be  meas¬ 
ured?  Plainly,  by  the  quantity  of  the  value-cre¬ 
ating  substance,  the  labour,  contained  in  the  ar¬ 
ticle.  The  quantity  of  labour,  however,  is  meas¬ 
ured  by  its  duration,  and  labour  time  in  its  turn 
finds  its  standard  in  weeks,  days,  and  hours. 

Some  people  might  think  that  if  the  value  of 
a  commodity  is  determined  by  the  quantity  of 
labour  spent  on  it,  the  more  idle  and  unskilful 
the  labourer,  the  more  valuable  would  his  com¬ 
modity  be,  because  more  time  would  be  required 
in  its  production.  The  labour,  however,  that 
forms  the  substance  of  value,  is  homogeneous 
human  labour,  expenditure  of  one  uniform  la¬ 
bour  power.  The  total  labour  power  of  society, 
which  is  embodied  in  the  sum  total  of  the  values 
of  all  commodities  produced  by  that  society, 
counts  here  one  homogeneous  mass  of  hu¬ 
man  labour  power,  composed  though  it  be  of  in¬ 
numerable  individual  units.  Each  of  these  units 
is  the  same  as  any  other,  so  far  as  it  has  the 
character  of  the  average  labour  power  of  soci¬ 
ety,  and  takes  effect  as  such;  that  is,  so  far  as  it 
requires  for  producing  a  commodity  no  more 
time  than  isneeded  on  an  average,  no  more  than 
is  socially  necessary.  The  labour  time  socially 
necessary  is  that  required  to  produce  an  article 
under  the  normal  conditions  of  production,  and 
with  the  average  degree  of  skill  and  intensity 
prevalent  at  the  time.  The  introduction  of  pow¬ 
er  looms  into  England  probably  reduced  by  one- 
half  the  labour  required  to  weave  a  given  quan¬ 
tity  of  yarn  into  cloth.  The  hand-loom  weavers, 
as  a  mat  ter  of  fact,  continued  to  require  the  same 
time  as  before;  but  for  all  that,  the  product  of 
one  hour  of  their  labour  represented  after  the 
change  only  half  an  hour’s  social  labour,  and 
consequently  fell  to  one-half  its  former  value. 

We  see  then  that  that  which  determines  the 
magnitude  of  the  value  of  any  article  is  the 
amount  of  labour  socially  necessary,  or  the  la¬ 
bour  time  socially  necessary  for  its  production.1 
Each  individual  commodity,  in  this  connexio. , 

1  “The  value  of  them  (the  necessaries  of  life)  when  they 
are  exchanged  the  one  for  another  is  regulated  by  the 
quantity  of  labour  necessarily  required,  and  commonly 
taken  in  producing  them.”  ( Some  Thoughts  on  the  Interest 
of  Money  in  general,  and  particularly  in  the  Publtck  Funds, 
etc.,  London,  p.  36.)  This  remarkable  anonymous  work, 
written  in  the  last  century,  b « <«rs  no  date.  It  is  clear,  how¬ 
ever,  from  internal  evidence,  that  it  appeared  in  the  reign 
of  George  II  about  1739  or  1740. 


15 

is  to  be  considered  as  an  average  sample  of  its 
class.2  Commodities,  therefore,  in  which  equal 
quantities  of  labour  are  embodied,  or  which  can 
be  produced  in  the  same  time,  have  the  same 
value.  The  value  of  one  commodity  is  to  the  val¬ 
ue  of  any  other,  as  the  labour  time  necessary 
for  the  production  of  the  one  is  to  that  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  production  of  the  other.  “As  val¬ 
ues,  all  commodities  are  only  definite  masses  of 
congealed  labour  time.”8 

The  value  of  a  commodity  would,  therefore, 
remain  constant,  if  the  labour  time  required  for 
its  production  also  remained  constant.  But  the 
latter  changes  with  every  variation  in  the  pro¬ 
ductiveness  of  labour.  This  productiveness  is 
determined  by  various  circumstances,  amongst 
others,  by  the  average  amount  of  skill  of  the 
workmen,  the  state  of  science,  and  the  degree  of 
its  practical  application,  the  social  organization 
of  production,  the  extent  and  capabilities  of  the 
means  of  production,  and  by  physical  condi¬ 
tions.  For  example,  the  same  amount  of  labour 
in  favourable  seasons  is  embodied  in  eight  bush¬ 
els  of  corn,  and  in  unfavourable,  only  in  four. 
The  same  labour  extracts  from  rich  mines  more 
metal  than  from  poor  mines.  Diamonds  are  of 
very  rare  occurrence  on  the  earth’s  surface,  and 
hence  their  discover)  costs,  on  an  average,  a 
great  deal  of  labour  time.  Consequently,  much 
labour  is  represented  in  a  small  compass.  Jacob 
doubts  whether  gold  has  ever  been  paid  for  at 
its  full  value.  This  appliesstill  more  todiamonds. 
According  to  Eschwege,  the  total  produce  of  the 
Brazilian  diamond  mines  for  the  eighty  years, 
ending  in  i  s "  3,  had  not  realized  the  price  of  one 
and  a  half  >  iurs’  average  produce  of  the  sugar 
and  coffee  plantations  of  the  same  country,  al¬ 
though  the  diamonds  cost  much  more  labour, 
and  therefore  represented  more  value.  With 
richer  mines,  the  same  quantity  of  labour  would 
embody  itself  in  more  diamonds,  and  their  val¬ 
ue  would  fall.  If  we  could  succeed  at  a  small  ex¬ 
penditure  of  labour  in  converting  carbon  into 
diamonds,  their  value  might  fall  below  that  of 
bricks.  In  general,  the  greater  the  productive¬ 
ness  ot  labour,  the  less  is  the  labour  time  re¬ 
quired  for  the  production  of  an  article,  the  less 
is  the  amount  ot  labour  crystallized  in  that  ar¬ 
ticle,  and  the  less  is  its  value;  and  vice  versa ,  the 
less  the  productiveness  of  labour,  the  greater  is 
the  labour  time  required  for  the  production  of 
an  article,  and  the  greater  is  its  value.  The  value 

3  “All  products  belonging  to  the  same  class  of  things 
constitute  essentially  a  single  mass,  the  price  of  which  is 
determined  in  a  general  manner,  without  regard  for  the 
particular  circumstances.”— Le  Trosne,  op, at,,  p.  893. 

3  K.  Marx,  op,  at,,  p.  6. 


U  CAPITAL 


of  a  commodity,  therefore,  varies  directly  as 
the  quantity,  and  inversely  as  the  productive¬ 
ness,  of  the  labour  incorporated  in  it. 

A  thing  can  be  a  use-value,  without  having 
value.  This  is  the  case  whenever  its  utility  to 
man  is  not  due  to  labour.  Such  are  air,  virgin 
soil,  natural  meadows,  etc.  A  thing  can  be  use¬ 
ful,  and  the  product  of  human  labour,  without 
being  a  commodity.  Whoever  directly  satisfies 
his  wants  with  the  produce  of  his  own  labour 
creates,  indeed,  use-values,  but  not  commodi¬ 
ties.  In  order  to  produce  the  latter,  he  must  not 
only  produce  use-values,  but  use-values  for 
others,  social  use-values.  [And  not  only  just  “for 
others.’*  The  medieval  peasant  produced  grain 
for  feudal  dues  and  for  the  tithe.  But  this  grain 
did  not  become  a  commodity  merely  because  it 
was  produced  for  others.  In  order  to  become  a 
commodity,  the  product  must  be  transferred  by 
exchange  to  the  person  whom  it  will  serve  as  use- 
value.]1  Lastly,  nothing  can  have  value,  without 
being  an  object  of  utility.  If  the  thing  is  useless, 
so  is  the  labour  contained  in  it;  the  labour  does 
not  count  as  labour,  and  therefore  creates  no 
value. 

a.  The  Twofold  Character  of  the  Labour  embodied 

in  Commodities 

At  first  sight  a  commodity  presented  itself  to 
us  as  a  complex  of  two  things— use-value  and 
exchange  value.  Later  on,  we  saw  also  that  la¬ 
bour,  too,  possesses  the  same  two-fold  nature; 
for,  so  far  as  it  finds  expression  in  value/it  does 
not  possess  the  same  characteristics  that  belong 
to  it  as  a  creator  of  use- values.  I  was  the  first  to 
point  out  and  to  examine  critically  this  two-fold 
nature  of  the  labour  contained  in  commodities. 
As  this  point  is  the  pivot  on  which  a  clear  com¬ 
prehension  of  political  economy  turns,  we  must 
go  more  into  detail. 

Let  us  take  two  commodities,  such  as  a  coat 
and  10  yards  of  linen,  and  let  the  former  be 
double  the  value  of  the  latter,  so  that,  if  io 
yards  of  linen  =  W,  the  coat  =  2 W. 

The  coat  is  a  use-value  that  satisfies  a  par¬ 
ticular  want.  Its  existence  is  the  result  of  a  spe¬ 
cial  sort  of  productive  activity,  the  nature  of 
which  is  determined  by  its  aim,  mode  of  opera¬ 
tion,  subject,  means,  and  result.  The  labour, 
whose  utility  is  thus  represented  by  the  value  in 
use  of  its  product,  or  which  manifests  itself  by 

1  Note  to  the  4th  ed.:  I  have  inserted  this  passage  in 
brackets  because,  in  its  absence,  the  misunderstanding  has 
frequently  arisen  that  Marx  holds  any  product  consumed 
by  a  person  other  than  the  producer  to  be  a  commodity. 


making  its  product  a  use-value,  we  call  useful 
labour.  In  this  connexion  we  consider  only  its 
useful  effect. 

As  the  coatand  the  linen  are  too  qualitatively 
different  use-values,  so  also  are  the  two  forms 
oflabour  that  produce  them,  tailoring  and  weav¬ 
ing.  Were  these  two  objects  not  qualitatively 
different,  not  produced  respectively  by  labour 
of  different  quality,  they  could  not  stand  to  each 
other  in  the  relation  of  commodities.  Coats  are 
not  exchanged  for  coats;  one  use- value  is  not  ex¬ 
changed  for  another  of  the  same  kind. 

To  all  the  different  varieties  of  values  in  use 
there  correspond  as  many  different  kinds  of  use¬ 
ful  labour,  classified  according  to  the  order,  ge¬ 
nus,  species,  and  variety  to  which  they  belong 
in  the  social  division  oflabour.  This  division  of 
labour  is  a  necessary  condition  for  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  commodities,  but  it  does  not  follow,  con¬ 
versely,  that  the  production  of  commodities  is  a 
necessary  condition  for  the  division  of  labour. 
In  the  primitive  Indian  community  there  is  so- 
ci  al  di  vision  oflabour  wi  thou  t  production  of corn- 
modi  ties.  Or,  to  take  an  example  nearer  home, 
in  every  factory  the  labour  is  divided  according 
to  a  system,  but  this  division  is  not  brought 
about  by  the  operatives  mutually  exchanging 
their  individual  products.  Only  such  products 
can  become  commodities  with  regard  to  each 
other  as  result  from  different  kinds  of  labour, 
each  kind  being  carried  on  independently  and 
for  the  account  of  private  individuals. 

Toresume,  then :  I  n  the  use-value  of  each  com¬ 
modity  there  is  contai ned  useful  labour,  i.e. ,  pro¬ 
ductive  activity  of  a  definite  kind  and  exercised 
with  a  definite  aim.  Use- values  cannot  confront 
each  other  as  commodities,  unless  the  useful  la¬ 
bour  embodied  in  them  is  qualitatively  differ¬ 
ent  in  each  of  them.  In  a  community  the  pro¬ 
duce  of  which  in  general  takes  the  form  of  com¬ 
modities,  i.e.,  in  a  community  of  commodity 
producers,  this  qualitative  difference  between 
the  useful  forms  of  labour  that  are  carried  on 
independently  by  individual  producers,  each  on 
their  own  account,  develops  ihto  a  complex  sys¬ 
tem,  a  social  division  of  labouL 

Anyhow,  whether  the  coajt  be  worn  by  the 
tailor  or  by  his  customer,  in  dither  case  it  oper¬ 
ates  as  a  use-value.  Nor  is  the  relation  between 
the  coat  and  the  labour  that  produced  it  altered 
by  the  circumstance  that  taSloring  may  have 
become  a  special  trade,  an  independent  branch 
of  the  social  division  of  labour.  Wherever  the 
want  of  clothing  forced  them  to  it,  the  human 
race  made  clothes  for  thousands  of  years,  with¬ 
out  a  single  man  becoming  a  tailor.  But  coats 


COMMODITIES 


and  linen,  like  every  other  element  of  material 
wealth  that  is  not  the  spontaneous  produce  of 
nature,  must  invariably  owe  their  existence  to  a 
special  produc ti  ve  activity,  exercised  wi  th  a  def¬ 
inite  aim,  an  activity  that  appropriates  particu¬ 
lar  nature-given  materials  to  particular  human 
wants.  So  far,  therefore,  as  labour  is  a  creator  of 
use-value,  is  useful  labour,  it  is  a  necessary  con¬ 
dition,  independent  of  all  forms  of  society,  for 
the  existence  of  the  human  race;  it  is  an  eternal 
necessity  imposed  by  Nature  without  which 
there  can  be  no  material  exchanges  between  man 
and  Nature,  and  therefore  no  life. 

The  use-values,  coat,  linen,  etc.,  i.e.,  the  bod¬ 
ies  of  commodities  in  general,  are  combinations 
of  two  elements — matter  and  labour.  If  we  take 
away  the  useful  labour  expended  upon  them,  a 
material  substratum  is  always  left,  which  is  fur¬ 
nished  by  nature  without  the  help  of  man.  The 
latter  can  work  only  as  nature  does,  that  is,  by 
changing  the  form  of  matter.1  Nay  more,  in  this 
workofchangingthe  form  heisconstantly  helped 
by  natural  forces.  We  see,  then,  that  labour  is 
not  the  only  source  of  material  wealth,  of  use- 
values  produced  by  labour.  As  William  Petty 
puts  it,  labour  is  its  father  and  the  earth  its 
mother. 

Let  us  now  pass  from  the  commodity  consid¬ 
ered  as  a  use-value  to  the  value  of  commodities. 

By  our  assumption,  the  coat  is  worth  twice 
as  much  as  the  linen.  But  this  is  a  mere  quanti¬ 
tative  difference,  which  for  the  present  does  not 
concern  us.  We  bear  in  mind  however,  that  if 
the  value  of  the  coat  is  double  that  of  io  yards 
of  linen,  20  yards  of  linen  must  have  the  same 
value  as  one  coat.  So  far  as  they  are  values,  the 
coat  and  the  linen  are  things  of  a  like  substance, 
objective  expressions  of  essentially  identical  la¬ 
bour.  But  tailoring  and  weaving  are,  qualita¬ 
tively,  different  kinds  of  labour.  There  are,  how¬ 
ever,  states  of  society  in  which  one  and  the  same 
man  does  tailoring  and  weaving  alternately,  in 

1  "All  the  phenomena  of  the  universe,  whether  they  are 
the  products  of  man’s  art,  or  of  the  universal  laws  of  phys¬ 
ics,  exhibit  without  exception  not  the  idea  of  actual  crea¬ 
tion,  but  solely  of  a  modification  of  matter.  Aggregation 
and  separation  are  the  only  elements  which  the  human 
mind  comes  upon  in  analyzing  the  idea  of  production:  and 
in  this  are  included  the  production  of  value  (value  in  u.  , 
although  Verri  in  this  passage  of  his  controversy  with  the 
Physiocrats  is  not  himself  quite  certain  of  what  kind  of 
value  he  is  speaking)  and  of  wealth  when,  in  the  fields, 
earth,  air,  and  water  are  changed  into  grain,  or  when  man 
by  his  hands  changes  the  glutinous  matter  of  an  insect  into 
velvet,  or  when  some  pieces  of  metal  are  formed  into  a  re¬ 
peater-watch." — Pietro  Verri,  Meditazioni  sulla  Economia 
Politics  (first  printed  in  1773 1,  in  Custodi’s  edition  of  Scrit- 
tori  Classici  Itslisni  di  Economia  Politico^  Parte  Moderna, 
Vol.  XV,  p.  22. 


17 

which  case  these  two  forms  of  labour  are  mere 
modifications  of  the  labour  of  the  same  individ¬ 
ual,  and  not  special  and  fixed  functions  of  dif¬ 
ferent  persons;  just  as  the  coat  which  our  tailor 
makes  one  day,  and  the  tro  users  which  he  makes 
another  day,  imply  only  a  variation  in  the  la¬ 
bour  of  one  and  the  same  individual.  Moreover, 
we  see  at  a  glance  that,  in  our  capitalist  society, 
a  given  portion  of  human  labour  is,  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  varying  demand,  at  one  time  sup¬ 
plied  in  the  form  of  tailoring,  at  another  in  the 
form  of  weaving.  This  change  may  possibly  not 
take  place  without  friction,  but  take  place  it 
must. 

Productive  activity,  if  we  leave  out  of  sight 
its  special  form,  viz.,  the  useful  character  of  the 
labour,  is  nothing  but  the  expenditure  of  human 
labour  power.  Tailoring  and  weaving,  though 
qualitatively  different  productive  activities,  are 
each  a  productive  expenditure  of  human  brains, 
nerves,  and  muscles,  and  in  this  sense  are  hu¬ 
man  labour.  They  are  but  two  different  modes 
of  expending  human  labour  power.  Of  course, 
this  labour  power,  which  remains  the  same  un¬ 
der  all  its  modifications,  must  have  attained  a 
certain  pitch  of  development  before  it  can  be 
expended  in  a  multiplicity  of  modes.  But  the 
value  of  a  commodity  represents  human  labour 
intheabstract,theexpenditureofhumanlabour 
in  general.  And  just  as  in  society  a  general  or  a 
banker  plays  a  great  part,  but  mere  man,  on  the 
other  hand,  a  very  shabby  part,2  so  here  with 
mere  human  labour.  It  is  the  expenditure  of  sim¬ 
ple  labour  power,  i.e.,  of  the  labour  power  which 
on  an  average,  apart  from  any  special  develop¬ 
ment,  exists  in  the  organism  of  every  ordinary 
individual.  Simple  average  labour,  it  is  true,  var¬ 
ies  in  character  in  different  countries  and  at  dif¬ 
ferent  times,  bu  t  i  n  a  part  icular  societ  y  i  t  isgi  ven. 
Skilled  labour  counts  only  as  simple  labour  in¬ 
tensified,  or  rather,  as  multiplied  simple  labour, 
a  given  quantity  of  skilled  bei  ng  considered  eq  u  al 
to  a  greater  quantity  of  simple  labour.  Experi¬ 
ence  shows  that  this  reduction  is  constantly  be¬ 
ing  made.  A  commodity  may  be  the  product  of 
the  most  skilled  labour,  but  its  value,  by  equat¬ 
ing  it  to  the  product  of  simple  unskilled  labour, 
representsadefinitequantityof  thelatterlabour 
alone.3  The  different  proportions  in  which  dif¬ 
ferent  sorts  of  labour  are  reduced  to  unskilled 

3  Cf.  Hegel,  Philosophy  0]  Right ,  $  190. 

3  The  reader  must  note  that  we  are  not  speaking  here 
of  the  wages  or  value  that  the  labourer  gets  for  a  given 
labour  time,  but  of  the  value  of  the  commodity  in  which 
that  labour  time  is  materialized.  Wages  is  a  category  that, 
as  yet,  has  no  existence  at  the  present  stage  of  our  investi¬ 
gation. 


CAPITAL 


18 

labour  as  their  standard,  are  established  by  a 
social  process  that  goes  on  behind  the  backs  of 
the  producers,  and,  consequently,  appear  to  be 
fixed  by  custom.  For  simplicity's  sake  we  shall 
henceforth  account  every  kind  of  labour  to  be 
unskilled,  simple  labour;  by  this  we  do  no  more 
than  save  ourselves  the  trouble  of  making  the 
reduction. 

Just  as,  therefore,  in  viewing  the  coat  and  linen 
as  values,  we  abstract  from  their  different  use- 
values,  so  it  is  with  the  labour  represented  by 
those  values:  we  disregard  the  difference  between 
its  useful  forms,  weaving  and  tailoring.  As  the 
use-values,  coat  and  linen,  are  combinations  of 
speci  al  product!  ve  act i  vi  ties  wi  t h  clot h  and  yarn, 
while  the  values,  coat  and  linen,  are,  on  the  other 
hand,  mere  homogeneous  congelations  of  undif¬ 
ferentiated  labour,  so  the  labour  embodied  in 
these  latter  values  does  not  count  by  virtue  of 
its  productive  relation  to  cloth  and  yarn,  but 
only  as  being  expenditure  of  human  labour  pow¬ 
er.  Tailoring  and  weaving  are  necessary  factors 
in  the  creation  of  the  use-values,  coat  and  linen, 
precisely  because  these  two  kinds  of  labour  are 
of  different  qualities;  but  only  in  so  far  as  ab¬ 
straction  is  made  from  their  special  qualities, 
only  in  so  far  as  both  possess  the  same  quality 
of  being  human  labour,  do  tailoring  and  weaving 
form  the  substance  of  the  values  of  the  same 
articles. 

Coats  and  linen,  however,  are  not  merely  val¬ 
ues,  but  values  of  definite  magnitude,  and,  ac¬ 
cording  to  our  assumption,  the  coat  is  worth 
twice  as  much  as  the  ten  yards  of  linen.  Whence 
this  difference  in  their  values?  It  is  owing  to  the 
fact  that  the  linen  contains  only  half  as  much 
labour  as  the  coat,  and,  consequently,  that  in  the 
production  of  the  latter,  labour  power  must  have 
been  expended  during  twice  the  time  necessary 
for  the  production  of  the  former. 

While,  therefore,  with  reference  to  use-value, 
the  labour  contained  in  acommodity  counts  only 
qualitatively,  with  reference  to  value  it  counts 
only  quantitatively,  and  must  first  be  reduced  to 
human  labour  pure  and  simple.  In  the  former 
case,  it  is  a  question  of  How  and  What,  in  the 
latter  of  How  much?  How  long  r  time?  Since 
the  magnitude  of  the  value  of  a  commodity  rep¬ 
resents  only  the  quantity  of  labour  embodied  in 
it,  it  follows  that  all  commodities,  when  taken 
in  certain  proportions,  must  be  equal  in  value. 

If  the  productive  power  of  all  the  different 
sorts  of  useful  labour  required  for  the  production 
of  a  coat  remains  unchanged,  the  sum  of  the  val¬ 
ues  of  the  coats  produced  increases  with  their 
number.  If  one  coat  represents  x  days’  labour. 


two  coats  represent  2x  days’  labour,  and  so  on. 
But  assume  that  the  duration  of  the  labour  nec¬ 
essary  for  the  production  of  a  coat  becomes  dou¬ 
bled  or  halved.  In  the  first  case,  one  coat  is  worth 
as  much  as  two  coats  were  before;  in  the  second 
case,  two  coats  are  only  worth  as  much  as  one 
was  before,  although  in  both  cases  one  coat  ren¬ 
ders  the  same  service  as  before,  and  the  useful 
labour  embodied  in  it  remains  of  the  same  qual¬ 
ity.  But  the  quantity  of  labour  spent  on  its  pro¬ 
duction  has  altered. 

An  increase  in  the  quantity  of  use-values  is  an 
increase  of  material  wealth.  With  two  coats  two 
men  can  be  clothed,  with  one  coat  only  one  man. 
Nevertheless,  an  increased  quantity  of  material 
wealth  may  correspond  to  a  simultaneous  fall 
in  the  magnitude  of  its  value.  This  antagonistic 
movement  has  its  origin  in  the  two-fold  char¬ 
acter  of  labour.  Productive  power  has  reference, 
of  course,  only  to  labour  of  some  useful  concrete 
form,  the  efficacy  of  any  special  productive  ac¬ 
tivity  during  a  given  time  being  dependent  on 
its  productiveness.  Useful  labour  becomes, 
therefore,  a  more  or  less  abundant  source  of 
products,  in  proportion  to  the  rise  or  fall  of  its 
productiveness.  On  the  other  hand,  no  change 
in  this  productiveness  affects  the  labour  repre¬ 
sented  by  value.  Since  productive  power  is  an 
attribute  of  the  concrete  useful  forms  of  labour, 
of  course  it  can  no  longer  have  any  bearing  on 
that  labour  so  soon  as  we  make  abstraction  from 
those  concrete  useful  forms.  However,  then, 
productive  power  may  vary,  the  same  labour, 
exercised  during  equal  periods  of  time,  always 
yields  equal  amounts  of  value.  But  it  will  yield, 
during  equal  periods  of  time,  different  quanti¬ 
ties  of  values  in  use;  more,  if  the  productive 
power  rise,  fewer,  if  it  fall.  The  same  change  in 
productive  power,  which  increases  the  fruitful¬ 
ness  of  labour,  and,  in  consequence,  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  use-values  produced  by  that  labour,  will 
diminish  the  total  value  of  this  increased  quan¬ 
tity  of  use- values,  provided  such  change  shorten 
the  total  labour  time  necessary  for  their  pro¬ 
duction,  and  lice  versa . 

On  the  one  hand,  all  labouf  is,  speaking  phys- 
iologically,  an  expenditure  of  human  labour 
power,  and  in  its  character  of  identical  abstract 
human  labour  it  creates  and  forms  the  value  of 
commodities.  On  the  other  hand,  all  labour  is 
the  expenditure  of  human  labour  power  in  a 
special  form  and  with  a  definite  aim,  and  in  this, 
its  character  of  concrete  useful  labour,  it  pro¬ 
duces  use-values.1 

1  In  order  to  prove  that  labour  alone  is  that  all-sufficient 
and  real  measure,  by  which  at  all  times  the  value  of  all 


COMMODITIES 


j.  The  Form  of  Value ,  or  Exchange  Value 

Commodities  come  into  the  world  in  the 
shape  of  use-values,  articles,  or  goods,  such  as 
iron,  linen,  corn,  etc.  This  is  their  plain,  homely, 
bodily  form.  They  are,  however,  commodities 
only  because  they  are  something  two-fold,  both 
objects  of  utility  and,  at  the  same  time,  deposi¬ 
tories  of  value.  They  manifest  themselves, 
therefore,  as  commodities,  or  have  the  form  of 
commodities,  only  in  so  far  as  they  have  two 
forms,  a  physical  or  natural  form,  and  a  value 
form. 

The  reality  of  the  value  of  commodities  thus 
resembles  Dame  Quickly,  of  whom  Falstaff 
said:  “A  man  knows  not  where  to  have  her.” 
The  value  of  commodities  is  the  very  opposite 
of  the  coarse  materiality  of  their  substance,  not 
an  atom  of  matter  enters  into  its  composition. 
Turn  and  examine  a  single  commodity,  by  it¬ 
self,  as  we  will.  Yet  in  so  far  as  it  remains  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  value,  it  seems  impossible  to  grasp  it.  If, 
however,  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  value  of  com¬ 
modities  has  a  purely  social  reality,  and  that 
they  acquire  this  reality  only  in  so  far  as  they 
are  expressions  or  embodiments  of  one  identical 
social  substance,  viz.,  human  labour,  it  follows 
as  a  matter  of  course  that  value  can  only  man¬ 
ifest  itself  in  the  social  relation  of  commodity 
to  commodity.  In  fact  we  started  from  ex¬ 
change  value,  or  the  exchange  relation  of  com¬ 
modities,  in  order  to  get  at  the  value  that  lies 

commodities  can  be  estimated  and  compared,  Adam  Smith 
says:  "Equal  quantities  oflabour  must  at  all  times  and  in 
all  places  have  the  same  value  for  the  labourer.  In  his  noi- 
mai  state  of  health,  strength,  and  activity,  and  with  the 
average  degree  of  skill  that  he  may  possess,  he  must  al¬ 
ways  give  up  the  same  portion  of  his  rest,  his  freedom,  and 
his  happiness."  (Wealth  of  Nations,  bk.  I,  ch.  v.)  On  the 
one  hand,  Adam  Smith  here  (but  not  everywhere)  con¬ 
fuses  the  determination  of  value  by  means  of  the  quantity 
oflabour  expended  in  the  production  of  commodities,  with 
the  determination  of  the  values  of  commodities  by  means 
of  the  value  of  labour,  and  seeks  in  consequence  to  prove 
that  equal  quantities  oflabour  have  always  the  same  val¬ 
ue.  On  the  other  hand,  he  has  a  presentiment  that  labour, 
so  far  as  it  manifests  itself  in  the  value  of  commodities, 
counts  only  as  expenditure  of  labour  power,  but  he  treats 
this  expenditure  as  the  mere  sacrifice  of  rest,  freedom,  and 
happiness,  not  as  at  the  same  time  the  normal  activity  of 
living  beings.  But  then,  he  has  the  modern  wage  laboui 
in  his  eye.  Much  more  aptly,  the  anonymous  predecessor 
of  Adam  Smith,  quoted  above  in  Note1,  p.  15,  says  "one 
man  has  employed  himself  a  week  in  providing  this  neces¬ 
sary  of  life  . . .  and  he  that  gives  him  some  other  in  ex¬ 
change,  cannot  make  a  better  estimate  of  what  is  a  proper 
equivalent,  than  by  computing  what  cost  him  just  as  much 
labour  and  time;  which  in  effect  is  no  more  than  exchang¬ 
ing  one  man's  labour  in  one  *hing  for  a  time  certain,  for 
another  man's  labour  in  another  thing  for  the  same  time." 
(op.  cit.t  p.  39.) 


19 

hidden  behind  it.  We  must  now  return  to  this 
form  under  which  value  first  appeared  to  us. 

Every  one  knows,  if  he  knows  nothing  else, 
that  commodities  have  a  value  form  common 
to  them  all,  and  presenting  a  marked  contrast 
with  the  varied  bodily  forms  of  their  use-values. 
I  mean  their  money  form.  Here,  however,  a  task 
is  set  us,  the  performance  of  which  has  never 
yet  even  been  attempted  by  bourgeois  econom¬ 
ics,  the  task  of  tracing  the  genesis  of  this  money 
form,  of  developing  the  expression  of  value  im¬ 
plied  in  the  value  relation  of  commodities,  from 
its  simplest,  almost  imperceptible  outline,  to 
the  dazzling  money  form.  By  doing  this  we  shall, 
at  the  same  time,  solve  the  riddle  presented  by 
money. 

The  simplest  value  relation  is  evidently  that 
of  one  commodity  to  some  one  other  commodity 
of  a  different  kind.  Hence,  the  relation  between 
the  values  of  two  commodities  supplies  us  with 
the  simplest  expression  of  the  value  of  a  single 
commodity. 

A.  Elementary  or  Accidental  Form  of  Value 
x  commodity  A  =  y  commodity  5,  or 
x  commodity  A  is  worth  y  commodity  B. 

20  yards  of  linen  =  1  coat,  or 
20  yards  of  linen  are  worth  1  coat. 

I.  The  two  Poles  of  the  Expression  of  Value:  Rel¬ 
ative  Form  and  Equivalent  Form 
The  whole  mystery  of  the  form  of  value  lies 
hidden  in  this  elementary  form.  Its  analysis, 
therefore,  is  our  real  difficulty. 

Here  two  different  kinds  of  commodities  (in 
our  example  ♦  he  linen  and  the  coat),  evidently 
play  two  different  parts.  The  linen  expresses  its 
value  in  the  coat;  the  coat  serves  as  the  material 
in  which  that  value  is  expressed.  The  former 
plays  an  active,  the  latter  a  passive,  part.  The 
value  of  the  linen  is  represented  as  relative  val¬ 
ue,  or  appears  in  relative  form.  The  coat  offici¬ 
ates  as  equivalent,  or  appears  in  equivalent 
form. 

The  relative  form  and  the  equivalent  form 
are  two  intimately  connected,  mutually  depend¬ 
ent  and  inseparable  elements  of  the  expression 
of  value;  but,  at  the  same  time,  are  mutually 
exclusive,  antagonistic  extremes— i.e.,  poles  of 
the  same  expression.  They  are  allotted  respec¬ 
tively  to  the  two  different  commodities  brought 
into  relation  by  that  expression.  It  is  not  possi« 
ble  to  express  the  value  of  linen  inlinen.  20  yards 
of  linen  —  20  yards  of  linen  is  no  expression  of 
value.  On  the  contrary,  such  an  equation 
merely  says  that  20  yards  of  linen  are  nothing 


20 


CAPITAL 


else  than  20  yards  of  linen,  a  definite  quantity 
of  the  use-value  linen.  The  value  of  the  linen 
can  therefore  be  expressed  only  relatively — i.e., 
in  some  other  commodity.  The  relative  form  of 
the  value  of  the  linen  presupposes,  therefore, 
the  presence  of  some  other  commodity — here 
the  coat — under  the  form  of  an  equivalent. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  commodity  that  figures 
astheequivalentcannot  at  thesame  time  assume 
the  relative  form.  That  second  commodity  is 
not  the  one  whose  value  is  expressed.  Its  func¬ 
tion  is  merely  to  serve  as  the  material  in  which 
the  value  of  the  first  commodity  is  expressed. 

No  doubt,  the  expression  20  yards  of  linen  * 
1  coat,  or  20  yards  of  linen  are  worth  1  coat,  im¬ 
plies  the  opposite  relation:  1  coat  =  20  yards 
of  linen,  or  1  coat  is  worth  20  yards  of  linen. 
But,  in  that  case,  1  must  reverse  the  equation, 
in  order  to  express  the  value  of  the  coat  rela¬ 
tively;  and,  so  soon  as  I  do  that,  the  linen  be¬ 
comes  the  equivalent  instead  of  the  coat.  A 
single  commodity  cannot,  therefore,  simultane¬ 
ously  assume,  in  the  same  expression  of  value, 
both  forms.  The  very  polarity  of  these  forms 
makes  them  mutually  exclusive. 

Whether,  then,  a  commodity  assumes  the 
relative  form,  or  the  opposite  equivalent  form, 
depends  entirely  upon  its  accidental  position  in 
the  expression  of  value — that  is,  upon  whether 
it  is  the  commodity  whose  value  is  being  ex¬ 
pressed  or  the  commodity  in  which  value  is 
being  expressed. 

2.  The  Relative  Form  of  Value 

(a)  The  Nature  and  Import  of  this  Form 
In  order  to  discover  how  the  elementary  ex¬ 
pression  of  the  value  of  a  commodity  lies  hidden 
in  the  value  relation  of  two  commodities,  we 
must,  in  the  first  place,  consider  the  latter  en¬ 
tirely  apart  from  its  quantitative  aspect.  The 
usual  mode  of  procedure  is  generally  the  re¬ 
verse,  and  in  the  value  relation  nothing  is  seen 
but  the  proportion  between  definite  quantities 
of  two  different  sorts  of  commodities  that  are 
considered  equal  to  each  other.  It  is  apt  to  be 
forgotten  that  the  magnitudes  of  different 
things  can  be  compared  quantitatively,  only 
when  those  magnitudes  are  expressed  in  terms 
of  the  same  unit.  It  is  only  as  expressions  of  such 
a  unit  that  they  are  of  the  same  denomination, 
and  therefore  commensurable.1 


1  The  few  economists,  amongst  whom  is  S.  Bailey,  who 
have  occupied  themselves  with  the  analysis  of  the  form  of 
value,  have  been  unable  to  arrive  at  be¬ 

cause  they  confuse  the  form  of  valuo^ffi^XmSI^md 
■wand,  because,  under  the 


Whether  20  yards  of  linen *1  coat,  or*  20 
coats,  or**  coats — that  is,  whether  a  given 
quantity  of  linen  is  worth  few  or  many  coats, 
every  such  statement  implies  that  the  linen  and 
coats,  as  magnitudes  of  value,  are  expressions 
of  the  same  unit,  things  of  the  same  kind.  Linen 
*  coat  is  the  basis  of  the  equation. 

But  the  two  commodities  whose  identity  of 
quality  is  thus  assumed  do  not  play  the  same 
part.  It  is  only  the  value  of  the  linen  that  is  ex¬ 
pressed.  And  how?  By  its  reference  to  the  coat 
as  its  equivalent,  as  something  that  can  be  ex¬ 
changed  for  it.  In  this  relation  the  coat  is  the 
mode  of  existence  of  value,  is  value  embodied, 
for  only  as  such  is  it  the  same  as  the  linen.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  linen's  own  value  comes  to 
the  front,  receives  independent  expression,  for 
it  is  only  as  being  value  that  it  is  comparable 
with  the  coat  as  a  thing  of  equal  value,  or  ex¬ 
changeable  with  the  coat.  To  borrow  an  illus¬ 
tration  from  chemistry,  butyric  acid  is  a  differ¬ 
ent  substance  from  propyl  formate.  Yet  both 
are  made  up  of  the  same  chemical  substances, 
carbon  (C),  hydrogen  (H),  and  oxygen  (O),  and 
that,  too,  in  like  proportions — namely,  C4H8O2. 
If  now  we  equate  butyric  acid  to  propyl  for¬ 
mat  e,  then,  in  the  first  place,  propyl  formate 
would  be,  in  this  relation,  merely  a  form  of  ex¬ 
istence  of  CiHgOs;  and  in  the  second  place,  we 
should  be  stating  that  butyric  acid  also  con¬ 
sists  of  C4H8O2.  Therefore,  by  thus  equating 
the  two  substances,  expression  would  be  given 
to  their  chemical  composition,  while  their  dif¬ 
ferent  physical  forms  would  be  neglected. 

If  we  say  that,  as  values,  commodities  are 
mere  congelations  of  human  labour,  we  reduce 
them  by  our  analysis,  it  is  true,  to  the  abstrac¬ 
tion,  value;  but  we  ascribe  to  this  value  no  form 
apart  from  their  bodily  form.  It  is  otherwise  in 
the  value  relation  of  one  commodity  to  another. 
Here,  the  one  stands  forth  in  its  character  of 
value  by  reason  of  its  relation  to  the  other. 

By  making  the  coat  the  equivalent  of  the  lin¬ 
en,  we  equate  the  labour  embodied  in  the  for¬ 
mer  to  that  in  the  latter.  Now,  it  is  true  that  the 
tailoring,  which  makes  the  cjbat,  is  concrete  la¬ 
bour  of  a  different  sort  from  the  weaving  which 
makes  the  linen.  But  the  adt  of  equating  it  to 
the  weaving  reduces  the  tailoring  to  that  which 
is  really  equal  in  the  two  kinds  of  labour,  to 
their  common  character  of  human  labour.  In 
this  roundabout  way,  then,  the  fact  is  expressed 

cal  bourgeois,  they  exclusively  give  their  attention  to  the 
quantitative  aspect  of  the  question.  "The  command  of 
quantity  .  . .  constitutes  value." — S.  Bailey,  Money  and 
its  Vicissitudes,  London  1837,  p.  II. 


COMMODITIES 


that  weaving  also,  in  so  far  as  it  weaves  value, 
has  nothing  to  distinguish  it  from  tailoring, 
and,  consequently,  is  abstract  human  labour. 
It  is  the  expression  of  equivalence  between  dif¬ 
ferent  sorts  of  commodities  that  alone  brings 
into  relief  the  specific  character  of  value-creat¬ 
ing  labour,  and  this  it  does  by  actually  reducing 
the  different  varieties  of  labour  embodied  in 
the  different  kinds  of  commodities  to  their 
common  quality  of  human  labour  in  the  ab¬ 
stract.1 

There  is,  however,  something  else  required 
beyond  the  expression  of  the  specific  character 
of  the  labour  of  which  the  value  of  the  linen  con¬ 
sists.  Human  labour  power  in  motion,  or  hu¬ 
man  labour,  creates  value,  but  is  not  itself  value. 
It  becomes  value  only  in  its  congealed  state, 
when  embodied  in  the  form  of  some  object.  In 
order  to  express  the  value  of  the  linen  as  a  con¬ 
gelation  of  human  labour,  that  value  must  be 
expressed  as  having  objective  existence,  as  be¬ 
ing  a  something  materially  different  from  the 
linen  itself,  and  vet  a  something  common  to  the 
linen  and  all  other  commodities.  The  problem 
is  already  solved. 

When  occupying  the  position  of  equivalent 
in  the  equation  of  value,  the  coat  ranks  qualita¬ 
tively  as  the  equal  of  the  linen,  as  something  of 
the  same  kind,  because  it  is  value.  In  this  posi¬ 
tion  it  is  a  thing  in  which  we  see  nothing  but 
value,  or  whose  palpable  bodily  form  represents 
value.  Yet  the  coat  itself,  the  body  of  the  com¬ 
modity,  coat,  is  a  mere  use-value.  A  coat  as  such 
no  more  tells  us  it  is  value  than  does  the  first 
piece  of  linen  we  take  hold  of.  This  shows  that 
when  placed  in  value  relation  to  the  linen,  the 
coat  signifies  more  than  when  out  of  that  rela¬ 
tion,  just  as  many  a  man  strutting  about  in  a 
gorgeous  uniform  counts  for  more  than  when  in 
mufti. 

In  the  production  of  the  coat,  human  labour 
power,  in  the  shape  of  tailoring,  must  have  been 
actually  expended.  Human  labour  is  therefore 
accumulated  in  it.  In  this  aspect  the  coat  is  a 

1  The  celebrated  Franklin,  one  of  the  first  economists, 
after  William  Petty,  who  saw  through  the  nature  of  value, 
says:  “Trade  in  general  being  nothing  else  but  the  ex¬ 
change  of  labour  for  labour,  the  value  of  all  things  is  . . 
most  justly  measured  by  labour."  ( The  Works  of  B.  Frank¬ 
lin,  etc.,  edited  by  Sparks,  Boston,  1836,  vol.  ii,  p.  267.) 
Franklin  is  unaware  that  by  estimating  the  value  of  every¬ 
thing  in  labour,  he  makes  abstraction  from  any  difference 
in  the  sorts  of  labour  exchanged,  and  thus  reduces  them 
all  to  equal  human  labour.  But  although  ignorant  of  this, 
yet  he  says  it.  He  speaks  first  of  “the  one  labour,"  then 
of  “the  other  labour,"  and  finally  of  "labour,"  without 
further  qualification,  as  the  substance  of  the  value  of 
everything. 


21 

depository  of  value,  but,  though  worn  to  a 
thread,  it  does  not  let  this  fact  show  through. 
And  as  equivalent  of  the  linen  in  the  value 
equation,  it  exists  under  this  aspect  alone, 
counts,  therefore,  as  embodied  value,  as  a  body 
that  is  value.  A ,  for  instance,  cannot  be  “your 
majesty”  to  B,  unless  at  the  same  time  majesty 
in  B’s  eyes  assumes  the  bodily  form  of  A ,  and, 
what  is  more,  with  every  new  father  of  the 
people,  changes  its  features,  hair,  and  many 
other  things  besides. 

Hence,  in  the  value  equation,  in  which  the 
coat  is  the  equivalent  of  the  linen,  the  coat  offi¬ 
ciates  as  the  form  of  value.  The  value  of  the 
commodity  linen  is  expressed  by  the  bodily 
form  of  the  commodity  coat,  the  value  of  one  by 
the  use-value  of  the  other.  As  a  use- value,  the 
linen  is  something  palpably  different  from  the 
coat;  as  value,  it  is  the  same  as  the  coat,  and 
now  has  the  appearance  of  a  coat.  Thus,  the 
linen  acquires  a  value  form  different  from  its 
physical  form.  The  fact  that  it  is  value  is  made 
manifest  by  its  equality  with  the  coat,  just  as 
the  sheep-nature  of  a  Christian  is  shown  in  his 
resemblance  to  the  Lamb  of  God. 

We  see,  then,  that  all  that  our  analysis  of  the 
value  of  commodities  has  already  told  us  is  told 
us  by  the  linen  itself  so  soon  as  it  comes  into 
communication  with  another  commodity,  the 
coat.  Only  it  betrays  its  thoughts  in  that  lan¬ 
guage  with  which  aione  it  is  familiar— the  lan¬ 
guage  of  commodities.  1  n  order  to  tell  us  that  its 
own  value  is  created  by  labour  in  its  abstract 
character  of  human  labour,  it  says  that  the 
coat,  in  so  tar  as  it  is  worth  as  much  as  the  linen, 
and  therefoi  e  is  value,  consists  of  the  same  la¬ 
bour  as  the  linen.  In  order  to  inform  us  that  its 
sublime  reality  as  value  is  not  the  same  as  its 
buckram  body,  it  says  that  value  has  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  a  coat,  and  consequently  that,  so 
far  as  the  linen  is  value,  it  and  the  coat  are  as 
like  as  two  peas.  We  may  here  remark  that  the 
language  of  commodities  has,  besides  Hebrew, 
many  other  more  or  less  correct  dialects.  The 
German  werthsein  (to  be  worth),  for  instance, 
expresses  m  a  less  striking  manner  than  the 
Romance  verbs  uilere ,  valer ,  valoir,  that  the 
equating  of  commodity  B  to  commodity  A  is 
commodity  A' s  own  mode  of  expressing  its 
value.  Paris  vautbien  une  tnessef 

By  means,  therefore,  of  the  value  relation  ex¬ 
pressed  in  our  equation,  the  bodily  form  of  com¬ 
modity  B  becomes  the  value  form  of  commod¬ 
ity  A ,  or  the  body  of  commodity  B  acts  as  a 

a  Paris  is  worth  a  Mass. 


CAPITAL 


22 

mirror  to  the  value  of  commodity  A .*  By  put¬ 
ting  itself  in  relation  with  commodity  B,  as 
value  in  propria  persona*  as  the  matter  of  which 
human  labour  is  made  up,  the  commodity^ 
converts  the  value  in  use,  B,  into  the  substance 
in  which  to  express  its,  A\  own  value.  The 
value  of  Ay  thus  expressed  in  the  use-value  of 
B,  has  taken  the  form  of  relative  value. 

(b)  Quantitative  Determination  of  Relative  Value . 

Every  commodity,  whose  value  it  is  intended 
to  express,  is  a  useful  object  of  given  quantity, 
as  15  bushels  of  corn,  or  100  pounds  of  coffee. 
And  a  given  quantity  of  any  commodity  con¬ 
tains  a  definite  quantity  of  human  labour.  The 
value  form  must  therefore  not  only  express  val¬ 
ue  generally,  but  also  value  in  definite  quantity. 
Therefore,  in  the  value  relation  of  commodity 
A  to  commodity  B,  of  the  linen  to  the  coat,  not 
only  is  the  latter,  as  value  in  general,  made  the 
equal  in  quality  of  the  linen,  but  a  definite  quan¬ 
tity  of  coat  (1  coat)  is  made  the  equivalent  of  a 
definite  quantity  (20  yards)  of  linen. 

The  equation,  20  yards  of  linen  =  1  coat,  or 
20  yards  of  linen  are  worth  one  coat,  implies 
that  the  same  quantity  of  value  substance  (con¬ 
gealed  labour)  is  embodied  in  both;  that  the 
two  commodities  have  each  cost  the  same 
amount  of  labour  or  the  same  quantity  of  la¬ 
bour  time.  But  the  labour  time  necessary  for 
the  production  of  20  yards  of  linen,  or  1  coat, 
varies  with  every  change  in  the  productiveness 
of  weaving  or  tailoring.  We  have  now  to  con¬ 
sider  the  influence  of  such  changes  on  the  quan¬ 
titative  aspect  of  the  relative  expression  of 
value. 

I.  Let  the  value  of  the  linen  vary,3  that  of  the 
coat  remaining  constant.  If,  say  in  consequence 
of  the  exhaustion  of  flax-growing  soil,  the  la¬ 
bour  time  necessary  for  the  production  of  the 
linen  be  doubled,  the  value  of  the  linen  will  also 
be  doubled.  Instead  of  the  equation,  20  yards  of 
linen  *  1  coat,  we  should  have  20  yards  of  linen 
=»  2  coats,  since  1  coat  would  now  contain  only 
half  the  labour  time  embodied  in  20  yards  of 
linen.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  in  consequence, 
say,  of  improved  looms,  this  labour  time  be  re- 

1  In  s  sort  of  way,  it  is  with  man  as  with  commodities. 
Since  he  comes  into  the  world  neither  with  a  looking  glass 
in  his  hand,  nor  as  a  Fichtian  philosopher,  to  whom  "I  am 
I**  is  sufficient,  man  first  sees  and  recognizes  himself  in 
other  men.  Peter  only  establishes  his  own  identity  as  a 
man  by  first  comparing  himself  with  Paul  as  being  of  hke 
kind.  And  thereby  Paul,  just  as  he  stands  in  his  Pauline 
personality,  becomes  to  Peter  the  type  of  the  genus  homo. 

1  Personified. 

3  Value  is  here,  as  occasionally  in  the  preceding  pages, 
used  in  the  sense  of  value  determined  as  to  quantity,  or  of 
magnitude  of  value. 


duced  by  one-half,  the  value  of  the  linen  would 
fall  by  one-half.  Consequently,  we  should  have 
20  yards  of  linen  —  yi  coat.  The  relative  value 
of  commodity  Ay  i.e.,  its  value  expressed  in 
commodity  B,  rises  and  falls  directly  as  the 
value  of  Ay  the  value  of  B  being  supposed  con¬ 
stant. 

II.  Let  the  value  of  the  linen  remain  con¬ 
stant,  while  the  value  of  the  coat  varies.  If,  un¬ 
der  these  circumstances,  in  consequence,  for 
instance,  of  a  poor  crop  of  wool,  the  labour  time 
necessary  for  the  production  of  a  coat  becomes 
doubled,  we  have  instead  of  20  yards  of  linen  — 

1  coat,  20  yards  of  linen  =  l/i  coat.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  value  of  the  coat  sinks  by  one- 
half,  then  20  yards  of  linen  =  2  coats.  Hence,  if 
the  value  of  commodity  A  remain  constant,  its 
relative  value  expressed  in  commodity  B  rises 
and  falls  inversely  as  the  value  of  B  changes. 

If  we  compare  the  different  cases  in  I  and  II, 
we  see  that  the  same  change  of  magnitude  in 
relative  value  may  arise  from  totally  opposite 
causes.  Thus,  the  equation,  20  yards  of  linen  =  1 
coat,  becomes  20  yards  of  linen  =  2  coats,  either 
because  the  value  of  the  linen  has  doubled,  or 
because  the  value  of  the  coat  has  fallen  by  one- 
half;  and  it  becomes  20  yards  of  linen  =  l/2  coat, 
either  because  the  value  of  the  linen  has  fallen 
by  one-half,  or  because  the  value  of  the  coat  has 
doubled. 

III.  Let  the  quantitierof  labour  time  respec¬ 
tively  necessary  for  the  production  of  the  linen 
and  the  coat  vary  simultaneously  in  the  same 
direction  and  in  the  same  proportion.  In  this 
case  20  yards  of  linen  continue  equal  to  1  coat, 
however  much  their  values  may  have  altered. 
Their  change  of  value  is  seen  as  soon  as  they  are 
compared  with  a  third  commodity  whose  value 
has  remained  constant.  If  the  values  of  all  com¬ 
modities  rose  or  fell  simultaneously,  and  in  the 
same  proportion,  their  relative  values  would 
remain  unaltered.  Their  real  change  of  value 
would  appear  from  the  diminished  or  increased 
quantity  of  commodities  produced  in  a  given 
time. 

IV.  The  labour  time  respectively  necessary 
for  the  production  of  the  Upen  and  the  coat, 
and,  therefore,  the  value  of  these  commodities, 
may  simultaneously  vary  in  the  same  direction, 
but  at  unequal  rates,  or  in  opposite  directions, 
or  in  other  ways.  The  effect  of  all  these  possible 
different  variations  on  the  relative  value  of  a 
commodity  may  be  deduced  from  the  results  of 
I,  II,  and  III. 

Thus,  real  changes  in  the  magnitude  of  value 
are  neither  unequivocally  nor  exhaustively  re- 


COMMODITIES 


fleeted  in  their  relative  expression— that  is,  in 
the  equation  expressing  the  magnitude  of  rela¬ 
tive  value.  The  relative  value  of  a  commodity 
may  vary,  although  its  value  remains  constant. 
Its  relative  value  may  remain  constant,  al¬ 
though  its  value  varies;  and  finally,  simultane¬ 
ous  variations  in  the  magnitude  of  value  and  in 
that  of  its  relative  expression  by  no  means 
necessarily  correspond  in  amount.1 

3.  The  Equivalent  Form  oj  Value 

We  have  seen  that  commodity  A  (the  linen), 
by  expressing  its  value  in  the  use-value  of  a 
commodity  differing  in  kind  (the  coat),  at  the 
same  time  impresses  upon  the  latter  a  specific 
form  of  value,  namely,  that  of  the  equivalent. 
The  commodity  linen  manifests  its  quality  of 
having  a  value  by  the  fact  that  the  coat,  with¬ 
out  having  assumed  a  value  form  different  from 
its  bodily  form,  is  equated  to  the  linen.  The  fact 
that  the  latter  therefore  has  a  value  is  expressed 
by  saying  that  the  coat  is  directly  exchangeable 
with  it.  Therefore,  when  we  say  that  a  commod¬ 
ity  is  in  the  equivalent  form,  we  express  the  fact 
that  it  is  directly  exchangeable  with  other  com¬ 
modities. 

When  one  commodity,  such  as  a  coat,  serves 
as  the  equivalent  of  another,  such  as  linen,  and 
coats  consequently  acquire  the  characteristic 
property  of  being  directly  exchangeable  with 
linen,  we  are  far  from  knowing  in  what  propor¬ 
tion  the  two  are  exchangeable.  The  value  of  the 
linen  being  given  in  magnitude,  that  proportion 
depends  on  the  value  of  the  coat.  Whether  the 

1  This  incongruity  between  the  magnitude  of  value  and 
its  relative  expression  has,  with  customar)  ingenuity,  been 
exploited  by  vulgar  economists.  For  example,  "Once  ad¬ 
mit  that  A  falls,  because  Bt  with  which  it  is  exchanged, 
rises,  while  no  less  labour  is  bestowed  in  the  meantime  on 
A ,  and  your  general  principle  of  value  falls  to  the  ground 
...  If  he  (Ricardo)  allowed  that  when  A  rises  in  value 
relatively  to  B ,  B  falls  in  value  relatively  to  A ,  he  cut 
away  the  ground  on  which  he  rested  his  grand  proposition 
that  the  value  of  a  commodity  is  ever  determined  bv  the 
labour  embodied  in  it;  for  if  a  change  in  the  cost  of  A  alters 
not  only  its  own  value  m  relation  to  B ,  for  which  it  is  ex¬ 
changed,  but  also  the  value  of  B  relatively  to  that  of  /#, 
though  no  change  has  taken  place  in  the  quantity  of  la¬ 
bour  to  produce  B,  then  not  only  the  doctrine  falls  to  the 
ground  which  asserts  that  the  quantity  of  labour  bestowed 
on  an  article  regulates  its  value,  but  also  that  which  *t 
firms  the  cost  of  an  article  to  regulate  its  value." — J. 
Broadhurst,  Political  Economy ,  London,  1842,  pp.  11  and 
*4. 

Mr.  Broadhurst  might  just  as  well  say:  consider  the 
fractions  4J,  etc.;  the  number  10  remains  un¬ 

changed,  and  yet  its  proportional  magnitude,  its  magni¬ 
tude  relatively  to  the  numbers  20, 50, 100,  etc.;  continually 
diminishes.  Therfore,  the  great  principle  that  the  magni¬ 
tude  of  a  whole  number,  such  as  10,  is  "regulated"  by  the 
number  of  times  unity  is  contained  in  it  falls  to  the  ground. 


23 

coat  serves  as  the  equivalent  and  the  linen  as 
relative  value,  or  the  linen  as  the  equivalent 
and  the  coat  as  relative  value,  the  magnitude  of 
the  coat's  value  is  determined,  independently 
of  its  value  form,  by  the  labour  time  necessary 
for  its  production.  But  whenever  the  coat  as¬ 
sumes  in  the  equation  of  value  the  position  of 
equivalent,  its  value  acquires  no  quantitative 
expression;  on  the  contrary,  the  commodity 
coat  now  figures  only  as  a  definite  quantity  of 
some  article. 

For  instance,  40  yards  of  linen  are  worth — 
what  ?  Two  coats.  Because  the  commodity  coat 
here  plays  the  part  of  equivalent,  because  the 
use-value  coat,  as  opposed  to  the  linen,  figures 
as  an  embodiment  of  value,  therefore  a  definite 
number  of  coats  suffices  to  express  the  definite 
quantity  of  value  in  the  linen.  Two  coats  may 
therefore  express  the  quantity  of  value  of  40 
yards  ofFnen,  but  they  can  never  express  the 
quantity  of  their  own  value.  A  superficial  ob¬ 
servation  of  this  fact,  namely,  that  in  the  equa¬ 
tion  of  value,  the  equivalent  figures  exclusively 
as  a  simple  quantity  of  some  article,  of  some 
use-value,  has  misled  Bailey,  as  also  many  oth¬ 
ers  both  before  and  after  him,  into  seeing,  in 
the  expression  of  value,  merely  a  quantitative 
relation.  The  truth  is  that,  when  a  commodity 
acts  as  equivalent,  no  quantitative  determina¬ 
tion  ofits  value  is  expressed. 

The  first  peculiarity  that  strikes  us  in  con¬ 
sidering  the  form  of  the  equivalent  is  this:  use- 
value  becomes  the  form  of  manifestation,  the 
phenomenal  form  of  its  opposite,  value. 

The  bodily  form  of  the  commodity  becomes 
its  value  form.  But,  mark  well,  that  this  quid 
pro  quo 2  exists  in  the  case  of  any  commodity 
only  whrn  some  other  commodity  //enters  into 
a  value  relation  with  it,  and  then  only  within 
the  limits  of  this  relation.  Since  no  commodity 
can  stand  in  the  relation  of  equivalent  to  itself, 
and  thus  turn  its  own  bodily  shape  into  the 
expression  of  its  own  value,  every  commodity 
is  compelled  to  choose  some  other  commodity 
for  its  equivalent,  and  to  accept  the  use-value, 
that  is  to  say,  the  bodily  shape  of  that  other 
commodity,  as  the  form  of  its  own  value. 

One  of  the  measures  that  we  apply  to  com¬ 
modities  as  material  substances,  as  use-values, 
will  serve  to  illustrate  this  point.  A  sugar-loaf, 
being  a  body,  is  heavy,  and  therefore  has  weight; 
but  we  can  neither  see  nor  touch  this  weight. 
We  then  take  various  pieces  of  iron,  whose 
weight  has  been  determined  beforehand.  The 
iron,  as  iron,  is  no  more  the  form  of  manifesta- 

*  Compensation;  something  for  something. 


CAPITAL 


24 

tion  of  weight,  than  is  the  sugar-loaf.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  in  order  to  express  the  sugar-loaf  as  so 
much  weight,  we  put  it  into  a  weight  relation 
with  the  iron.  In  this  relation,  the  iron  officiates 
as  a  body  representing  nothing  but  weight.  A 
certain  quantity  of  iron  therefore  serves  as  the 
measure  of  the  weight  of  the  sugar,  and  repre¬ 
sents,  in  relation  to  the  sugar-loaf,  weight  em¬ 
bodied,  the  form  of  manifestation  of  weight. 
This  part  is  played  by  the  iron  only  within  this 
relation,  into  which  the  sugar  or  any  other  body, 
whose  weight  has  to  be  determined,  enters  with 
the  iron.  Were  they  not  both  heavy,  they  could 
not  enter  into  this  relation,  and  the  one  could 
therefore  not  serve  as  the  expression  of  the 
weight  of  the  other.  When  we  throw  both  into 
the  scales  we  see,  in  reality,  that  as  weight  they 
are  both  the  same,  and  that,  therefore,  when 
taken  in  proper  proportions,  they  have  the 
same  weight.  Just  as  the  substance  iron,  as  a 
measure  of  weight,  represents  in  relation  to  the 
sugar-loaf  weight  alone,  so,  in  our  expression  of 
value,  the  material  object,  coat,  in  relation  to 
the  linen,  represents  value  alone. 

Here,  however,  the  analogy  ceases.  The  iron, 
in  the  expression  of  the  weight  of  the  sugar-loaf, 
represents  a  natural  property  common  to  both 
bodies,  namely  their  weight;  but  the  coat,  in 
the  expression  of  value  of  the  linen,  represents 
a  non-natural  property  of  both,  something 
purely  social;  namely,  their  value. 

Since  the  relative  form  of  value  of  a  commod¬ 
ity  —  the  li  nen,  for  example  — -expresses! he  value 
of  that  commodity,  as  being  something  wholly 
different  from  its  substance  and  properties,  as 
being,  for  instance,  coat-like,  we  see  that  this 
expression  itself  indicates  that  some  social  rela¬ 
tion  lies  at  the  bottom  of  it.  With  the  equiva¬ 
lent  form  it  is  just  the  contrary.  The  very  es¬ 
sence  of  this  form  is  that  the  material  commod¬ 
ity  itself— the  coat — just  as  it  is,  expresses  val¬ 
ue,  and  is  endowed  with  the  form  of  value  by 
Nature  itself.  Of  course,  this  holds  good  only 
so  long  as  the  value  relation  exists,  in  which  the 
coat  stands  in  the  position  of  equivalent  to  the 
linen.1  Since,  however,  the  properties  of  a  thing 
are  not  the  result  of  its  relations  to  other  things, 
but  only  manifest  themselves  in  such  relations, 
the  coat  seems  to  be  endowed  with  its  equiva¬ 
lent  form,  its  property  of  being  directly  ex¬ 
changeable,  just  as  much  by  Nature  as  it  is 

1  Such  expressions  of  relations  in  general,  called  by  Hegel 
“reflex-categories,”  form  a  very  curious  class.  For  instance* 
one  man  is  king  only  because  other  men  stand  in  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  subjects  to  him.  They,  on  the  contrary,  imagine 
that  they  are  subjects  because  he  is  king. 


endowed  with  the  property  of  being  heavy,  or 
the  capacity  to  keep  us  warm.  Hence  the  enig¬ 
matical  character  of  the  equivalent  form  which 
escapes  the  notice  of  the  bourgeois  political 
economist  until  this  form,  completely  devel¬ 
oped,  confronts  him  in  the  shape  of  money.  He 
then  seeks  to  explain  away  the  mystical  char¬ 
acter  of  gold  and  silver,  by  substituting  for 
them  less  dazzling  commodities,  and  by  recit¬ 
ing,  with  ever  renewed  satisfaction,  the  cata¬ 
logue  of  all  possible  commodities  which  at  one 
time  or  another  have  played  the  part  of  equiv¬ 
alent.  He  has  not  the  least  suspicion  that  the 
most  simple  expression  of  value,  such  as  20 
yards  of  linen  =  1  coat,  already  propounds  the 
riddle  of  the  equivalent  form  for  our  solution. 

The  body  of  the  commodity  that  serves  as 
the  equivalent  figures  as  the  materialization  of 
human  labour  in  the  abstract,  and  is  at  the 
same  time  the  product  of  some  specifically  use¬ 
ful  concrete  labour.  This  concrete  labour  be¬ 
comes,  therefore,  the  medium  for  expressing 
abstract  human  labour.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
coat  ranks  as  nothing  but  the  embodiment  of 
abstract  human  labour,  so,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  tailoring  which  is  actually  embodied  in  it 
counts  as  nothing  but  the  form  under  which 
that  abstract  labour  is  realized.  In  the  expres¬ 
sion  of  value  of  the  linen,  the  utility  of  the  tail¬ 
oring  consists,  not  in  making  clothes,  but  in 
making  an  object,  whicli  we  at  once  recognize 
to  be  value,  and  therefore  to  be  a  congelation  of 
labour,  but  of  labour  indistinguishable  from 
that  realized  in  the  value  of  the  linen.  In  order 
to  act  as  such  a  mirror  of  value,  the  labour  of 
tailoring  must  reflect  nothing  besides  its  own 
abstract  quality  of  being  human  labour  gener¬ 
ally. 

In  tailoring,  as  well  as  in  weaving,  human 
labour  power  is  expended.  Both,  therefore,  pos¬ 
sess  the  general  property  of  being  human  labour, 
and  may  therefore,  in  certain  cases,  such  as  in 
the  production  of  value,  have  to  be  considered 
under  this  aspect  alone.  There  is  nothing  mys¬ 
terious  in  this.  But  in  the  expression  of  value 
there  is  a  complete  turn  of  the  tables.  Kor  in¬ 
stance,  how  is  the  fact  to  be  expressed  that 
weaving  creates  the  value  0f  the  linen,  not  by 
virtue  of  being  weaving,  as  fuch,  but  by  reason 
of  its  general  property  of  being  human  labour? 
Simply  by  opposing  to  weaving  that  other  par¬ 
ticular  form  of  concrete  labour  (in  this  instance 
tailoring),  which  produces  the  equivalent  of  the 
product  of  weaving.  Just  as  the  coat  in  its  bod¬ 
ily  form  became  a  direct  expression  of  value,  so 
now  does  tailoring,  a  concrete  form  of  labour. 


COMMODITIES  25 


appear  as  the  direct  and  palpable  embodiment 
of  human  labour  generally. 

Hence,  the  second  peculiarity  of  the  equiva¬ 
lent  form  is  that  concrete  labour  becomes  the 
form  under  which  its  opposite,  abstract  human 
labour,  manifests  itself. 

But  because  this  concrete  labour— tailoring, 
in  our  case— ranks  as,  and  is  directly  identified 
with,  undifferentiated  human  labour,  it  also 
ranks  as  identical  with  any  other  sort  of  labour, 
and  therefore  with  that  embodied  in  the  linen. 
Consequently,  although,  like  all  other  commod¬ 
ity-producing  labour,  it  is  the  labour  of  private 
individuals,  yet,  at  the  same  time,  it  ranks  as 
labour  directly  social  in  its  character.  This  is 
the  reason  why  it  results  in  a  product  directly 
exchangeable  with  other  commodities.  We  have 
then  a  third  peculiarity  of  the  equivalent  form; 
namely,  that  the  labour  of  private  individuals 
takes  the  form  of  its  opposite,  labour  directly 
social  in  its  form. 

The  two  latter  peculiarities  of  the  equivalent 
form  will  become  more  intelligible  if  we  go  back 
to  the  great  thinker  who  was  the  first  to  analyse 
so  many  forms,  whether  of  thought,  society,  or 
nature,  and  amongst  them  also  the  form  of 
value.  I  mean  Aristotle. 

In  the  first  place,  he  clearly  enunciates  that 
the  money  form  of  commodities  is  only  the 
further  development  of  the  simple  form  of  value 
— i.e.,  of  the  expression  of  the  value  of  one  com¬ 
modity  in  some  other  commodity  taken  at  ran¬ 
dom;  for  he says — 

5  beds  —  i  house  is  not  to  be  distinguished 
from 

5  beds = so  much  money. 

He  further  sees  that  the  value  relation  which 
gives  rise  to  this  expression  makes  it  necessary 
that  the  house  should  qualitatively  be  made  the 
equal  of  the  bed,  and  that,  without  such  an 
equalization,  these  two  clearly  different  things 
could  not  be  compared  with  each  other  as  com¬ 
mensurable  quantities.  “Exchange,"  he  says 
“cannot  take  place  without  equality,  and  equal¬ 
ity  not  without  commensurability."  Here,  how¬ 
ever,  he  comes  to  a  stop,  and  gives  up  the  further 
analysis  of  the  form  of  value.  “It  is,  however,  in 
reality,  impossible  that  such  unlike  things  c..n 
be  commensurable"— i.e.,  qualitatively  equal. 
Such  an  equalization  can  only  be  something 
foreign  to  their  real  nature,  consequently  only 
“a  make-shift  for  practical  purposes." 

Aristotle,  therefore,  himself  tells  us  what  bar¬ 
red  the  way  to  his  further  analysis;  it  was  the 
absence  of  any  concept  of  value.  What  is  that 
equal  something,  that  common  substance, 


which  admits  of  the  value  of  the  beds  being  ex¬ 
pressed  by  a  house?  Such  a  thing,  in  truth,  can¬ 
not  exist,  says  Aristotle.  And  why  not  ?  Com¬ 
pared  with  the  beds,  the  house  does  represent 
something  equal  to  them,  in  so  far  as  it  re¬ 
presents  what  is  really  equal,  both  in  the  beds 
and  the  house.  And  that  is— human  labour. 

There  was,  however,  an  important  fact  which 
prevented  Aristotle  from  seeing  that  to  attrib¬ 
ute  value  to  commodities  is  merely  a  mode  of 
expressing  all  labour  as  equal  human  labour, 
and,  consequently,  as  labour  of  equal  quality. 
Greek  society  was  founded  upon  slavery,  and 
had,  therefore,  for  its  natural  basis,  the  inequal¬ 
ity  of  men  and  of  their  labour  powers.  The  se¬ 
cret  of  the  expression  of  value  (namely,  that  all 
kinds  of  labour  are  equal  and  equivalent,  be¬ 
cause,  and  so  far  as,  they  are  human  labour  in 
general)  cannot  be  deciphered  until  the  notion 
of  human  equality  has  already  acquired  the 
fixity  of  a  popular  prejudice.  This,  however,  is 
possible  only  in  a  society  in  which  the  great 
mass  of  the  produce  of  labour  takes  the  form  of 
commodities,  in  which,  consequently,  the  dom¬ 
inant  relation  between  man  and  man  is  that  of 
owners  of  commodities.  The  brilliancy  of  Aris¬ 
totle’s  genius  is  shown  by  this  alone,  that  he 
discovered,  in  the  expression  of  the  value  of 
commodities,  a  relation  of  equality.  The  pecul¬ 
iar  conditions  of  the  society  in  which  he  lived 
alone  prevented  him  from  discovering  what, 
“in  truth,"  was  at  the  bottom  of  this  equality. 

4.  The  Elementary  Form  of  Value  considered  as  a 

Whole 

The  elementary  form  of  value  of  a  commod¬ 
ity  is  contained  in  the  equation  expressing  its 
value  relation  to  another  commodity  of  a  dif¬ 
ferent  kind,  or  in  its  exchange  relation  to  the 
same.  The  value  of  commodity  Ay  is  qualita¬ 
tively  expressed  by  the  fact  that  commodity  B 
is  directly  exchangeable  with  it.  Its  value  is 
quantitatively  expressed  by  the  fact  that  a  def¬ 
inite  quantity  of  B  is  exchangeable  with  a  defin¬ 
ite  quantity  of  A .  In  other  words,  the  value  of  a 
commodity  obtains  independent  and  definite 
expression  by  taking  the  form  of  exchange  val¬ 
ue.  When,  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  we 
said,  in  common  parlance,  that  a  commodity  is 
both  a  use-value  and  an  exchange  value,  we 
were,  accurately  speaking,  wrong.  A  commod¬ 
ity  is  a  use-value  or  object  of  utility,  and  a 
value.  It  manifests  itself  as  this  two-fold  thing, 
that  it  is,  as  soon  as  its  value  assumes  an  inde¬ 
pendent  form— viz.,  the  form  of  exchange  val¬ 
ue.  It  never  assumes  this  form  when  isolated, 


26  CAPITAL 


but  only  when  placed  in  a  value  or  exchange 
relation  with  another  commodity  of  a  different 
kind.  When  once  we  know  this,  such  a  mode  of 
expression  does  no  harm;  it  simply  serves  as  an 
abb  reviation. 

Our  analysis  has  shown  that  the  form  or  ex¬ 
pression  of  the  value  of  a  commodity  originates 
in  the  nature  of  value,  and  not  that  value  and 
its  magnitude  originate  in  the  mode  of  their  ex¬ 
pression  as  exchange  value.  This,  however,  is 
the  delusion  as  well  of  the  mercantilists  and 
their  recent  revivers,  Ferrier,  Ganilh,1  and 
others,  as  also  of  their  antipodes,  the  modern 
bagmen  of  Free  Trade,  such  as  Bastiat  .The  mer¬ 
cantilists  lay  special  stress  on  the  qualitative 
aspect  of  the  expression  of  value,  and  conse¬ 
quently  on  the  equivalent  form  of  commodities, 
which  attains  its  full  perfection  in  money.  The 
modern  hawkers  of  Free  Trade,  who  must  get 
rid  of  their  article  at  any  price,  on  the  other 
hand,  lay  most  stress  on  the  quantitative  as¬ 
pect  of  the  relative  form  of  value.  For  them 
there  consequently  exists  neither  value  nor  mag¬ 
nitude  of  value  anywhere  except  in  its  expres¬ 
sion  by  means  of  the  exchange  relation  of  com¬ 
modities,  that  is,  in  the  daily  list  of  prices  cur¬ 
rent.  MacLeod,  who  has  taken  upon  himself  to 
dress  up  the  confused  ideas  of  Lombard  Street 
in  the  most  learned  finery,  is  a  successful  cross 
between  the  superstitious  mercantilists  and  the 
enlightened  Free  Trade  bagmen. 

A  close  scrutiny  of  the  expression  of  the  value 
of  A  in  terms  of  B  contained  in  the  equation 
expressing  the  value  relation  of  A  to  By  has 
shown  us  that,  within  that  relation,  the  bodily 
form  of  A  figures  only  as  a  use-value,  the  bodily 
form  of  B  only  as  the  form  or  aspect  of  value. 
The  opposition  or  contrast  existing  internally 
in  each  commodity  between  use- value  and  val¬ 
ue  is,  therefore,  made  evident  externally  by 
two  commodities  being  placed  in  such  relation 
to  each  other  that  the  commodity  whose  value 
it  is  sought  to  express  figures  directly  as  a  mere 
use-value,  while  the  commodity  in  which  that 
value  is  to  be  expressed  figures  directly  as  mere 
exchange  value.  Hence,  the  elementary  form  of 
value  of  a  commodity  is  the  elementary  form  in 
which  the  contrast  contained  in  that  commod¬ 
ity,  between  use-value  and  value,  becomes  ap¬ 
parent. 

Every  product  of  labour  is,  in  all  states  of  so¬ 
ciety,  a  use-value;  but  it  is  only  at  a  definite  his- 

1 F.  L.  A.  Ferrier,  Sub-Inspector  of  Customs,  Du  gou- 
vernement  considM  dans  ses  rapports  aoecle  commerce ,  Paris, 
1805;  and  Charles  Ganilh,  Des  systbnes  de  V  economic  poli- 
fifue,  and  ed.,  Paris,  2821. 


torical  epoch  in  a  society’s  development  that 
such  a  product  becomes  a  commodity,  viz.,  at 
the  epoch  when  the  labour  spent  on  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  a  useful  article  becomes  expressed  as  one 
of  the  objective  qualities  of  the  article,  i.e.,  as 
its  value.  It  therefore  follows  that  the  elemen¬ 
tary  value  form  is  also  the  primitive  form  un¬ 
der  which  a  product  of  labour  appears  histori¬ 
cally  as  a  commodity,  and  that  the  gradual 
transformation  of  such  products  into  commodi¬ 
ties  proceeds  pari  passu 2  with  the  development 
of  the  value  form. 

We  perceive,  at  first  sight,  the  deficiencies  of 
the  elementary  form  of  value:  it  is  a  mere  germ 
which  must  undergo  a  series  of  metamorphoses 
before  it  can  ripen  into  the  price  form. 

The  expression  of  the  value  of  commodity  A 
in  terms  of  any  other  commodity  B  merely  dis¬ 
tinguishes  the  value  from  the  use-value  of  Ay 
and,  therefore,  places  A  merely  in  a  relation  of 
exchange  with  a  single  different  commodity,  Bt 
but  it  is  still  far  from  expressing  A’ s  qualitative 
equality,  and  quantitative  proportionality,  to 
all  commodities.  To  the  elementary  relative 
value  form  of  a  commodity,  there  corresponds 
the  single  equivalent  form  of  one  other  com¬ 
modity.  Thus,  in  the  relative  expression  of  val¬ 
ue  of  the  linen,  the  coat  assumes  the  form  of 
equivalent,  or  of  being  directly  exchangeable, 
only  in  relation  to  a  single  commodity,  the  lin¬ 
en. 

Nevertheless,  the  elementary  form  of  value 
passes  by  an  easy  transition  into  a  more  com¬ 
plete  form.  It  is  true  that  by  means  of  the  ele¬ 
mentary  form,  the  value  of  a  commodity  A  be¬ 
comes  expressed  in  terms  of  one,  and  only  one, 
other  commodity.  But  that  one  may  be  a  com¬ 
modity  of  any  kind— coat,  iron,  corn,  or  any¬ 
thing  else.  Therefore,  according  as  A  is  placed 
in  relation  with  one  or  the  other,  we  get  for  one 
and  the  same  commodity  different  elementary 
expressions  of  value.8  The  number  of  such  pos¬ 
sible  expressions  is  limited  only  by  the  number 
of  the  different  kinds  of  commodities  distinct 
from  it.  The  isolated  expression  of  A's  value  is, 
therefore,  convertible  into  a  series,  prolonged 
to  any  length,  of  the  different  elementary  ex¬ 
pressions  of  that  value. 

B.  Total  or  Expanded  Form  of  Value 

We  write:  2  Commodity  A = u  Commodity  By 
or=i>  Commodity  C,  or=w  Commodity  D,  or 
**x  Commodity  £,  or* etc.  In  the  concrete,  20 

?  Step  for  step. 

*  In  Homer,  for  instance,  the  value  of  an  article  is  ex¬ 
pressed  in  a  series  of  different  things.  Iliad ,  vii.  472-475. 


COMMODITIES 


yards  of  linen  =  i  coat,  or  =  io  pounds  tea,  or= 
40  pounds  coffee,  or=i  quarter  corn,  or =2 
ounces  gold,  or  =  y£  ton  iron,  or  =  etc. 

1 .  The  Expanded  Relative  Form  of  Value 

The  value  of  a  single  commodity,  the  linen, 
for  example,  is  now  expressed  in  terms  of  num¬ 
berless  other  elements  of  the  world  of  commodi¬ 
ties.  Every  other  commodity  now  becomes  a 
mirror  of  the  linen’s  value.1  It  is  thus  that  for 
the  first  time  this  value  shows  itself  in  its  true 
light  as  a  congelation  of  undifferentiated  human 
labour.  For  the  labour  that  creates  it  now 
stands  expressly  revealed  as  labour  that  ranks 
equally  with  every  other  sort  of  human  labour, 
no  matter  what  its  form,  whether  tailoring, 
ploughing,  mining,  etc.,  and  no  matter,  there¬ 
fore,  whether  it  is  realized  in  coats,  corn,  iron, 
or  gold.  The  linen,  by  virtue  of  the  form  of  its 
value,  now  stands  in  a  social  relation,  no  longer 
with  only  one  other  kind  of  commodity,  but 
with  the  whole  *vorMof  commodities.  As  a  com¬ 
modity ,  it  is  a  citizen  of  that  world.  At  the  same 
time,  the  interminable  series  of  value  equations 
implies  that,  as  regards  the  value  of  a  commodi¬ 
ty,  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  under  what  par¬ 
ticular  form,  or  kind,  of  use-value  it  appears. 

In  the  first  form,  20  yards  of  linen  =  1  coat, 
it  might,  for  ought  that  otherwise  appears,  be 
pure  accident  that  these  two  commodities  are 
exchangeable  in  definite  quantities.  In  the  sec¬ 
ond  form,  on  the  contrary,  we  perceive  at  once 
the  background  that  determines,  and  is  essen¬ 
tially  different  from,  this  accidental  appearance. 
The  value  of  the  linen  remains  unaltered  in 
magnitude,  whether  expressed  in  coats,  coffee, 

1  For  this  reason,  we  can  speak  of  the  coat-value  of  the 
linen  when  its  value  is  expressed  in  coats,  or  of  its  corn- 
value  when  expressed  in  corn,  and  so  on.  Every  such  ex¬ 
pression  tells  us  that  what  appears  in  the  use-values,  coat, 
corn,  etc.,  is  the  value  of  the  linen.  “The  value  of  any  com¬ 
modity  denoting  its  relation  in  exchange,  we  may  speak  of 
it  as  . . .  corn-value,  cloth-value,  according  to  the  com¬ 
modity  with  which  it  is  compared;  and  hence  there  are  a 
thousand  different  kinds  of  value,  as  many  kinds  of  value 
as  there  are  commodities  in  existence,  and  all  are  equally 
real  and  equally  nominal.”  {A  Critical  Dissertation  on  the 
Nature ,  Measure,  and  Causes  of  Value:  chiefly  in  referer-  f 
to  the  writings  of  Mr.  Ricardo  and  his  followers,  by  the  au¬ 
thor  of  Essays  on  the  Formation ,  etc.,  of  Opinions,  London, 
1825,  p.  39.)  S.  Bailey,  the  author  of  this  anonymous  work, 
a  work  which  in  its  day  created  much  stir  in  England, 
fancied  that,  by  thus  pointing  out  the  various  relative  ex¬ 
pressions  of  one  and  the  same  value,  he  had  proved  the 
impossibility  of  any  determination  of  the  concept  of  value. 
However  narrow  his  own  views  may  have  been,  yet  that 
he  laid  his  finger  on  some  serious  defects  in  the  Ricardian 
Theory  is  proved  by  the  animosity  with  which  he  was  at¬ 
tacked  by  Ricardo's  followers.  See  the  Westminster  Review, 
for  example. 


27 

or  iron,  or  in  numberless  different  commodities, 
the  property  of  as  many  different  owners.  The 
accidental  relation  between  two  individual 
commodity  owners  disappears.  It  becomes 
plain  that  it  is  not  the  exchange  of  commodities 
which  regulates  the  magnitude  of  their  value; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  is  the  magnitude  of 
their  value  which  controls  their  exchange  pro¬ 
portions. 

2.  The  Particular  Equi valent  Form 

Each  commodity,  such  as,  coat,  tea,  corn, 
iron,  etc.,  figures  in  the  expression  of  value  of 
the  linen,  as  an  equivalent,  and,  consequently, 
as  a  thing  that  is  value.  The  bodily  form  of  each 
of  these  commodities  figures  now  as  a  particu¬ 
lar  equivalent  form,  one  out  of  many.  In  the 
same  way  the  manifold  concrete  useful  kinds  of 
labour,  embodied  in  these  different  commodi¬ 
ties,  rank  now  as  so  many  different  forms  of  the 
realization,  or  manifestation,  of  undifferentiat¬ 
ed  human  labour. 

3.  Defects  of  the  Total  or  Expanded  Form  of  Value 

In  the  first  place,  the  relative  expression  of 

value  is  incomplete  because  the  series  represent¬ 
ing  it  is  interminable.  The  chain,  of  which  each 
equation  of  value  is  a  link,  is  liable  at  any  mo¬ 
ment  to  be  lengthened  by  each  new  kind  of  com¬ 
modity  that  comes  into  existence  and  furnishes 
the  material  for  a  fresh  expression  of  value.  In 
the  second  place,  it  is  a  many-coloured  mosaic 
of  disparate  and  independent  expressions  of  val¬ 
ue.  And  lastly,  if,  as  must  be  the  case,  the  rela¬ 
tive  value  of  each  commodity  in  turn  becomes 
expressed  in  this  expanded  form,  we  get  for  each 
of  them  a  relative  value  form,  different  in  every 
case,  and  consisting  of  an  interminable  series  of 
expressions  of  value.  The  defects  of  the  expand¬ 
ed  relative  value  form  are  reflected  in  the  cor¬ 
responding  equivalent  form.  Since  the  bodily 
form  of  each  single  commodity  is  one  particular 
equivalent  form  amongst  numberless  others,  we 
have,  on  the  whole,  nothing  but  fragmentary 
equivalent  forms,  each  excluding  the  others.  In 
the  same  way,  also,  the  special,  concrete,  useful 
kind  of  labour  embodied  in  each  particular 
equivalent  is  presented  only  as  a  particular  kind 
of  labour,  and,  therefore,  not  as  an  exhaustive 
representative  of  human  labour  generally.  The 
latter,  indeed,  gains  adequate  manifestation  in 
the  totality  of  its  manifold,  particular,  concrete 
forms.  But,  in  that  case,  its  expression  in  an  in¬ 
finite  series  is  ever  incomplete  and  deficient  in 
unity. 

The  expanded  relative  value  form  is,  how- 


28  CAPITAL 


ever,  nothing  but  the  sum  of  the  elementary 
relative  expressions  or  equations  of  the  first 
kind, such  as: 

20  yards  of  linen  =  i  coat 

20  yards  of  linen  *  10  pounds  of  tea,  etc. 

Each  of  these  implies  the  corresponding  in¬ 
verted  equation, 

i  coat  —  20  yards  of  linen 
io  pounds  of  tea**  20  yards  of  linen,  etc. 

In  fact,  when  a  person  exchanges  his  linen  for 
many  other  commodities,  and  thus  expresses 
its  value  in  a  series  of  other  commodities,  it  nec¬ 
essarily  follows  that  the  various  owners  of  the 
latter  exchange  them  for  the  linen,  and  conse¬ 
quently  express  the  value  of  their  various  com¬ 
modities  in  one  and  the  same  third  commodity, 
the  linen.  If,  then,  we  reverse  the  series,  20 
yards  of  linen  =  1  coat,  or  =  10  pounds  of  tea, 
etc.,  that  is  to  say,  if  we  give  expression  to  the 
converse  relation  already  implied  in  the  series, 
we  get: 

C.  The  General  Form  of  Value 
1  coat 
10  pounds  of  tea 
40  pounds  of  coffee 

I  quarter  of  corn  =  20  yards  of  linen 
2  ounces  of  gold 
#  ton  of  iron 
x  commodity  A ,  etc. 

1.  The  altered  Character  of  the  Form  of  Value 

All  commodities  now  express  their  values  (1) 
in  an  elementary  form,  because  in  a  single  com¬ 
modity;  (2)  with  unity,  because  in  one  and  the 
same  commodity.  This  form  of  value  is  elemen¬ 
tary  and  the  same  for  all;  therefore,  general. 

The  forms  A  and  B  were  fit  only  to  express 
the  value  of  a  commodity  as  something  distinct 
from  its  use-value  or  material  form. 

The  first  form,  A>  furnishes  such  equations 
as  the  following:  1  coat  =*20  yards  of  linen,  10 
pounds  of  tea= }4  ton  of  iron.  The  value  of  the 
coat  is  equated  to  linen,  that  of  the  tea  to  iron. 
But  to  be  equated  to  linen,  and  again  to  iron,  is 
to  be  as  different  as  are  linen  and  iron.  This  form 
it  is  plain,  occurs  practically  only  in  the  first  be¬ 
ginning,  when  the  products  of  labour  are  con¬ 
verted  into  commodities  by  accidental  and  oc¬ 
casional  exchanges. 

The  second  form,  fl,  distinguishes,  in  a  more 
adequate  manner  than  the  first,  the  value  of  a 
commodity  from  its  use-value;  for  the  value  of 
the  coat  is  there  placed  in  contrast  under  all 
possible  shapes  with  the  bodily  form  of  the  coat; 


it  is  equated  to  linen,  to  iron,  to  tea,  in  short,  to 
everything  else,  only  not  to  itself,  the  coat.  On 
the  other  hand,  any  general  expression  of  value 
common  to  all  is  directly  excluded;  for,  in  the 
equation  of  value  of  each  commodity,  all  other 
commodities  now  appear  only  under  the  form 
of  equivalents.  The  expanded  form  of  value 
comes  into  actual  existence  for  the  first  time  so 
soon  as  a  particular  product  of  labour,  such  as 
cattle,  is  no  longer  exceptionally,  but  habitually, 
exchanged  for  various  other  commodities. 

The  third  and  lastly  developed  form  express¬ 
es  the  values  of  the  whole  world  of  commodities 
in  terms  of  a  single  commodity  set  apart  for  the 
purpose,  namely,  the  linen,  and  thus  represents 
to  us  their  values  by  means  of  their  equality 
with  linen.  The  value  of  every  commodity  is 
now,  by  being  equated  to  linen,  not  only  differ¬ 
entiated  from  its  own  use-value,  but  from  all 
other  use-values  generally,  and  is,  by  that  very 
fact,  expressed  as  that  which  is  common  to  all 
commodities.  By  this  form,  commodities  are, 
for  the  first  time,  effectively  brought  into  rela¬ 
tion  with  one  another  as  values,  or  made  to  ap¬ 
pear  as  exchange  values. 

The  two  earlier  forms  either  express  the  value 
of  each  commodity  in  terms  of  a  single  com¬ 
modity  of  a  different  kind,  or  in  a  series  of  many 
such  commodities.  I  n  both  cases,  it  is,  so  to  say, 
the  special  business  of  each  single  commodity 
to  find  an  expression  for  its  value,  and  this  it 
does  without  the  help  of  the  others.  These  oth¬ 
ers,  with  respect  to  the  former,  play  the  passive 
parts  of  equivalents.  The  general  form  of  value, 
C,  results  from  the  joint  action  of  the  whole 
world  of  commodities,  and  from  that  alone.  A 
commodity  can  acquire  a  general  expression  of 
its  value  only  by  all  other  commodities,  simul¬ 
taneously  with  it,  expressing  their  values  in  the 
same  equivalent;  and  every  new  commodity 
must  follow  suit.  It  thus  becomes  evident  that, 
since  the  existence  of  commodities  as  values  is 
purely  social,  this  social  existence  can  be  expres¬ 
sed  by  the  totality  of  their  social  relations  alone, 
and,  consequently,  that  the  form  of  their  value 
must  be  a  socially  recognized  form. 

All  commodities  being  equaled  to  linen  now 
appear  not  only  as  qualitatively  equal  as  values 
generally,  but  also  as  values  whose  magnitudes 
are  capable  of  comparison.  By  expressing  the 
magnitudes  of  their  values  in  one  and  the  same 
material,  the  linen,  those  magnitudes  are  also 
compared  with  each  other.  For  instance,  10 
pounds  of  tea  *=  20  yards  of  linen,  and  40  pounds 
of  coffee  *=20  yards  of  linen.  Therefore,  10 
pounds  of  tea  **40  pounds  of  coffee.  In  other 


COMMODITIES 


words,  there  is  contained  in  i  pound  of  coffee 
only  one-fourth  as  much  substance  of  value — 
labour— as  is  contained  in  i  pound  of  tea. 

The  general  form  of  relative  value,  embrac¬ 
ing  the  whole  world  of  commodities,  converts 
the  single  commodity  that  is  excluded  from  the 
rest  and  made  to  play  the  part  of  equivalent — 
here  the  linen— into  the  universal  equivalent. 
The  bodily  form  of  the  linen  is  now  the  form 
assumed  in  common  by  the  values  of  all  com¬ 
modities;  it,  therefore,  becomes  directly  ex¬ 
changeable  with  all  and  every  one  of  them.  The 
substance  linen  becomes  the  visible  incarnation, 
the  social  chrysalis  form  of  every  kind  of  human 
labour.  Weaving,  which  is  the  labour  of  certain 
private  individuals  producing  a  particular  arti¬ 
cle,  linen,  acquires  in  consequence  a  social  char¬ 
acter,  the  character  of  equality  with  all  other 
kinds  of  labour.  The  innumerable  equations  of 
which  the  general  form  of  value  is  composed 
equate  in  turn  the  labour  embodied  in  the  linen 
to  that  embodied  in  every  other  commodity,  and 
they  thus  convert  weaving  into  the  general  form 
of  manifestation  of  undifferentiated  human  la¬ 
bour.  Jn  this  manner  the  labour  realized  in  the 
values  of  commodities  is  presented  not  only  un¬ 
der  its  negative  aspect,  under  which  abstrac¬ 
tion  is  made  from  every  concrete  form  and  use¬ 
ful  property  of  actual  work,  but  its  own  positive 
nature  is  made  to  reveal  itself  expressly.  The 
general  value  form  is  the  reduction  of  all  kinds 
of  actual  labour  to  their  common  character  of 
being  human  labour  generally,  of  being  the  ex¬ 
penditure  of  human  labour  power. 

The  general  value  form,  which  represents  all 
products  of  labour  as  mere  congelations  of  un¬ 
differentiated  human  labour,  shows  by  its  very 
structure  that  it  is  the  social  r£sum£  of  the  world 
of  commodities.  That  form  consequently  makes 
it  indisputably  evident  that  in  the  world  of 
commodities  the  character  possessed  by  all  la¬ 
bour  of  being  human  labour  constitutes  its  spe¬ 
cific  social  character. 

a.  The  interdependent  Development  of  the  Rela¬ 
tive  Form  of  Value ,  and  of  the  Equivalent 

Form 

The  degree  of  development  of  the  relative 
form  of  value  corresponds  to  that  of  the  equi  ► 
alent  form.  But  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  the 
development  of  the  latter  is  only  the  expression 
and  result  of  the  development  of  the  former. 

The  primary  or  isolated  relative  form  of  val¬ 
ue  of  one  commodity  converts  some  other  com¬ 
modity  into  an  isolated  equivalent.The  expand¬ 
ed  form  of  relative  value,  which  is  the  expres¬ 


29 

sion  of  the  value  of  one  commodity  in  terms  of 
all  other  commodities,  endows  those  other  com¬ 
modities  with  the  character  of  particular  equiv¬ 
alents  differing  in  kind.  And  lastly,  a  particular 
kind  of  commodity  acquires  the  character  of  uni¬ 
versal  equivalent,  because  all  other  commod¬ 
ities  make  it  the  material  in  which  they  uniform¬ 
ly  express  their  value. 

The  antagonism  between  the  relative  form  of 
value  and  the  equivalent  form,  the  two  poles  of 
the  value  form,  is  developed  concurrently  with 
that  form  itself. 

The  first  form,  20  yards  of  linen  =  one  coat, 
already  contains  this  antagonism,  without  as 
yet  fixing  it.  According  as  we  read  this  equation 
forwards  or  backwards,  the  parts  played  by  the 
linen  and  the  coat  are  different.  In  the  one  case 
the  relative  value  of  the  linen  is  expressed  in  the 
coat,  in  the  other  case  the  relative  value  of  the 
coat  is  expressed  in  the  linen.  In  this  first  form 
of  value,  therefore,  it  is  difficult  to  grasp  the 
polar  contrast. 

Form  B  shows  that  only  one  single  commod¬ 
ity  at  a  time  can  completely  expand  its  relative 
value,  and  that  it  acquires  this  expanded  form 
only  because,  and  in  so  far  as,  all  other  commod¬ 
ities  are,  with  respect  to  it,  equivalents.  Here 
we  cannot  reverse  the  equation,  as  we  can  the 
equation  20  yards  of  linen  =  1  coat,  without  al¬ 
tering  its  general  character,  and  converting  it 
from  the  expanded  form  of  value  into  the  gen¬ 
eral  form  of  value. 

Finally,  the  form  C  gives  to  the  world  of  com¬ 
modities  a  general  social  relative  form  of  value 
because,  and  in  so  far  as,  therby  all  commodi¬ 
ties,  with  rhe  exception  of  one,  are  excluded 
from  the  equivalent  form.  A  single  commodity, 
the  linen,  appears,  therefore,  to  have  acquired 
the  chaiacter  of  direct  exchangeability  with 
every  other  commodity  because,  and  in  so  far 
as,  this  character  is  denied  to  every  other  com¬ 
modity.1 

1  It  is  by  no  means  self-evident  that  this  character  oft 
direct  and  universal  exchangeability  is,  so  to  speak,  a  polar 
one,  and  as  intimately  connected  with  its  opposite  pole, 
the  absence  of  direct  exchangeability,  as  the  positive  pole 
of  the  magnet  is  with  its  negative  counterpart.  It  may, 
therefore,  be  imagined  that  all  commodities  can  simultan¬ 
eously  have  this  character  impressed  upon  them,  just  as 
it  can  be  imagined  that  all  Catholics  can  be  Popes  to¬ 
gether.  It  is,  of  course,  highly  desirable  in  the  eyes  of  the 
petit  bourgeois ,  for  whom  the  production  of  commodities  is 
the  ne  plus  ultra  [highest  goal]  of  human  freedom  and  in¬ 
dividual  independence,  that  the  inconveniences  resulting 
from  this  character  of  commodities  not  being  directly  ex¬ 
changeable  should  be  removed.  Proudhon’s  socialism  is  a 
working  out  of  this  Philistine  Utopia,  a  form  of  socialism 
which,  as  1  have  elsewhere  shown,  does  not  possess  even 


CAPITAL 


30 

The  commodity  that  figures  as  universal 
equivalent  is,  on  the  other  hand,  excluded  from 
the  relative  value  form.  If  the  linen,  or  any  oth¬ 
er  commodity  serving  as  universal  equivalent, 
were,  at  the  same  time,  to  share  in  the  relative 
form  of  value,  it  would  have  to  serve  as  its  own 
equivalent.  We  should  then  have  20  yards  of 
linen  =  20  yards  of  linen;  this  tautology  ex- 

firesses  neither  value,  nor  magnitude  of  value, 
n  order  to  express  the  relative  value  of  the  uni¬ 
versal  equivalent,  we  must  rather  reverse  the 
form  C.  This  equivalent  has  no  relative  form  of 
value  in  common  with  other  commodities,  but 
its  value  is  relatively  expressed  by  a  never- 
ending  series  of  other  commodities.  Thus,  the 
expanded  form  of  relative  value,  or  form  By 
now  shows  itself  as  the  specific  form  of  relative 
value  for  the  equivalent  commodity. 

3.  Transition  from  the  General  Form  of  Value  to 
the  Money  Form 

The  universal  equivalent  form  is  a  form  of 
value  in  general.  It  can,  therefore,  be  assumed 
by  any  commodity.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a 
commodity  be  found  to  have  assumed  the  uni¬ 
versal  equivalent  form  (form  C),  this  is  only  be¬ 
cause,  and  in  so  far  as,  it  has  been  excluded  from 
the  rest  of  all  other  commodities  as  their  equiv¬ 
alent,  and  that  by  their  own  act.  And  from  the 
moment  that  this  exclusion  becomes  finally  re¬ 
stricted  to  one  particular  commodity,  from  that 
moment  only,  the  general  form  of  relative  value 
of  the  world  of  commodities  obtains  real  con¬ 
sistence  and  general  social  validity. 

The  particular  commodity,  with  whose  bod¬ 
ily  form  the  equivalent  form  is  thus  socially 
identified,  now  becomes  the  money  commodity, 
or  serves  as  money.  It  becomes  the  special  so¬ 
cial  function  of  that  commodity,  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  its  social  monopoly,  to  play  within  the 
world  of  commodities  the  part  of  the  universal 
equivalent.  Amongst  the  commodities  which, 
in  form  B ,  figure  as  particular  equivalents  of  the 
linen,  and,  in  form  C,  express  in  common  their 
relative  values  in  linen,  this  foremost  place  has 
been  attained  by  one  in  particular— namely, 

the  merit  of  originality.  Long  before  his  time,  the  task  was 
attempted  with  much  better  success  by  Gray,  Bray,  and 
others.  But,  for  all  that,  wisdom  of  this  kind  flourishes 
even  now  in  certain  circles  under  the  name  of  “science." 
Never  has  any  school  played  more  tricks  with  the  word 
“science,"  than  that  of  Proudhon,  for 
wo  Begrijfefthlen 

Da  stellt  xur  rechten  Zeit  ein  Wort  sieh  tin* 

(“For  at  the  point  where  concepts  fail 
At  the  right  time  a  word  is  thrust  in  there.”] 


gold.  If,  then,  in  form  C  we  replace  the  linen  by 
gold,  we  get: 

D.  The  Money  Form 

20  yards  of  linen 
1  coat 

10  pounds  of  tea 

40  pounds  of  coffee  I  =  2  ounces  of  gold. 

1  quarter  of  corn 
ton  of  iron 
x  commodity  A 

In  passing  from  form  A  to  form  B ,  and  from 
the  latter  to  form  C,  the  changes  are  fundamen¬ 
tal.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  difference  be¬ 
tween  forms  C  and  Dy  except  that,  in  the  latter, 
gold  has  assumed  the  equivalent  form  in  the 
place  of  linen.  Gold  is  in  form  D  what  linen  was 
in  form  C — the  universal  equivalent.  The  prog¬ 
ress  consists  in  this  alone,  that  the  character  of 
direct  and  universal  exchangeability— in  other 
words,  that  the  universal  equivalent  form — has 
now,  by  social  custom,  become  finally  identified 
with  the  substance,  gold. 

Gold  is  now  money  with  reference  to  all  other 
commodities  only  because  it  was  previously, 
with  reference  to  them,  a  simple  commodity. 
Like  all  other  commodities,  it  was  also  capable 
of  serving  as  an  equivalent,  either  as  simple 
equivalent  in  isolated  exchanges,  or  as  particu¬ 
lar  equivalent  by  the  side  of  others.  Gradually, 
it  began  to  serve,  within  varying  limits,  as  uni¬ 
versal  equivalent.  So  soon  as  it  monopolizes 
this  position  in  the  expression  of  value  for  the 
world  of  commodities,  it  becomes  the  money 
commodity,  and  then,  and  not  till  then,  does 
form  D  become  distinct  from  form  C,  and  the 
general  form  of  value  become  changed  into  the 
money  form. 

The  elementary  expression  of  the  relative 
value  of  a  single  commodity,  such  as  linen,  in 
termsof  the  commodity,  such  as  gold,  that  plays 
the  part  of  money,  is  the  price  form  of  that  com¬ 
modity.  The  price  form  of  the  linen  is,  therefore: 

20  yards  of  linen  =  2  ounces  of  gold,  or,  if  2 

ounces  of  gold  when  coined  are  £2, 20  yards 
of  linen  =  £2. 

The  difficulty  in  forming  a  concept  of  the 
money  form  consists  in  clearly  comprehending 
the  universal  equivalent  form,  and  as  a  neces¬ 
sary  corollary,  the  general  form  of  value,  form 
C.  The  latter  is  deducible  from  form  By  the  ex¬ 
panded  form  of  value,  the  essential  component 
element  of  which,  we  saw,  is  form  Ay  20  yards 
oflinen  =  1  coa  tor  x  commodity  A=y  commod¬ 
ity  B .  The  simple  commodity  form  is,  therefore, 
the  germ  of  the  money  form. 


COMMODITIES 


4.  The  Fetishism  of  Commodities  and  the  Secret 

thereof 

A  commodity  appears,  at  first  sight,  a  very 
trivial  thing,  and  easily  understood.  Its  analysis 
shows  that  it  is,  in  reality,  a  very  queer  thing, 
abounding  in  metaphysical  subtleties  and  theo¬ 
logical  niceties.  So  far  as  it  is  a  value  in  use, 
there  is  nothing  mysterious  about  it,  whether 
we  consider  it  from  the  point  of  view  that  by  its 
properties  it  is  capable  of  satisfying  human 
wants,  or  from  the  point  that  those  properties 
are  the  product  of  human  labour.  1 1  is  as  clear  as 
noonday  that  man,  by  his  industry,  changes  the 
forms  of  the  materials  furnished  by  nature  in 
such  a  way  as  to  make  them  useful  to  him.  The 
form  of  wood,  for  instance,  is  altered  by  making 
a  table  out  of  it.  Yet,  for  all  that,  the  table  con¬ 
tinues  to  be  that  common,  palpable  thing,  wood. 
But,  so  soon  as  it  steps  forth  as  a  commodity,  it 
is  changed  into  something  transcendent.  It  not 
only  stands  with  its  feet  on  the  ground,  but,  in 
relation  to  all  other  commodities,  it  stands  on 
its  head,  ar<d  evolves  out  of  its  wooden  brain 
grotesque  ideas,  far  more  wonderful  than"  table- 
turn  mg”  ever  was. 

The  mystical  character  of  commodities  does 
not  originate,  therefore,  in  their  use-value.  Just 
as  little  does  it  proceed  from  the  nature  of  the 
determining  factors  of  value.  For,  in  the  first 
place,  however  varied  the  useful  kinds  of  labour 
or  productive  activities  may  be,  it  is  a  physio¬ 
logical  fact  that  they  arc  functions  of  the  hu¬ 
man  organism,  and  that  each  such  function, 
whatever  may  be  its  nature  or  form,  is  essen¬ 
tially  the  expenditure  of  human  brain,  nerves, 
muscles,  etc.  Secondly,  with  regard  to  that 
which  forms  the  groundwork  for  the  quantita¬ 
tive  determination  of  value,  namely,  the  dura¬ 
tion  of  that  expenditure,  or  the  quantity  of  la¬ 
bour,  it  is  quite  clear  that  there  is  a  palpable  dif¬ 
ference  between  its  quantity  and  quality.  In  all 
states  of  society,  the  labour  time  that  it  costs  to 
produce  the  means  of  subsistence,  must  neces¬ 
sarily  be  an  object  of  interest  to  mankind, 
though  not  of  equal  interest  in  different  stages 
of  development.1  And  lastly,  from  the  moment 
that  men  in  any  way  work  for  one  another,  their 
labour  assumes  a  social  form. 

Whence,  then,  arises  the  enigmatical  charac¬ 
ter  of  the  product  of  la  hour  so  soon  as  it  assumes 

1  Among  the  ancient  Germans  the  unit  for  measuring 
land  was  what  could  he  harvested  in  a  day,  and  was  called 
Tagwerk ,  Tagwanne  {jurnale ,  or  terra  j  urn  alts,  or  dtornalis ), 
Manmmaady  etc .  See  G.  L.  von  Maurer,  Etnleitung  zur 
Geschichte  der  Mark — ,  etc.%  Verjassung ,  Munich,  1859,  pp. 
129-59. 


31 

the  form  of  commodities?  Clearly  from  this 
form  itself.  The  equality  of  all  sorts  of  human 
labour  is  expressed  objectively  by  their  prod¬ 
ucts  all  being  equally  values;  the  measure  of  the 
expenditure  of  labour  power  by  the  duration  of 
that  expenditure  takes  the  form  of  the  quantity 
of  value  of  the  products  of  labour;  and  finally, 
the  mutual  relations  of  the  producers,  within 
which  the  social  character  of  their  labour  affirms 
itself,  take  the  form  of  a  social  relation  between 
the  products. 

A  commodity  is,  therefore,  a  mysterious 
thing  simply  because  in  it  the  social  character 
of  men’s  labour  appears  to  them  as  an  objective 
character  stamped  upon  the  product  of  that  la¬ 
bour,  because  the  relation  of  the  producers  to 
the  sum  total  of  their  own  labour  is  presented 
to  them  as  a  social  relation,  existing  not  between 
themselves,  but  between  the  products  of  their 
labour.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  products  of 
labour  become  commodities,  social  things  whose 
qualities  are  at  the  same  time  perceptible  and 
imperceptible  by  the  senses.  In  the  same  way 
the  light  from  an  object  is  perceived  by  us  not 
as  the  subjective  excitation  of  our  optic  nerve, 
but  as  the  objective  form  of  something  outside 
the  eye  itself.  But,  in  the  act  of  seeing,  there  is 
at  all  events  an  actual  passage  of  light  from  one 
thing  to  another,  from  the  external  object  to  the 
eye.  There  is  a  physical  relation  between  phys¬ 
ical  things.  But  it  is  different  with  commodities. 
There,  the  existence  of  the  things  qua  commod¬ 
ities,  and  the  value  relation  between  the  prod¬ 
ucts  of  labour  which  stamps  them  as  commodi¬ 
ties,  have  absolutely  no  connection  with  their 
physical  properties  and  with  the  material  rela¬ 
tions  arising  therefrom.  There  it  is  a  definite 
social  relation  between  men  that  assumes,  in 
their  ey^s,  the  fantastic  form  of  a  relation  be¬ 
tween  things.  In  order,  therefore,  to  find  an 
analogy,  we  must  have  recourse  to  the  mist- 
enveloped  regions  of  the  religious  world.  In  that 
world  the  productions  of  the  human  brain  ap¬ 
pear  as  independent  beings  endowed  with  life, 
and  entering  into  relation  both  with  one  an¬ 
other  and  the  human  race.  So  it  is  in  the  world 
of  commodities  with  the  products  of  men’s 
hands.  This  I  call  the  fetishism  which  attaches 
itself  to  the  products  of  labour,  so  soon  as  they 
are  produced  as  commodities,  and  which  is, 
therefore,  inseparable  from  the  production  of 
commodities. 

This  fetishism  of  commodities  has  its  origin, 
as  the  foregoing  analysis  has  already  shown,  in 
the  peculiar  social  character  of  the  labour  that 
produces  them. 


32  CAPITAL 


As  a  general  rule,  articles  of  utility  become 
commodities  only  because  they  are  products  of 
the  labour  of  private  individuals  or  groups  of 
individuals  who  carry  on  their  work  independ¬ 
ently  of  each  other.  The  sum  total  of  the  labour 
of  all  these  private  individuals  forms  the  aggre¬ 
gate  labour  of  society.  Since  the  producers  do 
not  come  into  social  contact  with  each  other 
until  they  exchange  their  products,  the  specific 
social  character  of  each  producer’s  labour  does 
not  show  itself  except  in  the  act  of  exchange.  In 
other  words,  the  labour  of  the  individual  as¬ 
serts  itself  as  a  part  of  the  labour  of  society  only 
by  means  of  the  relations  which  the  act  of  ex¬ 
change  establishes  directly  between  the  prod¬ 
ucts,  and  indirectly,  through  them,  between  the 
producers.  To  the  latter,  therefore,  the  relations 
connecting  the  labour  of  one  individual  with 
that  of  the  rest  appear,  not  as  direct  social  rela¬ 
tions  between  individuals  at  work,  but  as  what 
they  really  are,  material  relations  between  per¬ 
sons  and  social  relations  between  things,  it  is 
only  by  being  exchanged  that  the  products  of 
labour  acquire,  as  values,  one  uniform  social 
status,  distinct  from  their  varied  forms  of  exist¬ 
ence  as  objects  of  utility.  This  division  of  a 
product  into  a  useful  thing  and  a  value  becomes 
practically  important  only  when  exchange  has 
acquired  such  an  extension  that  useful  articles 
are  produced  for  the  purpose  of  being  exchanged, 
and  their  character  as  values  has  therefore  io  be 
taken  into  account,  beforehand,  during  produc¬ 
tion.  From  this  moment  the  labour  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  producer  acquires  socially  a  twofold 
character.  On  the  one  hand,  it  must,  as  a  defi¬ 
nite  useful  kind  of  labour,  satisfy  a  definite  so¬ 
cial  want,  and  thus  hold  its  place  as  part  and 
parcel  of  the  collective  labour  of  all,  as  a  branch 
of  a  social  division  of  labour  that  has  sprung  up 
spontaneously.  On  the  other  hand,  it  can  satisfy 
the  manifold  wants  of  the  individual  producer 
himself,  only  in  so  far  as  the  mutual  exchange¬ 
ability  of  all  kinds  of  useful  private  labour  is  an 
established  social  fact,  and,  therefore,  the  pri¬ 
vate  useful  labour  of  each  producer  ranks  on  an 
equality  with  that  of  all  others.  The  equaliza¬ 
tion  of  the  most  different  kinds  of  labour  can  be 
the  result  only  of  an  abstraction  from  their  in¬ 
equalities,  or  of  reducing  them  to  their  common 
denominator,  viz.,  expenditure  of  human  la¬ 
bour  power  or  human  labour  in  the  abstract. 
The  twofold  social  character  of  the  labour  of 
the  individual  appears  to  him,  when  reflected  in 
his  brain,  only  under  those  forms  which  are  im- 
ressed  upon  that  labour  in  everyday  practice 
y  the  exchange  of  products.  In  this  way,  the 


character  that  his  own  labour  possesses  of  being 
socially  useful  takes  the  form  of  the  condition 
that  the  product  must  be  not  only  useful,  but 
useful  for  others,  and  the  social  character  that 
his  particular  labour  has  of  being  the  equal  of  all 
other  particular  kinds  of  labour,  takes  the  form 
that  all  the  physically  different  articles  that  are 
the  products  of  labour,  have  one  common  qual¬ 
ity,  viz.,  that  of  having  value. 

Hence,  when  we  bring  the  products  of  our  la¬ 
bour  into  relation  with  each  other  as  values,  it 
is  not  because  we  see  in  these  articles  the  mate¬ 
rial  receptacles  of  homogeneous  human  labour. 
Quite  the  contrary:  whenever,  by  an  exchange, 
we  equate  as  values  our  different  products,  by 
that  very  act  we  also  equate,  as  human  labour, 
the  different  kinds  of  labour  expended  upon 
them.  We  are  not  aware  of  this;  nevertheless, 
we  do  it.1  Value,  therefore,  does  not  stalk  about 
with  a  label  describing  what  it  is.  It  is  value, 
rather,  that  converts  every  product  into  a  social 
hieroglyphic.  Later  on,  we  try  to  decipher  the 
hieroglyphic,  to  get  behind  the  secret  of  ourown 
social  products;  for  to  stamp  an  object  of  utility 
as  a  value,  is  just  as  much  a  social  product  as 
language.  The  recent  scientific  discovery  that 
the  products  of  labour,  so  far  as  they  are  values, 
are  but  material  expressions  of  the  human  la¬ 
bour  spent  in  their  production,  marks,  indeed, 
an  epoch  in  the  history  of  the  development  of 
the  human  race,  but  by  no  means  dissipates  the 
mist  through  which  the  social  character  of  la¬ 
bour  appears  to  us  to  be  an  objective  character 
of  the  products  themselves.  The  fact  that  in  the 
particular  form  of  production  with  which  we 
are  dealing,  viz.,  the  production  of  commodities, 
the  specific  social  character  of  private  labour 
carried  on  independently,  consists  in  the  equal¬ 
ity  of  every  kind  of  that  labour  by  virtue  of  its 
being  human  labour,  which  character,  there¬ 
fore,  assumes  in  the  product  the  form  of  value — 
this  fact  appears  to  the  producers,  notwith¬ 
standing  the  discovery  above  referred  to,  to  be 
just  as  real  and  final  as  the  fact  that,  after  the 
discovery  by  science  of  the  component  gases  of 
air,  the  atmosphere  itself  remained  unaltered. 

What,  first  of  all,  practically  concerns  pro- 
ducerswhen  theymakean  exchange  ishowmuch 
of  some  other  product  they  Will  get  for  their 
own?  in  what  proportions  the  products  are  ex¬ 
changeable?  When  these  proportions  have,  by 

When,  therefore,  Galiani  says:  “Value  (riechexxa)  is  a 
relation  between  persons”— he  ought  to  have  added:  a  re¬ 
lation  between  persons  expressed  as  a  relation  between 
things.— Galiani,  Della  Moneta ,  p.  221,  vol.  in  of  Custodi's 
collection,  “Scrittori  Classics  Italians  di  Economia  Polit* 
/for,  Parte  Modcma"  Milan,  1803. 


COMMODITIES  33 


custom,  attained  a  certain  stability,  they  ap¬ 
pear  to  result  from  the  nature  of  the  products, 
so  that,  for  instance,  one  ton  of  iron  and  two 
ounces  of  gold  appear  as  naturally  to  be  of  equal 
value  as  a  pound  of  gold  and  a  pound  of  iron,  in 
spite  of  their  different  physical  and  chemical 
qualities,  appear  to  be  of  equal  weight.  The 
character  of  having  value,  when  once  impressed 
upon  products,  obtains  fixity  only  by  reason  of 
their  acting  and  reacting  upon  each  other  as 
quantities  of  value.  These  quantities  vary  con¬ 
tinually,  independently  of  the  will,  foresight, 
and  action  of  the  producers.  To  them,  their  own 
social  action  takes  the  form  of  the  action  of  ob¬ 
jects,  which  rule  the  producers  instead  of  being 
ruled  by  them.  It  requires  a  fully  developed  pro¬ 
duction  of  commodities  before,  from  accumu¬ 
lated  experience  alone,  the  scientific  conviction 
springs  up  that  all  the  different  kinds  of  private 
labour,  which  are  carried  on  independently  of 
each  other,  and  yet  as  spontaneously  developed 
branches  of  the  social  division  of  labour,  are 
continually  being  reduced  to  the  quantitative 
proportion  which  society  requires  them. 
And  why?  Because,  in  the  midst  of  all  the  acci¬ 
dental  and  ever  fluctuating  exchange  relations 
between  the  products,  the  labour  time  socially 
necessary  for  their  production  forcibly  asserts 
itself  like  an  overriding  law  of  nature.  The  law 
of  gravity  thus  asserts  itself  when  a  house  falls 
about  our  ears.1  The  determination  of  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  value  by  labour  time  is  therefore  a  se¬ 
cret,  hidden  under  the  apparent  fluctuations  in 
the  relative  values  of  commodities.  Its  discov¬ 
ery,  while  removing  all  appearance  of  mere  acci¬ 
dental!  ty  from  the  determination  of  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  values  of  products,  yet  in  no  way 
alters  the  mode  in  which  that  determination 
takes  place. 

Man’s  reflections  on  the  forms  of  social  life, 
and,  consequently,  also  his  scientific  analysis  of 
those  forms  take  a  course  directly  opposite  to 
that  of  their  actual  historical  development.  He 
begins postfestum?  with  the  results  of  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  development  ready  to  hand  before  him. 
The  characters  that  stamp  products  as  com¬ 
modities,  and  whose  establishment  is  a  neces¬ 
sary  preliminary  to  the  circulation  of  commod¬ 
ities,  have  already  acquired  the  stability  of  nat- 

1  “What  are  we  to  think  of  a  law  that  asserts  itself  only 
by  periodical  revolutions?  It  is  just  nothing  but  a  law  of 
Nature,  founded  on  the  want  of  knowledge  of  those  whose 
action  is  the  subject  of  it.’*  Friedrich  Engels,  Umrtsse  zu 
finer  Krttik  der  Nationalokonomie  in  the  Deutsch-ftanzo- 
niche  Jahrbilcher,  edited  by  Arnold  Ruge  and  Karl  Marx, 
Pans,  1844* 

1  After  the  event. 


ural,  self-understood  forms  of  social  life,  before 
man  seeks  to  decipher,  not  their  historical  char¬ 
acter,  for  in  his  eyes  they  are  immutable,  but 
their  meaning.  Consequently,  it  was  the  analy¬ 
sis  of  the  prices  of  com  modi  ties  that  alone  led  to 
the  determination  of  the  magnitude  of  value, 
and  it  was  the  common  expression  of  all  corn- 
modi  ti es  i n  money  tha  t  alone  led  to  the  es tabl  ish- 
ment  of  their  characters  as  values.  It  is,  how¬ 
ever,  just  this  ultimate  money  form  of  the  world, 
of  commodities  that  actually  conceals,  instead 
of  disclosing,  the  social  character  of  private  Ia~ 
bour,  and  the  social  relations  between  the  indi¬ 
vidual  producers.  When  I  state  that  coats  or 
boots  stand  in  a  relation  to  linen,  because  it  is 
the  universal  incarnation  of  abstract  human 
labour,  the  absurdity  of  the  statement  is  self- 
evident.  Nevertheless,  when  the  producers  of 
coats  and  boots  compare  those  articles  with 
linen,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  with  gold  or 
silver,  as  the  universal  equivalent,  they  express 
the  relation  between  their  own  private  labour 
and  the  collective  labour  of  society  in  the  same 
absurd  form. 

The  categories  of  bourgeois  economy  consist 
of  such  like  forms.  They  are  forms  of  thought 
expressing  with  social  validity  the  conditions 
and  relations  of  a  definite,  historically  deter¬ 
mined  mode  of  production,  viz.,  the  production 
of  commodities.  The  whole  mystery  of  com¬ 
modities,  all  the  magic  and  necromancy  that 
surrounds  the  products  of  labour  as  long  as  they 
take  the  form  of  commodities,  vanishes,  there¬ 
fore,  so  soon  as  we  come  to  other  forms  of  pro¬ 
duction. 

Since  Robinson  Crusoe’s  experiences  are  a 
favourite  theme  with  political  economists,3  let 
us  take  a  look  at  him  on  his  island.  Moderate 
though  he  be,  yet  some  few  wants  he  has  to  sat¬ 
isfy,  and  must  therefore  do  a  little  useful  work 
of  various  sorts,  such  as  making  tools  and  furni¬ 
ture,  taming  goats,  fishing,  and  hunting.  Of  his 
prayers  and  the  like  we  take  no  account,  since 
they  are  a  source  of  pleasure  to  him,  and  he 
looks  upon  them  as  so  much  recreation.  In  spite 
of  the  variety  of  his  work,  he  knows  that  his  1  a- 

3  Even  Ricardo  has  his  stories  h  la  Robinson.  “He  makes 
the  primitive  hunter  and  the  primitive  fisher  straightway, 
as  owners  of  commodities,  exchange  fish  and  game  in  the 
proportion  in  which  labour  time  is  incorporated  in  these 
exchange  values.  On  this  occasion  he  commits  the  an¬ 
achronism  of  making  these  men  apply  to  the  calculation, 
so  far  as  their  implements  have  to  be  taken  into  account, 
the  annuity  tables  in  current  use  on  the  London  Exchange 
m  the  year  1817.  'The  parallelograms  of  Mr.  Owen’  ap¬ 
pear  to  be  the  only  form  of  society,  besides  the  bourgeois 
form,  with  which  he  was  acquainted.” — Karl  Marx,  Zur 
Krittk ,  etc.,  pp.  38, 39. 


CAPITAL 


34 

bour,  whatever  its  form,  is  but  the  activity  of 
one  and  the  same  Robinson,  and  consequently 
that  it  consists  of  nothing  but  different  modes 
of  human  labour.  Necessity  itself  compels  him 
to  apportion  his  time  accurately  between  his 
different  kinds  of  work.  Whether  one  kind  oc¬ 
cupies  a  greater  space  in  his  general  activity 
than  another  depends  on  the  difficulties,  greater 
or  less  as  the  case  may  be,  to  be  overcome  in  at¬ 
taining  the  useful  effect  aimed  at.  This  our 
friend  Robinson  soon  learns  by  experience,  and 
having  rescued  a  watch,  ledger,  and  pen  and  ink 
from  the  wreck,  commences,  like  a  true-born 
Briton,  to  keep  a  set  of  books.  His  stock-book 
contains  a  list  of  the  objects  of  utility  that  be¬ 
long  to  him,  of  the  operations  necessary  for  their 
production;  and  lastly,  of  the  labour  time  that 
definite  quantities  of  those  objects  have,  on  an 
average,  cost  him.  All  the  relations  between 
Robinson  and  the  objects  that  form  this  wealth 
of  his  own  creation  are  here  so  simple  and  clear 
as  to  be  intelligible  without  exertion,  even  to 
Mr.  Sedley  Taylor.  And  yet  those  relations  con¬ 
tain  all  that  is  essential  to  the  determination  of 
value. 

Let  us  now  transport  ourselves  from  Robin¬ 
son’s  island  bathed  in  light  to  the  European 
middle  ages  shrouded  in  darkness.  Here,  in¬ 
stead  of  the  independent  man,  we  find  every¬ 
one  dependent,  serfs  and  lords,  vassals  and  su¬ 
zerains,  laymen  and  clergy.  Personal  depend¬ 
ence  here  characterizes  the  social  relations  of 
production  just  as  much  as  it  does  the  other 
spheres  of  life  organized  on  tl\e  basis  of  that  pro¬ 
duction.  But  for  the  very  reason  that  personal 
dependence  forms  the  groundwork  of  society, 
there  is  no  necessity  for  labour  and  its  products 
to  assume  a  fantastic  form  different  from  their 
reality.  They  take  the  shape,  in  the  transactions 
of  society,  of  services  in  kind  and  payments  in 
kind.  Here  the  particular  and  natural  form  of 
labour,  and  not,  as  in  a  society  based  on  produc¬ 
tion  of  commodities,  its  general  abstract  form, 
is  the  immediate  social  form  of  labour.  Compul¬ 
sory  labour  is  just  as  properly  measured  by  time 
as  commodity-producing  labour;  but  every  serf 
knows  that  what  he  expends  in  the  service  of  his 
lord  is  a  definite  quantity  of  his  own  personal 
labour  power.  The  tithe  to  be  rendered  to  the 
priest  is  more  matter  of  fact  than  his  blessing. 
No  matter,  then,  what  we  may  think  of  the 
parts  played  by  the  different  classes  of  people 
themselves  in  this  society,  the  social  relations 
between  individuals  in  the  performance  of  their 
labour  appear  at  all  events  as  their  own  mutual 
personal  relations,  and  are  not  disguised  under 


the  shape  of  social  relations  between  the  prod¬ 
ucts  of  labour. 

For  an  example  of  labour  in  common,  or  di¬ 
rectly  associated  labour,  we  have  no  occasion  to 
go  back  to  that  spontaneously  developed  form 
which  we  find  on  the  threshold  of  the  history  of 
all  civilized  races. 1  We  have  one  close  at  hand  in 
the  patriarchal  industries  of  a  peasant  family 
that  produces  corn,  cattle,  yarn,  linen,  and 
clothing  for  home  use.  These  different  articles 
are,  as  regards  the  family,  so  many  products  of 
its  labour,  but  as  between  themselves,  they  are 
not  commodities.  The  different  kinds  of  labour, 
such  as  tillage,  cattle  tending,  spinning,  weav¬ 
ing,  and  making  clothes,  which  result  in  the 
various  products,  are  in  themselves,  and  such  as 
they  are,  direct  social  functions,  because  func¬ 
tions  of  the  family,  which,  just  as  much  as  a 
society  based  on  the  production  of  commodities, 
possesses  a  spontaneously  developed  system  of 
division  of  labour.  The  distribution  of  the  work 
within  the  family  and  the  regulation  of  the  la¬ 
bour  time  of  the  several  members  depend  as 
well  upon  differences  of  age  and  sex  as  upon 
natural  conditions  varying  with  the  seasons. 
The  labour  power  of  each  individual,  by  its  very 
nature,  operates  in  this  case  merely  as  a  definite 
portion  of  the  whole  labour  power  of  the  family, 
and,  therefore,  the  measure  of  the  expenditure 
of  individual  labour  power  by  its  duration  ap¬ 
pears  here  by  its  very  nature  as  a  social  charac¬ 
ter  of  their  labour. 

Let  us  now  picture  to  ourselves,  by  way  of 
change,  a  community  of  free  individuals,  carry¬ 
ing  on  their  work  with  the  means  of  production 
in  common,  in  which  the  labour  power  of  all  the 
different  individuals  is  consciously  applied  as 
the  combined  labour  power  of  the  community. 
All  the  characteristics  of  Robinson’s  labour  are 
here  repeated,  but,  with  this  difference,  that 
they  are  social  instead  of  individual.  Every¬ 
thing  produced  by  him  was  exclusively  the  re¬ 
sult  of  his  own  personal  labour  and,  therefore, 
simply  an  object  of  use  for  himself.  The  total 
product  of  our  community  is  a  social  product. 

1  "A  ridiculous  presumption  has  latterly  got  abroad  that 
common  property  in  its  primitive  form  is  specifically  a 
Slavonian,  or  even  exclusively  Russian  form.  It  is  the  prim¬ 
itive  form  that  we  can  prove  to  have  existed  amongst 
Romans,  Teutons,  and  Celts,  and  even  to  this  day  we  find 
numerous  examples,  ruins  though  they  be,  in  India.  A 
more  exhaustive  study  of  Asiatic,  and  especially  of  Indian, 
forms  of  common  property,  would  show  how  from  the  dif¬ 
ferent  forms  of  primitive  common  property,  different  forms 
of  ill  dissolution  have  been  developed.  Thus,  for  instance, 
the  various  original  types  of  Roman  and  Teutonic  private 
proptrty  are  deducible  from  different  forms  of  Indian  com¬ 
mon  property/'— Karl  Marx,  Zur  Kntik ,  etc.,  p.  io. 


COMMODITIES 


One  portion  serves  as  fresh  means  of  production 
and  remains  social.  But  another  portion  is  con¬ 
sumed  by  the  members  as  means  of  subsistence. 
A  distribution  of  this  portion  amongst  them  is 
consequently  necessary.  The  mode  of  this  dis¬ 
tribution  will  vary  with  the  productive  organi¬ 
zation  of  the  community  and  the  degree  of  his¬ 
torical  development  attained  by  the  producers. 
We  will  assume,  but  merely  for  the  sake  of  a 
parallel  with  the  production  of  commodities, 
that  the  share  of  each  individual  producer  in  the 
means  of  subsistence  is  determinea  by  his  la¬ 
bour  time.  Labour  time  would,  in  that  case, 
play  a  double  part.  Its  apportionment  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  a  definite  social  plan  maintains  the 
proper  proportion  between  the  different  kinds 
of  work  to  be  done  and  the  various  wants  of  the 
community.  On  the  other  hand,  it  also  serves  as 
a  measure  of  the  portion  of  the  common  labour 
borne  by  each  individual,  and  of  his  share  in  the 
part  of  the  total  product  destined  for  individual 
consumption.  The  social  relations  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  produc'd o,  with  regard  both  to  their  la¬ 
bour  and  to  its  products,  are  in  this  case  per¬ 
fectly  simple  and  intelligible,  and  that  with  re¬ 
gard  not  only  to  production  but  also  to  distribu¬ 
tion. 

The  religious  world  is  but  the  reflex  of  the 
real  world.  And  for  a  society  based  upon  the 
production  of  commodities,  in  which  the  pro¬ 
ducers  in  general  enter  into  social  relations  with 
one  another  by  treating  their  products  as  com¬ 
modities  and  values,  whereby  they  reduce  their 
individual  private  labour  to  the  standard  of  ho¬ 
mogeneous  human  labour— for  such  a  society, 
Christianity  with  its  cultus  of  abstract  man, 
more  especially  in  its  bourgeois  developments, 
Protestantism,  Deism,  etc.,  is  the  most  fitting 
form  of  religion.  In  the  ancient  Asiatic  and  oth¬ 
er  ancient  modes  of  production,  we  find  that  the 
conversion  of  products  into  commodities,  and 
therefore  the  conversion  of  men  into  producers 
of  commodities,  holds  a  subordinate  place, 
which,  however,  increases  in  importance  as  the 
primitive  communities  approach  nearer  and 
nearer  to  their  dissolution.  Trading  nations, 
properly  so-called,  exist  in  the  ancient  world  on¬ 
ly  in  its  interstices,  like  the  gods  of  Epicurus  in 
the  Intermundia,  or  like  Jews  in  the  pores  of 
Polish  society.  Those  ancient  social  organisms 
of  production  are,  as  compared  with  bourgeois 
society,  extremely  simple  and  transparent.  But 
they  are  founded  either  on  the  immature  devel¬ 
opment  of  man  individually,  who  has  not  yet 
severed  the  umbilical  cord  that  unites  him  with 
his  fellow  men  in  a  primitive  tribal  community, 


35 

or  upon  direct  relations  of  subjection.  They  can 
arise  and  exist  only  when  the  development  of 
the  productive  power  of  labour  has  not  risen  be¬ 
yond  a  low  stage,  and  when,  therefore,  the  so¬ 
cial  relations  within  the  sphere  of  material  life, 
between  man  and  man,  and  between  man  and 
Nature,  are  correspondingly  narrow.  This  nar¬ 
rowness  is  reflected  in  the  ancient  worship  of 
Nature  and  in  the  other  elements  of  the  popular 
religions.  The  religious  reflex  of  the  real  world 
can,  in  any  case,  only  then  finally  vanish  when 
the  practical  relations  of  everyday  life  offer  to 
man  none  but  perfectly  intelligible  and  reason¬ 
able  relations  with  regard  to  his  fellow  men  and 
to  nature. 

The  life-process  of  society,  which  is  based  on 
the  process  of  material  production,  does  not 
strip  off  its  mystical  veil  until  it  is  treated  as 
production  by  freely  associated  men,  and  is  con¬ 
sciously  regulated  by  them  in  accordance  with 
a  settled  plan.  This,  however,  demands  for  so¬ 
ciety  a  certain  material  groundwork  or  set  of 
conditions  of  existence  which  in  their  turn  are 
the  spontaneous  product  of  a  long  and  painful 
process  of  development. 

Political  economy  has  indeed  analyzed,  how¬ 
ever  incompletely,1  value  and  its  magnitude, 
and  has  discovered  what  lies  beneath  these 

1  The  insufficiency  of  Ricardo's  analysis  of  the  magni¬ 
tude  of  value,  and  his  analysis  is  by  far  the  best,  will  ap¬ 
pear  from  the  third  and  fourth  books  of  this  work.  As  re¬ 
gards  value  in  general,  it  is  the  weak  point  of  the  classical 
school  of  political  economy  that  it  nowhere,  expressly  and 
with  full  consciousness,  distinguishes  between  labour  as  it 
appears  in  the  value  of  a  product,  and  the  same  labour  as 
it  appears  in  the  use- value  of  that  product.  Of  course,  the 
distinction  is  practically  made,  since  this  school  treats  la¬ 
bour,  at  one  time  under  its  quantitative  aspect,  at  another 
under  its  qua^tative  aspect.  But  it  has  not  the  least  idea 
that  when  the  difference  between  various  kinds  of  labour 
is  treated  as  purely  quantitative,  their  qualitative  unity 
or  equality,  and,  therefore,  their  reduction  to  abstract 
human  labour,  is  implied.  For  instance,  Ricardo  declares 
that  he  agrees  with  Destutt  de  Tracy  in  this  proposition: 
"As  it  is  certain  that  our  physical  and  moral  faculties  are 
alone  our  original  riches,  the  employment  of  those  facul¬ 
ties,  labour  of  some  kind,  is  our  only  original  treasure,  and 
it  is  always  from  this  employment  that  all  those  things  are 
created  which  we  call  riches. ...  It  is  certain,  too,  that  all 
those  things  only  represent  the  labour  which  has  created 
them,  and  if  they  have  a  value,  or  even  two  distinct  val¬ 
ues,  they  can  only  derive  them  from  that  (the  value)  of 
the  labour  from  which  they  emanate."  (Ricardo,  The  Prin - 
ctples  of  Political  Eionomy ,  third  edition,  London,  1821,  p. 
334.)  We  would  here  only  point  out  that  Ricardo  puts  his 
own  more  profound  interpretation  upon  the  words  of  Des¬ 
tutt.  What  the  latter  really  says  is  that  on  the  one  hand 
all  things  which  constitute  wealth  represent  the  labour 
that  creates  them,  but  that  on  the  other  hand  they  acquire 
their  "two  different  values"  (use-value  and  exchange  val¬ 
ue)  from  "the  value  of  labour."  He  thus  falls  into  the  com¬ 
monplace  error  of  the  vulgar  economists,  who  assume  the 


36  CAPITAL 


forms.  But  it  has  never  once  asked  the  question 
why  labour  is  represented  by  the  value  of  its 
product  and  labour  time  by  the  magnitude  of 
that  value.1  These  formulae,  which  bear 
stamped  upon  them  in  unmistakable  letters 
that  they  belong  to  a  state  of  society  in  which 
the  process  of  production  has  the  mastery  over 
man,  instead  of  being  controlled  by  him,  such 
formulae  appear  to  the  bourgeois  intellect  to  be 
as  much  a  self-evident  necessity  imposed  by  na¬ 
ture  as  productive  labour  itself.  Hence,  forms  of 
social  production  that  preceded  the  bourgeois 

value  of  one  commodity  (in  this  case,  labour)  in  order  to 
determine  the  value  of  the  rest.  But  Ricardo  reads  him  as 
if  he  had  said  that  labour  (not  the  value  of  labour)  is  em¬ 
bodied  both  in  use-value  and  exchange  value.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  Ricardo  himself  pays  so  little  attention  to  the  two¬ 
fold  character  of  the  labour  which  has  a  two-fold  embodi¬ 
ment  that  he  devotes  the  whole  of  his  chapter  on  “Value 
and  Riches,  Their  Distinctive  Properties*’  to  a  laborious 
examination  of  the  trivialities  of  a  J.  B.  Say.  And  at  the 
finish  he  is  quite  astonished  to  find  that  Destutt  on  the  one 
hand  agrees  with  him  as  to  labour  being  the  source  of  val¬ 
ue,  and  on  the  other  hand  with  J.  B.  Say  as  to  the  notion 
of  value. 

1  It  is  one  of  the  chief  failings  of  classical  economy  that 
it  has  never  succeeded,  by  means  of  its  analysis  of  com¬ 
modities,  and,  in  particular,  of  their  value,  in  discovering 
that  form  under  which  value  becomes  exchange  value. 
Even  Adam  Smith  and  Ricardo,  the  best  representatives 
of  the  school,  treat  the  form  of  value  as  a  thing  of  no  im¬ 
portance,  as  having  no  connection  with  the  inherent  na¬ 
ture  of  commodities.  The  reason  for  this  is  not  solely  be¬ 
cause  their  attention  is  entirely  absorbed  in  the  analysis 
of  the  magnitude  of  value.  It  lies  deeper.  The  value  form 
of  the  products  of  labour  is  not  only  the  most  abstract,  but 
is  also  the  most  universal  form,  taken  by  the  product  in 
bourgeois  production,  and  stamps  that  production  as  a 
particular  species  of  social  production,  and  thereby  gives 
it  its  special  historical  character.  If  then  we  treat  this  mode 
of  production  as  one  eternally  fixed  by  nature  for  every  state 
of  society,  we  necessarily  overlook  that  which  is  the  differ- 
tntia  specific a  of  the  value  form,  and  consequently  of  the 
commodity  form,  and  of  its  further  developments,  money 
form,  capital  form,  etc.  We  consequently  find  that  econo¬ 
mists,  who  are  thoroughly  agreed  as  to  labour  time  being 
the  measure  of  the  magnitude  of  value,  have  the  most 
strange  and  contradictory  ideas  of  money,  the  perfected 
form  of  the  general  equivalent.  This  is  seen  in  a  striking 
manner  when  they  treat  of  banking,  where  the  common¬ 
place  definitions  of  money  will  no  longer  hold  water.  This 
led  to  the  rise  of  a  restored  mercantile  system  (Ganilh, 
etc.),  which  sees  in  value  nothing  but  a  social  form,  or 
rather  the  unsubstantial  ghost  of  that  form.  Once  for  all, 
I  may  here  state  that,  by  classical  political  economy,  I  un¬ 
derstand  that  economy  which,  since  the  time  of  William 
Petty,  has  investigated  the  real  relations  of  production  in 
bourgeois  society,  in  contradistinction  to  vulgar  economy 
which  deals  with  appearances  only,  ruminates  without 
ceasing  on  the  materials  long  since  provided  by  scientific 
economy,  and  there  seeks  plausible  explanations  of  the 
most  obtrusive  phenomena  for  bourgeois  daily  use,  but  for 
the  rest,  confines  itself  to  systematizing  in  a  pedantic  way, 
and  proclaiming  for  everlasting  truths,  the  trite  ideas  held 
by  the  self-complacent  bourgeoisie  with  regard  to  their 
own  world,  to  them  the  best  of  all  possible  worlds. 


form  are  treated  by  the  bourgeoisie  in  much  the 
same  way  as  the  Fathers  of  the  Church  treated 
pre-Christian  religions.1 

To  what  extent  some  economists  are  misled 
by  the  fetishism  inherent  in  commodities,  or  by 
the  objective  appearance  of  the  social  charac¬ 
teristics  of  labour,  is  shown,  amongst  other 
ways,  by  the  dull  and  tedious  quarrel  over  the 
part  played  by  Nature  in  the  formation  of  ex¬ 
change  value.  Since  exchange  value  is  a  definite 
social  manner  of  expressing  the  amount  of  la¬ 
bour  bestowed  upon  an  object.  Nature  has  no 
more  to  do  with  it  than  it  has  in  fixing  the  course 
or  exchange. 

1  'The  economists  have  a  singular  manner  of  proceeding. 
There  are  for  them  only  two  kinds  of  institutions,  those 
of  art  and  those  of  nature.  Feudal  institutions  are  arti¬ 
ficial  institutions,  those  of  the  bourgeoisie  are  natural  in¬ 
stitutions.  In  this  they  resemble  the  theologians,  who  also 
establish  two  kinds  of  religion.  Every  religion  but  their 
own  is  an  invention  of  men,  while  their  own  religion  is  an 
emanation  from  God. . . .  Thus  there  has  been  history,  but 
there  is  no  longer  any."  (Karl  Marx,  Misire  de  la  Philoso¬ 
phies  RJponse  h  la  Philosophic  de  la  Mi  si  re  par  M.  Proud¬ 
hons  1847,  p.  1 13.)  Truly  comical  is  M.  Bastiat,  who  im¬ 
agines  that  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Romans  lived  by  plun¬ 
der  alone.  But  when  people  plunder  for  centuries,  there 
must  always  be  something  at  hand  for  them  to  seize;  the 
objects  of  plunder  must  be  continually  reproduced.  It 
would  thus  appear  that  even  Greeks  and  Romans  had 
some  process  of  production,  consequently,  an  economy, 
which  just  as  much  constituted  the  material  basis  of  their 
world  as  bourgeois  economy  constitutes  that  of  our  modern 
world.  Or  perhaps  Bastiat  means  that  a  mode  of  produc¬ 
tion  based  on  slavery  is  based  on  a  system  of  plunder.  In 
that  case,  he  treadson  dangerous  ground.  If  a  giant  thinker 
like  Aristotle  erred  in  his  appreciation  of  slave  labour,  why 
should  a  dwarf  economist  like  Bastiat  be  right  in  his  ap¬ 
preciation  of  wage  labour?— I  seize  this  opportunity  of 
shortly  answering  an  objection  taken  by  a  German  paper 
in  America  to  my  work,  Zur  Kritik  der  Politischen  Oekono- 
mie s  1859.  In  the  estimation  of  that  paper,  my  view  that 
each  special  mode  of  production  and  the  social  relations 
corresponding  to  it,  in  short,  that  the  economic  structure 
of  society  is  the  real  basis  on  which  the  juridical  and  polit¬ 
ical  superstructure  is  raised,  and  to  which  definite  social 
forms  of  thought  correspond;  that  the  mode  of  production 
determines  the  character  of  the  social,  political,  and  in¬ 
tellectual  life  generally,  all  this  is  very  true  for  our  own 
times,  in  which  material  interests  preponderate,  but  not 
for  the  Middle  Age9,  in  which  Catholicism*,  nor  for  Athens 
and  Rome,  where  politics,  reigned  supreme.  In  the  first 
place,  it  strikes  one  as  an  odd  thing  for  anyone  to  suppose 
that  these  well-worn  phrases  about  the  If  iddle  Ages  and 
the  ancient  world  are  unknown  to  anyone  klse.  This  much, 
however,  is  clear— that  the  Middle  Ages  dbuld  not  live  on 
Catholicism,  nor  the  ancient  world  on  politics.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  it  is  the  mode  in  which  they  gained  livelihood  that 
explains  why  here  politics,  and  there  Catholicism,  played 
the  chief  part.  For  the  rest,  it  requires  but  a  slight  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  the  history  of  the  Roman  republic,  for 
example,  to  be  aware  that  its  secret  history  is  the  history 
of  its  landed  property.  On  the  other  hand,  Don  Quixote 
long  ago  paid  the  penalty  for  wrongly  imagining  that 
knigh*--errantry  was  compatible  with  all  economical  forms 
of  society. 


EXCHANGE 


The  mode  of  production  in  which  the  product 
takes  the  form  of  a  commodity,  or  is  produced 
directly  for  exchange,  is  the  most  general  and 
most  embryonic  form  of  bourgeois  production. 
It,  therefore,  makes  its  appearance  at  an  early 
date  in  history,  though  not  in  the  same  predom¬ 
inating  and  characteristic  manner  as  nowadays. 
Hence,  its  fetishistic  character  is  comparatively 
easy  to  discern.  But  when  we  come  to  more  con¬ 
crete  forms,  even  this  appearance  of  simplicity 
vanishes.  Whence  arose  the  illusions  of  the  mon¬ 
etary  system  ?  To  it  gold  and  silver,  when  serv¬ 
ing  as  money,  did  not  represent  a  social  relation 
between  producers,  but  were  natural  objects 
with  strange  social  properties.  And  modern 
economy,  which  looks  down  with  such  disdain 
on  the  monetary  system,  does  not  its  supersti¬ 
tion  come  out  as  clear  as  noonday,  whenever  it 
treats  of  capital  ?  How  long  is  it  since  economy 
discarded  the  physiocratic  illusion  that  rents 
grow  out  of  the  soil  and  not  out  of  society? 

But  not  to  anticipate,  we  will  content  our¬ 
selves  with  yrt  mother  example  relating  to  the 
commodity  form.  Could  commodities  them¬ 
selves  speak,  they  would  say:  “Our  use- value 
may  be  a  thing  that  interests  men.  It  is  no  part 
of  us  as  objects.  What,  however,  does  belong  to 
us  as  objects  is  our  value.  Our  natural  inter¬ 
course  as  commodities  proves  it.  In  the  eyes  of 
each  other  we  are  nothing  but  exchange  values.” 
Now  listen  how  those  commodities  speak 
through  the  mouth  of  the  economist.  “Value — 
(i.e.,  exchange  value)  is  a  property  of  things; 
riches—  (i.e.,  use-value)  of  man.  Value,  in  this 
sense,  necessarily  implies  exchanges;  riches  do 
not.”1  “Riches  (use-value)  are  the  attribute  of 
men;  value  is  the  attribute  of  commodities.  A 
man  or  a  community  is  rich;  a  pearl  or  a  dia¬ 
mond  is  valuable  ...  A  pearl  or  a  diamond  is 
valuable”  as  a  pearl  or  diamond.2  So  far  no 
chemist  has  ever  discovered  exchange  value  ei¬ 
ther  in  a  pearl  or  a  diamond.  The  economical 
discoverers  of  this  chemical  element,  who,  by- 
the-bye,  lay  special  claim  to  critical  acumen, 
find,  however,  that  the  use-value  of  objects  be¬ 
longs  to  them  independently  of  their  material 
properties,  while  their  value,  on  the  other  hand, 
forms  a  part  of  them  as  objects.  What  confirms 
them  in  this  view  is  the  peculiar  circumstance 
that  the  use-value  of  objects  is  realized  without 
exchange,  by  means  of  a  direct  relation  between 
the  objects  and  man,  while,  on  the  other  hand, 

1  Observations  on  certain  verbal  disputes  in  Political  Econ¬ 
omy ,  particularly  relating  to  value  and  to  demand  and  supply , 
London,  1821,  p.  16. 

*  S.  Bailey,  op.  cit.9  p.  165. 


37 

their  value  is  realized  only  by  exchange,  that  is, 
by  means  of  a  social  process.  Who  fails  here  to 
call  to  mind  our  good  friend,  Dogberry,  who  in¬ 
forms  neighbour  Seacoal  that,  “To  be  a  well- 
favoured  man  is  the  gift  of  fortune;  but  reading 
and  writing  comes  by  nature.”1 


CHAPTER  II.  EXCHANGE 

It  is  plain  that  commodities  cannot  go  to  mar¬ 
ket  and  make  exchanges  of  their  own  account. 
We  must,  therefore,  have  recourse  to  their 
guardians,  who  are  also  their  owners.  Commod¬ 
ities  are  things,  and,  therefore,  without  power 
of  resistance  against  man.  If  they  are  wanting 
in  docility  he  can  use  force;  in  other  words,  he 
can  take  possession  of  them.4 1  n  order  that  these 
objects  may  enter  into  relation  with  each  other 
as  commodities,  their  guardians  must  place 
themselves  in  relation  to  one  another,  as  per¬ 
sons  whose  will  resides  in  those  objects,  and 
must  behave  in  such  a  way  that  each  does  not 
appropriate  the  commodity  of  the  other,  and 
part  with  his  own,  except  by  means  of  an  act 
done  by  mutual  consent.  They  must,  therefore, 
mutually  recognize  in  each  other  the  rights  of 
private  proprietors.  This  juridical  relation, 
which  thus  expresses  itself  in  a  contract, 
whether  such  contract  be  part  of  a  developed 
legal  system  or  not,  is  a  relation  between  two 
wills,  and  is  but  the  reflex  of  the  real  economical 
relation  between  the  two.  It  is  this  economical 
relation  that  determines  the  subject  matter 
comprised  in  each  such  juridical  act.6  The  per- 

3  The  author  of  Observations  and  S.  Bailey  accuse  Ricar¬ 
do  of  converting  exchange  value  from  something  relative 
into  something  absolute.  The  opposite  is  the  fact.  He  has 
explained  the  apparent  relation  between  objects,  such  as 
diamonds  and  pearls,  in  which  relation  they  appear  as  ex¬ 
change  values,  and  disclosed  the  true  relation  hidden  be¬ 
hind  the  appearances,  namely,  their  relation  to  each  other 
as  mere  expressions  of  human  labour.  If  the  followers  of 
Ricardo  answer  Bailey  somewhat  rudely,  and  by  no  means 
convincingly,  the  reason  is  to  be  sought  in  this,  that  they 
were  unable  to  find  in  Ricardo’s  own  works  any  key  to  the 
hidden  relations  existing  between  value  and  its  form,  ex¬ 
change  value. 

4  In  the  twelfth  century,  so  renowned  for  its  piety,  they 
included  amongst  commodities  some  very  delicate  things. 
Thus,  a  French  poet  of  the  period  enumerates  amongst  the 
goods  to  be  found  in  the  market  of  Landit,  not  only  cloth¬ 
ing,  shoes,  leather,  agricultural  implements,  etc.,  but  also 
“ 'femmes  folles  de  leur  corps”  [“women  for  sale”]. 

6  Proudhon  begins  by  taking  his  ideal  of  justice,  of justice 
fternelle  [eternal  justice],  from  the  juridical  relations  that 
correspond  to  the  production  of  commodities:  thereby,  it 
may  be  noted,  he  proves,  to  the  consolation  of  all  good 
citizens,  that  the  production  of  commodities  is  a  form  of 
production  as  everlasting  as  justice.  Then  he  turns  around 


CAPITAL 


38 

sons  exist  for  one  another  merely  as  representa¬ 
tives  of,  and,  therefore,  as  owners  of,  commodi¬ 
ties.  In  the  course  of  our  investigation  we  shall 
find,  in  general,  that  the  characters  who  appear 
on  the  economic  stage  are  but  the  personifica¬ 
tions  of  the  economical  relations  that  exist  be¬ 
tween  them. 

What  chiefly  distinguishes  a  commodity 
from  its  owner  is  the  fact  that  it  looks  upon 
every  other  commodity  as  but  the  form  of  ap¬ 
pearance  of  its  own  value.  A  born  leveller  and 
a  cynic,  it  is  always  ready  to  exchange  not  only 
soul,  but  body,  with  any  and  every  other  com¬ 
modity,  be  the  same  more  repulsive  than  Mari- 
tornes  herself.  The  owner  makes  up  for  this  lack 
in  the  commodity  of  a  sense  of  the  concrete  by 
his  own  five  and  more  senses.  His  commodity 
possesses  for  himself  no  immediate  use-value. 
Otherwise,  he  would  not  bring  it  to  the  market. 
It  has  use-value  for  others;  but  for  himself  its 
only  direct  use-value  is  that  of  being  a  deposi¬ 
tory  of  exchange  value,  and,  consequently,  a 
means  of  exchange.1  Therefore,  he  makes  up  his 
mind  to  part  with  it  for  commodities  whose  val¬ 
ue  in  use  is  of  service  to  him.  All  commodities 
are  non-use- values  for  their  owners,  and  use- 
values  for  their  non-owners.  Consequently, they 
must  all  change  hands.  But  this  change  of  hands 
is  what  constitutes  their  exchange,  and  the  lat¬ 
ter  puts  them  in  relation  with  each  other  as  val¬ 
ues,  and  realizes  them  as  values.  Hence,  com¬ 
modities  must  be  realized  as  values  before  they 
can  be  realized  as  use- values. 

On  the  other  hand,  they  mu$t  show  that  they 
are  use-values  before  they  can  be  realized  as  val¬ 
ues.  For  the  labour  spent  upon  them  counts  ef- 

and  seeks  to  reform  the  actual  production  of  commodities, 
and  the  actual  legal  system  corresponding  thereto,  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  this  ideal.  What  opinion  should  we  have  of 
a  chemist  who,  instead  of  studying  the  actual  laws  of  the 
molecular  changes  in  the  composition  and  decomposition 
of  matter,  and  on  that  foundation  solving  definite  prob¬ 
lems,  claimed  to  regulate  the  composition  and  decomposi¬ 
tion  of  matter  by  means  of  the  “eternal  ideas,’1  of  natural - 
itS  [naturality]  and  affiniti  [affinity]?  Do  we  really  know 
any  more  about  “usury,”  when  we  say  it  contradicts  jus¬ 
tice  iternelle  t  iquiti  iternelle  [eternal  equity],  mutuahti  iter- 
nelle  [eternal  mutuality],  and  other  virttSs  iternelle s  [eter¬ 
nal  verities]  than  the  Fathers  of  the  Church  did  when  they 
said  it  was  incompatible  withj yr&ce  iternelle  [eternal  grace], 
foi  iternelle  [eternal  faith],  and  la  volonti  iternelle  de  Dieu 
[the  eternal  will  of  God]? 

1  “For  twofold  is  the  use  of  every  object; . . .  The  one  is 
peculiar  to  the  object  as  such,  the  other  is  not,  as  a  sandal 
which  may  be  worn,  and  is  also  exchangeable.  Both  are 
uses  of  the  sandal,  for  even  he  who  exchanges  the  sandal 
for  the  money  or  food  he  is  in  want  of  makes  use  of  the 
sandal  as  a  sandal.  But  not  in  its  natural  way.  For  it  has 
not  been  made  for  the  sake  of  being  exchanged.”— Aris¬ 
totle,  Politics ,  1, 9. 


fectively  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  spent  in  a  form 
that  is  useful  for  others.  Whether  that  labour 
is  useful  for  others,  and  its  product  consequent¬ 
ly  capable  of  satisfying  the  wants  of  others,  can 
be  proved  only  by  the  act  of  exchange. 

Every  owner  of  a  commodity  wishes  to  part 
with  it  in  exchange  only  for  those  commodities 
whose  use-value  satisfies  some  want  of  his. 
Looked  at  in  this  way,  exchange  is  for  him 
simply  a  private  transaction.  On  the  other  hand, 
he  desires  to  realize  the  value  of  his  commodity, 
to  convert  i  t  into  any  other  sui  table  commodi  ty 
of  equal  value,  irrespective  of  whether  his  own 
commodity  has  or  has  not  any  use-value  for  the 
owner  of  the  other.  From  this  point  of  view, 
exchange  is  for  him  a  social  transaction  of  a  gen¬ 
eral  character.  But  one  and  the  same  set  of 
transactions  cannot  be  simultaneously  for  all 
owners  of  commodities  both  exclusively  private 
and  exclusively  social  and  general. 

Let  us  look  at  the  matter  a  li  ttle  closer.  To  the 
owner  of  a  commodity,  every  other  commodity 
is,  in  regard  to  his  own,  a  particular  equivalent, 
and  consequently  his  own  commodity  is  the 
universal  equivalent  for  all  theothers.  But  si  nee 
this  applies  to  every  owner,  there  is,  in  fact,  no 
commodity  acting  as  universal  equivalent,  and 
the  relative  value  of  commodities  possesses  no 
general  form  under  which  they  can  be  equated 
as  values  and  have  the  magni  tudp  of  their  values 
compared.  So  far,  therefore,  they  do  not  con¬ 
front  each  other  as  commodities,  but  only  as 
products  or  use-values.  In  their  difficulties  our 
commodity  owners  think  like  Faust:  ImAnfang 
war  die  That .2  They,  therefore,  acted  and  trans¬ 
acted  before  they  thought,  instinctively  they 
conform  to  the  laws  imposed  by  the  nature  of 
commodities.  They  cannot  bring  their  commod¬ 
ities  into  relation  as  values,  and  therefore  as 
commodities,  except  by  comparing  them  with 
some  one  other  commodity  as  the  universal 
equivalent.  That  we  saw  from  the  analysis  of  a 
commodity.  But  a  particular  commodity  can¬ 
not  become  the  universal  equivalent  except  by 
a  social  act.  The  social  action,  therefore,  of  all 
other  commodities  sets  apart  the  particular 
commodity  in  which  they  all  represent  their 
values.  Thereby,  the  bodily  form  of  this  com¬ 
modity  becomes  the  form  of  the  socially  recog¬ 
nized  universal  equivalent.  To  be  the  universal 
equivalent  becomes,  by  this  social  process,  the 
speciflcfunctionofthecommoditythusexcluded 
by  the  rest.  Thus  it  becomes — money.  I  Hi  unum 
consilium  habent  et  virtutem  et  potestatem  suam 
bestia  tradunt .  Et  ne  quis  possit  emere  aut  ven- 
9  “In  the  beginning  was  the  deed.’* 


EXCHANGE 


dere ,  nisi  qui  habet  characterem  aut  nomen  bestuet 
autnumerum  nominis  ej us.1 

Money  is  a  crystal  formed  of  necessity  in  the 
course  of  the  exchanges,  whereby  different  prod¬ 
ucts  of  labour  are  practically  equated  to  one 
another  and  thus  by  practice  converted  into 
commodities.  The  historical  progress  and  exten¬ 
sion  of  exchanges  develops  the  contrast,  latent 
in  commodities,  between  use-value  and  value. 
The  necessity  for  giving  an  external  expression 
to  this  contrast  for  the  purposes  of  commercial 
intercourse  urges  on  the  establishment  of  an 
independent  form  of  value,  and  finds  no  rest  un¬ 
til  it  is  once  for  all  satisfied  by  the  differentia¬ 
tion  of  commodities  into  commodities  and 
money.  At  the  same  rate,  then,  as  the  conver¬ 
sion  of  products  into  commodities  is  being  ac¬ 
complished,  so  also  is  the  conversion  of  one 
special  commodity  into  money.2 

The  direct  barter  of  products  attains  the  ele¬ 
mentary  form  of  the  relative  expression  of  value 
in  one  respect,  but  not  in  another.  That  form  is 
x  Commodity  a  j  Commodity  B.  The  form 
of  direct  barter  is  x  use- value.,  I  —  v  use  value  B.z 
The  articles  A  and  B  in  this  case  are  not  as  yet 
commodities,  but  become  so  only  by  the  act  of 
barter.  The  first  step  made  by  an  object  of  util¬ 
ity  towards  acquiring  exchange  value  is  when  it 
forms  a  non-use- value  for  its  owner,  and  that 
happens  when  it  forms  a  superfluous  portion  of 
some  article  required  for  his  immediate  wants. 
Objects  in  themselves  are  external  to  man,  and 
consequently  alienable  by  him.  In  order  that 
this  alienation  may  be  reciprocal,  it  is  only  nec¬ 
essary  for  men,  by  a  tacit  understanding,  to 
treat  each  other  as  private  owners  of  those  al¬ 
ienable  objects,  and  by  implication  as  independ¬ 
ent  individuals.  But  such  a  state  of  reciprocal 
independence  has  no  existence  in  a  primitive  so¬ 
ciety  based  on  property  in  common,  whether 
such  a  society  takes  the  form  of  a  patriarchal 

1  “These  have  one  mind,  and  shall  give  their  power  and 
strength  unto  the  beast.  And  that  no  man  might  buy  or 
sell,  save  he  that  had  the  mark,  or  the  name  of  the  beast, 
or  the  number  of  his  name.”—  Revelation,  17.  3,  and  ij. 

1  From  this  we  may  form  an  estimate  of  the  shrewdness 
of  the  petit-bourgeois  socialism,  which,  while  perpetuating 
the  production  of  commodities,  aims  at  abolishing  the  “an¬ 
tagonism”  between  money  and  commodities,  and  conse¬ 
quently,  since  money  exists  only  by  virtue  of  this  antago¬ 
nism,  at  abolishing  money  itself.  We  might  just  as  well  try 
to  retain  Catholicism  without  the  Pope.  For  more  on  this 
point  see  my  work,  Zur  Kritik ,  etc.,  p.  61  ff. 

1  So  long  as,  instead  of  two  distinct  use-values  being  ex¬ 
changed,  a  chaotic  mass  of  articles  are  offered  as  the  equiv¬ 
alent  of  a  single  article,  which  is  often  the  case  with  sav¬ 
ages,  even  the  direct  barter  of  products  is  in  its  first  in¬ 
fancy. 


39 

family,  an  ancient  Indian  community,  or  a  Peru¬ 
vian  Inca  State.  The  exchange  of  commodities, 
therefore,  first  begins  on  the  boundaries  of  such 
communities,  at  their  points  of  contact  with 
other  similar  communities,  or  with  members  of 
the  latter.  So  soon,  however,  as  products  once 
become  commodities  in  the  external  relations  of 
a  community,  they  also,  by  reaction,  become  so 
in  its  internal  intercourse.  The  proportions  in 
which  they  are  exchangeable  are  at  first  quite  a 
matter  of  chance.  What  makes  them  exchange¬ 
able  is  the  mutual  desire  of  their  owners  to  al¬ 
ienate  them.  Meantime  the  need  for  foreign  ob¬ 
jects  of  utility  gradually  establishes  itself.  The 
constant  repetition  of  exchange  makes  it  a  nor¬ 
mal  social  act.  In  the  course  of  time,  therefore, 
some  portion  at  least  of  the  products  of  labour 
must  be  produced  with  a  special  view  to  ex¬ 
change.  From  that  moment  the  distinction  be¬ 
comes  firmly  established  between  the  utility  of 
an  object  for  the  purposes  of  consumption,  and 
its  utility  for  the  purposes  of  exchange.  Its  use- 
value  becomes  distinguished  from  its  exchange 
value.  On  the  other  hand,  the  quantitative  pro¬ 
portion  in  which  the  articles  are  exchangeable 
becomes  dependent  on  their  production  itself. 
Custom  stamps  them  as  values  with  definite 
magnitudes. 

In  the  direct  barter  of  products  each  com¬ 
modity  is  directly  a  means  of  exchange  to  its 
owner,  and  to  all  other  persons  an  equivalent, 
but  that  only  in  so  far  as  it  has  use-value  for 
them.  At  this  stage,  therefore,  the  articles  ex¬ 
changed  do  not  acquire  a  value  form  independ¬ 
ent  of  their  own  use-value,orof  the  individual 
needs  of  the  exchangers.  The  necessity  for  a  val¬ 
ue  form  grows  with  the  increasing  number  and 
variety  of  the  commodities  exchanged.  The 
problem  and  the  means  of  solution  arise  simul¬ 
taneously.  Commodity  owners  never  equate 
their  own  commodities  to  those  of  others  and 
exchange  them  on  a  large  scale,  without  differ¬ 
ent  kinds  of  commodities  belonging  to  different 
owners  being  exchangeable  for,  and  equated  as 
values  to,  one  and  the  same  special  article.  Such 
last-mentioned  article,  by  becoming  the  equiva¬ 
lent  of  various  other  commodities,  acquires  at 
once,  though  within  narrow  limits,  the  character 
of  a  general  social  equivalent.  This  character 
comes  and  goes  with  the  momentary  social  acts 
that  called  it  into  life.  In  turns  and  transiently 
it  attaches  itself  first  to  this  and  then  to  that 
commodity.  But  with  the  development  of  ex¬ 
change  it  fixes  itself  firmly  and  exclusively  to 
particular  sorts  of  commodities,  and  becomes 
crystallized  by  assuming  the  money  form.  The 


40  CAPITAL 


particular  kind  of  commodity  to  which  it  sticks 
is  at  first  a  matter  of  accident.  Nevertheless, 
there  are  two  circumstances  whose  influence  is 
decisive.  The  money  form  attaches  itself  either 
to  the  most  important  articles  of  exchange  from 
outside,  and  these  in  fact  are  primitive  and  nat¬ 
ural  forms  in  which  the  exchange  value  of  home 
products  finds  expression;  or  else  it  attaches  it¬ 
self  to  the  object  of  utility  that  forms,  like  cat¬ 
tle,  the  chief  portion  of  indigenous  alienable 
wealth.  Nomad  races  are  the  first  to  develop  the 
money  form,  because  all  their  worldly  goods 
consist  of  moveable  objects  and  are  therefore 
directly  alienable;  and  because  their  mode  of 
life,  by  continually  bringing  them  into  contact 
with  foreign  communities,  solicits  the  exchange 
of  products.  Man  has  often  made  man  himself, 
under  the  form  of  slaves,  serve  as  the  primitive 
material  of  money,  but  has  never  used  land  for 
that  purpose.  Such  an  idea  could  only  spring  up 
in  a  bourgeois  society  already  well  developed. 
It  dates  from  the  last  third  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  and  the  first  attempt  to  put  it  in  prac¬ 
tice  on  a  national  scale  was  made  a  century 
afterwards,  during  the  French  bourgeois 
revolution. 

In  proportion  as  exchange  bursts  its  local 
bonds,  and  the  value  of  commodities  more  and 
more  expands  into  an  embodiment  of  human  la¬ 
bour  in  the  abstract,  in  the  same  proportion  the 
character  of  money  attaches  itself  to  commodi¬ 
ties  that  are  by  nature  fitted  to  perform  the  so¬ 
cial  function  of  a  universal  equivalent.  Thdse 
commodities  are  the  precious  metals. 

The  truth  of  the  proposition  that,  “although 
gold  and  silver  are  not  by  nature  money,  money 
is  by  nature  gold  and  silver,”1  is  shown  by  the 
fitness  of  the  physical  properties  of  these  metals 
for  the  functions  of  money.2  Up  to  this  point, 
however,  we  are  acquainted  only  with  one  func¬ 
tion  of  money,  namely,  to  serve  as  the  form  of 
manifestation  of  the  value  of  commodities,  or 
as  the  material  in  which  the  magnitudes  of  their 
values  are  socially  expressed.  An  adequate  form 
of  manifestation  of  value,  a  fit  embodiment  of 
abstract,  undifferentiated,  and,  therefore,  equal 
human  labour,  that  material  alone  can  be  whose 
every  sample  exhibits  the  same  uniform  quali¬ 
ties.  On  the  other  hand,  since  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  magnitudes  of  value  is  purely  quan- 

1  Karl  Marx,  op,  at .,  p.  135.  “/  metalh  . . .  naturalmente 
moneta ”  ("Metal  is. . .  natural  money”]—  (Galiani, Della 
moneta  in  Custodi's  collection)  op,  cit,,  Vol.  III. 

1  For  further  details  on  this  subject  see,  in  my  work  cited 
above,  the  chapter  on  "The  Precious  Metals." 


titative,  the  money  commodity  must  be  sus¬ 
ceptible  of  merely  quantitative  differences, 
must  therefore  be  divisible  at  will,  and  equally 
capable  of  being  reunited.  Gold  and  silver 
possess  these  properties  by  nature. 

The  use-value  of  the  money  commodity  be¬ 
comes  twofold.  In  addition  to  its  special  use- 
value  as  a  commodity  (gold,  for  instance,  serv¬ 
ing  to  stop  teeth,  to  form  the  raw  material  of 
articles  of  luxury,  etc.),  it  acquires  a  formal  use- 
value,  originating  in  its  specific  social  function. 

Since  all  commodities  are  merely  particular 
equivalents  of  money,  the  latter  being  their  uni¬ 
versal  equivalent,  they,  with  regard  to  the  lat¬ 
ter  as  the  universal  commodity,  play  the  parts 
of  particular  commodities.3 

We  have  seen  that  the  money  form  is  but  the 
reflex,  thrown  upon  one  single  commodity,  of 
the  value  relations  between  all  the  rest.  That 
money  is  a  commodity4  is  therefore  a  new  dis¬ 
covery  only  for  those  who,  when  they  analyse 
it,  start  from  its  fully  developed  shape.  The  act 
of  exchange  gives  to  the  commodity  converted 
into  money,  not  its  value,  but  its  specific  value 
form.  By  confounding  these  two  distinct  things 
some  writers  have  been  led  to  hold  that  the  v  al- 
ue  of  gold  and  silver  is  imaginary.5  The  fact  that 
money  can,  in  certain  functions,  be  replaced  by 

•"Money  19  the  universal  merchandise.”— Verri,  op, 
cit.,  p.  16. 

4  "Silver  and  gold  themselves  (which  we  may  call  by  the 
general  name  of  bullion),  are  . . .  commodities  . . .  rising 
and)  falling  in  . . .  value.  . .  .  Bullion,  then,  may  be  reck¬ 
oned  to  be  of  higher  value  where  the  smaller  weight  will 
purchase  the  greater  quantity  of  the  product  or  manufac¬ 
ture  of  the  country,”  etc.  (A  Discourse  of  the  General  Notions 
of  Money ,  Trade ,  and  Exchange ,  as  they  stand  m  relations 
to  each  other.  By  a  Merchant.  London,  1695,  p.  7).  "Silver 
and  gold,  coined  or  uncoined,  though  they  are  used  for  a 
measure  of  all  other  things,  are  no  les9  a  commodity  than 
wine,  oil,  tobacco,  cloth,  or  stuffs.”  {A  Discourse  concern¬ 
ing  Trade ,  and  that  in  particular  of  the  East  Indies,  London 
1689,  p.  2.)  "The  stock  and  riches  of  the  kingdom  cannot 
properly  be  confined  to  money,  nor  ought  gold  and  silver 
to  be  excluded  from  being  merchandise.”  (A  Treatise  con¬ 
cerning  the  East  India  Trade  being  a  most  profitable  Trade , 
London,  1680,  reprint  1696,  p.  4.) 

3  "Gold  and  silver  have  value  as  metals  btfore  they  come 
to  be  money.”  (Galiani,  op.  at,)  Locke  says,  "The  univer¬ 
sal  consent  of  mankind  gave  to  silver,  ot|  account  of  its 
qualities  which  made  it  suitable  for  money,  an  imaginary 
value.”  Law,  on  the  other  hand,  "How  coifld  different  na¬ 
tions  give  an  imaginary  value  to  any  sinoe  thing  ...  or 
how  could  this  imaginary  value  have  maintained  itself?” 
But  the  following  shows  how  little  he  himtelf  understood 
about  the  matter:  "Silver  was  exchanged  10  proportion  to 
the  value  in  use  it  possessed,  consequently,  in  proportion 
to  its  real  value.  By  its  adoption  as  money  it  received  an 
additional  value  (une  oaleur  additionelle). ' '  (jean  Law,  Con - 
sidirations  sur  le  numiraire  et  le  commerce ,  m  E.  Daire’s 
editor  of  Economistes  Financiers  du  XVIII  stick,  p.  470.) 


EXCHANGE  41 


mere  symbols  of  itself,  gave  rise  to  that  other 
mistaken  notion,  that  it  is  itself  a  mere  symbol. 
Nevertheless,  under  this  error  lurked  a  present¬ 
iment  that  the  money  form  of  an  object  is  not 
an  inseparable  part  of  that  object,  but  is  simply 
the  form  under  which  certain  social  relations 
manifest  themselves.  In  this  sense  every  com¬ 
modity  is  a  symbol,  since,  in  so  far  as  it  is  value, 
it  is  only  the  material  envelope  of  the  human 
labour  spent  upon  it.1  But  if  it  be  declared  that 
the  social  characters  assumed  by  objects,  or  the 
material  forms  assumed  by  the  social  qualities 
of  labour  under  the  regime  of  a  definite  mode  of 
production,  are  mere  symbols,  it  is  in  the  same 
breath  also  declared  that  these  characteristics 
are  arbitrary  fictions  sanctioned  by  the  so-called 
universal  consent  of  mankind.  This  suited  the 
mode  of  explanation  in  favour  during  the  eight¬ 
eenth  century.  Unable  to  account  for  the  origin 
of  the  puzzling  forms  assumed  by  social  relations 
between  man  and  man,  people  sought  to  denude 
them  of  their  strange  appearance  by  ascribing 
to  them  a  conventional  origin. 

It  has  already  been  remarked  above  that  the 
equivalent  form  of  a  commodity  does  not  imply 

1  “Money  is  the  sign  of  commodities.1*  (V.  de  Forbon- 
nais,  Kliments  de  Commerce ,  new  edition,  Leyde,  1776,  Vol. 
II,  p.  143.)  “As  the  sign,  it  is  attracted  by  commodities.” 
(, Ibid.,  p.  155.)  “Money  is  a  sign  of  a  thing  and  stands  for 
it."  (Montesquieu,  The  Spirit  of  Law,  Bk.  xxii,  ch.  2.) 
"Money  is  not  merely  a  sign,  since  it  is  itself  wealth;  it 
does  not  represent  all  values,  but  is  equivalent  to  them." 
(Le  Trosne,  op.  cit.,  p.  910.)  “The  notion  of  value  con¬ 
templates  the  valuable  article  as  a  mere  symbol;  the 
article  counts  not  for  what  it  is,  but  for  what  it  is  worth." 
(Hegel,  op .  cit.,  add.  to  par.  63.)  Lawyers  started  long 
before  economists  the  idea  that  money  is  a  mere  symbol, 
and  that  the  value  of  the  precious  metals  is  purely  imag¬ 
inary.  This  they  did  in  the  sycophantic  service  of  the 
crowned  heads,  supporting  the  right  of  the  latter  to  debase 
the  coinage,  during  the  whole  of  the  Middle  Ages,  by  the 
traditions  of  the  Roman  Empire  and  the  conceptions  of 
money  to  be  found  in  the  Pandects .  “Qu’  aucun  puisse  ni 
doive  faire  doute,”  say9  an  apt  scholar  of  thcir9,  Philip  of 
Valois,  in  a  decree  of  1346,  “que  k  nous  et  k  notre  majestd 
royale  n’  appartiennent  seulement . . .  le  mestier,  le  fait, 
fttat,  la  provision  et  toute  l’ordonnance  des  monnaies,  de 
donner  tel  cours,  et  pour  tel  prix  comme  il  nous  plait  et 
bon  nous  semble."  l“No  one  can  nor  should  doubt  that  to 
os  and  to  our  royal  majesty  alone  pertain  the  coining,  the 
quality,  and  the  supply  of  money,  and  the  making  of  all 
regulations  concerning  money;  to  give  it  such  currency  and 
at  such  a  price  as  seems  right  and  proper  to  us."]  It  was  a 
maxim  of  the  Roman  Law  that  the  value  of  money  was 
fixed  by  decree  of  the  Emperor.  It  was  expressly  forbidden 
to  treat  money  as  a  commodity.  “It  will  be  wrong  for  any¬ 
one  to  buy  money,  since  it  is  improper  to  turn  things  es¬ 
tablished  for  public  use,  into  articles  of  merchandise.*’ 
Some  good  work  on  this  question  has  been  done  by  G.  F. 
Ptgnini:  Saggio  sopra  il  giusto  pregio  delle  cose,  1751,  in 
Custodi,  op.  cit.,  Vol.  II.  In  the  second  part  of  his  work 
Pagnini  directs  his  polemics  against  the  lawyers. 


the  determination  of  the  magnitude  of  its  value. 
Therefore,  although  we  may  be  aware  that  gold 
is  money,  and  consequently  directly  exchange¬ 
able  for  all  other  commodities,  yet  that  fact  by 
no  means  tells  how  much  iopounds,  for  instance, 
of  gold  is  worth.  Money,  like  every  other  com¬ 
modity,  cannot  express  the  magnitude  of  its 
value  except  relatively  in  other  commodities. 
This  value  is  determined  by  the  labour  time  re¬ 
quired  for  its  production,  and  is  expressed  by 
the  quantity  of  any  other  commodi  ty  that  costs 
the  same  amount  of  labour  time.2  Such  quanti¬ 
tative  determination  of  its  relative  value  takes 
place  at  the  source  of  its  production  by  means  of 
barter.  When  it  steps  into  circulation  as  money, 
its  value  is  already  given.  In  the  last  decades  of 
the  seventeenth  century  it  had  already  been 
shown  that  money  is  a  commodity,  but  this 
step  marks  only  the  infancy  of  the  analysis.  The 
difficulty  lies,  not  in  comprehending  that  mon¬ 
ey  is  a  commodity,  but  in  discovering  how,  why, 
and  by  what  means  a  commodity  becomes  mon¬ 
ey.3 

We  have  already  seen,  from  the  most  elemen¬ 
tary  expression  of  value,  x  commodity  A=y 
commodity  By  that  the  object  in  which  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  value  of  another  object  is  repre¬ 
sented  appears  to  have  the  equivalent  form  in¬ 
dependently  of  this  relation,  as  a  social  property 
given  to  it  by  Nature.  We  followed  up  this  false 
appearance  to  its  final  establishment,  which  is 

1  “If  a  man  can  bring  to  London  an  ounce  of  silver  out 
of  the  earth  in  Peru  in  the  same  time  that  he  can  produce 
a  bushel  of  corn,  then  the  one  is  the  natural  price  of  the 
other;  now,  if  by  reason  of  new  or  more  easie  mines  a  man 
can  procure  two  ounces  of  silver  as  easily  as  he  formerly 
did  one,  the  corn  will  be  as  cheap  at  ten  shillings  the  bushel 
as  it  was  bef  re  at  five  shillings,  cateris  paribus  [other 
things  being  equall.”— William  Petty,  A  Treatise  on  Taxes 
and  Contributions,  London,  1662,  p.  32. 

*  The  learned  Professor  Roscher,  after  first  informing  us 
that  “the  false  definitions  of  money  may  be  divided  into 
two  main  groups:  those  which  make  it  more,  and  those 
which  make  it  le«s,  than  a  commodity,”  gives  us  a  long 
and  very  mixed  catalogue  of  works  on  the  nature  of  money, 
from  which  it  appears  that  he  has  not  the  remotest  idea  of 
the  real  history  of  the  theory;  and  then  he  moralises  thus: 
“For  the  rest,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  most  of  the  later 
economists  do  not  bear  sufficiently  in  mind  the  peculiar¬ 
ities  that  distinguish  money  from  other  commodities”  (It 
is,  then,  after  all,  either  more  or  less  than  a  commodity!) 

. . .  “So  far,  the  semi-mercantilist  reaction  of  Ganilh  is  not 
altogether  without  foundation.”— Wilhelm  Roscher,  Die 
Grundlagen  der  Nationaldkonomie ,  third  edition,  1858,  pp. 
277-210.  More!  less!  not  sufficiently!  so  far!  not  altogether! 
What  clearness  and  precision  of  ideas  and  language!  And 
such  eclectic  professorial  twaddle  is  modestly  baptised  by 
Mr.  Roscher,  “the  anatomico-physiological  method”  of 
political  economy!  One  discovery  however,  he  must  have 
credit  for,  namely,  that  money  is  “a  pleasant  commodity." 


CAPITAL 


42 

complete  so  soon  as  the  universal  equivalent 
form  becomes  identified  with  the  bodily  form  of 
a  particular  commodity,  and  thus  crystallized 
into  the  money  form.  What  appears  to  happen 
is  not  that  gold  becomes  money,  in  consequence 
of  all  other  commodities  expressing  their  values 
in  it,  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  all  other  com¬ 
modities  universally  express  their  values  in 
gold,  because  it  is  money.  The  intermediate 
steps  of  the  process  vanish  in  the  result  and 
leave  no  trace  behind.  Commodities  find  their 
own  value  already  completely  represented, 
without  any  initiative  on  their  part,  in  another 
commodity  existing  in  company  with  them. 
These  objects,  gold  and  silver,  just  as  they  come 
out  of  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  are  forthwith  the 
direct  incarnation  of  all  human  labour.  Hence 
the  magic  of  money.  In  the  form  of  society  now 
under  consideration,  the  behaviour  of  men  in 
the  social  process  of  production  is  purely  atom¬ 
ic.  Hence,  their  relations  to  each  other  in  pro¬ 
duction  assume  a  material  character  independ¬ 
ent  of  their  control  and  conscious  individual 
action.  These  facts  manifest  themselves  at  first 
by  products  as  a  general  rule  taking  the  form  of 
commodities.  We  have  seen  how  the  progressive 
development  of  a  society  of  commodity  produc¬ 
ers  stamps  one  privileged  commodity  with  the 
character  of  money.  Hence,  the  riddle  presented 
by  money  is  but  the  riddle  presented  by  com¬ 
modities;  only  it  now  strikes  us  in  its  most  glar¬ 
ing  form. 

CHAPTER  III.  MONEY, 

OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES 

i.  The  Measure  of  Values 

Throughout  this  work,  I  assume,  for  the  sake 

of  simplicity,  gold  as  the  money  commodity. 

The  first  chief  function  of  money  is  to  supply 
commodities  with  the  material  for  the  expres¬ 
sion  of  their  values,  or  to  represent  their  values 
as  magnitudes  of  the  same  denomination,  qual¬ 
itatively  equal,  and  quantitatively  comparable. 
It  thus  serves  as  a  universal  measure  if  value. 
And  only  by  virtue  of  this  function  does  gold, 
the  equivalent  commodity  par  excellence,  be¬ 
come  money. 

It  is  not  money  that  renders  commodities 
commensurable.  Just  the  contrary.  It  is  because 
all  commodities,  as  values,  are  realized  human 
labour,  and  therefore  commensurable,  that  their 
values  can  be  measured  by  one  and  the  same 
special  commodity,  and  the  latter  be  converted 
into  the  common  measure  of  their  values,  i.e.. 


into  money.  Money  as  a  measure  of  value  is  the 
phenomenal  form  that  must  of  necessity  be  as¬ 
sumed  by  that  measure  of  value  which  is  imma¬ 
nent  in  commodities,  labour  time.1 

The  expression  of  the  value  of  a  commodity 
in  gold— x  commodity  A —y  money  commodity 
—is  its  money  form  or  price.  A  single  equation, 
such  as  i  ton  of  iron  =  2  ounces  of  gold,  now 
suffices  to  express  the  value  of  the  iron  in  a  so¬ 
cially  valid  manner.  There  is  no  longer  any  need 
for  this  equation  to  figure  as  a  link  in  the  chain 
of  equations  that  express  the  values  of  all  other 
commodities,  because  the  equivalent  commod- 
ity,  gold,  now  has  the  character  of  money.  The 
general  form  of  relative  value  has  resumed  its 
original  shape  of  simple  or  isolated  relative  val¬ 
ue.  On  the  other  hand,  the  expanded  expression 
of  relative  value,  the  endless  series  of  equations, 
has  now  become  the  form  peculiar  to  the  rela¬ 
tive  value  of  the  money  commodity.  The  series 
itself,  too,  is  now  given  and  has  social  recogni¬ 
tion  in  the  prices  of  actual  commodities.  We 
have  only  to  read  the  quotations  of  a  price  list 
backwards  to  find  the  magnitude  of  the  value 
of  money  expressed  in  all  sorts  of  commodities. 
But  money  itself  has  no  price.  In  order  to  put  it 
on  an  equal  footing  with  all  other  commodities 
in  this  respect,  we  should  be  obliged  to  equate  it 
to  itself  as  its  own  equivalent. 

The  price  or  money  form  of  commodities  is, 
like  their  form  of  value  generally,  a  form  quite 
distinct  from  their  palpable  bodily  form;  it  is, 
therefore,  a  purely  ideal  or  mental  form.  Al¬ 
though  invisible,  the  value  of  iron,  linen,  and 
corn  has  actual  existence  in  these  very  articles: 
it  is  ideally  made  perceptible  by  their  equality 
with  gold,  a  relation  that,  so  to  say,  exists  only 

1  The  question — Why  does  not  money  directly  represent 
labour  time,  so  that  a  piece  of  paper  may  represent,  for  in¬ 
stance,  x  hour's  labour,  is  at  bottom  the  same  as  the  ques¬ 
tion  why,  given  the  production  of  commodities,  must  prod¬ 
ucts  take  the  form  of  commodities?  This  is  evident,  since 
their  taking  the  form  of  commodities  implies  their  differ¬ 
entiation  into  commodities  and  money.  Or,  why  cannot 
private  labour — labour  for  the  account  of  private  individ¬ 
uals— be  treated  as  its  opposite,  immediate  social  labour? 
I  have  elsewhere  examined  thoroughly  the  Utopian  idea  of 
''labour  money"  in  a  society  founded  on  the  production  of 
commodities  (op  cit .,  pp.  61,  If).  On  this  point  I  will  only 
say  further,  that  Owen’s  "labour  money,  for  instance,  is 
no  more  "money"  than  a  ticket  for  the  theatre.  Owen  pre¬ 
supposes  directly  associated  labour,  a  form  of  production 
that  is  entirely  inconsistent  with  the  production  of  com¬ 
modities.  The  certificate  of  labour  is  merely  evidence  of 
the  part  taken  by  the  individual  in  the  common  labour, 
and  of  his  right  to  a  certain  portion  of  the  common  pro¬ 
duce  destined  for  consumption.  But  it  never  enters  into 
Ower's  head  to  presuppose  the  production  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  and  at  the  same  time,  by  juggling  with  money,  to 
try  to  evade  the  necessary  conditions  of  that  production. 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES 


in  their  own  heads.  Their  owner  must,  there¬ 
fore,  lend  them  his  tongue,  or  hang  a  ticket  on 
them,  before  their  prices  can  be  communicated 
to  the  outside  world.1  Since  the  expression  of 
the  value  of  commodi  ties  in  gold  is  a  mcrel  y  ideal 
act,  we  may  use  for  this  purpose  imaginary  or 
ideal  money.  Every  trader  knows  that  he  is  far 
from  having  turned  his  goods  into  money  when 
he  has  expressed  their  value  in  a  price  or  in  imag¬ 
inary  money,  and  that  it  does  not  require  the 
least  bit  of  real  gold  to  estimate  in  that  metal 
millions  of  pounds’  worth  of  goods.  When,  there¬ 
fore,  money  serves  as  a  measure  of  value,  it  is 
employed  only  as  imaginary  or  ideal  money. 
This  circumstance  has  given  rise  to  the  wildest 
theories.2  But,  although  the  money  that  per¬ 
forms  the  functions  of  a  measure  of  value  is  only 
ideal  money,  price  depends  entirely  upon  the 
actual  substance  that  is  money.  The  value,  or  in 
other  words,  the  quantity  of  human  labour  con¬ 
tained  in  a  ton  of  iron,  is  expressed  in  imagina¬ 
tion  by  such  a  quantity  of  the  money  commod¬ 
ity  as  contact,’  she  same  amount  of  labour  as 
the  iron.  According,  therefore,  as  the  measure  of 
value  is  gold,  silver,  or  copper,  the  value  of  the 
ton  of  iron  will  be  expressed  by  very  different 
prices,  or  will  be  represented  by  very  different 
quantities  of  those  metals  respectively. 

If,  therefore,  two  different  commodities,  such 
as  gold  and  silver,  arc  simultaneously  measures 
of  value,  all  commodities  have  two  prices — one 
a  gold  price,  the  other  a  silver  price.  These  exist 
quietly  side  by  side,  so  long  as  the  ratio  of  the 
value  of  silver  to  that  of  gold  remains  un¬ 
changed,  say,  at  15:1.  Every  change  in  their 
ratio  disturbs  the  ratio  which  exists  between 
the  gold  prices  and  the  silver  prices  of  commod¬ 
ities,  and  thus  proves,  by  facts,  that  a  double 

1  Savages  and  half-civilized  races  use  the  tongue  differ¬ 
ently.  Captain  Parry  says  of  the  inhabitants  on  the  west 
coast  of  Baffin's  Bay:  “In  this  case  (he  refers  to  barter) 
they  licked  it  (the  thing  represented  to  them)  twice  to 
their  tongues,  after  which  they  seemed  to  consider  the  bar¬ 
gain  satisfactorily  concluded."  In  the  same  way,  the  East¬ 
ern  Esquimaux  licked  the  articles  they  received  in  ex¬ 
change.  If  the  tongue  is  thus  used  in  the  North  as  the  or¬ 
gan  of  appropriation,  no  wonder  that,  in  the  South,  the 
stomach  serves  as  the  organ  of  accumulated  property,  and 
that  a  Kaffir  estimates  the  wealth  of  a  man  by  the  size  of 
his  belly.  That  the  Kaffirs  know  what  they  are  about  is 
shown  by  the  following:  at  the  same  time  that  the  official 
British  Health  Report  of  1864  disclosed  the  deficiency  of 
fat-forming  food  among  a  large  part  of  the  working  class, 
a  certain  Dr.  Harvey  (not,  however,  the  celebrated  dis¬ 
coverer  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood),  made  a  good  thing 
by  advertising  recipes  for  reducing  the  superfluous  fat  of 
the  bourgeoisie  and  aristocracy. 

1  See  Karl  Marx,  Zur  Kritik ,  etc.  “  Theorien  von  der  Mas - 
seinhettdes  Geldes ,"  pp.  53  seq. 


43 

standard  of  value  is  inconsistent  with  the 
functions  of  a  standard.3 

Commodities  with  definite  prices  present 
themselves  under  the  form:  a  commodity  A  =  # 
gold;  b  commodity  B  =  z  gold;  c  commodity  C = 
y  gold,  etc.,  where  a ,  b>  r,  represen  t  defini  te  quan- 
tities  of  the  commodities  A>  By  C,  and  x>  z,  y , 
definite  quantities  of  gold.  The  values  of  these 
commodities  are,  therefore,  changed  in  imagi¬ 
nation  into  so  many  different  quantities  of  gold. 
Hence,  in  spite  of  the  confusing  variety  of  the 
commodities  themselves,  their  values  become 
magnitudes  of  the  same  denomination,  gold 
magnitudes.  They  are  now  capable  of  being 
compared  with  each  other  and  measured,  and 
the  want  becomes  technically  felt  of  comparing 
them  with  some  fixed  quantity  of  gold  as  a  unit 
measure.  This  unit,  by  subsequent  division  into 
aliquot  parts,  becomes  itself  the  standard  or 
scale.  Before  they  become  money,  gold,  silver, 
and  copper  already  possess  such  standard  meas¬ 
ures  in  their  standards  of  weight,  so  that,  for 
example,  a  pound  weight,  while  serving  as  the 
unit,  is,  on  the  one  hand,  divisible  into  ounces, 
and,  on  the  other,  may  be  combined  to  make  up 

3  “Wherever  gold  and  silver  have  by  law  been  made  to 
perform  the  function  of  money  or  of  a  measure  of  value 
side  by  side,  it  has  always  been  tried,  but  in  vain,  to  treat 
them  as  one  and  the  same  material.  To  assume  that  there 
is  an  invariable  ratio  between  the  quantities  of  gold  and 
silver  in  which  a  given  quantity  of  labour  time  is  incor¬ 
porated  is  to  assume,  in  fact,  that  gold  and  silver  are  of 
one  and  the  same  material,  and  that  a  given  mass  of  the 
less  valuable  metal,  silver,  is  a  constant  fraction  of  a  given 
mass  of  gold.  From  the  reign  of  F.dward  III  to  the  time  of 
George  II,  the  h'utory  of  money  in  England  consists  of  one 
long  series  of  perturbations  caused  by  the  clashing  of  the 
legally  Axed  ratio  between  the  values  of  gold  and  silver, 
with  rhe  fluctuations  in  their  real  values.  At  one  time  gold 
was  too  high,  at  another,  silver.  The  metal  that  for  the 
time  being  was  estimated  below  its  value  was  withdrawn 
from  circulation,  melted,  and  exported.  The  ratio  between 
the  two  metals  was  then  again  altered  by  law,  but  the  new 
nominal  ratio  soon  came  into  conflict  again  with  the  real 
one.  In  our  own  times,  the  slight  and  transient  fall  in  the 
value  of  gold  compared  with  silver,  which  was  a  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  Indo-Chinese  demand  for  silver,  produced 
on  a  far  more  extended  scale  in  France  the  same  phenom¬ 
ena— export  of  silver,  and  its  expulsion  from  circulation 
by  gold.  During  the  years  1855,  1856,  and  1857,  the  excess 
in  France  of  gold  imporrs  over  gold  exports  amounted  to 
£41,580,000,  while  the  excess  of  silver  exports  over  silver 
imports  was  £14,704,000.  In  fact,  in  those- countries  in 
which  both  metals  are  legally  measures  of  value,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  both  legal  tender,  so  that  everyone  has  the  option  of 
paying  in  either  metal,  the  metal  that  rises  in  value  is  at  a 
premium,  and,  like  every  other  commodity,  measures  its 
price  in  the  over-estimated  metal  which  alone  serves  in  re¬ 
ality  as  the  standard  of  value.  The  result  of  all  experience 
and  history  with  regard  to  this  question  is  simply  that, 
where  two  commodities  perform  by  law  the  functions  of  a 
measure  of  value,  in  practice  one  alone  maintains  that  po¬ 
sition."  (Karl  Marx,  op.  cif.,  pp.  52, 53.) 


CAPITAL 


44 

hundredweights.1  It  is  owing  to  this  that,  in  all 
metallic  currencies,  the  names  given  to  the 
standards  of  money  or  of  price  were  originally 
taken  from  the  pre-existing  names  of  the  stand¬ 
ards  of  weight. 

As  measure  of  value  and  as  standard  of  price , 
money  has  two  entirely  distinct  functions  to 
perform.  It  is  the  measure  of  value  inasmuch  as 
it  is  the  socially  recognized  incarnation  of  hu¬ 
man  labour;  it  is  the  standard  of  price  inasmuch 
as  it  is  a  fixed  weight  of  metal.  As  the  measure 
of  value  it  serves  to  convert  the  values  of  all  the 
manifold  commodities  into  prices,  into  imagi¬ 
nary  quantities  of  gold;  as  the  standard  of  price 
it  measures  those  quantities  of  gold.  The  meas¬ 
ure  of  values  measures  commodities  considered 
as  values;  the  standard  of  price  measures,  on 
the  contrary,  quantities  of  gold  by  a  unit  quan¬ 
tity  of  gold,  not  the  value  of  one  quantity  of 
gold  by  the  weight  of  another.  In  order  to  make 
gold  a  standard  of  price,  a  certain  weight  must 
be  fixed  upon  as  the  unit.  In  this  case,  as  in  all 
cases  of  measuring  quantities  of  the  same  de¬ 
nomination,  the  establishment  of  an  unvary¬ 
ing  unit  of  measure  is  all-important.  Hence,  the 
less  the  unit  is  subject  to  variation,  so  much  the 
better  does  the  standard  of  price  fulfil  its  office. 
But  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  itself  a  product  of  la¬ 
bour,  and,  therefore,  potentially  variable  in 
value,  can  gold  serve  as  a  measure  of  value.2 

It  is,  in  the  first  place,  quite  clear  that  a 
change  in  the  value  of  gold  does  not,  in  any  way, 
affect  its  function  as  a  standard  of  price.  No 
matter  how  this  value  varies,  the  proportions 
between  the  values  of  different  quantities  of  the 
metal  remain  constant.  However  great  the  fall 
in  its  value,  12  ounces  of  gold  still  have  12  times 
the  value  of  1  ounce;  and  in  prices,  the  only 
thing  considered  is  the  relation  between  differ¬ 
ent  quantities  of  gold.  Since,  on  the  other  hand, 
no  rise  or  fall  in  the  value  of  an  ounce  of  gold  can 
alter  its  weight,  no  alteration  can  take  place  in 
the  weight  of  its  aliquot  parts.  Thus  gold 

1  The  peculiar  circumstance,  that  while  the  ounce  of  gold 
serres  in  England  as  the  unit  of  the  standard  of  money, 
the  pound  sterling  docs  not  form  an  aliquot  part  uf  it,  has 
been  explained  as  follows:  “Our  coinage  was  originally 
adapted  to  the  employment  of  silver  only,  hence,  an  ounce 
of  silver  can  always  be  divided  into  a  certain  adequate 
number  of  pieces  of  coin;  but  as  gold  was  introduced  at  a 
later  period  into  a  coinage  adapted  only  to  silver,  an  ounce 
of  gold  cannot  be  coined  into  an  aliquot  number  of  pieces." 
Madaren,  A  Sketch  of  the  History  oj  the  Currency .  London, 
1858,  p.  16. 

•With  English  writers  the  confusion  between  measure 
of  value  and  standard  of  price  (standard  of  value)  is  in¬ 
describable.  Their  functions,  as  well  as  their  names,  are 
constantly  interchanged. 


always  renders  the  same  service  as  an  invari¬ 
able  standard  of  price,  however  much  its  value 
may  vary. 

In  the  second  place,  a  change  in  the  value  of 
gold  does  not  interfere  with  its  functions  as  a 
measure  of  value.  The  change  affects  all  com¬ 
modities  simultaneously,  and,  therefore,  cceteris 
paribus ,  leaves  their  relative  values  inters e*  un- 
a  1  tered,  al  though  those  values  are  now  expressed 
in  higher  or  lower  gold  prices. 

Just  as  when  we  estimate  the  value  of  any 
commodity  by  a  definite  quantity  of  the  use- 
value  of  some  other  commodi  ty,  so,  in  estima  ti  ng 
the  value  of  the  former  in  gold,  we  assume  noth¬ 
ing  more  than  that  the  production  of  a  given 
quantity  of  gold  costs,  at  the  given  period,  a 
given  amount  of  labour.  As  regards  the  fluctua¬ 
tions  of  prices  generally,  they  are  subject  to  the 
laws  of  elementary  relative  value  investigated 
in  a  former  chapter. 

A  general  rise  in  the  prices  of  commodities  can 
result  only  either  from  a  rise  in  their  values,  the 
value  of  money  remaining  constant,  or  from  a 
fall  in  the  value  of  money,  the  values  of  com¬ 
modities  remaining  constant.  On  theotherhand, 
a  general  fall  in  prices  can  result  only  either 
from  a  fall  in  the  values  of  commodities,  the 
value  of  money  remaining  constant,  or  from  a 
rise  in  the  value  of  money,  the  values  of  com¬ 
modities  remaining  constant.  U,  therefore,  by 
no  means  follows  that  a  rise  in  the  value  of  mon¬ 
ey  necessarily  implies  a  proportional  fall  in  the 
prices  of  commodities;  or  that  a  fall  in  the  value 
of  money  implies  a  proportional  rise  in  prices. 
Such  change  of  price  holds  good  only  in  the  case 
of  commodities  whose  value  remains  constant. 
With  those,  for  example,  whose  value  rises  si¬ 
multaneously  with,  and  proportionally  to,  that 
of  money,  there  is  no  alteration  in  price.  And  if 
their  value  rise  either  slower  or  faster  than  that 
of  money,  the  fall  or  rise  in  their  prices  will  be 
determined  by  thediflference  between  thechange 
in  their  value  and  that  of  money;  and  so  on. 

Let  us  now  go  back  to  the  consideration  of 
the  price  form. 

By  degrees  there  arises  a  discrepancy  between 
the  current  money  names  of  the  various  weights 
of  the  precious  metal  figuring  as  money,  and 
the  actual  weights  which  those  names  originally 
represented.  This  discrepancy  is  the  result  of 
historical  causes,  among  which  th$  chief  are:— 
(1)  The  importation  of  foreign  money  into  an 
imperfectly  developed  community.  This  hap¬ 
pened  in  Rome  in  its  early  days,  where  gold  and 
silver  coins  circulated  at  first  as  foreign  com- 

*  Among  themselves. 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES 


modi  ties.  The  names  of  these  foreign  coins  nev¬ 
er  coincide  with  those  of  the  indigenous  weights. 
(2)  As  wealth  increases,  the  less  precious  metal 
is  thrust  out  by  the  more  precious  from  its  place 
as  a  measure  of  value,  copper  by  silver,  silver  by 
gold,  however  much  this  order  of  sequence  may 
be  in  contradiction  with  poetical  chronology.1 * 
The  word  pound ,  for  instance,  was  the  money 
name  given  to  an  actual  pound  weight  of  silver. 
When  gold  replaced  silver  as  a  measure  of  value, 
the  same  name  was  applied  according  to  the 
ratio  between  the  values  of  silver  and  gold,  to 
perhaps  one-fifteenth  of  a  pound  of  gold.  The 
word  pound ,  as  a  money  name,  thus  becomes 
differentiated  from  the  same  word  as  a  weight 
name.*  (3)  The  debasing  of  money  carried  on 
for  centuries  by  kings  and  princes  to  such  an 
extent  that,  of  the  original  weights  of  the  coins, 
nothing  in  fact  remained  but  the  names.3 

These  historical  causes  convert  the  separa¬ 
tion  of  the  money  name  from  the  weight  name 
into  an  established  habit  with  the  community. 
Since  the  staiuldfJ  of  money  is  on  the  one  hand 
purely  conventional,  and  must  on  the  other 
hand  find  general  acceptance,  it  is  in  the  end 
regulated  by  law.  A  given  weight  of  one  of  the 
precious  metals,  an  ounce  of  gold,  for  instance, 
becomes  officially  divided  into  aliquot  parts, 
with  legally  bestowed  names,  such  as  pound , 
dollar ,  etc.  These  aliquot  parts,  which  thence¬ 
forth  serve  as  units  of  money,  are  then  subdi¬ 
vided  into  other  aliquot  parts  with  legal  names, 
such  as  shillings  penny ,  etc.4 *  But,  both  before 
and  after  these  divisions  are  made,  a  definite 
weight  of  metal  is  the  standard  of  metallic 
money.  The  sole  alteration  consists  in  the  sub¬ 
division  and  denomination. 

The  prices,  or  quantities  of  gold,  into  which 
the  values  of  commodities  are  ideally  changed, 
are  therefore  now  expressed  in  the  names  of 

1  Moreover,  it  has  not  general  historical  validity. 

*  It  is  thus  that  the  pound  sterling  in  English  denotes 
less  than  one-third  of  its  original  weight;  the  pound  Scot, 
before  the  Union,  only  one-thirty-sixth;  the  French  livre , 
one-seventy-fourth;  the  Spanish  maraoedl,  less  than  one- 
one-thousandth;  and  the  Portuguese  rei,  a  still  smaller 
fraction. 

a  “Those  moneys  which  today  are  merely  ideal  figments 
of  the  imagination  are  the  most  ancient  for  any  nation, 
and  once  all  of  them  were  real.  Because  they  were  real,  it 
was  with  them  that  people  counted."  Galiani,  Delia  mon - 
eta,  op,  cit.,  p.  1 53. 

4  David  Urquhart  remarks  in  his  Familiar  Words  on  the 

monstrosity  (!)  that  nowadays  a  pound  (sterling),  which 
is  the  unit  of  the  English  standard  of  money,  is  equal  to 
about  a  quarter  of  an  ounce  of  gold.  “This  is  falsifying  a 

measure,  not  establishing  a  standard."  He  sees  in  this 
"false  denomination"  of  the  weight  of  gold,  as  in  every¬ 

thing  else,  the  falsifying  hand  of  civilization. 


45 

coins,  or  in  the  legally  valid  names  of  the  sub¬ 
divisions  of  the  gold  standard.  Hence,  instead 
of  saying:  A  quarter  of  wheat  is  worth  an 
ounce  of  gold;  we  say,  it  is  worth  £3  17  s.  10  }4d. 
In  this  way,  commodities  express  by  their 
prices  how  much  they  are  worth,  and  money 
serves  as  money  of  account  whenever  it  is  a 
question  of  fixing  the  value  of  an  article  in  its 
money  form.6 

The  name  of  a  thing  is  something  distinct 
from  the  qualities  of  that  thing.  I  know  nothing 
of  a  man  by  knowing  that  his  name  is  Jacob.  In 
the  same  way  with  regard  to  money,  every  trace 
of  a  value  relation  disappears  in  the  names 
pound,  dollar,  franc,  ducat,  etc.  The  confusion 
caused  by  attributing  a  hidden  meaning  to  these 
cabalistic  signs  is  all  the  greater,  because  these 
money  names  express  both  the  values  of  com¬ 
modities  and,  at  the  same  time,  aliquot  parts  of 
the  weight  of  the  metal  that  is  the  standard  of 
money.®  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  absolutely  nec¬ 
essary  that  value,  in  order  that  it  may  be  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  the  varied  bodily  forms  of  com¬ 
modities,  should  assume  this  material  and  un¬ 
meaning,  but,  at  the  same  time,  purely  social 
form.7 

Price  is  the  money  name  of  the  labour  real¬ 
ized  in  a  commodity.  Hence  the  expression  of 
the  equivalence  of  a  commodity  with  the  sum  of 

5  When  Anacharsis  was  asked  for  what  purposes  the 
Greeks  used  money,  he  replied,  “For  reckoning."  Athen- 
aeus,  The  Deipnosophists  1.  iv.  49,  Vol.  II,  edited  Schweig- 
hauser,  1802. 

6  “Owing  to  the  fact  that  money,  when  serving  as  the 
standard  of  price,  appears  under  the  same  reckoning  names 
as  do  the  prices  of  commodities,  and  that  therefore  the  sum 
of  £3  17J.  10 frd.  may  signify  on  the  one  hand  an  ounce 
weight  of  gold,  and  on  the  other,  the  value  of  a  ton  of  iron, 
this  reckoning  name  of  money  has  been  called  its  mint 
price.  Hence  there  sprang  up  the  extraordinary  notion  that 
the  value  of  gold  is  estimated  111  its  own  material,  and  that, 
in  contradistinction  to  all  other  commodities,  its  price  is 
fixed  by  the  State.  It  was  erroneously  thought  that  the 
giving  of  reckoning  names  to  definite  weights  of  gold  is  the 
same  thing  as  fixing  the  value  of  those  weights."-  ■  Karl 
Marx.  op.  cit.,  p.  52. 

7  See  “Theontn  von  der  Massemheit  des  G tides"  in  Zur 
Krilik ,  etc.,  p.  53,  ff.  The  fantastic  notions  about  raising 
or  lowering  the  mint  price  of  money  by  transferring  to 
greater  or  smaller  weights  of  gold  or  silver  the  names  al¬ 
ready  legally  appropriated  to  fixed  weights  of  those  metals; 
such  notions,  at  least  in  those  cases  in  which  they  aim,  not 
at  clumsy  financial  operations  against  creditors,  both  pub¬ 
lic  and  private,  but  at  economical  quack  remedies,  have 
been  so  exhaustively  treated  by  Wm.  Petty  in  his  Quan- 
tulumcunque  concerning  money:  To  the  Lord  Marquis  of  Hal¬ 
ifax,  1682,  that  even  his  immediate  followers,  Sir  Dudley 
North  and  John  Locke,  not  to  mention  later  ones,  could 
only  dilute  him.  “If  the  wealth  of  a  nation,"  he  remarks, 
“could  be  decupled  by  a  proclamation,  it  were  strange  that 
such  proclamations  have  not  long  since  been  made  by  our 
Governors."  (op.  cit.,  p.  36.) 


CAPITAL 


46 

money  constituting  its  price  is  a  tautology,1  just 
as  in  general  the  expression  of  the  relative  value 
of  a  commodity  is  a  statement  of  the  equiva¬ 
lence  of  two  commodities.  But  although  price, 
being  the  exponent  of  the  magnitude  of  a  com¬ 
modity’s  value,  is  the  exponent  of  its  exchange 
ratio  with  money,  it  does  not  follow  that  the 
exponent  of  this  exchange  ratio  is  necessarily 
the  exponent  of  the  magnitude  of  the  com¬ 
modity’s  value.  Suppose  two  equal  quantities 
of  socially  necessary  labour  to  be  respectively 
represented  by  i  quarter  of  wheat  and  £2  (near¬ 
ly  *4  oz.  of  gold),  then  £2  is  the  expression  in 
money  of  the  magnitude  of  the  value  of  the 
quarter  of  wheat,  or  is  its  price.  If  now  circum¬ 
stances  allow  of  this  price  being  raised  to  £3,  or 
compel  it  to  be  reduced  to  £1,  then,  although  £1 
and  £3  may  be  too  small  or  too  great  properly  to 
express  the  magnitude  of  the  wheat’s  value, 
nevertheless  they  are  its  prices,  for  they  are,  in 
the  first  place,  the  form  under  which  its  value 
appears,  i.e.,  money;  and  in  the  second  place, 
the  exponents  of  its  exchange  ratio  with  money. 
If  the  conditions  of  production,  in  other  words, 
if  the  productive  power  of  labour  remain  con¬ 
stant,  the  same  amount  of  social  labour  time 
must,  both  before  and  after  the  change  in  price, 
be  expended  in  the  reproduction  of  a  quarter  of 
wheat.  This  circumstance  depends  neither  on 
the  will  of  the  wheat  producer,  nor  on  that  of 
the  owners  of  other  commodities. 

Magnitude  of  value  expresses  a  relation,  of 
social  production,  it  expresses  the  connection 
that  necessarily  exists  between  a  certain  article 
and  the  portion  of  the  total  labour  time  of  soci¬ 
ety  required  to  produce  it.  As  soon  as  magni¬ 
tude  of  value  is  converted  into  price,  the  above 
necessary  relation  takes  the  shape  of  a  more  or 
less  accidental  exchange  ratio  between  a  single 
commodity  and  another,  the  money  commod¬ 
ity.  But  this  exchange  ratio  may  express  either 
the  real  magnitude  of  that  commodity’s  value, 
or  the  quantity  of  gold  deviating  from  that  val¬ 
ue,  for  which,  according  to  circumstances,  it 
may  be  parted  with.  The  possibility,  therefore, 
of  quantitative  incongruity  between  price  and 
magnitude  of  value,  or  the  deviation  of  the  for¬ 
mer  from  the  latter,  is  inherent  in  the  price 
form  itself.  This  is  no  defect,  but,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  admirably  adapts  the  price  form  to  a 

1  “Else  we  should  find  it  necessary  to  agree  that  a  mil¬ 
lion  in  money  is  worth  more  than  equal  value  in  merchan¬ 
dise.”  (Le  Trosne,  op.  at.,  p.  919.)  This  amounts  to  saying 
“that  a  value  is  worth  more  than  a  value  which  is  equal  to 
it.” 


mode  of  production  whose  inherent  laws  impose 
themselves  only  as  the  mean  of  apparently  law¬ 
less  irregularities  that  compensate  one  another. 

The  price  form,  however,  is  not  only  compat¬ 
ible  with  the  possibility  of  a  quantitative  incon¬ 
gruity  between  magnitude  of  value  and  price, 
i.e.,  between  the  former  and  its  expression  in 
money,  but  it  may  also  conceal  a  qualitative 
inconsistency,  so  much  so  that,  al  though  money 
is  nothing  but  the  value  form  of  commodities, 
price  ceases  altogether  to  express  value.  Objects 
that  in  themselves  are  no  commodities,  such  as 
conscience,  honour,  etc.,  are  capable  of  being 
offered  for  sale  by  their  holders,  and  of  thus 
acquiring,  through  their  price,  the  form  of  com¬ 
modities.  Hence  an  object  may  have  a  price 
without  having  value.  The  price  in  that  case  is 
imaginary,  like  certain  quantities  in  mathemat¬ 
ics.  On  the  other  hand,  the  imaginary  price 
form  may  sometimes  conceal  either  a  direct  or 
indirect  real  value  relation;  for  instance,  the 
price  of  uncultivated  land,  which  is  without 
value,  because  no  human  labour  has  been  incor¬ 
porated  in  it. 

Price,  like  relative  value  in  general,  expresses 
the  value  of  a  commodity  (e.g.,  a  ton  of  iron),  by 
stating  that  a  given  quantity  of  the  equivalent 
(e.g.,  an  ounce  of  gold)  is  directly  exchangeable 
for  iron.  But  it  by  no  means  states  the  con  verse, 
that  iron  is  directly  exchangeable  for  gold.  In 
order,  therefore,  that  a  commodity  may  in  prac¬ 
tice  act  effectively  as  exchange  value,  it  must 
quit  its  bodily  shape,  must  transform  itself  from 
mere  imaginary  into  real  gold,  although  to  the 
commodity  such  transubstantiation  may  be 
more  difficult  than  to  the  Hegelian  “concept,” 
the  transition  from  “necessity”  to  “freedom,” 
or  to  a  lobster  the  casting  of  his  shell,  or  to  Saint 
Jerome  the  putting  off  of  theold  Adam. ‘Though 
a  commodity  may,  side  by  side  with  its  actual 
form  (iron,  for  instance),  take  in  our  imagina¬ 
tion  the  form  of  gold,  yet  it  cannot  at  one  and 
the  same  time  actually  be  both  iron  and  gold. 
To  fix  its  price,  it  suffices  to  equate  it  to  gold  in 
imagination.  But  to  enable  it  to  render  to  its 
owner  the  service  of  a  universal  equivalent,  it 
must  be  actually  replaced  by  gold.  If  the  owner 
of  the  iron  were  to  go  to  the  owner  of  some  other 

8Jerome  had  to  wrestle  hard,  not  only  in  his  youth  with 
the  bodily  flesh,  as  is  shown  by  his  fight  in  the  desert  with 
the  handsome  women  of  his  imagination,  but  also  in  his 
old  age  with  the  spiritual  flesh.  “I  thought,”  he  says,  “I 
was  in  spirit  before  the  Judge  of  the  Universe.”  “Who  art 
thou?”  asked  a  voice.  “I  am  a  Christian.”  “Thou  liest,” 
thuniered  back  the  great  Judge;  “thou  art  nought  but  a 
Cicertman.” 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES 


commodity  offered  for  exchange,  and  were  to 
refer  him  to  the  price  of  the  iron  as  proof  that 
it  was  already  money,  he  would  get  the  same  an¬ 
swer  as  St.  Peter  gave  in  heaven  to  Dante,  when 
the  latter  recited  the  creed— 

Assai  bene  £  trascorsa 
D'esta  moneta  gib  la  lega  el  peso, 

Ma  dimmi  se  tu  I'hai  nella  tua  borsa.1 

A  price  therefore  implies  both  that  a  com¬ 
modity  is  exchangeable  for  money,  and  also 
that  it  must  be  so  exchanged.  On  the  other  hand 
gold  serves  as  an  ideal  measure  of  value,  only 
because  it  has  already,  in  the  process  of  ex¬ 
change,  established  itself  as  the  money  com¬ 
modity.  Under  the  ideal  measure  of  values  there 
lurks  the  hard  cash. 

2.  The  Medium  oj  Circulation 

a.  The  Metamorphosis  of  Commodities 

We  saw  in  a  former  chapter  that  the  exchange 
of  commodities  implies  contradictory  and  mu¬ 
tually  exclusive  conditions.  The  differentiation 
of  commodities  into  commodities  and  money 
does  not  sweep  away  these  inconsistencies,  but 
develops  a  modus  vivendi ,  a  form  in  which  they 
can  exist  side  by  side.  This  is  generally  the  way 
in  which  real  contradictions  are  reconciled.  For 
instance,  it  is  a  contradiction  to  depict  one  body 
as  constantly  falling  towards  another,  and  as, 
at  the  same  time,  constantly  flying  away  from 
it.  The  ellipse  is  a  form  of  motion  which,  while 
allowing  this  contradiction  to  go  on,  at  the  same 
time  reconciles  it. 

In  so  far  as  exchange  is  a  process,  by  which 
commodities  are  transferred  from  hands  in 
which  they  are  non-use-values,  to  hands  in 
which  they  become  use-values,  it  is  a  social  cir¬ 
culation  of  matter.  The  product  of  one  form  of 
useful  labour  replaces  that  of  another.  When 
once  a  commodity  has  found  a  resting  place, 
where  it  can  serve  as  a  use-value,  it  falls  out  of 
the  sphere  of  exchange  into  that  of  consump¬ 
tion.  But  the  former  sphere  alone  interests  us 
at  present.  We  have,  therefore,  now  to  consider 
exchange  from  a  formal  point  of  view;  to  inves¬ 
tigate  the  change  of  form  or  metamorphosis  of 
commodities  which  effectuates  the  social  circu¬ 
lation  of  matter. 

The  comprehension  of  this  change  of  form  is, 
as  a  rule,  very  imperfect.  The  cause  of  this  im¬ 
perfection  is,  apart  from  indistinct  notions  of 
value  itself,  that  every  change  of  form  in  a  com¬ 
modity  results  from  the  exchange  of  two  com- 

l“Very  well  have  the  alloy  and  the  weight  of  this  coin 
been  gone  over,  but  tell  me  if  thou  hast  it  in  thy  purse.” 


47 

modi  ties,  an  ordinary  one  and  the  money  com¬ 
modity.  If  we  keep  in  view  the  material  fact 
alone  that  a  commodity  has  been  exchanged  for 
gold,  we  overlook  the  very  thing  that  we  ought 
to  observe— namely,  what  has  happened  to  the 
form  of  the  commodity.  We  overlook  the  facts 
that  gold,  when  a  mere  commodity,  is  not  mon¬ 
ey,  and  that  when  other  commodities  express 
their  prices  in  gold,  this  gold  is  but  the  money 
form  of  those  commodities  themselves. 

Commodities,  first  of  all,  enter  into  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  exchange  just  as  they  are.  The  process 
then  differentiates  them  into  commodities  and 
money,  and  thus  produces  an  external  opposi¬ 
tion  corresponding  to  the  internal  opposition 
inherent  in  them,  as  being  at  once  use-values 
and  values.  Commodities  as  use-values  now 
stand  opposed  to  money  as  exchange  value.  On 
the  other  hand,  both  opposing  sides  are  com¬ 
modities,  unities  of  use- value  and  value.  But 
this  unity  of  differences  manifests  itself  at  two 
opposite  poles,  and  at  each  pole  in  an  opposite 
way.  Being  poles  they  are  as  necessarily  oppo¬ 
site  as  they  are  connected.  On  the  one  side  of  the 
equation  we  have  an  ordinary  commodity, 
which  is  in  reality  a  use-value.  Its  value  is  ex¬ 
pressed  only  ideally  in  its  price,  by  which  it  is 
equated  to  its  opponent,  the  gold,  as  to  the  real 
embodiment  of  its  value.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
gold,  in  its  metallic  reality,  ranks  as  the  embod¬ 
iment  of  value,  as  money.  Gold,  as  gold,  is  ex¬ 
change  value  itself.  As  to  its  use-value,  that  has 
only  an  ideal  existence,  represented  by  the  se¬ 
ries  of  expressions  of  relative  value  in  which  it 
stands  face  to  face  with  all  other  commodities, 
the  sum  of  whose  uses  makes  up  the  sum  of  the 
various  uses  of  gold.  These  antagonistic  forms 
of  commodities  are  the  real  forms  in  which  the 
process  of  their  exchange  moves  and  takes 
place. 

Let  us  now  accompany  the  owner  of  some 
commodity— say,  our  old  friend  the  weaver  of 
linen— to  the  scene  of  action,  the  market.  His 
20  yards  of  linen  has  a  definite  price,  £2.  He 
exchanges  it  for  the  £2,  and  then,  like  a  man  of 
the  good  old  stamp  that  he  is,  he  parts  with  the 
£2  for  a  family  Bible  of  the  same  price.  The 
linen,  which  in  his  eyes  is  a  mere  commodity, 
a  depository  of  value,  he  alienates  in  exchange 
for  gold,  which  is  the  linen's  value  form,  and 
this  form  he  again  parts  with  for  another  com¬ 
modity,  the  Bible,  which  is  destined  to  enter 
his  house  as  an  object  of  utility  and  of  edifica¬ 
tion  to  its  inmates.  The  exchange  becomes  an 
accomplished  fact  by  two  metamorphoses  of  op- 


CAPITAL 


48 

posite  yet  supplementary  character-— the  con¬ 
version  of  the  commodity  into  money,  and  the 
re-conversion  of  the  money  into  a  commodity.1 
The  two  phases  of  this  metamorphosis  are  both 
of  them  distinct  transactions  of  the  weaver: 
selling,  or  the  exchange  of  the  commodity  for 
money;  buying,  or  the  exchange  of  the  money 
for  a  commodity;  and,  the  unity  of  the  two 
acts,  selling  in  order  to  buy. 

The  result  of  the  whole  transaction,  as  re¬ 
gards  the  weaver,  is  this,  that  instead  of  being 
in  possession  of  the  linen,  he  now  has  the  Bible; 
instead  of  his  original  commodity,  he  now  pos¬ 
sesses  another  of  the  same  value  but  of  differ¬ 
ent  utility.  In  like  manner  he  procures  his  other 
means  of  subsistence  and  means  of  production. 
From  his  point  of  view,  the  whole  process  effec¬ 
tuates  nothing  more  than  the  exchange  of  the 
product  of  his  labour  for  the  product  of  some 
one  else’s,  nothing  more  than  an  exchange  of 
products. 

The  exchange  of  commodities  is  therefore  ac¬ 
companied  by  the  following  changes  in  their 
form: 

Commodity — Money — Commodi  ty 
C - M - C 

The  result  of  the  whole  process  is,  so  far  as 
concerns  the  objects  themselves,  C— C,  the  ex¬ 
change  of  one  commodity  for  another,  the  cir,. 
culation  of  materialized  social  labour.  When 
this  result  is  attained,  the  process  is  at  an  end. 

C—  M.  First  Metamorphosis,  or  Sale 

The  leap  taken  by  value  from  the  body  of  the 
commodity  into  the  body  of  the  gold  is,  as  I 
have  elsewhere  called  it,  the  salto  mortale1  of 
the  commodity.  If  it  falls  short,  then,  although 
the  commodity  itself  is  not  harmed,  its  owner 
decidedly  is.  The  social  division  of  labour  causes 
his  labour  to  be  as  one-sided  as  his  wants  are 
many-sided.  This  is  precisely  the  reason  why 
the  product  of  his  labour  serves  him  solely  as  ex¬ 
change  value.  But  it  cannot  acquire  the  proper¬ 
ties  of  a  socially  recognized  universal  equiva¬ 
lent,  except  by  being  converted  into  money. 
That  money,  however,  is  in  some  on#  else’s 
pocket.  In  order  to  entice  the  money  out  of  that 
pocket,  our  friend’s  commodity  must,  above  all 
things,  be  a  use-value  to  theownerof  the  money. 

1  "What  Heraclitus  says  of  fire:  ‘fire  turns  into  all  things, 
and  all  things  return  into  fire,'  applies  to  money  too,  for 
money  is  exchanged  into  gold,  and  gold  in  turn  is  exchanged 
into  money."  (F.  Lassalle,  Die  Philosophic  Heraklettos  des 
Dunkeln.  Berlin,  1845.  VoL  I,  p.  222.)  Lassalle,  in  his  note 
on  this  passage,  p.  224,  n.  3,  erroneously  makes  gold  a  mere 
symbol  of  value. 

9  Desperate  leap. 


For  this,  it  is  necessary  that  the  labour  expend¬ 
ed  upon  it  be  of  a  kind  that  is  socially  useful,  of 
a  kind  that  constitutes  a  branch  of  the  social 
division  of  labour.  But  division  of  labour  is 
a  system  of  production  which  has  grown  up 
spontaneously  and  continues  to  grow  behind 
the  backs  of  the  producers.  The  commodity 
to  be  exchanged  may  possibly  be  the  product 
of  some  new  kind  of  labour  that  pretends  to 
satisfy  newly  arisen  requirements,  or  even  to 
give  rise  itself  to  new  requirements.  A  par¬ 
ticular  operation,  though  yesterday,  perhaps, 
forming  one  out  of  the  many  operations  con¬ 
ducted  by  one  producer  in  creating  a  given 
commodity,  may  today  separate  itself  from 
this  connection,  may  establish  itself  as  an  in¬ 
dependent  branch  of  labour  and  send  its  in¬ 
complete  product  to  market  as  an  independent 
commodity.  The  circumstances  may  or  may  not 
be  ripe  for  such  a  separation.  Today  the  product 
satisfies  a  social  want.  Tomorrow  the  article 
may,  either  altogether  or  partially,  be  super¬ 
seded  by  some  other  appropriate  product. 
Moreover,  although  our  weaver’s  labour  may  be 
a  recognized  branch  of  the  social  division  of  la¬ 
bour,  yet  that  fact  is  by  no  means  sufficient  to 
guarantee  the  utility  of  his  20  yards  of  linen. 
If  the  community’s  want  of  linen,  and  such  a 
want  has  a  limit  like  every  other  want,  should 
already  be  saturated  by  the  products  of  rival 
weavers,  our  friend’s  product  is  superfluous,  re¬ 
dundant,  and  consequently  useless.  Although 
people  do  not  look  a  gift-horse  in  the  mouth, 
our  friend  does  not  frequent  the  market  for  the 
purpose  of  making  presents.  But  suppose  his 
product  turns  out  a  real  use-value,  and  thereby 
attracts  money.  The  question  arises,  how  much 
will  it  attract?  No  doubt  the  answer  is  already 
anticipated  in  the  price  of  the  article,  in  the  ex¬ 
ponent  of  the  magnitude  of  its  value.  We  leave 
out  of  consideration  here  any  accidental  miscal¬ 
culation  of  value  by  our  friend,  a  mistake  that 
is  soon  rectified  in  the  market.  We  suppose  him 
to  have  spent  on  his  product  only  that  amount 
of  labour  time  that  is  on  an  average  socially 
necessary.  The  price,  then,  is  merely  the  money 
name  of  the  quantity  of  social  labour  realized 
in  his  commodity.  But  without  the  leave,  and 
behind  the  back,  of  our  weaver,  the  old  fash¬ 
ioned  mode  of  weaving  undergoes  4  change.  The 
labour  time  that  yesterday  was  without  doubt 
socially  necessary  to  the  production  of  a  yard 
of  linen,  ceases  to  be  so  today,  a  fact  which  the 
owner  of  the  money  is  only  too  eager  to  prove 
from  the  prices  quoted  by  our  friend’s  competi¬ 
tors.  Unluckily  for  him,  weavers  are  not  few  and 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES  49 


far  between.  Lastly,  suppose  that  every  piece  of 
linen  in  the  market  contains  no  more  labour 
time  than  is  socially  necessary.  In  spite  of  this, 
all  these  pieces  taken  as  a  whole,  may  have  had 
superfluous  labour  time  spent  upon  them.  If 
the  market  cannot  stomach  the  whole  quantity 
at  the  normal  price  of  2  shillings  a  yard,  this 
proves  that  too  great  a  portion  of  the  total  la¬ 
bour  of  the  community  has  been  expended  in 
the  form  of  weaving.  The  effect  is  the  same  as 
if  each  individual  weaver  had  expended  more 
labour  time  upon  his  particular  product  than 
is  socially  necessary.  Here  we  may  say,  with  the 
German  proverb:  “Caught  together,  hanged 
together/’  All  the  linen  in  the  market  counts 
but  as  one  article  of  commerce,  of  which  each 
piece  is  only  an  aliquot  part.  And  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  value  also  of  each  single  yard  is  but  the 
materialized  form  of  the  same  definite  and  so¬ 
cially  fixed  quantity  of  homogeneous  human 
labour. 

We  see  then,  commodities  are  in  love  with 
money,  but  “iKe  course  of  true  love  never  did 
run  smooth.”  The  quantitative  division  of  la¬ 
bour  is  brought  about  in  exactly  the  same  spon¬ 
taneous  and  accidental  manner  as  its  qualita¬ 
tive  division.  The  owners  of  commodities,  there¬ 
fore,  find  out  that  the  same  division  of  labour 
that  turns  them  into  independent  private  pro¬ 
ducers  also  frees  the  social  process  of  production 
and  the  relations  of  the  individual  producers  to 
each  other  within  that  process  from  all  depend¬ 
ence  on  the  will  of  those  producers,  and  that 
the  seeming  mutual  independence  of  the  indi¬ 
viduals  is  supplemented  by  a  system  of  general 
and  mutual  dependence  through  or  by  means 
of  the  products. 

The  division  of  labour  converts  the  product 
of  labour  into  a  commodity,  and  thereby 
makes  necessary  its  further  conversion  into 
money.  At  the  same  time  it  also  makes  the  ac¬ 
complishment  of  this  transubstantiation  quite 
accidental.  Here,  however,  we  are  only  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  phenomenon  in  its  integrity, 
and  we  therefore  assume  its  progress  to  be 
normal.  Moreover,  if  the  conversion  takes  place 
at  all,  that  is,  if  the  commodity  be  not  absolute¬ 
ly  unsaleable,  its  metamorphosis  does  take 
place  although  the  price  realized  may  be  ab¬ 
normally  above  or  below  the  value. 

The  seller  has  his  commodity  replaced  by 
gold,  the  buyer  has  his  gold  replaced  by  a  com¬ 
modity.  The  fact  which  here  stares  us  in  the 
face  is  that  a  commodity  and  gold,  20  yards  of 
linen  and  £2,  have  changed  hands  and  places, 
in  other  words,  that  they  have  been  exchanged. 


But  for  what  is  the  commodity  exchanged?  For 
the  shape  assumed  by  its  own  value,  for  the  uni¬ 
versal  equivalent.  And  for  what  is  the  gold  ex¬ 
changed?  For  a  particular  form  of  its  own  use- 
value.  Why  does  gold  take  the  form  of  money 
face  to  face  with  the  linen?  Because  the  linen’s 
price  of  £2,  its  denomination  in  money,  has  al¬ 
ready  equated  the  linen  to  gold  in  its  character 
of  money.  A  commodity  strips  off  its  original 
commodity  form  on  being  alienated,  i.e.,  on  the 
instant  its  use- value  actually  attracts  the  gold 
that  before  existed  only  ideally  in  its  price.  The 
realization  of  a  commodity’s  price,  or  of  its  ideal 
value  form,  is  therefore  at  the  same  time  the 
realization  of  the  ideal  use-value  of  money;  the 
conversion  of  a  commodity  into  money  is  the 
simultaneous  conversion  of  money  into  a  com¬ 
modity.  The  apparently  single  process  is  in 
reality  a  double  one.  From  the  pole  of  the 
commodity  owner  it  is  a  sale,  from  the  opposite 
pole  of  the  money  owner,  it  is  a  purchase.  In 
other  words,  a  sale  is  a  purchase,  C — M  is  also 
M-Cl. 

Up  to  this  point  we  have  considered  men  in 
only  one  economic  capacity,  that  of  owners  of 
commodities,  a  capacity  in  which  they  appro¬ 
priate  the  produce  of  the  labour  of  others  by 
alienating  that  of  their  own  labour.  Hence,  for 
one  commodity  owner  to  meet  with  another 
who  has  money,  it  is  necessary  either  that  the 
product  of  the  labour  of  the  latter  person,  the 
buyer,  should  be  in  itself  money,  should  be 
gold,  the  material  of  which  money  con¬ 
sists,  or  that  his  product  should  already  have 
changed  its  skin  and  have  stripped  off  its  orig¬ 
inal  form  of  a  useful  object.  In  order  that  it  may 
play  the  part  of  money,  gold  must  of  course  en¬ 
ter  the  market  at  some  point  or  other.  This 
point  is  to  be  found  at  the  source  of  production 
of  the  metal,  at  which  place  gold  is  bartered,  as 
the  immediate  product  of  labour,  for  some  other 
product  of  equal  value.  From  that  moment  it 
always  represents  the  realized  price  of  some 
commodity.2  Apart  from  its  exchange  for  other 
commodities  at  the  source  of  its  production, 
gold,  in  whoever’s  hands  it  may  be,  is  the  trans¬ 
formed  shape  of  some  commodity  alienated  by 
its  owner;  it  is  the  product  of  a  sale  or  of  the  first 

1  "Every  sale  is  a  purchase."  (Dr.  Quesnay, " Dialogues 
surle  commerce  etles  Travauxdes  Artisans”  in  Physiocrates, 
ed.  Daire,  I  Partie,  Paris,  1846,  p.  170.)  Or,  as  Quesnay  in 
his  Maximes  ginirales  puts  it,  "To  sell  is  the  same  as  to 
buy." 

1  "The  price  of  one  commodity  can  be  paid  only  by  the 
price  of  another  commodity." — Mercier  de  la  Rivifcre, 
" LOrdre  naturel  et  essenitel  des  sociftis  politiques ,"  in  Phys - 
iocrates%  ed.  Daire,  II  Partie,  p.  554. 


CAPITAL 


50 

metamorphosis  C— A/.1  Gold,  as  we  saw,  be¬ 
came  ideal  money,  or  a  measure  of  values,  in 
consequence  of  all  commodities  measuring  their 
values  by  it,  and  thus  contrasting  it  ideally  with 
their  natural  shape  as  useful  objects,  and  mak¬ 
ing  it  the  shape  of  their  value.  It  became  real 
money  by  the  general  alienation  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  by  actually  changing  places  with  their  nat¬ 
ural  forms  as  useful  objects,  and  thus  becoming 
in  reality  the  embodiment  of  their  values.  When 
they  assume  this  money  shape,  commodities 
strip  off  every  trace  of  their  natural  use-value, 
and  of  the  particular  kind  of  labour  to  which 
they  owe  their  creation,  in  order  to  transform 
themselves  into  the  uniform,  socially  recog¬ 
nized  incarnation  of  homogeneous  human  la¬ 
bour.  We  cannot  tell  from  the  mere  look  of  a 
piece  of  money  for  what  particular  commodity 
it  has  been  exchanged.  Under  their  money  form 
all  commodities  look  alike.  Hence,  money  may 
be  dirt,  although  dirt  is  not  money.  We  will  as¬ 
sume  that  the  two  gold  pieces,  in  consideration 
of  which  our  weaver  has  parted  with  his  linen, 
are  the  metamorphosed  shape  of  a  quarter  of 
wheat.  The  sale  of  the  linen,  C — A/,  is  at  the 
same  time  its  purchase,  Af— C.  But  the  sale  is 
the  first  act  of  a  process  that  ends  with  a  trans¬ 
action  of  an  opposite  nature,  namely,  the  pur¬ 
chase  of  a  Bible;  the  purchase  of  the  linen,  on 
the  other  hand,  ends  a  movement  that  began 
with  a  transaction  of  an  opposite  nature,  name¬ 
ly,  with  the  sale  of  the  wheat.  C—  Af  (linen — 
money),  which  is  the  first  phase  of  C— Af— C 
(linen— money— Bible),  is  also  Af—  C  (money 
—linen),  the  last  phase  of  another  movement 
C—  Af—  C  (wheat— money— linen).  The  first 
metamorphosis  of  one  commodity,  its  transfor¬ 
mation  from  a  commodity  into  money,  is  there¬ 
fore  also  invariably  the  second  metamorphosis 
of  some  other  commodity,  the  retransformation 
of  the  latter  from  money  into  a  commodity.2 

Af— C,  or  Purchase.  The  Second  and  Concluding 

Metamorphosis  of  a  Commodity. 

Because  money  is  the  metamorphosed  shape 
of  all  other  commodities,  the  result  of  their  gen¬ 
eral  alienation,  it  is  alienable  itself  without  re¬ 
striction  or  condition.  It  reads  all  prices  back¬ 
wards,  and  thus,  so  to  say,  depicts  itself  in  the 
bodies  of  all  other  commodities  which  offer  to  it 
the  material  for  the  realization  of  its  own  use- 

1  "In  order  to  hive  this  money,  one  must  hive  made  i 
sal p.  543. 

1  As  before  remirked,  the  ictuil  producer  of  gold  or  sil¬ 
ver  forms  an  exception.  He  exchanges  his  product  directly 
for  another  commodity  without  hiving  first  sold  it. 


value.  At  the  same  time  the  prices,  wooing 
glances  cast  at  money  by  commodities,  define 
the  limits  of  its  convertibility,  by  pointing  to  its 
quantity.  Since  every  commodity,  on  becoming 
money,  disappears  as  a  commodity,  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  tell  from  the  money  itself  how  it  got 
into  the  hands  of  its  possessor,  or  what  article 
has  been  changed  into  it.  Non  oletpecunia ,3  from 
whatever  source  it  may  come.  Representing  on 
the  one  hand  a  sold  commodity,  it  represents  on 
the  other  a  commodity  to  be  bought.4 

Af — C,  a  purchase,  is,  at  the  same  time,  C — 
Af,  a  sale;  the  concluding  metamorphosis  of  one 
commodity  is  the  first  metamorphosis  of  an¬ 
other.  With  regard  to  our  weaver,  the  life  of  his 
commodity  ends  with  the  Bible,  into  which  he 
has  reconverted  his  £2.  But  suppose  the  seller 
of  the  Bible  turns  the  £2  set  free  by  the  weaver 
into  brandy.  Af — C,  the  concluding  phase  of 
C—  Af—  C  (linen,  money,  Bible),  is  also  C— Af, 
the  first  phase  of  C— Af— C  (Bible,  money, 
brandy).  The  producer  of  a  particular  commod¬ 
ity  has  that  one  article  alone  to  offer;  this  he 
sells  very  often  in  large  quantities,  but  his  many 
and  various  wants  compel  him  to  split  up  the 
price  realized,  the  sum  of  money  set  free,  into 
numerous  purchases.  Hence  a  sale  leads  to  many 
purchases  of  various  articles.  The  concluding 
metamorphosis  of  a  commodity  thus  consti¬ 
tutes  an  aggregation  of  first  metamorphoses  of 
various  other  com  modi  ti  es. 

If  we  now  consider  the  completed  metamor¬ 
phosis  of  a  commodity,  as  a  whole,  it  appears 
in  the  first  place  that  it  is  made  up  of  two  op¬ 
posite  and  complementary  movements,  C— Af 
and  Af—  C.  These  two  antithetical  transmu¬ 
tations  of  a  commodity  are  brought  about  by 
two  antithetical  social  acts  on  the  part  of  the 
owner,  and  these  acts  in  their  turn  stamp 
the  character  of  the  economical  parts  played 
by  him.  As  the  person  who  makes  a  sale,  he 
is  a  seller;  as  the  person  who  makes  a  pur¬ 
chase,  he  is  a  buyer.  But  just  as,  upon  every 
such  transmutation  of  a  commodity,  its  two 
forms,  commodity  form  and  money  form,  exist 
simultaneously  but  at  opposite  £oles,  so  every 
seller  has  a  buyer  opposed  to  him,  and  every 
buyer  a  seller.  While  one  particular  commodity 
is  going  through  its  two  transmutations  in  suc¬ 
cession,  from  a  commodity  intp  money  and 
from  money  into  another  commodity,  the  own- 

*  Money  has  no  smell. 

4  "If  money  in  our  hands  represents  the  things  we  desire 
to  buy,  it  also  represents  those  things  which  we  have  sold 
in  order  to  obtain  this  money." — Merrier  de  la  Rivifcre, 
op.  eit.t  p.  586. 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES 


er  of  the  commodity  changes  in  succession  his 
part  from  that  of  seller  to  that  of  buyer.  These 
characters  of  seller  and  buyer  are  therefore  not 
permanent,  but  attach  themselves  in  turns  to 
the  various  persons  engaged  in  the  circulation 
of  commodities. 

The  complete  metamorphosis  of  a  commod¬ 
ity,  in  its  simplest  form,  implies  four  extremes, 
and  thr  tz  dramatis  persona .  First,  a  commodity 
comes  face  to  face  with  money;  the  latter  is  the 
form  taken  by  the  value  of  the  former,  and  ex¬ 
ists  in  all  its  hard  reality  in  the  pocket  of  the 
buyer.  A  commodity  owner  is  thus  brought  into 
contact  with  a  possessor  of  money.  So  soon, 
now,  as  the  commodity  has  been  changed  into 
money,  the  money  becomes  its  transient  equiv¬ 
alent  form,  the  use-value  of  which  equivalent 
form  is  to  be  found  in  the  bodies  of  other  com¬ 
modities.  Money,  the  final  term  of  the  first 
transmutation,  is  at  the  same  time  the  starting 
point  for  the  second.  The  person  who  is  a  seller 
in  the  first  transaction  thus  becomes  a  buyer  in 
the  second,  in  wliu  ii  a  third  commodity  owner 
appears  on  the  scene  as  a  seller.1 

The  two  phases,  each  inverse  to  the  other, 
that  make  up  the  metamorphosis  of  a  commod¬ 
ity,  constitute  together  a  circular  movement,  a 
circuit:  commodity  form,  stripping  off  of  this 
form,  and  return  to  the  commodity  form.  No 
doubt,  the  commodity  appears  here  under  two 
different  aspects.  At  the  starting  point  it  is  not 
a  use-value  to  its  owner;  at  the  finishing  point 
it  is.  So,  too,  the  money  appears  in  the  first 
phase  .as  a  solid  crystal  of  value,  a  crystal  into 
which  the  commodity  eagerly  solidifies,  and  in 
the  second,  dissolves  into  the  mere  transient 
equivalent  form  destined  to  be  replaced  by  a 
use-value. 

The  two  metamorphoses  constituting  the  cir¬ 
cuit  are  at  the  same  time  two  inverse  partial 
metamorphoses  of  two  other  commodities.  One 
and  the  same  commodity,  the  linen,  opens  the 
series  of  its  own  metamorphoses,  and  completes 
the  metamorphosis  of  another  (the  wheat).  In 
the  first  phase  or  sale,  the  linen  plays  these  two 
parts  in  its  own  person.  But,  then,  changed  into 
gold,  it  completes  its  own  second  and  final  met¬ 
amorphosis,  and  helps  at  the  same  time  to  ac¬ 
complish  the  first  metamorphosis  of  a  third 
commodity.  Hence  the  circuit  made  by  one 
commodity  in  the  course  of  its  metamorphoses 
is  inextricably  mixed  up  with  the  circuits  of 
other  commodities.  The  total  of  all  the  different 

1  “There  are,  then,  four  terms  and  three  contracting.par- 
ties,  and  one  of  the  parties  puts  in  an  appearance  twice.” 
— Lc  Trosne,  op. «/.,  p.  909. 


51 

circuits  constitutes  the  circulation  of  commodi¬ 
ties . 

The  circulation  of  commodities  differs  from 
the  direct  exchange  of  products  (barter),  not 
only  in  form,  but  in  substance.  Only  consider 
the  course  of  events.  The  weaver  has,  as  a  mat¬ 
ter  of  fact,  exchanged  his  linen  for  a  Bible,  his 
own  commodity  for  that  of  someone  else.  But 
this  is  true  only  so  far  as  he  himself  is  concerned. 
The  seller  of  the  Bible,  who  prefers  something 
to  warm  his  inside,  no  more  thought  of  exchang¬ 
ing  his  Bible  for  linen  than  our  weaver  knew 
that  wheat  had  been  exchanged  for  his  linen. 
B's  commodity  replaces  that  of  A,  but  A  and  B 
do  not  mutually  exchange  those  commodities. 
It  may,  of  course,  happen  that  A  and  B  make 
simultaneous  purchases,  the  one  from  the  other; 
but  such  exceptional  transactions  are  by  no 
means  the  necessary  result  of  the  general  condi¬ 
tions  of  the  circulation  of  commodities.  We  see 
here,  on  the  one  hand,  how  the  exchange  of  corn- 
modi  ties  breaks  through  all  local  and  personal 
bounds  inseparable  from  direct  barter,  and  de¬ 
velops  the  circulation  of  the  products  of  social 
labour;  and  on  the  other  hand,  how  it  develops 
a  whole  network  of  social  relations  spontaneous 
in  their  growth  and  entirely  beyond  the  control 
of  the  actors.  It  is  only  because  the  farmer  has 
sold  his  wheat  that  the  weaver  is  enabled  to  sell 
his  linen,  only  because  the  weaver  has  sold  his 
linen  that  our  Hotspur  is  enabled  to  sell  his 
Bible,  and  only  because  the  latter  has  sold  the 
water  of  everlasting  life  that  the  distiller  is  en¬ 
abled  to  sell  his  eau-de-vie?  and  so  on. 

The  process  of  circula  tion,  therefore,  does  not, 
like  direct  barter  of  products,  become  extin¬ 
guished  upon  the  use-values  changing  places 
and  hands.  The  money  does  not  vanish  on  drop¬ 
ping  out  of  the  circuit  of  the  metamorphosis  of 
a  given  commodity.  It  is  constantly  being  pre¬ 
cipitated  into  new  places  in  the  arena  of  circu¬ 
lation  vacated  by  other  commodities.  In  the 
complete  metamorphosis  of  the  linen,  for  ex¬ 
ample  (linen — money — Bible),  the  linen  first 
falls  out  of  circulation,  and  money  steps  into  its 
place.  Then  the  Bible  falls  out  of  circulation, 
and  again  money  takes  its  place.  When  one 
commodity  replaces  another,  the  money  com¬ 
modity  always  sticks  to  the  hands  of  some  third 
person.3  Circulation  sweats  money  from  every 
pore. 

Nothing  can  be  more  childish  than  the  dog- 

9  Brandy. 

9  Self-evident  as  this  may  be,  it  is  nevertheless  for  the 
most  part  unobserved  by  political  economists,  and  es¬ 
pecially  by  the  "Freetrader  Vulgaris .” 


52  CAPITAL 

ma  that  because  every  sale  is  a  purchase,  and  titheses  and  contradictions,  which  areimmanent 


every  purchase  a  sale,  therefore  the  circulation 
of  commodities  necessarily  implies  an  equilib¬ 
rium  of  sales  and  purchases.  If  this  means  that 
the  number  of  actual  sales  is  equal  to  the  num¬ 
ber  of  purchases,  it  is  mere  tautology.  But  its 
real  purport  is  to  prove  that  every  seller  brings 
his  buyer  to  market  with  him.  Nothing  of  the 
kind.  The  sale  and  the  purchase  constitute  one 
identical  act,  an  exchange  between  a  commod¬ 
ity  owner  and  an  owner  of  money,  between  two 
persons  as  opposed  to  each  other  as  the  two 
poles  of  a  magnet.  They  form  two  distinct  acts  of 
polar  and  opposite  characters  when  performed 
by  one  single  person.  Hence  the  identity  of 
sale  and  purchase  implies  that  the  commodity 
is  useless,  if,  on  being  thrown  into  the  alchemis- 
tical  retort  of  circulation,  it  does  not  come  out 
again  in  the  shape  of  money ;  if,  in  other  words, 
it  cannot  be  sold  by  its  owner,  and  therefore  be 
bought  by  the  owner  of  the  money.  That  iden¬ 
tity  further  implies  that  the  exchange,  if  it  does 
take  place,  constitutes  a  period  of  rest,  an  inter¬ 
val,  long  or  short,  in  the  life  of  the  commodity. 
Since  the  first  metamorphosis  of  a  commodity  is 
at  once  a  sale  and  a  purchase,  it  is  also  an  inde¬ 
pendent  process  in  itself.  The  purchaser  has  the 
commodity,  the  seller  has  the  money,  i.e.,  a 
commodity  ready  to  go  into  circulation  at  any 
time.  No  one  can  sell  unless  some  one  else  pur¬ 
chases.  But  no  one  is  forthwith  bound  to  pur¬ 
chase  because  he  has  just  sold.  Circulatjon 
bursts  through  all  restrictions  as  to  time,  place, 
and  individuals,  imposed  by  direct  barter,  and 
this  it  effects  by  splitting  up  into  the  antithesis 
of  a  sale  and  a  purchase  the  direct  identity  that 
in  barter  does  exist  between  the  alienation  of 
one’s  own  and  the  acquisition  of  some  other 
man’s  product.  To  say  that  these  two  independ¬ 
ent  and  antithetical  acts  have  an  intrinsic  uni¬ 
ty,  are  essentially  one,  is  the  same  as  to  say  that 
this  intrinsic  oneness  expresses  itself  in  an  ex¬ 
ternal  antithesis.  If  the  interval  in  time  be¬ 
tween  the  two  complementary  phases  of  the 
complete  metamorphosis  of  a  commodity  be¬ 
comes  too  great,  if  the  split  between  the  sale  and 
the  purchase  becomes  too  pronounced,  the  in¬ 
timate  connection  between  them,  their  oneness, 
asserts  itself  by  producing—a  crisis.  The  anti¬ 
thesis  between  use-value  and  value;  the  contra¬ 
dictions  that  private  labour  is  bound  to  mani¬ 
fest  itself  as  direct  social  labour,  that  a  particu¬ 
larized  concrete  kind  of  labour  has  to  pass  for 
abstract  human  labour;  the  contradiction  be¬ 
tween  the  personification  of  objects  and  the  rep¬ 
resentation  of  persons  by  things;  all  these  an- 


in  commodities,  assert  themselves,  and  develop 
their  modes  of  motion,  in  the  antithetical  phases 
of  the  metamorphosis  of  a  commodity.  These 
modes  therefore  imply  the  possibility,  and  no 
more  than  the  possibility,  of  crises.  The  conver¬ 
sion  of  this  mere  possibility  into  a  reality  is  the 
result  of  a  long  series  of  relations  that,  from  our 
present  standpoint  of  simple  circulation,  have 
as  yet  no  existence. 1 

b.  The  Currency  of  Money . 

The  change  of  form,  C— A/— C,  by  which  the 
circulation  of  the  material  products  of  labour  is 
brought  about,  requires  that  a  given  value  in 
the  shape  of  a  commodity  shall  begin  the  proc¬ 
ess,  and  shall,  also  in  the  shape  of  a  commodity, 
end  it.  The  movement  of  the  commodity  is 
therefore  a  circuit.  On  the  other  hand,  the  form 
of  this  movement  precludes  a  circuit  from  being 
made  by  the  money.  The  result  is  not  the  return 
of  the  money,  but  its  continued  removal  farther 
and  farther  away  from  its  starting  point.  So 
long  as  the  seller  sticks  fast  to  his  money,  which 
is  the  transformed  shape  of  his  commodity,  that 
commodity  is  still  in  the  first  phase  of  its  meta¬ 
morphosis,  and  has  completed  only  half  its 
course.  But  so  soon  as  he  completes  the  process, 
so  soon  as  he  supplements  his  sale  by  a  purchase, 
the  money  again  leaves  the  hands  of  its  posses¬ 
sor.  It  is  true  that  if  the  weaver,  after  buying 
the  Bible,  sells  more  linen,  money  comes  back 
into  his  hands.  But  this  return  is  not  owing  to 
the  circulation  of  the  first  20  yards  of  linen ;  that 
circulation  resulted  in  the  money  getting  into 
the  hands  of  the  seller  of  the  Bible.  The  return 
of  money  into  the  hands  of  the  weaver  is  brought 
about  only  by  the  renewal  or  repetition  of  the 

1  See  my  observations  on  James  Mill  in  Zur  Krtttk ,  etc., 
p.  74-76.  With  regard  to  this  subject,  we  may  notice  two 
methods  characteristic  of  apologetic  economy.  The  first  is 
the  identification  of  the  circulation  of  commodities  with 
the  direct  barter  of  products,  by  simple  abstraction  from 
their  points  of  difference;  the  second  is,  the  attempt  to  ex¬ 
plain  away  the  contradictions  of  capitalist  production,  by 
reducing  the  relations  between  the  persons  engaged  in  that 
mode  of  production,  to  the  simple  relations  arising  out  of 
the  circulation  of  commodities.  The  production  and  cir¬ 
culation  of  commodities  are,  however,  phenomena  that  oc¬ 
cur  to  a  greater  or  less  extent  in  modes  of  production  the 
most  diverse.  If  we  are  acquainted  with  nothing  but  the 
abstract  categories  of  circulation,  which  are  common  to  all 
these  modes  of  production,  we  cannot  possibly  know  any¬ 
thing  of  the  specific  points  of  difference  of  those  modes, 
nor  pronounce  any  judgment  upon  them.  In  no  science  is 
sucn  a  big  fuss  made  with  commonplace  truisms  as  in  po¬ 
litical  economy.  For  instance,  J.  B.  Say  sets  himself  up  as 
a  judge  of  crises,  because,  forsooth,  he  knows  that  a  com¬ 
modity  is  a  product. 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES 


process  of  circulation  with  a  fresh  commodity, 
which  renewed  process  ends  with  the  same  re¬ 
sult  as  its  predecessor  did.  Hence  the  movement 
directly  imparted  to  money  by  the  circulation 
of  commodities  takes  the  form  of  a  constant 
motion  away  from  its  starting  point,  of  a  course 
from  the  hands  of  one  commodity  owner  into 
those  of  another.  This  course  constitutes  its 
currency  {cours  de  la  monnaic). 

The  currency  of  money  is  the  constant  and 
monotonous  repetition  of  the  same  process.  The 
commodity  is  always  in  the  hands  of  the  seller; 
the  money,  as  a  means  of  purchase,  always  in 
the  hands  of  the  buyer.  And  money  serves  as  a 
means  of  purchase  by  realizing  the  price  of  the 
commodity.  This  realization  transfers  the  com¬ 
modity  from  the  seller  to  the  buyer,  and  re¬ 
moves  the  money  from  the  hands  of  the  buyer 
into  those  of  the  seller,  where  it  again  goes 
through  the  same  process  with  another  com¬ 
modity.  That  this  one-sided  character  of  the 
money’s  motion  arises  out  of  the  two-sided  char¬ 
acter  of  the  comiriudity’s  motion,  is  a  circum¬ 
stance  that  is  veiled  over.  The  very  nature  of 
the  circulation  of  commodities  begets  the  oppo¬ 
site  appearance.  The  first  metamorphosis  of  a 
commodity  is  visible,  not  only  as  the  money’s 
movement,  but  also  as  that  of  the  commodity 
itself;  in  the  second  metamorphosis,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  the  movement  appears  to  us  as  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  money  alone.  In  the  first  phase  of 
its  circulation  the  commodity  changes  place 
with  the  money.  Thereupon  the  commodity, 
under  its  aspect  of  a  useful  object,  falls  out  of 
circulation  into  consumption.1  In  its  stead  we 
have  its  value  shape — the  money.  It  then  goes 
through  the  second  phase  of  its  circulation,  not 
under  its  own  natural  shape,  but  under  the 
shape  of  money.  The  continuity  of  the  move¬ 
ment  is  therefore  kept  up  by  the  money  alone, 
and  the  same  movement  that  as  regards  the 
commodity  consists  of  two  processes  of  an  anti¬ 
thetical  character,  is,  when  considered  as  the 
movement  of  the  money,  always  one  and  the 
same  process,  a  continued  change  of  places  with 
ever  fresh  commodities.  Hence  the  result 
brought  about  by  the  circulation  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  namely,  the  replacing  of  one  commodity  by 
another,  takes  the  appearance  of  having  been 
effected  not  by  means  of  the  change  of  form  of 
the  commodities,  but  rather  by  the  money  act- 

1  Even  when  the  commodity  is  sold  over  and  over  again, 
a  phenomenon  that  at  present  has  no  existence  for  us,  it 
falls,  when  definitely  sold  for  the  last  time,  out  of  the 
sphere  of  circulation  into  that  of  consumption,  where  it 
serves  either  as  means  of  subsistence  or  means  of  produc¬ 
tion. 


53 

ing  as  a  medium  of  circulation,  by  an  action 
that  circulates  commodities,  to  all  appearance 
motionless  in  themselves,  and  transfers  them 
from  hands  in  which  they  are  non-use-values, 
to  hands  in  which  they  are  use-values;  and  that 
in  a  direction  constantly  opposed  to  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  money.  The  latter  is  continually 
withdrawing  commodities  from  circulation  and 
stepping  into  their  places,  and  in  this  way  con¬ 
tinually  moving  farther  and  farther  from  its 
starting-point.  Hence,  although  the  movement 
of  the  money  is  merely  the  expression  of  the  cir¬ 
culation  of  commodities,  yet  the  contrary  ap¬ 
pears  to  be  the  actual  fact,  and  the  circulation 
of  commodities  seems  to  be  the  result  of  the 
movement  of  the  money.1 

Again,  money  functions  as  a  means  of  circu¬ 
lation,  only  because  in  it  the  values  of  commod¬ 
ities  have  independent  reality.  Hence  its  move¬ 
ment,  as  the  medium  of  circulation,  is,  in  fact, 
merely  the  movement  of  commodities  while 
changing  their  forms.  This  fact  must  therefore 
make  itself  plainly  visible  in  the  currency  of 
money.  The  twofold  change  of  form  in  a  com¬ 
modity  is  reflected  in  the  twice  repeated  change 
of  place  of  the  same  piece  of  money  during  the 
complete  metamorphosis  of  a  commodity,  and 
in  its  constantly  repeated  change  of  place  as 
metamorphosis  follows  metamorphosis  and 
each  becomes  interlaced  with  the  others. 

The  linen,  for  instance,  first  of  all  exchanges 
its  commodity  form  for  its  money  form.  The 
last  term  of  its  first  metamorphosis  or 

the  money  form,  is  the  first  term  of  its  final  met¬ 
amorphosis  ( M — C),  of  its  re-conversion  into  a 
useful  commodity,  the  Bible.  But  each  of  these 
changes  of  form  is  accomplished  by  an  exchange 
between  commodity  and  money,  by  their  recip¬ 
rocal  displacement.  The  same  pieces  of  coin, 
in  the  first  act,  changed  places  with  the  linen;  in 
the  second,  with  the  Bible.  They  are  displaced 
twice.  The  first  metamorphosis  puts  them  into 
the  weaver’s  pocket,  the  second  draws  them  out 
of  it.  The  two  inverse  changes  undergone  by  the 
same  commodity  are  reflected  in  the  displace¬ 
ment,  twice  repeated,  but  in  opposite  directions, 
of  the  same  pieces  of  coin. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  only  one  phase  of  the  met¬ 
amorphosis  is  gone  through,  if  there  are  only 
sales  or  only  purchases,  then  a  given  piece  of 
money  changes  its  place  only  once.  Its  second 
change  corresponds  to  and  expresses  the  second 
metamorphosis  of  the  commodity,  its  re-con- 

1  "It  (money)  has  no  other  movement  than  that  which 
is  impressed  on  it  by  the  products."— Le  Trosno,  op.  d$.% 
p.  885. 


CAPITAL 


54 

version  from  money  into  another  commodity 
intended  for  use.  It  is  a  matter  of  course,  that 
all  this  is  applicable  to  the  simple  circulation  of 
commodities  alone,  the  only  form  that  we  are 
now  considering. 

Every  commodity,  when  it  first  steps  into  cir¬ 
culation,  and  undergoes  its  first  change  of  form, 
does  so  only  to  fall  out  of  circulation  again  and 
to  be  replaced  by  other  commodities.  Money, 
on  the  contrary,  as  the  medium  of  circulation, 
keeps  continually  within  the  sphere  of  circula¬ 
tion,  and  moves  about  in  it.  The  question  there¬ 
fore  arises  how  much  money  this  sphere  con¬ 
stantly  absorbs. 

In  a  given  country  there  take  place  everyday 
at  the  same  time,  but  in  different  localities,  nu¬ 
merous  one-sided  metamorphoses  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  or,  in  other  words,  numerous  sales  and  nu¬ 
merous  purchases.  The  commodities  are  equat¬ 
ed  beforehand  in  imagination,  by  their  prices, 
to  definite  quantities  of  money.  And  since,  in 
the  form  of  circulation  now  under  considera¬ 
tion,  money  and  commodities  always  come  bod¬ 
ily  face  to  face,  one  at  the  positive  pole  of  pur¬ 
chase,  the  other  at  the  negative  pole  of  sale,  it 
is  clear  that  the  amount  of  the  means  of  circu¬ 
lation  required  is  determined  beforehand  by  the 
sum  of  the  prices  of  all  these  commodities.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  money  in  reality  represents 
the  quantity  or  sum  of  gold  ideally  expressed 
beforehand  by  the  sum  of  the  prices  of  the  com¬ 
modities.  The  equality  of  these  two  sums  is 
therefore  self-evident.  We  know,  however,  that, 
the  values  of  commodities  remaining  constant, 
their  prices  vary  with  the  value  of  gold  (the 
material  of  money),  rising  in  proportion  as  it 
falls,  and  falling  in  proportion  as  it  rises.  Now 
if,  in  consequence  of  such  a  rise  or  fall  in  the 
value  of  gold,  the  sum  of  the  prices  of  commodi¬ 
ties  fall  or  rise,  the  quantity  of  money  in  cur¬ 
rency  must  fall  or  rise  to  the  same  extent.  The 
change  in  the  quantity  of  the  circulating  medi¬ 
um  is,  in  this  case,  it  is  true,  caused  by  the  mon¬ 
ey  itself,  yet  not  in  virtue  of  its  function  as  a 
medium  of  circulation,  but  of  its  function  as  a 
measure  of  value.  First,  the  price  of  the  com¬ 
modities  varies  inversely  as  the  value  of  the 
money,  and  then  the  quantity  of  the  medium 
of  circulation  varies  directly  as  the  price  of  the 
commodities.  Exactly  the  same  thing  would 
happen  if,  for  instance,  instead  of  the  value  of 
gold  falling,  gold  were  replaced  by  silver  as  the 
measure  of  value,  or  if,  instead  of  the  value  of 
silver  rising,  gold  were  to  thrust  silver  out  from 
being  the  measure  of  value.  In  the  one  case, 
more  silver  would  be  current  than  gold  was  be¬ 


fore;  in  the  other  case,  less  gold  would  be  cur¬ 
rent  than  silver  was  before.  In  each  case  the 
value  of  the  material  of  money,  i.e.,  the  value 
of  the  commodity  that  serves  as  the  measure  of 
value,  would  have  undergone  a  change,  and 
therefore  so,  too,  would  the  prices  of  commodi¬ 
ties  which  express  their  values  in  money,  and 
so,  too,  would  the  quantity  of  money  current 
whose  function  it  is  to  realize  those  prices.  We 
have  already  seen  that  the  sphere  of  circulation 
has  an  opening  through  which  gold  (or  the  ma¬ 
terial  of  money  generally)  enters  into  it  as  a 
commodity  with  a  given  value.  Hence,  when 
money  enters  on  its  functions  as  a  measure  of 
value,  when  it  expresses  prices,  its  value  is  al¬ 
ready  determined.  If  now  its  value  falls,  this  fact 
is  first  evidenced  by  a  change  in  the  prices  of 
those  commodities  that  are  directly  bartered 
for  the  precious  metals  at  the  sources  of  their 
production.  The  greater  part  of  all  other  com¬ 
modities,  especially  in  the  imperfectly  devel¬ 
oped  stages  of  civil  society,  will  continue  for  a 
long  time  to  be  estimated  by  the  former  anti¬ 
quated  and  illusory  value  of  the  measure  of  val¬ 
ue.  Nevertheless,  one  commodity  infects  anoth¬ 
er  through  their  common  value  relation,  so  that 
their  prices,  expressed  in  gold  or  in  silver,  grad¬ 
ually  settle  down  into  the  proportions  deter¬ 
mined  by  their  comparative  values,  until  final¬ 
ly  the  values  of  all  commodities  are  estimated 
in  terms  of  the  new  value  of  the  metal  that  con¬ 
stitutes  money.  This  process  is  accompanied  by 
the  continued  increase  in  the  quantity  of  the 
precious  metals,  an  increase  caused  by  their 
streaming  in  to  replace  the  articles  directly  bar¬ 
tered  for  them  at  their  sources  of  production. 
In  proportion,  therefore,  as  commodities  in  gen¬ 
eral  acquire  their  true  prices,  in  proportion  as 
their  values  become  estimated  according  to  the 
fallen  value  of  the  precious  metal,  in  the  same 
proportion  the  quantity  of  that  metal  neces¬ 
sary  for  realizing  those  new  prices  is  provided 
beforehand.  A  one-sided  observation  of  the  re¬ 
sults  that  followed  upon  the  discovery  of  fresh 
supplies  of  gold  and  silver  led  some  economists 
in  the  seventeenth,  and  particularly  in  the 
eighteenth  century,  to  the  false  Conclusion,  that 
the  prices  of  commodities  had  gone  up  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  increased  quantity  of  gold  and 
silver  serving  as  means  of  circulation.  Hence¬ 
forth  we  shall  consider  the  value  of  gold  to  be 
fixed,  as,  in  fact,  it  is  momentarily  whenever  we 
estimate  the  price  of  a  commodity. 

On  this  supposition,  then,  the  quantity  of  the 
medium  of  circulation  is  determined  by  the  sum 
of  the  prices  that  have  to  be  realized.  If  now  we 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES 


further  suppose  the  price  of  each  commodity  to 
be  given,  the  sum  of  the  prices  clearly  depends 
on  the  mass  of  commodities  in  circulation.  It 
requires  but  little  racking  of  brains  to  compre¬ 
hend  that  if  one  quarter  of  wheat  costs  £2, 100 
quarters  will  cost  £200,  200  quarters  £400,  and 
so  on,  consequently  the  quantity  of  money 
that  changes  place  with  the  wheat,  when  sold, 
must  increase  with  the  quantity  of  that  wheat. 

If  the  mass  of  commodities  remain  constant, 
the  quantity  of  circulating  money  varies  with 
the  fluctuations  in  the  prices  of  those  commodi¬ 
ties.  It  increases  and  diminishes  because  the 
sum  of  the  prices  increases  or  diminishes  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  the  change  of  price.  To  produce  this 
effect,  it  is  by  no  means  requisite  that  the  prices 
of  all  commodities  should  rise  or  fall  simultane¬ 
ously.  A  rise  or  a  fall  in  the  prices  of  a  number  of 
leading  articles  is  sufficient  in  the  one  case  to 
increase,  in  the  other  to  diminish,  the  sum  of  the 
prices  of  all  commodities,  and,  therefore,  to  put 
more  or  less  money  in  circulation.  Whether  the 
change  in  the  price  correspond  to  an  actual 
change  of  value  in  the  commodities,  or  whether 
it  be  the  result  of  mere  fluctuations  in  market 
prices,  the  effect  on  the  quantity  of  the  medium 
of  circulation  remains  the  same. 

Suppose  the  following  articles  to  be  sold  or 
partially  metamorphosed  simultaneously  in 
different  localities:  say,  one  quarter  of  wheat, 
20  yards  of  linen,  one  Bible,  and  4  gallons  of 
brandy.  If  the  price  of  each  article  be  £2,  and 
the  sum  of  the  prices  to  be  realized  be  conse¬ 
quently  £8,  it  follows  that  £8  in  money  must 
go  into  circulation.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  these 
same  articles  arc  links  in  the  following  chain  of 
metamorphoses:  1  quarter  of  wheat — £2 — 20 
yards  of  linen — £2—  1  Bible— £2— 4  gallons  of 
brandy — £2,  a  chain  that  is  already  well-known 
to  us,  in  that  case  the  £2  cause  the  different 
commodities  to  circulate  one  after  the  other, 
and  after  realizing  their  prices  successively,  and 
therefore  the  sum  of  those  prices,  £8,  they  come 
to  rest  at  last  in  the  pocket  of  the  distiller.  The 
£2  thus  make  four  moves.  This  repeated  change 
of  place  of  the  same  pieces  of  money  corre¬ 
sponds  to  the  double  change  in  form  of  the  com¬ 
modities,  to  their  motion  in  opposite  directions 
through  two  stages  of  circulation,  and  to  the 
interlacing  of  the  metamorphoses  of  different 
commodities.1  These  antithetic  and  comple- 

1  “It  is  the  products  which  set  it  G«*.,  money)  in  motion, 
and  cause  it  to  circulate.  . . .  The  velocity  of  it9  motion 
makes  up  for  any  lack  of  quantity  which  it  may  have. 
When  there  is  need,  it  can  slide  from  one  hand  to  another 
without  stopping  for  an  instant.”— Le  Trosne,  op .  cit.,  pp. 
915,916. 


55 

mentary  phases,  of  which  the  process  of  meta¬ 
morphosis  consists,  are  gone  through,  not  simul¬ 
taneously,  but  successively.  Time  is  therefore 
required  for  the  completion  of  the  series.  Hence 
the  velocity  of  the  currency  of  money  is  meas¬ 
ured  by  the  number  of  moves  made  by  a  given 
piece  of  money  in  a  given  time.  Suppose  the  cir¬ 
culation  of  the  four  articles  takes  a  day.  The 
sum  of  the  prices  to  be  realized  in  the  day  is  £8, 
the  number  of  moves  of  the  two  pieces  of  money 
is  four,  and  the  quantity  of  money  circulating  is 
£2.  Hence,  for  a  given  interval  of  time  during 
the  process  of  circulation,  we  have  the  following 
relation:  the  quantity  of  money  functioning  as 
the  circulating  medium  is  equal  to  the  sum  of 
the  prices  of  the  commodities  divided  by  the 
number  of  moves  made  by  coins  of  the  same 
denomination.  This  law  holds  generally. 

The  total  circulation  of  commodities  in  a 
given  country  during  a  given  period  is  made  up 
on  the  one  hand  of  numerous  isolated  and 
simultaneous  partial  metamorphoses,  sales 
which  are  at  the  same  time  purchases,  in  which 
each  coin  changes  its  place  only  once,  or  makes 
only  one  move;  on  the  other  hand,  of  numerous 
distinct  series  of  metamorphoses  partly  running 
side  by  side,  and  partly  coalescing  with  each 
other,  in  each  of  which  series  each  coin  makes  a 
number  of  moves,  the  number  being  greater  or 
less  according  to  circumstances.  The  total  num¬ 
ber  of  moves  made  by  all  the  circulating  coins 
of  one  denomination  being  given,  we  can  arrive 
at  the  average  number  of  moves  made  by  a  sin¬ 
gle  coin  of  that  denomination,  or  at  the  average 
velocity  of  the  currency  of  money.  The  quantity 
of  money  thrown  into  the  circulation  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  each  day  is  of  course  determined  by 
the  sum  of  the  prices  of  all  the  commodities  cir¬ 
culating  simultaneously  side  by  side.  But  once 
in  circulation,  coins  are,  so  to  say,  made  respon¬ 
sible  for  one  another.  If  the  one  increase  its  ve¬ 
locity,  the  other  either  retards  its  own,  or  alto¬ 
gether  falls  out  of  circulation;  for  the  circula¬ 
tion  can  absorb  only  such  a  quantity  of  gold  as, 
when  multiplied  by  the  mean  number  of  moves 
made  by  one  single  coin  or  element,  is  equal  to 
the  sum  of  the  prices  to  be  realized.  Hence,  if  the 
number  of  moves  made  by  the  separate  pieces 
increase,  the  total  number  of  those  pieces  in  cir¬ 
culation  diminishes.  If  the  number  of  the  moves 
diminish,  the  total  number  of  pieces  increases. 
Since  the  quantity  of  money  capable  of  being 
absorbed  by  the  circulation  is  given  for  a  given 
mean  velocity  of  currency,  all  that  is  necessary 
in  order  to  abstract  a  given  number  of  sover¬ 
eigns  from  the  circulation  is  to  throw  the  same 


56  CAPITAL 


number  of  one-pound  notes  into  it,  a  trick  well 
known  to  all  bankers. 

Just  as  the  currency  of  money,  generally  con¬ 
sidered,  is  but  a  reflex  of  the  circulation  of  com¬ 
modities,  or  of  the  antithetical  metamorphoses 
they  undergo,  so,  too,  the  velocity  of  that  cur¬ 
rency  reflects  the  rapidity  with  which  commodi¬ 
ties  change  their  forms,  the  continued  interlac¬ 
ing  of  one  series  of  metamorphoses  with  anoth¬ 
er,  the  hurried  social  interchange  of  matter,  the 
rapid  disappearance  of  commodities  from  the 
sphere  of  circulation,  and  the  equally  rapid  sub¬ 
stitution  of  fresh  ones  in  their  places.  Hence,  in 
the  velocity  of  the  currency  we  have  the  fluent 
unity  of  the  antithetical  and  complementary 
phases,  the  unity  of  the  conversion  of  the  useful 
aspect  of  commodities  into  their  value  aspect, 
and  their  re-conversion  from  the  latter  aspect 
to  the  former,  or  the  unity  of  the  two  processes 
of  sale  and  purchase.  On  the  other  hand,  the  re¬ 
tardation  of  the  currency  reflects  the  separation 
of  these  two  processes  into  isolated  antithetical 
phases,  reflects  the  stagnation  in  the  change  of 
form,  and,  therefore,  in  the  social  interchange  of 
matter.  The  circulation  itself,  of  course,  gives 
no  clue  to  the  origin  of  this  stagnation;  it  merely 
puts  in  evidence  the  phenomenon  itself.  The 
general  public,  who,  simultaneously,  with  the 
retardation  of  the  currency,  see  money  appear 
and  disappear  less  frequently  at  the  periphery 
of  circulation,  naturally  attribute  this  retarda¬ 
tion  to  a  quantitative  deficiencv  in  the  circulat¬ 
ing  medium.1 

1  “Money  being  ...  the  common  measure  of  buying  and 
selling,  everybody  who  hath  anything  to  sell,  and  cannot 
procure  chapmen  for  it,  is  presently  apt  to  think  that  want 
of  money  in  the  kingdom,  or  country,  is  the  cause  why  his 
goods  do  not  go  off;  and  so,  want  of  money  is  the  common 
cry;  which  is  a  great  mistake.  . . .  What  do  these  people 
want,  who  cry  out  for  money? . . .  The  farmer  complains 
...  he  thinks  that,  were  more  money  in  the  country,  he 
should  have  a  price  for  his  goods.  Then  it  seems  money  is 
not  his  want,  but  a  price  for  his  corn  and  cattle,  which  he 
would  sell,  but  cannot. . . .  Why  cannot  he  get  a  price? . . . 
(t)  Either  there  is  too  much  corn  and  cattle  in  the  country, 
so  that  most  who  come  to  market  have  need  of  selling,  as 
he  hath,  and  few  of  buying;  or  (2)  There  wants  the  usual 
vent  abroad  by  transportation  . . .;  or  (3)  Ths^consump- 
tion  fails,  as  when  men,  by  reason  of  poverty,  do  not  spend 
so  much  in  their  houses  as  formerly  they  did;  wherefore  it 
is  not  the  increase  of  specific  money,  which  would  at  all 
advance  the  farmer's  goods,  but  the  removal  of  any  of 
these  three  causes,  which  do  truly  keep  down  the  market. 
. . .  The  merchant  and  shopkeeper  want  money  in  the  same 
manner,  that  is,  they  want  a  vent  for  the  goods  they  deal 
in,  by  reason  that  the  markets  fail"  ...  [A  nation]  "never 
thrives  better,  than  when  riches  are  tost  from  hand  to 
hand."  (Sir  Dudley  North,  Discounts  upon  Tradet  Lon¬ 
don,  1691,  pp.  11-15,  passim.}  Herrenschwand's  fanciful 
notions  amount  merely  to  this,  that  the  antagonism,  which 
has  its  origin  in  the  nature  of  commodities,  and  is  repro- 


The  total  quantity  of  money  functioning 
during  a  given  period  as  the  circulating  medium 
is  determined  on  the  one  hand,  by  the  sum  of  the 
prices  of  the  circulating  commodities,  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  by  the  rapidity  with  which  the 
antithetical  phases  of  the  metamorphoses  fol¬ 
low  one  another.  On  this  rapidity  depends  what 
proportion  of  the  sum  of  the  prices  can,  on  the 
average,  be  realized  by  each  single  coin.  But  the 
sum  of  the  prices  of  the  circulating  commodities 
depends  on  the  quantity,  as  well  as  on  the  prices, 
of  the  commodities.  These  three  factors,  how¬ 
ever,  state  of  prices,  quantity  of  circulating 
commodities,  and  velocity  of  money  currency, 
are  all  variable.  Hence,  the  sum  of  the  prices  to 
be  realized,  and  consequently  the  quantity  of 
the  circulating  medium  depending  on  that  sum, 
will  vary  with  the  numerous  variations  of  these 
three  factors  in  combination.  Of  these  varia¬ 
tions  we  shall  consider  those  alone  that  have 
been  the  most  important  in  the  history  of  prices. 

While  prices  remain  constant,  the  quantity 
of  the  circulating  medium  may  increase  owing 
to  the  number  of  circulating  commodities  in¬ 
creasing,  or  to  the  velocity  of  currency  decreas¬ 
ing,  or  to  a  combination  of  the  two.  On  the  other 
hand  the  quantity  of  the  circulating  medium 
may  decrease  with  a  decreasing  number  of  com¬ 
modities,  or  with  an  increasing  rapidity  of  their 
circulation. 

With  a  general  rise  in  the  prices  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  the  quantity  of  the  circulating  medium  will 
remain  constant,  provided  the  number  of  com¬ 
modities  in  circulation  decrease  proportionally 
to  the  increase  in  their*  prices,  or  provided  the 
velocity  of  currency  increase  at  the  same  rate 
as  prices  rise,  the  number  of  commodities  in  cir¬ 
culation  remaining  constant.  The  quantity  of 
the  circulating  medium  may  decrease,  owing  to 
the  number  of  commodities  decreasing  more 
rapidly;  or  to  the  velocity  of  currency  increas¬ 
ing  more  rapidly  than  prices  rise. 

With  a  general  fall  in  the  prices  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  the  quantity  of  the  circulating  medium  will 
remain  constant,  provided  the  number  of  com¬ 
modities  increase  proportionally !to  their  fall  in 
price,  or  provided  the  velocity  of  currency  de¬ 
crease  in  the  same  proportion.  The  quantity  of 
the  circulating  medium  will  increase,  provided 

duced  in  their  circulation,  can  be  removed  by  increasing 
the  circulating  medium.  But  if,  on  the  one  hand,  it  is  a 
popular  delusion  to  ascribe  stagnation  in  production  and 
circulation  to  insufficiency  of  the  circulating  medium,  it 
by  no  means  follows,  on  the  other  hand,  that  an  actual 
paucity  of  the  medium  in  consequence,  c.g.,  of  bungling 
legislative  interference  with  the  regulation  of  currency,  may 
not  give  rise  to  such  stagnation. 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES 


the  number  of  commodi  ties  increase  quicker,  or 
the  rapidity  of  circulation  decrease  quicker, 
than  the  prices  fall. 

The  variations  of  the  different  factors  may 
mutually  compensate  each  other,  so  that,  not¬ 
withstanding  their  continued  instability,  the 
sum  of  the  prices  to  be  realized  and  the  quantity 
of  money  in  circulation  remains  constant;  con¬ 
sequently,  we  find,  especially  if  we  take  long 
periods  into  consideration,  that  the  deviations 
from  the  average  level  of  the  quantity  of  money 
current  in  any  country  arc  much  smaller  than 
we  should  at  first  sight  expect,  apart  of  course 
from  excessive  perturbations  periodically  aris¬ 
ing  from  industrial  and  commercial  crises,  or, 
less  frequently,  from  fluctuations  in  the  value 
of  money. 

The  law  that  the  quantity  of  the  circulating 
medium  is  determined  by  the  sum  of  the  prices 
of  the  commodities  circulating,  and  by  the  av¬ 
erage  velocity  of  currency,1  may  also  be  stated 
as  follows:  given  the  sum  of  the  values  of  com¬ 
modities,  and  the  average  rapidity  of  their  met¬ 
amorphoses,  the  quantity  of  precious  metal  cur- 

1  “There  is  a  certain  measure  and  proportion  of  money 
requisite  to  drive  the  trade  of  a  nation,  more  or  less  than 
which  would  prejudice  the  same.  Just  as  there  is  a  certain 
proportion  of  farthings  necessary  in  a  small  retail  trade, 
to  change  silver  money,  and  to  even  such  reckonings  as 
cannot  be  adjusted  with  the  smallest  silver  pieces. . . .  Now, 
as  the  proportion  of  the  number  of  farthings  requisite  in 
commerce  is  to  be  taken  from  the  number  of  people,  the 
frequency  of  their  exchanges,  as  also,  and  principally,  from 
the  value  of  the  smallest  silver  pieces  of  money;  so  in  like 
manner,  the  proportion  of  money  [gold  and  silver  specie] 
requisite  in  our  trade  is  to  be  likewise  taken  from  the  fre¬ 
quency  of  commutations  and  from  the  bigness  of  the  pay¬ 
ments."  (William  Petty,  A  Treatise  on  Taxes  and  Contri¬ 
butions .  London,  1662,  p.  17.)  The  theory  of  Hume  was  de¬ 
fended  against  the  attacks  of  J.  Steuart  and  others  by  A. 
Young,  in  his  Political  Arithmetic,  I-ondon,  1774,  in  which 
work  there  is  a  special  chapter  entitled  “Prices  depend  on 
quantity  of  money,’*  at  p.112,  ff.  I  have  stated  in  Zur 
Kritik ,  etc.,  p.  149:  “He  (Adam  Smith)  passes  over  with¬ 
out  remark  the  question  as  to  the  quantity  of  coin  in  cir¬ 
culation,  and  treats  money  quite  wrongly  as  a  mere  com¬ 
modity."  This  statement  applies  only  in  so  far  as  Adam 
Smith,  ex  officio ,  treats  of  money.  Now  and  then,  however, 
as  in  his  criticism  of  the  earlier  systems  of  political  econo¬ 
my,  he  takes  the  right  view.  “The  quantity  of  coin  in  every 
country  is  regulated  by  the  value  of  the  commodities  which 
are  to  be  circulated  by  it. . . .  The  value  of  the  goods  an¬ 
nually  bought  and  sold  in  any  country  requires  a  certain 
quantity  of  money  to  circulate  and  distribute  them  to  their 
proper  consumers,  and  can  give  employment  to  no  more. 
The  channel  of  circulation  necessarily  draws  to  itself  a  sum 
sufficient  to  fill  it,  and  never  admits  any  more."  (i Wealth 
of  Nations ,  Bk.  IV.,  ch.  I.)  In  like  manner,  ex  officio ,  he 
opens  his  work  with  an  apotheosis  on  the  division  of  la¬ 
bour.  Afterwards,  in  the  last  book,  which  treats  of  the 
sources  of  public  revenue,  he  occasionally  repeats  the  de¬ 
nunciations  of  the  division  of  labour  made  by  his  teacher, 
A.  Ferguson. 


57 

rent  as  money  depends  on  the  value  of  that 
precious  metal.  The  erroneous  opinion  that  it 
is,  on  the  contrary,  prices  that  are  determined 
by  the  quantity  of  the  circulating  medium,  and 
that  the  latter  depends  on  the  quantity  of  the 
precious  metals  in  a  country;*  this  opinion  was 
based  by  those  who  first  held  it,  on  the  absurd 
hypothesis  that  commodities  are  without  a 
price,  and  money  without  a  value,  when  they 
first  enter  into  circulation,  and  that,  once  in  the 
circulation,  an  aliquot  part  of  the  medley  of 
commodities  is  exchanged  for  an  aliquot  part  of 
the  heap  of  precious  metals.® 

*  “The  prices  of  things  will  certainly  rise  in  every  na¬ 
tion,  as  the  gold  and  silver  increase  amongst  the  people; 
and,  consequently,  where  the  gold  and  silver  decrease  in 
any  nation,  the  prices  of  all  things  must  fall  proportion- 
ably  to  such  decrease  of  money."  (Jacob  Vanderlint,  Money 
answers  all  Things ,  London,  1734,  p.  5.)  A  careful  compar¬ 
ison  of  this  book  with  Hume’s  Essays ,  proves  to  my  mind 
without  doubt  mat  Hume  was  acquainted  with  and  made 
use  of  Vanderlint’s  work,  which  is  certainly  an  important 
one.  The  opinion  that  prices  are  determined  by  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  the  circulating  medium  was  also  held  by  Barbon 
and  other  much  earlier  writers.  “No  inconvenience,’’  says 
Vanderlint,  “can  arise  by  an  unrestrained  trade,  but  very 
great  advantage;  since,  if  the  cash  of  the  nation  be  de¬ 
creased  by  it,  which  prohibitions  are  designed  to  prevent, 
those  nations  that  get  the  cash  will  certainly  find  every¬ 
thing  advance  in  price,  as  the  cash  increases  amongst  them. 
And  . . .  our  manufactures,  and  everything  else;  will  soon 
become  so  moderate  as  to  turn  the  balance  of  trade  in  our 
favour,  and  thereby  fetch  the  money  back  again.”  (op.  cit ., 
PP-43,44-) 

1  That  the  price  of  each  single  kind  of  commodity  forms 
a  part  of  the  sum  of  the  prices  of  all  the  commodities  in 
circulation  is  a  self-evident  proposition.  But  how  use-val¬ 
ues,  which  are  incommensurable  with  regard  to  each  other, 
are  to  be  exchanged,  en  masse ,  for  the  total  sum  of  gold 
and  silver  in  a  country,  is  quite  incomprehensible.  If  we 
start  from  the  notion  that  all  commodities  together  form 
one  single  commodity,  of  which  each  is  but  an  aliquot  part, 
we  get  the  following  beautiful  result:  The  total  commodity 
=  x  cwt.  of  gold;  commodity  A  =  an  aliquot  part  of  the 
total  commodity  =  the  same  aliquot  part  of  x  cwt.  of  gold. 
This  is  stated  in  all  seriousness  by  Montesquieu:  “When 
we  compare  the  mass  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  whole  world 
with  the  quantity  of  merchandise  contained  therein,  it  is 
certain  that  every  commodity  or  merchandise  in  particu¬ 
lar  may  be  compared  to  a  certain  portion  of  the  entire  mass 
of  gold  and  silver.  Let  us  suppose  that  there  is  only  one 
commodity  or  merchandise  in  the  world,  or  only  one  to  be 
purchased,  and  that  this  is  divisible  like  money;  a  part  of 
this  merchandise  will  answer  to  a  part  of  the  mass  of  gold 
and  silver;  the  half  of  the  total  of  the  one  to  the  half  of  the 
total  of  the  other,  etc.  ...  the  establishment  of  the  price 
of  things  fundamentally  depends  on  the  proportion  of  the 
total  of  things  to  the  total  of  signs."  (Montesquieu,  op.  cit.9 
Bk.  xxii,  ch.  7.)  As  to  the  further  development  of  this 
theory  by  Ricardo  and  his  disciples,  James  Mill,  Lord 
Overstone,  and  others,  see  Zur  Kritik ,  etc.,  pp.  1 40- 146, 
and  p.  150,  ff.  John  Stuart  Mill,  with  his  usual  eclectic 
logic,  understands  how  to  hold  at  the  same  time  the  view 
of  his  father,  James  Mill,  and  the  opposite  view.  On  a  com¬ 
parison  of  the  text  of  his  compendium.  Principles  of  Politi¬ 
cal  Economy,  with  his  preface  to  the  first  edition,  in  which 


58  CAPITAL 


c.  Coin  and  Symbols  of  Value 

That  money  takes  the  shape  of  coin  springs 
from  its  function  as  the  circulating  medium. 
The  weight  of  gold  represented  in  imagination 
by  the  prices  or  money  names  of  commodities, 
must  confront  those  commodities,  within  the 
circulation,  in  the  shape  of  coins  or  pieces  of 
gold  of  a  given  denomination.  Coining,  like  the 
establishment  of  a  standard  of  prices,  is  the 
business  of  the  State.  The  different  national  uni¬ 
forms  worn  athome  by  gold  and  silver  as  coins, 
and  doffed  again  in  the  market  of  the  world,  in¬ 
dicate  the  separation  between  the  internal  or 
national  spheres  of  the  circulation  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  and  their  universal  sphere. 

The  only  difference,  therefore,  between  coin 
and  bullion  is  one  of  shape,  and  gold  can  at  any 
time  pass  from  one  form  to  the  other.1  But  no 
sooner  does  coin  leave  the  mint,  than  it  immedi¬ 
ately  finds  itself  on  the  high  road  to  the  melting 
pot.  During  their  currency,  coins  wear  away, 
some  more,  others  less.  Name  and  substance, 
nominal  weight  and  real  weight,  begin  their  proc¬ 
ess  of  separation.  Coins  of  the  same  denomina¬ 
tion  become  different  in  value,  because  they  are 

preface  he  announces  himself  as  the  Adam  Smith  of  his 
day—we  do  not  know  whether  to  admire  more  the  sim¬ 
plicity  of  the  man,  or  that  of  the  public,  who  took  him,  in 
good  faith,  for  the  Adam  Smith  he  announced  himself  to 
be,  although  he  bears  about  as  much  resemblance  to  Adam 
Smith  as  say  General  Williams,  of  Kars,  to  the  Duke  of 
Wellington.  The  original  researches  of  Mr.  J.  S.  Mill,  which 
are  neither  extensive  nor  profound  in  the  domain  of  po¬ 
litical  economy,  will  be  found  mustered  in  rank  and  fife  in 
his  little  work.  Some  Unsettled  Questions  of  Political  Econ¬ 
omy  >  which  appeared  in  1844.  Locke  asserts  point-blank 
the  connection  between  the  absence  of  value  in  gold  and 
silver,  and  the  determination  of  their  values  by  quantity 
alone,  “Mankind  having  consented  to  put  an  imaginary 
value  upon  gold  and  silver . . .  the  intrinsic  value,  regarded 
in  these  metals,  is  nothing  but  the  quantity.”  Some  Con~ 
siderations  on  the  Consequences ,  etc.,  1691,  Works,  Ed.  1777, 
vol.  II.,  p.  15. 

1  It  lies,  of  course,  entirely  beyond  my  purpose  to  take 
into  consideration  such  details  as  the  seigniorage  on  mint¬ 
ing.  I  will,  however,  cite  for  the  benefit  of  the  romantic 
sycophant,  Adam  M filler,  who  admires  the  “generous  lib¬ 
erality”  with  which  the  English  Government  coins  gratu¬ 
itously,  the  following  opinion  of  Sir  Dudley  North:  “Silver 
and  gold,  like  other  commodities,  have  their  ebbings  and 
flowings.  Upon  the  arrival  of  quantities  from  Spain  ...  it 
is  carried  into  the  Tower,  and  coined.  Not  long  after  there 
will  come  a  demand  for  bullion  to  be  exported  again.  If 
there  is  none,  but  all  happens  to  be  in  coin,  what  then? 
Melt  it  down  again;  there's  no  loss  in  it,  for  the  coining 
costs  the  owner  nothing.  Thus  the  nation  has  been  abused, 
and  made  to  pay  for  the  twisting  of  straw  for  asses  to  eat. 
If  the  merchant  were  made  to  pay  the  price  of  the  coinage, 
he  would  not  have  sent  his  silver  to  the  Tower  without  con¬ 
sideration;  and  coined  money  would  always  keep  a  value 
above  uncoined  silver.”  (North,  op,  cit.9  p.  18.)  North 
was  himself  one  of  the  foremost  merchants  in  the  reign  of 
Charles  1L 


different  in  weight.  The  weight  of  gold  fixed  up¬ 
on  as  the  standard  of  prices  deviates  from  the 
weight  that  serves  as  the  circulating  medium, 
and  the  latter  thereby  ceases  any  longer  to  be 
a  real  equivalent  of  the  commodities  whose 
prices  it  realizes.  The  history  of  coinage  during 
the  middle  ages  and  down  into  the  eighteenth 
century,  records  the  ever  renewed  confusion 
arising  from  this  cause.  The  natural  tendency  of 
circulation  to  convert  coins  into  a  mere  sem¬ 
blance  of  what  they  profess  to  be,  into  a  symbol 
of  the  weight  of  metal  they  are  officially  sup¬ 
posed  to  contain,  is  recognized  by  modern  leg¬ 
islation,  which  fixes  the  loss  of  weight  sufficient 
to  demonetize  a  gold  coin,  or  to  make  it  no  long¬ 
er  legal  tender. 

The  fact  that  the  currency  of  coins  itself  ef¬ 
fects  a  separation  between  their  nominal  and 
their  real  weight,  creating  a  distinction  between 
them  as  mere  pieces  of  metal  on  the  one  hand, 
and  as  coins  with  a  definite  function  on  the 
other— this  fact  implies  the  latent  possibility  of 
replacing  metallic  coins  by  tokens  of  some  other 
material,  by  symbols  serving  the  same  purposes 
as  coins.  The  practical  difficulties  in  the  way  of 
coining  extremely  minute  quantities  of  gold  or 
silver,  and  the  circumstance  that  at  first  the  less 
precious  metal  is  used  as  a  measure  of  value  in¬ 
stead  of  the  more  precious,  copper  instead  of 
silver,  silver  instead  of  gold,  and  that  the  less 
precious  circulates  as  money  until  dethroned  by 
the  more  precious — all  these  facts  explain  the 
parts  historically  played  by  silver  and  copper 
tokens  as  substitutes  for  gold  coins.  Silver  and 
copper  tokens  take  the  place  of  gold  in  those 
regions  of  the  circulation  where  coins  pass  from 
hand  to  hand  most  rapidly,  and  are  subject  to 
the  maximum  amount  of  wear  and  tear.  This 
occurs  where  sales  and  purchases  on  a  very  small 
scale  are  continually  happening.  In  order  to 
prevent  these  satellites  from  establishing  them¬ 
selves  permanently  in  the  place  of  gold,  positive 
enactments  determine  the  extent  to  which  they 
must  be  compulsorily  received  as  payment  in¬ 
stead  of  gold.  The  particular  tracks  pursued  by 
the  different  species  of  coin  in  currency  run  nat¬ 
urally  in  to  each  other.  The  tokens  keep  company 
with  gold  to  pay  fractional  parts  of  the  smallest 
gold  coin;  gold  is,  on  the  one  hand,  constantly 
pouring  into  retail  circulation,  and,  on  the  oth¬ 
er  hand,  is  as  constantly  being  thrown  out 
again  by  being  changed  into  tokens.2 

2  “If  silver  never  exceed  what  is  wanted  for  the  smaller 
payments,  it  cannot  be  collected  in  sufficient  quantities  for 
the  larger  payments  . . .  The  use  of  gold  in  the  main  pay¬ 
ments  necessarily  implies  also  its  use  in  the  retail  trade: 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES 


The  weight  of  metal  in  the  silver  and  copper 
tokens  is  arbitrarily  fixed  by  law.  When  in  cur¬ 
rency,  they  wear  away  even  more  rapidly  than 
gold  coins.  Hence  their  functions  are  totally  in¬ 
dependent  of  their  weight,  and  consequently  of 
all  value.  The  function  of  gold  as  coin  becomes 
completely  independent  of  the  metallic  value  of 
that  gold.  Therefore  things  that  are  relatively 
without  value,  such  as  paper  notes,  can  serve  as 
coins  in  its  place.  This  purely  symbolic  charac¬ 
ter  is  to  a  certain  extent  masked  in  metal  tokens. 
In  paper  money  it  stands  out  plainly.  In  fact, 
ce  nest  que  le  premier  pas  qui  codte .l 

We  allude  here  only  to  inconvertible  paper 
money  issued  by  the  State  and  having  compul¬ 
sory  circulation.  It  has  its  immediate  origin  in 
the  metallic  currency.  Money  based  upon  credit 
implies,  on  the  other  hand,  conditions  which, 
from  our  standpoint  of  the  simple  circulation  of 
commodities,  are  as  yet  totally  unknown  to  us. 
But  we  may  affirm  this  much,  that  just  as  true 
paper  money  tak^s  its  rise  in  the  function  of 
money  as  the  circulating  medium,  so  money 
based  upon  credit  takes  root  spontaneously  in 
the  function  of  money  as  the  means  of  pay¬ 
ment.2 

The  State  puts  in  circulation  bits  of  paper  on 
which  their  various  denominations,  say  £i,  £5, 
etc.,  are  printed.  In  so  far  as  they  actually  take 

those  who  have  gold  coin  offering  them  for  small  purchas¬ 
es,  and  receiving  with  the  commodity  purchased  a  balance 
of  silver  in  return;  by  which  means  the  surplus  of  silver 
that  would  otherwise  encumber  the  retail  dealer  is  drawn 
off  and  dispersed  into  general  circulation.  But  if  there  is 
as  much  silver  as  will  transact  the  small  payments  inde¬ 
pendent  of  gold,  the  retail  trader  must  then  receive  silver 
for  small  purchases;  and  it  must  of  necessity  accumulate 
in  his  hands." — David  Buchanan,  Inquiry  into  the  Taxa¬ 
tion  and  Commercial  Policy  of  Great  Britain ,  Edinburgh, 
1844,  pp.  248,  249. 

1  "In  fact,  it  is  only  the  first  step  which  is  difficult." 

2  The  mandarin  Wan-mao-in,  the  Chinese  Chancellor  of 
the  Exchequer,  took  it  into  his  head  one  day  to  lay  before 
the  Son  of  Heaven  a  proposal  that  secretly  aimed  at  con¬ 
verting  the  assignats  of  the  empire  into  convertible  bank 
notes.  The  Assignats  Committee,  in  its  report  of  April, 
1854,  gives  him  a  severe  snubbing.  Whether  he  also  re¬ 
ceived  the  traditional  drubbing  with  bamboos  is  not  stated. 
The  concluding  part  of  the  report  is  as  follows:  "The  Com¬ 
mittee  has  carefully  examined  his  proposal  and  finds  that 
it  is  entirely  in  favour  of  the  merchants,  and  that  no  ad¬ 
vantage  will  result  to  the  crown.”  {Arbeiten  der  Kaiserlich 
Russischen  Gesandtschaft  2 u  Peking  iiber  China.  "Aus  dem 
Russischen  von  Dr.  K.  Abel  und  F.  A.  Mecklenburg.  Erster 
Band.*1  Berlin,  1858,  pp.  47,  59.)  In  his  evidence  before  the 
Committee  of  the  House  of  Lords  on  the  Bank  Acts,  a  gov¬ 
ernor  of  the  Bank  of  England  says,  with  regard  to  the  abra¬ 
sion  of  gold  coins  during  currency:  "Every  year  a  fresh 
class  of  sovereigns  becomes  too  light.  The  class  which  one 
year  passes  with  full  weight,  loses  enough  by  wear  and 
tear  to  draw  the  scales  next  year  against  it."  (House  of 
Lords*  Committee,  1848,  n.  429.) 


59 

the  place  of  gold  to  the  same  amount,  their 
movement  is  subject  to  the  laws  that  regulate 
the  currency  of  money  itself.  A  law  peculiar  to 
the  circulation  of  paper  money  can  spring  up 
only  from  the  proportion  in  which  that  paper 
money  represents  gold.  Such  a  law  exists;  stated 
simply,  it  is  as  follows:  the  issue  of  paper  money 
must  not  exceed  in  amount  the  gold  (or  silver  as 
the  case  may  be)  which  would  actually  circulate 
if  not  replaced  by  symbols.  Now  the  quantity  of 
gold  which  the  circulation  can  absorb,  con¬ 
stantly  fluctuates  about  a  given  level.  Still,  the 
mass  of  the  circulating  medium  in  a  given  coun¬ 
try  never  sinks  below  a  certain  minimum  easily 
ascertained  by  actual  experience.  The  fact  that 
this  minimum  mass  continually  undergoes 
changes  in  its  constituent  parts,  or  that  the 
pieces  of  gold  of  which  it  consists  are  being  con¬ 
stantly  replaced  by  fresh  ones,  causes  of  course 
no  change  either  in  its  amount  or  in  thecontinu- 
ityofits  circulation.  It  can  therefore  be  replaced 
by  paper  symbols.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  all  the 
conduits  of  circulation  were  today  filled  with 
paper  money  to  the  full  extent  of  their  capacity 
for  absorbing  money,  they  might  tomorrow  be 
overflowing  in  consequence  of  a  fluctuation  in 
the  circulation  of  commodities.  There  would  no 
longer  be  any  standard.  If  the  paper  money  ex¬ 
ceed  its  proper  limit,  which  is  the  amount  in  gold 
coins  of  the  like  denomination  that  can  actually 
be  current,  it  would,  apart  from  the  danger  of 
falling  into  general  disrepute,  represent  only 
that  quantity  of  gold  which,  in  accordance  with 
the  laws  of  the  circulation  of  commodities,  is 
required  and  is  alone  capable  of  being  repre¬ 
sented  by  paper.  If  the  quantity  of  paper  money 
issued  be  double  what  it  ought  to  be,  then,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  £1  would  be  the  money-name 
not  of  }<\  of  an  ounce,  but  of  H  of  an  ounce  of 
gold.  The  effect  would  be  the  same  as  if  an  alter¬ 
ation  had  taken  place  in  the  function  of  gold  as 
a  standard  of  prices.  Those  values  that  were 
previously  expressed  by  the  price  of  £1  would 
now  be  expressed  by  the  price  of  £2. 

Paper  money  is  a  token  representing  gold  or 
money.  The  relation  between  it  and  the  values 
of  commodities  is  this,  that  the  latter  are  ideally 
expressed  in  the  same  quantities  of  gold  that 
are  symbolically  represented  by  the  paper.  Only 
in  so  far  as  paper  money  represents  gold,  which 
like  all  other  commodities  has  value,  is  it  a  sym¬ 
bol  of  value.3 

3  The  following  passage  from  Fullarton  shows  the  want 
of  clearness  on  the  part  of  even  the  best  writers  on  money, 
in  their  comprehension  of  its  various  functions:  "That,  as 
far  as  concerns  our  domestic  exchanges,  all  the  monetary 


60  CAPITAL 


Finally,  some  one  may  ask  why  gold  is  capa¬ 
ble  of  being  replaced  by  tokens  that  have  no 
value?  But,  as  we  have  already  seen,  it  is  capa¬ 
ble  of  being  so  replaced  only  in  so  far  as  it  func¬ 
tions  exclusively  as  coin,  or  as  the  circulating 
medium,  and  as  nothing  else.  Now,  money  has 
other  functions  besides  this  one,  and  the  iso¬ 
lated  function  of  serving  as  the  mere  circulating 
medium  is  not  necessarily  the  only  one  attached 
to  gold  coin,  although  this  is  the  case  with  those 
abraded  coins  that  continue  to  circulate.  Each 
piece  of  money  is  a  mere  coin,  or  means  of  circu¬ 
lation,  only  so  long  as  it  actually  circulates.  But 
this  is  just  the  case  with  that  minimum  mass  of 
gold,  which  is  capable  of  being  replaced  by 
paper  money.  That  mass  remains  constantly 
within  the  sphere  of  circulation,  continually 
functions  as  a  circulating  medium,  and  exists 
exclusively  for  that  purpose.  Its  movement, 
therefore,  represents  nothing  but  the  continued 
alternation  of  the  inverse  phases  of  the  meta¬ 
morphosis  C—  M—C,  phases  in  which  commod¬ 
ities  confront  their  value-forms,  only  to  disap¬ 
pear  again  immediately.  The  independent  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  exchange  value  of  a  commodity  is 
here  a  transient  apparition,  by  means  of  which 
the  commodity  is  immediately  replaced  by  an¬ 
other  commodity.  Hence,  in  this  process  which 
continually  makes  money  pass  from  hand  to 
hand,  the  mere  symbolical  existence  of  money 
suffices.  Its  functional  existence  absorbs,  so  to 
say,  its  material  existence.  Being  a  transient 
and  objective  reflex  of  the  prices  of  commod¬ 
ities,  it  serves  only  as  a  symbol  of  itself,  and  is 
therefore  capable  of  being  replaced  by  a  token.1 

functions  which  are  usually  performed  by  gold  and  silver 
coins,  may  be  performed  as  effectually  by  a  circulation  of 
inconvertible  notes,  having  no  value  but  that  factitious 
and  conventional  value  they  derive  from  the  law,  is  a  fact 
which  admits,  I  conceive,  of  no  denial.  Value  of  this  de¬ 
scription  may  be  made  to  answer  all  the  purposes  of  in¬ 
trinsic  value,  and  supersede  even  the  necessity  for  a  stand¬ 
ard,  provided  only  the  quantity  of  issues  be  kept  under  due 
limitation.*’  (Fullarton,  Regulation  of  Currencies ,  London, 
1844*  p.  21.)  Because  the  commodity  that  serves  as  money 
is  capable  of  being  replaced  in  circulation  by  mere  symbols 
of  value,  therefore  its  functions  as  a  measure  of  value 
and  a  standard  of  prices  are  declared  to  be  superfluous. 

1  From  the  fact  that  gold  and  silver,  so  far  as  they  are 
coins,  or  exclusively  serve  as  the  medium  of  circulation, 
become  mere  tokens  of  themselves,  Nicholas  Barbon  de¬ 
duces  the  right  of  Governments  “to  raise  money,**  that  is, 
to  give  to  the  weight  of  silver  that  is  called  a  shilling  the 
name  of  a  greater  weight,  such  as  a  crown;  and  so  to  pay 
creditors  shillings,  instead  of  crowns.  “Money  does  wear 
and  grow  lighter  by  often  telling  over. ..  It  is  the  denom¬ 
ination  and  currency  of  the  money  that  men  regard  in  bar¬ 
gaining,  and  not  the  quantity  of  silver. . .  *1  is  the  public 
authority  upon  the  metal  that  makes  it  money.**— N.  Bar- 
bon,op.f«7.,pp.  29,30,25. 


One  thing  is,  however,  requisite;  this  token  must 
have  an  objective  social  validity  of  its  own,  and 
this  the  paper  symbol  acquires  by  its  forced  cur¬ 
rency.  This  compulsory  action  of  the  State  can 
take  effect  only  within  that  inner  sphere  of  cir¬ 
culation  which  is  co-terminons  with  the  terri¬ 
tories  of  the  community,  but  it  is  also  only  with¬ 
in  that  sphere  that  money  completely  responds 
to  its  function  of  being  the  circulating  medium, 
or  becomes  coin. 

3.  Money 

The  commodity  that  functions  as  a  meas¬ 
ure  of  value,  and,  either  in  its  own  person  or  by 
a  representative,  as  the  medium  of  circulation, 
is  money.  Gold  (or  silver)  is  therefore  money. 
It  functions  as  money,  on  the  one  hand,  when  it 
has  to  be  present  in  its  own  golden  person.  It  is 
then  the  money  commodity,  neither  merely 
ideal,  as  in  its  function  of  a  measure  of  value, 
nor  capable  of  being  represented ,  as  in  its  func¬ 
tion  of  circulating  medium.  On  the  other  hand, 
it  also  functions  as  money,  when  by  virtue  of  its 
function,  whether  that  function  be  performed 
in  person  or  by  representative,  it  congeals  into 
the  sole  form  of  value,  the  only  adequate  form 
of  existence  of  exchange  value,  in  opposition  to 
use- value,  represented  by  all  other  commodities. 

a.  Hoarding 

The  continual  movement  in  circuits  of  the 
two  antithetical  metamorphoses  of  commod¬ 
ities,  or  the  never  ceasing  alternation  of  sale  and 
purchase,  is  reflected  in  the  restless  currency  of 
money,  or  in  the  function  that  money  performs 
of  a  perpetuum  mobile 2  of  circulation.  But  so 
soon  as  the  series  of  metamorphoses  is  inter¬ 
rupted,  so  soon  as  sales  are  not  supplemented 
by  subsequent  purchases,  money  ceases  to  be 
mobilized;  it  is  transformed,  as  Boisguillebert 
says,  from  meuble  into  immeubley  from  movable 
into  immovable,  from  coin  into  money. 

With  the  very  earliest  development  of  the 
circulation  of  commodities,  there  is  also  devel¬ 
oped  the  necessity,  and  the  passionate  desire, 
to  hold  fast  the  product  of  the  fitst  metamor¬ 
phosis.  This  product  is  the  transformed  shape 
of  the  commodity,  or  its  gold  chrysalis.8  Com¬ 
modities  are  thus  sold  not  for  the  purpose  of 
buying  others,  but  in  order  to  replace  their  com¬ 
modity  form  by  their  money  form*  From  being 

*  Perpetual  motion. 

8  “Wealth  in  money  is  merely  . . .  wealth  in  products 
converted  into  money.**  (Mercier  de  la  Rivi&re,  loc,  cit.) 
"A  value  in  products  has  undergone  merely  a  change  of 
form.**  (Ibid.  p.  486.) 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES  61 


the  mere  means  of  effecting  the  circulation  of 
commodities,  this  change  of  form  becomes  the 
end  and  aim.  The  changed  form  of  the  commod¬ 
ity  is  thus  prevented  from  functioning  as  its 
unconditionally  alienable  form,  or  as  its  merely 
transient  money  form.  The  money  becomes 
petrified  into  a  hoard,  and  the  seller  becomes 
a  hoarder  of  money. 

In  the  early  stages  of  the  circulation  of  com¬ 
modities,  it  is  the  surplus  use-values  alone  that 
are  converted  into  money.  Gold  and  silver  thus 
become  of  themselves  social  expressions  for  su¬ 
perfluity  or  wealth.  This  naive  form  of  hoarding 
becomes  perpetuated  in  those  communities  in 
which  the  traditional  mode  of  production  is 
carried  on  for  the  supply  of  a  fixed  and  limited 
circle  of  home  wants.  It  is  thus  with  the  people 
of  Asia,  and  particularly  of  the  East  Indies. 
Vanderlint,  who  fancies  that  the  prices  of  com¬ 
modities  in  a  country  are  determined  by  the 
quantity  of  gold  and  silver  to  be  found  in  it,  asks 
himself  why  Indian  commodities  are  so  cheap. 
He  answers:  Because  the  Hindoos  bury  their 
money.  From  1602  to  1734,  he  remarks,  they 
buried  150  millions  of  pounds  sterling  of  silver, 
which  originally  came  from  America  to  Europe.1 * 
In  the  10  years  from  1856  to  1866,  England  ex¬ 
ported  to  India  and  China  £120,000,000  in  sil¬ 
ver,  which  had  been  received  in  exchange  for 
Australian  gold.  Most  of  the  silver  exported  to 
China  makes  its  way  to  India. 

As  the  production  of  commodities  further 
develops,  every  producer  of  commodi  ties  is  com¬ 
pel  led  to  make  sure  of  the  nexus  rerum1  or  the 
social  pledge.3  His  wants  are  constantly  making 
themselves  felt  and  necessitate  the  continual 
purchase  of  other  people’s  commodities,  while 
the  production  and  sale  of  his  own  goods  require 
time  and  depend  upon  circumstances.  In  order, 
then,  to  be  able  to  buy  without  selling,  he  must 
have  sold  previously  without  buying.  This  op¬ 
eration,  conducted  on  a  general  scale,  appears 
to  imply  a  contradiction.  But  the  precious  met¬ 
als  at  the  sources  of  their  production  are  directly 
exchanged  for  other  commodities.  And  here  we 
have  sales  (by  the  owners  of  commodities)  with¬ 
out  purchases  (by  the  owners  of  gold  or  silver).4 
And  subsequent  sales,  by  other  producers,  unless 

1  “  Tit  by  this  practice  they  keep  all  their  goods  and  man¬ 

ufactures  at  such  low  rates."— Vanderlint,  op,  cit.y  p.  96. 

1  Connecting  medium. 

4  "Money  ...  is  a  pledge.'*— John  Bellers,  Essays  about 

the  Poor ,  Manufacturers ,  Trade  y  Plantations ,  and  Immoral¬ 

ity  ,  London,  1699,  p.  13. 

4  A  purchase,  in  a  "categorical"  sense,  implies  that  gold 

and  silver  are  already  the  converted  form  of  commodities, 

or  the  product  of  a  sale. 


followed  by  purchases,  merely  bring  about  the 
distribution  of  the  newly  produced  precious 
metals  among  all  the  owners  of  commodities. 
In  this  way,  all  along  the  line  of  exchange,  hoards 
of  gold  and  silver  of  varied  extent  are  accumu¬ 
lated.  With  the  possibility  of  holding  and  stor¬ 
ing  up  exchange  value  in  the  shape  of  a  particu¬ 
lar  commodity  arises  also  the  greed  for  gold. 
Along  with  the  extension  of  circulation,  in¬ 
creases  the  power  of  money,  that  absolutely  so¬ 
cial  form  of  wealth  ever  ready  for  use.  “Gold  is 
a  wonderful  thing!  Whoever  possesses  it  is  lord 
of  all  he  wants.  By  means  of  gold  one  can  even 
get  souls  into  Paradise.”  (Columbus  in  his  let¬ 
ter  from  Jamaica,  1503.)  Since  gold  does  not 
disclose  what  has  been  transformed  into  it, 
everything,  commodity  or  not,  is  convertible 
into  gold.  Everything  becomes  saleable  and 
buyable.  Circulation  becomes  the  great  social 
retort  into  which  everything  is  thrown,  to  come 
out  again  as  crystallized  gold.  Not  even  are  the 
bones  of  Saints,  and  still  less  are  more  delicate 
res  sacrosancta  extra  commercium  hominumh 
able  to  withstand  this  alchemy.4 *  Just  as  every 
qualitative  difference  between  commodities  is 
extinguished  in  money,  $0  money,  on  its  side, 
like  the  radical  leveller  that  it  is,  does  away  with 
all  distinctions.7 *  But  money  itself  is  a  commod¬ 
ity,  an  external  object,  capable  of  becoming  the 
private  property  of  any  individual.  Thus  social 
power  becomes  the  private  power  of  private 
persons.  The  ancients  therefore  denounced 
money  as  subversive  of  the  economic  and  moral 
order  of  things.4  Modern  society,  which,  soon 
after  its  birth,  pulled  Plutus  by  the  hair  of  his 
head  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth,9  greets  gold 
as  its  Holy  Grail,  as  the  glittering  incarnation 
of  the  very  principle  of  its  own  life. 

1  Sacrosanct  things,  beyond  everyday  affairs. 

6  Henry  III,  most  Christian  king  of  France,  robbed  clois¬ 
ters  of  their  relics,  and  turned  them  into  money.  It  is  well 
known  what  part  the  despoiling  of  the  Delphic  Temple,  by 
the  Phocians,  played  in  the  history  of  Greece.  Temples 
with  the  ancients  served  as  the  dwellings  of  the  gods  of 
commodities.  They  were  "sacred  banks."  With  the  Phoe¬ 
nicians,  a  trading  people  par  excellence ,  money  was  the 
transmuted  shape  of  everything.  It  was,  therefore,  quite 
in  order  that  the  virgins,  who,  at  the  feast  of  the  Goddess 
of  Love,  gave  themselves  up  to  strangers,  should  offer  to 
the  goddess  the  piece  of  money  they  received. 

7  See  Shakespeare,  Timon  of  Athens ,  Act  IV,  sc.  iii. 

8  "Nothing  so  evil  as  money  ever  grew  to  be  current 
among  men.  This  lays  cities  low,  this  drives  men  from  their 
homes,  this  trains  and  warps  honest  souls  till  they  set  them¬ 
selves  to  works  of  shame;  this  still  teaches  folk  to  practice 
villainies,  and  to  know  every  godless  deed."— Sophocles, 
Antigone  y 295. 

*  "The  eagerness  of  greed  to  fetch  Plutus  himself  from 
the  bowels  of  the  earth."— Athenaeus,  The  Deipnosophistst 
VI.  23. 


CAPITAL 


62 

A  commodity,  in  its  capacity  of  a  use-value, 
satisfies  a  particular  want  and  is  a  particular 
element  of  material  wealth.  But  the  value  of  a 
commodity  measures  the  degree  of  its  attrac¬ 
tion  for  all  other  elements  of  material  wealth, 
and  therefore  measures  the  social  wealth  of  its 
owner.  To  a  barbarian  owner  of  commodities, 
and  even  to  a  Western  European  peasant,  value 
is  the  same  as  value  form,  and,  therefore,  to  him 
the  increase  in  his  hoard  of  gold  and  silver  is  an 
increase  in  value.  It  is  true  that  the  value  of 
money  varies;  at  one  time  in  consequence  of  a 
variation  in  its  own  value,  at  another  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  a  change  in  the  values  of  commodi¬ 
ties.  But  this,  on  the  one  hand,  does  not  prevent 
200  ounces  of  gold  from  still  containing  more 
value  than  100  ounces,  nor,  on  the  other  hand, 
does  it  hinder  the  actual  metallic  form  of  this 
article  from  continuing  to  be  the  universal 
equivalent  form  of  all  other  commodities  and 
the  immediate  social  incarnation  of  all  human 
labour.  The  desire  to  hoard  is  in  its  very  nature 
unsalable.  In  its  qualitative  aspect,  or  for¬ 
mally  considered,  money  has  no  bounds  to  its 
efficacy,  i.e.,  it  is  the  universal  representative  of 
material  wealth,  because  it  is  directly  converti¬ 
ble  into  any  other  commodity.  But,  at  the  same 
time,  every  actual  sum  of  money  is  limited  in 
amount,  and,  therefore,  as  a  means  of  pur¬ 
chasing,  has  only  a  limited  efficacy.  This  antag¬ 
onism  between  the  quantitative  limits  of  money 
and  its  qualitative  boundlessness,  continually 
acts  as  a  spur  to  the  hoarder  in  his  Sisyphus-like 
labour  of  accumulating.  It  is  with  him  as  it  is 
with  a  conqueror,  who  sees  in  every  new  coun¬ 
try  annexed  only  a  new  boundary. 

In  order  that  gold  may  be  held  as  money,  and 
made  to  form  a  hoard,  it  must  be  prevented  from 
circulating,  or  from  transforming  itself  into  a 
means  of  enjoyment.  The  hoarder,  therefore, 
makes  a  sacrifice  of  the  lusts  of  the  fiesh  to  his 
gold  fetish.  He  acts  out  in  earnest  the  gospel  of 
abstention.  On  the  other  hand,  he  can  with¬ 
draw  from  circulation  no  more  than  what  he 
has  thrown  into  it  in  the  shape  of  commodities. 
The  more  he  produces,  the  more  he  is  able  to 
sell.  Hard  work,  saving,  and  avarice,  are,  there¬ 
fore,  his  three  cardinal  virtues,  and  to  sell  much 
and  buy  little  the  sum  of  his  political  economy.1 

By  the  side  of  the  gross  form  of  a  hoard,  we 
find  also  its  aesthetic  form  in  the  possession  of 

1  “To  increase  as  much  as  one  can  the  number  of  sellers 
of  any  commodity,  and  to  decrease  as  much  as  one  can  the 
number  of  buyers,  these  arc  the  cardinal  principles  on  which 
all  operations  of  political  economy  depend.”— Verri,  op. 
cit.,  p.  52. 


gold  and  silver  articles.  This  grows  with  the 
wealth  of  civil  society.  “Soyons  riches  ouparais - 
sons  riches”  (Diderot).2  In  this  way  there  is 
created,  on  the  one  hand,  a  constantly  extend¬ 
ing  market  for  gold  and  silver,  unconnected 
with  their  functions  as  money,  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  a  latent  source  of  supply,  to  which  re¬ 
course  is  had  principally  in  times  of  crisis  and 
social  disturbance. 

Hoarding  serves  various  purposes  in  the 
economy  of  the  metallic  circulation.  Its  first 
function  arises  out  of  the  conditions  to  which 
the  currency  of  gold  and  silver  coins  is  subject. 
We  have  seen  how,  along  with  the  continual 
fluctuations  in  the  extent  and  rapidity  of  the 
circulation  of  commodities  and  in  their  prices, 
the  quantity  of  money  current  unceasingly  ebbs 
and  flows.  This  mass  must,  therefore,  be  capa¬ 
ble  of  expansion  and  contraction.  At  one  time, 
money  must  be  attracted  in  order  to  act  as  cir¬ 
culating  coin;  at  another,  circulating  coin  must 
be  repelled  in  order  to  act  again  as  more  or  less 
stagnant  money.  In  order  that  the  mass  of  mon¬ 
ey  actually  current  may  constantly  saturate 
the  absorbing  power  of  the  circulation,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver 
in  a  country  be  greater  than  the  quantity  re¬ 
quired  to  function  as  coin.  This  condition  is  ful¬ 
filled  by  money  taking  the  form  of  hoards.  These 
reserves  serve  as  conduits  for  the  supply  or 
withdrawal  of  money  to  or  from  the  circulation, 
which  in  this  way  never  overflows  its  banks.8 

b.  Means  of  Payment 

In  the  simple  form  of  the  circulation  of  com¬ 
modities  hitherto  considered,  we  found  a  given 
value  always  presented  to  us  in  a  double  shape, 

*  “Let  us  be  rich,  or  at  any  rate  appear  to  be  rich.” 

•  “There  is  required  for  carrying  on  the  trade  of  the  na¬ 
tion  a  determinate  sum  of  specific  money,  which  varies,  and 
is  sometimes  more,  sometimes  less,  as  the  circumstances 
we  are  in  require.  .  .  .  This  ebbing  and  flowing  of  money 
supplies  and  accommodates  itself,  without  any  aid  of  poli¬ 
ticians.  . . .  The  buckets  work  alternately;  when  money  is 
scarce,  bullion  is  coined;  when  bullion  is  scarce,  money  is 
melted.”  (Sir  D.  North,  op .  at..  Postscript,  p.  3.)  John 
Stuart  Mill,  who  for  a  long  time  was  an  official  of  the  East 
India  Company,  confirms  the  fact  that  in  India  silver  orna¬ 
ments  still  continue  to  perform  directly  the  functions  of  a 
hoard.  The  silver  ornaments  arc  brought  out  and  coined 
when  there  is  a  high  rate  of  interest,  aOd  go  back  again 
when  the  rate  of  interest  falls.  (J.  S.  Mill’s  evidence,  Re¬ 
ports  on  Bank  Acts,  1857,  N.  2084.)  According  to  a  Parlia¬ 
mentary  document  of  1864,  on  the  gold  and  silver  import 
and  export  of  India,  the  import  of  gold  and  silver  in  1863 
exceeded  the  export  by  £19,367,764.  During  the  eight  years 
immediately  preceding  1 864,  the  excess  of  imports  over  ex¬ 
ports  of  the  precious  metals  amounted  to  £109,652,917. 
During  this  century  far  more  than  £200,000,000  has  been 
coined  in  India. 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES 


as  a  commodity  at  one  pole,  as  money  at  the 
opposite  pole.  The  owners  of  commodities  came 
therefore  into  contact  as  the  respective  repre¬ 
sentatives  of  what  were  already  equivalents. 
But  with  the  development  of  circulation,  condi¬ 
tions  arise  under  which  the  alienation  of  com¬ 
modities  becomes  separated,  by  an  interval  of 
time  from  the  realization  of  their  prices,  it  will 
be  sufficient  to  indicate  the  most  simple  of  these 
conditions.  One  sort  of  article  requires  a  longer, 
another  a  shorter,  time  for  its  production.  Again, 
the  production  of  different  commodities  de¬ 
pends  on  different  seasons  of  the  year.  One  sort 
of  commodity  may  be  born  on  its  own  market 
place;  another  has  to  make  a  long  journey  to 
market.  Commodity-owner  No.  i  may  there¬ 
fore  be  ready  to  sell  before  No.  2  is  ready  to  buy. 
When  the  same  transactions  are  continually 
repeated  between  the  same  persons,  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  sale  are  regulated  in  accordance  with 
the  conditions  of  production. On  the  other  hand, 
the  use  of  a  given  commodity,  of  a  house,  for 
instance,  is  sold  (in  common  parlance,  let)  for  a 
definite  period.  Here,  it  is  only  at  the  end  of  the 
term  that  the  buyer  has  actually  received  the 
use-value  of  the  commodity.  He  therefore  buys 
it  before  he  pays  for  it.  The  vendor  sells  an  ex¬ 
isting  commodity;  the  purchaser  buys  it  as  the 
mere  representative  of  money,  or  rather  of  fu¬ 
ture  money.  The  vendor  becomes  a  creditor; 
the  purchaser  becomes  a  debtor.  Since  the  met¬ 
amorphosis  of  commodities,  or  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  their  value  form,  appears  here  under  a 
new  aspect,  money  also  acquires  a  fresh  func¬ 
tion;  it  becomes  the  means  of  payment. 

The  character  of  creditor,  or  of  debtor,  results 
here  from  the  simple  circulation.  The  change  in 
the  form  of  that  circulation  stamps  buyer  and 
seller  with  this  new  die.  At  first,  therefore,  these 
new  parts  are  just  as  transient  and  alternating 
as  those  of  seller  and  buyer,  and  are  in  turns 
played  by  the  same  actors.  But  the  opposition 
is  not  nearly  so  pleasant,  and  is  far  more  capable 
of  crystallization.1  The  same  characters  can, 
however,  be  assumed  independently  of  the  cir¬ 
culation  of  commodities.  The  class  struggles  of 
the  ancient  world  took  the  form  chiefly  of  a  con¬ 
test  between  debtors  and  creditors,  which  in 
Rome  ended  in  the  ruin  of  the  plebeian  debtors. 
They  were  displaced  by  slaves.  In  the  Middle 

1  The  following  shows  the  debtor  and  creditor  relations 
existing  between  English  traders  at  the  beginning  of  the 
eighteenth  century.  “Such  a  spirit  of  cruelty  reigns  here 
in  England  among  the  men  of  trade  that  is  not  to  be  met 
with  in  any  other  society  of  men,  nor  in  any  other  kingdom 
of  the  world." — An  Essay  on  Credit  and  the  Bankrupt  Act, 
London,  1707,  p.  2. 


63 

Ages  the  contest  ended  with  the  ruin  of  the 
feudal  debtors,  who  lost  their  political  power 
together  with  the  economical  basis  on  which  it 
was  established.  Nevertheless,  the  money  rela¬ 
tion  of  debtor  and  creditor  that  existed  at  these 
two  periods  reflected  only  the  deeper-lying  an¬ 
tagonism  between  the  general  economic  condi¬ 
tions  of  existence  of  the  classes  in  question. 

Let  us  return  to  the  circulation  of  commod¬ 
ities.  The  appearance  of  the  two  equivalents, 
commodities  and  money,  at  the  two  poles  of  the 
process  of  sale,  has  ceased  to  be  simultaneous. 
The  money  now  functions,  first  as  a  measure  of 
value  in  the  determination  of  the  price  of  the 
commodity  sold;  the  price  fixed  by  the  contract 
measures  the  obligation  of  the  debtor,  or  the 
sum  of  money  that  he  has  to  pay  at  a  fixed  date. 
Secondly,  it  serves  as  an  ideal  means  of  pur¬ 
chase.  Although  existing  only  in  the  promise  of 
the  buyer  to  pay,  it  causes  the  commodity  to 
change  hands.  It  is  not  before  the  day  fixed  for 
payment  that  the  means  of  payment  actually 
steps  into  circulation,  leaves  the  hand  of  the 
buyer  for  that  of  the  seller.  The  circulating  me¬ 
dium  was  transformed  into  a  hoard,  because  the 
process  stopped  short  after  the  first  phase,  be¬ 
cause  the  converted  shape  of  the  commodity, 
viz.,  the  money,  was  withdrawn  from  circula¬ 
tion.  The  means  of  payment  enters  the  circula¬ 
tion,  but  only  after  the  commodity  has  left  it. 
The  money  is  no  longer  the  means  that  brings 
about  the  process.  1 1  only  brings  it  to  a  close,  by 
stepping  in  as  the  absolute  form  of  existence  of 
exchange  value,  or  as  the  universal  commodity. 
The  seller  turned  his  commodity  into  money,  in 
order  thereby  to  satisfy  some  want;  the  hoarder 
did  the  same  in  order  to  keep  his  commodity  in 
its  money  form,  and  the  debtor  in  order  to  be 
able  to  pay;  if  he  does  not  pay,  his  goods  will  be 
sold  by  the  sheriff.  The  value  form  of  commod¬ 
ities,  money,  is  therefore  now  the  end  and  aim  of 
a  sale,  and  that  owing  to  a  social  necessity 
springing  out  of  the  process  of  circulation  itself. 

The  buyer  converts  money  back  into  com¬ 
modities  before  he  has  turned  commodities  into 
money:  in  other  words,  he  achieves  the  second 
metamorphosis  of  commodities  before  the  first. 
The  seller’s  commodity  circulates,  and  realizes 
its  price,  but  only  in  the  shape  of  a  legal  claim 
upon  money.  It  is  converted  into  a  use-value 
before  it  has  been  converted  into  money.  The 
completion  of  its  first  metamorphosis  follows 
only  at  a  later  period.2 

1  It  will  be  seen  from  the  following  quotation  from  my 
book  which  appeared  in  1859,  why  1  take  no  notice  in  the 
text  of  an  opposite  form:  “Contrariwise,  in  the  process 


64  CAPITAL 


The  obligations  falling  due  within  a  given  pe¬ 
riod,  represent  the  sum  of  the  prices  of  the  com¬ 
modities,  the  sale  of  which  gave  rise  to  those 
obligations.  The  quantity  of  gold  necessary  to 
realize  this  sum  depends,  in  the  first  instance, 
on  the  rapidity  of  currency  of  the  means  of  pay¬ 
ment.  That  quantity  is  conditioned  by  two  cir¬ 
cumstances:  first  the  relations  between  debtors 
and  creditors  form  a  sort  of  chain,  in  such  a  way 
that  Ay  when  he  receives  money  from  his  debtor 
By  straightway  hands  it  over  to  C  his  creditor, 
and  so  on;  the  second  circumstance  is  the  length 
of  the  intervals  between  the  different  dates  due 
of  the  obligations.  The  continuous  chain  of  pay¬ 
ments,  or  retarded  first  metamorphoses,  is  es¬ 
sentially  different  from  that  interlacing  of  the 
series  of  metamorphoses  which  we  considered 
on  a  former  page.  By  the  currency  of  the  circu¬ 
lating  medium,  the  connection  between  buyers 
and  sellers  is  not  merely  expressed.  This  con¬ 
nection  is  originated  by,  and  exists  in,  the  circu¬ 
lation  alone.  Contrariwise,  the  movement  of 
the  means  of  payment  expresses  a  social  rela¬ 
tion  that  was  in  existence  long  before. 

The  fact  that  a  number  of  sales  take  place 
simultaneously,  and  side  by  side,  limits  the  ex¬ 
tent  to  which  coin  can  be  replaced  by  the  rapid¬ 
ity  of  currency.  On  the  other  hand,  this  fact  is 
a  new  lever  in  economizing  the  means  of  pay¬ 
ment.  In  proportion  as  payments  are  concen¬ 
trated  at  one  spot,  special  institutions  and 
methods  are  developed  for  their  liquidation. 
Such  in  the  Middle  Ages  were  the  virement*1  at 
Lyons.  The  debts  due  to  A  from  By  to  B  from  C, 
to  C  from  At  and  so  on,  have  only  to  be  con¬ 
fronted  with  each  other  in  order  to  annul  each 
other  to  a  certain  extent  like  positive  and  nega¬ 
tive  quantities.  There  thus  remains  only  a  single 
balance  to  pay.  The  greater  the  amount  of  the 
payments  concentrated,  the  less  is  this  balance 
relatively  to  that  amount,  and  the  less  is  the 
mass  of  the  means  of  payment  in  circulation. 

The  function  of  money  as  the  means  of  pay¬ 
ment  implies  a  direct  contradiction.  In  so  far 
as  the  payments  balance  one  another,  money 

M — C,  the  money  can  be  alienated  as  a  real  means  of 
purchase,  and,  in  that  way,  the  price  of  the  commodity  can 
oe  realized  before  the  use-value  of  the  money  is  realized  and 
the  commodity  actually  delivered.  This  occurs  constantly 
under  the  everyday  form  of  prepayments.  And  it  is  under 
this  form,  that  the  English  government  purchases  opium 
from  the  ryots  of  India.  ...  In  these  cases,  however,  the 
money  always  acts  as  a  means  of  purchase. . . .  Of  course 
capital  also  is  advanced  in  the  shape  of  money.  . . .  This 
point  of  view,  however,  does  not  fall  within  the  horizon  of 
simple  circulation." — Zur  Krittk ,  etc.,  pp.  1 19, 120. 

1  Clearings  of  account. 


functions  only  ideally  as  money  of  account,  as 
a  measure  of  value.  In  so  far  as  actual  payments 
have  to  be  made,  money  does  not  serve  as  a  cir¬ 
culating  medium,  as  a  mere  transient  agent  in 
the  interchange  of  products,  but  as  the  individ¬ 
ual  incarnation  of  social  labour,  as  the  inde¬ 
pendent  form  of  existence  of  exchange  value,  as 
the  universal  commodity.  This  contradiction 
comes  to  a  head  in  those  phases  of  industrial 
and  commercial  crises  which  are  known  as  mon¬ 
etary  crises.3  Such  a  crisis  occurs  only  where  the 
ever-lengthening  chain  of  payments,  and  an 
artificial  system  of  settling  them,  has  been  fully 
developed.  Whenever  there  is  a  general  and  ex¬ 
tensive  disturbance  of  this  mechanism,  no  mat¬ 
ter  what  its  cause,  money  becomes  suddenly 
and  immediately  transformed  from  its  merely 
ideal  shape  of  money  of  account  into  hard  cash. 
Profane  commodities  can  no  longer  replace  it. 
The  use-value  of  commodities  becomes  value¬ 
less,  and  their  value  vanishes  in  the  presence  of 
its  own  independent  form.  On  the  eve  of  the 
crisis,  the  bourgeois,  with  the  self-sufficiency 
that  springs  from  intoxicating  prosperity,  de¬ 
clares  money  to  be  a  vain  imagination.  Com¬ 
modities  alone  are  money.  But  now  the  cry  is 
everywhere  that  money  alone  is  a  commodity! 
As  the  hart  pants  after  fresh  water,  so  pants  his 
soul  after  money,  the  only  wealth.3  In  a  crisis, 
the  antithesis  between  commodities  and  their 
value  form,  money,  becomes  heightened  into  an 
absolute  contradiction.  Hence,  in  such  events, 
the  form  under  which  money  appears  is  of  no 
importance.  The  money  famine  continues, 
whether  payments  have  to  be  made  in  gold  or 
in  credit  money  such  as  bank-notes.4 

2 The  monetary  crisis  referred  to  in  the  text,  being  a 
phase  of  every  crisis,  must  be  clearly  distinguished  from 
that  particular  form  of  crisis  which  also  is  called  a  mone¬ 
tary  crisis,  but  which  may  be  produced  by  itself  as  an  in¬ 
dependent  phenomenon  in  such  a  way  as  to  react  only  in¬ 
directly  on  industry  and  commerce.  The  pivot  of  these 
crises  is  to  be  found  in  moneyed  capital,  and  their  sphere 
of  direct  action  is  therefore  the  sphere  of  that  capital,  viz., 
banking,  the  stock  exchange,  and  finance. 

8  "The  sudden  reversion  from  a  system  of  credit  to  a 
system  of  hard  cash  heaps  theoretical  fright  on  top  of  the 
practical  panic;  and  the  dealers,  by  whom  agency  circula¬ 
tion  is  affected,  shudder  before  the  impenetrable  mystery 
in  which  their  own  economical  relations  are  involved" 
(Karl  Marx,  op .  cit.,  p.  126).  "The  poor  stand  still,  because 
the  rich  have  no  money  to  employ  them,  tnough  they  have 
the  same  land  and  hands  to  provide  vicfaals  and  clothes 
as  ever  they  had; . . .  which  is  the  true  riches  of  a  nation, 
and  not  the  money.*’— John  Bellers,  Proposals  for  raising 
a  Coiled#  of  Industry ,  London,  1695.  p.  3. 

4  The  following  shows  how  such  times  are  exploited  by 
the  "amis  du  commerce"  ["friends  of  commerce"].  "On  one 
occasion  (1839)  an  old  grasping  banker  (in  the  city)  in  his 
private  room  raised  the  lid  of  the  desk  he  sat  over,  and  dis- 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES  65 


If  we  now  consider  the  sum  total  of  the  money 
current  during  a  given  period,  we  shall  find  that, 
given  the  rapidity  of  currency  of  the  circulating 
medium  and  of  the  means  of  payment,  it  is  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  prices  to  be  realized,  plus  the 
sum  of  the  payments  falling  due,  minus  the  pay¬ 
ments  that  balance  each  other,  minus  finally 
the  number  of  circuits  in  which  the  same  piece 
of  coin  serves  in  turn  as  means  of  circulation 
and  of  payment.  Hence,  even  when  prices,  ra¬ 
pidity  of  currency,  and  the  extent  of  the  econ¬ 
omy  in  payments  are  given,  the  quantity  of 
money  current  and  the  mass  of  commodities 
circulating  during  a  given  period,  such  as  a  day, 
no  longer  correspond.  Money  that  represents 
commodities  long  withdrawn  from  circulation 
continues  to  be  current.  Commodities  circulate 
whose  equivalent  in  money  will  not  appear  on 
the  scene  till  some  future  day.  Moreover,  the 
debts  contracted  each  day,  and  the  payments 
falling  due  on  the  same  day,  are  quite  incom¬ 
mensurable  quantities.1 

Credit  money  springs  directly  out  of  the  func¬ 
tion  of  money  as  a  means  of  payment.  Certifi¬ 
cates  of  the  debts  owing  for  the  purchased 
commodities  circulate  for  the  purpose  of  trans¬ 
ferring  those  debts  to  others.  On  the  other  hand, 
to  the  same  extent  as  the  system  of  credit  is 
extended,  so  is  the  function  of  money  as  a  means 
of  payment.  In  that  character  it  takes  various 
forms  peculiar  to  itself  under  which  it  makes  it¬ 
self  at  home  in  the  sphere  of  great  commercial 
transactions.  Gold  and  silver  coin,  on  the  other 

played  to  a  friend  rolls  of  bank-notes,  saying  with  intense 
glee  there  were  £600,000  of  them,  they  were  held  to  make 
money  tight,  and  would  all  be  let  out  after  three  o’clock 
on  the  same  day.”  {The  Theory  0/  Exchanges .  The  Bank 
Charter  Act  of  1844.  London,  1864.  p.  81.)  The  Observer ,  a 
semi-official  government  organ,  contained  the  following 
paragraph  on  24th  April,  1864:  “Some  very  curious  ru¬ 
mours  are  current  of  the  means  which  have  been  resorted 
to  in  order  to  create  a  scarcity  of  bank-notes. . . .  Question¬ 
able  as  it  would  seem,  to  suppose  that  any  trick  of  the  kind 
would  be  adopted,  the  report  has  been  so  universal  that 
it  really  deserves  mention.” 

1  “The  amount  of  purchases  or  contracts  entered  upon 
during  the  course  of  any  given  day  will  not  affect  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  money  afloat  on  that  particular  day,  but,  in  the 
vast  majority  of  cases,  will  resolve  themselves  into  multi¬ 
farious  drafts  upon  the  quantity  of  money  which  may  be 
afloat  at  subsequent  dates  more  or  less  distant.  . . .  The 
bills  granted  or  credits  opened,  today,  need  have  no  re¬ 
semblance  whatever,  either  in  quantity,  amount,  or  dura¬ 
tion,  to  those  granted  or  entered  upon  tomorrow  or  next 
day;  nay,  many  of  today’s  bills  and  credits,  when  due,  fall 
in  with  a  mass  of  liabilities  whose  origins  traverse  a  range 
of  antecedent  dates  altogether  indefinite,  bills  at  12,  6,  3 
months,  or  I,  often  aggregating  together  to  swell  the  com¬ 
mon  liabilities  of  one  particular  day. .  • .  ” — The  Currency 
Theory  Reviewed:  a  letter  to  the  Scottish  people .  By  a  Banker 
in  England,  Edinburgh,  1845,  PP-  *9>  3°»  p***im. 


hand,  are  mostly  relegated  to  the  sphere  of  re¬ 
tail  trade.2 

When  the  production  of  commodities  has  suf¬ 
ficiently  extended  itself,  money  begins  to  serve 
as  the  means  of  payment  beyond  the  sphere  of 
the  circulation  of  commodities.  It  becomes  the 
commodity  that  is  the  universal  subject  mat¬ 
ter  of  all  contracts.3  Rents,  taxes,  and  such  like 
payments  are  transformed  from  payments  in 
kind  into  money  payments.  To  what  extent  this 
transformation  depends  upon  the  general  con¬ 
ditions  of  production  is  shown,  to  take  one  ex¬ 
ample,  by  the  fact  that  the  Roman  Empire 
twice  failed  in  its  attempt  to  levy  all  contribu¬ 
tions  in  money.  The  unspeakable  misery  of 
the  French  agricultural  population  under  Louis 
XIV,  a  misery  so  eloquently  denounced  by 
Boisguillebert,  Marshal,  Vauban,  and  others, 
was  due  not  only  to  the  weight  of  the  taxes,  but 
also  to  the  conversion  of  taxes  in  kind  into  mon¬ 
ey  taxes.4  In  Asia,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fact 
that  state  taxes  are  chiefly  composed  of  rents 

2  As  an  example  of  how  little  ready  money  is  required  in 
true  commercial  operations,  I  give  below  a  statement  by 
one  of  the  largest  London  houses  of  its  yearly  receipts  and 
payments.  Its  transactions  during  the  year  1856,  extend¬ 
ing  to  many  millions  of  pounds  sterling,  are  here  reduced 
to  the  scale  of  one  million. 

Receipts 


Bankers’  and  Merchants’  Bills 


payable  after  date 

£533.5 96 

Cheques  on  Bankers,  etc., 

payable  on  demand 

357.7*5 

Country  Notes 

9.6*7 

Bank  of  England  Notes 

6*.  JJ4 

Gold 

28,089 

Silver  and  Copper 

1,486 

Post  Office  Orders 

933 

Total  £1,000,000 

Payments 

Bills  payable  after  date 

£302,674 

Cheques  on  London  Bankers 

663,672 

Bank  of  England  Notes 

22,743 

Gold 

9*427 

Silver  and  Copper 

2.4»4 

Total  £1,000,000 

Report  from  the  Select  Committee  on  the  Bank  Acts,  July, 
1858,  p.  Ixxi. 


2  “The  course  of  trade  being  thus  turned  from  exchang¬ 
ing  of  goods  for  goods,  or  delivering  and  taking,  to  selling 
and  paying,  all  the  bargains  . . .  are  now  stated  upon  the 
foot  of  a  price  in  money.” — An  Essay  upon  Public k  Credit , 
3rd  Edition,  London,  1710,  p.  8. 

4  “Gold  has  become  the  hangman  of  all  things.”  Finance 
is  the  “alembic  in  which  a  frightening  number  of  goods  and 
products  has  evaporated,  in  order  to  produce  this  perni¬ 
cious  extract.”  “Money  declares  war  on  the  entire  human 
race.”— Boisguillebert,  Dissertation  sur  la  nature  des  rich - 
esses,  de  V argent,  et  des  tributs,  in  Economistes  financiers , 
edited  Daire,  Paris,  1843,  VoL  I,  pp.  413, 4x9, 417. 


CAPITAL 


66 

payable  in  kind  depends  on  conditions  of  pro¬ 
duction  that  are  reproduced  with  the  regularity 
of  natural  phenomena.  And  this  mode  of  pay¬ 
ment  tends  in  its  turn  to  maintain  the  ancient 
form  of  production.  1 1  is  one  of  the  secrets  of  the 
conservation  of  the  Ottoman  Empire.  If  the  for¬ 
eign  trade,  forced  upon  Japan  by  Europeans, 
should  lead  to  the  substitution  of  money  rents 
for  rents  in  kind,  it  will  be  all  up  with  the  ex¬ 
emplary  agriculture  of  that  country.  The  nar¬ 
row  economic  conditions  under  which  that  ag¬ 
riculture  is  carried  on  will  be  swept  away. 

In  every  country,  certain  days  of  the  year 
become  by  habit  recognized  settling  days  for 
various  large  and  recurrent  payments.  These 
dates  depend,  apart  from  other  revolutions  in 
the  wheel  of  reproduction,  on  conditions  closely 
connected  with  the  seasons.  They  also  regulate 
the  dates  for  payments  that  have  no  direct  con¬ 
nection  with  the  circulation  of  commodities  such 
as  taxes,  rents,  and  so  on.  The  quantity  of  mon¬ 
ey  requisite  to  make  the  payments,  falling  due 
on  those  dates  all  over  the  country,  causes  peri¬ 
odical,  though  merely  superficial,  perturbations 
in  the  economy  of  the  medium  of  payment.1 2 

From  the  law  of  the  rapidity  of  currency  of 
the  means  of  payment,  it  follows  that  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  the  means  of  payment  required  for  all 
periodical  payments,  whatever  their  source,  is 
in  inverse  proportion  to  the  length  of  their  pe¬ 
riods.* 

1  “On  Whitsuntide,  1824,”  says  Mr.  Craig  before  the 
Commons*  Committee  of  1826,  “there  was  such  an  im¬ 
mense  demand  for  notes  upon  the  banks  of  Edinburgh  that 
by  eleven  o’clock  they  had  not  a  note  left  in  their  custody. 
They  sent  round  to  all  the  different  banks  to  borrow,  but 
could  not  get  them,  and  many  of  the  transactions  were  ad 
justed  by  slips  of  paper  only;  yet  by  three  o’clock  the  whole 
of  the  notes  were  returned  into  the  banks  from  which  they 
had  issued1  It  was  a  mere  transfer  from  hand  to  hand  ” 
Although  the  average  effective  circulation  of  bank-notes 
in  Scotland  is  less  than  three  millions  sterling,  yet  on  cer¬ 
tain  pay  days  in  the  year,  every  single  note  in  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  bankers,  amounting  on  the  whole  to  about 
£7,000,000,  is  called  into  activity.  On  these  occasions  the 
notes  have  a  single  and  specific  function  to  perform,  and 
so  soon  as  they  have  performed  it,  they  flow  back  into  the 
various  banks  from  which  they  issued.  ( See  John  Fullar- 
ton,  Regulation  oj  Currencies ,  London,  1844,  p.  85  note  ) 
In  explanation  it  should  be  stated  that  in  Scotland,  at  the 
date  of  Fullarton’s  work,  notes  and  not  cheques  were  used 
to  withdraw  deposits. 

2  To  the  question,  “If  there  were  occasion  to  raise  40 
millions  per  annum,  whether  the  same  6  millions  (gold) 

. . .  would  suffice  for  such  revolutions  and  circulations 
thereof,  as  trade  requires,”  Petty  replies  in  his  usual  mas¬ 
terly  manner.  “I  answer,  Yes;  for  the  expense  being  40 
millions,  if  the  revolutions  were  in  such  short  circles,  viz., 
weekly,  as  happens  among  poor  artizans  and  labourers, 
who  receive  and  pay  every  Saturday,  then  4°/sa  parts  of  I 
million  of  money  would  answer  these  ends,  but  if  the  circles 


The  development  of  money  into  a  medium  of 
payment  makes  it  necessary  to  accumulate 
money  against  the  dates  fixed  for  the  payment 
of  the  sums  owing.  While  hoarding,  as  a  distinct 
mode  of  acquiring  riches,  vanishes  with  the 
progress  of  civil  society,  the  formation  of  re¬ 
serves  of  the  means  of  payment  grows  with  that 
progress. 

c.  Universal  Money 

When  money  leaves  the  home  sphere  of  cir¬ 
culation,  it  strips  oft  the  local  vesture  of  a  stand¬ 
ard  of  prices,  of  coin,  of  tokens,  and  of  a  symbol 
of  value,  and  returns  to  its  original  form  of  bul¬ 
lion.  In  the  trade  between  the  markets  of  the 
world,  the  value  of  commodities  is  expressed  so 
as  to  be  universally  recognized.  Hence  their  in¬ 
dependent  value  form  also,  in  these  cases,  con¬ 
fronts  them  under  the  shape  of  universal  mon¬ 
ey.  It  is  only  in  the  markets  of  the  world  that 
money  acquires  to  the  full  extent  the  character 
of  the  commodity  whose  bodily  form  is  also  the 
immediate  social  incarnation  of  human  labour 
in  the  abstract.  I  ts  real  mode  of  existence  in  this 
sphere  adequately  corresponds  to  its  ideal  con¬ 
cept. 

Within  the  sphere  of  home  circulation,  there 
can  be  but  one  commodity  which,  by  serving  as 
a  measure  of  value,  becomes  money.  In  themar- 
kets  of  the  world  a  double  measure  of  value 
holds  sway,  gold  and  silver.3 

be  quarterly,  according  to  our  custom  of  paying  rent  and 
gathering  taxes,  then  10  millions  were  requisite.  Where¬ 
fore,  supposing  payments  in  general  to  be  of  a  mixed  circle 
between  one  week  and  13,  then  add  10  millions  to  4°/^3,the 
half  of  which  will  be  5J2,  so  as  if  we  have  5>2  millions  we 
have  enough  ”  William  Petty ,  Political  / Inatomy  of  Ireland. 
London,  1691,  Appendix,  pp  13, 14 

*  Hence  the  absurdity  of  every  law  prescribing  that  the 
banks  of  a  country  shall  form  reserves  of  that  precious 
metal  alone  which  circulates  at  home.  I  he  “pleasant  diffi¬ 
culties  ’  thus  self-created  by  the  Bank  of  England,  are  well 
known.  On  the  subject  of  the  great  epochs  in  the  history  of 
the  changes  in  the  relative  value  of  gold  and  silver,  see 
Karl  Marx,  op.  ctt.f  p  136  ff  Sir  Robert  Peel,  by  his  Bank 
Act  of  1844,  sought  to  tide  over  the  difficulty,  by  allowing 
the  Bank  of  England  to  issue  notes  against  silver  bullion, 
on  condition  that  the  reserve  of  silver  should  never  exceed 
more  than  one  fourth  of  the  reserve  of  gold  The  value  of 
silver  being  for  that  purpose  estimated  at  its  price  in  the 
London  market  -  Note  to  the  4th  ed  We  find  ourselves 
again  in  a  period  of  marked  changes  in  the  relative  value 
of  gold  and  silver.  About  twenty-five  years  ago,  the  ratio 
of  gold  to  silver  was  15 yi  :  i;  today  it  is  approximately 
22  :  x,  with  silver  still  falling  as  against  gold.  This  is  es¬ 
sentially  the  result  of  a  revolution  in  the  method  of  pro¬ 
duction  of  the  two  metals.  Formerly,  gold  was  obtained  al¬ 
most  exclusively  by  washing  gold-bearing  alluvial  strata, 
products  of  the  deterioration  of  aunferous  rocks.  Today, 
this  method  is  no  longer  sufficient  and  has  been  superseded 
by  another,  which  hitherto  had  been  regarded  as  secondary, 


MONEY,  OR  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  COMMODITIES 


Money  of  the  world  serves  as  the  universal 
medium  of  payment,  as  the  universal  means  of 
purchasing,  and  as  the  universally  recognized 
embodiment  of  all  wealth.  Its  function  as  a 
means  of  payment  in  the  settling  of  internation¬ 
al  balances  is  its  chief  one  Hence  the  watchword 
of  the  mercantilists,  “balance  of  trade  ’n  Gold 


although  it  was  already  known  to  the  ancients  (Diodorus, 
III,  12  14)  the  mining  of  gold  bearing  quart2  layers  On 
the  other  hand,  not  only  were  tremendous  new  deposits  of 
silver  discovered  in  the  Rocky  Mountains,  but  these  and 
the  Mexican  silver  mines  were  opened  up  by  railroads 
which  facilitate  their  supply  with  modern  machinery  and 
fuel  Thus,  the  exploitation  of  silver  at  low  cost,  and  on  a 
very  large  scale,  has  been  made  possible  But  there  is  a 
great  difference  in  the  way  in  which  the  two  metals  are 
deposited  in  the  ore  Gold  is  present  usually  in  a  pure  state, 
but  is  scattered  through  the  quartz  m  extremely  small  bits 
Hence,  all  the  diggings  must  be  crushed  in  order  to  wash 
out  the  gold,  or  to  extract  it  with  quicksilver  One  million 
grams  of  quartz  often  contain  as  little  as  1  to  3  grams  of 
gold,  rarely  as  much  as  30  to  60  grams  Silver,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  rarely  present  in  the  pure  state,  but  is  present  in 
ores  which  are  easily  separated  from  the  dross,  and  which 
usuall)  contain  as  much  as  40%  to  90%  of  silver  Or  it  may 
be  contained  in  snsller  quantities  in  other  ores,  such  as 
copper,  lead,  etc  ,  which  in  themselves  are  worth  mining 
All  this  goes  to  show  that  the  amount  of  work  required  for 
the  production  of  gold  has  rather  increased,  whereas  in  the 
case  of  silver  it  has  certainly  decreased  1  hus,  the  fall  in 
the  value  of  silver  receives  an  altogether  natural  explana 
tion  This  fall  in  value  would  express  itself  m  an  even  great 
er  fall  of  price  than  has  at tu  illy  taken  place,  were  it  not 
for  the  fact  that  the  price  of  silver  is  even  now  kept  high 
by  artificial  means  Yet,  only  a  small  part  of  the  silver  de 
posits  of  America  has  been  exploited  so  far  Consequently, 
there  is  every  prospect  that  the  value  of  silver  will  con 
tmue  to  fall  for  some  time  to  come  I  he  relative  decrease 
in  the  demand  for  silver  in  articles  of  use  and  luxury,  re 
suiting  from  the  increased  use  of  plated  ware  and  alumi 
num  as  a  substitute,  will  further  contribute  to  this  trend 
Measured  by  this,  we  may  judge  the  utopianism  of  the  bi 
metallist  notion  that  the  old  1 5  1  ratio  could  be  restored 
by  an  internationally  fixed  price  for  silver  Indications 
rather  are  that  silver  will  increasingly  lose  its  money  char 
acter  on  the  world  market  b  £ 

1  The  opponents,  themselves,  of  the  mercantile  system, 
a  system  which  considered  the  settlement  of  surplus  trade 
balances  in  gold  and  silver  as  the  aim  of  international  trade, 
entirely  misconceived  the  functions  of  money  of  the  world 
I  have  shown  by  the  example  of  Ricardo  m  what  way  their 
false  conception  of  the  laws  that  regulate  the  quantity  of 
the  circulating  medium  is  reflected  in  their  equally  false 
conception  of  the  international  movement  of  the  precious 
metals  (op.  at ,  pp  150!?)  His  erroneous  dogma  “An  un¬ 
favourable  balance  of  trade  never  arises  but  from  a  redun¬ 
dant  currency  ...  1  he  exportation  of  the  com  is  caused 
by  its  cheapness,  and  is  not  the  effect,  but  the  cause,  of  an 
unfavourable  balance,  already  occurs  in  Barbon  I  he 
balance  of  trade,  if  there  be  one,  is  not  the  <  ause  of  sending 
away  the  money  out  of  a  nation,  but  that  proceeds  from 
the  difference  of  the  value  of  bullion  in  every  country  ' 
(N  Barbon,  op  at ,  pp  59, 60 )  MacCulloch  in  The  Litera¬ 
ture  of  Political  Economy ,  a  Classified  Catalogue ,  london, 
1845,  praises  Barbon  for  this  anticipation,  but  prudently 
passes  over  the  naive  forms,  in  which  Barbon  clothes  the 
absurd  supposition  on  which  the  “currency  principle  is 


67 

and  silver  serve  as  international  means  of  pur¬ 
chasing  chiefly  and  necessarily  in  those  periods 
when  the  customary  equilibrium  in  the  inter¬ 
change  of  products  between  different  nations  is 
suddenly  disturbed  And,  lastly,  it  serves  as  the 
universally  recognized  embodiment  of  social 
wealth,  whenever  the  question  is  not  of  buying 
or  paying,  but  of  transferring  wealth  from  one 
country  to  another,  and  whenever  this  transfer¬ 
ence  in  the  form  of  commodities  is  rendered 
impossible,  either  by  special  conjunctures  in 
the  markets,  or  by  the  purpose  itself  that  is  in¬ 
tended.2 

Just  as  every  country  needs  a  reserve  of  mon 
ey  for  its  home  circulation,  so,  too,  it  requires 
one  for  external  circulation  in  the  markets  of 
the  world.  The  functions  of  hoards,  therefore, 
arise  in  part  out  of  the  function  of  money,  as  the 
medium  of  the  home  circulation  and  home  pay¬ 
ments,  and  in  part  out  of  its  function  as  money 
of  the  world  *  for  this  latter  function,  the  genu¬ 
ine  money  commodity,  actual  gold  and  silver, 
is  necessary  On  that  account,  Sir  James 
Steuart,  in  order  to  distinguish  them  from  their 
purely  local  substitutes,  calls  gold  and  silver 
“money  of  the  world.* * 

The  current  of  the  stream  of  gold  and  silver  is 
a  double  one  On  the  one  hand,  it  spreads  itself 
from  its  sources  over  all  the  markets  of  the 
world,  in  order  to  become  absorbed,  to  various 
extents,  into  the  different  national  sphtres  of 
circulation,  to  fill  the  conduits  of  currency,  to 
replace  abraded  gold  and  silver  coins,  to  supply 


based  1  he  absence  of  real  criticism  and  even  of  honesty, 
in  that  catalogue,  culminates  in  the  sections  devoted  to  the 
history  of  the  theory  of  money  the  reason  is  that  Mac- 
Culloch  m  this  part  of  the  work  is  flattering  Lord  Over 
stone  whom  he  calls  ‘  facile  pnneeps  argentanorum  [“easi¬ 
ly  the  prince  of  bankers  ] 

*  bor  instance,  in  subsidies,  money  loans  for  carrying  on 
wars  or  for  enabling  banks  to  resume  cash  payments,  etc  , 
it  is  the  money  form,  and  no  other,  of  value  that  may  be 
wanted 

3  I  would  des  re,  indeed,  no  more  convincing  evidence 
of  thecompetency  of  the  machinery  of  the  hoards  in  specie¬ 
paying  countries  to  perferm  ever)  necessar)  office  of  in 
ttrnational  adjustment,  without  any  sensible  aid  from  the 
general  circulation,  than  the  facility  with  which  trance, 
when  but  just  recovering  from  the  shock  of  a  destructive 
foreign  invasion,  completed  within  the  space  of  27  months 
the  payment  of  her  forced  contribution  of  nearly  20  mil¬ 
lions  to  the  allied  powers,  and  a  considerable  proportion 
of  the  sum  in  specie,  without  any  perceptible  contraction 
or  derangement  of  her  domestic  currency,  or  even  any 
alarming  fluctuation  of  her  exchanges  (1  u  liar  ton,  op  cit , 
P  134  )— Note  to  the  4th  ed  We  have  a  still  more  strik¬ 
ing  example  in  the  east  with  which  France  was  able,  in 
1870-1,  to  pay  off  an  indemnity  more  than  ten  times  as 
large  within  thirty  months,  for  the  greatest  part  in  metal 
money.  F.E. 


68  CAPITAL 


the  material  of  articles  of  luxury,  and  to  petrify 
into  hoards.1  This  first  current  is  started  by  the 
countries  that  exchange  their  labour,  realized 
in  commodities,  for  the  labour  embodied  in  the 
precious  metals  by  gold-and  silver-producing 
countries.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  con¬ 
tinual  flowing  backwards  and  forwards  of  gold 
and  silver  between  the  different  national  spheres 
of  circulation,  a  current  whose  motion  depends 
on  the  ceaseless  fluctuations  in  the  course  of 
exchange.1 

Countries  in  which  the  bourgeois  form  of  pro¬ 
duction  is  developed  to  a  certain  extent,  limit 
the  hoards  concentrated  in  the  strong  rooms  of 
the  banks  to  the  minimum  required  for  the 

1  “Money  distributes  itself  among  the  nations,  relatively 
to  the  needs  of  each  . . .  being  always  attracted  by  the 
products."  (Le  Trosne,  op.  ctt.9  p.  916.)  “The  mines  which 
are  continually  gmng  gold  and  silver,  do  give  sufficient  to 
supply  such  a  needful  balance  to  every  nation.”  (J.  Van* 
derlint,  op.  ctt.,  p.  40.) 

1  “Exchanges  rise  and  fall  every  week,  and  at  some  par¬ 
ticular  times  in  the  year  run  high  against  a  nation,  and  at 
other  times  run  as  high  on  the  contrary.”— N.  Barbon,  op. 
«/.,  P-3* 


proper  performance  of  their  peculiar  func¬ 
tions.1  Whenever  these  hoards  are  strikingly 
above  their  average  level,  it  is,  with  some  excep¬ 
tions,  an  indication  of  stagnation  in  the  circula¬ 
tion  of  commodities,  of  an  interruption  in  the 
even  flow  of  their  metamorphoses.4 

*  These  various  functions  are  liable  to  come  into  dan- 
gerous  conflict  with  one  another  whenever  gold  and  silver 
have  also  to  serve  as  a  fund  for  the  conversion  of  bank¬ 
notes. 

4  “What  money  is  more  than  of  absolute  necessity  for  a 
home  trade  is  dead  stock .  • .  and  brings  no  profit  to  that 
country  it’s  kept  in,  but  as  it  is  transported  in  trade,  as 
well  as  imported.”  (John  Bellers,  Essays, ,  p.  12.)  “What  if 
we  have  too  much  coin?  We  may  melt  down  the  heaviest 
and  turn  it  into  the  splendour  of  plate,  vessels,  or  utensils 
of  gold  or  silver;  or  send  it  out  as  a  commodity,  where  the 
same  is  wanted  or  desired;  or  let  it  out  at  interest,  where 
interest  is  high.”  (W.  Petty,  ^uantulumcunquei  p.  39.) 
“Money  is  but  the  fat  of  the  body  politic,  whereof  too 
much  doth  as  often  hinder  its  agility,  as  too  little  makes  it 
sick . . .  as  fat  lubricates  the  motion  of  the  muscles,  feeds 
in  want  of  victuals,  fills  up  the  uneven  cavities,  and  beau¬ 
tifies  the  body,  so  doth  money  in  the  state  quicken  its  ac¬ 
tion,  feeds  from  abroad  *n  time  of  dearth  at  home;  evens 
accounts . . .  and  beautifies  the  whole,  altho  more  especial 
ly  the  particular  persons  that  have  it  in  plenty.”  (W.  Petty, 
Political  Anatomy  of  Ireland^  p.  14.) 


Part  Two 


THE  TRANSFORMATION  OF  MONEY  INTO 

CAPITAL 


CHAPTER  IV.  THE  GENERAL  FORMULA 
FOR  CAPITAL 


The  circulation  of  commodities  is  the  starting 
point  of  capital.  The  production  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  their  circulation,  and  that  more  developed 
form  of  their  circulation  called  commerce,  these 
form  the  historical  groundwork  from  which  it 
rises.  The  modern  history  of  capital  dates  from 
the  creation  in  the  sixteenth  century  of  a  world¬ 
embracing  commerce  and  a  world-embracing 
market. 

If  we  abstract  from  the  material  substance  of 
the  circulation  of  commodities,  that  is,  from  the 
exchange  of  the  various  use-values,  and  con¬ 
sider  only  the  economic  forms  produced  by  this 
process  of  circulation,  we  find  its  final  result  to 
be  money.  This  final  product  of  the  circulation 
of  commodities  is  the  first  form  in  which  capital 
appears. 

As  a  matter  of  history,  capital,  as  opposed  to 
landed  property,  invariably  takes  the  form  at 
first  of  money;  it  appears  as  moneyed  wealth, 
as  the  capital  of  the  merchant  and  of  the  usu¬ 
rer.1  But  we  have  no  need  to  refer  to  the  origin 
of  capital  in  order  to  discover  that  the  first  form 
of  appearance  of  capital  is  money.  We  can  see  it 
daily  under  our  very  eyes.  All  new  capital,  to 
commence  with,  comes  on  the  stage,  that  is,  on 
the  market,  whether  of  commodities,  labour,  or 
money,  even  in  our  days,  in  the  shape  of  money 
that  by  a  definite  process  has  to  be  transformed 
into  capital. 

The  first  distinction  we  notice  between  mon¬ 
ey  that  is  money  only,  and  money  that  is  capital, 
is  nothing  more  than  a  difference  in  their  form 
of  circulation. 

The  simplest  form  of  the  circulation  of  com¬ 
modities  is  C—  M—  C,  the  transformation  of 

1  The  contrast  between  the  power,  based  on  the  personal 
relations  of  dominion  and  servitude,  that  is  conferred  by 
landed  property,  and  the  impersonal  power  that  is  given 
by  money,  is  well  expressed  by  the  two  French  proverbs, 
"There  is  no  land  without  a  landlord,"  and  "Money  has 
no  master." 


commodities  into  money,  and  the  change  of  the 
money  back  again  into  commodities;  or  selling 
in  order  to  buy.  But  alongside  of  this  form  we 
find  another  specifically  different  form:  Af— 
C — Af,  the  transformation  of  money  into  com¬ 
modities,  and  the  change  of  commodities  back 
again  into  money;  or  buying  in  order  to  sell. 
Money  that  circulates  in  the  latter  manner  is 
thereby  transformed  into,  becomes,  capital, 
and  is  already  potentially  capital. 

Now  let  us  examine  the  circuit  A/—  C—  Af  a 
little  closer.  It  consists,  like  the  other,  of  two 
antithetical  phases.  In  the  first  phase,  A/—  C, 
or  the  purchase,  the  money  is  changed  into 
a  commodity.  In  the  second  phase,  C — Af,  or 
the  sale,  the  commodity  is  changed  back  again 
into  money.  The  combination  of  these  two 
phases  constitutes  the  single  movement  where¬ 
by  money  is  exchanged  for  a  commodity,  and 
the  same  commodity  is  again  exchanged  for 
money;  whereby  a  commodity  is  bought  in 
order  to  be  sold,  or,  neglecting  the  distinction 
in  form  between  buying  and  selling,  whereby 
a  commodity  is  bought  with  money,  and  then 
money  is  bought  with  a  commodity.2  The  re¬ 
sult,  in  which  the  phases  of  the  process  vanish, 
is  the  exchange  of  money  for  money,  A/— A/. 
If  I  purchase  2000  pounds  of  cotton  for  £100, 
and  resell  the  2000  pounds  of  cotton  for  £1 10, 
I  have,  in  fact,  exchanged  £100  for  £110, 
money  for  money. 

Now  it  is  evident  that  the  circuit  Af—  C—  Af 
would  be  absurd  and  without  meaning  if  the  in¬ 
tention  were  to  exchange  by  this  means  two 
equal  sums  of  money,  £100  for  £100.  The  mi¬ 
ser’s  plan  would  be  far  simpler  and  surer;  he 
sticks  to  his  £100  instead  of  exposing  it  to  the 
dangers  of  circulation.  And  yet,  whether  the 
merchant  who  has  paid  £100  for  his  cotton  sells 
it  for  £x  10,  or  lets  it  go  for  £100,  or  even  £jo, 
his  money  has,  at  all  events,  gone  through  a 

*  "With  money  one  buys  merchandises,  and  with  mer¬ 
chandises  one  buys  money."—  Mercier  de  la  Rivi&re,  £W- 
dre  naturel  ct  cssenticl  dcs  sociitfs  politiques ,  p.  543. 

69 


CAPITAL 


70 

characteristic  and  original  movement  quite 
different  in  kind  from  that  which  it  goes 
through  in  the  hands  of  the  peasant  who 
sells  corn,  and  with  the  money  thus  set  free 
buys  clothes.  We  have  therefore  to  examine 
first  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of 
the  forms  of  the  circuits  Af—  C—  Af  and 
C— Af— C,  and  in  doing  this  the  real  difference 
that  underlies  the  mere  difference  of  form  will 
reveal  itself. 

Let  us  see,  in  the  first  place,  what  the  two 
forms  have  in  common. 

Both  circuits  are  resolvable  into  the  same  two 
antithetical  phases,  C— Af,  a  sale,  and  Af— C, 
a  purchase.  In  each  of  these  phases  the  same 
material  elements — a  commodity,  and  money, 
and  the  same  economical  dramatis  persona ,  a 
buyer  and  a  seller — confront  one  another. 
Each  circuit  is  the  unity  of  the  same  two  anti¬ 
thetical  phases,  and  in  each  case  this  unity  is 
brought  about  by  the  intervention  of  three 
contracting  parties,  of  whom  one  only  sells, 
another  only  buys,  while  the  third  both  buys 
and  sells. 

What,  however,  first  and  foremost  distin¬ 
guishes  the  circuit  C— Af— C  from  the  circuit 
Af—  C—  Af  is  the  inverted  order  of  succession 
of  the  two  phases.  The  simple  circulation  of 
commodities  begins  with  a  sale  and  ends  with 
a  purchase,  while  the  circulation  of  money 
as  capital  begins  with  a  purchase  and  ends 
with  a  sale.  In  the  one  case  both  the  starting 
point  and  the  goal  are  commodities,  in  the  other 
they  are  money.  In  the  first  form  the 
movement  is  brought  about  by  the  interven¬ 
tion  of  money,  in  the  second  by  that  of  a  com¬ 
modity. 

In  the  circulation  C— Af— C,  the  money  is  in 
the  end  converted  into  a  commodity  that  serves 
as  a  use-value;  it  is  spent  once  for  all.  In  the  in¬ 
verted  form,  Af— C— Af,  on  the  contrary,  the 
buyer  lays  out  money  in  order  that,  as  a  seller, 
he  may  recover  money.  By  the  purchase  of  his 
commodity  he  throws  money  into  circulation, 
in  order  to  withdraw  it  again  by  the  sale  of  the 
same  commodity.  He  lets  the  money  go,  but 
only  with  the  sly  intention  of  getting  it  back 
again.  The  money,  therefore,  is  not  spent;  it  is 
merely  advanced.1 

In  the  circuit  C— Af— C,  the  same  piece  of 
ironey  changes  its  place  twice.  The  seller  gets 

1  "When  a  thing  is  bought  in  order  to  be  sold  again,  the 
sum  employed  is  called  money  advanced;  when  it  is  bought 
not  to  be  sold,  it  may  be  said  to  be  expended." — James 
Steuart,  Works ,  etc.,  edited  by  Gen.  Sir  James  Steuart,  his 
son.  London,  1805.  Vol.  I,  p.  274. 


it  from  the  buyer  and  pays  it  away  to  another 
seller.  The  complete  circulation,  which  begins 
with  the  receipt,  concludes  with  the  payment 
of  money  for  commodities.  It  is  the  very  con¬ 
trary  in  the  circuit  Af— C— Af.  Here  it  is  not 
the  piece  of  money  that  changes  its  place  twice, 
but  the  commodity.  The  buyer  takes  it  from  the 
hands  of  the  seller  and  passes  it  into  the  hands 
of  another  buyer.  Just  as  in  the  simple  circula¬ 
tion  of  commodities  the  double  change  of  place 
of  the  same  piece  of  money  effects  its  passage 
from  one  hand  into  another,  so  here  the  double 
change  of  place  of  the  same  commodity  brings 
about  the  reflux  of  the  money  to  its  point  of  de¬ 
parture. 

Such  reflux  is  not  dependent  on  the  commod¬ 
ity  being  sold  for  more  than  was  paid  for  it.  This 
circumstance  influences  only  the  amount  of  the 
money  that  comes  back.  The  reflux  itself  takes 
place,  so  soon  as  the  purchased  commodity  is 
resold,  in  other  words,  so  soon  as  the  circuit 
Af— C— Af  is  completed.  We  have  here,  there¬ 
fore,  a  palpable  difference  between  the  circula¬ 
tion  of  money  as  capital,  and  its  circulation  as 
mere  money. 

The  circuit  C—  Af—  C  comes  completely  to 
an  end  so  soon  as  the  money  brought  in  by  the 
sale  of  one  commodity  is  abstracted  again  by 
the  purchase  of  another.  If,  nevertheless,  there 
follows  a  reflux  of  money  to  its  starting  point, 
this  can  only  happen  through  a  nenewal  or  repe¬ 
tition  of  the  operation.  Ifl  sell  a  quarter  of  corn 
for  £3,  and  with  this  £3  buy  clothes,  the  money, 
so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  is  spent  and  done  with. 
It  belongs  to  the  clothes  merchant.  Ifl  now  sell 
a  second  quarter  of  corn,  money  indeed  flows 
back  to  me,  but  not,  however,  as  a  sequel  to  the 
first  transaction,  but  in  consequence  of  its  repe¬ 
tition.  The  money  again  leaves  me,  so  soon  as  I 
complete  this  second  transaction  by  a  fresh  pur¬ 
chase.  Therefore,  in  the  circuit  C — Af— C,  the 
expenditure  of  money  has  nothing  to  do  with 
its  reflux.  On  the  other  hand,  in  Af— C— Af, 
the  reflux  of  the  money  is  conditioned  by  the 
very  mode  of  its  expenditure.  Without  this 
reflux,  the  operation  fails,  or  thg  process  is 
interrupted  and  incomplete,  owing  to  the 
absence  of  its  complementary  and  final  phase, 
the  sale. 

The  circuit  C—  Af—  C  starts  with  one  com¬ 
modity  and  finishes  with  another,  which  falls 
out  of  circulation  and  into  consumption.  Con¬ 
sumption,  the  satisfaction  of  wants,  in  one 
word,  use-value,  is  its  end  and  aim.  The  circuit 
Af— C— Af,  on  the  contrary,  commences  with 
money  and  ends  with  money.  Its  leading  mo- 


THE  GENERAL  FORMULA  FOR  CAPITAL 


tive,  and  the  goal  that  attracts  it,  is  therefore 
mere  exchange  value. 

In  the  simple  circulation  of  commodities,  the 
two  extremes  of  the  circuit  have  the  same  eco¬ 
nomic  form.  They  are  both  commodities,  and 
commodities  of  equal  value.  But  they  are  also 
use- values  differing  in  their  qualities,  as,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  corn  and  clothes.  The  exchange  of  prod¬ 
ucts,  of  the  different  materials  in  which  the  la¬ 
bour  of  society  is  embodied,  forms  here  the  basis 
of  the  movement.  It  is  otherwise  in  the  circula¬ 
tion  Af—  C— Af,  which  at  first  sight  appears 
purposeless,  because  tautological.  Both  ex¬ 
tremes  have  the  same  economic  form.  They  are 
both  money,  and  therefore  are  not  qualitatively 
different  use-values;  for  money  is  but  the  con¬ 
verted  form  of  commodities,  in  which  their  par¬ 
ticular  use-values  vanish.  To  exchange  £100  for 
cotton,  and  then  this  same  cotton  again  for 
£100,  is  merely  a  roundabout  way  of  exchang¬ 
ing  money  for  money,  the  same  for  the  same, 
and  appears  to  be  an  operation  just  as  purpose¬ 
less  as  it  is  absurd.1  One  sum  of  money  is  distin¬ 
guishable  from  another  only  by  its  amount.  The 
character  and  tendency  of  the  process  Af — 
C— Af  is  therefore  not  due  to  any  qualitative 
difference  between  its  extremes,  both  being 
money,  but  solely  to  their  quantitative  differ¬ 
ence.  More  money  is  withdrawn  from  circula¬ 
tion  at  the  finish  than  was  thrown  into  it  at  the 
start.  The  cotton  that  was  bought  for  £100  is 

1  “One  does  not  exchange  money  for  money,”  says  Mer¬ 
rier  de  la  Riviferc  to  the  Mercantilists  {op.  cit .,  p.  486).  In 
a  work,  which,  ex  professo,  treats  of  “trade”  and  “specula¬ 
tion,”  occurs  the  following:  “All  trade  consists  in  the  ex¬ 
change  of  things  of  different  kinds;  and  the  advantage” 
[to  the  merchant?]  “arises  out  of  this  difference.  To  ex¬ 
change  a  pound  of  bread  against  a  pound  of  bread  . . . 
would  be  attended  with  no  advantage; . . .  Hence  trade  is 
advantageously  contrasted  with  gambling,  which  consists 
in  a  mere  exchange  of  money  for  money.”  (Th.  Corbet,  An 
Inquiry  into  the  Causes  and  Modes  of  the  Wealth  of  Individ¬ 
uals ;  or  the  Principles  of  Trade  and  Speculation  explained , 
London,  1841,  p.  5.)  Although  Corbet  does  not  see  that  M 
— Af,  the  exchange  of  money  for  money,  is  the  character¬ 
istic  form  of  circulation,  not  only  of  merchants’  capital  but 
of  all  capital,  yet  at  least  he  acknowledges  that  this  form 
is  common  to  gambling  and  to  one  species  of  trade,  viz., 
speculation:  but  then  comes  MacCulloch  and  makes  out 
that  to  buy  in  order  to  sell  is  to  speculate,  and  thus  the 
difference  between  speculation  and  trade  vanishes.  “Every 
transaction  in  which  an  individual  buys  produce  in  order 
to  sell  it  again,  is,  in  fact,  a  speculation.”  (MacCulloch,  A 
Dictionary  Practical ,  etc.,  of  Commerce .  London,  1847,  P* 
1058.)  With  much  more  naivetl,  Pinto,  the  Pindar  of  the 
Amsterdam  Stock  Exchange,  remarks,  “Commerce  is  a 
game  of  chance,  and  it  is  not  against  beggars  that  one  can 
win.  If  in  the  long  run  one  won,  it  would  still  be  necessary 
to  give  back  willingly  the  major  part  of  one’s  profit,  in  or¬ 
der  that  the  game  might  begin  again.” — (Pinto,  Traitfde 
la  Circulation  etdu  Credit.  Amsterdam,  1771,  p.  231.) 


71 

perhaps  resold  for  £100  +  £10  or  £1 10.  The  ex¬ 
act  form  of  this  process  is  therefore  Af—C—Af', 
where  Af r  =  Af  +  AAf  =  the  original  sum  ad¬ 
vanced,  plus  an  increment.  This  increment  or 
excess  over  the  original  value  I  call  surplus  val¬ 
ue.  The  value  originally  advanced,  therefore, 
not  only  remains  intact  while  in  circulation,  but 
adds  to  itself  a  surplus  value  or  expands  itself. 
It  is  this  movement  that  converts  it  into  capi¬ 
tal. 

Of  course,  it  is  also  possible  that  in  C—  Af—  C 
the  two  extremes  C—  C,  say  corn  and  clothes, 
may  represent  different  quantities  qf  value. 
The  farmer  may  sell  his  corn  above  its  value,  or 
may  buy  the  clothes  at  less  than  their  value.  He 
may,  on  the  other  hand,  be  taken  advantage  of 
by  the  clothes  merchant.  Yet,  in  the  form  of  cir¬ 
culation  now  under  consideration,  such  differ¬ 
ences  in  value  are  purely  accidental.  The  fact 
that  the  corn  and  the  clothes  are  equivalents 
does  not  deprive  the  process  of  all  meaning,  as 
it  does  in  Af— C— Af.  The  equivalence  of  their 
values  is  rather  a  necessary  condition  to  its  nor¬ 
mal  course. 

The  repetition  or  renewal  of  the  act  of  selling 
in  order  to  buy,  is  kept  within  bounds  by  the 
very  object  it  aims  at,  namely,  consumption  or 
the  satisfaction  of  definite  wants,  an  aim  that 
lies  altogether  outside  the  sphere  of  circulation. 
But  when  we  buy  in  order  to  sell,  we,  on  the 
contrary,  begin  and  end  with  the  same  thing, 
money,  exchange  value;  and  thereby  the  move¬ 
ment  becomes  interminable.  No  doubt,  Af  be¬ 
comes  Af+  AAf,  £100  become  £110.  But  when 
viewed  in  their  qualitative  aspect  alone,  £110 
are  the  same  as  £100,  namely,  money;  and  con¬ 
sidered  quantitatively,  £110  is,  like  £100,  a 
sum  of  definite  and  limited  value.  If  now,  the 
£1 1  o  be  spent  as  money,  they  cease  to  play  their 
part.  They  are  no  longer  capital.  Withdrawn 
from  circulation,  they  become  petrified  into  a 
hoard,  and  though  they  remained  in  that  state 
till  doomsday,  not  a  single  farthing  would  ac¬ 
crue  to  them.  If,  then,  the  expansion  of  value 
is  once  aimed  at,  there  is  just  the  same  induce¬ 
ment  to  augment  the  value  of  the  £1 10  as  that 
of  the  £100;  for  both  are  but  limited  expressions 
for  exchange  value,  and  therefore  both  have  the 
same  mission  to  approach,  by  quantitative  in¬ 
crease,  as  near  as  possible  to  absolute  wealth. 
Momentarily,  indeed,  the  value  originally  ad¬ 
vanced,  the  £100,  is  distinguishable  from  the 
surplus  value  of  £10  that  is  annexed  to  it  during 
circulation;  but  the  distinction  vanishes  imme¬ 
diately.  At  the  end  of  the  process,  we  do  not  re¬ 
ceive  with  one  hand  the  original  £100,  and  with 


72  CAPITAL 


the  other,  the  surplus  value  of  £10.  We  simply 
get  a  value  of  £i  10,  which  is  in  exactly  the  same 
condition  and  fitness  for  commencing  the  ex¬ 
panding  process  as  the  original  £100  was.  Mon¬ 
ey  ends  the  movement  only  to  begin  it  again.1 
Therefore,  the  final  result  of  every  separate  cir¬ 
cuit,  in  which  a  purchase  and  consequent  sale  are 
completed,  forms  of  itself  the  starting  point  of  a 
new  circuit.  The  simple  circulation  of  commod¬ 
ities— selling  in  order  to  buy— is  a  means  of  carry¬ 
ing  out  a  purpose  unconnected  with  circulation, 
namely,  the  appropriation  of  use-values,  the 
satisfaction  of  wants.  The  circulation  of  money 
as  capital  is,  on  the  contrary,  an  end  in  itself, 
for  the  expansion  of  value  takes  place  only  with¬ 
in  this  constantly  renewed  movement.  The 
circulation  of  capital  has  therefore  no  limits.3 

1  "Capital  is  divisible  . . .  into  the  original  capital  and 
the  profit,  the  increment  to  the  capital  . . .  although  in 
practice  this  profit  is  immediately  turned  into  capital  and 
set  in  motion  with  the  original."— F.  Engels, 11 Umrisse  zu 
finer  Kritik  der  Nationalokonomie ,"  in,  Deutsch-Franzfr- 
sische  Jahrbuchery  herausgegeben  von  Arnold  Ruge  und  Karl 
Marx,  Paris,  1844,  p.  99. 

1  Aristotle  opposes  (Economic  to  Ckrematistic .  He  starts 
from  the  former.  So  far  as  it  is  the  art  of  gaining  a  liveli¬ 
hood,  it  is  limited  to  procuring  those  articles  that  are  nec¬ 
essary  to  existence,  and  useful  either  to  a  household  or  the 
state.  "True  wealth  consists  of  such  values  in  use;  for  the 
quantity  of  possessions  of  this  kind,  capable  of  making  life 
pleasant,  is  not  unlimited.  There  is,  however,  a  second 
mode  of  acquiring  things,  to  which  we  may  by  preference 
and  with  correctness  give  the  name  of  Ckrematistic ,  and  in 
this  case  there  appear  to  be  no  limits  to  riches  and  posses¬ 
sions.  Trade  (literally  'retail  trade,'  and  Aristotle  takes 
this  kind  because  in  it  values  in  use  predominate)  does  dot 
in  its  nature  belong  to  Chrematistic,  for  here  the  exchange 
has  reference  only  to  what  is  necessaty  to  themselves  (the 
buyer  or  seller)."  Therefore,  as  he  goes  on  to  show,  the 
original  form  of  trade  was  barter,  but  with  the  extension 
of  the  latter,  there  arose  the  necessity  for  money.  On  the 
discovery  of  money,  barter  of  necessity  developed  into 
trading  in  commodities,  and  this  again,  in  opposition  to 
its  original  tendency,  grew  into  Chrematistic,  into  the  art 
of  making  money.  Now  Chrematistic  is  distinguishable 
from  (Economic  in  this  way,  that  "in  the  case  of  Chrema¬ 
tistic,  circulation  is  the  source  of  riches.  And  it  appears  to 
revolve  about  money,  for  money  is  the  beginning  and  end 
of  this  kind  of  exchange.  Therefore  also  riches,  such  as 
Chrematistic  strives  for,  are  unlimited.  Just  as  every  art 
that  is  not  a  means  to  an  end,  hut  an  end  in  itself,  has  no 
limit  to  its  aims,  because  it  seeks  constantly  to  approach 
nearer  and  nearer  to  that  end;  while  those  arts  thtft  pursue 
means  to  an  end  are  not  boundless,  since  the  goal  itself  im¬ 
poses  a  limit  upon  them;  so  with  Chrematistic,  there  are 
no  bounds  to  its  aims,  these  aims  being  absolute  wealth. 
(Economic,  not  Chrematistic,  has  a  limit ...  the  object  of 
the  former  is  something  different  from  money,  of  the  latter 
the  augmentation  of  money. ...  By  confounding  these  two 
forms,  which  overlap  each  other,  some  people  have  been 
led  to  look  upon  the  preservation  and  increase  of  money 
ad  infinitum  as  the  end  and  aim  of  (Economic."— Aris¬ 
totle,  Politics ,  I.  8-9.  passim . 


Thus  the  conscious  representative  of  this 
movement,  the  possessor  of  money,  be¬ 
comes  a  capitalist.  His  person,  or  rather  his 
pocket,  is  the  point  from  which  the  money 
starts  and  to  which  it  returns.  The  expansion  of 
value,  which  is  the  objective  basis  or  main¬ 
spring  of  the  circulation  Af—  C— Af,  becomes 
his  subjective  aim,  and  it  is  only  in  so  far  as  the 
appropriation  of  ever  more  and  more  wealth  in 
the  abstract  becomes  the  sole  motive  of  his  op¬ 
erations  that  he  functions  as  a  capitalist,  that  is, 
as  capital  personified  and  endowed  with  con¬ 
sciousness  and  a  will.  Use-values  must  there¬ 
fore  never  be  looked  upon  as  the  real  aim  of  the 
capitalist;3  neither  must  the  profit  on  any  single 
transaction.  The  restless  never-ending  process 
of  profit-making  alone  is  what  he  aims  at.4  This 
boundless  greed  after  riches,  this  passionate 
chase  after  exchange  value,3  is  common  to  the 
capitalist  and  the  miser;  but  while  the  miser  is 
merely  a  capitalist  gone  mad,  the  capitalist  is 
a  rational  miser.  The  never-ending  augmenta¬ 
tion  of  exchange  value,  which  the  miser  strives 
after  by  seeking  to  save®  his  money  from  circu¬ 
lation,  is  attained  by  the  more  acute  capitalist 
by  constantly  throwing  it  afresh  into  circula¬ 
tion.7 

The  independent  form,  i.e.,  the  money  form, 
which  the  value  of  commodities  assumes  in  the 
case  of  simple  circulation,  serves  only  one  pur¬ 
pose,  namely,  their  exchange,  md  vanishes  in 
the  final  result  of  the  movement.  On  the  other 
hand,  in  the  circulation  Af—  C—  Af,  both  the 

1  "Commodities  (here  used  in  the  sense  of  use-values) 
are  not  the  terminating  object^  of  the  trading  capitalist; 
money  is  his  terminating  object."— Thomas  Chalmers,  On 
Political  Economy ,  etc.,  2nd  edition,  Glasgow,  1832,  pp. 
16c,  166. 

4  "The  merchant  holds  in  little  esteem  the  profit  already 
made,  and  constantly  has  his  eyes  on  the  profits  of  the 
future."— A.  Genovesi,  Lnsoni  di  Economta  Civile ,  1765, 
Custodi’s  edition  of  Italian  Economists.  Parte  Moderns, 
Vol.  VIII  p.139. 

3  "The  inextinguishable  passion  for  gain,  the  auri  sacra 
fames ,  will  always  lead  capitalists."  (MacCulloch,  The  prin¬ 
ciples  of  Political  Economy 9  London,  1830,  p.  179.)  This 
view,  of  course,  does  not  prevent  the  same  MacCulloch 
and  others  of  his  kidney,  when  in  theoretical  difficulties, 
such,  for  example,  as  the  question  of  over-production,  from 
transforming  the  same  capitalist  into  a  morgl  citizen  whose 
sole  concern  is  for  use-values,  and  who  even  develops  an 
insatiable  hunger  for  boots,  hats,  eggs,  calico,  and  other 
extremely  familiar  sorts  of  use-values. 

e  The  characteristic  Greek  expression  for  hoarding  is  the 
same  as  for  to  rescue .  So  in  English  to  save  his  the  same  two 
meanings:  to  rescue  and  to  spare. 

7  "This  infinity  which  things  which  progress  in  a  straight 
line  do  not  have,  they  do  have  when  the  motion  is  circu¬ 
lar.”-  Galiani,  op.  eit. 


THE  GENERAL  FORMULA  FOR  CAPITAL 


money  and  the  commodity  represent  only  dif¬ 
ferent  modes  of  existence  of  value  itself,  the 
money  its  general  mode,  and  the  commodity  its 
particular,  or,  so  to  say,  disguised  mode.1  It  is 
constantly  changing  from  one  form  to  the  other 
without  thereby  becoming  lost,  and  thus  as¬ 
sumes  an  automatically  active  character.  If 
now  we  take  in  turn  each  of  the  two  different 
forms  which  self-expanding  value  successively 
assumes  in  the  course  of  its  life,  we  then  arrive 
at  these  two  propositions:  Capital  is  money; 
Capita]  is  commodities.2  In  truth,  however,  val¬ 
ue  is  here  the  active  factor  in  a  process,  in 
which,  while  constantly  assuming  the  form  in 
turn  of  money  and  commodities,  it  at  the  same 
time  changes  in  magnitude,  differentiates  itself 
by  throwing  off  surplus  value  from  itself;  the 
original  value,  in  other  words,  expands  spon¬ 
taneously.  For  the  movement,  in  the  course  of 
which  it  adds  surplus  value,  is  its  own  move¬ 
ment;  its  expansion,  therefore,  is  automatic  ex¬ 
pansion.  Because  it  is  value,  it  has  acquired  the 
occult  quality  pf  being  able  to  add  value  to  it¬ 
self.  It  brings  forth  living  offspring,  or,  at  the 
least,  lays  golden  eggs. 

Value,  therefore,  being  the  active  factor  in 
such  a  process,  and  assuming  at  one  time  the 
form  of  money,  at  another  that  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  but  through  all  these  changes  preserving 
itself  and  expanding,  it  requires  some  independ¬ 
ent  form,  by  means  of  which  its  identity  may 
at  any  time  be  established.  And  this  form  it  pos¬ 
sesses  only  in  the  shape  of  money.  It  is  under 
the  form  of  money  that  value  begins  and  ends, 
and  begins  again,  every  act  of  its  own  sponta¬ 
neous  generation.  It  began  by  being  JCioo,  it  is 
now  £ijo,  and  so  on.  But  the  money  itself  is 
only  one  of  the  two  forms  of  value.  Unless  it 
takes  the  form  of  some  commodity,  it  does  not 
become  capital.  There  is  here  no  antagonism,  as 
in  the  case  of  hoarding,  between  the  money  and 
commodities.  The  capitalist  knows  that  all 
commodities,  however  scurvy  they  may  look, 
or  however  badly  they  may  smell,  are  in  faith 
and  in  truth  money,  inwardly  circumcised 
Jews,  and  what  is  more,  a  wonderful  means 
whereby  out  of  money  to  make  more  money. 

1  "It  is  not  material  things  which  constitute  capital, 
but  the  value  of  these  material  things.”-  -J.  B.  Say, 
Trait i  de  1' Economic  Politique ,  3  feme  fid.,  Paris,  1817,  VoL 
I,  p.  428. 

f  "Currency  (!)  employed  in  producing  articles  ...  is 
capital.”  (MacLeod,  The  Theory  and  Practice  of  Banking* 
London,  1855,  Vol.  I,  ch.  i.,  p.  55.)  "Capital  is  commodi¬ 
ties.”  (James  Mill,  Elements  of  Political  Economy ,  London, 
1821,  p.  74.) 


73 

In  simple  circulation,  C— A/— C,  the  value  of 
commodities  attained  at  the  most  a  form  inde¬ 
pendent  of  their  use-values,  i.e.,  the  form  of 
money;  but  that  same  value  now  in  the  circula¬ 
tion  Af—C— A/,  or  the  circulation  of  capita], 
suddenly  presents  itself  as  an  independent  sub¬ 
stance,  endowed  with  a  motion  of  its  own,  pass¬ 
ing  through  a  life-process  of  its  own,  in  which 
money  and  commodities  are  mere  forms  which 
it  assumes  and  casts  off  in  turn.  Nay,  more:  in¬ 
stead  of  simply  representing  the  relations  of 
commodities,  it  enters  now,  so  to  say,  into  pri¬ 
vate  relations  with  itself.  It  differentiates  itself 
as  original  value  from  itself  as  surplus  value;  as 
the  father  differentiates  himself  from  himself 
qua  the  son,  yet  both  are  one  and  of  one  age: 
for  only  by  the  surplus  value  of  £10  does  the 
£100  originally  advanced  become  capital,  and 
so  soon  as  this  takes  place,  so  soon  as  the  son, 
and  by  the  son,  the  father,  is  begotten,  so  soon 
does  their  difference  vanish,  and  they  again  be¬ 
come  one,  £110. 

Value  therefore  now  becomes  value  in  proc¬ 
ess,  money  in  process,  and,  as  such,  capital.  It 
comes  out  of  circulation,  enters  into  it  again, 
preserves  and  multiplies  itself  within  its  circuit, 
comes  back  out  of  it  with  expanded  bulk,  and 
begins  the  same  round  ever  afresh.3  Af— A/', 
money  which  begets  money,  such  is  the  descrip¬ 
tion  of  capital  from  the  mouths  of  its  first  in¬ 
terpreters,  the  mercantilists. 

Buying  in  order  to  sell,  or,  more  accurately, 
buying  in  order  to  sell  dearer,  Af—C— A/',  ap¬ 
pears  certainly  to  be  a  form  peculiar  to  one 
kind  of  capital  alone,  namely,  merchants'  cap¬ 
ital.  But  industrial  capital,  too,  is  money,  that 
is  changed  into  commodities  and  by  the  sale  of 
these  commodities  is  re-converted  into  more 
money.  The  events  that  take  place  outside  the 
sphere  of  circulation,  in  the  interval  between 
the  buying  and  selling,  do  not  affect  the  form  of 
this  movement.  Lastly,  in  the  case  of  interest- 
bearing  capital,  the  circulation  Af—  C—  Af' 
appears  abridged.  We  have  its  result  with¬ 
out  the  intermediate  stage,  in  the  form  Af— 
M\  en  style  lapidaire*  so  to  say,  money  that 
is  worth  more  money,  value  that  is  greater 
than  itself. 

Af—  C— Af;  is,  therefore,  in  reality  the  general 
formula  of  capital  as  it  appears  prima  facie 
within  the  sphere  of  circulation. 

9  Capital:  "The  fructifying  part  of  accumulated  wealth 
. .  .permanent  value,  multiplying  itself.”— Sismondi, 
veaux  principes  de  I'iconomie  politique ,  Vol  I,  pp.  88, 89. 

4  In  lapidary  fashion. 


CAPITAL 


74 

CHAPTER  V.  CONTRADICTIONS  IN 
THE  GENERAL  FORMULA  OF  CAPITAL 

The  form  which  circulation  takes  when  money 
becomes  capital  is  opposed  to  all  the  laws  we 
have  hitherto  investigated  bearing  on  the  na¬ 
ture  of  commodities,  value  and  money,  and 
even  of  circulation  itself.  What  distinguishes 
this  form  from  that  of  the  simple  circulation  of 
commodities  is  the  inverted  order  of  succession 
of  the  two  antithetical  processes,  sale  and  pur¬ 
chase.  How  can  this  purely  formal  distinction 
between  these  processes  change  their  character 
as  it  were  by  magic ? 

But  that  is  not  all.  This  inversion  has  no  ex¬ 
istence  for  two  out  of  the  three  persons  who 
transact  business  together.  As  capitalist,  I  buy 
commodities  from  A  and  sell  them  again  to  By 
but  as  a  simple  owner  of  commodities,  I  sell 
them  to  B  and  then  purchase  fresh  ones  from 
A .  A  and  B  see  no  difference  between  the  two 
sets  of  transactions.  They  are  merely  buyers  or 
sellers.  And  I  on  each  occasion  meet  them  as  a 
mere  owner  of  either  money  or  commodities,  as 
a  buyer  or  a  seller,  and,  what  is  more,  in  both 
sets  of  transactions  I  am  opposed  to  A  only  as 
a  buyer,  and  to  B  only  as  a  seller;  to  the  one 
only  as  money,  to  the  other  only  as  commodi¬ 
ties,  and  to  neither  of  them  as  capital  or  a  cap¬ 
italist,  or  as  representative  of  anything  that  is 
more  than  money  or  commodities,  or  that  can 
produce  any  effect  beyond  what  money  and 
commodities  can.  For  me  the  purchase  from*/? 
and  the  sale  to  B  are  part  of  a  series.  But  the 
connection  between  the  two  rfcts  exists  for  me 
alone.  A  does  not  trouble  himself  about  my 
transaction  with  By  nor  does  B  about  my  busi¬ 
ness  with  A .  And  if  I  offered  to  explain  to  them 
the  meritorious  nature  of  my  action  in  in  verting 
the  order  of  succession,  they  would  probably 
point  out  to  me  that  I  was  mistaken  as  to  that 
order  of  succession,  and  that  the  whole  transac¬ 
tion,  instead  of  beginning  with  a  purchase  and 
ending  with  a  sale,  began,  on  the  contrary,  with 
a  sale  and  was  concluded  with  a  purchase.  In 
truth,  my  first  act,  the  purchase,  was,  from  the 
Standpoint  of  Ay  a  sale,  and  my  second  act,  the 
sale,  was,  from  the  standpoint  of  By  a  purchase. 
Not  content  with  that,  A  and  B  would  declare 
that  the  whole  series  was  superfluous  and  noth¬ 
ing  but  hocus  pocus;  that  for  the  fu  tu  re  A  would 
buy  direct  from  By  and  B  sell  direct  to  A.  Thus 
the  whole  transaction  would  be  reduced  to  a 
single  act  forming  an  isolated,  non-comple- 
mented  phase  in  the  ordinary  circulation  of 


commodities,  a  mere  sale  from  A' s  point  of 
view,  and  from  B* s  a  mere  purchase.  The  in¬ 
version,  therefore,  of  the  order  of  succession 
does  not  take  us  outside  the  sphere  of  the  simple 
circulation  of  commodities,  and  we  must  rather 
inquire  whether  there  is  in  this  simple  circula¬ 
tion  anything  permitting  an  expansion  of  the 
value  that  enters  into  circulation,  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  a  creation  of  surplus  value. 

Let  us  take  the  process  of  circulation  in  a 
form  under  which  it  presents  itself  as  a  simple 
and  direct  exchange  of  commodities.  This  is  al¬ 
ways  the  case  when  two  owners  of  commodities 
buy  from  each  other,  and  on  the  settling  day 
the  amounts  mutually  owing  are  equal  and  can¬ 
cel  each  other.  The  money  in  this  case  is  money 
of  account  and  serves  to  express  the  value  of  the 
commodities  by  their  prices,  but  is  not,  itself, 
in  the  shape  of  hard  cash,  confronted  with 
them.  So  far  as  regards  use- values,  it  is  dear 
that  both  parties  may  gain  some  advantage. 
Both  part  with  goods  that,  as  use-values,  are  of 
no  service  to  them,  and  receive  others  that  they 
can  make  use  of.  And  there  may  also  be  a  fur¬ 
ther  gain.  Ay  who  sells  wine  and  buys  corn,  pos¬ 
sibly  produces  more  wine,  with  given  labour 
time,  than  farmer  B  could,  and  By  on  the  other 
hand,  more  corn  than  wine-grower  A  could.  Ay 
therefore,  may  get,  for  the  same  exchange  val¬ 
ue,  more  corn,  and  B  more  wine,  than  each 
would  respectively  get  without  any  exchange 
by  producing  his  own  corn  and  wine.  With  ref¬ 
erence,  therefore,  to  use-value,  there  is  good 
ground  for  saying  that  "exchange  is  a  transac¬ 
tion  by  which  both  sides  gain.”1  It  is  otherwise 
with  exchange  value.  “A  man  who  has  plenty 
of  wine  and  no  corn  treats  with  a  man  who  has 
plenty  of  corn  and  no  wine;  an  exchange  takes 
place  between  them  of  corn  to  the  value  of  jo, 
for  wine  of  the  same  value.  This  act  produces  no 
increase  of  exchange  value  either  for  the  one  or 
the  other;  for  each  of  them  already  possessed, 
before  the  exchange,  a  value  equal  to  that 
which  he  acquired  by  means  of  that  opera¬ 
tion.”2  The  result  is  not  altered  by  introducing 
money,  as  a  medium  of  circulation,  between  the 
commodities,  and  making  the  sale  and  the  pur¬ 
chase  two  distinct  acts.8  The  value  of  a  com¬ 
modity  is  expressed  in  its  price  before  it  goes 

1  Dcstutt  de  Tracy,  Trattf  de  la  Volonti  et  de  ses  ejfetsy 
Paris,  1 826,  p.  68.  This  work  appeared  afterwards  as:  Traiti 
de  V Economic  Politique, 

2  Mercier  de  la  Riviere,  op,  cit,y  p.  544. 

*  “It  is,  intrinsically,  completely  indifferent  whether  one 
of  these  two  values  is  money  or  both  are  ordinary  goods.*’ 
— /M.,p.543* 


CONTRADICTIONS  IN  THE  FORMULA  OF  CAPITAL 


into  circulation,  and  is  therefore  a  precedent 
condition  of  circulation,  not  its  result.1 

Abstractly  considered,  that  is,  apart  from 
circumstances  not  immediately  flowing  from 
the  laws  of  the  simple  circulation  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  there  is  in  an  exchange  nothing  (if  we  ex¬ 
cept  the  replacing  of  one  use-value  by  another) 
but  a  metamorphosis,  a  mere  change  in  the  form 
of  the  commodity.  The  same  exchange  value 
i.e.,  the  same  quantity  of  incorporated  social 
labour,  remains  throughout  in  the  hands  of  the 
owner  of  the  commodity,  first  in  the  shape  of 
his  own  commodity,  then  in  the  form  of  the 
money  for  which  he  exchanged  it,  and  lastly, 
in  the  shape  of  the  commodity  he  buys  with 
that  money.  This  change  of  form  does  not  imply 
a  change  in  the  magnitude  of  the  value.  But  the 
change,  which  the  value  of  the  commodity  un¬ 
dergoes  in  this  process,  is  limited  to  a  change  in 
its  money  form.  This  form  exists  first  as  the 
price  of  the  commodity  offered  for  sale,  then  as 
an  actual  sum  of  money,  which,  however,  was 
already  expressed  in  the  price,  and  lastly,  as  the 
price  of  an  equivalent  commodity.  This  change 
of  form  no  more  implies,  taken  alone,  a  change 
in  the  quantity  of  value  than  does  the  change  of 
a  £y  note  into  sovereigns,  half  sovereigns  and 
shillings.  So  far  therefore  as  the  circulation  of 
commodities  effects  a  change  in  the  form  alone 
of  their  values,  and  is  free  from  disturbing  in¬ 
fluences,  it  must  be  the  exchange  of  equivalents. 
Little  as  Vulgar  Economics  knows  about  the  na¬ 
ture  of  value,  yet  whenever  it  wishes  to  consider 
the  phenomena  of  circulation  in  their  purity,  it 
assumes  that  supply  and  demand  are  equal, 
which  amounts  to  this,  that  their  effect  is  nil. 
If  therefore,  as  regards  the  use-values  ex¬ 
changed,  both  buyer  and  seller  may  possibly 
gain  something,  this  is  not  the  case  as  regards 
the  exchange  values.  Here  we  must  rather  say, 
“Where  equality  exists  there  can  be  no  gain.”2 
It  is  true,  commodities  may  be  sold  at  prices 
deviating  from  their  values,  but  these  devia¬ 
tions  are  to  be  considered  as  infractions  of  the 
laws  of  the  exchange  of  commodities,3  which  in 
its  normal  state  is  an  exchange  of  equivalents, 

1  “It  is  not  the  contracting  parties  who  pronounce  on  the 
value;  that  is  already  decided  before  the  contact  is  made." 
— Le  Trosne,  op.  p.  906. 

*  Galiani,  Della  Moneta,  in  Custodi,  “ Parte  Moderna 
Book  IV,  p.  244. 

3  “Exchange  becomes  disadvantageous  for  one  of  the 

parties  when  something  external  enters  to  diminish  or 

raise  the  price;  then  the  equality  is  injured;  but  the  lesion 

is  caused  by  this,  and  not  by  the  exchange."-- Le  Trosne, 
op. «/.,  p.  904. 


75 

consequently,  no  method  for  increasing  value.4 * 

Hence,  we  see  that  behind  all  attempts  to 
represent  the  circulation  of  commodities  as  a 
source  of  surplus-value,  there  lurks  a  quid  pro 
quoy  a  mixing  up  of  use-value  and  exchange-val¬ 
ue.  For  instance,  Condillac  says:  “It  is  not  true 
that  on  an  exchange  of  commodities  we  give 
value  for  value.  On  the  contrary,  each  of  the 
two  contracting  parties  in  every  case,  gives  a 
less  for  a  greater  value.  ...  If  we  really  ex¬ 
changed  equal  values,  neither  party  could  make 
a  profit.  And  yet,  they  both  gain,  or  ought  to 
gain.  Why?  The  value  of  a  thing  consists  solely 
in  its  relation  to  our  wants.  What  is  more  to  the 
one  is  less  to  the  other,  and  vice  versa . ...  It  is 
not  to  be  assumed  that  we  offer  for  sale  articles 
required  for  our  own  consumption. . . .  We  wish 
to  part  with  a  useless  thing,  in  order  to  get  one 
that  we  need;  we  want  to  give  less  for  more.  . . . 
It  was  natural  to  think  that,  in  an  exchange, 
value  was  given  for  value,  whenever  each  of  the 
articles  exchanged  was  of  equal  value  with  the 
same  quantity  of  gold. . . .  But  there  is  another 
point  to  be  considered  in  our  calculation.  The 
question  is  whether  we  both  exchange  some¬ 
thing  superfluous  for  something  necessary.”6 
We  see  in  this  passage,  how  Condillac  not  only 
confuses  use-value  with  exchange-value,  but  in 
a  really  childish  manner  assumes  that  in  a  so¬ 
ciety  in  which  the  production  of  commodities 
is  well  developed  each  producer  produces  his 
own  means  of  subsistence,  and  throws  into  cir¬ 
culation  only  the  excess  over  his  own  require¬ 
ments.6  Still,  Condillac’s  argument  is  frequent¬ 
ly  used  by  modern  economists,  more  especially 
when  the  point  is  to  show  that  the  exchange  of 
commodities  in  its  developed  form,  commerce, 
is  productive  of  surplus  value.  For  instance, 
“Commerce  ....  adds  value  to  products,  for 
the  same  products  in  the  hands  of  consumers, 

4  “Exchange  is  by  nature  a  contract  of  equality,  which 
comes  about  between  one  value  and  another  value  equal 
to  it.  It  is  therefore  not  a  means  of  enrichment,  for  one 
gives  as  much  as  one  receives." — Le  Trosne,  op.  eit.}  p.  903. 

6  Condillac,  Le  Commerce  et  le  Gouvernement ,  1 776,  edited 
Daire  et  Molinari  in  the  Melanges  d'Economie  Politique , 
Paris,  1847,  P-  267. 

6  Le  Trosne,  therefore,  answers  his  friend  Condillac  with 
justice  as  follows:  “In  a  developed  society,  there  is  no 
superabundance  of  any  kind."  At  the  same  time,  in  a  ban¬ 
tering  way,  he  remarks:  “If  both  the  persons  who  exchange 
receive  more  to  an  equal  amount,  and  part  with  less  to  an 
equal  amount,  they  both  get  the  same."  It  is  because  Con¬ 
dillac  has  not  the  remotest  idea  of  the  nature  of  exchange- 
value  that  he  has  been  chosen  by  Herr  Professor  Wilhelm 
Roscher  as  a  proper  person  to  answer  for  the  soundness  of 
his  own  childish  notions.  See  Roscher’s  Die  Grundlagen  der 
Nationalokonom ie,  Dritte  A  ullage,  1858. 


CAPITAL 


76 

are  worth  more  than  in  the  hands  of  producers, 
and  it  may  strictly  be  considered  an  act  of  pro¬ 
duction.”1 *  But  commodities  are  not  paid  for 
twice  over,  once  on  account  of  their  use-value, 
and  again  on  accountof  their  value.  And  though 
the  use- value  of  a  commodity  is  more  service¬ 
able  to  the  buyer  than  to  the  seller,  its  money 
form  is  more  serviceable  to  the  seller.  Would 
he  otherwise  sell  it?  We  might  therefore  just  as 
well  say  that  the  buyer  performs  “strictly  an 
act  of  production”  by  converting  stockings,  for 
example,  into  money. 

If  commodities,  or  commodities  and  money, 
of  equal  exchange-value,  and  consequently 
equivalents,  are  exchanged,  it  is  plain  that  no 
one  abstracts  more  value  from,  than  he  throws 
into,  circulation.  There  is  no  creation  of  sur¬ 
plus  value.  And,  in  its  normal  form,  the  circula¬ 
tion  of  commodities  demands  the  exchange  of 
equivalents.  But  in  actual  practice,  the  process 
does  not  retain  its  normal  form.  Let  us,  there¬ 
fore,  assume  an  exchange  of  non-equivalents. 

In  any  case  the  market  for  commodities  is 
only  frequented  by  owners  of  commodities,  and 
the  power  which  these  persons  exercise  over 
each  other  is  no  other  than  the  power  of  their 
commodities.  The  material  variety  of  these 
commodities  is  the  material  incentive  to  the  act 
of  exchange,  and  makes  buyers  and  sellers  mu¬ 
tually  dependent,  because  none  of  them  pos¬ 
sesses  the  object  of  his  own  wants,  and  each 
holds  in  his  hand  the  object  of  another’s  wants. 
Besides  these  material  differences  of  their  use- 
values,  there  is  only  one  other  difference  be¬ 
tween  commodities,  namely,  that  between  their 
bodily  form  and  the  form  into  which  they  are 
converted  by  sale,  the  difference  between  com¬ 
modities  and  money.  And  consequently  the 
owners  of  commodities  are  distinguishable  only 
as  sellers,  those  who  own  commodities,  and 
buyers,  those  who  own  money. 

Suppose,  then,  that  by  some  inexplicable 
privilege,  the  seller  is  enabled  to  sell  his  com¬ 
modities  above  their  value,  what  is  worth  100 
for  iio,  in  which  case  the  price  is  nominally 
raised  10%.  The  seller  therefore  pockets  a  sur¬ 
plus  value  of  io.  But  after  he  has  sold,  he  be¬ 
comes  a  buyer.  A  third  owner  of  commodities 
comes  to  him  now  as  a  seller,  who  in  this  capac¬ 
ity  also  enjoys  the  privilege  of  selling  his  com¬ 
modities  10%  too  dear.  Our  friend  gained  io  as 
a  seller  only  to  lose  it  again  as  a  buyer.3  The  net 

1 S.  P.  Newman,  Elements  of  Political  Economy,  Andover 

and  New  York,  1 835,  p.  175. 

3  “By  the  augmentation  of  the  nominal  value  of  the  prod¬ 

uce  . . .  sellers  not  enriched .  •  .  since  what  they  gain  as 


result  is  that  all  owners  of  commodities  sell  their 
goods  to  one  another  at  10%  above  their  value, 
which  comes  precisely  to  the  same  as  if  they 
sold  them  at  their  true  value.  Such  a  general 
and  nominal  rise  of  prices  has  the  same  effect  as 
if  the  values  had  been  expressed  in  weight  of 
silver  instead  of  in  weight  of  gold.  The  nominal 
prices  of  commodities  would  rise,  but  the  real 
relation  between  their  values  would  remain  un¬ 
changed. 

Let  us  make  the  opposite  assumption,  that 
the  buyer  has  the  privilege  of  purchasing  com¬ 
modities  under  their  value.  In  this  case  it  is  no 
longer  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that  he  in  his 
turn  will  become  a  seller.  He  was  so  before  he 
became  buyer;  he  had  already  lost  10%  in  sell¬ 
ing  before  he  gained  10%  as  buyer.3  Everything 
is  just  as  it  was. 

The  creation  of  surplus  value,  and  therefore 
the  conversion  of  money  into  capital,  can  con¬ 
sequently  be  explained  neither  on  the  assump¬ 
tion  that  commodities  are  sold  above  their  val¬ 
ue,  nor  that  they  are  bought  below  their  value.4 

The  problem  is  in  no  way  simplified  by  intro¬ 
ducing  irrelevant  matters  after  the  manner  of 
Col.  Torrens:  “Effectual  demand  consists  in  the 
power  and  inclination  (!),  on  the  part  of  con¬ 
sumers,  to  give  for  commodities,  either  by  im¬ 
mediate  or  circuitous  barter,  some  greater  por¬ 
tion  of.  .  .capital  than  their  production  costs.”6 
In  relation  to  circulation,  producers  and  con¬ 
sumers  meet  only  as  buyers  and  sellers.  To  as¬ 
sert  that  the  surplus  value  acquired  by  the  pro¬ 
ducer  has  its  origin  in  the  fact  that  consumers 
pay  for  commodities  more  than  their  value,  is 
only  to  say  in  other  words:  The  owner  of  com¬ 
modities  possesses,  as  a  seller,  the  privilege  of 
selling  too  dear.  The  seller  has  himself  produced 
the  commodities,  or  represents  their  producer; 
but  the  buyer  has  to  no  less  extent  produced  the 
commodities  represented  by  his  money,  or  rep¬ 
resents  their  producer.  The  distinction  between 

sellers,  they  precisely  expend  in  the  quality  of  buyers.”— 
The  Essential  Principles  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  etc.,  Lon¬ 
don,  1797,  p.  66. 

3  “If  one  is  forced  to  sell  for  18  livres  a  quantity  of  prod¬ 
ucts  which  are  worth  24  livres,  when  oyie  uses  the  same 
money  in  buying,  one  gets  in  return  for  the  18  livres  that 
for  which  one  pays  24  livres.”— Le  Trosnt,  op.  at.,  p.  897. 

4  "No  seller,  therefore,  can  habitually  raise  the  price  of 
his  merchandise,  without  agreeing  in  tilrn  habitually  to 
pay  a  higher  price  for  the  goods  of  the  other  sellers;  and 
for  the  same  reason,  no  consumer  can  habitually  buy  at  a 
lower  price,  without  agreeing  in  turn  to  a  decrease  of  like 
kii»d  in  the  price  of  goods  which  he  sells.”— Mercier  de  la 
Rivilre,  op.  at.,  p.  555. 

s  R.  Torrens,  An  Essay  on  the  Production  of  Wealth*  Lon¬ 
don,  :8n,  p.  349. 


CONTRADICTIONS  IN  THE  FORMULA  OF  CAPITAL 


them  is  that  one  buys  and  the  other  sells.  The 
fact  that  the  owner  of  the  commodities,  under 
the  designation  of  producer,  sells  them  over 
their  value,  and  under  the  designation  of  con¬ 
sumer  pays  too  much  for  them,  does  not  carry 
us  a  single  step  further.1 

To  be  consistent,  therefore,  the  upholders  of 
the  delusion  that  surplus  value  has  its  origin  in 
a  nominal  rise  of  prices  or  in  the  privilege  which 
the  seller  has  of  selling  too  dear,  must  assume 
the  existence  of  a  class  that  only  buys  and  does 
not  sell,  i.e.,  only  consumes  and  does  not  pro¬ 
duce.  The  existence  of  such  a  class  is  inexplica¬ 
ble  from  the  standpoint  we  have  so  far  reached, 
viz.,  that  of  simple  circulation.  But  let  us  an¬ 
ticipate.  The  money  with  which  such  a  class  is 
constantly  making  purchases  must  constantly 
flow  into  their  pockets,  without  any  exchange, 
gratis,  by  might  or  right,  from  the  pockets  of 
the  commodity  owners  themselves.  To  sell  com¬ 
modities  above  their  value  to  such  a  class  is  only 
to  crib  back  again  a  part  of  the  money  previous¬ 
ly  given  to  itAThe  towns  of  Asia  Minor  thus 
paid  a  yearly  money  tribute  to  ancient  Rome. 
With  this  money  Rome  purchased  from  them 
commodities,  and  purchased  them  too  dear. 
The  provincials  cheated  the  Romans,  and  thus 
got  back  from  their  conquerors,  in  the  course  of 
trade,  a  portion  of  the  tribute.  Yet,  for  all  that, 
the  conquered  were  the  really  cheated.  Their 
goods  were  still  paid  for  with  their  own  money. 
That  is  not  the  way  to  get  rich  or  to  create  sur¬ 
plus  value. 

Let  us  therefore  keep  within  the  bounds  of 
exchange  where  sellers  are  also  buyers,  and  buy¬ 
ers,  sellers.  Our  difficulty  may  perhaps  have 
arisen  from  treating  the  actors  as  personifica¬ 
tions  instead  of  as  individuals. 

A  may  be  clever  enough  to  get  the  advantage 
of  B  or  C  without  their  being  able  to  retaliate. 
A  sells  wine  worth  £40  to  B ,  and  obtains  from 
him  in  exchange  corn  to  the  value  of  £50.  A  has 
converted  his  £40  into  £50,  has  made  more 
money  out  of  less,  and  has  converted  his  com¬ 
modities  into  capital.  Let  us  examine  this  a  lit¬ 
tle  more  closely.  Before  the  exchange  we  had 

1  “The  idea  of  profits  being  paid  by  the  consumers,  is, 
assuredly,  very  absurd.  Who  are  the  consumers?”— G. 
Ramsay,  An  Essay  on  the  Distribution  of  Wealthy  Edin¬ 
burgh,  1836,  p.  183. 

•"When  a  man  is  in  want  of  a  demand,  does  Mr.  Mal¬ 
thas  recommend  him  to  pay  some  other  person  to  take  off 
his  goods?”  is  a  question  put  by  an  angry  disciple  of  Ricar¬ 
do  to  Malthus,  who,  like  his  disciple,  Parson  Chalmers, 
economically  glorifies  this  class  of  simple  buyers  or  con¬ 
sumers.— See  An  Inquiry  into  those  principles  respecting  the 
Nature  of  Demand  and  the  Necessity  of  Consumption ,  lately 
advocated  by  Mr.  Malthus ,  etc.,  London,  1821,  p.  55. 


77 

£40  worth  of  wine  in  the  hands  of  A ,  and  £50 
worth  of  corn  in  those  of  B>  a  total  value  of  £90. 
After  the  exchange  we  have  still  the  same  total 
value  of  £90.  The  value  in  circulation  has  not 
increased  by  one  iota;  it  is  only  distributed  dif¬ 
ferently  between  A  and  B .  What  is  a  loss  of  val¬ 
ue  to  B  is  surplus  value  to  A;  what  is  “minus” 
to  one  is  “plus”  to  the  other.  The  same  change 
would  have  taken  place,  if  A>  without  the  for¬ 
mality  of  an  exchange,  had  directly  stolen  the 
£10  from  B.  The  sum  of  the  values  in  circula¬ 
tion  can  clearly  not  be  augmented  by  any 
change  in  their  distribution,  any  more  than  the 
quantity  of  the  precious  metals  in  a  country  by 
a  Jew  selli  ng  a  Queen  Ann’s  farthing  for  a  guinea. 
The  capitalist  class,  as  a  whole,  in  any  coun¬ 
try,  cannot  overreach  themselves.8 

Turn  and  twist  then  as  we  may,  the  fact  re¬ 
mains  unaltered.  If  equivalents  are  exchanged, 
no  surplus  value  results,  and  if  non-equivalents 
are  exchanged,  still  no  surplus  value.4  Circula¬ 
tion,  or  the  exchange  of  commodities,  begets  no 
value.5 

The  reason  is  now  therefore  plain  why,  in  an¬ 
alysing  the  standard  form  of  capital,  the  form 
under  which  it  determines  the  economic  organ¬ 
ization  of  modern  society,  we  entirely  left  out 
of  consideration  its  most  popular,  and,  so  to  say, 
antediluvian  forms,  merchants’  capital  and 
money  lenders’  capital. 

Thecircuit  Af— C— Af ',  buying  in  order  to  sell 
dearer,  is  seen  most  clearly  in  genuine  mer¬ 
chants’  capital.  But  the  movement  takes  place 
entirely  within  the  sphere  of  circulation.  Since, 
however,  it  is  impossible,  by  circulation  alone, 
to  account  for  the  conversion  of  money  into 

8  Destutt  de  Tracy,  although,  or  perhaps  because,  he 
was  a  member  of  the  Institute,  held  the  opposite  view.  He 
says  industrial  capitalists  make  profits  because  "they  all 
sell  for  more  than  it  has  cost  to  produce.  And  to  whom  do 
they  sell?  In  the  first  instance  to  one  another.”— Op.  «7., 
P-  a39* 

4  "The  exchange  of  two  equal  values  neither  increases 
nor  diminishes  the  mas9  of  values  present  in  the  society. 
The  exchange  of  two  unequal  values  ...  in  no  way  alters 
the  sum-total  of  social  values,  although  it  adds  to  the  for¬ 
tune  of  one  what  it  subtracts  from  the  fortune  of  the  other.” 
(J.  B.  Say,  op.  cif.t  Vol.  I,  pp.  344,  345.)  Say,  not  in  the 
least  troubled  as  to  the  consequences  of  this  statement, 
borrows  it,  almost  word  for  word,  from  the  Physiocrats. 
The  following  example  will  show  how  Monsieur  Say  turned 
to  account  the  writings  of  the  Physiocrats,  in  his  day  quite 
forgotten,  for  the  purpose  of  expanding  his  own.  His  most 
celebrated  saying,  "We  can  buy  products  only  with  prod¬ 
ucts”  {op.  cit .,  Vol.  II,  p.  438)  runs  as  follows  in  the  orig¬ 
inal  physiocratic  work:  **Les  productions  ne  se  patent  qu' a- 
oecdes  productions .”  (Le  Trosne,  op.  cit.t  p.  899.) 

8  "Exchange  confers  no  value  at  all  upon  products.”— 
F.  Wayland,  The  Elements  of  Political  Economy ,  Boston, 
1853,  p.  168. 


CAPITAL 


78 

capital,  for  the  formation  of  surplus  value>  it 
would  appear,  that  merchants’  capital  is  an  im¬ 
possibility,  so  long  as  equivalents  are  ex¬ 
changed;1  that,  therefore,  it  can  only  have  its 
origin  in  the  twofold  advantage  gained,  over 
both  the  selling  and  the  buying  producers,  by 
the  merchant  who  parasitically  shoves  himself 
in  between  them.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  Frank¬ 
lin  says,  “War  is  robbery,  commerce  is  general¬ 
ly  cheating.”2  If  the  transformation  of  mer¬ 
chants’  money  into  capital  is  to  be  explained 
otherwise  than  by  the  producers  being  simply 
cheated,  a  long  series  of  intermediate  steps 
would  be  necessary,  which,  at  present,  when  the 
simple  circulation  of  commodities  forms  our 
only  assumption,  are  entirely  wanting. 

What  we  have  said  with  reference  to  mer¬ 
chants’  capital  applies  still  more  to  money 
lenders’  capital.  In  merchants’  capital,  the  two 
extremes,  the  money  that  is  thrown  upon  the 
market,  and  the  augmented  money  that  is  with¬ 
drawn  from  the  market,  are  at  least  connected 
by  a  purchase  and  a  sale,  in  other  words  by  the 
movement  of  the  circulation.  In  money  lenders’ 
capital  the  form  A/—  C—  M'  is  reduced  to  the 
two  extremes  without  a  mean,  M — M'y  money 
exchanged  for  more  money,  a  form  that  is  in¬ 
compatible  with  the  nature  of  money,  and 
therefore  remains  inexplicable  from  the  stand¬ 
point  of  the  circulation  of  commodities.  Hence 
Aristotle  wrote:  “Since  chrematistic  is  a  double 
science,  one  part  belonging  to  commerce,  the 
other  to  economics,  the  latter  being  necessary 
and  praiseworthy,  the  former  based  on  circula¬ 
tion  and  with  justice  disapproved  (for  it  is  not 
based  on  Nature,  but  on  mutual  cheating), 
therefore  the  usurer  is  most  rightly  hated,  be¬ 
cause  money  itself  is  the  source  of  his  gain  and 
is  not  used  for  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  in¬ 
vented.  For  it  originated  for  the  exchange  of 
commodities,  but  interest  makes  out  of  money 
more  money.  Hence  its  nam etokds,  (interest  and 
offspring).  For  the  begotten  are  like  those  who 
beget  them.  But  interest  is  money  of  money;  so 
that  of  all  modes  of  making  a  living,  this  is  the 
most  contrary  to  Nature.”3 

In  the  course  of  our  investigation,  rte  shall 

1  Under  the  rule  of  invariable  equivalents,  commerce 
would  be  impossible.  (G.  Opdyke,  A  Treatise  on  Political 
Economy ,  New  York,  1851,  pp.  66-69.)  “The  difference  be¬ 
tween  real  value  and  exchange  value  is  based  upon  this 
fact,  namely,  that  the  value  of  a  thing  is  different  from  the 
ao-called  equivalent  given  for  it  in  trade,  i.e.,  that  this 
equivalent  is  no  equivalent.”  (F.  Engels,  op.  eit .,  p.  96.) 

2  Benjamin  Franklin,  Works,  Vol.  II,  edited  Sparks  in 

Positions  to  be  examined  concerning  National  Wealth ,  p.  376. 

2  Aristotle,  op.  eit.,  1, 10. 


find  that  both  merchants’  capital  and  interest- 
bearing  capital  are  derivative  forms,  and  at  the 
same  time  it  will  become  clear  why  these  two 
forms  appear  in  the  course  of  history  before  the 
modern  standard  form  of  capital. 

We  have  shown  that  surplus  value  cannot  be 
created  by  circulation,  and,  therefore,  that  in 
its  formation  something  must  take  place  in  the 
background  which  is  not  apparent  in  the  circu¬ 
lation  itself.4  But  can  surplus  value  possibly 
originate  anywhere  else  than  in  circulation, 
which  is  the  sum-total  of  all  the  mutual  rela¬ 
tions  of  commodity  owners,  as  far  as  they  are 
determined  by  their  commodities?  Apart  from 
circulation,  the  commodity  owner  is  in  relation 
only  with  his  own  commodity.  So  far  as  regards 
value,  that  relation  is  limited  to  this,  that  the 
commodity  contains  a  quantity  of  his  own  la¬ 
bour,  that  quantity  being  measured  by  a  defi¬ 
nite  social  standard.  This  quantity  is  expressed 
by  the  value  of  the  commodity,  and,  since  the 
value  is  reckoned  in  money  of  account,  this 
quantity  is  also  expressed  by  the  price,  which 
we  will  suppose  to  be  £10.  But  his  labour  is  not 
represented  both  by  the  value  of  the  commod¬ 
ity  and  by  a  surplus  over  that  value;  not  by  a 
price  of  10  that  is  also  a  price  of  1 1;  not  by  a 
value  that  is  greater  than  itself.  The  commod¬ 
ity  owner  can,  by  his  labour,  create  value,  but 
not  self-expanding  value.  He  can  increase  the 
value  of  his  commodity,  by  addtTVg  fresh  labour, 
and  therefore  more  value  to  the  value  in  hand, 
by  making,  for  instance,  leather  into  boots.  The 
same  material  has  now  more  value,  because  it 
con  tai  ns  a  greater  quantity  of  labour.  The  boots 
have  therefore  more  value  than  the  leather,  but 
the  value  of  the  leather  remains  what  it  was;  it 
has  not  expanded  itself,  has  not,  during  the 
making  of  the  boots,  annexed  surplus  value.  It 
is  therefore  impossible  that,  outside  the  sphere 
of  circulation,  a  producer  of  commodities  can, 
without  coming  into  contact  with  other  com¬ 
modity  owners,  expand  value,  and  consequent¬ 
ly  convert  money  or  commodities  into  capital. 

It  is  therefore  impossible  for  capital  to  be 
produced  by  circulation,  and  it  is  equally  im¬ 
possible  for  it  to  originate  apart  from  circula¬ 
tion.  It  must  have  its  origin  both  in  circulation 
and  yet  not  in  circulation. 

We  have,  therefore,  got  a  double  result. 

The  conversion  of  money  into  capital  has  to 
be  explained  on  the  basis  of  the  laws  that  regu¬ 
late  the  exchange  of  commodities,  in  such  a  way 

4  “Profit,  in  the  usual  condition  of  the  market,  is  not 
made  by  exchanging.  Had  it  not  existed  before,  neither 
could  it  after  that  transaction.”— Ramsay,  op.  cit.,  p.  184. 


THE  BUYING  AND  SELLING  OF  LABOUR  POWER 


that  the  starting  point  is  the  exchange  of  equiv¬ 
alents.1  Our  friend.  Moneybags,  who  as  yet  is 
only  an  embryo  capitalist,  must  buy  his  com¬ 
modities  at  their  value,  must  sell  them  at  their 
value,  and  yet  at  the  end  of  the  process  must 
withdraw  more  value  from  circulation  than  he 
threw  into  it  at  starting.  His  development  into 
a  full-grown  capitalist  must  take  place,  both 
within  the  sphere  of  circulation  and  without  it. 
These  are  the  conditions  of  the  problem.  Hie 
Rhodusy  hie  salta\ 


CHAPTER  VI.  THE  BUYING  AND  SELLING 
OF  LABOUR  POWER 

The  change  of  value  that  occurs  in  the  case  of 
money  intended  to  be  converted  into  capital 
cannot  take  place  in  the  money  itself,  since,  in 
its  function  of  means  of  purchase  and  of  pay¬ 
ment,  it  docs  no  more  than  realize  the  price  of 
the  commodity  it  buys  or  pays  for;  and,  as  hard 
cash,  it  is  value  petrified,  never  varying.2 *  Just 
as  little  can  ii  originate  in  the  second  act  of  cir¬ 
culation,  the  resale  of  the  commodity,  which 
does  no  more  than  transform  the  article  from 
its  bodily  form  back  again  into  its  money  form. 
The  change  must,  therefore,  take  place  in  the 
commodity  bought  by  the  first  act,  M— C,  but 
not  in  its  value,  for  equivalents  are  exchanged, 
and  the  commodity  is  paid.for.At.its  full  value. 
We  are,  therefore,  forced  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  change  originates  in  the  use-value,  as  such, 

1  From  the  foregoing  investigation,  the  reader  will  see 
that  this  statement  only  means  that  the  formation  of  capi¬ 
tal  must  be  possible  even  though  the  price  and  value  of  a 
commodity  be  the  same;  for  its  formation  cannot  be  at¬ 
tributed  to  any  deviation  of  the  one  from  the  other.  If  prices 
actually  differ  from  values,  we  must,  first  of  all,  reduce 
the  former  to  the  latter,  in  other  words,  treat  the  differ¬ 
ence  as  accidental  in  order  that  the  phenomena  may  be  ob¬ 
served  in  their  purity,  and  our  observations  not  interfered 
with  by  disturbing  circumstances  that  have  nothing  to  do 
with  the  process  in  question.  We  know,  moreover,  that  this 
reduction  is  no  mere  scientific  process.  The  continual  oscil¬ 
lations  in  prices,  their  rising  and  falling,  compensate  each 
other,  and  reduce  themselves  to  an  average  price,  which  is 
their  hidden  regulator.  It  forms  the  guiding  star  of  the 
merchant  or  the  manufacturer  in  every  undertaking  that 
requires  time.  He  knows  that,  when  a  long  period  of  time 
is  taken,  commodities  are  sold  neither  over  nor  under,  but 
at  their  average  price.  If  therefore  he  thought  about  the 
matter  at  all,  he  would  formulate  the  problem  of  the  for¬ 
mation  of  capital  as  follows:  How  can  we  account  for  the 
origin  of  capital  on  the  supposition  that  prices  are  regu¬ 
lated  by  the  average  price,  i.e.,  ultimately  by  the  value  of 
the  commodities?  I  say  “ultimately,”  because  average 
prices  do  not  directly  coincide  with  the  values  of  commod¬ 
ities,  as  Adam  Smith,  Ricardo,  and  others  believe. 

2  “In  the  form  of  money  . . .  capital  is  productive  of  no 

profit.”— Ricardo,  Principles  of  Political  Economy ,  p.  267. 


79 

of  the  commodity,  i.e.,  in  its  consumption.  In 
order  to  be  able  to  extract  value  from  the  con¬ 
sumption  of  a  commodity,  our  friend,  Money¬ 
bags,  must  be  so  lucky  as  to  find,  within  the 
sphere  of  circulation,  in  the  market,  a  commod¬ 
ity  whose  use-value  possesses  the  peculiar  prop¬ 
erty  of  being  a  source  of  value,  whose  actual 
consumption,  therefore,  is  itself  an  embodiment 
of  labour,  and,  consequently,  a  creation  of  val¬ 
ue.  The  possessor  of  money  does  find  on  the 
market  such  a  special  commodity  in  capacity 
for  labour  or  labour  power. 

By  labour  power  or  capacity for  labour  is  to  be 
understood  the  aggregate  of  those  mental  and 
physical  capabilities  existing  in  a  human  being 
which  he  exercises  whenever  he  produces  a  use- 
value  of  any  description. 

But  in  order  that  our  owner  of  money  may  be 
able  to  find  labour  power  offered  for  sale  as  a 
commodity,  various  conditions  must  first  be 
fulfilled.  The  exchange  of  commodities  of  itself 
implies  no  other  relations  of  dependence  than 
those  which  result  from  its  own  nature.  On  this 
assumption,  labour  power  can  appear  upon  the 
market  as  a  commodity  only  if,  and  so  far  as,  its 
possessor,  the  individual  whose  labour  power  it 
is,  offers  it  for  sale,  or  sells  it,  as  a  commodity. 
In  order  that  he  may  be  able  to  do  this,  he  must 
have  it  at  his  disposal,  must  be  the  untram¬ 
melled  owner  of  his  capacity  for  labour,  i.e.,  of 
his  person.*  He  and  the  owner  of  money  meet 
in  the  market  and  deal  with  each  other  as  on 
the  basis  of  equal  rights,  with  this  difference 
alone,  that  one  is  buyer,  the  other  seller;  both, 
therefore,  equal  in  the  eyes  of  the  law.  The  con¬ 
tinuance  of  this  relation  demands  that  the  own¬ 
er  of  the  labour  power  should  sell  it  only  for  a 
definite  period,  for  if  he  were  to  sell  it  rump  and 
stump,  once  for  all,  he  would  be  selling  himself, 
converting  himself  from  a  free  man  into  a  slave, 
from  an  owner  of  a  commodity  into  a  commod¬ 
ity.  He  must  constantly  look  upon  his  labour 
power  as  his  own  property,  his  own  commodity, 
and  this  he  can  only  do  by  placing  it  at  the  dis¬ 
posal  of  the  buyer  temporarily,  for  a  definite 
period  of  time.  By  this  means  alone  can  he  avoid 
renouncing  his  rights  of  ownership  over  it.4 

*In  encyclopaedias  of  classical  antiquities  we  find  such 
nonsense  as  this — that  in  the  ancient  world  capital  was 
fully  developed,  “except  that  the  free  labourer  and  a  sys¬ 
tem  of  credit  was  wanting.”  Mommsen  also,  in  his  History 
of  Rome ,  commits  in  this  respect  one  blunder  after  another. 

4  Hence  legislation  in  various  countries  fixes  a  maximum 
for  labour  contracts.  Wherever  free  labour  is  the  rule,  the 
laws  regulate  the  mode  of  terminating  this  contract.  In 
some  States,  particularly  in  Mexico  (before  the  American 
Civil  War,  also  in  the  territories  taken  from  Mexico,  and 


80  CAPITAL 


The  second  essential  condition  to  the  owner 
of  money  finding  labour  power  in  the  market 
as  a  commodity  is  this— that  the  labourer,  in¬ 
stead  of  being  in  the  position  to  sell  commodi¬ 
ties  in  which  his  labour  is  incorporated,  must 
be  obliged  to  offer  for  sale  as  a  commodity  that 
very  labour  power,  which  exists  only  in  his  liv¬ 
ing  self. 

In  order  that  a  man  may  be  able  to  sell  com¬ 
modities  other  than  labour  power,  he  must  of 
course  have  the  means  of  production,  as  raw 
material,  implements,  etc.  No  boots  can  be 
made  without  leather.  He  requires  also  the 
means  of  subsistence.  Nobody— not  even  “a 
musician  of  the  future"— can  live  upon  future 
products,  or  upon  use-values  m  an  unfinished 
state;  and  ever  since  the  first  moment  of  his  ap¬ 
pearance  on  the  world’s  stage,  man  always  has 
been,  and  must  still  be,  a  consumer,  both  before 
and  while  he  is  producing.  In  a  society  where 
all  products  assume  the  form  of  commodities, 
these  commodities  must  be  sold  after  they  have 
been  produced;  it  is  only  after  their  sale  that 
they  can  serve  in  satisfying  the  requirements 
of  their  producer.  The  time  necessary  for  their 
sale  is  superadded  to  that  necessary  for  their 
production. 

For  the  conversion  of  his  money  into  capital, 
therefore,  the  owner  of  money  must  meet  in  the 
market  with  the  free  labourer,  free  in  the  double 
sense;  that  as  a  free  man  he  can  dispose  of  his 
labour  power  as  his  own  commodity,  and  that, 
on  the  other  hand,  he  has  no  other  commodity 
for  sale,  is  short  of  everything  necessary  for  the 
realization  of  his  labour  power. 

The  question  why  this  free  labourer  confronts 
him  in  the  market  has  no  interest  for  the  owner 
of  money,  who  regards  the  labour  market  as  a 
branch  of  the  general  market  for  commodities. 
And  for  the  present  it  interests  us  just  as  little. 

also,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  the  Danubian  provinces  till  the 
revolution  effected  by  Kusa),  slavery  is  hidden  under  the 
form  of  peonage .  By  means  of  advances,  repayable  in  la¬ 
bour,  which  are  handed  down  from  generation  to  genera¬ 
tion,  not  only  the  individual  labourer,  but  his  family,  be¬ 
come,  de facto ,  the  property  of  other  persons  and  their  fam¬ 
ilies.  Juarez  abolished  peonage.  The  so-called  Emperor  Max¬ 
imilian  re-established  it  by  a  decree,  which,  in  the  House 
of  Representatives  at  Washington,  was  aptly  denounced 
as  a  decree  for  the  re-introduction  of  slavery  into  Mexico. 
*T  may  make  over  to  another  the  use,  for  a  limited  time, 
of  my  particular  bodily  and  mental  aptitudes  and  capa¬ 
bilities;  because,  in  consequence  of  this  restriction,  they 
are  impressed  with  a  character  of  alienation  with  regard  to 
me  as  a  whole.  But  by  the  alienation  of  all  my  labour  time 
and  the  whole  of  my  work*  I  should  be  converting  the  sub¬ 
stance  itself,  in  other  words,  my  general  activity  and  real¬ 
ity,  my  person,  into  the  property  of  another*’— Hegel,  Phi- 
Ucophy  of  Right »  (  67* 


We  cling  to  the  fact  theoretically,  as  he  does 
practically.  One  thing,  however,  is  clear— Na¬ 
ture  does  not  produce  on  the  one  side  owners  of 
money  or  commodities,  and  on  the  other  men 
possessing  nothing  but  their  own  labour  power. 
This  relation  has  no  natural  basis,  neither  is  its 
social  basis  one  that  is  common  to  all  historical 
periods.  It  is  clearly  the  result  of  a  past  histori¬ 
cal  development,  the  product  of  many  econom¬ 
ic  revolutions,  of  the  extinction  of  a  whole  series 
of  older  forms  of  social  production. 

So,  too,  the  economic  categories,  already  dis¬ 
cussed  by  us,  bear  the  stamp  of  history.  Defi¬ 
nite  historical  conditions  are  necessary,  that  a 
product  may  become  a  commodity.  It  must  not 
be  produced  as  the  immediate  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence  of  the  producer  himself.  Had  we  gone  fur¬ 
ther,  and  inquired  under  what  circumstances 
all,  or  even  the  majority  of  products  take  the 
form  of  commodities,  we  should  have  found 
that  this  can  only  happen  with  production  of  a 
very  specific  kind,  capitalist  production.  Such 
an  inquiry,  however,  would  have  been  foreign 
to  the  analysis  of  commodities.  Production  and 
circulation  of  commodities  can  take  place,  al¬ 
though  the  great  mass  of  the  objects  produced 
are  intended  for  the  immediate  requirements  of 
their  producers,  are  not  turned  into  commodi¬ 
ties,  and  consequently  social  production  is  not 
yet  by  a  long  way  dominated  in  its  length  and 
breadth  by  exchange- value.  Thr*appearance  of 
products  as  commodities  presupposes  such  a  de¬ 
velopment  of  the  social  division  of  labour  that 
the  separation  of  use-value  from  exchange-val¬ 
ue,  a  separation  which  first  begins  with  barter, 
must  already  have  been  completed.  But  such  a 
degree  of  development  is  common  to  many 
forms  of  society,  which  in  other  respects  present 
the  most  varying  historical  features.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  we  consider  money,  its  existence 
implies  a  definite  stage  in  the  exchange  of  com¬ 
modities.  The  particular  functions  of  money 
which  it  performs,  either  as  the  mere  equivalent 
of  commodities,  or  as  means  of  circulation,  or 
means  of  payment,  as  hoard  or  as  universal 
money,  point,  according  to  the  extent  and  rela¬ 
tive  preponderance  of  the  one  function  or  the 
other,  to  very  different  stages  in  the  process  of 
social  production.  Yet  we  know  by  experience 
that  a  circulation  of  commodities  relatively 
primitive  suffices  for  the  production  of  all  these 
forms.  It  is  otherwise  with  capital.  The  histori¬ 
cal  conditions  of  its  existence  are  by  no  means 
given  with  the  mere  circulation  of  money  and 
commodities.  It  can  spring  into  life  only  when 
the  owner  of  the  means  of  production  and  sub- 


THE  BUYING  AND  SELLING  OF  LABOUR  POWER 


sistence  meets  in  the  market  with  the  free  la¬ 
bourer  selling  his  labour  power.  And  this  one 
historical  condition  comprises  a  world’s  history. 
Capital,  therefore,  announces  from  its  first  ap¬ 
pearance  a  new  epoch  in  the  process  of  social 
production.1 

We  must  now  examine  more  closely  this  pe¬ 
culiar  commodity,  labour  power.  Like  all  oth¬ 
ers,  it  has  a  value.2  How  is  that  value  deter¬ 
mined? 

The  value  of  labour  power  is  determined,  as 
in  the  case  of  every  other  commodity,  by  the 
labour  time  necessary  for  the  production,  and 
consequently  also  the  reproduction,  of  this  spe¬ 
cial  article.  So  far  as  it  has  value,  it  represents 
no  more  than  a  definite  quantity  of  the  average 
labour  of  society  incorporated  in  it.  Labour 
power  exists  only  as  a  capacity,  or  power,  of  the 
living  individual.  Its  production  consequendy 
presupposes  his  existence.  Given  the  individual, 
the  production  of  labour  power  consists  in  his 
reproduction  of  himself  or  his  maintenance.  For 
his  maintenance  he  requires  a  given  quantity 
of  the  means  of  subsistence.  Therefore  the  la¬ 
bour  time  requisite  for  the  production  of  labour 
power  reduces  itself  to  that  necessary  for  the 
production  of  those  means  of  subsistence;  in 
other  words,  the  value  of  labour  power  is  the 
value  of  the  means  of  subsistence  necessary  for 
the  maintenance  of  the  labourer.  Labour  power, 
however,  becomes  a  reality  only  by  its  exercise; 
it  sets  itself  in  action  only  by  working.  But 
thereby  a  definite  quantity  of  human  muscle, 
nerve,  brain,  etc.,  is  wasted,  and  these  require 
to  be  restored.  This  increased  expenditure  de¬ 
mands  a  larger  income.3  If  the  owner  of  labour 
power  works  today,  tomorrow  he  must  again 
be  able  to  repeat  the  same  process  under  the 
same  conditions  as  regards  health  and  strength. 
His  means  of  subsistence  must  therefore  be  suf¬ 
ficient  to  maintain  him  in  his  normal  state  as 
a  labouring  individual.  His  natural  wants,  such 
as  food,  clothing,  fuel,  and  housing,  vary  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  climatic  and  other  physical  con- 

1  The  capitalist  epoch  is  therefore  characterized  by  this, 
that  labour  power  takes  in  the  eyes  of  the  labourer  him¬ 
self  the  form  of  a  commodity  which  is  his  property;  his  la¬ 
bour  consequently  becomes  wage  labour.  On  the  other  hand, 
it  is  only  from  this  moment  that  the  produce  of  labour  uni¬ 
versally  becomes  a  commodity. 

2  “The  value  or  worth  of  a  man  is,  as  of  all  other  things, 

his  price— that  is  to  say,  so  much  as  would  be  given  for 

the  use  of  his  power."— Thomas  Hobbes,  Leviathan,  Part 
I.  ch.  io. 

*  Hence  the  Roman  Villicus,  as  overlooker  of  the  agri¬ 
cultural  slaves,  received  “more  meagre  fare  than  working 

slaves,  because  his  work  was  lighter." — Thomas  Momm¬ 
sen,  Romisch e  Gesehichte ,  1856,  p.  810. 


81 

ditions  of  his  country.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
number  and  extent  of  his  so-called  necessary 
wants,  as  also  the  modes  of  satisfying  them,  are 
themselves  the  product  of  historical  develop¬ 
ment,  and  depend  therefore  to  a  great  extent 
on  the  degree  of  civilization  of  a  country,  more 
particularly  on  the  conditions  under  which,  and 
consequently  on  the  habits  and  degree  of  com¬ 
fort  in  which,  the  class  of  free  labourers  has  been 
formed.4 *  In  contradistinction,  therefore,  to  the 
case  of  other  commodities,  there  enters  into  the 
determination  of  the  value  of  labour  power  a 
historical  and  moral  element.  Nevertheless,  in 
a  given  country,  at  a  given  period,  the  average 
quantity  of  the  means  of  subsistence  necessary 
for  the  labourer  is  practically  known. 

The  owner  of  labour  power  is  mortal.  If,  then, 
his  appearance  in  the  market  is  to  be  continu¬ 
ous,  and  the  continuous  conversion  of  money 
into  capital  assumes  this,  the  seller  of  labour 
power  must  perpetuate  himself,  “in  the  way 
that  every  living  individual  perpetuates  him¬ 
self,  by  procreation.”6  The  labour  power  with¬ 
drawn  from  the  market  by  wear  and  tear  and 
death  must  be  continually  replaced  by,  at  the 
very  least,  an  equal  amount  of  fresh  labour 
power.  Hence  the  sum  of  the  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence  necessary  for  the  production  of  labour 
power  must  include  the  means  necessary  for  the 
labourer’s  substitutes,  i.e.,  his  children,  in  order 
that  this  race  of  peculiar  commodity  owners 
may  perpetuate  its  appearance  in  the  market.4 

In  order  to  modify  the  human  organism,  so 
that  it  may  acquire  skill  and  handiness  in  a  giv¬ 
en  branch  of  industry,  and  become  labour  pow¬ 
er  of  a  special  kind,  a  special  education  or  train¬ 
ing  is  requisite,  and  this,  on  its  part,  costs  an 
equivalent  in  commodities  of  a  greater  or  less 
amount.  This  amount  varies  according  to  the 
more  or  less  complicated  character  of  the  labour 
power.  The  expenses  of  this  education  (exces¬ 
sively  small  in  the  case  of  ordinary  labour  pow¬ 
er)  enter  pro  tanto1  into  the  total  value  spent 
in  its  production. 

The  value  of  labour  power  resolves  itself  into 
the  value  of  a  definite  quantity  of  the  means  of 

4  Compare  W.  H.  Thornton,  Overpopulation  audits  Ren r- 
§dy%  London,  1846. 

*  Petty. 

8  “Its  (labour's)  natural  price . . .  consists  in  such  a  quan¬ 
tity  of  necessaries  and  comforts  of  life  as,  from  the  nature 
of  the  climate,  and  the  habits  of  the  country,  are  necessary 
to  support  the  labourer,  and  to  enable  him  to  rear  such  a 
family  as  may  preserve,  in  the  market,  an  undiminished 
supply  of  labour."  (R.  Torrens,  An  Essay  on  the  external 
Corn  Trade ,  London,  1815,  p.  62.)  The  word  labour  is  here 
wrongly  used  for  labour  power . 

1  To  that  extent. 


CAPITAL 


82 

subsistence.  It  therefore  varies  with  the  value 
of  these  means  or  with  the  quantity  of  labour 
requisite  for  their  production. 

Some  of  the  means  of  subsistence,  such  as 
food  and  fuel,  are  consumed  daily,  and  a  fresh 
supply  must  be  provided  daily.  Others,  such  as 
clothes  and  furniture,  last  for  longer  periods 
and  require  to  be  replaced  only  at  longer  inter¬ 
vals.  One  article  must  be  bought  or  paid  for 
daily,  another  weekly,  another  quarterly,  and 
so  on.  But  in  whatever  way  the  sum-total  of 
these  outlays  may  be  spread  over  the  year,  they 
must  be  covered  by  the  average  income,  taking 
one  day  with  another.  If  the  total  of  the  com¬ 
modities  required  daily  for  the  production  of  la¬ 
bour  power = A>  and  those  required  weekly  =  B> 
and  those  required  quarterly = C,  and  so  on,  the 
daily  average  of  these  commodities  — 

365^+52^+4^+etc. 

36s 

Suppose  that  in  this  mass  of  commodities  requi- 
site  for  the  average  day  there  are  embodied  6 
hours  of  social  labour;  then  there  is  incorpo¬ 
rated  daily  in  labour  power  half  a  day’s  average 
social  labour;  in  other  words,  half  a  day's  labour 
is  requisite  for  the  daily  production  of  labour 
power.  This  quantity  of  labour  forms  the  value 
of  a  day’s  labour  power  or  the  value  of  the  la¬ 
bour  power  daily  reproduced.  If  half  a  day’s 
average  social  labour  is  incorporated  in  three 
shillings,  then  three  shillings  is  the  price  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  value  of  a  day’slabour  power:  If 
its  owner,  therefore,  offers  it  for  sale  at  three 
shillings  a  day,  its  selling  price  is  equal  to  its 
value,  and,  according  to  our  supposition,  our 
friend  Moneybags,  who  is  intent  upon  convert¬ 
ing  his  three  shillings  into  capital,  pays  this  val¬ 
ue. 

The  minimum  limit  of  the  value  of  labour 
power  is  determined  by  the  value  of  the  com¬ 
modities  without  the  daily  supply  of  which  the 
labourer  cannot  renew  his  vital  energy;  conse¬ 
quently  by  the  value  of  those  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence  that  are  physically  indispensable.  If  the 
price  of  labour  power  falls  to  this  minimum,  it 
falls  below  its  value,  since  under  such  circum¬ 
stances  it  can  be  maintained  and  developed 
only  in  a  crippled  state.  But  the  value  of  every 
commodity  is  determined  by  the  labour  time 
requisite  to  turn  it  out  so  as  to  be  of  normal 
quality. 

It  is  a  very  cheap  sort  of  sentimentality 
which  declares  this  method  of  determining  the 
value  of  labour  power,  a  method  prescribed  by 
the  very  nature  of  the  case,  to  be  a  brutal  meth¬ 


od,  and  which  wails  with  Rossi  that:  "To  com¬ 
prehend  capacity  for  labour  {puissance  de  trav¬ 
ail)  at  the  same  time  that  we  make  abstraction 
from  the  means  of  subsistence  of  the  labourers 
during  the  process  of  production,  is  to  compre¬ 
hend  a  phantom  (Jtre  de  raison ).  When  we 
speak  of  labour,  or  capacity  for  labour,  we 
speak  at  the  same  time  of  the  labourer  and  his 
means  of  subsistence,  of  labourer  and  wages.”1 
When  we  speak  of  capacity  for  labour,  we  do 
not  speak  of  labour,  any  more  than  when  we 
speak  of  capacity  for  digestion,  wc  speak  of  di¬ 
gestion.  The  latter  process  requires  something 
more  than  a  good  stomach.  When  we  speak  of 
capacity  for  labour,  we  do  not  abstract  from  the 
necessary  means  of  subsistence.  On  the  contra¬ 
ry,  their  value  is  expressed  in  its  value.  If  his 
capacity  for  labour  remains  unsold,  the  labour¬ 
er  derives  no  benefit  from  it,  but  rather  he  will 
feel  it  to  be  a  cruel  natural  necessity  that  this 
capacity  has  cost  for  its  production  a  definite 
amount  of  the  means  of  subsistence  and  that  it 
will  continue  to  do  so  for  its  reproduction.  He 
will  then  agree  with  Sismondi:  “that  capacity 
for  labour. ...  is  nothing  unless  it  is  sold.”2 

One  consequence  of  the  peculiar  nature  of  la¬ 
bour  power  as  a  commodity  is  that  its  use- value 
does  not,  on  the  conclusion  of  the  contract  be¬ 
tween  the  buyer  and  seller,  immediately  pass 
into  the  hands  of  the  former.  Its  value,  like  that 
of  every  other  commodity,  is  already  fixed  be¬ 
fore  it  goes  into  circulation,  since  a  definite 
quantity  of  social  labour  has  been  spent  upon 
it;  but  its  use-value  consists  in  the  subsequent 
exercise  of  its  force.  The  alienation  of  labour 
power  and  its  actual  appropriation  by  the  buy¬ 
er,  its  employment  as  a  use- value,  are  separated 
by  an  interval  of  time.  But  in  those  cases  in 
which  the  formal  alienation  by  sale  of  the  use- 
value  of  a  commodity  is  not  simultaneous  with 
its  actual  delivery  to  the  buyer,  the  money  of 
the  latter  usually  functions  as  means  of  pay¬ 
ment.3  In  every  country  in  which  the  capitalist 
mode  of  production  reigns,  it  is  the  custom  not 
to  pay  for  labour  power  before  it  has  been  exer¬ 
cised  for  the  period  fixed  by  the  contract,  as, 

1  Rossi,  Cours  d' Economic  Politique ,  Brussels,  1842,  p. 
37°- 

2  Sismondi,  Nouveau  Principes  etc.,  VoL  I,  p.  1 12. 

8  "All  labour  is  paid  after  it  has  ceased.”  {An  Inquiry 
into  Those  Principles  respecting  the  Nature  of  Demand ,  etc., 
p.  104.)  "commercial  credit  must  begin  at  that  moment  in 
which  the  worker,  the  first  creator  of  production,  was  in  a 
position,  by  means  of  his  savings,  to  wait  for  his  salary  un¬ 
til  the  end  of  the  week,  or  the  fortnight,  or  the  month,  or 
the  quarter,  etc."  (Charles  Ganilh,  Des  Systimes  de  V 
Economic  Politique ,  2lme  edition,  Paris,  1821,  Vol.  I,  p. 
15a) 


THE  BUYING  AND  SELLING  OF  LABOUR  POWER 


for  example,  the  end  of  each  week.  In  all  cases, 
therefore,  the  use-value  of  the  labour  power  is 
advanced  to  the  capitalist:  the  labourer  allows 
the  buyer  to  consume  it  before  he  receives  pay¬ 
ment  of  the  price;  he  everywhere  gives  credit 
to  the  capitalist.  That  this  credit  is  no  mere 
fiction  is  shown  not  only  by  the  occasional  loss 
of  wages  on  the  bankruptcy  of  the  capitalist,1 
but  also  by  a  series  of  more  enduring  conse¬ 
quences.2  Nevertheless,  whether  money  serves 

1  “The  worker  lends  his  industry ,"  but,  adds  Storch  sly¬ 
ly,  he  “risks  nothing"  except  “the  loss  of  his  salary.  . . . 
The  worker  transmits  nothing  material." — Storch,  Cours 
d’ Economic  Politique ,  Ptftersbourg,  1815,  Vol.  II,  p.  37. 

2  One  example.  In  l^ondon  there  are  two  sorts  of  bakers, 
the  “full  priced,"  who  sell  bread  at  its  full  value,  and  the 
“undersellers,"  who  sell  it  under  its  value.  The  latter  class 
comprises  more  than  three-fourths  of  the  total  number  of 
bakers.  (See  p.  xxxii  in  the  Offictal  Report  of  H.  S.  Tremen- 
heere,  commissioner  to  examine  into  The  Grievances  Com¬ 
plained  of  by  the  journeymen  Bakers ,  etc.,  London,  1862.) 
The  undersellers,  almost  without  exception,  sell  bread  adul¬ 
terated  with  alum,  soap,  pearl  ashes,  chalk,  Derbyshire 
Stone-dust,  and  such  like  agreeable  nourishing  and  whole¬ 
some  ingredients.  (See  the  above  cited  blue  book,  as  also 
the  report  of  “the  c.<*^mittee  of  1855  on  the  adulteration 
of  bread,”  and  Dr.  HassaU’l  Adulterations  detected ,  2nd  edi¬ 
tion,  London,  1862.)  Sir  John  Gordon  stated  before  the 
committee  of  1855  that  “in  consequence  of  these  adultera¬ 
tions,  the  poor  man,  who  lives  on  two  pounds  of  bread  a 
day,  docs  not  now  get  one  fourth  part  of  nourishing  mat¬ 
ter,  let  alone  the  deleterious  effects  on  his  health."  Trem- 
enheere  states  {op.  cit.%  p.  xlvm),  as  the  reason,  why  a  very 
large  part  of  the  working  class,  although  well  aware  of  this 
adulteration,  nevertheless  accept  the  alum,  stone-dust,  etc., 
as  part  of  their  purchase:  that  it  is  for  them  “a  matter  of 
necessity  to  take  from  their  baker  or  from  the  chandler’s 
shop  such  bread  as  they  choose  to  supply."  As  they  are  not 
paid  their  wages  before  the  end  of  the  week,  they  in  their 
turn  are  unable  “to  pay  for  the  bread  consumed  by  their 
families,  during  the  week,  before  the  end  of  the  week,”  and 
Tremenheere  adds  on  the  evidence  of  witnesses,  “it  is  no¬ 
torious  that  bread  composed  of  those  mixtures  is  made  ex¬ 
pressly  for  sale  in  this  manner."  In  many  English  and  still 
more  Scotch  agricultural  districts,  wages  are  paid  fort¬ 
nightly  and  even  monthly;  with  such  long  intervals  be¬ 
tween  the  payments,  the  agricultural  labourer  is  obliged 
to  buy  on  credit.  . . .  He  must  pay  higher  prices,  and  is  in 
fact  tied  to  the  shop  which  gives  him  credit.  Thus  at  Horn- 
ingham  in  Wilts,  for  example,  where  the  wages  arc  month¬ 
ly,  the  same  flour  that  he  could  buy  elsewhere  at  is  10 d 
per  stone,  costs  him  2s  4// per  stone.  (Sixth  Report  on  Public 
Health  by  the  Medical  Officer  of  the  Privy  Council,  1864, 
p.  264.)  “The  block  printers  of  Paisley  and  Kilmarnock 
enforced,  by  a  strike,  fortnightly,  instead  of  monthly  pay¬ 
ment  of  wages."  ( Reports  of  the  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  Oct. 
31, 1 853,  p.  34.)  As  a  further  pretty  result  of  the  credit  given 
by  the  workmen  to  the  capitalist,  we  may  refer  to  the 
method  current  in  many  English  coal  mines  where  the  la¬ 
bourer  is  not  paid  till  the  end  of  the  month,  and,  in  the 
meantime,  receives  sums  on  account  from  the  capitalist, 
often  in  goods  for  which  the  miner  is  obliged  to  pay  more 
than  the  market  price.  (Truck  system.)  “It  is  a  common 
practice  with  the  coal  masters  to  pay  once  a  month,  and 
advance  cash  to  their  workmen  at  the  end  of  each  inter¬ 
mediate  week.  The  cash  ia  given  in  the  shop"  (i.e.,  the 
Tommy  shop  which  belongs  to  the  master);  “the  men  take 


83 

as  a  means  of  purchase  or  as  a  means  of  pay¬ 
ment,  this  makes  no  alteration  in  the  nature  of 
the  exchange  of  commodities.  The  price  of  the 
labour  power  is  fixed  by  the  contract,  although 
it  is  not  realized  till  later,  like  the  rent  of  a 
house.  The  labour  power  is  sold,  although  it  is 
only  paid  for  at  a  later  period.  It  will,  therefore, 
be  useful,  for  a  clear  comprehension  of  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  the  parties,  to  assume  provisionally  that 
the  possessor  of  labour  power,  on  the  occasion 
of  each  sale,  immediately  receives  the  price  stip¬ 
ulated  to  be  paid  for  it. 

We  now  know  how  the  value  paid  by  the 
purchaser  to  the  possessor  of  this  peculiar  com¬ 
modity,  labour  power,  is  determined.  The  use- 
value  which  the  former  gets  in  exchange  mani¬ 
fests  itself  only  in  the  actual  usufruct,  in  the 
consumption  of  the  labour  power.  The  money 
owner  buys  everything  necessary  for  this  pur¬ 
pose,  such  as  raw  material,  in  the  market,  and 
pays  for  it  at  its  full  value.  The  consumption  of 
labour  power  is  at  one  and  the  same  time  the 
production  of  commodities  and  of  surplus  val¬ 
ue.  The  consumption  of  labour  power  is  com¬ 
pleted,  as  in  the  case  of  every  other  commodity, 
outside  the  limits  of  the  market  or  of  the  sphere 
of  circulation.  Accompanied  by  Mr.  Money¬ 
bags  and  by  the  possessor  of  labour  power,  wc 
therefore  take  leave  for  a  time  of  this  noisy 
sphere  where  everything  takes  place  on  the  sur¬ 
face  and  in  view  of  all  men,  and  follow  them 
both  into  the  hidden  abode  of  production,  on 
whose  threshold  there  stares  us  in  the  face:  “No 
admittance  except  on  business.**  Here  we  shall 
see,  not  only  how  capital  produces,  but  how 
capital  is  produced.  We  shall  at  last  force  the 
secret  of  profit  making. 

This  sphere  that  we  are  deserting,  within 
whose  boundaries  the  sale  and  purchase  of  la¬ 
bour  power  goes  on,  is  in  fact  a  very  Eden  of  the 
innate  rights  of  man.  There  alone  rule  freedom, 
equality,  property,  and  Bentham.  Freedom,  be¬ 
cause  both  buyer  and  seller  of  a  commodity,  say 
of  labour  power,  are  constrained  only  by  their 
own  free  will.  They  contract  as  free  agents,  and 
the  agreement  they  come  to  is  but  the  form  in 
which  they  give  legal  expression  to  their  com¬ 
mon  will.  Equality,  because  each  enters  into  re¬ 
lation  with  the  other,  as  with  a  simple  owner  of 
commodities,  and  they  exchange  equivalent  for 
equivalent.  Property,  because  each  disposes 
only  of  what  is  his  own.  And  Bentham,  because 
each  looks  only  to  himself.  The  only  force  that 

it  on  one  side,  and  lay  it  out  on  the  other."  (1 Children's 
Employment  Commission ,  Third  Report,  London,  1864,  p. 
38,  n.  192.) 


CAPITAL 


84 

brings  them  together  and  puts  them  in  relation 
with  each  other  is  the  selfishness,  the  gain,  and 
the  private  interests  of  each.  Each  looks  to  him¬ 
self  only,  and  no  one  troubles  himself  about  the 
rest;  and  just  because  they  do  so,  do  they  all,  in 
accordance  with  the  pre-established  harmony 
of  things,  or  under  the  auspices  of  an  all  wise 
providence,  work  together  to  their  mutual  ad¬ 
vantage,  for  the  common  weal,  and  in  the  in¬ 
terest  of  all. 

On  leaving  this  sphere  of  simple  circulation 
or  of  exchange  of  commodities,  which  furnishes 


the  “Free-trader  Vulgaris ”  with  his  views  and 
ideas,  and  with  the  standard  by  which  he  judges 
a  society  based  on  capital  and  wages,  we  think 
we  can  perceive  a  change  in  the  physiognomy 
of  our  dramatis  persona.  He,  who  before  was  the 
money  owner,  now  strides  in  front  as  capitalist; 
the  possessor  of  labour  power  follows  as  his  la* 
bourer.  The  one  with  an  air  of  importance, 
smirking,  intent  on  business;  the  other,  timid 
and  holding  back,  like  one  who  is  bringing  his 
own  hide  to  market  and  has  nothing  to  expect 
but— a  hiding. 


Part  Three 


THE  PRODUCTION  OF  ABSOLUTE  SURPLUS  VALUE 


CHAPTER  VII.  THE  LABOUR  PROCESS 
AND  THE  PROCESS  OF  PRODUCING 
_ SURPLUS  VALUE _ 

I.  The  Labour  Process  or  the  Production  of  Use - 

Values 

The  capitalist  buys  labour  power  in  order  to 
use  it;  and  labour  power  in  use  is  labour  itself. 
The  purchaser  of  labour  power  consumes  it  by 
setting  the  seller  of  it  to  work.  By  working,  the 
latter  becomes  actually,  what  before  he  only 
was  potentially,  labour  power  in  action,  a  la¬ 
bourer.  In  order  that  his  labour  may  reappear 
in  a  commodity,  he  must,  before  all  things,  ex¬ 
pend  it  on  something  useful,  on  something  ca¬ 
pable  of  satisfying  a  want  of  some  sort.  Hence, 
what  the  capitalist  sets  the  labourer  to  produce 
is  a  particular  use-value,  a  specified  article. 
The  fact  that  the  production  of  use-values,  or 
goods,  is  carried  on  under  the  control  of  a 
capitalist  and  on  his  behalf  does  not  alter 
the  general  character  of  that  production.  We 
shall,  therefore,  in  the  first  place,  have  to  con¬ 
sider  the  labour  process  independently  of  the 
particular  form  it  assumes  under  given  social 
conditions. 

Labour  is,  in  the  first  place,  a  process  in 
which  both  man  and  Nature  participate,  and 
in  which  man  of  his  own  accord  starts,  regu¬ 
lates,  and  controls  the  material  reactions  be¬ 
tween  himself  and  Nature.  He  opposes  himself 
to  Nature  as  one  of  her  own  forces,  setting  in 
motion  arms  and  legs,  head  and  hands,  the  nat¬ 
ural  forces  of  his  body,  in  order  to  appropriate 
Nature’s  productions  in  a  form  adapted  to  his 
own  wants.  By  thus  acting  on  the  external 
world  and  changing  it,  he  at  the  same  time 
changes  his  own  nature.  He  develops  his  slum¬ 
bering  powers  and  compels  them  to  act  in  obe¬ 
dience  to  his  sway.  We  are  not  now  dealing  with 
those  primitive  instinctive  forms  of  labour  that 
remind  us  of  the  mere  animal.  An  immeasur¬ 
able  interval  of  time  separates  the  state  of 
things  in  which  a  man  brings  his  labour  power 
to  market  for  sale  as  a  commodity,  from  that 
state  in  which  human  labour  was  still  in  its  first 


instinctive  stage.  We  presuppose  labour  in  a 
form  that  stamps  it  as  exclusively  human.  A 
spider  conducts  operations  that  resemble  those 
of  a  weaver,  and  a  bee  puts  to  shame  many  an 
architect  in  the  construction  of  her  cells.  But 
what  distinguishes  the  worst  architect  from  the 
best  of  bees  is  this,  that  the  architect  raises  his 
structure  in  imagination  before  he  erects  it  in 
reality.  At  the  end  of  every  labour  process,  we 
get  a  result  that  already  existed  in  the  imagina¬ 
tion  of  the  labourer  at  its  commencement.  He 
not  only  effects  a  change  of  form  in  the  material 
on  which  he  works,  but  he  also  realizes  a  pur¬ 
pose  of  his  own  that  gives  the  law  to  his  modus 
operandiy  and  to  which  he  must  subordinate  his 
will.  And  this  subordination  is  no  mere  momen¬ 
tary  act.  Besides  the  exertion  of  the  bodily  or¬ 
gans,  the  process  demands  that,  during  the 
whole  operation,  the  workman’s  will  be  steadi¬ 
ly  in  consonance  with  his  purpose.  This  means 
dose  attention.  The  less  he  is  attracted  by  the 
nature  of  the  work,  and  the  mode  in  which  it  is 
carried  on,  and  the  less,  therefore,  he  enjoys  it 
as  something  which  gives  play  to  his  bodily  and 
mental  powers,  the  more  dose  his  attention  is 
forced  to  be. 

The  elementary  factors  of  the  labour  process 
are:  i,  the  personal  activity  of  man,  i.e.,  work 
itself;  2,  the  subject  of  that  work;  and  3,  its  in¬ 
struments. 

The  soil  (and  this,  economically  speaking,  in¬ 
dudes  water)  in  the  virgin  state  in  which  it  suj>- 
plies1  man  with  necessaries  or  the  means  of  sub¬ 
sistence  ready  to  hand,  exists  independently  of 
him,  and  is  the  universal  subject  of  human  la¬ 
bour.  All  those  things  which  labour  merely  sep¬ 
arates  from  immediate  connection  with  their 
environment  are  subjects  of  labour  spontane¬ 
ously  provided  by  Nature.  Such  are  fish  which 
we  catch  and  take  from  their  element,  water, 

1  "The  earth’s  spontaneous  productions  being  in  small 
quantity,  and  quite  independent  of  man,  appear,  as  it  were, 
to  be  furnished  by  Nature,  in  the  same  way  as  a  small  sum 
is  given  to  a  young  man  in  order  to  put  him  in  a  way  of 
industry,  and  of  making  his  fortune.’’— James  Steuart, 
Principles  of  Political  Economy  %  Dublin  edition,  1770,  Vol. 
I,p.  1 16. 


86  CAPITAL 

timber  which  we  fell  in  the  virgin  forest,  and  and  fabrication  of  instruments  of  labour,  al- 


ores  which  we  extract  from  their  veins.  If,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  subject  of  labour  has,  so  to 
say,  been  filtered  through  previous  labour,  we 
call  it  raw  material^  such  is  ore  already  extracted 
and  ready  for  washing.  All  raw  material  is  the 
subject  of  labour,  but  not  every  subject  of  la¬ 
bour  is  raw  material ;  it  can  only  become  so  after 
it  has  undergone  some  alteration  by  means  of 
labour. 

An  instrument  of  labour  is  a  thing,  or  a  com¬ 
plex  of  things,  which  the  labourer  interposes 
between  himself  and  the  subject  of  his  labour, 
and  which  serves  as  the  conductor  of  his  activ¬ 
ity.  He  makes  use  of  the  mechanical,  physical, 
and  chemical  properties  of  some  substances  in 
order  to  make  other  substances  subservient  to 
his  aims.1  Leaving  out  of  consideration  such 
ready-made  means  of  subsistence  as  fruits,  in 
gathering  which  a  man's  own  limbs  serve  as  the 
instruments  of  his  labour,  the  first  thing  of 
which  the  labourer  possesses  himself  is  not  the 
subject  of  labour  but  its  instrument.  Thus  Na¬ 
ture  becomes  one  of  the  organs  of  his  activity, 
one  that  he  annexes  to  his  own  bodily  organs, 
adding  stature  to  himself  in  spite  of  the  Bible. 
As  the  earth  is  his  original  larder,  so  too  it  is  his 
original  tool  house.  It  supplies  him,  for  in¬ 
stance,  with  stones  for  throwing,  grinding, 
pressing,  cutting,  etc.  The  earth  itself  is  an  in¬ 
strument  of  labour,  but  when  used  as  such  in 
agriculture  requires  a  whole  series  of  other  in¬ 
struments  and  a  comparatively  high  develop¬ 
ment  of  labour.2 *  No  sooner  does  labour  undergo 
the  least  development  than  it  requires  specially 
prepared  instruments.  Thus  in  the  oldest  caves 
we  find  stone  implements  and  weapons.  In  the 
earliest  period  of  human  history  domesticated 
animals,  i.e.,  animals  which  have  been  bred  for 
the  purpose,  and  have  undergone  modifications 
by  means  of  labour,  play  the  chief  part  as  in¬ 
struments  of  labour  along  with  specially  pre¬ 
pared  stones,  wood,  bones,  and  shells.9  The  use 

1  “Reason  is  just  as  cunning  as  she  is  powerful.  Her  cun¬ 
ning  consists  principally  in  her  mediating  activity,  which, 
by  causing  objects  to  act  and  react  on  each  other  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  their  own  nature,  m  this  way,  without  any 
direct  interference  in  the  process,  carries  out  Reason’s  in¬ 
tentions."— Hegel,  Encyklopadte ,  Part  I,  Die  Logtky  Ber¬ 
lin,  1840,  p.  382. 

2  In  his  otherwise  miserable  work  {ThioriedeV Economic 

Pohtiquey  Paris,  18x9),  Ganilh  enumerates  in  a  striking 

manner  in  opposition  to  the  “Physiocrats"  the  long  series 

of  previous  processes  necessary  before  agriculture  properly 

so  called  can  commence. 

1  Turgot,  in  his  Reflexions  sur  la  Formation  et  la  Distri¬ 

bution  des  Rtchesses ,  1766,  brings  well  into  prominence  the 

importance  of  domesticated  animals  to  early  civilization. 


though  existing  in  the  germ  among  certain  spe¬ 
cies  of  animals,  is  specifically  characteristic  of 
the  human  labour  process,  and  Franklin  there¬ 
fore  defines  man  as  “a  tool-making  animal.” 
Relics  of  by-gone  instruments  of  labour  possess 
the  same  importance  for  the  investigation  of  ex¬ 
tinct  economic  forms  of  society  as  do  fossil 
bones  for  the  determination  of  extinct  species 
of  animals.  It  is  not  the  articles  made,  but  how 
they  are  made,  and  by  what  instruments,  that 
enables  us  to  distinguish  different  economic  ep¬ 
ochs.4 * * * *  Instruments  of  labour  not  only  supply  a 
standard  of  the  degree  of  development  to  which 
human  labour  has  attained,  but  they  are  also 
indicators  of  the  social  conditions  under  which 
that  labour  is  earned  on.  Among  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour,  those  of  a  mechanical  nature, 
which,  taken  as  a  whole,  we  may  call  the  bone 
and  muscles  of  production,  offer  much  more  de¬ 
cided  characteristics  of  a  given  epoch  of  produc¬ 
tion  than  those  which,  like  pipes,  tubs,  baskets, 
jars,  etc.,  serve  only  to  hold  the  materials  for 
labour,  which  latter  class  we  may,  in  a  general 
way,  call  the  vascular  system  of  production. 
The  latter  first  begins  to  play  an  important  part 
in  the  chemical  industries. 

In  a  wider  sense  we  may  include  among  the 
instruments  of  labour,  in  addition  to  those 
things  that  arc  used  for  directly  transferring  la¬ 
bour  to  its  subject,  and  which,  therefore,  in  one 
way  or  another,  serve  as  conductors  of  activity, 
all  such  objects  as  are  necessary  for  carrying  on 
the  labour  process.  These  do  not  enter  directly 
into  the  process,  but  without  them  it  is  either 
impossible  for  it  to  take  place  at  all,  or  possible 
only  to  a  partial  extent.  Once  more  we  find  the 
earth  to  be  a  universal  instrument  of  this  sort, 
for  it  furnishes  a  locus  standi  to  the  labourer  and 
a  field  of  employment  for  his  activity.  Among 
instruments  that  are  the  result  of  previous  la¬ 
bour  and  also  belong  to  this  class,  we  find  work¬ 
shops,  canals,  roads,  and  so  forth. 

In  the  labour  process,  therefore,  man's  activ¬ 
ity,  with  the  help  of  the  instruments  of  labour, 
effects  an  alteration,  designed  from  the  com- 

4  The  least  important  commodities  of  all  for  the  tech¬ 
nological  comparison  of  different  epochs  tf  production  are 
articles  of  luxury,  in  the  strict  meaning  of  the  term.  How¬ 
ever  little  our  written  mstones  up  to  this  time  notice  the 
development  of  material  production,  which  is  the  basis  of 
all  social  life,  and  therefore  of  all  real  history,  yet  prehis¬ 
toric  times  have  been  classified  in  accordance  with  the  re¬ 
sults,  not  of  so-called  historical,  but  of  materialistic,  in¬ 
vestigations.  These  periods  have  been  divided  to  corres¬ 
pond  with  the  materials  from  which  their  implements  and 
weapons  were  made,  viz.,  into  the  stone,  the  bronze,  and 
the  iron  ages. 


THE  LABOUR  PROCESS 


mencement,  in  the  material  worked  upon.  The 
process  disappears  in  the  product;  the  latter  is 
a  use-value,  Nature’s  material  adapted  by  a 
change  of  form  to  the  wants  of  man.  Labour  has 
incorporated  itself  with  its  subject;  the  former 
is  materialized,  the  latter  transformed.  That 
which  in  the  labourer  appeared  as  movement 
now  appears  in  the  product  as  a  fixed  quality 
without  motion.  The  blacksmith  forges  and  the 
product  is  a  forging. 

If  we  examine  the  whole  process  from  the 
point  of  view  of  its  rcsul  t,  the  product,  it  is  plain 
that  both  the  instruments  and  the  subject  of 
labour  are  means  of  production,1  and  that  the 
labour  itself  is  productive  labour.2 

Though  a  use-value,  in  the  form  of  a  product, 
issues  from  the  labour  process,  yet  other  use- 
values,  products  of  previous  labour,  enter  into 
it  as  means  of  production.  The  same  use-value 
is  both  the  product  of  a  previous  process  and  a 
means  of  production  in  a  later  process.  Prod¬ 
ucts  are  therefore  not  only  results,  but  also  es¬ 
sential  condition  of  labour. 

With  the  exception  of  the  extractive  indus¬ 
tries,  in  which  the  material  for  labour  is  pro¬ 
vided  immediately  by  Nature,  such  as  mining, 
hunting,  fishing,  and  agriculture  (so  far  as  the 
latter  is  confined  to  breaking  up  virgin  soil),  all 
branches  of  industry  manipulate  raw  material, 
objects  already  filtered  through  labour,  already 
products  of  labour.  Such  is  seed  in  agriculture. 
Animals  and  plants,  which  we  are  accustomed 
to  consider  as  products  of  Nature,  are,  in  their 
present  form,  not  only  products  of,  say,  last 
year’s  labour,  but  the  result  of  a  gradual  trans¬ 
formation,  continued  through  many  genera¬ 
tions,  under  man’s  superintendence,  and  by 
means  of  his  labour.  But  in  the  great  majority 
of  cases,  instruments  of  labour  show  even  to  the 
most  superficial  observer  traces  of  the  labour  of 
past  ages. 

Raw  material  may  either  form  the  principal 
substance  of  a  product,  or  it  may  enter  into  its 
formation  only  as  an  accessory.  An  accessory 
may  be  consumed  by  the  instruments  of  labour, 
as  coal  under  a  boiler,  oil  by  a  wheel,  hay  by 
draft-horses,  or  it  may  be  mixed  with  the  raw 
material  in  order  to  produce  some  modification 
thereof,  as  chlorine  into  unbleached  linen,  coal 

1  It  appears  paradoxical  to  assert  that  uncaught  fish, 
for  instance,  are  a  means  of  production  in  the  fishing  in¬ 
dustry.  But  hitherto  no  one  has  discovered  the  art  of  catch¬ 
ing  fish  in  waters  that  contain  none. 

2  This  method  of  determining  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
labour  process  alone  what  is  productive  labour  is  by  no 
means  directly  applicable  to  the  case  of  the  capitalist  proc¬ 
ess  of  production. 


87 

with  iron,  dye-stuff  with  wool;  or  again,  it  may 
help  to  carry  on  the  work  itself,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  materials  used  for  heating  and  lighting 
workshops.  The  distinction  between  principal 
substance  and  accessory  vanishes  in  the  true 
chemical  industries,  because  there  none  of  the 
raw  material  reappears,  in  its  original  composi¬ 
tion,  in  the  substance  of  the  product.8 

Every  object  possesses  various  properties, 
and  is  thus  capable  of  being  applied  to  different 
uses.  One  and  the  same  product  may  therefore 
serve  as  raw  material  in  very  different  process¬ 
es.  Corn,  for  example,  is  a  raw  material  for 
millers,  starch-manufacturers,  distillers,  and 
cattle-breeders.  It  also  enters  as  raw  material 
into  its  own  production  in  the  shape  of  seed: 
coal,  too,  is  at  the  same  time  the  product  of,  and 
a  means  of  production  in,  coal  mining. 

Again,  a  particular  product  may  be  used 
in  one  and  *he  same  process,  both  as  an 
instrument  of  labour  and  as  raw  material. 
Take,  for  instance,  the  fattening  of  cattle, 
where  the  animal  is  the  raw  material  and  at  the 
same  time  an  instrument  for  the  production  of 
manure. 

A  product,  though  ready  for  immediate  con¬ 
sumption,  may  yet  serve  as  raw  material  for  a 
further  product,  as  grapes  when  they  become 
the  raw  material  for  wine.  On  the  other  hand, 
labour  may  give  us  its  product  in  such  a  form 
that  we  can  use  it  only  as  raw  material,  as  is  the 
case  with  cotton,  thread,  and  yarn.  Such  a  raw 
material,  though  itself  a  product,  may  have  to 
go  through  a  whole  series  of  different  processes; 
in  each  of  these  in  turn,  it  serves,  with  constant¬ 
ly  varying  form,  as  raw  material,  until  the  last 
process  of  the  scries  leaves  it  a  perfect  product, 
ready  for  individual  consumption,  or  for  use  as 
an  instrument  of  labour. 

Hence  we  see  that  whether  a  use-value  is  to 
be  regarded  as  raw  material,  as  instrument  of 
labour,  or  as  product,  this  is  determined  entire¬ 
ly  by  its  function  in  the  labour  process,  by  the 
position  it  there  occupies;  as  this  varies,  so  does 
its  character. 

Whenever,  therefore,  a  product  enters  as  a 
means  of  production  into  a  new  labour  process, 
ii  thereby  loses  its  character  of  product  and  be¬ 
comes  a  mere  factor  in  the  process.  A  spinner 
treats  spindles  only  as  implements  for  spinning, 
and  fiax  only  as  the  material  that  he  spins.  Of 
course  it  is  impossible  to  spin  without  material 
and  spindles;  and  therefore  the  existence  of 

3  Storch  calls  true  raw  materials  matiires ,  and  accessory 
material  matiriaux:  Cherbuliez  describes  accessories  as  raa- 
tib'es  instrumcntales . 


CAPITAL 


88 

these  things  as  products>  at  the  commencement 
of  the  spinning  operation,  must  be  presumed: 
but  in  the  process  itself,  the  fact  that  they  are 
products  of  previous  labour  is  a  matter  of  utter 
indifference;  just  as  in  the  digestive  process,  it 
is  of  no  importance  whatever  that  bread  is  the 
produce  of  the  previous  labour  of  the  farmer, 
the  miller,  and  the  baker.  On  the  contrary,  it  is 
generally  by  their  imperfections  as  products 
that  the  means  of  production  in  any  process  as¬ 
sert  themselves  in  their  character  of  products. 
A  blunt  knife  or  weak  thread  forcibly  remind  us 
of  Mr.  A,  the  cutler,  or  Mr.  B,  the  spinner.  In 
the  finished  product  the  labour  by  means  of 
which  it  has  acquired  its  useful  qualities  is  not 
palpable,  has  apparently  vanished. 

A  machine  which  does  not  serve  the  purposes 
of  labour  is  useless.  In  addition,  it  falls  a  prey 
to  the  destructive  influence  of  natural  forces. 
Iron  rusts  and  wood  rots.  Yarn  with  which  we 
neither  weave  nor  knit  is  cotton  wasted.  Living 
labour  must  seize  upon  these  things  and  rouse 
them  from  their  death-sleep,  change  them  from 
mere  possible  use-values  into  real  and  effective 
ones.  Bathed  in  the  fire  of  labour,  appropriated 
as  part  and  parcel  of  labour’s  organism,  and,  as 
it  were,  made  alive  for  the  performance  of  their 
functions  in  the  process,  they  are  in  truth  con¬ 
sumed,  but  consumed  with  a  purpose,  as  ele¬ 
mentary  constituents  of  new  use-values,  of 
new  products,  ever  ready  as  means  of  sub¬ 
sistence  for  individual  consumption,  or  as 
means  of  production  for  some  new  labour 
process. 

If,  then,  on  the  one  hand,  finished  products 
are  not  only  results,  but  also  necessary  condi¬ 
tions,  of  the  labour  process,  on  the  other  hand, 
their  assumption  into  that  process,  their  con¬ 
tact  with  living  labour,  is  the  sole  means  by 
which  they  can  be  made  to  retain  their  char¬ 
acter  of  use-values,  and  be  utilized. 

Labour  uses  up  its  material  factors,  its  sub¬ 
ject  and  its  instruments,  consumes  them,  and 
is  therefore  a  process  of  consumption.  Such  pro¬ 
ductive  consumption  is  distinguished  from  in¬ 
dividual  consumption  by  this,  that  the  latter 
uses  up  products  as  means  of  subsistence  for 
the  living  individual;  the  former,  as  means 
whereby  alone  labour,  the  labour  power  of  the 
living  individual,  is  enabled  to  act.  The  prod¬ 
uct,  therefore,  of  individual  consumption  is  the 
consumer  himself;  the  result  of  productive  con¬ 
sumption  is  a  product  distinct  from  the  con¬ 
sumer. 

In  so  far,  then,  as  its  instruments  and  sub¬ 
jects  are  themselves  products,  labour  consume 


products  in  order  to  create  products,  or,  in  other 
words,  consumes  one  set  of  products  by  turn¬ 
ing  them  into  means  of  production  for  another 
set.  But,  just  as  in  the  beginning,  the  only 
participators  in  the  labour  process  were  man 
and  the  earth,  which  latter  exists  indepen¬ 
dently  of  man,  so  even  now  we  still  employ  in 
the  process  many  means  of  production,  pro¬ 
vided  directly  by  Nature,  that  do  not  repre¬ 
sent  any  combination  of  natural  substances 
with  human  labour. 

The  labour  process,  resolved  as  above  into  its 
simple  elementary  factors,  is  human  action 
with  a  view  to  the  production  of  use-values,  ap¬ 
propriation  of  natural  substances  to  human  re¬ 
quirements;  it  is  the  necessary  condition  for  ef¬ 
fecting  exchange  of  matter  between  man  and 
Nature;  it  is  the  everlasting  condition  imposed 
by  Nature  upon  human  existence,  and  there¬ 
fore  is  independent  of  every  social  phase  of  that 
existence,  or  rather,  is  common  to  every  such 
phase.  It  was,  therefore,  not  necessary  to  repre¬ 
sent  our  labourer  in  connection  with  other  la¬ 
bourers;  man  and  his  labour  on  one  side,  Nature 
and  its  materials  on  the  other,  sufficed.  As  the 
taste  of  the  porridge  does  not  tell  you  who  grew 
the  oats,  no  more  does  this  simple  process  tell 
you  of  itself  what  are  the  social  conditions  un¬ 
der  which  it  is  taking  place,  whether  under  the 
slave-owner’s  brutal  lash,  or  tljg  anxious  eye  of 
the  capitalist,  whether  Cincinnatus  carries  it  on 
in  tilling  his  modest  farm  or  a  savage  in  killing 
wild  animals  with  stones.1 

Let  us  now  return  to  our  would-be  capitalist. 
We  left  him  just  after  he  had  purchased,  in  the 
open  market,  all  the  necessary  factors  of  the  la¬ 
bour  process;  its  objective  factors,  the  means  of 
production,  as  well  as  its  subjective  factor,  la¬ 
bour  power.  With  the  keen  eye  of  an  expert,  he 
has  selected  the  means  of  production  and  the 
kind  of  labour  power  best  adapted  to  his  partic¬ 
ular  trade,  be  it  spinning,  bootmaking,  or  any 
other  kind.  He  then  proceeds  to  consume  the 
commodity,  the  labour  power  that  he  has  just 
bought,  by  causing  the  labourer,  the  imperson¬ 
ation  of  that  labour  power,  to  consume  the 
means  of  production  by  his  labour.  The  general 
character  of  the  labour  process  is  evidently  not 

1  By  a  wonderful  feat  of  logical  acumen,  Colonel  Tor* 
rens  has  discovered,  in  this  stone  of  the  savage,  the  origin 
of  capital.  “In  the  first  stone  which  he  [the  savage]  flings 
at  the  wild  animal  he  pursues;  in  the  first  stick  that  he 
seizes  to  strike  down  the  fruit  which  hangs  above  his  reach, 
we  see  the  appropriation  of  one  article  for  the  purpose  of 
aiding  in  the  acquisition  of  another,  and  thus  discover  the 
origin  of  capital.— R.  Torrens,  An  Essay  on  the  Production 
of  Wealth,  etc.,  pp.  70-71. 


89 


THE  LABOUR  PROCESS 


changed  by  the  fact  that  the  labourer  works  for 
the  capitalist  instead  of  for  himself;  moreover, 
the  particular  methods  and  operations  em¬ 
ployed  in  bootmaking  or  spinning  are  not  im¬ 
mediately  changed  by  the  intervention  of  the 
capitalist.  He  must  begin  by  taking  the  labour 
power  as  he  finds  it  in  the  market,  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  be  satisfied  with  labour  of  such  a  kind 
as  would  be  found  in  the  period  immediately 
preceding  the  rise  of  capitalists.  Changes  in  the 
methods  of  production  by  the  subordination  of 
labour  to  capital  can  take  place  only  at  a  later 
period,  and  therefore  will  have  to  be  treated  of 
in  a  later  chapter. 

The  labour  process,  turned  into  the  process 
by  which  the  capitalist  consumes  labour  power, 
exhibits  two  characteristic  phenomena.  First, 
the  labourer  works  under  the  control  of  the  cap¬ 
italist  to  whom  his  labour  belongs;  the  capital¬ 
ist  taking  good  care  that  the  work  is  done  in  a 
proper  manner,  and  that  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  arc  used  with  intelligence,  so  that  there  is 
no  unnecessary  waste  of  raw  material,  and  no 
wear  and  tear  of  the  implements  beyond  what 
is  necessarily  caused  by  the  work. 

Secondly,  the  product  is  the  property  of  the 
capitalist  and  not  that  of  the  labourer,  its  im¬ 
mediate  producer.  Suppose  that  a  capitalist 
pays  for  a  day’s  labour  power  at  its  value;  then 
the  right  to  use  that  power  for  a  day  belongs  to 
him,  just  as  much  as  the  right  to  use  any  other 
commodity,  such  as  a  horse  that  he  has  hired 
for  the  day.  To  the  purchaser  of  a  commodity 
belongs  its  use,  and  the  seller  of  labour  power, 
by  giving  his  labour,  does  no  more,  in  reality, 
than  part  with  the  use- value  that  he  has  sold. 
From  the  instant  he  steps  into  the  workshop, 
the  use-value  of  his  labour  power,  and  therefore 
also  its  use,  which  is  labour,  belongs  to  the  cap¬ 
italist.  By  the  purchase  of  labour  power,  the 
capitalist  incorporates  labour,  as  a  living  fer¬ 
ment,  with  the  lifeless  constituents  of  the  prod¬ 
uct.  From  his  point  of  view,  the  labour  process 
is  nothing  more  than  the  consumption  of  the 
commodity  purchased,  i.e.,  of  labour  power; 
but  this  consumption  cannot  be  effected  except 
by  supplying  the  labour  power  with  the  means 
of  production.  The  labour  process  is  a  process 
between  things  that  the  capitalist  has  pur¬ 
chased,  things  that  have  become  his  property. 
The  product  of  this  process  belongs,  therefore, 
to  him,  just  as  much  as  does  the  wine  which  is 
the  product  of  a  process  of  fermentation  com¬ 
pleted  in  his  cellar.1 

1  "Products  are  appropriated  before  they  are  converted 
into  capital;  this  conversion  does  not  secure  them  from 


2.  The  Production  of  Surplus  Value 

The  product  appropriated  by  the  capitalist 
is  a  use-value,  as  yarn,  for  example,  or  boots. 
But,  although  boots  are,  in  one  sense,  the  basis 
of  all  social  progress,  and  our  capitalist  is  a  de¬ 
cided  “progressist,”  yet  he  does  not  manufac¬ 
ture  boots  for  their  own  sake.  Use-value  is,  by 
no  means,  the  thing  qu'on  aimepourlui-mtme 2  in 
the  production  of  commodities.  Use-values  are 
only  produced  by  capitalists,  because,  and  in 
so  far  as,  they  are  the  material  substratum,  the 
depositaries  of  exchange-value.  Our  capitalist 
has  two  objects  in  view;  in  the  first  place,  he 
wants  to  produce  a  use-value  that  has  a  value 
in  exchange,  that  is  to  say,  an  article  destined 
to  be  sold,  a  commodity;  and  secondly,  he  de¬ 
sires  to  produce  a  commodity  whose  value  shall 
be  greater  than  the  sum  of  the  values  of  the 
commodities  used  in  its  production,  that  is,  of 
the  means  of  production  and  the  labour  power, 
that  he  purchased  with  his  good  money  in  the 
open  market.  His  aim  is  to  produce  not  only  a 
use-value,  but  a  commodity  also;  not  only  use- 
value,  but  value;  not  only  value,  but  at  the 
same  time  surplus  value. 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  we  are  now 
dealing  with  the  production  of  commodities, 
and  that,  up  to  this  point,  we  have  only  con¬ 
sidered  one  aspect  of  the  process.  Just  as  com¬ 
modities  are,  at  the  same  time,  use-values  and 
values,  so  the  process  of  producing  them  must 
be  a  labour  process,  and  at  the  same  time,  a  proc¬ 
ess  of  creating  value. 

Let  us  now  examine  production  as  a  creation 
of  value. 

We  know  that  the  value  of  each  commodity 
is  determined  by  the  quantity  of  labour  expend- 


such  appropriation.**  (Cherbuliez,  Riche  ou  Pauore ,  Paris, 
1841,  pp.  53,  54.)  "The  Proletarian,  by  selling  his  labour 
for  a  definite  quantity  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  renounces 
all  claim  to  a  share  in  the  product.  The  mode  of  appropri¬ 
ation  of  the  products  remains  the  same  as  before;  it  is  in 
no  way  altered  by  the  bargain  we  have  mentioned.  The 
product  belongs  exclusively  to  the  capitalist,  who  supplied 
the  raw  material  and  the  necessaries  of  life;  and  this  is  a 
rigorous  consequence  of  the  law  of  appropriation,  a  law 
whose  fundamental  principle  was  the  very  opposite,  name¬ 
ly,  that  every  labourer  has  an  exclusive  right  to  the  owner¬ 
ship  of  what  he  produces.”  {Ibid.,  p.  58.)  "When  the  la¬ 
bourers  receive  wages  for  their  labour  . . .  the  capitalist  is 
then  the  owner  not  of  the  capital  only”  (he  means  the 
means  of  production)  "but  of  the  labour  also.  If  what  is 
paid  as  wages  is  included,  as  it  commonly  is,  in  the  term 
capital,  it  is  absurd  to  talk  of  labour  separately  from  capi¬ 
tal.  The  word  capital  as  thus  employed  includes  labour  and 
capital  both.**  (James  Mill,  Elements  of  Political  Economy , 
etc.,  1821,  pp.  70, 71.) 

*  Which  one  values  for  its  own  sake. 


90  CAPITAL 


ed  on  and  materialized  in  it;  by  the  working 
time  necessary,  under  given  social  conditions, 
for  its  production.  This  rule  also  holds  good  in 
the  case  of  the  product  that  accrued  to  our  cap¬ 
italist  as  the  result  of  the  labour  process  carried 
on  for  him.  Assuming  this  product  to  be  io 
pounds  of  yarn,  our  first  step  is  to  calculate  the 
quantity  of  labour  realized  in  it. 

For  spinning  the  yarn,  raw  material  is  re¬ 
quired;  suppose,  in  this  case,  10  pounds  of  cot¬ 
ton.  We  have  no  need  at  present  to  investigate 
the  value  of  this  cotton,  for  our  capitalist  has, 
we  will  assume,  bought  it  at  its  full  value,  say  of 
ten  shillings.  In  this  price  the  labour  required 
for  the  production  of  the  cotton  is  already  ex¬ 
pressed  in  terms  of  the  average  labour  of  so¬ 
ciety.  We  will  further  assume  that  the  wear  and 
tear  of  the  spindle,  which,  for  our  present  pur¬ 
pose,  may  represent  all  other  instruments  of  la¬ 
bour  employed,  amounts  to  the  value  of  2  shil¬ 
lings.  I  f,  then,  twenty-four  hours’  labour,  or  two 
working  days,  are  required  to  produce  the 
quantity  of  gold  represented  by  twelve  shil¬ 
lings,  we  have  here,  to  begin  with,  two  days’  la¬ 
bour  already  incorporated  in  the  yarn. 

We  must  not  let  ourselves  be  misled  by  the 
circumstance  that  the  cotton  has  taken  a  new 
shape  while  the  substance  of  the  spindle  has  to 
a  certain  extent  been  used  up.  By  the  general 
law  of  value,  if  the  value  of  40  pounds  of  yarn  = 
the  value  of  40  pounds  of  cotton + the  value  of  a 
whole  spindle,  i.e.,  if  the  same  working  time  is 
required  to  produce  the  commodities  on  eithfer 
side  of  this  equation,  then  10  pounds  of  yarn 
are  an  equivalent  for  10  pounds  of  cotton,  to¬ 
gether  with  one-fourth  of  a  spindle.  In  the  case 
we  are  considering  the  same  working  time  is  ma¬ 
terialized  in  the  io  pounds  of  yarn  on  the  one 
hand,  and  in  the  10  pounds  of  cotton  and  the 
fraction  of  a  spindle  on  the  other.  Therefore, 
whether  value  appears  in  cotton,  in  a  spindle, 
or  in  yarn,  makes  no  difference  in  the  amount 
of  that  value.  The  spindle  and  cotton,  instead 
of  resting  quietly  side  by  side,  join  together  in 
the  process,  their  forms  are  altered,  and  they 
are  turned  into  yarn;  but  their  value  is  no  more 
affected  by  this  fact  than  it  would  be  if  they  had 
been  simply  exchanged  for  their  equivalent  in 
yarn. 

The  labour  required  for  the  production  of  the 
cotton,  the  raw  material  of  the  yarn,  is  part  of 
the  labour  necessary  to  produce  the  yarn,  and 
is  therefore  contained  in  the  yarn.  The  same  ap¬ 
plies  to  the  labour  embodied  in  the  spindle, 
without  whose  wear  and  tear  the  cotton  could 
not  be  spun. 


Hence,  in  determining  the  value  of  the  yarn, 
or  the  labour  time  required  for  its  production, 
all  the  special  processes  carried  on  at  various 
times  and  in  different  places,  which  were  neces¬ 
sary,  first  to  produce  the  cotton  and  the  wasted 
portion  of  the  spindle,  and  then  with  the  cotton 
and  spindle  to  spin  the  yarn,  may  together  be 
looked  on  as  different  and  successive  phases  of 
one  and  the  same  process.  The  whole  of  the  la¬ 
bour  in  the  yarn  is  past  labour;  and  it  is  a  mat¬ 
ter  of  no  importance  that  the  operations  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  production  of  its  constituent  ele¬ 
ments  were  carried  on  at  times  which,  referred 
to  the  present,  are  more  remote  than  the  final 
operation  of  spinning.  If  a  definite  quantity  of 
labour,  say  thirty  days,  is  requisite  to  build  a 
house,  the  total  amount  of  labour  incorporated 
in  it  is  not  altered  by  the  fact  that  the  work  of 
the  last  day  is  done  twenty-nine  days  later  than 
that  of  the  first.  Therefore,  the  labour  con¬ 
tained  in  the  raw  material  and  the  instruments 
of  labour  can  be  treated  just  as  if  it  were  labour 
expended  in  an  earlier  stage  of  the  spinning 
process,  before  the  labour  of  actual  spinning 
commenced. 

The  values  of  the  means  of  production,  i.e., 
the  cotton  and  the  spindle,  which  values  are  ex¬ 
pressed  in  the  price  of  twelve  shillings,  are 
therefore  constituent  parts  of  the  value  of  the 
yarn,  or,  in  other  words,  of  the  value  of  the 
product.  ^ 

Two  conditions  must  nevertheless  be  ful¬ 
filled.  First,  the  cotton  and  spindle  must  concur 
in  the  production  of  a  use-value;  they  must  in 
the  present  case  become  yarn.  Value  is  indepen¬ 
dent  of  the  particular  use-value  by  which  it  is 
borne,  but  it  must  be  embodied  in  a  use- value 
of  some  kind.  Secondly,  the  time  occupied  in 
the  labour  of  production  must  not  exceed  the 
time  really  necessary  under  the  given  social 
conditions  of  the  case.  Therefore,  if  no  more 
than  1  pound  of  cotton  be  requisite  to  spin  1 
pound  of  yarn,  care  must  be  taken  that  no  more 
than  this  weight  of  cotton  is  consumed  in  the 
production  of  1  pound  of  yarn;  and  similarly 
with  regard  to  the  spindle.  Though  the  capital¬ 
ist  have  a  hobby,  and  use  a  gold  instead  of  a 
steel  spindle,  yet  the  only  labour  that  counts 
for  anything  in  the  value  of  the  yarn  is  that 
which  would  be  required  to  produce  a  steel 
spindle,  because  no  more  is  necessary  under  the 
given  social  conditions. 

We  now  know  what  portion  of  the  value  of 
the  yarn  is  owing  to  the  cotton  and  the  spindle. 
It  amounts  to  twelve  shillings  or  the  value  of 
two  days'  work.  The  next  point  for  our  consid- 


THE  LABOUR  PROCESS 


eration  is  what  portion  of  the  value  of  the  yarn 
is  added  to  the  cotton  by  the  labour  of  the  spin¬ 
ner. 

We  have  now  to  consider  this  labour  under 
a  very  different  aspect  from  that  which  it  had 
during  the  labour  process;  there,  we  viewed  it 
solely  as  that  particular  kind  of  human  activity 
which  changes  cotton  into  yarn;  there,  the 
more  the  labour  was  suited  to  the  work,  the 
better  the  yarn,  other  circumstances  remaining 
the  same.  The  labour  of  the  spinner  was  then 
viewed  as  specifically  different  from  other  kinds 
of  productive  labour,  different  on  the  one  hand 
in  its  special  aim,  viz.,  spinning;  different,  on  the 
other  hand,  in  the  special  character  of  its  opera¬ 
tions,  in  the  special  nature  of  its  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  and  in  the  special  use- value  of  its  prod¬ 
uct.  For  the  operation  of  spinning,  cotton  and 
spindles  are  a  necessity,  but  for  making  rifled 
cannon  they  would  be  of  no  use  whatever.  Here, 
on  the  contrary,  where  we  consider  the  labour 
of  the  spinner  only  so  far  as  it  is  value-creating, 
i.e.,  a  source  of  v.duc,  his  labour  differs  in  no 
respect  from  the  labour  of  the  man  who  bores 
cannon,  or  (what  here  more  nearly  concerns  us), 
from  the  labour  of  the  cotton-planter  and  spin¬ 
dle-maker  incorporated  in  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion.  It  is  solely  by  reason  of  this  identity  that 
cotton  planting,  spindle  making,  and  spinning 
are  capable  of  forming  the  component  parts, 
differing  only  quantitatively  from  each  other, 
of  one  whole,  namely,  the  value  of  the  yarn. 
Here,  we  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  the 
quality,  the  nature,  and  the  specific  character 
of  the  labour,  but  merely  with  its  quantity.  And 
this  simply  requires  to  be  calculated.  We  pro¬ 
ceed  upon  the  assumption  that  spinning  is 
simple,  unskilled  labour,  the  average  labour  of 
a  given  state  of  society.  Hereafter  we  shall  see 
that  the  contrary  assumption  would  make  no 
difference. 

While  the  labourer  is  at  work,  his  labour  con¬ 
stantly  undergoes  a  transformation:  from  being 
motion,  it  becomes  an  object  without  motion; 
from  being  the  labourer  working,  it  becomes  the 
thing  produced.  At  the  end  of  one  hour’s  spin¬ 
ning,  that  act  is  represented  by  a  definite  quan¬ 
tity  of  yarn;  in  other  words,  a  definite  quantity 
of  labour,  namely  that  of  one  hour,  has  become 
embodied  in  the  cotton.  We  say  labour,  i.e.,  the 
expenditure  of  his  vital  force  by  the  spinner, 
and  not  spinning  labour,  because  the  special 
work  of  spinning  counts  here  only  so  far  as  it  is 
the  expenditure  of  labour  power  in  general,  and 
not  in  so  far  as  it  is  the  specific  work  of  the  spin¬ 
ner. 


91 

In  the  process  we  are  now  considering  it  is  of 
extreme  importance  that  no  more  time  be  con¬ 
sumed  in  the  work  of  transforming  the  cotton 
into  yarn  than  is  necessary  under  the  given  so¬ 
cial  conditions.  If  under  normal,  i.e.,  average 
social  conditions  of  production,  a  pounds  of  cot¬ 
ton  ought  to  be  made  into  b  pounds  of  yarn  by 
one  hour’s  labour,  then  a  day’s  labour  does  not 
count  .as  12  hours’  labour  unless  12  a  pounds  of 
cotton  have  been  made  into  1 2  b  pounds  of  yarn; 
for  in  the  creation  of  value,  the  time  that  is  so¬ 
cially  necessary  alone  counts. 

Not  only  the  labour,  but  also  the  raw  materi¬ 
al  and  the  product  now  appear  in  quite  a  new 
light,  very  different  from  that  in  which  we 
viewed  them  in  the  labour  process  pure  and 
simple.  The  raw  material  serves  now  merely  as 
an  absorbent  of  a  definite  quantity  of  labour. 
By  this  absorption  it  is  in  fact  changed  into 
yarn,  because  it  is  spun,  because  labour  power 
in  the  form  of  spinning  is  added  to  it;  but  the 
product,  the  yarn,  is  now  nothing  more  than  a 
measure  of  the  labour  absorbed  by  the  cotton. 
If  in  one  hour  1  pounds  of  cotton  can  be  spun 
into  \  %  pounds  of  yarn,  then  10  pounds  of  yarn 
indicate  the  absorption  of  6  hours’  labour.  Defi¬ 
nite  quantities  of  product,  these  quantities  be¬ 
ing  determined  by  experience,  now  represent 
nothing  but  definite  quantities  of  labour,  defi¬ 
nite  masses  of  crystallized  labour  time.  They 
are  nothing  more  than  the  materialization  of  so 
many  hours  or  so  many  days  of  social  labour. 

We  are  here  no  more  concerned  about  the 
facts  that  the  labour  is  the  specific  work  of  spin¬ 
ning,  that  its  subject  is  cotton  and  its  product 
yarn,  than  we  are  about  the  fact  that  the  sub¬ 
ject  itself  is  already  a  product  and  therefore  raw 
material.  If  the  spinner,  instead  of  spinning, 
were  working  in  a  coal  mine,  the  subject  of  his 
labour,  the  coal,  would  be  supplied  by  Nature; 
nevertheless,  a  definite  quantity  of  extracted 
coal,  a  hundredweight  for  example,  would  rep¬ 
resent  a  definite  quantity  of  absorbed  labour. 

We  assumed,  on  the  occasion  of  its  sale,  that 
the  value  of  a  day’s  labour  power  is  three  shil¬ 
lings,  and  that  six  hours’  labour  arc  incorporated 
in  that  sum;  and  consequently  that  this  amount 
of  labour  is  requisite  to  produce  the  necessaries 
of  life  daily  required  on  an  average  by  the  la¬ 
bourer.  If  now  our  spinner  by  working  for  one 
hour,  can  convert  pounds  of  cotton  into  1% 
pounds  of  yarn,1  it  follows  that  in  six  hours  he 
will  convert  10  pounds  of  cotton  into  10  pounds 
of  yarn.  Hence,  during  the  spinning  process,  the 
cotton  absorbs  six  hours’  labour.  The  same 

1  These  figures  are  quite  arbitrary. 


CAPITAL 


92 

quantity  of  labour  is  also  embodied  in  a  piece 
of  gold  of  the  value  of  three  shillings.  Conse- 
quendy  by  the  mere  labour  of  spinning,  a  value 
of  three  shillings  is  added  to  the  cotton. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  total  value  of  the 
product,  the  io  pounds  of  yarn.  Two  and  a  half 
days’  labour  have  been  embodied  in  it,  of  which 
two  days  were  contained  in  the  cotton  and  in 
the  substance  of  the  spindle  worn  away,  and 
half  a  day  was  absorbed  during  the  process  of 
spinning.  This  two  and  a  half  days’  labour  is 
also  represented  by  a  piece  of  gold  of  the  value 
of  fifteen  shillings.  Hence,  fifteen  shillings  is  an 
adequate  price  for  the  io  pounds  of  yarn,  or  the 
price  of  one  pound  is  eighteen-pence. 

Our  capitalist  stares  in  astonishment.  The 
value  of  the  product  is  exactly  equal  to  the  val¬ 
ue  of  the  capital  advanced.  The  value  so  ad¬ 
vanced  has  not  expanded,  no  surplus  value  has 
been  created,  and  consequently  money  has  not 
been  converted  into  capital.  The  price  of  the 
yarn  is  fifteen  shillings,  and  fifteen  shillings 
were  spent  in  the  open  market  upon  the  con¬ 
stituent  elements  of  the  product,  or,  what 
amounts  to  the  same  thing,  upon  the  factors  of 
the  labour  process;  ten  shillings  were  paid  for 
the  cotton,  two  shillings  for  the  substance  of  the 
spindle  worn  away,  and  three  shillings  for  the 
labour  power.  The  swollen  value  of  the  yarn  is 
of  no  avail,  for  it  is  merely  the  sum  of  the  values 
formerly  existing  in  the  cotton,  the  spindle,  and 
the  labour  power:  out  of  such  a  simple  additiqn 
of  existing  values,  no  surplus  value  can  possibly 
arise.1  These  separate  values  are  now  all  con¬ 
centrated  in  one  thing;  but  so  they  were  also  in 
the  sum  of  fifteen  shillings,  before  it  was  split  up 
into  three  parts  by  the  purchase  of  the  com¬ 
modities. 

There  is  in  reality  nothing  very  strange  in 
this  result.  The  value  of  one  pound  of  yarn  b&- 
ing  eighteen-pence,  if  our  capitalist  buys  io 
pounds  of  yarn  in  the  market,  he  must  pay  fif¬ 
teen  shillings  for  them.  It  is  clear  that,  whether 
a  man  buys  his  house  ready  built,  or  gets  it 
built  for  him,  in  neither  case  will  the  mode  of 

1  This  is  the  fundamental  proposition  on  which  is  based 
the  doctrine  of  the  Physiocrats  as  to  the  unproductiveness 
of  all  labour  that  is  not  agriculture:  it  is  irrefutable  for  the 
orthodox  economist.  “This  mode  of  imputing  to  a  single 
thing  the  value  of  several  others  (for  example,  of  imputing 
to  flax  the  cost  of  maintenance  of  the  weaver),  of  impos¬ 
ing,  as  it  were,  several  values,  like  strata,  on  one  value, 
brings  about  a  proportional  growth  in  circumference  of  the 
latter.  The  term  addttton  is  very  apt  for  describing  the  way 
in  which  the  price  of  hand-made  products  is  formed;  this 
price  is  merely  a  sum-total  of  several  values  which  have 
been  consumed  and  added  together;  but  adding  is  not  mul¬ 
tiplying.*’— Mercicr  de  la  Rivifere,  op,  cit p.  599. 


acquisition  increase  the  amount  of  money  laid 
out  on  the  house. 

Our  capitalist,  who  is  at  home  in  his  vulgar 
economy,  exclaims:  “Oh!  but  I  advanced  my 
money  for  the  express  purpose  of  making  more 
money.”  The  way  to  Hell  is  paved  with  good 
intentions,  and  he  might  just  as  easily  have  in¬ 
tended  to  make  money  without  producing  at 
all.2  He  threatens  all  sorts  of  things.  He  won’t 
be  caught  napping  again.  In  future  he  will  buy 
the  commodities  in  the  market,  instead  of  man¬ 
ufacturing  them  himself.  But  if  all  his  brother 
capitalists  were  to  do  the  same,  where  would 
he  find  his  commodities  in  the  market?  And 
his  money  he  cannot  eat.  He  tries  persuasion. 
“Consider  my  abstinence;  I  might  have  played 
ducks  and  drakes  with  the  15  shillings;  but  in¬ 
stead  of  that  I  consumed  it  productively,  and 
made  yarn  with  it.”  Very  well,  and  by  way  of 
reward  he  is  now  in  possession  of  good  yarn  in¬ 
stead  of  a  bad  conscience;  and  as  for  playing 
the  part  of  a  miser,  it  would  never  do  for  him  to 
relapse  into  such  bad  ways  as  that;  we  have  seen 
before  to  what  results  such  asceticism  leads.  Be¬ 
sides,  where  nothing  is,  the  king  has  lost  his 
rights:  whatever  may  be  the  merit  of  his  absti¬ 
nence,  there  is  nothing  wherewith  specially  to 
remunerate  it,  because  the  value  of  the  product 
is  merely  the  sum  of  the  values  of  the  commodi¬ 
ties  that  were  thrown  into  the-^process  of  pro¬ 
duction.  Let  him,  therefore,  console  himself 
with  the  reflection  that  virtue  is  its  own  reward. 
But  no,  he  becomes  importunate.  He  says: 
“The  yarn  is  of  no  use  to  me;  l  produced  it  for 
sale.”  In  that  case  let  him. sell  it,  or,  still  better, 
let  him  for  the  future  produce  only  things  for 
satisfying  his  personal  wants,  a  remedy  that  his 
physician  M’Culloch  has  already  prescribed  as 
infallible  against  an  epidemic  of  over-produc¬ 
tion.  He  now  gets  obstinate.  “Can  the  labour¬ 
er,”  he  asks,  “merely  with  his  arms  and  legs, 
produce  commodities  out  of  nothing?  Did  I  not 
supply  him  with  the  materials,  by  means  of 
which,  and  in  which  alone,  his  labour  could  be 
embodied?  And  as  the  greater  paft  of  society 
consists  of  such  wastrels,  have  I  ttot  rendered 
society  incalculable  service  by  my  instruments 
of  production,  my  cotton  and  my  spindle,  and 
not  only  society,  but  the  labourer  also,  whom 
in  addition  I  have  provided  with  the  necessa¬ 
ries  of  life?  And  am  I  to  be  allowed  nothing  in 

2  Thus  from  1844-47  he  withdrew  part  of  his  capital  from 
productive  employment,  in  order  to  throw  it  away  in  rail¬ 
way  speculations;  and  so  also,  during  the  American  Civil 
War,  ae  closed  his  factory,  and  turned  his  workers  into  the 
streets,  in  order  to  gamble  on  the  Liverpool  cotton  ex¬ 
change. 


THE  LABOUR  PROCESS 


return  for  all  this  service?”  Well,  but  has  not 
the  labourer  rendered  him  the  equivalent  serv¬ 
ice  of  changing  his  cotton  and  spindle  into 
yarn?  Moreover,  there  is  here  no  question  of 
service.1  A  service  is  nothing  more  than  the  use¬ 
ful  effect  of  a  use-value,  be  it  of  a  commodity, 
or  be  it  of  labour.2  But  here  we  are  dealing  with 
exchange-value.  The  capitalist  paid  to  the  la¬ 
bourer  a  value  of  3  shillings,  and  the  labourer 
gave  him  back  an  exact  equivalent  in  the  value 
of  3  shillings,  added  by  him  to  the  cotton:  he 
gave  him  value  for  value.  Our  friend,  up  to  this 
time  so  purse-proud,  suddenly  assumes  the 
modest  demeanour  of  his  own  workman,  and 
exclaims:  “Have  I  myself  not  worked?  Have  I 
not  performed  the  labour  of  superintendence 
and  of  overlooking  the  spinner?  And  does  not 
this  labour,  too,  create  value?”  His  overlooker 
and  his  manager  try  to  hide  their  smiles.  Mean¬ 
while,  after  a  hearty  laugh,  he  reassumes  his 
usual  mien.  Though  he  chanted  to  us  the  whole 
creed  of  the  economists,  in  reality,  he  says,  he 
would  not  give  ?  brass  farthing  for  it.  He  leaves 
this  and  all  such  like  subterfuges  and  juggling 
tricks  to  the  professors  of  political  economy 
who  are  paid  for  it.  He  himself  is  a  practical 
man;  and  though  he  does  not  always  consider 
what  he  says  outside  his  business,  yet  in  his 
business  he  knows  what  he  is  about. 

Let  us  examine  the  matter  more  closely.  The 
value  of  a  day’s  labour  power  amounts  to  3  shil¬ 
lings,  because  on  our  assumption  half  a  day’s  la¬ 
bour  is  embodied  in  that  quantity  of  labour 
power,  i.e.,  because  the  means  of  subsistence 
that  are  daily  required  for  the  production  of  la¬ 
bour  power  cost  half  a  day’s  labour.  But  the 
past  labour  that  is  embodied  in  the  labour- 
power,  and  the  living  labour  that  it  can  call  into 
action;  the  daily  cost  of  maintaining  it,  and  its 

1  “Extol  thyself,  put  on  finery  and  adorn  thyself. . .  but 
whoever  takes  more  or  better  than  he  gives,  that  is  usury, 
and  is  not  service,  but  wrong  done  to  his  neighbour,  as 
when  one  steals  and  robs.  All  is  not  service  and  benefit  to  a 
neighbour  that  is  called  service  and  benefit.  For  an  adul¬ 
teress  and  adulterer  do  one  another  great  service  and  pleas¬ 
ure.  A  horseman  does  an  incendiary  a  great  service  by 
helping  him  to  rob  on  the  highway,  and  pillage  land  and 
houses.  The  papists  do  ours  a  great  service  in  that  they 
don’t  drown,  burn,  murder  all  of  them,  or  let  them  all  rot 
in  prison;  but  let  some  live,  and  only  drive  them  out,  or 
take  from  them  what  they  have.  The  devil  himself  does 
his  servants  inestimable  service  ...  To  sum  up,  the  world 
is  full  of  great,  excellent,  and  daily  service  and  benefit." — 
Martin  Luther,  An  die  P/arrherrn ,  wider  den  Wucher  2 u 
predigen ,  Wittenberg,  1  $40. 

2  In  Zur  Kritik ,  etc.,  p.  14, 1  make  the  following  remark 
on  this  point:  “It  is  nqt  difficult  to  understand  what  'serv¬ 
ice*  the  category  'service'  must  render  to  a  class  of  econ¬ 
omists  like  J.  B.  Say  and  F.  Bostiat." 


93 

daily  expenditure  in  work,  are  two  totally  dif¬ 
ferent  things.  The  former  determines  the  ex¬ 
change  value  of  the  labour  power,  the  latter  is 
its  use-value.  The  fact  that  half  a  day’s  labour 
is  necessary  to  keep  the  labourer  alive  during  24 
hours,  does  not  in  any  way  prevent  him  from 
working  a  whole  day.  Therefore,  the  value  of 
labour  power,  and  the  value  which  that  labour 
power  creates  in  the  labour  process,  are  two  en¬ 
tirely  different  magnitudes;  and  this  difference 
of  the  two  values  was  what  the  capitalist  had 
in  view  when  he  was  purchasing  the  labour 
power.  The  useful  qualities  that  labour  power 
possesses,  and  by  virtue  of  which  it  makes  yarn 
or  boots,  were  to  him  nothing  more  than  a  con¬ 
ditio  sine  qua  non;  for  in  order  to  create  value, 
labour  must  be  expended  in  a  useful  manner. 
What  really  influenced  him  was  the  specific  use- 
value  which  this  commodity  possesses  of  being 
a  source  not  oufy  of  value ,  but  of  more  value  than  it 
has  itself .  This  is  the  special  service  that  the  cap¬ 
italist  expects  from  labour  power,  and  in  this 
transaction  he  acts  in  accordance  with  the 
“eternal  laws”  of  the  exchange  of  commodities. 
The  seller  of  labour  power,  like  the  seller  of  any 
other  commodity,  realizes  its  exchange  value, 
and  parts  with  its  use-value.  He  cannot  take 
the  one  without  giving  the  other.  The  use-value 
of  labour  power,  or  in  other  words,  labour,  be¬ 
longs  just  as  little  to  its  seller  as  the  use-value  of 
oil  after  it  has  been  sold  belongs  to  the  dealer 
who  has  sold  it.  The  owner  of  the  money  has 
paid  the  value  of  a  day’s  labour  power;  his, 
therefore,  is  the  use  of  it  for  a  day;  a  day’s  la¬ 
bour  belongs  to  him.  The  circumstance  that  on 
the  one  hand  the  daily  sustenance  of  labour 
power  costs  only  half  a  day’s  labour,  while  on 
the  other  hand  the  very  same  labour  power  can 
work  during  a  whole  day,  that  consequently  the 
value  which  its  use  during  one  day  creates  is 
double  what  he  pays  for  that  use,  this  circum¬ 
stance  is,  without  doubt,  a  piece  of  good  luck 
for  the  buyer,  but  by  no  means  an  injury  to  the 
seller. 

Our  capitalist  foresaw  this  state  of  things, 
and  that  was  the  cause  of  his  laughter.  The  la¬ 
bourer  therefore  finds,  in  the  workshop,  the 
means  of  production  necessary  for  working,  not 
only  during  six,  but  during  twelve  hours.  Just 
as  during  the  six  hours’  process  our  10  pounds 
of  cotton  absorbed  six  hours’  labour,  and  be¬ 
came  10  pounds  of  yarn,  so  now,  20  pounds  of 
cotton  will  absorb  12  hours’  labour  and  be 
changed  into  20  pounds  of  yarn.  Let  us  now  ex¬ 
amine  the  product  of  this  prolonged  process. 
There  is  now  materialized  in  this  20  pounds  of 


CAPITAL 


94 

yarn  the  labour  of  five  days,  of  which  four  days 
are  due  to  the  cotton  and  the  lost  steel  of  the 
spindle,  the  remaining  day  having  been  ab¬ 
sorbed  by  the  cotton  during  the  spinning  proc¬ 
ess.  Expressed  in  gold,  the  labour  of  five  days 
is  thirty  shillings.  This  is  therefore  the  price  of 
the  20  pounds  of  yarn,  giving,  as  before,  eigh¬ 
teen-pence  as  the  price  of  a  pound.  But  the  sum 
of  the  values  of  the  commodities  that  entered 
into  the  process  amounts  to  27  shillings.  The 
value  of  the  yarn  is  30  shillings.  Therefore,  the 
value  of  the  product  is  1/9  greater  than  the  value 
advanced  for  its  production;  27  shillings  have 
been  transformed  into  30  shillings;  a  surplus 
value  of  3  shillings  has  been  created.  The  trick 
has  at  last  succeeded;  money  has  been  con¬ 
verted  into  capital. 

Every  condition  of  the  problem  is  satisfied, 
while  the  laws  that  regulate  the  exchange  of 
commodities,  have  been  in  no  way  violated. 
Equivalent  has  been  exchanged  for  equivalent. 
For  the  capitalist  as  buyer  paid  for  each  com¬ 
modity,  for  the  cotton,  the  spindle  and  the  la¬ 
bour  power,  its  full  value.  He  then  did  what  is 
done  by  every  purchaser  of  commodities,  he  con¬ 
sumed  their  use- value.  The  consumption  of  the 
labour  power,  which  was  also  the  process  of  pro¬ 
ducing  commodities,  resulted  in  20  pounds  of 
yarn,  having  a  value  of  30  shillings.  The  capital¬ 
ist,  formerly  a  buyer,  now  returns  to  market  as 
a  seller,  of  commodities.  He  sells  his  yarn  at 
eighteen-pence  a  pound,  which  is  its  exact  value. 
Yet  for  all  that  he  withdraws  3  shillings  more 
from  circulation  than  he  originally  threw  into 
it.  This  metamorphosis,  this  conversion  of  mon¬ 
ey  into  capital,  takes  place  both  within  the 
sphere  of  circulation  and  also  outside  it;  within 
the  circulation,  because  conditioned  by  the  pur¬ 
chase  of  the  labour  power  in  the  market;  out¬ 
side  the  circulation,  because  what  is  done  with¬ 
in  it  is  only  a  stepping-stone  to  the  production 
of  surplus  value,  a  process  which  is  entirely  con¬ 
fined  to  the  sphere  of  production.  Thus  tout  est 
pour  le  mieux  dans  le  meilleur  des  mondes  pos¬ 
sibles} 

By  turning  his  money  into  commodities  that 
serve  as  the  material  elements  of  a  new  product, 
and  as  factors  in  the  labour  process,  by  incor¬ 
porating  living  labour  with  their  dead  sub¬ 
stance,  the  capitalist  at  the  same  time  converts 
value,  i.e.,  past,  materialized,  and  dead  labour 
into  capital,  into  value  big  with  value,  a  live 
monster  that  is  fruitful  and  multiplies. 

If  we  now  compare  the  two  processes  of  pro- 

1  Everything  is  for  the  best  in  the  best  of  all  possible 
worlds. 


ducing  value  and  of  creating  surplus  value,  we 
see  that  the  latter  is  nothing  but  the  continua¬ 
tion  of  the  former  beyond  a  definite  point.  If,  on 
the  one  hand,  the  process  be  not  carried  beyond 
the  point  where  the  value  paid  by  the  capitalist 
for  the  labour  power  is  replaced  by  an  exact 
equivalent,  it  is  simply  a  process  of  producing 
value;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  be  continued  be¬ 
yond  that  point,  it  becomes  a  process  of  creat¬ 
ing  surplus  value. 

If  we  proceed  further,  and  compare  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  producing  value  with  the  labour  process, 
pure  and  simple,  we  find  that  the  latter  consists 
of  the  useful  labour,  the  work,  that  produces 
use-values.  Here  we  contemplate  the  labour  as 
producing  a  particular  article;  we  view  it  under 
its  qualitative  aspect  alone,  with  regard  to  its 
end  and  aim.  But  viewed  as  a  value-creating 
process,  the  same  labour  process  presents  itself 
under  its  quantitative  aspect  alone.  Here  it  is 
a  question  merely  of  the  time  occupied  by  the 
labourer  in  doing  the  work;  of  the  period  during 
which  the  labour  power  is  usefully  expended. 
Here,  the  commodities  that  take  part  in  the 
process  do  not  count  any  longer  as  necessary 
adjuncts  of  labour  power  in  the  production  of 
a  definite,  useful  object.  They  count  merely  as 
depositaries  of  so  much  absorbed  or  material¬ 
ized  labour;  that  labour,  whether  previously 
embodied  in  the  means  of  production,  or  incor¬ 
porated  in  them  for  the  first  tfthe  during  the 
process  by  the  action  of  labour  power,  counts 
in  either  case  only  according  to  its  duration;  it 
amounts  to  so  many  hours  or  days  as  the  case 
may  be. 

Moreover,  only  so  much  of  the  time  spent  in 
the  production  of  any  article  is  counted  as,  un¬ 
der  the  given  social  conditions,  is  necessary. 
The  consequences  of  this  are  various.  In  the 
first  place,  it  becomes  necessary  that  the  labour 
should  be  carried  on  under  normal  conditions. 
If  a  self-acting  mule  is  the  implement  in  general 
use  for  spinning,  it  would  be  absurd  to  supply 
the  spinner  with  a  distaff  and  spinning  wheel. 
The  cotton,  too,  must  not  be  such  rubbish  as 
to  cause  extra  waste  in  being  worked,  but  must 
be  of  suitable  quality.  Otherwise  the  spinner 
would  be  found  to  spend  more  time  in  produc¬ 
ing  a  pound  of  yarn  than  is  socially  necessary, 
in  which  case  the  excess  of  time  Would  create 
neither  value  nor  money.  But  whether  the  ma¬ 
terial  factors  of  the  process  are  of  normal  qual¬ 
ity  or  not  depends  not  upon  the  labourer,  but 
entirely  upon  the  capitalist.  Then  again,  the  la¬ 
bour  power  itself  must  be  of  average  efficacy. 
In  the  trade  in  which  it  is  being  employed,  it 


THE  LABOUR  PROCESS 


must  possess  the  average  skill,  handiness,  and 
quickness  prevalent  in  that  trade,  and  our  cap¬ 
italist  took  good  care  to  buy  labour  power  of 
such  normal  goodness.  This  power  must  be  ap¬ 
plied  with  the  average  amount  of  exertion  and 
with  the  usual  degree  of  intensity;  and  the  cap¬ 
italist  is  as  careful  to  see  that  this  is  done  as  that 
his  workmen  are  not  idle  for  a  single  moment. 
He  has  bought  the  use  of  the  labour  power  for 
a  definite  period,  and  he  insists  upon  his  rights. 
He  has  no  intention  of  being  robbed.  Lastly, 
and  for  this  purpose  our  friend  has  a  penal  code 
of  his  own,  all  wasteful  consumption  of  raw  ma¬ 
terial  or  instruments  of  labour  is  strictly  for¬ 
bidden,  because  what  is  so  wasted  represents 
labour  superfluously  expended,  labour  that 
does  not  count  in  the  product  or  enter  into  its 
value.1 

We  now  see,  that  the  difference  between  la¬ 
bour  considered,  on  the  one  hand,  as  producing 
utilities,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  as  creating  val- 

1  This  is  one  of  the  circumstances  that  makes  produc¬ 
tion  by  slave  lab'  ur  a  costly  process.  The  labourer 
here  is,  to  use  a  striking  expression  of  the  ancients,  dis¬ 
tinguishable  only  as  instrumentum  oocale  [vocal  instrument], 
from  an  animal  as  instrumentum  semi-vocale  [semi-vocal  in- 
strumentj,  and  from  an  implement  as  instrumentum  mu- 
turn  [mute  instrument].  But  he  himself  takes  care  to  let 
both  beast  and  implement  feel  that  he  is  none  of  them,  but 
is  a  man.  He  convinces  himself  with  immense  satisfaction 
that  he  is  a  different  being  by  treating  the  one  unmerci¬ 
fully  and  damaging  the  other  con  amore.  Hence  the  princi¬ 
ple,  universally  applied  in  this  method  of  production,  only 
to  employ  the  rudest  and  heaviest  implements  and  such  as 
are  difficult  to  damage  owing  to  their  sheer  clumsiness.  In 
the  slave-states  bordering  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  down  to 
the  date  of  the  civil  war,  ploughs  constructed  on  old  Chinese 
models,  which  turned  up  the  soil  like  a  hog  or  a  mole,  in¬ 
stead  of  making  furrows,  were  alone  to  be  found.  (Sec  J.  C. 
Cairns,  The  Slave  Power ,  London,  1 862,  p.  46-49.)  In  his  Sea 
Board  Slave  States ,  Olmsted  tells  us:  “I  am  here  shown  tools 
that  no  man  in  his  senses,  with  us,  would  allow  a  labourer, 
for  whom  he  was  paying  wages,  to  be  encumbered  with; 
and  the  excessive  weight  and  clumsiness  of  which,  1  would 
judge,  would  make  work  at  least  ten  per  cent  greater  than 
with  those  ordinarily  used  with  us.  And  1  am  assured  that, 
in  the  careless  and  clumsy  way  they  must  be  used  by  the 
slaves,  anything  lighter  or  less  rude  could  not  be  furnished 
them  with  good  economy,  and  that  such  tools  as  we  con¬ 
stantly  give  our  labourers  and  find  our  profit  in  giving 

them,  would  not  last  out  a  day  in  a  Virginia  cornfield — 
much  lighter  and  more  free  from  stones  though  it  be  than 
ours.  So,  too,  when  I  ask  why  mules  are  so  universally  sub¬ 
stituted  for  horses  on  the  farm,  the  first  reason  given,  and 
confessedly  the  most  conclusive  one,  is  that  horses  cannot 
bear  the  treatment  that  they  always  must  get  from  negroes; 
horses  are  always  soon  foundered  or  crippled  by  them,  while 
mules  will  bear  cudgelling,  or  lose  a  meal  or  two  now  and 

then,  and  not  be  materially  injured,  and  they  do  not  take 
cold  or  get  sick,  if  neglected  or  overworked.  But  I  do  not 
need  to  go  further  than  to  the  window  of  the  room  in  which 
I  am  writing  to  see,  at  almost  any  time,  treatment  of  cattle 
that  would  ensure  the  immediate  discharge  of  the  driver 
by  almost  any  farmer  owning  them  in  the  North.” 


95 

ue,  a  difference  which  we  discovered  by  our 
analysis  of  a  commodity  resolves  itself  into  a 
distinction  between  two  aspects  of  the  process 
of  production. 

The  process  of  production,  considered  on  the 
one  hand  as  the  unity  of  the  labour  process  and 
the  process  of  creating  value,  is  production  of 
commodities;  considered  on  the  other  hand  as 
the  unity  of  the  labour  process  and  the  process 
of  producing  surplus  value,  it  is  the  capitalist 
process  of  production,  or  capitalist  production 
of  commodities. 

We  stated,  on  a  previous  page,  that  in  the 
creation  of  surplus  value  it  does  not  in  the  least 
matter  whether  the  labour  appropriated  by  the 
capitalist  be  simple  unskilled  labour  of  average 
quality  or  more  complicated  skilled  labour.  All 
labour  of  a  higher  or  more  complicated  charac¬ 
ter  than  average  labour  is  expenditure  of  labour 
power  of  a  more  costly  kind,  labour  power 
whose  production  has  cost  more  time  and  la¬ 
bour,  and  which  therefore  has  a  higher  value, 
than  unskilled  or  simple  labour  power.  This 
power  being  of  higher  value,  its  consumption 
is  labour  of  a  higher  class,  labour  that  creates 
in  equal  times  proportionally  higher  values 
than  unskilled  labour  does.  Whatever  differ¬ 
ence  in  skill  there  may  be  between  the  labour 
of  a  spinner  and  that  of  a  jeweller,  the  portion 
of  his  labour  by  which  the  jeweller  merely  re¬ 
places  the  value  of  his  own  labour  power  does 
not  in  any  way  differ  in  quality  from  the  addi¬ 
tional  portion  by  which  he  creates  surplus  val¬ 
ue.  In  the  making  of  jewellery,  just  as  in  spin¬ 
ning,  the  surplus  value  results  only  from  a 
quantitative  excess  of  labour,  from  a  lengthen¬ 
ing-out  of  one  and  the  same  labour  process  in 
the  one  case,  of  the  process  of  making  jewels,  in 
the  other,  of  the  process  of  making  yarn.2 

*The  distinction  between  skilled  and  unskilled  labour 
rests  in  part  on  pure  illusion,  or,  to  say  the  least,  on  dis¬ 
tinctions  that  have  long  since  ceased  to  be  real,  and  that 
survive  only  by  virtue  of  a  traditional  convention;  in  part 
on  the  helpless  condition  of  some  groups  of  the  working- 
class,  a  condition  that  prevents  them  from  exacting  equal¬ 
ly  with  the  rest  the  value  of  their  labour  power.  Accidental 
circumstances  here  play  so  great  a  part  that  these  two 
forms  of  labour  sometimes  change  places.  Where,  for  in¬ 
stance,  the  physique  of  the  working-class  has  deteriorated, 
and  is,  relatively  speaking,  exhausted,  which  is  the  case  in 
all  countries  with  a  well  developed  capitalist  production, 
the  lower  forms  of  labour,  which  demand  great  expendi¬ 
ture  of  muscle,  are  in  general  considered  as  skilled,  com¬ 
pared  with  much  more  delicate  forms  of  labour;  the  latter 
sink  down  to  the  level  of  unskilled  labour.  Take  as  an  ex¬ 
ample  the  labour  of  a  bricklayer,  which  in  England  occu¬ 
pies  a  much  higher  level  than  that  of  a  dam  ask- weaver. 
Again,  although  the  labour  of  a  fustian  cutter  demands 
great  bodily  exertion,  and  is  at  the  same  time  unhealthy. 


96  CAPITAL 


But  on  the  other  hand,  in  every  process  of 
creating  value,  the  reduction  of  skilled  labour  to 
average  social  labour,  e.g.,  one  day  of  skilled  to 
six  days  of  unskilled  labour,  is  unavoidable.1  We 
therefore  save  ourselves  a  superfluous  opera¬ 
tion,  and  simplify  our  analysis,  by  the  assump¬ 
tion  that  the  labour  of  the  workman  employed 
by  the  capitalist  is  unskilled  average  labour. 


CHAPTER  VIII.  CONSTANT  CAPITAL 
AND  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 

The  various  factors  of  the  labour  process  play 
different  parts  in  forming  the  value  of  the  prod¬ 
uct. 

The  labourer  adds  fresh  value  to  the  subject 
of  his  labour  by  expending  upon  it  a  given 
amount  of  additional  labour,  no  matter  what 
the  specific  character  and  utility  of  that  labour 
may  be.  On  the  other  hand,  the  values  of  the 
means  of  production  used  up  in  the  process  are 
preserved,  and  present  themselves  afresh  as 
constituent  parts  of  the  value  of  the  product; 
the  values  of  the  cotton  and  the  spindle,  for  in¬ 
stance,  reappear  again  in  the  value  of  the  yarn. 
The  value  of  the  means  of  production  is  there¬ 
fore  preserved,  by  being  transferred  to  the 
product.  This  transfer  takes  place  during  the 
conversion  of  those  means  into  a  product,  or  in 
other  words,  during  the  labour  process. 
It  is  brought  about  by  labour;  but  how? 

The  labourer  does  not  perform  two  opera¬ 
tions  at  once,  one  in  order  to  add  value  to  the 
cotton,  the  other  in  order  to  preserve  the  value 
of  the  means  of  production,  or,  what  amounts  to 

yet  it  counts  only  as  unskilled  labour.  And,  then,  we  must 
not  forget  that  the  so-called  skilled  labour  does  not  occupy 
a  large  space  in  the  held  of  national  labour.  Laing  esti¬ 
mates  that  in  England  (and  Wales)  the  livelihood  of 
11,300,000  people  depends  on  unskilled  labour.  If  from  the 
total  population  of  18,000,000  living  at  the  time  when  he 
wrote  we  deduct  1,000,000  for  the  “genteel  population/’  and 
1,500,000  for  paupers,  vagrants,  criminals,  prostitutes,  etc., 
and  4,650,000  who  compose  the  middle-class,  there  remain 
the  above  mentioned  1 1,000,000.  But  in  his  middle-class 
he  includes  people  that  live  on  the  interest  of  small  invest¬ 
ments,  officials,  men  of  letters,  artists,  schoolmasters,  and 
the  like,  and  in  order  to  swell  the  number  he  also  includes 
in  these  4,650,000  the  better  paid  portion  of  the  factory 
operatives!  The  bricklayers,  too,  figure  amongst  them.  (S. 
Laing,  National  Distress ,  etc.,  London,  1844.)  “The  great 
class  who  have  nothing  to  give  for  food  but  ordinary  labour 
are  the  great  bulk  of  the  people/*  (James  Mill,  in  the  article, 
“QcAany  "Supplement  to  the  Encyclopedia  Eritannicati  831.) 

1  “Where  reference  is  made  to  labour  as  a  measure  of 
value,  it  necessarily  implies  labour  of  one  particular  kind 
...  the  proportion  which  the  other  kinds  bear  to  it  being 
easily  ascertained."  Outlines  oj  Political  Economy ,  London, 
1832,  pp.  22  and  23. 


the  same  thing,  to  transfer  to  the  yarn,  to  the 
product,  the  value  of  the  cotton  on  which  he 
works,  and  part  of  the  value  of  the  spindle  with 
which  he  works.  But,  by  the  very  act  of  adding 
new  value,  he  preserves  their  former  values. 
Since,  however,  the  addition  of  new  value  to 
the  subject  of  his  labour,  and  the  preserva¬ 
tion  of  its  former  value,  are  two  entirely  dis¬ 
tinct  results,  produced  simultaneously  by  the 
labourer  during  one  operation,  it  is  plain  that 
this  twofold  nature  of  the  result  can  be  ex¬ 
plained  only  by  the  twofold  nature  of  his  la¬ 
bour;  at  one  and  the  same  time,  it  must  in  one 
character  create  value,  and  in  another  character 
preserve  or  transfer  value. 

Now,  in  what  manner  does  every  labourer 
add  new  labour  and,  consequently,  new  value? 
Evidently,  only  by  labouring  productively  in  a 
particular  way;  the  spinner  by  spinning,  the 
weaver  by  weaving,  the  smith  by  forging.  But, 
while  thus  incorporating  labour  generally,  that 
is  value,  it  i9  by  the  particular  form  alone  of  the 
labour,  by  the  spinning,  the  weaving  and  the 
forging  respectively,  that  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion,  the  cotton  and  spindle,  the  yarn  and  loom, 
and  the  iron  and  anvil  become  constituent  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  product,  of  a  new  use-value.2  Each 
use-value  disappears,  but  only  to  reappear  un¬ 
der  a  new  form  in  a  new  use-value.  Now,  we 
saw,  when  we  were  considcrin^the  process  of 
creating  value,  that,  if  a  use-value  be  effectively 
consumed  in  the  production  of  a  new  use-value, 
the  quantity  of  labour  expended  in  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  the  consumed  article  forms  a  portion  of 
the  quantity  of  labour  necessary  to  produce  the 
new  use-value;  this  portion  is  therefore  labour 
transferred  from  the  means  of  production  to  the 
new  product.  Hence,  the  labourer  preserves  the 
values  of  the  consumed  means  of  production,  or 
transfers  them  as  portions  of  its  value  to  the 
product,  not  by  virtue  of  his  additional  labour, 
abstractly  considered,  but  by  virtue  of  the  par¬ 
ticular  useful  character  of  that  labour,  by  vir¬ 
tue  of  its  special  productive  form.  In  so  far, 
then,  as  labour  is  such  specific  productive  ac¬ 
tivity,  in  so  far  as  it  i9  spinning,  "weaving,  or 
forging,  it  raises,  by  mere  contact,  the  means  of 
production  from  the  dead,  makes  them  living 
factors  of  the  labour  process,  and  combines  with 
them  to  form  the  new  products. 

If  the  special  productive  labour 'of  the  work¬ 
man  were  not  spinning,  he  could  not  convert  the 
cotton  into  yarn,  and  therefore  could  not  trans- 

*  “Labour  gives  a  new  creation  for  one  extinguished."— 
An  essay  on  the  Political  Economy  0/ Nations,  London,  1821, 

p.13. 


CONSTANT  CAPITAL  AND  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


fer  the  values  of  the  cotton  and  spindle  to  the 
yarn.  Suppose  the  same  workman  were  to 
change  his  occupation  to  that  of  a  joiner,  he 
would  still  by  a  day's  labour  add  value  to  the 
material  he  works  upon.  Consequently,  we  see, 
first,  that  the  addition  of  new  value  takes  place 
not  by  virtue  of  his  labour  being  spinning  in 
particular,  or  joinering  in  particular,  but  be¬ 
cause  it  is  labour  in  the  abstract,  a  portion  of  the 
total  labour  of  society;  and  we  see  next,  that  the 
value  added  is  of  a  given  definite  amount,  not 
because  his  labour  has  a  special  utility,  but  be¬ 
cause  it  is  exerted  for  a  definite  time.  On  the  one 
hand,  then,  it  is  by  virtue  of  its  general  charac¬ 
ter,  as  being  expenditure  of  human  labour  power 
in  the  abstract,  that  spinning  adds  new  value 
to  the  values  of  the  cotton  and  the  spindle;  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  by  virtue  of  its  special 
character,  as  being  a  concrete,  useful  process, 
that  the  same  labour  of  spinning  both  transfers 
the  values  of  the  means  of  production  to  the 
product,  and  preserves  them  in  the  product. 
Hence  at  one  and  the  same  time  there  is  pro¬ 
duced  a  twofold  result. 

By  the  simple  addition  of  a  certain  quantity 
of  labour,  new  value  is  added,  and,  by  the  qual¬ 
ity  of  this  added  labour,  the  original  values  of 
the  means  of  production  are  preserved  in  the 
product.  This  twofold  effect,  resulting  from  the 
twofold  character  of  labour,  may  be  traced  in 
various  phenomena. 

Let  us  assume,  that  some  invention  enables 
the  spinner  to  spin  as  much  cotton  in  6  hours  as 
he  was  able  to  spin  before  in  36  hours.  His  labour 
is  now  six  times  as  effective  as  it  was,  for  the 
purposes  of  useful  production.  The  product  of 
6  hours*  work  has  increased  sixfold,  from  6 
pounds  to  36  pounds.  But  now  the  36  pounds  of 
cotton  absorb  only  the  same  amount  of  labour 
as  formerly  did  the  6  pounds.  One-sixth  as  much 
new  labour  is  absorbed  by  each  pound  of  cotton, 
and,  consequently,  the  value  added  by  the  la¬ 
bour  to  each  pound  is  only  one-sixth  of  what  it 
formerly  was.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  product, 
in  the  36  pounds  of  yarn,  the  value  transferred 
from  the  cotton  is  six  times  as  great  as  before. 
By  the  6  hours*  spinning,  the  value  of  the  raw 
material  preserved  and  transferred  to  the  prod¬ 
uct  is  six  times  as  great  as  before,  although  the 
new  value  added  by  the  labour  of  the  spinner  to 
each  pound  of  the  very  same  raw  material  is 
one-sixth  what  it  was  formerly.  This  shows  that 
the  two  properties  of  labour,  by  virtue  of  which 
it  is  enabled  in  one  case  to  preserve  value,  and 
in  the  other  to  create  value,  are  essentially  dif¬ 
ferent.  On  the  one  hand,  the  longer  the  time 


97 

necessary  to  spin  a  given  weight  of  cotton  into 
yarn,  the  greater  is  the  new  value  added  to  the 
material;  on  the  other  hand,  the  greater  the 
weight  of  the  cotton  spun  in  a  given  time,  the 
greater  is  the  value  preserved,  by  being  trans¬ 
ferred  from  it  to  the  product. 

Let  us  now  assume  that  the  productiveness  of 
the  spinner’s  labour,  instead  of  varying,  re¬ 
mains  constant,  that  he  therefore  requires  the 
same  time  as  he  formerly  did  to  convert  one 
pound  of  cotton  into  yarn,  but  that  the  ex¬ 
change  value  of  the  cotton  varies,  either  by  ris¬ 
ing  to  six  times  its  former  value  or  falling  to  one- 
sixth  of  that  value.  In  both  these  cases  the  spin¬ 
ner  puts  the  same  quantity  of  labour  into  a 
pound  of  cotton,  and  therefore  adds  as  much 
value  as  he  did  before  the  change  in  the  value; 
he  also  produces  a  given  weight  of  yarn  in  the 
same  time  as  he  did  before.  Nevertheless,  the 
value  that  he*, transfers  from  the  cotton  to  the 
yarn  is  either  one-sixth  of  what  it  was  before  the 
variation,  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  six  times  as 
much  as  before.  The  same  result  occurs  when 
the  value  of  the  instruments  of  labour  rises  or 
falls,  while  their  useful  efficacy  in  the  process 
remains  unaltered. 

Again,  if  the  technical  conditions  of  the  spin¬ 
ning  process  remain  unchanged,  and  no  change 
of  value  takes  place  in  the  means  of  production, 
the  spinner  continues  to  consume  in  equal  work¬ 
ing-times  equal  quantities  of  raw  material,  and 
equal  quantities  of  machinery  of  unvarying  val¬ 
ue.  The  value  that  he  preserves  in  the  product 
is  directly  proportional  to  the  new  value  that  he 
adds  to  the  product.  In  two  weeks  he  incorpo¬ 
rates  twice  as  much  labour,  and  therefore  twice 
as  much  value,  as  in  one  week,  and  during  the 
same  time  he  consumes  twice  as  much  material, 
and  wears  out  twice  as  much  machinery,  of 
double  the  value  in  each  case;  he  therefore  pre¬ 
serves,  in  the  product  of  two  weeks,  twice  as 
much  value  as  in  the  product  of  one  week.  So 
long  as  the  conditions  of  production  remain  the 
same,  the  more  value  the  labourer  adds  by  fresh 
labour,  the  more  value  he  transfers  and  pre¬ 
serves;  but  he  does  so  merely  because  this  addi¬ 
tion  of  new  value  takes  place  under  conditions 
that  have  not  varied  and  are  independent  of  his 
own  labour.  Of  course,  it  may  be  said  in  one 
sense  that  the  labourer  preserves  old  value  al¬ 
ways  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  new  value 
that  he  adds.  Whether  the  value  of  cotton  rise 
from  one  shilling  to  two  shillings,  or  fall  to  six¬ 
pence,  the  workman  invariably  preserves  in  the 
product  of  one  hour  only  one  half  as  much  value 
as  he  preserves  in  two  hours.  In  like  manner,  if 


CAPITAL 


98 

the  productiveness  of  his  own  labour  varies  by 
rising  or  falling,  he  will  in  one  hour  spin  either 
more  or  less  cotton,  as  the  case  may  be,  than  he 
did  before,  and  will  consequently  preserve  in  the 
product  of  one  hour,  more  or  less  value  of  cotton; 
but,  all  the  same,  he  will  preserve  by  two  hours’ 
labour  twice  as  much  value  as  he  will  by  one. 

Value  exists  only  in  articles  of  utility,  in  ob¬ 
jects:  we  leave  out  of  consideration  its  purely 
symbolical  representation  by  tokens.  (Man 
himself,  viewed  as  the  impersonation  of  labour 
power,  is  a  natural  object,  a  thing,  although  a 
living  conscious  thing,  and  labour  is  the  mani¬ 
festation  of  this  power  residing  in  him.)  If, 
therefore,  an  article  loses  its  utility,  it  also  loses 
its  value.  The  reason  why  means  of  production 
do  not  lose  their  value  at  the  same  time  that 
they  lose  their  use-value  is  this:  they  lose  in  the 
labour  process  the  original  form  of  their  use- 
value,  only  to  assume  in  the  product  the  form 
of  a  new  use- value.  But,  however  important  it 
may  be  to  value  that  it  should  have  some  ob¬ 
ject  of  utility  to  embody  itself  in,  yet  it  is  a  mat¬ 
ter  of  complete  indifference  what  particular  ob¬ 
ject  serves  this  purpose;  this  we  saw  when  treat¬ 
ing  of  the  metamorphosis  of  commodities. 
Hence,  it  follows  that  in  the  labour  process  the 
means  of  production  transfer  their  value  to  the 
product  only  so  far  as  along  with  their  use-value 
they  lose  also  their  exchange  value.  They  give 
up  to  the  product  that  value  alone  which  they 
themselves  lose  as  means  of  production.  But  in 
this  respect  the  material  factors  of  the  laboilr 
process  do  not  all  behave  alike. 

The  coal  burnt  under  the  boiler  vanishes 
without  leaving  a  trace;  so,  too,  the  tallow  with 
which  the  axles  of  wheels  are  greased.  Dyestuffs 
and  other  auxiliary  substances  also  vanish  but 
reappear  as  properties  of  the  product.  Raw  ma¬ 
terial  forms  the  substance  of  the  product,  but 
only  after  it  has  changed  its  form.  Hence  raw 
material  and  auxiliary  substances  lose  the  char¬ 
acteristic  form  with  which  they  are  clothed  on 
entering  the  labour  process.  It  is  otherwise  with 
the  instruments  of  labour.  Tools,  machines, 
workshops,  and  vessels,  are  of  use  in  the  labour 
process,  only  so  long  as  they  retain  their  original 
shape,  and  are  ready  each  morning  to  renew 
the  process  with  their  shape  unchanged.  And 
just  as  during  their  lifetime,  that  is  to  say,  dur¬ 
ing  the  continued  labour  process  in  which  they 
serve,  they  retain  their  shape  independent  of 
the  product,  so,  too,  they  do  after  their  death. 
The  corpses  of  machines,  tools,  workshops,  etc., 
are  always  separate  and  distinct  from  the  prod¬ 
uct  they  helped  to  turn  out.  If  we  now  con¬ 


sider  the  case  of  any  instrument  of  labour  dur¬ 
ing  the  whole  period  of  its  service,  from  the  day 
of  its  entry  into  the  workshop  till  the  day  of  its 
banishment  into  the  lumber  room,  we  find  that 
during  this  period  its  use-value  has  been  com¬ 
pletely  consumed,  and  therefore  its  exchange 
value  completely  transferred  to  the  product. 
For  instance,  if  a  spinning  machine  lasts  for  io 
years  it  is  plain  that  during  that  working  period 
its  total  value  is  gradually  transferred  to  the 
product  of  the  io  years.  The  life-time  of  an  in¬ 
strument  of  labour,  therefore,  is  spent  in  the 
repetition  of  a  greater  or  less  number  of  similar 
operations.  Its  life  may  be  compared  with  that 
of  a  human  being.  Every  day  brings  a  man  24 
hours  nearer  to  his  grave:  but  how  many  days 
he  has  still  to  travel  on  that  road  no  man  can 
tell  accurately  by  merely  looking  at  him.  This 
difficulty,  however,  does  not  prevent  life  insur¬ 
ance  offices  from  drawing,  by  means  of  the  the¬ 
ory  of  averages,  very  accurate,  and  at  the  same 
time  very  profitable,  conclusions.  So  it  is  with 
the  instruments  of  labour.  It  is  known  by  ex¬ 
perience  how  long  on  the  average  a  machine  of  a 
particular  kind  will  last.  Suppose  its  use-value 
in  the  labour-process  to  last  only  six  days.  Then, 
on  the  average,  it  loses  each  day  one-sixth  of  its 
use-value,  and  therefore  parts  with  one-sixth  of 
its  value  to  the  daily  product.  The  wear  and 
tear  of  all  instruments,  their  daily  loss  of  use- 
value,  and  the  corresponding  quantity  of  value 
they  part  with  to  the  product,  are  accordingly 
calculated  upon  this  basis. 

It  is  thus  strikingly  dear  that  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  never  transfer  more  value  to  the  prod¬ 
uct  than  they  themselves  lose  during  the  la¬ 
bour  process  by  the  destruction  of  their  own 
use-value.  If  such  an  instrument  has  no  value 
to  lose,  if,  in  other  words,  it  is  not  the  product 
of  human  labour,  it  transfers  no  value  to  the 
product.  It  helps  to  create  use- value  without 
contributing  to  the  formation  of  exchange  value. 
In  this  class  are  included  all  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  supplied  by  Nature  without  human  assist¬ 
ance,  such  as  land,  wind,  water,  metals  in  situ\ 
and  timber  in  virgin  forests. 

Yet  another  interesting  phenomenon  here 
presents  itself.  Suppose  a  machine  to  be  worth 
£1000,  and  to  wear  out  in  1000  days.  Then  one 
thousandth  part  of  the  value  of  the  machine  is 
daily  transferred  to  the  day’s  product.  At  the 
same  time,  though  with  diminishing  vitality, 
the  machine  as  a  whole  continues  to  take  part 
in  the  labour  process.  Thus  it  appears  that  one 
factor  of  the  labour  process,  a  means  of  produc- 

1  In  the  ground. 


CONSTANT  CAPITAL  AND  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


tion,  continually  enters  as  a  whole  into  that 
process,  while  it  enters  into  the  process  of  the 
formation  of  value  by  fractions  only.  The  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  two  processes  is  here  reflected 
in  their  material  factors,  by  the  same  instru¬ 
ment  of  production  taking  part  as  a  whole  in  the 
labour  process,  while  at  the  same  time  as  an  ele¬ 
ment  in  the  formation  of  value,  it  enters  only 
by  fractions.1 

On  the  other  hand,  a  means  of  production 
may  take  part  as  a  whole  in  the  formation  of 
value,  while  into  the  labour  process  it  enters 
only  bit  by  bit.  Suppose  that,  in  spinning  cot¬ 
ton,  the  waste  for  every  i  15  pounds  used 
amounts  to  1 J  pounds,  which  is  converted,  not 
into  yarn,  but  into  “devil's  dust.”  Now,  al¬ 
though  this  1 5  pounds  of  cotton  never  becomes 
a  constituent  element  of  the  yarn,  yet  assuming 
this  amount  of  waste  to  be  normal  and  inevit¬ 
able  under  average  conditions  of  spinning,  its 
value  is  just  as  surely  transferred  to  the  value 
of  the  yarn  as  is  the  value  of  the  100  pounds 
that  form  the  substance  of  the  yarn.  The  use- 
value  of  15  pounds  of  cotton  must  vanish  into 
dust,  before  100  pounds  of  yam  can  be  made. 
The  destruction  of  this  cotton  is,  therefore,  a 
necessary  condition  in  the  production  of  the 
yarn.  And  because  it  is  a  necessary  condition, 
and  for  no  other  reason,  the  value  of  that  cotton 
is  transferred  to  the  product.  The  same  holds 

1  The  subject  of  repairs  of  the  implements  of  labour  does 
not  concern  us  here.  A  machine  that  is  undergoing  repair 
no  longer  plays  the  part  of  an  instrument,  but  that  of  a 
subject  of  labour.  Work  is  no  longer  done  with  it,  but  upon 
it.  It  is  quite  permissible  for  our  purpose  to  assume  that 
the  labour  expended  on  the  repairs  of  instruments  is  in¬ 
cluded  in  the  labour  necessary  for  their  original  produc¬ 
tion.  But  in  the  text  we  deal  with  that  wear  and  tear  which 
no  doctor  can  cure,  and  which  little  by  little  brings  about 
death,  with  “that  kind  of  wear  which  cannot  be  repaired 
from  time  to  time,  and  which,  in  the  case  of  a  knife,  would 
ultimately  reduce  it  to  a  state  in  which  the  cutler  would 
say  of  it,  it  is  not  worth  a  new  blade.”  We  have  shown  in 
the  text  that  a  machine  takes  part  in  every  labour  process 
as  an  integral  machine,  but  that  into  the  simultaneous 
process  of  creating  value  it  enters  only  bit  by  bit.  How 
great,  then,  is  the  confusion  of  ideas  exhibited  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  extract!  “Mr.  Ricardo  says  a  portion  of  the  labour 
of  the  engineer  in  making  [stocking]  machines”  is  contained 
for  example  in  the  value  of  a  pair  of  stockings.  “Yet  the 
total  labour  that  produced  each  single  pair  of  stockings 
. . .  includes  the  whole  labour  of  the  engineer,  not  a  por¬ 
tion;  for  one  machine  makes  many  pairs,  and  none  of  those 
pairs  could  have  been  done  without  any  part  of  the  ma¬ 
chine.”  (Observations  on  certain  Verbal  Disputes  in  Political 
Economy  particularly  relating  to  Value ,  p.  54.)  The  author, 
an  uncommonly  self-satisfied  wiseacre,  is  right  in  his  con¬ 
fusion  and  therefore  in  his  contention,  to  this  extent  only, 
that  neither  Ricardo  nor  any  other  economist  before  or 
since  him  has  accurately  distinguished  the  two  aspects  of 
labour,  and  still  less,  therefore,  the  part  played  by  it  under 
each  of  these  aspects  in  the  formation  of  value. 


99 

good  for  every  kind  of  refuse  resulting  from  a 
labour  process,  so  far  at  least  as  such  refuse  can¬ 
not  be  further  employed  as  a  means  in  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  new  and  independent  use-values. 
Such  an  employment  of  refuse  may  be  seen  in 
the  large  machine  works  at  Manchester,  where 
mountains  of  iron  turnings  arc  carted  away  to 
the  foundry  in  the  evening,  in  order  the  next 
morning  to  reappear  in  the  workshops  as  solid 
masses  of  iron. 

We  have  seen  that  the  means  of  production 
transfer  value  to  the  new  product  so  far  only 
as  during  the  labour  process  they  lose  value  in 
the  shape  of  their  old  use-value.  The  maximum 
loss  of  value  that  they  can  suffer  in  the  process 
is  plainly  limited  by  the  amount  of  the  original 
value  with  which  they  came  into  the  process, 
or,  in  other  words,  by  the  labour  time  necessary 
for  their  production.  Therefore,  the  means  of 
production  can  never  add  more  value  to  the 
product  than  they  themselves  possess  inde¬ 
pendently  of  the  process  in  which  they  assist. 
However  useful  a  given  kind  of  raw  material, 
or  a  machine,  or  other  means  of  production  may 
be,  though  it  may  cost  £150,  or,  say,  joo  days' 
labour,  yet  it  cannot,  under  any  circumstances, 
add  to  the  value  of  the  product  more  than  £150. 
Its  value  is  determined  not  by  the  labour  proc¬ 
ess  into  which  it  enters  as  a  means  of  produc¬ 
tion,  but  by  that  out  of  which  it  has  issued  as  a 
product.  In  the  labour  process  it  only  serves  as 
a  mere  use-value,  a  thing  with  useful  properties, 
and  could  not,  therefore,  transfer  any  value  to 
the  product,  unless  it  possessed  such  value  pre¬ 
viously.2 

2  From  this  wc  may  judge  of  the  absurdity  of  J.  B.  Say, 
who  pretends  to  account  for  surplus  value  (Interest,  Profit, 
Rent),  by  the  services  product  tfs  [productive  services] 
which  the  means  of  production,  soil,  instruments,  and  raw 
material,  render  in  the  labour  process  by  means  of  their 
use-values.  Mr.  Wm.  Roscher,  who  seldom  loses  an  occa¬ 
sion  of  registering,  in  black  and  white,  ingenious  apologetic 
fancies, records  thefollowingspecimen: — “J.  B.Say  ( Traiti , 
Vol.  1,  ch.  4)  very  truly  remarks:  ‘the  value  produced  by 
an  oil  mill,  after  deduction  of  all  costs,  is  something  new, 
something  quite  different  from  the  labour  by  which  the  oil 
mill  itself  was  erected.’  ”  (op.  cit .,  p.  82,  note.)  Very  true, 
Mr.  Professor!  the  oil  produced  by  the  oil  mill  is  indeed 
something  very  different  from  the  labour  expended  in  con¬ 
structing  the  mill!  By  value ,  Mr.  Roscher  understands  such 
stuff  as  0/7,  because  oil  has  value,  notwithstanding  that 
“Nature”  produces  petroleum,  though  relatively  “in  small 
quantities,”  a  fact  to  which  he  seems  to  refer  in  his  further 
observation:  “It  (Nature)  produces  scarcely  any  exchange 
value.”  Mr.  Roscher’s  “Nature”  and  the  exchange  value 
it  produces  are  rather  like  the  foolish  virgin  who  admitted 
indeed  that  she  had  had  a  child,  but  “it  was  such  a  little 
one.”  This  savant  sfrieux  [erudite  scientist]  in  continuation 
remarks:  “Ricardo’s  school  is  in  the  habit  of  including  cap¬ 
ital  as  accumulated  labour  under  the  head  of  labour.  This 


100  CAPITAL 


While  productive  labour  is  changing  the 
means  of  production  into  constituent  elements 
of  a  new  product,  their  value  undergoes  a  met¬ 
empsychosis.  It  deserts  the  consumed  body,  to 
occupy  the  newly  created  one.  But  this  trans¬ 
migration  takes  place,  as  it  were,  behind  the 
back  of  the  labourer.  He  is  unable  to  add  new 
labour,  to  create  new  value,  without  at  the  same 
time  preserving  old  values,  and  this  because  the 
labour  he  adds  must  be  of  a  specific  useful  kind: 
and  he  cannot  do  work  of  a  useful  kind  without 
employing  products  as  the  means  of  production 
of  a  new  product,  and  thereby  transferring  their 
value  to  the  new  product.  The  property  there¬ 
fore  which  labour  power  in  action,  living  labour, 
possesses  of  preserving  value,  at  the  same  time 
that  it  adds  it,  is  a  gift  of  Nature  which  costs  the 
labourer  nothing,  but  which  is  very  advanta¬ 
geous  to  the  capitalist  inasmuch  as  it  preserves 
the  existing  value  of  his  capital.1  So  long  as 
trade  is  good,  the  capitalist  is  too  much  ab¬ 
sorbed  in  money-grubbing  to  take  notice  of 
this  gratuitous  gift  of  labour.  A  violent  inter¬ 
ruption  of  the  labour  process  by  a  crisis  makes 
him  sensitively  aware  of  it.2 

As  regards  the  means  of  production,  what  is 
really  consumed  is  their  use-value,  and  the  con¬ 
sumption  of  this  use-value  by  labour  results  in 
the  product.  There  is  no  consumption  of  their 

is  unskilful  work,  because,  indeed,  the  owner  of  capital, 
after  all,  does  something  more  than  the  merely  creating 
and  preserving  of  the  same:  namely,  the  abstention  from 
the  enjoyment  of  it,  for  which  he  demands,  e.g.,  interest.7 
(op.  at.)  How  very  “skilful"  is  this  “fcnatomico-physiologi- 
cal  method”  of  political  economy,  which,  “indeed,"  con¬ 
verts  a  mere  destre  “ after  air  into  a  source  oj  value! 

1  “Of  all  the  instruments  of  the  farmers’  trade,  the  la¬ 
bour  of  man  ...  is  that  on  which  he  is  most  to  rely  for  the 
repayment  of  his  capital.  The  other  two  . . .  the  working 
stock  of  the  cattle  and  the . . .  carts,  ploughs,  spades,  and 
so  forth,  without  a  given  portion  of  the  first,  are  nothing 
at  all."— Edmund  Burke,  Thoughts  and  Details  on  Scarcity , 
originally  presented  to  the  Right  Hon.  IV.  Pitt ,  in  the  month 
of  November  iypyt  London,  1800,  p.  10. 

1  In  The  Times  of  26th  November,  1862,  a  manufacturer, 
whose  mill  employed  800  hands,  and  consumed,  on  the 
average,  1 50  bales  of  East  Indian,  or  130  bales  of  American 
cotton,  complains,  in  doleful  manner,  of  the  standing  ex¬ 
penses  of  his  factory  when  not  working.  He  estimates  them 
at  £6,000  a  year.  Among  them  are  a  number  of  items  that 
do  not  concern  us  here,  such  as  rent,  rates,  and  taxes,  in¬ 
surance,  salaries  of  the  manager,  bookkeeper,  engineer, 
and  others.  Then  he  reckons  £150  for  coal  used  to  heat  the 
mill  occasionally,  and  run  the  engine  now  and  then.  Be¬ 
sides  this,  he  includes  the  wages  of  the  people  employed  at 
odd  times  to  keep  the  machinery  in  working  order.  Lastly, 
he  puts  down  £1,200  for  depreciation  of  machinery,  be¬ 
cause  “the  weather  and  the  natural  principle  of  decay  do 
not  suspend  their  operations  because  the  steam  engine 
ceases  to  revolve."  He  says,  emphatically,  he  does  not  esti¬ 
mate  his  depreciation  at  more  than  the  smallsum  of  £1,200, 
because  his  machinery  is  already  nearlv  worn  out. 


value/  and  it  would  therefore  be  inaccurate  to 
say  that  it  is  reproduced.  It  is  rather  preserved; 
not  by  reason  of  any  operation  it  undergoes 
itself  in  the  process;  but  because  the  article  in 
which  it  originally  exists,  vanishes,  it  is  true, 
but  vanishes  into  some  other  article.  Hence, 
in  the  value  of  the  product,  there  is  a  reappear¬ 
ance  of  the  value  of  the  means  of  production, 
but  there  is,  strictly  speaking,  no  reproduction 
of  that  value.  That  which  is  produced  is  a  new 
use-value  in  which  the  old  exchange  value  re¬ 
appears.4 

It  is  otherwise  with  the  subjective  factor  of 
the  labour  process,  with  labour  power  in  action. 
While  the  labourer,  by  virtue  of  his  labour  be¬ 
ing  of  a  specialized  kind  that  has  a  special  ob¬ 
ject,  preserves  and  transfers  to  the  product  the 
vajue  of  the  means  of  production,  he  at  the 
same  time,  by  the  mere  act  of  working,  creates 
each  instant  an  additional  or  new  value.  Sup¬ 
pose  the  process  of  production  to  be  stopped 
just  when  the  workman  has  produced  an  equiv¬ 
alent  for  the  value  of  his  own  labour  power, 
when,  for  example,  by  six  hours*  labour  he  has 
added  a  value  of  three  shillings.  This  value  is 
the  surplus,  of  the  total  value  of  the  product, 
over  the  portion  of  its  value  that  is  due  to  the 
means  of  production.  It  is  the  only  original  bit 
of  value  formed  during  this  process,  the  only  por¬ 
tion  of  the  value  of  the  product  created  by  this 
process.  Of  course,  we  do  not  forget  that  this 
new  value  only  replaces  the  money  advanced 
by  the  capitalist  in  the  purchase  of  the  labour 
power,  and  spent  by  the  labourer  on  the  neces¬ 
saries  of  life.  With  regard  to  the  money  spent, 

1  “Productive  consumption  . . .  where  the  consumption 
of  a  commodity  is  a  part  of  the  process  of  production. . . . 
In  these  instances  there  is  no  consumption  of  value." —  S. 
P.  Newman,  op.  at .,  p.  296. 

4  In  an  American  compendium  that  has  gone  through 
perhaps  20  editions,  this  passage  occurs:  “It  matters  not 
in  what  form  capital  reappears";  then  after  a  lengthy  enu¬ 
meration  of  all  the  possible  ingredients  of  production  whose 
value  reappears  in  the  product,  the  passage  concludes  thus: 
“The  various  kinds  of  food,  clothing,  and  shelter,  necessary 
for  the  existence  and  comfort  of  the  human  being,  are  also 
changed.  They  are  consumed  from  time  to  time,  and  their 
value  reappears  in  that  new  vigour  imparted  to  his  body 
and  mind,  forming  fresh  capital,  to  be  employed  again  in 
the  work  of  production."  (F.  Wayland,  op.  dt.t  pp.  31, 32.) 
Without  noticing  any  other  oddities,  it  suftces  to  observe 
that  what  reappears  in  the  fresh  vigour  is  got  the  bread's 
price,  but  its  blood-forming  substances.  What,  on  the  other 
hand,  reappears  in  the  value  of  that  vigour  i|  not  the  means 
of  subsistence,  but  their  value.  The  same  necessaries  of  life, 
at  half  the  price,  would  form  just  as  much  muscle  and  bone, 
just  as  much  vigour,  but  not  vigour  of  the  same  value. 
This  confusion  of  “value"  and  “vigour,"  coupled  with  our 
author’s  pharisaical  indefiniteness,  mark  an  attempt,  futile 
for  all  that,  to  thrash  out  an  explanation  of  surplus  value 
from  a  mere  reappearance  of  pre-existing  values. 


CONSTANT  CAPITAL  AND  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


the  new  value  is  merely  a  reproduction;  but, 
nevertheless,  it  is  an  actual,  and  not,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  value  of  the  means  of  production, 
only  an  apparent,  reproduction.  The  substitu¬ 
tion  of  one  value  for  another  is  here  effected  by 
the  creation  of  new  value. 

We  know,  however,  from  what  has  gone  be¬ 
fore,  that  the  labour  process  may  continue  be¬ 
yond  the  time  necessary  to  reproduce  and  in¬ 
corporate  in  the  product  a  mere  equivalent  for 
the  value  of  the  labour  power.  Instead  of  the 
six  hours  that  are  sufficient  for  the  latter  pur¬ 
pose,  the  process  may  continue  for  twelve  hours. 
The  action  of  labour  power,  therefore,  not  only 
reproduces  its  own  value,  but  produces  value 
over  and  above  it.  This  surplus  value  is  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  the  value  of  the  product  and 
the  value  of  the  elements  consumed  in  the  for¬ 
mation  of  that  product,  in  other  words,  of  the 
means  of  production  and  the  labour  power. 

By  our  explanation  of  the  different  parts 
played  by  the  various  factors  of  the  labour 
process  in  tlv*  fn«  nation  of  the  product’s  value, 
we  have,  in  fact,  disclosed  the  characters  of  the 
different  functions  allotted  to  the  different  ele¬ 
ments  of  capital  in  the  process  of  expanding  its 
own  value.  The  surplus  of  the  total  value  of  the 
product,  over  the  sum  of  the  values  of  its  con¬ 
stituent  factors,  is  the  surplus  of  the  expanded 
capital  over  the  capital  originally  advanced. 
The  means  of  production  on  the  one  hand,  la¬ 
bour  power  on  the  other,  are  merely  the  differ¬ 
ent  modes  of  existence  which  the  value  of  the 
original  capital  assumed  when  from  being  mon¬ 
ey  it  was  transformed  into  the  various  factors 
of  the  labour  process.  That  part  of  capital,  then, 
which  is  represented  by  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion,  by  the  raw  material,  auxiliary  materia], 
and  the  instruments  of  labour,  does  not,  in  the 
process  of  production,  undergo  any  quantita¬ 
tive  alteration  of  value.  I  therefore  call  it  the 
constant  part  of  capital,  or,  more  shortly,  con¬ 
stant  capital . 

On  the  other  hand,  that  part  of  capital,  rep¬ 
resented  by  labour  power  does,  in  the  process 
of  production,  undergo  an  alteration  of  value. 
It  both  reproduces  the  equivalent  of  its  own 
value,  and  also  produces  an  excess,  a  surplus 
value,  which  may  itself  vary,  may  be  more  or 
less  according  to  circumstances.  This  part  of 
capital  is  continually  being  transformed  from  a 
constant  into  a  variable  magnitude.  I  therefore 
call  it  the  variable'part  of  capital,  or,  shortly, 
variable  capital .  The  same  elements  of  capital 
which, from  the  pointof  view  of  the  labour  proc¬ 
ess,  present  themselves  respectively  as  the  ob- 


101 

jective  and  subjective  factors,  as  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  and  labour  power,  present  themselves, 
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  process  of  creating 
surplus  value,  as  constant  and  variable  capital. 

The  definition  of  constant  capital  given 
above  by  no  means  excludes  the  possibility  of  a 
change  of  value  in  its  elements.  Suppose  the 
price  of  cotton  to  be  one  day  sixpence  a  pound, 
and  the  next  day,  in  consequence  of  a  failure  of 
the  cotton  crop,  a  shilling  a  pound.  Each  pound 
of  the  cotton  bought  at  sixpence,  and  worked 
up  after  the  rise  in  value,  transfers  to  the  prod¬ 
uct  a  value  of  one  shilling;  and  the  cotton  al¬ 
ready  spun  before  the  rise,  and  perhaps  circu¬ 
lating  in  the  market  as  yarn,  likewise  transfers 
to  the  product  twice  its  original  value.  It  is  plain 
however,  that  these  changes  of  value  are  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  increment  or  surplus  value  add¬ 
ed  to  the  value  of  the  cotton  by  the  spinning  it¬ 
self.  If  the  old  cotton  had  never  been  spun,  it 
could,  after  the  rise,  be  resold  at  a  shilling  a 
pound  instead  of  at  sixpence.  Further,  the  fewer 
the  processes  the  cotton  has  gone  through,  the 
more  certain  is  this  result.  We  therefore  find 
that  speculators  make  it  a  rule  when  such  sud¬ 
den  changes  in  value  occur,  to  speculate  in  that 
material  on  which  the  least  possible  quantity  of 
labour  has  been  spent:  to  speculate,  therefore, 
in  yarn  rather  than  in  cloth,  in  cotton  itself, 
rather  than  in  yarn.  The  change  of  value  in  the 
case  we  have  been  considering  originates,  not 
in  the  process  in  which  the  cotton  plays  the  part 
of  a  means  of  production,  and  in  which  it  there¬ 
fore  functions  as  constant  capital,  but  in  the 
process  in  which  the  cotton  itself  is  produced. 
The  value  of  a  commodity,  it  is  true,  is  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  quantity  of  labour  contained  in 
it,  but  this  quantity  is  itself  limited  by  social 
conditions.  If  the  time  socially  necessary  for  the 
production  of  any  commodity  alters— and  a 
given  weight  of  cotton  represents,  after  a  bad 
harvest,  more  labour  than  after  a  good  one— all 
previously  existing  commodities  of  the  same 
class  are  affected,  because  they  are,  as  it  were, 
only  individuals  of  the  species,1  and  their  value 
at  any  given  time  is  measured  by  the  labour  so¬ 
cially  necessary,  i.e.,  by  the  labour  necessary 
for  their  production  under  the  then  existing  so¬ 
cial  conditions. 

As  the  value  of  the  raw  material  may  change, 
so,  too,  may  that  of  the  instruments  of  labour, 
of  the  machinery,  etc.,  employed  in  the  process; 

1  "All  products  of  the  same  class  form,  properly  speak¬ 
ing,  a  single  mass,  the  price  of  which  is  determined  in  a 
general  manner  without  regard  to  particular  circumstanc¬ 
es." — Le  Trosne,  op.  cit .,  p.  893. 


CAPITAL 


102 

and  consequently  that  portion  of  the  value  of 
the  product  transferred  to  it  from  them  may 
also  change.  If  in  consequence  of  a  new  inven¬ 
tion,  machinery  of  a  particular  kind  can  be  pro¬ 
duced  by  a  diminished  expenditure  of  labour, 
the  old  machinery  becomes  depreciated  more  or 
less  and  consequently  transfers  so  much  less 
value  to  the  product.  But  here  again,  the  change 
in  value  originates  outside  the  process  in  which 
the  machine  is  acting  as  a  means  of  production. 
Once  engaged  in  this  process,  the  machine  can¬ 
not  transfer  more  value  than  it  possesses  apart 
from  the  process. 

Just  as  a  change  in  the  value  of  the  means  of 
production,  even  after  they  have  commenced 
to>  take  a  part  in  the  labour  process,  does  not 
alter  their  character  as  constant  capital,  so,  too, 
a  change  in  the  proportion  of  constant  to  vari¬ 
able  capital  does  not  affect  the  respective  func¬ 
tions  of  these  two  kinds  of  capital.  The  techni¬ 
cal  conditions  of  the  labour  process  may  be  rev¬ 
olutionized  to  such  an  extent  that,  where  form¬ 
erly  ten  men  using  ten  implements  of  small  val¬ 
ue  worked  up  a  relatively  small  quantity  of  raw 
material,  one  man  may  now,  with  the  aid  of  one 
expensive  machine,  work  up  one  hundred  times 
as  much  raw  material.  In  the  latter  case  we  have 
an  enormous  increase  in  the  constant  capital 
that  is  represented  by  the  total  value  of  the 
means  of  production  used,  and  at  the  same  time 
a  great  reduction  in  the  variable  capital,  invest¬ 
ed  in  labour  power.  Such  a  revolution,  however, 
alters  only  the  quantitative  relation  between 
the  constant  and  the  variable -capital,  or  the 
proportions  in  which  the  total  capital  is  split 
up  into  its  constant  and  variable  constituents; 
it  has  not  in  the  least  degree  affected  the  essen¬ 
tial  difference  between  the  two. 


CHAPTER  IX.  THE  RATE  OF 
SURPLUS  VALUE 

I.  The  Degree  of  Exploitation  of  Labour  Power 
The  surplus  value  generated  in  the  process  of 
production  by  C,  the  capital  advanced,  or,  in 
other  words,  the  self-expansion  of  the  value  of 
the  capital  C,  presents  itself  for  our  considera¬ 
tion,  in  the  first  place,  as  a  surplus,  as  the 
amount  by  which  the  value  of  the  product  ex¬ 
ceeds  the  value  of  its  constituent  elements. 

The  capital  C  is  made  up  of  two  components: 
one,  the  sum  of  money,  c,  laid  out  upon  the 
means  of  production,  and  the  other,  the  sum  of 
money,  o,  expended  upon  the  labour  power;  c 
represents  the  portion  that  has  become  con¬ 


stant  capital,  and  v  the  portion  that  has  be¬ 
come  variable  capital.  At  first  then,  C=c+vi 
for  example,  if  £500  is  the  capital  advanced,  its 
components  may  be  such  that  the  £500  —  £410 
constant+£90  variable.  When  the  process  of 
production  is  finished,  we  get  a  commodity 
whose  value  =  (c+t/)+j,  where  s  is  the  surplus 
value;  or  taking  our  former  figures,  the  val¬ 
ue  of  this  commodity  may  be  (£410  con¬ 
stant +£90  variable) +£90  surplus  value.  The 
original  capital  has  now  changed  from  C  to  C', 
from  £500  to  £590.  The  difference  is  s  or  a  sur¬ 
plus  value  of  £90.  Since  the  value  of  the  con¬ 
stituent  elements  of  the  product  is  equal  to  the 
value  of  the  advanced  capital,  it  is  mere  tautol¬ 
ogy  to  say  that  the  excess  of  the  value  of  the 
product  over  the  value  of  its  constituent  ele¬ 
ments  is  equal  to  the  expansion  of  the  capital 
advanced  or  to  the  surplus  value  produced. 

Nevertheless,  we  must  examine  this  tautol¬ 
ogy  a  little  more  closely.  The  two  things  com¬ 
pared  are  the  value  of  the  product  and  the  value 
of  its  constituents  consumed  in  the  process  of 
production.  Now  we  have  seen  how  that  por¬ 
tion  of  the  constant  capital  which  consists  of 
the  instruments  of  labour  transfers  to  the  prod¬ 
uct  only  a  fraction  of  its  value,  while  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  that  value  continues  to  reside  in 
those  instruments.  Since  this  remainder  plays 
no  part  in  the  formation  of  value,  we  may  at 
present  put  it  to  one  side.  To  introduce  it  into 
the  calculation  would  make  no  difference.  For 
instance,  taking  our  former  example,  £  =  £410: 
suppose  this  sum  to  consist  of  £312  value  of 
raw  materia],  £44  value  of  auxiliary  material, 
and  £54  value  of  the  machinery  worn  away  in 
the  process;  and  suppose  that  the  total  value 
of  the  machinery  employed  is  £1,054.  Out  of 
this  latter  sum,  then,  we  reckon  as  advanced 
for  the  purpose  of  turning  out  the  product,  the 
sum  of  £54  alone,  which  the  machinery  loses 
by  wear  and  tear  in  the  process;  for  this  is  all 
it  parts  with  to  the  product.  Now  if  we  also 
reckon  the  remaining  £1,000,  which  still  con¬ 
tinues  in  the  machinery,  as  transferred  to  the 
product,  we  ought  also  to  reckon  it  as  part  of 
the  value  advanced,  and  thus  make  it  appear 
on  both  sides  of  our  calculation.1  We  should,  in 
this  way,  get  £1,500  on  one  side  and  £1,590  on 
the  other.  The  difference  of  these  two  sums,  or 
the  surplus  value,  would  still  be  £90.  Through- 

1  “If  we  reckon  the  value  of  the  fixed  capital  employed 
as  a  part  of  the  advances,  wc  must  reckon  the  remaining 
value  cf  such  capital  at  the  end  of  the  year  as  a  part  of  the 
annual  .•eturna.” — Malthus,  Principles  of  Political  Econo ■ 
my,  and  edition,  London,  1836,  p.  269. 


THE  RATE  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE 


out  this  Book,  therefore,  by  constant  capital 
advanced  for  the  production  of  value,  we  al¬ 
ways  mean,  unless  the  context  is  repugnant 
thereto,  the  value  of  the  means  of  production 
actually  consumed  in  the  process,  and  that 
value  alone. 

This  being  so,  let  us  return  to  the  formula 
C=c+vy  which  we  saw  was  transformed  into 
C'  =  (f+»)+J,  C  becoming  C'.  We  know  that 
the  value  of  the  constant  capital  is  transferred 
to,  and  merely  reappears  in  the  product.  The 
new  value  actually  created  in  the  process,  the 
value  produced,  or  value  product,  is  therefore 
not  the  same  as  the  value  of  the  product;  it  is 
not,  as  it  would  at  first  sight  appear, 
or  £4 1  o constant + £90  variable^- £90 surplus; 
but  v+s  or  £90  variable-f  £90  surplus;  not 
£590  but  £180.  If  c  =  0,  or  in  other  words,  if 
there  were  branches  of  industry  in  which  the 
capitalist  could  dispense  with  all  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  made  by  previous  labour,  whether  they 
be  raw  material,  auxiliary  material,  or  instru¬ 
ments  of  labpu*. ,  '*mploying  only  labour  power 
and  materials  supplied  by  Nature,  in  that  case, 
there  would  be  no  constant  capital  to  transfer 
to  the  product.  This  component  of  the  value  of 
the  product,  i.e.,  the  £410  in  our  example, 
would  be  eliminated,  but  the  sum  of  £180,  the 
amount  of  new  value  created,  or  the  value  pro¬ 
duced,  which  contains  £90  of  surplus  value, 
would  remain  just  as  great  as  if  c  represented 
the  highest  value  imaginable.  We  should  have 
C=  (0+0)  =  y;  or  C'  (the  expanded  capital) 
=  u+j,  and,  therefore,  C' — C-  j,  as  before.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  s  =  o,  or  in  other  words,  if  the 
labour  power,  whose  value  is  advanced  in  the 
form  of  variable  capital  were  to  produce  only 
its  equivalent,  we  should  have  C—c+vy  or  C' 
(the  value  of  the  product)  =  (r  +  i>)  +  o,  or 
C  =  Cf,  The  capital  advanced  would,  in  this 
case,  not  have  expanded  its  value. 

From  what  has  gone  before,  we  know  that 
surplus  value  is  purely  the  result  of  a  variation 
in  the  value  of  vy  of  that  portion  of  the  capital 
which  is  transformed  into  labour  power;  conse¬ 
quently,  =  or  v  plus  an  increment  of 
v .  But  the  fact  that  it  is  v  alone  that  varies,  and 
the  conditions  of  that  variation,  are  obscured 
by  the  circumstance  that,  in  consequence  of  the 
increase  in  the  variable  component  of  the  cap¬ 
ital,  there  is  also  an  increase  in  the  sum-total  of 
the  advanced  capital.  It  was  originally  £500 
and  becomes  £590.Thcrefore,  in  order  that  our 
investigation  may  lead  to  accurate  results,  we 
must  make  abstraction  from  that  portion  of  the 
value  of  the  product,  in  which  constant  capital 


103 

alone  appears,  and  consequently  must  equate 
the  constant  capital  to  zero  or  make  c  =  0.  This 
is  merely  an  application  of  a  mathematical  rule, 
employed  whenever  we  operate  with  constant 
and  variable  magnitudes,  related  to  each  other 
by  the  symbols  of  addition  and  subtraction 
only. 

A  further  difficulty  is  caused  by  the  original 
form  of  the  variable  capital.  In  our  example, 
C  =  £410  constant+£90  variable+£90  sur¬ 
plus  value;  but  £90  is  a  given  and  therefore  a 
constant  quantity;  hence  it  appears  absurd  to 
treat  it  as  variable.  But  in  fact,  the  term  £90 
variable  is  here  merely  a  symbol  to  show  that  this 
value  undergoes  a  process.  The  portion  of  the 
capital  invested  in  the  purchase  of  labour  power 
is  a  definite  quantity  of  materialized  labour,  a 
constant  valuelikc  the  valueof  the  labour  power 
purchased.  But  in  the  process  of  production  the 
place  of  the  £90  is  taken  by  the  labour  power 
in  action,  dead  labour  is  replaced  by  living  la¬ 
bour,  something  stagnant  by  something  flow¬ 
ing,  a  constan  t  by  a  variable.  The  result  is  the  re¬ 
production  of  v  plus  an  increment  of  v.  From  the 
point  of  view,  then,  of  capitalist  production,  the 
whole  process  appears  as  the  spontaneous  vari¬ 
ation  of  the  originally  constant  value,  which  is 
transformed  into  labour  power.  Both  the  proc¬ 
ess  and  its  result  appear  to  be  owing  to  this  val¬ 
ue.  If,  therefore,  such  expressions  as  “£90  vari¬ 
able  capital,**  or  “so  much  self-expanding  val¬ 
ue,**  appear  contradictory,  this  is  only  because 
they  bring  to  the  surface  a  contradiction  im¬ 
manent  in  capitalist  production. 

At  first  sight  it  appears  a  strange  proceeding 
to  equate  the  constant  capital  to  zero.  Yet  it  is 
what  we  do  every  day.  I  f,  for  example,  we  wish 
to  calculate  the  amount  of  England's  profits 
from  the  cotton  industry,  we  first  of  all  deduct 
the  sums  paid  for  cotton  to  the  United  States, 
India,  Egypt,  and  other  countries;  in  other 
words,  the  valueof  the  capital  that  merely  re¬ 
appears  in  the  value  of  the  product  is  put  =  o. 

Of  course  the  ratio  of  surplus  value  not  only 
to  that  portion  of  the  capital  from  which  it  im¬ 
mediately  springs,  and  whose  change  of  value 
it  represents,  but  also  to  the  sum- total  of  the 
capital  advanced,  is  economically  of  very  great 
importance.  We  shall,  therefore,  in  Book  III, 
treat  of  this  ratio  exhaustively.  In  order  to  en¬ 
able  one  portion  of  a  capital  to  expand  its  value 
by  being  converted  into  labour  power,  it  is  ne¬ 
cessary  that  another  portion  be  converted  into 
means  of  production.  In  order  that  variable 
capital  may  perform  its  function,  constant  cap¬ 
ital  must  be  advanced  in  proper  proportion,  a 


CAPITAL 


104 

proportion  given  by  the  special  technical  con¬ 
ditions  of  each  labour  process.  The  circum¬ 
stance,  however,  that  retorts  and  other  vessels, 
are  necessary  to  a  chemical  process,  does  not 
compel  the  chemist  to  notice  them  in  the  result 
of  his  analysis.  If  we  look  at  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  in  their  relation  to  the  creation  of  val¬ 
ue  and  to  the  variation  in  the  quantity  of  value, 
apart  from  anything  else,  they  appear  simply 
as  the  material  in  which  labour  power,* the  value- 
creator,  incorporates  itself.  Neither  the  na¬ 
ture,  nor  the  value  of  this  material  is  of  any  im¬ 
portance.  The  only  requisite  is  that  there  be  a 
sufficient  supply  to  absorb  the  labour  expended 
in  the  process  of  production.  That  supply  once 
given,  the  material  may  rise  or  fall  in  value,  or 
even  be,  as  land  and  the  sea,  without  any  value 
in  itself;  but  this  will  have  no  influence  on  the 
creation  of  value  or  on  the  variation  in  the 
quantity  of  value.1 

In  the  first  place,  then,  we  equate  the  con¬ 
stant  capital  to  zero.  The  capital  advanced  is 
consequently  reduced  from  c+v  to  v3  and  in¬ 
stead  of  the  value  of  the  product  (r+u)+j  we 
have  now  the  value  produced  (0+j).  Given  the 
new  value  produced  =  £  1 80,  which  sum  conse¬ 
quently  represents  the  whole  labour  expended 
during  the  process,  then  subtracting  from  it 
£90,  the  value  of  the  variable  capital,  we  have 
remaining  £90,  the  amount  of  the  surplus  value. 
This  sum  of  £90,  or  s ,  expresses  the  absolute 
quantity  of  surplus  value  produced.  The  rela¬ 
tive  quantity  produced,  or  the  increase  per  cent 
of  the  variable  capital,  is  determined,  it  is  plain, 
by  the  ratio  of  the  surplus  value  to  the  variable 

capital,  or  is  expressed  by  jj.  In  our  example  this 

ratio  is  °%o,  which  gives  an  increase  of  100%. 
This  relative  increase  in  the  value  of  the  vari¬ 
able  capital,  or  the  relative  magnitude  of 
the  surplus  value,  I  call  the  rate  oj  surplus 
value} 

We  have  seen  that  the  labourer,  during  one 
portion  of  the  labour  process,  produces  only  the 
value  of  his  labour  power,  that  is,  the  value  of 

1  What  Lucretius  says  is  self-evident:  "nil  posse  creari 
de  nihilo”  out  of  nothing,  nothing  can  be  created.  Crea¬ 
tion  of  value  is  transformation  of  labour  power  into  labour. 
Labour  power  itself  is  energy  transferred  to  a  human  or¬ 
ganism  by  means  of  nourishing  matter. 

*  In  the  same  way  that  the  English  use  the  terms  rate  of 
profit  rate  of  interest .  We  shall  see,  in  Book  III,  that  the 
rate  of  profit  is  no  mystery,  so  soon  as  we  know  the  laws 
of  surplus  value.  If  we  reverse  the  process,  we  cannot  com¬ 
prehend  either  the  one  or  the  other. 


his  means  of  subsistence.  Now  since  his  work 
forms  part  of  a  system,  based  on  the  social  di  v  i- 
sion  of  labour,  he  does  not  directly  produce  the 
actual  necessaries  which  he  himself  consumes; 
he  produces  instead  a  particular  commodity, 
yarn  for  example,  whose  value  is  equal  to  the 
value  of  those  necessaries  or  of  the  money  with 
which  they  can  be  bought.  The  portion  of  his 
day's  labour  devoted  to  this  purpose  will  be 
greater  or  less,  in  proportion  to  the  value  of  the 
necessaries  that  he  daily  requires  on  an  average, 
or,  what  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  labour  time  required  on  an  average 
to  produce  them.  If  the  value  of  those  necessar¬ 
ies  represent  on  an  average  the  expenditure  of 
six  hours’  labour,  the  workman  must  on  an  av¬ 
erage  work  for  six  hours  to  produce  that  value. 
If  instead  of  working  for  the  capitalist,  he 
worked  independently  on  his  own  account,  he 
would,  other  things  being  equal,  still  be  obliged 
to  labour  for  the  same  number  of  hours,  in  order 
to  produce  the  value  of  his  labour  power,  and 
thereby  to  gain  the  means  of  subsistence  neces¬ 
sary  for  his  conservation  or  continued  repro¬ 
duction.  But  as  wc  have  seen,  during  that  por¬ 
tion  of  his  day's  labour  in  which  he  produces  the 
value  of  his  labour  power,  say  three  shillings, 
he  produces  only  an  equivalent  for  the  value 
of  his  labour  power  already  advanced  by  the 
capitalist;3  the  new  value  created  only  replaces 
the  variable  capital  advanced.*^  is  owing  to 
this  fact,  that  the  production  of  the  new  value 
of  three  shillings  takes  the  semblance  of  a  mere 
reproduction.  That  portion  of  the  working  day, 
then,  during  which  this  reproduction  takes 
place,  I  call  necessary  labour  time,  and  the  la¬ 
bour  expended  during  that  time  I  call  necessary 
labour.4  Necessary,  as  regards  the  labourer,  be¬ 
cause  independent  of  the  particular  social  form 
of  his  labour;  necessary,  as  regards  capital  and 
the  world  of  capitalists,  because  on  the  contin- 

3  Note  to  the  3rd  edition:  The  author  uses  here  the  cus¬ 
tomary  terminology  of  economics.  One  will  remember  that 
he  demonstrated,  on  p.  83,  how  it  is  in  reality  not  the 
capitalist  who  "advances"  something  to  the  labourer,  but 
rather  the  labourer  who  "advances"  to  the  capitalist.— 
F.E. 

4  In  this  work,  we  have,  up  to  now,  employed  the  term 
"necessary  labour  time,"  to  designate  the  time  necessary 
under  given  social  conditions  for  the  production  of  any 
commodity.  Henceforward  we  use  it  to  designate  also  the 
time  necessary  for  the  production  of  the  particular  com¬ 
modity,  labour  power.  The  use  of  one  and  tne  same  techni¬ 
cal  term  in  different  senses  is  inconvenient,  but  in  no  science 
can  i*  be  altogether  avoided.  Compare,  for  instance,  the 
higher  with  the  lower  branches  of  mathematics. 


THE  RATE  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE  105 


ued  existence  of  the  labourer  depends  their 
existence  also. 

During  the  second  period  of  the  labour  proc¬ 
ess,  that  in  which  his  labour  is  no  longer  neces¬ 
sary  labour,  the  workman  it  is  true,  labours,  ex¬ 
pends  labour  power;  but  his  labour  being  no 
longer  necessary  labour,  he  creates  no  value  for 
himself.  He  creates  surplus  value  which,  for  the 
capitalist,  has  all  the  charms  of  a  creation  out 
of  nothing.  This  portion  of  the  working  day,  I 
name  surplus  labour  time ,  and  to  the  labour  ex¬ 
pended  during  that  time  I  give  the  name  of  sur¬ 
plus  labour .  It  is  every  bit  as  important  for  a 
correct  understanding  of  surplus  value  to  con¬ 
ceive  it  as  a  mere  congelation  of  surplus  labour 
time,  as  nothing  but  materialized  surplus  la¬ 
bour,  as  it  is  for  a  proper  comprehension  of  val¬ 
ue  to  conceive  it  as  a  mere  congelation  of  so 
many  hours  of  labour,  as  nothing  but  material¬ 
ized  labour.  The  essential  difference  between 
the  various  economic  forms  of  society,  between, 
for  instance,  a  society  based  on  slave  labour 
and  one  based  on  wage  labour,  lies  only  in 
the  mode  in  which  this  surplus  labour  is  in  each 
case  extracted  from  the  actual  producer,  the 
labourer.1 

Since,  on  the  one  hand,  the  values  of  the  vari¬ 
able  capital  and  of  the  labour  power  purchased 
by  that  capital  are  equal,  and  the  value  of  this 
labour  power  determines  the  necessary  portion 
of  the  working  day;  and  since,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  surplus  value  is  determined  by  the 
surplus  portion  of  the  working  day,  it  follows 
that  surplus  value  bears  the  same  ratio  to  vari¬ 
able  capital  that  surplus  labour  does  to  neces¬ 
sary  labour,  or  in  other  words,  the  rate  of  sur- 


.  ,  s  surplus  labour  „  , 

plus  value  -  = - L - r-r —  .  Both 

r  v  necessary  labour 


s  .  surplus  labour  .  .  . 

-  and  - - - -r —  >  express  the  same  thing 

v  necessary  labour’  r  ° 


in  different  ways;  in  the  one  case  by  reference 
to  materialized,  incorporated  labour,  in  the 


1  Herr  Wilhelm  Thucydides  Roscher  has  found  a  inare's 
nest.  He  has  made  the  important  discovery  that  if,  on  the 
one  hand,  the  formation  of  surplus  value,  or  surplus  pro¬ 
duce,  and  the  consequent  accumulation  of  capital,  is  now¬ 
adays  due  to  the  thrift  of  the  capitalist,  on  the  other  hand 
in  the  lowest  stages  of  civilization  it  is  the  strong  who  com¬ 
pel  the  weak  to  economize  (op,  cit,3  p.  78).  To  economize 
what?  Labour?  Or  superfluous  wealth  that  does  not  exist? 
What  is  it  that  makes  such  men  as  Roscher  account  for 
the  origin  of  surplus  value,  by  a  mere  rechauffe  [rehash]  of 
the  more  or  less  plausible  excuses  by  the  capitalist  for  his 
appropriation  of  surplus  value?  It  is,  besides  their  real  ig¬ 
norance,  their  apologetic  dread  of  a  scientific  analysis  of 
value  and  surplus  value,  and  of  obtaining  a  result  possibly 
not  altogether  palatable  to  the  powers  that  be. 


other  by  reference  to  living,  fluent  labour. 

The  rate  of  surplus  value  is,  therefore,  an  ex¬ 
act  expression  for  the  degree  of  exploitation  of 
labour  power  by  capital,  or  of  the  labourer  by 
the  capitalist.2 

We  assumed  in  our  example  that  the  value  of 
the  product^  £410  constant  +  £90  varia¬ 
ble +£90  surplus  value,  and  that  the  capital  ad¬ 
vanced  =  £500.  Since  the  surplus  value  =  £90, 
and  the  advanced  capital  -  £500,  we  should,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  usual  way  of  reckoning,  get  as 
the  rate  of  surplus  value  (generally  confounded 
with  rate  of  profits)  18%,  a  rate  so  low  as  pos¬ 
sibly  to  cause  a  pleasant  surprise  to  Mr.  Carey 
and  other  harmonizers.  But,  in  truth,  the  rate  of 

surplus  value  is  not  equal  to  ^  or  but  to  js 

thus  it  is  not  °°/soo  but  $%o  or  100%,  which  is 
more  than  five  times  the  apparent  degree  of  ex¬ 
ploitation.  Although,  in  the  case  we  have  sup¬ 
posed,  we  are  ignorant  of  the  actual  length  of 
the  working  day,  and  of  the  duration  in  days  or 
weeks  of  the  labour  process,  as  also  of  the  num¬ 
ber  of  labourers  employed,  yet  the  rate  of  sur¬ 
plus  value  *-  accurately  discloses  to  us,  by  means 

e  ^  .  surplus  labour 

of  its  equivalent  expression, - - - r-r — » 

1  r  ’  necessary  labour 

the  relation  between  the  two  parts  of  the  work¬ 
ing  day.  This  relation  is  here  one  of  equality, 
the  rate  being  100%.  Hence,  it  is  plain,  the 
labourer,  in  our  example,  works  one  half  of 
the  day  for  himself,  the  other  half  for  the 
capitalist. 

The  method  of  calculating  the  rate  of  surplus 
value  is  therefore,  briefly,  as  follows.  We  take 
the  total  value  of  the  product  and  put  the  con¬ 
stant  capital  which  merely  reappears  in  it  equal 
to  zero.  What  remains  is  the  only  value  that 
has,  in  the  process  of  producing  the  commodity, 
been  actually  created.  If  the  amount  of  surplus 
value  be  given,  we  have  only  to  deduct  it  from 
this  remainder,  to  find  the  variable  capital.  And 
vice  versa ,  if  the  latter  be  given,  and  we  require 

*  Although  the  rate  of  surplus  value  is  an  exact  expres¬ 
sion  for  the  degree  of  exploitation  of  labour  power,  it  is  in 
no  sense  an  expression  for  the  absolute  amount  of  exploita¬ 
tion.  For  example,  if  the  necessary  labour  =  5  hours  and 
the  surplus  labour  —  5  hours,  the  degree  of  exploitation 
is  100%.  The  amount  of  exploitation  is  here  measured  by 
5  hours.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  necessary  labour  =  6 
hours  and  the  surplus-labour  =  6  hours,  the  degree  of  ex¬ 
ploitation  remains,  as  before,  xoo%,  while  the  actual 
amount  of  exploitation  has  increased  20%,  namely  from 
five  hours  to  six. 


106  CAPITAL 


to  find  the  surplus  value.  If  both  be  given,  we 
have  only  to  perform  the  concluding  operation, 

viz.,  to  calculate  s->  the  ratio  of  the  surplus  value 

to  the  variable  capital. 

Though  the  method  is  so  simple,  yet  it  may 
not  be  amiss,  by  means  of  a  few  examples,  to 
exercise  the  reader  in  the  application  of  the 
novel  principles  underlying  it. 

First  we  will  take  the  case  of  a  spinning  mill 
containing  10,000  mule  spindles,  spinning  No. 
32  yarn  from  American  cotton,  and  producing  1 
pound  of  yarn  weekly  per  spindle.  We  assume 
the  waste  to  be  6%:  under  these  circumstances 
10,600  pounds  of  cotton  are  consumed  weekly, 
of  which  600  pounds  go  to  waste.  The  price  of 
the  cotton  in  April,  1871,  was  7 ^id.  per  pound; 
the  raw  material  therefore  costs  in  round  num¬ 
bers  £342.  The  10,000  spindles,  including  prep¬ 
aration  machinery  and  motive  power  cost,  we 
will  assume,  £1  per  spindle,  amounting  to  a  to¬ 
tal  of  £10,000.  The  wear  and  tear  we  put  at 
10%, or  £1000  yearly = £20  weekly.  The  rentof 
the  building  we  suppose  to  be  £300  a  year,  or 
£6  a  week.  Coal  consumed  (for  100  horsepower 
indicated,  at  4  pounds  of  coal  per  horsepower 
per  hour  during  60  hours,  and  inclusive  of  that 
consumed  in  heating  the  mill),  11  tons  a  week 
at  8 s.  6d.  a  ton,  amounts  to  about  £4#  a  week; 
gas,  £1  a  week;  oil,  etc.  £4#  a  week.  Total  cost 
of  the  above  auxiliary  materials,  £10  weekly. 
Therefore  the  constant  portion  of  the  value  0/ 
the  week's  product  is  £378.  Wages  amount  to 
£52  a  week.  The  price  of  the  yarn  is  I2j^</.  per 
pound,  which  gives  for  the  value  of  10,000 
pounds  the  sum  of  £510.  The  surplus  value  is 
therefore  in  this  case  £510— £430  =£80.  We 
put  the  constant  part  of  the  value  of  the  prod¬ 
uct  =0,  as  it  plays  no  part  in  the  creation  of 
value.  There  remains  £132  as  the  weekly  value 
created,  which  =  £j2  variable+£8o  surplus 
value.  The  rate  of  surplus  value  is  therefore 
8%a=  I53xi/i3%.  In  a  working  day  of  10  hours 
with  average  labour  the  result  is:  necessary 
labour =33I/33  hours,  and  surplus  labour = 
6a/33-1 

One  more  example.  Jacob  gives  the  following 
calculation  for  the  year  1815.  Owing  to  the  pre¬ 
vious  adjustment  of  several  items  it  is  very  im¬ 
perfect;  nevertheless,  for  our  purpose  it  is  suffi- 

1  The  above  data,  which  may  be  relied  upon,  were  given 
me  by  a  Manchester  spinner.  In  England  the  horsepower 
of  an  engine  was  formerly  calculated  from  the  diameter  of 
its  cylinder,  now  the  actual  horsepower  shown  by  the  in¬ 
dicator  is  taken. 


cient.  In  it  he  assumes  the  price  of  wheat  to  be 
Bs.  a  quarter,  and  the  average  yield  per  acre  to 
be  22  bushels. 

Value  Produced  Per  Acre 

Seed  £1  90  Tithes,  rates 

Manure  2  10  o  and  taxes  £1  10 

Wages  3  10  o  Rent  1  8  o 

Farmers  profit 

and  interest  1  2  o 

Total  £790  Total  £3  11  o 

Assuming  that  the  price  of  the  product  is  the 
same  as  its  value,  we  here  find  the  surplus  value 
distributed  under  the  various  heads  of  profit, 
interest,  rent,  etc.  We  have  nothing  to  do  with 
these  in  detail;  we  simply  add  them  together, 
and  the  sum  is  a  surplus  value  of  £3  1  is.  o d.  The 
sum  of  £3  19J.  o d.y  paid  for  seed  and  manure,  is 
constant  capital,  and  we  put  it  equal  to  zero. 
There  is  left  the  sum  of  £3  10 s.  od .,  which  is  the 
variable  capital  advanced:  and  we  see  that  a 
new  value  of  £3  ioj.  od.+fy  1  is.  od.  has  been 

produced  in  its  place  Therefore  - = UJ‘ 
r  r  v  £3  ioj.  od. 

giving  a  rate  of  surplus  value  of  more  than 
100%.  The  labourer  employs  more  than  one 
half  of  his  working  day  in  producing  the  sur¬ 
plus  value,  which  different  persons,  under  dif¬ 
ferent  pretexts,  share  amongst  themselves.2 

2.  The  Representation  of  the  Components  of  the 
Value  of  the  Product  by  corresponding  propor¬ 
tional  Parts  of  the  Product  itself 
Let  us  now  return  to  the  example  by  which 
we  were  shown  how  the  capitalist  converts 
money  into  capital. 

The  product  of  a  working  day  of  12  hours  is 
20  pounds  of  yarn,  having  a  value  of  30  s.  No  less 
than  8/io  of  this  value,  or  24 s.y  is  due  to  mere  re¬ 
appearance  in  it  of  the  value  of  the  means  of 
production  (20  pounds  of  cotton,  value  20 s., 
and  spindle  worn  away,  43.);  it  is  therefore  con¬ 
stant  capital.  The  remaining  a/io,  or  6s. >  is  the 
new  value  created  during  the  spinning  process: 
of  this  one  half  replaces  the  value  of  the  day’s 
labour  power,  or  the  variable  capital,  the  re¬ 
maining  half  constitutes  a  surplus  value  of  33. 
The  total  value  then  of  the  20  pounds  of  yarn 
is  made  up  as  follows: 

8  The  calculations  given  in  the  text  are  intended  merely 
as  illustrations.  We  have  in  fact  assumed  that  prices  = 
values.  We  shall,  however,  see,  in  Book  III,  that  even  in 
the  cast*  of  average  prices  the  assumption  cannot  be  made 
in  this  very  simple  manner. 


THE  RATE  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE 


30 s.  value  of  yarn  =  24 s.  constant+3J.  vari- 
able+3J.  surplus  value. 

Since  the  whole  of  this  value  is  contained  in 
the  20  pounds  of  yarn  produced,  it  follows  that 
the  various  component  parts  of  this  value  can 
be  represented  as  being  contained  respectively 
in  corresponding  parts  of  the  product. 

If  the  value  of  30 s.  is  contained  in  20  pounds 
of  yarn,  then  fyio  of  this  value,  or  the  24 s.  that 
form  its  constant  part,  is  contained  ina/ioof  the 
product  or  in  16  pounds  of  yarn.  Of  the  latter 
1  jYi  pounds  represent  the  value  of  the  raw  ma¬ 
terial,  the  2oj.  worth  of  cotton  spun,  and  2% 
pounds  represent  the  4 s.  worth  of  spindle  etc., 
worn  away  in  the  process. 

Hence  the  whole  of  the  cotton  used  up  in 
spinning  the  20  pounds  of  yarn,  is  represented 
by  13  H  pounds  of  yarn.  This  latter  weight  of 
yarn  contains,  it  is  true,  by  weight,  no  more 
than  1 pounds  of  cotton,  worth  13^  s but 
the  6%  s .  additional  value  contained  in  it  are 
the  equivalent  for  the  cotton  consumed  in  spin¬ 
ning  the  remain- r  3  pounds  of  yarn.  The  ef¬ 
fect  is  the  same  as  if  these  6*3  pounds  of  yarn 
contained  no  cotton  at  all,  and  the  whole  20 
pounds  of  cotton  were  concentrated  in  the  13  l/$ 
pounds  of  yarn.  The  latter  weight,  on  the  other 
hand,  does  not  contain  an  atom  cither  of  the 
value  of  the  auxiliary  materials  and  imple¬ 
ments,  or  of  the  value  newly  created  in  the  proc¬ 
ess. 

In  the  same  way,  the  2*4  pounds  of  yarn,  in 
which  the  4*.,  the  remainder  of  the  constant 
capital,  is  embodied,  represents  nothing  but  the 
value  of  the  auxiliary  materials  and  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour  consumed  in  producing  the  20 
pounds  of  yarn. 

We  have,  therefore,  arrived  at  this  result:  al¬ 
though  fyio  of  the  product,  or  1 6  pounds  of  yarn, 
is,  in  its  character  of  an  article  of  utility,  just 
as  much  the  fabric  of  the  spinner’s  labour  as  the 
remainder  of  the  same  product,  yet  when 
viewed  in  this  connection,  it  does  not  contain, 
and  has  not  absorbed,  any  labour  expended 
during  the  process  of  spinning.  It  is  just  as  if 
the  cotton  had  converted  itself  into  yarn,  with¬ 
out  help;  as  if  the  shape  it  had  assumed  was 
mere  trickery  and  deceit:  for  so  soon  as  our  cap- 
talist  sells  it  for  24J.,  and  with  the  money  re¬ 
places  his  means  of  production,  it  becomes  evi¬ 
dent  that  this  1 6  pounds  of  yarn  is  nothing  more 
than  so  much  cotton  and  spindle-waste  in  dis¬ 
guise. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  remaining  a/io  of  the 
product,  or  4  pounds  of  yarn,  represent  nothing 


107 

but  the  new  value  of  6s .,  created  during  the  12 
hours'  spinning  process.  All  the  value  trans¬ 
ferred  to  those  4  pounds  from  the  raw  material 
and  instruments  of  labour  consumed  was,  so  to 
say,  intercepted  in  order  to  be  incorporated  in 
the  16  pounds  first  spun.  In  this  case,  it  is  as  if 
the  spinner  had  spun  4  pounds  of  yarn  out  of 
air,  or  as  if  he  had  spun  them  with  the  aid  of 
cotton  and  spindles  that,  being  the  spontane¬ 
ous  gift  of  Nature,  transferred  no  value  to  the 
product. 

Of  this  4  pounds  of  yarn,  in  which  the  whole 
of  the  value  newly  created  during  the  process  is 
condensed,  one  half  represents  the  equivalent 
for  the  value  of  the  labour  consumed,  or  the  3*. 
variable  capital,  the  other  half  represents  the 
3«f.  surplus  value. 

Since  1 2  working  hours  of  the  spinner  are  em¬ 
bodied  in  6/.,  it  follows  that  in  yarn  of  the  value 
of  30.f.,  there  must  be  embodied  60  working 
hours.  And  this  quantity  of  labour  time  does 
in  fact  exist  in  the  20  pounds  of  yarn;  for  in  8/io 
or  16  pounds  there  are  materialized  the  48  hours 
of  labour  expended  before  the  commencement 
of  the  spinning  process  on  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion;  and  in  the  remaining  a/ioor4  pounds  there 
are  materialized  the  1 2  hours’  work  done  during 
the  process  itself. 

On  a  former  page  we  saw  that  the  value  of  the 
yarn  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  new  value  cre¬ 
ated  during  the  production  of  that  yarn  plus  the 
value  previously  existing  in  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction. 

It  has  now  been  shown  how  the  various  com¬ 
ponent  parts  of  the  value  of  the  product,  parts 
that  differ  functionally  from  each  other,  may 
be  represented  by  corresponding  proportional 
parts  of  the  product  itself. 

To  split  up  in  this  manner  the  product  into 
different  parts,  of  which  one  represents  only  the 
labour  previously  spent  on  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  or  the  constant  capital;  another,  only 
the  necessary  labour  spent  during  the  process 
of  production,  or  the  variable  capital;  and  an¬ 
other  and  last  part,  only  the  surplus  labour  ex¬ 
pended  during  the  same  process  or  the  surplus 
value;  to  do  this,  is,  as  will  be  seen  later  on  from 
Its  application  to  complicated  and  hitherto  un¬ 
solved  problems,  no  less  important  than  it  is 
simple. 

In  the  preceding  investigation  we  have 
treated  the  total  product  as  the  final  result, 
ready  for  use,  of  a  working  day  of  1 2  hours.  We 
can,  however,  follow  this  total  product  through 
all  the  stages  of  its  production;  and  in  this  way 


CAPITAL 


108 

we  shall  arrive  at  the  same  result  as  before,  if 
we  represent  the  partial  products,  given  off  at 
the  different  stages,  as  functionally  different 
parts  of  the  final  or  total  product. 

The  spinner  produces  in  12  hours  20  pounds 
of  yarn,  or  in  1  hour  pounds;  consequently 
he  produces  in  8  hours  1 3)^  pounds,  or  a  partial 
product  equal  in  value  to  all  the  cotton  that 
is  spun  in  a  whole  day.  In  like  manner  the 
partial  product  of  the  next  period  of  1  hour 
and  36  minutes,  is  2 pounds  of  yarn:  this 
represents  the  value  of  the  instruments  of  la¬ 
bour  that  are  consumed  in  12  hours.  In  the  fol¬ 
lowing  hour  and  12  minutes,  the  spinner  pro¬ 
duces  2  pounds  of  yarn  worth  3  shillings,  a  value 
equal  to  the  whole  value  he  creates  in  his  6 
hours  of  necessary  labour.  Finally,  in  the  last 
hour  and  12  minutes  he  produces  another  2 
pounds  of  yarn,  whose  value  is  equal  to  the  sur¬ 
plus  value,  created  by  his  surplus  labour  dur¬ 
ing  half  a  day.  This  method  of  calculation  serves 
the  English  manufacturer  for  everyday  use;  it 
shows,  he  will  say,  that  in  the  first  8  hours,  or  % 
of  the  working  day,  he  gets  back  the  value 
of  his  cotton;  and  so  on  for  the  remaining 
hours.  It  is  also  a  perfectly  correct  method, 
being  in  fact  the  first  method  given  above,  with 
this  difference,  that,  instead  of  being  applied  to 
space,  in  which  the  different  parts  of  the  com¬ 
pleted  product  lie  side  by  side,  it  deals  with 
time,  in  which  those  parts  are  successively  pro¬ 
duced.  But  it  can  also  be  accompanied  by  very 
barbarian  notions,  more  especially  in  the  heads 
of  those  who  are  as  much  interested,  practically, 
in  the  process  of  making  value  beget  value,  as 
they  are  in  misunderstanding  that  process  theo¬ 
retically.  Such  people  may  get  the  notion  into 
their  heads  that  our  spinner,  for  example,  pro¬ 
duces  or  replaces  in  the  first  8  hours  of  his  work¬ 
ing  day  the  value  of  the  cotton;  in  the  following 
hour  and  36  minutes  the  value  of  the  instruments 
of  labour  worn  away;  in  the  next  hour  and  12 
minutes  the  value  of  the  wages;  and  that  he  de¬ 
votes  to  the  production  of  surplus  value  for  the 
manufacturer  only  that  well  known  “last  hour.” 
In  this  way  the  poor  spinner  is  made  to  perform 
the  twofold  miracle,  not  only  of  producing  cot¬ 
ton,  spindles,  steam  engine,  coal,  oil,  etc.,  at  the 
same  time  that  he  spins  with  them,  but  also  of 
turning  one  working  day  into  five;  for,  in  the 
example  we  are  considering,  the  production  of 
the  raw  material  and  instruments  of  labour  de¬ 
mands  four  working  days  of  twelve  hours  each, 
and  their  conversion  into  yarn  requires  anoth¬ 
er  such  day.  That  the  love  of  lucre  induces  an 
easy  belief  in  such  miracles,  and  that  sycophant 


doctrinaires  are  never  wanting  to  prove  them, 
is  vouched  for  by  the  following  incident  of  his¬ 
torical  celebrity. 

3.  Seniors  “ Last  Hour ” 

One  fine  morning  in  the  year  1 836,  Nassau  W. 
Senior,  who  may  be  called  the  bel-esprit  of  Eng¬ 
lish  economists,  well  known  alike  for  his  econom¬ 
ical  “science"  and  for  his  beautiful  style,  was 
summoned  from  Oxford  to  Manchester  to  learn 
in  the  latter  place  the  political  economy  that  he 
taught  in  the  former.  The  manufacturers  elect¬ 
ed  him  as  their  champion,  not  only  against  the 
newly  passed  Factory  Act,  but  against  the  still 
moremenacingTen  Hours’  agitation  .With  their 
usual  practical  acuteness,  they  had  found  out 
that  the  learned  Professor  “wanted  a  good  deal 
of  finishing";  it  was  this  discovery  that  caused 
them  to  write  for  him.  On  his  side,  the  Professor 
has  embodied  the  lecture  he  received  from  the 
Manchester  manufacturers,  in  a  pamphlet,  en¬ 
titled:  letters  on  the  Factory  Acty  as  it  affects  the 
cotton  manufacture ,  London,  1 837.  Here  we  find, 
amongst  others,  the  following  edifying  passage: 
“Under  the  present  law,  no  mill  in  which  per¬ 
sons  under  18  years  of  age  are  employed  . . .  can 
be  worked  more  than  11}  %  hours  a  day,  that  is, 
12  hours  for  5  days  in  the  week,  and  nine  on 
Saturday. 

“Now  the  following  analysis  will  show  that 
in  a  mill  so  worked,  the  whole  net  profit  is  de¬ 
rived  from  the  last  hour .  I  will  suppose  a  manu¬ 
facturer  to  invest  £100,000:  £80,000  in  his  mill 
and  machinery,  and  £20,000  in  raw  material 
and  wages.  The  annual  return  of  that  mill,  sup¬ 
posing  the  capital  to  be  turned  once  a  year  and 
gross  profits  to  be  1 J  per  cent,  ought  to  be  goods 
worth  £115,000. ...  Of  this  £ny,ooo,  each  of 
the  twenty- three  half  hours  of  work  produces 
s/ii5orone  twenty-third.  Of  these  twenty-three 
twenty-thirds  (constituting  the  whole  £115, 
000),  twenty,  that  is  to  say  £100,000  out  of  the 
£115,000,  simply  replace  the  capital;— one 
twenty-third  (or  £5000  out  of  the  £115,000) 
makes  up  for  the  deterioration  of  the  mill  and 
machinery.  The  remaining  two  twenty-thirds, 
that  is,  the  last  two  of  the  twenty  three  half 
hours  of  every  day,  produce  the  net  profit  of  10 
per  cent.  If,  therefore  (prices  remaining  the 
same),  the  factory  could  be  kept  at  work  thir¬ 
teen  hours  instead  of  eleven  and  a  half,  with  an 
addition  of  about  £2600  to  the  circulating  capi¬ 
tal,  the  net  profit  would  be  more  than  doubled. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  the  hours  of  working  were 
reduced  by  one  hour  per  day  (prices  remain¬ 
ing  the  same),  the  net  profit  would  be  de- 


THE  RATE  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE 


stroyed— if  they  were  reduced  by  one  hour 
and  a  half,  even  the  gross  profit  would  be  de¬ 
stroyed.”1 

And  the  professor  calls  this  an  “analysis!” 
If,  giving  credence  to  the  complaints  of  the 
manufacturers,  he  believed  that  the  workmen 
spend  the  best  part  of  the  day  in  the  production, 
i.e.,  the  reproduction  or  replacement  of  the  val¬ 
ue  of  the  buildings,  machinery,  cotton,  coal,  etc. 
then  his  analysis  was  superfluous.  His  answer 
would  simply  have  been:  “Gentlemen!  if  you 
work  your  mills  for  10  hours  instead  of  n 
then,  other  things  being  equal,  the  daily  con¬ 
sumption  of  cotton,  machinery,  etc.,  will  de¬ 
crease  in  proportion.  You  gain  just  as  much  as 
you  lose.  Your  workers  will  in  future  spend  one 
hour  and  a  half  less  time  in  reproducing  or  re¬ 
placing  the  capital  that  has  been  advanced.”  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  he  did  not  believe  them  with¬ 
out  further  inquiry,  but,  as  being  an  expert  in 
such  matters,  deemed  an  analysis  necessary, 
then  he  ought,  in  a  question  that  is  concerned 
exclusively  with  uV.  relations  of  net  profit  to 
the  length  of  the  working  day,  before  all  things 
to  have  asked  the  manufacturers  to  be  careful 
not  to  lump  together  machinery,  workshops, 
raw  material,  and  labour,  but  to  be  good  enough 

1  Senior,  op .  cit.,  pp.  12,  13.  We  let  pass  such  extraor¬ 
dinary  notions  as  are  of  no  importance  for  our  purpose;  for 
instance,  the  assertion  that  manufacturers  reckon  as  part 
of  their  profit,  gross  or  net,  the  amount  required  to  make 
good  wear  and  tear  of  machinery,  or  in  other  words,  to  re¬ 
place  a  part  of  the  capital.  So,  too,  we  pass  over  any  ques¬ 
tion  as  to  the  accuracy  of  his  figures.  Leonard  Horner  has 
shown,  in  A  Letter  to  Mr.  Senior ,  etc.,  London,  1837,  that 
they  are  worth  no  more  than  the  so-called  “Analysis.’* 
Leonard  Horner  was  one  of  the  Factory  Inquiry  Commis¬ 
sioners  in  1833,  and  Inspector,  or  rather  Censor,  of  Fac¬ 
tories  till  1859.  He  rendered  undying  service  to  the  Eng¬ 
lish  working  class.  He  carried  on  a  lifelong  contest,  not 
only  with  the  embittered  manufacturers,  but  also  with  the 
Cabinet,  to  whom  the  number  of  votes  given  by  the  mas¬ 
ters  in  the  Lower  House  was  a  matter  of  far  greater  impor¬ 
tance  than  the  number  of  hours  worked  by  the  “hands"  in 
the  mills. 

Apart  from  errors  in  principle,  Senior’s  statement  is  con¬ 
fused.  What  he  really  intended  to  say  was  this:  The  manu¬ 
facturer  employs  the  workman  for  u'/i  hours  or  for  23 
half  hours  daily.  As  the  working  day,  so,  too,  the  working 
year,  may  be  conceived  to  consist  of  1 1 J*  hours  or  23  half 
hours,  but  each  multiplied  by  the  number  of  working  days 
in  the  year.  On  this  supposition,  the  23  half  hours  yield  an 
annual  product  of  £115,000;  one  half  hour  yields  V^aX 
£1 1 5,000;  20  half  hours  yield  ao/a3  X  £1 1  $  ,000  *  £100,000, 
i.e.,  they  replace  no  more  than  the  capital  advanced.  There 
remain  3  half  hours  which  yield  a/-»3X£i  15,000=  £15,000, 
or  the  gross  profit.  Of  these  3  half  hours,  one  yields  VaaX 
£115,000 =£5000;  i.e.,  it  makes  up  for  the  wear  and  tear 
of  the  machinery;  the  remaining  2  half  hours  i.e.,  the  last 
hour,  yield  */aj X£ii 5,000  =  £lo, 000,  or  the  net  profit.  In 
the  text  Senior  converts  the  last  3/aj  of  the  product  into 
portions  of  the  working  day  itself. 


109 

to  place  the  constant  capital,  invested  in  build¬ 
ings,  machinery,  raw  material,  etc.,  on  one  side 
of  the  account,  and  the  capital  advanced  in 
wages  on  the  other  side.  If  the  professor  then 
found  that,  in  accordance  with  the  calculation 
of  the  manufacturers,  the  workman  reproduced 
or  replaced  his  wages  in  2  half  hours,  in  that 
case  he  should  have  continued  his  analysis 
thus: 

According  to  your  figures,  the  workman  in 
the  last  hour  but  one  produces  his  wages,  and 
in  the  last  hour  your  surplus  value  or  net  profit. 
Now,  since  in  equal  periods  he  produces  equal 
values,  the  produce  of  the  last  hour  but  one 
must  have  the  same  value  as  that  of  the  last 
hour.  Further,  it  is  only  while  he  labours  that 
he  produces  any  value  at  all,  and  the  amount  of 
his  labour  is  measured  by  his  labour  time.  This, 
you  say,  amounts  to  1 1  l/i  hours  per  day.  He 
employs  one  portion  of  these  1 1  yi  hours  in  pro¬ 
ducing  or  replacing  his  wages,  and  the  remain¬ 
ing  portion  in  producing  your  net  profit.  Be¬ 
yond  this  he  does  absolutely  nothing.  But  since, 
on  your  assumption,  his  wages  and  the  surplus 
value  he  yields  are  of  equal  value,  it  is  clear  that 
he  produces  his  wages  in  5^  hours,  and  your 
net  profit  in  the  other  5^  hours.  Again,  since 
the  value  of  the  yarn  produced  in  2  hours,  is 
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  values  of  his  wages  and 
of  your  net  profit,  the  measure  of  the  value  of 
this  yarn  must  be  1 1 K  working  hours,  of  which 
hours  measure  the  value  of  the  yarn  pro¬ 
duced  in  the  last  hour  but  one,  and  5 %  the  value 
of  the  yarn  produced  in  the  last  hour.  We 
now  come  to  a  ticklish  point;  therefore,  atten¬ 
tion!  The  last  working  hour  but  one  is,  like  the 
first,  an  ordinary  working  hour,  neither  more 
nor  less.  How  then  can  the  spinner  produce  in 
one  hour,  in  the  shape  of  yarn,  a  value  that  em¬ 
bodies  5K  hours  labour?  The  truth  is  that  he 
performs  no  such  miracle.  The  use-value  pro¬ 
duced  by  him  in  one  hour  is  a  definite  quantity 
of  yarn.  The  value  of  this  yarn  is  measured  by 
5#  working  hours,  of  which  4^  were,  without 
any  assistance  from  him,  previously  embodied 
in  the  means  of  production,  in  the  cotton,  the 
machinery,  and  so  on;  the  remaining  one  hour 
alone  is  added  by  him.  Therefore  since  his  wages 
arc  produced  in  5K  hours,  and  the  yarn  pro¬ 
duced  in  one  hour  also  contains  hours’  work, 
there  is  no  wi  tchcraft  in  the  resul  t,  that  the  value 
created  by  his  5#  hours’  spinning,  is  equal 
to  the  value  of  the  product  spun  in  one  hour. 
You  are  altogether  on  the  wrong  track,  if  you 
think  that  he  loses  a  single  moment  of  his  work¬ 
ing  day  in  reproducing  or  replacing  the  values 


CAPITAL 


110 

of  the  cotton,  the  machinery,  and  so  on.  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  because  his  labour  converts  the 
cotton  and  spindles  into  yarn,  because  he  spins, 
that  the  values  of  the  cotton  and  spindles  go 
over  to  the  yarn  of  their  own  accord.  This  result 
is  owing  to  the  quality  of  his  labour,  not  to  its 
quantity.  It  is  true,  he  will  in  one  hour  transfer 
to  the  yarn  more  value,  in  the  shape  of  cotton, 
than  he  will  in  half  an  hour;  but  that  is  only  be¬ 
cause  in  one  hour  he  spins  up  more  cotton  than 
in  half  an  hour.  You  see,  then,  your  assertion 
that  the  workman  produces,  in  the  last  hour  but 
one,  the  value  of  his  wages,  and  in  the  last  hour 
your  net  profit,  amounts  to  no  more  than  this: 
that  in  the  yarn  produced  by  him  in  2  working 
hours,  whether  they  are  the  2  first  or  the  2  last 
hours  of  the  working  day,  in  that  yarn,  there 
are  incorporated  1 1 } 2  working  hours,  or  just  a 
whole  day’s  work,  i.e.,  two  hours  of  his  own 
work  and  9^  hours  of  other  people’s.  And  my 
assertion  that,  in  the  first  5^  hours,  he  produces 
his  wages,  and  in  the  last  hours  your  net 
profit,  amounts  only  to  this:  that  you  pay  him 
for  the  former,  but  not  for  the  latter.  In  speak¬ 
ing  of  payment  of  labour,  instead  of  payment 
of  labour  power,  I  only  talk  your  own  slang. 
Now,  gentlemen,  if  you  compare  the  working 
time  you  pay  for,  with  that  which  you  do  not 
pay  for,  you  will  find  that  they  are  to  one  an¬ 
other,  as  half  a  day  is  to  half  a  day;  this  gives  a 
rate  of  100%,  and  a  very  pretty  percentage  it 
is.  Further,  there  is  not  the  least  doubt  thatif 
you  make  your  “hands”  toil  for  13  hours,  in¬ 
stead  of  1 1  and,  as  may  be  expected  from 
you,  treat  the  work  done  in  that  extra  one  hour 
and  a  half,  as  pure  surplus  labour,  then  the  lat¬ 
ter  will  be  increased  from  5J4  hours’  labour  to 
7^  hours*  labour,  and  the  rate  of  surplus  value 
from  100%  to  1267*3%.  So  that  you  are  alto¬ 
gether  too  sanguine  in  expecting  that,  by  such 
an  addition  of  1  %  hours  to  the  working  day,  the 
rate  will  rise  from  100%  to  200%  and  more,  in 
other  words  that  it  will  be  “more  than  doubled.” 
On  the  other  hand— man’s  heart  is  a  wonderful 
thing,  especially  when  carried  in  the  purse — 
you  take  too  pessimistic  a  view,  when  you  fear 
that  with  a  reduction  of  the  hours  of  labour 
from  1  \yi  to  10  the  whole  of  your  net  profit  will 
go  to  the  dogs.  Not  at  all.  All  other  conditions 
remaining  the  same,  the  surplus  labour  will 
fall  from  5#  hours  to  4 K  hours,  a  period  that 
still  gives  a  very  profitable  rate  of  surplus 
value,  namely  82*7*3  %•  But  this  dreadful“last 
hour,”  about  which  you  have  invented  more 
stories  than  have  the  millenarians  about  the 
day  of  judgment,  is  “all  bosh.”  If  it  goes,  it  will 


cost  neither  you,  your  net  profit,  nor  the  boys 
and  girls  whom  you  employ,  their  “purity  of 
mind.”1 

1  If,  on  the  one  hand.  Senior  proved  that  the  net  profit 
of  the  manufacturer,  the  existence  of  the  English  cotton 
industry,  and  England's  command  of  the  markets  of  the 
world,  depend  on  "the  last  working  hour,"  on  the  other 
hand,  Dr.  Andrew  Urc  showed  that  if  children  and  )oung 
persons  under  18  years  of  age,  instead  of  being  kept  the 
full  12  hours  in  the  warm  and  pure  moral  atmosphere  of 
the  factory,  are  turned  out  an  hour  sooner  into  the  heart¬ 
less  and  frivolous  outer  world,  they  will  be  deprived,  by 
idleness  and  vice,  of  all  hope  of  salvation  for  their  souls. 
Since  1848,  the  factory  inspectors  have  never  tired  of  twit¬ 
ting  the  masters  with  this  "last,”  this  "fatal  hour.”  Thus 
Mr.  Howell  in  his  report  of  the  31st  May,  1855:  “Had  the 
following  ingenious  calculation  (he  quotes  Senior)  been  cor¬ 
rect,  every  cotton  factory  in  the  United  kingdom  would 
have  been  working  at  a  loss  since  the  year  1850."  {Reports 
0/ the  Inspectors  of  Factories  for  the  half  year,  ending  30th 
April,  1855,  pp.  19,  20.)  In  the  year  1848,  after  the  passing 
of  the  Ten  Hours  bill,  the  masters  of  some  flax  spinning 
mills,  scattered,  few  and  far  between,  over  the  country  on 
the  borders  of  Dorset  and  Somerset,  foisted  a  petition 
against  the  bill  on  to  the  shoulders  of  a  few  of  their  work 
people.  One  of  the  clauses  of  this  petition  is  as  follows: 
“Your  petitioners,  as  parents,  conceive  that  an  additional 
hour  of  leisure  will  tend  more  to  demoralize  the  children 
than  otherwise,  believing  that  idleness  is  the  parent  of 
vice.”  On  this  the  factory  inspectors’  Report  of  31st  Oct., 
1848,  says.  The  atmosphere  of  the  flax  nulls,  in  which  the 
children  of  these  virtuous  and  tender  parents  work,  is  so 
loaded  with  dust  and  fibre  from  the  raw  material  that  it  is 
exceptionally  unpleasant  to  stand  even  10  minutes  in  the 
spinning  rooms,  for  >ou  are  unable  to  do  so  without  the 
most  painful  sensation,  owing  to  the  ey&,  the  ears,  the  nos¬ 
trils,  and  mouth,  being  immediately  filled  by  the  clouds  of 
flax  dust  from  which  there  is  no  escape  I  he  labour  itself, 
owing  to  the  feverish  haste  of  the  machincn ,  demands  un¬ 
ceasing  application  of  skill  and  movement,  under  the  con¬ 
trol  of  a  watchfulness  that  never  tires,  and  it  seems  some¬ 
what  hard  to  let  parents  apply*  the  term  “idling”  to  their 
own  children,  who,  after  allowing  for  meal  tunes,  are  fet¬ 
tered  for  10  whole  hours  to  such  an  occupation  in  such  an 
atmosphere.  . . .  'Ihese  children  work  longer  than  the  la¬ 
bourers  in  the  neighbouring  villages.  .  . .  Such  cruel  talk 
about  “idleness  and  vice”  ought  to  be  branded  as  the  pur¬ 
est  cant,  and  the  most  shameless  hypocrisy. . . .  rl  hat  por¬ 
tion  of  the  public,  who,  about  12  years  ago,  were  struck 
by  the  assurance  with  which,  under  the  sanction  of  high 
authority,  it  was  publicly  and  most  earnestly  proclaimed 
that  the  whole  net  profit  of  the  manufacturer  flows  from 
the  labour  of  the  last  hour,  and  that,  therefore,  the  reduc¬ 
tion  of  the  working  day  by  one  hour,  would  destroy  his  net 
profit;  that  portion  of  the  public,  we  say,  will  hardly  be¬ 
lieve  its  own  eyes  when  it  now  finds  that  the  original  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  virtues  of  “the  last  hour”  has  since  been  so 
far  improved  as  to  include  morals  as  well  as  profit;  so  that, 
if  the  duration  of  the  labour  of  children  is  reduced  to  a  full 
10  hours,  their  morals,  together  with  the  net  profits  of  their 
employers,  will  vanish,  both  being  dependent  on  this  last, 
this  fatal  hour.  (See  Reports  of  the  Inspectors  of  Factories , 
for  31st  Oct.,  1848,  p.  xoi.)  The  same  report  then  gives 
some  examples  of  the  morality  and  virtue  of  these  same 
pure-minded  manufacturers,  of  the  tricks,  the  artifices,  the 
cajoling,  the  threats,  and  the  falsifications  they  made  use 
of,  in  order,  first,  to  compel  a  few  defenceless  workmen  to 
sign  petitions  of  such  a  kind,  and  then  to  impose  them  upon 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


Whenever  your  “last  hour”  strikes  in  earnest, 
think  on  the  Oxford  Professor.  And  now,  gentle¬ 
man,  “farewell,  and  may  we  meet  again  in  yon¬ 
der  better  world,  but  not  before.” 

Senior  invented  the  battle  cry  of  the  “last 
hour”  in  1836.1  In  the  London  Economist  of  the 
15th  April,  1848,  the  same  cry  was  again  raised 
by  James  Wilson,  an  economical  mandarin  of 
high  standing:  this  time  in  opposition  to  the 
Ten  Hours’  bill. 

4.  Surplus  Produce 

The  portion  of  the  product  that  represents 
the  surplus  value,  (x/xo  of  the  20  pounds,  or  2 
pounds  of  yarn,  in  the  exam  pie  given  in  Section 
2)  we  call  surplus  produce .  Just  as  the  rate  of 
surplus  value  is  determined  by  its  relation,  not 
to  the  sum-total  of  the  capital,  but  to  its  variable 
part;  in  like  manner,  the  relative  quantity  of 
surplus  produce  is  determined  by  the  ratio  that 
this  produce  bears,  not  to  the  remaining  part  of 
the  total  product,  but  to  that  part  of  it  in  which 
is  incorporated  •ft*  necessary  labour.  Since  the 
production  of  surplus  value  is  the  chief  end  and 
aim  of  capitalist  production,  it  is  clear  that  the 
greatness  of  a  man’s  or  a  nation’s  wealth  should 
be  measured,  not  by  the  absolute  quantity  pro¬ 
duced,  but  by  the  relative  magnitude  of  the  sur¬ 
plus  produce.2 

Parliament  as  the  petitions  of  a  whole  branch  of  industry, 
or  a  whole  country.  It  is  highly  characteristic  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  status  of  so-called  economic  science,  that  neither  Senior 
himself,  who,  at  a  later  period,  to  his  honour  be  it  said, 
energetically  supported  the  factory  legislation,  nor  his  op¬ 
ponents,  from  first  to  last,  have  ever  been  able  to  explain 
the  false  conclusions  of  the  “original  discovery.”  They  ap¬ 
peal  to  actual  experience,  but  the  why  and  wherefore  re¬ 
main  a  mystery. 

1  Nevertheless,  the  learned  professor  was  not  without 
some  benefit  from  his  journey  to  Manchester.  In  the  Let¬ 
ters  on  the  Factory  Act ,  he  makes  the  whole  net  gains  in¬ 
cluding  “profit”  and  “interest,”  and  even  “something 
more,”  depend  upon  a  single  unpaid  hour’s  work  of  the  la¬ 
bourer.  One  year  previously,  in  his  Outlines  of  Political 
Economy ,  written  for  the  instruction  of  Oxford  students 
and  cultivated  Philistines,  he  had  also  “discovered,  in  op¬ 
position  to  Ricardo’s  determination  of  value  by  labour, 
that  profit  is  derived  from  the  labour  of  the  capitalist,  and 
interest  from  his  asceticism,  in  other  words,  from  his  “ab¬ 
stinence.”  The  dodge  was  an  old  one,  but  the  word  “ab¬ 
stinence”  was  new.  Herr  Roscher  translates  it  rightly  by 
Enthaltung.  Some  of  his  countrymen,  the  Browns,  Jones, 
and  Robinsons,  of  Germany,  not  so  well  versed  in  Latin 
as  he,  have,  monk-like,  rendered  it  by  Entsagung  (renun¬ 
ciation). 

1  “To  an  individual  with  a  capital  of  £20,000,  whose 
profits  were  £2000  per  annum,  it  would  be  a  matter  quite 
indifferent  whether  his  capital  would  employ  100  or  1000 
men,  whether  the  commodity  produced  sold  for  £10,000 
or  £20,000,  provided,  in  all  cases,  his  profit  were  not  di¬ 
minished  below  £2000.  Is  not  the  real  interest  of  the  na¬ 
tion  similar?  Provided  its  net  real  income,  its  rent  and  prof- 


111 

The  sum  of  the  necessary  labour  and  the  sur¬ 
plus  labour,  i.e.,  of  the  periods  of  time  during 
which  the  workman  replaces  the  value  of  his 
labour  power,  and  produces  the  surplus  value, 
this  sum  constitutes  the  actual  time  during 
which  he  works,  i.e.,  the  working  day. 


CHAPTER  X.  THE  WORKING  DAY 

I.  The  Limits  oj  the  IE orking  Day 
We  startfd  with  the  supposition  that  labour 
power  is  bought  and  sold  at  its  value.  Its  value, 
like  that  of  all  other  commodities,  is  determined 
by  the  working  time  necessary  to  its  production. 
If  the  production  of  the  average  daily  means  of 
subsistence  of  the  labourer  takes  up  6  hours,  he 
must  work,  on  the  average,  6  hours  every  day 
to  produce  his  daily  labour  power,  or  to  repro¬ 
duce  the  value  received  as  the  result  of  its  sale. 
The  necessary  part  of  his  working  day  amounts 
to  6  hours,  and  is,  therefore,  c ceteris  paribus ,  a 
given  quantity.  But  with  this,  the  extent  of  the 
working  day  itself  is  not  yet  given. 

Let  us  assume  that  the  line  AB  represents  the 
length  of  the  necessary  working  time,  say  6 
hours.  If  the  labour  be  prolonged  1, 3,  or  6  hours 
beyond  AB,  we  have  three  other  lines:  repre- 

Working  day  I.  Working  day  II. 

A - B-C  A - B - C 

Working  day  III 
A - B - C 

senting  three  different  working  days  of  7, 9,  and 
12  hours.  The  extension  BC  of  the  line  AB  rep¬ 
resents  the  length  of  the  surplus  labour.  As  the 
working  day  is  AB+BC  or  AC,  it  varies  with 
the  variable  quantity  BC.  Since  AB  is  constant, 
the  ratio  of  BC  to  AB  can  always  be  calculated. 
In  working  day  I,  it  is  x/6;  in  working  day  II,  3/6; 
in  working  day  III,  6/6  of  AB.  Since,  further,  the 

surplus  working  time  ,  , 

ratio  — - r-2 — : —  determines  the  rate 

necessary  working  time 

its,  be  the  same,  it  is  of  no  importance  whether  the  nation 
consists  of  10  or  of  12  millions  of  inhabitants.”  (Ricardo, 
op.  cit .,  p.  416.)  Long  before  Ricardo,  Arthur  Young,  a 
fanatical  upholder  of  surplus  produce,  for  the  rest,  a  ram¬ 
bling,  uncritical  writer,  whose  reputation  is  in  the  inverse 
ratio  of  his  merit,  says:  “Of  what  use,  in  a  modern  king¬ 
dom,  would  be  a  whole  province  thus  divided  [in  the  old 
Roman  manner,  by  small  independent  peasants],  however 
well  cultivated,  except  for  the  mere  purpose  of  breeding 
men,  which  taken  singly  is  a  most  useless  purpose?”  (Ar¬ 
thur  Young,  Political  Arithmetic^  tc., London,  1774,  p.47.) 

Very  curious  is  “the  strong  inclination  ...  to  represent 
net  wealth  as  beneficial  to  the  labouring  class  . . .  though 
it  is  evidently  not  on  account  of  being  net.”— T.  Hopkins, 
On  Rent  of  Land ,  etc.,  London,  1823,  p.  126. 


112  CAPITAL 


of  the  surplus  value,  the  latter  is  given  by  the 
ratio  of  BC  to  AB.  It  amounts  in  the  three  dif¬ 
ferent  working  days  respectively  to  1 50  and 
100  per  cent.  On  the  other  hand,  the  rate  of  sur¬ 
plus  value  alone  would  not  give  us  the  extent  of 
the  working  day.  If  this  rate,  e.g.,  were  100  per 
cent,  the  working  day  might  be  of  8, 10, 12,  or 
more  hours.  It  would  indicate  that  the  two  con¬ 
stituent  parts  of  the  working  day,  necessary  la¬ 
bour  and  surplus  labour  time,  were  equal  in  ex¬ 
tent,  but  not  how  long  each  of  these  two  con¬ 
stituent  parts  was. 

The  working  day  is  thus  not  a  constant,  but 
a  variable  quantity.  One  of  its  parts,  certainly, 
is  determined  by  the  working  time  required  for 
the  reproduction  of  the  labour  power  of  the  la¬ 
bourer  himself.  But  its  total  amount  varies  with 
the  duration  of  the  surplus  labour.  The  work¬ 
ing  day  is,  therefore,  determinable,  but  is,  per 
se ,  indeterminate.1 

Although  the  working  day  is  not  a  fixed,  but  a 
fluent  quantity,  it  can,  on  the  other  hand,  only 
vary  within  certain  limits.  The  minimum  limit 
is,  however,  not  determinable;  of  course,  if  we 
make  the  extension  line  BC  or  the  surplus  la¬ 
bour  =0,  we  have  a  minimum  limit,  i.e.,  the 
part  of  the  day  which  the  labourer  must  neces¬ 
sarily  work  for  his  own  maintenance.  On  the 
basis  of  capitalist  production,  however,  this  nec¬ 
essary  labour  can  form  a  part  only  of  the  work¬ 
ing  day;  the  working  day  itself  can  never  be  re¬ 
duced  to  this  minimum.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
working  day  has  a  maximum  limit.  It  cannbt 
be  prolonged  beyond  a  certain  point.  This  max¬ 
imum  limit  is  conditioned  by  two  things.  First, 
by  the  physical  bounds  of  labour  power.  Within 
the  24  hours  of  the  natural  day,  a  man  can  ex¬ 
pend  only  a  definite  quantity  of  his  vital  force. 
A  horse,  in  like  manner,  can  only  work,  from 
day  to  day,  8  hours.  During  part  of  the  day  this 
force  must  rest,  sleep;  during  another  part  the 
man  has  to  satisfy  other  physical  needs,  to  feed, 
wash,  and  clothe  himself.  Besides  these  purely 
physical  limitations,  the  extension  of  the  work¬ 
ing  day  encounters  moral  ones.  The  labourer 
needs  time  for  satisfying  his  intellectual  and  so¬ 
cial  wants,  the  extent  and  number  of  which  are 
conditioned  by  the  general  state  of  social  ad¬ 
vancement.  The  variation  of  the  working  day 
fluctuates,  therefore,  within  physical  and  social 
bounds.  But  both  these  limiting  conditions  are 
of  a  very  elastic  nature,  and  allow  the  greatest 
latitude.  So  we  find  working  days  of  8,  10,  12, 

1  *‘A  day's  labour  is  vague,  it  may  be  long  or  short."— 
An  essay  on  Trade  and  Commerce ,  containini  observations 
on  tastes ,  etc.,  London,  1770,  p.  73. 


14,  16,  18  hours,  i.e.,  of  the  most  different 
lengths. 

The  capitalist  has  bought  the  labour  power 
at  i  ts  day  rate.  To  him  i  ts  use-value  belongs  dur¬ 
ing  one  working  day.  He  has  thus  acquired  the 
right  to  make  the  labourer  work  for  him  during 
one  day.  But,  what  is  a  working  day?2 

At  all  events,  less  than  a  natural  day.  By  how 
much?  The  capitalist  has  his  own  views  of  this 
ultima  Thule*  the  necessary  limit  of  the  work¬ 
ing  day.  As  capitalist,  he  is  only  capital  personi¬ 
fied.  His  soul  is  the  soul  of  capital.  But  capital 
has  one  single  life  impulse,  the  tendency  to  cre¬ 
ate  value  and  surplus  value,  to  make  its  con¬ 
stant  factor,  the  means  of  production,  absorb 
the  greatest  possible  amount  of  surplus  labour.4 

Capital  is  dead  labour  that,  vampire-like, 
only  lives  by  sucking  living  labour,  and  lives  the 
more,  the  more  labour  it  sucks.  The  time  during 
which  the  labourer  works  is  the  time  during 
which  the  capitalist  consumes  the  labour  power 
he  has  purchased  of  him.6 

If  the  labourer  consumes  his  disposable  time 
for  himself,  he  robs  the  capitalist.6 

The  capitalist  then  takes  his  stand  on  the  law 
of  the  exchange  of  commodities.  He,  like  all 
other  buyers,  seeks  to  get  the  greatest  possible 
benefit  out  of  the  use- value  of  his  commodity. 
Suddenly  the  voice  of  the  labourer,  which 
had  been  stifled  in  the  storm  and  stress  of  the 
process  of  production,  rises: 

“The  commodity  that  I  have  sold  to  you  dif¬ 
fers  from  the  crowd  of  other  commodities  in  that 
its  use  creates  value,  and  a  value  greater  than 
its  own.  That  is  why  you  bought  it.  That  which 
on  your  side  appears  a  spontaneous  expansion 

6  This  question  is  far  more  important  than  the  celebrated 
question  of  Sir  Robert  Peel  to  the  Birmingham  Chamber 
of  Commerce:  "What  is  a  pound?"  A  question  that  could 
only  have  been  proposed  because  Peel  was  as  much  in  the 
dark  as  to  the  nature  of  money  as  the  "little  shilling  men" 
of  Birmingham. 

6  Furthest  limit. 

4  It  is  the  aim  of  the  capitalist  to  obtain  with  his  ex¬ 
pended  capital  the  greatest  possible  quantity  of  labour 
(d'obtenir  du  capital  dipcnsS  la  plus  forte  Somme  de  travail 
possible .)— J.  G.  Courcelle-Seneuil,  Tratti ihiortque  et pra¬ 
tique  des  entrepriscs  mdustr  idles .  and  edition,  Paris,  1857, 
P-6  3. 

1  "An  hour's  labour  lost  in  a  day  is  a  prodigious  injury 
to  a  commercial  State. . . .  There  is  a  very  great  consump¬ 
tion  of  luxuries  among  the  labouring  poor  of  this  kingdom: 
particularly  among  the  manufacturing  populace,  by  which 
they  also  consume  their  time,  the  most  fatal  of  consump¬ 
tions." — An  Essay  on  Trade  and  Commerce ,  etc.,  p.  47  and 
*53- 

6 '  If  the  free  manual  labourer  takes  a  moment’s  rest, 
the  sordid  economy,  which  does  not  remove  its  restive  eyes 
from  Kim,  maintains  that  he  is  robbing  it."— N.  Linguet, 
Thhrie  des  loin  chiles ,  etc.,  London,  1767,  Vol.  II,  p.  466. 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


of  capital,  is  on  mine  extra  expenditure  of  la¬ 
bour  power.  You  and  I  know  on  the  market  only 
one  law,  that  of  the  exchange  of  commodities. 
And  the  consumption  of  the  commodity  belongs 
not  to  the  seller,  who  parts  with  it,  but  to  the 
buyer,  who  acquires  it.  To  you,  therefore,  be¬ 
longs  the  use  of  my  daily  labour  power.  But  by 
means  of  the  price  that  you  pay  for  it  each  day, 
I  must  be  able  to  reproduce  it  daily  and  to  sell 
it  again.  Apart  from  natural  exhaustion 
through  age,  etc.,  I  must  be  able  on  the  morrow 
to  work  with  the  same  normal  amount  of  force, 
health,  and  freshness  as  to-day.  You  preach  to 
me  constantly  the  gospel  of  saving  and  absti¬ 
nence .  Good !  1  will,  like  a  sensible  saving  owner, 
husband  my  sole  wealth,  labour  power,  and  ab¬ 
stain  from  all  foolish  waste  of  it.  1  will  each  day 
spend,  set  in  motion,  put  into  action,  only  as 
much  of  it  as  is  compatible  with  its  normal  dura¬ 
tion  and  healthy  development.  By  an  unlimited 
extension  of  the  working  day,  you  may  in  one 
day  use  up  a  quantity  of  labour  power  greater 
than  I  can  rector**  m  three.  What  you  gain  in 
labour  I  lose  in  substance.  The  use  of  my  labour 
power  and  the  spoliation  of  it  are  quite  different 
things.  If  the  average  time  that  (doing  a  reason¬ 
able  amount  of  work)  an  average  labourer  can 
live,  is  30  years,  the  value  of  my  labour  power, 
which  you  pay  me  from  day  to  day  is  7365*30 
or  x/xoQ5o  of  its  total  value.  But  if  you  consume 
it  in  10  years,  you  pay  me  daily  l/ioos<>  instead 
of  V3650  of  its  total  value,  i.e.,  only  of  its  daily 
value,  and  you  rob  me,  therefore,  every  day  of 
%  of  the  value  of  my  commodity.  You  pay  me 
for  one  day’s  labour  power,  whilst  you  use  that 
of  three  days.  That  is  against  our  contract  and 
the  law  of  exchanges.  I  demand,  therefore,  a 
working  day  of  normal  length,  and  I  demand  it 
without  any  appeal  to  your  heart,  for  in  money 
matters  sentiment  is  out  of  place.  You  may  be 
a  model  citizen,  perhaps  a  member  of  the  So¬ 
ciety  for  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals, 
and  in  the  odour  of  sanctity  to  boot;  but  the 
thing  that  you  represent  face  to  face  with  me 
has  no  heart  in  its  breast.  That  which  seems  to 
throb  there  is  my  own  heart  beating.  I  demand 
the  normal  working  day  because  I,  like  every 
other  seller,  demand  the  value  of  my  commod¬ 
ity/'1 

1  During  the  great  strike  of  the  London  builders,  1860- 
6x,  for  the  reduction  of  the  working  day  to  9  hours,  their 
Committee  published  a  manifesto  that  contained,  to  some 
extent,  the  plea  of  our  worker.  The  manifesto  alludes,  not 
without  irony,  to  the  fact  that  the  greatest  profit  monger 
amongst  the  building  masters,  a  certain  Sir  M.  Peto,  was 
in  the  odour  of  sanctity.  (This  same  Peto,  after  1867,  came 
to  an  end  hi*  Strousberg.) 


113 

We  see,  then,  that,  apart  from  extremely  elas¬ 
tic  bounds,  the  nature  of  the  exchange  of  com¬ 
modities  itself  imposes  no  limit  to  the  working 
day,  no  limit  to  surplus  labour.  The  capitalist 
maintains  his  rights  as  a  purchaser  when  he 
tries  to  make  the  working  day  as  long  as  possi¬ 
ble,  and  to  make,  whenever  possible,  two  work¬ 
ing  days  out  of  one.  On  the  other  hand,  the  pe¬ 
culiar  nature  of  the  commodity  sold  implies  a 
limit  to  its  consumption  by  the  purchaser,  and 
the  labourer  maintains  his  right  as  seller  when 
he  wishes  to  reduce  the  working  day  to  one  of 
definite  normal  duration.  There  is  here,  there¬ 
fore,  an  antinomy,  right  against  right,  both 
equally  bearing  the  seal  of  the  law  of  exchanges. 
Between  equal  rights,  force  decides.  Hence  is  it 
that,  in  the  history  of  capitalist  production,  the 
determination  of  what  is  a  working  day,  pre¬ 
sents  itself  as  the  result  of  a  struggle,  a  struggle 
between  collective  capital,  i.e.,  the  class  of  cap¬ 
italists,  and  collective  labour,  i.e.,  the  working 
class. 

2.  The  Greed for  Surplus  Labour .  Manufacturer 

and  Boyard 

Capital  has  not  invented  surplus  labour. 
Wherever  a  part  of  society  possesses  the  monop¬ 
oly  of  the  means  of  production,  the  labourer, 
free  or  not  free,  must  add  to  the  working  time 
necessary  for  his  own  maintenance  an  extra 
working  time  in  order  to  produce  the  means  of 
subsistence  for  the  owners  of  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,2  whether  this  proprietor  be  the  Athe¬ 
nian  K a\6s  Kayadbs*  Etruscan  theocrat,  civis 
Romanus  *  Norman  baron,  American  slave 
owner,  Wallachian  boyard,  modern  landlord 
or  capitalist.5  It  is,  however,  clear  that  in  any 
given  economic  formation  of  society,  where  not 
the  exchange  value  but  the  use-value  of  the  prod¬ 
uct  predominates,  surplus  labour  will  be  limit¬ 
ed  by  a  given  set  of  wants  which  may  be  greater 
or  less,  and  that  here  no  boundless  thirst  for  sur¬ 
plus  labour  arises  from  the  nature  of  the  pro¬ 
duction  itself.  Hence,  in  antiquity  overwork  be¬ 
comes  horrible  only  when  the  object  is  to  obtain 
exchange  value  in  its  specific  independent  mon¬ 
ey  form;  in  the  production  of  gold  and  silver. 
Compulsory  working  to  death  is  here  the  recog- 

2  "Those  who  labour  ...  in  reality  feed  both  the  pen¬ 
sioners  . . .  [called  the  rich]  and  themselves."— Edmund 
Burke,  op.  cit.t  p.  2. 

1  Nobleman.  4  Roman  citizen. 

5  Niebuhr  in  his  Roman  History  says  very  naively:  "It  is 
evident  that  works  like  the  Etru&can,  which,  in  their  ruins 
astound  us,  presuppose  in  little  (!)  states  lords  and  vas¬ 
sals."  Sismondi  says,  far  more  to  the  purpose,  that:  "Brus¬ 
sels  lace"  presupposes  wage  lords  and  wage  slaves. 


CAPITAL 


114 

nized  form  of  overwork.  Only  read  Diodorus 
Siculus.1  Still,  these  are  exceptions  in  antiquity. 
But  as  soon  as  people,  whose  production  still 
moves  within  the  lower  forms  of  slave-labour, 
corv£e-Iabour,  etc.,  are  drawn  into  the  whirl¬ 
pool  of  an  international  market  dominated  by 
the  capitalistic  mode  of  production,  the  sale  of 
their  products  for  export  becoming  their  prin¬ 
cipal  interest,  the  civilized  horrors  of  overwork 
are  grafted  on  the  barbaric  horrors  of  slavery, 
serfdom,  etc.  Hence,  the  negro  labour  in  the 
Southern  States  of  the  American  Union  pre¬ 
served  something  of  a  patriarchal  character,  so 
long  as  production  was  chiefly  directed  to  im¬ 
mediate  local  consumption.  Rut  in  proportion, 
as  the  export  of  cotton  became  of  vital  interest 
to  these  states,  the  overworking  of  the  negro 
and  sometimes  the  using  up  of  his  life  in  seven 
years’  of  labour  became  a  factor  in  a  calculated 
and  calculating  system.  It  was  no  longer  a  ques¬ 
tion  of  obtaining  from  him  a  certain  quantity 
of  useful  products.  It  was  now  a  question  of  pro¬ 
duction  of  surplus  labour  itself.  So  was  it  also 
with  the  corvee,  e.g.,  in  the  Danubian  Princi¬ 
palities  (now  Roumania). 

The  comparison  of  the  greed  for  surplus  la¬ 
bour  in  the  Danubian  Principalities  with  the 
same  greed  in  English  factories  has  a  special  in¬ 
terest,  because  surplus  labour  in  the  corv£e  has 
an  independent  and  palpable  form. 

Suppose  the  working  day  consists  of  6  hours 
of  necessary  labour,  and  6  hours  of  surplus  la¬ 
bour.  Then  the  free  labourer  gives  the  capitalist 
every  week  6X6  or  36  hours  of  surplus  labour. 
It  is  the  same  as  if  he  worked  3  days  in  the  week 
for  himself,  and  3  days  in  the  week  gratis  for  the 
capitalist.  But  this  is  not  evident  on  the  surface. 
Surplus  labour  and  necessary  labour  glide  one 
into  the  other.  I  can,  therefore,  express  the  same 
relationship  by  saying,  e.g.,  that  the  labourer 
in  every  minute  works  30  seconds  for  himself 
and  30  for  the  capitalist,  etc.  It  is  otherwise  with 
the  corv6e.  The  necessary  labour  which  the 
Wallachian  peasant  does  for  his  own  mainte¬ 
nance  is  distinctly  marked  off  from  his  surplus 
labour  on  behalf  of  the  boyard.Theonehedoes 
on  his  own  field,  the  other  on  the  seignorial 
estate.  Both  parts  of  the  labour  time  exist,  there¬ 
fore,  independently,  side  by  side  one  with  the 

1  “One  cannot  see  these  unfortunates  (in  the  gold  mines 
between  Egypt,  Ethiopia,  and  Arabia)  who  cannot  even 
have  their  bodies  clean,  or  their  nakedness  clothed,  with¬ 
out  pitying  their  miserable  lot.  There  is  no  indulgence,  no 
forbearance  for  the  sick,  the  feeble,  the  aged,  for  woman's 
weakness.  All  must,  forced  by  blows,  work  on  until  death 
puts  an  end  to  their  sufferings  and  their  distress." — Di¬ 
odorus  Siculus,  Bibliotheca  Historical  III.  13. 


other.  In  the  corv£e,  the  surplus  labour  is  accu¬ 
rately  marked  off  from  the  necessary  labour. 
This,  however,  can  make  no  difference  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  quantitative  relation  of  surplus  la¬ 
bour  to  necessary  labour.  Three  days’  surplus 
labour  in  the  week  remain  three  days  that  yield 
no  equivalent  to  the  labourer  himself,  whether 
it  be  called  corvic  or  wage  labour.  But  in  the  capi¬ 
talist  the  greed  for  surplus  labour  appears  in  the 
straining  after  an  unlimited  extension  of  the 
working  day,  in  the  boyard  more  simply  in  a 
direct  hunting  after  days  of  corv6e.a 

In  the  Danubian  Principalities  the  corv£e 
was  mixed  up  with  rents  in  kind  and  other  ap¬ 
purtenances  of  bondage,  but  it  formed  the  most 
important  tribute  paid  to  the  ruling  class. 
Where  this  was  the  case,  the  corv6e  rarely  arose 
from  serfdom;  serfdom  much  more  frequently, 
on  the  other  hand,  took  origin  from  the  corvee.5 
This  is  what  took  place  in  the  Roumanian  prov¬ 
inces.  Their  original  mode  of  production  was 
based  on  community  of  the  soil,  but  not  in  the 
Slavonic  or  Indian  form.  Part  of  the  land  was 
cultivated  in  severalty  as  freehold  by  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  community,  another  part—^r  pttb- 
licus 4 — was  cultivated  by  them  in  common.  The 
products  of  this  common  labour  served  partly 
as  a  reserve  fund  against  bad  harvests  and  other 
accidents,  partly  as  a  public  store  for  providing 
the  costs  of  war,  religion,  and  ojher  common  ex¬ 
penses.  In  course  of  time,  military  and  clerical 
dignitaries  usurped,  along  with  the  common 
land,  the  labour  spent  upon  it.  The  labour  of  the 
free  peasants  on  their  common  land  was  trans¬ 
formed  into  corv6e  for  the  thieves  of  the  com¬ 
mon  land.  This  corv6e  soon  developed  into  a 
servile  relationship  existing  in  point  of  fact,  not 
in  point  of  law,  until  Russia,  the  liberator  of  the 
world,  made  it  legal  under  pretence  of  abolish¬ 
ing  serfdom.  The  code  of  the  corvee,  which  the 

2  That  which  follows  refers  to  the  situation  in  the  Rou¬ 
manian  provinces  before  the  change  effected  since  the  Cri¬ 
mean  war. 

8  This  holds  likewise  for  Germany,  and  especially  for 
Prussia  east  of  the  Elbe.  In  the  fifteenth  century  the  Ger¬ 
man  peasant  was  nearly  everywhere  a  man,  who,  whilst 
subject  to  certain  rents  paid  in  produce  and  labour,  was 
otherwise  at  least  practically  free.  The  German  colonists 
in  Brandenburg,  Pomerania,  Silesia,  and  Eastern  Prussia, 
were  even  legally  acknowledged  as  free  men.  The  victory 
of  the  nobility  in  the  peasants’  war  put  an  end  to  that.  Not 
only  were  the  conquered  South  German  peasants  again  en¬ 
slaved.  From  the  middle  of  the  Sixteenth  century  the  peas¬ 
ants  of  Eastern  Prussia,  Brandenburg,  Pomerania,  and 
Silesia,  and  soon  after  the  free  peasants  of  Schleswig-Hol¬ 
stein  were  degraded  to  the  condition  of  serfs.— See  Maurer, 
Geschichte  der  Fronhofe,  Vol.  IV;  Meitzen,  der  Boden  des 
pnusfischen  Stoats;  Hansen,  Leibeigenschaft  in  Schleswig- 
Holstein.  4  The  public  fields. 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


Russian  General  KiselefF  proclaimed  in  1831, 
was  of  course  dictated  by  the  boyards  them¬ 
selves.  Thus  Russia  conquered  with  one  blow 
the  magnates  of  the  Danubian  provinces,  and 
gained  the  applause  of  liberal  cretins  through¬ 
out  Europe. 

According  to  the  R6glement0rganiquey  as  this 
code  of  the  corvee  is  called,  every  Wallachian 
peasant  owes  to  the  so-called  landlord,  besides 
a  mass  of  detailed  payments  in  kind:(i),  12 
days  of  general  labour;  (2),  one  day  of  field  la¬ 
bour;  (3),  one  day  of  wood  carrying.  In  all,  14 
days  in  the  year.  With  deep  insight  into  politi¬ 
cal  economy,  however,  the  working  day  is  not 
taken  in  its  ordinary  sense,  but  as  the  working 
day  necessary  to  the  production  of  an  average 
daily  product;  and  that  average  daily  product 
is  determined  in  so  crafty  a  way  that  no  Cyclops 
would  be  done  with  it  in  24  hours.  In  dry  words, 
the  Reglement  itself  declares,  with  true  Russian 
irony,  that  by  1 2  working  days  one  must  under¬ 
stand  the  product  of  the  manual  labour  of  36 
days,  by  1  day  ui  livid  labour  3  days,  and  by  1 
day  of  wood  carrying  in  like  manner  three  times 
as  much.  In  all  there  were  42  corvee  days.  To 
this  had  to  be  added  the  so-called  jobagie,  serv¬ 
ice  due  to  the  lord  for  extraordinary  occasions. 
In  proportion  to  the  size  of  its  population,  ev¬ 
ery  village  has  to  furnish  annually  a  definite  con¬ 
tingent  to  the  jobagie .  This  additional  corvee  is 
estimated  at  14  days  for  each  Wallachian  peas¬ 
ant.  Thus  the  prescribed  corvee  amounts  to  56 
working  days  yearly.  But  the  agricultural  year 
in  Wallachia  numbers,  in  consequence  of  the 
severe  climate,  only  210  days,  of  which  40  for 
Sundays  and  holidays,  30  on  an  average  for  bad 
weather,  together  70  days,  do  not  count.  140 
working  days  remain.  The  ratio  of  the  corvee 
to  the  necessary  labour,  *6/84  or  66a/3%,  gives  a 
much  smaller  rate  of  surplus  value  than  that 
which  regulates  the  labour  of  the  English  agri¬ 
cultural  or  factory  labourer.  This  is,  however, 
only  the  legally  prescribed  corvee.  And  in  a 
spirit  yet  more  “liberal"  than  the  English  Fac¬ 
tory  Acts,  the  Reglement  Qrganique  has  known 
how  to  facilitate  its  own  evasion.  After  it  has 
made  56  days  out  of  1 2,  the  nominal  day's  work 
of  each  of  the  56  corv£e  days  is  again  so  arranged 
that  a  portion  of  it  must  fall  on  the  ensuing  day. 
In  one  day,  e.g.,  must  be  weeded  an  extent  of 
land,  which,  for  this  work,  especially  in  maize 
plantations,  needs  twice  as  much  time.  The  le¬ 
gal  day's  work  for  some  kinds  of  agricultural 
labour  is  interpretablc  in  such  a  way  that  the 
day  begins  in  May  and  ends  in  October.  In 
Moldavia  conditions  are  still  harder.  “The  12 


115 

corvee  days  of  the  Reglement  Qrganique  cried  a 
boyard,  drunk  with  victory,  amount  to  365  days 
in  the  year."1 

If  the  Reglement  Organtque  of  the  Danubian 
provinces  was  a  positive  expression  of  the  greed 
for  surplus  labour  which  every  paragraph  le¬ 
galized,  the  English  Factory  Acts  are  the  nega¬ 
tive  expression  of  the  same  greed.  These  acts 
curb  the  passion  of  capital  for  a  limitless  drain¬ 
ing  of  labour  power,  by  forcibly  limiting  the 
working  day  by  state  regulations,  made  by  a 
state  that  is  ruled  by  capitalist  and  landlord. 
Apart  from  the  working-class  movement  that 
daily  grew  more  threatening,  the  limiting  of  fac¬ 
tory  labour  was  dictated  by  the  same  necessity 
which  spread  guano  over  the  English  fields.  The 
same  blind  eagerness  for  plunder  that,  in  the 
one  case,  exhausted  the  soil,  had,  in  the  other, 
torn  up  by  the  roots  the  living  force  of  the  na¬ 
tion.  Periodical  epidemics  speak  on  this  point 
as  clearly  as  the  diminishing  military  standard 
in  Germany  and  France.2 

The  Factory  Act  of  1 8 50,  now  in  force  f  1 867), 
allows  for  the  average  working  day  10  hours, 
i.e.,  for  the  first  5  days  12  hours  from  6  a.m.  to 
6  p.m.,  including  one  half  an  hour  for  breakfast, 
and  an  hour  for  dinner,  and  thus  leaving  10J2 
working  hours,  and  8  hours  for  Saturday,  from 
6  a.m.  to  2  p.m.,  of  which  half  an  hour  is  sub¬ 
tracted  for  breakfast.  Sixty  working  hours  are 
left,  io1 2  for  each  of  the  first  5  days,  7J2  for  the 
last.3  Certain  guardians  of  these  laws  are  ap¬ 
pointed,  Factory  Inspectors,  directly  under  the 
Home  Secretary,  whose  reports  are  published 

1  Further  details  are  to  be  found  in  E.  Regnault’s 
Histoire  politique  etjociale  des  Prtncipautfs  Danubiennes , 
Paris,  1855. 

1  “In  general  and  within  certain  limits,  exceeding  the 
medium  size  of  their  kind,  is  evidence  of  the  prosperity  of 
organic  beings.  As  to  man,  his  bodily  height  lessens  if  his 
due  growth  is  interfered  with,  either  by  physical  or  social 
conditions.  In  all  European  countries  in  which  the  con¬ 
scription  holds,  since  its  introduction,  the  medium  height 
of  adult  men,  and  generally  their  fitness  for  military  serv¬ 
ice,  has  diminished.  Before  the  revolution  (1789),  the  mini¬ 
mum  for  the  infantry  in  France  was  165  centimetres;  in 
1818  (law  of  March  10th),  157;  by  the  law  of  1852,  156 
centimetres;  on  the  average  in  France  more  than  half  are 
rejected  on  account  of  deficient  height  or  bodily  weakness. 
The  military  standard  in  Saxony  was  in  1780,  178  centi¬ 
metres.  It  is  now  1 55.  In  Prussia  it  is  1 57.  According  to  the 
statement  of  Dr.  Meyer  in  the  Bayrische  Zeitung,  May  9th, 
1862,  the  result  of  an  average  of  9  years  is  that  in  Prussia 
out  of  1000  conscripts  716  were  unfit  for  military  service, 
317  because  of  deficiency  in  height,  and  399  because  of 
bodily  defects.  . . .  Berlin  in  1858  could  not  provide  its 
contingent  of  recruits;  it  was  156  men  short.”— J.  von 
Liebig,  Die  Chemie  in  ihrer  Anwendungauf  Agrikultur  und 
Physiologies  1862, 7th  edition,  Vol.  I,  pp.  117, 118. 

•The  history  of  the  Factory  Act  of  1850  will  be  found 
in  the  course  of  this  chapter. 


116  CAPITAL 


half-yearly,  by  order  of  Parliament.  They  give 
regular  and  official  statistics  of  the  capitalistic 
greed  for  surplus  labour. 

Let  us  listen,  for  a  moment,  to  the  Factory 
Inspectors.1  “The  fraudulent  mill  owner  begins 
work  a  quarter  of  an  hour  (sometimes  more, 
sometimes  less)  before  6  a.m.,  and  leaves  off  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  (sometimes  more,  sometimes 
less)  after  6  p.m.  He  takes  5  minutes  from  the 
beginning  and  from  the  end  of  the  half  hour 
nominally  allowed  for  breakfast,  and  10  min¬ 
utes  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  hour  nom¬ 
inally  allowed  for  dinner.  He  works  for  a  quar¬ 
ter  of  an  hour  (sometimes  more,  sometimes  less) 
after  2  p.m.  on  Saturday.  Thus  his  gain  is: 


Before  6  a.m. 

ic  minutes 

After  6  p.m. 

*j  ” 

At  breakfast  time 

10  - 

At  dinner  time 

20  ” 

60  ” 

Five  days- 

-300  minutes 

On  Saturday  before  6 

a.m.  1 5  minutes 

At  breakfast  time 

10  M 

After  2  p.m. 

*5  " 

40  minutes 

Total  weekly  340  minutes 

Or  5  hours  and  40  minutes  weekly,  which  mul¬ 
tiplied  by  50  working  weeks  in  the  year  (allow¬ 
ing  two  for  holidays  and  occasional  stoppages) 
is  equal  to  27  working  days.”2 

“Five  minutes  a  day’s  increased  work,  mul¬ 
tiplied  by  weeks,  are  equal  to  two  and  a  half 
days  of  produce  in  the  year.”* 

1 1  only  touch  here  and  there  on  the  period  from  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  modern  industry  in  England  to  1845.  For  this 
period  1  refer  the  reader  to  Die  Lage  der  arbeitenden  Klasse 
in  England ,  Friedrich  Engels,  Leipzig,  1845.  How  com¬ 
pletely  Engels  understood  the  nature  of  the  capitalist  mode 
of  production  is  shown  by  the  Factory  Reports,  Reports 
on  Mines,  etc.,  that  have  appeared  since  1845,  and  how 
wonderfully  he  painted  the  circumstances  in  detail  is  seen 
on  the  most  superficial  comparison  of  his  work  with  the 
official  reports  of  the  Children's  Employment  Commission, 
published  18  to  20  years  later  (1863-1867).  These  deal  es¬ 
pecially  with  the  branches  of  industry  in  which  the  Factory 
Acts  had  not,  up  to  1862,  been  introduced,  in  fact  are  not 
yet  introduced.  Here,  then,  little  or  no  alteration  had  been 
enforced,  by  authority,  in  the  conditions  painted  by  Engels. 
I  borrow  my  examples  chiefly  from  the  free  trade  period 
after  1848,  that  age  of  paradise,  of  which  the  commercial 
travellers  for  the  great  firm  of  free  trade,  blatant  as  ig¬ 
norant,  tell  such  fabulous  tales.  For  the  rest,  England 
figures  here  in  the  foreground  because  she  is  the  classic 
representative  of  capitalist  production,  and  she  alone  has 
a  continuous  set  of  official  statistics  of  the  things  we  are 
considering. 

1  Suggestions ,  etc.,  by  Mr.  L.  Horner,  Inspector  of  Fac¬ 
tories,  in,  Factory  Regulations  Act,  ordered  by  the  House 
of  Commons  to  be  printed,  9th  August,  1859,  pp.  4, 5. 

s  Reports  of  the  Inspector  of  Factories ,  October,  1856,  p.  35. 


“An  additional  hour  a  day  gained  by  small 
instalments  before  6  a.m.,  after  6  p.m.,  and  at 
the  beginning  and  end  of  the  times  nominally 
fixed  for  meals,  is  nearly  equivalent  to  working 
13  months  in  the  year.”4 

Crises  during  which  production  is  interrupt¬ 
ed  and  the  factories  work  “short  time,”  i.e.,  for 
only  a  part  of  the  week,  naturally  do  not  affect 
the  tendency  to  extend  the  working  day.  The 
less  business  there  is,  the  more  profit  has  to  be 
made  on  the  business  done.  The  less  time  spent 
in  work,  the  more  of  that  time  has  to  be  turned 
into  surplus  labour  time. 

Thus  the  Factory  Inspector’s  report  on  the 
period  of  the  crisis  from  1857  to  i8j8: 

“It  may  seem  inconsistent  that  there  should 
be  any  overworking  at  a  time  when  trade  is  so 
bad;  but  that  very  badness  leads  to  the  trans¬ 
gression  by  unscrupulous  men;  they  get  the  ex¬ 
tra  profit  of  it. . . .  In  the  last  half  year,”  says 
Leonard  Horner,“i22  mills  in  my  district  have 
been  given  up;  143  were  found  standing,  yet, 
overwork  is  continued  beyond  the  legal  hours.”6 

“For  a  great  part  of  the  time,”  says  Mr. 
Howell,  “owing  to  the  depression  of  trade, 
many  factories  were  altogether  closed,  and  a 
still  greater  number  were  working  short  time. 
I  continue,  however,  to  receive  about  the  usual 
number  of  complaints  that  half,  or  three-quar¬ 
ters  of  an  hour  in  the  day  are  matched  from  the 
workers  by  encroaching  upon  the  times  profes¬ 
sedly  allowed  for  rest  and  refreshment.”4  The 
same  phenomenon  was  reproduced  on  a  smaller 
scale  during  the  frightful  cotton  crisis  from  1 861 
to  1865.7  "I*  is  sometimes  advanced  by  way  of 
excuse,  when  persons  arc  found  at  work  in  a 
factory  either  at  a  meal  hour  or  at  some  illegal 
time,  that  they  will  not  leave  the  mill  at  the 
appointed  hour,  and  that  compulsion  is  neces¬ 
sary  to  force  them  to  cease  work  [cleaning  their 
machinery,  etc.],  especially  on  Saturday  after¬ 
noons.  But,  if  the  hands  remain  in  a  factory 
after  the  machinery  has  ceased  to  revolve  . .  . 
they  would  not  have  been  so  employed  if  suf¬ 
ficient  time  had  been  set  apart  specially  for 
cleaning,  etc.,  either  before  6  a.m.  [sic!]  or  be¬ 
fore  2  p.m.  on  Saturday  afternoons.”8 

4  Reports ,  etc.,  30th  April,  1858,  p.  9. 

*  Reports ,  etc.,  op.  eit.,  p.  43. 

9  Reports,  etc.,  op,  cit .,  p.  25. 

7  Report r,  etc.  for  the  half  year  ending  30th  April,  1861. 
See  Appendix  No.  2;  Reports ,  etc.,  31st  October,  1862,  pp. 
7>  S2*  53*  The  violations  of  the  Acts  became  more  numerous 
during  the  last  half  year  1 863.  Cf.  Reports ,  etc.,  ending  31st 
October,  1863,  p.  7. 

9  Reports,  etc.,  October  31st,  i860,  p.  23.  With  what 
fanaticism,  according  to  the  evidence  of  manufacturers 
given  in  courts  of  law,  their  hands  set  themselves  against 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


“The  profit  to  be  gained  by  it  (overworking 
in  violation  of  the  Act)  appears  to  be,  to  many, 
a  greater  temptation  than  they  can  resist;  they 
calculate  upon  the  chance  of  not  being  found 
out;  and  when  they  see  the  small  amount  of 
penalty  and  costs  which  those  who  have  been 
convicted  have  had  to  pay,  they  find  that  if  they 
should  be  detected  there  will  still  be  a  consid¬ 
erable  balance  of  gain. . .  .l  In  cases  where  the 
additional  time  is  gained  by  a  multiplication  of 
small  thefts  in  the  course  of  the  day,  there  are 
insuperable  difficulties  to  the  inspectors  mak¬ 
ing  out  a  case.”2 

These  “small  thefts”  of  capital  from  the  la¬ 
bourer's  meal  and  recreation  time,  the  factory 
inspectors  also  designate  as  “petty  pilferings  of 
minutes,”3  “snatching  a  few  minutes.”4  or,  as 
the  labourers  technically  called  them,  “nib¬ 
bling  and  cribbling  at  meal  times.”6 

It  is  evident  that  in  this  atmosphere  the  for¬ 
mation  of  surplus  value  by  surplus  labour  is  no 
secret.  “If  you  allow  me,”  said  a  highly  respect¬ 
able  master  to  mv,  “to  work  only  ten  minutes 
in  the  day  overtime,  you  put  one  thousand  a 
year  in  my  pocket.”6  “Moments  are  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  profit.”7 

Nothing  is  from  this  point  of  view  more  char¬ 
acteristic  than  the  designation  of  the  workers 
who  work  full  time  as  “full-timers,”  and  the 
children  under  13  who  are  only  allowed  to  work 
6  hours  as  “half-timers.”  The  worker  is  here 
nothing  more  than  personified  labour-time.  All 

every  Interruption  in  factory  labour,  the  following  curious 
circumstance  shows.  In  the  beginning  of  June,  1836,  in¬ 
formation  reached  the  magistrates  of  Dewsbury  (York- 
shiie)  that  the  owners  of  8  large  mills  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  of  Batlcy  had  violated  the  Factory  Acts.  Some  of 
these  gentlemen  were  accused  of  having  kept  at  work  5 
boys  between  12  and  15  years  of  age,  from  6  a  m.  on  Fri¬ 
day  to  4  p.if.  on  the  following  Saturday,  not  allowing  them 
any  respite  except  for  meals  and  one  hour  for  sleep  at  mid¬ 
night.  And  these  children  had  to  do  this  ceaseless  labour 
of  30  hours  in  the  “shoddy-hole,”  as  the  hole  is  called  in 
which  the  woolen  rags  are  pulled  in  pieces,  and  where  a 
dense  atmosphere  of  dust,  shreds,  etc.,  forces  even  the 
adult  workman  to  cover  his  mouth  continually  with  hand¬ 
kerchiefs  for  the  protection  of  his  lungs!  The  accused  gen¬ 
tlemen  affirm  in  lieu  of  taking  an  oath— as  Quakers  they 
were  too  scrupulously  religious  to  take  an  oath—  that  they 
had,  in  their  great  compassion  for  the  unhappy  children, 
allowed  them  four  hours  for  sleep,  but  the  obstinate 
children  absolutely  would  not  go  to  bed.  The  Quaker 
gentlemen  were  fined  £20.  Dryden  anticipated  these  gen¬ 
try: 

Fox full fraught  in  seeming  sanctity , 

That  feared  an  oath ,  but  like  the  deoil  would  lie , 

That  look'd  like  lAht,  and  had  the  holy  leer. 

And  durst  not  sin!  before  he  said  his  prayer / 

1 Ibid.,  31st  Oct.,  1856,  p.  34.  *  Ibid.,  p.  35. 

9  Ibid.,  p.48.  4  Ibid.,  p.  48.  1  Ibid.,  p.  48. 

•  Ibid.,  p.  48.  7  Reports,  etc.,  30th  April,  x  860,  p.  56. 


117 

individual  distinctions  arc  merged  in  those  of 
“full-timers”  and  “half-timers.”8 

3.  Branches  of  English  Industry  without  Legal 

Limits  to  Exploitation 

We  have  hitherto  considered  the  tendency  to 
the  extension  of  the  working  day,  the  werewolf's 
hunger  for  surplus  labour  in  a  department 
where  the  monstrous  exactions,  not  surpassed, 
says  an  English  bourgeois  economist,  by  the 
cruelties  of  the  Spaniards  to  the  American  red¬ 
skins,9  caused  capital  at  last  to  be  bound  by  the 
chains  of  legal  regulations.  Now,  let  us  cast 
a  glance  at  certain  branches  of  produc¬ 
tion  in  which  the  exploitation  of  labour  is 
either  free  from  fetters  to  this  day,  or  was  so 
yesterday. 

Mr.  Broughton  Charlton,  county  magistrate, 
declared,  as  chairman  of  a  meeting  held  at  the 
Assembly  Rooms,  Nottingham,  on  the  14th 
January,  i860,  “that  there  was  an  amount  of 
privation  and  suffering  among  that  portion  of 
the  population  connected  with  the  lace  trade, 
unknown  in  other  parts  of  the  kingdom,  indeed, 
in  the  civilized  world  . . .  Children  of  nine  or 
ten  years  are  dragged  from  their  squalid  beds 
at  two,  three,  or  four  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
and  compelled  to  work  for  a  bare  subsistence 
until  ten,  eleven,  or  twelve  at  night,  their  limbs 
wearing  away,  their  frames  dwindling,  their 
faces  whitening,  and  their  humanity  absolutely 
sinking  into  a  stone-like  torpor,  utterly  horrible 
to  contemplate. . . .  We  arc  not  surprised  that 
Mr.  Mallett,  or  any  other  manufacturer,  should 
stand  forward  and  protest  against  discussion. 
. . .  The  system,  as  the  Rev.  Montagu  Valpy 
describes  it,  is  one  of  unmitigated  slavery,  so¬ 
cially,  physically,  morally,  and  spiritually. . . . 
What  can  be  thought  of  a  town  which  holds  a 
public  meeting  to  petition  that  the  period  of 
labour  for  men  shall  be  diminished  to  eighteen 
hours  a  day? . . .  We  declaim  against  the  Vir¬ 
ginian  and  Carolinian  cotton  planters.  Is  their 
black  market,  their  lash,  and  their  barter  of  hu¬ 
man  flesh  more  detestable  than  this  slow  sacri¬ 
fice  of  humanity  which  takes  place  in  order  that 

•This  is  the  official  expression  both  in  the  factories  and 
in  the  reports. 

•“The  cupidity  of  mill-owners  whose  cruelties  in  the 
pursuit  of  gain  have  hardly  been  exceeded  by  those  per¬ 
petrated  by  the  Spaniards  on  the  conquest  of  America  in 
the  pursuit  of  gold.”  (John  Wade,  History  of  the  Middle 
and  Working  Classes,  3rd  edition,  London,  1835,  p.  114.) 
The  theoretical  part  of  this  book,  a  kind  of  hand-book  of 
political  economy,  is,  considering  the  time  of  its  publica¬ 
tion,  original  in  some  parts,  e.g.,  on  commercial  crises.  The 
historical  part  is,  to  a  great  extent,  a  shameless  plagiarism 
of  Sir  F.  M.  Eden’s  History  of  the  Poor,  London,  1797. 


CAPITAL 


118 

veils  and  collars  may  be  fabricated  for  the  bene¬ 
fit  of  capitalists?”1 * 

The  potteries  of  Staffordshire  have,  during 
the  last  22  years,  been  the  subject  of  three  par¬ 
liamentary  inquiries.  The  result  is  embodied  in 
Mr.  Scriven’s  report  of  1841  to  the  Children’s 
Employment  Commissioners,  in  the  report  of 
Dr.  Greenhow  of  i860,  published  by  order  of 
the  medical  officer  of  the  Privy  Council  {Public 
Health ,  Third  Report ,  pp.  112-113);  lastly,  in 
the  report  of  Mr.  Longe  of  1862  in  the  First  Re - 
port  of  the  Childrens  Employment  Commission , 
of  the  13th  June,  1863.  For  my  purpose  it  is 
enough  to  take  from  the  reports  of  i860  and 
1863  some  depositions  of  the  exploited  children 
themselves.  From  the  children  we  may  form  an 
opinion  as  to  the  adults,  especially  the  girls  and 
women,  and  that  in  a  branch  of  industry  by  the 
side  of  which  cotton  spinning  appears  an  agree¬ 
able  and  healthful  occupation.1 

William  Wood,  9  years  old,  was  7  years  and 
10  months  when  he  began  to  work.  He  “ran 
moulds”  (carried  ready-moulded  articles  into 
the  drying  room,  afterwards  bringing  back  the 
empty  mould)  from  the  beginning.  He  came  to 
work  every  day  in  the  week  at  6  a.m.,  and  left 
off  about  9  p.m.  “I  work  till  9  o’clock  at  night 
six  days  in  the  week.  I  have  done  so  seven  or 
eight  weeks.’*  Fifteen  hours  of  labor  for  a  child 
7  years  old!  J.  Murray,  12  years  of  age,  says: 
“I  turn  jigger,  and  run  moulds.  I  come  at  6. 
Sometimes  I  come  at  4.  I  worked  all  night  last 
night,  till  6  o’clock  this  morning.  I  have  not 
been  in  bed  since  the  night  before  last.  There 
were  eight  or  nine  other  boys  working  last 
night.  All  but  one  have  come  this  morning.  I 
get  3  shillings  and  sixpence.  I  do  not  get  any 
more  for  working  at  night.  I  worked  two  nights 
last  week.”  Fernyhough,  a  boy  of  ten:  “I  have 
not  always  an  hour  (for  dinner).  I  have  only 
half  an  hour  sometimes;  on  Thursday,  Friday, 
and  Saturday.”3 

Dr.  Greenhow  states  that  the  average  dura¬ 
tion  of  life  in  the  pottery  districts  of  Stoke-on- 
Trent  and  Wolstanton  is  extraordinarily  short. 
Although  in  the  district  of  Stoke,  only  36.6%, 
and  in  Wolstanton  only  30.4%,  of  the  adult 
male  population  above  20  are  employed  in  the 
potteries,  among  the  men  of  that  age  in  the  first 
district  more  than  half,  in  the  second,  nearly 
two-fifths  of  the  deaths  are  the  result  of  pul¬ 
monary  diseases  among  the  potters.  Dr.  Booth- 

1  Daily  Telegraph*  17th  January,  i860. 

1  Cf.  F.  Engels’  Lage*  etc.,  p.  249-51. 

3  Childrens  Employment  Commission,  First  Report *  etc., 

1863.  Evidence,  pp.  16, 18, 19. 


royd,  a  medical  practitioner  at  Hanley,  says: 
“Each  successive  generation  of  potters  is  more 
dwarfed  and  less  robust  than  the  preceding 
one.”  In  like  manner  another  doctor,  Mr. 
M’Bean:  “Since  he  began  to  practise  among  the 
potters  25  years  ago,  he  had  observed  a  marked 
degeneration,  especially  shown  in  diminution  of 
stature  and  breadth.”  These  statements  are 
taken  from  the  report  of  Dr.  Greenhow  in  i860.4 

From  the  report  of  the  Commissioners  in 
1863,  the  following:  Dr.  J.  T.  Arledge,  senior 
physician  of  the  North  Staffordshire  Infirmary, 
says:  “The  potters  as  a  class,  both  men  and 
women,  represent  a  degenerated  population, 
both  physically  and  morally.  They  are,  as  a 
rule,  stunted  in  growth,  ill-shaped,  and  fre¬ 
quently  ill-formed  in  the  chest;  they  become 
prematurely  old,  and  are  certainly  short-lived; 
they  are  phlegmatic  and  bloodless,  and  exhibit 
their  debility  of  constitution  by  obstinate  at¬ 
tacks  of  dyspepsia,  and  disorders  of  the  liver 
and  kidneys,  and  by  rheumatism.  But  of  all  dis¬ 
eases  they  are  especially  prone  to  chest  disease, 
to  pneumonia,  phthisis,  bronchitis,  and  asthma. 
One  form  would  appear  peculiar  to  them, 
and  is  known  as  potter’s  asthma,  or  potter’s 
consumption.  Scrofula  attacking  the  glands,  or 
bones,  or  other  parts  of  the  body,  is  a  disease  of 
two-thirds  or  more  of  the  potters.  .  . .  That  the 
‘degenercscence’  of  the  population  of  this  dis¬ 
trict  is  not  even  greater  than  it  is,  is  due  to 
the  constant  recruiting  from  the  adjacent 
country,  and  intermarriages  with  more  healthy 
races.”6 

Mr.  Charles  Parsons,  late  house  surgeon  of 
the  same  institution,  writes  in  a  letter  to  Com¬ 
missioner  Longe,  amongst  other  things:  ,4I  can 
only  speak  from  personal  observation  and  not 
from  statistical  data,  but  I  do  not  hesitate  to 
assert  that  my  indignation  has  been  aroused 
again  and  again  at  the  sight  of  poor  children 
whose  health  has  been  sacrificed  to  gratify  the 
avarice  of  either  parents  or  employers.”  He 
enumerates  the  causes  of  the  diseases  of  the  pot¬ 
ters,  and  sums  them  up  in  the  phrase,  “long 
hours.”  The  report  of  the  Commission  trusts 
that  “a  manufacture  which  has  assumed  so 
prominent  a  place  in  the  whole  world  will  not 
long  be  subject  to  the  remark  that  its  great  suc¬ 
cess  is  accompanied  with  the  physical  deterio¬ 
ration,  wide-spread  bodily  suffering,  and  early 
death  of  the  workpeople  ...  by  whose  labour 
and  skill  such  great  resul  tshavebeen  achieved.”* 

4  Public  Health*  Third  Report*  etc.,  pp.  102, 104, 105. 

6  Children's  Employment  Commission*  First  Report*  p.  24. 

9  Ibid,*  pp.  22,  and  xi. 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


And  all  that  holds  of  the  potteries  in  England 
is  true  of  those  in  Scotland. 

The  manufacture  of  lucifer  matches  dates 
from  1833,  from  the  discovery  of  the  method  of 
applying  phosphorus  to  the  match  itself.  Since 
1845  this  manufacture  has  rapidly  developed 
in  England,  and  has  extended  especially 
amongst  the  thickly  populated  parts  of  London 
as  well  as  in  Manchester,  Birmingham,  Liver¬ 
pool,  Bristol,  Norwich,  Newcastle,  and  Glas¬ 
gow.  With  it  has  spread  the  form  of  lockjaw 
which  a  Vienna  physician  in  1845  discovered  to 
be  a  disease  peculiar  to  lucifer-matchmakers. 
Half  the  workers  are  children  under  thirteen, 
and  young  persons  under  eighteen.  The  manu¬ 
facture  is,  on  account  of  its  unhealthiness  and 
unpleasantness,  in  such  bad  odour  that  only  the 
most  miserable  part  of  the  labouring  class,  half- 
starved  widows  and  so  forth,  deliver  up  their 
children  to  it,  ‘'the  ragged,  half-starved,  un¬ 
taught  children.’*1 

Of  the  witn-  '  SL  that  Commissioner  White 
examined  (1863),  270  were  under  eighteen,  50 
under  ten,  10  only  eight,  and  5  only  six  years 
old.  A  range  of  the  working  day  from  12  to  14 
or  i<;  hours,  night-labour,  irregular  meal-times, 
meals  for  the  most  part  taken  in  the  very  work¬ 
rooms  that  are  pestilent  with  phosphorus.2 
Dante  would  have  found  the  worst  horrors 
of  his  Inferno  surpassed  in  this  manufacture. 

In  the  manufacture  of  wallpapers  the  coarser 
sorts  are  printed  by  machine;  the  finer  by  hand 
(block  printing).  The  most  active  business 
months  are  from  the  beginning  of  October  to 
the  end  of  April.  During  this  time  the  work  goes 
on  fast  and  furious  without  intermission  from 
6  a. m.  to  10  i*.m.,  or  further  into  the  night. 

J.  Leach  deposes:  “Last  winter  six  out  of 
nineteen  girls  were  away  from  ill-health  at  one 
time  from  overwork.  I  have  to  bawl  at  them  to 
keep  them  awake.”  W.  Duffy:  “I  have  seen 
when  the  children  could  none  of  them  keep  their 
eyes  open  for  the  work;  indeed,  none  of  us 
could.”  J.  Lightbourne:  “Am  13  .  .  .  We 
worked  last  winter  till  9  (evening),  and  the  win¬ 
ter  before  till  10.  I  used  to  cry  with  sore  feet 
every  night  last  winter.”  G.  Apsden:  “That  boy 
of  mine  . . .  when  he  was  7  years  old  I  used  to 
carry  him  on  my  back  to  and  fro  through  the 
now,  and  he  used  to  have  16  hours  a  day  ...  I 
have  often  knelt  down  to  feed  him  as  he  stood 
by  the  machine,  for  he  could  not  leave  it  or 
stop.”  Smith,  the  managing  partner  of  a  Man¬ 
chester  factory:  “We  (he  means  his  “hands” 
who  work  for  “us”)  work  on,  with  no  stoppage 

1  Ibid.,  p.  xlvii.  1  Ibid.,  p,  liv. 


119 

for  meals,  so  that  the  day’s  work  of  10K  hours  is 
finished  by  4:30  p.m.  and  all  after  that  is  over¬ 
time.”3  ( I  )oes  this  Mr.  Smith  take  no  meals  hi  m- 
sclfduring  io>^hours?)  “We(thissameSmith) 
seldom  leave  off  working  before  6  p.m.  (he  means 
leaveoffthe  consumption  of  “our”  labour-power 
machines),  so  that  we  (iterum  Crispin  us)4  are 
really  working  overtime  the  whole  year  round 
...For  all  these,  children  and  adults  alike  ( 1 52 
children  and  young  persons  and  140  adults), 
the  average  work  for  the  last  18  months  has 
been  at  the  very  least  7  days  and  5  hours,  or 
78  J  2  hours  per  week.  For  the  six  months  ending 
May  2nd  this  year  (1862),  the  average  was 
higher— 8  days,  or  84  hours  a  week.”  Still  this 
same  Mr.  Smith,  who  is  so  extremely  devoted 
to  the  pluralis  majestatisf  adds  with  a  smile, 
“Machine  work  is  not  great.”  So  the  employers 
in  the  block  printing  say:  “Hand  labour  is  more 
healthy  than  machine  work.”  On  the  whole, 
manufacturers  declare  with  indignation  against 
the  proposal  “to  stop  the  machines  at  least  dur¬ 
ing  meal- times.”  A  clause,  says  Mr.  Otley,  man¬ 
ager  of  a  wallpaper  factory  in  the  Borough, 
“which  allowed  work  between,  say,  6  a.m.  and 
9  p.m.  . .  .  would  suit  us(!)  very  well,  but  the 
factory  hours,  6  a.m.  to  6  p.m.,  are  not  suitable. 
Our  machine  is  always  stopped  for  dinner. 
(What  generosity!)  There  is  no  waste  of  paper 
and  colour  to  speak  of.  But,”  he  adds  sympa¬ 
thetically,  “I  can  understand  the  loss  of  time 
not  being  liked.”  The  report  of  the  Commission 
opines  with  naivete  that  the  fear  of  some  “lead¬ 
ing  firms”  of  losing  time,  i.e.,  the  time  for  ap¬ 
propriating  the  1«.  hour  of  others,  and  thence  los¬ 
ing  profit,  is  not  a  sufficient  reason  for  allowing 
children  under  13,  and  young  persons  under  18, 
working  12  to  16  hours  per  day,  to  lose  their 
dinner,  nor  for  giving  it  to  them,  as  coal  and 
water  are  supplied  to  the  steam-engine,  soap  to 
wool,  oil  to  the  wheel — as  merely  auxiliary  ma¬ 
terial  to  the  instruments  of  labour,  during  the 
process  of  production  itself.6 

No  branch  of  industry  in  England  (we  do  not 
take  into  account  the  making  of  bread  by  ma¬ 
chinery  recently  introduced)  has  preserved  up 

3  This  is  not  to  be  taken  in  the  same  sense  as  our  surplus 
labour  time.  These  gentlemen  consider  io>j  hours  of  la¬ 
bour  as  the  normal  working  day,  which  includes  of  course 
the  normal  surplus  labour.  After  this  begins  “overtime” 
which  is  paid  a  little  better.  It  will  be  seen  later  that  the 
labour  expended  during  the  so-called  normal  day  is  paid 
below  its  value,  so  that  the  overtime  is  simply  a  capitalist 
trick  in  order  to  extort  more  surplus  labour,  which  it  would 
still  be,  even  if  the  labour- power  expended  during  the  nor* 
mal  working  day  were  properly  paid. 

4  Again  Crispinus.  6  Royal  plural. 

6  Ibid.,  evidence,  p.  123, 124, 125, 1 40,  and  54. 


CAPITAL 


120 

to  the  present  day  a  method  of  production  so 
archaic,  so— as  we  sec  from  the  poets  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  Empire— pre-Christian,  as  baking.  But 
capital,  as  was  said  earlier,  is  at  first  indifferent 
as  to  the  technical  character  of  the  labour  proc¬ 
ess;  it  begins  by  taking  it  just  as  it  finds  it. 

The  incredible  adulteration  of  bread,  espe¬ 
cially  in  London,  was  first  revealed  by  the 
House  of  Commons  Committee  on  the  adulter¬ 
ation  of  articles  of  food  (1855-56),  and  by  Dr. 
Hassall’s  work,  Adulterations  detected }  The  con¬ 
sequence  of  these  revelations  was  the  Act  of 
August  6th,  i860,  for  Preventing  the  Adultera¬ 
tion  of  Articles  of  Food  and  Drink,  an  inopera¬ 
tive  law,  as  it  naturally  shows  the  tenderest 
consideration  for  every  free-trader  who  deter¬ 
mines  by  the  buying  or  selling  of  adulterated 
commodities  “to  turn  an  honest  penny/’2  The 
Committee  itself  formulated  more  or  less  naive¬ 
ly  its  conviction  that  free-trade  meant  essen¬ 
tially  trade  with  adulterated,  or,  as  the  English 
ingeniously  put  it,  “sophisticated,”  goods.  In 
fact  this  kind  of  sophistry  knows  better  than 
Protagoras  how  to  make  white  black,  and  black 
white,  and  better  than  the  Eleatics  how  to  dem¬ 
onstrate  ad  oculos*  that  everything  is  only  ap¬ 
pearance.4 

At  all  events  the  committee  had  directed  the 
attention  of  the  public  to  its  “daily  bread,”  and 
therefore  to  the  baking  trade.  At  the  same  time 
in  public  meetings  and  in  petitions  to  Parlia¬ 
ment  rose  the  cry  of  the  London  journeymen 
bakers  against  their  overwork,  etc.  The  cry  was 
so  urgent  that  Mr.  H.  S.  Trcmenheere,  also  a 
member  of  the  Commission  of  1863  several 

1  Alum  finely  powdered,  or  mixed  with  salt,  is  a  normal 
article  of  commerce  bearing  the  significant  name  of  “bak¬ 
ers’  stuff.'’ 

1  Soot  is  a  well  known  and  very  energetic  form  of  car¬ 
bon,  and  forms  a  manure  that  capitalistic  chimney-sweeps 
sell  to  English  farmers.  Now  in  1862  the  British  juryman 
had  in  a  law  suit  to  decide  whether  soot,  with  which,  un¬ 
known  to  the  buyer,  90%  of  dust  and  sand  are  mixed,  is 
genuine  soot  in  the  commercial  sense  or  adulterated  soot 
in  the  legal  sense.  The  amis  du  commerce  [friends  of  com¬ 
merce]  decided  it  to  be  genuine  commercial  soot,  and  non¬ 
suited  the  plaintiff  farmer,  who  had  in  addition  to  pay  the 
costs  of  the  suit.  v 

*  Before  our  very  eyes. 

4  The  French  chemist,  Chevallier,  in  his  treatise  on  the 
“sophistications”  of  commodities,  enumerates  for  many  of 
the  600  or  more  articles  which  he  passes  in  review,  10,  20, 
30  different  methods  of  adulteration.  He  adds  that  he  does 
not  know  all  the  methods,  and  does  not  mention  all  that 
he  knows.  He  gives  6  kinds  of  adulteration  of  sugar,  9  of 
olive  oil,  10  of  butter,  12  of  salt,  19  of  milk,  20  of  bread,  23 
of  brandy,  24  of  meal,  28  of  chocolate,  30  of  wine,  32  of 
coffee,  etc.  Even  God  Almighty  does  not  escape  this  fate. 
See  Ronard  de  Card,  on  the  falsifications  of  the  materials 
of  the  Sacrament:  De  la  falsification  des  substances  sacra - 
mentelles ,  Paris,  1856. 


times  mentioned,  was  appointed  Royal  Com¬ 
missioner  of  Inquiry.  His  report,5  together  with 
the  evidence  given,  roused  not  the  heart  of  the 
public  but  its  stomach.  Englishmen,  always 
well  up  on  the  Bible,  knew  well  enough  that 
man,  unless  by  elective  grace  a  capitalist,  or 
landlord,  or  sinccurist,  is  commanded  to  eat  his 
bread  in  the  sweat  of  his  brow,  but  they  did  not 
know  that  he  had  to  eat  daily  in  his  bread  a  cer¬ 
tain  quantity  of  human  perspiration  mixed 
with  the  discharge  of  abscesses,  cobwebs,  dead 
black-beetles,  and  putrid  German  ye.ist,  with¬ 
out  counting  alum,  sand,  and  other  agreeable 
mineral  ingredients.  Without  any  regard  to  his 
holiness,  Free  trade,  the  free  baking  trade  was 
therefore  placed  under  the  supervision  of  the 
State  inspectors  (Close  of  the  Parliamentary 
session  of  1 863),  and  by  the  same  Act  of  Parlia¬ 
ment,  work  from  9  in  the  evening  to  5  in  the 
morning  was  forbidden  for  journeymen  bakers 
under  18.  The  last  clause  speaks  volumes  as  to 
the  over-work  in  this  old-fashioned,  homely  line 
of  business. 

“The  work  of  a  London  journeyman  baker 
begins,  as  a  rule,  at  about  eleven  at  night.  At 
that  hour  he  ‘makes  the  dough,’ — a  laborious 
process,  which  lasts  from  half  an  hour  to  three 
quarters  of  an  hour,  according  to  the  size  of  the 
batch  or  the  labour  bestowed  upon  it.  He  then 
lies  down  upon  the  kneading*board,  which  is 
also  the  covering  of  the  trough  in  which  the 
dough  is  ‘made’;  and  with  a  sack  under  him, 
and  another  rolled  up  as  a  pillow,  he  sleeps  for 
about  a  couple  of  hours.  He  is  then  engaged  in 
a  rapid  and  continuous  labour  for  about  five 
hours— throwing  out  the  dough,  ‘scaling  it  off,* 
moulding  it,  putting  it  into  the  oven,  preparing 
and  baking  rolls  and  fancy  bread,  taking  the 
batch  bread  out  of  the  oven,  and  up  into  the 
shop,  etc.,  etc.  The  temperature  of  a  bakehouse 
ranges  from  about  75  to  upwards  of  90  degrees, 
and  in  the  smaller  bakehouses  approximates 
usually  to  the  higher  rather  than  to  the  lower 
degree  of  heat.  When  the  business  of  making 
the  bread,  rolls,  etc.,  is  over,  that  of  its  distribu¬ 
tion  begins,  and  a  considerable  proportion  of 
the  journeymen  in  the  trade,  aftesworking  hard 
in  the  manner  described  during  the  night,  are 
upon  their  legs  for  many  hours  during  the  day, 
carrying  baskets,  or  wheeling  hand-carts,  and 
sometimes  again  in  the  bakehouse,  leaving  off 
work  at  various  hours  between  1  and  6  p.m.  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  season  of  the  year,  or  the  amount 

5  Report ,  etc.,  relating  to  the  Grievances  complained  of  by 
the  Journeymen  Bakers ,  etc.,  London,  1862,  and  Second 
Report ,  etc.,  London,  1863. 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


and  nature  of  their  master’s  business;  while 
others  are  again  engaged  in  the  bakehouse  in 
’bringing  out*  more  batches  until  late  in  the 
afternoon.1 . . .  During  what  is  called  ‘the  Lon¬ 
don  season/  the  operatives  belonging  to  the 
‘full-priced*  bakers  at  the  West  End  of  the  town 
generally  begin  work  at  n  p.m.,  and  are  en¬ 
gaged  in  making  the  bread,  with  one  or  two 
short  (sometimes  very  short)  intervals  of  rest, 
up  to  8  o'clock  the  next  morning.  They  are  then 
engaged  all  day  long,  up  to  4, 5,  6,  and  as  late  as 
7  o’clock  in  the  evening  carrying  out  bread,  or 
sometimes  in  the  afternoon  in  the  bakehouse 
again,  assisting  in  the  biscuit-baking.  They 
may  have,  after  they  have  done  their  work, 
sometimes  five  or  six,  sometimes  only  four  or 
five  hours’  sleep  before  they  begin  again.  On 
Fridays  they  always  begin  sooner,  some  about 
ten  o’clock,  and  continue  in  some  cases,  at 
work,  either  in  making  or  delivering  the  bread 
up  to  8  p.m.  on  Saturday  night,  but  more  gen¬ 
erally  up  to  4  or  5  o’clock,  Sunday  morning.  On 
Sundays  the  me.*  must  attend  twice  or  three 
times  during  the  day  for  an  hour  or  two  to  make 
preparations  for  the  next  day’s  bread. . . .  The 
men  employed  by  the  underselling  masters 
(who  sell  their  bread  under  the  'full  price,’  and 
who,  as  already  pointed  out,  comprise  three- 
fourths  of  the  London  bakers)  have  not  only  to 
work  on  the  average  longer  hours,  but  their 
work  is  almost  entirely  confined  to  the  bake¬ 
house.  The  underselling  masters  generally  sell 
their  bread  ...  in  the  shop.  If  they  send  it  out, 
which  is  not  common,  except  as  supplying  chan¬ 
dlers’  shops,  they  usually  employ  other  hands 
for  that  purpose.  It  is  not  their  practice  to  de¬ 
liver  bread  from  house  to  house.  Towards  the 
end  of  the  week.  . .  .  the  men  begin  on  Thursday 
night  at  10  o'clock,  and  continue  on  with  only 
slight  intermission  until  late  on  Saturday  eve¬ 
ning.”2 

Even  the  bourgeois  intellect  understands  the 
position  of  the  “underselling”  masters.  “The 
unpaid  labour  of  the  men  was  made  the  source 
whereby  the  competition  was  carried  on.”3  And 
the  “full-priced”  baker  denounced  his  under¬ 
selling  competitors  to  the  Commission  of  In¬ 
quiry  as  thieves  of  foreign  labour  and  adultera¬ 
tors.  “They  only  exist  now  by  first  defrauding 
the  public,  and  next  getting  18  hours’  work  out 
of  their  men  for  12  hours'  wages.”4 

1  First  Report ,  etc.,  p.  Vi.  *  Ibid.,  p.  Ixxi. 

*  George  Read,  The  History  of  Raking,  I<ondon,  1848, 

p.  16. 

4  First  Report,  etc.,  evidence  of  the  “full-priced  baker,” 
Cheeseman,  p.  108. 


121 

The  adulteration  of  bread  and  the  formation 
of  a  class  of  bakers  that  sold  the  bread  below  the 
full  price,  date  from  the  beginning  of  the  eight¬ 
eenth  century,  from  the  time  when  the  corpo¬ 
rate  character  of  the  trade  was  lost,  and  the  cap¬ 
italist,  in  the  form  of  the  miller  or  flour  factor, 
rises  behind  the  nominal  master  baker.6  Thus 
was  laid  the  foundation  of  capitalistic  produc¬ 
tion  in  this  trade,  of  the  unlimited  extension  of 
the  working  day  and  of  night  labour,  although 
the  latter  only  since  1824  had  gained  a  serious 
footing,  even  in  London.6 

After  what  has  just  been  said,  it  will  be  un¬ 
derstood  that  the  report  of  the  Commission 
classes  journeymen  bakers  among  the  short¬ 
lived  labourers,  who,  having  by  good  luck  es¬ 
caped  the  normal  decimation  of  the  children  of 
the  working  class,  rarely  reach  the  age  of  42. 
Nevertheless,  the  baking  trade  is  always  over¬ 
whelmed  witfc  applicants.  The  sources  of  the 
supply  of  these  labour  powers  to  London  are 
Scotland,  the  western  agricultural  districts  of 
England,  and  Germany. 

In  the  years  1858-60,  the  journeymen  bakers 
in  Ireland  organized  at  their  own  expense  great 
meetings  to  agitate  against  night  and  Sunday 
work.  The  public— e.g.,  at  the  Dublin  meeting  in 
May,  i860— took  their  part  with  Irish  warmth. 
As  a  result  of  this  movement,  day  labour 
alone  was  successfully  established  in  Wexford, 
Kilkenny,  Clonmel,  Waterford,  etc.  “In  Limer¬ 
ick,  where  the  grievances  of  the  journeymen  arc 
demonstrated  to  be  excessive,  the  movement 
has  been  defeated  by  the  opposition  of  the  mas¬ 
ter  bakers,  the  miller  bakers  being  the  greatest 
opponents.  The  example  of  Limerick  led  to  a 
retrogression  in  Ennis  and  Tipperary.  In  Cork, 
where  the  strongest  possible  demonstration  of 
feeling  took  place,  the  masters,  by  exercising 
their  power  of  turning  the  men  out  of  employ¬ 
ment,  have  defeated  the  movement.  In  Dublin, 
the  master  bakers  have  offered  the  most  deter¬ 
mined  opposition  to  the  movement  and,  by  dis¬ 
countenancing  as  much  as  possible  the  journey¬ 
men  promoting  it,  have  succeeded  in  leading 
the  men  into  acquiescence  in  Sunday  work  and 

6  George  Read,  op.  cit.  At  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  and 
the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  centuries,  the  factors 
(agents)  that  crowded  into  every  possible  trade  were  still 
denounced  as  “public  nuisances.”  Thus  the  Grand  Jury, 
at  the  quarter  session  of  the  Justices  of  the  Peace  for  the 
County  of  Somerset,  addressed  a  presentment  to  the  Ixsw- 
er  House  which,  among  other  things,  states,  “that  these 
factors  of  Blackwell  Hall  are  a  public  nuisance  and  preju¬ 
dice  to  the  clothing  trade,  and  ought  to  be  put  down  as  a 
nuisance.”  The  Case  of  our  Enghsh  Wool,  etc.,  London, 
1685,  pp.  6, 7. 

6  First  Report,  etc.,  p.  viii. 


122  CAPITAL 


night  work,  contrary  to  the  convictions  of  the 
men.”1 

The  Committee  of  the  English  Government, 
which  Government,  in  Ireland,  is  armed  to  the 
teeth,  and  generally  knows  how  to  show  it,  re¬ 
monstrates  in  mild,  though  funereal,  tones  with 
the  implacable  master  bakers  of  Dublin,  Limer¬ 
ick,  Cork,  etc.:  “The  Committee  believe  that 
the  hours  of  labour  are  limited  by  natural  laws, 
which  cannot  be  violated  with  impunity.  That 
for  master  bakers  to  induce  their  workmen,  by 
the  fear  of  losing  employment,  to  violate  their 
religious  convictions  and  their  better  feelings, 
to  disobey  the  laws  of  the  land,  and  to  disregard 
public  opinion,”  this  all  refers  to  Sunday  la¬ 
bour,  “is  calculated  to  provoke  ill-feeling  be¬ 
tween  workmen  and  masters, .  .  .  and  affords  an 
example  dangerous  to  religion,  morality,  and 
social  order. . . .  The  Committee  believe  that 
any  constant  work  beyond  1 2  hours  per  day  en¬ 
croaches  on  the  domestic  and  private  life  of  the 
working  man,  and  so  leads  to  disastrous  moral 
results,  interfering  with  each  man's  home,  and 
the  discharge  of  his  family  duties  as  a  son,  a 
brother,  a  husband,  a  father.  That  work  beyond 
12  hours  has  a  tendency  to  undermine  the 
health  of  the  working  man,  and  so  leads  to  pre¬ 
mature  old  age  and  death,  to  the  great  injury 
of  families  of  working  men,  thus  deprived  of  the 
care  and  support  of  the  head  of  the  family  when 
most  required.”2 

So  far,  we  have  dealt  with  Ireland.  On  Jthe 
other  side  of  the  channel,  in  Scotland,  the  agri¬ 
cultural  labourer,  the  ploughman,  protests 
against  his  13-14  hours’  work  in  the  most  in¬ 
clement  climate,  with  4  hours’  additional  work 
on  Sunday  (in  this  land  of  Sabbatarians!),3 
whilst,  at  the  same  time,  three  railway  men  are 
standing  before  a  London  coroner’s  jury — a 
guard,  an  engine-driver,  a  signalman.  A  tre¬ 

1  Report  of  Committee  on  the  Baking  Trade  in  Ireland for 

1861.  2  Op.  ctt. 

3  Public  meeting  of  agricultural  labourers  at  Lasswade, 
near  Edinburgh,  January  5th,  1866.  (See  Workman's  Ad- 
ooeate ,  January  13th,  1866.)  The  formation,  since  the  close 
of  1865,  of  a  Trades’  Union  among  the  agricultural  labour¬ 
ers  at  first  in  Scotland  is  a  historic  event.  In  one  of  the 
most  oppressed  agricultural  districts  of  England,  Bucking¬ 
hamshire,  the  labourers,  in  March,  1867,  made  a  great 
strike  for  the  raising  of  their  weekly  wage  from  9-10  shil¬ 
lings  to  12  shillings.— Note  to  the  3rd  edition:  It  will  be 

teen  from  the  preceding  passage  that  the  movement  of  the 
English  agricultural  proletariat,  entirely  crushed  since  the 
suppression  of  its  violent  manifestations  after  1830,  and 
especially  since  the  introduction  of  the  new  Poor  Laws,  be¬ 
gins  again  in  the  sixties,  until  it  becomes  finally  epoch- 
making  in  1872.  I  return  to  this  in  the  second  volume,  as 
well  as  to  the  Blue  Rooks  that  have  appeared  since  1867 
on  the  position  of  the  English  land  labourers. 


mendous  railway  accident  has  hurried  hun¬ 
dreds  of  passengers  into  another  world.  The 
negligence  of  the  employees  is  the  cause  of  the 
misfortune.  They  declare  with  one  voice  before 
the  jury  that  ten  or  twelve  years  before,  their 
labour  only  lasted  eight  hours  per  day.  During 
the  last  five  or  six  years  it  had  been  screwed  up 
to  14,  18,  and  20  hours,  and  under  a  specially 
severe  pressure  of  holiday-makers,  at  times  of 
excursion  trains,  it  often  lasted  for  40  or  50 
hours  without  a  break.  They  were  ordinary 
men,  not  Cyclops.  At  a  certain  point  their  la¬ 
bour  power  failed.  Torpor  seized  them.  Their 
brain  ceased  to  think,  their  eyes  to  sec.  The 
thoroughly  “respectable”  British  jurymen  an¬ 
swered  by  a  verdict  that  sent  them  to  the  next 
assizes  on  a  charge  of  manslaughter,  and,  in  a 
gentle  “rider”  to  their  verdict,  expressed  the 
pious  hope  that  the  capitalistic  magnates  of  the 
railways  would,  in  future,  be  more  extravagant 
in  the  purchase  of  a  sufficient  quantity  of  labour 
power,  and  more  “abstemious,”  more  “self-de¬ 
nying,”  more  “thrifty,”  in  the  draining  of  paid 
labour  power.4 

From  the  motley  crowd  of  labourers  of  all 
callings,  ages,  sexes,  that  press  on  us  more  in¬ 
sistently  than  the  souls  of  the  slain  on  Ulysses, 
on  whom — without  referring  to  the  Blue  Books 
under  their  arms— we  sec  at  a  glance  the  mark 
of  overwork,  let  us  take  two  mare  figures,  whose 
striking  contrast  proves  that  before  capital  all 
men  are  alike— a  milliner  and  a  blacksmith. 

4  Reynolds'  Newspaper ,  January,  1866.  Every  week  this 
same  paper  has,  under  the  sensational  headings,  “I* earful 
andfatalaccidents,’*“Appallulgtragcdies,”etc.,awholc  list 
of  fresh  railway  c  atastrophes.  ( )n  these  an  emplo)  ec  on  the 
North  Staffordshire  line  comments:  “Ever) one  knows  the 
consequences  that  may  occur  if  the  driver  and  fireman  of  a 
locomotive  engine  are  not  continually  on  the  lookout.  How 
can  that  be  expected  from  a  man  who  has  been  at  such 
work  for  29  or  30  hours,  exposed  to  the  weather  and  with¬ 
out  rest.  The  following  is  an  example  which  is  of  very  fre¬ 
quent  occurrence:  One  fireman  commenced  work  on  the 
Monday  morning  at  a  very  early  hour.  When  he  had  fin¬ 
ished  what  is  called  a  day’s  work,  he  had  been  on  duty  14 
hours,  50  minutes.  Before  he  had  time  to  get  his  tea,  he 
was  again  called  on  for  duty. . . .  The  next  time  he  finished 
he  had  been  on  duty  14  hours,  25  minutes,  making  a  total 
of  29  hours,  15  minutes  without  intermission.  The  rest  of 
the  week’s  work  was  made  up  as  follows:  Wednesday,  15 
hours; Thursday,  15  hours,  35  minutes;  Friday,  14J3  hours; 
Saturday,  14  hours,  10  minutes,  making  a  total  for  the 
week  of  88  hours,  40  minutes.  Now,  sir,  fency  his  astonish¬ 
ment  on  being  paid  6>4  days  for  the  whole.  Thinking  it 
was  a  mistake,  he  applied  to  the  timekeeper  . . .  and  in¬ 
quired  what  they  considered  a  day’s  work,  and  was  told  13 
hours  for  a  goods  man  (i.e.,  78  hours).  ...  He  then  asked 
for  what  he  had  made  over  and  above  the  78  hours  per 
wee.-;,  but  was  refused.  However,  he  was  at  last  told  they 
would  give  him  another  quarter,  i.e.,  10 d."  Op.  cit .,  4th 
February,  1866. 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


In  the  last  week  of  June,  1 863,  all  the  London 
daily  papers  published  a  paragraph  with  the 
sensational  heading,  “Death  from  simple  over¬ 
work.”  It  dealt  with  the  death  of  the  milliner, 
Mary  Anne  Walkley,  20  years  of  age,  employed 
in  a  highly  respectable  dressmaking  establish¬ 
ment,  exploited  by  a  lady  with  the  pleasant 
name  of  Elise.  The  old,  often-told  story1  was 
once  more  recounted.  This  girl  worked,  on  an 
average,  16  hours,  during  the  season  often  30 
hours,  without  a  break,  reviving  her  failing  la¬ 
bour  power  by  occasional  supplies  of  sherry, 
port,  or  coffee.  It  was  just  now  the  height  of  the 
season.  It  was  necessary  to  conjure  up  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye  the  gorgeous  dresses  for  the 
noble  ladies  bidden  to  the  ball  in  honour  of  the 
newly  imported  Princess  of  Wales.  Mary  Anne 
Walkley  had  worked  without  intermission  for 
26  J  2  hours,  with  60  other  girls,  30  in  one  room, 
that  only  afforded  one-third  of  the  cubic  feet  of 
air  required  for  them.  At  night,  they  slept  in 
pairs  in  one  of  the  stifling  holes  into  which  the 
bedroom  was  divided  by  partitions  of  board.2 
And  this  was  one  of  the  best  millinery  estab¬ 
lishments  in  London.  Mary  Anne  Walkley  fell 
ill  on  a  Friday,  died  on  Sunday,  without,  to  the 
astonishment  of  Madame  Elise,  having  previ¬ 
ously  completed  the  work  in  hand.  The  doctor, 
Mr.  Keys,  called  too  late  to  the  deathbed,  duly 
bore  witness  before  the  coroner’s  jury  that 
“Mary  Anne  Walkley  had  died  from  long  hours 

1  Cf.  F.  Engels.  Op.  cit.,  pp.  253, 254. 

2  Dr.  Lethcby,  consulting  physician  of  the  Board  of 
Health,  declared:  “The  minimum  of  air  for  each  adult 
ought  to  be  in  a  sleeping  room  300,  and  in  a  dwelling  room 
500  cubic  feet.”  Dr.  Richardson,  senior  physician  to  one 
of  the  London  hospitals:  “With  needlewomen  of  all  kinds, 
including  milliners,  dressmakers,  and  ordinary  sempstres¬ 
ses,  there  are  three  miseries — over-work,  deficient  air,  and 
either  deficient  food  or  deficient  digestion. .  . .  Needlework, 
in  the  main, ...  is  infinitely  better  adapted  to  women  than 
to  men.  Hut  the  mischiefs  of  the  trade,  in  the  metropolis 
especially,  arc  that  it  is  monopolized  by  some  twenty-six 
capitalists,  who,  under  the  advantages  that  spring  from 
capital,  can  bring  in  capital  to  force  economy  out  of  la¬ 
bour.  This  power  tells  throughout  the  whole  class.  If  a 
dressmaker  can  get  a  little  circle  of  customers,  such  is  the 
competition  that,  in  her  home,  she  must  work  to  the  death 
to  hold  together,  and  this  same  overwork  she  must  of  ne¬ 
cessity  inflict  on  any  who  may  assist  her.  If  she  fail,  or  do 
not  try  independently,  she  must  join  an  establishment, 
where  her  labour  is  not  less,  but  where  her  money  is  safe. 
Placed  thus,  she  becomes  a  mere  slave,  tossed  about  with 
the  variations  of  society.  Now  at  home,  in  one  room,  starv¬ 
ing,  or  near  to  it,  then  engaged  15,  16,  aye,  even  18  hours 
out  of  the  24,  in  an  air  that  is  scarcely  tolerable,  and  on 
food  which,  even  if  it  be  good,  cannot  be  digested  in  the 
absence  of  pure  air.  On  these  victims,  consumption,  which 
is  purely  a  disease  of  bad  air,  feeds."  Dr.  Richardson, 
"Work  and  Overwork,”  in  Social  Science  Review ,  1 8th  July, 

1863. 


123 

of  work  in  an  overcrowded  workroom,  and  a 
too  small  and  badly- ventilated  bedroom.”  In 
order  to  give  the  doctor  a  lesson  in  good  man¬ 
ners,  the  coroner’s  jury  thereupon  brought  in  a 
verdict  that  “the  deceased  had  died  of  apo¬ 
plexy,  but  there  was  reason  to  fear  that  her 
death  had  been  accelerated  by  overwork  in  an 
overcrowded  workroom,  etc.”  “Our  white 
slaves,”  cried  the  Morning  Star ,  the  organ  of 
the  free-traders,  Cobden  and  Bright,  “our 
white  slaves,  who  arc  toiled  into  the  grave,  for 
the  most  part  silently  pine  and  die.”3 

“It  is  not  only  in  dressmakers’  rooms  that 
working  to  death  is  the  order  of  the  day,  but  in 
a  thousand  other  places;  in  every  place,  I  had 
almost  said,  where  ‘a  thriving  business’  has  to 
be  done.  .  .  .  We  will  take  the  blacksmith  as  a 
type.  If  the  poets  were  true,  there  is  no  man  so 
hearty,  so  merry,  as  the  blacksmith;  he  rises 
early  and  strikes  his  sparks  before  the  sun;  he 
eats  and  drinks  and  sleeps  as  no  other  man. 
Working  in  moderation,  he  is,  in  fact,  in  one  of 
the  best  of  human  positions,  physically  speak¬ 
ing.  But  we  follow  him  into  the  city  or  town, 
and  we  see  the  stress  of  work  on  that  strong 
man,  and  what  then  is  his  position  in  the  death- 
rate  of  his  country.  In  Marylebone,  black¬ 
smiths  die  at  the  rate  of  3 1  per  thousand  per  an¬ 
num,  or  1 1  above  the  mean  of  the  male  adults  of 
the  country  in  its  entirety.  The  occupation,  in¬ 
stinctive  almost  as  a  portion  of  human  art, 
unobjectionable  as  a  branch  of  human  indus¬ 
try,  is  made,  by  mere  excess  of  work,  the  de¬ 
stroyer  of  the  man.  He  can  strike  so  many  blows 
per  day,  walk  so  many  steps,  breathe  so  many 

3  Morning  Star ,  23rd  June,  1863. — The  Times  made  use 
of  the  circumstance  to  defend  the  American  slave  owners 
against  Bright,  etc.  “Very  many  of  us  think,"  says  a  leader 
of  July  2nd,  1863,  “that  while  we  work  our  own  young 
women  to  death,  using  the  scourge  of  starvation  instead 
of  the  crack  of  the  whip  as  the  instrument  of  compulsion, 
we  have  scarcely  a  right  to  hound  on  fire  and  slaughter 
against  families  who  were  born  slave  owners,  and  who,  at 
least,  feed  their  slaves  well,  and  work  them  lightly."  In 
the  same  manner,  The  Standard ,  a  Tory  organ,  fell  foul  of 
the  Rev.  Newman  Hall:  “He  excommunicated  the  slave 
owners,  but  prays  with  the  fine  folk  who,  without  remorse, 
make  the  omnibus  drivers  and  conductors  of  London,  etc., 
work  16  hours  per  day  for  the  wages  of  a  dog."  Finally, 
spake  the  oracle,  Thomas  Carlyle,  of  whom  I  wrote,  in 
1850,  "The  genius  has  gone  to  the  devil,  and  only  the  wor¬ 
ship  remains."  In  a  short  parable,  he  reduces  the  one  great 
event  of  contemporary  history,  the  American  Civil  War,  to 
this  level,  that  the  Peter  of  the  North  wants  to  break  the 
head  of  the  Paul  of  the  South  with  all  his  might,  because 
the  Peter  of  the  North  hires  his  labour  by  the  day,  and  the 
Paul  of  the  South  hires  his  by  the  life.  {Macmtllan  s  Maga¬ 
zine.  I  lias  Americana  in  nuce  [the  American  Iliad  in  a  nut- 
shelll,  August,  1863.)  Thus,  the  bubble  of  Tory  sympathy 
for  the  urban  workers— by  no  means  for  the  rural— hat 
burst  at  last.  The  sum  of  all  is— slavery ! 


124  CAPITAL 


breaths,  produce  so  much  work,  and  live  an  av¬ 
erage,  say,  of  fifty  years;  he  is  made  to  strike 
so  many  more  blows,  to  walk  so  many  more 
steps,  to  breathe  so  many  more  breaths  per  day, 
and  to  increase  altogether  a  fourth  of  his  life. 
He  meets  the  effort;  the  result  is  that,  produc¬ 
ing  for  a  limited  time  a  fourth  more  work,  he 
dies  at  37  for  50.**1 

4.  Day  and  Night  Work .  The  Relay  System 
Constant  capital,  the  means  of  production, 
considered  from  the  standpoint  of  the  creation 
of  surplus  value,  only  exists  to  absorb  labour, 
and  with  every  drop  of  labour  a  proportional 
quantity  of  surplus  labour.  While  they  fail  to 
do  this,  their  mere  existence  causes  a  relative 
loss  to  the  capitalist,  for  they  represent  during 
the  time  they  lie  fallow,  a  useless  advance  of 
capital.  And  this  loss  becomes  positive  and  ab¬ 
solute  as  soon  as  the  intermission  of  their  em¬ 
ployment  necessitates  additional  outlay  at  the 
recommencement  of  work.  The  prolongation  of 
the  working  day  beyond  the  limits  of  the  natu¬ 
ral  day  into  the  night  only  acts  as  a  palliative. 
It  quenches  only  in  a  slight  degree  the  vampire 
thirst  for  the  living  blood  of  labour.  To  appro¬ 
priate  labour  during  all  the  24  hours  of  the  day 
is,  therefore,  the  inherent  tendency  of  capitalist 
production.  But  as  it  is  physically  impossible 
to  exploit  the  same  individual  labour  power 
constantly  during  the  night  as  well  as  the  day, 
to  overcome  this  physical  hindrance  an  alterna¬ 
tion  becomes  necessary  between  the  workers 
whose  powers  are  exhausted  by  day  and  those 
who  are  used  up  by  night.  This  alternation  may 
be  effected  in  various  ways;  e.g.,  it  may  be  so 
arranged  that  part  of  the  workers  are  one  week 
employed  on  day  work,  the  next  week  on  night 
work.  It  is  well  known  that  this  relay  system, 
this  alternation  of  two  sets  of  workers,  held  full 
sway  in  the  full-blooded  youth  of  the  English 
cotton  manufacture,  and  that  at  the  present 
time  it  still  flourishes,  among  others,  in  the  cot¬ 
ton  spinning  of  the  Moscow  district.  This  24 
hours*  process  of  production  exists  today  as  a 
system  in  many  of  the  branches  of  industry  of 
Great  Britain  that  are  still  “free,”  in  thd  blast¬ 
furnaces,  forges,  plate-rolling  mills,  and  other 
metallurgical  establishments  in  England, 
Wales,  and  Scotland.  The  working  time  here 
includes,  besides  the  24  hours  of  the  6  working 
days,  a  great  part  also  of  the  24  hours  of  Sun¬ 
day.  The  workers  consist  of  men  and  women, 
adults  and  children  of  both  sexes.  The  ages  of 
the  children  and  young  persons  run  through  all 
1  Dr.  Richardson,  toe,  cit . 


intermediate  grades,  from  8  (in  some  cases  from 
6)  to  18.* 

In  some  branches  of  industry,  the  girls  and 
women  work  through  the  night  together  with 
the  males.3 

Placing  on  one  side  the  generally  injurious 
influence  of  night-labour,4  the  duration  of  the 
process  of  production,  unbroken  during  the  24 
hours,  offers  very  welcome  opportunities  of  ex¬ 
ceeding  the  limits  of  the  normal  working  day, 
e.g.,  in  the  branches  of  industry  already  men¬ 
tioned,  which  are  of  an  exceedingly  fatiguing 
nature;  the  official  working  day  means  for  each 
worker  usually  12  hours  by  night  or  day.  But 
the  overwork  beyond  this  amount  is  in  many 
cases,  to  use  the  words  of  the  English  official  re¬ 
port,  “truly  fearful.**6 

“It  is  impossible,  ”  the  report  continues,  “for 
any  mind  to  realize  the  amount  of  work  de¬ 
scribed  in  the  following  passages  as  being  per- 

6  Children's  Employment  Commtssiony  Third  Report.  Lon¬ 
don,  1864,  PP-  iv.,  v  ,  vi. 

3  “Both  in  Staffordshire  and  in  South  Wales,  young  girls 
and  women  are  employed  on  the  pit  banks  and  on  the  coke 
heaps,  not  only  by  day  but  also  by  night.  This  prat  tice  has 
been  often  noticed,  in  reports  presented  to  Parliament,  as 
being  attended  with  great  and  notorious  evils.  These  fe¬ 
males  employed  with  the  men,  hardly  distinguished  from 
them  in  their  dress,  and  begrimed  with  dirt  and  smoke,  are 
exposed  to  the  deterioration  of  character  arising  from  the 
loss  of  self-respect  which  can  hardly  fail  to  follow  from  their 
unfeminme  occupation  ”  {Op.  ctt.  194*4)  xxvi.  Cf.  fourth 
Report ,  1865, 61,  p.  xiii.)  It  is  the  same  in  glass  works. 

*  A  steel  manufacturer  who  employs  children  in  night  la¬ 
bour  remarked  “It  seems  but  natural  that  boys  who  work 
at  night  cannot  sleep  and  get  proper  rest  by  day,  but  will 
be  running  about.”  (Op. «/.,  Fourth  Report ,  63,  p.  xm.)  On 
the  importance  of  sunlight  for  the  maintenance  and  growth 
of  the  body,  a  physician  writes:  “Light  also  acts  upon  the 
tissues  of  the  body  directly  in  hardening  them  and  sup¬ 
porting  their  elasticity.  The  muscles  of  animals,  when  they 
arc  deprived  of  a  proper  amount  of  light,  become  soft  and 
inelastic,  the  nervous  power  loses  its  tone  from  defective 
stimulation,  and  the  elaboration  of  all  growth  seems  to  be 
perverted.  ...  In  the  case  of  children,  constant  access  to 
plenty  of  light  during  the  day,  and  to  the  direct  rays  of  the 
sun  for  a  part  of  it,  is  most  essential  to  health.  1  ight  assists 
in  the  elaboration  of  good  plastic  blood,  and  hardens  the 
fibre  after  it  has  been  laid  down.  It  also  acts  as  a  stimulus 
upon  the  organs  of  sight,  and  by  this  means  brings  about 
more  activity  in  the  various  cerebral  functions.”  Dr.  W. 
Strange,  senior  physician  of  the  Worcester  General  Hos¬ 
pital,  from  whose  work  on  Health  (1864)  this  passage  is 
taken,  writes  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  White,  oni  of  the  commis¬ 
sioners:  “I  have  had  opportunities  formerly,  when  in  Lan¬ 
cashire,  of  observing  the  effects  of  night-work  upon  chil¬ 
dren,  and  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  contrary  to  what 
some  employers  were  fond  of  asserting,  those  children  who 
were  subjected  to  it  soon  suffered  in  their  health.”  ( Report , 
284*  P-  55-)  That  such  a  question  should  furnish  the  ma¬ 
teria1  of  serious  controversy  shows  plainly  how  capitalist 
production  acts  on  the  brain-functions  of  capitalists  and 
their  retainers. 

4  Op.  n/.,  57,  p.  xii. 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


formed  by  boys  of  from  9  to  12  years  of  age. . . . 
without  coming  irresistibly  to  the  conclusion 
that  such  abuses  of  the  power  of  parents  and  of 
employers  can  no  longer  be  allowed  to  exist."1 

“The  practice  of  boys  working  at  all  by  day 
and  night  shifts  either  in  the  usual  course  of 
things,  or  at  pressing  times,  seems  inevitably 
to  open  the  door  to  their  not  unfrequently 
working  unduly  long  hours.  These  hours  arc, 
indeed,  in  some  cases,  not  only  cruelly  but  even 
incredibly  long  for  children.  Amongst  a  number 
of  boys  it  will,  of  course,  not  unfrequently  hap¬ 
pen  that  one  or  more  are  from  some  cause  ab¬ 
sent.  When  this  happens,  their  place  is  made  up 
by  one  or  more  boys  who  work  in  the  other  shift. 
That  this  is  a  well  understood  system  is  plain 
.  .  .  from  the  answer  of  the  manager  of  some 
large  rolling-mills,  who,  when  I  asked  him  how 
the  place  of  the  boys  absent  from  their  shift  was 
made  up,  said  T  daresay,  sir,  you  know  that  as 
well  as  1  do/  and  admitted  the  fact.”* 

“At  a  rolling-mill  where  the  proper  hours 
were  from  6  a.m.  to  j.30  p.m.  a  boy  worked 
about  four  nighb»  every  week  till  8.30  p.m.  at 
least .  .  .  and  this  for  six  months.  Another,  at  9 
years  old,  sometimes  made  three  12-hour  shifts 
running,  and,  when  10,  has  worked  two  days 
and  two  nights  running.”  A  third,  “now  10 . .  . 
worked  from  6  a.m.  till  12  p.m.  three  nights,  and 
till  9  p.m.  the  other  nights”  “Another,  now  13, 
. . .  worked  from  6  p.m.  till  12  noon  next  day, 
for  a  week  together,  and  sometimes  for  three 
shifts  together,  e.g.,  from  Monday  morning  till 
Tuesday  night.”  “Another,  now  12,  has  worked 
in  an  iron  foundry  at  Stavely  from  6  a.m.  till 
12  p.m.  for  a  fortnight  on  end;  could  not  do  it 
any  more.”  “George  Allinsworth,  age  9,  came 
here  as  a  cellar-boy  last  Friday;  next  morning 
we  had  to  begin  at  3,  so  I  stopped  here  all  night. 
Live  five  miles  off.  Slept  on  the  floor  of  the  fur¬ 
nace,  overhead,  with  an  apron  under  me,  and  a 
bit  of  a  jacket  over  me.  The  two  other  days  I 
have  been  here  at  6  a.m.  Aye!  it  is  hot  in  here. 
Before  I  came  here  I  was  nearly  a  year  at  the 
same  work  at  some  works  in  the  country.  Began 
there,  too,  at  3  on  Saturday  morning— always 
did,  but  was  very  gain  [near]  home,  and  could 
sleep  at  home.  Other  days  I  began  at  6  in  the 
morning,  and  gi’en  over  at  6  or  7  in  the  even¬ 
ing,”  etc.* 

1  Fourth  Report ,  1865, 58,  p.  xii.  *  Op,  cit. 

•  Op.  cit .,  p.  xiii.  The  degree  of  culture  of  these  “labour 
powers"  must  naturally  be  such  as  appears  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  dialogues  with  one  of  the  commissioners:  Jeremiah 
Haynes,  age  12:  “Four  times  four  is  8;  4  fours  are  16.  A 
king  is  him  that  has  all  the  money  and  gold.  We  have  a 
King  (told  it  is  a  Queen),  they  call  her  the  Princess  Alex- 


125 

Let  us  now  hear  how  capital  itself  regards 
this  24  hours*  system.  The  extreme  forms  of  the 
system,  its  abuse  in  the  “cruel  and  incredible” 
extension  of  the  working  day,  are  naturally 
passed  over  in  silence.  Capital  only  speaks  of 
the  system  in  its  “normal**  form. 

Messrs.  Naylor  &  Vickers,  steel  manufactur¬ 
ers,  who  employ  between  600  and  700  persons, 
among  whom  only  1  o  per  cent  are  under  1 8,  and 
of  those,  only  20  boys  under  18  work  in  night 
sets,  thus  express  themselves:  “The  boys  do  not 
suffer  from  the  heat.  The  temperature  is  prob¬ 
ably  from  86°  to  90°. ...  At  the  forges  and  in  the 


andria.Told  that  she  married  the  Queen’s  son.  The  Queen’s 
son  is  the  Princess  Alexandria.  A  Princess  is  a  man."  Wil¬ 
liam  Turner,  age  12:  “Don’t  live  in  England.  Think  it  is  a 
country,  but  didn’t  know  before."  John  Morris,  age  14: 
“Have  heard  say  that  God  made  the  world,  and  that  all 
the  people  was  drownded  but  one;  heard  say  that  one  was 
a  little  bird."  William  Smith,  age  15:  “God  made  man,  man 
made  woman."  Edward  Taylor,  age  15:  “Do  not  know  of 
London."  Henry  Matthewman,  age  17:  “Had  been  to 
chapel,  but  missed  a  good  many  times  lately.  One  name 
that  they  preached  about  was  Jesus  Christ,  but  1  cannot 
say  any  others,  and  1  cannot  tell  anything  about  him.  He 
was  not  killed,  but  died  like  other  people.  He  was  not  the 
same  as  other  people  in  some  ways,  because  he  was  reli¬ 
gious  in  some  ways,  and  others  isn’t."  (Op.  at.,  p.  xv.) 
“The  devil  is  a  good  person.  I  don’t  know  where  he  lives." 
“Christ  was  a  wicked  man."  “This  girl  spelt  God  as  dog, 
and  did  not  know  the  name  of  the  queen."  (Children  s  Em¬ 
ployment  Commission,  Fifth  Report ,  1866,  p.  55,  n.  278.) 
The  same  system  obtains  in  the  glass  and  paper  works  as 
in  the  metallurgical,  already  cited.  In  the  paper  factories, 
where  the  paper  is  made  by  machinery,  night-work  is  the 
rule  for  all  processes,  except  rag-sorting.  In  some  cases, 
night-work,  by  relays,  is  carried  on  incessantly  through 
the  whole  week,  usually  from  Sunday  night  until  midnight 
of  the  following  Saturday.  Those  who  are  on  day  work, 
work  5  days  of  12,  and  1  day  of  18  hours;  those  on  night 
work,  5  nights  of  12,  and  1  of  6  hours  in  each  week.  In 
other  cases,  each  set  works  24  hours  consecutively  on  al¬ 
ternate  days,  one  set  working  6  hours  on  Monday,  and  18 
on  Saturday  to  make  up  the  24  hours.  In  other  cases,  an 
intermediate  system  prevails,  by  which  all  employed  on 
the  paper-making  machinery  work  15  or  16  hours  every 
day  in  the  week.  This  system,  says  Commissioner  Lord, 
“seems  to  combine  all  the  evils  of  both  the  12  hours'  and 
the  24  hour’s  relays."  Children  under  13,  young  persons 
under  1 8,  and  women,  work  under  this  night  system.  Some¬ 
times  under  the  12  hours’  system  they  are  obliged,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  non-appearance  of  those  that  ought  to  relieve 
them,  to  work  a  double  turn  of  24  hours.  The  evidence 
proves  that  boys  and  girls  very  often  work  overtime,  which, 
not  infrequently,  extends  to  24  or  even  36  hours  of  unin¬ 
terrupted  toil.  In  the  continuous  and  unvarying  process  of 
glaring  are  found  girls  of  12  who  work  the  whole  month  14 
hours  a  day,  “without  any  regular  relief  or  cessation  beyond 
2  or,  at  most,  3  breaks  of  half  an  hour  each  for  meals."  In 
some  mills,  where  regular  night-work  has  been  entirely  giv¬ 
en  up,  overwork  goes  on  to  a  terrible  extent,  “and  that 
often  in  the  dirtiest,  and  in  the  hottest,  and  in  the  most 
monotonous  of  the  various  processes  ’’  (Children  s  Employ¬ 
ment  Commission ,  Fourth  Report ,  1865,  pp.  xxxviii.  and 
xxxix.) 


126  CAPITAL 


rolling-mills  the  hands  work  night  and  day,  in 
relays,  but  all  the  other  parts  of  the  work  are 
day  work,  i.  e.,  from  6  a.  m.  to 6 1\  m.  In  the  forge 
the  hours  are  from  12  to  12.  Some  of  the  hands 
always  work  in  the  night,  without  any  alterna¬ 
tion  of  day  and  night-work.  . .  .  We  do  not  find 
any  difference  in  the  health  of  those  who  work 
regularly  by  night  and  those  who  work  by  day, 
and  probably  people  can  sleep  better  if  they 
have  the  same  period  of  rest  than  if  it  is 
changed. .  .  .  About  20  of  the  boys  under  the 
age  of  1 8  work  in  the  night  sets. . . .  We  could 
not  well  do  without  lads  under  18  working  by 
night.  The  objection  would  be  the  increase  in 
the  cost  of  production. . . .  Skilled  hands  and 
the  heads  in  every  department  are  difficult  to 
get,  but  of  lads  we  could  get  any  number.  .  .  • 
But  from  the  small  proportion  of  boys  that  we 
employ  the  subject  (i.c.,  of  restrictions  on  night 
work)  is  of  little  importance  or  interest  to  us.”1 

Mr.  J.  Ellis,  one  of  the  firm  of  Messrs.  John 
Brown  &  Co.,  steel  and  iron  works,  employing 
about  3000  men  and  boys,  part  of  whose  opera¬ 
tions.  namely,  iron  and  heavier  steel  work,  goes 
on  night  and  oay  by  relays,  states:  “that  in  the 
heavier  steel  work  one  or  two  boys  are  em¬ 
ployed  to  a  score  or  two  men.”  Their  concern 
employs  upwards  of  500  boys  under  18,  of 
whom  about  y$y  or  170,  are  under  the  age  of  13. 
With  reference  to  the  proposed  alteration  of  the 
law,  Mr.  Ellis  says:  “I  do  not  think  it  would  be 
very  objectionable  to  require  that  no  person  un¬ 
der  the  age  of  18  should  work  more  than  12 
hours  in  the  24.  But  wc  do  not  think  that  any 
line  could  be  drawn  over  the  age  of  1 2,  at  which 
boys  could  be  dispensed  with  for  night  work. 
But  we  would  sooner  be  prevented  from  em¬ 
ploying  boys  under  the  age  of  13,  or  even  so  high 
as  14,  at  all,  than  not  be  allowed  to  employ  boys 
that  we  do  have  at  night.  Those  boys  who  work 
in  the  day  sets  must  take  their  turn  in  the  night 
sets  also,  because  the  men  could  not  work  in  the 
night  sets  only;  it  would  ruin  their  health. . . . 
We  think,  however,  that  night  work  in  alter¬ 
nate  weeks  is  no  harm.”  Messrs.  Naylor  &  Vick¬ 
ers,  on  the  other  hand,  in  conformity  with  the 
interest  of  their  business,  considered  th^t  peri¬ 
odically  changed  night  labour  might  possibly 
do  more  harm  than  continual  night  labour.  “We 
find  the  men  who  do  it  are  as  well  as  the  others 
who  do  other  work  only  by  day. .  .  .  Our  objec¬ 
tions  to  not  allowing  boys  under  18  to  work  at 
night  would  be  on  account  of  the  increase  of  ex¬ 
pense,  but  this  is  the  only  reason.”  What  cyni¬ 
cal  ndiveti  \  “We  think  that  the  increase  would 

1  Fourth  Report  i86{,  79,  p.  xvi. 


be  more  than  the  trade,  with  due  regard  to  its 
being  successfully  carried  out,  could  fairly 
bear.”  What  mealy-mouthed  phraseology! 
“Labour  is  scarce  here  and  might  fall  short  if 
there  were  *"ch  a  regulation,”  i.e.,  Ellis  Brown 
&  Co.  mighc  tall  into  the  fatal  perplexity  of  be¬ 
ing  obliged  to  pay  labour  power  its  full  value.2 

The  Cyclops  Steel  and  Iron  Works,  of 
Messrs.  Cammell  &  Co.,  are  conducted  on  tho 
same  large  scale  as  those  of  the  above  men¬ 
tioned  John  Brown  &  Co.  The  managing  direc 
tor  had  handed  in  his  evidence  to  the  Govern¬ 
ment  Commissioner,  Mr.  White,  in  writing. 
Later  he  found  it  convenient  to  suppress  the 
MS.  when  it  had  been  returned  to  him  for  re¬ 
vision.  Mr.  White,  however,  has  a  good  mem 
ory.  He  remembered  quite  clearly  that  for  the 
Messrs.  Cyclops  the  forbidding  of  the  night  la¬ 
bour  of  children  and  young  persons  “would  be 
impossible,  it  would  be  tantamount  to  stopping 
their  works,”  and  yet  their  business  employs 
little  more  than  6%  of  boys  under  18,  and  less 
than  1  %  under  13.3 

On  the  same  subject,  Mr.  E.  F.  Sanderson,  of 
the  firm  of  Sanderson,  Bros.,  &  Co.,  steel  roll¬ 
ing-mills  and  forges,  Attcrclifife,  says:  “Great 
difficulty  would  be  caused  by  preventing  boys 
under  18  from  working  at  night.  The  chief 
would  be  the  increase  of  cost  from  employing 
men  instead  of  boys.  I  cannot  say  what  this 
would  be,  but  probably  it  wouy  not  be  enough 
to  enable  the  manufacturers  to  raise  the  price 
of  steel,  and  consequently  it  would  fall  on  them, 
as  of  course  the  men  would  refuse  to  pay  it.” 
What  queer-headed  folk!  Mr.  Sanderson  does 
not  know  how  much  he  pays  the  children,  but 
“perhaps  the  younger  boys  get  from  4 s.  to  5 s. 
a  week.  .  .  .  The  boys’  work  is  of  a  kind  for 
which  the  strength  of  the  boys  is  generally” 
(“generally,”  of  course  not  always)  “quite  suffi¬ 
cient,  and  consequently  there  would  be  no  gain 
in  the  greater  strength  of  the  men  to  counter¬ 
balance  the  loss,  or  it  would  be  only  in  the  few 
cases  in  which  the  metal  is  heavy.  The  men 
would  not  like  so  well  not  to  have  boys  under 
them,  as  men  would  be  less  obedient.  Besides, 
boys  must  begin  young  to  learn  the  trade.  Leav¬ 
ing  day-work  alone  open  to  boys  would  not  an¬ 
swer  this  purpose.”  And  why  not?  Why  could 
not  boys  learn  their  handicraft  in  the  daytime? 
Your  reason?  “Owing  to  the  men  working  days 
and  nights  in  alternate  weeks,  the  men  would 
be  separated  half  the  time  from  their  boys,  and 
would  lose  half  the  profit  which  they  make  from 
them.  The  training  which  they  give  to  an  ap- 

2  Op.  at.,  80,  p.  xvi.  8  Op.  at.,  82,  p.  xvn. 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


prentice  is  considered  as  part  of  the  return  for 
the  boys*  labour,  and  thus  enables  the  men  to 
get  it  at  a  cheaper  rate.  Each  man  would  want 
half  of  this  profit.”  In  other  words,  Messrs.  San¬ 
derson  would  have  to  pay  part  of  the  wages  of 
the  adult  men  out  of  their  own  pockets  instead 
of  by  the  night-work  of  the  boys.  Messrs.  San¬ 
derson’s  profit  would  thus  fall  to  some  extent, 
and  this  is  the  good  Sandcrsonian  reason  why 
boys  cannot  learn  their  handicraft  in  the  day.1 
In  addition  to  this,  it  would  throw  night  labour 
on  those  who  worked  instead  of  the  boys,  which 
they  would  not  be  able  to  stand.  The  difficulties 
in  fact,  would  be  so  great  that  they  would  very 
likely  lead  to  the  giving  up  of  night-work  alto¬ 
gether,  and  '  as  far  as  the  work  itself  is  con¬ 
cerned,”  says  E.  F.  Sanderson  /‘this  would  suit 
as  well,  but—”  But  Messrs.  Sanderson  have 
something  else  to  make  besides  steel.  Steel¬ 
making  is  simply  a  pretext  for  surplus  value 
making.  The  smelting  furnaces,  rolling-mills, 
etc.,  the  buildings,  machinery,  iron,  coal,  etc., 
have  something. more  to  do  than  transform 
themselves  into  steel.  They  are  there  to  absorb 
surplus  labour,  and  naturally  absorb  more  in  24 
hours  than  in  12.  Jn  fact  they  give,  by  grace  of 
God  and  law,  the  Sandersons  a  cheque  on  the 
working  time  of  a  certain  number  of  hands  for 
all  the  24  hours  of  the  day,  and  they  lose  their 
character  as  capital,  are  therefore  a  pure  loss 
for  the  Sandersons,  as  soon  as  their  function  of 
absorbing  labour  is  interrupted.  “But  then 
there  would  be  the  loss  from  so  much  expensive 
machinery,  lying  idle  half  the  time  and,  to  get 
through  the  amount  of  work  which  we  are  able 
to  do  on  the  present  system,  we  should  have  to 
double  our  premises  and  plant,  which  would 
double  the  outlay.”  But  why  should  these  San¬ 
dersons  pretend  to  a  privilege  not  enjoyed  by 
the  other  capitalists  who  only  work  during  the 
day,  and  whose  buildings,  machinery,  raw  ma¬ 
terial,  therefore  lie  “idle”  during  the  night?  E. 
F.  Sanderson  answers  in  the  name  of  all  the  San¬ 
dersons:  “It  is  true  that  there  is  this  loss  from 
machinery  lying  idle  in  those  manufactories  in 
which  work  only  goes  on  by  day.  But  the  use  of 
furnaces  would  involve  a  further  loss  in  our 
case.  If  they  were  kept  up  there  would  be  a 
waste  of  fuel,”  instead  of,  as  now,  a  waste  of  the 
living  substance  of  the  workers,  “and  if  they 
were  not,  there  would  be  loss  of  time  in  laying 

1  “In  our  reflecting  and  reasoning  age,  a  man  is  not  worth 
much  who  cannot  give  a  good  reason  for  everything,  no 
matter  how  bad  or  how  crazy.  Everything  in  the  world  that 
has  been  done  wrong  has  been  done  wrong  for  the  very  best 
of  reasons.”  Hegel,  op.  cit .,  p.  249. 


127 

the  fires  and  getting  the  heat  up/*  whilst  the 
loss  of  sleeping  time,  even  to  children  of  8  is  a 
gain  of  working  time  for  the  Sanderson  tribe, 
“and  the  furnaces  themselves  would  suffer  from 
the  changes  of  temperature.”  Whilst  those 
same  furnaces  suffer  nothing  from  the  day  and 
night  change  of  labour.2 

5.  The  Struggle for  a  Normal  Working  Day.  Com¬ 
pulsory  Laws  for  the  Extension  of  the  Working 
Day from  the  Middle  of  the  Fourteenth  to  the 
End  of  the  Seventeenth  Century 
“What  is  a  working  day?  What  is  the  length 
of  time  during  which  capital  may  consume  the 
labour  power  whose  daily  value  it  buys?  How 
far  may  the  working  day  be  extended  beyond 
the  working  time  necessary  for  the  reproduc¬ 
tion  of  labour  power  itself?”  It  has  been  seen 
that  to  these  questions  capital  replies:  “The 
working  day  contains  the  full  24  hours,  with  the 

2  Op.  cit.t  85,  p.  xvii.  To  similar  tender  scruples  of  the 
glass  manufacturers  that  regular  meal  times  for  the  chil¬ 
dren  arc  impossible  because,  as  a  consequence,  a  certain 
quantity  of  heat,  radiated  by  the  furnaces,  would  be  “a 
pure  loss”  or  “wasted,”  Commissioner  White  makes  an¬ 
swer.  His  answer  is  unlike  that  of  L're,  Senior,  etc.,  and 
their  puny  German  plagiarists  a  la  Roschcr  who  arc  touched 
by  the  “abstinence,”  “self-denial,”  “saving,”  of  the  cap¬ 
italists  in  the  expenditure  of  their  gold,  and  by  their  Timur- 
Tamerlanish  prodigality  of  human  life!  “A  certain  amount 
of  heat  beyond  what  is  usual  at  present  might  also  be  go¬ 
ing  to  waste,  if  meal  times  were  secured  in  these  cases,  but 
it  seems  likely  not  equal  in  money-value  to  the  waste  of 
animal  power  now  going  on  in  glass-houses  throughout  the 
kingdom  from  growing  boys  not  having  enough  quiet  time 
to  eat  their  meals  at  ease,  with  a  little  rest  afterwards  for 
digestion.”  {Op.  cit .,  p.  xlv.)  And  this  in  the  year  of  prog¬ 
ress  1865!  Without  considering  the  expenditure  of  strength 
in  lifting  and  carrying,  such  a  child,  in  the  sheds  where 
bottle  and  flint  glass  are  made,  walks  during  the  perform¬ 
ance  of  his  work  1 5-20  miles  in  every  6  hours!  And  the  work 
often  lasts  14  or  15  hours!  In  many  of  these  glass-works,  as 
in  the  Moscow  spinning  mills,  the  system  of  6  hours'  relays 
is  in  force.  “During  the  working  part  of  the  week  six  hours 
is  the  utmost  unbroken  period  ever  attained  at  any  one 
time  for  rest,  and  out  of  this  has  to  come  the  time  spent  in 
coming  and  going  to  and  from  work,  washing,  dressing, 
and  meals,  leaving  a  very  short  period  indeed  for  rest,  and 
none  for  fresh  air  and  play,  unless  at  the  expense  of  the 
sleep  necessary  for  young  boys,  especially  at  such  hot  and 
fatiguing  work. .  . .  Even  the  short  sleep  is  obviously  liable 
to  be  broken  by  a  boy  having  to  wake  himself,  if  it  is  night, 
or  by  the  noise,  if  it  is  day.”  Mr.  White  gives  cases  where  a 
boy  worked  36  consecutive  hours;  others  where  boys  of  12 
drudged  on  until  2  in  the  morning,  and  then  slept  in  the 
works  till  <  a.m.  (3  hours!)  only  to  resume  their  work.  “The 
amountofwork,”  say  Tremenheere  and  Tufnell,  who  draft¬ 
ed  the  general  report,  “done  by  boys,  youths,  girls,  and 
women,  in  the  course  of  their  daily  or  nightly  spell  of  la¬ 
bour,  is  certainly  extraordinary.”  {Op.  cit.t  pp.  xlni.  and 
xliv.)  Meanwhile,  late  by  night  perhaps,  self-denying  Mr. 
Glass-Capital,  primed  with  port  wine,  reels  out  of  his  club 
homeward  droning  out  idiotically,  “Britons  never,  never 
shall  be  slaves!” 


128  CAPITAL 


deduction  of  the  few  hours  of  repose  without 
which  labour  power  absolutely  refuses  its  serv¬ 
ices  again.”  Hence  it  is  self-evident  that  the  la¬ 
bourer  is  nothing  else,  his  whole  life  through, 
but  labour  power,  that,  therefore,  all  his  dis¬ 
posable  time  is  by  nature  and  law  labour  time, 
to  be  devoted  to  the  self-expansion  of  capital. 
Time  for  education,  for  intellectual  develop¬ 
ment,  for  the  fulfilling  of  social  functions  and 
for  social  intercourse,  for  the  free  play  of  his 
bodily  and  mental  activity,  even  the  rest  time 
of  Sunday  (and  that  in  a  country  of  Sabbatari¬ 
ans!)1 — moonshine!  But  in  its  blind  unrestrain- 
abie  passion,  its  werewolf  hunger  for  surplus  la¬ 
bour,  capital  oversteps  not  only  the  moral,  but 
even  the  merely  physical  maximum  bounds  of 
the  working  day.  It  usurps  the  time  for  growth, 
development,  and  healthy  maintenance  of  the 
body.  It  steals  the  time  required  for  the  con¬ 
sumption  of  fresh  air  and  sunlight.  It  higgles 
over  a  meal  time,  incorporating  it  where  possi¬ 
ble  with  the  process  of  production  itself,  so  that 
food  is  given  to  the  labourer  as  to  a  mere  means 
of  production,  as  coal  is  supplied  to  the  boiler, 
grease  and  oil  to  the  machinery.  It  reduces  the 
sound  sleep  needed  for  the  restoration,  repara¬ 
tion,  refreshment  of  the  bodily  powers  to  just 
so  many  hours  of  torpor  as  the  revival  of  an  or¬ 
ganism,  absolutely  exhausted,  renders  essen¬ 
tial.  It  is  not  the  normal  maintenance  of  the  la¬ 
bour  power  which  is  to  determine  the  limits  of 
the  working  day;  it  is  the  greatest  possible  daily 
expenditure  of  labour  power,  no  matter  hoV 
diseased,  compulsory,  and  painful  it  may  be, 
which  is  to  determine  the  limits  of  the  labour¬ 
ers’  period  of  repose.  Capital  cares  nothing  for 
the  length  of  life  of  labour  power.  All  that  con¬ 
cerns  it  is  simply  and  solely  the  maximum  of 
labour  power  that  can  be  rendered  fluent  in  a 
1  In  England  even  now  occasionally  in  rural  districts  a 
labourer  is  condemned  to  imprisonment  for  desecrating  the 
Sabbath,  by  working  in  his  front  garden.  The  same  labour¬ 
er  ia  punished  for  breach  of  contract  if  he  remains  away 
from  his  metal,  paper,  or  glass-works  on  the  Sunday,  even 
if  it  be  from  a  religious  whim.  The  orthodox  Parliament 
will  hear  nothing  of  Sabbath-breaking  if  it  occurs  in  the 
process  of  expanding  capital.  A  memorial  (August  186.3), 
in  which  the  London  day-labourers  in  fish  and  pou  ltr  y  shops 
asked  for  the  abolition  of  Sunday  labour,  states  that  their 
work  lasts  for  the  first  6  days  of  the  week  on  an  average 
15  hours  a  day,  and  on  Sunday  8-10  hours.  From  this  same 
memorial  we  learn  also  that  the  delicate  gourmands  among 
the  aristocratic  hypocrites  of  Exeter  Hall  especially  en¬ 
courage  this  “Sundav  labour.”  These  “holy  ones,”  so  zeal¬ 
ous  in  cute  curanda  [of  their  material  welfare],  show  their 
Christianity  by  the  humility  with  which  they  bear  the 
overwork,  the  privations,  and  the  hunger  of  others.  Obsc- 
quium  ventris  tstis  (the  labourers)  perniciosius  est  [It  would 
kill  them  to  look  out  for  these  (the  labourers')  hungry 
bellies]. 


working  day.  It  attains  this  end  by  shortening 
the  extent  of  the  labourer’s  life,  as  a  greedy 
farmer  snatches  increased  produce  from  the  soil 
by  robbing  it  of  its  fertility. 

The  capitalistic  mode  of  production  (essen¬ 
tially  the  production  of  surplus  value,  the  ab¬ 
sorption  of  surplus  labour),  produces  thus,  with 
the  extension  of  the  working  day,  not  only  the 
deterioration  of  human  labour  power  by  rob¬ 
bing  it  of  its  normal  moral  and  physical  condi¬ 
tions  of  development  and  function.  It  produces 
also  the  premature  exhaustion  and  death  of  this 
labour  power  itself.2  It  extends  the  labourer’s 
time  of  production  during  a  given  period  by 
shortening  his  actual  lifetime. 

But  the  value  of  the  labour  power  includes 
the  value  of  the  commodities  necessary  for  the 
reproduction  of  the  worker,  or  for  the  keeping 
up  of  the  working  class.  If,  then,  the  unnatural 
extension  of  the  working  day  that  capital  neces¬ 
sarily  strives  after,  in  its  unmeasured  passion 
for  self-expansion,  shortens  the  length  of  life  of 
the  individual  labourer,  and  therefore  the  dura¬ 
tion  of  his  labour  power,  the  forces  used  up  have 
to  be  replaced  at  a  more  rapid  rate  and  the  sum 
of  the  expenses  for  the  reproduction  of  labour 
power  will  be  greater;  just  as  in  a  machine  the 
part  of  its  value  to  be  reproduced  every  day  is 
greater  the  more  rapidly  the  machine  is  worn 
out.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  tj^at  the  interest 
of  capital  itself  points  in  the  direction  of  a  nor¬ 
mal  working  day. 

The  slave  owner  buys  his  labourer  as  he  buys 
his  horse.  If  he  loses  his  slave,  he  loses  capital 
that  can  only  be  restored  by  new  outlay  in  the 
slave  mart.  But  “the  rice-grounds  of  Georgia, 
or  the  swamps  of  the  Mississippi,  may  be  fatally 
injurious  to  the  human  constitution;  but  the 
waste  of  human  life  which  the  cultivation  of 
these  districts  necessitates  is  not  so  great  that 
it  cannot  be  repaired  from  the  teeming  pre¬ 
serves  of  Virginia  and  Kentucky.  Considera¬ 
tions  of  economy,  moreover,  which,  under  a 
natural  system,  afford  some  security  for  hu¬ 
mane  treatment  by  identifying  the  master's  in¬ 
terest  with  the  slave’s  preservation,  when  once 
trading  in  slaves  is  practised,  become  reasons 
for  racking  to  the  uttermost  the  toil  of  the  slave; 
for,  when  his  place  can  at  once  be  supplied  from 
foreign  preserves,  the  duration  of  his  life  be¬ 
comes  a  matter  of  less  moment  than  its  produc¬ 
tiveness  while  it  lasts.  It  is  accordingly  a  maxim 

*  “We  have  given  in  our  previous  reports  the  statements 
of  several  experienced  manufacturers  to  the  effect  that  over- 
hours  .  .  certainly  tend  prematurely  to  exhaust  the  work¬ 
ing  power  of  the  men.”  (Op. 64,  p.  xiii.) 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


of  slave  management,  in  slave-importing  coun¬ 
tries,  that  the  most  effective  economy  is  that 
which  takes  out  of  the  human  chattel  in  the 
shortest  space  of  time  the  utmost  amount  of 
exertion  it  is  capable  of  putting  forth.  It  is  in 
tropical  culture,  where  annual  profits  often 
equal  the  whole  capital  of  plantations,  that  ne¬ 
gro  life  is  most  recklessly  sacrificed  .It  is  the 
agriculture  of  the  West  Indies,  which  has  been 
for  centuries  prolific  of  fabulous  wealth,  that 
that  has  engulfed  millions  of  the  African  race. 
It  is  in  Cuba,  at  this  day,  whose  revenues  are 
reckoned  by  millions,  and  whose  planters  are 
princes,  that  we  see  in  the  servile  class  the 
coarsest  fare,  the  most  exhausting  and  unremit¬ 
ting  toil,  and  even  the  absolute  destruction  of 
a  portion  of  its  numbers  every  year.**1 

Mutato  nomine  de  te  jabttla  narra tur.2  For 
“slave  trade**  read  “labour  market,*’  for  “Ken¬ 
tucky  and  Virginia,**  “Ireland  and  the  agricul¬ 
tural  districts  of  England,  Scotland,  and 
Wales,**  for  “Africa,**  “Germany.**  Wc  heard 
how  overwork  thinned  the  ranks  of  the  bakers 
in  London.  Nevertheless,  the  London  labour 
market  is  always  overstocked  with  German  and 
other  candidates  for  death  in  the  bakeries.  Pot¬ 
tery,  as  we  saw,  is  one  of  the  shortest-lived  in¬ 
dustries.  Is  there  any  want,  therefore,  of  pot¬ 
ters?  Josiah  Wedgwood,  the  inventer  of  mod¬ 
ern  pottery,  himself  originally  a  common  work¬ 
man,  said  in  1785  before  the  House  of  Com¬ 
mons  that  the  whole  trade  employed  from 
15,000  to  20,000  people.3  In  the  year  1861,  the 
population  alone  of  the  town  centres  of  this  in¬ 
dustry  in  Great  Britain  numbered  101,302. 
“The  cotton  trade  has  existed  for  ninety  years. 
...  It  has  existed  for  three  generations  of  the 
English  race,  and  I  believe  I  may  safely  say  that 
during  that  period  it  has  destroyed  nine  genera¬ 
tions  of  factory  operatives.**4 

No  doubt,  in  certain  epochs  of  feverish  ac¬ 
tivity,  the  labour  market  shows  significant 
gaps,  as,  for  instance,  in  1834.  But  then  the 
manufacturers  proposed  to  the  Poor  Law  Com¬ 
missioners  that  they  should  send  the  “surplus 
population**  of  the  agricultural  districts  to  the 
north,  with  the  explanation  “that  the  manufac¬ 
turers  would  absorb  and  use  it  up.’*5  “Agents 
were  appointed  with  the  consent  of  the  Poor 

1  Cairnes,  The  Slave  Power ,  pp.  1 10, 1 1 1. 

1  Change  the  names,  and  the  story  is  about  you. 

•  John  Ward,  History  of  the  Borough  of  Stoke-upon-Trent, 
London,  1 843,  p.  42. 

4  Ferrand’s  Speech  in  the  House  of  Commons,  27  th  April, 

i8,63- 

B  ‘Those  were  the  very  words  used  by  the  cotton  manu¬ 
facturers."  Ibid. 


129 

Law  Commissioners. ...  An  office  was  set  up  in 
Manchester,  to  which  lists  were  sent  of  those 
workpeople  in  the  agricultural  districts  want¬ 
ing  employment,  and  their  names  were  regis¬ 
tered  in  books.  The  manufacturers  attended  at 
these  offices,  and  selected  such  persons  as  they 
chose;  when  they  had  selected  such  persons  as 
their  ‘wants  required,’  they  gave  instructions 
to  have  them  forwarded  to  Manchester,  and 
they  were  sent,  ticketed  like  bales  of  goods,  by 
canals,  or  with  carriers,  others  tramping  on  the 
road,  and  many  of  them  were  found  on  the  way 
lost  and  half-starved.  This  system  had  grown 
up  into  a  regular  trade.  This  House  will  hardly 
believe  it,  but  I  tell  them  that  this  traffic  in  hu¬ 
man  flesh  was  as  well  kept  up,  they  were  in  ef¬ 
fect  as  regularly  sold  to  these  [Manchester] 
manufacturers,  as  slaves  are  sold  to  the  cotton 
grower  in  the  United  States.  ...  In  i860,  ‘the 
cotton  trade  >pas  at  its  zenith.* . . .  The  manu¬ 
facturers  again  found  that  they  were  short  of 
hands.  . . .  They  applied  to  the  'flesh  agents,*  as 
they  are  called.  Those  agents  sent  to  the  south¬ 
ern  downs  of  England,  to  the  pastures  of  Dor¬ 
setshire,  to  the  glades  of  Devonshire,  to  the  peo¬ 
ple  tending  kine  in  Wiltshire,  but  they  sought 
in  vain.  The  surplus  population  was  ‘ab¬ 
sorbed.***  The  Bury  Guardian  said,  on  the  com¬ 
pletion  of  the  French  treaty,  that  “10,000  addi¬ 
tional  hands  could  be  absorbed  by  Lancashire, 
and  that  30,000 or  40,000  will  be  needed.**  After 
the  “flesh  agents  and  subagents’*  had  in  vain 
sought  through  the  agricultural  districts,  “a 
deputation  came  up  to  London,  and  waited  on 
the  Right  Hon.  Gentleman  [Mr.  Villiers,  Presi¬ 
dent  of  the  Poor  Law  Board]  with  a  view  of  ob¬ 
taining  poor  children  from  certain  union  houses 
for  the  mills  of  Lancashire.**6 

*  Ibid.  Mr.  Villiers,  despite  the  best  of  intentions  on  his 
part,  was  “legally”  obliged  to  refuse  the  requests  of  the 
manufacturers.  These  gentlemen,  however,  attained  their 
endthroughtheobligmg  natureof  the  local  Poor  Law  boards. 
Mr.  A.  Redgrave,  Inspector  of  Factories,  asserts  that  this 
time  the  system  under  which  orphans  and  pauper  children 
were  treated  “legally"  as  apprentices  “was  not  accompan¬ 
ied  with  the  old  abuses”  (on  these  “abuses,”  see  Engels, 
op.  «7.),  although  in  one  case  there  certainly  was  “abuse 
of  this  system  in  respect  to  a  number  of  girls  and  young 
women  brought  from  the  agricultural  districts  of  Scotland 
into  Lancashire  and  Cheshire.”  Under  this  system  the  man¬ 
ufacturer  entered  into  a  contract  with  the  workhouse  au¬ 
thorities  for  a  certain  period.  He  fed,  clothed,  and  lodged 
the  children,  and  gave  them  a  small  allowance  of  money. 
A  remark  of  Mr.  Redgrave,  to  be  quoted  directly,  seems 
strange,  especially  if  we  consider  that  even  among  the  years 
of  prosperity  of  the  F.nglish  cotton  trade,  the  year  i860 
stands  unparalleled,  and  that,  besides,  wages  were  excep¬ 
tionally  high.  For  this  extraordinary  demand  for  work  had 
to  contend  with  the  depopulation  of  Ireland,  with  unex¬ 
ampled  emigration  from  the  English  and  Scotch  agricul- 


130  CAPITAL 


What  experience  shows  to  the  capitalist  gen¬ 
erally  is  a  constant  excess  of  population,  i.e.,  an 
excess  in  relation  to  the  momentary  require¬ 
ments  of  surplus-labour-absorbing  capital,  al¬ 
though  this  excess  is  made  up  of  generations  of 
human  beings  who  are  stunted,  short-lived, 
swiftly  replacing  each  other,  plucked,  so  to  say, 
before  maturity.1  And,  indeed,  experience 
shows  to  the  intelligent  observer  with  what 
swiftness  and  grip  the  capitalist  mode  of  pro¬ 
duction,  dating,  historically  speaking,  only 
from  yesterday,  has  seized  the  vital  power  of 
the  people  by  the  very  root— shows  how  the  de¬ 
generation  of  the  industrial  population  is  only 
retarded  by  the  constant  absorption  of  primi¬ 
tive  and  physically  uncorrupted  elements  from 
the  country— shows  how  even  the  country  la¬ 
bourers,  in  spite  of  fresh  air  and  the  principle 
of  natural  selection  that  works  so  powerfully 
amongst  them  and  only  permits  the  survival  of 

tural  districts  to  Australia  and  America,  with  an  actual 
diminution  of  the  population  in  some  of  the  English  agri¬ 
cultural  districts,  in  consequence  partly  of  an  actual  break¬ 
down  of  the  vital  force  of  the  labourers,  partly  of  the  al¬ 
ready  effected  dispersion  of  the  disposable  population 
through  the  dealers  in  human  flesh.  Despite  all  this,  Mr. 
Redgrave  says:  “This  kind  of  labour,  however,  would  only 
be  sought  after  when  none  other  could  be  procured,  for  it 
is  a  high-priced  labour.  The  ordinary  wages  of  a  boy  of  13 
would  be  about  4/.  per  week,  but  to  lodge,  to  clothe,  to 
feed,  and  to  provide  medical  attendance  and  proper  super¬ 
intendence  for  50  or  100  of  these  boys,  and  to  set  aside 
some  remuneration  for  them,  could  not  be  accomplished 
for  4 s.  a  head  per  week.”  {Report  of  the  Inspector  of  Fac¬ 
tories  30th  April,  i860,  p.  27.)  Mr.  Redgrave  forgets  to  tell 
us  how  the  labourer  himself  can  do  all  this  for  his  children 
out  of  their  4 s.  a  week  wages,  when  the  manufacturer  can¬ 
not  do  it  for  the  50  or  100  children  lodged,  boarded,  super¬ 
intended  all  together.  To  guard  against  false  conclusions 
from  the  text,  I  ought  here  to  remark  that  the  English  cot¬ 
ton  industry,  since  it  was  placed  under  the  Factory  Act  of 
1850  with  its  regulations  of  labour  time,  etc.,  must  be  re¬ 
garded  as  the  model  industry  of  England.  The  English  cot¬ 
ton  operative  is  in  every  respect  better  off  than  his  con¬ 
tinental  companion  in  misery.  “The  Prussian  factory  oper¬ 
ative  labours  at  least  ten  hours  per  week  more  than  his 
English  competitor,  and,  if  employed  at  his  own  loom  in 
his  own  house,  his  labour  is  not  restricted  to  even  those 
additional  hours.”  {Report  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  Oct. 
1853,  p.  103.)  Redgrave,  the  Factory  Inspector  mentioned 
above,  after  the  Industrial  Exhibition  in  1851,  travelled 
on  the  Continent,  especially  in  France  and  Germany,  for 
the  purpose  of  inquiring  into  the  conditionsof  the  factories. 
Of  the  Prussian  operative  he  says:  “He  receives  a  remuner¬ 
ation  sufficient  to  procure  the  simple  fare,  and  to  supply 
the  slender  comforts  to  which  he  has  been  accustomed  . . . 
He  lives  upon  his  coarse  fare,  and  works  hard,  wherein  his 
position  is  subordinate  to  that  of  the  English  operative.” 
{Report  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  Oct.,  1 853,  p.  85.) 

1  The  overworked  “die  off  with  strange  rapidity;  but  the 
places  of  those  who  perish  are  instantly  filled,  and  a  fre¬ 
quent  change  of  persons  makes  no  alteration  in  the  scene.” 
— E.  G.  Wakefield,  England  and  America ,  London,  1833, 
Vol.  I,  p.  55. 


the  strongest,  are  already  beginning  to  die  off.9 
Capital,  that  has  such  good  reasons  for  denying 
the  sufferings  of  the  legions  of  workers  that  sur¬ 
round  it,  is  in  practice  moved  as  much  and  as 
little  by  the  sight  of  the  coming  degradation 
and  final  depopulation  of  the  human  race  as  by 
the  probable  fall  of  the  earth  into  the  sun.  In 
every  stock-jobbing  swindle  every  one  knows 
that  some  time  or  other  the  crash  must  come, 
but  every  one  hopes  that  it  may  fall  on  the  head 
of  his  neighbour,  after  he  himself  has  caught  the 
shower  of  gold  and  placed  it  in  safety.  Aprhs 
mot  le  dilugel 3  is  the  watchword  of  every  capi¬ 
talist  and  of  every  capitalist  nation.  Hence  cap¬ 
ital  is  reckless  of  the  health  or  length  of  life  of 
the  labourer,  unless  under  compulsion  from  so¬ 
ciety.4  To  the  outcry  as  to  the  physical  and 
mental  degradation,  the  premature  death,  the 
torture  of  overwork,  it  answers:  “Ought  these 
to  trouble  us,  since  they  increase  our  profits ?” 
But  looking  at  things  as  a  whole,  ail  this  does 
not,  indeed,  depend  on  the  good  or  ill  will  of  the 
individual  capitalist.  Free  competition  brings 
out  the  inherent  laws  of  capitalist  production 
in  the  shape  of  external  coercive  laws  having 
power  over  every  individual  capitalist.6 

*  Sec  Public  Health .  Sixth  Report  of  the  Medical  Officer  of 
the  Privy  Council ,  1863.  Published  in  London  1864.  This 
report  deals  especially  with  the  agricultural  labourers. 
“Sutherland  ...  is  commonly  represented  as  a  highly  un¬ 
proved  county  . . .  but  . . .  recent  inquiry  has  discovered 
that,  even  there,  in  districts  once  famous  for  fine  men  and 
gallant  soldiers,  the  inhabitants  have  degenerated  into  a 
meagre  and  stunted  race.  In  the  healthiest  situations,  on 
hill-sides  fronting  the  sea,  the  faces  of  their  famished  chil¬ 
dren  are  as  pale  as  they  could  be  in  the  foul  atmosphere  of 
a  London  alley.”  (W.  T.  Thornton,  Overpopulation  and  its 
Remedy ,  pp.  74, 75.)  They  resemble  in  fact  the  30,000  “gal¬ 
lant  Highlanders”  whom  Glasgow  pigs  together  in  its  wynds 
and  closes  with  prostitutes  and  thieves. 

8  “After  me  the  deluge.” 

4  “But  though  the  health  of  a  population  is  so  important 
a  fact  of  the  national  c  apital,  wc  are  afraid  it  must  be  said 
that  the  class  of  employers  of  labour  have  not  been  the 
most  forward  to  guard  and  cherish  this  treasure. . . .  The 
consideration  of  the  health  of  the  operatives  was  forced 
upon  the  millowners.”  {The  Ttmest  November  5th,  1861.) 
“The  men  of  the  West  Riding  became  the  clothiers  of  man¬ 
kind  . . .  the  health  of  the  workpeople  was  sacrificed,  and 
the  race  in  a  few  generations  must  have  degenerated.  But 
a  reaction  set  in.  Lord  Shaftesbury's  Bill  limited  the  hours 
of  children’s  labour,”  etc.  {Report  of  the  Registrar -General , 
October  1861.) 

6  Wc,  therefore,  find,  e.g.,  that  in  the  beginning  of  1863, 
twenty-six  firms  owning  extensive  potteries  in  Stafford¬ 
shire,  amongst  others,  Josiah  Wedgwood,  St  Sons',  petition 
in  a  memorial  for  “some  legislative  enactment.”  Competi¬ 
tion  with  other  capitalists  permits  them  no  voluntary  lim¬ 
itation  of  working-time  for  children,  etc.  “Much  as  we  de¬ 
plore  the  evils  before  mentioned,  it  would  not  be  possible 
to  prevent  them  by  any  scheme  of  agreement  between  the 
manufacturers. . . .  Taking  all  these  points  into  considera¬ 
tion,  we  have  come  to  the  conviction  that  some  legislative 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


The  establishment  of  a  normal  working  day 
is  the  result  of  centuries  of  struggle  between 
capitalist  and  labourer.  The  history  of  this 
struggle  shows  two  opposed  tendencies.  Com¬ 
pare,  e.g.,  the  English  factory  legislation  of  our 
time  with  the  English  Labour  Statutes  from  the 
fourteenth  century  to  well  into  the  middle  of 
the  eighteenth.1  Whilst  the  modern  Factory 
Acts  compulsorily  shortened  the  working  day, 
the  earlier  statutes  tried  to  lengthen  it  by  com¬ 
pulsion.  Of  course  the  pretensions  of  capital  in 
embryo— when,  beginning  to  grow,  it  secures 
the  right  of  absorbing  a  quantum  sufficit 2  of  sur¬ 
plus  labour,  not  merely  by  the  force  of  economic 
relations,  but  by  the  help  of  the  State— appear 
very  modest  when  put  face  to  face  with  the  con¬ 
cessions  that,  growling  and  struggling,  it  has  to 
make  in  its  adult  condition.  It  takes  centuries 
ere  the  “free”  labourer,  thanks  to  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  capitalistic  production,  agrees,  i.c.,  is 
compelled  by  social  conditions,  to  sell  the  whole 
of  his  active  life,  his  very  capacity  for  work,  for 
the  price  of  thp  r,<  v'ssaries  of  life,  his  birthright 
for  a  mess  of  pottage.  Hence  it  is  natural  that 
the  lengthening  of  the  working  day,  which  cap¬ 
ital,  from  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  to  the 
end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  tries  to  impose 
by  State  measures  on  adult  labourers,  approxi¬ 
mately  coincides  with  the  shortening  of  the 
working  day  which,  in  the  second  half  of  the 
nineteenth  century,  has  here  and  there  been  ef¬ 
fected  by  the  State  to  prevent  the  coining  of 
children’s  blood  into  capital.  That  which  today, 
e.g.,  in  the  State  of  Massachusetts,  until  recent¬ 
ly  the  freest  state  of  the  North  American  Re¬ 
public,  has  been  proclaimed  as  the  statutory 
limit  of  the  labour  of  children  under  12,  was  in 
England,  even  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth 


enactment  is  wanted.”  {Children  s  Employment  Commis¬ 
sion ,  First  Report ,  1863,  p.  322.)  Most  recently  a  much 
more  striking  example  offers.  The  rise  in  the  price  of  cot¬ 
ton,  during  a  period  of  feverish  activity,  had  induced  the 
manufacturers  in  Blackburn  to  shorten,  by  mutual  con¬ 
sent,  the  working  time  in  their  mills  during  a  certain  fixed 
period.  This  period  terminated  about  the  end  of  Novem¬ 
ber,  1871.  Meanwhile,  the  wealthier  manufacturers,  who 
combined  spinning  with  weaving,  used  the  diminution  of 
production  resulting  from  this  agreement  to  extend  their 
own  business  and  thus  to  make  great  profits  at  the  expense 
of  the  small  employers.  The  latter  thereupon  turned  in 
their  extremity  to  the  operatives,  urged  them  earnestly 
to  agitate  for  the  9  hours’  system,  and  promised  contri¬ 
butions  in  money  to  this  end. 

1  The  Labour  Statutes,  the  like  of  which  were  enacted 
at  the  same  time  in  France,  the  Netherlands,  and  else¬ 
where,  were  first  formally  repealed  in  England  in  1813, 
long  after  the  changes  in  methods  of  production  had  ren¬ 
dered  them  obsolete. 

1  Sufficient  quantity. 


131 

century,  the  normal  working-day  of  able- 
bodied  artizans,  robust  labourers,  athletic 
blacksmiths.3 

The  first  Statute  of  Labourers  (23  Edward 
III,  1349)  found  its  immediate  pretext  (not  its 
cause,  for  legislation  of  this  kind  lasts  centuries 
after  the  pretext  for  it  has  disappeared)  in  the 
great  plague  that  decimated  the  people,  so  that, 
as  a  Tory  writer  says,  “The  difficulty  of  getting 
men  to  work  on  reasonable  terms  (i.e.,  at  a  price 
that  left  their  employers  a  reasonable  quantity 
of  surplus  labour)  grew  to  such  a  height  as  to  be 
quite  intolerable.”4  Reasonable  wages  were, 
therefore,  fixed  by  law,  as  well  as  the  limits  of 
the  working  day.  The  latter  point,  the  only  one 
that  here  interests  us,  is  repeated  in  the  Statute 
of  1496  (Henry  VIII).  The  working  day  for  all 
artificers  and  field  labourers  from  March  to 
September  ought,  according  to  this  statute 
(which,  however,  could  not  be  enforced),  to  last 
from  5  in  the  morning  to  between  7  and  8  in  the 
evening.  But  the  meal-times  consist  of  1  hour 
for  breakfast,  1  )A  hours  for  dinner,  and  lA  an 
hour  for  “noon-meate,”  i.e.,  exactly  twice  as 
much  as  under  the  Factory  Acts  now  in  force.6 

3  “No  child  under  12  years  of  age  shall  be  employed  in 
any  manufacturing  establishment  more  than  10  hours  in 
one  day.”  General  Statutes  of  Massachusetts,  63,  ch.  12.  (The 
various  Statutes  were  passed  between  1 836  and  1858.)  “La¬ 
bour  performed  during  a  period  of  10  hours  on  any  day  in 
all  cotton,  woollen,  silk,  paper,  glass,  and  flax  factories,  or 
in  manufactories  of  iron  and  brass,  shall  be  considered  a 
legal  day’s  labour.  And  be  it  enacted  that  hereafter  no  mi¬ 
nor  engaged  in  any  factory  shall  be  holden  or  required  to 
work  more  than  10  hours  in  any  day,  or  60  hours  in  any 
week;  and  that  hereafter  no  minor  shall  be  admitted  as  a 
worker  under  the  age  of  10  years  in  any  factory  within  this 
State.”  State  of  New  Jersey ,  an  Act  to  limit  the  Hours  of 
Labour ,  etc.,  61  and  62.  (Law  of  nth  March,  1855.)  “No 
minor  who  has  attained  the  age  of  12  years,  and  is  under 
the  age  of  15  years,  shall  be  employed  in  any  manufactur¬ 
ing  establishment  more  than  1 1  hours  in  any  one  day,  nor 
before  5  o’clock  in  the  morning,  nor  after  7.30  in  the  even¬ 
ing.”  {Revised  Statutes  of  the  State  of  Rhode  Island ,  etc.,  ch. 
39.  §2J,ist  July,  1857.) 

4  Sophisms  of  Free  Trade,  7th  edition,  London,  1850,  p. 
205;  9th  edition,  p.  253.  This  same  Tory,  moreover,  ad¬ 
mits  that  “Actsof  Parliament  regulating  wages,  but  against 
the  labourer  and  in  favour  of  the  master,  lasted  for  the 
long  period  of  464  years.  Population  grew.  These  laws  were 
then  found,  and  really  became,  unnecessary  and  burden- 
tome.”  {Ibid.,  p.  206.) 

3  In  reference  to  this  statute,  J.  Wade  with  truth  re¬ 
marks:  “From  the  statement  above  (i.e.,  with  regard  to  the 
statute)  it  appears  that  in  1496  the  diet  was  considered 
equivalent  to  one-third  of  the  income  of  an  artificer  and 
one-half  the  income  of  a  labourer,  which  indicates  a  greater 
degree  of  independence  among  the  working  classes  than 
prevails  at  present;  for  the  board,  both  of  labourers  and 
artificers,  would  now  be  reckoned  at  a  much  higher  pro¬ 
portion  of  their  wages.”  (J.  Wade,  History  of  the  Middle 
and  ITorking  Classes ,  pp.  24, 2<,  and  577.)  The  opinion  that 
this  difference  is  due  to  the  difference  in  the  price  relations 


CAPITAL 


132 

In  winter,  work  was  to  last  from  5  in  the  morn¬ 
ing  until  dark,  with  the  same  intervals.  A  stat¬ 
ute  of  Elizabeth  of  1 562  leaves  the  length  of  the 
working  day  for  all  labourers  “hired  for  daily 
or  weekly  wage’*  untouched,  but  aims  at  limit¬ 
ing  the  intervals  to  hours  in  the  summer,  or 
to  2  in  the  winter.  Dinner  is  to  last  only  1  hour, 
and  the  “afternoon  sleep  of  half  an  hour”  is  al¬ 
lowed  only  between  the  middle  of  May  and  the 
middle  of  August.  For  every  hour  of  absence  id, 
is  to  be  subtracted  from  the  wage.  In  practice, 
however,  the  conditions  were  much  more  fa¬ 
vourable  to  the  labourers  than  in  the  statute 
book.  William  Petty,  the  father  of  political 
economy,  and  to  some  extent  the  founder  of 
statistics,  says  in  a  work  that  he  published  in 
the  last  third  of  the  seventeenth  century:  “La¬ 
bouring  men  (then  meaning  field  labourers) 
work  10  hours  per  diemy  and  make  20  meals  per 
week,  viz.,  3  a  day  for  working  days,  and  2  on 
Sundays;  whereby  it  is  plain  that  if  they  could 
fast  on  Fryday  nights  and  dine  in  one  hour  and 
an  half,  whereas  they  take  two,  from  eleven  to 
one;  thereby  this  working  x/aomore,  and  spend¬ 
ing  x/aoless,  the  above-mentioned  (tax)  might  be 
raised.” 1  Was  not  Dr.  Andrew  Ure  right  in  crying 
down  the  Twelve  Hours  Bill  of  1833  as  a  retro¬ 
gression  to  the  times  of  the  dark  ages  ?  It  is  true, 
these  regulations  contained  in  the  statute  men¬ 
tioned  by  Petty  apply  also  to  apprentices.  But 
the  condition  of  child  labour,  even  at  the  end  of 
the  seventeenth  century,  is  seen  from  the  fol¬ 
lowing  complaint:  “Tis  not  their  practice  (in 
Germany),  as  with  us  in  this  kingdom,  to  bind 
an  apprentice  for  seven  years;  three  or  four  is 
their  common  standard:  and  the  reason  is  be¬ 
cause  they  are  educated  from  their  cradle  to 
something  of  employment,  which  renders  them 
the  more  apt  and  docile,  and  consequently  the 
more  capable  of  attaining  to  a  ripeness  and 
quicker  proficiency  in  business.  Whereas  our 
youth,  here  in  England,  being  bred  to  nothing 
before  they  come  to  be  apprentices,  make  a  very 
slow  progress  and  require  much  longer  time 
wherein  to  reach  the  perfection  of  accomplished 
artists.”* 


between  food  and  clothing  then  and  now  is  refuted  by  the 
most  cursory  glance  at  Chronicon  pretiosum,  etc.,  by  Bishop 
Fleetwood.  1st  edition,  London,  1707;  2d  edition,  London, 
*745- 

1 W.  Petty,  Political  Anatomy  of  Ireland ,  1672, 1691  edi¬ 
tion,  p.  10,  Per  bum  Sapienti. 

*  A  Discourse  on  the  Necessity  of  encouraging  Mechanic 
Industry ,  London,  1689,  p.  13.— Macaulay,  who  has  falsi¬ 
fied  Engbsh  history  in  the  interest  of  the  Whigs  and  the 
bourgeoisie,  declares  as  follows:  “The  practice  of  setting 
children  prematurely  to  work  • .  •  prevailed  in  the  seven- 


Still,  during  the  greater  part  of  the  eight¬ 
eenth  century,  up  to  the  epoch  of  modern  in¬ 
dustry  and  machinism,  capital  in  England  had 
not  succeeded  in  seizing  for  itself,  by  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  the  weekly  value  of  labour  power,  the 
whole  week  of  the  labourer  with  the  exception, 
however,  of  the  agricultural  labourers.  The 
fact  that  they  could  live  for  a  whole  week  on 
the  wage  of  four  days  did  not  appear  to  the  la¬ 
bourers  a  sufficient  reason  that  they  should 
work  the  other  two  days  for  the  capitalist.  One 
party  of  English  economists,  in  the  interest  of 
capital,  denounces  this  obstinacy  in  the  most 
violent  manner;  another  party  defends  the 
labourers.  Let  us  listen,  e.g.,  to  the  contest  be¬ 
tween  Postlethwayt  (whose  Dictionary  of  Trade 
then  had  the  same  reputation  as  the  kindred 
works  of  McCulloch  and  McGregor  today)  and 
the  author  (already  quoted)  of  the  Essay  on 
Trade  and  Commerce } 


teenth  century  to  an  extent  which,  when  compared  with 
the  extent  of  the  manufacturing  system,  seems  almost  in¬ 
credible.  At  Norwich,  the  chief  seat  of  the  clothing  trade, 
a  little  creature  of  six  years  old  was  thought  fit  for  labour. 
Several  writers  of  that  time,  and  among  them  some  who 
were  considered  as  eminently  benevolent,  mention  with 
exultation  the  fact  that  in  that  single  city  boys  and  girls  of 
very  tender  age  create  wealth  exceeding  what  was  neces¬ 
sary  for  their  own  subsistence  by  twelve  thousand  pounds 
a  year.  The  more  carefully  we  examine  the  history  of  the 
past,  the  more  reason  shall  we  find  to  dissent  from  those 
who  imagine  that  our  age  has  been  fruitful  of  new  social 
evils. . . .  That  which  is  new  is  the  intelligence  and  the  hu¬ 
manity  which  remedies  them  ”  {History  of  England ,  Vol. 
I,  p.  419.)  Macaulay  might  have  reported  further  that  “ex¬ 
tremely  well-disposed"  amts  du  commerce  in  the  seven¬ 
teenth  century,  narrate  with  “exultation”  how  in  a  poor- 
house  in  Holland  a  child  of  four  was  employed,  and  that 
this  example  of  “orr/M  mise  en  pratique ”  [“virtue  put  into 
practice"]  passes  muster  in  all  the  humanitarian  works,  h 
la  Macaulay,  to  the  time  of  Adam  Smith.  It  is  true  that 
with  the  substitution  of  manufacture  for  handicrafts,  trac¬ 
es  of  the  exploitation  of  children  begin  to  appear.  This  ex¬ 
ploitation  existed  always  to  a  certain  extent  among  peas¬ 
ants  and  was  the  more  developed  the  heavier  the  yoke 
pressing  on  the  husbandman.  The  tendency  of  capital  is 
there  unmistakably;  but  the  facts  themselves  are  still  as 
isolated  as  the  phenomena  of  two-headed  children.  Hence 
they  were  noted  “with  exultation"  as  especially  worthy  of 
remark  and  as  wonders  by  the  far-seeing  "amis  du  com¬ 
merce ,"  and  recommended  as  models  for  their  own  time 
and  for  posterity.  This  same  Scotch  sycophant  and  fine 
talker,  Macaulay,  says:  “We  hear  today  only  of  retro¬ 
gression  and  see  only  progress."  What  eyoi,  and,  especial¬ 
ly,  what  ears! 

*  Among  the  accusers  of  the  workpeople  the  most  angry 
is  the  anonymous  author  quoted  in  the  text  of  An  Essay  on 
Trade  and  Commerce ,  containing  Observations  on  Taxation , 
etc.,  London,  1770.  He  had  already  dealt  with  this  subject 
in  his  earlier  work:  Considerations  on  Taxes ,  London,  1765. 
On  tie  same  side  follows  Polomus  Arthur  Young,  the  un¬ 
utterable  statistical  prattler.  Among  the  defenders  of  the 
working  classes  the  foremost  are.  Jacob  Vanderlint,  Money 
answers  all  Things ,  London,  1734;  the  Rev.  Nathaniel  For- 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


Postlethwayt  says,  among  other  things:  “We 
cannot  put  an  end  to  those  few  observations, 
without  noticing  that  trite  remark  in  the  mouth 
of  too  many;  that  if  the  industrious  poor  can 
obtain  enough  to  maintain  themselves  in  five 
days,  they  will  not  work  the  whole  six.  Whence 
they  infer  the  necessity  of  even  the  necessaries 
of  life  being  made  dear  by  taxes,  or  any  other 
means,  to  compel  the  working  artizan  and  man¬ 
ufacturer  to  labour  the  whole  six  days  in  the 
week,  without  ceasing.  I  must  beg  leave  to  dif¬ 
fer  in  sentiment  from  those  great  politicians 
who  contend  for  the  perpetual  slavery  of  the 
working  people  of  this  kingdom;  they  forget  the 
vulgar  adage,  ‘All  work  and  no  play.*  Have 
not  the  English  boasted  of  the  ingenuity  and 
dexterity  of  her  working  artists  and  manufac¬ 
turers  which  have  heretofore  given  credit  and 
reputation  to  British  wares  in  general?  What 
has  this  been  owing  to?  To  nothing  more  prob¬ 
ably  than  the  relaxation  of  the  working  people 
in  their  own  way.  Were  they  obliged  to  toil  the 
year  round,  thw  wfmle  six  days  in  the  week,  in 
a  repetition  of  the  same  work,  might  it  not  blunt 
their  ingenuity,  and  render  them  stupid  instead 
of  alert  and  dexterous;  and  might  not  our  work¬ 
men  lose  their  reputation,  instead  of  maintain¬ 
ing  it  by  such  eternal  slavery? . . .  And  what 
sort  of  workmanship  could  we  expect  from  such 
hard-driven  animals?  .  .  .  Many  of  them  will 
execute  as  much  work  in  four  days  as  a  French¬ 
man  will  in  five  or  six.  But  if  Englishmen  are  to 
be  eternal  drudges,  *tis  to  be  feared  they  will 
degenerate  below  the  Frenchmen.  As  our  peo¬ 
ple  are  famed  for  bravery  in  war,  do  we  not  say 
that  it  is  owing  to  good  English  roast  beef  and 
pudding  in  their  bellies,  as  well  as  their  consti¬ 
tutional  spirit  of  liberty?  And  why  may  not  the 
superior  ingenuity  and  dexterity  of  our  artists 
and  manufactures,  be  owing  to  that  freedom 
and  liberty  to  direct  themselves  in  their  own 
way,  and  I  hope  we  shall  never  have  them  de¬ 
prived  of  such  privileges  and  that  good  living 
from  whence  their  ingenuity  no  less  than  their 
courage  may  proceed.”1  Thereupon  the  author 
of  the  Essay  on  Trade  and  Commerce  replies: 
“If  the  making  of  every  seventh  day  an  holiday 
is  supposed  to  be  of  divine  institution,  as  it  im- 

9ter,  D.D.,  An  Enquiry  into  the  Causes  of  the  Present  Price 
of  Provisions ,  London,  1766;  Dr.  Price,  and  especially 
Postlethwayt,  as  well  in  the  supplement  to  his  Universal 
Dictionary  of  Trade  and  Commerce ,  as  in  his  Great  Britain's 
Commercial  Interest  Explained  and  Improved ,  2nd  edition, 
1755.  The  facts  themselves  are  confirmed  by  many  other 
writers  of  the  time,  among  others  by  Josiah  Tucker. 

1  Postlethwayt,  op,  cit, ,  First  Preliminary  Discourse ,  p. 
Li- 


133 

plies  the  appropriating  the  other  six  days  to  la¬ 
bour”  (he  means  capital  as  we  shall  soon  see) 
“surely  it  will  not  be  thought  cruel  to  enforce 
it. . . .  That  mankind  in  general,  are  naturally 
inclined  to  ease  and  indolence,  we  fatally  ex¬ 
perience  to  be  true,  from  the  conduct  of  our 
manufacturing  populace,  who  do  not  labour, 
upon  an  average,  above  four  days  in  a  week,  un¬ 
less  provisions  happen  to  be  very  dear.  . .  .  Put 
all  the  necessaries  of  the  poor  under  one  denom¬ 
ination;  for  instance,  call  them  all  wheat,  or 
suppose  that . .  .  the  bushel  of  wheat  shall  cost 
five  shillings  and  that  he  (a  manufacturer) 
earns  a  shilling  by  his  labour,  he  then  would  be 
obliged  to  work  five  days  only  in  a  week.  If  the 
bushel  of  wheat  should  cost  but  four  shillings, 
he  would  be  obliged  to  work  but  four  days;  but 
as  wages  in  this  kingdom  are  much  higher  in 
proportion  to  the  price  of  necessaries  . .  .  the 
manufacturer, vVho  labours  four  days,  has  a  sur¬ 
plus  of  money  to  live  idle  with  the  rest  of  the 
week  ...  1  hope  I  have  said  enough  to  make  it 
appear  that  the  moderate  labour  of  six  days  in 
a  week  is  no  slavery.  Our  labouring  people  do 
this,  and  to  all  appearance  are  the  happiest  of 
all  our  labouring  poor;2  but  the  Dutch  do  this 
in  manufactures,  and  appear  to  be  a  very  happy 
people.  The  French  do  so,  when  holidays  do  not 
intervene.3  But  our  populace  have  adopted  a 
notion  that  as  Englishmen  they  enjoy  a  birth¬ 
right  privilege  of  being  more  free  and  independ¬ 
ent  than  in  any  country  in  Europe.  Now  this 
idea,  as  far  as  it  may  affect  the  bravery  of  our 
troops,  may  be  of  some  use;  but  the  less  the 
manufacturing  poor  have  of  it,  certainly  the 
better  for  themselves  and  for  the  State.  The  la¬ 
bouring  people  should  never  think  themselves 
independent  of  their  superiors.  ...  It  is  ex¬ 
tremely  dangerous  to  encourage  mobs  in  a  com¬ 
mercial  state  like  ours,  where,  perhaps,  seven 
parts  out  of  eight  of  the  whole  are  people  with 
little  or  no  property.  The  cure  will  not  be  per¬ 
fect  till  our  manufacturing  poor  are  contented 
to  labour  six  days  for  the  same  sum  which  they 
now  earn  in  four  days.”4  To  this  end,  and  for 

2  An  Essay ,  etc.  He  himself  relates  on  p.  96  wherein  the 
''happiness”  of  the  English  agricultural  labourer  already 
in  1770  consisted.  "Their  powers  are  always  upon  the 
stretch,  they  cannot  live  cheaper  than  they  do,  nor  work 
haidcr.” 

9  Protestantism,  by  changing  almost  all  the  traditional 
holidays  into  workdays,  plays  an  important  part  in  the  gen¬ 
esis  of  capital. 

4  Op,  cit,t  pp.  15,  41,  96,  97,  55,  57, 69.— Jacob  Vandcr- 
lint,  as  early  as  1734.  declared  that  the  secret  of  the  outcry 
of  the  capitalists  as  to  the  laziness  of  the  working  people 
was  simply  that  they  claimed  for  the  same  wages  6  days* 
labour  instead  of  4. 


CAPITAL 


134 

“extirpating  idleness,  debauchery  and  excess,” 
promoting  a  spirit  of  industry,  “lowering  the 
price  of  labour  in  our  manufactories,  and  easing 
the  lands  of  the  heavy  burden  of  poor’s  rates,” 
our  “faithful  Eckart”  of  capital  proposes  this 
approved  device:  to  shut  up  such  labourers  as 
become  dependent  on  public  support,  in  a  word, 
paupers,  in  “an  ideal  workhouse .”  Such  an  ideal 
workhouse  must  be  made  a  “House  of  Terror,” 
and  not  an  asylum  for  the  poor,  “where  they 
are  to  be  plentifully  fed,  warmly  and  decently 
clothed,  and  where  they  do  but  little  work.”1 
In  this  “House  of  Terror,”  this  “ideal  work- 
house,”  the  poor  “shall  work  14  hours  in  a  day, 
allowing  proper  time  for  meals,  in  such  manner 
that  there  shall  remain  1 2  hours  of  net  labour.”2 

Twelve  working  hours  daily  in  the  “ideal 
workhouse,”  in  the  “House  of  Terror”  of  1770! 
Sixty-three  years  later,  in  1833,  when  the  Eng¬ 
lish  Parliament  reduced  the  working  day  for 
children  of  13  to  18,  in  four  branches  of  indus¬ 
try,  to  12  full  hours,  the  judgment  day  of  Eng¬ 
lish  Industry  had  dawned!  In  1852,  when  Louis 
Bonaparte  sought  to  secure  his  position  with 
the  bourgeoisie  by  tampering  with  the  legal 
working  day,  the  French  people  cried  out  with 
one  voice:  “The  law  that  limits  the  working  day 
to  12  hours  is  the  one  good  that  has  remained 
to  us  of  the  legislation  of  the  Republic!”3  At 
Zurich  the  work  of  children  over  10  is  limited  to 
12  hours;  in  Aargau  in  1862,  the  work  of  chil¬ 
dren  between  13  and  16  was  reduced  from  12 
to  12  hours;  in  Austria  in  i860,  for  children  be¬ 
tween  14  and  16,  the  same  reduction  was  made.4 

1  Op.  tit.,  p.  242. 

1  “The  French,"  he  says,  “laugh  at  our  enthusiastic  ideas 
of  liberty."  Op.  cit p.  78. 

3  “They  especially  objected  to  work  beyond  the  12  hours 
per  day,  because  the  law  which  fixed  those  hours  is  the 
only  good  which  remains  to  them  of  the  legislation  of  the 
Republic."  {Reports  oj  Inspectors  oj  Factories,  31st  Octo¬ 
ber,  1856,  p.  80.)  The  French  Twelve  Hours  Bill  of  Sep¬ 
tember  5th,  1850,  a  bourgeois  edition  of  the  decree  of  the 
Provisional  Government  of  March  2nd,  1848,  holds  in  all 
workshops  without  exceptions.  Before  this  law  the  work¬ 
ing  day  in  France  was  without  definite  limit.  It  lasted  in 
the  factories  14,  15,  or  more  hours.  See  M.  Blanqui,  Des 
classes  ouvribes  en  France ,  pendant  Vannfe  1848.  M.  Blan¬ 
qui  the  economist,  not  the  Revolutionist,  had  been  en¬ 
trusted  by  the  Government  with  an  inquiry  into  the  con¬ 
dition  of  the  working  class. 

4  Belgium  is  the  model  bourgeois  state  in  regard  to  the 
regulation  of  the  working  day.  Lord  Howard  of  Welden, 
English  minister  plenipotentiary  at  Brussels,  reports  to 
the  Foreign  Office,  May  12th,  1862:  “M.  Rogier,  the  min¬ 
ister,  informed  me  that  children’s  labour  is  limited  neither 
by  a  general  law  nor  by  any  local  regulations;  that  the 
Government,  during  the  last  three  years,  intended  in  every 
session  to  propose  a  bill  on  the  subject,  but  always  found 
an  insuperable  obstacle  in  the  jealous  opposition  to  any  leg¬ 
islation  in  contradiction  with  the  principle  of  perfect  free¬ 
dom  of  labour." 


“What  a  progress,”  since  1770!  Macaulay 
would  shout  with  exultation! 

The  “House  of  Terror”  for  paupers,  of  which 
the  capitalistic  soul  of  1770  only  dreamed,  was 
realized  a  few  years  later  in  the  shape  of  a  gigan¬ 
tic  Workhouse  for  the  industrial  worker  him¬ 
self.  It  is  called  the  factory .  And  the  ideal  this 
time  fades  before  the  reality. 

6.  The  Struggle  for  the  Normal  Working  Day . 

Compulsory  Limitation  by  Law  of  the  Working 

Time .  The  English  Factory  Acts,  1833  to  1864 

After  capital  had  taken  centuries  in  extend¬ 
ing  the  working  day  to  its  normal  maximum 
limit,  and  then  beyond  this  to  the  limit  of  the 
natural  day  of  12  hours,6  there  followed  on  the 
birth  of  mechinism  and  modern  industry  in  the 
last  third  of  the  eighteenth  century,  a  violent 
encroachment  like  that  of  an  avalanche  in  its 
intensity  and  extent.  All  bounds  of  morals  and 
nature,  age  and  sex,  day  and  night,  were  broken 
down.  Even  the  ideas  of  day  and  night,  of  rustic 
simplicity  in  the  old  statutes,  became  so  con¬ 
fused  that  an  English  judge,  as  late  as  i860, 
needed  a  quite  Talmudic  sagacity  to  explain 
“judicially”  what  was  day  and  what  was  night.0 
Capital  celebrated  its  orgies. 

As  soon  as  the  working  class,  stunned  at  first 
by  the  noise  and  turmoil  of  the  new  system  of 
production,  recovered  in  some  measure  its  sens¬ 
es,  its  resistance  began,  and  first  in  the  native 
land  of  mechinism,  in  England.  For  30  years, 
however,  the  concessions  conquered  by  the 
workpeople  were  purely  nominal.  Parliament 
passed  5  Labour  Laws  between  1802  and  1833, 
but  was  shrewd  enough  not  to  vote  a  penny  for 
their  carrying  out,  for  the  requisite  officials,  etc.7 

*  “It  is  certainly  much  to  be  regretted  that  any  class  of 
persons  should  toil  12  hours  a  day,  which,  including  the 
time  for  their  meals  and  for  going  to  and  returning  from 
their  work,  amounts,  in  fact,  to  14  of  the  24  hours.  . .  . 
Without  entering  into  the  question  of  health,  no  one  will 
hesitate,  I  think,  to  admit  that,  in  a  moral  point  oj  view ,  so 
entire  an  absorption  of  the  time  of  the  working  classes, 
without  intermission,  from  the  early  age  of  13,  and,  in 
trades  not  subject  to  restriction,  much  younger,  must  be 
extremely  prejudicial,  and  is  an  evil  greatly  to  be  deplored. 
. . .  For  the  sake,  therefore,  of  public  morals,  of  bringing 
up  an  orderly  population,  and  of  giving  the  great  boay  of 
the  people  a  reasonable  enjoyment  of  life,  ft  is  much  to  be 
desired  that  in  all  trades  some  i>ortion  of  every  working 
day  should  be  reserved  for  rest  and  leisure.”— Leonard 
Horner,  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories,  Dec.,  1841. 

6  See  the  judgment  of  Mr.  J.  II.  Otwey,  Belfast.  Hilary 
Sessions,  County  Antrim,  i860. 

7  It  is  very  characteristic  of  the  regime  of  Louis  Philippe, 
the  bourgeois  king,  that  the  one  Factory  Act  passed  during 
his  reign,  that  of  March  22nd,  1841,  was  never  put  in  force. 
And  this  law  only  dealt  with  child  labour.  It  fixed  8  hours 
a  day  for  children  between  8  and  12,  12  hours  for  children 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


They  remained  a  dead  letter.  'The  fact  is 
that,  prior  to  the  Act  of  1 833  young  persons  and 
children  were  arbitrarily  worked  all  night,  all 
day,  or  both.**1 

A  normal  working  day  for  modern  industry 
dates  only  from  the  Factory  Act  of  1833,  which 
included  cotton,  wool,  flax,  and  silk  factories. 
Nothing  is  more  characteristic  of  the  spirit  of 
capital  than  the  history  of  the  English  Factory 
Acts  from  1833  to  1864. 

The  Act  of  1 833  declares  the  ordinary  factory 
working  day  to  be  from  half-past  five  in  the 
morning  to  half-past  eight  in  the  evening,  and 
within  these  limits,  a  period  of  15  hours,  it  is 
lawful  to  employ  young  persons  (i.c.,  persons 
between  13  and  18  years  of  age),  at  any  time  of 
the  day,  provided  no  one  individual  young  per¬ 
son  should  work  more  than  12  hours  in  any  one 
day,  except  in  certain  cases  especially  provided 
for.  The  6th  section  of  the  Act  provided  :“That 
there  shall  be  allowed  in  the  course  of  every  day 
not  less  than  one  and  a  half  hours  for  meals  to 
every  such  person  restricted  as  hereinbefore 
provided. "  The  employment  of  children  under 
9,  with  exceptions  mentioned  later,  was  forbid¬ 
den;  the  work  of  children  between  9  and  13  was 
limited  to  8  hours  a  day;  night-work,  i.e.,  ac¬ 
cording  to  this  Act,  work  between  8.30  p.m.  and 
5.30  a.m.,  was  forbidden  for  all  persons  between 
9  and  18. 

The  lawmakers  were  so  far  from  wishing  to 
trench  on  the  freedom  of  capital  to  exploit  adult 
labour  power,  or,  as  they  called  it,  “the  freedom 
of  labour/*  that  they  created  a  special  system 
in  order  to  prevent  the  Factory  Acts  from  hav¬ 
ing  a  consequence  so  outrageous. 

“The  great  evil  of  the  factory  system  as  at 
present  conducted,**  says  the  first  report  of  the 
Central  Board  of  the  Commission  of  June  28  th, 
1833,  “has  appeared  to  us  to  be  that  it  entails 
the  necessity  of  continuing  the  labour  of  child¬ 
ren  to  the  utmost  length  of  that  of  the  adults. 
The  only  remedy  for  this  evil,  short  of  the  limi¬ 
tation  of  the  labour  of  adults,  which  would,  in 
our  opinion,  create  an  evil  greater  than  that 
which  is  sought  to  be  remedied,  appears  to  be 


between  12  and  16,  etc.,  with  many  exceptions  which  allow 
night-work  even  for  children  8  yeais  old.  The  supervision 
and  enforcement  of  this  law  are,  in  a  country  where  every 
mouse  is  under  police  administration,  left  to  the  good  will 
of  the  amts  du  commerce.  Only  since  185,3,  in  one  single  de¬ 
partment — the  Departement  du  Notd  has  a  paid  govern¬ 
ment  inspector  been  appointed.  Not  less  characteristic  of 
the  development  of  French  society,  generally,  is  the  fact 
that  Louis  Philippe’s  law  stood  solitary  among  the  all-em¬ 
bracing  mass  of  French  laws,  till  the  Revolution  of  1848. 

1  Report 0/ Inspectors  oj Factories ,  30th  April,  i860,  p.  50. 


135 

theplanofworkingdoublesetsofchildren." .  . . 
Under  the  name  of  "system  of  relays/'  this 
“plan"  was  therefore  carried  out,  so  that,  e.g., 
from  5.30  a.m.  until  1.30  in  the  afternoon,  one 
set  of  children  between  9  and  13,  and  from  1.30 
p.m.  to  8. 30 in  the  evening  another  set  were  “put 
to  work**  etc. 

In  order  to  reward  the  manufacturers  for 
having,  in  the  most  barefaced  way,  ignored  all 
the  Acts  as  to  children's  labour  passed  during 
the  last  twenty-two  years,  the  pill  was  yet  fur¬ 
ther  gilded  for  them.  Parliament  decreed  that 
after  March  1st,  1834,  no  child  under  11,  after 
March  1st,  1835,  no  child  under  12,  and  after 
March  1  st,  1 836,  no  child  under  13,  was  to  work 
more  than  eight  hours  in  a  factory.  This  “liber¬ 
alism/*  so  full  of  consideration  for  “capital/* 
was  the  more  noteworthy  as  Dr.  Farre,  Sir  A. 
Carlisle,  Sir  B.  Brodie,  Sir  C.  Bell,  Mr.  Guthrie, 
etc.,  in  a  word,  the  most  distinguished  physi¬ 
cians  and  surgeons  in  London,  had  declared  in 
their  evidence  before  the  House  of  Commons 
that  there  was  danger  in  delay.  Dr.  Farre  ex¬ 
pressed  himself  still  more  coarsely.  “Legislation 
is  necessary  for  the  prevention  of  death  in  any 
form  in  which  it  can  be  prematurely  inflicted, 
and  certainly  this  (i.e.,  the  factory  method) 
must  be  viewed  as  a  most  cruel  mode  of  inflict¬ 
ing  it." 

That  same  “reformed”  Parliament  which  in 
its  delicate  consideration  for  the  manufacturers 
condemned  children  under  13,  for  years  to  come 
to  72  hours  of  work  per  week  in  the  factory  hell, 
on  the  other  hand,  in  the  Emancipation  Act, 
which  also  administered  freedom  drop  by  drop, 
forbade  the  planters,  from  the  outset,  to  work 
any  negro  slave  more  than  45  hours  a  week. 

But  in  nowise  conciliated,  capital  now  began 
a  noisy  agitation  that  went  on  for  several  years. 
It  turned  chiefly  on  the  age  of  those  who,  under 
the  name  of  children,  were  limited  to  8  hours 
work,  and  were  subject  to  a  certain  amount  of 
compulsory  education.  According  to  capitalis¬ 
tic  anthropology,  the  age  of  childhood  ended  at 
10,  or,  at  the  outside,  at  1 1 .  The  more  nearly  the 
time  approached  for  the  coming  into  full  force 
of  the  Factory  Act,  the  fatal  year  1836,  the 
more  wildly  raged  the  mob  of  manufacturers. 
They  managed,  in  fact,  to  intimidate  the  gov¬ 
ernment  to  such  an  extent  that  in  1835  it  pro¬ 
posed  to  lower  the  limit  of  the  age  of  childhood 
from  13  to  12.  In  the  meantime  the  pressure 
from  without  grew  more  threatening.  Courage 
failed  the  House  of  Commons.  It  refused  to 
throw  children  of  13  under  the  Juggernaut  car 
of  capital  for  more  than  8  hours  a  day,  and  the 


136  CAPITAL 


Act  of  1833  came  into  full  operation.  It  re¬ 
mained  unaltered  until  June,  1844. 

In  the  ten  years  during  which  it  regulated 
factory  work,  first  in  part,  and  then  entirely, 
the  official  reports  of  the  factory  inspectors 
teem  with  complaints  as  to  the  impossibility  of 
putting  the  Act  into  force.  As  the  law  of  1833 
left  it  optional  with  the  lords  of  capital  during 
the  ij  hours,  from  5.30  a.m.  to  8.30  p.m.,  to 
make  every  “young  person,"  and  “every  child" 
begin,  break  off,  resume,  or  end  his  1 2  or  8  hours 
at  any  moment  they  liked,  and  also  permitted 
them  to  assign  to  different  persons  different 
times  for  meals,  these  gentlemen  soon  discovered 
a  new  “system  of  relays,"  by  which  the  la¬ 
bour  horses  were  not  changed  at  fixed  stations, 
but  were  constantly  re-harnessed  at  changing 
stations.  We  do  not  pause  longer  on  the  beauty 
of  this  system,  as  we  shall  have  to  return  to  it 
later.  But  this  much  is  clear  at  the  first  glance: 
that  this  system  annulled  the  whole  Factory 
Act,  not  only  in  the  spirit,  but  in  the  letter.  How 
could  factory  inspectors,  with  this  complex 
bookkeeping  in  respect  to  each  individual  child 
or  young  person,  enforce  the  legally  determined 
work  time  and  the  granting  of  the  legal  meal¬ 
times?  In  a  great  many  of  the  factories,  the  old 
brutalities  soon  blossomed  out  again  unpun¬ 
ished.  In  an  interview  with  the  Home  Secretary 
(1844),  the  factory  inspectors  demonstrated  the 
impossibility  of  any  control  under  the  newly  in¬ 
vented  relay  system.1  In  the  meantime,  how¬ 
ever,  circumstances  had  greatly  changed.  The 
factory  hands,  especially  since  1838,  had  made 
the  Ten  Hours  Bill  their  economical,  as  they 
had  made  the  Charter  their  political,  election- 
cry.  Some  of  the  manufacturers,  even,  who  had 
managed  their  factories  in  conformity  with  the 
Act  of  1833,  overwhelmed  Parliament  with 
memorials  on  the  immoral  competition  of  their 
false  brethren  whom  greater  impudence,  or 
more  fortunate  local  circumstances,  enabled  to 
break  the  law.  Moreover,  however  much  the  in¬ 
dividual  manufacturer  might  give  the  rein  to 
his  old  lust  for  gain,  the  spokesmen  and  politi¬ 
cal  leaders  of  the  manufacturing  class  ordered  a 
change  of  front  and  of  speech  towards  the  work¬ 
people.  They  had  entered  upon  the  contest  for 
the  repeal  of  the  Corn  Laws,  and  needed  the 
workers  to  help  them  to  victory.  They  promised 
therefore,  not  only  a  double-sized  loaf  of  bread, 
but  the  enactment  of  the  Ten  Hours  Bill  in  the 
FreeTrademillennium.*Thustheystilllessdared 

1  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  October,  1849, 

p.  6. 

1  Ibid.,  31st  October,  1848,  p.  98. 


to  oppose  a  measure  intended  only  to  make  the 
law  of  1833  a  reality.  Threatened  in  their  holi¬ 
est  interest,  the  rent  of  land,  the  Tories  thund¬ 
ered  with  philanthropic  indignation  against  the 
“nefarious  practices"*  of  their  foes. 

This  was  the  origin  of  the  additional  Factory 
Act  of  June  7th,  1844.  It  came  into  effect  on 
September  10th,  1844.  It  places  under  protec¬ 
tion  a  new  category  of  workers,  viz,  the  women 
over  18.  They  were  placed  in  every  respect  on 
the  same  footing  as  the  young  persons,  their 
work  time  limited  to  twelve  hours,  their  night 
labour  forbidden,  etc.  For  the  first  time,  legis¬ 
lation  saw  itself  compelled  to  control  directly 
and  officially  the  labour  of  adults.  In  the  Fac¬ 
tory  Report  of  1844-1845,  it  is  said  with  irony: 
“No  instances  have  come  to  my  knowledge  of 
adult  women  having  expressed  any  regret  at 
their  rights  being  thus  far  interfered  with."4  The 
working  time  of  children  under  13  was  reduced 
to  6}4y  and  in  certain  circumstances  to  7  hours 
a  day.6 

To  get  rid  of  the  abuses  of  the  “spurious  relay- 
system,"  the  law  established  besides  others  the 
following  important  regulations*  “That  the 
hours  of  work  of  children  and  young  persons 
shall  be  reckoned  from  the  time  when  any 
child  or  young  person  shall  begin  to  work  in  the 
morning."  So  that  if  A,  e.g.,  begins  work  at  8 
in  the  morning,  and  /?,  at  10,  B* s  workday  must 
nevertheless  end  at  the  same  haur  as  A*s.  “The 
time  shall  be  regulated  by  a  public  clock,"  for 
example,  the  nearest  railway  clock,  by  which 
the  factory  clock  is  to  be  set.  The  occupier  is  to 
hangup  a  “legible"  printed  notice  stating  the 
hours  for  the  beginning  and  ending  of  work 
and  the  times  allowed  for  the  several  meals. 
Children  beginning  work  before  12  noon  may 
not  be  again  employed  after  1  p.m.  The  after¬ 
noon  shift  must,  therefore,  consist  of  other 
children  than  those  employed  in  the  morning. 
Of  the  hour  and  a  half  for  meal- times,  “one  hour 
thereof  at  the  least  shall  be  given  before  three 
of  the  clock  in  the  afternoon.  .  .  .  and  at  the 
same  period  of  the  day.  No  child  or  young  per¬ 
son  shall  be  employed  more  than  five  hours 
before  1  p.m.  without  an  interval  for  meal  time 
of  at  least  30  minutes.  No  child  Or  young  per¬ 
son  (or  female)  shall  be  employed  or  allowed 
to  remain  in  any  room  in  which  any  manu- 

*  Leonard  Horner  uses  the  expression  ^nefarious  prac¬ 
tices”  in  his  official  reports.— Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Fac¬ 
tories,  31st  October,  1859,  p.  7. 

4  Ibid.,  30th  Sept.,  1844,  p.  *5* 

*  1  he  Act  allows  children  to  be  employed  for  10  hours  if 
they  do  not  work  day  after  day,  but  only  on  alternate  days. 
In  the  main,  this  clause  remained  inoperative. 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


facturing  process  is  then  (i.e.,  at  meal-times) 
carried  on,  etc. 

It  has  been  seen  that  these  minutiae,  which, 
with  military  uniformity,  regulate  by  stroke  of 
the  clock  the  times,  limits,  pauses  of  the  work, 
were  not  at  all  the  products  of  Parliamentary 
fancy.  They  developed  gradually  out  of  circum¬ 
stances  as  natural  laws  of  the  modern  mode  of 
production.  Their  formulation,  official  recogni¬ 
tion,  and  proclamation  by  the  State,  were  the 
result  of  a  long  struggle  of  classes.  One  of  their 
first  consequences  was  that  in  practice  the 
working  day  of  the  adult  males  in  factories  be¬ 
came  subject  to  the  same  limitations,  since  in 
most  processes  of  production  the  co-operation 
of  the  children,  young  persons,  and  women  is 
indispensable.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  during 
the  period  from  1844  to  1847,  the  12  hours* 
working  day  became  general  and  uniform  in  all 
branches  of  industry  under  the  Factory  Act. 

The  manufacturers,  however,  did  not  allow 
this  “progress’*  without  a  compensating  “retro¬ 
gression.**  At  tlicii  Instigation  the  House  of 
Commons  reduced  the  minimum  age  for  exploit¬ 
able  children  from  9  to  8,  in  order  to  assure  that 
additional  supply  of  factory  children  which  is 
due  to  capitalists  according  to  divine  and  hu¬ 
man  law.1 

The  years  1846-47  are  epoch-making  in  the 
economic  history  of  England.  The  repeal  of  the 
Corn  Laws,  and  of  the  duties  on  cotton  and 
other  raw  material;  free  trade  proclaimed  as  the 
guiding  star  of  legislation;  in  a  word,  the  arrival 
of  the  millennium.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the 
same  years,  the  Chartist  movement  and  the  Ten 
Hours  agitation  reached  their  highest  point. 
They  found  allies  in  the  Tories  panting  for  re¬ 
venge.  Despite  the  fanatical  opposition  of  the 
army  of  perjured  Freetraders,  with  Bright  and 
Cobden  at  their  head,  the  Ten  Hours  Bill, 
fought  against  for  so  long,  went  through  Parlia¬ 
ment. 

The  new  Factory  Act  of  June  8th,  1847,  en“ 
acted  that  on  July  1st,  1847,  there  should  be  a 
preliminary  shortening  of  the  working  day  for 
“young  persons**  (from  13  to  18),  and  all  fe¬ 
males,  to  11  hours,  but  that  on  May  1st,  1848, 
there  should  be  a  definite  limitation  of  the  work¬ 
ing  day  to  10  hours.  In  other  respects,  the  Act 
only  amended  and  completed  the  Acts  of  1833 
and  1 844* 

Capital  now  entered  upon  a  preliminary  cam- 

1  “As  a  reduction  in  their  hours  of  work  would  cause  a 
larger  number  (of  children)  to  be  employed,  it  was  thought 
that  the  additional  supply  of  children  from  8  to  9  years  of 
age  would  meet  the  increased  demand"— Ibid.,  p.  13. 


137 

paign  in  order  to  hinder  the  Act  from  coming  in¬ 
to  full  force  on  May  1st,  1848.  And  the  workers 
themselves,  under  the  pretence  that  they  had 
been  taught  by  experience,  were  to  help  in  the 
destruction  of  their  own  work.  The  moment  was 
cleverly  chosen.  “It  must  be  remembered,  too, 
that  there  has  been  more  than  two  years  of  great 
suffering  (in  consequence  of  the  terrible  crisis  of 
1846-47)  among  the  factory  operatives,  from 
many  mills  having  worked  short  time,  and 
many  being  altogether  closed.  A  considerable 
number  of  the  operatives  must  therefore  be  in 
very  narrow  circumstances;  many,  it  is  to  be 
feared,  in  debt;  so  that  it  might  fairly  have  been 
presumed  that  at  the  present  time  they  would 
prefer  working  the  longer  time,  in  order  to  make 
up  for  past  losses,  perhaps  to  pay  off  debts,  or 
get  their  furniture  out  of  pawn,  or  replace  that 
sold,  or  to  get  a  new  supply  of  clothes  for  them¬ 
selves  and  the!r  families.**2 

The  manufacturers  tried  to  aggravate  the 
natural  effect  of  these  circumstances  by  a  gen¬ 
eral  reduction  of  wages  by  j  0%.  This  was  done, 
so  to  say,  to  celebrate  the  inauguration  of  the 
new  Free  Trade  era.  Then  followed  a  further 
reduction  of  8 }$%  as  soon  as  the  working  day 
was  shortened  to  1 1,  and  a  reduction  of  double 
that  amount  as  soon  as  it  was  finally  shortened 
to  10  hours.  Wherever,  therefore,  circumstances 
allowed  it,  a  reduction  of  wages  of  at  least 
25%  took  place.3  Under  such  favourably  pre¬ 
pared  conditions,  the  agitation  among  the  fac¬ 
tory  workers  for  the  repeal  of  the  Act  of  1 847 
was  begun.  Neither  lies,  bribery,  nor  threats 
were  spared  in  this  attempt.  But  all  was  in  vain. 
Concerning  the  half-dozen  petitions  in  which 
workpeople  were  made  to  complain  of  “their 
oppression  by  the  Act,**  the  petitioners  them¬ 
selves  declared  under  oral  examination,  that 
their  signatures  had  been  extorted  from  them. 
“They  felt  themselves  oppressed,  but  not  ex¬ 
actly  by  the  Factory  Act.**4  But  if  the  manufac¬ 
turers  did  not  succeed  in  making  the  workpeople 
speak  as  they  wished,  they  themselves  shrieked 
all  the  louder  in  press  and  Parliament  in  the 
name  of  the  workpeople.  They  denounced  tht 

2  Ibid.,  31st  Oct.,  1848,  p.  16. 

2  "1  found  that  men  who  had  been  getting  xoj.  a  week, 
had  had  is.  taken  off  for  a  reduction  in  the  rate  of  xo  per 
cent,  and  ij.  6d.  off  the  remaining  9J.  for  the  reduction  in 
time,  together  is.  6d.,  and  notwithstanding  this,  many  of 
them  said  they  would  rather  work  10  hours."  Ibid. 

4  "  'Though  l  signed  it  [the  petition],  1  said  at  the  time  I 
was  putting  my  hand  to  a  wrong  thing.’  'Then  why  did 
you  put  your  hand  to  it?’  'Because  1  should  have  been 
turned  off  if  1  had  refused.’  V\  hence  it  would  appeur  that 
this  petitioner  felt  himself 'oppressed,’  but  not  exactly  by 
the  Factory  Act."  Ibid.,  p.  102. 


CAPITAL 


138 

factory  inspectors  as  a  kind  of  revolutionary 
commissioners  like  those  of  the  French  National 
Convention,  ruthlessly  sacrificing  the  unhappy 
factory  workers  to  their  humanitarian  crotchet. 
This  manoeuvre  also  failed.  Factory  Inspector 
Leonard  Horner  conducted  in  his  own  person, 
and  through  his  sub-inspectors,  many  exami¬ 
nations  of  witnesses  in  the  factories  of  Lanca¬ 
shire.  About  70%  of  the  workpeople  examined 
declared  in  favour  of  10  hours,  a  much  smaller 
percentage  in  favour  of  11,  and  an  altogether 
insignificant  minority  for  the  old  12  hours.1 

Another  “friendly”  dodge  was  to  make  the 
adult  males  work  12  to  15  hours,  and  then  to 
blazon  abroad  this  fact  as  the  best  proof  of  what 
the  proletariat  desired  in  its  heart  of  hearts.  But 
the  “ruthless**  Factory  Inspector  Leonard  Hor¬ 
ner  was  again  to  the  fore.  The  majority  of  the 
“overtimers**  declared:  “They  would  much  pre¬ 
fer  working  ten  hours  for  less  wages,  but  that 
they  had  no  choice;  that  so  many  were  out  of 
employment  (so  many  spinners  getting  very  low 
wages  by  having  to  work  as  piecers,  being  un¬ 
able  to  do  better),  that  if  they  refused  to  work 
the  longer  time,  others  would  immediately  get 
their  places,  so  that  it  was  a  question  with  them 
of  agreeing  to  work  the  long  time,  or  of  being 
thrown  out  of  employment  altogether.**2 

The  preliminary  campaign  of  capital  thus 
came  to  grief,  and  the  Ten  Hours  Act  came  into 
force  May  1st,  1848.  But  meanwhile  the  fiasco 
of  the  Chartist  party  whose  leaders  were  im¬ 
prisoned,  and  whose  organization  was  dismem¬ 
bered,  had  shaken  the  confidence  of  the  English 
working  class  in  its  own  strength.  Soon  after 
this,  the  June  insurrections  in  Paris  and  its 
bloody  suppression  united,  in  England  as  on 
the  Continent,  all  factions  of  the  ruling  classes, 
landlords  and  capitalists,  stock  exchange 
wolves  and  shop-keepers,  Protectionists  and 
free-traders,  government  and  opposition, 
priests  and  freethinkers,  young  whores  and  old 
nuns,  under  the  common  cry  for  the  salvation 
of  Property,  Religion,  the  Family  and  Society. 
The  working  class  was  everywhere  proclaimed, 
placed  under  a  ban,  under  a  virtual  law  of  sus¬ 
pects.  The  manufacturers  had  no  need  any 

1  Ibid.,  p.  17.  In  Mr.  Horner's  district,  10,270  adult  male 
labourers  were  thus  examined  in  101  factories.  Their  evi¬ 
dence  is  to  be  found  in  the  appendix  to  the  Factory  Re¬ 
ports  for  the  half-year  ending  October  1848.  These  exam¬ 
inations  furnish  valuable  material  mother  connections  also. 

*  Ibid,  See  the  evidence  collected  by  Leonard  Horner 
himself,  Nos.  69,  70,  71,  72,  92,  93,  and  that  collected  by 
Sub-Inspector  A,  Nos.  51,  52,  58,  59,  62,  70,  of  the  Ap¬ 
pendix.  One  manufacturer,  too,  tells  the  plain  truth.  See 
No.  14,  and  No.  265. 


longer  to  restrain  themselves.  They  broke  out 
in  open  revolt  not  only  against  the  Ten  Hours 
Act,  but  against  the  whole  of  the  legislation 
that  since  1 833  had  aimed  at  restricting  in  some 
measure  the  “free**  exploitation  of  labour 
power.  It  was  a  pro-slavery  rebellion  in  minia¬ 
ture,  carried  on  for  over  two  years  with  a  cynical 
recklessness,  a  terrorist  energy  all  the  cheaper 
because  the  rebel  capitalist  risked  nothing  ex¬ 
cept  the  skin  of  his  “hands.** 

To  understand  that  which  follows  we  must 
remember  that  the  Factory  Acts  of  1 833,  1 844, 
and  1 847  were  all  three  in  force  so  far  as  the  one 
did  not  amend  the  other:  that  not  one  of  these 
limited  the  working  day  of  the  male  worker 
over  18,  and  that  since  1833  the  l5  hours  from 
5.30  a.m.  to  8.30  p.m.  had  remained  the  legal 
day,  within  the  limits  of  which  at  first  the  12, 
and  later  the  10  hours*  labour  of  young  persons 
and  women  had  to  be  performed  under  the  pre¬ 
scribed  conditions. 

The  manufacturers  began  by  here  and  there 
discharging  a  part  of,  in  many  cases  half  of,  the 
young  persons  and  women  employed  by  them, 
and  then,  for  the  adult  males,  restoring  the  al¬ 
most  obsolete  night- work.  The  Ten  Hours  Act, 
they  cried,  left  no  other  alternative.3 

Their  second  step  dealt  with  the  legal  pauses 
for  meals.  Let  us  hear  the  factory  inspectors. 
“Since  the  restriction  of  the  hours  of  work  to 
ten,  the  factory  occupiers  maintain,  although 
they  have  not  yet  practically  gone  the  whole 
length,  that  supposing  the  hours  of  work  to  be 
from  9  a.m.  to  7  p.m.,  they  fulfil  the  provisions 
of  the  statutes  by  allowing  an  hour  before  9  a.m. 
and  half  an  hour  after  7  p.m.  [for  meals].  In 
some  cases  they  now  allow  an  hour,  or  half  an 
hour  for  dinner,  insisting  at  the  same  time  that 
they  are  not  bound  to  allow  any  part  of  the  hour 
and  a  half  in  the  course  of  the  factory  working- 
day.**4  The  manufacturers  maintained,  there¬ 
fore,  that  the  scrupulously  strict  provisions  of 
the  Acts  of  1844  with  regard  to  meal-times  only 
gave  the  operatives  permission  to  eat  and  drink 
before  coming  into,  and  after  leaving  the  fac¬ 
tory— i.e.,  at  home.  And  why  should  not  the 
workpeople  eat  their  dinner  before  9  in  the 
morning?  The  crown  lawyers,  however,  decid¬ 
ed  that  the  prescribed  meal-times  “must  be  in 
the  interval  during  the  working  hours,  and  that 
it  will  not  be  lawful  to  work  for  10  hours  con¬ 
tinuously,  from  9  a.m.  to  7  p.m.,  without  any 
interval.**5 

%Ibid .,  31st  October,  1848,  p.  133, 1 34. 

4  Ibid.,  30th  April,  1848,  p.  47. 

1  Ibri .,  31st  October,  1 848,  p.  13a 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


After  these  pleasant  demonstrations,  capital 
preluded  its  revolt  by  a  step  which  agreed  with 
the  letter  of  the  law  of  1 844,  and  was  therefore 
legal. 

The  Act  of  1 844  certainly  prohibited  the  em¬ 
ployment  after  1  p.m.  of  such  children,  from  8 
to  13,  as  had  been  employed  before  noon.  But 
it  did  not  regulate  in  any  way  the  hours* 
work  of  the  children  whose  work  time  began  at 
12  midday  or  later.  Children  of  8  might,  if  they 
began  work  at  noon,  be  employed  from  12  to  1, 

1  hour;  from  2  to  4  in  the  afternoon,  2  hours; 
from  5  to  8.30  in  the  evening,  3I2  hours;  in  all, 
the  legal  6j2  hours.  Or  better  still.  In  order  to 
make  their  work  coincide  with  that  of  the  adult 
male  labourers  up  to  8.30  p.m.,  the  manufac¬ 
turers  only  had  to  give  them  no  work  till  2  in 
the  afternoon;  they  could  then  keep  them  in  the 
factory  without  intermission  till  8.30  in  the 
evening.  “And  it  is  now  expressly  admitted  that 
the  practice  exists  in  England  from  the  desire 
of  millowncrs  to  have  their  machinery  at  work 
for  more  than  10  hours  a  day,  to  keep  the  chil¬ 
dren  at  work  witn  male  adults  after  all  the 
young  persons  and  women  have  left,  and  until 
8.30  p.m.,  if  the  factory-owners  choose.”1 
Workmen  and  factory  inspectors  protested  on 
hygienic  and  moral  grounds,  but  capital  an¬ 
swered; 

My  deeds  upon  my  head!  I  crave  the  law , 
The  penalty  and forfeit  of  my  bond. 

In  fact,  according  to  statistics  laid  before  the 
House  of  Commons  on  July  26th,  1850,  in  spite 
of  all  protests,  on  July  15th,  1850,  3,742  chil¬ 
dren  were  subjected  to  this  “practice”  in  257 
factories.2  Still,  this  was  not  enough.  The  lynx 
eye  of  capital  discovered  that  the  Act  of  1844 
did  not  allow  5  hours’  work  before  mid-day 
without  a  pause  of  at  least  30  minutes  for  re¬ 
freshment,  but  prescribed  nothing  of  the  kind 
for  work  after  midday.  Therefore,  it  claimed 
and  obtained  the  enjoyment  not  only  of  making 
children  of  8  drudge  without  intermission  from 

2  to  8.30  p.m.,  but  also  of  making  them  hunger 
during  that  time. 

Ay,  his  hearty 
So  says  the  bond} 

1  Ibid.,  p.  142.  *  Ibid.,  31st  October,  1 850,  pp.  5, 6. 

*  The  nature  of  capital  remains  the  same  in  its  developed 
as  in  its  undeveloped  form.  In  the  code  which  the  influence 
or  the  slave-owners,  shortly  before  the  outbreak  of  the 
American  Civil  War,  imposed  on  the  territory  of  New  Mex¬ 
ico,  it  is  said  that  the  labourer,  in  as  much  as  the  capitalist 
has  bought  his  labour-power,  “is  his  (the  capitalist’s)  mon¬ 
ey."  The  same  view  was  current  among  the  Roman  patri¬ 
cians.  The  money  they  had  advanced  to  the  plebeian  debt- 


139 

This  Shylock-clinging  to  the  letter  of  the  law 
of  1 844,  so  far  as  it  regulated  children's  labour, 
was  but  to  lead  up  to  an  open  revolt  against  the 
same  law,  so  far  as  it  regulated  the  labour  of 
“young  persons  and  women.”  It  will  be  remem¬ 
bered  that  the  abolition  of  the  “false  relay  sys¬ 
tem”  was  the  chief  aim  and  object  of  that  law. 
The  masters  began  their  revolt  with  the  simple 
declaration  that  the  sections  of  the  Act  of  1 844 
which  prohibited  the  ad  libitum 14  use  of  young 
persons  and  women  in  such  short  fractions  of 
the  day  of  1 5  hours  as  the  employer  chose,  were 
“comparatively  harmless”  so  long  as  the  work 
time  was  fixed  at  12  hours.  But  under  the  Ten 
Hours  Act  they  were  a  “grievous  hardship.”5 
They  informed  the  inspectors  in  the  coolest 
manner  that  they  should  place  themselves 
above  the  letter  of  the  law,  and  re-introduce  the 
old  system  on  their  own  account.6  They  were 
acting  in  the  interests  of  the  ill-advised  opera¬ 
tives  themselves,  “in  order  to  be  able  to  pay 
them  higher  wages.”  “This  was  the  only  possi¬ 
ble  plan  by  which  to  maintain,  under  the  Ten 
Hours  Act,  the  industrial  supremacy  of  Great 
Britain.”  “Perhaps  it  may  be  a  little  difficult 
to  detect  irregularities  under  the  relay  system; 
but  what  of  that?  Is  the  great  manufacturing 
interest  of  this  country  to  be  treated  as  a  sec¬ 
ondary  matter  in  order  to  save  some  little 
trouble  to  inspectors  and  sub-inspectors  of  fac¬ 
tories?”7 

All  these  shifts  naturally  were  of  no  avail. 
The  factory  inspectors  appealed  to  the  law 
courts.  But  soon  such  a  cloud  of  dust  in  the  way 
of  petitions  from  the  masters  overwhelmed  the 
Home  Secretary,  Sir  George  Grey,  that  in  a  cir¬ 
cular  of  August  5th,  1848,  he  recommends  the 
inspectors  not  “to  lay  informations  against 
mill  owners  for  a  breach  of  the  letter  of  the  Act, 
or  for  employment  of  young  persons  by  relays 
in  cases  in  which  there  is  no  reason  to  believe 
that  such  young  persons  have  been  actually  em¬ 
ployed  for  a  longer  period  than  that  sanctioned 
by  law.”  Hereupon,  Factory  Inspector  J. 
Stuart  allowed  the  so-called  relay  system  dur- 

or  had  been  transformed  via  the  means  of  subsistence  into 
the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  debtor.  This  “flesh  and  blood" 
were,  therefore,  “their  money."  Hence,  the  Shylock-law  of 
the  Ten  Tables.  Linguet’s  hypothesis  that  the  patrician 
creditors  from  time  to  time  prepared,  beyond  the  Tiber, 
banquets  of  debtors*  flesh,  may  remain  as  undecided  as 
that  of  Daumcr  on  the  Christian  Eucharist. 

4  Arbitrary. 

6  Reports ,  etc.,  for  30th  April,  1848,  p  28. 

6  Thus,  among  others,  Philanthropist  Ashworth  to 
Leonard  Horner,  in  a  disgusting  Quaker  letter. — Ibid., 
April,  1849.  P-  4- 

7  Ibid.,  p.  1 40. 


140  CAPITAL 


ing  the  15  hours  of  the  factory  day  throughout 
Scotland,  where  it  soon  flourished  again  as  of 
old.  The  English  factory  inspectors,  on  the  oth¬ 
er  hand,  declared  that  the  Home  Secretary  had 
no  power  dictatorially  to  suspend  the  law,  and 
continued  their  legal  proceedings  against  the 
pro-slavery  rebellion. 

But  what  was  the  good  of  summoning  the 
capitalists  when  the  courts,  in  this  case  the 
country  magistrates— Cobbett’s  “great  un¬ 
paid”— acquitted  them?  In  these  tribunals,  the 
masters  sat  in  judgment  on  themselves.  An  ex¬ 
ample.  One  Eskrigge,  cotton  spinner,  of  the  firm 
of  Kershaw,  Leese,  &  Co.,  had  laid  before  the 
factory  inspector  of  his  district  the  scheme  of  a 
relay  system  intended  for  his  mill.  Receiving  a 
refusal,  he  at  first  kept  quiet.  A  few  months 
later,  an  individual  named  Robinson,  also  a  cot¬ 
ton  spinner,  and  if  not  his  Man  Friday,  at  all 
events  related  to  Eskrigge,  appeared  before  the 
borough  magistrates  of  Stockport  on  a  charge 
of  introducing  the  identical  plan  of  relays  in¬ 
vented  by  Eskrigge.  Four  Justices  sat,  among 
them  three  cotton  spinners,  at  their  head  this 
same  inevitable  Eskrigge.  Eskrigge  acquitted 
Robinson,  and  now  was  of  opinion  that  what 
was  right  for  Robinson  was  fair  for  Eskrigge. 
Supported  by  his  own  legal  decision,  he  intro¬ 
duced  the  system  at  once  into  his  own  factory.1 
Of  course,  the  composition  of  this  tribunal  waa 
in  itself  a  violation  of  the  law.2  These  judicial 
farces,  exclaims  Inspector  Howell,  “urgently 
call  for  a  remedy— either  that  the  law  should  be 
so  altered  as  to  be  made  to  conform  to  these  de¬ 
cisions,  or  that  it  sould  be  administered  by  a 
less  fallible  tribunal,  whose  decisions  would 
conform  to  the  law  . . .  when  these  cases  are 
brought  forward.  I  long  for  a  stipendiary  magis¬ 
trate.”8 

The  Crown  lawyers  declared  the  masters’  in¬ 
terpretation  of  the  Act  of  1848  absurd.  But  the 
saviours  of  society  would  not  allow  themselves 
to  be  turned  from  their  purpose.  Leonard  Horn¬ 
er  reports,  “Having  endeavoured  to  enforce  the 
Act ...  by  ten  prosecutions  in  seven  magiste¬ 
rial  divisions,  and  having  been  supported  by  the 
magistrates  in  one  case  only. ...  I  considered 
it  useless  to  prosecute  more  for  this  evasion  of 
the  law.  That  part  of  the  Act  of  1 848  which  was 

1  Ibid.,  30th  April,  1849,  pp.  11,  22.  Cf.  like  examples, 
ibid.  pp.  4,  5. 

2  By  1  and  2  William  IV,  ch.  24,  $  10,  known  as  Sir  John 
Hobhouse's  Factory  Act,  it  was  forbidden  to  any  owner  of 
a  cotton-spinning  or  weaving  mill,  or  the  father,  son,  or 
brother  of  such  owner,  to  act  as  Justice  of  the  Peace  in  any 
inquiries  that  concerned  the  Factory  Act. 

*  Reports ,  etc..  30th  April,  1 849,  p.  22. 


framed  for  securing  uniformity  in  the  hours  of 
work  ...  is  thus  no  longer  in  force  in  my  dis¬ 
trict  (Lancashire).  Neither  have  the  sub-in¬ 
spectors  or  myself  any  means  of  satisfying  our¬ 
selves,  when  we  inspect  a  mill  working  by  shifts, 
that  the  young  persons  and  women  are  not 
working  more  than  10  hours  a  day. ...  In  a  re¬ 
turn  of  the  30th  April, ...  of  mill  owners  work¬ 
ing  by  shifts,  the  number  amounts  to  1 14,  and 
has  been  for  some  time  rapidly  increasing.  In 
general,  the  time  of  working  the  mill  is  extended 
to  1 hours,  from  6  a.m.  to  7.30  p.m.  ...  in 
some  instances  it  amounts  to  15  hours,  from 
5.30  a.m.  to  8.30  p.m.”4  Already,  in  December, 
1848,  Leonard  Horner  had  a  list  of  65  manu¬ 
facturers  and  29  overlookers  who  unanimously 
declared  that  no  system  of  supervision  could, 
under  this  relay  system,  prevent  enormous  over¬ 
work.6  Now,  the  same  children  and  young  per¬ 
sons  were  shifted  from  the  spinning  room  to  the 
weaving  room,  now,  during  15  hours,  from  one 
factory  to  another.6  How  was  it  possible  to  con¬ 
trol  a  system  which,  “under  the  guise  of  relays, 
is  some  one  of  the  many  plans  for  shuffling  ‘the 
hands’  about  in  endless  variety,  and  shifting 
the  hours  of  work  and  of  rest  for  different  in¬ 
dividuals  throughout  the  day,  so  that  you  may 
never  have  one  complete  set  of  hands  work¬ 
ing  together  in  the  same  room  at  the  same 
time”?7 

But  altogether  independentlyof  actual  over¬ 
work,  this  so-called  relay  system  was  an  off¬ 
spring  of  capitalistic  fantasy  such  as  Fourier, 
in  his  humorous  sketches  of  “short  sittings,” 
has  never  surpassed,  except  that  the  “attrac¬ 
tion  of  labour”  was  changed  into  the  “attrac¬ 
tion  of  capital.”  Look,  for  example,  at  those 
schemes  of  the  masters  which  the  “respectable” 
press  praised  as  models  of  “what  a  reasonable 
degree  of  care  and  method  can  accomplish.” 
The  personnel  of  the  workpeople  was  sometimes 
divided  into  from  12  to  14  categories,  which 
themselves  constantly  changed  and  rechanged 
their  constituent  parts.  During  the  1 5  hours  of 
the  factory  day,  capital  dragged  in  the  labourer 
now  for  30  minutes,  now  for  an  hour,  and  then 
pushed  him  out  again,  to  drag  him  into  the  fac¬ 
tory  and  to  thrust  him  out  afresh,  hounding 
him  hither  and  thither,  in  scattered  shreds  of 
time,  without  ever  losing  hold  of  him  until  the 
full  10  hours’  work  was  done.  As  on  the  stage, 
the  same  persons  had  to  appear  in  turns  in  the 
different  scenes  of  the  different  acts.  But  as  an 

4  Ibid.,  p.  5.  1  Ibid.,  31st  October,  1849,  P-  & 

•  Ibid.,  30th  April,  1849*  P* 21  • 

1 1bid.,  1st  October,  1848,  p.  95. 


THE  WORKING  DAY 


actor  during  the  whole  course  of  the  play  be¬ 
longs  to  the  stage,  so  the  operatives,  during  15 
hours,  belonged  to  the  factory,  without  reckon¬ 
ing  the  time  for  going  and  coming.Thus  the  hours 
of  rest  were  turned  into  hours  of  enforced  idle¬ 
ness,  which  drove  the  youths  to  the  pot-house, 
and  the  girls  to  the  brothel.  At  every  new  trick 
that  the  capitalist,  from  day  to  day,  hit  upon 
for  keeping  his  machinery  going  12  or  15  hours 
without  increasing  the  number  of  his  hands,  the 
worker  had  to  swallow  his  meals  now  in  this  frag¬ 
ment  of  time,  now  in  that.  At  the  time  of  the 
Ten  Hours'  agitation,  the  masters  cried  out 
that  the  working  mob  petitioned  in  the  hope  of 
obtaining  12  hours'  wages  for  10  hours'  work. 
Now  they  reversed  the  medal.  They  paid  10 
hours'  wages  for  1 2  or  15  hours'  lordship  over 
labour  power.1  This  was  the  gist  of  the  matter, 
this  the  masters’  interpretation  of  the  Ten 
Hours’  law!  These  were  the  same  unctuous  free¬ 
traders,  perspiring  with  the  love  of  humanity, 
who  for  full  10  years,  during  the  Anti-Corn  Law 
agitation,  had  Dr\:  ,rhed  to  the  operatives,  by  a 
reckoning  of  pounds,  shillings,  and  pence,  that 
with  free  importation  of  corn,  and  with  the 
means  possessed  by  English  industry,  10  hours' 
labour  would  be  quite  enough  to  enrich  the  cap¬ 
italists.2  This  revolt  of  capital,  after  two  years, 
was  at  last  crowned  with  victory  by  a  decision 
of  one  of  the  four  highest  courts  of  justice  in 
England,  the  Court  of  Exchequer,  which,  in  a 
case  brought  before  it  on  February  8th,  1850, 
decided  that  the  manufacturers  were  certainly 
acting  against  the  sense  of  the  Act  of  1844,  but 
that  this  Act  itself  contained  certain  words  that 
rendered  it  meaningless.  “By  this  decision,  the 
Ten  Hours’  Act  was  abolished.”3 4  A  crowd  of 
masters,  who  until  then  had  been  afraid  of  using 
the  relay  system  for  young  persons  and  women, 
now  took  it  up  heart  and  soul.* 

But  on  this  apparently  decisive  victory  of 
capital  followed  at  once  a  revulsion.  The  work¬ 
people  had  hitherto  offered  a  passive,  although 

1  See  Reports ,  etc.  for  30th  April,  1849,  p.  6,  and  the  de¬ 

tailed  explanation  of  the  “shifting  system,”  by  Factory  In¬ 
spectors  Howell  and  Saunders,  in  Reports ,  etc.,  for  31st 
October,  1848.  See  also  the  petition  to  the  Queen  from  the 
clergy  of  Ashton  and  vicinity,  in  the  spring  of  1849,  against 
the  “shift  system.” 

3  Cf.,  for  example,  The  Factory  Question  and  the  Ten 
Hours ’  Bit/,  by  R.  H.  Greg,  1837. 

*  F.  Engels,  The  English  Ten  Hours *  2?i7/,  in  the  uNeue 
Rheinische  Zeitung ,  Politisch-akonomische  Revue”  edited 
by  K.  Marx,  April  1850,  pr.  13.  The  same  “high”  court  of 

4'usticc  discovered,  during  the  American  Civil  War,  a  ver¬ 
bal  ambiguity  which  exactly  reversed  the  meaning  of  the 
law  against  the  arming  of  pirate  ships. 

4  Reports ,  etc.,  for  30th  April,  1850. 


141 

inflexible  and  unremitting,  resistance.  They 
now  protested  in  Lancashire  and  Yorkshire  in 
threatening  meetings.  The  pretended  Ten 
Hours’  Act  was  thus  simple  humbug,  parlia¬ 
mentary  cheating,  had  never  existed!  The  fac¬ 
tory  inspectors  urgently  warned  the  Govern¬ 
ment  that  the  antagonism  of  classes  had  arrived 
at  an  incredible  tension.  Some  of  the  masters 
themselves  murmured:  “On  account  of  the  con¬ 
tradictory  decisions  of  the  magistrates,  a  condi¬ 
tion  of  things  altogether  abnormal  and  anarchi¬ 
cal  obtains.  One  law  holds  in  Yorkshire,  another 
in  Lancashire;  one  law  in  one  parish  of  Lanca¬ 
shire,  another  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood. 
The  manufacturer  in  large  towns  could  evade 
the  law,  the  manufacturer  in  country  districts 
could  not  find  the  people  necessary  for  the  relay 
system,  still  less  for  the  shifting  of  hands  from 
one  factory  to  another,”  etc.  And  the  first  birth¬ 
right  of  capita!  is  equal  exploitation  of  labour 
power  by  all  capitalists. 

Under  these  circumstances  a  compromise  be¬ 
tween  masters  and  men  was  effected  that  re¬ 
ceived  the  seal  of  Parliament  in  the  additional 
Factory  Act  of  August  5th,  1850.  The  working 
day  for  “young  persons  and  women,'*  was 
raised  from  10  to  10*2  hours  for  the  first  five 
days  of  the  week,  and  was  shortened  to  7 }4  on 
Saturday.  The  work  was  to  go  on  between  6 
a.m.  and  6  p.m.,6  with  pauses  of  not  less  than 
1  yi  hours  for  meal- times,  these  meal-times  to  be 
allowed  at  one  and  the  same  time  for  all,  and 
conformably  to  the  conditions  of  1844.  By  this 
an  end  was  put  to  the  relay  system  once  for  all.6 
For  children's  labour,  the  Act  of  1 844  remained 
in  force. 

One  set  of  masters,  this  time  as  before,  se¬ 
cured  to  itself  special  seigneurial  rights  over  the 
children  of  the  proletariat.  These  were  the  silk 
manufacturers.  In  1833  they  had  howled  out  in 
threatening  fashion,  “if  the  liberty  of  working 
children  of  any  age  for  10  hours  a  day  were 
taken  away,  it  would  stop  their  works.'*7  It 
would  be  impossible  for  them  to  buy  a  sufficient 
number  of  children  over  13.  They  extorted  the 
privilege  they  desired.  The  pretext  was  shown 
on  subsequent  investigation  to  be  a  deliberate 
lie.®  It  did  not,  however,  prevent  them,  during 
10  years,  from  spinning  silk  10  hours  a  day  out 
of  the  blood  of  little  children  who  had  to  be 

4  In  winter,  from  7  a.m.  to  7  p.m.  might  be  substituted. 

6  “The  present  law  (of  1850)  was  a  compromise  whereby 
the  employed  surrendered  the  benefit  of  the  Ten  Hours* 
Act  for  the  advantage  of  one  uniform  period  for  the  com¬ 
mencement  and  termination  of  the  labour  of  those  whose 
labour  is  restricted."— Reports  %  etc.,  for  30th  April,  1852, 
p.  14.  7  Ibid.,  Sept.,  1844,  p.  13.  6  Ibid . 


142 


CAPITAL 


placed  upon  stools  for  the  performance  of  their 
work.1  The  Act  of  1844  certainly  “robbed” 
them  of  the  “liberty”  of  employing  children  un¬ 
der  11  longer  than  6yi  hours  a  day.  But  it  se¬ 
cured  to  them,  on  the  other  hand,  the  privilege 
of  working  children  between  1 1  and  13 ,10  hours 
a  day,  and  of  annulling  in  their  case  the  educa¬ 
tion  made  compulsory  for  all  other  factory  chil¬ 
dren.  This  time  the  pretext  was  “the  delicate 
texture  of  the  fabric  in  which  they  were  em¬ 
ployed,  requiring  a  lightness  of  touch,  only  to 
be  acquired  by  their  early  introduction  to  these 
factories.”2  The  children  were  slaughtered  out- 
and-out  for  the  sake  of  their  delicate  fingers,  as 
in  Southern  Russia  the  horned  cattle  for  the 
sake  of  their  hide  and  tallow.  At  length,  in  1850, 
the  privilege  granted  in  1844  was  limited  to  the 
departments  of  silk  twisting  and  silk  winding. 
But  here,  to  make  amends  to  capital  bereft  of 
its  “freedom,”  the  work  time  for  children  from 
11  to  13  was  raised  from  10  to  10 1 2  hours.  Pre¬ 
text:  “Labour  in  silk  mills  was  lighter  than  in 
mills  for  other  fabrics,  and  less  likely  in  other 
respects  also  to  be  prejudicial  to  health.”3  Offi¬ 
cial  medical  inquiries  proved  afterwards  that, 
on  the  contrary,  “the  average  death-rate  is  ex¬ 
ceedingly  high  in  the  silk  districts,  and  amongst 
the  female  part  of  the  population  is  higher  even 
than  it  is  in  the  cotton  districts  of  Lancashire.”4 

1  Ibid.  p.  20. 

*  Ibid.,  31st  Oct.,  1861,  p.  26. 

4  Loc .  ctt.,  p.  27.— On  the  whole  the  working  population, 
subject  to  the  Factory  Act,  has  greatly  improved  physical¬ 
ly.  AH  medical  testimony  agrees  on  this  point,  and  personal 
observation  at  different  times  has  convinced  me  of  it.  Nev¬ 
ertheless,  and  exclusive  of  the  terrible  death-rate  of  chil¬ 
dren  in  the  first  years  of  their  life,  the  official  reports  of  Dr. 
Greenhow  show  the  unfavourable  health  condition  of  the 
manufacturing  districts  as  compared  with  “agricultural 
districts  of  normal  health.”  As  evidence,  take  the  follow¬ 
ing  table  from  his  1861  report: 


Despite  the  protests  of  the  factory  inspector, 
renewed  every  6  months,  the  mischief  continues 
to  this  hour.6 

The  Act  of  1850  changed  the  15  hours*  time 
from  6  a.m.  to  8.30  p.m.,  into  the  12  hours  from 
6  a.m.  to  6  p.m.  for  “young  persons  and  women” 
only.  It  did  not,  therefore,  affect  children,  who 
could  always  be  employed  for  half  an  hour  be¬ 
fore  and  2^2  hours  after  this  period,  provided 
the  whole  of  their  labour  did  not  exceed  6yi 
hours.  Whilst  the  bill  was  under  discussion,  the 
factory  inspectors  laid  before  Parliament  sta¬ 
tistics  of  the  infamous  abuses  due  to  this  anom¬ 
aly.  To  no  purpose.  In  the  background  lurked 
the  intention  of  screwing  up,  during  prosperous 
years,  the  working  day  of  adult  males  to  15 
hours  by  the  aid  of  the  children.  The  experience 
of  the  three  following  years  showed  that  such 
an  attempt  must  come  to  grief  against  the  re¬ 
sistance  of  the  adult  male  operatives.  The  Act 
of  1850  was  therefore  finally  completed  in  1 853 
by  forbidding  the  “employment  of  children  in 
the  morning  before  and  in  the  evening  after 
young  persons  and  women.”  Henceforth  with 
a  few  exceptions  the  Factory  Act  of  1850  regu¬ 
lated  the  working  day  of  all  workers  in  the 
branches  of  industry  that  came  under  it.6  Since 

5  It  is  well  known  with  what  reluctance  the  F nglish  “free 
traders”  gave  up  the  protective  duty  on  the  silk  manufac¬ 
ture.  Instead  of  the  protection  agains4JI;rench  importa¬ 
tion,  the  absence  of  protection  to  English  factory  children 
now  serves  their  turn. 

8  During  1859  and  i860,  the  zenith  years  of  the  English 
cotton  industry,  some  manufactuiers  tried,  by  the  decoy 
bait  of  higher  wages  for  overtime,  to  reconcile  the  adult 
male  operatives  to  an  extension  of  the  working  day.  1  he 
hand-mule  spinners  and  self  actor  minders  put  an  end  to 
the  experiment  by  a  petition  to  their  emplovers  in  which 
they  say,  “Plainly  speaking,  our  h\cs  are  to  us  a  burthen; 
and,  while  we  arc  conhned  to  the  mills  nearly  two  days  a 
week  more  than  the  other  operatives  of  the  country,  we  feel 


Percentage  of  Adult 
Males  engaged  in 
Manufactures. 

g  2  *2 
g  v3  5 

§ 

4  If 
4  k 

Name  of 
District 

Death-rate  from  Pul¬ 
monary  Affections 
per  100,000  Females. 

Percentage  of  Adult 
Females  engaged  tn 
Manufactures. 

Kind  of  Fe¬ 
male  Occu¬ 
pation. 

149 

59* 

Wigan 

644 

18.0 

Cotton 

42.6 

708 

Blackburn 

734 

34-9 

Cotton 

37-3 

547 

Halifax 

564 

20.4 

Worsted 

41.9 

6l  I 

Bradford 

603 

30.0 

Worsted 

31.0 

69I 

Macclesfield 

804 

26.0 

Silk 

*4-9 

588 

Leek 

705 

17.2 

Silk 

36.6 

721 

Stoke-upon-Trent 

Mj 

*9-3 

Earthenware 

30.4 

726 

Wolstanton 

7V 

iJ-9 

Earthenware 

3°5 

Eight  healthy  agri¬ 
cultural  districts 

340  — 

— 

THE  WORKING  DAY 


the  passing  of  the  first  Factory  Act  half  a  cen¬ 
tury  had  elapsed.1 

Factory  legislation  for  the  first  time  went  be¬ 
yond  its  original  sphere  in  the  Printworks’  Act 
of  1845.  The  displeasure  with  which  capital  re¬ 
ceived  this  new  “extravagance”  speaks  through 
every  line  of  the  Act.  It  limits  the  working  day 
for  children  from  8  to  13,  and  for  women  to  16 
hours,  between  6  a.m.  and  10  p.m.,  without  any 
legal  pause  for  meal-times.  It  allows  males  over 
13  to  be  worked  at  will  day  and  night.2  It  is  a 
Parliamentary  abortion.3 

However,  the  principle  had  triumphed  with 
its  victory  in  those  great  branches  of  industry 
which  form  the  most  characteristic  creation  of 
the  modern  mode  of  production.  Their  wonder¬ 
ful  development  from  1853  to  i860,  hand  in 
hand  with  the  physical  and  moral  regeneration 
of  the  factory  workers,  struck  the  most  pur¬ 
blind.  The  masters  from  whom  the  legal  limita¬ 
tion  and  regulation  had  been  wrung  step  by 
step  after  a  civil  war  of  half  a  century,  them¬ 
selves  referred  ostentatiously  to  the  contrast 
with  the  branches  c,f  exploitation  still  “free.”4 
The  Pharisees  of  “political  economy”  now  pro¬ 
claimed  the  discernment  of  the  necessity  of  a 
legally  fixed  working  day  as  a  characteristic 
new  discovery  of  their  “science.”5  It  will  be 
easily  understood  that,  after  the  factory  mag¬ 
nates  had  resigned  themselves  and  become  rec¬ 
onciled  to  the  inevitable,  the  power  of  resist¬ 
ance  of  capital  gradually  weakened,  whilst  at 
the  same  time  the  power  of  attack  of  the  work¬ 
ing  class  grew  with  the  number  of  its  allies  in 

like  helots  in  the  land,  and  that  we  are  perpetuating  a  sys¬ 
tem  injurious  to  ourselves  and  future  generations. . . .  This, 
therefore,  is  to  give  you  most  respectful  notice  that  when 
we  commence  work  again  after  the  Christmas  and  New 
Year’s  holidays,  we  shall  work  60  hours  per  week,  and  no 
more,  or  from  six  to  six,  with  one  hour  and  a  half  out.” 
Reports ,  etc.,  for  30th  April,  i860,  p.  30. 

1  On  the  means  that  the  wording  of  this  Act  afforded  for 
its  violation  consult  the  parliamentary  return,  Factory  Reg¬ 
ulations  Act ,  6rh  August,  1859,  and  in  it  Leonard  Horner’s 
Suggestions  Jot  amending  the  Factory  Acts  to  enable  the  In¬ 
spectors  to  prevent  illegal  Workings  now  become  very  preva¬ 
lent. 

3  “Children  of  the  age  of  8  years  and  upwards  have,  in¬ 
deed,  been  employed  from  6  a.m.  to  9  p.m.  during  the  last 
half  year  in  my  district.” — Reports ,  etc.,  for  31st  October, 
*  857.  P-39- 

3  “The  Printworks’  Act  is  admitted  to  be  a  failure,  both 
with  reference  to  its  educational  and  protective  provi¬ 
sions.” — Ibid.,  31st  October,  1862,  p.  52. 

*  Thus,  e.g.,  E.  Potter  in  a  letter  to  The  Times ,  March 
24th,  1863.  The  Times  reminded  him  of  the  manufacturers' 
revolt  against  the  Ten  HourV  Bill. 

6  Thus,  among  others,  Mr.  W.  Newmarch,  collaborator 
and  editor  of  Tooke’s  History  0 f  Prices .  Is  it  a  scientific  ad¬ 
vance  to  make  cowardly  concessions  to  public  opinion? 


143 

the  classes  of  society  not  immediately  interest¬ 
ed  in  the  question.  Hence  the  comparatively 
rapid  advance  since  i860. 

In  i860,6  the  dye-works  and  bleach- works  all 
came  under  the  Factory  Act  of  1850;  lace  and 
stocking  manufactures  in  1861. 

In  consequence  of  the  first  report  of  the  Chil¬ 
dren’s  Employment  Commission  (1863),  the 
same  fate  was  shared  by  the  manufacturers  of 
all  earthenwares  (not  merely  pottery),  lucifer 
matches,  percussion  caps,  cartridges,  carpets, 
fustian-cutting,  and  many  processes  included 
under  the  name  of  “finishing.”  In  the  year  1863, 
bleaching  in  the  open  air7  and  baking  were 

6  The  Act,  passed  in  i860,  determined  that,  in  regard  to 
dye-and  bleach-works,  the  working  day  should  be  fixed  on 
August  1st,  1861,  provisionally  at  12  hours,  and  definitely 
on  August  1st,  1862,  at  10  hours,  i.e.,  at  io>£  hours  for 
ordinary  days,  and  7 for  Saturday.  Now,  when  the  fatal 
year,  1862,  came,  the  old  farce  was  repeated.  Besides,  the 
manufacturers  petitioned  Parliament  to  allow  the  employ¬ 
ment  of  young  persons  and  women  for  1 2  hours  during  one 
year  longer.  “In  the  existing  condition  of  the  trade  (the 
time  of  the  cotton  famine),  it  was  greatly  to  the  advantage 
of  the  operatives  to  work  12  hours  per  day,  and  make 
wages  when  they  could.”  A  bill  to  this  effect  had  been 
brought  in,  “and  it  was  mainly  due  to  the  action  of  the 
operative  bleachers  in  Scotland  that  the  bill  was  aban¬ 
doned.”  ( Reports ,  etc.,  for  31st  October,  1862,  pp.  14-15.) 
Thus  defeated  by  the  very  workpeople  in  whose  name  it 
pretended  to  speak,  capital  discovered,  with  the  help  of 
lawyer  spectacles,  that  the  Act  of  i860,  drawn  up,  like  all 
the  Acts  of  Parliament  for  the  “protection  of  labour,”  in 
equivocal  phrases,  gave  them  a  pretext  to  exclude  from  its 
working  the  calenderers  and  finishers.  English  jurispru¬ 
dence,  ever  the  faithful  servant  of  capital,  sanctioned  in 
the  Court  of  Common  Pleas  this  piece  of  pettifogging. 
“The  operatives  have  been  greatly  disappointed  . . .  they 
have  complained  of  overwork,  and  it  is  greatly  to  be  re¬ 
gretted  that  the  clear  intention  of  the  legislature  should 
have  failed  by  reason  of  a  faulty  definition.”  ( Ibid .,  p.  18.) 

7  The  “open  air  bleachers”  had  evaded  the  law  of  i860 
by  means  of  the  lie  that  no  women  worked  at  it  in  the 
night.  The  lie  was  exposed  by  the  factory  inspectors,  and 
at  the  same  time  Parliament  was,  by  petitions  from  the 
operatives,  bereft  of  its  notions  as  to  the  cool  meadow- 
fragrance  in  which  bleaching  in  the  open  air  was  reported 
to  take  place.  In  this  aerial  bleaching,  drying-rooms  were 
used  at  temperatures  of  from  90°  to  ioob  Fahrenheit,  in 
which  the  work  was  done  for  the  most  part  by  girls.  “Cool¬ 
ing”  is  the  technical  expression  for  their  occasional  escape 
from  the  drying-rooms  into  the  fresh  air.  “Fifteen  girls  in 
stoves.  Heat  from  8o°  to  90°  for  linens,  and  ioo°  and  up¬ 
wards  for  cambrics.  Twelve  girls  ironing  and  doing-up  in  a 
small  room  about  10  feet  square,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  a 
close  stove.  The  girls  stand  round  the  stove,  which  throws 
out  a  terrific  hear,  and  dries  the  cambrics  rapidly  for  the 
ironers.  The  hours  of  work  for  these  hands  are  unlimited. 
If  busy,  they  work  till  9  or  12  at  night  for  successive 
nights."  (. Ibid .,  p.  56.)  A  medical  man  states:  “No  special 
hours  are  allowed  for  cooling,  but  if  the  temperature  gets 
too  high,  or  the  workers’  hands  get  soiled  from  perspira¬ 
tion,  they  are  allowed  to  go  out  for  a  few  minutes. . . .  My 
experience,  which  is  considerable  in  treating  the  diseases 
of  stove  workers,  compels  me  to  express  the  opinion  that 
their  sanitary  condition  is  by  no  means  so  high  as  that  of 


144  CAPITAL 


placed  under  special  Acts,  by  which,  in  the 
former,  the  labour  of  young  persons  and  women 
during  the  nighttime  (from  8  in  the  evening  to 
6  in  the  morning),  and  in  the  latter,  the  employ¬ 
ment  of  journeymen  bakers  under  18,  between 
9  in  the  evening  and  5  in  the  morning,  were  for¬ 
bidden.  We  shall  return  to  the  later  proposals 
of  the  same  commission,  which  threatened  to 
deprive  of  their  “freedom”  all  the  important 
branches  of  English  industry,  with  the  excep¬ 
tion  of  agriculture,  mines,  and  the  means  of 
transport.1 

7.  The  Struggle  for  the  Normal  Working  Day .  Re¬ 
action  of  the  English  Factory  Acts  on  Other 

Countries 

The  reader  will  bear  in  mind  that  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  surplus  value,  or  the  extraction  of  sur¬ 
plus  labour,  is  the  specific  end  and  aim,  the  sum 
and  substance,  of  capitalist  production,  quite 
apart  from  any  changes  in  the  mode  of  produc¬ 
tion  which  may  arise  from  the  subordination  of 
labour  to  capital.  He  will  remember  that  as  far 
as  we  have  at  present  gone  only  the  independ¬ 
ent  labourer,  and  therefore  only  the  labourer 
legally  qualified  to  act  for  himself,  enters  as  a 
vendor  of  a  commodity  into  a  contract  with  the 
capitalist.  If,  therefore,  in  our  historical  sketch, 
on  the  one  hand  modern  industry,  on  the  other 
the  labour  of  those  who  are  physically  and  le- 

the  operative*  in  a  spinning  factory'*  (and  capital,  in  its 
memorials  to  Parliament,  had  painted  them  as  floridly 
healthy,  after  the  manner  of  Rubens)*  "The  diseases  most 
observable  amongst  them  are  phthisis,  bronchitis,  irreg¬ 
ularity  of  uterine  functions,  hysteria  in  its  most  aggravated 
forms,  and  rheumatism.  All  of  these,  1  believe,  are  either 
directly  or  indirectly  induced  by  the  impure,  overheated 
air  of  the  apartments  in  which  the  hands  are  employed, 
and  the  want  of  sufficient  comfortable  clothing  to  protect 
them  from  the  cold,  damp  atmosphere,  in  winter,  when  go¬ 
ing  to  their  homes."  {Ibid.,  p.  56-57.)  The  factory  inspec¬ 
tors  remarked  on  the  supplementary  law  of  1 860,  torn  from 
these  open  air  bleachers:  "The  Act  has  not  only  failed  to 
afford  that  protection  to  the  workers  which  it  appears  to 
offer,  but  contains  a  clause . . .  apparently  so  worded  that, 
unless  persons  are  detected  working  after  8  o'clock  at  night, 
they  appear  to  come  under  no  protective  provisions  at  all, 
and  if  they  do  so  work,  the  mode  of  proof  is  so  doubtful 
that  a  conviction  can  scarcely  follow."  {Ibid.,  p.  12.)  "To 
all  intents  and  purposes,  therefore,  as  an  Act  forany  be¬ 
nevolent  or  educational  purpose,  it  is  a  failure;  since  it  can 
scarcely  be  called  benevolent  to  permit,  which  is  tanta¬ 
mount  to  compelling,  women  and  children  to  work  14 
hours  a  day  with  or  without  meals,  as  the  case  may  be,  and 
perhaps  for  longer  hours  than  these,  without  limit  as  to  age, 
without  reference  to  sex,  and  without  regard  to  the  social 
habits  of  the  families  of  the  neighbourhood,  in  which  such 
works  (bleaching  and  dyeing)  are  situated."  {Ibid.,  30th 
April,  1863,  p.  40.) 

1  Note  to  the  and  edition:  Since  1866,  when  I  wrote  the 
above  passages,  a  reaction  has  again  set  in. 


gaily  minors,  play  important  parts,  the  former 
was  to  us  only  a  special  department,  and  the 
latter  only  a  specially  striking  example  of  la¬ 
bour  exploitation.  Without,  however,  antici¬ 
pating  the  subsequent  development  of  our  in¬ 
quiry,  from  the  mere  connection  of  the  historic 
facts  before  us,  it  follows: 

First.  The  passion  of  capital  for  an  unlimited 
and  reckless  extension  of  the  working  day  is  first 
gratified  in  the  industries  earliest  revolution¬ 
ized  by  water-power,  steam,  and  machinery,  in 
those  first  creations  of  the  modern  mode  of  pro¬ 
duction,  cotton,  wool,  flax,  and  silk  spinning, 
and  weaving.  The  changes  in  the  material  mode 
of  production,  and  the  corresponding  changes 
in  the  social  relations  of  the  producers,2  gave 
rise  first  to  an  extravagance  beyond  all  bounds, 
and  then,  in  opposition  to  this,  called  forth  a 
control  on  the  part  of  society  which  legally  lim¬ 
its,  regulates,  and  makes  uniform  the  working 
day  and  its  pauses.  This  control  appears,  there¬ 
fore,  during  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  cen¬ 
tury  simply  as  exceptional  legislation.2  As  soon 
as  this  primitive  dominion  of  the  new  mode  of 
production  was  conquered,  it  was  found  that, 
in  the  meantime,  not  only  had  many  other 
branches  of  production  been  made  to  adopt  the 
same  factory  system,  but  that  manufactures 
with  more  or  less  obsolete  methods,  such  as  pot¬ 
teries,  glass-making,  etc.,  that  old-fashioned 
handicrafts,  like  baking,  and,  fiaally,  even  that 
the  so-called  domestic  industries,  such  as  nail¬ 
making,4  had  long  since  fallen  as  completely  un¬ 
dercapitalist  exploitation  as  the  factories  them¬ 
selves.  Legislation  was,  therefore,  compelled 
gradually  to  get  rid  of  its  exceptional  character, 
or  else,  as  in  England,  after  the  manner  of  the 
Roman  Casuists,  to  declare  any  house  in  which 
work  was  done  to  be  a  factory.6 

2  "The  conduct  of  each  of  these  classes  (capitalists  and 
workmen)  has  been  the  result  of  the  relative  situation  in 
which  they  have  been  placed." — Reports ,  etc.,  for  31st  Oc¬ 
tober,  1848,  p.  1 13. 

8  "The  employments  placed  under  restriction  were  con¬ 
nected  with  the  manufacture  of  textile  fabrics  by  the  aid 
of  steam  or  water  power.  There  were  two  conditions  to 
which  an  employment  must  be  subject  flo  cause  it  to  be 
inspected,  viz.,  the  use  of  steam  or  water  power,  and  the 
manufacture  of  certain  specified  fibres."— < 'Reports,  etc.,  for 
31st  October,  1864,  p.  8. 

4  On  the  condition  of  so-called  domestic  industries,  spe¬ 
cially  valuable  materials  are  to  be  found  in  the  latest  re¬ 
ports  of  the  Children’s  Employment  Commission. 

6  "The  Acts  of  last  session  (1864)  . . .  embrace  a  diver¬ 
sity  of  occupations  the  customs  in  which  differ  greatly,  and 
the  use  of  mechanical  power  to  give  motion  to  machinery 
is  no  longer  one  of  the  elements  necessary,  as  formerly,  to 
constitute,  in  legal  phrase,  a  factory."— Reports,  etc.,  for 
31st  October,  1864,  p.  8. 


THE  WORKING  DAY  145 


Second .  The  history  of  the  regulation  of  the 
working  day  in  certain  branches  of  production, 
and  the  struggle  still  going  on  in  others  in  re¬ 
gard  to  this  regulation,  prove  conclusively  that 
the  isolated  labourer,  the  labourer  as  “free” 
vendor  of  his  labour  power,  when  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction  has  once  attained  a  certain  stage,  suc¬ 
cumbs  without  any  power  of  resistance.  The 
creation  of  a  normal  working  day  is,  therefore, 
the  product  of  a  protracted  civil  war,  more  or 
less  dissembled,  between  the  capitalist  class 
and  the  working  class.  As  the  contest  takes 
place  in  the  arena  of  modern  industry,  it  first 
breaks  out  in  the  home  of  that  industry— Eng¬ 
land.1  The  English  factory  workers  were  the 
champions,  not  only  of  the  English,  but  of  the 
modern  working  class  generally,  as  their  theo¬ 
rists  were  the  first  to  throw  down  the  gauntlet 
to  the  theory  of  capital.2 3  Hence,  the  philoso¬ 
pher  of  the  factory,  Ure,  denounces  as  an  in¬ 
effable  disgrace  to  the  English  working  class 
that  they  inscribed  “the  slavery  of  the  Factory 
Acts”  on  the  banner  which  they  bore  against 
capital,  manfully  striving  for  “perfect  freedom 
of  labour.”* 

France  limps  slowly  behind  England.  The 
February  revolution  was  necessary  to  bring  in¬ 
to  the  world  the  12  hours*  law,4 *  which  is  much 

1  Belgium,  the  paradise  of  continental  liberalism,  shows 
no  trace  of  this  movement.  Even  in  the  coal  and  metal 
mines,  labourers  of  both  sexes,  and  all  ages,  are  consumed 
in  perfect  "freedom,”  at  any  period,  and  through  any 
length  of  time.  Of  every  1000  persons  employed  there, 
733  are  men,  88  women,  135  boys,  and  44  girls  under  16; 
in  the  blast-furnaces,  etc.,  of  every  1000,  688  are  men,  149 

women,  98  boys,  and  85  girls  under  16.  Add  to  this  the  low 
wages  for  the  enormous  exploitation  of  mature  and  im¬ 
mature  labour  power.  The  average  daily  pay  for  a  man  is 
2s.  8 </.,  for  a  woman,  n.  8 </.,  for  a  boy,  1/.  l\^d.  As  a  re¬ 
sult,  Belgium  had  in  1863,  as  compared  with  1850,  nearly 
doubled  both  the  amount  and  the  value  of  its  exports  of 
coal,  iron,  etc. 

3  Robert  Owen,  soon  after  1810,  not  only  maintained 
the  necessity  of  a  limitation  of  the  working  day  in  theory, 
but  actually  introduced  the  10  hours’  day  into  his  factory 
at  New  Lanark.  This  was  laughed  at  as  a  communistic 
utopia;  so  were  his  “Combination  of  children’s  education 
with  productive  labour”  and  the  cooperative  societies  of 
working  men,  first  called  into  being  by  him.  Today,  the 
first  utopia  is  a  Factory  Act,  the  second  figures  as  an  official 
phrase  in  all  Factory  Acts,  the  third  is  already  being  used 
as  a  cloak  for  reactionary  humbug. 

*  Ure,  (French  translation)  Philosophic  dcs  manufactures , 
Paris  1 836,  Vol.  II,  pp.  39, 40, 67, 77,  etc. 

4  In  the  report  of  the  International  Statistical  Congress 
at  Paris,  1855,  it  is  stated:  "The  French  law  which  limits 
the  length  of  daily  labour  in  factories  and  workshops  to  12 

hours  does  not  confine  this  work  to  definite  fixed  hours. 

For  children’s  labour  only  the  work  time  is  prescribed  as 
between  5  a.m.  and  9  p.m.  Therefore,  some  of  the  masters 
use  the  right  which  this  fatal  silence  gives  them  to  keep 
their  works  going,  without  intermission,  day  in,  day  out. 


more  deficient  than  its  English  original.  For  all 
that,  the  French  revolutionary  method  has  its 
special  advantages.  It  once  for  all  commands 
the  same  limit  to  the  working  day  in  all  shops 
and  factories  without  distinction,  whilst  Eng¬ 
lish  legislation  reluctantly  yields  to  the  pressure 
of  circumstances,  now  on  this  point,  now  on 
that,  and  is  getting  lost  in  a  hopelessly  bewil¬ 
dering  tangle  of  contradictory  enactments.6  On 
the  other  hand,  the  French  law  proclaims  as  a 
principle  that  which  in  England  was  only  won 
in  the  name  of  children,  minors,  and  women, 
and  has  been  only  recently  for  the  first  time 
claimed  as  a  general  right.® 

In  the  United  States  of  America,  every  inde¬ 
pendent  movement  of  the  workers  was  para¬ 
lysed  so  long  as  slavery  disfigured  a  part  of  the 
republic.  Labour  cannot  emancipate  itself  in 
the  white  skin  where  in  the  black  it  is  branded. 
But  out  of  the  death  of  slavery  a  new  life  at  once 
arose.  The  first  fruit  of  the  Civil  War  was  the 
eight  hours*  agitation,  that  ran  with  the  seven- 
leagued  boots  of  the  locomotive  from  the  At¬ 
lantic  to  the  Pacific,  from  New  England  to  Cal¬ 
ifornia.  The  General  Congress  of  Labour  at  Bal¬ 
timore  (August  16th,  1866)  declared:  “The  first 
and  great  necessity  of  the  present,  to  free  the 
labour  of  this  country  from  capitalistic  slavery, 
is  the  passing  of  a  law  by  which  eight  hours  shall 
be  the  normal  working  day  in  all  States  of  the 
American  Union.  We  are  resolved  to  put  forth 
all  our  strength  until  this  glorious  result  is  at- 

possibly  with  the  exception  of  Sunday.  For  this  purpose 
they  use  two  different  sets  of  workers,  of  whom  neither  is 
in  the  workshop  more  than  12  hours  at  a  time,  but  the 
work  of  the  establishment  lasts  day  and  night.  The  law  is 
satisfied,  but  is  humanity?”  Besides  “the  destructive  in¬ 
fluence  of  night  labour  on  the  human  organism,”  stress  is 
also  laid  upon  “the  fatal  influence  of  the  association  of 
the  two  sexes  by  night  in  the  same  badly-lighted  work¬ 
shops.” 

4  "For  instance,  there  is  within  my  district  one  occupier 
who,  within  the  same  curtilage,  is  at  the  same  time  a  bleacher 
and  dyer  under  the  Bleaching  and  Dyeing  Works  Act,  a 
printer  under  the  Printworks  Act,  and  a  finisher  under  the 
Factory  Act.”  (Report  of  Mr.  Baker,  in  Reports ,  etc.,  for 
October  31st,  1861,  p.  20.)  After  enumerating  the  different 
provisions  of  these  Acts,  and  the  complications  arising  from 
them,  Mr.  Baker  says:  “It  will  hence  appear  that  it  must 
be  very  difficult  to  secure  the  execution  of  these  three  Acts 
of  Parliament  where  the  occupier  chooses  to  evade  the 
law.”  But  what  is  assured  to  the  lawyers  by  this  is  law¬ 
suits. 

•  Thus  the  factory  inspectors  at  last  venture  to  say: 
“These  objections  (of  capital  to  the  legal  limitation  of  the 
working-day)  must  succumb  before  the  broad  principle  of 
the  rights  of  labour. . . .  There  is  a  time  when  the  master’s 
right  in  his  workman‘9  labour  ceases,  and  his  time  becomes 
his  own,  even  if  there  were  no  exhaustion  in  the  question.” 
—/#</.,  3 1st  Oct.,  1862,  p.  54. 


CAPITAL 


146 

tained.”1 *  At  the  same  time,  the  Congress  of  the 
International  Working  Men’s  Association  at 
Geneva,  on  the  proposition  of  the  London  Gen¬ 
eral  Council,  resolved  that  “the  limitation  of 
the  working  day  is  a  preliminary  condition 
without  which  all  further  attempts  at  improve¬ 
ment  and  emancipation  must  prove  abortive. 
. . .  the  Congress  proposes  eight  hours  as  the 
legal  limit  of  the  working  day.” 

Thus  the  movement  of  the  working  class  on 
both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  that  had  grown  in¬ 
stinctively  out  of  the  conditions  of  production 
themselves,  endorsed  the  words  of  the  English 
Factory  Inspector,  R.  J.  Saunders.  “Further 
steps  towards  a  reformation  of  society  can 
never  be  carried  out  with  any  hope  of  success, 
unless  the  hours  of  labour  be  limited,  and  the 
prescribed  limit  strictly  enforced.”' 

It  must  be  acknowledged  that  our  labourer 
comes  out  of  the  process  of  production  other 
than  he  entered.  In  the  market  he  stood  as  own¬ 
er  of  the  commodity  “labour  power,”  face  to 
face  with  other  owners  of  commodities,  dealer 
against  dealer.  The  contract  by  which  he  sold 
to  the  capitalist  his  labour  power  proved,  so  to 
say,  in  black  and  white  that  he  disposed  of  him¬ 
self  freely  The  bargain  concluded,  it  is  discov¬ 
ered  that  he  was  no  “free  agent,”  that  the  time 
for  which  he  is  free  to  sell  his  labour  power  is  the 
time  for  which  he  is  forced  to  sell  it,3  that  in  fact 
the  vampire  will  not  lose  its  hold  on  him  “so 
long  as  there  is  a  muscle,  a  nerve,  a  drop  of 
blood  to  be  exploited.”4  For  “protection” 
against  “the  serpent  of  their  agonies,”  the  la¬ 
bourers  must  put  their  heads  together,  and,  as 

1  “We,  the  workers  of  Dunkirk,  declare  that  the  length 
of  time  of  labour  required  under  the  present  system  is  too 
great,  and  that,  far  from  leaving  the  worker  time  for  rest 
and  education,  it  plunges  him  into  a  condition  of  servitude 
but  little  better  than  slavery.  That  is  why  we  decide  that 
8  hours  are  enough  for  a  working  day,  and  ought  to  be 
legally  recognized  as  enough,  why  we  call  to  our  help  that 
powerful  lever,  the  press,  .  and  why  we  shall  consider  all 
those  that  refuse  us  this  help  as  enemies  of  the  reform  of 
labour  and  of  the  rights  of  the  labourer  ’’ — Resolution  of 
the  WorktngMen  of  Dunkirk,  New  York  State,  1866. 

1  Reports ,  etc  ,  for  Oct ,  1 848,  p  112 

3  “1  he  proceedings  (the  manoeuvres  of  capital,  e  g  ,  from 
1848-50)  have  afforded,  moreover,  incontrovertible  proof 
of  the  fallacy  of  the  assertion  so  often  advanced,  that  oper¬ 
atives  need  no  protection,  but  may  be  considered  as  free 
agents  in  the  disposal  of  the  only  property  which  they  pos¬ 
sess — the  labour  of  their  hands  and  the  sweat  of  their 
brows."  {Ibid ,  April  30th,  1850,  p.  45  )  "Free  labour  (if  so 
it  may  be  termed)  even  in  a  free  country,  requires  the 
strong  arm  of  the  law  to  protect  it  "  {Ibid ,  October  31st, 
1864,  p.  34.)  "To  permit,  which  is  tantamount  to  compel¬ 
ling  ...  to  work  14  hours  a  day  with  or  without  meals," 
etc.  {Ibtd.,  April  30th,  1863,  p.  40.) 

4  Friedrich  Engels,  op.  at.,  p.  5. 


a  class,  compel  the  passing  of  a  law,  an  all-pow¬ 
erful  social  barrier  that  shall  prevent  the  very 
workers  from  selling,  by  voluntary  contract 
with  capital,  themselves  and  their  families  into 
slavery  and  death.5  In  place  of  the  pompous 
catalogue  of  the  “inalienable  rights  of  man” 
comes  the  modest  Magna  Charta  of  a  legally 
limited  working  day,  which  shall  make  clear 
“when  the  time  which  the  worker  sells  is  ended, 
and  when  his  own  begins.”6  Quantum  mutatus 
ab  tllo" 


CHAPTER  XI.  RATE  AND  MASS  OF 
SURPLUS  VALUE 

In  this  chapter,  as  hitherto,  the  value  of  labour 
power,  and  therefore  the  part  of  the  working- 
day  necessary  for  the  reproduction  or  mainte¬ 
nance  of  that  labour  power,  are  supposed  to  be 
given,  constant  magnitudes. 

This  premised,  with  the  rate,  the  mass  is  at 
the  same  time  given  of  the  surplus  value  that 
the  individual  labourer  furnishes  to  the  capital¬ 
ist  in  a  definite  period  of  time  If,  c  g  ,  the  neces¬ 
sary  labour  amounts  to  6  hours  daily,  expressed 
in  a  quantum  of  gold  =  shillings,  then  y  is  the 
daily  value  of  one  labour  power  or  the  value  of 
the  capital  advanced  m  the  buying  of  one  la¬ 
bour  power  If,  further,  the  rate  of  suiplus  val¬ 
ue  be  =100%,  this  variable  capital  of  y  pro¬ 
duces  a  mass  of  surplus  value  of  y  ,  or  the  la¬ 
bourer  supplies  daily  a  mass  of  surplus  labour 
equal  to  6  hours 

But  the  variable  capital  of  a  capitalist  is  the 

5  The  Ten  Hours  Act  has,  in  the  branches  of  industry 
that  come  under  it, '  put  an  end  to  the  premature  decrepi¬ 
tude  of  the  former  long  hour  workers  ( Reports ,  etc  ,  for 
31st  Oct ,  1859,  p  47  )  "Capital  (in  factories)  tan  never  be 
employed  in  keeping  the  machinery  in  motion  beyond  a 
limited  time,  without  certain  injury  to  the  health  and  mor¬ 
als  of  the  labourers  employed,  and  they  are  not  in  a  posi¬ 
tion  to  protect  themselves  {I bid  ,  p  8  ) 

6  "A  still  greater  boon  is  the  distinction  at  last  made 
clear  between  the  worker  s  own  time  and  his  master’s  1  he 
worker  knows  now  when  that  which  he  sells  is  ended,  and 
when  his  own  begins,  and  by  possessing  a  sure  foreknowl¬ 
edge  of  this  is  enabled  to  prearrange  his  own  minutes  for 
his  own  purposes  "  {Ibid ,  p  52  )  "By  making  them  mas¬ 
ters  of  their  own  time,  (the  factory  Acts)  have  given  them 
a  moral  energy  which  is  directing  them  to  the  eventual  pos¬ 
session  of  political  power  {Ibtd,  p  47)  With  suppressed 
irony,  and  in  very  well  weighed  words,  the  factory  inspec¬ 
tors  hint  that  the  actual  law  also  frees  the  capitalist  from 
some  of  the  brutality  natural  to  a  man  who  is  a  mere  em¬ 
bodiment  of  capital,  and  that  it  has  given  him  time  for  a 
httl*  "culture  ’  "Formerly  the  master  had  no  time  for  any¬ 
thing  but  money,  the  servant  had  no  time  for  anything 
but  labour’  {Ibid ,  p.  48). 

7  Wfratachangel 


RATE  AND  MASS  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE  147 


expression  in  money  of  the  total  value  of  all  the 
labour  powers  that  he  employs  simultaneously. 
Its  value  is,  therefore,  equal  to  the  average  val¬ 
ue  of  one  labour  power  multiplied  by  the  num¬ 
ber  of  labour  powers  employed.  With  a  given 
value  of  labour  power,  therefore,  the  magnitude 
of  the  variable  capital  varies  directly  as  the 
number  of  labourers  employed  simultaneously. 
If  the  daily  value  of  one  labour  power  =  3^., 
then  a  capital  of  300J.  must  be  advanced  in 
order  to  exploit  daily  100  labour  powers,  of  n 
times  3.*.,  in  order  to  exploit  daily  n  labour  pow¬ 
ers. 

In  the  same  way,  if  a  variable  capital  of  3.J., 
being  the  daily  value  of  one  labour  power,  pro¬ 
duce  a  daily  surplus  value  of  3J.,  a  variable  cap¬ 
ital  of  300 s.  will  produce  a  daily  surplus  value 
of  300J.,  and  one  of  n  times  3 s.  a  daily  surplus 
value  of  nXjs.  The  mass  of  the  surplus  value 
produced  is,  therefore,  equal  to  the  surplus 
value  which  the  working-day  of  one  labourer 
supplies  multiplied  by  the  number  of  labourers 
employed.  But  as  further  the  mass  of  sur¬ 
plus  value  which  a  single  labourer  produces,  the 
value  of  labour  power  being  given,  is  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  rate  of  the  surplus  value,  this  law 
follows:  the  mass  of  the  surplus  value  produced 
is  equal  to  the  amount  of  the  variable  capital 
advanced,  multiplied  by  the  rate  of  surplus  val¬ 
ue;  in  other  words:  it  is  determined  by  the  com¬ 
pound  ratio  between  the  number  of  labour  pow¬ 
ers  exploited  simultaneously  by  the  same  cap¬ 
italist  and  the  degree  of  exploitation  of  each  in¬ 
dividual  labour  power. 

Let  the  mass  of  the  surplus  value  be  S,  the 
surplus  value  supplied  by  the  individual  la¬ 
bourer  in  the  average  day  s,  the  variable  capital 
daily  advanced  in  the  purchase  of  one  individ¬ 
ual  labour  power  v,  the  sum-total  of  the  vari¬ 
able  capital  y,  the  value  of  an  average  labour 
power  Py  its  degree  of  exploitation 
a'  /  surplus  labour  \ 
a  y necessary  labour  I 

and  the  number  of  labourers  employed  w;  we 
have: 

5-xv 

PX-Xn 

a 

It  is  always  supposed,  not  only  that  the  value 
of  an  average  labour  power  is  constant,  but  that 
the  labourers  employed  by  a  capitalist  are  re¬ 
duced  to  average  labourers.  There  are  excep¬ 
tional  cases  in  which  the  surplus  value  pro¬ 
duced  does  not  increase  in  proportion  to  the 


number  of  labourers  exploited,  but  then  the 
value  of  the  labour  power  does  not  remain  con¬ 
stant. 

In  the  production  of  a  definite  mass  of  sur¬ 
plus  value,  therefore,  the  decrease  of  one  factor 
may  be  compensated  by  the  increase  of  the 
other.  If  the  variable  capital  diminishes,  and  at 
the  same  time  the  rate  of  surplus  value  increases 
in  the  same  ratio,  the  mass  of  surplus  value  pro¬ 
duced  remains  unaltered.  If  on  our  earlier  as¬ 
sumption  the  capitalist  must  advance  300J.,  in 
order  to  exploit  100  labourers  a  day,  and  if  the 
rate  of  surplus  value  amounts  to  50%,  this  vari¬ 
able  capital  of  300J.  yields  a  surplus  value  of 
1 50 s,  or  of  100X3  working  hours.  If  the  rate  of 
surplus  value  doubles,  or  the  working  day,  in¬ 
stead  of  being  extended  from  6  to  9,  is  extended 
from  6  to  12  hours  and  at  the  same  time  vari¬ 
able  capital  is  lessened  by  half,  and  reduced  to 
150J.,  it  yields  also  a  surplus  value  of  150 s.  or 
50x6  working  hours.  Diminution  of  the  vari¬ 
able  capital  may  therefore  be  compensated  by 
a  proportionate  rise  in  the  degree  of  exploita¬ 
tion  of  labour  power,  or  the  decrease  in  the 
number  of  the  labourers  employed  by  a  propor¬ 
tionate  extension  of  the  working  day.  Within 
certain  limits,  therefore,  the  supply  of  labour 
exploitable  by  capital  is  independent  of  the  sup¬ 
ply  of  labourers.1  On  the  contrary,  a  fall  in  the 
rate  of  surplus  value  leaves  unaltered  the  mass 
of  the  surplus  value  produced,  if  the  amount  of 
the  variable  capital,  or  number  of  the  labourers 
employed,  increases  in  the  same  proportion. 

Nevertheless,  the  compensation  of  a  decrease 
in  the  number  of  labourers  employed,  or  of  the 
amount  of  variable  capital  advanced,  by  a  rise 
in  the  rate  of  surplus  value,  or  by  the  lengthen¬ 
ing  of  the  working  day,  has  impassable  limits. 
Whatever  the  value  of  labour  power  may  be, 
whether  the  working  time  necessary  for  the 
maintenance  of  the  labourer  is  2  or  10  hours,  the 
total  value  that  a  labourer  can  produce,  day  in, 
day  out,  is  always  less  than  the  value  in  which 
24  hours  of  labour  are  embodied,  less  than  1 2 s.y 
if  1 2s.  is  the  money  expression  for  24  hours  of 
realized  labour.  In  our  former  assumption,  ac¬ 
cording  to  which  6  working  hours  are  daily  nec¬ 
essary  in  order  to  reproduce  the  labour  power 
itself  or  to  replace  the  value  of  the  capital  ad¬ 
vanced  in  its  purchase,  a  variable  capital  of 
1500J.,  that  employs  500  labourers  at  a  rate  of 

1  This  elementary  law  appears  to  be  unknown  to  the  vul¬ 
gar  economists,  who  reverse  Archimedes  in  the  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  market  price  of  labour  by  supply  and  demand 
and  imagine  they  have  found  the  fulcrum  by  means  of 
which,  not  to  move  the  world,  but  to  stop  its  motion. 


CAPITAL 


148 

surplus  value  of  100%  with  ail  hours*  working 
day,  produces  daily  a  surplus  value  of  1500;., 
or  of  6x500  working  hours.  A  capital  of  300J. 
that  employs  100  labourers  a  day  with  a  rate 
of  surplus  value  of  200%,  or  with  a  working- 
day  of  1 8  hours,  produces  only  a  mass  of  surplus 
value  of  600 s.  or  12X100  working  hours;  and 
its  total  value  product,  the  equivalent  of  the 
variable  capital  advanced  plus  the  surplus  val¬ 
ue,  can,  day  in,  day  out,  never  reach  the  sum 
of  1200J.  or  24 X 100  working  hours.  The  abso¬ 
lute  limit  of  the  average  working-day— this  be¬ 
ing  by  Nature  always  less  than  24  hours— sets 
an  absolute  limit  to  the  compensation  of  a  re¬ 
duction  of  variable  capital  by  a  higher  rate  of 
surplus  value,  or  of  the  decrease  of  the  number 
of  labourers  exploited  by  a  higher  degree  of  ex¬ 
ploitation  of  labour  power.  This  palpable  law 
is  of  importance  for  the  clearing  up  of  many 
phenomena,  arising  from  a  tendency  (to  be 
worked  out  later  on)  of  capital  to  reduce  as 
much  as  possible  the  number  of  labourers  em¬ 
ployed  by  it,  or  its  variable  constituent  trans¬ 
formed  into  labour  power,  in  contradiction  to 
its  other  tendency  to  produce  the  greatest  pos¬ 
sible  mass  of  surplus  value.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  the  mass  of  labour  power  employed,  or  the 
amount  of  variable  capital,  increases,  but  not 
In  proportion  to  the  fall  in  the  rate  of  surplus 
value,  the  mass  of  the  surplus  value  produced 
falls. 

A  third  law  results  from  the  determination 
of  the  mass  of  the  surplus  value  produced  by  the 
two  factors:  rate  of  surplus  value  and  amount 
of  variable  capital  advanced.  The  rate  of  sur¬ 
plus  value,  or  the  degree  of  exploitation  of  la¬ 
bour  power,  and  the  value  of  labour  power,  or 
the  amount  of  necessary  working  time  being 
given,  it  is  self-evident  that  the  greater  the  vari¬ 
able  capital,  the  greater  would  be  the  mass  of 
the  value  produced  and  of  the  surplus  value.  If 
the  limit  of  the  working  day  is  given,  and  also 
the  limit  of  its  necessary  constituent,  the  mass 
of  value  and  surplus  value  that  an  individual 
capitalist  produces  is  clearly  exclusively  de¬ 
pendent  on  the  mass  of  labour  that  he  sets  in 
motion.  But  this,  under  the  conditions  sup¬ 
posed  above,  depends  on  the  mass  of  labour 
power,  or  the  number  of  labourers  whom  he  ex¬ 
ploits,  and  this  number  in  its  turn  is  determined 
by  the  amount  of  the  variable  capital  advanced. 
With  a  given  rate  of  surplus  value,  and  a  given 
value  of  labour  power,  therefore,  the  masses  of 
surplus  value  produced  vary  directly  as  the 
amounts  of  the  variable  capitals  advanced. 
Now  we  know  that  the  capitalist  divides  his 


capital  into  two  parts.  One  part  he  lays  out  in 
means  of  production.  This  is  the  constant  part 
of  his  capital.  The  other  part  he  lays  out  in  liv¬ 
ing  labour  power.  This  part  forms  his  variable 
capital.  On  the  basis  of  the  same  mode  of  social 
production,  the  division  of  capital  into  constant 
and  variable  differs  in  different  branches  of  pro¬ 
duction,  and  within  the  same  branch  of  produc¬ 
tion,  too,  this  relation  changes  with  changes  in 
the  technical  conditions  in  and  the  social  com¬ 
binations  of  the  processes  of  production.  But  in 
whatever  proportion  a  given  capital  breaks  up 
into  a  constant  and  a  variable  part,  whether  the 
latter  is  to  the  former  as  1 :2  or  1  :io  or  1  the 
law  just  laid  down  is  not  affected  by  this.  For, 
according  to  our  previous  analysis,  the  value  of 
the  constant  capital  reappears  in  the  value  of 
the  product,  but  does  not  enter  into  the  newly 
produced  value,  the  newly  created  value  prod¬ 
uct.  To  employ  1 000  spinners,  more  raw  materi¬ 
al,  spindles,  etc.,  are,  of  course,  required,  than 
to  employ  100.  The  value  of  these  additional 
means  of  production,  however,  may  rise,  fall, 
remain  unaltered,  be  large  or  small;  it  has  no 
influence  on  the  process  of  creation  of  surplus 
value  by  means  of  the  labour  powers  that  put 
them  in  motion.  The  law  demonstrated  above 
now,  therefore,  takes  this  form:  the  masses  of 
value  and  of  surplus  value  produced  by  differ¬ 
ent  capitals— the  value  of  labour  power  being 
given  and  its  degree  of  exploitation  being  equal 
— vary  directly  as  the  amounts  of  the  variable 
constituents  of  these  capitals,  i.e.,  as  their  con¬ 
stituents  transformed  into  living  labour  power. 

This  law  clearly  contradicts  all  experience 
based  on  appearance.  Every  one  knows  that  a 
cotton  spinner,  who,  reckoning  the  percentage 
on  the  whole  of  his  applied  capital,  employs 
much  constant  and  little  variable  capital,  does 
not,  on  account  of  this,  pocket  less  profit  or  sur¬ 
plus  value  than  a  baker,  who  relatively  sets  in 
motion  much  variable  and  little  constant  cap¬ 
ital.  For  the  solution  of  this  apparent  contra¬ 
diction,  many  intermediate  terms  are  as  yet 
wanted,  as  from  the  standpoint  of  elementary 
algebra  many  intermediate  terms  are  wanted  to 
understand  that  5  may  represent  an  actual 
magnitude.  Classical  economy,  although  not 
formulating  the  law,  holds  instinctively  to  it, 
because  it  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  gen¬ 
eral  law  of  value.  It  tries  to  rescue  the  law  from 
collision  with  contradictory  phenomena  by  a 
violent  abstraction.  It  will  be  seen  later  how 
the  school  of  Ricardo  has  come  to  grief  over  this 
stumbling  block.  Vulgar  economy  which,  in¬ 
deed,  “has  really  learnt  nothing,*’  here  as  every- 


RATE  AND  MASS  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE 


where  sticks  to  appearances  in  opposition  to  the 
law  which  regulates  and  explains  them.  In  op¬ 
position  to  Spinoza,  it  believes  that  “ignorance 
is  a  sufficient  reason.” 

The  labour  which  is  set  in  motion  by  the  total 
capital  of  a  society,  day  in,  day  out,  may  be  re¬ 
garded  as  a  single  collective  working  day.  If, 
e.g.,  the  number  of  labourers  is  a  million,  and 
the  average  working  day  of  a  labourer  is  io 
hours,  the  social  working  day  consists  of  ten 
million  hours.  With  a  given  length  of  this  work¬ 
ing  day,  whether  its  limits  are  fixed  physically 
or  socially,  the  mass  of  surplus  value  can  only 
be  increased  by  increasing  the  number  of  la¬ 
bourers,  i.e.,  of  the  labouring  population.  The 
growth  of  population  here  forms  the  mathemat¬ 
ical  limit  to  the  production  of  surplus  value  by 
the  total  social  capital.  On  the  contrary,  with 
a  given  amount  of  population,  this  limit  is 
formed  by  the  possible  lengthening  of  the  work¬ 
ing  day.1  It  will,  however,  be  seen  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  chapter  that  this  law  only  holds  for  the  form 
of  surplus  value  d^alt  with  up  to  the  present. 

From  the  treatment  of  the  production  of  sur¬ 
plus  value  so  far,  it  follows  that  not  every  sum 
of  money,  or  of  value,  is  at  pleasure  transform¬ 
able  into  capital.  To  effect  this  transformation, 
in  fact,  a  certain  minimum  of  money  or  of  ex¬ 
change  value  must  be  presupposed  in  the  hands 
of  the  individual  possessor  of  money  or  com¬ 
modities.  The  minimum  of  variable  capital  is 
the  cost  price  of  a  single  labour  power,  em¬ 
ployed  the  whole  year  through,  day  in,  day  out, 
for  the  production  of  surplus  value.  If  this  la¬ 
bourer  were  in  possession  of  his  own  means  of 
production,  and  were  satisfied  to  live  as  a  la¬ 
bourer,  he  need  not  work  beyond  the  time  nec¬ 
essary  for  the  reproduction  of  his  means  of  sub¬ 
sistence,  say  8  hours  a  day.  He  would,  besides, 
only  require  the  means  of  production  sufficient 
for  8  working  hours.  The  capitalist,  on  the  other 
hand,  who  makes  him  do,  besides  these  8  hours, 
say  4  hours*  surplus  labour,  requires  an  addi¬ 
tional  sum  of  money  for  furnishing  the  addi¬ 
tional  means  of  production.  On  our  supposition, 
however,  he  would  have  to  employ  two  labour¬ 
ers  in  order  to  live,  on  the  surplus  value  appro¬ 
priated  daily,  as  well  as,  and  no  better  than,  a 
labourer,  i.e.,  to  be  able  to  satisfy  his  necessary 
wants.  In  this  case  the  mere  maintenance  of  life 

1  “The  labour,  that  is  the  economic  time,  of  society  is  a 
given  portion,  say  ten  hours  a  day  of  a  million  of  people, 
or  ten  million  hours.  . . .  Capital  has  its  boundary  of  in¬ 
crease.  ThiB  boundary  may,  at  any  given  period,  be  at¬ 
tained  in  the  actual  extent  of  economic  time  employed.”— 
An  Essay  on  the  Political  Economy  of  Nations ,  London, 
1821,  pp.  47, 49. 


149 

would  be  the  end  of  his  production,  not  the  in¬ 
crease  of  wealth;  but  this  latter  is  implied  in 
capitalist  production.  That  he  may  live  only 
twice  as  well  as  an  ordinary  labourer,  and  be¬ 
sides  turn  half  of  the  surplus  value  produced 
into  capital,  he  would  have  to  raise,  with  the 
number  of  labourers,  the  minimum  of  the  capi¬ 
tal  advanced  8  times.  Of  course  he  can,  like  his 
labourer,  take  to  work  himself,  participate  di¬ 
rectly  in  the  process  of  production,  but  he  is 
then  only  a  hybrid  between  capitalist  and  la¬ 
bourer,  a  “small  master.**  A  certain  stage  of 
capitalist  production  necessitates  that  the  cap¬ 
italist  be  able  to  devote  the  whole  of  the  time 
during  which  he  functions  as  a  capitalist,  i.e., 
as  personified  capital,  to  the  appropriation  and 
therefore  control  of  the  labour  of  others,  and  to 
the  selling  of  the  products  of  this  labour.2  The 
guilds  of  the  Middle  Ages,  therefore,  tried  to  pre¬ 
vent  by  force  the  transformation  of  the  master 
of  a  trade  into  a  capitalist,  by  limiting  the  num¬ 
ber  of  labourers  that  could  be  employed  by  one 
master  within  a  very  small  maximum.  The  pos¬ 
sessor  of  money  or  commodities  actually  turns 
into  a  capitalist  in  such  cases  only  where  the 
minimum  sum  advanced  for  production  greatly 
exceeds  the  maximum  of  the  Middle  Ages. 
Here,  as  in  natural  science,  is  shown  the  correct¬ 
ness  of  the  law  discovered  by  Hegel  (in  his 
Logic)>  that  merely  quantitative  differences  be¬ 
yond  a  certain  point  pass  into  qualitative 
changes.3 

2  “The  farmer  cannot  rely  on  his  own  labour,  and  if  he 
docs,  I  will  maintain  that  he  is  a  loser  by  it.  His  employ¬ 
ment  should  be  a  general  attention  to  the  whole:  his  thresher 
must  be  watched,  or  he  will  soon  lose  his  wages  in  corn  not 
threshed  out;  his  mowers,  reapers,  etc.,  must  be  looked 
after;  he  must  constantly  go  round  his  fences;  he  must  see 
there  is  no  neglect;  which  would  be  the  case  if  he  was  con¬ 
fined  to  any  one  spot.”  {An  Inquiry  into  the  Connexion  be¬ 
tween  the  Price  of  Provisions  and  the  Size  of  Farms  ^  etc.,  by 
a  Farmer ,  London,  1773,  p.  12.)  This  book  is  very  inter¬ 
esting.  In  it  the  genesis  of  the  “capitalist  farmer”  or  “mer¬ 
chant  farmer,”  as  he  is  explicitly  called,  may  be  studied, 
and  his  self-glorification  at  the  expense  of  the  small  farmer 
who  has  only  to  do  with  bare  subsistence,  be  noted.  “The 
class  of  capitalists  are  from  the  first  partially,  and  they  be¬ 
come  ultimately  completely,  discharged  from  the  necessity 
of  the  manual  labour.”  ( Text-book  of  Lectures  on  the  Politi¬ 
cal  Economy  of  Nations ,  by  the  Rev.  Richard  Jones,  Hert¬ 
ford,  1852.  Lecture  III,  p.  39.) 

3  The  molecular  theory  of  modern  chemistry,  first  scien¬ 
tifically  worked  out  by  Laurent  and  Gerhardt,  rests  on  no 
other  law.— Addition  to  3rd  edition.  For  the  explanation 
of  this  statement,  which  is  not  very  clear  to  non-chemists, 
we  remark  that  the  author  speaks  here  of  the  homologous 
series  of  carbon  compounds,  first  so  named  by  C.  Gerhardt 
in  1843,  each  series  of  which  has  its  own  general  algebraic 
formula.  Thus  the  scries  of  paraffins:  Cn  H*tt+1,  that  of  the 
normal  alcohols:  C“  H^+^O;  of  the  normal  fatty  acids:  Cn 
H*“  U2;  and  many  others.  In  the  above  examples,  by  the 


CAPITAL 


150 

The  minimum  of  the  sum  of  value  that  the 
individual  possessor  of  money  or  commodities 
must  command,  in  order  to  metamorphose  him¬ 
self  into  a  capitalist,  changes  with  the  different 
stages  of  development  of  capitalist  production, 
and  is  at  given  stages  different  in  different 
spheres  of  production,  according  to  their  special 
and  technical  conditions.  Certain  spheres  of 
production  demand,  even  at  the  very  outset  of 
capitalist  production,  a  minimum  of  capital 
that  is  not  as  yet  found  in  the  hands  of  single 
individuals.  This  gives  rise  partly  to  state  sub¬ 
sidies  to  private  persons,  as  in  France  in  the 
time  of  Colbert,  and  as  in  many  German  states 
up  to  our  own  epoch;  partly  to  the  formation  of 
societies  with  legal  monopoly  for  the  exploita¬ 
tion  of  certain  branches  of  industry  and  com¬ 
merce,  the  forerunners  of  our  modern  joint- 
stock  companies.1 

Within  the  process  of  production,  as  we  have 
seen,  capital  acquired  the  command  over  la¬ 
bour,  i.e.,  over  functioning  labour  power  or  the 
labourer  himself.  Personified  capital,  the  capi¬ 
talist  takes  care  that  the  labourer  does  his  work 
regularly  and  with  the  proper  degree  of  inten¬ 
sity. 

Capital  further  developed  into  a  coercive  re¬ 
lation,  which  compels  the  working  class  to  do 
more  work  than  the  narrow  round  of  its  own 
life-wants  prescribes.  As  a  producer  of  the  ac¬ 
tivity  of  others,  as  a  pumper-out  of  surplus  la¬ 
bour  and  exploiter  of  labour  power,  it  surpasses 
in  energy,  disregard  of  bounds,  recklessness, 
and  efficiency,  all  earlier  systems  of  production 
based  on  directly  compulsory  labour. 

At  first,  capital  subordinates  labour  on  the 
basis  of  the  technical  conditions  in  which  it  his¬ 
torically  finds  it.  It  does  not,  therefore,  change 
immediately  the  mode  of  production.  The  pro¬ 
duction  of  surplus  value — in  the  form  hitherto 
considered  by  us — by  means  of  simple  exten¬ 
sion  of  the  working  day  proved,  therefore,  to  be 
independent  of  any  change  in  the  mode  of  pro¬ 
duction  itself.  It  was  not  less  active  in  the  old- 
fashioned  bakeries  than  in  the  modern  cotton 
factories. 

If  we  consider  the  process  of  production  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  simple  labour  process, 

simply  quantitative  addition  of  C  H3  to  the  molecular  for¬ 
mula  a  qualitatively  different  body  is  each  time  formed. 
On  the  share  (overestimated  by  Marx)  of  Laurent  and 
Gerhardt  in  the  determination  of  this  important  fact  see 
Kopp,  Entwicklung  der  Chemte ,  Munich,  1873,  pp.  709, 
716;  and  Schorlemmer,  Rise  and  Progress  oj  Organic  Chem¬ 
istry ,  London,  1879,  p.  54.—  F.E. 

1  Martin  Luther  calls  these  kinds  of  institutions  “mo¬ 
nopoly  companies." 


the  labourer  stands  in  relation  to  the  means  of 
production,  not  in  their  quality  as  capital,  but 
as  the  mere  means  and  material  of  his  own  in¬ 
telligent  productive  activity.  In  tanning,  e.g., 
he  deals  with  the  skins  as  his  simple  object  of 
labour.  It  is  not  the  capitalist  whose  skin  he 
tans.  But  it  is  different  as  soon  as  we  deal  with 
the  process  of  production  from  the  point  of  view 
of  the  process  of  creation  of  surplus  value.  The 
means  of  production  are  at  once  changed  into 
means  for  the  absorption  of  the  labour  of  others. 
It  is  now  no  longer  the  labourer  that  employs 
the  means  of  production,  but  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  that  employ  the  labourer.  Instead  of 
being  consumed  by  him  as  material  elements  of 
his  productive  activity,  they  consume  him  as 
the  ferment  necessary  to  their  own  life  process, 
and  the  life  process  of  capital  consists  only  in 
its  movement  as  value  constantly  expanding, 
constantly  multiplying  itself.  Furnaces  and 
workshops  that  stand  idle  by  night,  and  absorb 
no  living  labour,  are  “a  mere  loss”  to  the  capi¬ 
talist.  Hence,  furnaces  and  workshops  consti¬ 
tute  lawful  claims  upon  the  night  labour  of  the 
workpeople.  The  simple  transformation  of 
money  into  the  material  factors  of  the  process 
of  production,  into  means  of  production,  trans¬ 
forms  the  latter  into  a  title  and  a  right  to  the 
labour  and  surplus  labour  of  others.  An  exam¬ 
ple  will  show,  in  conclusion,  how  this  sophisti¬ 
cation,  peculiar  to  and  characteristic  of  capital¬ 
ist  production,  this  complete  inversion  of  the 
relation  between  dead  and  living  labour,  be¬ 
tween  value  and  the  force  that  creates  value, 
mirrors  itself  in  the  consciousness  of  capitalists. 
During  the  revolt  of  the  Knglish  factory  lords 
between  1848  and  18^0,  “the  head  of  one  of  the 
oldest  and  most  respectable  houses  in  the  West 
of  Scotland,  Messrs.  Garble  Sons  &  Co.,  of  the 
linen  and  cotton  thread  factory  at  Paisley,  a 
company  which  has  now  existed  for  about  a 
century,  which  was  in  operation  in  1752,  and 
four  generations  of  the  same  family  have  con¬ 
ducted  it”  .  .  .  this  “very  intelligent  gentle¬ 
man”  then  wrote  a  letter2  in  the  Glasgow  Daily 
Mail  of  April  25th,  1849,  with  the  title,  “The 
Relay  System,”  in  which  among  other  things 
the  following  grotesquely  naive  passage  occurs: 
“Let  us  now  ...  see  what  evils  will  attend  the 
limiting  to  10  hours  the  working  of  the  factory. 
. . .  They  amount  to  the  most  serious  damage  to 
the  mill-owner’s  prospects  and  property.  If  he 
(i.e.,  his  “hands”)  worked  12  hours  before,  and 
is  limited  to  10,  then  every  12  machines  orspin- 

1  Reports  oj  Inspectors  of  Factories >  April  30th,  1849, 
p.  59/ 


RATE  AND  MASS  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE 


dies  in  his  establishment  shrink  to  io,  and 
should  the  works  be  disposed  of,  they  will  be 
valued  only  as  io,  so  that  a  sixth  part  would 
thus  be  deducted  from  the  value  of  every  fac¬ 
tory  in  the  country.”1 

To  this  West  of  Scotland  bourgeois  brain,  in¬ 
heriting  the  accumulated  capitalistic  qualities 
of  “four  generations,”  the  value  of  the  means 

1  Ibid.,  p.  60.  Factory  Inspector  Stuart,  himself  a  Scotch¬ 
man,  and  in  contrast  to  the  English  factory  inspectors, 
quite  taken  captive  by  the  capitalistic  method  of  thinking, 
remarks  expressly  on  this  letter,  which  he  incorporates  in 
his  report,  that  it  is  “the  most  useful  of  the  communica¬ 
tions  which  any  of  the  factory  owners  working  with  relays 
have  given  to  those  engaged  in  the  same  trade,  and  which 
is  the  most  calculated  to  remove  the  prejudices  of  such  of 
them  as  have  scruples  respecting  any  change  of  the  ar¬ 
rangement  of  the  hoursof  work.” 


151 

of  production,  spindles,  etc.  is  so  inseparably 
mixed  up  with  their  property,  as  capital,  to  ex¬ 
pand  their  own  value,  and  to  swallow  up  daily 
a  definite  quantity  of  the  unpaid  labour  of  oth¬ 
ers,  that  the  head  of  the  firm  of  Carlile  &  Co. 
actually  imagines  that  if  he  sells  his  factory,  not 
only  will  the  value  of  the  spindles  be  paid  to 
him,  but,  in  addition,  their  power  of  annexing 
surplus  value,  not  only  the  labour  which  is  em¬ 
bodied  in  them  and  is  necessary  to  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  spindles  of  this  kind,  but  also  the  sur¬ 
plus  labour  which  they  help  to  pump  out  daily 
from  the  brave  Scots  of  Paisley:  and  for  that 
very  reason  he  thinks  that,  with  the  shorten¬ 
ing  of  the  working  day  by  2  hours,  the  sell¬ 
ing-price  of  12  spinning  machines  dwindles  to 
that  of  io! 


Part  IV 


PRODUCTION  OF  RELATIVE  SURPLUS  VALUE 


CHAPTER  XII.  THE  CONCEPT  OF 
RELATIVE  SURPLUS  VALUE 

That  portion  of  the  working  day  which  merely 
produces  an  equivalent  for  the  value  paid  by 
the  capitalist  for  his  labour  power  has,  up  to 
this  point,  been  treated  by  us  as  a  constant 
magnitude;  and  such  in  fact  it  is,  under  given 
conditions  of  production  and  at  a  given  stage 
in  the  economical  development  of  society.  Be¬ 
yond  this,  his  necessary  labour  time,  the  labour¬ 
er,  we  saw,  could  continue  to  work  for  2, 3, 4, 6, 
etc.,  hours.  The  rate  of  surplus  value  and  the 
length  of  the  working  day  depended  on  the 
magnitude  of  this  prolongation.  Though  the 
necessary  labour  time  was  constant,  we  saw,  on 
the  other  hand,  that  the  total  working  day  was 
variable.  Now  suppose  we  have  a  working  day 
whose  length,  and  whose  apportionment  be¬ 
tween  necessary  labour  and  surplus  labour,  are 
given.  Let  the  whole  line  ac ,  a - b — c ,  rep¬ 

resent,  for  example,  a  working  day  of  12  hours; 
the  portion  of  ab  10  hours  of  necessary  labour, 
and  the  portion  be  2  hours  of  surplus  labour. 
How  now  can  the  production  of  surplus  value 
be  increased,  i.e.,  how  can  the  surplus  labour 
be  prolonged,  without,  or  independently  of,  any 
prolongation  of  ac? 

Although  the  length  of  ac  is  given,  be  appears 
to  be  capable  of  prolongation,  if  not  by  exten¬ 
sion  beyond  its  end  c ,  which  is  also  the  end  of 
the  working  day  ac ,  yet,  at  all  events,  by  push¬ 
ing  back  its  starting  point  b  in  the  direction  of 

a.  Assume  that  b'—b,  in  the  line  a - bf — 

b - cy  is  equal  to  half  of  bcy  or  to  one  hour’s 

labour  time.  If,  now,  in  ac9  the  working  day  of 
12  hours,  we  move  the  point  b  to  b\  be  becomes 
b'c\  the  surplus  labour  increases  by  one-half, 
from  2  hours  to  3  hours,  although  the  working 
day  remains  as  before  at  12  hours.  This  exten¬ 
sion  of  the  surplus  labour  time  from  be  to  b'c, 
from  2  hours  to  3  hours,  is,  however,  evidently 
impossible  without  a  simultaneous  contraction 
of  the  necessary  labour  time  from  ab  into  ab' , 
from  10  hours  to  9  hours.  The  prolongation  of 
the  surplus  labour  would  correspond  to  a  short¬ 


ening  of  the  necessary  labour;  or  a  portion  of 
the  labour  time  previously  consumed,  in  real¬ 
ity,  for  the  labourer’s  own  benefit,  would  be 
converted  into  labour  time  for  the  benefit  of  the 
capitalist.  There  would  be  an  alteration,  not  in 
the  length  of  the  working  day,  but  in  its  divi¬ 
sion  into  necessary  labour  time  and  surplus  la¬ 
bour  time. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  evident  that  the  dura¬ 
tion  of  the  surplus  labour  is  given,  when  the 
length  of  the  working  day  and  the  value  of  la¬ 
bour  power  are  given.  The  value  of  labour  pow¬ 
er,  i.e.,  the  labour  time  requisite  to  produce  la¬ 
bour  power,  determines  the  labour  time  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  reproduction  of  that  value.  If  one 
working  hour  be  embodied  in  sixpence,  and  the 
value  of  a  day’s  labour  power  be  five  shillings, 
the  labourer  must  work  10  hours  a  day  in  order 
to  replace  the  value  paid  by  capital  for  his  la¬ 
bour  power,  or  to  produce  an  equivalent  for  the 
value  of  his  daily  necessary  mSSlns  of  subsist¬ 
ence.  Given  the  value  of  these  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence,  the  value  of  his  labour  power  is  given;1 
and  given  the  value  of  his  labour  power,  the 
duration  of  his  necessary  labour  time  is  given. 
The  duration  of  the  surplus  labour,  however,  is 
arrived  at  by  subtracting  the  necessary  labour 
time  from  the  total  working  day.  Ten  hours 
subtracted  from  twelve  leave  two,  and  it  is  not 
easy  to  see  how,  under  the  given  conditions,  the 
surplus  labour  can  possibly  be  prolonged  be- 

1  The  value  of  his  average  daily  wages  is  determined  by 
what  the  labourer  requires  “so  as  to  live,  labour,  and  gen¬ 
erate.”  (William  Petty,  Political  Anatomy  of  Ireland,  1672, 
p.  64.)  "The  price  of  labour  is  always  constituted  of  the 
price  of  necessaries  . . .  whenever  . . .  the  labouring  man's 
wages  will  not,  suitably  to  his  low  rank  and  station  as  a 
labouring  man,  support  such  a  family  as  is  often  the  lot  of 
many  of  them  to  have,"  he  does  not  reccnte  proper  wages. 
(J.  Vanderlint,  op.  at .,  p.  15.)  “The  simplfc  working  man, 
who  has  only  his  arms  and  his  industry,  his  nothing  until 
he  succeeds  in  selling  his  work  to  others. ...  In  every  kind 
of  work  it  should  come  about,  and  indeed  it  docs  come 
about,  that  the  salary  of  the  worker  is  restricted  to  that 
which  is  necessary  for  his  subsistence.”  (Turgot,  Reflex¬ 
ions ,  »tc.,  in  Oeuvres,  Daire’s  edition,  Vol.  1,  p.  10.)  “The 
price  of  the  necessaries  of  life  is,  in  fact,  the  cost  of  pioduc- 
ing  labour.”  (Malthus, /wywir?  into  the  Nature  and  Progress 
oj  Rent,  London,  1815,  p.  48,  note.) 


THE  CONCEPT  OF  RELATIVE  SURPLUS  VALUE 


yond  two  hours.  No  doubt,  the  capitalist  can, 
instead  of  five  shillings,  pay  the  labourer  four 
shillings  and  sixpence,  or  even  less.  For  the  re¬ 
production  of  this  value  of  four  shillings  and 
sixpence,  nine  hours  labour  time  would  suffice; 
and  consequently  three  hours  of  surplus  labour, 
instead  of  two,  would  accrue  to  the  capitalist, 
and  the  surplus  value  would  rise  from  one  shil¬ 
ling  to  eighteen-pence.  This  result,  however, 
would  be  obtained  only  by  lowering  the  wages 
of  the  labourer  below  the  value  of  his  labour 
power.  With  the  four  shillings  and  sixpence 
which  he  produces  in  nine  hours,  he  commands 
one-tenth  less  of  the  necessaries  of  life  than  be¬ 
fore,  and  consequently  the  proper  reproduction 
of  his  labour  power  is  crippled.  The  surplus  la¬ 
bour  would,  in  this  case,  be  prolonged  only  by 
an  overstepping  of  its  normal  limits;  its  domain 
would  be  extended  only  by  a  usurpation  of  part 
of  the  domain  of  necessary  labour  time.  De¬ 
spite  the  important  part  which  this  method 
plays  in  actual  practice,  we  are  excluded  from 
considering  it  in  this  place  by  our  assumption 
that  all  commixlitics,  including  labour  power, 
are  bought  and  sold  at  their  full  value.  Granted 
this,  it  follows  lhat  the  labour  time  necessary 
for  the  production  of  labour  power,  or  for  the 
reproduction  of  its  value,  cannot  be  lessened  by 
a  fall  in  the  labourer’s  wages  below  the  value  of 
his  labour  power,  but  only  by  a  fall  in  this  value 
itself.  Given  the  length  of  the  working  day,  the 
prolongation  of  the  surplus  labour  must  of  ne¬ 
cessity  originate  in  the  curtailment  of  the  neces¬ 
sary  labour  time;  the  latter  cannot  arise  from 
the  former.  In  the  example  we  have  taken,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  value  of  labour  power  should 
actually  fall  by  one-tenth,  in  order  that  the  nec¬ 
essary  labour  time  may  be  diminished  by  one- 
tenth,  i.e.,  from  ten  hours  to  nine,  and  in  order 
that  the  surplus  labour  may  consequently  be 
prolonged  from  two  hours  to  three. 

Such  a  fall  in  the  value  of  labour  power  im¬ 
plies,  however,  that  the  same  necessaries  of  life 
which  were  formerly  produced  in  ten  hours,  can 
now  be  produced  in  nine  hours.  But  this  is  im¬ 
possible  without  an  increase  in  the  productive- 
•  ness  of  labour.  For  example,  suppose  a  shoe¬ 
maker,  with  given  tools,  makes  in  one  working 
day  of  twelve  hours,  one  pair  of  boots.  If  he 
must  make  two  pairs  in  the  same  time,  the  pro¬ 
ductiveness  of  his  labour  must  be  doubled;  and 
this  cannot  be  done,  except  by  an  alteration  in 
his  tools  or  in  his  mode  of  working,  or  in  both. 
Hence,  the  conditions  of  production,  i.e.,  his 
mode  of  production  and  the  labour  process  it¬ 
self,  must  be  revolutionized.  By  increase  in  the 


153 

productiveness  of  labour  we  mean,  generally, 
an  alteration  in  the  labour  process  of  such  a 
kind  as  to  shorten  the  labour  time  socially  nec¬ 
essary  for  the  production  of  a  commodity,  and 
to  endow  a  given  quantity  of  labour  with  the 
power  of  producing  a  greater  quantity  of  use- 
value.1  Hitherto  in  treating  of  surplus  value 
arising  from  a  simple  prolongation  of  the  work¬ 
ing  day  we  have  assumed  the  mode  of  produc¬ 
tion  to  be  given  and  invariable.  But  when  sur¬ 
plus  value  has  to  be  produced  by  the  conversion 
of  necessary  labour  into  surplus  labour,  it  by 
no  means  suffices  for  capital  to  take  over  the 
labour  process  in  the  form  under  which  it  has 
been  historically  handed  down,  and  then  simply 
to  prolong  the  duration  of  that  process.  The 
technical  and  social  conditions  of  the  process, 
and  consequently  the  very  mode  of  production, 
must  be  revolutionized,  before  the  productive¬ 
ness  of  labour  can  be  increased.  By  that  means 
alone  can  the  value  of  labour  power  be  made  to 
sink,  and  the  portion  of  the  working  day  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  reproduction  of  that  value  be  short¬ 
ened. 

The  surplus  value  produced  by  prolongation 
of  the  working  day  I  call  absolute  surplus  value . 
On  the  other  hand,  the  surplus  value  arising 
from  the  curtailment  of  the  necessary  labour 
time,  and  from  the  corresponding  alteration  in 
the  respective  lengths  of  the  two  components 
of  the  working  day,  I  call  relative  surplus  value . 

In  order  to  effect  a  fall  in  the  value  of  labour 
power,  the  increase  in  the  productiveness  of  la¬ 
bour  must  seize  upon  those  branches  of  indus¬ 
try  whose  products  determine  the  value  of  la¬ 
bour  power,  and  consequently  either  belong  to 
the  class  of  customary  means  of  subsistence,  or 
are  capable  of  supplying  the  place  of  those 
means.  But  the  value  of  a  commodity  is  deter¬ 
mined,  not  only  by  the  quantity  of  labour  which 
the  labourer  directly  bestows  upon  that  com¬ 
modity,  but  also  by  the  labour  contained  in  the 
means  of  production.  For  instance,  the  valueof  a 
pair  of  boots  depends,  not  only  on  the  cobbler's 
labour,  but  also  on  the  value  of  the  leather, 
wax,  thread,  etc.  Hence,  a  fall  in  the  value  of  la¬ 
bour  power  is  also  brought  about  by  an  increase 
in  the  productiveness  of  labour,  and  by  a  corre¬ 
sponding  cheapening  of  commodities  in  those  in¬ 
dustries  which  supply  the  instruments  of  labour 

1  “When  the  arts  are  perfected,  and  by  this  is  meant 
only  the  discovery  of  new  ways  by  which  a  product  can  be 
completed  by  fewer  workers,  or  (what  comes  to  the  same 
thing)  in  less  time  than  was  formerly  the  case.**  (Galiani, 
op.  ci/.y  p.  159.)  “Saving  in  the  expense  of  production  is 
necessarily  saving  in  the  quantity  of  work  used  for  pro¬ 
duction.’*  (Sismondi,  Etudes ,  etc.,  Vol.  I,  p.  22.) 


154  CAPITAL 


and  the  raw  material  that  form  the  material 
elements  of  the  constant  capital  required  for 
producing  the  necessaries  of  life.  But  an  in¬ 
crease  in  the  productiveness  of  labour  in  those 
branches  of  industry  which  supply  neither  the 
necessaries  of  life  nor  the  means  of  production 
for  such  necessaries,  leaves  the  value  of  labour 
power  undisturbed. 

The  cheapened  commodity,  of  course,  causes 
only  a  pro  tanto 1  fall  in  the  value  of  labour  pow¬ 
er,  a  fall  proportional  to  the  extent  of  that  com- 
modity  ^s  employment  in  the  reproduction  of  la¬ 
bour  power.  Shirts,  for  instance,  are  a  necessary 
means  of  subsistence,  but  are  only  one  out  of 
many.  The  totality  of  the  necessaries  of  li  fe  con¬ 
sists,  however,  of  various  commodities,  each 
the  product  of  a  distinct  industry;  and  the  val¬ 
ue  of  each  of  those  commodities  enters  as  a  com¬ 
ponent  part  into  the  value  of  labour  power.  This 
latter  value  decreases  with  the  decrease  of  the 
labour  time  necessary  for  its  reproduction;  the 
total  decrease  being  the  sum  of  all  the  different 
curtailments  of  labour  time  effected  in  those 
various  and  distinct  industries.  This  general  re¬ 
sult  is  treated  here  as  if  it  were  the  immediate 
result  directly  aimed  at  in  each  individual  case. 
Whenever  an  individual  capitalist  cheapens 
shirts,  for  instance,  by  increasing  the  produc¬ 
tiveness  of  labour,  he  by  no  means  necessarily 
aims  at  reducing  the  value  of  labour  power  and 
shortening,  pro  tanto ,  the  necessary  labour  time. 
But  it  is  only  in  so  far  as  he  ultimately  contrib¬ 
utes  to  this  result  that  he  assists  in  raising  the 
general  rate  of  surplus  value.*  The  general  and 
necessary  tendencies  of  capital'must  be  distin¬ 
guished  from  their  forms  of  manifestation. 

It  is  not  our  intention  to  consider  here  the 
way  in  which  the  laws,  immanent  in  capitalist 
production,  manifest  themselves  in  the  move¬ 
ments  of  individual  masses  of  capital,  where 
they  assert  themselves  as  coercive  laws  of  com¬ 
petition,  and  are  brought  home  to  the  mind  and 
consciousness  of  the  individual  capitalist  as  the 
directing  motives  of  his  operations.  But  this 
much  is  clear;  a  scientific  analysis  of  competi¬ 
tion  is  not  possible  before  we  have  a  conception 
of  the  inner  nature  of  capital,  just  as  the  ap¬ 
parent  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  are  not 
intelligible  to  any  but  him  who  is  acquainted 

1  Proportional. 

*  “Let  us  suppose  ...  the  products  ...  of  the  manufac¬ 
turer  are  doubled  by  improvement  in  machinery  ...  he 
will  be  able  to  clothe  his  workmen  by  means  of  a  smaller 
proportion  of  the  entire  return  . . .  and  thus  his  profit  will 
be  raised.  But  in  no  other  way  will  it  be  influenced.”— 
Ramsay,  op.  cit.9  pp.  i68, 169. 


with  their  real  motions,  motions  which  are  not 
directly  perceptible  by  the  senses.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  for  the  better  comprehension  of  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  relative  surplus  value,  we  may  add 
the  following  remarks,  in  which  we  assume 
nothing  more  than  the  results  we  have  already 
obtained. 

If  one  hour’s  labour  is  embodied  in  sixpence, 
a  value  of  six  shillings  will  be  produced  in  a 
working  day  of  12  hours.  Suppose  that,  with 
the  prevailing  productiveness  of  labour,  1 2  ar¬ 
ticles  are  produced  in  these  1 2  hours.  Let  the 
value  of  the  means  of  production  used  up  in 
each  article  be  sixpence.  Under  these  circum¬ 
stances,  each  article  costs  one  shilling:  sixpence 
for  the  value  of  the  means  of  production,  and 
sixpence  for  the  value  newly  added  in  working 
with  those  means.  Now  let  some  one  capitalist 
contrive  to  double  the  productiveness  of  labour 
and  to  produce  in  the  working  day  of  12  hours 
24  instead  of  1 2  such  articles.  The  value  of  the 
means  of  production  remaining  the  same,  the 
value  of  each  article  will  fall  toninepence,  made 
up  of  sixpence  for  the  value  of  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  and  threepence  for  the  value  newly 
added  by  the  labour.  Despite  the  doubled  pro¬ 
ductiveness  of  labour,  the  day’s  labour  creates, 
as  before,  a  new  value  of  six  shillings  and  no 
more,  which,  however,  is  now  spread  over  twice 
as  many  articles.  Of  this  value  each  article  now 
has  embodied  in  it  V24,  instead  of  Via,  threepence 
instead  of  sixpence;  or,  what  amounts  to  the 
same  thing,  only  half  an  hour’s  instead  of  a 
whole  hour’s  labour  time  is  now  added  to  the 
means  of  production  while  they  are  being  trans¬ 
formed  into  each  article.  The  individual  value 
of  these  articles  is  now  below  their  social  value; 
in  other  words,  they  have  cost  less  labour  time 
than  the  great  bulk  of  the  same  article  produced 
under  the  average  social  conditions.  Each  ar¬ 
ticle  costs,  on  an  average,  one  shilling,  and  rep¬ 
resents  2  hours  of  social  labour;  but  under  the 
altered  mode  of  production  it  costs  only  nine- 
pence,  or  contains  only  1  hours’  labour.  The 
real  value  of  a  commodity  is,  however,  not  its 
individual  value,  but  its  social  value;  that  is  to 
say,  the  real  value  is  not  measured  by  the  la¬ 
bour  time  that  the  article  in  each  individual 
case  costs  the  producer,  but  by  the  labour  time 
socially  required  for  its  production.  If,  there¬ 
fore,  the  capitalist  who  applies  the  new  method 
sells  his  commodity  at  its  social  value  of  one 
shilling,  he  sells  it  for  threepence  above  its  in¬ 
dividual  value,  and  thus  realizes  an  extra  sur¬ 
plus  value  of  threepence.  On  the  other  hand,  the 


THE  CONCEPT  OF  RELATIVE  SURPLUS  VALUE 


working  day  of  12  hours  is,  as  regards  him,  now 
represented  by  24  articles  instead  of  12.  Hence, 
in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  product  of  one  working 
day,  the  demand  must  be  double  what  it  was, 
i.e.,  the  market  must  become  twice  as  exten¬ 
sive.  Other  things  being  equal,  his  commodities 
can  command  a  more  extended  market  only  by 
a  diminution  of  their  prices.  He  will  therefore 
sell  them  above  their  individual  but  under  their 
social  value,  say  at  tenpcnce  each.  By  this 
means  he  still  squeezes  an  extra  surplus  value 
of  one  penny  out  of  each.  This  augmentation  of 
surplus  value  is  pocketed  by  him,  whether  his 
commodities  belong  or  not  to  the  class  of  nec¬ 
essary  means  of  subsistence  that  participate  in 
determining  the  general  value  of  labour  power. 
Hence,  independently  of  this  latter  circum¬ 
stance,  there  is  a  motive  for  each  individual 
capitalist  to  cheapen  his  commodities,  by  in¬ 
creasing  the  productiveness  of  labour. 

Nevertheless,  even  in  this  case,  the  increased 
production  of  surplus  value  arises  from  the  cur¬ 
tailment  of  the  nectary  labour  time,  and  from 
the  corresponding  prolongation  of  the  surplus 
labour.1  Let  the  necessary  labour  time  amount 
to  10  hours,  the  value  of  a  day's  labour  power 
to  five  shillings,  the  surplus  labour  time  to  2 
hours,  and  the  daily  surplus  value  to  one  shil¬ 
ling.  But  the  capitalist  now  produces  24  articles, 
which  he  sells  at  tenpence  apiece,  making  twen¬ 
ty  shillings  in  all.  Since  the  value  of  the  means 
of  production  is  twelve  shillings,  i42/s  of  these 
articles  merely  replace  the  constant  capital  ad¬ 
vanced.  T  he  labour  of  the  12  hours'  working 
day  is  represented  by  the  remaining  93/s  arti¬ 
cles.  Since  the  price  of  the  labour  power  is  five 
shillings,  6  articles  represent  the  necessary  la¬ 
bour  time,  and  3V5  articles  the  surplus  labour. 
The  ratio  of  the  necessary  labour  to  the  surplus 
labour,  v/hich  under  average  social  conditions 
was  5:1,  is  now  only  5:3.  The  same  result  may 
be  arrived  at  in  the  following  way.  The  value 
of  the  product  of  the  working  day  of  12  hours  is 
twenty  shillings.  Of  this  sum,  twelve  shillings  be¬ 
long  to  the  value  of  the  means  of  production,  a 
value  that  merely  reappears.  There  remain  eight 
shillings,  which  are  the  expression  in  money 
of  the  value  newly  created  during  the  work- 

1  “A  man’s  profit  does  not  depend  upon  his  command  of 
the  produce  of  other  men’s  labour,  but  upon  his  command 
cc  labour  itself.  If  he  can  sell  his  goods  at  a  higher  price, 
while  his  workmen’s  wages  remain  unaltered,  he  is  clearly 
benefited. ...  A  smaller  proportion  of  what  he  produces  is 
sufficient  to  put  that  labour  into  motion,  and  a  larger  pro¬ 
portion  consequently  remains  for  himself.”— Outlines  of 
Political  Economy ,  I<ondon,  183a,  pp.  4 <j,  50. 


155 

ing  day.  This  sum  is  greater  than  the  sum  in 
which  average  social  labour  of  the  same  kind 
is  expressed:  twelve  hours  of  the  latter  labour 
are  expressed  by  six  shillings  only.  The  excep¬ 
tionally  productive  labour  operates  as  intensi¬ 
fied  labour;  it  creates  in  equal  periods  of  time 
greater  values  than  average  social  labour  of  the 
same  kind.  But  our  capitalist  still  continues  to 
pay  as  before  only  five  shillings  as  the  value  of 
a  day’s  labour  power.  Hence,  instead  of  10 
hours,  the  labourer  need  now  work  only  7 Vs 
hours,  in  order  to  reproduce  this  value.  His  sur¬ 
plus  labour  is,  therefore,  increased  by  2 Vs 
hours,  and  the  surplus  value  he  produces  grows 
from  one  into  three  shillings.  Hence,  the  capi¬ 
talist  who  applies  the  improved  method  of  pro¬ 
duction  appropriates  to  surplus  labour  a  greater 
portion  of  the  working  day,  than  the  other  cap¬ 
italists  in  the  same  trade.  He  does  individually 
what  the  whole  body  of  capitalists  engaged  in 
producing  relative  surplus  value  do  collective¬ 
ly.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  this  extra  sur¬ 
plus  value  vanishes,  so  soon  as  the  new  method 
of  production  has  become  general,  and  has  con¬ 
sequently  caused  the  difference  between  the  in¬ 
dividual  value  of  the  cheapened  commodity 
and  its  social  value  to  vanish.  The  law  of  the 
determination  of  value  by  labour  time,  a  law 
which  brings  under  its  sway  the  individual  cap¬ 
italist  who  applies  the  new  method  of  produc¬ 
tion  by  compelling  him  to  sell  his  goods  under 
their  social  value,  this  same  law,  acting  as  a  co¬ 
ercive  law  of  competition,  forces  his  competi¬ 
tors  to  adopt  the  new  method.2  The  general  rate 
of  surplus  value  is,  therefore,  ultimately  affect¬ 
ed  by  the  whole  process,  only  when  the  increase 
in  the  productiveness  of  labour  has  seized  upon 
those  branches  of  production  that  are  connect¬ 
ed  with,  and  has  cheapened  those  commodities 
that  form  part  of  the  necessary  means  of  sub¬ 
sistence,  and  are  therefore  elements  of  the  value 
of  labour  power. 

The  value  of  commodities  is  in  inverse  ratio 
to  the  productiveness  of  labour.  And  so,  too,  is 
the  value  of  labour  power,  because  it  depends 
on  the  values  of  commodities.  Relative  surplus 
value  is,  on  the  contrary,  directly  proportional 

2  “If  my  neighbour,  by  doing  much  with  little  labour, 
can  sell  cheap,  I  must  contrive  to  sell  as  cheap  as  he.  So 
that  every  art,  trade,  or  engine,  doing  work  with  labour  of 
fewer  hands,  and  consequently  cheaper,  begets  in  others  a 
kind  of  necessity  and  emulation,  either  of  using  the  same 
art,  trade,  or  engine,  or  of  inventing  something  like  it,  that 
every  man  may  be  upon  the  square,  that  no  man  may  be 
able  to  undersell  his  neighbour.” —  The  Advantages  of  the 
East  India  Trade  to  England ,  London,  1720,  p.  67. 


156  CAPITAL 


to  that  productiveness.  It  rises  with  rising  and 
falls  with  falling  productiveness.  The  value  of 
money  being  assumed  to  be  constant,  an  aver¬ 
age  social  working  day  of  12  hours  always  pro¬ 
duces  the  same  new  value,  six  shillings,  no  mat¬ 
ter  how  this  sum  may  be  apportioned  between 
surplus  value  and  wages.  But  if,  in  consequence 
of  increased  productiveness,  the  value  of  the 
necessaries  of  life  fall,  and  the  value  of  a  day's 
labour  power  be  thereby  reduced  from  five  shil¬ 
lings  to  three,  the  surplus  value  increases  from 
one  shilling  to  three.  Ten  hours  were  necessary 
for  the  reproduction  of  the  value  of  the  labour 
power;  now  only  six  are  required.  Four  hours 
have  been  set  free  and  can  be  annexed  to  the 
domain  of  surplus  labour.  Hence  there  is  im¬ 
manent  in  capital  an  inclination  and  constant 
tendency  to  heighten  the  productiveness  of  la¬ 
bour  in  order  to  cheapen  commodities,  and  by 
such  cheapening  to  cheapen  the  labourer  him- 
self.1 

The  value  of  a  commodity  is,  in  itself,  of  no 
interest  to  the  capitalist.  What  alone  interests 
him  is  the  surplus  value  that  dwells  in  it  and 
is  realizable  by  sale.  Realization  of  the  surplus 
value  necessarily  carries  with  it  the  refunding 
of  the  value  that  was  advanced.  Now,  since  rel¬ 
ative  surplus  value  increases  in  direct  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  development  of  the  productiveness 
of  labour,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  value 
of  commodities  diminishes  in  the  same  propor¬ 
tion;  since  one  and  the  same  process  cheapens 
commodities,  and  augments  the  surplus  value 
contained  in  them;  we  have  here  the  solution 
of  the  riddle:  Why  does  the  capitalist,  whose 
sole  concern  is  the  production  of  exchange  val¬ 
ue,  continually  strive  to  depress  the  exchange 
value  of  commodities?  A  riddle  with  which 
Quesnay,  one  of  the  founders  of  political  econ¬ 
omy,  tormented  his  opponents,  and  to  which 
they  could  give  him  no  answer.  “You  acknowl¬ 
edge,”  he  says,  “that  the  more  expenses  and  the 
cost  of  labour  can,  in  the  manufacture  of  indus- 

1  “In  whatever  proportion  the  expenses  of  a  labourer  are 
diminished,  in  the  same  proportion  will  his  wages  be  di¬ 
minished,  if  the  restraints  upon  industry  are  at  the  same 
time  taken  off.”  ( Considerations  concerning  Taking  Off  the 
Bounty  on  Corn  Exported ,  etc.,  London,  1753,  p.  7.)  “The 
interest  of  trade  requires  that  corn  and  all  provisions  should 
be  as  cheap  as  possible;  for  whatever  makes  them  dear  must 
make  labour  dear  also. ...  In  all  countries,  where  industry 
is  not  restrained,  the  price  of  provisions  must  affect  the 
price  of  labour.  This  will  always  be  diminished  when  the 
necessaries  of  life  grow  cheaper.*'  (/£«</.,  p.  3.)  “Wages  are 
decreased  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  powers  of  produc¬ 
tion  increase.  Machinery,  it  is  true,  cheapens  the  neces¬ 
saries  of  life,  but  it  also  cheapens  the  labourer.'*  {A  Prize 
Essay  on  the  Comparative  Merits  of  Competition  and  Cooper - 
ation,  London,  1834,  p.  27.) 


trial  products,  be  reduced  without  injury  to 
production,  the  more  advantageous  is  such  re¬ 
duction,  because  it  diminishes  the  price  of  the 
finished  article.  And  yet  you  believe  that  the 
production  of  wealth,  which  arises  from  the  la¬ 
bour  of  the  workpeople,  consists  in  the  augmen¬ 
tation  of  the  exchange  value  of  their  prod¬ 
ucts.”2 

The  shortening  of  the  working  day  is,  there¬ 
fore,  by  no  means  what  is  aimed  at  in  capitalist 
production  when  labour  is  economized  by  in¬ 
creasing  its  productiveness.2  It  is  only  the  short¬ 
ening  of  the  labour  time,  necessary  for  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  a  definite  quantity  of  commodities 
that  is  aimed  at.  The  fact  that  the  workman, 
when  the  productiveness  of  his  labour  has  been 
increased,  produces,  say,  1  o  times  as  many  com¬ 
modities  as  before,  and  thus  spends  onc-tenth 
as  much  labour  time  on  each,  by  no  means  pre¬ 
vents  him  from  continuing  to  work  12  hours  as 
before,  nor  from  producing  in  those  12  hours 
1200  articles  instead  of  120.  Nay,  more,  his 
working  day  may  be  prolonged  at  the  same 
time,  so  as  to  make  him  produce,  say  1400  ar¬ 
ticles  in  1 4  hours.  In  the  treatises,  therefore,  of 
economists  of  the  stamp  of  MacCulloch,  Lire, 
Senior,  and  tutti  quant'tf  we  may  read  upon  one 
page  that  the  labourer  owes  a  debt  of  gratitude 
to  capital  for  developing  his  productiveness,  be¬ 
cause  the  necessary  labour  time  is  thereby 
shortened,  and  on  the  next  pagiTthat  he  must 
prove  his  gratitude  by  working  in  future  for  1 5 
hours  instead  of  10.  The  object  of  all  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  productiveness  of  labour  within  the 
limits  of  capitalist  production  is  to  shorten  that 
part  of  the  working  day  during  which  the  work¬ 
man  must  labour  for  his  own  benefit,  and,  by 
that  very  shortening,  to  lengthen  the  other  part 
of  the  day,  during  which  he  is  at  liberty  to  work 
gratis  for  the  capitalist.  How  far  this  result  is 
also  attainable  without  cheapening  commodi¬ 
ties  will  appear  from  an  examination  of  the  par¬ 
ticular  modes  of  producing  relative  surplus  val¬ 
ue,  to  which  examination  we  now  proceed. 

2  Quesnay,  Dialogues  sur  le  commerce  et  sur  les  travaux 
des  artisans t  Paris,  1846,  pp.  188, 189. 

*  “These  speculators,  who  are  so  thrifty  frith  the  work 
of  the  workers,  whom  they  have  to  pay."  (J.  N.  Bidaut, 
Du  monopole  qui  s' 6 tablit  dans  les  arts  industriels  et  le  com - 
merce ,  Paris,  1828,  p.  13.)  “The  employer  frill  be  always 
on  the  stretch  to  economize  time  and  labour."  (Dugald 
Stewart,  Lectures  on  Political  Economy ,  in  tPorks,  edited 
by  Sir  W.  Hamilton,  Edinburgh,  1855,  p.  318.)  “Their  (the 
capitalists')  interest  is  that  the  productive  powers  of  the 
labout’rs  they  employ  should  be  the  greatest  possible. 
On  promoting  that  power  their  attention  is  fixed  and  al¬ 
most  exclusively  fixed."  (R.  Jones,  op.  cit.t  Lecture  III.) 

4  All  like  those. 


COOPERATION 


CHAPTER  XIII.  COOPERATION 

Capitalist  production  only,  then,  really  be¬ 
gins,  as  we  have  already  seen,  when  each  in¬ 
dividual  capital  employs  simultaneously  a  com¬ 
paratively  large  number  of  labourers;  so  that 
the  labour  process  is  carried  on  on  an  extensive 
scale  and  yields,  relatively,  large  quantities  of 
products.  A  greater  number  of  labourers  work¬ 
ing  together,  at  the  same  time,  in  one  place  (or, 
if  you  will,  in  the  same  field  of  labour),  in  order 
to  produce  the  same  sort  of  commodity  under 
the  mastership  of  one  capitalist,  constitutes, 
both  historically  and  logically,  the  starting 
point  of  capitalist  production.  With  regard  to 
the  mode  of  production  itself,  manufacture,  in 
its  strict  meaning,  is  hardly  to  be  distinguished, 
in  its  earliest  stages,  from  the  handicraft  trades 
of  the  guilds,  except  by  the  greater  number  of 
workmen  simultaneously  employed  by  one  and 
the  same  individual  capital.  The  workshop  of 
the  mediaeval  master  handicraftsman  is  simply 
enlarged. 

At  first,  therefore,  the  difference  is  purely 
quantitative.  We  have  shown  that  the  surplus 
value  produced  by  a  given  capital  is  equal  to  the 
surplus  value  produced  by  each  workman  mul¬ 
tiplied  by  the  number  of  workmen  simultane¬ 
ously  employed.  The  number  of  workmen  in  it¬ 
self  does  not  affect  either  the  rate  of  surplus  val¬ 
ue,  or  the  degree  of  exploitation  of  labour  pow¬ 
er.  If  a  working  day  of  12  hours  be  embodied  in 
six  shillings,  1 200  such  days  will  be  embodied 
in  1200  times  6  shillings.  In  one  case  12x1200 
working  hours,  and  in  the  other  12  such  hours 
are  incorporated  in  the  product.  In  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  value,  a  number  of  workmen  rank  mere¬ 
ly  as  so  many  individual  workmen;  and  it  there¬ 
fore  makes  no  difference  in  the  value  produced 
whether  the  1200  men  work  separately,  or 
united  under  the  control  of  one  capitalist. 

Nevertheless,  within  certain  limits,  a  modi¬ 
fication  takes  place.  The  labour  realized  in  val¬ 
ue  is  labour  of  an  average  social  quality;  it  is 
consequently  the  expenditure  of  average  labour 
power.  Any  average  magnitude,  however,  is 
merely  the  average  of  a  number  of  separate 
magnitudes  all  of  one  kind,  but  differing  as  to 
quantity.  In  every  industry,  each  individual  la¬ 
bourer,  be  he  Peter  or  Paul,  differs  from  the  av¬ 
erage  labourer.  These  individual  differences,  or 
“errors”  as  they  are  called  in  mathematics, 
compensate  one  another  and  vanish  whenever 
a  certain  minimum  number  of  workmen  are  em¬ 
ployed  together.  The  celebrated  sophist  and  syc¬ 


157 

ophant,  Edmund  Burke,  goes  so  far  as  to  make 
the  following  assertion,  based  on  his  practical 
observations  as  a  farmer;  viz.,  that  “in  so  small 
a  platoon”  as  that  of  five  farm  labourers,  all 
individual  differences  in  the  labour  vanish,  and 
that  consequently  any  given  five  adult  farm  la¬ 
bourers  taken  together  will  in  the  same  time  do 
as  much  work  as  any  other  five.1  But,  however 
that  may  be,  it  is  clear  that  the  collective  work¬ 
ing  day  of  a  large  number  of  workmen  simul¬ 
taneously  employed,  divided  by  the  number  of 
these  workmen,  gives  one  day  of  average  social 
labour.  For  example,  let  the  working  day  of 
each  individual  be  12  hours.  Then  the  collective 
working  day  of  12  men  simultaneously  em¬ 
ployed  consists  of  144  hours;  and  although  the 
labour  of  each  of  the  dozen  men  may  deviate 
more  or  less  from  average  social  labour,  each  of 
them  requiring  a  different  time  for  the  same 
operation,  yet^ince  the  working  day  of  each  is 
one-twelfth  of  the  collective  working  day  of  144 
hours,  it  possesses  the  qualities  of  an  average 
social  working  day.  From  the  point  of  view, 
however,  of  the  capitalist  who  employs  these 
12  men,  the  working  day  is  that  of  the  whole 
dozen.  Each  individual  man's  day  is  an  aliquot 
part  of  the  collective  working  day,  no  matter 
whether  the  12  men  assist  one  another  in  their 
work,  or  whether  the  connection  between  their 
operations  consists  merely  in  the  fact  that  the 
men  are  all  working  for  the  same  capitalist.  But 
if  the  12  men  are  employed  in  six  pairs,  by  as 
many  different  small  masters,  it  will  be  quite  a 
matter  of  chance  whether  each  of  these  masters 
produces  the  same  value,  and  consequently 
whether  he  realizes  the  general  rate  of  surplus 
value.  Deviations  would  occur  in  individual 
cases.  If  one  workman  required  considerably 
more  time  for  the  production  of  a  commodity 
than  is  socially  necessary,  the  duration  of  the 
necessary  labour  time  would,  in  his  case,  sensi¬ 
bly  deviate  from  the  labour  time  socially  neces¬ 
sary  on  an  average;  and  consequently  his  la¬ 
bour  would  not  count  as  average  labour,  nor  his 
labour  power  as  average  labour  power.  It  would 

1  ‘‘Unquestionably,  there  is  a  good  deal  of  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  value  of  one  man’s  labour  and  that  of  another 
from  strength,  dexterity,  and  honest  application.  But  I  am 
quite  slire,  from  my  best  observation,  that  any  given  five 
men  will,  in  their  total,  afford  a  proportion  of  labour  equal 
to  any  other  five  within  the  periods  of  life  I  have  stated; 
that  is,  that  among  such  five  men  there  will  be  one  posses¬ 
sing  all  the  qualifications  of  a  good  workman,  one  bad,  and 
the  other  three  middling,  and  approximating  to  the  first 
and  the  last.  So  that  in  so  small  a  platoon  as  that  of  even 
five,  you  will  find  the  full  complement  of  all  that  five  men 
can  earn."— E.  Burke,  op.  cit.,  pp.  15, 16.  Compare  Qu6- 
teleton  the  average  individual. 


CAPITAL 


158 

either  be  not  saleable  at  all,  or  only  at  some¬ 
thing  below  the  average  value  of  labour  power. 
A  fixed  minimum  of  efficiency  in  all  labour  is 
therefore  assumed,  and  we  shall  see,  later  on, 
that  capitalist  production  provides  the  means 
of  fixing  this  minimum.  Nevertheless,  this  min¬ 
imum  deviates  from  the  average,  although,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  capitalist  has  to  pay  the 
average  value  of  labour  power.  Of  the  six  small 
masters,  one  would  therefore  squeeze  out  more 
than  the  average  rate  of  surplus  value,  another 
less.  The  inequalities  would  be  compensated  for 
the  society  at  large,  but  not  for  the  individual 
masters.  Thus  the  laws  of  the  production  of  val¬ 
ue  are  only  fully  realized  for  the  individual  pro¬ 
ducer  when  he  produces  as  a  capitalist  and  em¬ 
ploys  a  number  of  workmen  together,  whose  la¬ 
bour,  by  its  collective  nature,  is  at  once 
stamped  as  average  social  labour.1 

Even  without  an  alteration  in  the  system  of 
working,  the  simultaneous  employment  of  a 
large  number  of  labourers  effects  a  revolution 
in  the  material  conditions  of  the  labour  process. 
The  buildings  in  which  they  work,  the  store¬ 
houses  for  the  raw  material,  the  implements 
and  utensils  used  simultaneously  or  in  turns  by 
the  workmen;  in  short,  a  portion  of  the  means 
of  production  are  now  consumed  in  common. 
On  the  one  hand,  the  exchange  value  of  these 
means  of  production  is  not  increased;  for  the 
exchange  value  of  a  commodity  is  not  raised  by 
its  use-value  being  consumed  more  thoroughly 
and  to  greater  advantage.  On  the  other  hand, 
they  are  used  in  common  and,  therefore,  on  a 
larger  scale  than  before.  A  room  where  twenty 
weavers  work  at  twenty  looms  must  be  larger 
than  the  room  of  a  single  weaver  with  two  as¬ 
sistants.  But  it  costs  less  labour  to  build  one 
workshop  for  twenty  persons  than  to  build  ten 
to  accommodate  two  weavers  each;  thus  the 
value  of  the  means  of  production  that  are  con¬ 
centrated  for  use  in  common  on  a  large  scale 
does  not  increase  in  direct  proportion  to  the  ex¬ 
pansion  and  to  the  increased  useful  effect  of 
those  means.  When  consumed  in  common,  they 
give  up  a  smaller  part  of  their  value  to  each 
single  product;  partly  because  the  total  value 
they  part  with  is  spread  over  a  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  products,  and  partly  because  their  value, 
though  absolutely  greater,  is,  having  regard  to 

1  Professor  Roscher  claims  to  have  discovered  that  one 
needlewoman  employed  by  Mrs.  Roscher  during  two  days 
does  more  work  than  two  needlewomen  employed  together 
during  one  day.  The  learned  professor  should  not  study  the 
capitalist  process  of  production  in  the  nursery,  nor  under 
circumstances  where  the  principal  personage,  the  capital¬ 
ist,  is  wanting. 


their  sphere  of  action  in  the  process,  relatively 
less  than  the  value  of  isolated  means  of  produc¬ 
tion.  Owing  to  this,  the  value  of  a  part  of  the 
constant  capital  falls,  and,  in  proportion  to  the 
magnitude  of  the  fall,  the  total  value  of  the 
commodity  also  falls.  The  effect  is  the  same  as 
if  the  means  of  production  had  cost  less.  The 
economy  in  their  application  is  entirely  owing 
to  their  being  consumed  in  common  by  a  large 
number  of  workmen.  Moreover,  this  character 
of  being  necessary  conditions  of  social  labour, 
a  character  that  distinguishes  them  from  the 
dispersed  and  relatively  more  costly  means  of 
production  of  isolated,  independent  labourers 
or  small  masters,  is  acquired  even  when  the  nu¬ 
merous  workmen  assembled  together  do  not  as¬ 
sist  one  another,  but  merely  work  side  by  side. 
A  portion  of  the  instruments  of  labour  acquires 
this  social  character  before  the  labour  process 
itself  does  so. 

Economy  in  the  use  of  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  has  to  be  considered  under  two  aspects. 
First,  as  cheapening  commodities,  and  thereby 
bringing  about  a  fall  in  the  value  of  labour  pow¬ 
er.  Secondly,  as  altering  the  ratio  of  the  surplus 
value  to  the  total  capital  advanced,  i.e.,  to  the 
sum  of  the  values  of  the  constant  and  variable 
capital.  The  latter  aspect  will  not  be  considered 
until  Part  One  of  Book  Three,  to  which,  with 
the  object  of  treating  them  in  their  proper  con¬ 
nection,  we  also  relegate  many  otker  points  that 
relate  to  the  present  question.  The  march  of  our 
analysis  compels  this  splitting  up  of  the  subject 
matter,  a  splitting  up  that  is  quite  in  keeping 
with  the  spirit  of  capitalist  production.  For 
since,  in  this  mode  of  production,  the  workman 
finds  the  instruments  of  labour  existing  inde¬ 
pendently  of  him  as  another  man’s  property, 
economy  in  their  use  appears,  with  regard  to 
him,  to  be  a  distinct  operation,  one  that  docs 
not  concern  him,  and  which,  therefore,  has  no 
connection  with  the  methods  by  which  his  own 
personal  productiveness  is  increased. 

When  numerous  labourers  work  together  side 
by  side,  whether  in  one  and  the  same  process 
or  in  different  but  connected  processes,  they  are 
said  to  cooperate,  or  to  work  in  cooperation.2 

Just  as  the  offensive  power  of  a  Squadron  of 
cavalry,  or  the  defensive  power  of  a  regiment 
of  infantry,  is  essentially  different  from  the  sum 
of  the  offensive  or  defensive  powers  of  the  in¬ 
dividual  cavalry  or  infantry  soldiers  taken  sep¬ 
arately,  so  the  sum-total  of  the  mechanical 
forces  exerted  by  isolated  workmen  differs  from 
the  social  force  that  is  developed  when  many 
*  “Meeting  of  forces.”— Destutt  de  Tracy,  op.  cit.t  p.  78. 


COOPERATION 


hands  take  part  simultaneously  in  one  and  the 
same  undivided  operation,  such  as  raising  a 
heavy  weight,  turning  a  winch,  or  removing  an 
obstacle.1  In  such  cases  the  effect  of  the  com¬ 
bined  labour  either  could  not  be  produced  at  all 
by  isolated  individual  labour,  or  it  could  be  pro¬ 
duced  only  by  a  great  expenditure  of  time,  or  on 
a  very  dwarfed  scale.  Not  only  have  we  here  an 
increase  in  the  productive  power  of  the  indivi¬ 
dual,  by  means  of  cooperation,  but  the  creation 
of  a  new  power,  namely,  the  collective  power  of 
masses.2 

Apart  from  the  new  power  that  arises  from 
the  fusion  of  many  forces  into  one  single  force, 
mere  social  contact  begets  in  most  industries  an 
emulation  and  a  stimulation  of  the  animal  spir¬ 
its  that  heighten  the  efficiency  of  each  individ¬ 
ual  workman.  Hence  it  is  that  a  dozen  persons 
working  together  will,  in  their  collective  work¬ 
ing  day  of  144  hours,  produce  far  more  than 
twelve  isolated  men  each  working  12  hours,  or 
than  one  man  who  works  twelve  days  in  succes¬ 
sion.3  The  reason  of  this  is  that  man  is,  if  not  as 
Aristotle  contends,  a  political,4  at  all  events  a 
social,  animal. 

Although  a  number  of  men  may  be  occupied 
together  at  the  same  time  on  the  same,  or  the 
same  kind  of  work,  yet  the  labour  of  each,  as  a 
part  of  the  collective  labour,  may  correspond 
to  a  distinct  phase  of  the  labour  process, 
through  all  whose  phases,  in  consequence  of  co- 

1  “There  are  numerous  operations  of  so  simple  a  kind  as 
not  to  admit  a  division  into  parts,  which  cannot  be  per¬ 
formed  without  the  cooperation  of  many  pairs  of  hands.  I 
would  instance  the  lifting  of  a  large  tree  on  to  a  wain  . . . 
everything,  in  short,  which  cannot  be  done  unless  a  great 
many  pairs  of  hands  help  each  other  in  the  same  undivided 
employment  and  at  the  same  time.”-  E.  G.  Wakefield,  A 
View  of  the  Art  of  Colonization ,  London,  1849,  p.  168. 

2  “As  one  man  cannot,  and  ten  men  must  strain  to  lift  a 
tun  of  weight,  yet  100  men  can  do  it  only  by  the  strength 
of  a  finger  of  each  of  them.” — John  Hellers,  Proposals  for 
raising  a  College  of  Industry,  London,  1696,  p.  21. 

3  “There  is  also”  (when  the  same  number  of  men  are  em¬ 
ployed  by  one  farmer  on  300  acres,  instead  of  by  ten  farm¬ 
ers  with  30  acres  apiece)  “an  advantage  in  the  proportion 
of  servants,  which  will  not  so  easily  be  understood  but  by 
practical  men;  for  it  is  natural  to  say,  as  1  is  to  4,  so  are  3 
to  12:  but  this  will  not  hold  good  in  practice;  for  in  harvest 
time  and  many  other  operations  which  require  that  kind 
of  despatch  by  the  throwing  many  hands  together,  the 
work  is  better  and  more  expeditiously  done;  for  instance,  in 
harvest,  2  drivers,  2  loaders,  2  pitchers,  2  rakers,  and  the 
rest  at  the  rick,  or  in  the  barn,  will  despatch  double  the 
work  that  the  same  number  of  hands  would  do  if  divided 
into  different  gangs  on  different  farms.” — An  Inquiry  into 
the  connection  between  the  present  Price  of  Provisions  and  the 
Size  of  Farms,  by  a  Farmery  London,  1773,  pp.  7,  8. 

4  Strictly,  Aristotle’s  definition  is  that  man  is  by  nature 
a  town-citizen.  This  is  quite  as  characteristic  of  ancient 
classical  society  as  Franklin’s  definition  of  man  as  a  tool- 
making  animal  is  characteristic  of  Yankeedom. 


159 

operation,  the  subject  of  their  labour  passes 
with  greater  speed.  For  instance,  if  a  dozen 
masons  place  themselves  in  a  row,  so  as  to  pass 
stones  from  the  foot  of  a  ladder  to  its  summit, 
each  of  them  does  the  same  thing;  nevertheless, 
their  separate  acts  form  connected  parts  of  one 
total  operation;  they  are  particular  phases, 
which  must  be  gone  through  by  each  stone;  and 
the  stones  arc  thus  carried  up  quicker  by  the 
24  hands  of  the  row  of  men  than  they  could  be 
if  each  man  went  separately  up  and  down  the 
ladder  with  his  burden.5  The  object  is  carried 
over  the  same  distance  in  a  shorter  time.  Again, 
a  combination  of  labour  occurs  whenever  a 
building,  for  instance,  is  taken  in  hand  on  dif¬ 
ferent  sides  simultaneously;  although  here  also 
the  cooperating  masons  are  doing  the  same,  or 
the  same  kind  of  work.  The  12  masons,  in  their 
collective  working  day  of  144  hours,  make  much 
more  progress prith  the  building  than  one  mason 
could  make  working  for  12  days,  or  144  hours. 
The  reason  is  that  a  body  of  men  working  in 
concert  has  hands  and  eyes  both  before  and  be¬ 
hind,  and  is,  to  a  certain  degree,  omnipresent. 
The  various  parts  of  the  work  progress  simul¬ 
taneously. 

In  the  above  instances  we  have  laid  stress 
upon  the  point  that  the  men  do  the  same,  or  the 
same  kind  of  work,  because  this,  the  most  sim¬ 
ple  form  of  labour  in  common,  plays  a  great 
part  in  cooperation,  even  in  its  most  fully  de¬ 
veloped  stage.  If  the  work  be  complicated,  then 
the  mere  number  of  the  men  who  cooperate  al¬ 
lows  of  the  various  operations  being  appor¬ 
tioned  to  different  hands,  and,  consequently,  of 
being  carried  on  simultaneously.  The  time  nec¬ 
essary  for  the  completion  of  the  whole  work  is 
thereby  shortened.6 

In  many  industries,  there  are  critical  periods, 

5  “Moreover  one  should  observe  that  this  partial  divi¬ 
sion  of  labour  can  take  place  even  when  the  workers  are 
occupied  with  the  same  task.  Masons,  for  example,  occu¬ 
pied  in  passing  bricks  from  hand  to  hand  to  the  top  of  a 
scaffold,  are  all  performing  the  same  task,  and  yet  there 
exists  among  them  a  kind  of  division  of  labour,  which  con¬ 
sists  in  the  fact  that  each  of  them  has  to  pass  the  brick 
through  a  given  space,  and  all  together  can  get  it  to  the 
designated  place  much  more  quickly  than  if  each  of  them 
individually  carried  his  brick  to  the  top  of  the  scaffold.” — 
F.  Skarbeck,  Thtorie  des  richesses  sociales ,  second  edition, 
Paris,  1840,  Vol.  I,  pp.  97-98. 

8  “Should  it  be  necessary  to  carry  out  a  complicated  la¬ 
bour,  several  things  have  to  be  done  simultaneously.  One 
man  does  something  while  another  does  something  else, 
and  all  contribute  to  the  effect  which  one  man  alone  could 
not  bring  about.  One  man  rows  while  another  steers  and  a 
third  casts  the  net  or  harpoons  the  fish,  and  the  fishing  en¬ 
terprise  could  not  succeed  without  this  cooperative  en¬ 
deavour.’’— Destutt  de  Tracy,  op.  cit. 


1*0  CAPITAL 


determined  by  the  nature  of  the  process,  during 
which  certain  definite  results  must  be  obtained. 
For  instance,  if  a  flock  of  sheep  has  to  be  shorn, 
or  a  field  of  wheat  to  be  cut  and  harvested,  the 
quantity  and  quality  of  the  product  depends  on 
the  work  being  begun  and  ended  within  a  cer¬ 
tain  time.  In  these  cases,  the  time  that  ought 
to  be  taken  by  the  process  is  prescribed,  just  as 
it  is  in  herring  fishing.  A  single  person  cannot 
carve  a  working  day  of  more  than,  say,  12 
hours,  out  of  the  natural  day,  but  ioo  men  co¬ 
operating  extend  the  working  day  to  1,200 
hours.  The  shortness  of  the  time  allowed  for  the 
work  is  compensated  for  by  the  large  mass  of 
labour  thrown  upon  the  field  of  production  at 
the  decisive  moment.  The  completion  of  the 
task  within  the  proper  time  depends  on  the  si¬ 
multaneous  application  of  numerous  combined 
working  days;  the  amount  of  useful  effect  de¬ 
pends  on  the  number  of  labourers;  this  number, 
however,  is  always  smaller  than  the  number  of 
isolated  labourers  required  to  do  the  same 
amount  of  work  in  the  same  period.1  It  is  owing 
to  the  absence  of  this  kind  of  cooperation  that, 
in  the  western  part  of  the  United  States,  quan¬ 
tities  of  corn,  and  in  those  parts  of  East  India 
where  English  rule  has  destroyed  the  old  com- 
munities,  quantities  of  cotton,  are  yearly 
wasted.* 

On  the  one  hand,  cooperation  allows  of  the 
work  being  carried  on  over  an  extended  space; 
it  is  consequently  imperatively  called  for  in  cer¬ 
tain  undertakings,  such  as  draining,  construct* 
ing  dykes,  irrigation  works,  and  the  making  of 
canals,  roads,  and  railways.  On  'the  other  hand, 
while  extending  the  scale  of  production,  it  ren¬ 
ders  possible  a  relative  contraction  of  the  arena. 
This  contraction  of  arena  simultaneous  with, 
and  arising  from,  extension  of  scale,  whereby  a 
number  of  useless  expenses  are  cut  down,  is  ow- 

1  “The  doing  of  it  (agricultural  work)  at  the  critical  junc¬ 
ture  is  of  so  much  the  greater  consequence."  {An  Inquiry 
into  the  Connection  between  the  Present  Price ,  etc.,  p.  9.)  “In 
agriculture,  there  is  no  more  important  factor  than  that  of 
time."  (Liebig,  Ober  Theorte  und  Praxis  in  der  Landwirth- 
schaft,  1856,  p.  23.) 

*  "The  next  evil  is  one  which  one  would  scarcely  f  xpect 
to  find  in  a  country  which  exports  more  labour  than  any 
other  in  the  world,  with  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  China 
and  England — the  impossibility  of  procuring  a  sufficient 
number  of  hands  to  clean  the  cotton.  The  consequence  of 
this  is  that  large  quantities  of  the  crop  are  left  unpicked, 
while  another  portion  is  gathered  from  the  ground,  when 
it  has  fallen,  and  is  of  course  discoloured  and  partially  rot¬ 
ted,  so  that  for  want  of  labour  at  the  proper  season  the 
cultivator  is  actually  forced  to  submit  to  the  loss  of  a  large 
part  of  that  crop  for  which  England  is  so  anxiously  look¬ 
ing.^ "—Bengal  Hurkaru  ,  Bi-Monthly  Overland  Summary  of 
News,  22nd  July,  1861. 


ing  to  the  conglomeration  of  labourers,  to  the 
aggregation  of  various  processes,  and  to  the 
concentration  of  the  means  of  production.* 

The  combined  working  day  produces,  as 
compared  with  an  equal  sum  of  isolated  work¬ 
ing  days,  a  greater  quantity  of  use-values,  and, 
consequently,  diminishes  the  labour  time  nec¬ 
essary  for  the  production  of  a  given  useful  ef¬ 
fect.  Whether  the  combined  working  day,  in  a 
given  case,  acquires  this  increased  productive 
power,  because  it  heightens  the  mechanical 
force  of  labour,  or  extends  its  sphere  of  action 
over  a  greater  space,  or  contracts  the  field  of 
production  relatively  to  the  scale  of  production, 
or  at  the  critical  moment  sets  large  masses  of  la¬ 
bour  to  work,  or  excites  emulation  between  in¬ 
dividuals  and  raises  their  animal  spirits,  or  im¬ 
presses  on  the  similar  operations  carried  on  by 
a  number  of  men  the  stamp  of  continuity  and 
many-sidedness,  or  performs  simultaneously 
different  operations,  or  economizes  the  means 
of  production  by  use  in  common,  or  lends  to  in¬ 
dividual  labour  the  character  of  average  social 
labour — whichever  of  these  be  the  cause  of  the 
increase,  the  speci.il  productive  power  of  the 
combined  working  day  is,  under  all  circum¬ 
stances,  the  social  productive  power  of  labour, 
or  the  productive  power  of  social  labour.  This 
power  is  due  to  cooperation  itself.  When  the  la¬ 
bourer  cooperates  systematically  with  others, 
he  strips  off  the  fetters  of  his  individuality,  and 
develops  the  capabilities  of  his  species.4 

As  a  general  rule,  labourers  cannot  cooperate 
without  being  brought  together:  their  assem¬ 
blage  in  one  place  is  a  necessary  condition  of 
their  cooperation.  Hence  Wage  labourers  can¬ 
not  cooperate,  unless  they  arc  employed  simul¬ 
taneously  by  the  same  capital,  the  same  capi¬ 
talist,  and  unless,  therefore,  their  labour  pow¬ 
ers  are  bought  simultaneously  by  him.  The  to¬ 
tal  value  of  these  labour  powers,  or  the  amount 
of  the  wages  of  these  labourers  for  a  day,  or  a 
week,  as  the  case  may  be,  must  be  ready  in  the 

*  In  the  progress  of  culture  "all,  and  perhaps  more  than 
all,  the  capital  and  labour  which  once  loosely  occupied  500 
acres,  are  now  concentrated  for  the  more  complete  tillage 
of  100."  Although  "relatively  to  the  amount  of  capital  and 
labour  employed,  space  is  concentrated,  it  is  an  enlarged 
sphere  of  production,  as  compared  to  the  sphere  of  produc¬ 
tion  formerly  occupied  or  worked  upon  by  olie  single  inde¬ 
pendent  agent  of  production."— R.  Jones,  An  Essay  on 
the  Distribution  of  Wealthy  Part  /,  On  Rcntt  London,  1831, 
P-  I91, 

4  "The  force  of  each  man  is  slight,  but  the  union  of  slight 
forces  constitutes  a  total  force  which  is  greater  even  than 
the  sum  of  these  same  forces;  so  that  the  forces  by  their 
nature  can  diminish  the  time  and  widen  the  space  of  their 
action/  — G.  R.  Carli,  note  to  P.  Verri,  op.  cit.,  Vol.  XV, 
p.  196. 


COOPERATION 


pocket  of  the  capitalist  before  the  workmen  are 
assembled  for  the  process  of  production.  The 
payment  of  300  workmen  at  once,  though  only 
for  one  day,  requires  a  greater  outlay  of  capital 
than  does  the  payment  of  a  smaller  number  of 
men,  week  by  week,  during  a  whole  year.  Hence 
the  number  of  the  labourers  that  cooperate,  or 
the  scale  of  cooperation,  depends,  in  the  first 
instance,  on  the  amount  of  capital  that  the  in¬ 
dividual  capitalist  can  spare  for  the  purchase  of 
labour  power;  in  other  words,  on  the  extent  to 
which  a  single  capitalist  has  command  over  the 
means  of  subsistence  of  a  number  of  labourers. 

And  as  with  the  variable,  so  it  is  with  the  con¬ 
stant  capital.  For  example,  the  outlay  on  raw 
material  is  30  times  as  great  for  the  capitalist 
who  employs  300  men  as  it  is  for  each  of  the  30 
capitalists  who  employ  10  men.  The  value  and 
quantity  of  the  instruments  of  labour  used  in 
common  do  not,  it  is  true,  increase  at  the  same 
rate  as  the  number  of  workmen,  but  they  do 
increase  very  considerably.  Hence,  concentra¬ 
tion  of  large  maws  of  the  means  of  production 
in  the  hands  of  individual  capitalists  is  a  ma¬ 
terial  condition  for  the  cooperation  of  wage  la¬ 
bourers,  and  the  extent  of  the  cooperation  or 
the  scale  of  production  depends  on  the  extent 
of  this  concentration. 

We  saw  in  a  former  chapter  that  a  certain 
minimum  amount  of  capital  was  necessary,  in 
order  that  the  number  of  labourers  simultane¬ 
ously  employed  and,  consequently,  the  amount 
of  surplus  value  produced  might  suffice  to  liber¬ 
ate  the  employer  himself  from  manual  labour, 
to  convert  him  from  a  small  master  into  a  cap¬ 
italist,  and  thus  formally  to  establish  capitalist 
production.  We  now  see  that  a  certain  mini¬ 
mum  amount  is  a  necessary  condition  for  the 
conversion  of  numerous  isolated  and  independ¬ 
ent  processes  into  one  combined  social  process. 

We  also  saw  that  at  first  the  subjection  of  la¬ 
bour  to  capital  was  only  a  formal  result  of  the 
fact  that  the  labourer,  instead  of  working  for 
himself,  works  for  and  consequently  under  the 
capitalist.  By  the  cooperation  of  numerous 
wage  labourers,  the  sway  of  capital  develops 
into  a  requisite  for  carrying  on  the  labour  proc¬ 
ess  itself,  into  a  real  requisite  of  production. 
That  a  capitalist  should  command  on  the  field 
of  production  is  now  as  indispensable  as  that  a 
general  should  command  on  the  field  of  battle. 

All  combined  labour  on  a  large  scale  requires, 
more  or  less,  a  directing  authority,  in  order  to 
secure  the  harmonious  working  of  the  individ¬ 
ual  activities,  and  to  perform  the  general  func¬ 
tions  that  have  their  origin  in  the  action  of  the 


161 

combined  organism,  as  distinguished  from  the 
action  of  its  separate  organs.  A  single  violin 
player  is  his  own  conductor;  an  orchestra  re¬ 
quires  a  separate  one.  The  work  of  directing, 
superintending,  and  adjusting,  becomes  one  of 
the  functions  of  capital,  from  the  moment  that 
the  labour  under  the  control  of  capital  becomes 
cooperative.  Once  a  function  of  capital,  it 
acquires  special  characteristics. 

The  directing  motive,  the  end  and  aim  of  cap¬ 
italist  production,  is  to  extract  the  greatest  pos¬ 
sible  amount  of  surplus  value,1  and  consequent¬ 
ly  to  exploit  labour  power  to  the  greatest  possi¬ 
ble  extent.  As  the  number  of  the  cooperating 
labourers  increases,  so,  too,  does  their  resist¬ 
ance  to  the  domination  of  capita],  and  with  it 
the  necessity  for  capital  to  overcome  this  resist¬ 
ance  by  counter-pressure.  The  control  exercised 
by  the  capitalist  is  not  only  a  special  function, 
due  to  the  nature  of  the  social  labour  process, 
and  peculiar  to  that  process,  but  it  is,  at  the 
same  time,  a  function  of  the  exploitation  of  a 
social  labour  process,  and  is  consequently 
rooted  in  the  unavoidable  antagonism  between 
the  exploiter  and  the  living  and  labouring  raw 
material  he  exploits. 

Again,  in  proportion  to  the  increasing  mass 
of  the  means  of  production,  now  no  longer  the 
property  of  the  labourer,  but  of  the  capitalist, 
the  necessity  increases  for  some  effective  con¬ 
trol  over  the  proper  application  of  those 
means.2  Moreover,  the  cooperation  of  wage  la¬ 
bourers  is  entirely  brought  about  by  the  capital 
that  employs  them.  Their  union  into  one  single 
productive  body  and  the  establishment  of  a 
connection  between  their  individual  functions 
are  matters  foreign  and  external  to  them,  are 
not  their  own  act,  but  the  act  of  the  capital  that 
brings  and  keeps  them  together.  Hence  the  con¬ 
nection  existing  between  their  various  labours 
appears  to  them,  ideally,  in  the  shape  of  a  pre¬ 
conceived  plan  of  the  capitalist,  and  practically 

1  “Profits  ...  is  the  sole  end  of  trade.”— J.  Vanderlint, 
op.  cit.t  p.  x  1. 

2  That  Philistine  paper,  the  Spectator ,  states  that  after 
the  introduction  of  a  sort  of  partnership  between  capitalist 
and  workmen  in  the  Wirewurk  Company  of  Manchester, 
**the  first  result  was  a  sudden  decrease  in  waste,  the  men 
not  seeing  why  they  should  waste  their  own  property  any 
more  than  any  other  master’s,  and  waste  is,  perhaps,  next 
to  bad  debts,  the  greatest  source  of  manufacturing  loss.” 
The  same  paper  finds  that  the  main  defect  in  the  Rochdale 
cooperative  experiment  is  this:  “They  showed  that  associ¬ 
ations  of  workmen  could  manage  shops,  mills,  and  almost 
all  forms  of  industry  with  success,  and  they  immediately 
improved  the  condition  of  the  men;  but  then  they  did  not 
leave  a  clear  place  for  masters.”  Quelle  horreur !  [How 
terrible!] 


CAPITAL 


162 

in  the  shape  of  the  authority  of  the  same  capi¬ 
talist,  in  the  shape  of  the  powerful  will  of  an¬ 
other,  who  subjects  their  activity  to  his  aims. 
If,  then,  the  control  of  the  capitalist  is  in  sub¬ 
stance  twofold  by  reason  of  the  twofold  nature 
of  the  process  of  production  itself— which,  on 
the  one  hand,  is  a  social  process  for  producing 
use-values,  on  the  other,  a  process  for  creating 
surplus- value— in  form  that  control  is  despotic. 
As  cooperation  extends  its  scale,  this  despotism 
takes  forms  peculiar  to  itself.  Just  as  at  first  the 
capitalist  is  relieved  from  actual  labour  so  soon 
as  his  capital  has  reached  that  minimum 
amount  with  which  capitalist  production,  as 
such,  begins,  so  now  he  hands  over  the  work  of 
direct  and  constant  supervision  of  the  individ¬ 
ual  workmen  and  groups  of  workmen  to  a  spe¬ 
cial  kind  of  wage  labourer.  An  industrial  army 
of  workmen,  under  the  command  of  a  capitalist, 
requires,  like  a  real  army,  officers  (managers), 
and  sergeants  (foremen,  overlookers),  who, 
while  the  work  is  being  done,  command  in  the 
name  of  the  capitalist.  The  work  of  supervision 
becomes  their  established  and  exclusive  func¬ 
tion.  When  comparing  the  mode  of  production 
of  isolated  peasants  and  artizans  with  produc¬ 
tion  by  slave  labour,1  the  political  economist 
counts  this  labour  of  superintendence  among 
the  faux  frais 2  of  production.  But,  when  con¬ 
sidering  the  capitalist  mode  of  production,  he, 
on  the  contrary,  treats  the  work  of  control  made 
necessary  by  the  cooperative  character  of  the 
labour  process  as  identical  with  the  different 
work  of  control,  necessitated  by  the  capitalist 
character  of  that  process  and  the  antagonism  of 
interests  between  capitalist  and  labourer.3  It  is 
not  because  he  is  a  leader  of  industry  that  a  man 
is  a  capitalist;  on  the  contrary,  he  is  a  leader  of 
industry  because  he  is  a  capitalist.  The  leader¬ 
ship  of  industry  is  an  attribute  of  capital,  just 
as  in  feudal  times  the  functions  of  general  and 
judge  were  attributes  of  landed  property.4 

1  Professor  Cairnes,  after  stating  that  the  superintend¬ 
ence  of  labour  is  a  leading  feature  of  production  by  slaves 
in  the  southern  States  of  North  America,  continues:  “The 
peasant  proprietor  (of  the  North),  appropriating  the  whole 
produce  of  his  toil,  needs  no  other  stimulus  to  exertion. 
Superintendence  is  here  completely  dispensed  with.'* —  op, 

«7.,pp.  48,49- 

#  Incidental  expenses. 

*  Sir  James  Steuart,  a  writer  altogether  remarkable  for 
his  quick  eye  for  the  characteristic  social  distinctions  be¬ 
tween  different  modes  of  production,  says:  “Why  do  large 
undertakings  in  the  manufacturing  way  ruin  private  in¬ 
dustry,  but  by  coming  nearer  to  the  simplicity  of  slaves?” 
— Principles  oj  Political  Economy ,  London,  1767,  Vol.  I, 
pp.  167, 168. 

4  Auguste  Comte  and  his  school  might,  therefore,  have 
shown  that  feudal  lords  are  an  eternal  necessity  in  the 


The  labourer  is  the  owner  of  his  labour  power 
until  he  has  done  bargaining  for  its  sale  with  the 
capitalist;  and  he  can  sell  no  more  than  what  he 
has — i.e.,  his  individual,  isolated  labour  power. 
This  state  of  things  is  in  no  way  altered  by  the 
fact  that  the  capitalist,  instead  of  buying  the 
labour  power  of  one  man,  buys  that  of  100,  and 
enters  into  separate  contracts  with  100  uncon¬ 
nected  men  instead  of  with  one.  He  is  at  liberty 
to  set  the  100  men  to  work,  without  letting 
them  cooperate.  He  pays  them  the  value  of  100 
independent  labour  powers,  but  he  does  not  pay 
for  the  combined  labour  power  of  the  hundred. 
Being  independent  of  each  other,  the  labourers 
are  isolated  persons,  who  enter  into  relations 
with  the  capitalist,  but  not  with  one  another. 
This  cooperation  begins  only  with  the  labour 
process,  but  they  have  then  ceased  to  belong  to 
themselves.  On  entering  that  process,  they  be¬ 
come  incorporated  with  capital.  As  coopera¬ 
tors,  as  members  of  a  working  organism,  they 
are  but  special  modes  of  existence  of  capital. 
Hence,  the  productive  power  developed  by  the 
labourer  when  working  in  cooperation  is  the 
productive  power  of  capital.  This  power  is  de¬ 
veloped  gratuitously,  whenever  the  workmen 
are  placed  under  given  conditions,  and  it  is  cap¬ 
ital  that  places  them  under  such  conditions.  Be¬ 
cause  this  power  costs  capital  nothing,  and  be¬ 
cause,  on  the  other  hand,  the  labourer  himself 
does  not  develop  it  before  his  labOUr  belongs  to 
capital,  it  appears  as  a  power  with  which  capital 
is  endowed  by  Nature— a  productive  power 
that  is  immanent  in  capital. 

The  colossal  effects  of  simple  cooperation  are 
to  be  seen  in  the  gigantic  structures  of  the  an¬ 
cient  Asiatics,  Egyptians,  Etruscans,  etc.  “It 
has  happened  in  times  past  that  these  Oriental 
States,  after  supplying  the  expenses  of  their 
civil  and  military  establishments,  have  found 
themselves  in  possession  of  a  surplus  which 
they  could  apply  to  works  of  magnificence  or 
utility,  and  in  the  construction  of  these  their 
command  over  the  hands  and  arms  of  almost 
the  entire  non-agricultural  population  has  pro¬ 
duced  stupendous  monuments  which  still  in¬ 
dicate  their  power.  The  teeming  valley  of  the 
Nile  . . .  produced  food  for  a  swarming  non-ag- 
ricultural  population,  and  this  food,  belonging 
to  the  monarch  and  the  priesthood,  afforded  the 
means  of  erecting  the  mighty  monuments 
which  filled  the  land. . .  .In  moving  the  colossal 
statues  and  vast  masses,  of  which  the  transport 
creates  wonder,  human  labour  almost  alone  was 

same  w^y  that  they  have  done  in  the  case  of  the  lords  of 
capital. 


COOPERATION 


prodigally  used. . . .  The  number  of  the  labour- 
ers  and  the  concentration  of  their  efforts  suf¬ 
ficed.  We  see  mighty  coral  reefs  rising  from  the 
depths  of  the  ocean  into  islands  and  firm  land, 
yet  each  individual  depositor  is  puny,  weak, 
and  contemptible.  The  non-agricultural  labour¬ 
ers  of  an  Asiatic  monarchy  have  little  but  their 
individual  bodily  exertions  to  bring  to  the  task, 
but  their  number  is  their  strength,  and  the  pow¬ 
er  of  directing  these  masses  gave  rise  to  the  pal¬ 
aces  and  temples,  the  pyramids,  and  the  armies 
of  gigantic  statues  of  which  the  remains  aston¬ 
ish  and  perplex  us.  It  is  that  confinement  of  the 
revenues  which  feed  them  to  one  or  a  few  hands 
which  makes  such  undertakings  possible.”1 
This  power  of  Asiatic  and  Egyptian  kings, 
Etruscan  theocrats,  etc.,  has  in  modern  society 
been  transferred  to  the  capitalist,  whether  he 
be  an  isolated,  or  as  in  joint-stock  companies,  a 
collective  capitalist. 

Cooperation,  such  as  we  find  it  at  the  dawn 
of  human  development,  among  races  who  live 
by  the  chase,2  or,  say,  in  the  agriculture  of  In¬ 
dian  communities,  is  based,  on  the  one  hand,  on 
ownership  in  common  of  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion,  and  on  the  other  hand,  on  the  fact  that  in 
those  cases  each  individual  has  no  more  torn 
himself  off  from  the  navel-string  of  his  tribe  or 
community  than  each  bee  has  freed  itself  from 
connection  with  the  hive.  Such  cooperation  is 
distinguished  from  capitalistic  cooperation  by 
both  of  the  above  characteristics.  The  sporadic 
application  of  cooperation  on  a  large  scale  in 
ancient  times,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  in  mod¬ 
ern  colonies,  reposes  upon  relations  of  domin¬ 
ion  and  servitude,  principally  upon  slavery. 
The  capitalistic  form,  on  the  contrary,  presup¬ 
poses  from  first  to  last  the  free  wage  labourer 
who  sells  his  labour  power  to  capital.  Historical¬ 
ly,  however,  this  form  is  developed  in  opposi¬ 
tion  to  peasant  agriculture  and  to  the  carrying 
on  of  independent  handicrafts,  whether  in 
guilds  or  not.3  From  the  standpoint  of  these, 

1  R.  Jones,  Textbook  of  Lectures ,  etc.,  pp.  77,  78.  The 
ancient  Assyrian,  Egyptian,  and  other  collections  in  Lon¬ 
don,  and  in  other  European  capitals,  make  us  eye-witnesses 
of  the  modes  of  carrying  on  that  cooperative  labour. 

*  2  Linguet  is  probably  right  when,  in  his  Theorie  des  lots 
civile* y  he  declares  hunting  to  be  the  first  form  of  coopera¬ 
tion,  and  man-hunting  (war)  one  of  the  earliest  forms  of 
hunting. 

3  Peasant  agriculture  on  a  small  scale,  and  the  carrying 
on  of  independent  handicrafts,  which  together  form  the 
basis  of  the  feudal  mode  of  production,  and  after  the  dis¬ 
solution  of  that  system,  continue  side  by  side  with  the  cap¬ 
italist  mode,  also  form  the  economic  foundation  of  the  clas¬ 
sical  communities  at  their  best,  after  the  primitive  form  of 
ownership  of  land  in  common  had  disappeared,  and  before 
slavery  had  seized  on  production  in  earnest. 


163 

capitalistic  cooperation  does  not  manifest  itself 
as  a  particular  historical  form  of  cooperation, 
but  cooperation  itself  appears  to  be  a  historical 
form  peculiar  to,  and  specifically  distinguish¬ 
ing,  the  capitalist  process  of  production. 

Just  as  the  social  productive  power  of  labour 
that  is  developed  by  cooperation  appears  to  be 
the  productive  power  of  capital,  so  cooperation 
itsel  f,  contrasted  with  the  process  of  production 
carried  on  by  isolated  independent  labourers, 
or  even  by  small  employers,  appears  to  be  a 
specific  form  of  the  capitalist  process  of  produc¬ 
tion.  It  is  the  first  change  experienced  by  the 
actual  labour  process  when  subjected  to  capital. 
This  change  takes  place  spontaneously.  The  si¬ 
multaneous  employment  of  a  large  number  of 
wage  labourers  in  one  and  the  same  process, 
which  is  a  necessary  condition  of  this  change, 
also  forms  the  starting  point  of  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction.  This  point  coincides  with  the  birth  of 
capital  itself.  If,  then,  on  the  one  hand,  the  cap¬ 
italist  mode  of  production  presents  itself  to  us 
historically  as  a  necessary  condition  to  the 
transformation  of  the  labour  process  into  a  so¬ 
cial  process,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  this  social 
form  of  the  labour  process  presents  itself  as  a 
method  employed  by  capital  for  the  more  prof¬ 
itable  exploitation  of  labour,  by  increasing  that 
labour’s  productiveness. 

In  the  elementary  form  under  which  we  have 
hitherto  viewed  it,  cooperation  is  a  necessary 
concomitant  of  all  production  on  a  large  scale, 
but  it  does  not,  in  itself,  represent  a  fixed  form 
characteristic  of  a  particular  epoch  in  the  de¬ 
velopment  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production. 
At  the  most  it  appears  to  do  so,  and  that  only 
approximately,  in  the  handicraft-like  begin¬ 
nings  of  manufacture,4  and  in  that  kind  of  agri¬ 
culture  on  a  large  scale  which  corresponds  to 
the  epoch  of  manufacture  and  is  distinguished 
from  peasant  agriculture,  mainly  by  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  labourers  simultaneously  employed 
and  by  the  mass  of  the  means  of  production 
concentrated  for  their  use.  Simple  cooperation 
is  always  the  prevailing  form  in  those  branches 
of  production  in  which  capital  operates  on  a 
large  scale,  and  division  of  labour  and  machin¬ 
ery  play  but  a  subordinate  part. 

Cooperation  ever  constitutes  the  fundamen¬ 
tal  form  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production; 
nevertheless,  the  elementary  form  of  coopera- 

4“\Vhether  the  united  skill,  industry,  and  emulation  of 
many  together  on  the  same  work  be  not  the  way  to  ad¬ 
vance  it?  And  whether  it  had  been  otherwise  possible  for 
England,  to  have  carried  on  her  woollen  manufacture  to 
so  great  a  perfection?”— Berkeley,  The  Querist,  London, 
1750,  p.  56,  §  jai. 


CAPITAL 


164 

tion  continues  to  subsist  as  a  particular  form  of 
capitalist  production,  side  by  side  with  the  more 
developed  forms  of  that  mode  of  production. 


CHAPTER  XIV.  DIVISION  OF  LABOUR 
AND  MANUFACTURE 

I.  Twofold  Origin  of  Manufacture 
That  cooperation  which  is  based  on  division  of 
labour  assumes  its  typical  form  in  manufacture, 
and  is  the  prevalent  characteristic  form  of  the 
capitalist  process  of  production  throughout  the 
manufacturing  period  properly  so  called.  That 
period,  roughly  speaking,  extends  from  the 
middle  of  the  sixteenth  to  the  last  third  of  the 
eighteenth  century. 

Manufacture  takes  its  rise  in  two  ways: 

(i)  By  the  assemblage  in  one  workshop  under 
the  control  of  a  single  capitalist  of  labourers  be- 
longing  to  various  independent  handicrafts,  but 
through  whose  hands  a  given  article  must  pass 
on  its  way  to  completion.  A  carriage,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  was  formerly  the  product  of  the  labour  of  a 
great  number  of  independent  artificers,  such  as 
wheelwrights,  harness-makers,  tailors,  lock¬ 
smiths,  upholsterers,  turners,  fringe-makers, 
glaziers,  painters,  polishers,  gilders,  etc.  In  the 
manufacture  of  carriages,  however,  all  these 
different  artificers  are  assembled  in  one  build¬ 
ing,  where  they  work  into  one  another's  hands. 
It  is  true  that  a  carriage  cannot  be  gilded  before 
it  has  been  made.  But  if  a  number  of  carriages 
are  being  made  simultaneously,  some  may  be 
in  the  hands  of  the  gilders  whiltfothers  are  going 
through  an  earlier  process.  So  far,  we  are  still 
in  the  domain  of  simple  cooperation,  which 
finds  its  materials  ready  to  hand  in  the  shape  of 
men  and  things.  But  very  soon  an  important 
change  takes  place.  The  tailor,  the  locksmith, 
and  the  other  artificers,  being  now  exclusively 
occupied  in  carriage-making,  each  gradually 
loses,  through  want  of  practice,  the  ability  to 
carry  on,  to  its  full  extent,  his  old  handicraft. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  his  activity,  now  con¬ 
fined  in  one  groove,  assumes  the  form  best 
adapted  to  the  narrowed  sphere  of  action.  At 
first,  carriage  manufacture  is  a  combination  of 
various  independent  handicrafts.  By  degrees, 
it  becomes  the  splitting  up  of  carriage-making 
into  its  various  detail  processes,  each  of  which 
crystallizes  into  the  exclusive  function  of  a  par¬ 
ticular  workman,  the  manufacture,  as  a  whole, 
being  carried  on  by  the  men  in  conjunction.  In 
the  same  way,  cloth  manufacture,  as  also  a 
whole  series  of  other  manufactures,  arose  by 


combining  different  handicrafts  together  under 
the  control  of  a  single  capitalist.1 

(2)  Manufacture  also  arises  in  a  way  exactly 
the  reverse  of  this — namely,  by  one  capitalist 
employing  simultaneously  in  one  workshop  a 
number  of  artificers  who  all  do  the  same,  or  the 
same  kind  of  work,  such  as  making  paper,  type, 
or  needles.  This  is  cooperation  in  its  most  ele¬ 
mentary  form.  Each  of  these  artificers  (with  the 
help,  perhaps,  of  one  or  two  apprentices)  makes 
the  entire  commodity,  and  he  consequently  per¬ 
forms  in  succession  all  the  operations  necessary 
for  its  production.  He  still  works  in  his  old  han¬ 
dicraft-like  way.  But  very  soon  external  cir¬ 
cumstances  cause  a  different  use  to  be  made  of 
the  concentration  of  the  workmen  on  one  spot 
and  of  the  simultaneousness  of  their  work.  An 
increased  quantity  of  the  article  has  perhaps  to 
be  delivered  within  a  given  time.  The  work  is 
therefore  redistributed.  Instead  of  each  man 
being  allowed  to  perform  all  the  various  opera¬ 
tions  in  succession,  these  operations  are 
changed  into  disconnected,  isolated  ones,  car¬ 
ried  on  side  by  side;  each  is  assigned  to  a  differ¬ 
ent  artificer,  and  the  whole  of  them  together  are 
performed  simultaneously  by  the  cooperating 
workmen.  This  accidental  distribution  gets  re¬ 
peated,  develops  advantages  of  its  own,  and 
gradually  ossifies  into  a  systematic  division  of 
labour.  The  commodity,  from  being  the  indi¬ 
vidual  product  of  an  independent  artificer,  be¬ 
comes  the  social  product  of  a  union  of  artificers, 
each  of  whom  performs  one,  and  only  one,  of  the 
constituent  partial  operations.  The  same  opera¬ 
tions  which,  in  the  case  of  a  papermaker  belong¬ 
ing  to  a  German  guild,  merged  one  into  the  oth¬ 
er  as  the  successive  acts  of  one  artificer,  became 
in  the  Dutch  paper  manufacture  so  many  par¬ 
tial  operations  carried  on  side  by  side  by  numer¬ 
ous  cooperating  labourers.  The  needlemaker  of 
the  Nuremberg  guild  was  the  cornerstone  on 
which  the  English  needle  manufacture  was 
raised.  But  while  in  Nuremberg  that  single  arti- 

1  To  give  a  more  modern  instance*  The  silk  spinning  and 
weaving  of  Lyons  and  Nlmes,  “is  quite  patriarchal;  it  em¬ 
ploys  many  women  and  children,  but  without  exhausting 
or  corrupting  them.  It  leaves  them  in  their  charming  val¬ 
leys  of  the  Drdme,  the  Var,  the  Is&re,  and  the  Vaucluse, 
there  to  raise  silkworms  and  unwind  their  cocoons;  it  never 
becomes  a  true  factory.  On  closer  examination,  the  princi¬ 
ple  of  division  of  labour  presents  here  a  special  character. 
There  are  a  great  many  winders,  silk-throlkers,  dyers,  su¬ 
ers,  and  weavers;  but  they  do  not  come  together  in  a  single 
establishment,  nor  do  they  depend  on  the  same  master;  all 
are  independent.11 — A.  Blanqui,  Cours  d'iconomte  indus- 
tritile ,  edited  by  A.  Blaise,  Paris,  18.38-1839,  p.  79.  Since 
Blanqwi  wrote  this,  the  various  independent  labourers  have, 
to  some  extent,  been  united  in  factories. 


DIVISION  OF  LABOUR  AND  MANUFACTURE 


ficer  performed  a  series  of  perhaps  20  operations 
one  after  another,  in  England  it  was  not  long 
before  there  were  20  needlemakers  side  by  side, 
each  performing  one  alone  of  those  20  opera¬ 
tions;  and,  in  consequence  of  further  experi¬ 
ence,  each  of  those  20  operations  was  again  split 
up,  isolated,  and  made  the  exclusive  function 
of  a  separate  workman. 

The  mode  in  which  manufacture  arises,  its 
growth  out  of  handicrafts,  is  therefore  twofold. 
On  the  one  hand,  it  arises  from  the  union  of  var¬ 
ious  independent  handicrafts,  which  become 
stripped  of  their  independence  and  specialized 
to  such  an  extent  as  to  be  reduced  to  mere  sup¬ 
plementary  partial  processes  in  the  production 
of  one  particular  commodity.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  arises  from  the  cooperation  of  artificers 
of  one  handicraft;  it  splits  up  that  particular 
handicraft  into  its  various  detail  operations, 
isolating,  and  making  these  operations  inde¬ 
pendent  of  one  another  up  to  the  point  where 
each  becomes  the  exclusive  function  of  a  par¬ 
ticular  labourer.  On  the  one  hand,  therefore, 
manufacture  either  introduces  division  of  la¬ 
bour  into  a  process  of  production,  or  further 
develops  that  division;  on  the  other  hand,  it 
unites  together  handicrafts  that  were  formerly 
separate.  But  whatever  may  have  been  its  par¬ 
ticular  starting  point,  its  final  form  is  invari¬ 
ably  the  same— a  productive  mechanism  whose 
parts  are  human  beings. 

For  a  proper  understanding  of  the  division  of 
labour  in  manufacture,  it  is  essential  that  the 
following  points  be  firmly  grasped.  First,  the 
decomposition  of  a  process  of  production  into  its 
various  successive  steps  coincides  here  strictly 
with  the  resolution  of  a  handicraft  into  its 
successive  manual  operations.  Whether  com¬ 
plex  or  simple,  each  operation  has  to  be  done 
by  hand,  retains  the  character  of  a  handicraft, 
and  is  therefore  dependent  on  the  strength, 
skill,  quickness,  and  sureness,  of  the  individual 
workman  in  handling  his  tools.  The  handicraft 
continues  to  be  the  basis.  This  narrow  technical 
basis  excludes  a  really  scientific  analysis  of  any 
definite  process  of  industrial  production,  since 
it  is  still  a  condition  that  each  detail  process 
gone  through  by  the  product  must  be  capable 
of  being  done  by  hand  and  of  forming,  in  its 
way,  a  separate  handicraft.  It  is  just  because 
handicraft  skill  continues,  in  this  way,  to  be  the 
foundation  of  the  process  of  production  that 
each  workman  becomes  exclusively  assigned  to 
a  partial  function,  and  that  for  the  rest  of  his 
life  his  labour-power  is  turned  into  the  organ  of 
this  detail  function. 


165 

Secondly,  this  division  of  labour  is  a  particu¬ 
lar  sort  of  cooperation,  and  many  of  its  disad¬ 
vantages  spring  from  the  general  character  of 
cooperation,  and  not  from  this  particular  form 
of  it. 

2.  The  Detail  Labourer  and  His  Implements 

If  we  now  go  more  into  detail,  it  is,  in  the  first 
place,  clear  that  a  labourer  who  all  his  life  per¬ 
forms  one  and  the  same  simple  operation  con¬ 
verts  his  whole  body  into  the  automatic,  spe¬ 
cialized  implement  of  that  operation.  Conse¬ 
quently,  he  takes  less  time  in  doing  it,  than  the 
artificer  who  performs  a  whole  series  of  opera¬ 
tions  in  succession.  But  the  collective  labourer, 
who  constitutes  the  living  mechanism  of  manu¬ 
facture,  is  made  up  solely  of  such  specialized 
detail  labourers.  Hence,  in  comparison  with  the 
independent  handicraft,  more  is  produced  in  a 
given  time,  or  ${ie  productive  power  of  labour 
is  increased.1  Moreover,  when  once  this  frac¬ 
tional  work  is  established  as  the  exclusive  func¬ 
tion  of  one  person,  the  methods  it  employs  be¬ 
come  perfected.  The  workman’s  continued 
repetition  of  the  same  simple  act,  and  the  con¬ 
centration  of  his  attention  on  it,  teach  him  by 
experience  how  to  attain  the  desired  effect  with 
the  minimum  of  exertion.  But  since  there  are 
always  several  generations  of  labourers  living 
at  one  time  and  working  together  at  the  manu¬ 
facture  of  a  given  article,  the  technical  skill,  the 
tricks  of  the  trade  thus  acquired,  become  estab¬ 
lished  and  are  accumulated  and  handed  down.2 
Manufacture,  in  fact,  produces  the  skill  of  the 
detail  labourer  by  reproducing  and  systematic¬ 
ally  driving  to  an  extreme  within  the  workshop 
the  naturally  developed  differentiation  of 
trades  which  it  found  ready  to  hand  in  society 
at  large.  On  the  other  hand,  the  conversion  of 
fractional  work  into  the  life-calling  of  one  man 
corresponds  to  the  tendency  shown  by  earlier 
societies  to  make  trades  hereditary;  either  to 
petrify  them  into  castes,  or,  whenever  definite 
historical  conditions  beget  in  the  individual  a 
tendency  to  vary  in  a  manner  incompatible 
with  the  nature  of  castes,  to  ossify  them  into 
guilds.  Castes  and  guilds  arise  from  the  action 
of  the  same  natural  law  that  regulates  the  dif¬ 
ferentiation  of  plants  and  animals  into  species 
and  varieties,  except  that,  when  a  certain  de- 

1  “The  more  any  manufacture  of  much  variety  shall  be 
distributed  and  assigned  to  different  artists,  the  same  must 
needs  be  better  done  and  with  greater  expedition,  with  less 
loss  of  time  and  labour.’* — The  Advantages  of  the  East  India 
Trade ,  London,  1720,  p.  71. 

2  “Easy  labour  is  transmitted  skill.’ '—Thomas  Hodgs- 
kin,  op,  cit.t  p.  125. 


CAPITAL 


166 

gree  of  development  has  been  reached,  the  he¬ 
redity  of  castes  and  the  exclusiveness  of  guilds 
are  ordained  as  a  law  of  society.1  “The  muslins 
of  Dakka  in  fineness,  the  calicoes  and  other 
piece  goods  of  Coromandel  in  brilliant  and  du¬ 
rable  colours,  have  never  been  surpassed.  Yet 
they  are  produced  without  capital,  machinery, 
division  of  labour,  or  any  of  those  means  which 
give  such  facilities  to  the  manufacturing  inter¬ 
est  of  Europe.  The  weaver  is  merely  a  detached 
individual,  working  a  web  when  ordered  of  a 
customer,  and  with  a  loom  of  the  rudest  con¬ 
struction,  consisting  sometimes  of  a  few 
branches  or  bars  of  wood  put  roughly  together. 
There  is  even  no  expedient  for  rolling  up  the 
warp;  the  loom  must  therefore  be  kept  stretched 
to  its  full  length,  and  becomes  so  inconveniently 
large  that  it  cannot  be  contained  within  the  hut 
of  the  manufacturer,  who  is  therefore  com¬ 
pelled  to  ply  his  trade  in  the  open  air,  where  it 
is  interrupted  by  every  vicissitude  of  the  weath¬ 
er.”2  It  is  only  the  special  skill  accumulated 
from  generation  to  generation,  and  transmitted 
from  father  to  son,  that  gives  to  the  Hindu,  as 
it  does  to  the  spider,  this  proficiency.  And  yet 
the  work  of  such  a  Hindu  weaver  is  very  com¬ 
plicated,  compared  with  that  of  a  manufactur¬ 
ing  labourer. 

An  artificer  who  performs  one  after  another 
the  various  fractional  operations  in  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  a  finished  article  must  at  one  time 
change  his  place,  at  another  his  tools.  The  tran¬ 
sition  from  one  operation  to  another  interrupts 
the  flow  of  his  labour  and  creates,  so  to  say,  gaps 
in  his  working  day.  These  gaps'close  up  so  soon 
as  he  is  tied  to  one  and  the  same  operation  all 
day  long;  they  vanish  in  proportion  as  the 
changes  in  his  work  diminish.  The  resulting  in- 

1  “The  arts  also  have  ...  in  Egypt  reached  the  requisite 
degree  of  perfection.  For  it  is  the  only  country  where  arti¬ 
ficers  may  not  in  any  way  meddle  with  the  affairs  of  an¬ 
other  class  of  citizens,  but  must  follow  that  calling  alone 
which  by  law  is  hereditary  in  their  clan. . . .  In  other  coun¬ 
tries  it  is  found  that  tradesmen  divide  their  attention  be¬ 
tween  too  many  objects.  At  one  time  they  try  agriculture, 
at  another  they  take  to  commprce,  at  another  they  busy 
themselves  with  two  or  three  occupations  at  once.  In  free 
countries,  they  mostly  frequent  the  assemblies  of  the  peo¬ 
ple..  .  .  In  Egypt,  on  the  contrary,  every  artificer  is  severely 
punished  if  he  meddles  with  affairs  of  State,  or  carries  on 
several  trades  at  once.  Thus  there  is  nothing  to  disturb 
their  application  to  their  calling. . . .  Moreover,  since  they 
inherit  from  their  forefathers  numerous  rules,  they  are  eager 
to  discover  fresh  advantages.”— Diodorus  Siculus,  Bibli¬ 
otheca  hi  st  or  tea  I,  p.  74. 

1  Historical  and  Descriptive  Account  of  British  India ,  etc., 
by  Hugh  Murray  and  James  Wilson,  etc.,  Edinburgh,  1832, 
vol.  II,  p.  449.  The  Indian  loom  is  upright,  i.e.,  the  warp  is 
stretched  vertically. 


creased  productive  power  is  owing  either  to  an 
increased  expenditure  of  labour  power  in  a 
given  time— i.e.,  to  increased  intensity  of  la¬ 
bour— or  to  a  decrease  in  the  amount  of  labour 
power  unproducti vely  consumed.  The  extra  ex¬ 
penditure  of  power,  demanded  by  every  transi¬ 
tion  from  rest  to  motion,  is  made  up  for  by  pro¬ 
longing  the  duration  of  the  normal  velocity 
when  once  acquired.  On  the  other  hand,  con¬ 
stant  labour  of  one  uniform  kind  disturbs  the 
intensity  and  flow  of  a  man's  animal  spirits, 
which  find  recreation  and  delight  in  mere 
change  of  activity. 

The  productiveness  of  labour  depends  not 
only  on  the  proficiency  of  the  workman,  but  on 
the  perfection  of  his  tools.  Tools  of  the  same 
kind,  such  as  knives,  drills,  gimlets,  hammers, 
etc.,  may  be  employed  in  different  processes; 
and  the  same  tool  may  serve  various  purposes 
in  a  single  process.  But  so  soon  as  the  different 
operations  of  a  labour  process  are  disconnected 
the  one  from  the  other,  and  each  fractional  op¬ 
eration  acquires  in  the  hands  of  the  detail  la¬ 
bourer  a  suitable  and  peculiar  form,  alterations 
become  necessary  in  the  implements  that  pre¬ 
viously  served  more  than  one  purpose.  The  di¬ 
rection  taken  by  this  change  is  determined  by 
the  difficulties  experienced  in  consequence  of 
the  unchanged  form  of  the  implement.  Manu¬ 
facture  is  characterized  by  the  differentiation 
of  the  instruments  of  labour— aUifferentiation 
whereby  implements  of  a  given  sort  acquire 
fixed  shapes,  adapted  to  each  particular  appli¬ 
cation,  and  by  the  specialization  of  those  instru¬ 
ments  giving  to  each  special  implement  its  full 
play  only  in  the  hands  of  a  specific  detail  la¬ 
bourer.  In  Birmingham  alone,  500  varieties  of 
hammers  are  produced,  and  not  only  is  each 
adapted  to  one  particular  process,  but  several 
varieties  often  serve  exclusively  for  the  differ¬ 
ent  operations  in  one  and  the  same  process.  The 
manufacturing  period  simplifies,  improves,  and 
multiplies  the  implements  of  labour,  by  adapt¬ 
ing  them  to  the  exclusively  special  functions  of 
each  detail  labourer.3  It  thus  creates  at  the 
same  time  one  of  the  material  conditions  for  the 

3  Darwin,  in  his  epoch-making  work  On  the  Origin  of  Spe¬ 
cies ,  ch.  5,  remarks,  with  reference  to  the  natural  organs  of 
plants  and  animals:  "So  long  as  one  and  the  same  organ 
has  different  kinds  of  work  to  perform,  a  ground  for  its 
changeability  may  possibly  be  found  in  this,  that  natural 
selection  preserves  or  suppresses  each  small  variation  of 
form  less  carefully  than  if  that  organ  were  destined  for  one 
special  purpose  alone.  Thus,  knives  that  are  adapted  to  cut 
all  sorts  of  things  may,  on  the  whole,  be  of  one  shape;  but 
an  implement  destined  to  be  used  exclusively  in  one  way 
must  have  a  different  shape  for  every  different  use.” 


DIVISION  OF  LABOUR  AND  MANUFACTURE 


existence  of  machinery,  which  consists  of  a 
combination  of  simple  instruments. 

The  detail  labourer  and  his  implements  are 
the  simplest  elements  of  manufacture.  Let  us 
now  turn  to  its  aspect  as  a  whole. 

3.  The  Two  Fundamental  Forms  of  Manufacture: 

Heterogeneous  Manufacture ,  Serial  Manufac¬ 
ture 

The  organization  of  manufacture  has  two 
fundamental  forms  which,  in  spite  of  occasional 
blending,  are  essentially  different  in  kind,  and, 
moreover,  play  very  distinct  parts  in  the  sub¬ 
sequent  transformation  of  manufacture  into 
modern  industry  carried  on  by  machinery.  This 
double  character  arises  from  the  nature  of  the 
article  produced.  This  article  either  results  from 
the  mere  mechanical  fitting  together  of  partial 
products  made  independently,  or  owes  its  com¬ 
pleted  shape  to  a  series  of  connected  processes 
and  manipulations. 

A  locomotive,  for  instance,  consists  of  more 
than  5000  independent  parts.  It  cannot,  how¬ 
ever,  serve  as  an  example  of  the  first  kind  of 
genuine  manufacture,  for  it  is  a  structure  pro¬ 
duced  by  modern  mechanical  industry.  But  a 
watch  can;  and  William  Petty  used  it  to  illus¬ 
trate  the  division  of  labour  in  manufacture. 
Formerly  the  individual  work  of  a  Nuremberg 
artificer,  the  watch  has  been  transformed  into 
the  social  product  of  an  immense  number  of  de¬ 
tail  labourers,  such  as  mainspring-makers,  dial- 
makers,  spi  ral- spring-makers,  j  ewelled-hole- 
makers,  ruby-lcver-makers,  hand-makers, 
case-makers,  screw-makers,  gilders,  with  nu¬ 
merous  sub-divisions,  such  as  wheel-makers 
(brass  and  steel  separate),  pin-makers,  move¬ 
ment-makers,  acheceurs  de  pignon  (those  who 
fix  the  wheels  on  the  axles,  polish  the  facets, 
etc.),  pivot-makers,  plantcurs  de finis  sage  (those 
who  put  the  wheels  and  springs  in  the  works), 
finisseurs  de  bardlet  (those  who  cut  teeth  in  the 
wheels,  make  the  holes  of  the  right  size,  etc.), 
escapement-makers,  cylinder-makers  for  cylin¬ 
der  escapements,  escapement-whecl-makers, 
balance-wheel-makcrs,  raquette- makers  (those 
who  make  apparatus  for  regulating  the  watch), 
the  planteurs  d'echappement  (escapement- 
makers  proper) ;  then  the  repasscurs  de  bardlet 
(those  who  finish  the  box  for  the  spring,  etc.), 
steel-polishers,  wheel-polishers,  screw-polishers, 
figure  painters,  dial  enamellers  (those  who  melt 
the  enamel  on  the  copper )ifabricants  de  pen¬ 
dants  (those  who  make  the  ring  by  which  the 
case  is  hung )y  finisseurs  de  charnibre  (those  who 


167 

put  the  brass  hinge  in  the  cover,  etc ,)>faiseurs 
de  secret  (those  who  put  in  the  springs  that  open 
thecase)  >graveurs,lciseleurs?polisseursdeboite* 
etc.,  etc.,  and  last  of  all  the  repasseur ,  the  man 
who  fits  together  the  whole  watch  and  hands  it 
over  in  a  going  state.  Only  a  few  parts  of  the 
watch  pass  through  several  hands;  and  all  these 
membra  disjecta 4  come  together  for  the  first  time 
in  the  hand  that  binds  them  into  one  mechani¬ 
cal  whole.  This  external  relation  between  the 
finished  product,  and  its  various  and  diverse 
elements  makes  it,  as  well  in  this  case  as  in  the 
case  of  all  similar  finished  articles,  a  matter  of 
chance  whether  the  detail  labourers  are  brought 
together  in  one  workshop  or  not.  The  detail 
operations  may  further  be  carried  on  like  so 
many  independent  handicrafts,  as  they  are  in 
the  cantons  of  Vaud  and  Neufchitel;  while  in 
Geneva  there  exist  large  watch  manufactories 
where  the  detail  labourers  directly  cooperate 
under  the  control  of  a  single  capitalist.  And 
even  in  the  latter  case,  the  dial,  the  springs,  and 
the  case,  are  seldom  made  in  the  factory  itself. 
To  carry  on  the  trade  as  a  manufacture,  with 
concentration  of  workmen,  is,  in  the  watch 
trade,  profitable  only  under  exceptional  condi¬ 
tions,  because  competition  is  greater  between 
the  labourers  who  desire  to  work  at  home,  and 
because  the  splitting  up  of  the  work  into  a  num¬ 
ber  of  heterogeneous  processes  permits  but  lit¬ 
tle  use  of  the  instruments  of  labour  in  common, 
and  the  capitalist,  by  scattering  the  work,  saves 
the  outlay  on  workshops,  etc.5  Nevertheless  the 
position  of  this  detail  labourer  who,  though  he 
works  at  home,  does  so  for  a  capitalist  (manu¬ 
facturer,  etablisseur ),  is  very  different  from  that 

1  Engravers.  2  Carvers.  8  Case-polishers. 

4  Disjected  members. 

5  In  the  year  18^4,  Geneva  produced  80,000  watches, 
which  is  not  one-fifth  of  the  production  in  the  canton  of 
NeufchAtel.  La  Chaux-de-Kond  alone,  which  we  may  look 
upon  as  a  huge  watch  manufactory,  produces  yearly  twice 
as  many  as  Geneva.  In  1850-61,  Geneva  produced  750,000 
watches.  See  Report  /torn  Geneva  on  the  Watch  Trade ;  Re¬ 
ports  by  ft.  M.'s  Secretaries  0]  Embassy  and  Legation  on  the 
Manufactures ,  Commerce ,  etc..  So.  6y  1863.  The  want  of 
connection  alone,  between  the  processes  into  which  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  articles  that  merely  consist  of  parts  fitted  to¬ 
gether  is  split  up,  makes  it  very  difficult  to  convert  such  a 
manufacture  into  a  branch  of  modern  industry  carried  on 
by  machinery;  but  in  the  case  of  a  watch  there  are  two 
other  impediments  in  addition,  the  minuteness  and  deli¬ 
cacy  of  its  parts,  and  its  character  as  an  article  of  luxury. 
Hence  their  variety,  which  is  such  that  in  the  best  London 
houses  scarcely  a  dozen  watches  are  made  alike  in  the  course 
of  a  year.  The  watch  manufactory  of  Messrs.  Vacheron  & 
Constantin,  in  which  machinery  has  been  employed  with 
success,  produces  at  the  most  three  or  four  different  vari¬ 
eties  of  size  and  form. 


168  CAPITAL 


of  the  independent  artificer  who  works  for  his 
own  customers.1 

The  second  kind  of  manufacture,  its  per¬ 
fected  form,  produces  articles  that  go  through 
connected  phases  of  development,  through  a 
series  of  processes  step  by  step,  like  the  wire  in 
the  manufacture  of  needles,  which  passes 
through  the  hands  of  72  and  sometimes  even  92 
different  detail  workmen. 

In  so  far  as  such  a  manufacture,  when  first 
started,  combines  scattered  handicrafts,  it  less¬ 
ens  the  space  by  which  the  various  phases  of 
production  are  separated  from  each  other.  The 
time  taken  in  passing  from  one  stage  to  another 
is  shortened;  so  is  the  labour  that  effectuates 
this  passage.1  In  comparison  with  a  handicraft, 
productive  power  is  gained,  and  this  gain  is  ow¬ 
ing  to  the  general  cooperative  character  of  man¬ 
ufacture.  On  the  other  hand,  division  of  labour, 
which  is  the  distinguishing  principle  of  manu¬ 
facture,  requires  the  isolation  of  the  various 
stages  of  production  and  their  independence  of 
each  other.  The  establishment  and  mainte¬ 
nance  of  a  connection  between  the  isolated  func¬ 
tions  necessitates  the  incessant  transport  of  the 
article  from  one  hand  to  another,  and  from  one 
process  to  another.  From  the  standpoint  of 
modern  mechanical  industry,  this  necessity 
stands  forth  as  a  characteristic  and  costly  dis¬ 
advantage,  and  one  that  is  immanent  in  the 
principle  of  manufacture.3 

If  we  confine  our  attention  to  some  particular 
lot  of  raw  materials,  of  rags,  for  instance,  in 
paper  manufacture,  Or  of  wire  in  needle  manu¬ 
facture,  we  perceive  that  it  passes  in  succession 
through  a  series  of  stages  in  the  hands  of  the 
various  detail  workmen  until  completion.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  we  look  at  the  workshop  as  a 
whole,  we  see  the  raw  material  in  all  the  stages 
of  its  production  at  the  same  time.  The  collec¬ 
tive  labourer,  with  one  set  of  his  many  hands 
armed  with  one  kind  of  tools,  draws  the  wire, 
with  another  set,  armed  with  different  tools,  he, 
at  the  same  time,  straightens  it,  with  another, 
he  cuts  it,  with  another,  points  it,  and  so  on. 

1  In  watchmaking,  that  classical  example  of  heterogene¬ 
ous  manufacture,  we  may  study  with  great  accuracy  the 
above  mentioned  differentiation  and  specialization  of  the 
instruments  of  labour  caused  by  the  sub-diviston  of  handi¬ 
crafts. 

*  “In  so  close  a  cohabitation  of  the  people,  the  carriage 
must  needs  be  less." — The  Advantages  0/  the  East  India 
Trade ,  p.  106. 

3  'The  isolation  of  the  different  stages  of  manufacture, 
consequent  upon  the  employment  of  manual  labour,  adds 
immensely  to  the  cost  of  production,  the  loss  mainly  aris¬ 
ing  from  the  mere  removals  from  one  process  to  another." 
—The  Industry  of  Nations ,  London,  1855,  Part  II,  p.  Ooo. 


The  different  detail  processes,  which  were  suc¬ 
cessive  in  time,  have  become  simultaneous,  go 
on  side  by  side  in  space.  Hence,  production  of 
a  greater  quantity  of  finished  commodities  in  a 
given  time.4  This  simultaneity,  it  is  true,  is  due 
to  the  general  cooperative  form  of  the  process 
as  a  whole;  but  manufacture  not  only  finds  the 
conditions  for  cooperation  ready  to  hand,  it  al¬ 
so,  to  some  extent,  creates  them  by  the  sub¬ 
division  of  handicraft  labour.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  accomplishes  this  social  organization 
of  the  labour  process  only  by  riveting  each  la¬ 
bourer  to  a  single  fractional  detail. 

Since  the  fractional  product  of  each  detail  la¬ 
bourer  is,  at  the  same  time,  only  a  particular 
stage  in  the  development  of  one  and  the  same 
finished  article,  each  labourer,  or  each  group  of 
labourers,  prepares  the  raw  material  for  anoth¬ 
er  labourer  or  group.  The  result  of  the  labour  of 
the  one  is  the  starting  point  for  the  labour  of  the 
other.  The  one  workman  therefore  gives  occu¬ 
pation  directly  to  the  other.  The  labour  time 
necessary  in  each  partial  process,  for  attaining 
the  desired  effect,  is  learned  by  experience;  and 
the  mechanism  of  manufacture  as  a  whole  is 
based  on  the  assumption  that  a  given  result  will 
be  obtained  in  a  given  time.  It  is  only  on  this 
assumption  that  the  various  supplementary  la¬ 
bour  processes  can  proceed  uninterruptedly,  si¬ 
multaneously,  and  side  by  side.  It  is  clear  that 
this  direct  dependence  of  the  operations  and, 
therefore,  of  the  labourers  on  each  other  com¬ 
pels  each  one  of  them  to  spend  on  his  work  no 
more  than  the  necessary  time,  and  thus  a  con¬ 
tinuity,  uniformity,  regularity,  order,6  and 
even  intensity  of  labour,*  of  quite  a  different 
kind,  is  begotten  than  is  to  be  found  in  an  inde¬ 
pendent  handicraft  or  even  in  simple  coopera¬ 
tion.  The  rule  that  the  labour  time  expended  on 
a  commodity  should  not  exceed  that  which  is 
socially  necessary  for  its  production  appears,  in 
the  production  of  commodities  generally,  to  be 
established  by  the  mere  effect  of  competition; 
since,  to  express  ourselves  superficially,  each 
single  producer  is  obliged  to  sell  his  commodity 

4  "It  (the  division  of  labour)  produces  also  an  economy 
of  time  by  separating  the  work  into  its  different  branches, 
all  of  which  may  be  carried  on  into  execution  at  the  same 
moment.  ...  By  carrying  on  all  the  differeht  processes  at 
once  which  an  individual  must  have  executed  separately, 
it  becomes  possible  to  produce  a  multitude  of  pins  com¬ 
pletely  finished  in  the  same  time  as  a  single  pin  might  have 
been  either  cut  or  pointed." — Dugald  Stewart,  op.  eit.,  p. 

"The  more  variety  of  artists  to  every  manufacture . . . 
the  greater  the  order  and  regularity  of  every  work,  the 
same  ft  ust  needs  be  done  in  less  time,  the  labour  must  be 
less.” — The  Advantages  of  the  East  Indian  Trade,  p  68. 


DIVISION  OF  LABOUR  AND  MANUFACTURE 


at  its  market  price.  In  manufacture,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  the  turning  out  of  a  given  quantity  of 
product  in  a  given  time  is  a  technical  law  of  the 
process  of  production  itself.1 

Different  operations  take,  however,  unequal 
periods  and  yield  therefore,  in  equal  times  un¬ 
equal  quantities  of  fractional  products.  If, 
therefore,  the  same  labourer  has,  day  after  day, 
to  perform  the  same  operation,  there  must  be  a 
different  number  of  labourers  for  each  opera¬ 
tion;  for  instance,  in  type  manufacture,  there 
are  four  founders  and  two  breakers  to  one  rub¬ 
ber:  the  founder  casts  2,000  type  an  hour,  the 
breaker  breaks  up  4,000  and  the  rubber  polishes 
8,000.  Here  we  have  again  the  principle  of  co¬ 
operation  in  its  simplest  form,  the  simultaneous 
employment  of  many  doing  the  same  thing; 
only  now  this  principle  is  the  expression  of  an 
organic  relation.  The  division  of  labour,  as  car¬ 
ried  out  in  manufacture,  not  only  simplifies  and 
multiplies  the  qualitatively  different  parts  of 
the  social  collective  labourer,  but  also  creates 
a  fixed  mathematic  1  relation  or  ratio  which 
regulates  the  quantitative  extent  of  those  parts 
— i.e.,  the  relative  number  of  labourers,  or  the 
relative  size  of  the  group  of  labourers,  for  each 
detail  operation.  It  develops,  along  with  the 
qualitative  sub-division  of  the  social  labour 
process,  a  quantitative  rule  and  proportionality 
for  that  process. 

When  once  the  most  fitting  proportion  has 
been  experimentally  established  for  the  num¬ 
bers  of  the  detail  labourers  in  the  various  groups 
when  producing  on  a  given  scale,  that  scale  can 
be  extended  only  by  employing  a  multiple  of 
each  particular  group.2  There  is  this  to  boot, 
that  the  same  individual  can  do  certain  kinds 
of  work  just  as  well  on  a  large  as  on  a  small  scale; 
for  instance,  the  labour  of  superintendence,  the 
carriage  of  the  fractional  product  from  one 
stage  to  the  next,  etc.  The  isolation  of  such 
functions,  their  allotment  to  a  particular  la¬ 
bourer,  does  not  become  advantageous  till  after 

1  Nevertheless,  the  manufacturing  system,  in  many 
branches  of  industry,  attains  this  result  but  very  imper¬ 
fectly,  because  it  knows  not  how  to  control  with  certainty 
the  general  chemical  and  physical  conditions  of  the  process 
of  production. 

2  "When  (from  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  produce  of 
each  manufactory)  the  number  of  processes  into  which  it 
is  most  advantageous  to  divide  it  is  ascertained,  as  well  as 
the  number  of  individuals  to  be  employed,  then  all  other 
manufactories  which  do  not  employ  a  direct  multiple  of 
this  number  will  produce  the  article  at  a  greater  cost. . . . 
Hence  arises  one  of  the  causes  of  the  great  size  of  manu¬ 
facturing  establishments."— C.  Babbage,  On  the  Economy 
of  Machinery ,  first  edition,  London,  1832,  ch.  XXI,  pp. 

I72-I73- 


169 

an  increase  in  the  number  of  labourers  em¬ 
ployed;  but  this  increase  must  affect  every 
group  proportionally. 

The  isolated  group  of  labourers  to  whom  any 
particular  detail  function  is  assigned  is  made  up 
of  homogeneous  elements  and  is  one  of  the  con¬ 
stituent  parts  of  the  total  mechanism.  In  many 
manufactures,  however,  the  group  itself  is  an 
organized  body  of  labour,  the  total  mechanism 
being  a  repetition  or  multiplication  of  these  ele¬ 
mentary  organisms.  Take,  for  instance,  the 
manufacture  of  glass  bottles.  It  may  be  resolved 
into  three  essentially  different  stages.  First,  the 
preliminary  stage,  consisting  of  the  prepara¬ 
tion  of  the  components  of  the  glass,  mixing  the 
sand  and  lime,  etc.,  and  melting  them  into  a 
fluid  mass  of  glass.3  Various  detail  labourers  are 
employed  in  this  first  stage,  as  also  in  the  final 
one  of  removing  the  bottles  from  the  drying 
furnace,  sorting^and  packing  them,  etc.  In  the 
middle,  between  these  two  stages,  comes  the 
glass-melting  proper,  the  manipulation  of  the 
fluid  mass.  At  each  mouth  of  the  furnace,  there 
works  a  group,  called  “the  hole,*’  consisting  of 
one  bottlemaker  or  finisher,  one  blower,  one 
gatherer,  one  putter-up  or  whetter-off,  and  one 
taker-in.  These  five  detail  workers  are  so  many 
special  organs  of  a  single  working  organism  that 
acts  only  as  a  whole,  and  therefore  can  operate 
only  by  the  direct  cooperation  of  the  whole  five. 
The  whole  body  is  paralysed  if  but  one  of  its 
members  be  wanting.  But  a  glass  furnace  has 
several  openings  (in  England  from  4  to  6),  each 
of  which  contains  an  earthenware  melting-pot 
full  of  molten  glass,  and  employs  a  similar  five- 
membered  group  of  workers.  The  organization 
of  each  group  is  based  on  division  of  labour,  but 
the  bond  between  the  different  groups  is  simple 
cooperation,  which,  by  using  in  common  one  of 
the  means  of  production,  the  furnace,  causes  it 
to  be  more  economically  consumed.  Such  a  fur¬ 
nace,  with  its  4-6  groups,  constitutes  a  glass¬ 
house;  and  a  glass-manufactory  comprises  a 
number  of  such  glass-houses,  together  with  the 
apparatus  and  workmen  requisite  for  the  pre¬ 
paratory  and  final  stages. 

Finally,  just  as  manufacture  arises  in  part 
from  the  combination  of  various  handicrafts, 
so,  too,  it  develops  into  a  combination  of  vari¬ 
ous  manufactures.  The  larger  English  glass 
manufacturers,  for  instance,  make  their  own 
earthenware  melting-pots,  because,  on  the  qual¬ 
ity  of  these  depends,  to  a  great  extent,  the  suc- 

3  In  England,  the  melting  furnace  is  distinct  from  the 
glass  furnace  in  which  the  glass  is  manipulated.  In  Bel¬ 
gium,  one  and  the  same  furnace  serves  for  both  processes. 


CAPITAL 


170 

cess  or  failure  of  the  process.  The  manufacture 
of  one  of  the  means  of  production  is  here  united 
with  that  of  the  product.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  manufacture  of  the  product  may  be  united 
with  other  manufactures,  of  which  that  prod¬ 
uct  is  the  raw  material,  or  with  the  products  of 
which  it  is  itself  subsequently  mixed.  Thus,  we 
find  the  manufacture  of  flint  glass  combined 
with  that  of  glass  cutting  and  brass  founding; 
the  latter  for  the  metal  settings  of  various  ar¬ 
ticles  of  glass.  The  various  manufactures  so 
combined  form  more  or  less  separate  depart¬ 
ments  of  a  larger  manufacture,  but  are  at  the 
same  time  independent  processes,  each  with  its 
own  division  of  labour.  In  spite  of  ( he  many  ad¬ 
vantages  offered  by  this  combination  of  manu¬ 
factures,  it  never  grows  into  a  complete  tech¬ 
nical  system  on  its  own  foundation.  That  hap¬ 
pens  only  on  its  transformation  into  an  indus¬ 
try  carried  on  by  machinery. 

Early  in  the  manufacturing  period,  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  lessening  the  necessary  labour  time  in 
the  production  of  commodities1  was  accepted 
and  formulated:  and  the  use  of  machines,  es¬ 
pecially  for  certain  simple  first  processes  that 
have  to  be  conducted  on  a  very  large  scale,  and 
with  the  application  of  great  force,  sprang  up 
here  and  there.  Thus,  at  an  early  period  in  paper 
manufacture,  the  tearing  up  of  the  rags  was 
done  by  paper-mills;  and  in  metal- works,  the 
pounding  of  the  ores  was  effected  by  stamping- 
mills.2  The  Roman  Empire  had  handed  down 
the  elementary  form  of  all  machinery  in  the 
waterwheel.3 

The  handicraft  period  bequeathed  to  us  the 
great  inventions  of  the  compass,  of  gunpowder, 
of  type  printing,  and  of  the  automatic  clock. 
But,  on  the  whole,  machinery  played  that  sub¬ 
ordinate  part  which  Adam  Smith  assigns  to  it 
in  comparison  with  division  of  labour.4  The  spo¬ 

1  This  can  be  seen  from  W.  Petty,  John  Belters,  Andrew 
Yarranton,  The  Advantages  of  the  East  India  Trade ,  and  J. 
Vanderlint,  not  to  mention  others. 

2  Towards  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  mortars  and 
sieves  were  still  used  in  France  for  pounding  and  washing 
ores. 

*  The  whole  history  of  the  development  of  machinery 
can  be  traced  in  the  history  of  the  corn  mill.  The  factory 
in  England  is  still  a  mill.  In  German  technological  works 
of  the  first  decade  of  this  century,  the  term  muhle  is  still 
found  in  use,  not  only  for  all  machinery  driven  by  the  forces 
of  Nature,  but  also  for  all  manufactures  where  apparatus 
in  the  nature  of  machinery  is  applied. 

4  As  will  be  seen  more  in  detail  in  the  Fourth  Book  of 

this  work,  Adam  Smith  has  not  established  a  single  new 
proposition  relating  to  division  of  labour.  What,  however, 
characterizes  him  as  the  political  economist  par  excellence 

of  the  period  of  manufacture  is  the  stress  he  lays  on  divi- 


radic  use  of  machinery  in  the  seventeenth  cen¬ 
tury  was  of  the  greatest  importance,  because  it 
supplied  the  great  mathematicians  of  that  time 
with  a  practical  basis  and  stimulant  to  the  crea¬ 
tion  of  the  science  of  mechanics. 

The  collective  labourer,  formed  by  the  com¬ 
bination  of  a  number  of  detail  labourers,  is  the 
machinery  specially  characteristic  of  the  manu¬ 
facturing  period.  The  various  operations  that 
are  performed  in  turns  by  the  producer  of  a 
commodity,  and  coalesce  one  with  another  dur¬ 
ing  the  progress  of  production,  lay  claim  to  him 
in  various  ways.  In  one  operation  he  must  exert 
more  strength,  in  another  more  skill,  in  another 
more  attention;  and  the  same  individual  does 
not  possess  all  these  qualities  in  an  equal  de¬ 
gree.  After  manufacture  has  once  separated, 
made  independent,  and  isolated  the  various  op¬ 
erations,  the  labourers  are  divided,  classified, 
and  grouped  according  to  their  predominating 
qualities.  If  their  natural  endowments  are,  on 
the  one  hand,  the  foundation  on  which  the  di¬ 
vision  of  labour  is  built  up,  on  the  other  hand, 
manufacture,  once  introduced,  develops  in 
them  new  powers  that  arc  by  nature  fitted  only 
for  limited  and  special  functions.  The  collective 
labourer  now  possesses,  in  an  equal  degree  of 
excellence,  all  the  qualities  requisite  for  produc¬ 
tion,  and  expends  them  in  the  most  economical 
manner,  by  exclusively  employing  all  his  or¬ 
gans,  consisting  of  particular  labourers,  or 
groups  of  labourers,  in  performing  their  special 
functions.5  The  one-sidedness  and  the  deficien¬ 
cies  of  the  detail  labourer  become  perfections 
when  he  is  a  part  of  the  collective  labourer.6  The 
habit  of  doing  only  one  thing  converts  him  into 
a  never  failing  instrument,  while  his  connection 
with  the  whole  mechanism  compels  him  to  work 

sionof  labour.  The  subordinate  part  which  he  assigns  to 
machinery  gave  occasion,  in  the  early  days  of  modern 
mechanical  industry,  to  the  polemic  of  Lauderdale,  and, 
at  a  later  period,  to  that  of  Ure.  A.  Smith  also  confounds 
differentiation  of  the  instruments  of  labour,  in  which  the 
detail  labourers  themselves  took  an  active  part,  with  the 
invention  of  machinery;  in  this  latter,  it  is  not  the  work¬ 
men  in  manufactories,  but  learned  men,  handicraftsmen, 
and  even  peasants  (Brindley),  who  play  a  part. 

6  “The  master  manufacturer,  by  dividing  the  work  to  be 
executed  into  different  processes,  each  requiring  different 
degrees  of  skill  or  of  force,  can  purchase  exactly  that  pre¬ 
cise  quantity  of  both  which  is  necessary  for  each  process; 
whereas,  if  the  whole  work  were  executed  by  one  workman, 
that  person  must  possess  sufficient  skill  to  perform  the 
most  difficult,  and  sufficient  strength  to  execute  the  most 
laborious,  of  the  operations  into  which  the  article  is  divid¬ 
ed/’-  Ch.  Babbage,  op,  cit .,  ch.  xviii. 

6  For  instance,  abnormal  development  of  some  muscles, 
curvatvre  of  bones,  etc. 


DIVISION  OF  LABOUR  AND  MANUFACTURE 


with  the  regularity  of  the  parts  of  a  machine.1 

Since  the  collective  labourer  has  functions, 
both  simple  and  complex,  both  high  and  low, 
his  members,  the  individual  labour  powers,  re¬ 
quire  different  degrees  of  training,  and  must 
therefore  have  different  values.  Manufacture, 
therefore,  develops  a  hierarchy  of  labour  pow¬ 
ers,  to  which  there  corresponds  a  scale  of  wages. 
If,  on  the  one  hand,  the  individual  labourers  are 
appropriated  and  annexed  for  life  by  a  limited 
function,  on  the  other  hand,  the  various  opera¬ 
tions  of  the  hierarchy  are  parcelled  out  among 
the  labourers  according  to  both  their  natural 
and  their  acquired  capabilities.2  Every  process 
of  production,  however,  requires  certain  simple 
manipulations,  which  every  man  is  capable  of 
doing.  They,  too,  arc  now  severed  from  their 
connection  with  the  more  pregnant  moments  of 
activity,  and  ossified  into  exclusive  functions  of 
specially  appointed  labourers.  Hence,  manufac¬ 
ture  begets,  in  every  handicraft  that  it  seizes 
upon,  a  class  of  so-called  unskilled  labourers,  a 
class  which  handicraft  industry  strictly  ex¬ 
cluded.  If  it  develops  a  one-sided  speciality  into 
a  perfection  at  the  expense  of  the  whole  of  a 
man’s  working  capacity,  it  also  begins  to  make 
a  speciality  of  the  absence  of  all  development. 
Alongside  of  the  hierarchic  gradation  there 
steps  the  simple  separation  of  the  labourers  into 
skilled  and  unskilled.  For  the  latter,  the  cost  of 
apprenticeship  vanishes;  for  the  former,  it  di¬ 
minishes,  compared  with  that  of  artificers,  in 
consequence  of  the  functions  being  simplified. 
In  both  cases  the  value  of  labour  power  falls.3  An 

1  The  question  put  by  one  of  the  Inquiry  Commission¬ 
ers,  “How  the  young  persons  arc  kept  steadily  to  their 
work,"  is  very  correctly  answered  by  Mr.  William  Mar¬ 
shall,  the  general  manager  of  a  glass-manufactory:  “They 
cannot  well  neglect  their  work;  when  they  once  begin,  they 
must  go  on;  they  are  just  the  9amc  as  parts  of  a  machine." 
— Children  s  Employment  Commission ,  Fourth  Report ,  1 865, 

P- 147- 

sDr.  lire,  in  his  apotheosis  of  modern  mechanical  in¬ 
dustry,  brings  out  the  peculiar  character  of  manufacture 
more  sharply  than  previous  economists,  who  had  not  his 
polemical  interest  in  the  matter,  and  more  sharply  even 
than  his  contemporaries  -  Kabbage,  e.g. ,  who,  though  much 
his  superior  as  a  mathematician  and  mechanician,  treated 
mechanical  industry  from  the  standpoint  of  manufacture 
alone,  lire  says,  “This  appropriation  ...  to  each,  a  work¬ 
man  of  appropriate  value  and  cost  was  naturally  assigned, 
forms  the  very  essence  of  division  of  labour."  On  the  other 
hand,  he  describes  this  division  as  “adaptation  of  labour 
to  the  different  talents  of  men,”  and  lastly,  characterizes 
the  whole  manufacturing  system  as  “  a  system  for  the  di¬ 
vision  or  gradation  of  labour,”  as  “the  division  of  labour 
into  degrees  of  skill,”  etc. — Ure,  op,  cit ,,  pp.  19-23,  passim. 

•“Each  handicraftsman  being  ...  enabled  to  perfect 
himself  by  practice  in  one  point,  became  ...  a  cheaper 
workman."— lire,  op,  cit,,  p.  19. 


171 

exception  to  this  law  holds  good  whenever  the 
decomposition  of  the  labour  process  begets  new 
and  comprehensive  functions  that  either  had  no 
place  at  all,  or  only  a  very  modest  one,  in  handi¬ 
crafts.  The  fall  in  the  value  of  labour  power, 
caused  by  the  disappearance  or  diminution  of 
the  expenses  of  apprenticeship,  implies  a  direct 
increaseof  surplus  value  for  the  benefitof capital; 
for  everything  that  shortens  the  necessary  la¬ 
bour  time  required  for  the  reproduction  of  labour 
power,  extends  the  domain  of  surplus  labour. 

4.  Division  of  Labour  in  Manufacture ,  and  Divi¬ 
sion  of  Labour  in  Society 

We  first  considered  the  origin  of  manufac¬ 
ture,  then  its  simple  elements,  then  the  detail 
labourer  and  his  implements,  and,  finally,  the 
totality  of  the  mechanism.  We  shall  now  lightly 
touch  upon  the  relation  between  the  division  of 
labour  in  manufacture  and  the  social  division 
of  labour  which  forms  the  foundation  of  all  pro¬ 
duction  of  commodities. 

If  we  keep  labour  alone  in  view,  we  may  des¬ 
ignate  the  separation  of  social  production  into 
its  main  divisions  or  genera—  viz.,  agriculture, 
industries,  etc.,  as  division  of  labour  in  general, 
and  the  splitting  up  of  these  families  into  spe¬ 
cies  and  sub-species,  as  division  of  labour  in  par¬ 
ticular,  and  the  division  of  labour  within  the 
workshop  as  division  of  labour  in  singular  or  in 
detail.4 

Division  of  labour  in  a  society,  and  the  cor¬ 
responding  tying  down  of  individuals  to  a  par¬ 
ticular  calling,  develops  itself,  just  as  does  the 
division  of  labour  in  manufacture,  from  oppo¬ 
site  starting  points.  Within  a  family,5  and  after 

4  “Division  of  labour  proceeds  from  the  separation  of 
professions  the  most  widely  different  to  that  division  where 
several  labourers  divide  between  them  the  preparation  of 
one  and  the  same  product,  as  in  manufacture.”  (Storch, 
cours  d*  economic  politique ,  Paris  edition,  Vol.  I,  p.  173.) 
“We  find  among  the  peoples  who  have  arrived  at  a  certain 
degree  of  civilization,  three  species  of  division  of  labour. 
The  first,  which  we  shall  call  th e  general,  governs  the  divi¬ 
sion  of  producers  into  agricultural,  manufacturing,  and 
commercial,  and  is  related  to  the  three  principal  branches 
of  national  industry.  The  second,  which  one  could  call  the 
special ,  is  the  division  of  each  branch  of  industry  into  spe¬ 
cies.  Finally,  the  third  division  of  industry,  which  may  be 
characterized  as  the  division  of  the  function  or  the  division 
of  labour  proper,  is  that  which  is  established  in  the  sepa¬ 
rate  arts  and  trades  . . .  and  is  utilized  in  most  manufac¬ 
tures  and  workshops.”  (Skarbek,  op.  cit.,  pp.  84-85.) 

6 Note  to  the  third  edition:  Subsequent  very  searching 
study  of  the  primitive  condition  of  man,  led  the  author  to 
the  conclusion,  that  it  was  not  the  family  that  originally 
developed  into  the  tribe,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  the 
tribe  was  the  primitive  and  spontaneously  developed  form 
of  human  association,  on  the  basis  of  blood  relationships 


CAPITAL 


172 

further  development  within  a  tribe,  there 
springs  up  naturally  a  division  of  labour,  caused 
by  differences  of  sex  and  age,  a  division  that  is 
consequently  based  on  a  purely  physiological 
foundation,  which  division  enlarges  its  materi¬ 
als  by  the  expansion  of  the  community,  by  the 
increase  of  population,  and  more  especially  by 
the  conflicts  between  different  tribes,  and  the 
subjugation  of  one  tribe  by  another.  On  the  oth¬ 
er  hand,  as  1  have  before  remarked,  the  ex¬ 
change  of  products  springs  up  at  the  points 
where  different  families,  tribes,  communities, 
come  in  contact;  for,  in  the  beginning  of  civili¬ 
zation,  it  is  not  private  individuals  but  families, 
tribes,  etc.,  that  meet  on  an  independent  foot¬ 
ing.  Different  communities  And  different  means 
of  production  and  different  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence  in  their  natural  environment.  Hence,  their 
modes  of  production,  and  of  living,  and  their 
products  are  different.  It  is  this  spontaneously 
developed  difference  which,  when  different 
communities  come  in  contact,  calls  forth  the 
mutual  exchange  of  products,  and  the  conse¬ 
quent  gradual  conversion  of  those  products  into 
commodities.  Exchange  does  not  create  the  dif¬ 
ferences  between  the  spheres  of  production,  but 
brings  what  are  already  different  into  relation, 
and  thus  converts  them  into  more  or  less  inter¬ 
dependent  branches  of  the  collective  produc¬ 
tion  of  an  enlarged  society.  In  the  latter  case, 
the  social  division  of  labour  arises  from  the  ex¬ 
change  between  spheres  of  production,  that  are 
originally  distinct  and  independent  of  one  an¬ 
other.  In  the  former,  where  the  physiological 
division  of  labour  is  the  starting  point,  the  par¬ 
ticular  organs  of  a  compact  whole  grow  loose, 
and  break  off,  principally  owing  to  the  exchange 
of  commodities  with  foreign  communities,  and 
then  isolate  themselves  so  far  that  the  sole  bond 
still  connecting  the  various  kinds  of  work  is  the 
exchange  of  the  products  as  commodities.  In 
the  one  case,  it  is  the  making  dependent  what 
was  before  independent;  in  the  other  case,  the 
making  independent  what  was  before  depend¬ 
ent. 

The  foundation  of  every  division  of  labour 
that  is  well  developed  and  brought  abouj;  by  the 
exchange  of  commodities  is  the  separation  be¬ 
tween  town  and  country.1  It  may  be  said,  that 

and  that  out  of  the  first  incipient  loosening  of  the  tribal 
bonds,  the  many  and  various  forms  of  the  family  were 
afterwards  developed.  F.E. 

1  Sir  James  Steuart  is  the  economist  who  has  handled 
this  subject  best.  How  little  his  book,  which  appeared  ten 
years  before  the  Wealth  of  Nations ,  is  known,  even  at  the 
present  time,  may  be  judged  from  the  fact  that  the  ad¬ 
mirers  of  Maithus  do  not  even  know  that  the  first  edition 


the  whole  economical  history  of  society  is 
summed  up  in  the  movement  of  this  antithesis. 
We  pass  it  over,  however,  for  the  present. 

Just  as  a  certain  number  of  simultaneously 
employed  labourers  are  the  material  prerequi¬ 
sites  for  division  of  labour  in  manufacture,  so 
are  the  number  and  density  of  the  population, 
which  here  correspond  to  the  agglomeration  in 
one  workshop,  a  necessary  condition  for  the  di¬ 
vision  of  labour  in  society.2  Nevertheless,  this 
density  is  more  or  less  relative.  A  relatively 
thinly  populated  country,  with  well  developed 
means  of  communication,  has  a  denser  popula¬ 
tion  than  a  more  numerously  populated  coun¬ 
try,  with  badly-developed  means  of  communi¬ 
cation;  and  in  this  sense  the  northern  states  of 
the  American  Union,  for  instance,  are  more 
thickly  populated  than  India.3 

Since  the  production  and  the  circulation  of 
commodities  are  the  general  prerequisites  of  the 
capitalist  mode  ofproduction,  division  of  labour 
in  manufacture  demands  that  division  of  labour 
in  society  at  large  should  previously  have  at¬ 
tained  a  certain  degree  of  development.  In¬ 
versely,  the  former  division  reacts  upon  and  de¬ 
velops  and  multiplies  the  latter.  Simultaneous¬ 
ly  with  the  differentiation  of  the  instruments  of 
labour,  the  industries  that  produce  these  in¬ 
struments  become  more  and  more  differenti¬ 
ated.4  If  the  manufacturing  system  seize  upon 
an  industry  which  previously  carried  on  in 
connection  with  others,  either  as  a  chief  or  as  a 
subordinate  industry,  and  by  one  producer, 
these  industries  immediately  separate  their 
connection,  and  become  independent.  If  it  su/c 
upon  a  particular  stage  jn  the  production  of  a 
commodity,  the  other  stages  of  its  production 
become  converted  into  so  many  independent 

of  the  latter's  work  on  population  contains,  except  in  the 
purely  declamatory  part,  very  little  but  extracts  fi  om  Steu¬ 
art  and,  in  a  less  degree,  from  Wallace  and  Townsend. 

2  "There  is  a  certain  density  of  population  which  is  con¬ 
venient,  both  for  social  intercourse  and  for  that  combina¬ 
tion  of  powers  by  which  the  produce  of  labour  is  increased." 
(James  Mill,  op.  cit .,  p.  50.)  "As  the  number  of  labourers 
increases,  the  productive  power  of  society  augments  in  the 
compound  ratio  of  that  increase,  multiplied  by  the  effects 
of  the  division  of  labour."  (Thomas  Hodgskin,  op.  at.,  pp. 
I2C,  126.) 

3  In  consequence  of  the  great  demand  for  cotton  after 
1861,  the  production  of  cotton,  in  some  thickly  populated 
districts  of  India,  was  extended  at  the  expense  of  lice  cul¬ 
tivation.  In  consequence  there  arose  local  famines,  the  de¬ 
fective  means  of  communication  not  permitting  the  failure 
of  rice  in  one  district  to  be  compensated  by  importation 
from  another. 

4  Thus  the  fabrication  of  shuttles  formed,  as  early  as  the 
seventeenth  century,  a  special  branch  of  industry  in  Hol¬ 
land. 


DIVISION  OF  LABOUR  AND  MANUFACTURE 


industries.  It  has  already  been  stated,  that 
where  the  finished  article  consists  merely  of  a 
number  of  parts  fitted  together,  the  detail  op¬ 
erations  may  re-establish  themselves  as  genu¬ 
ine  and  separate  handicrafts.  In  order  to  carry 
out  more  perfectly  the  division  of  labour  in 
manufacture,  a  single  branch  of  production  is, 
according  to  the  varieties  of  its  raw  material  or 
the  various  forms  that  one  and  the  same  raw 
material  may  assume,  split  up  into  numerous 
and,  to  some  extent,  entirely  new  manufac¬ 
tures.  Accordingly,  in  France  alone,  in  the  first 
half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  over  one  hun¬ 
dred  different  kinds  of  silk  stuffs  were  woven, 
and  in  Avignon  it  was  law  that  “every  appren¬ 
tice  should  devote  himself  to  only  one  sort  of 
fabrication,  and  should  not  learn  the  prepara¬ 
tion  of  several  kinds  of  stuff  at  once.”  The  terri¬ 
torial  division  of  labour  which  confines  special 
branches  of  production  to  special  districts  of  a 
country  acquires  fresh  stimulus  from  the  manu¬ 
facturing  system  which  exploits  every  special 
advantage.1  The  Colonial  system  and  the  open¬ 
ing  out  of  the  markets  of  the  world,  both  of 
which  are  included  in  the  general  conditions  of 
existence  of  the  manufacturing  period,  furnish 
rich  material  for  developing  the  division  of  la¬ 
bour  in  society.  It  is  not  the  place,  here,  to  go 
on  to  show  how  division  of  labour  seizes  upon, 
not  only  the  economic  but  every  other  sphere 
of  society,  and  everywhere  lays  the  foundation 
of  that  all  engrossing  system  of  specializing  and 
sorting  men,  that  development  in  a  man  of  one 
single  faculty  at  the  expense  of  all  other  facul¬ 
ties,  which  caused  A.  Ferguson,  the  master  of 
Adam  Smith,  to  exclaim:  “We  make  a  nation 
of  Helots,  and  have  no  free  citizens.”2 

But,  in  spite  of  the  numerous  analogies  and 
links  connecting  them,  division  of  labour  in  the 
interior  of  a  society  and  that  in  the  interior  of 
a  workshop  differ  not  only  in  degree,  but  also  in 
kind.  The  analogy  appears  most  indisputable 
where  there  is  an  invisible  bond  uniting  the  var¬ 
ious  branches  of  trade.  For  instance,  the  cattle 
breeder  produces  hides,  the  tanner  makes  the 
hides  into  leather,  and  the  shoemaker,  the 
leather  into  boots.  Here  the  thing  produced  by 
each  of  them  is  but  a  step  towards  the  final 

1  “Whether  the  woollen  manufacture  of  England  is  not 
divided  into  several  parts  or  branches  appropriated  to  par¬ 
ticular  places,  where  they  are  only  or  principally  manufac¬ 
tured;  fine  cloths  in  Somersetshire,  coarse  in  Yorkshire, 
long  ells  at  Exeter,  silks  at  Sudbury,  crapes  at  Norwich, 
linseys  at  Kendal,  blankets  at  Whitney,  and  so  forth."— 
Berkeley,  The  Querist,  1750,  p.  520. 

2  A.  Ferguson,  History  of  Civil  Society,  Edinburgh,  1767; 

Part  IV,  sect,  ii,  p.  285. 


173 

form,  which  is  the  product  of  all  their  labours 
combined.  There  are,  besides,  all  the  various 
industries  that  supply  the  cattle  breeder,  the 
tanner,  and  the  shoemaker  with  the  means  of 
production.  Now  it  is  quite  possible  to  imagine, 
with  Adam  Smith,  that  the  difference  between 
the  above  social  division  of  labour  and  the  divi¬ 
sion  in  manufacture  is  merely  subjective,  exists 
merely  for  the  observer,  who,  in  a  manufacture, 
can  see  with  one  glance,  all  the  numerous  opera¬ 
tions  being  performed  on  one  spot,  while,  in  the 
instance  given  above,  the  spreading  out  of  the 
work  over  great  areas,  and  the  great  number  of 
people  employed  in  each  branch  of  labour,  ob¬ 
scure  the  connection.3  But  what  is  it  that  forms 
the  bond  between  the  independent  labours  of 
the  cattle  breeder,  the  tanner,  and  the  shoe¬ 
maker?  It  is  the  fact  that  their  respective  prod¬ 
ucts  are  commodities.  What,  on  the  other  hand, 
characterizes  division  of  labour  in  manufac¬ 
tures?  The  fact  that  the  detail  labourer  pro¬ 
duces  no  commodities.4  It  is  only  the  common 
product  of  all  the  detail  labourers  that  becomes 
a  commodity.5  Division  of  labour  in  a  society  is 

3  In  manufacture  proper,  he  says,  the  division  of  labour 
appears  to  be  greater,  because  “those  employed  in  every 
different  branch  of  the  work  can  often  be  collected  into  the 
same  workhouse  and  placed  at  once  under  the  view  of  the 
spectator.  In  those  great  manufactures  (!),on  the  contrary, 
which  are  destined  to  supply  the  great  wants  of  the  great 
body  of  the  people,  every  different  branch  of  the  work  em¬ 
ploys  so  great  a  number  of  workmen  that  it  is  impossible 
to  collect  them  all  into  the  same  workhouse  . . .  the  divi¬ 
sion  is  not  near  so  obvious."  (A.  Smith,  Wealth  of  Nations 
Book  I,  ch.  i.)  The  celebrated  passage  in  the  same  chapter 
that  begins  with  the  words,  “Observe  the  accommodation 
of  the  most  common  artificer  or  day  labourer  in  a  civilized 
and  thriving  country,"  etc.,  and  then  proceeds  to  depict 
what  an  enormous  number  and  variety  of  industries  con¬ 
tribute  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  wants  of  an  ordinary  la¬ 
bourer,  is  copied  almost  word  for  word  from  B.  de  Mande- 
ville’s  Remarks  to  his  Fable  of  the  Bees,  or  Private  Frees, 
Publick  Benefits.  (First  edition,  without  the  Remarks ,  1706; 
with  the  Remarks ,  1714.) 

4  “There  is  no  longer  anything  which  we  can  call  the 
natural  reward  of  individual  labour.  Each  labourer  pro¬ 
duces  only  some  part  of  a  whole,  and  each  part,  having 
no  value  or  utility  in  itself,  there  is  nothing  on  which  the 
labourer  can  seize,  and  say:  'It  is  my  product,  this  I  will 
keep  to  myself.’  ”  ( labour  Defended  against  the  Claims  of 
Capital ,  London,  1825,  p.  25.)  The  author  of  this  admirable 
work  is  the  Thomas  Hodgskin  I  have  already  cited. 

•  This  distinction  between  division  of  labour  in  society 
and  in  manufacture  was  practically  illustrated  to  the  Yan¬ 
kees.  One  of  the  new  taxes  devised  at  Washington  during 
the  Civil  War  was  the  duty  of  6%  “on  all  industrial  prod¬ 
ucts."  Question:  W’hat  is  an  industrial  product?  Answer  of 
the  legislature:  A  thing  is  produced  “when  it  is  made," 
and  it  is  made  when  it  is  ready  for  sale.  Now,  for  one  ex¬ 
ample  out  of  many.  The  New  York  and  Philadelphia  man¬ 
ufacturers  had  previously  been  in  the  habit  of  “making" 
umbrellas,  with  all  their  belongings.  But  since  an  umbrella 
is  a  mixtum  compositum  [mixed  composite]  of  very  hetero- 


CAPITAL 


174 

brought  about  by  the  purchase  and  sale  of  the 
products  of  different  branches  of  industry, 
while  the  connection  between  the  detail  opera¬ 
tions  in  a  workshop,  is  due  to  the  sale  of  the  la¬ 
bour  power  of  several  workmen  to  one  capital¬ 
ist,  who  applies  it  as  combined  labour  power. 
The  division  of  labour  in  the  workshop  implies 
concentration  of  the  means  of  production  in  the 
hands  of  one  capitalist;  the  division  of  labour 
in  society  implies  their  dispersion  among  many 
independent  producers  of  commodities.  While 
within  the  workshop  the  iron  law  of  proportion¬ 
ality  subjects  definite  numbers  of  workmen  to 
definite  functions,  in  the  society  outside  the 
workshop  chance  and  caprice  have  full  play  in 
distributing  the  producers  and  their  means  of 
production  among  the  various  branches  of  in¬ 
dustry.  The  different  spheres  of  production,  it 
is  true,  constantly  tend  to  an  equilibrium:  for, 
on  the  one  hand,  while  each  producer  of  a  com¬ 
modity  is  bound  to  produce  a  use- value,  to  sat¬ 
isfy  a  particular  social  want,  and  while  the  ex¬ 
tent  of  these  wants  differs  quantitatively,  still 
there  exists  an  inner  relation  which  settles  their 
proportions  into  a  regular  system,  and  that  sys¬ 
tem  one  of  spontaneous  growth;  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  law  of  the  value  of  commodities 
ultimately  determines  how  much  of  its  dispos¬ 
able  working  time  society  can  expend  on  each 
particular  class  of  commodities.  But  this  con¬ 
stant  tendency  to  equilibrium,  of  the  various 
spheres  of  production,  is  exercised,  only  in  the 
shape  of  a  reaction  against  the  constant  upset¬ 
ting  of  this  equilibrium.  The  a  priori  system  on 
which  the  division  of  labour  within  the  work¬ 
shop  is  regularly  carried  out  becomes  in  the  di¬ 
vision  of  labour  within  the  society  an  a  posteri¬ 
ori  y  nature- imposed  necessity,  controlling  the 
lawless  caprice  of  the  producers,  and  percept¬ 
ible  in  the  barometrical  fluctuations  of  the  mar¬ 
ket  prices.  Division  of  labour  within  the  work¬ 
shop  implies  the  undisputed  authority  of  the 
capitalist  over  men  who  arc  but  parts  of  a  mech¬ 
anism  that  belongs  to  him.  The  division  of  la¬ 
bour  within  the  society  brings  into  contact  in¬ 
dependent  commodity  producers,  who  ac¬ 
knowledge  no  other  .authority  but  that  of  com¬ 
petition,  of  the  coercion  exerted  by  the  pressure 

geneous  parts,  by  degrees  these  parts  became  the  products 
of  various  separate  industries,  carried  on  independently  in 
different  places.  They  entered  as  separate  commodities  into 
the  umbrella  manufactory,  where  they  were  fitted  together. 
The  Yankees  have  given  to  articles  thus  fitted  together  the 
name  of  assembled  articles ,  a  name  they  deserve,  for  being 
an  assemblage  of  taxes.  Thus  the  umbrella  “assembles/* 
first,  6%  on  the  price  of  each  of  its  elements,  and  a  further 
6%  on  its  own  total  price. 


of  their  mutual  interests;  just  as  in  the  animal 
kingdom,  the  bellum  omnium  contra  omnes 1 
more  or  less  preserves  the  conditions  of  exist¬ 
ence  of  every  species.  The  same  bourgeois  mind 
which  praises  division  of  labour  in  the  work¬ 
shop,  lifelong  annexation  of  the  labourer  to  a 
partial  operation,  and  his  complete  subjection 
to  capital,  as  being  an  organization  of  labour 
that  increases  its  productiveness — that  same 
bourgeois  mind  denounces  with  equal  vigour 
every  conscious  attempt  socially  to  control  and 
regulate  the  process  of  production  as  an  inroad 
upon  such  sacred  things  as  the  rights  of  prop¬ 
erty,  freedom,  and  unrestricted  play  for  the 
bent  of  the  individual  capitalist.  1 1  is  very  char¬ 
acteristic  that  the  enthusiastic  apologists  of  the 
factory  system  have  nothing  more  damning  to 
urge  against  a  general  organization  of  the  la¬ 
bour  of  society  than  that  it  would  turn  all  so¬ 
ciety  into  one  immense  factory. 

If,  in  a  society  with  capitalist  production,  an¬ 
archy  in  the  social  division  of  labour  and  des¬ 
potism  in  that  of  the  workshop  are  mutual  con¬ 
ditions  the  one  of  the  other,  we  find,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  in  those  earlier  forms  of  society  in  which 
the  separation  of  trades  has  been  spontaneously 
developed,  then  crystallized,  and  finally  made 
permanent  by  law,  on  the  one  hand,  a  specimen 
of  the  organization  of  the  labour  of  society  in 
accordance  with  an  approved  and  authoritative 
plan,  and  on  the  other,  the  entire  exclusion  of 
division  of  labour  in  the  workshop,  or  at  all 
events  a  mere  dwarf-like  or  sporadic  and  acci¬ 
dental  development  of  the  same.2 

Those  small  and  extremely  ancient  Indian 
communities,  some  of  which  have  continued 
down  to  this  day,  are  based  upon  possession  in 
common  of  the  land,  on  the  blending  of  agricul¬ 
ture  and  handicrafts,  and  on  an  unalterable  di¬ 
vision  of  labour,  which  serves,  whenever  a  new 
community  is  started,  as  a  plan  and  scheme 
ready  cut  and  dried.  Occupying  areas  of  from 
one  hundred  up  to  several  thousand  acres,  each 
forms  a  compact  whole  producing  all  it  requires. 
The  chief  part  of  the  products  is  destined  for 
direct  use  by  the  community  itself  and  does  not 
take  the  form  of.  a  commodity.  Hence,  produc¬ 
tion  here  is  independent  of  that  division  of  la- 

1  War  of  each  against  all. 

3  “It  might  be  set  up  as  a  general  rule  that  the  less  au¬ 
thority  presides  over  the  division  of  labour  in  the  interior 
of  society,  the  more  will  the  division  of  labour  be  developed 
inside  the  factory  and  the  more  absolutely  will  it  there  be 
subject  to  the  authority  of  a  single  individual.  Thus  the 
authority  in  the  factory  and  that  in  society,  in  relation  to 
the  division  of  labour,  are  in  inverse  ratio  the  one  to  the 
other.1  —Karl  Marx,  Misire  de  la  philosophic t  pp.  130-131. 


DIVISION  OF  LABOUR 

hour  brought  about  in  Indian  society  as  a  whole 
by  means  of  the  exchange  of  commodities.  It  is 
the  surplus  alone  that  becomes  a  commodity, 
and  a  portion  of  even  that,  not  until  it  has 
reached  the  hands  of  the  State,  into  whose 
hands  from  time  immemorial  a  certain  quantity 
of  these  products  has  found  its  way  in  the  shape 
of  rent  in  kind.  The  constitution  of  these  com¬ 
munities  varies  in  different  parts  of  India.  In 
those  of  the  simplest  form,  the  land  is  tilled  in 
common,  and  the  produce  divided  among  the 
members.  At  the  same  time,  spinning  and  weav¬ 
ing  are  carried  on  in  each  family  as  subsidiary 
industries.  Side  by  side  with  the  masses  thus 
occupied  with  one  and  the  same  work,  we  find 
the  “chief  inhabitant,”  who  is  judge,  police, 
and  tax-gatherer  in  one;  the  bookkeeper  who 
keeps  the  accounts  of  the  tillage  and  registers 
everything  relating  thereto;  another  official, 
who  prosecutes  criminals,  protects  strangers 
travelling  through,  and  escorts  them  to  the  next 
village;  the  boundary  man,  who  guards  the 
boundaries  against  neighbouring  communities; 
the  water  ovei&eer,  who  distributes  the  water 
from  the  common  tanks  for  irrigation;  the 
Brahmin,  who  conducts  the  religious  services; 
the  schoolmaster,  who  on  the  sand  teaches  the 
children  reading  and  writing;  the  calendar- 
Brahmin,  or  astrologer,  who  makes  known  the 
lucky  or  unlucky  days  for  seed-time  and  har¬ 
vest,  and  for  every  other  kind  of  agricultural 
work;  a  smith  and  a  carpenter,  who  make  and 
repair  all  the  agricultural  implements;  the  pot¬ 
ter,  who  makes  all  the  pottery  of  the  village;  the 
barber;  the  washerman,  who  washes  clothes; 
the  silversmith;  here  and  there  the  poet,  who  in 
spme  communities  replaces  the  silversmith,  in 
others  the  schoolmaster.  This  dozen  of  individ¬ 
uals  is  maintained  at  the  expense  of  the  whole 
community.  If  the  population  increases,  a  new 
community  is  founded,  on  the  pattern  of  the 
old  one,  on  unoccupied  land.  The  whole  mech¬ 
anism  discloses  a  systematic  division  of  labour; 
but  a  division  like  that  in  manufactures  is  im¬ 
possible,  since  the  smith  and  the  carpenter,  etc., 
find  an  unchanging  market,  and  at  the  most 
.there  occur,accordingtothesizesof  the  villages, 
two  or  three  of  each,  instead  of  one.1  The  law 
that  regulates  the  division  of  labour  in  the  com¬ 
munity  acts  with  the  irresistible  authority  of  a 
law  of  Nature,  at  the  same  time  that  each  indi- 

1  Lieut. -Col.  Mark  VTi\kst  Historical  Sketches  of  the  South 
of  India.  London,  1810-17,  Vol.  I,  pp.  118-20.  A  good  de¬ 
scription  of  the  various  forms  of  the  Indian  communities 
is  to  be  found  in  George  Campbell's  Modern  I ndia .  Lon¬ 
don,  1852. 


AND  MANUFACTURE  175 

vidual  artificer,  the  smith,  the  carpenter,  and 
so  on,  conducts  in  his  workshop  all  the  opera¬ 
tions  of  his  handicraft  in  the  traditional  way, 
but  independently  and  without  recognizing  any 
authority  over  him.  The  simplicity  of  the  or¬ 
ganization  for  production  in  these  self-sufficing 
communities  that  constantly  reproduce  them¬ 
selves  in  the  same  form  and,  when  accidentally 
destroyed,  spring  up  again  on  the  spot  and  with 
the  same  name2 — this  simplicity  supplies  the 
key  to  the  secret  of  the  unchangcableness  of 
Asiatic  societies,  an  unchangcableness  in  such 
striking  contrast  with  the  constant  dissolution 
and  refounding  of  Asiatic  states,  and  the  never- 
ceasing  changes  of  dynasty.  The  structure  of 
the  economical  elements  of  society  remains  un¬ 
touched  by  the  storm-clouds  of  the  political  sky. 

The  rules  of  the  guilds,  as  I  have  said  before, 
by  limiting  most  strictly  the  number  of  appren¬ 
tices  and  journeymen  that  a  single  master  could 
employ,  prevented  him  from  becoming  a  capi¬ 
talist.  Moreover,  he  could  not  employ  his  jour¬ 
neymen  in  any  other  handicraft  than  the  one  in 
which  he  was  a  master.  The  guilds  zealously  re¬ 
pelled  every  encroachment  by  the  capital  of 
merchants,  the  only  form  of  free  capital  with 
which  they  came  in  contact.  A  merchant  could 
buy  every  kind  of  commodity,  but  labour  as  a 
commodity  he  could  not  buy.  He  existed  only 
on  sufferance,  as  a  dealer  in  the  products  of  the 
handicrafts.  If  circumstances  called  for  a  fur¬ 
ther  division  of  labour,  the  existing  guilds  split 
themselves  up  into  varieties,  or  founded  new 
guilds  by  the  side  of  the  old  ones;  all  this,  how¬ 
ever,  without  concentrating  various  handi¬ 
crafts  in  a  single  workshop.  Hence,  the  guild 
organization,  however  much  it  may  have  con¬ 
tributed  by  separating,  isolating  and  perfecting 
the  handicrafts,  to  create  the  material  condi¬ 
tions  for  the  existence  of  manufacture,  excluded 
division  of  labour  in  the  workshop.  On  the 
whole,  the  labourer  and  his  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  remained  closely  united,  like  the  snail  with 
its  shell,  and  thus  there  was  wanting  the  princi¬ 
pal  basis  of  manufacture,  the  separation  of  the 

*  “Under  this  simple  form  . ..  the  inhabitants  of  the 
country  have  lived  from  time  immemorial.  The  boundaries 
of  the  villages  have  been  but  seldom  altered;  and  though 
the  villages  themselves  have  been  sometimes  injured,  and 
even  desolated  by  war,  famine,  and  disease,  the  same  name, 
the  same  limits,  the  same  interests,  and  even  the  same 
families,  have  continued  for  ages.  The  inhabitants  give 
themselves  no  trouble  about  the  breaking  up  and  division 
of  kingdoms;  while  the  village  remains  entire,  they  care 
not  to  what  power  it  is  transferred,  or  to  what  sovereign 
it  devolves;  its  internal  economy  remains  unchanged." — 
Thomas  Stamford  Raffles,  late  Lieutenant  Governor  of 
Java,  The  History  ofjaoat  London,  1817,  Vol.  I,  p.  285. 


CAPITAL 


1 76 

labourer  from  his  means  of  production,  and  the 
conversion  of  these  means  into  capital. 

While  division  of  labour  in  society  at  large, 
whether  or  not  such  division  be  brought  about 
by  exchange  of  commodities,  is  common  to  eco¬ 
nomical  formations  of  society  the  most  diverse, 
division  of  labour  in  the  workshop  as  practised 
by  manufacture  is  a  special  creation  of  the  cap¬ 
italist  mode  of  production  alone. 

5.  The  Capitalistic  Character  of  Manufacture 

An  increased  number  of  labourers  under  the 
control  of  one  capitalist  is  the  natural  starting- 
point  as  well  of  cooperation  generally  as  of  man¬ 
ufacture  in  particular.  But  the  division  of  la¬ 
bour  in  manufacture  makes  this  increase  in  the 
number  of  workmen  a  technical  necessity.  The 
minimum  number  that  any  given  capitalist  is 
bound  to  employ  is  here  prescribed  by  the  pre¬ 
viously  established  division  of  labour.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  advantages  of  further  division 
are  obtainable  only  by  adding  to  the  number 
of  workmen,  and  this  can  be  done  only  by  add¬ 
ing  multiples  of  the  various  detail  groups.  But 
an  increase  in  the  variable  component  of  the 
capital  employed  necessitates  an  increase  in 
its  constant  component,  too,  in  the  workshops, 
implements,  etc.,  and  in  particular,  in  the  raw 
material,  the  call  for  which  grows  quicker 
than  the  number  of  workmen.  The  quantity 
of  it  consumed  in  a  given  time  by  a  given 
amount  of  labour  increases  in  the  same  ratio 
as  does  the  productive  power  of  that  labour 
in  consequence  of  its  division.  Hence,  it  is  a 
law  based  on  the  very  nature  of  manufacture 
that  the  minimum  amount  of  capital  which  is 
bound  to  be  in  the  hands  of  each  capitalist 
must  keep  increasing;  in  other  words,  that 
the  transformation  into  capital  of  the  social 
means  of  production  and  subsistence  must  keep 
extending.1 

In  manufacture,  as  well  as  in  simple  coopera- 

1  “It  is  not  sufficient  that  the  capital’*  (the  writer  should 
have  said  the  necessary  means  of  subsistence  and  of  pro¬ 
duction)  “required  for  the  sub-division  of  handicrafts 
should  be  in  readiness  in  the  society:  it  mu9t  also  be  ac¬ 
cumulated  in  the  hands  of  the  employers  in  sufficiently 
large  quantities  to  enable  them  to  conduct  their  operations 
on  a  large  scale. . . .  The  more  the  division  increases,  the 
more  does  the  constant  employment  of  a  given  number  of 
labourers  require  a  greater  outlay  of  capital  in  tools,  raw 
material,  etc."  (Storch,  Court  d’Seonomie  politique ,  Paris 
edition,  VoL  I,  pp.  250,  251.)  “The  concentration  of  the 
instruments  of  production  and  the  division  of  labour  are 
as  inseparable  the  one  from  the  other  as  are,  in  the  domain 
of  politics,  the  concentration  of  the  public  powers  and  the 
division  of  private  interests.*’  (Karl  Marx,  Misire  de  la 
philosophic ,  p.  134.) 


tion,  the  collective  working  organism  is  a  form 
of  existence  of  capital.  The  mechanism  that  is 
made  up  of  numerous  individual  detail  labour¬ 
ers  belongs  to  the  capitalist.  Hence,  the  produc¬ 
tive  power  resulting  from  a  combination  of  la¬ 
bours  appears  to  be  the  productive  power  of 
capital.  Manufacture  proper  not  only  subjects 
the  previously  independent  workman  to  the 
discipline  and  command  of  capital,  but,  in  addi¬ 
tion,  creates  a  hierarchic  gradation  of  the  work¬ 
men  themselves.  While  simple  cooperation 
leaves  the  mode  of  working  by  the  individual 
for  the  most  part  unchanged,  manufacture 
thoroughly  revolutionizes  it  and  seizes  labour 
power  by  its  very  roots.  It  converts  the  labourer 
into  a  crippled  monstrosity,  by  forcing  his  de¬ 
tail  dexterity  at  the  expense  of  a  world  of  pro¬ 
ductive  capabilities  and  instincts;  just  as  in  Ar¬ 
gentina  they  butcher  a  whole  beast  for  the  sake 
of  his  hide  or  his  tallow.  Not  only  is  the  detail 
work  distributed  to  the  different  individuals, 
but  the  individual  himself  is  made  the  auto¬ 
matic  motor  of  a  fractional  operation,3  and  the 
absurd  fable  of  Menenius  Agrippa,  which 
makes  man  a  mere  fragment  of  his  own  body, 
becomes  realized.3  If  at  first  the  workman  sells 
his  labour  power  to  capital,  because  the  materi¬ 
al  means  of  producing  a  commodity  fail  him, 
now  his  very  labour  power  refuses  its  services 
unless  it  has  been  sold  to  capital.  Its  functions 
can  be  exercised  only  in  an  environment  that 
exists  in  the  workshop  of  the  capitalist  after  the 
sale.  By  nature  unfitted  to  make  anything  in¬ 
dependently,  the  manufacturing  labourer  de¬ 
velops  productive  activity  as  a  mere  appendage 
of  the  capitalist’s  workshop.4  As  the  chosen  peo¬ 
ple  bore  in  their  features  the  sign  manual  of 
Jehovah,  so  division  of  labour  brands  the  man¬ 
ufacturing  workman  as  the  property  of  capital. 

The  knowledge,  the  judgment,  and  the  will, 
which,  though  in  ever  so  small  a  degree,  are 
practised  by  the  independent  peasant  or  handi¬ 
craftsman,  in  the  same  way  as  the  savage  makes 

3  Dugald  Stewart  calls  manufacturing  labourers  “living 
automatons  . . .  employed  in  the  details  of  the  work.” — 
op.  cit.,  p.318. 

3  In  corals,  each  individual  is  in  fact  the  stomach  of  the 
whole  group:  but  it  supplies  the  group  with  nourishment, 
instead  of,  like  the  Roman  patrician,  withdrawing  it. 

4  “The  worker  who  is  in  control  of  an  entire  handicraft 
can  work  anywhere  and  find  his  livelihodd;  the  manufac¬ 
turing  worker,  on  the  other  hand,  is  merely  an  accessory 
who,  separated  from  his  colleagues,  has  capacity  neither 
for  employment  nor  independence  and  is,  therefore,  forced 
to  accept  whatever  law  it  is  deemed  suitable  to  impose  on 
him.'*— Storch,  op.  cit .,  St.  Petersburg  edition,  1815,  Vol. 
I,  p.204. 


DIVISION  OF  LABOUR  AND  MANUFACTURE  177 


the  whole  art  of  war  consist  in  the  exercise  of 
his  personal  cunning — these  faculties  are  now 
required  only  for  the  workshop  as  a  whole.  In¬ 
telligence  in  production  expands  in  one  direc¬ 
tion,  because  it  vanishes  in  many  others.  What 
is  lost  by  the  detail  labourers  is  concentrated 
in  the  capital  that  employs  them.1  It  is  a  result 
of  the  division  of  labour  in  manufactures  that 
the  labourer  is  brought  face  to  face  with  the  in¬ 
tellectual  potencies  of  the  material  process  of 
production,  as  the  property  of  another,  and  as 
a  ruling  power.  This  separation  begins  in  simple 
cooperation,  where  the  capitalist  represents  to 
the  single  workman  the  oneness  and  the  will  of 
the  associated  labour.  It  is  developed  in  manu¬ 
facture  which  cuts  down  the  labourer  into  a  de¬ 
tail  labourer.  It  is  completed  in  modern  indus¬ 
try,  which  makes  science  a  productive  force  dis¬ 
tinct  from  labour  and  presses  it  into  the  service 
of  capital.2 * 

In  manufacture,  in  order  to  make  the  collec¬ 
tive  labourer,  and  through  him  capital,  rich  in 
social  productive  power,  each  labourer  must  be 
made  poor  in  individual  productive  powers. 
“Ignorance  is  the  mother  of  industry  as  well  as 
of  superstition.  Reflection  and  fancy  are  subject 
to  err;  but  a  habit  of  moving  the  hand  or  the 
foot  is  independent  of  either.  Manufactures,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  prosper  most  where  the  mind  is  least 
consulted,  and  where  the  workshop  may  ...  be 
considered  as  an  engine,  the  parts  of  which  are 
men.”*  As  a  matter  of  fact,  some  few  manufac¬ 
turers  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century 
preferred,  for  certain  operations  that  were  trade 
secrets,  to  employ  half-idiotic  persons.4 * 

“The  understandings  of  the  greater  part  of 
men,”  says  Adam  Smith,  “arc  necessarily 
formed  by  their  ordinary  employments.  The 
man  whose  whole  life  is  spent  in  performing  a 
few  simple  operations  . . .  has  no  occasion  to 
exert  his  understanding. ...  He  generally  be¬ 
comes  as  stupid  and  ignorant  as  it  is  possible  for 

1  A.  Ferguson,  op.  cit.9  p.  281:  “The  former  may  have 
gained  what  the  other  has  iost.** 

2  “The  man  of  knowledge  and  the  productive  labourer 
come  to  be  widely  divided  from  each  other,  and  knowl¬ 
edge,  instead  of  remaining  the  handmaid  of  labour  in  the 
hand  of  the  labourer  to  increase  his  productive  powers . . . 
has  almost  everywhere  arrayed  itself  against  labour  . . . 
systematically  deluding  and  leading  them  (the  labourers) 
astray  in  order  to  render  their  muscular  powers  entirely 
mechanical  and  obedient.** — W.  Thompson,  An  Inquiry 
ini -  the  Principles  of  the  Distribution  of  Wealthy  London, 
1824,  p.  274. 

*  A.  Ferguson,  op.  cit.9  p.  28o. 

4  J.  13.  Tuckett,  A  History  of  the  Past  and  Present  State 

of  the  Labouring  Population,  London,  1846. 


a  human  creature  to  become/'  After  describing 
the  stupidity  of  the  detail  labourer,  he  goes  on: 
“The  uniformity  of  his  stationary  life  naturally 
corrupts  the  courage  of  his  mind. ...  It  cor¬ 
rupts  even  the  activity  of  his  body  and  renders 
him  incapable  of  exerting  his  strength  with  vig¬ 
our  and  perseverance  in  any  other  employment 
than  that  to  which  he  has  been  bred.  His  dex¬ 
terity  at  his  own  particular  trade  seems  in  this 
manner  to  be  acquired  at  the  expense  of  his  in¬ 
tellectual,  social,  and  martial  virtues.  But  in 
every  improved  and  civilized  society,  this  is  the 
state  into  which  the  labouring  poor,  that  is,  the 
great  body  of  the  people,  must  necessarily 
fall/*6  For  preventing  the  complete  deteriora¬ 
tion  of  the  great  mass  of  the  people  by  division 
of  labour,  A.  Smith  recommends  education  of 
the  people  by  the  State,  but  prudently  and  in 
homoeopathic  doses.  G.  Gamier,  his  French 
translator  and^commentator,  who  under  the 
first  French  empire  quite  naturally  developed 
into  a  senator,  quite  as  naturally  opposes  him 
on  this  point.  Education  of  the  masses,  he  urges, 
violates  the  first  law  of  the  division  of  labour, 
and  with  it  “our  whole  social  system  would  be 
proscribed/’  “Like  all  other  divisions  of  la¬ 
bour,”  he  says,  “that  between  hand  labour  and 
head  labour6  is  more  pronounced  and  decided 
in  proportion  as  society  (he  rightly  uses  this 
word,  for  capital,  landed  property,  and  their 
State)  becomes  richer.  This  division  of  labour, 
like  every  other,  is  an  effect  of  past,  and  a  cause 
of  future,  progress. . . .  Ought  the  government, 
then,  to  work  in  opposition  to  this  division  of 
labour,  and  to  hinder  its  natural  course?  Ought 
it  to  expend  a  part  of  the  public  money  in  the 
attempt  to  confound  and  blend  together  two 
classes  of  labour  which  arc  striving  after  divi¬ 
sion  and  separation?”7 

6  A.  Smith,  Wealth  of  Nations,  Bk.  V,  ch.  I,  pt.  3,  II.  Be¬ 
ing  a  pupil  of  A.  Ferguson  who  showed  the  disadvantageous 
effects  of  division  of  labour,  Adam  Smith  was  perfectly 
clear  on  this  point.  In  the  introduction  to  his  work,  where 
he  ex  professo  [with  a  professional  touch]  praises  division 
of  labour,  he  indicates  only  in  a  cursory  manner  that  it  is 
the  source  of  social  inequalities.  It  is  not  till  the  fifth  book, 
on  the  revenue  of  the  State,  that  he  reproduces  Ferguson. 
I  n  my  Mislre  de  la  philosophic ,  I  have  sufficiently  explained 
tbe  historical  connection  between  Ferguson,  A.  Smith,  Le- 
montey^and  Say,  as  regards  their  criticisms  of  division  of 
labour,  and  have  shown,  for  the  first  time,  that  division  of 
labour  as  practised  in  manufactures  is  a  specific  form  of 
the  capitalist  mode  of  production. 

6  Ferguson  had  already  said,  op.  cit.9  p.  28 1 : 11  And  think¬ 
ing  itself,  in  this  age  of  separations,  may  become  a  peculiar 
craft." 

7  G.  Gamier,  Vol.  V  of  his  translation  of  A.  Smith,  pp. 
4-5- 


CAPITAL 


178 

Some  crippling  of  body  and  mind  is  insepara¬ 
ble  even  from  division  of  labour  in  society  as  a 
whole.  Since,  however,  manufacture  carries 
this  social  separation  of  branches  of  labour 
much  further,  and  also,  by  its  peculiar  division, 
attacks  the  individual  at  the  very  roots  of  his 
life,  it  is  the  first  to  afford  the  materials  for,  and 
to  give  a  start  to,  industrial  pathology.1 

“To  subdivide  a  man  is  to  execute  him,  if  he 
deserves  the  sentence,  to  assassinate  him  if  he 
does  not. . . .  The  subdivision  of  labour  is  the 
assassination  of  a  people.’’2 

Cooperation  based  on  division  of  labour  (in 
other  words,  manufacture)  commences  as  a 
spontaneous  formation.  So  soon  as  it  attains 
some  consistence  and  extension,  it  becomes  the 
recognized  methodical  and  systematic  form  of 
capitalist  production.  History  shows  how  the 
division  of  labour  peculiar  to  manufacture, 
strictly  so-called,  acquires  the  best  adapted 
form  at  first  by  experience,  as  it  were  behind 
the  backs  of  the  actors,  and  then,  like  the  guild 
handicrafts,  strives  to  hold  fast  that  form  when 
once  found,  and  here  and  there  succeeds  in 
keeping  it  for  centuries.  Any  alteration  in  this 
form,  except  in  trivial  matters,  is  solely  owing 
to  a  revolution  in  the  instruments  of  labour. 
Modern  manufacture  wherever  it  arises— I  do 
not  here  allude  to  modern  industry  based  on 
machinery— either  finds  the  disjecta  membra 
poeta*  ready  to  hand,  and  only  waiting  to  be 
collected  together,  as  is  the  case  in  the  manu¬ 
facture  of  clothes  in  large  towns;  or  it  can  easily 
apply  the  principle  of  division,  simply  by  ex¬ 
clusively  assigning  the  various  operations  of  a 
handicraft  (such  as  bookbinding)  to  particular 
men.  In  such  cases,  a  week’s  experience  is 

1  Ramazzini,  professor  of  practical  medicine  at  Padua, 
published  in  1713  his  work  De  morbis  arttficum ,  which  was 
translated  into  French  1781,  reprinted  1841  in  the  Ency¬ 
clopedic  des  sciences  midi  calcs.  The  period  of  modern  me¬ 
chanical  industry  has,  of  course,  very  much  enlarged  his 
catalogue  of  occupational  diseases.  See  Hygiine  physique 
et  morale  de  I'ouorierdans  les  grande  s  miles  en  gSntral  etdans 
la  oille  de  Lyon  en  particular,  by  Dr.  A.  L.  Fonterel,  Paris, 
1858;  and  Die  Krankheiten,  welche  verschtednen  Standen , 
Altern  und  Geschlechtern  cigenthumltch  sind,  6  Vols.,  lTlm, 
i860,  and  others.  In  1854  the  Society  of  Arts  appointed  a 
Commission  of  Inquiry  into  industrial  pathology/The  list 
of  documents  collected  by  this  commission  is  to  be  seen  in 
the  catalogue  of  the  Twickenham  Economic  Museum.  Very 
important  are  the  official  Reports  on  Public  Health .  See  also 
Eduard  Reich,  M.D.,  Ueber  dte  Entartung  des  Men  sc  hen, 
Erlangen,  1868. 

*  D.  Urquhart,  Familiar  Words ,  London,  1855,  p.  119. 
—Hegel  held  very  heretical  views  on  division  of  labour.  In 
his  Philosophy  of  Right,  Add.  to  par.  187,  he  says:  “By 
well  educated  men  we  understand,  in  the  first  instance, 
those  who  can  do  everything  that  others  do." 

1  Scattered  limbs  of  the^organism. 


enough  to  determine  the  proportion  between 
the  numbers  of  the  hands  necessary  for  the  vari¬ 
ous  functions.4 

By  decomposition  of  handicrafts,  by  special¬ 
ization  of  the  instruments  of  labour,  by  the 
formation  of  detail  labourers,  and  by  grouping 
and  combining  the  latter  into  a  single  mecha¬ 
nism,  division  of  labour  in  manufacture  creates 
a  qualitative  gradation  and  a  quantitative  pro¬ 
portion  in  the  social  process  of  production;  it 
consequently  creates  a  definite  organization  of 
the  labour  of  society,  and  thereby  develops  at 
the  same  time  new  productive  forces  in  the  so¬ 
ciety.  In  its  specific  capitalist  form— and  under 
the  given  conditions,  it  could  take  no  other  form 
than  a  capitalistic  one — manufacture  is  but  a 
particular  method  of  begetting  relative  surplus 
value,  or  of  augmenting  at  the  expense  of  the 
labourer  the  self-expansion  of  capital— usually 
called  “social  wealth,**  “Wealth  of  Nations,** 
etc.  It  increases  the  social  productive  power  of 
labour,  not  only  for  the  benefit  of  the  capitalist 
instead  of  for  that  of  the  labourer,  but  it  docs 
this  by  crippling  the  individual  labourers.  It 
creates  new  conditions  for  the  lordship  of  capi¬ 
tal  over  labour.  If,  therefore,  on  the  one  hand 
it  presents  itself  historically  as  a  progress  and 
as  a  necessary  phase  in  the  economic  develop¬ 
ment  of  society,  on  the  other  hand  it  is  a  re¬ 
fined  and  civilized  method  of  exploitation. 

Political  economy,  which  as^m  independent 
science  first  sprang  into  being  during  the  period 
of  manu  facture,  views  the  social  division  of  la¬ 
bour  only  from  the  standpoint  of  manufacture/’ 
and  sees  in  it  only  the  means  of  producing  more 
commodities  with  a  given  quantity  of  labour, 
and,  consequently,  of  cheapening  commodities 
and  hurrying  on  the  accumulation  of  capital. 
In  most  striking  contrast  with  this  accentua¬ 
tion  of  quantity  and  exchange  value  is  the  at¬ 
titude  of  the  writers  of  classical  antiquity,  who 
hold  exclusively  by  quality  and  use-value.6  In 

4  The  simple  belief  in  the  inventive  genius  exercised  a 
priori  by  the  individual  capitalist  in  division  of  labour  ex¬ 
ists  nowadays  only  among  German  professors  of  the  stamp 
of  Herr  Roscher,  who,  to  recompense  the  capitalist  from 
whose  Jovian  head  division  of  labour  sprang  ready  formed, 
dedicates  to  him  "various  wages"  {dioerse  Jrbetts/ohne). 
The  more  or  less  extensive  application  of  division  of  labour 
depends  on  length  of  purse,  not  on  greatness  of  genius. 

•  The  older  writers,  like  Petty  and  the  anonymous  author 
of  Advantages  of  the  East  Indta  Trade,  bring  out  the  capi¬ 
talist  character  of  division  of  labour  as  applied  in  manu¬ 
facture  more  than  A.  Smith  does. 

6  Among  the  moderns  may  be  excepted  a  few  writers  of 
the  eighteenth  century,  like  Beccaria  and  James  Harris, 
who  with  regard  to  division  of  labour  almost  entirely  fol¬ 
low  the  ancients.  Thus,  Beccaria:  "It  is  evident  to  every 
man  from  his  experience  that,  if  one  applies  his  hand  and 


DIVISION  OF  LABOUR  AND  MANUFACTURE 


consequence  of  the  separation  of  the  social 
branches  of  production,  commodities  are  better 
made,  the  various  bents  and  talents  of  men 
select  a  suitable  field,1  and  without  some  re¬ 
straint  no  important  results  can  be  obtained 
anywhere.2  Hence  both  product  and  producer 
are  improved  by  division  of  labour.  If  the 
growth  of  the  quantity  produced  is  occasionally 
mentioned,  this  is  only  done  with  reference  to 
the  greater  abundance  of  use-values.  There  is 
not  a  word  alluding  to  exchange  value  or  to  the 
cheapening  of  commodities.  This  aspect,  from 
the  standpoint  of  use-value  alone,  is  taken  as 
well  by  Plato,3  who  treats  division  of  labour  as 

his  mind  always  to  the  same  kind  of  work  and  products,  he 
will  produce  results  more  easily,  better,  and  in  more  abun¬ 
dance  than  if  each  one  produced  for  himself  everything 
which  he  needs  individually.  In  this  manner,  men  are  di¬ 
vided  into  various  classes  and  conditions,  for  the  common 
and  private  utility.”  (Cesare  Beccaria,  Element i  di  Econo - 
mia  pubblica,  Custodi  edition,  “ Parte  Modern  a ,”  Vol.  xi, 
p.  28.)  James  Harris,  afterwards  Earl  of  Malmesbury,  cele¬ 
brated  for  the  Diaries  of  his  embassy  at  St.  Petersburg, 
says  in  a  note  to  his  Dialogue  Concerning  Happiness ,  (Lon¬ 
don,  1741,  repriiued  afterwards  in  Three  Treatises ,  etc., 
third  edition,  London,  1772):  “The  whole  argument  to 
prove  society  natural  (i.c.,  by  division  of  employments) 
...  is  taken  from  the  second  book  of  Plato’s  Republic .” 

1  Thus,  in  The  Odyssey ,  xiv,  228:  “One  man  is  delighted 
by  one  activity,  another  man  by  others.”  And  Archilochus 
in  Sextus  Empiricus ,  “Different  men  are  enthusiastic  about 
different  work.” 

2  “Many  works  he  knew,  but  none  knew  he  well.”  Every 
Athenian  considered  himself  superior  as  a  producer  of  com¬ 
modities  to  a  Spartan;  for  the  latter  in  time  of  war  had 
men  enough  at  his  disposal  but  could  nut  command  mon¬ 
ey,  as  Thucydides  makes  Pcnclcs  say  in  the  speech  incit¬ 
ing  the  Athenians  to  the  Peloponnesian  war:  “In  war,  the 
independent  farmer  would  sooner  risk  his  body  than  his 
property.”  (Thucydides,  I,  141.)  Nevertheless,  even  with 
regard  to  material  production,  “Independence”  as  opposed 
to  division  of  labour  remained  their  ideal,  “for  whereas  in 
this  latter  there  is  well-being,  in  the  former  there  is  also 
self-sufficiency.”  It  should  be  mentioned  here  that  at  the 
date  of  the  fall  of  the  Thirty  Tyrants  there  were  still  not 
five  thousand  Athenians  without  landed  property. 

3  With  Plato,  division  of  labour  within  the  community 
is  a  development  from  the  multifarious  requirements  and 
the  limited  capacities  of  individuals.  The  main  point  with 
him  is  that  the  labourer  must  adapt  himself  to  the  work, 
not  the  work  to  the  labourer;  which  latter  is  unavoidable 
if  he  carries  on  several  trades  at  once,  thus  making  one  or 
the  other  of  them  subordinate. 

“‘For  work  does  not  wait,  I  assume,  until  such  time  as 
the  doer  is  at  leisure,  but  the  doer  must  see  to  the  work, 
and  make  it  his  primary  interest.’ 

“'He  must.’ 

“'Hence  it  follows  that  everything  will  be  produced  in 
greater  quantity  and  superior  quality  and  with  greater 
ease,  when  each  man  works  at  a  single  task,  for  which  he 
has  a  natural  aptitude,  and  does  this  at  the  right  time,  and 
allows  nothing  else  to  interfere.’”  ( Republic ,  II,  370.)  So 
in  Thucydides  {op.  cit.y  142):  “Seafaring  is  an  art  like  any 
other,  and  cannot,  as  circumstances  require,  be  carried  on 
as  a  subsidiary  occupation;  nay,  other  subsidiary  occupa- 


179 

the  foundation  on  which  the  division  of  society 
into  classes  is  based,  as  by  Xenophon,4  who  with 
characteristic  bourgeois  instinct  approaches 
more  nearly  to  division  of  labour  within  the 
workshop.  Plato’s  Republic y  in  so  far  as  division 
of  labour  is  treated  in  it,  as  the  formative  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  State,  is  merely  the  Athenian  ideal¬ 
ization  of  the  Egyptian  system  of  castes,  Egypt 
having  served  as  the  model  of  an  industrial 
country  to  many  of  his  contemporaries  also, 
amongst  others  to  Isocrates;6  and  it  continued 
to  have  this  importance  to  the  Greeks  of  the 
Roman  Empire.6 

tions  cannot  be  carried  on  alongside  of  this  one.”  If  the 
work,  says  Plato,  has  to  wait  for  the  labourer,  the  critical 
point  in  the  process  is  missed  and  the  article  spoiled.  The 
same  Platonic  idea  is  found  recurring  in  the  protest  of  the 
English  bleachers  against  the  clause  in  the  Factory  Act 
that  provides  fixed  meal- times  for  all  operatives.  Their 
business  cannot  wait  the  convenience  of  the  workmen,  for 
“in  the  various  operations  of  singeing,  washing,  bleaching, 
mangling,  calendering,  and  dyeing,  none  of  them  can  be 
stopped  at  a  given  moment  without  risk  of  damage. . . .  To 
enforce  the  same  dinner  hour  for  all  the  work-people  might 
occasionally  subject  valuable  goods  to  the  risk  of  danger  by 
incomplete  operations.”  I*  platonisme  ou  va-t-il  se  nicherl 
[Is  there  any  place  where  Platonism  cannot  find  a  nest?] 

4  Xenophon  says  it  is  not  only  an  honour  to  receive  food 
from  the  table  of  the  king  of  Persia,  but  such  food  is  much 
more  tasty  than  other  food.  “And  there  is  nothing  wonder¬ 
ful  in  this,  for  as  the  other  arts  are  brought  to  special  per¬ 
fection  in  the  great  towns,  so  the  royal  food  is  prepared  in 
a  special  way.  For  in  the  small  towns  the  same  man  makes 
bedsteads,  doors,  ploughs,  and  tables:  often,  too,  he  builds 
houses  into  the  bargain,  and  is  quite  content  if  he  finds 
custom  sufficient  for  his  sustenance.  It  is  altogether  im¬ 
possible  for  a  man  who  does  so  many  things  to  do  them  all 
well.  But  in  the  great  towns,  where  each  can  find  many 
buyers,  one  trade  is  sufficient  to  maintain  the  man  who 
carries  it  on.  Nay,  there  is  often  not  even  need  of  one  com¬ 
plete  trade,  but  one  man  makes  shoes  for  men,  another  for 
women.  Here  and  there  one  man  gets  a  living  by  sewing, 
another  by  cutting  our  shoes;  one  does  nothing  but  cut  out 
clothes,  another  nothing  but  sew  the  pieces  together.  It 
follows  necessarily,  then,  that  lie  who  does  the  simplest 
kind  of  work,  undoubtedly  does  it  better  than  anyone  else. 
So  it  is  with  the  art  of  cooking.”  {Cyropaediay  VIII,  ii,  5.) 
Xenophon  here  lays  stress  exclusively  upon  the  excellence 
to  be  attained  in  use-value,  although  he  well  knows  that 
the  gradations  of  the  division  of  labour  depend  on  the  ex¬ 
tent  of  the  market. 

6  “He  (Busiris)  divided  them  all  into  special  castes . 

commanded  that  the  same  individuals  should  always  carry 
on  the  same  trade,  for  he  knew  that  they  who  change  their 
occupations  become  skilled  in  none;  but  that  those  who 
constantly  stick  to  one  occupation  bring  it  to  the  highest 
perfection.  In  truth,  we  shall  also  find  that,  in  relation  to 
the  arts  and  handicrafts,  they  have  outstripped,  their  ri¬ 
vals  more  than  a  master  does  a  bungler;  and  the  contriv¬ 
ances  for  maintaining  the  monarchy  and  the  other  institu¬ 
tions  of  their  State  are  so  admirable  that  the  most  cele¬ 
brated  philosophers  who  treat  of  this  subject  praise  the 
constitution  of  the  Egyptian  State  above  all  others.”— 
Isocrates,  Busirisy  ch.  8. 

6  Cf.  Diodorus  Siculus. 


CAPITAL 


180 

During  the  manufacturing  period  proper, 
i.e.,  the  period  during  which  manufacture  is  the 
predominant  form  taken  by  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion,  many  obstacles  are  opposed  to  the  full  de¬ 
velopment  of  the  peculiar  tendencies  of  manu¬ 
facture.  Although  manufacture  creates,  as  we 
have  already  seen,  a  simple  separation  of  the 
labourers  into  skilled  and  unskilled,  simultane¬ 
ously  with  their  hierarchic  arrangement  in 
classes,  yet  the  number  of  the  unskilled  labour¬ 
ers,  owing  to  the  preponderating  influence  of 
the  skilled,  remains  very  limited.  Although  it 
adapts  the  detail  operations  to  the  various  de¬ 
grees  of  maturity,  strength,  and  development 
of  the  living  instruments  of  labour,  thus  con¬ 
ducing  to  exploitation  of  women  and  children, 
yet  this  tendency  as  a  whole  is  wrecked  on  the 
habits  and  the  resistance  of  the  male  labourers. 
Although  the  splitting  up  of  handicrafts  lowers 
the  cost  of  training  the  workman,  and  thereby 
lowers  his  value,  yet  for  the  more  difficult  detail 
work  a  longer  apprenticeship  is  necessary  and, 
even  where  it  would  be  superfluous,  is  jealously 
insisted  upon  by  the  workmen.  In  England,  for 
instance,  we  find  the  laws  of  apprenticeship, 
with  their  seven  years'  probation,  in  full  force 
down  to  the  end  of  the  manufacturing  period; 
and  they  are  not  thrown  on  one  side  till  the 
advent  of  modern  industry.  Since  handicraft 
skill  is  the  foundation  of  manufacture,  and  since 
the  mechanism  of  manufacture  as  a  whole  pos¬ 
sesses  no  framework  apart  from  the  labourers 
themselves,  capital  is  constantly  compelled  to 
wrestle  with  the  insubordination  of  the  work¬ 
men.  “By  the  infirmity  of  human  nature,"  says 
friend  Ure,  “it  happens  that  the  more  skilful 
the  workman,  the  more  self-willed  and  intract¬ 
able  he  is  apt  to  become,  and  of  course  the  less 
fit  a  component  of  a  mechanical  system  in 
which  ...  he  may  do  great  damage  to  the 
whole.”1  Hence,  throughout  the  whole  manu¬ 
facturing  period  there  runs  the  complaint  of 
want  of  discipline  among  the  workmen.2  And 
had  we  not  the  testimony  of  contemporary 
writers,  the  simple  facts  that,  during  the  period 
between  the  sixteenth  century  and  the  epoch  of 
modern  industry,  capital  failed  to  become  the 
master  of  the  whole  disposable  working  time  of 
the  manufacturing  labourers,  that  manufac¬ 
tures  are  short-lived,  and  change  their  locality 
from  one  country  to  another  with  the  emigrat¬ 
ing  or  immigrating  workmen,  these  facts  would 
speak  volumes.  “Order  must  in  one  way  or  an¬ 

1  Ure,  op.  cil,t  p.  ao. 

2  This  is  more  the  case  in  England  than  in  France,  and 

more  in  France  than  in  Holland. 


other  be  established,”  exclaims  in  1770  the  oft- 
cited  author  of  the  Essay  on  Trade  and  Com - 
merce .  “Order,"  re-echoes  Dr.  Andrew  Ure  66 
years  later,  “Order"  was  wanting  in  manufac¬ 
ture  based  on  “the  scholastic  dogma  of  division 
of  labour”;  and  “Arkwright  created  order." 

At  the  same  time  manufacture  was  unable, 
either  to  seize  upon  the  production  of  society 
to  its  full  extent,  or  to  revolutionize  that  pro¬ 
duction  to  its  very  core.  It  towered  up  as  an 
economic  work  of  art,  on  the  broad  foundation 
of  the  town  handicrafts,  and  of  the  rural  domes¬ 
tic  industries.  At  a  given  stage  in  its  develop¬ 
ment,  the  narrow  technical  basis  on  which  man¬ 
ufacture  rested  came  into  conflict  with  require¬ 
ments  of  production  that  were  created  by  man¬ 
ufacture  itself. 

One  of  its  most  finished  creations  was  the 
workshop  for  the  production  of  the  instruments 
of  labour  themselves,  including  especially  the 
complicated  mechanical  apparatus  then  al¬ 
ready  employed.  A  machine  factory,  says  Ure, 
“displayed  the  division  of  labour  in  manifold 
gradations— the  file,  the  drill,  the  lathe,  having 
each  its  different  workman  in  the  order  of 
skill."3  This  workshop,  the  product  of  the  divi¬ 
sion  of  labour  in  manufacture,  produced  in  its 
turn— machines.  It  is  they  that  sweep  away  the 
handicraftsman's  work  as  the  regulating  prin¬ 
ciple  of  social  production.  Thus,  on  the  one 
hand,  the  technical  reason  for  the  life-long  an¬ 
nexation  of  the  workman  to  a  detail  function 
is  removed.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fetters  fall 
away  that  this  same  principle  laid  on  the  do¬ 
minion  of  capital. 

CHAPTER  XV.  MACHINERY  AND 
MODERN  INDUSTRY 

1.  The  Development  of  Machinery 
John  Stuart  Mill  says  in  his  Principles  of  Po¬ 
litical  Economy :  “It  is  questionable  if  all  the 
mechanical  inventions  yet  made  have  lightened 
the  day's  toil  of  any  human  being."4  That  is, 
however,  by  no  means  the  aim  of  thd capitalistic 
application  of  machinery.  Like  every  other  in¬ 
crease  in  the  productiveness  of  labour,  ma¬ 
chinery  is  intended  to  cheapen  commodities 
and,  by  shortening  that  portion  of  the  working 
day,  in  which  the  labourer  works  for  himself, 
to  lengthen  the  other  portion  that  he  gives  with- 

•  Ure,  op.  ri/.,p.  21. 

4  Mill  should  have  said,  “of  any  human  being  not  fed  by 
other  people’s  labour,”  for,  without  doubt,  machinery  haa 
greatly  increased  the  number  of  well-to-do  idlers. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


out  an  equivalent  to  the  capitalist.  In  short,  it 
is  a  means  for  producing  surplus  value. 

In  manufacture,  the  revolution  in  the  mode 
of  production  begins  with  the  labour  power;  in 
modern  industry,  it  begins  with  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour.  Our  first  inquiry,  then,  is  how 
the  instruments  of  labour  are  converted  from 
tools  into  machines,  or  what  is  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  a  machine  and  the  implements  of  a  hand¬ 
icraft?  We  are  only  concerned  here  with  strik¬ 
ing  and  general  characteristics;  for  epochs  in 
the  history  of  society  are  no  more  separated 
from  each  other  by  hard  and  fast  lines  of  demar¬ 
cation  than  are  geological  epochs. 

Mathematicians  and  mechanicians,  and  in 
this  they  are  followed  by  a  few  English  econ¬ 
omists,  call  a  tool  a  simple  machine,  and  a  ma¬ 
chine  a  complex  tool.  They  sec  no  essential  dif¬ 
ference  between  them,  and  even  give  the  name 
of  machine  to  the  simple  mechanical  powers,  the 
lever,  the  inclined  plane,  the  screw,  the  wedge, 
etc.1  As  a  matter  of  fact,  every  machine  is  a 
combination  of  those  simple  powers,  no  matter 
how  they  may  be  disguised.  From  the  econom¬ 
ic  standpoint,  this  explanation  is  worth  noth¬ 
ing,  because  the  historical  clement  is  wanting. 
Another  explanation  of  the  difference  between 
tool  and  machine  is  that,  in  the  case  of  a  tool, 
man  is  the  motive  power,  while  the  motive  pow¬ 
er  of  a  machine  is  something  different  from 
man,  is,  for  instance,  an  animal,  water,  wind, 
and  so  on.2  According  to  this,  a  plough  drawn 
by  oxen,  which  is  a  contrivance  common  to  the 
most  different  epochs,  would  be  a  machine, 
while  Clausscn’s  circular  loom,  which,  worked 
by  a  single  labourer,  weaves  96,000  picks  per 
minute,  would  be  a  mere  tool.  Nay,  this  very 
loom,  though  a  tool  when  worked  by  hand, 
would,  if  worked  by  steam,  be  a  machine.  And 
since  the  application  of  animal  power  is  one  of 
man’s  earliest  inventions,  production  by  ma¬ 
chinery  would  have  preceded  production  by 
handicrafts.  When,  in  1735,  John  Wyalt 
brought  out  his  spinning  machine  and  began 
the  industrial  revolution  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬ 
tury,  not  a  word  did  he  say  about  an  ass  driving 
it  instead  of  a  man,  and  yet  this  part  fell  to  the 

1  See,  for  instance,  Hutton,  Course  of  Mathematics. 

1  “From  this  point  of  view,  we  may  draw  a  sharp  line  of 
distinction  between  a  tool  and  a  machine:  spades,  ham¬ 
mers,  chisels,  etc.,  combinations  of  levers  and  of  screws,  in 
all  of  which,  no  matter  how  complicated  they  may  be  in 
other  respects,  man  is  the  motive  power-all  this  falls  un¬ 
der  the  idea  of  a  tool;  but  the  plough,  which  is  drawn  by 
animal  power,  and  windmills,  etc.,  must  be  classed  among 
machines."— Wilhelm  Schulz,  Die  Bewegung  der  Produk - 
tion,  Ziirich,  1843,  P-  38.  (In  many  respects  a  book  to  be 
recommended.) 


181 

ass.  He  described  it  as  a  machine  “to  spin  with¬ 
out  fingers.”* 

All  fully  developed  machinery  consists  of 
three  essentially  different  parts,  the  motor 
mechanism,  the  transmitting  mechanism,  and 
finally  the  tool  or  working  machine.  The  motor 
mechanism  is  that  which  puts  the  whole  in  mo¬ 
tion.  It  either  generates  its  own  motive  power, 
like  the  steam  engine,  the  caloric  engine,  the 
electro-magnetic  machine,  etc.,  or  it  receives  its 
impulse  from  some  already  existing  natural 
force,  like  the  water-wheel  from  a  head  of  water, 
the  windmill  from  wind,  etc.  The  transmitting 
mechanism,  composed  of  flywheels,  shafting, 
cogwheels,  pulleys,  straps,  ropes,  bands,  pin¬ 
ions,  and  gearing  of  the  most  varied  kinds,  reg¬ 
ulates  the  motion,  changes  its  form  where  nec¬ 
essary,  as,  for  instance,  from  linear  to  circular, 
and  divides  and  distributes  it  among  the  work¬ 
ing  machines.  These  two  first  parts  of  the  whole 
mechanism  are  there  solely  for  putting  the 
working  machines  in  motion,  by  means  of  which 
motion  the  subject  of  labour  is  seized  upon  and 
modified  as  desired.  The  tool  or  working  ma¬ 
chine  is  that  part  of  the  machinery  with  which 
the  industrial  revolution  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬ 
tury  started.  And  to  this  day  it  constantly 
serves  as  such  a  starting  point  whenever  a  hand¬ 
icraft,  or  a  manufacture,  is  turned  into  an  in¬ 
dustry  carried  on  by  machinery. 

On  a  closer  examination  of  the  working  ma- 

8  Before  his  time,  spinning  machines,  although  very  im¬ 
perfect  ones,  had  already  been  used,  and  Italy  was  prob¬ 
ably  the  country  of  their  first  appearance.  A  critical  history 
of  technology  would  show  how  little  any  of  the  inventions 
of  the  eighteenth  century  are  the  work  of  a  single  individ¬ 
ual.  Hitherto  there  is  no  such  book.  Darwin  has  interested 
us  in  the  history  of  Nature's  technology,  i.e.,  in  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  the  organs  of  plants  and  animals,  which  organs  serve 
as  instruments  of  production  for  sustaining  life.  Does  not 
the  history  of  the  productive  organs  of  man,  of  organs  that 
are  the  material  basis  of  all  social  organization,  deserve  equal 
attention?  And  would  not  such  a  history  be  easier  to  com¬ 
pile,  since,  as  Vico  says,  human  history  differs  from  natural 
history  in  this,  that  we  have  made  the  former,  but  not  the 
latter?  Technology  discloses  man’s  mode  of  dealing  with 
Nature,  the  process  of  production  by  which  he  sustains  his 
life,  and  thereby  also  lays  bare  the  mode  of  formation  of 
his  social  relations,  and  of  the  mental  conceptions  that  flow 
from  them.  Every  history  of  religion,  even,  that  fails  to 
take  account  of  this  material  basis,  is  uncritical.  It  is,  in 
reality,  much  easier  to  discover  by  analysis  the  earthly 
core  of  the  misty  creations  of  religion  than,  conversely,  it 
is  to  develop  from  the  actual  relations  of  life  the  corres¬ 
ponding  celestialized  forms  of  those  relations.  The  latter 
method  is  the  only  materialistic  and,  therefore,  the  only 
scientific  one.  The  weak  points  in  the  abstract  materialism 
of  natural  science,  a  materialism  that  excludes  history  and 
its  process,  are  at  once  evident  from  the  abstract  and  ide¬ 
ological  conceptions  of  its  spokesmen,  whenever  they  ven¬ 
ture  beyond  the  bounds  of  their  own  specialty. 


CAPITAL 


182 

chine  proper,  we  find  in  it,  as  a  general  rule, 
though  often,  no  doubt,  under  very  altered 
forms,  the  apparatus  and  tools  used  by  the 
handicraftsman  or  manufacturing  workman; 
with  this  difference,  that  instead  of  being  hu¬ 
man  implements,  they  are  the  implements  of  a 
mechanism,  or  mechanical  implements.  Either 
the  entire  machine  is  only  a  more  or  less  altered 
mechanical  edition  of  the  old  handicraft  tool, 
as,  for  instance,  the  power-loom;1  or  the  work¬ 
ing  parts  fitted  in  the  frame  of  the  machine  arc 
old  acquaintances,  as  spindles  are  in  a  mule, 
needles  in  a  stocking  loom,  saws  in  a  sawing 
machine,  and  knives  in  a  chopping  machine. 
The  distinction  between  these  tools  and  the 
body  proper  of  the  machine  exists  from  their 
very  birth;  for  they  continue  for  the  most  part 
to  be  produced  by  handicraft,  or  by  manufac¬ 
ture,  and  are  afterwards  fitted  into  the  body  of 
the  machine,  which  is  the  product  of  machin¬ 
ery.1  The  machine  proper  is  therefore  a  mechan¬ 
ism  that,  after  being  set  in  motion,  performs 
with  its  tools  the  same  operations  that  were 
formerly  done  by  the  workman  with  similar 
tools.  Whether  the  motive  power  is  derived 
from  man,  or  from  some  other  machine,  makes 
no  difference  in  this  respect.  From  the  moment 
that  the  tool  proper  is  taken  from  man  and 
fitted  into  a  mechanism,  a  machine  takes  the 
place  of  a  mere  implement.  The  difference 
strikes  one  at  once,  even  in  those  cases  where 
man  himself  continues  to  be  the  prime  mover. 
The  number  of  implements  that  he  himself  cai\ 
use  simultaneously  is  limited  by  the  number  of 
his  own  natural  instruments  of  production,  by 
the  number  of  his  bodily  organs.  In  Germany, 
they  tried  at  first  to  make  one  spinner  work  two 
spinning  wheels,  that  is,  to  work  simultaneous¬ 
ly  with  both  hands  and  both  feet.  This  was  too 
difficult.  Later,  a  treadle  spinning  wheel  with 
two  spindles  was  invented,  but  adepts  in  spin¬ 
ning,  who  could  spin  two  threads  at  once,  were 
almost  as  scarce  as  two-headed  men.  The  jenny 
on  the  other  hand,  even  at  its  very  birth,  spun 
with  twelve  to  eighteen  spindles,  and  the  stock¬ 
ing-loom  knits  with  many  thousand  needles  at 

1  Especially  in  the  original  form  of  the  power-loom,  we 
recognize,  at  the  first  glance,  the  ancient  loom.  In  its  mod¬ 
ern  form,  the  power-loom  has  undergone  essential  altera¬ 
tions. 

1  It  is  only  during  the  last  fifteen  years  (i.e.,  since  about 
1850)  that  a  constantly  increasing  portion  of  these  ma¬ 
chine  tools  have  been  made  in  England  by  machinery,  and 
that  not  by  the  same  manufacturers  who  make  the  ma¬ 
chines.  Instances  of  machines  for  the  fabrication  of  these 
mechanical  tools  are:  the  automatic  bobbin-making  engine, 
the  card-setting  engine,  shuttle-making  machines,  and  ma¬ 
chines  for  forging  mule  and  throstle  spindles. 


once.  The  number  of  tools  that  a  machine  can 
bring  into  play  simultaneously  is  from  the  very 
first  emancipated  from  the  organic  limits  that 
hedge  in  the  tools  of  a  handicraftsman. 

In  many  manual  implements  the  distinction 
between  man  as  mere  motive  power  and  man 
as  the  workman  or  operator,  properly  so-called, 
is  brought  into  striking  contrast.  For  instance, 
the  foot  is  merely  the  prime  mover  of  the  spin¬ 
ning  wheel,  while  the  hand,  working  with  the 
spindle  and  drawing  and  twisting,  performs  the 
real  operation  of  spinning.  It  is  this  last  part  of 
the  handicraftsman's  implement  that  is  first 
seized  upon  by  the  industrial  revolution,  leav¬ 
ing  to  the  workman,  in  addition  to  his  new  la¬ 
bour  of  watching  the  machine  with  his  eyes  and 
correcting  its  mistakes  with  his  hands,  the 
merely  mechanical  part  of  being  the  moving 
power.  On  the  other  hand,  implements,  in  re¬ 
gard  to  which  man  has  always  acted  as  a  simple 
motive  power  (as,  for  instance,  by  turning  the 
crank  of  a  mill,3  by  pumping,  by  moving  up  and 
down  the  arm  of  a  bellows,  by  pounding  with  a 
mortar, etc.),  such  implements  soon  call  for  the 
application  of  animals,  water,4  and  wind,  as  mo¬ 
tive  powers.  Here  and  there,  long  before  the 
period  of  manufacture,  and  also  to  some  extent 
during  that  period,  these  implements  pass  over 
into  machines,  but  without  creating  any  revo¬ 
lution  in  the  mode  of  production.  It  becomes 
evident  in  the  period  of  modern  industry  that 
these  implements,  even  under  their  form  of 
manual  tools,  are  already  machines.  For  in¬ 
stance,  the  pumps  with  which  the  Dutch,  in 
1 836-7,  emptied  the  Lake  of  Harlem,  were  con¬ 
structed  on  the  principle  of  ordinary  pumps; 
the  only  difference  being  that  their  pistons  were 
driven  by  cyclopean  steam-engines  instead  of 
by  men.  The  common  and  very  imperfect  bel- 

8  Moses  says:  “Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  ox  that  treads 
the  corn."  The  Christian  philanthropists  of  Germany,  on 
the  contrary,  fastened  a  wooden  board  round  the  necks  of 
the  serfs,  whom  they  used  as  a  motive  power  for  grinding, 
in  order  to  prevent  them  from  putting  flour  into  their 
mouths  with  their  hands. 

4  It  was  partly  the  want  of  streams  with  a  good  fall  on 
them,  and  partly  their  battles  with  superabundance  of 
water  in  other  respects,  that  compelled  the  Dutch  to  re¬ 
sort  to  wind  as  a  motive  power.  The  windmill  itself  they 
got  from  Germany,  where  its  invention  was  the  origin  of  a 
pretty  squabble  between  the  nobles,  the  priests,  and  the 
emperor,  as  to  which  of  those  three  the  wind  “belonged." 
“The  air  makes  bondage,"  was  the  cry  in  Germany,  at  the 
same  time  that  the  wind  was  making  Holland  free.  What 
it  reduced  to  bondage  in  this  case  was  not  the  Dutchman, 
but  the  land  for  the  Dutchman.  In  1836, 12,000  windmills 
of  6ooo  horse-power  were  still  employed  in  Holland,  to 
prevent  two-thirds  of  the  land  from  being  reconverted  into 
morasses. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


lows  of  the  blacksmith  is,  in  England,  occasion¬ 
ally  converted  into  a  blowing-engine  by  con¬ 
necting  its  arm  with  a  steam-engine.  The 
steam-engine  itself,  such  as  it  was  at  its  inven¬ 
tion,  during  the  manufacturing  period  at  the 
close  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  such  as 
it  continued  to  be  down  to  1780,1  did  not  give 
rise  to  any  industrial  revolution.  It  was,  on  the 
contrary,  the  invention  of  machines  that  made 
a  revolution  in  the  form  of  steam-engines  neces¬ 
sary.  As  soon  as  man,  instead  of  working  with 
an  implement  on  the  subject  of  his  labour,  be¬ 
comes  merely  the  motive  power  of  an  imple¬ 
ment-machine,  it  is  a  mere  accident  that  motive 
power  takes  the  disguise  of  human  muscle;  and 
it  may  equally  well  take  the  form  of  wind, 
water,  or  steam.  Of  course,  this  does  not  pre¬ 
vent  such  a  change  of  form  from  producing 
great  technical  alterations  in  the  mechanism 
that  was  originally  constructed  to  be  driven  by 
man  alone.  Nowadays,  all  machines  that  have 
their  way  to  make,  such  as  sewing  machines, 
bread-making  machines,  etc.,  arc,  unless  from 
their  very  nature  their  use  on  a  small  scale 
is  excluded,  constructed  to  be  driven  both 
by  human  and  by  purely  mechanical  motive 
power. 

The  machine,  which  is  the  starting  point  of 
the  industrial  revolution,  supersedes  the  work¬ 
man,  who  handles  a  single  tool,  by  a  mechanism 
operating  with  a  number  of  similar  tools,  and 
set  in  motion  by  a  single  motive  power,  what¬ 
ever  the  form  of  that  power  may  be.2  Here  we 
have  the  machine,  but  only  as  an  elementary 
factor  of  production  by  machinery. 

Increase  in  the  size  of  the  machine  and  in  the 
number  of  its  working  tools  calls  for  a  more 
massive  mechanism  to  drive  it;  and  this  mech¬ 
anism  requires,  in  order  to  overcome  its  resist¬ 
ance,  a  mightier  moving  power  than  that  of 
man,  apart  from  the  fact  that  man  is  a  very  im¬ 
perfect  instrument  for  producing  uniform  con¬ 
tinued  motion.  But  assuming  that  he  is  acting 
simply  as  a  motor,  that  a  machine  has  taken  the 
place  of  his  tool,  it  is  evident  that  he  can  be  re¬ 
placed  by  natural  forces.  Of  all  the  great  motors 
•  handed  down  from  the  manufacturing  period, 
horse-power  is  the  worst,  partly  because  a  horse 
has  a  head  of  his  own,  partly  because  he  is  cost¬ 
ly,  and  the  extent  to  which  he  is  applicable  in 

1  It  was,  indeed,  very  much  improved  by  Watt’s  first  so- 
called  single  acting  engine;  but,  in  this  form,  it  continued 
to  be  a  mere  machine  for  raising  water  and  the  liquor  from 
salt  mines. 

a  “The  union  of  all  these  simple  instruments,  set  in  mo¬ 
tion  by  a  single  motor,  constitutes  a  machine.”— -Babbage, 
op.  tit. 


183 

factories  is  very  restricted.3  Nevertheless,  the 
horse  was  extensively  used  during  the  infancy 
of  modern  industry.  This  is  proved  as  well  by  the 
complaints  of  contemporary  agriculturists  as 
by  the  term  horse-power ,  which  has  survived  to 
this  day  as  an  expression  for  mechanical  force. 

Wind  was  too  inconstant  and  uncontrollable, 
and,  besides,  in  England,  the  birthplace  of  mod¬ 
ern  industry,  the  use  of  water-power  preponder¬ 
ated  even  during  the  manufacturing  period.  In 
the  seventeenth  century  attempts  had  already 
been  made  to  turn  two  pairs  of  millstones  with 
a  single  water-wheel.  But  the  increased  size  of 
the  gearing  was  too  much  for  the  water-power, 
which  had  now  become  insufficient  and  this  was 
one  of  the  circumstances  that  led  to  a  more  ac¬ 
curate  investigation  of  the  laws  of  friction.  In 
the  same  way,  the  irregularity  caused  by  the 
motive  power  in  mills  that  were  put  in  motion 
by  pushing  and  pulling  a  lever  led  to  the  theory 
and  the  application  of  the  flywheel,  which  after¬ 
wards  plays  so  important  a  part  in  modern  in¬ 
dustry.4  In  this  way,  during  the  manufacturing 
period  were  developed  the  first  scientific  and 
technical  elements  of  modern  mechanical  in¬ 
dustry.  Arkwright’s  throstle  spinning  mill  was 
from  the  very  first  turned  by  water.  But  for  all 
that,  the  use  of  water,  as  the  predominant  mo¬ 
tive  power,  was  beset  with  difficulties.  It  could 
not  be  increased  at  will,  it  failed  at  certain  sea¬ 
sons  of  the  year,  and,  above  all,  it  was  essential- 

*  In  January,  1861,  John  C.  Morton  read  before  the 
Society  of  Arts  a  paper  on  The  Forces  Employed  in  Agri¬ 
culture.  He  there  states:  "Every  improvement  that  fur¬ 
thers  the  uniformity  of  the  land  makes  the  steam-engine 
more  and  more  applicable  to  the  production  of  pure  me¬ 
chanical  force.  .  .  .  Horse-power  is  requisite  wherever 
crooked  fences  and  other  obstructions  prevent  uniform  ac¬ 
tion.  These  obstructions  are  vanishing  day  by  day.  For 
operations  that  demand  more  exercise  of  will  than  actual 
force,  the  only  power  applicable  is  that  controlled  every 
instant  by  the  human  mind—  in  other  words,  man-power.” 
Mr.  Morton  then  reduces  steam-power,  horse-power,  and 
man-power,  to  the  unit  in  general  use  for  steam-engines, 
namely,  the  force  required  to  raise  33,000  pounds  one  foot 
in  one  minute,  and  reckons  the  cost  of  one  horse-power 
from  a  steam  engine  to  be  3<f.,  and  from  a  horse  to  be  5  Ytd. 
per  hour.  Further,  if  a  horse  must  fully  maintain  its  health, 
it  can  work  no  more  than  8  hours  a  day.  Three  at  the  least 
out  of  every  seven  horses  used  on  tillage  land  during  the 
can  be  dispensed  with  by  using  steam-power,  at  an 
expense  not  greater  than  that  which  the  horses  dispensed 
with  would  cost  during  the  three  of  four  months  in  which 
alone  they  can  be  used  effectively.  Lastly,  steam-power,  in 
those  agricultural  operations  in  which  it  can  be  employed, 
improves,  in  comparison  with  horse-power,  the  quality  of 
the  work.  To  do  the  work  of  a  steam-engine  would  require 
sixty-six  men,  at  a  total  cost  of  15 s.  an  hour,  and  to  do  the 
work  of  a  horse,  thirty-two  men,  at  a  total  cost  of  &r.  an 
hour. 

4  Faulhebr,  1625;  De  Cous,  1688. 


CAPITAL 


184 

ly  local.1  Not  till  the  invention  of  Watt’s  second 
and  so-called  double-acting  steam-engine  was 
a  prime  mover  found  that  begot  its  own  force 
by  the  consumption  of  coal  and  water;  whose 
power  was  entirely  under  man's  control;  that 
was  mobile  and  a  means  of  locomotion;  that 
was  urban  and  not,  like  the  water-wheel,  rural; 
that  permitted  production  to  be  concentrated 
in  towns  instead  of,  like  the  water-wheels,  being 
scattered  up  and  down  the  country;1  that  was  of 
universal  technical  application  and,  relatively 
speaking,  little  affected  in  its  choice  of  residence 
by  local  circumstances.  The  greatness  of  Watt's 
genius  showed  itself  in  the  specification  of  the 
patent  that  he  took  out  in  April,  1784.  In  that 
specification  his  steam-engine  is  described  not 
as  an  invention  for  a  specific  purpose  but  as  an 
agent  universally  applicable  in  mechanical  in¬ 
dustry.  In  it  he  points  out  applications,  many 
of  which,  as,  for  instance,  the  steam-hammer, 
were  not  introduced  till  half  a  century  later. 
Nevertheless,  he  doubted  the  use  of  steam-en¬ 
gines  in  navigation.  His  successors,  Boulton 
and  Watt,  sent  to  the  exhibition  of  1851  steam- 
engines  of  colossal  size  for  ocean  steamers. 

As  soon  as  tools  had  been  converted  from  be¬ 
ing  manual  implements  of  man  into  implements 
of  a  mechanical  apparatus,  of  a  machine,  the 
motive  mechanism  also  acquired  an  independ¬ 
ent  form,  entirely  emancipated  from  the  re¬ 
straints  of  human  strength.  Thereupon  the  in¬ 
dividual  machine  that  we  have  hitherto  been 
considering  sinks  into  a  mere  factor  in  produce 
tion  by  machinery.  One  motive  mechanism  was 
now  able  to  drive  many  machines  at  once.  The 
motive  mechanism  grows  with  the  number  of 
the  machines  that  are  turned  simultaneously, 
and  the  transmitting  mechanism  becomes  enor¬ 
mously  extended. 

We  now  proceed  to  distinguish  the  coopera¬ 
tion  of  a  number  of  machines  of  one  kind  from  a 
complex  system  of  machinery. 

1  The  modern  turbine  frees  the  industrial  exploitation 
of  water-power  from  many  of  its  former  fetters. 

1  “In  the  early  days  of  textile  manufactures,  the  locality 
of  the  factory  depended  upon  the  existence  of  a  stream 
having  a  sufficient  fall  to  turn  a  water-wheel;  and,  although 
the  establishment  of  the  water  mills  was  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  the  breaking  up  of  the  domestic  system  of  manu¬ 
facture,  yet  the  mills  necessarily  situated  upon  streams, 
and  frequently  at  considerable  distances  the  one  from  the 
other,  formed  part  of  a  rural,  rather  than  an  urban,  system; 
and  it  was  not  until  the  introduction  of  steam-power  as  a 
substitute  for  the  stream  that  factories  were  congregated 
in  towns  and  localities  where  the  coal  and  water  required 
for  the  production  of  steam  were  found  in  sufficient  quan¬ 
tities.  The  steam-engine  is  the  parent  of  manufacturing 
towns.”— A.  Redgrave,  Reports  oj  the  Inspectors  oj  Fac~ 
tories ,  30th  April,  1866,  p.  36. 


In  the  one  case,  the  product  is  entirely  made 
by  a  single  machine  which  performs  all  the  vari¬ 
ous  operations  previously  done  by  one  handi¬ 
craftsman  with  his  tool;  as,  for  instance,  by  a 
weaver  with  his  loom;  or  by  several  handicrafts¬ 
men  successively,  either  separately  or  as  mem¬ 
bers  of  a  system  of  manufacture.*  For  example, 
in  the  manufacture  of  envelopes,  one  man  fold¬ 
ed  the  paper  with  the  folder,  another  laid  on  the 
gum,  a  third  turned  over  the  flap  on  which  the 
device  is  impressed,  a  fourth  embossed  the  de¬ 
vice,  and  so  on;  and  for  each  of  these  operations 
the  envelope  had  to  change  hands.  One  single 
envelope  machine  now  performs  all  these  opera¬ 
tions  at  once,  and  makes  more  than  three  thou¬ 
sand  envelopes  in  an  hour.  In  the  London  ex¬ 
hibition  of  1862,  there  was  an  American  ma¬ 
chine  for  making  paper  bags,  ft  cut  the  paper, 
pasted,  folded,  and  finished  three  hundred  in  a 
minute.  Here,  the  whole  process,  which  when 
carried  on  as  manufacture  was  split  up  into,  and 
carried  out  by,  a  series  of  operations,  is  com¬ 
pleted  by  a  single  machine  working  a  combina¬ 
tion  of  various  tools.  Now,  whether  such  a  ma¬ 
chine  be  merely  a  reproduction  of  a  complicated 
manual  implement,  or  a  combination  of  various 
simple  implements  specialized  by  manufacture, 
in  either  case,  in  the  factory  (i.e.,  in  the  work¬ 
shop  in  which  machinery  alone  is  used)  we  meet 
again  with  simple  cooperation;  and,  leaving  the 
workman  out  of  consideration  forthe  moment, 
this  cooperation  presents  itself  to  us  in  the  first 
instance  as  the  conglomeration  in  one  place  of 
similar  and  simultaneously  acting  machines. 
Thus,  a  weaving  factory  is  constituted  of  a 
number  of  power-looms  working  side  by  side, 
and  a  sewing  factory  of  a  number  of  sewing  ma¬ 
chines  all  in  the  same  building.  But  there  is  here 
a  technical  oneness  in  the  whole  system,  owing 
to  all  the  machines  receiving  their  impulse  si¬ 
multaneously  and  in  an  equal  degree  from  the 
pulsations  of  the  common  prime  mover,  by  the 
intermediary  of  the  transmitting  mechanism; 
and  this  mechanism  to  a  certain  extent  is  also 
common  to  them  all,  since  only  particular  rami- 

*  From  the  standpoint  of  division  of  labour  in  manufac¬ 
ture,  weaving  was  not  simple,  but,  on  the  contrary,  com¬ 
plicated  manual  labour;  and  consequently  the  power-loom 
is  a  machine  that  does  very  complicated  w^rk.  It  is  alto¬ 
gether  erroneous  to  suppose  that  modern  machinery  origi¬ 
nally  appropriated  those  operations  alone,  which  division 
of  labour  had  simplified.  Spinning  and  weaving  were,  dur¬ 
ing  the  manufacturing  period,  split  up  into  new  species, 
and  the  implements  were  modified  and  improved;  but  the 
labour  itself  was  in  no  way  divided,  and  it  retained  its 
handicraft  character.  It  is  not  the  labour,  but  the  instru¬ 
ment  01  labour,  that  serves  as  the  starting-point  of  the 
machine. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


fications  of  it  branch  off  to  each  machine.  Just 
as  a  number  of  tools,  then,  form  the  organs  of 
a  machine,  so  a  number  of  machines  of  one  kind 
constitute  the  organs  of  the  motive  mechanism. 

A  real  machinery  system,  however,  does  not 
take  the  place  of  these  independent  machines, 
until  the  subject  of  labour  goes  through  a  con¬ 
nected  series  of  detail  processes  that  are  car¬ 
ried  out  by  a  chain  of  machines  of  various  kinds, 
the  one  supplementing  the  other.  Here  we  have 
again  the  cooperation  by  division  of  labour  that 
characterizes  manufacture;  only  now  it  is  a 
combination  of  detail  machines.  The  special 
tools  of  the  various  detail  workmen,  such  as 
those  of  the  beaters,  combers,  spinners,  etc.,  in 
the  woollen  manufacture,  are  now  transformed 
into  the  tools  of  specialized  machines,  each  ma¬ 
chine  constituting  a  special  organ  with  a  spe¬ 
cial  function  in  the  system.  In  those  branches 
of  industry  in  which  the  machinery  system  is 
first  introduced,  manufacture  itself  furnishes,  in 
a  general  way,  the  natural  basis  for  the  division, 
and  consequent  organization,  of  the  process  of 
production.1 

Nevertheless,  an  essential  difference  at  once 
manifests  itself.  In  manufacture  it  is  the  work¬ 
men  who,  with  their  manual  implements,  must, 
either  singly  or  in  groups,  carry  on  each  par¬ 
ticular  detail  process.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
workman  becomes  adapted  to  the  process,  on 
the  other,  the  process  was  previously  made  suit¬ 
able  to  the  workman.  This  subjective  principle 
of  the  division  of  labour  no  longer  exists  in  pro¬ 
duction  by  machinery.  Here,  the  process  as  a 
whole  is  examined  objectively,  in  itself,  that  is 

1  Before  the  epoch  of  mechanical  industry,  the  wool  man¬ 
ufacture  was  the  predominating  manufacture  in  England. 
Hence  it  was  in  this  industry  that,  in  the  first  half  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  the  most  experiments  were  made.  Cot¬ 
ton,  which  required  less  careful  preparation  for  its  treat¬ 
ment  by  machinery,  derived  the  benefit  of  the  experience 
gained  on  wool,  just  as  afterwards  the  manipulation  of 
wool  by  machinery  was  developed  on  the  lines  of  cotton¬ 
spinning  and  weaving  by  machinery.  It  was  only  during 
the  ten  years  immediately  preceding  1866  that  isolated  de¬ 
tails  of  the  wool  manufacture,  such  as  wool-combing,  were 
incorporated  in  the  factory  system.  “The  application  of 
power  to  the  process  of  combing  wool . . .  extensively  in 
operation  since  the  introduction  of  the  combing  machine, 
especially  Lister’s . . .  undoubtedly  had  the  effect  of  throw¬ 
ing  a  very  large  number  of  men  out  of  work.  Wool  was 
formerly  combed  by  hand,  moat  frequently  in  the  cottage 
of  the  comber.  It  is  now  very  generally  combed  in  the  fac¬ 
tory,  and  hand-labour  is  superseded,  except  in  some  par¬ 
ticular  kinds  of  work,  in  which  hand-combed  wool  is  still 
preferred.  Many  of  the  hand-combers  found  employment 
in  the  factories,  but  the  produce  of  the  hand-combers  bears 
so  small  a  proportion  to  that  of  the  machine  that  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  a  very  large  number  of  combers  has  passed 
away.”— Report*  of  Inspectors  of  Factories  for  31st  Oct., 
1856^  p.  16. 


185 

to  say,  without  regard  to  the  question  of  its 
execution  by  human  hands,  it  is  analysed  into 
its  constituent  phases;  and  the  problem  of  how 
to  execute  each  detail  process,  and  bind  them 
all  into  a  whole,  is  sol  ved  by  the  aid  of  machines, 
chemistry,  etc.2  But,  of  course,  in  this  case  also, 
theory  must  be  perfected  by  accumulated  ex¬ 
perience  on  a  large  scale.  Each  detail  machine 
supplies  raw  material  to  the  machine  next  in 
order;  and  since  they  arc  all  working  at  the 
same  time,  the  product  is  always  going  through 
the  various  stages  of  its  fabrication,  and  is  also 
constantly  in  a  state  of  transition,  from  one 
phase  to  another.  Just  as  in  manufacture  the 
direct  cooperation  of  the  detail  labourers  es¬ 
tablishes  a  numerical  proportion  between  the 
special  groups,  so  in  an  organized  system  of  ma¬ 
chinery,  where  one  detail  machine  is  constantly 
kept  employed  by  another,  a  fixed  relation  is 
established  between  their  numbers,  their  size, 
and  their  speed.  The  collective  machine,  now 
an  organized  system  of  various  kinds  of  single 
machines  and  of  groups  of  single  machines,  be¬ 
comes  more  and  more  perfect,  the  more  the 
process  as  a  whole  becomes  a  continuous  one, 
i.e.,  the  less  the  raw  material  is  interrupted  in 
its  passage  from  its  first  phase  to  its  last;  in 
other  words,  the  more  its  passage  from  one 
phase  to  another  is  effected,  not  by  the  hand  of 
man,  but  by  the  machinery  itself.  In  manufac¬ 
ture  the  isolation  of  each  detail  process  is  a  con¬ 
dition  imposed  by  the  nature  of  division  of  la¬ 
bour,  but  in  the  fully  developed  factory  the  con¬ 
tinuity  of  those  processes  is,  on  the  contrary, 
imperative. 

A  system  of  machinery,  whether  it  reposes 
on  the  mere  cooperation  of  similar  machines,  as 
in  weaving,  or  on  a  combination  of  different  ma¬ 
chines,  as  in  spinning,  constitutes  in  itself  a  huge 
automaton,  wheneveritisdriven  by  a  self-acting 
prime  mover.  But  although  the  factory  as  a 
whole  be  driven  by  its  steam-engine,  yet  either 
some  of  the  individual  machines  may  require 
the  aid  of  the  workman  for  some  of  their  move¬ 
ments  (such  aid  was  necessary  for  the  running 
in  of  the  mule  carriage,  before  the  invention  of 
the  self-acting  mule,  and  is  still  necessary  in 
fine-spinning  mills);  or,  to  enable  a  machine  to 
do  its  work,  certain  parts  of  it  may  require  to  be 
handled  by  the  workman  like  a  manual  tool; 
this  was  the  case  in  machinemakers'  workshops, 

2  “The  principle  of  the  factory  system,  then,  is  to  sub¬ 
stitute  . . .  the  partition  of  a  process  into  its  essential  con¬ 
stituents,  for  the  division  or  graduation  of  labour  among 
artisans.”— Andrew  Ure,  The  Philosophy  of  Manufactures 
London,  1835,  p.  10. 


CAPITAL 


186 

before  the  conversion  of  the  slide  rest  into  a 
self-actor.  As  soon  as  a  machine  executes,  with¬ 
out  man’s  help,  all  the  movements  requisite  to 
elaborate  the  raw  material,  needing  only  at¬ 
tendance  from  him,  we  have  an  automatic  sys¬ 
tem  of  machinery,  and  one  that  is  susceptible 
of  constant  improvement  in  its  details.  Such 
improvements  as  the  apparatus  that  stops  a 
drawing  frame  whenever  a  sliver  breaks,  and 
the  self-acting  stop  that  stops  the  power-loom 
so  soon  as  the  shuttle  bobbin  is  emptied  of  weft, 
are  quite  modern  inventions.  As  an  example 
both  of  continuity  of  production  and  of  the  car¬ 
rying  out  of  the  automatic  principle,  we  may 
take  a  modem  paper-mill.  In  the  paper  industry 
generally,  we  may  advantageously  study  in  de¬ 
tail  not  only  the  distinctions  between  modes  of 
production  based  on  different  means  of  produc¬ 
tion,  but  also  the  connection  of  the  social  condi¬ 
tions  of  production  with  those  modes:  for  the 
old  German  paper-making  furnishes  us  with  a 
sample  of  handicraft  production;  that  of  Hol¬ 
land  in  the  seventeenth  and  of  France  in  the 
eighteenth  century  with  a  sample  of  manufac¬ 
turing  in  the  strict  sense;  and  that  of  modern 
England  with  a  sample  of  automatic  fabrica¬ 
tion  of  this  article.  Besides  these,  there  still  ex¬ 
ist  in  India  and  China  two  distinct  antique 
Asiatic  forms  of  the  same  industry. 

An  organized  system  of  machines  to  which 
motion  is  communicated  by  the  transmitting 
mechanism  from  a  central  automaton  is  the 
most  developed  form  of  production  by  ma¬ 
chinery.  Here  we  have  in  the  place  of  the  iso¬ 
lated  machine  a  mechanical  monster  whose 
body  fills  whole  factories,  and  whose  demon 
power,  at  first  veiled  under  the  slow  and  meas¬ 
ured  motions  of  his  giant  limbs,  at  length  breaks 
out  into  the  fast  and  furious  whirl  of  his  count¬ 
less  working  organs. 

There  were  mules  and  steam-engines  before 
there  were  any  labourers  whose  exclusive  occu¬ 
pation  it  was  to  make  mules  and  steam-engines; 
just  as  men  wore  clothes  before  there  were  such 
people  as  tailors.  The  inventions  of  Vaucanson, 
Arkwright,  Watt,  and  others,  were,  however, 
practicable,  only  because  those  inventors  found, 
ready  to  hand,  a  considerable  number  of  skilled 
mechanical  workmen,  placed  at  their  disposal 
by  the  manufacturing  period.  Some  of  these 
workmen  were  independent  handicraftsmen  of 
various  trades,  others  were  grouped  together  in 
manufactures,  in  which,  as  before-mentioned, 
division  of  labour  was  strictly  carried  out.  As 
inventions  increased  in  number,  and  the  de¬ 


mand  for  the  newly  discovered  machines  grew 
larger,  the  machine-making  industry  split  up 
more  and  more  into  numerous  independent 
branches,  and  division  of  labour  in  these  man¬ 
ufactures  was  more  and  more  developed. 
Here,  then,  we  see  in  manufacture  the  imme¬ 
diate  technical  foundation  of  modern  industry. 
Manufacture  produced  the  machinery  by 
means  of  which  modern  industry  abolished 
the  handicraft  and  manufacturing  systems 
in  those  spheres  of  production  that  it  first 
seized  upon.  The  factory  system  was  there¬ 
fore  raised,  in  the  natural  course  of  things,  on 
an  inadequate  foundation.  When  the  system  at¬ 
tained  to  a  certain  degree  of  development,  it 
had  to  root  up  this  ready-made  foundation, 
which  in  the  meantime  had  been  elaborated  on 
the  old  lines,  and  to  build  up  for  itself  a  basis 
that  should  correspond  to  its  methods  of  pro¬ 
duction.  Just  as  the  individual  machine  retains 
a  dwarfish  character,  so  long  as  it  is  worked  by 
the  power  of  man  alone,  and  just  as  no  system 
of  machinery  could  be  properly  developed  be¬ 
fore  the  steam-engine  took  the  place  of  the  ear¬ 
lier  motive  powers,  animals,  wind,  and  even 
water;  so,  too,  modern  industry  was  crippled  in 
its  complete  development,  so  long  as  its  char¬ 
acteristic  instrument  of  production,  the  ma¬ 
chine,  owed  its  existence  to  personal  strength 
and  personal  skill,  and  depended  on  the  muscu¬ 
lar  development,  the  keenness  of-wght,  and  the 
cunning  of  hand,  with  which  the  detail  work¬ 
men  in  manufactures,  and  the  manual  labour¬ 
ers  in  handicrafts,  wielded  their  dwarfish  im¬ 
plements.  Thus,  apart  from  the  costliness  of  the 
machines  made  in  this  way, -a  circumstance  that 
is  ever  present  to  the  mind  of  the  capitalist,  the 
expansion  of  industries  carried  on  by  means  of 
machinery,  and  the  invasion  by  machinery  of 
fresh  branches  of  production,  were  dependent 
on  the  growth  of  a  class  of  workmen  who,  owing 
to  the  almost  artistic  nature  of  their  employ¬ 
ment,  could  increase  their  numbers  only  grad¬ 
ually,  and  not  by  leaps  and  bounds.  But  be¬ 
sides  this,  at  a  certain  stage  of  its  development, 
modern  industry  became  technologically  in¬ 
compatible  with  the  basis  furnished  for  it  by 
handicraft  and  manufacture.  The  increasing 
size  of  the  prime  movers,  of  the  transmitting 
mechanism,  and  of  the  machines  proper,  the 
greater  complication,  multiformity,  and  regu¬ 
larity  of  the  details  of  these  machines,  as  they 
more  and  more  departed  from  the  model  of 
those  originally  made  by  manual  labour,  and 
acquired  a  form,  untrammelled  except  by  the 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


conditions  under  which  they  worked,1  the  per¬ 
fecting  of  the  automatic  system,  and  the  use, 
every  day  more  unavoidable,  of  a  more  refrac¬ 
tory  material,  such  as  iron  instead  of  wood — 
the  solution  of  all  these  problems,  which  sprang 
up  by  the  force  of  circumstances,  everywhere 
met  with  a  stumbling-block  in  the  personal  re¬ 
strictions  which  even  the  collective  labourer  of 
manufacture  could  not  break  through  except  to 
a  limited  extent.  Such  machines  as  the  modern 
hydraulic  press,  the  modern  power-loom,  and 
the  modern  carding  engine,  could  never  have 
been  furnished  by  manufacture. 

A  radical  change  in  the  mode  of  production 
in  one  sphere  of  industry  involves  a  similar 
change  in  other  spheres.  This  happens  at  first 
in  such  branches  of  industry  as  are  connected 
by  being  separate  phases  of  a  process,  and  yet 
arc  isolated  by  the  social  division  of  labour  in 
such  a  way  that  each  of  them  produces  an  in¬ 
dependent  commodity.  Thus  spinning  by  ma¬ 
chinery  made  weaving  by  machinery  a  neces¬ 
sity,  and  both  .u^fher  made  imperative  the 
mechanical  and  chemical  revolution  that  took 
place  in  bleaching,  printing,  and  dyeing.  So  too, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  revolution  in  cotton¬ 
spinning  called  forth  the  invention  of  the  gin  for 
separating  the  seeds  from  the  cotton  fibre;  it 
was  only  by  means  of  this  invention  that  the 
production  of  cotton  became  possible  on  the 
enormous  scale  at  present  required.2  But  more 
especially,  the  revolution  in  the  modes  of  pro¬ 
duction  of  industry  and  agriculture  made  nec¬ 
essary  a  revolution  in  the  general  conditions  of 
the  social  process  of  production,  i.e.,  in  the 

1  The  power-loom  was  at  first  made  chiefly  of  wood;  in 
its  improved  modern  form  it  is  made  of  iron.  To  what  an 
extent  the  old  forms  of  the  instruments  of  production  in¬ 
fluenced  their  new  forms  at  first  starring  is  shown  by, 
amongst  other  things,  the  most  superficial  comparison  of 
the  present  power-loom  with  the  old  one,  of  the  modern 
blowing  apparatus  of  a  blast  furnace  with  the  first  ineffi¬ 
cient  mechanical  reproduction  of  the  ordinary  bellows, 
and,  perhaps  more  strikingly  than  in  any  other  way,  by 
the  attempts  before  the  invention  of  the  present  locomo¬ 
tive  to  construct  a  locomotive  that  actually  had  two  feet, 
which,  after  the  fashion  of  a  horse,  it  raised  alternately 
from  the  ground.  It  is  only  after  considerable  development 
of  the  science  of  mechanics,  and  accumulated  practical  ex¬ 
perience,  that  the  form  of  a  machine  becomes  settled  en¬ 
tirely  in  accordance  with  mechanical  principles  and  eman¬ 
cipated  from  the  traditional  form  of  the  tool  that  gave  rise 
to  it. 

2  Eli  Whitney’s  cotton  gin  had  until  very  recent  times 
undergone  less  essential  changes  than  any  other  machine 
of  the  eighteenth  century.  It  is  only  during  the  last  decade 
(i.e.,  since  1856)  that  another  American,  Mr.  Emery,  of  Al¬ 
bany,  New  York,  has  rendered  Whitney’s  gin  antiquated 
by  an  improvement  as  simple  as  it  is  effective. 


187 

means  of  communication  and  of  transport.  In 
a  society  whose  pivots,  to  use  an  expression  of 
Fourier,  were  agriculture  on  a  small  scale,  with 
its  subsidiary  domestic  industries,  and  the  ur¬ 
ban  handicrafts,  the  means  of  communication 
and  transport  were  so  utterly  inadequate  to  the 
productive  requirements  of  the  manufacturing 
period,  with  its  extended  division  of  social  la¬ 
bour,  its  concentration  of  the  instruments  of  la¬ 
bour  and  of  the  workmen,  and  its  colonial  mar¬ 
kets,  that  they  became  in  fact  revolutionized. 
In  the  same  way  the  means  of  communication 
and  transport  handed  down  from  the  manufac¬ 
turing  period  soon  became  unbearable  tram¬ 
mels  on  modern  industry,  with  its  feverish  haste 
of  production,  its  enormous  extent,  its  constant 
flinging  of  capital  and  labour  from  one  sphere 
of  production  into  another,  and  its  newly-cre¬ 
ated  connections  with  the  marketsof  the  whole 
world.  Hence,  apart  from  the  radical  changes 
introduced  in  the  construction  of  sailing  ves¬ 
sels,  the  means  of  communication  and  transport 
became  gradually  adapted  to  the  modes  of  pro¬ 
duction  of  mechanical  industry,  by  the  creation 
of  a  system  of  river  steamers,  railways,  ocean 
steamers,  and  telegraphs.  But  the  huge  masses 
of  iron  that  had  now  to  be  forged,  to  be  welded, 
to  be  cut,  to  be  bored,  and  to  be  shaped,  de¬ 
manded,  on  their  part,  huge  machines,  for  the 
construction  of  which  the  methods  of  the  manu¬ 
facturing  period  were  utterly  inadequate. 

Modern  industry  had,  therefore,  itself  to  take 
in  hand  the  machine,  its  characteristic  instru¬ 
ment  of  production,  and  to  construct  machines 
by  machines.  It  was  not  till  it  did  this  that  it 
built  up  for  itself  a  fitting  technical  foundation 
and  stood  on  its  own  feet.  Machinery,  simul¬ 
taneously  with  the  increasing  use  of  it  in  the 
first  decades  of  this  century,  appropriated,  by 
degrees,  the  fabrication  of  machines  proper. 
But  it  was  only  during  the  decade  preceding 
1866  that  the  construction  of  railways  and 
ocean  steamers  on  a  stupendous  scale  called  in¬ 
to  existence  the  gigantic  machines  now  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  construction  of  prime  movers. 

The  most  essential  condition  to  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  machines  by  machines  was  a  prime  mov¬ 
er  capable  of  exerting  any  amount  of  force  and 
yet  under  perfect  control.  Such  a  condition  was 
already  supplied  by  the  steam-engine.  But  at 
the  same  time  it  was  necessary  to  produce  the 
geometrically  accurate  straight  lines,  planes, 
circles,  cylinders,  cones,  and  spheres,  required 
in  the  detail  parts  of  the  machines.  This  prob¬ 
lem  Henry  Maudsley  solved  in  the  first  decade 


188  CAPITAL 


of  this  century  by  the  invention  of  the  slide  rest, 
a  tool  that  was  soon  made  automatic,  and  in  a 
modified  form  was  applied  to  other  construc¬ 
tive  machines  besides  the  lathe,  for  which  it  was 
originally  intended.  This  mechanical  appliance 
replaces,  not  some  particular  tool,  but  the  hand 
itself,  which  produces  a  given  form  by  holding 
and  guiding  the  cutting  tool  along  the  iron  or 
other  material  operated  upon.  Thus  it  became 
possible  to  produce  the  forms  of  the  individual 
parts  of  machinery  “with  a  degree  of  ease,  ac¬ 
curacy,  and  speed,  that  no  accumulated  experi¬ 
ence  of  the  hand  of  the  most  skilled  workman 
could  give/’1 

If  we  now  fix  our  attention  on  that  portion 
of  the  machinery  employed  in  the  construction 
of  machines,  which  constitutes  the  operating 
tool,  we  find  the  manual  implements  reappear¬ 
ing,  but  on  a  huge  scale.  The  operating  part  of 
the  boring  machine  is  an  immense  drill  driven 
by  a  steam-engine;  without  this  machine,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  cylinders  of  large  steam- 
engines  and  of  hydraulic  presses  could  not  be 
made.  The  mechanical  lathe  is  only  a  titanic  re¬ 
production  of  the  ordinary  foot-lathe;  the  plan¬ 
ing  machine,  an  iron  carpenter  that  works  on 
iron  with  the  same  tools  that  the  human  car¬ 
penter  employs  on  wood;  the  instrument  that, 
on  the  London  wharves,  cuts  the  veneers,  is  a 
gigantic  razor;  the  tool  of  the  shearing  machine, 
which  shears  iron  as  easily  as  a  tailor's  scissors 
cut  cloth,  is  a  monster  pair  of  scissors;  and  the 
steam  hammer  works  with  an  ordinary  hammer 
head,  but  of  such  a  weight  that  not  Thor  him¬ 
self  could  wield  it.2  These  steam  hammers  are 
an  invention  of  Nasmyth,  and  there  is  one  that 
weighs  over  six  tons  and  strikes  with  a  vertical 
fall  of  seven  feet,  on  an  anvil  weighing  thirty-six 
tons.  It  is  mere  child’s-play  for  it  to  crush  a 
block  of  granite  into  powder,  yet  it  is  no  less 
capable  of  driving,  with  a  succession  of  light 
taps,  a  nail  into  a  piece  of  soft  wood.3 

The  implements  of  labour,  in  the  form  of  ma¬ 
chinery,  necessitate  the  substitution  of  natural 

1  The  Industry  of  Nations ,  London,  1855,  Part  II,  p. 
239. — This  work  also  remarks:  "Simple  and  outwardly  un¬ 
important  as  this  appendage  to  lathes  may  appear,  it  is 
not,  we  believe,  averring  too  much  to  state  that  its  influ¬ 
ence  in  improving  and  extending  the  use  of  machinery  has 
been  as  great  as  that  produced  by  Watt’s  improvements  of 
the  steam-engine  itself.  Its  introduction  went  at  once  to 
perfect  all  machinery,  to  cheapen  it,  and  to  stimulate  in¬ 
vention  and  improvement.” 

2  One  of  these  machines,  used  for  forging  paddle-wheel 
shafts  in  London,  is  called  "Thor.”  It  forges  a  shaft  of  16# 

tons  with  as  much  ease  as  a  blacksmith  forges  a  horseshoe. 

*  Wood-working  machines  that  are  also  capable  of  being 
employed  on  a  small  scale  are  mostly  American  inventions. 


forces  for  human  force,  and  the  conscious  appli¬ 
cation  of  science,  instead  of  rule  of  thumb.  In 
manufacture,  the  organization  of  the  social  la¬ 
bour  process  is  purely  subjective;  it  is  a  combi¬ 
nation  of  detail  labourers;  in  its  machinery  sys¬ 
tem,  modern  industry  has  a  productive  organ¬ 
ism  that  is  purely  objective,  in  which  the  la¬ 
bourer  becomes  a  mere  appendage  to  an  already 
existing  material  condition  of  production.  In 
simple  cooperation,  and  even  in  that  founded 
on  division  of  labour,  the  suppression  of  the  iso¬ 
lated  by  the  collective  workman  still  appears  to 
be  more  or  less  accidental.  Machinery,  with  a 
few  exceptions  to  be  mentioned  later,  operates 
only  by  means  of  associated  labour,  or  labour 
in  common.  Hence  the  cooperative  character  of 
the  labour  process  is,  in  the  latter  case,  a  techni¬ 
cal  necessity  dictated  by  the  instrument  of  la¬ 
bour  itself. 

a.  The  Value  transferred  by  Machinery  to  the 

Product 

We  saw  that  the  productive  forces  resulting 
from  cooperation  and  division  of  labour  cost 
capital  nothing.  They  are  natural  forces  of  so¬ 
cial  labour.  So  also  physical  forces,  like  steam, 
water,  etc.,  when  appropriated  to  productive 
processes,  cost  nothing.  But  just  as  a  man  re¬ 
quires  lungs  to  breathe  with,  so  he  requires 
something  that  is  work  of  man’s  hand,  in  order 
to  consume  physical  forces  proUiictively.  A 
water-wheel  is  necessary  to  exploit  the  force  of 
water,  and  a  steam-engine  to  exploit  the  elas¬ 
ticity  of  steam.  Once  discovered,  the  law  of  the 
deviation  of  the  magnetic  needle  in  the  field  of 
an  electric  current,  or  the  law  of  the  magnetiza¬ 
tion  of  iron,  around  which  an  electric  current 
circulates,  cost  never  a  penny.4  But  the  exploi¬ 
tation  of  these  laws  for  the  purposes  of  teleg¬ 
raphy,  etc.,  necessitates  a  costly  and  extensive 
apparatus.  The  tool,  as  we  have  seen,  is  not  ex¬ 
terminated  by  the  machine.  From  being  a 
dwarf  implement  of  the  human  organism,  it  ex¬ 
pands  and  multiplies  into  the  implement  of  a 
mechanism  created  by  man.  Capital  now  sets 
the  labourer  to  work,  not  with  a  manual  tool, 
but  with  a  machine  which  itself  handles  the 

4  Science,  generally  speaking,  costs  the  capitalist  noth¬ 
ing,  a  fact  that  by  no  means  hinders  him  from  exploiting 
it.  The  science  of  others  is  as  much  annexed  by  capital  as 
the  labour  of  others.  Capitalistic  appropriation  and  per¬ 
sonal  appropriation,  whether  of  science  or  of  material 
wealth,  are,  however,  totally  different  things.  Dr.  lire  him¬ 
self  deplores  the  gross  ignorance  of  mechanical  science  ex¬ 
isting  anong  his  dear  machinery-exploiting  manufactur¬ 
ers,  and  Liebig  can  a  tale  unfold  about  the  astounding  ig¬ 
norance  of  chemistry  displayed  by  English  chemical  man¬ 
ufacturers. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


tools.  Although,  therefore,  it  is  clear  at  the  first 
glance  that,  by  incorporating  both  stupendous 
physical  forces  and  the  natural  sciences  with 
the  process  of  production,  modern  industry 
raises  the  productiveness  of  labour  to  an  extra¬ 
ordinary  degree,  it  is  by  no  means  equally  clear 
that  this  increased  productive  force  is  not,  on 
the  other  hand,  purchased  by  an  increased  ex¬ 
penditure  of  labour.  Machinery,  like  every  oth¬ 
er  component  of  constant  capital,  creates  no 
new  value,  but  yields  up  its  own  value  to  the 
product  that  it  serves  to  beget.  In  so  far  as  the 
machine  has  value  and,  in  consequence,  parts 
with  value  to  the  product,  it  forms  an  element 
in  the  value  of  that  product.  Instead  of  being 
cheapened,  the  product  is  made  dearer  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  value  of  the  machine.  And  it  is 
clear  as  noonday  that  machines  and  systems  of 
machinery,  the  characteristic  instruments  of  la¬ 
bour  of  modern  industry,  are  incomparably 
more  loaded  with  value  than  the  implements 
used  in  handicrafts  and  manufactures. 

In  the  first  place,  it  must  be  observed  that 
the  machinery,  while  always  entering  as  a  whole 
into  the  labour  process,  enters  into  the  value- 
hegetting  process  only  by  bits.  It  never  adds 
more  value  than  it  loses,  on  an  average,  by  wear 
and  tear.  Hence  there  is  a  great  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  value  of  a  machine  and  the  value 
transferred  in  a  given  time  by  that  machine  to 
the  product.  The  longer  the  life  of  the  machine 
in  the  labour  process,  the  greater  is  that  differ¬ 
ence.  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  as  we  have  already 
seen,  that  every  instrument  of  labour  enters  as 
a  whole  into  the  labour  process,  and  only  piece¬ 
meal,  proportionally  to  its  average  daily  loss  by 
wear  and  tear,  into  the  value-begetting  process. 
But  this  difference  between  the  instrument  as 
a  whole  and  its  daily  wear  and  tear  is  much 
greater  in  a  machine  than  in  a  tool,  because  the 
machine,  being  made  from  more  durable  ma¬ 
terial,  has  a  longer  life;  because  its  employment, 
being  regulated  by  strictly  scientific  laws,  al¬ 
lows  of  greater  economy  in  the  wear  and  tear  of 
its  parts,  and  in  the  materials  it  consumes;  and, 
lastly,  because  its  field  of  production  is  incom¬ 
parably  larger  than  that  of  a  tool.  After  making 
allowance,  both  in  the  case  of  the  machine  and 
of  the  tool,  for  their  average  daily  cost,  that  is, 
for  the  value  they  transmit  to  the  product  by 
their  average  daily  wear  and  tear,  and  for  their 
consumption  of  auxiliary  substances,  such  as 
oil,  coal,  and  so  on,  they  each  do  their  work  gra¬ 
tuitously,  just  like  the  forces  furnished  by  na¬ 
ture  without  the  help  of  man.  The  greater  the 
productive  power  of  the  machinery  compared 


189 

with  that  of  the  tool,  the  greater  is  the  extent  of 
its  gratuitous  service  compared  with  that  of  the 
tool.  In  modern  industry  man  succeeded  for  the 
first  time  in  making  the  product  of  his  past  la¬ 
bour  work  on  a  large  scale  gratuitously,  like  the 
forces  of  nature.1 

In  treating  of  cooperation  and  manufacture 
it  was  shown  that  certain  general  factors  of  pro¬ 
duction,  such  as  buildings,  are,  in  comparison 
with  the  scattered  means  of  production  of 
the  isolated  workman,  economized  by  being 
consumed  in  common,  and  that  they  therefore 
make  the  product  cheaper.  In  a  system  of  ma¬ 
chinery,  not  only  is  the  framework  of  the 
machine  consumed  in  common  by  its  numer¬ 
ous  operating  implements,  but  the  prime 
mover,  together  with  a  part  of  the  transmit¬ 
ting  mechanism,  is  consumed  in  common  by 
the  numerous  operative  machines. 

Given  the  difference  between  the  value  of  the 
machinery  and  the  value  transferred  by  it  in  a 
day  to  the  product,  the  extent  to  which  this 
latter  value  makes  the  product  dearer  depends, 
in  the  first  instance,  upon  the  size  of  the  prod¬ 
uct;  so  to  say,  upon  its  area.  Mr.  Baynes,  of 
Blackburn,  in  a  lecture  published  in  1858,  esti¬ 
mates  that  “each  real  mechanical  horsepower’2 

1  Ricardo  lays  such  stress  on  this  effect  of  machinery  (of 
which,  in  other  connections,  he  takes  no  more  notice  than 
he  does  of  the  general  distinction  between  the  labour  proc¬ 
ess  and  the  process  of  creating  surplus  value)  that  he  oc¬ 
casionally  loses  sight  of  the  value  given  up  by  machines  to 
the  product  and  puts  machines  on  the  same  footing  as  nat¬ 
ural  forces.  Thus  “Adam  Smith  nowhere  undervalues  the 
services  which  the  natural  agents  and  machinery  pet  form 
for  us,  but  he  very  justly  distinguishes  the  nature  of  the 
value  which  they  add  to  commodities. ...  As  they  perform 
their  work  gratuitously,  the  assistance  which  they  afford 
us,  adds  nothing  to  value  in  exchange."  (Ricardo,  op.  cit.% 
pp.  336, 337.)  This  observation  of  Ricardo  is  of  course  cor¬ 
rect  in  so  far  as  it  is  directed  against  J.  B.  Say,  who  imag¬ 
ines  that  machines  render  the  "service"  of  creating  value 
which  forms  a  part  of  "profits." 

*  A  horse-power  is  equal  to  a  force  of  33,000  foot-pounds 
per  minute,  i.e.,  to  a  force  that  raises  33,000  pounds  one 
foot  in  a  minute,  or  one  pound  33,000  feet.  This  is  the 
horse-power  meant  in  the  text.  In  ordinary  language,  and 
also  here  and  there  in  quotations  in  this  work,  a  distinc¬ 
tion  is  drawn  between  the  "nominal"  and  the  "commer¬ 
cial"  or  "indicated"  horse-power  of  the  same  engine.  The 
old  or  nominal  horse-power  is  calculated  exclusively  from 
the  length  of  piston-stroke  and  the  diameter  of  the  cylin¬ 
der,  and  leaves  pressure  of  steam  and  piston  speed  out  of 
consideration.  It  expresses  practically  this:  This  engine 
would  be  one  of  50  horse-power,  if  it  were  driven  with  the 
same  low  pressure  of  steam,  and  the  same  slow  piston 
speed,  as  in  the  days  of  Boulton  and  Watt.  But  the  two 
latter  factors  have  increased  enormously  since  those  days. 
In  order  to  measure  the  mechanical  force  exerted  today  by 
an  engine,  an  indicator  has  been  invented  which  shows  the 
pressure  of  the  steam  in  the  cylinder.  The  piston  speed  is 
easily  ascertained.  Thus  the  "indicated"  or  "commercial" 


190  CAPITAL 


will  drive  450  self-acting  mule  spindles,  with 
preparation,  or  200  throstle  spindles,  or  15 
looms  for  40-inch  cloth  with  the  appliances  for 
warping,  sizing,  etc.'*  In  the  first  case,  it  is  the 
day’s  produce  of  450  mule  spindles,  in  the  sec¬ 
ond,  of  200  throstle  spindles,  in  the  third,  of  15 
powerlooms,  over  which  the  daily  cost  of  one 
horse-power  and  the  wear  and  tear  of  the  ma¬ 
chinery  set  in  motion  by  that  power  are  spread; 
so  that  only  a  very  minute  value  is  transferred 
by  such  wear  and  tear  to  a  pound  of  yarn  or  a 
yard  of  cloth.  The  same  is  the  case  with  the 
steam-hammer  mentioned  above.  Since  its 
daily  wear  and  tear,  its  coal-consumption,  etc., 
are  spread  over  the  stupendous  masses  of  iron 
hammered  by  it  in  a  day,  only  a  small  value  is 
added  to  a  hundredweight  of  iron,  hut  that  val¬ 
ue  would  be  very  great,  if  the  huge  instrument 
were  employed  in  driving  in  nails. 

Given  a  machine’s  capacity  for  work,  that  is, 
the  number  of  its  operating  tools,  or,  where  it  is 
a  question  of  force,  their  mass,  the  amount  of 
its  product  will  depend  on  the  velocity  of  its 
working  parts,  on  the  speed,  for  instance,  of  the 
spindles,  or  on  the  number  of  blows  given  by  the 
hammer  in  a  minute.  Many  of  these  colossal 
hammers  strike  seventy  times  in  a  minute, 
and  Ryder’s  patent  machine  for  forging  spin¬ 
dles  with  small  hammers  gives  as  many  as 
700  strokes  per  minute. 

Given  the  rate  at  which  machinery  transfers 
its  value  to  the  product,  the  amount  of  value 
so  transferred  depends  on  the  total  value  of  the 
machinery.1  The  less  labour  it  contains,  the  less 
value  it  imparts  to  the  product.  The  less  value 
it  gives  up,  so  much  the  more  productive  it  is, 
and  so  much  the  more  its  services  approximate 

horse-power  of  an  engine  is  expressed  by  a  mathematical 
formula,  involving  diameter  of  cylinder,  length  of  stroke, 
piston  speed,  and  steam  pressure,  simultaneously,  and 
showing  what  multiple  of  33,000  pounds  is  really  raised  by 
the  engine  in  a  minute.  Hence,  one  “nominal”  horse- power 
may  exert  three,  four,  or  even  five  “indicated”  or  “real” 
horse-powers.  This  observation  is  made  for  the  purpose  of 
explaining  various  citations  in  the  subsequent  pages — F.E. 

1  The  reader  who  is  imbued  with  capitalist  notions  will 
naturally  miss  here  the  “interest”  that  the  machine,  in 
proportion  to  its  capital  value,  adds  to  the  product.  It  is, 
however,  easily  seen  that,  since  a  machine  no  more  creates 
new  value  than  any  other  part  of  constant  capital,  it  can¬ 
not  add  any  value  under  the  name  of  “interest.”  It  is  also 
evident  that  here,  where  we  are  treating  of  the  production 
of  surplus  value,  we  cannot  assume  a  priori  the  existence 
of  any  part  of  that  value  under  the  name  of  interest.  The 
capitalist  mode  of  calculating,  which  appears,  prima facie , 
[on  the  face  of  it]  absurd,  and  repugnant  to  the  laws  of  the 
creation  of  value,  will  be  explained  in  the  Third  Book  of 
this  work. 


to  those  of  natural  forces.  But  the  production 
of  machinery  by  machinery  lessens  its  value  rel¬ 
atively  to  its  extension  and  efficacy. 

An  analysis  and  comparison  of  the  prices  of 
commodities  produced  by  handicrafts  or  manu¬ 
factures,  and  of  the  prices  of  the  same  commod¬ 
ities  produced  by  machinery,  shows  generally 
that,  in  the  product  of  machinery,  the  value  due 
to  the  instruments  of  labour  increases  relative¬ 
ly,  but  decreases  absolutely.  In  other  words,  its 
absolute  amount  decreases,  but  its  amount,  rel¬ 
atively  to  the  total  value  of  the  product,  of  a 
pound  of  yarn,  for  instance,  increases.2 

It  is  evident  that,  whenever  it  costs  as  much 
labour  to  produce  a  machine  as  is  saved  by  the 
employment  of  that  machine,  there  is  nothing 
but  a  transposition  of  labour;  consequently  the 
total  labour  required  to  produce  a  commodity 
is  not  lessened,  and  the  productiveness  of  la¬ 
bour  is  not  increased.  It  is  clear,  however,  that 
the  difference  between  the  labour  a  machine 
costs  and  the  labour  it  saves,  or  the  degree  of  its 
productiveness,  does  not  depend  on  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  its  own  value  and  the  value  of  the 
implement  it  replaces.  As  long  as  the  labour 
spent  on  a  machine,  and  consequently  the  por¬ 
tion  of  its  value  added  to  the  product,  remains 
smaller  than  the  value  added  by  the  workman 
to  the  product  with  his  tool,  there  is  always  a 

2  This  portion  of  value  which  is  added  by  the  machinery 
decreases  both  absolutely  and  relatively  wTfen  the  machin¬ 
ery  does  away  with  horses  and  other  animals  that  are  em¬ 
ployed  as  mere  moving  forces,  and  not  as  machines  for 
changing  the  form  of  matter.  It  may  here  be  incidentally 
observed  that  Descartes,  in  defining  animals  as  mere  ma¬ 
chines,  saw  with  eyes  of  the  manufacturing  period,  while 
to  eyes  of  the  M  iddle  Ages,  animals’werr  assistants  to  man, 
as  they  were  later  to  Von  Iialler  in  his  Restauration  tier 
Staatswissensehaften.  That  Descartes,  like  Bacon,  antici¬ 
pated  an  alteration  in  the  form  of  production,  and  the 
practical  subjugation  of  nature  by  man,  as  a  result  of  the 
altered  methods  of  thought,  is  plain  from  his  Discourse  on 
Method.  He  there  (Part  VI)  says:  “It  is  possible”  (by  the 
methods  he  introduced  in  philosophy)  "to  attain  knowledge 
which  is  very  useful  in  life,  and,  instead  of  that  speculative 
philosophy  which  is  taught  in  the  schools,  to  find  a  practical 
philosophy  by  means  of  which,  knowing  the  force  and  ac¬ 
tion  of  fire,  water,  air,  the  stars,  heavens,  and  all  other 
bodies  that  are  our  environment,  as  distinctly  as  we  know 
the  different  crafts  of  our  artisans,  we  can  likewise  apply 
our  knowledge  in  all  the  uses  to  which  they  are  adapted, 
and  thus  become  the  masters  and  possessors  of  nature,” 
and  thus . . .  “contribute  to  the  perfecting  of  human  life.” 
In  the  preface  to  Sir  Dudley  North’s  Discourses  upon  Tradey 
1691,  it  is  stated  that  Descartes’  method  had  begun  to  free 
political  economy  from  the  old  fables  and  superstitious  no¬ 
tions  of  gold,  trade,  etc.  On  the  whole,  however,  the  early 
English  economists  sided  with  Bacon  and  Hobbes  as  their 
philosophers;  while,  at  a  later  period,  the  philosopher  near* 
Us  such]  of  political  economy  in  England,  France, 
and  Italy,  was  Locke. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


difference  of  labour  saved  in  favour  of  the  ma¬ 
chine.  The  productiveness  of  a  machine  is  there¬ 
fore  measured  by  the  human  labour  power  it 
replaces.  According  to  Mr.  Baynes,  opera¬ 
tives  are  required  for  the  450  mule  spindles,  in¬ 
clusive  of  preparation  machinery,1  that  are 
driven  by  one  horse-power;  each  self-acting 
mule  spindle,  working  ten  hours,  produces  13 
ounces  of  yarn  (average  number  or  thickness); 
consequently  operatives  spin  weekly  365$^ 
pounds  of  yarn.  Hence,  leaving  waste  on  one 
side,  366  pounds  of  cotton  absorb,  during  their 
conversion  into  yarn,  only  1  jo  hours’  labour,  or 
fifteen  days’  labour  of  ten  hours  each.  But  with 
a  spinning-wheel,  supposing  the  hand-spinner 
to  produce  13  ounces  of  yarn  in  sixty  hours,  the 
same  weight  of  cotton  would  absorb  2700  days’ 
labour  of  ten  hours  each,  or  27,000  hours’  la¬ 
bour.2  Where  block-printing,  the  old  method  of 
printing  calico  by  hand,  has  been  superseded  by 
machine  printing,  a  single  machine  prints,  with 
the  aid  of  one  man  or  boy,  as  much  calico  of  four 
colours  in  one  hour  as  it  formerly  took  200  men 
to  do.3  Before  hli  Whitney  invented  the  cotton- 
gin  in  1793,  the  separation  of  the  seed  from  a 
pound  of  cotton  cost  an  average  day’s  labour. 
By  means  of  his  invention  one  negress  was  en¬ 
abled  to  clean  100  pounds  daily;  and  since  then, 
the  efficacy  of  the  gin  has  been  considerably  in¬ 
creased.  A  pound  of  cotton  fibre,  previously 
costing  50  cents  to  produce,  included  after  that 
invention  more  unpaid  labour,  and  was  conse¬ 
quently  sold  with  greater  profit,  at  10  cents.  In 
India  they  employ  for  separating  the  fibre  from 
the  seed  an  instrument,  half  machine,  half  tool, 
called  a  churka;  wi  th  this  one  man  and  a  woman 
can  clean  28  pounds  daily.  With  the  churka  in¬ 
vented  some  years  ago  by  I)r.  Forbes,  one  man 
and  a  boy  produce  250  pounds  daily.  If  oxen, 
steam,  or  water,  be  used  for  driving  it,  only  a 
few  boys  and  girls  as  feeders  are  required.  Six¬ 
teen  of  these  machines  driven  by  oxen  do  as 

According  to  the  annual  report  (1863)  of  the  Essen 
chamber  of  commerce,  there  was  produced  in  1862,  at  the 
cast-steel  works  of  Krupp,  with  its  161  furnaces,  32  steam- 
engines  (in  the  year  1800  this  was  about  the  number  of  all 
the  steam-engines  working  in  Manchester),  and  14  steam- 
hammers  (representing  in  all  1236  horse-power),  49  forges, 
203  tool-machines,  and  about  2400  workmen  --13,000,000 
pounds  of  cast  steel.  Here  there  are  not  two  workmen  to 
each  horse-power. 

2  Babbage  estimates  that  in  Java  the  spinning  labour 
alone  adds  117%  to  the  value  of  the  cotton.  At  the  same 
period  (1832)  the  total  value  added  to  the  cotton  by  ma¬ 
chinery  and  labour  in  the  jine-spinning  industry,  amounted 
to  about  33%  of  the  value  of  the  cotton.— On  the  Economy 
oj  Machinery ,  p.  214. 

8  Machine  printing  also  economizes  colour. 


191 

much  work  in  a  day  as  formerly  750  people  did 
on  an  average.4 

As  already  stated,  a  steam-plough  does  as 
much  work  in  one  hour  at  a  cost  of  threepence, 
as  66  men  at  a  cost  of  15  shillings.  I  return  to 
this  example  in  order  to  clear  up  an  erroneous 
notion.  The  1 5  shillings  arc  by  no  means  the  ex¬ 
pression  in  money  of  all  the  labour  expended  in 
one  hour  by  the  66  men.  I  f  the  ratio  of  surplus  la¬ 
bour  to  necessary  labour  were  100%,  these  66 
men  would  produce  in  one  hour  a  value  of  30 
shillings,  although  their  wages,  1 5  shillings,  rep¬ 
resent  only  their  labour  for  half  an  hour.  Sup¬ 
pose,  then,  that  a  machine  cost  as  much  as  the 
wages  for  a  year  of  the  1 50  men  it  displaces,  say 
£3000;  this  £3000  is  by  no  means  the  expression 
in  money  of  the  labour  added  to  the  object  pro¬ 
duced  by  these  1  jo  men  before  the  introduction 
of  the  machine,  but  only  of  that  portion  of  their 
year’s  labour  which  was  expended  for  them¬ 
selves  and  represented  by  their  wages.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  £3000,  the  money  value  of  the 
machine,  expresses  all  the  labour  expended  on 
its  production,  no  matter  in  what  proportion 
this  labour  constitutes  wages  for  the  workman, 
and  surplus  value  for  the  capitalist.  Therefore, 
though  a  machine  cost  as  much  as  the  labour 
power  displaced  by  it,  yet  the  labour  material¬ 
ized  in  it  is  even  then  much  less  than  the  living 
labour  it  replaces.6 

The  use  of  machinery  for  the  exclusive  pur¬ 
pose  of  cheapening  the  product  is  limited  in  this 
way,  that  less  labour  must  be  expended  in  pro¬ 
ducing  the  machinery  than  is  displaced  by  the 
employment  of  that  machinery.  For  the  capi¬ 
talist,  however,  this  use  is  still  more  limited. 
Instead  of  paying  for  the  labour,  he  only  pays 
the  value  of  the  labour  power  employed;  there¬ 
fore,  the  limit  to  his  using  a  machine  is  fixed  by 
the  difference  between  the  value  of  the  machine 
and  the  value  of  the  labour  power  replaced  by 
it.  Since  the  division  of  the  day’s  work  into  nec¬ 
essary  and  surplus  labour  differs  in  different 
countries,  and  even  in  the  same  country  at  dif¬ 
ferent  periods,  or  in  different  branches  of  indus¬ 
try;  and,  further,  since  the  actual  wage  of  the 
labourer  at  one  time  sinks  below  the  value  of  his 
labour  power,  at  another  rises  above  it,  it  is 
possible  for  the  difference  between  the  price  of 

4  Sec  paper  read  by  Dr.  Watson,  reporter  on  products  to 
the  government  of  India,  before  the  Society  of  Arts,  17th 
April,  1 86a 

5  “These  mute  agents  (machines)  arc  always  the  prod¬ 
uce  of  much  less  labour  than  that  which  they  displace, 
even  when  they  are  of  the  same  money  value." — Ricardo 
op.  at.,  p.  40. 


192  CAPITAL 


themachinery  and  the  price  of  the  labour  power 
replaced  by  that  machinery  to  vary  very  much, 
although  the  difference  between  the  quantity  of 
labour  requisite  to  produce  the  machine  and  the 
total  quantity  replaced  by  it,  remain  constant.1 
But  it  is  the  former  difference  alone  that  deter¬ 
mines  the  cost,  to  the  capitalist,  of  producing  a 
commodity  and,  through  the  pressure  of  com¬ 
petition,  influences  his  action.  Hence  the  inven¬ 
tion  nowadays  of  machines  in  England  that  are 
employed  only  in  North  America;  just  as  in  the 
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  machines 
were  invented  in  Germany  to  be  used  only  in 
Holland,  and  just  as  many  a  French  invention 
of  the  eighteenth  century  was  exploited  in  Eng¬ 
land  alone.  In  the  older  countries,  machinery, 
when  employed  in  some  branches  of  industry, 
creates  such  a  redundancy  of  labour  in  other 
branches  that  in  these  latter  the  fall  of  wages 
below  the  value  of  labour  power  impedes  the 
use  of  machinery,  and,  from  the  standpoint  of 
the  capitalist,  whose  profit  comes,  not  from  a 
diminution  of  the  labour  employed,  but  of  the 
labour  paid  for,  renders  that  use  superfluous 
and  often  impossible.  In  some  branches  of  the 
woollen  manufacture  in  England  the  employ¬ 
ment  of  children  has,  during  recent  years,  been 
considerably  diminished,  and  in  some  cases  has 
been  entirely  abolished.  Why?  Because  the  Fac¬ 
tory  Acts  made  two  sets  of  children  necessary, 
one  working  six  hours,  the  other  four,  or  each 
working  five  hours.  But  the  parents  refused  to 
sell  the  “half-timers”  cheaper  than  the  “full- 
timers.”  Hence  the  substitution  of  machinery 
for  the  “half-timers.”2  Before  the  labour  of 
women  and  of  children  under  io  years  of  age 
was  forbidden  in  mines,  capitalists  considered 
the  employment  of  naked  women  and  girls, 
often  in  company  with  men,  so  far  sanctioned 
by  their  moral  code,  and  especially  by  their 
ledgers,  that  it  was  only  after  the  passing  of  the 

1  Hence  in  a  communistic  society  there  would  be  a  very 
different  scope  for  the  employment  of  machinery  than  there 
can  be  in  a  bourgeois  society. 

2  “Employers  of  labour  would  not  unnecessarily  retain 
two  sets  of  children  under  thirteen. ...  In  fact  one  class  of 
manufacturers,  the  spinners  of  woollen  yarn,  now  rarely 
employ  children  under  thirteen  years  of  age,  i.e.,  ffalf- 
timers.  They  have  introduced  improved  and  new  machin¬ 
ery  of  various  kinds,  which  altogether  supersedes  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  children  (i.e.,  under  13  years);  for  instance,  I 
will  mention  one  process  as  an  illustration  of  this  diminu¬ 
tion  in  the  number  of  children,  wherein  by  the  addition  of 
an  apparatus,  called  a  piecing  machine,  to  existing  ma¬ 
chines,  the  work  of  six  or  four  half-times,  according  to  the 
peculiarity  of  each  machine,  can  be  performed  by  one  young 
person  (over  13  years). . . .  The  half-time  system  'stimu¬ 
lated*  the  invention  of  the  piecing  machine.**— Reports  of 
Inspectors  of  Factories  for  31st  Oct.,  1858. 


Act  that  they  had  recourse  to  machinery.  The 
Yankees  have  invented  a  stone-breaking  ma¬ 
chine.  The  English  do  not  make  use  of  it,  be¬ 
cause  the  “wretch”3  who  does  this  work  gets 
paid  for  such  a  small  portion  of  his  labour  that 
machinery  would  increase  the  cost  of  produc¬ 
tion  to  the  capitalist.4  In  England  women  are 
still  occasionally  used  instead  of  horses  for  haul¬ 
ing  canal  boats,6  because  the  labour  required  to 
produce  horses  and  machines  is  an  accurately 
known  quantity,  while  that  required  to  main¬ 
tain  the  women  of  the  surplus  population  is  be¬ 
low  all  calculation.  Hence  nowhere  do  we  find 
a  more  shameful  squandering  of  human  labour 
power  for  the  most  despicable  purposes  than  in 
England,  the  land  of  machinery. 

3.  The  Proximate  Effects  oj  Machinery  on  the 

Workman 

The  starting  point  of  modern  industry  is,  as 
we  have  shown,  the  revolution  in  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour,  and  this  revolution  attains  its 
most  highly  developed  form  in  the  organized 
system  of  machinery  in  a  factory.  Before  we 
inquire  how  human  material  is  incorporated 
with  this  objective  organism,  let  us  consider 
some  general  effects  of  this  revolution  on  the 
labourer  himself. 

a.  Appropriation  of  supplementary  Labour 
Power  by  Capital .  The  Employment  of  Women 
and  Children 

In  so  far  as  machinery  dispenses  with  muscu¬ 
lar  power,  it  becomes  a  means  of  employing  la¬ 
bourers  of  slight  muscular  strength,  and  those 
whose  bodily  development  rs  incomplete,  but 
whose  limbs  are  all  the  more  supple.  The  labour 
of  women  and  children  was,  therefore,  the  first 
thing  sought  for  by  capitalists  who  used  ma¬ 
chinery.  That  mighty  substitute  for  labour  and 
labourers  was  forthwith  changed  into  a  means 
for  increasing  the  number  of  wage  labourers  by 
enrolling  under  the  direct  sway  of  capital  every 
member  of  the  workman’s  family,  without  dis¬ 
tinction  of  age  or  sex.  Compulsory  work  for  the 
capitalist  usurped  the  place,  not  oftly  of  the 
children’s  play,  but  also  of  free  labour  at  home 
within  moderate  limits  for  the  support  of  the 
family.6 

3  “Wretch**  is  the  recognized  term  in  EngBsh  political 
economy  for  the  agricultural  labourer. 

4  “Machinery  . . .  can  frequently  not  be  employed  until 
labour  (he  means  wages)  rises.**— Ricardo,  op.  cit.%  p.  579. 

6  See  Report  of  the  Social  Science  Congress  at  Edinburgh , 
Oct.,  1863. 

6  Dr.  Edward  Smith,  during  the  cotton  crisis  caused  by 
the  American  Civil  War,  was  sent  by  the  English  Govern- 


MACHINERY  AND 

The  value  of  labour  power  was  determined, 
not  only  by  the  labour  time  necessary  to  main¬ 
tain  the  individual  adult  labourer,  but  also  by 
that  necessary  to  maintain  his  family.  Ma¬ 
chinery,  by  throwing  every  member  of  that 
family  on  to  the  labour  market,  spreads  the 
value  of  the  man’s  labour  power  over  his  whole 
family.  It  thus  depreciates  his  labour  power.  To 
purchase  the  labour  power  of  a  family  of  four 
workers  may,  perhaps,  cost  more  than  it  for¬ 
merly  did  to  purchase  the  labour  power  of  the 
head  of  the  family,  but,  in  return,  four  days’ 
labour  takes  the  place  of  one,  and  their  price 
falls  in  proportion  to  the  excess  of  the  surplus 
labour  of  four  over  the  surplus  labour  of  one.  In 
order  that  the  family  may  live,  four  people  must 
now  not  only  labour,  but  expend  surplus  labour 
for  the  capitalist.  Thus  we  see  that  machinery, 
while  augmenting  the  human  material  that 
forms  the  principal  object  of  capital’s  exploit¬ 
ing  power,1  at  the  same  time  raises  the  degree 
of  exploitation. 

Machinery  a*so  revolutionizes  completely 
the  contract  between  the  labourer  and  the  cap¬ 
italist  which  formally  fixes  their  mutual  rela- 

ment  to  Lancashire,  Cheshire,  and  other  places,  to  report 
on  the  sanitary  condition  of  the  cotton  operatives.  He  re¬ 
ported  that  from  a  hygienic  point  of  view,  and  apart  from 
the  banishment  of  the  operatives  from  the  factory  atmos¬ 
phere,  the  crisis  had  several  advantages.  The  women  now 
had  sufficient  leisure  to  give  their  infants  the  breast,  in¬ 
stead  of  poisoning  them  with  Godfrey's  Cordial.  They  had 
time  to  learn  to  cook.  Unfortunately  the  acquisition  of  this 
art  occurred  at  a  time  when  they  had  nothing  to  cook.  But 
from  this  we  see  how  capital,  for  the  purposes  of  its  self¬ 
expansion,  has  usurped  the  labour  necessary  in  the  home 
of  the  family.  This  crisis  was  also  utilized  to  teach  sewing 
to  the  daughters  of  the  workmen  in  sewing  schools.  An 
American  revolution  and  a  universal  crisis,  in  order  that 
the  working  girls,  who  spin  for  the  whole  world,  might 
learn  to  sew! 

1  “The  numerical  increase  of  labourers  has  been  great, 
through  the  growing  substitution  of  female  for  male,  and 
above  all,  of  childish  for  adult  labour.  Three  girls  of  13,  at 
wages  of  from  6  shillings  to  8  shillings  a  week,  have  re¬ 
placed  the  one  man  of  mature  age,  of  wages  varying  from 
18  shillings  to  45  shillings.”  (Thomas  de  Quincey,  The 
Logie  of  Political  Economy,  London,  1845,  Note  to  p.  147.) 
Since  certain  family  functions,  such  as  nursing  and  suck¬ 
ling  children,  cannot  be  entirely  suppressed,  the  mothers 
confiscated  by  capital  must  try  substitutes  of  some  sort. 
Domestic  work,  such  as  sewing  and  mending,  must  be  re¬ 
placed  by  the  purchase  of  ready-made  articles.  Hence,  the 
diminished  expenditure  of  labour  in  the  house  is  accom¬ 
panied  by  an  increased  expenditure  of  money.  The  cost  of 
keeping  the  family  increases  and  balances  the  greater  in¬ 
come.  In  addition  to  this,  economy  and  judgment  in  the 
consumption  and  preparation  of  the  means  of  subsistence 
becomes  impossible.  Abundant  material  relating  to  these 
facts,  which  are  concealed  by  official  political  economy,  is 
to  be  found  in  the  Reports  of  the  Inspectors  of  Factories, 
of  the  Children's  Employment  Commission,  and  more  es¬ 
pecially  in  the  Reports  on  Public  Health. 


MODERN  INDUSTRY  193 

tions.  Taking  the  exchange  of  commodities  as 
our  basis,  our  first  assumption  was  that  capital¬ 
ist  and  labourer  met  as  free  persons,  as  inde¬ 
pendent  owners  of  commodities;  the  one  pos¬ 
sessing  money  and  means  of  production,  the 
other  labour  power.  But  now  the  capitalist  buys 
children  and  young  persons  under  age.  Previ¬ 
ously,  the  workman  sold  his  own  labour  power, 
which  he  disposed  of  nominally  as  a  free  agent. 
Now  he  sells  wife  and  child.  He  has  become  a 
slave  dealer.2  The  demand  for  children’s  labour 
often  resembles  in  form  the  inquiries  for  negro 
slaves,  such  as  were  formerly  to  be  read  among 
the  advertisements  in  American  journals.  “My 
attention,”  says  an  English  factory  inspector, 
“was  drawn  to  an  advertisement  in  the  local 
paper  of  one  of  the  most  important  manufac¬ 
turing  towns  of  my  district,  of  which  the  follow¬ 
ing  is  a  copy:  ‘Wanted,  12  to  20  young  persons, 
not  younger  than  what  can  pass  for  13  years. 
Wages,  4  shillings  a  week.  Apply  etc.’  ”*  The 
phrase  “what  can  pass  for  13  years,”  has  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  fact  that,  by  the  Factory  Act,  chil¬ 
dren  under  13  years  may  work  only  6  hours.  A 
surgeon  officially  appointed  must  certify  their 
age.  The  manufacturer,  therefore,  asks  for  chil¬ 
dren  who  look  as  if  they  were  already  13  years 
old.  The  decrease,  often  by  leaps  and  bounds, 
in  the  number  of  children  under  13  years  em¬ 
ployed  in  factories,  a  decrease  that  is  shown  in 
an  astonishing  manner  by  the  English  statistics 
of  the  last  20  years,  was  for  the  most  part,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  evidence  of  the  factory  inspectors 
themselves,  the  work  of  the  certifying  surgeons, 
who  overstated  the  age  of  the  children  agree¬ 
ably  to  the  capitalist’s  greed  for  exploitation 
and  the  sordid  trafficking  needs  of  the  parents. 
In  the  notorious  district  of  Bethnal  Green,  a 

2  In  striking  contrast  with  the  great  fact,  that  the  short¬ 
ening  of  the  hoursof  labour  for  women  and  children  in  Eng¬ 
lish  factories  was  exacted  from  capital  by  the  male  opera¬ 
tives,  we  find  in  the  latest  reports  of  the  Children's  Em¬ 
ployment  Commission  traits  of  the  operative  parents  in 
relation  to  the  traffic  in  children  that  are  truly  revolting 
and  thoroughly  like  slave-dealing.  But  the  Pharisee  of  a 
capitalist,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  same  reports,  denounces 
this  brutality  which  he  himself  creates,  perpetuates,  and 
exploits,  and  which  he  moreover  baptizes  “freedom  of  la¬ 
bour.”  “Infant  labour  has  been  called  into  aid  . . .  even  to 
work  for  their  own  daily  bread.  Without  strength  to  en- 
dureSuch  disproportionate  toil,  without  instruction  toguide 
their  future  life,  they  have  been  thrown  into  a  situation 
physically  and  morally  polluted.  The  Jewish  historian  has 
remarked  upon  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus  that 
it  was  no  wonder  it  should  have  been  destroyed,  with  such 
a  signal  destruction,  when  an  inhuman  mother  sacrificed 
her  own  offspring  to  satisfy  the  cravings  of  absolute  hun¬ 
ger.” — Public  Economy  Concentrated ,  Carlisle,  1833,  p.  56. 

*  A.  Redgrave  in  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories  for 
31st  October,  1858,  pp.  40, 41. 


194  CAPITAL 


public  market  is  held  every  Monday  and  Tues¬ 
day  morning  where  children  of  both  sexes  from 
9  years  of  age  upwards  hire  themselves  out  to 
the  silk  manufacturers.  “The  usual  terms  are 
i j.  8 d.  a  week  (this  belongs  to  the  parents)  and 
*2d,  for  myself  and  tea.1  The  contract  is  binding 
only  for  the  week.  The  scene  and  language  while 
this  market  is  going  on  are  quite  disgraceful.'*1 
It  has  also  occurred  in  England,  that  women 
have  taken  “children  from  the  workhouse  and 
let  any  one  have  them  out  for  2 s.  6d.  a  week."2 
In  spite  of  legislation,  the  number  of  boys  sold 
in  Great  Britain  by  their  parents  to  act  as  live 
chimney-sweeping  machines  (although  there 
exist  plenty  of  machines  to  replace  them)  ex¬ 
ceeds  two  thousand.* The  revolution  effected  by 
machinery  in  the  juridical  relations  between  the 
buyer  and  the  seller  of  labour  power,  causing 
the  transaction  as  a  whole  to  lose  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  a  contract  between  free  persons,  afford¬ 
ed  the  English  Parliament  an  excuse,  founded 
on  juridical  principles,  for  the  interference  of 
the  state  with  factories.  Whenever  the  law 
limits  the  labour  of  children  to  six  hours  in  in¬ 
dustries  not  before  interfered  with,  the  com¬ 
plaints  of  the  manufacturers  are  always  re¬ 
newed.  They  allege  that  numbers  of  the  parents 
withdraw  their  children  from  the  industry 
brought  under  the  Act,  in  order  to  sell  them 
where  "freedom  of  labour"  still  rules,  i.e.,  where 
children  under  13  years  are  compelled  to  work 
like  grown-up  people,  and  therefore  can  be  got 
rid  of  at  a  higher  price.  But  since  capital  is  by 
nature  a  leveller,  since  it  exacts  in  every  sphere 
of  production  equality  in  the  conditions  of  the 
exploitation  of  labour,  the  limitation  by  law  of 
children's  labour  in  one  branch  of  industry  be¬ 
comes  the  cause  of  its  limitation  in  others. 

We  have  already  alluded  to  the  physical  de¬ 
terioration  as  well  of  the  children  and  young 
persons  as  of  the  women,  whom  machinery,  first 
directly  in  the  factories  that  shoot  up  on  its 
basis,  and  then  indirectly  in  all  the  remaining 
branches  of  industry,  subjects  to  the  exploita¬ 
tion  of  capital.  In  this  place,  therefore,  we  dwell 
only  on  one  point,  the  enormous  mortality,  dur¬ 
ing  the  first  few  years  of  their  life,  of  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  the  operatives.  In  sixteen  of  the  regis¬ 
tration  districts  into  which  England  is  divided 
there  are,  for  every  100,000  children  alive  under 
the  age  of  one  year,  only  9000  deaths  in  a  year 

1  Children* s  Employment  Commission ,  Fifth  Report ,  Lon¬ 
don,  1866,  p.  8i,note3i. — Note  to  the 4th edition:  The  silk 
industry  of  Bethnal  Green  is  by  now  practically  destroyed. 
F.E. 

2  Ibid.,  Third  Report,  London,  1864,  p.  53,  note  15. 

*  Ibid.,  Fifth  Report ,  p.  22,  note  137. 


on  an  average  (in  one  district  only  7047);  in  24 
districts  the  deaths  are  over  10,000,  but  under 
11,000;  in  39  districts,  over  ij,ooo,  but  un¬ 
der  12,000,  in  48  districts  over  12,000,  but  un¬ 
der  13,000;  in  22  districts  over  20,000;  in  2J 
districts  over  21,000;  in  17  over  22,000;  in  n 
over  23,000;  in  Hoo,  Wolverhampton,  Ashton- 
under-Lyne,  and  Preston,  over  24,000;  in 
Nottingham,  Stockport,  and  Bradford,  over 
25,000;  in Wisbeach,  26,000;  and  in  Manchester, 
26,i25.4  As  was  shown  by  an  official  medical  in¬ 
quiry  in  the  year  1861,  the  high  death-rates  are, 
apart  from  local  causes,  principally  due  to  the 
employment  of  the  mothers  away  from  their 
homes,  and  to  the  neglect  and  maltreatment 
consequent  on  her  absence,  such  as,  amongst 
others,  insufficient  nourishment,  unsuitable 
food,  and  dosing  with  opiates;  besides  this, 
there  arises  an  unnatural  estrangement  be¬ 
tween  mother  and  child,  and  as  a  consequence, 
intentional  starving  and  poisoning  of  the  chil¬ 
dren.5  In  those  agricultural  districts  “where  a 
minimum  in  the  employment  of  women  exists, 
the  death-rate  is  on  the  other  hand  very  low."8 
The  Inquiry  Commission  of  1861  led,  however, 
to  the  unexpected  result  that,  in  some  purely 
agricultural  districts  bordering  on  the  North 
Sea,  the  death-rate  of  children  under  one  year 
old  almost  equalled  that  of  the  worst  factory 
districts.  Dr.  Julian  Hunter  was,  therefore, 
commissioned  to  investigate  this  'phenomenon 
on  the  spot.  His  report  is  incorporated  with  the 
Sixth  Report  on  Public  Health?  Up  to  that  time 
it  was  supposed  that  the  children  were  decimat¬ 
ed  by  malaria,  and  other  diseases  peculiar  to 
low-lying  and  marshy  districts.  But  the  inquiry 
showed  the  very  opposite,  namely,  that  the 
same  cause  which  drove  away  malaria,  the  con¬ 
version  of  the  land  from  a  morass  in  winter  and 
a  scanty  pasture  in  summer  into  fruitful  corn 
land,  created  the  exceptional  death-rate  of  the 
infants.8  The  seventy  medical  men,  whom  Dr. 
Hunter  examined  in  that  district,  were  “won¬ 
derfully  in  accord"  on  this  point.  In  fact,  the 
revolution  in  the  mode  of  cultivation  had  led 

4  Sixth  Report  on  Public  Health ,  London,  1864,  P-  34* 

5  “It  (the  inquiry  of  1861)  . . .  showed,  moreover,  that 
while,  with  the  described  circumstances,  infants  perish  un¬ 
der  the  neglect  and  mismanagement  which  their  mothers’ 
occupations  imply,  the  mothers  become  to  a  grievous  ex¬ 
tent  denaturalized  towards  their  offspring—  commonly  not 
troubling  themselves  much  at  the  death,  and  even  some¬ 
times  . . .  taking  direct  measures  to  insure  it.”  Ibid. 

*  Ibid.,  p.  454- 

7  Ibid.,  p.  454-463,  “Report  by  I)r.  Henry  Julian  Hunter 
on  the  Excessive  Mortality  of  Infants  in  some  Rural  Dis¬ 
tricts  of  England.” 

•  Ibid.,  p.  35  and  pp.  455, 4J6. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


to  the  introduction  of  the  industrial  system. 
Married  women,  who  work  in  gangs  along  with 
boys  and  girls,  arc,  for  a  stipulated  sum  of  mon¬ 
ey,  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  farmer,  by  a 
man  called  the  “undertaker,”  who  contracts  for 
the  whole  gang.  “These  gangs  will  sometimes 
travel  many  miles  from  their  own  village;  they 
are  to  be  met  morning  and  evening  on  the  roads, 
dressed  in  short  petticoats,  with  suitable  coats 
and  boots,  and  sometimes  trousers,  looking 
wonderfully  strong  and  healthy,  but  tainted 
with  a  customary  immorality,  and  heedless  of 
the  fatal  results  which  their  love  of  this  busy 
and  independent  life  is  bringing  on  their  unfor¬ 
tunate  offspring  who  are  pining  at  home.”1 
Every  phenomenon  of  the  factory  districts  is 
here  reproduced,  including,  but  to  a  greater  ex¬ 
tent,  ill-disguised  infanticide,  and  dosing  chil¬ 
dren  with  opiates.2  “My  knowledge  of  such 
evils,”  says  Dr.  Simon,  the  medical  officer  of 
the  Privy  Council  and  editor-in-chief  of  the  Re¬ 
ports  on  Public  Health ,  “may  excuse  the  pro¬ 
found  misgiving  w^th  which  I  regard  any  large 
industrial  employment  of  adult  women.”3 
“Happy  indeed,”  exclaims  Mr.  Baker,  the  fac¬ 
tory  inspector,  in  his  official  report,  “happy  in¬ 
deed  will  it  be  for  the  manufacturing  districts 
of  England,  when  every  married  woman  having 
a  family  is  prohibited  from  working  in  any  tex¬ 
tile  works  at  all.”4 

The  moral  degradation  caused  by  the  capi¬ 
talistic  exploitation  of  women  and  children  has 
been  so  exhaustively  depicted  by  F.  Engels  in 
his  Lage  der  arbeitenden  Klasse  in  England ,  and 
by  other  writers,  that  I  need  only  mention  the 
subject  in  this  place.  But  the  intellectual  deso¬ 
lation,  artificially  produced  by  converting  im¬ 
mature  human  beings  into  mere  machines  for 
the  fabrication  of  surplus  value,  a  state  of  mind 
clearly  distinguishable  from  that  natural  ignor¬ 
ance  which  keeps  the  mind  fallow  without  de¬ 
stroying  its  capacity  for  development,  its  natu¬ 
ral  fertility,  this  desolation  finally  compelled 
even  the  English  Parliament  to  make  elemen¬ 
tary  education  a  compulsory  condition  to  the 

1  Ibid.,  p.  456. 

2  In  the  agricultural  as  well  as  in  the  factory  districts  the 
consumption  of  opium  among  the  grown-up  labourers,  both 
male  and  female,  is  extending  daily.  “To  push  the  sale  of 
opiate  ...  is  the  great  aim  of  some  enterprising  wholesale 
merchants.  By  druggis  ts  i  t  is  considered  the  leading  article." 
( THd.,  p.  459.)  Infants  that  take  opiates  “shrank  up  into 
little  old  men,"  or  “wizened  like  little  monkeys,"  {Ibid., 
p.  460).  We  here  see  how  India  and  China  avenged  them¬ 
selves  on  England. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  37. 

4  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories  for  31st  Oct.,  186a, 
p.  59.  Mr.  Baker  was  formerly  a  doctor. 


195 

“productive”  employment  of  children  under 
fourteen  years,  in  every  industry  subject  to  the 
Factory  Acts.  The  spirit  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion  stands  out  clearly  in  the  ludicrous  wording 
of  the  so-called  education  clauses  in  the  Factory 
Acts,  in  the  absence  of  an  administrative  ma¬ 
chinery,  an  absence  that  again  makes  the  com¬ 
pulsion  illusory,  in  the  opposition  of  the  manu¬ 
facturers  themselves  to  these  education  clauses, 
and  in  the  tricks  and  dodges  they  put  in  prac¬ 
tice  for  evading  them.  “For  this  the  legislature 
is  alone  to  blame,  by  having  passed  a  delusive 
law  which,  while  it  would  seem  to  provide  that 
the  children  employed  in  factories  shall  be  edu¬ 
cated ,  contains  no  enactment  by  which  that  pro¬ 
fessed  end  can  be  secured.  It  provides  nothing 
more  than  that  the  children  shall  on  certain 
days  of  the  week,  and  for  a  certain  number  of 
hours  (three)  in  each  day,  be  enclosed  within  the 
four  walls  of  a  place  called  a  school,  and  that 
the  employer  of  the  child  shall  receive  weekly  a 
certificate  to  that  effect  signed  by  a  person  des¬ 
ignated  by  the  subscriber  as  a  schoolmaster  or 
schoolmistress.”5  Previous  to  the  passing  of  the 
amended  Factory  Act  of  1844,  it  happened,  not 
infrequently,  that  the  certificates  of  attendance 
at  school  were  signed  by  the  schoolmaster  or 
schoolmistress  with  a  cross,  as  they  themselves 
were  unable  to  write.  “On  one  occasion,  on  vis¬ 
iting  a  place  called  a  school,  from  which  certifi¬ 
cates  of  school  attendance  had  issued,  I  was  so 
struck  with  the  ignorance  of  the  master  that  I 
said  to  him:  ‘Pray,  sir,  can  you  read?’  His  re¬ 
ply  was:  ‘Aye,  summat!’  and,  as  a  justification 
of  his  right  to  grant  certificates,  he  added:  ‘At 
any  rate,  I  am  before  my  scholars.*  The  inspec¬ 
tors,  when  the  Bill  of  1844  was  in  preparation, 
did  not  fail  to  represent  the  disgraceful  state  of 
the  places  called  schools,  certificates  from 
which  they  were  obliged  to  admit  as  a  compli¬ 
ance  with  the  laws,  but  they  were  successful 
only  in  obtaining  thus  much,  that  since  the 
passing  of  the  Act  of  1844,  the  figures  in  the 
school  certificate  must  be  filled  up  in  the  hand¬ 
writing  of  the  schoolmaster,  who  must  also  sign 
his  Christian  and  surname  in  full.”6  Sir  John 
Kincaid,  Factory  Inspector  for  Scotland,  re¬ 
lates  experiences  of  the  same  kind.  “The  first 
school  we  visited  was  kept  by  a  Mrs.  Ann  Killin. 
Upon  asking  her  to  spell  her  name,  she  straight¬ 
way  made  a  mistake,  by  beginning  with  the  let¬ 
ter  C,  but,  correcting  herself  immediately,  she 
said  her  name  began  with  a  K.  On  looking  at  her 

6  Leonard  Horner,  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories  for 
30th  June,  1857,  p.  17. 

6  Ibid.,  31st  Oct.,  1855,  pp.  18, 19. 


CAPITAL 


196 

signature,  however,  in  the  school  certificate 
books,  I  noticed  that  she  spelt  it  in  various 
ways,  while  her  handwriting  left  no  doubt  as  to 
her  unfitness  to  teach.  She  herself  also  acknowl¬ 
edged  that  she  could  not  keep  the  register. . . . 
In  a  second  school  I  found  the  schoolroom  15 
feet  long,  and  10  feet  wide,  and  counted  in  this 
space  75  children,  who  were  gabbling  something 
unintelligible.”1  “But  it  is  not  only  in  the  miser¬ 
able  places  above  referred  to  that  the  children 
obtain  certificates  of  school  attendance  without 
having  received  instruction  of  any  value,  for  in 
many  schools  where  there  is  a  competent  teach¬ 
er  his  efforts  are  of  little  avail  from  the  distract¬ 
ing  crowd  of  children  of  all  ages,  from  infants  of 
3  years  old  and  upwards;  his  livelihood,  miser¬ 
able  at  the  best,  depending  on  the  pence  re¬ 
ceived  from  the  greatest  number  of  children 
whom  it  is  possible  to  cram  into  the  space.  To 
this  is  to  be  added  scanty  school  furniture, 
deficiency  of  books,  and  other  materials  for 
teaching,  and  the  depressing  effect  upon  the 
poor  children  themselves  of  a  close,  noisome  at¬ 
mosphere.  1  have  been  in  many  such  schools, 
where  I  have  seen  rows  of  children  doing  abso¬ 
lutely  nothing;  and  this  is  certified  as  school  at¬ 
tendance,  and,  in  statistical  returns,  such  chil¬ 
dren  are  set  down  as  being  educated.”  In  Scot¬ 
land  the  manufacturers  try  all  they  can  to  do 
without  the  children  that  are  obliged  to  attend 
school.  “It  requires  no  further  argument  to 
prove  that  the  educational  clauses  of  the  Fac¬ 
tory  Act,  being  held  in  such  disfavour  among 
mill  owners,  tend  in  a  great  measure  to  exclude 
that  class  of  children  alike  from  the  employ¬ 
ment  and  the  benefit  of  education  contem¬ 
plated  by  this  Act.”2  Horribly  grotesque  does 
this  appear  in  works  where  prints  are  made, 
which  are  regulated  by  a  special  Act.  By  that 
Act,  “every  child,  before  being  employed  in  a 
print-works  must  have  attended  school  for  at 
least  30  days,  and  not  less  than  1 50  hours,  dur¬ 
ing  the  six  months  immediately  preceding  such 
first  day  of  employment,  and  during  the  contin¬ 
uance  of  its  employment  in  the  print-works,  it 
must  attend  for  a  like  period  of  30  days,  and  1 50 
hours  during  every  successive  period  df  six 
months. . . .  The  attendance  at  school  must  be 
between  8  a.m.  and  6  p.m.  No  attendance  of  less 
than  2#  hours,  nor  more  than  5  hours  on  any 
one  day,  shall  be  reckoned  as  part  of  the  1 50 
hours.  Under  ordinary  circumstances  the  chil- 

1  Sir  John  Kincaid,  Reports  0]  Inspectors  0 f  Factories  for 
31st  Oct.,  1858,  pp.  31, 3a. 

fL.  Horner,  Reports ,  etc.,  31st  Oct.,  1857,  pp.  17,  18. 
Sir  J.  Kincaid,  Reports ,  etc.,  31st  Oct.,  1856,  p.  66. 


dren  attend  school  morning  and  afternoon  for 
30  days,  for  at  least  5  hours  each  day,  and  upon 
the  expiration  of  the  30  days,  the  statutory 
total  of  1 50  hours  having  been  attained,  having, 
in  their  language,  made  up  their  book,  they  re¬ 
turn  to  the  print-works,  where  they  continueun- 
til  the  six  months  have  expired,  when  another 
instalment  of  school  attendance  becomes  due, 
and  they  again  seek  the  school  until  the  book  is 
again  made  up. . .  .Many  boys  having  attended 
school  for  the  required  number  of  hours,  when 
they  return  to  school  after  the  expiration  of 
their  six  months'  work  in  the  print-works,  are  in 
the  same  condition  as  when  they  first  attended 
school  as  print-work  boys,  that  they  have  lost 
all  they  gained  by  their  previous  school  attend¬ 
ance.  ...  In  other  print-works  the  children's  at¬ 
tendance  at  school  is  made  to  depend  altogether 
upon  the  exigencies  of  the  work  in  the  establish¬ 
ment.  The  requisite  number  of  hours  is  made 
up,  each  six  months,  by  instalments  consisting 
of  from  3  to  5  hours  at  a  time,  spreading  over, 
perhaps,  the  whole  six  months.  .  .  .  For  in¬ 
stance,  the  attendance  on  one  day  might  be 
from  8  to  11  a.m.,  on  another  day  from  1  p.m. 
to  4  p.m.,  and  the  child  might  not  appear  at 
school  again  for  several  days,  when  it  would  at¬ 
tend  from  3  p.m.  to 6  p.m.;  then  it  might  attend 
for  3  or  4  days  consecutively,  or  for  a  week;  then 
it  would  not  appear  in  school  for  3  weeks  or  a 
month;  after  that  upon  some  odcTdays  at  some 
odd  hours  when  the  operative  who  employed  it 
chose  to  spare  it;  and  thus  the  child  was,  as  it 
were,  buffeted  from  school  to  work,  from  work 
to  school,  until  the  tale  of  1 50  hours  was  told.”3 

By  the  excessive  addition  of  women  and  chil¬ 
dren  to  the  ranks  of  the  workers,  machinery  at 
last  breaks  down  the  resistance  which  the  male 
operatives  in  the  manufacturing  period  contin¬ 
ued  to  oppose  to  the  despotism  of  capital.4 

*  A.  Redgrave,  Reports ,  etc.,  31st  Oct.,  1857,  pp.  41-42. 
In  those  industries  where  the  Factory  Act  proper  (not  the 
Print-Works  Act  referred  to  in  the  text)  has  been  in  force 
for  some  time,  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  education 
clauses  have,  in  recent  years,  been  overcome.  In  industries 
not  under  the  Act,  the  views  of  Mr.  J.  Gcddes,  a  glass 
manufacturer,  still  extensively  prevail.  He  informed  Mr. 
White,  one  of  the  inquiry  commissioners:  ‘Vts  far  as  I  can 
see,  the  greater  amount  of  education  which  a  part  of  the 
working  class  has  enjoyed  for  some  years  past  is  an  evil.  It 
is  dangerous,  because  it  makes  them  independent.”—  Chil- 
dreris  Employment  Commission ,  Fourth  Report t  London, 
1865,  p.  153. 

4  **Mr.  E,  a  manufacturer  . . .  informed  me  that  he  em¬ 
ployed  females  exclusively  at  his  power-looms  . . .  gives  a 
decided  preference  to  married  females,  especially  those  who 
have  families  at  home  dependent  on  them  for  support;  they 
are  attentive,  docile,  more  so  than  unmarried  females,  and 
are  compelled  to  use  their  utmost  exertions  to  procure  the 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


b.  Prolongation  of  the  Working  Day 

If  machinery  be  the  most  powerful  means  for 
increasing  the  productiveness  of  labour— i.e., 
for  shortening  the  working  time  required  in  the 
production  of  a  commodity — it  becomes  in  the 
hands  of  capital  the  most  powerful  means,  in 
those  industries  first  invaded  by  it,  for  length¬ 
ening  the  working  day  beyond  all  bounds  set  by 
human  nature.  It  creates,  on  the  one  hand,  new 
conditions  by  which  capital  is  enabled  to  give 
free  scope  to  this  its  constant  tendency,  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  new  motives  with  which  to 
whet  capital’s  appetite  for  the  labour  of  others. 

In  the  first  place,  in  the  form  of  machinery, 
the  implements  of  labour  become  automatic, 
things  moving  and  working  independent  of  the 
workman.  They  are  thenceforth  an  industrial 
perpetuum  mobile  that  would  go  on  producing 
forever,  did  it  not  meet  with  certain  natural  ob¬ 
structions  in  the  weak  bodies  and  the  strong 
wills  of  its  human  attendants.  This  automaton 
as  capital,  and  because  it  is  capital,  is  endowed, 
in  the  person  of  the  capitalist,  with  intelligence 
and  will;  it  is,  therefore,  animated  by  the  long¬ 
ing  to  reduce  to  a  minimum  the  resistance  of¬ 
fered  by  that  repellent  yet  elastic  natural  bar¬ 
rier,  man.1  This  resistance  is  moreover  lessened 
by  the  apparent  lightness  of  machine  work,  and 
by  the  more  pliant  and  docile  character  of  the 
women  and  children  employed  on  it.2 

necessaries  of  life.  Thus  are  the  virtues,  the  peculiar  vir¬ 
tues  of  the  female  character,  to  be  perverted  to  her  injury 
— thus  all  that  is  most  dutiful  and  tender  in  her  nature  is 
made  a  means  of  her  bondage  and  suffering." — Ten  Hours 
Factory  Bill ,  a  speech  of  Lord  Ashley,  March  15th,  Lon¬ 
don,  1844,  p.  20. 

1  "Since  the  general  introduction  of  machinery,  human 
nature  has  been  forced  far  beyond  its  average  strength." 
—Robert  Owen,  Observations  on  the  Effects  of  the  Manufac¬ 
turing  System ,  second  edition,  London,  1817. 

2  The  English,  who  have  a  tendency  to  look  upon  the 
earliest  form  of  appearance  of  a  thing  as  the  cause  of  its 
existence,  are  in  the  habit  of  attributing  the  long  hours  of 
work  in  factories  to  the  extensive  kidnapping  of  children 
practised  by  capitalists  in  the  infancy  of  the  factory  sys¬ 
tem,  on  workhouses  and  orphanages,  by  means  of  which 
robbery  unresisting  material  for  exploitation  was  procured. 
Thus,  for  instance,  Fielden,  himself  a  manufacturer,  says: 
"It  is  evident  that  the  long  hours  of  work  were  brought 
about  by  the  circumstance  of  so  great  a  number  of  desti¬ 
tute  children  being  supplied  from  different  parts  of  the 
country  that  the  masters  were  independent  of  the  hands, 
and  that  having  once  established  the  custom  by  means  of 
the  miserable  materials  they  had  procured  in  this  way, 
they  could  impose  it  on  their  neighbours  with  the  greater 
facility."  (J.  Fielden,  The  Curse  of  the  Factory  System,  Lon¬ 
don,  1836,  p.  xi.)  With  reference  to  the  labour  of  women, 
Saunders,  the  factory  inspector,  says  in  his  report  of  1844: 
"Amongst  the  female  operatives  there  are  some  women 
who,  for  many  weeks  in  succession,  except  for  a  few  days, 


197 

The  productiveness  of  machinery  is,  as  we 
saw,  inversely  proportional  to  the  value  trans¬ 
ferred  by  it  to  the  product.  The  longer  the  life 
of  the  machine,  the  greater  is  the  mass  of  the 
products  over  which  the  value  transmitted  by 
the  machine  is  spread,  and  the  less  is  the  por¬ 
tion  of  that  value  added  to  each  single  com¬ 
modity.  The  active  lifetime  of  a  machine  is, 
however,  clearly  dependent  on  the  length  of  the 
working  day,  or  on  the  duration  of  the  daily 
labour  process  multiplied  by  the  number  of 
days  for  which  the  process  is  carried  on. 

The  wear  and  tear  of  a  machine  is  not  exactly 
proportional  to  its  working  time.  And  even  if  it 
were  so,  a  machine  working  16  hours  daily  for 
7^2  years,  covers  as  long  a  working  period  as, 
and  transmits  to  the  total  product  no  more  val¬ 
ue  than,  the  same  machine  would  if  it  worked 
only  8  hours  daily  for  15  years.  But  in  the  first 
case  the  valueof  the  machine  would  be  repro¬ 
duced  twice  as  quickly  as  in  the  latter,  and  the 
capitalist  would,  by  this  use  of  the  machine,  ab¬ 
sorb  in  7 y2  years  as  much  surplus  value  as  in 
the  second  case  he  would  in  15. 

The  material  wear  and  tear  of  a  machine  is  of 
two  kinds.  The  one  arises  from  use,  as  coin9 
wear  away  by  circulating,  the  other  from  non¬ 
use,  as  a  sword  rusts  when  left  in  its  scabbard. 
The  latter  kind  is  due  to  the  elements.  The 
former  is  more  or  less  directly  proportional,  the 
latter  to  a  certain  extent  inversely  proportion¬ 
al,  to  the  use  of  the  machine.* 

But  in  addition  to  the  material  wear  and  tear, 
a  machine  also  undergoes  what  we  may  call  a 
moral  depreciation.  It  loses  exchange  value,  ei¬ 
ther  by  machines  of  the  same  sort  being  pro¬ 
duced  cheaper  than  it,  or  by  better  machines 
entering  in  to  competition  with  it.4  In  both  cases, 
be  the  machine  ever  so  young  and  full  of  life,  its 
value  is  no  longer  determined  by  the  labour  actu¬ 
ally  materialized  in  it,  but  by  the  labour  time  re¬ 
quisite  to  reproduce  either  it  or  the  better  ma¬ 
chine.  It  has,  therefore,  lost  value  more  or  less. 
The  shorter  the  period  taken  to  reproduce  its  to¬ 
tal  value,  the  less  is  the  danger  of  moral  depreci¬ 
ation;  and  the  longer  the  working  day,  the 

arc  employed  from  6  a.m.  till  midnight,  with  less  than  2 
hours  for  meals,  so  that  on  5  days  of  the  week  they  have 
only  6  hours  left  out  of  the  24,  for  going  to  and  from  their 
homes  and  resting  in  bed." 

*  "Occasion  . . .  injury  to  the  delicate  moving  parts  of 
metallic  mechanism  by  inaction."—  Ure,  op.  eit .,  p.  28. 

4  The  Manchester  spinner  ( The  Times ,  26th  Nov.,  1862) 
before  referred  to  says  in  relation  to  this  subject:  "It  (name¬ 
ly,  the  'allowance  for  deterioration  of  machinery’)  is  also 
intended  to  cover  the  loss  which  is  constantly  arising  from 
the  superseding  of  machines  before  they  are  worn  out,  by 
others  of  a  new  and  better  construction." 


CAPITAL 


198 

shorter  is  that  period.  When  machinery  is  first 
introduced  into  an  industry,  new  methods  of 
reproducing  it  more  cheaply  follow  blow  upon 
blow,1  and  so  do  improvements,  that  affect  not 
onl  y  individual  parts  and  details  of  the  machine, 
but  its  entire  build.  It  is,  therefore,  in  the  early 
days  of  the  life  of  machinery  that  this  special 
incentive  to  the  prolongation  of  the  working 
day  makes  itself  felt  most  acutely.2 

Given  the  length  of  the  working  day,  all  other 
circumstances  remaining  the  same,  the  exploi¬ 
tation  of  double  the  number  of  workmen  de¬ 
mands  not  only  a  doubling  of  that  part  of  con¬ 
stant  capital  which  is  invested  in  machinery 
and  buildings,  but  also  of  that  part  which  is  laid 
out  in  raw  material  and  auxiliary  substances. 
The  lengthening  of  the  working  day,  on  the  oth¬ 
er  hand,  allows  of  production  on  an  extended 
scale  without  any  alteration  in  the  amount  of 
capital  laid  out  on  machinery  and  buildings.3 
Not  only  is  there,  therefore,  an  increase  of  sur¬ 
plus  value,  but  the  outlay  necessary  to  obtain 
it  diminishes.  It  is  true  that  this  takes  place 
more  or  less  with  every  lengthening  of  the  work¬ 
ing  day;  but,  in  the  case  under  consideration, 
the  change  is  more  marked,  because  the  capital 
converted  into  the  instruments  of  labour  pre¬ 
ponderates  to  a  greater  degree.4  The  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  factory  system  fixes  a  constantly 
increasing  portion  of  the  capital  in  a  form  in 
which,  on  the  one  hand,  its  value  is  capable 
of  continual  self-expansion,  and  in  which,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  loses  both  use-value  and* 
exchange  value  whenever  it  loses  contact  with 

1  “It  has  been  estimated,  roughly,  that  the  first  individ¬ 
ual  of  a  newly-invented  machine  will  cost  about  five  times 
as  much  as  the  construction  of  the  second.” — Babbage,  op . 
cit.,  p.  21 1. 

*  “The  improvements  which  took  place  not  long  ago  in 
frames  for  making  patent  net  were  so  great  that  a  machine 
in  good  repair  which  had  cost  £1,200  sold  a  few  years  after 
for  £60. . . .  Improvements  succeeded  each  other  so  rapid¬ 
ly  that  machines  which  had  never  been  finished  were  aban¬ 
doned  in  the  hands  of  their  makers,  because  new  improve¬ 
ments  had  superseded  their  utility.”  (Babbage,  op.  cit.,  p. 
233.)  In  these  stormy,  go-ahead  times,  therefore,  the  tulle 
manufacturers  soon  extended  the  working  day,  by  means 
of  double  sets  of  hands,  from  the  original  8  hours  to  24. 

9  “It  is  self-evident,  that,  amid  the  ebbings  and  flowings 
of  the  markets  and  the  alternate  expansions  and  contrac¬ 
tions  of  demand,  occasions  will  constantly  recur  in  which 
the  manufacturer  may  employ  additional  floating  capital 
without  employing  additional  fixed  capital ...  if  addition¬ 
al  quantities  of  raw  material  can  be  worked  up  without  in¬ 
curring  an  additional  expense  for  buildings  and  machinery.” 
— R.  Torrens,  On  Wages  and  Combinations ,  London,  1834, 
P-6 3. 

4  This  circumstance  is  mentioned  only  for  the  sake  of 
completeness,  for  I  shall  not  consider  the  rate  of  profit,  i.e., 
the  ratio  of  the  surplus  value  to  the  total  capital  advanced, 
until  I  come  to  Book  Three. 


living  labour.  “When  a  labourer,”  said  Mr. 
Ashworth,  a  cotton  magnate,  to  Professor 
Nassau  W.  Senior,  “lays  down  his  spade,  he 
renders  useless  for  that  period  a  capital 
worth  eighteenpence.  When  one  of  our  people 
leaves  the  mill,  he  renders  useless  a  capital  that 
has  cost  £ioo,ooo.”5Oniy  fancy!  making  “use¬ 
less”  for  a  single  moment,  a  capital  that  has  cost 
£100,000!  It  is,  in  truth,  monstrous  that  a  sin¬ 
gle  one  of  our  people  should  ever  leave  the  fac¬ 
tory!  The  increased  use  of  machinery,  as  Senior 
after  the  instruction  he  received  from  Ashworth 
clearly  perceives,  makes  a  constantly  increas¬ 
ing  lengthening  of  the  working  day  “desir¬ 
able.”9 

Machinery  produces  relative  surplus  value; 
not  only  by  directly  depreciating  the  value  of 
labour  power,  and  by  indirectly  cheapening  the 
same  through  cheapening  the  commodities  that 
enter  into  its  reproduction,  but  also,  when  it  is 
first  introduced  sporadically  into  an  industry, 
by  converting  the  labour  employed  by  the  own¬ 
er  of  that  machinery  into  labour  of  a  higher  de¬ 
gree  and  greater  efficacy,  by  raising  the  social 
value  of  the  article  produced  above  its  individ¬ 
ual  value  and  thus  enabling  the  capitalist  to  re¬ 
place  the  value  of  a  day’s  labour  power  by  a 
smaller  portion  of  the  value  of  a  day’s  product. 
During  this  transition  period,  when  the  use  of 
machinery  is  a  sort  of  monopoly,  the  profits  are 
therefore  exceptional,  and  the  Thpitalist  en¬ 
deavours  to  exploit  thoroughly  “the  sunny  time 
of  this  his  first  love,”  by  prolonging  the  working 
day  as  much  as  possible.  The  magnitude  of  the 
profit  whets  his  appetite  for  more  profit. 

As  the  use  of  machinery  becomes  more  gen¬ 
eral  in  a  particular  industry,  the  social  value  of 
the  product  sinks  down  to  its  individual  value, 
and  the  law  that  surplus  value  does  not  arise 
from  the  labour  power  that  has  been  replaced 
by  the  machinery,  but  from  the  labour  power 
actually  employed  in  working  with  the  machin¬ 
ery,  asserts  itself.  Surplus  value  arises  from  vari- 

6  Senior,  Letters  on  the  Factory  / let ,  London,  1837,  pp.  13, 
14. 

6  “The  great  proportion  of  fixed  to  circulating  capital 
. ..  make9  long  hours  of  work  desirable.”  With  the  increased 
use  of  machinery,  etc.,  “the  motives  to  long  hours  of  work 
will  become  greater,  as  the  only  means  by  which  a  large 
proportion  of  fixed  capital  can  be  made  profitable.”  (Ibid., 
pp.  11-13.)  “There  are  certain  expenses  upoft  a  mill  which 
go  on  in  the  same  proportion  whether  the  mill  be  running 
short  or  full  time,  as,  for  instance,  rent,  rates,  and  taxes, 
insurance  against  fire,  wages  of  several  permanent  serv¬ 
ants,  deterioration  of  machinery,  with  variousother  charges 
upon  a  manufacturing  establishment,  the  proportion  of 
which  to  profits  increases  as  the  production  decreases.” 
(Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories  for  31st  Oct.,  1862,  p.  19.) 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


able  capital  alone,  and  we  saw  that  the  amount 
of  surplus  value  depends  on  two  factors,  viz.,  the 
rate  of  surplus  value  and  the  number  of  the 
workmen  simultaneously  employed.  Given  the 
length  of  the  working  day,  the  rate  of  surplus 
value  is  determined  by  the  relative  duration  of 
the  necessary  labour  and  of  the  surplus  labour 
in  a  day.  The  number  of  the  labourers  simulta¬ 
neously  employed  depends,  on  its  side,  on  the 
ratio  of  the  variable  to  the  constant  capital. 
Now,  however  much  the  use  of  machinery  may 
increase  the  surplus  labour  at  the  expense  of 
the  necessary  labour  by  heightening  the  produc¬ 
tiveness  of  labour,  it  is  clear  that  it  attains  this 
result  only  by  diminishing  the  number  of  work¬ 
men  employed  by  a  given  amount  of  capital. 
It  converts  what  was  formerly  variable  capital 
invested  in  labour  power  into  machinery  which, 
being  constant  capital,  does  not  produce  sur¬ 
plus  value.  It  is  impossible,  for  instance,  to 
squeeze  as  much  surplus  value  out  of  two  as  out 
of  twenty-four  labourers.  I  f  each  of  these  twen¬ 
ty-four  men  gives  only  one  hour  of  surplus  la¬ 
bour  in  twelve,  the  twenty-four  men  give  to¬ 
gether  twenty-four  hours  of  surplus  labour, 
while  twenty-four  hours  is  the  total  labour  of 
the  two  men.  Hence,  the  application  of  machin¬ 
ery  to  the  production  of  surplus  value  implies 
a  contradiction  which  is  immanent  in  it,  since, 
of  the  two  factors  of  the  surplus  value  created 
by  a  given  amount  of  capital,  one,  the  rate  of 
surplus  value,  cannot  be  increased  except  by 
diminishing  the  other,  the  number  of  workmen. 
This  contradiction  comes  to  light  as  soon  as,  by 
the  general  employment  of  machinery  in  a  given 
industry,  the  value  of  the  machine-produced 
commodity  regulates  the  value  of  all  commodi¬ 
ties  of  the  same  sort;  and  it  is  this  contradiction 
that  in  its  turn  drives  the  capitalist,  without 
his  being  conscious  of  the  fact,1  to  excessive 
lengthening  of  the  working  day,  in  order  that 
he  may  compensate  the  decrease  in  the  relative 
number  of  labourers  exploited  by  an  increase 
not  only  of  the  relative,  but  of  the  absolute, 
surplus  labour. 

If,  then,  the  capitalistic  employment  of  ma¬ 
chinery,  on  the  one  hand,  supplies  new  and 
powerful  motives  to  an  excessive  lengthening  of 
the  working  day,  and  radically  changes  both 
the  methods  of  labour  and  also  the  character  of 
the  social  working  organism  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  break  down  all  opposition  to  this  tend- 

1  Why  it  is  that  the  capitalist,  and  also  the  political 
economists  who  are  embued  with  his  views,  are  unconscious 
of  this  immanent  contradiction  will  appear  from  the  first 
part  of  Book  Three. 


199 

ency;  on  the  other  hand,  it  produces,  partly  by 
opening  out  to  the  capitalist  new  strata  of  the 
working  class  previously  inaccessible  to  him, 
partly  by  setting  free  the  labourers  it  supplants, 
a  surplus  working  population,2  which  is  com¬ 
pelled  to  submit  to  the  dictation  of  capital. 
Hence  that  remarkable  phenomenon  in  the  his¬ 
tory  of  modern  industry,  that  machinery 
sweeps  away  every  moral  and  natural  restric¬ 
tion  on  the  length  of  the  working  day.  Hence, 
too,  the  economic  paradox,  that  the  most  pow¬ 
erful  instrument  for  shortening  labour  time,  be¬ 
comes  the  most  unfailing  means  for  placing 
every  moment  of  the  labourer’s  time  and  that 
of  his  family,  at  the  disposal  of  the  capitalist  for 
the  purpose  of  expanding  the  value  of  his  capi¬ 
tal.  “If, M  dreamed  Aristotle,  the  greatest  thinker 
of  antiquity,  “if  every  tool,  when  summoned, 
or  even  of  its  own  accord,  could  do  the  work 
that  befits  it,  jtist  as  the  creations  of  Daedalus 
moved  of  themselves,  or  the  tripods  of  Hephses- 
tos  went  of  their  own  accord  to  their  sacred 
work,  if  the  weavers’  shuttles  were  to  weave  of 
themselves,  then  there  would  be  no  need  either 
of  apprentices  for  the  master  workers,  or  of 
slaves  for  the  lords.”3  And  Antiparos,  a  Greek 
poet  of  the  time  of  Cicero,  hailed  the  invention 
of  the  water-wheel  for  grinding  corn,  an  inven¬ 
tion  that  is  the  elementary  form  of  all  machin¬ 
ery,  as  the  giver  of  freedom  to  female  slaves, 
and  the  bringer  back  of  the  Golden  Age.4  Oh 
those  heathens!  They  understood,  as  the 
learned  Bastiat  and  before  him  the  still  wiser 
MacCulloch  have  discovered,  nothing  of  poli¬ 
tical  economy  and  Christianity.  They  did  not, 
for  example,  comprehend  that  machinery  is  the 
surest  means  of  lengthening  the  working  day. 
They  perhaps  excused  the  slavery  of  one  on  the 
ground  that  it  was  a  means  to  the  full  develop¬ 
ment  of  another.  But  to  preach  slavery  of  the 
masses,  in  order  that  a  few  crude  and  half- 
educated  parvenus  might  become  “eminent 

2  It  is  one  of  the  greatest  merits  of  Ricardo  to  have  seen 
in  machinery  not  only  the  means  of  producing  commodities, 
but  of  creating  a  “redundant  population." 

3  F.  Biese,  Die  Philosophy  des  Artstotelcs ,  Vol.  II,  Ber¬ 
lin,  1842,  p.  408.  [See  Aristotle,  Politics ,  I.  4.] 

4 1  give  below  the  translation  of  this  poem  because  it 
brings  into  relief,  quite  in  the  spirit  of  former  quotations 
referring  to  division  of  labour,  the  antithesis  between  the 
views  of  the  ancients  and  the  moderns.  "Spare  the  hand 
that  grinds  the  corn.  Oh  miller  girls,  and  softly  sleep.  Let 
Chanticleer  announce  the  morn  in  vain!  Deo  has  com¬ 
manded  the  work  of  the  girls  be  done  by  the  Nymphs,  and 
now  they  skip  lightly  over  the  wheels,  so  that  the  shaken 
axles  revolve  with  their  spokes  and  pull  round  the  load  of 
the  revolving  stones.  Let  us  live  the  life  of  our  fathers,  and 
let  us  rest  from  work  and  enjoy  the  gifts  that  the  Goddess 
sends  us." 


CAPITAL 


200 

spinners,*9  “extensive  sausage-makers/*  and 
“influential  shoe-black  dealers/’  to  do  this 
they  lacked  the  bump  of  Christianity. 

c.  Intensification  of  Labour 

The  immoderate  lengthening  of  the  working 
day  produced  by  machinery  in  the  hands  of  cap¬ 
ital  leads  to  a  reaction  on  the  part  of  society,  the 
very  sources  of  whose  life  are  menaced,  and 
thence  to  a  normal  working  day  whose  length  is 
fixed  by  law.  Thenceforth  a  phenomenon  that 
we  have  already  met  with,  namely,  the  intensi¬ 
fication  of  labour,  develops  into  great  impor¬ 
tance.  Our  analysis  of  absolute  surplus  value 
had  reference  primarily  to  the  extension  or  du¬ 
ration  of  the  labour,  its  intensity  being  assumed 
as  given.  We  now  proceed  to  consider  the  sub¬ 
stitution  of  a  more  intensified  labour  for  labour 
of  more  extensive  duration,  and  the  degree  of 
the  former. 

It  is  self-evident  that  in  proportion  as  the  use 
of  machinery  spreads,  and  the  experience  of  a 
special  class  of  workmen  habituated  to  machin¬ 
ery  accumulates,  the  rapidity  and  intensity  of 
labour  increase  as  a  natural  consequence.  Thus 
in  England,  during  half  a  century,  lengthening 
of  the  working  day  went  hand  in  hand  with  in¬ 
creasing  intensity  of  factory  labour.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  the  reader  will  clearly  see  that  where  we 
have  labour  not  carried  on  by  fits  and  starts, 
but  repeated  day  after  day  with  unvarying  uni¬ 
formity,  a  point  must  inevitably  be  reached 
where  extension  of  the  working  day  and  inten-# 
sity  of  the  labour  mutually  exclude  one  another, 
in  such  a  way  that  lengthening  of  the  working 
day  becomes  compatible  only  with  a  lower  de¬ 
gree  of  intensity,  and  a  higher  degree  of  inten¬ 
sity  only  with  a  shortening  of  the  working  day. 
So  soon  as  the  gradually  surging  revolt  of  the 
working  class  compelled  Parliament  to  shorten 
compulsorily  the  hours  of  labour,  and  to  begin 
by  imposing  a  normal  working  day  on  factories 
proper,  so  soon,  consequently,  as  an  increased 
production  of  surplus  value  by  the  prolongation 
of  the  working  day  was  once  for  all  put  a  stop 
to,  from  that  moment  capital  threw  itself  with 
all  its  might  into  the  production  of  relative'sur- 
plus  value,  by  hastening  on  the  further  im¬ 
provement  of  machinery.  At  the  same  time  a 
change  took  place  in  the  nature  of  relative  sur¬ 
plus  value.  Generally  speaking,  the  mode  of 
producing  relative  surplus  value  consists  in 
raising  the  productive  power  of  the  workman, 
so  as  to  enable  him  to  produce  more  in  a  given 
time  with  the  same  expenditure  of  labour.  La¬ 
bour  time  continues  to  transmit  as  before  the 


same  value  to  the  total  product,  but  this  un¬ 
changed  amount  of  exchange  value  is  spread 
over  more  use-values;  hence  the  value  of  each 
single  commodity  sinks.  Things  are  different, 
however,  so  soon  as  the  compulsory  shortening 
of  the  hours  of  labour  takes  place.  The  immense 
impetus  it  gives  to  the  development  of  produc¬ 
tive  power,  and  to  economy  in  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  imposes  on  the  workman  increased  ex¬ 
penditure  of  labour  in  a  given  time,  heightened 
tension  of  labour  power,  and  closer  filling  up  of 
the  pores  of  the  working  day,  or  condensation 
of  labour  to  a  degree  that  is  attainable  only 
within  the  limits  of  the  shortened  working  day. 
This  condensation  of  a  greater  mass  of  labour 
into  a  given  period  thenceforward  counts  for 
what  it  really  is,  a  greater  quantity  of  labour. 
In  addition  to  a  measure  of  its  extension,  i.e., 
duration,  labour  now  acquires  a  measure  of  its 
intensity  or  of  the  degree  of  its  condensation  or 
density.1  The  denser  hour  of  the  ten  hours’ 
working  day  contains  more  labour,  i.e.,  expend¬ 
ed  labour  power,  than  the  more  porous  hour  of 
the  twelve  hours*  working  day.  The  product, 
therefore,  of  one  the  former  hours  has  as  much 
or  more  value  than  has  the  product  of  ix/s  of 
the  latter  hours.  Apart  from  the  increased  yield 
of  relative  surplus  value  through  the  heightened 
productiveness  of  labour,  the  same  mass  of  val¬ 
ue  is  now  produced  for  the  capitalist,  say,  by 
3^  hours  of  surplus  labour,  ancTfcK  hours  of 
necessary  labour,  as  was  previously  produced 
by  4  hours  of  surplus  labour  and  8  hours  of  nec¬ 
essary  labour. 

We  now  come  to  the  question:  How  is  the 
labour  intensified? 

The  first  effect  of  shortening  the  working  day 
results  from  the  self-evident  law  that  the  effi¬ 
ciency  of  labour  power  is  in  an  inverse  ratio  to 
the  duration  of  its  expenditure.  Hence,  within 
certain  limits  what  is  lost  by  shortening  the  du¬ 
ration  is  gained  by  the  increasing  tension  of  la¬ 
bour  power.  That  the  workman  moreover  really 
does  expend  more  labour  power  is  ensured  by 
the  mode  in  which  the  capitalist  pays  him.2  In 
those  industries  such  as  potteries  wherb  ma- 

1  There  are,  of  course,  always  differences  In  the  intensi¬ 
ties  of  the  labour  in  various  industries.  But  these  differ¬ 
ences  are,  as  Adam  Smith  has  shown,  compensated  to  a 
partial  extent  by  minor  circumstances,  peculiar  to  each  sort 
of  labour.  Labour  time,  as  a  measure  of  value,  is  not,  how¬ 
ever,  affected  in  this  case,  except  in  so  far  as  the  duration 
of  labour  and  the  degree  of  its  intensity  are  two  antitheti¬ 
cal  and  mutually  exclusive  expressions  for  one  and  the  same 
quantity  of  labour. 

2  Especially  by  piece-work,  a  form  we  shall  investigate 
in  Part  Six  of  this  book. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


chinery  plays  little  or  no  part,  the  introduction 
of  the  Factory  Acts  has  strikingly  shown  that 
the  mere  shortening  of  the  working  day  in¬ 
creases  to  a  wonderful  degree  the  regularity, 
uniformity,  order,  continuity,  and  energy  of  the 
labour.1  Jt  seemed,  however,  doubtful  whether 
this  effect  was  produced  in  the  factory  proper, 
where  the  dependence  of  the  workman  on  the 
continuous  and  uniform  motion  of  the  machin¬ 
ery  had  already  created  the  strictest  discipline. 
Hence,  when  in  1844  the  reduction  of  the  work¬ 
ing  day  to  less  than  twelve  hours  was  being  de¬ 
bated,  the  masters  almost  unanimously  de¬ 
clared  “that  their  overlookers  in  the  different 
rooms  took  good  care  that  the  hands  lost  no 
time,”  that  “the  extent  of  vigilance  and  atten¬ 
tion  on  the  part  of  the  workmen  was  hardly 
capable  of  being  increased,”  and  that,  therefore, 
the  speed  of  the  machinery  and  other  conditions 
remaining  unaltered,  “to  expect  in  a  well-man¬ 
aged  factory  any  important  result  from  in¬ 
creased  attention  of  the  workmen  was  an  ab¬ 
surdity.”2  This  '•s'se  tion  was  contradicted  by 
experiments.  Mr.  Robert  Gardner  reduced  the 
hours  of  labour  in  his  two  large  factories  at  Pres¬ 
ton,  on  and  after  the  doth  April,  1844,  from 
twelve  to  eleven  hours  a  day.  The  result  of 
about  a  year’s  working  was  that  “the  same 
amount  of  product  for  the  same  cost  was  re¬ 
ceived,  and  the  workpeople  as  a  whole  earned 
in  eleven  hours  as  much  wages  as  they  did  be¬ 
fore  in  twelve.”3  I  pass  over  the  experiments 
made  in  the  spinning  and  carding  rooms,  be¬ 
cause  they  were  accompanied  by  an  increase  of 
2%  in  the  speed  of  the  machines.  But  in  the 
weaving  department,  where,  moreover,  many 
sorts  of  figured  fancy  articles  were  woven,  there 
was  not  the  slightest  alteration  in  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  the  work.  The  result  was:  “From  6th 
January  to  doth  April,  1844,  with  a  twelve-hour 
day,  average  weekly  wages  of  each  hand  10 s. 
1  from  doth  April  to  29  June,  1844,  with 
day  of  eleven  hours,  average  weekly  wages  10s. 
ZlAd''h  Here  we  have  more  produced  in  eleven 
hours  than  previously  in  twelve,  and  entirely 
in  consequence  of  more  steady  application  and 
economy  of  time  by  the  workpeople.  While 
they  got  the  same  wages  and  gained  one  hour 
of  spare  time,  the  capitalist  got  the  same 

1  See  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories  for  31st  October, 
1865. 

2  Ibid. 1 1844  and  the  quarter  ending  30th  April  1845,  pp. 
20-21. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  19.  Since  the  wages  for  piece-work  were  un¬ 
altered,  the  weekly  wages  depended  on  the  quantity  pro¬ 
duced. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  12. 


201 

amount  produced  and  saved  the  cost  of  coal, 
gas,  and  other  such  items,  for  one  hour.  Similar 
experiments,  and  with  the  like  success,  were 
carried  out  in  the  mills  of  Messrs.  Horrocks 
and  Jacson.6 

The  shortening  of  the  hours  of  labour  creates, 
to  begin  with,  the  subjective  conditions  for  the 
condensation  of  labour,  by  enabling  the  work¬ 
man  to  exert  more  strength  in  a  given  time.  So 
soon  as  that  shortening  becomes  compulsory, 
machinery  becomes  in  the  hands  of  capital  the 
objective  means,  systematically  employed  for 
squeezing  out  more  labour  in  a  given  time.  This 
is  effected  in  two  ways:  by  increasing  the  speed 
of  the  machinery,  and  by  giving  the  workman 
more  machinery  to  tend.  Improved  construc¬ 
tion  of  the  machinery  is  necessary,  partly  be¬ 
cause  without  it  greater  pressure  cannct  be  put 
on  the  workman,  and  partly  because  the 
shortened  hourS' of  labour  force  the  capitalist 
to  exercise  the  strictest  watch  over  the  cost  of 
production.  The  improvements  in  the  steam- 
engine  have  increased  the  piston  speed,  and  at 
the  same  time  have  made  it  possible,  by  means 
of  a  greater  economy  of  power,  to  drive  with  the 
same  or  even  a  smaller  consumption  of  coal 
more  machinery  with  the  same  engine.  The  im¬ 
provements  in  the  transmitting  mechanism 
have  lessened  friction,  and,  what  so  strikingly 
distinguishes  modern  from  the  older  machin¬ 
ery,  have  reduced  the  diameter  and  weight  of 
the  shafting  to  a  constantly  decreasing  mini¬ 
mum.  Finally,  the  improvements  in  the  opera¬ 
tive  machines  have,  while  reducing  their  size, 
increased  their  speed  and  efficiency,  as  in  the 
modern  power-loom;  or,  while  increasing  the 
size  of  their  framework,  have  also  increased  the 
extent  and  number  of  their  working  parts,  as  in 
spinning  mules,  or  have  added  to  the  speed  of 
these  working  parts  by  imperceptible  altera¬ 
tions  of  detail,  such  as  those  which  ten  years 
ago  increased  the  speed  of  the  spindles  in  self¬ 
acting  mules  by  one-fifth. 

The  reduction  of  the  working  day  to  twelve 
hours  dates  in  England  from  1832.  In  1836  a 
manufacturer  stated:  “The  labour  now  under¬ 
gone  in  the  factories  is  much  greater  than  it 
used  to-be  .  compared  with  thirty  or  forty 
years  ago . . .  owing  to  the  greater  attention 
and  activity  required  by  the  greatly  increased 

6  The  moral  element  played  an  important  part  in  the 
above  experiments.  The  workpeople  told  the  factory  in¬ 
spector:  “We  work  with  more  spirit,  we  have  the  reward 
ever  before  us  of  getting  away  sooner  at  night,  and  one 
active  and  cheerful  spirit  pervades  the  whole  mill,  from 
the  youngest  piecer  to  the  oldest  hand,  and  we  can  greatly 
help  each  other.*’— Ibid.,  p.  21. 


202  CAPITAL 


speed  which  is  given  to  the  machinery.”1  In  the 
year  1844,  Lord  Ashley,  now  Lord  Shaftesbury, 
made  in  the  House  of  Commons  the  following 
statements,  supported  by  documentary  evi¬ 
dence: 

“The  labour  performed  by  those  engaged  in 
the  processes  of  manufacture  is  three  times  as 
great  as  in  the  beginning  of  such  operations. 
Machinery  has  executed,  no  doubt,  the  work 
that  would  demand  the  sinews  of  millions  of 
men;  but  it  has  also  prodigiously  multiplied  the 
labour  of  those  who  are  governed  by  its  fearful 
movements. ...  In  1815,  the  labour  of  follow¬ 
ing  a  pair  of  mules  spinning  cotton  of  No.  40 — 
reckoning  12  hours  to  the  working  day— in¬ 
volved  a  necessity  of  walking  8  miles.  In  1832, 
the  distance  travelled  in  following  a  pair  of 
mules,  spinning  cotton  yarn  of  the  same  num¬ 
ber,  was  20  miles,  and  frequently  more.  In  1 835* 
the  spinner  put  up  daily  on  each  of  these  mules 
820  stretches,  making  a  total  of  1,640  stretches 
in  the  course  of  the  day.  In  1832,  the  spinner 
put  up  on  each  mule  2,200  stretches,  making  a 
total  of  4,400.  In  1844,  2,400  stretches,  making 
a  total  of  4,800;  and  in  some  cases  the  amount 
of  labour  required  is  even  still  greater  ...  I  have 
another  document,  sent  to  me  in  1842,  stating 
that  the  labour  is  progressively  increasing — in¬ 
creasing  not  only  because  the  distance  to  be 
travelled  is  greater,  but  because  the  quantity 
of  goods  produced  is  multiplied,  while  the  hands 
are  fewer  in  proportion  than  before;  and,  more¬ 
over,  because  an  inferior  species  of  cotton  is 
now  often  spun,  which  it  is  more  difficult  to 
work. ...  In  the  carding- room  there  has  also 
been  a  great  increase  of  labour.  One  person 
there  does  the  work  formerly  divided  between 
two.  In  the  weaving-room,  where  a  vast  num¬ 
ber  of  persons  are  employed,  and  principally 
females  . . .  the  labour  has  increased  within  the 
last  few  years  fully  10  per  cent,  owing  to  the 
increased  speed  of  the  machinery  in  spinning. 
In  1838,  the  number  of  hanks  spun  per  week 
was  18,000;  in  1843  it  amounted  to  21,000.  In 
1819  the  number  of  picks  in  power-loom  weav¬ 
ing  per  minute  was  60— in  1842  it  was  140, 
showing  a  vast  increase  of  labour.”3 

In  the  face  of  this  remarkable  intensity  of  la¬ 
bour  which  had  already  been  reached  in  1844 
under  the  Twelve  Hours  Act,  there  appeared  to 
be  a  justification  for  the  assertion,  made  at  that 
time  by  the  English  manufacturers,  that  any 
further  progress  in  that  direction  was  impossi- 

1  John  Fielden,  op.  cit.y  p.  32. 

*  Presumably  a  misprint  for  1815  or  1825. 

1  Lord  Ashley,  op.  cit.,  p.  6-9,  passim. 


ble,  and  therefore  that  every  further  reduc¬ 
tion  of  the  hours  of  labour  meant  a  lessened 
production.  The  apparent  correctness  of  their 
reasons  will  be  best  shown  by  the  following 
contemporary  statement  by  Leonard  Horner, 
the  Factory  Inspector,  their  ever  watchful 
censor. 

“Now,  as  the  quantity  produced  must,  in  the 
main,  be  regulated  by  the  speed  of  the  machin¬ 
ery,  it  must  be  the  interest  of  the  millowner  to 
drive  it  at  the  utmost  rate  of  speed  consistent 
with  these  following  conditions,  viz.,  the  pres¬ 
ervation  of  the  machinery  from  too  rapid  de¬ 
terioration;  the  preservation  of  the  quality  of 
the  article  manufactured;  and  the  capability  of 
the  workman  to  follow  the  motion  without  a 
greater  exertion  than  he  can  sustain  for  a  con¬ 
stancy.  One  of  the  most  important  problems, 
therefore,  which  the  owner  of  a  factory  has  to 
solve  is  to  find  out  the  maximum  speed  at  which 
he  can  run,  with  a  due  regard  to  the  above  con¬ 
ditions.  It  frequently  happens  that  he  finds  he 
has  gone  too  fast,  that  breakages  and  bad  work 
more  than  counterbalance  the  increased  speed, 
and  that  he  is  obliged  to  slacken  his  pace.  I 
therefore  concluded,  that  as  an  active  and  in¬ 
telligent  millowner  would  find  out  the  safe  max¬ 
imum,  it  would  not  be  possible  to  produce  as 
much  in  eleven  hours  as  in  twelve.  I  further  as¬ 
sumed  that  the  operative  paid  by  piece-work, 
would  exert  himself  to  the  utmost  consistent 
with  the  power  of  continuing  at  the  same  rate.”4 
Horner,  therefore,  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
a  reduction  of  the  working  hours  below  twelve 
would  necessarily  diminish  production.6  He 
himself,  ten  years  later,  cites  his  opinion  of  1845 
in  proof  of  how  much  he  underestimated  in  that 
year  the  elasticity  of  machinery  and  of  man’s 
labour  power,  both  of  which  are  simultaneously 
stretched  to  an  extreme  by  the  compulsory 
shortening  of  the  working  day. 

We  now  come  to  the  period  that  follows  the 
introduction  of  the  Ten  Hours  Act  in  1847  *nto 
the  English  cotton,  woollen,  silk,  and  flax  mills. 

“The  speed  of  the  spindles  has  increased  up¬ 
on  throstles  500,  and  upon  mules  1000,  revolu¬ 
tions  a  minute,  i.e.,  the  speed  of  the  throstle 
spindle,  which  in  1839  was  4500  times  a  minute, 
is  now  (1862)  5000;  and  of  the  mule  spindle, 
that  was  5000,  is  now  6000  times  a  minute, 
amounting  in  the  former  case  to  one-tenth,  and 
in  the  second  case  to  one-fifth  additional  in- 

4  Reports  0]  Inspectors  0]  Factories ,  quarter  ending  30th 
September,  1844,  and  from  1st  October,  1844,  to  30th  April, 
1845,  p.  20. 

6  Op.  cit.,  p.  22. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


crease.”1  James  Nasmyth,  the  eminent  civil  en¬ 
gineer  of  Patricroft,  near  Manchester,  ex¬ 
plained  in  a  letter  to  Leonard  Horner,  written 
in  1852,  the  nature  of  the  improvements  in  the 
steam-engine  that  had  been  made  between  the 
years  1848  and  1852.  After  remarking  that  the 
horse-power  of  steam-engines,  being  always  es¬ 
timated  in  the  official  returns  according  to  the 
power  of  similar  engines  in  1828, 2  is  only  nom¬ 
inal,  and  can  serve  only  as  an  index  of  their  real 
power,  he  goes  on  to  say:  “I  am  confident  that 
from  the  same  weight  of  steam-engine  machin¬ 
ery  we  are  now  obtaining  at  least  50  per  cent 
more  duty  or  work  performed  on  the  average, 
and  that  in  many  cases  the  identical  steam-en¬ 
gines  which  in  the  days  of  the  restricted  speed 
of  220  feet  per  minute  yielded  50  horse-power 
are  now  yielding  upwards  of  100.”  . . .  “The 
modern  steam-engine  of  100  horse- power  is  ca¬ 
pable  of  being  driven  at  a  much  greater  force 
than  formerly,  arising  from  improvements  in 
its  construction,  the  capacity  and  construction 
of  the  boilers,  “  .  .  .  “Although  the  same 
number  of  hands  are  employed  in  proportion  to 
the  horse-power  as  at  former  periods,  there  arc 
fewer  hands  employed  in  proportion  to  the  ma¬ 
chinery.”3  “In  the  year  1850,  the  factories  of 
the  United  Kingdom  employed  134,217  nom¬ 
inal  horse-power  to  give  motion  to  25,638,716 
spindles  and  301,445  looms.  The  number  of 
spindles  and  looms  in  1856  was  respectively 
33,5°3,58o°f  the  former,  and  369,205  of  the  lat¬ 
ter,  which,  reckoning  the  force  of  the  nominal 
horse-power  required  to  be  the  same  as  in  1850, 
would  require  a  force  equal  to  175,000  horses, 
but  the  actual  power  given  in  the  return  for 
1856  is  161,435,  ^ess  by  above  10,000  horses 
than,  calculating  upon  the  basis  of  the  return 
of  1850,  the  factories  ought  to  have  required  in 
1856.”4  “The  facts  thus  brought  out  by  the  Re¬ 
turn  (of  1856)  appear  to  be  that  the  factory  sys¬ 
tem  is  increasing  rapidly;  that  although  the 
same  number  of  hands  are  employed  in  propor¬ 

1  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories,  31st  October,  1862, 
p.  62. 

.  2  This  was  altered  in  the  Parliamentary  Return  of  1862. 
In  it  the  actual  horse-power  of  the  modern  steam-engines 
and  water-wheels  appears  in  place  of  the  nominal.  The 
doubling  spindles,  too,  are  no  longer  included  in  the  spin¬ 
ning  spindles  (as  was  the  case  in  the  Returns  of  1839, 1850, 
and  1856);  further,  in  the  case  of  woollen  mills,  the  num- 
bei  of  “gigs”  is  added,  a  distinction  made  between  jute 
and  hemp  mills  on  the  one  hand  and  flax  mills  on  the  other, 
and  finally  stocking-weaving  is  for  the  first  time  inserted 
in  the  report. 

*  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  October,  1856, 
PP;  *3-14,  and  1852,  p.  23. 

4  Op,  at .,  p.  14-15. 


203 

tion  to  the  horse-power  as  at  former  periods, 
there  are  fewer  hands  employed  in  proportion 
to  the  machinery;  that  the  steam-engine  is  en¬ 
abled  to  drive  an  increased  weight  of  machinery 
by  economy  of  force  and  other  methods,  and 
that  an  increased  quantity  of  work  can  be 
turned  off  by  improvements  in  machinery  and 
in  methods  of  manufacture,  by  increase  of  speed 
of  the  machinery  and  by  a  variety  of  other 
causes.”6 

“The  great  improvements  made  in  machines 
of  every  kind  have  raised  their  productive  pow¬ 
er  very  much.  Without  any  doubt,  the  shorten¬ 
ing  of  the  hours  of  labour  .  .  .  gave  the  impulse 
to  these  improvements.  The  latter,  combined 
with  the  more  intense  strain  on  the  workman, 
have  had  the  effect  that  at  least  as  much  is  pro¬ 
duced  in  the  shortened  (by  two  hours  or  one- 
sixth)  working  day  as  was  previously  produced 
during  the  longfcr  one.”6 

One  fact  is  sufficient  to  show  how  greatly  the 
wealth  of  the  manufacturers  increased  along 
with  the  more  intense  exploitation  of  labour 
power.  From  1838  to  1850,  the  average  propor¬ 
tional  increase  in  English  cotton  and  other  fac¬ 
tories  was  32%,  while  from  1850  to  1856  it 
amounted  to  86%. 

But  however  great  the  progress  of  English 
industry  had  been  during  the  8  years  from  1848 
to  1856  under  the  influence  of  a  working  day  of 
10  hours,  it  was  far  surpassed  during  the  next 
period  of  6  years  from  1856  to  1862.  In  silk  fac¬ 
tories,  for  instance,  there  werein  1856, 1,093,799 
spindles;  in  1862,  1,388,544;  in  1856,  9,260 
looms;  in  1862,  10,709.  But  the  number  of  op¬ 
eratives  was,  in  1856,  56,131;  in  1862,  52,429. 
The  increase  in  the  spindles  was,  therefore, 
26.9%,  and  in  the  looms  15.6%,  while  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  operatives  decreased  7%.  In  the  year 
1850,  there  were  employed  in  worsted  mills 
875,830  spindles;  in  1856,  1,324,549  (increase 
51.2%),  and  in  1862, 1,289,172  (decrease 2.7%). 
But  if  we  deduct  the  doubling  spindles  that  fig¬ 
ure  in  the  numbers  for  1856,  but  not  in  those  for 
1862,  it  will  be  found  that  after  1856  the  num¬ 
ber  of  spindles  remained  nearly  stationary.  On 
the  other  hand,  after  1850,  the  speed  of  the  spin¬ 
dles  and  looms  was  in  many  cases  doubled.  The 
number  of  power-looms  in  worsted  mills  was,  in 
1850,  32,617;  in  1856,  38,956;  in  1862,  43, °48- 
The  number  of  the  operatives  was,  in  1850, 
79,7375  in  l856>  87>7945  in  1862,  86,063;  in¬ 
cluded  in  these,  however,  the  children  under  14 

6  Op.  cit .,  p.  20. 

6  Reports,  etc.,  for  31st  October,  1858,  pp.  9-10.  Com¬ 
pare  Reports, etc.,  for  30th  April,  i860,  p.  30,ff. 


CAPITAL 


204 

years  of  age  were,  in  1850,  9,956;  in  1856, 
11,228;  in  1862,  13,178.  In  spite,  therefore,  of 
the  greatly  increased  number  of  looms  in  1862, 
compared  with  1856,  the  total  number  of  the 
workpeople  employed  decreased,  and  that  of 
the  children  exploited  increased.1 

On  the  27th  April,  1863,  Mr.  Ferrand  said  in 
the  House  of  Commons:  “I  have  been  informed 
by  delegates  from  16  districts  of  Lancashire  and 
Cheshire,  in  whose  behalf  I  speak,  that  the  work 
in  the  factories  is,  in  consequence  of  the  im¬ 
provements  in  machinery,  constantly  on  the  in¬ 
crease.  Instead  of,  as  formerly,  one  person  with 
two  helps  tenting  two  looms,  one  person  now 
tents  three  looms  without  helps,  and  it  is  no 
uncommon  thing  for  one  person  to  tent  four. 
Twelve  hours'  work,  as  is  evident  from  the 
facts  adduced,  is  now  compressed  into  less 
than  10  hours.  It  is  therefore  self-evident  to 
what  an  enormous  extent  the  toil  of  the  fac¬ 
tory  operative  has  increased  during  the  last  10 
years.”* 

Although,  therefore,  the  factory  inspectors 
unceasingly  and  with  justice  commend  the  re- 

1  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  Oct.,  186a,  pp. 
100  and  130. 

*  On  2  modern  power-looms  a  weaver  now  makes  in  a 
week  of  60  hours  26  pieces  of  certain  quality,  length,  and 
breadth;  while  on  the  old  power-looms  he  could  make  no 
more  than  4  such  pieces.  The  cost  of  weaving  a  piece  of 
•uch  cloth  had  already  soon  after  1850  fallen  from  as.  9 d. 
to  5  yid. 

“Thirty  years  ago  (1841)  one  spinner  with  three  piecers 
was  not  required  to  attend  to  more  than  one  pair  of  mules 
with  300-324  spindles.  At  the  present  time  (1871)  he  has  to 
mind  with  the  help  of  5  piecers  2200  spindles,  and  produces 
not  less  than  seven  times  as  much  yarn  as  in  1841.“ — Alex¬ 
ander  Redgrave,  factory  inspector,  in  the  Journal  of  Arts, 
5th  January,  1872. 

Output  of  British  Factories 


suits  of  the  Acts  of  1844  and  1850,  yet  they  ad¬ 
mit  that  the  shortening  of  the  hours  of  labour 
has  already  called  forth  such  an  intensification 
of  the  labour  as  is  injurious  to  the  health  of  the 
workman  and  to  his  capacity  for  work.  “In 
most  of  the  cotton,  worsted,  and  silk  mills,  an 
exhausting  state  of  excitement  necessary  to  en¬ 
able  the  workers  satisfactorily  to  mind  the  ma¬ 
chinery,  the  motion  of  which  has  been  greatly 
accelerated  within  the  last  few  years,  seems  to 
me  not  unlikely  to  be  one  of  the  causes  of  that 
excess  of  mortality  from  lung  disease  which  Dr. 
Greenhow  has  pointed  out  in  his  recent  report 
on  this  subject.''*  There  cannot  be  the  slightest 
doubt  that  the  tendency  that  urges  capital,  so 
soon  as  a  prolongation  of  the  hours  of  labour  is 
once  for  all  forbidden,  to  compensate  itself  by 
a  systematic  heightening  of  the  intensity  of  la¬ 
bour  and  to  convert  every  improvement  in  ma¬ 
chinery  into  a  more  perfect  means  of  exhausting 
the  workman,  must  soon  lead  to  a  state  of 
things  in  which  a  reduction  of  the  hours  of  la¬ 
bour  will  again  be  inevitable.4  On  the  other 
hand,  the  rapid  advance  of  English  industry  be¬ 
tween  1848  and  the  present  time,  under  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  a  day  of  10  hours,  surpasses  the  ad¬ 
vance  made  between  1833  and  1847,  when  the 
day  was  12  hours  long,  by  far  more  than  the 
latter  surpasses  the  advance  made  during  the 
half  century  after  the  first  introduction  of  the 
factory  system,  when  the  working  day  was 
without  limits.* 

3 Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  Oct.  1861,  pp. 
25,26, 

^he  agitation  for  a  working  day  of  8  hours  has  now 
(1867)  begun  in  Lancashire  among  the  factory  operatives. 

*The  following  few  figures  indicate  the  increase  in  the 
“factories"  of  the  United  Kingdom  since  1848: 


Quantity  Quantity  Quantity  Quantity 

Exported \  1848  Exported ,  1851  Exported ,  i860  Exported ,  186 5 


Cotton — 

Cotton  yarn 

lbs. 

135.83*.*6a 

143, 966, 106 

197.343,655 

I°3»75,.455 

Sewing  thread 

lbs. 

4,39  V  76 

6,297,554 

4,648,611 

Cotton  cloth 

yds. 

W1. 373.93® 

>,543,‘6,.789 

2,776,218,427 

2.015,237.851 

Flax  and  Hemp — 

Yarn 

11,722,182 

18,841,326 

31,210,612 

36,777,334 

Cloth 

yds. 

88,901,519 

129,106,753 

143,996.773 

247.01 V*9 

Silk- 

Yarn 

lbs. 

466,825 

462,513 

897,402 

812,589 

Cloth 

yds. 

•  .  . 

V8i,455 

1,307,293 

2,869,837 

Wool- 

Woollen  and  Worsted 
yarns  lbs. 

14,670,880 

27,533.968 

31,669,267 

Cloth 

yds.| 

If* 

241,120,973 

190,381,537 

278,837^38 

MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


4«  The  Factory 

At  the  commencement  of  this  chapter  we 
considered  that  which  we  may  call  the  body  of 
the  factory,  i.e.,  machinery  organized  into  a 
system.  We  there  saw  how  machinery,  by  an¬ 
nexing  the  labour  of  women  and  children,  aug¬ 
ments  the  number  of  human  beings  who  form 
the  material  for  capitalistic  exploitation,  how 
it  confiscates  the  whole  of  the  workman’s  dis¬ 
posable  time  by  immoderate  extension  of  the 
hours  of  labour,  and  how,  finally,  its  progress, 
which  allows  of  enormous  increase  of  produc¬ 
tion  in  shorter  and  shorter  periods,  serves  as  a 
means  of  systematically  getting  more  work 
done  in  a  shorter  time,  or  of  exploiting  labour 
power  more  intensely.  We  now  turn  to  the  fac¬ 
tory  as  a  whole,  and  that  in  its  most  perfect 
form. 

Dr.  Ure,  the  Pindar  of  the  automatic  factory, 
describes  it,  on  the  one  hand  as  “combined  co¬ 
operation  of  many  orders  of  workpeople,  adult 
and  young,  in  tending  with  assiduous  skill  a  sys¬ 
tem  of  productive  machines  continuously  im¬ 
pelled  by  a  central  power”  (the  prime  mover); 
on  the  other  hand,  as  “a  vast  automaton,  com¬ 
posed  of  various  mechanical  and  intellectual  or¬ 
gans,  acting  in  uninterrupted  concert  for  the 
production  of  a  common  object,  all  of  them  be¬ 
ing  subordinate  to  a  self-regulated  moving 
force.”  These  two  descriptions  are  far  from  be¬ 
ing  identical.  In  one,  the  collective  labourer,  or 
social  body  of  labour,  appears  as  the  dominant 
subject,  and  the  mechanical  automaton  as  the 


205 

object;  in  the  other,  the  automaton  itself  is  the 
subject,  and  the  workmen  are  merely  conscious 
organs,  coordinate  with  the  unconscious  organs 
of  the  automaton,  and  together  with  them  sub¬ 
ordinated  to  the  central  moving-power.  The 
first  description  is  applicable  to  every  possible 
employment  of  machinery  on  a  large  scale;  the 
second  is  characteristic  of  its  use  by  capital  and, 
therefore,  of  the  modern  factory  system.  Ure 
prefers,  therefore,  to  describe  the  central  ma¬ 
chine,  from  which  the  motion  comes,  not  only 
as  an  automaton,  but  as  an  autocrat.  “In  these 
spacious  halls  the  benignant  power  of  steam 
summons  around  him  his  myriads  of  willing 
menials.”1 

Along  with  the  tool,  the  skill  of  the  workman 
in  handling  it  passes  over  to  the  machine.  The 
capabilities  of  the  tool  are  emancipated  from 
the  restraints  that  are  inseparable  from  human 
labour  power.  Thereby  the  technical  founda¬ 
tion  on  which  is  based  the  division  of  labour  in 
manufacture  is  swept  away.  Hence,  in  the  place 
of  the  hierarchy  of  specialized  workmen  that 
characterizes  manufacture,  there  steps  in  the 
automatic  factory  a  tendency  to  equalize  and 
reduce  to  one  and  the  same  level  every  kind  of 
work  that  has  to  be  done  by  the  minders  of  the 
machines;2  in  the  place  of  the  artificially  pro¬ 
duced  differentiations  of  the  detail  workmen 
step  the  natural  differences  of  age  and  sex. 

So  far  as  division  of  labour  reappears  in  the 

1  Urc yOp.cit.y  p.  1 8. 

2  Ure,  op.  cit.,  p.  31.  See  Karl  Marx,  Mtsfre  de  la  philoso¬ 
phic,  pp.  140-141. 


Value  Exported,  Value  Exported,  Value  Exported,  Value  Exported, 
1848 _ 1851 _ i860 _ / 865 


Cotton — 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

Yam 

5,9*7.83* 

6,634,0*6 

9,870,875 

10,351,049 

Cloth 

•6,753.369 

*3,454,810 

42,141,505 

46,903,796 

Flax  and  Hemp — 

Yam 

493.449 

95 1 .4*6 

1,801,272 

2»5°5>497 

Cloth 

2,802,789 

4, *07,396 

4,804,803 

9,*S5>3*8 

Silk- 

Yarn 

*95,380 

9*8,34* 

768,067 

Cloth 

77.789 

*,*30,398 

*,587^03 

1,409,221 

Wool 

Yam 

776,975 

*,484,544 

3.843,450 

5,424,017 

Cloth 

5.733.8*8 

8,377,*  83 

**,*56,998 

20,102,259 

See  the  Blue  Books,  Statistical  Abstract  of  the  United  Ktng- 
dom.  Nos.  8  and  13,  London,  1861  and  1866.  In  Lancashire 
the  number  of  mills  increasedonly  4  per  cent  between  1839 
and  1850;  19  per  cent  between  1850  and  1856;  and  33  per 
cent  between  1856  and  1862;  while  the  persons  employed 
in  them  during  each  of  the  above  periods  of  1 1  years  in¬ 
creased  absolutely,  but  diminished  relatively.  (Sea  Reports 
oj  Inspectors  oj  Factories,  31st  Oct.,  1862,  p.  63.)  The  cot¬ 


ton  trade  preponderates  in  Lancashire.  We  may  form 
an  idea  of  the  stupendous  nature  of  the  cotton  trade  in 
that  district  when  we  consider  that,  of  the  gross  number 
of  textile  factories  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  absorbs  45.2 
per  cent,  of  the  spindles  83.3  per  cent,  of  the  power-looms 
81.4  percent,  of  the  mechanical  horse-power  72.6  per  cent, 
and  of  the  total  number  of  persons  employed  58.2  per  cent; 
(ftP*  dt;  pp.  62-63.) 


206  CAPITAL 


factory,  it  is  primarily  a  distribution  of  the 
workmen  among  the  specialized  machines;  and 
of  masses  of  workmen,  not  however  organized 
into  groups,  among  the  various  departments  of 
the  factory,  in  each  of  which  they  work  at  a 
number  of  similar  machines  placed  together; 
their  cooperation,  therefore,  is  only  simple.  The 
organized  group  peculiar  to  manufacture  is  re¬ 
placed  by  the  connection  between  the  head 
workman  and  his  few  assistants.  The  essential 
division  is  into  workmen  who  are  actually  em¬ 
ployed  on  the  machines  (among  whom  are  in¬ 
cluded  a  few  who  look  after  the  engine),  and 
into  mere  attendants  (almost  exclusively  chil¬ 
dren)  of  these  workmen.  Among  the  attendants 
are  reckoned  more.or  less  ail  “feeders**  who  sup¬ 
ply  the  machines  with  the  material  to  be 
worked.  In  addition  to  these  two  principal 
classes,  there  is  a  numerically  unimportant 
class  of  persons  whose  occupation  it  is  to  look 
after  the  whole  of  the  machinery  and  repair  it 
from  time  to  time;  such  as  engineers,  mechan¬ 
ics,  joiners,  etc.  This  is  a  superior  class  of  work¬ 
men,  some  of  them  scientifically  educated,  oth¬ 
ers  brought  up  to  a  trade;  it  is  distinct  from  the 
factory  operative  class  and  merely  aggregated 
toit.lThis  division  of  labour  is  purely  technical. 

To  work  at  a  machine,  the  workman  should 
be  taught  from  childhood,  in  order  that  he  may 
learn  to  adapt  his  own  movements  to  the  uni¬ 
form  and  unceasing  motion  of  an  automaton. 
When  the  machinery  as  a  whole  forms  a  system, 
of  manifold  machines,  working  simultaneously 
and  in  concert,  the  cooperation  based  upon  it 
requires  the  distribution  of  various  groups  of 
workmen  among  the  different  kinds  of  ma¬ 
chines.  But  the  employment  of  machinery  docs 
away  with  the  necessity  of  crystallizing  this  dis¬ 
tribution  after  the  manner  of  manufacture,  by 
the  constant  annexation  of  a  particular  man  to 
a  particular  function.2  Since  the  motion  of  the 

1  It  looks  very  like  intentional  misleading  by  statistics 
(which  misleading  it  would  be  possible  to  prove  in  detail  in 
other  cases  too),  when  the  English  factory  legislation  ex¬ 
cludes  from  its  operation  the  class  of  labourers  last  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  text,  while  the  Parliamentary  Returns  express¬ 
ly  include  in  the  category  of  factory  operatives,  not  only 
engineers,  mechanics,  etc.,  but  also  managers,  salesmen, 
messengers,  warehousemen,  packers,  etc.,  in  short  every¬ 
body,  except  the  owner  of  the  factory  himself. 

2  Ure  grants  this.  He  says,  “in  case  of  need,”  the  work¬ 
men  can  be  moved  at  the  will  of  the  manager  from  one  ma¬ 
chine  to  another,  and  he  triumphantly  exclaims:  “Such  a 
change  is  in  flat  contradiction  with  the  old  routine  that 
divides  the  labour,  and  to  one  workman  assigns  the  task  of 
fashioning  the  head  of  a  needle,  to  another  the  sharpening 
of  the  point.”  He  had  much  better  have  asked  himself, 
why  this  “old  routine”  is  departed  from  in  the  automatic 
factory,  only  “in  case  of  need.” 


whole  system  does  not  proceed  from  the  work¬ 
man,  but  from  the  machinery,  a  change  of  per¬ 
sons  can  take  place  at  any  time  without  an  in¬ 
terruption  of  the  work.  The  most  striking  proof 
of  this  is  afforded  by  the  relays  system ,  put  into 
operation  by  the  manufacturers  during  their  re¬ 
volt  from  1848-1850.  Lastly,  the  quickness 
with  which  machine-work  is  learnt  by  young 
people  does  away  with  the  necessity  of  bringing 
up  for  exclusive  employment  by  machinery  a 
special  class  of  operatives.3  With  regard  to  the 
work  of  the  mere  attendants,  it  can,  to  some  ex¬ 
tent,  be  replaced  in  the  mill  by  machines,4  and 
owing  to  its  extreme  simplicity  it  allows  of  a 
rapid  and  constant  change  of  the  individuals 
burdened  with  this  drudgery. 

Although,  then,  technically  speaking,  the  old 
system  of  division  of  labour  is  thrown  over¬ 
board  by  machinery,  it  hangs  on  in  the  factory 
as  a  traditional  habit  handed  down  from  manu¬ 
facture,  and  is  afterwards  systematically  re¬ 
moulded  and  established  in  a  more  hideous 
form  by  capital,  as  a  means  of  exploiting  labour 
power.  The  life-long  speciality  of  handling  one 
and  the  same  tool  now  becomes  the  life-long 
speciality  of  serving  one  and  the  same  machine. 
Machinery  is  put  to  a  wrong  use,  with  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  transforming  the  workman  from  his  very 

3  When  distress  is  very  great,  as,  for  in§£ynce,  during  the 
American  Civil  War,  the  factory  operative  is  now  and  then 
set  by  the  bourgeois  to  do  the  roughest  of  work,  such  as 
road-making,  etc.  The  English  ateliers  nattonaux  [national 
workshops]  of  1862  and  the  following  years,  established  for 
the  benefit  of  the  destitute  cotton  operatives,  differ  from 
the  French  of  1848  in  this,  that  in  the  latter  the  workmen 
had  to  do  unproductive  work  at  the  expense  of  the  state, 
in  the  former  they  had  to  do  productive  municipal  work  to 
the  advantage  of  the  bourgeois,  and  that,  too,  cheaper 
than  the  regular  workmen,  with  whom  they  were  thus 
thrown  into  competition.  “The  physical  appearance  of  the 
cotton  operatives  is  unquestionably  improved.  This  I  at¬ 
tribute  ...  as  to  the  men,  to  outdoor  labour  on  public 
works.”  ( Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  Oct.,  1865, 
p.  59.)  The  writer  here  alludes  to  the  Preston  factory  oper¬ 
atives,  who  were  employed  on  Preston  Moor. 

4  An  example:  The  various  mechanical  apparatus  intro¬ 
duced  since  the  Act  of  1844  into  woollen  mills,  for  replac¬ 
ing  the  labour  of  children.  So  soon  as  it  sha|l  happen  that 
the  children  of  the  manufacturers  themselves  have  to  go 
through  a  course  of  schooling  as  helpers  in  the  mill,  this  al¬ 
most  unexplored  territory  of  mechanics  will  loon  make  re¬ 
markable  progress.  “Of  machinery,  perhaps  self-acting 
mules  are  as  dangerous  as  any  other  kind.  Most  of  the  ac¬ 
cidents  from  them  happen  to  little  children,  from  their 
creeping  under  the  mules  to  sweep  the  floor  whilst  the 
mules  are  in  motion.  Several  ‘minders'  have  been  fined  for 
this  offence,  but  without  much  general  benefit.  If  machine 
maker?  would  only  invent  a  self-sweeper,  by  whose  use  the 
necessity  for  these  little  children  to  creep  under  the  ma¬ 
chinery  might  be  prevented,  it  would  be  a  happy  addition 
to  our  protective  measures.”— Reports  of  Inspectors  ofFac- 
tories ,  for  31st  Oct.,  1 8 66,  p.  63. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY  207 


childhood  into  a  part  of  a  detail-machine.1  In 
this  way,  not  only  are  the  expenses  of  his  repro¬ 
duction  considerably  lessened,  but  at  the  same 
time  his  helpless  dependence  upon  the  factory 
as  a  whole,  and  therefore  upon  the  capitalist,  is 
rendered  complete.  Here,  as  everywhere  else, 
wc  must  distinguish  between  the  increased  pro¬ 
ductiveness  due  to  the  development  of  the  so¬ 
cial  process  of  production  and  that  due  to  the 
capitalist  exploitation  of  that  process.  In  hand¬ 
icrafts  and  manufacture,  the  workman  makes 
use  of  a  tool;  in  the  factory,  the  machine  makes 
use  of  him.  There  the  movements  of  the  instru¬ 
ment  of  labour  proceed  from  him;  here  it  is  the 
movements  of  the  machine  that  he  must  follow. 
In  manufacture  the  workmen  are  parts  of  a  liv¬ 
ing  mechanism.  In  the  factory  we  have  a  lifeless 
mechanism  independent  of  the  workman,  who 
becomes  its  mere  living  appendage.  “The  miser¬ 
able  routine  of  endless  drudgery  and  toil,  in 
which  the  same  mechanical  process  is  gone 
through  over  and  over  again,  is  like  the  labour 
of  Sisyphus, The  uui  uen  of  labour,  like  the  rock, 
keeps  ever  falling  back  on  the  worn-out  labour¬ 
er.”2  At  the  same  time  that  factory  work  ex¬ 
hausts  the  nervous  system  to  the  uttermost,  it 
does  away  with  the  many-sided  play  of  the 
muscles,  and  confiscates  every  atom  of  free¬ 
dom,  both  in  bodily  and  intellectual  activity.3 
The  lightening  of  the  labour,  even,  becomes  a 
sort  of  torture,  since  the  machine  does  not  free 
the  labourer  from  work,  hut  deprives  the  work 
of  all  interest.  Kvcry  kind  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion,  in  so  far  as  it  is  not  only  a  labour  process, 
but  also  a  process  of  creating  surplus  value,  has 
this  in  common:  that  it  is  not  the  workman  that 
employs  the  instruments  of  labour,  but  the  in¬ 
struments  of  labour  that  employ  the  workman. 
But  it  is  only  in  the  factory  system  that  this  in¬ 
version  for  the  first  time  acquires  technical  and 
palpable  reality.  By  means  of  its  conversion  in¬ 
to  an  automaton,  the  instrument  of  labour  con¬ 
fronts  the  labourer,  during  the  labour  process, 

1  So  much,  then,  for  Proudhon's  wonderful  idea:  he  “con¬ 
strues"  machinery  not  as  a  synthesis  of  instruments  of  la¬ 
bour,  but  as  a  synthesis  of  detail  operations  for  the  benefit 
of  the  labourer  himself. 

*  F.  Engels,  op.  cit.,  p.  217.— Even  an  ordinary  and  opti¬ 
mistic  freetrader  like  Mr.  Molinari  goes  so  far  as  to  say: 
“A  man  will  become  exhausted  sooner  if  he  watches  over 
the  uniform  motion  of  a  mechanism  fifteen  hours  daily 
than  if  he  exercises  his  physical  force  over  the  same  inter¬ 
val  of  time.  This  work  of  watching  over  something,  which 
could  be  useful  perhaps  as  mental  gymnastics  provided  it 
were  not  too  prolonged,  will,  in  the  long  run,  destroy  both 
body  and  mind  through  excess." — G.  de  Molinari,  Etudes 
tconomiqueSy  Paris,  1846. 

1  F.  Engels,  op.  cit.,  p.  216. 


in  the  shape  of  capital,  of  dead  labour,  which 
dominates  and  pumps  dry  living  labour  power. 
The  separation  of  the  intellectual  powers  of  pro¬ 
duction  from  the  manual  labour,  and  the  con¬ 
version  of  those  powers  into  the  might  of  cap¬ 
ital  over  labour,  is,  as  we  have  already  shown, 
finally  completed  by  modern  industry  erected 
on  the  foundation  of  machinery.  The  special 
skill  of  each  individual  insignificant  factory  op¬ 
erative  vanishes  as  an  infinitesimal  quantity 
before  the  science,  the  gigantic  physical  forces, 
and  the  mass  of  labour  that  are  embodied  in 
the  factory  mechanism  and,  together  with  that 
mechanism,  constitute  the  power  of  the  “mas¬ 
ter.”  This  “master,”  therefore,  in  whose 
brain  the  machinery  and  his  monopoly  of  it 
are  inseparably  united,  whenever  he  falls  out 
with  his  “hands,”  contemptuously  tells 
them:  “The  factory  operatives  should  keep  in 
wholesome  remembrance  the  fact  that  theirs  is 
really  a  low  species  of  skilled  labour;  and  that 
there  is  none  which  is  more  easily  acquired,  or 
of  its  quality  more  amply  remunerated,  or 
which  by  a  short  training  of  the  least  expert  can 
be  more  quickly,  as  well  as  abundantly,  ac¬ 
quired.  .  .  .  The  master's  machinery  really 
plays  a  far  more  important  part  in  the  business 
of  pioduction  than  the  labour  and  the  skill  of 
the  operative,  which  six  months'  education  can 
teach  and  a  common  labourer  can  learn.’*4 

The  technical  subordination  of  the  workman 
to  the  uniform  motion  of  the  instruments  of  la¬ 
bour,  and  the  peculiar  composition  of  the  body 
of  workpeople,  consisting  as  it  does  of  individ¬ 
uals  of  both  sexes  and  of  all  ages,  give  rise  to  a 
barrack-like  discipline,  which  is  elaborated  into 
a  complete  system  in  the  factory,  and  which 
fully  develops  the  before  mentioned  labour  of 
overlooking,  thereby  dividing  the  workpeople 
into  operatives  and  overlookers,  into  private 
soldiers  and  sergeants  of  an  industrial  army. 
“The  main  difficult)  [in  the  automatic  factory] 
.  .  .  lay  .  .  .  above  all  in  training  human  beings 
to  renounce  their  desultory  habits  of  work  and 
to  identify  themselves  with  the  unvarying  regu¬ 
larity  of  the  complex  automaton.  To  devise  and 
adru  nister  a  successful  code  of  factory  disci¬ 
pline,  suited  to  the  necessities  of  factory  dili¬ 
gence,  was  the  Herculean  enterprise,  the  noble 
achievement  of  Arkwright!  Even  at  the  present 
day,  when  the  system  is  perfectly  organized  and 

4  The  Master  Spinners'  and  Manufacturers'  Defence  Fund, 
Report  of  the  Committee ,  Manchester,  1854,  p.  17.  We  shall 
see  hereafter  that  the  “master"  can  sing  quite  another 
song  when  he  is  threatened  with  the  loss  of  his  “living" 
automaton. 


CAPITAL 


208 

its  labour  lightened  to  the  utmost,  it  is  found 
nearly  impossible  to  convert  persons  past  the 
age  of  puberty  into  useful  factory  hands.*’1  The 
factory  code  in  which  capital  formulates,  like 
a  private  legislator,  and  at  his  own  good  will, 
his  autocracy  over  his  workpeople,  unaccom¬ 
panied  by  that  division  of  responsibility,  in 
other  matters  so  much  approved  of  by  the  bour¬ 
geoisie,  and  unaccompanied  by  the  still  more 
approved  representative  system,  this  code  is 
but  the  capitalistic  caricature  of  that  social  reg¬ 
ulation  of  the  labour-process  which  becomes 
requisite  in  co-operation  on  a  great  scale,  and  in 
the  employment  in  common,  of  instruments  of 
labour  and  especially  of  machinery.  The  place 
of  the  slave  driver's  lash  is  taken  by  the  over¬ 
looker's  book  of  penalties.  All  punishments  nat¬ 
urally  resolve  themselves  into  fines  and  deduc¬ 
tions  from  wages,  and  the  lawgiving  talent  of 
the  factory  Lycurgus  so  arranges  matters,  that 
a  violation  of  his  laws  is,  if  possible,  more  profit¬ 
able  to  him  than  the  keeping  of  them.2 

1  Ure,  op.  cit.y  p.  15.  Whoever  knows  the  life  history  of 
Arkwright  will  never  dub  this  barber-genius  "noble.”  Of 
all  the  great  inventors  of  the  eighteenth  century,  he  was  in¬ 
contestably  the  greatest  thievcr  of  other  people’s  inven¬ 
tions  and  the  meanest  fellow. 

1  “The  slavery  in  which  the  bourgeoisie  has  bound  the 
proletariat  comes  nowhere  more  plainly  into  daylight  than 
in  the  factory  system.  In  it  all  freedom  comes  to  an  end, 
both  at  law  and  in  fact.  The  workman  mu9t  be  in  the  fac¬ 
tory  at  half  past  five.  If  he  comes  a  few  minutes  late,  he  is 
punished;  if  he  comes  ten  minutes  late,  he  is  not  allowed 
to  enter  until  after  breakfast,  and  thus  loses  a  quarter  of/ 
day's  wage.  He  must  eat,  drink,  and  sleep  at  word  of  com¬ 
mand.  . . .  The  despotic  bell  calls  h;n\  from  his  bed,  calls 
him  from  breakfast  and  dinner.  And  how  does  he  fare  in 
the  mill?  There  the  master  is  the  absolute  law-giver.  He 
makes  what  regulations  he  pleases;  he  alters  and  makes 
additions  to  his  code  at  pleasure;  and  if  he  insert  the  veri¬ 
est  nonsense,  the  courts  say  to  the  workman:  ‘Since  you 
have  entered  into  this  contract  voluntarily,  you  must  now 
carry  it  out.' . . .  These  workmen  are  condemned  to  live, 
from  their  ninth  year  till  their  death  under  this  mental  and 
bodily  torture.”  (F.  Engels,  op.  c//.,  p.  217,  ff.)  What  "the 
courts  say”  i  will  illustrate  by  two  examples.  One  occurs 
at  Sheffield  at  the  end  of  1866.  In  that  town  a  workman 
had  engaged  himself  for  two  years  in  a  steelworks.  In  con¬ 
sequence  of  a  quarrel  with  his  employer,  he  left  the  works 
and  declared  that  under  no  circumstances  would  he  work 
for  that  master  any  more.  He  was  prosecuted  for  brpach  of 
contract,  and  condemned  to  two  months’  imprisonment. 
(If  the  master  break  the  contract,  he  can  be  proceeded 
against  only  in  a  civil  action,  and  risks  nothing  but  money 
damages.)  After  the  workman  has  served  his  two  months, 
the  master  invites  him  to  return  to  the  works,  pursuant  to 
the  contract.  The  workman  says,  “No”;  he  has  already 
been  punished  for  the  breach.  The  master  prosecutes  again, 
the  court  condemns  again,  although  one  of  the  judges,  Mr. 
Shee,  publicly  denounces  this  as  a  legal  monstrosity,  by 
which  a  man  can  periodically,  as  long  as  he  lives,  be  pun¬ 
ished  over  and  over  again  for  the  same  offence  or  crime. 
This  judgment  was  given  not  by  the  “Great  Unpaid,”  the 
provincial  Dogberries,  but  by  one  of  the  highest  courts  of 


We  shall  here  merely  allude  to  the  material 
conditions  under  which  factory  labour  is  car¬ 
ried  on.  Every  organ  of  sense  is  injured  in  an 
equal  degree  by  artificial  elevation  of  the  tem¬ 
perature,  by  the  dust-laden  atmosphere,  by  the 
deafening  noise,  not  to  mention  danger  to  life 
and  limb  among  the  thickly  crowded  machin- 


justice  in  London.  (Note  to  the  4th  edition:  This  is  now 
abolished  in  England.  With  few  exceptions,  such  as  in  the 
case  of  public  gasworks,  the  labourer  has  been  put  on  an 
equal  footing  with  the  capitalist  as  far  as  breach  of  con¬ 
tract  is  concerned,  and  can  be  sued  only  in  the  civil  courts. 
F.E.)  The  second  case  occurs  in  Wiltshire  at  the  end  of 
November  1863.  About  30  power-loom  weavers,  in  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  one  Harrup,  a  cloth  manufacturer  at  Leower's 
Mill,  Westbury  Leigh,  struck  work  because  master  Harrup 
indulged  in  the  agreeable  habit  of  making  deductions  from 
their  wages  for  being  late  in  the  morning;  fid.  for  2  minutes; 
u.  for  3  minutes,  and  is.  6d.  for  ten  minutes.  This  is  at  the 
rate  of  gs .  per  hour,  and  £4  ioj.  od.  per  diem\  while  the 
wages  of  the  weavers  on  the  average  of  a  year  never  ex¬ 
ceeded  1  or.  to  I2J.  weekly.  Harrup  also  appointed  a  boy  to 
announce  the  starting  time  by  a  whistle,  which  he  often 
did  before  six  o’clock  in  the  morning:  and  if  the  hands  were 
not  all  there  at  the  moment  the  whistle  ceased,  the  doors 
were  closed,  and  those  hands  who  were  outside  were  fined: 
and  as  there  was  no  clock  on  the  premises,  the  unfortunate 
hands  were  at  the  mercy  of  the  young  Harrup-inspired 
time-keeper.  The  hands  on  strike,  mothers  of  families  as 
well  as  girls,  offered  to  resume  work  if  the  time-keeper  were 
replaced  by  a  clock,  and  a  more  reasonable  scale  of  fines 
were  introduced.  Harrup  summoned  19  women  and  girls 
before  the  magistrates  for  breach  of  contract.  To  the  utter 
indignation  of  all  present,  they  were  each  mulcted  in  a  fine 
of  6 d.  and  2/.  Sd.  for  costs.  Harrup  wasTollowed  from  the 
court  by  a  crowd  of  people  who  hissed  him. — A  favourite 
operation  with  manufacturers  is  to  punish  the  workpeople 
by  deductions  made  from  their  wages  on  account  of  faults 
in  the  material  worked  on.  This  method  gave  rise  in  1866 
to  a  general  strike  in  the  English  pottery  districts.  The  Re¬ 
ports  oj the  Children  s  Employment  Commission  (1863-1866) 
give  cases  where  the  worker  not  only  receives  no  wages, 
but  becomes,  by  means  of  his  labour,  and  of  the  penal  reg¬ 
ulations,  the  debtor  to  boot  of  his  worthy  master.  The  late 
cotton  crisis  also  furnished  edifying  examples  of  the  sagac¬ 
ity  shown  by  the  factory  autocrats  in  making  deductions 
from  wages.  Mr.  R.  Baker,  the  Inspector  of  Factories,  says: 
*T  have  myself  had  lately  to  direct  prosecutions  against 
one  cotton  mill  occupier  for  having  in  these  pinching  and 
painful  times  deducted  10 d.  apiece  from  some  of  the  young 
workers  employed  by  him,  for  the  surgeon’s  certificate  (for 
which  he  himself  had  only  paid  6 d.)t  when  only  allowed  by 
the  law  to  deduct  3d.,  and  by  custom  nothing  at  all. . . .  And  I 
have  been  informed  of  another,  who,  in  order  to  keep  with¬ 
out  the  law,  but  to  attain  the  same  objefct,  charges  the 
poor  children  who  work  for  him  a  shilling  each,  as  a  fee  for 
learning  them  the  art  and  mystery  of  cotton-spinning,  so 
soon  as  they  are  declared  by  the  surgeon' fit  and  proper 
persons  for  that  occupation.  There  may,  therefore,  be  un¬ 
dercurrent  causes  for  such  extraordinary' exhibitions  as 
strikes,  not  only  wherever  they  arise,  but  particularly  at 
such  times  as  the  present,  which  without  explanation  ren¬ 
der  them  inexplicable  to  the  public  understanding.”  He  al¬ 
ludes  here  to  a  strike  of  power-loom  weavers  at  Darwen, 
June,  .863.  {Reports  oj  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  30  April, 
1863,  pp.  50-51.)  The  reports  always  go  beyond  their  offi¬ 
cial  dates. 


209 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


ery  which,  with  the  regularity  of  the  seasons, 
issues  its  list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  in  the 
industrial  battle.1  Economy  of  the  social  means 
of  production,  matured  and  forced  as  in  a  hot¬ 
house  by  the  factory  system,  is  turned,  in  the 
hands  of  capital,  into  systematic  robbery  of 
what  is  necessary  for  the  life  of  the  workman 
while  he  is  at  work,  robbery  of  space,  light,  air, 
and  of  protection  to  his  person  against  the  dan¬ 
gerous  and  unwholesome  accompaniments  of 
the  productive  process,  not  to  mention  the  rob¬ 
bery  of  appliances  for  the  comfort  of  the  work¬ 
man.2  is  Fourier  wrong  when  he  calls  factories 
“tempered  bagnios?”3 

1  The  protection  afforded  by  the  Factory  Acts  against 
dangerous  machinery  has  had  a  beneficial  effect.  “But . . . 
there  are  other  sources  of  accident  which  did  not  exist 
twenty  years  since;  one  especially,  viz.,  the  increased  speed 
of  the  machinery.  Wheels,  rollers,  spindles,  and  shuttles 
are  now  propelled  at  increased  and  increasing  rates;  fingers 
must  be  quicker  and  defter  in  their  movements  to  take  up 
the  broken  thread,  for,  if  placed  with  hesitation  or  careless¬ 
ness,  they  are  sacrificed.  ...  A  large  number  of  accidents 
are  caused  by  the  eagerness  of  the  workpeople  toget  through 
their  work  expeditiofasly/lt  rnubt  be  remembered  that  it  is 
of  the  highest  importance  to  manufacturers  that  their  ma¬ 
chinery  should  be  in  motion,  i.e.,  producing  yarns  and  goods. 
Every  minute’s  stoppage  is  not  only  a  loss  of  power,  but  of 
production,  and  the  workpeople  are  urged  by  the  over¬ 
lookers,  who  are  interested  in  the  quantity  of  work  turned 
off,  to  keep  the  machinery  in  motion;  and  it  is  no  less  im¬ 
portant  to  those  of  the  operatives  who  are  paid  by  the 
weight  or  piece  that  the  machines  should  be  kept  in  mo¬ 
tion.  Consequently,  although  it  is  strictly  forbidden  in 
many,  nay,  in  most  factories  that  machinery  should  be 
cleaned  while  in  motion,  it  is  nevertheless  the  constant 
practice  in  most  if  not  in  all,  that  the  workpeople  do,  un¬ 
reproved,  pick  out  waste,  wipe  rollers  and  wheels,  etc., 
while  their  frames  are  in  motion.  Thus  from  this  cause 
only,  906  accidents  have  occurred  during  the  six  months. 

. . .  Although  a  great  deal  of  cleaning  is  constantly  going 
on  day  by  day,  yet  Saturday  is  generally  the  day  set  apart 
for  the  thorough  cleaning  of  the  machinery,  and  a  great 
deal  of  this  is  done  while  the  machinery  is  in  motion." 
Since  cleaning  is  not  paid  for,  the  workpeople  seek  to  get 
done  with  it  as  speedily  as  possible.  Hence,  “the  number 
of  accidents  which  occur  on  Fridays,  and  especially  on  Sat¬ 
urdays,  is  much  larger  than  on  any  other  day.  On  the  form¬ 
er  day  the  excess  is  nearly  12  per  cent  over  the  average 
number  of  the  four  first  days  of  the  week,  and  on  the  latter 
day  the  excess  is  25  per  cent  over  the  average  of  the  pre¬ 
ceding  five  days;  or,  if  the  number  of  working  hours  on 
Saturday  being  taken  into  account— 7#  hours  on  Satur¬ 
day  as  compared  with  10J-3  on  other  days— there  is  an  ex¬ 
cess  of  65  per  cent  on  Saturdays  over  the  average  of  the 
other  five  days." — Reports  of  the  Inspectors  of  Factories , 
31st  Oct.,  1866,  pp.  9, 15, 16, 17. 

2  In  Part  I  of  Book  Three  I  shall  give  an  account  of  a  re¬ 
cent  campaign  by  the  English  manufacturers  against  the 
clauses  in  the  Factory  Acts  that  protect  the  “hands"  against 
dangerous  machinery.  For  the  present,  let  this  one  quota¬ 
tion  from  the  official  report  of  Leonard  Horner  suffice:  “I 
have  heard  some  millowners  speak  with  inexcusable  levity 
of  some  of  the  accidents;  such,  for  instance,  as  the  loss  of  a 
finger  being  a  trifling  matter.  A  working  man's  living  and 
prospects  depend  so  much  upon  his  fingers  that  any  loss  of 


5.  The  Strife  between  Workman  and  Machine 

The  contest  between  the  capitalist  and  the 
wage  labourer  dates  back  to  the  very  origin  of 
capital.  It  raged  on  throughout  the  whole  man¬ 
ufacturing  period.*  But  only  since  the  introduc¬ 
tion  of  machinery  has  the  workman  fought 
against  the  instrument  of  labour  itself,  the  ma¬ 
terial  embodiment  of  capital.  He  revolts  against 
this  particular  form  of  the  means  of  production, 
as  being  the  material  basis  of  the  capitalist 
mode  of  production. 

In  the  seventeenth  century  nearly  all  Europe 
experienced  revolts  of  the  workpeople  against 
the  ribbon-loom,  a  machine  for  weaving  ribbons 
and  trimmings,  called  in  Germany  Bandmuhle , 
Schnurmuhley  and  Muhlenstuhl.  These  ma¬ 
chines  were  invented  in  Germany.  Abb6  Lan- 
cellotti,  in  a  wojck  that  appeared  in  Venice  in 
1636,  but  which  was  written  in  1579,  says  as 
follows:  “Anthony  Muller,  of  Danzig,  saw 
about  fifty  years  ago  in  that  town  a  very  ingeni¬ 
ous  machine,  which  weaves  four  to  six  pieces  at 
once.  But  the  Mayor,  being  apprehensive  that 
this  invention  might  throw  a  large  number  of 
workmen  on  the  streets,  caused  the  inventor  to 
be  secretly  strangled  or  drowned.”  In  Leyden, 
this  machine  was  not  used  till  1629;  there  the 
riots  of  the  ribbon- weavers  at  length  compelled 

them  is  a  very  serious  matter  to  him.  When  I  have  heard 
such  inconsiderate  remarks  made,  I  have  usually  put  this 
question:  ’Suppose  you  were  in  want  of  an  additional  work¬ 
man,  and  two  were  to  apply,  both  equally  well  qualified  in 
other  respects,  but  one  had  lost  a  thumb  or  a  forefinger; 
which  would  you  engage?’  There  never  was  a  hesitation  as 
to  the  answer."  . . .  The  manufacturers  have  “mistaken 
prejudices  against  what  they  have  heard  represented  as  a 
pseudo-philanthropic  legislation.’’— Reports  of  Inspectors  of 
Factories,  31  st  Oct.,  1855.  These  manufacturers  are  clev¬ 
er  folk,  and  not  without  reason  were  they  enthusiastic  for 
the  slave-holders’  rebellion. 

3  In  those  factories  that  have  been  longest  subject  to  the 
Factory  Acts,  with  their  compulsory  limitation  of  the  hours 
of  labour  and  other  regulations,  many  of  the  older  abuses 
have  vanished.  The  very  improvement  of  the  machinery 
demands  to  a  certain  extent  “improved  construction  of  the 
buildings,”  and  this  is  an  advantage  to  the  workpeople. — 
See  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  Oct.,  1863,  p. 
109. 

4  See  among  others,  John  Houghton,  Husbandry  and 
Trade  Improved ,  London,  1727,  The  Advantages  of  the  East 
India  Trade ,  1720.  John  Belters,  op.  «/.— “The  masters 
and  their  workmen  are,  unhappily,  in  a  perpetual  war  with 
each  other.  The  invariable  object  of  the  former  is  to  get 
their  work  done  as  cheaply  as  possible,  and  they  do  not 
fail  to  employ  every  artifice  to  this  purpose;  whilst  the  lat¬ 
ter  are  equally  attentive  to  every  occasion  of  distressing 
their  masters  into  a  compliance  with  higher  demands." — 
An  Inquiry  into  the  Causes  of  the  Present  High  Prices  of 
Provisions ,  pp.  61-62.  Author,  the  Rev.  Nathaniel  Forster, 
quite  on  the  side  of  the  workmen. 


CAPITAL 


210 

the  Town  Council  to  prohibit  it.  “In  this  city,” 
says  Boxhorn,  referring  to  the  introduction  of 
this  machine  in  Leyden,  “about  twenty  years 
ago  someone  invented  a  weaving  instrument  by 
means  of  which  one  man  could  finish  more  rib¬ 
bons  and  more  easily  than  could  many  men  in 
equal  time.  This  led  to  great  unrest  and  com¬ 
plaints  among  the  weavers,  until  the  use  of 
these  instruments  was  forbidden  by  the  magis¬ 
trates.”1  After  making  various  decrees  more  or 
less  prohibitive  against  this  loom  in  1632, 1639, 
etc.,  the  States  General  of  Holland  at  length 
permitted  it  to  be  Used,  under  certain  condi¬ 
tions,  by  the  decree  of  the  15  th  December,  1661. 
It  was  also  prohibited  in  Cologne  in  167 6,  at 
the  same  time  that  its  introduction  into  Eng¬ 
land  was  causing  disturbances  among  the  work¬ 
people.  By  an  imperial  edict  of  19th  Feb., 
1685,  its  use  was  forbidden  throughout  all  Ger¬ 
many.  In  Hamburg  it  was  burnt  in  public  by 
order  of  the  senate.  The  Emperor  Charles  VI, 
on  9th  Feb.,  1719,  renewed  the  edict  of  1685, 
and  not  till  1765  was  its  use  openly  allowed  in 
the  Electorate  of  Saxony.  This  machine,  which 
shook  Europe  to  its  foundations,  was  in  fact  the 
precursor  of  the  mule  and  the  power-loom,  and 
of  the  industrial  revolution  of  the  eighteenth 
century.  It  enabled  a  totally  inexperienced  boy 
to  set  the  whole  loom  with  all  its  shuttles  in  mo¬ 
tion  by  simply  moving  a  rod  backwards  and 
forwards,  and  in  its  improved  form  it  produced 
from  forty  to  fifty  pieces  at  once. 

About  1 630,  a  wind  sawmill  erected  near  Lon¬ 
don  by  a  Dutchman,  succumbed  to  the  excesses 
of  the  populace.  Even  as  late  as  the  beginning 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  sawmills  driven  by 
water  overcame  the  opposition  of  the  people, 
supported  as  it  was  by  parliament,  only  with 
great  difficulty.  No  sooner  had  Evcret  in  1758 
erected  the  first  wool-shearing  machine  that 
was  driven  by  water-power  than  it  was  set  on 
fire  by  a  hundred  thousand  people  who  had 
been  thrown  out  of  work.  Fifty  thousand  work¬ 
people  who  had  previously  lived  by  carding 
wool  petitioned  parliament  against  Arkwright’s 
scribbling  mills  and  carding  engines.  Th$  enor¬ 
mous  destruction  of  machinery  that  occurred 
in  the  English  manufacturing  districts  during 
the  first  fifteen  years  of  this  century  (chiefly 
caused  by  the  employment  of  the  power-loom) 
and  known  as  the  Luddite  movement,  gave  the 
anti-Jacobin  governments  of  a  Sidmouth,  a 
Castiereagh,  and  the  like,  a  pretext  for  the  most 
reactionary  and  forcible  measures.  It  took  both 
time  and  experience  before  the  workpeople 

1  Institution ts  Politico e$  1663. 


learnt  to  distinguish  between  machinery  and  its 
employment  by  capital,  and  to  direct  their  at¬ 
tacks,  not  against  the  material  instruments  of 
production,  but  against  the  mode  in  which  they 
are  used.2 

The  contests  about  wages  in  manufacture 
presuppose  manufacture  and  are  in  no  sense  di¬ 
rected  against  its  existence.  The  opposition 
against  the  establishment  of  new  manufactures 
proceeds  from  the  guilds  and  privileged  towns, 
not  from  the  workpeople.  Hence  the  writers  of 
the  manufacturing  period  treat  the  division  of 
labour  chiefly  as  a  means  of  virtually  supplying 
a  deficiency  of  labourers,  and  not  as  a  means  of 
actually  displacing  those  in  work.  This  distinc¬ 
tion  is  self-evident.  If  it  be  said  that  100  mil¬ 
lions  of  people  would  be  required  in  England  to 
spin  with  the  old  spinning-wheel  the  cotton  that 
is  now  spun  with  mules  by  500,000  people,  this 
does  not  mean  that  the  mules  took  the  place  of 
those  millions  who  never  existed.  It  means  only 
that  many  millions  of  workpeople  would  be  re¬ 
quired  to  replace  the  spinning  machinery.  I  f,  on 
the  other  hand,  we  say  that  in  England  the 
power-loom  threw  800,000  weavers  on  the 
streets,  we  do  not  refer  to  existing  machinery 
that  would  have  to  be  replaced  by  a  definite 
number  of  workpeople,  but  to  a  number  of 
weavers  in  existence  who  were  actually  replaced 
or  displaced  by  the  looms.  Duriqg  the  manufac¬ 
turing  period,  handicraft  labour,  altered 
though  it  was  by  division  of  labour,  was  yet  the 
basis.  The  demands  of  the  new  colonial  markets 
could  not  be  satisfied  owing  to  the  relatively 
small  number  of  town  operatives  handed  down 
from  the  Middle  Ages,  and  the  manufactures 
proper  opened  out  new  fields  of  production  to 
the  rural  population,  driven  from  the  land  by 
the  dissolution  of  the  feudal  system.  At  that 
time,  therefore,  division  of  labour  and  coopera¬ 
tion  in  the  workshops,  were  viewed  more  from 
the  positive  aspect  that  they  made  the  work¬ 
people  more  productive.3  Long  before  the  pe- 

2  In  old-fashioned  manufactures  the  revolts  of  the  work¬ 
people  against  machinery,  even  to  this  day,  occasionally 
assume  a  savage  character,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Sheffield 
file  cutters  in  1865. 

*  Sir  James  Steuart  also  understands  machinery  quite  in 
this  sense.  "Machines,  therefore,  I  consider  as  a  method  of 
augmenting  (virtually)  the  number  of  the  industrious,  with¬ 
out  theexpenseof  feeding  an  additional  number. . .  .Where¬ 
in  does  the  effect  of  a  machine  differ  from  that  of  a  new 
inhabitant?"  {An  Inquiry  into  the  Principles  of  Political 
Economy ,  Book  I,  ch.  xix.)  More  naive  is  Petty,  who  says 
it  replaces  "polygamy."  The  above  point  of  view  is,  at  the 
most,  admissible  only  for  some  parts  of  the  United  States. 
On  the  other  hand,  "machinery  can  seldom  be  used  with 
success  to  abridge  the  labour  of  an  individual;  more  time 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


nod  of  modern  industry,  cooperation  and  the 
concentration  of  the  instruments  of  labour  in 
the  hands  of  a  few  gave  rise,  in  numerous  coun¬ 
tries  where  these  methods  were  applied  in  agri¬ 
culture,  to  great,  sudden,  and  forcible  revolu¬ 
tions  in  the  modes  of  production,  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  in  the  conditions  of  existence  and  the 
means  of  employment  of  the  rural  populations. 
But  this  contest  at  first  takes  place  more  be¬ 
tween  the  large  and  the  small  landed  proprie¬ 
tors  than  between  capital  and  wage  labour;  on 
the  other  hand,  when  the  labourers  are  dis¬ 
placed  by  the  instruments  of  labour,  by  sheep, 
horses,  etc.,  in  this  case  force  is  directly  resorted 
to  in  the  first  instance  as  the  prelude  to  the  in¬ 
dustrial  revolution.  The  labourers  arc  first 
driven  from  the  land,  and  then  come  the  sheep. 
Land  grabbing  on  a  great  scale,  such  as  was 
perpetrated  in  Kngland,  is  the  first  step  in  creat¬ 
ing  a  field  for  the  establishment  of  agriculture 
on  a  great  scale.1  Hence  this  subversion  of  agri¬ 
culture  puts  on,  at  first,  more  the  appearance  of 
a  political  revolt ii 

The  instrument  of  labour,  when  it  takes  the 
form  of  a  machine,  immediately  becomes  a 
competitor  of  the  workman  himself.2  The  self- 
expansion  of  capital  by  means  of  machinery  is 
thenceforward  directly  proportional  to  the 
number  of  the  workpeople,  whose  means  of  live¬ 
lihood  have  been  destroyed  by  that  machinery. 
The  whole  system  of  capitalist  production  is 
based  on  the  fact  that  the  workman  sells  his 
labour  power  as  a  commodity.  Division  of  la¬ 
bour  specializes  this  labour  power,  by  reducing 
it  to  skill  in  handling  a  particular  tool.  So  soon 
as  the  handling  of  this  tool  becomes  the  work 
of  a  machine,  then,  with  the  use-value,  the  ex¬ 
change  value  of  the  workman’s  labour  power 
also  vanishes;  the  workman  becomes  unsale¬ 
able,  like  paper  money  thrown  out  of  currency 
by  legal  enactment.  That  portion  of  the  work- 


would  be  lost  in  its  construction  than  could  be  saved  by  its 
application.  It  is  only  really  useful  when  it  acts  on  great 
masses,  when  a  single  machine  can  assist  the  work  of  thou¬ 
sands.  It  is  accordingly  in  the  most  populous  countries, 
where  there  are  most  idle  men,  that  it  is  most  abundant. 
...  It  is  not  called  into  use  by  a  scarcity  of  men,  but  by 
the  facility  with  which  they  can  be  brought  to  work  in 
masses."  (Piercy  Ravenstone,  Thoughts  on  the  Funding 
System  audits  Effects^  London,  1824,  p.  15.) 

1  Note  to  the  4th  edition:  This  is  also  true  for  Germany. 
Wherever  there  is  large-scale  agriculture  in  Germany,  that 
is  mainly  in  the  East,  it  was  made  possible  only  by  the 
landlords  "clearing”  the  land  of  the  peasantry  (. Bauernle - 
gen),  a  process  which  started  in  the  sixteenth  century  and 
has  continued  at  a  great  rate  since  1648.  F.E. 

3  "Machinery  and  labour  are  in  constant  competition.'* 
—Ricardo,  op.  cit .,  p.  479, 


211 

ing  class  thus  by  machinery  rendered  superflu¬ 
ous  (i.e.,  no  longer  immediately  necessary  for 
the  self-expansion  of  capital)  either  goes  to  the 
wall  in  the  unequal  contest  of  the  old  handi¬ 
crafts  and  manufactures  with  machinery,  or 
else  floods  all  the  more  easily  accessible 
branches  of  industry,  swamps  the  labour  mar¬ 
ket,  and  sinks  the  price  of  labour  power  below 
its  value.  It  is  impressed  upon  the  workpeople, 
as  a  great  consolation,  first,  that  their  sufferings 
are  only  temporary  (“a  temporary  inconven¬ 
ience”),  secondly,  that  machinery  acquires  the 
mastery  over  the  whole  of  a  given  field  of  pro¬ 
duction  only  by  degrees,  so  that  the  extent  and 
intensity  of  its  destructive  effect  is  diminished. 
The  first  consolation  neutralizes  the  second. 
When  machinery  seizes  on  an  industry  by  de¬ 
grees,  it  produces  chronic  misery  among  the  op¬ 
eratives  who  compete  with  it.  Where  the  tran¬ 
sition  is  rapid,4  the  effect  is  acute  and  felt  by 
great  masses.  History  discloses  no  tragedy  more 
horrible  than  the  gradual  extinction  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  handloom  weavers,  an  extinction  that  was 
spread  over  several  decades,  and  finally  sealed 
in  1 838.  Many  of  them  died  of  starvation,  many 
with  families  vegetated  for  a  long  time  on  7.}4d. 
a  day.3  On  the  other  hand,  the  English  cotton 
machinery  produced  an  acute  effect  in  India. 
In  1834-35,  the  governor-general  reported: 
“The  misery  hardly  finds  a  parallel  in  the  his¬ 
tory  of  commerce.  The  bones  of  the  cotton- 
weavers  are  bleaching  the  plains  of  India.”  No 
doubt,  in  turning  them  out  of  this  “temporal” 
world,  the  machinery  caused  them  no  more 
than  “a  temporary  inconvenience.”  For  the 

•The  competition  between  hand-weaving  and  power¬ 
weaving  in  England,  before  the  passing  of  the  Poor  Law  of 
1833,  was  prolonged  by  supplementing  the  wages,  which 
had  fallen  considerably  below  the  minimum,  with  parish 
relief.  "The  Rev.  Mr.  Turner  was,  in  1827,  rector  of  \Vi  lms- 
low,  in  Cheshire,  a  manufacturing  district.  The  questions 
of  the  Committee  of  Emigration,  and  Mr.  Turner's  an¬ 
swers,  show  how  the  competition  of  human  labour  is  main¬ 
tained  against  machinery.  Question:  'Has  not  the  use  of 
the  power-loom  superseded  the  use  of  the  handloom?’  An¬ 
swer:  'Undoubtedly;  it  would  have  superseded  them  much 
more  than  it  has  done,  if  the  handloom  weavers  were  not 
enabled  to  submit  to  a  reduction  of  wages.'  Question:  'But, 
in  submitting,  he  has  accepted  wages  which  are  insufficient 
to  support  him,  and  looks  to  parochial  contribution  as  the 
remainder  of  his  support?’  Answer:  'Yes,  and  in  fact  the 
competition  between  the  handloom  and  the  power-loom  is 
maintained  out  of  the  poor-rates.’  Thus  degrading  pauper¬ 
ism  or  expatriation,  is  the  benefit  which  the  industrious  re¬ 
ceive  from  the  introduction  of  machinery,  to  be  reduced 
from  the  respectable  and  in  some  degree  independent 
mechanic,  to  the  cringing  wretch  who  lives  on  the  debas¬ 
ing  bread  of  charity.  This  they  call  a  temporary  inconven¬ 
ience.”— if  Prize  Essay  on  the  Comparative  Merits  of  Com¬ 
petition  and  Cooperation,  London,  1834,  p.  29. 


212  CAPITAL 


rest,  since  machinery  19  continually  seizing  up¬ 
on  new  fields  of  production,  its  temporary  effect 
is  really  permanent.  Hence,  the  character  of  in¬ 
dependence  and  estrangement  which  the  capi¬ 
talist  mode  of  production  as  a  whole  gives  to  the 
instruments  of  labour  and  to  the  product,  as 
against  the  workman,  is  developed  by  means  of 
machinery  into  a  thorough  antagonism.1  There¬ 
fore,  it  is  with  the  advent  of  machinery  that  the 
workman  for  the  first  time  brutally  revolts 
against  the  instruments  of  labour. 

The  instrument  of  labour  strikes  down  the  la¬ 
bourer.  This  direct  antagonism  between  the 
two  comes  out  most  strongly  whenever  newly 
introduced  machinery  competes  with  handi¬ 
crafts  or  manufactures,  handed  down  from 
former  times.  But  even  in  modern  industry  the 
continual  improvement  of  machinery,  and  the 
development  of  the  automatic  system,  has  an 
analogous  effect.  “The  object  of  improved  ma¬ 
chinery  is  to  diminish  manual  labour,  to  pro¬ 
vide  for  the  performance  of  a  process  or  the 
completion  of  a  link  in  a  manufacture  by  the  aid 
of  an  iron  instead  of  the  human  apparatus.”* 
“The  adaptation  of  power  to  machinery  hereto¬ 
fore  moved  by  hand  is  almost  of  daily  occur¬ 
rence  ...  the  minor  improvements  in  machin¬ 
ery  having  for  their  object  economy  of  power, 
the  production  of  better  work,  the  turning  off 
more  work  in  the  same  time,  or  in  supplying  the 
place  of  a  child,  a  female,  or  a  man,  are  con¬ 
stant,  and  although  sometimes  apparently  of 
no  great  moment,  have  somewhat  important 
results.”3  “Whenever  a  process  requires  pecul¬ 
iar  dexterity  and  steadiness  of  hand,  it  is  with¬ 
drawn  as  soon  as  possible  from  the  cunning 
workman  who  is  prone  to  irregularities  of  many 
kinds,  and  it  is  placed  in  charge  of  a  peculiar 
mechanism,  so  self-regulating  that  a  child  can 
superintend  it.”4  “On  the  automatic  plan 
skilled  labour  gets  progressively  superseded.”6 

I  “The  same  cause  which  may  increase  the  revenue  of 
the  country*'  (i.e.,  as  Ricardo  explains  in  the  same  passage, 
the  revenues  of  landlords  and  capitalists,  whose  wealth, 
from  the  economic  point  of  view,  forms  the  wealth  of  the 
nation),  “may  at  the  same  time  render  the  population  re¬ 
dundant  and  deteriorate  the  condition  of  the  labourer.** 
(Ricardo,  op.  «/.,  p.  469.)  “The  constant  aim  and  the  tend¬ 
ency  of  every  improvement  in  machinery  is,  in  fact,  to  do 
away  entirely  with  the  labour  of  man,  or  to  lessen  its  price 
by  substituting  the  labour  of  women  and  children  for  that 
of  grown  up  men,  or  of  unskilled  for  that  of  skilled  work¬ 
men.”  (Ure,  op.  cit.t  Vol.  I,  p.  35.) 

*  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories  t  31st  October,  1858, 
P-43- 

I I  bid.  1 31st  October,  1856,  p.  15. 

4  Ure,  op.  cit.t  p.  19.  “The  great  advantage  of  the  ma¬ 
chinery  employed  in  brick-making  consists  in  this,  that  the 
employer  is  made  entirely  independent  of  skilled  labourers.” 


“The  effect  of  improvements  in  machinery,  not 
merely  in  superseding  the  necessity  for  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  the  same  quantity  of  adult  labour 
as  before,  in  order  to  produce  a  given  result,  but 
in  substituting  one  description  of  human  labour 
for  another,  the  less  skilled  for  the  more  skilled, 
juvenile  for  adult,  female  for  male,  causes  a 
fresh  disturbance  in  the  rate  of  wages.”3  “The 
effect  of  substituting  the  self-acting  mule  for 
the  common  mule  is  to  discharge  the  greater 
part  of  the  men  spinners  and  to  retain  adoles¬ 
cents  and  children.”7 

The  extraordinary  power  of  expansion  of  the 
factory  system  owing  to  accumulated  practical 
experience,  to  the  mechanical  means  at  hand, 
and  to  constant  technical  progress,  was  proved 
to  us  by  the  giant  strides  of  that  system  under 
the  pressure  of  a  shortened  working  day.  But 
who,  in  i860,  the  zenith  year  of  the  English  cot¬ 
ton  industry,  would  have  dreamed  of  the  gal¬ 
loping  improvements  in  machinery,  and  the 
corresponding  displacement  of  working  people, 
called  into  being  during  the  following  three 
years,  under  the  stimulus  of  the  American  Civil 
War?  A  couple  of  examples  from  the  reports  of 
the  inspectors  of  factories  will  suffice  on  this 
point.  A  Manchester  manufacturer  states:  “We 
formerly  had  75  carding  engines;  now  we  have 
12,  doing  the  same  quantity  of  work. . . .  We 
are  doing  with  fewer  hands  by  14,  at  a  saving  in 
wages  of  £10  a  week.  Our  estimated  saving  in 
waste  is  about  10%  in  the  quantity  of  cotton 
consumed.”  “In  another  fine-spinning  mill  in 
Manchester,  I  was  informed  that  through  in¬ 
creased  speed  and  the  adoption  of  some  self- 
acting  processes,  a  reduction  had  been  made, 
in  number,  of  a  fourth  in  one  department,  and 
of  above  half  in  another,  and  that  the  introduc¬ 
tion  of  the  combing  machine  in  place  of  the 
second  carding  had  considerably  reduced  the 
number  of  hands  formerly  employed  in  the 
carding-room.”  Another  spinning-mill  is  esti- 


(1 Children  s  Employment  Commission ,  Fifth  Report ;  Lon¬ 
don,  1866,  p.  180,  note  46.)  Mr.  A.  Sturrocf  superintend¬ 
ent  of  the  machine  department  of  the  Great  Northern  Rail¬ 
way,  says,  with  regard  to  the  building  of  locomotives,  etc.: 
“Expensive  English  workmen  are  being  Ifss  used  every 
day.  The  production  of  the  workshops  of  England  is  being 
increased  by  the  use  of  improved  tools  and  these  tools  are 
again  served  by  a  low  class  of  labour.  . . .  Formerly  their 
skilled  labour  necessarily  produced  all  the  parts  of  engines. 
Now  the  parts  of  engines  are  produced  by  labour  with  leu 
skill,  but  with  good  tools.  By  tools,  I  mean  engineer’s  ma¬ 
chinery,  lathes,  planing  machines,  drills,  and  soon.  (Roto/ 
Commission  on  Railway j,  London,  1867,  Minutes  of  Evi¬ 
dence,  nn.  17,862  and  17,863.) 

*  Ure,  op.  cit.t  p.  20. 

8  Ure,  op.  cit.t  p.  321.  7  Ure,  op.  cit.t  p.  23. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


mated  to  effect  a  saving  of  labour  of  10%.  The 
Messrs.  Gilmour,  spinners  at  Manchester, 
state:  “In  our  blowing-room  department  we 
consider  our  expense  with  new  machinery  is  ful¬ 
ly  one-third  less  in  wages  and  hands  ...  in  the 
jack-frame  and  drawing-frame  room,  about 
one-third  less  in  expense,  and  likewise  one-third 


213 

school  is  not  only  caused  by  the  distress,  but  by 
the  changes  of  machinery  in  the  woollen  mills, 
in  consequence  of  which  a  reduction  of  seventy 
short-timers  had  taken  place.”2 

The  following  table  shows  the  total  result  of 
the  mechanical  improvements  in  the  English 
cotton  industry  due  to  the  American  Civil  War. 


Number  of  Factories 


1858 

1861 

1868 

England  and  Wales 

a, 046 

*.7*5 

2,405 

Scotland 

152 

l63 

131 

Ireland 

12 

9 

*3 

United  Kingdom 

2,210 

4,887 

2,549 

Number  of  Power-Looms 

1S58 

i86j 

1868 

England  and  Wales 

27  5,59<> 

368,145 

344.719 

Scotland 

21,624 

30,1 10 

31,864 

Ireland 

*.757 

2,746 

United  Kingdom 

498,847 

399.992 

379,329 

Number  of  Spindles 

€ 

1861 

1868 

England  and  Wales 

45,818,576 

28,352,152 

30,478,228 

Scotland 

2,041,129 

1,915.398 

1.397.546 

Ireland 

150^11 

119,944 

124,240 

United  Kingdom 

28,010,217 

30.387.494 

32,000,014 

Number  of  Persons  Employed 

f8jS 

Ms 

England  and  Wales 

34I»I7° 

407,598 

357.051 

Scotland 

34,698 

41.237 

39,809 

Ireland 

3.34? 

2>734 

4,203 

United  Kingdom 

379>2I3 

451.5^9 

401,064 

less  in  hands;  in  the  spinning-room  about  one- 
third  less  in  expenses.  But  this  is  not  all;  when 
our  yarn  goes  to  the  manufacturers,  it  is  so 
much  better  by  the  application  of  our  new  ma¬ 
chinery  that  they  will  produce  a  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  cloth,  and  cheaper  than  from  the  yarn 
produced  by  old  machinery.”1  Mr.  Redgrave 
further  remarks  in  the  same  report:  “The  re¬ 
duction  of  hands  against  increased  production 
is,  in  fact,  constantly  taking  place;  in  woollen 
mills  the  reduction  commenced  some  time  since, 
and  is  continuing;  a  few  days  since,  the  master 
of  a  school  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Rochdale 
said  to  me  that  the  great  falling  off  in  the  girls’ 

1  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories,  31ft  Oct.,  1863,  pp. 
I08, 109. 


Hence,  between  1861  and  1868,  338  cotton 
factories  disappeared;  in  other  words  more  pro¬ 
ductive  machinery  on  a  larger  scale  was  con- 

*Ibid.y  p.  109.  The  rapid  improvement  of  machinery 
during  the  crisis  allowed  the  English  manufacturers,  im¬ 
mediately  after  the  termination  of  the  American  Civil  War, 
and  almost  in  no  time,  to  glut  the  markets  of  the  world 
again.  Cloth,  during  the  last  six  months  of  1866,  was  al¬ 
most  unsaleable.  Thereupon  began  the  consignment  of 
goods  to  India  and  China,  thus  naturally  making  the  glut 
more  intense.  At  the  beginning  of  1867,  the  manufacturers 
resorted  to  their  usual  way  out  of  the  difficulty,  viz.,  re¬ 
ducing  wages  5  per  cent.  The  workpeople  resisted  and  said 
that  the  only  remedy  was  to  work  short  time,  4  days  a 
week;  and  their  theory  was  the  correct  one.  After  holding 
out  for  some  time,  the  self-elected  captains  of  industry  had 
to  make  up  their  minds  to  short  time,  with  reduced  wages 
in  some  places,  and  in  others  without. 


CAPITAL 


214 

centrated  in  the  hands  of  a  smaller  number  of 
capitalists.  The  number  of  power-looms  de¬ 
creased  by  20,663;  but  since  their  product  in¬ 
creased  in  the  same  period,  an  improved  loom 
must  have  yielded  more  than  an  old  one.  Last¬ 
ly,  the  number  of  spindles  increased  by 
1,612,541,  while  the  number  of  operatives  de¬ 
creased  by  50,505.  The  “temporary'*  misery  in¬ 
flicted  on  the  workpeople  by  the  cotton  crisis 
was  heightened,  and  from  being  temporary 
was  made  permanent,  by  the  rapid  and  persis¬ 
tent  progress  of  machinery. 

But  machinery  not  only  acts  as  a  competitor 
who  gets  the  better  of  the  workman  and  is  con¬ 
stantly  on  the  point  of  making  him  superfluous. 
It  is  also  a  power  inimical  to  him,  and  as  such 
capital  proclaims  it  from  the  roof  tops  and  as 
such  makes  use  of  it.  It  is  the  most  powerful 
weapon  for  repressing  strikes,  those  periodical 
revolts  of  the  working  class  against  the  autoc¬ 
racy  of  capital.1  According  to  Gaskell,  the 
steam-engine  was  from  the  very  first  an  antag¬ 
onist  of  human  power,  an  antagonist  that  en¬ 
abled  the  capitalist  to  tread  under  foot  the 
growing  claims  of  the  workmen,  who  threatened 
the  newly  born  factory  system  with  a  crisis.2 
It  would  be  possible  to  write  quite  a  history  of 
the  inventions  made  since  1 830  for  the  sole  pur¬ 
pose  of  supplying  capital  with  weapons  against 
the  revolts  of  the  working  class.  At  the  head  of 
these  in  importance  stands  the  self-acting  mule, 
because  it  opened  up  a  new  epoch  in  the  auto¬ 
matic  system.8 

Nasmyth,  the  inventor  of  the  steam  hammer, 
gives  the  following  evidence  before  the  Trades 
Union  Commission,  with  regard  to  the  im¬ 
provements  made  by  him  in  machinery  and  in¬ 
troduced  in  consequence  of  the  wide-spread  and 
long  strikes  of  the  engineers  in  1851.  “The  char¬ 
acteristic  feature  of  our  modern  mechanical  im¬ 
provements  is  the  introduction  of  self-acting 
tool  machinery.  What  every  mechanical  work¬ 
man  has  now  to  do,  and  what  every  boy  can  do, 
is  not  to  work  himself  but  to  superintend  the 
beautiful  labour  of  the  machine.  The  whole 

1  “The  relation  of  master  and  man  in  the  blown-flint 
bottle  trades  amounts  to  a  chronic  strike."  Hence  the  im¬ 
petus  given  to  the  manufacture  of  pressed  glass,  in  which 
the  chief  operations  are  done  by  machinery.  One  firm  in 
Newcastle,  which  formerly  produced  350,000  pounds  of 
blown-flint  glass,  now  produces  in  its  place  3,000,500 
pounds  of  pressed  glass.— Children's  Employment  Com - 
mission.  Fourth  Report ,  1865,  pp.  262,  263. 

2  Gaskell,  The  Manufacturing  Population  of  England , 
London,  1 833,  pp.  3, 4. 

•  W.  Fairbairn  discovered  several  very  important  appli¬ 
cations  of  machinery  to  the  construction  of  machines  in 
consequence  of  strikes  in  his  own  workshops. 


class  of  workmen  that  depend  exclusively  on 
their  skill  is  now  done  away  with.  Formerly,  I 
employed  four  boys  to  every  mechanic.  Thanks 
to  these  new  mechanical  combinations,  I  have 
reduced  the  number  of  grown-up  men  from 
1500  to  750.  The  result  was  a  considerable  in¬ 
crease  in  my  profits." 

Ure  says  of  a  machine  used  in  calico  printing: 
“At  length  capitalists  sought  deliverance  from 
this  intolerable  bondage”  (namely  the,  in  their 
eyes,  burdensome  terms  of  their  contracts  with 
the  workmen)  “in  the  resources  of  science,  and 
were  speedily  reinstated  in  their  legitimate  rule, 
that  of  the  head  over  the  inferior  members." 
Speaking  of  an  invention  for  dressing  warps: 
“Then  the  combined  malcontents,  who  fancied 
themselves  impregnably  intrenched  behind  the 
old  lines  of  division  of  labour,  found  their  flanks 
turned  and  their  defences  rendered  useless  by 
the  new  mechanical  tactics,  and  were  obliged  to 
surrender  at  discretion."  With  regard  to  the  in¬ 
vention  of  the  self-acting  mule,  he  says:  “A  cre¬ 
ation  destined  to  restore  order  among  the  in¬ 
dustrious  classes. . . .  This  invention  confirms 
the  great  doctrine  already  propounded,  that, 
when  capital  enlists  science  into  her  service,  the 
refractory  hand  of  labour  will  always  be  taught 
docility."4  Although  Ure's  work  appeared  thir¬ 
ty  years  ago,  at  a  time  when  the  factory  system 
was  comparatively  but  little  developed,  it  still 
perfectly  expresses  the  spirit  of  the  factory,  not 
only  by  its  undisguised  cynicism,  but  also  by 
the  naivet6  with  which  it  blurts  out  the  stupid 
contradictions  of  the  capitalist  brain.  For  in¬ 
stance,  after  propounding  the  “doctrine" 
stated  above,  that  capital,  with  the  aid  of  sci¬ 
ence  taken  into  its  pay,  always  reduces  the  re¬ 
fractory  hand  of  labour  to  docility,  he  grows  in¬ 
dignant  because  “it  (physico-mechanical  sci¬ 
ence)  has  been  accused  of  lending  itself  to  the 
rich  capitalist  as  an  instrument  for  harassing 
the  poor."  After  preaching  a  long  sermon  to 
show  how  advantageous  the  rapid  development 
of  machinery  is  to  the  working  classes,  he  warns 
them  that  by  their  obstinacy  and  their  strikes 
they  hasten  that  development.  “Violent  revul¬ 
sions  of  this  nature,”  he  says,  “display  short¬ 
sighted  man  in  the  contemptible  character  of  a 
self- tormentor."  A  few  pages  before  he  states 
the  contrary.  “Had  it  not  been  for  the  violent 
collisions  and  interruptions  resulting  from  er¬ 
roneous  views  among  the  factory  operatives, 
the  factory  system  would  have  been  developed 
still  more  rapidly  and  beneficially  for  all  con¬ 
cerned."  Then  he  exclaims  again:  “Fortunately 
4  Ure,  op.  cit.,  pp.  368-370. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


for  the  state  of  society  in  the  cotton  districts  of 
Great  Britain,  the  improvements  in  machinery 
are  gradual.”  “It”  (improvement  in  machin¬ 
ery)  “is  said  to  lower  the  rate  of  earnings  of 
adults  hy  displacing  a  portion  of  them,  and  thus 
rendering  their  number  superabundant  as  com¬ 
pared  with  the  demand  for  their  labour.  It  cer¬ 
tainly  augments  the  demand  for  the  labour  of 
children  and  increases  the  rate  of  their  wages.” 
On  the  other  hand,  this  same  dispenser  of  con¬ 
solation  defends  the  lowness  of  the  children’s 
wages  on  the  ground  that  it  prevents  parents 
from  sending  their  children  at  too  early  an  age 
into  the  factory.  The  whole  of  his  book  is  a  vin¬ 
dication  of  a  working  day  of  unrestricted 
length;  that  Parliament  should  forbid  children 
of  thirteen  years  to  be  exhausted  by  working 
twelve  hours  a  day  reminds  his  liberal  soul  of 
the  darkest  days  of  the  Middle  Ages.  This 
docs  not  prevent  him  from  calling  upon  the  fac¬ 
tory  operatives  to  thank  Providence,  who  by 
means  of  machinery  has  given  them  the  leisure 
to  think  of  their  “immortal  interests.”1 

6.  The  Theory  of  Compensation  as  regards  the 

Workpeople  displaced  by  Machinery 

James  Mill,  MacCulloch,  Torrens,  Senior, 
John  Stuart  Mill,  and  a  whole  scries  besides  of 
bourgeois  political  economists  insist  that  all 
machinery  that  displaces  workmen  simultan¬ 
eously  and  necessarily  sets  free  an  amount  of 
capital  adequate  to  employ  the  same  identical 
workmen.2 

Suppose  a  capitalist  to  employ  ioo  workmen, 
at  £30  a  year  each,  in  a  carpet  factory. The  var¬ 
iable  capital  annually  laid  out  amounts,  there¬ 
fore,  to  £3000.  Suppose,  also,  that  he  discharges 
50  of  his  workmen,  and  employs  the  remaining 
50  with  machinery  that  costs  him  £1500.  To 
simplify  matters,  we  take  no  account  of  build¬ 
ings,  coal,  etc.  Further  suppose  that  the  raw 
material  annually  consumed  costs  £3000,  both 
before  and  after  the  change.3  Is  any  capital  set 
free  by  this  metamorphosis?  Before  the  change, 
the  total  sum  of  £6000  consisted  half  of  con¬ 
stant,  and  half  of  variable  capital.  After  the 
change  it  consists  of  £4500  constant  (£3000 
raw  material  and  £1500  machinery),  and  £1500 
variable  capital.  The  variable  capital,  instead 
of  being  one-half,  is  only  one-quarter,  of  the 

1  Ure,  op, .  cit.y  pp.  368, 7, 370,  a8o,  321, 281, 370, 475. 

2  Ricardo  originally  was  also  of  this  opinion,  but  after¬ 
wards  expressly  disclaimed  it,  with  the  scientific  imparti¬ 
ality  and  love  of  truth  characteristic  of  him.  Op.  tit ch. 
xxxi,  “On  Machinery.’* 

*  N.B.  My  illustration  is  entirely  on  the  lines  of  those 
given  by  the  above-named  economists. 


215 

total  capital.  Instead  of  being  set  free,  a  part  of 
the  capital  is  here  locked  up  in  such  a  way  as  to 
cease  to  be  exchanged  against  labour  power: 
variable  has  been  changed  into  constant  capi¬ 
tal.  Other  things  remaining  unchanged,  the 
capital  of  £6000  can,  in  future,  employ  no  more 
than  50  men.  With  each  improvement  in  the 
machinery,  it  will  employ  fewer.  If  the  newly 
introduced  machinery  had  cost  less  than  did  the 
labour  power  and  implements  displaced  by  it, 
if,  for  instance,  instead  of  costing  £1500,  it  had 
cost  only  £1000,  a  variable  capital  of  £1000 
would  have  been  converted  into  constant  capi¬ 
tal  and  locked  up;  and  a  capital  of  £500  would 
have  been  set  free.  The  latter  sum,  supposing 
wages  unchanged,  would  form  a  fund  sufficient 
to  employ  about  16  out  of  the  50  men  dis¬ 
charged;  nay,  less  than  16,  for,  in  order  to 
be  employed  as  capital,  a  part  of  this  £500 
must  now  become  constant  capital,  thus  leav¬ 
ing  only  the  remainder  to  be  laid  out  in  labour 
power. 

But  suppose,  besides,  that  the  making  of  the 
new  machinery  affords  employment  to  a  greater 
number  of  mechanics;  can  that  be  called  com¬ 
pensation  to  the  carpet-makers,  thrown  on  the 
streets?  At  the  best,  its  construction  employs 
fewer  men  than  its  employment  displaces.  The 
sum  of  £1500  that  formerly  represented  the 
wages  of  the  discharged  carpet-makers  now  rep- 
rcsents  in  the  shape  of  machinery:  (1)  the  value 
of  the  means  of  production  used  in  the  con¬ 
struction  of  that  machinery,  (2)  the  wages  of 
the  mechanics  employed  in  its  construction, 
and  (3)  the  surplus  value  falling  to  the  share  of 
their  “master.”  Further,  the  machinery  need 
not  be  renewed  till  it  is  worn  out.  Hence,  in 
order  to  keep  the  increased  number  of  mechan¬ 
ics  in  constant  employment,  one  carpet  manu¬ 
facturer  after  another  must  displace  workmen 
by  machines. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  apologists  do  not 
mean  this  sort  of  setting  free.  They  have  in  their 
minds  the  means  of  subsistence  of  the  liberated 
workpeople.  It  cannot  be  denied,  in  the  above 
instance,  that  the  machinery  not  only  liberates 
jo  men,  thus  placing  them  at  others'  disposal, 
but  at  the  same  time  it  withdraws  from  their 
consumption,  and  sets  free,  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence  to  the  value  of  £1500.  The  simple  fact,  by 
no  means  a  new  one,  that  machinery  cuts  off  the 
workmen  from  their  means  of  subsistence  is, 
therefore,  in  economic  parlance  tantamount  to 
this,  that  machinery  liberates  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence  for  the  workman,  or  converts  those  means 
into  capital  for  his  employment.  The  mode  of 


CAPITAL 


216 

expression,  you  see,  is  everything.  Nominibus 
mollire  licet  mala.1 

This  theory  implies  that  the  £1500  worth  of 
means  of  subsistence  was  capital  that  was  being 
expended  by  the  labour  of  the  50  men  dis¬ 
charged.  Consequently,  this  capital  falls  out  of 
employment  so  soon  as  they  commence  their 
forced  holidays,  and  never  rests  till  it  has  found 
a  fresh  investment  where  it  can  again  be  pro¬ 
ductively  consumed  by  these  same  50  men. 
Sooner  or  later,  therefore,  the  capital  and  the 
workmen  must  come  together  again,  and  then 
the  compensation  is  complete.  The  sufferings  of 
the  workmen  displaced  by  machinery  are, 
therefore,  as  transient  as  are  the  riches  of  this 
world. 

In  relation  to  the  discharged  workmen,  the 
£1500  worth  of  means  of  subsistence  never  was 
capital.  What  really  confronted  them  as  capital 
was  the  sum  of  £1500,  afterwards  laid  out  in 
machinery.  On  looking  closer,  it  will  be  seen 
that  this  sum  represented  part  of  the  carpets 
produced  in  a  year  by  the  50  discharged  men, 
which  part  they  received  as  wages  from  their 
employer  in  money  instead  of  in  kind.  With  the 
carpets  in  the  form  of  money,  they  bought 
means  of  subsistence  to  the  value  of  £1500. 
These  means,  therefore,  were  to  them  not  capi¬ 
tal  but  commodities,  and  they,  as  regards  these 
commodities,  were  not  wage-labourers  but  buy¬ 
ers.  The  circumstance  that  they  were  “freed” 
by  the  machinery  from  the  means  of  purchase 
changed  them  from  buyers  into  non-buyess. 
Hence  a  lessened  demand  for  those  commodi¬ 
ties — voild  tout?  If  this  diminution  be  not  com¬ 
pensated  by  an  increase  from  some  other  quar¬ 
ter,  the  market  price  of  the  commodities  falls. 
If  this  state  of  things  lasts  for  some  time  and 
extends,  there  follows  a  discharge  of  workmen 
employed  in  the  production  of  these  commodi¬ 
ties.  Some  of  the  capital  that  was  previously  de¬ 
voted  to  production  of  necessary  means  of  sub¬ 
sistence  has  to  become  reproduced  in  another 
form.  While  prices  fall  and  capital  is  being  dis¬ 
placed,  the  labourers  employed  in  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  necessary  means  of  subsistence  are  in 
their  turn  “freed"  from  a  part  of  their  tyages. 
Instead,  therefore,  of  proving  that  when  ma¬ 
chinery  frees  the  workman  from  his  means  of 
subsistence  it  simultaneously  converts  those 
means  into  capital  for  his  further  employment, 
our  apologists,  with  their  cut-and-dricd  law  of 
supply  and  demand,  prove,  on  the  contrary, 
that  machinery  throws  workmen  on  the  streets, 

1  By  means  of  words,  one  can  gloss  over  real  evils. 

*That  is  alL 


not  only  in  that  branch  of  production  in  which 
it  is  introduced,  but  also  in  those  branches  in 
which  it  is  not  introduced. 

The  real  facts,  which  are  travestied  by  the 
optimism  of  economists,  are  as  follows:  the  la¬ 
bourers,  when  driven  out  of  the  workshop  by 
the  machinery,  are  thrown  upon  the  labour 
market,  and  there  add  to  the  number  of  work¬ 
men  at  the  disposal  of  the  capitalists.  In  Part 
Seven  of  this  book  it  will  be  seen  that  this  effect 
of  machinery,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  repre¬ 
sented  to  be  a  compensation  to  the  working 
class,  is  on  the  contrary  a  most  frightful 
scourge.  For  the  present  I  will  say  only  this: 
The  labourers  that  are  thrown  out  of  work  in 
any  branch  of  industry  can  no  doubt  seek  for 
employment  in  some  other  branch.  If  they  find 
it,  and  thus  renew  the  bond  between  them  and 
the  means  of  subsistence,  this  takes  place  only 
by  the  intermediary  of  a  new  and  additional 
capital  that  is  seeking  investment;  not  at  all  by 
the  intermediary  of  the  capital  that  formerly 
employed  them  and  was  afterwards  converted 
into  machinery.  And  even  should  they  find  em¬ 
ployment,  what  a  poor  look-out  is  theirs!  Crip¬ 
pled  as  they  are  by  division  of  labour,  these  poor 
devils  are  worth  so  little  outside  their  old  trade 
that  they  cannot  find  admission  into  any  in¬ 
dustries,  except  a  few  of  inferior  kind  that  are 
over-supplied  with  underpaid  workmen.3  Fur¬ 
ther,  every  branch  of  industry  attracts  each 
year  a  new  stream  of  men  who  furnish  a  con¬ 
tingent  from  which  to  fill  up  vacancies  and  to 
draw  a  supply  for  expansion.  So  soon  as  ma¬ 
chinery  sets  free  a  part  of  the  workmen  em¬ 
ployed  in  a  given  branch  of  industry,  the  re¬ 
serve  men  are  also  diverted  into  new  channels 
of  employment  and  become  absorbed  in  other 
branches;  meanwhile  the  original  victims  dur¬ 
ing  the  period  of  transition  for  the  most  part 
starve  and  perish. 

It  is  an  undoubted  fact  that  machinery,  as 
such,  is  not  responsible  for  “setting  free"  the 
workman  from  the  means  of  subsistence.  It 
cheapens  and  increases  production  in  that 
branch  which  it  seizes  on,  and  at  first  makes  no 

3  A  disciple  of  Ricardo,  in  answer  to  the  insipidities  of  J. 
B.  Say,  remarks  on  this  point:  “Where  division  of  labour 
is  well  developed,  the  skill  of  the  labourer  is  available  only 
in  that  particular  branch  in  which  it  has  been  acquired;  he 
himself  is  a  sort  of  machine.  It  does  not  therefore  help  mat¬ 
ters  one  jot  to  repeat  in  parrot  fashion  that  things  have  a 
tendency  to  And  their  level.  On  looking  around  us  we  can¬ 
not  but  see  that  they  are  unable  to  find  their  level  for  a 
long  time;  and  that  when  they  do  find  it,  the  level  is  always 
lower  than  at  the  commencement  of  the  process.”— In¬ 
quiry  *nto  those  Principles  respecting  the  Nature  oj  Demand 
etc.  London,  1821,  p.  72. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


change  in  the  mass  of  the  means  of  subsistence 
produced  in  other  branches.  Hence,  after  its  in¬ 
troduction,  the  society  possesses  as  much,  if  not 
more,  of  the  necessaries  of  life  than  before,  for 
the  labourers  thrown  out  of  work;  and  that 
quite  apart  from  the  enormous  share  of  the  an¬ 
nual  produce  wasted  by  the  non-workers.  And 
this  is  the  point  relied  on  by  our  apologists!  The 
contradictions  and  antagonisms  inseparable 
from  the  capitalist  employment  of  machinery 
do  not  exist,  they  say,  since  they  do  not  arise 
out  of  machinery,  as  such,  but  out  of  its  capital¬ 
ist  employment!  Since,  therefore,  machinery, 
considered  alone,  shortens  the  hours  of  labour, 
but,  when  in  the  service  of  capital,  lengthens 
them;  since  in  itself  it  lightens  labour,  but  when 
employed  by  capital  heightens  the  intensity  of 
labour;  since  in  itself  it  is  a  victory  of  man  over 
the  forces  of  nature,  but  in  the  hands  of  capital, 
makes  man  the  slave  of  those  forces;  since  in 
itself  it  increases  the  wealth  of  the  producers,  but 
in  the  hands  of  capital,  makes  them  paupers — 
for  all  these  reasons  and  others  besides,  says 
the  bourgeois  economist  without  more  ado,  it 
is  clear  as  noonday  that  all  these  contradictions 
are  a  mere  semblance  of  the  reality,  and  that, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  they  have  neither  an  actual 
nor  a  theoretical  existence.  Thus  he  saves  him¬ 
self  from  all  further  puzzling  of  the  brain  and, 
what  is  more,  implicitly  declares  his  oppo¬ 
nent  to  be  stupid  enough  to  contend  against, 
not  the  capitalistic  employment  of  machinery, 
but  machinery  itself. 

No  doubt  he  is  far  from  denying  that  tem¬ 
porary  inconvenience  may  result  from  the  cap¬ 
italist  use  of  machinery.  But  where  is  the  medal 
without  its  reverse!  Any  employment  of  ma¬ 
chinery,  except  by  capital,  is  to  him  an  impos¬ 
sibility.  Exploitation  of  the  workman  by  the 
machine  is,  therefore,  with  him,  identical  with 
exploitation  of  the  machine  by  the  workman. 
Whoever,  therefore,  exposes  the  real  state  of 
things  in  the  capitalistic  employment  of  ma¬ 
chinery  is  against  its  employment  in  any  way 
and  is  an  enemy  of  social  progress!1  Exactly  the 
reasoning  of  the  celebrated  Bill  Sykes.  “Gentle¬ 
men  of  the  jury,  no  doubt  the  throat  of  this 

1  MacCulloch  amongst  others,  is  a  past  master  in  this 
pretentious  cretinism.  “If,”  he  says,  with  the  affected  na¬ 
ivete  of  a  child  of  eight  years,  “if  it  be  advantageous,  to 
develop  the  skill  of  the  workman  more  and  more,  so  that 
he  is  capable  of  producing,  with  the  same  or  with  a  less 
quantity  of  labour,  a  constantly  increasing  quantity  of 
commodities,  it  must  also  be  advantageous  that  he  should 
avail  himself  of  the  help  of  such  machinery  as  will  assist 
him  most  effectively  in  the  attainment  of  this  result.”— 
MacCulloch,  Principles  of  Political  Economy ,  London 
1830,  p.  166. 


21? 

commercial  traveller  has  been  cut.  But  that  is 
not  my  fault,  it  is  the  fault  of  the  knife.  Must 
we,  for  such  a  temporary  inconvenience,  abol¬ 
ish  the  use  of  the  knife?  Only  consider!  where 
would  agriculture  and  trade  be  without  the 
knife?  Is  it  not  as  salutary  in  surgery  as  it  is 
knowing  in  anatomy?  And  in  addition  a  willing 
help  at  the  festive  board?  If  you  abolish  the 
knife— you  hurl  us  back  into  the  depths  of  bar¬ 
barism/*2 

Although  machinery  necessarily  throws  men 
out  of  work  in  those  industries  into  which  it  is 
introduced,  yet  it  may,  notwithstanding  this, 
bring  about  an  increase  of  employment  in  other 
industries.  This  effect,  however,  has  nothing  in 
common  with  the  so-called  theory  of  compensa¬ 
tion.  Since  every  article  produced  by  a  machine 
is  cheaper  than  a  similar  article  produced  by 
hand,  we  deduce  the  following  infallible  law;  If 
the  total  quantity  of  the  article  produced  by 
machinery  be  equal  to  the  total  quantity  of  the 
article  previously  produced  by  a  handicraft  or 
by  manufacture  and  now  made  by  machinery, 
then  the  total  labour  expended  is  diminished. 
The  new  labour  spent  on  the  instruments  of  la¬ 
bour,  on  the  machinery,  on  the  coal,  and  so  on, 
must  necessarily  be  less  than  the  labour  dis¬ 
placed  by  the  use  of  the  machinery;  otherwise 
the  product  of  the  machine  would  be  as  dear,  or 
dearer,  than  the  product  of  the  manual  labour. 
But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  total  quantity  of 
the  article  produced  by  machinery  with  a  di¬ 
minished  number  of  workmen,  instead  of  re¬ 
maining  equal  to,  by  far  exceeds  the  total  quan¬ 
tity  of  the  hand-made  article  that  has  been  dis¬ 
placed.  Suppose  that  400,000  yards  of  cloth 
have  been  produced  on  power-looms  by  fewer 
weavers  than  could  weave  100,000  yards  by 
hand.  In  the  quadrupled  product  there  lies  four 
times  as  much  raw  material.  Hence  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  raw  material  must  be  quadrupled.  But 
as  regards  the  instruments  of  labour,  such  as 
buildings,  coal,  machinery,  and  so  on,  it  is  dif¬ 
ferent;  the  limit  up  to  which  the  additional  la¬ 
bour  required  for  their  production  can  increase, 
varies  with  the  difference  between  the  quantity 
of  the  machine-made  article  and  the  quantity 
of  the  same  article  that  the  same  number  of 
workmen  could  make  by  hand. 

Hence,  as  the  use  of  machinery  extends  in  a 
given  industry,  the  immediate  effect  is  to  in- 

*  “The  inventor  of  the  spinning  machine  has  ruined  In¬ 
dia,  a  fact,  however,  that  touches  us  but  little.”  (A.  Thiers, 
De  la propriftl.)  M.  Thiers  here  confounds  the  spinning  ma¬ 
chine  with  the  power-loom,  “a  fact,  however,  that  touches 
us  but  little.” 


CAPITAL 


218 

crease  production  in  the  other  industries  that 
furnish  the  first  with  means  of  production. 
How  far  employment  is  thereby  found  for  an 
increased  number  of  men,  depends,  given  the 
length  of  the  working  day  and  the  intensity  of 
labour,  on  the  composition  of  the  capital  em¬ 
ployed,  i.e.,  on  the  ratio  of  its  constant  to  its 
variable  component.  This  ratio,  in  its  turn,  var¬ 
ies  considerably  with  the  extent  to  which  ma¬ 
chinery  has  already  seized  on,  or  is  then  seizing 
on,  those  trades.  The  number  of  the  men  con¬ 
demned  to  work  in  coal  and  metal  mines  in¬ 
creased  enormously  owing  to  the  progress  of  the 
English  factory  system;  but  during  the  last  few 
decades  this  increase  of  number  has  been  less 
rapid,  owing  to  the  use  of  new  machinery  in 
mining.1  A  new  type  of  workman  springs  into 
life  along  with  the  machine,  namely,  its  maker. 
We  have  already  learned  that  machinery  has 
possessed  itself  even  of  this  branch  of  produc¬ 
tion  on  a  scale  that  grows  greater  every  day.2 
As  to  raw  material,8  there  is  not  the  least  doubt 
that  the  rapid  strides  of  cotton  spinning,  not 
only  pushed  on  with  tropical  luxuriance  the 
growth  of  cotton  in  the  United  States,  and  with 
it  the  African  slave  trade,  but  also  made  the 
breeding  of  slaves  the  chief  business  of  the  bor¬ 
der  slave  States.  When,  in  1790,  the  first  census 
of  slaves  was  taken  in  the  United  States,  their 
number  was  697,000;  in  1861,  it  had  nearly- 
reached  four  millions.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
no  less  certain  that  the  rise  of  the  English  wool¬ 
len  factories,  together  with  the  gradual  conver¬ 
sion  of  arable  land  into  sheep  pasture,  brought 
about  the  superfluity  of  agricultural  labourers 
that  led  to  their  being  driven  in  masses  into  the 
towns.  Ireland,  having  during  the  last  twenty 
years  reduced  its  population  by  nearly  one-half, 
is  at  this  moment  undergoing  the  process  of  still 

1  According  to  the  census  of  1861  (Vol.  II,  London,  1863), 
the  number  of  people  employed  in  coal  mines  in  England 
and  Wales  amounted  to  246,613,  of  which  7  ^545  were  un¬ 
der,  and  173,067  were  over  twenty  years  of  age.  Of  those 
under  twenty,  835  were  between  five  and  ten  years,  30,701 
between  ten  and  fifteen  years,  42,010  between  fifteen  and 
nineteen  years.  The  number  employed  in  iron,  copper,  lead, 
tin,  and  other  mines  of  every  description,  was  319,222. 

2  In  England  and  Wales,  in  1861,  there  were  deployed 
in  making  machinery,  60,807  persons,  including  the  mas¬ 
ters  and  their  clerks,  etc.,  also  all  agents  and  business  peo¬ 
ple  connected  with  this  industry,  but  excluding  the  makers 
of  small  machines,  such  as  sewing  machines,  etc.,  as  also 
the  makers  of  the  operative  parts  of  machines,  such  as 
spindle9.  The  total  number  of  civil  engineers  amounted  to 
33J9- 

8  Since  iron  is  one  of  the  most  important  raw  materials, 
let  me  here  state  that,  in  1861,  there  were  in  England  and 
Wales  125,771  operative  iron  founders,  of  whom  123,430 
were  males,  2341  females.  Of  the  former,  30,810  were  un¬ 
der,  and  92,620  over  twenty  years  of  age. 


further  reducing  the  number  of  its  inhabitants, 
so  as  exactly  to  suit  the  requirements  of  its  land¬ 
lords  and  of  the  English  woollen  manufacturers. 

When  machinery  is  applied  to  any  of  the  pre¬ 
liminary  or  intermediate  stages  through  which 
the  subject  of  labour  has  to  pass  on  its  way  to 
completion,  there  is  an  increased  yield  of  ma¬ 
terial  in  those  stages,  and  simultaneously  an  in¬ 
creased  demand  for  labour  in  the  handicrafts  or 
manufactures  supplied  by  the  produce  of  the 
machines.  Spinning  by  machinery,  for  example, 
supplied  yarn  so  cheaply  and  so  abundantly 
that  the  hand-loom  weavers  were,  at  first,  able 
to  work  full  time  without  increased  outlay. 
Their  earnings  accordingly  rose.4  Hence  a  flow 
of  people  into  the  cotton-weaving  trade,  till  at 
length  the  800,000  weavers,  called  into  exist¬ 
ence  by  the  jenny,  the  throstle,  and  the  mule, 
were  overwhelmed  by  the  power-loom.  So  also, 
owing  to  the  abundance  of  clothing  materials 
produced  by  machinery,  the  number  of  tailors, 
seamstresses  and  needlewomen,  went  on  in¬ 
creasing  until  the  appearance  of  the  sewing  ma¬ 
chine. 

In  proportion  as  machinery,  with  the  aid  of  a 
relatively  small  number  of  workpeople,  in¬ 
creases  the  mass  of  raw  materials,  intermediate 
products,  instruments  of  labour,  etc.,  the  work- 
ing-up  of  these  raw  materials  and  intermediate 
products  becomes  split  up  into  numberless 
branches;  social  production  increases  in  diver¬ 
sity.  The  factory  system  carries  the  social  divi¬ 
sion  of  labour  immeasurably  further  than  does 
manufacture,  for  it  increases  the  productive¬ 
ness  of  the  industries  it  seizes  upon  in  a  far  high¬ 
er  degree. 

The  immediate  result  of  machinery  is  to  aug¬ 
ment  surplus  value  and  the  mass  of  products  in 
which  surplus  value  is  embodied.  And,  as  the 
substances  consumed  by  the  capitalists  and 
their  dependants  become  more  plentiful,  so  too 
do  these  orders  of  society.  Their  growing  weal  th 
and  the  relatively  diminished  number  of  work¬ 
men  required  to  produce  the  necessaries  of  life 
beget,  simultaneously  with  the  rise  of  new  and 
luxurious  wants,  the  means  of  satisfying  those 
wants.  A  larger  portion  of  the  produce  of  society 
is  changed  into  surplus  produce,  and  a  larger 
part  of  the  surplus  produce  is  supplied  for  con¬ 
sumption  in  a  multiplicity  of  refined  shapes.  In 
other  words,  the  production  of  luxuries  in- 

4  *'A  family  of  four  grown-up  persons,  with  two  children 
as  winders,  earned  at  the  end  of  the  last,  and  the  beginning 
of  the  present  century,  by  ten  hours’  daily  labour,  £4  a 
week.  If  the  work  was  very  pressing,  they  could  earn  more. 
. . .  Before  that,  they  had  always  suffered  from  a  deficient 
supply  of  yarn.” — Gaskell,  op .  cit.,  pp.  25-27. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY  219 


creases.1  The  refined  and  varied  forms  of  the 
products  are  also  due  to  new  relations  with  the 
markets  of  the  world,  relations  that  are  created 
by  modern  industry.  Not  only  are  greater  quan¬ 
tities  of  foreign  articles  of  luxury  exchanged  for 
home  products,  but  a  greater  mass  of  foreign 
raw  materials,  ingredients,  and  intermediate 
products,  are  used  as  means  of  production  in 
the  home  industries.  Owing  to  these  relations 
with  the  markets  of  the  world,  the  demand  for 
labour  increases  in  the  carrying  trades,  which 
split  up  into  numerous  varieties.2 

The  increase  of  the  means  of  production  and 
subsistence,  accompanied  by  a  relative  diminu¬ 
tion  in  the  number  of  labourers,  causes  an  in¬ 
creased  demand  for  labour  in  making  canals, 
docks,  tunnels,  bridges,  and  so  on,  works  that 
can  only  bear  fruit  in  the  far  future.  Entirely 
new  branches  of  production,  creating  new  fields 
of  labour,  are  also  formed,  as  the  direct  result 
either  of  machinery  or  of  the  general  industrial 
changes  brought  about  by  it.  But  the  place  oc¬ 
cupied  by  these  branches  in  the  general  produc¬ 
tion  is,  even  in  the  must  developed  countries, 
far  from  important.  The  number  of  labourers 
that  find  employment  in  them  is  directly  pro¬ 
portional  to  the  demand,  created  by  those  in¬ 
dustries,  for  the  crudest  form  of  manual  labour. 
The  chief  industries  of  this  kind  are,  at  present, 
gasworks,  telegraphs,  photography,  steam 
navigation,  and  railways.  According  to  the  cen¬ 
sus  of  i  S6 1  for  England  and  Wales,  we  find  in 
the  gas  industry  (gasworks,  production  of 
mechanical  apparatus,  servants  of  the  gas  com¬ 
panies,  etc.)  15,211  persons;  in  telegraphy, 
2309;  in  photography,  2366;  steam  navigation, 
3570;  and  in  railways,  70,599,  of  whom  the  “un¬ 
skilled”  navvies,  more  or  less  permanently  em¬ 
ployed,  and  the  whole  administrative  and  com¬ 
mercial  staff,  make  up  about  28,000.  The  total 
number  of  persons,  therefore,  employ  oil  in  these 
five  new  industries  amounts  to  94,145. 

Lastly,  the  extraordinary  productiveness  of 
modern  industry,  accompanied  as  it  is  by  both 
a  more  extensive  and  a  more  intense  exploita¬ 
tion  of  labour  power  in  all  other  spheres  of  pro¬ 
duction,  allows  of  the  unproductive  employ¬ 
ment  of  a  larger  and  larger  part  of  the  working 
class,  and  the  consequent  reproduction  on  a 
constantly  extending  scale  of  the  ancient  do¬ 
mestic  slaves  under  the  name  of  a  “servant” 

1  R  Engels  in  lMgey  etc.,  points  out  the  miserable  condi¬ 
tion  of  a  large  number  <\f  those  who  work  on  these  very 
articles  of  luxury.  See  also  numerous  instances  m  the  re¬ 
ports  of  the  Children  s  Employment  Commission. 

2  In  1861,  in  England  and  Wales,  there  were  94,665  sail¬ 
ors  in  the  merchant  service. 


class,  including  men-servants,  women-serv- 
ants,  lackeys,  etc.  According  to  the  census  of 
1861,  the  population  of  England  and  Wales  was 
20,066,244;  of  these,  9,776,259  were  males,  and 
10,289,965  were  females.  If  we  deduct  from  this 
population  all  who  are  too  old  or  too  young  for 
work,  all  unproductive  women,  young  persons, 
and  children,  the  “ideological”  classes,  such  as 
government  officials,  priests,  lawyers,  soldiers, 
etc.;  further,  all  who  have  no  occupation  but  to 
consume  the  labour  of  others  in  the  form  of  rent, 
interest,  etc.;  and,  lastly,  paupers,  vagabonds, 
and  criminals,  there  remain  in  round  numbers 
8,000,000  of  the  two  sexes  of  every  age,  includ¬ 
ing  in  that  number  every  capitalist  who  is  in 
any  way  engaged  in  industry,  commerce,  or  fi¬ 
nance.  Among  these  8,000,000  are: 

Persons 

Agricultural  labourers  (including  shep¬ 
herds,  farm  servants,  and  maidserv¬ 
ants  living  in  the  houses  of  farmers)  1,098,261 
All  who  are  employed  in  cotton,  woollen, 
worsted,  flax,  hemp,  silk,  and  jute  fac¬ 
tories,  in  stocking  making  and  lace¬ 
making  by  machinery  642,607® 

All  who  are  employed  in  coal  mines  and 

metal  mines  565,835 

All  who  are  employed  in  metal  works 
(blast-furnaces,  rolling-mills,  etc.), 
and  metal  manufactures  of  every  kind  396,998* 
The  servant  class  1,208,648s 

All  the  persons  employed  in  textile  factories 
and  in  mines,  taken  together,  number  1,208,442; 
those  employed  in  textile  factories  and  metal 
industries,  taken  together,  number  1,039,605; 
in  both  cases  less  than  the  number  of  modern 
domestic  slaves.  What  a  splendid  result  of  the 
capitalist  exploitation  of  machinery! 

7.  Repulsion  and  Attraction  of  W orkpeople  by  the 
Factory  System.  Crises  in  the  Cotton  Trade 
All  political  economists  of  any  standing  ad¬ 
mit  that  the  introduction  of  new  machinery  has 
had  a  baneful  effect  on  the  workmen  in  the  old 
handicrafts  and  manufactures  with  which  this 
machinery  at  first  competes.  Almost  all  of  them 
bemoan  the  slavery  of  the  factory  operative. 

*Of  these  only  177,(96  are  males  above  13  years  of  age. 
4  Of  these,  30,501  are  females. 

8  Of  these,  137,447  are  males.  None  are  included  in  the 
1,208,648  who  do  not  serve  in  private  houses.  Between 
1861  and  1870,  the  number  of  male  servants  nearly  doubled 
itself.  It  increased  to  267,671.  In  the  year  1847,  there  were 
2694 gamekeepers  (foi  the  landlords’  preserves);  in  1869, 
there  were  4921.  The  young  servant  girls  in  the  houses  of 
the  London  lower  middle  class  are  in  common  parlance 
called  “slaveys.” 


220  CAPITAL 


And  what  is  thegreat  trump-card  that  they  pi  ay? 
That  machinery,  after  the  horrors  of  the  period 
of  introduction  and  development  have  sub¬ 
sided,  instead  of  diminishing,  in  the  long  run  in¬ 
creases  the  number  of  the  slaves  of  labour!  Yes, 
political  economy  revels  in  the  hideous  theory 
(hideous  to  every  “philanthropist”  who  believes 
in  the  eternal  nature-ordained  necessity  for 
capitalist  production)  that  after  a  period  of 
growth  and  transition,  even  its  crowning  suc¬ 
cess,  the  factory  system  based  on  machinery, 
grinds  down  more  workpeople  than  on  its  first 
introduction  it  throws  on  the  streets.1 

It  is  true  that  in  some  cases,  as  we  saw  from 
instances  of  English  worsted  and  silk  factories, 
an  extraordinary  extension  of  the  factory  sys¬ 
tem  may,  at  a  certain  stage  of  its  development, 
be  accompanied  not  only  by  a  relative,  but  by 
an  absolute  decrease  in  the  number  of  opera¬ 
tives  employed.  I n  the  year  1 860,  when  a  special 
census  of  all  the  factories  in  the  United  King¬ 
dom  was  taken  by  order  of  Parliament,  the  fac¬ 
tories  in  those  parts  of  Lancashire,  Cheshire, 
and  Yorkshire,  included  in  the  district  of  Mr. 
Baker,  the  Factory  Inspector,  numbered  652; 
570  of  these  contained  85,622  power-looms, 
6,819,146  spindles  (exclusive  of  doubling  spin¬ 
dles),  employed  27,439  horse-power  (steam), 
and  1390  (water),  and  94,119  persons.  In  the 
year  1865,  the  same  factories  contained  95,163 . 
looms,  7,025,031  spindles,  had  a  steam-power 
of  28,925  horses,  and  a  water-power  of  1445 
horses,  and  employed  88,913  persons.  Between 

1  Ganith,  on  the  contrary,  considers  the  final  result  of 
the  factory  system  to  be  an  absolutely  less  number  of  oper¬ 
atives  at  whose  expense  an  increased  number  o (gens  Aon- 
nites  [respectable  people]  live  and  develop  their  well-known 
perfectibilitl perfectible  [perfectible  perfectibility].  Little  as 
he  understands  the  movement  of  production,  at  least  he 
feels  that  machinery  must  needs  be  a  very  fatal  institution, 
if  its  introduction  converts  busy  workmen  into  paupers, 
and  its  development  calls  more  slaves  of  labour  into  exist¬ 
ence  than  it  has  suppressed.  It  is  not  possible  to  bring  out 
the  cretinism  of  his  standpoint,  except  by  his  own  words: 
“The  classes  which  are  condemned  to  produce  and  con¬ 
sume,  diminish  in  number,  and  the  classes  which  direct  la¬ 
bour,  which  soothe,  console,  and  instruct  the  whole  popu¬ 
lation,  multiply  . . .  and  appropriate  to  themselves  all  the 
benefits  which  result  from  the  decrease  in  the  cost  of  la¬ 
bour,  from  the  abundance  of  products,  and  from  the  cheap 
price  of  consumable  goods.  In  this  way  the  human  race  is 
elevated  to  the  highest  concept  of  genius,  penetrates  the 
hidden  depths  of  religion,  establishes  the  wholesome  prin¬ 
ciples  of  morality*’  (which  consists  in  “appropriating  to  it¬ 
self  all  the  benefits,”  etc.),  “the  laws  protective  of  liberty” 
(liberty  of  “the  classes  condemned  to  produce”?)  “and  of 
power,  obedience  and  justice,  of  duty  and  humanity.”— 
For  this  twaddle,  see  Des  systimes  d'iconomie  politique , 
etc.,  second  edition,  Paris,  1821,  Vol.  II,  p.  224.  See  also  p. 
212. 


i860  and  1865,  therefore,  the  increase  in  looms 
was  11%,  in  spindles  3%,  and  in  engine-power 
3%,  while  the  number  of  persons  employed  de¬ 
creased  5J'j%.2  Between  1852  and  1862,  con¬ 
siderable  extension  of  the  English  woollen  man¬ 
ufacture  took  place,  while  the  number  of  hands 
employed  in  it  remained  almost  stationary, 
showing  how  greatly  the  introduction  of  new 
machines  had  superseded  the  labour  of  preced¬ 
ing  periods.9  In  certain  cases,  the  increase  in 
the  number  of  hands  employed  is  only  appar¬ 
ent;  that  is,  it  is  not  due  to  the  extension  of  the 
factories  already  established,  but  to  the  gradual 
annexation  of  connected  trades;  for  instance, 
the  increase  in  power-looms,  and  in  the  hands 
employed  by  them  between  1 838  and  1856,  was, 
in  the  cotton  trade,  simply  owing  to  the  exten¬ 
sion  of  this  branch  of  industry;  but,  in  the  other 
trades,  to  the  application  of  steam-power  to  the 
carpet-loom,  to  the  ribbon-loom,  and  to  the 
linen-loom,  which  previously  had  been  worked 
by  the  power  of  men.4  Hence  the  increase  of  the 
hands  in  these  latter  trades  was  merely  a  symp¬ 
tom  of  a  diminution  in  the  total  number  em¬ 
ployed.  Finally,  we  have  considered  this  ques¬ 
tion  entirely  apart  from  the  fact,  that  every¬ 
where,  except  in  the  metal  industries,  young 
persons  (under  18),  and  women  and  children, 
form  the  preponderating  element  in  the  class  of 
factory  hands. 

Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  the^ass  of  hands 
actually  displaced  and  virtually  replaced  by 
machinery,  we  can  understand  how  the  factory 
operatives,  through  the  building  of  more  mills 
and  the  extension  of  old  ones  in  a  given  indus¬ 
try,  may  become  more  numerous  than  the  man¬ 
ufacturing  workmen  and  handicraftsmen  that 
have  been  displaced.  Suppose,  for  example,  that 
in  the  old  mode  of  production,  a  capital  of  £500 
is  employed  weekly,  two-fifths  being  constant 

*  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31  Oct.,  1865,  p.  58, 
ff. — At  the  same  time,  however,  means  of  employment  for 
an  increased  number  of  hands  was  ready  in  no  new  mills 
with  11,625  looms,  628,756  spindles  and  2695  total  horse¬ 
power  of  steam  and  water.  {Ibid.) 

*  Ibid.,  31  Oct.,  1862,  p.  79.  At  the  end  of  1871,  Mr.  A. 
Redgrave,  the  Factory  Inspector,  in  a  lecture  given  at 
Bradford  in  the  New  Mechanics’  Institution,  said:  “What 
has  struck  me  for  some  time  past  is  the  Altered  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  woollen  factories.  Formerly  they  were  filled 
with  women  and  children,  now  machinery  seems  to  do  all 
the  work.  At  my  asking  for  an  explanatioA  of  this  from  a 
manufacturer,  he  gave  me  the  following:  4Under  the  old 
system,  I  employed  63  persons;  after  the  introduction  of 
improved  machinery,  I  reduced  my  hands  to  33,  and  lately, 
in  consequence  of  new  and  extensive  alterations,  I  have 
been  'n  a  position  to  reduce  those  33  to  13.’” 

4lb*d.t  31  Oct.,  1856,  p.  16. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


and  three-fifths  variable  capital,  i.e.,  £200  be¬ 
ing  laid  out  in  means  of  production,  and  £300, 
say  £1  per  man,  in  labour-power.  On  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  machinery,  the  composition  of  this 
capital  becomes  altered.  We  will  suppose  it  to 
consist  of  four-fifths  constant  and  one-fifth  var¬ 
iable,  which  means  that  only  £100  is  now  laid 
out  in  labour  power.  Consequently,  two-thirds 
of  the  workmen  are  discharged.  If,  now,  the 
business  extends,  and  the  total  capital  em¬ 
ployed  grows  to  £1500  under  unchanged  condi¬ 
tions,  the  number  of  operatives  employed  will 
increase  to  300,  just  as  many  as  before  the  in¬ 
troduction  of  the  machinery.  If  the  capital  fur¬ 
ther  grows  to  £2000, 400  men  will  be  employed, 
or  one-third  more  than  under  the  old  system. 
Their  numbers  have,  in  point  of  fact,  increased 
by  100,  but  relatively,  i.e.,  in  proportion  to  the 
total  capital  advanced,  they  have  diminished 
by  800,  for  the  £2000  capital  would,  in  the  old 
state  of  things,  have  employed  1200  instead  of 
400  men.  Hence,  a  relative  decrease  in  the  num¬ 
ber  of  hands  is  consistent  with  an  actual  in¬ 
crease.  We  as'sumed  above  that,  while  the  total 
capital  increases,  its  composition  remains  the 
same,  because  the  conditions  of  production  re¬ 
main  constant.  But  we  have  already  seen  that, 
with  every  advance  in  the  use  of  machinery,  the 
constant  component  of  capital,  that  part  which 
consists  of  machinery,  raw  material,  etc.,  in¬ 
creases,  while  the  variable  component,  the  part 
laid  out  in  labour-power,  decreases.  We  also 
know  that  in  no  other  system  of  production  is 
improvement  so  continuous,  and  the  composi¬ 
tion  of  the  capital  employed  so  constantly 
changing,  as  in  the  factory  system.  These 
changes  are,  however,  continually  interrupted 
by  periods  of  rest,  during  which  there  is  a  mere 
quantitative  extension  of  the  factories  on  the 
existing  technical  basis.  During  such  periods 
the  operatives  increase  in  number.  Thus,  in 
1835,  the  total  number  of  operatives  in  the  cot¬ 
ton  , woollen,  worsted,  flax,  and  silk  factories  of 
the  United  Kingdom  was  only  354,684;  while 
in  1861  the  number  of  the  power-loom  weavers 
alone  (of  both  sexes  and  of  all  ages,  from  eight 
years  upwards),  amounted  to  230,654.  Certain¬ 
ly,  this  growth  appears  less  important  when  we 
consider  that  in  1838  the  hand-loom  weavers 
with  their  families  still  numbered  800,000/  not 

1  'The  sufferings  of  the  hand-loom  weavers  were  the 
subject  of  an  inquiry  by  a  Royal  Commission,  but  although 
their  distress  was  acknowledged  and  lamented,  the  ameli¬ 
oration  of  their  condition  was  left,  and  probably  necessar¬ 
ily  so,  to  the  chances  and  changes  of  time,  which  it  may 
now  be  hoped”  (twenty  years  later!)  "have  nearly  obliter- 


221 

to  mention  those  thrown  out  of  work  in  Asia 
and  on  the  continent  of  Europe. 

In  the  few  remarks  I  have  still  to  make  on 
this  point,  I  shall  refer  to  some  actually  existing 
relations,  the  existence  of  which  our  theoretical 
investigation  has  not  yet  disclosed. 

So  long  as  in  a  given  branch  of  industry  the 
factory  system  extends  itself  at  the  expense  of 
the  old  handicrafts  or  of  manufacture,  the  re¬ 
sult  is  as  sure  as  is  the  result  of  an  encounter 
between  an  army  furnished  with  breach-loaders 
and  one  armed  with  bows  and  arrows.  This  first 
period,  during  which  machinery  conquers  its 
field  of  action,  is  of  decisive  importance,  owing 
to  the  extraordinary  profits  that  it  helps  to  pro¬ 
duce.  These  profits  not  only  form  a  source  of 
accelerated  accumulation,  but  also  attract  into 
the  favoured  sphere  of  production  a  large  part 
of  the  additional  social  capital  that  is  being  con¬ 
stantly  created  and  is  ever  on  the  look-out  for 
new  investments.  The  special  advantages  of 
this  first  period  of  fast  and  furious  activity  are 
felt  in  every  branch  of  production  that  machin¬ 
ery  invades.  So  soon,  however,  as  the  factory 
system  has  gained  a  certain  breadth  of  footing 
and  a  definite  degree  of  maturity,  and,  especial¬ 
ly,  so  soon  as  its  technical  basis,  machinery,  is 
itself  produced  by  machinery;  so  soon  as  coal 
mining  and  iron  mining,  the  metal  industries, 
and  the  means  of  transport  have  been  revolu¬ 
tionized;  so  soon,  in  short,  as  the  general  condi¬ 
tions  requisite  for  production  by  the  modern 
industrial  system  have  been  established,  this 
mode  of  production  acquires  an  elasticity,  a  ca¬ 
pacity  for  sudden  extension  by  leaps  and 
bounds,  that  finds  no  hindrance  except  in  the 
supply  of  raw  material  and  in  the  disposal  of  the 
produce.  On  the  one  hand,  the  immediate  effect 
of  machinery  is  to  increase  the  supply  of  raw 
material  in  the  same  way,  for  example,  as  the 
cotton  gin  augmented  the  production  of  cot¬ 
ton.2  On  the  other  hand,  the  cheapness  of  the 
articles  produced  by  machinery,  and  the  im¬ 
proved  means  of  transport  and  communication, 
furnish  the  weapons  for  conquering  foreign 
markets.  By  ruining  handicraft  production  in 
other  countries,  machinery  forcibly  converts 
them  into  fields  for  the  supply  of  its  raw  mate¬ 
rial.' In  this  way  East  India  was  compelled  to 
produce  cotton,  wool,  hemp,  jute,  and  indigo 

ated  those  miseries,  and  not  improbably  by  the  present 
great  extension  of  the  power-loom.”— /£/</.,  31  Oct.,  1856, 
p.  15. 

2  Other  ways  in  which  machinery  affects  the  production 
of  raw  material  will  be  mentioned  in  Book  Three. 


CAPITAL 


222 

for  Great  Britain.1  By  constantly  making  a  part 
of  the  hands  “supernumerary,”  modern  indus¬ 
try,  in  all  countries  where  it  has  taken  root, 
gives  a  spur  to  emigration  and  to  the  coloniza¬ 
tion  of  foreign  lands,  which  are  thereby  con¬ 
verted  into  settlements  for  growing  the  raw  ma¬ 
terial  of  the  mother  country;  just  as  Australia, 
for  example,  was  converted  into  a  colony  for 


On  the  motion  of  Mr.  Gladstone,  the  House 
of  Commons  ordered,  on  the  17th  February, 
1867,  a  return  of  the  total  quantities  of  grain, 
corn,  and  flour,  of  all  sorts,  imported  into,  and 
exported  from,  the  United  Kingdom,  between 
the  years  1 83 1  and  1866.  I  give  below  a  sum¬ 
mary  of  the  result.  The  flour  is  given  in  quarters 
of  corn. 


Quinquennial  Periods  and  the  Year  1866 


Annual  Average 

rSji-iSis 

/Sj6  /8fO 

1841  184s 

1846-1850 

Import  (Qrs.) 

2, 3*9,7 :9 

1,843,865 

8,776.55  * 

Export  (Qrs.) 

*-5,3*3 

25I»77° 

139,056 

•55,461 

Excess  of  import  over  export 

871,110 

2,i37»959 

2,704,809 

8,621,091 

Population 

Yearly  average  in  each  period 

24,621,107 

*5.9*9, 5°7 

27,162,569 

*7,797,598 

Average  quantity  of  corn,  etc.,  in 
qrs.,  consumed  annually  per  head 
over  and  above  the  home  produce 
consumed 

0.036 

0.082 

0.099 

0.310 

Annual  Average 

185/  tS55 

/8j;6-/S6o 

/S6/  /86q 

rS66 

Import  (Qrs.) 

8.345, *37 

10,912,612 

1 

•6.457,340 

Export  (Qrs.) 

307,491 

34i,KO 

302,754 

216,218 

Excess  of  import  over  export 

8,037,746 

10,572,462 

I4,707,”7 

16,241,122 

Population 

Yearly  average  in  each  period 

*7,57*,9  *3 

*8,391,544 

29,381^460 

29,935,404 

Average  quantity  of  corn,  etc.,  in 
qrs.,  consumed  annually  per  head 
over  and  above  the  home  produce 
consumed 

0.291 

0.372 

o-543 

$•543 

growing  wool.2  A  new  and  international  divi¬ 
sion  of  labour,  a  division  suited  to  the  require¬ 
ments  of  the  chief  centres  of  mfodern  industry, 
springs  up  and  converts  one  part  of  the  globe 
into  a  chiefly  agricultural  field  of  production 
for  supplying  the  other  part  which  remains  a 
chiefly  industrial  field.  This  revolution  hangs 
together  with  radical  changes  in  agricul¬ 
ture  which  we  need  not  here  further  inquire 
into.1 

1  Export  oj  Cotton  from  India  to  Great  Britain. 

1846  34.540,143  lbs.  i860  204,141,168  lbs. 

1865  445,947,600  lbs. 

*  Export  oj  Wool  jrom  India  to  Great  Britain. 

2846  4,570,581  lbs.  i860  20,214,173  lbs. 

1865  20,679,111  lbs. 

Export  0}  Wool  Jrom  the  Cape  to  Great  Britain. 

1846  2,958,457  lbs.  i860  16,574,345  lbs. 

1865  29,920,623  lbs. 

Export  of  Wool  Jrom  Australia  to  Great  Britain. 

1846  21,789,346  lbs.  i860  59,166,616  lbs. 

1 865  109,734,261  lbs. 

9  The  economic  development  of  the  United  States  is  it¬ 
self  a  product  of  European,  more  especially  of  English, 
modern  industry.  Tn  their  present  form  (1866)  the  United 
States  must  still  be  considered  a  European  colony. — Note 
to  the  4th  edition:  Since  that  time,  the  United  States  has 


The  enormous  power  of  expanding  by  jumps, 
inherent  in  the  factory  system,  and  the  depend¬ 
ence  of  that  system  on  the  markets  of  the  world, 
necessarily  beget  feverish  production,  followed 
by  over-filling  of  the  markets,  whereupon  con¬ 
traction  of  the  markets  brings  on  crippling  of 


developed  into  the  second  largest  industrial  power  of  the 
world,  without,  however,  completely  shedding  its  colonial 
character.  F.E. 


Export  oj  Cotton  Jrom  the  United  States  to  Great  Britain 
1846  401,949*393  lbs.  1852  765,630,543  lbs. 

i8$9  961,707,264  lbs.  i860  1,115,890,608  lbs. 


tLxpori  oj  ^orn%  etc .,  jrom  the 
In  cwts. 

Wheat 

Barley 

Oats 

Rye 

Flour 

Buckwheat 

Maize 

fiere  or  Bigg  (a  sort  of  Barley) 

Peas 

Beans 

Total 


u/iiira  kjiu tu  vircui 


1850 

16,202,312 
3.6*9,653 
3.' 74, *01 
388.749 
3.819,440 

1,054 

5,473.«6i 

*.039 

811,620 

1,822,972 


1862 

41,033,503 

6,624,800 

4,426,994 

7,108 

7,2°7,H3 

19»571 

11,694,818 

7.67s 

1,024,721 

V>37.«37 


34,365,801  74,083,351 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


production.  The  life  of  modern  industry  be¬ 
comes  a  series  of  periods  of  moderate  activity, 
prosperity,  over-production,  crisis,  and  stagna¬ 
tion.  The  uncertainty  and  instability  to  which 
machinery  subjects  the  employment,  and  con¬ 
sequently  the  conditions  of  existence,  of  the  op¬ 
eratives  become  normal  owing  to  these  periodic 
changes  of  the  industrial  cycle.  Except  in  the 
periods  of  prosperity,  there  rages  between  the 
capitalists  the  most  furious  combat  for  the 
share  of  each  in  the  markets.  This  share  is  di¬ 
rectly  proportional  to  the  cheapness  of  the 
product.  Besides  the  rivalry  that  this  struggle 
begets  in  the  application  of  improved  machin¬ 
ery  for  replacing  labour-power,  and  of  new 
methods  of  production,  there  also  comes  a  time 
in  every  industrial  cycle  when  a  forcible  reduc¬ 
tion  of  wages  beneath  the  value  of  labour-power 
is  attempted  for  the  purpose  of  cheapening 
commodities.1 

A  condition  necessary  to  the  growth  of  the 
number  of  factory  hands  therefore  is  a  propor¬ 
tionally  much  more  rapid  growth  of  the  amount 
of  capital  invested  in  mills.  This  growth,  how¬ 
ever,  is  conditioned  by  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the 
industrial  cycle.  It  is,  besides,  constantly  inter- 

1  In  an  appeal  made  in  July,  1866,  to  the  Trade  Societies 
of  England,  by  the  shoe-makers  of  Leicester,  who  had  been 
thrown  on  the  streets  by  a  lock-out,  it  is  stated:  “Twenty 
years  ago  the  Leicester  shoe  trade  was  revolutionized  by 
the  introduction  of  riveting  in  the  place  of  stitching.  At 
that  time  good  wages  could  be  earned.  Great  competition 
was  shown  between  the  different  firms  as  to  which  could 
turn  out  the  neatest  article.  Shortly  afterwards,  however, 
a  worse  kind  of  competition  sprang  up,  namely,  that  of 
underselling  one  another  in  the  market.  The  injurious  con¬ 
sequences  soon  manifested  themselves  in  reductions  of 
wages,  and  so  swcepingly  quick  was  the  fall  in  the  price 
of  labour  that  many  firms  now  pay  only  one-half  of  the 
original  wages.  And  yet,  though  wages  sink  lower  and 
lower,  profits  appear,  with  each  alteration  in  the  scale  of 
wages,  to  increase.”  Even  bad  times  are  utilised  by  the 
manufacturers  for  making  exceptional  profits  by  exces¬ 
sive  lowering  of  wages,  i.e.,  by  a  direct  robbery  of  the  la¬ 
bourer’s  means  of  subsistence.  One  example  (it  has  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  crisis  in  the  Coventry  silk-weaving):  “From 
information  I  have  received  from  manufacturers  as  well 
as  workmen,  there  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  wages  have 
been  reduced  to  a  greater  extent  than  either  the  competi¬ 
tion  of  the  foreign  producers  or  other  circumstances  have 
rendered  necessary. . . .  The  majority  of  weavers  are  work¬ 
ing  at  a  reduction  of  30  to  40  per  cent  in  their  wages.  A 
piece  of  ribbon  for  making  which  the  weaver  got  6 s.  or  7 s. 
five  years  back,  now  only  brings  them  js.  J,d.  or  3;.  6d.; 
other  work  is  now  priced  at  2s.  and  2s.  31/.  which  was  for¬ 
merly  priced  at  4 s.  and  4 s.  3*/.  The  reduction  in  wage  seems 
to  have  been  carried  to  a  greater  extent  than  is  necessary 
for  increasing  demand.  Indeed,  the  reduction  in  the  cost  of 
weaving,  in  the  case  of  qjany  descriptions  of  ribbons,  has 
not  been  accompanied  by  any  corresponding  reduction  in 
the  selling  price  of  the  manufactured  article.” — Mr.  F.  D. 
Longe’s  Report,  Children  s  Employment  Commission,  Fifth 
Report ,  1866,  p.  1 14,  note  1. 


223 

rupted  by  the  technical  progress  that  at  one 
time  virtually  supplies  the  place  of  new  work¬ 
men,  at  another,  actually  displaces  old  ones. 
This  qualitative  change  in  mechanical  industry 
continually  discharges  hands  from  the  factory, 
or  shuts  its  doors  against  the  fresh  stream  of  re¬ 
cruits,  while  the  purely  quantitative  extension 
of  the  factories  absorbs  not  only  the  men 
thrown  out  of  work,  but  also  fresh  contingents. 
The  workpeople  are  thus  continually  both  re¬ 
pelled  and  attracted,  hustled  from  pillar  to 
post,  while,  at  the  same  time,  constant  changes 
take  place  in  the  sex,  age,  and  skill  of  the  levies. 

The  lot  of  the  factory  operatives  will  be  best 
depicted  by  taking  a  rapid  survey  of  the  course 
of  the  English  cotton  industry. 

From  1770  to  1815,  this  trade  was  depressed 
or  stagnant  for  five  years  only.  During  this  pe¬ 
riod  of  forty-five  years,  the  English  manufac¬ 
turers  had  a  gionopoly  of  machinery  and  of  the 
markets  of  the  world.  From  1815  to  1821,  there 
was  depression;  1822  and  1823  had  prosperity; 
1824  brought  abolition  of  the  laws  against 
Trades’  Unions,  great  extension  of  factories 
everywhere;  in  1825  there  was  a  crisis;  1826 
saw  great  misery  and  riots  among  the  factory 
operatives;  1827  brought  a  slight  improve¬ 
ment;  in  1828,  there  was  great  increase  in 
power-looms  and  in  exports;  in  1829,  exports, 
especially  to  I  ndia,  surpassed  all  former  years;  in 
1830,  glutted  market,  great  distress;  from  1831 
to  1833,  continued  depression,  the  monopoly  of 
the  trade  with  India  and  China  was  withdrawn 
from  the  East  India  Company;  in  1834,  there 
was  great  increase  of  factories  and  machinery, 
shortness  of  hands.  The  new  Poor  Law  fur¬ 
thered  migration  of  agricultural  labourers  into 
the  factory  districts.  The  country  districts  were 
sw'ept  of  children — white  slave  trade;  in  1835, 
great  prosperity,  contemporaneous  with  star¬ 
vation  of  the  handloom  weavers:  in  1836,  great 
prosperity;  in  1837  and  1838,  depression  and 
crisis;  in  1839,  revival;  in  1840,  great  depres¬ 
sion,  riots,  calling  out  of  the  military;  in  1841 
and  1842,  frightful  suffering  among  the  opera¬ 
tives;  in  1842,  the  manufacturers  locked  the 
hands  out  of  the  factories  in  order  to  enforce  the 
repeal  of  the  Corn  Laws.  The  operatives 
streamed  in  thousands  into  the  towns  of  Lanca¬ 
shire  and  Yorkshire,  were  driven  back  by  the 
military,  and  their  leaders  were  brought  to  trial 
at  Lancaster;  in  1843,  great  misery;  in  1844, 
revival;  in  1845,  great  prosperity;  in  1846,  con¬ 
tinued  improvement  at  first,  then  reaction.  Re¬ 
peal  of  the  Corn  Laws;  in  1847,  crisis,  general 
reduction  of  wages  by  ten  and  more  per  cent, 


CAPITAL 


224 

in  honour  of  the  “big  loaf”;  in  1848,  continued 
depression,  Manchester  under  military  protec¬ 
tion;  in  1849,  revival;  in  1850,  prosperity;  in 
1851,  falling  prices,  low  wages,  frequent  strikes; 
in  1851,  improvement  began,  strikes  continued, 
the  manufacturers  threatened  to  import  foreign 
hands;  in  1853,  increasing  exports.  Strike  for 
eight  months,  and  great  misery  at  Preston;  in 
1854,  prosperity  and  glutted  markets;  in  1855, 
the  news  of  failures  streamed  in  from  the  United 
States,  Canada,  and  the  Eastern  markets;  in 
1856,  great  prosperity;  in  1857,  crisis;  in  1858, 
improvement;  in  1859,  great  prosperity,  in¬ 
crease  in  factories;  in  i860,  zenith  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  cotton  trade,  the  Indian,  Australian,  and 
other  markets  so  glutted  with  goods  that  even 
in  1863  they  had  not  absorbed  the  whole  lot; 
the  French  Treaty  of  Commerce,  enormous 
growth  of  factories  and  machinery;  in  1861, 
prosperity  continued  for  a  time,  reaction,  the 
American  Civil  War,  cotton  famine;  from  1862 
to  1863,  complete  collapse. 

The  history  of  the  cotton  famine  is  too  char¬ 
acteristic  to  dispense  with  dwelling  upon  it  for 
a  moment.  From  the  indications  as  to  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  markets  of  the  world  in  i860  and 
1861,  we  see  that  the  cotton  famine  came  in  the 
nick  of  time  for  the  manufacturers,  and  was  to 
some  extent  advantageous  to  them,  a  fact  that 
was  acknowledged  in  the  reports  of  the  Man¬ 
chester  Chamber  of  Commerce,  proclaimed  in 
Parliament  by  Palmerston  and  Derby,  and  con¬ 
firmed  by  events.1  No  doubt,  among  the  2887 
cotton-mills  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1861, 
there  were  many  of  small  size.  According  to  the 
report  of  Mr.  A.  Redgrave,  out  of  the  2109  mi^s 
included  in  his  district,  392  (or  19%)  employed 
less  than  ten  horse-power  each;  345  (or  16%) 
employed  ten  horse-power,  and  less  than  twenty 
horse-power;  while  1372  employed  upwards  of 
twenty  horse- power.2  The  majority  of  the  small 
mills  were  weaving-sheds,  built  during  the  pe¬ 
riod  of  prosperity  after  1858,  for  the  most  part 
by  speculators,  of  whom  one  supplied  the  yarn, 
another  the  machinery,  a  third  the  buildings, 
and  were  worked  by  men  who  had  been  over¬ 
lookers,  or  by  other  persons  of  small  means. 
These  small  manufacturers  mostly  went  to  the 
wall.  The  same  fate  would  have  overtaken  them 
in  the  commercial  crisis  that  was  staved  off  only 
by  the  cotton  famine.  Although  they  formed 
one-third  of  the  total  number  of  manufacturers, 

1  Cf.  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  October, 
iS6ifp.30. 

xIbid.t  p.  19. 


yet  their  mills  absorbed  a  much  smaller  part  of 
the  capital  invested  in  the  cotton  trade.  As  to 
the  extent  of  the  stoppage,  it  appears  from  au¬ 
thentic  estimates  that  in  October  1862,  60.3% 
of  the  spindles,  and  j8%  of  the  looms,  were 
standing.  This  refers  to  the  cotton  trade  as  a 
whole  and,  of  course,  requires  considerable 
modification  for  individual  districts.  Only  very 
few  mills  worked  full  time  (60  hours  a  week); 
the  remainder  worked  at  intervals.  Even  in 
those  few  cases  where  full  time  was  worked,  and 
at  the  customary  rate  of  piece-wage,  the  weekly 
wages  of  the  operatives  necessarily  shrank,  ow¬ 
ing  to  good  cotton  being  replaced  by  bad,  Sea 
Island  by  Egyptian  (in  fine-spinning  mills), 
American  and  Egyptian  by  Surat,  and  pure  cot¬ 
ton  by  mixings  of  waste  and  Surat.  The  shorter 
fibre  of  the  Surat  cotton  and  its  dirty  condition, 
the  greater  fragility  of  the  thread,  the  substitu¬ 
tion  of  all  sorts  of  heavy  ingredients  for  flour  in 
sizing  the  warps,  all  these  lessened  the  speed  of 
the  machinery,  or  the  number  of  the  looms  that 
could  be  superintended  by  one  weaver,  in¬ 
creased  the  labour  caused  by  defects  in  the  ma¬ 
chinery,  and  reduced  the  piece-wage  by  reduc¬ 
ing  the  mass  of  the  product  turned  off.  Where 
Surat  cotton  was  used,  the  loss  to  the  operatives 
when  on  full  time  amounted  to  20, 30,  and  more 
per  cent.  But  besides  this,  the  majority  of  the 
manufacturers  reduced  the  rate  of  piece-wage 
by  5,  7J2,  and  10  per  cent.  We^ean  therefore 
conceive  the  situation  of  those  hands  who  were 
employed  for  only  3,  3*2,  or  4  days  a  week,  or 
for  only  6  hours  a  day.  Even  in  1863,  after  a 
comparative  improvement  had  set  in,  the  week¬ 
ly  wages  of  spinners  and  of  weavers  were  3J .  4^., 
3J.  1  a/.,  4J.  6 d.y  and  5 s.  id?  Even  in  this  miser¬ 
able  state  of  things,  however,  the  inventive 
spirit  of  the  master  never  stood  still,  but  was  ex¬ 
ercised  in  making  deductions  from  wages. 
These  were  to  some  extent  inflicted  as  a  penalty 
for  defects  in  the  finished  article  that  were  real¬ 
ly  due  to  his  bad  cotton  and  to  his  unsuitable 
machinery.  Moreover,  where  the  manufacturer 
owned  the  cottages  of  the  workpeople,  he  paid 
himself  his  rents  by  deducting  the  ainount  from 
these  miserable  wages.  Mr.  Redgrave  tells  us  of 
self-acting  minders  (operatives  who  manage  a 
pair  of  self-acting  mules)  “earning  at  the  end  of 
a  fortnight's  full  work  8j.  hi/.,  and  that  from 
this  sum  was  deducted  the  rent  of  the  house, 
the  manufacturer,  however,  returning  half  the 
rent  as  a  gift.  The  minders  took  away  the  sum 
of  6s.  nd.  In  many  places  the  self-acting  mind- 
*/£«(£,  319 t  October,  1865,  pp.  41-45. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


ers  ranged  from  5 s.  to  9 s.  per  week,  and  the 
weavers  from  is.  to  6s.  per  week,  during  the 
latter  part  of  1862.”1  Even  when  working  short 
time  the  rent  was  frequently  deducted  from  the 
wages  of  the  operatives.2  No  wonder  that  in 
some  parts  of  Lancashire  a  kind  of  famine  fever 
broke  out.  But  more  characteristic  than  all  this 
was  the  revolution  that  took  place  in  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  production  at  the  expense  of  the  work¬ 
people.  Expert menta  in  corpore  vili*  like  those 
of  anatomists  on  frogs,  were  formally  made. 
“Although,”  says  Mr.  Redgrave,  “1  have  given 
the  actual  earnings  of  the  operatives  in  the  sev¬ 
eral  mills,  it  does  not  follow  that  they  earn  the 
same  amount  week  by  week.  The  operatives  are 
subject  to  great  fluctuation  from  the  constant 
experimentalizing  of  the  manufacturers.  . . . 
The  earnings  of  the  operatives  rise  and  fall  with 
the  quality  of  the  cotton  mixings;  sometimes 
they  have  been  within  15  per  cent  of  former 
earnings,  and  then,  in  a  week  or  two,  they  have 
fallen  off  from  50  to  60  per  cent.”4  These  experi¬ 
ments  were  not  r%  ide  solely  at  the  expense  of 
the  workman’s  means  of  subsistence.  His  five 
senses  also  had  to  pay  the  penalty.  “The  people 
who  are  employed  in  making  up  Surat  cotton 
complain  very  much.  They  inform  me,  on  open¬ 
ing  the  bales  of  cotton  there  is  an  intolerable 
smell,  which  causes  sickness. ...  In  the  mixing, 
scribbling,  and  carding  rooms,  the  dust  and  dirt 
which  are  disengaged  irritate  the  air  passages 
and  give  rise  to  cough  and  difficulty  of  breathing. 
A  disease  of  the  skin,  no  doubt  from  the  irrita¬ 
tion  of  the  dirt  contained  in  the  Surat  cotton, 
also  prevails.  .  .  .  The  fibre  being  so  short,  a 
great  amount  of  size,  both  animal  and  vege¬ 
table,  is  used.  .  . .  Bronchitis  is  more  prevalent 
owing  to  the  dust.  Inflammatory  sore  throat  is 
common,  from  the  same  cause.  Sickness  and 
dyspepsia  are  produced  by  the  frequent  break¬ 
ing  of  the  weft,  when  the  weaver  sucks  the  weft 
through  the  eye  of  the  shuttle.”  On  the  other 
hand,  the  substitutes  for  flour  were  a  Fortuna- 
tus’  purse  to  the  manufacturers,  by  increasing 
the  weight  of  the  yarn.  They  caused  “  1 5  pounds 
of  raw  material  to  weigh  26  pounds  after  it  was 
woven.”6  In  the  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factor¬ 
ies  for  30th  April,  1864,  we  read  as  follows: 
“The  trade  is  availing  itself  of  this  resource  at 

resent  to  an  extent  which  is  even  discreditable. 

have  heard  on  good  authority  of  a  cloth  weigh¬ 
ing  8  pounds  which  was  made  of  j >4  pounds 

1  Ibid.,  31st  October,  1 863,  pp.  41-42*  1  Ibid.,  p.  5 1. 

*  Experiments  with  that  cheap  material. 

4  Ibid.,  pp.  50-5 1 .  6  Ibid.,  pp.  62-63. 


225 

cotton  and  2^  pounds  size;  and  of  another 
cloth  weighing  j  14  pounds,  of  which  2  pounds 
was  size.  These  were  ordinary  export  shirtings. 
In  cloths  of  other  descriptions,  as  much  as  50 
per  cent  size  is  sometimes  added;  so  that  a  man¬ 
ufacturer  may  and  does  truly  boast  that  he  is 
getting  rich  by  selling  cloth  for  less  money  per 
pound  than  he  paid  for  the  mere  yarn  of  which 
they  are  composed.”6  But  the  workpeople  had 
to  suffer,  not  only  from  the  experiments  of  the1 
manufacturers  inside  the  mills,  and  of  the  mu¬ 
nicipalities  outside,  not  only  from  reduced 
wages  and  absence  of  work,  from  want  and 
from  charity,  and  from  the  eulogistic  speeches 
of  lords  and  commons.  “Unfortunate  females 
who,  in  consequence  of  the  cotton  famine,  were 
at  its  commencement  thrown  out  of  employ¬ 
ment,  and  have  thereby  become  outcasts  of  so¬ 
ciety;  and  now,  though  trade  has  revived,  and 
work  is  plentiful,  continue  members  of  that  un¬ 
fortunate  class,  and  are  likely  to  continue  so. 
There  are  also  in  the  borough  more  youthful 
prostitutes  than  I  have  known  for  the  last 
twenty-five  years.”7 

We  find,  then,  in  the  first  forty-five  years  of 
the  English  cotton  trade,  from  1770  to  1815, 
only  five  years  of  crisis  and  stagnation;  but  this 
was  the  period  of  monopoly.  The  second  period, 
from  1815  to  1 863,  counts,  during  its  forty-eight 
years,  only  twenty  years  of  revival  and  pros¬ 
perity  against  twenty-eight  of  depression  and 
stagnation.  Between  1815  and  1830,  the  compe¬ 
tition  with  the  continent  of  Europe  and  with 
the  United  States  set  in.  After  1833,  exten¬ 
sion  of  the  Asiatic  markets  was  enforced  by  “de¬ 
struction  of  the  human  race”  (the  wholesale  ex¬ 
tinction  of  Indian  handloom  weavers).  After 
the  repeal  of  the  Corn  Laws,  from  1846  to  1863, 
there  were  eight  years  of  moderate  activity  and 
prosperity  against  nine  years  of  depression  and 
stagnation.  The  condition  of  the  adult  male  op¬ 
eratives,  even  during  the  years  of  prosperity, 
may  be  judged  from  the  note  subjoined.8 

8  Ibid.,  30th  April,  1864,  P*  *7- 

7  From  a  letter  of  Mr.  Harris,  Chief  Constable  of  Bolton; 
Ibid.,  31st  October,  1865,  pp.  61-62. 

8  In  an  appeal,  dated  1863,  of  the  factory  operatives  of 
Lancashire,  etc.,  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a  society  for 
organized  emigration,  we  find  the  following:  'That  a  large 
emigration  of  factory  workers  is  now  absolutely  essential 
to  raise  them  from  their  present  prostrate  condition,  few 
will  deny;  but  to  show  that  a  continuous  stream  of  emigra¬ 
tion  is  at  all  times  demanded,  and,  without  which  it  is  im¬ 
possible  for  them  to  maintain  their  position  in  ordinary 
times,  we  beg  to  call  attention  to  the  subjoined  facts:  In 
1814,  the  official  value  of  cotton  goods  exported  was 
£17,665,378,  whilst  the  real  marketable  value  was  £20,070- 


226  CAPITAL 


8.  Revolution  effected  in  Manufacture ,  Handi¬ 
crafts,  and  Domestic  Industry ,  by  Modern  In¬ 
dustry 

a.  Overthrow  of  Cooperation  based  on  Handicraft 
and  on  the  Division  of  Labour 
We  have  seen  how  machinery  does  away  with 
cooperation  based  on  handicrafts,  and  with 
manufacture  based  on  the  division  of  handi¬ 
craft  labour.  An  example  of  the  first  sort  is  the 
mowing  machine;  it  replaces  cooperation  be¬ 
tween  mowers.  A  striking  example  of  the  second 
kind  is  the  needle-making  machine.  According 
to  Adam  Smith,  io  men,  in  his  day,  made  in  co¬ 
operation  over  48,000  needles  a  day.  On  the 
other  hand,  a  single  needle-machine  makes 
145,000  in  a  working  day  of  1 1  hours.  One  wom¬ 
an  or  one  girl  superintends  four  such  machines, 
and  so  produces  near  upon  600,000  needles  in  a 
day,  and  upwards  of  3,000,000  in  a  week.1  A 
single  machine,  when  it  takes  the  place  of  co¬ 
operation  or  of  manufacture,  may  itself  serve 
as  the  basis  of  an  industry  of  a  handicraft  char¬ 
acter.  Still,  such  a  return  to  handicrafts  is  but 
a  transition  to  the  factory  system,  which,  as  a 
rule,  makes  its  appearance  so  soon  as  the  human 
muscles  are  replaced,  for  the  purpose  of  driving 
the  machines,  by  a  mechanical  motive  power, 
such  as  steam  or  water.  Here  and  there,  but  in 
any  case  only  for  a  time,  an  industry  may  be 
carried  on,  on  a  small  scale,  by  means  of  me¬ 
chanical  power.  This  is  effected  by  hiring  steam 

824.  In  1858,  the  official  value  of  cotton  goods  exported 
was  £182,221,681;  but  the  real  or  marketable  value  was 
only  £43,001,322,  being  a  tenfold  quantity  sold  for  little 
more  than  double  the  former  price  '1  o  produce  results  so 
disadvantageous  to  the  country  generally,  and  to  the  fac¬ 
tory  workers  in  particular,  several  causes  have  cooper¬ 
ated,  which,  had  circumstances  permitted,  we  should  have 
brought  more  prominently  under  >our  notice;  suffice  it  for 
the  present  to  say  that  the  most  obvious  one  is  the  con¬ 
stant  redundancy  of  labour,  without  which  a  trade  so  ruin¬ 
ous  in  its  effects  never  could  have  been  carried  on,  and 
which  requires  a  constantl)  extending  market  to  save  it 
from  annihilation.  Our  cotton  mills  may  be  brought  to  a 
stand  by  the  periodical  stagnations  of  trade,  which,  under 
present  arrangements,  arc  as  inevitable  as  death  itself,  but 
the  human  mind  is  constantly  at  work,  and  although  we 
believe  we  are  under  the  mark  in  stating  that  six  rdillions 
of  persons  have  left  these  shores  during  the  last  twenty-five 
years,  yet,  from  the  natural  increase  of  population,  and 
the  displacement  of  labour  to  cheapen  production,  a  large 
percentage  of  the  male  adults  in  the  most  prosperous  times 
find  it  impossible  to  obtain  work  in  factories  on  any  con¬ 
ditions  whatever.*’  ( lbid.t  30th  April,  1863,  pp.  51-52.)  We 
shall,  in  a  later  chapter,  see  how  our  friends,  the  manufac¬ 
turers,  endeavoured,  during  the  catastrophe  in  the  cotton 
trade,  to  prevent  by  every  means,  including  State  inter¬ 
ference,  the  emigration  of  the  operatives. 

1  Children's  Employment  Commission ,  Fourth  Report , 
1864,  p.  108,  note  447. 


power,  as  is  done  in  some  of  the  Birmingham 
trades,  or  by  the  use  of  small  caloric  engines,  as 
in  some  branches  of  weaving.2  In  the  Coventry 
silk-weaving  industry  the  experiment  of  “cot¬ 
tage  factories”  was  tried.  In  the  centre  of 
a  square  surrounded  by  rows  of  cottages,  an 
engine-house  was  built  and  the  engine  connect¬ 
ed  by  shafts  with  the  looms  in  the  cottages.  In  all 
cases  the  power  was  hired  at  so  much  per  loom. 
The  rent  was  payable  weekly,  whether  the 
looms  worked  or  not.  Each  cottage  held  from 
two  to  six  looms;  some  belonged  to  the  weaver, 
some  were  bought  on  credit,  and  some  were 
hired.  The  struggle  between  these  cottage  fac¬ 
tories  and  the  factory  proper  lasted  over  twelve 
years.  It  ended  with  the  complete  ruin  of  the 
three  hundred  cottage  factories.3  Wherever  the 
nature  of  the  process  did  not  involve  production 
on  a  large  scale,  the  new  industries  that  have 
sprung  up  in  the  last  few  decades,  such  as  en¬ 
velope  making,  steel-pen  making,  etc.,  have,  as 
a  general  rule,  first  passed  through  the  handi¬ 
craft  stage,  and  then  the  manufacturing  stage, 
as  short  phases  of  transition  to  the  factory 
stage.  The  transition  is  very  difficult  in  those 
cases  where  the  production  of  the  article  by 
manufacture  consists,  not  of  a  series  of  gradu¬ 
ated  processes,  but  of  a  great  number  of  discon¬ 
nected  ones.  This  circumstance  formed  a  great 
hindrance  to  the  establishment  ofsteeJ-pcn  fac¬ 
tories.  Nevertheless,  about  fifteen  years  ago,  a 
machine  was  invented  that  automatically  per¬ 
formed  six  separate  operations  at  once.  The  first 
steel  pens  were  supplied  by  the  handicraft  sys¬ 
tem,  in  the  year  1820,  at  £7  4J.  the  gross;  in 
1830,  they  were  supplied  by  manufacture  at  8j., 
and  today  the  factory  system  supplies  them  to 
the  trade  at  from  2 s.  to  6 d.  the  gross.4 

b.  Reaction  of  the  Factory  System  on  Manufac¬ 
ture  and  Domestic  Industries 
Along  with  the  development  of  the  factory 
system  and  of  the  revolution  in  agriculture  that 
accompanies  it,  production  in  all  the  other 

2  In  the  United  States,  the  restoration  in  this  way  of 
handicrafts  based  on  machinery  is  frequent;  and  therefore, 
when  the  inevitable  transition  to  the  factory  system  shall 
take  place,  the  ensuing  concentration  will,  compared  with 
Europie  and  even  with  England,  stride  on  ill  seven-league 
boots. 

*  See  Reports  oj  Ins  pec  tors  of  Factories,^  istOct.,i  865^.64. 

4  Mr.  Gillott  erected  in  Birmingham  the  first  steel-pen 
factory  on  a  large  scale.  It  produced,  so  early  as  1851,  over 
180,000,000  pens  yearly,  and  consumed  120  tons  of  steel. 
Birmingham  has  the  monopoly  of  this  industry  in  the 
United  Kingdom,  and  at  present  produces  thousands  of 
millions  of  steel  p»ens.  According  to  the  census  of  1861,  the 
number  of  persons  employed  was  1428,  of  whom  1268 
were  females  from  five  years  of  age  upwards. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


branches  of  industry  not  only  extends  but  alters 
its  character.  The  principle,  carried  out  in  the 
factory  system,  of  analysing  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction  into  its  constituent  phases,  and  of  solv¬ 
ing  the  problems  thus  proposed  by  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  mechanics,  of  chemistry,  and  of  the 
whole  range  of  the  natural  sciences,  becomes 
the  determining  principle  everywhere.  Hence, 
machinery  squeezes  itself  into  the  manufactur¬ 
ing  industries  first  for  one  detail  process,  then 
for  another.  Thus  the  solid  crystal  of  their  or¬ 
ganization,  based  on  the  old  division  of  labour, 
becomes  dissolved  and  makes  way  for  constant 
changes.  Independently  of  this,  a  radical 
change  takes  place  in  the  composition  of  the 
collective  labourer,  a  change  of  the  persons 
working  in  combination.  In  contrast  with  the 
manufacturing  period,  the  division  of  labour  is 
thenceforth  based,  wherever  possible,  on  the 
employment  of  women,  of  children  of  all  ages, 
and  of  unskilled  labourers — in  one  word,  on 
cheap  labour,  as  it  is  characteristically  called  in 
Kngland.  This  «s  r! '  rase  not  only  with  all  pro¬ 
duction  on  a  large  scale,  whether  employing 
machinery  or  not,  but  also  with  the  so-called 
domestic  industry,  whether  carried  on  in  the 
houses  of  the  workpeople  or  in  small  workshops. 
This  modern  so-called  domestic  industry  has 
nothing  except  the  name  in  common  with  the 
old-fashioned  domestic  industry,  the  existence 
of  which  presupposes  independent  urban  handi¬ 
crafts,  independent  peasant  farming,  and, 
above  all,  a  dwelling-house  for  the  labourer  and 
his  family.  That  old-fashioned  industry  has 
now  been  converted  into  an  outside  department 
of  the  factory,  the  manufactory,  or  the  ware¬ 
house.  Besides  the  factory  operatives,  the  man¬ 
ufacturing  workmen,  and  the  handicraftsmen, 
whom  it  concentrates  in  large  masses  at  one 
spot  and  directly  commands,  capital  also  sets 
in  motion,  by  means  of  invisible  threads,  anoth¬ 
er  army  consisting  of  the  workers  in  the  domes¬ 
tic  industries,  who  dwell  in  the  large  towns  and 
arc  also  scattered  over  the  face  of  the  country. 
An  example:  The  shirt  factory  of  Messrs.  Tillie 
at  Londonderry,  which  employs  1000  opera¬ 
tives  in  the  factory  itself,  and  9000  people 
spread  up  and  down  the  country  and  working 
in  their  own  houses.1 

The  exploitation  of  cheap  and  immature  la¬ 
bour-power  is  carried  out  in  a  more  shameless 
manner  in  modern  manufacture  than  in  the  fac¬ 
tory  proper.  This  is  because  the  technical  foun¬ 
dation  of  the  factory  system  (namely,  the  sub- 

1  Children's  Employment  Commission ,  Second  Report , 
1864,  P*  lxviii,  note  415. 


227 

stitution  of  machines  for  muscular  power,  and 
the  light  character  of  the  labour)  is  almost  en¬ 
tirely  absent  in  manufacture,  and  at  the  same 
time  women  and  over-young  children  are  sub¬ 
jected,  in  a  most  unconscionable  way,  to  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  poisonous  or  injurious  substances. 
This  exploitation  is  more  shameless  in  the  so- 
called  domestic  industry  than  in  manufactures, 
and  that  because  the  power  of  resistance  in  the 
labourers  decreases  with  their  dissemination; 
because  a  whole  series  of  plundering  parasites 
insinuate  themselves  between  the  employer 
and  the  workman;  because  a  domestic  industry 
has  always  to  compete  either  with  the  factory 
system  or  with  manufacturing  in  the  same 
branch  of  production ;  because  poverty  robs  the 
workman  of  the  conditions  most  essential  to  his 
labour,  of  space,  light  and  ventilation;  because 
employment  becomes  more  and  more  irregular; 
and,  finally,  because  in  these  the  last  resorts  of 
the  masses  made  “redundant”  by  modern  in¬ 
dustry  and  agriculture,  competition  for  work 
attains  its  maximum.  Economy  in  the  means  of 
production,  first  systematically  carried  out  in 
the  factory  system,  and  there,  from  the  very  be- 
ginning,  coincident  with  the  most  reckless 
squandering  of  labour-power,  and  robbery  of 
the  conditions  normally  requisite  for  labour — 
this  economy  now  shows  its  antagonistic  and 
murderous  side  more  and  more  in  a  given 
branch  of  industry,  the  less  the  social  produc¬ 
tive  power  of  labour  and  the  technical  basis  for 
a  combination  of  processes  are  developed  in 
that  branch. 

c.  Modern  Manufacture 

I  now  proceed  by  a  few  examples  to  illustrate 
the  principles  laid  down  above.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  reader  is  already  familiar  with  numer¬ 
ous  instances  given  in  the  chapter  on  the  work¬ 
ing  day.  In  the  hardware  manufactures  of  Bir¬ 
mingham  and  the  neighbourhood,  there  are  em¬ 
ployed,  mostly  in  very  heavy  work,  30,000 chil¬ 
dren  and  young  persons,  besides  10,000  women. 
There  they  are  to  be  seen  in  the  unwholesome 
brass-foundries,  button  factories,  enamelling, 
galvanizing,  and  lacquering  works.2  Owing  to 
the  excessive  labour  of  their  workpeople,  both 
adult  and  non-adult,  certain  London  houses 
where  newspapers  and  books  are  printed  have 
got  the  ill-omened  name  of  “slaughter¬ 
houses.”8  Similar  excesses  are  practised  in  book- 

*  And  now,  forsooth,  children  are  employed  at  file-cut- 
ting  in  Sheffield. 

*  Children's  Employment  Commission ,  Fifth  Report ,  1866, 
p.  3,  note  24;  p.  6,  notes  55,  56;  p.  7,  notes  59, 60. 


228  CAPITAL 


binding,  where  the  victims  are  chiefly  women, 
girls,  and  children;  young  persons  have  to  do 
heavy  work  in  rope-walks  and  night  work  in 
salt  mines,  candle  manufactories,  and  chemical 
works;  young  people  are  worked  to  death  at 
turning  the  looms  in  silk- weaving,  when  it  is  not 
carried  on  by  machinery.1  One  of  the  most 
shameful,  the  most  dirty,  and  the  worst  paid 
kinds  of  labour,  and  one  on  which  women  and 
young  girls  are  by  preference  employed,  is  the 
sorting  of  rags.  It  is  well  known  that  Great 
Britain,  apart  from  its  own  immense  store  of 
rags,  is  the  emporium  for  the  rag  trade  of  the 
whole  world.  They  flow  in  from  Japan,  from  the 
most  remote  States  of  South  America,  and  from 
the  Canary  Islands.  But  the  chief  sources  of 
their  supply  are  Germany,  France,  Russia, 
Italy,  Egypt,  Turkey,  Belgium,  and  Holland. 
They  are  used  for  manure,  for  making  bed- 
flocks,  for  shoddy,  and  they  serve  as  the  raw 
material  of  paper.  The  rag-sorters  are  the  medi¬ 
um  for  the  spread  of  smallpox  and  other  infec¬ 
tious  diseases,  and  they  themselves  are  the  first 
victims.5  A  classical  example  of  overwork,  of 
hard  and  inappropriate  lahour,  and  of  its  bru¬ 
talizing  effects  on  the  workman  from  his  child¬ 
hood  upwards,  is  afforded  not  only  by  coal-min¬ 
ing  and  miners  generally,  but  also  by  tile  and 
brick  making,  in  which  industry  the  recently 
invented  machinery  is,  in  England,  used  only 
here  and  there.  Between  May  and  September, 
the  work  lasts  from  5  in  the  morning  till  8  in  the 
evening,  and,  where  the  drying  is  done  in  the 
open  air,  it  often  lasts  from  4  in*  the  morning  till 
9  in  the  evening.  Work  from  5  in  the  morning 
till  7  in  the  evening  is  considered  “reduced”  and 
“moderate.”  Both  boys  and  girls  of  six  and  even 
of  four  years  of  age  are  employed.  They  work  for 
the  same  number  of  hours,  often  longer,  than 
the  adults.  The  work  is  hard,  and  the  summer 
heat  increases  the  exhaustion.  In  a  certain  tile 
field  at  Mosley,  e.g.,  a  young  woman,  twenty- 
four  years  of  age,  was  in  the  habit  of  making 
2000  tiles  a  day,  with  the  assistance  of  two  little 
girls,  who  carried  the  clay  for  her,  and  stacked 
the  tiles.  These  girls  carried  daily  10  tons*ip  the 
slippery  sides  of  the  clay  pits,  from  a  depth  of 
30  feet,  and  then  for  a  distance  of  210  feet.  “It 
is  impossible  for  a  child  to  pass  through  the  pur¬ 
gatory  of  a  tile-field  without  great  moral  degra¬ 
dation.  . . .  The  low  language,  which  they  arc 

1  Op.  cit .,  pp.  1 14,  x  1 5,  notes  6, 7.  The  commissioner  just¬ 
ly  remarks  that  though  as  a  rule  machines  take  the  place 
of  men,  here  literally  young  persons  replace  machines. 

*  See  the  report  on  the  rag  trade  with  numerous  details  in 
Eighth  Report  on  PuUic  Health ,  London,  1866,  appendix, 
pp.  196, 208. 


accustomed  to  hear  from  their  tenderest  years, 
the  filthy,  indecent,  and  shameless  habits, 
amidst  which,  unknowing,  and  half  wild,  they 
grow  up,  make  them  in  after-life  lawless,  aban¬ 
doned,  dissolute. ...  A  frightful  source  of  de¬ 
moralization  is  the  mode  of  living.  Each  mould¬ 
er,  who  is  always  a  skilled  labourer  and  the  chief 
of  a  group,  supplies  his  seven  subordinates  with 
board  and  lodging  in  his  cottage.  Whether 
members  of  his  family  or  not,  the  men,  boys, 
and  girls  all  sleep  in  the  cottage,  which  contains 
generally  two,  exceptionally,  three  rooms,  all  on 
the  ground  floor  and  badly  ventilated.  These 
people  are  so  exhausted  after  the  day’s  hard 
work,  that  neither  the  rules  of  health,  of  clean¬ 
liness,  nor  of  decency  arc  in  the  least  observed. 
Many  of  these  cottages  are  models  of  untidi¬ 
ness,  dirt,  and  dust.  . .  .  The  greatest  evil  of  the 
system  that  employs  young  girls  on  this  sort  of 
work  consists  in  this,  that,  as  a  rule,  it  chains 
them  fast  from  childhood  for  the  whole  of  their 
after-life  to  the  most  abandoned  rabble.  They 
become  rough,  foul-mouthed  boys,  before  Na¬ 
ture  has  taught  them  that  they  are  women. 
Clothed  in  a  few  dirty  rags,  the  legs  naked  far 
above  the  knees,  hair  and  face  besmeared  with 
dirt,  they  learn  to  treat  all  feelings  of  decency 
and  of  shame  with  contempt.  During  meal¬ 
times  they  lie  at  full  length  in  the  fields,  or 
watch  the  boys  bathing  in  a  neighbouring  canal. 
Their  heavy  day’s  work  at  length  completed, 
they  put  on  better  clothes,  and  accompany  the 
men  to  the  public  houses.”  That  excessive  in¬ 
sobriety  is  prevalent  from  childhood  upwards 
among  the  whole  of  this  class  is  only  natural. 
“The  worst  is  that  the  brickmakers  despair  of 
themselves.  ‘You  might  as  well,’  said  one  of  the 
better  kind  to  a  chaplain  of  Southallfield,  ‘try 
to  raise  and  improve  the  devil  as  a  brickie, 
sir!”’8 

As  to  the  manner  in  which  capital  effects  an 
economy  in  the  requisites  of  labour  in  modern 
manufacture  (in  which  I  include  all  workshops 
of  larger  size,  except  factories  proper),  official 
and  most  ample  material  bearing  on  it  is  to  be 
found  in  the  Public  Health  Reports,  Fourth  Re¬ 
port  (1863)  and  Sixth  Report  (1864).  The  de¬ 
scription  of  the  workshops,  mofe  especially 
those  of  the  I^ondon  printers  and  tailors,  sur¬ 
passes  the  most  loathsome  phantasies  of  our  ro¬ 
mance  writers.  The  effect  on  the  health  of  the 
workpeople  is  self-evident.  Dr.  Simon,  the  chief 
medical  officer  of  the  Privy  Council  and  the  offi- 

*  Children's  Employment  Commission,  Fifth  Report,  1866, 
xvi,  notes  96,  97;  and  p.  130,  notes  39,  61.  See  also  Third 
Report,  1864,  pp.  48,  56. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY  229 


cial  editor  of  the  Public  Health  Reports ,  says: 
“In  my  Fourth  Report  (1863),  I  showed  how  it 
is  practically  impossible  for  the  workpeople  to 
insist  upon  that  which  is  their  first  sanitary 
right,  viz.,  the  right  that,  no  matter  what  the 
work  for  which  their  employer  brings  them  to¬ 
gether,  the  labour,  so  far  as  it  depends  upon 
him,  should  be  freed  from  all  avoidably  un¬ 
wholesome  conditions.  I  pointed  out  that  while 
the  workpeople  are  practically  incapable  of  do¬ 
ing  themselves  this  sanitary  justice,  they  are 
unable  to  obtain  any  effective  support  from  the 
paid  administrations  of  the  sanitary  police.  .  . . 
The  life  of  myriads  of  workmen  and  workwom¬ 
en  is  now  uselessly  tortured  and  shortened  by 
the  never-ending  physical  suffering  that  their 
mere  occupation  begets.*' 1  In  illustration  of  the 
way  in  which  the  workrooms  influence  the  state 
of  health,  Dr.  Simon  gives  the  following  table 
of  mortality.2 


Number  of 

Persons  of  Death-rate  per  100,000 

all  Ages  Men  in  the  Respective 

Employed  Industries  between 

in  the  Industries  the  Stated  Ages 

Respective  compared  as  Age  Age  Age 
Industries  regards  Health  25-35  35-45  45  55 


958,265 


22,301  men 
12,379  women 
i3>8°3 


Agriculture  in 
England  and 

Wales  743  805  1,145 

London  tailors  958  1,262  2,093 

Ixmdon  printers  894  1,747  2,367 


d.  Modern  Domestic  Industry 

I  now  come  to  the  so-called  domestic  indus¬ 
try.  In  order  to  get  an  idea  of  the  horrors  of  this 
sphere,  in  which  capital  conducts  its  exploita¬ 
tion  in  the  background  of  modern  mechanical 
industry,  one  must  go  to  the  apparently  quite 
idyllic  trade  of  nail-making,3  carried  on  in  a  few 
remote  villages  of  England.  In  this  place,  how- 

1  Public  Healthy  Sixth  Report,  London,  1864,  p.  31. 

2  Op.  cit.,  p.  30. — Dr.  Simon  remarks  that  the  mortality 
among  the  London  tailors  and  printers  between  the  ages 
of  25  and  35  is  in  fact  much  greater,  because  the  employers 
\n  London  obtain  from  the  country  a  great  number  of 
young  people  up  to  30  years  of  age,  as  “apprentices”  and 
“improvers,”  who  come  for  the  purpose  of  being  perfected 
in  their  trade.  These  figure  in  the  census  as  Londoners; 
they  swell  out  the  number  of  heads  on  which  the  London 
death-rate  is  calculated,  without  adding  proportionally  to 
th  number  of  deaths  in  that  place.  The  greater  part  of 
them  in  fact  return  to  the  country,  and  especially  in  cases 
of  severe  illness. 

1 1  allude  here  to  hammered  nails,  as  distinguished  from 
nails  cut  out  and  made  by  machinery.  See  Children  s  Em¬ 
ployment  Commission,  Third  Report,  p.  xi;  p.  xix,  notes 
125-X30,  p.  53,  note  1 1 ;  p.  1 14,  note  487;  p.  137,  note  674. 


ever,  it  will  be  enough  to  give  a  few  examples 
from  those  branches  of  the  lace-making  and 
straw-plaiting  industries  that  are  not  yet  car¬ 
ried  on  by  the  aid  of  machinery  and  that  as  yet 
do  not  compete  with  branches  carried  on  in  fac¬ 
tories  or  in  manufactories. 

Of  the  1 50,000  persons  employed  in  England 
in  the  production  of  lace,  about  10,000  fall  un¬ 
der  the  authority  of  the  Factory  Act,  1861.  Al¬ 
most  the  whole  of  the  remaining  140,000  are 
women,  young  persons,  and  children  of  both 
sexes,  the  male  sex,  however,  being  weakly  rep¬ 
resented.  The  state  of  health  of  this  cheap  ma¬ 
terial  for  exploitation  will  be  seen  from  the  fol¬ 
lowing  table,  computed  by  Dr.  Trueman,  phy¬ 
sician  to  the  Nottingham  General  Dispensary. 
Out  of  686  female  patients  who  were  lace- 
makers,  most  of  them  between  the  ages  of  17 
and  24,  the  number  of  consumptive  ones  were: 

1852— 1  in  45  1855—1  in  18  1859—1  in  9 

1853— 1  in  28  1856—1  in  15  i860— 1  in  8 

1 8^4 —  1  in  17  1857—1  in  13  1861 — 1  in  84 

1858—1  in  15 

This  progress  in  the  rate  of  consumption 
ought  to  suffice  for  the  most  optimistic  of  pro¬ 
gressives  and  even  the  biggest  hawker  of  lies 
among  the  Free  Trade  bagmen  of  Germany. 

The  Factory  Act  of  1861  regulates  the  actual 
making  of  the  lace  so  far  as  it  is  done  by  machin¬ 
ery,  and  this  is  the  rule  in  England.  The 
branches  that  we  are  now  about  to  examine, 
solely  with  regard  to  those  of  the  workpeople 
who  work  at  home,  and  not  those  who  work  in 
manufactories  or  warehouses,  fall  into  two  divi¬ 
sions:  viz.  (1)  finishing;  (2)  mending.  The  for¬ 
mer  gives  the  finishing  touches  to  the  machine- 
made  lace,  and  includes  numerous  sub-divi¬ 
sions. 

The  lace  finishing  is  done  either  in  what  are 
called  “mistresses'  houses,**  or  by  women  in 
their  own  houses,  with  or  without  the  help  of 
their  children.  The  women  who  keep  the  “mis¬ 
tresses'  houses'*  are  themselves  poor.  The  work¬ 
room  is  in  a  private  house.  The  mistresses  take 
orders  from  manufacturers,  or  from  warehouse¬ 
men,  and  employ  as  many  women,  girls,  and 
young  children  as  the  size  of  their  rooms  and  the 
fluctuating  demand  of  the  business  will  allow. 
The  number  of  the  workwomen  employed  in 
these  workrooms  varies  from  twenty  to  forty  in 
some,  and  from  ten  to  twenty  in  others.  The 
average  age  at  which  the  children  commence 
work  is  six  years,  but  in  many  cases  it  is  below 
five.  The  usual  working  hours  are  from  8  in  the 

4  Ibid.,  Second  Report,  p.  xxii,  note  166. 


CAPITAL 


230 

morning  till  8  in  the  evening,  with  hours  for 

meals,  which  are  taken  at  irregular  intervals, 
and  often  in  the  foul  workrooms.  When  busi¬ 
ness  is  brisk,  the  labour  frequently  lasts  from  8 
or  even  6  o’clock  in  the  morning  till  io,  1 1 ,  or  1 2 
o’clock  at  night.  In  English  barracks,  the  regu¬ 
lation  space  allotted  to  each  soldier  is  500-600 
cubic  feet,  and  in  the  military  hospitals  1200 
cubic  feet.  But  in  those  finishing  styes  there  are 
but  67  to  100  cubic  feet  to  each  person.  At  the 
same  time  the  oxygen  of  the  air  is  consumed  by 
gas-lights.  In  order  to  keep  the  lace  clean,  and 
although  the  floor  is  tiled  or  flagged,  the  chil¬ 
dren  are  often  compelled,  even  in  winter,  to  puli 
off  their  shoes.  “It  is  not  at  all  uncommon  in 
Nottingham  to  find  14  to  20  children  huddled 
together  in  a  small  room,  of,  perhaps,  not  more 
than  1 2  feet  square,  and  employed  for  1 5  hours 
out  of  the  24  at  work  that  of  itself  is  exhausting, 
from  its  weariness  and  monotony,  and  is  be¬ 
sides  carried  on  under  every  possible  unwhole¬ 
some  condition.  .  .  .  Even  the  very  youngest 
children  work  with  a  strained  attention  and  a 
rapidity  that  is  astonishing,  hardly  ever  giving 
their  fingers  rest  or  slackening  their  motion.  If  a 
question  be  asked  them,  they  never  raise  their 
eyes  from  their  work  from  fear  of  losing  a  single 
moment.”  The  “long  stick”  is  used  by  the  mis¬ 
tresses  as  a  stimulant  more  and  more  as  the 
working  hours  are  prolonged.  “The  children 
gradually  tire  and  become  as  restless  as  birds 
towards  the  end  of  their  long  detention  at  an 
occupation  that  is  monotonous,  eye-straining, 
and  exhausting  from  the  uniformity  in  the  pos¬ 
ture  of  the  body.  Their  work  is  like  slavery.”1 
When  women  and  their  children  work  at  home, 
which  nowadays  means  in  a  hired  room,  often 
in  a  garret,  the  state  of  things  is,  if  possible,  still 
worse.  This  sort  of  work  is  given  out  within  a 
circle  of  eight  miles  radius  from  Nottingham. 
On  leaving  the  warehouses  at  9  or  10  o’clock  at 
night,  the  children  are  often  given  a  bundle  of 
lace  to  take  home  with  them  and  finish.  The 
Pharisee  of  a  capitalist,  represented  by  one  of 
his  servants,  accompanies  this  action,  of  course, 
with  the  unctuous  phrase.  “That’s  for  mother,” 
yet  he  knows  well  enough  that  the  poor  children 
must  sit  up  and  help.2 

Pillow  lacemaking  is  chiefly  carried  on  in 
England  in  two  agricultural  districts;  one,  the 
Honiton  lace  district,  extending  from  twenty  to 
thirty  miles  along  the  south  coast  of  Devon¬ 
shire,  and  including  a  few  places  in  North  De¬ 
von;  the  other  comprising  a  great  part  of  the 
counties  of  Buckingham,  Bedford,  and  North- 

1  Ibid.,  pp.  xix,  xx,  xxi.  2  Ibid.,  pp.  xxi,  xxvi. 


ampton,  and  also  the  adjoining  portions  of  Ox¬ 
fordshire  and  Huntingdonshire.  The  cottages 
of  the  agricultural  labourers  are  the  places 
where  the  work  is  usually  carried  on.  Many 
manufacturers  employ  upwards  of  three  thou¬ 
sand  of  these  lacemakers,  who  are  chiefly  chil¬ 
dren  and  young  persons  of  the  female  sex  ex¬ 
clusively.  The  state  of  things  described  as  inci¬ 
dental  to  lace  finishing  is  here  repeated,  save 
that  instead  of  the  “mistresses’  houses,”  we  find 
what  are  called  “lace-schools,”  kept  by  poor 
women  in  their  cottages.  From  their  fifth  year, 
and  often  earlier,  until  their  twelfth  or  fifteenth 
year,  the  children  work  in  these  schools;  during 
the  first  year  the  very  young  ones  work  from 
four  to  eight  hours,  and  later  on,  from  six  in  the 
morning  till  eight  and  ten  o’clock  at  night.  “The 
rooms  are  generally  the  ordinary  living  rooms 
of  small  cottages,  the  chimney  stopped  up  to 
keep  out  draughts,  the  inmates  kept  warm  by 
their  own  animal  heat  alone,  and  this  frequent¬ 
ly  in  winter.  In  other  cases,  these  so-called 
school-rooms  are  like  small  store-rooms  with¬ 
out  fire-places. . . .  The  overcrowding  in  these 
dens  and  the  consequent  vitiation  of  the  air  are 
often  extreme.  Added  to  this  is  the  injurious  ef¬ 
fect  of  drains,  privies,  decomposing  substances, 
and  other  filth  usual  in  the  purlieus  of  the  small¬ 
er  cottages.”  With  regard  to  space:  “In  one  lace- 
school  18  girls  and  a  mistress,  3£  cubic  feet  to 
each  person;  in  another,  where  the  smell  was  un¬ 
bearable,  18  persons  and  24*2'  cubic  feet  per 
head.  In  this  industry  are  to  be  found  employed 
children  of  2  and  2X4  years.”3 

W'hcre  lacemaking  ends  in  the  counties  of 
Buckingham  and  Bedford,  straw-plaiting  be¬ 
gins,  and  extends  over  a  large  part  of  Hertford¬ 
shire  and  the  westerly  and  northerly  parts  of 
Essex.  In  1861,  there  were  40,043  persons  em¬ 
ployed  in  straw-plaiting  and  straw-hat  making; 
of  these,  3815  were  males  of  all  ages;  the  rest 
females,  of  whom  14,913,  including  about  7000 
children,  were  under  twenty  years  of  age.  In  the 
place  of  the  lace-schools  we  find  here  the 
“straw-plait  schools.”  The  children  commence 
their  instruction  in  straw-plaiting  generally  in 
their  fourth,  often  between  their  third  and 
fourth  year.  Education,  of  course,  they  get 
none.  The  children  themselves  call  the  elemen¬ 
tary  schools,  “natural  schools,”  to  distinguish 
them  from  these  blood-sucking  institutions,  in 
which  they  are  kept  at  work  simply  to  get 
through  the  task,  generally  30  yards  daily,  pre¬ 
scribed  by  their  half-starved  mothers.  These 
same  mothers  often  make  them  work  at  home. 

1  Ibid.,  pp.  xxix,  xxx. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


after  school  is  over,  til!  io,  1 1,  and  12  o’clock  at 
night.  The  straw  cuts  their  mouths,  with  which 
they  constantly  moisten  it,  and  their  fingers. 
l)r.  Ballard  gives  it  as  the  general  opinion  of  the 
whole  body  of  medical  officers  in  London,  that 
300  cubic  feet  is  the  minimum  space  proper  for 
each  person  in  a  bedroom  or  workroom.  But 
in  the  straw-plait  schools,  space  is  more  spar¬ 
ingly  allotted  than  in  the  lace-schools,  “12^, 
17,  18  li  and  below  22  cubic  feet  for  each  per¬ 
son.**  The  smaller  of  these  numbers,  says  one  of 
the  commissioners,  Mr.  White,  represents  less 
space  than  the  half  of  what  a  child  would  oc¬ 
cupy  if  packed  in  a  box  measuring  3  feet  in  each 
direction.  Thus  do  the  children  enjoy  life  till  the 
age  of  twelve  or  fourteen.  The  wretched  half- 
starved  parents  think  of  nothing  but  getting  as 
much  as  possible  out  of  their  children.  The  lat¬ 
ter,  as  soon  as  they  are  grown  up,  do  not  care  a 
farthing,  and  naturally  so,  for  their  parents, 
and  leave  them.  “It  is  no  wonder  that  ignorance 
and  vice  abound  in  a  population  so  brought  up. 
.  .  .  Their  morn  Hi')  at  the  lowest  ebb.  ...  A 
great  number  of  the  women  have  illegitimate 
children,  and  that  at  such  an  immature  age  that 
even  those  most  conversant  with  criminal  sta¬ 
tistics  are  astounded.**1  And  the  native  land  of 
these  model  families  is  the  pattern  Christian 
country  for  Europe;  so  says  at  least  Count 
Montalembcrt,  certainly  a  competent  author¬ 
ity  on  Christianity! 

Wages  in  the  above  industries,  miserable  as 
they  are  (the  maximum  wages  of  a  child  in  the 
straw-plait  schools  rising  in  rare  cases  to  3  shil¬ 
lings),  are  reduced  far  below  their  nominal 
amount  by  the  prevalence  of  the  truck  system 
everywhere,  but  especially  in  the  lace  districts.2 

c.  Passage  of  Modern  Manufacture ,  and  Do?nes- 
tic  Industry  into  Modern  Mechanical  Indus¬ 
try.  The  Hastening  of  this  Revolution  by  the 
Application  of  the  Factory  Acts  to  those  Indus¬ 
tries 

The  cheapening  of  labour  power  by  sheer 
abuse  of  the  labour  of  women  and  children,  by 
sheer  robbery  of  every  normal  condition  requi¬ 
site  for  working  and  Jiving,  and  by  the  sheer 
brutality  of  overwork  and  night  work,  meets  at 
last  with  natural  obstacles  that  cannot  be  over¬ 
stepped.  So  also,  when  based  on  these  methods, 
dc.  the  cheapening  of  commodities  and  capital¬ 
ist  exploitation  in  general.  So  soon  as  this  point 
is  at  last  reached— and  it  takes  many  years — 
the  hour  has  struck  for  the  introduction  of  ma¬ 
chinery,  and  for  the  thenceforth  rapid  conver- 
1  Ibid.,  pp.  xl,  xli.  *  Ibid.,  First  Report ,  1 863,  p.  1 85. 


231 

sion  of  the  scattered  domestic  industries  and 
also  of  manufactures  into  factory  industries. 

An  example  of  this  movement  on  the  most 
colossal  scale  is  afforded  by  the  production  of 
wearing  apparel.  This  industry,  according  to 
the  classification  of  the  Children’s  Employment 
Commission,  comprises  straw-hat  makers,  la- 
dies*-hat  makers,  capmakers,  tailors,  milliners 
and  dressmakers,  shirtmakers,  corset-makers, 
glovemakcrs,  shoemakers,  besides  many  minor 
branches,  such  as  the  making  of  neckties,  col¬ 
lars,  etc.  In  1861,  the  number  of  females  em¬ 
ployed  in  these  industries  in  England  and  Wales 
amounted  to  586,299;  of  these  115,242  at  the 
least  were  under  twenty,  and  16,650  under  fif¬ 
teen  years  of  age.  The  number  of  these  work¬ 
women  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1861  was 
750,334.  The  number  of  males  employed  in 
England  and  Wales,  in  hatmaking,  shocmak- 
ing,  glovemakifig  and  tailoring  was  437,969;  of 
these  14,964  under  fifteen  years,  89,285  be¬ 
tween  fifteen  and  twenty,  and  333,117  over 
twenty  years.  Many  of  the  smaller  branches  are 
not  included  in  these  figures.  But  take  the  fig¬ 
ures  as  they  stand;  we  then  have  for  England 
and  W’ales  alone,  according  to  the  census  of 
1861,  a  total  of  1,024,277  persons,  about  as 
many  as  are  absorbed  by  agriculture  and  cattle 
breeding.  We  begin  to  understand  what  be¬ 
comes  of  the  immense  quantities  of  goods  con¬ 
jured  up  by  the  magic  of  machinery,  and  of  the 
enormous  masses  of  workpeople,  which  that 
machinery  sets  free. 

The  production  of  wearing  apparel  is  carried 
on  partly  in  manufactories  in  whose  workrooms 
there  is  but  a  reproduction  of  that  division  of 
labour,  the  membra  disjecta  of  which  were  found 
ready  to  hand;  partly  by  small  master-handi¬ 
craftsmen;  these,  however,  do  not,  as  formerly, 
work  for  individual  consumers,  but  for  manu¬ 
factories  and  warehouses,  and  to  such  an  extent 
that  often  whole  towns  and  stretches  of  country 
carry  on  certain  branches,  such  as  shoemaking, 
as  a  specialty;  finally,  on  a  very  great  scale  by 
the  so-called  domestic  workers,  who  form  an 
external  departmen  t  of  the  manu  factories,  ware¬ 
houses,  and  even  of  the  workshops  of  the 
smaller  masters.3 

The  raw  material,  etc.,  is  supplied  by  me¬ 
chanical  industry,  the  mass  of  cheap  human 
material  ( taillable  d  merei  et  misericorde 4)  is  com- 

*  In  England,  millinery  and  dressmaking  are  for  the  most 
part  carried  on,  on  the  premises  of  the  employer,  partly  by 
workwomen  who  live  there,  partly  by  women  who  live  off 
the  premises. 

4  Thrown  upon  pity  and  charity. 


CAPITAL 


232 

posed  of  the  individuals  "liberated”  by  me¬ 
chanical  industry  and  improved  agriculture. 
The  manufactures  of  this  class  owed  their  origin 
chiefly  to  the  capitalist’s  need  of  having  at  hand 
an  army  ready  equipped  to  meet  any  increase 
of  demand.1  These  manufactures,  nevertheless, 
allowed  the  scattered  handicrafts  and  domestic 
industries  to  continue  to  exist  as  a  broad  foun¬ 
dation.  The  great  production  of  surplus  value 
in  these  branches  of  labour,  and  the  progressive 
cheapening  of  their  articles,  were  and  are  chief¬ 
ly  due  to  the  minimum  wages  paid,  no  more 
than  requisite  for  a  miserable  vegetation,  and 
to  the  extension  of  working  time  up  to  the  max¬ 
imum  endurable  by  the  human  organism.  It 
was  in  fact  by  the  cheapness  of  the  human  sweat 
and  the  human  blood,  which  were  converted  in¬ 
to  commodities,  that  the  markets  were  con¬ 
stantly  being  extended,  and  continue  daily  to 
be  extended;  more  especially  was  this  the  case 
with  England’s  colonial  markets,  where,  be¬ 
sides,  English  tastes  and  habits  prevail.  At  last 
the  critical  point  was  reached.  The  basis  of  the 
old  method,  sheer  brutality  in  the  exploitation 
of  the  workpeople,  accompanied  more  or  less 
by  a  systematic  division  of  labour,  no  longer 
sufficed  for  the  extending  markets  and  for  the 
still  more  rapidly  extending  competition  of  the 
capitalists.  The  hour  struck  for  the  advent  of 
machinery.  The  decisively  revolutionary  ma¬ 
chine,  the  machine  which  attacks  in  an  equal 
degree  the  whole  of  the  numberless  branches  of 
this  sphere  of  production,  dressmaking,  tailor¬ 
ing,  shoemaking,  sewing,  hatmaking,  and  many 
others,  is  the  sewing  machine. 

Its  immediate  effect  on  the  workpeople  is  like 
that  of  all  machinery,  which,  since  the  rise  of 
modern  industry,  has  seized  upon  new  branches 
of  trade.  Children  of  too  tender  an  age  are  sent 
adrift.  The  wage  of  the  machine  hands  rises 
compared  with  that  of  the  house  workers,  many 
of  whom  belong  to  the  poorest  of  the  poor.  That 
of  the  better  situated  handicraftsmen,  with 
whom  the  machine  competes,  sinks.  The  new 
machine  hands  are  exclusively  girls  and  young 
women.  With  the  help  of  mechanical  force,  they 
destroy  the  monopoly  that  male  labour  had  of 
the  heavier  work,  and  they  drive  off  from  the 
lighter  work  numbers  of  old  women  and  very 
young  children.  The  overpowering  competition 
crushes  the  weakest  of  the  manual  labourers. 

1  Mr.  White,  a  commissioner,  visited  a  military  clothing 
manufactory  that  employed  1000  to  1200  persons,  almost 
all  females,  and  a  shoe  manufactory  with  1300  persons;  of 
these  nearly  one  half  were  children  and  young  persons. 


The  fearful  increase  in  death  from  starvation 
during  the  last  ten  years  in  London  runs  paral¬ 
lel  with  the  extension  of  machine  sewing.2  The 
new  workwomen  turn  the  machines  by  hand 
and  foot,  or  by  hand  alone,  sometimes  sitting, 
sometimes  standing,  according  to  the  weight, 
size,  and  special  make  of  the  machine,  and  ex¬ 
pend  a  great  deal  of  labour  power.  Their  occu¬ 
pation  is  unwholesome,  owing  to  the  long  hours, 
although  in  most  cases  they  are  not  so  long  as 
under  the  old  system.  Wherever  the  sewing  ma¬ 
chine  locates  itself  in  narrow  and  already  over¬ 
crowded  workrooms,  it  adds  to  the  unwhole¬ 
some  influences.  “The  effect,”  says  Mr.  Lord, 
“on  entering  low-ceiled  workrooms  in  which  30 
to  40  machine  hands  arc  working  is  unbearable. 

. . .  The  heat,  partly  due  to  the  gas  stoves  used 

for  warming  the  irons,  is  horrible . Even 

when  moderate  hours  of  work,  i.c.,  from  8  in  the 
morning  till  6  in  the  evening,  prevail  in  such 
places,  yet  3  or  4  persons  fall  into  a  swoon  regu¬ 
larly  every  day.”3 

The  revolution  in  the  industrial  methods 
which  is  the  necessary  result  of  the  revolution 
in  the  instruments  of  production,  is  effected  by 
a  medley  of  transition  forms.  These  forms  vary 
according  to  the  extent  to  which  the  sewing  ma¬ 
chine  has  become  prevalent  in  one  branch  of 
industry  or  the  other,  to  the  time  during  which 
it  has  been  in  operation,  to  the  previous  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  workpeople,  to  the^preponderance 
of  manufacture,  of  handicrafts  or  of  domestic 
industry,  to  the  rent  of  the  workrooms,  etc.4  In 
dressmaking,  for  instance,  where  the  labour  for 
the  most  part  was  already  organized,  chiefly  by 
simple  cooperation,  the  sewing  machine  at  first 
formed  merely  a  new  factor  in  that  manufactur¬ 
ing  industry.  In  tailoring,  shirtmaking,  shoe¬ 
making,  etc.,  all  the  forms  are  intermingled. 
Here  the  factory  system  proper.  There  middle¬ 
men  receive  the  raw  material  from  the  capitalist 
en  chef,  and  group  around  their  sewing  ma- 

2  An  instance.  The  weekly  report  of  deaths  by  the  Reg¬ 
istrar  General  dated  26th  Feb.,  1864,  contains  five  cases  of 
death  from  starvation.  On  the  same  day  The  Times  reports 
another  case.  Six  victims  of  starvation  in  one  week! 

s  Children  s  Employment  Commission ,  Second  Report , 
1864,  p.  Ixvii,  notes  406-9;  p.  84,  note  1^4;  p.  lxxiii,  note 
441;  p.  66,  note  6;  p.  84,  note  126;  p.  78,  note  85;  p.  76, 
note  69;  p.  Ixxii,  note  483. 

4  *'The  rental  of  premises  required  for  trorkrooms  seems 
the  element  which  ultimately  determines  the  point;  and 
consequently  it  is  in  the  metropolis  that  the  old  system  of 
giving  work  out  to  small  employers  and  families  has  been 
longest  retained,  and  earliest  returned  to.”  (Ihid,t  p.  83, 
now  123.)  The  concluding  statement  in  this  quotation  re¬ 
fers  exclusively  to  shoemaking. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


chines,  in  “chambers”  and  “garrets,”  from  io 
to  50  or  more  workwomen.  Finally,  as  is  always 
the  case  with  machinery  when  not  organized  in¬ 
to  a  system,  and  when  it  can  also  be  used  in 
dwarfish  proportions,  handicraftsmen  and  do¬ 
mestic  workers,  along  with  their  families,  or 
with  a  little  extra  labour  from  without,  make 
use  of  their  own  sewing  machines.1  The  system 
actually  prevalent  in  England  is  that  the  capi¬ 
talist  concentrates  a  large  number  of  machines 
on  his  premises  and  then  distributes  the  prod¬ 
uce  of  those  machines  for  further  manipula¬ 
tion  amongst  the  home  workers.2  The  variety 
of  the  transition  forms,  however,  does  not  con¬ 
ceal  the  tendency  to  conversion  into  the  factory 
system  proper.  This  tendency  is  nurtured  by 
the  very  nature  of  the  sewing  machine,  the 
manifold  uses  of  which  push  on  the  concentra¬ 
tion,  under  one  roof  and  one  management,  of 
previously  separated  branches  of  a  trade.  It  is 
also  favoured  by  the  circumstance  that  prepar¬ 
atory  needlework  and  certain  other  operations 
are  most  conveniently  done  on  the  premises 
where  the  maduiic  at  work;  as  well  as  by  the 
inevitable  expropriation  of  the  hand  sewers, 
and  of  the  domestic  workers  who  work  with 
their  own  machines.  This  fate  has  already  in 
part  overtaken  them.  The  constantly  increas¬ 
ing  amount  of  capital  invested  in  sewing  ma¬ 
chines3  gives  the  spur  to  the  production  of,  and 
gluts  the  markets  with,  machine-made  articles, 
thereby  giving  the  signal  to  the  domestic  work¬ 
ers  for  the  sale  of  their  machines.  The  overpro¬ 
duction  of  sewing  machines  themselves,  causes 
their  producers,  in  bad  want  of  a  sale,  to  let 
them  out  for  so  much  a  week,  thus  crushing  by 
their  deadly  competition  the  small  owners  of 
machines.4  Constant  changes  in  the  construc¬ 
tion  of  the  machines,  and  their  ever-increasing 
cheapness,  depreciate  day  by  day  the  older 
makes,  and  allow  of  their  being  sold  in  great 
numbers,  at  absurd  prices,  to  large  capitalists, 
who  alone  can  thus  employ  them  at  a  profit. 
Finally,  the  substitution  of  the  steam-engine 
for  man  gives  in  this,  as  in  all  similar  revolu¬ 
tions,  the  finishing  blow.  At  first,  the  use  of 
steam  power  meets  with  mere  technical  difficul¬ 
ties,  such  as  unsteadiness  in  the  machines,  diffi¬ 
culty  in  controlling  their  speed,  rapid  wear  and 

1  In  glovemaking  and  other  industries  where  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  workpeople  is  hardly  distinguishable  from  that 

f  paupers  this  does  not  occur 

2  Op.  cit.y  p.  2,  note  122. 

*  In  the  wholesale  boot  and  shoe  trade  of  Leicester  alone, 
there  were,  in  1864,  800  sewing  machines  already  in  use. 

4  Op.  cit.,  p.  84,  note  124. 


233 

tear  of  the  lighter  machines,  etc.,  all  of  which 
are  soon  overcome  by  experience.6  If,  on  the  one 
hand,  the  concentration  of  many  machines  in 
large  manufactories  leads  to  the  use  of  steam 
power,  on  the  other  hand,  the  competition  of 
steam  with  human  muscles  hastens  on  the  con¬ 
centration  of  workpeople  and  machines  in  large 
factories.  Thus  England  is  at  present  experienc¬ 
ing,  not  only  in  the  colossal  industry  of  making 
wearing  apparel,  but  in  most  of  the  other  trades 
mentioned  above,  the  conversion  of  manufac¬ 
ture,  of  handicrafts,  and  of  domestic  work  into 
the  factory  system,  after  each  of  those  forms  of 
production,  totally  changed  and  disorganized 
under  the  influence  of  modern  industry,  has 
long  ago  reproduced,  and  even  outdone,  all  the 
horrors  of  the  factory  system,  without  partici¬ 
pating  in  any  of  the  elements  of  social  progress 
it  contains.6 

This  industrial  revolution,  which  takes  place 
spontaneously,  is  artificially  helped  on  by  the 
extension  of  the  Factory  Acts  to  all  industries 
in  which  women,  young  persons  and  children 
are  employed.  The  compulsory  regulation  of 
the  working  day  as  regards  its  length,  pauses, 
beginning  and  end,  the  system  of  relays  of  chil¬ 
dren,  the  exclusion  of  all  children  under  a  certain 

age,  etc.,  necessitate  on  the  one  hand  more  ma¬ 
chinery7  and  the  substitution  of  steam  as  a  mo¬ 
tive  power  in  the  place  of  muscles.8  On  the  other 

6  Instances:  The  army  clothing  depot  at  Pimlico,  Lon¬ 
don,  the  shirt  factory  of  Tillie  and  Henderson  at  London¬ 
derry,  and  the  clothes  factory  of  Messrs.  Tait  at  Limerick 
which  employs  about  1200  hands. 

6  “Tendency  to  factory  system”  {op.  cit.t  p.  lxvii).  “The 
whole  employment  is  at  this  time  in  a  state  of  transition, 
and  is  undergoing  the  same  change  as  that  effected  in  the 
lace  trade,  weaving,  etc.”  {Op.  cit.y  note  40c.)  “A  complete 
revolution”  {Op.  cit.  p.  xlvi,  note  318).  At  the  date  of  the 
Children’s  Employment  Commission  of  1840,  stocking 
making  was  still  done  by  manual  labour.  Since  1846,  vari¬ 
ous  sorts  of  machines  have  been  introduced  which  are  now 
driven  by  steam.  The  total  number  of  persons  of  both  sexes 
and  of  all  ages  from  three  years  upwards,  employed  in 
stocking  making  in  England,  was  in  1862  about  129,000. 
Of  these  only  4063  were,  according  to  the  Parliamentary 
Return  of  the  nth  February,  1862,  working  under  the  Fac¬ 
tory  Acts. 

7  Thus,  for  example,  in  the  earthenware  trade,  Messrs. 
Cochrane,  of  the  Britain  Pottery,  Glasgow,  report:  “To 
keep  up  our  quantity  we  have  gone  extensively  into  ma¬ 
chines  wrought  by  unskilled  labour,  and  every  day  con¬ 
vinces  us  that  we  can  produce  a  greater  quantity  than  by 
the  old  method.”  {Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st 
Oct.,  1865,  p.  13.)  “The  effect  of  the  Factory  Acts  is  to 
force  on  the  further  introduction  of  machinery”  {Op.  cit., 

pp.  13-14). 

8  Thus,  after  the  extension  of  the  Factory  Acts  to  the 
potteries,  great  increase  of  power-jiggers  in  place  of  hand- 
moved  jiggers. 


CAPITAL 


234 

hand,  in  order  to  make  up  for  the  loss  of  time, 
an  expansion  occurs  of  the  means  of  production 
used  in  common,  of  the  furnaces,  buildings, 
etc.;  in  one  word,  greater  concentration  of  the 
means  of  production  and  a  correspondingly 
greater  concourse  of  workpeople.  The  chief  ob¬ 
jection,  repeatedly  and  passionately  urged  on 
behalf  of  each  manufacture  threatened  with  the 
Factory  Acts,  is  in  fact  this,  that  in  order  to  con¬ 
tinue  the  business  on  the  old  scale  a  greater  out¬ 
lay  of  capital  will  be  necessary.  But  as  regards 
labour  in  the  so-called  domestic  industries  and 
the  intermediate  forms  between  them  and  man¬ 
ufacture,  so  soon  as  limits  are  put  to  the  work¬ 
ing  day  and  to  the  employment  of  children 
those  industries  go  to  the  wall.  Unlimited  ex¬ 
ploitation  of  cheap  labour  power  is  the  sole 
foundation  of  their  power  to  compete. 

One  of  the  essential  conditions  for  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  factory  system,  especially  when  the 
length  of  the  working  day  is  fixed,  is  certainty 
in  the  result,  i.e.,  the  production  in  a  given  time 
of  a  given  quantity  of  commodities,  or  of  a  given 
useful  effect.  The  statutory  pauses  in  the  work¬ 
ing  day,  moreover,  imply  the  assumption  that 
periodical  and  sudden  cessation  of  the  work 
does  no  harm  to  the  article  undergoing  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  production.  This  certainty  in  the  result 
and  this  possibility  of  interrupting  the  work 
are,  of  course,  easier  to  attain  in  the  purely  me¬ 
chanical  industries  than  in  those  in  which  chem¬ 
ical  and  physical  processes  play  a  part;  as,  for 
instance,  in  the  earthenware  trade,  in  bleach¬ 
ing,  dyeing,  baking,  and  in  most  of  the  metal 
industries.  Wherever  there  is  a  working  day 
without  restriction  as  to  length,  wherever  there 
is  night  work  and  unrestricted  waste  of  human 
life,  there  the  slightest  obstacle  presented  by 
the  nature  of  the  work  to  a  change  for  the  better 
is  soon  looked  upon  as  an  everlasting  barrier 
erected  by  Nature.  No  poison  kills  vermin  with 
more  certainty  than  the  Factory  Act  removes 
such  everlasting  barriers.  No  one  made  a 
greater  outcry  over  “impossibilities”  than  our 
friends  the  earthenware  manufacturers.  In 
1864,  however,  they  were  brought  under  the 
Act,  and  within  sixteen  months  every  “impos¬ 
sibility”  had  vanished.  “The  improved  meth¬ 
od,”  called  forth  by  the  Act,  “of  making  slip  by 
pressure  instead  of  by  evaporation,  the  newly- 
constructed  stoves  for  drying  the  ware  in  its 
green  state,  etc.,  arc  each  events  of  great  im¬ 
portance  in  the  pottery  art,  and  mark  an  ad¬ 
vance  which  the  preceding  century  could  not 
rival. ...  It  has  even  considerably  reduced  the 


temperature  of  the  stoves  themselves,  with  a 
considerable  saving  of  fuel,  and  with  a  readier 
effect  on  the  ware.”1  In  spite  of  every  prophecy, 
the  cost  price  of  earthenware  did  not  rise,  but 
the  quantity  produced  did,  and  to  such  an  ex¬ 
tent  that  the  export  for  the  twelve  months  end¬ 
ing  December,  1865,  exceeded  in  value  by 
£138,628  the  average  of  the  preceding  three 
years.  In  the  manufacture  of  matches  it  was 
thought  to  be  an  indispensable  requirement 
that  boys,  even  while  bolting  their  dinner, 
should  go  on  dipping  the  matches  in  melted 
phosphorus,  the  poisonous  vapour  from  which 
rose  into  their  faces.  The  Factory  Act  (1864) 
made  the  saving  of  time  a  necessity,  and  so 
forced  into  existence  a  dipping  machine,  the  va¬ 
pour  from  which  could  not  come  in  contact  with 
the  workers.2  So,  at  the  present  time,  in  those 
branches  of  the  lace  manufacture  not  yet  sub¬ 
ject  to  the  Factory  Act,  it  is  maintained  that 
the  meal-times  cannot  be  regular  owing  to  the 
different  periods  required  by  the  various  kinds 
of  lace  for  drying,  which  periods  vary  from 
three  minutes  up  to  an  hour  and  more.  To  this 
the  Children’s  Employment  Commissioners 
answer:  “The  circumstances  of  this  case  are 
precisely  analogous  to  that  of  the  paper-stain¬ 
ers,  dealt  with  in  our  first  report.  Some  of  the 
principal  manufacturers  in  the  trade  urged  that 
in  consequence  of  the  nature  of  the  materials 
used,  and  their  various  process*#,  they  would  be 
unable,  without  serious  loss,  to  stop  for  meal¬ 
times  at  any  given  moment.  But  it  was  seen 
from  the  evidence  that,  by  due  care  and  previ¬ 
ous  arrangement,  the  apprehended  difficulty 
would  be  got  over;  and  accordingly,  by  clause  6 
of  section  6  of  the  Factory  Acts  Extension  Act, 
passed  during  this  session  of  Parliament,  an  in¬ 
terval  of  eighteen  months  is  given  to  them  from 
the  passing  of  the  Act  before  they  are  required 
to  conform  to  the  meal  hours  specified  by  the 
Factory  Acts.”3  Hardly  had  the  Act  been 
passed  when  our  friends  the  manufacturers 
found  out:  “The  inconveniences  we  expected  to 
arise  from  the  introduction  of  the  Factory  Acts 
into  our  branch  of  manufacture,  I  am  happy  to 
say,  have  not  arisen.  We  do  not  find  the  produc- 

1  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  Oct.,  1865,  pp. 
96  and  1 27. 

2 The  introduction  of  this  and  other  machinery  into 
matchmaking  caused  in  one  department  alone  230  young 
persons  to  be  replaced  by  32  boys  and  girls  of  14  to  17  years 
of  age.  This  saving  in  labour  was  carried  still  further,  in 
1865,  by  the  employment  of  steam  power. 

*  Children's  Employment  Commission ,  Second  Report 
1864,  p.  ix,  note  50. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


tion  at  all  interfered  with;  in  short,  we  produce 
more  in  the  same  time.”1  It  is  evident  that  the 
English  legislature,  which  certainly  no  one  will 
venture  to  reproach  with  being  overdosed  with 
genius,  has  been  led  by  experience  to  the  con¬ 
clusion  that  a  simple  compulsory  law  is  suffi¬ 
cient  to  enact  away  all  the  so-called  impedi¬ 
ments,  opposed  by  the  nature  of  the  process,  to 
the  restriction  and  regulation  of  the  work¬ 
ing  day.  Hence,  on  the  introduction  of  the  Fac¬ 
tory  Act  into  a  given  industry,  a  period  varying 
from  six  to  eighteen  months  is  fixed  within 
which  it  is  incumbent  on  the  manufacturers  to 
remove  all  technical  impediments  to  the  work¬ 
ing  of  the  Act.  Mirabcau's  “ Impossible !  tie  me 
dttes  jamais  ce  bite  de  mot!"2  is  particularly  ap¬ 
plicable  to  modern  technology.  But  though  the 
Factory  Acts  thus  artificially  ripen  the  material 
elements  necessary  for  the  conversion  of  the 
manufacturing  system  into  the  factory  system, 
yet  at  the  same  time,  owing  to  the  necessity 
they  impose  for  greater  outlay  of  capital,  they 
hasten  on  the  decline  of  the  small  masters,  and 
the  concentration  oi  capital.3 

Besides  the  purely  technical  impediments 
that  are  removable  by  technical  means,  the  ir¬ 
regular  habits  of  the  workpeople  themselves  ob¬ 
struct  the  regulation  of  the  hours  of  labour. 
This  is  especially  the  case  where  piece  wage  pre¬ 
dominates,  and  where  loss  of  time  in  one  part  of 
the  day  or  week  can  be  made  good  by  subse¬ 
quent  overtime,  or  by  night  work — a  process 
which  brutalizes  the  adult  workman,  and  ruins 
his  wife  and  children.4  Although  this  absence 

1  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  Oct.,  1 865,  p.  22. 

2  “Impossible?  Don’t  ever  mention  to  me  this  stupid 
word1’’ 

3  “Kut  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  those  improve¬ 
ments,  though  carried  out  fully  in  some  establishments, 
arc  by  no  means  general,  and  are  not  capable  of  being 
brought  into  use  in  many  of  the  old  manufactories  without 
an  expenditure  of  capital  beyond  the  means  of  many  of 
the  present  occupiers.”  “1  cannot  but  rejoice,”  writes  Sub- 
Inspector  May,  “that  notwithstanding  the  temporary  dis¬ 
organization  which  inevitably  follows  the  introduction  of 
such  a  measure  (as  the  Factory  Act  Extension  Act),  and 
is,  indeed,  directly  indicative  of  the  evils  which  it  was  in¬ 
tended  to  remedy,  etc.”— Ibid. 

4  With  blast  furnaces,  for  instance,  “work  towards  the 
•end  of  the  week  being  generally  much  increased  in  dura¬ 
tion  in  consequence  of  the  habit  of  the  men  of  idling  on 
Monday  and  occasionally  during  a  part  or  the  whole  of 
Tuesday  also.”  {Children  s  Employment  Commission ,  Third 
Report ,  p.  vi.)  “The  little  masters  generally  have  very  ir¬ 
regular  hours.  They  lose  two  or  three  days  ,  and  then  work 
ail  night  to  make  it  up. . . .  They  always  employ  their  own 
children,  if  they  have  any.”  (Ibid.t  p.  vii.)  “The  want  of 
regularity  in  coming  to  work,  encouraged  by  the  possibility 
and  practice  of  making  up  for  this  by  working  longer  hours.” 
(Ibid.s  p.  xviii.)  “In  Birmingham  ...  an  enormous 


235 

of  regularity  in  the  expenditure  of  labour  power 
is  a  natural  and  rude  reaction  against  the  te¬ 
dium  of  monotonous  drudgery,  it  originates, 
also,  to  a  much  greater  degree  from  anarchy  in 
production,  anarchy  that  in  its  turn  presup¬ 
poses  unbridled  exploitation  of  labour  power  by 
the  capitalist.  Besides  the  general  periodic 
changes  of  the  industrial  cycle,  and  the  special 
fluctuations  in  the  markets  to  which  each  indus¬ 
try  is  subject,  we  may  also  reckon  what  is  called 
“the  season,”  dependent  either  on  the  perio¬ 
dicity  of  favourable  seasons  of  the  year  for  nav¬ 
igation;  or  on  fashion,  and  the  sudden  placing 
of  large  orders  that  have  to  be  executed  in  the 
shortest  possible  time.  The  habit  of  giving  such 
orders  becomes  more  frequent  with  the  exten¬ 
sion  of  railways  and  telegraphs.  “The  extension 
of  the  railway  system  throughout  the  country 
has  tended  very  much  to  encourage  giving  short 
notice.  Purchasers  now  come  up  from  Glasgow, 
Manchester,  and  Edinburgh  once  every  fort¬ 
night  or  so  to  the  wholesale  city  warehouses 
which  we  supply,  and  give  small  orders  requir¬ 
ing  immediate  execution,  instead  of  buying 
from  stock  as  they  used  to  do.  Years  ago  we 
were  always  able  to  work  in  the  slack  times,  so 
as  to  meet  the  demand  of  the  next  season,  but 
now  no  one  can  say  beforehand  what  will  be  the 
demand  then.”5 

In  those  factories  and  manufactories  that  are 
not  yet  subject  to  the  Factory  Acts,  the  most 
fearful  overwork  prevails  periodically  during 
what  is  called  the  season,  in  consequence  of  sud¬ 
den  orders.  In  the  outside  department  of  the 
factory,  of  the  manufactory,  and  of  the  ware¬ 
house,  the  so-called  domestic  workers,  whose 
employment  is  at  the  best  irregular,  are  entirely 
dependent  for  their  raw  material  and  their  or¬ 
ders  on  the  caprice  of  the  capitalist,  who,  in  this 
industry,  is  not  hampered  by  any  regard  for  de¬ 
preciation  of  his  buildings  and  machinery,  and 
risks  nothing  by  a  stoppage  of  work  but  the 
skin  of  the  worker  himself.  Here,  then,  he  sets 
himself  systematically  to  work  to  form  an  in¬ 
dustrial  reserve  force  that  shall  be  ready  at  a 
moment’s  notice;  during  one  part  of  the  year 
he  decimates  this  force  by  the  most  inhuman 
toil,  during  the  other  part,  he  lets  it  starve  for 

amount  of  time  is  lost  .  . .  idling  part  of  the  time,  slaving 
the  rest.”  (. lbtd.>  p.  xi.) 

1  IbtJ.i  Fourth  Report ,  p.  xxxii— “The  extension  of  the 
railway  system  is  said  to  have  contributed  greatly  to  this 
custom  of  giving  sudden  orders,  and  the  consequent  hurry, 
neglect  of  mealtimes,  and  late  hours  of  the  workpeople.” 
— Ibid .,  p.  xxxi. 


CAPITAL 


236 

want  of  work.  “The  employers  avail  themselves 
of  the  habitual  irregularity  in  the  home  work, 
when  any  extra  work  is  wanted  at  a  push,  so 
that  the  work  goes  on  till  u,  and  12  p.m.  or  2 
a.m.,  or  as  the  usual  phrase  is,  'all  hours,’  and 
that  in  localities  where  'the  stench  is  enough  to 
knock  you  down,  you  go  to  the  door,  perhaps, 
and  open  it,  but  shudder  to  go  further.'  ”1€They 
are  curious  men,”  said  one  of  the  witnesses,  a 
shoemaker,  speaking  of  the  masters;  "they 
think  it  does  a  boy  no  harm  to  work  too  hard  for 
half  the  year,  if  he  is  nearly  idle  for  the  other 
half.”* 

In  the  same  way  as  technical  impediments, 
so,  too,  those  "usages  which  have  grown  with 
the  growth  of  trade”  were  and  still  are  pro¬ 
claimed  by  interested  capitalists  as  obstacles 
due  to  the  nature  of  the  work.  This  was  a  fa¬ 
vourite  cry  of  the  cotton  lords  at  the  time  they 
were  first  threatened  with  the  Factory  Acts. 
Although  their  industry  more  than  any  other 
depends  on  navigation,  yet  experience  has 
given  them  the  lie.  Since  then,  every  pretended 
obstruction  to  business  has  been  treated  by  the 
Factory  inspectors  as  a  mere  sham.8  The  thor¬ 
oughly  conscientious  investigations  of  the  Chil¬ 
dren's  Employment  Commission  prove  that  the 
effect  of  the  regulation  of  the  hours  of  work,  in 
some  industries,  was  to  spread  the  mass  of  la¬ 
bour  previously  employed  more  evenly  over  the 
whole  year;4  that  this  regulation  was  the  first 
rational  bridle  on  the  murderous,  meaningless 
caprices  of  fashion,5  caprices  that  consort  so 

1  Children  s  Employment  Commission ,  Fourth  Report , 
p.  xxxv,  notes  235, 237. 

1  Hid.,  p.  127,  note  56. 

*  "With  respect  to  the  loss  of  trade  by  non-completion 
of  shipping  orders  in  time,  I  remember  that  this  was  the 
pet  argument  of  the  factory  masters  in  1832  and  1833. 
Nothing  that  can  be  advanced  now  on  this  subject  could 
have  the  force  that  it  had  then,  before  steam  had  halved 
all  distances  and  established  new  regulations  for  transit. 
It  quite  failed  at  that  time  of  proof  when  put  to  the  test, 
and  again  it  will  certainly  fail  should  it  have  to  be  tried." 
— Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories,  31  Oct.,  1 862,  pp.  54, 55. 

4  Children's  Employment  Commission ,  Fourth  Report , 
p.xviii,  note  x  1 8. 

1  John  Belters  remarked,  as  far  back  as  1699:  "The  un¬ 
certainty  of  fashions  does  increase  necessitous  pqor.  It  has 
two  great  mischiefs  in  it.  First,  the  journeymen  are  miser¬ 
able  in  winter  for  want  of  work,  the  mercers  and  master 
weavers  not  daring  to  lay  out  their  stocks  to  keep  the 
journeymen  employed  before  the  spring  comes,  and  they 
know  what  the  fashion  will  then  be:  secondly,  in  the  spring 
the  journeymen  are  not  sufficient,  but  the  master-weavers 
must  draw  m  many  prentices,  that  they  may  supply  the 
trade  of  the  kingdom  in  a  quarter  or  half  a  year,  which 
robs  the  plough  of  hands,  drains  the  country  of  labourers, 
and  in  a  great  part  stocks  the  city  with  beggars,  and  starves 
some  in  winter  that  are  ashamed  to  beg."— Essays  about 
the  Poor ,  Manufactures,  etc.,  p.  9. 


badly  with  the  system  of  modern  industry;  that 
the  development  of  ocean  navigation  and  of  the 
means  of  communication  generally,  has  swept 
away  the  technical  basis  on  which  seasonal 
work  was  really  supported,®  and  that  all  other 
so-called  unconquerable  difficulties  vanish  be¬ 
fore  larger  buildings,  additional  machinery,  in¬ 
crease  in  the  number  of  workpeople  employed,7 
and  the  alterations  caused  by  all  these  in  the 
mode  of  conducting  the  wholesale  trade.8  But 
for  all  that,  capital  never  becomes  reconciled  to 
such  changes— and  this  is  admitted  over  and 
over  again  by  its  own  representatives — except 
"under  the  pressure  of  a  general  Act  of  Parlia¬ 
ment”9  for  the  compulsory  regulation  of  the 
hours  of  labour. 

9.  The  Factory  Acts .  Sanitary  and  Educational 

Clauses  of  the  same .  Their  general  Extension  in 

England 

Factory  legislation,  that  first  conscious  and 
methodical  reaction  of  society  against  the  spon¬ 
taneously  developed  form  of  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction,  is,  as  we  have  seen,  just  as  much  the 
necessary  product  of  modern  industry  as  cotton 
yarn,  self-actors,  and  the  electric  telegraph.  Be¬ 
fore  passing  to  the  consideration  of  the  exten¬ 
sion  of  that  legislation  in  England,  we  shall 
shortly  notice  certain  clauses  contained  in  the 
Factory  Acts,  and  not  relating  to  the  hours  of 
work. 

Apart  from  their  wording,  which  makes  it 
easy  for  the  capitalist  to  evade  them,  the  sani¬ 
tary  clauses  are  extremely  meagre,  and,  in  fact, 

8 Childrens  Employment  Commission,  Fifth  Report ,  p. 
171,  note  34. 

7  The  evidence  of  some  Bradford  export  houses  is  as  fol¬ 
lows:  "Under  these  circumstances,  it  seems  clear  that  no 
boys  nerd  be  worked  longer  than  from  8  a.m.  to  7  or  7.30 
p.m.,  in  making  up.  It  is  merely  a  question  of  extra  hands 
and  extra  outlay.  If  some  masters  were  not  so  greedy,  the 
boys  would  not  work  late;  an  extra  machine  costs  only  £16 
or  £18;  much  of  such  overtime  as  does  occur  is  to  be  re¬ 
ferred  to  an  insufficiency  of  appliance!,  and  a  want  of 
space." — Children's  Employment  Commission ,  Fifth  Report , 
p.  171,  notes  31, 36, 38. 

8  Ibid.,  A  London  manufacturer,  who  in  other  respects 
looks  upon  the  compulsory  regulation  of  the  hours  of  la¬ 
bour  as  a  protection  for  the  workpeople  Against  the  manu¬ 
facturers,  and  for  the  manufacturers  thtmselves  against 
the  wholesale  trade,  states:  "The  pressure  in  our  business 
is  caused  by  the  shippers,  who  want,  e.g.»  to  send  the  goods 
by  sailing  vessel  so  as  to  reach  their  destination  at  a  given 
season,  and  at  the  same  time  want  to  pocket  the  difference 
in  freight  between  a  sailing  vessel  and  a  Steamship,  or  who 
select  the  earlier  of  two  steamships  in  order  to  be  in  the 
foreign  market  before  their  competitors/' 

9  "This  could  be  obviated,"  says  a  manufacturer,  "at 
the  expense  of  an  enlargement  of  the  works  under  the 
pressure  of  A  General  Act  of  Parliament."— Ibid.,  p.  x, 
note  38* 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


limited  to  provisions  for  whitewashing  the 
walls,  for  insuring  cleanliness  in  some  other 
matters,  for  ventilation,  and  for  protection 
against  dangerous  machinery.  In  Book  Three 
we  shall  return  again  to  the  fanatical  opposition 
of  the  masters  to  those  clauses  which  imposed 
upon  them  a  slight  expenditure  on  appliances  for 
protecting  the  limbs  of  their  workpeople,  an  op¬ 
position  that  throws  a  fresh  and  glaring  light  on 
the  free  trade  dogma,  according  to  which,  in  a 
society  with  conflicting  interests,  each  individ¬ 
ual  necessarily  furthers  the  common  weal  by 
seeking  nothing  but  his  own  personal  advan¬ 
tage!  One  example  is  enough.  The  reader  knows 
that  during  the  last  twenty  years,  the  flax  in¬ 
dustry  has  very  much  extended,  and  that,  with 
that  extension,  the  number  of  scutching  mills 
in  Ireland  has  increased.  In  1864,  there  were  in 
that  country  1800  of  these  mills.  Regularly  in 
autumn  and  winter  women  and  “young  per¬ 
sons,”  the  wives,  sons,  and  daughters  of  the 
neighbouring  small  farmers,  a  class  of  people 
totally  unaccustomed  to  machinery,  are  taken 
from  field  labour  to  feed  the  rollers  of  the 
scutching  mills  with  flax.  The  accidents,  both 
as  regards  number  and  kind,  arc  wholly  unex¬ 
ampled  in  the  history  of  machinery.  In  one 
scutching  mill,  at  Kildinan,  near  Cork,  there 
occurred  between  i8ji  and  1856  six  fatal  acci¬ 
dents  and  sixty  mutilations,  every  one  of  which 
might  have  been  prevented  by  the  simplest  ap¬ 
pliances,  at  the  cost  of  a  few  shillings.  Dr.  W. 
White,  the  certifying  surgeon  for  factories  at 
Downpatrick,  states  in  his  official  report,  dated 
the  15th  December,  1865:  “The  serious  acci¬ 
dents  at  the  scutching  mills  arc  of  the  most 
fearful  nature.  In  many  cases  a  quarter  of  the 
body  is  torn  from  the  trunk,  and  either  in¬ 
volves  death,  or  a  future  of  wretched  inca¬ 
pacity  and  suffering.  The  increase  of  mills  in 
the  country  will,  of  course,  extend  these  dread¬ 
ful  results,  and  it  will  be  a  great  boon  if  they 
are  brought  under  the  legislature.  I  am  con¬ 
vinced  that  by  proper  supervision  of  scutching 
mills  a  vast  sacrifice  of  life  and  limb  would  be 
averted.”1 

What  could  possibly  show  better  the  charac¬ 
ter  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production  than 
the  necessity  that  exists  for  forcing  upon  it,  by 
Acts  of  Parliament,  the  simplest  appliances  for 
maintaining  cleanliness  and  health?  In  the  pot¬ 
teries  the  Factory  Act  of  1864  “has  white¬ 
washed  and  cleansed  upwards  of  200  work¬ 
shops,  after  a  period  of  abstinence  from  any 
such  cleaning,  in  many  cases,  of  twenty  years, 
1  Op.  cit .,  p.  xv,  note  72.  ff. 


237 

and  in  some,  entirely,”  (this  is  the  “abstinence” 
of  the  capitalist!)  “in  which  were  employed 
27,800  artisans,  hitherto  breathing  through 
protracted  days  and  often  nights  of  labour,  a 
mephitic  atmosphere,  and  which  rendered  an 
otherwise  comparatively  innocuous  occupa¬ 
tion  pregnant  with  disease  and  death.  The  Act 
has  improved  the  ventilation  very  much.”2  At 
the  same  time,  this  portion  of  the  Act  strikingly 
shows  that  the  capitalist  mode  of  production, 
owing  to  its  very  nature,  excludes  all  rational  im¬ 
provement  beyond  a  certain  point.  It  has  been 
stated  over  and  over  again  that  the  English 
doctors  are  unanimous  in  declaring  that,  where 
the  work  is  continuous,  500  cubic  feet  is  the 
very  least  space  that  should  be  allowed  for  each 
person.  Now,  if  the  Factory  Acts,  owing  to  their 
compulsory  provisions,  indirectly  hasten  on  the 
conversion  of  small  workshops  into  factories, 
thus  indirectly  attacking  the  proprietary  rights 
of  the  smaller  capitalists  and  assuring  a  monop¬ 
oly  to  the  great  ones,  so,  if  it  were  made  obliga¬ 
tory  to  provide  the  proper  space  for  each  work¬ 
man  in  every  workshop,  thousands  of  small  em¬ 
ployers  would,  at  one  full  swoop,  be  expropri¬ 
ated  directly!  The  very  root  of  the  capitalist 
mode  of  production,  i.e.,  the  self-expansion  of 
all  capital,  large  or  small,  by  means  of  the 
“free”  purchase  and  consumption  of  labour 
power,  would  be  attacked.  Factory  legislation 
is  therefore  brought  to  a  deadlock  before  these 
500  cubic  feet  of  breathing  space.  The  sanitary 
officers,  the  industrial  inquiry  commissioners, 
the  factory  inspectors,  all  harp  over  and  over 
again  upon  the  necessity  for  those  500  cubic 
feet  and  upon  the  impossibility  of  wringing 
them  out  of  capital.  They  thus,  in  fact,  declare 
that  consumption  and  other  lung  diseases 
among  the  workpeople  are  necessary  conditions 
to  the  existence  of  capital.3 

Paltry  as  the  educational  clauses  of  the  Act 
appear  on  the  whole,  yet  they  proclaim  elemen¬ 
tary  education  to  be  an  indispensable  condition 

2  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  October,  1865, 
p.  127. 

8  It  has  been  found  out  by  experiment  that  with  each 
respiration  of  average  intensity  made  by  a  healthy  average 
individual,  about  25  cubic  inches  of  air  are  consumed,  and 
that  about  twenty  respirations  are  made  in  each  minute. 
Hence  the  air  inhaled  in  twenty-four  hours  by  each  indi¬ 
vidual  is  about  720,000  cubic  inches,  or  416  cubic  feet.  It 
is  clear,  however,  that  air  which  has  been  once  breathed, 
can  no  longer  serve  for  the  same  process  until  it  has  been 
purified  in  the  great  workshop  of  Nature.  According  to  the 
experiments  of  Valentin  and  Brunner,  it  appears  that  a 
healthy  man  gives  off  about  1300  cubic  inches  of  carbonic 
acid  per  hour;  this  would  give  about  8  ounces  of  solid 
carbon  thrown  off  from  the  lungs  in  twenty-four  hours. 
“Every  man  should  have  at  least  800  cubic  feet.'*— Huxley, 


CAPITAL 


238 

to  the  employment  of  children.1  The  success  of 
those  clauses  proved  for  the  first  time  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  combining  education  and  gymnastics2 
with  manual  labour,  and,  consequently,  of  com¬ 
bining  manual  labour  with  education  and  gym¬ 
nastics.  The  factory  inspectors  soon  found  out 
by  questioning  the  schoolmasters  that  the  fac¬ 
tory  children,  although  receiving  only  one  half 
the  education  of  the  regular  day-scholars,  yet 
learnt  quite  as  much  and  often  more.  “This  can 
be  accounted  for  by  the  simple  fact  that,  with 
only  being  at  school  for  one  half  of  the  day,  they 
are  always  fresh,  and  nearly  always  ready  and 
willing  to  receive  instruction.  The  system  on 
which  they  work,  half  manual  labour,  and  half 
school,  renders  each  employment  a  rest  and  a 
relief  to  the  other;  consequently,  both  are  far 
more  congenial  to  the  child,  than  would  be  the 
case  were  he  kept  constantly  at  one.  It  is  quite 
clear  that  a  boy  who  has  been  at  school  all  the 
morning  cannot  (in  hot  weather  particularly) 
cope  with  one  who  comes  fresh  and  bright  from 
his  work.”3  Further  information  on  this  point 
will  be  found  in  Senior’s  speech  at  the  Social 
Science  Congress  at  Edinburgh  in  1863.  He 
there  shows,  amongst  other  things,  how  the 
monotonous  and  uselessly  long  school  hours  of 
the  children  of  the  upper  and  middle  classes  use¬ 
lessly  add  to  the  labour  of  the  teacher,  “while 
he  not  only  fruitlessly  but  absolutely  injurious¬ 
ly,  wastes  the  time,  health,  and  energy  of  the 
children.”4 *  From  the  Factory  system  budded, 

1  According  to  the  English  Factory  Act,  parents  cannot 
send  their  children  under  14  years  of  age  into  factories 
under  the  control  of  the  Act,  unless  at  the  same  time  they 
allow  them  to  receive  elementary  education.  The  manu¬ 
facturer  is  responsible  for  compliance  with  the  Act.  “Fac¬ 
tory  education  is  compulsory,  and  it  is  a  condition  of  la¬ 
bour.” — Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  Oct.,  1863, 
p.  III. 

*On  the  very  advantageous  results  of  combining  gym¬ 
nastics  (and  drilling  in  the  case  of  boys)  with  compulsory 
education  for  factory  children  and  pauper  scholars,  see  the 
speech  of  N.  W.  Senior  at  the  Seventh  Annual  Congress  of 
the  National  Association  for  the  Promotion  of  Social  Sci¬ 
ence,  in  Report  of  Proceedings ,  etc.,  London,  1863,  pp.  63, 
64;  also  the  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  Oct., 
1865,  pp.  1 1 8,  1 19,  120  126,  ff. 

*  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  Oct.,.  1865,  p. 
1 1 8. — A  silk  manufacturer  naively  states  to  the  Children's 
Employment  commissioners:  (<I  am  quite  sure  that  the 
true  secret  of  producing  efficient  workpeople  is  to  be  found 
in  uniting  education  and  labour  from  a  period  of  child¬ 
hood.  Of  course  the  occupation  must  not  be  too  severe,  nor 
irksome,  or  unhealthy.  Rut  of  the  advantage  of  the  union 
I  have  no  doubt.  I  wish  my  own  children  could  have  some 
work  as  well  as  play  to  give  variety  to  their  schooling.” — 
Children's  Employment  Commission ,  Fifth  Report,  p.  82, 
note  36. 

4  Senior,  op.  cit .,  p.  66.— How  modern  industry,  when  it 

has  attained  to  a  certain  pitch,  is  capable,  by  the  revolu- 


as  Robert  Owen  has  shown  us  in  detail,  the 
germ  of  the  education  of  the  future,  an  educa¬ 
tion  that  will,  in  the  case  of  every  child  over  a 
given  age,  combine  productive  labour  with  in¬ 
struction  and  gymnastics,  not  only  as  one  of  the 
methods  of  adding  to  the  efficiency  of  produc¬ 
tion,  but  as  the  only  method  of  producing  fully 
developed  human  beings. 

Modern  industry,  as  we  have  seen,  sweeps 
away  by  technical  means  the  manufacturing  di¬ 
vision  of  labour,  under  which  each  man  is  bound 
hand  and  foot  for  life  to  a  single  detail-opera¬ 
tion.  At  the  same  time,  the  capitalistic  form  of 
that  industry  reproduces  this  same  division  of 
labour  in  a  still  more  monstrous  shape;  in  the 
factory  proper,  by  converting  the  workman  in¬ 
to  a  living  appendage  of  the  machine;  and 
everywhere  outside  the  factory,  partly  by  the 
sporadic  use  of  machinery  and  machine  work¬ 
ers,6  partly  by  re-establishing  the  division  of  la¬ 
bour  on  a  fresh  basis  by  the  general  introduc¬ 
tion  of  the  labour  of  women  and  children,  and 
of  cheap  unskilled  labour. 

The  antagonism  between  the  manufacturing 
division  of  labour  and  the  methods  of  modern 
industry  makes  itself  forcibly  felt.  It  manifests 
itself,  amongst  other  ways,  in  the  frightful  fact 
that  a  great  part  of  the  children  employed  in 
modern  factories  and  manufactures  arc  from 

tion  it  effects  in  the  mode  of  production  and  in  the  social 
conditions  of  production,  of  also  revolutionizing  people's 
minds,  is  strikingly  shown  by  a  comparison  of  Senior’s 
speech  in  1863,  with  his  philippic  against  the  Factory  Act 
of  1833;  or  by  a  comparison  of  the  views  of  the  congress 
above  referred  to  with  the  fact  that,  in  certain  country 
districts  of  England,  poor  parents  arc  forbidden,  on  pain 
of  death  by  starvation,  to  educate  their  children.  '1  hus, 
e.g.,  Mr.  Snell  icports  it  to  be  a  common  occurrence  in 
Somersetshire  that,  when  a  poor  person  claims  paiish  re¬ 
lief,  he  is  compelled  to  take  his  children  from  school.  Mr. 
Wollarton,  the  clergyman  at  Felt  ham,  also  tells  of  cases 
where  all  relief  was  denied  to  certain  families  “because 
they  were  sending  their  children  to  school”! 

6  Wherever  handicraft  machines  driven  by  men  com¬ 
pete  directly  or  indirectly  with  more  developed  machines 
driven  by  mechanical  power,  a  great  change  takes  place 
with  regard  to  the  labourer  who  drives  the  machine.  At 
first  the  steam-engine  replaces  this  labourer,  afterwards  he 
must  replace  the  steam-engine.  Consequently  the  tension 
and  the  amount  of  labour  power  expended  become  mon¬ 
strous,  and  especially  so  in  the  case  of  the  children  who  are 
condemned  to  this  torture.  Thus  Mr.  I.«nge,  one  of  the 
commissioners,  found  in  Coventry  and  the  neighbourhood 
boys  of  from  ten  to  fifteen  years  employed  in  driving  the 
ribbon  looms,  not  to  mention  younger  children  who  had  to 
drive  smaller  machines.  "It  is  extraordinarily  fatiguing 
work.  The  boy  is  a  mere  substitute  for  steam-power.” 
(Children's  Employment  Commission ,  Fifth  Report ,  1866,  p. 
114,  note  6.)  As  to  the  fatal  consequences  of  “this  system 
of  slavery,”  as  the  official  report  styles  it,  see  ibid.,  p.  114 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


their  earliest  years  riveted  to  the  most  simple 
manipulations,  and  exploited  for  years,  without 
being  taught  a  single  sort  of  work  that  would 
afterwards  make  them  of  use,  even  in  the  same 
manufactory  or  factory.  In  the  English  letter- 
press  printing  trade,  for  example,  there  existed 
formerly  a  system,  corresponding  to  that  in  the 
old  manufactures  and  handicrafts,  of  advanc¬ 
ing  the  apprentices  from  easy  to  more  and  more 
difficult  work.  They  went  through  a  course  of 
teaching  till  they  were  finished  printers.  To  be 
able  to  read  and  write  was  for  every  one  of  them 
a  requirement  of  their  trade.  All  this  was 
changed  by  the  printing  machine.  It  employs 
two  sorts  of  labourers,  one  grown  up,  a  tenter, 
the  other,  boys  mostly  from  eleven  to  seventeen 
years  of  age  whose  sole  business  is  either  to 
spread  the  sheets  of  paper  under  the  machine, 
or  to  take  from  it  the  printed  sheets.  They  per¬ 
form  this  weary  task,  in  London  especially,  for 
14, 1  j,  and  16  hours  at  a  stretch,  during  several 
days  in  the  week,  and  frequently  for  36  hours, 
with  only  a  hour?*  rest  for  meals  and  sleep!1  A 
great  part  of  them  cannot  read,  and  they  are,  as 
a  rule,  utter  savages  and  very  extraordinary 
creatures.  “To  qualify  them  for  the  work  which 
they  have  to  do,  they  require  no  intellectual 
training;  there  is  little  room  in  it  for  skill,  and 
less  for  judgment;  their  wages,  though  rather 
high  for  boys,  do  not  increase  proportionately 
as  they  grow  up,  and  the  majority  of  them  can¬ 
not  look  for  advancement  to  the  better  paid  and 
more  responsible  post  of  machine  minder,  be¬ 
cause,  while  each  machine  has  but  one  minder, 
it  has  at  least  two,  and  often  four,  boys  attached 
to  it.”2  As  soon  as  they  get  too  old  for  such 
child’s  work,  that  is  about  seventeen  at  the 
latest,  they  are  discharged  from  the  printing  es¬ 
tablishments.  They  become  recruits  of  crime. 
Several  attempts  to  procure  them  employment 
elsewhere  were  rendered  of  no  avail  by  their  ig¬ 
norance  and  brutality,  and  by  their  mental  and 
bodily  degradation. 

As  with  the  division  of  labour  in  the  interior 
of  the  manufacturing  workshops,  so  it  is  with 
the  division  of  labour  in  the  interior  of  society. 
So  long  as  handicraft  and  manufacture  form  the 
general  groundwork  of  social  production,  the 
subjection  of  the  producer  to  one  branch  exclu¬ 
sively,  the  breaking  up  of  the  multifariousness 
of  his  employment,3  is  a  necessary  step  in  the 

1  Ibid.,  p.  3,  note  24 .  2  Ibid.,  p.  7,  note  60. 

3  “In  some  parrs  of  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  not  many 
years  ago,  every  peasant,  according  to  the  Statistical  Ac - 
count ,  made  his  own  shoes  of  leather  tanned  by  himself. 
Many  a  shepherd  and  cottar  too,  with  his  wife  and  chil¬ 
dren,  appeared  at  church  in  clothes  which  had  been  touched 


239 

development.  On  that  groundwork,  each  sepa¬ 
rate  branch  of  production  acquires  empirically 
the  form  that  is  technically  suited  to  it,  slowly 
perfects  it,  and,  so  soon  as  a  given  degree  of 
maturity  has  been  reached,  rapidly  crystallizes 
that  form.  The  only  thing,  that  here  and  there 
causes  a  change,  besides  new  raw  material  sup¬ 
plied  by  commerce,  is  the  gradual  alteration  of 
the  instruments  of  labour.  But  their  form,  too, 
once  definitely  settled  by  experience,  petrifies, 
as  is  proved  by  their  being  in  many  cases 
handed  down  in  the  same  form  by  one  genera¬ 
tion  to  another  during  thousands  of  years.  A 
characteristic  feature  is  that,  even  down  into 
the  eighteenth  century,  the  different  trades 
were  called  “mysteries”  ( mysteres )4;  into  their 
secrets  none  but  those  duly  initiated  could  pen¬ 
etrate.  Modern  industry  rent  the  veil  that  con¬ 
cealed  from  men  their  own  social  process  of  pro¬ 
duction,  and  that  turned  the  various  spontane¬ 
ously  divided  branches  of  production  into  so 
many  riddles,  not  only  to  outsiders,  but  even 
to  the  initiated.  The  principle  which  it  pursued 
of  resolving  each  process  into  its  constituent 
movements,  without  any  regard  to  their  possi¬ 
ble  execution  by  the  hand  of  man,  created  the 
new  modern  science  of  technology.  The  varied, 
apparently  unconnected,  and  petrified  forms  of 
the  industrial  processes  now  resolved  them¬ 
selves  into  so  many  conscious  and  systematic 
applications  of  natural  science  to  the  attain¬ 
ment  of  given  useful  effects.  Technology  also 
discovered  the  few  main  fundamental  forms  of 
motion,  which,  despite  the  diversity  of  the  in¬ 
struments  used,  are  necessarily  taken  by  every 
productive  action  of  the  human  body;  just  as 
the  science  of  mechanics  sees  in  the  most  com¬ 
plicated  machinery  nothing  but  the  continual 
repetition  of  the  simple  mechanical  powers. 

Modern  industry  never  looks  upon  and  treats 
the  existing  form  of  a  process  as  final.  The  tech¬ 
nical  basis  of  that  industry  is  therefore  revolu- 


by  no  hands  but  their  own,  since  they  were  shorn  from  the 
sheep  and  sown  m  the  flaxHeld.  In  the  preparation  of  these, 
it  is  added,  scarcely  a  single  article  had  been  purchased, 
except  the  awl,  needle,  thimble,  and  a  very  few  parts  of 
the  iron-work  employed  in  the  weaving.  The  dyes,  too, 
were  chiefly  extracted  by  the  women  from  trees,  shrubs 
and  herbs.” — Dugald  Stewart’s  Worksy  Hamilton’s  edi¬ 
tion,  Vol.  VIII,  pp.  327-328. 

4  In  the  celebrated  Livrc  des  MItiers  of  Etienne  Boileau, 
we  find  it  prescribed  that  a  journeyman  on  being  admitted 
among  the  masters  had  to  swear  “to  love  his  brethren  with 
brotherly  love,  to  support  them  in  their  respective  trades, 
not  wilfully  to  betray  the  secrets  of  the  trade,  and  besides, 
in  the  interests  of  all,  not  to  recommend  his  own  wares  by 
calling  the  attention  of  the  buyer  to  defects  in  the  articles 
made  by  others.” 


CAPITAL 


240 

tionary,  while  all  earlier  modes  of  production 
were  essentially  conservative.1  By  means  of  ma¬ 
chinery,  chemical  processes,  and  other  meth¬ 
ods,  it  is  continually  causing  changes  not  only 
in  the  technical  basis  of  production,  but  also  in 
the  functions  of  the  labourer,  and  in  the  social 
combinations  of  the  labour  process.  At  the  same 
time,  it  thereby  also  revolutionizes  the  division 
of  labour  within  the  society,  and  incessantly 
launches  masses  of  capital  and  of  workpeople 
from  one  branch  of  production  to  another.  But 
if  modern  industry,  by  its  very  nature,  there¬ 
fore,  necessitates  variation  of  labour,  fluency  of 
function,  universal  mobility  of  the  labourer,  on 
the  other  hand,  in  its  capitalistic  form  it  repro¬ 
duces  the  old  division  of  labour  with  its  ossified 
particularizations.  We  have  seen  how  this  abso¬ 
lute  contradiction  between  the  technical  neces¬ 
sities  of  modern  industry,  and  the  social  charac¬ 
ter  inherent  in  its  capitalistic  form,  dispels  all 
fixity  and  security  in  the  situation  of  the  labour¬ 
er;  how  it  constantly  threatens,  by  taking  away 
the  instruments  of  labour,  to  snatch  from  his 
hands  his  means  of  subsistence,2  and,  by  sup¬ 
pressing  his  detail-function,  to  make  him  super¬ 
fluous.  We  have  seen,  too,  how  this  antago¬ 
nism  vents  its  rage  in  the  creation  of  that  mon¬ 
strosity,  an  industrial  reserve  army,  kept  in 
misery  in  order  to  be  always  at  the  disposal  of 
capital;  in  the  incessant  human  sacrifices  from 
among  the  working  class,  in  the  most  reckless 
squandering  of  labour  power,  and  in  the  devas¬ 
tation  caused  by  a  social  anarchy  which  turns 
every  economic  progress  into  a  social  calamity. 
This  is  the  negative  side.  But  if,  on  the  one 
hand,  variation  of  work  at  present  imposes  it¬ 
self  after  the  manner  of  an  overpowering  natu¬ 
ral  law,  and  with  the  blindly  destructive  action 
of  a  natural  law  that  meets  with  resistance3  at 

1  “The  bourgeoisie  cannot  exist  without  continually  rev¬ 
olutionizing  the  instruments  of  production,  and  thereby 
the  relations  of  production  and  all  the  social  relations.  Con¬ 
servation,  in  an  unaltered  form,  of  the  old  modes  of  pro¬ 
duction  was  on  the  contrary  the  first  condition  of  existence 
for  all  earlier  industrial  classes.  Constant  revolution  in  pro¬ 
duction,  uninterrupted  disturbance  of  all  social  conditions, 
everlasting  uncertainty  and  agitation,  distinguish  the  bour¬ 
geois  epoch  from  all  earlier  ones.  All  fixed,  fast-frozen  rela¬ 
tions,  with  their  train  of  ancient  and  venerable  prejudices 
and  opinions,  are  swept  away,  all  new-formed  ones  become 
antiquated  before  they  can  ossify.  All  that  is  solid  melts 
into  air,  all  that  is  holy  is  profaned,  and  man  is  at  last  com¬ 
pelled  to  face  with  sober  senses  his  real  conditions  of  life, 
and  his  relations  with  his  kind.'*— F.  Engels  and  Karl  Marx, 
Manifesto  of  the  Com  mu  ms  t  Party ,  p.  421  below. 

2  You  take  my  life 
W hen  you  do  take  the  means  whereby  I  live . 
Shakespeare,  Merchant  of  Yenice ,  Act  IV,  Scene  i,  11.  376-7 

2  A  French  workman,  on  his  return  from  San  Francisco, 
writes  as  follows:  “I  never  could  have  believed  that  I  was 


all  points,  modern  industry,  on  the  other  hand, 
through  its  catastrophes  imposes  the  necessity 
of  recognizing,  as  a  fundamental  law  of  produc¬ 
tion,  variation  of  work,  consequently  fitness  of 
the  labourer  for  varied  work,  consequently  the 
greatest  possible  development  of  his  varied  ap¬ 
titudes.  it  becomes  a  question  of  life  and  death 
for  society  to  adapt  the  mode  of  production  to 
the  normal  functioning  of  this  law.  Modern  in¬ 
dustry,  indeed,  compels  society,  under  penalty 
of  death,  to  replace  the  detail-worker  of  to-day, 
crippled  by  lifelong  repetition  of  one  and  the 
same  trivial  operation,  and  thus  reduced  to  the 
mere  fragment  of  a  man,  by  the  fully  developed 
individual,  fit  for  a  variety  of  labours,  ready  to 
face  any  change  of  production,  and  to  whom  the 
different  social  functions  he  performs  are  but  so 
many  modes  of  giving  free  scope  to  his  own  nat¬ 
ural  and  acquired  powers. 

One  step  already  spontaneously  taken  to¬ 
wards  effecting  this  revolution  is  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  technical  and  agricultural  schools,  and 
of  boles  d'cnseignementprofessionnelf  in  which 
the  children  of  the  working-men  receive  some 
little  instruction  in  technology  and  in  the  prac¬ 
tical  handling  of  the  various  implements  of  la¬ 
bour.  Though  the  Factory  Act,  that  first  and 
meagre  concession  wrung  from  capital,  is  lim¬ 
ited  to  combining  elementary  education  with 
work  in  the  factory,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
when  the  working  class  contCS  into  power,  as 
inevitably  it  must,  technical  instruction,  both 
theoretical  and  practical,  will  take  its  proper 
place  in  the  working-class  schools.  There  is  also 
no  doubt  that  such  revolutionary  ferments,  the 
final  result  of  which  is  the  abolition  of  the  old 
division  of  labour,  are  diametrically  opposed  to 
the  capitalistic  form  of  production,  and  to  the 
economic  status  of  the  labourer  corresponding 
to  that  form.  But  the  historical  development  of 
the  antagonisms,  immanent  in  a  given  form  of 
production,  is  the  only  way  in  which  that  form 
of  production  can  be  dissolved  and  a  new  form 
established.  Ne  sutor  ultra  crepidamb— this  nec 
plus  ultra 6  of  handicraft  wisdom  became  sheer 

capable  of  working  at  the  various  occupations  I  was  em¬ 
ployed  on  in  California.  I  was  firmly  convinced  that  I  was 
fit  for  nothing  but  letterpress  printing,  . . .  Once  in  the 
midst  of  this  world  of  adventurers,  who^change  their  occu¬ 
pation  as  often  as  they  do  their  shirt,  egad,  I  did  as  the 
others.  As  mining  did  not  turn  out  remunerative  enough,  I 
left  it  for  the  town,  where  in  succession  I  became  typog¬ 
rapher,  slater,  plumber,  etc.  In  consequence  of  thus  find¬ 
ing  out  that  I  am  fit  for  any  9ort  of  work,  I  feel  less  of  a 
mollusk  and  more  of  a  man.”— A.  Cor  bon,  Del  *enseigne~ 
merit  professional,  second  edition,  Paris,  1858,  p.  50. 

1  Vocational  training  schools. 

1  Cobbler,  stick  to  your  last.  0  Highest  maxim. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


nonsense  from  the  moment  the  watchmaker 
Watt  invented  the  steam-engine,  the  barber 
Arkwright,  the  throstle,  and  the  working  jewel¬ 
ler,  Fulton,  the  steamship.1 

So  long  as  factory  legislation  is  confined  to 
regulating  the  labour  in  factories,  manufactor¬ 
ies,  etc.,  it  is  regarded  as  a  mere  interference 
with  the  exploiting  rights  of  capital.  But  when 
it  comes  to  regulating  the  so-called  home- 
labour,2  it  is  immediately  viewed  as  a  direct 
attack  on  th epatriapotestas*  on  parental  auth¬ 
ority.  The  tender-hearted  English  Parliament 
long  affected  to  shrink  from  taking  this  step. 
The  force  of  facts,  however,  compelled  it  at  last 
to  acknowledge  that  modern  industry,  in  over¬ 
turning  the  economic  foundation  on  which  was 
based  the  traditional  family,  and  the  family  la¬ 
bour  corresponding  to  it,  had  also  unloosened 
all  traditional  family  ties.  The  rights  of  the  chil¬ 
dren  had  to  be  proclaimed.  The  final  report  of 
the  Children's  Employment  Commission  of 
1866,  states:  “It  is  unhappily,  to  a  painful  de¬ 
gree,  apparent  throughout  the  whole  of  the  evi¬ 
dence  that  ag?inst  no  persons  do  the  children 
of  both  sexes  so  much  require  protection  as 
against  their  parents."  The  system  of  unlimited 
exploitation  of  children's  labour  in  general  and 
the  so-called  home-labour  in  particular  is 
“maintained  only  because  the  parents  are  able, 
without  check  or  control,  to  exercise  this  arbi¬ 
trary  and  mischievous  power  over  their  young 
and  tender  offspring. . . .  Parents  must  not  pos¬ 
sess  the  absolute  power  of  making  their  children 
mere  'machines  to  earn  so  much  weekly  wage/ 

. . .  The  children  and  young  persons,  therefore, 
in  all  such  cases  may  justifiably  claim  from  the 
legislature,  as  a  natural  right,  that  an  exemp¬ 
tion  should  be  secured  to  them  from  what  de¬ 
stroys  prematurely  their  physical  strength,  and 

1  John  Beliers,  a  very  phenomenon  in  the  history  of  po¬ 
litical  economy,  saw  most  clearly,  at  the  end  of  the  seven¬ 
teenth  century,  the  necessity  for  abolishing  the  present 
system  of  education  and  division  of  labour,  which  beget 
hypertrophy  and  atrophy  at  the  two  opposite  extremities 
of  society.  Amongst  other  things,  he  says  this:  “An  idle 
learning  being  little  better  than  the  learning  of  idleness. 
•  • .  Bodily  labour,  it’s  a  primitive  institution  of  God.  .  • . 
Labour  being  as  proper  for  the  bodies’  health  as  eating  is 
.for  its  living;  for  what  pains  a  man  saves  by  ease,  he  will 
find  in  disease.  . . .  Labour  adds  oil  to  the  lamp  of  life, 
when  thinking  inflames  it. ...  A  childish  silly  employ”  (a 
warning  this,  by  presentiment,  against  the  Basedows  and 
their  modern  imitators)  “leaves  the  children’s  minds  silly.” 
— Proposals  for  Raising  a  College  of  Industry  of  All  Useful 
Trades  and  Husbandry ,  London,  1696,  pp.  12, 14, 18. 

1  This  sort  of  labour  goes  on  mostly  in  small  workshops, 
as  we  have  seen  in  the  lacemaking  and  straw-plaiting  trades, 
and  as  could  be  shown  more  in  detail  from  the  metal  trades 
of  Sheffield,  Birmingham,  etc. 

*Paternal  authority. 


241 

lowers  them  in  the  scale  of  intellectual  and  mor¬ 
al  beings."4  It  was  not,  however,  the  misuse 
of  parental  authority  that  created  the  capital¬ 
istic  exploitation,  whether  direct  or  indirect,  of 
children’s  labour;  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  was 
the  capitalistic  mode  of  exploitation  which,  by 
sweeping  away  the  economic  basis  of  parental 
authority,  made  its  exercise  degenerate  into  a 
mischievous  misuse  of  power.  However  terrible 
and  disgusting  under  the  capitalist  system  the 
dissolution  of  the  old  family  ties  may  appear, 
nevertheless,  modern  industry,  by  assigning  as 
it  does  an  important  part  in  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction,  outside  the  domestic  sphere,  to  wom¬ 
en,  to  young  persons,  and  to  children  of  both 
sexes,  creates  a  new  economic  foundation  for 
a  higher  form  of  the  family  and  of  the  relations 
between  the  sexes.  It  is,  of  course,  just  as  absurd 
to  hold  theTeutonic-Christian  form  of  the  fam¬ 
ily  to  be  absolute  and  final  as  it  would  be  to 
apply  that  character  to  the  ancient  Roman,  the 
ancient  Greek,  or  the  Eastern  forms  which, 
moreover,  taken  together,  form  a  series  in  his¬ 
toric  development.  Moreover,  it  is  obvious  that 
the  fact  of  the  collective  working  group  being 
composed  of  individuals  of  both  sexes  and  all 
ages,  must  necessarily,  under  suitable  condi¬ 
tions,  become  a  source  of  humane  development; 
although  in  its  spontaneously  developed,  bru¬ 
tal,  capitalistic  form,  where  the  labourer  exists 
for  the  process  of  production,  and  not  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  production  for  the  labourer,  that  fact  is 
a  pestiferous  source  of  corruption  and  slavery.6 

The  necessity  for  a  generalization  of  the  Fac¬ 
tory  Acts,  for  transforming  them  from  an  ex¬ 
ceptional  law  relating  to  mechanical  spinning 
and  weaving — those  first  creations  of  machin¬ 
ery — into  a  law  affecting  social  production  as 
a  whole,  arose,  as  we  have  seen,  from  the  mode 
in  which  modern  industry  was  historically  de¬ 
veloped.  In  the  rear  of  that  industry,  the  tradi¬ 
tional  form  of  manufacture,  of  handicraft,  and 
of  domestic  industry,  is  entirely  revolutionized; 
manufactures  are  constantly  passing  into  the 
factory  system,  and  handicrafts  into  manufac¬ 
tures;  and  lastly,  the  spheres  of  handicraft  and 
of  the  domestic  industries  become,  in  a  compar¬ 
atively  speaking  wonderfully  short  time,  dens 
of  misery  in  which  capitalistic  exploitation  ob¬ 
tains  free  play  for  the  wildest  excesses.  There 
are  two  circumstances  that  finally  turn  the 

4  Children's  Employment  Commissiont  Fifth  Report ,  p. 
xxv,  note  162;  and  Second  Report ,  p.  xxxviii,  notes  285, 
289;  pp.  xxv,  xx vi,  note  191. 

6  “Factory  labour  may  be  as  pure  and  as  excellent  as 
domestic  labour,  and  perhaps  more  so  ."—Reports  of  In* 
specters  of  Factories ,  31st  October,  1865,  P- 127* 


CAPITAL 


242 

scale:  first,  the  constantly  recurring  experience 
that  capital,  so  soon  as  it  finds  itself  subject  to 
legal  control  at  one  point,  compensates  itself 
all  the  more  recklessly  at  other  points;1  second¬ 
ly,  the  cry  of  the  capitalists  for  equality  in  the 
conditions  of  competition,  i.e.,  for  equal  re¬ 
straint  on  all  exploitation  of  labour.2  On  this 
point  let  us  listen  to  two  heart-broken  cries. 
Messrs.  Cooksley  of  Bristol,  nail  and  chain, 
etc.,  manufacturers,  spontaneously  introduced 
the  regulations  of  the  Factory  Act  into  their 
business.  “As  the  old  irregular  system  prevails 
in  neighbouring  works,  the  Messrs.  Cooksley 
are  subject  to  the  disadvantage  of  having  their 
boys  enticed  to  continue  their  labour  elsewhere 
after  6  p.m.  ‘This,’  they  naturally  say,  ‘is  an 
unjustice  and  loss  to  us,  as  it  exhausts  a  portion 
of  the  boy's  strength,  of  which  we  ought  to  have 
the  full  benefit.*  *’3  Mr.  J.  Simpson  (paper  box 
and  bagmakcr,  London)  states  before  the  com¬ 
missioners  of  the  Children’s  Employment  Com¬ 
mission:  “He  would  sign  any  petition  for  it” 
(legislative  interference).  . . .  “As  it  was,  he  al¬ 
ways  felt  restless  at  night,  when  he  had  closed 
his  place,  lest  others  should  be  working  later 
than  him  and  getting  away  his  orders.**4  Sum¬ 
marizing,  the  Children’s  Employment  Com¬ 
mission  says:  “It  would  be  unjust  to  the  larger 
employers  that  their  factories  should  be  placed 
under  regulation,  while  the  hours  of  labour  in 
the  smaller  places  in  their  own  branch  of  busi¬ 
ness  were  under  no  legislative  restriction.  And 
to  the  injustice  arising  from  the  unfair  condi¬ 
tions  of  competition,  in  regard  to  hours,  that 
would  be  created  if  the  smaller  places  of  work 
were  exempt,  would  be  added  the  disadvantage 
to  the  larger  manufacturers,  of  finding  their 
supply  of  juvenile  and  female  labour  drawn  off 
to  the  places  of  work  exempt  from  legislation. 
Further,  a  stimulus  would  be  given  to  the  mul¬ 
tiplication  of  the  smaller  places  of  work,  which 
are  almost  invariably  the  least  favourable  to 
the  health,  comfort,  education,  and  general  im¬ 
provement  of  the  people.**5 * 

In  its  final  report,  the  Children’s  Employ¬ 
ment  Commission  proposes  to  subject  to  the 
Factory  Act  more  than  1,400,000  children, 

1  Ibid.,  3 1st  October,  1865,  pp.  27-32. 

2  Numerous  instances  will  be  found  in  Reports  of  Inspec¬ 
tors  0]  Factories. 

*  Children's  Employment  Commisston ,  Fifth  Report ,  p.  x, 
note  35. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  ix,  note  28. 

*  Ibid.,  p.  xxv,  notes  165-167.— As  to  the  advantages  of 

large  scale,  compared  with  small  scale,  industries,  see  Ibid., 

Third  Report,  p.  13,  note  144;  p.  25,  note  121;  p.  26,  note 

125;  p.  27,  note  140,  etc. 


young  persons,  and  women,  of  which  number 
about  one-half  are  exploited  in  small  industries 
and  by  the  so-called  homework.®  It  says:  “But 
if  it  should  seem  fit  to  Parliament  to  place  the 
whole  of  that  large  number  of  children,  young 
persons,  and  females  under  the  protective  legis¬ 
lation  above  adverted  to  ...  it  cannot  be 
doubted  that  such  legislation  would  have  a 
most  beneficent  effect,  not  only  upon  the  young 
and  the  feeble,  who  are  its  more  immediate  ob¬ 
jects,  but  upon  the  still  larger  body  of  adult 
workers,  who  would  in  all  these  employments, 
both  directly  and  indirectly,  come  immediately 
under  its  influence.  It  would  enforce  upon  them 
regular  and  moderate  hours;  it  would  lead  to 
their  places  of  work  being  kept  in  a  healthy  and 
cleanly  state;  it  would,  therefore,  husband  and 
improve  that  store  of  physical  strength  on 
which  their  own  well-being  and  that  of  the 
country  so  much  depends;  it  would  save  the  ris¬ 
ing  generation  from  that  over-exertion  at  an 
early  age  which  undermines  their  constitutions 
and  leads  to  premature  decay;  finally,  it  would 
ensure  them  — at  least  up  to  the  age  of  thirteen 
— the  opportunity  of  receiving  the  elements  of 
education,  and  would  put  an  end  to  that  utter 
ignorance  ...  so  faithfully  exhibited  in  the  re¬ 
ports  of  our  Assistant  Commissioners,  and 
which  cannot  be  regarded  without  the  deepest 
pain  and  a  profound  sense  of  national  degrada¬ 
tion.**7 

On  February  5,  1867,  the  Tory  Cabinet  an¬ 
nounced  in  the  speech  from  the  throne  that  it 
had  drawn  up  bills  embodying  the  proposals8  of 

®  The  trades  proposed  to  be  brought  under  the  Act  were 
the  following:  Lacemaking,  stocking- weaving,  straw-plait- 
ing,  the  manufacture  of  wearing  apparel  with  its  numerous 
subdivisions,  artificial-flower  making,  shoemaking,  hat¬ 
making,  glove-making,  tailoring,  all  metal  works,  from 
blast  furnaces  down  to  needleworks,  etc.,  paper-mills,  glass 
works,  tobacco  factories,  india-rubber  works,  braid-mak¬ 
ing  (for  weaving),  hand-carpetmaking,  umbrclla-and-par* 
asol  making,  the  manufacture  of  spindles  and  spools,  let¬ 
terpress  printing,  bookbinding,  manufacture  of  station¬ 
ery  (including  paper  bags,  cards,  coloured  paper,  etc.,) 
ropemaking,  manufacture  of  jet  ornaments,  bnckmaking, 
silk  manufacture  by  hand,  Coventry  weaving,  saltworks, 
tallow  chandlers,  cement  works,  sugar  refineries,  biscuit¬ 
making,  various  industries  connected  with  timber,  and 
other  mixed  trades. 

7  Op.  cit.,  p.  xxv,  note  169. 

*The  Factory  Acts  Extension  Act  was  passed  on  August 
X2, 1867.  It  regulated  all  foundries,  forget,  and  other  metal 
working  manufactures,  including  machinery;  further: 
glass,  paper,  gutta-percha,  India  rubber  and  tobacco 
manufactures,  printing  shops  and  book  binderies;  finally, 
all  workshops  in  which  more  than  fifty  persons  are  em¬ 
ployed.  The  Hours  of  Labor  Regulation  Act  of  August  17, 
1867,  regulates  smaller  workshops  and  homework.  I  will 
coire  back  to  these  laws,  and  to  the  new  Mining  Act,  in 
the  abscond  volume. 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


the  Industrial  Commission  of  Inquiry.  To  reach 
even  this  point,  the  “dregs  of  humanity”  had 
been  subjected  to  another  twenty  years  of  ex¬ 
perimentation!  As  early  as  1840,  a  parliamen¬ 
tary  commission  had  been  named  to  investi¬ 
gate  child  labour.  Its  report  of  1842  revealed, 
in  the  words  of  N.  W.  Senior:  “the  most  fright¬ 
ful  picture  of  avarice,  selfishness,  and  cruelty  on 
the  part  of  masters  and  of  parents,  and  of  ju¬ 
venile  and  infantile  misery,  degradation,  and 
destruction  ever  presented.  ...  It  may  be  sup¬ 
posed  that  it  describes  the  horrors  of  a  past  age. 
But  there  is  unhappily  evidence  that  those  hor¬ 
rors  continue  as  intense  as  they  were.  A  pam¬ 
phlet  published  by  Hardwicke  about  two  years 
ago  states  that  the  abuses  complained  of  in  1 842 
are  in  full  bloom  at  the  present  day.  It  is  a 
strange  proof  of  the  general  neglect  of  the  mor¬ 
als  and  health  of  the  children  of  the  working 
class  that  this  report  lay  unnoticed  for  twenty 
years,  during  which  the  children,  ‘bred  up  with¬ 
out  the  remotest  sign  of  comprehension  as  to 
what  is  meant  bv  the  term  morals ,  who  had 
neither  knowledge,  nor  religion,  nor  natural  af¬ 
fection*  were  allowed  to  become  the  parents  of 
the  present  generation.**1 

The  social  conditions  having  undergone  a 
change,  Parliament  could  not  venture  to  shelve 
the  demands  of  the  Commission  of  1863,  as  it 
had  done  those  of  the  Commission  of  1840. 
Hence  in  1864,  when  the  Commission  had  not 
yet  published  more  than  a  part  of  its  reports, 
the  earthenware  industries  (including  the  pot¬ 
teries),  makers  of  wallpaper,  matches,  car¬ 
tridges,  and  caps,  and  fustian-cutters  were 
made  subject  to  the  Acts  in  force  in  the  textile 
industries.  In  the  speech  from  the  throne,  on 
5  th  February,  1 867,  the  Tory  Cabinet  of  the  day 
announced  the  introduction  of  Bills  founded  on 
the  final  recommendations  of  the  Commission, 
which  had  completed  its  labours  in  1866. 

On  the  15th  August,  1867,  the  Factory  Acts 
Extension  Act,  and  on  the  21st  August,  the 
Workshops*  Regulation  Act  received  the  royal 
assent;  the  former  Act  having  reference  to  large 
industries,  the  latter  to  small. 

The  former  applies  to  blast  furnaces,  iron  and 
copper  mills,  foundries,  machine  shops,  metal 
manufactories, gutta-percha  works,  paper-mills, 
glassworks,  tobacco  manufactories,  letterpress 
printing  (including  newspapers),  bookbinding, 
in  short  to  all  industrial  establishments  of  the 
above  kind,  in  which  fifty  individuals  or  more 
are  occupied  simultaneously,  and  for  not  less 
than  one  hundred  days  during  the  year. 

1  Senior,  Social  Science  Congress ,  pp.  55-58. 


243 

To  give  an  idea  of  the  extent  of  the  sphere 
embraced  by  the  Workshops*  Regulation  Act  in 
its  application,  we  cite  from  its  interpretation 
clause  the  following  passages: 

“ Handicraft  shall  mean  any  manual  labour 
exercised  by  way  of  trade,  or  for  purposes  of 
gain  in,  or  incidental  to,  the  making  of  any  ar¬ 
ticle  or  part  of  an  article,  or  in,  or  incidental  to, 
the  altering,  repairing,  ornamenting,  finishing, 
or  otherwise  adapting  for  sale  any  article.** 

“Workshop  shall  mean  any  room  or  place 
whatever  in  the  open  air  or  under  cover,  in 
which  any  handicraft  is  carried  on  by  any  child, 
young  person,  or  woman,  and  to  which  and  over 
which  the  person  by  whom  such  child,  young 
person,  or  woman  is  employed,  has  the  right  of 
access  and  control.** 

“ Employed  shall  mean  occupied  in  any  handi¬ 
craft,  whether  for  wages  or  not,  under  a  master 
or  under  a  paeent  as  herein  defined.** 

“ Parent  shall  mean  parent,  guardian,  or  per¬ 
son,  having  the  custody  of,  or  control  over,  any 
. . .  child  or  young  person.** 

Clause  7,  which  imposes  a  penalty  for  em¬ 
ployment  of  children,  young  persons,  and  wom¬ 
en,  contrary  to  the  provisions  of  the  Act, 
subjects  to  fines,  not  only  the  occupier  of  the 
workshop,  whether  parent  or  not,  but  even  “the 
parent  of,  or  the  person  deriving  any  direct  ben¬ 
efit  from  the  labour  of,  or  having  the  control 
over,  the  child,  young  person,  or  woman.** 

The  Factory  Acts  Extension  Act,  which  af¬ 
fects  the  large  establishments,  derogates  from 
the  Factory  Act  by  a  crowd  of  vicious  excep¬ 
tions  and  cowardly  compromises  with  the  mas¬ 
ters. 

The  Workshops*  Regulation  Act,  wretched 
in  all  its  details,  remained  a  dead  letter  in  the 
hands  of  the  municipal  and  local  authorities 
who  were  charged  with  its  execution.  When,  in 
1871,  Parliament  withdrew  from  them  this  pow¬ 
er,  in  order  to  confer  it  on  the  Factory  Inspec¬ 
tors,  to  whose  province  it  thus  added  by  a  single 
stroke  more  than  one  hundred  thousand  work¬ 
shops  and  three  hundred  brickworks,  care  was 
taken  at  the  same  time  not  to  add  more  than 
eight  assistants  to  their  already  undermanned 
staff.8 

What  strikes  us,  then,  in  the  English  legisla¬ 
tion  of  1867,  is,  on  the  one  hand,  the  necessity 

2  The  personnel  of  this  staff  consisted  of  two  inspectors, 
two  assistant  inspectors  and  forty-one  sub- inspectors. 
Eight  additional  sub-inspectors  were  appointed  in  1871. 
The  total  cost  of  administering  the  Acts  in  England,  Scot¬ 
land,  and  Ireland  amounted  for  the  year  1871-72  to  no 
more  than  £25,347,  inclusive  of  the  law  expenses  incurred 
by  prosecutions  of  offending  masters. 


CAPITAL 


244 

imposed  on  the  parliament  of  the  ruling  classes, 
of  adopting  in  principle  measures  so  extraor¬ 
dinary,  and  on  90  great  a  scale,  against  the  ex¬ 
cesses  of  capitalistic  exploitation;  and  on  the 
other  hand,  the  hesitation,  the  repugnance,  and 
the  bad  faith,  with  which  it  lent  itself  to  the  task 
of  carrying  those  measures  into  practice. 

The  Inquiry  Commission  of  1862  also  pro¬ 
posed  a  new  regulation  of  the  mining  industry, 
an  industry  distinguished  from  others  by  the 
exceptional  characteristic  that  the  interests  of 
landlord  and  capitalist  there  join  hands.  The 
antagonism  of  these  two  interests  had  been  fa¬ 
vourable  to  factory  legislation,  while  on  the 
other  hand  the  absence  of  that  antagonism  is 
sufficient  to  explain  the  delays  and  chicanery  of 
the  legislation  on  mines. 

The  Inquiry  Commission  of  1840  had  made 
revelations  so  terrible,  so  shocking,  and  creat¬ 
ing  such  a  scandal  all  over  Europe,  that  to  salve 
its  conscience  Parliament  passed  the  Mining 
Act  of  1842,  in  which  it  limited  itself  to  forbid¬ 
ding  the  employment  underground  in  mines  of 
children  under  ten  years  of  age  and  females. 

Then  another  Act,  the  Mines*  Inspection  Act 
of  i860,  provided  that  mines  should  be  in¬ 
spected  by  public  officers  nominated  specially 
for  that  purpose,  and  that  boys  between  the 
ages  of  ten  and  twelve  years  should  not  be  em¬ 
ployed,  unless  they  had  a  school  certificate,  or 
go  to  school  for  a  certain  number  of  hours.  This 
Act  was  a  complete  dead  letter  owing  to  the  ri¬ 
diculously  small  number  of  inspectors,  the 
meagreness  of  their  powers,  and  other  causes 
that  will  become  apparent  as  we  proceed. 

One  of  the  most  recent  Blue  Books  on  mines 
is  the  Report  from  the  Select  Committee  on  Mines, 
together  with . . .  Evidence ,  23rd  July,  1866.  This 
report  is  the  work  of  a  parliamentary  committee 
selected  from  members  of  the  House  of  Com¬ 
mons,  and  authorized  to  summon  and  examine 
witnesses.  It  is  a  thick  folio  volume  in  which 
the  report  itself  occupies  only  five  lines  to  this 
effect;  that  the  committee  has  nothing  to  say, 
and  that  more  witnesses  must  be  examined! 

The  mode  of  examining  the  witnesses  re¬ 
minds  one  of  the  cross-examination  of  witnesses 
in  English  courts  of  justice,  where  the  advocate 
tries,  by  means  of  impudent,  unexpected, 
equivocal,  and  involved  questions,  put  without 
connection,  to  intimidate,  surprise,  and  con¬ 
found  the  witness,  and  to  give  a  forced  meaning 
to  the  answers  extorted  from  him.  In  this  in¬ 
quiry,  the  members  of  the  committee  them¬ 
selves  are  the  cross-examiners,  and  among  them 
are  to  be  found  both  mine  owners  and  mine  ex¬ 


ploiters;  the  witnesses  are  mostly  working  coal¬ 
miners.  The  whole  farce  i9  too  characteristic  of 
the  spirit  of  capital  not  to  call  for  a  few  extracts 
from  this  report.  For  the  sake  of  conciseness  I 
have  classified  them.  I  may  also  add  that  every 
question  and  its  answer  are  numbered  in  the 
English  Blue  Books. 

I.  EMPLOYMENT  IN  MINES  OF  BOYS  OF  lO 

years  and  upwards.  In  the  mines,  the  work, 
inclusive  of  going  and  returning,  usually  lasts 
14  or  1 5  hours,  sometimes  even  from  3, 4,  and  5 
o’clock  a.m.,  till  5  and  6  o’clock  p.m.  (No.  6,  452, 
83).  The  adults  work  in  two  shifts  of  eight  hours 
each;  but  there  is  no  alternation  with  the  boys, 
on  account  of  the  expense  (No.  80,  203,  204). 
The  younger  boys  are  chiefly  employed  in  open¬ 
ing  and  shutting  the  ventilating  doors  in  the 
various  parts  of  the  mine;  the  older  ones  are 
employed  on  heavier  work,  in  carrying  coal, 
etc.  (No.  122, 739, 1747).  They  work  these  long 
hours  underground  until  their  eighteenth  or 
twenty-second  year,  when  they  are  put  to  min¬ 
er’s  work  proper  (No.  161).  Children  and  young 
persons  are  at  present  worse  treated,  and  harder 
worked  than  at  any  previous  period  (No.  1663 
— 1667).  And  now  Hussey  Vivian  (himself  an 
exploiter  of  mines)  asks:  “Would  not  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  the  workman  depend  upon  the  poverty  of 
the  workman’s  family?”  Mr.  Bruce:  “Do  you 
not  think  it  would  be  a  very  hard  case,  where  a 
parent  had  been  injured,  or  whEfre  he  was  sick¬ 
ly,  or  where  a  father  was  dead,  and  there  was 
only  a  mother,  to  prevent  a  child  between 
twelve  and  fourteen  earning  u.  yd.  a  day  for  the 
good  of  the  family? . . .  You  must  lay  down  a 
general  rule? . . .  Are  you  prepared  to  recom¬ 
mend  legislation  which  would  prevent  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  children  under  twelve  and  fourteen, 
whatever  the  state  of  their  parents  might  be?” 
“Yes”  (No.  107-1 10).  Vivian:  “Supposing  that 
an  enactment  were  passed  preventing  the  em¬ 
ployment  of  children  under  the  age  of  fourteen, 
would  it  not  be  probable  that . . .  the  parents  of 
children  would  seek  employment  for  their  chil¬ 
dren  in  other  directions,  for  instance,  in  manu¬ 
facture?”  “Not  generally  I  think’*  (No.  174). 
Kinnaird:  “Some  of  the  boys  ate  keepers  of 
doors?”  “Yes.”  “Is  there  not  generally  a  very 
great  draught  every  time  you  open  a  door  or 
close  it?”  “Yes,  generally  there  is.”  “It  sounds 
a  very  easy  thing,  but  it  i9  in  fact  father  a  pain¬ 
ful  one?”  “He  is  imprisoned  there  just  the  same 
a9  if  he  was  in  a  cell  of  a  gaol.”  Bourgeois  Viv¬ 
ian.  “Whenever  a  boy  is  furnished  with  a  lamp, 
cannot  he  read?”  “Ye9,  he  can  read,  if  he  finds 
himself  in  candles ...  I  suppose  he  would  be 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


found  fault  with  if  he  were  discovered  reading; 
he  is  there  to  mind  his  business,  he  has  a  duty 
to  perform,  and  he  has  to  attend  to  it  in  the  first 
place,  and  I  do  not  think  it  would  be  allowed 
down  the  pit”  (No.  139,  141,  143,  158,  160). 

II.  education.  The  working  miners  want  a 
law  for  the  compulsory  education  of  their  chil¬ 
dren,  as  in  factories.  They  declare  the  clauses 
of  the  Act  of  1 860,  which  require  a  school  certifi¬ 
cate  to  be  obtained  before  employing  boys  of 
ten  and  twelve  years  of  age,  to  be  quite  illusory. 
The  examination  of  the  witnesses  on  this  sub¬ 
ject  is  truly  droll.  "Is  it”  (the  Act)  “required 
more  against  the  masters  or  against  the  par¬ 
ents?”  "It  is  required  against  both  I  think.” 
"You  cannot  say  whether  it  is  required  against 
one  more  than  against  the  other?”  “No;  I  can 
hardly  answer  that  question”  (No.  115,  116). 
"  Does  there  appear  to  be  any  desire  on  the  part 
of  the  employers  that  the  boys  should  have  such 
hours  as  to  enable  them  to  go  to  school  ?”  "No; 
the  hours  are  never  shortened  for  that  purpose” 
(No.  137).  Mr.  KHnnird:  "Should  you  say  that 
the  colliers  generally  improve  their  education; 
have  you  any  instances  of  men  who  have,  since 
they  began  to  work,  greatly  improved  their  ed¬ 
ucation,  or  do  they  not  rather  go  back,  and  lose 
any  advantage  that  they  may  have  gained?” 
"They  generally  become  worse:  they  do  not  im¬ 
prove;  they  acquire  bad  habits;  they  get  on  to 
drinking  and  gambling  and  such  like,  and  they 
go  completely  to  wreck”  (No.  21 1).  "Do  they 
make  any  attempt  of  the  kind  (for  providing 
instruction)  by  having  schools  at  night?” 
"There  are  few  collieries  where  night  schools 
are  held,  and  perhaps  at  those  collieries  a  few 
boys  do  go  to  those  schools;  but  they  are  so 
physically  exhausted  that  it  is  to  no  purpose 
that  they  go  there”  (No.  454).  "You  are  then,” 
concludes  the  bourgeois,  "against  education?” 
"Most  certainly  not;  but,”  etc.  (No.  443).  "But 
are  they”  (the  employers)  “not  compelled  to 
demand  them”  (school  certificates)?  "By  law 
they  are;  but  I  am  not  aware  that  they  are  de¬ 
manded  by  the  employers.”  "Then  it  is  your 
opinion  that  this  provision  of  the  Act  as  to  re¬ 
quiring  certificates  is  not  generally  carried  out 
in  the  collieries?”  "It  is  not  carried  out”  (No. 
443,  444).  "Do  the  men  take  a  great  interest 
in  this  question”  (of  education)  ?  "The  majority 
of  them  do”  (No.  717).  “Are  they  very  anxious 
to  see  the  law  enforced?”  "The  majority  are” 
(No.  718).  "Do  you  think  that  in  this  country 
any  law  that  you  pass . . .  can  really  be  effectual 
unless  the  population  themselves  assist  in  put¬ 
ting  it  into  operation?”  "Many  a  man  might 


245 

wish  to  object  to  employing  a  boy,  but  he  would 
perhaps  become  marked  by  it”  (No.  720). 
“Marked  by  whom?”  "By  his  employers”  (No. 
721).  "Do  you  think  that  the  employers  would 
find  any  fault  with  a  man  who  obeyed  the  law 
. . .  ?”  "I  believe  they  would”  (No.  722).  "Have 
you  ever  heard  of  any  workman  objecting  to 
employ  a  boy  between  ten  and  twelve  who 
could  not  write  or  read  ?”  "It  is  not  left  to  men’s 
option”  (No.  123).  "Would  you  call  for  the  in¬ 
terference  of  Parliament?”  "I  think  that  if  any¬ 
thing  effectual  is  to  be  done  in  the  education  of 
the  colliers’  children,  it  will  have  to  be  made 
compulsory  by  Act  of  Parliament”  (No.  1634). 
"Would  you  lay  that  obligation  upon  the  col¬ 
liers  only,  of  all  the  workpeople  of  Great 
Britain?”  "I  came  to  speak  for  the  colliers” 
(No.  1636).  “Why  should  you  distinguish 
them”  (colliery  boys)  "from  other  boys?”  "Be¬ 
cause  I  think  Ihey  are  an  exception  to  the  rule” 
(No.  1638).  "In  what  respect?”  “In  a  physical 
respect”  (No.  1639).  “Why  should  education 
be  more  valuable  to  them  than  to  other  classes 
of  lads?”  "I  do  not  know  that  it  is  more  valu¬ 
able;  but  through  the  over-exertion  in  mines 
there  is  less  chance  for  the  boys  that  are  em¬ 
ployed  there  to  get  education,  either  at  Sunday 
schools  or  at  day  schools”  (No.  1640).  "It  is 
impossible  to  look  at  a  question  of  this  sort  ab¬ 
solutely  by  itself?”  (No.  1644).  “Is  there  a  suf¬ 
ficiency  of  schools?”  "No”  . . .  (No.  1646).  "If 
the  state  were  to  require  that  every  child  should 
be  sent  to  school,  would  there  be  schools  for  the 
children  to  go  to?”  "No;  but  I  think  if  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  were  to  spring  up,  the  schools 
would  be  forthcoming”  (No.  1647).  “Some  of 
them”  (the  boys)  “cannot  read  and  write  at  all, 
I  suppose?”  "The  majority  cannot. . . .  The 
majority  of  the  men  themselves  cannot”  (No. 
7°S>  725)- 

III.  employment  of  women.  Since  1842, 
women  are  no  more  employed  underground, 
but  are  occupied  on  the  surface  in  loading  the 
coal,  etc.,  in  drawing  the  tubs  to  the  canals  and 
railway  waggons,  in  sorting,  etc.  Their  numbers 
have  considerably  increased  during  the  last 
three  or  four  years  (No.  1727).  They  are  mostly 
the  wives,  daughters,  and  widows  of  the  work¬ 
ing  miners,  and  their  ages  range  from  twelve  to 
fifty  or  sixty  years  (No.  645,  1779).  “What  is 
the  feeling  among  the  working  miners  as  to  the 
employment  of  women  ?”  "I  think  they  general¬ 
ly  condemn  it”  (No.  648).  “What  objection  do 
you  see  to  it?”  "I  think  it  is  degrading  to  the 
sex”  (No.  649).  "There  is  a  peculiarity  of 
dress?”  "Yes  ...  it  is  rather  a  man’s  dress,  and 


246  CAPITAL 

I  believe  in  some  cases,  it  drowns  all  sense  of  (No.  1741).  “Would  you  interfere  in  every  case 
decency.'*  “Do  the  women  smoke  ?"  “Some  with  the  employment  of  women  where  that  em- 


do."  “And  I  suppose  it  is  very  dirty  work?" 
“Very  dirty."  “They  get  black  and  grimy?” 
“As  black  as  those  who  are  down  the  mines  . . . 
I  believe  that  a  woman  having  children  (and 
there  are  plenty  on  the  banks  that  have)  cannot 
do  her  duty  to  her  children"  (No.  650-654, 
701).  “Do  you  think  that  those  widows  could 
get  employment  anywhere  else,  which  would 
bring  them  in  as  much  wages  as  that  (from  8 s.  to 
10 s.  a  week)?"  “I  cannot  speak  to  that"  (No. 
709).  “You  would  still  be  prepared,  would  you” 
(flint-hearted  fellow!)  “to  prevent  their  obtain¬ 
ing  a  livelihood  by  these  means?"  “I  would" 
(No.  710).  “What  is  the  general  feeling  in  the 
district ...  as  to  the  employment  of  women  ?" 
“The  feeling  is  that  it  is  degrading;  and  we  wish 
as  miners  to  have  more  respect  to  the  fair  sex 
than  to  see  them  placed  on  the  pit  bank. . . . 
Some  part  of  the  work  is  very  hard;  some  of 
these  girls  have  raised  as  much  as  ten  tons  of 
stuff  a  day"  (No.  1715,  1717).  “Do  you  think 
that  the  women  employed  about  the  collieries 
are  less  moral  than  the  women  employed  in  the 
factories?"  “. . .  The  percentage  of  bad  ones 
may  be  a  little  more  . . .  than  with  the  girls  in 
the  factories"  (No.  1237).  “But  you  are  not 
quite  satisfied  with  the  state  of  morality  in  the 
factories?"  “No"  (No.  1733).  “Would  you  pro¬ 
hibit  the  employment  of  women  in  factories 
also?"  “No,  I  would  not"  (No.  1734).  "Why 
not?"  “I  think  it  a  more  honourable  occupation 
for  them  in  the  mills"  (No.  1735).  “Still  it  is  in¬ 
jurious  to  their  morality,  you  think?"  “Not  so 
much  as  working  on  the  pit  bank;  but  it  is  more 
on  the  social  position  I  take  it;  I  do  not  take  it 
on  its  moral  ground  alone.  The  degradation,  in 
its  social  bearing  on  the  girls,  is  deplorable  in 
the  extreme.  When  these  400  or  500  girls  be¬ 
come  colliers*  wives,  the  men  suffer  greatly  from 
this  degradation,  and  it  causes  them  to  leave 
their  homes  and  drink**  (No.  1736).  “You 
would  be  obliged  to  stop  the  employment  of 
women  in  the  ironworks  as  well,  would  you  not, 
if  you  stopped  it  in  the  collieries?**  “I  cannot 
speak  for  any  other  trade*’  (No.  1737).  “Can 
you  see  any  difference  in  the  circumstances  of 
women  employed  in  ironworks,  and  the  circum¬ 
stances  of  women  employed  above  ground  in 
collieries?”  “I  have  not  ascertained  anything 
as  to  that"  (No.  1740).  “Can  you  see  anything 
that  makes  a  distinction  between  one  class  and 
the  other?"  “I  have  not  ascertained  that,  but  I 
know  from  house  to  house  visitation  that  it  is  a 
deplorable  state  of  things  in  our  district.  • 


ployment  was  degrading?"  “It  would  become 
injurious,  I  think,  in  this  way:  the  best  feelings 
of  Englishmen  have  been  gained  from  the  in¬ 
struction  of  a  mother  . . ."  (No.  1750).  “That 
equally  applies  to  agricultural  employments, 
does  it  not?"  “Yes,  but  that  is  only  for  two  sea¬ 
sons,  and  we  have  work  all  the  four  seasons" 
(No.  1751).  “They  often  work  day  and  night, 
wet  through  to  the  skin,  their  constitution  un¬ 
dermined  and  their  health  ruined.**  “You  have 
not  inquired  into  that  subject  perhaps?"  “I 
have  certainly  taken  note  of  it  as  I  have  gone 
along,  and  certainly  I  have  seen  nothing  paral¬ 
lel  to  the  effects  of  the  employment  of  women 
on  the  pit  bank.  ...  It  is  the  work  of  a  man  .  . . 
a  strong  man**  (No.  1753,  1793,  1794).  “Your 
feeling  upon  the  whole  subject  is  that  the  better 
class  of  colliers  who  desire  to  raise  themselves 
and  humanize  themselves,  instead  of  deriving 
help  from  the  women,  are  pulled  down  by 
them?**  “Yes**  (No.  1808).  After  some  further 
crooked  questions  from  these  bourgeois,  the  se¬ 
cret  of  their  “sympathy**  for  widows,  poor  fam¬ 
ilies,  etc.,  comes  out  at  last.  “The  coal  proprie¬ 
tor  appoints  certain  gentlemen  to  take  the  over¬ 
sight  of  the  workings,  and  it  is  their  policy,  in 
order  to  receive  approbation,  to  place  things  on 
the  most  economical  basis  the^can,  and  these 
girls  are  employed  at  from  is.  up  to  is.  6 d.  a 
day,  where  a  man  at  the  rate  of  2 s.  6 d.  a  day 
would  have  to  be  employed**  (No.  1816). 

IV.  coroner’s  inquests.  “With  regard  to 
coroner's  inquests  in  your  district,  have  the 
workmen  confidence  in  the  proceedings  at  those 
inquests  when  accidents  occur?"  “No;  they 
have  not"  (No.  360).  “Why  not?"  “Chiefly  be¬ 
cause  the  men  who  are  generally  chosen  are  men 
who  know  nothing  about  mines  and  such  like." 
“Are  not  workmen  summoned  at  all  upon  the 
juries?"  “Never  but  as  witnesses,  to  my  knowl¬ 
edge."  “Who  are  the  people  who  are  generally 
summoned  upon  these  juries?"  “Generally 
tradesmen  in  the  neighbourhood  . .  .  from  their 
circumstances  they  are  sometimes  liable  to  be 
influenced  by  their  employers  . . .  the  owners  of 
the  works.  They  are  generally  men  who  have  no 
knowledge,  and  can  scarcely  understand  the 
witnesses  who  are  called  before  them,  and  the 
terms  which  are  used  and  such  like."  “Would 
you  have  the  jury  composed  of  persons  who  had 
been  employed  in  mining?"  “Yes,  partly  . . . 
they"  (the  workmen)  “think  that  the  verdict  is 
not  in  accordance  with  the  evidence  given  gen- 
erally”  (No.  361, 364, 366, 368, 371, 375).  “One 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


great  object  in  summoning  a  jury  is  to  have  an 
impartial  one,  is  it  not?**  “Yes,  1  should  think 
so.”  “I)o  you  think  that  the  juries  would  be  im¬ 
partial  if  they  were  composed  to  a  considerable 
extent  of  workmen  ?”  “1  cannot  see  any  motive 
which  the  workmen  would  have  to  act  partially 
.  .  .  they  necessarily  have  a  better  knowledge  of 
the  operations  in  connection  with  the  mine.’* 
“You  do  not  think  there  would  be  a  tendency 
on  the  part  of  the  workmen  to  return  unfairly 
severe  verdicts?”  “No,  I  think  not”  (No.  378, 

379, 380). 

V.  FALSE  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.  The  work¬ 
men  demand  to  be  paid  weekly  instead  of  fort¬ 
nightly,  and  by  weight  instead  of  by  cubical 
contents  of  the  tubs;  they  also  demand  protec¬ 
tion  against  the  use  of  false  weights,  etc.  (No. 
1071).  “If  the  tubs  were  fraudulently  increased, 
a  man  could  discontinue  working  by  giving 
fourteen  days’  notice?”  “But  if  he  goes  to  an¬ 
other  place,  there  is  the  same  thing  going  on 
there”  (No.  1071).  “But  he  can  leave  that  place 
where  the  wront  been  committed?”  “It  is 
general;  wherever  he  goes,  he  has  to  submit  to 
it”  (No.  1072).  “Could  a  man  leave  by  giving 
fourteen  days’  notice?”  “Yes”  (No.  1073).  And 
yet  they  arc  not  satisfied! 

VI.  inspection  of  mines.  Casualties  from 
explosions  arc  not  the  only  things  the  workmen 
suffer  from  (No.  234#*.).  “Our  men  complained 
very  much  of  the  bad  ventilation  of  the  col¬ 
lieries  .  .  .  the  ventilation  is  so  bad  in  general 
that  the  men  can  scarcely  breathe;  they  are 
quite  unfit  for  employment  of  any  kind  after 
they  have  been  fora  length  of  time  in  connection 
with  their  work;  indeed,  just  at  the  part  of  the 
mine  where  I  am  working,  men  have  been 
obliged  to  leave  their  employment  and  come 
home  in  consequence  of  that. . .  .  Some  of  them 
have  been  out  of  work  for  weeks  just  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  bad  state  of  the  ventilation  where 
there  is  not  explosive  gas.  .  .  .  There  is  plenty 
of  air  generally  in  the  main  courses,  yet  pains 
are  not  taken  to  get  air  into  the  workings  where 
men  are  working.”  “Why  do  you  not  apply  to 
the  inspector?”  “To  cell  the  truth,  there  are 
’many  men  who  are  timid  on  that  point;  there 
have  been  cases  of  men  being  sacrificed  and  los¬ 
ing  their  employment  in  consequence  of  apply¬ 
ing  to  the  inspector.”  “Why;  is  he  a  marked 
man  for  having  complained?”  “Yes.”  “And  he 
finds  it  difficult  to  get  employment  in  another 
mine?”  “Yes.”  “Do  you  think  the  mines  in  your 
neighbourhood  are  sufficiently  inspected  to  in¬ 
sure  a  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the 
Act?”  “No;  they  arc  not  inspected  at  all.  • 


247 

The  inspector  has  been  down  just  once  in  the 
pit,  and  it  has  been  going  seven  years.  ...  In 
the  district  to  which  I  belong  there  are  not  a 
sufficient  number  of  inspectors.  We  have  one 
old  man  more  than  seventy  years  of  age  to  in¬ 
spect  more  than  130  collieries.”  “You  wish  to 
have  a  class  of  sub-inspectors?”  “Yes”  (No. 
234,241,251,254,274,275,  554,  276,  293).  “But 
do  you  think  it  would  be  possible  for  govern¬ 
ment  to  maintain  such  an  army  of  inspectors  as 
would  be  necessary  to  do  all  that  you  want  them 
to  do,  without  information  from  the  men?” 
“No,  I  should  think  it  would  be  next  to  impos¬ 
sible.”  “It  would  be  desirable  the  inspectors 
should  come  oftener  ?”  “Yes,  and  without  being 
sent  for”  (No.  280,  277).  “Do  you  not  think 
that  the  effect  of  having  these  inspectors  ex¬ 
amining  the  collieries  so  frequently  would  be  to 
shift  the  responsibility(l)  of  supplying  proper 
ventilation  from  the  owners  of  the  collieries  to 
the  go\  ernment  officials?”  “No,  I  do  not  think 
that,  I  think  that  they  should  make  it  their 
business  to  enforce  the  Acts  which  arc  already 
in  existence”  (No.  285).  “When  you  speak  of 
sub-inspectors,  do  you  mean  men  at  a  less  sal¬ 
ary  and  of  an  inferior  stamp  to  the  present  in¬ 
spectors?”  “I  would  not  have  them  inferior,  if 
you  could  get  them  otherwise”  (No.  294).  “Do 
you  merely  want  more  inspectors,  or  do  you 
want  a  lower  class  of  men  as  an  inspector?”  “A 
man  who  would  knock  about  and  sec  that 
things  are  kept  right;  a  man  who  would  not  be 
afraid  of  himself”  (No.  295).  “If  you  obtained 
your  wish  in  getting  an  inferior  class  of  inspec¬ 
tors  appointed,  do  )ou  think  that  there  would 
be  no  danger  from  want  of  skill,  etc.?”  “I  think 
not;  I  think  that  the  government  would  see  af¬ 
ter  that,  and  have  proper  men  in  that  position” 
(No.  297).  This  kind  of  examination  becomes 
at  last  too  much  even  for  the  chairman  of  the 
committee,  and  he  interrupts  with  the  observa¬ 
tion:  “You  want  a  class  of  men  who  would  look 
into  all  the  details  of  the  mine,  and  would  go  in¬ 
to  all  the  holes  and  corners,  and  go  into  the  real 
facts.  .  .  .  They  would  report  to  the  chief  in¬ 
spector,  who  would  then  bring  his  scientific 
knowledge  to  bear  on  the  facts  they  ha\e 
stated?”  (No.  298,  299).  “Would  it  not  entail 
very  great  expense  if  all  these  old  workings  were 
kept  ventilated?”  “Yes,  expense  might  be  in¬ 
curred,  but  life  would  be  at  the  same  time  pro¬ 
tected”  (No.  531).  A  working  miner  objects  to 
the  17th  section  of  the  Act  of  i860;  he  says,  “At 
the  present  time,  if  the  inspector  of  mines  finds 
a  part  of  the  mine  unfit  to  work  in,  he  has  to  re¬ 
port  it  to  the  mine  owner  and  the  Home  Secre- 


CAPITAL 


248 

tary.  After  doing  that,  there  is  given  to  the  own¬ 
er  twenty  days  to  look  over  the  matter;  at  the 
end  of  twenty  days  he  has  the  power  to  refuse 
making  any  alteration  in  themine;  but,  when  he 
refuses,  the  mine  owner  writes  to  the  Home  Sec¬ 
retary,  at  the  same  time  nominating  five  engin¬ 
eers,  and  from  those  five  engineers  named  by 
the  mine  owner  himself,  the  Home  Secretary 
appoints  one,  I  think,  as  arbitrator,  or  appoints 
arbitrators  from  them;  now  we  think  in  that 
case  the  mine  owner  virtually  appoints  his  own 
arbitrator*’  (No.  581).  Bourgeois  examiner, 
himself  a  mine  owner:  “But ...  is  this  a  merely 
speculative  objection?”  (No.  586).  “Then  you 
have  a  very  poor  opinion  of  the  integrity  of  min¬ 
ing  engineers?”  “It  is  most  certainly  unjust  and 
inequitable”  (No.  588).  “Do  not  mining  engin¬ 
eers  possess  a  sort  of  public  character,  and  do 
not  you  think  that  they  are  above  making  such 
a  partial  decision  as  you  apprehend?”  “I  do  not 
wish  to  answer  such  a  question  as  that  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  personal  character  of  those  men. 
1  believe  that  in  many  cases  they  would  act 
very  partially  indeed,  and  that  it  ought  not  to 
be  in  their  hands  to  do  so,  where  men’s  lives  are 
at  stake”  (No.  589).  This  same  bourgeois  is  not 
ashamed  to  put  this  question:  “Do  you  not 
think  that  the  mine  owner  also  suffers  loss  from 
an  explosion?”  Finally,  “Are  not  you  workmen 
in  Lancashire  able  to  take  care  of  your  own  in¬ 
terests  without  calling  in  the  Government  to 
help  you?”  “No”  (No.  1042). 

In  the  year  1865,  there  were  3217  coal  mines 
in  Great  Britain,  and  12  inspectors.  A  York¬ 
shire  mine  owner  himself  calculates  ( The  Times , 
26th  January,  1867)  that  putting  on  one  side 
their  office  work,  which  absorbs  all  their  time, 
each  mine  can  be  visited  but  once  in  ten  years 
by  an  inspector.  No  wonder  that  explosions 
have  increased  progressively,  both  in  number 
and  extent  (sometimes  with  a  loss  of  two  to 
three  hundred  men)  during  the  last  ten  years. 

The  very  defective  Act  passed  in  1872  is  the 
first  that  regulates  the  hours  of  labour  of  the 
children  employed  in  mines,  and  makes  exploit¬ 
ers  and  owners,  to  a  certain  extent,  responsible 
for  so-called  accidents. 

The  Royal  Commission  appointed  in  1867  to 
inquire  into  the  employment  in  agriculture  of 
children,  young  persons,  and  women,  has  pub¬ 
lished  some  very  important  reports.  Several  at¬ 
tempts  to  apply  the  principles  of  the  Factory 
Acts,  but  in  a  modified  form,  to  agriculture 
have  been  made,  but  have  so  far  resulted  in 
complete  failure.  All  that  I  wish  to  draw  atten¬ 


tion  to  here  is  the  existence  of  an  irresistible 
tendency  towards  the  general  application  of 
those  principles. 

If  the  general  extension  of  factory  legislation 
to  all  trades  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  the 
working  class  both  in  mind  and  body  has  be¬ 
come  inevitable;  on  the  other  hand,  as  wc  have 
already  pointed  out,  that  extension  hastens  on 
the  general  conversion  of  numerous  isolated 
small  industries  into  a  few  combined  industries 
carried  on  upon  a  large  scale;  it  therefore  ac¬ 
celerates  the  concentration  of  capital  and  the 
exclusive  predominance  of  the  factory  system. 
It  destroys  both  the  ancient  and  the  transition¬ 
al  forms,  behind  which  the  dominion  of  capital 
is  still  in  part  concealed,  and  replaces  them  by 
the  direct  and  open  sway  of  capital;  but  thereby 
it  also  generalizes  the  direct  opposition  to  this 
sway.  While  in  each  individual  workshop  it  en¬ 
forces  uniformity,  regularity,  order,  and  econ¬ 
omy,  it  increases  by  the  immense  spur  which 
the  limitation  and  regulation  of  the  working- 
day  give  to  technical  improvement,  the  an¬ 
archy  and  the  catastrophes  of  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction  as  a  whole,  the  intensity  of  labour,  and 
the  competition  of  machinery  with  the  labour¬ 
er.  By  the  destruction  of  petty  and  domestic  in¬ 
dustries,  it  destroys  the  last  resort  of  the  “re¬ 
dundant  population,”  and  with  it  the  sole  re¬ 
maining  safety-valve  of  the  whole  social  mech¬ 
anism.  By  maturing  the  material  conditions, 
and  the  combination  on  a  social  scale  of  the 
processes  of  production,  it  matures  the  contra¬ 
dictions  and  antagonisms  of  the  capitalist  form 
of  production,  and  thereby  provides,  along  with 
the  elements  for  the  formation  of  a  new  society, 
the  forces  for  exploding  the  old  one.1 

1  Robert  Owen,  the  father  of  cooperative  factories  and 
stores,  but  who,  as  before  remarked,  in  no  way  shared  the 
illusions  of  his  followers  with  regard  to  the  bearing  of  these 
isolated  elements  of  transformation,  not  only  practically 
made  the  factory  system  the  sole  foundation  of  his  experi¬ 
ments,  but  also  declared  that  system  to  be  theoretically  the 
starting-point  of  the  social  revolution.  Herr  Visscring,  Pro¬ 
fessor  of  Political  Economy  in  the  University  of  Leyden, 
appears  to  have  a  suspicion  of  this  wh»n,  in  his  liandboek 
van  Praktische  Staatshuuhoudkunde ,  186062,  which  re¬ 
produces  all  the  platitudes  of  vulgar  economy,  he  strongly 
supports  handicrafts  against  the  factory  system.— Note  to 
the  al’h  edition:  Finally,  that  whole  juridical  tangle  created 
by  the  English  legislation  in  the  form  of  the  mutually  con¬ 
tradictory  Factory  Acts,  Factory  Extension  Act  and  Work¬ 
shops  Act,  became  intolerable,  and  so  the  Factory  and 
Workshops  Act  of  1878  came  into  being  as  a  codification 
of  all  the  existing  legislation  in  this  field.  It  would  be  im¬ 
possible  to  give  here  an  exhaustive  critical  analysis  of  the 
industrial  code  of  England  now  in  force.  Instead,  the  fol¬ 
lowing  brief  notes  may  suffice.  The  Act  embraces:  (1)  Tex¬ 
tile  industries.  Here  everything  remains  more  or  less  the 


MACHINERY  AND  MODERN  INDUSTRY 


10.  Modem  Industry  and  Agriculture 

The  revolution  called  forth  by  modern  indus¬ 
try  in  agriculture,  and  in  the  social  relations  of 
agricultural  producers,  will  be  investigated 
later  on.  In  this  place  we  shall  merely  indicate 
a  few  results  by  way  of  anticipation.  If  the  use 
of  machinery  in  agriculture  is  for  the  most  part 
free  from  the  injurious  physical  effect  it  has  on 
the  factory  operative,1  its  action  in  superseding 
the  labourers  is  more  intense  and  finds  less  re¬ 
sistance,  as  wc  shall  see  later  in  detail.  In  the 
counties  of  Cambridge  and  Suffolk,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  the  area  of  cultivated  land  has  extended 
very  much  within  the  last  twenty  years  (up  to 
1868),  while  in  the  same  period  the  rural  popu¬ 
lation  has  diminished,  not  only  relatively,  but 
absolutely.  In  the  United  States,  it  is  as  yet 
only  virtually  that  agricultural  machines  re¬ 
place  labourers;  in  other  words,  they  allow  of 
the  cultivation  by  the  farmer  of  a  larger  surface, 
but  do  not  actually  expel  the  labourers  em- 


samc.  Working  time  permitted  for  children  over  ten,  $>£ 
hours  daily,  or  6  hours  and  no  Saturday  work;  for  young 
persons  and  women,  10  hours  five  days  a  week,  6y2  hours 
on  Saturday.  (2)  Industries  other  than  textiles.  Here  the 
regulations  now  approach  more  closely  the  conditions  pre¬ 
vailing  in  class  (1),  but  there  still  exist  a  number  of  excep¬ 
tions  favourable  to  the  capitalist,  which,  moreover,  can  be 
extended  in  some  cases  through  special  permission  of  the 
Home  Office.  (3)  Workshops,  defined  in  approximately  the 
same  way  as  in  the  original  Act.  For  workshops  employing 
children,  young  persons,  and  women,  the  regulations  are 
about  the  same  as  those  for  class  (2),  but  again  with  relief 
for  the  capitalist  in  special  cases.  (4)  Workshops  which  do 
not  employ  children  or  young  persons,  but  only  workers  of 
both  sexes  over  eighteen.  For  this  category,  even  more  re¬ 
lief  is  granted.  (5)  Domestic  workshops,  in  which  only 
members  of  the  family  arc  employed,  working  in  the 
family  home.  Here  the  regulations  arc  still  more  elastic, 
and  a  further  restriction  is  imposed  by  barring  inspec¬ 
tors  from  visiting  any  rooms  which  are  also  used  as 
living  quarters,  except  by  special  ministerial  permission. 
Finally,  straw-plaiting,  lace  and  glovcmaking  in  the  fam¬ 
ily  circle  have  been  entirely  freed  from  regulation. 

Yet,  with  all  its  shortcomings,  this  act  (together  with 
the  Swiss  Federal  Factory  Act  of  March  23,  1877)  is  still 
by  far  the  best  piece  of  legislation  in  its  field.  A  comparison 
of  the  English  and  the  Swiss  statutes  is  of  special  interest, 
since  it  shows  clearly  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of 
.the  two  legislative  methods  involved:  the  English  method, 
which  is  “historical,”  attacking  problems  as  they  may  arise 
from  time  to  time,  and  the  more  generalizing  continental 
method,  which  is  built  upon  the  traditions  of  the  French 
Revolution.  Unfortunately,  the  English  code  is  still  a  dead 
letter  as  far  as  workshops  are  concerned,  because  of  lack  of 
inspectors.  F.E. 

1  A  full  account  of  the  kind  of  machinery  used  in  English 
agriculture  will  be  found  \rCThc  Agricultural  Machines  and 
Implements  of  England ,  Dr.  W.  Hamm,  second  edition, 
1856.— Note  to  the  4  th  edition:  Now  of  course  out  of  date. 
F.E. 


249 

ployed.  In  1861,  the  number  of  persons  occu¬ 
pied  in  England  and  Wales  in  the  manufacture 
of  agricultural  machines  was  1034,  whilst  the 
number  of  agricultural  labourers  employed  in 
the  use  of  agricultural  machines  and  steam  en¬ 
gines  did  not  exceed  1205. 

In  the  sphere  of  agriculture,  modern  industry 
has  a  more  revolutionary  effect  than  elsewhere, 
because  it  annihilates  the  peasant,  that  bul¬ 
wark  of  the  old  society,  and  replaces  him  by  the 
wage  labourer.  Thus  the  desire  for  social 
changes,  and  the  class  antagonisms  are  brought 
to  the  same  level  in  the  country  as  in  the  towns. 
The  irrational,  old  fashioned  methods  of  agri¬ 
culture  are  replaced  by  scientific  ones.  Capital¬ 
ist  production  completely  tears  asunder  the  old 
bond  of  union  which  held  together  agriculture 
and  manufacture  in  their  infancy.  But  at  the 
same  time  it  creates  the  material  conditions  for 
a  higher  synthesis  in  the  future,  viz.,  the  union 
of  agriculture  and  industry  on  the  basis  of  the 
more  perfected  forms  they  have  each  acquired 
during  their  temporary  separation.  Capitalist 
production,  by  collecting  the  population  in 
great  centres  and  causing  an  ever  increasing 
preponderance  of  town  population,  on  the  one 
hand  concentrates  the  historical  motive-power 
of  society;  on  the  other  hand,  it  disturbs  the 
circulation  of  matter  between  man  and  the  soil 
(i.c.,  prevents  the  return  to  the  soil  of  its  ele¬ 
ments  consumed  by  man  in  the  form  of  food  and 
clothing);  it  therefore  violates  the  conditions 
necessary  to  lasting  fertility  of  the  soil.  By  this 
action,  it  destroys  at  the  same  time  the  health 
of  the  town  labourer  and  the  intellectual  life  of 
the  rural  labourer.2  But  while  upsetting  the  nat¬ 
urally  grown  conditions  for  the  maintenance  of 
that  circulation  of  matter,  it  imperiously  calls 
for  its  restoration  as  a  system,  as  a  regulating 
law  of  social  production,  and  under  a  form  ap¬ 
propriate  to  the  full  development  of  the  human 
race.  In  agriculture,  as  in  manufacture,  the 
transformation  of  production  under  the  sway 
of  capital  means  at  the  same  time  the  martyr¬ 
dom  of  the  producer;  the  instrument  of  labour 
becomes  the  means  of  enslaving,  exploiting,  and 

*  “You  divide  the  people  into  two  hostile  camps  of  clown¬ 
ish  boors  and  emasculated  dwarfs.  Good  heavens!  a  nation 
divided  into  agricultural  and  commercial  interests,  calling 
itself  sane;  nay,  styling  itself  enlightened  and  civilized,  not 
only  in  spite  of,  but  in  consequence  of  this  monstrous  and 
unnatural  division.”  (David  Urquhart,  op.  cit.,  p.  119.) 
This  passage  shows,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  the  strength 
and  the  weakness  of  that  kind  of  criticism  which  knows 
how  to  judge  and  condemn  the  present,  but  not  how  to 
comprehend  it. 


CAPITAL 


250 

impoverishing  the  labourer;  the  social  combi¬ 
nation  and  organization  of  labour  processes  is 
turned  into  an  organized  mode  of  crushing  out 
the  workman’s  individual  vitality,  freedom, 
and  independence.  The  dispersion  of  the  rural 
labourers  over  larger  areas  breaks  their  power 
of  resistance,  while  concentration  increases  that 
of  the  town  operatives.  In  modern  agriculture, 
as  in  the  urban  industries,  the  increased  pro¬ 
ductiveness  and  quantity  of  the  labour  set  in 
motion  are  bought  at  the  cost  of  laying  waste 
and  consuming  by  disease  labour  power  itself. 
Moreover,  all  progress  in  capitalistic  agricul¬ 
ture  is  a  progress  in  the  art,  not  only  of  robbing 
the  labourer,  but  of  robbing  the  soil;  all  prog¬ 
ress  in  increasing  the  fertility  of  the  soil  for  a 
given  time  is  a  progress  towards  ruining  the 
lasting  sources  of  that  fertility.  The  more  a 
country  starts  its  development  on  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  modern  industry,  like  the  United  States, 
for  example,  the  more  rapid  is  this  process  of 
destruction.1  Capitalist  production,  therefore, 

1  Sec  Liebig,  Die  Chemie  in  ihrer  Anwendung  auf  Agri¬ 
cult  ur  und Physiologic ,  seventh  edition,  1862,  and  especial¬ 
ly  the  Einleitung  in  die  Naturgeselzc  des  Feldbausy  in  the 
1st  volume.  To  have  developed  from  the  point  of  view  of 
natural  science,  the  negative,  i.e.,  destructive,  side  of  mod¬ 
ern  agriculture,  is  one  of  Liebig’s  immortal  merits.  His 
summary,  too,  of  the  history  of  agriculture,  although  not 
free  from  gross  errors,  contains  flashes  of  light.  It  is,  how¬ 
ever,  to  be  regretted  that  he  ventures  on  such  haphazard 
assertions  as  the  following:  “By  greater  pulverizing  and 
more  frequent  ploughing,  the  circulation  of  air  in  the  in¬ 
terior  of  porous  soil  is  aided,  and  the  surface  exposed  to 
the  action  of  the  atmosphere  is  increased  and  renewed;  but 


develops  technology,  and  the  combining  to¬ 
gether  of  various  processes  into  a  social  whole, 
only  by  sapping  the  original  sources  of  all 
wealth — the  soil  and  the  labourer. 

it  is  easily  seen  that  the  increased  yield  of  the  land  cannot 
be  proportional  to  the  labour  spent  on  that  land,  but  in¬ 
creases  in  a  much  smaller  proportion.  This  law,”  adds 
Liebig,  44was  first  enunciated  by  John  Stuart  Mill  in  his 
Principles  oj  Political  Economy ,  Vol.  I,  p.  17,  as  follows: 
'That  the  produce  of  land  increases,  ceeteris  paribus ,  in  a 
diminishingratio  to  the  increase  of  the  labourers  employed’  ” 
(Mill  here  introduces  in  an  erroneous  form  the  law  enunci¬ 
ated  by  Ricardo’s  school,  for  since  the  '‘decrease  of  the  la¬ 
bourers  employed”  kept  even  pace  in  England  with  the  ad¬ 
vance  of  agriculture,  the  law  discovered  in,  and  applied  to, 
England,  could  have  no  application  to  that  country,  at  all 
events)K‘is  theuniversal  lawof  agricultural  industry.’  This 
is  very  remarkable,  since  Mill  was  ignorant  of  the  reason 
for  this  law.”  (Liebig,  op.  cit.t  Vol.  I,  p.  143,  and  note.) 
Apart  from  Liebig’s  wrong  interpretation  of  the  word  la - 
hour ,  by  which  word  he  understands  something  quite  dif¬ 
ferent  from  what  political  economy  does,  it  is,  in  any 
case,  “very  remarkable”  that  he  should  make  Mr.  John 
Stuart  Mill  the  first  propounder  of  a  theory  which  was 
first  published  by  James  Anderson  in  A.  Smith’s  days,  and 
was  repeated  in  various  works  down  to  the  beginning  of 
the  nineteenth  century;  a  theory  which  Malthus,  that  mas* 
ter  in  plagiarism  (the  whole  of  his  population  theory  is  a 
shameless  plagiarism),  appropriated  to  himself  in  1815; 
which  West  developed  at  the  same  time  as,  and  indepen¬ 
dently  of,  Anderson;  which  in  the  year  1817  was  connected 
by  Ricardo  with  the  general  theory  of  value,  then  made  the 
round  of  the  world  as  Ricardo’s  theory,  and  in  1820  was 
vulgarized  by  James  Mill,  the  father  of  John  Stuart  Mill; 
and  which,  finally,  was  reproduced  by  John  Stuart  M  ill  and 
others,  as  a  dogma  already  quite  commonplace,  and  known 
to  every  schoolboy.  It  cannot  br  denied  that  John  Stuart 
Mill  owes  his,  at  all  events,  “remarkable”  authority  al¬ 
most  entirely  to  such  quul-pro-quos  [tit-for-tat]. 


Part  Five 


THE  PRODUCTION  OF  ABSOLUTE  AND  OF 
RELATIVE  SURPLUS  VALUE 


CHAPTER  XVI.  ABSOLUTE  AND  RELATIVE 
SURPLUS  VALUE 


I  n  considering  the  labour  process,  we  began  (see 
Chapter  V)  by  treating  it  in  the  abstract,  apart 
from  its  historical  forms,  as  a  process  between 
man  and  nature.  We  there  stated,  p.  87:  “If 
we  examine  the  whole  labour  process  from  the 
point  of  view  of  its  result,  it  is  plain  that  both 
the  instruments  and  the  subject  of  labour  are 
means  of  prod  mi  *’•  r.,  and  that  the  labour  itself 
is  productive  labour.”  And  in  note  2,  same  page, 
we  further  added :  “This  method  of  determining, 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  labour  process  alone, 
what  is  productive  labour,  is  by  no  means  di¬ 
rectly  applicable  to  the  case  of  the  capitalist 
process  of  production.”  We  now  proceed  to  the 
further  development  of  this  subject. 

So  far  as  the  labour  process  is  purely  individ¬ 
ual,  one  and  the  same  labourer  unites  in  himself 
all  the  functions  that  later  on  become  sepa¬ 
rated.  When  an  individual  appropriates  natural 
objects  for  his  livelihood,  no  one  controls  him 
but  himself.  Afterwards  he  is  controlled  by  oth¬ 
ers.  A  single  man  cannot  operate  upon  nature 
without  calling  his  own  muscles  into  play  under 
the  control  of  his  own  brain.  As  in  the  natural 
body  head  and  hand  wait  upon  each  other,  so 
the  labour  process  unites  the  labour  of  the  hand 
with  that  of  the  head.  Later  on  they  part  com¬ 
pany  and  even  become  deadly  foes.  The  prod¬ 
uct  ceases  to  be  the  direct  product  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual,  and  becomes  a  social  product,  produced 
in  common  by  a  collective  labourer,  i.e.,  by  a 
combination  of  workmen,  each  of  whom  takes 
only  a  part,  greater  or  less,  in  the  manipulation 
of  the  subject  of  their  labour.  As  the  coopera¬ 
tive  character  of  the  labour  process  becomes 
more  and  more  marked,  so,  as  a  necessary  con¬ 
sequence,  does  our  notion  of  productive  labour, 
and  of  its  agent  the  productive  labourer,  be¬ 
come  extended.  In  order  to  labour  productive¬ 
ly,  it  is  no  longer  necessary  for  you  to  do  manual 
work  yourself;  enough,  if  you  are  an  organ  of 

251 


the  collective  labourer,  and  perform  one  of  its 
subordinate  functions.  The  first  definition 
given  above  of  productive  labour,  a  definition 
deduced  from  the  very  nature  of  the  production 
of  material  objects,  still  remains  correct  for  the 
collective  labourer,  considered  as  a  whole.  But 
it  no  longer  holds  good  for  each  member  taken 
individually.* 

On  the  other  hand,  however,  our  notion  of 
productive  labour  becomes  narrowed.  Capital¬ 
ist  production  is  not  merely  the  production  of 
commodities;  it  is  essentially  the  production  of 
surplus  value.  The  labourer  produces,  not  for 
himself,  but  for  capital.  It  no  longer  suffices, 
therefore,  that  he  should  simply  produce.  He 
must  produce  surplus  value.  That  labourer 
alone  is  productive  who  produces  surplus  value 
for  the  capitalist,  and  thus  works  for  the  self¬ 
expansion  of  capital.  If  we  may  take  an  example 
from  outside  the  sphere  of  production  of  ma¬ 
terial  objects,  a  schoolmaster  is  a  productive 
labourer  when,  in  addition  to  belabouring  the 
heads  of  his  scholars,  he  works  like  a  horse  to 
enrich  the  school  proprietor.  That  the  latter  has 
laid  out  his  capital  in  a  teaching  factory,  instead 
of  in  a  sausage  factory,  does  not  alter  the  rela¬ 
tion.  Hence  the  notion  of  a  productive  labourer 
implies  not  merely  a  relation  between  work  and 
useful  effect,  between  labourer  and  product  of 
labour,  but  also  a  specific  social  relation  of  pro¬ 
duction,  a  relation  that  has  sprung  up  histori¬ 
cally  and  stamps  the  labourer  as  the  direct 
means  of  creating  surplus  value.  To  be  a  pro¬ 
ductive  labourer  is,  therefore,  not  a  piece  of 
luck,  but  a  misfortune.  In  Book  Four,  which 
treats  of  the  history  of  the  theory,  it  will  be 
more  clearly  seen  that  the  production  of  surplus 
value  has  at  all  times  been  made,  by  classical 
political  economists,  the  distinguishing  char¬ 
acteristic  of  the  productive  labourer.  Hence 
their  definition  of  a  productive  labourer 
changes  wi  th  their  comprehension  of  the  nature 
of  surplus  value.  Thus  the  Physiocrats  insist 
that  only  agricultural  labour  is  productive, 


CAPITAL 


252 

since  that  alone,  they  say,  yields  a  surplus 
value.  And  they  say  so  because,  with  them, 
surplus  value  has  no  existence  except  in  the 
form  of  rent. 

The  prolongation  of  the  working  day  beyond 
the  point  at  which  the  labourer  would  have  pro¬ 
duced  just  an  equivalent  for  the  value  of  his  la¬ 
bour  power,  and  the  appropriation  of  that  sur¬ 
plus  labour  by  capital — this  is  production  of  ab¬ 
solute  surplus  value.  It  forms  the  general 
groundwork  of  the  capitalist  system  and  the 
starting  point  for  the  production  of  relative  sur¬ 
plus  value.  The  latter  presupposes  that  the 
working  day  is  already  divided  into  two  parts, 
necessary  labour  and  surplus  labour.  In  order 
to  prolong  the  surplus  labour,  the  necessary  la¬ 
bour  is  shortened  by  methods  whereby  the 
equivalent  for  the  wages  is  produced  in  less 
time.  The  production  of  absolute  surplus  value 
turns  exclusively  upon  the  length  of  the  work¬ 
ing  day;  the  production  of  relative  surplus 
value,  revolutionizes  out  and  out  the  technical 
processes  of  labour  and  the  composition  of  so¬ 
ciety.  It  therefore  presupposes  a  specific  mode, 
the  capitalist  mode  of  production,  a  mode 
which,  along  with  its  methods,  means,  and  con¬ 
ditions,  arises  and  develops  itself  spontaneous¬ 
ly  on  the  foundation  afforded  by  the  formal 
subjection  of  labour  to  capital.  In  the  course 
of  this  development,  the  formal  subjection  is 
replaced  by  the  real  subjection  of  labour  to 
capital. 

It  will  suffice  merely  to  refer  to  certain  inter¬ 
mediate  forms,  in  which  surplus  labour  is  not 
extorted  by  direct  compulsion  from  the  pro¬ 
ducer,  nor  the  producer  himself  yet  formally 
subjected  to  capital.  In  such  forms  capital  has 
not  yet  acquired  the  direct  control  of  the  la¬ 
bour  process.  By  the  side  of  independent  pro¬ 
ducers  who  carry  on  their  handicrafts  and 
agriculture  in  the  traditional  old-fashioned  way, 
there  stands  the  usurer  or  the  merchant,  with 
his  usurer’s  capital  or  merchant’s  capital,  feed¬ 
ing  on  them  like  a  parasite.  The  predominance, 
in  a  society,  of  this  form  of  exploitation  ex¬ 
cludes  the  capitalist  mode  of  production;  to 
which  mode,  however,  this  form  may  serve  as  a 
transition,  as  it  did  towards  the  close  of  the 
Middle  Ages.  Finally,  as  is  shown  by  modern 
“domestic  industry,”  some  intermediate  forms 
are  here  and  there  reproduced  in  the  back¬ 
ground  of  modern  industry,  though  their  phys¬ 
iognomy  is  totally  changed. 

If,  on  the  one  hand,  the  mere  formal  subjec¬ 
tion  of  labour  to  capital  suffices  for  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  absolute  surplus  value,  if,  e.g.,  it  is  suf¬ 


ficient  that  handicraftsmen  who  previously 
worked  on  their  own  account,  or  as  apprentices 
of  a  master,  should  become  wage  labourers  un¬ 
der  the  direct  control  of  a  capitalist;  so,  on  the 
other  hand,  we  have  seen  how  the  methods  of 
producing  relative  surplus  value  are,  at  the 
same  time,  methods  of  producing  absolute  sur¬ 
plus  value.  Nay,  more,  the  excessive  prolonga¬ 
tion  of  the  working  day  turned  out  to  be  the  pe¬ 
culiar  product  of  modern  industry.  Generally 
speaking,  the  specifically  capitalist  mode  of 
production  ceases  to  be  a  mere  means  of  pro¬ 
ducing  relative  surplus  value  so  soon  as  that 
mode  has  conquered  an  entire  branch  of  pro¬ 
duction;  and  still  more  so,  so  soon  as  it  has  con¬ 
quered  all  the  important  branches.  It  then  be¬ 
comes  the  general,  socially  predominant  form 
of  production.  As  a  special  method  of  producing 
relative  surplus  value,  it  remains  effective  only, 
first,  in  so  far  as  it  seizes  upon  industries  that 
previously  were  only  formally  subject  to  capi¬ 
tal,  that  is,  so  far  as  it  is  propagandist;  second¬ 
ly,  in  so  far  as  the  industries  that  have  been 
taken  over  by  it  continue  to  be  revolutionized 
by  changes  in  the  methods  of  production. 

From  one  standpoint,  any  distinction  be¬ 
tween  absolute  and  relative  surplus  value  ap¬ 
pears  illusory.  Relative  surplus  value  is  abso¬ 
lute,  since  it  compels  the  absolute  prolongation 
of  the  working  day  beyond  the  labour  time  nec¬ 
essary  to  the  existence  of  the  laBourer  himself. 
Absolute  surplus  value  is  relative,  since  it 
makes  necessary  such  a  development  of  the  pro¬ 
ductiveness  of  labour  as  will  allow  of  the  neces¬ 
sary  labour  time  being  confined  to  a  portion  of 
the  working  day.  But  if  we  keep  in  mind  the  be¬ 
haviour  of  surplus  value,  this  appearance  of 
identity  vanishes.  Once  the  capitalist  mode  of 
production  has  been  established  and  has  be¬ 
come  general,  the  difference  between  absolute 
and  relative  surplus  value  makes  itself  felt 
whenever  there  is  a  question  of  raising  the  rate 
of  surplus  value.  Assuming  that  labour  power 
is  paid  for  at  its  value,  we  are  confronted  by 
this  alternative:  given  the  productiveness  of  la¬ 
bour  and  its  normal  intensity,  the  rate  of  sur¬ 
plus  value  can  be  raised  only  by  the  actual  pro¬ 
longation  of  the  working  day;  on  the  other 
hand,  given  the  length  of  the  working  day,  that 
rise  can  be  effected  only  by  a  change  in  the  rela¬ 
tive  magnitudes  of  the  componentsof  the  work¬ 
ing  day,  viz.,  necessary  labour  and  surplus  la¬ 
bour;  a  change  which,  if  the  wages  are  not  to 
fall  below  the  value  of  labour  power,  presup¬ 
poses  a  change  either  in  the  productiveness 
or  in  the  intensity  of  the  labour. 


ABSOLUTE  AND  RELATIVE  SURPLUS  VALUE 


If  the  labourer  wants  all  his  time  to  produce 
the  necessary  means  of  subsistence  for  himself 
and  his  race,  he  has  no  time  left  in  which  to  work 
gratis  for  others.  Without  a  certain  degree  of 
productiveness  in  his  labour,  he  has  no  such 
superfluous  time  at  his  disposal;  without  such 
superfluous  time,  no  surplus  labour,  and  there¬ 
fore  no  capitalists,  no  slave  owners,  no  feudal 
lords— in  one  word,  no  class  of  large  proprie¬ 
tors.1 

Thus  we  may  say  that  surplus  value  rests  on 
a  natural  basis;  but  this  is  permissible  only  in 
the  very  general  sense  that  there  is  no  natural 
obstacle  absolutely  preventing  one  man  from 
disburdening  himself  of  the  labour  requisite  for 
his  own  existence,  and  burdening  another  with 
it,  any  more,  for  instance,  than  unconquerable 
natural  obstacles  prevent  one  man  from  eating 
the  flesh  of  another.2  No  mystical  ideas  must  in 
any  way  be  connected,  as  sometimes  happens, 
with  this  historically  developed  productiveness 
of  labour.  1 1  is  only  after  men  have  raised  them¬ 
selves  above  the  rank  of  animals,  when,  there¬ 
fore,  their  labour  has  been  to  some  extent  so¬ 
cialized,  that  a  state  of  things  arises  in  which 
the  surplus  labour  of  the  one  becomes  a  condi¬ 
tion  of  existence  for  the  other.  At  the  dawn  of 
civilization  the  productiveness  acquired  by  la¬ 
bour  is  small,  but  so  too  are  the  wants  which 
develop  with  and  by  the  means  of  satisfying 
them.  Further,  at  that  early  period,  the  portion 
of  society  that  lives  on  the  labour  of  others  is 
infinitely  small  compared  with  the  mass  of  di¬ 
rect  producers.  Along  with  the  progress  in  the 
productiveness  of  labour,  that  small  portion  of 
society  increases  both  absolutely  and  relative¬ 
ly.*  Besides,  capital  with  its  accompanying  re¬ 
lations  springs  up  from  an  economic  soil  that 
is  the  product  of  a  long  process  of  development. 
The  productiveness  of  labour  that  serves  as  its 
foundation  and  starting-point  is  a  gift,  not  of 
nature,  but  of  a  history  embracing  thousands 
of  centuries. 

Apart  from  the  degree  of  development,  great¬ 
er  or  less,  in  the  form  of  social  production,  the 

1  “The  very  existence  of  the  master  capitalists,  as  a  dis- 
ti  net  class,  is  dependent  on  the  productiveness  of  industry.” 
(Ramsay,  op.  cit.t  p.  206.)  “If  each  man’s  labour  were  but 
enough  to  produce  his  own  food,  there  could  be  no  prop¬ 
erty.”  (Kavenstone,  op.  cit.,  pp.  14, 15.) 

*  According  to  a  recent  calculation,  there  are  yet  at  least 
4,000, coo  cannibals  in  those  parts  of  the  earth  which  have 
already  been  explored. 

*  “Among  the  wild  Indians  in  America,  almost  every¬ 
thing  is  the  labourer’s,  ninety-nine  parts  of  a  hundred  are 
to  be  put  upon  the  account  of  labour.  In  England,  per¬ 
haps,  the  labourer  has  not  a/3.” — The  Advantages  of  the 
East  India  Trade ,  etc.,  p.  73. 


253 

productiveness  of  labour  is  fettered  by  physical 
conditions.  These  are  all  referable  to  the  consti¬ 
tution  of  man  himself  (race,  etc.),  and  to  sur¬ 
rounding  nature.  The  external  physical  condi¬ 
tions  fall  into  two  great  economic  classes:  (1) 
natural  wealth  in  means  of  subsistence,  i.e.,  a 
fruitful  soil,  waters  teeming  with  fish,  etc.,  and 
(2),  natural  wealth  in  the  instruments  of  la¬ 
bour,  such  as  waterfalls,  navigable  rivers,  wood, 
metal,  coal,  etc.  At  the  dawn  of  civilization,  it 
is  the  first  class  that  turns  the  scale;  at  a  higher 
stage  of  development,  it  is  the  second.  Compare 
for  example,  England  with  India,  or,  in  ancient 
times,  Athens  and  Corinth  with  the  shores  of 
the  Black  Sea. 

The  fewer  the  number  of  natural  wants  im¬ 
peratively  calling  for  satisfaction,  and  the 
greater  the  natural  fertility  of  the  soil  and  the 
favourableness  of  the  climate,  so  much  less  is 
the  labour  tiqie  necessary  for  the  maintenance 
and  reproduction  of  the  producer.  So  much 
greater,  therefore,  can  be  the  excess  of  his  la¬ 
bour  for  others  over  his  labour  for  himself.  Dio¬ 
dorus  long  ago  remarked  this  in  relation  to  the 
ancient  Egyptians.  “It  is  altogether  incredible 
how  little  trouble  and  expense  the  bringing  up  of 
their  children  causes  them.  They  cook  for  them 
the  first  simple  food  at  hand;  they  also  give  them 
the  lower  part  of  the  papyrus  stem  to  eat,  so 
far  as  it  can  be  roasted  in  the  fire,  and  the  roots 
and  stalks  of  marsh  plants,  some  raw,  some 
boiled  and  roasted.  Most  of  the  children  go 
without  shoes  and  unclothed,  for  the  air  is  so 
mild.  Hence  a  child,  until  he  is  grown  up,  costs 
his  parents  not  more,  on  the  whole,  than  twenty 
drachmas.  1 1  is  this,  chiefly,  which  explains  why 
the  population  of  Egypt  is  so  numerous,  and, 
therefore,  why  so  many  great  works  can  be  un¬ 
dertaken. Nevertheless  the  grand  structures 
of  ancient  Egypt  are  less  due  to  the  extent  of  its 
population  than  to  the  large  proportion  of  it 
that  was  freely  disposable.  Just  as  the  individ¬ 
ual  labourer  can  do  more  surplus  labour  in  pro¬ 
portion  as  his  necessary  labour  time  is  less,  so 
with  regard  to  the  working  population.  The 
smaller  the  part  of  it  which  is  required  for  the 
production  of  the  necessary  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence,  so  much  the  greater  is  the  part  that  can 
be  set  to  do  other  work. 

Capitalist  production  once  assumed,  then,  all 
other  circumstances  remaining  the  same,  and 
given  the  length  of  the  working  day,  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  surplus  labour  will  vary  with  the  physi¬ 
cal  conditions  of  labour,  especially  with  the  fer¬ 
tility  of  the  soil.  But  it  by  no  means  follows  from 

4  Diodorus,  op.  cit.,  I.  8a 


CAPITAL 


254 

this  that  the  most  fruitful  soil  is  the  most  fitted 
for  the  growth  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  produc¬ 
tion.  This  mode  is  based  on  the  dominion  of 
man  over  nature.  Where  Nature  is  too  lavish, 
she  '‘keeps  him  in  hand,  like  a  child  in  leading- 
strings.1’  She  does  not  impose  upon  him  any 
necessity  to  develop  himself.1  It  is  not  the  trop¬ 
ics,  with  their  luxuriant  vegetation,  but  the 
temperate  zone  that  is  the  mother  country  of 
capital.  It  is  not  the  mere  fertility  of  the  soil, 
but  the  differentiation  of  the  soil,  the  variety  of 
its  natural  products,  the  changes  of  the  seasons, 
which  form  the  physical  basis  for  the  social  di¬ 
vision  of  labour,  and  which,  by  changes  in  the 
natural  surroundings,  spur  man  on  to  the  mul¬ 
tiplication  of  his  wants,  his  capabilities,  his 
means  and  modes  of  labour.  It  is  the  necessity 
of  bringing  a  natural  force  under  the  control  of 
society,  of  economizing,  of  appropriating  or 
subduing  it  on  a  large  scale  by  the  work  of  man’s 
hand,  that  first  plays  the  decisive  part  in  the 
history  of  industry.  Examples  are  the  irrigation 
works  in  Egypt,2  Lombardy,  Holland,  or  in  In¬ 
dia  and  Persia  where  irrigation  by  means  of  ar¬ 
tificial  canals  not  only  supplies  the  soil  with  the 
water  indispensable  to  it,  but  also  carries  down 
to  it,  in  the  shape  of  sediment  from  the  hills, 
mineral  fertilizers.  The  secret  of  the  flourishing 
state  of  industry  in  Spain  and  Sicily  under  the 
dominion  of  the  Arabs  lay  in  their  irrigation 
works.3 

1  "The  first  (natural  wealth)  as  it  is  most  noble  and  ad¬ 
vantageous,  so  doth  it  make  the  people  careless,  proud, 
and  given  to  all  excesses;  whereas  the  second  enforceth 
vigilancy,  literature,  arts,  and  policy.’’  (England's  Treas¬ 
ure  by  Foreign  Trade ,  or  the  Balance  of  our  Foreign  Trade  is 
the  Rule  of  our  Tree  sure,  written  by  Thomas  Mun  of  Lon¬ 
don,  merchant,  and  now  published  for  the  common  good 
by  his  son  John  Mun,  London,  1669,  pp.  181,  182.)  "Nor 
can  I  conceive  a  greater  curse  upon  a  body  of  people  than 
to  be  thrown  upon  a  spot  of  land  where  the  productions 
for  subsistence  and  food  were,  in  great  measure,  spontane¬ 
ous,  and  the  climate  required  or  admitted  little  care  for 
raiment  and  covering.  . . .  There  may  be  an  extreme  on 
the  other  side.  A  soil  incapable  of  produce  by  labour  is 
quite  as  bad  as  a  soil  that  produces  plentifully  without  any 
labour.”  (An  Inquiry  into  the  present  High  Price  of  Provi¬ 
sions,  London,  1767,  p.  10.) 

2  The  necessity  for  predicting  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  Nile 
created  Egyptian  astronomy,  and  with  it  the  dominion  of 
the  priests,  as  directors  of  agriculture.  "The  solstice  is  that 
moment  of  the  year  when  the  Nile  begins  to  rise  and  which, 
therefore,  the  Egyptians  were  obliged  to  observe  with  the 
greatest  care. ...  It  was  this  solstitial  turning-point  of  the 
year  which  they  were  obliged  to  fix,  so  as  to  be  guided  in 
their  agricultural  activities.  Hence  they  had  to  seek  in  the 
heavens  for  a  visible  sign  of  its  return.”— Cuvier,  Dis¬ 
cours  surles  revolutions  du  globe,  Hoefer,  Paris,  1863,  p.  141. 

3  One  of  the  material  bases  of  the  power  of  the  state  over 
the  small  disconnected  producing  organisms  in  India  was 
the  regulation  of  the  water  supply.  The  Mohammedan 
rulers  of  India  understood  this  better  than  their  English 


Favourable  natural  conditions  alone  give  U9 
only  the  possibility,  never  the  reality,  of  sur¬ 
plus  labour,  nor,  consequently,  of  surplus  value 
and  a  surplus  product.  The  result  of  difference 
in  the  natural  conditions  of  labour  is  this,  that 
the  same  quantity  of  labour  satisfies,  in  differ¬ 
ent  countries,  a  different  mass  of  requirements,4 
consequently,  that  under  circumstances  in  oth¬ 
er  respects  analogous,  the  necessary  labour  time 
is  different.  These  conditions  affect  surplus  la¬ 
bour  only  as  natural  limits,  i.e.,  by  fixing  the 
points  at  which  labour  for  others  can  begin.  In 
proportion  as  industry  advances,  these  natural 
limits  recede.  In  the  midst  of  our  West  Euro¬ 
pean  society,  where  the  labourer  purchases  the 
right  to  work  for  his  own  livelihood  only  by  pay¬ 
ing  for  it  in  surplus  labour,  the  idea  easily  takes 
root  that  it  is  an  inherent  quality  of  human  la¬ 
bour  to  furnish  a  surplus  product.5  But  con¬ 
sider,  for  example,  an  inhabitant  of  the  eastern 
islands  of  the  Asiatic  archipelago,  where  sago 
grows  wild  in  the  forests.  "When  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  have  convinced  themselves,  by  boring  a 
hole  in  the  tree,  that  the  pith  is  ripe,  the  trunk 
is  cut  down  and  divided  into  several  pieces,  the 
pith  is  extracted,  mixed  with  water  and  filtered: 
it  is  then  quite  fit  for  use  as  sago.  One  tree  com¬ 
monly  yields 300  pounds,  and  occasionally  500 
to  600  pounds.  There,  then,  people  go  into  the 
forests,  and  cut  bread  for  themselves,  just  as 
with  us  they  cut  firewood."®  Suppose,  now,  such 
an  eastern  breadcutter  requires  twelve  working 
hours  a  week  for  the  satisfaction  of  all  his  wants. 
Nature's  direct  gift  to  him  is  plenty  of  leisure 
time.  Before  he  can  apply  this  leisure  time  pro¬ 
ductively  for  himself,  a  whole  series  of  historical 

successors.  It  is  enough  to  recall  to  mind  the  famine  of 
1866,  which  cost  the  lives  of  more  than  a  million  Hindus  in 
the  district  of  Orissa,  in  the  Bengal  Presidency. 

4  "There  are  no  two  countries  which  furnish  an  equal 
number  of  the  necessaries  of  life  in  equal  plenty,  and  with 
the  same  quantity  of  labour.  Men's  wants  increase  or  di¬ 
minish  with  the  severity  or  temperateness  of  the  climate 
they  live  in;  consequently,  the  proportion  of  trade  which 
the  inhabitants  of  different  countries  are  obliged  to  carry  on 
through  necessity  cannot  be  the  same,  nor  is  it  practicable 
to  ascertain  the  degree  of  variation  further  than  by  the  de¬ 
grees  of  heat  and  cold;  from  whence  one  may  make  this 
general  conclusion,  that  the  quantity  of  labour  required 
for  a  certain  number  of  people  is  greatest  in  cold  climates, 
and  least  in  hot  ones;  for  in  the  former  men  not  only  want 
more  clothes,  but  the  earth  more  cultivating  than  in  the 
latter.”  (An  Essay  on  the  Governing  Causes  of  the  Natural 
Rate  of  Interest,  London,  1750,  p.  60.)  The  author  of  this 
epoch-making  anonymous  work  was  J.  Massey.  Hume  took 
his  theory  of  interest  from  it. 

®  "Labour  must”  (this  appears  to  be  part  of  the  rights 
and  duties  of  the  citizen)  "leave  a  surplus.” — Proudhon. 

6  F.  £houw,  Die  Erde,  die  Pflanze  und  der  Mensch,  sec¬ 
ond  edition,  Leipzig,  1854,  p.  148. 


ABSOLUTE  AND  RELATIVE  SURPLUS  VALUE 


events  is  required;  before  he  spends  it  in  surplus 
labour  for  strangers,  compulsion  is  necessary. 
If  capitalist  production  were  introduced,  the 
honest  fellow  would  perhaps  have  to  work  six 
days  a  week,  in  order  to  appropriate  to  himself 
the  product  of  one  working  day.  The  bounty  of 
Nature  does  not  explain  why  he  would  then 
have  to  work  six  days  a  week,  or  why  he  must 
furnish  five  days  of  surplus  labour.  It  explains 
only  why  his  necessary  labour  time  would  be 
limited  to  one  day  a  week.  But  in  no  case  would 
his  surplus  product  arise  from  some  occult  qual¬ 
ity  inherent  in  human  labour. 

Thus,  not  only  does  the  historically  devel¬ 
oped  social  productiveness  of  labour,  but  also 
its  natural  productiveness,  appear  to  be  produc¬ 
tiveness  of  the  capital  with  which  that  labour 
is  incorporated. 

Ricardo  never  concerns  himself  about  the  or¬ 
igin  of  surplus  value.  He  treats  it  as  a  thing  in¬ 
herent  in  the  capitalist  mode  of  production, 
which  mode,  in  his  eyes,  is  the  natural  form  of 
social  production.  Whenever  he  discusses  the 
productiveness  ol  labour,  he  seeks  in  it,  not  the 
cause  of  surplus  value,  but  the  cause  that  de¬ 
termines  the  magnitude  of  that  value.  On  the 
other  hand,  his  school  has  openly  proclaimed 
the  productiveness  of  labour  to  be  the  originat¬ 
ing  cause  of  profit  (read,  surplus  value).  This 
at  all  events  is  a  progress  as  against  the  mer¬ 
cantilists  who,  on  their  side,  derived  the  excess 
of  the  price  over  the  cost  of  production  of  the 
product  from  the  act  of  exchange,  from  the 
product  being  sold  above  its  value.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  Ricardo's  school  simply  shirked  the  prob¬ 
lem,  they  did  not  solve  it.  In  fact  these  bour¬ 
geois  economists  instinctively  saw,  and  rightly 
so,  that  it  is  very  dangerous  to  stir  too  deeply 
the  burning  question  of  the  origin  of  surplus 
value.  But  what  are  we  to  think  of  John  Stuart 
Mill,  who,  half  a  century  after  Ricardo,  sol¬ 
emnly  claims  superiority  over  the  mercantil¬ 
ists,  by  clumsily  repeating  the  wretched  eva¬ 
sions  of  Ricardo’s  earliest  vulgarizers? 

Mill  says:  “The  cause  of  profit  is  that  labour 
produces  more  than  is  required  for  its  support.” 
So  far,  nothing  but  the  old  story ;  but  Mill,  wish¬ 
ing  to  add  something  of  his  own,  proceeds:  “To 
vary  the  form  of  the  theorem ;  the  reason  why 
capital  yields  a  profit,  is  because  food,  clothing, 
materials,  and  tools,  last  longer  than  the  time 
which  was  required  to  produce  them.”  He  here 
confounds  the  duratipn  of  labour  time  with  the 
duration  of  its  products.  According  to  this  view, 
a  baker  whose  product  lasts  only  a  day  could 
never  extract  from  his  workpeople  the  same 


255 

profit  as  a  machine  maker  whose  products  en¬ 
dure  for  twenty  years  and  more.  Of  course,  it  is 
very  true  that,  if  a  bird's  nest  did  not  last  longer 
than  the  time  it  takes  in  building,  birds  would 
have  to  do  without  nests. 

This  fundamental  truth  once  established. 
Mill  establishes  his  own  superiority  over  the 
mercantilists.  “We  thus  see,”  he  proceeds, 
“that  profit  arises,  not  from  the  incident  of  ex¬ 
change,  but  from  the  productive  power  of  la¬ 
bour;  and  the  general  profit  of  the  country  is 
always  what  the  productive  power  of  labour 
makes  it,  whether  any  exchange  takes  place  or 
not.  If  there  were  no  division  of  employments, 
there  would  be  no  buying  or  selling,  but  there 
would  still  be  profit.”  For  Mill,  then,  exchange, 
buying  and  selling,  those  general  conditions  of 
capitalist  production,  arc  but  an  incident,  and 
there  would  always  be  profits  even  without  the 
purchase  and  sale  of  labour  power! 

“If,”  he  continues,  “the  labourers  of  the 
country  collectively  produce  twenty  per  cent 
more  than  their  wages,  profits  will  be  20%, 
whatever  prices  may  or  may  not  be.”  This  is,  on 
the  one  hand,  a  rare  bit  of  tautology;  for  if  la¬ 
bourers  produce  a  surplus  value  of  20%  for  the 
capitalist,  his  profit  will  be  to  the  total  wages 
of  the  labourers  as  20:100.  On  the  other  hand, 
it  is  absolutely  false  to  say  that  “profits  will  be 
20%.”  They  will  always  be  less,  because  they 
are  calculated  upon  the  sum-total  of  the  capital 
advanced.  If,  for  example,  the  capitalist  have 
advanced  £500,  of  which  £400  is  laid  out  in 
means  of  production  and  £100  in  wages,  and  if 
the  rate  of  surplus  value  be  20%,  the  rate  of 
profit  will  be  20:500,  i.e.,  4%  and  not  20%. 

Then  follows  a  splendid  example  of  Mill’s 
method  of  handling  the  different  historical 
forms  of  social  production.  “1  assume,  through¬ 
out,  the  state  of  things  which,  where  the  labour¬ 
ers  and  capitalists  are  separate  classes,  prevails, 
with  few  exceptions,  universally;  namely,  that 
the  capitalist  advances  the  whole  expenses,  in¬ 
cluding  the  entire  remuneration  of  the  labour¬ 
er.”  Strange  optical  illusion  to  see  everywhere 
a  state  of  things  which  as  yet  exists  only  excep¬ 
tionally  on  our  earth.  But  let  us  finish — Mill  is 
willing  to  concede  “that  he  should  do  so  is  not  a 
matter  of  inherent  necessity.”  On  the  contrary: 
“the  labourer  might  wait,  until  the  production 
is  complete,  for  all  that  part  of  his  wages  which 
exceeds  mere  necessaries;  and  even  for  the 
whole,  if  he  has  funds  in  hand  sufficient  for  his 
temporary  support.  But  in  the  latter  case,  the 
labourer  is  to  that  extent  really  a  capitalist  in 
the  concern,  by  supplying  a  portion  of  the  funds 


CAPITAL 


256 

necessary  for  carrying  it  on/’  Mill  might  have 
gone  further  and  have  added  that  the  labourer 
who  advances  to  himself  not  only  the  neces¬ 
saries  of  life  but  also  the  means  of  production  is 
in  reality  nothing  but  his  own  wage  labourer. 
He  might  also  have  said  that  the  American 
peasant  proprietor  is  but  a  serf  who  does  en¬ 
forced  labour  for  himself  instead  of  for  his  lord. 

After  thus  proving  clearly  that,  even  if  cap¬ 
italist  production  had  no  existence,  still  it 
would  always  exist,  Mill  is  consistent  enough  to 
show,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  has  no  existence, 
even  when  it  does  exist.  “And  even  in  the 
former  case”  (when  the  workman  is  a  wage  la¬ 
bourer  to  whom  the  capitalist  advances  all  the 
necessaries  of  life,  he  the  labourer)  “may  be 
looked  upon  in  the  same  light”  (i.e.,  as  a  capi¬ 
talist),  “since,  contributing  his  labour  at  less 
than  the  market  price,  (!)  he  may  be  regarded 
as  lending  the  difference  ( ?)  to  his  employer  and 
receiving  it  back  with  interest,  etc.”1  In  reality, 
the  labourer  advances  his  labour  gratuitously 
to  the  capitalist  during,  say  one  week,  in  order 
to  receive  the  market  price  at  the  end  of  the 
week,  etc.,  and  it  is  this  which,  according  to 
Mill,  transforms  him  into  a  capitalist.  On  the 
level  plain,  simple  mounds  look  like  hills;  and 
the  imbecile  flatness  of  the  present  bourgeoisie 
is  to  be  measured  by  the  altitude  of  its  great 
intellects. 


CHAPTER  XVII.  CHANGES  OF  MAGNITUDE 
IN  THE  PRICE  OF  LABOUR  POWER  AND 
IN  SURPLUS  VALUE 

The  value  of  labour  power  is  determined  by  the 
value  of  the  necessaries  of  life  habitually  re¬ 
quired  by  the  average  labourer.  The  quantity 
of  these  necessaries  is  known  at  any  given  epoch 
of  a  given  society,  and  can  therefore  be  treated 
as  a  constant  magnitude.  What  changes  is  the 
value  of  this  quantity.  There  are,  besides,  two 
other  factors  that  enter  into  the  determination 
of  the  value  of  labour  power.  One,  the  expenses 
of  developing  that  power,  which  expenses  vary 
with  the  mode  of  production;  the  other,  its  nat¬ 
ural  diversity,  the  difference  between  the  la¬ 
bour  power  of  men  and  women,  of  children  and 
adults.  The  employment  of  these  different  sorts 
of  labour  power,  an  employment  which  is,  in  its 
turn,  made  necessary  by  the  mode  of  produc¬ 
tion,  makes  a  great  difference  in  the  cost  of 
maintaining  the  family  of  the  labourer,  and  in 

1  John  Stuart  Mill,  Principles  of  Political  Economy ,  Lon¬ 
don,  1868,  p.  251-53,  passim. 


the  value  of  the  labour  power  of  the  adult  male. 
Both  these  factors,  however,  are  excluded  in 
the  following  investigation.2 

I  assume:  (1)  that  commodities  are  sold  at 
their  value;  (2)  that  the  price  of  labour  power 
rises  occasionally  above  its  value,  but  never 
sinks  below  it. 

On  this  assumption,  we  have  seen  that  the 
relative  magnitudes  of  surplus  value  and  of 
price  of  labour  power  are  determined  by  three 
circumstances:  (1)  the  length  of  the  working 
day,  or  the  extensive  magnitude  of  labour;  (2) 
the  normal  intensity  of  labour,  its  intensive 
magnitude,  whereby  a  given  quantity  of  labour 
is  expended  in  a  given  time;  (3)  the  productive¬ 
ness  of  labour,  whereby  the  same  quantum  of 
labour  yields,  in  a  given  time,  a  greater  or  less 
quantum  of  product,  dependent  on  the  degree 
of  development  in  the  conditions  of  production. 
Very  different  combinations  are  clearly  possi¬ 
ble,  according  as  one  of  the  three  factors  is  con¬ 
stant  and  two  variable,  or  two  constant  and 
one  variable,  or  lastly,  all  three  simultaneously 
variable.  And  the  number  of  these  combina¬ 
tions  is  augmented  by  the  fact  that,  when  these 
factors  simultaneously  vary,  the  amount  and 
direction  of  their  respective  variations  may  dif¬ 
fer.  In  what  follows  the  chief  combinations 
alone  are  considered. 

I.  Length  of  the  fV or king  Day  and  Intensity  of 

Labour  constant.  Productiveness  of  Labour  var¬ 
iable 

On  these  assumptions  the  value  of  labour 
power  and  the  magnitude  of  surplus  value  are 
determined  by  three  laws.  * 

(1) .  A  working  day  of  given  length  always 
creates  the  same  amount  of  value,  no  matter 
how  the  productiveness  of  labour,  and,  with  it, 
the  mass  of  the  product,  and  the  price  of  each 
single  commodity  produced,  may  vary. 

If  the  value  created  by  a  working  day  of 
twelve  hours  be,  say,  six  shillings,  then,  al¬ 
though  the  mass  of  the  articles  produced  varies 
with  the  productiveness  of  labour,  the  only  re¬ 
sult  is  that  the  value  represented  by  six  shillings 
is  spread  over  a  greater  or  less  nufnber  of  ar¬ 
ticles. 

(2) .  Surplus  value  and  the  valtie  of  labour 
power  vary  in  opposite  directions.  A  variation 
in  the  productiveness  of  labour,  its  increase  or 
diminution,  causes  a  variation  in  the  opposite 
direction  in  the  value  of  labour  power,  and  in 
the  s<'me  direction  in  surplus  value. 

*  Note  to  3rd  edition:  The  case  considered  at  pages  305- 
308  [German  edition]  is  here,  of  course,  omitted. 


CHANGES  OF  MAGNITUDE 


The  value  created  by  a  working  day  of  twelve 
hours  is  a  constant  quantity,  say,  six  shillings. 
This  constant  quantity  is  the  sum  of  the  surplus 
value  plus  the  value  of  the  labour  power,  which 
latter  value  the  labourer  replaces  by  an  equiva¬ 
lent.  It  is  self-evident  that  if  a  constant  quan¬ 
tity  consist  of  two  parts,  neither  of  them  can 
increase  without  the  other  diminishing.  Let  the 
two  parts  at  starting  be  equal;  three  shillings 
value  of  labour  power,  three  shillings  surplus 
value.  Then  the  value  of  the  labour  power  can¬ 
not  rise  from  three  shillings  to  four  without  the 
surplus  value  falling  from  three  shillings  to  two; 
and  the  surplus  value  cannot  rise  from  three 
shillings  to  four  without  the  value  of  labour 
power  falling  from  three  shillings  to  two.  Under 
these  circumstances,  therefore,  no  change  can 
take  place  in  the  absolute  magnitude  either  of 
the  surplus  value  or  of  the  value  of  labour  pow¬ 
er  without  a  simultaneous  change  in  their  rela¬ 
tive  magnitudes,  i.e.,  relatively  to  each  other. 
It  is  impossible  for  them  to  rise  or  fall  simul¬ 
taneously. 

Further,  the  value  of  labour  power  cannot 
fall,  and  consequently  surplus  value  cannot 
rise,  without  a  rise  in  the  productiveness  of  la¬ 
bour.  For  instance,  in  the  above  case,  the  value 
of  the  labour  power  cannot  sink  from  three  shiU 
lings  to  two,  unless  an  increase  in  the  produc¬ 
tiveness  of  labour  makes  it  possible  to  produce 
in  four  hours  the  same  quantity  of  necessaries 
as  previously  required  six  hours  to  produce.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  value  of  the  labour  power 
cannot  rise  from  three  shillings  to  four  without 
a  decrease  in  the  productiveness  of  labour, 
whereby  eight  hours  become  requisite  to  pro¬ 
duce  the  same  quantity  of  necessaries  for  the 
production  of  which  six  hours  previously  suf¬ 
ficed.  It  follows  from  this  that  an  increase  in  the 
productiveness  of  labour  causes  a  fall  in  the  val¬ 
ue  of  labour  power  and  a  consequent  rise  in 
surplus  value,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  a 
decrease  in  such  productiveness  causes  a  rise 
in  the  value  of  labour  power,  and  a  fall  in  sur¬ 
plus  value. 

In  formulating  this  law,  Ricardo  overlooked 
one  circumstance;  although  a  change  in  the 
magnitude  of  the  surplus  value  or  surplus  la¬ 
bour  causes  a  change  in  the  opposite  direction 
in  the  magnitude  of  the  value  of  labour  power, 
or  in  the  quantity  of  necessary  labour,  it  by  no 
means  follows  that  they  vary  in  the  same  pro¬ 
portion.  They  do  increase  or  diminish  by  the 
same  quantity.  But  their  proportional  increase 
or  diminution  depends  on  their  original  magni¬ 
tudes  before  the  change  in  the  productiveness 


257 

of  labour  took  place.  If  the  value  of  the  labour 
power  be  4  shillings,  or  the  necessary  labour 
time  8  hours,  and  the  surplus  value  be  2  shil¬ 
lings,  or  the  surplus  labour  4  hours,  and  if,  in 
consequence  of  an  increase  in  the  productive¬ 
ness  of  labour,  the  value  of  the  labour  power 
fall  to  3  shillings,  or  the  necessary  labour  to  6 
hours,  the  surplus  value  will  rise  to  3  shillings, 
or  the  surplus  labour  to  6  hours.  The  same 
quantity,  1  shilling  or  2  hours,  is  added  in  one 
case  and  subtracted  in  the  other.  But  the  pro¬ 
portional  change  of  magnitude  is  different  in 
each  case.  While  the  value  of  the  labour  power 
falls  from  4  shillings  to  3  (i.e.,  by  %  or  25%), 
the  surplus  value  rises  from  2  shillings  to  3  (i.e., 
by  x/i  or  50%).  It  therefore  follows  that  the 
proportional  increase  or  diminution  in  surplus 
value,  consequent  on  a  given  change  in  the  pro¬ 
ductiveness  of  labour,  depends  on  the  original 
magnitude  of  that  portion  of  the  working  day 
which  embodies  itself  in  surplus  value;  the 
smaller  that  portion,  the  greater  is  the  propor¬ 
tional  change;  the  greater  that  portion,  the  less 
is  the  proportional  change. 

(3.)  Increase  or  diminution  in  surplus  value  is 
always  consequent  on,  and  never  the  cause  of, 
the  corresponding  diminution  or  increase  in  the 
value  of  labour  power.1 

•  Since  the  working  day  is  constant  in  magni¬ 
tude  and  is  represented  by  a  value  of  constant 
magnitude,  since  to  every  variation  in  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  surplus  value  there  corresponds  an  in¬ 
verse  variation  in  the  value  of  labour  power, 
ana  since  the  value  of  labour  power  cannot 
change  except  in  consequence  of  a  change  in  the 
productiveness  of  labour,  it  clearly  follows,  un¬ 
der  these  conditions,  that  every  change  of  mag¬ 
nitude  in  surplus  value  arises  from  an  inverse 
change  of  magnitude  in  the  value  of  labour 
power.  If,  then,  as  we  have  already  seen,  there 
can  be  no  change  of  absolute  magnitude  in  the 
value  of  labour  power  and  in  surplus  value  un¬ 
accompanied  by  a  change  in  their  relative  mag- 

lTo  this  third  law  MacCulloch  has  made,  amongst 
others,  this  absurd  addition:  that  a  rise  in  surplus  value, 
unaccompanied  by  a  fall  in  the  value  oflabour  power,  can 
occur  through  the  abolition  of  taxes  payable  by  the  capi¬ 
talist.  The  abolition  of  such  taxes  makes  no  change  what¬ 
ever  in  the  quantity  of  surplus  value  that  the  capitalist 
extorts  at  first  hand  from  the  labourer.  It  alters  only  the 
proportion  in  which  that  surplus  value  is  divided  between 
himself  and  third  persons.  It  consequently  makes  no  alter¬ 
ation  whatever  in  the  relation  between  surplus  value  and 
value  of  labour  power.  MacCulloch’s  exception,  therefore, 
proves  only  his  misapprehension  of  the  rule,  a  misfortune 
that  as  often  happens  to  him  in  the  vulgarization  of  Ri¬ 
cardo  as  it  does  to  J.  B.  Say  in  the  vulgarization  of  Adam 
Smith. 


258 


CAPITAL 


nitudes,  so  now  it  follows  that  no  change  in  their 
relative  magnitudes  is  possible  without  a  previ¬ 
ous  change  in  the  absolute  magnitude  of  the 
value  of  labour  power. 

According  to  the  third  law,  a  change  in  the 
magnitude  of  surplus  value  presupposes  a 
movement  in  the  value  of  labour  power,  which 
movement  is  brought  about  by  a  variation  in 
the  productiveness  of  labour.  The  limit  of  this 
change  is  given  by  the  altered  value  of  labour 
power.  Nevertheless,  even  when  circumstances 
allow  the  law  to  operate,  subsidiary  movements 
may  occur.  For  example:  if  in  consequence  of 
the  increased  productiveness  of  labour,  the  val¬ 
ue  of  labour  power  fall  from  4  shillings  to  3,  or 
the  necessary  labour  time  from  8  hours  to  6, 
the  price  of  labour-power  may  possibly  not  fall 
below  3J.  8 d.y  3s.  6 d.y  or  3s.  2d.y  and  the  surplus 
value  consequently  not  rise  above  3s.  4 d.t  3J. 
6d.y  or  3s.  10 d.  The  amount  of  this  fall,  the 
lowest  limit  of  which  is  3  shillings  (the  new  val¬ 
ue  of  labour  power),  depends  on  the  relative 
weight,  which  the  pressure  of  capital  on  the  one 
side,  and  the  resistance  of  the  labourer  on  the 
other,  throws  into  the  scale. 

The  value  of  labour  power  is  determined  by 
the  value  of  a  given  quantity  of  necessaries.  It 
is  the  value  and  not  the  mass  of  these  necessar¬ 
ies  that  varies  with  the  productiveness  of  la¬ 
bour.  It  is,  however,  possible  that,  owing  to  an 
increase  of  productiveness,  both  the  labourer 
and  the  capitalist  may  simultaneously  be  able 
to  appropriate  a  greater  quantity  of  these  nec* 
essaries  without  any  change  in  the  price  of  la¬ 
bour  power  or  in  surplus  value.*  If  the  value  of 
labour  power  be  3  shillings,  and  the  necessary 
labour  time  amount  to  6  hours,  if  the  surplus 
value  likewise  be  3  shillings,  and  the  surplus  la¬ 
bour  6  hours,  then  if  the  productiveness  of  la¬ 
bour  were  doubled  without  altering  the  ratio  of 
necessary  labour  to  surplus  labour,  there  would 
be  no  change  of  magnitude  in  surplus  value  and 
price  of  labour  power.  The  only  result  would  be 
that  each  of  them  would  represent  twice  as 
many  use-values  as  before,  these  use-values  be¬ 
ing  twice  as  cheap  as  before.  Although  labour 
power  would  be  unchanged  in  price,  it  would  be 
above  its  value.  If,  however,  the  price  of  labour 
power  had  fallen,  not  to  1  s.  6 d.,  the  lowest  pos¬ 
sible  point  consistent  with  its  new  value,  but  to 
2 s.  lod .  or  2s.  6 d.y  still  this  lower  price  would 
represent  an  increased  mass  of  necessaries.  In 
this  way  it  is  possible,  with  an  increasing  pro¬ 
ductiveness  of  labour,  for  the  price  of  labour 
power  to  keep  on  falling,  and  yet  this  fall  to  he 
accompanied  by  a  constant  growth  in  the  mass 


of  the  labourer’s  means  of  subsistence.  But  even 
in  such  case,  the  fall  in  the  value  of  labour  pow¬ 
er  would  cause  a  corresponding  rise  of  surplus 
value,  and  thus  the  abyss  between  the  labour¬ 
er’s  position  and  that  of  the  capitalist  would 
keep  widening.1 

Ricardo  was  the  first  who  accurately  formu¬ 
lated  the  three  laws  we  have  above  stated.  But 
he  falls  into  the  following  errors:  (1)  he  looks 
upon  the  special  conditions  under  which  these 
laws  hold  good  as  the  general  and  sole  condi¬ 
tions  of  capitalist  production.  He  knows  no 
change,  cither  in  the  length  of  the  working  day, 
or  in  the  intensity  of  labour;  consequently  with 
him  there  can  be  only  one  variable  factor,  viz., 
the  productiveness  oflabour;  (2)  (and  this  error 
vitiates  his  analysis  much  more  than  (1)  he  has 
not,  any  more  than  have  the  other  economists, 
investigated  surplus  value  as  such,  i.e.,  inde¬ 
pendently  of  its  particular  forms,  such  as  profit, 
rent,  etc.  He  therefore  confounds  together  the 
laws  of  the  rate  of  surplus  value  and  the 
laws  of  the  rate  of  profit.  The  rate  of  profit  is, 
as  we  have  already  said,  the  ratio  of  the  surplus 
value  to  the  total  capital  advanced;  the  rate  of 
surplus  value  is  the  ratio  of  the  surplus  value  to 
the  variable  part  of  that  capital.  Assume  that 
a  capital  C  of  £500  is  made  up  of  raw  material, 
instruments  of  labour,  etc.,  (« c )  to  the  amount 
of  £400;  and  of  wages  ( v )  to  the  amount  of 
£100;  and  further,  that  the  surplus  value  CO 
=  £100.  Then  we  have  rate  of  surplus  value 

v  =  £ioo=  IOO%'  Hut  t^ie  rate 


=  20%.  1 1  is,  besides,  obvious  that  the  rate 

of  profit  may  depend  on  circumstances  that  in 
no  way  affect  the  rate  of  surplus  value.  1  shall 
show  in  Book  'Three  that,  with  a  given  rate  of 
surplus  value,  we  may  have  any  number  of  rates 
of  profit,  and  that  various  rates  of  surplus  value 
may,  under  given  conditions,  express  them¬ 
selves  in  a  single  rate  of  profit. 


II.  Working  Day  constant.  Productiveness  of  La¬ 
bour  constant .  Intensity  of  Labour  variable 
Increased  intensity  of  labour  means  in¬ 
creased  expenditure  of  labour  in  a  given  time. 
Hence  a  working  day  of  more  intense  labour  is 
embodied  in  more  products  than  is  one  of  less 

1  “When  an  alteration  takes  place  in  the  productiveness 
of  industry,  and  that  either  more  or  less  is  produced  by  a 
given  quantity  of  labour  and  capital,  the  proportion  of 
wages  may  obviously  vary,  whilst  the  quantity  which  that 
proportion  represents  remains  the  same,  or  the  quantity 
may  va«-y  whilst  the  proportion  remains  the  same.”— Out¬ 
lines  of  Political  Economy ,  etc.,  p.  67. 


CHANGES  OF 

intense  labour,  the  length  of  each  day  being  the 
same.  Increased  productiveness  of  labour  also, 
it  is  true,  will  supply  more  products  in  a  given 
working  day.  But  in  this  latter  case  the  value 
of  each  single  product  falls,  for  it  costs  less  la¬ 
bour  than  before;  in  the  former  case,  that  value 
remains  unchanged,  for  each  article  costs  the 
same  labour  as  before.  Here  we  have  an  increase 
in  the  number  of  products,  unaccompanied  by 
a  fall  in  their  individual  prices:  as  their  number 
increases,  so  does  the  sum  of  their  prices.  But 
in  the  case  of  increased  productiveness,  a  given 
value  is  spread  over  a  greater  mass  of  products. 
Hence  the  length  of  the  working  day  being  con¬ 
stant,  a  day’s  labour  of  increased  intensity  will 
be  incorporated  in  an  increased  value  and,  the 
value  of  money  remaining  unchanged,  in  more 
money.  The  value  created  varies  with  the  ex¬ 
tent  to  which  the  intensity  of  labour  deviates 
from  its  normal  intensity  in  the  society.  A  given 
working  day,  therefore,  no  longer  creates  a  con¬ 
stant  but  a  variable  value;  in  a  day  of  12  hours 
of  ordinary  intensity,  the  value  created  is,  say 
6  shillings,  but  with  increased  intensity,  the  val¬ 
ue  created  may  be  7,  8,  or  more  shillings,  it  is 
clear  that,  if  the  value  created  by  a  day’s  labour 
increases  from,  say,  6  to  8  shillings,  then  the 
two  parts  into  which  this  value  is  divided  (viz., 
price  of  labour  power  and  surplus  value)  may 
both  of  them  increase  simultaneously,  and  ei¬ 
ther  equally  or  unequally.  They  may  both  si¬ 
multaneously  increase  from  3  shillings  to  4. 
Here,  the  rise  in  the  price  of  labour  power  does 
not  necessarily  imply  that  the  price  has  risen 
above  the  value  of  labour  power.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  the  rise  in  price  may  be  accompanied  by 
a  fall  in  value.  This  occurs  whenever  the  rise  in 
the  price  of  labour  power  does  not  compensate 
for  its  increased  wear  and  tear. 

We  know  that,  with  transitory  exceptions,  a 
change  in  the  productiveness  of  labour  does  not 
cause  any  change  in  the  value  of  labour  power, 
nor  consequently  in  the  magnitude  of  surplus 
value,  unless  the  products  of  the  industries  af¬ 
fected  are  articles  habitually  consumed  by  the 
labourers.  In  the  present  case  this  condition  no 
longer  applies.  For  when  the  variation  is  either 
in  the  duration  or  in  the  intensity  of  labour, 
there  is  always  a  corresponding  change  in  the 
magnitude  of  the  value  created,  independently 
of  the  nature  of  the  article  in  which  that  value 
is  embodied. 

If  the  intensity  of  labour  were  to  increase  si¬ 
multaneously  and  equally  in  every  branch  of 
industry,  then  the  new  and  higher  degree  of  in¬ 
tensity  would  become  the  normal  degree  for  the 


MAGNITUDE  259 

society,  and  would  therefore  cease  to  be  taken 
account  of.  But  still,  even  then,  the  intensity  of 
labour  would  be  different  in  different  countries, 
and  would  modify  the  international  application 
of  the  law  of  value.  The  more  intense  working 
day  of  one  nation  would  be  represented  by  a 
greater  sum  of  money  than  would  the  less  in¬ 
tense  day  of  another  nation.1 

III.  Productiveness  and  Intensity  of  Labour  con¬ 
stant .  Length  of  the  Working  Day  variable 

The  working  day  may  vary  in  two  ways.  It 
may  be  made  either  longer  or  shorter.  F rom  our 
present  data,  and  within  the  limits  of  the  as¬ 
sumptions  made  on  p.  256  we  obtain  the  follow¬ 
ing  laws: 

(1 .)  The  working  day  creates  a  greater  or  less 
amount  of  value  in  proportion  to  its  length — 
thus,  a  variable  and  not  a  constant  quantity  of 
value. 

(2.)  Every  change  in  the  relation  between  the 
magnitudes  of  surplus  value  and  of  the  value 
of  labour  power  arises  from  a  change  in  the  ab¬ 
solute  magnitude  of  the  surplus  labour,  and 
consequently  of  the  surplus  value. 

(3.)  The  absolute  value  of  labour  power  can 
change  only  in  consequence  of  the  reaction  ex¬ 
ercised  by  the  prolongation  of  surplus  labour 
upon  the  wear  and  tear  of  labour  power.  Every 
change  in  this  absolute  value  is  therefore  the 
effect,  but  never  the  cause,  of  a  change  in  the 
magnitude  of  surplus  value. 

We  begin  with  the  case  in  which  the  working 
day  is  shortened. 

(1.)  A  shortening  of  the  working  day  under 
the  conditions  given  above  leaves  the  value  of 
labour  power,  and  with  it  the  necessary  labour 
time,  unaltered.  It  reduces  the  surplus  labour 
and  surplus  value.  Along  with  the  absolute 
magnitude  of  the  latter,  its  relative  magnitude 
also  falls,  i.e.,  its  magnitude  relatively  to  the 
value  of  labour  power  whose  magnitude  re¬ 
mains  unaltered.  Only  by  lowering  the  price  of 
labour  power  below  its  value  could  the  capital¬ 
ist  indemnify  himself. 

All  the  usual  arguments  against  the  shorten¬ 
ing  of  the  working  day  assume  that  it  takes 

1  "All  things  being  equal,  the  English  manufacturer  can 
turn  out  a  considerably  larger  amount  of  work  in  a  given 
time  than  a  foreign  manufacturer,  so  much  as  to  counter¬ 
balance  the  difference  of  the  working  days,  between  60 
hours  a  week  here,  and  72  or  80  elsewhere."  {Reports  of 
Inspectors  of  Factories ,  jist  Oct.  1855,  p.  65.)  The  most  in¬ 
fallible  means  for  reducing  this  qualitative  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  English  and  continental  working  hour  would  be 
a  law  shortening  quantitatively  the  length  of  the  working 
day  in  continental  factories. 


CAPITAL 


260 

place  under  the  conditions  we  have  here  sup* 
posed  to  exist;  but  in  reality  the  very  contrary 
is  the  case:  a  change  in  the  productiveness  and 
intensity  of  labour  either  precedes,  or  immedi¬ 
ately  follows,  a  shortening  of  the  working  day.1 

(a.)  Lengthening  of  the  working  day:  let  the 
necessary  labour  time  be  6  hours,  or  the  value 
of  labour  power  3  shillings;  also  let  the  surplus 
labour  be  6  hours  or  the  surplus  value  3  shil¬ 
lings.  The  whole  working  day  then  amounts  to 
12  hours  and  is  embodied  in  a  value  of  6  shil¬ 
lings.  If,  now,  the  working  day  be  lengthened  by 
2  hours  and  the  price  of  labour  power  remain 
unaltered,  the  surplus  value  increases  both  ab¬ 
solutely  and  relatively.  Although  there  is  no 
absolute  change  in  the  value  of  labour  power, 
it  suffers  a  relative  fall.  Under  the  conditions 
assumed  in  I,  there  could  not  be  a  change  of 
relative  magnitude  in  the  value  of  labour  power 
without  a  change  in  its  absolute  magnitude. 
Here,  on  the  contrary,  the  change  of  relative 
magnitude  in  the  value  of  labour  power  is  the 
result  of  the  change  of  absolute  magnitude  in 
surplus  value. 

Since  the  value  in  which  a  day’s  labour  is  em¬ 
bodied  increases  with  the  length  of  that  day,  it 
is  evident  that  the  surplus  value  and  the  price 
of  labour  power  may  simultaneously  increase, 
either  by  equal  or  unequal  quantities.  This 
simultaneous  increase  is  therefore  possible  in 
two  cases,  one,  the  actual  lengthening  of  the 
working  day,  the  other,  an  increase  in  the 
intensity  of  labour  unaccompanied  by  such 
lengthening. 

When  the  working  day  is  prolonged,  the  price 
of  labour  power  may  fall  below  its  value,  al¬ 
though  that  price  be  nominally  unchanged  or 
even  rise.  The  value  of  a  day’s  labour  power  is, 
as  will  be  remembered,  estimated  from  its  nor¬ 
mal  average  duration,  or  from  the  normal  dura¬ 
tion  of  life  among  the  labourers,  and  from  cor¬ 
responding  normal  transformations  of  organ¬ 
ized  bodily  matter  into  motion,2  in  conformity 
with  the  nature  of  man.  Up  to  a  certain  point, 
the  increased  wear  and  tear  of  labour  power, 
inseparable  from  a  lengthened  working  day, 
may  be  compensated  by  higher  wages.  Btit  be- 

1  “There  are  compensating  circumstances . . .  which  the 
working  of  the  Ten  Hours  Act  has  brought  to  light.” — 
Biports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  1st  Dec.  1848,  p.  7. 

*  “The  amount  of  labour  which  a  man  had  undergone  in 
the  course  of  24  hours  might  be  approximately  arrived  at 
by  an  examination  of  the  chemical  changes  which  had  tak¬ 
en  place  in  his  body,  changed  forms  in  matter  indicating 
the  anterior  exercise  of  dynamic  force.” — Grove,  On  the 
Correlation  of  Physical  Forces . 


yond  this  point  the  wear  and  tear  increases  in 
geometrical  progression,  and  every  condi¬ 
tion  suitable  for  the  normal  reproduction  and 
functioning  of  labour  power  is  suppressed.  The 
price  of  labour  power  and  the  degree  of  its 
exploitation  cease  to  be  commensurable  quan¬ 
tities. 

IV.  Simultaneous  Variations  in  the  Duration , 

Productiveness ,  and  Intensity  oj  Labour 

It  is  obvious  that  a  large  number  of  combina¬ 
tions  are  here  possible.  Any  two  of  the  factors 
may  vary  and  the  third  remain  constant,  or  all 
three  may  vary  at  once.  They  may  vary  either 
in  the  same  or  in  different  degrees,  in  the 
same  or  in  opposite  directions,  with  the  result 
that  the  variations  counteract  one  another,  ei¬ 
ther  wholly  or  in  part.  Nevertheless  the  analy¬ 
sis  of  every  possible  case  is  easy  in  view  of  the 
results  given  i  n  1 ,  1 1 ,  and  1 1 1 .  The  effect  of  every 
possible  combination  may  be  found  by  treating 
each  factor  in  turn  as  variable,  and  the  other 
two  as  constant  for  the  time  being.  We  shall, 
therefore,  notice  briefly  but  two  important 
cases. 

(1)  Diminishing  Productiveness  of  Labour 
with  a  simultaneous  Lengthening  oj  the 
Working  Day 

In  speaking  of  diminishing  productiveness  of 
labour,  we  here  refer  to  diminution  in  those  in¬ 
dustries  whose  products  determine  the  value  of 
labour  power;  such  a  diminution,  for  example, 
as  results  from  decreasing  fertility  of  the  soil, 
and  from  the  corresponding  dearness  of  its 
products.  Take  the  working  day  at  1 2  hours  and 
the  value  created  by  it  at  6  shillings,  of  which 
one-half  replaces  the  value  of  the  labour  power, 
the  other  forms  the  surplus  value.  Suppose,  in 
consequence  of  the  increased  dearness  of  the 
products  of  the  soil,  that  the  value  of  labour 
power  rises  from  3  shillings  to  4,  and  therefore 
the  necessary  labour  time  from  6  hours  to  8.  If 
there  be  no  change  in  the  length  of  the  working 
day,  the  surplus  labour  would  fall  from  6  hours 
to  4,  the  surplus  value  from  3  shillings  to  2.  If 
the  day  be  lengthened  by  2  hours  Q.e.,  from  1 2 
hours  to  14)  the  surplus  labour  remains  at  6 
hours,  the  surplus  value  at  6  shillings,  but  the 
surplus  value  decreases  compared  with  the  val¬ 
ue  of  labour  power,  as  measured  by  the  neces¬ 
sary  labour  time.  If  the  day  be  lengthened  by  4 
hours  (viz.,  from  12  hours  to  16)  the  propor¬ 
tional  magnitudes  of  surplus  value  and  value  of 
labour  power,  of  surplus  labour  and  necessary 


CHANGES  OF  MAGNITUDE 


labour,  continue  unchanged,  but  the  absolute 
magnitude  of  surplus  value  rises  from  3  shillings 
to  4,  that  of  the  surplus  labour  from  6  hours  to 
8,  an  increment  of  33^3%.  Therefore,  with  di¬ 
minishing  productiveness  of  labour  and  a  si¬ 
multaneous  lengthening  of  the  working  day,  the 
absolute  magnitude  of  surplus  value  may  con¬ 
tinue  unaltered,  at  the  same  time  that  its  rela¬ 
tive  magnitude  diminishes;  its  relative  magni¬ 
tude  may  continue  unchanged,  at  the  same  time 
that  its  absolute  magnitude  increases;  and,  pro¬ 
vided  the  lengthening  of  the  day  be  sufficient, 
both  may  increase. 

In  the  period  between  1799  and  1815,  the  in¬ 
creasing  price  of  provisions  led  in  England  to  a 
nominal  rise  in  wages,  although  the  real  wages, 
expressed  in  the  necessaries  of  life,  fell.  From 
this  fact  West  and  Ricardo  drew  the  conclusion 
that  the  diminution  in  the  productiveness  of 
agricultural  labour  had  brought  about  a  fall  in 
the  rate  of  surplus  value,  and  they  made  this 
assumption  of  a  fact  that  existed  only  in  their 
imaginations  the  starting-point  of  important 
investigations  into  the  relative  magnitudes  of 
wages,  profits,  and  rent.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact 
surplus  value  had  at  that  time,  thanks  to  the 
increased  intensity  of  labour  and  to  the  pro¬ 
longation  of  the  working  day,  increased  both  in 
absolute  and  relative  magnitude.  This  was  the 
period  in  which  the  right  to  prolong  the  hours 
of  labour  to  an  outrageous  extent  was  estab¬ 
lished;1  the  period  that  was  especially  charac- 

1  “Corn  and  labour  rarely  march  quite  abreast;  but  there 
is  an  obvious  limit  beyond  which  they  cannot  be  separated. 
With  regard  to  the  unusual  exertions  made  by  the  labour¬ 
ing  classes  in  periods  of  dearness,  which  produce  the  fall  of 
wages  noticed  in  the  evidence”  (namely,  before  the  Parlia¬ 
mentary  Committee  of  Inquiry,  1814-15),  “they  are  most 
meritorious  in  the  individuals,  and  certainly  favour  the 
growth  of  capital.  But  no  man  of  humanity  could  wish  to 
see  them  constant  and  unremitted.  They  are  most  admira¬ 
ble  as  a  temporary  relief;  but  if  they  were  constantly  in 
action,  effects  of  a  similar  kind  would  result  from  them  as 
from  the  population  of  a  country  being  pushed  to  the  very 
extreme  limits  of  its  food.”  (Malthus,  Inqutry  into  the  Na¬ 
ture  and  Progress  of  Rent ,  London,  1815,  p.  48,  note.)  All 
honour  to  Malthus  that  he  lays  stress  on  the  lengthening 
of  the  hours  of  labour,  a  fact  to  which  he  elsewhere  in  his 
pamphlet  draws  attention,  while  Ricardo  and  others,  in 
face  of  the  most  notorious  facts,' make  invariability  in  the 
length  of  the  working  day  the  groundwork  of  all  their  in¬ 
vestigations.  But  the  conservative  interests,  which  Mal¬ 
thus  served,  prevented  him  from  seeing  that  an  unlimited 
prolongation  of  the  working  day,  combined  with  an  extra¬ 
ordinary  development  of  machinery  and  the  exploitation 
uf  women  and  children,  must  inevitably  have  made  a  great 
portion  of  the  working  class  “supernumerary,”  particu¬ 
larly  whenever  the  war* should  have  ceased,  and  the 
monopoly  of  England  in  the  markets  of  the  world  should 
have  come  to  an  end.  It  was,  of  course,  far  more  con- 


261 

terized  by  an  accelerated  accumulation  of  capi¬ 
tal  here,  by  pauperism  there.9 

(2)  Increasing  Intensity  and  Productiveness  of 
Labour  with  simultaneous  Shortening  of  the 
Working  Day 

Increased  productiveness  and  greater  inten¬ 
sity  of  labour  both  have  a  like  effect.  They  both 
augment  the  mass  of  articles  produced  in  a  giv¬ 
en  time.  Both,  therefore,  shorten  that  portion 
of  the  working  day  which  the  labourer  needs  to 
produce  his  means  of  subsistence  or  their  equiv¬ 
alent.  The  minimum  length  of  the  working  day 
is  fixed  by  this  necessary  but  contractile  por¬ 
tion  of  it.  If  the  whole  working  day  were  to 
shrink  to  the  length  of  this  portion,  surplus 
labour  would  vanish,  a  consummation  utterly 
impossible  under  the  regime  of  capital.  Only  by 
suppressing  the  capitalist  form  of  production 
could  the  length  of  the  working  day  be  reduced 
to  the  necessary  labour  time.  But,  even  in  that 
case,  the  latter  would  extend  its  limits.  On  the 
one  hand,  because  the  notion  of  “means  of  sub¬ 
sistence”  would  considerably  expand,  and  the 
labourer  would  lay  claim  to  an  altogether  dif¬ 
ferent  standard  of  life.  On  the  other  hand,  be¬ 
cause  a  part  of  what  is  now  surplus  labour 
would  then  count  as  necessary  labour;  I  mean 
the  labour  of  forming  a  fund  for  reserve  and 
accumulation. 

The  more  the  productiveness  of  labour  in¬ 
creases,  the  more  can  the  working  day  be  short¬ 
ened;  and  the  more  the  working  day  is  short¬ 
ened,  the  more  can  the  intensity  of  labour  in¬ 
crease.  From  a  social  point  of  view,  the  produc¬ 
tiveness  increases  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  econ¬ 
omy  of  labour,  which,  in  its  turn,  includes  not 
only  economy  of  the  means  of  production,  but 
also  the  avoidance  of  all  useless  labour.  The 
capitalist  mode  of  production,  while  on  the  one 
hand  enforcing  economy  in  each  individual 
business,  on  the  other  hand  begets,  by  its  an- 

venient,  and  much  more  in  conformity  with  the  interests 
of  the  ruling  classes,  whom  Malthus  adored  like  a  true 
priest,  to  explain  this  "over-population”  by  the  eternal 
laws  of  Nature,  rather  than  by  the  historical  laws  of  capi¬ 
talist  production. 

9  “A  principal  cause  of  the  increase  of  capital,  during 
the  war,  proceeded  from  the  greater  exertions,  and  per¬ 
haps  the  greater  privations,  of  the  labouring  classes,  the 
most  numerous  in  every  society.  More  women  and  chil¬ 
dren  were  compelled  by  necessitous  circumstances  to  enter 
upon  laborious  occupations;  and  former  workmen  were, 
from  the  same  cause,  obliged  to  devote  a  greater  portion 
of  their  time  to  increase  production.” — Essays  on  Political 
Economy ,  in  which  are  illustrated  the  Principal  Causes  of 
the  present  National  Distress,  London,  1830,  p.  248. 


262 


CAPITAL 


archical  system  of  competition,  the  most  out¬ 
rageous  squandering  of  labour  power  and  of  the 
social  means  of  production,  not  to  mention  the 
creation  of  a  vast  number  of  employments,  at 
present  indispensable,  but  in  themselves  super¬ 
fluous. 

The  intensity  and  productiveness  of  labour 
being  given,  the  time  which  society  is  bound  to 
devote  to  material  production  is  shorter,  and, 
as  a  consequence,  the  time  at  its  disposal  for  the 
free  development,  intellectual  and  social,  of  the 
individual  is  greater,  in  proportion  as  the  work 
is  more  and  more  evenly  divided  among  all  the 
able-bodied  members  of  society,  and  as  a  par¬ 
ticular  class  is  more  and  more  depiived  of  the 
power  to  shift  the  natural  burden  of  labour  from 
its  own  shoulders  to  those  of  another  layer  of 
society.  In  this  direction,  the  shortening  of  the 
working  day  finds  at  last  a  limit  in  the  general¬ 
ization  of  labour.  In  capitalist  society,  spare 
time  is  acquired  for  one  class  by  converting  the 
whole  lifetime  of  the  masses  into  labour  time. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

VARIOUS  FORMULAE  FOR  THE  RATE  OF 
SURPLUS  VALUE 

We  have  seen  that  the  rate  of  surplus  value  is 
represented  by  the  following  formulae. 

surplus  value  /  s\  _ _ surplus  value 

*  variable  capital  \vj  value  of  labour  power 
surplus  labour 
necessary  labour 

The  two  first  of  these  formulae  represent,  as  a 
ratio  of  values,  that  which,  in  the  third,  is  repre¬ 
sented  as  a  ratio  of  the  times  during  which  those 
values  are  produced.  These  formula;,  supple¬ 
mentary  the  one  to  the  other,  are  rigorously 
definite  and  correct.  We  therefore  find  them 
substantially,  but  not  consciously,  worked  out 
in  classical  political  economy.  There  we  meet 
with  the  following  derivative  formulae. 

^  surplus  labour  __  surplus  value 
working  day  value  of  the  product 
_  surplus  product 
total  product 

One  and  the  same  ratio  is  here  expressed  as 
a  ratio  of  labour  times,  of  the  values  in  which 
those  labour  times  are  embodied,  and  of  the 
products  in  which  those  values  exist.  It  is  of 
course  understood  that  by  “value  of  the  prod¬ 
uct”  is  meant  only  the  value  newly  created  in 


a  working  day,  the  constant  part  of  the  value  of 
the  product  being  excluded. 

In  all  of  these  formulae,  the  actual  degree  of 
exploitation  of  labour,  or  the  rate  of  surplus 
value,  is  falsely  expressed.  Let  the  working“-day 
be  12  hours.  Then,  making  the  same  assump¬ 
tions  as  in  former  instances,  the  real  degree  of 
exploitation  of  labour  will  be  represented  in  the 
following  proportions. 


6  hours*  surplus  labour  _  surplus  value  of  3s. 
6  hours'  necessary  labour  variable  capital  of  3s. 


100% 


From  formulae  2.  we  get  very  differently: 


6  hours*  surplus  labour  __  surplus  value  of  3s. 
working-day  of  12  hours  value  created  of  6s. 


50% 


These  derivative  formulae  express  in  reality 
only  the  proportion  in  which  the  working  day, 
or  the  value  produced  by  it,  is  divided  between 
capitalist  and  labourer.  If  they  are  to  be  treated 
as  direct  expressions  of  the  degree  of  self-expan¬ 
sion  of  capital,  the  following  erroneous  law 
would  hold  good:  Surplus  labour  or  surplus  val¬ 
ue  can  never  reach  ioo%1.  Since  the  surplus  la¬ 
bour  is  only  an  aliquot  part  of  the  working  day, 
or  since  surplus  value  is  only  an  aliquot  part  of 
the  value  created,  the  surplus  labour  must  nec¬ 
essarily  be  always  less  than  the  working  day, 
or  the  surplus  value  always  less  than  the  total 
value  created.  In  order,  however,  to  attain  the 
ratio  of  100:100  they  must  be  equal.  In  order 


1  See,  for  instance,  Rodbertus,  Soziale  Brie/e  an  Kirch- 
mann ,  Third  letter,  Widerlcgung  der  Ricardo* schen  Theorie 
von  der  Grundrente  und  Begrundung  etner  neuen  Renten- 
theorte ,  Berlin,  1851.  1  shall  return  to  this  letter  later  on; 
in  spite  of  its  erroneous  theory  of  rent,  it  sees  through  the 
nature  of  capitalist  production. — Note  to  the  3rd  edition. 
It  may  be  seen  from  this  how  favourably  Marx  judged  his 
predecessors,  whenever  he  found  in  them  real  progress,  or 
new  and  sound  ideas.  The  subsequent  publication  of  Rod¬ 
bertus’  letters  to  Rudolf  Meyer  has  shown  that  the  above 
acknowledgment  by  Marx  wants  restricting  to  some  ex¬ 
tent.  In  those  letters,  this  passage  occurs:  "Capital  must 
be  rescued  not  only  from  labour,  but  from  itself,  and  that 
will  be  best  effected  by  treating  the  acts  of  the  industrial 
capitalist  as  economical  and  political  functions  that  have 
been  delegated  to  him  with  his  capital,  and  by  treating  his 
profit  as  a  form  of  salary,  because  we  still  know  no  other 
social  organization.  But  salaries  may  be  regulated,  and 
may  also  be  reduced  if  they  take  too  much  from  wages. 
The  irruption  of  Marx  into  society,  as  I  may  call  his  book, 
must  be  warded  off. . . .  Altogether,  Marx's  book  is  not  so 
much  an  investigation  into  capital,  as  a  polemic  against 
the  present  form  of  capital,  a  form  which  he  confounds 
with  the  concept  itself  of  capital.”  ( Brie/e ,  etc.,  von  Dr. 
Rodbertus-JagetzoWy  edited  by  Dr.  Rudolf  Meyer,  Berlin, 
1881,  Vol.  I,  p.  in,  forty-eighth  letter  from  Rodbertus.) 
To  such  ideological  commonplaces  did  the  bold  attack  by 
Rodber.us  in  his  "Social  Letters”  finally  dwindle  down. 
F.E. 


VARIOUS  FORMULAE  FOR  THE  RATE  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE  263 


that  the  surplus  labour  may  absorb  the  whole 
day  (i.e.,  an  average  day  of  any  week  or  year), 
the  necessary  labour  must  sink  to  zero.  But  if 
the  necessary  labour  vanish,  so  too  does  the 
surplus  labour,  since  it  is  only  a  function 


of  the  former.  The  ratio  ,urP,ul>^  or 

working  day 

surplus  value  ,  e 

— - - -  can  therefore  never  reach  the 

value  created 


Moreover,  the  formula  2  can  at  any  time  be 
reconverted  into  formula  1.  If,  for  instance,  we 
,  surplus  labour  of  6  hours  .  . 

have  —  - - - - 7 - r - ,  then  the  necessary 

working  day  of  12  hours  J 

labour  time  being  12  hours  less  the  surplus 
labour  of  6  hours,  we  get  the  following  result: 
surplus  labour  of  6  hours  _  100 
necessary  labour  of  6  hours  100 

There  is  a  third  formula  which  I  have  occa- 


limit  of—,  still  less  rise  to  — — .  But  not  so 
100  100 

the  rate  of  surplus  value,  the  real  degree  of  ex¬ 
ploitation  of  labour.  Take,  e.g.,  the  estimate  of 
L.  de  Lavergne,  according  to  which  the  English 
agricultural  labourer  gets  only  the  capital¬ 
ist  (farmer)  on  the  other  hand  $4  of  the  product1 
or  of  its  value,  apart  from  the  question  of  how 
the  booty  is  subsequently  divided  between  the 
capitalist,  the  landlord,  and  others.  According 
to  this,  the  surplus  labour  of  the  English  agri¬ 
cultural  labourer  is  to  his  necessary  labour  as 
3:1,  which  gives  a  rate  of  exploitation  of  300%. 

'The  favourite  method  of  treating  the  work¬ 
ing  day  as  constant  in  magnitude  became, 
through  the  use  of  the  formula  2,  a  fixed  usage, 
because  in  them  surplus  labour  is  always  com¬ 
pared  with  a  working  day  of  given  length.  The 
same  holds  good  when  the  repartition  of  the 
value  produced  is  exclusively  kept  in  sight.  The 
working  day  that  has  already  been  realized  in 
a  given  value  must  necessarily  be  a  day  of  given 
length. 

The  habit  of  representing  surplus  value  and 
value  of  labour  power  as  fractions  of  the  value 
created — a  habit  that  originates  in  the  capital¬ 
ist  mode  of  production  itself,  and  whose  import 
will  hereafter  be  disclosed — conceals  the  very 
transaction  that  characterizes  capital,  namely 
the  exchange  of  variable  capital  for  living  la¬ 
bour  power  and  the  consequent  exclusion  of  the 
labourer  from  the  product.  Instead  of  the  real 
fact,  we  have  the  false  semblance  of  an  associa¬ 
tion  in  which  labourer  and  capitalist  divide  the 
product  in  proportion  to  the  different  elements 
which  they  respectively  contribute  towards  its 
formation.2 

1  That  part  of  the  product  which  merely  replaces  the 
constant  capital  advanced  is,  of  course,  left  out  in  this  cal¬ 
culation.  M.  1..  de  Lavergne,  a  blind  admirer  of  Eng¬ 
land,  is  inclined  to  estimate  the  share  of  the  capitalist  too 
low,  rather  than  too  high. 

2  All  well-developed  forms  of  capitalist  production  being 
forms  of  cooperation,  nothing  is,  of  course,  easier,  than  to 
make  abstraction  from  their  antagonistic  character,  and 
to  transform  them  by  a  word  into  some  form  of  free  associ¬ 
ation,  as  is  done  by  A.  de  Laborde  in  De  Vesprit  de  V associ¬ 
ation  dans  tous  Its  intirits  de  la  communauti ,”  Pans,  1818. 
H.  Carey,  the  Yankee,  occasionally  performs  this  conjur- 


sionally  already  anticipated;  it  is: 

2  surplus  value  __  surplus  labour 
value  of  labor  power  necessary  labour 
_  unpaid  labour 
paid  labour 

After  the  investigations  we  have  given  above, 
it  is  no  longer  possible  to  be  misled  by  the  for- 
,  unpaid  labour  ...  . 

mula  —  — — -  >nto  concluding  that  the 

paid  labour  0 

capitalist  pays  for  labour  and  not  for  labour 
power.  This  formula  is  only  a  popular  expres- 
.  r  surplus  labour  ... 

sion  tor  - — — .  The  capitalist  pays 

necessary  labour  1  r  J 

the  value,  so  far  as  price  coincides  with  value, 
of  the  labour  power,  and  receives  in  exchange 
the  disposal  of  the  living  labour  power  itself. 
His  usufruct  is  spread  over  two  periods.  During 
one,  the  labourer  produces  a  value  that  is  only 
equal  to  the  value  of  his  labour  power:  he  pro¬ 
duces  its  equivalent.  Thus  the  capitalist  re¬ 
ceives,  in  return  for  his  advance  of  the  price  of 
the  labour  power,  a  product  of  the  same  price. 
It  is  the  same  as  if  he  had  bought  the  product 
ready  made  in  the  market.  During  the  other 
period,  the  period  of  surplus  labour,  the  usu¬ 
fruct  of  the  labour  power  creates  a  value  for  the 
capitalist  that  costs  him  no  equivalent.3  This 
expenditure  of  labour  power  comes  to  him  gra¬ 
tis.  In  this  sense  it  is  that  surplus  labour  can  be 
called  unpaid  labour. 

Capital,  therefore,  is  not  only,  as  Adam  Smith 
says,  the  command  over  labour.  It  is  essentially 
the  command  over  unpaid  labour.  All  surplus 
value,  whatever  particular  form  (profit,  inter¬ 
est,  or  rent)  it  may  subsequently  crystallize  in¬ 
to,  is  in  substance  the  materialization  of  unpaid 
labour.  The  secret  of  the  self-expansion  of  capi¬ 
tal  resolves  itself  into  having  the  disposal  of  a 
definite  quantity  of  other  people’s  unpaid  la¬ 
bour. 

ing  trick  with  like  success,  even  with  the  relations  result¬ 
ing  from  slavery. 

*  Although  the  Physiocrats  could  not  penetrate  the  mys¬ 
tery  of  surplus  value,  yet  this  much  was  clear  to  them,  viz., 
that  it  is  ‘*A  wealth  which  is  independent  and  variable, 
which  he  (the  possessor)  has  not  bought  and  which  he 
sells.”— Turgot,  Rlftexions  sur  la  formation  et  la  distribu¬ 
tion  des  richesses ,  p.  1 1. 


Part  Six 


WAGES 


CHAPTER  XIX.  THE  TRANSFORMATION  OF 
THE  VALUE  (AND  RESPECTIVELY  THE 
PRICE)  OF  LABOUR  POWER  INTO 
WAGES 

On  the  surface  of  bourgeois  society,  the  wage 
of  the  labourer  appears  as  the  price  of  labour,  a 
certain  quantity  of  money  that  is  paid  for  a  cer¬ 
tain  quantity  of  labour.  Thus  people  speak  of 
the  value  of  labour  and  call  its  expression  in 
money  its  necessary  or  natural  price.  On  the 
other  hand  they  speak  of  the  market  prices  of 
labour,  i.e.,  prices  oscillating  above  or  below  its 
natural  price. 

But  what  is  the  value  of  a  commodity?  The 
objective  form  of  the  social  labour  expended  in 
its  production.  And  how  do  we  measure  the 
quantity  of  this  value?  By  the  quantity  of  the 
labour  contained  in  it.  How,  then,  is  the  value 
of,  for  example,  a  12  hour  working  day  to  be 
determined?  By  the  12  working  hours  con¬ 
tained  in  a  working  day  of  12  hours,  which  is  an 
absurd  tautology.1 

In  order  to  be  sold  as  a  commodity  in  the 
market,  labour  must  at  all  events  exist  before 
it  is  sold.  But,  could  the  labourer  give  it  an  in¬ 
dependent  objective  existence,  he  would  sell  a 
commodity  and  not  labour.2 

1  “Mr.  Ricardo,  ingeniously  enough,  avoids  a  difficulty 
which,  on  a  first  view,  threatens  to  encumber  his  doctrine 
— that  value  depends  on  the  quantity  of  labour  employed 
in  production.  If  this  principle  is  rigidly  adhered  to,  it 
follows  that  the  value  of  labour  depends  on  the  quantity 
of  labour  employed  in  producing  it — which  is  evidently 
absurd.  By  a  dexterous  turn,  therefore,  Mr.  Ricardo  makes 
the  value  of  labour  depend  on  the  quantity  of  labour  re¬ 
quired  to  produce  wages;  or,  to  give  him  the  benefit  of  his 
own  language,  he  maintains  that  the  value  of  laboqr  is  to 
be  estimated  by  the  quantity  of  labour  required  to  pro¬ 
duce  wages;  by  which  he  means  the  quantity  of  labour  re¬ 
quired  to  produce  the  money  or  commodities  given  to  the 
labourer.  This  is  similar  to  saying  that  the  value  of  cloth 
is  estimated,  not  by  the  quantity  of  labour  bestowed  on  its 
production,  but  by  the  quantity  of  labour  bestowed  on  the 
production  of  the  silver  for  which  the  cloth  is  exchanged. " — 
A  Critical  Discourse  on  the  Nature ,  etc.,  of  Value ,  pp.  5c,  51. 

*'If  you  call  labour  a  commodity,  it  is  not  like  a  com¬ 
modity  which  is  first  produced  in  order  to  exchange,  and 
then  brought  to  market  where  it  must  exchange  with  other 
commodities  according  to  the  respective  quantities  of  each 


Apart  from  these  contradictions,  a  direct  ex¬ 
change  of  money,  i.e.,  of  realized  labour,  with 
living  labour  would  either  do  away  with  the 
law  of  value  which  only  begins  to  develop  itself 
freely  on  the  basis  of  capitalist  production,  or 
do  away  with  capitalist  production  itself,  which 
rests  directly  on  wage  labour.  The  working  day 
of  12  hours  embodies  itself,  for  instance,  in  a 
money  value  of  6j.  Either  equivalents  are  ex¬ 
changed,  and  then  the  labourer  receives  6j.  for 
12  hours*  labour;  the  price  of  his  labour  would 
be  equal  to  the  price  of  his  product.  In  this  case, 
he  produces  no  surplus  value  for  the  buyer  of  his 
labour,  the  6j.  are  not  transformed  into  capital, 
the  basis  of  capitalist  production  vanishes.  But 
it  is  on  this  very  basis  that  he  sells  his  labour 
and  that  his  labour  is  wage  labour.  Or  else  he 
receives  for  12  hours*  labour  less  than  6j.,  i.e., 
less  than  12  hours*  labour.  Twelve  hours’  labour 
are  exchanged  against  10, 6,  etc.,  hours’  labour. 
This  equalization  of  unequal  ffTiantitics  not 
merely  does  away  with  the  determination  of 
value.  Such  a  self-destructive  contradiction 
cannot  be  in  any  way  even  enunciated  or  for¬ 
mulated  as  a  law.3 

It  is  of  no  avail  to  deduce  the  exchange  of 
more  labour  against  less  from  their  difference  of 
form,  the  one  being  realized,  the  other  living.4 

which  there  may  be  in  the  market  at  the  time;  labour  is 
created  the  moment  it  is  brought  to  market;  nay,  it  is 
brought  to  market  before  it  is  created.”— Observations  on 
certain  Verbal  Disputes ,  etc.,  pp.  75, 76. 

*  “Treating  labour  as  a  commodity,  and  capital,  the 
produce  of  labour,  as  another,  then,  if  the  values  of  these 
two  commodities  were  regulated  by  equal  quantities  of  la¬ 
bour,  a  given  amount  of  labour  would  . . .  exchange  for 
that  quantity  of  capital  which  had  been  produced  by  the 
same  amount  of  labour;  antecedent  labouft  would  . . .  ex¬ 
change  for  the  same  amount  as  present  labour.  But  the 
value  of  labour  in  relation  to  other  commodities  ...  is 
determined  not  by  equal  quantities  of  labour.” — E.  G. 
Wakefield  in  his  edition  of  Adam  Smith’s  IVealth  of  Na¬ 
tions ,  Vol.  I,  London,  1836,  p.  231,  note. 

4  “There  has  to  be  an  agreement”  (a  new  edition  of  the 
social  contract!)  “that  whenever  there  is  an  exchange  of 
work  done  for  work  to  be  done,  the  latter”  (the  capitalist) 
“is  to  receive  a  higher  value  than  the  former”  (the  worker). 
— Simonde  (de  Sismondi),  De  la  richesse  commercials ,  Ge¬ 
neva,  1803,  VoL  1,  p.  37. 


264 


VALUE  OF  LABOUR  POWER  AND  WAGES 


This  is  the  more  absurd  as  the  value  of  a  com¬ 
modity  is  determined  not  by  the  quantity  of 
labour  actually  realized  in  it,  but  by  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  living  labour  necessary  for  its  produc¬ 
tion.  A  commodity  represents,  say,  6  working 
hours.  If  an  invention  is  made  by  which  it  can 
be  produced  in  3  hours,  the  value,  even  of  the 
commodity  already  produced,  falls  by  half.  It 
represents  now  3  hours  of  social  labour  instead 
of  the  6  formerly  necessary.  It  is  the  quantity 
of  labour  required  for  its  production,  not  the 
realized  form  of  that  labour,  by  which  the 
amount  of  the  value  of  a  commodity  is  deter¬ 
mined. 

That  which  comes  directly  face  to  face  with 
the  possessor  of  money  on  the  market  is  in  fact 
not  labour,  but  the  labourer.  What  the  latter 
sells  is  his  labour  power.  As  soon  as  his  labour 
actually  begins,  it  has  already  ceased  to  be¬ 
long  to  him;  it  can  therefore  no  longer  be 
sold  by  him.  Labour  is  the  substance,  and  the 
immanent  measure  of  value,  but  has  itself  no 
value. 1 

In  the  expression  “value  of  labour,”  the  idea 
of  value  is  not  only  completely  obliterated,  but 
actually  reversed.  It  is  an  expression  as  imag¬ 
inary  as  the  value  of  the  earth.  These  imaginary 
expressions  arise,  however,  from  the  relations 
of  production  themselves.  They  are  categories 
for  the  phenomenal  forms  of  essential  relations. 
That  in  their  appearance  things  often  represent 
themselves  in  inverted  form  is  pretty  well 
known  in  every  science  except  political  econ¬ 
omy.2 

1  "Labour  the  exclusive  standard  of  value  . . .  the  cre¬ 
ator  of  all  wealth,  no  commodity.”  Thomas  Hodgskin,  op. 
cit p.  1 86. 

2  On  the  other  hand,  the  attempt  to  explain  such  expres¬ 
sions  as  merely  poetic  license  only  shows  the  impotence  of 
the  analysis.  Hence,  in  answer  to  Proudhon’s  phrase:  "La¬ 
bour  is  called  value ,  not  as  being  a  commodity  itself,  but  in 
view  of  the  values  supposed  to  be  potentially  embodied  in 
it.  The  value  of  labour  is  a  figurative  expression,”  etc.  I 
have  remarked:  "In  labour,  commodity,  which  is  a  fright¬ 
ful  reality,  he  (Proudhon)  sees  nothing  but  a  grammatical 
ellipsis.  The  whole  of  existing  society,  then,  based  upon  la¬ 
bour  commodity,  is  henceforth  based  upon  a  poetic  license, 
on  a  figurative  expression.  Does  society  desire  to  eliminate 

■  all  the  inconveniences  which  trouble  it,  it  has  only  to  elim¬ 
inate  all  the  ill-sounding  terms.  Let  it  change  the  language, 
and  for  that  it  has  only  to  address  itself  to  the  Academy 
and  ask  it  for  a  new  edition  of  its  dictionary.”  (Karl  Marx, 
Misbe  de  la  philosophies  pp.  34,  35.)  It  is  naturally  still 
more  convenient  to  understand  by  value  nothing  at  all. 
*i  hen  one  can  without  difficulty  subsume  everything  under 
this  category.  Thus,  for  example,  J.  B.  Say:  "What  is  val¬ 
ue?”  Answer:  "That  which  a  thing  is  worth”;  and  what  is 
"price”?  Answer:  "The  value  of  a  thing  expressed  in  mon¬ 
ey.”  And  why  has  agriculture  a  value?  Answer:  "Because 
one  sets  a  price  on  it.”  Therefore  value  is  what  a  thing  is 
worth,  and  the  land  has  its  "value,”  because  its  value  is 


265 

Classical  political  economy  borrowed  from 
everyday  life  the  category  “price  of  labour" 
without  further  criticism,  and  then  simply 
asked  how  this  price  is  determined.  It  soon  rec¬ 
ognized  that  the  change  in  the  relations  of  de¬ 
mand  and  supply  explained  in  regard  to  the 
price  of  labour,  as  of  all  other  commodities, 
nothing  except  its  changes,  i.e.,  the  oscillations 
of  the  market  price  above  or  below  a  certain 
mean.  If  demand  and  supply  balance,  the  os¬ 
cillation  of  prices  ceases,  all  other  conditions 
remaining  the  same.  But  then  demand  and  sup¬ 
ply  also  cease  to  explain  anything.  The  price  of 
labour,  at  the  moment  when  demand  and  sup¬ 
ply  are  in  equilibrium,  is  its  natural  price,  de¬ 
termined  independently  of  the  relation  of  de¬ 
mand  and  supply.  And  how  this  price  is  deter¬ 
mined  is  just  the  question.  Or  a  larger  period  of 
oscillations  in  the  market  price  is  taken,  e.g.,  a 
year,  and  they  afre  found  to  cancel  one  the  other, 
leaving  a  mean  average  quantity,  a  relatively 
constant  magnitude.  This  had  naturally  to  be 
determined  otherwise  than  by  its  own  compen¬ 
sating  variations.  This  price  which  always  final¬ 
ly  predominates  over  the  accidental  market 
prices  of  labour  and  regulates  them,  this  “nec¬ 
essary  price”  (Physiocrats)  or  “natural  price” 
of  labour  (Adam  Smith)  can,  as  with  all  other 
commodities,  be  nothing  else  than  its  value  ex¬ 
pressed  in  money.  In  this  way  political  economy 
expected  to  penetrate  athwart  the  accidental 
prices  of  labour  to  the  value  of  labour.  As  with 
other  commodities,  this  value  was  determined 
by  the  cost  of  production.  But  what  is  the  cost 
of  production —of  the  labourer,  i.e.,  the  cost  of 
producing  or  reproducing  the  labourer  himself? 
This  question  unconsciously  substituted  itself 
in  political  economy  for  the  original  one;  for  the 
search  after  the  cost  of  production  of  labour  as 
such  turned  in  a  circle  and  never  left  the  spot. 
What  economists  therefore  call  value  of  labour 
is  in  fact  the  value  of  labour  power  as  it  exists 
in  the  personality  of  the  labourer,  which  is  as 
different  from  its  function,  labour,  as  a  machine 
is  from  the  work  it  performs.  Occupied  with  the 
difference  between  the  market  price  of  labour 
and  its  so-called  value,  with  the  relation  of  this 
value  to  the  rate  of  profit,  and  to  the  values  of 
the  commodities  produced  by  means  of  labour, 
etc.,  they  never  discovered  that  the  course  of 
the  analysis  had  led  not  only  from  the  market 
prices  of  labour  to  its  presumed  value,  but  had 
led  to  the  resolution  of  this  value  of  labour  itself 
into  the  value  of  labour  power.  Classical  econ- 

"expressed  in  money.”  This  is,  anyhow,  a  very  simple  way 
of  explaining  the  why  and  the  wherefore  of  things. 


CAPITAL 


266 

omy  never  arrived  at  a  consciousness  of  the  re¬ 
sults  of  its  own  analysis;  it  accepted  uncritically 
the  categories  "value  of  labour,”  "natural  price 
of  labour,"  etc.,  as  final  and  as  adequate  ex¬ 
pressions  for  the  value  relation  under  considera¬ 
tion,  and  was  thus  led,  as  will  be  seen  later,  into 
inextricable  confusion  and  contradiction,  while 
it  offered  to  the  vulgar  economists  a  secure  basis 
of  operations  for  their  shallowness,  which  on 
principle  worships  appearances  only. 

Let  us  next  see  how  value  and  price  of  labour 
power  present  themselves  in  this  transformed 
condition  as  wages. 

We  know  that  the  daily  value  of  labour  pow¬ 
er  is  calculated  upon  a  certain  length  of  the  la¬ 
bourer's  life,  to  which,  again,  corresponds  a  cer¬ 
tain  length  of  working  day.  Assume  the  habit¬ 
ual  working  day  as  12  hours,  the  daily  value  of 
labour  power  as  3*.,  the  expression  in  money  of 
a  value  that  embodies  6  hours  of  labour.  If  the 
labourer  receives  3*.,  then  he  receives  the  value 
of  his  labour  power  functioning  through  12 
hours.  If,  now,  this  value  of  a  day's  labour  pow¬ 
er  is  expressed  as  the  value  of  a  day’s  labour  it¬ 
self,  we  have  the  formula:  Twelve  hours’  labour 
has  a  value  of  3J.  The  value  of  labour  power 
thus  determines  the  value  of  labour,  or,  ex¬ 
pressed  in  money,  its  necessary  price.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  price  of  labour  power  differs 
from  its  value,  in  like  manner  the  price  of  labour 
differs  from  its  so-called  value. 

As  the  value  of  labour  is  only  an  irrational 
expression  for  the  value  of  labour  power,  it  fol¬ 
lows,  of  course,  that  the  value*  of  labour  must 
always  be  less  than  the  value  it  produces,  for 
the  capitalist  always  makes  labour  power  work 
longer  than  is  necessary  for  the  reproduction  of 
its  own  value.  In  the  above  example,  the  value 
of  the  labour  power  that  functions  through  12 
hours  is  3*.,  a  value  for  the  reproduction  of 
which  6  hours  are  required.  The  value  which 
the  labour  power  produces  is,  on  the  other  hand, 
6s.,  because  it,  in  fact,  functions  during  12 
hours,  and  the  value  it  produces  depends,  not 
on  its  own  value,  but  on  the  length  of  time  it  is 
in  action.  Thus,  we  have  a  result  absurd  at  first 
sight— that  labour  which  creates  a  value  of  6 s. 
possesses  a  value  of  35. 1 

We  see,  further  that  the  value  of  3J.  which 
represents  a  part  only  of  the  working  day— i.e., 
6  hours'  labour— appears  as  the  value  or  price 

1  Cf.  Zur  Kritik  etc.,  p.  40,  where  I  state  that,  in  the 
portion  of  that  work  that  deals  with  capital,  this  problem 
will  be  solved:  “How  does  production,  on  the  basis  of  ex¬ 
change  value  determined  simply  by  labour  time,  lead  to 
the  result  that  the  exchange  value  of  labour  is  less  than 
the  exchange  value  of  its  product?’’ 


of  the  whole  working  day  of  12  hours,  which 
thus  includes  6  hours  unpaid  for.  The  wage  form 
thus  extinguishes  every  trace  of  the  division  of 
the  working  day  into  necessary  labour  and  sur¬ 
plus  labour,  into  paid  and  unpaid  labour.  All 
labour  appears  as  paid  labour.  In  the  corvde, 
the  labour  of  the  worker  for  himself,  and  his 
compulsory  labour  for  his  lord,  differ  in  space 
and  time  in  the  clearest  possible  way.  In  slave 
labour,  even  that  part  of  the  working  day  in 
which  the  slave  is  only  replacing  the  value  of  his 
own  means  of  existence,  in  which,  therefore,  in 
fact,  he  works  for  himself  alone,  appears  as  la¬ 
bour  for  his  master.  All  the  slave’s  labour  ap¬ 
pears  as  unpaid  labour.2  In  wage  labour,  on  the 
contrary,  even  surplus  labour,  or  unpaid  la¬ 
bour,  appears  as  paid.  There  the  property  rela¬ 
tion  conceals  the  labour  of  the  slave  for  himself; 
here  the  money  relation  conceals  the  unre¬ 
quited  labour  of  the  wage  labourer. 

Hence,  we  may  understand  the  decisive  im¬ 
portance  of  the  transformation  of  value  and 
price  of  labour  power  into  the  form  of  wages,  or 
into  the  value  and  price  of  labour  itself.  This 
phenomenal  form,  which  makes  the  actual  rela¬ 
tion  invisible  and,  indeed,  shows  the  direct  op¬ 
posite  of  that  relation,  forms  the  basis  of  all  the 
juridical  notions  of  both  labourer  and  capital¬ 
ist,  of  all  the  mystifications  of  the  capitalistic 
mode  of  production,  of  all  its  illusions  as  to  lib¬ 
erty,  of  all  the  apologetic  shifts  of  the  vulgar 
economists. 

If  history  took  a  long  time  to  get  at  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  the  mystery  of  wages,  nothing,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  more  easy  ta understand  than  the 
necessity,  the  raison  d'etre,  of  this  phenomenon. 

The  exchange  between  capital  and  labour  at 
first  presents  itself  to  the  mind  in  the  same  guise 
as  the  buying  and  selling  of  all  other  commodi¬ 
ties.  The  buyer  gives  a  certain  sum  of  money, 
the  seller  an  article  of  a  nature  different  from 
money.  The  jurist's  consciousness  recognizes  in 
this,  at  most,  a  material  difference,  expressed  in 
the  juridically  equivalent  formula:  Do  ut  des, 
do  ut facias,  facto  ut  des,facio  ut  facias .3 

Furthermore,  exchange-value  and  use-value 
being  intrinsically  incommensurable  magni- 

*  The  Morning  Star ,  a  London  free-trade  organ,  naif  to 
silliness,  protested  again  and  again  during  the  American 
Civil  War,  with  all  the  moral  indignation  of  which  man  is 
capable,  that  the  negro  in  the  Confederate  States  worked 
absolutely  for  nothing.  It  should  have  compared  the  daily 
cost  of  such  a  negro  with  that  of  the  free  workman  in  the 
East  End  of  London. 

*  I  gve  in  order  that  you  inay  give;  I  give  in  order  that 
you  ma;  produce;  I  produce  so  that  you  may  give;  I  pro¬ 
duce  so  that  you  may  produce. 


TIME-WAGES 


tudes,  the  expressions  “value  of  labour”  and 
“price  of  labour,”  do  not  seem  more  irrational 
than  the  expressions  “value  of  cotton”  and 
“price  of  cotton.”  Moreover,  the  labourer  is 
paid  after  he  has  given  his  labour.  In  its  func¬ 
tion  of  means  of  payment,  money  realizes  sub¬ 
sequently  the  value  or  price  of  the  article  sup¬ 
plied — i.e.,  in  this  particular  case,  the  value  or 
price  of  the  labour  supplied.  Finally,  the  use- 
value  supplied  by  the  labourer  to  the  capitalist 
is  not,  in  fact,  his  labour  power,  but  its  function, 
some  definite  useful  labour,  the  work  of  tailor¬ 
ing,  shocmaking,  spinning,  etc.  That  this  same 
labour  is,  on  the  other  hand,  the  universal  value- 
creating  element,  and  thus  possesses  a  prop¬ 
erty  by  which  it  differs  from  all  other  commodi¬ 
ties,  is  beyond  the  cognizance  of  the  ordinary 
mind. 

Let  us  put  ourselves  in  the  place  of  the  la¬ 
bourer  who  receives  for  12  hours’  labour,  say, 
the  value  produced  by  6  hours’  labour,  say  3J. 
For  him,  in  fact,  his  12  hours’  labour  is  the 
means  of  buying  tl. .  v*  The  value  of  his  labour 
power  may  vary  with  the  value  of  his  usual 
means  of  subsistence  from  3  to  4  shillings,  or 
from  3  to  2  shillings;  or,  if  the  value  of  his  labour 
power  remains  constant,  its  price  may,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  changing  relations  of  demand  and 
supply,  rise  to  4 s.  or  fall  to  2 s.  He  always  gives 
1 2  hours  of  labour.  Every  change  in  the  amount 
of  the  equivalent  that  he  receives  appears  to 
him,  therefore,  necessarily  as  a  change  in  the 
value  or  price  of  his  12  hours'  work.  This  cir¬ 
cumstance  misled  Adam  Smith,  who  treated 
the  working  day  as  a  constant  quantity,1  to  the 
assertion  that  the  value  of  labour  is  constant, 
although  the  value  of  the  means  of  subsistence 
may  vary,  and  the  same  working  day,  therefore, 
may  represent  itself  in  more  or  less  money  for 
the  labourer. 

Let  us  consider,  on  the  other  hand,  the  capi¬ 
talist.  He  wishes  to  receive  as  much  labour  as 
possible  for  as  little  money  as  possible.  Prac¬ 
tically,  therefore,  the  only  thing  that  interests 
him  is  the  difference  between  the  price  of  labour 
power  and  the  value  which  its  function  creates. 
But,  then,  he  tries  to  buy  all  commodities  as 
cheaply  as  possible,  and  always  accounts  for  his 
profit  by  simple  cheating,  by  buying  under  and 
selling  over  the  value.  Hence,  he  never  comes 
t )  see  that,  if  such  a  thing  as  the  value  of  labour 
really  existed  and  he  really  paid  this  value,  no 
capital  would  exist;  liis  money  would  not  be 
turned  into  capital. 

1  Adam  Smith  only  accidentally  alludes  to  the  variation 
of  the  working-day  when  he  is  referring  to  piece-wages. 


267 

Moreover,  the  actual  movement  of  wages 
presents  phenomena  which  seem  to  prove  that 
not  the  value  of  labour  power  is  paid,  but  the 
value  of  its  function,  of  labour  itself.  We  may 
reduce  these  phenomena  to  two  great  classes: 
(1)  Change  of  wages  with  the  changing  length 
of  the  working  day.  One  might  as  well  conclude 
that  not  the  value  of  a  machine  is  paid,  but  that 
of  its  working,  because  it  costs  more  to  hire  a 
machine  for  a  week  than  for  a  day.  (2)  The  indi¬ 
vidual  difference  in  the  wages  of  different  la¬ 
bourers  who  do  the  same  kind  of  work.  We  find 
this  individual  difference,  but  are  not  deceived 
by  it,  in  the  system  of  slavery,  where,  frankly 
and  openly,  without  any  circumlocution,  la¬ 
bour  power  itself  is  sold.  However,  in  the  slave 
system,  the  advantage  of  a  labour  power  above 
the  average,  and  the  disadvantage  of  a  labour 
power  below  the  average,  affects  the  slave  own¬ 
er;  in  the  wage  labour  system,  it  affects  the  la¬ 
bourer  himself,  because  his  labour  power  is,  in 
the  one  case,  sold  by  himself,  in  the  other,  by  a 
third  person. 

For  the  rest,  in  respect  to  the  phenomenal 
form,  “value  and  price  of  labour,”  or  “wages,” 
as  contrasted  with  the  essential  relation  mani¬ 
fested  therein  (viz.,  the  value  and  price  of  la¬ 
bour  power),  the  same  difference  holds  that 
holds  in  respect  to  all  phenomena  and  their 
hidden  substrata.  The  former  appear  directly 
and  spontaneously  as  current  modes  of 
thought;  the  latter  must  first  be  discovered  by 
science.  Classical  political  economy  nearly 
touches  the  true  relation  of  things,  without, 
however,  consciously  formulating  it.  This  it 
cannot,  so  long  as  it  sticks  in  its  bourgeois  skin. 


CHAPTER  XX.  TIME -WAGES 

Wages  themselves  again  take  many  forms,  a 
fact  not  recognizable  in  the  ordinary  economic 
treatises  which,  exclusively  interested  in  the 
material  side  of  the  question,  neglect  every  dif¬ 
ference  of  form.  An  exposition  of  all  these  forms 
however,  belongs  to  the  special  study  of  wage-la¬ 
bour,  not  therefore  to  this  work.  Still  the  two  fun¬ 
damental  forms  must  be  briefly  worked  out  here. 

The  sale  of  labour  power,  as  will  be  remem¬ 
bered,  takes  place  for  a  definite  period  of  time. 
The  converted  form  under  which  the  daily, 
weekly,  etc.,  value  of  labour  power  presents  it¬ 
self  is  hence  that  of  time-wages,  therefore  day 
wages,  etc. 

Next  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  laws  set  forth 
in  Chapter  17  on  the  changes  in  the  relative 


268  CAPITAL 


magnitudes  of  price  of  labour  power  and  surplus 
value,  pass  by  a  simple  transformation  of  form 
into  law9  of  wages.  Similarly  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  the  exchange-value  of  labour  power  and 
the  sum  of  the  necessaries  of  life  into  which  this 
value  is  converted,  now  reappears  as  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  nominal  and  real  wages.  It 
would  be  useless  to  repeat  here,  with  regard  to 
the  phenomenal  form,  what  has  been  already 
worked  out  in  the  substantial  form.  We  limit 
ourselves  therefore  to  a  few  points  characteris¬ 
tic  of  time-wages. 

The  sum  of  money1  which  the  labourer  re¬ 
ceives  for  his  daily  or  weekly  labour  forms  the 
amount  of  his  nominal  wages,  or  of  his  wages 
estimated  in  value.  But  it  is  clear  that  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  length  of  the  working  day,  that  is, 
according  to  the  amount  of  actual  labour  daily 
supplied,  the  same  daily  or  weekly  wage  may 
represent  very  different  prices  of  labour,  i.e., 
very  different  sums  of  money  for  the  same 
quantity  of  labour.1  We  must,  therefore,  in  con¬ 
sidering  time-wages,  again  distinguish  between 
the  sum-total  of  the  daily  or  weekly  wages,  etc., 
and  the  price  of  labour.  How  then,  to  And  this 
price,  i.e.,  the  money-value  of  a  given  quantity 
of  labour?  The  average  price  of  labour  is  found 
when  the  average  daily  value  of  the  labour  pow¬ 
er  is  divided  by  the  average  number  of  hours  in 
the  working  day.  If,  e.g.,  the  daily  value  of  la¬ 
bour  power  is  3  shillings,  the  value  of  the  prod¬ 
uct  of  6  working  hours,  and  if  the  working-day 
is  12  hours,  the  price  of  1  working  hour  is  Via 
shillings  =  3^/.  The  price  of  the  working  hour 
thus  found  serves  as  the  unit  measure  for  the 
price  of  labour. 

It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  daily  and  week¬ 
ly  wages,  etc.,  may  remain  the  same,  although 
the  price  of  labour  falls  constantly.  If,  e.g.,  the 
habitual  working  day  is  10  hours  and  the  daily 
value  of  the  labour  power  3*.,  the  price  of  the 
working  hour  is  3 */$d.  It  falls  to  $d.  as  soon  as 
the  working  day  rises  to  12  hours,  to  2*/$d.  as 
soon  a9  it  rise9  to  15  hours.  Daily  or  weekly 
wages  remain,  despite  all  this,  unchanged.  On 
the  contrary,  the  daily  or  weekly  wages  may 
rise,  although  the  price  of  labour  remains  con¬ 
stant  or  even  falls.  If,  e.g.,  the  working  day  is 
10  hours,  and  the  daily  value  of  labour  power  3 

1  The  value  of  money  itself  is  here  always  supposed  con¬ 
stant. 

1  “The  price  of  labour  is  the  sum  paid  for  a  given  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour."  (Sir  Edward  West,  Price  of  Corn  and  Wages 
of  Labour ,  London,  1836,  p.  67.)  West  is  the  author  of  the 
anonymous  Essay  on  the  Application  of  Capital  to  Land,  by 
a  Fellow  of  the  University  College  of  Chi  ford,  London,  1815. 
An  epoch-making  work  in  the  history  of  political  economy. 


shillings,  the  price  of  one  working  hour  is  &/s4. 
If  the  labourer,  in  consequence  of  increase  of 
trade,  works  12  hours,  the  price  of  labour  re¬ 
maining  the  same,  his  daily  wage  now  rises  to 
3J.  7 Vs^.  without  any  variation  in  the  price  of 
labour.  The  same  result  might  follow  if,  instead 
of  the  extensive  amount  of  labour,  its  intensive 
amount  increased.®  The  rise  of  the  nominal 
daily  or  weekly  wages  may  therefore  be  accom¬ 
panied  by  a  price  of  labour  that  remains  sta¬ 
tionary  or  falls.  The  same  holds  as  to  the  income 
of  the  labourer's  family,  as  soon  as  the  quantity 
of  labour  expended  by  the  head  of  the  family  is 
increased  by  the  labour  of  the  members  of  his 
family.  There  are,  therefore,  methods  of  lower¬ 
ing  the  price  of  labour  independent  of  the  re¬ 
duction  of  the  nominal  daily  or  weekly  wages.4 

As  a  general  law  it  follows  that,  given  the 
amount  of  daily  or  weekly  labour,  etc.,  the  daily 
or  weekly  wages  depend  on  the  price  of  labour 
which  itself  varies  either  with  the  value  of  la¬ 
bour  power,  or  with  the  difference  between  its 
price  and  its  value.  Given,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  price  of  labour,  the  daily  or  weekly  wages 
depend  on  the  quantity  of  the  daily  or  weekly 
labour. 

The  unit  measure  for  time-wages,  the  price 
of  the  working  hour,  is  the  quotient  of  the  value 
of  a  day's  labour  power  divided  by  the  number 
of  hours  of  the  average  working  day.  Let  the 
latter  be  12  hours,  and  the  daily  value  of  labour 
power  3  shillings,  the  value  of  the  product  of  6 
hours  of  labour.  Under  these  circumstances  the 
price  of  a  working  hour  is  3d.;  the  value  pro- 

®  “The  wages  of  labour  depend  upon  the  price  of  labour 
and  the  quantity  of  labour  performed. . . .  An  increase  in 
the  wages  of  labour  docs  not  necessarily  imply  an  en¬ 
hancement  of  the  price  of  labour.  From  fuller  employ¬ 
ment,  and  greater  exertions,  the  wages  of  labour  may 
be  considerably  increased,  while  the  price  of  labour  may 
continue  the  same."  (West,  op.  ett pp. 67,68, 1 12.)  West, 
however,  dismisses  with  mere  banalities  the  main  ques¬ 
tion:  “How  is  the  price  of  labour  determined?" 

4  This  is  perceived  by  the  fanatical  representative  of  the 
industrial  bourgeoisie  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  au¬ 
thor  of  the  Essay  on  Trade  and  Commerce  often  quoted  by 
us,  although  he  puts  the  matter  in  a  confused  way:  “It  is 
the  quantity  of  labour  and  not  the  price  of  it"  (he  means 
by  this  the  nominal  daily  or  weekly  wages)  “that  is  de¬ 
termined  by  the  price  of  provisions  and  other  necessaries: 
reduce  the  price  of  necessaries  very  low,  aad  of  course  you 
reduce  the  quantity  of  labour  in  proportion.  Master  man¬ 
ufacturers  know  that  there  are  various  ways  of  raising  and 
felling  the  price  of  labour  besides  that  of  altering  its  nomi¬ 
nal  amount.”  {op.  cit .,  pp.  48, 61.)  In  his  Three  lectures  on 
the  Rate  of  Wages ,  London,  1830,  in  which  N.  W.  Senior 
uses  West’s  work  without  mentioning  it,  he  says:  “The 
labourer  is  principally  interested  in  the  amount  of  wages" 
(p.  14),  that  is  to  say,  the  labourer  is  principally  interested 
in  wha:  he  receives,  the  nominal  sum  of  his  wages,  not  in 
that  which  he  gives,  the  amount  of  labour! 


TIME-WAGES 


duced  in  it  is  6d.  If  the  labourer  is  now  employed 
less  than  12  hours  (or  less  than  6  days  in  the 
week),  e.g.,  only  6  or  8  hours,  he  receives,  with 
this  price  of  labour,  only  is,  or  is.  6d.  a  day.1  As 
on  our  hypothesis  he  must  work  on  the  average 
6  hours  daily,  in  order  to  produce  a  day’s  wage 
corresponding  merely  to  the  value  of  his  labour 
power,  as  according  to  the  same  hypothesis  he 
works  only  half  of  every  hour  for  himself  and 
half  for  the  capitalist,  it  is  clear  that  he  cannot 
obtain  for  himself  the  value  of  the  product  of  6 
hours  if  he  is  employed  less  than  12  hours.  In 
previous  chapters  we  saw  the  destructive  con¬ 
sequences  of  overwork;  here  we  find  the  sources 
of  the  sufferings  that  result  to  the  labourer  from 
his  insufficient  employment. 

If  the  hour's  wage  is  fixed  so  that  the  capital¬ 
ist  does  not  bind  himself  to  pay  a  day’s  or  a 
week's  wage,  but  only  to  pay  wages  for  the 
hours  during  which  he  chooses  to  employ  the 
labourer,  he  can  employ  him  for  a  shorter  time 
than  that  which  is  originally  the  basis  of  the 
calculation  of  tbciu.vir-wage,  or  the  unit  meas¬ 
ure  of  the  price  of  labour.  Since  this  unit  is  de¬ 
termined  by  the  ratio 

d ally  value  of  labour  power _ 

working  day  of  a  given  number  of  hours' 
it,  of  course,  loses  all  meaning  as  soon  as  the 
working  day  ceases  to  contain  a  definite  num¬ 
ber  of  hours.  The  connection  between  the  paid 
and  the  unpaid  labour  is  destroyed.  The  capi¬ 
talist  can  now  wring  from  the  labourer  a  certain 
quantity  of  surplus  labour  without  allowing 
him  the  labour-time  necessary  for  his  own  sub¬ 
sistence.  He  can  annihilate  all  regularity  of  em¬ 
ployment,  and  according  to  his  own  conven¬ 
ience,  caprice,  and  the  interest  of  the  moment, 
make  the  most  enormous  overwork  alternate 
with  relative  or  absolute  cessation  of  work.  He 
can,  under  the  pretence  of  paying  “the  normal 
price  of  labour,”  abnormally  lengthen  the 
working  day  without  any  corresponding  com¬ 
pensation  to  the  labourer.  Hence  the  perfectly 
rational  revolt  in  i860  of  the  London  labourers 
employed  in  the  building  trades  against  the  at¬ 
tempt  of  the  capitalists  to  impose  on  them  this 
sort  of  wage  by  the  hour.  The  legal  limitation 

1  The  effect  of  such  an  abnormal  lessening  of  employ¬ 
ment  is  quite  different  from  that  of  a  general  reduction  of 
the  working  day  enforced  by  law.  The  former  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  absolute  length  of  the  working  day,  and  may 
occur  just  as  well  in  a  working  day  of  15  as  of  6  hours.  The 
normal  price  of  labour  is  in  the  first  case  calculated  on  the 
labourer  working  15  hours,  in  the  second  case  on  his  work¬ 
ing  6  hours  a  day  on  the  average.  The  result  is  therefore 
the  same,  if  he  in  the  one  case  is  employed  only  for  y)4,  in 
the  other  only  for  3  hours. 


269 

of  the  working  day  puts  an  end  to  such  mischief, 
although  not,  of  course,  to  the  diminution  of 
employment  caused  by  the  competition  of  ma¬ 
chinery,  by  changes  in  the  quality  of  the  labour¬ 
ers  employed,  and  by  crises  partial  or  general. 

With  an  increasing  daily  or  weekly  wage  the 
price  of  labour  may  remain  nominally  constant, 
and  yet  may  fall  below  its  normal  level.  This 
occurs  every  time  that,  the  price  of  labour 
(reckoned  per  working  hour)  remaining  con¬ 
stant,  the  working-day  is  prolonged  beyond  its 
customary  length.  If  in  the  fraction: 

daily  value  of  labour  power 
working  day 

the  denominator  increases,  the  numerator  in¬ 
creases  yet  more  rapidly.  The  value  of  labour 
power,  as  dependent  on  its  wear  and  tear,  in¬ 
creases  with  the  duration  of  its  functioning,  and 
in  more  rapid  proportion  than  the  increase  of 
that  duration.  *In  many  branches  of  industry 
where  time- wage  is  the  general  rule  without 
legal  limits  to  the  working  time,  the  habit  has, 
therefore,  spontaneously  grown  up  of  regarding 
the  working  day  as  normal  only  up  to  a  certain 
point,  e.g.,  up  to  the  expiration  of  the  tenth 
hour  (“normal  working-day,”  “the  day’s 
work,”  “the  regular  hours  of  work”).  Beyond 
this  limit  the  working  time  is  overtime,  and  is, 
taking  the  hour  as  unit  measure,  paid  better 
(“extra  pay”),  although  often  in  a  proportion 
ridiculously  small.2  The  normal  working  day 
exists  here  as  a  fraction  of  the  actual  working 
day,  and  the  latter,  often  during  the  whole  year, 
lasts  longer  than  the  former.®  The  increase  in 
the  price  of  labour,  with  the  extension  of  the 
working  day  beyond  a  certain  normal  limit, 
takes  such  a  shape  in  various  British  industries 
that  the  low  price  of  labour  during  the  so- 
called  normal  time  compels  the  labourer  to 
work  during  the  better  paid  overtime,  if  he 
wishes  to  obtain  a  sufficient  wage  at  all.4  Legal 

2  “The  rate  of  payment  for  overtime  (in  lacemaking)  is 
so  small,  from  y£d.  and  to  2d.  per  hour,  that  it  stands 
in  painful  contrast  to  the  amount  of  injury  produced  to 
the  health  and  stamina  of  the  workpeople.  . . .  The  small 
amount  thus  earned  is  also  often  obliged  to  be  spent  in 
extra  nourishment.” — Children's  Employment  Commission , 
Second  Report,  p.  xvi,  note  1x7. 

8  For  .example,  in  paper-staining  before  the  recent  intro¬ 
duction  into  this  trade  of  the  Factory  Act.  “We  work  on 
with  no  stoppage  for  meals,  so  that  the  day's  work  of  10M 
hours  is  finished  by  4.30  p.m.,  and  all  after  that  is  overtime, 
and  we  seldom  leave  off  working  before  6  P.M.,  so  that  we 
arc  really  working  overtime  the  whole  year  round.” — Mr. 
Smith’s  evidence  Ibid.,  First  Report,  p.  125. 

4  For  example,  in  the  Scotch  bleaching-works.  “In  some 
parts  of  Scotland  this  trade”  (before  the  introduction  of 
the  Factory  Act  in  186a)  “was  carried  on  by  a  system  of 
overtime,  i.e.,  ten  hours  a  day  were  the  regular  hours  of 


CAPITAL 


270 

limitation  of  the  working  day  puts  an  end  to 
these  amenities.1 

It  is  a  fact  generally  known  that  the  longer 
the  working  days  in  any  branch  of  industry,  the 
lower  are  the  wages.2  A.  Redgrave,  factory  in¬ 
spector,  illustrates  this  by  a  comparative  re¬ 
view  of  the  twenty  years  from  1839-1859,  ac¬ 
cording  to  which  wages  rose  in  the  factories  un¬ 
der  the  Ten  Hours  Law,  whilst  they  fell  in  the 
factories  in  which  the  work  lasted  1 4  to  1 5  hours 
daily.5 

From  the  law,  “the  price  of  labour  being 
given,  the  daily  or  weekly  wage  depends  on  the 
quantity  of  labour  expended,”  it  follows,  first 
of  all,  that  the  lower  the  price  of  labour,  the 
greater  must  be  the  quantity  of  labour,  or  the 
longer  must  be  the  working  day  for  the  labourer 
to  secure  even  a  miserable  average  wage.  The 
lowness  of  the  price  of  labour  acts  here  as  a 
stimulus  to  the  extension  of  the  labour  time.4 

work,  for  which  a  nominal  wage  of  is.  id.  per  day  was  paid 
to  a  man,  there  being  every  day  overtime  for  three  or  four 
hours,  paid  at  the  rate  of  $d.  per  hour.  The  effect  of  this 
system  ...  a  man  could  not  earn  more  than  8j.  per  week 
when  working  the  ordinary  hours  . . .  without  overtime 
they  could  not  earn  a  fair  day’s  wages.”  {Reports  of  Inspec- 
tors  of  Factories ,  April  30th,  1863,  p.  10.)  ”The  higher  wages, 
for  getting  adult  males  to  work  longer  hours,  are  a  tempta¬ 
tion  too  strong  to  be  resisted.”  {Ibid.,  April  30th,  1848,  p. 
5.)  The  bookbinding  trade  in  the  city  of  London  employs 
very  many  young  girls  from  14  to  15  years  old,  and  that 
under  indentures  which  prescribe  certain  definite  hours  of 
labour.  Nevertheless,  they  work  in  the  last  week  of  each 
month  until  10,  11,  12,  or  1  o’clock  at  night,  along  with 
the  older  labourers,  in  a  very  mixed  company.  “The  mas¬ 
ters  tempt  them  by  extra  pay  and  supper,”  which  they  eat 
in  neighboring  public-houses.  The  great  debauchery  thus 
produced  among  these  “young  immortals”  {Children's  Em¬ 
ployment  Commission ,  Fifth  Report ,  p.  44,  note  191)  is  com¬ 
pensated  by  the  fact  that  among  the  rest  many  Uiblcs  and 
religious  books  are  bound  by  them. 

1  Cf.  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  30th  April,  1863, 
p.  10.  With  very  accurate  appreciation  of  the  state  of  things, 
the  London  labourers  employed  in  the  building  trades  de¬ 
clared,  during  the  great  strike  and  lockout  of  i860,  that 
they  would  only  accept  wages  by  the  hour  under  two  con¬ 
ditions:  (1)  that,  with  the  price  of  the  working  hour,  a  nor¬ 
mal  working  day  of  9  and  10  hours  respectively  should  be 
fixed,  and  that  the  price  of  the  hour  for  the  10  hours’  work¬ 
ing  day  should  be  higher  than  that  for  the  hour  of  the  9 
hours’  working  day;  (2)  that  every  hour  beyond  the  nor¬ 
mal  working  day  should  be  reckoned  as  overtime  and  pro¬ 
portionally  more  highly  paid. 

*  “It  is  a  very  notable  thing,  too,  that  where  long  hours 
are  the  rule,  small  wages  are  also  so.”  {Ibid.,  31st  Oct., 
1863,  p.  9.)  “The  work  which  obtains  the  scanty  pittance 
of  food,  is,  for  the  most  part,  excessively  prolonged.”  {Pub¬ 
lic  Health ,  Sixth  Report ,  1864,  p.  15.) 

1  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  30th  April,  i860,  pp. 

3*»  3a- 

4  The  hand-nailmakers  in  England,  for  example,  have, 
on  account  of  the  low  price  of  labour,  to  work  15  hours  a 
day  in  order  to  hammer  out  their  miserable  weekly  wage. 


On  the  other  hand,  the  extension  of  the  work¬ 
ing  time  produces,  in  its  turn,  a  fall  in  the  price 
of  labour,  and  with  this  a  fall  in  the  day's  or 
week’s  wages. 

The  determination  of  the  price  of  labour  by 

daily  value  of  labour  power 
working  day  of  a  given  number  of  hours 
shows  that  a  mere  prolongation  of  the  working 
day  lowers  the  price  of  labour,  if  no  compensa¬ 
tion  steps  in.  But  the  same  circumstances  which 
allow  the  capitalist  in  the  long  run  to  prolong 
the  working  day  also  allow  him  first,  and  com¬ 
pel  him  finally,  to  nominally  lower  the  price 
of  labour  until  the  total  price  of  the  increased 
number  of  hours  is  lowered  and,  therefore,  the 
daily  or  weekly  wage.  Reference  to  two  circum¬ 
stances  is  sufficient  here.  If  one  man  docs  the 
work  of  \  l/i  or  2  men,  the  supply  of  labour  in¬ 
creases,  although  the  supply  of  labour  power 
on  the  market  remains  constant.  The  competi¬ 
tion  thus  created  between  the  labourers  allows 
the  capitalist  to  beat  down  the  price  of  labour, 
whilst  the  falling  price  of  labour  allows  him,  on 
the  other  hand,  to  screw  up  still  further  the 
working  time.6  Soon,  however,  this  command 
over  abnormal  quantities  of  unpaid  labour,  i.e., 
quantities  in  excess  of  the  average  social 
amount,  becomes  a  source  of  competition 
amongst  the  capitalists  themselves.  A  part  of 
the  price  of  the  commodity  consists  of  the  price 
of  labour.  The  unpaid  part  of  the  labour  price 
need  not  be  reckoned  in  the  price  of  the  com¬ 
modity.  It  may  be  presented  to  the  buyer.  This 
is  the  first  step  to  which  competition  leads.  The 
second  step  to  which  it  drives  is  to  exclude  also 
from  the  selling  price  of  the  commodity  at  least 
a  part  of  the  abnormal  surplus  value  created  by 
the  extension  of  the  working  day.  In  this  way, 
an  abnormally  low  selling  price  of  the  commod¬ 
ity  arises,  at  first  sporadically,  and  becomes 

“It's  a  great  many  hours  in  a  day  (6  a.m.  to  8  p.m.),  and  he 
has  to  work  hard  all  the  time  to  get  1  id.  or  is.,  and  there  is 
the  wear  of  the  tools,  the  cost  of  firing,  and  something  for 
waste  iron  to  go  out  of  this,  which  takes  oflf  altogether 
2 }4d.  or  3d."  {Children's  Employment  Commission,  Third 
Report,  p.  136,  note  671.)  The  women  earn  by  the  same 
working  time  a  week’s  wage  of  only  5  shillings.  {Ibid.,  p. 
137,  note  674.) 

5  If  a  factory-hand,  for  example,  refused  to  work  the 
customary  long  hours,  “he  would  very  shortly  be  replaced 
by  somebody  who  would  work  any  length  of  time,  and  thus 
be  thrown  out  of  employment.”  {Reports  of  Inspectors  of 
Factories,  31st  Oct.,  1848.  Evidence,  p.  39,  note  58.)  “If 
one  man  performs  the  work  of  two  ...  the  rate  of  profits 
will  generally  be  raised ...  in  consequence  of  the  additional 
supply  of  labour  having  diminished  its  price.”  (Senior,  op . 
cit.,  p.  *4.) 


PIECE-WAGES 


fixed  by  degrees;  a  lower  selling  price  which 
henceforward  becomes  the  constant  basis  of  a 
miserable  wage  for  an  excessive  working  time, 
as  originally  it  was  the  product  of  these  very 
circumstances.  This  movement  is  simply  indi¬ 
cated  here,  as  the  analysis  of  competition  does 
not  belong  to  this  part  of  our  subject.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  the  capitalist  may,  for  a  moment,  speak 
for  himself.  “In  Birmingham  there  is  so  much 
competition  of  masters  one  against  another 
that  many  are  obliged  to  do  things  as  employers 
that  they  would  otherwise  be  ashamed  of;  and 
yet  no  more  money  is  made,  but  only  the  public 
gets  the  benefit.”1  The  reader  will  remember 
the  two  sorts  of  London  bakers,  of  whom  one 
sold  the  bread  at  its  full  price  (the “full-priced” 
bakers),  the  other  below  its  normal  price  (“the 
underpriced,”  “the  undersellers”).  The  “full- 
priced”  denounced  their  rivals  before  the  Par¬ 
liamentary  Committee  of  Inquiry:  “They  only 
exist  now  by  first  defrauding  the  public,  and 
next  getting  18  hours’  work  out  of  their  men 
for  12  hours’  wages. .  .  .  The  unpaid  labour  of 
the  men  was  made  .  . .  the  source  whereby  the 
competition  was  carried  on,  and  continues  so  to 
this  day.  . . .  The  competition  among  the  mas¬ 
ter  bakers  is  the  cause  of  the  difficulty  in  getting 
rid  of  night  work.  An  undersellcr,  who  sells  his 
bread  below  the  cost  price  according  to  the  price 
of  flour,  must  make  it  up  by  getting  more  out  of 
the  labour  of  the  men. . . .  If  I  got  only  12  hours’ 
work  out  of  my  men,  and  my  neighbour  got  18 
or  20,  he  must  beat  me  in  the  selling  price.  I  f  the 
men  could  insist  on  payment  for  overwork,  this 
would  be  set  right. ...  A  large  number  of  those 
employed  by  the  undcrsellers  are  foreigners, 
and  youths,  who  are  obliged  to  accept  almost 
any  wages  they  can  obtain.”2 

This  jeremiad  is  also  interesting  because  it 
shows  how  the  appearance  only  of  the  relations 
of  production  mirrors  itself  in  the  brain  of  the 
capitalist.  The  capitalist  does  not  know  that 
the  normal  price  of  labour  also  includes  a  defi¬ 
nite  quantity  of  unpaid  labour,  and  that  this 
very  unpaid  labour  is  the  normal  source  of  his 
•gain.  The  category  of  surplus  labour  time  does 

1  "Children's  Employment  Commission ,  Third  Report" 
Evidence,  p.  66,  note  22. 

2  Reporty  etc.,  relative  to  the  Grievances  complained  of  by 
the  Journeymen  Bakers.  London,  1862,  p.  411,  and  Evi¬ 
dence,  notes  479,  359,  and  27.  Anyhow,  the  full-priced 
bakers,  as  was  mentioned  above,  and  as  their  spokesman, 
Rennett,  himself  admits,  make  their  men  “generally  begin 
work  at  1 1  p.m.  ...  up  to  8  o'clock  the  next  morning. . . . 
They  are  then  engaged  all  day  long ...  as  late  as  7  o'clock 
in  the  evening.”—  Jbid.3  p.  22. 


271 

not  exist  at  all  for  him,  since  it  is  included  in  the 
normal  working  day,  which  he  thinks  he  has 
paid  for  in  the  day’s  wages.  But  overtime  does 
exist  for  him,  the  prolongation  of  the  working 
day  beyond  the  limits  corresponding  with  the 
usual  price  of  labour.  Face  to  face  with  his  un¬ 
derselling  competitor,  he  even  insists  upon  ex¬ 
tra  pay  for  this  overtime.  He  again  does  not 
know  that  this  extra  pay  includes  unpaid  la¬ 
bour,  just  as  well  as  does  the  price  of  the  cus¬ 
tomary  hour  of  labour.  For  example,  the  price 
of  one  hour  of  the  12  hour  working  day  is  3//., 
say  the  value-product  of  half  a  working  hour, 
whilst  the  price  of  the  overtime  working  hour 
is  4 d.y  or  the  value-product  of  %  of  a  working 
hour.  In  the  first  case  the  capitalist  appropri¬ 
ates  to  himself  one-half,  in  the  second,  one- 
third,  of  the  working  hour  without  paying  for  it. 


CHAPTER  XXI.  PIECE- WAGES 

Wages  by  the  piece  are  nothing  else  than  a  con¬ 
verted  form  of  wages  by  time,  just  as  wages  by 
time  are  a  converted  form  of  the  value  or  price 
of  labour  power. 

In  piece-wages  it  seems  at  first  sight  as  if  the 
use-value  bought  from  the  labourer  was  not  the 
function  of  his  labour  power,  living  labour,  but 
labour  already  realized  in  the  product,  and  as 
if  the  price  of  this  labour  was  determined  not 
as  with  time-wages,  by  the  fraction 

daily  value  of  labour  power 
working  day  of  given  number  of  hours 

but  by  the  capacity  for  work  of  the  producer.* 

The  confidence  that  trusts  in  this  appearance 
ought  to  receive  a  first  severe  shock  from  the 
fact  that  both  forms  of  wages  exist  side  by  side, 
simultaneously,  in  the  same  branches  of  indus¬ 
try;  for  example:  “the  compositors  of  London, 
as  a  general  rule,  work  by  the  piece,  time-work 
being  the  exception,  while  those  in  the  country 

3  “The  system  of  piece-work  illustrates  an  epoch  in  the 
history  of  the  working  man;  it  is  halfway  between  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  mere  day  labourer  depending  upon  the  will  of 
the  capitalist  and  the  cooperative  artisan,  who  in  the  not 
distant  future  promises  to  combine  the  artisan  and  the 
capitalist  in  his  own  person.  Piece-workers  are  in  fact  their 
own  masters,  even  whilst  working  upon  the  capital  of  the 
employer.”  (John  Watts,  Trade  Societies  and  Strikes ,  Ma¬ 
chinery  and  Cooperative  Societies ,  Manchester,  1865,  pp. 
52,  53.)  I  quote  this  little  work  because  it  is  a  very  sink  of 
all  ancient  and  rotten  apologetic  commonplaces.  This  same 
Mr.  Watts  earlier  traded  in  Owenism  and  published  in 
1842  another  pamphlet  entitled  Facts  and  Fictions  of  Politi¬ 
cal  Economists ,  in  which  among  other  things  he  declares 
that  “property  is  robbery.”  That  was  long  ago. 


CAPITAL 


272 

work  by  the  day,  the  exception  being  work  by 
the  piece.  The  shipwrights  of  the  port  of  Lon¬ 
don  work  by  the  job  or  piece,  while  those  of  all 
other  ports  work  by  the  day/’1 

In  the  same  saddlery  shops  of  London,  often 
for  the  same  work,  piece-wages  are  paid  to  the 
French,  time- wages  to  the  English.  In  the  regu¬ 
lar  factories  in  which  piece-wages  predominate, 
particular  kinds  of  work  are  unsuitable  to  this 
form  of  wage,  and  are  therefore  paid  by  time.8 
But  it  is,  however,  self-evident  that  the  differ¬ 
ence  of  form  in  the  payment  of  wages  alters  in 
no  way  their  essential  nature,  although  the  one 
form  may  be  more  favourable  to  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  capitalist  production  than  the  other. 

Let  the  ordinary  working  day  contain  12 
hours  of  which  6  are  paid,  6  unpaid.  Let  its  val¬ 
ue-product  be  6  j.,  that  of  one  hour’s  labour, 
therefore,  6d.  Let  us  suppose  that,  as  the  result 
of  experience,  a  labourer  who  works  with  the 
average  amount  of  intensity  and  skill,  who, 
therefore,  gives  in  fact  only  the  time  socially 
necessary  to  the  production  of  an  article,  sup¬ 
plies  in  12  hours  24  pieces,  either  distinct  prod¬ 
ucts  or  measurable  parts  of  a  continuous  whole. 
Then  the  value  of  these  24  pieces,  after  subtrac¬ 
tion  of  the  portion  of  constant  capital  contained 
in  them,  is  6j.,  and  the  value  of  a  single  piece 
3d.  The  labourer  receives  1  }4d.  per  piece,  and 
thus  earns  in  12  hours  3s.  Just  as,  with  time- 
wages,  it  does  not  matter  whether  we  assume 
that  the  labourer  works  6  hours  for  himself  and 
6  hours  for  the  capitalist,  or  half  of  every  hour 
for  himself,  and  the  other  half  for  the  capitalist, 
so  here  it  does  not  matter  whether  we  say  that 
each  individual  piece  is  half  paid  and  half  un¬ 
paid  for,  or  that  the  price  of  12  pieces  is  the 
equivalent  only  of  the  value  of  the  labour  pow¬ 
er,  while  in  the  other  12  pieces  surplus  value  is 
incorporated. 

1 T.  J.  Dunning,  Trade’s  Unions  and  Strikes ,  London, 
i860,  p.  22. 

*  How  the  existence,  side  by  side  and  simultaneously,  of 
these  two  forms  of  wage  favours  the  masters’  cheating:  "A 
factory  employs  400  people,  half  of  which  work  by  the 
piece  and  have  a  direct  interest  in  working  longer  hours. 
The  other  200  are  paid  by  the  day,  work  equally  long  with 
the  others,  and  get  no  more  money  for  their  overtime. . . . 
The  work  of  these  200  people  for  half  an  hour  a  day  is  equal 
to  one  person’s  work  for  50  hours,  or  five-sixths  of  one  per¬ 
son's  labour  in  a  week,  and  is  a  positive  gain  to  the  em¬ 
ployer.”  {Reports  oj  Inspectors  of  Factories, 31st  Oct.,  i860, 
p.  9.)  "Overworking  to  a  very  considerable  extent  still  pre¬ 
vails;  and,  in  most  instances,  with  that  security  against 
detection  and  punishment  which  the  law  itself  affords.  I 
have  in  many  former  reports  shown ...  the  injury  to  work¬ 
people  who  are  not  employed  on  piece-work,  but  receive 
weekly  wages.”  (Leonard  Horner,  Reports  of  Inspectors  of 
Factories,  30th  April,  1859,  pp.  8, 9.) 


The  form  of  piece-wages  is  just  as  irrational 
as  that  of  time-wages.  While  in  our  example  two 
pieces  of  a  commodity,  after  subtraction  of  the 
value  of  the  means  of  production  consumed  in 
them,  are  worth  6 d.  as  being  the  product  of  one 
hour,  the  labourer  receives  for  them  a  price  of 
3d.  Piece-wages  do  not,  in  fact,  distinctly  ex¬ 
press  any  relation  of  value.  It  is  not,  therefore, 
a  question  of  measuring  the  value  of  the  piece 
by  the  working  time  incorporated  in  it,  but  on 
the  contrary,  of  measuring  the  working  time  the 
labourer  has  expended  by  the  number  of  pieces 
he  has  produced.  In  time-wages,  the  labour  is 
measured  by  its  immediate  duration;  in  piece- 
wages,  by  the  quantity  of  products  in  which  the 
labour  has  embodied  itself  during  a  given  time.3 
The  price  of  labour  time  itself  is  finally  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  equation:  value  of  a  day’s  labour 
*  daily  value  of  labour  power.  Piece- wage  is, 
therefore,  only  a  modified  form  of  time-wage. 

Let  us  now  consider  a  little  more  closely  the 
characteristic  peculiarities  of  piece-wages. 

The  quality  of  the  labour  is  here  controlled 
by  the  work  itself,  which  must  be  of  average 
perfection  if  the  piece-price  is  to  be  paid  in  full. 
Piece-wages  become,  from  this  point  of  view, 
the  most  fruitful  source  of  reductions  of  wages 
and  capitalistic  cheating. 

They  furnish  to  the  capitalist  an  exact  meas¬ 
ure  for  the  intensity  of  labour.  Only  the  work¬ 
ing  time  which  is  embodied  in  a  quantum  of 
commodities  determined  beforehand,  and  ex¬ 
perimentally  fixed,  counts  as  socially  necessary 
working  time,  and  is  paid  as  such.  In  the  larger 
workshops  of  the  London  tailors,  therefore,  a 
certain  piece  of  work  (a  waistcoat  for  example) 
is  called  an  hour,  or  half  an  hour,  the  hour 
reckoned  at  Gd.  By  practice  it  is  known  how 
much  is  the  average  product  of  one  hour.  With 
new  fashions,  repairs,  etc.,  a  contest  arises  be¬ 
tween  master  and  labourer  as  to  whether  a  par¬ 
ticular  piece  of  work  is  one  hour,  and  so  on,  until 
here  also  experience  decides.  Similarly  in  the 
London  furniture  workshops,  etc.  If  the  labour¬ 
er  docs  not  possess  the  average  capacity,  if  he 
cannot  in  consequence  supply  a  certain  mini¬ 
mum  of  work  per  day,  he  is  dismiised.4 

3  "Wages  can  be  measured  in  two  wayfc:  either  by  the 
duration  of  the  labour,  or  by  its  product.” — Abrlgf  ili- 
mentatre  des  prtncipes  de  V economic  politique ,  Paris,  1796, 
p.  32.  (The  author  of  this  anonymous  work  was  G.  Gar- 
mer.) 

4  "So  much  weight  of  cotton  is  delivered  to  him”  (the 
spinner),  "and  he  has  to  return  by  a  certain  time,  in  lieu  of 
it,  a  given  weight  of  twist  or  yarn,  of  a  certain  degree  of 
fineness,  and  he  is  paid  so  much  per  pound  for  all  that  he 
so  returns.  If  his  work  is  defective  m  quality,  the  penalty 


PIECE-WAGES  273 


Since  the  quality  and  intensity  of  the  work 
are  here  controlled  by  the  form  of  wage  itself, 
superintendence  of  labour  becomes  in  great 
part  superfluous.  Piece-wages,  therefore,  lay 
the  foundation  of  the  modern  “domestic  la¬ 
bour”  described  above,  as  well  as  of  a  hierarchi¬ 
cally  organized  system  of  exploitation  and  op¬ 
pression.  The  latter  has  two  fundamental 
forms.  On  the  one  hand,  piece- wages  facilitate 
the  interposition  of  parasites  between  the  capi¬ 
talist  and  the  wage-labourer,  the  “sub-letting 
of  labour.”  The  gain  of  these  middlemen  comes 
entirely  from  the  difference  between  the  labour 
price  which  the  capitalist  pays,  and  the  part  of 
that  price  which  they  actually  allow  to  reach 
the  labourer.1  In  England  this  system  is  charac¬ 
teristically  called  the  “sweating  system.”  On 
the  other  hand,  piece-wage  allows  the  capitalist 
to  make  a  contract  for  so  much  per  piece  with 
the  head  labourer — in  manufactures  with  the 
chief  of  some  group,  in  mines  with  the  extractor 
of  the  coal,  in  the  factory  with  the  actual  ma¬ 
chine  worker— ;it  a  piicr  for  which  the  head  la¬ 
bourer  himself  undertakes  the  enlisting  and 
payment  of  his  assistant  workpeople.  The  ex¬ 
ploitation  of  the  labourer  by  capital  is  here 
effected  through  the  exploitation  of  the  la¬ 
bourer  by  the  labourer.2 

Given  piece-wage,  it  is  naturally  the  personal 
interest  of  the  labourer  to  strain  his  labour  pow¬ 
er  as  intensely  as  possible;  this  enables  the  cap¬ 
italist  to  raise  more  easily  the  normal  degree  of 
intensity  of  labour.3  It  is  moreover  now  the  per- 


r  tils  on  him;  if  less  in  quantity  than  the  minimum  fixed  for 
a  given  time,  he  is  dismissed  and  an  abler  operative  pro¬ 
cured/’— Ure,  op.  at.,  p.  317. 

1  "It  is  when  work  passes  through  several  hands,  each  of 
which  is  to  take  its  share  of  profits,  while  only  the  last  does 
the  work,  that  the  pay  which  reaches  the  workwoman  is 
miserably  disproportioned.” — ( Children's  Employment 
Commission ,  Second  Report ,  p.  lxx,  note  424.) 

2  Even  Watts,  the  apologetic,  remarks:  "It  would  be  a 
great  improvement  to  the  system  of  piece-work,  if  all  the 
men  employed  on  a  job  were  partners  in  the  contract,  each 
according  to  his  abilities,  instead  of  one  man  being  inter¬ 
ested  in  overworking  his  fellows  for  his  own  benefit."  (Op. 

p.  53.)  On  the  vileness  of  this  system,  cf.  Children's 
Employment  Commission ,  Third  Report ,  p.  66,  note  22; 
p.  x  I ,  note  124;  p.  xi,  notes  13,  53,  59,  etc. 

*  This  spontaneous  result  isoften  artificially  helped  along, 
for  example,  in  the  engineering  trade  of  London,  a  cus¬ 
tomary  trick  is  "the  selecting  of  a  man  who  possesses  supe¬ 
rior  physical  strength  and  quickness,  as  the  principal  of 
several  workmen,  and  paying  him  an  additional  rate,  by 
the  quarter  or  otherwise,  wjth  the  understanding  that  he 
is  to  exert  himself  to  the  utmost  to  induce  the  others,  who 
are  only  paid  the  ordinary  wages,  to  keep  up  to  him. . . . 
Without  any  comment,  this  will  go  far  to  explain  many  of 
the  complaints  of  stinting  the  action,  superior  skill,  and 
working  power,  made  by  the  employers  against  the  men." 


sonal  interest  of  the  labourer  to  lengthen  the 
working  day,  since  with  it  his  daily  or  weekly 
wages  rise.4  This  gradually  brings  on  a  reaction 
like  that  already  described  in  time-wages,  with¬ 
out  reckoning  that  the  prolongation  of  the 
working  day,  even  if  the  piece-wage  remains 
constant,  includes  of  necessity  a  fall  in  the  price 
of  the  labour. 

In  time-wages,  with  few  exceptions,  the  same 
wage  holds  for  the  same  kind  of  work,  while  in 
piece-wages,  though  the  price  of  the  working 
time  is  measured  by  a  certain  quantity  of  prod¬ 
uct,  the  day's  or  week's  wage  will  vary  with  the 
individual  differences  of  the  labourers,  of  whom 
one  supplies  in  a  given  time  the  minimum  of 
product  only,  another  the  average,  a  third  more 
than  the  average.  With  regard  to  actual  receipts 
there  is,  therefore,  great  variety  according  to 
the  different  skill,  strength,  energy,  staying- 
power,  etc.,  offthe  individual  labourers.5  Of 
course  this  does  not  alter  the  general  relations 
between  capital  and  wage-labour.  First,  the  in¬ 
dividual  differences  balance  one  another  in  the 
workshop  as  a  whole,  which  thus  supplies  in  a 
given  working  time  the  average  product,  and 
the  total  wages  paid  will  be  the  average  wages 
of  that  particular  branch  of  industry.  Second, 
the  proportion  between  wages  and  surplus  val¬ 
ue  remains  unaltered,  since  the  mass  of  surplus 
labour  supplied  by  each  particular  labourer  cor¬ 
responds  with  the  wage  received  by  him.  But 
the  wider  scope  that  piece-wage  gives  to  indi¬ 
viduality  tends  to  develop  on  the  one  hand  that 
individuality,  and  with  it  the  sense  of  liberty, 
independence,  and  self-control  of  the  labourers, 

(Dunning,  op.  cit.t  pp.  22,  23.)  As  the  author  is  himself  a 
labourer  and  secretary  of  a  trade’s  union,  this  might  be 
taken  for  exaggeration.  But  the  reader  may  compare  the 
"highly  respectable"  Cyclopaedia  of  Agriculture  of  J.  C. 
Morton,  the  article  "Labourer,"  where  this  method  is  rec¬ 
ommended  to  the  farmers  as  an  approved  one. 

4  "All  those  who  are  paid  by  piece-work  . . .  profit  by 
the  transgression  of  the  legal  limits  of  work.  This  observa¬ 
tion  as  to  the  willingness  to  work  overtime  is  especially 
applicable  to  the  women  employed  as  weavers  and  reelers." 
{Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  30th  April,  1858,  p.  9.) 
"This  system"  (piece-work),  "so  advantageous  to  the  em¬ 
ployer  . . .  tends  directly  to  encourage  the  young  potter 
greatly  to  overwork  himself  during  the  four  or  five  years 
during  which  he  is  employed  in  the  piece-work  system, 
but  at  low  wages. . . .  This  is  .  .  .  another  great  cause  to 
which  the  bad  constitutions  of  the  potters  are  to  be  attri¬ 
buted."  {Children's  Employment  Commission ,  First  Report , 
p.  xiii.) 

4  "Where  the  work  in  any  trade  is  paid  for  by  the  piece  at 
so  much  per  job  . . .  wages  may  very  materially  differ  in 
amount. . . .  But  in  work  by  the  day  there  is  generally  an 
uniform  rate  . . .  recognized  by  both  employer  and  em¬ 
ployed  as  the  standard  of  wages  for  the  general  run  of 
workmen  in  the  trade."— Dunning,  op.  cit .,  p.  17. 


CAPITAL 


274 

and  on  the  other,  their  competition  one  with 
another.  Piece-work  has,  therefore,  a  tendency, 
while  raising  individual  wages  above  the  aver¬ 
age,  to  lower  this  average  itself.  But  where  a 
particular  rate  of  piece- wage  has  for  a  long  time 
been  fixed  by  tradition,  and  its  lowering,  there¬ 
fore,  presented  especial  difficulties,  the  masters, 
in  such  exceptional  cases,  sometimes  had  re¬ 
course  to  its  compulsory  transformation  into 
time-wages.  Hence,  for  example,  in  1 860  a  great 
strike  among  the  ribbon  weavers  of  Coventry.1 
Piece-wage  is  finally  one  of  the  chief  supports  of 
the  hour  system  described  in  the  preceding 
chapter.2 

From  what  has  been  shown  so  far,  it  follows 
that  piece-wage  is  the  form  of  wages  most  in 
harmony  with  the  capitalist  mode  of  produc¬ 
tion.  Although  by  no  means  new— i  t  figures  side 
by  side  with  time-wages  officially  in  the  French 
and  English  labour  statutes  of  the  fourteenth 
century — it  only  conquers  a  larger  field  for  ac¬ 
tion  during  the  period  of  manufacture,  properly 
so-called.  In  the  stormy  youth  of  modern  indus¬ 
try,  especially  from  1797  to  1815,  it  served  as  a 
lever  for  the  lengthening  of  the  working  day, 
and  the  lowering  of  wages.  Very  important  ma¬ 

1  “The  work  of  the  journeyman-artisans  will  be  ruled  by 
the  day  or  by  the  piece.  These  master-artisans  know  about 
how  much  work  a  journeyman-artisan  can  do  per  day  in 
each  craft,  and  often  pay  them  in  proportion  to  the  work 
which  they  do;  the  journeymen,  therefore,  work  as  much 
as  they  can,  in  their  own  interest,  without  any  further  in¬ 
spection.’*  . . .  (Cantillon,  Essai  surla  nature  du  commerce 
engintral,  Amsterdam  edition,  1756,  pp.  185  and  102.  The 
first  edition  appeared  in  1755).  Cantillon,  from  whom  Ques- 
nay.  Sir  James  Steuart,  &  A.  Smith  have  largely  drawn, 
already  here  represents  piece-wage  as  simply  a  modified 
form  of  time-wage.  The  French  edition  of  Cantillon  pro¬ 
fesses  in  its  title  to  be  a  translation  from  the  English,  but 
the  English  edition:  “The  Analysis  of  Trade,  Commerce , 
etc.,  by  Philip  Cantillon,  late  of  the  city  of  London,  Mer¬ 
chant,  is  not  only  of  later  date  (1759),  but  proves  by  its 
contents  that  it  is  a  later  and  revised  edition;  e.g.,  in  the 
French  edition,  Hume  is  not  yet  mentioned,  whilst  in  the 
English,  on  the  other  hand,  Petty  hardly  figures  any 
longer.  The  English  edition  is  theoretically  less  impor¬ 
tant,  but  it  contains  numerous  details  referring  specifically 
to  English  commerce,  bullion  trade,  etc.,  that  are  want¬ 
ing  in  the  French  text.  The  words  on  the  title-page  of 
the  English  edition,  according  to  which  the  work  is  “taken 
chiefly  from  the  manuscript  of  a  very  ingenious  gentle¬ 
man,  deceased,  and  adapted,  etc.,’’  seem,  therefore,  a 
pure  fiction,  very  customary  at  that  time. 

2  “How  often  have  we  seen,  in  some  workshops,  many 

more  workers  recruited  than  the  work  actually  called  for? 
On  many  occasions,  workers  are  recruited  in  anticipation 
of  future  work,  which  may  never  materialize.  Because  they 

are  paid  by  piece-wages,  it  is  said  that  no  risk  is  incurred, 

since  any  loss  of  time  will  be  charged  against  the  unem¬ 

ployed.’*—  H.  Grdgoir,  Les  typography  devant  le  tribunal 
eorrectionnel  de  Bruxelles,  Brussels,  1865,  p.  Q. 


terials  for  the  fluctuation  of  wages  during  that 
period  are  to  be  found  in  the  Blue  Books,  Re - 
port  and  Evidence  from  the  Select  Committee  on 
Petitions  respecting  the  Corn  Laws  (Parliamen¬ 
tary  Session  of  1813-14),  and  Report  from  the 
Lords'  Committee ,  on  the  State  of  the  Growthy 
Commerce ,  and  Consumption  of  Grain ,  and  all 
Laws  relating  thereto  (Session  of  1814-15).  Here 
we  find  documentary  evidence  of  the  constant 
lowering  of  the  price  of  labour  from  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  anti-Jacobin  War.  In  the  weav¬ 
ing  industry,  for  example.,  piece-wages  had 
fallen  so  low  that,  in  spite  of  the  very  great 
lengthening  of  the  working  day,  the  daily 
wages  were  then  lower  than  before.  “The 
real  earnings  of  the  cotton  weaver  are  now  far 
less  than  they  were;  his  superiority  over  the 
common  labourer,  which  at  first  was  very  great, 
has  now  almost  entirely  ceased.  Indeed  .  .  .  the 
difference  in  the  wages  of  skilful  and  common 
labour  is  far  less  now  than  at  any  former  pe¬ 
riod.”3  How  little  the  increased  intensity  and  ex¬ 
tension  of  labour  through  piece-wages  benefited 
the  agricultural  proletariat,  the  following  pas¬ 
sage  borrowed  from  a  work  on  the  side  of  the 
landlords  and  farmers  shows:  “By  far  the  great¬ 
er  part  of  agricultural  operations  is  done  by 
people  who  arc  hired  for  the  day  or  on  piece¬ 
work.  Their  weekly  wages  arc  about  I2j.,  and 
although  it  may  be  assumed  that  a  man  earns 
on  piece-work  under  the  greater  stimulus  to  la¬ 
bour,  is,  or  perhaps  is.  more  than  on  weekly 
wages,  yet  it  is  found,  on  calculating  his  total 
income,  that  his  loss  of  employment,  during  the 
year,  outweighs  this  again.  .  .  .  Further,  it 
will  generally  be  found  that  the  wages  of  these 
men  bear  a  certain  proportion  to  the  price  of 
the  necessary  means  of  subsistence,  so  that  a 
man  with  two  children  is  able  to  bring  up  his 
family  without  recourse  to  parish  relief.”4 *  Mal- 
thus  at  that  time  remarked  with  reference  to 
the  facts  published  by  Parliament:  “I  con¬ 
fess  that  I  see,  with  misgiving,  the  great  ex¬ 
tension  of  the  practice  of  piece-wage.  Really 
hard  work  during  12  or  14  hours  of  the  day, 
or  for  any  longer  time,  is  too  much  for  any  hu¬ 
man  being.”6 

In  the  workshops  under  the  Factory  Acts, 
piece-wages  become  the  general  |nle,  because 

8  Remarks  on  the  Commercial  Policy  of  Great  Britain 9 
London,  1815. 

4  A  Defence  of  the  Landowners  and  Farmers  of  Great  Brit- 
ain,  1814,  pp.  4,  5. 

1  Malthus,  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Progress  of  Rent, 
London.  i8i<. 


NATIONAL  DIFFERENCES  OF  WAGES 


capital  can  there  only  increase  the  efficacy  of 
the  working  day  by  intensifying  labour.1 

With  the  changing  productiveness  of  labour, 
the  same  quantum  of  product  represents  a  vary¬ 
ing  working  time.  Therefore,  piece- wage  also 
varies,  for  it  is  the  money  expression  of  a  deter¬ 
mined  working  time.  In  our  example  above,  24 
pieces  were  produced  in  12  hours,  while  the  val¬ 
ue  of  the  product  of  the  12  hours  was  6s .,  the 
daily  value  of  the  labour-power  3^.,  the  price  of 
the  labour-hour  3*/.,  and  the  wage  for  one  piece 
I  }4d.  In  one  piece  half-an-hour's  labour  was  ab¬ 
sorbed.  If  the  same  working  day  now  supplies, 
in  consequence  of  the  doubled  productiveness 
of  labour,  48  pieces  instead  of  24,  and  all  other 
circumstances  remain  unchanged,  then  the 
piece-wage  falls  from  1  }4d.  to  34*/.,  as  every 
piece  now  only  represents  one-quarter,  instead 
of  one-half  of  a  working  hour.  24  by  1 
and  in  like  manner  48  by  tfd. =3*.  In  other 
words,  piece-wage  is  lowered  in  the  same  pro¬ 
portion  as  the  number  of  the  pieces  produced 
in  the  same  tiir:  ri.  ws,9  and,  therefore,  as  the 
working  time  spent  on  the  same  piece  falls.  This 
change  in  piece-wage,  so  far  purely  nominal, 
leads  to  constant  battles  between  the  capitalist 
and  the  worker.  Either  because  the  capitalist 
uses  it  as  a  pretext  for  actually  lowering  the 
price  of  labour,  or  because  increased  productive 
power  of  labour  is  accompanied  by  an  increased 
intensity  of  the  same.  Or  because  the  labourer 
takes  seriously  the  appearance  of  piece- wages 
(viz.,  that  his  product  is  paid  for,  and  not  his 
labour  power)  and  therefore  revolts  against  a 
lowering  of  wages  unaccompanied  by  a  lower¬ 
ing  in  the  selling  price  of  the  commodity.  “The 
operatives  . . .  carefully  watch  the  price  of  the 

1  “Those  who  are  paid  by  piece-work  . . .  constitute 
probably  four-fifths  of  the  workers  in  the  factories.”— /&- 
port  of  Inspectors  of  Factories,  30th  April,  1858. 

2  “The  productive  power  of  his  spinning-machine  is  ac¬ 
curately  measured,  and  the  rate  of  pay  for  work  done  with 
its  decreases  with,  though  not  as,  the  increase  of  its  pro¬ 
ductive  power.”  (tire,  op.  cit.,  p.  317.)  This  last  apologetic 
phrase  Ure  himself  again  cancels.  The  lengthening  of  the 
mule  causes  some  increase  of  labour,  he  admits.  The  labour 
does  therefore  not  diminish  in  the  same  ratio  as  its  pro¬ 
ductivity  increases.  Further:  “By  this  increase  the  produc¬ 
tive  power  of  the  machine  will  be  augmented  one-fifth. 
When  this  event  happens,  the  spinner  will  not  be  paid  at 
the  same  rate  for  work  done  as  he  was  before,  but  as  that 
rate  will  not  be  diminished  in  the  ratio  of  one-fifth,  the  im¬ 
provement  will  augment  his  money  earnings  for  any  given 
number  of  hours’  work,”  but  “the  foregoing  statement  re¬ 
quires  a  certain  modification. . . .  The  spinner  has  to  pay 
something  additional  for  juvenile  aid  out  of  his  additional 
sixpence,  accompanied  by  displacing  a  portion  of  adults” 
(Jbid.,  p.  321),  which  has  in  no  way  a  tendency  to  raise 
wages. 


275 

raw  material  and  the  price  of  manufactured 
goods,  and  are  thus  enabled  to  form  an  accurate 
estimate  of  their  master’s  profits.”8 

The  capitalist  rightly  protests  against  such 
pretensions  as  gross  errors  as  to  the  nature  of 
wage  labour.4  He  cries  out  against  this  usurping 
attempt  to  lay  taxes  on  the  advance  of  indus¬ 
try,  and  declares  roundly  that  the  productive¬ 
ness  of  labour  does  not  concern  the  labourer  at 
all.6 


CHAPTER  XXII.  NATIONAL  DIFFERENCES 
OF  WAGES 

In  Chapter  17  we  were  occupied  with  the  man¬ 
ifold  combinations  which  may  bring  about  a 
change  in  magnitude  of  the  value  of  labour 
power— this  magnitude  being  considered  either 
absolutely  or  relatively,  i.e.,  as  compared  with 
surplus  value;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
quantum  of  the  means  of  subsistence  in  which 
the  price  of  labour  is  realized  might  again  un¬ 
dergo  fluctuations  independent  of,  or  different 
from,  the  changes  of  this  price.6  As  has  been  al¬ 
ready  said,  the  simple  translation  of  the  value 
or  the  price  of  labour  power  into  the  exoteric 
form  of  wages  transforms  all  these  laws  into 
laws  of  the  fluctuations  of  wages.  That  which 
appears  in  these  fluctuations  of  wages  within  a 
single  country  as  a  series  of  varying  combina¬ 
tions,  may  appear  in  different  countries  as  con- 

*  H.  Fawcett,  The  Economic  Position  of  the  British  La¬ 
bourer,  Cambridge  and  London,  1865,  p.  178. 

4  In  the  London  Standard  of  October  26, 1861,  there  is  a 
report  of  proceedings  of  the  firm  of  John  Bright  &  Co.,  be¬ 
fore  the  Rochdale  magistrates  “to  prosecute  for  intimida¬ 
tion  the  agents  of  the  Carpet  Weavers  Trades’  Union. 
Bright’s  partners  had  introduced  new  machinery  which 
would  turn  out  240  yards  of  carpet  in  the  time  and  with 
the  labour  (!)  previously  required  to  produce  160  yards. 
The  workmen  had  no  claim  whatever  to  share  in  the  profits 
made  by  the  investment  of  their  employer’s  capital  in  me¬ 
chanical  improvements.  Accordingly,  Messrs.  Bright  pro¬ 
posed  to  lower  the  rate  of  pay  from  1  }4d.  per  yard  to  id., 
leaving  the  earnings  of  the  men  exactly  the  same  as  before 
for  the  same  labour.  But  there  was  a  nominal  reduction,  of 
which  the  operatives,  it  is  asserted,  had  not  fair  warning 
beforehand." 

*  “Trades’  Unions,  in  their  desire  to  maintain  wages,  en¬ 
deavour  to  share  in  the  benefits  of  improved  machinery.” 
{Quelle  horreur!)  “. . .  The  demanding  higher  wages,  because 
labour  is  abbreviated,  is  in  other  words  the  endeavour  to 
establish  a  duty  on  mechanical  improvements.”— On  Com¬ 
bination  of  Trades,  new  edition,  London,  1 834,  p.  42. 

•“It  is  not  accurate  to  say  that  wages”  (he  deals  here 
with  their  money  expression)  "are  increased,  because  they 
purchase  more  of  a  cheaper  article.” — David  Buchanan  in 
his  edition  of  Adam  Smith’s  Wealth  of  Nations,  1814,  VoL 
I,  p.  417,  note. 


CAPITAL 


276 

temporaneous  difference  of  national  wages.  In 
the  comparison  of  the  wages  in  different  na¬ 
tions,  we  must  therefore  take  into  account  all 
the  factors  that  determine  changes  in  the 
amount  of  the  value  of  labour  power;  the  price 
and  the  extent  of  the  prime  necessaries  of  life 
as  naturally  and  historically  developed,  the  cost 
of  training  the  labourers,  the  part  played  by  the 
labour  of  women  and  children,  the  productive¬ 
ness  of  labour,  its  extensive  and  intensive  mag¬ 
nitude.  Even  the  most  superficial  comparison 
requires  the  reduction  first  of  the  average  day 
wage  for  the  same  trades,  in  different  countries, 
to  a  uniform  working  day.  After  this  reduction 
to  the  same  terms  of  the  day  wages,  time- wages 
must  again  be  translated  into  piece-wages,  as 
the  latter  only  can  be  a  measure  both  of  the 
productivity  and  the  intensity  of  labour. 

In  every  country,  there  is  a  certain  average 
intensity  of  labour  below  which  the  labour  for 
the  production  of  a  commodity  requires  more 
than  the  socially  necessary  time,  and  therefore 
does  not  reckon  as  labour  of  normal  quality. 
Only  a  degree  of  intensity  above  the  national 
average  affects,  in  a  given  country,  the  measure 
of  value  by  the  mere  duration  of  the  working 
time.  This  is  not  the  case  on  the  universal  mar¬ 
ket,  whose  integral  parts  are  the  individual 
countries.  The  average  intensity  of  labour 
changes  from  country  to  country;  here  it  is 
greater,  there  less.  These  national  averages 
form  a  scale  whose  unit  of  measure  is  the  aver¬ 
age  unit  of  universal  labour.  The  more  intepse 
national  labour,  therefore,  as  compared  with 
the  less  intense,  produces  m  the  same  time 
more  value,  which  expresses  itself  in  more 
money. 

But  the  law  of  value  in  its  international  ap¬ 
plication  is  yet  more  modified  by  the  fact  that 
on  the  world  market  the  more  productive  na¬ 
tional  labour  reckons  also  as  the  more  intense, 
so  long  as  the  more  productive  nation  is  not 
compelled  by  competition  to  lower  the  selling 
price  of  its  commodities  to  the  level  of  their 
value. 

In  proportion  as  capitalist  production  is  de¬ 
veloped  in  a  country,  in  the  same  proportion  do 
the  national  intensity  and  productivity  of  la¬ 
bour  there  rise  above  the  international  level.1 
The  different  quantities  of  commodities  of  the 
same  kind  produced  in  different  countries  in  the 
same  working  time  have,  therefore,  unequal  in¬ 
ternational  values,  which  are  expressed  in  dif- 

1  We  shall  inquire  in  another  place  what  circumstances 
in  relation  to  productivity  may  modify  this  law  for  indi¬ 
vidual  branches  of  industiy. 


ferent  prices,  i.e.,  in  sums  of  money  varying  ac¬ 
cording  to  international  values.  The  relative 
value  of  money  will,  therefore,  be  less  in  the 
nation  with  more  developed  capitalist  mode  of 
production  than  in  the  nation  with  less  devel¬ 
oped.  It  follows,  then,  that  the  nominal  wages, 
the  equivalent  of  labour  power  expressed  in 
money,  will  also  be  higher  in  the  first  nation 
than  in  the  second;  which  does  not  at  all  prove 
that  this  holds  also  for  the  real  wages,  i.e.,  for 
the  means  of  subsistence  placed  at  the  disposal 
of  the  labourer. 

But  even  apart  from  these  relative  differ¬ 
ences  of  the  value  of  money  in  different  coun¬ 
tries,  it  will  be  found,  frequently,  that  the  daily 
or  weekly,  etc.,  wage  in  the  first  nation  is  higher 
than  in  the  second,  whilst  the  relative  price  of 
labour  (i.e.,  the  price  of  labour  as  compared 
both  with  surplus  value  and  with  the  value  of 
the  product)  stands  higher  in  the  second  than 
in  the  first.2 

J.  W.  Cowell,  member  of  the  Factory  Com¬ 
mission  of  1833,  after  careful  investigation  of 
the  spinning  trade,  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
“in  England  wages  are  virtually  lower  to  the 
capitalist,  though  higher  to  the  operative  than 
on  the  continent  of  Europe/'8  The  English  Fac¬ 
tory  Inspector,  Alexander  Redgrave,  in  his  re¬ 
port  of  Oct.  31st,  1866,  proves  by  comparative 
statistics  with  continental  states  that  in  spite 
of  lower  wages  and  much  longer  working  time, 
continental  labour  is,  in  proportion  to  the  prod¬ 
uct,  dearer  than  English.  An  English  manager 
of  a  cotton  factory  in  Oldenburg  declares  that 
the  working  time  there  lasted  from  J.30  a.m. 
to  8  p.m.,  Saturdays  included,  and  that  the 
workpeople  there,  when  under  English  over- 

1  James  Anderson  remarks  in  his  polemic  against  Adam 
Smith:  “It  deserves,  likewise,  to  be  remarked  that  although 
the  apparent  price  of  labour  is  usually  lower  in  poor  coun¬ 
tries,  where  the  produce  of  the  soil,  and  grain  in  general,  is 
cheap;  yet  it  is  in  fact  for  the  most  part  really  higher  than 
in  other  countries.  For  it  is  not  the  wages  that  is  given  to 
the  labourer  per  day  that  constitutes  the  real  price  of  la¬ 
bour,  although  it  is  its  apparent  price.  The  real  price  is 
that  which  a  certain  quantity  of  work  performed  actually 
costs  the  employer;  and,  considered  in  this  light,  labour  is 
in  almost  all  cases  cheaper  in  rich  countries  than  in  those 
that  are  poorer,  although  the  price  of  grrin  and  other  pro¬ 
visions  is  usually  much  lower  in  the  last  than  in  the  first. 
. . .  Labour  estimated  by  the  day  is  much  lower  in  Scotland 
than  in  England.  . . .  Labour  by  the  piece  is  generally 
cheaper  in  England/'  (James  Anderson^  Observation*  on 
the  Means  of  Exciting  a  Spirit  of  National  Industry ,  etc., 
Edinburgh,  1777,  pp.  350, 351.)  On  the  contrary,  lowness 
of  wages  produces,  in  its  turn,  dearness  of  labour.  “Labour 
being  dearer  in  Ireland  than  it  is  in  England  . . .  because 
the  wages  are  so  much  lower."  (Note  2079,  in  Royal  Com - 
mission  on  Railways ,  Minutes ,  1 867.) 

*  Ure,  op,  cit.9  p.  314. 


NATIONAL  DIFFERENCES  OF  WAGES 


lookers,  did  not  supply  during  this  time  quite 
so  much  product  as  the  English  in  io  hours,  but 
under  German  overlookers  much  less.  Wages 
are  much  lower  than  in  England,  in  many  cases 
Jo%,  but  the  number  of  hands  in  proportion  to 
the  machinery  was  much  greater,  in  certain  de¬ 
partments  in  the  proportion  of  5:3. 

Mr.  Redgrave  gives  very  full  details  as  to  the 
Russian  cotton  factories.  The  data  were  given 
him  by  an  English  manager  until  recently  em¬ 
ployed  there.  On  this  Russian  soil,  so  fruitful  of 
all  infamies,  the  old  horrors  of  the  early  days  of 
English  factories  are  in  full  swing.  The  man¬ 
agers  are,  of  course,  English,  as  the  native  Rus¬ 
sian  capitalist  is  of  no  use  in  factory  business. 
Despite  all  overwork,  continued  day  and  night; 
despite  the  most  shameful  under-payment  of 
the  workpeople,  Russian  manufacture  manages 
to  vegetate  only  by  prohibition  of  foreign  com¬ 
petition. 

I  give,  in  conclusion,  a  comparative  table  of 
Mr.  Redgrave’s,  on  the  average  number  of  spin¬ 
dles  per  factory  and  per  spinner  in  the  different 
countries  of  Europe.  He  himself  remarks  that 
he  had  collected  these  figures  a  few  years  ago, 
and  that  since  that  time  the  size  of  the  factories 
and  the  number  of  spindles  per  labourer  in  Eng¬ 
land  has  increased.  He  supposes,  however,  an 
approximately  equal  progress  in  the  continen¬ 
tal  countries  mentioned,  so  that  the  numbers 
given  would  still  have  their  value  for  purposes 
of  comparison. 

Average  Number  of  Spindles  per  Factory 

England,  average  of  spindles  per  factory  12,600 
France  “  “  “  '  — 

Prussia,  w 

Belgium,  “ 

Saxony,  *' 

Austria,  *' 

Switzerland,  “ 

Average  Number  of  Persons  Employed 
to  Spindles 

Spindles 


France  one  person  to  14 

Russia  “  28 

Prussia  44  37 

Bavaria  “  46 

Austria  i€  49 

Belgium  “  5° 

Saxony  i€  5° 

Switzerland  *  €i  55 

Smaller  States  of  Germany  M  55 

Great  Britain  “  74 


‘This  comparison,”  says  Mr.  Redgrave,  “is 
yet  more  unfavourable  to  Great  Britain,  inas¬ 


277 

much  as  there  is  so  large  a  number  of  factories 
in  which  weaving  by  power  is  carried  on  in  con¬ 
junction  with  spinning”  (whilst  in  the  table  the 
weavers  are  not  deducted),  “and  the  factories 
abroad  are  chiefly  spinning  factories;  if  it  were 
possible  to  compare  like  with  like,  strictly,  I 
could  find  many  cotton  spinning  factories 
in  my  district  in  which  mules  containing  2,200 
spindles  are  minded  by  one  man  (the  minder) 
and  two  assistants  only,  turning  off  daily 
220  pounds  of  yarn,  measuring  400  miles  in 
length.”1 

It  is  well  known  that  in  eastern  Europe,  as 
well  as  in  Asia,  English  companies  have  under¬ 
taken  the  construction  of  railways,  and  have, 
in  making  them,  employed  side  by  side  with  the 
native  labourers  a  certain  number  of  English 
workingmen.  Compelled  by  practical  necessity, 
they  thus  have  had  to  take  into  account  the 
national  difference  in  the  intensity  of  labour, 
but  this  has  brought  them  no  loss.  Their  experi¬ 
ence  shows  that,  even  if  the  height  of  wages  cor¬ 
responds  more  or  less  with  the  average  intensity 
of  labour,  the  relative  price  of  labour  varies  gen¬ 
erally  in  the  inverse  direction. 

In  an  Essay  on  the  Rate  of  W ages?  one  of  his 
first  economic  writings,  H.  Carey  tries  to  prove 
that  the  wages  of  the  different  nations  are  di¬ 
rectly  proportional  to  the  degree  of  productive¬ 
ness  of  the  national  working  days,  in  order  to 
draw  from  this  international  relation  the  conclu¬ 
sion  that  wages  everywhere  rise  and  fall  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  productiveness  of  labour.  The 
whole  of  our  analysis  of  the  production  of  sur¬ 
plus  value  shows  the  absurdity  of  this  conclu¬ 
sion,  even  if  Carey  himself  had  proved  his  pre¬ 
mises  instead  of,  after  his  usual  uncritical  and 
superficial  fashion,  shuffling  to  and  fro  a  con¬ 
fused  mass  of  statistical  materials.  The  best  of 
it  is  that  he  does  not  assert  that  things  actually 
are  as  they  ought  to  be  according  to  his  theory. 
For  State  intervention  has  falsified  the  natural 
economic  relations.  The  different  national 
wages  must  be  reckoned,  therefore,  as  if  that 
part  of  each  that  goes  to  the  State,  in  the  form 
of  taxes,  came  to  the  labourer  himself.  Ought 
not  Mr.  Carey  to  consider  further  whether 
those  “State  expenses”  are  not  the  “natural” 
fruits  of  capitalistic  development?  The  reason¬ 
ing  is  quite  worthy  of  the  man  who  first  de¬ 
clared  the  relations  of  capitalist  production  to 

1  Reports  0/  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  Oct.,  1866,  pp. 
31-33,  passim. 

1  Essay  on  the  Rate  of  Wages,  with  an  Examination  of  the 
Causes  of  the  Differences  in  the  Conditions  of  the  Labouring 
Population  throughout  the  World ,  Philadelphia,  1835. 


*»5W 

1.500 
4,000 

4.500 
7,000 
8,000 


CAPITAL 


278 

be  eternal  laws  of  nature  and  reason,  whose  free, 
harmonious  working  is  only  disturbed  by  the 
intervention  of  the  State,  in  order  afterwards 
to  discover  that  the  diabolical  influence  of  Eng¬ 
land  on  the  world  market  (an  influence  which, 
it  appears,  does  not  spring  from  the  natural 
laws  of  capitalist  production)  necessitates  State 
intervention,  i.e.,  the  protection  of  those  laws 
of  nature  and  reason  by  the  State,  alias  the  sys¬ 
tem  of  protection.  He  discovered  further  that 
the  theorems  of  Ricardo  and  others,  in  which 
existing  social  antagonisms  and  contradictions 
are  formulated,  are  not  the  ideal  product  of  the 
real  economic  movement,  but  on  the  contrary. 


that  the  real  antagonisms  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion  in  England  and  elsewhere  are  the  result  of 
the  theories  of  Ricardo  and  others!  Finally,  he 
discovered  that  it  is,  in  the  last  resort,  com¬ 
merce  that  destroys  the  inborn  beauties  and 
harmonies  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production. 
A  step  further  and  he  will,  perhaps,  discover 
that  the  one  evil  in  capitalist  production  is  cap¬ 
ital  itself.  Only  a  man  with  such  atrocious  want 
of  the  critical  faculty  and  such  spurious  erudi¬ 
tion  deserved,  in  spite  of  his  protectionist  her¬ 
esy,  to  become  the  secret  source  of  the  harmoni¬ 
ous  wisdom  of  a  Rastiat,  and  of  all  the  other 
free-trade  optimists  of  today. 


Part  Seven 


THE  ACCUMULATION  OF  CAPITAL 


The  conversion  of  a  sum  of  money  into  means 
of  production  and  labour  power  is  the  first  step 
taken  by  the  quantum  of  value  that  is  going  to 
function  as  capital.  This  conversion  takes  place 
in  the  market,  within  the  sphere  of  circulation. 
The  second  step,  the  process  of  production,  is 
complete  so  soon  as  the  means  of  production 
have  been  converted  into  commodities  whose 
value  exceeds  that  of  their  component  parts, 
and,  therefore,  contains  the  capital  originally 
advanced,  plus  a  surplus  value.  These  com¬ 
modities  must  then  be  thrown  into  circulation. 
They  must  be  sold,  their  value  realized  in  mon¬ 
ey,  this  money  converted  afresh  into  capital, 
and  so  over  and  over  again.  This  circular  move¬ 
ment,  in  which  the  same  phases  are  continually 
gone  through  in  succession,  forms  the  circula¬ 
tion  of  capital. 

The  first  condition  of  accumulation  is  that 
the  capitalist  must  have  contrived  to  sell  his 
commodities,  and  to  reconvert  into  capital  the 
greater  part  of  the  money  so  received.  In  the 
following  pages  we  shall  assume  that  capital 
circulates  in  its  normal  way.  The  detailed 
analysis  of  the  process  will  be  found  in  Book 
Two. 

The  capitalist  who  produces  surplus  value — 
i.e.,  who  extracts  unpaid  labour  directly  from 
the  labourers,  and  fixes  it  in  commodities — is, 
indeed,  the  first  appropriator,  but  by  no  means 
the  ultimate  owner,  of  this  surplus  value.  He 
has  to  share  it  with  capitalists,  with  landown¬ 
ers,  etc.,  who  fulfil  other  functions  in  the  com¬ 
plex  of  social  production.  Surplus  value,  there¬ 
fore,  splits  up  into  various  parts.  Its  fragments 
fall  to  various  categories  of  persons,  and  take 
various  forms,  independent  the  one  of  the  oth¬ 
er,  such  as  profit,  interest,  merchants’  profit, 
rent,  etc.  It  is  only  in  Book  Three  that  we  can 
take  in  hand  these  modified  forms  of  surplus 
value. 

On  the  one  hand  then,  we  assume  that  the 
capitalist  sells  at  their  value  the  commodities 
he  has  produced,  without  concerning  ourselves 
either  about  the  new  forms  that  capital  as¬ 
sumes  while  in  the  sphere  of  circulation,  or 


about  the  concrete  conditions  of  reproduction 
hidden  under  these  forms.  On  the  other  hand, 
we  treat  the  capitalist  producer  as  owner  of  the 
entire  surplus  value,  or  better  perhaps,  as  the 
representative  of  all  the  sharers  with  him  in  the 
booty.  We,  therefore,  first  of  all  consider  accu¬ 
mulation  from  an  abstract  point  of  view — i.e., 
as  a  mere  phase  in  the  actual  process  of  produc¬ 
tion. 

So  far  as  accumulation  takes  place,  the  capi¬ 
talist  must  have  succeeded  in  selling  his  com¬ 
modities  and  in  reconverting  the  sale  money  in¬ 
to  capital.  Moreover,  the  breaking-up  of  sur¬ 
plus  value  into  fragments  neither  alters  its  na¬ 
ture  nor  the  conditions  under  which  it  becomes 
an  element  of  accumulation.  Whatever  be  the 
proportion  of  surplus  value  which  the  industrial 
capitalist  retains  for  himself  or  yields  up  to  oth¬ 
ers,  he  is  the  one  who,  in  the  first  instance,  ap¬ 
propriates  it.  We,  therefore,  assume  no  more 
than  what  actually  takes  place.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  simple  fundamental  form  of  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  accumulation  is  obscured  by  the  incident 
of  the  circulation  which  brings  it  about,  and  by 
the  splitting  up  of  surplus  value.  An  exact  anal¬ 
ysis  of  the  process,  therefore,  demands  that  we 
should,  for  a  time,  disregard  all  phenomena  that 
hide  the  play  of  its  inner  mechanism. 


CHAPTER  XXIII.  SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


Whatever  the  form  of  the  process  of  produc¬ 
tion  in  a  society,  it  must  be  a  continuous  proc¬ 
ess,  must  continue  to  go  periodically  through 
the  same  phases.  A  society  can  no  more  cease 
to  produce  than  it  can  cease  to  consume.  When 
viewed,  therefore,  as  a  connected  whole,  and  as 
flowing  on  with  incessant  renewal,  every  social 
process  of  production  is,  at  the  same  time,  a 
process  of  reproduction. 

The  conditions  of  production  are  also  those 
of  reproduction.  No  society  can  go  on  produc¬ 
ing  (in  other  words,  no  society  can  reproduce) 
unless  it  constantly  reconverts  a  part  of  its 


279 


280  CAPITAL 

products  into  mean9  of  production,  or  elements  tition  of  the  process  of  production  on  the  old 


of  fresh  products.  All  other  circumstances  re¬ 
maining  the  same,  the  only  mode  by  which  it 
can  reproduce  its  wealth,  and  maintain  it  at  one 
level,  is  by  replacing  the  means  of  production— 
i.e.,  the  instruments  of  labour,  the  raw  material, 
and  the  auxiliary  substances  consumed  in  the 
course  of  the  year— by  an  equal  quantity  of  the 
same  kind  of  articles;  these  must  be  separated 
from  the  mass  of  the  yearly  products,  and 
thrown  afresh  into  the  process  of  production. 
Hence,  a  definite  portion  of  each  year’s  product 
belongs  to  the  domain  of  production.  Destined 
for  productive  consumption  from  the  very  first, 
this  portion  exists,  for  the  most  part,  in  the 
shape  of  articles  totally  unfitted  for  individual 
consumption. 

If  production  be  capitalistic  in  form,  so  too 
will  be  reproduction.  Just  as  in  the  former  the 
labour  process  figures  but  as  a  means  towards 
the  self-expansion  of  capital,  so  in  the  latter  it 
figures  but  as  a  means  of  reproducing  as  capital 
—i.e.,  as  self-expanding  value— the  value  ad¬ 
vanced.  It  is  only  because  his  money  constantly 
functions  as  capital  that  the  economic  guise  of 
acapitalist  attaches  to  a  man.  If,  for  instance,  a 
sum  of  £100  has  this  year  been  converted  into 
capital,  and  produced  a  surplus  value  of  £20, 
it  must  continue  during  next  year,  and  subse¬ 
quent  years,  to  repeat  the  same  operation.  As  a 
periodic  increment  of  the  capital  advanced,  or 
periodic  fruit  of  capital  in  process,  surplus  value 
acquires  the  form  of  a  revenue  flowing  out*of 
capital.1 

If  this  revenue  serve  the  capitalist  only  as  a 
fund  to  provide  for  his  consumption,  and  be 
spent  as  periodically  as  it  is  gained,  then,  eateris 
paribus,  simple  reproduction  will  take  place. 
And  although  this  reproduction  is  a  mere  repe- 

1  "But  these  rich  men,  who  consume  the  products  of  the 
labour  of  other  men,  can  obtain  them  only  through  ex¬ 
change"  (purchases  of  commodities).  "However,  should 
they  give  the  wealth  which  they  have  acquired  and  accu¬ 
mulated  in  return  for  these  new  products  which  are  the 
objects  of  their  imagination,  they  would  seem  to  be  in  dan¬ 
ger  of  soon  exhausting  their  reserve  funds.  As  we  have  al¬ 
ready  said,  they  don’t  work  and  are,  m  fact,  incapable  of 
working.  One  would  assume,  therefore,  that  each  day  should 
see  their  old  funds  diminish,  and  that,  as  soon  as  they  have 
nothing  left,  they  won't  have  anything  to  offer  in  exchange 
to  the  workers  who  work  exclusively  for  them. . . .  But  in 
the  social  order,  wealth  has  acquired  the  power  of  repro¬ 
ducing  itself  through  the  labour  of  someone  else  and  with¬ 
out  the  proprietor’s  having  to  contribute  anything  to  the 
process.  Wealth,  like  labour,  and  through  labour,  yields  a 
yearly  fruit,  which  can  be  destroyed  every  year  without  a 
wealthy  man’s  becoming  poorer.  This  fruit  is  the  menu* 
which  springs  from  capital*'— Sismondi,  Nouveaux  prith 
apes  ’Sconomie  politique,  Paris,  1819,  VoL  I,  pp.  81-82. 


scale,  yet  this  mere  repetition,  or  continuity, 
gives  a  new  character  to  the  process,  or  rather, 
causes  the  disappearance  of  some  apparent 
characteristics  which  it  possessed  as  an  isolated 
discontinuous  process. 

The  purchase  of  labour  power  for  a  fixed  peri¬ 
od  is  the  prelude  to  the  process  of  production; 
and  this  prelude  is  constantly  repeated  when 
the  stipulated  term  comes  to  an  end,  when  a 
definite  period  of  production,  such  as  a  week  or 
a  month,  has  elapsed.  But  the  labourer  is  not 
paid  until  after  he  has  expended  his  labour 
power,  and  realized  in  commodities  not  only  its 
value,  but  surplus  value.  He  has,  therefore,  pro¬ 
duced  not  only  surplus  value,  which  we  for  the 
present  regard  as  a  fund  to  meet  the  private 
consumption  of  the  capitalist,  but  he  has  also 
produced,  before  it  flows  back  to  him  in  the 
shape  of  wages,  the  fund  out  of  which  he  him¬ 
self  is  paid,  the  variable  capital;  and  his  em¬ 
ployment  lasts  only  so  long  as  he  continues  to 
reproduce  this  fund.  Hence,  that  formula  of  the 
economists  referred  to  in  Chapter  XVIII  which 
represents  wages  as  a  share  in  the  product  it¬ 
self.2  What  flows  back  to  the  labourer  in  the 
shape  of  wages  is  a  portion  of  the  product  that 
is  continuously  reproduced  by  him.  The  capi¬ 
talist,  it  is  true,  pays  him  in  money,  but  this 
money  is  merely  the  transmuted  form  of  the 
product  of  his  labour.  While  hTis  converting  a 
portion  of  the  means  of  production  into  prod¬ 
ucts,  a  portion  of  his  former  product  is  being 
turned  into  money.  It  is  his  labour  of  last  week, 
or  of  last  year,  that  pays  for  his  labour  power 
this  week  or  this  year.  The  illusion  begotten  by 
the  intervention  of  money  vanishes  immediate¬ 
ly  if,  instead  of  taking  a  single  capitalist  and  a 
single  labourer,  we  take  the  class  of  capitalists 
and  the  class  of  labourers  as  a  whole.  The  capi¬ 
talist  class  is  constantly  giving  to  the  labouring 
class  order-notes  in  the  form  of  money  on  a  por¬ 
tion  of  the  commodities  produced  by  the  latter 
and  appropriated  by  the  former.  The  labourers 
give  these  order-notes  back  just  as  constantly 
to  the  capitalist  class,  and  in  this  way  get  their 
share  of  their  own  product.  The  transaction  is 
veiled  by  the  commodity-form  of  the  product 
and  the  money-form  of  the  commodity. 

Variable  capital  is  therefore  only  a  particular 
historical  form  of  appearance  of  the  fund  for 

*  "Wages  as  well  as  profits  are  to  be  considered,  each  of 
them,  aa  really  a  portion  of  the  finished  product."  (Ram¬ 
say,  op*  cit .,  p.  142.)  "The  share  of  the  product  which  comes 
to  the  labourer  in  the  form  of  wages."  (J.  Mill,  Elements  of 
Political  Economy,  translated  by  Parissot,  Paris,  1823,  p. 
340 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


providing  the  necessaries  of  life,  or  the  labour 
fund  which  the  labourer  requires  for  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  himself  and  family,  and  which,  what¬ 
ever  be  the  system  of  social  production,  he  must 
himself  produce  and  reproduce.  If  the  labour 
fund  constantly  flows  to  him  in  the  form  of 
money  that  pays  for  his  labour,  it  is  because  the 
product  he  has  created  moves  constantly  away 
from  him  in  the  form  of  capital.  But  all  this 
does  not  alter  the  fact  that  it  is  the  labourer's 
own  labour,  realized  in  a  product,  which  is  ad¬ 
vanced  to  him  by  the  capitalist.1  Let  us  take  a 
peasant  liable  to  do  compulsory  service  for  his 
lord.  He  works  on  his  own  land,  with  his  own 
means  of  production,  for,  say,  three  days  a 
week.  The  three  other  days  he  does  forced  work 
on  the  lord’s  domain.  He  constantly  reproduces 
his  own  labour  fund,  which  never,  in  his  case, 
takes  the  form  of  a  money  payment  for  his  la¬ 
bour  advanced  by  another  person.  But  in  re¬ 
turn,  his  unpaid  forced  labour  for  the  lord,  on 
its  side,  never  acquires  the  character  of  volun¬ 
tary  paid  labour.  If  one  flne  morning  the  lord 
appropriates  to  himself  the  land,  the  cattle,  the 
seed,  in  a  word,  the  means  of  production  of  this 
peasant,  the  latter  will  thenceforth  be  obliged 
to  sell  his  labour  power  to  the  lord.  He  will, 
cateris  paribus ,  labour  six  days  a  week  as  before, 
three  for  himself,  three  for  his  lord,  who  thence¬ 
forth  becomes  a  wage-paying  capitalist.  As  be¬ 
fore,  he  will  use  up  the  means  of  production  as 
means  of  production,  and  transfer  their  value 
to  the  product.  As  before,  a  definite  portion  of 
the  product  will  be  devoted  to  reproduction. 
But  from  the  moment  that  the  forced  labour  is 
changed  into  wage  labour,  from  that  moment 
the  labour  fund,  which  the  peasant  himself  con¬ 
tinues  as  before  to  produce  and  reproduce, 
takes  the  form  of  a  capital  advanced  in  the  form 
of  wages  by  the  lord.  The  bourgeois  economist, 
whose  narrow  mind  is  unable  to  separate  the 
form  of  appearance  from  the  thing  that  appears, 
shuts  his  eyes  to  the  fact  that  it  is  but  here  and 
there  on  the  face  of  the  earth  that  even  nowa¬ 
days  the  labour  fund  crops  up  in  the  form  of 
capital.2 

Variable  capital,  it  is  true,  only  then  loses  its 
character  of  a  value  advanced  out  of  the  capi- 

1  “When  capital  is  employed  in  advancing  to  the  work¬ 
man  his  wages,  it  adds  nothing  to  the  funds  for  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  labour.’*— Cazenove,  in  note  to  his  edition  of 
Malthus’  Definitions  in  Political  Economy ,  London,  1853, 

p.  32. 

*  “The  wages  of  labour  are  advanced  by  capitalists  in 
the  case  of  less  than  one-fourth  of  the  labourers  of  the 
earth.”  Richard  Jones,  Textbook  0/  Lectures  on  the  Politico! 
Economy  of  Nations,  Hertford,  1852,  p.  16. 


281 

talist’s  funds,*  when  we  view  the  process  of  cap¬ 
italist  production  in  the  flow  of  its  constant  re¬ 
newal.  But  that  process  must  have  had  a  begin¬ 
ning  of  some  kind.  From  our  present  standpoint 
it  therefore  seems  likely  that  the  capitalist,  once 
upon  a  time,  became  possessed  of  money,  by 
some  accumulation  that  took  place  independ¬ 
ently  of  the  unpaid  labour  of  others,  and  that 
this  was,  therefore,  how  he  was  enabled  to  fre¬ 
quent  the  market  as  a  buyer  of  labour  power. 
However  this  may  be,  the  mere  continuity  of 
the  process,  the  simple  reproduction,  brings 
about  some  other  wonderful  changes  which  af¬ 
fect  not  only  the  variable  but  the  total  capital. 

If  a  capital  of  £1000  begets  yearly  a  surplus 
value  of  £200,  and  if  this  surplus  value  is  con¬ 
sumed  every  year,  it  is  clear  that  at  the  end  of 
5  years  the  surplus  value  consumed  will  amount 
to  5X£200  or  the  £1000  originally  advanced. 
If  only  a  part,  pay  one-half,  were  consumed,  the 
same  result  would  follow  at  the  end  of  10  years, 
since  10X  £100= £1000.  In  general  terms,  the 
value  of  the  capital  advanced  divided  by  the 
surplus  value  annually  consumed  gives  the 
number  of  years,  or  reproduction  periods,  at  the 
expiration  of  which  the  capital  originally  ad¬ 
vanced  has  been  consumed  by  the  capitalist  and 
has  disappeared.  The  capitalist  thinks  that  he 
is  consuming  the  produce  of  the  unpaid  labour 
of  others  (i.e.,  the  surplus  value)  and  is  keeping 
intact  his  original  capital;  but  what  he  thinks 
cannot  alter  facts.  After  the  lapse  of  a  certain 
number  of  years,  the  capital  value  he  then  pos¬ 
sesses  is  equal  to  the  sum  total  of  the  surplus 
value  appropriated  by  him  during  those  years, 
and  the  total  value  he  has  consumed  is  equal  to 
that  of  his  original  capital.  It  is  true  that  he  has 
in  hand  a  capital  whose  amount  has  not 
changed,  and  of  which  a  part,  viz.,  the  build¬ 
ings,  machinery,  etc.,  were  already  there  when 
the  work  of  his  business  began.  But  what  we 
have  to  do  with  here  is  not  the  material  ele¬ 
ments  but  the  value  of  that  capital.  When  a 
person  gets  through  all  his  property  by  taking 
upon  himself  debts  equal  to  the  value  of  that 
property,  it  is  clear  that  his  property  represents 
nothing  but  the  sum-total  of  his  debts.  And  so 
it  is  with  the  capitalist;  when  he  has  consumed 
the  equivalent  of  his  original  capital,  the  value 
of  his  present  capital  represents  nothing  but  the 
total  amount  of  the  surplus  value  appropriated 

1  “Though  the  manufacturer”  (i.e.  the  labourer)  “has 
his  wages  advanced  to  him  by  his  master,  he  in  reality 
costs  him  no  expense,  the  value  of  these  wages  being  gen¬ 
erally  reserved,  together  with  a  profit,  in  the  improved 
value  of  the  subject  upon  which  his  labour  is  bestowed.” 
— A.  Smith,  op,  cit,.  Book  II,  ch.  iii. 


CAPITAL 


282 

by  him  without  payment.  Not  a  single  atom  of 
the  value  of  his  old  capital  continues  to  exist. 

Apart  then,  from  all  accumulation,  the  mere 
continuity  of  the  process  of  production,  in  other 
words  simple  reproduction,  sooner  or  later,  and 
of  necessity,  converts  every  capital  into  accu¬ 
mulated  capital,  or  capitalized  surplus  value. 
Even  if  that  capital  was  originally  acquired  by 
the  personal  labour  of  its  employer,  it  sooner  or 
later  becomes  value  appropriated  without  an 
equivalent,  the  unpaid  labour  of  others  materi¬ 
alized  either  in  money  or  in  some  other  object. 
We  saw,  in  Chapter  IV,  that  in  order  to  convert 
money  into  capital  something  more  is  required 
than  the  production  and  circulation  of  com¬ 
modities.  We  saw  that,  on  the  one  side,  the  pos¬ 
sessor  of  value  or  money,  on  the  other,  the  pos¬ 
sessor  of  the  value-creating  substance;  on  the 
one  side,  the  possessor  of  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  and  subsistence,  on  the  other,  the  possessor 
of  nothing  but  labour  power,  must  confront  one 
another  as  buyer  and  seller.  The  separation  of 
labour  from  its  product,  of  subjective  labour 
power  from  the  objective  conditions  of  labour, 
was  therefore  the  real  foundation  in  fact,  and 
the  starting-point  of  capitalist  production. 

But  that  which  at  first  was  but  a  starting- 
point  becomes,  by  the  mere  continuity  of  the 
process,  by  simple  reproduction,  the  peculiar 
result,  constantly  renewed  and  perpetuated,  of 
capitalist  production.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
process  of  production  incessantly  converts  ma¬ 
terial  wealth  into  capital,  into  means  of  creat¬ 
ing  more  wealth  and  means  of  enjoyment  for 
the  capitalist.  On  the  other  hand,  the  labourer, 
on  quitting  the  process,  is  what  he  was  on  enter¬ 
ing  it,  a  source  of  wealth,  but  devoid  of  all 
means  of  making  that  wealth  his  own.  Since, 
before  entering  on  the  process,  his  own  labour 
has  already  been  alienated  from  himself  by  the 
sale  of  his  labour  power,  has  been  appropriated 
by  the  capitalist  and  incorporated  with  capital, 
it  must,  during  the  process,  be  realized  in  a 
product  that  does  not  belong  to  him.  Since  the 
process  of  production  is  also  the  process  by 
which  the  capitalist  consumes  labour  power, 
the  product  of  the  labourer  is  incessantly  con¬ 
verted,  not  only  in  to  commodities,  but  into  cap¬ 
ital,  into  value  that  sucks  up  the  value-creating 
power,  into  means  of  subsistence  that  buy  the 
person  of  the  labourer,  into  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  that  command  the  producers.1  The  labour¬ 
er,  therefore,  constantly  produces  material,  ob- 

1  'This  is  a  remarkably  peculiar  property  of  productive 
labour.  Whatever  is  productively  consumed  is  capital,  and 
it  becomes  capital  by  consumption.'*  (James  Mill,  op,  tit,, 


jective  wealth,  but  in  the  form  of  capital,  of  an 
alien  power  that  dominates  and  exploits  him; 
and  the  capitalist  as  constantly  produces  labour 
power,  but  in  the  form  of  a  subjective  source  of 
wealth,  separated  from  the  objects  in  and  by 
which  it  can  alone  be  realized;  in  short  he  pro¬ 
duces  the  labourer,  but  as  a  wage  labourer.* 
This  incessant  reproduction,  this  perpetuation 
of  the  labourer,  is  the  sine  qua  non  of  capitalist 
production. 

The  labourer  consumes  in  a  twofold  way. 
While  producing,  he  consumes  by  his  labour  the 
means  of  production,  and  converts  them  into 
products  with  a  higher  value  than  that  of  the 
capital  advanced.  This  is  his  productive  con¬ 
sumption.  It  is  at  the  same  time  consumption 
of  his  labour  power  by  the  capitalist  who 
bought  it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  labourer  turns 
the  money  paid  to  him  for  his  labour  power  into 
means  of  subsistence.  This  is  his  individual  con¬ 
sumption.  The  labourer's  productive  consump¬ 
tion  and  his  individual  consumption  are,  there¬ 
fore,  totally  distinct.  In  the  former,  he  acts  as 
the  motive  power  of  capital  and  belongs  to  the 
capitalist.  In  the  latter,  he  belongs  to  himself 
and  performs  his  necessary  vital  functions  out¬ 
side  the  process  of  production.  The  result  of  the 
one  is  that  the  capitalist  lives;  of  the  other,  that 
the  labourer  lives. 

When  treating  of  the  working  day,  we  saw 
that  the  labourer  is  often  compelled  to  make  his 
individual  consumption  a  mere  incident  of  pro¬ 
duction.  In  such  a  case,  he  supplies  himself  with 
necessaries  in  order  to  maintain  his  labour  pow¬ 
er,  just  as  coal  and  water  are  supplied  to  the 
steam  engine  and  oil  to  the  wheel.  His  means  of 
consumption,  in  that  case,  are  the  mere  means 
of  consumption  required  by  a  means  of  produc¬ 
tion;  his  individual  consumption  is  directly  pro¬ 
ductive  consumption.  This,  however,  appears 
to  be  an  abuse  not  essentially  appertaining  to 
capitalist  production.3 

The  matter  takes  quite  another  aspect  when 
we  contemplate  not  the  single  capitalist  and  the 
single  labourer,  but  the  capitalist  class  and  the 

p.  142.)  James  Mill,  however,  never  got  on  the  track  of 
this  "remarkably  peculiar  property." 

9  "It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  first  introducing  a  manu¬ 
facture  employs  many  poor,  but  they  cease  not  to  be  so, 
and  the  continuance  of  it  makes  many,"  {Reasons  for  a 
Limited  Exportation  oj  Wool,  London,  1677,  P-  *9*)  "The 
farmer  now  absurdly  asserts  that  he  keeps  the  poor.  They 
are  indeed  kept  in  misery."  {Reasons  for  the  late  Increase  of 
the  Poor  Rate ,  or  a  Comparative  Vtew  of  the  Prices  of  La¬ 
bour  and  Provisions ,  London,  1777,  p.  37.) 

1  Rossi  would  not  declaim  so  emphatically  against  this, 
had  ’le  really  penetrated  the  secret  of  "productive  con¬ 
sumption." 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


labouring  class,  not  an  isolated  process  of  pro¬ 
duction,  but  capitalist  production  in  full  swing 
and  on  its  actual  social  scale.  By  converting 
part  of  his  capital  into  labour  power,  the  capi¬ 
talist  augments  the  value  of  his  entire  capital. 
He  kills  two  birds  with  one  stone.  He  profits, 
not  only  by  what  he  receives  from,  but  by  what 
he  gives  to,  the  labourer.  The  capital  given  in 
exchange  for  labour  power  is  converted  into 
necessaries  by  the  consumption  of  which  the 
muscles,  nerves,  bones,  and  brains  of  existing 
labourers  are  reproduced  and  new  labourers  are 
begotten.  Within  the  limits  of  what  is  strictly 
necessary,  the  individual  consumption  of  the 
working  class  is,  therefore,  the  reconversion  of 
the  means  of  subsistence  given  by  capital  in  ex¬ 
change  for  labour  power,  into  fresh  labour  pow¬ 
er  at  the  disposal  of  capital  for  exploitation.  It 
is  the  production  and  reproduction  of  that 
means  of  production  so  indispensable  to  the 
capitalist— the  labourer  himself.  The  individu¬ 
al  consumption  of  the  labourer,  whether  it  pro¬ 
ceed  within  the  \*<vkshop  or  outside  it,  whether 
it  be  part  of  the  process  of  production  or  not, 
forms  therefore  a  factor  of  the  production  and 
reproduction  of  capital;  just  as  cleaning  ma¬ 
chinery  docs,  whether  it  be  done  while  the  ma¬ 
chinery  is  working  or  while  it  is  standing.  The 
fact  that  the  labourer  consumes  his  means  of 
subsistence  for  his  own  purposes,  and  not  to 
please  the  capitalist,  has  no  bearing  on  the  mat¬ 
ter.  The  consumption  of  food  by  a  beast  of  bur¬ 
den  is  none  the  less  a  necessary  factor  in  the 
process  of  production,  because  the  beast  enjoys 
what  it  eats.  The  maintenance  and  reproduc¬ 
tion  of  the  working  class  is,  and  must  ever  be,  a 
necessary  condition  to  the  reproduction  of  cap¬ 
ital.  But  the  capitalist  may  safely  leave  its 
fulfilment  to  the  labourer's  instincts  of  self- 
preservation  and  of  propagation.  All  the  capi¬ 
talist  cares  for  is  to  reduce  the  labourer's  indi¬ 
vidual  consumption  as  far  as  possible  to  what  is 
strictly  necessary,  and  he  is  far  from  imitating 
those  brutal  South  Americans,  who  force  their 
labourers  to  take  the  more  substantial,  rather 
than  the  less  substantial,  kind  of  food.1 

Hence  both  the  capitalist  and  his  ideological 

1  “The  labourers  in  the  mines  of  South  America,  whose 
daily  task"  (the  heaviest  perhaps  in  the  world)  “consists 
in  bringing  to  the  surface  on  their  shoulders  a  load  of  metal 
weighing  from  180  to  200  pounds,  from  a  depth  of  450  feet, 
i.ve  on  bread  and  beans  only;  they  themselves  would  pre¬ 
fer  the  bread  alone  for  food,  but  their  masters,  who  have 
found  out  that  the  men  tannot  work  so  hard  on  bread, 
treat  them  like  horses,  and  compel  them  to  cat  beans; 
beans,  however,  are  relatively  much  richer  in  bone-earth** 
(phosphate  of  lime)  “than  is  bread.*’— Liebig,  op.  cit .,  Vol. 
I,  p.  194,  note. 


283 

representative,  the  political  economist,  consid¬ 
er  that  part  alone  of  the  labourer's  individual 
consumption  to  be  productive  which  is  requisite 
for  the  perpetuation  of  the  class  and  which 
therefore  must  take  place  in  order  that  the  cap¬ 
italist  may  have  labour  power  to  consume; 
what  the  labourer  consumes  for  his  own  pleas¬ 
ure  beyond  that  part  is  unproductive  consump¬ 
tion.2  If  the  accumulation  of  capital  were  to 
cause  a  rise  of  wages  and  an  increase  in  the  la¬ 
bourer’s  consumption,  unaccompanied  by  in¬ 
crease  in  the  consumption  of  labour  power  by 
capital,  the  additional  capital  would  be  con¬ 
sumed  unproductively.3  In  reality,  the  individ¬ 
ual  consumption  of  the  labourer  is  unproduc¬ 
tive  as  regards  himself,  for  it  reproduces  noth¬ 
ing  but  the  needy  individual;  it  is  productive  to 
the  capitalist  and  to  the  State,  since  it  is  the 
production  of  the  power  that  creates  their 
wealth.4  * 

From  a  social  point  of  view,  therefore,  the 
working  class,  even  when  not  directly  engaged 
in  the  labour  process,  is  just  as  much  an  append¬ 
age  of  capital  as  the  ordinary  instruments  of 
labour.  Even  its  individual  consumption  is, 
within  certain  limits,  a  mere  factor  in  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  production.  That  process,  however,  takes 
good  care  to  prevent  these  self-conscious  in¬ 
struments  from  leaving  it  in  the  lurch,  for  it  re¬ 
moves  their  product,  as  fast  as  it  is  made,  from 
their  pole  to  the  opposite  pole  of  capital.  Indi¬ 
vidual  consumption  provides,  on  the  one  hand, 
the  means  for  their  maintenance  and  reproduc¬ 
tion;  on  the  other  hand,  it  secures,  by  the  anni¬ 
hilation  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  the  continued 
reappearance  of  the  workman  in  the  labour 
market.  The  Roman  slave  was  held  by  fetters; 
the  wage  labourer  is  bound  to  his  owner  by  in¬ 
visible  threads.  The  appearance  of  independ¬ 
ence  is  kept  up  by  means  of  a  constant  change 
of  employers,  and  by  the  fictio  juris 5  of  a  con¬ 
tract. 

In  former  times,  capital  resorted  to  legisla¬ 
tion,  whenever  necessary,  to  enforce  its  proprie¬ 
tary  rights  over  the  free  labourer.  For  instance, 

2  James  Mill,  op.  cit.,  p.  238. 

1  “If  the  price  of  labour  should  rise  so  high  that,  not¬ 
withstanding  the  increase  of  capital,  no  more  could  be  em¬ 
ployed,  I  should  say  that  such  increase  of  capital  would  be 
still  unproductively  consumed.** — Ricardo,  op.  cit.,  p.  163. 

4  “The  only  productive  consumption,  properly  so-called, 
is  the  consumption  or  destruction  of  wealth"  (he  alludes 
to  the  means  of  production)  “by  capitalists  with  a  view  to 
reproduction.  . . .  The  workman  ...  is  a  productive  con¬ 
sumer  to  the  person  who  employs  him,  and  to  the  State, 
but  not,  strictly  speaking,  to  himself.’’— Malthus,  Defini¬ 
tions,  etc.,  p.  30. 

1  Legal  fiction. 


284  CAPITAL 


down  to  1815,  the  emigration  of  mechanics  em- 

loyed  in  machine  making  was,  in  England,  for- 

idden,  under  grievous  pains  and  penalties. 

The  reproduction  of  the  working  class  carries 
with  it  the  accumulation  of  skill  that  is  handed 
down  from  one  generation  to  another.1  To  what 
extent  the  capitalist  reckons  the  existence  of 
such  a  skilled  class  among  the  factors  of  produc¬ 
tion  that  belong  to  him  by  right,  and  to  what 
extent  he  actually  regards  it  as  the  reality  of  his 
variable  capital,  is  seen  so  soon  as  a  crisis 
threatens  him  with  its  loss.  In  consequence  of 
the  Civil  War  in  the  United  States  and  of  the 
accompanying  cotton  famine,  the  majority  of 
the  cotton  operatives  in  Lancashire  were,  as  is 
well  known,  thrown  out  of  work.  Both  from  the 
working  class  itself,  and  from  other  ranks  of  so¬ 
ciety,  there  arose  a  cry  for  State  aid,  or  for  vol¬ 
untary  national  subscriptions,  in  order  to  en¬ 
able  the  “superfluous* *  hands  to  emigrate  to  the 
British  colonies  or  to  the  United  States.  There¬ 
upon,  The  Times  published  on  the  24th  March, 
1863,  a  letter  from  Edmund  Potter,  a  former 
president  of  the  Manchester  Chamber  of  Com¬ 
merce.  This  letter  was  rightly  called  in  the 
House  of  Commons  the  manufacturers*  mani¬ 
festo.2 * *  We  cull  here  a  few  characteristic  pas¬ 
sages,  in  which  the  proprietary  rights  of  capital 
over  labour  power  are  unblushingly  asserted. 

“He**  (the  man  out  of  work)  “may  be  told 
the  supply  of  cotton  workers  is  too  large  . .  • 
and  . . .  must ...  in  fact  be  reduced  by  a  third, 
perhaps,  and  that  then  there  will  be  a  healthy 
demand  for  the  remaining  two-thirds  . . .  Pub¬ 
lic  opinion  . . .  urges  emigration. . . .  The  mas¬ 
ter  cannot  willingly  sec  his  labour  supply  being 
removed;  he  may  think,  and  perhaps  justly, 
that  it  is  both  wrong  and  unsound. . . .  But  if 
the  public  funds  are  to  be  devoted  to  assist  emi¬ 
gration,  he  has  a  right  to  be  heard,  and  perhaps 
to  protest.”  Mr.  Potter  then  shows  how  useful 
the  cotton  trade  is,  how  the  “trade  has  un¬ 
doubtedly  drawn  the  surplus  population  from 
Ireland  and  from  the  agricultural  districts,’* 
how  immense  is  its  extent,  how  in  the  year  i860 
it  yielded  five- thirteenths  of  the  total  ^nglish 
exports,  how,  after  a  few  years,  it  will  again  ex¬ 
pand  by  the  extension  of  the  market,  particu¬ 

1  "The  only  thing  of  which  one  can  say  that  it  is  stored 
up  and  prepared  beforehand  is  the  skill  of  the  labourer. 
. . .  The  accumulation  and  storage  of  skilled  labour,  that 
most  important  operation,  is,  as  regards  the  great  mass  of 
labourers,  accomplished  without  any  capital  whatever." 
— Thomas  Hodgskin,  Labour  Defended)  etc.,  p.  13. 

2  "That  letter  might  be  looked  upon  as  the  manifesto  of 

the  manufacturers."— Ferrand,  Motion  on  the  Cotton 

Famine,  House  of  Commons,  37th  April,  1 863. 


larly  of  the  Indian  market,  and  by  calling  forth 
a  plentiful  supply  of  cotton  at  6d.  per  pound.  He 
then  continues:  “Some  time . . .  one,  two,  or 
three  years,  it  may  be,  will  produce  the  quan¬ 
tity.  . . .  question  I  would  put  then  is  this:  Is 
the  trade  worth  retaining?  Is  it  worth  while 
to  keep  the  machinery”  (he  means  the  living 
labour  machines)  “in  order,  and  is  it  not  the 
greatest  folly  to  think  of  parting  with  that?  I 
think  it  is.  I  allow  that  the  workers  are  not  a 
property,  not  the  property  of  Lancashire  and 
the  masters;  but  they  are  the  strength  of  both; 
they  are  the  mental  and  trained  power  which 
cannot  be  replaced  for  a  generation;  the  mere 
machinery  which  they  work  might  much  of  it 
be  beneficially  replaced,  nay  improved,  in  a 
twelvemonth.8  Encourage  or  allow  (!)  the  work¬ 
ing  power  to  emigrate,  and  what  of  the  capital¬ 
ist?  . . .  Take  away  the  cream  of  the  workers, 
and  fixed  capital  will  depreciate  in  a  great  de¬ 
gree,  and  the  floating  will  not  subject  itself  to  a 
struggle  with  the  short  supply  of  inferior  la¬ 
bour.  . . .  We  are  told  the  workers  wish  it”  (emi¬ 
gration).  “Very  natural  it  is  that  they  should 
do  so. . . .  Reduce,  compress  the  cotton  trade 
by  taking  away  its  working  power  and  reducing 
their  wages  expenditure,  say  one-fifth,  or  five 
millions,  and  what  then  would  happen  to  the 
class  above,  the  small  shopkeepers;  and  what  of 
the  rents,  the  cottage  rents. .  ^  Trace  out  the 
effects  upward  to  the  small  farmer,  the  better 
householder,  and  . . .  the  landowner,  and  say  if 
there  could  be  any  suggestion  more  suicidal  to 
all  classes  of  the  country  than  by  enfeebling  a 
nation  by  exporting  the  best  of  its  manufactur¬ 
ing  population,  and  destroying  the  value  of 
some  of  its  most  productive  capital  and  enrich¬ 
ment.  ...  I  advise  a  loan  (of  five  or  six  millions 
sterling), . . .  extending  it  may  be  over  two  or 
three  years,  administered  by  special  commis¬ 
sioners  added  to  the  Boards  of  Guardians  in  the 
cotton  districts,  under  special  legislative  regu¬ 
lations,  enforcing  some  occupation  or  labour,  as 
*  It  will  not  be  forgotten  that  this  same  capital  sings 
quite  another  song  under  ordinary  circumstances  when 
there  is  a  question  of  reducing  wages.  Then  the  masters 
exclaim  with  one  voice:  "The  factory  operatives  should 
keep  in  wholesome  remembrance  the  fact  that  theirs  is 
really  a  low  species  of  skilled  labour;  and  diat  there  is  none 
which  is  more  easily  acquired,  or  of  its  quality  more  amply 
remunerated,  or  which,  by  a  short  training  of  the  least  ex¬ 
pert,  can  be  more  quickly,  as  well  as  abundantly,  acquired. 
. . .  The  master’s  machinery”  (which  we  Mow  learn  can  be 
replaced  with  advantage  in  12  months)  "really  plays  a  far 
more  important  part  in  the  business  of  production  than 
the  labour  and  skill  of  the  operative"  (who  cannot  now  be 
replaced  tinder  30  years),  "which  six  months’  education 
can  teach,  and  a  common  labourer  can  learn.’’— See  above, 
p.  189. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


a  means  of  keeping  up  at  least  the  moral  stand¬ 
ard  of  the  recipients  of  the  loan. . . .  Can  any¬ 
thing  be  worse  for  landowners  or  masters  than 
parting  with  the  best  of  the  workers,  and  de¬ 
moralizing  and  disappointing  the  rest  by  an  ex¬ 
tended  depletive  emigration,  a  depletion  of  cap¬ 
ital  and  value  in  an  entire  province ?” 

Potter,  the  chosen  mouthpiece  of  the  manu¬ 
facturers,  distinguishes  two  sorts  of  “machin¬ 
ery,”  each  of  which  belongs  to  the  capitalist, 
and  of  which  one  stands  in  his  factory,  the  other 
at  night  and  on  Sundays  is  housed  outside  the 
factory,  in  cottages.  The  one  is  inanimate,  the 
other  living.  The  inanimate  machinery  not  only 
wears  out  and  depreciates  from  day  to  day,  but 
a  great  part  of  it  becomes  so  quickly  superannu¬ 
ated  by  constant  technical  progress  that  it  can 
be  replaced  with  advantage  by  new  machinery 
after  a  few  months.  The  living  machinery,  on 
the  contrary,  gets  better  the  longer  it  lasts,  and 
in  proportion  as  the  skill,  handed  from  one  gen¬ 
eration  to  another,  accumulates.  The  Times  an¬ 
swered  the  cotton  lord  as  follows: 

“Mr.  Edmund  Potter  is  so  impressed  with 
the  exceptional  and  supreme  importance  of  the 
cotton  masters  that,  in  order  to  preserve  this 
class  and  perpetuate  their  profession,  he  would 
keep  half  a  million  of  the  labouring  class  con¬ 
fined  in  a  great  moral  workhouse  against  their 
will.  ‘Is  the  trade  worth  retaining?9  asks  Mr. 
Potter.  ‘Certainly  by  all  honest  means  it  is,*  we 
answer.  ‘Is  it  worth  while  keeping  the  machin¬ 
ery  in  order?'  again  asks  Mr.  Potter.  Here  we 
hesitate.  By  the  ‘machinery'  Mr.  Potter  means 
the  human  machinery,  for  he  goes  on  to  protest 
that  he  does  not  mean  to  use  them  as  an  abso¬ 
lute  property.  We  must  confess  that  we  do  not 
think  it  ‘worth  while,'  or  even  possible,  to  keep 
the  human  machinery  in  order— that  is  to  shut 
it  up  and  keep  it  oiled  till  it  is  wanted.  Human 
machinery  wiilrust  under  inaction,  oil  and  rub 
it  as  you  may.  Moreover,  the  human  machinery 
will,  as  we  have  just  seen,  get  the  steam  up  of  its 
own  accord,  and  burst  or  run  amuck  in  our  great 
towns.  It  might,  as  Mr.  Potter  says,  require 
some  time  to  reproduce  the  workers,  but,  hav¬ 
ing  machinists  and  capitalists  at  hand,  we  could 
always  find  thrifty,  hard,  industrious  men 
wherewith  to  improvise  more  master  manufac¬ 
turers  than  we  can  ever  want.  Mr.  Potter  talks 
of  the  trade  reviving  ‘in  one,  two,  or  three 
years,'  and  he  asks  us  not  'to  encourage  or  allow 
(!)  the  working  power  to  emigrate.'  He  says 
that  it  is  very  natural  the  workers  should  wish 
to  emigrate;  but  he  thinks  that  in  spite  of  their 
desire,  the  nation  ought  to  keep  this  half  million 


285 

of  workers  with  their  700,000  dependents,  shut 
up  in  the  cotton  districts;  and,  as  a  necessary 
consequence,  he  must  of  course  think  that  the 
nation  ought  to  keep  down  their  discontent  by 
force,  and  sustain  them  by  alms— and  upon  the 
chance  that  the  cotton  masters  may  some  day 
want  them.  .  .  .  The  time  is  come  when  the 
great  public  opinion  of  these  islands  must  op¬ 
erate  to  save  this  ‘working  power'  from  those 
who  would  deal  with  it  as  they  would  deal  with 
iron,  and  coal,  and  cotton.” 

The  Times 9  article  was  only  a  jeu  d' esprit.1 
The  “great  public  opinion”  was,  in  fact,  of  Mr. 
Potter's  opinion,  that  the  factory  operatives  are 
part  of  the  movable  fittings  of  a  factory.  Their 
emigration  was  prevented.*  They  were  locked 
up  in  that  “moral  workhouse,”  the  cotton  dis¬ 
tricts,  and  they  form,  as  before,  “the  strength” 
of  the  cotton  manufacturers  of  Lancashire. 

Capitalist  production,  therefore,  of  itself  re¬ 
produces  the  separation  between  labour  power 
and  the  means  of  labour.  It  thereby  reproduces 
and  perpetuates  the  condition  for  exploiting  the 
labourer.  It  incessantly  forces  him  to  sell  his  la¬ 
bour  power  in  order  to  live,  and  enables  the  cap¬ 
italist  to  purchase  labour  power  in  order  that 
he  may  enrich  himself.3  It  is  no  longer  a  mere 
accident  that  capitalist  and  labourer  confront 
each  other  in  the  market  as  buyer  and  seller.  It 
is  the  process  itself  that  incessantly  hurls  back 
the  labourer  on  to  the  market  as  a  vendor  of  his 
labour  power,  and  that  incessantly  converts  his 
own  product  into  a  means  by  which  another 
man  can  purchase  him.  In  reality,  the  labourer 
belongs  to  capital  before  he  has  sold  himself 
to  capital.  His  economic  bondage4  is  both 

1  Intellectual  exercise. 

*  Parliament  did  not  vote  a  single  farthing  in  aid  of 
emigration,  but  simply  passed  some  Acts  empowering  the 
municipal  corporations  to  keep  the  operatives  in  a  half- 
starved  state,  i.e.,  to  exploit  them  at  less  than  the  normal 
wages.  On  the  other  hand,  when  three  years  later  the  cattle 
disease  broke  out,  Parliament  broke  wildly  through  its 
usages  and  voted,  straight  off,  millions  for  indemnifying 
the  millionaire  landlords,  whose  farmers  in  any  event  came 
off  without  loss,  owing  to  the  rise  in  the  price  of  meat.  The 
bulMike  bellow  of  the  landed  proprietors  at  the  opening  of 
Parliament,  in  1866,  showed  that  a  man  can  worship  the 
cow  Sabala  without  being  a  Hindu,  and  can  change  him¬ 
self  into  an  ox  without  being  a  Jupiter. 

*  “The  worker  asked  for  subsistence  in  order  to  live;  the 
boss  asked  for  labour  in  order  to  make  profit.”— Sismondi, 
op.  cit,y  p.  91. 

4  A  boorishly  clumsy  form  of  this  bondage  exists  in  the 
county  of  Durham.  This  is  one  of  the  few  counties  in  which 
circumstances  do  not  secure  to  the  farmer  undisputed  pro¬ 
prietary  rights  over  the  agricultural  labourer.  The  mining 
industry  allows  the  latter  some  choice.  In  this  county,  the 
farmer,  contrary  to  the  custom  elsewhere,  rents  only  such 
farms  as  have  on  them  labourers*  cottages.  The  rent  of  the 


CAPITAL 


286 

brought  about  and  concealed  by  the  periodic 
sale  of  himself,  by  his  change  of  masters,  and 
by  the  oscillations  in  the  market  price  of 
labour  power.1 

Capitalist  production,  therefore,  under  its  as¬ 
pect  of  a  continuous  connected  process,  of  a 
process  of  reproduction,  produces  not  only  com¬ 
modities,  not  only  surplus  value,  but  it  also  pro¬ 
duces  and  reproduces  the  capitalist  relation;  on 
the  one  side  the  capitalist,  on  the  other  the 
wage  labourer.* 


CHAPTER  XXIV.  CONVERSION  OF 
SURPLUS  VALUE  INTO  CAPITAL 


I.  Capitalist  Production  on  a  progressively  in¬ 
creasing  Scale .  Transition  of  the  Laws  of  Prop¬ 
erty  that  characterize  Production  of  Commodi¬ 
ties  into  Laws  of  Capitalist  Appropriation 
Hitherto  we  have  investigated  how  surplus 
value  emanates  from  capital;  we  have  now  to 
see  how  capital  arises  from  surplus  value.  Em¬ 
ploying  surplus  value  as  capital,  reconverting 
it  into  capital,  is  called  accumulation  of  capital? 

cottage  is  a  part  of  the  wages.  These  cottages  are  known  as 
“hinds'  houses."  They  are  let  to  the  labourers  in  consider¬ 
ation  of  certain  feudal  services,  under  a  contract  called, 
“bondage,"  which,  amongst  other  things,  binds  the  la¬ 
bourer,  during  the  time  he  is  employed  elsewhere,  to  leave 
some  one,  say  his  daughter,  etc.,  to  supply  his  place.  The 
labourer  himself  is  called  a  "bondsman."  The  relationship 
here  set  up  also  shows  how  individual  consumption  by  the 
labourer  becomes  consumption  on  behalf  of  capital’— or 
productive  consumption — from  quite  a  new  point  of  view: 
“It  is  curious  to  observe  that  the  very  dung  of  the  hind 
and  bondsman  is  the  perquisite  of  the  calculating  lord . . . 
and  the  lord  will  allow  no  privy  but  his  own  to  exist  in  the 
neighbourhood,  and  will  rather  give  a  bit  of  manure  here 
and  there  for  a  garden  than  bate  any  part  of  his  seigneurial 
right." — Public  Health ,  Seventh  Report ,  1864,  p.  188. 

1  It  will  not  be  forgotten  that,  with  respect  to  the  labour 
of  children,  etc.,  even  the  formality  of  a  voluntary  sale 
disappears. 

*  “Capital  presupposes  wage  labour,  and  wage  labour 
presupposes  capital.  One  is  a  necessary  condition  to  the 
existence  of  the  other;  they  mutually  call  each  other  into 
existence.  Does  an  operative  in  a  cotton  factory  produce 
nothing  but  cotton  goods?  No,  he  produces  capital.  He 
produces  values  that  give  fresh  command  over  his  labour, 
and  that,  by  means  of  such  command,  create  fresh  values." 
(Karl  Marx,  Lohnarbeit  und  Kapital ,  in  the  Neue  Rhein - 
ische  Zeitung,  No.  166, 7th  April,  1849.)  The  articles  pub¬ 
lished  under  the  above  title  in  the  Neue  Rheinische  Zeitung 
are  parts  of  some  lectures  given  by  me  on  that  subject,  in 
1847,  in  the  German  Arbeiter-Verein  [workers’  society]  at 
Brussels,  the  publication  of  which  was  interrupted  by  the 
revolution  of  February. 

1  “Accumulation  of  capital;  the  employment  of  a  por¬ 
tion  of  revenue  as  capital."  (Malthus,  Definitions ,  etc., 
Cazenove  edition,  p.  1 1 .)  “Conversion  of  revenue  into  capi- 


First  let  us  consider  this  transaction  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  individual  capitalist.  Sup¬ 
pose  a  spinner  to  have  advanced  a  capital  of 
£10,000,  of  which  four-fifths  (£8000)  are  laid 
out  in  cotton,  machinery,  etc.,  and  one-fifth 
(£2000)  in  wages.  Let  him  produce  240,000 
pounds  of  yarn  annually,  having  a  value  of 
£12,000.  The  rate  of  surplus  value  being  100%, 
the  surplus  value  lies  in  the  surplus  or  net  prod¬ 
uct  of  40,000  pounds  of  yarn,  one-sixth  of  the 
gross  product,  with  a  value  of  £2000  which  will 
be  realized  by  a  sale.  £2000  is  £2000.  We  can 
neither  see  nor  smell  in  this  sum  of  money  a 
trace  of  surplus  value.  When  we  know  that  a 
given  value  is  surplus  value,  we  know  how  its 
owner  came  by  it;  but  that  does  not  alter  the 
nature  either  of  value  or  of  money. 

In  order  to  convert  this  additional  sum  of 
£2000  into  capital,  the  master  spinner  will,  all 
circumstances  remaining  as  before,  advance 
four-fifths  of  it  (£1600)  in  the  purchase  of  cot¬ 
ton,  etc.,  and  one-fifth  (£400)  in  the  purchase 
of  additional  spinners,  who  will  find  in  the  mar¬ 
ket  the  necessaries  of  life  whose  value  the  mas¬ 
ter  has  advanced  to  them.  Then  the  new  capital 
of  £2000  functions  in  the  spinning-mill,  and 
brings  in,  in  its  turn,  a  surplus  value  of  £400. 

The  capital  value  was  originally  advanced  in 
the  money  form.  The  surplus  value  on  the  con¬ 
trary  is  originally  the  value  of  a  definite  portion 
of  the  gross  product.  If  this  gTBss  product  be 
sold,  converted  into  money,  the  capital  value 
regains  its  original  form.  From  this  moment, 
the  capital  value  and  the  surplus  value  are  both 
of  them  sums  of  money,  and  their  reconversion 
into  capital  takes  place  In  precisely  the  same 
way.  The  one,  as  well  as  the  other,  is  laid  out  by 
the  capitalist  in  the  purchase  of  commodities 
that  place  him  in  a  position  to  begin  afresh  the 
fabrication  of  his  goods,  and  this  time,  on  an 
extended  scale.  But  in  order  to  be  able  to  buy 
those  commodities,  he  must  find  them  ready  in 
the  market. 

His  own  yarns  circulate,  only  because  he 
brings  his  annual  product  to  market,  as  all  oth¬ 
er  capitalists  likewise  do  with  their  commodi¬ 
ties.  But  these  commodities,  before  coming  to 
market,  were  part  of  the  general  annual  prod¬ 
uct,  part  of  the  total  mass  of  objects  of  every 
kind,  into  which  the  sum  of  the  individual  capi¬ 
tals  (i.e.,  the  total  capital  of  society)  had  been 
converted  in  the  course  of  the  year,  and  of 
which  each  capitalist  had  in  hand  only  an  ali¬ 
quot  part.  The  transactions  in  the  market  ef- 

tal."  (Malthus,  Principles  of  Political  Economy ,  second 
edition,  London,  1836,  p.  319.) 


CONVERSION  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE  INTO  CAPITAL 


fectuate  only  the  interchange  of  the  individual 
components  of  this  annual  product,  transfer 
them  from  one  hand  to  another,  but  can  neither 
augment  the  total  annual  production,  nor  alter 
the  nature  of  the  objects  produced.  Hence  the 
use  that  can  be  made  of  the  total  annual  prod¬ 
uct  depends  entirely  upon  its  own  composition, 
but  in  no  way  upon  circulation. 

The  annual  production  must  in  the  first  place 
furnish  all  those  objects  (use-values)  from 
which  the  material  components  of  capital,  used 
up  in  the  course  of  the  year,  have  to  be  replaced. 
Deducting  these,  there  remains  the  net  or  sur¬ 
plus  product,  in  which  the  surplus  value  lies. 
And  of  what  does  this  surplus  product  consist? 
Only  of  things  destined  to  satisfy  the  wants  and 
desires  of  the  capitalist  class,  things  which,  con¬ 
sequently,  enter  into  the  consumption  fund  of 
the  capitalists?  Were  that  the  case,  the  cup  of 
surplus  value  would  be  drained  to  the  very 
dregs,  and  nothing  but  simple  reproduction 
would  ever  take  place. 

To  accumulate  it  is  necessary  to  convert  a 
portion  of  the  ourpjus  product  into  capital.  But 
we  cannot,  except  by  a  miracle,  convert  into 
capital  anything  but  such  articles  as  can  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  labour  process  (i.e.,  means  of  pro¬ 
duction),  and  such  further  articles  as  are  suit¬ 
able  for  the  sustenance  of  the  labourer  (i.e., 
means  of  subsistence).  Consequently,  a  part  of 
the  annual  surplus  labour  must  have  been  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  production  of  additional  means  of 
production  and  subsistence,  over  and  above  the 
quantity  of  these  things  required  to  replace  the 
capital  advanced.  In  one  word,  surplus  value  is 
convertible  into  capital  solely  because  the  sur¬ 
plus  product,  whose  value  it  is,  already  com¬ 
prises  the  material  elements  of  new  capital.1 

Now  in  order  to  allow  these  elements  actual¬ 
ly  to  function  as  capital,  the  capitalist  class  re¬ 
quires  additional  labour.  If  the  exploitation  of 
the  labourers  already  employed  does  not  in¬ 
crease,  either  extensively  or  intensively,  then 
additional  labour  power  must  be  found.  For  this 
the  mechanism  of  capitalist  production  pro¬ 
vides  beforehand,  by  converting  the  working 
class  into  a  class  dependent  on  wages,  a  class 
whose  ordinary  wages  suffice,  not  only  for  its 
maintenance,  but  for  its  increase.  It  is  only  nec- 

1  We  here  take  no  account  of  export  trade,  by  means  of 
which  a  nation  can  change  articles  of  luxury  either  into 
means  of  production  or  means  of  subsistence,  and  vice 
versa .  In  order  to  examine  the  object  of  our  investigation 
in  its  integrity,  free  from  all  disturbing  subsidiary  circum¬ 
stances,  we  must  treat  the  whole  world  as  one  nation,  and 
assume  that  capitalist  production  is  everywhere  estab¬ 
lished  and  has  possessed  itself  of  every  branch  of  industry. 


287 

essary  for  capital  to  incorporate  this  additional 
labour  power,  annually  supplied  by  the  work¬ 
ing  class  in  the  shape  of  labourers  of  all  ages, 
with  the  surplus  means  of  production  com¬ 
prised  in  the  annual  produce,  and  the  conver¬ 
sion  of  surplus  value  into  capital  is  complete. 
From  a  concrete  point  of  view,  accumulation 
resolves  itself  into  the  reproduction  of  capital 
on  a  progressively  increasing  scale.  The  circle 
in  which  simple  reproduction  moves,  alters  its 
form,  and,  to  use  Sismondi’s  expression,  changes 
into  a  spiral.2 

Let  us  now  return  to  our  illustration.  It  is  the 
old  story:  Abraham  begat  Isaac,  Isaac  begat 
Jacob,  and  so  on.  The  original  capital  of 
£10,000  brings  in  a  surplus  value  of  £2000, 
which  is  capitalized.  The  new  capital  of  £2000 
brings  in  a  surplus  value  of  £400,  and  this,  too, 
is  capitalized,  converted  into  a  second  addition¬ 
al  capital,  which  in  its  turn  produces  a  further 
surplus  value  bf  £80.  And  so  the  ball  rolls  on. 

We  here  leave  out  of  consideration  the  por¬ 
tion  of  the  surplus  value  consumed  by  the  capi¬ 
talist.  Just  as  little  does  it  concern  us,  for  the 
moment,  whether  the  additional  capital  is 
joined  on  to  the  original  capital,  or  is  separated 
from  it  to  function  independently;  whether  the 
same  capitalist,  who  accumulated  it,  employs 
it,  or  whether  he  hands  it  over  to  another.  This 
only  we  must  not  forget,  that  by  the  side  of 
the  newly-formed  capital,  the  original  capital 
continues  to  reproduce  itself,  and  to  produce 
surplus  value,  and  that  this  is  also  true  of  all 
accumulated  capital  and  the  additional  capital 
engendered  by  it. 

The  original  capital  was  formed  by  the  ad¬ 
vance  of  £10,000.  How  did  the  owner  become 
possessed  of  it?  "By  his  own  labour  and  that  of 
his  forefathers/'  answer  unanimously  the 
spokesmen  of  political  economy.8  And,  in  fact, 
their  supposition  appears  the  only  one  conso¬ 
nant  with  the  laws  of  the  production  of  com¬ 
modities. 

But  it  is  quite  otherwise  with  regard  to  the 
additional  capital  of  £2000.  How  that  origin¬ 
ated  we  know  perfectly  well.  There  is  not  one 
single  atom  of  its  value  that  does  not  owe  its 
existence  to  unpaid  labour.  The  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  with  which  the  additional  labour  pow¬ 
er  is  incorporated,  as  well  as  the  necessaries 
with  which  the  labourers  are  sustained,  are 

*  Sismondi's  analysis  of  accumulation  suffers  from  the 
great  defect  that  he  contents  himself  to  too  great  an  extent 
with  the  phrase  “conversion  of  revenue  into  capital/’  with¬ 
out  fathoming  the  material  conditions  of  this  operation. 

*  “The  original  labour  to  which  capital  owes  its  birth/* 
— Sismondi,  op.  cit .,  Paris  edition,  Vol.  I,  p.  109. 


CAPITAL 


288 

nothing  but  component  parts  of  the  surplus 
product  of  the  tribute  annually  exacted  from 
the  working  class  by  the  capitalist  class. 
Though  the  latter  with  a  portion  of  that  tribute 
purchases  the  additional  labour  power  even  at 
its  full  price,  so  that  equivalent  is  exchanged 
for  equivalent,  yet  the  transaction  is  for  all  that 
only  the  old  dodge  of  every  conqueror  who  buys 
commodities  from  the  conquered  with  the  mon¬ 
ey  he  has  robbed  them  of. 

If  the  additional  capital  employs  the  person 
who  produced  it,  this  producer  must  not  only 
continue  to  augment  the  value  of  the  original 
capital,  but  must  buy  back  the  fruits  of  his  pre¬ 
vious  labour  with  more  labour  than  they  cost. 
When  viewed  as  a  transaction  between  the  cap¬ 
italist  class  and  the  working  class,  it  makes  no 
difference  that  additional  labourers  are  em¬ 
ployed  by  means  of  the  unpaid  labour  of  the 
previously  employed  labourers.  The  capitalist 
may  even  convert  the  additional  capital  into  a 
machine  that  throws  the  producers  of  that  cap¬ 
ital  out  of  work,  and  that  replaces  them  by  a 
few  children.  In  every  case  the  working  class 
creates  by  the  surplus  labour  of  one  year  the 
capital  destined  to  employ  additional  labour  in 
the  following  year.1  And  this  is  what  is  called 
creating  capital  out  of  capital. 

The  accumulation  of  the  first  additional  cap¬ 
ital  of  £2000  presupposes  a  value  of  £  10,000  be¬ 
longing  to  the  capitalist  by  virtue  of  his  “prim¬ 
itive  labour,*’  and  advanced  by  him.  The  sec¬ 
ond  additional  capital  of  £400  presupposes,  on 
the  contrary,  only  the  previous  accumulation 
of  the  £2000,  of  which  the  £400  is  the  surplus 
value  capitalized.  The  ownership  of  past  un¬ 
paid  labour  is  thenceforth  the  sole  condition  for 
the  appropriation  of  living  unpaid  labour  on  a 
constantly  increasing  scale.  The  more  the  capi¬ 
talist  has  accumulated,  the  more  is  he  able  to 
accumulate. 

In  so  far  as  the  surplus  value,  of  which  the 
additional  capital  of  No.  1  consists,  is  the  result 
of  the  purchase  of  labour  power  with  part  of  the 
original  capital,  a  purchase  that  conformed  to 
the  laws  of  the  exchange  of  commodities,  and 
that,  from  a  legal  standpoint,  presupposes 
nothing  beyond  the  free  disposal,  on  the  part  of 
the  labourer,  of  his  own  capacities,  and  on  the 
part  of  the  owner  of  money  or  commodities,  of 
the  values  that  belong  to  him;  in  so  far  as  the 
additional  capital  of  No.  2,  etc.,  is  the  mere  re¬ 
sult  of  No.  1,  and,  therefore,  a  consequence  of 

1  “Labour  creates  capital  before  capital  employs  labour.*’ 
— E.  G.  Wakefield,  England  and  America^  London,  1833, 
VoLILp.  11a 


the  above  conditions;  in  so  far  as  each  single 
transaction  invariably  conforms  to  the  laws  of 
the  exchange  of  commodities,  the  capitalist 
buying  labour  power,  the  labourer  selling  it, 
and  we  will  assume  at  its  real  value;  in  so  far  as 
all  this  is  true,  it  is  evident  that  the  laws  of  ap¬ 
propriation  or  of  private  property,  laws  that 
are  based  on  the  production  and  circulation  of 
commodities,  become  by  their  own  inner  and 
inexorable  dialectic  changed  into  their  very  op¬ 
posite.  The  exchange  of  equivalents,  the  origi¬ 
nal  operation  with  which  we  started,  has  now 
become  turned  round  in  such  a  way  that  there 
is  only  an  apparent  exchange.  This  is  owing 
to  the  fact,  first,  that  the  capital  which  is  ex¬ 
changed  for  labour  power  is  itself  but  a  portion 
of  the  product  of  others*  labour  appropriated 
without  an  equivalent;  and,  secondly,  that  this 
capital  must  not  only  be  replaced  by  its  pro¬ 
ducer,  but  replaced  together  with  an  added  sur¬ 
plus.  The  relation  of  exchange  subsisting  be¬ 
tween  capitalist  and  labourer  becomes  a  mere 
semblance  appertaining  to  the  process  of  circu¬ 
lation,  a  mere  form,  foreign  to  the  real  nature 
of  the  transaction,  and  only  mystifying  it.  The 
ever  repeated  purchase  and  sale  of  labour  pow¬ 
er  is  now  the  mere  form ;  what  really  takes  place 
is  this — the  capitalist  again  and  again  appro¬ 
priates,  without  equivalent,  a  portion  of  the  pre¬ 
viously  materialized  labour  of  others,  and  ex¬ 
changes  it  for  a  greater  quantity  of  living  la¬ 
bour.  At  first  the  rights  of  property  seemed  to 
us  to  be  based  on  a  man’s  own  labour.  At  least, 
some  such  assumption  was  necessary  since  only 
commodity  owners  with  equal  rights  confront¬ 
ed  each  other,  and  the  sole  means  by  which  a 
man  could  become  possessed  of  the  commodi¬ 
ties  of  others  was  by  alienating  his  own  com¬ 
modities;  and  these  could  be  replaced  by  labour 
alone.  Now,  however,  property  turns  out  to  be 
the  right,  on  the  part  of  the  capitalist,  to  ap¬ 
propriate  the  unpaid  labour  of  others  or  its 
product,  and  to  be  the  impossibility,  on  the  part 
of  the  labourer,  of  appropriating  his  own  prod¬ 
uct.  The  separation  of  property  from  labour  has 
become  the  necessary  consequencaof  a  law  that 
apparently  originated  in  their  identity.2 

Much  as  the  capitalist  mode  of  appropria¬ 
tion  may  appear  thus  to  run  counter  to  the  basic 
laws  of  commodity  production,  it  actually 

*  The  property  of  the  capitalist  in  the  pvoduct  of  the  la¬ 
bour  of  others  “is  a  strict  consequence  of  the  law  of  appro¬ 
priation,  the  fundamental  principle  of  which  was,  on  the 
contrary,  the  exclusive  title  of  every  labourer  to  the  prod¬ 
uct  of  his  own  labour.'*  (Cherbuliez,  Rich*  oupauvre ,  Paris, 
1841, 9.  58.)  Here,  however,  the  dialectical  reversal  is  not 
properly  developed. 


CONVERSION  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE  INTO  CAPITAL 


arises  not  at  all  from  the  violation,  but  on  the 
contrary  from  the  application,  of,  those  laws. 
A  brief  reconsideration  of  the  sequence  of  de¬ 
velopmental  phases  which  find  their  culmina¬ 
tion  in  capitalist  accumulation  should  clarify 
this  point  once  more. 

First  we  have  seen  that  the  original  trans¬ 
formation  of  a  quantity  of  value  into  capital 
took  place  strictly  according  to  the  laws  of  ex¬ 
change.  One  of  the  contracting  parties  sells  his 
labour  power,  the  other  buys  it.  The  former  re¬ 
ceives  the  exchange  value  of  his  commodity, 
the  use- value  of  which— that  is,  labour— passes 
into  the  possession  of  the  latter.  This  latter  now 
converts  means  of  production  belonging  to  him, 
into  a  new  product,  also  rightly  belonging  to 
him,  by  means  of  labour  which  likewise  is  his. 

The  value  of  this  product  includes,  in  the  first 
place,  the  value  of  the  new  means  of  produc¬ 
tion.  Useful  labour  cannot  consume  these 
means  of  production  without  transferring  their 
value  to  the  new  product.  However,  in  order  to 
be  saleable,  this  labour  power  must  be  capable 
of  supplying  useful  labour  in  that  branch  of  in¬ 
dustry  in  which  it  is  to  be  employed. 

The  value  of  the  new  product  further  in¬ 
cludes  the  equivalent  of  the  value  of  labour 
power,  plus  a  surplus  value.  This  is  so  because 
labour  power  sold  for  a  certain  period,  such  as  a 
day  or  a  week,  has  less  value  than  that  which 
its  use  creates  during  that  period.  Yet  the  la¬ 
bourer  has  received  the  exchange-value  of  his  la¬ 
bour  power,  having  thereby  given  upi  ts  use-val- 
ue,  just  as  in  any  other  case  of  sale  or  purchase. 

The  fact  that  this  particular  commodity,  la¬ 
bour  power,  possesses  the  peculiar  use-value  of 
supplying  labour,  that  is  to  say,  of  creating  val¬ 
ue,  cannot  affect  the  general  laws  of  commodity 
production.  If,  therefore,  the  quantity  of  value 
advanced  in  the  form  of  wages  is  not  merely 
reproduced  in  the  product,  but  is  indeed  in¬ 
creased  by  a  surplus  value,  this  does  not  stem 
from  any  undue  advantage  gained  over  the  sell¬ 
er,  who  after  all  has  received  the  value  of  his 
commodity,  but  solely  from  the  consumption 
of  this  commodity  by  the  buyer. 

The  law  of  exchange  demands  equality  only 
as  between  the  exchange  values  of  commodities 
traded  against  each  other.  It  requires,  however, 
from  the  very  beginning,  the  inequality  of  their 
values,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  their  use, 
which  only  begins  after  the  act  of  trading  has 
been  completed. 

Thus,  the  original  transformation  of  money 
into  capital  proceeds  in  strictest  accordance 
with  the  laws  of  commodity  production  as  well 


289 

as  with  the  property  rights  which  are  derived 
from  them.  Nevertheless,  it  has  the  following 
results: 

(1)  The  product  belongs  to  the  capitalist,  not 
to  the  labourer. 

(2)  The  value  of  the  product  includes  over  and 
above  the  value  of  the  advanced  capital  a  sur¬ 
plus  value,  which  has  cost  the  labourer  labour, 
while  it  has  cost  the  capitalist  nothing,  and  yet 
is  the  latter’s  rightful  property. 

(3)  The  labourer  has  reproduced  his  labour 
power  which  he  is  free  to  sell  again,  provided 
he  finds  a  buyer. 

Simple  reproduction  is  but  the  periodic  repe¬ 
tition  of  this  first  operation.  Every  time  it  takes 
place,  money  is  transformed  anew  into  capital. 
The  general  law  is  not  violated;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  it  finds  the  proper  occasion  to  manifest 
itself  continuously.  “Several  successive  ex¬ 
changes  have  merely  made  of  the  last  a  repre¬ 
sentative  of  the  first.”1 

Nevertheless,  we  have  seen  that  the  process 
of  simple  reproduction  suffices  to  imbue  this 
first  operation — in  so  far  as  it  was  considered 
as  an  isolated  transaction — with  a  totally  dif¬ 
ferent  character.  “Among  those  who  share  in 
the  national  income,  some”  (the  labourers)  “ac¬ 
quire  every  year  a  new  title  to  it  by  new  labour, 
while  others”  (the  capitalists)  “have  previously 
acquired  a  permanent  title  to  it  by  primitive 
work.”2  The  field  of  labour  is  evidently  not  the 
only  one  in  which  primogeniture  works  miracles. 

Nor  docs  it  make  any  difference  if  simple  re¬ 
production  is  replaced  by  reproduction  on  an 
expanded  scale,  that  is  by  accumulation.  In  the 
first  case,  the  capitalist  squanders  the  entire 
surplus  value;  in  the  second  he  demonstrates 
his  civic  virtue  by  consuming  only  a  portion  of 
it  and  converting  the  remainder  into  money. 

The  surplus  value  is  his.  It  never  has  be¬ 
longed  to  anybody  else.  If  he  advances  it  for 
production,  such  advances  are  made  out  of  his 
own  funds,  exactly  as  on  the  day  when  he  first 
entered  the  market.  The  fact  that  these  funds 
now  originate  in  the  unpaid  labour  of  his  la¬ 
bourers  makes  no  difference  whatsoever.  If  la¬ 
bourer  B  is  employed  with  the  surplus  value 
created  by  labourer  A>  it  still  remains  true,  first, 
that  A  created  this  surplus  value  without  hav¬ 
ing  been  cheated  out  of  one  farthing  of  the  just 
price  of  his  commodity,  and,  second,  that  this 
transaction  is  none  of  B9 s  concern.  What  B  de¬ 
mands— and  rightly  so— is  to  be  paid  the  value 
of  his  labour  power  by  the  employer.  “Both 
sides  have  gained :  the  labourer  because  he  was 

1  Sismondi,  op.  cit.%  p.  7a  *  Ibid.y  p.  1 1  z. 


290  CAPITAL 


advanced  the  fruit  of  his  labour”  (read,  the  un¬ 
paid  labour  of  other  labourers)  “before  this  la¬ 
bour  was  performed”  (read,  before  his  own  had 
borne  fruit);  “the  master  because  the  labour  of 
this  labourer  was  worth  more  than  his  wages” 
(read,  produced  more  value  than  that  of  his 
wages)1. 

To  be  sure,  the  matter  takes  on  an  entirely 
different  aspect  when  we  observe  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction  in  the  steady  stream  of  its  renewal, 
looking  upon  the  capitalist  class  as  a  whole  con¬ 
fronted  by  the  working  class  as  a  whole,  and  not 
at  the  individual  capitalist  and  the  individual 
labourer.  But  that  would  be  to  use  a  yardstick 
utterly  inapplicable  to  the  sphere  of  commodity 
production. 

In  the  production  of  commodities,  only  sell¬ 
ers  and  buyers  confront  each  other  independ¬ 
ently.  Their  mutual  relations  terminate  with 
the  contract  concluded  between  them.  If  the 
transaction  is  repeated,  this  is  done  by  virtue 
of  a  new  contract,  which  has  nothing  to  do  with 
the  first;  the  same  seller  and  the  same  buyer  will 
be  brought  together  only  accidentally. 

Hence,  if  we  want  to  judge  commodity  pro¬ 
duction  or  one  of  its  phases  according  to  its  own 
economic  laws,  we  must  consider  each  act  of 
exchange  by  itself,  unconnected  with  cither 
that  which  preceded  or  that  which  followed  it. 
And  since  sales  and  purchases  are  made  be-* 
tween  individuals  only,  it  would  not  be  permis¬ 
sible  to  seek  in  them  relationships  between  en¬ 
tire  social  classes. 

Through  however  long  a  series  of  periodical 
reproduction  and  previous  accumulation  it  may 
have  passed,  the  capital  functioning  today  re¬ 
tains  its  primal  virginity.  So  long  as  the  laws 
of  exchange  are  followed  in  each  act  of  exchange 
considered  individually,  the  mode  of  appropria¬ 
tion  may  be  revolutionized  without  touching 
property  rights  derived  from  commodity  pro¬ 
duction.  The  same  right  was  valid  at  a  time 
when  the  product  belonged  to  the  producer, 
who  could  only  enrich  himself  by  his  own  la¬ 
bour,  exchanging  equivalent  for  equivalent, 
and  is  still  valid  in  the  capitalist  period  in  which 
the  social  wealth  becomes  to  an  ever  increasing 
degree  the  property  of  those  who  are  in  a  posi¬ 
tion  to  appropriate  over  and  over  again  the  un¬ 
paid  labour  of  others. 

This  becomes  inevitable  when  labour  power 
is  freely  sold  by  the  labourer  himself  as  a  com¬ 
modity.  But  it  is  only  from  that  point  on  that 
commodity  production  becomes  universal,  and 

1  Ibid.,  p.  135. 


becomes  the  typical  form  of  production;  that 
every  product  is  produced  for  sale  from  the  out¬ 
set,  and  that  all  wealth  produced  has  to  pass 
through  circulation.  Commodity  production 
does  not  force  itself  upon  society  as  a  whole  until 
wage  labour  has  become  its  basis.  But  only  then 
does  it  unfold  all  its  hidden  potentialities.  To 
say  that  the  intrusion  of  wage  labour  falsifies 
commodity  production  is  to  say  that  commodi¬ 
ty  production  cannot  develop  without  being 
falsified.  In  the  very  measure  that  it  develops 
by  its  own  inherent  laws  into  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion,  to  that  same  measure  are  the  property 
laws  of  commodity  production  transformed  in¬ 
to  the  laws  of  capitalist  appropriation.12 

We  have  seen  that,  even  in  the  case  of  simple 
reproduction,  all  capital,  whatever  its  original 
source,  becomes  converted  into  accumulated 
capital,  capitalized  surplus  value.  But  in  the 
flood  of  production  all  the  capital  originally  ad¬ 
vanced  becomes  a  vanishing  quantity  ( magni - 
tudo  evanescent^  in  the  mathematical  sense) 
compared  with  the  directly  accumulated  capi¬ 
tal,  i.c.,  with  the  surplus  value  or  surplus  prod¬ 
uct  that  is  reconverted  into  capital,  whether  it 
function  in  the  hands  of  its  accumulator  or  in 
those  of  others.  Hence,  political  economy  de¬ 
scribes  capital  in  general  as  “accumulated 
wealth”  (converted  surplus  value  or  revenue), 
“that  is  employed  over  again  in  the  production 
of  surplus  value,”3  and  the  capitalist  as  “the 
owner  of  surplus  value.”4  It  is  merely  another 
way  of  expressing  the  same  thing  to  say  that  all 
existing  capital  is  accumulated  or  capitalized 
interest,  for  interest  is  a  mere  fragment  of  sur¬ 
plus  value.5 

2.  Erroneous  Conception  by  Political  Economy  of 

Reproduction  on  a  progressively  increasing 

Scale 

Before  we  further  investigate  accumulation 
or  the  reconversion  of  surplus  value  into  capi- 

*  Proudhon’s  ingenuity  here  is  wonderful1  He  wants  to 
abolish  capitalist  property  by  opposing  to  it— the  eternal 
property  laws  of  commodity  production. 

3  “Capital,  viz.,  accumulated  wealth  employed  with  a 
view  to  profit."  (Malthus,  op.  at.)  “Capital . . .  consists  of 
wealth  saved  from  revenue,  and  used  with  a  view  to 
profit.”  (R.  Jones,  An  Introductory  Lecture  on  Political 
Economy ,  London,  1833,  p.  16.) 

4  “The  possessors  of  surplus  produce  or  capital."—  The 
Source  and  Remedy  oj  the  National  Difficulties ,  a  Letter  to 
Lord  John  Russell,  London,  1821. 

1  “Capital,  with  compound  interest  on  every  portion  of 
capital  saved,  is  so  all-engrossing  that  all  the  wealth  in  the 
world  from  which  income  is  derived  has  long  ago  become 
the  interest  on  capital  ."—London  Economist ,  19th  July, 

1859. 


CONVERSION  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE  INTO  CAPITAL 


tal,  we  must  brush  on  one  side  an  ambiguity  in¬ 
troduced  by  the  classical  economists. 

Just  as  little  as  the  commodities  that  the  cap¬ 
italist  buys  with  a  part  of  the  surplus  value  for 
his  own  consumption  serve  the  purpose  of  pro¬ 
duction  and  of  creation  of  value,  so  little  is  the 
labour  that  he  buys  for  the  satisfaction  of  his 
natural  and  social  requirements,  productive  la¬ 
bour.  Instead  of  converting  surplus  value  into 
capital,  he,  on  the  contrary,  by  the  purchase  of 
those  commodities  and  that  labour,  consumes 
or  expends  it  as  revenue.  In  the  face  of  the  ha¬ 
bitual  mode  of  life  of  the  old  feudal  nobility, 
which,  as  Hegel  rightly  says,  “consists  in  con¬ 
suming  what  is  in  hand,”  and  more  especially 
displays  itself  in  the  luxury  of  personal  retain¬ 
ers,  it  was  extremely  important  for  bourgeois 
economy  to  promulgate  the  doctrine  that  ac¬ 
cumulation  of  capital  is  the  first  duty  of  every 
citizen,  and  to  preach  without  ceasing,  that  a 
man  cannot  accumulate,  if  he  eats  up  all  his 
revenue,  instead  of  spending  a  good  part  of  it 
in  the  acquisition  of  additional  productive  la¬ 
bourers,  who  bring  in  more  than  they  cost.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  economists  had  to  contend 
against  the  popular  prejudice  that  confuses 
capitalist  production  with  hoarding,1  and  fan¬ 
cies  that  accumulated  wealth  is  either  wealth 
that  is  rescued  from  being  destroyed  in  its  exist¬ 
ing  form  (i.e.,  from  being  consumed)  or  wealth 
that  is  withdrawn  from  circulation.  Exclusion 
of  money  from  circulation  would  also  exclude 
absolutely  its  self-expansion  as  capital,  while 
accumulation  of  a  hoard  in  the  shape  of  com¬ 
modities  would  be  sheer  tomfoolery.2  The  ac¬ 
cumulation  of  commodities  in  great  masses  is 
the  result  either  of  overproduction  or  of  a  stop¬ 
page  of  circulation.3  It  is  true  that  the  popular 
mind  is  impressed  by  the  sight,  on  the  one  hand, 
of  the  mass  of  goods  that  are  stored  up  for  grad¬ 
ual  consumption  by  the  rich,  and  on  the  other 
hand,  by  the  formation  of  reserve  stocks.  The 
latter  is  a  phenomenon  that  is  common  to 
all  modes  of  production  and  on  which  we  shall 

luNo  political  economist  of  the  present  day  can  by  saving 
mean  mere  hoarding:  and  beyond  this  contracted  and  in¬ 
sufficient  proceeding,  no  use  of  the  term  in  reference  to  the 
national  wealth  can  well  be  imagined,  but  that  which  must 
arise  from  a  different  application  of  what  is  saved,  founded 
upon  a  real  distinction  between  the  different  kinds  of  la¬ 
bour  maintained  by  it."— Malthus,  op.  ci/.t  pp.  38, 39. 

2  Thus  for  instance,  Balzac,  who  so  thoroughly  studied 
every  shade  of  avarice,  represents  the  old  usurer  Gobsec 
as  in  his  second  childhood  when  he  begins  to  heap  up  a 
hoard  of  commodities. 

3  "Accumulation  of  stocks  . . .  non-exchange  . . .  over¬ 
production."— Thomas  Corbet  op.  cit.t  p.  14. 


291 

dwell  for  a  moment  when  we  come  to  analyse 
circulation. 

Classical  economy  is,  therefore,  quite  right 
when  it  maintains  that  the  consumption  of  sur¬ 
plus  products  by  productive,  instead  of  by  un¬ 
productive,  labourers  is  a  characteristic  feature 
of  the  process  of  accumulation.  But  at  this  point 
the  mistakes  also  begin.  Adam  Smith  has  made 
it  the  fashion,  to  represent  accumulation  as 
nothing  more  than  consumption  of  surplus 
products  by  productive  labourers,  which 
amounts  to  saying  that  the  capitalizing  of  sur¬ 
plus  value  consists  in  merely  turning  surplus 
value  into  labour  power.  Let  us  see  what 
Ricardo,  for  example,  says:  “It  must  be  under¬ 
stood  that  all  the  productions  of  a  country  are 
consumed;  but  it  makes  the  greatest  difference 
imaginable  whether  they  arc  consumed  by  those 
who  reproduce,  or  by  those  who  do  not  repro¬ 
duce  anothervalue.  When  we  say  that  revenue 
is  saved  and  added  to  capital,  what  we  mean  is 
that  the  portion  of  revenue  so  said  to  be  added 
to  capital  is  consumed  by  productive  instead  of 
unproductive  labourers.  There  can  be  no  great¬ 
er  error  than  in  supposing  that  capital  is  in¬ 
creased  by  non-consumption.”4  There  can  be 
no  greater  error  than  that  which  Ricardo  and 
all  subsequent  economists  repeat  after  A.  Smith 
viz.,  that  “the  part  of  revenue,  of  which  it  is 
said  that  it  has  been  added  to  capital,  is  con¬ 
sumed  by  productive  labourers.”  According  to 
this,  all  surplus  value  that  is  changed  into  capi¬ 
tal  becomes  variable  capital.  So  far  from  this 
being  the  case,  the  surplus  value,  like  the  origin¬ 
al  capital,  divides  itself  into  constant  capital 
and  variable  capital,  into  means  of  production 
and  labour  power.  Labour  power  is  the  form 
under  which  variable  capital  exists  during  the 
process  of  production.  I  n  this  process  the  labour 
power  is  itself  consumed  by  the  capitalist  while 
the  means  of  production  are  consumed  by  the 
labour  power  in  the  exercise  of  its  function,  la¬ 
bour.  At  the  same  time,  the  money  paid  for  the 
purchase  of  the  labour  power  is  converted  into 
necessaries  that  arc  consumed,  not  by  “produc¬ 
tive  labour,”  but  by  the  “productive  labourer.” 
Adam  Smith,  by  a  fundamentally  perverted 
analysis,  arrives  at  the  absurd  conclusion  that, 
even  though  each  individual  capital  is  divided 
into  a  constant  and  a  variable  part,  the  capital 
of  society  resolves  itself  only  into  variable  capi¬ 
tal,  i.e.,  is  laid  out  exclusively  in  payment  of 
wages.  For  instance,  suppose  a  cloth  manufac¬ 
turer  converts  £2000  into  capital.  One  portion 

‘Ricardo,  op.  cit.,  p.  163,  note. 


292  CAPITAL 


he  lays  out  in  buying  weavers,  the  other  in  wool¬ 
len  yarn,  machinery,  etc.  But  the  people  from 
whom  he  buys  the  yam  and  the  machinery  pay 
for  labour  with  a  part  of  the  purchase  money, 
and  so  on  until  the  whole  £2000  are  spent  in  the 
payment  of  wages,  i.e.,  until  the  entire  product 
represented  by  the  £2000  has  been  consumed 
by  productive  labourers.  It  is  evident  that  the 
whole  gist  of  this  argument  lies  in  the  words 
“and  so  on/*  which  send  us  from  pillar  to  post. 
In  truth,  Adam  Smith  breaks  his  investigation 
off  just  where  its  difficulties  begin.1 

The  annual  process  of  reproduction  is  easily 
understood,  so  long  as  we  keep  in  view  merely 
the  sum  total  of  the  year’s  production.  But 
every  single  component  of  this  product  must  be 
brought  into  the  market  as  a  commodity,  and 
there  the  difficulty  begins.  The  movements  of 
the  individual  capitals,  and  of  the  personal  rev¬ 
enues,  cross  and  intermingle  and  are  lost  in  the 
general  change  of  places,  in  the  circulation  of 
the  wealth  of  society;  this  dazzles  the  sight  and 
propounds  very  complicated  problems  for  solu¬ 
tion.  In  the  third  part  of  Book  Two,  I  shall  give 
the  analysis  of  the  real  bearings  of  the  facts.  It 
is  one  of  the  great  merits  of  the  Physiocrats  that 
they  were  the  first  to  attempt  to  depict  the  an¬ 
nual  production  in  the  shape  in  which  it  is  pre¬ 
sented  to  us  after  passing  through  the  process 
of  circulation.  (This  in  Quesnay’s  Tableau  ico - 
nomique.y 

For  the  rest,  it  is  a  matter  of  course  that  po¬ 
litical  economy,  acting  in  the  interests  of  the 
capitalist  class,  has  not  failed  tq  exploit  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  Adam  Smith,  viz.,  that  the  whole  of 
that  part  of  the  surplus  product  which  is  con- 

1  In  spite  of  his  Logic,  John  Stuart  Mill  never  detects 
even  such  faulty  analysis  as  this  when  made  by  his  prede¬ 
cessors,  an  analysis  which,  even  from  the  bourgeois  stand¬ 
point  of  the  science,  cries  out  for  rectification.  In  every 
case  he  registers  with  the  dogmatism  of  a  disciple  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  his  master's  thoughts.  So  here:  “The  capital  itself 
in  the  long  run  becomes  entirely  wages,  and  when  replaced 
by  the  sale  of  produce  becomes  wages  again." 

*  In  his  description  of  the  process  of  reproduction  and  of 
accumulation,  Adam  Smith  in  many  ways  not  only  made 
no  advance,  but  even  lost  considerable  ground,  compared 
with  his  predecessors,  especially  the  Physiocrats.  Con¬ 
nected  with  the  illusion  mentioned  in  the  text,  is  the  really 
wonderful  dogma,  left  by  him  as  an  inheritance  to  political 
economy,  the  dogma  that  the  price  of  commodities  is  made 
up  of  wages,  profit  (interest)  and  rent,  i.e.,  of  wages  and 
surplus  value.  Starting  from  this  basis,  Storch  naively  con¬ 
fesses,  “It  is  impossible  to  resolve  the  necessary  price  into 
its  most  simple  elements."  (Op.  cit.,  St.  Petersburg  edition, 
1815,  VoL  I,  p.  I40,  note.)  A  fine  science  of  economy  this, 
which  declares  it  impossible  to  resolve  the  price  of  a  com¬ 
modity  into  its  simplest  elements!  This  point  will  be  fur¬ 
ther  investigated  in  the  seventh  part  of  Book  Three. 


verted  into  capital,  is  consumed  by  the  working 
class. 

3.  Separation  of  Surplus  Value  into  Capital  and 

Revenue .  The  Abstinence  Theory 

In  the  last  preceding  chapter,  we  treated  sur¬ 
plus  value  (or  the  surplus  product)  solely  as  a 
fund  for  supplying  the  individual  consumption 
of  the  capitalist.  In  this  chapter  we  have,  so  far, 
treated  it  solely  as  a  fund  for  accumulation.  It 
is,  however,  neither  the  one  nor  the  other,  but 
is  both  together.  One  portion  is  consumed  by 
the  capitalist  as  revenue,3  the  other  is  employed 
as  capital,  or  accumulated. 

Given  the  mass  of  surplus  value,  then,  the 
larger  the  one  of  these  parts,  the  smaller  is  the 
other.  Cateris  paribus ,  the  ratio  of  these  parts 
determines  the  magnitude  of  the  accumulation. 
But  it  is  by  the  owner  of  the  surplus  value,  by 
the  capitalist  alone,  that  the  division  is  made. 
It  is  his  deliberate  act.  That  part  of  the  trib¬ 
ute  exacted  by  him  which  he  accumulates  is 
said  to  be  saved  by  him,  because  he  does  not 
eat  it,  i.e.,  because  he  performs  the  function  of 
a  capitalist  and  enriches  himself. 

Except  as  personified  capital,  the  capitalist 
has  no  historical  value,  and  no  right  to  that 
historical  existence  which,  to  use  an  expression 
of  the  witty  Lichnowsky,  “has  got  no  date.” 
And  so  far  only  is  the  necessity  for  his  own  tran¬ 
sitory  existence  implied  in  the  transitory  neces¬ 
sity  for  the  capitalist  mode  of  production.  But, 
so  far  as  he  is  personified  capital,  it  is  not  values 
in  use  and  the  enjoyment  of  them,  but  exchange- 
value  and  its  augmentation,  that  spur  him  into 
action.  Fanatically  bent  bn  making  value  ex¬ 
pand  itself,  he  ruthlessly  forces  the  human  race 
to  produce  for  production’s  sake;  he  thus  forces 
the  development  of  the  productive  powers  of 
society,  and  creates  those  material  conditions 
which  alone  can  form  the  real  basis  of  a  higher 
form  of  society,  a  society  in  which  the  full  and 
free  development  of  every  individual  forms  the 
ruling  principle.  Only  as  personified  capital  is 
the  capitalist  respectable.  As  such,  he  shares 
with  the  miser  the  passion  for  wealth  as  wealth. 
But  that  which  in  the  miser  is  a  mere  idiosyn¬ 
crasy  is  in  the  capitalist  the  effect  of  the  social 

*  The  reader  will  notice  that  the  word  revenue  is  used  in 
a  double  sense:  first,  to  designate  surplus  Value  so  far  as  it 
is  the  fruit  periodically  yielded  by  capital;  secondly,  to 
designate  the  part  of  that  fruit  which  is  periodically  con¬ 
sumed  by  the  capitalist,  or  added  to  the  fund  that  supplies 
his  private  consumption.  I  have  retained  this  double  mean¬ 
ing  because  it  harmonizes  with  the  language  of  the  English 
and  French  economists. 


CONVERSION  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE  INTO  CAPITAL 


mechanism  of  which  he  is  but  one  of  the  wheels. 
Moreover,  the  development  of  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction  makes  it  constantly  necessary  to  keep 
increasing  the  amount  of  the  capital  laid  out 
in  a  given  industrial  undertaking,  and  com¬ 
petition  makes  the  immanent  laws  of  capital¬ 
ist  production  to  be  felt  by  each  individual 
capitalist  as  external  coercive  laws.  It  com¬ 
pels  him  to  keep  constantly  extending  his 
capital,  in  order  to  preserve  it;  but  extend  it 
he  cannot,  except  by  means  of  progressive 
accumulation. 

So  far,  therefore,  as  his  actions  are  a  mere 
function  of  capital— endowed  as  capital  is,  in 
his  person,  with  consciousness  and  a  will— his 
own  private  consumption  is  a  robbery  perpe¬ 
trated  on  accumulation,  just  as  in  book-keeping 
by  double  entry  the  private  expenditure  of  the 
capitalist  is  placed  on  the  debtor  side  of  his  ac¬ 
count  against  his  capital.  To  accumulate  is  to 
conquer  the  world  of  social  wealth,  to  increase 
the  mass  of  human  beings  exploited  by  him,  and 
thus  to  extend  both  the  direct  and  the  indirect 
sway  of  the  capitalist.1 

1  Talcing  the  usurer,  that  old-fashioned  but  ever  renewed 
specimen  of  the  capitalist,  for  his  text,  Luther  shows  very 
aptly  that  the  love  of  power  is  an  element  in  the  desire  to 
get  rich.  “The  heathen  were  able,  by  the  light  of  reason,  to 
conclude  that  a  usurer  is  a  double-dyed  thief  and  murder¬ 
er.  We  Christians,  however,  hold  them  in  such  honour  that 
we  fairly  worship  them  for  the  sake  of  their  money.  .  • . 
Whoever  cats  up,  robs,  and  steals  the  nourishment  of  an¬ 
other,  that  man  commits  as  great  a  murder  (so  far  as  in 
him  lies)  as  he  who  starves  a  man  or  utterly  undoes  him. 
Such  does  a  usurer,  and  sits  the  while  safe  on  his  stool, 
when  he  ought  rather  to  be  hanging  on  the  gallows,  and  be 
eaten  by  as  many  ravens  as  he  has  stolen  guilders,  if  only 
there  were  so  much  flesh  on  him  that  so  many  ravens  could 
stick  their  beaks  in  and  share  it.  Meanwhile,  we  hang  the 
small  thieves. . . .  Little  thieves  are  put  in  the  stocks,  great 
thieves  go  flaunting  in  gold  and  silk. . . .  Therefore  is  there, 
on  this  earth,  no  greater  enemy  of  man  (after  the  devil) 
than  a  gripe-money,  and  usurer,  for  he  wants  to  be  God 
over  all  men.  Turks,  soldiers,  and  tyrants  are  also  bad 
men,  yet  must  they  let  the  people  live,  and  confess  that 
they  are  bad,  and  enemies,  and  do,  nay,  must,  now  and 
then  show  pity  to  some.  But  a  usurer  and  money-glutton, 
such  a  one  would  have  the  whole  world  perish  of  hunger 
and  thirst,  misery  and  want,  so  far  as  in  him  lies,  so  that 
he  may  have  all  to  himself,  and  every  one  may  receive  from 
him  as  from  a  God  and  be  his  serf  for  ever.  To  wear  fine 
'cloaks,  golden  chains,  rings,  to  wipe  his  mouth,  to  be 
deemed  and  taken  for  a  worthy,  pious  man. . . .  Usury  is 
a  great  huge  monster,  like  a  werewolf,  who  lays  waste  all, 
more  than  any  Cacus,  Gerion,  or  Antus.  And  yet  decks 
himself  out  and  would  be  thought  pious,  so  that  people 
may  not  see  where  the  oxen  have  gone  that  he  drags 
backwards  into  his  den.  But  Hercules  shall  hear  the  cry  of 
the  oxen  and  of  his  prisoners,  and  shall  seek  Cacus  even  in 
cliffs  and  among  rocks,  and  shall  set  the  oxen  loose  again 
from  the  villain.  For  Cacus  meant  the  villain  that  is  a 
pious  usurer,  and  steals,  robs,  eats  everything.  And  will 


293 

But  original  sin  is  at  work  everywhere.  As 
capitalist  production,  accumulation,  and 
wealth,  become  developed,  the  capitalist  ceases 
to  be  the  mere  incarnation  of  capital.  He  has  a 
fellow-feeling  for  his  own  Adam,  and  his  educa¬ 
tion  gradually  enables  him  to  smile  at  the  rage 
for  asceticism,  as  a  mere  prejudice  of  the  old- 
fashioned  miser.  While  the  capitalist  of  the  clas¬ 
sical  type  brands  individual  consumption  as  a 
sin  against  his  function,  and  as  “ abstinence*’ 
from  accumulating,  the  modernized  capitalist 
is  capable  of  looking  upon  accumulation  as  “ab¬ 
stinence**  from  pleasure. 

Two  souls ,  alas,  do  dwell  within  his  breast ; 

The  one  is  ever fartingjrom  the  other? 

At  the  historical  dawn  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion— and  every  capitalist  upstart  has  person¬ 
ally  to  go  through  this  historical  stage— avarice 
and  desire  tofet  rich  are  the  ruling  passions. 
But  the  progress  of  capitalist  production  not 
only  creates  a  world  of  delights;  it  lays  open,  in 
speculation  and  the  credit  system,  a  thousand 
sources  of  sudden  enrichment.  When  a  certain 
stage  of  development  has  been  reached,  a  con¬ 
ventional  degree  of  prodigality,  which  is  also  an 
exhibition  of  wealth  and  consequently  a  source 
of  credit,  becomes  a  business  necessity  to  the 
“Unfortunate**  capitalist.  Luxury  enters  into 
capital’s  expenses  of  representation.  Moreover, 
the  capitalist  gets  rich,  not  like  the  miser,  in 
proportion  to  his  personal  labour  and  restricted 
consumption,  but  at  the  same  rate  as  he 
squeezes  out  the  labour  power  of  others  and  en¬ 
forces  on  the  labourer  abstinence  from  all  life’s 
enjoyments.  Although,  therefore,  the  prodigal¬ 
ity  of  the  capitalist  never  possesses  the  bona-fide 
character  of  the  open-handed  feudal  lord's 
prodigality,  but,  on  the  contrary,  has  always 
lurking  behind  it  the  most  sordid  avarice  and 
the  most  anxious  calculation,  yet  his  expendi¬ 
ture  grows  with  his  accumulation,  without  the 
one  necessarily  restricting  the  other.  But  along 
with  this  growth,  there  is  at  the  same  time  de¬ 
veloped  in  his  breast  a  Faustian  conflict  be- 


notown  that  he  has  done  it,  and  thinks  no  one  will  And 
him  out,  because  the  oxen,  drawn  backwards  into  his  den, 
make  it  seem,  from  their  foot-prints,  that  they  have  been 
let  out.  So  the  usurer  would  deceive  the  world,  as  though 
he  were  of  use  and  gave  the  world  oxen,  which  he,  how¬ 
ever,  rends,  and  eats  all  alone.  . . .  And  since  we  break 
on  the  wheel,  and  behead  highwaymen,  murderers  and 
housebreakers,  how  much  more  ought  we  to  break  on 
the  wheel  and  kill,  . . .  hunt  down,  curse,  and  behead 
all  usurers." — Martin  Luther,  op.cit, 

2 See  Goethe’s  Faust ,  Fart  1, 11.  ina-13. 


CAPITAL 


294 

tween  the  passion  for  accumulation,  and  the 
desire  for  enjoyment. 

Dr.  Aikin  says  in  a  work  published  in  1795: 
“The  trade  of  Manchester  may  be  divided  into 
four  periods.  First,  when  manufacturers  were 
obliged  to  work  hard  for  their  livelihood.'*  They 
enriched  themselves  chiefly  by  robbing  the 
parents,  whose  children  were  bound  as  appren¬ 
tices  to  them;  the  parents  paid  a  high  premium, 
while  the  apprentices  were  starved.  On  the  oth¬ 
er  hand,  the  average  profits  were  low,  and,  to 
accumulate,  extreme  parsimony  was  requisite. 
They  lived  like  misers,  and  were  far  from  con¬ 
suming  even  the  interest  on  their  capital.  “The 
second  period,  when  they  had  begun  to  acquire 
little  fortunes,  but  worked  as  hard  as  before" 
(for  direct  exploitation  of  labour  costs  labour, 
as  every  slave-driver  knows)  “and  lived  in  as 
plain  a  manner  as  before. . . .  The  third,  when 
luxury  began,  and  the  trade  was  pushed  by 
sending  out  riders  for  orders  into  every  market 
town  in  the  kingdom. ...  It  is  probable  that 
few  or  no  capitals  of  £3000  to  £4000  acquired 
by  trade  existed  here  before  1690.  However, 
about  that  time,  or  a  little  later,  the  traders  had 
got  money  beforehand  and  began  to  build  mod¬ 
ern  brick  houses  instead  of  those  of  wood  and 
plaster."  Even  in  the  early  part  of  the  eight¬ 
eenth  century,  a  Manchester  manufacturer 
who  placed  a  pint  of  foreign  wine  before  his 
guests  exposed  himself  to  the  remarks  and 
headshakings  of  all  his  neighbours.  Before  the 
rise  of  machinery,  a  manufacturer’s  evening  ex¬ 
penditure  at  the  public  house  where  they  all 
met,  never  exceeded  sixpence  for  a  glass  of 
punch,  and  a  penny  for  a  screw  of  tobacco.  It 
was  not  till  1758,  and  this  marks  an  epoch,  that 
a  person  actually  engaged  in  business  was  seen 
with  an  equipage  of  his  own.  “The  fourth 
period,"  the  last  thirty  years  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  “is  that  in  which  expense  and  luxury 
have  made  great  progress,  and  was  supported 
by  a  trade  extended  by  means  of  riders  and  fac¬ 
tors  through  every  part  of  Europe."1  What 
would  the  good  Dr.  Aikin  say  if  he  could  rise 
from  his  grave  and  see  the  Manchester  of  to¬ 
day? 

Accumulate,  accumulate!  That  is  Moses  and 
the  prophets!  “Industry  furnishes  the  material 
which  saving  accumulates."2  Therefore,  save, 
save,  i.e.,  reconvert  the  greatest  possible  por¬ 
tion  of  surplus  value,  or  surplus  product,  into 
capital !  Accumulation  for  accumulation’s  sake, 

1  Dr.  Aikin,  Description  of  the  Country  from  Thirty  to 
Forty  Miles  round  Manchester ,  London,  1795,  p.  182,  ff. 

2  A.  Smith,  op.  cit.%  Book  III,  ch.  111. 


production  for  production’s  sake;  by  this  for¬ 
mula,  classical  economy  expressed  the  histori¬ 
cal  mission  of  the  bourgeoisie,  and  did  not  for  a 
single  instant  deceive  itself  over  the  birth- 
throes  of  wealth.9  But  what  avails  lamentation 
in  the  face  of  historical  necessity?  If,  to  classical 
economy,  the  proletarian  is  but  a  machine  for 
the  production  of  surplus  value;  on  the  other 
hand,  the  capitalist  is  in  its  eyes  only  a  machine 
for  the  conversion  of  this  surplus  value  into  ad¬ 
ditional  capital.  Political  economy  takes  the 
historical  function  of  the  capitalist  in  bitter 
earnest.  In  order  to  charm  out  of  his  bosom  the 
awful  conflict  between  the  desire  for  enjoyment 
and  the  chase  after  riches,  Mai  thus,  about  the 
year  1820,  advocated  a  division  of  labour  which 
assigns  to  the  capitalist  actually  engaged  in  pro¬ 
duction  the  business  of  accumulating,  and  to 
the  other  sharers  in  surplus  value  (to  the  land¬ 
lords,  the  place-men,  the  beneficed  clergy,  etc.) 
the  business  of  spending.  It  is  of  the  highest  im¬ 
portance,  he  says,  “to  keep  separate  the  passion 
for  expenditure  and  the  passion  for  accumula¬ 
tion.’’4  The  capitalists,  having  long  been  good 
livers  and  men  of  the  world,  uttered  loud  cries. 
What,  exclaimed  one  of  their  spokesmen,  a  dis¬ 
ciple  of  Ricardo,  Mr.  Malthus  preaches  high 
rents,  heavy  taxes,  etc.,  so  that  the  pressure  of 
the  spur  may  constantly  be  kept  on  the  indus¬ 
trious  by  unproductive  consumers!  By  all 
means,  production,  production  a  constantly 
increasing  scale,  runs  the  shibboleth;  but  “pro¬ 
duction  will,  by  such  a  process,  be  far  more 
curbed  in  than  spurred  on.  Nor  is  it  quite  fair 
thus  to  maintain  in  idleness  a  number  of  per¬ 
sons,  only  to  pinch  others,  who  are  likely,  from 
their  characters,  if  you  can  force  them  to  work, 
to  work  with  success."6  Unfair  as  he  finds  it  to 
spur  on  the  industrial  capitalist,  by  depriving 
his  bread  of  its  butter,  yet  he  thinks  it  necessary 
to  reduce  the  labourer’s  wages  to  a  minimum 
“to  keep  him  industrious."  Nor  does  he  for  a 
moment  conceal  the  fact  that  the  appropriation 
of  unpaid  labour  is  the  secret  of  surplus  value. 
“Increased  demand  on  the  part  of  the  labourers 
means  nothing  more  than  their  willingness  to 
take  less  of  their  own  product  for  themselves, 
and  leave  a  greater  part  of  it  to  their  employers; 

*  Even  J.  B.  Say  says:  “The  savings  of  the  rich  are  made 
at  the  expense  of  the  poor."  “The  Roman  proletarian  lived 
almost  entirely  at  the  expense  of  society. ...  It  can  almost 
be  said  that  modern  society  lives  at  the  expense  of  the  pro¬ 
letarians,  on  what  it  keeps  out  of  the  remuneration  of  la¬ 
bour."  (Sismondi,  Etudes ,  etc.,  Vol.  I,  p.  24.) 

*  Malthus,  op.  cit.,  pp.  319, 320. 

1  At  Inquiry  into  those  Principles  respecting  the  Nature 
of  Demand,  etc.,  p.  67. 


CONVERSION  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE  INTO  CAPITAL 


and  if  it  be  said  that  this  begets  glut,  by  lessen¬ 
ing  consumption**  (on  the  part  of  the  labour¬ 
ers),  “I  can  only  reply  that  glut  is  synonymous 
with  large  profits.**1 2 

The  learned  disputation  concerning  the  way 
in  which  the  booty  pumped  out  of  the  labourer 
may  be  divided,  with  most  advantage  to  ac¬ 
cumulation,  between  the  industrial  capitalist 
and  the  rich  idler,  was  hushed  in  face  of  the 
revolution  of  July.  Shortly  afterwards,  the 
town  proletariat  at  Lyons  sounded  the  tocsin  of 
revolution,  and  the  country  proletariat  in  Eng¬ 
land  began  to  set  fire  to  farmyards  and  corn- 
stacks.  On  the  British  side  of  the  Channel, 
Owcnism  began  to  spread;  on  the  other  side, 
St.  Simonism  and  Fourierism.  The  hour  of  vul¬ 
gar  economy  had  struck.  Exactly  a  year  before 
Nassau  W.  Senior  discovered  at  Manchester 
that  the  profit  (including  interest)  of  capital  is 
the  product  of  the  last  hour  of  the  twelve,  he 
had  announced  to  the  world  another  discovery. 
“I  substitute,**  he  proudly  says,  “for  the  word 
capital ,  considered  is  an  instrument  of  produc¬ 
tion,  the  word  abstinence.'"1  An  unparalleled 
sample,  this,  of  the  discoveries  of  vulgar  econ¬ 
omy!  It  substitutes  for  an  economic  category 
a  sycophantic  phrase— voila  tout .  “When  the 
savage,’*  says  Senior,  “makes  bows,  he  exercises 
an  industry,  but  he  does  not  practise  abstin¬ 
ence.”  This  explains  how  and  why  in  the  earlier 
states  of  society  the  implements  of  labour  were 
fabricated  without  abstinence  on  the  part  of  the 
capitalist.  “The  more  society  progresses,  the 
more  abstinence  is  demanded,*’3  namely,  from 
those  who  ply  the  industry  of  appropriating  the 
fruits  of  others*  industry.  All  the  conditions  for 

1  Op.  cit.,  p.  50. 

2  Senior,  Principes  Jondamentaux  de  Viconomie  politique, 
French  translation,  Paris,  1836,  p.  308.— This  was  rather 
too  much  for  the  adherents  of  the  old  classical  school.  “Mr. 
Senior  has  substituted  for  it”  (the  expression  “labour  and 
profit")  “the  expression  ‘labour  and  abstinence.'  He  who 
converts  his  revenue  abstains  from  the  enjoyment  which 
its  expenditure  would  afford  him.  It  is  not  the  capital,  but 
the  use  of  the  capital  productively,  which  is  the  cause  of 
profits.”  (John  Cazenove,  op.  cit.,  p.  130,  note.)  John  Stuart 
Mill,  on  the  contrary,  accepts  on  the  one  hand  Ricardo’s 
theory  of  profit,  and  annexes  on  the  other  hand  Senior's 
“remuneration  of  abstinence."  He  is  as  much  at  home  in 
absurd  contradictions,  as  he  feels  at  sea  in  the  Hegelian 
contradiction,  the  source  of  all  dialectic.  It  has  never  oc¬ 
curred  to  the  vulgar  economist  to  make  the  simple  reflexion 

that  every  human  action  may  be  viewed  as  “abstinence" 

from  its  opposite.  F.ating  is  abstinence  from  fasting,  walk¬ 
ing  is  abstinence  from  standing  still,  working  is  abstinence 
from  idling,  idling  is  abstinence  from  working,  ere.  These 
gentlemen  would  do  well  to  ponder,  once  in  a  way,  over 
Spinoza’s  “ Detcrminatio  est  negatio  [Determination  is  nega¬ 

tion]." 

1  Senior,  op.  cit.,  p.  34 2. 


295 

carrying  on  the  labour  process  are  suddenly 
converted  into  so  many  acts  of  abstinence  on 
the  part  of  the  capitalist.  If  the  corn  is  not  all 
eaten,  but  part  of  it  also  sown— abstinence  of 
the  capitalist.  If  the  wine  gets  time  to  mature- 
abstinence  of  the  capitalist.4  The  capitalist  robs 
his  own  self,  whenever  he  “lends**  (!)  “the  in¬ 
struments  of  production  to  the  labourer,*’  that 
is,  whenever  by  incorporating  labour  power 
with  them,  he  uses  them  to  extract  surplus  val¬ 
ue  out  of  that  labour  power,  instead  of  eating 
them  up,  steam-engines,  cotton,  railways,  man¬ 
ure,  horses,  and  all;  or,  as  the  vulgar  economist 
childishly  puts  it,  instead  of  dissipating  “their 
value”  in  luxuries  and  other  articles  of  con¬ 
sumption.5  How  the  capitalists  as  a  class  are 
to  perform  that  feat  is  a  secret  that  vulgar  econ¬ 
omy  has  hitherto  obstinately  refused  to  divulge. 
Enough  that  the  world  still  jogs  on,  solely 
through  the  sdf-chastisement  of  this  modern 
penitent  of  Vishnu,  the  capitalist.  Not  only  ac¬ 
cumulation,  but  the  simple  “conservation  of  a 
capital  requires  a  constant  effort  to  resist  the 
temptation  of  consuming  it.”6  The  simple  dic¬ 
tates  of  humanity,  therefore,  plainly  enjoin  the 
release  of  the  capitalist  from  this  martyrdom 
and  temptation,  in  the  same  way  that  the 
Georgian  slave  owner  was  lately  delivered,  by 
the  abolition  of  slavery,  from  the  painful  dilem¬ 
ma  of  whether  to  squander  the  surplus  product 
lashed  out  of  his  negroes  entirely  in  champagne, 
or  whether  to  reconvert  a  part  of  it  into  more 
negroes  and  more  land. 

In  economic  forms  of  society  of  the  most  dif¬ 
ferent  kinds,  there  occurs,  not  only  simple  re¬ 
production,  but,  in  varying  degrees,  reproduc¬ 
tion  on  a  progressively  increasing  scale.  By  de¬ 
grees  more  is  produced  and  more  consumed, 
and  consequently  more  products  have  to  be 
converted  into  means  of  production.  This  proc¬ 
ess,  however,  does  not  present  itself  as  accumu- 

4  “No  one . . .  will  sow  his  wheat,  for  instance,  and  allow 
it  to  remain  a  twelve-month  in  the  ground,  or  leave  his 
wine  in  a  cellar  for  years,  instead  of  consuming  these  things 
or  their  equivalent  at  once . . .  unless  he  expects  to  acquire 
additional  value,  etc.”— Scrope,  Political  Economy,  edited 
by  A.  Potter,  New  York,  1841,  pp.  133- 134. 

1  “The  privation  which  the  capitalist  inflicts  on  himself 
when  he  lends  his  instruments  of  production  to  the  worker" 
(this  euphemism  is  used  for  the  purpose  of  identifying,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  approved  method  of  vulgar  economy,  the 
labourer  who  is  exploited,  with  the  industrial  capitalist 
who  exploits,  and  to  whom  other  capitalists  lend  money) 
“instead  of  dedicating  the  value  to  his  own  use  by 
transforming  it  into  objects  of  utility  or  of  comfort. . .  .” 
— G.  de  Molinari,  op.  cit .,  p.  49. 

•  “The  conservation  of  a  capital  demands ...  a  constant 
effort  in  resisting  the  temptation  to  consume  it.”— Cour- 
celies-Scneuil,  op.  cit .,  p.  57. 


296  CAPITAL 


lation  of  capital,  nor  as  the  function  of  a  capital¬ 
ist,  so  long  as  the  labourer's  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  and  with  them  his  product  and  means  of 
subsistence,  do  not  confront  him  in  the  shape  of 
capital.1  Richard  Jones,  who  died  a  few  years 
ago,  and  was  the  successor  of  Malthus  in  the 
chair  of  political  economy  at  Haileybury  Col¬ 
lege,  discusses  this  point  well  in  the  light  of  two 
important  facts.  Since  the  great  mass  of  the 
Hindu  population  are  peasants  cultivating 
their  land  themselves,  their  products,  their  in¬ 
struments  of  labour  and  means  of  subsistence 
never  take  “the  shape  of  a  fund  saved  from  rev¬ 
enue,  which  fund  has,  therefore,  gone  through 
a  previous  process  of  accumulation."*  On  the 
other  hand,  the  non-agricultural  labourers  in 
those  provinces  where  the  English  rule  has  least 
disturbed  the  old  system,  are  directly  employed 
by  the  magnates,  to  whom  a  portion  of  the  agri- 
cultural  surplus  product  is  rendered  in  the 
shape  of  tribute  or  rent.  One  portion  of  this 
product  is  consumed  by  the  magnates  in  kind; 
another  is  converted  for  their  use  by  the  labour¬ 
ers  into  articles  of  luxury  and  such  like  things; 
while  the  rest  forms  the  wages  of  the  labourers, 
who  own  their  implements  of  labour.  Here,  pro¬ 
duction  and  reproduction  on  a  progressively  in¬ 
creasing  scale  go  on  their  way  without  any  in¬ 
tervention  from  that  queer  saint,  that  knight 
of  the  woeful  countenance,  the  capitalist  “ab¬ 
stainer." 

4.  Circumstances  that ,  independently  of  the  pro¬ 
portional  Division  of  Surplus  Value  into  Capi¬ 
tal  and  Revenue ,  determine  the  Amount  of  Ac¬ 
cumulation.  Degree  of  Exploitation  of  Labour 
Power.  Productivity  of  Labour .  Growing  Dif¬ 
ference  in  Amount  between  Capital  Employed 
and  Capital  Consumed.  Magnitude  of  Capital 
Advanced 

The  proportion  in  which  surplus  value  breaks 
up  into  capital  and  revenue  being  given,  the 
magnitude  of  the  capital  accumulated  clearly 
depends  on  the  absolute  magnitude  of  the  sur¬ 
plus  value.  Suppose  that  80%  were  capitalized 
and  20%  eaten  up,  the  accumulated  capi^l  will 

1  “The  particular  classes  of  income  which  yield  the  most 
abundantly  to  the  progress  of  national  capital  change  at 
different  stages  of  their  progress,  and  are,  therefore,  en¬ 
tirely  different  in  nations  occupying  different  positions  in 
that  progress  . . .  Profits  . . .  unimportant  source  of  ac¬ 
cumulation,  compared  with  wages  and  rents,  in  the  earlier 
stages  of  society  .  .  .  When  a  considerable  advance  in  the 
powers  of  national  industry  has  actually  taken  place,  prof¬ 
its  rise  into  comparative  importance  as  a  source  of  ac¬ 
cumulation."— Richard  Jones,  Textbook ,  etc.,  pp.  16, 21. 

*  Op.  at.,  p.  36.  ff.— Note  to  the  4th  edition;  This  must 
have  been  an  error.  The  passage  could  not  be  found.  F.E. 


be  £2,400  or  £1,200,  according  as  the  total  sur¬ 
plus  value  has  amounted  to  £3,000  or  £1,500. 
Hence  all  the  circumstances  that  determine  the 
mass  of  surplus  value  operate  to  determine  the 
magnitude  of  the  accumulation.  We  sum  them 
up  once  again,  but  only  in  so  far  as  they  afford 
new  points  of  view  in  regard  to  accumulation. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  rate  of  surplus 
value  depends,  in  the  first  place,  on  the  degree 
of  exploitation  of  labour  power.  Political  econ¬ 
omy  values  this  fact  so  highly  that  it  occasion¬ 
ally  identifies  the  acceleration  of  accumulation 
due  to  increased  productiveness  of  labour,  with 
its  acceleration  due  to  increased  exploitation  of 
the  labourer.*  In  the  chapters  on  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  surplus  value  it  was  constantly  presup¬ 
posed  that  wages  are  at  least  equal  to  the  value 
of  labour  power.  Forcible  reduction  of  wages 
below  this  value  plays,  however,  in  practice  too 
important  a  part  for  us  not  to  pause  upon  it  for 
a  moment.  It,  in  fact,  transforms,  within  cer¬ 
tain  limits,  the  labourer’s  necessary  consump¬ 
tion-fund  into  a  fund  for  the  accumulation  of 
capital. 

“Wages,"  says  John  Stuart  Mill,  “have  no 
productive  power;  they  are  the  price  of  a  pro¬ 
ductive  power.  Wages  do  not  contribute,  along 
with  labour,  to  the  production  of  commodities, 
any  more  than  the  price  of  tools  contributes 
along  with  the  tools  themsel  vesJU*  labour  could 
be  had  without  purchase,  wages  might  be  dis¬ 
pensed  with.”4  But  if  the  labourers  could  live 
on  air,  they  could  not  be  bought  at  any  price. 
The  zero  of  their  cost  is,  therefore,  a  limit  in  a 
mathematical  sense,  always  beyond  reach,  al¬ 
though  we  can  always  approximate  more  and 
more  nearly  to  it.  The  constant  tendency  of 
capital  is  to  force  the  cost  of  labour  back  to¬ 
wards  this  zero.  A  writer  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬ 
tury,  often  quoted  already,  the  author  of  the 
Essay  on  Trade  and  Commerce ,  only  betrays  the 
innermost  secret  soul  of  English  capitalism, 
when  he  declares  the  historic  mission  of  Eng- 

*  "Ricardo  says:  'In  different  stages  of  society,  the  ac¬ 
cumulation  of  capital  or  of  the  means  of  employ  mg’ ’  (i.e., 
exploiting)  "labour  is  more  or  less  rapid,  and  must  in  all 
cases  depend  on  the  productive  powers  of  labour.  The  pro¬ 
ductive  powers  of  labour  are  generally  greatest  where  there 
is  an  abundance  of  fertile  land.'  If,  in  the  first  sentence, 
'the  productive  powers  of  labour*  mean  t)ie  smallness  of 
that  aliquot  part  of  any  produce  that  goes  to  those  whose 
manual  labour  produced  it,  the  sentence  b  nearly  identi¬ 
cal,  because  the  remaining  aliquot  part  is  the  fund  whence 
capital  can,  if  the  owner  pleases ,  be  accumiylated.  But  then 
this  docs  not  generally  happen  where  there  is  most  fertile 
land.'  — Observations  on  certain  Verbal  Disputes %  etc.,  pp. 
74.75- 

4  John  Stuart  Mill,  Essays  on  some  Unsettled  Questions  qf 
Political  Economy ,  London,  1844,  P*  9°> 


CONVERSION  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE  INTO  CAPITAL  297 


land  to  be  the  forcing  down  of  English  wages  to 
the  level  of  the  French  and  the  Dutch.1  With 
other  things,  he  says  naively:  “But  if  our  poor'* 
(technical  term  for  labourers)  “will  live  luxu¬ 
riously  . . .  then  labour  must,  of  course,  be  dear 
. . .  .When  it  is  considered  what  luxuries  the  man¬ 
ufacturing  populace  consume,  such  as  brandy, 
gin,  tea,  sugar,  foreign  fruit,  strong  beer, 
printed  linens,  snuff,  tobacco,  etc.'**  He  quotes 
the  work  of  a  Northamptonshire  manufacturer, 
who,  with  eyes  squinting  heavenward,  moans: 
“Labour  is  one-third  cheaper  in  France  than  in 
England;  for  their  poor  work  hard,  and  fare 
hard,  as  to  their  food  and  clothing.  Their  chief 
diet  is  bread,  fruit,  herbs,  roots,  and  dried  fish; 
for  they  very  seldom  eat  flesh;  and  when  wheat 
is  dear,  they  eat  very  little  bread."*  “To  which 
may  be  added,”  our  essayist  goes  on,  “that  their 
drink  is  either  water  or  other  small  liquors,  so 
that  they  spend  very  little  money. . . .  These 
things  are  very  difficult  to  be  brought  about; 
but  they  are  not  impracticable,  since  they  have 
been  effected  both'  in  France  and  in  Holland.”4 
Twenty  years  later,  an  American  humbug,  the 
baronized  Yankee,  Benjamin  Thomson  (alias 
Count  Rumford)  followed  the  same  line  of  phi¬ 
lanthropy  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  God  and 
man.  His  Essays  are  a  cookery  book  with  recipes 
of  all  kinds  for  replacing  by  some  succedaneum 6 
the  ordinary  dear  food  of  the  labourer.  The 
following  is  a  particularly  successful  recipe  of 
this  wonderful  philosopher:  “5  pounds  of  barley 
meal,  7  l,4d.;  5  pounds  of  Indian  corn,  6^id.;  3d. 
worth  of  red  herring;  id.  salt;  id.  vinegar;  2d. 

1  An  Essay  on  Trade  and  Commerce ,  London,  1770,  p.  44. 
The  Times  of  December,  1866,  and  January,  1867,  in  like 
manner  published  certain  outpourings  of  the  heart  of  the 
English  mineowner,  in  which  was  pictured  the  happy  lot 
of  the  Belgian  miners  who  asked  and  received  no  more 
than  was  strictly  necessary  for  them  to  live  fur  their  “mas¬ 
ters.”  The  Belgian  labourers  have  to  suffer  much,  but  to 
figure  in  The  Times  as  model  labourers!  In  the  beginning 
of  February,  1867,  came  the  answer:  strike  of  the  Belgian 
miners  at  Marchienne,  put  down  by  powder  and  lead. 

*  Op.  cit .,  pp.  44, 46. 

*  The  Northamptonshire  manufacturer  commits  a  pious 
fraud,  pardonable  in  one  whose  heart  is  so  full.  He  nomi¬ 
nally  compares  the  life  of  the  English  and  French  manu¬ 
facturing  labourer,  but  in  the  words  just  quoted  he  is  paint¬ 
ing,  as  he  himself  confesses  in  his  confused  way,  the  French 
agricultural  labourers. 

4  Op.  cit.y  pp.  70,  71.— Note  to  the  3rd  edition:  Today, 
thanks  to  the  competition  on  the  world  market  established 
$;nce  then,  we  have  advanced  much  further.  “If  China,” 
says  Mr.  Stapleton,  M.P.,  to  his  constituents,  “should  be¬ 
come  a  great  manufacturing  country,  I  do  not  see  how  the 
manufacturing  population  of  Europe  could  sustain  the  con¬ 
test  without  descending  to  the  level  of  their  competitors.” 
{The  Times ,  Sept.  9,  1873,  p.  8.)  The  wished-for  goal  of 
English  capital  is  no  longer  continental  wages  but  Chinese. 

1  Substitute. 


pepper  and  sweet  herbs;  in  all  20 }id.  make  a 
soup  for  64  men,  and  at  the  medium  price  of 
barley  and  of  Indian  corn  . . .  this  soup  may 
be  provided  at  %d.  the  portion  of  20  ounces.”6 
With  the  advance  of  capitalistic  production, 
the  adulteration  of  food  rendered  Thompson's 
Ideal  superfluous.7  At  the  end  of  the  eighteenth 
and  during  the  first  ten  years  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  the  English  farmers  and  landlords 
enforced  the  absolute  minimum  of  wage  by 
paying  the  agricultural  labourers  less  than 
the  minimum  in  the  form  of  wages,  and  the 
remainder  in  the  shape  of  parochial  relief.  An 
example  of  the  waggish  way  in  which  the 
English  Dogberries  acted  in  their  “legal” 
fixing  of  a  wages  tariff:  “The  squires  of 
Norfolk  had  dined,  says  Mr.  Burke,  when 
they  fixed  the  rate  of  wages;  the  squires  of 
Berks  evidently  thought  the  labourers  ought 
not  to  do  so,  when  they  fixed  the  rate  of  wages 
at  Speenhamland,  1795. . . .  There  they  decide 
that  ‘income  (weekly)  should  be  3s.  for  a  man,' 
when  the  gallon  or  half-peck  loaf  of  8  pounds  1 1 
ounces  is  at  1  s.y  and  increase  regularly  till  bread 
is  is.  5 d.;  when  it  is  above  that  sum,  decrease 
regularly  till  it  be  at  2 s.y  and  then  his  food 
should  be  one-fifth  less.”8  Before  the  Committee 
of  Inquiry  of  the  House  of  Lords,  1 814,  a  certain 
A.  Bennett,  a  large  farmer,  magistrate,  poor- 
law  guardian,  and  wage  regulator,  was  asked: 
“Has  any  proportion  of  the  value  of  daily  la- 

6  Benjamin  Thompson,  Essays ,  Political ,  Economical , 
and  Philosophical ,  etc.,  3  vols.,  London,  1 796- 1 802,  Vol.  I,  p. 
288.— In  his  The  State  of  the  Poor ,  or  an  History  of  the  La¬ 
bouring  Classes  in  England ,  etc.,  Sir  F.  M.  Eden  strongly 
recommends  the  Rumfordian  beggar-soup  to  workhouse 
overseers,  and  reproachfully  warns  the  English  labourers 
that  “many  poor  people,  particularly  in  Scotland,  live, 
and  that  very  comfortably,  for  months  together,  upon  oat¬ 
meal  and  barley  meal,  mixed  with  only  water  and  salt.” 
{Op.  cit.y  Vol.  I,  Book  i,  ch.  2,  p.  503.)  The  same  sort  of 
hints  in  the  nineteenth  century.  “The  most  wholesome 
mixtures  of  flour  having  been  refused”  (by  the  English 
agricultural  labourer)  “. . .  in  Scotland,  where  education 
is  better,  this  prejudice  is  probably  unknown.”  (Charles 
H.  Parry.  M.D.,  The  Question  of  the  necessity  of  the  existing 
Corn  Laws  considered ,  London,  1816,  p.  69.)  This  same 
Parry,  however,  complains  that  the  English  labourer  is 
now  (1815)  in  a  much  worse  condition  than  in  Eden's 
time  (1787). 

7  From  the  reports  of  the  last  Parliamentary  Commis¬ 
sion  on  adulteration  of  means  of  subsistence,  it  will  be 
seen  that  the  adulteration  even  of  medicines  is  the  rule,  not 
the  exception  in  England.  For  instance,  the  examination 
of  34  specimens  of  opium,  purchased  of  as  many  different 
chemists  in  London,  showed  that  31  were  adulterated  with 
poppy  heads,  flour,  gum,  clay,  sand,  etc.  Several  did  not 
contain  an  atom  of  morphia. 

»  G.  B.  Newnham,  barrister-at-law,  A  Review  of  the  Evi¬ 
dence  before  the  Committee  of  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament 
on  the  Corn  Laws ,  London,  1815,  p.  28,  note. 


CAPITAL 


298 

bour  been  made  up  to  the  labourers  out  of  the 
poors’  rate?"  Answer:  "Yes,  it  has;  the  weekly 
income  of  every  family  is  made  up  to  the  gallon 
loaf  (8  pounds  1 1  ounces),  and  $d.  per  head! . . . 
The  gallon  loaf  per  week  is  what  we  suppose 
sufficient  for  the  maintenance  of  every  person 
in  the  family  for  the  week;  and  the  $d.  is  for 
clothes,  and,  if  the  parish  think  proper  to  find 
clothes,  the  3</.  is  deducted.  This  practice  goes 
through  all  the  western  part  of  Wiltshire,  and, 
I  believe,  throughout  the  country.’*1  "For 
years,"  exclaims  a  bourgeois  author  of  that 
time,  "they"  (the  farmers)  "have  degraded  a 
respectable  class  of  their  countrymen,  by  forc¬ 
ing  them  to  have  recourse  to  the  workhouse  . . . 
the  farmer,  while  increasing  his  own  gains,  has 
prevented  any  accumulation  on  the  part  of  his 
labouring  dependants."2  The  part  played  in  our 
days  by  the  direct  robbery  from  the  labourer’s 
necessary  consumption  fund  in  the  formation 
of  surplus  value,  and,  therefore,  of  the  accumu¬ 
lation  fund  of  capital,  the  so-called  domestic  in¬ 
dustry  has  served  to  show.  (Ch.  xv,  sect.  8, 
§  r.)  Further  facts  on  this  subject  will  be  given 
later. 

Although  in  all  branches  of  industry  that 
part  of  the  constant  capital  consisting  of  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour  must  be  sufficient  for  a  certain 
number  of  labourers  (determined  by  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  undertaking),  it  by  no  means  al¬ 
ways  necessarily  increases  in  the  same  propor¬ 
tion  as  the  quantity  of  labour  employed.  In.a 
factory,  suppose  that  100  labourers  working  8 
hours  a  day  yield  800  working  hours.  If  the  cap¬ 
italist  wishes  to  raise  this  sum  by  one-half,  he 
can  employ  50  more  workers;  but  then  he  must 
also  advance  more  capital,  not  merely  for  wages 
but  for  instruments  of  labour.  But  he  might  also 
let  the  100  labourers  work  12  hours  instead  of  8, 
and  then  the  instruments  of  labour  already  to 
hand  would  be  enough.  These  would  then  sim¬ 
ply  be  more  rapidly  consumed.  Thus  additional 
labour,  begotten  of  the  greater  tension  of  labour 
power,  can  augment  surplus  product  and  sur¬ 
plus  value  (i.e.,  the  subject  matter  of  accumula¬ 
tion),  without  corresponding  augmentation  in 
the  constant  part  of  capital. 

In  the  extractive  industries,  mines,  etc.,  the 
raw  materials  form  no  part  of  the  capital  ad¬ 
vanced.  The  subject  of  labour  is  in  this  case  not 

1  Op.  at.,  pp.  19, 20. 

*  C.  H.  Parry,  op.  cit.,  pp.  69, 77.  The  landlords,  on  their 
side,  not  only  “indemnified”  themselves  for  the  anti-Jaco- 
bin  war,  which  they  waged  in  the  name  of  England,  but 
enriched  themselves  enormously.  Their  rents  doubled, 
trebled,  quadrupled,  “and  in  one  instance,  increased  six¬ 
fold  in  eighteen  years.” — op.  cit .,  pp.  100, 101. 


a  product  of  previous  labour,  but  is  furnished 
by  Nature  gratis,  as  in  the  case  of  metals,  min¬ 
erals,  coal,  stone,  etc.  In  these  cases  the  con¬ 
stant  capital  consists  almost  exclusively  of  in¬ 
struments  of  labour,  which  can  very  well  ab¬ 
sorb  an  increased  quantity  of  labour  (day  and 
night  shifts  of  labourers,  for  example).  All  other 
things  being  equal,  the  mass  and  value  of  the 
product  will  rise  in  direct  proportion  to  the  la¬ 
bour  expended.  As  on  the  first  day  of  produc¬ 
tion,  the  original  produce- formers,  now  turned 
into  the  creators  of  the  material  elements  of 
capital — man  and  Nature — still  work  together. 
Thanks  to  the  elasticity  of  labour  power,  the 
domain  of  accumulation  has  extended  without 
any  previous  enlargement  of  constant  capital. 

In  agriculture,  the  land  under  cultivation 
cannot  be  increased  without  the  advance  of 
more  seed  and  manure.  But  this  advance  once 
made,  the  purely  mechanical  working  of  the  soil 
itself  produces  a  marvellous  effect  on  the 
amount  of  the  product.  A  greater  quantity  of 
labour,  done  by  the  same  number  of  labourers 
as  before  thus  increases  the  fertility,  without 
requiring  any  new  advance  in  the  instruments 
of  labour.  It  is  once  again  the  direct  action  of 
man  on  Nature  which  becomes  an  immediate 
source  of  greater  accumulation,  without  the  in¬ 
tervention  of  any  new  capital. 

Finally,  in  what  is  called  manufacturing  in¬ 
dustry,  every  additional  expenditure  of  labour 
presupposes  a  corresponding  additional  ex¬ 
penditure  of  raw  materials,  but  not  necessarily 
of  instruments  of  labour.  And  as  extractive  in¬ 
dustry  and  agriculture  supply  manufacturing 
industry  with  its  raw  materials  and  those  of  its 
instruments  of  labour,  the  additional  product 
the  former  have  created  without  additional  ad¬ 
vance  of  capital  tells  also  in  favour  of  the  latter. 

Let  us  consider  the  general  result.  By  incor¬ 
porating  with  itself  the  two  primary  creators  of 
wealth,  labour  power  and  the  land,  capital  ac¬ 
quires  a  power  of  expansion  that  permits  it  to 
augment  the  elements  of  its  accumulation  be¬ 
yond  the  limits  apparently  fixed  by  its  own 
magnitude,  or  by  the  value  and  the  mass  of  the 
means  of  production,  already  produced,  in 
which  it  has  its  being. 

Another  important  factor  in  the  accumula¬ 
tion  of  capital  is  the  degree  of  productivity 
of  social  labour. 

With  the  productive  power  of  labour  in¬ 
creases  the  mass  of  the  products,  in  which  a  cer¬ 
tain  value,  and  therefore,  a  surplus  value  of  a 
given  magnitude,  is  embodied.  The  rate  of  sur¬ 
plus  value  remaining  the  same  or  even  falling, 


CONVERSION  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE  INTO  CAPITAL 


so  long  as  it  only  falls  more  slowly  than  the  pro¬ 
ductive  power  of  labour  rises,  the  mass  of  the 
surplus  product  increases.  The  division  of  this 
product  into  revenue  and  additional  capital  re¬ 
maining  the  same,  the  consumption  of  the  cap¬ 
italist  may,  therefore,  increase  without  any  de¬ 
crease  in  the  fund  of  accumulation.  The  relative 
magnitude  of  the  accumulation  fund  may  even 
increase  at  the  expense  of  the  consumption 
fund,  whilst  the  cheapening  of  commodities 
places  at  the  disposal  of  the  capitalist  as  many 
means  of  enjoyment  as  formerly,  or  even  more 
than  formerly.  But  hand-in-hand  with  the  in¬ 
creasing  productivity  of  labour  goes,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  cheapening  of  the  labourer,  therefore 
a  higher  rate  of  surplus  value,  even  when  the 
real  wages  are  rising.  The  latter  never  rise  pro¬ 
portionally  to  the  productive  power  of  labour. 
The  same  value  in  variable  capital,  therefore, 
sets  in  movement  more  labour  power,  and, 
therefore,  more  labour.  The  same  value  in  con¬ 
stant  capital  is  embodied  in  more  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  i.e.,  in  m  w  instruments  of  labour,  ma¬ 
terials  of  labour  and  auxiliary  materials;  it 
therefore  also  supplies  more  elements  for  the 
production  both  of  use-value  and  of  value,  and 
with  these  more  absorbers  of  labour.  The  value 
of  the  additional  capital,  therefore,  remaining 
the  same  or  even  diminishing,  accelerated  ac¬ 
cumulation  still  takes  place.  Not  only  does  the 
scale  of  reproduction  materially  extend,  but  the 
production  of  surplus  value  increases  more  rap¬ 
idly  than  the  value  of  the  additional  capital. 

The  development  of  the  productive  power  of 
labour  reacts  also  on  the  original  capital  al¬ 
ready  engaged  in  the  process  of  production.  A 
part  of  the  functioning  constant  capital  con¬ 
sists  of  instruments  of  labour,  such  as  machin¬ 
ery,  etc.,  which  are  not  consumed,  and  therefore 
not  reproduced,  or  replaced  by  new  ones  of  the 
same  kind,  until  after  long  periods  of  time.  But 
every  year  a  part  of  these  instruments  of  labour 
perishes  or  reaches  the  limit  of  its  productive 
function.  It  reaches,  therefore,  in  that  year,  the 
time  for  its  periodical  reproduction,  for  its  re¬ 
placement  by  new  ones  of  the  same  kind.  If  the 
'productiveness  of  labour  has,  during  the  using 
up  of  these  instruments  of  labour,  increased 
(and  it  develops  continually  with  the  uninter¬ 
rupted  advance  of  science  and  technology), 
more  efficient  and  (considering  their  increased 
efficiency)  cheaper  machines,  tools,  apparatus, 
etc.,  replace  the  old.  The  old  capital  is  repro¬ 
duced  in  a  more  productive  form,  apart  from 
the  constant  detail  improvements  in  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour  already  in  use.  The  other  part 


299 

of  the  constant  capital,  raw  material  and  aux¬ 
iliary  substances,  is  constantly  reproduced  in 
less  than  a  year;  those  produced  by  agriculture, 
for  the  most  part,  annually.  Every  introduc¬ 
tion  of  improved  methods,  therefore,  works  al¬ 
most  simultaneously  on  the  new  capital  and  on 
that  already  in  action.  Every  advance  in  chem¬ 
istry  not  only  multiplies  the  number  of  useful 
materials  and  the  useful  applications  of  those 
already  known,  thus  extending  with  the  growth 
of  capital  its  sphere  of  investment.  It  teaches  at 
the  same  time  how  to  throw  the  excrements  of 
the  processes  of  production  and  consumption 
back  again  into  the  circle  of  the  process  of  re¬ 
production,  and  thus,  without  any  previous 
outlay  of  capita],  creates  new  matter  for  capi¬ 
tal.  Like  the  increased  exploitation  of  natural 
wealth  by  the  mere  increase  in  the  tension  of 
labour  power,  science  and  technology  give  cap¬ 
ital  a  power  of  expansion  independent  of  the 
given  magnitude  of  the  capital  actually  func¬ 
tioning.  They  react  at  the  same  time  on  that 
part  of  the  original  capital  which  has  entered 
upon  its  stage  of  renewal.  This,  in  passing  into 
its  new  shape,  incorporates  gratis  the  social  ad¬ 
vance  made  while  its  old  shape  was  being  used 
up.  Of  course,  this  development  of  productive 
power  is  accompanied  by  a  partial  depreciation 
of  functioning  capital.  So  far  as  this  deprecia¬ 
tion  makes  itself  acutely  felt  in  competition, 
the  burden  falls  on  the  labourer,  in  the  in¬ 
creased  exploitation  of  whom  the  capitalist 
looks  for  his  indemnification. 

Labour  transmits  to  its  product  the  value  of 
the  means  of  production  consumed  by  it.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  value  and  mass  of  the  means 
of  production  set  in  motion  by  a  given  quantity 
of  labour  increase  as  the  labour  becomes  more 
productive.  Though  the  same  quantity  of  la¬ 
bour  adds  always  to  its  products  only  the  same 
sum  of  new  value,  still  the  old  capital  value, 
transmitted  by  the  labour  to  the  products,  in¬ 
creases  with  the  growing  productivity  of  la¬ 
bour. 

An  English  and  a  Chinese  spinner,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  may  work  the  same  number  of  hours 
with  the  same  intensity;  then  they  will  both 
in  a  week  create  equal  values.  But  in  spite  of 
this  equality,  an  immense  difference  will  obtain 
between  the  value  of  the  week’s  product  of  the 
Englishman,  who  works  with  a  mighty  automa¬ 
ton,  and  that  of  the  Chinaman,  who  has  but  a 
spinning-wheel.  In  the  same  time  as  the  China¬ 
man  spins  one  pound  of  cotton,  the  Englishman 
spins  several  hundreds  of  pounds.  A  sum,  many 
hundred  times  as  great,  of  old  values  swells  the 


CAPITAL 


300 

value  of  his  product,  in  which  those  reappear  in 
a  new,  useful  form,  and  can  thus  function  anew 
as  capital.  “In  1782,“  as  Friedrich  Engels 
teaches  us,  “all  the  wool  crop  in  England  of  the 
three  preceding  years  lay  untouched  for  want 
of  labourers,  and  so  it  must  have  lain,  if  newly 
invented  machinery  had  not  come  to  its  aid  and 
spun  it.’*1  Labour  embodied  in  the  form  of  ma¬ 
chinery,  of  course,  did  not  directly  force  into 
life  a  single  man,  but  it  made  it  possible  for  a 
smaller  number  of  labourers,  with  the  addition 
of  relatively  less  living  labour,  not  only  to  con¬ 
sume  the  wool  productively  and  put  into  it  new 
value,  but  to  preserve  in  the  form  of  yarn,  etc., 
its  old  value.  At  the  same  time,  it  caused  and 
stimulated  increased  reproduction  of  wool.  It 
is  the  natural  property  of  living  labour  to  trans¬ 
mit  old  value  whilst  it  creates  new.  Hence,  with 
the  increase  in  efficacy,  extent,  and  value  of  its 
means  of  production,  consequently  with  the  ac¬ 
cumulation  that  accompanies  the  development 
of  its  productive  power,  labour  keeps  up  and 
eternizes  an  always  increasing  capital  value  in 
a  form  ever  new.2  This  natural  power  of  labour 

1  Friedrich  Engels,  Lage  der  arbeitenden  Klasse  in  Eng - 
land'  p,  20. 

*  Classic  economy  has,  on  account  of  a  deficient  analysis 
of  the  labour  process,  and  of  the  process  of  creating  value, 
never  properly  grasped  this  weighty  element  of  reproduc¬ 
tion,  as  may  be  seen  in  Ricardo;  he  says,  e.g.,  whatever 
the  change  in  productive  power,  “a  million  men  always 
produce  in  manufactures  the  same  value/'  This  is  accurate, 
if  the  extension  and  degree  of  intensity  of  their  labour  are 
given.  But  it  does  not  prevent  (this  Ricardo  overlooks  in 
certain  conclusions  he  draws)  a  million  men  with  different 
powers  of  productivity  in  their  labour,  turning  into  prod¬ 
ucts  very  different  masses  of  the  means  of  production,  and 
therefore  preserving  m  their  products  very  different  masses 
of  value;  in  consequence  of  which  the  values  of  the  products 
yielded  may  vary  considerably.  Ricardo  has,  it  may  be 
noted  in  passing,  tried  in  vain  to  make  clear  to  J.  B.  Say, 
by  that  very  example,  the  difference  between  use-value 
(which  he  here  calls  wealth  or  material  riches)  and  ex¬ 
change-value.  Say  answers:  “As  for  the  difficulty  raised  by 
Dr.  Ricardo  when  he  says  a  million  men  can  produce,  by 
means  of  better  processes,  twice  and  even  three  times  as 
much  wealth  without  creating  more  value,  this  ceases  to 
be  a  real  difficulty  if  we  consider  (as  we  should)  production 
as  an  exchange  in  which  one  gives  the  productive  services 
of  his  labour,  his  land,  and  his  capital,  in  order  to  obtain 
products.  It  is  by  means  of  these  productive  services  that 
we  acquire  all  the  products  there  are  in  the  world^ut . . . 
we  are  the  richer,  our  productive  services  have  greater  val¬ 
ue,  to  the  degree  that,  in  the  exchange  known  as  produc¬ 
tion,  they  obtain  a  greater  number  of  useful  things/'  (J. 
B.  Say,  Lettres  h  M.  Malthas,  Paris,  1820,  pp.  168,  169.) 
The  “difficulty"— it  exists  for  him,  not  for  Ricardo— that 
Say  means  to  clear  up  is  this:  Why  does  not  the  exchange- 
value  of  the  use-values  increase  when  their  quantity  in¬ 
creases  in  consequence  of  increased  productive  power  of 
labour?  Answer:  the  difficulty  is  met  by  calling  use-value 
exchange-value,  if  you  please.  Exchange-value  is  a  thing 


takes  the  appearance  of  an  intrinsic  property  of 
capital,  in  which  it  is  incorporated,  just  as  the 
productive  forces  of  social  labour  take  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  inherent  properties  of  capital,  and 
as  the  constant  appropriation  of  surplus  labour 
by  the  capitalists  takes  that  of  a  constant  self¬ 
expansion  of  capital. 

With  the  increase  of  capital,  the  difference 
between  the  capital  employed  and  the  capital 
consumed  increases.  In  other  words,  there  is  in¬ 
crease  in  the  value  and  the  material  mass  of  the 
instruments  of  labour,  such  as  buildings,  ma¬ 
chinery,  drain-pipes,  working  cattle,  apparatus 
of  every  kind  that  function  for  a  longer  or  short¬ 
er  time  in  processes  of  production  constantly 
repeated,  or  that  serve  for  the  attainment  of 
particular  useful  effects,  whilst  they  themselves 
only  gradually  wear  out,  therefore  only  lose 
their  value  piecemeal,  therefore  transfer  that 
value  to  the  product  only  bit  by  bit.  I n  the  same 
proportion  as  these  instruments  of  labour  serve 
as  product-formers  without  adding  value  to  the 
product,  (i.e.,  in  the  same  proportion  as  they 
are  wholly  employed  but  only  partly  con- 

that  is  connected  one  way  or  another  with  exchange.  If, 
therefore,  production  is  called  an  exchange  of  labour  and 
means  of  production  against  the  product,  it  is  dear  as  day 
that  you  obtain  more  exchange-value  in  proportion  as  the 
production  yields  more  use-value.  In  other  words,  the  more 
use-values,  for  example,  stockings,  a  working  day  jields  ro 
the  stocking-manufacturer,  the  richer  is  he  in  stockings. 
Suddenly,  however,  Say  recollects  tKal  “with  a  greatci 
quantity"  of  stockings  their  “price"  (which  of  course  has 
nothing  to  do  with  their  exchange-value!)  falls  “because 
the  competition  forces  them  (the  producers)  to  surrender 
the  products  for  what  they  cost  them."  But  whence  does 
the  profit  come,  if  the  capitalist  sells  the  commodities  at 
cost-price?  Never  mind!  Say  declares  that,  in  consequence 
of  increased  productivity,  every  one  now  receives  in  re¬ 
turn  for  a  given  equivalent  two  pairs  of  stockings  instead 
of  one  as  before.  The  result  he  arrives  at  is  precisely  that 
proposition  of  Ricardo  that  he  aimed  at  disproving.  After 
this  mighty  effort  of  thought,  he  triumphantly  apostro¬ 
phizes  Malthus  in  the  words:  “Sir,  this  is  the  well-knit 
doctrine,  without  which  it  is  impossible,  I  insist,  to  explain 
the  greatest  difficulties  of  political  economy,  and  especially 
how  it  happens  that  a  nation  is  richer  while  its  products 
decrease  in  value,  despite  the  fact  that  wealth  represents 
value."  (Op.  ci/.,  p.  170.)  An  English  economist  remarks 
upon  the  conjuring  tricks  of  the  same  nature  that  appear 
in  Say's  Lettres:  “Those  affected  ways  of  talking  make  up 
in  general  that  which  M.  Say  is  pleased  totcall  his  doctrine 
and  which  he  earnestly  urges  Malthus  to  teach  at  Hert¬ 
ford,  as  it  is  already  taught  Tn  several  parts  of  Europe/ 
He  says,  'If  you  find  in  all  these  propositions  an  appear¬ 
ance  of  paradox,  examine  the  things  for  which  they  stand, 
and  I  am  sure  you  will  find  them  quite  timple  and  very 
reasonable/  Doubtless,  and  in  consequence  of  the  same 
process,  they  will  appear  everything  else  except  original." 
(An  Inquiry  into  those  Principles  respecting  the  Nature  of 
Demand ,  etc.,  pp.  1 10, 116.) 


CONVERSION  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE  INTO  CAPITAL 


Burned),  they  perform,  as  we  saw  earlier,  the 
same  gratuitous  service  as  the  natural  forces, 
water,  steam,  air,  electricity,  etc.  This  gratui¬ 
tous  service  of  past  labour,  when  seized  and 
filled  with  a  soul  by  living  labour,  increases  with 
the  advancing  stages  of  accumulation. 

Since  past  labour  always  disguises  itself  as 
capital,  i.e.,  since  the  “liabilities’*  of  the  labour 
of  Ay  By  Cy  etc.,  takes  the  form  of  the  “assets’* 
of  the  non-labourer  X,  bourgeois  and  political 
economists  are  full  of  praises  of  the  services  of 
dead  and  gone  labour,  which,  according  to  the 
Scotch  genius  McCulloch,  ought  to  receive  a 
special  remuneration  in  the  shape  of  interest, 
profit,  etc.1  The  powerful  and  ever-increasing 
assistance  given  by  past  labour  to  the  living  la¬ 
bour  process  under  the  form  of  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  is,  therefore,  attributed  to  that  form  of 
past  labour  in  which  it  is  alienated,  as  unpaid 
labour,  from  the  worker  himself,  i.e.,  to  its  cap¬ 
italistic  form.  The  practical  agents  of  capital¬ 
istic  production  and  their  pettifogging  ideolo¬ 
gists  are  as  unable  to  think  of  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  as  scpurau.  fiom  the  antagonistic  social 
mask  they  wear  today,  as  a  slave-owner  to  think 
of  the  worker  himself  as  distinct  from  his  char¬ 
acter  as  a  slave. 

With  a  given  degree  of  exploitation  of  labour 
power,  the  mass  of  the  surplus  value  produced 
is  determined  by  the  number  of  workers  simul¬ 
taneously  exploited;  and  this  corresponds,  al¬ 
though  in  varying  proportions,  with  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  capital.  The  more,  therefore,  cap¬ 
ital  increases  by  means  of  successive  accumula¬ 
tions,  the  more  does  the  sum  of  the  value  in¬ 
crease  that  is  divided  into  consumption  fund 
and  accumulation  fund.  The  capitalist  can, 
therefore,  live  a  more  jolly  life,  and  at  the  same 
time  show  more  “abstinence.**  And  finally,  all 
the  springs  of  production  act  with  greater  elas¬ 
ticity,  the  more  its  scale  extends  with  the  mass 
of  the  capital  advanced. 

5.  The  so-called  Labour  Fund 

It  has  been  shown  in  the  course  of  this  in¬ 
quiry  that  capital  is  not  a  fixed  magnitude,  but 
is  a  part  of  social  wealth,  elastic  and  constantly 
fluctuating  with  the  division  of  fresh  surplus 
value  into  revenue  and  additional  capital.  It 
has  been  seen  further  that,  even  with  a  given 
magnitude  of  functioning  capital,  the  labour 
power,  the  science,  and  the  land  (by  which  are 
to  be  understood,  economically,  all  conditions 

1  McCulloch  took  out  a  patent  for  “wages  of  past  la¬ 
bour,"  long  before  Senior  did  for  “wages  of  abstinence." 


301 

of  labour  furnished  by  Nature  independently  of 
man),  embodied  in  it,  form  elastic  powers  of 
capital,  allowing  it,  within  certain  limits,  a  field 
of  action  independent  of  its  own  magnitude.  In 
this  inquiry  we  have  neglected  all  effects  of  the 
process  of  circulation,  effects  which  may  pro¬ 
duce  very  different  degrees  of  efficiency  in  the 
same  mass  of  capital.  And  as  we  presupposed 
the  limits  set  by  capitalist  production— that  is 
to  say,  presupposed  the  process  of  social  pro¬ 
duction  in  a  form  developed  by  purely  spon¬ 
taneous  growth— we  neglected  any  more 
rational  combination,  directly  and  systemati¬ 
cally  practicable  with  the  means  of  production, 
and  the  mass  of  labour  power  at  present  dispos¬ 
able.  Classical  economy  always  loved  to  con¬ 
ceive  social  capital  as  a  fixed  magnitude  of  a 
fixed  degree  of  efficiency.  But  this  prejudice 
was  first  established  as  a  dogma  by  the  arch- 
Philistine,  Jeremy  Bentham,  that  insipid,  pe¬ 
dantic,  leathet-tongued  oracle  of  the  ordinary 
bourgeois  intelligence  of  the  nineteenth  cen¬ 
tury.2  Bentham  is  among  philosophers  what 
Martin  Tupper  is  among  poets.  Both  could  only 
have  been  manufactured  in  England.3  In  thd 
light  of  his  dogma,  the  commonest  phenomena 
of  the  process  of  production,  as,  for  example, 
its  sudden  expansions  and  contractions,  nay, 
even  accumulation  itself,  become  perfectly  in- 

3  Compare  among  others,  Jeremy  Bentham,  Thiorie  des 
Peines  el  des  recompenses,  French  translation  by  Etienne 
Dumont,  third  edition,  Paris,  1826,  Vol.  II,  Book  iv, 
ch.  2. 

1  Bentham  is  a  purely  English  phenomenon.  Not  even 
excepting  our  philosopher,  Christian  Wolf,  in  no  time  and 
in  no  country  has  the  most  homespun  commonplace  ever 
strutted  about  in  so  self-satisfied  a  way.  The  principle  of 
utility  was  no  discovery  of  Bentham.  He  simply  repro¬ 
duced  in  his  dull  way  what  Helvetius  and  other  French¬ 
men  had  said  with  esprit  in  the  eighteenth  century.  To 
know  what  is  useful  for  a  dog,  one  must  study  dog-nature. 
This  nature  itself  is  not  to  be  deduced  from  the  principle 
of  utility.  Applying  this  to  man,  he  that  would  criticize  all 
human  acts,  movements,  relations,  etc.,  by  the  principle 
of  utility,  must  first  deal  with  human  nature  in  general, 
and  then  with  human  nature  as  modified  in  each  historical 
epoch.  Bentham  makes  short  work  of  it.  With  the  dryest 
nalvetd  he  takes  the  modern  shopkeeper,  especially  the 
English  shopkeeper,  as  the  normal  man.  Whatever  is  use¬ 
ful  to  this  queer  normal  man,  and  to  his  world,  is  absolutely 
useful.  This  yard-measure,  then,  he  applies  to  past,  pres¬ 
ent,  and  future.  The  Christian  religion,  for  example,  is 
“usefiil,"  because  it  forbids  in  the  name  of  religion  the 
same  faults  that  the  penal  code  condemns  in  the  name  of 
the  law.  Artistic  criticism  is  “harmful,"  because  it  disturbs 
worthy  people  in  their  enjoyment  of  Martin  Tupper,  etc. 
With  such  rubbish  has  the  brave  fellow,  with  his  motto; 
“ Nulla  dies  sine  lined ,”  ["No  day  without  a  lineof  writing"] 
piled  up  mountains  of  books.  Had  I  the  courage  of  my 
friend,  Heinrich  Heine,  I  should  call  Mr.  Jeremy  a  genius 
in  the  way  of  bourgeois  stupidity. 


CAPITAL 


302 

conceivable.1  The  dogma  was  used  by  Bentham 
himself,  as  well  as  by  Mai  thus,  James  Mill,  Mc¬ 
Culloch,  etc.,  for  an  apologetic  purpose,  and  es¬ 
pecially  in  order  to  represent  one  part  of  capi¬ 
tal,  namely,  variable  capital,  or  that  part  con¬ 
vertible  into  labour  power,  as  a  fixed  magni¬ 
tude.  The  material  of  variable  capital,  i.e.,  the 
mass  of  the  means  of  subsistence  it  represents 
for  the  labourer,  or  the  so-called  labour  fund, 
was  fabled  as  a  separate  part  of  social  wealth, 
fixed  by  natural  laws  and  unchangeable.  To  set 
in  motion  the  part  of  social  wealth  which  is  to 
function  as  constant  capital,  or,  to  express  it  in 
a  material  form,  as  means  of  production,  a  defi¬ 
nite  mass  of  living  labour  is  required.  This  mass 
is  given  technologically.  But  neither  is  the  num¬ 
ber  of  labourers  required  to  render  fluid  thi9 
mass  of  labour  power  given  (it  changes  with  the 
degree  of  exploitation  of  the  individual  labour 
power),  nor  is  the  price  of  this  labour  power 
given,  but  only  its  minimum  limit,  which  is 
moreover  very  variable.  The  facts  that  lie  at 
the  bottom  of  this  dogma  are  these:  on  the  one 
hand,  the  labourer  has  no  right  to  interfere  in 
the  division  of  social  wealth  into  means  of  en¬ 
joyment  for  the  non-labourer  and  means  of  pro¬ 
duction.2  On  the  other  hand,  only  in  favourable 
and  exceptional  cases,  has  he  the  power  to  en¬ 
large  the  so-called  labour  fund  at  the  expense 
of  the  “revenue”  of  the  wealthy. 

What  silly  tautology  results  from  the  at¬ 
tempt  to  represent  the  capitalistic  limits  of  the 
labour  fund  as  its  natural  and  social  limits  may 

1  “Political  economists  are  too  apt  to  consider  a  certain 
quantity  of  capital  and  a  certain  number  of  labourers  as 
productive  instruments  of  uniform  power,  or  operating 
with  a  certain  uniform  intensity. . . .  Those . . .  who  main¬ 
tain  . . .  that  commodities  are  the  sole  agents  of  produc¬ 
tion  . . .  prove  that  production  could  never  be  enlarged,  for 
it  requires  as  an  indispensable  condition  to  such  an  en¬ 
largement  that  food,  raw  materials,  and  tools  should  be 
previously  augmented;  which  is  in  fact  maintaining  that 
no  increase  of  production  can  take  place  without  a  previous 
increase,  or,  in  other  words,  that  an  increase  is  impossible." 
(S.  Bailey,  Money  and  its  Pictssitudes,  pp.  26  and  7a) 
Bailey  criticizes  the  dogma  mainly  from  the  point  of  view 
of  the  process  of  circulation. 

*  John  Stuart  Mill,  in  his  Principles  of  Political  Economy  t 
says:  “The  really  exhausting  and  the  really  repulsive  la¬ 
bours,  instead  of  being  better  paid  than  others,  are  almost 
invariably  paid  the  worst  of  all.  . . .  The  more  revolting 
the  occupation,  the  more  certain  it  is  to  receive  the  mini¬ 
mum  of  remuneration.  . . .  The  hardships  and  the  earn¬ 
ings,  instead  of  being  directly  proportional,  as  in  any  just 
arrangements  of  society  they  would  be,  are  generally  in  an 
inverse  ratio  to  one  another."  To  avoid  misunderstanding, 
let  me  say  that  although  men  like  John  Stuart  Mill  are  to 
blame  for  the  contradiction  between  their  traditional  eco¬ 
nomic  dogmas  and  their  modern  tendencies,  it  would  be 
very  wrong  to  class  them  with  the  herd  of  vulgar  economic 
apologists. 


be  seen,  for  example,  in  Professor  Fawcett.1 
“The  circulating  capital  of  a  country,”  he  says, 
“is  its  wage  fund.  Hence,  if  we  desire  to  calcu¬ 
late  the  average  money  wages  received  by  each 
labourer,  we  have  simply  to  divide  the  amount 
of  this  capital  by  the  number  of  the  labouring 
population.”4  That  is  to  say  we  first  add  togeth¬ 
er  the  individual  wages  actually  paid,  and  then 
we  affirm  that  the  sum  thus  obtained  forms  the 
total  value  of  the  “labour  fund”  determined 
and  vouchsafed  to  us  by  God  and  Nature.  Last¬ 
ly,  we  divide  the  sum  thus  obtained  by  the  num¬ 
ber  of  labourers  to  find  out  again  how  much 
may  come  to  each  on  the  average.  An  uncom¬ 
monly  knowing  dodge  this.  It  did  not  prevent 
Mr.  Fawcett  saying  in  the  same  breath:  “The 
aggregate  wealth  which  is  annually  saved  in 
England  is  divided  into  two  portions;  one  por¬ 
tion  is  employed  as  capital  to  maintain  our  in¬ 
dustry,  and  the  other  portion  is  exported  to 
foreign  countries. . . .  Only  a  portion,  and,  per¬ 
haps,  not  a  large  portion  of  the  wealth  which 
is  annually  saved  in  this  country  is  invested  in 
our  own  industry.”6 

The  greater  part  of  the  yearly  accruing  sur¬ 
plus  product,  embezzled  from  the  English  la¬ 
bourer,  because  abstracted  without  return  of  an 
equivalent,  is  thus  used  as  capital,  not  in  Eng¬ 
land,  but  in  foreign  countries.  But  with  the  ad¬ 
ditional  capital  thus  exported,  a  part  of  the  “la¬ 
bour  fund”  invented  by  God  and  Bentham  is 
also  exported.® 


CHAPTER  XXV.  THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF 
CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION 


I.  The  increased  Demand for  Labour  Power  that 
accompanies  Accumulation ,  the  Composition 
of  Capital  remaining  the  same 
In  this  chapter  we  consider  the  influence  of  the 
growth  of  capital  on  the  lot  of  the  labouring 

*H.  Fawcett,  Professor  of  Political  Economy  at  Cam¬ 
bridge.  The  Economic  Position  of  the  British  Labourer ,  Lon¬ 
don,  1865,  p.  120. 

4  I  must  here  remind  the  reader  that  the  categories,  “va¬ 
riable  and  constant  capital,"  were  first  used  by  me.  Political 
economy  since  the  time  of  Adam  Smith  has  confusedly 
mixed  up  the  essential  distinctions  involved  in  these  cate¬ 
gories,  with  the  mere  formal  differences,  arising  out  of  the 
process  of  circulation,  of  fixed  and  circulating  capital.  For 
further  details  on  this  point,  see  Book  Two,  Part  Two. 

•  Fawcett,  op,  cit.y  pp.  122, 123. 

•It  might  be  said  that  not  only  capital,  but  also  labour¬ 
ers,  in  the  shape  of  emigrants,  are  annually  exported  from 
England.  In  the  text,  however,  there  is  no  question  of  the 
peculium  of  the  emigrants,  who  are  in  great  part  not  la- 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  303 


class.  The  most  important  factor  in  this  inquiry 
is  the  composition  of  capital  and  the  changes  it 
undergoes  in  the  course  of  the  process  of  ac¬ 
cumulation. 

The  composition  of  capital  is  to  be  understood 
in  a  twofold  sense.  On  the  side  of  value,  it  is 
determined  by  the  proportion  in  which  it  is  di¬ 
vided  into  constant  capital  or  value  of  the 
means  of  production,  and  variable  capital  or 
value  of  labour  power,  the  sum-total  of  wages. 
On  the  side  of  material,  as  it  functions  in  the 
process  of  production,  all  capital  is  divided  into 
means  of  production  and  living  labour  power. 
This  latter  composition  is  determined  by  the 
relation  between  the  mass  of  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  employed,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
mass  of  labour  necessary  for  their  employment, 
on  the  other.  I  call  the  former  the  value-composi¬ 
tion ,  the  latter  the  technical  composition  of  capi¬ 
tal.  Between  the  two  there  is  a  strict  correlation. 
To  express  this,  I  call  the  value  composition  of 
capital,  in  so  far  as  it  is  determined  by  its  tech¬ 
nical  composition  and  mirrors  the  changes  of 
the  latter,  the  organic  composition  of  capital. 
Whenever  I  refer  to  the  composition  of  capital 
without  further  qualification,  its  organic  com¬ 
position  is  always  understood. 

The  many  individual  capitals  invested  in  a 
particular  branch  of  production  have,  one  with 
another,  more  or  less  different  compositions. 
The  average  of  their  individual  compositions 
gives  us  the  composition  of  the  total  capital  in 
this  branch  of  production.  Lastly,  the  average 
of  these  averages,  in  all  branches  of  production, 
gives  us  the  composition  of  the  total  social  capi¬ 
tal  of  a  country,  and  with  this  alone  are  we,  in 
the  last  resort,  concerned  in  the  following  in¬ 
vestigation. 

Growth  of  capital  involves  growth  of  its  vari¬ 
able  constituent  or  of  the  part  invested  in  la¬ 
bour  power.  A  part  of  the  surplus  value  turned 
into  additional  capital  must  always  be  re-trans- 
formed  into  variable  capital,  or  additional  la¬ 
bour  fund.  If  we  suppose  that,  all  other  circum¬ 
stances  remaining  the  same,  the  composition  of 
capital  also  remains  constant  (i.c.,  that  a  defi¬ 
nite  mass  of  means  of  production  constantly 
needs  the  same  mass  of  labour  power  to  set  it  in 
motion),  then  the  demand  for  labour  and  the 
subsistence  fund  of  the  labourers  clearly  in¬ 
crease  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  capital, 

bourers.  The  sons  of  farmers  make  up  a  great  part  of  them. 
The  additional  capital  annually  transported  abroad  to  be 
put  out  at  interest  is  in  much  greater  proportion  to  the  an¬ 
nual  accumulation  than  the  yearly  emigration  is  to  the 
yearly  increase  of  population. 


and  the  more  rapidly,  the  more  rapidly  the  capi¬ 
tal  increases.  Since  the  capital  produces  yearly 
a  surplus  value,  of  which  one  part  is  yearly 
added  to  the  original  capital;  since  this  incre¬ 
ment  itself  grows  yearly  along  with  the  aug¬ 
mentation  of  the  capital  already  functioning; 
since,  lastly,  under  special  stimulus  to  enrich¬ 
ment,  such  as  the  opening  of  new  markets,  or  of 
new  spheres  for  the  outlay  of  capital  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  newly  developed  social  wants,  etc., 
the  scale  of  accumulation  may  be  suddenly  ex¬ 
tended,  merely  by  a  change  in  the  division  of 
the  surplus  value  or  surplus  product  into  capi¬ 
tal  and  revenue,  the  requirements  of  accumu¬ 
lating  capital  may  exceed  the  increase  of  la¬ 
bour  power  or  of  the  number  of  labourers; 
the  demand  for  labourers  may  exceed  the  sup¬ 
ply,  and,  therefore,  wages  may  rise.  This  must, 
indeed,  ultimately  be  the  case  if  the  condi¬ 
tions  supposed  above  continue.  For  since  in 
each  year  more  labourers  are  employed  than 
in  its  predecessor,  sooner  or  later  a  point  must 
be  reached  at  which  the  requirements  of  accu¬ 
mulation  begin  to  surpass  the  customary  sup¬ 
ply  of  labour,  and,  therefore,  a  rise  of  wages 
takes  place.  A  lamentation  on  this  score  was 
heard  in  England  during  the  whole  of  the 
fifteenth,  and  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth 
centuries.  The  more  or  less  favourable  circum¬ 
stances  in  which  the  wage-earning  class  sup¬ 
ports  and  multiplies  itself  in  no  way  alter  the 
fundamental  character  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion.  As  simple  reproduction  constantly  repro¬ 
duces  the  capital  relation  itself,  i.e.,  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  capitalists,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
wage-earners  on  the  other,  so  reproduction  on 
a  progressive  scale,  i.e.,  accumulation,  repro¬ 
duces  the  capital  relation  on  a  progressive  scale, 
with  more  capitalists  or  larger  capitalists  at  this 
pole,  more  wage-earners  at  that.  The  reproduc¬ 
tion  of  a  mass  of  labour  power,  which  must  in¬ 
cessantly  re-incorporate  itself  with  capital  for 
that  capital’s  self-expansion;  which  cannot  get 
free  from  capital,  and  whose  enslavement  to 
capital  is  only  concealed  by  the  variety  of  indi¬ 
vidual  capitalists  to  whom  it  sells  itself,  this  re¬ 
production  of  labour  power  forms,  in  fact,  an 
essential  of  the  reproduction  of  capita]  itself. 
Accumulation  of  capital  is,  therefore,  increase 
of  the  proletariat.1 

1  Karl  Marx,  op.  cit. — "The  amount  of  oppression  of  the 
masses  remaining  equal,  then  the  more  proletarians  a  coun¬ 
try  has,  the  richer  it  is.”  (Collins,  L'iconomie  politique , 
source  des  revolutions  et  des  utopies  pritendues  sociaIistes9 
Paris,  1857,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  331.)  Our  "proletarian”  is  eco¬ 
nomically  none  other  than  the  wage  labourer,  who  pro¬ 
duces  and  increases  capital,  and  is  thrown  out  on  the  streets 


304  CAPITAL 


Classical  economy  grasped  this  fact  so  thor¬ 
oughly  that  Adam  Smith,  Ricardo,  etc.,  as  men¬ 
tioned  earlier,  inaccurately  identified  accumu¬ 
lation  with  the  consumption,  by  the  productive 
labourers,  of  all  the  capitalized  part  of  the  sur¬ 
plus  product,  or  with  its  transformation  into 
additional  wage  labourers.  As  early  as  1696 
John  Belters  wrote:  “For  if  one  had  a  hundred 
thousand  acres  of  land  and  as  many  pounds  in 
money,  and  as  many  cattle,  without  a  labourer, 
what  would  the  rich  man  be  but  a  labourer? 
And  as  the  labourers  make  men  rich,  so,  the 
more  labourers,  there  will  be  the  more  rich  men 
. . .  the  labour  of  the  poor  being  the  mines  of  the 
rich."1  So  also  Bernard  de  Mandeville  at  the 
beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century:  “It  would 
be  easier,  where  property  is  well  secured,  to  live 
without  money  than  without  poor;  for  who 
would  do  the  work? ...  As  they"  (the  poor) 
“ought  to  be  kept  from  starving,  so  they  should 
receive  nothing  worth  saving.  If  here  and  there 
one  of  the  lowest  class,  by  uncommon  industry 
and  pinching  his  belly,  lifts  himself  above  the 
condition  he  was  brought  up  in,  nobody  ought 
to  hinder  him;  nay,  it  is  undeniably  the  wisest 
course  for  every  person  in  the  society,  and  for 
every  private  family,  to  be  frugal;  but  it  is  the 
interest  of  all  rich  nations  that  the  greatest  part 
of  the  poor  should  almost  never  be  idle  and  yet 
continually  spend  what  they  get.  •  .  .  Those 
that  get  their  living  by  their  daily  labour  . . . 
have  nothing  to  stir  them  up  to  be  serviceable 
but  their  wants,  which  it  is  prudence  to  relieve, 
but  folly  to  cure.  The  only  thing,  then,  that  can 
render  the  labouring  man  industrious  is  a  mod¬ 
erate  quantity  of  money,  for  as  too  little  will, 
according  as  his  temper  is,  either  dispirit  or 
make  him  desperate,  so  too  much  will  make  him 
insolent  and  lazy. . . .  From  what  has  been  said, 
it  is  manifest  that,  in  a  free  nation,  where  slaves 
are  not  allowed  of,  the  surest  wealth  consists  in 
a  multitude  of  laborious  poor;  for  besides  that 
they  are  the  never-failing  nursery  of  fleets  and 
armies,  without  them  there  could  be  no  enjoy- 

u  soon  as  he  is  superfluous  for  the  needs  of  aggrandise¬ 
ment  of  “Monsieur  capital”  as  Pecqueur  calls  this  person. 
‘The  sickly  proletarian  of  the  primitive  forest,”  is  a  pretty 
Roscherian  fancy.  The  primitive  forester  is  owner  of  the 
primitive  forest,  and  uses  the  primitive  forest  as  his  prop¬ 
erty  with  the  freedom  of  an  orang-utang.  He  is  not,  there¬ 
fore,  a  proletarian.  This  would  only  be  the  case,  if  the 
primitive  forest  exploited  him,  instead  of  being  exploited 
ly  him.  As  far  as  his  health  is  concerned,  such  a  man  would 
well  bear  comparison,  not  only  with  the  modern  proletar¬ 
ian,  but  also  with  the  syphilitic  and  scrofulous  upper 
classes.  But,  no  doubt,  Herr  Wilhelm  Roscher  by  “prim¬ 
itive  forest”  means  his  native  heath  of  L&neburg. 

1  John  Bellers,  op.  «/.,  p.  2. 


ment,  and  no  product  of  any  country  could  be 
valuable.  To  make  the  society”  (which  of 
course  consists  of  non-workers)  “happy  and 
people  easier  under  the  meanest  circumstances, 
it  is  requisite  that  great  num  bers  of  them  should 
be  ignorant  as  well  as  poor;  knowledge  both  en¬ 
larges  and  multiplies  our  desires,  and  the  fewer 
things  a  man  wishes  for,  the  more  easily  his  ne¬ 
cessities  may  be  supplied.”2  What  Mandeville, 
an  honest,  clear-headed  man,  had  not  yet  seen 
is  that  the  mechanism  of  the  process  of  accumu¬ 
lation  itself  increases,  along  with  the  capital, 
the  mass  of  “labouring  poor,”  i.e.,  the  wage  la¬ 
bourers,  who  turn  their  labour  power  into  an 
increasing  power  of  self-expansion  of  the  grow¬ 
ing  capital,  and  even  by  doing  so  must  eternize 
their  dependent  relation  on  their  own  product, 
as  personified  in  the  capitalists.  In  reference  to 
this  relation  of  dependence,  Sir  F.  M.  Eden  in 
his  The  State  of  the  Poor%  an  History  of  the  La¬ 
bouring  Classes  in  England ,  says:  “The  natural 
produce  of  our  soil  is  certainly  not  fully  ade¬ 
quate  to  our  subsistence;  we  can  neither  be 
clothed,  lodged  nor  fed,  but  in  consequence  of 
some  prev  ious  labour.  A  portion  at  least  of  the 
society  must  be  indefatigably  employed.  . . . 
There  are  others  who,  though  they  ‘neither  toil 
nor  spin,'  can  yet  command  the  produce  of  in¬ 
dustry,  but  who  owe  their  exemption  from  la¬ 
bour  solely  to  civilization  and  order. . . .  They 
are  peculiarly  the  creatures W  civil  institu¬ 
tions,3  which  have  recognized  that  individuals 
may  acquire  property  by  various  other  means 
besides  the  exertion  of  labour. . . .  Persons  of 
independent  fortune  .  .  .  owe  their  superior  ad¬ 
vantages  by  no  means  to  any  superior  abilities 
of  their  own,  but  almost  entirely  ...  to  the  in¬ 
dustry  of  others.  It  is  not  the  possession  of  land, 
or  of  money,  but  the  command  of  labour  which 
distinguishes  the  opulent  from  the  labouring 
part  of  the  community. . . .  This”  (scheme  ap¬ 
proved  by  Eden)  “would  give  the  people  of 

9  Bernard  de  Mandeville,  The  Fable  of  the  Bees ,  5th  edi¬ 
tion,  London,  1728.  Remarks ,  pp.  212,  213,  328.— “Tem¬ 
perate  living  and  constant  employment  ia  the  direct  road, 
for  the  poor,  to  rational  happiness”  (by  which  he  most 
probably  means  long  working  days  and  little  means  of  sub¬ 
sistence),  “and  to  riches  and  strength  for  the  state”  (viz., 
for  the  landlords,  capitalists,  and  their  political  dignitaries 
and  agents).— An  Essay  on  Trade  and  Commerce,  London, 
*770.  P-54. 

*  Eden  should  have  asked  whose  creatures,  then,  are 
“the  civil  institutions”?  From  his  standpoint  of  juridical 
illusion,  he  does  not  regard  the  law  as  a  product  of  the  ma¬ 
terial  relations  of  production,  but  conversely  the  relations 
of  production  as  products  of  the  law.  Linguet  overthrew 
Monresquieu*s  illusory  “ Esprit  des  lots”  with  one  word: 
”V  esprit  des  lots ,  e'est  la  propriM”  [“The  spirit  of  the 
laws— that  is  property.”] 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  305 


property  sufficient  (but  by  no  means  too  much) 
influence  and  authority  over  those  who  .  . . 
work  for  them;  and  it  would  place  such  labour- 
ers,  not  in  an  abject  or  servile  condition,  but  in 
such  a  state  of  easy  and  liberal  dependence  as 
all  who  know  human  nature  and  its  history  will 
allow  to  be  necessary  for  their  own  comfort.”1 
Sir  F.  M.  Eden,  it  may  be  remarked  in  passing, 
is  the  only  disciple  of  Adam  Smith  during  the 
eighteenth  century  who  produced  any  work  of 
importance.3 

1  Eden,  op.  cit VoL  I,  Book  I,  chapter  1,  pp.  1, 2,  and 
preface,  p.  xx. 

*  If  the  reader  reminds  me  of  Malthus,  whose  Essay  on 
Population  appeared  in  1798, 1  remind  him  that  this  work 
in  its  first  form  is  nothing  more  than  a  schoolboy  ish,  super¬ 
ficial  plagiary  of  Defoe,  Sir  James  Steuart,  Iownsend, 
Franklin,  Wallace,  etc  ,  and  does  not  contain  a  single  sen¬ 
tence  thought  out  by  him&elf.  The  great  sensation  this 
pamphlet  caused  was  due  solely  to  party  interest  The 
French  Revolution  had  found  passionate  defenders  in  the 
United  Kingdom,  the  “principle  of  population,"  slowly 
worked  out  in  the  eighteenth  century,  and  then,  in  the 
midst  of  a  great  social  crisis,  proclaimed  with  drums  and 
trumpets  as  the  infallible  antidote  to  the  teachings  of  Con- 
**orcet,  etc  ,  was  giccieu  with  jubilance  by  the  English  oli¬ 
garchy  as  the  great  destroyer  of  all  hankerings  after  hu¬ 
man  development.  Malthus,  hugel)  astonished  at  his  suc¬ 
cess,  gave  himself  to  stuffing  into  his  book  materials  super¬ 
ficially  compiled,  and  adding  to  it  new  matter,  not  dis¬ 
covered  but  annexed  by  him.  Note  further  that,  although 
Malthus  was  a  parson  of  the  F  nglish  State  Church,  he  had 
taken  the  monastic  vow  of  celibacy— one  of  the  conditions 
of  holding  a  Fellowship  in  Protestant  Cambridge  Univer¬ 
sity  " Soctos  collegiorum  mantos  esse  non  permittimus ,  sed 
statim  postquam  quts  uxorem  duxerit ,  soctus  eo/legtt  desinat 
esse."  [“We  do  not  permit  members  of  the  college  to  be 
married,  and  if  one  takes  a  wife,  he  ceases  to  be  a  mem¬ 
ber."]  {Reports  of  Cambridge  University  Commission ,  p. 
172.)  '1  his  circumstance  favourably  distinguishes  Malthus 
from  the  othtr  Protestant  parsons,  who  have  shuffled  off 
the  command  enjoining  celibacy  of  the  priesthood  and  have 
taken  “Be  fruitful  and  multiply"  as  their  special  Biblical 
mission  in  such  a  degree  that  they  generally  contribute  to 
the  increase  of  population  to  a  really  unbecoming  extent, 
whilst  they  preach  at  the  same  time  to  the  labourers  the 
“principle  of  population  "  It  is  characteristic  that  the  eco¬ 
nomic  fall  of  man,  the  Adam’s  apple,  the  urgent  appetite, 
“the  checks  which  tend  to  blunt  the  shafts  of  Cupid,"  as 
Parson  Townsend  waggishly  puts  it,  that  this  delicate 
question  was  and  is  monopolized  by  the  Reverends  of  Prot¬ 
estant  theology,  or  rather  of  the  Protestant  Church.  With 
the  exception  of  the  Venetian  monk,  Ortes,  an  original  and 
clever  wntei,  most  of  the  population  theory  teachers  are 
•  Protestant  parsons.  For  instance,  Bruckner,  Thiorte  du 
systbne  animal .  Leyden,  1767,  in  which  the  whole  subject 
of  the  modern  population  theory  is  exhausted,  and  to  which 
the  passing  quarrel  between  Quesnay  and  his  pupil,  the 
elder  Mirabeau,  furnished  ideas  on  the  same  topic,  then 
Parson  Wallace,  Parson  Townsend,  Parson  Malthus  and 
his  pupil,  the  arch-Parson  Thomas  Chalmers,  to  say  no¬ 
thing  of  lesser  revel  end  scribblers  in  this  line.  Originally, 
political  economy  was  studfed  by  philosophers  like  Hobbes, 
Locke,  Hume,  by  business  men  and  statesmen,  likel  homas 
More,  Temple,  Sully,  De  Witt,  North,  Law,  Vanderlint, 
Cantillon,  Franklin,  and  especially,  and  with  the  greatest 


Under  the  conditions  of  accumulation  sup¬ 
posed  thus  far,  which  conditions  are  those  most 
favourable  to  the  labourers,  their  relation  of  de¬ 
pendence  upon  capital  takes  on  a  form  endu¬ 
rable,  or,  as  Eden  says:  “easy  and  liberal.”  In¬ 
stead  of  becoming  more  intensive  with  the 
growth  of  capital,  this  relation  of  dependence 
only  becomes  more  extensive,  i.e.,  the  sphere  of 
capital’s  exploitation  and  rule  merely  extends 
with  its  own  dimensions  and  the  number  of  its 
subjects.  A  larger  part  of  their  own  surplus 


success,  by  medical  men  like  Petty,  Barbon,  Mandeville, 
Quesnay.  Even  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
the  Rev  Mr  Tucker,  a  notable  economist  of  his  time,  ex¬ 
cused  himself  for  meddling  with  the  things  of  Mammon. 
Later  on,  and  in  truth  with  this  very  "principle  of  popula¬ 
tion,  *  struck  the  hour  of  the  Protestant  parsons  Petty, 
who  regarded  the  population  as  the  basis  of  wealth,  and 
was,  like  Adam  Smith,  an  outspoken  foe  to  parsons,  says, 
as  if  he  had  a  presentiment  of  their  bungling  interference, 
“that  religion  best  flourishes  when  the  priests  are  most 
mortified,  as  was  Before  said  of  the  law,  which  best  flour¬ 
ished  when  lawyers  have  least  to  do."  He  advises  the 
Protestant  priests,  therefore,  if  they,  once  for  all,  will  not 
follow  the  Apostle  Paul  and  “mortify"  themselves  bj  cell 
bacy,  “not  to  breed  more  churchmen  than  the  benefices, 
as  they  now  stand  shared  out,  will  receive,  that  is  to  say,  if 
there  be  places  for  about  12,000  in  England  and  Wales,  it 
will  not  be  safe  to  breed  up  24,000  ministers,  for  then  the 
12,000  which  arc  unprovided  for  will  seek  ways  how  to  get 
themselves  a  livelihood,  which  they  cannot  do  more  easily 
then  by  persuading  the  people  that  the  12,000  incumbents 
do  poison  or  starve  their  souls,  and  misguide  them  in  their 
way  to  Heaven."  (Petty,  A  Treatise  on  Taxes  and  Contri¬ 
butions,  London,  1667,  p  57  )  Adam  Smith’s  position  with 
the  Protestant  priesthood  of  his  time  is  shown  by  the  fol¬ 
lowing.  In  A  Letter  to  A.  Smith ,  L.L  D  ,  On  the  Life ,  Death 
and  Philosophy  of  his  Friend ,  David  Hume ,  By  one  of  the 
People  called  Christians ,  4th  Edition,  Oxford,  1784,  Dr. 
Horne,  Bishop  of  Norwich,  reproves  Adam  Smith,  because 
in  a  published  letter  to  Mr.  Strahan,  he  “embalmed  his 
friend  David"  (1  e  Hume),  because  he  told  the  world  how 
“Hume  amused  himself  on  his  deathbed  with  Lucian  and 
Whist,"  and  because  he  even  had  the  impudence  to  write 
of  Hume  “I  have  always  considered  him,  both  in  his  life¬ 
time  and  since  his  death,  as  approaching  as  nearly  to  the 
idea  of  a  perfectly  wise  and  virtuous  man  as,  perhaps,  the 
nature  of  human  frailty  will  permit."  The  bishop  cnes  out, 
in  a  passion  “Is  it  right  in  you,  Sir,  to  hold  up  to  our  view 
as  'perfectly  wise  and  virtuous,’  the  character  and  conduct 
of  one  who  seems  to  have  been  possessed  with  an  incurable 
antipathy  to  all  that  is  called  religion;  and  who  strained 
every  nerve  to  explode,  suppress,  and  extirpate  the  spirit  of 
it  among  men,  that  its  very  name,  if  he  could  effect  it, 
might  no  more  be  had  m  remembrance7’’  {Op  cit ,  p.  8  ) 
rtBut  let  not  the  lovers  of  truth  be  discouraged.  Atheism 
cannot  be  of  long  continuance."  {Op.  cit.,  p.  17  )  Adam 
Smith  “had  the  atrocious  wickedness  to  propagate  athe¬ 
ism  through  the  land"  (viz  by  his  Theory  of  Moral  Senti¬ 
ments.)  “Upon  the  whole,  Doctor,  your  meaning  is  good; 
but  I  think  you  will  not  succeed  this  time.  You  would  per¬ 
suade  us,  by  the  example  of  David  Hume,  Esq  ,  that  athe¬ 
ism  is  the  onl>  cordial  for  low  spirits,  and  the  proper  anti¬ 
dote  against  the  fear  of  death.  . .  You  may  smile  over 
Babylon  m  ruins  and  congratulate  the  hardened  Pharaoh 
on  his  overthrow  m  the  Red  Sea."  {Op.  cit.,  pp.  21,  22.) 


CAPITAL 


306 

product,  always  increasing  and  continually 
transformed  into  additional  capital,  comes  back 
to  them  in  the  shape  of  means  of  payment,  so 
that  they  can  extend  the  circle  of  their  enjoy¬ 
ments,  can  make  some  additions  to  their  con¬ 
sumption  fund  of  clothes,  furniture,  etc.,  and 
can  lay  by  small  reserve  funds  of  money.  But 
just  as  little  as  better  clothing,  food,  and  treat¬ 
ment,  and  a  larger  peculium,  do  away  with  the 
exploitation  of  the  slave,  so  little  do  they  set 
aside  that  of  the  wage-earner.  A  rise  in  the  price 
of  labour,  as  a  consequence  of  accumulation  of 
capital,  only  means,  in  fact,  that  the  length  and 
weight  of  the  golden  chain  the  wage-earner  has 
already  forged  for  himself  allow  of  a  relaxation 
of  the  tension  of  it.  In  the  controversies  on  this 
subject,  the  chief  fact  has  generally  been  over¬ 
looked,  viz.,  the  differentia  specified1  of  capital¬ 
istic  production.  Labour  power  is  sold  today, 
not  with  a  view  of  satisfying,  by  its  service  or  by 
its  product,  the  personal  needs  of  the  buyer.  His 
aim  is  augmentation  of  his  capital,  production 
of  commodities  containing  more  labour  than  he 
pays  for,  containing,  therefore,  a  portion  of  val¬ 
ue  that  costs  him  nothing,  and  that  is  neverthe¬ 
less  realized  when  the  commodities  are  sold. 
Production  of  surplus  value  is  the  absolute  law 
of  this  mode  of  production.  Labour  power  is 
only  saleable  so  far  as  it  preserves  the  means  of 
production  in  their  capacity  of  capital,  repro¬ 
duces  its  own  value  as  capital,  and  yields  in  un¬ 
paid  labour  a  source  of  additional  capital.2  The 
conditions  of  its  sale,  whether  more  or  less  fa¬ 
vourable  to  the  labourer,  include,  therefore,  the 
necessity  of  its  constant  re-selling,  and  the  con¬ 
stantly  extended  reproduction  of  all  wealth  in 
the  shape  of  capital.  Wages,  as  we  have  seen, 

One  orthodox  individual  amongst  Adam  Smith's  college 
friends  writes  after  his  death:  "Smith’s  well-placed  affec¬ 
tion  for  Hume  . . .  hindered  him  from  being  a  Christian. 
. . .  When  he  met  with  honest  men  whom  he  liked  ...  he 
would  believe  almost  anything  they  said.  Had  he  been  a 
friend  of  the  worthy  ingenious  Horrox,  he  would  have  be¬ 
lieved  that  the  moon  sometimes  disappeared  in  a  clear  sky 
without  the  interposition  of  a  cloud. ...  He  approached  to 
republicanism  in  his  political  principles.”  ( The  Bee,  By 
James  Anderson,  Vol.  3,  pp.  164,  165,  Edinburgh,  1791- 
93.)  Parson  Thomas  Chalmers  has  his  suspicions  as  to 
Adam  Smith  having  invented  the  category  of  "unproduc¬ 
tive  labourers”  solely  for  the  Protestant  parsons,  in  spite 
of  their  blessed  work  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord. 

1  Specific  characteristic. 

*  "The  limit,  however,  to  the  employment  of  both  the 
operative  and  the  labourer  is  the  same;  namely,  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  the  employer  realising  a  profit  on  the  produce  of 
their  industry.  If  the  rate  of  wages  is  such  as  to  reduce  the 
master's  gains  below  the  average  profit  of  capital,  he  will 
cease  to  employ  them,  or  he  will  only  employ  them  on  con¬ 
dition  of  submission  to  a  reduction  of  wages.”— John  Wade, 
op.  at.,  p.  241. 


by  their  very  nature,  always  imply  the  perform¬ 
ance  of  a  certain  quantity  of  unpaid  labour  on 
the  part  of  the  labourer.  Altogether,  irrespec¬ 
tive  of  the  case  of  a  rise  of  wages  with  a  falling 
price  of  labour  etc.,  such  an  increase  only 
means  at  best  a  quantitative  diminution  of  the 
unpaid  labour  that  the  worker  has  to  supply. 
This  diminution  can  never  reach  the  point  at 
which  it  would  threaten  the  system  itself.  Apart 
from  violent  conflicts  as  to  the  rate  of  wages 
(and  Adam  Smith  has  already  shown  that  in 
such  a  conflict,  taken  on  the  whole,  the  master 
is  always  master),  a  rise  in  the  price  of  labour 
resulting  from  accumulation  of  capital  implies 
the  following  alternative: 

Either  the  price  of  labour  keeps  on  rising, 
because  its  rise  does  not  interfere  with  the 
progress  of  accumulation.  In  this  there  is  noth¬ 
ing  wonderful,  for,  says  Adam  Smith,  “after 
these”  (profits)  “are  diminished,  stock  may  not 
only  continue  to  increase,  but  to  increase  much 
faster  than  before.  ...  A  great  stock,  though 
with  small  profits,  generally  increases  faster 
than  a  small  stock  with  great  profits.”3  In  this 
case  it  is  evident  that  a  diminution  in  the  un¬ 
paid  labour  in  no  way  interferes  with  the  ex¬ 
tension  of  the  domain  of  capital.  Or,  on  the  oth¬ 
er  hand,  accumulation  slackens  in  consequence 
of  the  rise  in  the  price  of  labour,  because  the 
stimulus  of  gain  is  blunted.  The  rate  of  accumu¬ 
lation  lessens;  but  with  its  lessening,  the  pri¬ 
mary  cause  of  that  lessening  vanishes,  i.e.,  the 
disproportion  between  capital  and  exploitable 
labour  power.  The  mechanism  of  the  process  of 
capitalist  production  removes  the  very  ob¬ 
stacles  that  it  temporarily  creates.  The  price  of 
labour  falls  again  to  a  level  corresponding  with 
the  needs  of  the  self-expansion  of  capital, 
whether  the  level  be  below,  the  same  as,  or 
above  the  one  which  was  normal  before  the  rise 
of  wages  took  place.  We  see,  then,  that,  in  the 
first  case,  it  is  not  the  diminished  rate  either  of 
the  absolute,  or  of  the  proportional,  increase  in 
labour  power,  or  labouring  population,  which 
causes  capital  to  be  in  excess,  but,  conversely, 
the  excess  of  capital  that  makes  exploitable  la¬ 
bour  power  insufficient.  In  the  second  case,  it 
is  not  the  increased  rate  either  of  the  absolute 
or  of  the  proportional  increase  in  labour  power, 
or  labouring  population,  that  makes  capital  in¬ 
sufficient;  but,  conversely,  the  relative  diminu¬ 
tion  of  capital  that  causes  the  Exploitable  la¬ 
bour  power,  or  rather  its  price,  to  be  in  excess. 
It  is  these  absolute  movements  of  the  accumu¬ 
lation  of  capital  which  are  reflected  as  relative 

*  The  Wealth  of  Nations,  Bk.  I,  ch.  9. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  307 


movements  of  the  mass  of  exploitable  labour 
power  and,  therefore,  seem  produced  by  the  lat¬ 
ter's  own  independent  movement.  To  put  it 
mathematically,  the  rate  of  accumulation  is  the 
independent,  not  the  dependent,  variable;  the 
rate  of  wages,  the  dependent,  not  the  independ¬ 
ent,  variable.  Thus,  when  the  industrial  cycle 
is  in  the  phase  of  crisis,  a  general  fall  in  the  price 
of  commodities  is  expressed  as  a  rise  in  the  val¬ 
ue  of  money,  and,  in  the  phase  of  prosperity,  a 
general  rise  in  the  price  of  commodities,  as  a  fall 
in  the  value  of  money.  The  so-called  currency 
school  concludes  from  this  that  with  high  prices 
too  little,  with  low  prices  too  much,  money  is  in 
circulation.  Their  ignorance  and  complete  mis¬ 
understanding  of  facts1  are  worthily  paralleled 
by  the  economists,  who  interpret  the  above 
phenomena  of  accumulation  by  saying  that 
there  are  now  too  few,  now  too  many,  wage  la¬ 
bourers. 

The  law  of  capitalist  production  that  is  at  the 
bottom  of  the  pretended  “natural  law  of  popu¬ 
lation"  reduces  itself  simply  to  this:  The  cor¬ 
relation  between  au  umulation  of  capital  and 
rate  of  wages  is  nothing  else  than  the  correla¬ 
tion  between  the  unpaid  labour  transformed  in¬ 
to  capital,  and  the  additional  paid  labour  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  setting  in  motion  of  this  additional 
capital.  It  is,  therefore,  in  no  way  a  relation  be¬ 
tween  two  magnitudes,  independent  one  of  the 
other:  on  the  one  hand  the  magnitude  of  the 
capital,  on  the  other  the  number  of  the  labour- 
ing  population;  it  is  rather,  at  bottom,  only  the 
relation  between  the  unpaid  and  the  paid  la¬ 
bour  of  the  same  labouring  population.  If  the 
quantity  of  unpaid  labour  supplied  by  the 
working  class,  and  accumulated  by  the  capital¬ 
ist  class,  increases  so  rapidly  that  its  conversion 
into  capital  requires  an  extraordinary  addition 
of  paid  labour,  then  wages  rise,  and,  all  other 
circumstances  remaining  equal,  the  unpaid  la¬ 
bour  diminishes  in  proportion.  But  as  soon  as 
this  diminution  touches  the  point  at  which  the 
surplus  labour  that  nourishes  capital  is  no 
longer  supplied  in  normal  quantity,  a  reaction 
sets  in:  a  smaller  part  of  revenue  is  capitalized, 
accumulation  lags,  and  the  movement  of  rise  in 
wages  receives  a  check.  The  rise  of  wages,  there¬ 
fore,  is  confined  within  limits  that  not  only 
leave  intact  the  foundations  of  the  capitalistic 
system,  but  also  secure  its  reproduction  on  a 
progressive  scale.  The  law  of  capitalistic  ac¬ 
cumulation,  metamorphosed  by  economists  in¬ 
to  a  pretended  law  of  nature,  in  reality  merely 
states  that  the  very  nature  of  accumulation  ex- 

lCf.  Karl  Marx:  Zur  Kritik ,  etc.,  pp.  x66,  ff. 


eludes  every  diminution  in  the  degree  of  ex¬ 
ploitation  of  labour,  and  every  rise  in  the  price 
of  labour,  which  could  seriously  imperil  the  con¬ 
tinual  reproduction,  on  an  ever  enlarging  scale, 
of  the  capitalistic  relation.  It  cannot  be  other¬ 
wise  in  a  mode  of  production  in  which  the  la¬ 
bourer  exists  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  self-expan¬ 
sion  of  existing  values,  instead  of,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  material  wealth  existing  to  satisfy  the 
needs  of  development  on  the  part  of  the  labour¬ 
er.  As  in  religion  man  is  governed  by  the  prod¬ 
ucts  of  his  own  brain,  so  in  capitalistic  produc¬ 
tion  he  is  governed  by  the  products  of  his  own 
hand.2 

2.  Relative  Diminution  of  the  Variable  Part  of 

Capital  simultaneously  with  the  Progress  of 

Accumulation  and  of  the  Concentration  that 

accompanies  it 

According  to  the  economists  themselves,  it  is 
neither  the  adtuai  extent  of  social  wealth,  nor 
the  magnitude  of  the  capital  already  function¬ 
ing,  that  leads  to  a  rise  of  wages,  but  only  the 
constant  growth  of  accumulation  and  the  de¬ 
gree  of  rapidity  of  that  growth.3  So  far,  we  have 
considered  only  one  special  phase  of  this  proc¬ 
ess,  that  in  which  the  increase  of  capital  occurs 
along  with  a  constant  technical  composition  of 
capital.  But  the  process  goes  beyond  this  phase. 

Once  given  the  general  basis  of  the  capital¬ 
istic  system,  then,  in  the  course  of  accumula¬ 
tion,  a  point  is  reached  at  which  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  productivity  of  social  labour  be¬ 
comes  the  most  powerful  lever  of  accumulation. 
“The  same  cause,"  says  Adam  Smith,  “which 
raises  the  wages  of  labour,  the  increase  of  stock, 
tends  to  increase  its  productive  powers,  and  to 
make  a  smaller  quantity  of  labour  produce  a 
greater  quantity  of  work." 

Apart  from  natural  conditions,  such  as  fer¬ 
tility  of  the  soil,  etc.,  and  from  the  skill  of  in¬ 
dependent  and  isolated  producers  (shown  qual¬ 
itatively  in  the  goodness  rather  than  quanti¬ 
tatively  in  the  mass  of  their  products),  the  de¬ 
gree  of  productivity  of  labour,  in  a  given  so¬ 
ciety,  is  expressed  in  the  relative  extent  of  the 

*  “If  we  now  return  to  our  first  inquiry,  wherein  it  was 
shown  that  capital  itself  is  only  the  result  of  human  labour 
. . .  it.  seems  quite  incomprehensible  that  man  can  have 
fallen  under  the  domination  of  capital,  his  own  product; 
can  be  subordinated  to  it;  and  as  in  reality  this  is  be>ond 
dispute  the  case,  involuntarily  the  question  arises:  How 
has  the  labourer  been  able  to  pass  from  being  master  of 
capital—  as  its  creator — to  being  its  slave?”  (Von  Thiinen, 
Derisoltrte  Staat ,  Rostock,  i86j,  Part  II,  Section  li,  pp.  5, 
6.)  It  is  Thiinen’s  merit  to  have  asked  this  question.  His 
answer  is  simply  childish. 

*  Adam  Smith,  The  It'calth  oj  Satiomt  Book  I,  ch.  8. 


CAPITAL 


308 

means  of  production  that  one  labourer,  during 
a  given  time,  with  the  same  tension  of  labour 
power,  turns  into  products.  The  mass  of  the 
means  of  production  which  he  thus  transforms 
increases  with  the  productiveness  of  his  labour. 
But  those  means  of  production  play  a  double 
part.  The  increase  of  some  is  a  consequence, 
that  of  the  others  a  condition,  of  the  increasing 
productivity  of  labour.  For  instance,  with  the 
division  of  labour  in  manufacture,  and  with  the 
use  of  machinery,  more  raw  material  is  worked 
up  in  the  same  time,  and,  therefore,  a  greater 
mass  of  raw  material  and  auxiliary  substances 
enter  into  the  labour  process.  That  is  the  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  increasing  productivity  of  labour. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  mass  of  machinery, 
beasts  of  burden,  mineral  manures,  drain-pipes, 
etc.,  is  a  condition  of  the  increasing  productiv¬ 
ity  of  labour.  So  also  is  it  with  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  concentrated  in  buildings,  furnaces, 
means  of  transport,  etc.  But  whether  condition 
or  consequence,  the  growing  extent  of  the 
means  of  production,  as  compared  with  the  la¬ 
bour  power  incorporated  with  them,  is  an  ex¬ 
pression  of  the  growing  productiveness  of  la¬ 
bour.  The  increase  of  the  latter  appears,  there¬ 
fore,  in  the  diminution  of  the  mass  of  labour  in 
proportion  to  the  mass  of  means  of  production 
moved  by  it,  or  in  the  diminution  of  the  sub¬ 
jective  factor  of  the  labour  process  as  compared 
with  the  objective  factor. 

This  change  in  the  technical  composition  of 
capital,  this  growth  in  the  mass  of  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  as  compared  with  the  mass  of  the  la¬ 
bour  power  that  vivifies  them,  is  reflected  again 
in  its  value  composition,  by  the  increase  of  the 
constant  constituent  of  capital  at  the  expense 
of  its  variable  constituent.  There  may  be,  for 
example,  originally  50%  of  a  capital  laid  out  in 
means  of  production  and  50%  in  labour  power; 
later  on,  with  the  development  of  the  produc¬ 
tivity  of  labour,  80%  in  means  of  production, 
20%  in  labour  power,  and  so  on.  This  law  of  the 
progressive  increase  in  constant  capital,  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  variable,  is  confirmed  at  every 
step  (as  already  shown)  by  the  comparative 
analysis  of  the  prices  of  commodities,  whether 
we  compare  different  economic  epochs  or  dif¬ 
ferent  nations  in  the  same  epoch.  The  relative 
magnitude  of  the  element  of  price,  which  repre¬ 
sents  the  value  of  the  means  of  production  only, 
or  the  constant  part  of  capital  consumed,  is  in 
direct  proportion,  the  relative  magnitude  of  the 
other  clement  of  price  that  pays  labour  (the 
variable  part  of  capital)  is  in  inverse  propor¬ 
tion,  to  the  advance  of  accumulation. 


This  diminution  in  the  variable  part  of  capi¬ 
tal  as  compared  with  the  constant,  or  the  al¬ 
tered  value  composition  of  the  capital,  how¬ 
ever,  only  shows  approximately  the  change  in 
the  composition  of  its  material  constituents.  If, 
for  example,  the  capital  value  employed  today 
in  spinning  is  X  constant  and  X  variable, 
whilst  at  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬ 
tury  it  was  yi  constant  and  X  variable,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  mass  of  raw  material,  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour,  etc.,  that  a  certain  quantity 
of  spinning  labour  consumes  productively  to¬ 
day  is  many  hundred  times  greater  than  at  the 
beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century.  The  rea¬ 
son  is  simply  that,  with  the  increasing  produc¬ 
tivity  of  labour,  not  only  does  the  mass  of  the 
means  of  production  consumed  by  it  increase, 
but  their  value  compared  with  their  mass  di¬ 
minishes.  Their  value  therefore  rises  absolute¬ 
ly,  but  not  in  proportion  to  their  mass.  The  in¬ 
crease  of  the  difference  between  constant  and 
variable  capital  is,  therefore,  much  less  than 
that  of  the  difference  between  the  mass  of  the 
means  of  production  into  which  the  constant, 
and  the  mass  of  the  labour  power  into  which  the 
variable,  capital  is  converted.  The  former 
difference  increases  with  the  latter,  but  in  a 
smaller  degree. 

But,  if  the  progress  of  accumulation  lessens 
the  relative  magnitude  of  the  variable  part  of 
capital,  it  by  no  means,  in  doing,  this,  excludes 
the  possibility  of  a  rise  in  its  absolute  magni¬ 
tude.  Suppose  that  a  capital  value  at  first  is  di¬ 
vided  into  50%  of  constant  and  jo%  of  vari¬ 
able  capital;  later  into  80%  of  constant  and 
20%  of  variable.  If  in  the  meantime  the  original 
capital,  say,  £6,000,  has  increased  to  £18,000, 
its  variable  constituent  has  also  increased.  It 
was  £3,000,  it  is  now  £3,600.  But  whereas  for¬ 
merly  an  increase  of  capital  by  20%  would  have 
sufficed  to  raise  the  demand  for  labour  20%, 
now  this  latter  rise  requires  a  tripling  of  the 
original  capital. 

In  Part  IV  it  was  shown  how  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  productiveness  of  social  labour  pre¬ 
supposes  cooperation  on  a  large  scale;  how  it  is 
only  upon  this  supposition  that  division  and 
combination  of  labour  can  be  organized,  and 
the  means  of  production  economized  by  con¬ 
centration  on  a  vast  scale;  how  instruments  of 
labour  which,  from  their  very  nature,  are  only 
fit  for  use  in  common,  such  as  a  system  of  ma¬ 
chinery,  can  be  called  into  being;  how  huge  nat¬ 
ural  forces  can  be  pressed  into  the  service  of 
production;  and  how  the  transformation  can  be 
effected  of  the  process  of  production  into  a  tech- 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  309 


nological  application  of  science.  On  the  basis  of 
the  production  of  commodities,  where  the 
means  of  production  are  the  property  of  private 
persons,  and  where  the  artisan,  therefore,  either 
produces  commodities,  isolated  from  and  inde¬ 
pendent  of  others,  or  sells  his  labour  power  as  a 
commodity,  because  he  lacks  the  means  for  in¬ 
dependent  industry,  cooperation  on  a  large 
scale  can  realize  itself  only  in  the  increase  of 
individual  capitals,  only  in  proportion  as  the 
means  of  social  production  and  the  means  of 
subsistence  are  transformed  into  the  private 
property  of  capitalists.  The  basis  of  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  commodities  can  admit  of  production 
on  a  large  scale  in  the  capitalistic  form  alone. 
A  certain  accumulation  of  capital,  in  the  hands 
of  individual  producers  of  commodities,  forms, 
therefore,  the  necessary  preliminary  of  the 
specifically  capitalistic  mode  of  production.  Wc 
had,  therefore,  to  assume  that  this  occurs  dur¬ 
ing  the  transition  from  handicraft  to  capitalis¬ 
tic  industry.  It  may  be  called  primitive  accumu¬ 
lation^  because  it  is  the  historic  basis,  instead  of 
the  historic  result  ot  specifically  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction.  How  it  itself  originates,  we  need  not 
here  inquire  as  yet.  It  is  enough  that  it  forms 
the  starting-point.  But  all  methods  for  raising 
the  social  productive  power  of  labour  that  are 
developed  on  this  basis  are  at  the  same  time 
methods  for  the  increased  production  of  surplus 
value  or  surplus  product,  which  in  its  turn  is 
the  formative  element  of  accumulation.  They 
are,  therefore,  at  the  same  time  methods  of  the 
production  of  capital  by  capital,  or  methods  of 
its  accelerated  accumulation.  The  continual  re- 
transformation  of  surplus  value  into  capital 
now  appears  in  the  shape  of  the  increasing  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  capital  that  enters  into  the  process 
of  production.  This  in  turn  is  the  basis  of  an 
extended  scale  of  production,  of  the  methods 
for  raising  the  productive  power  of  labour  that 
accompany  it,  and  of  accelerated  production  of 
surplus  value.  If,  therefore,  a  certain  degree  of 
accumulation  of  capital  appears  as  a  condition 
of  the  specifically  capitalist  mode  of  production, 
the  latter  causes  conversely  an  accelerated  ac¬ 
cumulation  of  capital.  With  the  accumulation 
of  capital,  therefore,  the  specifically  capitalistic 
mode  of  production  develops,  and  with  the  cap¬ 
italist  mode  of  production  the  accumulation  of 
capital.  Both  these  economic  factors  bring 
about,  in  the  compound  ratio  of  the  impulses 
they  reciprocally  give  one  another,  that  change 
in  the  technical  composition  of  capital  by  which 
the  variable  constituent  becomes  always  small¬ 
er  and  smaller  as  compared  with  the  constant. 


Every  individual  capital  is  a  larger  or  smaller 
concentration  of  means  of  production,  with  a 
corresponding  command  over  a  larger  or  small¬ 
er  labour  army.  Every  accumulation  becomes 
the  means  of  new  accumulation.  With  the  in¬ 
creasing  mass  of  wealth  which  functions  as  cap¬ 
ital,  accumulation  increases  the  concentration 
of  that  wealth  in  the  hands  of  individual  cap¬ 
italists,  and  thereby  widens  the  basis  of  produc¬ 
tion  on  a  large  scale  and  of  the  specific  methods 
of  capitalist  production.  The  growth  of  social 
capital  is  effected  by  the  growth  of  many  in¬ 
dividual  capitals.  All  other  circumstances  re¬ 
maining  the  same,  individual  capitals,  and  with 
them  the  concentration  of  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion,  increase  in  such  proportion  as  they  form 
aliquot  parts  of  the  total  social  capital.  At  the 
same  time  portions  of  the  original  capitals  dis¬ 
engage  themselves  and  function  as  new  inde¬ 
pendent  capitals.  Apart  from  other  causes,  the 
division  of  property  within  capitalist  families 
plays  a  great  part  in  this.  With  the  accumula¬ 
tion  of  capital,  therefore,  the  number  of  capi¬ 
talists  grows  to  a  greater  or  less  extent.  Two 
points  characterize  this  kind  of  concentration 
which  grows  directly  out  of,  or  rather  is  identi¬ 
cal  with,  accumulation.  First:  The  increasing 
concentration  of  the  social  means  of  production 
in  the  hands  of  individual  capitalists  is,  other 
things  remaining  equal,  limited  by  the  degree 
of  increase  of  social  wealth.  Second:  The  part 
of  social  capital  domiciled  in  each  particular 
sphere  of  production  is  divided  among  many 
capitalists  who  face  one  another  as  independent 
commodity  producers  competing  with  each 
other.  Accumulation  and  the  concentration  ac¬ 
companying  it  are,  therefore,  not  only  scattered 
over  many  points,  but  the  increase  of  each  func¬ 
tioning  capital  is  thwarted  by  the  formation  of 
new  and  the  sub-division  of  old  capitals.  Ac¬ 
cumulation,  therefore,  presents  itself  on  the  one 
hand  as  increasing  concentration  of  the  means 
of  production  and  of  the  command  over  labour; 
on  the  other,  as  repulsion  of  many  individual 
capitals  one  from  another. 

This  splitting-up  of  the  total  social  capital 
into  many  individual  capitals  or  the  repulsion 
of  its  fractions  one  from  another,  is  counter¬ 
acted  by  their  attraction.  This  last  does  not 
mean  that  simple  concentration  of  the  means 
of  production  and  of  the  command  over  labour 
which  is  identical  with  accumulation.  It  is  con¬ 
centration  of  capitals  already  formed,  destruc¬ 
tion  of  their  individual  independence,  expro¬ 
priation  of  capitalist  by  capitalist,  transforma¬ 
tion  of  many  small  into  few  large  capitals.  This 


CAPITAL 


310 

process  differs  from  the  former  in  this,  that  it 
only  presupposes  a  change  in  the  distribution 
of  capita]  already  to  hand  and  functioning;  its 
field  of  action  is,  therefore,  not  limited  by  the 
absolute  growth  of  social  wealth,  by  the  abso¬ 
lute  limits  of  accumulation.  Capital  grows  in 
one  place  to  a  huge  mass  in  a  single  hand,  be¬ 
cause  it  has  in  another  place  been  lost  by  many. 
This  is  centralization  proper,  as  distinct  from 
accumulation  and  concentration. 

The  laws  of  this  centralization  of  capitals,  or 
of  the  attraction  of  capital  by  capital,  cannot 
be  developed  here.  A  brief  hint  at  a  few  facts 
must  suffice.  The  battle  of  competition  is  fought 
by  cheapening  of  commodities.  The  cheapness 
of  commodities  depends,  coeteris  paribus ,  on  the 
productiveness  of  labour,  and  this  again  on  the 
scale  of  production.  Therefore,  the  larger  capi¬ 
tals  beat  the  smaller.  It  will  further  be  remem¬ 
bered  that,  with  the  development  of  the  capi¬ 
talist  mode  of  production,  there  is  an  increase 
in  the  minimum  amount  of  individual  capital 
necessary  to  carry  on  a  business  under  its  nor¬ 
mal  conditions.  The  smaller  capitals,  therefore, 
crowd  into  spheres  of  production  which  modern 
industry  has  only  sporadically  or  incompletely 
got  hold  of.  Here  competition  rages  in  direct 
proportion  to  the  number,  and  in  inverse  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  magnitudes,  of  the  antagonistic 
capitals.  It  always  ends  in  the  ruin  of  many 
small  capitalists,  whose  capitals  partly  pass  in¬ 
to  the  hand  of  their  conquerors,  partly  vanish. 
Apart  from  this,  an  altogether  new  force 
emerges  with  capitalist  production:  the  credit 
system.  In  its  beginnings,  it  creeps  in  stealthily 
in  the  guise  of  a  handmaiden  of  accumula¬ 
tion,  drawing  by  invisible  threads  into  the 
hands  of  individual  or  associated  capitalists 
all  the  money  resources  that  are  scattered 
in  larger  or  smaller  parcels  throughout  so¬ 
ciety.  But  soon  the  credit  system  becomes 
a  new  and  terrible  weapon  in  the  competitive 
struggle,  transforming  itself  eventually  into  a 
vast  social  mechanism  for  the  centralization 
of  capital. 

Competition  and  credit,  these  two  most  pow¬ 
erful  levers  of  centralization,  developin  the 
same  proportion  as  capitalist  accumulation  and 
production  develop.  While  the  progress  of  ac¬ 
cumulation  increases  the  individual  capitals 
which  are  subject  to  centralization,  the  expan¬ 
sion  of  production  creates,  on  the  one  hand,  so¬ 
cial  demand,  and  on  the  other  hand  creates  the 
technical  instruments  for  those  giant  industrial 
enterprises  which  depend  for  their  realization 


on  the  previous  accumulation  of  capital.  To¬ 
day,  then,  the  mutual  attraction  between  in¬ 
dividual  capitals  and  the  tendency  to  central¬ 
ization  are  stronger  than  ever  before.  Although 
the  relative  extent  and  vigour  of  the  centraliz¬ 
ing  tendency  are,  to  some  degree,  determined 
by  the  amount  of  capitalist  wealth  already 
formed,  and  by  the  superiority  of  the  economic 
mechanism,  yet  the  progress  of  centralization 
is  by  no  means  dependent  on  the  positive 
growth  in  volume  of  social  capital.  In  this  lies 
the  specific  difference  between  centralization 
and  concentration,  the  latter  being  merely  an¬ 
other  term  for  reproduction  on  an  enlarged 
scale.  Centralization  may  take  place  by  a  mere 
change  in  the  distribution  of  already  existing 
capitals,  that  is,  by  a  simple  quantitative  rear¬ 
rangement  of  the  constituent  parts  of  the  social 
capital.  Thus  capital  may  here  assume  vast  pro¬ 
portions  in  one  hand,  only  because  it  has  been 
withdrawn  from  many  individual  hands  else¬ 
where.  In  a  given  branch  of  industry,  central¬ 
ization  would  have  reached  its  utmost  limit 
with  the  amalgamation  of  all  the  capitals  in¬ 
vested  in  it  into  one  single  capital.1  In  a  given 
society,  however,  this  limit  would  be  reached 
only  at  the  point  where  the  total  social  capital 
was  amalgamated  cither  in  the  hands  of  a  single 
capitalist,  or  in  those  of  a  single  association  of 
capitalists. 

Centralization  completes  the^work  of  accu¬ 
mulation  by  putting  individual  capitalists  in  a 
position  to  expand  the  scale  of  their  operations. 
Whether  this  is  a  consequence  of  accumulation 
or  of  centralization;  whether  this  centraliza¬ 
tion  takes  place  by  the  violent  means  of  annexa¬ 
tion  (in  which  case  certain  capitals  become  such 
irrestible  centers  of  gravity  for  other  capitals 
that  they  first  break  the  cohesion  which  these 
possessed  individually,  and  then  absorb  the 
scattered  fragments) ;  or  whether  the  amalgam¬ 
ation  of  a  number  of  capitals  already  formed, 
or  in  the  process  of  being  formed,  takes  place  by 
the  smoother  method  of  the  organization  of 
joint  stock  companies— in  any  case,  the  eco¬ 
nomic  effect  remains  the  same.  The  increased 
size  of  the  industrial  establishments  invariably 
becomes  the  starting-point  for  a  more  compre¬ 
hensive  organization  of  their  combined  labour, 
and  for  a  wider  development  of  their  material 

1  The  latest  American  and  English  trusts  are  already 
working  toward  this  goal,  as  they  are  trying  to  amalga¬ 
mate  at  least  all  the  large  establishments  in  a  given  in¬ 
dustry  into  one  great  joint  stock  company,  possessing  a 
pract  cal  monopoly.  F.E. 


311 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION 


powers,  that  is,  for  the  progressive  transforma¬ 
tion  of  isolated  and  traditional  processes  of  pro¬ 
duction  into  socially  organized  and  scientifical¬ 
ly  managed  ones. 

Accumulation,  the  gradual  increase  of  capi¬ 
tal  by  reproduction  passing  from  the  circular 
to  the  spiral  form,  is  evidently  a  much  more 
leisurely  process  than  centralization,  which 
merely  needs  to  change  the  quantitative  ar¬ 
rangement  of  the  constituent  parts  of  the  social 
capital.  The  world  would  still  be  without  rail¬ 
roads  if  it  had  had  to  wait  for  accumulation  to 
build  up  a  few  capitals  to  the  point  where  rail¬ 
road  construction  could  be  undertaken.  Cen¬ 
tralization,  on  the  other  hand,  accomplished 
this  in  a  flash  by  means  of  the  joint  stock  com¬ 
pany.  And  while  centralization  thus  intensifies 
and  accelerates  the  effects  of  centralization,  it 
also  extends  and  accelerates  those  revolution¬ 
ary  changes  in  the  technical  composition  of  cap¬ 
ital  which  increase  its  constant  at  the  expense 
of  its  variable  part,  and  thus  diminish  the  rela¬ 
tive  demand  for  labour. 

Welded  together  overnight  by  the  process  of 
centralization,  these  masses  of  capital  in  turn 
grow  and  reproduce  themselves  just  as  other 
capitals,  only  faster,  and  thus  become  new  and 
powerful  levers  of  social  accumulation.  Hence, 
if  one  refers  nowadays  to  the  process  of  accumu¬ 
lation,  the  effects  of  centralization  are  under¬ 
stood  to  be  included  in  that  term.  The  addition¬ 
al  capitals  formed  in  the  course  of  normal  accu¬ 
mulation  serve  principally  as  vehicles  for  the 
exploitation  of  new  inventions  or  discoveries, 
and  in  general  for  industrial  improvements. 
But  the  old  capital,  too,  eventually  reaches  the 
moment  of  its  complete  rejuvenation,  when, 
having  shed  its  old  skin,  it  is  reborn  in  a  new 
and  perfected  technical  form,  in  which  a  small¬ 
er  quantity  of  labour  sufliccs  to  set  in  motion 
a  larger  mass  of  machinery  and  raw  materials. 
The  absolute  decrease  in  the  demand  for  labour 
which  necessarily  follows  from  this  will  natural¬ 
ly  be  the  greater,  the  more  the  capitals  under¬ 
going  this  process  of  rejuvenation  have  already 
been  massed  together  in  virtue  of  the  move¬ 
ment  of  centralization. 

On  the  one  hand,  therefore,  the  additional 
capital  formed  in  the  course  of  accumu¬ 
lation  attracts  fewer  and  fewer  labourers  in 
proportion  to  its  magnitude.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  old  capital,  periodically  repro¬ 
duced  with  change  of  composition,  repels 
more  and  more  of  the  labourers  formerly  em¬ 
ployed  by  it. 


3.  Progressive  Production  of  a  Relative  Surplus 

Population ,  or  Industrial  Reserve  Army 

The  accumulation  of  capital,  though  origin¬ 
ally  appearing  as  its  quantitative  extension 
only,  is  effected,  as  we  have  seen,  under  a  pro¬ 
gressive  qualitative  change  in  its  composition, 
under  a  constant  increase  of  its  constant,  at  the 
expense  of  its  variable  constituent.1 

The  specifically  capitalist  mode  of  produc¬ 
tion,  the  development  of  the  productive  power 
of  labour  corresponding  to  it,  and  the  change 
thence  resulting  in  the  organic  composition  of 
capital,  do  not  merely  keep  pace  with  the- ad¬ 
vance  of  accumulation,  or  with  the  growth  of 
social  wealth.  They  develop  at  a  much  quicker 
rate,  because  mere  accumulation,  the  absolute 
increase  of  the  total  social  capital,  is  accom¬ 
panied  by  the  centralization  of  the  individual 
capitals  of  which  that  total  is  made  up;  and 
because  the  change  in  the  technological  com¬ 
position  of  the  additional  capital  goes  hand  in 
hand  with  a  similar  change  in  the  technological 
composition  of  the  original  capital.  With  the 
advance  of  accumulation,  therefore,  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  constant  to  variable  capital  changes. 
If  it  was  originally,  say,  1  si,  it  now  becomes 
successively  2:1, 3:1, 4:1,  5:1, 7:1,  etc.,  so  that, 
as  the  capital  increases,  instead  of  ^2  of  its  total 
value,  only  V3,  x/4,  V5,  x/6,  Vs,  etc.,  is  trans¬ 
formed  into  labour  power,  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  2/3,  3/4>  Vs>  7/s  into  means  of  produc¬ 
tion.  Since  the  demand  for  labour  is  determined 
not  by  the  amount  of  capital  as  a  whole,  but  by 
its  variable  constituent  alone,  that  demand  falls 
progressively  with  the  increase  of  the  total  cap¬ 
ital,  instead  of,  as  previously  assumed,  rising  in 
proportion  to  it.  It  falls  relatively  to  the  magni¬ 
tude  of  the  total  capital,  and  at  an  accelerated 
rate,  as  this  magnitude  increases.  With  the 
growth  of  the  total  capital,  its  variable  constit¬ 
uent,  or  the  labour  incorporated  in  it,  also  does 
increase,  but  in  a  constantly  diminishing  pro¬ 
portion.  The  intermediate  pauses  are  short¬ 
ened,  in  which  accumulation  works  as  simple 
extension  of  production,  on  a  given  technical 
basis.  It  is  not  merely  that  an  accelerated 
accumulation  of  total  capital,  accelerated  in 
a  constantly  growing  progression,  is  needed 

1  Note  to  the  3rd  edition:  In  Marx’s  copy  there  is  here 
the  marginal  note:  “Here  note  for  working  out  later;  if  the 
extension  is  only  quantitative,  then  for  a  greater  and  a 
smaller  capital  in  the  same  branch  of  business  the  profits 
are  as  the  magnitudes  of  the  capitals  advanced.  If  the 
quantitative  extension  induces  qualitative  change,  then 
the  rate  of  profit  on  the  larger  capital  rises  simultaneously." 


CAPITAL 


312 

to  absorb  an  additional  number  of  labourers, 
or  even,  on  account  of  the  constant  metamor¬ 
phosis  of  old  capital,  to  keep  employed  those 
already  functioning.  In  its  turn,  this  increas¬ 
ing  accumulation  and  centralization  becomes 
a  source  of  new  changes  in  the  composition 
of  capital,  of  a  more  accelerated  diminution 
of  its  variable,  as  compared  with  its  constant, 
constituent.  This  accelerated  relative  diminu¬ 
tion  of  the  variable  constituent,  that  goes 
along  with  the  accelerated  increase  of  the 
total  capital,  and  moves  more  rapidly  than  this 
increase,  takes  the  inverse  form,  at  the  other 
pole,  of  an  apparently  absolute  increase  of  the 
labouring  population,  an  increase  always  mov¬ 
ing  more  rapidly  than  that  of  the  variable  capi¬ 
tal  or  the  means  of  employment.  But  in  fact,  it 
is  capitalistic  accumulation  itself  that  constant¬ 
ly  produces,  and  produces  in  the  direct  ratio  of 
its  own  energy  and  extent,  a  relatively  redun¬ 
dant  population  of  labourers,  i.e.,  a  population 
of  greater  extent  than  suffices  for  the  average 
needs  of  the  self-expansion  of  capital,  and  there¬ 
fore  a  surplus  population. 

Considering  the  social  capital  in  its  totality, 
the  movement  of  its  accumulation  now  causes 
periodical  changes,  affecting  it  more  or  less  as  a 
whole,  now  distributes  its  various  phases  simul¬ 
taneously  over  the  different  spheres  of  produc¬ 
tion.  In  some  spheres,  a  change  in  the  composi¬ 
tion  of  capital  occurs  without  increase  of  its  ab¬ 
solute  magnitude,  as  a  consequence  of  simple 
centralization;  in  others,  the  absolute  growth 
of  capital  is  connected  with  absolute  diminu¬ 
tion  of  its  variable  constituent*,  or  of  the  labour 
power  absorbed  by  it;  in  others  again,  capital 
continues  growing  for  a  time  on  its  given  tech¬ 
nical  basis,  and  attracts  additional  labour  pow¬ 
er  in  proportion  to  its  increase,  while  at  other 
times  it  undergoes  organic  change  and  lessens 
its  variable  constituent;  in  all  spheres,  the  in¬ 
crease  of  the  variable  part  of  capital,  and  there¬ 
fore  of  the  number  of  labourers  employed  by  it, 
is  always  connected  with  violent  fluctuations 
and  transitory  production  of  surplus  popula¬ 
tion,  whether  this  takes  the  more  striking  form 
of  the  repulsion  of  labourers  already  employed, 
or  the  less  evident  but  not  less  real  form  of  the 
more  difficult  absorption  of  the  additional  la¬ 
bouring  population  through  the  usual  chan¬ 
nels.1  With  the  magnitude  of  social  capital  al- 

1  The  census  of  England  and  Wales  shows;  all  persons 
employed  in  agriculture  (landlords,  farmers,  gardeners, 
shepherds,  etc.,  included):  1851,2,01 1,447;  *861,  1,924,110; 
a  drop  of  87,337.  Worsted  manufacture:  1851, 102,714  per¬ 
sons;  1861,  79,242.  Silk  weaving:  1851,  111,940:  l86x. 


ready  functioning,  and  the  degree  of  its  in¬ 
crease,  with  the  extension  of  the  scale  of  pro¬ 
duction,  and  the  mass  of  the  labourers  set  in 
motion, with  the  development  of  the  productive¬ 
ness  of  their  labour,  with  the  greater  breadth 
and  fulness  of  all  sources  of  wealth,  there  is  also 
an  extension  of  the  scale  on  which  greater  at¬ 
traction  of  labourers  by  capital  is  accompanied 
by  their  greater  repulsion;  the  rapidity  of  the 
change  in  the  organic  composition  of  capital, 
and  in  its  technical  form  increases,  and  an  in¬ 
creasing  number  of  spheres  of  production  be¬ 
comes  involved  in  this  change,  now  simultane¬ 
ously,  now  alternately.  The  labouring  popula¬ 
tion  therefore  produces,  along  with  the  accu¬ 
mulation  of  capital  produced  by  it,  the  means 
by  which  itself  is  made  relatively  superfluous, 
is  turned  into  a  relative  surplus  population;  and 
it  does  this  to  an  always  increasing  extent2  This 


101,678.  Calico-printing:  1851,  12,098;  1861,  12,556.  A 
small  rise  that,  in  the  face  of  the  enormous  extension  of 
this  industry  and  implying  a  great  fall  proportionally  in 
the  number  of  labourers  employed.  Hat-making:  1851, 
15,957;  1861, 13,814.  Straw-hat  and  bonnet  making.  1851, 
20,393;  1861, 18,176.  Malting.  1851,  10,566,  1861, 10,677. 
Chandlery,  1851,4949;  1861, 4686  *1  his  fall  is  due,  besides 
other  causes, to  the  increase  in  lighting  by  gas  Comb-mak- 
mg:  1851,  2,038;  1861, 1,478.  Sawyers  1851, 30,552,  1861, 
31,647,  a  small  rise  in  consequence  of  the  increase  of  saw- 
ing-machines.  Nail-nuking.  1851,  26,940;  1861,  26,130; 
fall  in  consequence  of  the  competition  ot  machinery.  Tin- 
and  copper-mining:  1851,  31,360,  1861,  32,041.  On  the 
other  hand,  cotton-spinning  and  weaving  1851,  3/1,777; 
1861,456,646.  Coal  mining:  1851,  183,389,  1861,  246,613. 
“The  increase  of  labourers  is  generally  greatest,  since  1851, 
in  such  branches  of  industry  in  which  machinery  has  not 
up  to  the  present  been  employed  with  success.”—  Ctnsus 
of  England  and  Walts  for  /S62t  Vol.  Ill,  London,  1863,  p. 
36. 

2  Some  of  the  best  economists  of  the  classical  school  had 
sensed,  though  they  had  not  comprehended,  the  law  of  the 
progressive  decrease  of  the  relative  sire  of  the  variable 
capital  with  its  effects  on  the  condition  of  the  class  of  wage 
labourers.  1  he  greatest  merit  here  belongs  to  John  Barton, 
although  he  too,  like  all  the  others,  confounds  the  constant 
with  the  fixed  and  the  variable  with  the  circulating  capi¬ 
tal.  He  says:  “The  demand  for  labour  depends  on  the  in¬ 
crease  of  circulating,  and  not  of  fixed,  capital.  Were  it  true 
that  the  proportion  between  these  two  sorts  of  capital  is 
the  same  at  all  times,  and  in  all  circumstances,  then,  in¬ 
deed,  it  follows  that  the  number  of  labourers  employed  is 
in  proportion  to  the  wealth  of  the  state.  But  such  a  propo¬ 
sition  has  not  the  sembtdnce  of  probability.  As  arts  are 
cultivated,  and  civilization  is  extended,  hied  capital  bears 
a  larger  and  larger  proportion  to  circulating  capital.  The 
amount  of  fixed  capital  employed  in  the  production  of  a 
piece  of  British  muslin  is  at  least  a  hundred,  probably  a 
thousand  times  greater  than  that  employed  in  a  similar 
piece  of  Indian  muslin.  And  the  proportion  of  circulating 
capital  is  a  hundred  or  thousand  times  less  . . .  the  whole 
of  the  annual  savings,  added  to  the  fixed  capital,  would 
have  no  effect  in  increasing  the  demand  for  labour.”  (0£- 
servahms  on  the  Circumstances  whtch  Influence  the  Condi - 
tion  of  the  Labouring  Classes  of  Society ,  London,  1817,  pp. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  313 


is  a  law  of  population  peculiar  to  the  capitalist 
mode  of  production;  and  in  fact  every  special 
historic  mode  of  production  has  its  own  special 
laws  of  population,  historically  valid  within  its 
limits  alone.  An  abstract  law  of  population  ex¬ 
ists  for  plants  and  animals  only,  and  only  in  so 
far  as  man  has  not  interfered  with  them. 

But  if  a  surplus  labouring  population  is  a  nec¬ 
essary  product  of  accumulation  or  of  the  de¬ 
velopment  of  wealth  on  a  capitalist  basis,  this 
surplus  population  becomes,  conversely,  the 
lever  of  capitalistic  accumulation,  nay,  a  condi¬ 
tion  of  existence  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  pro¬ 
duction.  It  forms  a  disposable  industrial  reserve 
army  that  belongs  to  capital  quite  as  absolutely 
as  if  the  latter  had  bred  it  at  its  own  cost.  Inde¬ 
pendently  of  the  limits  of  the  actual  increase  of 
population,  it  creates,  for  the  changing  needs 
of  the  self-expansion  of  capital,  a  mass  of  hu¬ 
man  material  always  ready  for  exploitation. 
With  accumulation,  and  the  development  of 
the  productiveness  of  labour  that  accompanies 
it,  the  power  of  sudden  expansion  of  capital 
grows  also;  it  grows,  not  merely  because  the 
elasticity  of  the  capital  already  functioning  in¬ 
creases,  not  merely  because  the  absolute  wealth 
of  society  expands  (of  which  capital  only  forms 
an  elastic  part),  not  merely  because  credit,  un¬ 
der  every  special  stimulus,  at  once  places  an 
unusual  part  of  this  wealth  at  the  disposal  of 
production  in  the  form  of  additional  capital;  it 
grows,  also,  because  the  technical  conditions  of 
the  process  of  production  themselves — machin¬ 
ery,  means  of  transport,  etc.— now  admit  of  the 
rapidest  transformation  of  masses  of  surplus 
product  into  additional  means  of  production. 
The  mass  of  social  wealth,  overflowing  with  the 
advance  of  accumulation,  and  transformable 
into  additional  capital,  thrusts  itself  frantically 
into  old  branches  of  production,  whose  market 
suddenly  expands,  or  into  newly  formed 

16,  17.)  “The  same  cause  which  may  increase  the  net  rev¬ 
enue  of  the  country  may  at  the  same  time  render  the  popu¬ 
lation  redundant,  and  deteriorate  the  condition  of  the  la¬ 
bourer.”  (Ricardo,  op.  at p.  469.)  With  increase  of  capi¬ 
tal,  “the  demand”  (for  labour)  “will  be  in  a  diminishing 
ratio.”  {Jbid.y  p.  480,  note.)  “The  amount  of  capital  de¬ 
voted  to  the  maintenance  of  labour  may  vary  independent¬ 
ly  of  any  changes  in  the  whole  amount  of  capital. . . .  Great 
fluctuations  in  the  amount  of  employment,  and  great  suf¬ 
fering,  may  become  more  frequent  as  capital  itself  becomes 
more  plentiful.”  (Richard  Jones,  An  Introductory  Lecture 
on  Political  Economy ,  London,  1833,  p.  13.)  “Demand” 
(for  labour)  “will  rise  . . .  not  in  proportion  to  the  accu¬ 
mulation  of  the  general  capital.  . . .  Kvery  augmentation, 
therefore,  in  the  national  stock  destined  for  reproduction, 
comes  in  the  progress  of  society  to  have  less  and  less  influ¬ 
ence  upon  the  condition  of  the  labourer.”  (Ramsay,  op.  cit ., 
pp.90,91.) 


branches,  such  ns  railways,  etc.,  the  need  for 
which  grows  out  of  the  development  of  the  old 
ones.  In  all  such  cases,  there  must  be  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  throwing  great  masses  of  men  sud¬ 
denly  on  the  decisive  points  without  injury  to 
the  scale  of  production  in  other  spheres.  Over¬ 
population  supplies  these  masses.  The  course 
characteristic  of  modern  industry,  viz.,  a  de¬ 
cennial  cycle  (interrupted  by  smaller  oscilla¬ 
tions),  of  periods  of  average  activity,  produc¬ 
tion  at  high  pressure,  crisis  and  stagnation,  de¬ 
pends  on  the  constant  formation,  the  greater  or 
less  absorption,  and  the  re-formation  of  the  in¬ 
dustrial  reserve  army  or  surplus  population.  In 
their  turn,  the  varying  phases  of  the  industrial 
cycle  recruit  the  surplus  population  and  be¬ 
come  one  of  the  most  energetic  agents  of  its  re¬ 
production. 

This  peculiar  course  of  modern  industry, 
which  occurs  in  no  earlier  period  of  human  his¬ 
tory,  was  alsd  impossible  in  the  childhood  of 
capitalist  production.  The  composition  of  cap¬ 
ital  changed  but  very  slowly.  With  its  accumu¬ 
lation,  therefore,  there  kept  pace,  on  the  whole, 
a  corresponding  growth  in  the  demand  for  la¬ 
bour.  Slow  as  was  the  advance  of  accumulation 
compared  with  that  of  more  modern  times,  it 
found  a  check  in  the  natural  limits  of  the  ex¬ 
ploitable  labouring  population,  limits  which 
could  only  be  got  rid  of  by  forcible  means  to  be 
mentioned  later.  The  expansion  by  fits  and 
starts  of  the  scale  of  production  is  the  prelimin¬ 
ary  to  its  equally  sudden  contraction;  the  lat¬ 
ter  again  evokes  the  former,  but  the  former  is 
impossible  without  disposable  human  material, 
without  an  increase  in  the  number  of  labourers 
independently  of  the  absolute  growth  of  the 
population.  This  increase  is  effected  by  the  sim¬ 
ple  process  that  constantly  "sets  free”  a  part 
of  the  labourers;  by  methods  which  lessen  the 
number  of  labourers  employed  in  proportion  to 
the  increased  production.  The  whole  form  of 
the  movement  of  modern  industry  depends, 
therefore,  upon  the  constant  transformation  of 
a  part  of  the  labouring  population  into  unem¬ 
ployed  or  half-employed  hands.  The  superficial¬ 
ity  of  political  economy  shows  itself  in  the  fact 
that  it  looks  upon  the  expansion  and  contrac¬ 
tion  of  credit,  which  is  a  mere  symptom  of  the 
periodic  changes  of  the  industrial  cycle,  as  their 
cause.  As  the  heavenly  bodies,  once  thrown  into 
a  certain  definite  motion,  always  repeat  this,  so 
is  it  with  social  production  as  soon  as  it  is  once 
thrown  into  this  movement  of  alternate  expan¬ 
sion  and  contraction.  Effects,  in  their  turn,  be¬ 
come  causes,  and  the  varying  accidents  of  the 


314  CAPITAL 


whole  process,  which  always  reproduces  its  own 
conditions,  take  on  the  form  of  periodicity. 
When  this  periodicity  is  once  consolidated, 
even  political  economy  then  sees  that  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  a  relative  surplus  population— i.e., 
surplus  with  regard  to  the  average  needs  of  the 
self-expansion  of  capital— is  a  necessary  condi¬ 
tion  of  modern  industry. 

‘‘Suppose,*'  says  H.  Merivale,  formerly  pro¬ 
fessor  of  political  economy  at  Oxford,  and  sub¬ 
sequently  employed  in  the  English  Colonial 
Office,  “suppose  that,  on  the  occasion  of  some 
of  these  crises,  the  nation  were  to  rouse  itself  to 
the  effort  of  getting  rid  by  emigration  of  some 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  superfluous  arms, 
what  would  be  the  consequence  ?  That,  at  the 
first  returning  demand  for  labour,  there  would 
be  a  deficiency.  However  rapid  reproduction 
may  be,  it  takes  at  all  events  the  space  of  a 
generation  to  replace  the  loss  of  adult  labour. 
Now,  the  profits  of  our  manufacturers  depend 
mainly  on  the  power  of  making  use  of  the  pros¬ 
perous  moment  when  demand  is  brisk,  and  thus 
compensating  themselves  for  the  interval  dur¬ 
ing  which  it  is  slack.  This  power  is  secured  to 
them  only  by  the  command  of  machinery  and 
of  manual  labour.  They  must  have  hands  ready 
by  them,  they  must  be  able  to  increase  the  ac¬ 
tivity  of  their  operations  when  required,  and  to 
slacken  it  again,  according  to  the  state  of  the 
market,  or  they  cannot  possibly  maintain  that 
pre-eminence  in  the  race  of  competition  on 
which  the  wealth  of  the  country  is  founded.'*1 
Even  Mai  thus  recognizes  overpopulation  as  a 
necessity  of  modern  industry,  though,  after  his 
narrow  fashion,  he  explains  it  by  the  absolute 
over-growth  of  the  labouring  population,  not 
by  their  becoming  relatively  supernumerary. 
He  says:  “Prudential  habits  with  regard  to 
marriage, carried  to  a  considerable  extent  among 
the  labouring  class  of  a  country  mainly  depend¬ 
ing  upon  manufactures  and  commerce,  might 
injure  it. . . .  From  the  nature  of  a  population, 
an  increase  of  labourers  cannot  be  brought  into 
market  in  consequence  of  a  particular  demand 
till  after  the  lapse  of  sixteen  or  eighteen  years, 
and  the  conversion  of  revenue  into  capital  by 
saving  may  take  place  much  more  rapidly;  a 
country  is  always  liable  to  an  increase  in  the 
quantity  of  the  funds  for  the  maintenance  of  la¬ 
bour  faster  than  the  increase  of  population.**2 

1 H.  Merivale,  Lectures  on  Colonixatton  and  Colonies , 
1841,  Vol.  I,  p.  146. 

2  Malthus,  Principles  oj  Political  Economy ,  pp.  254, 319, 
320.— In  this  work,  Malthus  finally  discovers,  with  the 

help  of  Sismondi,  the  beautiful  trinity  of  capitalistic  pro- 


After  Political  Economy  has  thus  demonstrated 
the  constant  production  of  a  relative  surplus 
population  of  labourers  to  be  a  necessity  of  cap¬ 
italistic  accumulation,  she  very  aptly,  in  the 
guise  of  an  old  maid,  puts  in  the  mouth  of  her 
beau  ideal  of  a  capitalist  the  following  words 
addressed  to  those  supernumeraries  thrown  on 
the  streets  by  their  own  creation  of  additional 
capital:  “We  manufacturers  do  what  we  can  for 
you,  whilst  we  are  increasing  that  capital  on 
which  you  must  subsist,  and  you  must  do  the 
rest  by  accommodating  your  numbers  to  the 
means  of  subsistence.**3 

Capitalist  production  can  by  no  means  con¬ 
tent  itself  with  the  quantity  of  disposable  la¬ 
bour  power  which  the  natural  increase  of  popu¬ 
lation  yields.  It  requires  for  its  free  play  an  in¬ 
dustrial  reserve  army  independent  of  these  nat¬ 
ural  limits. 

Up  to  this  point  it  has  been  assumed  that  the 
increase  or  diminution  of  the  variable  capital 
corresponds  rigidly  with  the  increase  or  diminu¬ 
tion  of  the  number  of  labourers  employed. 

The  number  of  labourers  commanded  by  cap¬ 
ital  may  remain  the  same,  or  even  fall,  while  the 
variable  capital  increases.  This  is  the  case  if  the 
individual  labourer  yields  more  labour,  and 
therefore  his  wages  increase,  and  this  although 
the  price  of  labour  remains  the  same  or  even 
falls,  only  more  slowly  than  the  mass  of  labour 
rises.  Increase  of  variable  capital,  in  this  case, 
becomes  an  index  of  more  labour,  but  not  of 
more  labourers  employed.  It  is  the  absolute  in¬ 
terest  of  every  capitalist  to  press  a  given  quan¬ 
tity  of  labour  out  of  a  smaller,  rather  than  a 
greater,  number  of  labourers,  if  the  cost  is  about 
the  same.  In  the  latter  case,  the  outlay  of  con¬ 
stant  capital  increases  in  proportion  to  the  mass 
of  labour  set  in  action;  in  the  former  that  in¬ 
crease  is  much  smaller.  The  more  extended  the 
scale  of  production,  the  stronger  this  motive. 
Its  force  increases  with  the  accumulation  of 
capital. 

We  have  seen  that  the  development  of  the 
capitalist  mode  of  production  and  of  the  pro¬ 
ductive  power  of  labour— at  once  the  cause  and 
effect  of  accumulation— enables  the  capitalist, 
with  the  same  outlay  of  variable  capital,  to  set 
in  action  more  labour  by  greater  exploitation 
(extensive  or  intensive)  of  each  individual  la¬ 
bour  power.  We  have  further  seen  that  the  cap¬ 
italist  buys  with  the  same  capital  agreater  mass 

duction:  over-production,  over-population,  over-consump¬ 
tion—  three  very  delicate  monsters,  indeed.  Cf.  F.  Engels, 
Umrtste  zu  etner  Kntik  der  National-Oekonomie ,  p.  107,  ff. 

1  Harriet  Marttneau,  The  Manchester  Strike,  1842,  p.xoi. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  315 


of  labour  power,  as  he  progressively  replaces 
skilled  labourers  by  less  skilled,  mature  labour 
power  by  immature,  male  by  female,  that  of 
adults  by  that  of  young  persons  or  children. 

On  the  one  hand,  therefore,  with  the  progress 
of  accumulation,  a  larger  variable  capital  sets 
more  labour  in  action  without  enlisting  more 
labourers;  on  the  other,  a  variable  capital  of  the 
same  magnitude  sets  in  action  more  labour  with 
the  same  mass  of  labour  power;  and,  finally,  a 
greater  number  of  inferior  labour  powers  by  dis¬ 
placement  of  higher. 

The  production  of  a  relative  surplus  popula¬ 
tion,  or  the  setting  free  of  labourers,  goes  on, 
therefore,  yet  more  rapidly  than  the  technical 
revolution  of  the  process  of  production  that  ac¬ 
companies,  and  is  accelerated  by,  the  advance 
of  accumulation;  and  more  rapidly  than  the 
corresponding  diminution  of  the  variable  part 
of  capital  as  compared  with  the  constant.  If  the 
means  of  production,  as  they  increase  in  extent 
and  effective  power,  become  to  a  less  extent 
means  of  employment  of  labourers,  this  state 
of  things  is  again  modified  by  the  fact  that,  in 
proportion  as  the  productiveness  of  labour  in¬ 
creases,  capital  increases  its  supply  of  labour 
more  quickly  than  its  demand  for  labourers. 
The  overwork  of  the  employed  part  of  the  work¬ 
ing  class  swells  the  ranks  of  the  reserve,  whilst 
conversely,  the  greater  pressure  that  the  latter 
by  its  competition  exerts  on  the  former,  forces 
these  to  submit  to  overwork  and  to  subjugation 
under  the  dictates  of  capital.  The  condemna¬ 
tion  of  one  part  of  the  working  class  to  enforced 
idleness  by  the  overwork  of  the  other  part,  and 
the  converse,  becomes  a  means  of  enriching  the 
individual  capitalists,1  and  accelerates  at  the 

1  Even  in  the  cotton  famine  of  1863  we  find,  in  a  pam¬ 
phlet  of  the  operative  cotton-spinners  of  Blackburn,  fierce 
denunciations  of  overwork,  which,  in  consequence  of  the 
Factory  Acts,  of  course,  only  effected  adult  male  labourers. 
“The  adult  operatives  at  this  mill  have  been  asked  to  work 
from  12  to  13  hours  per  day,  while  there  are  hundreds  who 
are  compelled  to  be  idle  who  would  willingly  work  partial 
time,  in  order  to  maintain  their  families  and  save  their 
brethren  from  a  premature  grave  through  being  over¬ 
worked.  . . .  We,”  it  goes  on  to  say,  “would  ask  if  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  working  overtime  by  a  number  of  hands  is  likely  to 
create  a  good  feeling  between  masters  and  servants.  Those 
who  are  worked  overtime  feel  the  injustice  equally  with 
those  who  are  condemned  to  forced  idleness.  There  is  in 
the  district  almost  sufficient  work  to  give  to  all  partial  em¬ 
ployment  if  fairly  distributed.  Wc  are  only  asking  what  is 
right  in  requesting  the  masters  generally  to  pursue  a  system 
of  short  hours,  particularly  until  a  better  state  of  things 
begins  to  dawn  upon  usK rather  than  to  work  a  portion  of 
the  hands  overtime,  while  others,  for  want  of  work,  are 
compelled  to  exist  upon  charity.*’  (Reports  of  Inspectors  of 
Factories ,  Oct.  31, 1863,  p.  8.)  The  author  of  the  Essay  on 
Trade  and  Commerce  grasps  the  effect  of  a  relative  surplus 


same  time  the  production  of  the  industrial  re¬ 
serve  army  on  a  scale  corresponding  with  the 
advance  of  social  accumulation.  How  impor¬ 
tant  is  this  element  in  the  formation  of  the  rela¬ 
tive  surplus  population,  is  shown  by  the  exam¬ 
ple  of  England.  Her  technical  means  for  saving 
labour  are  colossal.  Nevertheless,  if  tomorrow 
morning  labour  generally  were  reduced  to  a 
rational  amount,  and  proportioned  to  the  dif¬ 
ferent  sections  of  the  working  class  according 
to  age  and  sex,  the  working  population  to  hand 
would  be  absolutely  insufficient  for  the  carrying 
on  of  national  production  on  its  present  scale. 
The  great  majority  of  the  labourers  now  “un¬ 
productive”  would  have  to  be  turned  into  “pro¬ 
ductive”  ones. 

Taking  them  as  a  whole,  the  general  move¬ 
ments  of  wages  are  exclusively  regulated  by  the 
expansion  and  contraction  of  the  industrial  re¬ 
serve  army,  and  these  again  correspond  to  the 
periodic  changes  of  the  industrial  cycle.  They 
are,  therefore,  not  determined  by  the  variations 
of  the  absolute  number  of  the  working  popula¬ 
tion,  but  by  the  varying  proportions  in  which 
the  working  class  is  divided  into  active  and  re¬ 
serve  army,  by  the  increase  or  diminution  in  the 
relative  amount  of  the  surplus  population,  by 
the  extent  to  which  it  is  now  absorbed,  now  set 
free.  For  modern  industry  with  its  decennial 
cycles  and  periodic  phases,  which,  moreover,  as 
accumulation  advances,  are  complicated  by  ir¬ 
regular  oscillations  following  each  other  more 
and  more  quickly,  that  would  indeed  be  a  beau¬ 
tiful  law  which  pretends  to  make  the  action  of 
capital  dependent  on  the  absolute  variation  of 
the  population,  instead  of  regulating  the  de¬ 
mand  and  supply  of  labour  by  the  alternate  ex¬ 
pansion  and  contraction  of  capital,  the  labour 
market  now  appearing  relatively  under-full,  be¬ 
cause  capital  is  expanding,  now  again  over-full, 
because  it  is  contracting.  Yet  this  is  the  dogma 
of  the  economists.  According  to  them,  wages 
rise  in  consequence  of  accumulation  of  capital. 
The  higher  wages  stimulate  the  working  popu¬ 
lation  to  more  rapid  multiplication,  and  this 
goes  on  until  the  labour  market  becomes  too 

population  on  the  employed  labourers  with  his  usual  un¬ 
erring  bourgeois  instinct.  “Another  cause  of  idleness  in  this 
kingdom  is  the  want  of  a  sufficient  number  of  labouring 
hands.  . . .  Whenever,  from  an  extraordinary  demand  for 
manufactures,  labour  grows  scarce,  the  labourers  feel  their 
own  consequence,  and  will  make  their  masters  feel  it  like¬ 
wise — it  is  amazing;  but  so  depraved  are  the  dispositions 
of  these  people  that  in  such  cases  a  set  of  workmen  have 
combined  to  distress  the  employer  by  idling  a  whole  day 
together.”  (Op.  cit.9  pp.  27,  28.)  The  fellows,  in  fact,  were 
hankering  after  a  rise  in  wages. 


CAPITAL 


316 

full,  and  therefore  capital,  relatively  to  the  sup¬ 
ply  of  labour,  becomes  insufficient.  Wages  fall, 
and  now  we  have  the  reverse  of  the  medal.  The 
working  population  is  little  by  little  decimated 
as  the  result  of  the  fall  in  wages,  so  that  capital 
is  again  in  excess  relatively  to  them,  or,  as  oth¬ 
ers  explain  it,  falling  wages  and  the  correspond¬ 
ing  increase  in  the  exploitation  of  the  labourer 
again  accelerates  accumulation,  whilst,  at  the 
same  time,  the  lower  wages  hold  the  increase  of 
the  working  class  in  check.  Then  comes  again 
the  time  when  the  supply  of  labour  is  less  than 
the  demand,  wages  rise,  and  so  on.  A  beautiful 
mode  of  motion  this  for  developed  capitalist 
production!  Before,  in  consequence  of  the  rise 
of  wages,  any  positive  increase  of  the  popula¬ 
tion  really  fit  for  work  could  occur,  the  time 
would  have  been  passed  again  and  again  during 
which  the  industrial  campaign  must  have  been 
carried  through,  the  battle  fought  and  won. 

Between  1849  and  1859,  a  rise  of  wages  prac¬ 
tically  insignificant,  though  accompanied  by 
falling  prices  of  corn,  took  place  in  the  English 
agricultural  districts.  In  Wiltshire,  for  example, 
the  weekly  wages  rose  from  7 s.  to  8 s.\  in  Dorset¬ 
shire,  from  7 j.  or  8 j.,  to  9J.,  etc.  This  was  the 
result  of  an  unusual  exodus  of  the  agricultural 
surplus  population  caused  by  the  demands  of 
war,  the  vast  extension  of  railroads,  factories, 
mines,  etc.  The  lower  the  wages,  the  higher  is 
the  proportion  in  which  ever  so  insignificant  a 
rise  of  them  expresses  itself.  If  the  weekly  wage, 
for  example,  is  10s.  and  it  rises  to  22 j.,  that  is  a 
rise  of  10%;  but  if  it  is  only  7 s.  and  it  rises  to 
9 j.,  that  is  a  rise  of  28y7%,  which  sounds  very 
fine.  Everywhere  the  farmers  were  howling,  and 
the  London  Economist ,  with  reference  to  these 
starvation-wages,  prattled  quite  seriously  of  “a 
general  and  substantial  advance.”1  What  did 
the  farmers  do  now  ?  Did  they  wait  until,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  this  brilliant  remuneration,  the  ag¬ 
ricultural  labourers  had  so  increased  and  mul¬ 
tiplied  that  their  wages  must  fall  again,  as  pre¬ 
scribed  by  the  dogmatic  economic  brain?  They 
introduced  more  machinery,  and  in  a  moment 
the  labourers  were  redundant  again  in  a  pro¬ 
portion  satisfactory  even  to  the  farmers.  There 
was  now  "more  capital”  laid  out  in  agriculture 
than  before,  and  in  a  more  productive  form. 
With  this  the  demand  for  labour  fell,  not  only 
relatively,  but  absolutely. 

The  above  economic  fiction  confuses  the  laws 
that  regulate  the  general  movement  of  wages, 
or  the  ratio  between  the  working-class — i.c.,  the 
total  labour  power— and  the  total  social  capi- 

1  Economist,  Jan.  21 ,  i860. 


tal,  with  the  laws  that  distribute  the  working 
population  over  the  different  spheres  of  produc¬ 
tion.  If,  for  example,  in  consequence  of  favour¬ 
able  circumstances,  accumulation  in  a  particu¬ 
lar  sphere  of  production  becomes  especially  ac¬ 
tive,  and  profits  in  it,  being  greater  than  the 
average  profits,  attract  additional  capital,  of 
course  the  demand  for  labour  rises  and  wages 
also  rise.  The  higher  wages  draw  a  larger  part 
of  the  working  population  into  the  more  fa¬ 
voured  sphere,  until  it  is  glutted  with  labour 
power,  and  wages  at  length  fall  again  to  their 
average  level  or  below  it,  if  the  pressure  is  too 
great.  Then,  not  only  does  the  immigration  of 
labourers  into  the  branch  of  industry  in  ques¬ 
tion  cease;  it  gives  place  to  their  emigration. 
Here  the  political  economist  thinks  he  sees  the 
why  and  wherefore  of  an  absolute  increase  of 
workers  accompanying  an  increase  of  wages, 
and  of  a  diminution  of  wages  accompanying  an 
absolute  increase  of  labourers.  But  he  sees  real¬ 
ly  only  the  local  oscillation  of  the  labour  market 
in  a  particular  sphere  of  production— he  sees 
only  the  phenomena  accompanying  the  distri¬ 
bution  of  the  working  population  into  the  dif¬ 
ferent  spheres  of  outlay  of  capital,  according  to 
its  varying  needs. 

The  industrial  reserve  army,  during  the  peri¬ 
ods  of  stagnation  and  average  prosperity, 
weighs  down  the  active  labour  army ;  during  the 
periods  of  overproduction  and*paroxysm,  it 
holds  its  pretensions  in  check.  Relative  surplus 
population  is,  therefore,  the  pivot  upon  which 
the  law  of  demand  and  supply  of  labour  works. 
It  confines  the  field  of  action  of  this  law  within 
the  limits  absolutely  convenient  to  the  activity 
of  exploitation  and  to  the  domination  of  capital. 

This  is  the  place  to  return  to  one  of  the  grand 
exploits  of  economic  apologetics.  It  will  be  re¬ 
membered  that  if  through  the  introduction  of 
new,  or  the  extension  of  old  machinery,  a  por¬ 
tion  of  variable  capital  is  transformed  into  con¬ 
stant,  the  economic  apologist  interprets  this  op¬ 
eration  which  "fixes”  capital  and  by  that  very 
act  set  labourers  "free,”  in  exactly  the  opposite 
way,  pretending  that  it  sets  free  capital  for  the 
labourers.  Only  now  can  one  fully  understand 
the  effrontery  of  these  apologists.  What  are  set 
free  are  not  only  the  labourers  immediately 
turned  out  by  the  machines,  but  also  their  fu¬ 
ture  substitutes  in  the  rising  generation,  and 
the  additional  contingent  that  with  the  usual 
extension  of  trade  on  the  old  basis  would  be 
regularly  absorbed.  They  are  now  all  "set  free,” 
and  every  new  bit  of  capital  looking  out  for  em¬ 
ployment  can  dispose  of  them.  Whether  it  at- 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  317 


tracts  them  or  others,  the  effect  on  the  general 
labour  demand  will  be  nil,  if  this  capital  is  just 
sufficient  to  take  out  of  the  market  as  many  la¬ 
bourers  as  the  machines  threw  upon  it.  If  it  em¬ 
ploys  a  smaller  number,  that  of  the  supernu¬ 
meraries  increases;  if  it  employs  a  greater,  the 
general  demand  for  labour  only  increases  to  the 
extent  of  the  excess  of  the  employed  over  those 
“set  free.**  The  impulse  that  additional  capital, 
seeking  an  outlet,  would  otherwise  have  given 
to  the  general  demand  for  labour,  is  therefore 
in  every  case  neutralized  to  the  extent  of  the 
labourers  thrown  out  of  employment  by  the 
machine.  That  is  to  say,  the  mechanism  of  cap¬ 
italistic  production  so  manages  matters  that 
the  absolute  increase  of  capital  is  accompanied 
by  no  corresponding  rise  in  the  general  demand 
for  labour.  And  this  the  apologist  calls  a  com¬ 
pensation  for  the  misery,  the  sufferings,  the  pos¬ 
sible  death  of  the  displaced  labourers  during  the 
transition  period  that  banishes  them  into  the 
industrial  reserve  army!  The  demand  for  labour 
is  not  identical  with  increase  of  capi  tal,  nor  sup¬ 
ply  of  labour  vt  itii  uh  rease  of  the  working  class. 
It  is  not  a  case  of  two  independent  forces  work¬ 
ing  on  one  another.  Les  Ms  sontpipts .l  Capital 
works  on  both  sides  at  the  same  time.  If  its  ac¬ 
cumulation,  on  the  one  hand,  increases  the  de¬ 
mand  for  labour,  it  increases  on  the  other  the 
supply  of  labourers  by  the  “setting  free”  of 
them,  whilst  at  the  same  time  the  pressure  of 
the  unemployed  compels  those  that  are  em¬ 
ployed  to  furnish  more  labour,  and  therefore 
makes  the  supply  of  labour,  to  a  certain  extent, 
independent  of  the  supply  of  labourers.  The  ac¬ 
tion  of  the  law  of  supply  and  demand  of  labour 
on  this  basis  completes  the  despotism  of  capital. 
As  soon,  therefore,  as  the  labourers  learn  the 
secret  of  how  it  comes  to  pass  that,  in  the  same 
measure  as  they  work  more,  as  they  produce 
more  wealth  for  others,  and  as  the  productive 
power  of  their  labour  increases,  so  in  the  same 
measure  even  their  function  as  a  means  of  the 
self-expansion  of  capital  becomes  more  and 
more  precarious  for  them;  as  soon  as  they  dis¬ 
cover  that  the  degree  of  intensity  of  the  compe¬ 
tition  among  themselves  depends  wholly  on  the 
pressure  of  the  relative  surplus  population;  as 
soon  as,  by  Trades*  Unions,  etc.,  they  try  to 
organize  a  regular  cooperation  between  em¬ 
ployed  and  unemployed  in  order  to  destroy  or 
to  weaken  the  ruinous  effects  of  this  natural  law 
of  capitalistic  production  on  their  class,  so  soon 
capital  and  its  sycophant,  political  economy, 
cry  out  at  the  infringement  of  the  “eternal**  and 
1  The  dice  are  loaded. 


so  to  say  “sacred**  law  of  supply  and  demand. 
Every  combination  of  employed  and  unem¬ 
ployed  disturbs  the  “harmonious**  action  of  this 
law.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  soon  as  (in  the 
colonies,  for  instance)  adverse  circumstances 
prevent  the  creation  of  an  industrial  reserve 
army  and,  with  it,  the  absolute  dependence  of 
the  working  class  upon  the  capitalist  class,  cap¬ 
ital,  along  with  its  commonplace  Sancho  Panza, 
rebels  against  the  “sacred**  law  of  supply  and 
demand,  and  tries  to  check  its  inconvenient  ac¬ 
tion  by  forcible  means  and  State  interference. 

4.  Different  Forms  of  the  Relative  Surplus  Popu¬ 
lation.  The  General  Law  of  Capitalistic  Accu¬ 
mulation 

The  relative  surplus  population  exists  in 
every  possible  form.  Every  labourer  belongs  to 
it  during  the  time  when  he  is  only  partially  em¬ 
ployed  or  wholly  unemployed.  Not  taking  into 
account  the  gjfeat  periodically  recurring  forms 
that  the  changing  phases  of  the  industrial  cycle 
impress  on  it,  now  an  acute  form  during  a  crisis, 
then  again  a  chronic  form  during  dull  times — it 
has  always  three  forms,  the  floating,  the  latent, 
the  stagnant. 

In  the  centres  of  modern  industry— factories, 
manufactures,  ironworks,  mines,  etc.— the  la¬ 
bourers  are  sometimes  repelled,  sometimes  at¬ 
tracted  again  in  greater  masses,  the  number  of 
those  employed  increasing  on  the  whole,  al¬ 
though  in  a  constantly  decreasing  proportion 
to  the  scale  of  production.  Here  the  surplus  pop¬ 
ulation  exists  in  the  floating  form. 

In  the  automatic  factories,  as  in  all  the  great 
workshops,  where  machinery  enters  as  a  factor, 
or  where  only  the  modern  division  of  labour  is 
carried  out,  large  numbers  of  boys  arc  employed 
up  to  the  age  of  maturity.  When  this  term  is 
once  reached,  only  a  very  small  number  con¬ 
tinue  to  find  employment  in  the  same  branches 
of  industry,  whilst  the  majority  are  regularly 
discharged.  This  majority  forms  an  element  of 
the  floating  surplus  population,  growing  with 
the  extension  of  those  branches  of  industry. 
Part  of  them  emigrates,  following  in  fact  capital 
that  has  emigrated.  One  consequence  is  that  the 
female  population  grows  more  rapidly  than  the 
male,  as  we  see  in  England.  That  the  natural 
increase  of  the  number  of  labourers  does  not 
satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  accumulation  of 
capital,  and  yet  all  the  time  is  in  excess  of  them, 
is  a  contradiction  inherent  to  the  movement  of 
capital  itself.  It  wants  larger  numbers  of  youth¬ 
ful  labourers,  a  smaller  number  of  adults.  The 
contradiction  is  not  more  glaring  than  that 


CAPITAL 


318 

other  one  that  there  is  a  complaint  of  the  want 
of  hands,  while  at  the  same  time  many  thous- 
ands  are  out  of  work,  because  the  division  of 
labour  chains  them  to  a  particular  branch  of 
industry.1 

The  consumption  of  labour  power  by  capital 
is,  besides,  so  rapid  that  the  labourer,  half-way 
through  his  life,  has  already  more  or  less  com¬ 
pletely  livedhimself  out.  He  falls  intothe  ranks 
of  the  supernumeraries,  or  is  thrust  down  from 
a  higher  to  a  lower  step  in  the  scale.  1 1  is  precise¬ 
ly  among  the  workers  of  modern  industry  that 
we  meet  with  the  shortest  duration  of  life.  Dr. 
Lee,  medical  officer  of  health  for  Manchester, 
stated  “that  the  average  age  at  death  of  the 
Manchester  .  .  .  upper  middle  class  was  38 
years,  while  the  average  age  at  death  of  the  la¬ 
bouring  class  was  17;  while  at  Liverpool  those 
figures  were  represented  as  35  against  15.  It 
thus  appeared  that  the  well-to-do  classes  had  a 
lease  of  life  which  was  more  than  double  the 
value  of  that  which  fell  to  the  lot  of  the  less 
favoured  citizens.”2  In  order  to  conform  to 
these  circumstances,  the  absolute  increase  of 
this  section  of  the  proletariat  must  take  place 
under  conditions  that  shall  swell  their  numbers, 
although  the  individual  elements  are  used  up 
rapidly.  Hence,  rapid  renewal  of  the  genera¬ 
tions  of  labourers  (this  law  does  not  hold  for  the 
other  classes  of  the  population).  This  social 
need  is  met  by  early  marriages,  a  necessary  con¬ 
sequence  of  the  conditions  in  which  the  labour¬ 
ers  of  modern  industry  live,  and  by  the  premi¬ 
um  that  the  exploitation  of  children  sets  on 
their  production. 

As  soon  as  capitalist  production  takes  pos¬ 
session  of  agriculture,  and  in  proportion  to  the 
extent  to  which  it  does  so,  the  demand  for  an 
agricultural  labouring  population  falls  absolute¬ 
ly,  while  the  accumulation  of  the  capital  em¬ 
ployed  in  agriculture  advances,  without  this  re¬ 
pulsion  being,  as  in  non-agricultural  industries, 
compensated  by  a  greater  attraction.  Part  of 
the  agricultural  population  is,  therefore,  con¬ 
stantly  on  the  point  of  passing  over  into  an  ur¬ 
ban  or  manufacturing  proletariat,  and  on  the 
watch  for  circumstances  favourable  ta  this 

1  Whilst  during  the  last  six  months  of  1866,  eighty  to 
ninety  thousand  working  people  in  London  were  thrown 
out  of  work,  the  Factory  Report  for  that  same  half  year 
says:  “It  does  not  appear  absolutely  true  to  say  that  de¬ 
mand  will  always  produce  supply  just  at  the  moment  when 
it  is  needed.  It  has  not  done  so  with  labour,  for  much  ma¬ 
chinery  has  been  idle  last  year  for  want  of  hands.” — Re¬ 
ports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories,  31st  Oct.,  1866,  p.  81. 

1  Opening  address  to  the  Sanitary  Conference,  Birming¬ 
ham,  January  15th,  1875,  by  J.  Chamberlain,  Mayor  of 
the  town,  now  (1883)  president  of  the  Board  of  Trade. 


transformation.  ( Manufacture  is  used  here  in 
the  sense  of  all  non-agricultural  industries.)9 
This  source  of  relative  surplus  population  is 
thus  constantly  flowing.  But  the  constant  flow 
towards  the  towns  presupposes  in  the  country 
itself,  a  constant  latent  surplus  population,  the 
extent  of  which  becomes  evident  only  when  its 
channels  of  outlet  open  to  exceptional  width. 
The  agricultural  labourer  is  therefore  reduced 
to  the  minimum  of  wages  and  always  stands 
with  one  foot  already  in  the  swamp  of  pauper¬ 
ism. 

The  third  category  of  the  relative  surplus 
population,  the  stagnant,  forms  a  part  of  the 
active  labour  army,  but  with  extremely  irregular 
employment.  Hence,  it  furnishes  to  capital  an 
inexhaustible  reservoir  of  disposable  labour 
power.  Its  conditions  of  life  sink  below  the  aver¬ 
age  normal  level  of  the  working  class;  this 
makes  it  at  once  the  broad  basis  of  special 
branches  of  capitalist  exploitation.  It  is  char¬ 
acterized  by  maximum  of  working  time  and 
minimum  of  wages.  We  have  learnt  to  know  its 
chief  form  under  the  rubric  of  “domestic  indus¬ 
try.”  It  recruits  itself  constantly  from  the  su¬ 
pernumerary  forces  of  modern  industry  and  .ag¬ 
riculture,  and  specially  from  those  decaying 
branches  of  industry  where  handicraft  is  yield¬ 
ing  to  manufacture,  manufacture  to  machinery. 
Its  extent  grows,  as  with  the  extent  and  energy 
of  accumulation,  the  creation  of,*  surplus  pop¬ 
ulation  advances.  But  it  forms  at  the  same  time 
a  self-reproducing  and  self-perpetuating  ele¬ 
ment  of  the  working  class,  taking  a  proportion¬ 
ally  greater  part  in  the  general  increase  of  that 
class  than  the  other  elements.  In  fact,  not  only 
the  number  of  births  and  deaths,  but  the  abso¬ 
lute  size  of  the  families,  stand  in  inverse  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  height  of  wages,  and  therefore  to  the 
amount  of  means  of  subsistence  of  which  the 
different  categories  of  labourers  dispose.  This 
law  of  capitalistic  society  would  sound  absurd 
to  savages,  or  even  civilized  colonists.  It  calls 
to  mind  the  boundless  reproduction  of  animals 

*  Seven  hundred  and  eighty-one  towns  given  in  the  cen¬ 
sus  for  1861  for  England  and  Wales  “contained  10,960,998 
inhabitants,  while  the  villages  and  country  parishes  con¬ 
tained  9,105,226.  In  1851,  580  towns  were  distinguished, 
and  the  population  in  them  and  in  the  surrounding  coun¬ 
try  was  nearly  equal.  But  while  in  the  subsequent  ten 
years  the  population  in  the  villages  and  the  country  in¬ 
creased  half  a  million,  the  population  in  the  580  towns  in¬ 
creased  by  a  million  and  a  half  (1,554,067).  The  increase 
of  the  population  of  the  country  parishes  is  6.5  %,  and  of 
the  towns  17.3  %.  The  difference  in  the  rates  of  increase  is 
due  to  the  migration  from  country  to  town.  Three-fourths 
of  the  t*>tal  increase  of  population  has  taken  place  in  the 
towns. — Census,  etc.,  pp.  11  and  12. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  319 


individually  weak  and  constantly  hunted 
down.1 

The  lowest  sediment  of  the  relative  surplus 
population  finally  dwells  in  the  sphere  of  pau¬ 
perism.  Exclusive  of  vagabonds,  criminals, 
prostitutes,  in  a  word,  the  “dangerous”  classes, 
this  layer  of  society  consists  of  three  categories. 
First,  those  able  to  work.  One  need  only  glance 
superficially  at  the  statistics  of  English  pauper¬ 
ism  to  find  that  the  quantity  of  paupers  in¬ 
creases  with  every  crisis  and  diminishes  with 
every  revival  of  trade.  Second,  orphans  and 
pauper  children.  These  are  candidates  for  the 
industrial  reserve  army,  and  are,  in  times  of 
great  prosperity,  as  in  i860,  for  example,  speed¬ 
ily  and  in  large  numbers  enrolled  in  the  active 
army  of  labourers.  Third,  the  demoralized  and 
ragged  and  those  unable  to  work,  chiefly  people 
who  succumb  to  their  incapacity  for  adapta¬ 
tion,  due  to  the  division  of  labour;  people  who 
have  passed  the  normal  age  of  the  labourer;  the 
victims  of  industry,  whose  number  increases 
with  the  increase  of  dangerous  machinery,  of 
mines,  chemical  *  'rks,  etc.,  the  mutilated,  the 
sickly,  the  widows,  etc.  Pauperism  is  the  hos¬ 
pital  of  the  active  labour  army  and  the  dead 
weight  of  the  industrial  reserve  army.  Its  pro¬ 
duction  is  included  in  that  of  the  relative  sur¬ 
plus  population,  its  necessity  in  theirs;  along 
with  the  surplus  population,  pauperism  forms  a 
condition  of  capitalist  production,  and  of  the 
capitalist  development  of  wealth.  It  enters  into 
the JauxJrais  of  capitalist  production;  but  capi¬ 
tal  knows  how  to  throw  these,  for  the  most  part, 
from  its  own  shoulders  on  to  those  of  the  work¬ 
ing  class  and  the  lower  middle  class. 

The  greater  the  social  wealth,  the  function¬ 
ing  capital,  the  extent  and  energy  of  its  growth, 
and,  therefore,  also  the  absolute  mass  of  the 
proletariat  and  the  productiveness  of  its  labour, 
the  greater  is  the  industrial  reserve  army.  The 
same  causes  which  develop  the  expansive  power 
of  capital,  develop  also  the  labour  power  at  its 
disposal.  The  relative  mass  of  the  industrial  re¬ 
serve  army  increases,  therefore,  with  the  poten¬ 
tial  energy  of  wealth.  But  the  greater  this  re¬ 
serve  army  in  proportion  to  the  active  labour 

1  “Poverty  seems  favourable  to  generation.”  (A.  Smith.) 
This  is  even  a  specially  wise  arrangement  of  God,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  gallant  and  witty  Abb£  Galiani.  “God  has  or¬ 
dained  that  those  men  who  exercise  the  most  useful  trades 
are  born  most  abundantly.”  (Galiani,  op .  cit.t  p.  78.) 
“Misery  up  to  the  extreme  point  of  famine  and  pestilence, 
instead  of  checking,  tends  to  increase  population.”  (S. 
Laing,  National  Distress ,  1844,  p.  69.)  After  Laing  has  il¬ 
lustrated  this  by  statistics,  he  continues:  “If  the  people 
were  all  in  easy  circumstances,  the  world  would  soon  be 
depopulated.” 


army,  the  greater  is  the  mass  of  a  consolidated 
surplus  population,  whose  misery  is  in  inverse 
ratio  to  its  torment  of  labour.  The  more  exten¬ 
sive,  finally,  the  Lazarus  layers  of  the  working 
class,  and  the  industrial  reserve  army  the 
greater  is  official  pauperism.  This  is  the  absolute 
general  law  oj  capitalist  accumulation .  Like  all 
other  laws  it  is  modified  in  its  working  by  many 
circumstances,  the  analysis  of  which  does  not 
concern  us  here. 

The  folly  is  now  patent  of  the  economic  wis¬ 
dom  that  preaches  .to  the  labourers  the  accom¬ 
modation  of  their  number  to  the  requirements 
of  capital.  The  mechanism  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion  and  accumulation  constantly  effects  this 
adjustment.  The  first  word  of  this  adaptation 
is  the  creation  of  a  relative  surplus  population, 
or  industrial  reserve  army.  Its  last  word  is  the 
misery  of  constantly  extending  strata  of  the  ac¬ 
tive  army  of  labour,  and  the  dead  weight  of 
pauperism.  * 

The  law  by  which  a  constantly  increasing 
quantity  of  means  of  production,  thanks  to  the 
advance  in  the  productiveness  of  social  labour, 
may  be  set  in  movement  by  a  progressively 
diminishing  expenditure  of  human  power,  this 
law,  in  a  capitalist  society — where  the  labourer 
does  not  employ  the  means  of  production,  but 
the  means  of  production  employ  the  labourer — 
undergoes  a  complete  inversion  and  is  expressed 
thus:  the  higher  the  productiveness  of  labour, 
the  greater  is  the  pressure  of  the  labourers  on 
the  means  of  employment,  the  more  precarious, 
therefore,  becomes  their  condition  of  existence, 
viz.,  the  sale  of  their  own  labour  power  for  the 
increasing  of  another's  wealth,  or  for  the  self¬ 
expansion  of  capital.  The  fact  that  the  means  of 
production,  and  the  productiveness  of  labour, 
increase  more  rapidly  than  the  productive  pop¬ 
ulation,  expresses  itself,  therefore,  capitalisti¬ 
cally  in  the  inverse  form  that  the  labouring  pop¬ 
ulation  always  increases  more  rapidly  than  the 
conditions  under  which  capital  can  employ  this 
increase  for  its  own  self-expansion. 

We  saw  in  Part  IV,  when  analysing  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  relative  surplus  value  that  within  the 
capitalist  system  all  methods  for  raising  the  so¬ 
cial  productiveness  of  labour  are  brought  about 
at  the  cost  of  the  individual  labourer;  all  means 
for  the  development  of  production  transform 
themselves  into  means  of  domination  over,  and 
exploitation  of,  the  producers;  they  mutilate 
the  labourer  into  a  fragment  of  a  man,  degrade 
him  to  the  level  of  an  appendage  of  a  machine, 
destroy  every  remnant  of  charm  in  his  work 
and  turn  it  into  a  hated  toil;  they  estrange  from 


320  CAPITAL 

him  the  intellectual  potentialities  of  the  labour  many  others.  The  wealth  of  a  nation  corre- 


process  in  the  same  proportion  as  science  is  in¬ 
corporated  in  it  as  an  independent  power;  they 
distort  the  conditions  under  which  he  works, 
subject  him  during  the  labour  process  to  a  des¬ 
potism  the  more  hateful  for  its  meanness;  they 
transform  his  lifetime  into  working  time,  and 
drag  his  wife  and  child  beneath  the  wheels  of 
the  Juggernaut  of  capital.  But  all  methods  for 
the  production  of  surplus  value  are  at  the  same 
time  methods  of  accumulation;  and  every  ex¬ 
tension  of  accumulation  becomes  again  a  means 
for  the  development  of  those  methods.  It  fol¬ 
lows,  therefore,  that  in  proportion  as  capital  ac¬ 
cumulates,  the  lot  of  the  labourer,  be  his  pay¬ 
ment  high  or  low,  must  grow  worse.  The  law, 
finally,  that  always  equilibrates  the  relative 
surplus  population,  or  industrial  reserve  army, 
to  the  extent  and  energy  of  accumulation,  this 
law  rivets  the  labourer  to  capital  more  firmly 
than  the  wedges  of  Vulcan  did  Prometheus  to 
the  rock.  It  establishes  an  accumulation  of  mis¬ 
ery,  corresponding  with  accumulation  of  capi¬ 
tal.  Accumulation  of  wealth  at  one  pole  is, 
therefore,  at  the  same  time  accumulation  of 
misery,  agony  of  toil,  slavery,  ignorance,  bru¬ 
tality,  mental  degradation,  at  the  opposite  pole, 
i.e.,  on  the  side  of  the  class  that  produces  its 
own  product  in  the  form  of  capital. 

This  antagonistic  character  of  capitalistic  ac¬ 
cumulation1  is  enunciated  in  various  forms  by 
political  economists,  although  by  them  it  is  con¬ 
founded  with  phenomena  certainly  to  some  ex¬ 
tent  analogous,  but  nevertheless  essentially  dis¬ 
tinct,  and  belonging  to  pre-capijtalistic  modes  of 
production. 

The  Venetian  monk,  Ortes,  one  of  the  great 
economic  writers  of  the  eighteenth  century,  re¬ 
gards  the  antagonism  of  capitalist  production 
as  a  general  natural  law  of  social  wealth.  “In 
the  economy  of  a  nation,  advantages  and  evils 
always  balance  one  another;  the  abundance  of 
wealth  with  some  people,  is  always  equal  to  the 
want  of  it  with  others;  the  great  riches  of  a  small 
number  are  always  accompanied  by  the  abso¬ 
lute  privation  of  the  first  necessaries  of  life  for 

1  “From  day  to  day  it  becomes  more  clear  that  the  rela¬ 
tions  of  production  in  which  the  bourgeois  exists  have  not 
a  single,  a  simple  character,  but  a  double  character,  a  char¬ 
acter  of  duplicity;  that  in  the  same  relations  in  which 
wealth  is  produced,  poverty  is  produced  also;  that  in  the 
same  relations  in  which  there  is  a  development  of  produc¬ 
tive  forces,  there  is  a  productive  force  of  repression;  that 
these  relations  produce  bourgeois  wealth,  that  is  to  say, 
the  wealth  of  the  bourgeois  class,  only  in  continually  anni¬ 
hilating  the  wealth  of  integral  members  of  that  class  and 
in  producing  an  ever-growing  proletariat/*—  Karl 
Marx,  Miskre  de  la  philosophies  p.  1 16. 


sponds  with  its  population,  and  its  misery  cor¬ 
responds  with  its  wealth.  Diligence  in  some 
compels  idleness  in  others.  The  poor  and  idle  are 
a  necessary  consequence  of  the  rich  and  active,” 
etc.*  In  a  thoroughly  brutal  way  about  ten 
years  after  Ortes,  the  Church  of  England  par¬ 
son,  Townsend,  glorified  misery  as  a  necessary 
condition  of  wealth.  “Legal  constraint”  (to  la¬ 
bour)  “is  attended  with  too  much  trouble,  vio¬ 
lence,  and  noise, . . .  whereas  hunger  is  not  only 
a  peaceable,  silent,  unremitted  pressure,  but,  as 
the  most  natural  motive  to  industry  and  labour, 
it  calls  forth  the  most  powerful  exertions.” 
Everything  therefore  depends  upon  making 
hunger  permanent  among  the  working  class, 
and  for  this,  according  to  Townsend,  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  population,  especially  active  among  the 
poor,  provides.  “It  seems  to  be  a  law  of  nature 
that  the  poor  should  be  to  a  certain  degree  im¬ 
provident”  (i.e.,  so  improvident  as  to  be  born 
without  a  silver  spoon  in  the  mouth),  “that  there 
may  always  be  some  to  fulfil  the  most  servile, 
the  most  sordid,  and  the  most  ignoble  offices  in 
the  community.  The  stock  of  human  happiness 
is  thereby  much  increased,  whilst  the  more  deli¬ 
cate  are  not  only  relieved  from  drudgery. . . . 
but  are  left  at  liberty  without  interruption  to 
pursue  those  callings  which  are  suited  to  their 
various  dispositions.  ...  It”  (the  Poor  Law) 
“tends  to  destroy  the  harmony  a#d  beauty,  the 
symmetry  and  order  of  that  system  which  God 
and  Nature  have  established  in  the  world.”3  If 
the  Venetian  monk  found  in  the  fatal  destiny 
that  makes  misery  eternal  the  raison  d'etre  of 
Christian  charity,  celibacy,  monasteries,  and 
holy  houses,  the  Protestant  prebendary  finds  in 

8  G.  Ortes ,  Della  Economta  Nazionale ,  1777,  in  Custodi, 
“ Parte  Moderna"  Vol.  xxi,  pp.  6,  9,  22,  25,  etc.  Ortes  says, 
op.  cit .,  p.  3a:  “Rather  than  project  systems  which  are 
useless  for  the  happiness  of  the  people,  1  shall  limit  myself 
to  investigating  the  reason  for  their  unhappiness.” 

1 A  Dissertation  on  the  Poor  Lam ,  by  a  Well-wisher  of 
Mankind.  (The  Rev.  J.  Townsend)  1786,  republished  I-on- 
don,  1817,  pp.  15,  39,  41.— This  “delicate”  parson,  from 
whose  work  just  quoted,  as  well  as  from  his  Journey  through 
Spain ,  Malthus  often  copies  whole  pages,  himself  borrowed 
the  greater  part  of  his  doctrine  from  Sir  James  Steuart, 
whom  he  however  alters  in  the  borrowing.  For  example, 
when  Steuart  says:  “Here,  in  slavery,  was  a  forcible  method 
of  making  mankind  diligent,"  (for  the  ndn-workers). . .  • 
“Men  were  then  forced  to  work”  (i.e.  to  work  gratis  for 
others),  “because  they  were  slaves  of  others;  men  are  now 
forced  to  work”  (i.e.,  to  work  gratis  for  non-workers)  “be¬ 
cause  they  are  the  slaves  of  their  necessities.'*  He  does  not 
thence  conclude,  like  the  fat  holder  of  benefices,  that  the 
wage  labourer  must  always  go  fasting.  He  wishes,  on  the 
contrary,  to  increase  their  wants  and  to  make  the  increas¬ 
ing  number  of  their  wants  a  stimulus  to  their  labour  for 
the  “more  delicate/1 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  321 


it  a  pretext  for  condemning  the  laws  in  virtue 
of  which  the  poor  possessed  a  right  to  a  miser¬ 
able  public  relief. 

“The  progress  of  social  wealth,**  says  Storch, 
“begets  this  useful  class  of  society  . . .  which 
performs  the  most  wearisome,  the  vilest,  the 
most  disgusting  functions,  which  takes,  in  a 
word,  on  its  shoulders  all  that  is  disagreeable 
and  servile  in  life,  and  procures  thus  for  other 
classes  leisure,  serenity  of  mind  and  conven¬ 
tional’*  (good!)  “dignity  of  character.**1  Storch 
asks  himself  in  what  then  really  consists  the 
progress  of  this  capitalistic  civilization,  with  its 
misery  and  its  degradation  of  the  masses,  as 
compared  with  barbarism.  He  finds  but  one  an¬ 
swer:  security! 

“Thanks  to  the  advance  of  industry  and  sci¬ 
ence,**  says  Sismondi,  “every  labourer  can  pro¬ 
duce  every  day  much  more  than  his  consump¬ 
tion  requires.  Hut  at  the  same  time,  whilst  his 
labour  produces  wealth,  that  wealth  would, 
were  he  called  on  to  consume  it  himself,  make 
him  less  fit  for  labour.**  According  to  him, 
“men**  (i.e.,  non  workers)  “would  probably 
prefer  to  do  without  all  artistic  perfection  and 
all  the  enjoyments  that  manufactures  procure 
for  us,  if  it  were  necessary  that  all  should  buy 
them  by  constant  toil  like  that  of  the  labourer. 
. . .  Exertion  to-day  is  separated  from  its  rec¬ 
ompense;  it  is  not  the  same  man  that  first 
works  and  then  reposes;  but  it  is  because  the 
one  works  that  the  other  rests. . . .  The  indefi¬ 
nite  multiplication  of  the  productive  powers  of 
labour  can  then  only  have  for  result  the  increase 
of  luxury  and  enjoyment  of  the  idle  rich.**2 * 

Finally,  Dcstutt  de  Tracy,  the  fish-blooded 
bourgeois  doctrinaire,  blurts  out  brutally:  “In 
poor  nations  the  common  people  are  comfort¬ 
able,  in  rich  nations  they  are  generally  poor.*** 

5.  Illustrations  of  the  General  Law  of  Capitalist 

Accumulation 

a.  England  from  1846-1866 

No  period  of  modern  society  is  so  favourable 
for  the  study  of  capitalist  accumulation  as  the 
period  of  the  last  twenty  years.  It  is  as  if  this 
period  had  found  Fortunatus*  purse.  But  of  all 
countries  England  again  furnishes  the  classical 
example,  because  it  holds  the  foremost  place  in 
the  world  market,  because  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion  is  here  alone  completely  developed,  and 
lastly,  because  the  introduction  of  the  Free 

1  Storch,  op . «/.,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  213. 

2  Sismondi,  op . «/.,  pp.  79,  80, 8{. 

1  Dcstutt  de  1  racy,  op.  eit.>  p.  231. 


Trade  millennium  since  1 846  has  cut  off  the  last 
retreat  of  vulgar  economy.  The  titanic  advance 
of  production— the  latter  half  of  the  twenty 
years  period  again  far  surpassing  the  former — 
has  been  already  pointed  out  sufficiently  in 
Part  JV. 

Although  the  absolute  increase  of  the  English 
population  in  the  last  half  century  was  very 
great,  the  relative  increase  or  rate  of  growth  fell 
constantly,  as  the  following  table  borrowed 
from  the  census  shows. 

Annual  Increase  percent  of  the  Population  of  England 


and  JVales  in  decimal  numbers. 

Per  cent 

1811-1821 

1-533 

1821-1831 

1.446 

1831-1841 

1.326 

1841-1851 

1.216 

1851-1861 

1.141 

Let  us  now,  on  the  other  hand,  consider  the 
increaseof  wealth.  Here  the  movement  of  profit, 
rent  of  land,  etc.,  that  come  under  the  income 
tax,  furnishes  the  surest  basis.  The  increase  of 
profits  liable  to  income  tax  (farmers  and  some 
other  categories  not  included)  in  Great  Britain 
from  1853  to  1864  amounted  to  50.47%  or 
4.58%  as  the  annual  average,4  that  of  the  popu¬ 
lation  during  the  same  period  to  about  1 2%.  The 
augmentation  of  the  rent  of  land  subject  to  tax¬ 
ation  (including  houses,  railways,  mines,  fish¬ 
eries,  etc.),  amounted  for  1853  to  1864  to  38% 
or  3s/ia%  annually.  Under  this  head,  the  follow¬ 
ing  categories  show  the  greatest  increase: 


Excess  oj  annual  income  of 

1864  over  that  of  1853 

Increase 

Per  Year 

Houses 

3-50 

Quarries 

7.70 

Mines 

6.26 

Iron-works 

3-63 

Fisheries 

5.21 

Gasworks 

11.45 

Railways 

7-57* 

If  we  compare  the  years  from  1853  to  1864  in 
three  sets  of  four  consecutive  years  each,  the 
rate  of  augmentation  of  the  income  increases 
constantly.  It  is,  for  example,  for  that  arising 
from  profits  between  1853  to  1857, 1.73%  year¬ 
ly;  1857-1861,  2.74%,  and  for  1861  -64,  9.30% 
yearly.  The  sum  of  the  incomes  of  the  United 
Kingdom  that  come  under  the  income  tax  was 
in  1856,  £307,068,898 ;  in  1 859,  £328, 1 27,4 1 6;  in 

4  Tenth  Report  of  the  Commissioners  oj  H.  M.  Inland 
Revenue ,  London,  1866,  p.  38. 

'Ibid. 


322  CAPITAL 


1862,  £351,745,241;  in  1863,  £359>i4*,897;  in 
1864,  £362,462,279;  in  1865,  £385,530,020.* 
The  accumulation  of  capital  was  attended  at 
the  same  time  by  its  concentration  and  cen¬ 
tralization.  Although  no  official  statistics  of  ag¬ 
riculture  existed  for  England  (they  did  for  Ire¬ 
land),  they  were  voluntarily  given  in  ten  coun¬ 
ties.  These  statistics  gave  the  result  that  from 
185 1  toi  861,  the  number  of  farms  of  less  than  1 00 
acres  had  fallen  from  31,583  to  26,597,  so  that 
5016  had  been  thrown  together  into  larger 
farms.2  From  1815  to  1825,  no  personal  estate 
of  more  than  £1,000,000  came  under  the  suc¬ 
cession  duty;  from  1825  to  1855,  however,  8 
did;  and  4  from  1856  to  June,  1859,  i.e.,  in  4}^ 
years.3  The  centralization  will,  however,  be  best 
seen  from  a  short  analysis  of  the  Income  Tax 
Schedule  D  (profits,  exclusive  of  farms,  etc.),  in 
the  years  1 864  and  1 865. 1  note  beforehand  that 
incomes  from  this  source  pay  income  tax  on 
everything  over  £60.  These  incomes  liable  to 
taxation  in  England,  Wales,  and  Scotland, 
amounted  in  1864  to  £95,844,222;  in  1865  to 
£105,435,579:*  The  number  of  persons  taxed 
were,  in  1864,  308,416  out  of  a  population  of 
23,891,009;  in  1865,332,431  out  of  a  population 
of  24,127,003.  The  following  table  shows  the 
distribution  of  these  incomes  in  the  two  years: 


Year  ending  April  5,  1864 

Total  Income 

from  Profits  Persons 

Year  ending  April  S%  J^5 

Total  Income 

from  Profits  Persons 

£ 

£ 

95,844,222 

308,416 

>05.435.738 

332*43* 

57,028,289 

23.334 

64.554.297 

24,265 

36,415,225 

3»6i9 

42,535.576 

4,021 

22,809,781 

#3* 

27. 555.3*3 

973 

8,744,76* 

91 

107 

In  1855  there  were  produced  in  the  United 
Kingdom  61,453,079  tons  of  coal,  of  value 
£16,1 13,167;  in  1864,  92,787,873  tons,  of  value 

1  These  figures  are  sufficient  for  comparison,  but,  taken 
absolutely,  are  false,  since,  perhaps,  £100, 000, 000  of  in¬ 
come  are  annually  not  declared.  The  complaints  of  the  In¬ 
land  Revenue  Commissioners  of  systematic  fraud,  especial¬ 
ly  on  the  part  of  the  commercial  and  industrial  classes,  are 
repeated  in  each  of  their  reports.  So  for  example,  “A  joint- 
stock  company  returns  £6coo  as  assessable  profits,  fhe  sur¬ 
veyor  raises  the  amount  to  £88,000,  and  upon  that  sum 
duty  is  ultimately  paid.  Another  company  which  returns 
£x<p,ooo  is  finally  compelled  to  admit  that  the  true  re¬ 
turn  should  be  £250,000." — Ibid.,  p.  42. 

*  Census ,  etc.,  op.  cit .,  p.  29.  —John  Bright’s  assertion 
that  150  landlords  own  half  of  England,  and  12,  half  the 
Scotch  soil,  has  never  been  refuted. 

*  Fourth  Report  oj  the  Commissioners  of  H.  M.  Inland 
Revenue,  London,  i860,  p.  17. 

*  These  are  the  net  incomes  after  certain  legally  author¬ 
ized  abatements. 


£23>i97>9^8  ;  5n  1 855, 3,21 8, 1 54  tons  of  pig-iron, 
of  value  £8,045,385;  1864,  41767,951  tons,  of 
value  £11,919,877.  In  1854,  the  length  of  the 
railroads  worked  in  the  United  Kingdom  was 
8054  miles, with  a  paid-up  capital  of  £286,068,- 
794;  in  1864,  the  length  was  12,789  miles,  with 
capital  paid  up  of  £425,719,613.  In  1854,  the 
total  sum  of  the  exports  and  imports  of  the 
United  Kingdom  was  £268,210,145;  in  1865, 
£489,923,285.  The  following  table  shows  the 
movement  of  the  exports: 

£ 

1846  58,842,377 

*849  <>3»596>052 

1856  115,826,948 

i860  135,842,817 

1865  165,862,402 

1866  188,917,5636 

After  these  few  examples,  one  understands 
the  cry  of  triumph  of  the  registrar  general  of  the 
British  people:  “Rapidly  as  the  population  has 
increased,  it  has  not  kept  pace  with  the  progress 
of  industry  and  wealth.”® 

Let  us  turn  now  to  the  direct  agents  of  this 
industry,  or  the  producers  of  this  wealth,  to  the 
working  class.  “It  is  one  of  the  most  melancholy 
features  in  the  social  state  of  this  country.”  says 
Gladstone,  “that  while  there  was  a  decrease  in 
the  consuming  powers  of  the  people,  and  while 
there  was  an  increase  in  the  privations  and  dis¬ 
tress  of  the  labouring  class  and  Operatives,  there 
was  at  the  same  time  a  constant  accumulation 
of  wealth  in  the  upper  classes,  and  a  constant 
increase  of  capital.”7  Thus  spoke  this  unctuous 
minister  in  the  House  of  Commons  on  February 
13th,  1843.  On  April  16th,  1863,  twenty  years 
later,  in  the  speech  in  which  he  introduced  his 
budget:  “From  1842  to  1852  the  taxable  income 
of  the  country  increased  by  6%. ...  In  the 
eight  years  from  1853  to  1861  it  had  increased 
from  the  basis  taken  in  1853  by  20%!  The  fact 

s  At  this  moment,  March,  1867,  the  Indian  and  Chinese 
market  is  again  overstocked  by  the  consignments  of  the 
British  cotton  manufacturers.  In  1866  a  reduction  in  wages 
of  5%  took  place  amongst  the  cotton  operatives.  In  1867, 
as  consequence  of  a  similar  operation,  there  was  a  strike  of 
20,000  men  at  Preston. — Note  to  the  4th  edition:  1  his  was 
the  prelude  to  the  crisis  which  set  in  right  afterward.  F.E. 

•  Census ,  etc.,  op,  ctt.,  p.  1 1. 

7  Gladstone  in  the  House  of  Commons,  Feb.  13th,  1843. 
The  Times,  Feb.  14th,  1843. — "I*  is  onc  the  most  mel¬ 
ancholy  features  in  the  social  state  of  this  country  that  we 
see,  beyond  the  possibility  of  denial,  that  while  there  is  at 
this  moment  a  decrease  in  the  consuming  powers  of  the 
people,  an  increase  of  the  pressure  of  privations  and  dis¬ 
tress;  there  is  at  the  same  time  a  constant  accumulation  of 
wealth  in  the  upper  classes,  an  increase  of  the  luxurious¬ 
ness  of  their  habits, and  of  their  meansof  enjoyment." — 
Hansara,  13  th  Feb. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  323 


is  so  astonishing  as  to  be  almost  incredible  . . . 
this  intoxicating  augmentation  of  wealth  and 
power  . . .  entirely  confined  to  classes  of  proper¬ 
ty  .. .  must  be  of  indirect  benefit  to  the  labour¬ 
ing  population,  because  it  cheapens  the  com¬ 
modities  of  general  consumption.  While  the  rich 
have  been  growing  richer,  the  poor  have  been 
growing  less  poor.  At  any  rate,  whether  the  ex¬ 
tremes  of  poverty  are  less,  I  do  not  presume  to 
say.**1  How  lame  an  anticlimax!  If  the  working 
class  has  remained  “poor,”  only  “less  poor”  in 
proportion  as  it  produces  for  the  wealthy  class 
“an  intoxicating  augmentation  of  wealth  and 
power,”  then  it  has  remained  relatively  just  as 
poor.  If  the  extremes  of  poverty  have  not  less¬ 
ened,  they  have  increased,  because  the  ex¬ 
tremes  of  wealth  have.  As  to  the  cheapening  of 
the  means  of  subsistence,  the  official  statistics, 
for  instance,  the  accounts  of  the  I-ondon  Or¬ 
phan  Asylum,  show  an  increase  in  price  of  20% 
for  the  average  of  the  three  years  1860-1862, 
compared  with  1851-1853.  In  the  following 
three  years,  1861-1865,  there  was  a  progressive 
rise  in  the  price  of  meat,  butter,  milk,  sugar, 
salt,  coals,  and  a  number  of  other  necessary 
means  of  subsistence.54  Gladstone's  next  budget 
speech  of  April  7th,  1864,  is  a  Pindaric  dithy¬ 
ramb  on  the  advance  of  surplus  value  making 
and  the  happiness  of  the  people  tempered  by 
“poverty.”  He  speaks  of  masses  “on  the  bor¬ 
der”  of  pauperism,  of  branches  of  trade  in  which 
“wages  have  not  increased,”  and  finally  sums 
up  the  happiness  of  the  working  class  in  the 
words:  “Human  life  is  but,  in  nine  cases  out  of 
ten,  a  struggle  for  existence.”3  Professor  Faw¬ 
cett,  not  bound  like  Gladstone  by  official  con¬ 
siderations,  declares  roundly:  “I  do  not,  of 
course,  deny  that  money  wages  have  been  aug- 

1  Gladstone  in  the  House  of  Commons,  April  i6th,  1863. 
Morning  Star,  April  17th. 

2  See  the  official  accounts  in  the  Blue  Book,  Miscellane¬ 
ous  Statistics  0]  the  United  Kingdom ,  Part  VI,  I^ondon, 
1866,  pp.  260-273,  passim.  Instead  of  the  statistics  of  or¬ 
phan  asylums,  etc.,  the  declamations  of  the  ministerial 
journals  in  recommending  dowries  for  the  Royal  children 
might  also  serve.  The  greater  dearness  of  the  means  of  sub¬ 
sistence  is  never  forgotten  there. 

3  Gladstone,  House  of  Commons,  7th  April,  1864.— The 
Hansard  version  runs:  “Again,  and  yet  more  at  large— 
what  is  human  life,  but,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  a  struggle 
for  existence.”  The  continual  crying  contradictions  in  Glad¬ 
stone’s  budget  speeches  of  1863  and  1864  Were  character¬ 
ized  by  an  English  writer  ( The  Theory  of  Exchanges ,  etc., 
London,  1864,  p.  135)  by  the  following  quotation  from 
Molitre: 

Look  at  the  man  for  what  he  is:  he  goes  from  black  to  white , 

At  dawn  he  damns  the  evening's  sentiments; 

Annoying  to  all  others ,  and  troublesome  to  himself 

He  changes  his  mind  with  every  moment ,  as  if  he  were 
changing  fashions . 


merited  by  this  increase  of  capital  (in  the  last 
ten  years),  but  this  apparent  advantage  is  to  a 
great  extent  lost,  because  many  of  the  necessa¬ 
ries  of  life  are  becoming  dearer”  (he  believes 
because  of  the  fall  in  value  of  the  precious 
metals)  . .  .“the  rich  grow  rapidly  richer,  whilst 
there  is  no  perceptible  advance  in  the  comfort 
enjoyed  by  the  industrial  classes. . .  .They  (the 
labourers  )become  almost  the  slaves  of  the 
tradesman,  to  whom  they  owe  money.”4 

In  the  chapters  on  the  “working  day”  and 
“machinery,”  the  reader  has  seen  under  what 
circumstances  the  British  working-class  cre¬ 
ated  an  “intoxicating  augmentation  of  wealth 
and  power”  for  the  propertied  classes.  There  we 
were  chiefly  concerned  with  the  social  function¬ 
ing  of  the  labourer.  But  for  a  full  elucidation  of 
the  law  of  accumulation,  his  condition  outside 
the  workshop  must  also  be  looked  at,  his  condi¬ 
tion  as  to  food  and  dwelling.  The  limits  of  this 
book  compel  us  to  concern  ourselves  chiefly 
with  the  worst  paid  part  of  the  industrial  pro¬ 
letariat,  and  with  the  agricultural  labourers, 
who  together  form  the  majority  of  the  working- 
class. 

But  first,  one  word  on  official  pauperism,  or 
on  that  part  of  the  working-class  which  has  for¬ 
feited  its  condition  of  existence  (the  sale  of  la¬ 
bour  power),  and  vegetates  upon  public  alms. 
The  official  list  of  paupers  numbered  in  Eng¬ 
land5  85 1,369  persons;  in  1 856, 877,767;  in  1865, 
97 1  >433*  consequence  of  the  cotton  famine, 
it  grew  in  the  years  1863  and  1864  to  1,079,382 
and  1,014,978.  The  crisis  of  1866,  which  fell 
most  heavily  on  London,  created  in  this  centre 
of  the  world-market,  more  populous  than  the 
kingdom  of  Scotland,  an  increase  of  pauperism 
for  the  year  1866  of  19.5%  compared  with  1865, 
and  of  24.4%  compared  with  1864,  and  a  still 
greater  increase  for  the  first  months  of  1867  as 
compared  with  1866.  From  the  analysis  of  the 
statistics  of  pauperism,  two  points  are  to  be 
taken.  On  the  one  hand,  the  fluctuation  up  and 
down  of  the  number  of  paupers,  reflects  the  per¬ 
iodic  changes  of  the  industrial  cycle.  On  the 
other,  the  official  statistics  become  more  and 
more  misleading  as  to  the  actual  extent  of  pau¬ 
perism  in  proportion  as,  with  the  accumulation 
of  capital,  the  class  struggle,  and,  therefore,  the 
class  consciousness  of  the  working  men,  devel¬ 
op.  For  example,  the  barbarity  in  the  treatment 

4  H.  Fawcett,  op.  cit.%  pp.  67-82.— As  to  the  increasing 
dependence  of  labourers  on  the  retail  shopkeepers,  this  is 
the  consequence  of  the  frequent  oscillations  and  interrup¬ 
tions  of  their  employment. 

ft  Wales  here  is  always  included  in  England. 


CAPITAL 


324 

of  the  paupers,  at  which  the  English  press  ( The 
Times ,  Pali  Mall  Gazette,  etc.)  have  cried  out  so 
loudly  during  the  last  two  years,  is  of  ancient 
date.  F.  Engels  showed  in  1 844  exactly  the  same 
horrors,  exactly  the  same  transient  canting  out¬ 
cries  of  “sensational  literature.'*  But  frightful 
increase  of  “deaths  by  starvation"  in  London 
during  the  last  ten  years  proves  beyond  doubt 
the  growing  horror  in  which  the  working  people 
hold  the  slavery  of  the  workhouse,  that  place 
of  punishment  for  misery.1 

b.  The  badly  paid  Strata  of  the  British  Indus¬ 
trial  Class 

During  the  cotton  famine  of  1862,  Dr.  Smith 
was  charged  by  the  Privy  Council  with  an  in¬ 
quiry  into  the  conditions  of  nourishment  of  the 
distressed  operatives  in  Lancashire  and  Chesh¬ 
ire.  His  observations  during  many  preceding 
years  had  led  him  to  the  conclusion  that  “to 
avert  starvation  diseases,"  the  daily  food  of  an 
average  woman  ought  to  contain  at  least  3,900 
grains  of  carbon  with  180  grains  of  nitrogen;  the 
daily  food  of  an  average  man,  at  least  4,300 
grains  of  carbon  with  200  grains  of  nitrogen;  for 
women,  about  the  same  quantity  of  nutritive 
elements  as  are  contained  in  2  pounds  of  good 
wheaten  bread,  for  men  one-ninth  more;  for  the 
weekly  average  of  adult  men  and  women,  at 
least  28,600  grains  of  carbon  and  1,330  grains 
of  nitrogen.  His  calculation  was  practically  con¬ 
firmed  in  a  surprising  manner  by  its  agreement 
with  the  miserable  quantity  of  nourishments 
which  want  had  forced  down  the  consumption 
of  the  cotton  operatives.  This  was,  in  Decem¬ 
ber,  1862,  29,211  grains  of  carbon,  and  1,295 
grains  of  nitrogen  weekly. 

In  the  year  1863,  the  Privy  Council  ordered 
an  inquiry  into  the  state  of  distress  of  the  worst- 
nourished  part  of  the  English  working  class. 
Dr.  Simon,  medical  officer  to  the  Privy  Council, 
chose  for  this  work  the  above-mentioned  Dr. 
Smith.  His  inquiry  ranges,  on  the  one  hand, 
over  the  agricultural  labourers;  on  the  other, 
over  silk-weavers,  needle-women,  kid-glovers, 
stocking-weavers,  glove-weavers,  and  shoe¬ 
makers.  The  latter  categories  are,  with  the  ex¬ 
ception  of  the  stocking- weavers,  exclusively 
town  dwellers.  It  was  made  a  rule  in  the  inquiry 

1 A  peculiar  light  is  thrown  on  the  advance  made  since 
the  time  of  Adam  Smith,  by  the  fact  that  by  him  the  word 
“workhouse"  is  still  occasionally  used  as  synonymous  with 
“manufactory";  e.g.,  the  opening  of  his  chapter  on  the 
division  of  labour:  "those  employed  in  every  different 
branch  of  the  work  can  often  be  collected  into  the  same 
workhouse." 


to  select  in  each  category  the  most  healthy 
families,  and  those  comparatively  in  the  best 
circumstances. 

As  a  general  result  it  was  found  that  “in  only 
one  of  the  examined  classes  of  indoor  operatives 
did  the  average  nitrogen  supply  just  exceed, 
while  in  another  it  nearly  reached,  the  esti* 
mated  standard  of  bare  sufficiency"  (i.e.,  suffi¬ 
cient  to  avert  starvation  diseases),  “and  that  in 
two  classes  there  was  defect — in  one  a  very 
large  defect — of  both  nitrogen  and  carbon. 
Moreover,  as  regards  the  examined  families  of 
the  agricultural  population,  it  appeared  that 
more  than  one-fifth  were  with  less  than  the  es¬ 
timated  sufficiency  of  carbonaceous  food,  that 
more  than  one-third  were  with  less  than  the 
estimated  sufficiency  of  nitrogenous  food,  and 
that  in  three  counties  (Berkshire,  Oxfordshire, 
and  Somersetshire),  insufficiency  of  nitrogen¬ 
ous  food  was  the  average  local  diet."2  Among 
the  Agricultural  labourers,  those  of  England, 
the  wealthiest  part  of  the  United  Kingdom, 
were  the  worst  fed.*  The  insufficiency  of  food 
among  the  agricultural  labourers  fell,  as  a  rule, 
chiefly  on  the  women  and  children,  for  “the 
man  must  eat  to  do  his  work."  Still  greater 
penury  ravaged  the  town  workers  examined. 
“They  arc  so  ill  fed  that  assuredly  among  them 
there  must  be  many  cases  of  severe  and  injuri¬ 
ous  privation."4  (“Privation"  of  the  capitalist 
all  this!  i.e.,  “abstinence"  from  paying  for  the 
means  of  subsistence  absolutely  necessary  for 
the  mere  vegetation  of  his  “hands.") 

The  following  table  shows  the  conditions  of 
nourishment  of  the  above-named  categories  of 
purely  town-dwelling  work-people,  as  com¬ 
pared  with  the  minimum  assumed  by  Dr.  Smith 
and  with  the  food  allowance  of  the  cotton  op- 


Average 

Average 

BOTH  SEXES 

Weekly 

Weekly 

Carbon 

Nitrogen 

Grains 

Grains 

Five  indoor  occupations 
Unemployed  Lancashire  opera¬ 

28,876 

1,192 

tives 

28,&1I 

h*9  5 

Minimum  quantity  to  be  allowed 

to  the  Lancashire  operatives, 
equal  number  of  males  and  fe¬ 
males 

28,600 

1^30* 

*  Public  Healthy  Sixth  Report ,  1864,  P*  >3* 
1  Op* «/.,  p.  17. 

4  Op.  ctt.,  p.  1 3. 

1  Op.  cit.y  appendix,  p.  132. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  325 


eratives  during  the  time  of  their  greatest  dis¬ 
tress: 

One  half,  or60/^,  of  the  industrial  labour  cate¬ 
gories  investigated  had  absolutely  no  beer,  28% 
no  milk.  The  weekly  average  of  the  liquid 
means  of  nourishment  in  the  families  varied 
from  seven  ounces  in  the  needle-women  to  24^ 
ounces  in  the  stocking-makers.  The  majority  of 
those  who  did  not  obtain  milk  were  needle¬ 
women  in  London.  The  quantity  of  bread-stuffs 
consumed  weekly  varied  from  y$i  pounds  for 
the  needle-women  to  1 1  l/i  pounds  for  the  shoe¬ 
makers,  and  gave  a  total  average  of  9.9  pounds 
per  adult  weekly.  Sugar  (treacle,  etc.)  varied 
from  4  ounces  weekly  for  the  kid-glovers  to  11 
ounces  for  the  stocking-makers;  and  the  total 
average  per  week  for  all  categories  was  8  ounces 
per  adult  weekly.  Total  weekly  average  of 
butter  (fat,  etc.),  J  ounces  per  adult.  The 
weekly  average  of  meat  (bacon,  etc.)  varied 
from  7/4  ounces  for  the  silk-weavers  to  i85^ 
ounces  for  the  kid-glovers;  total  average  for 
the  different  categories,  13.6  ounces.  The 
weekly  cost  of  food  per  adult,  gave  the  follow¬ 
ing  average  figures:  silk- weavers,  is.  2 }4d.; 
needle-women,  is.  yd.;  kid-glovers,  is  y}4d.; 
shoemakers,  is.  7 *Ad.\  stocking  weavers,  is. 
6}  id.  For  the  silk-weavers  of  Macclesfield, 
the  average  was  only  is.  8  l/*d.  The  worst  cate¬ 
gories  were  the  needle-women,  silk-weavers  and 
kid-glovers.1  Of  these  facts,  Dr.  Simon  in  his 
General  Health  Report  says:  “That  cases  are 
innumerable  in  which  defective  diet  is  the  cause 
or  the  aggravator  of  disease,  can  be  affirmed  by 
anyone  who  is  conversant  with  Poor  Law  med¬ 
ical  practice,  or  with  the  wards  and  out-patient 
rooms  of  hospitals. . .  .Yet  in  this  point  of  view, 
there  is,  in  my  opinion,  a  very  important  sani¬ 
tary  context  to  be  added.  It  must  be  remem¬ 
bered  that  privation  of  food  is  very  reluctantly 
borne,  and  that  as  a  rule,  great  poorness  of  diet 
will  only  come  when  other  privations  have  pre¬ 
ceded  it.  Long  before  insufficiency  of  diet  is  a 
matter  of  hygienic  concern,  long  before  the 
physiologist  would  think  of  counting  the  grains 
of  nitrogen  and  carbon  which  intervene  be¬ 
tween  life  and  starvation,  the  household  will 
have  been  utterly  destitute  of  material  com¬ 
fort;  clothing  and  fuel  will  have  been  even  scan¬ 
tier  than  food— against  inclemencies  of  weather 
there  will  have  been  no  adequate  protection — 
dwelling  space  will  have  been  stinted  to  the  de¬ 
gree  in  which  overcrowding  produces  or  in¬ 
creases  disease;  of  household  utensils  and  furni- 

l0p.  cit.%  Pp.  232, 233. 


ture  there  will  have  been  scarcely  any— even 
cleanliness  will  have  been  found  costly  or  diffi¬ 
cult,  and  if  there  still  be  self-respectful  endeav¬ 
ours  to  maintain  it,  every  such  endeavour  will 
represent  additional  pangs  of  hunger.  The 
home,  too,  will  be  where  shelter  can  be  cheapest 
bought;  in  quarters  where  commonly  there  is 
least  fruit  of  sanitary  supervision,  least  drain¬ 
age,  least  scavenging,  least  suppression  of  pub¬ 
lic  nuisances,  least  or  worst  water  supply,  and, 
if  in  town,  least  light  and  air.  Such  are  the  san¬ 
itary  dangers  to  which  poverty  is  almost  cer¬ 
tainly  exposed,  when  it  is  poverty  enough  to  im¬ 
ply  scantiness  of  food.  And  while  the  sum  of 
them  is  of  terrible  magnitude  against  life,  the 
mere  scantiness  of  food  is  in  itself  of  very  serious 
moment.  .  .  .  These  are  painful  reflections,  es¬ 
pecially  when  it  is  remembered  that  the  poverty 
to  which  they  advert  is  not  the  deserved  pov¬ 
erty  of  idleness.  In  all  cases  it  is  the  poverty  of 
working  populations.  Indeed,  as  regards  the  in¬ 
door  operatives,  the  work  which  obtains  the 
scanty  pittance  of  food  is,  for  the  most  pa»-t, 
excessively  prolonged.  Yet  evidently  it  is  only 
in  a  qualified  sense  that  the  work  can  be  deemed 
self-supporting.  .  .  .  And  on  a  very  large  scale, 
the  nominal  self-support  can  be  only  a  circuit, 
longer  or  shorter,  to  pauperism.”2 

The  intimate  connection  between  the  pangs  of 
hunger  of  the  most  industrious  layers  of  the 
working  class,  and  the  extravagant  consump¬ 
tion,  coarse  or  refined,  of  the  rich,  for  which 
capitalist  accumulation  is  the  basis,  reveals  it¬ 
self  only  when  the  economic  laws  are  known. 
It  is  otherwise  with  the  “housing  of  the  poor.” 
Every  unprejudiced  observer  sees  that  the 
greater  the  centralization  of  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  the  greater  is  the  corresponding  heap¬ 
ing  together  of  the  labourers  within  a  given 
space;  that  therefore,  the  swifter  capitalistic  ac¬ 
cumulation,  the  more  miserable  arc  the  dwell¬ 
ings  of  the  working  people.  “Improvements” 
of  towns,  accompanying  the  increase  of  wealth, 
by  the  demolition  of  badly  built  quarters,  the 
erection  of  palaces  for  banks,  warehouses,  etc., 
the  widening  of  streets  for  business  traffic,  for 
the  carriages  of  luxury,  and  for  the  introduction 
of  tramways,  etc.,  drive  away  the  poor  into 
even  worse  and  more  crowded  hiding-places.  On 
the  other  hand,  every  one  knows  that  the  dear¬ 
ness  of  dwellings  is  in  inverse  ratio  to  their  ex¬ 
cellence,  and  that  the  mines  of  misery  are  ex¬ 
ploited  by  house  speculators  with  more  profit 
or  less  cost  than  ever  were  the  mines  of  Potosi. 

2  Op.  eit .,  pp.  14, 15. 


326  CAPITAL 


The  antagonistic  character  of  capitalist  accu¬ 
mulation,  and  therefore  of  the  capitalistic  rela¬ 
tions  of  property  generally,1  is  here  so  evident, 
that  even  the  official  English  reports  on  this 
subject  teem  with  heterodox  onslaughts  on 
“property  and  its  rights.*'  With  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  industry,  with  the  accumulation  of  cap¬ 
ital,  with  the  growth  and  “improvement**  of 
towns,  the  evil  makes  such  progress  that  the 
mere  fear  of  contagious  diseases  which  do  not 
spare  even  “respectability,*'  brought  into  exist¬ 
ence  from  1847  to  *864  no  less  t^ian  ten  Acts 
Parliament  on  sanitation,  and  that  the  fright¬ 
ened  bourgeois  in  some  towns,  as  Liverpool, 
Glasgow,  etc.,  took  strenuous  measures 
through  their  municipalities.  Nevertheless  Dr. 
Simon,  in  his  report  of  1865,  says:  “Speaking 
generally,  it  may  be  said  that  the  evils  are  un¬ 
controlled  in  England.’*  By  order  of  the  Privy 
Council,  in  1864,  an  inquiry  was  made  into  the 
conditions  of  the  housing  of  the  agricultural  la¬ 
bourers,  in  1865  of  the  poorer  classes  in  the 
towns.  The  results  of  the  admirable  work  of  Dr. 
Julian  Hunter  are  to  be  found  in  the  Seventh 
(1865)  and  Eighth  (1866)  Reports  on  Public 
Health .  To  the  agricultural  labourers,  I  shall 
come  later.  On  the  condition  of  town  dwellings, 
I  quote,  as  preliminary,  a  general  remark  of 
Dr.  Simon.  “Although  my  official  point  of 
view,"  he  says,  “is  one  exclusively  physical, 
common  humanity  requires  that  the  other  as¬ 
pect  of  this  evil  should  not  be  ignored. ...  In 
its  higher  degrees  it”  (i.e.,  overcrowding)  “al¬ 
most  necessarily  involves  such  negation  of  all 
delicacy,  such  unclean  confusion  of  bodies  and 
bodily  functions,  such  exposure  of  animal  and 
sexual  nakedness,  as  is  rather  bestial  than  hu¬ 
man.  To  be  subject  to  these  influences  is  a  deg¬ 
radation  which  must  become  deeper  and  deeper 
for  those  on  whom  it  continues  to  work.  To  chil¬ 
dren  who  are  born  under  its  curse,  it  must  often 
be  a  very  baptism  into  infamy.  And  beyond  all 
measure  hopeless  is  the  wish  that  persons  thus 
circumstanced  should  ever  in  other  respects 
aspire  to  that  atmosphere  of  civilization  which 
has  its  essence  in  physical  and  moral  cleanli¬ 
ness.”2 

London  takes  the  first  place  in  overcrowded 
habitations,  absolutely  unfit  for  human  beings. 

1  “In  no  particular  have  the  rights  of  persons  been  so 
avowedly  and  shamefully  sacrificed  to  the  rights  of  prop¬ 
erty  as  in  regard  to  the  lodging  of  the  labouring  class. 
Every  large  town  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  place  of  human 
sacrifice,  a  shrine  where  thousands  pass  yearly  through  the 
fire  as  offerings  to  the  Moloch  of  avarice.”— S.  Laing,  op, 
cit p.  150. 

2  Public  Healthy  Eighth  Report ,  1865,  p.  14,  note. 


“He  feels  clear,**  says  Dr.  Hunter,  “on  two 
points;  first,  that  there  are  about  twenty  large 
colonies  in  London,  of  about  10,000  persons 
each,  whose  miserable  condition  exceeds  almost 
anything  he  has  seen  elsewhere  in  England,  and 
is  almost  entirely  the  result  of  their  bad  house 
accommodation;  and  second,  that  the  crowded 
and  dilapidated  condition  of  the  houses  of  these 
colonies  is  much  worse  than  was  the  case  twenty 
years  ago.”3  “It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  life 
in  parts  of  London  and  Newcastle  is  infernal.”4 

Further,  the  better-oflF  part  of  the  working 
class,  together  with  the  small  shopkeepers  and 
other  elements  of  the  lower  middle  class,  falls 
in  London  more  and  more  under  the  curse  of 
these  vile  conditions  of  dwelling,  in  proportion 
as  “improvements,”  and  with  them  the  demoli¬ 
tion  of  old  streets  and  houses,  advance,  as  fac¬ 
tories  and  the  afflux  of  human  beings  grow  in 
the  metropolis,  and,  finally,  as  house  rents  rise 
with  the  ground  rents.  “Rents  have  become  so 
heavy  that  few  labouring  men  can  afford  more 
than  one  room.'*5  There  is  almost  no  house- 
property  in  London  that  is  not  overburdened 
with  a  number  of  middlemen.  For  the  price  of 
land  in  London  is  always  very  high  in  compari¬ 
son  with  its  yearly  revenue,  and  therefore  every 
buyer  speculates  on  getting  rid  of  it  again  at  a 
jury  price  (the  expropriation  valuation  fixed  by 
jurymen),  or  on  pocketing  an  extraordinary  in¬ 
crease  of  value  arising  from  thMeighbourhood 
of  some  large  establishment.  As  a  consequence 
of  this,  there  is  a  regular  trade  in  the  purchase 
of  “fag-ends  of  leases.”  “Gentlemen  in  this 
business  may  be  fairly  expected  to  do  as  they 
do — get  all  they  can  from  the  tenants  while 
they  have  them,  and  leave  as  little  as  they  can 
for  their  successors.”6 

The  rents  are  weekly,  and  these  gentlemen 
run  no  risk.  In  consequence  of  the  making  of 
railroads  in  the  City,  “the  spectacle  has  lately 
been  seen  in  the  cast  of  London  of  a  number  of 
families  wandering  about  some  Saturday  night 

3  Op.  cit.t  p.  89. — With  reference  to  the  children  in  these 
colonies.  Dr.  Hunter  says:  "People  are  not  now  alive  to 
tell  us  how  children  were  brought  up  before  this  age  of 
dense  agglomerations  of  poor  began,  and  he  would  be  a 
rash  prophet  who  should  tell  us  what  future  behaviour  is 
to  be  expected  from  the  present  growth  of  children  who, 
under  circumstances  probably  never  before  paralleled  in 
this  country,  are  now  completing  their  education  for  future 
practice,  as  "dangerous  classes”  by  sitting  up  half  the  night 
with  persons  of  every  age,  half  naked,  drunken,  obscene, 
and  quarrelsome.” — Op.  cit.%  p.  56. 

4  Op.  cit.t  p.  62. 

*  Report  0/  the  Officer  of  Health  0/  St.  Martins-in-the-Fieldst 
1865. 

•  Public  Health ,  Eighth  Report ,  1865,  p.  91. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  327 


with  their  scanty  worldly  goods  on  their  backs, 
without  any  resting  place  but  the  workhouse.”1 
The  workhouses  are  already  overcrowded,  and 
the  “improvements”  already  sanctioned  by 
Parliament  are  only  just  begun.  If  labourers  are 
driven  away  by  the  demolition  of  their  old 
houses,  they  do  not  leave  their  old  parish,  or  at 
most  they  settle  down  on  its  borders  as  near  as 
they  can  get  to  it.  “They  try,  of  course,  to  re¬ 
main  as  near  as  possible  to  their  workshops. 
The  inhabitants  do  not  go  beyond  the  same  or 
the  next  parish,  parting  their  two-room  tene¬ 
ments  into  single  rooms,  and  crowding  even 
those.  . . .  Even  at  an  advanced  rent,  the  people 
who  are  displaced  will  hardly  be  able  to  get  an 
accommodation  so  good  as  the  meagre  one  they 
have  left.  .  .  .  Half  the  workmen  ...  of  the 
Strand  . .  .  walked  two  miles  to  their  work.”2 
This  same  Strand,  a  main  thoroughfare  which 
gives  strangers  an  imposing  idea  of  the  wealth 
of  London,  may  serve  as  an  example  of  the 
packing  together  of  human  beings  in  that  town. 
In  one  of  its  parishes,  the  officer  of  health  reck¬ 
oned  5H i  persons  per  acre,  although  half  the 
width  of  the  Thames  was  reckoned  in.  It  will  be 
obvious  that  every  sanitary  measure,  which,  as 
has  been  the  case  hitherto  in  London,  hunts  the 
labourers  from  one  quarter,  by  demolishing  un¬ 
inhabitable  houses,  serves  only  to  crowd  them 
together  yet  more  closely  in  another.  “Either,” 
says  Dr.  Hunter,  “the  whole  proceeding  will  of 
necessity  stop  as  an  absurdity,  or  the  public 
compassion  (!)  be  effectually  aroused  to  the  ob¬ 
ligation  which  may  now  be  without  exaggera¬ 
tion  called  national,  of  supplying  cover  to  those 
who,  by  reason  of  their  having  no  capital,  can¬ 
not  provide  it  for  themselves,  though  they  can 
by  periodical  payments  reward  those  who  will 
provide  it  for  them.”3  Admire  this  capitalistic 
justice!  The  owner  of  land,  of  houses,  the  busi¬ 
ness  man,  when  expropriated  by  “improve¬ 
ments”  such  as  railroads,  the  building  of  new 
streets,  etc.,  not  only  receives  full  indemnity; 
he  must,  according  to  law,  human  and  divine, 
be  comforted  for  his  enforced  “abstinence”  over 
and  above  this  by  a  thumping  profit.  The  la¬ 
bourer,  with  his  wife  and  child  and  chattels,  is 
thrown  out  into  the  street,  and — if  he  crowds  in 
too  large  numbers  towards  quarters  of  the  town 
where  the  vestries  insist  on  decency,  he  is  prose¬ 
cuted  in  the  name  of  sanitation! 

Except  London,  there  was  at  the  beginning 
of  the  nineteenth  century  no  single  town  in 
England  of  100,000  inhabitants.  Only  five  had 
more  than  50,000.  Now  there  are  twenty-eight 

1  Op.  cit.,  p.  88.  2  Op.  cit.,  p.  88.  1  Op.  ctt.,  p.  89. 


towns  with  more  than  50,000  inhabitants.  “The 
result  of  this  change  is  not  only  that  the  class  of 
town  people  is  enormously  increased,  but  the 
old  close-packed  little  towns  are  now  centres, 
built  round  on  every  side,  open  nowhere  to  air, 
and,  being  no  longer  agreeable  to  the  rich,  are 
abandoned  by  them  for  the  pleasanter  out¬ 
skirts.  The  successors  of  these  rich  are  occupy¬ 
ing  the  larger  houses  at  the  rate  of  a  family  to 
each  room”  (  . . .  and  find  accommodation  for 
two  or  three  lodgers  . . .)  “and  a  population,  for 
which  the  houses  were  not  intended  and  quite 
unfit,  has  been  created,  whose  surroundings  are 
truly  degrading  to  the  adults  and  ruinous  tothe 
children.”4  The  more  rapidly  capital  accumu¬ 
lates  in  an  industrial  or  commercial  town,  the 
more  rapidly  flows  the  stream  of  exploitable  hu¬ 
man  material,  the  more  miserable  are  the  im¬ 
provised  dwellings  of  the  labourers. 

Newcastloon-Tyne,  as  the  centre  of  a  coal 
and  iron  district  of  growing  productiveness, 
takes  the  next  place  after  London  in  the  hous¬ 
ing  inferno.  Not  less  than  34,000  persons  live 
there  in  single  rooms.  Because  of  their  absolute 
danger  to  the  community,  houses  in  great  num¬ 
bers  have  lately  been  destroyed  by  the  authori¬ 
ties  in  Newcastle  and  Gateshead.  The  building 
of  new  houses  progresses  very  slowly,  business 
very  quickly.  The  town  was,  therefore,  in  1865, 
more  full  than  ever.  Scarcely  a  room  was  to  let. 
Dr.  Embleton,  of  the  Newcastle  Fever  Hospi¬ 
tal,  says:  “There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the 
great  cause  of  the  continuance  and  spread  of  the 
typhus  has  been  the  overcrowding  of  human 
beings,  and  the  uncleanli  ness  of  their  dwellings. 
The  rooms,  in  which  labourers  in  many  cases 
live,  are  situated  in  confined  and  unwholesome 
yards  or  courts,  and  for  space,  light,  air,  and 
cleanliness,  are  models  of  insufficiency  and  in¬ 
salubrity,  and  a  disgrace  to  any  civilized  com¬ 
munity;  in  them  men,  women,  and  children  lie 
at  night  huddled  together;  and  as  regards  the 
men,  the  night  shift  succeed  the  day  shift,  and 
the  day  shift  the  night  shift  in  unbroken  series 
for  some  time  together,  the  beds  having  scarce¬ 
ly  time  to  cool;  the  whole  house  badly  supplied 
with  water  and  worse  with  privies;  dirty,  un¬ 
ventilated,  and  pestiferous.”5  The  price  per 
week  of  such  lodgings  ranges  from  8^.  to  3J. 
“The  town  of  Newcastle-on-Tyne,”  says  Dr. 
Hunter,  “contains  a  sample  of  the  finest  tribe 
of  our  countrymen,  often  sunk  by  external  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  house  and  street  into  an  almost 
savage  degradation.”6 

4  Op.  fit.,  pp.  55  and  56. 

6  Op.  cit.,  p.  1 49. 


9  Op.  cit.,  p  50. 


CAPITAL 


328 

As  result  of  the  ebbing  and  flowing  of  capital 
and  labour,  the  state  of  the  dwellings  of  an  in¬ 
dustrial  town  may  today  be  bearable,  tomor¬ 
row  hideous.  Or  the  sanitary  authority  of  the 
town  may  have  pulled  itself  together  for  the 
removal  of  the  most  shocking  abuses.  Tomor¬ 
row,  like  a  swarm  of  locusts,  come  crowding  in 
masses  of  ragged  Irishmen  or  decayed  English 
agricultural  labourers.  They  are  stowed  away 
in  cellars  and  lofts,  or  the  hitherto  respectable 
labourer’s  dwelling  is  transformed  into  a  lodg¬ 
ing-house  whose  personnel  changes  as  quickly 
as  the  billets  in  the  Thirty  Years'  War.  Exam¬ 
ple:  Bradford  (Yorkshire).  There  the  municipal 
philistine  was  not  long  ago  busied  with  urban 
improvements.  Besides,  there  were  still  in 
Bradford,  in  1861,  1751  uninhabited  houses. 
But  now  comes  that  revival  of  trade  which  the 
mildly  liberal  Mr.  Forster,  the  negro's  friend, 
recently  crowed  over  with  so  much  grace.  With 
the  revival  of  trade  came  of  course  an  overflow 
from  the  waves  of  the  ever  fluctuating  “reserve 
army”  or  “relative  surplus  population.”  The 
frightful  cellar  habitations  and  rooms  regis¬ 
tered  in  the  list,1  which  Dr.  Hunter  obtained 
from  the  agent  of  an  insurance  company,  were 
for  the  most  part  inhabited  by  well-paid  labour¬ 
ers.  They  declared  that  they  would  willingly 
pay  for  better  dwellings  if  they  were  to  be  had. 
Meanwhile,  they  become  degraded,  they  fall 
ill,  one  and  all,  whilst  the  mildly  liberal  Forster, 
M.  P.,  sheds  tears  over  the  blessings  of  free- 


1  Collecting  Agents’  List  (Bradford) 
Houses 


Vulcan  Street,  No.  122 

room 

16  persons 

Lumley  Street,  No.  13 

si 

11  " 

Bower  Street,  No.  41 

«« 

11  “ 

Portland  Street,  No.  112 

4i 

10  “ 

Hardy  Street,  No.  17 

•• 

10  ** 

North  Street,  No.  18 

«< 

16  " 

North  Street,  No.  17 

i< 

>3  M 

Wymer  Street,  No.  191 

fi 

8  adults 

Jowett  Street,  No.  56 

fi 

12  persons 

George  Street,  No.  150 

ff 

3  families 

Rifle  Court  Marygate,  No.  11 

if 

11  persons 
10  " 

Marshall  Street,  No.  28 

ff 

Marshall  Street,  No.  49 

3 

it 

3  families 

George  Street,  No.  128 

fi 

18  persons 

George  Street,  No.  130 

ff 

16  “ 

Edward  Street,  No.  4 

11 

17  - 

George  Street,  No.  49 

if 

2  families 

York  Street,  No.  34 

if 

2  “ 

Salt  Pie  Street  (bottom) 

Cellars 

Regent  Square 

" 

26  persons 

cellar 

8  persons 

Acre  Street 

11 

7  -i 

33  Roberts  Court 

Back  Pratt  Street,  used  as 

•1 

7  ■ 

a  brazier’s  shop 

« 

1 

27  Ebenczer  Street 

Op.  cit.,  p.  iii. 

44 

trade,  and  the  profits  of  the  eminent  men  of 
Bradford  who  deal  in  worsted.  In  the  report  of 
September,  1865,  Dr.  Bell,  one  of  the  Poor  Law 
doctors  of  Bradford,  ascribes  the  frightful  mor¬ 
tality  of  fever  patients  in  his  district  to  the  na¬ 
ture  of  their  dwellings.  “In  one  small  cellar 
measuring  1 500  cubic  feet .  . .  there  are  ten  per¬ 
sons.  . . .  Vincent  Street,  Green  Aire  Place,  and 
the  Leys  include  223  houses  having  1,450  in¬ 
habitants,  435  beds,  and  36  privies.  .  .  .  The 
beds— and  in  that  term  1  include  any  roll  of 
dirty  old  rags,  or  an  armful  of  shavings— have 
an  average  of  3.3  person  to  each,  many  have  5 
and  6  persons  to  each,  and  some  people,  1  am 
told,  are  absolutely  without  beds;  they  sleep  in 
their  ordinary  clothes,  on  the  bare  boards — 
young  men  and  women,  married  and  unmar¬ 
ried,  all  together.  1  need  scarcely  add  that  many 
of  these  dwellings  are  dark,  damp,  dirty,  stink¬ 
ing  holes,  utterly  unfit  for  human  habitations; 
they  are  the  centres  from  which  disease  and 
death  are  distributed  amongst  those  in  better 
circumstances,  who  have  allowed  them  thus  to 
fester  in  our  midst.”2 

Bristol  takes  the  third  place  after  London  in 
the  misery  of  its  dwellings.  “Bristol,  where  the 
blankest  poverty  and  domestic  misery  abound 
in  the  wealthiest  town  of  Europe.”* 

c.  The  Nomad  Population 

We  turn  now  to  a  class  of  people  whose  origin 
is  agricultural,  but  whose  occupation  is  in  great 
part  industrial.  They  arc  the  light  infantry  of 
capital,  thrown  by  it,  according  to  its  needs, 
now  to  this  point,  now  to  that.  When  they  are 
not  on  the  march,  they  44camp.”  Nomad  labour 
is  used  for  various  operations  of  building  and 
draining,  brickmaking,  lime-burning,  railway- 
making,  etc.  A  flying  column  of  pestilence,  it 
carries  into  the  places  in  whose  neighbourhood 
it  pitches  its  camp  smallpox,  typhus,  cholera, 
scarlet  fever,  etc.4  In  undertakings  that  involve 
much  capita]  outlay,  such  as  railways,  etc.,  the 
contractor  himself  generally  provides  his  army 
with  wooden  huts  and  the  like,  thus  improvis¬ 
ing  villages  without  any  sanitary  provisions, 
outside  the  control  of  the  local  boards,  very 
profitable  to  the  contractor,  who  exploits  the 
labourers  in  twofold  fashion— as  soldiers  of  in¬ 
dustry  and  as  tenants.  According'as  the  wooden 
hut  contains,  1 , 2,  or  3  holes,  its  inhabitant,  nav¬ 
vy,  or  whatever  he  may  be,  has  to  pay  1, 3,  or  4 
shillings  weekly.5  One  example  will  suffice.  In 

*  Op.  eit.y  p.  1 14.  *  Op.  cit .,  p.  50. 

4  Public  Healthy  Seventh  Report ,  1864,  p.  1 8. 

•  Op.  cit.,  p.  165. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  329 


September,  1864,  Dr.  Simon  reports  that  the 
Chairman  of  the  Nuisances  Removal  Commit¬ 
tee  of  the  parish  of  Sevenoaks  sent  the  following 
denunciation  to  Sir  George  Grey,  Home  Sec¬ 
retary:  “Smallpox  cases  were  rarely  heard  of  in 
this  parish  until  about  twelve  months  ago. 
Shortly  before  that  time,  the  works  for  a  rail¬ 
way  from  Lewisham  to  Tunbridge  were  com¬ 
menced  here,  and,  in  addition  to  the  principal 
works  being  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood 
of  this  town,  here  was  also  established  the  depot 
for  the  whole  of  the  works,  so  that  a  large  num¬ 
ber  of  persons  was  of  necessity  employed  here. 
As  cottage  accommodation  could  not  be  ob¬ 
tained  for  them  all,  huts  were  built  in  several 
places  along  the  line  of  the  works  by  the  con¬ 
tractor,  Mr.  Jay,  for  their  especial  occupation. 
These  huts  possessed  no  ventilation  nor  drain¬ 
age,  and,  besides,  were  necessarily  overcrowd¬ 
ed,  because  each  occupant  had  to  accommodate 
lodgers,  whatever  the  number  in  his  own  family 
might  be,  although  there  were  only  two  rooms 
to  each  tenement  The  consequences  were,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  medical  report  we  received,  that 
in  the  night-time  these  poor  people  were  com¬ 
pelled  to  endure  all  the  horror  of  suffocation  to 
avoid  the  pestiferous  smells  arising  from  the 
filthy,  stagnant  water,  and  the  privies  close  un¬ 
der  their  windows.  Complaints  were  at  length 
made  to  the  Nuisances  Removal  Committee  by 
a  medical  gentleman  who  had  occasion  to  visit 
these  huts,  and  he  spoke  of  their  condition  as 
dwellings  in  the  most  severe  terms,  and  he  ex¬ 
pressed  his  fears  that  some  very  serious  conse¬ 
quences  might  ensue,  unless  some  sanitary 
tneasures  were  adopted.  About  a  year  ago,  Mr. 
J ay  promised  to  appropriate  a  hut  to  which  per¬ 
sons  in  his  employ,  who  were  suffering  from 
contagious  diseases,  might  at  once  be  removed. 
He  repeated  that  promise  on  the  23rd  July  last, 
but  although  since  the  date  of  the  last  promise 
there  have  been  several  cases  of  smallpox  in  his 
huts,  and  two  deaths  from  the  same  disease, 
yet  he  has  taken  no  steps  whatever  to  carry  out 
his  promise.  On  the  9th  September  instant,  Mr. 
Kelson,  surgeon,  reported  to  me  further  cases  of 
smallpox  in  the  same  huts,  and  he  described 
their  condition  as  most  disgraceful.  I  should 
add,  for  your”  (the  Home  Secretary's)  “infor¬ 
mation  that  an  isolated  house,  called  the  pest- 
house,  which  is  set  apart  for  parishioners  who 
might  be  suffering  from  infectious  diseases,  has 
been  continually  occupied  by  such  patients  for 
many  months  past,  and  is  also  now  occupied; 
that  in  one  family  five  children  died  from  small¬ 
pox  and  fever;  that  from  the  1st  April  to  the  1st 


September  this  year,  a  period  of  five  months, 
there  have  been  no  fewer  than  ten  deaths  from 
smallpox  in  the  parish,  four  of  them  being  in  the 
huts  already  referred  to;  that  it  is  impossible  to 
ascertain  the  exact  number  of  persons  who  have 
suffered  from  that  disease,  although  they  are 
known  to  be  many,  from  the  fact  of  the  families 
keeping  it  as  private  as  possible.”1 

The  labourers  in  coal  and  other  mines  belong 
to  the  best  paid  categories  of  the  British  prole¬ 
tariat.  The  price  at  which  they  buy  their  wages 
was  shown  on  an  earlier  page.2  Here  I  merely 
cast  a  hurried  glance  over  the  condi  tions  of  their 
dwellings.  As  a  rule,  the  exploiter  of  a  mine, 
whether  its  owner  or  his  tenant,  builds  a  num¬ 
ber  of  cottages  for  his  hands.  They  receive  cot¬ 
tages  and  coal  for  firing  “for  nothing” — i.e., 
these  form  part  of  their  wages,  paid  in  kind. 
Those  who  are  not  lodged  in  this  way  receive  in 
compensation  £4  per  annum.  The  mining  dis¬ 
tricts  attract  with  rapidity  a  large  population, 
made  up  of  the  miners  themselves,  and  the  ar¬ 
tisans,  shopkeepers,  etc.,  that  group  them¬ 
selves  around  them.  The  ground-rents  are  high, 
as  they  are  generally  where  population  is  dense. 
The  master  tries,  therefore,  to  run  up,  within 
the  smallest  space  possible  at  the  mouth  of  the 
pit,  just  so  many  cottages  as  are  necessary  to 
pack  together  his  hands  and  their  families.  If 
new  mines  are  opened  in  the  neighbourhood,  or 
old  ones  are  again  set  working,  the  pressure 
increases.  In  the  construction  of  the  cottages, 
only  one  point  of  view  is  of  moment,  the  “ab¬ 
stinence”  of  the  capitalist  from  all  expenditure 
that  is  not  absolutely  unavoidable.  “The  lodg¬ 
ing  which  is  obtained  by  the  pitmen  and  other 
labourers  connected  with  the  collieriesofNorth- 
umberland  and  Durham,”  says  Dr.  Julian 
Hunter,  “is  perhaps,  on  the  whole,  the  worst 
and  the  dearest  of  which  any  large  specimens 
can  be  found  in  England,  the  similar  parishes 

1  Op.cit., ,  p.  18,  note.—The  Relieving  Officer  of  the  Chap- 
el-en-le-Frith  Union  reported  to  the  registrar  general  as 
follows:  “At  Doveholes,  a  number  of  small  excavations 
have  been  made  into  a  large  hillock  of  lime  ashes  (the  refuse 
of  lime-kilns),  and  which  are  used  as  dwellings,  and  occu¬ 
pied  by  labourers  and  others  employed  in  the  construction 
of  a  railway  now  in  course  of  construction  through  that 
neighbourhood.  The  excavations  are  small  and  damp,  and 
have  no  drains  or  privies  about  them,  and  not  the  slightest 
means  of  ventilation  except  up  a  hole  pulled  through  the 
top,  and  used  for  a  chimney.  In  consequence  of  this  defect, 
smallpox  has  been  raging  for  some  time,  and  some  deaths** 
(amongst  the  troglodytes)  “have  been  caused  by  them** — 
Op.  cit.t  note  2. 

*  The  details  given  at  the  end  of  Part  IV  refer  especially 
to  the  labourers  in  coal  mines.  On  the  still  worse  condition 
in  metal  mines,  see  the  very  conscientious  report  of  the 
Royal  Commission  of  1864. 


CAPITAL 


330 

of  Monmouthshire  excepted.  •  •  •  The  extreme 
badness  is  in  the  high  number  of  men  found  in 
one  room,  in  the  smallness  of  the  ground-plot 
on  which  a  great  number  of  houses  are  thrust, 
the  want  of  water,  the  absence  of  privies,  and 
the  frequent  placing  of  one  house  on  the  top  of 
another,  or  distribution  into  flats  . . .  the  lessee 
acts  as  if  the  whole  colony  were  encamped,  not 
resident.”1 

“In  pursuance  of  my  instructions,”  says  Dr. 
Stevens,  “I  visited  most  of  the  large  colliery 
villages  in  the  Durham  Union. . . .  With  very 
few  exceptions,  the  general  statement  that  no 
means  are  taken  to  secure  the  health  of  the  in¬ 
habitants  would  be  true  of  all  of  them. ...  All 
colliers  are  bound”  (“bound,”  an  expression 
which,  like  “bondage,”  dates  from  the  age  of 
serfdom)  “to  the  colliery  lessee  or  owner  for 
twelve  months. .  .If  the  colliers  express  dis¬ 
content,  or  in  any  way  annoy  the  ‘viewer,*  a 
mark  or  memorandum  is  made  against  their 
names,  and,  at  the  annual  ‘binding,’  such  men 
are  turned  off. ...  It  appears  to  me  that  no  part 
of  the  ‘truck  system*  could  be  worse  than  what 
obtains  in  these  densely  populated  districts. 
The  collier  is  bound  to  take  as  part  of  his  hiring 
a  house  surrounded  with  pestiferous  influences; 
he  cannot  help  himself,  and  it  appears  doubtful 
whether  anyone  else  can  help  him  except  his 
proprietor  (he  is,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  a 
serf),  and  his  proprietor  first  consults  his  bal¬ 
ance  sheet,  and  the  result  is  tolerably  certain. 
The  collier  is  also  often  supplied  with  water-by 
the  proprietor,  which,  whether  it  be  good  or 
bad,  he  has  to  pay  for,  or  rather  he  suffers  a  de¬ 
duction  for  from  his  wages.**2 

In  conflict  with  “public  opinion,**  or  even 
with  the  officers  of  health,  capital  makes  no  dif¬ 
ficulty  about  “justifying”  the  conditions  partly 
dangerous,  partly  degrading,  to  which  it  con¬ 
fines  the  working  and  domestic  life  of  the  la¬ 
bourer,  on  the  ground  that  they  are  necessary 
for  profit.  It  is  the  same  thing  when  capital  “ab¬ 
stains”  from  protective  measures  against  dan¬ 
gerous  machinery  in  the  factory,  from  appli¬ 
ances  for  ventilation  and  for  safety  in  mines, 
etc.  It  is  the  same  here  with  the  housing  of  the 
miners.  Dr.  Simon,  medical  officer  of  the  Privy 
Council,  in  his  official  report  says:  “In  apology 
for  the  wretched  household  accommodation  . . . 
it  is  alleged  that  mines  are  commonly  worked  on 
lease;  that  the  duration  of  the  lessee’s  interest 
(which  in  collieries  is  commonly  for  21  years), 
is  not  so  long  that  he  should  deem  it  worth  his 

1  Op.  cit .,  pp.  180, 182. 

fOp. «/.,  PP.  515, 517. 


while  to  create  good  accommodation  for  his  la¬ 
bourers,  and  for  the  tradespeople  and  others 
whom  the  work  attracts;  that  even  if  he  were 
disposed  to  act  liberally  in  the  matter,  this  dis¬ 
position  would  commonly  be  defeated  by  his 
landlord’s  tendency  to  fix  on  him,  as  ground- 
rent,  an  exorbitant  additional  charge  for  the 
privilege  of  having  on  the  surface  of  the  ground 
the  decent  and  comfortable  village  which  the 
labourers  of  the  subterranean  property  ought 
to  inhabit,  and  that  prohibitory  price  (if  not 
actual  prohibition)  equally  excludes  others  who 
might  desire  to  build.  It  would  be  foreign  to  the 
purpose  of  this  report  to  enter  upon  any  discus¬ 
sion  of  the  merits  of  the  above  apology.  Nor 
here  is  it  even  needful  to  consider  where  it 
would  be  that,  if  decent  accommodation  were 
provided,  the  cost .  .  .  would  eventually  fall — 
whether  on  landlord,  or  lessee,  or  labourer,  or 
public.  But  in  presence  of  such  shameful  facts 
as  are  vouched  for  in  the  annexed  reports” 
(those  of  Dr.  Hunter,  Dr.  Stevens,  etc.)  “a 
remedy  may  well  be  claimed.  .  .  .  Claims  of 
landlordship  are  being  so  used  as  to  do  great 
public  wrong.  The  landlord,  in  his  capacity  of 
mine-owner,  invites  an  industrial  colony  to  la¬ 
bour  on  his  estate,  and  then  in  his  capacity  of 
surface  owner  makes  it  impossible  that  the  la¬ 
bourers  whom  he  collects  should  find  proper 
lodging  where  they  must  live.  The  lessee”  (the 
capitalist  exploiter)  “meanwhftfe  has  no  pecuni¬ 
ary  motive  for  resisting  that  division  of  the  bar¬ 
gain;  well  knowing  that,  if  its  latter  conditions 
be  exorbitant,  the  consequences  fall  noton  him, 
that  his  labourers  on  whom  they  fall  have  not 
education  enough  to  know  the  value  of  their 
sanitary  rights,  that  neither  obscencst  lodging 
nor  foulest  drinking  water  will  be  appreciable 
inducements  towards  a ‘strike.’”3 

d.  Effect  of  Crises  on  the  best  paid  Part  of  the 

Working  Class 

Before  I  turn  to  the  regular  agricultural  la¬ 
bourers,  I  may  be  allowed  to  show,  by  one  ex¬ 
ample,  how  industrial  crises  affect  even  the 
best-paid,  the  aristocracy  of  the  working  class. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  the  year  1857 
brought  one  of  the  great  crises  with  which  the 
industrial  cycle  periodically  ends.  The  next 
termination  of  the  cycle  was  due  in  1866.  Al¬ 
ready  discounted  in  the  regular  factory  districts 
by  the  cotton  famine,  which  threw  much  capi¬ 
tal  from  its  wonted  sphere  into  the  great  centres 
of  the  money  market,  the  crisis  assumed,  at  this 
tim?,  an  especially  financial  character.  Its  out- 

*  Op,  cit.,  p.  16. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  331 


break  in  1866  was  signalized  by  the  failure  of  a 
gigantic  London  bank,  immediately  followed 
by  the  collapse  of  countless  swindling  compa¬ 
nies.  One  of  the  great  London  branches  of  indus¬ 
try  involved  in  the  catastrophe  was  iron  ship¬ 
building.  The  magnates  of  this  trade  had  not 
only  over-produced  beyond  all  measure  during 
the  overtrading  time,  but  they  had,  besides,  en¬ 
gaged  in  enormous  contracts  on  the  speculation 
that  credit  would  be  forthcoming  to  an  equiva¬ 
lent  extent.  Now,  a  terrible  reaction  set  in,  that 
even  at  this  hour  (the  end  of  March,  1867)  con¬ 
tinues  in  this  and  other  London  industries.1  To 
show  the  condition  of  the  labourers,  I  quote  the 
following  from  the  circumstantial  report  of  a 
correspondent  of  the  Morning  Star ,  who,  at  the 
end  of  1866  and  beginning  of  1867,  visited  the 
chief  centres  of  distress:  “In  the  East  End  dis¬ 
tricts  of  Poplar,  Millwall,  Greenwich,  Deptford, 
Limchouse  and  Canning  Town,  at  least  15,000 
workmen  and  their  families  were  in  a  state  of 
utter  destitution,  and  3000  skilled  mechanics 
were  breaking* 'nes  in  the  workhouse  yard 
(after  distress  of  over  half  a  year’s  duration). 
...  1  had  great  difficulty  in  reaching  the  work- 
house  door,  for  a  hungry  crowd  besieged  it.  . . . 
They  were  waiting  for  their  tickets,  but  the 
time  had  not  yet  arrived  for  the  distribution. 
The  yard  was  a  great  square  place  with  an  open 
shed  running  all  round  it,  and  several  large 
heaps  of  snow  covered  the  paving-stones  in  the 
middle.  In  the  middle,  also,  were  little  wicker- 
fenced  spaces,  like  sheep  pens,  where  in  finer 
weather  the  men  worked;  but  on  the  day  of  my 
visit  the  pens  were  so  snowed  up  that  nobody 
could  sit  in  them.  Men  were  busy,  however,  in 
the  open  shed  breaking  paving-stones  into  mac¬ 
adam.  Each  man  had  a  big  paving-stone  for  a 
seat,  and  he  chipped  away  at  the  rime-covered 
granite  with  a  big  hammer  until  he  had  broken 
up,  and  think!  five  bushels  of  it,  and  then  he  had 

1  "Wholesale  starvation  of  the  I^ndon  Poor. . .  .Within 
the  last  few  days,  the  walls  of  London  have  been  placarded 
with  large  posters,  bearing  the  following  remarkable  an¬ 
nouncement:  ‘Fat  oxen!  Starving  men!  The  fat  oxen  from 
their  palace  of  glass  have  gone  to  feed  the  rich  in  their 
luxurious  abode,  while  the  starving  men  are  left  to  rot  and 
die  in  their  wretched  dens.’  The  placards  bearing  these 
ominous  words  are  put  up  at  certain  intervals.  No  sooner 
has  one  set  been  defaced  or  covered  over,  than  a  fresh  set 
is  placarded  in  the  former,  or  some  equally  public  place. 
. . .  This  . . .  reminds  one  of  the  secret  revolutionary  asso¬ 
ciations  which  prepared  the  French  people  for  the  events 
of  1789. ...  At  this  moment,  while  English  workmen  with 
their  wives  and  children  ate  dying  of  cold  and  hunger,  there 
are  millions  of  English  gold — the  produceof  English  labour 
—being  invested  in  Russian,  Spanish,  Italian,  and  other 
foreign  enterprises.'*— Reynolds*  Newspaper,  January  20th, 
1867. 


done  his  day’s  work,  and  got  his  day’s  pay- 
threepence  and  an  allowance  of  food*.  In  another 
part  of  the  yard  was  a  rickety  little  wooden 
house,  and  when  we  opened  the  door  of  it,  we 
found  it  filled  with  men  who  were  huddled  to¬ 
gether  shoulder  to  shoulder,  for  the  warmth  of 
one  another’s  bodies  and  breath.  They  were 
picking  oakum  and  disputing  the  while  as  to 
which  could  work  the  longest  on  a  given  quan¬ 
tity  of  food— for  endurance  was  the  point  of 
honour.  Seven  thousand  ...  in  this  one  work- 
house  .  .  .  were  recipients  of  relief  .  .  .  many 
hundreds  of  them  ...  it  appeared,  were,  six  or 
eight  months  ago,  earning  the  highest  wages 
paid  to  artisans.  .  .  .  Their  number  would  be 
more  than  doubled  by  the  count  of  those  who, 
having  exhausted  all  their  savings,  still  refuse 
to  apply  to  the  parish,  because  they  have  a  little 
left  to  pawn.  Leaving  the  workhouse,  I  took  a 
walk  through  the  streets,  mostly  of  little  one- 
storey  houses,  that  abound  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  of  Poplar.  My  guide  was  a  member  of  the 
Committee  of  the  Unemployed. . . .  My  first 
call  was  on  an  ironworker  who  had  been  seven 
and  twenty  weeks  out  of  employment.  I  found 
the  man  with  his  family  sitting  in  a  little  back 
room.  The  room  was  not  bare  of  furniture,  and 
there  was  a  fire  in  it.  This  was  necessary  to  keep 
the  naked  feet  of  the  young  children  from  get¬ 
ting  frost  bitten,  for  it  was  a  bitterly  cold  day. 
On  a  tray  in  front  of  the  fire  lay  a  quantity  of 
oakum,  which  the  wife  and  children  were  pick¬ 
ing  in  return  for  their  allowance  from  the  par¬ 
ish.  The  man  worked  in  the  stone-yard  of  the 
workhouse  for  a  certain  ration  of  food,  and 
threepence  per  day.  He  had  now  come  home  to 
dinner  quite  hungry,  as  he  told  us  with  a  melan¬ 
choly  smile,  and  his  dinner  consisted  of  a  couple 
of  slices  of  bread  and  dripping,  and  a  cup  of 
milkless  tea. . . .  The  next  door  at  which  we 
knocked  was  opened  by  a  middle-aged  woman, 
who,  without  saying  a  word,  led  us  into  a  little 
back  parlour,  in  which  sat  all  her  family,  silent 
and  fixedly  staring  at  a  rapidly  dying  fire.  Such 
desolation,  such  hopelessness  was  about  these 
people  and  their  little  room  as  I  should  not  care 
to  witness  again.  ‘Nothing  have  they  done,  sir,’ 
said  the  woman,  pointing  to  her  boys,  ‘for  six 
and  twenty  weeks;  and  all  our  money  gone— all 
the  twenty  pounds  that  me  and  father  saved 
when  times  were  better,  thinking  it  would  yield 
a  little  to  keep  us  when  we  got  past  work.  Look 
at  it,’  she  said,  almost  fiercely,  bringing  out  a 
bank  book  with  all  its  well-kept  entries  of  mon¬ 
ey  paid  in,  and  money  taken  out,  so  that  we 
could  see  how  the  little  fortune  had  begun  with 


CAPITAL 


332 

the  first  five  shilling  deposit,  and  had  grown  by 
little  and  little  to  be  twenty  pounds,  and  how  it 
had  melted  down  again  till  the  sum  in  hand  got 
from  pounds  to  shillings,  and  the  last  entry 
made  the  book  as  worthless  as  a  blank  sheet. 
This  family  received  relief  from  the  workhouse, 
and  it  furnished  them  with  just  one  scanty  meal 
per  day. . . .  Our  next  visit  was  to  an  iron  la- 
bourer’s  wife,  whose  husband  had  worked  in  the 
yards.  We  found  her  ill  from  want  of  food,  lying 
on  a  mattress  in  her  clothes,  and  just  covered 
with  a  strip  of  carpet,  for  all  the  bedding  had 
been  pawned.  Two  wretched  children  were 
tending  her,  themselves  looking  as  much  in 
need  of  nursing  as  their  mother.  Nineteen  weeks 
of  enforced  idleness  had  brought  them  to  this 
pass,  and  while  the  mother  told  the  history  of 
that  bitter  past,  she  moaned  as  if  all  her  faith 
in  a  future  that  should  atone  for  it  were  dead. 
• . .  On  getting  outside,  a  young  fellow  came 
running  after  us,  and  asked  us  to  step  inside  his 
house  and  see  if  anything  could  be  done  for  him. 
A  young  wife,  two  pretty  children,  a  cluster  of 
pawn-tickets,  and  a  bare  room  were  all  he  had 
to  show.” 

On  the  after  pains  of  the  crisis  of  1866,  the 
following  extract  from  a  Tory  newspaper.  It 
must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  East  End  of  Lon¬ 
don,  which  is  here  dealt  with,  is  not  only  the 
seat  of  the  iron  shipbuilding  mentioned  above, 
but  also  of  a  so-called  “home-industry”  always 
underpaid.  “A  frightful  spectacle  was  to  be  seen 
yesterday  in  one  part  of  the  metropolis.  Al¬ 
though  the  unemployed  thousands  of  the  East 
End  did  not  parade  with  their  black  flags  en 
masse ,  the  human  torrent  was  imposing  enough. 
Let  us  remember  what  these  people  sutler.  They 
are  dying  of  hunger.  That  is  the  simple  and  ter¬ 
rible  fact.  There  are  40,000  of  them. ...  In  our 
presence,  in  one  quarter  of  this  wonderful  me¬ 
tropolis,  are  packed— -next  door  to  the  most 
enormous  accumulation  of  wealth  the  world 
ever  saw— cheek  by  jowl  with  this  are  40,000 
helpless,  starving  people.  These  thousands  are 
now  breaking  in  upon  the  other  quarters;  al¬ 
ways  half-starving,  they  cry  their  misery  in  our 
ears,  they  cry  to  Heaven,  they  tell  us  from  their 
miserable  dwellings  that  it  is  impossible  for 
them  to  And  work  and  useless  for  them  to  beg. 
The  local  ratepayers  themselves  are  driven  by 
the  parochial  charges  to  the  verge  of  pauper¬ 
ism 

As  it  is  the  fashion  amongst  English  capital¬ 
ists  to  quote  Belgium  as  the  paradise  of  the  la- 

1  Standard)  5th  April,  1866. 


bourer  because  “freedom  of  labour,”  or  what  is 
the  same  thing,  “freedom  of  capital,”  is  there 
limited  neither  by  the  despotism  of  Trade’s  Un¬ 
ions,  nor  by  Factory  Acts,  a  word  or  two  on  the 
“happiness”  of  the  Belgian  labourer.  Assuredly 
no  one  was  more  thoroughly  initiated  in  the 
mysteries  of  this  happiness  than  the  late  M. 
Ducp6tiaux,  inspector-general  of  Belgian  pris¬ 
ons  and  charitable  institutions,  and  member  of 
the  Central  Commission  of  Belgian  Statistics. 
Let  us  take  his  work.  Budgets  iconomiques  des 
classes  ouvritres  de  la  Belgique ,  Brussels,  1855. 
Here  we  find,  among  other  matters,  a  normal 
Belgian  labourer's  family,  whose  yearly  income 
and  expenditure  he  calculates  on  very  exact 
data,  and  whose  conditions  of  nourishment  are 
then  compared  with  those  of  the  soldier,  sailor, 
and  prisoner.  The  family  “consists  of  father, 
mother,  and  four  children.”  Of  these  six  persons 
“four  may  be  usefully  employed  the  whole  year 
through.”  It  is  assumed  that  “there  is  no  sick 
person  nor  one  incapable  of  work,  among 
them,”  nor  are  there  “expenses  for  religious, 
moral,  and  intellectual  purposes,  except  a  very 
small  sum  for  church  sittings,”  nor  “contribu¬ 
tions  to  savings  banks  or  benefit  societies,”  nor 
“expenses  due  to  luxury  or  the  result  of  improv¬ 
idence.”  The  father  and  eldest  son,  however, 
allow  themselves  “the  use  of  tobacco,”  and  on 
Sundays  “go  to  the  cabaret ,”  for  which  a  whole 
86  centimes  a  week  are  reckoned.  “From  a  gen¬ 
eral  compilation  of  wages  allowed  to  the  labour¬ 
ers  in  different  trades,  it  follows  that  the  highest 
average  of  daily  wage  is  1  franc  56  centimes,  for 
men,  89  centimes  for  women,  56  centimes  for 
boys,  and  55  centimes  for  girls.  Calculated  at 
this  rate,  the  resources  of  the  family  would 
amount,  at  the  maximum,  to  1068  francs  a  year. 
...  In  the  family  .  . .  taken  as  typical  wc  have 
calculated  all  possible  resources.  But  in  ascrib¬ 
ing  wages  to  the  mother  of  the  family  we  raise 
the  question  0/  the  direction  of  the  household .  How 
will  its  internal  economy  be  cared  for?  Who 
will  look  after  the  young  children?  Who  will  get 
ready  the  meals,  do  the  washing  and  mending? 
This  is  the  dilemma  incessantly  presented  to 
the  labourers.” 

According  to  this  the  budget  of  the  family 
is: 


Father  300  working  day9  at  frs.  1 

l.j6  frs. 

468 

Mother  “ 

44  <1  II 

.89  “ 

267 

Boy  “ 

44  44  41 

.56  " 

168 

Girl  “ 

M  44  44 

•55  “ 

165 

Total 

frs.  1,068 

THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  333 


The  annual  expenditure  of  the  family  would 
cause  a  deficit  upon  the  hypothesis  that  the  la¬ 
bourer  has  the  food  of: 

Man  of  war’s  man  frs.  1828  Deficit  frs.  760 

Soldier  44  1473  44  44  405 

Prisoner  44  1112  44  44  44 

44  We  sec  that  few  labouring  families  can  reach, 
we  will  not  say  the  average  of  the  sailor  or  sol¬ 
dier,  but  even  that  of  the  prisoner.  The  general 
average  (of  the  cost  of  each  prisoner  in  the  dif¬ 
ferent  prisons  during  the  period  1847-1849), 
has  been  63  centimes  for  all  prisons.  This  figure, 
compared  with  that  of  the  daily  maintenance  of 
the  labourer,  shows  a  difference  of  13  centimes. 
It  must  be  remarked  further  that  if  in  the  pris¬ 
ons  it  is  necessary  to  set  down  in  the  account 
the  expenses  of  administration  and  surveillance, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  prisoners  have  not  to  pay 
for  their  lodging;  that  the  purchases  they  make 
at  the  canteens  are  not  included  in  the  expenses 
of  maintenance,  and  that  these  expenses  are 
greatly  lowercu  i.i  consequence  of  the  large 
number  of  persons  that  make  up  the  establish¬ 
ments,  and  of  contracting  for  or  buying  whole¬ 
sale,  the  food  and  other  things  that  enter  into 
their  consumption. . . .  How  comes  it,  however, 
that  a  great  number,  we  might  say,  a  great  ma¬ 
jority,  of  labourers,  live  in  a  more  economical 
way?  It  is  ...  by  adopting  expedients,  the  se¬ 
cret  of  which  only  the  labourer  knows;  by  re¬ 
ducing  his  daily  rations;  by  substituting  rye- 
bread  for  wheat;  by  eating  less  meat,  or  even 
none  at  all,  and  the  same  with  butter  and  con¬ 
diments;  by  contenting  themselves  with  one  or 
two  rooms  where  the  family  is  crammed  togeth¬ 
er,  where  boys  and  girls  sleep  side  by  side,  often 
on  the  same  pallet;  by  economy  of  clothing, 
washing,  decency;  by  giving  up  the  Sunday  di¬ 
versions;  by,  in  short,  resigning  themselves  to 
the  most  painful  privations.  Once  arrived  at 
this  extreme  limit,  the  least  rise  in  the  price  of 
food,  stoppage  of  work,  illness,  increases  the 
labourer’s  distress  and  determines  his  complete 
ruin;  debts  accumulate,  credit  fails,  the  most 
necessary  clothes  and  furniture  are  pawned, 
and,  finally,  the  family  asks  to  be  enrolled  on 
the  list  of  paupers.”1  In  fact,  in  this  “paradise  of 
capitalists”  there  follows,  on  the  smallest 
change  in  the  price  of  the  most  essential  means 
of  subsistence,  a  change  in  the  number  of  deaths 
andcrimesFInall  Belgium  are 930,000 families, 

1  Ducp6tiaux,  op.  cit.t  pp.  151, 154, 15^. 

2  Sec  Manifesto  of  the  Maatschappij:  De  Vlamingen 
Vooruitl  Brussels,  i860,  pp.  15, 16. 


of  whom,  according  to  the  official  statistics, 
90,000  are  wealthy  and  on  the  list  of  voters  com¬ 
prising  450,000  persons;  190,000  families  of  the 
lower  middle  class  in  towns  and  villages,  the 
greater  part  of  them  constantly  sinking  into  the 
proletariat,  comprising  1,950,000  persons.  Fi¬ 
nally,  450,000  working  class  families  compris¬ 
ing  2,250,000  persons,  of  whom  the  model  ones 
enjoy  the  happiness  depicted  by  Ducpctiaux. 
Of  the  450,000  working  class  families,  over  200,- 
000  are  on  the  pauper  list. 

e.  The  British  Agricultural  Proletariat 

Nowhere  does  the  antagonistic  character  of 
capitalistic  production  and  accumulation  assert 
itself  more  brutally  than  in  the  progress  of  Eng¬ 
lish  agriculture  (including  cattle-breeding)  and 
the  retrogression  of  the  English  agricultural  la¬ 
bourer.  Before  I  turn  to  his  present  situation,  a 
rapid  retrospect.  Modern  agriculture  in  Eng¬ 
land  dates  from  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  although  the  revolution  in  landed 
property,  from  which  the  changed  mode  of  pro¬ 
duction  starts  as  a  basis,  has  a  much  earlier 
date. 

If  we  take  the  statements  of  Arthur  Young,  a 
careful  observer  though  a  superficial  thinker,  as 
to  the  agricultural  labourer  of  1771,  the  latter 
plays  a  very  pitiable  part  compared  with  his 
predecessor  of  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  cen¬ 
tury,  “when  the  labourer  . . .  could  live  in  plen¬ 
ty,  and  accumulate  wealth,”3  not  to  speak  of 
the  fifteenth  century,  “the  golden  age  of  the 
English  labourer  in  town  and  country.”  We 
need  not,  however,  go  back  so  far.  In  a  very  in¬ 
structive  work  of  the  year  1777,  we  read:  “The 
great  farmer  is  nearly  mounted  to  a  level  with 
him”  (the  gentleman)  “while  the  poor  labourer 
is  depressed  almost  to  the  earth.  His  unfortu¬ 
nate  situation  will  fully  appear  by  taking  a  com¬ 
parative  view  of  it  only  forty  years  ago  and  at 
present.  .  .  .  Landlord  and  tenant  .  .  .  have 
both  gone  hand  in  hand  in  keeping  the  labourer 
down.”4  It  is  then  proved  in  detail  that  the  real 
agricultural  wages  between  1737  and  1777  fell 
nearly  one-fourth,  or  25%.  “Modern  policy,” 

*  James  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  professor  of  political  econ¬ 
omy  in  the  university  of  Oxford,  A  History  of  Agriculture 
and  Prices  in  England ,  Oxford,  1 866,  Vol.  I,  p.  690.  —  1  his 
work,  the  fruit  of  patient  and  diligent  labour,  contains  in 
the  two  volumes  that  have  so  far  appeared  onl>  the  period 
from  1295  *°  I4°°*  The  second  volume  contains  simply 
statistics.  It  is  the  first  authentic  history  of  prices  of  the 
time  that  we  possess. 

4  Reasons  for  the  late  Increase  of  the  Poor  Rate ,  or  a  Com¬ 
parative  View  nf  the  Pt  ice  of  Labour  and  Provisions ,  London, 
*777>  PP*  5* II- 


CAPITAL 


334 

also  says  Dr.  Richard  Price,  “is,  indeed,  more 
favourable  to  the  higher  classes  of  people;  and 
the  consequences  may  in  time  prove  that  the 
whole  kingdom  will  consist  of  only  gentry  and 
beggars,  or  of  grandees  and  slaves.”1 

Nevertheless,  the  position  of  the  English  ag¬ 
ricultural  labourer  from  1770  to  1780,  with  re¬ 
gard  to  his  food  and  dwelling,  as  well  as  to  his 
self-respect,  amusements,  etc.,  is  an  ideal  never 
attained  again  since  that  time.  His  average 
wage,  expressed  in  pints  of  wheat,  from  1770  to 
1771  amounted  to  90  pints,  in  Eden's  time 
(1797)  only  to  65,  in  1808  but  to  60.2 

The  state  of  the  agricultural  labourer  at  the 
end  of  the  anti-Jacobin  war,  during  which 
landed  proprietors,  farmers,  manufacturers, 
merchants,  bankers,  stockbrokers,  army-con¬ 
tractors,  etc.,  enriched  themselves  so  extraor¬ 
dinarily,  has  been  already  indicated  above.  The 
nominal  wages  rose  in  consequence  partly  of  the 
bank-note  depreciation,  partly  of  a  rise  in  the 
price  of  the  primary  means  of  subsistence  inde¬ 
pendent  of  this  depreciation.  But  the  actual 
wage  variation  can  be  evidenced  in  a  very  sim¬ 
ple  way,  without  entering  into  details  that  are 
here  unnecessary.  The  Poor  Law  and  its  ad¬ 
ministration  were  in  1795  and  1814  the  same. 
It  will  be  remembered  how  this  law  was  carried 
out  in  the  country  districts;  in  the  form  of  alms 
the  parish  made  up  the  nominal  wage  to  the 
nominal  sum  required  for  the  simple  vegetation 
of  the  labourer.  The  ratio  between  the  wages 
paid  by  the  farmer,  and  the  wage  deficit  made 
good  by  the  parish,  shows  us  two  things.  First, 
the  falling  of  wages  below  their  minimum;  sec¬ 
ond,  the  degree  in  which  the  agricultural  la¬ 
bourer  was  a  compound  of  wage  labourer  and 
pauper,  or  the  degree  in  which  he  had  been 
turned  into  a  serf  of  his  parish.  Let  us  take  one 
county  that  represents  the  average  condition  of 
things  in  all  counties.  In  Northamptonshire,  in 
1795,  the  average  weekly  wage  was  7 s.  6d.\  the 
total  yearly  expenditure  of  a  family  of  six  per¬ 
sons,  £36  12s.  5 d.\  their  total  income,  £29  i8j.; 
deficit  made  good  by  the  parish,  £6  14 s.  5 d.  In 

1  Dr.  Richard  Price,  Observations  on  Reversionary  Pay¬ 
ments ,  6th  edition,  London,  1803,  Vol.  II,  pp.  158, 159.— 
Price  remarks  on  p.  159:  “The  nominal  price  of  day-labour 
is  at  present  no  more  than  about  four  times,  or,  at  most, 
five  times  higher  than  it  was  in  the  year  1514.  But  the 
price  of  corn  is  seven  times,  and  of  flesh-meat,  and  rai¬ 
ment  about  fifteen  times  higher.  So  far,  therefore,  has  the 
price  of  labour  been  even  from  advancing  in  proportion  to 
the  increase  in  the  expenses  of  living,  that  it  does  not  ap¬ 
pear  that  it  bears  now  half  the  proportion  to  those  expenses 
that  it  did  bear." 

1  Barton,  op.  ctt.,  p.  26.-—  For  the  end  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  cf.  Eden,  op.  at. 


1814,  in  the  same  county,  the  weekly  wage  was 
12s.  2d .;  the  total  yearly  expenditure  of  a  family 
of  five  persons,  £54  i8j.  4 d.;  their  total  income, 
£36  2s .;  deficit  made  good  by  the  parish,  £18 
6s.  4 d.*  In  1 79J  the  deficit  was  less  than  one- 
fourth  the  wage,  in  1814,  more  than  half.  It  is 
self-evident  that,  under  these  circumstances, 
the  meagre  comforts  that  Eden  still  found  in 
the  cottage  of  the  agricultural  labourer,  had 
vanished  by  1814.4  Of  all  the  animals  kept  by 
the  farmer,  the  labourer,  the  instrumentum  vo- 
cale*  was,  thenceforth,  the  most  oppressed,  the 
worst  nourished,  the  most  brutally  treated. 

The  same  state  of  things  went  on  quietly  un¬ 
til  “the  Swing  riots,  in  1830,  revealed  to  us” 
(i.e.,  the  ruling  classes)  “by  the  light  of  blazing 
corn  stacks,  that  misery  and  black  mutinous 
discontent  smouldered  quite  as  fiercely  under 
the  surface  of  agricultural  as  of  manufacturing 
England.”8  At  this  time,  Sadler,  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  christened  the  agricultural  labour¬ 
ers  “white  slaves,”  and  a  Bishop  echoed  the 
epithet  in  the  Upper  House.  The  most  notable 
political  economist  of  that  period  — K.  G. 
Wakefield — says:  “The  peasant  of  the  South  of 
England  ...  is  not  a  freeman,  nor  is  he  a  slave; 
he  is  a  pauper.”7 

The  time  just  before  the  repeal  of  the  Corn 
Laws  threw  new  light  on  the  condition  of  the 
agricultural  labourers.  On  thcjjnc  hand,  it  was 
to  the  interest  of  the  middle  class  agitators  to 
prove  how  little  the  Corn  Laws  protected  the 
actual  producers  of  the  corn.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  industrial  bourgeoisie  foamed  with  sullen 
rage  at  the  denunciations  of  the  factory  system 
by  the  landed  aristocracy,  at  the  pretended 
sympathy  with  the  woes  of  the  factory  opera¬ 
tives,  of  those  utterly  corrupt,  heartless,  and 
genteel  loafers,  and  at  their  “diplomatic  zeal” 
for  factory  legislation.  It  is  an  old  English  prov¬ 
erb  that  “when  thieves  fall  out,  honest  men 
come  by  their  own,”  and,  in  fact,  the  noisy, 
passionate  quarrel  between  the  two  fractions 
of  the  ruling  class  about  the  question,  which  of 
the  two  exploited  the  labourers  the  more 
shamefully,  was  on  each  hand  the  midwife  of 
the  truth.  Earl  Shaftesbury,  then  Lord  Ashley, 
was  commander-in-chief  in  the  aristocratic, 
philanthropic,  anti-factory  campaign.  He  was, 
therefore,  in  1845,  a  favourite  subject  in  the 
revelations  of  the  Morning  Chronicle  on  the  con- 

8  Parry,  op.  cit.,  p.  86. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  213. 

8  Talking  tool. 

•  S  Laing,  op.  eit p.  62. 

7  England  and  America ,  London,  1833,  VoL  I,  p.  47. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  335 


dition  of  the  agricultural  labourers.  This  jour¬ 
nal,  then  the  most  important  liberal  organ,  sent 
special  commissioners  into  the  agricultural  dis¬ 
tricts,  who  did  not  content  themselves  with 
mere  general  descriptions  and  statistics,  but 
published  the  names  both  of  the  labouring  fam¬ 
ilies  examined  and  of  their  landlords.  The  fol¬ 
lowing  list  gives  the  wages  paid  in  three  villages 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Blanford,  Wimbourne, 
and  Poole.  The  villages  are  the  property  of  Mr. 
G.  Bankes  and  of  the  Earl  of  Shaftesbury.  It 
will  be  noted  that,  just  like  Bankes,  this  “Low 
Church  pope,”  this  head  of  English  pietists, 
pockets  a  great  part  of  the  miserable  wages  of 
the  labourers  under  the  pretext  of  house-rent: 


duced  nearly  one-half  by  the  introduction  of 
new  machinery.  On  the  other  hand,  the  actual 
return  of  the  soil  rose  rapidly.  Greater  outlay 
of  capital  per  acre,  and,  as  a  consequence,  more 
rapid  concentration  of  farms,  were  essential 
conditions  of  the  new  method.®  At  the  same 
time,  the  area  under  cultivation  increased  from 
1846  to  1856  by  464,119  acres,  without  reckon¬ 
ing  the  great  area  in  the  Eastern  Counties 
which  was  transformed  from  rabbit  warrens 
and  poor  pastures  into  magnificent  cornfields. 
It  has  already  been  seen  that,  at  the  same  time, 
the  total  number  of  persons  employed  in  agri¬ 
culture  fell.  As  far  as  the  actual  agricultural  la¬ 
bourers  of  both  sexes  and  of  all  ages  are  con- 


Children 


Number 
of  Mem¬ 
bers  in 
Family 


Weekly 
IV  age  of 
the  Men 


Weekly  Wage  of 
the  Children 


Weekly 
Income 
of  the 
Whole 
Family 


Total 
Weekly 
Weekly  Wage 
Rent  after  De¬ 
duction  of 
Rent 


Weekly 
Income 
per  Head 


2 

3 

2 

2 

6 

3 

6 

6 

8 

4 
3 


4 

5 

4 

4 
8 

5 

8 

8 

10 

6 
5 


s.  d. 
8  o 
8  o 
8  o 
8  o 
7  o 
7  o 


7  o 
7  0 
7  ° 
7  o 
7  o 


FIRST  VILLAGE 
d.  s.  d.  |  s.  d. 

8  o 
8  o 
8  o 
8  o 

10  1  6  I  10  6 
10  2  o  I  7  o 

SECOND  VILLAGE 
10  16 

10  16 


s.  d. 
2  o 


6 

o 

o 

o 

4 


d. 

o 

6 

o 

o 

6 

8 


s.  d. 
1  6 
x 
1 
1 
1 
1 


3* 

9 

9 

o  Ya 

iK 


10  0 

1  6 

8  6 

1 

7  0 

1  3# 

5 

0  sys 

7  0 

1  3# 

5 

0  7 

7  0 

1  6^ 

5  5* 

O  II 

7  0 

1  6  yi 

5  SK 

I  I 

THIRD  VILLAGE 


4 

6 

7  0 

1  -  ! 

7  0 

1  0 

6  0 

1  0 

3 

5 

7  0 

O 

c« 

O 

11  6 

0  10 

10  8 

2  1  yi 

0 

2 

5  0 

|  I  O  2  6  | 

5  0 

1  0 

4  0 

2  o1 

1  London  Economist ,  March  29th,  1845,  p.  290. 


The  repeal  of  the  Corn  Laws  gave  a  marvel¬ 
lous  impulse  to  English  agriculture.2  Drainage 
on  the  most  extensive  scale,  new  methods  of 
stall-feeding,  and  of  the  artificial  cultivation  of 
green  crops,  introduction  of  mechanical  manur¬ 
ing  apparatus,  new  treatment  of  clay  soils,  in¬ 
creased  use  of  mineral  manures,  employment  of 
the  steam-engine,  and  of  all  kinds  of  new  ma¬ 
chinery,  more  intensive  cultivation  generally, 
characterized  this  epoch.  Mr.  Pusey,  chairman 
c^the  Royal  Agricultural  Society,  declares  that 
the  (relative)  expenses  of  farming  have  been  re- 

2  The  landed  aristocracy  advanced  themselves  to  this 
end,  of  course  from  Parliament,  funds  from  the  State  Treas¬ 
ury,  at  a  very  low  rate  of  interest,  which  the  farmers  have 
to  make  good  at  a  much  higher  rate. 


cerned,  their  number  fell  from  1,241,396,  in 
1851,  to  1,163,217  in  1 861. 4  If  the  English  regis¬ 
trar  general,  therefore,  rightly  remarks:  “The 

8  The  decrease  of  the  middle  class  farmers  can  be  seen 
especially  in  the  census  category:  "Farmer’s  son,  grandson, 
brother,  nephew,  daughter,  granddaughter,  sister,  niece”; 
in  a  word,  the  members  of  his  own  family,  employed  by 
the  farmer.  This  category  in  1851  numbered  216,851  per¬ 
sons;  in  1861,  only  176,151.  From  1851  to  1871,  the  farms 
under  twenty  acres  fell  by  more  than  900  in  number;  those 
between  fifty  and  seventy-five  acres  fell  from  8,253  to 
6,370;  the  same  thing  occurred  with  all  other  farms  under 
one  hundred  acres.  On  the  other  hand,  during  the  same 
twenty  years,  the  number  of  large  farms  increased;  those 
of  three  to  five  hundred  acres  rose  from  7,771  to  8,410, 
those  of  more  than  five  hundred  acres  from  2,755  to  3»9*4> 
those  of  more  than  one  thousand  acres  from  492  to  582. 

4  The  number  of  shepherds  increased  from  12,517  to 
25.559- 


CAPITAL 


336 

increase  of  farmers  and  farm-labourers,  since 
1801,  bears  no  kind  of  proportion  ...  to  the  in¬ 
crease  of  agricultural  produce,”1 * *  this  dispropor¬ 
tion  obtains  much  more  for  the  last  period, 
when  a  positive  decrease  of  the  agricultural 
population  went  hand  in  hand  with  increase  of 
the  area  under  cultivation,  with  more  intensive 
cultivation,  unheard-of  accumulation  of  the 
capital  incorporated  with  the  soil,  and  devoted 
to  its  working,  an  augmentation  in  the  products 
of  the  soil  without  parallel  in  the  history  of  Eng¬ 
lish  agriculture,  plethoric  rent-rolls  of  landlords 
and  growing  wealth  of  the  capitalist  farmers. 
If  we  take  this,  together  with  the  swift,  un¬ 
broken  extension  of  the  markets,  viz.,  the 
towns,  and  the  reign  of  free  trade,  then  the  ag¬ 
ricultural  labourer  was  at  last,  post  tot  discrim - 
ina  rerum*  placed  in  circumstances  that  ought, 
secundum  artem ,*  to  have  made  him  drunk  with 
happiness. 

But  Professor  Rogers  comes  to  the  conclu¬ 
sion  that  the  lot  of  the  English  agricultural  la¬ 
bourer  of  today,  not  to  speak  of  his  predecessor 
in  the  last  half  of  the  fourteenth  and  in  the  fif¬ 
teenth  century,  but  only  compared  with  his 
predecessor  from  1770  to  1780,  has  changed  for 
the  worse  to  an  extraordinary  extent,  that  “the 
peasant  has  again  become  a  serf,*’  and  a  serf 
worse  fed  and  worse  clothed.4 *  Dr.  Julian  Hunt¬ 
er,  in  his  epoch-making  report  on  the  dwellings 
of  the  agricultural  labourers,  says:  “The  cost  of 
the  hind”  (a  name  for  the  agricultural  labourer, 
inherited  from  the  time  of  serfdom)  “is  fixed  at 
the  lowest  possible  amount-  on  which  he  can 
live. .  . .  The  supplies  of  wages  and  shelter  are 
not  calculated  on  the  profit  to  be  derived  from 
him.  He  is  a  zero  in  farming  calculations.6 * . . . 
The  means”  (of  subsistence)  “being  always 
supposed  to  be  a  fixed  quantity.6  As  to  any  fur¬ 
ther  reduction  of  his  income,  he  may  say,  Nihil 
habeo  nihil  euro?  He  has  no  fears  for  the  future, 
because  he  has  now  only  the  spare  supply  neces¬ 
sary  to  keep  him.  He  has  reached  the  zero  from 
which  are  dated  the  calculations  of  the  farmer. 

1  Census ,  op.  cit.,  p.  36. 

*  After  all  that  had  happened. 

*  By  all  the  rules. 

4  Rogers,  op.  eit.,  p.  693,  p.  10.— Mr.  Rogers  belongs  to 
the  liberal  school,  is  a  personal  friend  of  Cobden  and  Bright, 

and  therefore  no  laudator  temporis  acti  [apologist  for  past 

times]. 

*  Public  Health ,  Seventh  Report ,  1 864,  p.  042.— It  is  there¬ 

fore  nothing  unusual  either  for  the  landlord  to  raise  a  la¬ 
bourer's  rent  as  soon  as  he  hears  that  he  is  earning  a  little 

more,  or  for  the  farmer  to  lower  the  wage  of  the  labourer, 

"because  his  wife  has  found  a  trade." 

*  Op*  cit.9  p.  135. 

1  "1  have  nothing,  I  care  nothing." 


Come  what  will,  he  has  no  share  either  in  pros¬ 
perity  or  adversity.”8 

In  the  year  1863,  an  official  inquiry  took 
place  into  the  conditions  of  nourishment  and 
labour  of  the  criminals  condemned  to  transpor¬ 
tation  and  penal  servitude.  The  results  are  re¬ 
corded  in  two  voluminous  Blue  Books.  Among 
other  things  it  is  said:  “From  an  elaborate  com¬ 
parison  between  the  diet  of  convicts  in  the  con¬ 
vict  prisons  in  England,  and  that  of  paupers 
in  workhouses  and  of  free  labourers  in  the  same 
country  . .  .it  certainly  appears  that  the  former 
are  much  better  fed  than  either  of  the  two  other 
classes,”9  whilst  “the  amount  of  labour  required 
from  an  ordinary  convict  under  penal  servitude 
is  about  one-half  of  what  would  be  done  by  an 
ordinary  day  labourer.”10  A  few  characteristic 
depositions  of  witnesses:  John  Smith,  governor 
of  the  Edinburgh  prison,  deposes  (No.  5056): 
“The  diet  of  the  English  prisons”  (is)  “superior 
to  that  of  ordinary  labourers  in  England.”  (No. 
50):  “It  is  the  fact  .  .  .  that  the  ordinary  agri¬ 
cultural  labourers  in  Scotland  very  seldom  get 
any  meat  at  all.”  (Answer  No.  3047):  “Is  there 
anything  that  you  are  aware  of  to  account  for 
the  necessity  of  feeding  them  very  much  better 
than  ordinary  labourers? — Certainly  not.” 
(No.  3048):  “Do  you  think  that  further  experi¬ 
ments  ought  to  be  made  in  order  to  ascertain 
whether  a  dietary  might  notJ>e  hit  upon  for 
prisoners  employed  on  public  works  nearly  ap¬ 
proaching  to  the  dietary  of  free  labourers?”11. . . 
“He”  (the  agricultural  labourer)  “might  say: 
‘I  work  hard,  and  have  not  enough  to  eat, 
and  when  in  prison  I  did  not  work  harder  where 
I  had  plenty  to  eat,  and  therefore  it  is  better  for 
me  to  be  in  prison  again  than  here/  ”12  From  the 
tables  appended  to  the  first  volume  of  the  re¬ 
port  I  have  compiled  the  annexed  comparative 
summary. 

The  general  result  of  the  inquiry  by  the  medi¬ 
cal  commission  of  1 863  on  the  food  of  the  lowest 
fed  classes  is  already  known  to  the  reader.  He 
will  remember  that  the  diet  of  a  great  part  of 
the  agricultural  labourers’  families  is  below  the 
minimum  necessary  “to  arrest  starvation  dis¬ 
eases.”  This  is  especially  the  case  in  all  the  pure¬ 
ly  rural  districts  of  Cornwall,  Devon,  Somerset, 
Wilts,  Stafford,  Oxford,  Berks,  and  Herts. 
“The  nourishment  obtained  by  the  labourer 
himself,”  says  Dr.  E.  Smith,  “isiarger  than  the 

1 Op . «/.,  p.134. 

I  Report  0]  the  Commissioners  . . .  relating  to  Transporta¬ 
tion  and  Penal  Servitude ,  London,  1863,  pp.  42, 50. 

14  Ibid.,  p.  77,  Memorandum  by  the  Lord  Chief  Justice . 

II  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  Minutes  of  Evidence. 

l%Ibid.t  Vol.  I,  appendix,  p.  28a 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  337 

Weekly  Amount  of  Nutriment  “To  the  insufficient  quantity  and  miserable 


Quan¬ 
tity  0/ 
Nitro¬ 
genous 
Ingre¬ 
dients 

Quan- 
lily  0] 
Non- 
Nitro¬ 
genous 
Ingre¬ 
dients 

Quan - 
lily  0] 
Min¬ 
eral 
Matter 

Total 

Ounces 

Ounces 

Ounces 

Ounces 

Portland  (Convict) 

18.9s 

1 50.06 

4.68 

183.69 

Sailor  in  the  Navy 

29.63 

152.91 

4.52 

187.06 

Soldier 

*5-55 

1 14.49 

3-94 

*43-98 

Working  Coachmaker 

24-53 

162.06 

4-23 

190.82 

Compositor 

21.24 

100.83 

3-** 

H5.19 

Agricultural  Labourer 

*7-73 

118.06 

3*29 

1 39.08* 

average  quantity  indicates,  since  he  eats  a 
larger  share  .  . .  necessary  to  enable  him  to  per¬ 
form  his  labour  ...  of  food  than  the  other  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  family,  including  in  the  poorer  dis¬ 
tricts  nearly  all  the  meat  and  bacon.  . . .  The 
quantity  of  food  obtained  by  the  wife  and  also 
by  the  children  at  the  period  of  rapid  growth, 
is  in  many  cases-,  ;,n  almost  every  county,  defi¬ 
cient,  and  particularly  in  nitrogen.02  The  male 
and  female  servants  living  with  the  farmers 
themselves  are  sufficiently  nourished.  Their 
number  fell  from  288,277,  in  1851,  to  204,962, in 
1861.  “The  labour  of  women  in  the  fields,”  says 
Dr.  Smith,  “whatever  may  be  its  disadvan¬ 
tages,  ...  is  under  present  circumstances  of 
great  advantage  to  the  family,  since  it  adds  that 
amount  of  income  which  . . .  provides  shoes  and 
clothing  and  pays  the  rent,  and  thus  enables  the 
family  to  be  better  fed. 03  One  of  the  most  re¬ 
markable  results  of  the  inquiry  was  that  the 
agricultural  labourer  of  England,  as  compared 
with  other  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom,  “is 
considerably  the  worst  fed,”  as  the  appended 
table  shows: 

Quantities  of  carbon  and  nitrogen  weekly 


consumed  by  an 

average  a 

gricultural  adult 

Carbon 

Nitrogen 

Grains 

Grains 

England 

46.67J 

'•594 

Wales 

48-354 

2.031 

Scotland 

48.980 

2.348 

Ireland 

43-3w> 

2-434* 

1  Ibid.,  pp.  274, 275. 

*  Public  Healthy  Sixth  Report ,  1863,  pp.  238,  249,  261, 
2  C2. 


*  I  bid.,  p.  262. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  17.  The  English  agricultural  labourer  receives 
only  onc-fourth  as  much  milk,  and  one-half  as  much  bread 
as  the  Irish.  Arthur  Young  in  his  Tour  through  Ireland, 
at  the  beginning  of  this  century,  already  noticed  the  better 
nourishment  of  the  latter.  The  reason  is  simply  this,  that 


quality  of  the  house  accommodation  generally 
had,”  says  Dr.  Simon,  in  his  official  health  re¬ 
port,  “by  our  agricultural  labourers,  almost 
every  page  of  Dr.  Hunter's  report  bears  testi¬ 
mony.  And  gradually,  for  many  years  past,  the 

the  poor  Irish  farmer  is  incomparably  more  humane  than 
the  rich  English.  As  regards  Wales,  that  which  is  said  in 
the  text  holds  only  for  the  south-west.  All  the  doctors  there 
agree  that  the  increase  of  the  death-rate  through  tuber¬ 
culosis,  scrofula,  etc., increases  in  intensity  with  the  deteri¬ 
oration  of  the  physical  condition  of  the  population,  and  all 
ascribe  this  deterioration  to  poverty.  "His”  (the  farm  la¬ 
bourer’s)  "keep  is  reckoned  at  about  fivepence  a  day,  but 
in  many  districts  it  was  said  to  be  of  much  less  cost  to  the 
farmer”  (himself  very  poor). ...  "A  morsel  of  the  salt  meat 
or  bacon  . . .  salted  and  dried  to  the  texture  of  mahogany, 
and  hardly  worth  the  difficult  process  of  assimilation ...  is 
used  to  flavour  a  large  quantity  of  broth  or  gruel,  of  meal 
and  leeks,  and  day  after  day  this  is  the  labourer’s  dinner.” 
The  advance  of  industry  resulted  for  him,  in  this  harsh  and 
damp  climate,  in"the  abandonment  of  the  solid  homespun 
clothing  in  favour  of  the  cheap  and  so-called  cotton  goods,” 
and  of  stronger  drinks  for  so-called  tea.  "The  agriculturist, 
after  several  hours’  exposure  to  wind  and  rain,  gains  his 
cottage  to  sit  by  a  fire  of  peat,  or  of  balls  of  clay  and  small 
coal  kneaded  together,  from  which  volumes  of  carbonic 
and  sulphurous  acids  are  poured  forth.  His  walls  are  of 
mud  and  stones,  his  floor  the  bare  earth  which  was  there 
before  the  hut  was  built,  his  roof  a  mass  of  loose  and  sod¬ 
den  thatch.  Every  crevice  is  stopped  to  maintain  warmth, 
and  in  an  atmosphere  of  diabolic  odour,  with  a  mud  floor, 
with  his  only  clothes  drying  on  his  back,  he  often  sups  and 
sleeps  with  his  wife  and  children.  Obstetricians  who  have 
passed  parts  of  the  night  in  such  cabins  have  described 
how  they  found  their  feet  sinking  in  the  mud  of  the  floor, 
and  they  were  forced  (easy  task)  to  drill  a  hole  through 
the  wall  to  effect  a  little  private  respiration.  It  was  attested 
by  numerous  witnesses  in  various  grades  of  life  that  to 
these  insanitary  influences,  and  many  more,  the  underfed 
peasant  was  nightly  exposed,  and  of  the  result,  a  debili¬ 
tated  and  scrofulous  people,  there  was  no  want  of  evidence. 
. . .  The  statements  of  the  relieving  officers  of  Carmarthen¬ 
shire  and  Cardiganshire  show  in  a  striking  way  the  same 
state  of  things.”  There  is  besides  "a  plague  more  horrible 
still,  the  great  number  of  idiots.”  Now  a  word  on  the  cli¬ 
matic  conditions.  "A  strong  south-west  wind  blows  over 
the  whole  country  for  eight  or  nine  months  in  the  year, 
bringing  with  it  torrents  of  rain,  which  discharge  principal¬ 
ly  upon  the  western  slopes  of  the  hills.  Trees  are  rare,  ex¬ 
cept  in  sheltered  places  and,  where  not  protected,  are  blown 
out  of  all  shape.  The  cottages  generally  crouch  under  some 
bank,  or  often  in  a  ravine  or  quarry,  and  none  but  the 
smallest  sheep  and  native  cattle  can  live  on  the  pastures. 
. . .  The  young  people  migrate  to  the  eastern  mining  dis¬ 
tricts  of  Glamorgan  and  Monmouth.  Carmarthenshire  is 
the  breeding  ground  of  the  mining  population  and  their 
hospital.  The  population  can  therefore  barely  maintain  its 
numbers.”  Thus  in  Cardiganshire: 

1851  tS6r 
Males  45»  *55  44.44$ 

Females  52,459  5a»955 

97.6*4  97.40* 

Dr.  Hunter’s  report  in  Public  Healthy  Seventh  Report, 
*  864.  pp-  498-502,  passim. 


338  CAPITAL 


state  of  the  labourer  in  these  respects  has  been 
deteriorating,  house-room  being  now  greatly 
more  difficult  for  him  to  find,  and,  when  found, 
greatly  less  suitable  to  his  needs  than,  perhaps, 
for  centuries  had  been  the  case.  Especially  with¬ 
in  the  last  twenty  or  thirty  years,  the  evil  has 
been  in  very  rapid  increase,  and  the  household 
circumstances  of  the  labourer  are  now  in  the 
highest  degree  deplorable.  Except  in  so  far  as 
they  whom  his  labour  enriches  see  fit  to  treat 
him  with  a  kind  of  pitiful  indulgence,  he  is  quite 
peculiarly  helpless  in  the  matter.  Whether  he 
shall  find  house-room  on  the  land  which  he  con¬ 
tributes  to  till,  whether  the  house-room  which 
he  gets  shall  be  human  or  swinish,  whether  he 
shall  have  the  little  space  of  garden  that  so  vast¬ 
ly  lessens  the  pressure  of  his  poverty — all  this 
does  not  depend  on  his  willingness  and  ability 
to  pay  reasonable  rent  for  the  decent  accommo¬ 
dation  he  requires,  but  depends  on  the  use 
which  others  may  see  fit  to  make  of  their 
‘right  to  do  as  they  will  with  their  own.’  How¬ 
ever  large  may  be  a  farm,  there  is  no  law  that  a 
certain  proportion  of  labourers*  dwellings 
(much  less  of  decent  dwellings)  shall  be  upon 
it;  nor  does  any  law  reserve  for  the  labourer 
ever  so  little  right  in  that  soil  to  which  his  in¬ 
dustry  is  as  needful  as  sun  and  rain.  . .  •  An  ex¬ 
traneous  element  weighs  the  balance  heavily 
against  him  . . .  the  influence  of  the  Poor  Law 
in  its  provisions  concerning  settlement  and 
chargeability.1  Under  this  influence,  each  par¬ 
ish  has  a  pecuniary  interest  in  reducing  to  a 
minimum  the  number  of  its  resident  labourers: 
for,  unhappily,  agricultural  labour  instead  of 
implying  a  safe  and  permanent  independence 
for  the  hard-working  labourer  and  his  family, 
implies  for  the  most  part  only  a  longer  or  short¬ 
er  circuit  to  eventual  pauperism — a  pauperism 
which,  during  the  whole  circuit,  is  so  near,  that 
any  illness  or  temporary  failure  of  occupation 
necessitates  immediate  recourse  to  parochial  re¬ 
lief — and  thus  all  residence  of  agricultural  pop¬ 
ulation  in  a  parish  is  glaringly  an  addition  to  its 
poor  rates.  .  .  .  Large  proprietors2 .  .  .  have  but 
to  resolve  that  there  shall  be  no  labourers’ 
dwellings  on  their  estates,  and  their  estates  will 
thenceforth  be  virtually  free  from  half  their  re- 

1  In  1865  this  law  was  improved  to  some  extent.  It  will 
soon  be  learnt  from  experience  that  tinkering  of  this  sort  is 
of  no  use. 

*  In  order  to  understand  that  which  follows,  we  must  re¬ 
member  that  “close  villages''  are  those  whose  owners  are 
one  or  two  large  landlords.  “Open  villages,”  those  whose 
•oil  belongs  to  many  smaller  landlords.  It  is  in  the  latter 
that  building  speculators  can  build  cottages  and  lodging 
houses. 


sponsibility  for  the  poor.  How  far  it  has  been 
intended,  in  the  English  constitution  and  law, 
that  this  kind  of  unconditional  property  in  land 
should  be  acquirable,  and  that  a  landlord,  'do¬ 
ing  as  he  wills  with  his  own,*  should  be  able  to 
treat  the  cultivators  of  the  soil  as  aliens,  whom 
he  may  expel  from  his  territory,  is  a  question 
which  I  do  not  pretend  to  discuss. .  . .  For  that 
(power)  of  eviction  .  . .  does  not  exist  only  in 
theory.  On  a  very  large  scale  it  prevails  in  prac¬ 
tice— prevails  ...  as  a  main  governing  condi¬ 
tion  in  the  household  circumstances  of  agricul¬ 
tural  labour.  ...  As  regards  the  extent  of  the 
evil,  it  may  suffice  to  refer  to  the  evidence  which 
Dr.  Hunter  has  compiled  from  the  last  census, 
that  destruction  of  houses,  notwithstanding  in¬ 
creased  local  demands  for  them,  had,  during  the 
last  ten  years,  been  in  progress  in  821  separate 
parishes  or  townships  of  England,  so  that,  irre¬ 
spectively  of  persons  who  had  been  forced  to 
become  non-resident  (that  is  in  the  parishes  in 
which  they  work),  these  parishes  and  townships 
were  receiving  in  1861,  as  compared  with  1851, 
a  population  greater,  into  house-room 

4/2%  less. .  .  .  When  the  process  of  depopula¬ 
tion  has  completed  itself,  the  result,  says  Dr. 
Hunter,  is  a  show-village  where  the  cottages 
have  been  reduced  to  a  few,  and  where  none  but 
persons  who  are  needed  as  shepherds,  garden¬ 
ers,  or  gamekeepers,  are  allowed  to  live;  regular 
servants  who  receive  the  goocTtrcatment  usual 
to  their  class.2  But  the  land  requires  cultiva¬ 
tion,  and  it  will  be  found  that  the  labourers  em¬ 
ployed  upon  it  are  not  the  tenants  of  the  owner, 
but  that  they  come  from  a  neighbouring  open 
village,  perhaps  three  miles  oflf,  where  a  numer¬ 
ous  small  proprietary  had  received  them  when 
their  cottages  were  destroyed  in  the  close  vil¬ 
lages  around.  Where  things  are  tending  to  the 
above  result,  often  the  cottages  which  stand 
testify,  in  their  unrepaired  and  wretched  condi¬ 
tion,  to  the  extinction  to  which  they  are 
doomed.  They  are  seen  standing  in  the  various 
stages  of  natural  decay.  While  the  shelter  holds 
together,  the  labourer  is  permitted  to  rent  it, 
and  glad  enough  he  will  often  be  to  do  so,  even 
at  the  price  of  decent  lodging.  But  no  repair,  no 
3  A  show-village  of  this  kind  looks  very  nice,  but  is  as  un¬ 
real  as  the  villages  that  Catherine  II  saw  on  her  journey  to 
the  Crimea.  In  recent  times  the  shepherd  also  has  often 
been  banished  from  these  show- villages;  for  example,  near 
Market  Ilarboro’  is  a  sheep-farm  of  about  500  acres  which 
only  employs  the  labour  of  one  man.  To  reduce  the  long 
trudges  over  these  wide  plains,  the  beautiful  pastures  of 
Leicester  and  Northampton,  the  shepherd  used  to  get  a 
cottage  on  the  farm.  Now  they  give  him  a  thirteenth  shil¬ 
ling  a  week  for  lodging  that  he  must  find  far  away  in  an 
open  village. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  339 


improvement  shall  it  receive,  except  such  as  its 
penniless  occupants  can  supply.  And  when  at 
last  it  becomes  quite  uninhabitable— uninhab¬ 
itable  even  to  the  humblest  standard  of  serf¬ 
dom— it  will  be  but  one  more  destroyed  cot¬ 
tage,  and  future  poor  rates  will  be  somewhat 
lightened.  While  great  owners  are  thus  escaping 
from  poor  rates  through  the  depopulation  of 
lands  over  which  they  have  control,  the  nearest 
town  or  open  village  receives  the  evicted  labour¬ 
ers;  the  nearest,  I  say,  but  this  ‘nearest*  may 
mean  three  or  four  miles  distant  from  the  farm 
where  the  labourer  has  his  daily  toil.  To  that 
daily  toil  there  will  then  have  to  be  added,  as 
though  it  were  nothing,  the  daily  need  of  walk¬ 
ing  six  or  eight  miles  for  power  of  earning  his 
bread.  And  whatever  farmwork  is  done  by  his 
wife  and  children  is  done  at  the  same  disadvan¬ 
tage.  Nor  is  this  nearly  all  the  toil  which  the 
distance  occasions  him.  I  n  the  open  village,  cot¬ 
tage  speculators  buy  scraps  of  land  which  they 
throng  as  densely  as  they  can  with  the  cheapest 
of  all  possible  hovels.  And  into  those  wretched 
habitations**!,  which,  even  if  they  adjoin  theopen 
country,  have  some  of  the  worst  features  of  the 
worst  town  residences)  “crowd  the  agricultural 
labourers  of  England.1  .  .  .  Nor  on  the  other 
hand  must  it  be  supposed  that,  even  when  the 
labourer  is  housed  upon  the  lands  which  he  cul¬ 
tivates,  his  household  circumstances  are  gen¬ 
erally  such  as  his  life  of  productive  industry 

1  “The  labourers'  houses  (in  the  open  villages,  which,  of 
course,  are  always  overcrowded)  are  usually  in  rows,  built 
with  their  backs  against  the  extreme  edge  of  the  plot  of 
land  which  the  builder  could  call  his,  and  on  this  account 
are  not  allowed  light  and  air,  except  from  the  front."  (Dr. 
Hunter's  Report ,  op.  cit.t  p.  135.)  Very  often  the  beerseller 
or  grocer  of  the  village  is  at  the  same  time  the  letter  of  its 
houses.  In  this  case  the  agricultural  labourer  finds  in  him  a 
second  master,  besides  the  farmer.  He  must  be  his  customer 
as  well  as  his  tenant.  “The  hind  with  his  10 s.  a  week,  minus 
a  rent  of  £4  a  year  ...  is  obliged  to  buy  at  the  seller’s  own 
terms  his  modicum  of  tea,  sugar,  flour,  soap,  candles,  and 
beer."  (Ibid.,  p.  132.)  These  open  villages  form,  in  fact, 
the  “penal  settlements"  of  the  English  agricultural  prole¬ 
tariat.  Many  of  the  cottages  are  simply  lodging  houses, 
through  which  all  the  rabble  of  the  neighbourhood  passes. 
The  country  labourer  and  his  family  who  had  often,  in  a 
way  truly  wonderful,  preserved,  under  the  foulest  condi¬ 
tions,  a  thoroughness  and  purity  of  character,  go,  in  these, 
utterly  to  the  devil.  It  is,  of  course,  the  fashion  amongst 
the  aristocratic  Shylocks  to  shrug  their  shoulders  pharisa¬ 
ically  at  the  building  speculators,  the  small  landlords,  and 
theopen  villages.  They  know  well  enough  that  their  “close 
villages"  and  “show-villages"  are  the  birthplaces  of  the 
open  villages,  and  could  not  exist  without  them.  “The  la¬ 
bourers  . . .  were  it  not  for  the  small  owners,  would,  for  by 
far  the  most  part,  have  to  sleep  under  the  trees  of  the  farms 
on  which  they  work."  (Ibid.,  p.  135.)  The  system  of  “open" 
and  “closed"  villages  obtains  in  all  the  midland  counties 
and  throughout  the  east  of  England. 


would  seem  to  deserve.  Even  on  princely  es¬ 
tates  ...  his  cottage  . . .  may  be  of  the  meanest 
description.  There  are  landlords  who  deem  any 
stye  good  enough  for  their  labourer  and  his  fam¬ 
ily,  and  who  yet  do  not  disdain  to  drive  with 
him  the  hardest  possible  bargain  for  rent.2  It 
may  be  but  a  ruinous  one-bedroomed  hut,  hav¬ 
ing  no  fire-grate,  no  privy,  no  opening  window, 
no  water  supply  but  the  ditch,  no  garden— but 
the  labourer  is  helpless  against  the  wrong. . .  • 
And  the  Nuisances  Removal  Acts  . . .  are  . .  • 
a  mere  dead  letter  ...  in  great  part  dependent 
for  their  working  on  such  cottage  owners  as  the 
one  from  whom  his’*  (the  labourer’s)  “hovel  is 
rented.  .  .  .  From  brighter,  but  exceptional 
scenes,  it  is  requisite  in  the  interests  of  justice 
that  attention  should  again  be  drawn  to  the 
overwhelming  preponderance  of  facts  which  are 
a  reproach  to  the  civilization  of  England.  Lam¬ 
entable  indeed,  must  be  the  case,  when,  not¬ 
withstanding  all  that  is  evident  with  regard  to 
the  quality  of  the  present  accommodation,  it  is 
the  common  conclusion  of  competent  observers 
that  even  the  general  badness  of  dwellings  is  an 
evil  infinitely  less  urgent  than  their  mere  nu¬ 
merical  insufficiency.  For  years  the  overcrowd¬ 
ing  of  rural  labourers*  dwellings  has  been  a  mat¬ 
ter  of  deep  concern,  not  only  to  persons  who 
care  for  sanitary  good,  but  to  persons  who  care 
for  decent  and  moral  life.  For,  again  and  again 
in  phrases  so  uniform  that  they  seem  stereo¬ 
typed,  reporters  on  the  spread  of  epidemic  dis¬ 
ease  in  rural  districts  have  insisted  on  the  ex¬ 
treme  importance  of  that  over-crowding  as  an 
influence  which  renders  it  a  quite  hopeless  task 
to  attempt  the  limiting  of  any  infection  which 
is  introduced.  And  again  and  again  it  has  been 
pointed  out  that,  notwithstanding  the  many 
salubrious  influences  which  there  are  in  country 
life,  the  crowding  which  so  favours  the  exten¬ 
sion  of  contagious  disease  also  favours  the 
origination  of  disease  which  is  not  contagious. 
And  those  who  have  denounced  the  over- 

*  “The  employer  . . .  is  . . .  directly  or  indirectly  secur¬ 
ing  to  himself  the  profit  on  a  man  employed  at  10/.  a  week, 
and  receiving  from  this  poor  hind  £4  or  £5  annual  rent  for 
houses  not  worth  £20  in  a  really  free  market,  but  main¬ 
tained  at  their  artificial  value  by  the  power  of  the  owner 
to  say  'Use  my  house,  or  go  seek  a  hiring  elsewhere,  with¬ 
out  a  character  from  me.’  . . .  Does  a  man  wish  to  better 
himself,  to  go  as  a  plate-layer  on  the  railway,  or  to  begin 
quarry-work,  the  same  power  is  ready  with  ‘Work  for  me 
at  this  low  rate  of  wages,  or  begone  at  a  week's  notice; 
take  your  pig  with  you,  and  get  what  you  can  for  the  pota¬ 
toes  growing  in  your  garden.'  Should  his  interest  appear  to 
be  better  served  by  it,  an  enhanced  rent  is  sometimes  pre¬ 
ferred  in  these  cases  by  the  owner  (i.e.  the  farmer)  as  the 
penalty  for  leaving  his  service."  (Ibid.,  p.  132.) 


CAPITAL 


340 

crowded  state  of  our  rural  population  have  not 
been  silent  as  to  a  further  mischief.  Even  where 
their  primary  concern  has  been  only  with  the 
injury  to  health,  often  almost  perforce  they 
have  referred  to  other  relations  on  the  subject. 
In  showing  how  frequently  it  happens  that 
adult  persons  of  both  sexes,  married  and  un¬ 
married,  are  huddled  together  in  single  small 
sleeping  rooms,  their  reports  have  carried  the 
conviction  that,  under  the  circumstances  they 
describe,  decency  must  always  be  outraged,  and 
morality  almost  of  necessity  must  suffer.1  Thus 
for  instance,  in  the  appendix  of  my  last  annual 
report,  Dr.  Ord,  reporting  on  an  outbreak  of 
fever  at  Wing,  in  Buckinghamshire,  mentions 
how  a  young  man  who  had  come  thither  from 
Wingrave  with  fever,  ‘in  the  first  days  of  his 
illness  slept  in  a  room  with  nine  other  persons. 
Within  a  fortnight  several  of  these  persons  were 
attacked,  and  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks  five 
out  of  the  nine  had  fever,  and  one  died*  .  .  . 
From  Dr.  Harvey,  of  St.  George's  Hospital, 
who,  on  private  professional  business,  visited 
Wing  during  the  time  of  the  epidemic,  I  re¬ 
ceived  information  exactly  in  the  sense  of  the 
above  report.  ...  ‘A  young  woman  having  fe¬ 
ver,  lay  at  night  in  a  room  occupied  by  her 
father  and  mother,  her  bastard  child,  two 
young  men  (her  brothers),  and  her  two  sisters, 
each  with  a  bastard  child—  io  persons  in  all.  A 
few  weeks  ago  13  persons  slept  in  it.’"2 

Dr.  Hunter  investigated  5,375  cottages  of  ag¬ 
ricultural  labourers,  not  only  in  the  purely  ag¬ 
ricultural  districts,  but  in  all  counties  of  Eng¬ 
land.  Of  these,  2,195  had  only  one  bedroom  (of¬ 
ten  at  the  same  time  used  as  living  room),  2,930 
only  two,  and  250,  more  than  two.  I  will  give  a 
few  specimens  culled  from  a  dozen  counties. 

(1)  Bedfordshire 

JVrestlingworth.  Bedrooms  about  12  feet  long 
and  10  broad,  although  many  are  smaller  than 

1  “New  married  couples  are  no  edifying  study  for  grow fl¬ 
ap  brothers  and  sisters;  and  though  instances  must  not  be 
recorded,  sufficient  data  are  remembered  to  warrant  the 
remark  that  great  depression  and  sometimes  death  are  the 
lot  of  the  female  participator  in  the  offence  of  incest." 
( [Ibid,,  p.  137.)  A  member  of  the  rural  police  who  had  for 
many  years  been  a  detective  in  the  worst  quarters  of  Lon¬ 
don,  says  of  the  girls  of  his  village:  “Their  boldness  and 
shamelessness  1  never  saw  equalled  during  some  years  of 
police  life  and  detective  duty  in  the  worst  parts  of  London. 
• . .  They  live  like  pigs,  great  boys  and  girls,  mothers  and 
fathers,  all  sleeping  in  one  room,  in  many  instances."  (Chil¬ 
dren1  j  Employment  Commission  Sixth  Report)  1867,  p.  77 
ff.,  and  155.) 

2  Public  Healthy  Sewenth  Report ,  1864,  pp.  9, 14,  passim. 


this.  The  small,  one-storeyed  cottages  are  often 
divided  by  partitions  into  two  bedrooms,  one 
bed  frequently  in  a  kitchen,  5  feet  6  inches  in 
height.  Rent,  £3  a  year.  The  tenants  have  to 
make  their  own  privies,  the  landlord  only  sup¬ 
plies  a  hole.  As  soon  as  one  has  made  a  privy,  it 
is  made  use  of  by  the  whole  neighbourhood.  One 
house,  belonging  to  a  family  called  Richardson, 
was  of  quite  unapproachable  beauty.  “Its  plas¬ 
ter  walls  bulged  very  like  a  lady's  dress  in  a 
curtsey.  One  gable  end  was  convex,  the  other 
concave,  and  on  this  last,  unfortunately,  stood 
the  chimney,  a  curved  tube  of  clay  and  wood 
like  an  elephant's  trunk.  A  long  stick  served  as 
prop  to  prevent  the  chimney  from  falling.  The 
doorway  and  window  were  rhomboidal."  Of  17 
houses  visited,  only  4  had  more  than  one  bed¬ 
room,  and  those  four  overcrowded.  The  cot¬ 
tages  with  one  bedroom  sheltered  3  adults  and 
3  children,  a  married  couple  with  6  children, 
etc. 

Dunton .  High  rents,  from  £4  to  £5;  weekly 
wages  of  the  man  were  10s.  They  hope  to  pay 
the  rent  by  the  straw-plaiting  of  the  family. 
The  higher  the  rent,  the  greater  the  number 
that  must  work  together  to  pay  it.  Six  adults, 
living  with  4  children  in  one  sleeping  apart¬ 
ment,  pay  £3  10 s.  for  it.  The  cheapest  house  in 
Dunton,  15  feet  long  externally,  10  broad,  let 
for  £3.  Only  one  of  the  houses  investigated  had 
2  bedrooms.  A  little  outside  thrvillage,  a  house 
whose  “tenants  dunged  against  the  house- 
side,”  the  lower  9  inches  of  the  door  were  eaten 
away  through  sheer  rottenness;  the  doorway,  a 
single  opening  closed  at  night  by  a  few  bricks, 
ingeniously  pushed  up  after  shutting  and  cov¬ 
ered  with  some  matting.  Half  a  window,  with 
glass  and  frame,  had  gone  the  way  of  all  flesh. 
Here,  without  furniture,  huddled  together, 
were  3  adults  and  5  children.  Dunton  is  not 
worse  than  the  rest  of  Biggleswade  Union. 

(2)  Berkshire 

Beenham .  In  June,  1 864,  a  man,  his  wife  and  4 
children  lived  in  a  cot  (one-storeyed  cottage). 
A  daughter  came  home  from  service  with  scar¬ 
let  fever.  She  died.  One  child  sickened  and  died. 
The  mother  and  one  child  were  down  with  ty¬ 
phus  when  Dr.  Hunter  was  called  in.  The  father 
and  one  child  slept  outside,  but  the  difficulty 
of  securing  isolation  was  seen  here,  for  in  the 
crowded  market  of  the  miserable  village  lay  the 
linen  of  the  fever-stricken  household,  waiting  for 
the  wash.  The  rent  of  H.'s  house  is  is.  a  week; 
one  bedroom  for  man,  wife,  and  6  children.  One 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  341 


house  let  for  8 d.  a  week,  14  feet  6  inches  long,  7 
feet  broad;  kitchen,  6  feet  high;  the  bedroom 
without  window,  fireplace,  door,  or  opening,  ex¬ 
cept  into  the  lobby;  no  garden.  A  man  lived 
here  for  a  little  while,  with  two  grown-up 
daughters  and  one  grown-up  son;  father  and 
son  slept  on  the  bed,  the  girls  in  the  passage. 
Each  of  the  latter  had  a  child  while  the  family 
was  living  here,  but  one  went  to  the  workhouse 
for  her  confinement  and  then  came  home. 

(3)  Buckinghamshire 

Thirty  cottages— on  1,000  acres  of  land- 
contained  here  about  130-140  persons.  The  par¬ 
ish  of  Bradenham  comprises  1,000  acres;  in 
1851  it  numbered  36  houses  and  a  population 
of  84  males  and  54  females.  This  inequality  of 
the  sexes  was  partly  remedied  in  1861,  when 
they  numbered  98  males  and  87  females,  an  in¬ 
crease  in  10  years  of  14  men  and  33  women. 
Meanwhile,  the  number  of  houses  was  one  less. 

Winslow .  A  great  part  of  this  is  newly  built 
in  good  style;  dlrrand  for  houses  appears  very 
marked,  since  very  miserable  cots  let  at  is.  to 
is.  3</.  per  week. 

Water  Eaton .  Here  the  landlords,  in  view  of 
the  increasing  population,  have  destroyed 
about  20%  of  the  existing  houses.  A  poor  la¬ 
bourer  who  had  to  go  about  4  miles  to  his  work 
answered  the  question  whether  he  could  not 
find  a  cot  nearer: 44 No;  they  know  better  than 
to  take  a  man  in  with  my  large  family.*' 

Tinker's  Endy  near  Winslow.  A  bedroom  in 
which  were  4  adults  and  4  children  was  1 1  feet 
long,  9  feet  broad,  6  feet  5  inches  high  at  its 
highest  part;  another,  1 1  feet  3  inches  by  9  feet, 
5  feet  10  inches  high,  sheltered  6  persons.  Each 
of  these  families  had  less  space  than  is  consid¬ 
ered  necessary  for  a  convict.  No  house  had  more 
than  one  bedroom,  not  one  of  them  a  back  door; 
water  very  scarce;  weekly  rent  from  is.  4 d.  to 
2s.  In  16  of  the  houses  visited,  there  was  only  1 
man  that  earned  10s.  a  week.  The  quantity  of 
air  for  each  person  under  the  circumstances  just 
described  corresponds  to  that  which  he  would 
have  if  he  were  shut  up  in  a  box  of  4  feet  measur¬ 
ing  each  way,  the  whole  night.  But  then,  the 
ancient  dens  afforded  a  certain  amount  of  un¬ 
intentional  ventilation. 

(4)  Cambridgeshire 

Gamblingay  belongs  to  several  landlords.  It 
contains  the  wretcheaest  cots  to  be  found  any¬ 
where.  There  is  much  straw-plaiting.  "A  deadly 
lassitude,  a  hopeless  surrendering  up  to  filth,” 


reigns  in  Gamblingay.  The  neglect  in  its  centre 
becomes  mortification  at  its  extremities,  north 
and  south,  where  the  houses  are  rotting  to 
pieces.  The  absentee  landlords  bleed  this  poor 
rookery  too  freely.  The  rents  are  very  high;  8 
or  9  persons  packed  in  one  sleeping  apartment, 
in  two  cases  6  adults,  each  with  1  or  2  children 
in  one  small  bedroom. 

(5)  Essex 

In  this  county,  diminutions  in  the  number  of 
ersons  and  of  cottages  go,  in  many  parishes, 
and  in  hand.  In  not  less  than  22  parishes,  how¬ 
ever,  the  destruction  of  houses  has  not  prevent¬ 
ed  increase  of  population,  or  has  not  brought 
about  that  expulsion  which,  under  the  name 
“migration  to  towns,"  generally  occurs.  In 
Fingringhoe,  a  parish  of  3,443  acres,  there  were 
in  1851,  14J  houses;  in  1861,  only  1 10.  But  the 
people  did  not  wish  to  go  away  and  managed 
even  to  increase  under  these  circumstances.  In 
1851,  252  persons  inhabited  61  houses,  but  in 
1861,  262  persons  were  squeezed  into  49  houses. 
In  Basildcn,  in  1851,  157 persons  lived  on  1,827 
acres  in  35  houses;  at  the  end  of  ten  years,  180 
persons  lived  in  27  houses.  In  the  parishes  of 
Fingringhoe,  South  Farnbridge,  Widford,  Bas- 
ilden,  and  Ramsden  Crags,  in  1851, 1,392  per¬ 
sons  were  living  on  8,449 acres  in  316  houses;  in 
1861,  on  the  same  area,  1,473  persons  lived  in 
249  houses. 

(6)  Herefordshire 

This  little  county  has  suffered  more  from  the 
“eviction  spirit**  than  any  other  in  England.  At 
Nad  by,  over-crowded  cottages,  generally  with 
only  2  bedrooms,  belonging  for  the  most  part 
to  the  farmers.  They  easily  let  them  for  £3  or 
£4  a  year,  and  paid  a  weekly  wage  of  9 s. 

(7)  Huntingdon 

Hartford  had,  in  1851,  87  houses;  shortly  af¬ 
ter  this,  19  cottages  were  destroyed  in  this  small 
parish  of  1,720  acres;  population  in  1831,  452; 
in  1852,  832;  and  in  1861,  341.  Fourteen  cot¬ 
tages,  each  with  1  bedroom,  were  visited.  In 
one,  a  married  couple,  3  grown-up  sons,  1 
grown-up  daughter,  4  children— in  all  10;  in  an¬ 
other,  3  adults,  6  children.  One  of  these  rooms, 
in  which  8  people  slept,  was  12  feet  10  inches 
long,  12  feet  2  inches  broad,  6  feet  9  inches  high: 
the  average,  without  making  any  deduction  for 
projections  into  the  apartment,  gave  about  130 
cubic  feet  per  head.  In  the  14  sleeping  rooms,  34 
adults  and  33  children.  These  cottages  are  set 


342 


CAPITAL 


dom  provided  with  gardens,  but  many  of  the 
inmates  are  able  to  farm  small  allotments  at 
iof.  or  12 s.  per  rood.  These  allotments  are  at  a 
distance  from  the  houses,  which  are  without 
privies.  The  family  “must  either  go  to  the  allot¬ 
ment  to  deposit  their  ordures,"  or,  as  happens 
in  this  place,  saving  your  presence,  “use  a  closet 
with  a  trough  set  like  a  drawer  in  a  chest  of 
drawers,  and  drawn  out  weekly  and  conveyed 
to  the  allotment  to  be  emptied  where  its  con¬ 
tents  were  wanted."  In  Japan,  the  circle  of  life- 
conditions  moves  more  decently  than  this. 

(8)  Lincolnshire 

Langtoft .  A  man  lives  here,  in  Wright's  house, 
with  his  wife,  her  mother,  and  5  children;  the 
house  has  a  front  kitchen,  scullery,  bedroom 
over  the  front  kitchen;  front  kitchen  and  bed¬ 
room,  12  feet  2  inches  by  9  feet  5  inches;  the 
whole  ground  floor,  21  feet  2  inches  by  9  feet  5 
inches.  The  bedroom  is  a  garret;  the  walls  run 
together  into  the  roof  like  a  sugar  loaf,  a  dor¬ 
mer-window  opening  in  front.  “Why  did  he  live 
here?  On  account  of  the  garden?  No;  it  is  very 
small.  Rent?  High,  is.  3 d.  per  week.  Near  his 
work  ?  No;  6  miles  away,  so  that  he  walks  daily, 
to  and  fro,  12  miles.  He  lived  there,  because  it 
was  a  tenan table  cot,”  and  because  he  wanted 
to  have  a  cot  for  himself  alone,  anywhere,  at 
any  price,  and  in  any  condition.  The  following 
are  the  statistics  of  12  houses  in  Langtoft,  with 
12  bedrooms,  38  adults,  and  36  children. 

# 

Twelve  Houses  in  Langtoft 


Bed -  Number 


Houses 

rooms 

Adults 

Children  of  Persons 

No.  1 

I 

3 

5 

8 

“  2 

I 

4 

3 

7 

4<  3 

I 

4 

4 

8 

4  4 

I 

5 

4 

9 

44  5 

I 

2 

2 

4 

“  6 

I 

5 

3 

8 

44  7 

I 

3 

3 

6 

“  8 

I 

3 

2 

5 

44  9 

I 

2 

0 

2 

“  10 

I 

2 

3 

5 

“  11 

3 

3 

6 

“  12 

(9)  Kent 

1 

2 

4 

6 

Kennington  was  very  seriously  over-popu¬ 
lated  in  1859,  when  diphtheria  appeared,  and 
the  parish  doctor  instituted  a  medical  inquiry 
into  the  condition  of  the  poorer  classes.  He 
found  that  in  this  locality,  where  much  labour 
is  employed,  various  cots  had  been  destroyed 


and  no  new  ones  built.  In  one  district  stood  four 
houses,  named  birdcages;  each  had  4  rooms  of 
the  following  dimensions  in  feet  and  inches: 

Kitchen:  9  ft.  5  by  8  ft.  1 1  by  6  ft.  6 

Scullery:  8  ft.  6  by  4  ft.  6  by  6  ft.  6 

Bedroom:  8  ft.  5  by  5  ft.  10  by  6  ft.  3 

Bedroom:  8  ft.  3  by  8  ft.  4  by  6  ft.  3 

(10)  Northamptonshire 

Brinworthy  Pickford  and  Floore :  in  these  vil¬ 
lages  in  the  winter  20  to  30  men  were  lounging 
about  the  streets  from  want  of  work.  The  farm¬ 
ers  do  not  always  till  sufficiently  the  corn  and 
turnip  lands,  and  the  landlord  has  found  it  best 
to  throw  all  his  farms  together  into  2  or  3. 
Hence  want  of  employment.  Whilst  on  one  side 
of  the  wall  the  land  calls  for  labour,  on  the  other 
side  the  defrauded  labourers  are  casting  at  it 
longing  glances.  Feverishly  overworked  in  sum¬ 
mer,  and  half-starved  in  winter,  it  is  no  wonder 
if  they  say  in  their  peculiar  dialect,  “the  parson 
and  gentlefolk  seem  frit  to  death  at  them.” 

At  Floore,  there  are  instances,  in  one  bed¬ 
room  of  the  smallest  size,  of  couples  with  4,  5, 
6  children;  3  adults  with  5  children;  a  couple 
with  grandfather  and  6  children  down  with 
scarlet  fever,  etc.;  in  two  houses  with  two  bed¬ 
rooms,  two  families  of  8  and  9  adults  respec¬ 
tively. 

(11)  Wiltshire  ^ 

Stratton .  31  houses  visited,  8  with  only  one 
bedroom.  Pen  till,  in  the  same  parish:  a  cot  let 
at  is.  3d.  weekly  with  4  adults  and  4  children, 
had  nothing  good  about  it,  except  the  walls, 
from  the  floor  of  rough-hewn  pieces  of  stones  to 
the  roof  of  worn-out  thatch. 

(12)  Worcestershire 

House-destruction  here  not  quite  so  exces¬ 
sive;  yet  from  1851  to  1861,  the  number  of  in¬ 
habitants  to  each  house  on  the  average,  has 
risen  from  4.2  to  4.6. 

Badsey .  Many  cots  and  little  gardens  here. 
Some  of  the  farmers  declare  that  the  cots  are 
“a  great  nuisance  here,  because  they  bring  the 
poor."  On  the  statement  of  one  gentleman: 
“The  poor  are  none  the  better  for  them;  if  you 
build  500,  they  will  let  fast  enough;  in  fact,  the 
more  you  build,  the  more  they  want”  (accord¬ 
ing  to  him  the  houses  give  birth  to  the  inhabi¬ 
tants,  who  then  by  a  law  of  Nature  press  on 
“the  means  of  housing”).  Dr.  Hunter  remarks: 
“Now  these  poor  must  come  from  somewhere, 
ana  as  there  is  no  particular  attraction,  such  as 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  343 


doles,  at  Badsey,  it  must  be  repulsion  from 
some  other  unfit  place  which  will  send  them 
here.  If  each  could  find  an  allotment  near  his 
work,  he  would  not  prefer  Badsey,  where  he 
pays  for  his  scrap  of  ground  twice  as  much  as 
the  farmer  pays  for  his.” 

The  continual  emigration  to  the  towns,  the 
continual  formation  of  surplus  population  in 
the  country  through  the  concentration  of 
farms,  conversion  of  arable  land  into  pasture, 
machinery,  etc.,  and  the  continual  eviction  of 
the  agricultural  population  by  the  destruction 
of  their  cottages,  go  hand  in  hand.  The  more 
empty  the  district  is  of  men,  the  greater  is  its 
“relative  surplus  population/*  the  greater  is 
their  pressure  on  the  means  of  employment,  the 
greater  is  the  absolute  excess  of  the  agricultural 
population  over  the  means  for  housing  it,  the 
greater,  therefore,  in  the  villages  is  the  local 
surplus  population  and  the  most  pestilential 
packi  ng  together  of  human  beings.  The  packi  ng 
together  of  knots  of  men  in  scattered  little  vil¬ 
lages  and  sma'!  country  towns  corresponds  to 
the  forcible  draining  of  men  from  the  surface 
of  the  land.  The  continuous  superseding  of  the 
agricultural  labourers,  in  spite  of  their  dimin¬ 
ishing  number  and  the  increasing  mass  of  their 
products,  gives  birth  to  their  pauperism.  Their 
pauperism  is  ultimately  a  motive  to  their  evic¬ 
tion  and  the  chief  source  of  their  miserable 
housing,  which  breaks  down  their  last  power  of 
resistance  and  makes  them  mere  slaves  of  the 
landed  proprietors  and  the  farmers.1  Thus  the 
minimum  of  wages  becomes  a  law  of  Nature  to 
them.  On  the  other  hand,  the  land,  in  spite  of 
its  constant  “relative  surplus  population/*  is  at 
the  same  time  under-populated.  This  is  seen, 
not  only  locally  at  the  points  where  the  outflow 
of  men  to  towns,  mines,  railroad-making,  etc., 
is  most  marked.  It  is  to  be  seen  everywhere,  in 
harvest-time  as  well  as  in  spring  and  summer, 

1  “The  heaven-born  employment  of  the  hind  gives  dig¬ 
nity  even  to  this  position.  He  is  not  a  slave,  but  a  soldier  of 
eace,  and  deserves  his  place  in  married  men's  quarters  to 
e  provided  by  the  landlord,  who  has  claimed  a  power  of 
enforced  labour  similar  to  that  the  country  demands  of 
the  soldier.  He  no  more  receives  market  price  for  his  work 
than  does  the  soldier.  Like  the  soldier  he  is  caught  young, 
ignorant,  knowing  only  his  own  trade  and  his  own  locality. 
Early  marriage  and  the  operation  of  the  various  laws  of 
settlement  affect  the  one  as  enlistment  and  the  Mutiny 
Act  affect  the  other."  (Dr.  Hunter,  op . p.  1 32.)  Some¬ 
times  an  exceptionally  soft-hearted  landlord  relents  at  the 
solitude  he  has  created.  “It  is  a  melancholy  thing  to  stand 
alone  in  one's  country,"  said  Lord  Leicester,  when  compli¬ 
mented  on  the  completion  of  Hookham.  “I  look  around 
and  not  a  house  is  to  be  seen  but  mine.  I  am  the  giant  of 
Giant  Castle,  and  have  eat  up  all  my  neighbours.'* 


at  those  frequently  recurring  times  when  Eng¬ 
lish  agriculture,  so  careful  and  intensive,  wants 
extra  hands.  There  are  always  too  many  agri¬ 
cultural  labourers  for  the  ordinary,  and  always 
too  few  for  the  exceptional  or  temporary  needs 
of  the  cultivation  of  the  soil.2  Hence  we  find  in 
the  official  documents  contradictory  com¬ 
plaints  from  the  same  places  of  deficiency  and 
excess  of  labour  simultaneously.  The  tempora¬ 
ry  or  local  want  of  labour  brings  about  no  rise 
in  wages,  but  a  forcing  of  the  women  and  chil¬ 
dren  into  the  fields,  and  exploitation  at  an  age 
constantly  lowered.  As  soon  as  the  exploitation 
of  the  women  and  children  takes  place  on  a 
larger  scale,  it  becomes  in  turn  a  new  means  of 
making  a  surplus  population  of  the  male  agri¬ 
cultural  labourer  and  of  keeping  down  his  wage. 
In  the  cast  of  England  thrives  a  beautiful  fruit 
of  this  vicious  circle— the  so-called  gang  sys¬ 
tem,  to  which^I  must  briefly  return  here.3 

The  gang  system  obtains  almost  exclusively 
in  the  counties  of  Lincoln,  Huntingdon,  Cam¬ 
bridge,  Norfolk,  Suffolk,  and  Nottingham,  here 
and  there  in  the  neighbouring  counties  of 
Northampton,  Bedford,  and  Rutland.  Lincoln¬ 
shire  will  serve  us  as  an  example.  A  large  part  of 
this  county  is  new  land,  marsh  formerly,  or 
even,  as  in  others  of  the  eastern  counties  just 
named,  won  lately  from  the  sea.  The  steam- 
engine  has  worked  wonders  in  the  way  of  drain¬ 
age.  What  were  once  fens  and  sandbanks  bear 
now  a  luxuriant  sea  of  corn  and  the  highest  of 
rents.  The  same  thing  holds  of  the  alluvial  lands 
won  by  human  endeavour,  as  in  the  island  of 
Axholme  and  other  parishes  on  the  banks  of  the 
Trent.  In  proportion  as  the  new  farms  arose, 

2  A  similar  movement  is  seen  during  the  last  ten  years  in 
France;  in  proportion  as  capitalist  production  there  takes 
possession  of  agriculture,  it  drives  the  “surplus'*  agricul¬ 
tural  population  into  the  towns.  Here  also  we  find  deteri¬ 
oration  in  the  housing  and  other  conditions  at  the  source 
of  the  surplus  population.  On  the  special  proletariat fonder 
[rural  proletariat]  to  which  this  system  of  parcelling  out 
the  land  has  given  rise,  see,  among  others,  the  work  of 
Colin9,  already  quoted,  and  Karl  Marx  Der  Achtiehnte 
Brumaxre  dcs  Louis  Bonaparte,  2nd  edition,  Hamburg,  1869, 
pp.  56,  if.  In  1846,  the  town  population  in  France  was  rep¬ 
resented  by  24.42,  the  agricultural  by  75.58;  in  1861,  the 
town  by  28.86,  the  agricultural  by  71.4  per  cent.  During 
the  last  five  years,  the  diminution  of  the  agricultural  per¬ 
centage  of  the  population  has  been  yet  more  marked.  As 
early  as  1846,  Pierre  Dupont  in  his  Oucriers ,  sang: 
Ill-clothed,  our  dwellings  holes , 

Hiding  in  garrets  amid  rubble , 

We  live  with  owls  and  thieves. 

The  friends  of  shadows, 

*  Sixth  Report  of  the  Children's  Employment  Commission , 
published  at  the  end  of  March,  1867.  It  deals  solely  with 
the  agricultural. 


CAPITAL 


344 

not  only  were  no  new  cottages  built:  old  ones 
were  demolished,  and  the  supply  of  labour  had 
to  come  from  open  villages,  miles  away,  by  long 
roads  that  wound  along  the  sides  of  the  hills. 
There  alone  had  the  population  formerly  found 
shelter  from  the  incessant  floods  of  the  winter. 
The  labourers  that  dwell  on  the  farms  of  400 
to  1000  acres  (they  are  called  “confined  labour¬ 
ers”)  are  solely  employed  on  such  kinds  of  agri¬ 
cultural  work  as  is  permanent,  difficult,  and 
carried  on  by  aid  of  horses.  For  every  100  acres 
there  is,  on  an  average,  scarcely  one  cottage. 
A  fen  farmer,  for  example,  gave  evidence  before 
the  Commission  of  Inquiry:  “I  farm  320  acres, 
all  arable  land.  I  have  not  one  cottage  on  my 
farm.  I  have  only  one  labourer  on  my  farm  now. 
I  have  four  horsemen  lodging  about.  We  get 
light  work  done  by  gangs.”1  The  soil  requires 
much  light  field  labour,  such  as  weeding,  hoe¬ 
ing,  certain  processes  of  manuring,  removing  of 
stones,  etc.  This  is  done  by  the  gangs,  or  organ¬ 
ized  bands  that  dwell  in  the  open  villages. 

The  gang  consists  of  10  to  40  or  jo  persons, 
women,  young  persons  of  both  sexes  (13  to  18 
years  of  age,  although  the  boys  are  for  the  most 
part  eliminated  at  the  age  of  13),  and  children 
of  both  sexes  (6  to  13  years  of  age).  At  the  head 
is  the  gang-master,  always  an  ordinary  agricul¬ 
tural  labourer,  generally  what  is  called  “a  bad 
lot,”  a  scapegrace,  unsteady,  drunken,  but  with 
a  dash  of  enterprise  and  savoir  jairc .  He  is  the 
recruiting-sergeant  for  the  gang,  which  works 
under  him,  not  under  the  farmer.  He  generally 
arranges  with  the  latter  for  piece-work,  and  his 
income,  which  on  the  average  is  not  very  much 
above  that  of  an  ordinary  agricultural  labour¬ 
er,2  depends  almost  entirely  upon  the  dexterity 
with  which  he  manages  to  extract  within  the 
shortest  time  the  greatest  possible  amount  of 
labour  from  his  gang.  The  farmers  have  dis¬ 
covered  that  women  work  steadily  only  under 
the  direction  of  men,  but  that  women  and  chil¬ 
dren,  once  set  going,  impetuously  spend  their 
life-force— as  Fourier  knew— while  the  adult 
male  labourer  is  shrewd  enough  to  economize 
his  as  much  as  he  can.  The  gang-master  goes 
from  one  farm  to  another,  and  thus  employs  his 
gang  from  6  to  8  months  in  the  year.  Employ¬ 
ment  by  him  is,  therefore,  much  more  lucrative 
and  more  certain  for  the  labouring  families  than 

1  Children's  Employment  Commission ,  Sixth  Report,  Evi¬ 
dence,  p.  37,  note  173. 

*  Some  gang-masters,  however,  have  worked  themselves 
up  to  the  position  of  farmers  of  500  acres,  or  proprietors  of 
whole  rows  of  houses. 


employment  by  the  individual  farmer,  who  on¬ 
ly  employs  children  occasionally.  This  circum¬ 
stance  so  completely  rivets  his  influence  in  the 
open  villages  that  children  are  generally  only 
to  be  hired  through  his  instrumentality.  The 
lending  out  of  these  individually,  independent¬ 
ly  of  the  gang,  is  his  second  trade. 

The  “drawbacks”  of  the  system  are  the  over¬ 
work  of  the  children  and  young  persons,  the 
enormous  marches  that  they  make  daily  to  and 
from  the  farms,  5, 6,  and  sometimes  7  miles  dis¬ 
tant,  Anally,  the  demoralization  of  the  gang. 
Although  the  gang-master,  who,  in  some  dis¬ 
tricts  is  called  “the  driver,”  is  armed  with  a  long 
stick,  he  uses  it  but  seldom,  and  complaints  of 
brutal  treatment  are  exceptional.  He  is  a  dem¬ 
ocratic  emperor,  or  a  kind  of  Pied  Piper  of 
Hamelin.  He  must,  therefore,  be  popular  with 
his  subjects,  and  he  binds  them  to  himself  by 
the  charms  of  the  gipsy  life  under  his  direction. 
Coarse  freedom,  a  noisy  jollity,  and  obscenest 
impudence  give  attractions  to  the  gang.  Gen¬ 
erally  the  gang-master  pays  up  in  a  public 
house;  then  he  returns  home  at  the  head  of  the 
procession  reeling  drunk,  propped  up  right  and 
left  by  a  stalwart  virago,  while  children  and 
young  persons  bring  up  the  rear,  boisterous, 
and  singing  chafling  and  bawdy  songs.  On  the 
return  journey  what  Fourier  calls  phaneroga¬ 
mic ,8  is  the  order  of  the  day.  '£]ie  getting  with 
child  of  girls  of  13  and  14  by  their  male  com¬ 
panions  of  the  same  age  is  common.  The  open 
villages  which  supply  the  contingent  of  the 
gang  become  Sodoms  and  Gomorrahs,4  and 
have  twice  as  high  a  rat?  of  illegitimate  births 
as  the  rest  of  the  kingdom.  The  moral  character 
ofgirls  bred  in  these  schools,  when  married 
women,  was  shown  above.  Their  children,  when 
opium  does  not  give  them  the  Anishing  stroke, 
are  born  recruits  of  the  gang. 

The  gang,  in  its  classical  form  just  described, 
is  called  the  public,  common,  or  tramping  gang. 
For  there  are  also  private  gangs.  These  are 
made  up  in  the  same  way  as  the  common  gang, 
but  count  fewer  members,  and  wprk,  not  under 
a  gang-master,  but  under  some  old  farm  ser¬ 
vant  whom  the  farmer  does  not  know  how  to 
employ  in  any  better  way.  The  gipsy  fun  has 
vanished  here,  but,  according  to  all  witnesses, 
the  payment  and  treatment  of  the  children  is 
worse. 

The  gang  system,  which  during  the  last  years 

*  Sexual  indulgence. 

4  "Half  the  girls  of  Ludford  have  been  ruined  by  going 
out”  in  gangs.— Op,  cit ,  p.  6,  ft  3a. 


345 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION 


has  steadily  increased,1  clearly  does  not  exist 
for  the  sake  of  the  gang-master.  It  exists  for  the 
enrichment  of  the  large  farmers,2  and,  indirect¬ 
ly,  of  the  landlords.3  For  the  farmer  there  is  no 
more  ingenious  method  of  keeping  his  labourers 
well  below  the  normal  level,  and  yet  of  always 
having  an  extra  hand  ready  for  extra  work,  of 
extracting  the  greatest  possible  amount  of  la¬ 
bour  with  the  least  possible  amount  of  money,4 
and  of  making  adult  male  labour  “redundant.** 
From  the  exposition  already  made,  it  will  be 
understood  why,  on  the  one  hand,  a  greater  or 
less  lack  of  employment  for  the  agricultural  la¬ 
bourer  is  admitted,  while  on  the  other,  the 
gang  system  is  at  the  same  time  declared  “nec¬ 
essary**  on  account  of  the  want  of  adult  male  la¬ 
bour  and  its  migration  to  the  towns.6  The  clean¬ 
ly  weeded  land,  and  the  uncleanly  human 
weeds,  of  Lincolnshire,  are  pole  and  counter- 
pole  of  capitalistic  production.® 

1  “They  (gangs)  have  greatly  increased  of  late  years.  In 
some  places  they  are  said  to  have  been  introduced  at  com¬ 
paratively  late  dsjtr’t, ' '  others,  where  gangs . . .  have  been 
known  for  many  years  . . .  more  and  younger  children  are 
employed  in  them.*’ — Ibid. ,  p.  79,  §  174. 

8  “Small  farmers  never  employ  gangs."  “It  is  not  on 
poor  land,  but  on  land  which  affords  rent  of  from  40  to  50 
shillings  that  women  and  children  are  employed  in  the 
greatest  numbers."— /Ji*/.,  pp.  17, 14. 

1  To  one  of  these  gentlemen,  the  taste  of  his  rent  was  so 
grateful  that  he  indignantly  declared  to  the  Commission  of 
Inquiry  that  the  whole  hubbub  was  only  due  to  the  name 
of  the  system.  If,  instead  of  “gang,"  it  were  called  “the 
Agricultural  Juvenile  Industrial  Self-supporting  Associa¬ 
tion,"  everything  would  be  all  right. 

4  “Gang  work  is  cheaper  than  other  work;  that  is  why 
they  are  employed,"  says  a  former  gang-master  (Ibid.,  p. 
17,  $  14).  “The  gang  system  is  decidedly  the  cheapest  for 
the  farmer,  and  decidedly  the  worst  for  the  children,"  says 
a  farmer.  (Ibid.,  p.  16,  5  3.) 

h  “Undoubtedly  much  of  the  work  now  done  by  children 
in  gangs  used  to  be  done  by  men  and  women.  More  men 
are  out  of  work  now  where  children  and  women  are  em¬ 
ployed  than  formerly."  (Ibid.,  p.  43,  n.  202.)  On  the  other 
hand,  “the  labour  question  in  some  agricultural  districts, 
particularly  the  arable,  is  becoming  so  serious  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  emigration  and  the  facility  afforded  by  railways 
for  getting  to  large  towns,  that  I"  (the  “1"  is  the  steward 
of  a  great  lord)  “think  the  services  of  children  are  most  in¬ 
dispensable."  (Ibid.,  p.  80,  n.  180.)  For  the  “labour  ques¬ 
tion"  in  F.nglish  agricultural  districts,  differently  from  the 
rest  of  the  civilized  world,  means  the  landlords'  and  farm¬ 
ers’  question,  viz.,  how  it  is  possible,  despite  an  always  in¬ 
creasing  exodus  of  the  agricultural  folk,  to  keep  up  a  suf¬ 
ficient  relative  surplus  population  in  the  country,  and  by 
means  of  it  keep  the  wages  of  the  agricultural  labourer  at 
a  minimum? 

'  The  Public  Health  Report,  where  in  dealing  with  the 
subject  of  children’s  mortality,  the  gang  system  is  treated 
in  passing,  remains  unknown  to  the  press,  and,  therefore, 
to  the  English  public.  On  the  other  hand,  the  last  Report  of 
the  Children's  Employment  Commission  afforded  the  press 
sensational  copy  always  welcome.  Whilst  the  liberal  press 


f.  Ireland 

In  concluding  this  section,  we  must  travel  for 
a  moment  to  Ireland.  First,  the  main  facts  of 
the  case. 

The  population  of  Ireland  had,  in  1841, 
reached  8,222,664;  in  1851,  it  had  dwindled  to 
6,623,985;  in  1861,  to  5,850,309;  in  1866,  to  5J2 
millions,  nearly  to  its  level  in  1801.  The  diminu¬ 
tion  began  with  the  famine  year,  1846,  so  that 
Ireland,  in  less  than  twenty  years,  lost  more 
than  Vx6  of  its  people.7  Its  total  emigration  from 
May,  1851,  to  July,  1865,  numbered  1,591,487; 
the  emigration  during  the  years  1861  to  1865 
was  more  than  half  a  million.  The  number  of 
inhabited  houses  fell,  from  1851  to  1861,  by 
52,990.  From  1851  to  1861,  the  number  of  hold¬ 
ings  of  15  to  30  acres  increased  61,000;  that  of 
holdings  over  30  acres,  109,000;  whilst  the  total 
number  of  all. farms  fell  120,000,  a  fall,  there¬ 
fore,  solely  due  to  the  suppression  of  farms  un¬ 
der  15  acres— i.e.,  to  their  centralization. 


asked  how  the  fine  gentlemen  and  ladies,  and  the  well- 
paid  clergy  of  the  State  Church,  with  whom  Lincolnshire 
swarms,  could  allow  such  a  system  to  arise  on  their  estates, 
under  their  very  eyes,  they  who  send  out  expressly  mis¬ 
sions  to  the  antipodes,  “for  the  improvement  of  the  morals 
of  South  Sea  Islanders"— the  more  refined  press  confined 
itself  to  reflections  on  the  coarse  degradation  of  the  agri¬ 
cultural  population  who  are  capable  of  selling  their  chil¬ 
dren  into  such  slavery!  Under  the  accursed  conditions  to 
which  these  “delicate"  people  condemn  the  agricultural 
labourer,  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  he  ate  his  own  chil¬ 
dren.  What  is  really  wonderful  is  the  healthy  integrity  of 
character  he  has,  in  great  part,  retained.  The  official  re¬ 
ports  prove  that  the  parents,  even  in  the  gang  districts, 
loathe  the  gang  system.  “There  is  much  in  the  evidence 
that  show  that  the  parents  of  the  children  would,  in  many 
instances,  be  glad  to  be  aided  by  the  requirements  of  a  legal 
obligation,  to  resist  the  pressure  and  the  temptations  to 
which  they  are  often  subject.  They  are  liable  to  be  urged, 
at  times  by  the  parish  officers,  at  times  by  employers,  un¬ 
der  threats  of  being  themselves  discharged,  to  be  taken  to 
work  at  an  age  when  . . .  school  attendance  . . .  would  be 
manifestly  to  their  greater  advantage.  ...  All  that  time 
and  strength  wasted;  all  the  suffering  from  extra  and  un¬ 
profitable  fatigue  produced  to  the  labourer  and  to  his  chil¬ 
dren;  every  instance  in  which  the  parent  may  have  traced 
the  moral  ruin  of  his  child  to  the  undermining  of  delicacy 
by  the  overcrowding  of  cottages,  or  to  the  contaminating 
influences  of  the  public  gang,  must  have  been  so  many  in¬ 
centives  to  feelings  in  the  minds  of  the  labouring  poor  which 
can  be  well  understood,  and  which  it  would  be  needless  to 
particularize.  They  must  be  conscious  that  much  bodily 
and  mental  pain  has  thus  been  inflicted  upon  them  from 
causes  for  which  they  were  in  no  way  answerable;  to  which, 
had  it  been  in  their  power,  they  would  have  in  no  way  con¬ 
sented;  and  against  which  they  were  powerless  to  struggle." 
(Ibid.,  p.  xx,  note  82,  and  xxiii,  note  96.) 

7  Population  of  Ireland:  1801,  5,319,867  persons;  1811, 
6, 084,996;  1821,6,869,544;  183*.  7*818,347;  1841,8,222,- 
664. 


346 


CAPITAL 


Livestock 


Table  A 


HORSES  CATTLE 

Total  Total 

Year  Number  Decrease  Number  Decrease  Increase 


i860 

619,811 

3,606,374 

1861 

614,232 

5.993 

3,471.688 

*38,3*6 

1862 

602,894 

"038 

3.254.890 

216,798 

1863 

579.978 

22,916 

3>*44,23* 

110,695 

1864 

562,158 

17,820 

3,262,294 

118,063 

1865 

547.867 

14,291 

3>493j4'4 

23I»I2° 

Year 

Total 

dumber 

SHEEP 

Decrease 

Increase 

Total 

Number 

PIGS 

Decrease 

Increase 

i860 

3,542,080 

1,271,072 

1861 

3,556,05° 

*3,97° 

1,102,042 

169,030 

1862 

3^56,  >32 

99,9*8 

V54.324 

52,282 

1863 

3,308,204 

147,982 

1,067,458 

86,866 

1864 

3,366,941 

58,737 

1,058,480 

8,978 

1865 

3,688,742 

321,801 

1,299,893 

24M*3 

The  decrease  of  the  population  was  naturally 
accompanied  by  a  decrease  in  the  mass  of  prod¬ 
ucts.  For  our  purpose,  it  suffices  to  consider  the 
five  years  from  1861  to  1865,  during  which  over 
half  a  million  emigrated,  and  the  absolute  num¬ 
ber  of  people  sank  by  more  than  one-third  of  a 
million. 

From  the  above  table  it  results: 


HORSES  CATTLE  SHEEP  PIGS 

Absolute  Absolute  Absolute  Absolute 

Decrease  Decrease  Increase  Increase 

7  2,358  |  116,626  |  146,608  |  28,819* 

Let  us  now  turn  to  agriculture,  which  yields 
the  means  of  subsistence  for  cattle  and  for  men. 

1  The  result  would  be  found  yet  more  unfavourable  if 
we  went  further  back.  Thus:  Sheep  in  1865, 3,688,742,  but 
in  1856,  3,694,294.  Pigs  in  1865,  1,299,  893,  but  in  1858, 
1,409,883. 


In  the  following  table  is  calculated  the  decrease 
or  increase  for  each  separate  year,  as  compared 
with  its  immediate  predecessor.  The  “cereal 
crops**  include  wheat,  oats,  barley,  rye,  beans, 
and  peas;  the  “green  crops,”  potatoes,  turnips, 
mangolds,  beetroot,  cabbages,  carrots,  par¬ 
snips,  vetches,  etc. 

In  the  year  1865,  127,470  additional  acres 
came  under  the  heading  “grass  land,*’  chiefly 
because  the  area  under  the  heading  of  “bog  and 
waste  unoccupied,”  decreased  by  101 ,543  acres. 
If  we  compare  1865  with  1864,  there  is  a  de¬ 
crease  in  cereals  of  246,667  quarters,  of  which 
48,999  were  wheat,  160,605  oats,  29,892  barley, 
etc.:  the  decrease  in  potatoes  was  446,398  tons, 
although  the  area  of  their  cultivation  increased 
in  1865. 

From  the  movement  of  population  and  the 
agricultural  produce  of  Ireland  we  pass  to  the 
movement  in  the  purse  of  its  landlords,  larger 


Table  B 


Increase  or  Decrease  in  the  Area  Under  Crops  and  Grass  in  Acreage 


Year 

Cereal 

Crops 

Green 

Crops 

Grass  and 
Clover 

Flax 

Total  Culti¬ 
vated  Land 

Acres 

Acres 

Acres 

Acres 

Acres 

1861 

-  15,701 

—  36,974 

-  47,969 

%  19,27* 

-  81,873 

1862 

-  7*»734 

-  74,785 

%  6,623 

%  2,055 

-138,841 

1863 

-144,719 

-  19,358 

%  7,724 

%  63,922 

-  92,43* 

1864 

-122,437 

-  2,317 

%  47,486 

%  87,761 

%  *0,493 

1865 

-  72.45° 

%  25,241 

%  68,970 

-  5°, *59 

—  28,218 

1861-65 

—428,041 

—107,984 

%  82,834 

%  122,8  50 

-330,860 

% = increase.  —  =*  decrease. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  347 

Table  C 

Increase  or  Decrease  in  the  Area  under  Cultivation,  Product  per  Acre,  and  Total 


Product  of  1 865  Compared  with  1 864 

Product 

1864 

1865 

Increase 

Decrease 

AREA  OF  CULTIVATED  LAND 

Wheat 

276,483 

266,989 

— 

9,494 

Oats 

1,814,886 

1,745,228 

— 

69,658 

Barley 

172,700 

177,102 

4,402 

— 

Bere 

Rye 

|  8,894 

10,091 

l>*97 

— 

Potatoes 

1,039.724 

1,066,260 

26,536 

— 

Turnips 

337.355 

334,21* 

— 

3,143 

Mangold-wurzel 

14.073 

14,839 

1  316 

— 

Cabbages 

31.821 

33»622 

1,801 

— 

Flax 

301,693 

251,433 

— 

50,260 

Hay 

1,609,569 

1,678,493 

68,924 

— 

PRODUCE  PER  ACRE  ' 

Wheat 

cwt. 

*3-3 

13.0 

— 

o-3 

Oats 

cwt. 

12.1 

12.3 

0.2 

— 

Barley 

cwt. 

15.9 

14.9 

— 

1.0 

Bere 

cwt. 

16.4 

14.8 

— 

1.6 

Rye 

cwt. 

8.5 

10.4 

*•9 

— 

Potatoes 

tons 

4.1 

3.6 

— 

0.5 

Turnips 

tons 

10.3 

9-9 

— 

0.4 

Mangold-wurzel 

tons 

10.5 

13-3 

2.8 

— 

Cabbages 

tons 

9-3 

10.4 

1.1 

— 

Flax 

st.  (14  lb.) 

34-2 

25.2 

— 

9.0 

Hay 

tons 

1.6 

1.8 

0.2 

— 

TOTAL  PRODUCT 

Wheat 

qrs. 

875,782 

826,783 

— 

48,999 

Oats 

qrs. 

7.826,332 

7,659.727 

— 

166,605 

Barley 

qrs. 

761,909 

732,017 

— 

29,892 

Bere 

qrs. 

15,160 

13.989 

— 

1,171 

Rye 

qrs. 

12,680 

18,364 

5,684 

— 

Potatoes 

tons 

4,312,388 

3,865,990 

— 

446,398 

Turnips 

tons 

3.467.659 

3, 3° ‘,683 

— 

165,976 

Mangold-wurzel 

tons 

147.284 

191.937 

44,653 

— 

Cabbages 

tons 

297.375 

350,252 

52,877 

— 

Flax 

st.  (14  lb.) 

64.506 

39,561 

— 

24,945 

Hay 

tons 

2,607,153 

3,068,707 

46i,554 

_i 

farmers,  and  industrial  capitalists.  It  is  re-  its— i.e.,  the  incomes  of  lawyers,  doctors,  etc.; 

fleeted  in  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  income-tax  and  the  Schedules  C  and  E,  in  which  no  special 

figures.  It  may  be  remembered  that  Schedule  D  details  are  given,  include  the  incomes  of  em- 

(profits  with  the  exception  of  those  of  farmers),  ployees,  officers,  State  sinecurists,  State  fund- 

includes  also  the  so-called  “professional”  prof-  holders,  etc. 

1  The  data  of  the  text  are  put  together  from  the  materials  nips,  mangold-wurzel,  and  the  like;  a  decrease  in  the  area 

of  the  Agricultural  Statistics ,  Ireland ,  General  Abstracts ,  under  cultivation  for  wheat  of  16,000  acres;  oats,  14,000; 

Dublin,  for  the  years  1 860,  et  seq.,  and  Agricultural  Statis -  barley  and  rye,  4*000;  potatoes,  66,632;  flax,  34,667;  grass, 

tics ,  Ireland ,  Tables  showing  the  estimated  average  produce ,  clover,  vetches,  rape-seed,  30,000.  The  soil  under  cultiya- 

etc.,  Dublin,  1866.  These  statistics  are  official,  and  laid  tion  for  wheat  shows  for  the  last  five  years  the  following 

before  Parliament  annually.— Note  to  2nd  edition:  The  stages  of  decrease:  1868,  285,000  acres;  1869,  280,000; 

official  statistics  for  the  year  1872  show,  as  compared  with  1870,  259,000;  1871,  244,000;  1872,  228,000.  For  1872  we 

1871,  a  decrease  in  area  under  cultivation  of  134,915  acres.  find,  in  round  numbers,  an  increase  of  2,600  horses,  80,000 

An  increase  occurred  in  the  cultivation  of  green  crops,  tur-  horned  cattle,  68,609  sheep,  and  a  decrease  cf  236,000  pigs. 


348 


CAPITAL 


Table  D 

The  Income-Tax  on  the  Subjoined  Incomes  in  Pounds  Sterling 


Schedule  D, 

Si  hedule  A,  Schedule  B,  Industrial ,  etc..  Total  Schedules, 

Rent  of  Land  Farmers'  Profits  Profits  A  to  E 


i860 

13,893,829 

2, "65.387 

4,891,652 

22,962,885 

1861 

I3i°°3»<54 

2,773.644 

4,836,203 

22,998,394 

1862 

i3.398,938 

2,937.899 

4,858,800 

23,597.574 

1863 

i3>494»°9i 

2,938.823 

4,846,497 

23,658,631 

1864 

i3»470,7°o 

2,930,874 

4,546,147 

23.236,298 

1865 

13,801,616 

2,946,07a 

4,850,199 

23,930,340* 

Under  Schedule  D,  the  average  annual  in¬ 
crease  of  income  from  1853  to  1864  was  only 
0.93;  whilst,  in  the  same  period,  in  Great  Brit¬ 
ain,  it  was  4.58.  The  following  table  shows  the 
distribution  of  the  profits  (with  the  excep¬ 
tion  of  those  of  farmers)  for  the  years  1864  and 
1865: 

Table  E 

Schedule  D,  Income  from  Profits  (over  £60) 
in  Ireland 

Total  yearly  income  of— 

1864  £4,368,610  divided  among  17,467  persons 

1865  £49669,979  44  44  18,081  44 

Yearly  income  over  £60  and  under  £100— 

1864  £  238,626  divided  among  5,015  persons 

1865  £  222,575  44  44  4,703  44 

Of  the  yearly  total  income- 

1864  £j, 979,066  divided  among  11,321  persons 

1865  £2,028,471  44  44  12,184  44 


Remainder  of  the  total  yearly  income —  • 

1864  £2,150,818  divided  among  1,131  persons 

iqAi-  ««  “  t  *« 


I865 

£2,418,933 

M 

1,194 

4* 

£1,083,906 

it 

CC 

910 

CC 

£1,066,912 

ft 

CC 

121 

CC 

Of  these 

£  430,535 

CC 

CC 

105 

CC 

1864 

£  646,377 

CC 

CC 

26 

CC 

£  262,610 

CC 

CC 

3 

“1 

£1,097,937 

CC 

CC 

1,044 

CC 

£1,320,996 

CC 

CC 

186 

CC 

Of  these 

£  584,458 

CC 

CC 

122 

CC 

1865 

£  736,448 

CC 

CC 

28 

CC 

£  264,528 

CC 

CC 

3 

CC 

England,  a  country  with  fully  developed  cap¬ 
italist  production,  and  pre-eminently  indus¬ 
trial,  would  have  bled  to  death  with  such  a 
drain  of  population  as  Ireland  has  suffered.  But 
Ireland  is  at  present  only  an  agricultural  dis¬ 
trict  of  England,  marked  off  by  a  wide  channel 

1  Tenth  Report  of  the  Commissioners  of  Inland  Revenue , 
London,  18  66. 

*  The  total  yearly  income  under  Schedule  D  is  different 
in  this  table  from  that  which  appears  in  the  preceding  ones, 
because  of  certain  deductions  allowed  by  law. 


from  the  country  to  which  it  yields  corn,  wool, 
cattle,  industrial  and  military  recruits. 

The  depopulation  of  Ireland  has  thrown 
much  of  the  land  out  of  cultivation,  has  greatly 
diminished  the  produce  of  the  soil,8  and,  in  spite 
of  the  greater  area  devoted  to  cattle  breeding, 
has  brought  about  in  some  of  its  branches  an 
absolute  diminution,  in  others,  an  advance 
scarcely  worthy  of  mention  and  constantly  in¬ 
terrupted  by  retrogressions.  Nevertheless, with 
the  fall  in  numbers  of  the  population,  rents  and 
farmers'  profits  rose,  although  the  latter  not  so 
steadily  as  the  former.  The  reason  of  this  is 
easily  comprehensible.  On  the  one  hand,  with 
the  throwing  of  small  holdings  into  large  ones, 
and  the  change  of  arable  into  pasture  land,  a 
larger  part  of  the  whole  produce  was  trans¬ 
formed  into  surplus  produce.  The  surplus  pro¬ 
duce  increased,  although  the  total  produce,  of 
which  it  formed  a  fraction,  decreased.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  money  value  of  this  surplus 
produce  increased  yet  more  rapidly  than  its 
mass,  in  consequence  of  the  rise  in  the  English 
market  price  of  meat,  wool,  etc.,  during  the  last 
twenty,  and  especially  during  the  last  ten 
years. 

The  scattered  means  of  production  that  serve 
the  producers  themselves  as  means  of  employ¬ 
ment  and  of  subsistence,  without  expanding 
their  own  value  by  the  incorporation  of  the  la¬ 
bour  of  others,  are  no  more  capital  than  a  prod¬ 
uct  consumed  by  its  own  producer  is  a  com¬ 
modity.  If,  with  the  mass  of  the  population, 
that  of  the  means  of  production  employed  in 
agriculture  also  diminished,  the  mass  of  the 
capital  employed  in  agriculture  increased,  be¬ 
cause  a  part  of  the  means  of  production  that 
were  formerly  scattered,  was  concentrated  and 
turned  into  capital. 

1  If  the  product  also  diminishes  relatively  per  acre,  it 
mus*  not  be  forgotten  that  for  a  century  and  a  half  Eng¬ 
land  has  indirectly  exported  the  soil  of  Ireland,  without  as 
much  as  allowing  its  cultivators  the  means  for  making  up 
the  constituents  of  the  soil  that  had  been  exhausted. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  349 


The  total  capital  of  Ireland  outside  agricul¬ 
ture,  employed  in  industry  and  trade,  accumu¬ 
lated  during  the  last  two  decades  slowly,  and 
with  great  and  constantly  recurring  fluctua¬ 
tions;  so  much  the  more  rapidly  did  the  concen¬ 
tration  of  its  individual  constituents  develop. 
And,  however  small  its  absolute  increase,  in 
proportion  to  the  dwindling  population  it  had 
increased  largely. 

Here,  then,  under  our  own  eyes  and  on  a 
large  scale,  a  process  is  revealed  than  which 
nothing  more  excellent  could  be  wished  for  by 
orthodox  economy  for  the  support  of  its  dog¬ 
ma:  that  misery  springs  from  absolute  surplus 
population,  and  that  equilibrium  is  re-estab¬ 
lished  by  depopulation.  This  is  a  far  more  im¬ 
portant  experiment  than  was  the  plague  in  the 
middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  so  belauded 
of  Malthusians.  Note  further  that,  if  only  the 
nai’vet6  of  the  schoolmaster  could  apply  the 
standard  of  the  fourteenth,  to  the  conditions  of 
production  and  population  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  this  naivet6,  into  the  bargain,  over¬ 
looked  the  face  that  whilst,  after  the  plague  and 
the  decimation  that  accompanied  it,  followed 
on  this  side  of  the  channel,  in  England,  enfran¬ 
chisement  and  enrichment  of  the  agricultural 
population,  on  that  side,  in  France,  followed 
greater  servitude  and  more  misery.1 

The  Irish  famine  of  1846  killed  more  than  a 
million  people,  but  it  killed  poor  devils  only.  To 
the  wealth  of  the  country  it  did  not  the  slightest 
damage.  The  exodus  of  the  next  twenty  years, 
an  exodus  still  constantly  increasing,  did  not, 
as,  for  example,  the  Thirty  Years*  War,  deci¬ 
mate,  along  with  the  human  beings,  their  means 
of  production.  Irish  genius  discovered  an  alto¬ 
gether  new  way  of  spiriting  a  poor  people  thou¬ 
sands  of  miles  away  from  the  scene  of  its  misery. 
The  exiles  transplanted  to  the  United  States 
send  home  sums  of  money  every  year  as  travel¬ 
ling  expenses  for  those  left  behind.  Every  troop 
that  emigrates  one  year  draws  another  after  it 
the  next.  Thus,  instead  of  costing  Ireland  any¬ 
thing,  emigration  forms  one  of  the  most  lucra¬ 
tive  branches  of  its  export  trade.  Finally,  it  is  a 
systematic  process,  which  does  not  simply 
make  a  passing  gap  in  the  population,  but  sucks 

1  As  Ireland  is  regarded  as  the  promised  land  of  the 
“principle  of  population,”  A.  Sadler,  before  the  publica¬ 
tion  of  his  work  on  population,  issued  his  famous  book, 
Ireland,  its  Evils  and  their  Remedies ,  (and  edition,  London, 
1829).  Here,  by  comparison  of  the  statistics  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  provinces  and  of  the  individual  counties  in  each 
province,  he  proves  that  the  misery  there  is  not,  as  Mal- 
thus  would  have  it,  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  the 
population,  but  in  inverse  ratio  to  this. 


out  of  it  every  year  more  people  than  are  re¬ 
placed  by  the  births,  so  that  the  absolute  level 
of  the  population  falls  year  by  year.2 

What  were  the  consequences  for  the  Irish  la¬ 
bourers  left  behind  and  freed  from  the  surplus 
population?  That  the  relative  surplus  popula¬ 
tion  is  today  as  great  as  before  1 846;  that  wages 
are  just  as  low;  that  the  oppression  of  the  la¬ 
bourers  has  increased;  that  misery  is  forcing  the 
country  towards  a  new  crisis.  The  facts  are 
simple.  The  revolution  in  agriculture  has  kept 
pace  with  emigration.  The  production  of  rela¬ 
tive  surplus  population  has  more  than  kept 
pace  with  the  absolute  depopulation.  A  glance 
at  Table  C  shows  that  the  change  of  arable  to 
pasture  land  must  work  yet  more  acutely  in 
Ireland  than  in  England.  In  England,  the  cul¬ 
tivation  of  green  crops  increases  with  the  breed¬ 
ing  of  cattle;  in  Ireland,  it  decreases.  Whilst 
large  number  of  acres  that  were  formerly  tilled 
lie  idle  or  are  turned  permanently  into  pasture, 
a  great  part  of  the  waste  land  and  peat  bogs 
that  were  unused  formerly,  become  of  service 
for  the  extension  of  cattle  breeding.  The  smaller 
and  medium  farmers— I  reckon  among  these  all 
who  do  not  cultivate  more  than  100  acres— still 
make  up  about  8/xoof  the  whole  number.®  They 
are,  one  after  the  other,  and  with  a  degree  of 
force  unknown  before,  crushed  by  the  competi¬ 
tion  of  an  agriculture  managed  by  capital,  and 
therefore  they  continually  furnish  new  recruits 
to  the  class  of  wage  labourers.  The  one  great 
industry  of  Ireland,  linen  manufacture,  re¬ 
quires  relatively  few  adult  men  and  only  em¬ 
ploys  altogether,  in  spite  of  its  expansion  since 
the  price  of  cotton  rose  in  1861  to  1866,  a  com¬ 
paratively  insignificant  part  of  the  population. 
Like  all  other  great  modern  industries,  it  con¬ 
stantly  produces,  by  incessant  fluctuations,  a 
relative  surplus  population  within  its  own 
sphere,  even  with  an  absolute  increase  in  the 
mass  of  human  beings  absorbed  by  it.  The  mis¬ 
ery  of  the  agricultural  population  forms  the 
pedestal  for  gigantic  shirt  factories,  whose 
armies  of  labourers  are,  for  the  most  part,  scat¬ 
tered  over  the  country.  Here,  we  encounter 
again  the  system  described  above  of  domestic 
industry,  which  in  under-payment  and  over¬ 
work,  possesses  its  own  systematic  means  for 
creating  supernumerary  labourers.  Finally,  al¬ 
though  the  depopulation  has  not  such  destruc- 

2  Between  1851  and  1874,  the  total  number  of  emigrants 
amounted  to  2,325,922. 

1  According  to  a  table  in  Murphy’s  Ireland ,  Industrial , 
Political ,  and  Social ,  1870, 94.6  %  of  the  holdings  do  not 
reach  100  acres,  5.4  exceed  100  acres. 


CAPITAL 


350 

tive  consequences  as  would  result  in  a  country 
with  fully  developed  capitalistic  production,  it 
does  not  go  on  without  constant  reaction  upon 
the  home  market.  The  gap  which  emigration 
causes  here,  limits  not  only  the  local  demand  for 
labour,  but  also  the  incomes  of  small  shopkeep¬ 
ers,  artisans,  and  tradespeople  generally.  Hence 
the  diminution  in  incomes  between  £60  and 
£100  in  Table  E. 

A  clear  statement  of  the  condition  of  the  ag¬ 
ricultural  labourers  in  Ireland  is  to  be  found  in 
the  reports  of  the  Irish  Poor  Law  Inspectors.1 
Officials  of  a  government  which  is  maintained 
only  by  bayonets  and  by  a  state  of  siege,  now 
open,  now  disguised,  they  have  to  observe  all 
the  precautions  of  language  that  their  col¬ 
leagues  in  England  disdain.  In  spite  of  this, 
however,  they  do  not  let  their  government  cra¬ 
dle  itself  in  illusions.  According  to  them  the  rate 
of  wages  in  the  country,  still  very  low,  has  with¬ 
in  the  last  twenty  years  risen  50  to  60%,  and 
stands  now,  on  the  average,  at  6s.  to  9 s.  per 
week.  But  behind  this  apparent  rise  is  hidden 
an  actual  fall  in  wages,  for  it  does  not  corres¬ 
pond  at  all  to  the  rise  in  price  of  the  necessary 
means  of  subsistence  that  has  taken  place  in  the 
meantime.  For  proof,  the  following  extract 
from  the  official  accounts  of  an  Irish  work- 
house. 


Average  Weekly  Cost  per  Head 


Provisions 

and  Nec- 

Year  Ended 

essartes 

Clothing 

Total 

29th  Sept.,  1849 

u.  $yid. 

3d- 

is.  6 yid. 

14  1869 

is.  yyid. 

6J. 

3s-  l'S*d. 

The  price  of  the  necessary  means  of  subsistence 
is  therefore  fully  twice,  and  that  of  clothing  ex¬ 
actly  twice,  as  much  as  they  were  twenty  years 
before. 

Even  apart  from  this  disproportion,  the  mere 
comparison  of  the  rate  of  wages  expressed  in 
gold  would  give  a  result  far  from  accurate.  Be¬ 
fore  the  famine,  the  great  mass  of  agricultural 
wages  were  paid  in  kind,  only  the  smallest  part 
in  money;  today,  payment  in  money  is  the  rule. 
From  this  it  follows  that,  whatever  the  amount 
of  the  real  wage,  its  money  rate  must  rise.  “Pre¬ 
vious  to  the  famine,  the  labourer  enjoyed  his 
cabin  . . .  with  a  rood,  or  half-acre  or  acre  of 
land,  and  facilities  for  ...  a  crop  of  potatoes. 
He  was  able  to  rear  his  pig  and  keep  fowl. . . . 
But  they  now  have  to  buy  bread,  and  they  have 

1  Reports  Jrom  the  Poor  Law  Inspectors  on  the  Wages  of 
Agricultural  Labourers  in  Dublin ,  1870.— See  also  Agricul¬ 
tural  Labourers  (Ireland)  Return ,  etc.,  8  March,  1862. 


no  refuse  upon  which  they  can  feed  a  pig  or 
fowl,  and  they  have  consequently  no  benefit 
from  the  sale  of  a  pig,  fowl,  or  eggs.”2  In  fact, 
formerly,  the  agricultural  labourers  were  but 
the  smallest  of  the  small  farmers,  and  formed 
for  the  most  part  a  kind  of  rear-guard  of  the 
medium  and  large  farms  on  which  they  found 
employment.  Only  since  the  catastrophe  of 
1 846  have  they  begun  to  form  a  fraction  of  the 
class  of  purely  wage  labourers,  a  special  class, 
connected  with  its  wage-masters  only  by  mone¬ 
tary  relations. 

We  know  what  were  the  conditions  of  their 
dwellings  in  1846.  Since  then  they  have  grown 
yet  worse.  A  part  of  the  agricultural  labourers, 
which,  however,  grows  less  day  by  day,  dwells 
still  on  the  holdings  of  the  farmers  in  over¬ 
crowded  huts  whose  hideousness  far  surpasses 
the  worst  that  the  English  agricultural  labour¬ 
ers  offered  us  in  this  way.  And  this  holds  gen¬ 
erally  with  the  exception  of  certain  tracts  of 
Ulster;  in  the  south,  in  the  counties  of  Cork, 
Limerick,  Kilkenny,  etc.;  in  the  east,  in  Wick¬ 
low,  Wexford,  etc.;  in  the  centre  of  Ireland,  in 
King’s  and  Queen’s  County,  Dublin,  etc.;  in  the 
west,  in  Sligo,  Roscommon,  Mayo,  Galway,  etc. 
“The  agricultural  labourers*  huts,”  an  inspec¬ 
tor  cries  out,  “are  a  disgrace  to  the  Christianity 
and  to  the  civilization  of  this  country.”3  In  or¬ 
der  to  increase  the  attractions  of  these  holes  for 
the  labourers,  the  pieces  ofjand  belonging 
thereto  from  time  immemorial  are  systemati¬ 
cally  confiscated.  “The  mere  sense  that  they 
exist  subject  to  this  species  of  ban,  on  the  part 
of  the  landlords  and  their  agents,  has  .  . .  given 
birth  in  the  minds  of  the  labourers  to  corres¬ 
ponding  sentiments  of  antagonism  and  dissatis¬ 
faction  towards  those  by  whom  they  are  thus 
led  to  regard  themselves  as  being  treated  as  . . . 
a  proscribed  race.”4 

The  first  act  of  the  agricultural  revolution 
was  to  sweep  away  the  huts  situated  on  the 
field  of  labour.  This  was  done  on  the  largest 
scale  and  as  if  in  obedience  to  a  command  from 
on  high.  Thus  many  labourers  were  compelled 
to  seek  shelter  in  villages  and  towns.  There  they 
were  thrown  like  refuse  into  garrets,  holes,  cel¬ 
lars,  and  corners,  in  the  worst  back  slums. 
Thousands  of  Irish  families,  who  (according  to 
the  testimony  of  the  English,  eaten  up  as  these 
are  with  national  prejudice)  are  notable  for 
their  rare  attachment  to  the  domestic  hearth, 
for  their  gaiety,  and  the  purity  of  their  home 
life,  found  themselves  suddenly  transplanted 
into  hotbeds  of  vice.  The  men  are  now  obliged 

*  Op.  cit.,  p.  29.  *  Ibid ,  p.  12.  4  Ibid,  p.  12. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  351 


to  seek  work  of  the  neighbouring  farmers  and 
are  only  hired  by  the  day,  and  therefore  under 
the  most  precarious  form  of  wage.  Hence  “they 
sometimes  have  long  distances  to  go  to  and 
from  work,  often  get  wet,  and  suffer  much  hard¬ 
ship,  not  unfrequently  ending  in  sickness,  dis¬ 
ease,  and  want.”1 

“The  towns  have  had  to  receive  from  year  to 
year  what  was  deemed  to  be  the  surplus  labour 
of  the  rural  division”;2  and  then  people  still 
wonder  “there  is  still  a  surplus  of  labour  in  the 
towns  and  villages,  and  either  a  scarcity  or  a 
threatened  scarcity  in  some  of  the  country  di¬ 
visions.”3  The  truth  is  that  this  want  only  be¬ 
comes  perceptible  “in  harvest  time,  or  during 
spring,  or  at  such  times  as  agricultural  oper¬ 
ations  are  carried  on  with  activity;  at  other 
periods  of  the  year  many  hands  are  idle”;4  that 
“from  the  digging  out  of  the  main  crop  of  po¬ 
tatoes  in  October  until  the  early  spring  follow¬ 
ing  .  .  .  there  is  no  employment  for  them”;3 
and,  further,  that  during  the  active  times  they 
“are  subject  to  broken  days  and  to  all  kinds 
of  interruptions 

These  results  of  the  agricultural  revolution 
— i.e.,  the  change  of  arable  into  pasture  land, 
the  use  of  machinery,  the  most  rigorous  econ¬ 
omy  of  labour,  etc. — are  still  further  aggra¬ 
vated  by  the  model  landlords,  who,  instead  of 
spending  their  rents  in  other  countries,  conde¬ 
scend  to  live  in  Ireland  on  their  demesnes.  In 
order  that  the  law  of  supply  and  demand  may 
not  be  broken,  these  gentlemen  draw  their  “la¬ 
bour  supply  . . .  chiefly  from  their  small  ten¬ 
ants,  who  are  obliged  to  attend  when  required 
to  do  the  landlord's  work,  at  rates  of  wages,  in 
many  instances,  considerably  under  the  current 
rates  paid  to  ordinary  labourers,  and  without 
regard  to  the  inconvenience  or  loss  to  the  tenant 
of  being  obliged  to  neglect  his  own  business  at 
critical  periods  of  sowing  or  reaping.”7 

The  uncertainty  and  irregularity  of  employ¬ 
ment,  the  constant  return  and  long  duration  of 
gluts  of  labour,  all  these  symptoms  of  a  relative 
surplus  population  figure,  therefore,  in  the  re¬ 
ports  of  the  Poor  Law  administration,  as  so 
many  hardships  of  the  agricultural  proletariat. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  we  met  with  a  simi¬ 
lar  spectacle  in  the  English  agricultural  prole¬ 
tariat.  But  the  difference  is  that  in  England,  an 
industrial  country,  the  industrial  reserve  re¬ 
cruits  itself  from  the  country  districts,  whilst 
in  Ireland,  an  agricultural  country,  the  agricul- 

1  Ibid.,  p.  25.  2  Ibid.,  p.  27.  *  Ibid.,  p.  25. 

4  Ibid.,  p.  I.  1  Ibid.,  pp.  31,  32.  6  Ibid.,  p.  25. 

1 1bid.,  p.  30. 


tural  reserve  recruits  itself  from  the  towns,  the 
cities  of  refuge  of  the  expelled  agricultural  la¬ 
bourers.  In  the  former,  the  supernumeraries  of 
agriculture  are  transformed  into  factory  opera¬ 
tives;  in  the  latter,  those  forced  into  the  towns, 
whilst  at  the  same  time  they  press  on  the  wages 
in  towns,  remain  agricultural  labourers  and  are 
constantly  sent  back  to  the  country  districts  in 
search  of  work. 

The  official  inspectors  sum  up  the  material 
condition  of  the  agricultural  labourer  as  fol¬ 
lows:  “Though  living  with  the  strictest  frugal¬ 
ity,  his  own  wages  are  barely  sufficient  to  pro¬ 
vide  food  for  an  ordinary  family  and  pay  his 
rent,  and  he  depends  upon  other  sources  for  the 
means  of  clothing  himself,  his  wife,  and  chil¬ 
dren.  .  .  .  The  atmosphere  of  these  cabins,  com¬ 
bined  with  the  other  privations  they  are  sub¬ 
jected  to,  has  made  this  class  particularly  sus¬ 
ceptible  to  low  fever  and  pulmonary  consump¬ 
tion.”8  After  this,  it  is  no  wonder  that,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  unanimous  testimony  of  the  inspec¬ 
tors,  a  sombre  discontent  runs  through  the 
ranks  of  this  class,  that  they  long  for  the  return 
of  the  past,  loathe  the  present,  despair  of  the 
future,  give  themselves  up  “to  the  evil  influence 
of  agitators,”  and  have  only  one  fixed  idea,  to 
emigrate  to  America.  This  is  the  land  of  Cock¬ 
ayne,  into  which  the  great  Malthusian  panacea, 
depopulation,  has  transformed  green  Erin. 

What  a  happy  life  the  Irish  factory  operative 
leads,  one  example  will  show:  “On  my  recent 
visit  to  the  North  of  Ireland,”  says  the  English 
Factory  Inspector,  Robert  Baker,  “I  met  with 
the  following  evidence  of  effort  in  an  Irish 
skilled  workman  to  afford  education  to  his  chil¬ 
dren;  and  I  give  his  evidence  verbatim,  as  I 
took  it  from  his  mouth.  That  he  was  a  skilled 
factory  hand  may  be  understood  when  I  say 
that  he  was  employed  on  goods  for  the  Man¬ 
chester  market.  Johnson:  “I  am  a  beetler  and 
work  from  6  in  the  morning  till  1 1  at  night,  from 
Monday  to  Friday.  Saturday  we  leave  off  at  6 
p.m.,  and  get  three  hours  of  it  (for  meals  and 
rest).  1  have  five  children  in  all.  For  this  work  I 
get  ioj.  6 d.  a  week;  my  wife  works  here  also, 
and  gets  j s.  a  week.  The  oldest  girl  who  is  12, 
minds  the  house.  She  is  also  cook,  and  all  the 
servant  we  have.  She  gets  the  young  ones  ready 
for  school.  A  girl  going  past  the  house  wakes 
me  at  half  past  five  in  the  morning.  My  wife 
gets  up  and  goes  along  with  me.  We  get  nothing 
(to  eat)  before  we  come  to  work.  The  child  of  1 2 
takes  care  of  the  little  children  all  the  day,  and 
we  get  nothing  till  breakfast  at  eight.  At  eight 

8  Ibid.,  pp.  21  and  13. 


CAPITAL 


352 

we  go  home.  We  get  tea  once  a  week;  at  other 
times  we  get  stirabout,  sometimes  of  oatmeal, 
sometimes  of  Indian  meal,  as  we  are  able  to  get 
it.  In  the  winter  we  get  a  little  sugar  and  water 
to  our  Indian  meal.  In  the  summer  we  get  a  few 
potatoes,  planting  a  small  patch  ourselves;  and 
when  they  are  done  we  get  back  to  stirabout. 
Sometimes  we  get  a  little  milk  as  it  may  be. 
So  we  go  on  from  day  to  day,  Sunday  and  week¬ 
day,  always  the  same  the  year  round.  I  am  al¬ 
ways  very  much  tired  when  I  have  done  at 
night.  We  may  see  a  bit  of  flesh  meat  some¬ 
times,  but  very  seldom.  Three  of  our  children 
attend  school,  for  whom  we  pay  id.  a  week  a 
head.  Our  rent  is  9 d.  a  week.  Peat  for  firing  costs 
1  j.  6d .  a  fortnight  at  the  very  lowest.*'1  Such  are 
Irish  wages,  such  is  Irish  life! 

In  fact  the  misery  of  Ireland  is  again  the 
topic  of  the  day  in  England.  At  the  end  of  18 66 
and  the  beginning  of  1867,  one  of  the  Irish  land 
magnates,  Lord  DufFerin,  set  about  its  solution 
in  The  Times .  “Wie  mensckhch  von  solch  grossem 
Herrnl”2 

From  Table  E  we  saw  that,  during  1864,  of 
£4,368,610  of  total  profits,  three  surplus  value 
makers  pocketed  only  £262,610;  that  in  1865, 
however,  out  of  £4,669,979  total  profits,  the 
same  three  virtuosi  of  “abstinence”  pocketed 
£274,448;  in  1864,  26  surplus  value  makers 
reached  to  £646,377;  in  1865,  28  surplus  value 
makers  reached  to  £736,448;  in  1864,  121  sur¬ 
plus  value  makers,  £1,066,91 2;  in  1865, 186  sur¬ 
plus  value  makers,  £1,320,996;  in  1864,  1131 
surplus  value  makers,  £2,1  $0,8 18,  nearly  h&lf 
of  the  total  annual  profit;  in  1.865, 11 94  surplus 
value  makers,  £2,41 8,933,  more  than  half  of  the 
total  annual  profit.  But  the  lion's  share,  which 
an  inconceivably  small  number  of  land  mag¬ 
nates  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland  swal¬ 
low  up  of  the  yearly  national  rental,  is  so  mon¬ 
strous  that  the  wisdom  of  the  English  state  does 
not  think  fit  to  afford  the  same  statistical  ma¬ 
terials  about  the  distribution  of  rents  as  about 
the  distribution  of  profits.  Lord  DufFerin  is  one 
of  those  land  magnates.  That  rent-rolls  and 
profits  can  ever  be  “excessive,**  or  that  their 
plethora  is  in  any  way  connected  with  plethora 
of  the  people's  misery  is,  of  course,  an  idea  as 
“disreputable”  as  “unsound.”  He  keeps  to 
facts.  The  fact  is  that,  as  the  Irish  population 
diminishes,  the  Irish  rent-rolls  swell;  that  de¬ 
population  benefits  the  landlords,  therefore  al¬ 
so  benefits  the  soil,  and,  therefore,  the  people, 
that  mere  accessory  of  the  soil.  He  declares, 

1  Reports  of  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  31st  Oct.,  1866,  p.  96. 

a  "How  humane  of  10  great  a  lord!” 


therefore,  that  Ireland  is  still  over-populated, 
and  the  stream  of  emigration  still  flows  too 
lazily.  To  be  perfectly  happy,  Ireland  must  get 
rid  of  at  least  one-third  of  a  million  of  labouring 
men.  Let  no  man  imagine  that  this  lord,  poetic 
into  the  bargain,  is  a  physician  of  the  school  of 
Sangrado,  who,  as  often  as  he  did  not  find  his 
patient  better,  ordered  phlebotomy  and  again 
phlebotomy,  until  the  patient  lost  his  sickness 
at  the  same  time  as  his  blood.  Lord  DufFerin 
demands  a  new  blood-letting  of  one-third  of  a 
million  only,  instead  of  about  two  millions;  in 
fact,  without  the  getting  rid  of  these,  the  mil¬ 
lennium  in  Erin  is  not  to  be.  The  proof  is  easily 
given. 


Number  and  Extent  of  Farms  in  Ireland 
in  1864 


Vumbcr 

Acres 

(1)  Farms  not  over  1  acre 

(2)  Farms  over  1, 

48.65J 

25,394 

not  over  5  acres 

82,037 

288,916 

(3)  Farms  over  5, 

not  over  1 5  acres 

i76,j68 

1,836,310 

(4)  Farms  over  1 5, 

not  over  30  acres 

>3<>,578 

3,051,343 

(5)  Farms  over  30, 

not  over  50  acres 

71,96! 

2,906,274 

(6)  Farms  over  50, 

not  over  100  acres 

54,247 

3,983,880 

(7)  Farms  over  100  acres 

31>,y2  7 

8,227,807 

(8)  Total  area 

— — 

26,319,924* 

Centralization  has  from  1851  to  1861  de¬ 
stroyed  principally  farms  of  the  first  three  cate¬ 
gories,  under  r  and  not  over  15  acres.  These 
above  all  must  disappear.  This  gives  307,058 
“supernumerary”  farmers,  and  reckoning  the 
families  at  the  low  average  of  4  persons,  1,228,- 
232  persons.  On  the  extravagant  supposition 
that,  after  the  agricultural  revolution  is  com¬ 
plete,  one-fourth  of  these  arc  again  absorbable, 
there  remain  for  emigration  921,174  persons. 
Categories  4,  5,  6,  of  over  15  and  not  over  100 
acres,  are,  as  was  known  long  since  in  England, 
too  small  for  capitalistic  cultivation  of  corn, 
and  for  sheep-breeding  are  almost  vanishing 
quantities.  On  the  same  supposition  as  before, 
therefore,  there  are  further  788,761  persons  to 
emigrate;  total,  1,709,532.  And  as  Vappitit 
vient  en  mangeant ,4  Rent-rolls'  eyes  will  soon 
discover  that  Ireland,  with  2JA  millions,  is  still 
always  miserable,  and  miserable  because  she  is 
over-populated.  Therefore  her  depopulation 
must  go  yet  further,  that  thus  she  may  fulfil  her 

*  The  total  area  includes  also  peat,  bogs,  and  waste  land. 

4Tt<e  appetite  grows  with  eating. 


THE  GENERAL  LAW  OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION  353 


true  destiny,  that  of  an  English  sheep  walk  and 
cattle-pasture.1 

1  How  the  famine  and  its  consequences  have  been  de¬ 
liberately  made  the  most  of,  both  by  the  individual  land¬ 
lords  and  by  the  English  legislature,  to  forcibly  carry  out 
the  agricultural  revolution  and  to  thin  the  population  of 
Ireland  down  to  the  proportion  satisfactory  to  the  land¬ 
lords,  I  shall  show  more  fully  in  Book  Three  of  this  work, 
in  the  section  on  landed  property.  There  also  I  return  to 
the  condition  of  the  small  farmers,  and  the  agricultural 
labourers.  At  present,  only  one  quotation.  Nassau  W.  Sen¬ 
ior  says,  with  other  things,  in  his  posthumous  work,  Jour¬ 
nals ,  Conversations  and  Essays ,  relating  to  Ireland  (l  vols., 
London,  1868),  Vol.  11,  p.  282:  ‘"Well/  said  Dr.  G.,  ‘we 
have  got  our  Poor  Law  and  it  is  a  great  instrument  for 
giving  the  victory  to  the  landlords.  Another,  and  a  still 
more  powerful  instrument  is  emigration. . . .  No  friend  to 
Ireland  can  wish  the  war  to  be  prolonged’  (between  the 
landlords  and  the  small  Celtic  farmers),  ‘still  less,  that  it 
should  end  by  the  victory  of  the  tenants.  The  sooner  it  is 
over— the  sooner  Ireland  becomes  a  gracing  country,  with 
the  comparatively  thin  population  which  a  grazing  coun¬ 
try  requires,  the  better  for  all  classes.'”  The  English  Corn 
Laws  of  1815  secured  Ireland  the  monopoly  of  the  free  im¬ 
portation  of  corn  into  Great  Britain.  They  favoured  arti¬ 
ficially,  therefore,  the  cultivation  of  corn.  With  the  aboli¬ 
tion  of  the  Corn  Laws  in  1 846,  this  monopoly  was  suddenly 


Like  all  good  things  in  this  bad  world,  this 
profitable  method  has  its  drawbacks.  With  the 
accumulation  of  rents  in  Ireland,  the  accumu¬ 
lation  of  the  Irish  in  America  keeps  pace.  The 
Irishman,  banished  by  sheep  and  ox,  reappears 
on  the  other  side  of  the  ocean  as  a  Fenian,  and 
face  to  face  with  the  old  queen  of  the  seas  rises, 
threatening  and  more  threatening,  the  young 
giant  Republic: 

Acerba fata  Romanos  agunt 
Scelusque  fraterna  necis.2 

removed.  Apart  from  all  other  circumstances,  this  event 
alone  was  sufficient  to  give  a  great  impulse  to  the  turning 
of  Irish  arable  into  pasture  land,  to  the  concentration  of 
farms,  and  to  the  eviction  of  small  cultivators.  After  the 
fruitfulness  of  the  Irish  soil  had  been  praised  from  181 5  to 
1846,  and  proclaimed  loudly  as  by  Nature  herself  destined 
for  the  cultivation  of  wheat,  English  agronomists,  econo¬ 
mists,  politicians,  discover  suddenly  that  it  is  good  for 
nothing  but  to  produce  forage.  M.  L<5oncc  de  Lavergne  has 
hastened  to  repeat  this  on  the  other  side  of  the  Channel. 
It  takes  a  '<scn6us,>  man,  h  la  Lavergne,  to  be  caught  by 
such  childishness. 

2  Harsh  fates  beset  the  Romans 
And  brother  killing  brother. 


Part  Eight 


THE  SO-CALLED  PRIMITIVE  ACCUMULATION 


CHAPTER  XXVI.  THE  SECRET  OF 
PRIMITIVE  ACCUMULATION 


We  have  seen  how  money  is  changed  into  capi¬ 
tal;  how,  through  capital,  surptus  value  is 
made,  and  from  surplus  value  more  capital.  But 
the  accumulation  of  capital  presupposes  sur¬ 
plus  value;  surplus  value  presupposes  capital¬ 
istic  production;  capitalistic  production  pre¬ 
supposes  the  pre-existence  of  considerable 
masses  of  capital  and  of  labour  power  in  the 
hands  of  producers  of  commodities.  The  whole 
movement,  therefore,  seems  to  turn  in  a  vicious 
circle,  out  of  which  we  can  only  get  by  suppos¬ 
ing  a  primitive  accumulation  (The  ‘'previous 
accumulation”  of  Adam  Smith)  preceding  cap¬ 
italistic  accumulation;  an  accumulation  not  the 
result  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production,  but 
its  starting-point. 

This  primitive  accumulation  plays  in  politi¬ 
cal  economy  about  the  same  part  as  original  sin 
in  theology.  Adam  bit  the  apple,  and  thereupon 
sin  fell  on  the  human  race.  Its  origin  is  supposed 
to  be  explained  when  it  is  told  as  an  anecdote 
of  the  past.  In  times  long  gome  by  there  were 
two  sorts  of  people:  one,  the  diligent,  intelli¬ 
gent,  and,  above  all,  frugal  ilite\  the  other,  lazy 
rascals,  spending  their  substance,  and  more,  in 
riotous  living.  The  theological  legend  of  original 
sin  tells  us  certainly  how  man  came  to  be  con¬ 
demned  to  eat  his  bread  in  the  sweat  of  his 
brow;  but  the  history  of  economic  original  sin 
reveals  to  us  that  there  are  people  to  whom  this 
is  by  no  means  essential.  Never  mind!  Thus  it 
came  to  pass  that  the  former  sort  accumulated 
wealth,  and  the  latter  sort  had  at  last  nothing  to 
sell  except  their  own  skins.  And  from  this  origi¬ 
nal  sin  dates  the  poverty  of  the  great  majority 
that,  despite  all  its  labour,  has  up  to  now  noth¬ 
ing  to  sell  but  itself,  and  the  wealth  of  the  few 
that  increases  constantly  although  they  have 
long  ceased  to  work.  Such  insipid  childishness 
is  every  day  preached  to  us  in  the  defence  of 
property.  M.  Thiers,  for  example,  had  the  as¬ 
surance  to  repeat  it  with  all  the  solemnity  of  a 
statesman,  to  the  French  people,  once  so  spirt- 


tuel.1  But  as  soon  as  the  question  of  property 
crops  up,  it  becomes  a  sacred  duty  to  proclaim 
the  intellectual  food  of  the  infant  as  the  one 
thing  fit  for  all  ages  and  for  all  stages  of  develop¬ 
ment.  In  actual  history  it  is  notorious  that  con¬ 
quest,  enslavement,  robbery,  murder— briefly, 
force— play  the  great  part.  In  the  tender  annals 
of  political  economy,  the  idyllic  reigns  from 
time  immemorial.  Right  and  “labour”  were 
from  all  time  the  sole  means  of  enrichment,  the 
present  year,  of  course,  always  excepted.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  methods  of  primitive  accu¬ 
mulation  are  anything  but  idyllic. 

In  themselves,  money  and  commodities  are 
no  more  capital  than  arc  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  and  of  subsistence.  They  want  transform¬ 
ing  into  capital.  But  this  transformation  itself 
can  only  take  place  under  certain  circumstances 
that  centre  in  this,  viz.,  that  two  very  different 
kinds  of  commodity  possessors  must  come  face 
to  face  and  into  contact;  on  throne  hand,  the 
owners  of  money,  means  of  production,  means 
of  subsistence,  who  are  eager  to  increase  the 
sum  of  values  they  possess  by  buying  other  peo¬ 
ple’s  labour  power;  on  the  other  hand,  free  la¬ 
bourers,  the  sellers  of  their  own  labour  power, 
and  therefore  the  sellers  of  labour.  Free  labour¬ 
ers,  in  the  double  sense  that  neither  they  them¬ 
selves  form  part  and  parcel  of  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  as  in  the  case  of  slaves,  bondsmen,  etc., 
nor  do  the  means  of  production  belong  to  them, 
as  in  the  case  of  peasant  proprietors;  they  are, 
therefore,  free  from,  unencumbered  by,  any 
means  of  production  of  their  own.  With  this 
polarization  of  the  market  for  commodities,  the 
fundamental  conditions  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion  arc  given.  The  capitalist  system  presup¬ 
poses  the  complete  separation  of  the  labourers 
from  all  property  in  the  means  by  which  they 
can  realize  their  labour.  As  soon  as  capitalist 
production  is  once  on  its  own  legs,  it  not  only 
maintains  this  separation,  but  reproduces  it  on 
a  continually  extending  scale.  The  process, 
therefore,  that  clears  the  way  for  the  capitalist 
system  can  be  none  other  than  the  process 

1  Keen. 


354 


EXPROPRIATION  OF  AGRICULTURAL  POPULATION  355 


which  takes  away  from  the  labourer  the  pos¬ 
session  of  his  means  of  production;  a  process 
that  transforms,  on  the  one  hand,  the  social 
means  of  subsistence  and  of  production  into 
capital,  on  the  other,  the  immediate  producers 
into  wage  labourers.  The  so-called  primitive  ac¬ 
cumulation,  therefore,  is  nothing  else  than  the 
historical  process  of  divorcing  the  producer 
from  the  means  of  production.  It  appears  as 
primitive,  because  it  forms  the  prehistoric 
stage  of  capital  and  of  the  mode  of  production 
corresponding  with  it. 

The  economic  structure  of  capitalistic  soci¬ 
ety  has  grown  out  of  the  economic  structure  of 
feudal  society.  The  dissolution  of  the  latter  set 
free  the  elements  of  the  former. 

The  immediate  producer,  the  labourer,  could 
only  dispose  of  his  own  person  after  he  had 
ceased  to  be  attached  to  the  soil  and  ceased  to 
be  the  slave,  serf,  or  bondman  of  another.  To 
become  a  free  seller  of  labour  power,  who  carries 
his  commodity  wherever  he  finds  a  market,  he 
must  further  have  escaped  from  the  regime  of 
the  guilds,  their  rults  fur  apprentices  and  jour¬ 
neymen,  and  the  impediments  of  their  labour 
regulations.  Hence,  the  historical  movement 
which  changes  the  producers  into  wage  work¬ 
ers,  appears,  on  the  one  hand,  as  their  emanci¬ 
pation  from  serfdom  and  from  the  fetters  of  the 
guilds,  and  this  side  alone  exists  for  our  bour¬ 
geois  historians.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  these 
new  freedmen  became  sellers  of  themsel  ves  only 
after  they  had  been  robbed  of  all  their  own 
means  of  production,  and  of  all  the  guarantees 
of  existence  afforded  by  the  old  feudal  arrange¬ 
ments.  And  the  history  of  this,  their  expropria¬ 
tion,  is  written  in  the  annals  of  mankind  in  let¬ 
ters  of  blood  and  fire. 

The  industrial  capitalists,  these  new  poten¬ 
tates,  had  on  their  part  not  only  to  displace  the 
guild  masters  of  handicrafts,  but  also  the  feudal 
lords,  the  possessors  of  the  sources  of  wealth. 
In  this  respect,  their  conquest  of  social  power 
appears  as  the  fruit  of  a  victorious  struggle  both 
against  feudal  lordship  and  its  revolting  pre¬ 
rogatives,  and  against  the  guilds  and  the  fetters 
•  they  laid  on  the  free  development  of  production 
and  the  free  exploitation  of  man  by  man.  The 
chevaliers  d'industrie?  however,  only  succeeded 
in  supplanting  the  chevaliers  of  the  sword  by 
making  use  of  events  of  which  they  themselves 
were  wholly  innocent.  They  have  risen  by 
means  as  vile  as  those  by  which  the  Roman 
freedman  once  on  a  time  made  himself  the  mas¬ 
ter  of  his  patronus .a 

1  Knights  of  industry.  s  Patron. 


The  starting-point  of  the  development  that 
gave  rise  to  the  wage  labourer  as  well  as  to  the 
capitalist  was  the  servitude  of  the  labourer.  The 
advance  consisted  in  a  change  of  form  of  this 
servitude,  in  the  transformation  of  feudal  ex¬ 
ploitation  into  capitalist  exploitation.  To  un¬ 
derstand  its  march,  we  need  not  go  back  very 
far.  Although  we  come  across  the  first  begin¬ 
nings  of  capitalist  production  as  early  as  the 
fourteenth  or  fifteenth  century,  sporadically,  in 
certain  towns  of  the  Mediterranean,  the  capi¬ 
talistic  era  dates  from  the  sixteenth  century. 
Wherever  it  appears,  the  abolition  of  serfdom 
has  been  long  effected,  and  the  highest  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  Middle  Ages,  the  existence  of  sover¬ 
eign  towns,  has  been  long  on  the  wane. 

In  the  history  of  primitive  accumulation,  all 
revolutions  are  epoch-making  that  act  as  levers 
for  the  capitalist  class  in  course  of  formation; 
but,  above  all,  those  moments  when  great 
masses  of  men  arc  suddenly  and  forcibly  torn 
from  their  means  of  subsistence,  and  hurled  as 
free  and  “unattached”  proletarians  on  the  la¬ 
bour  market.  The  expropriation  of  the  agricul¬ 
tural  producer,  of  the  peasant,  from  the  soil,  is 
the  basis  of  the  whole  process.  The  history  of 
this  expropriation  in  different  countries  as¬ 
sumes  different  aspects,  and  runs  through  its 
various  phases  in  different  orders  of  succession, 
and  at  different  periods.  In  England  alone, 
which  we  take  as  our  example,  has  it  the  classic 
form.3 


CHAPTER  XXVII.  EXPROPRIATION  OF  THE 
AGRICULTURAL  POPULATION  FROM 
THE  LAND 

In  England,  serfdom  had  practically  disap¬ 
peared  in  the  last  part  of  the  fourteenth  cen¬ 
tury.  The  immense  majority  of  the  population4 

3  In  Italy,  where  capitalistic  production  developed  earli¬ 
est,  the  dissolution  of  serfdom  also  took  place  earlier  than 
elsewhere.  The  serf  was  emancipated  in  that  country  be¬ 
fore  he  had  acquired  any  prescriptive  right  to  the  soil.  His 
emancipation  at  once  transformed  him  into  a  free  prole¬ 
tarian,  who,  moreover,  found  his  master  ready  waiting  for 
him  in  the  towns,  for  the  most  part  handed  down  as  lega¬ 
cies  from  the  Roman  time.  When  the  revolution  of  the 
world  faarket,  about  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  an¬ 
nihilated  Northern  Italy's  commercial  supremacy,  a  move¬ 
ment  in  the  reverse  direction  set  in.  The  labourers  of  the 
towns  were  driven  en  masse  into  the  country,  and  gave  an 
impulse,  never  before  seen,  to  the  petite  culture ,  carried  on 
in  the  form  of  gardening. 

4  "The  petty  proprietors  who  cultivated  their  own  fields 
with  their  own  hands  and  enjoyed  a  modest  competence 
• . .  then  formed  a  much  more  important  part  of  the  nation 
than  at  present.  If  we  may  trust  the  best  statistical  writers 


356  CAPITAL 


consisted  then,  and  to  a  still  larger  extent  in  the 
fifteenth  century,  of  free  peasant  proprietors, 
whatever  was  the  feudal  tide  under  which  their 
right  of  property  was  hidden.  In  the  larger  sei- 
gnorial  domains,  the  old  bailiff,  himself  a  serf, 
was  displaced  by  the  free  farmer.  The  wage  la¬ 
bourers  of  agriculture  consisted  partly  of  peas¬ 
ants,  who  utilized  their  leisure  time  by  working 
on  the  large  estates,  pardy  of  an  independent 
special  class  of  wage  labourers,  relatively  and 
absolutely  few  in  numbers.  The  latter  also  were 
practically  at  the  same  time  peasant  farmers, 
since,  besides  their  wages,  they  had  alloted  to 
them  arable  land  to  the  extent  of  four  or  more 
acres,  together  with  their  cottages.  Besides, 
they,  with  the  rest  of  the  peasants,  enjoyed  the 
usufruct  of  the  common  land,  which  gave  pas¬ 
ture  to  their  catde,  furnished  them  with  timber, 
firewood,  turf,  etc.1  In  all  countries  of  Europe, 
feudal  production  is  characterized  by  division 
of  the  soil  amongst  the  greatest  possible  num¬ 
ber  of  sub-feudatories.  The  might  of  the  feudal 
lord,  like  that  of  the  sovereign,  depended  noton 
the  length  of  his  rent  roll,  but  on  the  number  of 
his  subjects,  and  the  latter  depended  on  the 
number  of  peasant  proprietors.2  Although, 
therefore,  the  English  land,  after  the  Norman 
conquest,  was  distributed  in  gigantic  baronies, 
one  of  which  often  included  some  900  of  the  old 
Anglo-Saxon  lordships,  it  was  bestrewn  with 

of  that  age,  not  less  than  160,000  proprietors  who,  with 
their  families,  must  have  made  up  more  than  a  seventh  of 
the  whole  population,  derived  their  subsistence  from  little 
freehold  estates.  The  average  income  of  these  small  land¬ 
lords  . . .  was  estimated  at  between  £60  and  £70  a  year.  It 
was  computed  that  the  number  of  persons  who  tilled  their 
own  land  was  greater  than  the  number  of  those  who  farmed 
the  land  of  others."  (Macaulay,  History  oj  England ,  10th 
edition,  1854,  Vol.  I,  pp.  333, 334.)  Even  in  the  last  third 
of  the  seventeenth  century,  four-fifths  of  the  English  peo¬ 
ple  were  agricultural.  ( Ibid.,  p.  413.)  I  quote  Macaulay 
because,  as  systematic  falsifier  of  history,  he  minimizes  as 
much  as  possible  facts  of  this  kind. 

1  We  must  never  forget  that  even  the  serf  was  not  only 
the  owner,  if  but  a  tribute-paying  owner,  of  the  piece  of 
land  attached  to  his  house,  but  also  a  co-possessor  of  the 
common  land.  “The  peasant  there  (in  Silesia  under  Fred¬ 
erick  II)  is  a  serf."  Nevertheless,  these  serfs  possess  com¬ 
mon  lands.  “As  yet  it  has  been  impossible  to  induce  the 
Silesians  to  partition  the  common  lands,  whereas  in  the 
New  March  there  is  scarcely  a  village  in  which  this  parti¬ 
tion  has  not  been  effected  with  the  greatest  success."  (Mir- 
abeau,  De  la  monarchic  prussienne,  London,  1788,  Vol.  II, 
pp.  125, 126.) 

2  Japan,  with  its  purely  feudal  organization  of  landed 
property  and  its  developed  petttc  culture ,  gives  a  much 
truer  picture  of  the  European  middle  ages  than  all  our 
history  books,  dictated  as  these  are,  for  the  most  part,  by 
bourgeois  prejudices.  It  is  very  convenient  to  be  “liberal’ * 
at  the  expense  of  the  Middle  Ages. 


small  peasant  properties,  only  here  and  there 
interspersed  with  great  seignorial  domains. 
Such  conditions,  together  with  the  prosper¬ 
ity  of  the  towns  so  characteristic  of  the  fif¬ 
teenth  century,  allowed  of  that  wealth  of  the 
people  which  Chancellor  Fortescue  so  elo¬ 
quently  paints  in  his  De  Laudibu*  legum  Ang¬ 
lia;  but  it  excluded  the  possibility  of  capital¬ 
istic  wealth. 

The  prelude  of  the  revolution  that  laid  the 
foundation  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production 
was  played  in  the  last  third  of  the  fifteenth,  and 
the  first  decade  of  the  sixteenth  century.  A  mass 
of  free  proletarians  was  hurled  on  the  labour 
market  by  the  breaking-up  of  the  bands  of  feu¬ 
dal  retainers,  who,  as  Sir  James  Steuart  well 
says,  “everywhere  uselessly  filled  house  and 
castle.”  Although  the  royal  power,  itself  a  prod¬ 
uct  of  bourgeois  development,  in  its  strife  after 
absolute  sovereignty  forcibly  hastened  on  the 
dissolution  of  these  bands  of  retainers,  it  was 
by  no  means  the  sole  cause  of  it.  In  insolent  con¬ 
flict  with  king  and  parliament,  the  great  feudal 
lords  created  an  incomparably  larger  proletar¬ 
iat  by  the  forcible  driving  of  the  peasantry  from 
the  land,  to  which  the  latter  had  the  same  feu¬ 
dal  right  as  the  lord  himself,  and  by  the  usurpa¬ 
tion  of  the  common  lands.  The  rapid  rise  of  the 
Flemish  wool  manufactures,  and  the  corre¬ 
sponding  rise  in  the  price  of  wool  in  England, 
gave  the  direct  impulse  to  thCSte  evictions.  The 
old  nobility  had  been  devoured  by  the  great 
feudal  wars.  The  new  nobility  was  the  child  of 
its  time,  for  which  money  was  the  power  of  all 
powers.  Transformation  of  arable  land  into 
sheep-walks  was,  therefore,  its  cry.  Harrison, 
in  his  Description  of  England ',  prefixed  to  Holin- 
shed’s  Chronicle s,  describes  how  the  expropria¬ 
tion  of  small  peasants  is  ruining  the  country. 
“What  care  our  great  encroachers?”  The  dwell¬ 
ings  of  the  peasants  and  the  cottages  of  the  la¬ 
bourers  were  razed  to  the  ground  or  doomed  to 
decay.  “If,”  says  Harrison,  “the  old  records  of 
every  manor  be  sought ...  it  will  soon  appear 
that  in  some  manor  seventeen,  eighteen,  or 
twenty  houses  are  shrunk  . . .  that  England  was 
never  less  furnished  with  people  than  at  the 
present. ...  Of  cities  and  towns  either  utterly 
decayed  or  more  than  a  quarter  or  half  dimin¬ 
ished,  though  some  one  be  a  little  increased  here 
or  there;  of  towns  pulled  down  for  sheep-walks, 
and  no  more  but  the  lordships  now  standing  in 
them  ...  I  could  say  somewhat.”  The  com¬ 
plaints  of  these  old  chroniclers  are  always  exag¬ 
gerated,  but  they  reflect  faithfully  the  impres- 


EXPROPRIATION  OF  AGRICULTURAL  POPULATION  357 


Sion  made  on  contemporaries  by  the  revolution 
in  the  conditions  of  production.  A  comparison 
of  the  writings  of  Chancellor  Fortescue  and 
Thomas  More  reveals  the  gulf  between  the  fif¬ 
teenth  and  sixteenth  century.  As  Thornton 
rightly  has  it,  the  English  working  class  was 
precipitated  without  any  transition  from  its 
golden  into  its  iron  age. 

Legislation  was  terrified  at  this  revolution. 
It  did  not  yet  stand  on  that  height  of  civiliza¬ 
tion  where  the  “wealth  of  the  nation*'  (i.e.,  the 
formation  of  capital,  and  the  reckless  exploita¬ 
tion  and  impoverishing  of  the  mass  of  the  peo¬ 
ple)  figure  as  the  ultima  Thule 1  of  all  statecraft. 
In  his  history  of  Henry  VII,  Bacon  says:  “In¬ 
closures  at  that  time  (1489)  began  to  be  more 
frequent,  whereby  arable  land  (which  could  not 
be  manured  without  people  and  families  )was 
turned  into  pasture,  which  was  easily  rid  by  a 
few  herdsmen;  and  tenancies  for  years,  lives, 
and  at  will  (whereupon  much  of  the  yeomanry 
lived)  were  turned  into  demesnes.  This  bred  a 
decay  of  people,  and  (by  consequence)  a  decay 
of  towns,  churJia,  uthes,  and  the  like. ...  In 
remedying  of  this  inconvenience,  the  king's  wis¬ 
dom  was  admirable,  and  the  parliament's  at 
that  time  . . .  they  took  a  course  to  take  away 
depopulating  inclosures,  and  depopulating  pas¬ 
turage."  An  Act  of  Henry  VII,  1489,  cap.  19, 
forbad  the  destruction  of  all  “houses  of  hus¬ 
bandry”  to  which  at  least  20  acres  of  land  be¬ 
longed.  By  an  Act,  25  Henry  VIII,  the  same  law 
was  renewed.  It  recites,  among  other  things, 
that  many  farms  and  large  flocks  of  cattle,  es¬ 
pecially  of  sheep,  are  concentrated  in  the  hands 
of  a  few  men,  whereby  the  rent  of  land  has  much 
risen  and  tillage  has  fallen  off,  churches  and 
houses  have  been  pulled  down,  and  marvellous 
numbers  of  people  have  been  deprived  of  the 
means  wherewith  to  maintain  themselves  and 
their  families.  The  Act,  therefore,  ordains  the 
rebuilding  of  the  decayed  farmsteads,  and  fixes 
a  proportion  between  corn  land  and  pasture 
land,  etc.  An  Act  of  1 533  recites  that  some  own¬ 
ers  possess  24,000  sheep,  and  limits  the  number 
to  be  owned  to  2ooo.2,The  cry  of  the  people  and 
the  legislation  directed,  for  150  years  after 
Henry  VII,  against  the  expropriation  of  the 
small  farmers  and  peasants,  were  alike  fruitless. 

1  Furthest  limit. 

*  In  his  Utopia ,  Thomas  More  says  that  in  England 
"/our  shepe  that  were  wont  to  be  so  meke  and  tame,  and 
so  smal  eaters,  now,  as  I  heare  saye,  be  become  so  great 
devourers  and  so  wylde  that  they  eate  up,  and  swallow 
downe,  the  very  men  themselfes."—  Utopia^  translated  by 
Robinson,  edited  Arber,  London,  1869,  p.  41. 


The  secret  of  their  inefficiency  Bacon,  without 
knowing  it,  reveals  to  us.  “The  device  of  King 
Henry  VII,"  says  Bacon,  in  the  twenty-ninth 
of  his  Essays ,  Civil  and  Morale  “was  profound 
and  admirable,  in  making  farms  and  houses  of 
husbandry  of  a  standard;  that  is,  maintained 
with  such  a  proportion  of  land  unto  them  as 
may  breed  a  subject  to  live  in  convenient  plen¬ 
ty,  and  no  servile  condition,  and  to  keep  the 
plough  in  the  hands  of  the  owners  and  not  mere 
hirelings."8  What  the  capitalist  system  de¬ 
manded  was,  on  the  other  hand,  a  degraded  and 
almost  servile  condition  of  the  mass  of  the  peo¬ 
ple,  the  transformation  of  them  into  mercenar¬ 
ies,  and  of  their  means  of  labour  into  capital. 
During  this  transformation  period,  legislation 
also  strove  to  retain  the  four  acres  of  land  by 
the  cottage  of  the  agricultural  wage  labourer, 
and  forbad  him  to  take  lodgers  into  his  cottage. 
In  the  reign  of  James  1, 1627,  Roger  Crocker  of 
Front  Mill  wsis  condemned  for  having  built  a 
cottage  on  the  manor  of  Front  Mill  without 
four  acres  of  land  attached  to  the  same  in  per¬ 
petuity.  As  late  as  Charles  I's  reign,  1638,  a 
royal  commission  was  appointed  to  enforce  the 
carrying  out  of  the  old  laws,  especially  that  re¬ 
ferring  to  the  four  acres  of  land.  Even  in  Crom¬ 
well's  time,  the  building  of  a  house  within  four 
miles  of  London  was  forbidden  unless  it  was  en¬ 
dowed  with  four  acres  of  land.  As  late  as  the  first 
half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  complaint  is 
made  if  the  cottage  of  the  agricultural  labourer 
has  not  an  adjunct  of  one  or  two  acres  of  land. 
Nowadays  he  is  lucky  if  it  is  furnished  with  a 

3  Bacon  shows  the  connection  between  a  free,  well-to-do 
peasantry  and  good  infantry.  "This  did  wonderfully  con¬ 
cern  the  might  and  mannerhood  of  the  kingdom  to  have 
farms  as  it  were  of  a  standard  sufficient  to  maintain  an  able 
body  out  of  penury,  and  did  in  effect  amortize  a  great  part 
of  the  lands  of  the  kingdom  unto  the  hold  and  occupation 
of  the  yeomanry  or  middle  people,  of  a  condition  between 
gentlemen  and  cottagers  and  peasants. . . .  For  it  hath  been 
held  by  the  general  opinion  of  men  of  best  judgment  in  the 
wars . . .  that  the  principal  strength  of  an  army  consisteth 
in  the  infantry  or  foot.  And  to  make  good  infantry  it  re- 
quireth  men  bred,  not  in  a  servile  or  indigent  fashion,  but 
in  some  free  and  plentiful  manner.  Therefore,  if  a  state  run 
most  to  noblemen  and  gentlemen,  and  that  the  husband¬ 
men  and  ploughmen  be  but  as  their  workfolk  and  labour¬ 
ers,  or  else  mere  cottagers  (which  are  but  hous'd  beggars), 
you  mgy  have  a  good  cavalry,  but  never  good  stable  bands 
of  foot. . . .  And  this  is  to  be  seen  in  France,  and  Italy,  and 
some  other  parts  abroad,  where  in  effect  all  is  noblesse  or 
peasantry  . . .  insomuch  that  they  are  inforced  to  employ 
mercenary  bands  of  Switzers  and  the  like  for  their  bat¬ 
talions  of  foot;  whereby  also  it  comes  to  pass  that  those 
nations  have  much  people  and  few  soldiers."— The  Reign 
of  Henry  VII,  Verbatim  reprint  from  Kennet's  England , 
1719,  edition,  London,  1870,  p.  308. 


CAPITAL 


358 

little  garden,  or  if  he  may  rent,  far  away  from 
his  cottage,  a  few  roods.  "Landlords  and  farm¬ 
ers,”  says  Dr.  Hunter,  “work  here  hand  in 
hand.  A  few  acres  to  the  cottage  would  make 
the  labourers  too  independent.”1 

The  process  of  forcible  expropriation  of  the 
people  received  in  the  sixteenth  century  a  new 
and  frightful  impulse  from  the  Reformation, 
and  from  the  consequent  colossal  spoliation  of 
the  church  property  The  Catholic  Church  was, 
at  the  time  of  the  Reformation,  feudal  proprie¬ 
tor  of  a  great  part  of  the  English  land.  The  sup¬ 
pression  of  the  monasteries,  etc ,  hurled  their 
inmates  into  the  proletariat.  The  estates  of  the 
church  were  to  a  large  extent  Riven  away  to 
rapacious  royal  favourites,  or  sold  at  a  nominal 
pnee  to  speculating  farmers  and  citizens,  who 
drove  out,  en  ma  tse,  the  hereditary  sub-tenants 
and  threw  their  holdings  into  one  The  legally 
guaranteed  property  of  the  poorer  folk  in  a  part 
of  the  church’s  tithes  was  tacitly  confiscated.2 
" Pauper  ubtque  jacet, ”3  cried  Queen  Elizabeth, 
after  a  journey  through  England  In  the  forty 
third  year  of  her  reign,  the  nation  was  obliged 
to  recognize  pauperism  officially  by  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  a  poor  rate  “  The  authors  of  this  law 
seem  to  have  been  ashamed  to  state  the  grounds 
of  it,  for”  (contrary  to  tradition  ll  usage)  "it  has 
no  preamble  whatever  ”4 *  By  16  of  Charles  1, 4, 
it  was  declared  perpetual,  and  in  fact  only  in 
1834  did  it  take  a  new  and  harsher  form  6  1  hese 

1  Dr  Hunter,  op  cit ,  p  134  — 4  The  quantity  of  land 
assigned  (in  the  old  laws)  would  now  be  judged  too  great 
for  labourers,  and  rather  as  likely  to  convert  them  into 
small  farmers  — George  Roberts,  The  Social  History  of 
the  People  of  the  Southern  Counties  of  England  in  Past  Cen¬ 
turies,  London,  1856,  pp  184  185 

*  “The  right  of  the  poor  to  share  in  the  tithe  is  estab¬ 
lished  by  the  tenour  of  ancient  statutes  — 1  uckett,  op 
cit  ,Vo\  II, pp  804-805 

*  “Everywhere,  there  are  the  poor 

4  William  Cobbett,  A  History  of  the  Protestant  Reforma - 
Hon,  5471 

*  The  “spirit  *  of  Protestantism  may  be  seen  from  the 

following,  among  other  things  In  the  south  of  England 
certain  landed  proprietors  and  well  to-do  farmers  put  their 
heads  together  and  propounded  ten  questions  as  to  the 
right  interpretation  of  the  Poor  I  aw  of  Flizabeth  1  hese 

they  laid  before  a  celebrated  jurist  of  that  time,  Sergeant 
Snigge  (later  a  judge  under  James  I)  for  his  opinion  Ques¬ 
tion  9  Some  of  the  more  wealthy  farmers  in  the  parish 
have  devised  a  skilful  mode  by  which  all  the  trouble  of 
executing  this  Act  (the  43rd  of  Fli7abeth)  might  be  avoid¬ 
ed  They  have  proposed  that  we  shall  erect  a  prison  in  the 
parish,  and  then  give  notice  to  the  neighbourhood  that  if 
any  persons  are  disposed  to  farm  the  poor  of  this  parish, 
they  do  give  in  sealed  proposals,  on  a  certain  day,  of  the 
lowest  price  at  which  they  will  take  them  off  our  hands, 
and  that  they  will  be  authorized  to  refuse  to  any  one  unless 
he  be  shut  up  in  the  aforesaid  prison  The  proposers  of  this 


immediate  results  of  the  Reformation  were  not 
its  most  lasting  ones.  The  property  of  the 
church  formed  the  religious  bulwark  of  the  tra¬ 
ditional  conditions  of  landed  property  With  its 
fall,  these  were  no  longer  tenable.® 

Even  in  the  last  decade  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  the  yeomanry,  the  class  of  independ¬ 
ent  peasants,  were  more  numerous  than  the 
class  of  farmers  They  had  formed  the  b  ickbone 
of  Cromwell's  strength,  and,  even  according  to 
the  confession  of  Macaulay,  stood  in  favour¬ 
able  contrast  to  the  drunken  squires  and  to 
their  servants,  the  country  clergy,  who  had  to 
marry  their  masters’  cast  off  mistresses  About 
1750,  the  yeomanry  had  disappeared,7  and  so 

plan  conceive  that  there  will  be  found  in  the  adjoining 
counties  persons  who,  being  unwilling  to  labour  and  not 
possessing  substance  or  credit  to  take  a  farm  or  ship,  so  as 
to  live  without  labour,  may  be  induced  to  mike  a  ver>  ad 
vantageous  offer  to  the  parish  If  any  of  the  poor  perish 
under  the  contractor  s  care,  the  sin  will  lie  at  Ins  door,  as 
the  parish  will  have  done  its  duty  by  them  We  are, 
however,  apprehensive  that  the  present  Act  (43rd  of 
Elizabeth)  will  not  warrant  a  prudential  measure  of 
this  kind,  but  you  are  to  learn  that  the  rest  of  the 
freeholders  of  the  county,  and  of  the  adjoining  county 
of  B,  will  very  readily  join  in  instructing  their  members 
to  propose  an  Act  to  enable  the  parish  to  contract 
with  a  person  to  lock  up  and  work  the  poor,  and  to 
declare  that  if  any  person  shall  refuse  to  be  so  locked  up 
and  worked,  he  shall  be  entitled  to  no  relief  1  his,  it  is 
hoped,  will  prevent  persons  in  distress  from  wanting  relief, 
and  be  the  means  of  keeping  down  parishes  (R  Hlakey, 
The  History  of  Political  Literature  frlftn  the  Farhrst  l  tmes , 
London,  1855,  Vol  II,  pp  84  85  )  In  Scotland,  the  aboli¬ 
tion  of  serfdom  took  place  some  centuries  later  than  in 
England  B  ven  in  1698,  Fletcher  of  Saltoun  declared  in 
the  Scotch  parliament  I  he  number  of  beggars  in  Scot¬ 
land  is  reckoned  at  not  less  than  200,000  1  he  only  remedy 
that  I,  a  republican,  on  principle  can  suggest,  is  to  restore 
the  old  state  of  serfdom,  to  make  slaves  of  all  those  who 
are  unable  to  provide  for  their  own  subsistence  Eden, 
op  cit ,  Book  I,  ch  I,  pp  60-61,  says  I  he  decrease  of 
villenage  seems  necessarily  to  have  been  the  era  of  the 
origin  of  the  poor  Manufactures  and  commerce  are  the 
two  parents  of  our  national  poor  Eden,  like  our  Scotch 
republican  on  principle,  errs  only  in  this  not  the  abolition 
of  villenage,  but  the  abolition  of  the  property  of  the  agn 
cultural  labourer  in  the  soil  made  him  a  proletarian,  and 
eventually  a  pauper  In  France,  where  the  expropriation 
was  effected  in  another  way,  the  ordonnance  of  Moulins, 
1571,  and  the  Edict  of  1656,  correspond  to  the  Fnglish 
Poor  Laws 

6  Professor  Rogers,  although  formerly  professor  of  polit¬ 
ical  economy  in  the  University  of  Oxford,  the  hotbed  of 
Protestant  orthodoxy,  in  his  preface  to  the  History  of  Agri¬ 
culture ,  lays  stress  on  the  fact  of  the  pauperization  of  the 
mass  of  the  people  by  the  reformation. 

7  A  letter  to  Sir  T  C  Banbury ,  Bart ,  an  the  High  Price  of 
Provisions ,  by  a  Suffolk  Gentleman ,  Ipswich,  1795,  p  4- 
Even  the  fanatical  advocate  of  the  system  of  large  farms, 
the  author  of  the  Inquiry  into  the  Connection  of  Large  Farms , 
etc  ,  London,  1773,  p  133,  says  “I  most  lament  the  loss  of 
oux  yeomanry,  that  set  of  men  who  really  kept  up  the  in- 


EXPROPRIATION  OF  AGRICULTURAL  POPULATION  359 


had,  in  the  last  decade  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬ 
tury,  the  last  trace  of  the  common  land  of  the 
agricultural  labourer.  We  leave  on  one  side  here 
the  purely  economic  causes  of  the  agricultural 
revolution.  We  deal  only  with  the  forcible 
means  employed. 

After  the  restoration  of  the  Stuarts,  the 
landed  proprietors  carried,  by  legal  means,  an 
act  of  usurpation,  effected  everywhere  on  the 
continent  without  any  legal  formality.  They 
abolished  the  feudal  tenure  of  land,  i.e.,  they 
got  rid  of  all  its  obligations  to  the  State,  “in¬ 
demnified”  the  State  by  taxes  on  the  peasantry 
and  the  rest  of  the  mass  of  the  people,  vindi¬ 
cated  for  themselves  the  rights  of  modern  pri¬ 
vate  property  in  estates  to  which  they  had  only 
a  feudal  title,  and,  finally,  passed  those  laws  of 
settlement,  which,  mutatis  mutandis ,*  had  the 
same  effect  on  the  English  agricultural  labourer 
as  the  edict  of  the  Tartar  Boris  Godunof  on  the 
Russian  peasantry. 

The  “glorious  revolution”  brought  into  pow¬ 
er,  along  with  William  of  Orange,  the  landlord 
and  capitalist  appropiiators  of  surplus  value.2 
They  inaugarated  the  new  era  by  practising  on 
a  colossal  scale  thefts  of  state  lands,  thefts  that 
had  been  hitherto  managed  more  modestly. 
These  estates  were  given  away,  sold  at  a  ridicu¬ 
lous  figure,  or  even  annexed  to  private  estates  by 
direct  seizure.3  All  this  happened  without  the 
slightest  observation  of  legal  etiquette.  The 
crown  lands  thus  fraudulently  appropriated, 
together  with  the  robbery  of  the  Church  estates, 
as  far  as  these  had  not  been  lost  again  during  the 

dependence  of  this  nation;  and  sorry  I  am  to  see  their  lands 
now  in  the  hands  of  monopolizing  lords,  tenanted  out  to 
small  farmers,  who  hold  their  leases  on  such  conditions  as 
to  be  little  better  than  vassals  ready  to  attend  a  summons 
on  every  mischievous  occasion.” 

1  Necessary  changes  having  been  made. 

*  On  the  private  moral  character  of  this  bourgeois  hero, 
among  other  things:  “The  large  grant  of  lands  in  Ireland 
to  Lady  Orkney,  in  1695,  is  a  public  instance  of  the  King’s 
affection,  and  the  lady’s  influence.  . .  .  Lady  Orkney’s  en¬ 
dearing  offices  are  supposed  to  have  been— feeda  labiorum 
minis  ter  ia  [the  dishonorable  office  of  the  lips].”  (In  the 
Sloane  Manuscript  Collection,  at  the  British  Museum,  No. 
4224.  The  Manuscript  is  entitled:  The  character  and  Be¬ 
haviour  0/  King  William ,  Sunderland ,  etc.,  as  represented  in 
Original  Letters  to  the  Duke  oj  Shrewsbury ,  from  Somers 
Halifax ,  Oxford ,  Secretary  Vernon ,  etc.  It  is  full  of  curiosa.) 

8  “The  illegal  alienation  of  the  Crown  Estates,  partly  by 
sale  and  partly  by  gift,  is  a  scandalous  chapter  in  English 
history  ...  a  gigantic  fraud  on  the  nation.”  (F.  W.  New¬ 
man,  Lectures  on  Political  Economy,  I<ondon,  1851,  pp.  129, 
1 30.)— Note  to  the  4th  edition:  For  details  as  to  how  the 
present  large  landed  proprietors  of  England  came  into  their 
possessions  see  Our  Old  Nobility ,  by  Noblesse  Oblige .  Lon¬ 
don,  1879.  F.E. 


republican  revolution,  form  the  basis  of  the  to¬ 
day  princely  domains  of  the  English  oligarchy.4 
The  bourgeois  capitalists  favoured  the  opera¬ 
tion  with  the  view,  among  others,  to  promoting 
free  trade  in  land,  to  extending  the  domain  of 
modern  agriculture  on  the  large  farm  system, 
and  to  increasing  their  supply  of  the  free  agricul¬ 
tural  proletarians  ready  to  hand.  Besides,  the 
new  landed  aristocracy  was  the  natural  ally  of 
the  new  bankocracy,  of  the  newly-hatched 
haute  finance ,  and  of  the  large  manufacturers, 
then  depending  on  protective  duties.  The  Eng¬ 
lish  bourgeoisie  acted  for  its  own  interest  quite 
as  wisely  as  did  the  Swedish  bourgeoisie  who, 
reversing  the  process,  hand  in  hand  with  their 
economic  allies,  the  peasantry,  helped  the  kings 
in  the  forcible  resumption  of  the  Crown  lands 
from  the  oligarchy.  This  has  happened  since 
1604  under  Charles  X  and  Charles  XI. 

Communal  property — always  distinct  from 
the  State  property  just  dealt  with— was  an  old 
Teutonic  institution  which  lived  on  under  cover 
of  feudalism.  We  have  seen  how  the  forcible 
usurpation  of  this,  generally  accompanied  by 
the  turning  of  arable  into  pasture  land,  begins 
at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  and  extends  into  the 
sixteenth  century.  But,  at  that  time,  the  proc¬ 
ess  was  carried  on  by  means  of  individual  acts 
of  violence  against  which  legislation,  for  a  hun¬ 
dred  and  fifty  years,  fought  in  vain.  The  ad¬ 
vance  made  by  the  eighteenth  century  shows 
itself  in  this,  that  the  law  itself  becomes  now 
the  instrument  of  the  theft  of  the  people's  land, 
although  the  large  farmers  make  use  of  their 
little  independent  methods  as  well.5  The  parlia¬ 
mentary  form  of  the  robbery  is  that  of  Acts  for 
enclosures  of  Commons  (in  other  words,  de¬ 
crees  by  which  the  landlords  grant  themselves 
the  people's  land  as  private  property)  decrees 
of  expropriation  of  the  people.  Sir  F.  M.  Eden 
refutes  his  own  crafty  special  pleading,  in  which 
he  tries  to  represent  communal  property  as  the 
private  property  of  the  great  landlords  who 
have  taken  the  place  of  the  feudal  lords,  when 
he  himself  demands  a  “general  Act  of  Parlia- 

4  Read,  for  example,  E.  Burke’s  pamphlet  on  the  ducal 
house  of  Bedford,  whose  offshoot  was  Lord  John  Russell 
the“  tomtit  of  liberalism.” 

1  “The  farmers  forbid  cottagers  to  keep  any  living  crea¬ 
tures  besides  themselves  and  children,  under  the  pretence 
that  if  they  keep  any  beasts  or  poultry  they  will  steal  from 
the  farmers’  barns  for  their  support;  they  also  say,  keep 
the  cottagers  poor  and  you  will  keep  them  industrious,  etc., 
but  the  real  fact,  I  believe,  is  that  the  farmers  may  have 
the  whole  right  of  common  to  themselves.” — A  Political 
Inquiry  into  the  Consequences  of  Enclosing  Waste  Lands 
London,  1785,  p.  75. 


CAPITAL 


360 

ment  for  the  enclosure  of  Commons"  (admit¬ 
ting  thereby  that  a  parliamentary  coup  d'&tat 
is  necessary  for  its  transformation  into  private 
property),  and  moreover  calls  on  the  legislature 
for  the  indemnification  for  the  expropriated 
poor.1 

Whilst  the  place  of  the  independent  yeoman 
was  taken  by  tenants  at  will,  small  farmers  on 
yearly  leases,  a  servile  rabble  dependent  on  the 
pleasure  of  the  landlords,  the  systematic  rob¬ 
bery  of  the  Communal  lands  helped  especially, 
next  to  the  theft  of  the  State  domains,  to  swell 
those  large  farms  that  were  called  in  the  eight¬ 
eenth  century  "capital  farms"2 *  or  "merchant 
farms"*  and  to  “set  free”  the  agricultural  popu¬ 
lation  as  proletarians  for  manufacturing  indus- 
try. 

The  eighteenth  century,  however,  did  not  yet 
recognize  as  fully  as  the  nineteenth  the  identity 
between  national  wealth  and  the  poverty  of  the 
people.  Hence  the  most  vigorous  polemic  in  the 
economic  literature  of  that  time  on  the  "en¬ 
closure  of  commons."  From  the  mass  of  ma¬ 
terials  that  lie  before  me,  I  give  a  few  extracts 
that  will  throw  a  strong  light  on  the  circum¬ 
stances  of  the  time.  "In  several  parishes  of 
Hertfordshire,"  writes  one  indignant  person, 
"twenty-four  farms,  numbering  on  the  average 
50  to  1 50  acres,  have  been  melted  up  into  three 
farms."4 *  "In  Northamptonshire  and  Leicester¬ 
shire,  the  enclosure  of  common  lands  has  taken 
place  on  a  very  large  scale,  and  most  of  the  new 
lordships  resulting  from  the  enclosure  have 
been  turned  into  pasturage,  in  consequence  of 
which  many  lordships  have  ‘not  now  50  acres 
ploughed  yearly,  in  which  1  joo  were  ploughed 
formerly.  The  ruins  of  former  dwelling-houses, 
barns,  stables,  etc.,"  are  the  sole  traces  of  the 
former  inhabitants.  "An  hundred  houses  and 
families  have  in  some  open  field  villages .... 
dwindled  to  eight  or  ten. . . .  The  landholders 
in  most  parishes  that  have  been  enclosed  only 
fifteen  or  twenty  years  are  very  few  in  compar¬ 
ison  of  the  numbers  who  occupied  them  in  their 
open-field  state.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  for 
four  or  five  wealthy  graziers  to  engross  a  large 

1  Eden,  op.  cii.t  preface. 

*  “Capital  Farms”— Two  letters  on  the  Flour  Trade  and 
the  Dearness  0]  Corn ,  by  a  Person  tn  Business ,  London, 
1767,  pp.  19, 20. 

1  “Merchant  Farms” — An  Inquiry  into  the  present  High 
Prices  of  Provisions ,  London,  1767,  p.  11,  note.— This  ex¬ 
cellent  work,  published  anonymously,  was  written  by  the 
Rev.  Nathaniel  Forster. 

4  Thomas  Wright,  A  Short  Address  to  the  Public  on  the 

Monopoly  of  Large  Farms ,  1779,  pp.  2, 3. 


enclosed  lordship  which  was  before  in  the  hands 
of  twenty  or  thirty  farmers,  and  as  many  smaller 
tenants  and  proprietors.  All  these  are  hereby 
thrown  out  of  their  livings  with  their  families 
and  many  other  families  who  were  chiefly  em¬ 
ployed  and  supported  by  them."6  It  was  not 
only  the  land  that  lay  waste,  but  often  land 
cultivated  either  in  common  or  held  under  a 
definite  rent  paid  to  the  community,  that  was 
annexed  by  the  neighbouring  landlords  under 
pretext  of  enclosure.  "I  have  here  in  view  en¬ 
closures  of  open  fields  and  lands  already  im¬ 
proved.  It  is  acknowledged  by  even  the  writers 
in  defence  of  enclosures  that  these  diminished 
villages  increase  the  monopolies  of  farms,  raise 
the  prices  of  provisions,  and  produce  depopula¬ 
tion  ....  and  even  the  enclosure  of  waste  lands 
(as  now  carried  on)  bears  hard  on  the  poor,  by 
depriving  them  of  a  part  of  their  subsistence, 
and  only  goes  towards  increasing  farms  already 
too  large.6  "When,"  says  Dr.  Price,  “this  land 
gets  into  the  hands  of  a  few  great  farmers,  the 
consequence  must  be  that  the  little  farmers" 
(earlier  designated  by  him  as  "a  multitude  of 
little  proprietors  and  tenants,  who  maintain 
themselves  and  families  by  the  produce  of  the 
ground  they  occupy,  by  sheep  kept  on  a  com¬ 
mon,  by  poultry,  hogs,  etc.,  and  who  therefore 
have  little  occasion  to  purchase  any  of  the 
means  of  subsistence")  "will  be  converted  into 
a  body  of  men  who  earn  their  subsistence  by 
working  for  others,  and  who  will  be  under  a 
necessity  of  going  to  market  for  all  they  want 
....  There  will,  perhaps,  be  more  labour,  be¬ 
cause  there  will  be  more  compulsion  to  it . 

Towns  and  manufacturers  will  increase,  be¬ 
cause  more  will  be  driven  to  them  in  quest  of 
places  and  employment.  This  is  the  way  in 
which  the  engrossing  of  farms  naturally  oper¬ 
ates.  And  this  is  the  way  in  which,  for  many 
years,  it  has  been  actually  operating  in  this 
kingdom.”7  He  sums  up  the  effect  of  the  enclo¬ 
sures  thus:  "Upon  the  whole,  the  circumstances 
of  the  lower  ranks  of  men  are  altered  in  almost 
every  respect  for  the  worse.  From  little  occu¬ 
piers  of  land,  they  are  reduced  to  the  state  of 
day  labourers  and  hirelings;  and,  at  the  same 
time,  their  subsistence  in  that  st^te  has  become 

1  Rev.  Addington,  Inquiry  into  the  Redtons for  or  against 
enclosing  Open  Fields ,  London,  1772,  pp.  37, 43  passim. 

•Dr.  R.  Price,  op.  cit.t  Vol.  II,  p.  1$ 5.— Forster,  Ad¬ 
dington,  Kent,  Price,  and  James  Anderson,  should  be  read 
and  compared  with  the  miserable  prattle  of  sycophant  Mc¬ 
Culloch  in  his  catalogue,  The  Literature  of  Political  Econ¬ 
omy  t  London,  1845. 

7  Price,  op.  ct /.,  p.  1 47. 


EXPROPRIATION  OF  AGRICULTURAL  POPULATION  361 


more  difficult.”1  In  fact,  usurpation  of  the  com¬ 
mon  lands  and  the  revolution  in  agriculture  ac¬ 
companying  this,  told  so  acutely  on  the  agricul¬ 
tural  labourers  that,  even  according  to  Eden, 
between  1765  and  1780,  their  wages  began  to 
fall  below  the  minimum,  and  to  be  supple¬ 
mented  by  official  Poor  Law  relief.  Their  wages, 
he  says  41  were  not  more  than  enough  for  the 
absolute  necessaries  of  life.” 

Let  us  hear  for  a  moment  a  defender  of  en¬ 
closures  and  an  opponent  of  Dr.  Price.  “Nor  is 
it  a  consequence  that  there  must  be  depopula¬ 
tion,  because  men  are  not  seen  wasting  their  la¬ 
bour  in  the  open  field. . .  .  If,  by  converting  the 
li  ttle  farmers  into  a  body  of  men  who  must  work 
for  others,  more  labour  is  produced,  it  is  an  ad¬ 
vantage  which  the  nation”  (to  which,  of  course, 
the  “converted”  ones  do  not  belong)  “should 
wish  for. . .  .  The  produce  being  greater  when 
their  joint  labours  are  employed  on  one  farm, 
there  will  be  a  surplus  for  manufactures,  and  by 
this  means  manufactures,  one  of  the  mines 
of  the  nation,  will  i -crease  in  proportion  to  the 
quantity  of  corn  produced.”2 

The  stoical  peace  of  mind  with  which  the  po¬ 
litical  economist  regards  the  most  shameless  vi¬ 
olation  of  the  “sacred  rights  of  property”  and 

1  Ibid .,  p.  1 59 — \Ve  arc  reminded  of  ancient  Rome.  “The 
rich  had  got  possession  of  the  greater  part  of  the  undivided 
land.  They  trusted  in  the  conditions  of  the  time,  that  these 
possessions  would  not  be  again  taken  from  them,  and 
bought,  therefore,  some  of  the  pieces  of  land  lying  near 
theirs  and  belonging  to  the  poor,  with  the  acquiescence  of 
their  owners,  and  took  some  by  force,  so  that  they  now 
were  cultivating  widely  extended  domains  instead  of  iso¬ 
lated  fields.  Then  they  employed  slaves  in  agriculture  and 
cattle-breeding,  because  freemen  would  have  been  taken 
from  labour  for  military  service.  The  possession  of  slaves 
brought  them  great  gain,  inasmuch  as  these,  on  account  of 
their  immunity  from  military  service,  could  freely  multi¬ 
ply  and  have  a  multitude  of  children.  Thus  the  powerful 
men  drew  all  wealth  to  themselves,  and  all  the  land  swarmed 
with  slaves.  The  Italians,  on  the  other  hand,  were  always 
decreasing  in  number,  destroyed  as  they  were  by  poverty, 
taxes,  and  military  service.  Even  when  times  of  peace 
came,  they  were  doomed  to  complete  inactivity,  because 
the  rich  were  in  possession  of  the  soil,  and  used  slaves  in¬ 
stead  of  free  men  in  the  tilling  of  it.”  (Appian,  Civil  Wars , 
I,  7.)  This  passage  refers  to  the  time  before  the  Licinian 
rogations.  Military  service,  which  hastened  to  so  great  an 
extent  the  ruin  of  the  Roman  plebeians,  was  also  the  chief 
means  by  which,  as  in  a  forcing-house,  Charlemagne 
brought  about  the  transformation  of  free  German  peasants 
into  serfs  and  bondsmen. 

*  An  Inquiry  into  the  Connection  between  the  Present  Prices 
of  Provisions ,  etc.,  pp.  124,  129. — To  the  like  effect,  but 
with  an  opposite  tendency:  “Working  men  are  driven  from 
their  cottages  and  forced  into  the  towns  to  seek  for  em¬ 
ployment;  but  then  a  larger  surplus  is  obtained,  and  thus 
capital  is  augmented.”—-  The  Perils  of  the  Nation ,  2nd  edi¬ 
tion  London,  1843,  p.  14. 


the  grossest  acts  of  violence  to  persons,  as  soon 
as  they  are  necessary  to  lay  the  foundations  of 
the  capitalistic  mode  of  production,  is  shown  by 
Sir.  F.  M.  Eden,  philanthropist  and  tory,  to 
boot.  The  whole  series  of  thefts,  outrages,  and 
popular  misery,  that  accompanied  the  forcible 
expropriation  of  the  people,  from  the  last  third 
of  the  fifteenth  to  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬ 
tury,  lead  him  merely  to  the  comfortable  con¬ 
clusion;  “The  due  proportion  between  arable 
land  and  pasture  had  to  be  established.  During 
the  whole  of  the  fourteenth  and  the  greater  part 
of  the  fifteenth  century,  there  was  one  acre  of 
pasture  to  two,  three,  and  even  four  of  arable 
land.  About  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century 
the  proportion  was  changed  to  two  acres  of  pas¬ 
ture  to  two,  later  on,  of  two  acres  of  pasture  to 
one  of  arable,  until  at  last  the  just  proportion 
of  three  acres  of  pasture  to  one  of  arable  land 
was  attained.”' 

In  the  nineteenth  century,  the  very  memory 
of  the  connection  between  the  agricultural  la¬ 
bourer  and  the  communal  property  had,  of 
course,  vanished.  To  say  nothing  of  more  re¬ 
cent  times,  have  the  agricultural  population  re¬ 
ceived  a  farthing  of  compensation  for  the 
3,51 1,770  acres  of  common  land  which  between 
1801  and  1831  were  stolen  from  them  and  by 
parliamentary  devices  presented  to  the  land¬ 
lords  by  the  landlords? 

The  last  process  of  wholesale  expropriation 
of  the  agricultural  population  from  the  soil  is, 
finally,  the  so-called  clearing  of  estates,  i.e.,  the 
sweeping  men  off  them.  All  the  English  meth¬ 
ods  hitherto  considered  culminated  in  “clear¬ 
ing.”  As  we  saw  in  the  picture  of  modern  condi¬ 
tions  given  in  a  former  chapter,  where  there  are 
no  more  independent  peasants  to  get  rid  of,  the 
“clearing”  of  cottages  begins;  so  that  the  agri¬ 
cultural  labourers  do  not  find  on  the  soil  culti¬ 
vated  by  them  even  the  spot  necessary  for  their 
own  housing.  But  what  “clearing  of  estates” 
really  and  properly  signifies,  we  learn  only  in 
the  promised  land  of  modern  romance,  the 
Highlands  of  Scotland.  There  the  process  is  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  its  systematic  character,  by  the 
magnitude  of  the  scale  on  which  it  is  carried  out 
at  one  blow  (in  Ireland  landlords  have  gone  to 
the  length  of  sweeping  away  several  villages  at 
once;  in  Scotland  areas  as  large  as  German  prin¬ 
cipalities  are  dealt  with),  finally  by  the  peculiar 
form  of  property,  under  which  the  embezzled 
lands  were  held. 

The  Highland  Celts  were  organized  in  clans, 
each  of  which  was  the  owner  of  the  land  on 


CAPITAL 


362 

which  it  was  settled  The  representative  of  the 
dan,  its  chief  or  “great  man,”  was  only  the  titu¬ 
lar  owner  of  this  property,  just  as  the  Queen  of 
England  is  the  titular  owner  of  all  the  national 
soil.  When  the  English  government  succeeded 
in  suppressing  the  intestine  wars  of  these  “great 
men,”  and  their  constant  incursions  into  the 
Lowland  plains,  the  chiefs  of  the  clans  by  no 
means  gave  up  their  time  honoured  trade  as 
robbers,  they  only  changed  its  form  On  their 
own  authority  they  transformed  their  nominal 
right  into  a  right  of  private  property,  and  as 
this  brought  them  into  collision  with  their 
clansmen,  resolved  to  drive  them  out  by  open 
force  “A  king  of  England  might  as  well  claim 
to  drive  his  subjects  into  the  sea,”  says  Profes¬ 
sor  Newman  1  This  revolution,  which  began  in 
Scotland  after  the  last  rising  of  the  followers  of 
the  Stuart  Pretender,  can  be  followed  through 
its  first  phases  in  the  writings  of  Sir  James 
Steuart*  and  James  Anderson 3  In  the  eight¬ 
eenth  century,  the  hunted  out  Gaels  were  for¬ 
bidden  to  emigrate  from  the  country,  with  a 
view  to  driving  them  by  force  to  Glasgow  and 
other  manufacturing  towns 4  As  an  example  of 
the  method6  obtaining  in  the  nineteenth  cen- 
lOp  at,p  132 

*  Steuart  say9  *  If  you  compare  the  rent  of  these  lands  * 
(he  erroneously  includes  in  this  economic  category  the 
tribute  of  the  taskmen  to  the  clan-chief)  *with  the  extent, 
it  appears  very  small  If  you  compare  it  with  the  numbers 
fed  upon  the  farm,  you  will  find  that  an  estate  in  the  High¬ 
lands  maintains,  perhaps,  ten  times  as  many  people  as 
another  of  the  same  value  m  a  good  and  fertile  provinte  * 
—Op  n/,Vol  I, ch  xvi, p  104 
1  James  Anderson,  Observations  oh  the  Means  of  Exciting 
a  Spirit  of  National  Industry ,  etc  ,  Edinburgh,  1777 
4  In  1860,  the  people  expropriated  by  force  were  export¬ 
ed  to  Canada  under  false  pretences  Some  fled  to  the  moun¬ 
tains  and  neighbouring  islands  1  hey  were  followed  b>  the 
police,  came  to  blows  with  them,  and  escaped 
4  "In  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  says  Buchanan,  the 
commentator  on  Adam  Smith,  the  ancient  state  of  prop¬ 
erty  is  daily  subverted  1  he  landlord,  without  regard 
to  the  hereditary  tenant  (a  category  used  in  error  here), 
"now  offers  his  land  to  the  highest  bidder,  who,  if  he  is  an 
improver,  instantly  adopts  a  new  system  of  cultivation 
The  land,  formerly  overspread  with  small  tenants  or  la¬ 
bourers,  was  peopled  in  proportion  to  its  produce,  but  un 
der  the  new  system  of  improved  cultivation  and  increased 
rents,  the  largest  possible  produce  is  obtained  at  the  least 
possible  expense,  and  the  useless  hands  being,  with  this 
view,  removed,  the  population  is  reduced,  not  to  what  the 
land  will  maintain,  but  to  what  it  will  employ  1  he  dispos¬ 
sessed  tenants  either  seek  a  subsistence  in  the  neighbour¬ 
ing  towns,  etc  (David  Buchanan,  Observations  on,  etc  , 
A  Smith  s  Wealth  of  Nations,  Fdinburgh,  1 8 14,  Vol  IV,  p 
144)'  The  Scotch  grandees  dispossessed  families  a9  they 
would  grub  up  coppice  wood,  and  they  treated  villages 
and  their  people  as  Indians  harassed  with  wild  beasts  do, 
in  their  vengeance,  a  jungle  with  tigers  Man  is  bar 
tered  for  a  fleece  or  a  carcase  of  mutton,  nay,  held  cheaper 
•  • .  Why,  how  much  worse  is  it  than  the  intention  of  the 


tury,  the  “clearing”  made  by  the  Duchess  of 
Sutherland  will  suffice  here  This  person,  well 
instructed  in  economy,  resolved,  on  entering 
upon  her  government,  to  effect  a  radical  cure, 
and  to  turn  the  whole  country,  whose  popula¬ 
tion  had  already  been,  by  earlier  processes  of 
the  like  kind,  reduced  to  15,000,  into  a  sheep- 
walk  From  1814  to  1820,  these  15,000  inhabit¬ 
ants,  about  3000  families,  were  systematically 
hunted  and  rooted  out  All  their  villages  were 
destroyed  and  burnt,  all  their  fields  turned  into 
pasturage.  British  soldiers  enforced  this  evic¬ 
tion  and  came  to  blows  with  the  inhabit  ints. 
One  old  woman  was  burnt  to  death  in  the  flames 
of  the  hut,  which  she  refused  to  leave  Thus  this 
fine  lady  appropriated  794,000  acres  of  land 
that  had  from  time  immemorial  belonged  to  the 
clan  She  assigned  to  the  expelled  inhabitants 
about  6000  acres  on  the  seashore — two  acres 
per  family  The  6000  acres  had  until  this  time 
lain  waste,  and  brought  in  no  income  to  their 
owners  1  he  Duchess,  in  the  nobility  of  her 
heart,  actually  went  so  far  as  to  let  these  at  an 
average  rent  of  2 s  6d  per  acre  to  the  clansmen, 
who  for  centuries  had  shed  their  blood  for  her 
family  The  whole  of  the  stolen  clan  land  she 
divided  into  twenty-nine  great  sheep  farms, 
each  inhabited  by  a  single  family,  for  the  most 
part  imported  English  farm  servants  In  the 
year  1835,  *5>ooo  Gaels  jyere  already  re¬ 
placed  by  131,000  sheep  The  remnant  of  the 
aborigines  flung  on  the  seashore,  tried  to  live 
by  catching  fish  T  hey  bee  ime  amphibious  md 
lived,  as  an  English  author  says,  half  on  land 
and  half  on  water,  and  withal  only  half  on 
both  6 

But  the  brave  Gaels  must  expiate  yet  more 
bitterly  their  idolatry,  romantic  and  of  the 
mountains,  for  the  “great  men”  of  the  clan  The 
smell  of  their  fish  rose  to  the  noses  of  the  great 

Moguls,  who,  when  they  had  broken  into  the  northern 
provinces  of  China,  proposed  in  council  to  exterminate  the 
inhabitants,  and  convert  the  land  into  pasture  1  his  pro 
posal  many  Highland  proprietors  have  effected  in  their 
own  country  against  their  own  countrymen  (George  En- 
sor.  An  Inquiry  concerning  the  Population  of  Nations, Lon 
don,  1818,  pp  215,216  ) 

1  When  the  present  Duchess  of  Sutherland  entertained 
Mrs  Beecher  Stowe,  authoress  of  Uncle  Tom  s  Cabin ,  with 
great  magnificence  in  London,  to  show  her  sympathy  for 
the  negro  slaves  of  the  American  republic — a  sympathy 
that  she  prudently  forgot,  with  her  felloi  aristocrats,  dur 
ing  the  Civil  War,  in  which  every  noble  English  heart 
beat  for  the  slave-owner— I  gave  in  the  New  York  Tribune 
the  facts  about  the  Sutherland  slaves  (Epitomized  in  part 
by  Carey  m  The  Slave  Trade,  London,  1853,  p  202,  203  ) 
My  article  was  reprinted  in  a  Scotch  newspaper  and  led  to 
a  pretty  polemic  between  the  latter  and  the  sycophants  of 
the  Sutherlands 


EXPROPRIATION  OF  AGRICULTURAL  POPULATION  363 


men.  They  scented  some  profit  in  it,  and  let  the 
Seashore  to  the  great  fishmongers  of  London. 
For  the  second  time  the  Gaels  were  hunted  out.1 

But,  finally,  part  of  the  sheep-walks  are 
turned  into  deer  preserves.  Every  one  knows 
that  there  are  no  real  forests  in  England.  The 
deer  in  the  parks  of  the  great  are  demurely  do¬ 
mestic  cattle,  fat  as  London  aldermen.  Scot¬ 
land  is  therefore  the  last  refuge  of  the  “noble 
passion.”  “In  the  Highlands,”  says  Somers  in 
1848,  “new  forests  are  springing  up  like  mush¬ 
rooms.  Here,  on  one  side  of  Gaick,  you  have  the 
new  forest  of  Glenfeshie;  and  there,  on  the  oth¬ 
er,  you  have  the  new  forest  of  Ardverikie.  In  the 
same  line  you  have  the  Black  Mount,  an  im¬ 
mense  waste  also  recently  erected.  From  east  to 
west— from  the  neighbourhood  of  Aberdeen 
to  the  crags  of  Oban — you  have  now  a  con¬ 
tinuous  line  of  forests;  while  in  other  parts  of 
the  1  lighlands  there  are  the  new  forests  of  Loch 
Archaig,  Glengarry,  Glenmoriston,  etc.  Sheep 
were  introduced  into  glens  which  had  been  the 
seats  of  communities  of  small  farmers;  and  the 
latter  were  driver  to  seek  subsistence  on  coarser 
and  more  sterile  tracks  of  soil.  Now  deer  are 
supplanting  sheep;  and  these  are  once  more  dis¬ 
possessing  the  small  tenants,  who  will  neces¬ 
sarily  be  driven  down  upon  still  coarser  land 
and  to  more  grinding  penury.  Deer  forests2  and 
the  people  cannot  co-exist.  One  or  other  of  the 
two  must  yield.  Let  the  forests  be  increased  in 
number  and  extent  during  the  next  quarter  of  a 
century,  as  they  have  been  in  the  last,  and  the 
Gaels  will  perish  from  their  native  soil. . . .  This 
movement  among  the  Highland  proprietors  is 
with  some  a  matter  of  ambition  . . .  with  some, 
love  of  sport .  . .  while  others,  of  a  more  prac¬ 
tical  cast,  follow  the  trade  in  deer  with  an  eye 
solely  to  profit.  For  it  is  a  fact,  that  a  mountain 
range  laid  out  in  forest  is,  in  many  cases,  more 
profitable  to  the  proprietor  than  when  let  as  a 
sheep-walk.  .  .  .  The  huntsman  who  wants  a 
deer-forest  limits  his  offers  by  no  other  calcula¬ 
tion  than  the  extent  of  his  purse. .  . .  Sufferings 
have  been  inflicted  in  the  Highlands  scarcely 
less  severe  than  those  occasioned  by  the  policy 
of  the  Norman  kings.  Deer  have  received  ex¬ 
pended  ranges,  while  men  have  been  hunted 

1  Interesting  details  on  this  fish  trade  will  be  found  in 
Mr.  David  Urquhart’s  Portfolio ,  new  series.— Nassau  W. 
Senior,  in  his  posthumous  work,  already  quoted,  terms 
“the  proceedings  in  Sutherlandshire  one  of  the  most  bene¬ 
ficent  clearings  since  the  memory  of  man.1' 

2  The  deer-forests  of  Scotland  contain  not  a  single  tree. 
The  sheep  are  driven  from,  and  then  the  deer  driven  to, 
the  naked  hills,  and  then  it  is  called  a  deer-forest.  Not  even 

timber-planting  and  real  forest  culture. 


within  a  narrower  and  still  narrower  circle. . . . 
One  after  one  the  liberties  of  the  people  have 
been  cloven  down. . . .  And  the  oppressions  are 
daily  on  the  increase.  .  .  .  The  clearance  and 
dispersion  of  the  people  is  pursued  by  the 
proprietors  as  a  settled  principle,  as  an  agricul¬ 
tural  necessity,  just  as  trees  and  brushwood 
are  cleared  from  the  wastes  of  America  or 
Australia;  and  the  operation  goes  on  in  a 
quiet,  business-like  way,  etc.”3 

a  Robert  Somers,  Letters  Jrom  the  Highlands ,  or  the  Fam¬ 
ine  oj  1847 »  London  1848,  pp.  12-28  passim.  These  letters 
originally  appeared  in  The  Times . — The  English  econo¬ 
mists,  of  course,  explained  the  famine  of  the  Gaels  in  1847 
by  their  overpopulation.  At  all  events,  they  “were  pressing 
on  their  food  supply."  The  “clearing  of  estates,"  or,  as  it 
is  called  in  Germany,  Bauernlegen ,  occurred  in  Germany 
especially  after  the  Thirty  Years’  War,  and  led  to  peasant 
revolts  as  late  as  1790  in  Kursachsen.  It  obtained  especial¬ 
ly  in  East  Germany.  In  most  of  the  Prussian  provinces, 
Frederick  II  for  the  first  time  secured  right  of  property  for 
the  peasants.  After  the  conquest  of  Silesia,  he  forced  the 
landlords  to  rebuild  the  huts,  barns,  etc.,  and  to  provide 
the  peasants  with  cattle  and  implements.  He  wanted  sol¬ 
diers  for  his  army  and  tax-payers  for  his  treasury.  For  the 
rest,  the  pleasant  life  that  the  peasant  led  under  Freder¬ 
ick’s  system  of  finance  and  hodge-podge  rule  of  despot¬ 
ism,  bureaucracy  and  feudalism,  may  be  seen  from  the 
following  quotation  from  his  admirer,  Mirabeau:  “Thus 
flax  represents  one  of  the  greatest  riches  of  the  peasant  of 
North  Germany.  Unfortunately  for  humanity,  this  is  only 
a  remedy  against  poverty  and  not  a  means  for  well-being. 
The  direct  taxes,  the  feudal  statute  labour,  servitude  of 
every  variety,  all  these  overwhelm  the  German  peasant, 
who  pays  even  indirect  taxes  in  every  purchase  that  he 
makes. . . .  And  to  complete  his  ruin,  he  dares  not  sell  his 
products  where  and  as  he  may  wish  to;  he  dares  not,  more¬ 
over,  buy  what  he  needs  from  those  merchants  who  could 
sell  it  to  him  at  a  lower  price.  All  these  causes  impercep¬ 
tibly  bring  about  his  ruin,  and  without  his  spinning  he 
would  find  himself  unable  to  pay  the  direct  taxes  when  they 
are  due.  This  furnishes  him  with  an  expedient,  by  giving 
useful  employment  to  his  wife,  his  children,  his  servants, 
and  himself.  But  what  a  hard  life,  despite  these  remedies! 
In  the  summer  he  works  like  a  convict,  ploughing  and  reap¬ 
ing;  he  retires  at  nine  and  rises  at  two,  in  order  to  be  able 
to  finish  his  work.  In  the  winter  he  should  repair  his  strength 
by  taking  a  long  rest,  but  then  he  would  be  without  grains 
for  bread  and  for  sowing,  if  he  is  to  sell  all  the  products 
which  he  must  sell  in  order  to  pay  the  taxes.  To  fill  this 
gap,  therefore,  he  has  to  spin  . . .  and,  to  be  sure,  with  the 
maximum  perseverance.  So  in  winter  the  peasant  goes  to 
bed  at  midnight,  or  one,  and  gets  up  at  five  or  six — and 
this  is  the  regular  routine  every  day  of  his  life,  save  Sun¬ 
day.  This  excessive  vigilance  and  work  is  destructive  of 
human  nature,  and  so  it  comes  about  that  men  and  women 
age  more  quickly  in  the  country  than  in  the  towns." — 
Mirabean,  op.  eit.9  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  212  ff. 

Note  to  the  second  edition:  In  April  18 66, 18  years  after 
the  publication  of  the  work  of  Robert  Somers  quoted  above, 
Professor  Leone  Levi  gave  a  lecture  before  the  Society  of 
Arts  on  the  transformation  of  sheep-walks  into  deer-forest, 
in  which  he  depicts  the  advance  in  the  devastation  of  the 
Scottish  Highlands.  He  says,  with  other  things:  “Depopu¬ 
lation  and  transformation  into  sheep-walks  were  the  most 
convenient  means  for  getting  an  income  without  expendi¬ 
ture.  ...  A  deer-forest  in  place  of  a  sheep-walk  was  a  com- 


CAPITAL 


364 

The  spoliation  of  the  church’s  property,  the 
fraudulent  alienation  of  the  State  domains,  the 
robbery  of  the  common  lands,  the  usurpation  of 
feudal  and  clan  property,  and  its  transforma¬ 
tion  into  modern  private  property  under  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  reckless  terrorism,  were  just  so 
many  idyllic  methods  of  primitive  accumula¬ 
tion.  They  conquered  the  field  for  capitalistic 
agriculture,  made  the  soil  part  and  parcel  of 
capital,  and  created  for  the  town  industries  the 
necessary  supply  of  a  “free**  and  outlawed  pro¬ 
letariat. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII.  BLOODY  LEGISLATION 
AGAINST  THE  EXPROPRIATED,  FROM 
THE  END  OF  THE  FIFTEENTH  CENTURY. 
FORCING  DOWN  OF  WAGES  BY 
ACTS  OF  PARLIAMENT 

The  proletariat  created  by  the  breaking  up  of 
the  bands  of  feudal  retainers  and  by  the  forcible 
expropriation  of  the  people  from  the  soil,  this 
“free”  proletariat  could  not  possibly  be  ab¬ 
sorbed  by  the  nascent  manufactures  as  fast  as 

mon  change  in  the  Highlands.  The  landowners  turned  out 
the  sheep  as  they  once  turned  out  the  men  from  their 
estates,  and  welcomed  the  new  tenants— the  wild  beasts 
and  the  feathered  birds. . . .  One  can  walk  from  the  Earl  of 
Dalhousie's  estates  in  Forfarshire  to  John  o’ Groats,  with¬ 
out  ever  leaving  forest  land. ...  In  many  of  these  woods,  the 
fox,  the  wild  cat,  the  marten,  the  polecat,  the  weasel  and 
the  Alpine  hare  are  common;  whilst  the  rabbit,  the  squir¬ 
rel  and  the  rat  have  lately  made  their  way  into  the  coun¬ 
try.  Immense  tracts  of  land,  much  of  which  is  describe^!  in 
the  statistical  account  of  Scotland  as  having  a  pasturage 
in  richness  and  extent  of  very  superior  description,  arc  thus 
shut  out  from  all  cultivation  and  improvement,  and  are 
solely  devoted  to  the  sport  of  a  few  persons  for  a  very  brief 
period  of  the  year."  The  London  Economist  oi  June  2, 1 866, 
says:  "Amongst  the  items  of  news  in  a  Scotch  paper  of  la9t 
week,  we  read. . . .  'One  of  the  finest  sheep  farms  in  Suther- 
landshire,  for  which  a  rent  of  £1,200  a  year  was  recently 
offered,  on  the  expiry  of  the  existing  lease  this  year,  is  to 
be  converted  into  a  deer-forest.'  Here  we  see  the  modern 
instincts  of  feudalism  . . .  operating  pretty  much  as  they 
did  when  the  Norman  Conqueror  . . .  destroyed  thirty-six 
villages  to  create  the  New  Forest. ...  Two  millions  of  acres 
. . .  totally  laid  waste,  embracing  within  their  area  some  of 
the  most  fertile  lands  of  Scotland.  The  natural  grass  of 
Glen  Tilt  was  among  the  most  nutritive  in  the  county  of 
Perth.  The  deer-forest  of  Ben  Aulder  was  by  the  best 
grazing  ground  in  the  wide  district  of  Badcnoch;  a  part 
of  the  Black  Mount  forest  was  the  best  pasture  for  black¬ 
faced  sheep  in  Scotland.  Some  idea  of  the  ground  laid  waste 
for  purely  sporting  purposes  in  Scotland  may  be  formed 
from  the  fact  that  it  embraced  an  area  larger  than  the 
whole  county  of  Perth.  The  resources  of  the  forest  of  Ben 
Aulder  might  give  some  idea  of  the  loss  sustained  from  the 
forced  desolations.  The  ground  would  pasture  1 5,000  sheep, 
and  as  it  was  not  more  than  one-thirtieth  part  of  the  old 
forest  ground  in  Scotland  ...  it  might  etc.  . . .  All  that 
forest  land  is  as  totally  unproductive. ...  It  might  thus  as 


it  was  thrown  upon  the  world.  On  the  other 
hand,  these  men,  suddenly  dragged  from  their 
wonted  mode  of  life,  could  not  as  suddenly 
adapt  themselves  to  the  discipline  of  their  new 
condition.  They  were  turned  en  masse  into  beg¬ 
gars,  robbers,  vagabonds,  partly  from  inclina¬ 
tion,  in  most  cases  from  stress  of  circumstances. 
Hence  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  and  during  the 
whole  of  the  sixteenth  century,  throughout 
western  Europe  there  was  enacted  a  bloody 
legislation  against  vagabondage.  The  fathers  of 
the  present  working  class  were  chastised  for 
their  enforced  transformation  into  vagabonds 
and  paupers.  Legislation  treated  them  as  “vol¬ 
untary”  criminals,  and  assumed  that  it  de¬ 
pended  on  their  own  goodwill  to  go  on  working 
under  the  old  conditions  that  no  longer  existed. 

In  England  this  legislation  began  under 
Henry  VII. 

Under  Henry  VIII,  came  the  Act  of  1530: 
Beggars  old  and  unable  to  work  were  to  receive 
a  beggar’s  licence.  On  the  other  hand,  whipping 
and  imprisonment  were  for  sturdy  vagabonds. 
They  were  to  be  tied  to  the  cart-tail  and 
whipped  until  the  blood  streamed  from  their 
bodies,  then  to  swear  an  oath  to  go  back  to  their 
birthplace  or  to  where  they  had  lived  the  last 
three  years  and  to  “put  themselves  to  labour.” 
What  grim  irony!  In  27  Henry  VIII,  the  former 
statute  was  repeated,  but  strengthened  with 
new  clauses.  For  the  second  arrest  for  vaga¬ 
bondage,  the  whipping  was  tcTbe  repeated  and 
half  the  ear  sliced  off;  but  for  the  third  relapse, 
the  offender  was  to  be  executed  as  a  hardened 
criminal  and  enemy  of  the  common  weal. 

Then  came  Edward  VI ;  A  statute  of  the  first 
year  of  his  reign,  1J47,  ordained  that  if  anyone 
refused  to  work,  he  should  be  condemned  as  a 
slave  to  the  person  who  had  denounced  him  as 
an  idler.  The  master  should  feed  his  slave  on 
bread  and  water,  weak  broth  and  such  refuse 
meat  as  he  thought  fit.  He  had  the  right  to  force 
him  to  do  any  work,  no  matter  how  disgusting, 
with  whip  and  chains.  If  the  slave  was  absent  a 
fortnight,  he  was  condemned  to  slavery  for  life 
and  was  to  be  branded  on  forehead  or  back 
with  the  letter  S;  if  he  ran  away  thrice,  he  was 
to  be  executed  as  a  felon.  The  master  could  sell 
him,  bequeath  him,  let  him  out  on  hire  as  a 
slave,  just  as  any  other  personal  chattel  or  cat¬ 
tle.  If  the  slaves  attempted  anything  against 
the  masters,  they  were  also  to  be  executed.  Jus- 

wcll  have  been  submerged  under  the  waters  of  the  German 
Ocean.. .  .Such  extemporized  wildernesses  or  deserts  ought 
to  be  put  down  by  the  decided  interference  of  the  legisla¬ 
ture." 


LEGISLATION  AGAINST  THE  EXPROPRIATED 


tices  of  the  peace,  on  information,  were  to  hunt 
the  rascals  down.  If  it  happened  that  a  vaga¬ 
bond  had  been  idling  about  for  three  days,  he 
was  to  be  taken  to  his  birthplace,  branded  with 
a  redhot  iron  with  the  letter  V  on  the  breast  and 
set  to  work,  in  chains,  in  the  streets  or  at  some 
other  labour.  If  the  vagabond  gave  a  false  birth¬ 
place,  he  was  then  to  become  the  slave  for  life 
of  this  place,  of  its  inhabitants  or  its  corpora¬ 
tion,  and  to  be  branded  with  an  S.  All  persons 
had  the  right  to  take  away  the  children  of  the 
vagabonds  and  to  keep  them  as  apprentices,  the 
young  men  until  the  twenty-fourth  year,  the 
girls  until  the  twentieth.  If  they  ran  away,  they 
were  to  become  up  to  this  age  the  slaves  of  their 
masters,  who  could  put  them  in  irons,  whip 
them,  etc.,  if  they  liked.  Every  master  might  put 
an  iron  ring  round  the  neck,  arms,  or  legs  of  his 
slave,  by  which  to  know  him  more  easily  and  to 
be  more  certain  of  him.1  The  last  part  of  this 
statute  provided  that  certain  poor  people  might 
be  employed  by  a  place  or  by  persons  who  were 
willing  to  give  them  food  and  drink  and  to  find 
them  work.  This  Vind  of  parish-slavery  was 
kept  up  in  England  until  far  into  the  nineteenth 
century  with  the  name  of  “roundsmen.” 

Elizabeth,  157a:  Unlicensed  beggars  above 
fourteen  years  of  age  were  to  be  severely  flogged 
and  branded  on  the  left  ear,  unless  some  one 
would  take  them  into  service  for  two  years;  in 
case  of  a  repetition  of  the  offence,  if  they  were 
over  eighteen,  they  were  to  be  executed,  unless 
some  one  would  take  them  into  service  for  two 
years;  but  for  the  third  offence  they  were  to  be 
executed  without  mercy  as  felons.  Similar  stat¬ 
utes:  18  Elizabeth,  cap.  13,  and  another  of 
IS9'7*2 

1  The  author  of  the  Essay  on  Trade ,  etc.,  1770,  says,  “In 
the  reign  of  Edward  VI,  indeed,  the  English  seem  to  have 
set  in  good  earnest  about  encouraging  manufactures  and 
employing  the  poor.  This  we  learn  from  a  remarkable  stat¬ 
ute  which  runs  thus:  ‘That  all  vagrants  shall  be  branded, 
etc.’”-'  Op.«7.,p.  5. 

*  Thomas  More  says  in  his  Utopia :  “Therefore  that  one 
covetous  and  unsalable  cormaraunte  and  very  plage  of 
his  native  contrey  maye  compasse  aboute  and  inclose  many 
thousand  akers  of  grounde  together  within  one  pale  or 
hedge,  the  husbandmen  be  thrust  owte  of  their  owne,  or 
•els  either  by  coneyne  and  fraude,  or  by  violent  oppression 
they  be  put  besydes  it,  or  by  wrongs  and  injuries  thei  be  so 
weried  that  they  be  compelled  to  sell  all:  by  one  means, 
t  her  fore,  or  by  other,  either  by  hooke  or  crooke  they  muste 
needes  departe  awaye,  poore,  selye,  wretched  soules,  men, 
women,  husbands,  wiues,  fatherlesse  children,  widowes, 
Wufull  mothers  with  their  yonge  babes,  and  their  whole 
household  smal  in  substance,  and  muche  in  numbre,  as 
husbandrye  requireth  many  handes.  Awaye  thei  trudge,  I 
say,  owte  of  their  knowen  accustomed  houses,  fyndynge 
no  place  to  reste  in.  All  their  housholde  stufte,  which  is 
very  little  woorthe,  thoughe  it  might  well  abide  the  sale* 


365 

Under  James  I,  any  one  wandering  about  and 
begging  was  declared  a  rogue  and  a  vagabond. 
Justices  of  the  peace  in  petty  sessions  were  au¬ 
thorized  to  have  them  publicly  whipped  and  for 
the  first  offence  to  imprison  them  for  six 
months,  for  the  second  for  two  years.  Whilst  in 
prison  they  were  to  be  whipped  as  much  and  as 
often  as  the  justices  of  the  peace  thought  fit. . . . 
Incorrigible  and  dangerous  rogues  were  to  be 
branded  with  an  R  on  the  left  shoulder  and  set 
to  hard  labour,  and,  if  they  were  caught  begging 
again,  to  be  executed  without  mercy.  These 
statutes,  legally  binding  until  the  beginning  of 
the  eighteenth  century,  were  only  repealed  by 
12  Ann,  cap.  23. 

Similar  laws  were  enacted  in  France,  where 
by  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  a 
kingdom  of  vagabonds  (j royaumc  des  truands) 
was  established  in  Paris.  Even  at  the  beginning 
of  Louis  XVEs  reign  (Ordinance  of  July  13th, 
1777)  every  man  in  good  health  from  sixteen 
to  sixty  years  of  age,  if  without  means  of  sub¬ 
sistence  and  not  practising  a  trade,  was  to  be 
sent  to  the  galleys.  Of  the  same  nature  are  the 
statute  of  Charles  V  for  the  Netherlands  (Octo¬ 
ber,  1537),  the  first  edict  of  the  States  and 
Towns  of  Holland  (March  10,  1614),  the 
Plakaat  of  the  United  Provinces  (June  26, 
1649),  etc. 

Thus  were  the  agricultural  people,  first  forci¬ 
bly  expropriated  from  the  soil,  driven  from 
their  homes,  turned  into  vagabonds,  and  then 
whipped,  branded,  tortured  by  laws  grotesque- 


yet  beeynge  sodainely  thruste  owte,  they  be  constrayned 
to  sell  it  for  a  thing  of  nought.  And  when  they  haue  wan¬ 
dered  abrode  tyll  that  be  spent,  what  can  they  then  els 
doe  but  stcale,  and  then  iustly  pardy  be  hanged,  or  els  go 
about  beggyng.  And  yet  then  also  they  be  caste  in  prison 
as  vagaboundes,  because  they  go  aboute  and  worke  not: 
whom  no  man  wyl  set  a  worke  though  thei  neuer  so  will- 
yngly  profre  themselues  therto.”— Of  these  poor  fugitives 
of  whom  Thomas  More  says  that  they  were  forced  to 
thieve,  "7200  great  and  petty  thieves  were  put  to  death,” 
in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  (Hollinshed,  Chronicles  oj  Eng¬ 
land ,  Vol.  1,  p.  186.)  In  Eli7abeth’s  time,  “rogues  were 
trussed  up  apace,  and  that  there  was  not  one  year  com¬ 
monly  wherein  three  or  four  hundred  were  not  devoured 
and  eaten  up  by  the  gallowes.”  (Strype’s  Annals  of  the  Ref¬ 
ormation  and  Establishment  of  Religion ,  and  other  Various 
Occurrences  in  the  Church  of  England  during  Queen  Eliza¬ 
beth's  Happy  Reign ,  Second  edition,  1725,  Vol.  a.)  Accord¬ 
ing  to  this  same  Strype,  in  Somersetshire,  in  one  year,  40 
persons  were  executed,  35  robbers  burnt  in  the  hand,  37 
whipped,  and  183  discharged  as  “incorrigible  vagabonds.” 
Nevertheless,  he  is  of  opinion  that  this  large  number  of 
prisoners  does  not  comprise  even  a  fifth  of  the  actual  crim¬ 
inals,  thanks  to  the  negligence  of  the  justices  and  the  fool¬ 
ish  compassion  of  the  people;  and  the  other  counties  of 
England  were  not  better  off  in  this  respect  than  Somerset¬ 
shire  while  some  were  even  worse. 


CAPITAL 


366 

ly  terrible,  into  the  discipline  necessary  for  the 
wage  system. 

It  is  not  enough  that  the  conditions  of  labour 
are  concentrated  in  a  mass,  in  the  shape  of  capi¬ 
tal,  at  the  one  pole  of  society,  while  at  the  other 
are  grouped  masses  of  men  who  have  nothing 
to  sell  but  their  labour  power.  Neither  is  it 
enough  that  they  are  compelled  to  sell  it  volun¬ 
tarily.  The  advance  of  capitalist  production  de¬ 
velops  a  working  class,  which  by  education,  tra¬ 
dition,  habit,  looks  upon  the  conditions  of  that 
mode  of  production  as  self-evident  laws  of  na¬ 
ture.  The  organization  of  the  capitalist  process 
of  production,  once  fully  developed,  breaks 
down  all  resistance.  The  constant  generation  of 
a  relative  surplus  population  keeps  the  law  of 
supply  and  demand  of  labour,  and  therefore 
keeps  wages,  in  a  rut  that  corresponds  with  the 
wants  of  capital.  The  dull  compulsion  of  eco¬ 
nomic  relations  completes  the  subjection  of  the 
labourer  to  the  capitalist.  Direct  force,  outside 
economic  conditions  is  of  course  still  used,  but 
only  exceptionally.  In  the  ordinary  run  of 
things,  the  labourer  can  be  left  to  the  “natural 
laws  of  production/*  i.e.,  to  his  dependence  on 
capital,  a  dependence  springing  from,  and  guar¬ 
anteed  in  perpetuity  by  the  conditions  of  pro¬ 
duction  themselves.  It  is  otherwise  during  the 
historic  genesis  of  capitalist  production.  The 
bourgeoisie,  at  its  rise,  wants  and  uses  the  pow¬ 
er  of  the  state  to  “regulate**  wages,  i.e.,  to  force 
them  within  the  limits  suitable  for  surplus  val¬ 
ue  making,  to  lengthen  the  working  day  and  to 
keep  the  labourer  himself  in  the  normal  degree 
of  dependence.  This  is  an  essential  element  of 
the  so-called  primitive  accumulation. 

The  class  of  wage  labourers,  which  arose  in 
the  latter  half  of  the  fourteenth  century,  formed 
then  and  in  the  following  century  only  a  very 
small  part  of  the  population,  well  protected  in 
its  position  by  the  independent  peasant  propri¬ 
etary  in  the  country  and  the  guild  organization 
in  the  town.  In  country  and  town,  master  and 
workmen  stood  close  together  socially.  The 
subordination  of  labour  to  capital  was  only 
formal — i.e.,  the  mode  of  production  itself  had 
as  yet  no  specific  capitalistic  character*  Vari¬ 
able  capital  preponderated  greatly  over  con¬ 
stant.  The  demand  for  wage  labour  grew,  there¬ 
fore,  rapidly  with  every  accumulation  of  capi¬ 
tal,  whilst  the  supply  of  wage-labour  followed 
but  slowly.  A  large  part  of  the  national  prod¬ 
uct,  changed  later  into  a  fund  of  capitalist  ac¬ 
cumulation,  then  still  entered  into  the  con¬ 
sumption  fund  of  the  labourer. 


Legislation  on  wage-labour  (from  the  first, 
aimed  at  the  exploitation  of  the  labourer  and, 
as  it  advanced,  always  equally  hostile  to  him),1 
was  started  in  England  by  the  Statute  of  La¬ 
bourers  of  Edward  III,  1349.  The  ordinance  of 
1350  in  France,  issued  in  the  name  of  King 
John,  corresponded  with  it.  English  and  French 
legislation  ran  parallel  and  were  identical  in 
purport.  So  far  as  the  labour  statutes  aimed  at 
compulsory  extension  of  the  working  day,  I  do 
not  return  to  them,  as  this  point  was  treated 
earlier  (Chap.  X,  section  5). 

The  Statute  of  Labourers  was  passed  at  the 
urgent  instance  of  the  House  of  Commons.  A 
Tory  said  naively:  “Formerly  the  poor  de¬ 
manded  such  high  wages  as  to  threaten  industry 
and  wealth.  Next,  their  wages  are  so  low  as  to 
threaten  industry  and  wealth  equally  and  per¬ 
haps  more,  but  in  another  way.**2  A  tariff  of 
wages  was  fixed  by  law  for  town  and  country, 
for  piece-work  and  day-work.  The  agricultural 
labourers  were  to  hire  themselves  out  by  the 
year,  the  town  ones  “in  open  market.**  It  was 
forbidden,  under  pain  of  imprisonment,  to  pay 
higher  wages  than  those  fixed  by  the  statute, 
but  the  taking  of  higher  wages  was  more  severe¬ 
ly  punished  than  the  giving  them.  (So  also  in 
Sections  18  and  19  of  the  Statute  of  Apprentices 
of  Elizabeth,  ten  days*  imprisonment  is  decreed 
for  him  that  pays  the  higher  wages,  but  twenty- 
one  days  for  him  that  receives  tfrem.)  A  statute 
of  1360  increased  the  penalties  and  authorized 
the  masters  to  extort  labour  at  the  legal  rate  of 
wages  by  corporal  punishment.  All  combina¬ 
tions,  contracts,  oaths,  etc.,  by  which  masons 
and  carpenters  reciprocally  bound  themselves, 
were  declared  null  and  void.  Coalition  of  the 
labourers  is  treated  as  a  heinous  crime  from  the 
fourteenth  century  to  1825,  the  year  of  the  re¬ 
peal  of  the  laws  against  Trades*  Unions.  The 
spirit  of  the  Statute  of  Labourers  of  1349,  and 
of  its  offshoots,  comes  out  clearly  in  the  fact 
that  indeed  a  maximum  of  wages  is  dictated  by 
the  State,  but  on  no  account  a  minimum. 

In  the  sixteenth  century,  the  condition  of  the 
labourers  had,  as  we  know,  become  much  worse. 
The  money  wage  rose,  but  not  in  proportion  to 
the  depreciation  of  money  and  the  correspond- 

1  “Whenever  the  legislature  attempts  to  regulate  the  dif¬ 
ferences  between  masters  and  their  workmen,  its  counsel¬ 
lors  are  always  the  masters,”  says  A.  Smith.  “The  spirit  of 
the  laws  is-  property,”  says  Linguet. 

2  Sophisms  oj  Free  Trade ,  by  a  Barrister,  London,  1850, 
p.  53.— He  adds  maliciously:  “We  were  ready  enough  to 
interfere  for  the  employer,  can  nothing  now  be  done  for 
the  employed?” 


LEGISLATION  AGAINST  THE  EXPROPRIATED 


ing  rise  in  the  prices  of  commodities.  Wages, 
therefore,  in  reality  fell.  Nevertheless,  the  laws 
for  keeping  them  down  remained  in  force,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  ear-clipping  and  branding  of 
those  “whom  no  one  was  willing  to  take  into 
service.”  By  the  Statute  of  Apprentices,  5  Eliz¬ 
abeth,  cap.  3,  the  justices  of  the  peace  were  em¬ 
powered  to  fix  certain  wages  and  to  modify 
them  according  to  the  time  of  the  year  and  the 
price  of  commodities.  James  I  extended  these 
regulations  of  labour  also  to  weavers,  spinners, 
and  all  possible  categories  of  workers.1  George 
II  extended  the  laws  against  coalitions  of  la¬ 
bourers  to  manufactures.  In  the  manufacturing 
period  par  excellence  ^  the  capitalist  mode  of  pro¬ 
duction  had  become  sufficiently  strong  to  ren¬ 
der  legal  regulation  of  wages  as  impracticable 
as  it  was  unnecessary;  but  the  ruling  classes 
were  unwilling  in  case  of  necessity  to  be  without 
the  weapons  of  the  old  arsenal.  Still,  8  George 
II  forbade  a  higher  day's  wage  than  2s.  7 }4d. 
for  journeymen  tailors  in  and  around  London, 
except  in  cases  of  general  mourning;  still,  13 
George  III,  cap  ui ,  ^ave  the  regulation  of  the 
wages  of  silk-weavers  to  the  justices  of  the 
peace;  still,  in  1706,  it  required  two  judgments 
of  the  higher  courts  to  decide  whether  the  man¬ 
dates  of  justices  of  the  peace  as  to  wages  held 
good  also  for  non-agricultural  labourers;  still, 
in  1799,  an  Act  of  Parliament  ordered  that  the 
wages  of  the  Scotch  miners  should  continue  to 
be  regulated  by  a  statute  of  Elizabeth  and  two 
Scotch  acts  of  1661  and  1671.  How  completely, 
in  the  meantime,  circumstances  had  changed  is 

1  From  a  clause  of  Statute  2  James  I,  cap.  6,  we  see  that 
certain  clothmakers  took  upon  themselves  to  dictate,  in 
their  capacity  of  justices  of  the  peace,  the  official  tariff  of 
wages  in  their  own  shops.  In  Germany,  especially  after  the 
Thirty  Years’  War,  statutes  for  keeping  down  wages  were 
general.  “The  want  of  servants  and  labourers  was  very 
troublesome  to  the  landed  proprietors  in  the  depopulated 
districts.AU  villagers  were  forbidden  to  let  rooms  to  single 
men  and  women;  all  the  latter  were  to  be  reported  to  the 
authorities  and  cast  into  prison  if  they  were  unwilling  to 
become  servants,  even  if  they  were  employed  at  any  other 
work,  such  as  sowing  seeds  for  the  peasants  at  a  daily 
wage,  or  even  buying  and  selling  corn.  {Imperial privileges 
and  sanctions  for  Silesia ,  I,  25.)  For  a  whole  century  in  the 
decrees  of  the  small  German  potentates  a  bitter  cry  goes 
up  again  and  again  about  the  wicked  and  impertinent  rab¬ 
ble  that  will  not  reconcile  itself  to  its  hard  lot,  will  not  be 
content  with  the  legal  wage;  the  individual  landed  propri¬ 
etors  are  forbidden  to  pay  more  than  the  State  had  fixed 
by  a  tariff.  And  yet  the  conditions  of  service  were  at  times 
b^ter  after  the  war  than  a  hundred  years  later;  the  farm 
servants  of  Silesia  had,  in  1652,  meat  twice  a  week,  whilst 
even  in  our  century,  districts  are  known  where  they  have 
it  only  three  times  a  year.  Further,  wages  after  the  war 
were  higher  than  in  the  following  century.”  (G.  Frey  tag.) 


367 

proved  by  an  occurrence  unheard-of  before  in 
the  English  Lower  House.  In  that  place,  where 
for  more  than  four  hundred  years  laws  had  been 
made  for  the  maximum  beyond  which  wages 
absolutely  must  not  rise,  Whitbread  in  1796 
proposed  a  legal  minimum  wage  for  agricultural 
labourers.  Pitt  opposed  this,  but  confessed  that 
the  “condition  of  the  poor  was  cruel.”  Finally, 
in  1813,  the  laws  for  the  regulation  of  wages 
were  repealed.  They  were  an  absurd  anomaly, 
since  the  capitalist  regulated  his  factory  by  his 
private  legislation,  and  could  by  the  poor  rates 
make  up  the  wage  of  the  agricultural  labourer 
to  the  indispensable  minimum.  The  provisions 
of  the  labour  statutes  as  to  contracts  between 
master  and  workman,  as  to  giving  notice  and 
the  like,  which  only  allow  of  a  civil  action 
against  the  contract-breaking  master,  but  on 
the  contrary,  permit  a  criminal  action  against 
the  contract-breaking  workman,  are  to  this 
hour  (1873)  in  full  force.  The  barbarous  laws 
against  Trades*  Unions  fell  in  1825  before  the 
threatening  bearing  of  the  proletariat.  Despite 
this,  they  fell  only  in  part.  Certain  beautiful 
fragments  of  the  old  statute  vanished  only  in 
1859.  Finally,  the  Act  of  Parliament  of  June  29, 
1871,  made  a  pretence  of  removing  the  last 
traces  of  this  class  of  legislation  by  legal  recog¬ 
nition  of  Trades*  Unions.  But  an  Act  of  Parlia¬ 
ment  of  the  same  date  (an  Act  to  amend  the 
Criminal  Law  relating  to  Violence,  Threats, 
and  Molestation),  re-established,  in  point  of 
fact,  the  former  state  of  things  in  a  new  shape. 
By  this  Parliamentary  escamotage ,2  the  means 
which  the  labourers  could  use  in  a  strike  or  lock¬ 
out  were  withdrawn  from  the  laws  common  to 
all  citizens,  and  placed  under  exceptional  penal 
legislation,  the  interpretation  of  which  fell  to 
the  masters  themselves  in  their  capacity  as  jus¬ 
tices  of  the  peace.  Two  years  earlier,  the  same 
House  of  Commons  and  the  same  Mr.  Glad¬ 
stone  in  the  well-known  straightforward  fash¬ 
ion  brought  in  a  bill  for  the  abolition  of  all  ex¬ 
ceptional  penal  legislation  against  the  working 
class.  But  this  was  never  allowed  to  go  beyond 
the  second  reading,  and  the  matter  was  thus 
protracted  until  at  last  the  “Great  Liberal  Par¬ 
ty,”  by  an  alliance  with  tories,  found  courage 
to  turn  against  the  very  proletariat  that  had 
carried  it  into  power.  Not  content  withthis 
treachery,  the  “Great  Liberal  Party”  allowed 
the  English  judges,  ever  complaisant  in  the 
service  of  the  ruling  classes,  to  dig  up  again  the 
earlier  laws  against  “conspiracy,**  and  to  apply 
*  Juggling. 


CAPITAL 


368 

them  to  coalitions  of  labourers.  We  see  that  on- 
ly  against  its  will  and  under  the  pressure  of  the 
masses  did  the  English  parliament  give  up  the 
laws  against  strikes  and  trades’  unions,  after  it 
had  itself,  for  five  hundred  years,  held,  with 
shameless  egoism,  the  position  of  a  permanent 
Trades’  Union  of  the  capitalists  against  the  la¬ 
bourers. 

During  the  very  first  storms  of  the  revolu¬ 
tion,  the  French  bourgeoisie  dared  to  take  away 
from  the  workers  the  right  of  association  but 
just  acquired.  By  a  decree  of  June  14,  1791, 
they  declared  all  coalition  of  the  workers  as  “an 
attempt  against  liberty  and  the  declaration  of 
the  rights  of  man,"  punishable  by  a  fine  of  500 
livres,  together  with  deprivation  of  the  rights 
of  an  active  citizen  for  one  year.1  This  law  which, 
by  means  of  State  compulsion,  confined  the 
struggle  between  capital  and  labour  within 
limits  comfortable  for  capital,  has  outlived 
revolutions  and  changes  of  dynasties.  Even  the 
Reign  of  Terror  left  it  untouched.  It  was  but 
quite  recently  struck  out  of  the  Penal  Code. 
Nothing  is  more  characteristic  than  the  pretext 
for  this  bourgeois  coup  d'etat.  “Granting,"  says 
Chapelier,  the  reporter  of  the  Select  Committee 
on  this  law,  “that  wages  ought  to  be  a  little 
higher  than  they  are, . . .  that  they  ought  to  be 
high  enough  for  him  that  receives  them  to  be 
free  from  that  state  of  absolute  dependence  due 
to  the  want  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  and  which 
is  almost  that  of  slavery,"  yet  the  workers  must 
not  be  allowed  to  come  to  any  understanding 
about  their  own  interests,  nor  to  act  in  common 
and  thereby  lessen  their  “absolute  dependence, 
which  is  almost  that  of  slavery";  because,  for¬ 
sooth,  in  doing  this  they  injure  “the  freedom  of 
their  cidcvant 2  masters,  the  present  entrepre¬ 
neurs,"  and  because  a  coalition  against  the  des¬ 
potism  of  the  quondam  masters  of  the  corpora¬ 
tions  is — guess  what! — is  a  restoration  of  the 
corporations  abolished  by  the  French  constitu¬ 
tion.* 

1  Article  I  of  this  law  runs:  “Since  one  of  the  underlying 
bases  of  the  French  Constitution  is  the  annulment  of  all 
kinds  of  corporations  of  the  same  estate  and  profession,  it 
is  forbidden  to  reestablish  them  under  any  pretext  or  m 
any  form  whatever."  Article  IV  declares  that  if  “citizens 
connected  with  the  same  professions,  arts,  and  crafts,  took 
counsel  together  and  reached  agreements  among  them¬ 
selves,  the  tenor  of  which  was  to  refuse  jointly,  or  only  to 
guarantee  the  aid  of  their  industry  or  their  labours  for  a 
set  price,  the  said  deliberations  and  agreements . . .  will  be 
declared  unconstitutional,  a  violation  of  liberty  and  of  the 
Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Man,  etc.":  felony,  therefore, 
as  in  the  old  labour  statu tes. — Rholuttons  de  Paris ,  Paris, 
1701,  Vol.  Ill,  p.513. 

*  Former. 

1  Buchez  and  Roux, /fu/o/rr  Parlemcntaire?Jc\.  X,  p.  195. 


CHAPTER  XXIX.  GENESIS  OF  THE 
CAPITALIST  FARMER 


Now  that  wc  have  considered  the  forcible  crea¬ 
tion  of  a  class  of  outlawed  proletarians,  the 
bloody  discipline  that  turned  them  into  wage 
labourers,  the  disgraceful  action  of  the  state 
which  employed  the  police  to  accelerate  the  ac¬ 
cumulation  of  capital  by  increasing  the  degree 
of  exploitation  of  labour,  the  question  remains: 
whence  came  the  capitalists  originally?  For  the 
expropriation  of  the  agricultural  population 
creates,  directly,  none  but  great  landed  proprie¬ 
tors.  As  far,  however,  as  concerns  the  genesis  of 
the  farmer,  we  can,  so  to  say,  put  our  hand  on 
it,  because  it  is  a  slow  process  evolving  through 
many  centuries.  The  serfs,  as  well  as  the  free 
small  proprietors,  held  land  under  very  differ¬ 
ent  tenures,  and  were  therefore  emancipated 
under  very  different  economic  conditions.  In 
England,  the  first  form  of  the  farmer  is  the 
bailiff,  himself  a  serf.  His  position  is  similar  to 
that  of  the  old  Roman  villtcusf  only  in  a  more 
limited  sphere  of  action.  During  the  second  half 
of  the  fourteenth  century,  he  is  replaced  by  a 
farmer,  whom  the  landlord  provides  with  seed, 
cattle,  and  implements.  His  condition  is  not 
very  different  from  that  of  the  peasant.  Only 
he  exploits  more  wage-labour.  Soon  he  becomes 
a  mttayer>  a  half- firmer.  He  advances  one  part 
of  the  agricultural  stock,  the  landlord  the  other. 
The  two  divide  the  total  product  in  proportions 
determined  by  contract.  This  form  quickly  dis¬ 
appears  in  England,  to  give  place  to  the  farmer 
proper,  who  makes  his  own  capital  breed  by 
employing  wage  labourers,  and  pays  a  part  of 
the  surplus  product,  in  money  or  in  kind,  to  the 
landlord  as  rent.  So  long,  during  the  fifteenth 
century,  as  the  independent  peasant  and  the 
farm  labourer  working  for  himself  as  well  as  for 
wages,  enriched  themselves  by  their  own  la¬ 
bour,  the  circumstances  of  the  farmer  and  his 
field  of  production  were  equally  mediocre.  The 
agricultural  revolution  which  commenced  in 
the  last  third  of  the  fifteenth  century,  and  con¬ 
tinued  during  almost  the  whole  of  the  sixteenth 
(excepting,  however,  its  last  decade),  enriched 
him  just  as  speedily  as  it  impoverished  the  mass 
of  the  agricultural  people.* 

The  usurpation  of  the  common  lands  allowed 

4  Overseer. 

s  Harrison  in  his  Description  of  England \  says:  "although 
peradventure  four  pounds  of  old  rent  be  improved  to  forty, 
toward  the  end  of  his  term,  if  he  have  not  six  or  seven 
years'  rent  lying  by  him,  fifty  or  a  hundred  pounds,  yet 
will  the  farmer  think  his  gain  very  small" 


369 


REACTION  OF  THE  AGRICULTURAL  REVOLUTION 


him  to  augment  greatly  his  stock  of  cattle,  al¬ 
most  without  cost,  whilst  they  yielded  him  a 
richer  supply  of  manure  for  the  tillage  of  the 
soil.  To  this,  was  added,  in  the  sixteenth  cen¬ 
tury,  a  very  important  element.  At  that  time 
the  contracts  for  farms  ran  for  a  long  time,  often 
for  ninety-nine  years.  The  progressive  fall  in 
the  value  of  the  precious  metals,  and  therefore 
of  money,  brought  the  farmers  golden  fruit. 
Apart  from  all  the  other  circumstances  dis¬ 
cussed  above,  it  lowered  wages.  A  portion  of  the 
latter  was  now  added  to  the  profits  of  the  farm. 
The  continuous  rise  in  the  price  of  corn,  wool, 
meat— in  a  word  of  all  agricultural  produce — 
swelled  the  money  capital  of  the  farmer  without 
any  action  on  his  part,  whilst  the  rent  he  paid 
(being  calculated  on  the  old  value  of  money) 
diminished  in  reality.1  Thus  they  grew  rich  at 
the  expense  both  of  their  labourers  and  their 
landlords.  No  wonder  therefore,  that  England, 
at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  had  a  class 
of  capitalist  farmers,  rich,  considering  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  the  time.2 

1  On  the  influence  of  the  depreciation  of  money  in  the 
sixteenth  century,  on  the  different  classes  of  society,  see 
A  Compendious  or  Brie/e  Examination  of  Certayne  Ordinary 
complaints  of  Diverse  of  our  Countrymen  in  these  our  days , 
by  S.y  Gentleman ,  London,  1581.  The  dialogue  form  of 
this  work  led  people  for  a  long  time  to  ascribe  it  to  Shake¬ 
speare,  and  even  in  1751  it  was  published  under  his  name. 
Its  author  is  William  Stafford.  In  one  place  the  knight 
reasons  as  follows: 

Knight:  “You,  my  neighbour,  the  husbandman,  you 
Master  Mercer,  and  you  Goodman  Cooper,  with  other 
artificers,  may  save  yourselves  metely  well.  For  as  much 
as  all  things  are  dearer  than  they  were,  so  much  do  you 
arise  in  the  price  of  your  wares  and  occupations  that  ye 
sell  again.  Rut  we  have  nothing  to  sell  whereby  we  might 
advance  ye  price  thereof,  to  countervail  those  things  that 
we  must  buy  again.”  In  another  place  the  knight  asks  the 
doctor:  “I  pray  you,  what  be  those  sorts  that  ye  mean. 
And  first,  of  those  that  ye  think  should  have  no  loss  there¬ 
by?— Doctor:  I  mean  all  those  that  live  by  buying  and 
selling,  for  as  they  buy  dear,  they  sell  thereafter.  Knight: 
What  is  the  next  sort  that  ye  say  would  win  by  it?  Doctor: 
Marry,  all  such  as  have  takings  or  farms  in  their  own 
manurance”  (cultivation)”  at  the  old  rent,  for  where  they 
pay  after  the  old  rate  they  sell  after  the  new— that  is,  they 
pay  for  their  land  good  cheap,  and  sell  all  things  growing 
thereof  dear.— Knight:  What  sort  is  that  which,  ye  said 
should  have  greater  loss  hereby,  than  these  men  had  prof¬ 
it? — Doctor:  It  is  all  noblemen,  gentlemen,  and  all  other 
that  live  either  by  a  stinted  rent  or  stipend,  or  do  not 
manure  the  ground,  or  do  occupy  no  buying  and  selling.” 

*  In  France,  the  rigisseur ,  steward,  collector  of  dues  for 
the  feudal  lords  during  the  earlier  part  of  the  middle  ages, 
soon  became  an  homme  d'affaires  [business  man],  who  by 
extortion,  cheating,  etc.,  swindled  himself  into  a  capitalist. 
These  r/gisseurs  themselves  were  sometimes  noblemen. 
For  example:  “This  account  Js  being  rendered  by  messire 
Jacques  de  Thoraine,  knight  castellan  of  Besangon,  to  the 
lord  who  keeps  the  accounts  at  Dijon  for  Monseigneur  the 
Duke  and  Count  of  Burgundy,  concerning  the  rents  which 


CHAPTER  XXX.  REACTION  OF  THE 
AGRICULTURAL  REVOLUTION  ON 
INDUSTRY.  CREATION  OF  THE  HOME 
MARKET  FOR  INDUSTRIAL  CAPITAL 


The  expropriation  and  expulsion  of  the  agricul¬ 
tural  population,  intermittent  but  renewed 
again  and  again,  supplied,  as  we  saw,  the  town 
industries  with  a  mass  of  proletarians  entirely 
unconnected  with  the  corporate  guilds  and  un¬ 
fettered  by  them;  a  fortunate  circumstance  that 
makes  old  A.  Anderson  (not  to  be  confounded 
with  James  Anderson)  in  his  History  of  Com - 
merce ,  believe  in  the  direct  intervention  of  prov¬ 
idence.  We  must  still  pause  a  moment  on  this 
element  of  primitive  accumulation.  The  thin¬ 
ning-out  of  the  independent,  self-supporting 
peasants  not  only  brought  about  the  crowding 
together  of  the  industrial  proletariat,  in  the  way 
that  Geoffroy  S*int  Hilaire  explained  the  con¬ 
densation  of  cosmical  matter  at  one  place  by 
its  rarefaction  at  another.*  In  spite  of  the 
smaller  number  of  its  cultivators,  the  soil 
brought  forth  as  much  or  more  produce,  after 
as  before,  because  the  revolution  in  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  landed  property  was  accompanied  by 
improved  methods  of  culture,  greater  coopera¬ 
tion,  concentration  of  the  means  of  production, 
etc.,  and  because  not  only  were  the  agricultural 
wage  labourers  put  on  the  strain  more  intense¬ 
ly,4  but  the  field  of  production  on  which  they 

belong  to  the  said  manor  from  the  25th  day  of  December, 
135 9,  to  the  28th  day  of  December,  1360.”  (Alexis  Mon- 
teil,  Histoire  des  materiaux  manuscrits ,  etc.,  p.  244.)  Al¬ 
ready  it  is  evident  here  how  in  all  spheres  of  social  life  the 
lion’s  share  falls  to  the  middleman.  In  the  economic  do¬ 
main,  e.g.,  financiers,  stock-exchange  speculators,  mer¬ 
chants,  shopkeepers  skim  the  cream;  in  civil  matters,  the 
lawyer  fleeces  his  clients;  in  politics  the  representative  is 
of  more  importance  than  the  voters,  the  minister  than  the 
sovereign;  in  religion,  God  is  pushed  into  the  background 
by  the  “Mediator,”  and  the  latter  again  is  shoved  back  by 
the  priests,  the  inevitable  middlemen  between  the  good 
shepherd  and  his  sheep.  In  France,  as  in  England,  the 
great  feudal  territories  were  divided  into  innumerable  small 
homesteads,  but  under  conditions  incomparably  more  un¬ 
favourable  for  the  people.  During  the  fourteenth  century 
arose  the  farms  or  terriers .  Their  number  grew  constantly, 
far  beyond  100,000.  They  paidrents  varying  from  */«  a  to  Vs 
of  the  produce  in  money  or  in  kind.  These  farms  were  fiefs, 
sub-fiefs,  etc.,  according  to  the  value  and  extent  of  the  do¬ 
mains,  mfcny  of  them  only  containing  a  few  acres.  But  these 
farmers  had  rights  of  jurisdiction  in  some  degree  over 
the  dwellers  on  the  soil;  there  were  four  grades.  The  op¬ 
pression  of  the  agricultural  population  under  all  these  pet¬ 
ty  tyrants  will  be  understood.  Monteil  says  that  there 
were  once  in  France  160,000  judges,  where  today  4000  tri¬ 
bunals,  including  justices  of  the  peace,  suffice. 

*  In  his  Notions  de  philosophie  naturelle ,  Paris,  1838. 

4  A  point  that  Sir  James  Steuart  emphasizes. 


CAPITAL 


370 

worked  for  themselves  became  more  and  more 
contracted.  With  the  setting  free  of  a  part  of  the 
agricultural  population,  therefore,  their  former 
means  of  nourishment  were  also  set  free.  They 
were  now  transformed  into  material  elements 
of  variable  capital.  The  peasant,  expropriated 
and  cast  adrift,  must  buy  their  value  in  the  form 
of  wages  from  his  new  master,  the  industrial 
capitalist.  That  which  holds  good  of  the  means 
of  subsistence  holds  with  the  raw  materials  of 
industry  dependent  upon  home  agriculture. 
They  were  transformed  into  an  element  of  con¬ 
stant  capital.  Suppose,  for  example,  a  part  of 
the  Westphalian  peasants,  who  at  the  time  of 
Frederic  II,  all  span  flax,  forcibly  expropriated 
and  hunted  from  the  soil;  and  the  other  part 
that  remained,  turned  into  day  labourers  of 
large  farmers.  At  the  same  time  arise  large  es¬ 
tablishments  for  flax-spinning  and  weaving,  in 
which  the  men  “set  free’*  now  work  for  wages. 
The  flax  looks  exactly  as  before.  Not  a  fibre  of 
it  is  changed,  but  a  new  social  soul  has  popped 
into  its  body.  It  forms  now  a  part  of  the  con¬ 
stant  capital  of  the  master  manufacturer.  For¬ 
merly  divided  among  a  number  of  small  pro¬ 
ducers,  who  cultivated  it  themselves  and  with 
their  families  spun  it  in  retail  fashion,  it  is  now 
concentrated  in  the  hand  of  one  capitalist,  who 
sets  others  to  spin  and  weave  it  for  him.  The 
extra  labour  expended  in  flax-spinning  realized 
itself  formerly  in  extra  income  to  numerous 
peasant  families,  or  maybe,  in  Frederic  IPs 
time,  in  taxes  pour  le  rot  de  Prusse.1  It  realizes 
itself  now  in  profit  for  a  few  capitalists.  The 
spindles  and  looms,  formerly  scattered  over  the 
face  of  the  country,  are  now  crowded  together 
in  a  few  great  labour  barracks,  together  with 
the  labourers  and  the  raw  material.  And  spin¬ 
dles,  looms,  raw  material,  are  now  transformed, 
from  means  of  independent  existence  for  the 
spinners  and  weavers,  into  means  for  com¬ 
manding  them  and  sucking  out  of  them  unpaid 
labour.2  One  does  not  perceive,  when  looking 
at  the  large  manufactories  and  the  large  farms, 
that  they  have  originated  from  the  throwing 
into  one  of  many  small  centres  of  production, 
and  have  been  built  up  by  the  expropriation  of 
many  small  independent  producers.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  the  popular  intuition  was  not  at  fault.  In 
the  time  of  Mirabeau,  the  lion  of  the  revolu¬ 
tion,  the  great  manufactories  were  still  called 

1  For  the  king  of  Prussia. 

*  “I  shall  permit  you/*  says  the  capitalist,  “to  have  the 
honour  of  serving  me,  on  condition  that  you  give  me  the 
little  that  remains  to  you  in  exchange  for  the  pains  I  must 
take  in  order  to  command  you." — J.  J.  Rousseau,  Discount 
on  Political  Economy . 


manufactures  riunies,  workshops  thrown  into 
one,  as  we  speak  of  fields  thrown  into  one.  Says 
Mirabeau:  “We  are  only  paying  attention  to 
the  grand  manufactories,  in  which  hundreds  of 
men  work  under  a  director  and  which  are  com¬ 
monly  called  manufactures  rSunies .  Those 
where  a  very  large  number  of  labourers  work, 
each  separately  and  on  his  own  account,  are 
hardly  considered;  they  arc  placed  at  an  infinite 
distance  from  the  others.  This  is  a  great  error, 
as  the  latter  alone  make  a  really  important  ob¬ 
ject  of  national  prosperity.  . . .  The  large  work¬ 
shop  (manufacture  riunie)  will  enrich  prodi¬ 
giously  one  or  two  entrepreneurs,  but  the  la¬ 
bourers  will  only  be  journeymen,  paid  more  or 
less,  and  will  not  have  any  share  in  the  success 
of  the  undertaking.  In  the  discrete  workshop 
(manufacture  siparie)>  on  the  contrary,  no  one 
will  become  rich,  but  many  labourers  will  be 
comfortable;  the  saving  and  the  industrious  will 
be  able  to  amass  a  little  capital,  to  put  by  a  little 
for  a  birth  of  a  child,  for  an  illness,  for  them¬ 
selves  or  their  belongings.  The  number  of  sav¬ 
ing  and  industrious  labourers  will  increase,  be¬ 
cause  they  will  see  in  good  conduct,  in  activity, 
a  means  of  essentially  bettering  their  condition, 
and  not  of  obtaining  a  small  rise  of  wages  that 
can  never  be  of  any  importance  for  the  future, 
and  whose  sole  result  is  to  place  men  in  the  posi¬ 
tion  to  live  a  little  better,  but  only  from  day  to 
day.  .  .  .  The  large  workshops,  undertakings  of 
certain  private  persons  who  pjy  labourers  from 
day  to  day  to  work  for  their  gain,  may  be  able 
to  put  these  private  individuals  at  their  ease, 
but  they  will  never  be  an  object  worth  the  at¬ 
tention  of  governments.  Discrete  workshops, 
for  the  most  part  combined  with  cultivation  of 
small  holdings,  are  the  only  free  ones.”*  The 
expropriation  and  eviction  of  a  part  of  the  agri¬ 
cultural  population  not  only  set  free  for  indus¬ 
trial  capital  the  labourers,  their  means  of  sub¬ 
sistence,  and  material  for  labour;  it  also  created 
the  home  market. 

In  fact,  the  events  that  transformed  the  small 
peasants  into  wage  labourers,  and  their  means 
of  subsistence  and  of  labour  into  material  ele¬ 
ments  of  capital,  created,  at  the  same  time,  a 
home  market  for  the  latter.  Formerly,  the  peas¬ 
ant  family  produced  the  means  of  subsistence 
and  raw  materials  which  they  themselves,  for 
the  most  part,  consumed.  These  raw  materials, 

s  Mirabeau,  op.  «/.,  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  20-I09  passim.— That 
Mirabeau  considers  the  separate  workshops  more  econom¬ 
ic  and  productive  than  the  '‘combined, **  and  sees  in  the 
latter  merely  artificial  exotics  under  government  cultiva¬ 
tion,  is  explained  by  the  position  at  that  time  of  a  great 
par.  of  the  continental  manufactures. 


GENESIS  OF  THE  INDUSTRIAL  CAPITALIST 


and  means  of  subsistence  have  now  become 
commodities;  the  large  farmer  sells  them,  he 
finds  his  market  in  manufactures.  Yarn,  linen, 
coarse  woollen  stuffs — things  whose  raw  materi¬ 
als  had  been  within  the  reach  of  every  peasant 
family,  had  been  spun  and  woven  by  it  for  its 
own  use— were  now  transformed  into  articles  of 
manufacture,  to  which  the  country  districts  at 
once  served  for  markets.  The  many  scattered 
customers,  whom  stray  artisans  until  now  had 
found  in  the  numerous  small  producers  working 
on  their  own  account,  concentrate  themselves 
now  into  one  great  market  provided  for  by  in¬ 
dustrial  capital.1  Thus,  hand  in  hand  with  the 
expropriation  of  the  self-supporting  peasants, 
with  their  separation  from  their  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  goes  the  destruction  of  rural  domestic 
industry,  the  process  of  separation  between 
manufacture  and  agriculture.  And  only  the  de¬ 
struction  of  rural  domestic  industry  can  give 
the  internal  market  of  a  country  that  extension 
and  consistence  which  the  capitalist  mode  of 
production  requires.  Still  the  manufacturing 
period,  properl)  &o-c.uied,  does  not  succeed  in 
carrying  out  this  transformation  radically  and 
completely.  It  will  be  remembered  that  manu¬ 
facture,  properly  so-called,  conquers  but  par¬ 
tially  the  domain  of  national  production,  and 
always  rests  on  the  handicrafts  of  the  town  and 
the  domestic  industry  of  the  rural  districts  as 
its  ultimate  basis.  If  it  destroys  these  in  one 
form,  in  particular  branches,  at  certain  points, 
it  calls  them  up  again  elsewhere,  because  it 
needs  them  for  the  preparation  of  raw  material 
up  to  a  certain  point.  It  produces,  therefore,  a 
new  class  of  small  villagers  who,  while  following 
the  cultivation  of  the  soil  as  an  accessary  call¬ 
ing,  find  their  chief  occupation  in  industrial  la¬ 
bour,  the  products  of  which  they  sell  to  the 
manufacturers  directly,  or  through  the  medium 
of  merchants.  This  is  one,  though  not  the  chief, 
cause  of  a  phenomenon  which,  at  first,  puzzles 
the  student  of  English  history.  From  the  last 
third  of  the  fifteenth  century,  he  finds  continu¬ 
ally  complaints,  only  interrupted  at  certain  in¬ 
tervals,  about  the  encroachment  of  capitalist 
farming  in  the  country  districts  and  the  pro- 
1  “Twenty  pounds  of  wool  converted  unobtrusively  into 
the  yearly  clothing  of  a  labourer's  family  by  its  own  in¬ 
dustry  in  the  intervals  of  other  work  -this  makes  no  show; 
but  bring  it  to  market,  send  it  to  the  factory,  thence  to  the 
broker,  thence  to  the  dealer,  and  you  will  have  great  com¬ 
mercial  operations,  and  nominal  capital  engaged  to  the 
amount  of  twenty  times  its  value. . . .  The  working  class  is 
thus  emerced  to  support  a  wretched  factory  population,  a 
parasitical  shop-keeping  class,  and  a  fictitious  commercial, 
monetary,  and  financial  system.— David  Urquhart,  op. 
cit .,  p.  12a 


371 

gressive  destruction  of  the  peasantry.  On  the 
other  hand,  he  always  finds  this  peasantry  turn¬ 
ing  up  again,  although  in  diminished  number, 
and  always  under  worse  conditions.2  The  chief 
reason  is:  England  is  at  one  time  chiefly  a  cul¬ 
tivator  of  corn,  at  another  chiefly  a  breeder  of 
cattle,  in  alternate  periods,  and  with  these  the 
extent  of  peasant  cultivation  fluctuates.  Mod¬ 
ern  industry  alone,  and  finally,  supplies  in  ma¬ 
chinery  the  lasting  basis  of  capitalistic  agricul¬ 
ture,  expropriates  radically  the  enormous  ma¬ 
jority  of  the  agricultural  population,  and  com¬ 
pletes  the  separation  between  agriculture  and 
rural  domestic  industry,  whose  roots — spinning 
and  weaving — it  tears  up.3  It  therefore  also,  for 
the  first  time,  conquers  for  industrial  capital 
the  entire  home  market.4 


CHAPTER  XXXI.  GENESIS  OF  THE 
INDUSTRIAL  CAPITALIST 

The  genesis  of  the  industrial6  capitalist  did  not 
proceed  in  such  a  gradual  way  as  that  of  the 

2  Cromwell’s  time  forms  an  exception.  So  long  as  the 
Commonwealth  lasted,  the  mass  of  the  English  people  of 
all  grades  rose  from  the  degradation  into  which  they  had 
sunk  under  the  Tudors. 

3  Tuckett  is  aware  that  the  modern  woollen  industry  has 
sprung,  with  the  introduction  of  machinery,  from  manu¬ 
facture  proper  and  from  the  destruction  of  rural  and  do¬ 
mestic  industries.  “The  plough,  the  yoke,  were  ‘the  inven¬ 
tion  of  gods,  and  the  occupation  of  heroes’;  are  the  loom, 
the  spindle,  the  distaff,  of  less  noble  parentage?  You  sever 
the  distaff  and  the  plough,  the  spindle  and  the  yoke,  and 
you  get  factories  and  poorhouses,  credit  and  panics,  two 
hostile  nations,  agricultural  and  commercial.”  (David  Ur¬ 
quhart,  op.  cit.,  p.  122.)  But  now  comes  Carey  and  cries 
out  upon  England,  surely  not  with  unreason,  that  it  is  try¬ 
ing  to  turn  every  other  country  into  a  mere  agricultural 
nation,  whose  manufacturer  is  to  be  England.  He  pretends 
that  in  this  way  Turkey  has  been  ruined,  because  “the 
owners  and  occupants  of  land  have  never  been  permitted 
by  England  to  strengthen  themselves  by  the  formation  of 
that  natural  alliance  between  the  plough  and  the  loom, 
the  hammer  and  the  harrow.”  {The  Slave  Trade,  p.  125.) 
According  to  him,  Urquhart  himself  is  one  of  the  chief 
agents  in  the  ruin  of  Turkey,  where  he  had  made  free  trade 
propaganda  in  the  English  interest.  The  best  of  it  is  that 
Carey,  a  great  Russophile  by  the  way,  wants  to  prevent 
the  process  of  separation  by  that  very  system  of  protec¬ 
tion  which  accelerates  it. 

4  Philanthropic  English  economists,  like  Mill,  Rogers, 
Goldwin,  Smith,  Fawcett,  etc.,  and  liberal  manufacturers 
like  John  Bright  &  Co.,  ask  the  English  landed  proprie¬ 
tors,  as  God  asked  Cain  after  Abel:  “Where  are  our  thou¬ 
sands  of  freeholders  gone?  But  where  do  vow  come  from, 
then?  From  the  destruction  of  those  freeholders.”  Why 
don’t  you  ask  further:  “Where  are  the  independent  weav¬ 
ers,  spinners,  and  artisans  gone?” 

3  Industrial  here  in  contradistinction  to  agricultural.  In 
the  “categoric”  sense,  the  farmer  is  an  industrial  capitalist 
as  much  as  the  manufacturer. 


CAPITAL 


372 

farmer.  Doubtless  many  small  guild  masters, 
and  yet  more  independent  small  artisans,  or 
even  wage  labourers,  transformed  themselves 
into  small  capitalists,  and  (by  gradually  ex¬ 
tending  exploitation  of  wage  labour  and  corre¬ 
sponding  accumulation)  into  full-blown  capital¬ 
ists.  In  the  infancy  of  capitalist  production, 
things  often  happened  as  in  the  infancy  of  me¬ 
dieval  towns,  where  the  question  which  of  the 
escaped  serfs  should  be  master  and  which  serv¬ 
ant  was  in  great  part  decided  by  the  earlier  or 
later  date  of  their  flight.  The  snail’s  pace  of  this 
method  corresponded  in  no  wise  with  the  com¬ 
mercial  requirements  of  the  new  world  market 
that  the  great  discoveries  of  the  end  of  the  fif¬ 
teenth  century  created.  But  the  Middle  Ages 
had  handed  down  two  distinct  forms  of  capital, 
which  mature  in  the  most  different  economic 
social  formations,  and  which,  before  the  era  of 
the  capitalist  mode  of  production,  arc  consid¬ 
ered  as  capital  quand  mime1 — usurer’s  capital 
and  merchant’s  capital. 

“At  present,  all  the  wealth  of  society  goes 
first  into  the  possession  of  the  capitalist. . .  .He 
pays  the  landowner  his  rent,  the  labourer  his 
wages,  the  tax  and  tithe  gatherer  their  claims, 
and  keeps  a  large,  indeed  the  largest  and  a  con¬ 
tinually  augmenting  share  of  the  annual  prod¬ 
uce  of  labour  for  himself.  The  capitalist  may 
now  be  said  to  be  the  first  owner  of  all  the 
wealth  of  the  community,  though  no  law  has 
conferred  on  him  the  right  to  this  property. . . . 
This  change  has  been  effected  by  the  taking  of 
interest  on  capital . . .  and  it  is  not  a  little  curi¬ 
ous  that  all  the  lawgivers  of.  Europe  endeav¬ 
oured  to  prevent  this  by  statutes,  viz.,  statutes 
against  usury. . . .  The  power  of  the  capitalist 
over  all  the  wealth  of  the  country  is  a  complete 
change  in  the  right  of  property,  and  by  what 
law,  or  series  of  laws,  was  it  effected?”*  The 
author  should  have  remembered  that  revolu¬ 
tions  are  not  made  by  laws. 

The  money  capital  formed  by  means  of  usury 
and  commerce  was  prevented  from  turning  into 
industrial  capital,  in  the  country  by  the  feudal 
constitution,  in  the  towns  by  the  guild  organi¬ 
zation.*  These  fetters  vanished  with  the  dissolu¬ 
tion  of  feudal  society,  with  the  expropriation 
and  partial  eviction  of  the  country  population. 

1  As  such. 

1  The  Natural and  Artificial  Rights  of Property  Contrasted, 
London,  1832,  pp.  98-99.  Author  of  the  anonymous  work: 
Thomas  Hodgskin. 

1  Even  as  late  as  1794,  the  small  clothmakers  of  Leeds 
sent  a  deputation  to  Parliament  with  a  petition  for  a  law 
to  forbid  any  merchant  from  becoming  a  manufacturer.— 
Dr.  Aikin,  op.  cit. 


The  new  manufactures  were  established  at  sea¬ 
ports,  or  at  inland  points  beyond  the  control  of 
the  old  municipalities  and  their  guilds.  Hence 
in  England  an  embittered  struggle  of  the  cor¬ 
porate  towns  against  these  new  industrial  nurs¬ 
eries. 

The  discovery  of  gold  and  silver  in  America, 
the  extirpation,  enslavement,  and  entombment 
in  mines  of  the  aboriginal  population,  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  conquest  and  looting  of  the  East 
Indies,  the  turning  of  Africa  into  a  warren  for 
the  commercial  hunting  of  negroes,  signalized 
the  rosy  dawn  of  the  era  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion.  These  idyllic  proceedings  are  the  chief  fac¬ 
tors  of  primitive  accumulation.  On  their  heels 
treads  the  commercial  war  of  the  European  na¬ 
tions,  with  the  globe  for  a  theatre.  It  begins 
with  the  revolt  of  the  Netherlands  from  Spain, 
assumes  giant  dimensions  in  England's  anti 
Jacobin  war,  and  is  still  going  on  in  the  opium 
wars  against  China,  etc. 

The  different  factors  of  primitive  accumula¬ 
tion  distribute  themselves  now,  more  or  less  in 
chronological  order,  particularly  over  Spain, 
Portugal,  Holland,  France,  and  England.  In 
England  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century, 
they  arrive  at  a  systematical  combination,  em¬ 
bracing  the  colonies,  the  national  debt,  the 
modern  mode  of  taxation,  and  the  protectionist 
system.  These  methods  depend  in  part  on  brute 
force,  e.g.,  the  colonial  system.  &ut  they  all  em¬ 
ploy  the  power  of  the  State,  the  concentrated 
and  organized  force  of  society,  to  hasten,  hot¬ 
house  fashion,  the  process  of  transformation  of 
the  feudal  mode  of  production  into  the  capital¬ 
ist  mode,  and  to  shorten  the  transition.  Force 
is  the  midwife  of  every  old  society  pregnant 
with  a  new  one.  It  is  itself  an  economic  power. 

Of  the  Christian  colonial  system,  W.  Howitt, 
a  man  who  makes  a  speciality  of  Christianity, 
says:  “The  barbarities  and  desperate  outrages 
of  the  so-called  Christian  race,  throughout 
every  region  of  the  world,  and  upon  every  peo¬ 
ple  they  have  been  able  to  subdue,  are  not  to  be 
paralleled  by  those  of  any  other  race,  however 
fierce,  however  untaught,  and  however  reckless 
of  mercy  and  of  shame,  in  any  age  of  the 
earth.”4  The  history  of  the  colonial  administra¬ 
tion  of  Holland— and  Holland  was  the  head 

4  William  Howitt,  Colonization  and  Christianity ,  a  popu¬ 
lar  History  oj  the  Treatment  oj  the  Natives  the  Europeans 
in  all  their  Colonies ,  London,  1838,  p.  9.— On  the  treat¬ 
ment  of  the  slaves,  there  is  a  good  compilation  in  Charles 
Comte,  Traiti  dela  legislation,  3rd  edition,  Brussels,  1837. 
— This  subject  one  must  study  in  detail,  to  sec  what  the 
bourgeoisie  makes  of  itself  and  of  the  labourer,  wherever  it 
can,  wr  hout  restraint,  model  the  world  after  its  own  image. 


GENESIS  OF  THE  INDUSTRIAL  CAPITALIST 


capitalistic  nation  of  the  seventeenth  century 
— “is  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  relations 
of  treachery,  bribery,  massacre,  and  mean¬ 
ness.”1  Nothing  is  more  characteristic  than 
their  system  of  stealing  men,  to  get  slaves  for 
Java.  The  men-stealers  were  trained  for  this 
purpose.  The  thief,  the  interpreter,  and  the 
seller,  were  the  chief  agents  in  this  trade,  native 
princes  the  chief  sellers.  The  young  people 
stolen  were  thrown  into  the  secret  dungeons  of 
Celebes  until  they  were  ready  for  sending  to  the 
slave  ships.  An  official  report  says:  “This  one 
town  of  Macassar,  for  example,  is  full  of  secret 
prisons,  one  more  horrible  than  the  other, 
crammed  with  unfortunates,  victims  of  greed 
and  tyranny  fettered  in  chains,  forcibly  torn 
from  their  families.”  To  secure  Malacca,  the 
Dutch  corrupted  the  Portuguese  governor.  He 
let  them  into  the  town  in  1641.  They  hurried  at 
once  to  his  house  and  assassinated  him,  to  “ab¬ 
stain”  from  the  payment  of  £21,875,  the  Pr*cc 
of  his  treason.  Wherever  they  set  foot,  devasta¬ 
tion  and  depopulation  followed.  Banjuwangi,  a 
province  of  Java,  in  1  /50  numbered  over  80,000 
inhabitants,  in  1811  only  18,000.  Sweet  com¬ 
merce! 

The  English  East  India  Company,  as  is  well 
known,  obtained,  besides  the  political  rule  in 
India,  the  exclusive  monopoly  of  the  tea  trade, 
as  well  as  of  the  Chinese  trade  in  general,  and  of 
the  transport  of  goods  to  and  from  Europe.  But 
the  coasting  trade  of  India,  and  between  the 
islands,  as  well  as  the  internal  trade  of  India, 
were  the  monopoly  of  the  higher  employees  of 
the  company.  The  monopolies  of  salt,  opium, 
betel  and  other  commodities,  were  inexhausti¬ 
ble  mines  of  wealth.  The  employees  themselves 
fixed  the  price  and  plundered  at  will  the  unhap¬ 
py  Hindus.  The  governor  general  took  part  in 
this  private  traffic.  His  favourites  received  con¬ 
tracts  under  conditions  whereby  they,  cleverer 
than  the  alchemists,  made  gold  out  of  nothing. 
Great  fortunes  sprang  up  like  mushrooms  in  a 
day;  primitive  accumulation  went  on  without 
the  advance  of  a  shilling.  The  trial  of  Warren 
Hastings  swarms  with  such  cases.  Here  is  an 
instance.  A  contract  for  opium  was  given  to  a 
certain  Sullivan  at  the  moment  of  his  departure 
on  an  official  mission  to  a  part  of  India  far  re¬ 
moved  from  the  opium  district.  Sullivan  sold 
his  contract  to  one  Binn  for  £40,000;  Binn  sold 
it  the  same  day  for  £60,000,  and  the  ultimate 
purchaser  who  carried  out  the  contract  declared 

1  Thomas  Stamford  Raffles,  late  lieutenant-governor  of 
that  island,  History  of  Jaws  and  its  Dipendencies ,  London, 
1817. 


373 

that  after  all  he  realized  an  enormous  gain.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  one  of  the  lists  laid  before  Parlia¬ 
ment,  the  Company  and  its  employees  from 
1757  to  1766  got  £6,000,000  from  the  Indians 
as  gifts.  Between  1769  and  1770,  the  English 
manufactured  a  famine  by  buying  up  all  the 
rice  and  refusing  to  sell  it  again,  except  at  fabu¬ 
lous  prices.2 

The  treatment  of  the  aborigines  was,  natural¬ 
ly,  most  frightful  in  plantation-colonies  des¬ 
tined  for  export  trade  only,  such  as  the  West 
Indies,  and  in  rich  and  well-populated  countries 
such  as  Mexico  and  India,  that  were  given  uver 
to  plunder.  But  even  in  the  colonics  properly 
so-called,  the  Christian  character  of  primitive 
accumulation  did  not  belie  itself.  Those  sober 
virtuosi  of  Protestantism,  the  Puritans  of  New 
England,  in  1703,  by  decrees  of  their  assembly 
set  a  premium  of  £40  on  every  Indian  scalp  and 
every  captured,  redskin:  in  1720  a  premium  of 
£100  on  every  scalp;  in  1744,  after  Massachu¬ 
setts-Bay  had  proclaimed  a  certain  tribe  as 
rebels,  the  following  prices:  for  a  male  scalp  of 
12  years  and  upwards  £100  (new  currency),  for 
a  male  prisoner  £105,  for  women  and  children 
prisoners  £50,  for  scalps  of  women  and  children 
£50.  Some  decades  later,  the  colonial  system 
took  its  revenge  on  the  descendants  of  the  pious 
pilgrim  fathers,  who  had  grown  seditious  in  the 
meantime.  At  English  instigation  and  for  Eng¬ 
lish  pay  they  were  tomahawked  by  redskins. 
The  British  Parliament  proclaimed  blood¬ 
hounds  and  scalping  as  “means  that  God  and 
Nature  had  given  into  its  hand.” 

The  colonial  system  ripened,  like  a  hot-house, 
trade  and  navigation.  The  “monopoly  socie¬ 
ties”  of  Luther  were  powerful  levers  for  concen¬ 
tration  of  capital.  The  colonies  secured  a  mar¬ 
ket  for  the  budding  manufactures,  and,  through 
the  monopoly  of  the  market,  an  increased  accu¬ 
mulation.  The  treasures  captured  outside  Eu¬ 
rope  by  undisguised  looting,  enslavement,  and 
murder,  floated  back  to  the  mother  country  and 
were  there  turned  into  capital.  Holland,  which 
first  fully  developed  the  colonial  system,  in  1648 
stood  already  in  the  acme  of  its  commercial 
greatness.  It  was  “in  almost  exclusive  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  East  Indian  trade  and  the  commerce 
between  the  south-east  and  north-west  of  Eu¬ 
rope.  1  ts  fisheries,  navy,  and  manufactures,  sur¬ 
passed  those  of  any  other  country.  The  total 

*  In  the  year  1866,  more  than  a  million  Hindus  died  of 
hunger  in  the  province  ol'  Orissa  alone.  Nevertheless,  the 
attempt  was  made  to  enrich  the  Indian  treasury  by  the 
price  at  which  the  necessaries  of  life  were  sold  to  the  starv¬ 
ing  people. 


CAPITAL 


374 

capital  of  the  republic  was  probably  more  im¬ 
portant  than  that  of  all  the  rest  of  Europe  put 
together.”  Giilich  forgets  to  add  that,  by  1648, 
the  people  of  Holland  were  more  overworked, 
poorer  and  more  brutally  oppressed  than  those 
of  all  the  rest  of  Europe  put  together. 

Today  industrial  supremacy  implies  com¬ 
mercial  supremacy.  In  the  period  of  manufac¬ 
ture  properly  so-called,  it  is,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  commercial  supremacy  that  gives  industrial 
predominance.  Hence  the  preponderant  rdle 
that  the  colonial  system  plays  at  that  time.  It 
was  “the  strange  God”  who  perched  himself  on 
the  altar,  cheek  by  jowl  with  the  old  Gods  of 
Europe,  and  one  fine  day  with  a  shove  and  a 
kick  chucked  them  all  of  a  heap.  It  proclaimed 
surplus  value  making  as  the  sole  end  and  aim 
of  humanity. 

The  system  of  public  credit,  i.e.,  of  national 
debts,  whose  origin  we  discover  in  Genoa  and 
Venice  as  early  as  the  Middle  Ages,  took  pos¬ 
session  of  Europe  generally  during  the  manu¬ 
facturing  period.  The  colonial  system  with  its 
maritime  trade  and  commercial  wars  served  as 
a  forcing-house  for  it.  Thus  it  first  took  root  in 
Holland.  National  debts,  i.e.,  the  alienation  of 
the  state— whether  despotic,  constitutional,  or 
republican — marked  with  its  stamp  the  capi¬ 
talistic  era.  The  only  part  of  the  so-called  na¬ 
tional  wealth  that  actually  enters  into  the  col¬ 
lective  possessions  of  modern  peoples  is — their 
national  debt.1  Hence,  as  a  necessary  conse¬ 
quence,  the  modern  doctrine  that  a  nation  be¬ 
comes  the  richer  the  more  deeply  it  is  in  debt. 
Public  credit  becomes  the  credo  of  capital.  And 
with  the  rise  of  national  debt  making,  want  of 
faith  in  the  national  debt  takes  the  place  of  the 
blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  may 
not  be  forgiven. 

The  public  debt  becomes  one  of  the  most 
powerful  levers  of  primitive  accumulation.  As 
with  the  stroke  of  an  enchanter’s  wand,  it  en¬ 
dows  barren  money  with  the  power  of  breeding 
and  thus  turns  it  into  capital,  without  the  ne¬ 
cessity  of  its  exposing  itself  to  the  troubles 
and  risks  inseparable  from  its  employment  in 
industry  or  even  in  usury.  The  state  creditors 
actually  give  nothing  away,  for  the  sum  lent  is 
transformed  into  public  bonds,  easily  negotia¬ 
ble,  which  go  on  functioning  in  their  hands  just 
as  so  much  hard  cash  would.  But  further,  apart 
from  the  class  of  lazy  annuitants  thus  created, 
and  from  the  improvised  wealth  of  the  finan- 

1  William  Cobbctt  remarks  that  in  England  all  public 
Institutions  are  designated  “royal”;  as  compensation  for 
this,  however,  there  is  the  “national”  debt. 


ciers,  middlemen  between  the  government  and 
the  nation — as  also  apart  from  the  tax-farmers, 
merchants,  private  manufacturers,  to  whom  a 
good  part  of  every  national  loan  renders  the 
service  of  a  capital  fallen  from  heaven — the  na¬ 
tional  debt  has  given  rise  to  joint-stock  com¬ 
panies,  to  dealings  in  negotiable  effects  of  all 
kinds,  and  to  slot  k-jobbing ,  in  a  word  to  stock- 
exchange  gambling  and  the  modern  bankoc- 
racy. 

At  their  birth  the  great  banks,  decorated 
with  national  titles,  were  only  associations  of 
private  speculators,  who  placed  themselves  by 
the  side  of  governments,  and,  thanks  to  the 
privileges  they  received,  were  in  a  position  to 
advance  money  to  the  state.  Hence  the  accu¬ 
mulation  of  the  national  debt  has  no  more  in¬ 
fallible  measure  than  the  successive  rise  in  the 
stock  of  these  banks,  whose  full  development 
dates  from  the  founding  of  the  Bank  of  England 
in  1694.  The  Bank  of  England  began  with  lend¬ 
ing  its  money  to  the  Government  at  8%;  at  the 
same  time  it  was  empowered  by  Parliament  to 
coin  money  out  of  the  same  capital,  by  lending 
it  again  to  the  public  in  the  form  of  banknotes. 
It  was  allowed  to  use  these  notes  for  discount¬ 
ing  bills,  making  advances  on  commodities,  and 
for  buying  precious  metals.  It  was  not  long  ere 
this  credit-money,  made  by  the  bank  itself,  be¬ 
came  the  coin  in  which  the  Bank  of  England 
made  its  loans  to  the  state,  and-paid,  on  account 
of  the  state,  the  interest  on  the  public  debt.  It 
was  not  enough  that  the  bank  gave  with  one 
hand  and  took  back  more  with  the  other;  it  re¬ 
mained,  even  while  receiving,  the  eternal  credi¬ 
tor  of  the  nation  down  to  the  last  shilling  ad¬ 
vanced.  Gradually  it  became  inevitably  the  re¬ 
ceptacle  of  the  metallic  hoard  of  the  country, 
and  the  centre  of  gravity  of  all  commercial 
credit.  What  effect  was  produced  on  their  con¬ 
temporaries  by  the  sudden  uprising  of  this 
brood  of  bankocrats,  financiers,  bondholders, 
brokers,  stock-jobbers,  etc.,  is  proved  by  the 
writings  of  that  time,  for  instance,  by  Boling- 
broke’s.2 

With  the  national  debt  arose  an  international 
credit  system,  which  often  conceals  one  of  the 
sources  of  primitive  accumulation  in  this  or 
that  people.  Thus  the  villainies  of  the  Venetian 
thieving  system  formed  one  of  the  secret  bases 
of  the  capital  wealth  of  Holland  to  whom  Venice 
in  her  decadence  lent  large  sums  of  money.  So 

2  “If  the  Tartars  overran  Europe  today,  it  would  He 
hard  indeed  to  convey  to  them  what  a  financier  is  among 
us.”  -Montesquieu,  The  Spirit  of  Lawst  Bk.  xxx,  ch. 
*3- 


GENESIS  OF  THE  INDUSTRIAL  CAPITALIST 


also  was  it  with  Holland  and  England.  By  the 
beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  Dutch 
manufactures  were  far  outstripped.  Holland 
had  ceased  to  be  the  nation  preponderant 
in  commerce  and  industry.  One  of  its  main 
lines  of  business,  therefore,  from  1701  to  1776, 
is  the  lending  out  of  enormous  amounts  of 
capital,  especially  to  its  great  rival  England. 
The  same  thing  is  going  on  today  between 
England  and  the  United  States.  A  great  deal  of 
capital,  which  appears  today  in  the  United 
States,  without  any  certificate  of  birth,  was 
yesterday,  in  England,  the  capitalized  blood  of 
children. 

As  the  national  debt  finds  its  support  in  the 
public  revenue,  which  must  cover  the  yearly 
payments  for  interest,  etc.,  the  modern  system 
of  taxation  was  the  necessary  complement  of 
the  system  of  national  loans.  The  loans  enable 
the  government  to  meet  extraordinary  ex¬ 
penses,  without  the  taxpayers  feeling  it  imme¬ 
diately,  but  they  necessitate,  as  a  consequence, 
increased  taxes.  On  the  other  hand,  the  raising 
of  taxation,  caused  by  the  accumulation  of  debts 
contracted  one  after  another,  compels  the  gov¬ 
ernment  always  to  have  recourse  to  new  loans 
for  new  extraordinary  expenses.  Modern  fiscal- 
ity,  whose  pivot  is  formed  by  taxes  on  the  most 
necessary  means  of  subsistence  (thereby  in¬ 
creasing  their  price),  thus  contains  within  itself 
the  germ  of  automatic  progression.  Over-taxa¬ 
tion  is  not  an  incident,  but  rather  a  principle. 
In  Holland,  therefore,  where  this  system  was 
first  inaugurated,  the  great  patriot,  De  Witt, 
has  in  his  Ma.xtms  extolled  it  as  the  best  system 
for  making  the  wage  labourer  submissive,  fru¬ 
gal,  industrious,  and  overburdened  with  la¬ 
bour.  The  destructive  influence  that  it  exercises 
on  the  condition  of  the  wage  labourer  concerns 
us  less  however,  here,  than  the  forcible  expro¬ 
priation,  resulting  from  it,  of  peasants,  artisans, 
and,  in  a  word,  all  elements  of  the  lower  middle 
class.  On  this  there  are  not  two  opinions,  even 
among  the  bourgeois  economists.  Its  expropri¬ 
ating  efficacy  is  still  further  heightened  by  the 
system  of  protection  which  forms  one  of  its  in¬ 
tegral  parts. 

The  great  part  that  the  public  debt,  and  the 
fiscal  system  corresponding  with  it,  has  played 
in  the  capitalization  of  wealth  and  the  expro¬ 
priation  of  the  masses,  has  led  many  writers, 
like  Cobbett,  Doubleday,  and  others,  to  seek 
in  this,  incorrectly,  the  fundamental  cause  of 
the  misery  of  the  modern  peoples. 

The  system  of  protection  was  an  artificial 
means  of  manufacturing  manufacturers,  of  ex- 


375 

propria  ting  independent  labourers,  of  capital¬ 
izing  the  national  means  of  production  and  sub¬ 
sistence,  of  forcibly  abbreviating  the  transition 
from  the  mediaeval  to  the  modern  mode  of  pro¬ 
duction.  The  European  states  tore  one  another 
to  pieces  about  the  patent  of  this  invention,  and, 
once  entered  into  the  service  of  the  surplus  val¬ 
ue  makers,  did  not  merely  lay  under  contribu¬ 
tion  in  the  pursuit  of  this  purpose  their  own 
people,  indirectly  through  protective  duties, 
directly  through  export  premiums.  They  also 
forcibly  rooted  out,  in  their  dependent  coun¬ 
tries,  all  industry,  as,  for  example,  England  did 
with  the  Irish  woollen  manufacture.  On  the 
continent  of  Europe,  after  Colbert’s  example, 
the  process  was  much  simplified.  The  primitive 
industrial  capital  here  came  in  part  directly  out 
of  the  state  treasury.  “Why,”  cries  Mirabeau, 
“why  go  so  far  to  seek  the  cause  of  the  manu¬ 
facturing  glory  of  Saxony  before  the  war?  One 
hundred  and  eighty  millions  of  debts  con¬ 
tracted  by  the  sovereigns!”1 

Colonial  system,  public  debts,  heavy  taxes, 
protection,  commercial  wars,  etc.,  these  chil¬ 
dren  of  the  true  manufacturing  period  increase 
gigantically  during  the  infancy  of  modern  in¬ 
dustry.  The  birth  of  the  latter  is  heralded  by  a 
great  slaughter  of  the  innocents.  Like  the  royal 
na\  y,  the  factories  were  recruited  by  means  of 
the  press-gang.  Blast  as  Sir  F.  M.  Eden  is  as  to 
the  horrors  of  the  expropriation  of  the  agricul¬ 
tural  population  from  the  soil,  from  the  last 
third  of  the  fifteenth  century  to  his  own  time; 
with  all  the  self-satisfaction  with  which  he  re¬ 
joices  in  this  process,  “essential”  for  establish¬ 
ing  capitalistic  agriculture  and  “the  due  pro¬ 
portion  between  arable  and  pasture  land” — he 
does  not  show,  however,  the  same  economic  in¬ 
sight  in  respect  to  the  necessity  of  child-stealing 
and  child-slavery  for  the  transformation  of 
manufacturing  exploitation  into  factory  exploi¬ 
tation,  and  the  establishment  of  the  “true  rela¬ 
tion”  between  capital  and  labour  power.  He 
says:  “It  may,  perhaps,  be  worth  the  attention 
of  the  public  to  consider  whether  any  manufac¬ 
ture,  which,  in  order  to  be  carried  on  success¬ 
fully,  requires  that  cottages  and  workhouses 
sh  >uld  be  ransacked  for  poor  children;  that 
they  should  be  employed  by  turns  during  the 
greater  part  of  the  night  and  robbed  of  that  rest 
which,  though  indispensable  to  all,  is  most  re¬ 
quired  by  the  young;  and  that  numbers  of  both 
sexes,  of  different  ages  and  dispositions,  should 
be  collected  together  in  such  a  manner  that  the 
contagion  of  example  cannot  but  lead  to  profli- 

1  Mirabeau,  op.  cit.,  Vol.  VI,  p.  101. 


CAPITAL 


376 

gacy  and  debauchery;  will  add  to  the  sum  of 
individual  or  national  felicity?'*1 

“In  the  counties  of  Derbyshire,  Nottingham¬ 
shire,  and  more  particularly  in  Lancashire,” 
says  Fieldcn,  “the  newly  invented  machinery 
was  used  in  large  factories  built  on  the  sides  of 
streams  capable  of  turning  the  water-wheel. 
Thousands  of  hands  were  suddenly  required  in 
these  places  remote  from  towns;  and  Lanca¬ 
shire,  in  particular,  being,  till  then,  compara¬ 
tively  thinly  populated  and  barren,  a  popula¬ 
tion  was  all  that  she  now  wanted.  The  small  and 
nimble  fingers  of  little  children  being  by  very 
far  the  most  in  request,  the  custom  instantly 
sprang  up  of  procuring  apprentice  t  from  the  dif¬ 
ferent  parish  workhouses  of  London,  Birming¬ 
ham,  and  elsewhere.  Many,  many  thousands  of 
these  little,  hapless  creatures  were  sent  down 
into  the  north,  being  from  the  age  of  seven  to 
the  age  of  thirteen  or  fourteen  years  old.  The 
custom  was  for  the  master  to  clothe  his  appren¬ 
tices  and  to  feed  and  lodge  them  in  an  'appren- 
tice  house’  near  the  factory;  overseers  were  ap¬ 
pointed  to  see  to  the  works,  whose  interest  it 
was  to  work  the  children  to  the  utmost,  because 
•their  pay  was  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of 
work  that  they  could  exact.  Cruelty  was,  of 
course,  the  consequence.  ...  In  many  of  the 
manufacturing  districts,  but  particularly,  I  am 
afraid,  in  the  guilty  county  to  which  I  belong” 
(Lancashire),  “cruelties  the  most  heart-rending 
were  practised  upon  the  unoffending  and 
friendless  creatures  who  were  thus  consigned  to 
the  charge  of  master  manufacturers;  they  were 
harassed  to  the  brink  of  death  by  excess  of  la¬ 
bour  . . .  were  flogged,  fettered,  and  tortured  in 
the  most  exquisite  refinement  of  cruelty; . . . 
they  were  in  many  cases  starved  to  the  bone 
while  flogged  to  their  work  and  . . .  even  in  some 
instances  .  . .  were  driven  to  commit  suicide. 
.  .  .  The  beautiful  and  romantic  valleys  of 
Derbyshire,  Nottinghamshire,  and  Lancashire, 
secluded  from  the  public  eye,  became  the  dis¬ 
mal  solitudes  of  torture,  and  of  many  a  murder. 
The  profits  of  manufactures  were  enormous; 
but  this  only  whetted  the  appetite  that  it  should 
have  satisfied,  and  therefore  the  manufacturers 
had  recourse  to  an  expedient  that  seemed  to 
secure  to  them  those  profits  without  any  pos¬ 
sibility  of  limit;  they  began  the  practice  of  what 
is  termed  'night  working,'  that  is,  having  tired 
one  set  of  hands  by  working  them  throughout 
the  day,  they  had  another  set  ready  to  go  on 
working  throughout  the  night;  the  day  set  get¬ 
ting  into  the  beds  that  the  night  set  had  just 
1  Eden,  op.  cit.9  Vol.  I,  Book  II,  Ch.  i,  p.  421. 


quitted,  and,  in  their  turn  again,  the  night  set 
getting  into  the  beds  that  the  day  set  quitted 
in  the  morning.  It  is  a  common  tradition  in  Lan¬ 
cashire,  that  the  beds  never  get  cold”1 

With  the  development  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion  during  the  manufacturing  period,  the  pub¬ 
lic  opinion  of  Europe  had  lost  the  last  remnant 
of  shame  and  conscience.  The  nations  bragged 
cynically  of  every  infamy  that  served  them  as 
a  means  to  capitalistic  accumulation.  Read,  for 
instance,  the  naive  Annals  of  Commerce  of  the 
worthy  A.  Anderson.  Here  it  is  trumpeted 
forth  as  a  triumph  of  English  statecraft  that  at 
the  Peace  of  Utrecht,  England  extorted  from 
the  Spaniards  by  the  Asiento  Treaty  the  privi¬ 
lege  of  being  allowed  to  ply  the  negro  trade, 
until  then  only  carried  on  between  Africa  and 
the  English  West  Indies,  between  Africa  and 
Spanish  America  as  well.  England  thereby  ac¬ 
quired  the  right  of  supplying  Spanish  America 
until  1743  with  4800  negroes  yearly. This  threw, 
at  the  same  time,  an  official  cloak  over  British 
smuggling.  Liverpool  waxed  fat  on  the  slave 
trade.  This  was  its  method  of  primitive  accu¬ 
mulation.  And,  even  to  the  present  day,  Liver¬ 
pool  “respectability”  is  the  Pindar  of  the  slave 
trade  which— compare  the  work  of  Aikin  (1795) 
already  quoted — “has  coincided  with  that  spir¬ 
it  of  bold  adventure  which  has  characterized 
the  trade  of  Liverpool  and  rapidly  carried  it  to 
its  present  state  of  prosperity;  has  occasioned 
vast  employment  for  shipping  and  sailors,  and 
greatly  augmented  the  demand  for  the  manu¬ 
factures  of  the  country.”3  Liverpool  employed 

2  John  hidden,  op.  eit.>  pp.  5, 6.  —On  the  earlier  infamies 
of  the  factory  s)stem,  sec  als6  Dr.  Aikin  (1795)  op.  «/.,  p. 
219,  and  Gisborne,  Enquiry  into  the  Duties  of  Men ,  1795, 
Vol.  II.—  When  the  steam-engine  transplanted  the  fac¬ 
tories  from  the  country  waterfalls  to  the  middle  of  towns, 
the  "abstemious”  surplus  value  maker  found  the  child- 
material  ready  to  his  hand,  without  being  forced  to  seek 
slaves  from  the  workhouses.  When  Sir  R.  Peel,  (father  of 
the  "minister  of  plausibility”),  brought  in  his  bill  for  the 
protection  of  children,  in  1815,  Francis  Horner,  lumen 
[shining  light]  of  the  Bullion  Committee  and  intimate 
friend  of  Ricardo,  said  in  the  House  of  Commons:  "It  is 
notorious,  that  with  a  bankrupt’s  effects,  a  gang,  if  he 
might  use  the  word,  of  these  children  had  been  put  up  to 
sale,  and  were  advertised  publicly  as  part  of  the  property. 
A  most  atrocious  instance  had  been  brought  before  the 
Court  of  King’s  Bench  two  years  before,  in  which  a  num¬ 
ber  of  these  boys,  apprenticed  by  a  perish  in  London  to 
one  manufacturer,  had  been  transferrfd  to  another,  and 
had  been  found  by  some  benevolent  persons  in  a  state  of 
absolute  famine.  Another  case  more  horrible  had  come  to 
his  knowledge  while  on  a”  (Parliamentary)  "Committee 
. . .  that  not  many  years  ago,  an  agreement  had  been  made 
between  a  l<ondon  parish  and  a  Lancashire  manufacturer, 
by  which  it  was  stipulated  that  with  every  twenty  sound 
children  one  idiot  should  be  taken." 

'Op.  dt.tp.JJ9. 


HISTORICAL  TENDENCY  OF  ACCUMULATION  377 


in  the  slave  trade,  in  1730, 15  ships;  in  1751, 53; 
in  1760,  74;  in  1770,  96;  and  in  1792,  132. 

Whilst  the  cotton  industry  introduced  child 
slavery  in  England,  it  gave  in  the  United  States 
a  stimulus  to  the  transformation  of  the  earlier, 
more  or  less  patriarchal  slavery,  into  a  system 
of  commercial  exploitation.  In  fact,  the  veiled 
slavery  of  the  wage  workers  in  Europe  needed, 
for  its  pedestal,  slavery  pure  and  simple  in  the 
new  world.1 

Tantee  molts  erat‘l  to  establish  the  “eternal 
laws  of  Nature”  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  pro¬ 
duction,  to  complete  the  process  of  separation 
between  labourers  and  conditions  of  labour,  to 
transform,  at  one  pole,  the  social  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  and  subsistence  into  capital,  at  the  op¬ 
posite  pole,  the  mass  of  the  population  into 
wage  labourers,  into  “free  labouring  poor,”  that 
artificial  product  of  modern  society.3  If  money, 
according  to  Augier,4  “comes  into  the  world 
with  a  congenital  blood-stain  on  one  cheek,” 
capital  comes  dripping  from  head  to  foot,  from 
every  pore,  with  blood  and  dirt.6 

1  In  1790,  there  were  in  the  English  West  Indies  ten 
slaves  for  one  free  man,  in  the  French  fourteen  for  one,  in 
the  Dutch  twenty-three  for  one.  Henry  Brougham,  An 
Inquiry  into  the  Colonial  Poltcy  of  the  European  Powers% 
Edinburgh,  1803,  Vol.  II,  p.  74. 

3  Such  pains  did  it  take. 

3  The  phrase  “labouring  poor”  is  found  in  English  legis¬ 
lation  from  the  moment  when  the  class  of  wage  labourers 
becomes  noticeable.  This  term  is  used  in  opposition,  on 
the  one  hand,  to  the  “idle  poor,”  beggars,  etc.,  on  the  other 
to  those  labourers,  who,  pigeons  not  yet  plucked,  are  still 
possessors  of  their  own  means  of  labour.  From  the  Statute 
Book  it  passed  into  political  economy,  and  was  handed 
down  by  Culpeper,  J.  Child,  etc.,  to  Adam  Smith  and  Eden. 
After  this,  one  can  judge  of  the  good  faith  of  the  “execrable 
political  cant-monger,”  Edmund  Burke,  when  he  described 
the  expression  “labouring  poor”  as  “execrable  political 
cant."  This  sycophant  who,  in  the  pay  of  the  English  oli¬ 
garchy,  played  the  romantic  laudator  temports  acti  against 
the  French  Revolution,  just  as,  in  the  pay  of  the  North 
American  Colonies,  at  the  beginning  of  the  American  trou¬ 
bles,  he  had  played  the  liberal  against  the  English  oli¬ 
garchy,  was  an  out  and  out  vulgar  bourgeois.  “The  laws  of 
commerce  are  the  laws  of  Nature,  and  therefore  the  laws  of 
God."  (E.  Burke,  op .  cit.%  pp.  31,  3a.)  No  wonder  that, 
true  to  the  laws  of  God  and  of  Nature,  he  always  sold  him¬ 
self  in  the  best  market.  A  very  good  portrait  of  this  Ed¬ 
mund  Burke,  during  his  liberal  time,  is  to  be  found  in  the 

writings  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Tucker.  Tucker  was  a  parson  and 
a  tory,  but,  for  the  rest,  an  honourable  man  and  a  com¬ 
petent  political  economist.  In  face  of  the  infamous  cow¬ 
ardice  of  character  that  reigns  today,  and  believes  most 
devoutly  in  “the  laws  of  commerce,"  it  is  our  bounden 
d-’ty  again  and  again  to  brand  the  Burkes,  who  only  differ 
from  their  successors  in  one  thing—talent. 

4  Marie  Augier,  Du  crldifipuhlic,  Paris,  184a. 

‘  “Capital  is  said  by  a  Quarterly  Reviewer  to  fly  tur¬ 
bulence  and  strife,  and  to  be  timid,  which  is  very  true;  but 
this  is  very  incompletely  stating  the  question.  Capital  es¬ 
chews  no  profit,  or  very  small  profit,  just  as  Nature  was 


CHAPTER  XXXII.  HISTORICAL  TENDENCY 
OF  CAPITALIST  ACCUMULATION 

What  docs  the  primitive  accumulation  of  cap¬ 
ital,  i.e.,  its  historical  genesis,  resolve  itself  in¬ 
to?  In  so  far  as  it  is  not  immediate  transforms 
tion  of  slaves  and  serfs  into  wage  labourers,  and 
therefore  a  mere  change  of  form,  it  only  means 
the  expropriation  of  the  immediate  producers, 
i.e.,  the  dissolution  of  private  property  based 
on  the  labour  of  its  owner.  Private  property,  as 
the  antithesis  to  social,  collective  property,  ex¬ 
ists  only  where  the  means  of  labour  and  the  ex¬ 
ternal  conditions  of  labour  belong  to  private  in¬ 
dividuals.  But  according  as  these  private  indi¬ 
viduals  are  labourers  or  not  labourers,  private 
property  has  a  different  character.  The  num¬ 
berless  shades  that  it  at  first  sight  presents,  cor¬ 
respond  to  the  intermediate  stages  lying  be¬ 
tween  these  two  extremes.  The  private  proper¬ 
ty  of  the  labourer  in  his  means  of  production  is 
the  foundation  of  petty  industry,  whether  ag¬ 
ricultural,  manufacturing,  or  both;  petty  indus¬ 
try,  again,  is  an  essential  condition  for  the  de¬ 
velopment  of  social  production  and  of  the  free 
individuality  of  the  labourer  himself.  Of  course, 
this  petty  mode  of  production  exists  also  under 
slavery,  serfdom,  and  other  states  of  depend¬ 
ence.  But  it  flourishes,  it  lets  loose  its  whole 
energy,  it  attains  its  adequate  classical  form, 
only  where  the  labourer  is  the  private  owner  of 
his  own  means  of  labour  set  in  action  by  him¬ 
self;  the  peasant  of  the  land  which  he  cultivates, 
the  artisan  of  the  tool  which  he  handles  as  a 
virtuoso. 

This  mode  of  production  presupposes  parcel¬ 
ling  of  the  soil,  and  scattering  of  the  other 
means  of  production.  As  it  excludes  the  concen¬ 
tration  of  these  means  of  production,  so  also  it 
excludes  cooperation,  division  of  labour  within 
each  separate  process  of  production,  the  control 
over,  and  the  productive  application  of,  the 
forces  of  nature  by  society,  and  the  free  devel¬ 
opment  of  the  social  productive  powers.  It  is 
compatible  only  with  a  system  of  production, 
and  a  society,  moving  within  narrow  and  more 

formerly  said  to  abhor  a  vacuum.  With  adequate  profit, 
capital  is  very  bold.  A  certain  10%  will  ensure  its  employ¬ 
ment  anywhere;  20%  certain  will  produce  eagerness;  50%, 
positive  audacity;  100%  will  make  it  ready  to  trample  on 
all  human  laws;  300%,  and  there  is  not  a  crime  at  which  it 
will  scruple,  nor  a  risk  it  will  not  run,  even  to  the  chance 
of  its  owner  being  hanged.  If  turbulence  and  strife  will 
bring  a  profit,  it  will  freely  encourage  both.  Smuggling  and 
the  slave  trade  have  amply  proved  all  that  is  here  stated." 
— P.  J.  Dunning,  op.  cit.,  p.  35. 


CAPITAL 


378 

or  less  primitive  bounds.  To  perpetuate  it 
would  be,  as  Pecqueur  rightly  says,  “to  decree 
universal  mediocrity.”  At  a  certain  stage  of  de¬ 
velopment,  it  brings  forth  the  material  agencies 
for  its  own  dissolution.  From  that  moment,  new 
forces  and  new  passions  spring  up  in  the  bosom 
of  society;  but  the  old  social  organization  fet¬ 
ters  them  and  keeps  them  down.  It  must  be  an¬ 
nihilated;  it  is  annihilated.  Its  annihilation,  the 
transformation  of  the  individualized  and  scat¬ 
tered  means  of  production  into  socially  concen¬ 
trated  ones,  of  the  pygmy  property  of  the  many 
into  the  huge  property  of  the  few,  the  expropri¬ 
ation  of  the  great  mass  of  the  people  from  the 
soil,  from  the  means  of  subsistence,  and  from 
the  means  of  labour,  this  fearful  and  painful  ex¬ 
propriation  of  the  mass  of  the  people  forms  the 
prelude  to  the  history  of  capital.  It  comprises  a 
series  of  forcible  methods,  of  which  we  have 
passed  in  review  only  those  that  have  been 
epoch-making  as  methods  of  the  primitive  ac¬ 
cumulation  of  capital.  The  expropriation  of  the 
immediate  producers  was  accomplished  with 
merciless  vandalism,  and  under  the  stimulus  of 
passions  the  most  infamous,  the  most  sordid, 
the  pettiest,  the  most  meanly  odious.  Self- 
earned  private  property,  that  is  based,  so  to 
say,  on  the  fusing  together  of  the  isolated,  inde¬ 
pendent  labouring  individual  with  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  his  labour,  is  supplanted  by  capitalistic 
private  property,  which  rests  on  exploitation  of 
the  nominally  free  labour  of  others,  i.c.,  on 
wage-labour.1 

As  soon  as  this  process  of  transformation  has 
sufficiently  decomposed  the  old  society  from 
top  to  bottom,  as  soon  as  the  labourers  are 
turned  into  proletarians,  their  means  of  labour 
into  capital,  as  soon  as  the  capitalist  mode  of 
production  stands  on  its  own  feet,  then  the  fur¬ 
ther  socialization  of  labour  and  further  trans¬ 
formation  of  the  land  and  other  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  into  socially  exploited  and,  therefore, 
common  means  of  production,  as  well  as  the 
further  expropriation  of  private  proprietors, 
takes  a  new  form.  That  which  is  now  to  be 
expropriated  is  no  longer  the  labourer  working 
for  himself,  but  the  capitalist  exploiting  many 
labourers.  This  expropriation  is  accomplished 
by  the  action  of  the  immanent  laws  of  capital¬ 
istic  production  itself,  by  the  centralization 
of  capital.  One  capitalist  always  kills  many. 
Hand  in  hand  with  this  centralization,  or 

1  “We  are  in  a  completely  new  system  of  society. . . .  We 
endeavour  to  separate  every  species  of  property  from  every 
species  of  labour." — Sismondi,  Nouoeaux  prtnetpes  de  V 
iconomie  politique*  Vol.  Ill,  p.  434. 


this  expropriation  of  many  capitalists  by  few, 
develop,  on  an  ever  extending  scale,  the  cooper¬ 
ative  form  of  the  labour  process,  the  conscious 
technical  application  of  science,  the  methodical 
cultivation  of  the  soil,  the  transformation  of  the 
instruments  of  labour  into  instruments  of  la¬ 
bour  only  usable  in  common,  the  economizing 
of  all  means  of  production  by  their  use  as  the 
means  of  production  of  combined,  socialized  la¬ 
bour,  the  entanglement  of  all  peoples  in  the  net 
of  the  world  market,  and  with  this,  the  inter¬ 
national  character  of  the  capitalistic  regime. 
Along  with  the  constantly  diminishing  number 
of  the  magnates  of  capital,  who  usurp  and  mo¬ 
nopolize  all  advantages  of  this  process  of  trans¬ 
formation,  grows  the  mass  of  misery,  oppres¬ 
sion,  slavery,  degradation,  exploitation;  but 
with  this  too  grows  the  revolt  of  the  working 
class,  a  class  always  increasing  in  numbers,  and 
disciplined,  united,  organized  by  the  very 
mechanism  of  the  process  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion  itself.  The  monopoly  of  capital  becomes  a 
fetter  upon  the  mode  of  production,  which  has 
sprung  up  and  flourished  along  with,  and  under, 
it.  Centralization  of  the  means  of  production 
and  socialization  of  labour  at  last  reach  a  point 
where  they  become  incompatible  with  their 
capitalist  integument.  This  integument  is  burst 
asunder.  The  knell  of  capitalist  private  proper¬ 
ty  sounds.  The  expropriators  arc  expropriated. 

The  capitalist  mode  of  appropriation,  the  re¬ 
sult  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production,  pro¬ 
duces  capitalist  private  property.  This  is  the 
first  negation  of  individual  private  property,  as 
founded  on  the  labour  of  the  proprietor.  But 
capitalist  production  begets,  with  the  inexora¬ 
bility  of  a  law  of  nature,  its  own  negation.  It  is 
the  negation  of  negation.  This  does  not  re-es¬ 
tablish  private  property  for  the  producer,  but 
gives  him  individual  property  based  on  the  ac¬ 
quisitions  of  the  capitalist  era,  i.e.,  on  coopera¬ 
tion  and  the  possession  in  common  of  the  land 
and  of  the  means  of  production. 

The  transformation  of  scattered  private 
property,  arising  from  individual  labour,  into 
capitalist  private  property  is,  naturally,  a  proc¬ 
ess  incomparably  more  protracted,  violent,  and 
difficult,  than  the  transformation  of  capitalistic 
private  property,  already  practically  resting  on 
socialized  production,  into  socialized  property. 
In  the  former  case,  wc  had  the  expropriation  of 
the  mass  of  the  people  by  a  few  usurpers;  in  the 
latter,  we  have  the  expropriation  of  a  few  usurp¬ 
ers  by  the  mass  of  the  people.2 

*  The  advance  of  industry,  whose  involuntary  promoter 
is  the  bourgeoisie,  replaces  the  isolation  of  the  labourers. 


THE  MODERN  THEORY  OF  COLONIZATION 


CHAPTER  XXXIII.  THE  MODERN  THEORY 
OF  COLONIZATION 


Political  economy  confuses  on  principle  two 
very  different  kinds  of  private  property,  of 
which  one  rests  on  the  producers’  own  labour, 
the  other  on  the  employment  of  the  labour  of 
others.  It  forgets  that  the  latter  not  only  is  the 
direct  antithesis  of  the  former,  but  absolutely 
grows  on  its  tomb  alone.  In  western  Europe,  the 
home  of  political  economy,  the  process  of  primi¬ 
tive  accumulation  is  more  or  less  accomplished. 
Here  the  capitalist  regime  has  either  directly 
conquered  the  whole  domain  of  national  pro¬ 
duction,  or,  where  economic  conditions  are  less 
developed,  it,  at  least,  indirectly  controls  those 
strata  of  society  which,  though  belonging  to  the 
antiquated  mode  of  production,  continue  to  ex¬ 
ist  side  by  side  with  it  in  gradual  decay.  To  this 
ready-made  world  of  capital,  the  political  econ¬ 
omist  applies  the  notions  of  law  and  of  property 
inherited  from  a  p^e-capitalistic1  world  with  all 
the  more  anxious  zeal  and  all  the  greater  unc¬ 
tion,  the  more  loudly  the  facts  cry  out  in  the 
face  of  his  ideology.  It  is  otherwise  in  the  colo¬ 
nies.  There  the  capitalist  regime  everywhere 
comes  into  collision  with  the  resistance  of  the 
producer,  who,  as  owner  of  his  own  conditions 
of  labour,  employs  that  labour  to  enrich  him¬ 
self,  instead  of  the  capitalist.  The  contradiction 
of  these  two  diametrically  opposed  economic 
systems  manifests  itself  here  practically  in  a 
struggle  between  them.  Where  the  capitalist 
has  at  his  back  the  power  of  the  mother  coun¬ 
try,  he  tries  to  clegr  out  of  his  way  by  force  the 

due  to  competition,  by  their  revolutionary  combination, 
due  to  association.  The  development  of  modern  industry, 
therefore,  cuts  from  under  its  feet  the  very  foundation  on 
which  the  bourgeoisie  produces  and  appropriates  products. 
What  the  bourgeoisie,  therefore,  produces,  above  all,  are 
its  own  gravediggers.  Its  fall  and  the  victory  of  the  prole¬ 
tariat  are  equally  inevitable.  ...  Of  all  the  classes  that 
stand  face  to  face  with  the  bourgeoisie  today,  the  prole¬ 
tariat  alone  is  a  really  revolutionary  class.  The  other  classes 
perish  and  disappear  in  the  face  of  modern  industry;  the 
proletariat  is  its  special  and  essential  product.  . . .  The 
lower  middle  classes,  the  small  manufacturers,  the  shop¬ 
keepers,  the  artisan,  the  peasant,  all  these  fight  against 
the  bourgeoisie,  to  save  from  extinction  their  existence  as 
fractions  of  the  middle  class. . . .  They  are  reactionary,  for 
they  try  to  roll  back  the  wheel  of  history.— Karl  Marx  and 
Friedrich  Kngels,  Manifesto  of  the  Communist  Party ,  pp. 
4  '4-425  below. 

1  We  treat  here  of  real  colonies,  virgin  soils,  colonized 
by  free  immigrants.  The  United  States,  are,  speaking  eco¬ 
nomically,  still  only  a  colony  of  Europe.  Resides,  to  this 
category  belong  also  such  old  plantations  as  those  in  which 
the  abolition  of  slavery  has  completely  altered  the  earlier 
conditions. 


379 

modes  of  production  and  appropriation  based 
on  his  independent  labour  of  the  producer.  The 
same  interest  which  compels  the  sycophant  of 
capital,  the  political  economist,  in  the  mother 
country,  to  proclaim  the  theoretical  identity  of 
the  capitalist  mode  of  production  with  its  con¬ 
trary,  that  same  interest  compels  him  in  the 
colonies  to  make  a  clean  breast  of  it  and  to  pro¬ 
claim  aloud  the  antagonism  of  the  two  modes 
of  production.  To  this  end  he  proves  how  the 
development  of  the  social  productive  power  of 
labour,  cooperation,  division  of  labour,  use  of 
machinery  on  a  large  scale,  etc.,  are  impossible 
without  the  expropriation  of  the  labourers,  and 
the  corresponding  transformation  of  their 
means  of  production  into  capital.  In  the  interest 
of  the  so-called  national  wealth,  he  seeks  for 
artificial  means  to  ensure  the  poverty  of  the 
people.  Here  his  apologetic  armour  crumbles 
off,  bit  by  bit,  like  rotten  touchwood.  It  is  the 
great  merit  of  E.  G.  Wakefield  to  have  discov¬ 
ered,  not  anything  new  about  the  colonies,2  but 
to  have  discovered  in  the  colonies  the  truth  as 
to  the  conditions  of  capitalist  production  in  the 
mother  country.  As  the  system  of  protection  at 
its  origin3  attempted  to  manufacture  capital¬ 
ists  artificially  in  the  mother  country,  so 
Wakefield’s  colonization  theory,  which  Eng¬ 
land  tried  for  a  time  to  enforce  by  Acts  of  Par¬ 
liament,  attempted  to  effect  the  manu¬ 
facture  of  wage  workers  in  the  colonies.  This 
he  calls  “systematic  colonization.” 

First  of  all,  Wakefield  discovered  that  in  the 
colonies,  property  in  money,  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence,  machines,  and  other  means  of  production, 
does  not  as  yet  ^amp  a  man  as  a  capitalist  if 
there  be  wanting  the  correlative — the  wage 
worker,  the  other  man  who  is  compelled  to  sell 
himself  of  his  own  free-will.  He  discovered  that 
capital  is  not  a  thing,  but  a  social  relation  be¬ 
tween  persons,  established  by  the  instrumen¬ 
tality  of  things.4  Mr.  Peel,  he  moans,  took  with 
him  from  England  to  Swan  River,  West  Aus¬ 
tralia,  means  of  subsistence  and  of  production 

2  Wakefield’s  few  glimpses  on  the  subject  of  modern  col¬ 
onization  are  fully  anticipated  by  Mirabeau  Pfere,  the  phys¬ 
iocrat,  and  even  much  earlier  by  English  economists. 

*  Later,  it  became  a  temporary  necessity  in  the  inter¬ 
national  competitive  struggle.  But,  whatever  its  motive, 
the  consequences  remain  the  same. 

4  A  negro  is  a  negro.  In  certain  circumstances  he  becomes 
a  slave.  A  mule  is  a  machine  for  spinning  cotton.  Only  un¬ 
der  certain  circumstances  does  it  become  capital.  Outside 
these  circumstances,  it  is  no  more  capital  than  gold  is  in¬ 
trinsically  money,  or  sugar  is  the  price  of  sugar. . . .  Capi¬ 
tal  is  a  social  relation  of  production.  It  is  a  historical  rela¬ 
tion  of  production. — Karl  Marx,  **Lohnarbeit  und  Kapi- 
tal Neue  Rheintsche  Zeitung ,  No.  266,  April  7, 1849. 


CAPITAL 


386 

to  the  amount  of  £50,000.  Mr.  Peel  had  the 
foresight  to  bring  with  him,  besides,  three  thou¬ 
sand  pewons  of  the  working  class,  men,  women, 
and  children.  Once  arrived  at  his  destination, 
“Mr.  Peel  was  left  without  a  servant  to  make 
his  bed  or  fetch  him  water  from  the  river.*’1  Un¬ 
happy  Mr.  Peel,  who  provided  for  everything 
except  the  export  of  English  modes  of  produc¬ 
tion  to  Swan  River! 

For  the  understanding  of  the  following  dis¬ 
coveries  of  Wakefield,  two  preliminary  re¬ 
marks:  We  know  that  the  means  of  production 
and  subsistence,  while  they  remain  the  proper¬ 
ty  of  the  immediate  producer,  are  not  capital. 
They  become  capital,  only  under  circumstances 
in  which  they  serve  at  the  same  time  as  means 
of  exploitation  and  subjection  of  the  labourer. 
But  this  capitalist  soul  of  theirs  is  so  intimately 
v/edded,  in  the  head  of  the  political  economist, 
to  their  material  substance,  that  he  christens 
them  “capital”  under  all  circumstances,  even 
when  they  arc  its  exact  opposite.  Thus  is  it  with 
Wakefield.  Further:  the  splitting  up  of  the 
means  of  production  into  the  individual  proper¬ 
ty  of  many  independent  labourers,  working  on 
their  own  account,  he  calls  “equal  division  of 
capital.”  It  is  with  the  political  economist  as 
with  the  feudal  jurist.  The  latter  stuck  on  to 
pure  monetary  relations  the  labels  supplied  by 
feudal  law. 

“If,”  says  Wakefield,  “all  the  members  of  the 
society  are  supposed  to  possess  equal  portions 
of  capital ...  no  man  would  have  a  motive  for 
accumulating  more  capital  than  he  could  use 
with  his  own  hands.  This  is  to  some  extent  the 
case  in  new  American  settlements,  where  a  pas¬ 
sion  for  owning  land  prevents  the  existence  of 
a  class  of  labourers  for  hire.”2  So  long,  therefore, 
as  the  labourer  can  accumulate  for  himself— 
and  this  he  can  do  so  long  as  he  remains  posses¬ 
sor  of  his  means  of  production— capitalist  accu¬ 
mulation  and  the  capitalistic  mode  of  produc¬ 
tion  are  impossible.  The  class  of  wage  labourers, 
essential  to  these,  is  wanting.  How,  then,  in  old 
Europe,  was  the  expropriation  of  the  labourer 
from  his  conditions  of  labour  (i.e.,  the  co-cxist- 
ence  of  capital  and  wage-labour)  b'rought 
about?  By  a  social  contract  of  a  quite  original 
kind.  “Mankind  have  adopted  a  .  .  .  simple 
contrivance  for  promoting  the  accumulation  of 
capital,*'  wHich,  of  course,  since  the  time  of 
Adam,  floated  in  their  imagination  as  the  sole 
and  fina$  end  of  their  existence:  “They  have 
divided  themselves  into  owners  of  capital  and 

1  E.  G.  Wakefield,  England  and  America,  Vol.  II,  p.  33. 

zIbid.,  p.  17. 


owners  of  labour. . . .  This  division  was  the  re¬ 
sult  of  concert  and  combination.”8  In  one  word: 
the  mass  of  mankind  expropriated  itself  in  hon¬ 
our  of  the  “accumulation  of  capital.”  Now,  one 
would  think,  that  this  instinct  of  self-denying 
fanaticism  would  give  itself  full  fling  especially 
in  the  colonies,  where  alone  exist  the  men  and 
conditions  that  could  turn  a  social  contract 
from  a  dream  to  a  reality.  But  why,  then, 
should  “systematic  colonization”  be  called 
in  to  replace  its  opposite,  spontaneous,  unregu¬ 
lated  colonization?  But— but — “In  the  north¬ 
ern  States  of  the  American  Union,  it  may  be 
doubted  whether  so  many  as  a  tenth  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  would  fall  under  the  description  of  hired  la¬ 
bourers.  ...  In  England  . . .  the  labouring  class 
compose  the  bulk  of  the  people.”4  Nay,  the  im¬ 
pulse  to  self-expropriation,  on  the  part  of  la¬ 
bouring  humanity,  for  the  glory  of  capital,  ex¬ 
ists  so  little  that  slavery,  according  to  Wake¬ 
field  himself,  is  the  sole  natural  basis  of  colonial 
wealth.  His  systematic  colonization  is  a  mere 
pis  aller ,5  since  he  unfortunately  has  to  do  with 
free  men,  not  with  slaves.  “The  first  Spanish 
settlers  in  Saint  Domingo  did  not  obtain  la¬ 
bourers  from  Spain.  But,  without  labourers, 
their  capital  must  have  perished,  or,  at  least, 
must  soon  have  been  diminished  to  that  small 
amount  which  each  individual  could  employ 
with  his  own  hands.  This  has  actually  occurred 
in  the  last  colony  founded  by  Englishmen—  the 
Swan  River  settlement— where  a  great  mass  of 
capital,  of  seeds,  implements,  and  cattle,  has 
perished  for  want  of  labourers  to  use  it,  and 
where  no  settler  has  preserved  much  more  capi¬ 
tal  than  he  can  employ  witty  his  own  hands.”6 

Wrc  have  seen  that  the  expropriation  of  the 
mass  of  the  people  from  the  soil  forms  the  basis 
of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production.  The  es¬ 
sence  of  a  free  colony,  on  the  contrary,  consists 
in  this— that  the  bulk  of  the  soil  is  still  public 
property,  and  every  settler  on  it,  therefore,  can 
turn  part  of  it  into  his  private  property  and  in¬ 
dividual  means  of  production,  without  hinder¬ 
ing  the  later  settlers  in  the  same  operation.7 
This  is  the  secret  both  of  the  prosperity  of  the 
colonies  and  of  their  inveterate  vice— opposi¬ 
tion  to  the  establishment  of  capital.  “Where 
land  is  very  cheap  and  all  men  are  free,  where 
every  one  who  so  pleases  can  easily  obtain  a 
piece  of  land  for  himself,  not  only  is  labour  very 

*  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  1 8.  4  Ibid.,  pp.  41, 43, 44. 

*  Makeshift  solution.  *  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  5. 

7  “Land,  to  be  an  element  of  colonization,  must  not  only 
be  waste,  but  it  must  be  public  property,  liable  to  be  con¬ 
verted  into  private  property.”— Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  125. 


THE  MODERN  THEORY  OF  COLONIZATION 


dear,  as  respects  the  labourer’s  share  of  the 
produce,  but  the  difficulty  is  to  obtain  com¬ 
bined  labour  at  any  price.”1 

As  in  the  colonies  the  separation  of  the  la¬ 
bourer  from  the  conditions  of  labour  and  their 
root,  the  soil,  does  not  yet  exist,  or  only  sporad¬ 
ically,  or  on  too  limited  a  scale,  so  neither  does 
the  separation  of  agriculture  from  industry  ex¬ 
ist,  nor  the  destruction  of  the  household  indus¬ 
try  of  the  peasantry.  Whence,  then,  is  to  come 
the  internal  market  for  capital  ?  “No  part  of  the 
population  of  America  is  exclusively  agricultur¬ 
al,  excepting  slaves  and  their  employers,  who 
combine  capital  and  labour  in  particular  works. 
Free  Americans,  who  cultivate  the  soil,  follow 
many  other  occupations.  Some  portion  of  the 
furniture  and  tools  which  they  use  is  commonly 
made  by  themselves.  They  frequently  build 
their  own  houses,  and  carry  to  market,  at  what¬ 
ever  distance,  the  produce  of  their  own  indus¬ 
try.  They  are  spinners  and  weavers;  they  make 
soap  and  candles,  as  well  as,  in  many  cases, 
shoes  and  clothes  for  their  own  use.  In  America 
the  cultivation  o t  1  and  is  often  the  secondary 
pursuit  of  a  blacksmith,  a  miller,  or  a  shop¬ 
keeper.”2  With  such  queer  people  as  these, 
where  is  the  “field  of  abstinence”  for  the  capi¬ 
talists? 

The  great  beauty  of  capitalist  production 
consists  in  this — that  it  not  only  constantly  re¬ 
produces  the  wage  worker  as  wage  worker,  but 
produces  always,  in  proportion  to  the  accumu¬ 
lation  of  capital,  a  relative  surplus  population 
of  wage  workers.  Thus  the  law  of  supply  and 
demand  of  labour  is  kept  in  the  right  rut,  the 
oscillation  of  wages  is  penned  within  limits  sat¬ 
isfactory  to  capitalist  exploitation,  and,  lastly, 
the  social  dependence  of  the  labourer  on  the 
capitalist,  that  indispensable  requisite,  is  se¬ 
cured;  an  unmistakable  relation  of  depend¬ 
ence,  which  the  smug  political  economist,  at 
home,  in  the  mother  country,  can  transmogrify 
into  one  of  free  contract  between  buyer  and 
seller,  between  equally  independent  owners  of 
commodities,  the  owner  of  the  commodity  capi¬ 
tal  and  the  owner  of  the  commodity  labour. 
•But  in  the  colonies,  this  pretty  fancy  is  torn 
asunder.  The  absolute  population  here  in¬ 
creases  much  more  quickly  than  in  the  mother 
country,  because  many  labourers  enter  this 
world  as  ready-made  adults,  and  yet  the  labour 
market  is  always  understocked.  The  law  of  the 
supply  and  demand  of  labour  falls  to  pieces.  On 
the  one  hand,  the  old  world  constantly  throws 
in  capiral,  thirsting  after  exploitation  and  “ab- 

1  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  247 .  'Ibid.  pp.  21,  22. 


381 

stinence”;  on  the  other,  the  regular  reproduc¬ 
tion  of  the  wage-labourer  as  wage-labourer 
comes  into  collision  with  impediments  the  most 
impertinent  and  in  part  invincible.  What  be¬ 
comes  of  the  production  of  wage  labourers,  su¬ 
pernumerary  in  proportion  to  the  accumulation 
of  capital  ?  The  wage  worker  of  today  is  tomor¬ 
row  an  independent  peasant,  or  artisan,  work¬ 
ing  for  himself.  He  vanishes  from  the  labour 
market,  but  not  into  the  workhouse.  This  con¬ 
stant  transformation  of  the  wage  labourers  into 
independent  producers,  who  work  for  them¬ 
selves  instead  of  for  capital,  and  enrich  them¬ 
selves  instead  of  the  capitalist  gentry,  reacts  in 
its  turn  very  perversely  on  the  conditions  of  the 
labour  market.  Not  only  does  the  degree  of 
exploitation  of  the  wage  labourer  remain  in¬ 
decently  low.  The  wage  labourer  loses  into  the 
bargain,  along  with  the  relation  of  dependence, 
also  the  sentiment  of  dependence  on  the 
abstemious  capitalist.  Hence  all  the  incon¬ 
veniences  that  our  E.  G.  Wakefield  pictures  so 
doughtily,  so  eloquently,  so  pathetically. 

The  supply  of  wage  labour,  he  complains,  is 
neither  constant,  nor  regular,  nor  sufficient. 
“The  supply  of  labour  is  always,  not  only  small, 
but  uncertain.”3  “Though  the  produce  divided 
between  the  capitalist  and  the  labourer  be 
large,  the  labourer  takes  so  great  a  share  that  he 
soon  becomes  a  capitalist.  .  .  .  Few,  even  of 
those  whose  lives  are  unusually  long,  can  accu¬ 
mulate  great  masses  of  wealth.”4  The  labourers 
most  distinctly  decline  to  allow  the  capitalist 
to  abstain  from  the  payment  of  the  greater  part 
of  their  labour.  It  avails  him  nothing,  if  he  is  so 
cunning  as  to  import  from  Europe,  with  his  own 
capital,  his  own  wage  workers.  They  soon 
“cease  ...  to  be  labourers  for  hire;  they  ...  be¬ 
come  independent  landowners,  if  not  competi¬ 
tors  with  their  former  masters  in  the  labour 
market.”6  Think  of  the  horror!  The  excellent 
capitalist  has  imported  bodily  from  Europe, 
with  his  own  good  money,  his  own  competitors! 
The  end  of  the  world  has  come!  No  wonder 
W'akeficld  laments  the  absence  of  all  depend¬ 
ence  and  of  all  sentiment  of  dependence  on  the 
part  of  the  wage  workers  in  the  colonies.  On  ac¬ 
count  of  high  wages,  says  his  disciple,  Merivale, 
there  is  in  the  colonies  "the  urgent  desire  for 
cheaper  and  more  subservient  labourers — for  a 
class  to  whom  the  capitalist  might  dictate 
terms,  instead  of  being  dictated  toby  them.  . . . 
In  ancient  civilized  countries  the  labourer, 
though  free,  is  by  a  law  of  nature  dependent  on 

*  Ibid.,  Vol.  II,  p.  1 1 6.  *  Ibid.,  Vol.  I,  p.  i  jx. 

*  Ibtd.,  Vol.  II,  p.  5. 


CAPITAL 


382 

capitalists;  in  colonies  this  dependence  must  be 
created  by  artificial  means.”1 

What  is  now,  according  to  Wakefield,  the 
consequence  of  this  unfortunate  state  of  things 
in  the  colonies?  A  “barbarizing  tendency  of  dis¬ 
persion”  of  producers  and  national  wealth.2 
The  parcelling-out  of  the  means  of  production 
among  innumerable  owners,  working  on  their 
own  account,  annihilates,  along  with  the  cen¬ 
tralization  of  capital,  all  the  foundations  of 
combined  labour.  Every  long-winded  under¬ 
taking,  extending  over  several  years  and  de¬ 
manding  outlay  of  fixed  capital,  is  prevented 
from  being  carried  out.  In  Europe,  capital  in¬ 
vests  without  hesitating  a  moment,  for  the 
working  class  constitutes  its  living  appurte¬ 
nance,  always  in  excess,  always  at  disposal.  But 
in  the  colonies!  Wakefield  tells  an  extremely 
doleful  anecdote.  He  was  talking  with  some 
capitalists  of  Canada  and  the  state  of  New 
York,  where  the  immigrant  wave  often  becomes 
stagnant  and  deposits  a  sediment  of  “supernu¬ 
merary”  labourers.  “Our  capital,”  says  one  of 
the  characters  in  the  melodrama,  “was  ready 
for  many  operations  which  require  a  consider¬ 
able  period  of  time  for  their  completion;  but  we 
could  not  begin  such  operations  with  labour 
which,  we  knew,  would  soon  leave  us.  If  we  had 
been  sure  of  retaining  the  labour  of  such  emi¬ 
grants,  we  should  have  been  glad  to  have  en¬ 
gaged  it  at  once  and  for  a  high  price:  and  we 

1  Merivale,  op .  Vol.  II,  pp.  235-314,  passim.  Even 
the  mild,  free-trade,  vulgar  economist,  Molinari,  says:  *Tn 
those  colonies  where  slavery  has  been  abolished  without 
forced  labour  having  been  replaced  by  an  equivalent  quan¬ 
tity  of  free  work,  the  contrary  of  what  happens  daily  be¬ 
fore  our  eyes  takes  place.  One  sees  there  simple  workers 
exploiting  for  their  part  the  industrial  entrepreneurs,  de¬ 
manding  of  them  wages  beyond  all  proportion  to  their  just 
share  of  the  product.  The  planters,  unable  to  get  for  their 
sugar  a  price  sufficient  to  cover  the  rise  in  wages,  have  had 
to  furnish  the  excess,  at  first  from  their  profits,  then  from 
their  capital  itself.  A  number  of  planters  have  been  ruined 
in  this  way,  while  others  have  closed  their  workshops  to 
avert  the  impending  doom.  It  is  no  doubt  preferable  to  see 
accumulations  of  capital  vanish,  than  generations  of  men 
perish”  (how  generous  of  Mr.  Molinari ')  “but  wouldn’t  it 
be  better  if  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  perished  ?”  (Mol¬ 
inari,  op.  cit.y  pp.  51,  52.)  Mr.  Molinari,  Mr.  Molinari! 
What  then  becomes  of  the  Ten  Commandments  Of  Moses 
and  the  prophets,  of  the  law  of  supply  and  demand,  if  in 
Europe  the  “entrepreneur”  can  cut  down  the  labourer’s 
legitimate  part,  and  in  the  West  Indies,  the  labourer  can 
cut  down  the  entrepreneur’s?  And  what,  if  you  please,  is 
this  “legitimate  part,”  which  on  your  own  showing  the 
capitalist  in  Europe  daily  neglects  to  pay?  Over  yonder,  in 
the  colonies  where  the  labourers  are  so  “simple”  as  to  “ex¬ 
ploit”  the  capitalist,  Mr.  Molinari  feels  a  strong  itching  to 
set  the  law  of  supply  and  demand,  that  works  elsewhere 
automatically,  on  the  right  road  by  means  of  the  police. 

1  Wakefield,  op. «/.,  Vol.  II,  p.  52. 


should  have  engaged  it,  even  though  we  had 
been  sure  it  would  leave  us,  provided  we  had 
been  sure  of  a  fresh  supply  whenever  we  might 
need  it.”3 

After  Wakefield  has  contrasted  the  English 
capitalist  agriculture  and  its  “combined”  la¬ 
bour  with  the  scattered  cultivation  of  American 
peasants,  he  unwittingly  gives  us  a  glimpse  at 
the  reverse  of  the  medal,  lie  depicts  the  mass  of 
the  American  people  as  well-to-do,  independ¬ 
ent,  enterprising,  and  comparatively  cultured, 
whilst  “the  English  agricultural  labourer  is  a 
miserable  wretch,  a  pauper.  ...  In  what  coun¬ 
try,  except  North  America  and  some  new  colo¬ 
nies,  do  the  wages  of  free  labour  employed  in 
agriculture,  much  exceed  a  bare  subsistence  for 
the  labourer? .  .  .  Undoubtedly,  farm-horses  in 
England,  being  a  valuable  property,  arc  better 
fed  than  English  peasants.”4  But,  never  mind, 
national  wealth  is,  once  again,  by  its  very  na¬ 
ture,  identical  with  misery  of  the  people. 

How,  then,  to  heal  the  anti-capitalistic  can¬ 
cer  of  the  colonies?  If  men  were  willing,  at  a 
blow,  to  turn  all  the  soil  from  public  into  pri¬ 
vate  property,  they  would  destroy  certainly  the 
root  of  the  evil,  but  also—  the  colonies.  The 
trick  is  how  to  kill  two  birds  with  one  stone.  Let 
the  Government  put  upon  the  virgin  soil  an 
artificial  price,  independent  of  the  law  of  supply 
and  demand,  a  price  that  compels  the  immi¬ 
grant  to  work  a  long  time  foMvages  before  he 
can  earn  enough  money  to  buy  land,  and  turn 
himself  into  an  independent  peasant.5  The 
funds  resulting  from  the  sale  of  land  at  a  price 
relatively  prohibitory  for  the  wage  workers, 
this  fund  of  money  extorted  from  the  wages  of 
labour  by  violation  of  the  sacred  law  of  supply 
and  demand,  the  Government  is  to  employ,  on 
the  other  hand,  in  proportion  as  it  grows,  to  im¬ 
port,  have-nothings  from  Europe  into  the  colo¬ 
nies,  and  thus  keep  the  wage-labour  market  full 
for  the  capitalists.  Under  these  circumstances, 
tout  sera  pour  le  mieux  dans  le  meilleur  des 
mondcs  possibles .  This  is  the  great  secret  of 
“systematic  colonization.”  By  this  plan,  Wake- 

*  Jbld.y  pp.  191,  192. 

4  Ibid.y  Vol.  I,  pp.  47,  246. 

6  “It  is,  you  add,  in  virtue  of  the  appropriation  of  the 
soil  and  of  capitals  that  man,  who  has  only  his  arms,  finds 
employment  and  makes  an  income. ...  Oft  the  contrary,  it 
is  in  virtue  of  the  individual  appropriation  of  the  soil  that 
there  arc  men  who  have  only  their  arms.  . . .  When  you 
put  a  man  into  a  room,  you  are  robbing  him  of  the  air. 
Likewise,  if  you  take  possession  of  the  land,  you  are  doing 
the  same  sort  of  thing.  . . .  That  is  to  say,  you’ve  put  him 
in  a  vacuum  emptied  of  all  wealth,  so  that  he  can  live  only 
at  your  discretion.” — Colins,  op.  cit.y  Vol.  Ill,  268-271, 
passim . 


THE  MODERN  THEORY  OF  COLONIZATION 


field  cries  in  triumph,  “the  supply  of  labour  must 
be  constant  and  regular,  because,  first,  as  no  la¬ 
bourer  would  be  able  to  procure  land  until  he 
had  worked  for  money,  all  immigrant  labourers, 
working  for  a  time  for  wages  and  in  combina¬ 
tion,  would  produce  capital  for  the  employment 
of  more  labourers;  secondly,  because  every  la¬ 
bourer  who  left  off  working  for  wages  and  be¬ 
came  a  landowner  would,  by  purchasing  land, 
provide  a  fund  for  bringing  fresh  labour  to  the 
colony/’1  The  price  of  the  soil  imposed  by  the 
State  must,  of  course,  be  a  “sufficient  price” — 
i.c.,  so  high  “as  to  prevent  the  labourers  from 
becoming  independent  landowners  until  others 
had  followed  to  take  their  place.”2  This  “suffi¬ 
cient  price  for  the  land”  is  nothing  but  a  euphe¬ 
mistic  circumlocution  for  the  ransom  which  the 
labourer  pays  to  the  capitalist  for  leave  to  retire 
from  the  wage-labour  market  to  the  land.  First, 
he  must  create  for  the  capitalist  “capital,”  with 
which  the  latter  may  be  able  to  exploit  more 
labourers;  then  he  must  place,  at  his  own  ex¬ 
pense,  a  locum  tevms*  on  the  labour  market, 
whom  the  Government  forwards  across  the  sea 
for  the  benefit  of  his  old  master,  the  capitalist. 

1 1  is  very  characteristic  that  the  Knglish  Gov¬ 
ern  men  t  for  years  practised  this  method  of 
“primitive  accumulation,”  prescribed  by  Mr. 
Wakefield  expressly  for  the  use  of  the  colonies. 
The  fiasco  was,  of  course,  as  complete  as  that  of 
Sir  Robert  Peel’s  Bank  Act.  The  stream  of  emi¬ 
gration  was  only  diverted  from  the  Knglish  col¬ 
onies  to  the  United  States.  Meanwhile,  the  ad¬ 
vance  of  capitalistic  production  in  F.urope,  ac¬ 
companied  by  increasing  Government  pressure, 
has  rendered  Wakefield’s  recipe  superfluous.  On 
the  one  hand,  the  enormous  and  ceaseless 
stream  of  men,  year  after  year  driven  upon 
America,  leaves  behind  a  stationary  sediment 
in  the  east  of  the  United  States,  the  wave  of 
immigration  from  F.urope  throwing  men  on  the 
labour  market  there  more  rapidly  than  the 

'Wakefield,  op.  cit.y  Vol.  II,  p.  192. 

2  Op.  cit.y  p.  45. 

8  Kcplacement. 


383 

wave  of  emigration  westwards  can  wash  them 
away.  On  the  other  hand,  the  American  Civil 
War  brought  in  its  train  a  colossal  national  debt, 
and,  with  it,  pressure  of  taxes,  the  rise  of  the 
vilest  financial  aristocracy,  the  squandering  of 
a  huge  part  of  the  public  land  on  speculative 
companies  for  the  exploitation  of  railways, 
mines,  etc.,  in  brief,  the  most  rapid  centraliza¬ 
tion  of  capital.  The  great  republic  has,  there¬ 
fore,  ceased  to  be  the  promised  land  for  emi¬ 
grant  labourers.  Capitalistic  production  ad¬ 
vances  there  with  giant  strides,  even  though  the 
lowering  of  wages  and  the  dependence  of  the 
wage  worker  are  yet  far  from  being  brought 
down  to  the  normal  European  level.  The  shame¬ 
less  lavishing  of  uncultivated  colonial  land  on 
aristocrats  and  capitalists  by  the  Government, 
so  loudly  denounced  even  by  Wakefield,  has 
produced,  especially  in  Australia,4  in  conjunc¬ 
tion  with  the  stream  of  men  that  the  gold  dig¬ 
gings  attract,  and  with  the  competition  that  the 
importation  of  English  commodities  causes 
even  to  the  smallest  artisan,  an  ample  “relative 
surplus  labouring  population,”  so  that  almost 
every  mail  brings  the  Job’s  news  of  a  “glut  of 
the  Australian  labour  market,”  and  prostitu¬ 
tion  in  some  places  there  flourishes  as  wantonly 
as  in  the  London  Haymarkct. 

I  lowever,  we  are  not  concerned  here  with  the 
condition  of  the  colonies.  The  only  thing  that 
interests  us  is  the  secret  discovered  in  the  new 
world  by  the  political  economy  of  the  old  world, 
and  proclaimed  on  the  house-tops:  that  the  cap¬ 
italist  mode  of  production  and  accumulation, 
and  therefore  capitalist  private  property,  have 
for  their  fundamental  condition  the  annihila¬ 
tion  of  self-earned  private  property;  in  other 
words,  the  expropriation  of  the  labourer. 

4  As  soon  as  Australia  became  her  own  lawgiver,  she 
passed,  of  course,  laws  favourable  to  the  settlers,  but  the 
squandering  of  the  land,  alread)  accomplished  by  the  Eng¬ 
lish  Government,  stands  in  the  way.  "The  first  and  main 
object  at  which  the  new  Land  Act  of  1862  aims  is  to  give 
increased  facilities  for  the  settlement  of  the  people." — The 
ImhJ  /mu.'  of  l ' ictortdy  b)  the  Hon.  O.  G.  Duffy,  minister  of 
public  lands,  London,  1862. 


Authors  and  Works  Cited  in  CAPITAL 


I.  Books  and  Pamphlets 

Note:  Works  published  anonymously  will  be  found 
under  the  name  of  the  author  where  Marx  identi¬ 
fies  him.  In  these  cases,  the  name  is  put  in  brack¬ 
ets.  Otherwise,  anonymous  works  are  listed  by 
title,  with  the  name  of  the  author  added  in  paren¬ 
theses,  if  known. 

ADDINGTON,  Stephen.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Rea¬ 
sons  For  and  Against  Enclosing  Open  Fields . 
id  ed.,  London,  1772. 

The  Advantages  of  the  East-India  Trade  to  England . 

London,  1 720.  (S.  Addington.) 

AIKEN,  John.  Description  of  the  Country  from  Thir¬ 
ty  to  Forty  Mila  Round  Manchester,  London,  1795. 
ANDERSON,  Adam.  An  Historical  and  Chrono¬ 
logical  Deduction  of  the  Origin  of  Commerce  from 
the  Earliest  Accounts  to  the  Present  Time,  London, 
1 764* 

ANDERSON,  James.  Observations  on  the  Means 
of  Exciting  a  Spirit  of  National  Industry ,  Chiefly 
Intended  to  Promote  the  Agriculture ,  Commerce , 
Manufactures ,  and  Fisheries  of  Scotland.  Edin¬ 
burgh,  1777. 

- .The  Bee.  18  Vols.,  Edinburgh,  1791-93,  Vol. 

III. 

APPIAN.  Romische  Geschichten.  Ucbcrs.  von  Ferd. 
L.I.  Dillenius.  Stuttgart,  1830.  (Cited  as  Romische 
Burgerkriege.) 

ARISTOTLE.  Ethicorum  ad  Nicomachum  IAbri 
Decern.  Bk.  I,  Bekkcri  cd.,  Berlin,  1831.  (Ethics.) 
Politico.  Bk.  I,  Bekkeri  ed.,  Berlin,  1831.  ( Poli¬ 
tics .) 

ASHLEY,  Lord  Anthony.  Ten  Hours'  Factory  Bill 
—  The  Speech  of  Lord  Ashley ,  March  15th,  1844. 
London,  1844. 

ATHENAEUS.  Dcipnosophistartim  Libri Quindccim. 

Bk.  IV,  Schweighauser  ed.,  Strassburg,  1802. 
AUGIER,  Marie.  Du  credit  public  et  de  son  histoire 
depuis  les  temps  anciens  jusqu'h  nos  jours.  Paris, 
*  1 842. 

BABBAGE,  Charles.  On  the  Economy  of  Machinery 
and  Manufactures.  London,  1832. 

BACO.  See  bacon. 

BACON,  Francis.  The  Reign  of  Henry  VII.  Ver¬ 
batim  reprint  from  Rennet’s  England ,  1719  ed. 
London,  1 870. 

■ - .  Essays,  or  Councils ,  Civil  and  Moral.  London, 

r  ,597* 

[BAILEY,  Samuel]  A  Critical  Dissertation  on  the 
Nature ,  Measure ,  and  Causes  of  Value ,  Chiefly  in 


Reference  to  the  Writings  of  Mr.  Ricardo  and  His 
Followers.  London,  1825. 

BAILEY,  Samuel.  Money  and  Its  Vicissitudes  in 
Value;  as  They  Affect  National  Industry  and 
Pecuniary  Contracts:  With  a  Postscript  on  Joint 
Stock  Banks.  London,  1 837. 

BARBON,  Nicolas.  A  Discourse  Concerning  Coin¬ 
ing  the  New  Money  Lighter ,  in  Answer  to  Mr. 
Locke's  “Considerations  About  Raising  the  Value  of 
Money."  London,  1696. 

BARTON,  John.  Observations  on  the  Circumstances 
Which  Influence  the  Condition  of  the  Labouring 
Classes  of  Society.  Ixmdon,  1817. 

BECCARIA,  Cesare.  Elementi  di  economia  pubblica. 
Milano ,  I  So  4. 

BELLERS,  John.  Essays  About  the  Poor ,  Manufac¬ 
tures ,  Trade ,  Plantations  and  Immorality .  London, 
1699. 

- .  Proposals  for  Raising  a  College  of  Industry  of 

All  Useful  Trades  and  Husbandry.  London,  1696. 

BENTHAM,  Jeremy.  Theorie  des  peines  et  des 
recompenses .  Vol.  1. 3rd  ed.,  Paris,  1 826. 

BERKELEY,  George.  The  Querist.  Iondon,  1750. 
Beschlusse  der  Arbeiter  zu  Dunkirk ,  Staat  New 
York.  New  York,  1 866 

BIDAUT,  J.  N.  Du  Monopole  qui  s'etablit  dans  les 
arts  industriels  et  le  commerce  au  moyen  des 
grands  appareils  de  fabrication.  Deuxieme  Itvraison 
Du  monopole  de  la  fabrication  et  de  la  vente.  Paris, 
1828. 

BIESE,  Franz.  Die  Philosophic  des  Aristoteles 
in  threm  innern  Zusammcnhange ,  mit  besonderer 
Berucksichtigung  des  philosophtschen  Sprachge - 
brauchs ,  aus  dessen  Schrtften  entwickelu  Vol. 1 1. 
Berlin,  1842. 

BLAKEY,  Robert.  The  History  of  Political  Liter¬ 
ature  from  the  Earliest  Times.  Vol.  11.  London, 
1855. 

BLANQUI,  J6r6me  Adolphe.  Cours  d' economic 
indus  trie  lie,  annee  /8jy/j8.  Sel.  by  A.  Blaise. 
Paris,  1838-39. 

- .  Des  classes  ouvribes  en  France  pendant l' annee 

1848.  Parts  I-II.  Paris,  1849. 

BLOCK,  Maurice.  Les  theoriciens  du  socialisme 
en  Allemagne.  Extrait  du  Journal  des  konomistes , 
juillet  et  aout  1872.  Paris,  1 872. 

BOILEAU,  Etienne.  Reglemens  sur  les  arts  et 
metiers  de  Paris,  rediges  au  ijieme  siecle  et 
connus  sous  le  nom  du  “Livre  des  mbtiers."  G.B. 
Depping  ed.,  Paris,  1837. 

BOISGU1LLEBERT,  Pierre  de.  Dissertation  sur 
la  nature  des  richesses ,  de  P argent  et  des  tribute . 


385 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  TO  CAPITAL 


386 

In  Collection  dcs  prtncipaux  economists ,  Vol  I, 
Hconomistes  financiers  du  XVI I  Heme  siecle. 
Daire  ed.,  Paris,  1 843. 

BOXHORN,  M.  S.  Institutions  Politicae .  Leyden, 
1663. 

BROADHURST,  J.  Treatise  on  Political  Economy . 
London,  1842. 

BROUGHAM,  Henry.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Colonial 
Policy  of  the  European  Powers,  Vol.  II.  Edin¬ 
burgh,  1 803. 

BRUCKNER,  J.  Theorie  du  systeme  animal,  Leyden, 
>767- 

BUCHANAN,  David.  Inquiry  into  the  Taxation 
and  Commercial  Policy  of  Great  Britain.  Edinburgh, 
1844. 

- .Notes  on  Smith’s  Wealth  of  Nations .  See 

ADAM  SMITH. 

BUCHEZ,  Philippe,  and  ROUX-LA VERGN E, 
Pierre.  Histoire  parlementaire  de  la  Revolution 
franqaise;  ou ,  Journal  des  assemblies  nationals 
depuis  Jj8g  jusquen  18 fj.  Vol.  X.  Paris,  1834. 
BURKE,  Edmund.  A  letter  from  the  Rt.  Hon.  Ed. 
Burke  to  a  Noble  Lord,  on  the  Attacks  Made  upon 
Him  and  His  Pension  in  the  House  of  Lords ,  by 
the  Duke  of  Bedford  and  the  Earl  of  Lauderdale . 
London,  1796. 

- .Thoughts  and  Details  on  Scarcity ,  Originally 

Presented  to  the  Rt.  Hon.  IV.  Pitt  in  the  Month  of 
November ,  7795.  Ixindon,  1800. 

CAIRN ES,  John  Elliott.  The  Slave  Power.  London, 
1862. 

CAMPBELL,  George.  Modern  India.  A  Sketch  of 
the  System  of  Civil  Government.  London,  1852. 
CANTILLON,  Richard.  Essai  sur  la  nature  du  con 1- 
merce  en  general.  Amsterdam,  1756. 

- .  The  Analysis  of  Trade y  Commerce ,  Coin, 

Bullion ,  Banks  and  Foreign  Exchanges.  London 
1759- 

CARD.  See  ROUARD  DU  CARD. 

CAREY,  Henry  Charles.  Essay  on  the  Rate  of  IVages; 
with  an  Examination  of  the  Causes  of  the  Differ¬ 
ences  in  the  Condition  of  the  labouring  Population 
Throughout  the  IV orld.  Philadelphia,  1835. 

- .  The  Slave  Trade ,  Domestic  and  Foreign.  Why 

It  Exists  and  How  It  May  Be  Extinguished. 
Philadelphia,  1853. 

CARLI,  G.  R.  Notes  to  P.  Verri,  Meditazioni  sulla 
Economia  Politico.  Vol.  XV.  Custodi  ed.,  Milano, 
1804. 

The  Case  of  Our  English  Wool.  London,  1685. 
CAZENOVE,  John.  Notes  to  his  edition  of  Mal- 
thus*  Definitions  in  Political  Economy.  London, 

i853- 

CHALMERS,  Thomas.  On  Political  Economy  in 
Connection  with  the  Moral  State  and  Moral  Pros¬ 
pects  of  Society.  2d  ed.,  New  York,  1 832. 

The  Character  and  Behavior  of  King  William , 
Sunderland ,  etc .,  as  Represented  in  Original 
Letters  to  the  Duke  of  Shrewsbury  from  Somers , 
Halifax ,  Oxford ,  Secretary  Vernon  etc.  M.S.  British 
Museum,  Sloan  Collection.  No.  4224. 
CHERBULIEZ,  Antoine  £lis6e.  Riche  ou  pauvre . 


Paris.  1840.  (Marx  cites  the  new  ed.,  Richesse  ou 
pauvrete.  Paris,  1841.) 

COBBETT,  William.  A  History  of  the  Protestant 
“ Reformation ”  in  England  and  Ireland ;  Showing 
How  That  Event  Has  Impoverished  and  Degraded 
the  Main  Body  of  the  People  in  Those  Countries . 
Dublin  1868. 

COLINS,  J.  L'  economic  politique ,  source  des  revo¬ 
lutions  et  des  utopies pret endues  socialistes.  Vol.  III. 
Paris,  1857. 

COLUMBUS,  Brief  aus  Jamaica  (1503). 

COMTE,  Charles.  Traite  de  la  legislation .  Vols.  III- 
IV.  3rd  ed.,  Brussels,  1837. 

CONDILLAC,  Etienne  Bonnot.  Le  commerce  et  le 
Gouvernement.  In  Collection  des  principaux  econo - 
mistes .  Vol.  XIV,  Melanges  d*economie  politique. 
Daire  ed.,  Paris,  1847. 

Considerations  Concerning  Taking  Off  the  Bounty  on 
Corn  Exported.  London,  1753. 

Considerations  on  Taxes  as  They  are  Supposed  to  Affect 
the  Price  of  Labour.  London,  1765.  (J.  Cunningham.) 

CORBET,  Thomas.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Carnes  and 
Modes  of  the  Wealth  of  Individuals;  or,  The  Prin¬ 
ciples  of  Trade  and  Speculation  Explained.  London, 
1841. 

CORBON,  A.  De  I enseignement  professional.  2d  ed., 
Paris,  i860. 

COURCELLE-SEN EUIL,  J.  G.  Traite  theonque 
et  pratique  des  entreprises  industrtellesy  commer- 
ciales  et  agricoles;  out  Manuel  des  affaires.  2d  ed., 
Paris,  1857. 

The  Currency  Theory  Reviewed:  In  a  Letter  to  the  Scot¬ 
tish  People.  By  a  Banker  in  England.  Edinburgh, 

*845-,  ^ 

CUVIER,  Georges.  Discours  sur  les  revolutions  de  la 
surface  du  globe.  Hoefer  ed.,  Paris,  1 863. 

DANTE  ALIGHIERI.  Divina  Commedta  ( The  Di¬ 
vine  Comedy). 

DARWIN,  Charles  R.  On  the  Origin  of  Species  by 
Means  of  Natural  Selection.  London,  1859. 

A  Defence  of  the  Landowners  and  Farmers  of  Great 
Britain.  London,  1814. 

DE  QUINCKY,  Thomas.  The  Logic  of  Political  Econ¬ 
omy.  London,  1844. 

DESCARTES,  Ren6.  Discours  de  la  methode  pour 
b'ten  conduire  sa  raison.  Paris,  1668.  ( Discourse 
on  the  Method  of  Rightly  Conducting  the  Reason.) 

DESTUTT  DE  TRACY.  P.lfments  d’idiologie.  Parts 
IV-V  Traite  de  la  volontr  et  de  ses  ejfets.  Paris, 
I  826. 

DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Historische Bibliothek.  Vols. 
I  and  III.  Stuttgart,  1828-1829. 

A  Discourse  Concerning  Trade  and  That  in  Particu¬ 
lar  of  the  East  Indies.  London,  1 689. 

A  Discourse  on  the  General  Notions  of  Money ,  Trade 
and  Exchanges ,  as  They  Stand  in  Relation  to  Each 
Other .  By  a  Merchant.  Ixmdon,  1695. 

A  Discourse  on  the  Necessity  of  Encouraging  Mechan- 
ick  Industry.  London,  1689. 

DUCPfiTIAUX,  Edouard.  Budgets  economiques 
det  classes  ouvrieres  en  Belgique.  Subsistances , 
s ala  ires  y  population.  Brussels,  1855. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  TO  CAPITAL 


DUFFY,  Gavan.  The  Land  Law  of  Victoria,  London, 
1862. 

DUNNING,  T.  J.  Trades'  Unions  and  Strikes:  Their 
Philosophy  and  Intention.  London,  i860 

DUPONT,  Pierre  “l.e  Chant  des  ouvricrs,”  in  Chants 
et  chansons.  Paris,  1 846. 

The  East  India  Trade ,  a  Most  Profitable  Trade.  Ix>n- 
don,  1677.  (Thomas  Papillon.) 

EDEN,  Frederic  Morton.  The  State  of  the  Poor:  Or, 
An  History  of  the  Labouring  Classes  tn  England , 
From  the  Conquest  to  the  Present  Period.  Vols.  I-III. 
London,  1797. 

ENGELS,  Friedrich.  Die  Lage  der  arbeitenden  Klasse 
in  England.  Nach  eigener  Anschauung  und  authentic 
schen  Quellen.  Leipzig,  1845. 

ENSOR,  George.  An  Inquiry  Concerning  the  Popu¬ 
lation  of  Nations ,  Containing  a  Refutation  of  Mr. 
Malthus'  “ Essay  on  Population ."  London,  1818. 

An  Essay  on  Credit  and  the  Bankrupt  Act.  London, 
1707. 

An  Essay  on  the  Political  Economy  of  Nations.  Lon¬ 
don,  1821. 

Essays  on  Political  Economy  in  Which  Are  Illustrated 
the  Principal  Causes  of  the  Present  National  Dis¬ 
tress.  London,  1870.  (G.  Robertson.) 

An  Essay  Upon  hublick.  Lndtt.  3rd.  cd.,  London,  1710 

An  Essay  on  Trade  and  Commerce  Containing  Obser¬ 
vations  on  Taxation ,  etc.  Ix>ndon.  1770.  (J.  Cun¬ 
ningham.) 

The  Essential  Principles  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations.  Lon 
don,  1797.  (John  Gray.) 

FAWCETT,  Henry.  The  Economic  Position  of  the 
British  Labourer.  Cambridge  and  London,  1865. 

FERGUSON,  Adam.  An  Essay  on  the  History  of 
Civil  Society.  Edinburgh,  1767. 

FERRIER,  Francois  Louis  A.  Du  gouvernement  con - 
sidere  dans  ses  rapports  avec  le  commerce.  Paris, 
1805. 

FIELDEN,  John.  The  Curse  of  the  Factory  System: 
Or,  a  Short  Account  of  the  Origin  of  Factory  Cruel¬ 
ties ,  etc.  London,  1836. 

FLEETWOOD,  William.  Chronicon  Preciosum:  Or , 
an  Account  of  English  Gold  and  Silver  Money.  2d 
cd.,  London,  1745. 

FONT  FRET,  A.  L.  Hygiene  physique  et  morale  de 
Touvrier  dans  les  grandes  villes  en  general,  et  dans 
la  vtlle  de  Lyon  en  particulier.  Paris,  1858. 

FORBONNAIS,  Francois  \Tron  de.  Element  du 
commerce.  Vol.  II.  Rev.  ed.,  Leyden,  17 66. 

[FORSTER,  Nathaniel]  An  F.nquiry  into  the  Causes 
of  the  Present  High  Price  of  Provisions.  London, 
1767. 

FORTKSCUE,  John.  De  Laudibus  Legum  Angliae. 
London,  1537. 

FRANKLIN,  Benjamin.  Works.  J.  Sparks  ed.,  10 
Vols.  Boston,  1836-1840. 

FULLARTON,  John.  On  the  Regulation  of  Curren¬ 
cies ,  Being  an  Examination  of  the  Principles  on 
Which  It  Is  Proposed  to  Restrict . . .  the  Future  Is¬ 
sues  on  Credit  of  the  Bank  of  England.  2d  ed.,  Lon¬ 
don,  1845 

GALIANI,  Ferdinando.  Della  Moneta.  In  Scrittori 


387 

Classici  Italiani  di  Economia  Politica.  Parte  Mo- 
derna,  Vol.  III.  Custodi  ed.,  Milano,  1803. 

GANILH,  Charles.  La  theorie  de  I economic  politi¬ 
que.  Paris,  1815. 

- .  Des  systemes  d' economic  politique ,  de  la  valeur 

comparative  de  leurs  doctrines ,  et  de  celle  qui  parait 
la  plus  favorable  aux  progres  de  la  richesse.  Vol.  I. 
2d  ed.,  Paris,  1821. 

GARNIER,  Germain.  Abrege  elementaire  des  prin - 
cipes  de  V  economic  politique.  Paris.  1 796. 

- .  Notes  to  his  French  translation  of  Smith's 

Wealth  of  Nations.  Paris,  1802. 

GASKELL,  P.  The  Manufacturing  Population  of 
F.ngland  with  an  Examination  of  Infant  Labour. 
London, 1833. 

GENOV ESI,  Antonio.  Lezioni  di  economia  civile.  In 
Scrittori  Classici  Italiani  di  Economia  Politica. 
Parte  Modcrna.  Vol.  VIII.  Custodi  ed.,  Milano, 
1803. 

GFOKFROY  SAINT-HII.AIRF.,  Etienne.  Notions 
synthetiques ,  historiques  et  physiologiques  de  philo¬ 
sophic  nature  lit.  Paris,  1 838. 

GISBORNE,  Thomas.  Inquiry  into  the  Duties  of 
Men  in  the  Higher  Rank  and  Middle  Classes  of  So¬ 
ciety  in  Great  Britain.  Vol.  II.  London,  1795. 

[GREG,  R.  H.]  The  Factory  Question ,  Considered 
in  Relation  to  lh  Effects  on  the  Health  and  Mor¬ 
als  of  Those  Employed  in  Factories.  London, 
i«37- 

GRKJOIR,  H.  Les  typographes  devant  le  tribunal 
correctionnel de  Bruxelles.  Brussels,  1865. 

GROVE,  WTilliam  Robert.  On  the  Correlation  of  Phys¬ 
ical  Forces.  London,  1 846. 

GULICH,  Gustav  v.  Geschichtliche  Darstellung  des 
Handels ,  der  Gewerbe  und  des  Ackerbaus  der  bedeu - 
tends  ten  handeltreibenden  Staaten  unserer  Zeit. 
Vols.  I-II.  Jena,  1830. 

HALLFR,  Carl  Ludwig  v.  Restauration  der  Staats - 
wissenschaften ,  oder  Theorie  des  naturlich-geselli - 
gen  Zustandes ,  der  Chimare  des  kumthch-burger- 
lichen gegenubergestellt.  Bern,  1816-1834. 

HAMM,  Wilhelm.  Die  landwirtschaftlichen  Gerate 
und  Maschinen  Englands.  Ein  Handbuch  der  land - 
wirtschaftlichen  Mechanik  und  Maschinenkunde. 
Miteiner  Schilderung  der  britischen  Agrikultur.  2d 
ed.,  Braunschweig,  1856. 

HANSSEN,  Georg.  Die  Aufhebung  der  Leibeigen- 
schaft  und  die  Umgestaltung  der  guts herrltch-bauer- 
lichen  Verhaltnisse  uberhaupt  in  den  Herzogtumern 
Sc  hie  swig  und  Holstein.  St.  Petersburg,  1861. 

HARRIS,  James.  Dialogue  Concerning  Happiness. 
London,  1741. 

HARRISON,  William  John.  Description  of  England. 
Prefixed  to  Holinshed’s  Chronicles.  London,  1578. 

HASSALL,  Arthur  Hill.  Adulterations  Detected ,  or, 
Plain  Instructions  for  the  Discovery  of  Frauds  in 
Food  and  Medicine.  2d  ed.,  London  1861. 

HEGEL,  Georg  Wilhelm  Friedrich.  Enzyklopddie 
der  philosophischen  Wissenschaften.  Part  I,  Die 
Wissenschaft  der  Logik.  Berlin,  1840. 

- .  Grundlinien  der  Philosophic  des  Rechts.  Berlin, 

1840.  {Philosophy  of  Right.) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  TO  CAPITAL 


388 

HOBBES,  Thomas.  Leviathan;  or,  the  Matter ,  Form 
and  Power  of  a  Commonwealth ,  Ecclesiastical  and 
Civil.  In  English  Works ,  Vol.  III.  Molesworth  ed., 
London,  1 839-44. 

[HODGSKIN,  Thomas]  Labour  Defended  Against 
the  Claims  of  Capital;  or9  The  Unproductiveness  of 
Capital  Proved.  London,  1825. 

- .  The  Natural  and  Artificial  Rights  of  Property 

Contrasted.  London,  1832. 

HODGSKIN,  Thomas.  Popular  Political  Economy. 
London,  1827. 

HOMER,  Odyssee.  ( The  Odyssey.) 

HOPKINS,  Thomas.  On  Rent  of  Land  and  Its  Influ¬ 
ence  on  Subsistence  and  Population:  With  Observa¬ 
tions  on  the  Operating  Causes  of  the  Condition  of  the 
Labouring  Classes  in  Various  Countries.  London, 
1828. 

[HORNE,  George]  A  Letter  to  Adam  Smith ,  L.L.D. 
on  the  Life,  Death  and  Philosophy  of  His  Friend 
David  Hume%  by  One  of  the  People  Called  Chris¬ 
tians.  4th  ed.,  Oxford,  1 784. 

HORNER,  Leonard.  A  Letter  to  Mr.  Senior.  In  Nas¬ 
sau  W.  Senior,  tetters  on  the  Factory  Act  as  It  Af¬ 
fects  the  Cotton  Manufacture.  Ixmdon,  1 837. 

HOUGHTON,  John.  Husbandry  and  Trade  Im¬ 
proved.  Yols.  I-IV.  London,  1727. 

HOWITT,  William.  Colonization  and  Christianity:  A 
Popular  History  of  the  Treatment  of  the  Natives  by 
the  Europeans  in  All  Their  Colonies.  I-ondon, 
1838. 

HUTTON,  Charles.  Course  of  Mathematics.  Vols.  I- 
II.  i2thed.,  London,  1841-1843. 

The  Industry  of  Nations.  Part  II:  “A  Survey  of  the 
Existing  State  of  Arts,  Machines  and  Manufac¬ 
tures.”  London,  1855. 

An  Inquiry  into  the  Connection  between  the  Present 
Price  of  Provisions  and  the  Size  of  Farms ,  by  a 
Farmer.  London,  1773.  (J.  Arbuthnot.) 

Inquiry  into  Those  Principles  Respecting  the  Nature 
of  Demand  and  the  Necessity  of  Consumption ,  Late¬ 
ly  Advocated  by  Mr.  Malthus.  London,  1821. 

ISOCRATES,  Rusiris.  In  Orationes  et  Epistolae. 

JACOB,  William.  An  Historical  Inquiry  into  the  Pro¬ 
duction  and  Consumption  of  the  Precious  Metals. 
London,  1831. 

JONES,  Richard.  An  Essay  on  the  Distribution  of 
Wealth ,  and  on  the  Sources  of  Taxation.  London, 
1831. 

— .  An  Introductory  Lecture  on  Political  Economy. 
London,  1833. 

— .  Textbook  of  Lectures  on  the  Political  Economy  of 
Nations .  Hertford,  1852. 

KOPP,  H.  Entwicklung  der  Chemie  in  der  neueren 
Zeit.  Vol.  XII.  Munchen,  1871-1874. 

Die  Krankheiten9  welche  verschiedenen  Standen ,  Al- 
tem  und  Geschlechtern  eigentumlich  sind.  6  Vols. 
Ulm,  i860. 

LABORDE,  Alexandre  de.  De  esprit  dissociation 
dans  tons  les  interits  de  la  communaute.  Paris, 
1818. 

LAING,  Samuel.  National  Distress;  Its  Causes  and 
Remedies.  London,  1844. 


LANCELLOTTI,  Secondo.  Farfalloni  de  gli  Antichi 
Historici.  Venetia,  1636. 

- .  UHoggidiy  overo  gPingegni  non  inferiori  a *  pas- 

sati.  In  VHoggidi  overo  il  mondo  non  peggiore  ne 
piu  ealamitoso  del  passato  etc .  Parte  Seconds,  Vol. 
II.  Venetia,  1658. 

LASSALLE,  Ferdinand.  Die  Philosophic  Herakleitos 
des  Dunklen  von  Ephesos.  Nach  einer  neuen  Sam - 
mlung  seiner  Bruchstucke  und  der  Zeugnisse  der  Al- 
ten  dargestellt.  Vol.  I.  Berlin,  1858. 

- .  Herr  Bastiat-Schultze  von  Delitzsch ,  der  okono - 

mische  Julian ,  oder  Kapital  und  Arbeit.  Berlin, 
1864. 

LAVKRGNE,  Leonce  de.  Essai  sur  V economic  rurale 
de  VAngleterrCy  Paris,  1 858. 

LAW,  John.  Considerations  sur  le  numeraire  et  le 
commerce.  In  Collection  des  princtpaux  economistes . 
Vol.  I,  Economistes  financiers  du  XVII l  iemesiecle. 
Daire  ed.,  Paris,  1843. 

LE  TROSNE,  Guillaume  Francois.  De  Vinteret  so¬ 
cial.  In  Collection  des  principaux  Economistes.  Vol. 
II,  Physiocrates.  Daire  ed.,  Paris,  1846. 

A  tetter  to  Sir  T.  C.  Banbury ,  Bart.9  on  the  Poor 
Rates  and  the  High  Price  of  Provisions ,  by  a  Suf¬ 
folk  Gentleman.  Ipswich,  1795. 

LEVI,  Leone.  Lecture  Before  the  Society  of  Arts. 
April,  1866. 

LIEBIG,  Justus  v.  Ueber  Theorie  und  Praxis  in  der 
Landwirtschaft .  Braunschweig,  1856. 

- .  Die  Chemie  in  ihrer  Anwcndung  auf  Agrikultur 

und  Physiologic.  Vol.  I.  7th  ed.,  Braunschweig, 
1862. 

LINGUET,  Simon  Nicolas  Henri.  Theorie  des  lots 
civiles  ou  principes  fondamentaUTde  la  sociiti.  Vol. 
II.  London,  1767. 

LOCKE,  John.  Some  Considerations  on  the  Conse¬ 
quences  of  the  Lowering  of  Interest  and  Raising  the 
Value  of  Money.  In  Works ,  Vol.  II.  8th  ed.,  Lon- 
don,  1777. 

LUTHER,  Martin.  An  die  Pfarrherrn  wider  den  Wu - 
cherzu  predigen.  Vermanung.  Wittenberg,  1540. 

MACAULAY,  Thomas  Babington.  History  of  Eng¬ 
land  from  the  Accession  of  James  the  Second.  10th 
ed,  London,  1 854. 

McCULLOCH,  John  Ramsay.  The  Principles  of 
Political  Economy:  With  a  Sketch  of  the  Rise  and 
Progress  of  the  Sciences.  2d  ed.,  London,  1830. 

- .  The  Literature  of  Political  Economy ,  A  Classi¬ 
fied  Catalogue  of  Select  Publications  in  the  Different 
Departments  of  That  Science.  London,  1 845. 

- .  A  Dictionary ,  Practical ,  Theoretical ,  and  His- 

toricaly  of  Commerce  and  Commercial  Navigation . 
London,  1847. 

MACLAREN,  James.  A  Sketch  of  the  History  of  the 
Currency.  London,  1858. 

MACLFIOD,  Henry  Dunning.  The  Theory  and  Prac¬ 
tice  of  Banking:  With  the  Elementary  Principles  of 
Currency ,  Prices ,  Credit  and  Exchanges.  Vol.  I. 
London,  1855. 

MALTHUS,  Thomas  Robert.  Essay  on  the  Principle 
of  Population.  Ix>ndon,  1798. 

- .  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Progress  of 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  TO  CAPITAL 


Rent  and  the  Principles  by  Which  It  Is  Regulated \ 
London,  1815. 

- .  Principles  of  Political  Economy  Considered 

with  a  View  to  Their  Practical  Application .  2d  ed., 
London,  1 836. 

- .  Definitions  in  Political  Economy .  Cazenove  ed., 

London,  1853. 

MAN  DEVI  LLE,  Bernard  de.  The  Fable  of  the  Bees, 
or ,  Private  Vices ,  Public  Benefits .  5th  ed.,  London, 
1728. 

MARTINEAU,  Harriet.  A  Manchester  Strike ,  A 
Tale .  “Illustrations  of  Political  Economy,”  No.  7. 
London,  1832. 

MARX,  Karl.  Misere  de  la  philosophic,  Reponse  a  la 
Philosophic  de  la  misere  par  M,  Proudhon,  Paris 

1847. 

- .  Der  achtzehnte  Brumaire  des  Louis  Bonaparte, 

2d  ed.,  Hamburg,  1 869. 

- .  Zur  Kritik  der  pohtischen  Oekonomie,  Berlin, 

*8  59- 

- .  Inaugural adr esse  der  International  Ar beit er¬ 
as  sozi  at  ion  (1864). 

- .  and  ENGELS,  Friedrich.  Manifest  der  Kom- 

mumstischen  Partei.  London,  1848.  ( Manifesto  of 
the  Communist  Party.) 

[MASSIF  J osLfjfi j  An  btsay  on  the  Governing 
Causes  of  the  Natural  Rate  of  Interest.  London, 
17^0. 

MAURER,  Georg  Ludwig  v.  Einleitung  zur  Ge- 
schichte  der  Mark-,  Hof Dorf- und  Stadtterfassung 
und der  off entlichen  Geualt.  Munchen,  1854. 

- .  Geschichte  der  Fronhofe ,  der  Bauernhofe  und  der 

Hofverfassung  in  Deutschland.  Vol.  IV.  Erlangen, 
1 863. 

MAYER,  Sigmund.  Die  sozialc  Frage  in  Wien.  Stu- 
die  etnes  “ Arbeitgebcrs."  Wien,  1871. 

MEITZEN,  August.  Der  Boden  und  die  landwirt - 
schaftlichen  Verhaltmsse  des  Preusstschen  Staates 
nach  dem  Gebietsumfange  von  1S66.  (Atlas)  Berlin, 
1871. 

MF.RCIKR  I)K  I.A  RIVlfcRF.,  Paul  Pierre.  L'arJre 
naturel  et  essentiel  des  societes  politiques.  In  Collec¬ 
tion  des  principaux  economistes .  Vol.  II,  Physiocra- 
tes.  Daire  ed.,  Paris,  1846 

MF'RIVALE,  Herman,  lectures  on  Colonisation  and 
Colonies.  Vols.  I— II.  London,  1841-42. 

MILL,  James.  Elements  of  Political  Economy.  Ix>n- 
don,  1821.  “Colony”  in  Supplement  to  the  Encyclo¬ 
paedia  Britannica ,  1831. 

MILL,  John  Stuart.  System  of  Logic.  London,  1843. 

- .  Essays  on  Some  Unsettled  Questions  of  Political 

Economy.  London,  1844. 

- .  Principles  of  Political  Economy  with  Some  of 

Their  Applications  to  Social  Philosophy.  London, 

1848. 

- .  Reports  on  Bank-Acts ,  J.  St.  Mills  Evidence 

(18^7)- 

MIRABEAU,  Victor  R.  de.  De  la  monarchic  prus- 
sienne  sous  Frederic  le  Grand.  Vols.  1I-I V.  London, 
1788. 

MOLINARI,  Gustave  de.  Etudes  economiques.  Paris, 
1846. 


389 

MOMMSEN,  Theodor.  Romische  Geschichte.  Vols. 
I— III.  2d  ed.,  Berlin,  1856-1857. 

MONTEIL,  Amans  Alexis.  Traite  des  materiaux 
manuscrits  de  divers  genres  d'Histoire.  Vol.  I.  Rev. 
ed.,  Paris,  1 836. 

MONTESQUIEU,  Charles  de.  De  V esprit  des  lots. 
In  Oeuvres ,  Vols.  I— II.  London,  1767.  (Spirit  of 
Laws.) 

MORE,  Thomas.  Utopia.  Trans,  by  R.  Robinson, 
ed.  by  E.  Arbor.  Ixmdon,  1 869. 

MORTON,  John  C.  “Labourer,”  in  A  Cyclopaedia 
of  Agriculture ,  Practical  and  Scientific .  London, 

MUI.LKR,  Adam  Heinrich.  Die  Elemenle  der  •Slants- 
kunst.  Vol.  II.  Berlin,  1809. 

MUN,  Thomas.  England's  Treasure  by  Foreign 
Trade.  Or,  The  Balance  of  Our  Foreign  Trade  Is  the 
Rule  of  Our  Treasure.  London,  1669. 

MURPHY,  John  Nicholas.  Ireland:  Industrial ,  Po¬ 
litical ,  and  Social  ( 1 870). 

MURRAY, Hugh,  WILSON,  James,  et  al.  Historical 
and  Descriptive  Account  of  British  India.  Vol.  II. 
Edinburgh,  1832. 

NEWMAN,  Francis  William.  lectures  on  Political 
Economy.  London,  1851. 

NEWMAN,  Samuel  Phillips.  Elements  of  Political 
Economy.  New  York,  1835. 

NEWMARCH,  W.  Siehe  T ooke,  T. 

NLWNHAM,  G.  B.  A  Review  of  the  Evidence  Before 
the  Committees  of  the  Two  Houses  of  Parliament  on 
the  Corn  Laws.  London,  1815. 

NIEBUHR,  Berthold  Georg.  Romische  Geschichte , 
Berlin,  1863. 

[NORTH,  Sir  Dudley]  Discourses  Upon  Trade;  Prin¬ 
cipally  Directed  to  the  Cases  of  the  Interest ,  Coy  n  age, 
Clipping,  Increase  of  Money.  London,  1691. 

Observations  on  Certain  Verbal  Disputes  in  Political 
Economy ,  Particularly  Relating  to  Value  and  to  De¬ 
mand  and  Supply.  I  ondon,  1821. 

OLMSTED,  1«  red  eric  Law.  A  Journey  in  the  Sea¬ 
board  Slave  States,  with  Remarks  on  Their  Economy . 
New  York,  1856. 

On  Combinations  of  Trades.  Rev.  ed.,  London,  1834. 
(H.  I.  Collins.) 

OPDYKE,  George.  A  Treatise  on  Political  Economy. 
New  York,  1851. 

ORTES,  Giammaria.  Della  economia  nazionale.  Libri 
sei.  In  Scrittori  Classici  Italiam  di  Economia 
Politica ,  Parte  Moderna.  Custodi  ed.,  Milano, 

J803. 

Our  Old  Nobility ,  by  “Noblesse  Oblige.”  London  1 879. 
(Howard  Evans.) 

Outlines  of  Political  Economy  etc.  London,  1832. 

OWEN,  Robert.  Observations  on  the  Effects  of  the 
Manufacturing  System.  2d  ed.,  London,  1817. 

PAGNINI,  G.  Francesco.  Saggio  sopra  ilgiusto  pre- 
gio  delle  cose ,  la  giusta  valuta  della  moneta  e  sopra 
il  commercio  dei  Romani.  In  Scrittori  Classici  Itali¬ 
an!  di  Economia  Politica.  Parte  Moderna,  Vol.  II. 
Custodi  ed.,  Milano,  1803. 

PARRY,  Charles  Henry.  The  Question  of  the  Neces¬ 
sity  of  the  Existing  Corn  Laws  Considered,  in  Their 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  TO  CAPITAL 


390 

Relation  to  the  Agricultural  Labourer ,  the  Tenantry , 
the  Landholder  and  the  Country .  London,  1816. 

The  Perils  oj  the  Nation .  Appeal  to  the  Legislature* 

id  ed.,  London,  1843.  (R.  B.  Seeley.) 

PETTY,  William.  A  Treatise  of  Taxes  and  Contribu¬ 
tions.  London,  1667. 

- .  Political  Anatomy  oj  Ireland.  London,  1691. 

- .  Quantulumcunque  Concerning  Money .  To  the 

Lord  Marquess  of  Halyfax,  1682.  London,  1695. 

PINTO,  Isaac.  Traite  de  la  circulation  et  du  credit. 
Amsterdam,  1771. 

PLATO.  De  Republican  Bk.  I.  In  Plato nis  Opera  Om¬ 
nia.  J.  G.  Baiter  et  al.  eds.,  21  Vols.  Zurich,  1839- 
1841.  ( The  Republic.) 

A  Political  Inquiry  into  the  Consequences  oj  Enclosing 
Waste  Lands  and  the  Causes  oj  the  Present  High 
Price  oj  Butchers'  Meat.  London,  178^'. 

POSTLETHWAYT,  Malachy.  First  Preliminary 
Discourse ,  Also  Supplement  to  Universal  Dictionary 
oj  Trade  and  Commerce.  London,  17^1. 

- .  Britain's  Commercial  Interest  Explained  and 

Improved .  London,  1757. 

PRICE,  Richard.  Observations  on  Reversionary  Pay¬ 
ments.  Vol.  II.  6th  ed.,  London,  1808. 

A  Prize  Essay  on  the  Comparative  Merits  oj  Competi¬ 
tion  and  Cooperation.  London,  1834. 

Public  Economy  Concentrated ,  or  a  Connected  Eiew 
oj  Currency ,  Agriculture  and  Manufactures ,  by  an 
Enquirer  into  hirst  Principles.  Carlisle,  1833. 

QUESNAY,  Francois.  Dialogues  sur  le  commerce  et 
les  travaux  des  artisans.  In  Collection  des  Prtnci- 
paux  economistes.  Vol.  II,  Physiocrates.  Daire  ed., 
Paris,  1846. 

- .  Maximes  generates  du  gouvernement  economique 

d'un  royaume  agriccle.  Ibid. 

RAFFLES,  Thomas  Stamford.  The  History  oj  java. 
Vol.  I.  London,  1 8 1 7. 

RAMAZZINI,  Bernadini.  De  Moxbts  Artijicum  Dia - 
triba.  French  tr.,  1781. 

RAMSAY,  George.  An  Essay  on  the  Distribution  oj 
Wealth.  Edinburgh,  1 836. 

RAVEN STONE,  Piercy.  Thoughts  on  the  funding 
System  and  Its  Effects.  London,  1824. 

READ,  George.  The  History  oj  Baking.  London, 

1848. 

Reasons  for  a  Limited  Exportation  oj  Wool.  London, 

1677. 

Reasons  for  the  Late  Increase  oj  the  Poor  Rates:  ory  A 
Comparative  View  oj  the  Price  oj  Labour  and  Pro¬ 
visions.  London,  1777. 

REGNAULT,  filias.  Histoire  politique  et  sociale  des 
principautes  danubiennes.  Paris,  1855. 

REICH,  Eduard.  Ueberdte  Entartungdes  Menschen. 
Erlangen,  1868. 

Remarks  on  the  Commercial  Policy  oj  Great  Britain. 

London,  1815. 

RICARDO,  David.  On  the  Principles  oj  Political 
Economy  and  Taxation.  3d  ed.,  London,  1821. 

ROBERTS,  George.  The  Social  History  of  the  People 
oj  the  Southern  Counties  oj  England  in  Past  Cen¬ 
turies.  London,  1856. 

RODBERTUS-JAGETZOW,  Karl.  Soziale  Brieje 


an  0.  Kirchmann.  Dritter  Brief:  Widerlegung  der 
Ricardoschen  Lehre  von  der  Grundrente  und  Begrun - 
dung etner  neuen  Rententheorie.  Berlin,  i8<ji. 

- .  Brieje  und  Sozialpolitische  Aujsatze.  Vol.  I.  R. 

Meyer  ed.,  Berlin,  1881. 

ROGERS,  James  K.  Thorold.  A  History  oj  Agricul¬ 
ture  and  Prices  in  England  from  the  Year  After  the 
Oxford  Parliament  (/ 25 j)  to  the  Commencement  of 
the  Continental  War  {S/Vj).  Vol.  I.  Oxford,  1866. 

ROSCHER,  Wilhelm.  Die  Grundlagen  der  National- 
okonomie.  Vol.  I  of  System  der  Volkswirtschaft.  3d 
ed.,  Stuttgart,  1858. 

ROSSI,  P.  Caurs  d' economic  politique.  Brussels,  1842. 

ROUARD  DU  GARD,  Francois.  De  la  falsification 
des  substances  sacramentales.  Paris,  1 8  56. 

ROUSSEAU,  Jean  Jacques.  Dtscours  sur  1' economic 
politique.  New  cd.,  Geneva,  1760.  {A  Discourse  on 
Political  Economy.) 

RUMFORD,  Benjamin.  Essays ,  Political ,  Economi¬ 
cal  and  Philosophical.  Vols.  I— II I.  London,  1796- 
1802. 

SADLER,  Michael  Thomas.  Ireland ,  Its  Evils  and 
Their  Remedies.  2d  cd.,  London,  1829. 

SAY,  Jean  Baptiste.  Traite  d' economic  politique ;  ou. 
Simple  exposition  de  la  mamere  dont  se forwent,  se 
distrtbuent  et  se  consomment  les  rtchase s.  Vols.  I- 
III.  3d  ed.,  Paris,  1817. 

- .  Lettres  a  M.  Malthtts  sur  different  sujets  d' eco¬ 
nomic  politique ,  mtamment  sur  les  causes  de  la 
stagnation  gent  rale  du  comma cc.  Pans,  1820. 

SCHORLF  M\1ER,  Carl.  The  Rise  and  Development 
of  Organic  Chemistry.  London,  1879. 

SCHOUW,  Joakim  Frederik.  Die  frde ,  die  Pjlanzen 
und  der  Mensch.  2d  cd.,  Leipzig,  *8  ^4. 

SCHULZ,  Wilhelm.  Die  Becvegung  der  Produktion. 
Eine  geschichtlichstatistische  Abhandlung  zur 

Grundlegung  etner  neuen  Wissenschajt  des  Staats  und 
derGesellschajt.  Zurich,  1843. 

SCROPE,  Georue  Julius  P.  Principles  oj  Political 
Economy .  A.  Potter  cd.,  New  York,  1841. 

ShMOR,  William  Nassau.  Three  Lectures  on  the 
Rate  oj  If  ages.  London,  1830. 

- .  Outlines  oj  Political  Economy .  London,  1836. 

- .  Primipey jondamentaux  de  l' economic  politique. 

Trans,  into  French  by  I.  Arrivabcne.  Paris,  1836. 

- .  Letters  on  the  factory  Act ,  as  It  Affects  the  Cot¬ 
ton  Manufacture.  London,  1837. 

- .  journals ,  Conversations ,  and  Essays  Relating 

to  Ireland.  London,  1868. 

SIEBER,N.I.  ToopHH  HeiiHocTH  h  Kanirrajia 
PmcnpHO.  Kiev,  1871. 

SISMONDI,  Jean  Charles  Leonard  Simonde  de.  De 
la  richesse  commercial;  ou ,  Principcs  d' economic  po¬ 
litique ,  appliques  a  la  legislation  du  commerce.  Vol. 
I.  Geneva,  1 803. 

- .  Nouveaux  principes  de  V economic  politique. 

Vols.  I— II.  Paris,  1819. 

- .  Etudes  sur  V economic  politique.  Vol.  I.  New  cd., 

Brussels,  1836. 

SKARBEK,  Frederic.  Theorie  des  richesses  sociales. 
Vo\  I.  2d  ed.,  Paris,  1840. 

SMITH,  Adam.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  TO  CAPITAL 


Causes  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations .  E.  G.  Wakefield 
ed.,  London,  1835-1 839.  D.  Buchanan  ed.,  Edin¬ 
burgh,  1814. 

Some  Thoughts  on  the  Interest  of  Money  in  General 
and  Particularly  in  the  Public  Funds ,  etc .  London, 
I739-I740- 

SOMERS,  Robert.  letters  from  the  Highlands ,  or 
The  Famine  of  184J .  London.  1848. 

Sophisms  of  Free-Trade  and  Popular  Political  Econ¬ 
omy  Examined ,  by  a  Barrister.  5th  ed.,  London, 
1850.  (J.  B.  Byles.) 

SOPHOCLES.  Antigone . 

The  Source  and  Remedy  of  the  National  Difficulties — 
A  letter  to  Lord  John  Russell .  London,  1821. 

[STAFFORD,  William]  A  Compendious  or  Brief  Ex¬ 
amination  of  Certayne  Ordinary  Complaints  of 
Divers  of  Our  Countrymen  in  These  Our  Days ,  by 
W.  S.  Gentleman.  London,  1581. 

STEUART,  James.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Principles 
of  Political  Economy .  Being  an  Essay  onthe  Science 
of  Domestic  Policy  in  Free  Nations .  Vol.  I.  London, 
1767. 

- .  Works.  Sir  J.  Steuart  ed.,  London,  1801. 

STEWART',  Dugald.  lectures  on  Political  Economy. 
In  Collected  Works  of  Dugald  Stewart ,  Vol.  VIII. 
Sir  W.  Hamilton  rC  ,  Edinburgh.  1855. 

STORCH,  H.  F.  Cours  d* economic  politique ;  ou,  Ex¬ 
position  des  principes  qui  determinent  la  prosperite 
des  nations .  Vols.  II— III.  St.  Petersburg,  1815. 
(Paris,  1823.) 

STRANGE,  W.  Gesundheit  (1864). 

STRYPE,  John.  Annals  of  the  Reformation  and  Es¬ 
tablishment  of  Religion  and  Other  Various  Occur¬ 
rences  in  the  Church  of  England  During .  . .  Queen 
Elizabeth's  Happy  Reign.  3  Vols.  2d  ed.,  London, 

1 725- 

The  Theory  of  the  Exchanges.  The  Bank  Charter  Act 
of  1844.  London,  1 864.  (Henry  Roy. ) 

TI HERS,  Adolphe.  De  la propriete.  Paris,  1 848. 

THOMPSON,  William.  Inquiry  into  the  Principles 
of  the  Distribution  of  Wealthy  Most  Conducive  to 
Human  Happiness ,  Applied  to  the  Newly  Proposed 
System  of  Voluntary  Equality  of  Wealth .  London, 

1824. 

THOMPSON,  Benjamin.  See  rumford. 

THORNTON,  William  Thomas.  Over-Population 
and  Its  Remedy.  London,  1846. 

THUCYDIDES.  Geschichte  des  Peloponnesischen 
Krieges.  ( The  History  of  the  Peloponnesian  War.) 

THUNEN,  Johann  Heinrich  v.  Der  isolierte  Staat  in 
Beziehung  auf  Landwirtschaft  und  Nationalokono - 
mie.  Rostock,  1863. 

TOOKE,  Thomas  and  NEWMARCH,  W.  A  History 
of  Prices  and  of  the  State  of  the  Circulation  from 
I793 1856.  London,  1838-1857. 

TORRENS,  Robert.  An  Essay  on  the  External  Corn 
Trade.  London,  1815. 

- .  An  Essay  on  the  Production  of  Wealth ;  with  an 

Appendix ,  in  Which  the  Principles  of  Political 
Economy  are  Applied  to  the  Actual  Circumstances 
of  This  Country.  London,  1821. 

- .  On  Wages  and  Combination.  London,  1834. 


391 

[TOWNSEND,  Joseph]  A  Dissertation  on  the  Poor 
Laws ,  by  a  Well-Wisher  of  Mankind.  London, 
1786.  New  ed.,  London,  1817. 
TSCHERNYSCHEWSKIJ,  N.  OnepKH  Hojih- 
TH’iecKott  Bicohomhuiio  Mhjijiio.  St.  Petersburg, 
1865. 

TUCKETT,  J.  D.  A  History  of  the  Past  and  Present 
State  of  the  Labouring  Population ,  Including  the 
Progress  of  Agriculture ,  Manufactures  and  Com¬ 
merce  ,  etc.  London,  1 846. 

TURGOT,  Anne  Robert  Jacques.  Reflexions  sur  la 
formation  et  la  distribution  des  richesses.  In  Oeuvres 
Vol.  I.  Daire  ed.,  Paris,  1844. 

Two  Letters  on  the  Flour  Trade  and  the  Dearness  of 
Corn3  by  a  Person  in  Business.  London,  1767. 

URE,  Andrew.  The  Philosophy  of  Manufactures:  or. 
An  Exposition  of  the  Scientific,  Moral ,  and  Com¬ 
mercial  Economy  of  the  Factory  System  of  Great 
Britain.  2d  cd.,  London,  1835. 

- .  Philosophic  des  manufactures ;  ou ,  Economic  in- 

dustrielle  de  la  fabrication  du  coton ,  de  la  laine ,  du 
lin  etde  la  so iet  Paris,  1836. 

URQUHART,  David.  Portfolio.  Diplomatic  Review. 
New  Series.  London,  1843. 

- .  Familiar  Words  as  Affecting  England  and  the 

English.  Ixmdon,  1855. 

VANDERL1NT,  Jacob.  Money  Answers  All  Things . 
London,  1734. 

VERRI,  Pietro.  Meditazioni  sulla  economia  politica. 
In  Scrittori  Classici  Italiani  di  Economia  Politica , 
Parte  Moderna.  Vol.  XV.  Milano,  1 804. 

VISSERING,  S.  Handboek  van  praktische  Staatshuis - 
houdkunde.  Amsterdam,  1860-1865. 

De  Vlamingen  Voruit.  Manifest  der  Maatschappij  De 
Vlamingen  Voruit!  Brussels,  1 860. 

IWADE,  John]  History  of  the  Middle  and  Working 
Classes ,  etc.  3d  ed.,  London,  1835. 

WAKEFIELD,  Edward  Gibbon.  England  and 
America.  A  Comparison  of  the  Social  and  Political 
State  of  Both  Nations.  London,  1 833. 

- .  Notes  to  his  edition  of  Smith's  Wealth  of  Na¬ 
tions.  See  smith. 

- .  A  View  of  the  Art  of  Colonization.  London, 

i849-  "  ^ 

WARD,  John.  History  of  the  Borough  of  Stoke-upon- 
Trent .  London,  1843. 

WATTS,  John.  Facts  and  Fictions  of  Political  Econ¬ 
omists ,  Being  a  Review  of  the  Principles  of  the  Sci¬ 
ence.  Manchester,  1 842. 

- .  Trade  Societies  and  Strikes ,  Machinery  and  Co¬ 
operative  Societies.  Manchester,  1865. 

WAYLAND,  F.  The  Elements  of  Political  Economy. 
Boston,  1853. 

[WEST,  Edward]  Essay  on  the  Application  of  Capi¬ 
tal  to  Land ,  by  a  Fellow  of  University  College, 
Oxford.  London,  1815. 

- .  Price  of  Corn  and  Wages  of  Labour.  With  Ob¬ 
servations  upon  Dr.  Smith's ,  Mr.  Ricardo's  and  Mr. 
Malthus's  Doctrines  Upon  Those  Subjects.  London, 
1826. 

WILKS,  Mark.  Historical  Sketches  of  the  South  of 
India  from  the  Origin  of  the  Hindoo  Government  of 


392  BIBLIOGRAPHY  TO  CAPITAL 


That  State  to  the  Extinction  of  the  Mohammedan 
Dynasty  in  1799.  London,  1817. 

WILSON,  James.  See  Murray. 

WRIGHT,  Thomas.  A  Short  Address  to  the  Public  on 

the  Monopoly  of  large  Farms .  London,  1779. 

XENOPHON.  Cyropaedia. 

YOUNG,  Arthur.  Political  Arithmetic,  Containing 
Observations  on  the  Present  State  of  Great  Britain , 
and  the  Principles  of  Her  Policy  in  the  Encourage¬ 
ment  of  Agriculture.  London,  1774. 

— .  A  Tour  in  Ireland ,  with  General  Observations  on 
the  Present  State  of  That  Kingdom .  2d  ed.,  London, 
178a 


IL  Newspapers  and  Journals 

A.  Articles 

CARLYLE,  Thomas.  “Ilias  Americana  in  Nuce,” 
Macmillan's  Magazine.  August,  1863. 

ENGELS,  Friedrich.  “Umrissc  zu  einer  Kritik  der 
Nationaldkonomie,”  Deutsch-Franzosische  Jahr- 
bucher,  First  and  Second  issues.  Paris,  1 844. 

- .  “Die  Englische  Zehnstunden-Bill,’’  Neue 

Rheinische  Zettung  (Hamburg),  April,  1850. 
MARX,  Karl.  “Lohnarbeit  und  Kapitai,”  Neue 
Rheinische  Zeitung  (Cologne),  April,  1849. 
REDGRAVE,  A.  Report  of  his  speech  in  Journal  of 
the  Society  of  Arts.  January,  1872. 

RICHARDSON,  B.  W.  “Work  and  Overwork,”  So¬ 
cial  Science  Review  (London),  July  18, 1863. 

B.  Journals  Generally 
Bayerische  Zeitung. 

Bengal  Hurkaru .  Bi-Monthly  Overland  Summary  of 
News. 

Bury  Guardian. 

Concordia.  Zeitschrift fur  die  Arbeiterfrage. 

Daily  Telegraph ,  London. 

Demokratisches  Wochenblatt ,  Leipzig,  1868. 

Economist ,  London. 

The  Engineering ,  London. 

Evening  Standard ,  London. 

Glasgow  Daily  Mail. 

Journal  of  the  Society  of  Arts,  London. 

Morning  Advertiser,  Ix>ndon. 

Morning  Chronicle ,  London. 

Morning  Star ,  London. 

New  York  Daily  Tribune . 

The  Observer ,  London. 

Pall  Mall  Gazette ,  London. 

C.  IleTepSyprcKMC  Bpaomoctb.  St.  Petersburg 
Journal] 

Philosophie  Positive ,  Paris. 

Rivolutions  de  Paris,  Paris,  1791. 

Reynolds'  Newspaper,  London. 

Saturday  Review,  London. 

Social  Science  Review ,  London. 

Spectator,  London. 

Standard,  London. 


London  Times . 

To-Day ,  London. 

Folks  stoat,  Leipzig. 

Bgcthhk  EBponbi.  [European  Messenger]. 

Workman's  Advocate . 

Westminster  Review . 

III.  Public  Papers,  Reports  and  Documents 

A.  Great  Britain,  Official  Documents 

Agricultural  Labourers,  Ireland.  Return  of  the  Average 
Rate  of  Weekly  Earnings  of  Agricultural  Labourers 
in  Ireland.  Dublin,  1862. 

Agricultural  Statistics,  Ireland .  General  Abstracts . 
Dublin,  i860--. 

Agricultural  Statistics,  Ireland.  Tables  Showing  the 
Estimated  Average  Produce  of  the  Crops  for  the 
Year  1866.  Dublin,  1867. 

Children’s  Employment  Commission.  Reports  1-6  of 
the  Commissioners  on  the  Employment  of  Children 
and  Young  Persons  in  Trades  and  Manufactures 
Not  Already  Regulated  by  Law.  First  Report,  1863; 
Second  Report,  1864;  Third  Report,  1864,  Fourth 
Report,  1865;  Fifth  Report, 1866;  Sixth  Report, 
1867. 

Commissioners  of  Inland  Revenue.  Fourth  report  of 
the  Commissioners  of  Her  Majesty's  Inland  Revenue . 
London,  1 860. 

- .  Tenth  Report.  London,  1 866. 

Factories  Inquiry  Commission.  First  Report  of  the 
Central  Board  of  His  Majesty's  Commissioners  on  the 
Employment  of  Children  in  Factories.  With  Minutes 
of  Evidence.  London,  1833. 

Foreign  Office.  Correspondence  with  Her  Majesty's 
Missions  Abroad  Regarding  Industrial  Questions 
and  Trades' -Unions.  London,  1867. 

Foreign  Office.  Reports  by  Her  Majesty's  Secretaries 
of  Embassy  and  Legation  on  the  Manufactures, 
Commerce ,  etc.,  of  the  Countries  in  Which  They  Re¬ 
side.  No.  6.  London,  1 863. 

Hansard  Parliamentary  Debates.  London,  1843; 
1863; 1864. 

House  of  Commons.  Factories  Regulation  Acts. 
Ordered  by  the  House  of  Commons  to  be  Printed, 
August  9, 1859.  London,  1 859. 

-  First  and  Second  Reports  from  the  Select  Com¬ 
mittee  on  the  Adulteration  of  Food.  I*ondon,  1855. 

- .  Parliamentary  Return  for  1839,  *850,  *856, 

1862. 

- .  Report  from  the  Select  Committee  on  the  Bank 

Acts,  July  1838.  London,  1858. 

- .  Report  from  the  Select  Committee  on  Mines.  Lon¬ 
don,  1 866. 

- .  Report  from  the  Select  Committee  on  Petitions 

Relating  to  the  Com  Laws  of  This  Kingdom ;  To¬ 
gether  with  the  Minutes  of  Evidence  and  an 
Appendix  of  Accounts  (1813-1814). 

House  of  Lords.  First  and  Second  Reports  from  the 
Lords  Committee,  into  the  State  of  the  Growth , 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  TO  CAPITAL 


Commerce ,  and  Consumption  of  Grain,  and  All 
Laws  Relating  Thereto .  London,  1814-1815. 

- .  Committee  of  1848  on  the  Bank  Acts . 

Inspectors  of  Factories.  Reports  of  the  Inspectors  of 
Factories  for  the  Half  Year  Ending  31st  December 
1841.  London,  1842. 

- .  for  1844  and  Quarter  Ending  30th  April 

1845 .  London,  1845. 

- .  for  the  Half  Year  Ending  30th  April  1848 . 

London,  1 848. 

- .  for 31  st  October  1848.  London,  1 849. 

- .  for  1st  December  18/8.  London,  1 849. 

- .  for 30th  April  1849.  London,  1 849. 

- .  for 31st  October  1849 .  London,  1850. 

- •  for 30th  April  1850.  Ixmdon,  1850. 

- .  for 3 /st  October  1830 .  London,  1851. 

- .  for 30th  April  1832 .  London,  1852. 

- .  for 30th  April  1833 •  I-ondon,  1 8  53. 

- .  for 31st  October  1833. I-ondon,  1 854. 

- .  for 30th  April  1833.  London,  1855. 

- .  for 3 1st  October  1833.  London,  1856. 

- .  for 3 /st  October  1836.  London,  1 856. 

- •  for 3°th  June  1837,  London,  1857. 

- .  for 3 1st  October  1837.  London,  1 8 57758. 

- .  for 30th  April  r8$8.  London,  1858. 

- .  for 3 1st  Oi  sober  1838.  London,  1 859. 

- .  for 30th  April  1839 .  London,  1 860. 

- .  for 31st  October  1839.  London,  1 860. 

- .  for  30th  April  i860.  London,  i860. 

- .  for 3/ U  October  1S60 .  London,  1861. 

- .  for 30th  April  1S61 . 1  .ondon,  1861. 

- .  for 31st  October  1861 .  London,  1 862. 

- .  for 3 1st  October  1862 .  London,  1 863. 

—  .  for 30th  April  1863 .  London,  1 863. 

—  -.  for 31st  October  1863.  London,  1864. 

- .  for 30th  April  186  f.  London,  1864. 

- .  for 31st  October  (December)  1864.  London,  1865. 

- .  for 31st  October  2863.  London,  1866. 

- .  for 30th  April  1866.  London,  1 866. 

—  .  for  31st  October  (December)  1866.  London, 
1 867. 

Inspectors  of  the  Poor  Laws.  Reports  from  the  Poor 
Law  Inspectors  on  the  Wages  of  Agricultural  IjO- 
bourers  in  Dublin  (1870). 

Judgement  of  Mr.  J.  U.  Otway ,  Belfast  Hilary  Ses¬ 
sion* ,  County  Anirim  (i860). 

Miscellaneous  Statistics  of  the  United  Kingdom . 
Part  VI.  London,  1866. 

Office  of  the  Census.  Census  of  England  and  Wales  for 
the  Year  1861.  Vol.  Ill,  General  Report .  London, 
1863. 

'Privy  Council.  Public  Health.  Report  of  the  Medical 
Officerof  the  Privy  Council.  Third  Report,  i860 
(London,  1861);  Fourth  Report,  1861  (London, 
1863);  Sixth  Report,  1863  (London,  1864); 


393 

Seventh  Report,  1864  (London,  1865);  Eighth 
Report,  1 865  (London,  1 866). 

Registrar  General.  Report  of  the  Registrar  General  of 
Births ,  Deaths  and  Marriages  in  England for  Octo¬ 
ber  1861. 

Report  from  the  Commissioners  ....  Relating  to 
Transportation  and  Penal  Servitude.  I  .ondon,  1863. 

Report  of  the  Committee  on  the  Baking  Trade  in  Ire¬ 
land  for  1861. 

Report  etc.  Relative  to  the  Grievances  Complained  of 
by  the  Journeymen  Bakers.  With  Appendix  of 
Evidence.  I  .ondon,  1 862. 

Report  of  the  Officer  of  Health  of  St.  Martin's  in  the 
Fields.  London,  1 865. 

Royal  Commission  to  Inquire  into  the  Condition  of 
Mines  in  Great  Britain.  Report  of  the  Commission¬ 
ers  with  Appendix  and  Plans  and  Epitome  of 
Evidence  ( 1 864). 

Royal  Commission  on  Railways.  Minutes  of  Evidence 
Taken  Before  the  Commissioners  March  1863  to 
May  1866.  London,  1 867. 

Statistical  Abstract  for  the  United  Kingdom.  No.  8 
(1846-1860),  London,  1861;  No.  13  (1857-1865), 
London,  1 866. 

B.  Others 

Address  and  Provisional  Rules  of  the  International 
Working  Men's  Association ,  Established  September 
28 ,  iS6f,  at  a  Public  Meeting  Held  at  St.  Martin's 
Hall ,  fang  Acre ,  London.  London,  1864. 

International  Statistical  Congress.  Compte  Rendu . 
Paris,  1 864. 

Jahresbericht  der  Handelskammer  zu  Essen .  Essen, 
i863- 

Master  Spinners'  and  Maufacturers*  Defence  Fund. 
Report  of  the  Committee.  Manchester,  1854. 

National  Association  for  the  Promotion  of  Social 
Science.  Address  by  W.  N.  Senior  in  Reports  of 
Proceedings.  London,  1863 

Report  of  the  Social  Science  Congress  at  Edinburgh. 
Edinburgh,  1863. 

Russia.  Imperial  Embassy  in  Peking.  Arbeiten  der 
Kaiserlich  Russischen  Gesandtschaft  zu  Peking 
uber  China ,  sein  Folk ,  seine  Religion ,  seine 
Institutionen ,  soztalen  Verhaltnisse  usw.  Vol.  I. 
Ubersetzt  von  C.  Abel  und  F.  A.  Mecklenburg. 
Berlin,  1858. 

State  of  Massachusetts.  General  Statutes. ..Rev.  by 
Commissioners  and  Passed  Dec.  28 ,  1839.  Boston, 
i860. 

State  of  New  Jersey.  An  Act  to  Limit  the  Hours  of 
Labour  etc.  (1855). 

State  of  Rhode  Island.  Revised  Statutes  of  the  State 
of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations • 
Providence,  R.I.,  1857. 


Index 


Aargau,  134 
Abel,  K.,  59 
Aberdeen,  363 
Abolition  of  slavery,  295 

Abrigt  Uimentaire  des  principes  d'tconomie  politique 
((farmer),  272 

Abstinence,  theory  of,  in,  113,  237,  293,  295-6,301, 

324,  3Sl 

Accumulation,  279-383;  general  law  of,  302-21; 
primitive,  354-83 

Achtzehnte  Brumairc  des  Louis  Bonaparte, Der 
(Marx),  see  Eighteenth  Brumaire ,  etc. 

Act  for  Preventing  the  Adulteration  of  Articles  of 
Food  and  Drink,  120 

Act  to  amend  the  criminal  Law  relating  to  Violence, 
Threats,  and  Molestation,  367 
Acts  of  Parliamei  t  to  lOl  V.C  down  Wages,  366-8 
Addington,  Stephen,  360 
Adulteration,  83,  120,  297 
Adulteration  Detected  (H assail),  83,  120 
Advantages  of  the  East  India  Trade  to  England ,  The 
(Addington),  155,  165, 168,  170, 178,209,253 
Africa,  129,372,376 

Agricultural  Juvenile  Industrial  Self-Supporting  As¬ 
sociation,  345 

Agricultural  labourers,  122,  130,  163,  192,  218-19, 
229,  251-2,  274,  285,  312,  318,  324,  333-53,  356» 
367-7 1 j  37  5 

Agricultural  Labourers  ( Ireland )  Return,  350 
Agricultural  Machines  and  Implements  of  England , 
The  (Hamm),  249 
Agricultural  revolution,  369-71 
Agricultural  Statistics ,  Ireland ,  General  Abstracts  and 
Tables ,  etc.,  347 

Agriculture,  162-3,  211,  222,  249-50,  298 
Aikin,  John,  294, 372, 376 
America,  130,  253, 372, 380-3 
American  Union,  see  United  States 
Anacharsis,  45 

Analysis  of  Trade,  Commerce ,  etc.  (Cantillon),  274 
Anderson,  A.,  369, 376 

Anderson,  James,  250, 276, 306, 360, 362, 369 
An  die  Pjarrherrn ,  voider  den  IVucher  z u  Predigen 
(Luther),  93, 293 

Anglican  Church,  see  Church  of  England 
Anglo-Saxon  Lordships,  356 
Annals  of  the  Reformation ,  etc.  (Strype),  365 
A  ne,  Queen  of  England,  365 
Anti-Corn  Law  Agitation,  see  Corn  Law 
Anti-Corn  Law  League,  9 
Antigone  (Sophocles),  61 
Anti-Jacobin  Government,  210 
Anti-Jacobin  War,  274, 298, 334, 372 


Antiparos,  199 
Antrim,  3  50 
Appian,  361 

Apprenticeship,  126-7,  l29“3°»  132>  *73»  l8o>  294> 

366-7, 376 

Arabia,  1 14 
Arabs,  254 

Arbetten  der  Kaiserlich  Russischen  Gesandtschaft  zu 
Peking  uber  China  (Abel  and  Mecklenburg),  59 
Arbeiter  Verein  (Brussels),  286 
Archilocus,  179 
Archimedes,  147 
Ardverikie,  363 
Argentina,  176 

Aristotle,  25, 36, 38,  72, 78, 159, 199 

Arkwright,  Sir  Richard,  180, 183, 186,207-8,210,241 

Arledgc,  J.  T.,  1 18 

Ashley,  Anthony  Ashley-Cooper,  7th  earl  (later  Lord 
Shaftesbury),  130,  197,  201-2,334-5 
Ashton,  141 

Ashton-under-Lyne,  194 

Ashworth,  cotton  manufacturer,  139, 198 

Asia,  221, 277 

Asia  Minor,  77 

Asiatic  Archipelago,  254 

Asiatic  States,  162-3, 175 

Asiento,  Treaty  of,  376 

Assignats’  Committee,  59 

Athenaeus,  45, 61 

Athens,  36, 179, 253 

Attcrcliffe,  126 

Augier,  Marie,  377 

Australia,  130,  222,  224, 379-80, 383 

Austria,  134,  277 

Aveling,  Dr.  Edward  Bibbins,  1 

Aveling,  Eleanor  Marx,  1, 3,  5 

Avignon,  173 

Axholme,  343 

Babbage,  C.,  169-71, 183,  191,  198 
Bacon,  Sir  Francis,  190, 357 
Badenoch,  364 
Badsey,  342-3 
Baffin’s  Bay,  43 

Bailey,  Samuel,  20,  23, 27, 37, 302 
Bailiff,  368 

Baker,  R.,  145, 195,  208,  220, 351-2 

Bakers  and  Baking,  83, 1 19-22, 143-4,  271 

Bakers’  stuff,  1 20 

Balance  of  trade,  67 

Ballard,  Dr.,  231 

Baltimore,  145 

Balzac,  Honorl  de,  291 


INDEX 


396 

Banjuwangi,  373 
Bank  Acts,  59, 66, 383 
Bank  of  England,  59, 66, 374 
Bankes,  G.,  335 

Barbon,  Nicholas,  13- 14,  57, 60, 67-8, 305 
Barter,  39, 43,  ^1,72 
Barton,  John,  3 12, 334 
Basedow,  Johann  Bernard,  241 
Basildcn,  341 

Bastiat,  Claude  Frldlric,  9, 26, 36, 93, 199, 278 
Batley,  117 
Bauemlegeny  363 
Bavaria,  277 
Bavarian  Gazette,  1 1 5 
Baynes,  of  Blackburn,  1 89, 1 91 
Rebel,  4 

Beccaria,  Cesare,  178-9 
Bedford,  House  of,  359 
Bedfordshire,  230, 340, 343 
Beet  The  (Anderson),  306 
Beenham,  340-1 
Belfast,  134 

Belgium,  2, 134, 145, 169, 228, 277, 297,332-3 
Bell,  Dr.  (of  Bradford),  328 
Bell,  Sir  Charles,  135 
Bellers,  John,  61, 64,  68, 159, 170,  209,  236,  241, 304 
Ben  Aulder,  364 
Bengal  Hurkaruy  160 
Bengal  Presidency,  254 
Bennett,  A.,  271, 297 
Bentham,  Jeremy,  83, 301-2 
Bcrkely,  George,  163, 173 
Berkshire,  297, 324, 336, 340-1 
Berlin,  1 1 5 

Bethnal  Green,  193-4 

Bewegung  der  Produktion  (Schulz),  181 

Btbhotheca  htstortca  (Diodorus),  114, 166, 253 

Bidaut,  J.  N.,  156 

Biese,  F.,  199 

Biggleswade  Union,  340 

Big  loaf,  224 

Bill  for  the  Protection  of  Children,  376 
Bimetallism,  43, 66-7 
Birdcages,  342 

Birmingham,  1 1 2, 1 19, 166, 226-7, 27J»  37^ 

Birmingham  Sanitary  Conference,  31 8 

Blackburn,  1 31, 142, 315 

Black  Mount,  363-4 

Black  Sea,  253 

Blacksmiths,  123-4 

Blackwell  Hall,  121 

Blaise,  A.,  164 

Blakey,  R.,  358 

Blandford,  335 

Blanqui,  Adolphe,  134, 164 

Bleaching  and  dying  works,  143-5,  *79*  2*>9“70 

Bleaching  and  Dying  Works  Act,  143-5 

Block,  Maurice,  10 

Board  of  Health,  1 23 

Boden  des  preusstschen  Staats  (Meitzen),  114 
Boileau,  Etienne,  239 
Boisgui  Hebert,  Pierre  de,  60, 65 


Bolingbroke,  Henry  St.  John,  1st  viscount,  374 
Bolton,  225 

Bonaparte,  I^ouis  (Napoleon  III),  134 
Bondage  and  bondsmen,  285 
Bookbinding  trade,  227-8,  242-3, 270 
Boothroyd,  Dr.,  1 1 8 
Boulton,  Mathew,  184, 189 
Boulton  and  Watt,  184 
Boxhorn,  M.  S.,  210 
Bradenham,  341 

Bradford,  142, 194,  220,  236, 328 
Brahmin,  175 
Brandenburg,  114 
Bray,  Charles,  30 
Brazil,  1 5 

Brentano,  Professor,  5 
Breslau,  5 

Brickmaking,  228, 242 

Bnef  atis  "Jamaica  (Columbus),  61 

Brief Cy  etc.,  r on  Dr.  Rodbertus-Jagetzow ,  262 

Bright,  John,  9, 123, 137, 322, 336 

Brindley,  James,  170 

Bnnworth,  342 

Bristol,  119,328 

Britain  Pottery,  233 

British  Museum,  359 

Broadhurst,  J.,  23 

Brodie,  Sir,  B.,  135 

Bronze  Age,  86 

Brougham,  Henry,  377 

Bruce,  member  of  the  Mines  Committee,  244-5 

Bruckner,  J.,  305 

Brunner  (scientist),  237 

Brussels,  1 13, 134,  286  * 

Buchanan,  David,  58-9,  275, 362 
Buchez,  Philippe,  368 
Buckinghamshire,  122,  230, 340-1 
Budgets  economiques  de *  classes  ouineres  de  la  Bel¬ 
gique  (Ducp^tiaux),  332  3 
Builders’  Strike,  1 13 

Burke,  I  dmund,  100, 1 13, 157, 297, 359, 377 
Bury  Guardian ,  1 29 
Bunns  (Isocrates),  179 
Butler,  Samuel,  14 

Cacus,  293 

Cairnes,  John  Elliott,  95, 128-9,  *^2 

California,  240 

Cambridge,  4-5, 305 

Cambridgeshire,  249, 341, 343 

Cammcll  &  Co.,  1 26 

Campbell,  George,  175 

Canada,  224, 362, 382 

Canary  Islands,  228 

Cannibals,  253 

Canning  Town,  331 

Cantillon,  Philip,  274 

Can  ti  lion,  Richard,  274, 305 

Capttaly  />  (Marx),  1 

Capital,  accumulation  of,  279-383;  centralization  of, 
310-12;  322, 325 ;  composition  of,  303;  general  form¬ 
ula  for,  69-79;  origin  of  capitalistic  production, 


INDEX 


157;  merchant’s  and  usurer'9,  372;  constant  and 
variable,  96, 101 ;  primitive  accumulation,  309, 355 
Capital  FarmB,  149, 360 
Carbon  and  nitrogen  in  diet,  324-5, 337 
Card,  Rouard  de,  see  Rouard  de  Card 
Cardiganshire,  337 

Carey,  Henry  Charles,  105, 263, 277-8, 362, 371 

Carli,G.  R.,  160 

Carlile  Sons  &  Co.,  150-1 

Carlisle,  Sir  A.,  135 

Carlyle,  Thomas,  123 

Carmarthenshire,  337 

Carolina,  117 

Carpet  Weavers  Trade’s  Union,  275 

Case  of  our  English  Wool  (Anonymous),  121 

Castes, industrial,  i6{-6 

Catherine  II,  Empress  of  Russia,  338 

Catholic  Church,  36, 358 

Cattle  Plague,  285 

Cazenove,  John,  281, 295 

Celebes,  373 

Celts,  361-2 

Census  of  1 86 1 , 2 1 8- 1 9,  23 1 , 3 1 2, 3 1 8, 32 1  -2, 335-6 
Chalmers,  Thomas,  72, 77, 305-6 
Chamberlain,  J.,  71# 

Chapel-cn-le-Frith,  329 
Chapelier,  M.,  368 

Character  and  Behaviour  of  King  William ,  Sunder - 
/W,  etc.,  3  <9 
Charlemagne,  361 
Charles  I,  King  of  England,  357-8 
Charles  II,  King  of  England,  58 
Charles  V,  Emperor,  365 
Charles  VI,  Emperor,  210 
Charles  X,  King  of  Sweden,  359 
Charles  XI,  King  of  Sweden,  359 
Charlton,  Broughton,  117 
Charter,  136-7 

Chartist  movement  and  party,  137-8 
Chaux-de-Fonds,  167 

Chetnie  in  ihrer  Jnwendung  auf  Agrikultur  und  Phys¬ 
iologic ;  Die  (Liebig), 1  5,  250, 283 
Cherbuliez,  Antoine  Elisee,  87,  89,  288 
Cheshire,  129,  193,  204,  21 1, 220 
Chevallier,  French  chemist,  120 

Child,  J.,  377 

Children’s  Employment  Commission,  116,  ri8,  144, 
231,  234,  236,  242;  Reports  of,  193,  208,  219;  First 
Report y  118-19,  130-1, 143,  231,  269,  273;  Second 
Report y  227,  229-34,  241,  269,  273;  Third  Report , 
83,  124,  194,  228-9,  235,  242,  270-1,  273;  Fourth 
Report y  124-8, 1 71, 196,  214,  226,  23 5-0 ;  Fifth  Re- 
party  125,  194,  212,  223,  227-8,  236,  238-9,  241-2, 
270;  Sixth  Report ,  241-2, 340, 343-5 
China,  59,61, 160, 186, 195, 213, 223, 297, 362, 372-3 
Chrematistics,  72, 78 
Christianity,  35, 199-200, 231 , 301 , 372 
Chronicles  of  Englandy  Scotland^  and  Ireland  (Holin- 
shed),356,365 

Chronicon  pretiosum  (Fleetwood),  132 
Church  of  England,  7, 320 
Churka,  191 


397 

Cicero,  46 
Cincinnatus,  88 
Civil  Wars  (Appian),  361 
Class  Struggle,  63 

Classical  political  economy,  2, 35-6, 148,  265-7,  291, 
293»3°°».312 

Claussen’s  circular  loom,  181 
Clearing  of  estates,  361-3 
Clonmel,  121 
Close  villages,  338 
Clothing  trade,  132, 231-3, 242 
Coal,  322 

Coal  mines  and  miners,  83,  124,  144-5,  21 8-1 9,  228, 
312;  evidence  before  Select  Committee,  244-8; 
housing,  329-30,;  inspection  of,  247-8 
Cobbett,  William,  140, 358, 374-5 
Cobden,  Richard,  9, 123, 137, 336 
Cochrane,  of  Britain  Pottery,  233 
Coins  and  symbols  of  value,  58-60 
Colbert,  Jean  Baptiste,  1 50, 375 
Colins,  H.,  303, 343, 382 
Collective  worke^’25 1 
Colliers,  bound,  330 
Cologne,  210 
Colonial  Office,  314 
Colonial  system,  372-5 
Colonization,  379-  83;  systematic,  379, 382 
Colonization  and  Christianity ,  etc.  (Howitt),  372 
Colony  (Mill,  James),  96 
Columbus,  Christopher,  61 
Commerce  et  le gouvernement  (Condillac),  75 
Commission  of  Inquiry  into  Industrial  Pathology, 

178 . 

Committee  on  the  adulteration  of  articles  of  food, 

120-1,297 

Commodities,  6, 13-68 
Common  property,  34 
Commons,  enclosure  of,  359-60 
Commonwealth,  371 
Communism.  192 

Communist  Manifesto y  sec  Manifesto 
Compendious  or  Brief  Examination  of  certain  ordi¬ 
nary  Com plaints ,  etc.  (Stafford),  369 
Compensation,  theory  of,  215-19 
Com  pleat  History  of  England  (Kennett),  357 
Comte,  Auguste,  162 
Comte,  Charles,  372 
Concordia ,  3-5 

Condillac,  Etienne  Bonnot,  75 
Condorcet,  Marie  Jean  Antoine  Nicholas  de  Caritat, 
Marquis  de,  305 
Confederate  States,  266 

Considerations  concerning  Taking  Off  the  Bounty  on 
Corn  exportedy  etc.  (Anonymous),  1 56 
Considerations  on  Taxes  (Cunningham),  132 
Considerations  sur  le  numeraire  et  le  commerce  (Law), 
40 

Convicts,  333, 336-7 
Cooksley,  manufacturers  of  Bristol,  242 
Cooperation,  1 57-64, 226, 308-9, 377-8 
Corbet,  Thomas,  71, 291 
Corbon,  A.,  240 


INDEX 


398 

Corinth,  253 
Cork,  121-2, 237, 350 

Corn  Laws,  9, 136-7, 141,  223, 225, 334-5, 353 
Corn  mills,  170 
Cornwall,  336 
Coromandel,  166 
Coroner's  inquests,  246-7 
Correspondence  with  Her  Majesty's  Missions  Abroad , 
regarding  Industrial  Questions  and  Trades' Unions,  7 
Corv6e,  114, 266 

Cotton  famine,  143, 172,  224-5, 284, 3«S.  3a3“S»  33® 
Cotton  manufacture,  124,  129-31,  142-4,  187,  191, 
193,  202-6,  211-14,  218,  221-6,  236,  272-4,  277, 
284,312,315,322-5,377 

Cotton  trade,  crises  in,  192-3,  208,  213-14,  219, 
222-5,322-5,330 
Courcelle-Seneuil,  J.  G.,  1 12,  295 
Cours  d' economic  industrielle  (Blanqui),  164 
Cours  d' economic  politique  (Rossi),  82 
Cours  d' economic  politique  (Storch),  83, 171, 176, 292, 
321 

Course  of  Mathematics  (Hutton),  181 
Court  of  Common  Pleas,  143,  Exchequer,  141 ;  King's 
Bench,  376 

Coventry,  223, 226, 238, 274 
Cowell,  J.  W.,  276 
Credit  System,  310, 313 
Crimea,  338 
Crimean  War,  114 

Crises,  314, 330-3;  of  1 846-47, 137;  monetary,  64 
Critical  Dissertation  on  the  Nature ,  Measure ,  and 
Causes  of  Value ,  etc.  (Bailey),  27, 264 
Crocker,  Roger,  357 
Cromwell,  Oliver,  357-8, 371 
Cuba,  129 
Culpeper,  John,  377 
Currency  of  money,  52-7 
Currency  school,  307 

Currency  Theory  Reviewed',  a  letter  to  the  Scottish 
People ,  65 

Curse  of  the  Factory  System ,  The  (Ficlden),  197,  202, 

376 

Cuvier,  George,  254 

Cyclopaedia  of  Agriculture  (Morton),  273 
Cyclops  Works,  1 26 
Cyropadia  (Xenophon),  179 

Daedalus,  199 

Daily  Telegraph ,  117-18 

Dakka,  166 

Dalhousie,  Earl  of,  364 
Dante  Alighieri,  47,  1 19 
Danubian  Principalities,  1 14-15 
Danubian  Provinces,  80 
Danzig,  209 
Darwen,  208 

Darwin,  Charles  R.,  166, 181 

Daumer,  Georg  Friedrich,  139 

David  Ricardo's  Theory  of  Value  and  Capital  (Sieber) ,9 

Decennial  cycles,  3 13, 3 1 5 

Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Man,  368 

DeCous,  183 


Deer-Forests  of  Scotland,  363;  see  also  Clearing  of 
Estates 

Defence  of  the  I.andowners  and  Farmers  of  Great  Brit¬ 
ain ,  A  (Anonymous),  274 

Definitions:  Absolute  surplus  value,  153,  252;  Ac¬ 
cumulation  of  capital,  286;  Capitalist,  72;  Cen¬ 
tralization  of  capital,  310;  Classical  political  econ¬ 
omy,  36;  Commodity,  14;  Composition  of  capital, 
303;  Concentration  of  capital,  310;  Constant  capi¬ 
tal,  101;  Cooperation,  158;  Fetichistic  character 
of  commodities,  31 ;  Labour,  85;  Labour  power,  79 
Machinery,  181;  Manufacture,  178;  Necessary  la¬ 
bour,  104;  Necessary  labour  time,  104;  Price,  45; 
Primitive  accumulation,  309,  355;  Property,  287; 
Purchase,  61 ;  Rate  of  surplus  value,  104;  Raw  ma¬ 
terial,  86;  Relative  surplus  value,  153,252;  Reve¬ 
nue,  292;  Surplus  labour,  105;  Surplus  labour  time, 
105,  Surplus  value,  101 ;  Value  of  labour  power, 
265;  Variable  capital,  101;  V  ulgar  economists,  36; 
Worker,  85 

Definitions  in  Political  Economy  (Malthus),  281,  283, 
286, 290-1 
Defoe,  Daniel,  305 
Deipno sophists  (Athenaeus),  45, 61 
De  la  falsification  des  substances  sacramentelles  (Card), 
120 

De  la  monarchic  prussienne  (Mirabeau),  356,  363, 
370.375 

De  la  pr  opr  tit  6  (Thiers),  217 
De  la  richesse  commercial  (Sismondi),  264 
De  laudibus  legum  angliae  (Fortcscue),  356 
De  I enseignement  prof cs  si  unci  (Corbon),  240 
De  I'esprit  de  l' association  dans  tous  les  intcrcts  de 
la  communauti  (Laborde),  263 
De  rinttrtt  social  (Le  Trosne),  13,  15,  41,  46,  51,  53, 
68,75-7,101 

Dclitzsch,  see  Schulze- Deli  tzsch 

Della  economia  naztonale  (Ortes),  320 

Della  Moneta  (Galiani),  32,  40,  45,  72,  75,  153,  319 

De  morbts  artificum  (Ramazzini),  178 

Deptford,  331 

De  Quinccy,  Thomas,  193 

Derby,  E.  G.  G.  S.  Stanley,  14th  earl,  224 

Derbyshire,  376 

De  Republica  (Aristotle),  38, 72,  78 
Descartes,  Ren6, 190 

Des  classes  ouvrtires  en  France  pendant  Fannie  1848 
(Blanqui),  134 

Description  of  England  (Harrison),  356, 368 
Description  of  the  Country  from  Thirty  to  Forty  Miles 
around  Manchester  (Aikin),  294, 372, 376 
Des  sys times  de  Viconomie  politique  (Ganilh),  26,  82, 
220 

Destutt  de  Tracy,  35-6, 74, 77, 1 58-9, 321 
Deutsch-Franzbsische  Jahrbiicher,  33, 72 
Devonshire,  129, 230, 336 
De  Witt,  Jan,  305, 375 
Dewsbury,  117 
Dialectic,  11, 295 

Dialogue  Concerning  Happiness  (Harris),  179 
Dialogues  sur  le  commerce  et  les  Travaux  des  Arti¬ 
sans  (Quesnay),  49-50, 156 


Diaries  (Harris),  179 

Dictionary ,  etc.,  of  Commerce  (MacCulloch),  71 
Diderot,  Denis,  62 
Dictzgcn,  Joseph,  9 
Diminishing  returns,  law  of,  250 
Diodorus  Siculus,  67, 114, 166, 179, 253 
Discours  de  la  mithode  (Descartes),  190 
Discotirs  sur  V economic  politique  (Rousseau),  370 
Discours  sur  les  revolutions  du  globe  (Cuvier),  254 
Discourse  concerning  Coining  the  New  Money  Lighter , 
A  (Barbon),  13,  60, 67-8 

Discourse  concerning  Trade  of  the  East  Indies  (Anon¬ 
ymous),  40 

Discourse  of  the  General  Notions  of  Money ,  Trade ,  and 
Exchange ,  etc.  (Anonymous),  40 
Discourse  on  the  Necessity  of  Encouraging  Mechanick 
Industry  (Anonymous),  132 
Discourses  upon  Trade  (North),  56,  58, 62,  190 
Diseases,  occupational,  178 

Dissertation  on  the  Poor  Laws ,  etc .,  A  (Townsend), 

3 20 

Dissertation  sur  la  nature  des  rischesses,  etc.  (Bois- 
guillebert),65 
Divine  Comedy  (Dante),  47 

Domestic  Industry,  144,  227,  229-36,  241,  249,  252, 

273i3‘».34<> 

Don  Quixote,  36 
Dorsetshire,  no,  129,316 
Doubleday,  economist,  375 
Dovcholes,  3  29 
Down,  350 
Downpatrick,  237 

Dressmakers  and  Milliners,  123,231 
Drome,  164 
Drydcn,  John  ,117 
Dublin,  121-2,350 
Ducpetiaux,  Edouard,  332-3 
Du  credit  public  ( Augier),  377 
Dutferin,  Lord,  352 
Duffy,  Ci.,  383 

Du  Gouvernement  considers  dans  ses  rapports  avec  le 
commerce  (Fcrrier),  26 

Du  monopole  qui  s'Habht  dans  les  arts  industriels  et 
le  commerce  (Bidaut),  156 
Dumont,  Etienne,  301 
Dunkirk,  146 
Dunning,  T.  J.,  272-3, 377 
Dunton,  340 
Dupont,  Pierre,  343 
Durham,  285, 329-30 
Dutch,  133, 182,373,375 

East  India  Company  (English),  62, 223, 373 
East  Indies,  61, 372 
East  Prussia,  114 

Economic  Position  of  the  British  Labourer,  The  (Faw- 
t^tt),  275, 302, 323 

Economic  politique,  source  des  revolutions  et  des  utopies 
pr  It  endues  socialistes ,  V  (Colins),  303, 382 
Economist ,  hi,  290, 316, 364 
Economistes  financiers  du  XVIII  Silcle,  40, 65 
Eden,  Sir  F.  M.,  117,  297, 304-5  334,  358-61, 375-7 


INDEX  399 

Edict  of  1656  (France),  358 
Edinburgh,  66,  122,  238 
Education,  81, 195-6, 237-8, 240, 245,351-2 
Edward  III,  King  of  England,  43, 13 1 
Edward  VI,  King  of  England,  364-5 
Egypt,  1 14, 166, 179, 224, 228, 253-4 
Egyptians,  162-3, 179,253 

Eighteenth  Brumaireof  Louis  Bonaparte,  The  (Marx), 
343 

Einleitung  zur  Geschichte  der  Mark-,  Hof-,  Dorf-  und 
Stadtverfassung  und  der  ojfentlichen  Gewalt 
(Maurer),  31 
Elbe, 114 
Elea  tics,  120 

Element i  di  Economia  Pubblica  (Bcccaria),  178-9 
Elements  du  Commerce  (Forbonnais),  41 
Elements  of  Political  Economy  (Mill,  James),  73,  89, 
172,280,282-3 

Elements  of  Political  Economy  (Newman,  S.  P.), 
75-6,  100 

Elements  of  Political  Economy  (Wayland),  77, 100 
Elizabeth,  Queen  of  England,  132, 358, 365-7 
Ellis,  J.,  126 
Emancipation  Act,  135 
Embleton,  Dr.,  327 
Emery,  A.  II.,  187 

Emigration,  225-6,  284-5, 3o2“3»  3H,  3*7>  343>  345> 
349-53, 382-3;  Committee  of,  21 1 
Enclosure  of  Commons,  Acts  for,  359-60 
Encyclopedic  des  sciences  medicales,  178 
Engels,  Friedrich,  16, 33, 72, 78, 1 16, 1 1 8, 1 23, 129, 141, 
146,  195,  207-8,  219,  300,  314,  324,  378-9;  notes 
by,  16, 66-7, 104, 149-50, 1 71-2,  189-90, 194,  208, 
21 1,  222,  248-9,  262,  296, 31 1, 322,  359;  prefaces 
by,  1-5 

England  and  America  (Wakefield),  130,  288,  334, 

3«°-3f 

England's  Treasure  by  Foreign  Trade ,  etc.  (Mun),  254 
“English  Ten  Hours*  Bill”  (Engels),  see  “ Englische 
Zehnstu  nden-Bill " 

“ Englische  Zehnstunden-Bill ”  (Engels),  141, 146 
Ennis,  121 

Enquiry,  see  Inquiry 
Elnsor,  Cieorge,  362 
Entwicklung  der  Chemie  (Kopp),  150 
Envelope  making,  184,  226 

Enzyklopadie  der  Philusophischen  Wissenschaften 
(Hegel),  86,  127 
Epicurus,  35 

Erde,  die  Pflanze,  und  der  Mensch,  Die  (Shouw), 
254 

Eschwege,  15 

Eskriggc,  cotton  spinner,  140 
Esprit  des  luis  (Montesquieu),  41,  57, 304, 374 
Esquimaux,  43 

Essai  sur  la  nature  du  commerce  en  giniral  (Can til- 
ion),  274 

Essay  on  Credit  and  the  Bankrupt  Acts,  An  (Anony¬ 
mous),  63 

Essay  on  the  Application  of  Capital  to  Land ,  An 
(West),  268 

Essay  on  the  Distribution  of  Wealth,  An  (Jones),  160 


INDEX 


400 

Essay  on  the  Distribution  of  Wealthy  An  (Ramsay), 
77-8,154,253,280,313 

Essay  on  the  External  Corn  Trade ,  An  (Torrens),  81 
Essay  on  the  Governing  Causes  of  the  Natural  Rate  of 
Interest ,  An  (Massey),  254 
Essay  on  the  History  of  Civil  Society ,  An  (Ferguson), 
I73> *77 

Essay  on  the  Political  Economy  of  Nations ,  An  (Anon¬ 
ymous),  96, 149 

Essay  on  the  Principle  of  Population  An  (Malthus), 
305 

Essay  on  the  Production  of  Wealthy  An  (Torrens),  76, 
88 

Essay  on  the  Rate  of  Wages,  etc.  (Carey),  277 
Essay  on  Trade  and  Commerce ,  etc.  (Cunningham), 
1 1 2, 132-4, 1 80,  268, 296-7, 304, 3 1 5, 365 
Essay  upon  Publtck  Credit ,  An  (Anonymous),  65 
Essays  (Hume),  57 

Essays  about  the  Poor ,  etc.  (Bellers),  61 , 68, 236 
Essays  on  Political  Economy ,  etc.,  (Anonymous),  261 
Essays  on  some  Unsettled  Questions  of  Political  Econ¬ 
omy  {MAX,].  S.),  296 

Essays  on  the  Formation,  etc.,  of  Opinions  (Bailey),  27 
Essays ,  or  Councils ,  Civil  and  Moral  (Bacon),  357 
Essays ,  Political ,  Economical ,  Philosophical ,  etc. 

(Thompson),  297 
Essen,  191 

Essential  Principles  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations ,  etc. 

(Gray),  76 
Essex,  230, 341 
Ethiopia  ,114 
Etruscans,  113, 162-3 

Etudes  iconomiques  (Molinari),  207, 295, 382 
Etudes  sur  Vtconomie  politique  (Sismondi),  153,  294, 
321 

Eucharist,  139 

European  Messenger ,  io-ii 

Evening  Standard ,  2 

Everet’s  wool-shearing  machine,  2x0 

Eviction  Mania,  356-7 

Exchange,  37-42 

Exeter,  173 

Exeter  Hall,  128 

Expropriation,  355-72, 375, 377-80 

Fable  of  the  Bees ,  etc.  (Mandeville),  173, 304 
Factory  Act  Extension  Act,  235, 242-3, 249 
Factory  Acts,  6,  108,  1 15-17,  130-1,  134-46,  i92~3> 
195-6,  201,  204,  206,  209,  229,  233-49,  269,  274, 
3x5,  332;  educational  clauses,  *95-6,237-8,  240, 
245;  sanitation  clauses,  236-8 
Factory  and  Workshops  Act,  248-9 
Factory  Legislation,  7, 13 1 

Factory  Question  and  the  Ten  Hours  Bill ,  The  (Greg), 
141 

Factory  Regulations  Act,  143 
Factory  system,  186 

Facts  and  Fictions  of  Political  Economists  (Watts), 

27X 

Fairbairn,  W.,  214 
Falstaff,  19 

Familiar  Words  (Urquhart),  45, 178, 249 


Farre,  Dr.,  135 

Fathers  of  the  Church,  36, 38 

Faulheber,  183 

Faust  (Goethe),  293 

Fawcett,  H.,  275, 302, 323, 371 

February  Revolution  (1847),  *45>  *86 

Feltham,  238 

Fen  District,  343-4 

Fenian,  353 

Ferguson,  Adam,  57, 173, 177 
Ferrand,  M.  P.,  129, 204, 284 
Ferrier,  F.  L.  A.,  26 
Fetichism,3i-7 
Fieldcn,  J.,  197,  202, 376 
Fingnnghoe,  34  * 

Finishing,  143 

Fish  Trade,  362-3 

Flax  mills,  1 10, 144,  204-5, 221>  *37 

Fleetwood,  William,  132 

Flesh  Agents,  129 

Hetcher  of  Saltoun,  358 

Floore,  342 

Fontcrel,  A.  L.,  178 

Forbes,  Dr.,  191 

Forbonnais,  Francois  Vcron  de,  41 

horces  Employed  in  Agriculture  (Morton),  183 

Forfarshire,  363 

Forster,  Nathaniel,  132-3, 209, 360 
Forster,  William  Edward,  328 
Fortescue,  John,  356-7 

Fourier,  Francois  Marie  Charles,  140,  187,  209,  344 
Fourierism,  295 

France,  2,  8-9,  43.  65, 67,  1 1  j,  130-1,  134,  138,  145, 
150,  170,  173,  180,  186,  190,492,  228,  277,  295, 

297, 343. 349. 357-8. 365-6>  368-9. 37* 

Franklin,  Benjamin,  21, 78,  86, 159, 305 
Frederick  II,  King  of  Prussia,  356, 363, 370 
Free  Trade  and  Free  Traders,  2, 26,  51,  83, 120, 136- 
7,229,266,278,321 
Free  Trade  Legislation,  9 

French,  133-4;  Republic,  134;  Revolution,  305, 368, 
377;  Treaty  of  Commerce,  224 
Frey  tag,  G.,  367 
Front  Mill,  357 
Fullarton,  John,  59-60, 66-7 
Full-timers,  1 17, 192 

Gaels,  362-3 
Gaick,  363 

Galiani,  Ferdinando,  32, 40, 45, 72, 75, 153, 319 

Galway,  350 

Gamblingay,  341 

Gang  System,  343-5 

Ganilh,  Charles,  26, 36, 41, 82, 86, 220 

Gardner,  Robert,  201 

Gamier,  G.,  177, 272 

Gaskell,  P.,214, 218 

Gateshead,  327 

Geddes,  J.,  196 

General  Congress  of  Labour,  X45 
General  Statutes  of  Massachusetts,  131 
Gereva,  146, 167 


INDEX 


Genoa,  374 

Genovesi,  Antonio,  72 

George  II,  King  of  England,  1 5, 43, 367 

George  III,  King  of  England,  367 

Georgia,  128 

Gerhard  t,  Charles  Frldlric,  149-50 
German  Manufacturers’  Association,  3 
German  Workers’  Society  of  Brussels,  286 
Germany,  2, 6-9, 31, 114, 115, 121, 129-30, 132, 150, 
182, 186, 192,  210-n,  228-9,  276“7»  363>  367 
Geschichte der  Fronh'ofe  (Maurer),  1 14 
Geschichtliche  Darstellung  des  Handels ,  der  Gewerbe 
unddes  Acker baus,  etc.  (Gulich),  8 
Gesundheit  (Strange),  see  Health 
Gilmour,  spinners,  213 
Gillott,  9teel-pen  manufacturer,  226 
Gisborne,  Thomas,  376 

Gladstone,  William  Kwart,  3-5,  222, 322-3, 367 
Glamorganshire,  337 
Glasgow,  1 19, 130,  233, 326, 362 
Glasgow  Daily  Mail,  1 50 

Glassworks  and  glass  making,  124-5,  127,  144,  169- 
71,214,242-3 
Glenfeshie,  363 
Glengarry,  363 
Glenmoriston,  363 
Glen  Tilt,  364 
Glovemaking,  249 
Gobsec,  291 
Godfrey’s  Cordial,  193 
Godunoff,  Boris,  359 
Godwin,  Edward  Baldwin,  371 
Goethe,  Johann  Wolfgang  von,  293 
Gold  Diggings,  66  7, 383 
Gordon,  Sir  John,  83 
Gray,  30 

Great  Britain  s  Commercial  Interest  Explained  and 
Improved  (Postlethwayt),  133 
Great  Liberal  Party,  367 
Great  Northern  Railway,  212 
Greece,  61, 179 
Greenhow,  Dr.,  118, 142, 204 
Greenwich,  331 
Greg,  R.  H.,  141 
GrSgoir,  H.,  274 
Grey,  Sir  George,  139, 329 
Grove,  William  Robert,  260 

Grundlagen  der  Nattonaloekonomie,  Die  (Roscher), 

4L75>  99“IOO»  io5 
Guilds,  165-6 
Gulich,  Gustav  von,  8, 374 
Guthrie,  Dr.,  135 

Haarlem,  182 
Haileybury  College,  296 
Half-timers,  117, 192,  213 
Halifax,  142 

Hall,  Rev.  Newman,  123 
Haller,  Carl  Ludwig  von,  190 
Hamburg,  210 
Hamilton,  Sir  William,  156 
Hamm,  W.,  249 


401 

Handboek  van  Praktische  Staatshuishoudkundc  (Via- 
sering),  248 
Hanley,  118 
Hansard,  3-5, 322-3 
Hanssen,  Georg,  114 
Hardwicke,  243 

Harris,  Chief  Constable  of  Bolton,  225 
Harris,  James,  178-9 
Harrison,  William  John,  356, 368 
Harrupp,  cloth  manufacturer,  208 
Hartford,  341-2 

Harvey,  Dr.,  43, 340 

Hassall,  Arthur  Hill,  83, 120 
Hastings,  Warren,  373 
Haymarkct,  383 
Health  (Strange),  124 

Hegel,  Georg  Wilhelm  E'riedrich,  10-11,  24,  41,  46, 
80,86,127,149,178,291 
Heine,  Heinrich,  301 
Helvetius,  301 

Henry  111,  King  of  France,  61 

Henry  VII,  King  of  England,  357, 364 

Henry  VIII,  Kihg  of  England,  i3L357f364 

Hephaestos,  199 

Heraclitus,  48 

Herefordshire,  341 

Herrcnschwand,  56 

Hertford,  300 

Hertfordshire,  230, 336, 360 
Hind, 336 
Hinds'  houses,  286 
Hindus,  166, 254, 296, 373 

Histoiredes  materiaux  manuscrits ,  etc.  (Monteil),  369 
Histoire  parlementaire  (Buchez  and  Roux-Lavergne), 
368 

Histoire  politique  et  sociale  des  PrincipauUs  Danu - 
biennes  (Rcgnault),  115 

Historical  and  Chronological  Deduction  of  the  Origin 
of  Commerce ,  etc.  (Anderson,  A.),  369, 376 
Historical  and  Descriptive  Account  of  British  India 
(Murray  and  Wilson),  166 

Historical  Sketches  of  the  South  of  India  (Wilks),  175 
History  of  Agriculture  and  Prices  in  England ,  A 
(Rogers),  333, 336, 358 
History  of  Baking  (Read),  121 
History  of  England  (Macaulay),  132, 355-6 
History  of  Java  (Raffles),  175, 372-3 
History  of  Political  Literature  from  the  Earliest  Times , 
The  (Blakey),358 

History  of  Prices,  etc.  (Tooke  and  Newmarch),  143 
History  of  Rome  (Mommsen),  79, 81 
History  of  the  Borough  of  Stoke-upon-Trent  (Ward), 
129 

History  of  the  Middle  and  Working  Classes  (Wade, 
John),  1 17, 131,306 

History  of  the  Past  and  Present  State  of  the  Labouring 
Population,  A  (Tuckett),  177, 358 
History  of  the  Poor  (Eden),  1 17 
History  of  the  Protestant  Reformation,  A  (Cobbett), 

358 

Hoarding,  60-2, 67-8, 291 
Hobbes,  Thomas,  81, 190, 305 


INDEX 


402 

Hobhouse,  Sir  John,  140 
Hodgskin,  Thomas,  165, 172-3, 265, 284, 372 
Holinshed,  Raphael,  356, 365 
Holland,  2,  13 1-2,  172,  180,  182,  186,  192,  210,  228, 

254, 197.361,371-5 

Holy  Alliance,  8 
Homer,  26 
Horn  ton,  230 
Hoo,  194 
Hookham,  343 
Hopkins,  Thomas,  1 1 1 
Horne,  George,  305 
Horner,  Francis,  376 

Horner,  Leonard,  109,  116,  134,  136,  138-40,  143, 
195-6, 202, 209, 272 
Horningham,  83 
Horrocks,  Jeremiah,  306 
Horrocks,  mill  owner,  201 
Horse-power,  189-90, 203 
Houghton,  John,  209 
Hours  of  Labour  Regulation  Act,  242 
House  of  Terror,  134 
Housing,  337-9 

Howard  de  Walden,  Lord,  134 
Howell,  Factory  Inspector,  1 10, 1 16, 140-1 
Howitt,  W.,  372 

“How  Karl  Marx  Quotes  ’  (Anonymous),  3 
Hume,  David,  57, 254, 274, 305-6 
Hunter,  Julian,  194,  326-7,  329-30,  336-40,  342-3, 
358 

Huntingdonshire,  230, 341-3 
Husbandry  and  Trade  Improved  (Houghton),  209 
Hutton,  Charles,  181 
Huxley,  Thomas  Henrv,  237 
Hygiene  physique  et  morale  de  louvner,  etc.  (I  onterel), 
178 

I  had  (Homer),  26 

“I has  Americana  in  Nuceu  (Carlyle),  123 
Imperial privileges  and  sanctions  for  Stlesta,  367 
Improvers,  229 

Income  Tax  Returns,  321-2,  347-8 
India,  34,  61-2,  64,  160,  172,  174-5,  186,  191,  195, 
21 1,213, 217, 211-5, 253-4, 284, 373 
Indian  Communities,  163, 174-5 
Indo-China,  43 

Industry  of  Nations ,  The ,  168, 188 
Inquests,  246-7 

Inquiry  concerning  the  Population  of  Nations ,  An 
(Lnsor),362 

Inquiry  into  the  Causes  and  Modes  of  the  W ealth  of 
Individuals ,  etc  (Corbet),  71, 291 
Inquiry  into  the  Causes  of  the  Present  High  Price  of 
Provisions ,  An  (Forster),  133, 209, 354, 360 
Inquiry  into  the  Colonial  Policy  of  the  European  Pow¬ 
ers ,  An  (Brougham),  377 

Inquiry  into  the  Connection  between  the  Present  Price 
of  Provisions  and  the  Size  of  Farms ,  etc,  149, 

iS9r4°,  35*.  361 

Inquiry  into  the  Duties  of  Man ,  The  (Gisborne),  376 
Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Progress  of  Rent ,  An 
CMalthus),  152, 261, 274 


Inquiry  into  the  Principles  of  Political  Economy ,  An 
(Steuart),  85, 162, 210, 362 
Inquiry  into  the  Principles  of  the  Distribution  of 
Wealth ,  An  (1  hompson,  W.),  177 
Inquiry  into  the  Reasons  for  or  against  Enclosing 
Open  I  telds,  An  (Addington),  360 
Inquiry  into  the  Taxation  and  Commercial  Policy  of 
Great  Britain ,  An  (Buchanan),  58-9 
Inquiry  into  those  Principles  respecting  the  A  ature  of 
Demand  and  the  Necessity  of  Consumption ,  I  ately 
Advocated  by  Mr  Malthus,  An  (Anonymous),  77, 
82,216,294,300 

Institutions  politic ae  (Boxhorn),  210 
International  Statistical  Congress,  145 
International  Workingmen’s  Association,  146,  In¬ 
augural  address,  3-5 

Introductory  Lecture  on  Political  Economy ,  An 
(Jones),  290,313 

Ireland,  121-2, 129, 213, 237, 243, 276,  lb 4, 322, 337, 

345-53»359,36i 

Ireland  Industrial ,  Political ,  and  Social  (Murphy), 
349 

Ireland ,  its  Eitls  and  their  Remedies  (Sadler),  349 
Iron,  187,218 
Iron  Age,  86 

Iron  and  steel  works,  125-6, 218 
Irrigation,  254 
Is&re,  164 
Isocrates,  179 

Isoherte  Staat ,  Der  (Thunen),  307 
Italy,  2, 181, 190, 228,355,357,361 

Jacob,  William,  1 5, 106 
Jacson,  mill  owner,  201  ^ 

James  1,  King  of  F  ngland,  357-8, 365, 367 

Japan,  66, 34a,  3  56 

Java, 175, 191,373 

Jay,  contractor,  329 

Jerome,  Saint,  46 

Jerusalem,  193 

Jobagte ,  115 

John  II,  King  of  France,  366 
John  Bright  &  Co ,  275, 371 
John  Brown  &  Co  ,  126 
John  o  Groats,  364 

Joint  stock  companies,  150, 163,  310-1 1, 374 
Jones,  Richard,  3, 149, 156,  163,  281, 290, 296,313 
Josiah  Wedgwood  and  Sons,  130 
Journal des  bconomistes,  10 
Journal  of  Art  t ,  204 

Journals ,  Conversations ,  and  Essays  relating  to  Ire - 
land  (Senior),  353, 363 

Journey  in  the  Seaboard  Slave  States ,  etc  (Olmsted), 
95 

Journey  through  Spam  ( Townsend),  320 
Juarez,  Benito  Pablo,  80 
July  Revolution,  295 
Jury  Pnce,  326 

Kaffirs,  43 

Kapital ,  Das,  1-2,9-11 
Kelson,  Dr.,  329 


INDEX 


Kendal,  173 

Kennett,  White,  357 

Kennington,  342 

Kent,  342 

Kent,  Mr.,  360 

Kentucky,  128 

Kershaw,  Leese,  &  Co.,  140 

Kiev,  9 

Kildinan,  237 

Kilkenny,  1 21, 350 

Killin,  Mrs.  Ann,  195-6 

Kilmarnock,  83 

Kincaid,  Sir  John,  195-6 

King’s  County,  350 

Kingdom  of  Vagabonds,  365 

Kinnaird,  member  of  the  Mines  Committee,  244-5 

Kiselcff,  General,  1 1 5 

Kopp,  H.,  150 

Krankheiten,  welche  verschiednen  Standen,  Ahern  und 
Geschlechtern  eigenthumlich  sind,  178 
Krupp,  191 
Kursachscn,  363 
Kusa,  80 

Laborde,  A.  de,  263 

Labour,  detail,  ’ , ,  division  of,  164-80,  205-6; 
exploitation,  117-24;  intensity  of,  200-5,  27b; 
laws,  134-5;  necessary,  104;  power,  79-84,  102-6, 
256  62;  process,  85-9;  skilled  and  unskilled,  95-6; 
statutes,  131  2,  274,366-7;  surplus,  105,  113-17, 
366-7;  see  also  Redundant  population 
Labour  Defended  against  the  Claims  of  Capital  (Hodgs- 
kin),  173,  265,284 

Labour  Fund,  301-2;  see  also  Wages  Fund 
Lacc  trade,  117-18,  143,  229-30,  234,  241-2,  249, 
269 

Lage  der  arbeitenden  Klasse  in  England  (Engels),  1 16, 
118,  123,  129,  195,207-8,219,300 
Laing,  Samuel,  'A31 9. 3  A  334 
Lancashire,  124,  129,  138,  140-2,  193,  204-5,  22°, 
223,225,  284-5,324,376 
Lancaster,  223 
Lancellotti,  Secondo,  209 
Land  Acts,  357, 383 
Land  Grabbing,  21 1 
Landit,  37 

Land  Law  of  Victoria ,  The  (Duffy),  383 
Langtoft,  342 
Lasker,  4 

Lassallc,  Ferdinand,  6, 48 
Lasswade,  122 
•  Last  hour,  108-11 

Lauderdale,  James  Maitland,  8th  earl,  170 
Laurent,  Auguste,  149-50 
Lavcrgnc,  I.,  de,  263, 353 
Law,  Jean,  40, 305 
I  *\ws  of  settlement,  359 

Laws  to  enforce  extension  of  working  day,  127-34 
Lectures  on  Colonization  and  Colonies  (Merivale), 
3H,382 

Lectures  on  Political  Economy  (Newman,  F.  W.),  359, 

362 


403 

Lectures  on  Political  Economy  (Stewart),  156,  168, 
176,239 
Lee,  Dr.,  318 
I^ceds,  372 
Leek,  142 

Lei  bei gen  sc  haft  in  Schleswig-Holstein  (Hanssen),  114 

Leicester,  223,  233 

Leicester,  Lord,  343 

Leicestershire,  360 

Lemontey,  177 

Leower’s  Mill,  208 

Lessing,  Gotthold  F.phraim,  1 1 

Letheby,  Dr.,  1 23 

LeTrosne,  Guillaume  Francois,  13, 15, 41, 46,  51,  53, 
68,75-7,101 

Letter  from  Jamaica  (Columbus),  see  Brief  aus  Ja¬ 
maica 

Letter  to  A.  Smithy  etc.  (Horne),  305 
fitter  to  Mr,  Senior,  etc.  (Horner),  109 
letter  to  Sir  T.  C.  Banbury ,  etc.,  3  58 
letters  from  the  Highlands ,  or  the  Famine  of  1847 
(Somers),  363 

Letters  on  the  Factory  Act ,  as  it  affects  the  Cotton  Man¬ 
ufacture  (Senior),  108-9, 1!I»  J98,  238 
litres  a  Monsieur  Malthas  (Say),  300 
Levi,  Leone,  363-4 
Leviathan  (Hobbes),  81 
Lewisham,  329 
Lev  den,  209-10,  248 

Lezioni  dt  Economia  Civile  (Genovesi),  72 

Lichnowsky,  292 

Licinian  Laws,  361 

Liebig,  J.  von,  1 15, 160,  188,  250,  283 

Limehousc,  331 

Limerick,  121-2,  233,350 

I  .incolnshire,  342-3, 345 

Linen, 349 

Linguet,  Simon  Nicolas  Henri,  112,  139,  163,  304, 
366 

Lister,  Samuel  Cunliffc,  185 

Literature  of  Political  Economy ,  The  (MacCulloch), 

&7»  36° 

Little  Shilling  Men,  1 12 

Liverpool,  92,  1 19, 318, 326, 376-7 

Livredes  metiers  (Boileau),  239 

Loch  Archaig,  363 

Locke,  John,  13,40,45.  58.  l9°>3°5 

Logic  (Hegel),  149 

Logic  (Mill,  J.  S.),  292 

Logic  of  Political  Economy ,  The  (DcQuincey),  193 
“ Lohnarbeit  und  Kapital ”  (Marx),  286, 303, 379 
Iximbardv,  254 

London, 1 19-23,  129,  210,  229,  232-3,  239,  269,  272, 

31 8>  3*3, 3-5-7, 33 1  >  340, 357. 3<>7, 376. 383 

Londonderry,  227,  233 

London  General  Council  of  International  Working¬ 
men’s  Association,  146 
London  Orphan  Asylum,  323 
lamgc.  F.  D.,  118,223,238 
I*ord,  Commissioner,  125,  232 
Louis  XIV,  King  of  F ranee,  65 
Ixrois  XVI,  King  of  France,  365 


INDEX 


404 

Louis  Philippe,  King  of  France,  134-5 
Lucian,  305 
Lucretius,  104 
Luddites,  210 
Ludford,  344 
Luneburger  Heath,  304 
Luther,  Martin,  93, 150, 293, 373 
Lyons,  64, 164, 295 

Maatschappij  "De  Vlamingen  Vooruit,”  333 
Macassar,  373 
Macaulay,  Thomas  Babington,  132, 134,  355-6, 358 
M’Bean,  Dr.,  118 
Macclesfield,  142 

MacCulloch,  John  Ramsay,  67,  71-2,  92,  156,  199, 
215,217,257,301-2,360 
McGregor,  J.,  132 
Machinery,  180-250 
Maclaren,  J  ames,  44 
MacLeod,  Henry  Dunning,  26, 73 
Macmillan's  Magazine ,  123 
Malacca,  373 

Mallett,  manufacturer,  117 
Malmesbury,  see  Harris,  James 
Malthus,  Thomas  Robert,  77,  102,  152,  172,  250, 
261,  274,  281,  283,  286,  290-1,  294,  296,  300,  302, 
3°5»3i4>320,  349 

Manchester,  2, 106, 108, 1 19, 129, 161, 191, 194, 203, 
212-13,224,284,294,318 
Manchester  Strike,  The  (Martineau),  314 
Mandevillc,  Bernard  de,  173, 304-5 
Manifesto  of  the  Communist  Party  (Marx  and  Engels), 
240,378-9 

Manufacture,  capitalistic  character  of,  176-80;  divi¬ 
sion  of  labour  in,  171-6;  forms,  167-71;  modern, 
227-36;  origin,  164-5;  revolution  of  industry, 
226-7 

Manufacturing  Population  of  England,  The  (Gaskell), 
215,218 

Marchienne,  297 
Mari  tomes,  38 
Market  Harborough,  338 
Markets,  Asiatic,  225, 322 
Marshall,  William  171 
Martineau,  Harriet,  314 
Marx,  Eleanor,  see  Aveling,  Eleanor  Marx 
Marx,  Karl,  i-ii,  13,  33-4,  36.  39-4°,  43.  45.  52> 
63-4,  66,  141,  174,  176-7,  205,  265-6,  286,  303, 
307, 3M,  320, 343, 378-9 
Marylebone,  123 
Massachusetts,  131 
Massachusetts  Bay,  373 
Massey,  J.,  254 

Master  Spinners'  and  Manufacturers'  Defence  Fund , 
etc.,  207 

Matchmaking,  1 19, 143, 234, 243 
Maudslay,  Henry,  187 
Maurer,  G.  L.  von,  31, 1 14 
Maximes  ginirales  (Quesnay),49 
Maximilian,  Emperor,  80 
Maxims  (De  Witt),  375 
May,  Sub-Inspector,  235 


Mayer,  Sigmund,  1 15 
Mayo,  350 

Mecklenburg,  F.  A.,  59 

Meditazioni  sulla  Economia  Politica  (Verri),  17,  40, 
62, 160 

Meitzen,  August,  114 

Melanges  de  I'tconomie  politique  (Daire),  75 
Mendelssohn,  Moses,  1 1 
Menenius  Agrippa,  176 
Mercantile  System,  36, 67 
Mercantilists,  26, 67, 71 , 255 
Merchant  Farms,  149, 360 
Merchant  of  Venice  (Shakespeare),  139, 240 
Mercier  de  la  Riviere,  Paul  Pierre,  49-50, 60, 69,  71, 
74,76, 92 

Merivale,  H.,  314, 381-2 
Mltayer,  368 

Mexico,  67, 79-80, 95, 373 
Meyer,  Rudolf,  262 

Middle  Ages,  36,  41,  63-4,  149,  163,  190,  210,  252, 

355“6>  37^374 
Mill,  170 

Mill,  James,  52,  57,  73,  89,  96,  172,  215,  250,  280, 
282-3,302 

Mill,  John  Stuart,  9,  57-8,  62,  180,  215,  250,  255-6, 
292,295-6,302,371 
Millwall,  331 
Miners,  see  Coal  miners 
Mines,  see  Coal  mines 
Mines  Inspection  Act,  244, 247 
Mining  Acts  of  1842, 244 
Mining  Acts  of  1872, 242, 248 
Mirabeau,  Honor6  Gabriel,  235, 356, 363, 370, 375 
Mirabeau,  Victor  Riquetti,  305, 379 
Miscellaneous  Statistics  of  the  United  Kingdom,  323 
Mtsbe  de  la  philosophic,  etc.  (Marx),  36,  174, 176-7 
205,265,320 
Mississippi,  128 
Mistresses’  houses,  229-30 
Modern  India  (Campbell),  175 
Moguls,  362 
Moldavia,  115 
Moltere,  323 

Molinari,  Gustave  de,  207, 295, 382 
Mommsen,  Theodor,  79, 81 
Money,  13-68 

Money  and  its  Vicissitudes  (Bailey),  20, 302 
Money  Answers  all  Things  (Vanderlint),  57,  61,  68 
132,152,161 

Monmouthshire,  330, 337 
Monopoly  companies,  1 50, 373 
Montalembert,  Charles  Forbes,  Comte  de,  231 
Monteil,  Alexis,  369 

Montesquieu,  Charles  de,  41,  57, 304, 374 

Moore,  Samuel,  1 

More,  Thomas,  305, 357, 365 

Morgen,  31 

Morning  Advertiser,  4 

Morning  Chronicle,  334 

Morning  Star,  4, 123, 266, 323, 331 

Mortality  rate,  194, 229, 232, 337 

Merton,  John  G,  183, 273 


INDEX 


Moscow,  124, 127 
Moses,  182 
Mosley  228 
Muhle,  170 
Muller,  Adam,  58 
Muller,  Anton,  209 
Mun,  John,  254 
Mun,  Thomas,  254 
Murphy,  John  Nicholas,  349 
Murray,  Hugh,  166 
Mutiny  Act,  343 

Nadby,  341 

Nail-making,  144, 229, 270, 312 
Nasmyth,  James  188,  203,  214 
National  Association  for  the  Promotion  of  Social 
Science,  238, 243 
National  Debt,  374-5 
National  Distress  (Laing),  96, 319, 326, 334 
National  Labour  Union,  145 
National  Wealth,  379 
National  Workshops,  see  Workshops 
Natural  and  Artificial  Rights  of  Property  Contrasted , 
The  (Hodgskin),  372 
Naylor  and  Vickers,  125-6 
Needle-making,  *(. 4  ’5,  *68,  226,242 
Netherlands,  365, 372 
Neuch&tel,  167 

Neue  Rheinische  Zeitung,  etc.,  141, 286, 379 

Newcastle,  1 19, 326-7 

Newcastle  Fever  Hospital,  327 

New  Forest,  364 

New  Jersey,  131 

New  Lanark,  145 

Newman,  F.  W.,  359, 362 

Newman,  S.  P.,  75-6, 100 

Newmarch,  W.,  143 

New  Mechanics’  Institution,  Bradford,  220 

New  Mexico,  139 

Newnham,  G.  B.,  297-8 

New  York  City,  173 

New  York  State,  382 

New  York  Tribune,  362 

Niebuhr,  Berthold  Georg,  1 13 

Nile,  162, 254 

Ntmes,  164 

Nomad  Population,  328-30 
Norfolk,  297, 343 
Norman  conquest,  356 
Norman  Kings,  363 

North,  Sir  Dudley,  45,  56,  58, 62, 190, 305 
•North  America,  162, 192;  see  also  United  States 
North  American  Colonies,  377 
North  Sea,  194 

North  Staffordshire  Infirmary,  118 
North  Staffordshire  Railway,  122 
Northamptonshire,  230, 297, 334, 342-3, 360 
Northumberland,  329 
Norwich,  119, 132, 173 

Notions  de  philosophic  naturelle  (Saint-Hilaire),  369 
Nottingham,  117, 194, 229-30 
Nottingham  General  Dispensary,  229 


405 

Nottinghamshire,  343, 376 

Nouveau: <  principes  de  Vkonomie  politique  (Sismon- 
di),  73, 82, 280, 285, 287, 289-90, 378 
Nuisances  Removal  Acts,  329, 339 
Nuremberg,  164-5, 

Oban,  363 

Observations  on  . . .  Adam  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations 
(Buchanan),  362 

Observations  on  Certain  Verbal  Disputes  in  Political 
Economy ,  etc.  (Anonymous),  37,  99,  264,  296 
Observations  on  Reversionary  Payments  (Price),  334, 
360-1 

Observations  on  the  Circumstances  which  Influence  the 
Condition  of  the  Labouring  Classes  of  Society  (Bar¬ 
ton),  312, 334 

Observations  on  the  Effects  of  the  Manufacturing  Sys¬ 
tem  (Owen),  197 

Observations  on  the  Means  of  exciting  a  Spirit  of  Na¬ 
tional  Industry ,  etc.  (Anderson,  J.),  27 6, 362 
Observer ,  65 

Occupational  diseases,  178 
Odyssey  (Homer),  179 

Official  Report  Concerning  Grievances  Complained  of 
by  the  Journeymen  Bakers ,  etc., 

Oldenburg,  276 
Olmsted,  Frederic  Law,  95 
On  Combination  of  Trades  (Anonymous),  275 
On  Political  Economy ,  etc.  (Chalmers),  72 
On  Rent  of  Land,  etc.  (Hopkins),  1 1 1 
On  the  Correlation  of  Physical  Forces  (Grove),  260 
On  the  Economy  of  Machinery  (Babbage),  169,  191, 
198 

On  the  Origin  of  Species  (Darwin),  166 
On  the  Principles  of  Political  Economy  (Ricardo),  35, 
67,  79,  hi,  189,  191-2,  211-12,  215,  283,  291,  313 
On  Wages  and  Combinations  (Torrens),  198 
Opdyke ,  George ,  78 
Open-air  Bleachers,  143 
Open  villages,  338-9 
Opium,  195, 297, 372-3 
Ord,  Pr.,340 

Ordinance  of  Moulins,  358 

Ordre  nature l  et  essentiel  des  socUtis  politique  s,  V 
(Mercier  de  la  Riviire),  49-50,  60,  69,  71,  74,  76, 
92 

Orissa.  254, 373 
Orkney,  Lady,  359 
Ortes,  Giammaria,  305, 320 
Otley,  wallpaper  manufacturer,  1 19 
Ottoman  Empire,  66;  see  also  Turkey 
Otwey,  J.  H.,  134 
Our  Old  Nobility  (Evans),  359 
Outlines  of  Political  Economy  (Anonymous),  96, 155, 
258 

Outlines  of  Political  Economy  (Senior),  1 1 1 
Outlines  of  Political  Economy  according  to  Mill 
(Tschernysheffsky),  9 
Ouvriers  (Dupont),  343 

Overpopulation  and  its  Remedy  (Thornton),  81,  130 
Overstone,  Samuel  Jones  Loyd,  Baron,  57, 67 
Overtime,  119 


406 

Owen,  Robert,  33, 41, 145, 197, 138, 248 
Owenism,  271, 295 
Oxford,  108,314 
Oxfordshire,  230, 324, 336 

Padua,  178 
Pagnini,  G.  F.,  41 
Paisley,  83, 150-1 
Pall  Mall  Gazette ,  324 
Palmerston,  Henry  John  Temple,  3rd  viscount 
224 

Pandects ,  41 

Paper  making,  125, 164, 186, 242-3 

Paper-Bag  Making,  184, 242 

Paris,  10, 138, 145 

Parry,  Captain,  43 

Parry,  Dr.  C.  H.,  297-8, 334 

Parsons,  Charles,  1 18 

Patricroft,  203 

Paul  (Apostle),  22, 305 

Pauperism,  319, 323-5, 333-4, 336,  343, 358 

Peasants*  War,  114 

Pecqueur,  304, 378 

Peel,  Robert,  Junior  (Sir  Robert),  9,  66,  112,  376 
383 

Peel,  Robert,  Senior,  376 
Peel.,  of  Swan  River  Colony,  379-80 
Peloponnesian  War,  179 
Pen  till,  342 
Peonage,  80 
Pericles,  179 

Perils  of  the  Nation ,  The  (Seeley),  361 
Persia,  254 
Perth,  364 
Peter,  Saint,  22, 47 
Peto,  Sir  N.,  1 13 
Petty,  William,  21,  36,  41,  45,  57,  66,  68,  81,  132, 
152, 167, 170, 178, 210, 274, 305 
Philadelphia,  173 
Philip  of  Valois,  41 

Philosophic  des  Arista  teles.  Die  (Biese),  199 
Philosophic  des  manufactures  (Ure),  145;  see  also 
Philosophy  of  Manufactures 
Philosophic  Herakleitos  des  Dunkeln ,  Die  (Lassallc), 

48 

Philosophy  of  Manufactures,  The  (Ure),  145,  171, 
180,  185,  197,  205,  208,  212,  214-15,  272-3,  275-6 
Philosophy  of  Right  (Hegel),  17, 4 1,  80, 178 
Phocians,  61 
Phoenicians,  61 
Physiocrates  (Daire),  13, 49 
Physiocrats,  77, 86, 92, 251, 263, 265, 292 
Pickford,  342 
Piece-work,  271 
Pimlico,  233 
Pinto,  Isaac,  71 
Pitt,  William,  367 
Plague,  131,349 
Plakaat ,  365 
Plato,  179 
Platonism,  179 
Plutus,  61 


INDEX 

Political  Anatomy  of  Ireland  (Petty),  66,  68,  132, 
152 

Political  Arithmetic  (Young),  57, 1 1 1 
Political  Economy  (Broadhurst),  23 
Political  Economy  (Scrope),  295 
Political  Inquiry  into  the  Consequences  of  Enclosing 
Waste  Lands ,  A  (Anonymous),  359 
Polonius,  132 
Polygamy,  210 
Pomerania,  1 14 
Poole,  335 

Poor  Laws,  122,  129,  211,  223,  320,  325,  334,  338, 
353,  358,  361;  Commissioners,  129;  Inspectors, 
350 

Poplar,  331 

Population,  10,  172,  305-7,  312-17,  321;  see  also 
Redundant  population 
Portfolio  (Urquhart),  363, 371 
Portugal,  372-3 

Positions  to  be  Examined  concerning  National  Wealth 
(Franklin),  78 

Postlethwayt,  Malachy,  132-3 
Potter,  A.,  295 
Potter,  Edmund,  143,  284-5 

Potteries,  118-19,  129-30,  142-4,  200-1,  233-4,  237, 

*73 

Power-looms,  210-14 
Press-gang,  375 

Preston,  194, 201,  206, 224, 322 
Preston  Moor,  206 
Price,  Richard,  i33»334,36o“1 
Price  of  Com  and  Wages  of  labour  (West),  268 
Principes  fondamentaux  de  I'tconomic  politique  (Sen¬ 
ior),  295 

Principles  of  Political  Economy  (MacCulloch),  72, 
2iy 

Principles  of  Political  Economy  (Malthus),  102,  286, 
3J4 

Principles  of  Political  Economy  (Mill,  J.  S.),  57,  180, 
250,255-6,302 
Printers,  83,  229,  239, 242-3 
Printworks  Act,  143, 145, 196 

Prize  Essay  on  the  Comparative  Merits  of  Competition 
and  Co-operation ,  A  (Anonymous),  1 56,  21 1 
Property,  287-90,  304,  309,  326,  354,  361-2,  372, 
377-83 

Proposals  for  Raising  a  College  of  Industry ,  etc.  (Bel- 
lers),  64, 159,209,  241,304 
Protagoras,  1 20 

Protestantism,  133, 305, 320, 358, 373 
Proudhon,  Pierre  Joseph,  29-30,  37,  207,  254,  265, 
290 

Prussia,  114-15.  *3°..a77»  3^3 
Prusso-German  Empire,  1 1 
Public  Economy  Concentrated  (Carlisle),  193 
Public  Health ,  Reports  of  the  Medical  Officer  of  the 
Privy  Council:  178,  193,  195;  Third  Report  (i860), 
1 1 8;  Fourth  Report  (1861),  228-9;  Sixth  Report 
(1863),  83,  130,  194-5,  228-9,  a70,  324“5»  337; 
Seventh  Report  (1864),  43, 286, 326, 328-30, 336-7, 
339-40, 358;  Eighth  Report  (1865),  228, 326-8 
Puritans,  373 


INDEX 


Pusey,  Chairman  of  the  Royal  Agricultural  Society, 
335 

Quakers,  139 

Quantulumcunque  concerning  Money ,  etc.  (Petty), 
45,68 

Quarterly  Review ,  377 
Queen’s  County,  350 
Querist  (Berkeley),  163, 173 
Qucsnay,  Francois,  9,  49-50,  156,  274,  292, 305 
Question  of  the  Necessity  of  the  Existing  Com  Laws 
Considered ,  The  (Parry),  297-8, 334 
Qu6telet,  Lambert  Adolphe  Jacques,  157 
Quickly,  Dame,  19 

Raffles,  Thomas  Stamford,  175, 372-3 

Rag  trade,  227-8 

Railwaymen,  122 

Railway  system,  235, 322 

Ramazzini,  Bernardini,  178 

Ramsay,  George,  77-8, 1 54, 253, 280, 313 

Ramsden  Crags,  341 

Ravenstone,  Piercy,  210-1 1, 253 

Read,  George,  121 

Reasons  for  a  Limited  Exportation  of  Wool  (Anony¬ 
mous),  282 

Reasons  for  the  Late  Increase  of  the  Poor  Ratey  etc. 
(Anonymous),  282,  333 

Redgrave,  A.,  129-30,  184,  193,  196,  204,  213,  220, 
224-5,  27°.  27^“7 . 

Redundant  population,  199,  212,  226-7,  248,  261, 
343-5>  349~5* » 382 

Reflexions  sur  la  formatton  et  la  distribution  des  rich - 
esses  (Turgot),  86, 152, 263 
Reformation,  358 
R£gis seurs,  369 
Riglement  Organiquey  1 1 5 
Regnault,  Elias,  1 1 5 

Regulation  of  Currencies  (Fullarton),  59-60, 66-7 

Reich,  Eduard,  178 

Reign  of  Henry  VI I ,  The  (Bacon),  357 

Reign  of  Terror,  368 

Relay  System,  124-7,  !39“4i,  150-1*  2o6>  233 

Religious  forms,  35-6 

Remarks  (Mandeville),  see  Fable  of  the  Bees 
Remarks  on  the  Commercial  Policy  of  Great  Britain 
(Anonymous),  274 

Report ,  etc.,  on  Petitions  respecting  the  Corn  Law ,  274 
Report ,  etc.,  on  the  State  of  Growthy  Commercey  and 
Consumption  of  Grain ,  etc.,  274 
Report ,  etc.,  relative  to  the  Grievances  Complained  of 
by  the  Journeymen  Bakers  (Tremenheere),  83, 120, 
271 

Report  from  Geneva  on  the  Watch  Trade ,  etc.,  167 
Reports  from  the  Poor  Imw  Inspectors  on  the  Wages  of 
Agricultural  Labourers  in  Dublin ,  350-1 
Report  of  Committee  on  the  Baking  Trade  in  Irelandy 
121-2 

Report  of  the  Commissioners  . . .  relating  to  Transpor¬ 
tation  and  Penal  Servitude ,  336-7 
Report  of  the  Officer  of  Health  of  St.  Martins-in-the - 
Fields ,  326 


407 

Report  of  the  Registrar  General,  etc.,  130 
Reports  of  the  Commissioners  of  H .  M.  Inland  Reve¬ 
nue  ,  Fourth  Reporty  322;  Tenth  Reporty  321-2, 348 
Reports  of  the  Inspectors  of  Factories ,  83, 1 10, 116-17, 
I3°>  i34“46,  i5°-i,  *84-5>  l92~3>  >95 “6. >98>2oi- 
6,  208-9,  212-13,  220-1,  224-6,  233-8,  241-2, 
259-6o,  270,  272-3,  275,  277,  315, 318,  352 
Reports  on  Bank  Actsy  1857 y  62 
Reports  on  Mines ,  1 16,  244-9 
Republic  (Plato),  179 

Resolution  of  the  Workingmen  of  Dunkirky  146 
Restauration  der  Staatswissenschaften  (Haller),  190 
Restoration,  Stuart,  359 
Revelat\ony  39 

Review  of  the  Evidence .  ..on  the  Corn  Lawsy  A  (Newn- 
ham),  297-8 

Revised  Statutes  of  the  State  of  Rhode  Islandy  etc.,  131 
Revolution,  Agricultural,  369-71;  Continental,  of 
1848-49,  9,  135,  138;  French,  305, 368,  377 
Revolutions  de  Parisy  368 
Revue  Positivistey  10 
Reynolds  Newspaper ,  122, 331 
Rhode  Island,  131 

Ribbon- loom  and  weaving,  209-10,  223  274 
Ricardo,  David,  8-9,  23,  27,  33,  35,  37,  57,  67,  77, 
79,  99, 111, 148, 189,  191-2, 199,  211-12,  215-16, 
2 5°,  255>  257“8,  a6i,  264,  278,  283,  291,  294~6, 
3°°>  3°4>312>376 
Richardson,  Dr.,  123-4 
Riche  ou  Pauvre  (Cherbuliez),  89, 288 
Rise  and  Progress  of  Organic  Chemistry  (Schorlem- 
mer),  150 

Riviere,  see  Mercier 
Roberts,  George,  358 
Robinson,  140 
Robinson  Crusoe,  33-4 
Rochdale,  161,213,275 
Rodbertus-Jagetzow,  Karl,  262 
Rogers,  J .  E.  Thorold,  333, 336, 358, 371 
Rogicr,  M.,  134 

Roman  Empire,  41,  65,  170,  179;  Republic,  36 
Roman  History  (Niebuhr),  1 13 
Rome,  36, 63, 77, 139, 361 

Roschcr,  Wilhelm,  41,  75,  99-100,  105,  hi,  127, 
158,178,304 
Roscommon,  350 
Rossi,  P.,  82,  282 
Rouard  de  Card,  120 
Roumania,  114 
Roundsmen,  365 
Rousseau,  J.  J.,  370 
Roux-Lavergne,  Pierre,  368 
Roy,  M.  J.,  1 

Royal  Agricultural  Society,  335 
Royal  Commission  on  Agriculture,  248 
Royal  Commission  on  Railways,  212, 276 
Royaume  des  truandsy  365 
Ruge,  Arnold,  33 

Rum  ford,  see  Thompson,  Benjamin 
Russell,  Lord  John,  359 
Russia,  114-15, 124, 142, 228, 277 
Russian  Cotton  Factories,  277 


INDEX 


408 

Rutlandshire,  343 
Ryder,  190 
Ryots,  64 

Sabbatarianism,  122, 128 
Sadler,  Michael  Thomas,  334, 349 
Saggio  sopra  il  giusto  pregto  delle  cose  (Pagnini),  41 
Sago,  254 
St.  Domingo,  380 
St.  George’s  Hospital,  340 
Saint-Hilaire,  Geoffroy,  369 
St.  Martin’s-in-the-Fields,  326 
St.  Petersburg,  9-10, 179 
St,  Petersburg  Journal ,  9 
Saint-Simonism,  295 
Sale,  48-52 

Sanderson,  E.  F.,  126-7 
Sanderson  Bros.  &  Co.,  126-7 
Sangrado,  352 

Sanitary  Clauses  in  Factory  Act,  236-8 
Sanitation  Acts,  326 
Saturday  Review ,  9 
Saunders,  R.  J.,  141, 146, 197 
Saxony,  1 1 5, 210, 277,375 

Say,  Jean  Baptiste,  36,  52,  73,  77,  93,  99,  177,  189, 
216, 257, 265, 294,300 
Schleswig-Holstein,  114 
Schorlemmer,  Carl,  150 
Schulz,  Wilhelm,  1 8 1 
Schulze- Deli  tzsch,  6 

Scotland,  119,  121-2,  124,  129,  140,  143,  150,  195, 
213,  243,  269-70,  276,  297,  322,  337,  352,  358, 
36i“4 

Scriven,  1 1 8 

Scrope,  George  Julius  P.,  295 
Seacoal,  37 
Sea  Island  cotton,  224 
Seasonal  Work,  235-6 
Seigniorage,  58 
Seneuil,  see  Courcelle 

Senior,  Nassau  W.,  108-11,  127,  156,  198,  215,  238, 
243,268,270,195,301,353,363 
Senior’s  "Last  Hour,"  108-1 1 
Settlement,  Laws  of,  359 
Settling  Day,  65 
Sevenoaks,  329 

Seventh  Annual  Congress  of  the  National  Associa¬ 
tion  for  the  Promotion  of  Social  Science,  238,  243 
Seven  Years  War,  375 
Sewing  machine,  21 8, 232-3 
Sextus  Empiricus,  179 
Shaftesbury,  Lord,  see  Ashley 
Shakespeare,  William,  61 , 240, 369 
Shee,  Judge,  208 
Sheffield,  208, 210, 227 
Shift  System,  see  Relay  System 
Shoe-making,  232-3, 242 

Short  Address  to  the  Public  on  the  Monopoly  of  Large 
Farms ^  A  (Wright),  360 
Short  sittings,  140 
Shouw,  F.,  254 
Show  villages,  338 


Shylock,  139 
Sicily,  254 

Siculus,  see  Diodorus 
Sieber,  A.,  9-10 
Silesia,  114,356,363,367 

Silk  manufacture,  141-2, 144, 164, 173, 204-5,220-1, 
223,228,242,312,367 
Simon,  Dr.,  195,  228-9, 324-6, 329-30, 337 
Simonde,  see  Sismondi 
Simpson,  J.,  242 

Sismondi,  Jean  Charles  Leonard  Simonde  de,  8,  73, 
8*.  1 13.  T53»  *8o,  285,  287,  289-90,  294, 314, 

32I»378 

Skarbeck,  Fryderyk,  1 59, 171 
Sketch  of  the  History  nf  Currency  (Maclaren),  44 
Slaughter  houses,  227 
Slave  Power  (Cairnes),  95, 128-9,  l&2 
Slave  trade,  223, 376-7 
Slave  Trade ,  The  (Carey),  362, 371 
Slavery,  25,  36,  79-80,  95,  128-9,  *35.  H 5>  ^a-3, 
218, 241, 266, 361 , 364-5, 372-3, 375-81 
Slaveys,  219 
Shgo,35o 

Sloane  Manuscript  Collection,  359 
Small  master,  149 

Smith,  Adam,  9,  19,  36,  57-8,  79,  132,  170,  173,  177- 
8,  189,  200,  226,  250,  257,  263-5,  267»  274-*>  a8i, 
291-2,  294,  302,  304-7,  319,  324,  354,  366,  371, 
377 

Smith,  Edward,  192-3, 324, 336-7 
Smith,  John,  336 

Smith  (Wallpaper  Factory  Owner  ),  1 19 
Smuggling,  376-7 
Snell,  Factory  Inspector,  238 
Snigge,  Sergeant,  358 

Social  History  of  the  People  of  the  Southern  Counties 
of  England  in  Past  Centuries ,  The  (Roberts),  358 
Socialism,  29, 39 
Social  Science  Review ,  1 23 

Society  for  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals, 

l}3 

Society  of  Arts,  178, 183, 191,363 
Some  Considerations  on  the  Consequences  of  the  Lower¬ 
ing  of  Interest  (Locke),  13,  58 
Somers,  Robert,  363 

Somerset,  1 10, 1 21,  1 73,  238, 324, 336, 365 
Some  Thoughts  on  the  Interest  of  Money  in  general , 
and  particularly  in  the  Pubhck  Fundst  etc.  (Anony¬ 
mous),  15 

Some  Unsettled  Questions  of  Political  Economy  (Mill, 
J.S.),58 

Sophisms  of  Free  Trade  (Byles),  131,  366 
Sophocles,  61 
Sorge,  F.  A.,  1 

Source  and  Remedy  of  the  National  Difficulties ,  etc. 

(Anonymous),  290 
South  America,  228, 283 
South  Farnbndge,  341 
South  Wales,  124 
Southallfield,  228 

Soziale  Brief  e  an  Ktrchmann  (Rodbertus-Jagetzow), 
262 


INDEX 


Spain,  a,  254, 372, 376, 380 
Spanish  America,  376 
Spartans,  179 
Spectator ,  161 
Speenhamland,  297 
Spindles,  277 
Spinning  machines,  181-2 
Spinoza,  Baruch,  1 1, 149, 295 
Stafford,  William,  36  9 
Staffordshire,  n8, 124,  130,336 
Standard ,  123,  275,332 
Stapleton,  M.  P.,  297 

oj  Sew  Jersey,  an  Act  to  Limit  the  Hours  of  La¬ 
bour,  etc.,  13 1 

State  of  the  Poor ,  etc.  (Fden),  297,  304-5,  334,  358, 

36 0.376 

States  General,  of  Holland,  210 
Statistical  Abstract  of  the  United  Kingdom , 
205 

Statute  of  Apprentices,  366-7 
Statutes  of  Labourers,  13 1-2,  274, 366 
Stavely,  125 

Steel-pen  manufacture,  226 

Steuart,  Gen.  Sir  James,  67, 70 

Steuart,  Sir  James,  3,  57,  70,  85,  162,  172,  210, 

^  274,30^32o,.n6,0(‘.,j69 

Stevens,  Dr.,  3  30 

Stewart,  Dugald,  156, 168,  176,  239 
Stock-jobbing,  374 
Stockport,  140, 194 
Stoke-upon-Trcnt,  118,  142 
Stone  Age,  86 

Storch,  H.  F.,  83, 87, 171, 176, 292, 321 

Stowe,  Mrs.  Beecher,  362 

Strahan,  William,  305 

Strand,  327 

Strange,  Dr.  \V.,  124 

Strasburg,  5 

Stratton,  342 

Straw-Plaiting,  229-31, 241-2,  249 
Strype,  John,  365 

Stuart,  J.,  Factory  Inspector,  139-40,  151 
Stuart  Pretender,  362;  Restoration,  359 
Sturrock,  A.,  212 
Sudbury,  173 
Suffolk,  249, 343 

Suggestions  for  Amending  the  Factory  Acts,  etc.  (Hor¬ 
ner),  116,143 

Sully,  Maxmilicn  de  Bethune,  Due  de,  305 
Sunday  Labour,  122 

Supplement  to  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica ,  96 

Surat  cotton,  224-5 

Sutherland,  Duchess  of,  362 

Sutherlandshirc,  130, 362-4 

Swan  River,  379-80 

Sweating  System,  273 

Sweden,  359 

Swing  Riots,  334 

Swiss  Factory  Legislation,  249 

Switzerland,  2, 277 

Sykes,  Bill,  217 

Syncretism,  9 


409 

Tableau  teonomique  (Quean ay),  292 

Tailors,  229,  242,  272, 367 

Tait,  factory,  233 

Talmud,  134 

Tamerlane,  127 

Taylor,  Sedley,  4-5, 34 

Temple,  Sir  William,  305 

Ten  Hours  Act,  108,  110-11,  136-9,  141-6,  202,  260, 
270 

Ten  Hours  Factory  Bill  (Ashley),  196-7,  201-2 
Ten  Tables,  Law  of,  139 
Terriens,  369 

Textbook  of  Lectures  on  the  Political  Economy  of  Na¬ 
tions  (Jones,  Richard),  149, 156, 163,  281, 296 
Textile  industries,  248-9 

“ Theortciens  du  socialtsme  en  Allemagne ,  Lcs” 
(Block),  10 

Thcorie  de  I  tconomie  politique  (Ganilh),  86 
Thlurie  des  lois  chiles  (Linguet),  1 12, 163 
Thturie  des  petnes  et  des  recompenses  (Bentham),  301 
Thforte  des  richesses  sociales  (Skarbeck),  159,  171 
Thcorie  du  systape  animal  (Bruckner),  305 
Theory  and  Practice  of  Banking  (MacLeod),  73 
Theory  of  Exchanges ,  The  Bank  Charter  Act  of  1844 , 
(Anonymous),  64-5, 323 
Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments  (Smith,  A.),  305 
Thiers,  A.,  217, 354 
Thirty-nine  Articles,  7 
Thirty  Years’  War,  349>363»  367 
Thompson,  Benjamin  (Count  Rumford),  297 
Thompson,  W.,  177 
Thorainc,  Jacques  de,  369 
Thornton,  W.  H.,  81, 130, 357 
Thoughts  and  Details  on  Scarcity ,  etc.  (Burke),  100, 
H3»i57,377 

Thoughts  on  the  Funding  System ,  etc.  (Ravenstonc), 
210-11,253 

Three  lectures  on  the  Rate  of  IF  ages  (Senior),  268,  270 
Three  Treatises  (Harris),  179 
Thucydides,  179 

Thiinen,  Johann  Heinrich  von,  307 

Tillie  and  Henderson,  227, 233 

Times,  The ,  4-5,  100,  123,  130,  143,  197 >  *32> 

284-5,  *97, 322»  324, 35*,  3*tf 
Time  wages,  267-74 
Timon  of  Athens  (Shakespeare),  6 1 
Tinker’s  End,  341 
Tipperary,  121 
Titus,  193 
Today ,  5 

Tommy  Shop,  83 

Tonbridge,  329 

Tooke,  Thomas,  143 

Torrens,  Robert,  76, 81, 88, 198, 215 

Tour  through  Ireland  (Young),  337 

Townsend,  Joseph,  172, 305, 320 

Tracy,  see  Destutt 

Trade  Societies  and  Strikes ,  etc.  (Watts),  271, 273 
Trades  Union  Commission,  214 
Trades  Unions,  122, 223, 275, 332, 366-8 
Trade's  Unions  and  Strikes ,  etc.  (Dunning),  272-3, 
377 


410  INDEX 


Traiti  de  la  circulation  et  du  credit  (Pinto),  71 
Train  de  la  legislation  (Comte,  C.),  372 
Traitt  de  la  volontt  et  de  ses  effets  (Destutt  de  Tracy), 
74, 77il5&“9i3a« 

Traiti  de  P economic  politique  (Destutt  de  Tracy),  74 
Train  de  P  economic  politique  (Say),  73, 77,  99 
Traiti  thiorique  et  pratique  des  entreprises  industrielles 
(Courcelle-Seneuil),  112, 295 
Tratns  des  mattriaux  manuscnts ,  etc., 

Treatise  on  Political  Economy  (Opdyke),  78 
Treatise  on  Taxes  and  Contributions  (Petty),  41,  57, 
305 

Treatise  on  the  East  India  Trade  being  a  most  Profit¬ 
able  Trade  (Anonymous),  40 
Tremenheere,  H.  S.,  83, 120, 127 
Trent,  343 
Trinity  College,  4-5 
Trosne,  see  Le  Trosne 
Truck  System,  83,  231, 330 
Trueman,  Dr.,  229 
Trusts,  310 

Tschernysheffsky,  N.,  9 
Tucker,  Josiah,  133, 305, 377 
Tuckett,  J.  D.,  177,358,371 
Tudors,  371 

Tufnell,  Commissioner,  127 
Tupper,  Martin,  301 

Turgot,  Anne  Robert  Jacques,  86, 1 52, 263 
Turkey,  228, 371 ;  see  also  Ottoman  Empire 
Turner,  Rev.  Mr.,  21 1 
Twelve  Hours  Bill  and  Act,  132, 202 
Twelve  Hours  Bill  (French),  134, 145 
Twickenham  Economic  Museum,  178 
Two  Letters  on  the  Flour  Trade  and  the  Dearness  of 
Corn  (Anonymous),  360 
Typefounding,  169 

Typographes  devant  le  tribunal  correctionnel  de  Brux¬ 
elles,  Les  (Gr6goir),  274 
Tyrone,  350 

Ueber  die  Entartungdes  Menschen  (Reich),  178 
Ueber  Theorie  und  Praxis  in  der  Landwirthschaft 
(Liebig),  160 
Ulster,  350 
Umbrellas,  173-4 

Umrisse  zu  einer  Kritik  der  Nationalokonomie  (En- 

gels),  33. 7*.  78, 3'4 
Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  (Stowe),  362 
United  Provinces,  365 

United  States  of  America,  2,  7,  114,  131,  139,  145, 
160,  172,  188,  210,  218,  222,  224-6,  249-50,  284, 
349>  351*  375~7»  379-83;  Civil  War,  7,  79,  92, 123, 
139.  Hi,  145.  17 3.  J9 *-3.  212-13,  224,  266, 

284,  362, 383;  War  of  Independence,  7, 377 
Universal  Dictionary  of  Trade  and  Commerce  (Post- 
lethwayt),  132-3 
Universal  Money,  66-8 

Ure,  Andrew,  3,  no,  127, 132,  145, 156, 170-1, 180, 
185,  188,  197,  205-6,  208,  212,  214-15,  272-3, 
275-6 

Urquhart,  David,  45, 178, 249, 363, 371 
Usury, 93, 293, 372 


Utopia  (More),  3 £7,365 
Utrecht,  Peace  of,  376 

Vacheron  &  Constantin,  167 
Vagabondage,  364-5 
Valentin,  Gabriel  Gustav,  237 
Valpy,  Montagu,  1 17 
Value,  exchange,  19-37 

Value,  surplus,  71,  89-96, 101;  absolute,  153,  251-6; 
change  of  magnitude,  256-62;  formulae  for,  262-3; 
mass  of,  146-51;  rate  of,  102-11;  relative,  152-6, 
251-6 

Values,  use,  85-9 

Vanderlint,  Jacob,  57, 61,68, 132, 134, 152, 161, 170, 
305 

Var,  164 

Vauban,  Marquis  de,  65 
Vaucanson,  Jacques  de,  186 
Vaucluse,  164 
Vaud,  167 
Venice,  374 

Verbum  sapienti  (Petty),  see  Political  Anatomy  of 
Ireland 

Verri,  Pietro,  17, 40, 62, 160 

Vico,  Giovanni  Battista,  181 

View  of  the  Art  of  Colonization  (Wakefield),  1 59 

Vilhcus ,  8 1 ,  368 

Vilhers,  President  of  the  Poor  Law  Board,  129 

Virements,  64 

Virginia,  95, 1 17, 128 

Visscring,  S.,  248 

Vivian,  Hussey,  244-5 

Volksstaat,  4, 9 

Von  Haller,  see  Haller  ^ 

Vulgar  economists  and  economy,  9,  23,  35-6,  75, 
148-9,248,266,295,321 

Wade,  Benjamin  Franklin,  7 
Wade,  John,  117, 131,306 

Wages,  223-5,  247,  264-79,  291-2,  296, 315-16,  334- 
5,  366-8;  piece  wages,  235,  271-6;  time  wages, 
267-74,  276 
Wages  Fund,  302 

Wakefield,  E.  G.,  130,  159,  264,  288,  334,  379-83 

Walden,  see  Howard  de  Walden 

Wales,  96, 124,  129,  213,  218-19,  229>  a3*»  *49.  3°5» 

3i2,3l8,32!-45 

Wallace,  172,305 
Wallachia,  114-15 
Wallpaper  factories,  1 19,  243 
Wan-mao-in,  59 
Ward,  John,  129 
Warren  Hastings,  see  Hastings 
Watchmaking,  167-8 
Water  Eaton,  34 1 
Waterford,  12 1 
Watson,  Dr.,  191 

Watt,  James,  183-4, 186, 188-9,  a4J 
Watts,  John,  271, 273 
Wayland,  F.,  77, 100 

Wealth  of  Nations  (Smith,  A.),  19,  57,  172-3,  177, 
264,275,281,294,306-7 


Wedgwood,  Josiah,  119 
Wellington,  Arthur  Wellesley,  1st  Duke  of,  58 
West,  Sir  Edward,  250,  261, 268 
Westbury  Leigh,  208 
West  Indies,  129, 373, 376, 382 
Westminster  Review ,  27 
Westphalia,  370 
West  Riding,  130 
Wexford,  121,350 
Whitbread,  M.  P.,  367 

White,  Commissioner,  119,  124, 126-7,  196,  231 
White,  Dr.  W.,  237 
White  slaves,  334 
Whitney,  173 
Whitney,  Eli,  187, 191 
Wicklow,  350 
Widford,  341 
Wigan,  142 
Wilks,  Mark,  175 
William  III,  King  of  England,  359 
William  IV,  King  of  England,  140 
Williams,  Sir  William  Fenwick,  58 
Wilmslow,2ii 
Wilson,  James,  1 1 1, 166 
Wiltshire,  83, 129, 208, 316, 336, 342 
Wimbornc,  335 
Wing,  340 
Wingrave,  340 
Winslow,  34 1 

Wirework  Company  of  Manchester,  161 
Wisbeach,  194 
Wxssenschajt  der  Logtk  (Hegel),  see  EmykhpUie  der 
Phtlosophtschen  Wissenschaften 


INDEX  411 

Witt,  see  DeWitt 
Wolf,  Christian,  301 
W'ollarton,  Rev.  Mr.,  238 
Wolstanton,  118, 142 
Wolverhampton,  194 

Wool  manufacture,  142,  144,  185,  204-5,  213>  21  8» 
220-2,300,312,356,371 
Worcestershire,  342 

“Work  and  Overwork”  (Richardson),  123-4 
Workhouse,  ideal,  134 

Working  day,  111-46,  197-200,  256-62,  269- 
71 

Workman's  Advocate ,  122 
Works  of  Benjamin  1‘ranklin,  21 
Workshops,  249, 324;  national,  206;  Regulation  Act, 

Wrestlingworth,  340 
Wretch,  192 
Wright,  Thomas,  360 
Wyatt,  John,  181 

Xenophon,  179 

Yankeedom,  159 
Yankees,  173-4, 192 
Yarranton,  Andrew,  170 
Yorkshire,  117, 141, 173, 220, 223, 328 
Young,  Arthur,  57, 1 1 1, 13a,  333, 337 

Zurich,  134 

Zur  Kritik  der  pohtisehen  Oekonomte  (Marx),  6,  8, 
10, 13, 1  s,  33-4. 36.  39-40, 43, 45, 51, 57, 63-4, 66, 
93,266,307 


Contents:  AAa  nifesto 
of  the  Communist  Party 


Preface,  by  Friedrich  Engels  415 

MANIFESTO  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY 
By  Karl  Marx,  and  Friedrich  Engels 

I.  Bourgeois  and  Proletarians  4 19 

II.  Proletarians  and  Communists  425 

III.  Socialist  and  Communist  Literature  429 

1.  Reactionary  Socialism  429 

a.  Feudal  Socialism  429 

b.  Re  tty  Bourgeois  Socialism  430 

c.  German  or  **  True”  Socialism  4-30 

2.  Conservative  or  Bourgeois  Socialism  4 3a 

3.  Critical-  Utopian  Socialism  and 

Communism  432 


IV.  Position  of  the  Communists  in  Relation  to 

the  Various  Existing  Opposition  Parties  434 


<413 


MANIFESTO 

OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY 


PREFACE  BY  FRIEDRICH  ENGELS 


The  Manifesto  was  published  as  the  platform 
of  the  Communist  League,  a  workingmen’s  as¬ 
sociation,  first  exclusively  German,  later  on  in¬ 
ternational,  and,  under  the  political  conditions 
of  the  Continent  before  1848,  unavoidably  a 
secret  society.  At  a  Congress  of  the  League,  held 
in  London  in  November,  1847  Marx  and  Engels 
were  commission!  d  *0  prepare  for  publication  a 
complete  theoretical  and  practical  party  pro¬ 
gram.  Drawn  up  in  German  in  January,  1848, 
the  manuscript  was  sent  to  the  printer  in  Lon¬ 
don  a  few  weeks  before  the  French  revolution 
of  February  24th.  A  French  translation  was 
brought  out  in  Paris  shortly  before  the  insur¬ 
rection  of  June,  1848.  The  first  English  transla¬ 
tion,  by  Miss  Helen  Macfarlane,  appeared  in 
George  Julian  Harney’s  Red  Republic an>  Lon¬ 
don,  1850.  A  Danish  and  a  Polish  edition  had 
also  been  published. 

The  defeat  of  the  Parisian  insurrection  of 
June,  1848— the  first  great  battle  between  pro¬ 
letariat  and  bourgeoisie — drove  again  into  the 
background,  for  a  time,  the  social  and  political 
aspirations  of  the  European  working  class. 
Thenceforth,  the  struggle  for  supremacy  was 
again,  as  it  had  been  before  the  revolution  of 
February,  solely  between  different  sections  of 
the  propertied  class;  the  working  class  was  re¬ 
duced  to  a  fight  for  political  elbow-room,  and 
to  the  position  of  extreme  wing  of  the  middle 
class  radicals.  Wherever  independent  proletar¬ 
ian  movements  continued  to  show  signs  of  life, 
they  were  ruthlessly  hunted  down.  Thus  the 
Prussian  police  hunted  out  the  central  board 
of  the  Communist  League,  then  located  in  Co¬ 
logne.  The  members  were  arrested,  and,  after 
eighteen  months’  imprisonment,  they  were 
tried  in  October,  1852.  This  celebrated  “Co¬ 
logne  Communist  Trial**  lasted  from  October 
4th  till  November  12th;  seven  of  the  prisoners 
were  sentenced  to  terms  of  imprisonment  in  a 


fortress,  varying  from  three  to  six  years.  Im¬ 
mediately  after  the  sentence,  the  League  was 
formally  dissolved  by  the  remaining  members. 
As  to  the  Manifesto ,  it  seemed  thenceforth  to  be 
doomed  to  oblivion. 

When  the  European  working  class  had  re¬ 
covered  sufficient  strength  for  another  attack 
on  the  ruling  classes,  the  International  Work¬ 
ingmen’s  Association  sprang  up.  But  this  asso¬ 
ciation,  formed  with  the  express  aim  of  welding 
into  one  body  the  whole  militant  proletariat  of 
Europe  and  America,  could  not  at  once  pro¬ 
claim  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  Manifesto . 
The  International  was  bound  to  have  a  pro¬ 
gram  broad  enough  to  be  acceptable  to  the  Eng¬ 
lish  trades  unions,  to  the  followers  of  Proudhon 
in  France,  Belgium,  Italy,  and  Spain,  and  to 
the  Lassalleans1  in  Germany.  Marx,  who  drew 
up  this  program  to  the  satisfaction  of  ail  parties, 
entirely  trusted  to  the  intellectual  development 
of  the  working  class  which  was  sure  to  result 
from  combined  action  and  mutual  discussion. 
The  very  events  and  vicissitudes  of  the  struggle 
against  capital,  the  defeats  even  more  than  the 
victories,  could  not  help  bringing  home  to  men’s 
minds  the  insufficiency  of  their  various  favour¬ 
ite  nostrums,  and  preparing  the  way  for  a  more 
complete  insight  into  the  true  conditions  of 
working  class  emancipation.  And  Marx  was 
right.  The  International,  on  its  breaking  up  in 
1874,  left  the  workers  quite  different  men  from 
what  it  had  found  them  in  1864.  Proudhonism 
in  France,  Lassalleanism  in  Germany  were  dy¬ 
ing  out,  and  even  the  conservative  English 
trades  unions,  though  most  of  them  had  long 
since  severed  their  connection  with  the  Inter¬ 
national,  were  gradually  advancing  towards 
that  point  at  which,  last  year  at  Swansea,  their 

1  Lassalle  always  acknowledged  himself  to  us  personally 
to  be  a  disciple  of  Marx  and,  as  such,  stood  on  the  ground 
of  the  Manifesto.  But,  in  his  public  agitation,  1862-64,  he 
did  not  go  beyond  demanding  cooperative  workshops  sup¬ 
ported  by  state  credit. 


415 


PREFACE 


416 

president  could  say  in  their  name  “continental 
Socialism  has  lost  its  terrors  for  us.’*  In  fact,  the 
principles  of  the  Manifesto  had  made  consider¬ 
able  headway  among  the  workingmen  of  all 
countries. 

The  Manifesto  itself  thus  came  to  the  front 
again.  Since  1850  the  German  text  had  been  re¬ 
printed  several  times  in  Switzerland,  England, 
and  America.  In  1872  it  was  translated  into 
English  in  New  York,  where  the  translation  was 
published  in  Woodhull  and  Claflins  Weekly . 
From  this  English  version,  a  French  one  was 
made  in  Le  Socialiste  of  New  York.  Since  then 
at  least  two  more  English  translations,  more  or 
less  mutilated,  have  been  brought  out  in  Amer¬ 
ica,  and  one  of  them  has  been  reprinted  in  Eng¬ 
land.  The  first  Russian  translation,  made  by 
Bakunin,  was  published  at  Herzen’s  Kolokol 
office  in  Geneva,  about  1863;  a  second  one,  by 
the  heroic  Vera  Zasulich,  also  in  Geneva,  in 
1882.1  A  new  Danish  edition  is  to  be  found  in 
Soeialdemokratisk  Bibliothek>  Copenhagen, 
188  j;  a  fresh  French  translation  in  Le  Socialiste , 
Paris,  1886.  From  this  latter,  a  Spanish  version 
was  prepared  and  published  in  Madrid  in  1886. 
Not  counting  the  German  reprints  there  had 
been  at  least  twelve  editions.  An  Armenian 
translation,  which  was  to  be  published  in  Con¬ 
stantinople  some  months  ago,  did  not  see  the 
light,  I  am  told,  because  the  publisher  was 
afraid  of  bringing  out  a  book  with  the  name  of 
Marx  on  it,  while  the  translator  declined  to  call 
it  his  own  production.  Of  further  translations 
into  other  languages  I  have  heard,  but  have  not 
seen.  Thus  the  history  of  the  Manifesto  reflects 
to  a  great  extent  the  history  of  the  modern 
working  class  movement;  at  present  it  is  un¬ 
doubtedly  the  most  widespread,  the  most  inter¬ 
national  production  of  all  Socialist  literature, 
the  common  platform  acknowledged  by  mil¬ 
lions  of  workingmen  from  Siberia  to  California. 

Yet,  when  it  was  written,  we  could  not  have 
called  it  a  Socialist  manifesto.  By  Socialists,  in 
1847,  were  understood,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
adherents  of  the  various  Utopian  systems: 
Owenites  in  England,  Fouricrists  in  France, 
both  of  them  already  reduced  to  the  position  of 
mere  sects,  and  gradually  dying  out;  on  the 
other  hand,  the  most  multifarious  social  quacks, 
who,  by  all  manners  of  tinkering,  professed  to 
redress,  without  any  danger  to  capital  and 
profit,  all  sorts  of  social  grievances;  in  both  cases 
men  outside  the  working  class  movement,  and 
looking  rather  to  the  “educated”  classes  for 

1  This  version  was  actually  made  by  Plekhanov.  Bakun¬ 
in's  translation  appeared  in  1870.— Editor. 


support.  Whatever  portion  of  the  working  class 
had  become  convinced  of  the  insufficiency  of 
mere  political  revolutions  and  had  proclaimed 
the  necessity  of  a  total  social  change,  called  it¬ 
self  Communist .  It  was  a  crude,  rough-hewn, 
purely  instinctive  sort  of  Communism;  still,  it 
touched  the  cardinal  point  and  was  powerful 
enough  amongst  the  working  class  to  produce 
the  Utopian  Communism  of  Cabet  in  France, 
and  of  Wei  ding  in  Germany.  Thus,  in  1847, 
Socialism  was  a  middle  class  movement;  Com¬ 
munism,  a  working  class  movement.  Socialism 
was,  on  the  continent  at  least,  “respectable”; 
Communism  was  the  very  opposite.  And  as  our 
notion  from  the  very  beginning  was  that  “the 
emancipation  of  the  working  class  must  be  the 
act  of  the  working  class  itself,”  there  could  be 
no  doubt  as  to  which  of  the  two  names  we  must 
take.  Moreover,  we  have  ever  since  been  far 
from  repudiating  it. 

The  Manifesto  being  our  joint  production,  I 
consider  myself  bound  to  state  that  the  funda¬ 
mental  proposition  which  forms  its  nucleus  be¬ 
longs  to  Marx.  That  proposition  is:  That  in 
every  historical  epoch  the  prevailing  mode  of 
economic  production  and  exchange,  and  the  so¬ 
cial  organization  necessarily  following  from  it, 
form  the  basis  upon  which  is  built  up,  and  from 
which  alone  can  be  explained,  the  political  and 
intellectual  history  of  that  epoch;  that,  conse¬ 
quently,  the  whole  history  oFmankind  (since 
the  dissolution  of  primitive  tribal  society,  hold¬ 
ing  land  in  common  ownership)  has  been  a  his¬ 
tory  of  class  struggles,  contests  between  ex¬ 
ploiting  and  exploited,  ruling  and  oppressed 
classes;  that  the  history 'of  these  class  struggles 
forms  a  series  of  evolutions  in  which,  nowadays, 
a  stage  has  been  reached  where  the  exploited 
and  oppressed  class — the  proletariat— cannot 
attain  its  emancipation  from  the  sway  of  the 
exploiting  and  ruling  class — the  bourgeoisie — 
without  at  the  same  time,  and  once  and  for  all, 
emancipating  society  at  large  from  all  exploita¬ 
tion,  oppression,  class  distinctions  and  class 
struggles. 

This  proposition,  which  in  my  opinion  is  des¬ 
tined  to  do  for  history  what  Darwin’s  theory 
has  done  for  biology,  we,  both  of  us,  had  been 
gradually  approaching  for  some  years  before 
1845.  How  far  I  had  independently  progressed 
towards  it  is  best  shown  by  my  Condition  of  the 
Working  Class  in  England .  But  when  I  again 
met  Marx  at  Brussels  in  the  spring  of  1845, 
had  it  already  worked  out,  and  put  it  before  me 
in  t*rms  almost  as  clear  as  those  in  which  I  have 
stated  it  here. 


PREFACE 


From  our  joint  preface  to  the  German  edition 
of  1872  I  quote: 

“However  much  the  state  of  things  may  have 
altered  during  the  last  25  years,  the  general 
principles  laid  down  in  this  Manifesto  are,  on 
the  whole,  as  correct  today  as  ever.  Here  and 
there  some  detail  might  he  improved.  The  prac¬ 
tical  application  of  the  principles  will  depend, 
as  the  Manifesto  itself  states,  everywhere  and 
at  all  times,  on  the  historical  conditions  for  the 
time  being  existing,  and,  for  that  reason,  no 
special  stress  is  laid  on  the  revolutionary  meas¬ 
ures  proposed  at  the  end  of  Section  IT.  That 
passage  would  in  many  respects  he  very  differ¬ 
ently  worded  today.  In  view  of  the  gigantic 
strides  of  modern  industry  since  1848,  and  of 
the  accompanying  improved  and  extended  or¬ 
ganization  of  the  working  class;  in  view  of  the 
practical  experience  gained,  first  in  the  Febru¬ 
ary  revolution,  and  then,  still  more,  in  the  Paris 
Commune,  where  the  proletariat  for  the  first 
time  held  political  power  for  two  whole  months, 
this  program  ha*,  in  some  details  become  an¬ 
tiquated.  One  thing  especially  was  proved  by 
the  Commune,  viz.,  that  'the  working  class  can¬ 


417 

not  simply  lay  hold  of  the  ready  made  state 
machinery,  and  wield  it  for  its  own  purposes/ 
(Sec,  The  Civil  JVar  in  France;  Address  by  the 
General  Council  of  the  International  Working¬ 
men's  Association ,  1871,  where  this  point  is  fur¬ 
ther  developed.)  Further,  it  is  self-evident  that 
the  criticism  of  Socialist  literature  is  deficient 
in  relation  to  the  present  time,  because  it  comes 
down  only  to  1847;  also,  that  the  remarks  on 
the  relation  of  the  Communists  to  the  various 
opposition  parties  (Section  IV),  although  in 
principle  still  correct,  yet  in  practice  are  anti¬ 
quated,  because  the  political  situation  has  been 
entirely  changed,  and  the  progress  of  history 
has  swept  from  oflf  the  earth  the  greater  portion 
of  the  political  parties  there  enumerated. 

“But  then,  the  Manifesto  has  become  a  his¬ 
torical  document  which  we  have  no  longer  any 
right  to  alter/* 

The  present  translation  is  by  Mr.  Samuel 
Moore,  the  translator  of  the  greater  portion  of 
Man/s  Capital .  We  have  revised  it  in  common, 
and  I  have  added  a  few  notes  explanatory  of 
historical  allusions. 

London,  January  30th,  1888. 


Manifesto  of  the  Communist  Party 


A  spectre  is  haunting  Europe— the  spectre  of  Communism.  All  the  pow¬ 
ers  of  old  Europe  have  entered  into  a  holy  alliance  to  exorcise  this  spec¬ 
tre:  Pope  and  Czar,  Metternich  and  Guizot,  French  Radicals  and  Ger¬ 
man  police  spies. 

Where  is  the  party  in  opposition  that  has  not  been  decried  as  commu¬ 
nistic  by  its  opponents  in  power?  Where  the  opposition  that  has  not 
hurled  back  the  branding  reproach  of  Communism  against  the  more  ad¬ 
vanced  opposition  parties,  as  well  as  against  its  reactionary  adversaries? 

Two  things  result  from  this  fact: 

I.  Communism  is  already  acknowledged  by  all  European  powers  to 
be  itself  a  power. 

II.  It  is  high  time  that  Communists  should  openly,  in  the  face  of  the 
whole  wona,  publish  their  views,  their  aims,  their  tendencies,  and  meet 
this  nursery  tale  of  the  spectre  of  Communism  with  a  manifesto  of  the 
party  itself. 

To  this  end,  Communists  of  various  nationalities  have  assembled  in 
London  and  sketched  the  following  manifesto,  to  be  published  in  the  Eng¬ 
lish,  French,  German,  Italian,  Flemish,  and  Danish  languages. 


CHAPTER  I.  BOURGEOIS  AND  PROLETARIANS1 


The  history  of  all  hitherto  existing  society2 
is  the  history  of  class  struggles. 

Freeman  and  slave,  patrician  and  plebeian, 
lord  and  serf,  guild-master3  and  journeyman,  in 

1  By  bourgeoisie  is  meant  the  dass  of  modern  capitalists, 
owners  of  the  means  of  social  production,  and  employers 
of  wage  labour;  by  proletariat ,  the  class  of  modern  wage  la¬ 
bourers  who,  having  no  means  of  production  of  their  own, 
are  reduced  to  selling  their  labour  power  in  order  to  live. 

*  That  is,  all  written  history.  In  1837,  the  pre-history  of 
society,  the  social  organization  existing  previous  to  record¬ 
ed  history,  was  ail  but  unknown.  Since  then  Haxthausen 
discovered  common  ownership  of  land  in  Russia;  Maurer 
proved  it  to  be  the  social  foundation  from  which  all  Teu¬ 
tonic  races  started  in  history,  and,  by  and  by,  village  com¬ 
munities  were  found  to  be,  or  to  have  been,  the  primitive 
form  of  society  everywhere  from  India  to  Ireland.  The  in¬ 
ner  organization  of  this  primitive  communistic  society  was 
laid  bare,  in  its  typical  form,  by  Morgan’s  crowning  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  true  nature  of  the^enz  and  its  relation  to  the 
t‘  <be .  With  the  dissolution  of  these  primaival  communities 
society  begins  to  be  differentiated  into  separate  and  finally 
antagonistic  classes.  I  have  attempted  to  retrace  this  proc¬ 
ess  of  dissolution  in  The  Origin  of  the  Family ,  Private  Prop¬ 
erty  and  the  State. 

1  Guild-master,  that  is,  a  full  member  of  a  guild,  a  master 
within,  not  a  head  of  a  guild. 


a  word,  oppressor  and  oppressed  stood  in  con¬ 
stant  opposition  to  one  another,  carried  on  an 
uninterrupted,  now  hidden,  now  open  fight,  a 
fight  that  each  time  ended  either  in  a  revolu¬ 
tionary  reconstitution  of  society  at  large,  or  in 
the  common  ruin  of  the  contending  classes. 

I  n  the  carl  ier  epochs  of  history  we  find  al  most 
everywhere  a  complicated  arrangement  of  so¬ 
ciety  into  various  orders,  a  manifold  gradation 
of  social  rank.  In  ancient  Rome  we  have  patri¬ 
cians,  knights,  plebeians,  slaves;  in  the  Mid¬ 
dle  Ages,  feudal  lords,  vassals,  guild-masters, 
journeymen,  apprentices,  serfs;  in  almost 
all  of  these  classes,  again,  subordinate  grada¬ 
tions. 

The  modern  bourgeois  society  that  has 
sprouted  from  the  ruins  of  feudal  society  has 
not  done  away  with  class  antagonisms.  It  has 
but  established  new  classes,  new  conditions  of 
oppression,  new  forms  of  struggle  in  place  of  the 
old  ones. 

Our  epoch,  the  epoch  of  the  bourgeoisie,  pos¬ 
sesses,  however,  this  distinctive  feature:  it  has 
simplified  the  class  antagonisms.  Society  as  a 
whole  is  more  and  more  splitting  up  into  two 


419 


MANIFESTO  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY 


420 

great  hostile  camps,  into  two  great  classes  di¬ 
rectly  facing  each  other— bourgeoisie  and  pro¬ 
letariat. 

From  the  serfs  of  the  Middle  Ages  sprang  the 
chartered  burghers  of  the  earliest  towns.  From 
these  burgesses  the  first  elements  of  the  bour¬ 
geoisie  were  developed. 

The  discovery  of  America,  the  rounding  of 
the  Cape,  opened  up  fresh  ground  for  the  rising 
bourgeoisie.  The  East  Indian  and  Chinese  mar¬ 
kets,  the  colonization  of  America,  trade  with 
the  colonies,  the  increase  in  the  means  of  ex¬ 
change  and  in  commodities  generally,  gave  to 
commerce,  to  navigation,  to  industry,  an  im¬ 
pulse  never  before  known,  and  thereby,  to  the 
revolutionary  element  in  the  tottering  feudal 
society,  a  rapid  development. 

The  feudal  system  of  industry,  in  which  in¬ 
dustrial  production  was  monopolized  by  closed 
guilds,  now  no  longer  sufficed  for  the  growing 
wants  of  the  new  markets.  The  manufacturing 
system  took  its  place.  The  guild-masters  were 
pushed  aside  by  the  manufacturing  middle 
class;  division  of  labour  between  the  different 
corporate  guilds  vanished  in  the  face  of  division 
of  labour  in  each  single  workshop. 

Meantime  the  markets  kept  ever  growing, 
the  demand  ever  rising.  Even  manufacture  no 
longer  sufficed.  Thereupon,  steam  and  machin¬ 
ery  revolutionized  industrial  production.  The 
place  of  manufacture  was  taken  by  the  giant, 
modern  industry,  the  place  of  the  industrial 
middle  class,  by  industrial  millionaires— (he 
leaders  of  whole  industrial  armies,  the  modern 
bourgeois. 

Modern  industry  has  established  the  world 
market,  for  which  the  discovery  of  America 
paved  the  way.  This  market  has  given  an  im¬ 
mense  development  to  commerce,  to  naviga¬ 
tion,  to  communication  by  land.  This  develop¬ 
ment  has,  in  its  turn,  reacted  on  the  extension 
of  industry;  and  in  proportion  as  industry,  com¬ 
merce,  navigation,  railways  extended,  in  the 
same  proportion  the  bourgeoisie  developed,  in¬ 
creased  its  capital,  and  pushed  into  the  back¬ 
ground  every  class  handed  down  from  the  Mid¬ 
dle  Ages. 

We  see,  therefore,  how  the  modern  bourgeoi¬ 
sie  is  itself  the  product  of  a  long  course  of  devel¬ 
opment,  of  a  series  of  revolutions  in  the  modes 
of  production  and  of  exchange. 

Each  step  in  the  development  of  the  bour¬ 
geoisie  was  accompanied  by  a  corresponding 
political  advance  of  that  class.  An  oppressed 
class  under  the  sway  of  the  feudal  nobility,  it 
became  an  armed  and  self-governing  associa¬ 


tion  in  the  mediaeval  commune:1  here  independ¬ 
ent  urban  republic  (as  in  Italy  and  Germany); 
there,  taxable  “third  estate”  of  the  monarchy 
(as  in  France) ;  afterwards,  in  the  period  of  man¬ 
ufacture  proper,  serving  either  the  scmi-feudal 
or  the  absolute  monarchy  as  a  counterpoise 
against  the  nobility,  and,  in  fact,  corner  stone 
of  the  great  monarchies  in  general.  The  bour¬ 
geoisie  has  at  last,  since  the  establishment  of 
modern  industry  and  of  the  world  market,  con¬ 
quered  for  itself,  in  the  modern  representative 
state,  exclusive  political  sway.  The  executive 
of  the  modern  state  is  but  a  committee  for  man¬ 
aging  the  common  affairs  of  the  whole  bour¬ 
geoisie. 

The  bourgeoisie  has  played  a  most  revolu¬ 
tionary  role  in  history. 

The  bourgeoisie,  wherever  it  has  got  the  up¬ 
per  hand,  has  put  an  end  to  all  feudal,  patriar¬ 
chal,  idyllic  relations.  It  has  pitilessly  torn 
asunder  the  motley  feudal  tics  that  bound  man 
to  his  “natural  superiors,”  and  has  left  no  other 
bond  between  man  and  man  than  naked  self- 
interest,  than  callous  “cash  payment.”  It  has 
drowned  the  most  heavenly  ecstasies  of  reli¬ 
gious  fervour,  of  chivalrous  enthusiasm,  of  phil¬ 
istine  sentimentalism,  in  the  icy  water  of  ego¬ 
tistical  calculation.lt  has  resolved  personal 
worth  into  exchange  value,  and  in  place  of  the 
numberless  indefeasible  chartered  freedoms  has 
set  up  that  single,  unconscionable  freedom  — 
Free  Trade.  In  one  word,  for  exploitation, 
veiled  by  religious  and  political  illusions,  it  has 
substituted  naked,  shameless,  direct,  brutal  ex¬ 
ploitation. 

The  bourgeoisie  has  stripped  of  its  halo  every 
occupation  hitherto  honoured  and  looked  up  to 
with  reverent  awe.  It  has  converted  the  physi¬ 
cian,  the  lawyer,  the  priest,  the  poet,  the  man 
of  science,  into  its  paid  wage  labourers. 

The  bourgeoisie  has  torn  away  from  the  fam¬ 
ily  its  sentimental  veil,  and  has  reduced  the 
family  relation  to  a  mere  money  relation. 

The  bourgeoisie  has  disclosed  how  it  came  to 
pass  that  the  brutal  display  of  vigour  in  the 
Middle  Ages  which  reactionaries!  so  much  ad¬ 
mire  found  its  fitting  complement  in  the  most 
slothful  indolence.  It  has  been  th$  first  to  show 
what  man's  activity  can  bring  about.  It  has 
accomplished  wonders  far  surpassing  Egyptian 

1  "Commune"  was  the  name  taken  m  France  by  the 
nascent  towns  even  before  they  had  conquered  from  their 
feudal  lords  and  masters  local  self-government  and  politi¬ 
cal  rights  as  the  "Third  Estate."  Generally  speaking,  for 
the  economic  development  of  the  bourgeoisie,  England  is 
here  taken  as  the  typical  country;  for  its  political  develop¬ 
ment,  France. 


BOURGEOIS  AND  PROLETARIANS 


pyramids,  Roman  aqueducts,  and  Gothic  ca¬ 
thedrals;  it  has  conducted  expeditions  that  put 
in  the  shade  all  former  migrations  of  nations 
and  crusades. 

The  bourgeoisie  cannot  exist  without  con¬ 
stantly  revolutionizing  the  instruments  of  pro¬ 
duction,  and  thereby  the  relations  of  produc¬ 
tion,  and  with  them  the  whole  relations  of  so¬ 
ciety.  Conservation  of  the  old  modes  of  produc¬ 
tion  in  unaltered  form  was,  on  the  contrary, 
the  first  condition  of  existence  for  all  earlier 
industrial  classes.  Constant  revolutionizing  of 
production,  uninterrupted  disturbance  of  all  so¬ 
cial  conditions,  everlasting  uncertainty  and  agi¬ 
tation  distinguish  the  bourgeois  epoch  from  all 
earlier  ones.  All  fixed,  fast-frozen  relations  with 
their  train  of  ancient  and  venerable  prejudices 
and  opinions  are  swept  away;  all  new-formed 
ones  become  antiquated  before  they  can  ossify. 
All  that  is  solid  melts  in  air,  all  that  is  holy  is 
profaned,  and  man  is  at  last  compelled  to  face 
with  sober  senses  his  real  conditions  of  life  and 
his  relations  with  his  kind. 

The  need  of  a  constantly  expanding  market 
for  its  products  chases  the  bourgeoisie  over  the 
whole  surface  of  the  globe.  1 1  must  nestle  every¬ 
where,  settle  everywhere,  establish  connections 
everywhere. 

The  bourgeoisie  has  through  its  exploitation 
of  the  world  market  given  a  cosmopolitan  char¬ 
acter  to  production  and  consumption  in  every 
country.  To  the  great  chagrin  of  reactionaries 
it  has  drawn  from  under  the  feet  of  industry  the 
national  ground  on  which  it  stood.  All  old-es¬ 
tablished  national  industries  have  been  de¬ 
stroyed  or  arc  daily  being  destroyed.  They  are 
dislodged  by  new  industries  whose  introduction 
becomes  a  life  and  death  question  for  all  civil¬ 
ized  nations;  by  industries  that  no  longer  work 
up  indigenous  raw  material,  but  raw  material 
drawn  from  the  remotest  zones;  industries 
whose  products  are  consumed,  not  only  at 
home,  but  in  every  quarter  of  the  globe.  In  place 
of  the  old  wants,  satisfied  by  the  production  of 
the  country,  we  find  new  wants,  requiring  for 
their  satisfaction  the  products  of  distant  lands 
and  climes.  In  place  of  the  old  local  and  national 
seclusion  and  self-sufficiency  we  have  inter¬ 
course  in  every  direction,  universal  inter-de¬ 
pendence  of  nations.  And  as  in  material,  so  also 
in  intellectual  production.  The  intellectual  cre¬ 
ations  of  individual  nations  become  common 
property.  National  one-sidedness  and  narrow¬ 
mindedness  become  more  and  more  impossible, 
and  from  the  numerous  national  and  local  liter¬ 
atures  there  arises  a  world  literature. 


421 

The  bourgeoisie,  by  the  rapid  improvement 
of  all  instruments  of  production,  by  the  im¬ 
mensely  facilitated  means  of  communication, 
draws  all  nations,  even  the  most  barbarian,  into 
civilization.  The  cheap  prices  of  its  commodi¬ 
ties  are  the  heavy  artillery  with  which  it  batters 
down  all  Chinese  walls,  with  which  it  forces  the 
barbarians'  intensely  obstinate  hatred  of  for¬ 
eigners  to  capitulate.  It  compels  all  nations,  on 
pain  of  extinction,  to  adopt  the  bourgeois  mode 
of  production;  it  compels  them  to  introduce 
what  it  calls  civilization  into  their  midst,  i.e.9  to 
become  bourgeois  themselves.  In  a  word,  it  cre¬ 
ates  a  world  after  its  own  image. 

The  bourgeoisie  has  subjected  the  country  to 
the  rule  of  the  towns.  It  has  created  enormous 
cities,  has  greatly  increased  the  urban  popula¬ 
tion  as  compared  with  the  rural,  and  has  thus 
rescued  a  considerable  part  of  the  population 
from  the  idiocy  of  rural  life.  Just  as  it  has  made 
the  country  dependent  on  the  towns,  so  it  has 
made  barbarian  and  semi-barbarian  coun¬ 
tries  dependent  on  the  civilized  ones,  nations 
of  peasants  on  nations  of  bourgeois,  the  East 
on  the  West. 

More  and  more  the  bourgeoisie  keeps  doing 
away  with  the  scattered  state  of  the  population, 
of  the  means  of  production,  and  of  property. 
It  has  agglomerated  population,  centralized 
means  of  production,  and  has  concentrated 
property  in  a  few  hands.  The  necessary  conse¬ 
quence  of  this  was  political  centralization.  In¬ 
dependent,  or  but  loosely  connected  provinces, 
with  separate  interests,  laws,  governments  and 
systems  of  taxation,  became  lumped  together 
into  one  nation,  with  one  government,  one  code 
of  laws,  one  national  class  interest,  one  frontier 
and  one  customs  tariff. 

The  bourgeoisie  during  its  rule  of  scarce  one 
hundred  years  has  created  more  massive  and 
more  colossal  productive  forces  than  have  all 
preceding  generations  together.  Subjection  of 
nature's  forces  to  man,  machinery,  application 
of  chemistry  to  industry  and  agriculture, 
steam-navigation,  railways,  electric  telegraphs, 
clearing  of  whole  continents  for  cultivation, 
canalization  of  rivers,  whole  populations  con¬ 
jured  out  of  the  ground— what  earlier  century 
had  even  a  presentiment  that  such  productive 
forces  slumbered  in  the  lap  of  social  labour? 

We  see,  then,  that  the  means  of  production 
and  of  exchange  which  served  as  the  founda¬ 
tion  for  the  growth  of  the  bourgeoisie  were  gen¬ 
erated  in  feudal  society.  At  a  certain  stage  in 
the  development  of  these  means  of  production 
and  of  exchange,  the  conditions  under  which 


MANIFESTO  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY 


422 

feudal  society  produced  and  exchanged,  the 
feudal  organization  of  agriculture  and  manu¬ 
facturing  industry,  in  a  word,  the  feudal  rela¬ 
tions  of  property  became  no  longer  compatible 
with  the  already  developed  productive  forces; 
they  became  so  many  fetters.  They  had  to  be 
burst  asunder;  they  were  burst  asunder. 

Into  their  place  stepped  free  competition,  ac¬ 
companied  by  a  social  and  political  constitution 
adapted  to  it,  and  by  the  economic  and  political 
sway  of  the  bourgeois  class. 

A  similar  movement  is  going  on  before  our 
own  eyes.  Modern  bourgeois  society  with  its 
relations  of  production,  of  exchange  and  of 
property,  a  society  that  has  conjured  up  such 
gigantic  means  of  production  and  of  exchange, 
is  like  the  sorcerer  who  is  no  longer  able  to  con¬ 
trol  the  powers  of  the  nether  world  whom  he 
has  called  up  by  his  spells.  For  many  a  decade 
past  the  history  of  industry  and  commerce  is 
but  the  history  of  the  revolt  of  modern  produc¬ 
tive  forces  against  modern  conditions  of  pro¬ 
duction,  against  the  property  relations  that  are 
the  conditions  for  the  existence  of  the  bour¬ 
geoisie  and  of  its  rule.  It  is  enough  to  mention 
the  commercial  crises  that  by  their  periodical 
return  put  the  existence  of  the  entire  bourgeois 
society  on  trial,  each  time  more  threateningly. 
In  these  crises  a  great  part  not  only  of  the  exist¬ 
ing  products,  but  also  of  the  previously  created 
productive  forces,  are  periodically  destroyed. 
In  these  crises  there  breaks  out  an  epidemic 
that,  in  all  earlier  epochs,  would  have  seemed 
an  absurdity— the  epidemic  of  over-produc¬ 
tion.  Society  suddenly  finds  itself  put  back  into 
a  state  of  momentary  barbarism;  it  appears  as 
if  a  famine,  a  universal  war  of  devastation  had 
cut  off  the  supply  of  every  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence;  industry  and  commerce  seem  to  be  de¬ 
stroyed.  And  why?  Because  there  is  too  much 
civilization,  too  much  means  of  subsistence,  too 
much  industry,  too  much  commerce.  The  pro¬ 
ductive  forces  at  the  disposal  of  society  no  long¬ 
er  tend  to  further  the  development  of  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  bourgeois  property;  on  the  contrary, 
they  have  become  too  powerful  for  these  condi¬ 
tions,  by  which  they  arc  fettered,  and  nd sooner 
do  they  overcome  these  fetters  than  they  bring 
disorder  into  the  whole  of  bourgeois  society,  en¬ 
danger  the  existence  of  bourgeois  property.  The 
conditions  of  bourgeois  society  are  too  narrow 
to  comprise  the  wealth  created  by  them.  And 
how  does  the  bourgeoisie  get  over  these  crises? 
On  the  one  hand  by  enforced  destruction  of  a 
mass  of  productive  forces;  on  the  other,  by  the 
conquest  of  new  markets  and  by  the  more  thor¬ 


ough  exploitation  of  the  old  ones.  That  is  to  say, 
by  paving  the  way  for  more  extensive  and  more 
destructive  crises,  and  by  diminishing  the 
means  whereby  crises  are  prevented. 

The  weapons  with  which  the  bourgeoisie 
felled  feudalism  to  the  ground  are  now  turned 
against  the  bourgeoisie  itself. 

But  not  only  has  the  bourgeoisie  forged  the 
weapons  that  bring  death  to  itself;  it  has  also 
called  into  existence  the  men  who  are  to  wield 
those  weapons — the  modern  working  class,  the 
proletarians. 

In  proportion  as  the  bourgeoisie,  i.e.,  capital, 
is  developed,  in  the  same  proportion  is  the  pro¬ 
letariat,  the  modern  working  class,  developed 
— a  class  of  labourers,  who  live  only  so  long  as 
they  find  work,  and  who  find  work  only  so  long 
as  their  labour  increases  capital.  These  labour¬ 
ers,  who  must  sell  themselves  piecemeal,  are 
a  commodity  like  every  other  article  of  com¬ 
merce,  and  are  consequently  exposed  to  all  the 
vicissitudes  of  competition,  to  all  the  fluctua¬ 
tions  of  the  market. 

Owing  to  the  extensive  use  of  machinery  and 
to  division  of  labour,  the  work  of  the  proletari¬ 
ans  has  lost  all  individual  character,  and,  con¬ 
sequently,  all  charm  for  the  workman.  He  be¬ 
comes  an  appendage  of  the  machine,  and  it  is 
only  the  most  simple,  most  monotonous,  and 
most  easily  acquired  knack  that  is  required  of 
him.  Hence,  the  cost  of  production  of  a  work¬ 
man  is  restricted  almost  entirely  to  the  means 
of  subsistence  that  he  requires  for  his  mainte¬ 
nance  and  for  the  propagation  of  his  race.  But 
the  price  of  a  commodity,  and  therefore  also  of 
labour,  is  equal  to  its  cost  of  production.  In  pro¬ 
portion,  therefore,  as  the  repulsiveness  of  the 
work  increases,  the  wage  decreases.  Nay  more, 
in  proportion  as  the  use  of  machinery  and  divi¬ 
sion  of  labour  increases,  in  the  same  proportion 
the  burden  of  toil  also  increases,  whether  by 
prolongation  of  the  working  hours,  by  increase 
of  the  work  exacted  in  a  given  time,  or  by  in¬ 
creased  speed  of  the  machinery,  etc. 

Modern  industry  has  converted  the  little 
workshop  of  the  patriarchal  master  into  the 
great  factory  of  the  industrial  capitalist. 
Masses  of  labourers,  crowded  into  the  factory, 
are  organized  like  soldiers.  As  privates  of  the 
industrial  army  they  are  placed  under  the  com¬ 
mand  of  a  perfect  hierarchy  of  officers  and  ser¬ 
geants.  Not  only  are  they  slaves  of  the  bour¬ 
geois  class  and  of  the  bourgeois  state;  they  arc 
daily  and  hourly  enslaved  by  the  machine,  by 
the  overseer,  and,  above  all,  by  the  individual 
bourgeois  manufacturer  himself.  The  more 


BOURGEOIS  AND  PROLETARIANS 


openly  this  despotism  proclaims  gain  to  be  its 
end  and  aim,  the  more  petty,  the  more  hateful, 
and  the  more  embittering  it  is. 

The  less  the  skill  and  exertion  of  strength  im¬ 
plied  in  manual  labour — in  other  words,  the 
more  modern  industry  develops — the  more  is 
the  labour  of  men  superseded  by  that  of  women. 
Differences  of  age  and  sex  have  no  longer  any 
distinctive  social  validity  for  the  working  class. 
All  are  instruments  of  labour,  more  or  less  ex¬ 
pensive  to  use,  according  to  their  age  and  sex. 

No  sooner  has  the  labourer  received  his  wages 
in  cash,  for  the  moment  escaping  exploitation 
by  the  manufacturer,  than  he  is  set  upon  by  the 
other  portions  of  the  bourgeoisie — the  landlord, 
the  shopkeeper,  the  pawnbroker,  etc. 

The  lower  strata  of  the  middle  class — the 
small  tradespeople,  shopkeepers,  and  retired 
tradesmen  generally,  the  handicraftsmen  and 
peasants-— all  these  sink  gradually  into  the  pro¬ 
letariat,  partly  because  their  diminutive  capi¬ 
tal  does  not  suffice  for  the  scale  on  which  modern 
industry  is  carried  on  and  is  swamped  in  the 
competition  with  the  large  capitalists,  partly 
because  their  specialized  skill  is  rendered  worth¬ 
less  by  new  methods  of  production.  Thus  the 
proletariat  is  recruited  from  all  classes  of  the 
population. 

The  proletariat  goes  through  various  stages 
of  development.  With  its  birth  begins  its  strug¬ 
gle  with  the  bourgeoisie.  At  first  the  contest  is 
carried  on  by  individual  labourers,  then  by  the 
workpeople  of  a  factory,  then  by  the  operatives 
of  one  trade,  in  one  locality,  against  the  indi¬ 
vidual  bourgeois  who  directly  exploits  them. 
They  direct  their  attacks  not  against  the  bour¬ 
geois  conditions  of  production,  but  against  the 
instruments  of  production  themselves;  they 
destroy  imported  wares  that  compete  with  their 
labour,  they  smash  machinery  to  pieces,  they 
set  factories  ablaze,  they  seek  to  restore  by  force 
the  vanished  status  of  the  workman  of  the  Mid¬ 
dle  Ages. 

At  this  stage  the  labourers  still  form  an  inco¬ 
herent  mass  scattered  over  the  whole  country, 
and  broken  up  by  their  mutual  competition. 
If  anywhere  they  unite  to  form  more  compact 
bodies,  this  is  not  yet  the  consequence  of  their 
own  active  union,  but  of  the  union  of  the  bour¬ 
geoisie,  which  class,  in  order  to  attain  its  own 
political  ends,  is  compelled  to  set  the  whole  pro¬ 
letariat  in  motion,  and  is,  moreover,  still  able 
to  do  so  for  a  time.  At  this  stage,  therefore,  the 
proletarians  do  not  fight  their  enemies,  but  the 
enemies  of  their  enemies,  the  remnants  of  abso¬ 
lute  monarchy,  the  landowners,  the  non-indus¬ 


423 

trial  bourgeois,  the  petty  bourgeoisie.  Thus  the 
whole  historical  movement  is  concentrated  in 
the  hands  of  the  bourgeoisie;  every  victory  so 
obtained  is  a  victory  for  the  bourgeoisie. 

But  with  the  development  of  industry  the 
proletariat  not  only  increases  in  number;  it  be¬ 
comes  concentrated  in  greater  masses,  its 
strength  grows,  and  it  feels  that  strength  more. 
The  various  interests  and  conditions  of  life 
within  the  ranks  of  the  proletariat  are  more  and 
more  equalized,  in  proportion  as  machinery 
obliterates  all  distinctions  of  labour  and  nearly 
everywhere  reduces  wages  to  the  same  low 
level.  The  growing  competition  among  the 
bourgeois  and  the  resulting  commercial  crises 
make  the  wages  of  the  workers  ever  more  fluc¬ 
tuating.  The  unceasing  improvement  of  ma¬ 
chinery,  ever  more  rapidly  developing,  makes 
their  livelihood  more  and  more  precarious;  the 
collisions  between  individual  workmen  and  in¬ 
dividual  bourgeois  take  more  and  more  the 
character  of  collisions  between  two  classes. 
Thereupon  the  workers  begin  to  form  combina¬ 
tions  (trade  unions)  against  the  bourgeoisie; 
they  club  together  in  order  to  keep  up  the  rate 
of  wages;  they  found  permanent  associations  in 
order  to  make  provision  beforehand  for  these 
occasional  revolts.  Here  and  there  the  contest 
breaks  out  into  riots. 

Now  and  then  the  workers  are  victorious,  but 
only  for  a  time.  The  real  fruit  of  their  battles 
lies  not  in  the  immediate  result  but  in  the  ever 
expanding  union  of  the  workers.  This  union  is 
furthered  by  the  improved  means  of  communi¬ 
cation  which  are  created  by  modern  industry, 
and  which  place  the  workers  of  different  locali¬ 
ties  in  contact  with  one  another.  It  was  just  this 
contact  that  was  needed  to  centralize  the  nu¬ 
merous  local  struggles,  all  of  the  same  charac¬ 
ter,  into  one  national  struggle  between  classes. 
But  every  class  struggle  is  a  political  struggle. 
And  that  union,  which  the  burghers  of  the  Mid¬ 
dle  Ages,  with  their  miserable  highways,  re¬ 
quired  centuries  to  attain,  the  modern  proletari¬ 
ans,  thanks  to  railways  achieve  in  a  few  years. 

This  organization  of  the  proletarians  into  a 
class,  and  consequently  into  a  political  party,  is 
continually  being  upset  again  by  the  competi¬ 
tion  between  the  workers  themselves.  But  it 
ever  rises  up  again,  stronger,  firmer,  mightier. 
It  compels  legislative  recognition  of  particular 
interests  of  the  workers  by  taking  advantage  of 
the  divisions  among  the  bourgeoisie  itself.  Thus 
the  Ten  Hour  bill  in  England  was  carried. 

Altogether,  collisions  between  the  classes  of 
the  old  society  further  the  course  of  develop- 


MANIFESTO  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY 


424 

ment  of  the  proletariat  in  many  ways.  The 
bourgeoisie  finds  itself  involved  in  a  constant 
battle-i-at  first  with  the  aristocracy;  later  on, 
with  those  portions  of  the  bourgeoisie  itself 
whose  interests  have  become  antagonistic  to 
the  progress  of  industry;  at  all  times  with  the 
bourgeoisie  of  foreign  countries.  In  all  these 
battles  it  sees  itself  compelled  to  appeal  to  the 
proletariat,  to  ask  for  its  help,  and  thus  to  drag 
it  into  the  political  arena.  The  bourgeoisie  itself, 
therefore,  supplies  the  proletariat  with  its  own 
elements  of  political  and  general  education;  in 
other  words,  it  furnishes  the  proletariat  with 
weapons  for  fighting  the  bourgeoisie. 

Further,  as  we  have  already  seen,  entire  sec¬ 
tions  of  the  ruling  classes  are,  by  the  advance 
of  industry,  precipitated  into  the  proletariat,  or 
are  at  least  threatened  in  their  conditions  of 
existence.  These  also  supply  the  proletariat 
with  fresh  elements  of  enlightenment  and  prog¬ 
ress. 

Finally,  in  times  when  the  class  struggle 
nears  the  decisive  hour,  the  process  of  dissolu¬ 
tion  going  on  within  the  ruling  class,  in  fact 
within  the  whole  range  of  old  society,  assumes 
such  a  violent,  glaring  character  that  a  small 
section  of  the  ruling  class  cuts  itself  adrift  and 
joins  the  revolutionary  class,  the  class  that 
holds  the  future  in  its  hands.  Just  as,  therefore, 
at  an  earlier  period  a  section  of  the  nobility 
went  over  to  the  bourgeoisie,  so  now  a  portion 
of  the  bourgeoisie  goes  over  to  the  proletariat, 
and  in  particular,  a  portion  of  the  bourgeois  ide¬ 
ologists  who  have  raised  themselves  to  the  level 
of  comprehending  theoretically  the  historical 
movement  as  a  whole. 

Of  all  the  classes  that  stand  face  to  face  with 
the  bourgeoisie  today,  the  proletariat  alone  is  a 
really  revolutionary  class.  The  other  classes  de¬ 
cay  and  finally  disappear  in  the  face  of  modern 
industry;  the  proletariat  is  its  special  and  es¬ 
sential  product. 

The  lower  middle  class,  the  small  manufac¬ 
turer,  the  shopkeeper,  the  artisan,  the  peasant 
—all  these  fight  against  the  bourgeoisie,  to  save 
from  extinction  their  existence  as  fractions  of 
the  middle  class.  They  are,  therefore,  ndt  revo¬ 
lutionary  but  conservative.  Nay  more,  they  are 
reactionary,  for  they  try  to  roll  back  the  wheel 
of  history.  If  by  chance  they  are  revolutionary 
they  are  so  only  in  view  of  their  impending 
transfer  into  the  proletariat;  they  thus  defend 
not  their  present  but  their  future  interests; 
they  desert  their  own  standpoint  to  adopt  that 
of  the  proletariat. 

The  “dangerous  class/’  the  social  scum 


C Lumpcnprolctariat)>  that  passively  rotting 
mass  thrown  off  by  the  lowest  layers  of  old  so¬ 
ciety,  may  here  and  there  be  swept  into  the 
movement  by  a  proletarian  revolution;  its  con¬ 
ditions  of  life,  however,  prepare  it  far  more  for 
the  part  of  a  bribed  tool  of  reactionary  intrigue. 

The  social  conditions  of  the  old  society  no 
longer  exist  for  the  proletariat.  The  proletari¬ 
an  is  without  property;  his  relation  to  his  wife 
and  children  has  no  longer  anything  in  common 
with  bourgeois  family  relations;  modern  indus¬ 
trial  labour,  modern  subjection  to  capital,  the 
same  in  England  as  in  France,  in  America  as  in 
Germany,  has  stripped  him  of  every  trace  of 
national  character.  Law,  morality,  religion  are 
to  him  so  many  bourgeois  prejudices,  behind 
which  lurk  in  ambush  just  as  many  bourgeois 
interests. 

All  the  preceding  classes  that  got  the  upper 
hand  sought  to  fortify  their  already  acquired 
status  by  subjecting  society  at  large  to  their 
conditions  of  appropriation.  The  proletarians 
cannot  become  masters  of  the  productive  forces 
of  society  except  by  abolishing  their  own  previ¬ 
ous  mode  of  appropriation,  and  thereby  also 
every  other  previous  mode  of  appropriation. 
They  have  nothing  of  their  own  to  secure  and 
to  fortify;  their  mission  is  to  destroy  all  previ¬ 
ous  securities  for,  and  insurances  of,  individual 
property. 

All  previous  historical  movements  were 
movements  of  minorities,  or  in  the  interest  of 
minorities.  The  proletarian  movement  is  the 
self-conscious,  independent  movement  of  the 
immense  majority,  in  the  interest  of  the  im¬ 
mense  majority.  The  proletariat,  the  lowest 
stratum  of  our  present  society,  cannot  stir,  can¬ 
not  raise  itself  up,  without  the  whole  superin¬ 
cumbent  strata  of  official  society  being  sprung 
into  the  air. 

Though  not  in  substance,  yet  in  form,  the 
struggle  of  the  proletariat  with  the  bourgeoisie 
is  at  first  a  national  struggle.  The  proletariat 
of  each  country  must,  of  course,  first  of  all  settle 
matters  with  its  own  bourgeoisie* 

In  depicting  the  most  general  phases  of  the 
development  of  the  proletariat  We  traced  the 
more  or  less  veiled  civil  war  raginf  within  exist¬ 
ing  society,  up  to  the  point  where  that  war 
breaks  out  into  open  revolution,  and  where  the 
violent  overthrow  of  the  bourgeoisie  lays  the 
foundation  for  the  sway  of  the  proletariat. 

Hitherto,  every  form  of  society  has  been 
based,  as  we  have  already  seen,  on  the  antagon¬ 
ism  of  oppressing  and  oppressed  classes.  But  in 
order  to  oppress  a  class  certain  conditions  must 


PROLETARIANS  AND  COMMUNISTS 


be  assured  to  it  under  which  it  can,  at  least,  con¬ 
tinue  its  slavish  existence.  The  serf,  in  the  pe¬ 
riod  of  serfdom,  raised  himself  to  membership  in 
the  commune,  just  as  the  petty  bourgeois,  un¬ 
der  the  yoke  of  feudal  absolutism,  managed  to 
develop  into  a  bourgeois.  The  modern  labourer, 
on  the  contrary,  instead  of  rising  with  the  prog¬ 
ress  of  industry,  sinks  deeper  and  deeper  below 
the  conditions  of  existence  of  his  own  class.  He 
becomes  a  pauper,  and  pauperism  develops 
more  rapidly  than  population  and  wealth.  And 
here  it  becomes  evident  that  the  bourgeoisie  is 
unfit  any  longer  to  be  the  ruling  class  in  society 
and  to  impose  its  conditions  of  existence  upon 
society  as  an  overriding  law.  It  is  unfit  to  rule 
because  it  is  incompetent  to  assure  an  existence 
to  its  slave  within  his  slavery,  because  it  cannot 
help  letting  him  sink  into  such  a  state  that  it  has 
to  feed  him,  instead  of  being  fed  by  him.  Society 
can  no  longer  live  under  this  bourgeoisie,  in  oth¬ 
er  words,  its  existence  is  no  longer  compatible 
with  society. 

The  essential  condition  for  the  existence  and 
sway  of  the  bourgeois  class  is  the  formation 
and  augmentation  of  capital;  the  condition  for 
capital  is  wage  labour.  Wage  labour  rests  ex¬ 
clusively  on  competition  between  the  labourers. 
The  advance  of  industry,  whose  involuntary 
promoter  is  the  bourgeoisie,  replaces  the  isola¬ 
tion  of  the  labourers,  due  to  competition,  by 
their  revolutionary  combination,  due  to  asso¬ 
ciation.  The  development  of  modern  industry, 
therefore,  cuts  from  under  its  feet  the  very 
foundation  on  which  the  bourgeoisie  produces 
and  appropriates  products.  What  the  bourgeoi¬ 
sie,  therefore,  produces  above  all  are  its  own 
grave-diggers.  Its  fall  and  the  victory  of  the 
proletariat  arc  equally  inevitable. 


CHAPTER  II.  PROLETARIANS  AND 
COMMUNISTS 

In  what  relation  do  the  Communists  stand 
to  the  proletarians  as  a  whole? 

The  Communists  do  not  form  a  separate  par¬ 
ty  opposed  to  other  working  class  parties. 

They  have  no  interests  separate  and  apart 
from  those  of  the  proletariat  as  a  whole. 

They  do  not  set  up  any  sectarian  principles 
of  their  own  by  which  to  shape  and  mould  the 
proletarian  movement. 

The  Communists  are  distinguished  from  the 
other  working  class  parties  by  this  only:  i.  In 
the  national  struggles  of  the  proletarians  of  the 
different  countries  they  point  out  and  bring  to 


425 

the  front  the  common  interests  of  the  entire 
proletariat,  independently  of  all  nationality;  2. 
In  the  various  stages  of  development  which  the 
struggle  of  the  working  class  against  the  bour¬ 
geoisie  has  to  pass  through  they  always  and 
everywhere  represent  the  interests  of  the  move¬ 
ment  as  a  whole. 

The  Communists,  therefore,  are  on  the  one 
hand,  practically,  the  most  advanced  and  reso¬ 
lute  section  of  the  working  class  parties  of  every 
country,  that  section  which  pushes  forward  all 
others;  on  the  other  hand,  theoretically,  they 
have  over  the  great  mass  of  the  proletariat  the 
advantage  of  clearly  understanding  the  line  of 
march,  the  conditions,  and  the  ultimate  general 
results  of  the  proletarian  movement. 

The  immediate  aim  of  the  Communists  is  the 
same  as  that  of  all  the  other  proletarian  parties: 
formation  of  the  proletariat  into  a  class,  over¬ 
throw  of  bourgeois  supremacy,  conquest  of  po¬ 
litical  power  by  the  proletariat. 

The  theoretical  conclusions  of  the  Commu¬ 
nists  are  in  no  way  based  on  ideas  or  principles 
that  have  been  invented  or  discovered  by  this 
or  that  would-be  universal  reformer. 

They  merely  express  in  general  terms  actual 
relations  springing  from  an  existing  class  strug¬ 
gle,  from  a  historical  movement  going  on  under 
our  very  eyes.  The  abolition  of  existing  proper¬ 
ty  relations  is  not  at  all  a  distinctive  feature  of 
Communism. 

All  property  relations  in  the  past  have  con¬ 
tinually  been  subject  to  historical  change  con¬ 
sequent  upon  the  change  in  historical  condi¬ 
tions. 

The  French  Revolution,  for  example,  abol¬ 
ished  feudal  property  in  favour  of  bourgeois 
property. 

The  distinguishing  feature  of  Communism  is 
not  the  abolition  of  property  generally,  but  the 
abolition  of  bourgeois  property.  But  modern 
bourgeois  private  property  is  the  final  and  most 
complete  expression  of  the  system  of  producing 
and  appropriating  products  that  is  based  on 
class  antagonisms,  on  the  exploitation  of  the 
many  by  the  few. 

In  this  sense  the  theory  of  the  Communists 
may  be  summed  up  in  the  single  sentence:  abo¬ 
lition  of  private  property. 

We  Communists  have  been  reproached  with 
the  desire  of  abolishing  the  right  of  personally 
acquiring  property  as  the  fruit  of  a  man’s  own 
labour,  which  property  is  alleged  to  be  the 
groundwork  of  all  personal  freedom,  activity 
and  independence. 

Hard-won,  self-acquired,  self-earned  proper- 


MANIFESTO  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY 


426 

ty !  Do  you  mean  the  property  of  the  petty  ar¬ 
tisan  and  of  the  small  peasant,  a  form  of  proper¬ 
ty  that  preceded  the  bourgeois  form  ?  There  is 
no  need  to  abolish  that;  the  development  of  in¬ 
dustry  has  to  a  great  extent  already  destroyed 
it  and  is  still  destroying  it  daily. 

Or  do  you  mean  modern  bourgeois  private 
property? 

But  does  wage  labour  create  any  property 
for  the  labourer?  Not  a  bit.  It  creates  capital, 
i.e.,  that  kind  of  property  which  exploits  wage 
labour  and  which  cannot  increase  except  upon 
condition  of  begetting  a  new  supply  of  wage 
labour  for  fresh  exploitation.  Property  in  its 
present  form  is  based  on  the  antagonism  of  cap¬ 
ital  and  wage  labour.  Let  us  examine  both  sides 
of  this  antagonism. 

To  be  a  capitalist  is  to  have  not  only  a  purely 
personal,  but  a  social,  status  in  production.  Cap¬ 
ital  is  a  collective  product,  and  only  by  the 
united  action  of  many  members— nay,  in  the 
last  resort,  only  by  the  united  action  of  all  mem¬ 
bers  of  society — can  it  be  set  in  motion. 

Capital  is,  therefore,  not  a  personal,  it  is  a 
social,  power. 

When,  therefore,  capital  is  converted  into 
common  property,  into  the  property  of  all 
members  of  society,  personal  property  is  not 
thereby  transformed  into  social  property.  It  is 
only  the  social  character  of  the  property  that  is 
changed.  It  loses  its  class  character. 

Let  us  now  take  wage  labour. 

The  average  price  of  wage  labour  is  the  mini¬ 
mum  wage,  i.e.,  that  quantum  of  the  means  of 
subsistence  which  is  absolutely  requisite  to 
keep  the  labourer  in  bare  existence  as  a  labour¬ 
er.  What,  therefore,  the  wage  labourer  appro¬ 
priates  by  means  of  his  labour  merely  suffices 
to  prolong  and  reproduce  a  bare  existence.  We 
by  no  means  intend  to  abolish  this  personal  ap¬ 
propriation  of  the  products  of  labour,  an  appro¬ 
priation  that  is  made  for  the  maintenance  and 
reproduction  of  human  life  and  that  leaves  no 
surplus  wherewith  to  command  the  labour  of 
others.  All  that  we  want  to  do  away  with  is  the 
miserable  character  of  this  appropriation,  un¬ 
der  which  the  labourer  lives  merely  to  increase 
capital,  and  is  allowed  to  live  only  insofar  as  the 
interest  of  the  ruling  class  requires  it. 

In  bourgeois  society  living  labour  is  but  a 
means  to  increase  accumulated  labour.  In  Com¬ 
munist  society  accumulated  labour  is  but  a 
means  to  widen,  to  enrich,  to  promote  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  labourer. 

In  bourgeois  society,  therefore,  the  past  dom¬ 
inates  the  present;  in  Communist  society,  the 


present  dominates  the  past.  In  bourgeois  soci¬ 
ety  capital  is  independent  and  has  individual¬ 
ity,  while  the  living  person  is  dependent  and  has 
no  individuality. 

And  the  abolition  of  this  state  of  things  is 
called  by  the  bourgeois,  abolition  of  individual¬ 
ity  and  freedom!  And  rightly  so.  The  aboli¬ 
tion  of  bourgeois  individuality,  bourgeois  in¬ 
dependence,  and  bourgeois  freedom  is  un¬ 
doubtedly  aimed  at. 

By  freedom  is  meant,  under  the  present  bour¬ 
geois  conditions  of  production,  free  trade,  free 
selling  and  buying. 

But  if  selling  and  buying  disappears,  free  sell¬ 
ing  and  buying  disappears  also.  This  talk  about 
free  selling  and  buying,  and  all  the  other  “brave 
words’*  of  our  bourgeoisie  about  freedom  in  gen¬ 
eral,  have  a  meaning,  if  any,  only  in  contrast 
with  restricted  selling  and  buying,  with  the  fet¬ 
tered  traders  of  the  Middle  Ages,  but  have  no 
meaning  when  opposed  to  the  Communist  abo¬ 
lition  of  buying  and  selling,  of  the  bourgeois 
conditions  of  production,  and  of  the  bourgeoi¬ 
sie  itself. 

You  are  horrified  at  our  intending  to  do  away 
with  private  property.  But  in  your  existing  so¬ 
ciety  private  property  is  already  done  away 
with  for  nine-tenths  of  the  population;  its  exist¬ 
ence  for  the  few  is  solely  due  to  its  non-existence 
in  the  hands  of  those  nine-tenths.  You  reproach 
us,  therefore,  with  intending  to  do  away  with 
a  form  of  property,  the  necessary  condition 
for  whose  existence  is  the  non-existence 
of  any  property  for  the  immense  majority  of 
society. 

In  a  word,  you  reproach  us  with  intending  to 
do  away  with  your  property.  Precisely  so;  that 
is  just  what  we  intend. 

From  the  moment  when  labour  can  no  longer 
be  converted  into  capital,  money,  or  rent— into 
a  social  power  capable  of  being  monopolised — 
i.e.,  from  the  moment  when  individual  property 
can  no  longer  be  transformed  into  bourgeois 
property,  into  capital;  from  that  moment,  you 
say,  individuality  vanishes. 

You  must,  therefore,  confess  that  by  “indi¬ 
vidual”  you  mean  no  other  person  than  the 
bourgeois,  than  the  middle  class  owner  of  prop¬ 
erty.  This  person  must,  indeed,  be  swept  out  of 
the  way  and  made  impossible. 

Communism  deprives  no  man  of  the  power 
to  appropriate  the  products  of  society;  all  that 
it  does  is  to  deprive  him  of  the  power  to  subju¬ 
gate  the  labour  of  others  by  means  of  such  ap¬ 
propriation. 

It  has  been  objected  that  upon  the  abolition 


PROLETARIANS  AND  COMMUNISTS 


of  private  property  all  work  will  cease  and  uni¬ 
versal  laziness  will  overtake  us. 

According  to  this,  bourgeois  society  ought 
long  ago  to  have  gone  to  the  dogs  through  sheer 
idleness;  for  those  of  its  members  who  work  ac¬ 
quire  nothing,  and  those  who  acquire  anything 
do  not  work.  The  whole  of  this  objection  is  but 
another  expression  of  the  tautology:  there  can 
no  longer  be  any  wage  labour  when  there  is  no 
longer  any  capital. 

All  objections  urged  against  the  Communist 
mode  of  producing  and  appropriating  material 
products  have  in  the  same  way  been  urged 
against  the  Communist  modes  of  producing  and 
appropriating  intellectual  products.  Just  as  to 
the  bourgeois  the  disappearance  of  class  proper¬ 
ty  is  the  disappearance  of  production  itself,  so 
the  disappearance  of  class  culture  is  to  him 
identical  with  the  disappearance  of  all  culture. 

That  culture,  the  loss  of  which  he  laments,  is 
for  the  enormous  majority  a  mere  training  to 
act  as  a  machine. 

Hut  don’t  wni.j;1  *  with  us  so  long  as  you  ap¬ 
ply  to  our  intended  abolition  of  bourgeois  prop¬ 
erty  the  standard  of  your  bourgeois  notions  of 
freedom,  culture,  law,  etc.  Your  very  ideas  are 
but  the  outgrowth  of  the  conditions  of  your 
bourgeois  production  and  bourgeois  property, 
just  as  your  jurisprudence  is  but  the  will  of  your 
class  made  into  a  law  for  all,  a  will  whose  essen¬ 
tial  character  and  direction  are  determined  by 
the  economic  conditions  of  existence  of  your 
class. 

The  selfish  misconception  that  induces  you 
to  transform  into  eternal  laws  of  nature  and  of 
reason  the  social  forms  springing  from  your 
present  mode  of  production  and  form  of  prop¬ 
erty-historical  relations  that  rise  and  disap¬ 
pear  in  the  progress  of  production — this  mis¬ 
conception  you  share  with  every  ruling  class 
that  has  preceded  you.  What  you  see  clearly  in 
the  case  of  ancient  property,  what  you  admit 
in  the  case  of  feudal  property,  you  are,  of  course 
forbidden  to  admit  in  the  case  of  your  own 
bourgeois  form  of  property. 

Abolition  of  the  family!  Even  the  most  radi¬ 
cal  flare  up  at  this  infamous  proposal  of  the 
Communists. 

On  what  foundation  is  the  present  family,  the 
bourgeois  family,  based?  On  capital,  on  private 
gain.  In  its  completely  developed  form  this 
family  exists  only  among  the  bourgeoisie.  But 
this  state  of  things  finds  its  complement  in  the 
practical  absence  of  the  family  among  the  pro¬ 
letarians,  and  in  public  prostitution. 

The  bourgeois  family  will  vanish  as  a  matter 


427 

of  course  when  its  complement  vanishes,  and 
both  will  vanish  with  the  vanishing  of  capital. 

Do  you  charge  us  with  wanting  to  stop  the 
exploitation  of  children  by  their  parents?  To 
this  crime  we  plead  guilty. 

But,  you  will  say,  we  destroy  the  most  hal¬ 
lowed  of  relations  when  we  replace  home  educa¬ 
tion  by  social. 

And  your  education!  Is  not  that  also  social, 
and  determined  by  the  social  conditions  under 
which  you  educate,  by  the  intervention  of  so¬ 
ciety,  direct  or  indirect,  by  means  of  schools, 
etc.?  The  Communists  have  not  invented  the 
intervention  of  society  in  education;  they  do 
but  seek  to  alter  the  character  of  that  interven¬ 
tion  and  to  rescue  education  from  the  influence 
of  the  ruling  class. 

The  bourgeois  claptrap  about  the  family  and 
education,  about  the  hallowed  co-relation  of 
parent  and  child,  becomes  all  the  more  disgust¬ 
ing,  the  more,  by  the  action  of  modern  industry, 
all  family  tics  among  the  proletarians  are  torn 
asunder  and  their  children  transformed  into 
simple  articles  of  commerce  and  instruments  of 
labour. 

But  you  Communists  would  introduce  com¬ 
munity  of  women,  screams  the  whole  bourgeoi¬ 
sie  in  chorus. 

The  bourgeois  sees  in  his  wife  a  mere  instru¬ 
ment  of  production.  He  hears  that  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  production  are  to  be  exploited  in  com¬ 
mon,  and,  naturally,  can  come  to  no  other  con¬ 
clusion  than  that  the  lot  of  being  common  to  all 
will  likewise  fall  to  the  women. 

He  has  not  even  a  suspicion  that  the  real 
point  aimed  at  is  to  do  away  with  the  status  of 
women  as  mere  instruments  of  production. 

For  the  rest,  nothing  is  more  ridiculous  than 
the  virtuous  indignation  of  our  bourgeois  at  the 
community  of  women  which,  they  pretend,  is 
to  be  openly  and  officially  established  by  the 
Communists.  The  Communists  have  no  need 
to  introduce  community  of  women;  it  has  ex¬ 
isted  almost  from  time  immemorial. 

Our  bourgeois,  not  content  with  having  the 
wives  and  daughters  of  their  proletarians  at 
their  disposal,  not  to  speak  of  common  prosti¬ 
tutes,  take  the  greatest  pleasure  in  seducing 
each  other’s  wives. 

Bourgeois  marriage  is  in  reality  a  system  of 
wives  in  common  and  thus  at  the  most  what  the 
Communists  might  possibly  be  reproached  with 
is  that  they  desire  to  introduce,  in  substitution 
for  a  hypocritically  concealed,  an  openly  legal¬ 
ized,  community  of  women.  For  the  rest,  it  is 
self-evident  that  the  abolition  of  the  present 


MANIFESTO  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY 


428 

system  of  production  must  bring  with  it  the 
abolition  of  the  community  of  women  spring¬ 
ing  from  that  system,  i.e.,  of  prostitution  both 
public  and  private. 

The  Communists  are  further  reproached 
with  desiring  to  abolish  countries  and  national- 
ity. 

The  workingmen  have  no  country.  We  can¬ 
not  take  from  them  what  they  have  not  got. 
Since  the  proletariat  must  first  of  all  acquire 
political  supremacy,  must  rise  to  be  the  leading 
class  of  the  nation,  must  constitute  itself  the  na¬ 
tion,  it  is,  so  far,  itself  national,  though  not  in 
the  bourgeois  sense  of  the  word. 

National  differences  and  antagonisms  be¬ 
tween  peoples  are  vanishing  gradually  from  day 
to  day,  owing  to  the  development  of  the  bour¬ 
geoisie,  to  freedom  of  commerce,  to  the  world 
market,  to  uniformity  in  the  mode  of  produc¬ 
tion  and  in  the  conditions  of  life  corresponding 
thereto. 

The  supremacy  of  the  proletariat  will  cause 
them  to  vanish  still  faster.  United  action,  of  the 
leading  civilized  countries  at  least,  is  one  of  the 
first  conditions  for  the  emancipation  of  the  pro¬ 
letariat. 

In  proportion  as  the  exploitation  of  one  in¬ 
dividual  by  another  is  put  an  end  to,  the  exploi¬ 
tation  of  one  nation  by  another  will  also  be  put 
an  end  to.  In  proportion  as  the  antagonism  be¬ 
tween  classes  within  the  nation  vanishes,  the 
hostility  of  one  nation  to  another  will  come  to 
an  end. 

The  charges  against  Communism  made  from 
a  religious,  a  philosophical,  and,  generally,  from 
an  ideological  standpoint  are  not  deserving  of 
serious  examination. 

Does  it  require  deep  intuition  to  comprehend 
that  man’s  ideas,  views,  and  conceptions— in 
one  word,  man’s  consciousness— changes  with 
every  change  in  the  conditions  of  his  material 
existence,  in  his  social  relations  and  in  his  social 
life? 

What  else  does  the  history  of  ideas  prove 
than  that  intellectual  production  changes  its 
character  in  proportion  as  material  production 
is  changed?  The  ruling  ideas  of  each  age  have 
ever  been  the  ideas  of  its  ruling  class. 

When  people  speak  of  ideas  that  revolution¬ 
ize  society,  they  do  but  express  the  fact  that 
within  the  old  society  the  elements  of  a  new  one 
have  been  created  and  that  the  dissolution  of  the 
old  ideas  keeps  even  pace  with  the  dissolution 
of  the  old  conditions  of  existence. 

When  the  ancient  world  was  in  its  last  throe9 
the  ancient  religions  were  overcome  by  Christi¬ 


anity.  When  Christian  ideas  succumbed  in  the 
1 8th  century  to  rationalist  ideas,  feudal  society 
fought  its  death-battle  with  the  then  revolu¬ 
tionary  bourgeoisie.  The  ideas  of  religious  liber¬ 
ty  and  freedom  of  conscience  merely  gave  ex¬ 
pression  to  the  sway  of  free  competition  within 
the  domain  of  knowledge. 

“Undoubtedly,”  it  will  be  said,  “religion, 
moral,  philosophical  and  juridical  ideas  have 
been  modified  in  the  course  of  historical  devel¬ 
opment.  But  religion,  morality,  philosophy,  po¬ 
litical  science,  and  law,  constantly  survived  this 
change.” 

“There  are,  besides,  eternal  truths  such  as 
freedom,  justice,  etc.,  that  are  common  to  all 
states  of  society.  But  Communism  abolishes 
eternal  truths,  it  abolishes  all  religion  and  all 
morality,  instead  of  constituting  them  on  a  new 
basis;  it,  therefore,  acts  in  contradiction  to  all 
past  historical  experience.” 

What  does  this  accusation  reduce  itself  to? 
The  history  of  all  past  society  has  consisted  in 
the  development  of  class  antagonisms,  antago¬ 
nisms  that  assumed  different  forms  at  different 
epochs. 

But  whatever  form  they  may  have  taken, 
one  fact  is  common  to  all  past  ages,  viz.,  the 
exploitation  of  one  part  of  society  by  the  other. 
No  wonder,  then,  that  the  social  consciousness 
of  past  ages,  despite  all  the  multiplicity  and  va¬ 
riety  it  displays,  moves  within  certain  common 
forms,  or  general  ideas,  which  cannot  complete¬ 
ly  vanish  except  with  the  total  disappearance 
of  class  antagonisms. 

The  Communist  revolution  is  the  most  radi¬ 
cal  rupture  with  traditional  property  relations; 
no  wonder  that  its  development  involves  the 
most  radical  rupture  with  traditional  ideas. 

But  let  us  have  done  with  the  bourgeois  ob¬ 
jections  to  Communism. 

We  have  seen  above  that  the  first  step  in  the 
revolution  by  the  working  class  is  to  raise  the 
proletariat  to  the  position  of  ruling  class,  to  es¬ 
tablish  democracy. 

The  proletariat  will  use  its  political  suprem¬ 
acy  to  wrest  by  degrees  all  capital  from  the 
bourgeoisie,  to  centralize  all  instruments  of  pro¬ 
duction  in  the  hands  of  the  state,  i.e.,  of  the  pro¬ 
letariat  organized  as  the  ruling  class,  and  to  in¬ 
crease  the  total  of  productive  forces  as  rapidly 
as  possible. 

Of  course,  in  the  beginning  this  cannot  be 
effected  except  by  means  of  despotic  inroads  on 
the  rights  of  property  and  on  the  conditions  of 
bourgeois  production;  by  means  of  measures, 
therefore,  which  appear  economically  insuffi- 


SOCIALIST  AND  COMMUNIST  LITERATURE 


dent  and  untenable,  but  which,  in  the  course 
of  the  movement  outstrip  themselves,  necessi¬ 
tate  further  inroads  upon  the  old  social  order, 
and  are  unavoidable  as  a  means  of  entirely 
revolutionizing  the  mode  of  production. 

These  measures  will,  of  course,  be  different  in 
different  countries. 

Nevertheless,  in  the  most  advanced  coun¬ 
tries  the  following  will  be  pretty  generally  ap¬ 
plicable: 

1.  Abolition  of  property  in  land  and  applica¬ 
tion  of  all  rents  of  land  to  public  purposes. 

2.  A  heavy  progressive  or  graduated  income 
tax. 

3.  Abolition  of  all  right  of  inheritance. 

4.  Confiscation  of  the  property  of  all  emi¬ 
grants  and  rebels. 

5.  Centralization  of  credit  in  the  hands  of  the 
state  by  means  of  a  national  bank  with  state 
capital  and  an  exclusive  monopoly. 

6.  Centralization  of  the  means  of  communi¬ 
cation  and  transport  in  the  hands  of  the  state. 

7.  Extension  f.-utorics  and  instruments  of 
production  owned  by  the  state;  the  bringing  in¬ 
to  cultivation  of  waste  lands,  and  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  the  soil  generally  in  accordance  with  a 
common  plan. 

8.  Equal  obligation  of  all  to  work.  Establish¬ 
ment  of  industrial  armies,  especially  for  agricul¬ 
ture. 

9.  Combination  of  agriculture  with  manufac¬ 
turing  industries;  gradual  abolition  of  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  town  and  country  by  a  more 
equable  distribution  of  the  population  over  the 
country. 

10.  Free  education  for  all  children  in  public 
schools.  Abolition  of  child  factory  labour  in  its 
present  form.  Combination  of  education  with 
industrial  production,  etc. 

When  in  the  course  of  development  class  dis¬ 
tinctions  have  disappeared  and  all  production 
has  been  concentrated  in  the  hands  of  a  vast  as¬ 
sociation  of  the  whole  nation,  the  public  power 
will  lose  its  political  character.  Political  power, 
properly  so  called,  is  merely  the  organized  pow¬ 
er  of  one  class  for  oppressing  another.  If  the  pro¬ 
letariat  during  its  contest  with  the  bourgeoisie 
is  compelled  by  the  force  of  circumstances  to 
organize  itself  as  a  class;  if  by  means  of  a  revolu¬ 
tion  it  makes  itself  the  ruling  class  and,  as  such, 
sweeps  away  by  force  the  old  conditions  of  pro¬ 
duction,  then  it  will,  along  with  these  condi¬ 
tions,  have  swept  away  the  conditions  for  the 
existence  of  class  antagonisms  and  of  classes 
generally,  and  will  thereby  have  abolished  its 
own  supremacy  as  a  class. 


429 

In  place  of  the  old  bourgeois  society,  with  its 
classes  and  class  antagonisms,  we  shall  have  an 
association  in  which  the  free  development  of 
each  is  the  condition  for  the  free  development 
of  all. 


CHAPTER  III.  SOCIALIST  AND  COMMUNIST 
LITERATURE 


1.  Reactionary  Socialism 

a.  Feudal  Socialism 

Owing  to  their  historical  position  it  became  the 
vocation  of  the  aristocracies  of  France  and  Eng¬ 
land  to  write  pamphlets  against  modern  bour¬ 
geois  society.  In  the  French  revolution  of  July, 
1830,  and  in  the  English  reform  agitation  these 
aristocracies  again  succumbed  to  the  hateful 
upstart.  Thenceforth,  a  serious  political  strug¬ 
gle  was  altogether  out  of  the  question.  A  liter¬ 
ary  battle  alone  remained  possible.  But  even  in 
the  domain  of  literature  the  old  cries  of  the  Res¬ 
toration  period1  had  become  impossible. 

In  order  to  arouse  sympathy  the  aristocracy 
was  obliged  to  lose  sight,  apparently,  of  its  own 
interests  and  to  formulate  its  indictment 
against  the  bourgeoisie  in  the  interest  of  the  ex¬ 
ploited  working  class  alone.  Thus  the  aristoc¬ 
racy  took  its  revenge  by  singing  lampoons 
against  its  new  master,  and  whispering  in  his 
ears  sinister  prophecies  of  coming  catastrophe. 

In  this  way  arose  Feudal  Socialism:  half  lam¬ 
entation,  half  lampoon;  half  echo  of  the  past, 
half  menace  of  the  future;  at  times,  by  its  bitter, 
witty  and  incisive  criticism,  striking  the  bour¬ 
geoisie  to  the  very  heart’s  core,  but  always  ludi¬ 
crous  in  its  effect  through  total  incapacity  to 
comprehend  the  march  of  modern  history. 

The  aristocracy,  in  order  to  rally  the  people 
to  them,  waved  the  proletarian  alms-bag  in 
front  for  a  banner.  But  the  people,  as  often  as  it 
joined  them,  saw  on  their  hindquarters  the  old 
feudal  coats  of  arms  and  deserted  with  loud  and 
irreverent  laughter. 

One  section  of  the  French  Legitimists,  and 
“Young  England,"  exhibited  this  spectacle. 

In  pointing  out  that  their  mode  of  exploita¬ 
tion  was  different  from  that  of  the  bourgeoisie, 
the  feudalists  forget  that  they  exploited  under 
circumstances  and  conditions  that  were  quite 
different  and  that  are  now  antiquated.  In  show¬ 
ing  that  under  their  rule  the  modern  proletariat 
never  existed,  they  forget  that  the  modern 

1  Not  the  English  Restoration,  1660  to  1689,  but  the 
French  Restoration,  1814  to  1830. 


MANIFESTO  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY 


430 

bourgeoisie  is  the  necessary  offspring  of  their 
own  form  of  society. 

For  the  rest,  so  little  do  they  conceal  the  reac¬ 
tionary  character  of  their  criticism  that  their 
chief  accusation  against  the  bourgeoisie 
amounts  to  this,  that  under  the  bourgeois  re¬ 
gime  a  class  is  being  developed  which  is  des¬ 
tined  to  cut  up  root  and  branch  the  old  order  of 
society. 

What  they  upbraid  the  bourgeoisie  with  is 
not  so  much  that  it  creates  a  proletariat  as  that 
it  creates  a  revolutionary  proletariat. 

In  political  practice,  therefore,  they  join  in 
all  coercive  measures  against  the  working  class; 
and  in  ordinary  life,  despite  their  highfalutin 
phrases,  they  stoop  to  pick  up  the  golden  apples 
dropped  from  the  tree  of  industry,  and  to  barter 
truth,  love,  and  honour  for  traffic  in  wool,  beet¬ 
root-sugar,  and  potato  spirits.1 

As  the  parson  has  ever  gone  hand  in  hand 
with  the  landlord,  so  has  Clerical  Socialism  with 
Feudal  Socialism. 

Nothing  is  easier  than  to  give  Christian  as¬ 
ceticism  a  Socialist  tinge.  Has  not  Christianity 
declaimed  against  private  property,  against 
marriage,  against  the  state  ?  Has  it  not  preached 
in  the  place  of  these,  charity  and  poverty,  celi¬ 
bacy  and  mortification  of  the  flesh,  monastic 
life  and  Mother  Church  P  Christian  Socialism  is 
but  the  holy  water  with  which  the  priest  conse¬ 
crates  the  heart-burnings  of  the  aristocrat. 

b.  Petty  Bourgeois  Socialism 

The  feudal  aristocracy  was-not  the  only  class 
that  was  ruined  by  the  bourgeoisie,  not  the  only 
class  whose  conditions  of  existence  pined  and 
perished  in  the  atmosphere  of  modern  bourgeois 
society.  The  mediaeval  burgesses  and  the  small 
peasant  proprietors  were  the  precursors  of  the 
modern  bourgeoisie.  In  those  countries  which 
are  but  little  developed  industrially  and  com¬ 
mercially  these  two  classes  still  vegetate  side  by 
side  with  the  rising  bourgeoisie. 

In  countries  where  modern  civilization  has 
become  fully  developed  a  new  class  of  petty 
bourgeois  has  been  formed,  fluctuating  between 
proletariat  and  bourgeoisie  and  ever  renewing 
itself  as  a  supplementary  part  of  bourgeois  so¬ 
ciety.  The  individual  members  of  this  class, 

1  This  applies  chiefly  to  Germany,  where  the  landed  ar¬ 
istocracy  and  squirearchy  have  large  portions  of  their  es¬ 
tates  cultivated  for  their  own  account  by  stewards,  and 
are,  moreover,  extensive  beetroot-sugar  manufacturers  and 
distillers  of  potato  spirits.  The  wealthier  British  aristo¬ 
crats  are  as  yet  rather  above  that;  but  they,  too,  know 
how  to  make  up  for  declining  rents  by  lending  their  names 
to  floaters  of  more  or  less  shady  joint-stock  companies. 


however,  are  being  constantly  hurled  down  into 
the  proletariat  by  the  action  of  competition, 
and,  as  modern  industry  develops,  they  even 
see  the  moment  approaching  when  they  will 
completely  disappear  as  an  independent  section 
of  modern  society,  to  be  replaced,  in  manufac¬ 
tures,  agriculture  and  commerce,  by  overlook¬ 
ers,  bailiffs  and  shopmen. 

In  countries  like  France  where  the  peasants 
constitute  far  more  than  half  of  the  population 
it  was  natural  that  writers  who  sided  with  the 
proletariat  against  the  bourgeoisie  should  use, 
in  their  criticism  of  the  bourgeois  regime,  the 
standard  of  the  peasant  and  petty  bourgeois, 
and  from  the  standpoint  of  these  intermediate 
classes  should  take  up  the  cudgels  for  the  work¬ 
ing  class.  Thus  arose  petty  bourgeois  Socialism. 
Sismondi  was  the  head  of  this  school,  not  only 
in  France  but  also  in  England. 

This  school  of  Socialism  dissected  with  great 
acuteness  the  contradictions  in  the  conditions 
of  modern  production.  It  laid  bare  the  hypo¬ 
critical  apologies  of  economists.  It  proved,  in- 
controvertibly,  the  disastrous  effects  of  ma¬ 
chinery  and  division  of  labour,  the  concentra¬ 
tion  of  capital  and  land  in  a  few  hands,  over-pro¬ 
duction  and  crises;  it  pointed  out  the  inevitable 
ruin  of  the  petty  bourgeois  and  peasant,  the 
misery  of  the  proletariat,  the  anarchy  in  pro¬ 
duction,  the  crying  rnequalitiewn  the  distribu¬ 
tion  of  wealth,  the  industrial  war  of  extermina¬ 
tion  between  nations,  the  dissolution  of  old 
moral  bonds,  of  the  old  family  relations,  of  the 
old  nationalities. 

In  its  positive  aims,  however,  this  form  of 
Socialism  aspires  either  to  restoring  the  old 
means  of  production  and  of  exchange,  and  with 
them  the  old  property  relations,  and  the  old 
society,  or  to  cramping  the  modern  means  of 
production  and  of  exchange  within  the  frame¬ 
work  of  the  old  property  relations  that  have 
been,  and  were  bound  to  be,  exploded  by  those 
means.  In  either  case  it  is  both  reactionary  and 
utopian. 

Its  last  words  are:  corporate  guilds  for  manu¬ 
facture;  patriarchal  relations  in  agriculture. 

Ultimately,  when  stubborn*  historical  facts 
had  dispersed  all  intoxicating  effects  of  self-de¬ 
ception,  this  form  of  Socialism  ended  in  a  miser¬ 
able  fit  of  the  blues. 

c.  German  or  “True”  Socialism 

The  Socialist  and  Communist  literature  of 
France,  a  literature  that  originated  under  the 
pressure  of  a  bourgeoisie  in  power  and  that  was 
the  expression  of  the  struggle  against  this  pow- 


SOCIALIST  AND  COMMUNIST  LITERATURE 


cr,  was  introduced  into  Germany  at  a  time 
when  the  bourgeoisie  in  that  country  had  just 
begun  its  contest  with  feudal  absolutism. 

German  philosophers,  would-bephilosophers, 
and  men  of  letters  eagerly  seized  on  this  litera¬ 
ture,  only  forgetting  that  when  these  writings 
immigrated  from  France  into  Germany,  French 
social  conditions  had  not  immigrated  along 
with  them.  In  contact  with  German  social  con¬ 
ditions  this  French  literature  lost  all  its  im¬ 
mediate  practical  significance,  and  assumed  a 
purely  literary  aspect.  Thus,  to  the  German 
philosophers  of  the  18th  century,  the  demands 
of  the  first  French  Revolution  were  nothing 
more  than  the  demands  of  “Practical  Reason” 
in  general,  and  the  utterance  of  the  will  of  the 
revolutionary  French  bourgeoisie  signified  in 
their  eyes  the  laws  of  pure  will,  of  will  as  it 
was  bound  to  he,  of  true  human  will  generally. 

The  work  of  the  German  literati  consisted 
solely  in  bringing  the  new  French  ideas  into 
harmony  with  their  ancient  philosophical  con¬ 
science,  or  rathe*-,  it:  annexing  the  French  ideas 
without  deserting  their  own  philosophic  point 
of  view. 

This  annexation  took  place  in  the  same  way 
in  which  a  foreign  language  is  appropriated, 
namely  by  translation. 

It  is  well  known  how  the  monks  wrote  silly 
lives  of  Catholic  saints  over  the  manuscripts  on 
which  the  classical  works  of  ancient  heathen¬ 
dom  had  been  written.  The  German  literati  re¬ 
versed  this  process  with  the  profane  French  lit¬ 
erature.  They  wrote  their  philosophical  non¬ 
sense  beneath  the  French  original.  For  instance, 
beneath  the  French  criticism  of  the  economic 
functions  of  money  they  wrote  “alienation  of 
humanity,”  and  beneath  the  French  criticism 
of  the  bourgeois  state  they  wrote,  “dethrone¬ 
ment  of  the  category  of  the  general,”  and  so 
forth. 

The  introduction  of  these  philosophical 
phrases  at  the  back  of  the  French  historical 
criticisms  they  dubbed  “Philosophy  of  Action,” 
“True  Socialism,”  “German  Science  of  Social¬ 
ism,”  “Philosophical  Foundation  of  Social¬ 
ism,”  and  so  on. 

The  French  Socialist  and  Communist  litera- 
ure  was  thus  completely  emasculated.  And, 
since  it  ceased  in  the  hands  of  the  German  to 
express  the  struggle  of  one  class  with  the  other, 
he  felt  conscious  of  having  overcome  “French 
one-sidedness”  and  of  representing,  not  true  re¬ 
quirements,  but  the  requirements  of  truth;  not 
the  interests  of  the  proletariat,  but  the  interests 
of  human  nature,  of  man  in  general,  who  be¬ 


431 

longs  to  no  class,  has  no  reality,  who  exists  only 
in  the  misty  realm  of  philosophical  phantasy. 

This  German  Socialism,  which  took  its 
school-boy  task  so  seriously  and  solemnly,  and 
extolled  its  poor  stock-in-trade  in  such  mounte¬ 
bank  fashion,  meanwhile  gradually  lost  its  pe¬ 
dantic  innocence. 

The  fight  of  the  German  and  especially  of  the 
Prussian  bourgeoisie  against  feudal  aristocracy 
and  absolute  monarchy,  in  other  words,  the 
liberal  movement,  became  more  earnest. 

By  this,  the  long-wished-for  opportunity  was 
offered  to  “True”  Socialism  of  confronting  the 
political  movement  with  the  Socialist  demands; 
of'hurling  the  traditionahanathemas  against 
liberalism,  against  representative  government, 
against  bourgeois  competition,  bourgeois  free¬ 
dom  of  the  press,  bourgeois  legislation,  bour¬ 
geois  liberty  and  equality;  and  of  preaching  to 
the  masses  that  they  had  nothing  to  gain,  and 
everything  to  lose,  by  this  bourgeois  move¬ 
ment.  German  Socialism  forgot  in  the  nick  of 
time  that  the  French  criticism,  whose  silly  echo 
it  was,  presupposed  the  existence  of  modern 
bourgeois  society,  with  its  corresponding  eco¬ 
nomic  conditions  of  existence,  and  the  political 
constitution  adapted  thereto— the  very  things 
whose  attainment  was  the  object  of  the  pending 
struggle  in  Germany. 

To  the  absolute  governments,  with  their  fol¬ 
lowing  of  parsons,  professors,  country  squires 
and  officials,  it  served  as  a  welcome  scarecrow 
against  the  threatening  bourgeoisie. 

It  was  a  sweet  finish  after  the  bitter  pills  of 
floggings  and  bullets,  with  which  these  same 
governments,  just  at  that  time,  dosed  the  ris¬ 
ings  of  the  German  working  class. 

While  this  “1  rue”  Socialism  thus  served  the 
governments  as  a  weapon  for  fighting  the  Ger¬ 
man  bourgeoisie  it  at  the  same  time  directly 
represented  a  reactionary  interest,  the  interest 
of  the  German  Philistines.  In  Germany  the  pet¬ 
ty  bourgeois  class,  a  relic  of  the  16th  century, 
and  since  then  constantly  cropping  up  again 
under  various  forms,  is  the  real  social  basis  of 
the  existing  state  of  things. 

To  preserve  this  class  is  to  preserve  the  exist¬ 
ing  state  of  things  in  Germany.  The  industrial 
and  political  supremacy  of  the  bourgeoisie 
threatens  it  with  certain  destruction— on  the 
one  hand,  from  the  concentration  of  capital;  on 
the  other,  from  the  rise  of  a  revolutionary  pro¬ 
letariat.  “True”  Socialism  appeared  to  kill 
these  two  birds  with  one  stone.  It  spread  like 
an  epidemic. 

The  robe  of  speculative  cobwebs,  embroid- 


432  MANIFESTO  OF  THE 

ered  with  flowers  of  rhetoric,  steeped  in  the  dew 
of  sickly  sentiment— this  transcendental  robe 
in  which  the  German  Socialists  wrapped  their 
sorry  “eternal  truths/’  all  skin  and  bone,  served 
to  increase  wonderfully  the  sale  of  their  goods 
amongst  such  a  public. 

And  on  its  part,  German  Socialism  recog¬ 
nized  more  and  more  its  own  calling  as  the  bom¬ 
bastic  representative  of  the  petty  bourgeois 
Philistine. 

It  proclaimed  the  German  nation  to  be  the 
model  nation,  and  the  German  petty  Philistine 
to  be  the  typical  man.  To  every  villainous 
meanness  of  this  model  man  it  gave  a  hidden, 
higher,  socialistic  interpretation,  the  exact  con¬ 
trary  of  his  real  character.  It  went  to  the  ex¬ 
treme  length  of  directly  opposing  the  “brutally 
destructive”  tendency  of  Communism,  and  of 
proclaiming  its  supreme  and  impartial  con¬ 
tempt  of  all  class  struggles.  With  very  few  ex¬ 
ceptions,  all  the  so-called  Socialist  and  Com¬ 
munist  publications  that  now  (1847)  circulate 
in  Germany  belong  to  the  domain  of  this  foul 
and  enervating  literature. 

2.  Conservative  or  Bourgeois  Socialism 

A  part  of  the  bourgeoisie  is  desirous  of  re¬ 
dressing  social  grievances  in  order  to  secure  the 
continued  existence  of  bourgeois  society. 

To  this  section  belong  economists,  philan¬ 
thropists,  humanitarians,  improvers  of  the  con¬ 
dition  of  the  working  class,  organizers  of  char¬ 
ity,  members  of  societies  for  the  prevention  of 
cruelty  to  animals,  temperance  fanatics,  hole- 
and-corner  reformers  of  every  imaginable  kind. 
This  form  of  Socialism  has,  moreover,  been 
worked  out  into  complete  systems. 

We  may  cite  Proudhon’s  Philosophy  of  Pov¬ 
erty  as  an  example  of  this  form. 

The  socialistic  bourgeois  want  all  the  advan¬ 
tages  of  modern  social  conditions  without  the 
struggles  and  dangers  necessarily  resulting 
therefrom.  They  desire  the  existing  state  of  so¬ 
ciety  minus  its  revolutionary  and  disintegrat¬ 
ing  elements.  They  wish  for  a  bourgeoisie  with¬ 
out  a  proletariat.  The  bourgeoisie  naturally 
conceives  the  world  in  which  it  is  supreme  to  be 
the  best;  and  bourgeois  Socialism  develops  this 
comfortable  conception  into  various  more  or 
less  complete  systems.  In  requiring  the  prole¬ 
tariat  to  carry  out  such  a  system,  and  there¬ 
by  to  march  straightway  into  the  social  New 
Jerusalem,  it  but  requires  in  reality  that  the 
proletariat  should  remain  within  the  bounds  of 
existing  society  but  should  cast  away  all  its 
hateful  ideas  concerning  the  bourgeoisie. 


COMMUNIST  PARTY 

A  second  and  more  practical,  but  less  sys¬ 
tematic,  form  of  this  Socialism  sought  to  depre¬ 
ciate  every  revolutionary  movement  in  the  eyes 
of  the  working  class  by  showing  that  no  mere 
political  reform,  but  only  a  change  in  the  ma¬ 
terial  conditions  of  existence,  in  economic  rela¬ 
tions,  could  be  of  any  advantage  to  them.  By 
changes  in  the  material  conditions  of  existence, 
this  form  of  Socialism,  however,  by  no  means 
understands  abolition  of  the  bourgeois  relations 
of  production— an  abolition  that  can  be  ef¬ 
fected  only  by  a  revolution — but  administra¬ 
tive  reforms,  based  on  the  continued  existence 
of  these  relations;  reforms,  therefore,  that  in  no 
respect  affect  the  relations  between  capital  and 
labour,  but,  at  the  best,  lessen  the  cost  and  sim¬ 
plify  the  administrative  work  of  bourgeois  gov¬ 
ernment. 

Bourgeois  Socialism  attains  adequate  expres¬ 
sion  when,  and  only  when,  it  becomes  a  mere 
figure  of  speech: 

Free  trade:  for  the  benefit  of  the  working 
class.  Protective  duties:  for  the  benefit  of  the 
working  class.  Prison  reform:  for  the  benefit  of 
the  working  class.  These  are  the  last  words  and 
the  only  seriously  meant  words  of  bourgeois  So¬ 
cialism. 

It  is  summed  up  in  the  phrase:  the  bourgeois 
are  bourgeois— for  the  benefit  of  the  working 
class.  ^ 

3.  Critical-Utopian  Socialism  and  Communism 

We  do  not  here  refer  to  that  literature  which 
in  every  great  modern  revolution  has  always 
given  voice  to  the  demands  of  the  proletariat, 
such  as  the  writings  of  Babeuf  and  others. 

The  first  direct  attempts  of  the  proletariat 
to  attain  its  own  ends— made  in  times  of  uni¬ 
versal  excitement,  when  feudal  society  was  be¬ 
ing  overthrown— necessarily  failed,  owing  to 
the  then  undeveloped  state  of  the  proletariat, 
as  well  as  to  the  absence  of  the  economic  condi¬ 
tions  for  its  emancipation,  conditions  that  had 
yet  to  be  produced  and  could  be  produced  by 
the  impending  bourgeois  epoch  alone.  The  revo- 
lutionary  literature  that  accompanied  these 
first  movements  of  the  proletariat  had  necessar¬ 
ily  a  reactionary  character.  It  inculcated  uni¬ 
versal  asceticism  and  social  levelling  in  its 
crudest  form. 

The  Socialist  and  Communist  systems  prop¬ 
erly  so  called,  those  of  St.  Simon,  Fourier, 
Owen  and  others,  spring  into  existence  in  the 
early  undeveloped  period  described  above  of  the 
struggle  between  proletariat  and  bourgeoisie 
(see  Section  1.  Bourgeois  and  Proletarians). 


SOCIALIST  AND  COMMUNIST  LITERATURE 


The  founders  of  these  systems  see,  indeed, 
the  class  antagonisms  as  well  as  the  action  of 
the  decomposing  elements  in  the  prevailing 
form  of  society.  But  the  proletariat,  as  yet  in 
its  infancy,  offers  to  them  the  spectacle  of  a 
class  without  any  historical  initiative  or  any 
independent  political  movement. 

Since  the  development  of  class  antagonism 
keeps  even  pace  with  the  development  of  indus¬ 
try,  the  economic  situation,  as  such  Socialists 
find  it,  does  not  as  yet  offer  to  them  the  material 
conditions  for  the  emancipation  of  the  prole¬ 
tariat.  They  therefore  search  after  a  new  social 
science,  after  new  social  laws  that  are  to  create 
these  conditions. 

Historical  action  is  to  yield  to  their  personal 
inventive  action;  historically  created  condi¬ 
tions  of  emancipation  to  fantastic  ones;  and 
the  gradual,  spontaneous  class  organization  of 
the  proletariat  to  an  organization  of  society 
specially  contrived  by  these  inventors.  Future 
history  resolves  itself  in  their  eyes  into  the  prop¬ 
aganda  and  the  pfa-  tical  carrying  out  of  their 
social  plans. 

In  the  formation  of  their  plans  they  are  con¬ 
scious  of  caring  chiefly  for  the  interests  of  the 
working  class,  as  being  the  most  suffering  class. 
Only  from  the  point  of  view  of  being  the  most 
suffering  class  does  the  proletariat  exist  for 
them. 

The  undeveloped  state  of  the  class  struggle, 
as  well  as  their  own  surroundings,  causes  Social¬ 
ists  of  this  kind  to  consider  themselves  far  su¬ 
perior  to  all  class  antagonisms.  They  want  to 
improve  the  condition  of  every  member  of  so¬ 
ciety,  even  that  of  the  most  favoured.  Hence, 
they  habitually  appeal  to  society  at  large,  with¬ 
out  distinction  of  class;  nay,  by  preference,  to 
the  ruling  class.  For  how  can  people,  when  once 
they  understand  their  system,  fail  to  see  in  it 
the  best  possible  plan  of  the  best  possible  state 
of  society  ? 

Hence,  they  reject  all  political,  and  especially 
all  revolutionary,  action;  they  wish  to  attain 
their  ends  by  peaceful  means,  and  endeavour 
by  small  experiments,  necessarily  doomed  to 
failure,  and  by  the  force  of  example,  to  pave  the 
way  for  the  new  social  gospel. 

Such  fantastic  pictures  of  future  society, 
painted  at  a  time  when  the  proletariat  is  still  in 
a  very  undeveloped  state  and  has  but  a  fan¬ 
tastic  conception  of  its  own  position,  corre¬ 
spond  with  the  first  instinctive  yearnings  of  that 
class  for  a  general  reconstruction  of  society. 

But  these  Socialist  and  Communist  writings 
contain  also  a  critical  element.  They  attack 


433 

every  principle  of  existing  society.  Hence,  they 
are  full  of  the  most  valuable  materials  for  the 
enlightenment  of  the  working  class.  The  prac¬ 
tical  measures  proposed  in  them— such  as  the 
abolition  of  the  distinction  between  town  and 
country;  abolition  of  the  family,  of  private  gain 
and  of  the  wage-system;  the  proclamation  of 
social  harmony;  the  conversion  of  the  functions 
of  the  state  into  a  mere  superintendence  of  pro¬ 
duction— all  these  proposals  point  solely  to  the 
disappearance  of  class  antagonisms  which  were 
at  that  time  only  just  cropping  up,  and  which 
in  these  publications  are  recognized  in  their  ear¬ 
liest,  indistinct,  and  undefined  forms  only. 
These  proposals,  therefore,  are  of  a  purely  uto¬ 
pian  character. 

The  significance  of  Critical-Utopian  So¬ 
cialism  and  Communism  bears  an  inverse  rela¬ 
tion  to  historical  development.  In  proportion  as 
the  modern  class  struggle  develops  and  takes 
definite  shape  this  fantastic  standing  apart 
from  the  contest,  these  fantastic  attacks  on 
it,  lose  all  practical  value  and  all  theoretical 
justification.  Therefore,  although  the  origina¬ 
tors  of  these  systems  were  in  many  respects  rev¬ 
olutionary,  their  disciples  have  in  every  case 
formed  mere  reactionary  sects.  They  hold  fast 
by  the  original  views  of  their  masters  in  opposi¬ 
tion  to  the  progressive  historical  development 
of  the  proletariat.  They,  therefore,  endeavour, 
and  that  consistently,  to  deaden  the  class  strug¬ 
gle  and  to  reconcile  the  class  antagonisms.  They 
still  dream  of  experimental  realization  of  their 
social  utopias,  of  founding  isolated  phalamtcres> 
of  establishing  “Home  Colonies, ”  or  setting  up 
a  “Little  Icaria”1— pocket  editions  of  the  New 
Jerusalem— and  to  realize  all  these  castles  in 
the  air  they  are  compelled  to  appeal  to  the  feel¬ 
ings  and  purses  of  the  bourgeois.  By  degrees 
they  sink  into  the  category  of  the  reactionary 
conservative  Socialists  depicted  above,  differ¬ 
ing  from  these  only  by  more  systematic  pedan¬ 
try  and  by  their  fanatical  and  superstitious  be¬ 
lief  in  the  miraculous  effects  of  their  social  sci¬ 
ence. 

They,  therefore,  violently  oppose  all  political 
action  on  the  part  of  the  working  class;  such 
action,  according  to  them,  can  only  result  from 
blind  unbelief  in  the  new  gospel. 

The  Owenites  in  England  and  the  Fourierists 
in  France,  respectively,  oppose  the  Chartists 
and  the  R&Jormistcs . 

1  Phalanstbres  were  socialist  colonies  on  the  plan  of 
Charles  Fourier;  Icaria  was  the  name  given  by  Cabet  to 
his  Utopia,  and,  later  on,  to  his  American  Communist  col¬ 
ony. 


434 


MANIFESTO  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY 


CHAPTER  IV.  POSITION  OF  THE  COMMU¬ 
NISTS  IN  RELATION  TO  THE  VARIOUS 
EXISTING  OPPOSITION  PARTIES 


Section  II  has  made  clear  the  relations  of  the 
Communists  to  the  existing  working  class  par¬ 
ties,  such  as  the  Chartists  in  England  and  the 
Agrarian  Reformers  in  America. 

The  Communists  fight  for  the  attainment  of 
the  immediate  aims,  for  the  enforcement  of  the 
momentary  interests  of  the  working  class;  but 
in  the  movement  of  the  present  they  also  repre¬ 
sent  and  take  care  of  the  future  of  that  move¬ 
ment.  In  France  the  Communists  ally  them¬ 
selves  with  the  Social-Democrats1  against  the 
conservative  and  radical  bourgeoisie,  reserv¬ 
ing,  however,  the  right  to  take  up  a  critical 
position  in  regard  to  phrases  and  illusions  tradi¬ 
tionally  handed  down  from  the  great  Revolu¬ 
tion. 

In  Switzerland  they  support  the  Radicals 
without  losing  sight  of  the  fact  that  this  party 
consists  of  antagonistic  elements,  partly  of 
Democratic  Socialists,  in  the  French  sense, 
partly  of  radical  bourgeois. 

In  Poland  they  support  the  party  that  insists 
on  an  agrarian  revolution  as  the  prime  condi¬ 
tion  for  national  emancipation,  that  party 
which  fomented  the  insurrection  of  Cracow  in 
1846. 

In  Germany  they  fight  with  the  bourgeoisie 
whenever  it  acts  in  a  revolutionary  way,  against 
the  absolute  monarchy,  the  feudal  squirearchy, 
and  the  petty  bourgeoisie. 

1  The  party  then  represented  in  Parliament  by  Ledru- 
Rollin,  m  literature  by  Louis  Blanc,  m  the  daily  press  by 
the  Rijorme .  The  name  of  Social-Democracy  signifies,  with 
these  its  inventors,  a  section  of  the  Democratic  or  Repub¬ 
lican  Party  more  or  less  tinged  with  Socialism. 


But  they  never  cease  for  a  single  instant  to 
instil  into  the  working  class  the  clearest  pos¬ 
sible  recognition  of  the  hostile  antagonism  be¬ 
tween  bourgeoisie  and  proletariat,  in  order  that 
the  German  workers  may  straightway  use,  as 
so  many  weapons  against  the  bourgeoisie,  the 
social  and  political  conditions  that  the  bour¬ 
geoisie  must  necessarily  introduce  along  with 
its  supremacy,  and  in  order  that,  after  the  fall 
of  the  reactionary  classes  in  Germany,  the  fight 
against  the  bourgeoisie  itself  may  immediately 
begin. 

The  Communists  turn  their  attention  chiefly 
to  Germany  because  that  country  is  on  the  eve 
of  a  bourgeois  revolution  that  is  bound  to  be 
carried  out  under  more  advanced  conditions  of 
European  civili/ation  and  with  a  much  more 
developed  proletariat  than  what  existed  in  Eng¬ 
land  in  the  17th  and  in  France  in  the  18th  cen¬ 
tury,  and  because  the  bourgeois  revolution  in 
Germany  will  be  but  the  prelude  to  an  imme¬ 
diately  following  proletarian  revolution. 

In  short,  the  Communists  everywhere  sup¬ 
port  every  revolutionary  movement  against  the 
existing  social  and  political  order  of  things. 

In  all  these  movements  they  bring  to  the 
front  as  the  leading  question  in  each  case  the 
property  question,  no  matter  what  its  degree 
of  development  at  the  time. 

Finally,  they  labour  eve^where  for  the 
union  and  agreement  of  the  democratic  parties 
of  all  countries. 

The  Communists  disdain  to  conceal  their 
views  and  aims.  They  openly  declare  that  their 
ends  can  be  attained  only  by  the  forcible  over¬ 
throw  of  all  existing  social  conditions.  Let  the 
ruling  classes  tremble  at  a  Communist  revolu¬ 
tion.  The  proletarians  have  nothing  to  lose  but 
their  chains.  They  have  a  world  to  win. 

Workingmen  of  all  countries,  unite! 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.  S.  A* 


