GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  ~ 


H2N 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


4.  HOMER 

5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 

6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 

7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 

10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 

1 1.  EUCLID 
ARCHIMEDES 
APOLLONIUS 
NICOMACHUS 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 

13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 

16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 

17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 

23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 

24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 

27.  SHAKESPEARE  II 


GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  t 


=F^F^F 


^FF^F 


H^FFSF 


;r^FV^F 


^FP^F 


P^FF=SF 


^FF^F 


^^SFV^F 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 


29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 


31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 


32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 


34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 


35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 


36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 


37.  FIELDING 


38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 


39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 


43.  AMERICAN  STATE 
PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 


44.  BOSWELL 


45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 


46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 


50.  MARX 
ENGELS 


51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

54.  FREUD 


25388 


R 

808.8  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE 
G786  WESTERN  WORLD 
v#l  The  great  conversation# 

_ _ _ 1 


OCT  1 4  1992 


7818 


ARCHBISHOP  MITTY  LIBRARY 


Archbishop  Mitty  High  School 
Media  Center 
5000  Mitty  Way 
San  Jose,  CA  95129 


RULES 

1.  All  pupils  in  the  school  are  entitled  to 
use  the  library  and  to  borrow  books. 

2.  Reserved  books  may  be  borrowed  for 
one  period,  or  at  the  close  of  school,  and 
should  be  returned  before  the  first  class  the 
following  school  day. 

3.  All  other  books  may  be  retained  for  two 
weeks. 

4.  Injury  to  books  beyond  reasonable  wear 
and  all  losses  shall  be  paid  for. 

5.  No  books  may  be  taken  from  the  library 
without  being  charged. 


6  /e£ 


it:  ■ 


24112 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


L 

THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


h- 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2012 


http://archive.org/details/greatconversatioOOhutc 


xThe 

GREAT  CONVERSATION 

The  Substance  of  a  Liberal  Education 


BY  ROBERT  M.  HUTCHINS 


William  Benton,  Publisher 

ENCYCLOPAEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 

CHICAGO  ■  LONDON  ■  TORONTO  ■  GENEVA  •  SYDNEY  ■  TOKYO  ■  MANILA 


The  quotations,  with  permission,  used  by  Mr.  Hutchins  in  this  volume 
are  from  the  following  sources: 

Aims  of  Education  by  Alfred  N.  Whitehead  (The  Macmillan  Company, 

i9i9) 

Am  I  My  Brother's  Keeper?  by  Ananda  K.  Coomaraswamy  (The  John  Day 
Company  Inc.,  1947) 

Democracy  and  Education  by  John  Dewey  (The  Macmillan  Company,  1916) 
On  Education  by  Sir  Richard  Livingstone  (Cambridge  University  Press, 
*944) 

On  Understanding  Science  by  James  B.  Conant  (Yale  University  Press,  1947) 
Selected  Essays  by  T.  S.  Eliot  (Harcourt,  Brace  and  Company,  Inc.,  1950) 
“Social  Science  Among  the  Humanities”  by  Robert  Redfield,  in  Measure , 
vol.  1,  no.  1  (Henry  Regnery  Company,  1950) 

Quotations  from  Louis  W.  Norris  and  John  D.  Wild  are  from  comments 
in  Goals  For  American  Education  (The  Conference  on  Science,  Philosophy 
and  Religion  in  Their  Relation  to  the  Democratic  Way  of  Life,  Inc., 
distributed  by  Harper  &  Brothers,  1950) 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 

The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

No  part  of  this  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 
publisher. 

© 

1952 

by  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Twenty-seventh  Printing,  1984 

Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10312 
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-85229— 163-9 


2  5  388 


X  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World 

Robert  Maynard  Hutchins,  Editor 
Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board 

Stringfellow  Barr,  Professor  of  History  in  the  University 
of  Virginia,  and  formerly  President  of  St.  John’s  College 
in  Annapolis,  Maryland 

Scott  Buchanan,  philosopher,  and  formerly  Dean  of  St. 
John’s  College 

John  Erskine,  novelist,  and  formerly  Professor  of  English  in 
Columbia  University 

Clarence  Faust,  President  of  the  Fund  for  the  Advancement 
of  Education,  and  formerly  Dean  of  the  Humanities  and 
Sciences  in  Leland  Stanford  University 

Alexander  Meiklejohn,  philosopher,  and  formerly  Chair¬ 
man  of  the  School  for  Social  Studies  in  San  Francisco 

Joseph  Schwab,  scientist,  and  Professor  in  the  College  of  the 
University  of  Chicago 

Mark  Van  Doren,  poet,  and  Professor  of  English  in  Colum¬ 
bia  University 

Editorial  Consultants 

CANADA.-  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  Professor  of  French  Literature 
in  the  University  of  British  Columbia,  Canada 

ENGLAND:  F.  L.  Lucas,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  King’s 
College,  Cambridge,  England 

AUSTRALIA:  Walter  Murdoch,  Professor  of  English  Lit¬ 
erature  in  the  University  of  Western  Australia 


^  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World 


This  private  library  edition 

of  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World  was  originally 
made  possible  in  1952  by  the  generous  support  of  the  subscribers 
to  the  Founders’  Edition.  The  Publisher  and  Editors  are  grate¬ 
ful  to  those  who,  by  their  subscription  at  a  cost  of  $joo  a  set 
to  the  limited  Founders’  Edition  of  j 00  sets ,  facilitated  the 
general  publication  of  these  books. 

In  addition  to  individual  persons,  the  subscription  list  in¬ 
cluded  business  corporations  and  educational  institutions — li¬ 
braries  or  schools.  Some  subscribers  purchased  sets  for  themselves 
and  some  donated  the  sets  they  purchased  to  educational  institu¬ 
tions. 

Listed  below  are  the  names  of  the  subscribers  to,  and  the  donors 
and  recipients  of,  the  Founders’  Edition  of  Great  Books  of  the 
Western  World.  The  names  of  a  certain  number  of  subscribers 
and  donors  have  been  withheld  at  their  request.  The  listing  is 
divided  into  the  following  four  groups: 

I.  Individual  Persons  who  subscribed  to  one  or 
more  sets  for  themselves  or  for  donation  to 
educational  institutions 

II.  Business  Corporations  which  subscribed  to  sets 
for  their  own  use  or  for  donation  to  educa¬ 
tional  institutions 


Ill  Educational  Institutions  which  subscribed  to 
sets  for  their  own  use,  and  philanthropic  or¬ 
ganizations  which  donated  sets  to  educational 
institutions 

IV.  Educational  Institutions  which  have  been  des¬ 
ignated  as  recipients  of  gift  sets 

In  the  first  three  lists  an  asterisk  after  the  name  of  the  person, 
business  corporation,  or  philanthropic  organisation  indicates 
subscribers  to  two  or  more  sets,  or  donors  of  sets  to  educational  in¬ 
stitutions.  Except  for  those  whose  names  are  withheld  at  their 
request,  the  names  of  donors  are  indicated  in  the  fourth  list  in 
parentheses  after  the  name  of  the  educational  institution  which 
received  the  gift  set  horn  them. 


John  Charles  Acton 
Mrs.  Sarah  Wood  Addington 
James  F.  Albright 
Bernice  Wells  Aldridge 
Dr.  Hector  M.  Davila  Alonso 
Charles  Lesley  Ames 
Clinton  P.  Anderson* 

J.  M.  Arvey 
C.  H.  Babcock 
George  Backer 
George  F.  Baker,  Jr.* 

Mrs.  James  H.  Becker 
Paul  E.  Becker 
S.  N.  Behrman 
Laird  Bell 

The  Rt.  Hon.  David  Ben-Gurion 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Clayton  W.  Bernhardt* 
Philip  Case  Biggert 
Walter  R.  Bimson 
Mrs.  Tiffany  Blake* 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Carleton  Blunt* 


Corwin  Hefright  Boate 
George  C.  Bolian  II 
J.  A.  Bolz,  M.D. 

Edwin  G.  Booz 
Frederic  M.  Bos  worth* 

Scott  Buchanan* 

Walther  Buchen 
Britton  I.  Budd* 

Leo  Burnett 

Mrs.  Adelaide  Cameron 

Frank  Capra 

Mrs.  John  Alden  Carpenter 
Alfred  T.  Carton* 

Rev.  Charles  S.  Casassa,  S.J. 

Joseph  and  Margaret  Chadwick 

Mrs.  Gilbert  W.  Chapman 

Alfredo  Chavero 

John  Timothy  Chord 

Jack  F.  Chrysler 

Carleton  A.  Cleveland* 

Edward  L.  Clissold 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Marvin  H.  Coleman 

Edward  Lyon  Compere,  M.D. 

Fairfax  M.  Cone 


John  Cowles* 

Abraham  M.  Davis 
J.  Lionberger  Davis* 

E.  DeGolyer* 

Edison  Dick* 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gaylord  Donnelley 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  James  H.  Douglas,  Jr. 
Gordon  Duke 
Alfred  K.  Eddy* 

C.  Fraser  Elliott,  C.M.G.,  K.C. 
Mrs.  Arthur  E.  English* 

Max  Epstein 

Armand  Grover  Erpf 

D.  C.  Everest* 

Dr.  Harold  E.  Farmer 
Millard  C.  Faught 
Harry  G.  Fernquist 
Marshall  Field 
Marshall  Field,  Jr. 

Richard  J.  Finnegan 
Clark  W.  Finnerud,  M.D 
Morris  Fishbein,  M.D. 

Louis  William  Forrey 
Charles  Y.  Freeman* 


Mr.  and  Mrs.  A.  J.  Freiler 
Edward  P.  Gallagher 
Edward  F.  Gallahue 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Robert  W.  Galvin 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Otto  Emil  Geppert 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gerald  S.  Gidwitz 
A.  M.  Gilbert 
Alfred  C.  Glassell,  Jr. 

Richard  E.  Gold 
Joel  Goldblatt 
William  T.  Golden 
Benedict  K.  Goodman 
Pierre  F.  Goodrich* 

Albert  H.  Gordon 
Edward  R.  Gould 
Charles  M.  Grace* 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Alan  R.  Graff 
Henry  S.  Griffing 
Vicente  Leon  Guerrero 
Eunice  F.  Hale* 

Jake  L.  Hamon 
Irving  Brooks  Harris 
Dr.  Emil  D.  W.  Hauser 
R.  E.  Havenstrite 


Will  H.  Hays 

Dr.  and  Mrs.  Paul  G.  Henley 
Burns  Henry,  Jr. 

Henry  H.  Hill 
Conrad  N.  Hilton 
Wm.  A.  Hirsh,  Jr. 

Oveta  Culp  Hobby 

Paul  G.  Hoffman 

Albert  L.  Hopkins 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cyril  O.  Houle 

G.  T.  Howson  and  J.  H.  Michener* 

A.  Norman  Into* 

Sr.  Manuel  Senderos  Irigoyen 
R.  G.  Ivey 

Proehl  Haller  Jaklon 
Sidney  L.  James 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Merlin  E.  Johnson 
Col.  Kilbourne  Johnston,  U.S.A.  (Ret.) 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  Leddy  Jones* 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jack  S.  Josey 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  William  H.  Joyce,  Jr. 

George  T.  Keating* 

John  E.  Kenney 
Meyer  Kestnbaum 


Willard  V.  King* 

Geoffrey  Knight 
John  S.  Knight 
R.  C.  Kramer* 

Roy  E.  Larsen 

Sam  Laud 

Marc  A.  Law 

Dr.  Theodore  K.  Lawless 

Jeffrey  L.  Lazarus 

Foreman  M.  Lebold* 

David  Lester 
Henry  R.  Levy* 

Isaac  D.  Levy* 

Charles  W.  Lewis 
Harold  F.  Linder* 

Walter  Lippmann 
Glen  A.  Lloyd* 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Henry  A.  Loeb* 
John  Langeloth  Loeb* 
Nanna  Rasmussen  Lothe 
Irwin  J.  Lubbers 
Henry  R.  Luce 
Hughston  M.  McBain 
Charles  E.  McCarthy 


Fowler  McCormick 

John  Wright  McGhee 

Arthur  B.  McGlothlan,  M.D.,  F.A.C.R. 

Earle  McKay 

Zachary  McKay 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  George  B.  McKibbin* 
Alan  Robert  McNabb 
Andrew  McNally  III 
Lewis  W.  MacNaughton 
John  W.  Maloney* 

Fred  L.  Mandel,  Jr. 

Col.  Leon  Mandel 
Joseph  L.  Mankiewicz 
James  A.  Markle 
Wirt  P.  Marks,  Jr. 

Arthur  F.  Marquette 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Samuel  A.  Marx 
Morton  D.  May 
Paul  Mellon* 

Mrs.  Thomas  A.  Mellon* 

John  P.  Mentzer 
Dr.  Henry  Mezger 
Olius  P.  Michaels 
Marvin  Millsap 


Mr.  and  Mrs.  Carleton  Mitchell 
Mrs.  Charlotte  I.  Morse 
Bernard  Mortimer 
Sol  Morton 
Carl  E.  Moses 
Robert  C.  Munnecke 
Elbert  Haven  Neese 
Walter  Gustav  Nelson 
John  Nuveen 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  Sanford  Otis 
Walter  P.  Paepcke 
William  S.  Paley 
Mrs.  Potter  Palmer 
Thomas  Parr  an,  M.D.* 

Miss  Alicia  Patterson 
Robert  Pollak* 

Ronald  Price,  M.D. 

George  E.  Probst 
Andrew  E.  Propper 
B.  Earl  Puckett 
Ernest  E.  Quantrell 
Henry  Regnery 
Ethel  Linder  Reiner 
Raymond  H.  Reiss 


Herman  Henry  Ridder 
George  Rieveschl,  Jr. 

Joel  Rocha,  Jr. 

Mrs.  William  M.  Rogers 
Charles  J.  Rosenbloom* 

M.  A.  Rosenthal 
Lessing  J.  Rosenwald 
George  W.  Rossetter 
Raymond  Rubicam 
Arthur  L.  H.  Rubin* 

Mrs.  Clive  Runnells* 

Robert  J.  Rush 
Mrs.  Paul  S.  Russell 
Wm.  J.  Samford 
Harry  W.  Schacter 
Harry  Scherman* 

Sydney  K.  Schiff 
Willem  C.  Schilthuis 
Adolph  W.  Schmidt 
M.  Lincoln  Schuster 
Charles  Ward  Seabury 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  George  L.  Seaton 
Lester  N.  Selig 
John  Lawson  Senior,  Jr. 


Alfred  Shaw 

Wilfred  L.  Shea 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Renslow  P.  Sherer* 

Leo  J.  Sheridan 

WlCKLIFFE  SHREVE 

Henry  Carlton  Shull* 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Louis  H.  Silver* 

John  L.  Simpson 
Tom  Slick 
Ralph  H.  Smale 
William  A.  Smith 
True  E.  Snowden* 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  John  V  Spachner 
A.  N.  Spanel* 

Albert  B.  Spector 
Leo  Spitz* 

Thos.  G.  Staley 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  W.  T.  Stalter* 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jay  Z.  Steinberg 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  William  Sherman  Street 

Mrs.  Ralph  Sullivant 

Elbert  Gary  Sutcliffe* 

Mrs.  Alden  B.  Swift 
Claire  D.  Swift* 


Harold  H.  Swift* 

H.  J.  Szold* 

Maurice  Joseph  Taylor,  M.D. 

M.  E.  Trapp,  Jr. 

Donald  S.  Trumbull* 

Adolph  Ullman 

Alfred  G.  Vanderbilt 

Galen  Van  Meter 

Robert  and  Anne  Vvn  Valkenburgh 

Charles  Vidor 

Dr.  Harold  C.  Voris 

Charles  R.  Walgreen,  Jr. 

William  M.  Ward 
George  H.  Watkins 
James  B.  Webber,  Jr. 

Richard  Weil,  Jr. 

Eric  W.  Weinmann 
Donald  P.  Welles 
Edward  K.  Welles 
Robert  Avery  Whitney 
Louis  Stoddard  Wilder 
Mrs.  Lynn  A.  Williams 
Raymond  H.  Wittcoff 
Max  Woolpy 


Thomas  R.  Yglesias 
James  Webb  Young* 

Ben  D.  Zevin 
Herbert  P.  Zimmermann 
Esther  Somerfeld-Ziskind,  M.D.,  and 
Eugene  Ziskind,  M.D. 


ill  9 


American  Typesetting  Corporation,  Chicago,  Illinois 
C.  C.  Anderson  Company,  Boise,  Idaho* 

C.  C.  Anderson  Company,  Ogden,  Utah* 

Arthur  Young  &  Company,  Chicago,  Illinois 
Barnes- Woodin,  Yakima,  Washington* 

The  Bon  Marche,  Everett,  Washington* 

The  Bon  Marche,  Longview,  Washington* 

The  Bon  Marche,  Spokane,  Washington * 

The  Bon  Marche,  Tacoma,  Washington* 

The  Bon  Marche,  Walla  Walla,  Washington* 

The  Bon  Ton,  Lebanon,  Pennsylvania* 

Container  Corporation  of  America,  Chicago,  Illinois 
Converse  Rubber  Corporation,  Malden,  Massachusetts 
Courier  Journal  &  Louisville  Times,  Louisville,  Kentucky 
Dey  Bros.  &  Company,  Syracuse,  New  York* 

L.  S.  Donaldson  Company,  Rapid  City,  South  Dakota* 
Doubleday  &  Company,  Inc.,  New  York,  New  York 
-  The  L.  H.  Field  Company,  Jackson,  Michigan* 

Geneva  Steel  Company,  Geneva,  Utah* 
Hardy-Herpolsheimer  Company,  Muskegon,  Michigan* 
Heer’s,  Inc.,  Springfield,  Missouri* 


Herpolsheimer  Company,  Grand  Rapids ',  Michigan* 
•Joske’s  of  Texas,  San  Antonio,  Texas* 

Kennecott  Copper  Corporation,  Chino  Mines  Division, 
Hurley,  New  Mexico* 

Wm.  Laubach  &  Sons,  Easton,  Pennsylvania* 

Maas  Bros.,  Tampa,  Florida* 

Marshall  Field  &  Company,  Chicago,  Illinois 
Metzger- Wright  Company,  Warren,  Pennsylvania* 

The  Meyer’s  Company,  Greensboro,  North  Carolina* 
Michigan  National  Bank,  Lansing,  Michigan* 

The  Muller  Company,  Ltd.,  Lake  Charles,  Louisiana * 
The  Paris  of  Montana,  Great  Falls,  Montana* 

The  Parker  Pen  Company,  Janesville,  Wisconsin 
Pepperidge  Farm,  Inc.,  Norwalk,  Connecticut 
The  Philadelphia  Inquirer,  Walter  H.  Annenberg, 
Editor  and  Publisher,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania 

A.  Polsky  &  Company,  Akron,  Ohio* 

Pomeroy’s,  Inc.,  Pottsville,  Pennsylvania* 

Pomeroy’s,  Inc.,  Wilkes-Barre,  Pennsylvania* 

Potash  Company  of  America,  Carlsbad,  New  Mexico* 
Quackenbush  Company,  Paterson,  New  Jersey* 

The  Rollman  &  Sons  Company,  Cincinnati,  Ohio* 
Salomon  Bros.  &  Hutzler,  New  York,  New  York* 
Standard  Oil  Company  (Indiana),  Chicago,  Illinois 


Sterling-Lindner-Davis  Company,  Cleveland  Ohio * 

Time  Inc.,  Library,  New  York ,  New  York 

The  Titche-Goettinger  Company,  Dallas,  Texas * 

A.  E.  Troutman  Company,  Greensburg,  Pennsylvania* 
A.  E.  Troutman  Company,  Indiana,  Pennsylvania* 
United  States  Potash  Company,  New  York,  New  York* 
Westinghouse  Educational  Center,  Wilkinsburg, 
Pennsylvania 


illu> 


Bates  College,  Leiviston ,  Maine 

Champlain  College  Library,  State  University  of  New 
York,  Plattsburg ,  New  York 

Colleges  of  the  Seneca:  Hobart  College,  William  Smith 
College,  Geneva ,  New  York 

The  Cranbrook  Foundation,  Bloomfield  Hills,  Michigan 
Department  of  Education  (Mariano  Villaronga,  Com¬ 
missioner  of  Education),  San  Juan ,  Puerto  Rico 
Department  of  Social  Sciences,  United  States  Military 
Academy,  West  Point ,  New  York 

Detroit  Public  Library,  Detroit ,  Michigan 

Erin  Bain  Jones  Library  of  Comparative  Literature, 
Southern  Methodist  University,  Dallas,  Texas 

The  Fund  for  Adult  Education,  Pasadena,  California 

The  Fund  for  the  Advancement  of  Education,  New 
York,  New  York 

Friends  of  Charles  H.  Compton,  St.  Louis,  Missouri* 
Friends  of  the  Oak  Park  Library,  Oak  Park,  Illinois* 

Gertrude  Kistler  Memorial  Library,  Rosemont  College, 

Rosemont,  Pennsylvania 

Great  Books  Discussion  Leaders,  Berkeley,  California* 


Huntington  Hartford  Foundation,  Pacific  Palisades, 
California 

Illinois  State  Library,  Springfield ',  Illinois 
Iwate  University,  Morioka,  Japan 
Kent  State  University  Library,  Kent,  Ohio 
The  Library,  Southwestern  at  Memphis,  Memphis, 
Tennessee 

Lincoln  Library,  Springfield,  Illinois 
Marquette  University,  Milwaukee ,  Wisconsin 
Minneapolis  Athenaeum,  Minneapolis,  Minnesota 
Northern  Illinois  State  Teachers  College,  De  Kalb, 
Illinois 

North  Texas  State  College  Library,  Denton,  Texas 
Oklahoma  City  Libraries,  Oklahoma  City,  Oklahoma 
Purdue  University  Libraries,  Lafayette,  Indiana 
The  Robert  D.  Sanders  Foundation,  Jackson,  Mississipp 

St.  Mary's  College  of  California,  Saint  Mary’s  College, 
California 

St.  Paul  Public  Library,  St.  Paid,  Minnesota 
St.  Vincent  College  Library,  Latrobe ,  Pennsylvania 

Southern  Illinois  University  Libraries,  Carbondale, 
Illinois 

Stephens  Memorial  Library,  Southwestern  Louisiana 
Institute,  Lafayette,  Louisiana 

Texas  Technological  College,  Lubbock,  Texas 


University  of  Notre  Dame,  Notre  Dame,  Indiana 
University  of  Utah  Library,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah 
Valparaiso  University,  Valparaiso,  Indiana 
Western  Carolina  Teachers  College,  Cullowhee ,  North 
Carolina 

Wisconsin  State  College  Library,  Milwaukee ,  Wisconsin 


i  iv» 


Akron  Public  Library,  Akron,  Ohio  (A.  Polsky  and 
Company,  Akron ,  Ohio') 

Alderman  Library,  University  of  Virginia, 
Charlottesville,  Virginia  (Paul  Mellon) 

American  University,  Washington ,  D.C, 

Austin  College,  Sherman ,  Texas 

Barnard  College,  New  York ,  New  York 

Belhaven  College,  Jackson,  Mississippi  (Robert  D. 
Sanders  Foundation) 

Berea  College,  Berea,  Kentucky  (Henry  R.  Levy) 

Berkeley  Public  Library,  Berkeley,  California  (Great 
Books  Discussion  Leaders,  Berkeley,  California ) 

Beverly  Hills  Public  Library,  Beverly  Hills,  California 
(Mrs.  Arthur  E.  English) 

Bryn  Mawr  College,  Bryn  Mawr,  Pennsylvania  (Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Henry  A.  Loeb) 

Carleton  College,  Northfield,  Minnesota  (John  Cowles) 

Carnegie  Institute  Library,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania 
(Charles  J.  Rosenbloom) 

Case  Institute  of  Technology,  Cleveland,  Ohio  (Frederic 
M.  Bosworth) 

Catholic  University,  Washington,  D.C. 


Centre  College,  Danville  Kentucky  (Elbert  Gary 
Sutcliffe) 

Chamberlain-Hunt  Academy,  Port  Gibson,  Mississippi 
(Robert  D.  Sanders  Foundation) 

The  Choate  School,  Wallingford,  Connecticut  (Paul 
Mellon) 

The  Clayton  Library,  Clayton,  Missouri  (J.  Lionberger 
Davis) 

Cleveland  College,  Western  Reserve  University, 
Cleveland,  Ohio  (G.  T.  Howson  and  J.  H. 
Michener) 

Cleveland  Public  Library,  Cleveland,  Ohio  (Sterling- 
Lindner-Davis  Company,  Cleveland,  Ohio') 

Coe  College,  Cedar  Rapids,  Iowa 

College  of  Idaho,  Caldwell,  Idaho  (C.  C.  Anderson 
Company,  Boise,  Idaho ) 

College  of  Puget  Sound,  Tacoma,  Washington  (The 
Bon  Marche,  Tacoma,  Washington) 

The  College  of  St.  Joseph  on  the  Rio  Grande, 

Albuquerque,  New  Mexico  (Clinton  P.  Anderson) 

Columbia  College,  Columbia  University,  New  York, 
New  York  (Harold  F.  Linder) 

Dallas  Public  Library,  Dallas,  Texas  (Mr.  and  Mrs.  J. 
Leddy  Jones) 

Dartmouth  College,  Hanover,  New  Hampshire 
(Harold  F.  Linder) 


Deering  Library,  Northwestern  University,  Evanston , 
Illinois 

DeGolyer  Collection,  University  of  Oklahoma  Library, 
Norman ,  Oklahoma  (E.  DeGolyer) 

DePaul  University,  Chicago ,  Illinois  (Britton  I.  Budd) 
District  of  Columbia  Public  Libraries,  Washington,  D.C. 
Drury  College,  Springfield,  Missouri  (Heer’s,  Inc., 
Springfield ,  Missouri) 

Everett  Public  Library,  Everett,  Washington  (The  Bon 
Marche,  Everett,  Washington ) 

Fisk  University,  Nashville,  Tennessee  (George  T.  Keating) 
Foxcroft  School,  Middleburg,  Virginia  (Paul  Mellon) 
Franklin  and  Marshall  College,  Lancaster,  Pennsylvania 
(Isaac  D.  Levy) 

George  F.  Baker  Trust,  New  York  New  York  (George  F. 
Baker,  Jr.) 

Georgetown  University,  Washington,  D.C. 

George  Washington  University,  Washington,  D.C. 

Gilmour  Academy,  Gates  Mills,  Ohio  (Charles  M. 
Grace) 

Goshen  College,  Goshen,  Indiana  (Mr.  and  Mrs.  W.  T. 
Stalter) 

Graduate  School  of  Public  Health  Library,  University 
of  Pittsburgh,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania  (Thomas 
Parran,  M.D.) 


Grand  Rapids  Public  Library,  Grand  Rapids,  Michigan 
(Herpolsheimer  Company,  Grand  Rapids ', 
Michigan ) 

Great  Falls  Public  Library,  Gnat  Falls,  Montana 
(The  Paris  of  Montana,  Great  Falls,  Montana) 

Greensboro  Public  Library,  Greensboro,  North  Carolina 
(The  Meyer’s  Company,  Greensboro, 

North  Carolina ) 

Greensburg  Library  Association,  Greensburg,  Pennsylvania 
(A.  E.  Troutman  Company,  Greensburg, 
Pennsylvania ) 

The  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Michigan 
(Hardy-Herpolsheimer  Company,  Muskegon, 
Michigan) 

Harpur  College,  Endicott,  New  York  (Carleton  A. 
Cleveland) 

Harvey  Memorial  Library,  Moravian  College, 

Bethlehem,  Pennsylvania  (Mr.  and  Mrs.  Clayton  W. 
Bernhardt) 

The  Hawthorne  Library,  Berryville,  Virginia  (Paul 
Mellon) 

Hazlehurst  High  School,  Ha'zjehurst,  Mississippi 
(Robert  D.  Sanders  Foundation) 

Highland  Park  Public  Library,  Highland  Park,  Illinois 
(Donald  S.  Trumbull) 


Howard  University,  Washington,  DC.  (Harold  F. 
Linder) 

Indiana  County  and  Free  Library,  Indiana, 

Pennsylvania  (A.  E.  Troutman  Company 
Indiana ,  Pennsylvania') 

Institute  for  Advanced  Study,  Princeton,  New  Jersey 
(Harold  F.  Linder) 

International  House,  Columbia  University,  New  York, 
New  York 

International  House,  University  of  California,  Berkeley, 
California 

International  House,  University  of  Chicago,  Chicago, 
Illinois 

Iowa  Wesleyan  College,  Mount  Pleasant,  Iowa  (Mr.  and 
Mrs.  George  B.  McKibbin) 

Jackson  Public  Library,  Jackson,  Michigan  (The  L.  H. 
Field  Company,  Jackson,  Michigan ) 

Jewish  Community  Center,  Washington,  D.C. 

Jewish  Theological  Seminary  of  America,  New  York, 
New  York  (Arthur  L.  H.  Rubin) 

Jewish  Theological  Seminary  of  America,  New  York, 
New  York  (Salomon  Bros.  &  Hutzler) 

John  Hay  Library,  Brown  University,  Providence,  Rhode 
Island  (Harold  H.  Swift) 

Knox  College,  Galesburg  Illinois  (H.  J.  Szold) 


Lafayette  College,  Easton ,  Pennsylvania  (Wm.  Laubach 
&  Sons,  Easton,  Pennsylvania') 

Lake  Charles  Public  Library,  Lake  Charles,  Louisiana 
(The  Muller  Company,  Lake  Charles,  Louisiana) 

Lake  Forest  College,  Lake  Forest,  Illinois 

Lawrence  College,  Appleton,  Wisconsin  (D.  C.  Everest) 

Lebanon  Community  Library,  Lebanon,  Pennsylvania 
(The  Bon  Ton,  Lebanon,  Pennsylvania ) 

Liberal  Arts  Foundation,  New  York,  New  York  (Arthur 
L.  H.  Rubin) 

Library  of  International  Relations,  Chicago,  Illinois 
(Eunice  F.  Hale) 

Lincoln  Memorial  University,  Harrogate,  Tennessee 
(Foreman  M.  Lebold) 

Lower  Columbia  Junior  College,  Longview,  Washington 
(The  Bon  Marche,  Longview,  Washington ) 

Madeira  School,  Greenway,  Fairfax  County,  Virginia 

Mary  Armstrong  Ayers  Memorial,  Oak  Park,  Illinois 
(Friends  of  the  Oak  Park  Library,  Oak  Park , 
Illinois) 

Maryville  College,  Maryville,  Tennessee  (Glen  A.  Lloyd) 

Michigan  State  College,  East  Lansing,  Michigan 
(Michigan  National  Bank,  Lansing,  Michigan) 

Millsaps  College,  Jackson,  Mississippi  (Robert  D. 
Sanders  Foundation) 


Mississippi  Southern  College,  Hattiesburg, ,  Mississippi 
(Robert  D.  Sanders  Foundation) 

Morehouse  College,  Atlanta,  Georgia  (Harry  Scherman) 
Mount  Holyoke  College,  South  Hadley,  Massachusetts 
(Alfred  K.  Eddy) 

New  Mexico  Military  Institute,  Roswell,  New  Mexico 
(A.  Norman  Into) 

New  Mexico  School  of  Mines,  Socorro,  New  Mexico 
(United  States  Potash  Company,  New  York, 

New  York') 

New  Mexico  Western  College,  Silver  City,  New  Mexico 
(Kennecott  Copper  Corporation,  Chino  Mines 
Division,  Hurley,  New  Mexico ) 

The  New  York  Public  Library,  New  York,  New  York 
(Harold  F.  Linder) 

Nicholas  Murray  Butler  Library,  Columbia  University 
New  York,  New  York  (Willard  V.  King) 

Northland  College,  Ashland,  Wisconsin  (D.  C.  Everest) 
North  Shore  Congregation,  Israel  Library,  Glencoe, 
Illinois  (Mr.  and  Mrs.  Louis  H.  Silver) 

Osterhout  Free  Public  Library,  Wilkes-Barre, 
Pennsylvania  (Pomeroy’s  Inc.,  Wilkes-Barre, 
Pennsylvania ) 

Paterson  Free  Public  Library,  Paterson,  New  Jersey 
(Quackenbush  Company,  Paterson,  New  Jersey ) 
Pennsylvania  College  for  Women,  Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania  (Paul  Mellon) 


Pierson  College,  Yale  University,  New  Haven , 

Connecticut  (Harold  F.  Linder} 

Piney  Woods  School,  Piney  Woods,  Mississippi  (Robert 
D.  Sanders  Foundation) 

Pottsville  Free  Public  Library,  Pottsville,  Pennsylvania 
(Pomeroy’s  Inc.,  Pottsville,  Pennsylvania') 

Princeton  University,  Princeton,  New  Jersey  (Alfred  T. 
Carton) 

Rapid  City  Air  Force  Base,  Rapid  City,  South  Dakota 
(L.  S.  Donaldson  Company,  Rapid  City,  South 
Dakota) 

Rockford  College,  Rockford,  Illinois  (Mrs.  Tiffany  Blake) 

Roosevelt  College,  Chicago,  Illinois  (Robert  Poliak) 

St.  Benedict’s  College,  Atchison,  Kansas  (True  E. 
Snowden) 

St.  John’s  College,  Annapolis,  Maryland  (Paul  Mellon) 

St.  Louis  Public  Library,  St.  Louis,  Missouri  (Friends  of 
Charles  H.  Compton,  St.  Louis,  Missouri) 

Salt  Lake  City  School  Board,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah 
(Geneva  Steel  Company,  Geneva,  Utah) 

Saybrook  College,  Yale  University,  New  Haven, 
Connecticut  (Edison  Dick) 

Southwest  Missouri  State  College,  Springfield, 

Missouri  (Heer’s,  Inc.,  Springfield,  Missouri) 

Southern  Methodist  University,  University  Park,  Texas 
(The  Titche-Goettinger  Company,  Dallas,  Texas) 


State  College  of  Washington,  Pullman ,  Washington 
(John  W.  Maloney,  through  Friends  of  the 
Library  of  the  State  College  of  Washington, 
Pullman,  Washington) 

Sterling  Library,  Yale  University,  New  Haven 
Connecticut  (Mr.  and  Mrs.  Louis  H.  Silver) 

Swarthmore  College,  Swarthmore ,  Pennsylvania  (Harold 
F.  Linder) 

Syracuse  Public  Library,  Syracuse, ,  New  York  (Dey  Bros. 
&  Company,  Syracuse ,  New  York ) 

Trinity  College  Library,  Hartford,  Connecticut  (Paul 
Mellon) 

Trinity  University,  San  Antonio,  Texas  (Joske’s  of 
Texas,  San  Antonio,  Texas ) 

United  States  Naval  Academy,  Annapolis,  Maryland 
(Harold  F.  Linder) 

University  of  California,  Berkeley,  California 

University  of  California  at  Los  Angeles,  Los  Angeles, 
California 

University  of  Chicago,  Chicago,  Illinois  (Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Renslow  P.  Sherer) 

University  of  Chicago  Library,  Chicago,  Illinois 

University  of  Cincinnati,  Cincinnati,  Ohio  (The 
Rollman  &  Sons  Company,  Cincinnati,  Ohio) 

University  of  Iowa,  Iowa  City,  Iowa  (Henry  Carlton 
Shull) 


University  of  Maryland,  College  Park ,  Maryland 

University  of  New  Mexico,  Albuquerque ,  AW  Mexzc<? 
(Potash  Company  of  America,  Carlsbad ,  New 
MexzA?) 

University  of  Tampa,  Tampa ,  Florida  (Maas  Bros., 
Tampa,  Florida ) 

University  of  Virginia,  Charlottesville ,  Virginia 

University  of  Virginia,  Charlotte sville,  Virginia  (Paul 
Mellon) 

Valeria  Home,  Inc.,  Oscawana ,  New  Yi?r&  (John 
Langeloth  Loeb)~ 

Varnum  Memorial  Library,  Jeffersonville,  Vermont  (Scott 
Buchanan) 

Virginia  Military  Institute,  Lexington,  Virginia  (R.  C. 
Kramer) 

Virginia  Poly  technical  Institute,  Blacksburg,  Virginia 
(Paul  Mellon) 

Wabash  College,  Crawjordsville ,  Indiana  (Pierre  F. 
Goodrich) 

Warren  Library  Association,  Warren,  Pennsylvania 
(Metzger- Wright  Company,  Warren, 

Pennsylvania') 

Weber  College,  Ogden,  Utah  (C.  C.  Anderson 
Company,  Ogden,  Utah ) 

Wharton  County  High  School,  Wharton,  Texas  (Mrs. 
Clive  Runnells) 


Whitman  College,  Walla  Walla,  Washington  (The 
Bon  Marche,  Walla  Walla,  Washington ) 
Whitworth  College,  Spokane,  Washington  (The  Bon 
Marche,  Spokane,  Washington ) 

Wilson  College,  Chambersburg,  Pennsylvania  (Mrs. 
Thomas  A.  Mellon) 

Winchester  Foundation,  Winchester,  Indiana  (Pierre 
F.  Goodrich) 

Woodland  High  School,  Woodland,  California 
Yakima  Valley  Junior  College,  Yakima,  Washington 
(Barnes- Woodin  Company,  Yakima,  Washington ) 
Yale  University,  New  Haven,  Connecticut 
Young  Men’s  and  Young  Women’s  Hebrew 

Association,  New  York,  New  York  (John  Langeloth 
Loeb) 


Other  Institutions  or  Organizations 

Chicago  Lying-In  Hospital,  Chicago,  Illinois  (Claire  D. 
Swift) 

Commonwealth  Edison  Company  Library,  Chicago, 
Illinois  (Charles  Y.  Freeman) 

Minneapolis  Star  &  Tribune  Library,  Minneapolis 
Minnesota  (John  Cowles) 

The  Washington  Post  Library,  Washington,  D.C. 


GUIDE  TO  THIS  SET 


i.  The  list  of  authors 

See  front  end-papers  in  each  volume 

z.  The  list  of  the  great  ideas 

See  rear  end-papers  in  each  volume 

3.  Explanation  of  colors  of  bindings 

See  Volume  1,  p.  86 

4.  Biography  of  each  author 

See  the  Biographical  Note  preceding  each  author  s  work 

3.  Explanation  of  history  and  structure  of  this  set 
See  Volume  1,  pp.  xi-xxvii 

6.  Statement  of  the  purpose  of  this  set 

See  Volume  1,  pp.  i-8z 

7.  Possible  approaches  to  the  reading  of  this  set 

See  Volume  1,  pp.  85-89 

8.  Complete  list  of  works  included  in  this  set 

See  Volume  1,  pp.  93-110 

9.  Suggested  ten-year  reading  plan 

See  Volume  1,  pp.  nz-131 

10.  Explanation  of  purpose,  structure  and  use  of  The  Great 
Ideas,  A  Syntopicon  of  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World 
(Volumes  2 .  and  3) 

See  Volume  1,  pp.  xxv-xxvi;  and  Volume  z,  pp.  xi-xxxi 

1 1 .  General  contents  of  the  Syntopicon 

See  Volume  z,  p.  vii;  Volume  3,  p.  v 

iz.  History  of  the  Syntopicon  and  the  principles  and  methods 
of  its  construction 

See  Volume  3,  pp.  1x19-1x99 


GUIDE  TO  THIS  SET 


13.  Additional  readings  suggested  under  the  head  of  each  of 
the  101  great  ideas 

See  the  end  of  each  chapter  of  the  Syntopicon 

14.  Information  about  the  1,181  authors  and  1,603  tides 
cited  in  the  101  reading  lists 

See  the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  ( Volume  3, 

pp.  1143-1117) 

15.  Alphabetical  list  of  1,791  ideas,  concepts,  and  terms  dealt 
with  under  the  1,987  topics  of  the  Syntopicon 

See  the  Inventory  of  Terms  ( Volume  3,  pp.  1303-1345) 

16.  List  of  page  locations  of  the  Outlines  of  Topics  for  each 
of  the  101  great  ideas 

See  Volume  3,  p.  1346 


yu  I 


CONTENTS 


Preface:  The  History  and  Purpose  of  This  Set  xi 


The  Great  Conversation 


I. 

The  Tradition  of  the  West 

i 

II. 

Modern  Times 

7 

III. 

Education  and  Economics 

17 

IV. 

The  Disappearance  of  Liberal  Education 

M 

V. 

Experimental  Science 

31 

VI. 

Education  for  All 

4Z 

VII. 

The  Education  of  Adults 

5Z 

VIII. 

The  Next  Great  Change 

57 

IX. 

East  and  West 

66 

X. 

A  Letter  to  the  Reader 

74 

Possible  Approaches  to  This  Set 

85 

I: 

The  Contents  of  This  Set 

93 

II: 

Ten  Years  of  Reading  in  This  Set 

IIZ 

IX 


X:  PREFACE  g 


X  Until  lately  the  West  has 
regarded  it  as  self-evident  that  the  road  to  education  lay 
through  great  books.  No  man  was  educated  unless  he  was 
acquainted  with  the  masterpieces  of  his  tradition.  There  nev¬ 
er  was  very  much  doubt  in  anybody’s  mind  about  which  the 
masterpieces  were.  They  were  the  books  that  had  endured 
and  that  the  common  voice  of  mankind  called  the  finest  cre¬ 
ations,  in  writing,  of  the  Western  mind. 

In  the  course  of  history,  from  epoch  to  epoch,  new  books 
have  been  written  that  have  won  their  place  in  the  list.  Books 
once  thought  entitled  to  belong  to  it  have  been  superseded; 
and  this  process  of  change  will  continue  as  long  as  men  can 
think  and  write.  It  is  the  task  of  every  generation  to  reassess 
the  tradition  in  which  it  lives,  to  discard  what  it  cannot  use, 
and  to  bring  into  context  with  the  distant  and  intermediate 
past  the  most  recent  contributions  to  the  Great  Conversation. 
This  set  of  books  is  the  result  of  an  attempt  to  reappraise  and 
re-embody  the  tradition  of  the  West  for  our  generation. 


xi 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


The  Editors  do  not  believe  that  any  of  the  social  and 
political  changes  that  have  taken  place  in  the  last  fifty  years, 
or  any  that  now  seem  imminent,  have  invalidated  or  can  in¬ 
validate  the  tradition  or  make  it  irrelevant  for  modern  men. 
On  the  contrary,  they  are  convinced  that  the  West  needs  to 
recapture  and  re-emphasize  and  bring  to  bear  upon  its  present 
problems  the  wisdom  that  lies  in  the  works  of  its  greatest 
thinkers  and  in  the  discussion  that  they  have  carried  on. 

This  set  of  books  is  offered  in  no  antiquarian  spirit.  We 
have  not  seen  our  task  as  that  of  taking  tourists  on  a  visit  to 
ancient  ruins  or  to  the  quaint  productions  of  primitive  peo¬ 
ples.  We  have  not  thought  of  providing  our  readers  with 
hours  of  relaxation  or  with  an  escape  from  the  dreadful  cares 
that  are  the  lot  of  every^man  in  the  second  half  of  the  twen¬ 
tieth  century  after  Christ.  We  are  as  concerned  as  anybody 
else  at  the  headlong  plunge  into  the  abyss  that  Western  civil¬ 
ization  seems  to  be  taking.  We  believe  that  the  voices  that 
may  recall  the  West  to  sanity  are  those  which  have  taken 
part  in  the  Great  Conversation.  We  want  them  to  be  heard 
again — not  because  we  want  to  go  back  to  antiquity,  or  the 
Middle  Ages,  or  the  Renaissance,  or  the  Eighteenth  Century. 
We  are  quite  aware  that  we  do  not  live  in  any  time  but  the 
present,  and,  distressing  as  the  present  is,  we  would  not  care 
to  live  in  any  other  time  if  we  could.  We  want  the  voices  of 
the  Great  Conversation  to  be  heard  again  because  we  think 
they  may  help  us  to  learn  to  live  better  now. 

We  believe  that  in  the  passage  of  time  the  neglect  of  these 
books  in  the  twentieth  century  will  be  regarded  as  an  aber¬ 
ration,  and  not,  as  it  is  sometimes  called  today,  a  sign  of 
progress.  We  think  that  progress,  and  progress  in  education 
in  particular,  depends  on  the  incorporation  of  the  ideas  and 
images  included  in  this  set  in  the  daily  lives  of  all  of  us,  from 
childhood  through  old  age.  In  this  view  the  disappearance  of 
great  books  from  education  and  from  the  reading  of  adults 

xii 


PREFACE 


constitutes  a  calamity.  In  this  view  education  in  the  West  has 
been  steadily  deteriorating;  the  rising  generation  has  been  de¬ 
prived  of  its  birthright;  the  mess  of  pottage  it  has  received  in 
exchange  has  not  been  nutritious;  adults  have  come  to  lead 
lives  comparatively  rich  in  material  comforts  and  very  poor 
in  moral,  intellectual,  and  spiritual  tone. 

We  do  not  think  that  these  books  will  solve  all  our  prob¬ 
lems.  We  do  not  think  that  they  are  the  only  books  worth 
reading.  We  think  that  these  books  shed  some  light  on  all  our 
basic  problems,  and  that  it  is  folly  to  do  without  any  light  we 
can  get.  We  think  that  these  books  show  the  origins  of  many 
of  our  most  serious  difficulties.  We  think  that  the  spirit  they 
represent  and  the  habit  of  mind  they  teach  are  more  necessary 
today  than  ever  before.  We  think  that  the  reader  who  does 
his  best  to  understand  these  books  will  find  himself  led  to 
read  and  helped  to  understand  other  books.  We  think  that 
reading  and  understanding  great  books  will  give  him  a  stand¬ 
ard  by  which  to  judge  all  other  books. 

We  believe  that  the  reduction  of  the  citizen  to  an  object  of 
propaganda,  private  and  public,  is  one  of  the  greatest  dangers 
to  democracy.  A  prevalent  notion  is  that  the  great  mass  of 
the  people  cannot  understand  and  cannot  form  an  indepen¬ 
dent  judgment  upon  any  matter;  they  cannot  be  educated,  in 
the  sense  of  developing  their  intellectual  powers,  but  they 
can  be  bamboozled.  The  reiteration  of  slogans,  the  distortion 
of  the  news,  the  great  storm  of  propaganda  that  beats  upon 
the  citizen  twenty-four  hours  a  day  all  his  life  long  mean 
either  that  democracy  must  fall  a  prey  to  the  loudest  and 
most  persistent  propagandists  or  that  the  people  must  save 
themselves  by  strengthening  their  minds  so  that  they  can  ap¬ 
praise  the  issues  for  themselves. 

Great  books  alone  will  not  do  the  trick;  for  the  people 
must  have  the  information  on  which  to  base  a  judgment  as 
well  as  the  ability  to  make  one.  In  order  to  understand  infla- 

xiii 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


tion,  for  example,  and  to  have  an  intelligent  opinion  as  to 
what  can  be  done  about  it,  the  economic  facts  in  a  given 
country  at  a  given  time  have  to  be  available.  Great  books 
cannot  help  us  there.  But  they  can  help  us  to  that  grasp  of 
history,  politics,  morals,  and  economics  and  to  that  habit  of 
mind  which  are  needed  to  form  a  valid  judgment  on  the  issue. 
Great  books  may  even  help  us  to  know  what  information  we 
should  demand.  If  we  knew  what  information  to  demand  we 
might  have  a  better  chance  of  getting  it. 

Though  we  do  not  recommend  great  books  as  a  panacea  for 
our  ills,  we  must  admit  that  we  have  an  exceedingly  high 
opinion  of  them  as  an  educational  instrument.  We  think  of 
them  as  the  best  educational  instrument  for  young  people  and 
adults  today.  By  this  we  do  not  mean  that  this  particular  set 
is  the  last  word  that  can  be  said  on  the  subject.  We  may  have 
made  errors  of  selection.  We  hope  that  this  collection  may 
some  day  be  revised  in  the  light  of  the  criticism  it  will  re¬ 
ceive.  But  the  idea  that  liberal  education  is  the  education 
that  everybody  ought  to  have,  and  that  the  best  way  to  a 
liberal  education  in  the  West  is  through  the  greatest  works 
the  West  has  produced,  is  still,  in  our  view,  the  best  edu¬ 
cational  idea  there  is. 

The  elements  of  novelty  in  the  present-day  presentation  of 
this  idea  are  accounted  for  by  the  changes  of  the  past  fifty 
years.  For  reasons  that  will  be  later  described,  great  books 
have  disappeared,  or  almost  disappeared,  from  American  edu¬ 
cation.  Since  we  take  American  education  as  the  prototype  of 
education  in  any  highly  developed  industrial  democracy,  we 
predict  their  disappearance  everywhere  in  the  West.  As  I  have 
said,  we  regard  this  disappearance  as  an  aberration,  and  not 
as  an  indication  of  progress.  We  do  not  look  upon  this  disap¬ 
pearance  as  a  benefit  to  be  thankful  for,  but  as  an  error  that 
should  be  corrected.  The  element  of  novelty  that  results  from 


xiv 


PREFACE 


the  disappearance  of  the  books  we  take  to  be  novelty  only  in 
the  most  superficial  sense.  We  see  this  set  as  continuing  a 
tradition  that  has  been  only  momentarily  interrupted. 

A  second  element  of  novelty  in  the  presentation  of  these 
books  at  this  time  is  found  in  the  proposition  that  democracy 
requires  liberal  education  for  all.  We  believe  that  this  propo¬ 
sition  is  true.  We  concede  that  it  has  not  been  "scientifically” 
proved.  We  call  upon  our  fellow  citizens  to  test  it.  We  think 
they  will  agree  that,  if  this  is  the  ideal,  we  should  struggle  to 
reach  it  and  not  content  ourselves  with  inferior  substitutes 
until  we  are  satisfied  that  the  goal  cannot  be  attained. 

The  third  element  of  novelty  in  the  effort  to  restore  these 
books  to  education  is  found  in  the  conception  of  adult  edu¬ 
cation  that  we  wish  to  advance.  Until  very  recently  the 
education  of  adults  the  world  over  was  regarded  as  com¬ 
pensatory;  opportunity  for  adult  study  was  offered  those 
whose  economic,  social,  or  political  position  had  deprived 
them,  in  ways  often  regarded  as  unjust,  of  the  amount  of  for¬ 
mal  education  usual  among  the  "superior”  classes. 

I  am  referring  here,  of  course,  only  to  general  nonvoca- 
tional  education.  Many  other  kinds  of  educational  activities 
for  adults  have  traveled  under  other  banners :  labor  unions 
have  wanted  to  train  their  members  in  industrial  bargaining; 
individuals  have  wanted  to  prepare  themselves  for  better 
jobs.  When  a  man  had  made  up  for  the  deficiencies  of  his  for¬ 
mal  schooling,  his  obligation,  and  usually  his  desire,  to  edu¬ 
cate  himself  naturally  disappeared.  He  had  reached  the  goal 
he  had  set  for  himself.  I  think  it  fair  to  say  that  in  most  coun¬ 
tries  of  the  world  today  the  notion  that  a  man  who  had 
"had”  in  childhood  and  youth  the  best  institutional  educa¬ 
tion  the  country  had  to  offer  should  go  on  educating  himself 
all  his  life  would  be  regarded  as  fantastic. 

Yet  we  believe  that  the  obligation  rests  on  all  of  us,  unedu¬ 
cated,  miseducated,  and  educated  alike,  to  do  just  that.  We  do 


xv 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


not  depreciate  the  possibilities  of  these  books  as  a  means  of 
educating  young  people.  We  think  the  sooner  the  young  are 
introduced  to  the  Great  Conversation  the  better.  They  will 
not  be  able  to  understand  it  very  well;  but  they  should  be  in¬ 
troduced  to  it  in  the  hope  that  they  will  continue  to  take 
part  in  it  and  eventually  understand  it.  But  we  confess  that 
we  have  had  principally  in  mind  the  needs  of  the  adult  popu¬ 
lation,  who,  in  America  at  least,  have  as  a  result  of  the 
changes  of  the  last  fifty  years  the  leisure  to  become  educated 
men  and  women.  They  now  have  the  chance  to  understand 
themselves  through  understanding  their  tradition.  Our  prin¬ 
cipal  aim  in  putting  these  books  together  was  to  offer  them 
the  means  of  doing  so. 

The  members  of  the  Advisory  Board,  in  addition  to  long 
experience  as  teachers  of  young  people,  had  all  devoted  a 
large  part  of  their  lives  to  the  education  of  adults.  They  had 
all  sought  to  use  great  books  for  the  purpose  of  educating 
adults.  They  determined  to  try  to  offer  the  means  of  liberal 
education  in  a  coherent  program.  This  set  of  books  was  the 
result. 

The  Board  asked  itself  whether  an  individual  book  con¬ 
tributed  in  an  important  way  to  the  Great  Conversation.  The 
members  drew  upon  their  experience  in  teaching  as  a  guide. 
They  do  not  claim  that  all  the  great  books  of  the  West  are 
here.  They  would  not  be  embarrassed  at  the  suggestion  that 
they  had  omitted  a  book,  or  several  books,  greater  than 
any  they  had  included.  They  would  be  disturbed  if  they 
thought  they  had  omitted  books  essential  to  a  liberal  edu¬ 
cation  or  had  included  any  that  had  little  bearing  upon  it. 

The  discussions  of  the  Board  revealed  few  differences  of 
opinion  about  the  overwhelming  majority  of  the  books  in  the 
list.  The  set  is  almost  self-selected,  in  the  sense  that  one  book 
leads  to  another,  amplifying,  modifying,  or  contradicting  it. 


xvi 


PREFACE 


There  is  not  much  doubt  about  which  are  the  most  important 
voices  in  the  Great  Conversation.  Of  marginal  cases  there  are 
a  few.  Many  readers  will  be  disappointed  to  find  one,  at  least, 
of  their  favorite  works  missing.  Many  readers  will  be  sur¬ 
prised  to  find  some  author  of  whom  they  had  a  low  opinion 
given  a  place  of  honor.  The  final  decision  on  the  list  was 
made  by  me.  I  do  not  pretend  that  my  prejudices  played  no 
part;  I  would  like  to  claim  that  I  sought,  obtained,  and 
usually  accepted  excellent  advice. 

Readers  who  are  startled  to  find  the  Bible  omitted  from  the 
set  will  be  reassured  to  learn  that  this  was  done  only  because 
Bibles  are  already  widely  distributed,  and  it  was  felt  unneces¬ 
sary  to  bring  another,  by  way  of  this  set,  into  homes  that 
had  several  already.  References  to  the  Bible  are,  however, 
included  in  both  the  King  James  and  the  Douai  versions  under 
the  appropriate  topics  in  the  Syntopicon. 

The  Editors  felt  that  the  chronological  order  was  the  most 
appropriate  organizing  principle  for  the  volumes  of  this  set. 
Since  they  conceived  of  this  collection  of  books  as  repro¬ 
ducing  a  conversation  among  its  authors,  it  was  a  natural 
decision  to  make  the  successive  volumes  of  the  set  present,  so 
far  as  possible,  the  authors  in  the  temporal  sequence  in  which 
they  took  part  in  that  conversation. 

Examining  the  chronological  structure  of  the  set,  the 
reader  will  also  note  that  the  Great  Conversation  covers 
more  than  twenty-five  centuries.  But  he  may  wonder  at  its 
apparent  termination  with  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century. 
With  the  exception  of  some  of  Freud’s  writings,  all  the  other 
works  here  assembled  were  written  or  published  before  1900; 
and  some  of  Freud’s  important  works  were  published  be¬ 
fore  that  date. 

The  Editors  do  not  think  that  the  Great  Conversation 
came  to  an  end  before  the  twentieth  century  began.  On  the 
contrary,  they  know  that  the  Great  Conversation  has  been 

xvii 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


going  on  during  the  first  half  of  this  century,  and  they  hope 
it  will  continue  to  go  on  during  the  rest  of  this  century  and 
the  centuries  to  follow.  They  are  confident  that  great  books 
have  been  written  since  1900  and  that  the  twentieth  century 
will  contribute  many  new  voices  to  the  Great  Conversation. 

The  reason,  then,  for  the  omission  of  authors  and  works 
after  1900  is  simply  that  the  Editors  did  not  feel  that  they  or 
anyone  else  could  accurately  judge  the  merits  of  contempo¬ 
rary  writings.  During  the  editorial  deliberations  about  the 
contents  of  the  set,  more  difficult  problems  were  encountered 
in  the  case  of  nineteenth-century  authors  and  titles  than  with 
regard  to  those  of  any  preceding  century.  The  cause  of  these 
difficulties — the  proximity  of  these  authors  and  works  to  our 
own  day  and  our  consequent  lack  of  perspective  with  regard 
to  them — would  make  it  far  more  difficult  to  make  a  selection 
of  twentieth-century  authors.  If  the  reader  is  interested  in 
knowing  some  of  the  possible  candidates  for  inclusion  from 
the  twentieth  century,  he  will  find  their  names  in  the  Bibli¬ 
ography  of  Additional  Readings,  which  is  appended  to  the 
Syntopicon  (in  Volume  3,  pp.  1143-1117).  The  Additional 
Readings  that  come  at  the  end  of  each  of  the  Syntopicon  s  102. 
chapters  on  the  great  ideas  try  to  make  an  adequate  repre¬ 
sentation  of  works  written  in  this  century;  and  in  doing  so, 
they  name  books  that  may  prove  themselves  great,  as  other 
great  books  have  done,  by  submission  with  the  passage  of 
time  to  the  general  judgment  of  mankind. 

The  Editors  did  not  seek  to  assemble  a  set  of  books  repre¬ 
sentative  of  various  periods  or  countries.  Antiquity  and  the 
Middle  Ages,  the  Renaissance  and  modern  times,  are  included 
in  proportion  as  the  great  writers  of  these  epochs  contributed 
to  the  deepening,  extension,  or  enrichment  of  the  tradition  of 
the  West.  It  is  worth  noting  that,  though  the  period  from 
1500  to  1900  represents  less  than  one-sixth  of  the  total  extent 
of  the  literary  record  of  the  Western  tradition,  the  last  four 

xviii 


PREFACE 


hundred  years  is  represented  in  this  set  by  more  than  one-half 
the  volumes  of  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World. 

The  Editors  did  not,  in  short,  allot  a  certain  space  to  a 
certain  epoch  in  terms  of  the  amount  of  time  in  human  his¬ 
tory  that  it  consumed.  Nor  did  we  arbitrarily  allot  a  certain 
space  to  a  certain  country.  We  tried  to  find  the  most  impor¬ 
tant  voices  in  the  Conversation,  without  regard  to  the  lan¬ 
guage  they  spoke.  We  did  encounter  some  difficulties  with 
language  that  we  thought  insurmountable.  Where  the  ex¬ 
cellence  of  a  book  depended  principally  on  the  excellence  of 
its  language,  and  where  no  adequate  translation  could  be 
found  or  made,  we  were  constrained  reluctantly  to  omit  it. 

We  thought  it  no  part  of  our  duty  to  emphasize  national 
contributions,  even  those  of  our  own  country.  I  omitted 
Emerson,  Whitman,  Thoreau,  and  Mark  Twain,  all  very 
great  writers,  because  I  felt  that,  important  as  they  were, 
they  did  not  measure  up  to  the  other  books  in  the  set.  They 
carried  forward  the  Great  Conversation,  but  not  in  such  a 
way  as  to  be  indispensable  to  the  comprehension  of  it.  Ob¬ 
viously  in  a  set  made  up  of  a  limited  number  of  volumes  only 
the  writers  that  seemed  indispensable  could  be  included. 

Some  writers  have  made  an  important  contribution  to  the 
Great  Conversation,  but  in  a  way  that  makes  it  impossible  to 
include  it  in  a  set  like  this.  These  are  writers,  of  whom  Leib¬ 
nitz,  Voltaire,  and  Balzac  are  notable  examples,  whose  con¬ 
tribution  lies  in  the  total  volume  of  their  work,  rather  than 
in  a  few  great  works,  and  whose  total  volume  is  too  large 
to  be  included  or  whose  single  works  do  not  come  up  to  the 
standard  of  the  other  books  in  this  set. 

'  What  we  wanted  first  of  all,  of  course,  was  to  make  these 
books  available.  In  many  cases,  all  or  some  of  an  author’s 
works  included  in  this  set  were  unavailable.  They  were  either 
inaccessible  or  prohibitively  expensive.  This  is  true  of  works 
by  Aristotle,  Galen,  Euclid,  Archimedes,  Apollonius,  Nicom- 


xix 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


achus,  Ptolemy,  Copernicus,  Kepler,  Plotinus,  Aquinas, 
Gilbert,  Harvey,  Descartes,  Pascal,  Newton,  Kant,  Lavoisier, 
Fourier,  Faraday,  and  Freud. 

We  attach  importance  to  making  whole  works,  as  distin¬ 
guished  from  excerpts,  available;  and  in  all  but  three  cases, 
Aquinas,  Kepler,  and  Fourier,  the  443  works  of  the  74  auth¬ 
ors  in  this  set  are  printed  complete.  One  of  the  policies  upon 
which  the  Advisory  Board  insisted  most  strongly  was  that 
the  great  writers  should  be  allowed  to  speak  for  themselves. 
They  should  speak  with  their  full  voice  and  not  be  digested 
or  mutilated  by  editorial  decisions.  Undoubtedly  this  policy 
makes  reading  more  difficult;  for  the  reader  becomes  to  this 
extent  his  own  editor.  No  one  will  deny  that  many  arid 
stretches  are  contained  in  the  works  of  the  great  writers.  But 
we  believed  that  it  would  be  presumptuous  for  us  to  do 
the  reader’s  skipping  for  him.  When  Hermann  Hesse  referred 
to  the  present  as  "the  Age  of  the  Digest,”  he  did  not  intend 
to  say  anything  complimentary. 

Since  the  set  was  conceived  of  as  a  great  conversation,  it  is 
obvious  that  the  books  could  not  have  been  chosen  with  any 
dogma  or  even  with  any  point  of  view  in  mind.  In  a  conver¬ 
sation  that  has  gone  on  for  twenty-five  centuries,  all  dogmas 
and  points  of  view  appear.  Here  are  the  great  errors  as  well  as 
the  great  truths.  The  reader  has  to  determine  which  are  the 
errors  and  which  the  truths.  The  task  of  interpretation  and 
conclusion  is  his.  This  is  the  machinery  and  life  of  the  West¬ 
ern  tradition  in  the  hands  of  free  men. 

The  title  of  this  set  is  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World.  I 
shall  have  more  to  say  later  about  great  books  of  the  Eastern 
world  and  merely  wish  to  remark  here  that  in  omitting 
them  from  this  collection  we  do  not  intend  to  depreciate 
them.  The  conversation  presented  in  this  set  is  peculiar  to 
the  West.  We  believe  that  everybody,  Westerners  and  East¬ 
erners,  should  understand  it,  not  because  it  is  better  than 


xx 


PREFACE 


anything  the  East  can  show,  but  because  it  is  important  to 
understand  the  West.  We  hope  that  editors  who  understand 
the  tradition  of  the  East  will  do  for  that  part  of  the  world 
what  we  have  attempted  for  our  own  tradition  in  Great  Books 
of  the  Western  World  and  the  Syntoficon.  With  that  task  accom¬ 
plished  for  both  the  West  and  the  East,  it  should  be  possible 
to  put  together  the  common  elements  in  the  traditions  and 
to  present  Great  Books  of  the  World.  Few  things  could  do 
as  much  to  advance  the  unity  of  mankind. 

Some  readers  may  feel  that  we  have  been  too  hard  on  them 
in  insisting  that  the  great  works  of  science  are  a  part  of  the 
conversation  and  that  a  man  who  has  not  read  them  has  not 
acquired  a  liberal  education.  Others,  who  concede  the  im¬ 
portance  of  science  to  understanding  the  world  today,  may 
raise  the  question  of  whether  it  is  possible  to  understand 
modern  science  and  its  contribution  to  the  modern  world 
through  the  medium  of  books  of  the  past.  They  may  feel 
that,  whereas  philosophy,  history,  and  literature  can  pro¬ 
duce  works  that  are  always  fresh  and  new,  natural  science 
is  progressive  and  is  rapidly  outdated.  Why  read  Copernicus 
or  Faraday  if  scientists  now  know  everything  that  they 
knew,  and  much  more  besides? 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that,  some  years  after  the  books  had 
been  selected  for  this  set,  President  James  B.  Conant  of  Har¬ 
vard,  a  distinguished  chemist,  proposed  to  make  the  kind  of 
books  selected  central  in  a  reform  of  scientific  education  for 
the  layman.  He  said:  "What  I  propose  is  the  establishment  of 
one  or  more  courses  at  the  college  level  on  the  Tactics  and 
Strategy  of  Science.  The  objective  would  be  to  give  a  greater 
degree  of  understanding  of  science  by  the  close  study  of  a 
relatively  few  historical  examples  of  the  development  of 
science.  I  suggest  courses  at  the  college  level,  for  I  do  not  be¬ 
lieve  they  could  be  understood  earlier  in  a  student’s  educa- 


xxi 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


tion;  but  there  is  no  reason  why  they  could  not  become  im¬ 
portant  parts  of  programs  of  adult  education.  Indeed  such 
courses  might  well  prove  particularly  suitable  for  older 
groups  of  men  and  women.  .  .  .  The  greatest  hindrance  to  the 
widespread  use  of  case  histories  in  teaching  science  is  the  lack 
of  suitable  case  material.  ...  I  am  hopeful  that  if  a  sufficient 
number  of  teachers  become  interested  in  the  approach  sug¬ 
gested  in  the  following  pages  a  co-operative  enterprise  might 
be  launched  which  would  go  far  to  overcome  the  difficulties 
now  presented  by  the  paucity  of  printed  material  available 
for  student  use.  .  .  .  Together  they  might  plan  for  the  trans¬ 
lation,  editing,  and  publishing  in  suitable  form  of  extracts 
from  the  history  of  science  which  would  be  of  importance  to 
the  college  teacher.  It  is  no  small  undertaking,  but  one  of  the 
first  importance.  When  it'  is  remembered  that  two  of  the  most 
significant  works  in  the  history  of  science,  the  De  Revolutioni- 
bus  of  Copernicus  and  the  De  Fabrica  of  Vesalius,  have  never 
been  published  in  English  translation — to  say  nothing  of  the 
vast  amount  of  untranslated  writings  of  Kepler,  Galileo, 
Lavoisier,  Galvani,  and  a  host  of  others — it  is  evident  how 
much  remains  to  be  accomplished.” 

The  De  Revolutionibus  of  Copernicus  and  writings  of  Kep¬ 
ler,  Galileo,  and  Lavoisier  appear  in  this  set.  So  also  do  the 
mathematical  and  scientific  works  of  nineteen  others — Aris¬ 
totle,  Hippocrates,  Galen,  Euclid,  Archimedes,  Apollonius, 
Nicomachus,  Ptolemy,  Gilbert,  Harvey,  Descartes,  Pascal, 
Newton,  Huygens,  Fourier,  Faraday,  Darwin,  James,  and 
Freud. 

It  is  true  that  scientific  works  are  often  omitted  from  lists 
of  important  books  on  the  assumption  that  such  works  lack 
the  educational  significance  of  the  great  poems,  the  great  his¬ 
tories,  and  the  great  philosophies  and  are  somehow  not  part 
of  our  "culture”;  or  that  they  cannot  be  read  except  by  a  few 
specialists;  or  that  science,  unlike  poetry,  has  somehow  "ad- 

xxii 


PREFACE 


vanced”  in  modern  times  in  such  fashion  as  to  rob  the  great 
steps  in  that  advance  of  any  but  antiquarian  value. 

But  the  Editors  do  not  agree  that  the  great  poets  of  every 
time  are  to  be  walked  with  and  talked  with,  but  not  those 
who  brought  deep  insight  into  the  mystery  of  number  and 
magnitude  or  the  natural  phenomena  they  observed  about 
them. 

We  do  not  agree  that  better  means  of  observation  or  more 
precise  instruments  of  measurement  invalidate  the  thinking 
of  great  scientists  of  the  past,  even  where  such  means  cause 
us  to  correct  the  hypotheses  of  these  scientists. 

We  lament  the  man  who,  properly  desiring  to  wrestle  at 
first  hand  with  the  problems  that  the  great  poets  and  philos¬ 
ophers  have  raised,  yet  contents  himself  with  the  "results” 
and  "findings”  of  modern  science. 

We  believe  that  it  is  a  gratuitous  assumption  that  anybody 
can  read  poetry  but  very  few  can  read  mathematics.  In  view 
of  the  countless  engineers  and  technicians  in  our  society  we 
should  expect  many  of  our  readers  to  find  the  mathematical 
and  scientific  masterpieces  more  understandable  than  many 
other  works.  As  Stringfellow  Barr  has  said,  the  world  is 
rapidly  dividing  into  technicians  who  cannot  tell  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  a  good  poem  and  sentimental  doggerel  and  "cul¬ 
tured”  people  who  know  nothing  about  electricity  except 
that  you  push  a  button  when  you  want  it.  In  a  society  that 
is  highly  technological  the  sooner  the  citizens  understand 
the  basic  ideas  of  mathematics  and  natural  science  the  better. 

Poor  books  in  science  deal  with  specialties  that  serve  the 
technician  and  pride  themselves  on  juggling  jargon.  But  the 
■best  books  get  their  power  from  the  refinement  and  precise 
use  of  the  common  language.  As  far  as  the  medium  of  com¬ 
munication  is  concerned,  they  are  products  of  the  most  elegant 
literary  style,  saying  precisely  what  is  meant.  Like  literary 
books,  they  have  beginnings,  middles,  and  ends  that  move 

xxiii 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


from  familiar  situations  through  complications  to  unravel- 
ings  and  recognitions.  They  sometimes  end  in  the  revelation 
of  familiar  mysteries. 

The  atmosphere  we  breathe  today,  because  of  the  univer¬ 
sal  use  of  gadgets  and  machines,  because  the  word  "scientific” 
is  employed  in  a  magical  sense,  and  because  of  the  half-hidden 
technological  fabric  of  our  lives,  is  full  of  the  images  and 
myths  of  science.  The  minds  of  men  are  full  of  shadows 
and  reflections  of  things  that  they  cannot  grasp.  As  Scott 
Buchanan  has  said,  "Popular  science  has  made  every  man 
his  own  quack;  he  needs  some  of  the  doctor’s  medicine.” 

Much  of  this  is  the  result  of  the  mystery  that  modern  man 
has  made  of  mathematics.  It  is  supposed  that  the  scientist  or 
engineer  can  understand  great  scientific  works  because  he 
understands  mathematics,  which  nobody  but  a  scientist  or 
engineer  can  understand.  This  is  the  reason  why  a  fairly  con¬ 
tinuous  series  of  great  books  in  mathematics  is  contained  in 
this  set.  The  Editors  believe  that  mathematical  truth  will  set 
us  free  from  the  superstitious  awe  that  surrounds  the  scien¬ 
tific  enterprise  today. 

The  reader  will  be  able  to  decide  for  himself  whether  the 
mathematical  and  scientific  works  should  have  been  excluded 
from  this  set  on  the  score  of  their  difficulty  for  the  ordinary 
reader  by  comparing  the  difficulty, for  such  a  reader,  of  Dante’s 
Divine  Comedy  and  that  most  difficult  of  all  scientific  works, 
Newton’s  Principia.  There  is  a  cult  of  scholarship  surrounding 
Dante’s  masterpiece  that  is  almost  as  formidable  as  the  cult 
of  mathematics.  Most  of  this  work  is  in  philology,  meta¬ 
physics,  and  history.  The  ordinary  reader,  who  has  heard  of 
this  apparatus  but  never  used  it,  is  surprised  to  find  that  he 
understands  Dante  without  it. 

Both  the  cult  of  learning  around  Dante  and  the  cult  of 
ignorance  around  Newton  are  phenomena  of  the  vicious  spe¬ 
cialization  of  scholarship.  Much  of  the  background  of  Dante 


xxiv 


PREFACE 


is  in  Euclid  and  in  Ptolemy’s  astronomy;  the  structure  of 
both  the  poem  and  the  world  it  describes  is  mathematical. 
Almost  all  of  Newton  by  his  express  intention  is  Euclidean 
in  its  arithmetic  as  well  as  its  geometry.  Dante  no  more 
delivers  his  whole  message  without  benefit  of  some  mathe¬ 
matics  than  does  Newton.  Both  are  enhanced  by  the  presence 
of  the  scientific  voice  in  the  conversation  of  which  they  are 
parts. 

The  Advisory  Board  recommended  that  no  scholarly  appa¬ 
ratus  should  be  included  in  the  set.  No  "introductions”  giv¬ 
ing  the  Editors’  views  of  the  authors  should  appear.  The 
books  should  speak  for  themselves,  and  the  reader  should  de¬ 
cide  for  himself.  Great  books  contain  their  own  aids  to  read¬ 
ing;  that  is  one  reason  why  they  are  great.  Since  we  hold  that 
these  works  are  intelligible  to  the  ordinary  man,  we  see  no 
reason  to  interpose  ourselves  or  anybody  else  between  the 
author  and  the  reader. 

The  Syntopicon* ,  which  began  as  an  index  and  then  turned 
into  a  means  of  helping  the  reader  find  paths  through  the 
books,  has  ended,  in  addition  to  making  these  contributions 
as  a  tool  for  reference,  research,  and  study,  as  a  preliminary 
summation  of  the  issues  around  which  the  Great  Conversa¬ 
tion  has  revolved,  together  with  indications  of  the  course  of 
the  debate  at  this  moment.  Once  again,  the  Syntopicon  argues 
no  case  and  presents  no  point  of  view.  It  will  not  interpret  any 
book  to  the  reader;  it  will  not  tell  him  which  author  is  right 
and  which  wrong  on  any  question.  It  simply  supplies  him 
with  suggestions  as  to  how  he  may  conveniently  pursue  the 
-  study  of  any  important  topic  through  the  range  of  Western 
intellectual  history.  It  shows  him  how  to  find  what  great 


*For  a  more  elaborate  description  of  the  structure  and  uses  of  the  Syntopicon ,  see  the  Possible 
Approaches  to  This  Set  in  this  volume  (pp.  85-89)  and  the  Preface  to  the  Syntopicon  (Vol. 
11,  Pp.  xi-xxxi). 


XXV 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


men  have  had  to  say  about  the  greatest  issues  and  what  is 
being  said  about  these  issues  today. 

But  I  would  do  less  than  justice  to  Mr.  Adler’s  achieve¬ 
ment  if  I  left  the  matter  there.  The  Syntopicon  is,  in  addition 
to  all  this,  and  in  addition  to  being  a  monument  to  the  indus¬ 
try,  devotion,  and  intelligence  of  Mr.  Adler  and  his  staff,  a 
step  forward  in  the  thought  of  the  West.  It  indicates  where 
we  are:  where  the  agreements  and  disagreements  lie;  where 
the  problems  are;  where  the  work  has  to  be  done.  It  thus 
helps  to  keep  us  from  wasting  our  time  through  misunder¬ 
standing  and  points  to  the  issues  that  must  be  attacked. 
When  the  history  of  the  intellectual  life  of  this  century  is 
written,  the  Syntopicon  will  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  land¬ 
marks  in  it. 

The  Editors  must  record  their  gratitude  to  the  Advisory 
Board  and  to  their  Editorial  Consultants  in  the  British 
Empire. 

The  Advisory  Board  consisted  of  Stringfellow  Barr,  Pro¬ 
fessor  of  History  in  the  University  of  Virginia,  and  formerly 
President  of  St.  John’s  College  in  Annapolis,  Maryland; 
Scott  Buchanan,  philosopher,  and  formerly  Dean  of  St. 
John’s  College;  John  Erskine,  novelist,  and  formerly  Pro¬ 
fessor  of  English  in  Columbia  University;  Clarence  Faust, 
President  of  the  Fund  for  the  Advancement  of  Education 
and  formerly  Dean  of  the  Humanities  and  Sciences  in  Leland 
Stanford  University;  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  philosopher, 
and  formerly  Chairman  of  the  School  for  Social  Studies  in 
San  Francisco;  Joseph  Schwab,  scientist,  and  Professor  in  the 
College  of  the  University  of  Chicago;  and  Mark  Van  Doren, 
poet,  and  Professor  of  English  in  Columbia  University. 

The  Editorial  Consultants  were  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  Professor 
of  French  Literature  in  the  University  of  British  Columbia, 
Canada;  F.  L.  Lucas,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  King’s  College, 


xxvi 


PREFACE 


Cambridge,  England;  and  Walter  Murdoch,  Professor  of 
English  Literature  in  the  University  of  Western  Australia. 

The  Editors  would  also  express  their  gratitude  to  Rudolph 
Ruzicka,  designer  and  typographer,  who  planned  the  format 
of  this  set  of  books  and  designed  the  typography  of  its  indi¬ 
vidual  works  in  the  light  of  his  reading  of  them. 

The  Editors  wish  especially  to  mention  their  debt  to  the 
late  John  Erskine,  who  over  thirty  years  ago  began  the  move¬ 
ment  to  reintroduce  the  study  of  great  books  into  American 
education,  and  who  labored  long  and  arduously  on  the 
preparation  of  this  set.  Their  other  special  obligation  is  to 
Senator  William  Benton,  who  as  a  member  of  a  discussion 
group  in  Great  Books  proposed  the  publication  of  this  col¬ 
lection,  and  who  as  Publisher  and  Chairman  of  the  Board 
of  Encyclopedia  Britannica  has  followed  and  fostered  it  and 
finally  brought  it  out. 

Robert  M.  Hutchins 


xxvil 


' 

THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


&  CHAPTER  I  £ 


The  Tradition  of  the  West 


tradition  of  the  West  is 
embodied  in  the  Great  Conversation  that  began  in  the  dawn  of 
history  and  that  continues  to  the  present  day.  Whatever  the 
merits  of  other  civilizations  in  other  respects,  no  civilization 
is  like  that  of  the  West  in  this  respect.  No  other  civilization 
can  claim  that  its  defining  characteristic  is  a  dialogue  of  this 
sort.  No  dialogue  in  any  other  civilization  can  compare  with 
that  of  the  West  in  the  number  of  great  works  of  the  mind 
that  have  contributed  to  this  dialogue.  The  goal  toward  which 
Western  society  moves  is  the  Civilization  of  the  Dialogue.  The 
spirit  of  Western  civilization  is  the  spirit  of  inquiry.  Its  domi- 
-  nant  element  is  the  Logos.  Nothing  is  to  remain  undiscussed. 
Everybody  is  to  speak  his  mind.  No  proposition  is  to  be  left 
unexamined.  The  exchange  of  ideas  is  held  to  be  the  path  to 
the  realization  of  the  potentialities  of  the  race. 

At  a  time  when  the  West  is  most  often  represented  by  its 


i 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


friends  as  the  source  of  that  technology  for  which  the  whole 
world  yearns  and  by  its  enemies  as  the  fountainhead  of  selfish¬ 
ness  and  greed,  it  is  worth  remarking  that,  though  both  ele¬ 
ments  can  be  found  in  the  Great  Conversation,  the  Western 
ideal  is  not  one  or  the  other  strand  in  the  Conversation,  but 
the  Conversation  itself.  It  would  be  an  exaggeration  to  say 
that  Western  civilization  means  these  books.  The  exaggera¬ 
tion  would  lie  in  the  omission  of  the  plastic  arts  and  music, 
which  have  quite  as  important  a  part  in  Western  civilization 
as  the  great  productions  included  in  this  set.  But  to  the  extent 
to  which  books  can  present  the  idea  of  a  civilization,  the  idea 
of  Western  civilization  is  here  presented. 

These  books  are  the  means  of  understanding  our  society  and 
ourselves.  They  contain  the  great  ideas  that  dominate  us 
without  our  knowing  it. 'There  is  no  comparable  repository 
of  our  tradition. 

To  put  an  end  to  the  spirit  of  inquiry  that  has  characterized 
the  West  it  is  not  necessary  to  burn  the  books.  All  we  have  to 
do  is  to  leave  them  unread  for  a  few  generations.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  revival  of  interest  in  these  books  from  time  to  time 
throughout  history  has  provided  the  West  with  new  drive 
and  creativeness.  Great  books  have  salvaged,  preserved,  and 
transmitted  the  tradition  on  many  occasions  similar  to  our 
own. 

The  books  contain  not  merely  the  tradition,  but  also  the 
great  exponents  of  the  tradition.  Their  writings  are  models  of 
the  fine  and  liberal  arts.  They  hold  before  us  what  Whitehead 
called  "the  habitual  vision  of  greatness.”  These  books  have 
endured  because  men  in  every  era  have  been  lifted  beyond 
themselves  by  the  inspiration  of  their  example.  Sir  Richard 
Livingstone  said:  "We  are  tied  down,  all  our  days  and  for 
the  greater  part  of  our  days,  to  the  commonplace.  That  is 
where  contact  with  great  thinkers,  great  literature  helps. 
In  their  company  we  are  still  in  the  ordinary  world,  but 


z 


THE  TRADITION  OF  THE  WEST 


it  is  the  ordinary  world  transfigured  and  seen  through  the 
eyes  of  wisdom  and  genius.  And  some  of  their  vision  be¬ 
comes  our  own.” 

Until  very  recently  these  books  have  been  central  in  educa¬ 
tion  in  the  West.  They  were  the  principal  instrument  of  lib¬ 
eral  education,  the  education  that  men  acquired  as  an  end  in 
itself,  for  no  other  purpose  than  that  it  would  help  them  to 
be  men,  to  lead  human  lives,  and  better  lives  than  they  would 
otherwise  be  able  to  lead. 

The  aim  of  liberal  education  is  human  excellence,  both  pri¬ 
vate  and  public  (for  man  is  a  political  animal).  Its  object  is 
the  excellence  of  man  as  man  and  man  as  citizen.  It  regards 
man  as  an  end,  not  as  a  means;  and  it  regards  the  ends  of  life, 
and  not  the  means  to  it.  For  this  reason  it  is  the  education  of 
free  men.  Other  types  of  education  or  training  treat  men  as 
means  to  some  other  end,  or  are  at  best  concerned  with  the 
means  of  life,  with  earning  a  living,  and  not  with  its  ends. 

The  substance  of  liberal  education  appears  to  consist  in  the 
recognition  of  basic  problems,  in  knowledge  of  distinctions 
and  interrelations  in  subject  matter,  and  in  the  comprehen¬ 
sion  of  ideas. 

Liberal  education  seeks  to  clarify  the  basic  problems  and  to 
understand  the  way  in  which  one  problem  bears  upon  an¬ 
other.  It  strives  for  a  grasp  of  the  methods  by  which  solutions 
can  be  reached  and  the  formulation  of  standards  for  testing 
solutions  proposed.  The  liberally  educated  man  understands, 
for  example,  the  relation  between  the  problem  of  the  immor¬ 
tality  of  the  soul  and  the  problem  of  the  best  form  of  govern¬ 
ment;  he  understands  that  the  one  problem  cannot  be  solved 
-by  the  same  method  as  the  other,  and  that  the  test  that  he 
will  have  to  bring  to  bear  upon  solutions  proposed  differs 
from  one  problem  to  the  other. 

The  liberally  educated  man  understands,  by  understanding 
the  distinctions  and  interrelations  of  the  basic  fields  of  sub- 


3 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


ject  matter,  the  differences  and  connections  between  poetry 
and  history,  science  and  philosophy,  theoretical  and  practical 
science;  he  understands  that  the  same  methods  cannot  be  ap¬ 
plied  in  all  these  fields;  he  knows  the  methods  appropriate  to 
each. 

The  liberally  educated  man  comprehends  the  ideas  that  are 
relevant  to  the  basic  problems  and  that  operate  in  the  basic 
fields  of  subject  matter.  He  knows  what  is  meant  by  soul, 
state,  God,  beauty,  and  by  the  other  terms  that  are  basic  to 
the  discussion  of  fundamental  issues.  He  has  some  notion  of 
the  insights  that  these  ideas,  singly  or  in  combination,  pro¬ 
vide  concerning  human  experience. 

The  liberally  educated  man  has  a  mind  that  can  operate 
well  in  all  fields.  He  may  be  a  specialist  in  one  field.  But  he 
can  understand  anything  important  that  is  said  in  any  field 
and  can  see  and  use  the  light  that  it  sheds  upon  his  own.  The 
liberally  educated  man  is  at  home  in  the  world  of  ideas  and  in 
the  world  of  practical  affairs,  too,  because  he  understands  the 
relation  of  the  two.  He  may  not  be  at  home  in  the  world  of 
practical  affairs  in  the  sense  of  liking  the  life  he  finds  about 
him;  but  he  will  be  at  home  in  that  world  in  the  sense  that  he 
understands  it.  He  may  even  derive  from  his  liberal  education 
some  conception  of  the  difference  between  a  bad  world  and  a 
good  one  and  some  notion  of  the  ways  in  which  one  might  be 
turned  into  the  other. 

The  method  of  liberal  education  is  the  liberal  arts,  and  the 
result  of  liberal  education  is  discipline  in  those  arts.  The  lib¬ 
eral  artist  learns  to  read,  write,  speak,  listen,  understand,  and 
think.  He  learns  to  reckon,  measure,  and  manipulate  matter, 
quantity,  and  motion  in  order  to  predict,  produce,  and  ex¬ 
change.  As  we  live  in  the  tradition,  whether  we  know  it  or 
not,  so  we  are  all  liberal  artists,  whether  we  know  it  or  not. 
We  all  practice  the  liberal  arts,  well  or  badly,  all  the  time 
every  day.  As  we  should  understand  the  tradition  as  well  as 


4 


THE  TRADITION  OF  THE  WEST 


we  can  in  order  to  understand  ourselves,  so  we  should  be  as 
good  liberal  artists  as  we  can  in  order  to  become  as  fully  hu¬ 
man  as  we  can. 

The  liberal  arts  are  not  merely  indispensable;  they  are  un¬ 
avoidable.  Nobody  can  decide  for  himself  whether  he  is  going 
to  be  a  human  being.  The  only  question  open  to  him  is  wheth¬ 
er  he  will  be  an  ignorant,  undeveloped  one  or  one  who  has 
sought  to  reach  the  highest  point  he  is  capable  of  attaining. 
The  question,  in  short,  is  whether  he  will  be  a  poor  liberal 
artist  or  a  good  one. 

The  tradition  of  the  West  in  education  is  the  tradition  of 
the  liberal  arts.  Until  very  recently  nobody  took  seriously  the 
suggestion  that  there  could  be  any  other  ideal.  The  educa¬ 
tional  ideas  of  John  Locke,  for  example,  which  were  directed 
to  the  preparation  of  the  pupil  to  fit  conveniently  into  the  so¬ 
cial  and  economic  environment  in  which  he  found  himself, 
made  no  impression  on  Locke’s  contemporaries.  And  so  it  will 
be  found  that  other  voices  raised  in  criticism  of  liberal  educa¬ 
tion  fell  upon  deaf  ears  until  about  a  half-century  ago. 

This  Western  devotion  to  the  liberal  arts  and  liberal  educa¬ 
tion  must  have  been  largely  responsible  for  the  emergence  of 
democracy  as  an  ideal.  The  democratic  ideal  is  equal  oppor¬ 
tunity  for  full  human  development,  and,  since  the  liberal  arts 
are  the  basic  means  of  such  development,  devotion  to  democ¬ 
racy  naturally  results  from  devotion  to  them.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  acquisition  of  the  liberal  arts  is  an  intrinsic  part  of 
human  dignity,  then  the  democratic  ideal  demands  that  we 
should  strive  to  see  to  it  that  all  have  the  opportunity  to 
attain  to  the  fullest  measure  of  the  liberal  arts  that  is  possible 
-to  each. 

The  present  crisis  in  the  world  has  been  precipitated  by  the 
vision  of  the  range  of  practical  and  productive  art  offered  by 
the  West.  All  over  the  world  men  are  on  the  move,  expressing 
their  determination  to  share  in  the  technology  in  which  the 


5 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


West  has  excelled.  This  movement  is  one  of  the  most  spec¬ 
tacular  in  history,  and  everybody  is  agreed  upon  one  thing 
about  it:  we  do  not  know  how  to  deal  with  it.  It  would  be 
tragic  if  in  our  preoccupation  with  the  crisis  we  failed  to  hold 
up  as  a  thing  of  value  for  the  world,  even  as  that  which 
might  show  us  a  way  in  which  to  deal  with  the  crisis,  our 
vision  of  the  best  that  the  West  has  to  offer.  That  vision  is 
the  range  of  the  liberal  arts  and  liberal  education.  Our  deter¬ 
mination  about  the  distribution  of  the  fullest  measure  of 
these  arts  and  this  education  will  measure  our  loyalty  to  the 
best  in  our  own  past  and  our  total  service  to  the  future  of  the 
world. 

The  great  books  were  written  by  the  greatest  liberal  artists. 
They  exhibit  the  range  of  the  liberal  arts.  The  authors  were 
also  the  greatest  teachers.  They  taught  one  another.  They 
taught  all  previous  generations,  up  to  a  few  years  ago.  The 
question  is  whether  they  can  teach  us.  To  this  question  we 
now  turn. 


6 


SC  CHAPTER  II  X; 


M.odem  Times 


Until  recently  great  books 
were  central  in  liberal  education;  but  liberal  education  was 
limited  to  an  elite.  So  great  books  were  limited  to  an  elite  and 
to  those  few  of  the  submerged  classes  who  succeeded  in  break¬ 
ing  into  them  in  spite  of  the  barriers  that  society  threw  up 
around  them.  Where  anybody  bothered  to  defend  this  exclu¬ 
sion,  it  was  done  on  the  basis  that  only  those  with  exception¬ 
al  intelligence  and  leisure  could  understand  these  books,  and 
that  only  those  who  had  political  power  needed  to  under¬ 
stand  them. 

As  the  masses  were  admitted  to  political  activity,  it  was 
-assumed  that,  though  they  must  be  educated,  they  could  not 
be  educated  in  this  way.  They  had  to  learn  to  read  the  news¬ 
paper  and  to  write  a  business  letter  and  to  make  change;  but 
how  could  they  be  expected  to  study  Plato  or  Dante  or  New¬ 
ton?  All  that  they  needed  to  know  about  great  writers  could 


7 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


be  translated  for  them  in  textbooks  that  did  not  suffer  from 
the  embarrassment  of  being  either  difficult  or  great. 

The  people  now  have  political  power  and  leisure.  If  they 
have  not  always  used  them  wisely,  it  may  be  because  they 
have  not  had  the  kind  of  education  that  would  enable  them 
to  do  so. 

It  is  not  argued  that  education  through  great  books  and  the 
liberal  arts  was  a  poor  education  for  the  elite.  It  is  argued 
that  times  have  changed  and  that  such  an  education  would  be 
a  poor  education  for  anybody  today,  since  it  is  outmoded.  It 
is  remote  from  real  life  and  today’s  problems.  Many  of  the 
books  were  written  when  men  held  slaves.  Many  were  writ¬ 
ten  in  a  prescientific  and  preindustrial  age.  What  can  they 
have  to  say  to  us,  free,  democratic  citizens  of  a  scientific,  in¬ 
dustrial  era? 

This  is  a  kind  of  sociological  determinism.  As  economic  de¬ 
terminism  holds  that  all  activity  is  guided  and  regulated  by 
the  conditions  of  production,  so  sociological  determinism 
claims  that  intellectual  activity,  at  least,  is  always  relative 
to  a  particular  society,  so  that,  if  the  society  changes  in  an 
important  way,  the  activity  becomes  irrelevant.  Ideas  orig¬ 
inating  in  one  state  of  society  can  have  no  bearing  on  another 
state  of  society.  If  they  seem  to  have  a  bearing,  this  is  only 
seeming.  Ideas  are  the  rationalizations  of  the  social  condi¬ 
tions  that  exist  at  any  given  time.  If  we  seek  to  use  in  our 
own  time  the  ideas  of  another,  we  shall  deceive  ourselves,  be¬ 
cause  by  definition  these  ideas  have  no  application  to  any 
other  time  than  that  which  produced  them. 

History  and  common  sense  explode  sociological  determin¬ 
ism,  and  economic  determinism,  too.  There  is  something 
called  man  on  this  earth.  He  wrestles  with  his  problems  and 
tries  to  solve  them.  These  problems  change  from  epoch  to 
epoch  in  certain  respects;  they  remain  the  same  in  others. 
What  is  the  good  life?  What  is  a  good  state?  Is  there  a  God? 

8 


MODERN  TIMES 


What  is  the  nature  and  destiny  of  man?  Such  questions  and  a 
host  of  others  persist  because  man  persists,  and  they  will  per¬ 
sist  as  long  as  he  does.  Through  the  ages  great  men  have 
written  down  their  discussion  of  these  persistent  questions. 
Are  we  to  disdain  the  light  they  offer  us  on  the  ground  that 
they  lived  in  primitive,  far-off  times?  As  someone  has  re¬ 
marked,  "The  Greeks  could  not  broadcast  the  Aeschylean 
tragedy;  but  they  could  write  it.” 

This  set  of  books  explodes  sociological  determinism,  be¬ 
cause  it  shows  that  no  age  speaks  with  a  single  voice.  No  so¬ 
ciety  so  determines  intellectual  activity  that  there  can  be  no 
major  intellectual  disagreements  in  it.  The  conservative  and 
the  radical,  the  practical  man  and  the  theoretician,  the  ideal¬ 
ist  and  the  realist  will  be  found  in  every  society,  many  of 
them  conducting  the  same  kind  of  arguments  that  are  carried 
on  today.  Although  man  has  progressed  in  many  spectacular 
respects,  I  suppose  it  will  not  be  denied  that  he  is  today  worse 
off  in  many  respects,  some  of  them  more  important  than  the 
respects  in  which  he  has  improved.  We  should  not  reject  the 
help  of  the  sages  of  former  times.  We  need  all  the  help  we 
can  get. 

The  chief  exponent  of  the  view  that  times  have  changed 
and  that  our  conception  of  the  best  education  must  change 
with  them  is  that  most  misunderstood  of  all  philosophers  of 
education,  John  Dewey.  It  is  one  of  the  ironies  of  fate  that  his 
followers  who  have  misunderstood  him  have  carried  all  be¬ 
fore  them  in  American  education;  whereas  the  plans  he  pro¬ 
posed  have  never  been  tried.  The  notion  that  is  perhaps  most 
popular  in  the  United  States,  that  the  object  of  education  is 
-to  adjust  the  young  to  their  environment,  and  in  particular  to 
teach  them  to  make  a  living,  John  Dewey  roundly  con¬ 
demned;  yet  it  is  usually  advanced  in  his  name. 

Dewey  was  first  of  all  a  social  reformer.  He  could  not  advo¬ 
cate  adjustment  to  an  environment  the  brutality  and  injustice 


9 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


of  which  repelled  him.  He  believed  in  his  own  conception  of 
liberal  education  for  all  and  looked  upon  any  kind  of  training 
directed  to  learning  a  trade,  solely  to  make  a  living  at  it,  as 
narrowing  and  illiberal.  He  would  especially  repudiate  those 
who  seek  to  differentiate  among  the  young  on  the  basis  of 
their  capacity  in  order  to  say  that  only  some  are  capable  of 
acquiring  a  liberal  education,  in  Dewey’s  conception  of  it  or 
any  other. 

John  Dewey’s  central  position  is  stated  in  his  major  book 
on  education,  Democracy  and  Education ,  published  in  1916.  He 
says:  "Both  practically  and  philosophically,  the  key  to  the 
present  educational  situation  lies  in  a  gradual  reconstruction 
of  school  materials  and  methods  so  as  to  utilize  various  forms 
of  occupation  typifying  social  callings,  and  to  bring  out  their 
intellectual  and  moral  cohtent.”  The  occupations  that  are  to 
be  engaged  in  are  those  "which  are  indicated  by  the  needs 
and  interests  of  the  pupil  at  the  time.  Only  in  this  way  can 
there  be  on  the  part  of  the  educator  and  of  the  one  educated 
a  genuine  discovery  of  personal  aptitudes  so  that  the  proper 
choice  of  a  specialized  pursuit  in  later  life  may  be  indicated. 
Moreover,  the  discovery  of  capacity  and  aptitude  will  be  a 
constant  progress  as  long  as  growth  continues.” 

Dewey’s  chief  reason  for  this  recommendation  is  found  in 
his  psychology  of  learning.  "An  occupation  is  a  continuous 
activity  having  a  purpose.  Education  through  occupations  con¬ 
sequently  combines  within  itself  more  of  the  factors  condu¬ 
cive  to  learning  than  any  other  method.  It  calls  instincts  and 
habits  into  play;  it  is  a  foe  to  passive  receptivity.  It  has  an 
end  in  view;  results  are  to  be  accomplished.  Hence  it  appeals 
to  thought;  it  demands  that  an  idea  of  an  end  be  steadily 
maintained,  so  that  activity  must  be  progressive,  leading 
from  one  stage  to  another;  observation  and  ingenuity  are  re¬ 
quired  at  each  stage  to  overcome  obstacles  and  to  discover 
and  readjust  means  of  execution.  In  short,  an  occupation, 

10 


MODERN  TIMES 


pursued  under  conditions  where  the  realization  of  the  activity 
rather  than  merely  the  external  product  is  the  aim,  fulfills  the 
requirements  which  were  laid  down  earlier  in  connection 
with  the  discussion  of  aims,  interest,  and  thinking.” 

The  doctrine  is  that  occupations,  means  of  earning  a  living, 
should  constitute  the  object  of  the  attention  of  the  education¬ 
al  system.  This  is  not  for  the  purpose  of  teaching  the  pupils 
how  to  make  a  living.  Dewey  opposes  pure  vocational  train¬ 
ing  and  urges  that  "a  truly  liberal,  and  liberating,  education 
would  refuse  today  to  isolate  vocational  training  on  any  of  its 
levels  from  a  continuous  education  in  the  social,  moral  and 
scientific  contexts  within  which  wisely  administered  callings 
and  professions  must  function.”  He  proposes  education 
through  occupations  as  a  means  of  arousing  interest,  which 
it  is  assumed  can  be  aroused  by  the  study  of  occupations, 
of  helping  students  to  select  a  vocation,  and  of  showing 
them  the  significance  of  the  various  ways  of  earning  a  living. 

This  is  not  the  place  for  an  elaborate  critique  of  this  doc¬ 
trine.  It  is  perhaps  enough  to  say  that  the  misinterpretations 
and  misapplications  of  it  were  natural  and  inevitable.  A  pro¬ 
gram  of  social  reform  cannot  be  achieved  through  the  educa¬ 
tional  system  unless  it  is  one  that  the  society  is  prepared  to 
accept.  The  educational  system  is  the  society’s  attempt  to 
perpetuate  itself  and  its  own  ideals.  If  a  society  wishes  to  im¬ 
prove,  it  will  use  the  educational  system  for  that  purpose. 
Even  in  this  case  it  will  not  allow  the  educational  system  to 
determine  for  itself  what  improvement  is,  unless  it  is  a  soci¬ 
ety  that  believes  that  the  free  and  independent  exercise  of  in¬ 
dividual  judgment  is  the  best  way  to  achieve  improvement. 
If  a  society  does  not  wish  to  change,  it  cannot  be  reformed 
through  the  educational  system.  In  practice,  a  program  of  so¬ 
cial  reform  will  turn  out  to  be  what  Dewey’s  has  turned  out 
to  be  in  the  hands  of  his  followers,  a  program  of  social  ad¬ 
justment. 


ii 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


So  a  program  of  education  through  occupations  will  in  prac¬ 
tice  turn  out  to  be  a  program  of  education  for  occupations. 
Indeed,  Dewey  never  tells  us  how  it  can  be  anything  else.  He 
does  not  say  how  he  would  accomplish  the  study  of  the  mor¬ 
al,  social,  scientific,  and  intellectual  contexts  of  occupations 
without  resorting  to  those  great  books  and  those  liberal  arts 
which  he  regards  as  outmoded  by  experimental  science  and 
industrialization. 

Nor  does  he  indicate  any  awareness  of  the  practical  difficul¬ 
ties  of  having  occupations  studied  at  school.  The  school  can¬ 
not  duplicate  the  actual  conditions  of  industry,  commerce, 
finance,  and  the  learned  professions.  Machines,  methods, 
teachers  can  never  be  up  to  date.  The  conditions  in  the  educa¬ 
tional  system  generally  can  never  be  those  that  obtain  in  the 
modern  medical  school, 'in  which  the  atmosphere  of  reality 
does  not  have  to  be  created,  because  it  is  already  there:  the 
patient  is  really  sick;  the  professor  is  trying  to  cure  him;  and 
the  student  learns  to  be  a  doctor  by  acting  as  the  professor’s 
assistant. 

Dewey  is  certainly  correct  in  saying  that  the  actual  condi¬ 
tions  of  practice  teach  by  arousing  interest  and  defining  the 
aim.  But  he  fails  to  notice  that  this  leads  not  to  the  study  of 
occupations  in  the  educational  system,  but  to  the  study  of  oc¬ 
cupations  through  apprenticeship.  This  is  the  situation  in  the 
medical  school.  The  apprentice  is  committed  to  the  occupa¬ 
tion  and  learns  it  under  the  actual  conditions  of  practice.  In 
the  educational  system  generally  the  actual  conditions  of 
practice  cannot  be  successfully  imitated;  and  the  pupil  is  not 
committed  to  the  occupation. 

Since  the  pupil  is  not  committed  to  the  occupation,  the 
proposition  that  the  occupations  that  are  to  be  studied  are 
those  which  are  indicated  by  the  needs  and  interests  of  the 
pupil  at  the  time  is  alarming.  Between  the  ages  of  six  and 
fourteen  I  wanted,  in  rapid  succession,  to  be  an  iceman  (a  now 


ii 


MODERN  TIMES 


extinct  occupation),  a  "motorman”  on  the  horse  cars  (also 
extinct),  a  fireman,  a  postman,  a  policeman,  a  professional 
baseball  player,  and  a  missionary.  The  notion  that  what  my 
teachers  should  have  done  was  to  offer  me  a  study  of  these 
occupations  as  the  fancy  for  each  of  them  took  me  is  so 
startling  that  Mr.  Dewey’s  followers  may  perhaps  be  excused 
for  refusing  to  take  him  literally  and  contenting  themselves 
with  trade-school  instruction  looking  toward  earning  a 
living. 

The  educational  results  of  studies  of  occupations  as  the 
passing  whims  of  children  suggested  them  would  hardly  be 
what  Mr.  Dewey  hoped,  even  if  such  a  curriculum  could  in 
fact  be  instituted,  as  it  never  has  been.  One  educational 
proposition  I  take  to  be  axiomatic,  that  matters  that  demand 
experience  of  those  who  seek  to  understand  them  cannot  be 
understood  by  those  who  are  without  experience.  A  child 
can  and  should  learn  about  the  economic  and  political 
system  by  way  of  introduction  to  it,  but  he  cannot  under¬ 
stand  it,  in  the  same  way  or  to  the  same  degree  that  he  can 
understand  arithmetic,  music,  and  science.  Nor  can  he  un¬ 
derstand  the  moral  and  social  contents  of  occupations  in 
which  he  has  never  engaged  under  the  actual  conditions  of 
practice. 

As  the  quotations  I  have  given  show,  Mr.  Dewey  wants  to 
concentrate  on  the  study  of  occupations  because  he  thinks 
that  they  will  arouse  real  interest  and  lead  to  real  learning. 
But  the  interest  of  the  young  in  occupations  is  neither  intense 
nor  permanent,  except  in  the  case  of  an  individual  with  a  very 
special,  overwhelming  bent,  until  the  time  is  almost  at  hand 
■at  which  they  have  to  make  up  their  minds  about  the  choice 
of  their  careers.  Even  then  they  can  learn  little  about  them 
until  they  have  engaged  in  them,  as  the  apprentice  does,  un¬ 
der  the  conditions  under  which  they  are  carried  on  in  the 
world.  They  cannot  understand  them;  least  of  all  can  they 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


understand  their  social  and  economic  and  political  contexts, 
until  they  have  had  some  experience  as  wage  earners  and 
citizens.  I  say  again  that  imitation  experiences  in  the  class¬ 
room  are  not  a  substitute  for  actual  experiences  in  life.  Such 
experiences  can  lead  only  to  illusion:  they  lead  the  pupil  to 
think  he  understands  something  when  he  does  not. 

From  the  looks  of  things,  all  young  Americans  of  a  certain 
age  now  want  to  be  cowboys.  I  doubt  whether  it  would  be 
useful  for  the  schools  to  concentrate  on  cowpunching  in  its 
moral,  social,  political,  scientific,  and  intellectual  contexts. 
I  do  not  see  how  the  schools  could  do  it,  except  by  apprentic¬ 
ing  the  pupils  to  cowmen.  I  doubt  whether,  in  the  absence  of 
such  apprenticeship,  much  real  learning  would  result.  I  doubt 
that,  if  it  were  possible  to  arouse  real  interest  in  cowmanship 
and  its  various  contexts  'and  to  train  up  a  generation  of  ac¬ 
complished  cowboys  through  the  educational  system,  it 
would  be  in  the  public  interest  to  dedicate  the  educational 
system  to  this  purpose. 

The  reason  is,  apart  from  those  I  have  already  mentioned, 
that  to  regard  the  study  of  occupations  as  central  in  educa¬ 
tion  assigns  them  a  place  to  which  they  are  not  entitled. 
Work  is  for  the  sake  of  leisure.  What  will  Mr.  Dewey  do 
about  leisure?  Will  he  ignore  the  end  and  concentrate  on  the 
means,  so  that,  when  the  means  have  given  us  the  end,  we  do 
not  know  what  to  do  with  ourselves?  What  about  the  duties 
of  citizenship,  which  are  more  complicated  and  more  im¬ 
portant  than  at  any  time  in  history?  Will  the  study  of  occu¬ 
pations,  in  all  their  contexts,  help  us  to  achieve  that  in¬ 
tellectual  independence  which  democratic  citizenship  re¬ 
quires?  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  we  are  now  so  wrapped  up  in  our 
own  occupations  and  the  special  interests  of  our  own  oc¬ 
cupational  groups  that  we  are  almost  at  the  pretyrannical 
stage  described  by  Vico,  the  stage  where  everybody  is  so 
concerned  with  his  own  special  interests  that  nobody  looks 


i4 


MODERN  TIMES 


after  the  common  good?  Is  not  the  study  of  occupations  the 
way  to  hasten  the  disintegration  of  such  community  as  still 
remains,  through  emphasizing  our  individuality  at  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  our  common  humanity? 

Democracy  and  Education  was  written  before  the  assembly 
line  had  achieved  its  dominant  position  in  the  industrial 
world  and  before  mechanization  had  depopulated  the  farms 
of  America.  The  signs  of  these  processes  were  already  at 
hand;  and  Dewey  saw  the  necessity  of  facing  the  social 
problems  they  would  raise.  One  of  these  is  the  humanization 
of  work.  His  book  is  a  noble,  generous  effort  to  solve  this  and 
other  social  problems  through  the  educational  system.  Un¬ 
fortunately,  the  methods  he  proposed  would  not  solve  these 
problems;  they  would  merely  destroy  the  educational  system. 

The  humanization  of  work  is  one  of  the  most  baffling  issues 
of  our  time.  We  cannot  hope  to  get  rid  of  work  altogether. 
We  cannot  say  that  we  have  dealt  adequately  with  work  when 
we  have  urged  the  prolongation  of  leisure. 

Whatever  work  there  is  should  have  as  much  meaning  as 
possible.  Wherever  possible,  workmen  should  be  artists;  their 
work  should  be  the  application  of  knowledge  or  science  and 
known  and  enjoyed  by  them  as  such.  They  should,  if  possi¬ 
ble,  know  what  they  are  doing,  why  what  they  are  doing  has 
the  results  it  has,  why  they  are  doing  it,  and  what  constitutes 
the  goodness  of  the  things  produced.  They  should  understand 
what  happens  to  what  they  produce,  why  it  happens  in  that 
way,  and  how  to  improve  what  happens.  They  should  under¬ 
stand  their  relations  to  others  co-operating  in  a  given  process, 
the  relation  of  that  process  to  other  processes,  the  pattern  of 
-them  all  as  constituting  the  economy  of  the  nation,  and  the 
bearing  of  the  economy  on  the  social,  moral,  and  political 
life  of  the  nation  and  the  world.  Work  would  be  humanized 
if  understanding  of  all  these  kinds  were  in  it  and  around  it. 

To  have  these  kinds  of  understanding  the  man  who  works 


x5 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


must  have  a  good  mind.  The  purpose  of  education  is  to  de¬ 
velop  a  good  mind.  Everybody  should  have  equal  access  to 
the  kind  of  education  most  likely  to  develop  such  a  mind  and 
should  have  it  for  as  long  as  it  takes  to  acquire  enough  intel¬ 
lectual  excellence  to  fix  once  and  for  all  the  vision  of  the 
continuous  need  for  more  and  more  intellectual  excellence. 

This  is  the  educational  path  to  the  humanization  of  work. 
The  man  who  acquires  some  intellectual  excellence  and  in¬ 
tends  to  go  on  acquiring  more  will,  to  borrow  a  phrase  from 
Dewey,  "reconstruct  and  reorganize  his  experience.”  We 
need  have  few  fears  that  he  will  not  be  able  to  learn  how  to 
make  a  living.  In  addition  to  performing  this  indispensable 
task,  he  will  inquire  critically  about  the  kind  of  life  he  leads 
while  making  a  living.  He  will  seek  to  understand  the  man¬ 
ner  in  which  the  life  of  aril  is  affected  by  the  way  he  and  his 
fellow  workers  are  making  a  living.  He  will  develop  all  the 
meaning  there  is  in  his  work  and  go  on  to  see  to  it  that  it  has 
more  and  better  meaning. 

This  set  of  books  is  offered  not  merely  as  an  object  upon 
which  leisure  may  be  expended,  but  also  as  a  means  to  the 
humanization  of  work  through  understanding. 


16 


X  CHAPTER  III  £ 


Education  and  Economics 


:Ai 


.PART  from  John  Dewey 
and  those  few  of  his  followers  who  understand  him,  most 
writers  on  education  hold  that,  though  education  through 
great  books  and  the  liberal  arts  is  still  the  best  education  for 
the  few,  it  cannot  be  the  best  education  for  the  many,  because 
the  many  have  not  the  capacity  to  acquire  it. 

It  would  seem  that  this  education  is  the  best  for  everybody, 
if  it  is  the  best  for  the  best,  provided  everybody  can  get  it. 
The  question,  then,  is:  Can  everybody  get  it?  This  is  the  most 
important  question  in  education.  Perhaps  it  is  the  most  im¬ 
portant  question  in  the  world. 

-  Nobody  knows  the  answer  to  this  question .  There  has  never 
been  a  time  in  history  when  everybody  has  had  a  chance  to 
get  a  liberal  education.  We  can,  however,  examine  the  alter¬ 
natives,  and  the  consequences  of  each. 

If  leisure  and  political  power  are  a  reason  for  liberal  educa- 


17 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


tion,  then  everybody  in  America  now  has  this  reason,  and 
everybody  where  democracy  and  industrialization  penetrate 
will  ultimately  have  it.  If  leisure  and  political  power  require 
this  education,  everybody  in  America  now  requires  it,  and 
everybody  where  democracy  and  industrialization  penetrate 
will  ultimately  require  it.  If  the  people  are  not  capable  of 
acquiring  this  education,  they  should  be  deprived  of  political 
power  and  probably  of  leisure.  Their  uneducated  political 
power  is  dangerous,  and  their  uneducated  leisure  is  degrad¬ 
ing  and  will  be  dangerous.  If  the  people  are  incapable  of 
achieving  the  education  that  responsible  democratic  citizen¬ 
ship  demands,  then  democracy  is  doomed,  Aristotle  rightly 
condemned  the  mass  of  mankind  to  natural  slavery,  and  the 
sooner  we  set  about  reversing  the  trend  toward  democracy 
the  better  it  will  be  for  the  world. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  conclusion  that  everybody  should 
have  the  chance  to  have  that  education  which  will  fit  him 
for  responsible  democratic  citizenship  and  which  will  de¬ 
velop  his  human  powers  to  the  fullest  degree  does  not  require 
the  immediate  adoption  in  any  given  country  of  universal 
liberal  education.  This  conclusion  states  the  ideal  toward 
which  the  society  should  strive.  Any  number  of  practical 
reasons  may  prevent  the  society  from  moving  rapidly  toward 
this  ideal.  But  this  does  not  mean  that  the  statement  of  and 
devotion  to  the  ideal  are  without  value.  On  the  contrary,  the 
educational  policy  of  a  country  will  depend  on  the  clarity 
and  enthusiasm  with  which  its  educational  ideal  is  stated  and 
believed. 

The  poverty  of  a  country  may  seem  to  prevent  it  from 
rapid  approximation  of  its  educational  ideal.  In  the  past  the 
education  of  the  few  rested  on  the  labor  of  the  many.  It  was 
assumed,  perhaps  rightly,  that  the  few  could  not  have  educa¬ 
tion  unless  the  many  were  deprived  of  it.  Thomas  Jefferson’s 
proposal  of  three  years  of  education  for  all  could  have  been, 

18 


EDUCATION  AND  ECONOMICS 


and  probably  was,  opposed  on  the  ground  that  the  economy 
of  Virginia  could  not  survive  it.  Whatever  may  have  been 
the  case  in  that  state  150  years  ago,  and  whatever  may  be 
the  case  today  in  underdeveloped  countries,  it  can  no  longer 
be  claimed  that  liberal  education  for  all,  from  childhood  to 
the  grave,  is  beyond  the  economic  powers  of  the  United 
States. 

The  economic  question  can  arise  in  another  way.  It  can  be 
suggested  that  liberal  education  is  no  good  to  a  man  who  is 
starving,  that  the  first  duty  of  man  is  to  earn  a  living,  and 
that  learning  to  earn  a  living  and  then  earning  it  will  absorb 
the  time  that  might  be  devoted  to  liberal  education  in  youth 
and  maturity. 

This  argument  is  persuasive  in  countries  where  people  are 
actually  starving  and  where  the  economic  system  is  at  so 
rudimentary  a  stage  that  all  a  man’s  waking  hours  must  be 
dedicated  to  extracting  a  meager  livelihood  from  the  soil. 
Undoubtedly  the  first  task  of  the  statesman  in  such  countries 
is  to  raise  the  standard  of  living  to  such  a  point  that  the 
people  may  be  freed  from  economic  slavery  and  given  the 
time  to  get  the  education  appropriate  to  free  men.  Millions 
of  men  throughout  the  world  are  living  in  economic  slavery. 
They  are  condemned  to  subhuman  lives.  We  should  do  every¬ 
thing  we  can  to  strike  the  shackles  from  them.  Even  while 
we  are  doing  so,  we  must  remember  that  economic  inde¬ 
pendence  is  not  an  end  in  itself;  it  is  only  a  means,  though  an 
absolutely  necessary  one,  to  leading  a  human  life.  Even  here, 
the  clarity  of  the  educational  ideal  that  the  society  holds 
before  itself,  and  the  tenacity  with  which  that  ideal  is 
pursued,  are  likely  to  be  decisive  of  the  fate  of  the  society. 

I  have  no  doubt  that  a  hundred  years  ago  we  thought  of 
dear,  little,  far-off,  feudal  Japan  in  the  same  way  in  which  we 
think  of  the  underdeveloped  countries  today.  With  our  as¬ 
sistance  Japan  became  a  full-fledged,  industrialized  world 


x9 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


power  in  the  space  of  forty  years.  We  and  the  Japanese 
thought,  in  the  1860’s,  how  wonderful  it  would  be  if  this 
result  could  be  achieved.  We  and  they  fixed  our  minds  on  the 
economic  development  of  Japan  and  modified  the  educational 
system  of  that  country  on  "American  lines”  to  promote  this 
economic  development.  So  the  rich  got  richer,  the  poor  got 
poorer,  the  powerful  got  more  bellicose;  and  Japan  became 
a  menace  to  the  world  and  to  itself. 

No  one  can  question  the  desirability  of  technical  training 
in  underdeveloped  countries.  No  one  can  be  satisfied  with 
technical  training  as  an  ideal.  The  ideal  is  liberal  education, 
and  technical  training  can  be  justified  only  because  it  may 
help  to  supply  the  economic  base  that  will  make  universal 
liberal  education  possible. 

In  developed  countries  technical  training  is  also  necessary, 
just  as  work  is  necessary  in  such  countries.  But  the  West  has 
already  achieved  such  a  standard  of  living  that  it  cannot  use 
economic  backwardness  as  an  excuse  for  failing  to  face  the 
task  of  making  liberal  education  available  to  all.  As  far  as 
the  United  States  is  concerned,  the  reorganization  of  the 
educational  system  would  make  it  possible  for  the  system  to 
make  its  contribution  to  the  liberal  education  of  the  young 
by  the  time  they  reached  the  age  of  eighteen. 

Think  of  the  time  that  could  be  saved  by  the  simple  process 
of  squeezing  the  waste,  water,  and  frivolity  out  of  American 
education.  The  American  scheme  of  an  eight-year  elementary 
school,  a  four-year  high  school,  and  a  four-year  college,  with 
graduate  and  professional  work  on  top  of  that,  is  unique  in 
the  world,  and  we  cannot  congratulate  ourselves  on  its  unique¬ 
ness.  No  other  country  could  afford  the  duplication  that 
occurs  in  passing  from  one  unit  in  the  American  system  to 
another,  or  the  inordinate  length  of  time  that  is  consumed  by 
each  unit.  The  tremendous  waste  of  time  in  the  American 
educational  system  must  result  in  part  from  the  fact  that 


zo 


EDUCATION  AND  ECONOMICS 


there  is  so  much  time  to  waste.  A  six-year  elementary  school, 
a  three-  or  four-year  high  school,  and  a  three-  or  four-year 
college  would  eliminate  from  two  to  four  years  of  lost  motion 
and  leave  plenty  of  time  for  liberal  education. 

The  degree  of  leisure  now  enjoyed  by  the  whole  American 
people  is  such  as  to  open  liberal  education  to  all  adults  if  they 
knew  where  to  find  it.  The  industrial  worker  now  has  twenty 
hours  of  free  time  a  week  that  his  grandfather  did  not  have. 
Neither  in  youth  nor  in  his  adult  life  does  he  need  much 
training  in  order  to  learn  how  to  make  a  living.  The  constant 
drive  to  simplify  industrial  operations  will  eventually  mean 
— and  means  in  many  industries  today — that  only  a  few  hours 
will  be  required  to  give  the  worker  all  the  training  he  can  use. 

If  we  assume  that  the  object  of  concentration  on  vocational 
training  in  the  schools  is  what  John  Dewey’s  mistaken  fol¬ 
lowers  think  it  is,  to  help  young  people  to  achieve  economic 
independence,  then  we  must  admit  that  under  present  condi¬ 
tions  in  the  United  States  the  effort  is  disproportionate  to  the 
results.  And  the  effort  to  do  something  that  is  not  worth 
doing  drives  out  of  education  the  kind  of  activity  that  should 
characterize  it.  This  effort  diverts  our  attention  from  the 
enormously  difficult  task  of  discovering  what  education 
should  be  and  then  introducing  it  into  the  schools. 

Even  before  mechanization  had  gone  as  far  as  it  has  now, 
one  factor  prevented  vocational  training,  or  any  other  form 
of  ad  hoc  instruction,  from  accomplishing  what  was  expected 
of  it,  and  that  factor  was  the  mobility  of  the  American 
population.  This  was  a  mobility  of  every  kind — in  space,  in 
occupation,  and  in  economic  position.  Training  given  in  one 
place  for  work  in  that  place  was  thrown  away  because  the 
persons  trained  were  almost  certain  to  live  and  work  in 
another  pl^ce,  or  in  several  other  places.  Training  given 
in  one  kind  of  work  was  equally  useless  because  the  persons 
trained  usually  did  several  other  kinds  of  work  rather  than 


2.1 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


the  kind  they  were  trained  to  do.  The  failure  of  ad  hoc  in¬ 
struction  is  so  obvious  that  it  has  contributed  to  the  notion 
that  education,  or  schooling,  is  really  irrelevant  to  any  im¬ 
portant  activities  of  life  and  is  merely  a  period  through  which 
the  young  must  pass  because  we  do  not  know  what  else  to  do 
with  them.  Actually  the  failure  of  ad  hoc  instruction  shows 
nothing  but  the  failure  of  ad  hoc  instruction.  It  does  not  show 
that  education  is  unimportant  or  that  in  a  mobile,  industrial 
society  there  is  no  education  that  can  meet  the  needs  of  the 
people. 

If  we  are  to  take  the  assembly  line  as  the  characteristic 
feature  of  Western  industry,  we  must  regard  industrialization 
as  at  best  a  mixed  blessing.  The  monotony,  impersonality, 
and  uncreativeness  of  such  work  supply  strong  justification 
for  the  movement  toward  a  steady  reduction  in  the  hours  of 
labor.  But  what  if  the  time  that  is  gained  for  life  off  the 
assembly  line  is  wasted,  as  much  of  it  is  today,  in  pursuits 
that  can  only  be  described  as  subhuman?  What  if  the  man  as 
he  works  on  the  line  has  nothing  in  his  head? 

As  the  business  of  earning  a  living  has  become  easier  and 
simpler,  it  has  also  become  less  interesting  and  significant; 
and  all  personal  problems  have  become  more  perplexing.  This 
fact,  plus  the  fact  of  the  disappearance  of  any  education 
adequate  to  deal  with  it,  has  led  to  the  development  of  all 
kinds  of  cults,  through  which  the  baffled  worker  seeks  some 
meaning  for  his  life,  and  to  the  extension  on  an  unprecedented 
scale  of  the  most  trivial  recreations,  through  which  he  may 
hope  to  forget  that  his  human  problems  are  unsolved. 

Adam  Smith  stated  the  case  long  ago:  "A  man  without 
the  proper  use  of  the  intellectual  faculties  of  a  man,  is,  if 
possible,  more  contemptible  than  even  a  coward,  and  seems 
to  be  mutilated  and  deformed  in  a  still  more  essential  part  of 
the  character  of  human  nature.”  He  points  out  that  this  is  the 
condition  of  "the  great  body  of  the  people,”  who,  by  the 


2.2. 


EDUCATION  AND  ECONOMICS 


division  of  labor  are  confined  in  their  employment  "to  a  few 
very  simple  operations”  in  which  the  worker  "has  no  occa¬ 
sion  to  exert  his  understanding,  or  to  exercise  his  invention 
in  finding  out  expedients  for  removing  difficulties  which 
never  occur.”  The  result,  according  to  Smith,  is  that  "the 
torpor  of  his  mind  renders  him,  not  only  incapable  of  relish¬ 
ing  or  bearing  a  part  in  any  rational  conversation,  but  of 
conceiving  any  generous,  noble,  or  tender  sentiment,  and 
consequently  of  forming  any  just  judgment  concerning  many 
even  of  the  ordinary  duties  of  private  life.” 

Yet  the  substitution  of  machines  for  slaves  gives  us  an 
opportunity  to  build  a  civilization  as  glorious  as  that  of  the 
Greeks,  and  far  more  lasting  because  far  more  just.  I  do  not 
concede  that  torpor  of  mind  is  the  natural  and  normal  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  mass  of  mankind,  or  that  these  people  are  neces¬ 
sarily  incapable  of  relishing  or  bearing  a  part  in  any  rational 
conversation,  or  of  conceiving  generous,  noble,  and  tender 
sentiments,  or  of  forming  just  judgments  concerning  the 
affairs  of  private  and  public  life.  If  they  are  so,  and  if  they 
are  so  as  a  result  of  the  division  of  labor,  then  industrializa¬ 
tion  and  democracy  are  fundamentally  opposed;  for  people  in 
this  condition  are  not  qualified  to  govern  themselves.  I  do  not 
believe  that  industrialization  and  democracy  are  inherently 
opposed.  But  they  are  in  actual  practice  opposed  unless  the 
gap  between  them  is  bridged  by  liberal  education  for  all. 
That  mechanization  which  tends  to  reduce  a  man  to  a  robot 
also  supplies  the  economic  base  and  the  leisure  that  will  en¬ 
able  him  to  get  a  liberal  education  and  to  become  truly  a  man. 


2-3 


aC  CHAPTER  IV 


The  Disappearance  of 
Liberal  Education 


«Thh  countries  of  the  West 
are  committed  to  universal,  free,  compulsory  education.  The 
United  States  first  made  this  commitment  and  has  extended 
it  further  than  any  other.  In  this  country  91.5%  of  the  chil¬ 
dren  who  are  fourteen  years  old  and  71.3%  of  those  between 
fourteen  and  seventeen  are  in  school.  It  will  not  be  suggested 
that  they  are  receiving  the  education  that  the  democratic 
ideal  requires.  The  West  has  not  accepted  the  proposition 
that  the  democratic  ideal  demands  liberal  education  for  all. 
In  the  United  States,  at  least,  the  prevailing  opinion  seems 
to  be  that  the  demands  of  that  ideal  are  met  by  universal 
schooling,  rather  than  by  universal  liberal  education.  What 
goes  on  in  school  is  regarded  as  of  relatively  minor  impor¬ 
tance.  The  object  appears  to  be  to  keep  the  child  off  the  labor 
market  and  to  detain  him  in  comparatively  sanitary  surround¬ 
ings  until  we  are  ready  to  have  him  go  to  work. 


M 


THE  DISAPPEARANCE  OF  LIBERAL  EDUCATION 


The  results  of  universal,  free,  compulsory  education  in 
America  can  be  acceptable  only  on  the  theory  that  the  object 
of  the  schools  is  something  other  than  education,  that  it  is, 
for  example,  to  keep  the  young  from  cluttering  up  homes  and 
factories  during  a  difficult  period  of  their  lives,  or  that  it  is 
to  bring  them  together  for  social  or  recreational  purposes. 

These  last  purposes,  those  which  are  social  and  recrea¬ 
tional,  the  American  educational  system,  on  a  very  low  level, 
achieves.  It  throws  young  people  together.  Since  this  does 
not  take  any  greater  effort  than  is  required  to  pass  compulsory 
school  laws  and  build  buildings,  the  accomplishment  of  this 
purpose  would  not  at  first  blush  seem  to  be  a  matter  for 
boasting.  Yet  we  often  hear  of  it  as  something  we  should  be 
proud  of,  and  even  as  something  that  should  suggest  to  us 
the  main  line  of  a  sound  educational  policy.  We  often  hear 
that  bringing  young  people  together,  having  them  work  and 
play  together,  and  having  them  organize  themselves  "demo¬ 
cratically”  are  the  great  contributions  to  democracy  that  the 
educational  system  can  make.  This  is  an  expansion  of  the 
doctrine  that  was  popular  in  my  youth  about  the  moral  bene¬ 
fits  conferred  on  everybody  through  intercollegiate  athletics, 
which  was,  in  turn,  an  adaptation  of  the  remark  dubiously 
imputed  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington  about  the  relationship 
between  the  battle  of  Waterloo  and  the  playing  fields  of  Eton. 

No  one  can  deny  the  value  of  getting  together,  of  learning 
to  get  along  with  others,  of  coming  to  appreciate  the  methods 
of  organization  and  the  duties  of  membership  in  an  organiza¬ 
tion  any  more  than  one  can  deny  the  importance  of  physical 
health  and  sportsmanship.  It  seems  on  the  face  of  it  a  trifle 
absurd,  however,  to  go  to  the  trouble  of  training  and  en¬ 
gaging  teachers,  of  erecting  laboratories  and  libraries,  and 
of  laying  out  a  program  of  instruction  and  learning  if,  in 
effect,  the  curriculum  is  extra  and  the  extra-curriculum  is  the 
heart  of  the  matter. 


2-5 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


It  seems  doubtful  whether  the  purposes  of  the  educational 
system  can  be  found  in  the  pursuit  of  objects  that  the  Boy 
Scouts,  the  Y.M.C.A.,  and  the  local  country  club,  to  say 
nothing  of  the  family  and  the  church,  purport  to  be  pursuing. 
The  unique  function  of  the  educational  system  would  appear 
to  have  something  to  do  with  the  mind.  No  other  agency  in 
the  community  sets  itself  up,  or  is  set  up,  to  train  the  mind. 
To  the  extent  to  which  the  educational  system  is  diverted  to 
other  objects,  to  that  extent  the  mind  of  the  community  is 
neglected. 

This  is  not  to  say  that  the  educational  system  should  not 
contribute  to  the  physical,  social,  and  moral  development  of 
those  committed  to  its  charge.  But  the  method  of  its  contri¬ 
bution,  apart  from  the  facilities  for  extra-curriculum  activi¬ 
ties  that  it  provides,  is  through  the  mind.  The  educational 
system  seeks  to  establish  the  rational  foundations  for  good 
physical,  moral,  and  social  behavior.  These  rational  founda¬ 
tions  are  the  result  of  liberal  education. 

Education  is  supposed  to  have  something  to  do  with  in¬ 
telligence.  It  was  because  of  this  connection  that  it  was  al¬ 
ways  assumed  that  if  the  people  were  to  have  political  power 
they  would  have  to  have  education.  They  would  have  to 
have  it  if  they  were  to  use  their  power  intelligently.  This  was 
the  basis  of  the  Western  commitment  to  universal,  free, 
compulsory  education.  I  have  suggested  that  the  kind  of 
education  that  will  develop  the  requisite  intelligence  for 
democratic  citizenship  is  liberal  education,  education  through 
great  books  and  the  liberal  arts,  a  kind  of  education  that  has 
all  but  disappeared  from  the  schools,  colleges,  and  universi¬ 
ties  of  the  United  States. 

Why  did  this  education  disappear?  It  was  the  education  of 
the  Founding  Fathers.  It  held  sway  until  fifty  years  ago.  Now 
it  is  almost  gone.  I  attribute  this  phenomenon  to  two  factors, 
internal  decay  and  external  confusion. 

x6 


THE  DISAPPEARANCE  OF  LIBERAL  EDUCATION 


By  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of  this  century  great  books 
and  the  liberal  arts  had  been  destroyed  by  their  teachers.  The 
books  had  become  the  private  domain  of  scholars.  The  word 
"classics”  came  to  be  limited  to  those  works  which  were 
written  in  Greek  and  Latin.  Whitehead  refers  to  Words¬ 
worth’s  remark  about  men  of  science  who  "murder  to  dis¬ 
sect”  and  properly  observes:  "In  the  past,  classical  scholars 
have  been  veritable  assassins  compared  to  them.”  The  classi¬ 
cal  books,  it  was  thought,  could  be  studied  only  in  the  origi¬ 
nal  languages,  and  a  student  might  attend  courses  in  Plato 
and  Lucretius  for  years  without  discovering  that  they  had 
any  ideas.  His  professors  were  unlikely  to  be  interested  in 
ideas.  They  were  interested  in  philological  details.  The 
liberal  arts  in  their  hands  degenerated  into  meaningless  drill. 

Their  reply  to  criticism  and  revolt  was  to  demand,  for¬ 
getting  that  interest  is  essential  in  education,  that  their 
courses  be  required.  By  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of  this 
century  the  great  Greek  and  Latin  writers  were  studied  only 
to  meet  requirements  for  entrance  to  or  graduation  from 
college.  Behind  these  tariff  walls  the  professors  who  had 
many  of  the  great  writers  and  much  of  the  liberal  arts  in 
their  charge  contentedly  sat,  oblivious  of  the  fact  that  they 
were  depriving  the  rising  generation  of  an  important  part  of 
their  cultural  heritage  and  the  training  needed  to  understand 
it,  and  oblivious  also  of  the  fact  that  they  were  depriving 
themselves  of  the  reason  for  their  existence. 

Philosophy,  history,  and  literature,  and  the  disciplines 
that  broke  away  from  philosophy — political  science,  sociol¬ 
ogy,  and  psychology — suffered  from  another  kind  of  decay, 
which  resulted  from  a  confusion  that  I  shall  refer  to  later,  a 
confusion  about  the  nature  and  scope  of  the  scientific  method. 
This  confusion  widened  the  break  between  those  disciplines 
that  split  off  from  philosophy;  it  led  professors  of  these 
disciplines  up  many  blind  alleys;  and  it  produced  profound 


2-7 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


changes  in  philosophical  study.  The  same  influences  cut  the 
heart  out  of  the  study  of  history  and  literature. 

In  general  the  professors  of  the  humanities  and  the  social 
sciences  and  history,  fascinated  by  the  marvels  of  experi¬ 
mental  natural  science,  were  overpowered  by  the  idea  that 
similar  marvels  could  be  produced  in  their  own  fields  by  the 
use  of  the  same  methods.  They  also  seemed  convinced  that 
any  results  obtained  in  these  fields  by  any  other  methods  were 
not  worth  achieving.  This  automatically  ruled  out  writers 
previously  thought  great  who  had  had  the  misfortune  to  live 
before  the  method  of  empirical  natural  science  had  reached 
its  present  predominance  and  who  had  never  thought  of 
applying  it  to  problems  and  subject  matters  outside  the  range 
of  empirical  natural  science.  The  insights  of  these  writers 
were  at  once  out  of  date;  for  they  could,  in  the  nature  of  the 
case,  represent  little  but  prejudice  or  guesswork,  which  it 
would  be  the  object  of  the  scientific  method  to  sweep  out  of 
the  way  of  progress. 

Since  the  aim  of  philosophers,  historians,  and  critics  of 
literature  and  art,  to  say  nothing  of  social  scientists,  was  to 
be  as  "scientific”  as  possible,  they  could  not  concern  them¬ 
selves  much  with  ideas  or  with  the  "unscientific”  tradition 
of  the  West.  Nor  could  they  admit  the  utility  of  the  liberal 
arts,  apart  from  those  associated  with  mathematics. 

Meanwhile  the  idea  of  education  for  all  became  firmly 
established  in  the  United  States.  The  school-leaving  age 
steadily  rose.  An  unprecedented  flood  of  pupils  and  students 
overwhelmed  the  schools,  colleges,  and  universities,  a  flood 
that  has  gone  on  growing,  with  minor  fluctuations,  to  this 
day.  Merely  to  house  and  staff  the  educational  enterprise  was 
an  undertaking  that  would  have  put  a  strain  on  the  wealth 
and  intelligence  of  any  country. 

The  triumphs  of  industrialization,  which  made  this  educa¬ 
tional  expansion  possible,  resulted  from  triumphs  of  tech- 

z8 


THE  DISAPPEARANCE  OF  LIBERAL  EDUCATION 


nology,  which  rested  on  triumphs  of  science,  which  were 
promoted  by  specialization.  Specialization,  experimental 
science,  technology,  and  industrialization  were  new.  Great 
books  and  the  liberal  arts  were  identified  in  the  public  mind 
with  dead  languages,  arid  routines,  and  an  archaic,  pre- 
scientific  past.  The  march  of  progress  could  be  speeded  by 
getting  rid  of  them,  the  public  thought,  and  using  scientific 
method  and  specialization  for  the  double  purpose  of  pro¬ 
moting  technological  advance  and  curing  the  social  malad¬ 
justments  that  industrialization  brought  with  it.  This  pro¬ 
gram  would  have  the  incidental  value  of  restoring  interest  to 
its  place  in  education  and  of  preparing  the  young  to  take 
part  in  the  new,  specialized,  scientific,  technological,  in¬ 
dustrial,  democratic  society  that  was  emerging,  to  join  in 
raising  the  standard  of  living  and  in  solving  the  dreadful 
problems  that  the  effort  to  raise  it  was  creating. 

The  revolt  against  the  classical  dissectors  and  drillmasters 
was  justified.  So  was  the  new  interest  in  experimental  science. 
The  revolt  against  liberal  education  was  not  justified.  Neither 
was  the  belief  that  the  method  of  experimental  science  could 
replace  the  methods  of  history,  philosophy,  and  the  arts.  As 
is  common  in  educational  discussion,  the  public  had  con¬ 
fused  names  and  things.  The  dissectors  and  drillmasters  had 
no  more  to  do  with  liberal  education  than  the  ordinary  col¬ 
lege  of  liberal  arts  has  to  do  with  those  arts  today.  And  the 
fact  that  a  method  obtains  sensational  results  in  one  field  is 
no  guarantee  that  it  will  obtain  any  results  whatever  in 
another. 

Do  science,  technology,  industrialization,  and  specializa¬ 
tion  render  the  Great  Conversation  irrelevant? 

We  have  seen  that  industrialization  makes  liberal  educa¬ 
tion  more  necessary  than  ever,  and  that  the  leisure  it  pro¬ 
vides  makes  liberal  education  possible,  for  the  first  time,  for 
everybody. 


z9 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


We  have  observed  that  the  reorganization  of  the  educa¬ 
tional  system  would  enable  everybody  to  get  a  liberal  educa¬ 
tion  and  to  become  a  specialist  as  well. 

I  should  like  to  add  that  specialization,  instead  of  making 
the  Great  Conversation  irrelevant,  makes  it  more  pertinent 
than  ever.  Specialization  makes  it  harder  to  carry  on  any 
kind  of  conversation;  but  this  calls  for  greater  effort,  not  the 
abandonment  of  the  attempt. 

There  can  be  little  argument  about  the  proposition  that  the 
task  of  the  future  is  the  creation  of  a  community.  Community 
seems  to  depend  on  communication.  This  requirement  is  not 
met  by  improvements  in  transportation  or  in  mail,  tele¬ 
graph,  telephone,  or  radio  services.  These  technological  ad¬ 
vances  are  frightening,  rather  than  reassuring,  and  disrup¬ 
tive,  rather  than  unifying,  in  such  a  world  as  we  have  today. 
They  are  the  means  of  bringing  an  enemy’s  bombs  or  propa¬ 
ganda  into  our  homes. 

The  effectiveness  of  modern  methods  of  communication  in 
promoting  a  community  depends  on  whether  there  is  some¬ 
thing  intelligible  and  human  to  communicate.  This,  in  turn, 
depends  on  a  common  language,  a  common  stock  of  ideas, 
and  common  human  standards.  These  the  Great  Conversa¬ 
tion  affords.  Reading  these  books  should  make  a  man  feel 
himself  a  member  of  the  species  and  tradition  that  these 
books  come  from.  He  should  recognize  the  ties  that  bind  him 
to  his  fellow  members  of  the  species  and  tradition.  He  should 
be  able  to  communicate,  in  a  real  sense,  with  other  men. 

Must  the  specialist  be  excluded  from  the  community?  If 
so,  there  can  hardly  be  one;  for  increasingly  in  the  West 
everybody  is  a  specialist.  The  task  is  to  have  a  community 
nevertheless,  and  to  discover  means  of  using  specialties  to 
promote  it.  This  can  be  done  through  the  Great  Conversa¬ 
tion.  Through  it  the  expert  can  discover  the  great  common 
principles  that  underlie  the  specialties.  Through  it  he  can 


3° 


THE  DISAPPEARANCE  OF  LIBERAL  EDUCATION 


bring  ideas  to  bear  upon  his  experience.  In  the  light  of  the 
Great  Conversation  his  special  brand  of  knowledge  loses  its 
particularistic  vices  and  becomes  a  means  of  penetrating  the 
great  books.  The  mathematical  specialist,  for  example,  can 
get  further  faster  into  the  great  mathematicians  than  a  reader 
who  is  without  his  specialized  training.  With  the  help  of 
great  books,  specialized  knowledge  can  radiate  out  into  a 
genuine  interfiltration  of  common  learning  and  common  life. 

Imagine  the  younger  generation  studying  great  books  and 
learning  the  liberal  arts.  Imagine  an  adult  population  con¬ 
tinuing  to  turn  to  the  same  sources  of  strength,  inspiration, 
and  communication.  We  could  talk  to  one  another  then.  We 
should  be  even  better  specialists  than  we  are  today  because  we 
could  understand  the  history  of  our  specialty  and  its  relation 
to  all  the  others.  We  would  be  better  citizens  and  better  men. 
We  might  turn  out  to  be  the  nucleus  of  the  world  community. 


X  CHAPTER  V  X 


Experimental  Science 


xThe  Great  Conversation 
began  before  the  beginnings  of  experimental  science.  But  the 
birth  of  the  Conversation  and  the  birth  of  science  were 
simultaneous.  The  earliest  of  the  pre-Socratics  were  investi¬ 
gating  and  seeking  to  understand  natural  phenomena;  among 
them  were  men  who  used  mathematical  notions  for  this  pur¬ 
pose.  Even  experimentation  is  not  new;  it  has  been  going 
on  for  hundreds  of  years.  But  faith  in  the  experiment  as  an 
exclusive  method  is  a  modern  manifestation.  The  experi¬ 
mental  method  has  won  such  clear  and  convincing  victories 
that  it  is  now  regarded  in  some  quarters  not  only  as  the  sole 
method  of  building  up  scientific  knowledge,  but  also  as  the 
sole  method  of  obtaining  knowledge  of  any  kind. 

Thus  we  are  often  told  that  any  question  that  is  not 
answerable  by  the  empirical  methods  of  science  is  not  really 
answerable  at  all,  or  at  least  not  by  significant  and  verifiable 


32- 


EXPERIMENTAL  SCIENCE 


statements.  Exceptions  may  be  made  with  regard  to  the  kinds 
of  questions  mathematicians  or  logicians  answer  by  their 
methods.  But  all  other  questions  must  be  submitted  to  the 
methods  of  experimental  research  or  empirical  inquiry. 

If  they  are  not  answerable  by  these  methods,  they  are  the 
sort  of  questions  that  should  never  have  been  asked  in  the 
first  place.  At  best  they  are  questions  we  can  answer  only 
by  guesswork  or  conjecture;  at  worst  they  are  meaningless 
or,  as  the  saying  goes,  nonsensical  questions.  Genuinely  sig¬ 
nificant  problems,  in  contrast,  get  their  meaning  in  large 
part  from  the  scientific  operations  of  observation,  experi¬ 
ment,  and  measurement  by  which  they  can  be  solved;  and  the 
solutions,  when  discovered  by  these  methods,  are  better  than 
guesswork  or  opinion.  They  are  supported  by  fact.  They  have 
been  tested  and  are  subject  to  further  verification. 

We  are  told  furthermore  that  the  best  answers  we  can  ob¬ 
tain  by  the  scientific  method  are  never  more  than  probable. 
We  must  free  ourselves,  therefore,  from  the  illusion  that,  out¬ 
side  of  mathematics  and  logic,  we  can  attain  necessary  and 
certain  truth.  Statements  that  are  not  mathematical  or  logical 
formulae  may  look  as  if  they  were  necessarily  or  certainly 
true,  but  they  only  look  like  that.  They  cannot  really  be 
either  necessary  or  certain.  In  addition,  if  they  have  not  been 
subjected  to  empirical  verification,  they  are,  far  from  being 
necessarily  true,  not  even  established  as  probable.  Such  state¬ 
ments  can  be  accepted  provisionally,  as  working  assumptions 
or  hypotheses,  if  they  are  acceptable  at  all.  Perhaps  it  is 
better,  unless  circumstances  compel  us  to  take  another  course, 
not  to  accept  such  statements  at  all. 

Consider,  for  example,  statements  about  God’s  existence 
or  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  These  are  answers  to  questions 
that  cannot  be  answered — one  way  or  the  other — by  the  ex¬ 
perimental  method.  If  that  is  the  only  method  by  which 
probable  and  verifiable  knowledge  is  attainable,  we  are  de- 


33 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


barred  from  having  knowledge  about  God’s  existence  or  the 
immortality  of  the  soul.  If  modern  man,  accepting  the  view 
that  he  can  claim  to  know  only  what  can  be  demonstrated  by 
experiment  or  verified  by  empirical  research,  still  wishes  to 
believe  in  these  things,  he  must  acknowledge  that  he  does  so 
by  religious  faith  or  by  the  exercise  of  his  will  to  believe;  and 
he  must  be  prepared  to  be  regarded  in  certain  quarters  as 
hopelessly  superstitious. 

It  is  sometimes  admitted  that  many  propositions  that  are 
affirmed  by  intelligent  people,  such  as  that  democracy  is  the 
best  form  of  government  or  that  world  peace  depends  upon 
world  government,  cannot  be  tested  by  the  method  of  ex¬ 
perimental  science.  But  it  is  suggested  that  this  is  simply  be¬ 
cause  the  method  is  still  not  fully  developed.  When  our  use  of 
the  method  matures,  we  shall  find  out  how  to  employ  it 
in  answering  every  genuine  question. 

Since  many  propositions  in  the  Great  Conversation  have 
not  been  arrived  at  by  experiment  or  have  not  been  submitted 
to  empirical  verification,  we  often  hear  that  the  Conversa¬ 
tion,  though  perhaps  interesting  to  the  antiquarian  as  setting 
forth  the  bizarre  superstitions  entertained  by  "thinkers”  be¬ 
fore  the  dawn  of  experimental  science,  can  have  no  relevance 
for  us  now,  when  experimental  science  and  its  methods  have 
at  last  revealed  these  superstitions  for  what  they  are.  We  are 
urged  to  abandon  the  reactionary  notion  that  the  earlier 
voices  in  the  Conversation  are  even  now  saying  something 
worth  listening  to,  and  supplicated  to  place  our  trust  in  the 
experimental  method  as  the  only  source  of  valid  or  verifiable 
answers  to  questions  of  every  sort. 

One  voice  in  the  Great  Conversation  itself  announces  this 
modern  point  of  view.  In  the  closing  paragraph  of  his  En¬ 
quiry  Concerning  Human  Understanding ,  David  Hume  writes: 
"When  we  run  over  libraries,  persuaded  of  these  principles, 
what  havoc  must  we  make?  If  we  take  in  our  hand  any  volume 


34 


EXPERIMENTAL  SCIENCE 


.  .  .  let  us  ask,  Does  it  contain  any  abstract  reasoning  concerning 
quantity  or  number ?  No.  Does  it  contain  any  experimental  reasoning 
concerning  matter  of  fact  and  existence ?  No.  Commit  it  then  to  the 
flames :  for  it  can  contain  nothing  but  sophistry  and  illusion.” 

The  books  that  Hume  and  his  followers,  the  positivists  of 
our  own  day,  would  commit  to  burning  or,  what  is  the  same, 
to  dismissal  from  serious  consideration,  do  not  reflect  igno¬ 
rance  or  neglect  of  Hume’s  principles.  Those  books,  written 
after  as  well  as  before  Hume,  argue  the  case  against  the  kind 
of  positivism  that  asserts  that  everything  except  mathematics 
and  experimental  science  is  sophistry  and  illusion.  They  state 
and  defend  propositions  quite  opposite  to  those  of  Hume. 

The  Great  Conversation,  in  short,  contains  both  sides  of 
the  issue  that  in  modern  times  is  thought  to  have  a  most 
critical  bearing  on  the  significance  of  the  Great  Conversation 
itself.  Only  an  unashamed  dogmatist  would  dare  to  assert 
that  the  issue  has  been  finally  resolved  now  in  favor  of  the 
view  that,  outside  of  logic  or  mathematics,  the  method  of 
modern  science  is  the  only  method  to  employ  in  seeking 
knowledge.  The  dogmatist  who  made  this  assertion  would 
have  to  be  more  than  unashamed.  He  would  have  to  blind 
himself  to  the  fact  that  his  own  assertion  was  not  established 
by  the  experimental  method,  nor  made  as  an  indisputable 
conclusion  of  mathematical  reasoning  or  of  purely  logical 
analysis. 

With  regard  to  this  issue  about  the  scientific  method, 
which  has  become  central  in  our  own  day,  the  contrary  claim 
is  not  made  for  the  Great  Conversation.  It  would  be  equally 
dogmatic  to  assert  that  the  issue  has  been  resolved  in  favor 
-of  the  opposite  point  of  view.  What  can  be  justly  claimed, 
however,  is  that  the  great  books  ably  present  both  sides  of 
the  issue  and  throw  light  on  aspects  of  it  that  are  darkly  as 
well  as  dogmatically  treated  in  contemporary  discussion. 

They  raise  the  question  for  us  of  what  is  meant  by  science 


35 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


and  the  scientific  method.  If  all  that  is  meant  is  that  a  scien¬ 
tist  is  honest  and  careful  and  precise,  and  that  he  weighs  all 
the  evidence  with  discrimination  before  he  pronounces  judg¬ 
ment,  then  we  can  agree  that  the  scientific  method  is  the  only 
method  of  reaching  and  testing  the  truth  in  any  field.  But 
this  conception  of  the  scientific  method  is  so  broad  as  to  in¬ 
clude  the  methods  used  by  competent  historians,  philoso¬ 
phers,  and  theologians  since  the  beginning  of  time;  and  it  is 
not  helpful,  indeed  it  is  seriously  misleading,  to  name  a 
method  used  in  all  fields  after  one  of  them. 

Sometimes  the  scientific  method  seems  to  mean  that  we 
must  pay  attention  to  the  facts,  which  carries  with  it  the 
suggestion  that  those  who  do  not  believe  that  the  method  of 
experimental  science  is  appropriate  to  every  other  field  of 
inquiry  do  not  pay  attention  to  the  facts  and  are  therefore 
remote  from  reality.  The  great  books  show,  on  the  contrary, 
that  even  those  thinkers  of  the  past  who  are  now  often  looked 
upon  as  the  most  reactionary,  the  medieval  theologians,  in¬ 
sisted,  as  Aristotle  had  before  them,  that  the  truth  of  any 
statement  is  its  conformity  to  reality  or  fact,  and  that  sense- 
experience  is  required  to  discover  the  particular  matters  of 
fact  that  test  the  truth  of  general  statements  about  the  nature 
of  things. 

"In  the  knowledge  of  nature,”  Aristotle  writes,  the  test  of 
principles  "is  the  unimpeachable  evidence  of  the  senses  as  to 
each  fact.”  He  holds  that  "lack  of  experience  diminishes  our 
power  of  taking  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  admitted  facts. 
Hence  those  who  dwell  in  intimate  association  with  nature 
and  its  phenomena  grow  more  and  more  able  to  formulate, 
as  the  foundation  of  their  theories,  principles  such  as  to  ad¬ 
mit  of  a  wide  and  coherent  development;  while  those  whom 
devotion  to  abstract  discussions  has  rendered  unobservant  of 
the  facts  are  too  ready  to  dogmatize  on  the  basis  of  a  few 
observations.”  Theories  should  be  credited,  Aristotle  insists, 

36 


EXPERIMENTAL  SCIENCE 


"only  if  what  they  affirm  agrees  with  the  observed  facts.” 
Centuries  later,  an  experimental  physiologist  such  as  William 
Harvey  says  neither  more  nor  less  when  he  declares  that  "to 
test  whether  anything  has  been  well  or  ill  advanced,  to  as¬ 
certain  whether  some  falsehood  does  not  lurk  under  a  propo¬ 
sition,  it  is  imperative  on  us  to  bring  it  to  the  proof  of  sense, 
and  to  admit  or  reject  it  on  the  decision  of  sense.” 

To  proclaim  the  necessity  of  observing  the  facts,  and  all  the 
facts,  is  not  to  say,  however,  that  merely  collecting  facts  will 
solve  a  problem  of  any  kind.  The  facts  are  indispensable;  they 
are  not  sufficient.  To  solve  a  problem  it  is  necessary  to  think. 
It  is  necessary  to  think  even  to  decide  what  facts  to  collect. 
Even  the  experimental  scientist  cannot  avoid  being  a  liberal 
artist,  and  the  best  of  them,  as  the  great  books  show,  are  men 
of  imagination  and  of  theory  as  well  as  patient  observers  of 
particular  facts.  Those  who  have  condemned  thinkers  who 
have  insisted  on  the  importance  of  ideas  have  often  over¬ 
looked  the  equal  insistence  of  these  writers  on  obtaining  the 
facts.  These  critics  have  themselves  frequently  misunderstood 
the  scientific  method  and  have  confused  it  with  the  aimless 
accumulation  of  data. 

When  the  various  meanings  of  science  and  the  scientific 
method  are  distinguished  and  clarified,  the  issue  remains 
whether  the  method  associated  with  experimental  science, 
as  that  has  developed  in  modern  times,  is  the  only  method  of 
seeking  the  truth  about  what  really  exists  or  about  what  men 
and  societies  should  do.  As  already  pointed  out,  both  sides 
of  this  issue  are  taken  and  argued  in  the  Great  Conversation. 
But  the  great  books  do  more  than  that.  They  afford  us  the 
-best  examples  of  man’s  efforts  to  seek  the  truth,  both  about 
the  nature  of  things  and  about  human  conduct,  by  methods 
other  than  those  of  experimental  science;  and  because  these 
examples  are  presented  in  the  context  of  equally  striking 
examples  of  man’s  efforts  to  learn  by  experiment  or  the 


37 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


method  of  empirical  science,  the  great  books  provide  us  with 
the  best  materials  for  judging  whether  the  experimental 
method  is  or  is  not  the  only  acceptable  method  of  inquiry 
into  all  things. 

That  judgment  the  reader  of  the  great  books  must  finally 
make  for  himself.  When  he  makes  it  in  the  light  of  the  best 
examples  of  the  employment  of  different  methods  to  solve 
the  problems  of  different  subject  matters,  he  will  not  have 
begged  the  question,  as  do  those  who,  before  reading  the 
great  books,  judge  them  in  terms  of  the  dogma  that  there  is 
only  one  method  and  that,  though  there  are  obvious  dif¬ 
ferences  among  subject  matters,  no  knowledge  about  any 
subject  matter  can  be  achieved  unless  this  one  method  is  ap¬ 
plied. 

On  one  point  there  seems  to  be  no  question.  The  con¬ 
temporary  practices  of  scientific  research,  as  well  as  the 
scientific  efforts  that  the  great  books  record,  show  beyond 
doubt  that  the  method  of  the  controlled  experiment  under 
artificial  conditions  is  not  the  only  method  used  by  men  who 
regard  themselves  and  are  regarded  as  scientists.  It  may 
represent  the  most  perfect  form  of  empirical  inquiry.  It  may 
be  the  model  on  which  all  the  less  exact  forms  of  scientific 
investigation  are  patterned.  But  as  the  work  of  astronomers, 
biologists,  and  social  scientists  reveals,  experiment  in  the 
strict  sense  is  not  always  possible. 

The  method  of  the  controlled  experiment  under  artificial 
conditions  is  exclusively  the  method  of  that  part  of  science 
the  subject  matter  of  which  permits  it  to  be  experimental. 
On  the  assumption  that  nonliving  matter  always  behaves  in 
the  same  way  under  the  same  conditions,  we  are  justified 
in  concluding  from  experiment  that  we  have  discovered  how 
certain  nonliving  matter  behaves  under  certain  conditions. 
On  the  assumption  that  living  matter,  when  very  large 
numbers  of  units  are  taken  into  account,  is  likely  to  exhibit 

38 


EXPERIMENTAL  SCIENCE 


uniformities  of  behavior  under  identical  conditions,  we  are 
justified  in  concluding  that  if  we  know  the  conditions  are 
identical,  which  is  possible  only  in  the  laboratory,  and  if  we 
know  that  the  number  of  units  under  examination  is  large 
enough,  then  probably  such  uniformities  of  behavior  as  we 
detect  will  recur  under  identical  conditions. 

The  griefs  and  losses  sustained  by  those  social  scientists 
who  predict  the  outcome  of  horse  races  and  presidential 
elections  are  sufficient  to  indicate  the  difficulties  of  their 
subject.  No  one  would  propose  that  the  social  scientists 
should  not  keep  on  trying.  The  more  refined  and  complete 
our  knowdedge  of  society,  the  better  off  we  shall  be.  But  it 
would  be  helpful  to  the  social  scientists  if  they  recognized 
that  in  understanding  human  beings,  who  often  cannot  be 
subjected  to  experiment  in  the  laboratory  like  guinea  pigs 
and  atoms,  the  method  of  experimental  science  cannot,  in 
the  nature  of  things,  produce  results  that  can  compare  with 
those  which  science  achieves  in  dealing  with  matters  more 
susceptible  to  experimentation. 

One  eminent  social  scientist,  Professor  Robert  Redfield,  has 
suggested  that  his  colleagues  consider  their  relation  to  the 
humanities  as  well  as  to  the  natural  sciences.  "The  imitation 
of  the  physical  and  biological  sciences,”  he  says,  "has  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  a  point  where  the  fullest  development  of  social 
science  is  hampered.”  Identification  with  the  natural  sciences 
shelters  the  social  scientist  "from  a  stimulation  from  philoso¬ 
phy  and  the  arts  and  literature  which  social  science  needs  .  .  . 
The  stimulation  which  the  social  scientists  can  gain  from  the 
humanities  can  come  from  the  arts  and  literature  themselves, 
-and  through  an  understanding  of  some  of  the  problems  which 
interest  philosophers  and  the  more  imaginative  students  of 
the  creative  productions  of  mankind.” 

According  to  Professor  Redfield,  the  bond  that  links  the 
social  scientist  and  the  humanist  is  their  common  subject 


39 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


matter.  "Humanity,”  he  says,  "is  the  common  subject-mat¬ 
ter  of  those  who  look  at  men  as  they  are  represented  in 
books  or  works  of  art,  and  of  those  who  look  at  men  as  they 
appear  in  institutions  and  in  directly  visible  action.  It  is  the 
central  and  essential  matter  of  interest  to  social  scientist  and 
humanist  alike.”  Though  they  differ  in  their  methods,  they 
"share  a  common  effort,  a  common  interest”;  and  Redfield 
adds,  "it  may  be  doubted  if  the  results  so  far  achieved  by  the 
social  scientists  are  more  communicative  of  the  truth  about 
human  nature  than  are  the  results  achieved  by  the  more 
personal  and  imaginative  methods  of  the  artist.” 

We  should  remember  such  sound  advice  when  we  are  urged 
to  abandon  methods  that  have  yielded  important  insights  in 
favor  of  one  that  will  doubtless  be  helpful,  but  may  not  be 
able  to  tell  us  everything  we  need  to  know.  It  may  be  unwise 
to  reject  the  sources  of  wisdom  that  have  been  traditionally 
found  in  history,  philosophy,  and  the  arts.  These  disciplines 
do  not  give  us  mathematical  knowledge  or  knowledge  ac¬ 
quired  in  the  laboratory,  but  to  say  that  for  these  reasons 
what  they  give  us  is  not  knowledge  in  any  sense  is  to  dis¬ 
regard  the  facts  and  to  put  the  world  of  knowable  things  in  a 
dogmatic  strait  jacket. 

The  rise  of  experimental  science  has  not  made  the  Great 
Conversation  irrelevant.  Experimental  science  is  a  part  of  the 
Conversation.  As  Etienne  Gilson  has  remarked,  "our  science 
is  a  part  of  our  humanism”  as  "the  science  of  Pericles’  time 
was  a  part  of  Greek  humanism.”  Science  is  itself  part  of  the 
Great  Conversation.  In  the  Conversation  we  find  science 
raising  issues  about  knowledge  and  reality.  In  the  light  of  the 
Conversation  we  can  reach  a  judgment  about  the  question  in 
dispute:  How  many  valid  methods  of  inquiry  are  there? 

Because  of  experimental  science  we  now  know  a  very  large 
number  of  things  about  the  natural  world  of  which  our  pred¬ 
ecessors  were  ignorant.  In  this  set  of  books  we  can  observe 


40 


EXPERIMENTAL  SCIENCE 


the  birth  of  science,  applaud  the  development  of  the  experi¬ 
mental  technique,  and  celebrate  the  triumphs  it  has  won. 
But  we  can  also  note  the  limitations  of  the  method  and  mourn 
the  errors  that  its  misapplication  has  caused.  We  can  distin¬ 
guish  the  outlines  of  those  great  persistent  problems  that 
the  method  of  experimental  natural  science  may  never  solve 
and  find  the  clues  to  their  solutions  offered  by  other  disci¬ 
plines  and  other  methods. 


4i 


X  CHAPTER  VI  S 


^We  have  seen  that  educa¬ 
tion  through  the  liberal  arts  and  great  books  is  the  best 
education  for  the  best.  We  have  seen  that  the  democratic 
ideal  requires  the  attempt  to  help  everybody  get  this  educa¬ 
tion.  We  have  seen  that  none  of  the  great  changes,  the  rise  of 
experimental  science,  specialization,  and  industrialization, 
makes  this  attempt  irrelevant.  On  the  contrary,  these  changes 
make  the  effort  to  give  everybody  this  education  more  nec¬ 
essary  and  urgent. 

We  must  now  return  to  the  most  important  question, 
which  is :  Can  everybody  get  this  education?  When  an  educa¬ 
tional  ideal  is  proposed,  we  are  entitled  to  ask  in  what 
measure  it  can  be  achieved.  If  it  cannot  be  achieved  at  all, 
those  who  propose  it  may  properly  be  accused  of  irresponsi¬ 
bility  or  disingenuousness. 

Such  accusations  have  in  fact  been  leveled  against  those 
4z 


EDUCATION  FOR  ALL 


who  propose  the  ideal  of  liberal  education  for  all.  Many- 
sincere  democrats  believe  that  those  who  propose  this  ideal 
must  be  antidemocratic.  Some  of  these  critics  are  carried 
away  by  an  educational  version  of  the  doctrine  of  guilt  by 
association.  They  say,  "The  ideal  that  you  propose  was  put 
forward  by  and  for  aristocrats.  Aristocrats  are  not  demo¬ 
crats.  Therefore  neither  you  nor  your  ideal  is  democratic.” 

The  answer  to  this  criticism  has  already  been  given.  Liberal 
education  was  aristocratic  in  the  sense  that  it  was  the  educa¬ 
tion  of  those  who  enjoyed  leisure  and  political  power.  If  it 
was  the  right  education  for  those  who  had  leisure  and  politi¬ 
cal  power,  then  it  is  the  right  education  for  everybody  today. 

That  all  should  be  well  acquainted  with  and  each  in  his 
measure  actively  and  continuously  engaged  in  the  Great 
Conversation  that  man  has  had  about  what  is  and  should  be 
does  not  seem  on  the  face  of  it  an  antidemocratic  desire.  It  is 
only  antidemocratic  if,  in  the  name  of  democracy,  it  is 
erecting  an  ideal  for  all  that  all  cannot  in  fact  achieve.  But  if 
this  educational  ideal  is  actually  implicit  in  the  democratic 
ideal,  as  it  seems  to  be,  then  it  should  not  be  refused  because 
of  its  association  with  a  past  in  which  the  democratic  ideal 
was  not  accepted. 

Many  convinced  believers  in  liberal  education  attack  the 
ideal  of  liberal  education  for  all  on  the  ground  that  if  we 
attempt  to  give  liberal  education  to  everybody  we  shall  fail 
to  give  it  to  anybody.  They  point  to  the  example  of  the 
United  States,  where  liberal  education  has  virtually  dis¬ 
appeared,  and  say  that  this  catastrophe  is  the  inevitable 
result  of  taking  the  dogma  of  equality  of  educational  op- 
-portunity  seriously. 

The  two  criticisms  I  have  mentioned  come  to  the  same 
thing:  that  liberal  education  is  too  good  for  the  people.  The 
first  group  of  critics  and  the  second  unite  in  saying  that  only 
the  few  can  acquire  an  education  that  was  the  best  for  the 


43 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


best.  The  difference  between  the  two  is  in  the  estimate  they 
place  on  the  importance  of  the  loss  of  liberal  education. 

The  first  group  says  that,  since  everybody  cannot  acquire  a 
liberal  education,  democracy  cannot  require  that  anybody 
should  have  it.  The  second  group  says  that,  since  everybody 
cannot  acquire  a  liberal  education,  the  attempt  to  give  it  to 
everybody  will  necessarily  result  in  an  inferior  education  for 
everybody.  The  remedy  is  to  segregate  the  few  who  are 
capable  from  the  many  who  are  incapable  and  see  to  it  that 
the  few,  at  least,  receive  a  liberal  education.  The  rest  can  be 
relegated  to  vocational  training  or  any  kind  of  activity  in 
school  that  happens  to  interest  them. 

The  more  logical  and  determined  members  of  this  second 
group  of  critics  will  confess  that  they  believe  that  the  great 
mass  of  mankind  is  and'of  right  ought  to  be  condemned  to  a 
modern  version  of  natural  slavery.  Hence  there  is  no  use 
wasting  educational  effort  upon  them.  They  should  be  given 
such  training  as  will  be  necessary  to  enable  them  to  survive. 
Since  all  attempts  to  do  more  will  be  frustrated  by  the  facts  of 
life,  such  attempts  should  not  be  made. 

Because  the  great  bulk  of  mankind  have  never  had  the 
chance  to  get  a  liberal  education,  it  cannot  be  "proved”  that 
they  can  get  it.  Neither  can  it  be  "proved”  that  they  cannot. 
The  statement  of  the  ideal,  however,  is  of  value  in  indicating 
the  direction  that  education  should  take.  For  example,  if  it  is 
admitted  that  the  few  can  profit  by  liberal  education,  then 
we  ought  to  make  sure  that  they,  at  least,  have  the  chance  to 
get  it. 

It  is  almost  impossible  for  them  to  do  so  in  the  United 
States  today.  Many  claims  can  be  made  for  the  American 
people;  but  nobody  would  think  of  claiming  that  they  can 
read,  write,  and  figure.  Still  less  would  it  be  maintained  that 
they  understand  the  tradition  of  the  West,  the  tradition  in 
which  they  live.  The  products  of  American  high  schools  are 


44 


EDUCATION  FOR  ALL 


illiterate;  and  a  degree  from  a  famous  college  or  university  is 
no  guarantee  that  the  graduate  is  in  any  better  case.  One  of 
the  most  remarkable  features  of  American  society  is  that  the 
difference  between  the  "uneducated”  and  the  "educated”  is 
so  slight. 

The  reason  for  this  phenomenon  is,  of  course,  that  so  little 
education  takes  place  in  American  educational  institutions. 
But  we  still  have  to  wrestle  with  the  question  of  why  this 
should  be  so.  Is  there  so  little  education  in  the  American 
educational  system  because  that  system  is  democratic?  Are 
democracy  and  education  incompatible?  Do  we  have  to  say 
that,  if  everybody  is  to  go  to  school,  the  necessary  conse¬ 
quence  is  that  nobody  will  be  educated? 

Since  we  do  not  know  that  everybody  cannot  get  a  liberal 
education,  it  would  seem  that,  if  this  is  the  ideal  education, 
we  ought  to  try  to  help  everybody  get  it.  Those  especially 
who  believe  in  "getting  the  facts”  and  "the  experimental 
method”  should  be  the  first  to  insist  that  until  we  have 
tried  we  cannot  be  certain  that  we  shall  fail. 

The  business  of  saying,  in  advance  of  a  serious  effort,  that 
the  people  are  not  capable  of  achieving  a  good  education  is 
too  strongly  reminiscent  of  the  opposition  to  every  extension 
of  democracy.  This  opposition  has  always  rested  on  the  alle¬ 
gation  that  the  people  were  incapable  of  exercising  intelli¬ 
gently  the  power  they  demanded.  Always  the  historic  state¬ 
ment  has  been  verified:  you  cannot  expect  the  slave  to  show 
the  virtues  of  the  free  man  unless  you  first  set  him  free.  When 
the  slave  has  been  set  free,  he  has,  in  the  passage  of  time,  be¬ 
come  indistinguishable  from  those  who  have  always  been  free. 

There  appears  to  be  an  innate  human  tendency  to  under¬ 
rate  the  capacity  of  those  who  do  not  belong  to  "our”  group. 
Those  who  do  not  share  our  background  cannot  have  our 
ability.  Foreigners,  people  who  are  in  a  different  economic 
status,  and  the  young  seem  invariably  to  be  regarded  as  in- 


45 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


tellectually  backward,  and  constitutionally  so,  by  natives, 
people  in  "our”  economic  status,  and  adults. 

In  education,  for  example,  whenever  a  proposal  is  made 
that  looks  toward  increased  intellectual  effort  on  the  part  of 
students,  professors  will  always  say  that  the  students  can¬ 
not  do  the  work.  My  observation  leads  me  to  think  that  what 
this  usually  means  is  that  the  professors  cannot  or  will  not 
do  the  work  that  the  suggested  change  requires.  When,  in 
spite  of  the  opposition  of  the  professors,  the  change  has  been 
introduced,  the  students,  in  my  experience,  have  always 
responded  nobly. 

We  cannot  argue  that,  because  those  Irish  peasant  boys 
who  became  priests  in  the  Middle  Ages  or  those  sons  of 
American  planters  and  businessmen  who  became  the  Found¬ 
ing  Fathers  of  our  coufttry  were  expected  as  a  matter  of 
course  to  acquire  their  education  through  the  liberal  arts  and 
great  books,  every  person  can  be  expected  as  a  matter  of 
course  to  acquire  such  an  education  today.  We  do  not  know 
the  intelligent  quotients  of  the  medieval  priests  or  of  the 
Founding  Fathers;  they  were  probably  high. 

But  such  evidence  as  we  have  in  our  own  time,  derived  from 
the  experience  of  two  or  three  colleges  that  have  made  the 
Great  Conversation  the  basis  of  their  course  of  study  and  from 
the  experience  of  that  large  number  of  groups  of  adults  who 
for  the  past  eight  years  have  been  discussing  great  books  in 
every  part  of  the  United  States,  suggests  that  the  difficulties 
of  extending  this  educational  program  to  everybody  may 
have  been  exaggerated. 

Great  books  are  great  teachers;  they  are  showing  us  every 
day  what  ordinary  people  are  capable  of.  These  books  came 
out  of  ignorant,  inquiring  humanity.  They  are  usually  the 
first  announcements  of  success  in  learning.  Most  of  them 
were  written  for,  and  addressed  to,  ordinary  people. 

If  many  great  books  seem  unreadable  and  unintelligible  to 

46 


EDUCATION  FOR  ALL 


the  most  learned  as  well  as  to  the  dullest,  it  may  be  because 
we  have  not  for  a  long  time  learned  to  read  by  reading  them. 
Great  books  teach  people  not  only  how  to  read  them,  but 
also  how  to  read  all  other  books. 

This  is  not  to  say  that  any  great  book  is  altogether  free 
from  difficulty.  As  Aristotle  remarked,  learning  is  accom¬ 
panied  by  pain.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  every  great  book 
is  always  over  the  head  of  the  reader;  he  can  never  fully 
comprehend  it.  That  is  why  the  books  in  this  set  are  infinitely 
rereadable.  That  is  why  these  books  are  great  teachers;  they 
demand  the  attention  of  the  reader  and  keep  his  intelligence 
on  the  stretch. 

As  Whitehead  has  said,  "Whenever  a  book  is  written  of 
real  educational  worth,  you  may  be  quite  certain  that  some 
reviewer  will  say  that  it  will  be  difficult  to  teach  from  it. 
Of  course  it  will  be  difficult  to  teach  from  it.  If  it  were  easy, 
the  book  ought  to  be  burned;  for  it  cannot  be  educational. 
In  education,  as  elsewhere,  the  broad  primrose  path  leads  to  a 
nasty  place.” 

But  are  we  to  say  that  because  these  books  are  more  difficult 
than  detective  stories,  pulp  magazines,  and  textbooks,  there¬ 
fore  they  are  to  remain  the  private  property  of  scholars?  Are 
we  to  hold  that  different  rules  obtain  for  books  on  the  one 
hand  and  painting,  sculpture,  and  music  on  the  other?  We  do 
not  confine  people  to  looking  at  poor  pictures  and  listening  to 
poor  music  on  the  ground  that  they  cannot  understand  good 
pictures  and  good  music.  We  urge  them  to  look  at  as  many 
good  pictures  and  hear  as  much  good  music  as  they  can,  con¬ 
vinced  that  this  is  the  way  in  which  they  will  come  to  under- 
'  stand  and  appreciate  art  and  music.  We  would  not  recom¬ 
mend  inferior  substitutes,  because  we  would  be  sure  that  they 
would  degrade  the  public  taste  rather  than  lead  it  to  better 
things. 

If  only  the  specialist  is  to  be  allowed  access  to  these 


47 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


books,  on  the  ground  that  it  is  impossible  to  understand  them 
without  "scholarship,”  if  the  attempt  to  understand 
them  without  "scholarship”  is  to  be  condemned  as  irremedi¬ 
able  superficiality,  then  we  shall  be  compelled  to  shut  out  the 
majority  of  mankind  from  some  of  the  finest  creations  of 
the  human  mind.  This  is  aristocracy  with  a  vengeance. 

Sir  Richard  Livingstone  said,  "No  doubt  a  trained  student 
will  understand  Aeschylus,  Plato,  Erasmus,  and  Pascal 
better  than  the  man  in  the  street;  but  that  does  not  mean  that 
the  ordinary  man  cannot  get  a  lot  out  of  them.  Am  I  not 
allowed  to  read  Dante  because  he  is  full  of  contemporary 
allusions  and  my  knowledge  of  his  period  is  almost  nil?  Or 
Shakespeare,  because  if  I  had  to  do  a  paper  on  him  in  the 
Oxford  Honours  School  of  English  literature,  I  should  be 
lucky  to  get  a  fourth  class?  Am  I  not  to  look  at  a  picture  by 
Velasquez  or  Cezanne,  because  I  shall  understand  and  ap¬ 
preciate  them  far  less  than  a  painter  or  art  critic  would?  Are 
you  going  to  postpone  any  acquaintance  with  these  great 
things  to  a  day  when  we  are  all  sufficiently  educated  to 
understand  them — a  day  that  will  never  come?  No,  no. 
Sensible  people  read  great  books  and  look  at  great  pictures 
knowing  very  little  of  Plato  or  Cezanne,  or  of  the  influences 
which  moulded  the  thought  or  art  of  these  men,  quite 
aware  of  their  own  ignorance,  but  in  spite  of  it  getting  a  lot 
out  of  what  they  read  or  see.” 

Sir  Richard  goes  on  to  refer  to  the  remarks  of  T.  S.  Eliot: 
"In  my  own  experience  of  the  appreciation  of  poetry  I  have 
always  found  that  the  less  I  knew  about  the  poet  and  his 
work,  before  I  began  to  read  it,  the  better.  An  elaborate 
preparation  of  historical  and  biographical  knowledge  has 
always  been  to  me  a  barrier.  It  is  better  to  be  spurred  to  ac¬ 
quire  scholarship  because  you  enjoy  the  poetry,  than  to 
suppose  that  you  enjoy  the  poetry  because  you  have  acquired 
the  scholarship.” 

48 


EDUCATION  FOR  ALL 


Even  more  important  than  the  dogma  of  scholarship  in 
keeping  people  from  the  books  is  the  dogma  of  individual 
differences.  This  is  one  of  the  basic  dogmas  of  American  edu¬ 
cation.  It  runs  like  this:  all  men  are  different;  therefore,  all 
men  require  a  different  education;  therefore,  anybody  who 
suggests  that  their  education  should  be  in  any  respect  the 
same  has  ignored  the  fact  that  all  men  are  different;  therefore, 
nobody  should  suggest  that  everybody  should  read  some  of 
the  same  books;  some  people  should  read  some  books,  some 
should  read  others.  This  dogma  has  gained  such  a  hold  on  the 
minds  of  American  educators  that  you  will  now  often  hear  a 
college  president  boast  that  his  college  has  no  curriculum. 
Each  student  has  a  course  of  study  framed,  or  "tailored”  is 
the  usual  word,  to  meet  his  own  individual  needs  and  interests. 

We  should  not  linger  long  in  discussing  the  question  of 
whether  a  student  at  the  age  of  eighteen  should  be  permitted 
to  determine  the  actual  content  of  his  education  for  himself. 
As  we  have  a  tendency  to  underrate  the  intelligence  of  the 
young,  we  have  a  tendency  to  overrate  their  experience  and 
the  significance  of  the  expression  of  interests  and  needs  on 
the  part  of  those  who  are  inexperienced.  Educators  ought  to 
know  better  than  their  pupils  what  an  education  is.  If  edu¬ 
cators  do  not,  they  have  wasted  their  lives.  The  art  of  teach¬ 
ing  consists  in  large  part  of  interesting  people  in  things  that 
ought  to  interest  them,  but  do  not.  The  task  of  educators  is 
to  discover  what  an  education  is  and  then  to  invent  the 
methods  of  interesting  their  students  in  it. 

But  I  do  not  wish  to  beg  the  question.  The  question,  in  ef¬ 
fect,  is  this:  Is  there  any  such  thing  as  "an  education”?  The 
-  answer  that  is  made  by  the  devotees  of  the  dogma  of  individ¬ 
ual  differences  is  No;  there  are  as  many  different  educations 
as  there  are  different  individuals;  it  is  "authoritarian”  to  say 
that  there  is  any  education  that  is  necessary,  or  even  suitable, 
for  every  individual. 

49 


ARCHBISHOP  MIT7Y  HIGH  SCHOOL  LIBRARY 
San  Jose,  California 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


So  Bertrand  Russell  once  said  to  me  that  the  pupil  in  school 
should  study  whatever  he  liked.  I  asked  whether  this  was  not 
a  crime  against  the  pupil.  Suppose  a  boy  did  not  like  Shake¬ 
speare.  Should  he  be  allowed  to  grow  up  without  knowing 
Shakespeare?  And,  if  he  did,  would  he  not  look  back  upon 
his  teachers  as  cheats  who  had  defrauded  him  of  his  cultural 
heritage?  Lord  Russell  replied  that  he  would  require  a  boy  to 
read  one  play  of  Shakespeare;  if  he  did  not  like  it,  he  should 
not  be  compelled  to  read  any  more. 

I  say  that  Shakespeare  should  be  a  part  of  the  education  of 
everybody.  The  point  at  which  he  is  introduced  into  the 
course  of  study,  the  method  of  arousing  interest  in  him,  the 
manner  in  which  he  is  related  to  the  problems  of  the  present 
may  vary  as  you  will.  But  Shakespeare  should  be  there  be¬ 
cause  of  the  loss  of  understanding,  because  of  the  impoverish¬ 
ment,  that  results  from  his  absence.  The  comprehension  of 
the  tradition  in  which  we  live  and  our  ability  to  communi¬ 
cate  with  others  who  live  in  the  same  tradition  and  to  in¬ 
terpret  our  tradition  to  those  who  do  not  live  in  it  are  dras¬ 
tically  affected  by  the  omission  of  Shakespeare  from  the 
intellectual  and  artistic  experience  of  any  of  us. 

If  any  common  program  is  impossible,  if  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  an  education  that  everybody  ought  to  have,  then  we 
must  admit  that  any  community  is  impossible.  All  men  are 
different;  but  they  are  also  the  same.  As  we  must  all  become 
specialists,  so  we  must  all  become  men.  In  view  of  the  ample 
provision  that  is  now  made  for  the  training  of  specialists,  in 
view  of  the  divisive  and  disintegrative  effects  of  specialism, 
and  in  view  of  the  urgent  need  for  unity  and  community,  it 
does  not  seem  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  present  crisis 
calls  first  of  all  for  an  education  that  shall  emphasize  those 
respects  in  which  men  are  the  same,  rather  than  those  in 
which  they  are  different.  The  West  needs  an  education  that 
draws  out  our  common  humanity  rather  than  our  individu- 


5° 


EDUCATION  FOR  ALL 


ality.  Individual  differences  can  be  taken  into  account  in  the 
methods  that  are  employed  and  in  the  opportunities  for 
specialization  that  may  come  later. 

In  this  connection  we  might  recall  the  dictum  of  Rousseau: 
"It  matters  little  to  me  whether  my  pupil  is  intended  for  the 
army,  the  church,  or  the  law.  Before  his  parents  chose  a  call¬ 
ing  for  him,  nature  called  him  to  be  a  man  .  .  .  When  he 
leaves  me,  he  will  be  neither  a  magistrate,  a  soldier,  nor  a 
priest;  he  will  be  a  man.” 

If  there  is  an  education  that  everybody  should  have,  how 
is  it  to  be  worked  out?  Educators  are  dodging  their  responsi¬ 
bility  if  they  do  not  make  the  attempt;  and  I  must  confess 
that  I  regard  the  popularity  of  the  dogma  of  individual  dif¬ 
ferences  as  a  manifestation  of  a  desire  on  the  part  of  educators 
to  evade  a  painful  but  essential  duty.  The  Editors  of  this  set 
believe  that  these  books  should  be  central  in  education.  But 
if  anybody  can  suggest  a  program  that  will  better  accomplish 
the  object  they  have  in  view,  they  will  gladly  embrace  him 
and  it. 


51 


CHAPTER  VII 


The  Education  of  Adults 


3cThe  Editors  believe  that 

these  books  should  be  read  by  all  adults  all  their  lives.  They 
concede  that  this  idea  has  novel  aspects.  The  education  of 
adults  has  uniformly  been  designed  either  to  make  up  for  the 
deficiencies  of  their  schooling,  in  which  case  it  might  termi¬ 
nate  when  these  gaps  had  been  filled,  or  it  has  consisted 
of  vocational  training,  in  which  case  it  might  terminate  when 
training  adequate  to  the  post  in  question  had  been  gained. 

What  is  here  proposed  is  interminable  liberal  education. 
Even  if  the  individual  has  had  the  best  possible  liberal  educa¬ 
tion  in  youth,  interminable  education  through  great  books 
and  the  liberal  arts  remains  his  obligation;  he  cannot  expect 
to  store  up  an  education  in  childhood  that  will  last  all  his 
life.  What  he  can  do  in  youth  is  to  acquire  the  disciplines  and 
habits  that  will  make  it  possible  for  him  to  continue  to  edu¬ 
cate  himself  all  his  life.  One  must  agree  with  John  Dewey  in 


51 


THE  EDUCATION  OF  ADULTS 


this:  that  continued  growth  is  essential  to  intellectual  life. 

The  twin  aims  that  have  animated  mankind  since  the  dawn 
of  history  are  the  conquest  of  nature  and  the  conquest  of 
drudgery.  Now  they  seem  in  a  fair  way  to  be  achieved.  And 
the  achievement  seems  destined,  at  the  same  time,  to  end  in 
the  trivialization  of  life.  It  is  impossible  to  believe  that  men 
can  long  be  satisfied  with  the  kind  of  recreations  that  now 
occupy  the  bulk  of  their  free  time.  After  all,  they  are  men. 
Man,  though  an  animal,  is  not  all  animal.  He  is  rational,  and 
he  cannot  live  by  animal  gratifications  alone;  still  less  by 
amusements  that  animals  have  too  much  sense  to  indulge  in. 
A  man  must  use  his  mind;  he  must  feel  that  he  is  doing  some¬ 
thing  that  will  develop  his  highest  powers  and  contribute  to 
the  development  of  his  fellow  men,  or  he  will  cease  to  be  a  man. 

The  trials  of  the  citizen  now  surpass  anything  that  previous 
generations  ever  knew.  Private  and  public  propaganda  beats 
upon  him  from  morning  till  night  all  his  life  long.  If  inde¬ 
pendent  judgment  is  the  sine  qua  non  of  effective  citizenship  in 
a  democracy,  then  it  must  be  admitted  that  such  judgment  is 
harder  to  maintain  now  than  it  ever  has  been  before.  It  is  too 
much  to  hope  that  a  strong  dose  of  education  in  childhood 
and  youth  can  inoculate  a  man  to  withstand  the  onslaughts 
on  his  independent  judgment  that  society  conducts,  or  allows 
to  be  conducted,  against  him  every  day.  For  this,  constant 
mental  alertness  and  mental  growth  are  required. 

The  conception  of  liberal  education  for  adults  that  is  here 
advanced  has  an  important  effect  on  our  conception  of  educa¬ 
tion  in  childhood  and  youth,  its  purpose  and  its  content.  If 
we  are  to  expect  the  whole  adult  population  to  engage  in 
liberal  education,  then  the  curriculum  of  schools,  colleges, 
and  universities  should  be  constructed  with  this  end  in  view. 
At  present  it  is  built  upon  the  notion,  which  is  unfortunately 
correct,  that  nobody  is  ever  going  to  get  any  education  after 
he  gets  out  of  school.  Here  we  encounter  the  melancholy  fact 


53 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


that  most  of  the  important  things  that  human  beings  ought 
to  understand  cannot  be  comprehended  in  youth. 

Although  I  have  known  several  astronomers  who  were 
contributing  to  the  international  journals  before  the  age  of 
sixteen,  I  have  never  known  a  child  of  any  age  who  had  much 
that  was  useful  to  say  about  the  organization  of  human  soci¬ 
ety  or  the  ends  of  human  life.  The  great  books  of  ethics, 
political  philosophy,  economics,  history,  and  literature  do 
not  yield  up  their  secrets  to  the  immature.  In  the  United 
States,  if  these  works  are  read  at  all,  they  are  read  in  school 
and  college,  where  they  can  be  only  dimly  understood,  and 
are  never  read  again.  Hence  Americans  are  unlikely  to  under¬ 
stand  them  fully;  we  are  deprived  of  the  light  they  might 
shed  upon  our  present  problems. 

Here  the  theory  that  education  must  meet  immediate  needs 
comes  in  to  complete  the  chaos  in  our  educational  institu¬ 
tions.  If  the  aim  of  education  is  to  meet  the  immediate  needs 
of  the  person  educated,  and  if  he  is  never  to  have  any  more 
education  after  he  gets  out  of  educational  institutions,  then 
he  must  learn  everything  he  might  ever  need  while  he  is  in 
these  institutions.  Since  there  is  no  way  of  telling  what  the 
graduate  might  need,  the  only  way  out  is  to  offer  him  a  little 
bit  of  everything,  hoping  that  he  will  find  some  bits  useful. 
So  the  American  high  school  and  college  are  jammed  with 
miscellaneous  information  on  every  conceivable  subject  from 
acrobatics  to  zymurgy;  for  who  can  say  that  some  future 
high-wire  artist  or  brewer  will  not  be  found  among  the  stu¬ 
dents?  The  great,  wild  proliferation  of  the  curriculum  of 
American  schools,  colleges,  and  universities  is  the  result  of 
many  influences;  but  we  can  say  with  some  assurance  that  if 
adult  life  had  been  looked  upon  as  a  time  for  continued  learn¬ 
ing,  the  pressure  toward  proliferation  would  have  been 
measurably  reduced. 

A  concern  with  liberal  education  for  all  adults  is  necessary 


54 


THE  EDUCATION  OF  ADULTS 


if  we  are  to  have  liberal  education  for  anybody;  because 
liberal  education  can  flourish  in  the  schools,  colleges,  and 
universities  of  a  country  only  if  the  adult  population  under¬ 
stands  and  values  it.  The  best  way  to  understand  and  value 
something  is  to  have  it  yourself. 

We  hear  a  great  deal  today  about  the  neglect  of  the  liberal 
arts  colleges  and  the  decay  of  humanistic  and  social  studies. 
It  is  generally  assumed  that  all  that  these  colleges  and  schol¬ 
ars  require  is  money.  If  they  had  more  money,  their  problems 
would  be  solved.  We  are  led  to  believe  that  their  failure  to 
get  money  results  from  the  obtuseness  or  perversity  of  college 
and  university  presidents.  These  officers  are  supposed  to  be 
interested  in  the  development  of  natural  science  and  tech¬ 
nology  at  the  expense  of  the  liberal  arts  and  the  humanistic 
and  social  studies. 

One  may  be  permitted  to  doubt  whether  the  colleges  of 
liberal  arts  and  scholars  in  the  humanities  and  the  social 
studies  could  wisely  spend  more  money  than  they  have.  The 
deficiencies  of  these  institutions  and  individuals  do  not  seem 
to  result  from  lack  of  funds,  but  from  lack  of  ideas.  When  the 
appeal  for  support  of  a  college  is  based  on  the  fact  that  its 
amenities  are  almost  as  gracious  as  those  of  the  local  country 
club;  when  scholars  in  the  humanities  and  social  studies, 
misled  by  their  misconception  of  the  scientific  method  and  by 
the  prestige  of  natural  science,  dedicate  themselves  to  the 
aimless  accumulation  of  data  about  trivial  subjects,  the  prob¬ 
lem  does  not  seem  to  be  financial.  Unfortunately,  the  only 
problems  that  money  can  solve  are  financial  problems. 

Institutions  and  subjects  develop  because  people  think  they 
are  important.  The  importance  comes  first,  and  the  money 
afterward.  The  importance  of  experimental  science  is  obvious 
to  everybody.  Science  produced  the  atomic  bomb;  and  the 
medical  schools  are  doing  almost  as  much  to  lengthen  life  as 
the  departments  of  physics  and  chemistry  are  doing  to 


55 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


shorten  it.  Many  colleges  of  liberal  arts  and  the  researches 
of  many  scholars  in  the  humanities  and  the  social  studies  are 
important  only  to  those  whose  livelihood  depends  upon 
them. 

Yet  the  great  issues  are  there.  What  is  our  destiny?  What 
is  a  good  life?  How  can  we  achieve  a  good  society?  What  can 
we  learn  to  guide  us  through  the  mazes  of  the  future  from 
history,  philosophy,  literature,  and  the  fine  arts? 

These  questions  lie,  for  the  most  part,  in  the  areas  tradi¬ 
tionally  assigned  to  the  liberal  arts,  the  humanities,  and  the 
social  studies.  If  through  this  set  of  books,  or  in  any  other 
way,  the  adult  population  of  laymen  came  to  regard  these 
issues  as  important;  if  scholars  in  these  fields  were  actually 
engaged  in  wrestling  with  these  problems;  if  in  a  large  num¬ 
ber  of  homes  all  over  the  country  these  questions  were  being 
discussed,  then  two  things  would  happen.  It  would  become 
respectable  for  intelligent  young  people,  young  people  with 
ideas,  to  devote  their  lives  to  the  study  of  these  issues,  as  it  is 
respectable  to  be  a  scientist  or  an  engineer  today;  and  the 
colleges  of  liberal  arts  and  scholars  in  the  humanities  and  the 
social  sciences  would  receive  all  the  support  they  could  use. 

An  axiomatic  educational  proposition  is  that  what  is 
honored  in  a  country  will  be  cultivated  there.  One  object  of 
this  set  of  books  is  to  do  honor  to  the  great  tradition  of  the 
West,  in  the  conviction  that  this  is  the  way  in  which  to 
promote  its  cultivation,  elaboration,  and  extension,  and  to 
perpetuate  it  to  posterity. 


5<S 


£  CHAPTER  VIII  & 


The  Next  Great  Change 


s, 


JINCE  education  is  concerned 
with  the  future,  let  us  ask  ourselves  what  we  know  positively 
about  the  future. 

We  know  that  all  parts  of  the  world  are  getting  closer  to¬ 
gether  in  terms  of  the  mechanical  means  of  transportation 
and  communication.  We  know  that  this  will  continue.  The 
world  is  going  to  be  unified,  by  conquest  or  consent. 

We  know  that  the  fact  that  all  parts  of  the  world  are  get¬ 
ting  closer  together  does  not  by  itself  mean  greater  unity 
or  safety  in  the  world.  It  may  mean  that  we  shall  all  go 
up  in  one  great  explosion. 

We  know  that  there  is  no  defense  against  the  most  destruc¬ 
tive  of  modern  weapons.  Both  the  victor  and  the  defeated 
will  lose  the  next  war.  All  the  factors  that  formerly  pro¬ 
tected  this  country,  geographical  isolation,  industrial  strength, 
and  military  power,  are  now  obsolete. 


57 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


We  know  that  the  anarchy  of  competing  sovereign  states 
must  lead  to  war  sooner  or  later.  Therefore  we  must  have 
world  law,  enforced  by  a  world  organization,  which  must 
be  attained  through  world  co-operation  and  community. 

We  know  that  it  will  be  impossible  to  induce  all  men  to 
agree  on  all  matters.  The  most  we  can  hope  for  is  to  induce 
all  men  to  be  willing  to  discuss  all  matters  instead  of  shooting 
one  another  about  some  matters.  A  civilization  in  which  all 
men  are  compelled  to  agree  is  not  one  in  which  we  would 
care  to  live.  Under  such  circumstances  one  world  would  be 
worse  than  many;  for  in  many  worlds  there  is  at  least  the 
chance  of  escape  from  one  to  another.  The  only  civilization 
in  which  a  free  man  would  be  willing  to  live  is  one  that  con¬ 
ceives  of  history  as  one  long  conversation  leading  to  clarifica¬ 
tion  and  understanding.  Such  a  civilization  presupposes  com¬ 
munication;  it  does  not  require  agreement. 

We  know  that  time  is  of  the  essence.  Every  day  we  read 
announcements  of  advances  in  transportation  and  "advances” 
in  destruction.  We  can  now  go  round  the  world  in  the  time 
it  used  to  take  to  go  from  New  York  to  Boston;  and  we  can 
kill  a  quarter  of  a  million  people  with  one  bomb.  We  are 
promised  bigger  and  better  instruments  of  mass  murder  in 
every  issue  of  our  daily  papers.  At  the  same  time  the  hostility 
among  sovereign  states  is  deepening  by  the  hour. 

How  can  we  prepare  for  a  future  like  this? 

We  see  at  once  that  the  primary,  not  the  incidental,  partici¬ 
pants  in  an  educational  program  designed  to  cope  with  a  fu¬ 
ture  like  this  must  be  adults.  They  are  in  charge  of  the  world. 
The  rising  generation,  unless  the  adults  in  charge  of  the 
world  can  find  some  way  of  living  together  immediately,  may 
never  have  a  chance  to  rise. 

I  do  not  wish  to  exaggerate  the  possibilities  of  adult  edu¬ 
cation  through  great  books  and  the  liberal  arts,  or  by  any 
other  means,  as  a  method  of  preventing  war.  If  all  the  adults 

58 


THE  NEXT  GREAT  CHANGE 


in  America  could  suddenly  realize  their  full  human  potenti¬ 
alities,  which  is  the  object  of  liberal  education,  and  the 
government  of  Russia  remained  what  it  is  today,  we  might 
merely  have  the  satisfaction  of  being  blown  up  with  our  full 
human  potentialities  realized  instead  of  unrealized.  In  view 
of  the  prevailing  skepticism  about  the  immortality  of  the 
soul  I  cannot  expect  American  readers  to  regard  this  as  more 
than  a  dubious  consolation. 

Yet  there  will  not  be  much  argument  against  the  proposi¬ 
tion  that,  on  the  whole,  reasonable  and  intelligent  people, 
even  if  they  confront  aggressively  unreasonable  or  stupid 
people,  have  a  better  chance  of  attaining  their  end,  which  in 
this  case  is  peace,  than  if  they  are  themselves  unreasonable 
and  stupid.  They  may  even  be  able  by  their  example  to  help 
their  opponents  to  become  more  reasonable  and  less  stupid. 

The  United  States  is  now  the  most  powerful  country  in  the 
world.  It  has  been  a  world  power  for  a  very  short  time.  It  has 
not  had  centuries  of  experience  in  which  to  learn  how  to  dis¬ 
charge  the  responsibilities  of  a  position  into  which  it  was  cata¬ 
pulted  against  its  will.  Nor  has  it  had  the  kind  of  education, 
in  the  last  fifty  years,  that  is  conducive  to  understanding  its 
position  or  to  maintaining  it  with  balance,  dignity,  and 
charity.  An  educational  system  that  aims  at  vocational  train¬ 
ing,  or  social  adjustment,  or  technological  advance  is  not 
likely  to  lead  to  the  kind  of  maturity  that  the  present  crisis 
demands  of  the  most  powerful  nation  in  the  world. 

A  country  that  is  powerful,  inexperienced,  and  uneducated 
can  be  a  great  danger  to  world  peace.  The  United  States  is 
unlikely  to  endanger  peace  through  malevolence.  The  people 
of  this  country  do  not  appear  to  bear  any  ill-will  toward  any 
other  people;  nor  do  they  want  anything  that  any  other 
people  have.  Since  they  are  devoted  to  their  own  kind  of 
society  and  government,  they  do  not  want  any  other  nation 
to  threaten  the  continued  prosperity  of  their  society  and 


59 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


government.  Any  military  moves  made  by  the  United  States 
will  be  made  in  the  conviction  that  they  are  necessary  for  the 
defense  of  this  country. 

But  this  conviction  may  be  mistaken.  It  may  be  hysterical, 
or  it  may  be  ignorant.  We  can  easily  blunder  into  war.  Since 
we  may  have  committed  such  a  blunder  even  before  these 
words  appear  in  print,  I  must  repeat  that  I  do  not  wish  to 
exaggerate  the  importance  of  these  books,  or  any  other  means 
of  adult  education,  as  a  method  of  preventing  such  a  blunder. 
The  time  is  short,  and  education  is  long.  What  I  am  saying  is 
that,  since  education  is  long,  and  since  it  is  indispensable,  we 
should  begin  it  right  away. 

When  Marshal  Lyautey  was  in  Africa,  he  asked  his  gar¬ 
dener  to  plant  a  certain  tree,  the  foliage  of  which  he  liked 
very  much.  The  gardener  said  that  a  tree  of  this  kind  took 
two  hundred  years  to  reach  maturity.  "In  that  case,”  said 
the  marshal,  "there  is  no  time  to  lose.  Plant  it  today.” 

The  Great  Conversation  symbolizes  that  Civilization  of 
the  Dialogue  which  is  the  only  civilization  in  which  a  free 
man  would  care  to  live.  It  promotes  the  realization  of  that 
civilization  here  and  now.  This  set  of  books  is  organized  on 
the  principle  of  attaining  clarification  and  understanding  of 
the  most  important  issues,  as  stated  by  the  greatest  writers 
of  the  West,  through  continuous  discussion.  Its  object  is  to 
project  the  Great  Conversation  into  the  future  and  to  have 
everybody  participate  in  it.  The  community  toward  which  it 
is  hoped  that  these  books  may  contribute  is  the  community 
of  free  minds. 

Now  the  only  defense  that  any  nation  can  have  is  the 
character  and  intelligence  of  its  people.  The  adequacy  of  that 
defense  will  depend  upon  the  strength  of  the  conviction  that 
the  nation  is  worth  defending.  This  conviction  must  rest  on  a 
comprehension  of  the  values  for  which  that  nation  stands.  In 
the  case  of  the  United  States  those  values  are  to  be  found  in 


60 


THE  NEXT  GREAT  CHANGE 


the  tradition  of  the  West.  The  tradition  of  the  West  is  the 
Great  Conversation. 

We  have  repeated  to  ourselves  so  much  of  late  the  slogan, 
"America  must  be  strong,”  that  we  have  forgotten  what 
strength  is.  We  appear  to  believe  that  strength  consists  of 
masses  of  men  and  machines.  I  do  not  deny  that  they  have 
their  role.  But  surely  the  essential  ingredients  of  strength  are 
trained  intelligence,  love  of  country,  the  understanding  of  its 
ideals,  and  such  devotion  to  those  ideals  that  they  become  a 
part  of  the  thought  and  life  of  every  citizen. 

We  cannot  hope  to  make  ourselves  intelligible  to  the  rest 
of  the  world  unless  we  understand  ourselves.  We  now  present 
a  confusing  picture  to  other  peoples  largely  because  we  are 
ourselves  confused.  To  take  only  one  example,  how  can  we 
say  that  we  are  a  part  of  the  great  tradition  of  the  West,  the 
essence  of  which  is  that  nothing  is  to  be  undiscussed,  when 
some  of  our  most  representative  citizens  constantly  demand 
the  suppression  of  freedom  of  speech  in  the  interest  of  na¬ 
tional  security?  Now  that  military  power  is  obsolescent,  the 
national  security  depends  on  our  understanding  of  and  devo¬ 
tion  to  such  ancient  Western  liberties  as  free  speech.  If  we 
abandon  our  ideals  under  external  pressure,  we  give  away 
without  a  fight  what  we  would  be  fighting  for  if  we  went  to 
war.  We  abandon  the  sources  of  our  strength. 

How  can  we  say  that  we  are  defending  the  tradition  of  the 
West  if  we  do  not  know  what  it  is?  An  educational  program, 
for  young  people  or  adults,  from  which  this  tradition  has 
disappeared,  fails,  of  course,  to  transmit  it  to  our  own 
people.  It  also  fails  to  convince  other  people  that  we  are 
devoted  to  it  as  we  claim.  Any  detached  observer  looking  at 
the  American  educational  system  can  see  that  the  bulk  of  its 
activity  is  irrelevant  to  any  of  the  things  we  know  about  the 
future. 

Vocationalism,  scientism,  and  specialism  can  at  the  most 

61 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


assist  our  people  to  earn  a  living  and  thus  maintain  the 
economy  of  the  United  States.  They  cannot  contribute  to  the 
much  more  important  elements  of  national  strength:  trained 
intelligence,  the  understanding  of  the  country’s  ideals,  and 
devotion  to  them.  Nor  can  they  contribute  to  the  growth  of  a 
community  in  this  country.  They  are  divisive  rather  than 
unifying  forces.  Vocational  training,  scientific  experimenta¬ 
tion,  and  specialization  do  not  have  to  supplant  liberal  edu¬ 
cation  in  order  to  make  their  economic  contribution.  We  can 
have  liberal  education  for  all  and  vocational  training,  scien¬ 
tific  experimentation,  and  specialization,  too. 

We  hear  a  great  deal  nowadays  about  international  under¬ 
standing,  world  community,  and  world  organization.  These 
things  are  all  supposed  to^be  good;  but  nothing  very  concrete 
is  put  forward  as  to  the  method  by  which  they  can  be  at¬ 
tained.  We  can  be  positive  on  one  point:  we  are  safe  in  saying 
that  these  things  will  not  be  brought  about  by  vocational 
training,  scientific  experiment,  and  specialization.  The  kind 
of  education  we  have  for  young  people  and  adults  in  the 
United  States  today  will  not  advance  these  causes.  I  should 
like  to  suggest  one  or  two  ways  in  which  they  may  be  ad¬ 
vanced. 

We  should  first  dispose  of  the  proposition  that  we  cannot 
have  world  organization,  a  world  of  law,  without  a  world 
community.  This  appears  to  overlook  the  obvious  inter¬ 
action  between  legal  institutions  and  culture.  As  Aristotle 
pointed  out  long  ago,  law  is  itself  an  educational  force.  The 
Constitution  of  the  United  States  educates  the  people  every 
day  to  believe  in  and  support  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States. 

World  community,  in  the  sense  of  perfect  understanding 
among  all  peoples  everywhere,  is  not  required  in  order  to 
have  the  beginnings  of  world  law.  What  is  required  is  that 
minimum  understanding  which  is  sufficient  to  allow  world 

6z 


THE  NEXT  GREAT  CHANGE 


law  to  begin.  From  that  point  forward  world  law  will  sup¬ 
port  world  community  and  world  community  will  support 
world  law. 

For  example,  there  are  those  who  oppose  the  discussion  of 
universal  disarmament  on  the  ground  that  disarmament  is  an 
effect  and  not  a  cause.  They  say  that,  until  the  tensions  in  the 
world  are  removed,  disarmament  cannot  take  place  and  that 
we  shall  simply  deceive  ourselves  if  we  talk  about  it  instead 
of  doing  something  about  the  tensions. 

Actually  one  way  to  do  something  about  the  tensions  is  to 
talk  about  disarmament.  The  manifestation  of  a  general  will¬ 
ingness  to  disarm  under  effective  international  regulation 
and  control  would  do  more  to  relieve  the  tensions  in  the 
world  than  any  other  single  thing.  Getting  together  to  see 
whether  such  a  plan  could  be  formulated  would  relieve  ten¬ 
sion.  No  doubt  there  would  be  disappointments,  and  the  risk 
of  exacerbating  international  irritations;  but  to  refuse  to  dis¬ 
cuss  the  principal  method  of  mitigating  tensions  on  the 
ground  that  they  have  to  be  mitigated  before  it  is  discussed 
does  not  seem  to  be  the  best  way  to  mitigate  them. 

What  are  the  best  ways  of  promoting  that  minimum  of 
understanding  which  is  necessary  to  permit  world  law  to 
begin?  If  community  depends  on  communication,  we  must 
ask  what  kinds  of  things  can  be  most  readily  communicated 
to  and  comprehended  by  the  largest  number  of  people,  and 
what  kinds  of  things  tell  the  most  about  the  people  who  are 
doing  the  communicating?  It  appears  that  the  kind  of  things 
that  are  most  intelligible  and  most  revealing  are  ideas  and 
artistic  objects.  They  are  most  readily  understood;  they  are 
most  characteristic  of  the  peoples  who  have  produced  or 
stated  them. 

We  can  learn  more  about  another  people  from  their  artistic 
and  intellectual  productions  than  we  can  from  all  the  statis¬ 
tics  and  data  that  can  ever  be  collected.  We  can  learn  more, 

63 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


that  is,  of  what  we  need  to  know  in  order  to  found  a  world 
community.  We  can  learn  more  in  the  sense  that  we  can  un¬ 
derstand  more.  What  we  have  in  this  set  of  books  is  a  means 
by  which  people  who  can  read  English  can  understand  the 
West.  We  in  the  West  can  understand  ourselves  and  one 
another;  peoples  in  other  parts  of  the  world  can  understand 
us. 

This  leads  to  the  idea  that  Scott  Buchanan  has  put  forward, 
the  idea  of  a  world  republic  of  law  and  justice  and  a  world  re¬ 
public  of  learning  mutually  supporting  each  other.  Any  re¬ 
public  maintains  its  justice,  peace,  freedom,  and  order  by  the 
exercise  of  intelligence.  Every  assent  on  the  part  of  the 
governed  is  a  product  of  learning.  A  republic  is  a  common 
educational  life  in  process.  So  Montesquieu  said  that  as  the 
principle  of  an  aristocracy  was  honor,  and  the  principle  of  a 
tyranny  was  fear,  the  principle  of  a  democracy  was  educa¬ 
tion.  Thomas  Jefferson  took  him  seriously.  Now  we  discover 
that  a  little  learning  is  a  dangerous  thing.  We  see  now  that 
we  need  more  learning,  more  real  learning,  for  everybody. 

The  republic  of  learning  is  that  republic  toward  which  all 
mere  political  republics  gravitate,  and  which  they  must  serve 
if  they  are  to  be  true  to  themselves.  No  one  saw  this  before 
yesterday,  and  we  only  today  are  able  to  begin  to  measure 
what  we  should  do  about  it  tomorrow.  The  immediate  in¬ 
ference  from  this  insight  is  a  utopia  for  today,  the  extension 
of  universal  education  to  every  man  and  woman,  from  child¬ 
hood  to  the  grave.  It  is  time  to  take  education  away  from  the 
scholars  and  school  teachers  and  to  open  the  gates  of  the 
republic  of  learning  to  those  who  can  and  will  make  it  re¬ 
sponsible  to  humanity. 

Learning  is  in  principle  and  should  be  in  fact  the  highest 
common  good,  to  be  defended  as  a  right  and  worked  for  as  an 
end.  All  men  are  capable  of  learning,  according  to  their 
abilities.  Learning  does  not  stop  as  long  as  a  man  lives,  unless 

64 


THE  NEXT  GREAT  CHANGE 


his  learning  power  atrophies  because  he  does  not  use  it. 
Political  freedom  cannot  last  without  provision  for  the  free 
unlimited  acquisition  of  knowledge.  Truth  is  not  long  re¬ 
tained  in  human  affairs  without  continual  learning  and  re¬ 
learning.  A  political  order  is  tyrannical  if  it  is  not  rational. 

If  we  aim  at  a  world  republic  of  law  and  justice,  we  must 
recover  and  revive  the  great  tradition  of  liberal  human 
thought,  rethink  our  knowledge  in  its  light  and  shadow,  and 
set  up  the  devices  of  learning  by  which  everybody  can,  per¬ 
haps  for  the  first  time,  become  a  citizen  of  the  world.  The 
kind  of  understanding  that  comes  through  belonging  to  the 
world  republic  of  learning  is  the  kind  that  constitutes  the 
world  community.  The  world  republic  of  law  and  justice  is 
nothing  but  the  political  expression  of  the  world  republic  of 
learning  and  the  world  community. 


65 


CHAPTER  IX  S: 


East  and  West 


.^\.T  this  point  I  hear  some 
reader  say,  "The  world  community  and  the  world  republic  of 
law  and  justice  must  be  composed  of  all  peoples  everywhere. 
These  are  great  books  of  the  West.  How  can  comprehension 
of  the  tradition  they  embody  amount  to  participation  in  the 
world  republic  of  learning?  How  can  such  comprehension 
promote  world  community,  since  great  books  of  the  East  are 
not  included?” 

The  Editors  reply  that  there  is  undoubtedly  to  be  a  meeting 
of  East  and  West.  It  is  now  going  on,  under  rather  unsatisfac¬ 
tory  conditions.  The  Editors  believe  that  those  who  come  to 
the  meeting  with  some  grasp  of  the  full  range  of  the  Western 
tradition  will  be  more  likely  to  understand  the  East  than 
those  who  have  attended  any  number  of  the  hastily  instituted 
survey  courses  about  the  East  proposed  by  educators  who 
have  been  suddenly  impressed  by  the  necessity  of  understand- 

66 


EAST  AND  WEST 


ing  the  East  and  whose  notion  is  that  the  way  to  understand 
anything  is  to  get  a  lot  of  information  about  it. 

The  Editors  are  impressed  by  the  many  reminders  given  to 
the  West  by  Eastern  thinkers  that  the  parts  of  the  Western 
tradition  that  are  now  the  least  known  and  the  least  respect¬ 
ed  in  America  are  the  very  parts  most  likely  to  help  us 
understand  the  deepest  thought  of  the  East.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Editors  are  convinced  that  those  aspects  of  the 
West  which  the  East  finds  most  terrifying,  its  materialism, 
rapacity,  and  ethnocentric  pride,  will  get  no  support  from 
those  great  books  which  indicate  the  main  line  of  the 
Western  pursuit  of  wisdom.  The  Editors  believe  that  an 
education  based  on  the  full  range  of  the  Western  search  is  far 
more  likely  to  produce  a  genuine  openness  about  the  East,  a 
genuine  capacity  to  understand  it,  than  any  other  form  of 
education  now  proposed  or  practicable. 

The  West  can  try,  as  the  saying  goes,  to  "win”  the  East  by 
coming  to  the  meetings  between  them  with  a  few  words  ad¬ 
justed  directly  to  the  questions  that  arise  from  the  manner  in 
which  the  East  is,  as  the  saying  goes,  "awakening.”  There 
is  no  question  that  the  West  will  inevitably  be  represented  at 
these  meetings  by  a  good  many  of  those  social  engineers  who 
feel,  in  all  ignorance,  that  they  represent  in  splendor  what 
twenty-five  centuries  of  Western  civilization  have  been  labor¬ 
ing  to  produce.  Scientific  humanism,  which  has  been  vigor¬ 
ously  and  in  high  places  presented  as  the  new  religion  that 
the  new  one  world  needs,  will  certainly  be  represented.  Some 
representatives  will  surely  be  making  the  offer  of  the  magic 
trio:  scientific  method,  technology,  and  the  American  Way 
of  Life. 

It  seems  safe  to  predict,  however,  that  these  representa¬ 
tives  of  the  West  are  likely  to  be  understood  only  by  those  in 
the  East  who  have  already  decided  for  "westernization.” 
These  representatives  of  the  West  may  be  considerably  non- 

67 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


plused  by  those  in  the  East  who  are  determined,  however 
much  they  "awaken”  in  certain  respects,  to  retain  the  cen¬ 
tral  convictions  and  habits  of  thought  of  Eastern  culture. 

As  Ananda  Coomaraswamy  has  said,  "It  is  true  that  there 
is  a  modernized,  uprooted  East,  with  which  the  West  can 
compete;  but  it  is  only  with  the  surviving,  superstitious  East 
— Gandhi’s  East,  the  one  that  has  never  attempted  to  live 
by  bread  alone — that  the  West  can  co-operate.” 

In  seeking  the  co-operation  of  this  modernized,  uprooted 
East  the  Western  social  engineers  will  find  themselves,  as  is 
already  menacingly  clear,  competing  with  the  rulers  of  the 
Soviet  Union.  These  rulers  are  bringing  to  the  meetings  of 
East  and  West  a  far  more  ruthless  version  of  this  latter-day 
shrunken  Western  voice.  Their  words  are  adjusted  far  more 
directly  to  the  exact  questions  that  are  involved  in  the 
"awakening”  of  the  East.  The  Russians  seem  prepared  to 
offer  the  new  Easterners  a  program  uncomplicated  by  any 
concern  about  the  old  East.  Perhaps  these  new  Easterners, 
under  Russian  guidance,  may  carry  through  a  new  kind  of  re¬ 
flexive  imperialism,  more  ruthless  toward  "the  superstitious 
East,  Gandhi’s  East,”  than  any  Western  imperialist  ever  was. 

If  the  East,  contrary  to  its  deepest  traditions,  becomes 
totally  absorbed  with  material  comfort,  there  will  be  little 
about  the  East  that  we  shall  have  to  understand,  since  we  al¬ 
ready  understand  that  kind  of  absorption  only  too  well.  We 
have  never  pictured  the  East  as  coming  to  share  it.  If  the 
East  does  come  to  share  it,  the  change  may  shock  us,  but  it 
will  raise  no  very  difficult  question  of  understanding. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  awakening  East  tries  to  retain, 
beneath  the  new  vigor  of  the  drive  toward  material  goods, 
its  various  forms  of  traditional  religion,  metaphysics,  and 
ethics,  the  West,  in  trying  to  co-operate  with  the  East,  has 
something  to  understand. 

Under  these  circumstances  anyone  anywhere,  in  or  out  of 

68 


EAST  AND  WEST 


the  universities,  who  has  attained  some  competence  to  bring 
forth  a  reading  of  the  East  that  the  West  can  understand, 
should  be  encouraged  in  every  way  to  increase  his  compe¬ 
tence  and  to  make  the  results  of  his  studies  available.  But 
the  number  of  persons  who  can  claim  even  such  an  initial 
competence  is  very  small.  Therefore  it  is  absurd  to  suggest, 
as  many  laymen  and  scholars  are  doing  today,  that  a  large 
part  of  the  course  of  study  of  our  educational  system  should 
be  devoted  to  "understanding  the  East.” 

Few  persons  are  less  helpful  to  the  world  than  those  edu¬ 
cators,  infatuated  with  the  magic  of  curriculum  changes,  who 
think  that  the  teachers  or  the  teachability  of  any  subject 
they  dream  of  can  spring  into  existence  by  curricular  de¬ 
cree.  It  is  irresponsible  to  suggest  that  the  East  can  be 
given  a  major  place  in  the  education  of  everybody  when  no 
more  than  a  handful  of  teachers  exists  who  could  decently 
commit  themselves  to  the  teaching  of  such  courses.  The 
"understanding”  of  the  East  that  would  emerge  from  such 
courses,  taught  by  instructors  who  had  hastily  "read  up”  on 
the  East,  could  set  communication  and  understanding  back 
for  generations. 

Professor  John  D.  Wild  of  Harvard  has  lately  commented 
on  some  educational  proposals  of  Professor  Howard  Mum- 
ford  Jones  of  Harvard.  Mr.  Wild  says:  "I  gather  that  Mr. 
Jones  is  worried  about  our  capacity  really  to  understand 
Russia  and  to  set  up  a  co-operative  world  community.  So  am 
I.  But  I  am  unable  to  follow  him  in  the  assumption  that  these 
crucially  important  aims  will  be  achieved  merely  by  setting 
up  more  machinery,  professors,  and  secretaries,  more  fields 
and  areas  called  'the  study  of  Russia’  and  'the  study  of  the 
Orient’.  How  are  these  things  to  be  studied;  from  what  sort 
of  integrating  point  of  view?  Is  he  proposing  an  amalgam  of 
Western,  Chinese,  and  Russian  culture?  If  so,  what  would 
this  be  like?  Or  is  he  proposing  a  sort  of  cultural  relativism 

69 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


in  which  every  one  seeks  to  divest  himself  so  far  as  possible 
from  all  the  culture  he  had?  I  do  not  believe  that  Mr.  Jones  is 
advocating  either  of  these  alternatives.  I  gather  that  he  is  in¬ 
terested  in  correcting  the  economic  and  social  injustices  that 
distort  our  present  civilization,  that  he  wishes  to  see  the  vast 
power  which  modern  technology  has  put  into  our  hands  used 
intelligently  for  the  common  good.  All  this  is  in  line  with 
the  best  philosophical  and  religious  thought  of  our  western 
tradition,  when  properly  understood.  I  gather  further  that  he 
feels  that  we  should  be  humble  about  the  rather  rudimentary 
civilization  we  now  possess  at  this  early  stage,  precious  as  it 
is,  and  that  we  should  be  open  to  suggestions  from  alien 
sources.  This  also  is  thoroughly  in  line  with  what  is  best  in 
our  own  tradition.  If  this  is  what  Mr.  Jones  means,  then  what 
we  need  most  of  all  is  to  recall  the  basic  insights  and  prin¬ 
ciples  (religious  as  well  as  philosophical)  upon  which  our 
western  culture  was  founded,  and  then  apply  them  to  the 
critical  problems  of  our  time.” 

So  also  Professor  Louis  W.  Norris:  "Professor  Jones  has 
entered  a  strong  and  just  plea  for  the  relevance  of  education 
to  its  times.  But  there  is  grave  danger  here  that  the  timeliness 
of  education  should  obscure  its  timelessness.  Socrates  and 
Plato,  as  Professor  Jones  says,  (and  even  more  truly  Aristotle) 
'struggled  with  the  local  political  problem.’  But  the  very 
reason  they  were  able  to  make  such  helpful  comments  about 
social,  ethical  and  political  questions  was,  that  they  were 
even  more  concerned  to  find  out  the  'forms’  of  things  that 
were  timeless.  Without  the  'definitions’  of  Socrates,  the 
'ideas’  of  Plato  and  the  'forms’  of  Aristotle,  their  'radio 
commentating’  would  have  been  shallow  gibberish,  forgotten 
as  soon  as  ninety-nine  per  cent  of  present  commentary.  A 
frantic  concern  to  understand  Russia  or  the  Orient  will  lead 
us  nowhere,  unless  the  student  brings  to  these  problems  skill 
in  analysis,  order  in  valuing,  knowledge  of  history,  and  such 


7° 


EAST  AND  WEST 


social  experience  as  gives  him  a  basis  for  judging  what  he 
finds  out  about  Russia  and  the  Orient.” 

There  is  no  reason  why  the  West  should  feel  that  it  must 
apologize  for  a  determination  to  retain  and  renew  a  sense  of 
its  own  character  and  its  own  range.  Western  civilization  is 
one  of  the  greatest  civilizations  to  date.  Not  in  a  spirit  of 
arrogance,  but  in  a  spirit  of  concern  that  nothing  good  be 
lost  for  the  future,  the  West  should  take  to  its  meetings  with 
the  East  a  full  and  vivid  sense  of  its  own  achievements. 

Nothing  in  the  main  line  of  the  Western  tradition  leads  to 
ethnocentric  pride  or  cultural  provincialism.  If  the  West  has 
been  guilty  of  these  sins,  it  is  not  because  of  its  fidelity  to  its 
own  character,  but  because  of  the  many  kinds  of  human 
weakness  that  always  afflict  any  "successful”  society. 

Moreover,  if  we  are  to  believe  such  an  eminent  student  of 
this  matter  as  Coomaraswamy,  the  Western  tradition  con¬ 
tains  within  itself  elements  that  permit  bridging  to  the 
deepest  elements  of  Eastern  traditions.  Presumably  we  can 
build  these  bridges  best  if  we  understand  the  nature  of  the 
ground  where  the  bridge  begins. 

Coomaraswamy  says:  "If  ever  the  gulf  between  East  and 
West,  of  which  we  are  made  continually  more  aware  as 
physical  intimacies  are  forced  upon  us,  is  to  be  bridged,  it 
will  be  only  by  an  agreement  on  principles.  .  .  .  A  philosophy 
identical  with  Plato’s  is  still  a  living  force  in  the  East.  .  .  . 
Understanding  requires  a  recognition  of  common  values.  For 
so  long  as  men  cannot  think  with  other  peoples,  they  have 
not  understood,  but  only  known  them;  and  in  this  situation 
it  is  largely  an  ignorance  of  their  own  intellectual  heritage 
that  stands  in  the  way  of  understanding  and  makes  an  un¬ 
familiar  way  of  thinking  to  seem  'queer’.” 

The  irony  here  is  that  those  who  talk  most  about  the  need 
to  change  the  course  of  study  in  order  to  promote  understand¬ 
ing  of  the  East  would  be  those  who  would  proclaim  most 


7i 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


loudly  the  obsolescence  of  those  parts  of  the  Western  tradi¬ 
tion  (for  example,  Plato,  Plotinus,  Augustine,  and  the 
Western  mystical  and  metaphysical  tradition)  which  are 
perhaps  equivalent,  with  some  transformation,  to  the  im¬ 
portant  parts  of  Eastern  traditions.  Such  people  would 
vigorously  oppose  an  education  requiring  everybody  to  try 
to  understand  those  things  in  the  West  which  have  the  best 
chance  of  leading  to  a  genuine  understanding  of  the  East;  but 
for  all  that  they  vigorously  propose  that  we  understand  the 
East. 

The  more  dogmatic  of  those  who  feel  that  most  of  the 
Western  tradition  is  obsolete,  and  who  take  scientific  hu¬ 
manism  as  the  new  religion,  are  not  likely  to  regard  the  prob¬ 
lem  of  relations  with  the  East  as  one  of  understanding, 
though  they  will  use  the  phrase.  They  will  see  in  the  East 
little  but  backwardness,  and  will  mark  down  Eastern  ritual 
and  mysticism  as  something  scheduled  for  early  technologi¬ 
cal  demolition.  One  can  imagine  the  indignant  astonishment 
with  which  a  beneficent  American  social  engineer  would 
greet  the  word  of  an  earnest  and  respected  student  of  the 
East,  Rene  Guenon,  that  "everything  in  the  East  is  seen  as 
the  application  and  extension  of  a  doctrine  which  in  essence 
is  purely  intellectual  and  metaphysical.” 

Any  widespread  achievement  of  understanding  between 
East  and  West  will  have  to  wait  on  the  production  of  an 
adequate  supply  of  liberally  educated  Westerners.  Mean¬ 
while,  the  problem  is  simply  how  to  produce  such  a  supply. 
The  pretense  that  we  are  now  prepared  within  the  educa¬ 
tional  system  at  large  to  include  understanding  the  East  as 
one  main  pivot  in  a  liberal  curriculum  will  obstruct,  not  as¬ 
sist,  the  solution  of  the  central  problem  of  producing  a 
liberally  educated  generation. 

Unquestionably  all  the  purposes  that  validate  the  publica¬ 
tion  of  great  books  lead  logically  to  Great  Books  of  the 


72- 


EAST  AND  WEST 


World,  not  of  any  part  of  the  world.  But  at  the  moment  we 
have  all  we  can  do  to  understand  ourselves  in  order  to  be 
prepared  for  the  forthcoming  meetings  between  East  and 
West.  Those  who  want  to  add  more  great  books  of  Eastern 
origin  are  deceiving  themselves.  The  time  for  that  will  come 
when  we  have  understood  our  own  tradition  well  enough 
to  understand  another. 

We  may  take  to  heart  the  message  given  the  West  by  one 
of  the  great  modern  representatives  of  another  culture. 
Charles  Malik  has  said:  "In  all  this  we  are  really  touching 
upon  the  great  present  crisis  in  western  culture.  We  are  say¬ 
ing  when  that  culture  mends  its  own  spiritual  fences,  all  will 
be  well  with  the  Near  East,  and  not  with  the  Near  East  alone. 
We  are  saying  it  is  not  a  simple  thing  to  be  the  heir  of  the 
Graeco-Roman-Christian-European  synthesis  and  not  to  be 
true  to  its  deepest  visions.  One  can  take  the  ten  greatest 
spirits  in  that  synthesis  and  have  them  judge  the  perform¬ 
ance  of  the  Western  world  in  relation  to  the  Near  East.  The 
deep  problem  of  the  Near  East  then  must  await  the  spiritual 
recovery  of  the  West.  And  he  does  not  know  the  truth  who 
thinks  that  the  West  does  not  have  in  its  own  tradition  the 
means  and  power  wherewith  it  can  once  again  be  true  to 
itself.” 


73 


5  CHAPTER  X  Je 


A  better  to  the  Reader 


I 


IMAGINE  you  reading  this  far 
in  this  set  of  books  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  whether 
you  should  read  further.  I  will  assume  that  you  have  been 
persuaded  of  the  necessity  and  possibility  of  reading  these 
books  in  order  to  get  a  liberal  education.  But  how  about  you? 
The  Editors  are  not  interested  in  general  propositions  about 
the  desirability  of  reading  the  books;  they  want  them  read. 
They  did  not  produce  them  as  furniture  for  public  or  private 
libraries. 

We  say  that  these  books  contain  a  liberal  education  and 
that  everybody  ought  to  try  to  get  one.  You  say  either  that 
you  have  had  one,  that  you  are  not  bright  enough  to  get  one, 
or  that  you  do  not  need  one. 

You  cannot  have  had  one.  If  you  are  an  American  under 
the  age  of  ninety,  you  can  have  acquired  in  the  educational 
system  only  the  faintest  glimmerings  of  the  beginnings  of 


74 


A  LETTER  TO  THE  READER 


liberal  education.  Ask  yourself  what  whole  great  books  you 
read  while  you  were  in  school,  college,  or  university.  Ask 
yourself  whether  you  and  your  teachers  saw  these  books  as  a 
Great  Conversation  among  the  finest  minds  of  Western 
history,  and  whether  you  obtained  an  understanding  of  the 
tradition  in  which  you  live.  Ask  yourself  whether  you 
mastered  the  liberal  arts.  I  am  willing  to  wager  that,  if  you 
read  any  great  books  at  all,  you  read  very  few,  that  you  read 
one  without  reference  to  the  others,  in  separate  courses,  and 
that  for  the  most  part  you  read  only  excerpts  from  them. 

As  for  me,  I  was  educated  in  two  very  "liberal”  colleges. 
Apart  from  Shakespeare,  who  was  scattered  through  my 
education,  I  read  one  of  the  books  in  this  set,  Goethe’s 
Faust ,  and  part  of  another,  a  few  of  the  dialogues  of  Plato,  as 
part  of  my  formal  education.  I  do  not  remember  that  I  ever 
heard  the  name  of  Thomas  Aquinas  or  Plotinus,  when  I  was 
in  college.  I  am  not  even  sure  that  I  heard  of  Karl  Marx.  I 
heard  of  many  of  the  great  scientific  writers,  but  avoided 
association  with  them  on  the  ground  that  they  were  too 
difficult  for  me — I  gloried  in  the  possession  of  an  "unmathe- 
matical”  mind — and  I  did  not  need  to  read  them,  because  I 
was  not  going  to  be  a  scientist. 

But  suppose  that  you  have  in  some  way  hammered  out  for 
yourself  the  kind  of  education  that  colleges  ought  to  give. 
If  you  have  done  so,  you  belong  to  a  rare  and  small  species, 
rare  and  small,  but  not  unknown.  If  you  have  read  all  these 
books,  read  them  again.  What  makes  them  great  is,  among 
other  things,  that  they  teach  you  something  every  time  you 
read  them.  Every  time,  you  see  something  you  had  not  seen 
before;  you  understand  something  you  had  missed;  no  matter 
how  hard  your  mind  worked  before,  it  works  again. 

And  this  is  the  point:  every  man’s  mind  ought  to  keep 
working  all  his  life  long;  every  man’s  imagination  should  be 
touched  as  often  as  possible  by  the  great  works  of  imagina- 


75 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


tion;  every  man  ought  to  push  toward  the  horizons  of  his 
intellectual  powers  all  the  time.  It  is  impossible  to  have 
"had”  a  liberal  education,  except  in  a  formal,  accidental,  im¬ 
material  sense.  Liberal  education  ought  to  end  only  with  life 
itself. 

I  must  reiterate  that  you  can  set  no  store  by  your  education 
in  childhood  and  youth,  no  matter  how  good  it  was.  Child¬ 
hood  and  youth  are  no  time  to  get  an  education.  They  are  the 
time  to  get  ready  to  get  an  education.  The  most  that  we  can 
hope  for  from  these  uninteresting  and  chaotic  periods  of  life 
is  that  during  them  we  shall  be  set  on  the  right  path,  the 
path  of  realizing  our  human  possibilities  through  intel¬ 
lectual  effort  and  aesthetic  appreciation.  The  great  issues, 
now  issues  of  life  and  death  for  civilization,  call  for  mature 
minds. 

There  is  a  simple  test  of  this.  Take  any  great  book  that  you 
read  in  school  or  college  and  have  not  read  since.  Read  it 
again.  Your  impression  that  you  understood  it  will  at  once 
be  corrected.  Think  what  it  means,  for  instance,  to  read 
Macbeth  at  sixteen  in  contrast  to  reading  it  at  thirty-five.  We 
can  understand  Macbeth  as  Shakespeare  meant  us  to  under¬ 
stand  it  only  when  we  have  had  some  experience,  vicarious 
or  otherwise,  of  marriage  and  ambition.  To  read  great  books, 
if  we  read  them  at  all,  in  childhood  and  youth  and  never  read 
them  again  is  never  to  understand  them. 

Can  you  ever  understand  them?  There  is  a  sense  in  which 
nobody  can.  That  is  why  the  Great  Conversation  never  ends. 
Jean  Cocteau  said  that  each  great  work  in  Western  thought 
arises  as  a  contradiction  of  one  that  precedes  it.  This  is  not 
the  result  of  the  perversity  or  vanity  of  these  writers.  No¬ 
body  can  make  so  clear  and  comprehensive  and  accurate  a 
statement  of  the  basic  issues  of  human  life  as  to  close  the  dis¬ 
cussion.  Every  statement  calls  for  explanation,  correction, 
modification,  expansion,  or  contradiction. 

76 


A  LETTER  TO  THE  READER 


There  is,  too,  the  infinite  suggestiveness  of  great  books. 
They  lead  us  to  other  books,  other  thoughts,  other  questions. 
They  enlarge  the  fund  of  ideas  we  have  and  relate  themselves 
to  those  we  possess.  Since  the  suggestiveness  of  great  books 
is  infinite,  we  cannot  get  to  the  end  of  them.  We  cannot  say 
we  understand  these  books  in  the  sense  that  we  are  finished 
with  them  and  what  they  have  to  teach  us. 

The  question  for  you  is  only  whether  you  can  ever  under¬ 
stand  these  books  well  enough  to  participate  in  the  Great 
Conversation,  not  whether  you  can  understand  them  well 
enough  to  end  it.  And  the  answer  is  that  you  can  never  know 
until  you  try.  We  have  built  up  around  the  "classics”  such 
an  atmosphere  of  pedantry,  we  have  left  them  so  long  to  the 
scholarly  dissectors,  that  we  think  of  them  as  incompre¬ 
hensible  to  the  ordinary  man  to  whom  they  were  originally 
addressed.  At  the  same  time  our  education  has  undergone  so 
drastic  a  process  of  dilution  that  we  are  ill-equipped,  even 
after  graduation  from  a  respectable  college,  to  tackle  any¬ 
thing  much  above  the  level  of  the  comic  book. 

The  decay  of  education  in  the  West,  which  is  felt  most  pro¬ 
foundly  in  America,  undoubtedly  makes  the  task  of  under¬ 
standing  these  books  more  difficult  than  it  was  for  earlier 
generations.  In  fact  my  observation  leads  me  to  the  horrid 
suspicion  that  these  books  are  easier  for  people  who  have  had 
no  formal  education  than  they  are  for  those  who  have  ac¬ 
quired  that  combination  of  misinformation,  unphilosophy, 
and  slipshod  habits  that  is  the  usual  result  of  the  most 
elaborate  and  expensive  institutional  education  in  America. 

For  one  thing,  those  who  have  had  no  formal  education  are 
less  likely  to  labor  under  prejudices  about  the  writers  con¬ 
tained  in  this  set.  They  have  not  heard,  or  at  least  not  so 
often,  that  these  authors  are  archaic,  unrealistic  and  incom¬ 
prehensible.  They  approach  the  books  as  they  would  ap¬ 
proach  any  others,  with  a  much  more  open  mind  than  their 


77 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


more  sophisticated,  or  more  miseducated,  contemporaries. 
They  have  not  been  frightened  by  their  education. 

If  you  will  pick  up  any  one  of  these  books  and  start  to 
read  it,  you  will  find  it  not  nearly  so  formidable  as  you 
thought.  In  one  way  the  great  books  are  the  most  difficult, 
and  in  another  way  the  easiest,  books  for  any  of  us  to  read. 
They  are  the  most  difficult  because  they  deal  with  the  most 
difficult  problems  that  men  can  face,  and  they  deal  with 
them  in  terms  of  the  most  complex  ideas.  But,  treating  the 
most  difficult  subjects  of  human  thought,  the  great  books 
are  the  clearest  and  simplest  expression  of  the  best  think¬ 
ing  that  can  be  done  on  these  subjects.  On  the  fundamental 
problems  of  mankind,  there  are  no  easier  books  to  read.  If 
you  will  pick  up  any  other,  after  you  have  read  the  first, 
you  will  find  that  you  understand  the  second  more  easily 
than  you  did  the  first  and  the  first  better  than  you  did  be¬ 
fore.  The  criteria  for  choosing  each  book  in  this  set  were 
excellence  of  construction  and  composition,  immediate  in¬ 
telligibility  on  the  aesthetic  level,  increasing  intelligibility 
with  deeper  reading  and  analysis,  leading  to  maximum  depth 
and  maximum  range  of  significance  with  more  than  one  level 
of  meaning  and  truth. 

In  our  colleges  the  curriculum  is  often  so  arranged  that 
taking  one  course  is  made  prerequisite  to  taking  another.  The 
pedagogical  habit  ingrained  by  such  arrangements  may 
prompt  the  question :  What  reading  is  prerequisite  to  reading 
great  books?  The  answer  is  simply  None.  For  the  understand¬ 
ing  of  great  books  it  is  not  necessary  to  read  background 
materials  or  secondary  works  about  them.  But  there  is  one 
sense  in  which  the  reading  of  a  great  book  may  involve  pre¬ 
requisite  reading.  Except  for  Homer,  the  authors  of  great 
books  who  come  later  in  the  course  of  the  Great  Conversation 
enter  into  it  themselves  as  a  result  of  reading  the  earlier 
authors.  Thus,  Plato  is  a  reader  of  the  Homeric  poems  and  of 

78 


A  LETTER  TO  THE  READER 


the  tragedies  and  comedies;  and  Aristotle  is  a  reader  of  all  of 
these  and  Plato,  too.  Dante  and  Montaigne  are  readers  of 
most  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  books,  not  only  the  poetry  and 
history,  but  the  science  and  philosophy  as  well.  John  Stuart 
Mill,  Karl  Marx,  William  James,  and  Sigmund  Freud  are 
readers  of  almost  all  the  books  in  this  set. 

This  suggests  that  we,  as  readers  of  a  particular  great  book, 
can  be  helped  in  reading  it  by  reading  first  some  of  the  books 
its  author  read  before  writing  it.  The  chronological  order  of 
the  works  in  this  set  is  a  good  reading  order  precisely  because 
earlier  books  are  in  a  way  the  prerequisite  reading  for  later 
books. 

But  though  earlier  books  prepare  for  later  ones,  it  is  also 
true  that  reading  one  great  book  makes  reading  another 
easier,  no  matter  in  what  order  they  are  read.  Though  earlier 
books  contribute  to  the  education  of  the  authors  of  later  ones, 
the  later  authors  do  more  than  reflect  this  influence.  They 
also  comment  on  and  interpret  the  meaning  of  the  earlier 
works;  they  report  and  take  issue  with  the  opinions  of  their 
predecessors.  Looked  at  forward  or  backward  in  the  time- 
sequence,  one  great  book  throws  light  on  another;  and  as  the 
number  of  great  books  one  has  read  in  any  order  increases,  the 
voices  in  the  Great  Conversation  tend  more  and  more  to 
speak  in  the  present  tense,  as  if  all  the  authors  were  con¬ 
temporaneous  with  one  another,  responding  directly  to  each 
other’s  thought. 

It  takes  imaginative  and  intellectual  work  to  read  a  book, 
and  facility  and  achievement  grow  by  exercise.  In  this  set 
each  book  is  readable  ultimately  because  of  its  place  in  the 
"tradition.  These  books  are  aware  of  and  responsive  to  other 
books,  to  those  which  come  after  them  as  well  as  to  those 
which  came  before.  Any  good  book  that  is  not  in  the  set 
should  be  able  to  find  itself  subsumed  under  and  related  to 
these  great  books.  Any  man  should  be  able,  perhaps  with  some 


79 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


effort,  to  find  his  own  mind  belonging  to  the  discourse  in 
these  books.  Some  degree  of  understanding  of  these  books 
should  convince  you  that  you  are  able  to  read  and  under¬ 
stand  progressively  any  good  book,  and  to  criticize  with  in¬ 
tegrity  and  security  anything  written  for  publication.  These 
books  are  genuinely  intelligible,  perhaps  late  and  with 
difficulty,  but  ultimately  and  intrinsically. 

Do  you  need  a  liberal  education?  We  say  that  it  is  unpatri¬ 
otic  not  to  read  these  books.  You  may  reply  that  you  are 
patriotic  enough  without  them.  We  say  that  you  are  gravely 
cramping  your  human  possibilities  if  you  do  not  read  these 
books.  You  may  answer  that  you  have  troubles  enough  al¬ 
ready. 

This  answer  is  the  one  that  Ortega  attacks  in  The  Revolt  of 
the  Masses.  It  assumes  that  we  can  leave  all  intellectual  ac¬ 
tivity,  and  all  political  responsibility,  to  somebody  else  and 
live  our  lives  as  vegetable  beneficiaries  of  the  moral  and  in¬ 
tellectual  virtue  of  other  men.  The  trouble  with  this  assump¬ 
tion  is  that,  whereas  it  was  once  possible,  and  even  com¬ 
pulsory,  for  the  bulk  of  mankind,  such  indulgence  now,  on 
the  part  of  anybody,  endangers  the  whole  community.  It  is 
now  necessary  for  everybody  to  try  to  live,  as  Ortega  says, 
"at  the  height  of  his  times.”  The  democratic  enterprise  is 
imperiled  if  any  one  of  us  says,  "I  do  not  have  to  try  to  think 
for  myself,  or  make  the  most  of  myself,  or  become  a  citizen  of 
the  world  republic  of  learning.”  The  death  of  democracy  is 
not  likely  to  be  an  assassination  from  ambush.  It  will  be  a 
slow  extinction  from  apathy,  indifference,  and  undernourish¬ 
ment. 

The  reply  that  Edmund  Burke  gave  to  the  movement  for 
the  extension  of  the  suffrage  is  the  one  that  the  majority  of 
men  unconsciously  supports.  Burke  developed  the  doctrine  of 
"virtual  representation,”  which  enabled  him  to  claim  that 
all  power  should  reside  in  the  hands  of  the  few,  in  his  case  in 

80 


A  LETTER  TO  THE  READER 


the  hands  of  the  landed  aristocracy.  They  had  the  qualifica¬ 
tions  for  governing:  intelligence,  leisure,  patriotism,  and 
education.  They  "virtually”  represented  the  rest  of  the  com¬ 
munity,  even  though  the  rest  of  the  community  had  not 
chosen  them  to  do  so.  Burke  was  not  interested  in  the  educa¬ 
tion  of  the  people,  because,  though  government  was  to  be 
conducted  in  their  interest,  it  was  unthinkable  that  they 
could  determine  what  their  interest  was.  They  had  neither 
the  information,  the  intelligence,  nor  the  time  to  govern 
themselves.  "I  have  often  endeavoured,”  he  says,  "to  com¬ 
pute  and  to  class  those  who,  in  any  political  view  are  to  be 
called  the  people.  ...  In  England  and  Scotland,  I  compute 
that  those  of  adult  age,  not  declining  in  life,  of  tolerable 
leisure  for  such  discussions,  and  of  some  means  of  informa¬ 
tion,  and  who  are  above  menial  dependence  (or  what  virtu¬ 
ally  is  such),  may  amount  to  about  four  hundred  thousand.” 
At  that  time  the  population  of  the  British  Isles  was  between 
eight  and  ten  million. 

This  is  indeed  the  only  reply  that  can  be  made  to  the  de¬ 
mand  for  universal  suffrage.  It  is  an  attack,  and  a  direct  one, 
on  the  essential  principle  of  democracy.  The  virtual  repre¬ 
sentatives  of  the  people  are,  in  Burke’s  view,  in  no  sense  ac¬ 
countable  to  them.  They  are  responsible  to  their  own  con¬ 
sciences,  and  perhaps  to  God.  But  the  only  way  in  which  the 
people  could  call  their  virtual  representatives  to  time  would 
be  through  revolution,  a  prospect  that  Burke  would  be  the 
first  to  deprecate.  In  his  view  only  those  in  possession  of 
power  are  in  a  position  to  decide  whether  or  not  they  should 
have  it.  On  this  principle  any  totalitarian  dictatorship  can 
-justify  itself. 

Dramatically  opposed  to  a  position  such  as  that  of  Burke 
is  the  American  faith  in  democracy,  and  in  education  in  re¬ 
lation  to  democracy,  stated  succinctly  by  Jefferson:  ‘‘I  know 
of  no  safe  depository  of  the  ultimate  powers  of  society  but 

81 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


the  people  themselves;  and  if  we  think  them  not  enlightened 
enough  to  exercise  their  control  with  a  wholesome  discre¬ 
tion,  the  remedy  is  not  to  take  it  from  them,  but  to  inform 
their  discretion  by  education.” 

We  who  say,  then,  that  we  believe  in  democracy  cannot 
content  ourselves  with  virtual  education  any  more  than  we 
can  with  virtual  representation.  We  have  not  the  option  of 
deciding  for  ourselves  whether  or  not  we  shall  be  liberal 
artists,  because  we  are  committed  to  the  proposition  that  all 
men  shall  be  free.  We  cannot  admit  that  ordinary  people 
cannot  have  a  good  education,  because  we  cannot  agree  that 
democracy  must  involve  a  degradation  of  the  human  ideal. 
Anything  less  than  the  effort  to  help  everybody  get  the  best 
education  necessarily  implies  that  some  cannot  achieve  in 
their  own  measure  our  human  ideal.  We  cannot  concede  that 
the  conquest  of  nature,  the  conquest  of  drudgery,  and  the 
conquest  of  political  power  must  lead  in  combination  to 
triviality  in  education  and  hence  in  all  the  other  occupations 
of  life.  The  aim  of  education  is  wisdom,  and  each  must  have 
the  chance  to  become  as  wise  as  he  can. 


8z 


POSSIBLE  APPROACHES  TO  THIS  SET 


POSSIBLE  APPROACHES  TO  THIS  SET 


For  REASONS  that  have  been  given,  the  Editors  decided  against  any 
prefaces  or  explanatory  apparatus  in  the  several  volumes  of  this  set.  The 
decision  was  made  to  let  the  great  books  speak  for  themselves.  The  Edi¬ 
tors  believe  that  the  great  books  do  not  need  explanation  in  order  to  be 
comprehended  by  the  ordinary  reader. 

But  the  ordinary  reader,  considering  the  set  as  a  whole,  may  well  ask 
where  he  should  begin  reading  and  how  he  should  proceed.  The  Editors 
have  several  suggestions  to  offer. 

The  first  suggestion  is  a  reminder  that  the  Syntopicon ,  which  comprises 
Volumes  2  and  3,  provides  one  kind  of  answer  to  the  question  about 
where  to  start  and  where  to  go  in  the  reading  of  the  set  as  a  whole.  The 
Syntopicon  invites  the  reader  to  make  on  the  set  whatever  demands  arise 
from  his  own  problems  and  interests.  It  is  constructed  to  enable  the  reader, 
nomatter  what  the  stages  of  his  reading  in  other  ways,  to  find  that  part  of  the 
Great  Conversation  in  which  any  topic  that  interests  him  is  being  discussed. 

As  explained  in  the  Preface  to  the  Syntopicon ,  its  2,987  topics  are  organ¬ 
ized  under  102  basic  ideas,  to  each  of  which  a  chapter  is  devoted;  particular 
topics  can  also  be  located  by  reference  to  the  1,798  key  terms  listed  in  the 
Inventory  of  Terms  (Volume  3,  pp.  1303-1345).  When  the  reader  has  lo¬ 
cated  the  topic  of  his  interest,  the  Syntopicon  shows  him  how  to  follow  the 
discussion  of  it  that  occurs  in  the  twenty-five  centuries  of  the  Great  Con¬ 
versation.  The  Preface  to  the  Syntopicon  (Volume  2,  pp.  xi-xxxi)  further 
explains  its  structure  and  describes  the  various  uses  to  which  it  can  be  put 
as  a  guide  to  the  contents  of  this  set  as  a  whole. 


85 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


The  Syntopicon  helps  the  reader  to  begin  reading  in  the  great  books  on 
any  subject  or  subjects  in  which  he  is  interested,  and  to  follow  one  idea 
or  one  theme  through  the  books  from  beginning  to  end.  Such  syntopical 
reading  in  the  set  as  a  whole,  for  its  varied  discourse  on  a  particular  theme, 
supplements  the  gradual  reading  of  the  books  taken  as  individual  wholes. 
Valuable  in  itself,  syntopical  reading  should  bring  the  reader  to  an  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  the  whole  set  and  thus  prepare  him  to  select  the  particular 
books  he  will  wish  to  start  reading  as  wholes. 

Yet,  apart  from  the  help  he  will  get  from  syntopical  reading,  the  ordi¬ 
nary  reader  may  still  ask  with  what  book  he  should  begin  and  in  what  order 
he  should  proceed  to  read  the  works  in  this  set.  One  answer  is,  of  course, 
that  he  can  begin  at  the  beginning,  or  with  any  book  that  especially  inter¬ 
ests  him,  and  go  where  the  books  themselves  will  lead  him.  As  parts  of  the 
Great  Conversation,  one  book  naturally  leads  to  another  both  forward  and 
backward  in  the  time-sequence ;*each  book  also  leads  to  many  others  that 
deal  with  the  same  subject  or  have  some  affinity  in  style  or  treatment. 

If  the  reader  wishes  to  concentrate  for  a  time  on  books  dealing  with  one 
subject  matter  or  with  books  of  a  certain  kind,  such  as  poetry,  history, 
philosophy,  or  science,  he  will  find  some  guidance  in  the  colors  in  which 
the  books  are  bound.  The  volumes  bound  in yelloio  contain  epic  and  dra¬ 
matic  poetry,  satires,  and  novels.  Those  bound  in  blue  contain  histories 
and  works  in  ethics,  economics,  politics,  and  jurisprudence.  Those  bound 
in  green  contain  mathematics  and  the  natural  sciences — works  in  astron¬ 
omy,  physics,  chemistry,  biology,  and  psychology.  Those  bound  in  red 
contain  philosophy  and  theology. 

Since  the  individual  volumes  often  include  many  works  by  a  single  au¬ 
thor,  and  sometimes  the  works  of  several  authors,  the  classification  of  the 
volumes  according  to  the  kinds  or  subject  matters  indicated  above  could 
not  always  be  an  adequate  representation  of  their  contents.  Each  volume 
is  placed  in  one  or  another  of  the  four  large  groupings  in  terms  of  the 
predominant  character  of  an  author’s  work.  But  the  works  of  certain  au¬ 
thors  cross  the  line  of  this  or  any  other  simple  classification,  and  certain 
authors  contribute  major  works  in  a  variety  of  fields. 

For  example,  Volume  53,  which  contains  William  James’  Principles  of 
Psychology ,  is  grouped  with  works  in  natural  science,  but  it  also  deserves 

86 


POSSIBLE  APPROACHES 


to  be  considered  as  a  contribution  to  philosophy.  Volumes  7,  8,  and  9, 
which  contain  the  writings  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  or  Volumes  19,  20,  31, 
33,  42,  and  46,  which  contain  the  writings  of  Aquinas,  Descartes,  Pascal, 
Kant,  and  Hegel,  are  classified  as  philosophy  and  theology  because  that 
accords  with  the  predominant  character  of  their  authors,  but  among 
the  writings  that  these  volumes  contain  are  works  in  moral  and  political 
science,  in  jurisprudence,  in  mathematics,  in  physics,  and  in  biology. 

The  color  of  the  binding,  therefore,  serves  only  as  a  rough  indication  of 
the  grouping  of  the  authors  and  the  works  according  to  their  literary  char¬ 
acter  or  their  subject  matter.  For  a  more  precise  selection  of  individual 
works  of  a  certain  sort,  the  reader  must  consult  the  actual  titles  of  the 
works  that  comprise  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World.  With  few  excep¬ 
tions,  they  plainly  indicate  the  character  of  the  works  they  name. 

To  aid  the  reader  in  making  this  selection  for  himself,  if  he  wishes  to 
concentrate  on  one  subject  matter  or  one  kind  of  book,  the  Editors  have 
provided  on  pages  93-110  a  complete  enumeration,  volume  by  volume,  of 
the  full  titles  of  all  the  works  included  in  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World. 

Still  another  suggestion  can  be  offered  in  response  to  the  question  about 
the  order  of  reading  the  books.  The  Editors  have  used  these  books  for 
many  years  in  teaching  young  people  and  in  leading  discussions  with 
groups  of  adults.  They  have  found  that  reading  whole  works  or  integral 
parts  of  works  in  chronological  order  and  in  an  ascending  scale  of  diffi¬ 
culty  is  an  effective  way  of  going  through  the  books.  This  plan  has  been 
widely  used  in  the  reading  courses  in  great  books  that  are  now  conducted 
by  some  colleges  and  universities  and  by  the  Great  Books  Foundation 
in  its  program  of  liberal  education  for  adults.  It  is  a  plan  that  is  equally 
good  for  individual  reading. 

This  plan  of  reading  for  this  set  is  set  forth  on  pages  112-131.  It  consists 
of  reading  lists  for  ten  successive  years.  In  their  general  pattern,  these  read¬ 
ying  lists  resemble  the  lists  that  have  been  tried  and  tested  by  the  Great  Books 
Foundation.  But  they  differ  in  many  particulars,  largely  as  a  result  of  the 
fact  that  works  that  are  included  in  the  present  lists  were  not  procurable  or 
readily  available  until  the  publication  of  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World. 

In  this  ten-year  plan  of  reading  there  are  eighteen  selections  for  each 
year,  and  for  each  selection  the  reader  is  given,  in  addition  to  author  and 

87 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 

title,  the  volume  and  page  numbers  that  quickly  locate  the  selection  in 
this  set  of  books. 

The  selections  in  each  list  follow,  with  one  exception,  the  order  of  the 
volumes.  That  one  exception  occurs  in  the  first-year  list,  where  Plato’s 
Apology  and  Crito  (in  Volume  7)  were  placed  before  Aristophanes’  Clouds 
and  Lysistrata  (in  Volume  5)  because  these  dialogues  of  Plato  constitute  so 
excellent  an  introduction  to  the  Great  Conversation.  The  arrangement  of 
the  selections  according  to  the  order  of  the  volumes  in  which  they  are  to 
be  found  places  the  readings  recommended  in  each  list  in  the  chronological 
order  of  the  Great  Conversation  itself.  Again,  there  are  a  few  exceptions 
that  result  from  the  fact  that  some  volumes  in  the  set,  in  which  several 
authors  are  grouped  together,  contain  writings  that  are  one  or  more  cen¬ 
turies  apart  in  time. 

Each  list  includes  a  wide  variety  of  books — almost  always  poetry,  his¬ 
tory,  and  morals  or  politics,  as  well  as  theology,  philosophy,  and  science. 
The  180  selections  recommended  in  the  ten  lists  represent  every  author 
included  in  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World ,  though  they  by  no  means 
exhaust  the  contents  of  this  set.  For  certain  authors,  notably  the  poets 
and  the  novelists,  the  recommended  readings  cover  all  their  work  here 
published;  but  for  other  authors,  the  selections  are  only  a  fair  sampling  of 
the  range  and  variety  of  their  contributions  to  the  Great  Conversation. 
Because  the  brevity  of  the  selections  was  one  consideration  in  the  con¬ 
struction  of  these  lists,  especially  in  the  early  years,  it  was  necessary  to 
recommend,  in  the  case  of  certain  long  works,  the  reading  of  successive 
portions  in  successive  years.  But  whenever  the  parts  of  a  single  work  are 
divided  among  several  years,  or  whenever  different  works  by  the  same 
author  are  placed  in  successive  years,  the  selections  are  so  arranged  that 
the  reader  is  carried  through  a  particular  book  or  through  a  number  of 
works  in  an  order  that  accords  with  the  structure  of  the  book  or  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  the  works. 

Each  list  has  several  centers  of  interest  or  several  connecting  themes. 
Each  list  represents  several  phases  of  the  Great  Conversation.  The  lists 
get  more  difficult  from  year  to  year  in  two  ways.  The  selections  get  longer, 
and  they  deal  with  more  difficult  subject  matters.  The  list  for  the  tenth 
year,  for  example,  assumes  that  the  reader  has  completed  the  reading  sug- 

88 


POSSIBLE  APPROACHES 


gested  for  the  other  nine,  and  that  the  reading  he  has  already  engaged  in 
and  the  books  he  has  already  read  afford  him  a  certain  facility  and  back¬ 
ground  for  understanding  the  selections  in  the  tenth  year. 

The  reader  who  completes  this  ten-year  program  will  have  become  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  range  and  depth  of  the  Great  Conversation.  Complet¬ 
ing  a  program  of  this  sort,  he  will  have  read,  in  whole  or  part,  all  the 
authors,  though  not  all  the  works  of  every  author.  He  will  have  a  sense 
of  the  relations  of  the  authors  to  one  another  and  of  the  variety  and  rela¬ 
tions  of  the  ideas  with  which  they  deal.  He  will  be  in  a  position  to  take 
part  in  the  Great  Conversation  and  should  be  able  to  carry  his  reading  of 
great  books  on  for  the  rest  of  his  life  under  the  direction  of  his  own 
interests. 


89 


I:  The  Contents  of 

Great  Books  of  the  Western  World 


THE  CONTENTS  OF 

GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


VOLUME l 

THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION:  THE  SUBSTANCE  OF  A  LIBERAL 
EDUCATION 

VOLUME  2 

THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  A  SYNTOPICON  OF  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE 
WESTERN  WORLD  [I.  Angel  to  Love] 

VOLUME  3 

THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  A  SYNTOPICON  OF  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE 
WESTERN  WORLD  [II.  Man  to  World;  Bibliography  of  Additional 
Readings;  Inventory  of  Terms] 

VOLUME  4 

HOMER,  THE  ILIAD  ■  THE  ODYSSEY 

VOLUME  5 

AESCHYLUS  (c.  525-456  b.c.) 

THE  SUPPLIANT  MAIDENS  PROMETHEUS  BOUND 

THE  PERSIANS  AGAMEMNON 

THE  SEVEN  AGAINST  THEBES  CHOEPHOROE 

EUMENIDES 

-SOPHOCLES  ( c .  495-406  b.c.) 

OEDIPUS  THE  KING  AJAX 

OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS  ELECTRA 

ANTIGONE  TRACHINIAE 

PHILOCTETES 


93 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


EURIPIDES  (o  480-406  b.c.) 
RHESUS 
MEDEA 
HIPPOLYTUS 
ALCESTIS 
HERACLEIDAE 
THE  SUPPLIANTS 
THE  TROJAN  WOMEN 
ION 
HELEN 

ANDROMACHE 

ARISTOPHANES  (o  445 -o 
THE  ACHARNIANS 
THE  KNIGHTS 
THE  CLOUDS 
THE  WASPS 
THE  PEACE 


ELECTRA 

THE  BACCHANTES 

HECUBA 

HERACLES  MAD 

THE  PHOENICIAN  MAIDENS 

ORESTES 

IPHIGENIA  AMONG  THE 
TAURI 

IPHIGENIA  AT  AULIS 
THE  CYCLOPS 


380  B.C.) 

THE  BIRDS 
THE  FROGS 
THE  LYSISTRATA 
THE  THESMOPHORIAZUSAE 
THE  ECCLESIAZUSAE 
THE  PLUTUS 


VOLUME  6 

HERODOTUS  (o  484-0425  b.c.),  THE  HISTORY 
THUCYDIDES  (o  460-0  400  b.c.),  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  PELOPON¬ 
NESIAN  WAR 


PLATO  (0428-0  348  b.c.) 
CHARMIDES 
LYSIS 
LACHES 
PROTAGORAS 
EUTHYDEMUS 
CRATYLUS 
PHAEDRUS 
ION 


VOLUME  7 

SYMPOSIUM 

MENO 

EUTHYPHRO 

APOLOGY 

CRITO 

PHAEDO 

GORGIAS 

THE  REPUBLIC 


94 


CONTENTS  OF  GREAT  BOOKS 


TIMAEUS 

CRITIAS 

PARMENIDES 

THEAETETUS 


SOPHIST 

STATESMAN 

PHILEBUS 

LAWS 


THE  SEVENTH  LETTER 


VOLUME  8 


ARISTOTLE  (384-322  b.c.) 

CATEGORIES  ■  ON  INTERPRETATION 
PRIOR  ANALYTICS  ■  POSTERIOR  ANALYTICS  ■  TOPICS 
ON  SOPHISTICAL  REFUTATIONS  ■  PHYSICS 
ON  THE  HEAVENS  ■  ON  GENERATION  AND  CORRUPTION 
METEOROLOGY  ■  METAPHYSICS  ■  ON  THE  SOUL 
ON  SENSE  AND  THE  SENSIBLE 
ON  MEMORY  AND  REMINISCENCE 
ON  SLEEP  AND  SLEEPLESSNESS 
ON  DREAMS  ■  ON  PROPHESYING  BY  DREAMS 
ON  LONGEVITY  AND  SHORTNESS  OF  LIFE 
ON  YOUTH  AND  OLD  AGE,  ON  LIFE  AND  DEATH, 

ON  BREATHING 


VOLUME  9 


ARISTOTLE 

HISTORY  OF  ANIMALS  •  ON  THE  PARTS  OF  ANIMALS 
ON  THE  MOTION  OF  ANIMALS  ■  ON  THE  GAIT  OF  ANIMALS 
ON  THE  GENERATION  OF  ANIMALS 
NICOMACHEAN  ETHICS  ■  POLITICS 
THE  ATHENIAN  CONSTITUTION 
RHETORIC  ■  ON  POETICS 


95 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 
VOLUME  10 
HIPPOCRATES  {ft.  400  B.c.) 

THE  OATH  ■  ON  ANCIENT  MEDICINE 
ON  AIRS,  WATERS,  AND  PLACES  •  THE  BOOK  OF  PROGNOSTICS 
ON  REGIMEN  IN  ACUTE  DISEASES  ■  OF  THE  EPIDEMICS 
ON  INJURIES  OF  THE  HEAD  ■  ON  THE  SURGERY 
ON  FRACTURES  ■  ON  THE  ARTICULATIONS 
INSTRUMENTS  OF  REDUCTION  ■  APHORISMS  ■  THE  LAW 
ON  ULCERS  ■  ON  FISTULAE  ■  ON  HEMORRHOIDS 
ON  THE  SACRED  DISEASE 

GALEN  (c.  a.d.  130-c  200),  ON  THE  NATURAL  FACULTIES 

VOLUME  11 

EUCLID  (ft.  c.  300  B.c.),  THE  THIRTEEN  BOOKS  OF  EUCLID'S 
ELEMENTS 

ARCHIMEDES  (c.  287-212  b.c.) 

ON  THE  SPHERE  AND  CYLINDER 
MEASUREMENT  OF  A  CIRCLE  ON  CONOIDS  AND  SPHEROIDS 
ON  SPIRALS  •  ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  PLANES 
THE  SAND-RECKONER  ■  QUADRATURE  OF  THE  PARABOLA 
ON  FLOATING  BODIES  ■  BOOK  OF  LEMMAS 
THE  METHOD  TREATING  OF  MECHANICAL  PROBLEMS 

APOLLONIUS  OF  PERGA  {c.  262-c.  200  b.c.),  ON  CONIC  SECTIONS 
NICOMACHUS  OF  GERASA  {ft.  c.  a.d.  ioo),  INTRODUCTION  TO 
ARITHMETIC 


VOLUME  12 

LUCRETIUS  {c.  98 -c.  55  B.c.),  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS 
EPICTETUS  {c.  a.d.  60-c.  138),  THE  DISCOURSES 
MARCUS  AURELIUS  (a.d.  121-180),  THE  MEDITATIONS 
96 


CONTENTS  OF  GREAT  BOOKS 
VOLUME  13 

VIRGIL  (70-19  b.c.),  THE  ECLOGUES  •  THE  GEORGICS  •  THE  AENEID 

VOLUME  14 

PLUTARCH  (c.  a.d.  4 6-c.  120),  THE  LIVES  OF  THE  NOBLE  GRE¬ 
CIANS  AND  ROMANS 


Theseus 

Romulus 

Romulus  and  Theseus  Compared 

Lycurgus 

Numa  Pompilius 

Lycurgus  and  Numa  Compared 

Solon 

Poplicola 

Poplicola  and  Solon  Compared 

Themistocles 

Camillus 

Pericles 

Fabius 

Fabius  and  Pericles  Compared 

Alcibiades 

Coriolanus 

Alcibiades  and  Coriolanus 
Compared 
Timoleon 
Aemilius  Paulus 
Aemilius  Paulus  and  Timoleon 
Compared 
Pelopidas 
Marcellus 

Marcellus  and  Pelopidas 
Compared 
Aristides 


Marcus  Cato 

Aristides  and  Marcus  Cato 
Compared 
Philopoemen 
Flamininus 

Flamininus  and  Philopoemen 
Compared 
Pyrrhus 
Caius  Marius 
Lysander 
Sulla 

Lysander  and  Sulla  Compared 

Cimon 

Lucullus 

Cimon  and  Lucullus  Compared 

Nicias 

Crassus 

Crassus  and  Nicias  Compared 

Sertorius 

Eumenes 

Eumenes  and  Sertorius  Compared 

Agesilaus 

Pompey 

Agesilaus  and  Pompey  Compared 

Alexander 

Caesar 

Phocion 


97 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


Cato  the  Younger 
Agu 

Cleomenes 
Tiberius  Gracchus 
Caius  Gracchus 

Caius  and  Tiberius  Gracchus  and 
Agis  and  Cleomenes  Compared 
Demosthenes 
Cicero 

Demosthenes  and  Cicero  Compared 


Demetrius 

Antony 

Antony  and  Demetrius  Compared 
Dion 

Marcus  Brutus 

Brutus  and  Dion  Compared 

Aratus 

Artaxerxes 

Galba 

Otho 


VOLUME  15 

P.  CORNELIUS  TACITUS  (c.  a.d.  55-c.  117),  THE  ANNALS  •  THE 
HISTORIES 


VOLUME  16 

PTOLEMY  (c.  a.d.  1 00— c.  178),  THE  ALMAGEST 
NICOLAUS  COPERNICUS  (1473-1543),  ON  THE  REVOLUTIONS  OF 
THE  HEAVENLY  SPHERES 

JOHANNES  KEPLER  (1571-1630),  EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  AS¬ 
TRONOMY  [Book  IV-V]  •  THE  HARMONIES  OF  THE  WORLD 
[Book  V] 

VOLUME  17 
PLOTINUS  (205-270),  THE  SIX  ENNEADS 

VOLUME  18 

SAINT  AUGUSTINE  (354-430),  THE  CONFESSIONS  •  THE  CITY  OF 
GOD  -  ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE 


VOLUME  19 

SAINT  THOMAS  AQUINAS  (c.  1225-1274),  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA 
Treatise  on  God  (Part  I,  QQ  1-26) 

Treatise  on  the  Trinity  (Part  1,  qq  27-43) 

Treatise  on  the  Creation  (Part  I,  QQ  44-49) 

98 


CONTENTS  OF  GREAT  BOOKS 


Treatise  on  the  Angels  (Part  I,  qq  50-64) 

Treatise  on  the  Work  of  the  Six  Days  (Part  1,  qq  65-74) 
Treatise  on  Man  (Part  1,  QQ  75-102) 

Treatise  on  the  Divine  Government  (Part  1,  QQ  103-119) 
Treatise  on  the  Last  End  (Part  1-11,  qq  1-5) 

Treatise  on  Human  Acts  (Part  1-11,  QQ  6-48) 


VOLUME  20 

SAINT  THOMAS  AQUINAS,  SUMMA  THE0L0G1CA  (cont.) 
Treatise  on  Habits  (Part  I-II,  QQ  49-89) 

Treatise  on  Law  (Part  1-11,  qq  90-108) 

Treatise  on  Grace  (Part  1-11,  qq  109-114) 

Treatise  on  Faith ,  Hope  and  Charity  (Part  11-11,  qq  1-46) 

Treatise  on  Active  and  Contemplative  Life  (Part  11-11,  QQ  179-182) 
Treatise  on  the  States  of  Life  (Part  11-11,  qq  183-189) 

Treatise  on  the  Incarnation  (Part  ill,  qq  1-26) 

Treatise  on  the  Sacraments  (Part  ill,  qq  60-65) 

Treatise  on  the  Resurrection  (Part  ill  Supplement,  QQ  69-86) 
Treatise  on  the  Last  Things  (Part  in  Supplement,  QQ  87-99) 


VOLUME  2  1 

DANTE  ALIGHIERI  (1265-1321),  THE  DIVINE  COMEDY 

VOLUME  22 


GEOFFREY  CHAUCER  (c.  1340-1400) 


TROILUS  AND  CRESSIDA 
THE  CANTERBURY  TALES 
The  Prologue 
The  Knight* s  Tale 
The  Miller  s  Prologue 
The  Miller  s  Tale 
The  Reeve  s  Prologue 


The  Reeve  s  Tale 
The  Cooks  Prologue 
The  Cooks  Tale 

Introduction  to  the  Man  of  Law* s 
Prologue 


99 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


The  Prologue  of  the  Man  of  Law's 
Tale 

The  Tale  of  the  Man  of  Law 

The  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue 

The  Tale  of  the  Wife  of  Bath 

The  Friar's  Prologue 

The  Friar's  Tale 

The  Summoner's  Prologue 

The  Summoner's  Tale 

The  Clerk's  Prologue 

The  Clerk's  Tale 

The  Merchant's  Prologue 

The  Merchant's  Tale 

Epilogue  to  the  Merchant's  Tale 

The  Squire's  Tale 

The  Words  of  the  Franklin 

The  Franklin's  Prologue 

The  Franklin's  Tale 

The  Physician' s  Tale 

The  Words  of  the  Host 

The  Prologue  of  the  Pardoner  s  Tale 

The  Pardoner's  Tale 

L'  Envoi 


The  Shipman's  Prologue 
The  Shipman's  Tale 
The  Prioress's  Prologue 
The  Prioress's  Tale 
Prologue  to  Sir  Thopas 
Sir  Thopas 
Prologue  to  Melibeus 
The  Tale  of  Melibeus 
The  Monk's  Prologue 
The  Monk's  Tale 
The  Prologue  of  the  Nun's  Priest's 
Tale 

The  Nun's  Priest's  Tale 

Epilogue  to  the  Nun's  Priest's  Tale 

The  Second  Nun's  Prologue 

The  Second  Nun's  Tale 

The  Canon's  Yeoman's  Prologue 

The  Canon's  Yeoman's  Tale 

The  Manciple's  Prologue 

The  Manciple's  Tale 

The  Parson's  Prologue 

The  Parson's  Tale 


VOLUME  23 

NICOLO  MACHIAVELLI  (1469-1527),  THE  PRINCE 
THOMAS  HOBBES  (1588-1679),  LEVIATHAN ,  OR,  MATTER, FORM, 
AND  POWER  OF  A  COMMONWEALTH ,  ECCLESIASTICAL  AND 
CIVIL 

VOLUME  24 

FRANCOIS  RABELAIS  (c.  1495-1553),  GARGANTUA  AND  PAN- 
TAGRUEL 


100 


CONTENTS  OF  GREAT  BOOKS 

VOLUME  25 

MICHEL  EYQUEM  de  MONTAIGNE  (1533-1592),  ESSAYS 


That  Men  by  Various  Ways  Arrive  at 
the  Same  End 
Of  Sorrow 

That  Our  Affections  Carry  Themselves 
Beyond  Us 

That  the  Soul  Discharges  Her  Passions 
Upon  False  Objects ,  Where  the  True 
are  Wanting 

Whether  the  Governor  of  a  Place  Be¬ 
sieged  Ought  Himself  to  Go  Out  to 
Parley 

That  the  Hour  of  Parley  is  Dangerous 
That  the  Intention  is  Judge  of  Our 
Actions 
Of  Idleness 
Of  Liars 

Of  Quick  or  Slow  Speech 
Of  Prognostications 
Of  Constancy 

The  Ceremony  of  the  Interview  of 
Princes 

That  Men  are  Justly  Punished  for  Be¬ 
ing  Obstinate  in  the  Defence  of  a 
Fort  that  is  not  in  Reason  to  be  De¬ 
fended 

Of  the  Punishment  of  Cowardice 
A  Proceeding  of  Some  Ambassadors 
Of  Fear 

That  Men  are  not  to  Judge  of  Our 
Happiness  till  After  Death 
That  to  Study  Philosophy  is  to  Learn 
to  Die 


Of  the  Force  of  Imagination 
That  the  Profit  of  One  Man  is  the 
Damage  of  Another 
Of  Custom  and  That  We  Should  Not 
Easily  Change  a  Law  Received 
Various  Events  from  the  Same 
Counsel 
Of  Pedantry 

Of  the  Education  of  Children 
That  It  is  Folly  to  Measure  Truth  and 
Error  by  Our  Own  Capacity 
Of  Friendship 

Nine-and-Twenty  Sonnets  of  Estienne 
de  La  Boetie 
Of  Moderation 
Of  Cannibals 

That  a  Man  is  Soberly  to  Judge  of  the 
Divine  Ordinances 

That  We  are  to  Avoid  Pleasures ,  Even 
at  the  Expense  of  Life 
That  Fortune  is  Oftentimes  Observed  to 
Act  by  the  Rules  of  Reason 
Of  One  Defect  in  Our  Government 
Of  the  Custom  of  Wearing  Clothes 
Of  Cato  the  Younger 
That  We  Laugh  and  Cry  for  the  Same 
Thing 
Of  Solitude 

A  Consideration  Upon  Cicero 
That  the  Relish  of  Good  and  Evil  De¬ 
pends  in  a  Great  Measure  Upon  the 
Opinion  We  Have  of  Them 


101 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


Not  to  Communicate  a  Man  s  Honour 
Of  the  Inequality  Amongst  Us 
Of  Sumptuary  Laws 
Of  Sleep 

Of  the  Battle  of  Dreux 
Of  Names 

Of  the  Uncertainty  of  Our  Judgment 

Of  War-Horses ,  or  Destriers 

Of  Ancient  Customs 

Of  Democritus  and  Heraclitus 

Of  the  Vanity  of  Words 

Of  the  Parsimony  of  the  Ancients 

Of  a  Saying  of  Caesar 

Of  Vain  Subtleties 

Of  Smells 

Of  Prayers 

Of  Age 

Of  the  Inconstancy  of  Our  Actions 
Of  Drunkenness 
A  Custom  of  the  Isle  of  Ce a 
To-morroiv  s  a  New  Day 
Of  Conscience 
Use  Makes  Perfect 
Of  Recompenses  of  Honour 
Of  the  Affection  of  Fathers  to  Their 
Children 

Of  the  Arms  of  the  Parthians 
Of  Books 
Of  Cruelty 

Apology  for  Raimond  de  Sebonde 
Of  Judging  of  the  Death  of  Another 


That  the  Mind  Hinders  Itself 
That  Our  Desires  are  Augmented  by 
Difficulty 
Of  Glory 
Of  Presumption 
Of  Giving  the  Lie 
Of  Liberty  of  Conscience 
That  We  Taste  Nothing  Pure 
Against  Idleness 
Of  Posting 

Of  III  Means  Employed  to  a  Good  End 
Of  the  Roman  Grandeur 
Not  to  Counterfeit  Being  Sick 
Of  Thumbs 

Cowardice  the  Mother  of  Cruelty 
All  Things  Have  Their  Season 
Of  Virtue 

Of  a  Monstrous  Child 
Of  Anger 

Defence  of  Seneca  and  Plutarch 
The  Story  of  Spur ina 
Observation  on  the  Means  to  Carry  on 
a  War  According  to  Julius  Caesar 
Of  Three  Good  Women 
Of  the  Most  Excellent  Men 
Of  the  Resemblance  of  Children  to 
Their  Fathers 
Of  Profit  and  Honesty 
Of  Repentance 
Of  Three  Commerces 
Of  Diversion 


ioz 


CONTENTS  OF  GREAT  BOOKS 


Upon  Some  Verses  of  Virgil 
Of  Coaches 

Of  the  Inconvenience  of  Greatness 
Of  the  Art  of  Conference 


Of  Vanity 

Of  Managing  the  Will 
Of  Cripples 
Of  Physiognomy 


Of  Experience 


VOLUME  26 


WILLIAM  SHAKESPEARE  (1564-1616) 

THE  FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  THE  SIXTH 
THE  SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  THE  SIXTH 
THE  THIRD  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  THE  SIXTH 
THE  TRAGEDY  OF  KING  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 
THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 
TITUS  ANDRONICUS 
THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 
THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 
LOVE'S  LABOUR’S  LOST 
ROMEO  AND  JULIET 

THE  TRAGEDY  OF  KING  RICHARD  THE  SECOND 
A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 
THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  KING  JOHN 
THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 
THE  FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  THE  FOURTH 
THE  SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  THE  FOURTH 
MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 
THE  LIFE  OF  KING  HENRY  THE  FIFTH 
JULIUS  CAESAR  ■  AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 

VOLUME  27 
WILLIAM  SHAKESPEARE 


TWELFTH  NIGHT;  OR,  WHAT  YOU  WILL 
HAMLET,  PRINCE  OF  DENMARK 


io3 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


THE  MERRY  WIVES  OF  WINDSOR 
TROILUS  AND  CRESSIDA 
ALL’S  WELL  THAT  ENDS  WELL 
MEASURE  FOR  MEASURE 
OTHELLO,  THE  MOOR  OF  VENICE 
KING  LEAR  ■  MACBETH 
ANTONY  AND  CLEOPATRA 
CORIOLANUS  ■  TIMON  OF  ATHENS 
PERICLES,  PRINCE  OF  TYRE  ■  CYMBELINE 
THE  WINTER'S  TALE  ■  THE  TEMPEST 
THE  FAMOUS  HISTORY  OF  THE  LIFE  OF 
KING  HENRY  THE  EIGHTH 
SONNETS 

VOLUME  28 

WILLIAM  GILBERT  (1540-1603),  ON  THE  LOADSTONE  AND  MAG¬ 
NETIC  BODIES 

GALILEO  GALILEI  (1564-1642),  DIALOGUES  CONCERNING  THE 
TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 

WILLIAM  HARVEY  (1578-1657) 

ON  THE  MOTION  OF  THE  HEART  AND  BLOOD  IN  ANIMALS 
ON  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 
ON  THE  GENERATION  OF  ANIMALS 

VOLUME  29 

MIGUEL  de  CERVANTES  (1547-1616),  THE  HISTORY  OF  DON 
QUIXOTE  DE  LA  MANCHA 

VOLUME  30 

SIR  FRANCIS  BACON  (1561-1626),  ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARN - 
ING  ■  NOVUM  ORGANUM  •  NEW  ATLANTIS 


104 


CONTENTS  OF  GREAT  BOOKS 
VOLUME  3  1 

RENE  DESCARTES  (1596-1650) 

RULES  FOR  THE  DIRECTION  OF  THE  MIND 
DISCOURSE  ON  THE  METHOD 
MEDITATIONS  ON  FIRST  PHILOSOPHY 
OBJECTIONS  AGAINST  THE  MEDITATIONS  AND  REPLIES 
THE  GEOMETRY 

BENEDICT  de  SPINOZA  (1632-1677),  ETHICS 

VOLUME  32 

JOHN  MILTON  (1608-1674) 

ENGLISH  MINOR  POEMS 


On  the  Morning  of  Christs  Nati¬ 
vity  and  The  Hymn 
A  Paraphrase  on  Psalm  114 
Psalm  136 
The  Passion 
On  Time 

Upon  the  Circumcision 
At  a  Solemn  Musick 
An  Epitaph  on  the  Marchioness 
of  Winchester 
Song  on  May  Morning 
On  Shakespear ,  1630 
On  the  University  Carrier 
Another  on  the  Same 
L'  Allegro 
II  Penseroso 

Psalms ,  I- VIII, 

PARADISE  LOST 
SAMSON  AGONISTES 
AREOPAGITICA 


Arcades 

Lycidas 

Comus 

On  the  Death  of  a  Fair  Infant 
At  a  Vacation  Exercise 
The  Fifth  Ode  of  Horace.  Lib.  I 
Sonnets ,  1,  vii-xix 
On  the  New  Forcers  of  Conscience 
under  the  Long  Parliament 
On  the  Lord  Gen.  Fairfax  at  the 
siege  of  Colchester 
To  the  Lord  Generali  Cromwell 
May  1632 

To  Sr  Henry  Vane  the  Younger 
To  Mr.  Cyriack  Skinner  upon  his 
Blindness 

LXXX-LXXXVIII 


I05 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 
VOLUME  33 
BLAISE  PASCAL  (1623-1662) 

THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 
PENSEES 

PREFACE  TO  THE  TREATISE  ON  THE  VACUUM 
NEW  EXPERIMENTS  CONCERNING  THE  VACUUM 
ACCOUNT  OF  THE  GREAT  EXPERIMENT  CONCERNING  THE 
EQUILIBRIUM  OF  FLUIDS 

TREATISES  ON  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  OF  LIQUIDS  AND  ON  THE 
WEIGHT  OF  THE  MASS  OF  THE  AIR 
ON  GEOMETRICAL  DEMONSTRATION 
TREATISE  ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE 
CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FERMAT  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  PROB¬ 
ABILITIES 

VOLUME  34 

SIR  ISAAC  NEWTON  (1642-1727),  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES 
OF  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY  ■  OPTICS 
CHRISTIAAN  HUYGENS  (1629-1695),  TREATISE  ON  LIGHT 

VOLUME  35 
JOHN  LOCKE  (1632-1704) 

A  LETTER  CONCERNING  TOLERATION 
CONCERNING  CIVIL  GOVERNMENT,  SECOND  ESSAY 
AN  ESSAY  CONCERNING  HUMAN  UNDERSTANDING 
GEORGE  BERKELEY  (1685-1753),  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  HUMAN 
KNOWLEDGE 

DAVID  HUME  (1711-1776),  AN  ENQUIRY  CONCERNING  HUMAN 
UNDERSTANDING 


106 


CONTENTS  OF  GREAT  BOOKS 
VOLUME  36 

JONATHAN  SWIFT  (1667-1745),  GULLIVER'S  TRAVELS 
LAURENCE  STERNE  (1713-1768),  THE  LIFE  AND  OPINIONS  OF 
TRISTRAM  SHANDY,  GENT. 

VOLUME  37 

HENRY  FIELDING  (1707-1754),  THE  HISTORY  OF  TOM  JONES, 
A  FOUNDLING 


VOLUME  38 

CHARLES  de  SECONDAT,  BARON  de  MONTESQUIEU  (1689-1755), 
THE  SPIRIT  OF  LAWS 
JEAN  JACQUES  ROUSSEAU  (1712-1778) 

A  DISCOURSE  ON  THE  ORIGIN  OF  INEQUALITY 
A  DISCOURSE  ON  POLITICAL  ECONOMY 
THE  SOCIAL  CONTRACT 

VOLUME  39 

ADAM  SMITH  (1723-1790),  AN  INQUIRY  INTO  THE  NATURE  AND 
CAUSES  OF  THE  WEALTH  OF  NATIONS 

VOLUME  40 

EDWARD  GIBBON  (1737-1794),  THE  DECLINE  AND  FALL  OF  THE 
ROMAN  EMPIRE  [Chapters  1-40] 

VOLUME  41 

EDWARD  GIBBON,  THE  DECLINE  AND  FALL  OF  THE  ROMAN 
EMPIRE  (Cont.)  [Chapters  41-71] 

VOLUME  42 

IMMANUEL  KANT  (1724-1804) 

THE  CRITIQUE  OF  PURE  REASON 

FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  METAPHYSIC  OF 
MORALS 


107 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 
THE  CRITIQUE  OF  PRACTICAL  REASON 

PREFACE  AND  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  METAPHYSICAL  ELE¬ 
MENTS  OF  ETHICS  WITH  A  NOTE  ON  CONSCIENCE 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  MORALS 
THE  SCIENCE  OF  RIGHT 
THE  CRITIQUE  OF  JUDGEMENT 

VOLUME  43 
AMERICAN  STATE  PAPERS 
THE  DECLARATION  OF  INDEPENDENCE 
ARTICLES  OF  CONFEDERATION 

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 
ALEXANDER  HAMILTON  (1757-1804),  JAMES  MADISON  (1751- 
1836),  JOHN  JAY  (1745-1829) 

THE  FEDERALIST 
JOHN  STUART  MILL  (1806-1873) 

ON  LIBERTY 

REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 
UTILITARIANISM 


VOLUME  44 

JAMES  BOSWELL  (1740-1795),  THE  LIFE  OF  SAMUEL  JOHNSON, 
LL.D. 


VOLUME  45 

ANTOINE  LAURENT  LAVOISIER  (1743-1794),  ELEMENTS  OF 
CHEMISTRY 

JEAN  BAPTISTE  JOSEPH  FOURIER  (1768-1830),  ANALYTICAL 
THEORY  OF  HEAT  [Preliminary  Discourse,  Ch.  1-2] 

MICHAEL  FARADAY  (1791-1867),  EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES 
IN  ELECTRICITY 


108 


CONTENTS  OF  GREAT  BOOKS 
VOLUME  46 

GEORG  WILHELM  FRIEDRICH  HEGEL  (1770-1831),  THE  PHILOS¬ 
OPHY  OF  RIGHT  ■  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 

VOLUME  47 

JOHANN  WOLFGANG  von  GOETHE  (1749-1832),  FAUST 

VOLUME  48 

HERMAN  MELVILLE  (1819-1882),  MOBY  DICK;  OR,  THE  WHALE 

VOLUME  49 

CHARLES  DARWIN  (1809-1882) 

THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES  BY  MEANS  OF  NATURAL  SELECTION 
THE  DESCENT  OF  MAN  AND  SELECTION  IN  RELATION  TO  SEX 

VOLUME  50 

KARL  MARX  (1818-1883),  CAPITAL 

KARL  MARX  and  FRIEDRICH  ENGELS  (1820-1895),  MANIFESTO 
OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY 

VOLUME  5  1 

COUNT  LEO  TOLSTOY  (1828-1910),  WAR  AND  PEACE 

VOLUME  52 

FYODOR  MIKHAILOVICH  DOSTOEVSKY  (1821-1881),  THE 
BROTHERS  KARAMAZOV 

VOLUME  5  3 

WILLIAM  JAMES  (1842-1910),  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY 

VOLUME  54 

SIGMUND  FREUD  (1856-1939) 

THE  ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  PSYCHO-ANALYSIS 
SELECTED  PAPERS  ON  HYSTERIA  [Chapters  1-10] 

THE  SEXUAL  ENLIGHTENMENT  OF  CHILDREN 

THE  FUTURE  PROSPECTS  OF  PSYCHO-ANALYTIC  THERAPY 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 

OBSERVATIONS  ON  "WILD”  PSYCHO-ANALYSIS 
THE  INTERPRETATION  OF  DREAMS 
ON  NARCISSISM 

INSTINCTS  AND  THEIR  VICISSITUDES 

REPRESSION 

THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

A  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  PSYCHO-ANALYSIS 

BEYOND  THE  PLEASURE  PRINCIPLE 

GROUP  PSYCHOLOGY  AND  THE  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  EGO 

THE  EGO  AND  THE  ID 

INHIBITIONS,  SYMPTOMS,  AND  ANXIETY 

THOUGHTS  FOR  THE  TIMES  ON  WAR  AND  DEATH 

CIVILIZATION  AND  ITS  DISCONTENTS 

NEW  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES  ON  PSYCHO-ANALYSIS 


no 


II:  Ten  Years  of  Reading  in 
Great  Books  of  the  Western  World 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


FIRST  YEAR 


1.  PLATO:  APOLOGY,  CRITO 

Vol.  7,  pp.  200-219 

2.  ARISTOPHANES:  CLOUDS,  LYSISTRATA 

Vol.  5,  pp.  488-506,  583-599 

3.  PLATO:  REPUBLIC  [Book  I-II] 

Vol.  7,  pp.  295-324 

4.  ARISTOTLE:  ETHICS  [Book  I] 

Vol.  9,  pp.  339-348 

5.  ARISTOTLE:  POLITICS  [Book  I] 

Vol.  9,  pp.  445-455 

6.  PLUTARCH:  THE  LIVES  OF  THE  NOBLE  GRECIANS  AND 
ROMANS  [Lycurgus,  Numa  Pompilius,  Lycurgus  and  Numa  Com¬ 
pared,  Alexander,  Caesar] 

Vol.  14,  pp.  32-64,  540-604 

7.  NEW  TESTAMENT  [The  Gospel  According  to  Saint  Matthew,  The 
Acts  of  the  Apostles] 

8.  ST.  AUGUSTINE:  CONFESSIONS  [Book  I-VIII] 

Vol.  18,  pp.  1-61 

9.  MACHIAVELLI:  THE  PRINCE 

Vol.  23,  pp.  1-37 

10.  RABELAIS:  GARGANTUA  AND  PANTAGRUEL  [Book  I-II] 

Vol.  24,  pp.  1-126 

11.  MONTAIGNE:  EWHYT  [Of  Custom,  and  That  We  Should  Not 
Easily  Change  a  Law  Received;  Of  Pedantry;  Of  the  Education  of 
Children;  That  It  Is  Folly  to  Measure  Truth  and  Error  by  Our  Own 


112 


TEN  YEARS  OF  READING 


Capacity;  Of  Cannibals;  That  the  Relish  of  Good  and  Evil  Depends 
in  a  Great  Measure  upon  the  Opinion  We  Have  of  Them ;  Upon  Some 
Verses  of  Virgil] 

Vol.  25,  pp.  42-51,  55-82,  91-98,  115-125,  406-434 

12.  SHAKESPEARE:  HAMLET 

Vol.  27,  pp.  29-72 

13.  LOCKE:  CONCERNING  CIVIL  GOVERNMENT  [Second  Essay] 

Vol.  35,  pp.  25-81 

14.  ROUSSEAU:  THE  SOCIAL  CONTRACT  [Book  I-II] 

Vol.  38,  pp.  387-406 

15.  GIBBON:  THE  DECLINE  AND  FALL  OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE 
[Ch.  15-16] 

Vol.  40,  pp.  i79-234 

16.  THE  DECLARATION  OF  INDEPENDENCE,  THE  CONSTITU¬ 
TION  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES,  THE  FEDERALIST  [Numbers 
1-10,  15,  31,  47,  51,  68-71] 

Vol.  43,  pp.  1-3,  11-20,  29-53,  62-66,  103-105,  153-156,  162-165, 

205-216 

17.  SMITH:  THE  WEALTH  OF  NATIONS  [Introduction— Book  I, 

Ch.  9] 

Vol.  39,  pp.  1-41 

18.  MARX-ENGELS:  MANIFESTO  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY 

Vol.  50,  pp.  415-434 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


SECOND  YEAR 


1.  HOMER:  THE  ILIAD 

Vol.  4,  pp.  3-179 

2.  AESCHYLUS:  AGAMEMNON,  CHOEPHOROE,  EUMENIDES 

Vol.  5,  pp.  52-91 

3.  SOPHOCLES:  OEDIPUS  THE  KING,  ANTIGONE 

Vol.  5,  pp.  99-113,  131-142 

4.  HERODOTUS:  THE  HISTORY  [Book  I-II] 

Vol.  6,  pp.  1-88 

5.  PLATO:  MENO 

Vol.  7,  pp.  174-190 

6.  ARISTOTLE:  POETICS 

Vol.  9,  pp.  681-699 

7.  ARISTOTLE:  ETHICS  [Book  II;  Book  III.  Ch.  5-12;  Book  VI,  Ch. 
8-13] 

Vol.  9,  pp.  348-355,  359-366,  39°~394 

8.  NICOMACHUS:  INTRODUCTION  TO  ARITHMETIC 

Vol.  11,  pp.  811-848 

9.  LUCRETIUS:  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  [Book  I-IV] 

Vol.  12,  pp.  1-61 

10.  MARCUS  AURELIUS:  MEDITATIONS 

Vol.  12,  pp.  253-310 

11.  HOBBES:  LEVIATHAN  [Part  I] 

Vol.  23,  pp.  45-98 

12.  MILTON:  AREOPAGITICA 

Vol.  32,  pp.  381-412 


TEN  YEARS  OF  READING 


13.  PASCAL:  PENSEES  [Numbers  72,  82-83,  I00>  I28,  I3I>  x39>  J42- 

143,  171,  194-195,  219,  229,  233-234,  242,  273,  277,  282,  289,  298, 

303,  320,  323,  325,  330-331,  374,  385.  392>  395~397>  4°9>  4I2~4i3. 

416,  418,  425,  430,  434-435,  463,  491,  525-531,  538,  543.  547>  553> 

556,  564,  571,  586,  598,  607-610,  613,  619-620,  631,  640,  644,  673, 

675,  684,  692-693,  737,  760,  768,  792-793] 

Vol.  33,  pp.  181-184,  186-189,  191-192,  195-200,  203,  205-210, 
212-218,  222-225,  227,  229-232,  237-251,  255,  259,  264-275,  277- 
287,  290-291,  296-302,  318,  321-322,  326-327 

14.  PASCAL:  TREATISE  ON  THE  ARITHMETICAL  TRIANGLE 

Vol.  33,  pp.  447-473 

15.  SWIFT:  GULLIVER'S  TRAVELS 

Vol.  36,  pp.  xv-184 

16.  ROUSSEAU:  A  DISCOURSE  ON  THE  ORIGIN  OF  INEQUALITY 

Vol.  38,  pp.  323-366 

17.  KANT:  FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  METAPHYSIC 
OF  MORALS 

Vol.  42,  pp.  253-287 

18.  MILL:  ON  LIBERTY 

Vol.  43,  pp.  267-323 


IJ5 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


THIRD  YEAR 


1.  AESCHYLUS:  PROMETHEUS  BOUND 

Vol.  5,  pp.  40-5 1 

2.  HERODOTUS:  THE  HISTORY  [Book  VII-IX] 

Vol.  6,  pp.  2 14-3 14 

3.  THUCYDIDES:  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  PELOPONNESIAN  WAR 
[Book  I-II,  V] 

Vol.  6,  pp.  349-416,  482-508 

4.  PLATO:  STATESMAN 

Vol.  7,  pp.  580-608 

5.  ARISTOTLE:  ON  INTERPRETATION  [Ch.  1-10] 

Vol.  8,  pp.  25-31 

6.  ARISTOTLE:  POLITICS  [Book  III-V] 

Vol.  9,  pp.  471-519 

7.  EUCLID:  ELEMENTS  [Book  I] 

Vol.  11,  pp.  1-29 

8.  TACITUS:  THE  ANNALS 

Vol.  15,  pp.  1-184 

9.  ST.  THOMAS  AQUINAS:  SUMMA  THE0L0G1CA  [Part  I-II,  QQ 
90-97] 

Vol.  20,  pp.  205-239 

10.  CHAUCER:  TROILUS  AND  CRESSIDA 

Vol.  22,  pp.  1— 1 55 

11.  SHAKESPEARE:  MACBETH 

Vol.  27,  pp.  284-310 
116 


TEN  YEARS  OF  READING 


12.  MILTON:  PARADISE  LOST 

Vol.  32,  pp.  93-333 

13.  LOCKE :  AN  ESSA  Y  CONCERNING  HUMAN  UNDERSTANDING 
[Book  III,  Ch.  1-3,  9-1 1] 

Vol.  35,  pp.  251-260,  285-306 

14.  KANT:  SCIENCE  OF  RIGHT 

Vol.  42,  pp.  397-458 

15.  MILL:  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT  [Ch.  1-6] 

Vol.  43,  pp.  327-370 

16.  LAVOISIER:  ELEMENTS  OF  CHEMISTRY  [Part  I] 

Vol.  45,  pp.  1-52 

17.  DOSTOEVSKY:  THE  BROTHERS  KARAMAZOV  [Part  I-II] 

Vol.  52,  pp.  1-170 

18.  FREUD:  THE  ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  PSYCHO¬ 
ANALYSIS 

Vol.  54,  pp.  1-20 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


FOURTH  YEAR 


1.  EURIPIDES:  MEDEA,  HIPPOLYTUS,  TROJAN  WOMEN,  THE 
BACCHANTES 

Vol.  5,  pp.  212-236,  270-281,  340-352 

2.  PLATO:  REPUBLIC  [Book  VI-VII] 

Vol.  7,  pp.  373-4°! 

3.  PLATO:  THEAETETUS 

Vol.  7,  pp.  512-550 

4.  ARISTOTLE:  PHYSICS  [Book  IV,  Ch.  1-5,  10-14] 

Vol.  8,  pp.  287-292,  297-304 

5.  ARISTOTLE:  METAPHYSICS  [Book  I,  Ch.  1-2;  Book  IV;  Book 
VI,  Ch.  1;  Book  XI,  Ch.  1-4] 

Vol.  8,  pp.  499-501,  522-532,  547-548.  587-590 

6.  ST.  AUGUSTINE:  CONFESSIONS  [Book  IX-XIII] 

Vol.  18,  pp.  61-125 

7.  ST.  THOMAS  AQUINAS:  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  [Part  I,  QQ 
16-17,  84-88] 

Vol.  19,  pp.  94-104,  440-473 

8.  MONTAIGNE:  APOLOGY  FOR  RAIMOND  DE  SEBONDE 

Vol.  25,  pp.  208-294 

9.  GALILEO:  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES  [Third  Day,  through  Scholium 
of  Theorem  II] 

Vol.  28,  pp.  197-2 10 

10.  BACON:  NOVUM  ORGANUM  [Preface,  Book  I] 

Vol.  30,  pp.  105-136 

11.  DESCARTES:  DISCOURSE  ON  THE  METHOD 

Vol.  31,  pp.  41-67 
118 


TEN  YEARS  OF  READING 


12.  NEWTON:  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  NATURAL 
PHILOSOPHY  [Prefaces,  Definitions,  Axioms,  General  Scholium] 

Vol.  34,  pp.  1-24,  369-372 

1 3 .  LOCKE :  AN  ESS  A  Y  CONCERNING  HUMAN  UNDERSTANDING 
[Book  II] 

Vol.  35,  pp.  121-251 

14.  HUME:  AN  ENQUIRY  CONCERNING  HUMAN  UNDERSTAND¬ 
ING 

Vol.  35,  pp.  450-509 

15.  KANT:  CRITIQUE  OF  PURE  REASON  [Prefaces,  Introduction, 

Transcendental  Aesthetic] 

Vol.  42,  pp.  1-33 

16.  MELVILLE:  MOBY  DICK 

Vol.  48 

17.  DOSTOEVSKY:  THE  BROTHERS  KARAMAZOV  [Part  III-IV] 

Vol.  52,  pp.  171-412 

18.  JAMES:  PRINCIPLES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY  [Ch.  XV,  XX] 

Vol.  53,  pp.  396-420,  540-635 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


FIFTH  YEAR 


1.  PLATO:  PHAEDO 

Vol.  7,  pp.  220-251 

2.  ARISTOTLE:  CATEGORIES 

Vol.  8,  pp.  5-21 

3.  ARISTOTLE:  ON  THE  SOUL  [Book  II,  Ch.  1-3;  Book  III] 

Vol.  8,  pp.  642-645,  656-668 

4.  HIPPOCRATES:  THE  OATH;  ON  ANCIENT  MEDICINE;  ON 
AIRS,  WATERS,  AND  PLACES;  THE  BOOK  OF  PROGNOSTICS; 
OF  THE  EPIDEMICS;  THE  LAW;  ON  THE  SACRED  DISEASE 

Vol.  10,  pp.  xiii-26,  44-63,  144,  154-160 

5.  GALEN:  ON  THE  NATURAL  FACULTIES 

Vol.  10,  pp.  167-215 

6.  VIRGIL:  THE  AENEID 

Vol.  13,  pp.  103-379 

7.  PTOLEMY:  THE  ALMAGEST  [Book  I,  Ch.  1-8] 

COPERNICUS:  REVOLUTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  SPHERES 
[Introduction — Book  I,  Ch.  1 1] 

KEPLER:  EPITOME  OF  COPERNICAN  ASTRONOMY  [Book  IV, 
Part  II,  Ch.  1-2] 

Vol.  16,  pp.  5-14,  505-532,  887-895 

8.  PLOTINUS:  SIXTH  ENNEAD 

Vol.  17,  pp.  252-360 

9.  ST.  THOMAS  AQUINAS:  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  [Part  I,  QQ 
75-76,  78-79] 

Vol.  19,  pp.  378-399,  407-427 


IZO 


TEN  YEARS  OF  READING 


10.  DANTE:  THE  DIVINE  COMEDY  [Hell] 

Vol.  21,  pp.  1-52 

11.  HARVEY:  THE  MOTION  OF  THE  HEART  AND  BLOOD 

Vol.  28,  pp.  267-304 

12.  CERVANTES:  DON  QUIXOTE  [Part  I] 

Vol.  29,  pp.  xi-204 

13.  SPINOZA:  ETHICS  [Part  II] 

Vol.  31,  pp.  373-394 

14.  BERKELEY:  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  HUMAN  KNOWLEDGE 

Vol.  35,  pp.  403-444 

15.  KANT:  CRITIQUE  OF  PURE  REASON  [Transcendental  Analytic] 

Vol.  42,  pp.  34-108 

16.  DARWIN:  THE  ORIGIN  OF  SPECIES  [Introduction — Ch.  6,  Ch.  15] 

Vol.  49,  pp.  6-98,  230-243 

17.  TOLSTOY:  WAR  AND  PEACE  [Book  I-VIII] 

Vol.  51,  pp.  1-341 

18.  JAMES:  PRINCIPLES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY  [Ch.  XXVIII] 

Vol.  53,  pp.  851-897 


1 2. 1 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


SIXTH  YEAR 


1.  OLD  TESTAMENT  [Genesis,  Exodus,  Deuteronomy] 

2.  HOMER:  THE  ODYSSEY 

Vol.  4,  pp.  183-322 

3.  PLATO:  LAWS  [Book  X] 

Vol.  7,  pp.  757-771 

4.  ARISTOTLE:  METAPHYSICS  [Book  XII] 

Vol.  8,  pp.  598-606 

5.  TACITUS:  THE  HISTORIES 

Vol.  15,  pp.  189-302 

6.  PLOTINUS:  FIFTH  ENNEAD 

Vol.  17,  pp.  208-251 

7.  ST.  AUGUSTINE:  THE  CITY  OF  GOD  [Book  XV-XVIII] 

Vol.  18,  pp.  397-507 

8.  ST.  THOMAS  AQUINAS:  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  [Part  I,  QQ 

1-13] 

Vol.  19,  pp.  3-75 

9.  DANTE:  THE  DIVINE  COMEDY  [Purgatory] 

Vol.  21,  pp.  53-105 

10.  SHAKESPEARE:  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS,  THE  TAMING  OF  THE 
SHREW,  AS  YOU  LIKE  IT,  TWELFTH  NIGHT 

Vol.  26,  pp.  149-169,  199-228,  597-626;  Vol.  27,  pp.  1-28 

11.  SPINOZA:  ETHICS  [Part  I] 

Vol.  31,  pp.  355-372 

12.  MILTON:  SAMSON  AGON  1ST ES 

Vol.  32,  pp.  337-378 


12.2. 


TEN  YEARS  OF  READING 


13.  PASCAL:  THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

Vol.  33,  pp.  1-167 

14.  LOCKE :  AN  ESS  A  Y  CONCERNING  HUMAN  UNDERSTANDING 
[Book  IV] 

Vol.  35,  pp.  307-395 

15.  GIBBON:  THE  DECLINE  AND  FALL  OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE 
[Ch.  1-5,  General  Observations  on  the  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire 
in  the  West] 

Vol.  40,  pp.  1-51,  630-634 

16.  KANT:  CRITIQUE  OF  PURE  REASON  [Transcendental  Dialectic] 

Vol.  42,  pp.  108-209 

17.  HEGEL:  PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY  [Introduction] 

Vol.  46,  pp.  153-206 

18.  TOLSTOY:  WAR  AND  PEACE  [Book  IX-XV,  Epilogues] 

Vol.  51,  pp.  342-696 


I2-3 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


SEVENTH  YEAR 


1.  OLD  TESTAMENT  [Job,  Isaiah,  Amos] 

2.  PLATO:  SYMPOSIUM 

Vol.  7,  PP-  I49_I73 

3.  PLATO:  PHILEBUS 

Vol.  7,  pp.  609-639 

4.  ARISTOTLE:  ETHICS  [Book  VIII-X] 

Vol.  9,  pp.  406-436 

5.  ARCHIMEDES:  MEASUREMENT  OF  A  CIRCLE,  THE  EQUI¬ 
LIBRIUM  OF  PLANES  [Book  I],  THE  SAND-RECKONER,  ON 
FLOATING  BODIES  [Book  I] 

Vol.  11,  pp.  447-451,  502-509.  520-526,  538-542 

6.  EPICTETUS:  DISCOURSES 

Vol.  12,  pp.  105-245 

7.  PLOTINUS:  FIRST  ENNEAD 

Vol.  17,  pp.  1-34 

8.  ST.  THOMAS  AQUINAS:  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  [Part  I-II,  QQ 

1-5] 

Vol.  19,  pp.  609-643 

9.  DANTE:  THE  DIVINE  COMEDY  [Paradise] 

Vol.  21,  pp.  106-157 

10.  RABELAIS:  GARGANTUA  AND  PANTAGRUEL  [Book  III-IV] 

Vol.  24,  pp.  1 27-3 1 2 

11.  SHAKESPEARE:  JULIUS  CAESAR,  ANTONY  AND  CLEOPA¬ 
TRA,  CORIOLANUS 

Vol.  26,  pp.  568-596;  Vol.  27,  pp.  31 1-392 
124 


TEN  YEARS  OF  READING 


12.  GALILEO:  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES  [First  Day] 

Vol.  28,  pp.  131-177 

13.  SPINOZA:  ETHICS  [Part  IV-V] 

Vol.  31,  pp.  422-463 

14.  NEWTON:  MATHEMATICAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  NATURAL 
PHILOSOPHY  [Book  III,  Rules],  OPTICS  [Book  I,  Part  I;  Book  III, 
Queries] 

Vol.  34,  pp.  270-271,  379-423»  5 1 6-544 

15.  HUYGENS:  TREATISE  ON  LIGHT 

Vol.  34,  pp.  551-619 

16.  KANT:  CRITIQUE  OF  PRACTICAL  REASON 

Vol.  42,  pp.  291-361 

17.  KANT:  CRITIQUE  OF  JUDGEMENT  [Critique  of  Aesthetic  Judge¬ 
ment] 

Vol.  42,  pp.  461-549 

18.  MILL:  UTILITARIANISM 

Vol.  43,  pp.  445-476 


I2-5 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


EIGHTH  YEAR 


1.  ARISTOPHANES:  THESM OPHORIAZUSAE,  ECCLESIAZUSAE, 
PLUTUS 

Vol.  5,  pp.  600-642 

2.  PLATO:  GORGIAS 

Vol.  7,  pp.  252-294 

3.  ARISTOTLE:  ETHICS  [Book  V] 

Vol.  9,  pp.  376-387 

4.  ARISTOTLE:  RHETORIC  [Book  I,  Ch.  1— Book  II,  Ch.  1;  Book  II, 
Ch.  20 — Book  III,  Ch.  1;  Book  III,  Ch.  13-19] 

Vol.  9,  pp.  593-623,  640-654,  667-675 

5.  ST.  AUGUSTINE:  ON  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE 

Vol.  18,  pp.  619-698 

6.  HOBBES:  LEVIATHAN  [Part  II] 

Vol.  23,  pp.  99-164 

7.  SHAKESPEARE:  OTHELLO,  KING  LEAR 

Vol.  27,  pp.  205-283 

8.  BACON:  ADVANCEMENT  OF  LEARNING  [Book  I,  Ch.  1— Book 
II,  Ch.  n] 

Vol.  30,  pp.  1-55 

9.  DESCARTES:  MEDITATIONS  ON  THE  FIRST  PHILOSOPHY 

Vol.  31,  pp.  69-103 

10.  SPINOZA:  ETHICS  [Part  III] 

Vol.  31,  pp.  395-422 

11.  LOCKE:  A  LETTER  CONCERNING  TOLERATION 

Vol.  35,  pp.  1-22 
ix6 


TEN  YEARS  OF  READING 


12.  STERNE:  TRISTRAM  SHANDY 

Vol.  3 6,  pp.  190-556 

13.  ROUSSEAU:  A  DISCOURSE  ON  POLITICAL  ECONOMY 

Vol.  38,  pp.  367-385 

14.  ADAM  SMITH:  THE  WEALTH  OF  NATIONS  [Book  II] 

Vol.  39,  pp.  117-162 

15.  BOSWELL:  THE  LIFE  OF  SAMUEL  JOHNSON 

Vol.  44,  pp.  49-55,  104-139,  159-173,  247-262,  281-322 

16.  MARX:  CAPITAL  [Prefaces,  Part  I-II] 

Vol.  50,  pp.  1-84 

17.  GOETHE:  FAUST  [Part  I] 

Vol.  47,  pp.  1-114 

18.  JAMES:  PRINCIPLES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY  [Ch.  VIII-X] 

Vol.  53,  pp.  130-259 


1-L7 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


NINTH  YEAR 


1.  PLATO:  THE  SOPHIST 

Vol.  7,  pp.  551-579 

2.  THUCYDIDES:  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  PELOPONNESIAN 
WAR  [Book  VII-VIII] 

Vol.  6,  pp.  538-593 

3.  ARISTOTLE:  POLITICS  [Book  VII-VIII] 

Vol.  9,  pp.  527-548 

4.  APOLLONIUS:  ON  CONIC  SECTIONS  [Book  I,  Prop.  1-15;  Book 
III,  Prop.  42-55] 

Vol.  11,  pp.  603-624,  780-797 

5.  NEW  TESTAMENT  [The  Gospel  According  to  Saint  John,  The 
Epistle  of  Paul  the  Apostle  to  the  Romans,  The  First  Epistle  of  Paul 
the  Apostle  to  the  Corinthians] 

6.  ST.  AUGUSTINE:  THE  CITY  OF  GOD  [Book  V,  XIX] 

Vol.  18,  pp.  207-230,  507-530 

7.  ST.  THOMAS  AQUINAS:  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  [Part  II-II, 

QQ  1-7] 

Vol.  20,  pp.  380-416 

8.  GILBERT:  ON  THE  LOADSTONE 

Vol.  28,  pp.  1-121 

9.  DESCARTES:  RULES  FOR  THE  DIRECTION  OF  THE  MIND 

Vol.  31,  pp.  1-40 

10.  DESCARTES:  GEOMETRY 

Vol.  31,  pp.  295-353 
118 


TEN  YEARS  OF  READING 


11.  PASCAL:  THE  GREAT  EXPERIMENT  CONCERNING  THE  EQUI¬ 
LIBRIUM  OF  FLUIDS,  ON  GEOMETRICAL  DEMONSTRATION 

Vol.  33,  pp.  382-389,  430-446 

12.  FIELDING:  TOM  JONES 

Vol.  37 

13.  MONTESQUIEU:  THE  SPIRIT  OF  LAWS  [Book  I-V,  VIII,  XI- 
XII] 

Vol.  38,  pp.  1-33,  51-58,  68-96 

14.  FOURIER:  ANALYTICAL  THEORY  OF  HEAT  [Preliminary 
Discourse,  Ch.  1-2] 

Vol.  45,  pp.  169-251 

15.  FARADAY:  EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES  IN  ELECTRICITY 
[Series  I-II],  A  SPECULATION  TOUCHING  ELECTRIC  CON¬ 
DUCTION  AND  THE  NATURE  OF  MATTER 

Vol.  45,  pp.  265-302,  850-855 

16.  HEGEL:  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT  [Part  III] 

Vol.  46,  pp.  55-114 

17.  MARX:  CAPITAL  [Part  III-IV] 

Vol.  50,  pp.  85-250 

18.  FREUD:  CIVILIZATION  AND  ITS  DISCONTENTS 

Vol.  54,  pp.  767-802 


129 


THE  GREAT  CONVERSATION 


TENTH  YEAR 


1.  SOPHOCLES:  AJAX,  ELECTRA 

Vol.  5»  PP-  M3-i69 

2.  PLATO:  TIMAEUS 

Vol.  7,  pp.  442-477 

3.  ARISTOTLE:  ON  THE  PARTS  OF  ANIMALS  [Book  I,  Ch.  t— 
Book  II,  Ch.  1],  ON  THE  GENERATION  OF  ANIMALS  [Book  I, 
Ch.  1,  17-18,  20-23] 

Vol.  9,  pp.  161-171,  255-256,  261-266,  268-271 

4.  LUCRETIUS:  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS  [Book  V-VI] 

Vol.  12,  pp.  61-97 

5.  VIRGIL:  THE  ECLOGUES,  THE  GEORGICS 

Vol.  13,  pp.  3-99 

6.  ST.  THOMAS  AQUINAS:  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  [Part  I,  QQ 

65-74] 

Vol.  19,  pp.  339-377 

7.  ST.  THOMAS  AQUINAS:  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  [Part  I,  QQ 
90-102] 

Vol.  19,  pp.  480-527 

8.  CHAUCER:  CANTERBURY  TALES  [Prologue,  Knight’s  Tale, 
Miller’s  Prologue  and  Tale,  Reeve’s  Prologue  and  Tale,  Wife  of 
Bath’s  Prologue  and  Tale,  Friar’s  Prologue  and  Tale,  Summoner’s 
Prologue  and  Tale,  Pardoner’s  Prologue  and  Tale] 

Vol.  22,  pp.  159-232,  256-295,  372-382 
130 


TEN  YEARS  OF  READING 


9.  SHAKESPEARE:  THE  TRAGEDY  OF  KING  RICHARD  II,  THE 
FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV,  THE  SECOND  PART  OF  KING 
HENRY  IV,  THE  LIFE  OF  KING  HENRY  V 
Vol.  2 6,  pp.  320-351,  434-502,  532-567 

10.  HARVEY:  ON  THE  GENERATION  OF  ANIMALS  [Introduction 
— Exercise  62] 

Vol.  28,  pp.  331-470 

11.  CERVANTES:  DON  QUIXOTE  [Part  II] 

Vol.  29,  pp.  203-429 

12.  KANT:  CRITIQUE  OF  JUDGEMENT  [Critique  of  Teleological 
Judgement] 

Vol.  42,  pp.  550-613 

13.  BOSWELL:  THE  LIFE  OF  SAMUEL  JOHNSON 

Vol.  44,  pp.  354-364,  373-384,  39I-4°7,  498-5i5,  584-587 

14.  GOETHE:  FAUST  [Part  II] 

Vol.  47,  pp.  1 15-294 

15.  DARWIN:  THE  DESCENT  OF  MAN  [Part  I;  Part  III,  Ch.  21] 

Vol.  49,  pp.  255-363,  590-597 

16.  MARX:  CAPITAL  [Part  VII-VIII] 

Vol.  50,  pp.  279-383 

17.  JAMES:  PRINCIPLES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY  [Ch.  I,  V-VII] 

Vol.  53,  pp.  1-7,  84-129 

18.  FREUD:  A  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  PSYCHO-ANALYSIS 

Vol.  54,  pp.  449-638 

ARCHBISHSP  5S1TTY  ffl'QH  SCHOOL 
Library 

5000  Mitty  Avenue  13 1 

San  JosejnQA  4&K&.1897 


* 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


T^rTSP 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


MATTER 

RELATION 

MECHANICS 

RELIGION 

MEDICINE 

REVOLUTION 

MEMORY  AND 

RHETORIC 

IMAGINATION 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

METAPHYSICS 

SCIENCE 

MIND 

SENSE 

MONARCHY 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 

NATURE 

SIN 

NECESSITY  AND 

SLAVERY 

CONTINGENCY 

SOUL 

OLIGARCHY 

SPACE 

ONE  AND  MANY 

STATE 

OPINION 

TEMPERANCE 

OPPOSITION 

THEOLOGY 

PHILOSOPHY 

TIME 

PHYSICS 

TRUTH 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

TYRANNY 

POETRY 

UNIVERSAL  AND 

PRINCIPLE 

PARTICULAR 

PROGRESS 

VIRTUE  AND  VICE 

PROPHECY 

WAR  AND  PEACE 

PRUDENCE 

WEALTH 

PUNISHMENT 

WILL 

QUALITY 

WISDOM 

QUANTITY 

WORLD 

REASONING 

ARCHBISHOP  MITTY  LIBRARY 


T  24112 


